Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

A Beginner’s Guide to Critical 
Thinking and Writing in Health 
and Social Care
i
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ii
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

A Beginner’s 
Guide to Critical 
Thinking and 
Writing in Health 
and Social Care
Second edition
Helen Aveyard, Pam Sharp and 
Mary Woolliams
iii
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Open University Press
McGraw- Hill Education
McGraw- Hill House
Shoppenhangers Road
Maidenhead
Berkshire
England
SL6 2QL
email: enquir ies@openup.co.uk
world wide web: www.openup.co.uk
and Two Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121- 2289, USA
First published 2015
Copyright © Helen Aveyard, Pam Sharp and Mary Woolliams, 2015
All rights reserved. Except for the quota tion of short passages for the 
purpose of criti cism and review, no part of this public a tion may be 
reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or trans mit ted, in any form or by 
any means, elec tronic, mech an ical, photo copy ing, record ing or other wise, 
without the prior written permis sion of the publisher or a licence from the 
Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Details of such licences (for 
reprographic repro duc tion) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing 
Agency Ltd of Saffron House, 6– 10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
A cata logue record of this book is avail able from the British Library
ISBN- 13: 978- 0- 33- 526434- 6 (pb)
ISBN- 10: 0- 33- 526434- 4 (pb)
eISBN: 978- 0- 33- 526435- 3
Library of Congress Cataloging- in- Publication Data
CIP data applied for
Typesetting and e- book compil a tions by
RefineCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk
Fictitious names of compan ies, products, people, char ac ters and/or data that 
may be used herein (in case studies or in examples) are not inten ded to 
repres ent any real indi vidual, company, product or event.
iv
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Praise for this book
“This is an amazing book that I recommend to all levels of students 
as there is something in it for all. It is written in an easy to understand 
and friendly style that is accessible to anyone who has an interest in 
critical thinking whether they are studying or not. It puts a different 
perspective on one’s thinking and has even turned it on its head for 
some students. I love this book and the sound of the penny dropping 
for my learners!”
Liz Rockingham, Adult Field Lead/ Teaching Fellow, 
University of Surrey, UK
“In my estimation this is the definitive beginner’s guide to critical 
thinking and writing in health and social care. After reading this 
book any student should understand why and how critical thinking 
underpins professional practice and the highest endeavours in 
academic work and research. Within the book are three invaluable 
checklists: (1) ‘Six questions for critical thinking’, (2) ‘Critical 
thinking skills in your written work’, and (3) ‘Critical thinking, or 
relying on routine’. A wonderful book for both Undergraduate and 
Masters’ students and a must for hard-pressed academics who wish 
to encourage and endorse the need for critical thinking at all levels in 
all of their students.” 
Dr Ruth Davies, Associate Professor Child and Family Health, 
Swansea University, UK
“I did not intend to read this book cover to cover but it was such a 
pleasure I did. The book by Aveyard, Sharp and Woolliams achieves 
exactly what it sets out to do and is a comprehensive and highly 
readable guide. In this little gem the mysteries of critical thinking 
and writing are unpacked. Useful tools, resources, activities and 
worked examples are included and the reader is guided to develop 
their own skills. From the initial challenge to explore their personal 
values, beliefs and assumptions, through to how to adopt critical 
thinking in practice, the reader is left in no doubt as to the valuable 
contribution this book will make to developing their skills of critical 
thinking and writing for professional practice.”
Ailsa Espie, Senior Lecturer, Division of Nursing, 
Queen Margaret University, UK  
v
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

“Health and social care professionals navigate through extensive 
quantities of information in the course of their work. The ability to 
think clearly and critically is fundamental for appraising and 
implementing evidence and knowledge in practice. This book is an 
excellent place to start learning these vital skills and I recommend it 
to my students and to you.”
Dr Martin Webber, Anniversary Reader in Social Work, 
University of York, UK
vi
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Contents
Acknowledgements 
x
 
Introduction 
1
1 What is ‘crit ical think ing’ and why is it import ant? 
6
Introduction to crit ical think ing: what it is and why it is 
import ant in health and social care 
7
Defining crit ical think ing 
10
Is crit ical think ing a new idea? 
11
Critical think ing is not as common as you may think 
13
An example of crit ical think ing in action 
14
How you can think more crit ic ally – using our ‘Six ques tions 
for crit ical think ing’ 
16
The need to think crit ic ally has never been more import ant . . . 
20
How crit ical think ing can help you in your profes sional prac tice 
and academic assign ments 
26
In summary 
28
Key points 
28
2 How you can think more crit ic ally about inform a tion 
that is readily avail able 
29
Critical think ing and the use of inform a tion/evid ence 
30
What type of inform a tion is readily avail able? 
30
Thinking crit ic ally about the quality and useful ness of ‘readily 
avail able inform a tion’ 
31
In summary 
42
Key points 
43
3 Being more crit ical: how you can find the 
‘best avail able’ evid ence 
44
Why you need to dig deeper to find evid ence 
45
Beginning the search process 
46
vii
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

viii CONTENTS
Using subject- specific elec tronic data bases 
47
How you can plan and search for liter at ure using specific 
data bases 
49
What is the ‘best avail able’ evid ence? 
53
Research evid ence 
56
In summary 
70
Key points 
70
4 How you can demon strate your crit ical think ing 
skills in your written work and present a tions 
72
Why it is import ant to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your 
writing and verbal present a tions 
73
When you need to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your writing 
and present a tions 
74
How you can develop good crit ical writing and present a tions 
75
The import ance of plan ning your work 
76
The import ance of devel op ing a clear, logical and thor ough 
approach to your work 
80
Using differ ent styles of writing and present ing 
85
An example of apply ing crit ical think ing skills to written 
academic work 
90
Demonstrating crit ical think ing in verbal present a tions 
96
A check list for assess ing your crit ical think ing in written work 
and present a tions 
98
In summary 
100
Key points 
100
5 How you can adopt crit ical think ing in your 
profes sional prac tice 
101
The profes sional context and complex ity of crit ical think ing – 
connect ing theory and prac tice 
102
How you can think crit ic ally about the influ ences on your 
profes sional prac tice: routine, relying on your exper i ence, 
using profes sional judge ment and learn ing from others 
105
Assessing and devel op ing your skills as a crit ical thinker 
113
Using ques tions to develop a more in- depth approach to crit ical 
think ing 
125
Influencing the ‘crit ical think ing’ culture of your work place 
130
In summary 
130
Key points 
131
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CONTENTS ix
6 Shaping the future: what is the role of crit ical think ing 
in the devel op ment of health and social care services? 132
Why is crit ical think ing import ant for devel op ing a broader 
perspect ive in your personal, profes sional and academic life? 
133
What are the changes influ en cing health and social care in the 
twenty- first century, and how can crit ical think ing help you 
respond to these? 
136
How can you think more crit ic ally about these changes? 
143
Skills and qual it ies needed to promote crit ical think ing in 
rela tion to broader perspect ives in health and social care 
146
Broadening your hori zons in health and social care in your 
academic work and prac tice 
148
In summary 
157
Key points 
157
Appendix: useful websites 
159
Glossary 
163
References 
167
Index 
177
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Acknowledgements
Thanks to Paul Aveyard, Tim Sharp and Steve Woolliams for support and for 
knowing when to leave us to it.
Thanks also to Jill Gregory for proof reading.
x
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Introduction
This book is for you if you are:
• A student under tak ing a pre- regis tra tion course in any of the health and 
social care profes sions.
• A registered prac ti tioner, who may be return ing to post- qual i fy ing study 
after a career break.
• Working or study ing anywhere in the world and want to develop your skills 
as a crit ical thinker and writer.
It is also for:
• Anyone who feels that they are not sure what to believe when they read 
conflict ing profes sional inform a tion.
• Those who tend to take things at ‘face value’, and need to dig deeper into 
the evid ence they come across.
• Practice assessors or mentors1 who are support ing students/learners in 
prac tice and are aware of the need to be more crit ical of the inform a tion 
and evid ence they use.
You may already know that:
• There is a large amount and many types of inform a tion avail able, and this 
is of vari able quality.
1  The term prac tice assessor/mentor will be used through out to describe those who 
support learners in prac tice. A variety of other terms are used through out the profes-
sions, includ ing clin ical educator, super visor, prac tice educator/teacher, clin ical tutor 
and instructor.
1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

2 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• You need to be able to make sense of the inform a tion that you use in prac-
tice and in your academic writing.
• Some find ings from one source may conflict with those of another.
• You are legally and profes sion ally account able for your prac tice once you 
are a registered prac ti tioner and need to use inform a tion appro pri ately.
• You cannot defend your prac tice by saying ‘I was told to do it this way’.
So . . . where do you start?
You might feel that you do not know where to begin when it comes to being 
crit ical of what you read, see or hear. Life would be easy if we could believe 
everything without the need to judge its quality. Furthermore, there is just so 
much inform a tion avail able. Making sense of the inform a tion and evid ence 
you encounter can seem daunt ing.
This book will help you to under stand and be more crit ical of the inform a-
tion you read, see or hear in a jargon- free way.
Aim of the book
The aim of this book is to help you develop skills in crit ical think ing – that 
is, not accept ing everything you read, see and hear at face value but instead 
making sense of the inform a tion you use in your profes sional and/or univer-
sity work. There is such a vast amount of inform a tion out there that, without 
these skills, it is diffi cult to know what to include in your academic assign-
ments or how to incor por ate new inform a tion into your prac tice. It is easy 
to feel over whelmed and you may find that you make decisions in your 
profes sional prac tice or write academic assign ments based on inap pro pri ate 
evid ence. As a result, poor decisions about profes sional prac tice are likely 
to be made, which can have a deep impact on patients and clients, and/or 
on the quality of your academic work. Critical think ing in writing and prac tice 
is there fore a vital skill that all students/learners and profes sion als need 
to develop from the very start of their prac tice exper i ences and in their 
academic work.
Furthermore, if you are a student, your ability to be crit ical will be 
assessed and this is a substan tial compon ent in almost all marking systems 
for those study ing for profes sional qual i fic a tions in health and social care. 
In fact, ‘being crit ical’ is prob ably the key element of all higher educa tion 
courses.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INTRODUCTION 3
How to get the most from this book
• We recom mend that you begin at the begin ning and work through the book 
system at ic ally, as the mater ial is presen ted in the order in which we think it 
should be read.
• You can use the index if you have a partic u lar topic or issue that you want 
to find out about.
• Use the gloss ary to find explan a tions of words you are unfa mil iar with.
• Get access to the inter net and gain confid ence in search ing using appro-
pri ate data bases – don’t leave it until you need to find inform a tion 
quickly.
• Be more crit ical of all of the sources of inform a tion you come across on a 
daily basis.
• Don’t give up if you find some thing diffi cult or don’t under stand it.
• Feel good about every new thing that you have learned.
• You may find it helpful to work along side a colleague or a fellow student/
learner who is more confid ent in crit ical think ing in prac tice, to share 
your ideas and make sense of what you read as you progress through 
this book.
What’s new in this edition?
We have respon ded to feed back on the first edition from a variety of readers 
and review ers. Key changes we have made include the follow ing:
• We have updated inform a tion sources where neces sary, for example incor-
por at ing up- to- date theory and new policy.
• We have included more examples to illus trate import ant points, such as 
adding more extracts demon strat ing how you can write more crit ic ally.
• We have added more activ it ies to help you to under stand and engage with 
the ideas we discuss.
• We have incor por ated advice about think ing crit ic ally when you use online 
sources of inform a tion and social media, and about how such inform a tion 
may be used appro pri ately in health and social care prac tice and academic 
work.
• In response to eval u ation from students, we have further developed our 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to make them clearer, more logical 
and easier to apply to academic work as well as prac tice issues.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Structure of the book
In the first chapter we discuss the concept of crit ical think ing and why it is 
import ant. In Chapter 2, we consider the best response to ‘readily avail able 
inform a tion’; by this we mean inform a tion that you encounter on an every day 
basis and do not need to look too hard for. In Chapter 3, we explore how you 
should ‘dig a bit deeper’ for evid ence when you need to, using compre hens ive 
search strategies. In Chapters 4 and 5, we discuss in more detail how to use 
crit ical think ing skills in your written academic work, present a tions and in 
prac tice. In Chapter 6, we consider the broader implic a tions of crit ical think ing 
within health and social care.
We will use the follow ing terms (altern at ives may be used in your setting):
Health or social care profes sional: includes nurses, midwives, doctors, occu-
pa tional ther ap ists, physio ther ap ists, oper at ing depart ment prac ti tion ers, 
dieti cians, para med ics, radio graph ers, speech and language ther ap ists, art 
ther ap ists, chiro pod ists/podi at rists, clin ical scient ists, orth optists, pros thet-
ists, social care workers, orthot ists, osteo paths.
Patient/client: used to refer to all service users that health and social care 
profes sion als may come into contact with. Although not stated, you may 
also need to consider carers’ perspect ives.
Practice assessor/mentor: used to describe those who support learners in 
prac tice.
Students/learners: used to refer to anyone, pre-  or post- qual i fy ing, under-
tak ing study either form ally or inform ally.
Examples
We have tried to include examples that may be easily under stood by a range 
of profes sions, as we all work within a wider team. We can learn a lot from the 
rich ness and diversity of examples from other profes sional groups even if 
they do not directly apply to our prac tice.
Web addresses
The web addresses we have provided were correct and access ible at the 
time of public a tion but do some times change. You may need to input the 
organ iz a tion’s details and search within their site if the address no longer 
works.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INTRODUCTION 5
Use the symbols
 Key inform a tion
Think point
Activity for you to do
 Key inform a tion
Think point
Activity for you to do
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

1
What is ‘crit ical 
think ing’ and why is 
it import ant?
• Introduction to crit ical think ing: what it is and why it is import ant in 
health and social care
• Defining crit ical think ing
• Is crit ical think ing a new idea?
• Critical think ing is not as common as you may think
• An example of crit ical think ing in action
• How you can think more crit ic ally – using our ‘Six ques tions for 
crit ical think ing’
• The need to think crit ic ally has never been more import ant . . .
• How crit ical think ing can help you in your profes sional prac tice and 
academic assign ments
• In summary
• Key points
In this chapter, we will:
• Introduce and define crit ical think ing and say why it is import ant.
• Give an example of crit ical think ing in action.
6
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 7
• Introduce our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’.
• Explore why crit ical think ing has become more import ant in recent years.
• Explore how crit ical think ing can help you in your academic assign ments 
and profes sional decision- making.
Introduction to crit ical think ing: what it is 
and why it is import ant in health and 
social care
In short, crit ical think ing is about taking a step back and think ing logic ally 
and care fully about the inform a tion and evid ence you have, rather than 
believ ing and acting on everything you read, see and hear. It is about 
seeking the best avail able evid ence and using this to chal lenge your own 
assump tions and prior under stand ing. Critical think ing is about ques tion ing 
and eval u at ing the inform a tion or evid ence avail able to you. This is import ant 
because there is an awful lot of inform a tion and evid ence avail able to 
inform your prac tice, much of which is of vari able quality. You need to 
be able to make sense of it to ensure that you are acting on good quality 
inform a tion and evid ence and there fore provide the optimum patient or 
client care.
Critical think ing is prob ably what you already do when you read a news-
pa per. You ques tion what you read and often take what you read with a ‘pinch 
of salt’. There is often good reason for this. Some news pa pers are known for 
their shock tactics and it is gener ally wise not to believe everything you read. 
Critical think ing is prob ably also some thing you do when you listen to and 
take part in discus sions about issues in your day- to- day life. You listen to 
others’ thoughts, and prob ably join in, but inside you may wonder if there is 
any evid ence behind the claims being made, such as whether claims about 
new skin care products or healthy foods are just a lot of ‘hype’.
But maybe you aren’t always crit ical of what you read, see and hear. 
Sometimes our own exper i ences make us biased and prevent us from being 
logical. To give an extreme example: someone who has just survived a plane 
crash is likely to perceive plane travel as danger ous, even though it is often 
quoted to be the safest form of travel. There are many times when we need to 
examine our percep tions and biases if we want to make logical choices.
You may have heard of the term reflec tion. We discuss this in more detail 
in Chapters 4 and 5 but in prin ciple, when you take the time to reflect, you 
consider more thor oughly your thoughts and feel ings and how they impact on 
the decisions you make.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

8 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Consider what precon ceived ideas and miscon cep tions about every day life 
might affect what you think, do, and how you do it.
You might think that in profes sional life, every body is rational – that profes-
sional life is tightly controlled. Yet health and social care profes sion als are 
indi vidu als with differ ent indi vidual values, atti tudes and beliefs that shape 
their approach to care deliv ery. In many ways, this is posit ive; we would not 
want to be looked after by robots or by people blindly follow ing guidelines 
or instruc tions. However, it does leave room for differ ent inter pret a tions of 
how we should act in differ ent situ ations, and differ ent inter pret a tions of 
information or evid ence. This means that it is not wise to believe all you read, 
see and hear in a profes sional capa city. Even profes sional liter at ure varies 
widely in quality, and it is essen tial that you can make sense of what you read. 
There is also a vast amount of inform a tion/evid ence, some of it good and 
some less good. The quality of the dialogue you hear in profes sional prac tice 
will also vary.
The implic a tions of this within health and social care are enorm ous. Kamhi 
(2011) describes how false beliefs that we develop can lead to the making of 
wrong or badly judged decisions in prac tice. In other words, if we are not crit-
ical of the values, beliefs and atti tudes we hold, this can lead to poor decision- 
making, and there fore impact negat ively on our care. In our personal lives, we 
take the consequences of this lack of crit ical think ing ourselves. In our profes-
sional lives, it is our patients and clients who will be affected if our care is 
based on false beliefs that lead to poor decision- making.
Imagine you exper i enced severe sick ness many years ago when you were 
given the pain- killing drug morphine after an oper a tion. You were intol er ant of 
the drug – this is an extreme side effect that affects a very small propor tion 
of people who are given morphine. Now, as a prac ti tioner, you do not routinely 
offer morphine even though it is written up ‘as required’ and you try to 
dissuade people from consent ing to it, even when they are in severe pain 
and morphine is the drug of choice.
or
Imagine you had a diffi cult exper i ence after having your first baby and were 
not able to breast feed. You were not given much encour age ment or support 
and the advice you received was to bottle feed. Now, as a midwife, you are 
influ enced by your early exper i ences and have very strong beliefs that all 
women should breast feed and that it is your role to strongly encour age this.
or
Consider what precon ceived ideas and miscon cep tions about every day life 
might affect what you think, do, and how you do it.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 9
Imagine you exper i enced severe bully ing as a child at nursery. Now, as a 
social worker, you find your self reluct ant to advise parents to send their chil-
dren to nursery even when your colleagues feel this is the most appro pri ate 
form of child care.
All these examples illus trate how lack of crit ical think ing can lead to the 
deliv ery of inap pro pri ate care. In these examples, previ ously held assump-
tions were not chal lenged and this demon strates how personal exper i ences 
and indi vidual beliefs can lead to what may be badly judged profes sional 
decisions.
Kida (2006) provides a summary of the most common think ing errors. These 
include:
• being persuaded by personal exper i ence rather than object ive evid ence; 
and
• prefer ring evid ence that supports our ideas rather than object ive evid ence.
Brookfield (2012) argues that crit ical think ing is about identi fy ing and 
check ing out our assump tions, looking at ideas and decisions from differ ent 
perspect ives and taking informed action.
Critical think ing, and in partic u lar using reflec tion (as we discuss in 
Chapters 4 and 5), helps us to avoid these think ing errors. Critical think ing 
involves taking a step back and think ing logic ally about the evid ence that you 
have.
Based on Facione’s seminal work, we can see why crit ical think ing is 
import ant:
Critical think ing is essen tial as a tool of inquiry. As such, crit ical 
think ing is a liber at ing force in educa tion and a power ful resource in 
one’s personal and civic life. While not synonym ous with good think ing, 
crit ical think ing is a pervas ive and self- recti fy ing human phenomenon.
(Facione 1990: 2)
This is very import ant in health and social care. You cannot help bring ing your 
own exper i ences with you into prac tice. What is import ant is that you acknow-
ledge these and examine your beliefs in a crit ical way. You will hear a large 
amount of profes sional dialogue and have access to a vast amount of profes-
sional liter at ure, and you need to work out what is useful and relev ant and 
what is not; you need to make sure you are using reli able inform a tion or evid-
ence wisely, both in your academic assign ments and to inform your prac tice. 
In this book, we will explain how you do this.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

10 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Defining crit ical think ing
There are many defin i tions of crit ical think ing (Moore 2013), but if you look at 
them care fully the message is largely consist ent.
Morrall and Goodman (2013: 936) define crit ical think ing as:
a form of think ing involving the rational and robust analysis of what is 
being thought about.
Price and Harrington (2013: 11) define crit ical think ing as:
a process where differ ent inform a tion is gathered, sifted, synthes ized 
and eval u ated . . . [which enables the profes sional to act] as a know ledge-
able doer – someone who selects, combines, judges and uses inform a tion 
in order to proceed in a profes sional manner.
And Wade and Tarvis (2008: 7) define it as:
the ability to assess claims and make object ive judge ments on the basis 
of well suppor ted reasons and evid ence rather than emotion and anec-
dote. Critical thinkers are able to look for flaws in argu ment and resist 
claims that have no support.
Furthermore, Brookfield (2012) emphas izes how import ant it is to chal lenge 
one’s own assump tions before enga ging with addi tional inform a tion or evid-
ence. In other words, if you are a crit ical thinker, you think care fully about 
what you read, see and hear. You also need to chal lenge your own previ ously 
held thoughts and assump tions. When you hear a news story or listen to a 
discus sion among friends, you ques tion the quality of the evid ence and the 
conclu sions drawn from that evid ence. If the topic is import ant to you, you 
attempt to find out more inform a tion or evid ence to help you make sense of 
the facts. This enables you to form an overall view and then apply it to the 
situ ation at hand.
To be a crit ical thinker means access ing the best avail able inform a tion 
and evid ence to inform the decisions and judge ments you make when 
Figure 1.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 11
deliv er ing care. This means making every effort to search for good quality 
inform a tion/evid ence about your prac tice. This is discussed in detail in 
Chapters 2 and 3.
Have you been a crit ical thinker in the past?
Refer back to how you have used inform a tion in the past and consider the 
poten tial prob lems with your approach. Did you do any of the follow ing?
• Believe what you were told without check ing out the inform a tion/evid ence?
• Scan read written inform a tion/evid ence, rather than analyse it in depth?
• Use only readily avail able sources?
• Ignore research that didn’t agree with your current prac tice?
• Listen to advice from colleagues without ques tion ing?
• Copy prac tice/proced ures that you observed without ques tion?
• Believe everything that you read without ques tion ing the author ity of the 
writers or the quality of the argu ments or evid ence?
• Use only one or two sources?
• Select only sources that support your view?
or
Do you feel that you fully consider the merits of each piece of inform a tion/
evid ence that you come across and seek out further resources or opin ions 
when the avail able inform a tion does not seem to be complete?
We need to ensure that we take into account all the facts before making judge-
ments. This helps us person ally and profes sion ally to ensure we make 
considered and reflect ive decisions, consid er ing the relev ant evid ence and 
not just follow ing the advice and actions of others.
Is crit ical think ing a new idea?
Critical think ing is not a new idea in health and social care and many profes-
sion als always ques tion what they read, see and hear. The ancient roots of 
crit ical think ing date back to the ideas of the Greek philo sopher Socrates, who 
is cred ited with pion eer ing a ques tion ing and rational approach to problem- 
solving and encour aging people to reject state ments made on the basis of 
confused meaning and inad equate evid ence. We can see then that the concept 
of crit ical think ing has stood the test of time, however, as shown by Examples 
1 and 2 below, the concept is neither univer sally nor routinely applied.
Have you been a crit ical thinker in the past?
Refer back to how you have used inform a tion in the past and consider the
poten tial prob lems with your approach. Did you do any of the follow ing?
• Believe what you were told without check ing out the inform a tion/evid ence?
• Scan read written inform a tion/evid ence, rather than analyse it in depth?
• Use only readily avail able sources?
• Ignore research that didn’t agree with your current prac tice?
• Listen to advice from colleagues without ques tion ing?
• Copy prac tice/proced ures that you observed without ques tion?
• Believe everything that you read without ques tion ing the author ity of the 
writers or the quality of the argu ments or evid ence?
• Use only one or two sources?
• Select only sources that support your view?
or
Do you feel that you fully consider the merits of each piece of inform a tion/
evid ence that you come across and seek out further resources or opin ions 
when the avail able inform a tion does not seem to be complete?
We need to ensure that we take into account all the facts before making judge-
ments. This helps us person ally and profes sion ally to ensure we make 
considered and reflect ive decisions, consid er ing the relev ant evid ence and 
not just follow ing the advice and actions of others.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

12 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Example 1: Evidence of a lack of crit ical think ing
Take, for example, a media story that ran in early January 2011. Newspaper 
and tele vi sion outlets (Daily Mail, The Guardian, The Daily Telegraph, Channel 
4 News, 3–6 January 2011) widely repor ted that hundreds of women had 
become preg nant while using a partic u lar contra cep tive device.
The reports carried the news that 584 women had become preg nant while 
using the ‘Implanon’ contra cept ive device. While these numbers are not 
disputed and many women may well have become preg nant while using the 
device, what we are not told is the overall context – that is, how many women 
used the device in total and hence whether the failure rate was higher than 
would be expec ted (given that no method of contra cep tion is 100 per cent 
effect ive). Media reports implied that the number of unwanted preg nan cies 
asso ci ated with this device was excess ively high and exceeded the number 
of unwanted preg nan cies asso ci ated with other contra cept ive devices. Yet 
when Radio 4’s More or Less picked up this story on 7 January 2011, it was 
set in context. Despite the stated number of preg nan cies asso ci ated with the 
device, research ers for the programme quoted a failure rate for Implanon of 
0.06 per cent – far lower than any other commonly used method, includ ing 
ster il iz a tion, provid ing evid ence that the device remains one of the most 
effect ive ways of prevent ing preg nancy. This would seem to be a clear 
example of stat ist ics being repres en ted in a mislead ing way, and illus trates 
perfectly why it is so import ant to be crit ical of what you read and hear, and 
to look beyond the head lines of a report.
Critical think ing requires that you look beyond the initial head line that catches 
your eye. In the example cited above, crit ical think ing was required to ques-
tion the sources of evid ence and look wider and deeper, consid er ing the vast 
number of people success fully using the device compared with those exper i-
en cing prob lems.
Example 2: Further evid ence of a lack of crit ical think ing
The contro versy over the measles, mumps and rubella vaccin a tion (MMR) 
provides another good example of why it is import ant to be crit ical of what 
you read, see and hear. The original research by Wakefield et al. (1998), 
which sparked a lack of confid ence in the safety of the vaccine, was hugely 
influ en tial.
This research paper has now been retrac ted by the publish ing journal, The 
Lancet. This was done because the evid ence presen ted was at a later date 
found to be flawed. However, before it was retrac ted, the paper attrac ted 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 13
wide publi city. Wakefield et al. described how 12 chil dren who had received 
the MMR vaccin a tion also went on to develop either autism or bowel disease. 
Yet millions of chil dren have had the MMR vaccin a tion and suffered no ill 
effects. Also, chil dren who have not been given the MMR vaccin a tion have 
developed autism and/or bowel disease.
Anyone looking crit ic ally at this research can see that the evid ence provided 
is not strong; in fact, it is very weak indeed and, as in the previ ous example, 
crit ical think ing is required to consider the method in which the data about 
the vaccin a tion was collec ted and presen ted. A crit ical thinker would have 
used rational judge ment and crit ical appraisal to explore the quality of the 
paper and to expose its weak nesses. Yet somehow the paper was not prop-
erly eval u ated, and was so well publi cized that vaccin a tion rates plummeted 
as parents feared for the safety of the vaccin a tion. In a further twist to this 
story, not only was the study very weak – and indeed, subsequent system-
atic reviews have found no link between autism/bowel disease and the MMR 
vaccin a tion (Demicheli et al. 2012) – but much later on it was found to be 
fraud u lent, in that there is evid ence that the details of some of the 12 chil-
dren described in the study were fabric ated (Deer 2011).
Critical think ing is not as common as you 
may think
Having read Examples 1 and 2, you may not be surprised to read that we 
believe that crit ical think ing is not as common as one would like to think 
(which is why we have written this book). We have given the examples of 
mislead ing media head lines and a misin ter preted poor quality research 
study. Indeed, there is evid ence that many profes sion als do not always think 
crit ic ally about the evid ence they use. When Simone et al. (2012) reviewed the 
role of health care profes sion als in inform ing chil dren and their parents about 
the MMR vaccin a tion, they found that a minor ity of health care profes sion als 
contin ued to hold negat ive atti tudes about the vaccin a tion because of 
Wakefield and colleagues’ research. This suggests that these health care 
profes sion als had neither read nor thought crit ic ally about the evid ence 
relat ing to this aspect of their prac tice.
Unfortunately, there are many other such examples. On his ‘Bad Science’ 
website (www.badscience.net) and in his book, Goldacre (2009) illus trates what 
can happen when people are not crit ical of inform a tion/evid ence that is 
presen ted to them. He explores many commonly held ideas about popular 
culture, most of which relate to health and social care. Using a crit ical approach, 
Goldacre exam ines the minimal evid ence on which many of these ideas are 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

14 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
based and yet which attract huge popular interest. For example, so- called 
‘miracle cures’ such as herbal remed ies and fruit drinks are advert ised and sold 
and yet the evid ence under pin ning their medi cinal qual it ies is often unproven. 
Goldacre writes espe cially ardently on the ‘science’ of detox i fic a tion, and 
outlines the lack of good quality evid ence support ing any bene fits of this widely 
used prac tice. Goldacre gives many examples where ‘weigh ing up’ or crit ical 
appraisal of the evid ence has not been carried out and as a result many people 
are adher ing to prac tices or beliefs that have no scientific under pin ning. In other 
words, there is very little evid ence behind some of these popular ‘remed ies’ and 
it is import ant that people think crit ic ally and ques tion them, rather than take at 
face value the claims made by those who will profit finan cially from their use.
An example of crit ical think ing in action
To be a crit ical thinker, you need to be able to under stand and make sense of 
what you read, see and hear. As a profes sional, bombarded with a vast amount 
of inform a tion/evid ence, you will come across sources of inform a tion that 
conflict with each other. You need to under stand why this is the case in order 
to make sense of the inform a tion. This is a long- term goal and you are not 
expec ted to under stand all the complex inform a tion, liter at ure and evid ence 
you come across right from the outset. However, if you start by devel op ing 
the right skills, you will become more and more adept at doing this.
In Example 3, we consider a state ment on crit ical think ing that has been 
agreed by experts (Facione 2013: 26) and apply it to a specific situ ation. 
Facione describes the char ac ter ist ics of a crit ical thinker as being someone 
who does not accept things at face value:
The ideal crit ical thinker is habitu ally inquis it ive, well- informed, 
trust ful of reason, open- minded, flex ible, fair- minded in eval u ation, 
honest in facing personal biases, prudent in making judge ments, willing 
to recon sider, clear about issues, orderly in complex matters, dili gent in 
seeking relev ant inform a tion, reas on able in the selec tion of criteria, 
focused in inquiry, and persist ent in seeking results which are as precise 
as the subject and the circum stances of inquiry permit.
Example 3: Critical think ing in action
In this example, we demon strate how you can use crit ical think ing. Imagine 
that your patient or client has read the follow ing news report in a leading 
current affairs public a tion. She asks you for your views on the report:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 15
Kedmey, D. (2014) Do mammo grams save lives? ‘Hardly’, a new study 
finds, Time Magazine, 12 February.
The news item claimed that a study (Miller et al. 2014) had come to the ‘start-
ling conclu sion’ that mammo grams ‘appear to be useless, at best’. The news 
item describes a study that compared the outcome for women who had been 
randomly assigned to receive either a mammo gram or a breast exam in a tion. 
The study had found that women who had received just breast exam in a tion 
fared no worse than those who had had mammo graphy in the detec tion of 
breast cancer. The conclu sion made was that mammo grams do not save lives.
But is this really the appro pri ate conclu sion to be made about this study? We 
suggest that by apply ing a crit ical approach, you may come to a differ ent 
conclu sion, one that will benefit your patient or client. Inquisitive and open- 
minded, you remem ber attend ing a lecture about the bene fits of screen ing, not 
only for breast cancer but also for many other diseases. This news report 
seems to ques tion the bene fits. Feeling some what confused, you endeav our to 
find out more. You realize you cannot answer your patient/client from the inform-
a tion presen ted, and demon strat ing Facione’s require ment of persist ence, you 
decide to seek further inform a tion/evid ence in order to be well informed.
The first thing to do is to consider the quality of the evid ence you have been 
presen ted with. Don’t be tempted to accept the head line that you have been 
shown as fact. You need further inform a tion. Indeed, Facione tells us to be 
dili gent in seeking further inform a tion. Remember that a current affairs 
journal article report ing a study – even if the journal is reput able – may not 
be an accur ate repres ent a tion of that study. It certainly does not provide 
suffi cient evid ence upon which you should inform your patient or client but it 
should trigger further action on your part.
The most useful step to take is to access the original research paper (Miller 
et al. 2014). We will discuss what research is and how you recog nize it in 
later chapters of this book. For now, let us see how the full report of a system-
atic scientific invest ig a tion or project (which is gener ally what research is) is 
likely to be stronger evid ence, and will give you more inform a tion, than a 
report in a magazine or journal. You access the original research paper:
ORIGINAL RESEARCH: Miller, A.B. et al. (2014) Twenty five year follow- up 
for breast cancer incid ence and mortal ity of the Canadian National Breast 
Screening Study, British Medical Journal, Vol. 348, 15 February.
To find the research report, you need to search for and locate the article to 
which the news report is refer ring using subject- specific search engines (we 
will discuss how to do this in Chapter 3). This is demon strat ing Facione’s 
char ac ter istic of persist ence, as you don’t easily give up.
When you locate the research, you find that it is a large random ized controlled 
study in which healthy women had been random ized to receive either a 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

16 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
mammo gram or phys ical breast exam in a tion on a regular basis. Both groups 
were followed up over many years and the incid ence of breast cancer in both 
groups was meas ured. The research ers found that those women who had 
had phys ical exam in a tion only, had very similar outcomes to those who had 
had mammo graphy; that is, there was an equal rate of breast cancer- related 
deaths in the two groups.
You return to the news report in Time Magazine and consider the wording. 
You now feel that ‘Does mammo graphy save lives? Hardly’ was misrep res ent-
at ive and possibly sensa tion al ist. A more accur ate state ment would be that 
both mammo graphy and phys ical breast exam in a tion save lives.
Such doubt on the value of mammo graphy could perhaps be justi fied if the 
research ers had compared mammo graphy with abso lutely no inter ven tion 
and the women had fared the same in both groups (although this would prob-
ably have been uneth ical). But instead, they compared mammo graphy 
against another method of detect ing breast abnor mal it ies. They found that 
women in both groups fared about the same. Returning to your patient or 
client, you can now explain that there is evid ence from a large study that 
phys ical breast exam in a tion is as effect ive at detect ing breast cancer as 
mammo graphy but that there might be other factors to consider – for 
example, this is a long- term study and the effect ive ness of mammo grams in 
detect ing breast cancer may have improved over time.
From Example 3, you can see why it is so import ant to be a crit ical thinker 
and a crit ical reader. In working through this example, you can see how, as a 
crit ical thinker, you can make sense of complex issues (Facione 2013). This 
enables you to get behind the head lines to see what the evid ence is really 
telling you. You can see how a news report alone is not suffi cient evid ence 
upon which to base prac tice or recom mend a tions to patients or clients. It is 
import ant to dig beneath titles and head lines to find out what the inform a tion 
is really about. This example there fore illus trates the import ance of access ing 
the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence about the situ ation you are concerned 
with. We discuss this in Chapters 2 and 3.
How you can think more crit ic ally – using our 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’
We cannot stress enough how import ant it is to chal lenge your own assump-
tions and consider whether you hold any biases that might affect your views or 
perspect ives on a topic. As prac tice in health and social care has a strong 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 17
(although not exclus ive) evid ence- based focus, it is also import ant to read and 
ask ques tions about what people tell you, and also to learn to make sense of 
what you read, see or hear. We will now intro duce our ‘Six ques tions for crit-
ical think ing’ to assist you. You will often come across the follow ing key terms:
Critical think ing is when you adopt a ques tion ing approach and thought ful 
atti tude to what you read, see or hear, rather than accept ing things at face 
value. It also involves chal len ging your own and others’ assump tions. This 
relates to both academic work and profes sional prac tice.
Critical think ing involves a crit ical analysis and appraisal of the inform a-
tion/evid ence avail able to you.
Critical analysis is when you break down or explore in depth all the 
compon ents of the inform a tion/evid ence you have. You can use ques tions 1–5 
of our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to help you do this. This may 
involve explor ing what is happen ing and the reasons why. You may need to 
consider altern at ive perspect ives, includ ing theory, the opin ions of others 
and research find ings (see Examples 1, 2 and 3 earlier in this chapter).
Critical appraisal is when you consider the strengths and limit a tions of 
the inform a tion/evid ence you read, see and hear, depend ing on the type of 
evid ence you have. When you start to think crit ic ally, you will also begin to 
crit ic ally appraise the inform a tion avail able to you. You can use all of our 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to help you do this, with emphasis on 
the ques tions in italics.
Professional judge ment is when you consider, appraise inform a tion/evid-
ence and eval u ate whether, and to what extent, it is relev ant to the care of 
your patient(s)/client(s). The end result of profes sional judge ment is usually 
a decision about the optimum care of a patient or client.
Introducing our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’
The follow ing six ques tions have been adapted from a tool origin ally devised by 
Woolliams et al. (2009). We have further adapted and updated this tool based on 
feed back from staff and students. You can use the six ques tions to help you 
consider the type of evid ence/inform a tion you have and the strengths and weak-
nesses of any piece of inform a tion/evid ence you come across (for example, 
Critical think ing is when you adopt a ques tion ing approach and thought ful
atti tude to what you read, see or hear, rather than accept ing things at face 
value. It also involves chal len ging your own and others’ assump tions. This 
relates to both academic work and profes sional prac tice.
Critical analysis is when you break down or explore in depth all the 
compon ents of the inform a tion/evid ence you have. You can use ques tions 1–5 
of our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to help you do this. This may
involve explor ing what is happen ing and the reasons why. You may need to
consider altern at ive perspect ives, includ ing theory, the opin ions of others 
and research find ings (see Examples 1, 2 and 3 earlier in this chapter).
Critical appraisal is when you consider the strengths and limit a tions of 
the inform a tion/evid ence you read, see and hear, depend ing on the type of 
evid ence you have. When you start to think crit ic ally, you will also begin to
crit ic ally appraise the inform a tion avail able to you. You can use all of our
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to help you do this, with emphasis on 
the ques tions in italics.
Professional judge ment is when you consider, appraise inform a tion/evid-
ence and eval u ate whether, and to what extent, it is relev ant to the care of 
your patient(s)/client(s). The end result of profes sional judge ment is usually 
a decision about the optimum care of a patient or client.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

18 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
news items, research reports, discus sions with colleagues, and so on). The ques-
tions will help you to judge the quality of the inform a tion/evid ence and there fore 
help you to decide how or whether to use it in your prac tice or academic work.
How to use this tool
Unfortunately, there is no exact way to assess the relev ance of inform a tion – 
this remains for you to judge. But our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ will 
help you in this process. As a general rule, research studies will provide you with 
stronger evid ence than more anec dotal liter at ure, and inform a tion from experts 
will be stronger than inform a tion from people with less exper i ence. Also, recent 
high- quality liter at ure will be stronger than older liter at ure, but no liter at ure is 
perfect. We discuss this in more detail in another book in this series, A Beginner’s 
Guide to Evidence Based Practice, second edition (Aveyard and Sharp 2013).
Some addi tional notes about our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’
What is it? It is very import ant that you can recog nize the type of inform a tion/
evid ence that you have. In general, well- conduc ted research is the strongest 
form of evid ence. For all types of inform a tion/evid ence, you need to judge the 
quality of the argu ments or evid ence presen ted. It is also import ant to be able 
to summar ize the find ings.
Where did you find it? Whether you are doing an assign ment or disser ta tion, 
or search ing for evid ence to inform prac tice, it is import ant to get the best 
avail able inform a tion/evid ence rather than relying on what first comes to 
hand (see later chapters where we discuss this further).
Who has written/said this? It is import ant to identify whether the authors 
include their relev ant qual i fic a tions and have the exper i ence to write or speak 
author it at ively on the topic. For research, it is also import ant that they have 
the neces sary clin ical, profes sional and/or academic expert ise to under take 
the research.
When was it written/said? It is import ant to consider the date of inform a tion/
public a tion. Older inform a tion will still be valid if it is considered ‘key or 
seminal’ (i.e. it is still widely refer enced and used in more recent texts). 
However, you should determ ine whether there are newer theor ies or research 
that may be equally or more valid.
Why was it written/said? It is import ant to consider that inform a tion will be 
tailored differ ently to meet the differ ent needs of differ ent groups. You should 
also consider any agendas, conflicts or incent ives (hidden or open).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 19
Figure 1.2 Six ques tions for crit ical think ing
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

20 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
How do you know if it is good quality? This ques tion incor por ates all of 
those above in addi tion to consid er a tion of the overall quality or analysis of 
the inform a tion/evid ence. Consider whether the argu ments presen ted are 
robust and, if the inform a tion/evid ence is research, whether the method is 
appro pri ate to the study. Some under stand ing of research methods is useful 
here and a research methods text book will help you develop your under-
stand ing. A summary of research methods is given in A Beginner’s Guide to 
Evidence Based Practice, second edition (Aveyard and Sharp 2013).
Discussing the type of inform a tion you refer to in an assign ment 
or report
We suggest that you get used to citing some detail about the inform a tion that 
you use in your academic or profes sional work (e.g. in an essay, report or 
present a tion). For example: if the inform a tion you use in an assign ment is a 
research report, say so. If it is anec dotal inform a tion or profes sional opinion, let 
your reader/audi ence know this. This lets readers/listen ers know that you under-
stand the type of inform a tion/evid ence you are using. You should use the best 
source of inform a tion/evid ence avail able. We discuss this later in Chapter 4.
The need to think crit ic ally has never been 
more import ant . . .
There are two reasons for this. First, there has been a marked growth in our 
profes sional know ledge due to the increase in avail able evid ence and the 
emphasis on evid ence- based prac tice. Second, health and social care profes-
sion als are increas ingly account able for their prac tice.
Critical think ing and the increase in profes sional know ledge
We live in a world in which the pace of change is often so fast that what is 
published today may be out of date by the time you read it. This is just as true 
in health and social care as in any other setting. What you learn today in a 
lecture or in the work place might be out of date by the time you encounter a 
situ ation in which you put this new know ledge into prac tice. It is certainly 
true that change is happen ing all the time and we would argue that you should 
embrace change. One reason why there is constant change is that we are 
continu ously acquir ing new inform a tion/evid ence about health and social 
care topics. Of course, not all of this inform a tion/evid ence will be good quality, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 21
and you need to be discern ing about what you use in profes sional prac tice in 
order to make good decisions about patient and client care.
What is evid ence- based prac tice?
You may have heard the term ‘evid ence- based prac tice’. Evidence- based prac-
tice is about being able to provide a strong rationale for your health or social 
care prac tice.
Put simply: ‘Evidence based prac tice is prac tice that is suppor ted by clear 
reas on ing, taking into account the patient’s/client’s pref er ences and using 
your own judge ment’. (Aveyard and Sharp 2013: 4)
The import ance of the concept of evid ence- based prac tice is that it emphas-
izes the need for the best possible evid ence to under pin prac tice. The concept 
of evid ence- based prac tice has replaced the concept of prac tice based on 
tradi tion and ritual. Most defin i tions of evid ence- based prac tice argue that in 
addi tion to evid ence, profes sion als should use their profes sional judge ment 
along side consid er a tion of patient or client pref er ences (Aveyard and Sharp 
2013).
Information over load and know ledge manage ment
Together with the rise in interest in evid ence- based prac tice, there has been a 
vast increase in know ledge and other evid ence relat ing to profes sional prac-
tice and discus sion about how this should be managed (Nicolini et al. 2008; 
Cases et al. 2013). Some inform a tion is useful and some less useful. There is so 
much inform a tion avail able on any health or social care matter that it can be 
diffi cult to read and compre hend everything related to your topic of study, let 
alone work out if the inform a tion is of good quality. This is why you need to 
be a crit ical thinker – so that you can work out what is useful inform a tion and 
what is less useful for your prac tice and academic writing.
Example
Writing in the British Medical Journal in 2010, Fraser and Dunstan cite the 
example of a cardiac surgeon who would need to read 40 papers each day, 
every day for 11 years to keep abreast of new devel op ments in their field. Of 
course, at the end of the 11 years, these devel op ments would already be out 
of date!
Put simply: ‘Evidence based prac tice is prac tice that is suppor ted by clear 
reas on ing, taking into account the patient’s/client’s pref er ences and using
your own judge ment’. (Aveyard and Sharp 2013: 4)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

22 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
This situ ation is roughly the same in every health and social care field. In addi-
tion to published academic papers, there are new websites, blogs and inform-
a tion resources for patients/clients. If you do a quick inter net search on any 
health or social care topic using a search engine such as Google or Yahoo!, 
you will get many thou sands of results or ‘hits’. This will be far too many to 
make any sense of, and this is why you require a more specific profes sional 
health or social care data base (which we discuss in Chapter 3) rather than a 
general inter net search engine when search ing more seri ously for health or 
social care topics. Using a more specific data base will reduce the number of 
unwanted hits you get; however, you will still access many thou sands of hits 
unless you are very focused in your search.
Let us take, for example, the topic of demen tia, one that is poten tially 
relev ant to health and social care profes sion als. CINAHL is the abbre vi ated 
title of a well- used data base contain ing refer ences for health and social care. 
A general search for inform a tion about demen tia using this subject- specific 
data base will yield over 18,000 hits. If you are more specific and request only 
research papers about demen tia, you will still get a few thou sand hits. 
Reducing this further to a partic u lar aspect of demen tia care will reduce the 
number of hits still further, but they are still likely to run into many hundreds 
or a few thou sand. Clearly, this is a daunt ing number but it illus trates the point 
we are trying to make – the more focused your search is, the more you can 
narrow down your search and reduce the number of unwanted hits you get.
Consider one area of your profes sional or clin ical prac tice (it could be a 
patient/client problem or inter ven tion) and think of a key phrase related to 
it. Enter the key phrase into a data base or search engine and see how many 
results (hits) you get. How do you think this would compare with 10 or 20 
years ago?
You can see that if you are going to use evid ence in your profes sional prac tice 
and academic writing, you need to seek out the best avail able inform a tion for 
your studies and prac tice. You also need to focus on the specific aspect of the 
topic you are inter ested in so that you do not get side tracked with more 
general inform a tion and there fore fail to find out what you really need to 
know. You also need to be select ive about what you read, see and hear and be 
able to recog nize good quality evid ence when you come across it. It is also 
import ant to make sense of what you read, see and hear, so that you can work 
out what inform a tion is good quality and should influ ence your prac tice, and 
what isn’t and should not. In general, research will be stronger evid ence than 
anec dotal evidence and reviews of research will be stronger still. We will 
discuss these in more detail in Chapter 3.
Consider one area of your profes sional or clin ical prac tice (it could be a
patient/client problem or inter ven tion) and think of a key phrase related to 
it. Enter the key phrase into a data base or search engine and see how many 
results (hits) you get. How do you think this would compare with 10 or 20 
years ago?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 23
Smith (2010) describes the responses from some health and social care 
workers to managing vast amounts of inform a tion. He high lights two main 
strategies: the ‘ostrich strategy’ that is adopted by those who do not try to 
keep up to date, and the ‘pigeon strategy’ in which profes sion als ‘cherry pick’ 
what they want to believe from all the avail able inform a tion. This ‘pigeon’ 
approach might include listen ing only to what they hear from colleagues in 
prac tice and not finding out more from a range of sources. In this book, we 
argue that neither strategy is appro pri ate: it is not good prac tice to accept the 
first thing you read, see or are told in prac tice without further invest ig a tion. 
You need to be more crit ical than this.
Professional know ledge is chan ging and expand ing all the time. It is not 
possible to teach every one how to respond in every given clin ical and 
profes sional situ ation. As inform a tion/evid ence is increas ing at such a 
fast pace, all students/learners and prac ti tion ers need to be confid ent in 
access ing new know ledge, and they need to be able to think crit ic ally about 
it. Professionals need skills to access and inter pret the know ledge they 
require when they require it. We will not survive in profes sional life if we 
just try to remem ber facts or learn from exper i ence, as we will quickly become 
out of date. Furthermore, we will then be ‘role- model ling’ out- of-
 date prac tice for others to learn from. It doesn’t take much imagin a tion 
to see how prac tice can quickly become outdated if people learn from others 
who are not up to date. We need to keep up to date and respond flex ibly 
and creat ively to solve prob lems in fast- chan ging health and social care 
envir on ments.
In response to this inform a tion over load, the best strategy is not just to keep 
reading and access ing up- to- date inform a tion but also to be crit ical of the 
inform a tion you read so that you know which inform a tion is useful to you 
and which is less useful. The aim of this book is to show you how to do this 
most effect ively.
It is not appro pri ate in the world of health and social care to accept everything 
you are told by lectur ers and prac tice assessor/mentors, or to learn only by 
observing role models and build ing up exper i ence. You also need to:
• Read widely about your topic and appraise the quality of what you are 
reading.
• Think crit ic ally about what you see and hear in prac tice.
• Think crit ic ally about how you seek out and use good quality inform a-
tion from a variety of sources.
• Think crit ic ally about how the best new evid ence can be applied to your 
prac tice.
It is not appro pri ate in the world of health and social care to accept everything 
you are told by lectur ers and prac tice assessor/mentors, or to learn only by 
observing role models and build ing up exper i ence. You also need to:
• Read widely about your topic and appraise the quality of what you are 
reading.
• Think crit ic ally about what you see and hear in prac tice.
• Think crit ic ally about how you seek out and use good quality inform a-
tion from a variety of sources.
• Think crit ic ally about how the best new evid ence can be applied to your 
prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

24 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Professional account ab il ity
Check and see how your organ iz a tion and/or profes sional body promotes 
account ab il ity and/or crit ical think ing. If not expli cit, consider further how 
your prac tice decisions or inter ven tions are guided by your own beliefs and/
or values and/or by profes sional policy and guidelines.
In many coun tries around the world, the account ab il ity of health and social 
care profes sion als is an integ ral part of profes sional stand ards or codes of 
conduct. As a health or social care profes sional or student/learner, you may 
have a repres ent at ive profes sional govern ing body. For example, profes sional 
bodies in the UK, includ ing the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC 2015) 
and the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC 2012), emphas ize the 
import ance of account ab il ity for profes sional prac tice. There is often further 
guid ance in specific profes sional colleges, asso ci ations and organ iz a tions, or 
in job descrip tions or policies provided by your employer.
As a prac ti tioner, you must be able to justify and give a clear account of and 
rationale for your prac tice, and this means that you are answer able for your 
acts and your omis sions. This involves a duty to provide the most up- to- date 
care, based on the best avail able evid ence. It is the role of the profes sional to 
incor por ate relev ant inform a tion into every day prac tice in order to provide 
safe and effect ive patient/client care and to ensure that the best care is 
delivered. A key compon ent of account ab il ity is think ing crit ic ally about your 
prac tice and being able to justify your actions and decisions.
When you are called to account for your prac tice, you will only be able to 
do so if you have admin istered care that you can justify. It is no good trying to 
defend oneself by saying ‘my colleague advised me to do this’ or ‘my lecturer 
told me to do that’. This will not be seen as a good justi fic a tion for your actions, 
and would certainly not be seen as a strong defence. It is not diffi cult to see 
where this is taking us. There is an ever increas ing amount of inform a tion 
avail able for health and social care profes sion als to make sense of, and each 
profes sional has an oblig a tion to make decisions based on the best avail able 
evid ence in order to provide optimum care and remain account able to their 
profes sional body. The best way to defend your prac tice is to provide appro-
pri ate evid ence to justify your actions – you need to be able to think crit ic ally 
to be able to do this. We discuss this further in Chapter 5.
A common feature of all profes sional organ iz a tions is they emphas ize that 
those account able to them should:
• 
Provide a high stand ard of prac tice at all times.
Professional account ab il ity
Check and see how your organ iz a tion and/or profes sional body promotes
account ab il ity and/or crit ical think ing. If not expli cit, consider further how 
your prac tice decisions or inter ven tions are guided by your own beliefs and/
or values and/or by profes sional policy and guidelines.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 25
• 
Provide care based on the best avail able evid ence.
This requires you to think crit ic ally.
One reason it is import ant to make sense of the inform a tion you come across 
is that, as a health or social care profes sional, you are account able for the 
care you give. If you are think ing crit ic ally about your prac tice, you are 
more likely to be able to fully justify the decisions you make and the inter-
ven tions you carry out.
The complic ated part comes when you consider that most aspects of care 
are informed by a wealth of inform a tion: recent devel op ments, exper i ence, 
expert opinion, research, policy docu ments, stand ards of prac tice, and 
so on. For any one aspect of care, there is a vast amount of inform a tion, 
includ ing liter at ure to consider. Once you have all the relev ant inform a tion, 
you need to be crit ical of what you read, see and hear, and then make a 
judge ment about it so that you can account for your care or prac tice if called 
on to do so.
Who are you account able to?
• Students are account able to their higher educa tion insti tu tion, and when in 
a prac tice setting should be super vised by a registered profes sional.
• Registered prac ti tion ers are usually account able to their profes sional body 
and their employ ers.
• All registered health and social care prac ti tion ers are account able to 
the law.
What about your legal respons ib il it ies?
We all have a moral and ethical respons ib il ity to deliver health and social care 
in a safe and effect ive way. In many coun tries, profes sion als owe a legal duty 
of care to those they look after and this duty involves deliv er ing care that is 
based on the best avail able evid ence.
In many coun tries, recent case law has suppor ted the role of evid ence, 
and using the best avail able evid ence, to determ ine the stand ard of care 
that profes sion als have to deliver rather than allow ing profes sion als to 
disreg ard evid ence and set their own stand ards. Overturning a previ ous 
land mark case (Bolam v. Friern Hospital Management Committee [1957] 
2 All ER 118 per McNair J.), judges have ruled that a doctor has a duty to 
use the best avail able evid ence rather than rely on an outdated defence 
One reason it is import ant to make sense of the inform a tion you come across 
is that, as a health or social care profes sional, you are account able for the 
care you give. If you are think ing crit ic ally about your prac tice, you are 
more likely to be able to fully justify the decisions you make and the inter-
ven tions you carry out.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

26 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
of ‘this is what my colleagues do’. In the case of Bolitho v. City & Hackney 
Health Authority [1993] 13 BMLR 111, CA, the court held that the body of 
expert opinion relied upon to judge good prac tice should be logical and evid-
ence based, thus estab lish ing a legal duty to provide care that is based on the 
best avail able evid ence, rather than a repe ti tion of other profes sion als’ action 
or advice.
See if you can find any examples of legal cases where a health or social 
care profes sional has been prosec uted or litig ated against. Consider whether 
a lack of crit ical think ing may have contrib uted to the reasons why the 
case arose.
If you think crit ic ally about your prac tice and crit ic ally appraise evid ence, 
you will be equipped to prac tise in a safe and effect ive way. You will also 
be more likely to be able to justify and account for your decisions and 
interven tions.
How crit ical think ing can help you in your 
profes sional prac tice and academic 
assign ments
We have illus trated how we are often inund ated with inform a tion, but a lot of 
it is of poor quality and we there fore need to think crit ic ally about the inform-
a tion we are presen ted with. Example 1 and Example 2 earlier in the chapter 
also helped illus trate how it is easy for a crit ical approach to be lost within a 
‘good story’. While this is unfor tu nate within every day life, it is far worse and 
poten tially far more serious within health and social care prac tice, as profes-
sion als risk making poor decisions if they are not crit ical about the inform a-
tion upon which they base their prac tice. Critical think ing is a skill that is 
essen tial to acquire and one that will enhance your prac tice. We illus trated this 
in Example 3.
As a student or profes sional under tak ing further educa tion, if you examine 
the marking criteria for your academic assign ments, you will see that you are 
marked on your ability to demon strate that you can be crit ical of the liter at ure 
you include. This involves using the best avail able evid ence relat ing to the 
points you are making. In prin ciple, this gener ally means looking for research 
See if you can find any examples of legal cases where a health or social
care profes sional has been prosec uted or litig ated against. Consider whether 
a lack of crit ical think ing may have contrib uted to the reasons why the 
case arose.
If you think crit ic ally about your prac tice and crit ic ally appraise evid ence, 
you will be equipped to prac tise in a safe and effect ive way. You will also
be more likely to be able to justify and account for your decisions and 
interven tions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

WHAT IS ‘CRIT ICAL THINK ING’ AND WHY IS IT IMPORT ANT? 27
evid ence rather than anec dotal sources. We also have to be aware of what 
consti tutes good quality research and if at all possible look for reviews of 
research rather than indi vidual papers. It is also neces sary to make a judge-
ment about the quality of the sources you use, which we will explain in later 
chapters. In your profes sional prac tice, this means ques tion ing what you are 
told and looking up inform a tion to inform your care. Taking inform a tion at 
face value and out of context – even if it is stated by an expert colleague or 
published in a reput able profes sional journal – is not the way to attain 
academic or profes sional cred ib il ity.
The need for health and social care profes sion als to keep up to date with 
inform a tion about new devel op ments and appraise the merits of new research 
and propos als in rela tion to their own prac tice is one of the main drivers 
behind the current move in the UK and other coun tries towards an ‘all- 
gradu ate’ health and social care profes sional body. The need to be able to 
think crit ic ally as a safe, effect ive and inde pend ent prac ti tioner has never 
been greater. Qualified profes sion als will be the indi vidu als who are able to 
assess the patient/client, plan and eval u ate evid ence- based care which can 
then be imple men ted by others, includ ing assist ant prac ti tion ers, care assist-
ants and those in support ive roles. As profes sion als, we need to be crit ical 
thinkers in order to plan and eval u ate the effect ive ness of the inter ven tions 
we deliver rather than carry ing out care unques tion ingly.
Before you move on to the rest of the book, can you identify how you might 
become more crit ical in your prac tice or academic writing?
Because there is so much inform a tion avail able, in this book we make a 
distinc tion between inform a tion that is readily avail able – for example, 
lecture notes, recom men ded text books or the opinion of colleagues (which we 
discuss in Chapter 2) – and inform a tion for which you need to search a bit 
harder – for example, through a liter at ure search to locate relev ant research 
studies and reviews (which we discuss in Chapter 3).
It is import ant to note that we will be discuss ing crit ical think ing in rela tion 
to both your profes sional prac tice and academic studies. This is because prac-
tice and theory are closely inter con nec ted. Sometimes you may be writing 
about what you or others have done in your work place, or you may be 
apply ing know ledge or research gained from writing in rela tion to your 
manage ment of care for a patient/client. It is hoped that this book will assist 
you in devel op ing your skills as a crit ical thinker within health and social care. 
Read on . . .
Before you move on to the rest of the book, can you identify how you might 
become more crit ical in your prac tice or academic writing?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

28 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
In summary
Being a crit ical thinker helps us to make rational decisions. We need to 
examine our own beliefs, such as our precon ceived ideas, assump tions, values 
and biases, in order to think crit ic ally about the inform a tion we come across. 
There is a vast amount of inform a tion and evid ence that you will encounter 
and you will need to make sense of what you see, hear and read and not accept 
argu ments at face value. We have sugges ted an approach to being crit ical 
using our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’.
As a profes sional, you are account able and you should ensure that the prac-
tice you deliver is evid ence-based. Critical think ing helps us to work out which 
evid ence to use.
Key points
1 Critical think ing is essen tial to promote the best decision- making.
2 Critical think ing means being crit ical about the inform a tion we receive and 
how we use it.
3 Information is expand ing in all areas of health and social care – some 
inform a tion is useful and relev ant, some less so, and some can be inac cur ate 
or mislead ing.
4 As profes sion als we need to be able to work out which inform a tion is useful 
to us and use it appro pri ately.
5 We suggest using the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ tool. This 
should help you to identify the most appro pri ate sources and enable you to 
be more crit ical of the inform a tion you use in your academic work and 
profes sional prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

2
How you can think 
more crit ic ally about 
inform a tion that is 
readily avail able
• Critical think ing and the use of inform a tion/evid ence
• What type of inform a tion is readily avail able?
• Thinking crit ic ally about the quality and useful ness of ‘readily 
available inform a tion’
• In summary
• Key points
In this chapter, we will:
• Identify what is readily avail able inform a tion.
• Discuss how to judge the quality and useful ness of this inform a tion.
• Show how you can begin to think crit ic ally about the inform a tion you find 
and how to use it.
29
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

30 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Critical think ing and the use of 
inform a tion/evid ence
If crit ical think ing involves chal len ging your own assump tions and then 
adopt ing a ques tion ing approach and thought ful atti tude to what you read, 
see or hear, then clearly the inform a tion/evid ence you use in your profes-
sional life is very import ant. As evid ence- based prac tice is a corner stone of 
contem por ary health and social care prac tice, we emphas ize how you can be 
crit ical of evid ence through out this book. We distin guish between inform a-
tion/evid ence that is readily avail able and the best avail able inform a tion/evid-
ence, which you might have to search a little bit harder for.
What type of inform a tion is readily avail able?
In this chapter, we will look at the inform a tion that you will encounter on a 
day- to- day basis and we will refer to this as readily avail able inform a tion.
By this we mean inform a tion that you do not have to search long and hard for; 
you may just encounter it in your day- to- day profes sional or student life. We 
all use this type of inform a tion/evid ence all the time and it is import ant to be 
crit ical of what you come across. Because there is so much of this inform a-
tion, it is import ant you can make sense of it and determ ine whether it is of a 
good enough quality for you to base your profes sional prac tice on or use in 
your academic work, and when you need to dig a bit deeper.
Think quickly and jot down all the places/people from which you currently 
get your inform a tion related to your studies and/or your prac tice.
Such forms of ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ include:
• Newspapers and other forms of media.
• Internet search engines such as Google and Bing.
• Websites focus ing on health and social care.
• Tweets and blogs.
• Advice from lectur ers or prac tice assessor/mentors.
• Lectures and lecture notes.
• Textbooks.
• Journals to which you have access.
Think quickly and jot down all the places/people from which you currently 
get your inform a tion related to your studies and/or your prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 31
• Professional policies and guidelines.
• Information leaf lets by patient or client organ iz a tions.
It is import ant to note that wherever you live in the world, patients/clients may 
also be exposed to such ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ and they often use the 
inter net for addi tional sources of inform a tion and a second opinion about their 
health or social care issues. There are some well- advert ised and readily avail-
able sources where the public can seek inform a tion, includ ing leaf lets produced 
by profes sional organ iz a tions and via the inter net – for example, in the UK:
• The British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) for health news [http://www.
bbc.co.uk/news/health/]
• Citizens Advice for a wider range of issues [http://www.citizensad vice.org.
uk/]
• Organizations that are targeted at the public include Patient.co.uk [http://
www.patient.co.uk/], Patient Opinion [https://www.patien topin ion.org.uk/] 
and NHS Choices [http://www.nhs.uk/Pages/HomePage.aspx].
The problem with ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ is that there is so much of 
it! This is partly the result of the inform a tion revolu tion and the free public a-
tion of ideas on the inter net. Anyone can publish anything online, and you 
need to be a crit ical reader to determ ine whether what you are reading is a 
reli able source of inform a tion. For example, anyone can add or edit inform a-
tion on Wikipedia [http://en.wiki pe dia.org/wiki/Main_Page], so you cannot be 
sure whether inform a tion about health and social care issues has been 
submit ted by a reli able or know ledge able source.
Thinking crit ic ally about the quality and 
useful ness of ‘readily avail able inform a tion’
Let us look at some sources of ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ to determ ine 
whether they are reli able enough for you to use in your profes sional prac tice 
and academic writing. Remember to use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical 
think ing’ to work out the strengths and weak nesses of the inform a tion at 
your disposal.
Newspapers/news websites
In Chapter 1, we provide an example of how news pa pers can use mislead ing 
stat ist ics to promote a story. This should be enough of a warning against 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

32 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
using media inform a tion in your academic work or any prac tice situ ation 
without seeking further inform a tion. However, news pa pers may provide 
useful back ground inform a tion. For example, they might lead you to a contro-
ver sial quota tion to start your assign ment or to get you think ing more widely. 
Or they might refer you to a research study, giving a snippet of inform a tion 
but not the full refer ence for the study, making it harder (but possible) to track 
it down. In prin ciple, you should avoid direct refer ence to news pa per articles 
in your written work or discus sions at work unless you use them as a spring-
board for further enquiry or you are discuss ing the media’s view or perspect ive 
on a topic. Some news pa pers may have stricter edit or ial quality control than 
others and so may offer a higher stand ard of inform a tion, but it will still need 
to be checked out. Take, for example, The Guardian’s article on ‘Hard to 
swallow: the world’s first drink able sunscreen’ (Burnett 2014) – this would 
certainly warrant further scru tiny.
Internet sources and general search engines
The inter net is a fant astic tool that can be used to search for both ‘easy to 
access’ and ‘harder to find’ sources of inform a tion/evid ence (the latter we 
discuss in Chapter 3); you can use it to access profes sional data bases, full text 
research studies, policies and guidelines, social media, news stories and more 
general websites. Often a general search engine such as Google, Bing or 
Yahoo! is the first port of call for busy profes sion als; however, the inform a tion 
presen ted in the results list from a general search does not prior it ize the 
inform a tion for your purposes or order the inform a tion in terms of quality, 
cred ib il ity or even relev ance. So, unless you use an appro pri ate search 
strategy and profes sional data base, as discussed in the next chapter, you are 
unlikely to get the best and most relev ant research from a random inter net 
search. Sometimes you can use general search engines if you know what 
profes sional source you are looking for – say, a refer ence to a journal article 
that may be avail able online. A crit ical thinker will access the best inform a-
tion in a system atic and profes sional way.
Websites
The inter net provides access to a vast array of websites offer ing millions of 
pages of inform a tion, includ ing everything from rigor ous research to trivia, 
personal opinion and misin form a tion. Useful websites are likely to be those 
that are produced by recog nized organ iz a tions, profes sional or patient/client 
groups. These might contain policies, guidelines for prac tice, up- to- date 
news on profes sional issues, and issues of concern to patient and client 
groups. But, as with all websites, it is import ant to recog nize quality and 
possible bias.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 33
How can you think crit ic ally about the quality of a website?
Before making use of inform a tion found on the web in your academic work or 
prac tice, you need to make sure it is of a high quality and up to date. 
Remember to use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ given in Chapter 1. 
For example:
• 
What is the evid ence that is repor ted? If a website refers to the conclu-
sion of a piece of research, you should try and access the original 
research if you are using this in your assign ments or prac tice.
• 
Who has written the website? Note if any author’s name is given. If so, 
consider whether the author is a cred ible expert on the topic and if they 
are likely to be biased or have a ‘hidden agenda’ on the topic – for 
example, are they from a campaign group trying to get a partic u lar drug 
or vaccin a tion banned (consider the publi city surround ing the MMR 
vaccin a tion mentioned in Chapter 1). Is the author’s perspect ive their 
personal perspect ive?
• 
When was the site produced? Do not assume it is up to date just 
because it is still on the inter net. See if you can locate the date it was 
written.
• 
Who is the target audi ence? Remember to use the inform a tion in this 
context. It may be pitched for patients/clients rather than for profes-
sion als.
In general, before you use a website in your academic work, you must assess 
the quality of the site and whenever possible you should use original sources. 
Consider whether it is the best evid ence avail able or whether you should 
use it as a spring board for finding further inform a tion/evid ence. Citing 
websites without judging their quality is like telling the marker, ‘I was in a bit 
of a rush and this is all I could find . . .’, and your mark will undoubtedly 
reflect this. Similarly, if you go to your profes sional prac tice area with only a 
website as a recom mend a tion for change, you will prob ably be encour aged to 
find stronger evid ence. Remember that if you use inform a tion from the web, 
the relev ant web page(s) must be cited in full in your refer ence list. You may 
wish to check whether your organ iz a tion or univer sity has a guide to refer en-
cing web pages.
Social media
Social media is being used increas ingly in a profes sional (Grajales et al. 2014) 
or academic capa city and also by patients (Househ 2014). The value of social 
media is that it is gener ally access ible to every one and has enorm ous poten tial 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

34 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
for sharing ideas and making connec tions. You should think crit ic ally about 
how you use social media your self as a profes sional but also if you use it to 
access sources of inform a tion. Common sites used are Twitter [www.twitter.
com], Facebook [https://www.face book.com] and, for career network ing, 
LinkedIn [https://www.linkedin.com/]. Many other sites are also avail able. 
Grajales et al. (2014) carried out a review of the applic a tions of social media 
in health care and found ten differ ent categor ies of social media, some of 
which we now discuss.
Twitter enables people to discuss profes sional issues and even organ ize 
profes sional discus sions. It can be used as a learn ing tool, to converse and 
share ideas (Forgie et al. 2013). A Twitter user has a user name begin ning with 
the ‘@’ symbol. Each contri bu tion or ‘tweet’ must be 140 char ac ters or less. 
Maclean et al. (2013) offer a guide to using Twitter, or there is a helpful ‘twit-
terversity’ at http://www.wenurses.com/Resources/twit terversity.php. There 
are inter na tional organ iz a tions who use Twitter to commu nic ate import ant 
health and policy inform a tion; (e.g. @WHO), profes sional journ als tweet 
about their latest papers, and profes sional organ iz a tions also use Twitter and 
other social media sites to share inform a tion quickly and concisely. You can 
search on Twitter for topics or people and you can use hasht ags to locate 
partic u lar discus sions (e.g. #crit ical think ing, #evid ence- based prac tice). 
Patients or clients may tweet about their exper i ences of health and social 
care; for example, under the user name @patien topin ion you may find patients/
carers tweet ing about indi vidual topics, and you can search Twitter for a 
specific topic using a hashtag.
A site that organ izes weekly and fort nightly Twitter chats is http://www.
wenurses.com/about/index.php. There are specific groups for mental health, 
midwives, phar macists, para med ics, learn ing disab il ity nurses, school nurses 
and commis sion ers. There is also inform a tion on taking part in Twitter chats.
Blogs (or web logs) are an inter net- based forum for people who have opin-
ions or expert ise in a partic u lar area. They use blogs to express their ideas (in 
more words than Twitter) or to draw atten tion to their own or others’ public a-
tions and ideas, and increas ingly so in educa tion and research. Blogs and 
tweets are easily dissem in ated (often via Twitter or you can find them by 
using a search engine). For example, a blog that a Canadian man with 
colorectal cancer posted [http://www.penma chine.com/] received 4 million 
views after his death (Grajales et al. 2014).
Blogs and Twitter may offer very differ ent perspect ives, specific ally on 
rapidly chan ging situ ations or issues.
Facebook is one of the most widely used social network ing sites – it is some-
times used by teach ers and students (Prescott et al. 2013) and by profes sion als 
in their personal and work lives. Killam et al. (2013) discuss use of Facebook 
in under gradu ate nurse educa tion, noting its strengths, such as the devel op-
ment of rela tion ships, but also high light ing the chal lenges and risks, includ ing 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 35
inap pro pri ate friend requests. One of the key uses for Facebook is as a 
support/inform a tion network by patients/clients with specific condi tions or 
prob lems, such as breast cancer (Bender et al. 2011).
Importance of crit ical think ing when using social media
As with any other source, you should think crit ic ally about any inform a tion/
evid ence you find on social media. Opinions can be stated very rapidly without 
users taking time to think through their point or explain ing them selves clearly. 
Thus it is hard to identify which comments on social media are based on 
consid er a tion of the best avail able evid ence. There are reports in the media of 
profes sion als who have been discip lined for unpro fes sional content on social 
media sites (Keogh 2013). Levati (2014) found that many nurses’ use of social 
media indic ated a blur ring of personal and profes sional lives, although there 
are guidelines and warn ings against doing this. In the UK, the Nursing and 
Midwifery Council (2013b) and the Health and Care Professions Council 
(undated) have guidelines on profes sional use of social media. Social media 
may be most useful for indi vidual or personal perspect ives and you should 
recog nize it as such. It is import ant to take into account the context in which 
it is written.
Advice from prac tice assessors/mentors and colleagues
Practice assessors/mentors and colleagues are a good source of profes sional 
know ledge and skills through role model ling. A role model may be described 
as someone who is able to exem plify beha viour and social roles (Perry 2009). 
Felstead (2013) notes that prac tice staff also model profes sional beha viour. 
We can all learn from role model ling from other profes sion als and most of us 
can remem ber a good role model. Indeed, learn ing from other profes sion als is 
a major part of profes sional educa tion. However, remem ber that health and 
social care providers are a wide and diverse group. There are expert prac ti-
tion ers and there are novice prac ti tion ers. Some prac ti tion ers are thought ful 
and reflect ive about their prac tice, while others are not. The quality of advice 
you receive in prac tice may vary!
How can you ‘think crit ic ally’ about inform a tion obtained from social media, 
prac tice assessors/mentors or colleagues?
If you read some thing about an inter ven tion or care decision on social media 
or are informed by a prac tice assessor/mentor or colleague, consider the 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’. For example, consider whether they are 
quoting from their own exper i ence or from research evid ence or guidelines. 
Where there is no research evid ence relat ing to a complex and unusual 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

36 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
problem, exper i ence and reflect ive judge ment can be very valu able. But you 
need to decide if it is the best avail able evid ence, and you should endeav our 
to check its accur acy.
Discussion between profes sion als about inform a tion or research that has 
been crit ic ally appraised is likely to be bene fi cial. However, it is not always 
the case that inform a tion will be crit ic ally appraised by prac ti tion ers. 
Referring back to our discus sion of the need to be crit ical of what you read, 
see and hear, you need to ques tion what you are told in prac tice rather 
than accept ing what your prac tice assessor/mentor or colleague tells or 
shows you. The examples of the report ing of the Implanon story (Example 1, 
Chapter 1) and the MMR vaccin a tion story (Example 2, Chapter 1) show 
how misin form a tion can easily spread when inform a tion is not crit ic ally 
appraised. If you stop to think about this, the implic a tions are enorm ous. If 
inform a tion or advice is not crit ic ally appraised or is based on unfoun ded 
rumour, and is then passed unchal lenged from one profes sional to another, 
that is not demon strat ing evid ence- based prac tice and is certainly not apply ing 
crit ical think ing! So beware of accept ing inform a tion at face value from your 
prac tice assessor/mentor and your colleagues. We will discuss this further in 
Chapter 5.
Lectures or confer ence present a tions
Lectures or confer ence present a tions may only provide a basic intro duc tion 
or focus on a specific aspect of a topic. To gain a fuller under stand ing, you 
are expec ted to access the given refer ences or reading list and read more 
broadly around the subject. It cannot be stressed enough how import ant 
it is do this. This is neces sary even when an expert deliv ers the confer ence 
present a tion, since he or she is only present ing a snap shot of their research 
or ideas.
If you only refer to lecture notes in your assign ment or use them as evid-
ence for your prac tice, it implies that you have not been think ing crit ic ally or 
in depth about the subject. It gives the same message as described previ ously: 
‘I was in a rush and did not have time to find evid ence related to the lecture’. 
You would there fore be unlikely to gain high marks in assign ments or be able 
to offer an adequate explan a tion for your prac tice decisions. There is one 
excep tion to this, which is when a leading author ity or expert deliv ers a 
lecture/present a tion and he or she is deliv er ing mater ial that is as yet unpub-
lished. Then, and only then, may you quote from this lecture in your assign-
ment or discuss their ideas in prac tice without finding further support ing 
inform a tion. However, even then your argu ment will be stronger if you find 
related evid ence to back up what you write. Although confer ence present a-
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 37
tions can inform you of expert and up- to- date inform a tion/evid ence, you 
should try to read more widely around the topics presen ted.
How can you think crit ic ally about the quality of a lecture/present a tion?
When you are in a lecture/present a tion, consider the ‘Six ques tions for crit-
ical think ing’. Consider the sources that the lecturer is refer ring to and 
whether the argu ments they present make sense. Our advice is that you 
should avoid refer ring only to a lecture/present a tion in your written work 
or prac tice. Instead, use the ideas presen ted there and read more widely 
on some of the refer ences and refer to these. It is far better still to 
search more widely on the topic, as we will discuss in the next chapter – a 
lecture/present a tion should be used as a basis for further reading and 
invest ig a tion.
Unfortunately, a lot of people rely on inform a tion they have received in a 
lecture without doing the appro pri ate reading. They also rely on this inform a-
tion for years to come. The implic a tions of this are similar to what happens 
if prac tice inform a tion is passed from one colleague to another without 
crit ical think ing. We quickly become out of date. If we are to become inde-
pend ent crit ical thinkers, we need to move on from this approach and use 
lectures as they are meant to be used – as launch- pads for further reading and 
discus sion.
Textbooks/e- books
Textbooks, espe cially at under gradu ate level, gener ally provide a spring-
board for further study. Some text books provide a basic over view of current 
know ledge on a partic u lar area, espe cially if you are new to a topic. They may 
provide sound factual inform a tion on topics such as anatomy and physiology. 
Others provide ideas, theor et ical models and frame works or opin ions on a 
topic by leading experts. The main thing is to ensure that you have iden ti fied 
the most appro pri ate text book for your purpose.
How do you know if a text book is a useful one?
We suggest you do not start with a special ist book if you are new to a topic. 
This is because when you are new to a topic, it is usually most helpful to 
have an over view of that topic rather than to start by focus ing on a special ist 
area that you may not be able to put into context. Use the ‘Six ques tions for 
crit ical think ing’: Consider who the author is, the date of public a tion and the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

38 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
target audi ence. Be prepared to use the text book as a spring board for further 
reading. Use the inform a tion on the back cover to find out who the book is 
aimed at and what the contents cover. Consider whether the text book is 
appro pri ate for your level and focus of study. We also suggest that you read 
reviews of text books and follow recom mend a tions on your reading list for 
core texts, noting who these are aimed at. Remember, it may be many 
months or even years before a book is published, so consider how up to date 
the inform a tion is and whether there are likely to be changes in the evid ence 
used to support the argu ments presen ted there. Finally, make sure that you 
have the most up- to- date edition of any text book you use, remem ber ing that 
new editions of the most popular texts are gener ally published every few 
years. Look at the dates of the refer ences cited in the book too. Those who 
mark your work will notice if you are refer ring to an older version of a recently 
updated book.
Hard copy and elec tronic journ als
Research and other inform a tion that is published in academic journ als forms 
the basis of much of our profes sional know ledge, some thing we discuss in 
depth in the next chapter. However, in this chapter, we are inter ested in 
‘readily avail able sources’, and thus inform a tion in journ als you are not 
specific ally search ing for but come across by chance in your every day life. 
Many work places subscribe to a journal, either in print format or using an 
online elec tronic journ als facil ity. If you find this is the case in your work or 
prac tice area, find out why that partic u lar journal was chosen. It may be a 
special ist journal that publishes all the best research in a partic u lar study 
area. But remem ber, differ ent inform a tion will be avail able in differ ent 
journ als and thus you might not get the ‘whole picture’ if you refer to one 
journal alone. There are also an increas ing number of open access journ als 
for which you do not need to subscribe, which you may come across from 
initial inter net searches. You should make sure that they have been peer 
reviewed before public a tion. Peer review is the process in which experts in a 
subject area are invited to review the academic work of an author, often prior 
to public a tion in a journal. Refer to Chapter 3 where we discuss how to search 
for a wider range of liter at ure.
One research paper, even if it is a piece of good quality research relev ant 
to your topic, will rarely be enough for you to base a judge ment on 
regard ing correct prac tice or an academic argu ment. For any one study 
support ing a view, there may be four other papers that have a contra dict ory 
view.
One research paper, even if it is a piece of good quality research relev ant 
to your topic, will rarely be enough for you to base a judge ment on 
regard ing correct prac tice or an academic argu ment. For any one study 
support ing a view, there may be four other papers that have a contra dict ory 
view.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 39
How can you think crit ic ally about what you find in a journal?
A wide variety of inform a tion is presen ted in journ als, includ ing edit or i als, 
original research papers and letters to the editor. It is import ant that you 
can recog nize the types of inform a tion you come across and use this 
appro pri ately in your written work or prac tice envir on ment. When you 
apply the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’, consider care fully the 
‘what’ so that you are clear about the type of inform a tion you have – for 
example, is it an edit or ial, a research study (if so, what type?), a descript ive 
liter at ure review or a system atic review, an over view of the topic? These 
are explained below. One import ant thing to remem ber is that journ als 
that are easily avail able in your work place will not provide a compre hens ive 
range of relev ant inform a tion on a topic. A full range of relev ant inform a tion 
may be published in a variety of other sources and you will only find 
these through carry ing out a compre hens ive search, which we discuss in 
Chapter 3.
What inform a tion will you find in a journal?
Editorials
Editorials are gener ally written by the editor of a journal and repres ent his or 
her view point or the view point of the edit or ial team.
Systematic reviews
These are reviews of research under taken on a partic u lar topic and are gener-
ally presen ted using a research struc ture, as follows:
• A ques tion or state ment of aims
• Method (which should outline the approach to the search)
• Results or find ings
• Discussion
• Conclusions.
They should discuss how the quality of the research was appraised. The most 
compre hens ive collec tion of system atic reviews is the Cochrane Collaboration 
and its sister organ iz a tion, the Campbell Collaboration. These are reviews 
compiled by expert ‘system atic review ers’ and published on the Cochrane 
Collaboration website [www.cochrane.org], and for more public health 
focused inform a tion, the Campbell Collaboration website [http://www.camp-
bellcol lab or a tion.org/].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

40 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Unsystematic reviews or descript ive reviews
These may give a broad over view of a topic drawing on a wide range of liter-
at ure. However, unless the approach to finding the liter at ure is thor ough and 
there is a specific ques tion and method for the search, you cannot be 
sure that all the evid ence on the topic has been included and there may be 
some bias in the selec tion of studies used. You should also note whether the 
quality of the research used has been appraised. This type of review will 
provide weaker evid ence than one which has been compiled system at ic ally. 
However, that is not to say that the inform a tion will not be useful, as such 
reviews may provide a concise (but not compre hens ive) intro duc tion to, 
or over view of, a topic. If you refer to this type of review in your written 
work, make sure that you are clear about the type of evid ence you are using. 
You may then want to access the indi vidual research studies or papers referred 
to in the review.
Research studies
Research studies gener ally provide stronger evid ence than more anec dotal 
sources. These can easily be iden ti fied, as they normally begin with a 
specific research ques tion (or aim) that is addressed using an iden ti fied 
method, follow ing which the results or find ings, discus sion and conclu sions 
are presen ted. Such studies can be quant it at ive (meas ur ing or count ing some-
thing) or qual it at ive (describ ing some thing), and various approaches can be 
adopted with either type of research. Research studies can provide good 
sources of evid ence but they still need to be appraised indi vidu ally. 
Be wary of a single piece of research evid ence that makes a claim about 
prac tice. Consider a jigsaw where you only have one bit of the picture; 
some times you cannot tell what the final view will be. Instead, as we will 
discuss in the next chapter, it is better to search more broadly for further 
research papers or to locate a system atic review that has already been 
carried out. This is so that you can gain an over view of what the conclu sion 
should be based on all the research on the topic – that is, complete the whole 
jigsaw.
Figure 2.1
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 41
Discussion or opinion papers
These will not have as clear a struc ture as a research study and will be intro-
duced as repres ent ing the opinion of the author. Remember that the quality of 
this type of evid ence will depend on the expert ise of the person writing the 
paper – do not assume that even an expert will be basing their argu ment on 
relev ant and evid ence- based sources. They may be also be biased – not neces-
sar ily inten tion ally – in the selec tion of the sources they use. Our advice is that 
you should only use this type of evid ence when you cannot find research evid-
ence on your topic.
Professional and clin ical guid ance, policies and ‘evid ence- based’ 
knowledge summar ies
The move towards provid ing summar ies of evid ence is one of the most useful 
devel op ments in health and social care. You might see paper volumes or links 
to inter net sites that summar ize the best avail able evid ence.
If you come across up- to- date policy or guidelines based on the evid ence 
from system atic reviews or summar ies of system atic reviews, you have 
strong evid ence upon which to base your profes sional prac tice or academic 
work.
The above public a tions are differ ent from other types of ‘readily access ible’ 
inform a tion because they are based not only on research but also on system-
atic reviews of research of best avail able evid ence. Below is an example of 
one of these summar ies:
• Evidence in Health and Social Care launched in 2009. This has a search 
facil ity and ranks research accord ing to relev ance and quality [see www.
evid ence.nhs.uk]
How do you think crit ic ally about guidelines or know ledge summar ies?
We argue that these kind of guidelines or summar ies of best avail able 
evid ence are an extremely useful resource for your academic and profes-
sional prac tice and they are readily avail able, usually in the prac tice envir on-
ment. So how can you tell which of these guidelines and summar ies are of 
good quality? You can apply the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to 
guidelines that you use. Tools have also been developed for the eval u ation 
If you come across up- to- date policy or guidelines based on the evid ence 
from system atic reviews or summar ies of system atic reviews, you have 
strong evid ence upon which to base your profes sional prac tice or academic 
work.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

42 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
of guidelines, such as the AGREE 11 tool, which is avail able at http://www.
agreetrust.org/, and a tool called DISCERN, which is used to ascer tain 
the quality of written inform a tion on treat ment choices [see www.discern.
org.uk].
Generally, there should be a good explan a tion of how the guidelines or 
summar ies were compiled. The sources that were used should be clearly 
iden ti fied; these should be from best avail able evid ence, usually research 
and system atic reviews of research. You should also check if they are up to 
date and have a review date.
If you come across guidelines and policies that appear to be evid ence based, 
then these are likely to be strong evid ence. This is because guidelines and 
policies from reli able sources (as in the examples given above) are compiled 
from the evid ence from system atic reviews. In other words, they have done 
the hard work of search ing for the best avail able evid ence (as we discuss in 
the next chapter).
Access the website above and see if you can find some guidelines that are 
relev ant to you in your profes sional role.
Remember . . .
You should ‘think crit ic ally’ about every source of inform a tion that you 
consider using.
In summary
In this chapter, we have outlined how you need to think crit ic ally about the 
readily avail able inform a tion that you may come across in your every day life 
as a student/learner or as a profes sional. The range of readily avail able 
inform a tion is vast and it is import ant that you can judge the quality and 
relev ance of what you find. We have argued that news pa per articles and news 
items as well as many websites can be mislead ing and that they should be 
referred to minim ally. They should certainly not be used in the main body of 
your assign ment or as the focus of decision- making within profes sional prac-
tice. Information from prac tice assessors/colleagues and from lecture notes 
and social media should be used only as a spring board for further study, 
Access the website above and see if you can find some guidelines that are 
relev ant to you in your profes sional role.
Remember . . .
You should ‘think crit ic ally’ about every source of inform a tion that you 
consider using.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

THINK MORE CRIT IC ALLY ABOUT READILY AVAIL ABLE INFORM A TION 43
rather than as an end in itself. Textbooks and academic journ als that you 
encounter ‘at random’ may or may not be the most appro pri ate for your 
academic and profes sional learn ing needs, so consider their use care fully. If 
you come across a useful article in a journal in your place ment area, you need 
to consider what type of paper it is and whether there are other relev ant 
articles that would add to or help ‘complete the picture’. If you find well- 
developed and - estab lished guidelines – espe cially those produced nation ally 
by recog nized organ iz a tions – you will have some high- quality evid ence.
Remember that ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ is usually just the ‘tip of the 
iceberg’ of the total inform a tion avail able on a partic u lar topic. To paint a 
more compre hens ive picture, you need to search more thor oughly, as we will 
discuss in the next chapter.
Key points
1 There is a vast amount of ‘readily avail able’ inform a tion. Such readily 
avail able evid ence gener ally repres ents the ‘tip of the iceberg’ of inform a-
tion avail able. You need to think crit ic ally about this in order to make 
decisions about patients and clients based on the best avail able evid ence.
2 This readily avail able inform a tion ranges from inform a tion that can be 
inac cur ate and mislead ing to useful sources.
3 Try to avoid refer en cing media sources or un- eval u ated websites in your 
assign ments.
4 Use lecture notes and advice from prac tice assessors/mentors and colleagues 
as a spring board for further study.
5 Remember that books and articles found in journ als need to be viewed 
along side other relev ant public a tions.
6 Professional guidelines and summar ies of evid ence gener ally provide 
strong evid ence if they are up to date and based on best avail able evid ence.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

3
Being more crit ical: how 
you can find the ‘best 
avail able’ evid ence
• Why you need to dig deeper to find evid ence
• Beginning the search process
• Using subject- specific elec tronic data bases
• How you can plan and search for liter at ure using specific data bases
• What is the ‘best avail able’ evid ence?
• Research evid ence
• In summary
• Key points
In this chapter, we will:
• Explain why you need to dig a little deeper to find the ‘best avail able’ 
evid ence in order to promote crit ical think ing.
• Explore the value of using specific data bases to search for evid ence, and 
examine how to plan and search for evid ence using specific data bases.
• Discuss how to find the best avail able evid ence.
• Discuss what type of research and other inform a tion/evid ence you should 
look for and how you know when you have found it.
44
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 45
Why you need to dig deeper to find evidence
You can see from the discus sion in Chapter 2 that you need to think care fully 
about inform a tion that is ‘readily avail able’, make a judge ment about its 
quality and decide if you need to dig a little deeper to find the best avail able 
evid ence. It is then import ant to think crit ic ally and to ques tion the inform a-
tion you find, so that you can recog nize the best avail able evid ence when you 
come across it.
You need to try to ensure you get the whole picture rather than relying on just 
the first piece of ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ you find.
We argued in Chapter 2 that unless you come across up- to- date guidelines or 
policies relat ing to your prac tice that are based on the best avail able evid-
ence, the inform a tion that is readily avail able (that is, inform a tion that you do 
not need to search too hard for) will gener ally provide just the ‘tip of the 
iceberg’ of avail able inform a tion on a topic and is gener ally best used as a 
spring board for further invest ig a tion or study.
You need to dig deeper because:
• As a ‘crit ical thinker’, you should not rely on the most readily avail able 
inform a tion or opinion; instead, you need to adopt a ques tion ing approach 
and search for all the avail able inform a tion. Otherwise, you could be 
making decisions about patients/clients based on weak evid ence.
• A piece of research on its own is gener ally not enough – other studies may 
provide a differ ent view or when viewed together may lead you to a 
differ ent overall conclu sion.
• The quality of inform a tion on websites, in the media, on social media and 
from colleagues may vary and may be biased.
• You need to be certain that you have found all the most up- to- date sources 
of evid ence.
• You should review all the evid ence on your topic rather than just select 
evid ence that is in line with your argu ment.
• More up- to- date and more relev ant evid ence may recently have become 
avail able.
In other words, a system atic and thor ough search of relev ant health or social 
care data bases will ensure that you have obtained all or most of the evid ence 
on a topic. You will be able to access these data bases in your univer sity or 
hospital library, and we discuss these in this chapter. Undertaking a thor ough 
You need to try to ensure you get the whole picture rather than relying on just 
the first piece of ‘readily avail able inform a tion’ you find.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

46 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
search for relev ant evid ence will enable you to demon strate to the marker of 
your assign ment or your colleagues in prac tice that you have searched dili-
gently for evid ence rather than simply relying on readily avail able sources.
Beginning the search process
In most cases, the best way to search is through your academic or profes-
sional library, either online via your library’s elec tronic resources or in person. 
Without doing this, you are unlikely to access the best avail able evid ence on 
your topic. Even if you find relev ant articles by looking at a recent edition of 
a journal, you will only be access ing a tiny propor tion of evid ence that is 
avail able on that partic u lar topic. You will not have accessed inform a tion that 
has been published previ ously or since. You need to ensure that you do not just 
‘cherry pick’ evid ence you want to include. You will be demon strat ing a crit-
ical approach when you decide to search more thor oughly for further evid-
ence. This is because you recog nize that the evid ence you have obtained via 
readily access ible sources is likely to be insuf fi cient for your purposes.
Why not use Google or other search engines?
Internet search engines such as Google, Bing and Yahoo! are not specific 
enough to search effect ively for evid ence. Beware of using only sources 
retrieved through general search engines. Their ability to search is limited 
and so the inform a tion you find may be too broad, of poor quality, or you 
may have missed a key piece of research.
Most people are famil iar with general inter net search engines such as Google, 
Bing and Yahoo! We use them on an every day basis to search for a wide variety 
of things. However, they are not specific enough to find the best avail able 
profes sional evid ence because they do not distin guish between what is good 
evid ence and what is not. They simply present you with a list of hits and 
because there is so much inform a tion avail able to you, it is very diffi cult, if 
not impossible, to identify what is worth looking at in more depth.
For this reason, for your academic and profes sional searches you need a 
search engine that is subject- specific and which does not trawl through all the 
‘lay’ public a tions and other sources of inform a tion that relate to your topic. 
Having said that, doing a quick search using an inter net search engine such as 
Internet search engines such as Google, Bing and Yahoo! are not specific 
enough to search effect ively for evid ence. Beware of using only sources 
retrieved through general search engines. Their ability to search is limited
and so the inform a tion you find may be too broad, of poor quality, or you 
may have missed a key piece of research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 47
Google on a topic you wish to explore further might give you some idea of the 
terms or language used around your topic. So it might be worth a ‘quick look’ 
just to see what words you can then use to search using the more specific 
profes sional data bases. A slightly more focused search can be carried out on 
Google Scholar (selec ted from the ‘more’ drop- down menu, where you can 
select type of public a tion and dates). However, this would still not consti tute 
a compre hens ive search.
Go to a general search engine and search for a health or social care condi tion 
or problem and look at the first few results. Then look at results much later in 
the list. Can you see any differ ence in the inform a tion? Think crit ic ally 
about what the implic a tions would be if you had taken the inform a tion/evid-
ence just from the first results.
This indic ates how general search engines only provide you with non- specific 
inform a tion/evid ence of vari able quality.
Using subject- specific elec tronic data bases
To take a crit ical approach to your academic writing and profes sional prac-
tice, you need to be compre hens ive and organ ized in your search for appro-
pri ate evid ence. The best way to do this is by using a subject- specific 
data base.
Why use a subject- specific data base instead of a more casual approach to 
finding liter at ure?
• 
You will find a broader range of liter at ure relev ant to your topic (breadth).
• 
You are more likely to find appro pri ate liter at ure (relev ance).
• 
You are more likely to find liter at ure of good quality (rigour).
• 
Your search will be more compre hens ive (thor ough ness).
What is a subject- specific data base?
Subject- specific data bases hold the refer ences for, and often abstracts or the 
full text version of, journal articles and many other texts, for which you can 
Go to a general search engine and search for a health or social care condi tion 
or problem and look at the first few results. Then look at results much later in
the list. Can you see any differ ence in the inform a tion? Think crit ic ally
about what the implic a tions would be if you had taken the inform a tion/evid-
ence just from the first results.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

48 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
search using key words. Many subject- specific data bases are related to a 
partic u lar academic field or profes sional group(s), such as health and/or 
social care. They are usually best accessed through your academic or profes-
sional library website. A data base is simply a way of storing, organ iz ing, 
search ing and access ing inform a tion. It is a bit like a large elec tronic filing 
cabinet.
How to find a subject- specific data base
If you go to the website of your academic or profes sional library or contact 
your subject librar ian, you are likely to find a list of data bases relev ant to your 
field of profes sional prac tice. Each data base will have a descrip tion of its 
scope and focus – some are psycho logy related, some are social science based, 
some are medic ally focused, while others focus on liter at ure for allied health 
care profes sion als, and so on. This is where you need to think creat ively and 
crit ic ally in terms of decid ing what your focus will be. For example, you need 
to consider whether inform a tion from other profes sions may add insight and 
whether you have considered a holistic approach to your issue (e.g. you could 
consider psycho lo gical, cultural or educa tional issues that may require using a 
differ ent data base). If you are not sure which data base to access, ask someone 
at your local univer sity or from your profes sional devel op ment team.
You could use more than one data base if you are doing a very thor ough 
search. If you are not confid ent using computers, you may find it easier to 
visit the library in person and access train ing courses on how to search using 
data bases. Do remem ber that these data bases change their format or their 
name on a fairly regular basis. If you are resum ing a search after a break, 
check with your subject librar ian which data base is best for your needs. Also, 
remem ber that differ ent data bases operate slightly differ ently, so consult the 
inform a tion provided with the data base to ensure that you make full use of 
the search facil ity.
Key words and phrases
When you access a data base, you will be invited to enter a key word such as 
‘Dementia’ or ‘Assessment’. You will then be askedd to refine your search 
using that key word: by date, type of evid ence, whether the key word appears 
in the whole text or just the abstract, and so on. If you widen the search and 
ask for all entries that have the key word in the whole text, you are likely to be 
inund ated with refer ences. If you are more select ive, for example, by request ing 
keyword entries in the title or abstract, you will limit your search. Also, by 
adding and combin ing addi tional key words, you will further narrow down your 
search, for example, ‘Dementia’ and ‘Nutrition’, or ‘Assessment’ and ‘Mobility’.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 49
How you can plan and search for liter at ure 
using specific data bases
The process of search ing for liter at ure is discussed in detail in the partner 
book in this series, A Beginner’s Guide to Evidence Based Practice by Aveyard 
and Sharp (2013). In this book, we discuss using the acronym PICOT to 
help you identify what you are trying to find out. Each letter prompts you 
to consider a differ ent aspect of the situ ation you are seeking inform a tion 
about:
Popula tion
Inter ven tion or issue
Compar ison or context
Outcome
Time
(Stillwell et al. 2010)
• Population: who are the people you are inter ested in invest ig at ing with 
similar char ac ter ist ics, such as gender, age, condi tion, problem, loca tion or 
role? For example, older people in resid en tial care, home less people, 
mothers under 45, patient/clients who have had knee replace ments, patient/
clients who have accessed para medic services for chest pain, staff who 
work out of hours, students who access study advice?
• Intervention/issue: this could be diagnostic, thera peutic, prevent at ive, 
expos ure, mana gerial, costs, and so on.
• Comparisons/context: this can be against another inter ven tion or no 
inter ven tion. Comparisons can be made against national or profes sional 
stand ards or guidelines. The context of the study might be where the study 
takes place, such as in a community setting or in a partic u lar country.
• Outcome: faster, cheaper, reduc tion or increase in symp toms, events, epis-
odes, prognosis, mortal ity, accur acy, etc. For more qual it at ive research, 
the outcome may be the percep tions or exper i ence of the parti cipants.
• Time: this may or may not be relev ant, for example, days post- op or post- 
inter ven tion, or within 24 hours of access ing the service.
Identifying what you need to find out
• Think crit ic ally and care fully about what you want to find out (consider the 
PICOT prompt, or maybe make a spider diagram or list all of the issues).
• Identify your key words and use a thesaurus to find altern at ive words 
(synonyms). Key words should reflect the topic you are search ing for, 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

50 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
remem ber ing to use all words, not just popular or current terms. Think 
widely and later ally!
• There is also the trun ca tion or * facil ity (on some data bases this is another 
symbol – do check!). This enables you to identify all possible endings of the 
key term you write. To use this, you need to identify the ‘root’ of the word 
(i.e. the part of the word that doesn’t change) and put the * after that last 
letter. For example, Disab* will find you disability, disabled and disabilities.
• Set limits on the search reques ted – consider whether you want to limit the 
number of hits you get by specify ing language, date, title or abstract.
• Use Boolean oper at ors. These help you refine the search:
 AND ensures that each term you have entered is searched for. This will 
reduce the number of hits you get, as each term must be included in the 
article for it to be recog nized. Be careful about using too many ANDs, as 
this may narrow your search too much.
 OR ensures that either one term or another is selec ted. This will increase 
the number of hits you get, as you only need to identify one of the terms 
for the article to be selec ted. All these words should broadly mean the 
same thing.
• Find out how each data base oper ates, as they are all slightly differ ent.
Planning your search
The follow ing key word search table illus trates how you could plan your 
search using trun cated words, and the AND/OR facil ity.
1
2
3
a)
Disab* or
Attitud*or
Student*or
b)
Handicap*or
Belief *or
Learner* or
c)
or
Valu* or
or
d)
or
AND
Mindset* or
AND
or
e)
Approach*
Set your limits
You can also specify whether you wish to search through out the whole article 
for the key word, or whether you want to limit your search to the abstract or 
title. This will depend on whether you get too many or too few hits.
• If you limit your search to identi fy ing the key word in the title alone, this 
might exclude a lot of refer ences that are relev ant, because the title may 
not use the key word you have chosen.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 51
• Conversely, if you search through all the articles for your key word, you 
may be over whelmed with liter at ure.
You should there fore consider select ing the abstract, as this gives a brief over-
view of what the article contains and what type of writing it is.
An abstract is a short summary of what an article is about and usually 
appears before the intro duc tion. It is often avail able directly through the 
subject- specific data base even when access to the full article is not. You should 
be able to tell from the abstract whether it is a research article or not.
Documenting your search strategy
It will be bene fi cial when produ cing inform a tion for prac tice or an assign ment 
if you can docu ment how you searched for the best avail able evid ence rather 
than just relying on readily avail able inform a tion. This demon strates that you 
took a crit ical approach to finding your evid ence and did not use the first 
pieces of inform a tion that came to hand. The follow ing chart has been 
developed to help you to do this.
Database
Limits set
Key search terms
Number of hits
(use one row for 
each data base)
(include trun ca tion, 
wild card and 
Boolean oper at ors, 
or medical 
subject/thesaurus 
head ings used)
Example
CINAHL
2004–2014, 
English language 
only, word 
appear ing in 
abstract only
Female* OR women 
OR woman AND 
cath eter*
251
Remember . . .
• Searching for liter at ure is time consum ing and is a skill that needs to be 
developed over time – you are advised not to leave it until the last minute.
• If you do not receive any ‘hits’ from your search, keep search ing with 
differ ent key words, or you may need to broaden your topic until you 
identify liter at ure that is linked to your subject area.
• If you get too many hits, you will need to re- focus your search, maybe by 
date or language.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

52 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• Keep a record of the search terms you have used and the results of these 
searches, and include these in your public a tion or assign ment, perhaps in 
an appendix.
• Even if you do not find any evid ence, this is still a useful ‘finding’ so long as 
you can demon strate that your search has been thor ough.
How to find addi tional evid ence that may not be found using 
data bases
Electronic searches of subject- specific data bases are not 100 per cent compre-
hens ive and are unlikely to identify all the relev ant liter at ure on your topic.
Despite advances in tech no logy, elec tronic search ing is not 100 per cent 
effect ive or accur ate. This means that you can miss key evid ence through 
elec tronic search ing. The reasons for this are as follows:
• Some relev ant liter at ure might have been categor ized using differ ent key 
words and there fore will not be iden ti fied by one partic u lar search strategy.
• The topic you are inter ested in may only be mentioned briefly in papers on 
broader topics and there fore will not be iden ti fied by key words or in the 
index when these papers are entered onto the data base. As a result, they 
may not be recog nized when you search.
• The title of the paper may be mislead ing, for example, some authors use 
humor ous titles or phrases that you may not be famil iar with.
If you want to be really thor ough, addi tional approaches to take when 
search ing for evid ence include:
• Looking in the refer ence lists of the papers you have found (this process is 
called ‘snow balling’).
• Looking through the contents pages of back copies of journ als that you 
have previ ously found useful.
• Asking experts who may have atten ded confer ences or who have access to 
as yet unpub lished ideas or contacts.
• Supplementing your search with the more readily avail able liter at ure, as 
iden ti fied in Chapter 2.
• Searching for papers written by experts in the field.
Remember, though, that this type of search ing is in addi tion to your elec tronic 
search rather than a substi tute for it.
Electronic searches of subject- specific data bases are not 100 per cent compre-
hens ive and are unlikely to identify all the relev ant liter at ure on your topic.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 53
Getting hold of your sources
The refer ences to which you are direc ted are likely to be found in journ als, 
books and other public a tions. Books are gener ally held in a library or book-
shop and you will need to access these in person; however, the number of 
books avail able elec tron ic ally in the form of e- books is growing.
Journals can gener ally be accessed either in person from the library where 
they are held as hard copies, or online though a library’s elec tronic journ als 
collec tion. You are strongly advised to become famil iar with your elec tronic 
library, as most univer sity and work place librar ies provide access to journ als 
in ‘full- text’ format, meaning you can locate and down load many articles 
without leaving your computer. You will need a pass word to access these. 
Sometimes there will be a link from the search engine data base to the full text 
article in the elec tronic library.
Using abstracts to select the most useful results
Once you have completed a search, you need to consider what type of evid-
ence you have iden ti fied on your chosen topic. Depending on the number of 
hits gener ated, you prob ably won’t be able down load or access all of it and 
you need to make sense of what you have found. It is better not to rely on the 
title alone, as this can be mislead ing. This is because the focus of the article is 
often unclear from the title alone. Instead, read the abstract.
Find several differ ent journal papers and look at their abstracts. See if you 
can tell what type of paper each one is (e.g. a review, a research paper, an 
opinion piece).
What is the ‘best avail able’ evid ence?
Once you have found your evid ence, you need to consider what type of evid-
ence is most useful to you. In other words, what exactly should you be looking 
for? You may have heard of the term ‘hier archy of evid ence’. Strong evid-
ence is at the top of the hier archy and the weakest evid ence is at the bottom. 
Classifications as to what counts as strong evid ence vary accord ing to what 
you are trying to find out, as we will see in the examples later on in this chapter.
In general terms, you will find the liter at ure review, in partic u lar the 
system atic review, at the top of the hier archy of evid ence in almost every 
clas si fic a tion you come across. The system atic review is gener ally considered 
Find several differ ent journal papers and look at their abstracts. See if you 
can tell what type of paper each one is (e.g. a review, a research paper, an
opinion piece).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

54 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
to provide the most useful inform a tion. A system atic review is a very detailed 
liter at ure review and seeks to summar ize all avail able evid ence on a topic. 
Less detailed reviews are called liter at ure reviews.
If you come across a system atic review when search ing for evid ence, you 
will likely have found the best avail able evid ence for your topic, espe cially if 
the review is recent and it is clear that it has been carried out thor oughly. You 
can prob ably stop search ing and use this review to inform your prac tice and 
academic work. Less detailed reviews will also be useful to you.
How you can recog nize a liter at ure review
Authors of a review will not have conduc ted their own first- hand study (e.g. 
exper i ments or inter views) but instead will have collec ted together the 
research of others in order to reach a new conclu sion. Good reviews will tell 
you how they have been under taken. A good system atic liter at ure review will 
be written up in the same manner as a research article, with a research or 
review ques tion, aims and object ives and a method section outlining how the 
review was under taken. The method should tell you how the research ers 
searched for liter at ure, what liter at ure they included and why, and what they 
excluded and why. By reading the method, you should have a good idea about 
how the research ers carried out their liter at ure review. The conclu sion will be 
based on weigh ing up the evid ence presen ted by all the liter at ure reviewed. 
You may find that a review concludes that the research evid ence is strong or 
that there is insuf fi cient high- quality evid ence. This is just as import ant for 
inform ing our writing and profes sional prac tice as a strong posit ive or 
negat ive result from exper i mental research.
Systematic reviews
A system atic review is the most detailed type of review and aims to identify 
all avail able liter at ure on a topic with clear explan a tions of the approach 
taken (meth od o logy).
Systematic reviews that have a detailed research meth od o logy should be 
regarded as a strong form of evid ence when they are iden ti fied as relev ant to 
a liter at ure review ques tion.
The most common way of conduct ing a system atic review is through the 
Cochrane Collaboration. The Cochrane Collaboration has a focus on the 
effect ive ness of health care inter ven tions. Its sister organ iz a tion, the Campbell 
Collaboration, has a focus on social care. On both websites, you can browse 
Systematic reviews that have a detailed research meth od o logy should be
regarded as a strong form of evid ence when they are iden ti fied as relev ant to
a liter at ure review ques tion.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 55
by topic for reviews and they have a plain English summary to help you under-
stand complex jargon. Information about the Cochrane Library reviews is 
avail able at www.cochrane.org/reviews. Information about the Campbell 
Library reviews is avail able at www.camp bellcol lab or a tion.org. Some inter-
na tional organ iz a tions also present system atic reviews in differ ent languages.
A system atic review under taken in the detail required by the Cochrane or 
Campbell Collaboration is usually considered to be the most detailed and 
robust form of review. For example, in the UK they are used in the formu la-
tion of guidelines for the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE), avail able at http://www.nice.org.uk/. NICE recom mend a tions for 
clin ical prac tice are based on the best avail able evid ence. Also, the Centre for 
Reviews and Dissemination is a useful and reli able source and has a data base 
relat ing to health policy and prac tice [http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/]. If you 
reside in a country other than the UK, you should seek out any national or 
inter na tional guidelines or stand ards.
Why are system atic reviews so useful?
Systematic liter at ure reviews are import ant because they seek to:
• Summarize all the liter at ure avail able on a partic u lar topic.
• Prevent one ‘high- profile’ piece of inform a tion having too much influ ence.
• Present an analysis of the avail able liter at ure so that the reader does not 
have to access each indi vidual research report included in the review.
Limitations of system atic reviews
Systematic reviews are some times criti cized because they:
• Include only the highest quality studies, omit ting other evid ence that might 
be useful.
• Over- simplify, decon tex tu al ize and summar ize the evid ence to such an 
extent that the find ings are stripped of meaning (Pawson 2005).
Before you carry out a data base search, access one of the websites above that 
contain system atic reviews and you may save your self hours of search ing 
other data bases.
Descriptive (or narrat ive) liter at ure reviews
Beware of reviews that have a very brief or no published method inform ing 
the reader how the review has been carried out. These are some times referred 
Before you carry out a data base search, access one of the websites above that 
contain system atic reviews and you may save your self hours of search ing 
other data bases.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

56 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
to as narrat ive or descript ive reviews. This type of review might be no 
more than a biased or randomly assembled collec tion of research papers 
about a given topic. Consequently, the conclu sions drawn are likely to be inac-
cur ate.
Although it may refer to a lot of liter at ure or evid ence, a narrat ive liter at ure 
review does not tell the reader how the authors iden ti fied or why they included 
this liter at ure. You do not know if the writers just ‘cherry picked’ the liter at ure 
they wanted to include, ignor ing everything else. Many papers in health and 
social care are written in this way. While you might find them useful for 
inform a tion, you should be aware that they will not give you a compre hens ive 
range of inform a tion on the topic because they do not state the criteria used 
to include or exclude inform a tion. If you come across an inform a tion 
or discus sion article that includes various refer ences and wonder if it is a 
liter at ure review, look to see if there is a clearly written method section 
inform ing you how the inform a tion included was iden ti fied. If there is no such 
method section, the article is not strictly a ‘liter at ure review’ – or at least not 
a detailed one – instead, it is more likely to be an inform at ive discus sion of 
liter at ure.
What if you cannot find a liter at ure review or system atic review?
If no reviews are avail able, the next best thing is to access indi vidual pieces of 
research on a topic. If you have done a thor ough and focused search, you will 
have high lighted the range of research papers that are avail able on your topic, 
rather than identi fy ing a single paper simply by flick ing through a journal that 
you have come across. It is import ant to remem ber that one indi vidual piece 
of research – however good it is – is never enough evid ence on its own to 
recom mend a change in prac tice. Thus if you cannot find a review, look at as 
many research articles as you can on the topic you are inter ested in. In the 
absence of a review, these will be your best avail able evid ence.
Research evid ence
Recognizing indi vidual research papers and system atic reviews
You can distin guish a research paper from a ‘non research’ paper by the way 
that it is struc tured. As with a system atic liter at ure review, a research paper 
will have a research ques tion, stated aims and a method section that tells you 
how the research was under taken. This is followed by a results or find ings 
section, a discus sion with conclu sions and recom mend a tions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 57
What type of indi vidual research papers should you look for?
In very general terms, research is divided into three types:
• Qualitative
• Quantitative
• Mixed method
‘Mixed methods’ approaches use more than one type of research. It is import ant 
to consider what type of research will address what you are hoping to find out 
(this does not matter as much in a liter at ure review, as reviews can contain 
both qual it at ive and quant it at ive papers). The type of research you find is 
often determ ined by the type of ques tion you are asking. So you need to think 
crit ic ally about this before you start your search. To do this, it is useful to 
consider the main differ ences between qual it at ive and quant it at ive research.
The main differ ences between qual it at ive and quant it at ive research
Qualitative research gener ally uses inter views to explore the exper i ence 
or meaning of an issue in depth. The results are presen ted using words.
Quantitative research gener ally explores if some thing is effect ive or not, 
or meas ures the amount of some thing. The results are gener ally presen ted 
using numbers or stat ist ics.
What is the best type of research?
There is no ‘best type’ of research. Some topics are best explored using qual it-
at ive research and others using quant it at ive research. To gain a better insight 
into an issue, mixed methods can be used. Thus it is not possible to say which 
type of research is better in any general sense. There is broad agree ment that 
liter at ure reviews are at the top of the hier archy of evid ence for all situ ations 
you can think of, but only if they have been conduc ted thor oughly. After that, 
it depends on what you are looking for. You may come across the so- called 
tradi tional ‘hier archy of evid ence’. This hier archy applies only when you need 
to measure the effect ive ness of some thing, for example, does some thing 
work or not. If you want to know if some thing works or is effect ive, the best 
way to find out is to test it against some thing else. This may be a new treat-
ment against the stand ard treat ment. Therefore, after the liter at ure review, in 
order to determ ine whether some thing works or not, the strongest evid ence is 
widely believed to be the random ized control trial (RCT) – or exper i ment – 
because it directly tests one treat ment or inter ven tion against another. We 
discuss RCTs in the section below.
The main differ ences between qual it at ive and quant it at ive research
Qualitative research gener ally uses inter views to explore the exper i ence
or meaning of an issue in depth. The results are presen ted using words.
Quantitative research gener ally explores if some thing is effect ive or not, 
or meas ures the amount of some thing. The results are gener ally presen ted
using numbers or stat ist ics.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

58 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Example of a tradi tional hier archy of evid ence for meas ur ing effect ive ness:
Systematic reviews of research
 
Highest form of evid ence
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs)
Other quant it at ive studies
Qualitative studies on patient/client exper i ence
Anecdotal reports
 
Lowest form of evid ence
However, do not be misled into think ing that this hier archy works in all cases. 
If only things were so simple! It is not the case that the random ized controlled 
trial is always the next best research design after the system atic liter at ure 
review. Unfortunately, there is no one hier archy that works in all cases. While 
it is prob ably true that a system atic review will be most useful to you, after that 
what is most useful depends on what you are hoping to find out. Different situ-
ations require differ ent types of evid ence. You can see from the discus sion of 
qual it at ive and quant it at ive research above that the two approaches are 
differ ent and give differ ent types of evid ence. The hier archy also suggests that 
quant it at ive studies, and in partic u lar RCTs, provide stronger evid ence than 
qual it at ive studies. However, this is not always the case; it depends what you 
are trying to find out – you cannot find everything out using an RCT or even 
quant it at ive research. For example, if you want to know whether a partic u lar 
inter ven tion is success ful – such as provid ing day care for chil dren at risk, or 
using a new type of leg ulcer dress ing – you need a study that directly compares 
one inter ven tion with another: in other words, compar ing two types of day 
care, or compar ing day care with staying at home, or compar ing differ ent types 
of leg ulcer dress ings. This would prob ably be an RCT.
The most common type of study for determ in ing whether an inter ven tion is 
success ful or not is an RCT or a similar quant it at ive study; so the hier archy 
does ‘work’ on this occa sion. However, RCTs would not be useful if you 
wished to find out about clients’ exper i ence of day care or patients’ views 
about a new leg ulcer dress ing. A direct compar ison of the effect ive ness of 
either day care or dress ings will not tell you about what the care or treat ment 
was like for the patient/client. In order to find out about this, you will usually 
need qual it at ive research. Therefore, the ‘tradi tional’ hier archy of evid ence is 
only helpful for assess ing strength of evid ence in certain cases
A rough hier archy of evid ence when looking at patient/client exper i ences is 
as follows. In this case, after the system atic liter at ure review, qual it at ive 
studies are often most useful in helping us under stand the exper i ences of 
patients/clients because these studies are designed to obtain in- depth inform-
a tion from parti cipants. We discuss qual it at ive research in more detail below.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 59
Systematic reviews of research 
Highest form of evid ence
Qualitative research
Anecdotal reports
Lowest form of evid ence
Thus there is no one hier archy of evid ence that works in all situ ations. Beware 
of any liter at ure that describes a hier archy of evid ence as if there is only one. 
You should think crit ic ally and ask, ‘What type of evid ence do I need for my 
ques tion?’ It is far better to work out what type of evid ence you need for your 
partic u lar topic and then make up your own ‘hier archy of evid ence’ for what 
you are looking for (Aveyard 2014).
We now provide a brief over view of the char ac ter ist ics of the main types of 
research (qual it at ive and quant it at ive) followed by some examples. You are 
advised to use addi tional texts (e.g. Aveyard and Sharp 2013) to provide you 
with a more detailed over view of differ ent research meth od o lo gies.
Qualitative research
If you are trying to find out about patients’ or clients’ exper i ences, such as 
how they feel about their care, or what it is like to live with a partic u lar condi-
tion, then you need to search for qual it at ive research. This is because qual it-
at ive research explores topics through discus sion with people involved in the 
situ ation, often using inter views or group inter views. Qualitative research is 
used to explore topics that cannot be meas ured numer ic ally. For example, 
the ques tion ‘What is it like to move to Italy (or any other country) as a polit-
ical refugee?’ is one that would be answered best by conduct ing in- depth inter-
views with the refugees them selves. Qualitative research studies tend to 
include fewer parti cipants than quant it at ive studies. Participants in qual it-
at ive research are selec ted because they know about the issue and not at 
random, as in quant it at ive studies.
The aim of all qual it at ive approaches is to explore the meaning of and 
develop in- depth under stand ing of the research topic as exper i enced by the 
parti cipants included in the research.
There are a wide variety of approaches to qual it at ive research. You are likely 
to encounter many differ ent approaches to this type of research when you 
read the liter at ure. It is useful to be able to recog nize these differ ent approaches 
The aim of all qual it at ive approaches is to explore the meaning of and 
develop in- depth under stand ing of the research topic as exper i enced by the
parti cipants included in the research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

60 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
and to under stand why one approach may have been selec ted for a specific 
research ques tion. Some are simply described in the liter at ure as ‘qual it at ive 
studies’, while others are named accord ing to the partic u lar qual it at ive 
approach that is followed. For example, here are three popular approaches:
• Grounded theory is a way of finding out about what happens in a social 
setting and then making wider gener al iz a tions about the way things happen. 
It is a ‘bottom- up’ approach in which data are collec ted, analysed and used 
to describe the way things happen in social life.
• Phenomenology is the study of the ‘lived exper i ence’ – what it is actu ally 
like to live with a partic u lar condi tion or exper i ence. Phenomenological 
studies often use in- depth inter views as their means of data collec tion, as 
this allows parti cipants the oppor tun ity to explore and describe their experi-
ences within an inter view setting.
• Ethnography is the study of human culture. An ethno graphic study focuses 
on a community (i.e. a specific group of people) to gain insight into how its 
members behave. Observation or parti cipant obser va tion and/or in- depth 
inter views may be under taken to achieve this.
Characteristics of qual it at ive research
• Depth rather than breadth is the focus of qual it at ive research.
• Researchers seek to under stand the whole of an exper i ence and gain insight 
into the parti cipants’ circum stances.
• The data collec ted are not numer ical but are collec ted, often through inter-
view, using the words and descrip tions given by parti cipants.
• Researchers do not set out to look for specific ideas, hoping to confirm pre- 
exist ing beliefs. Instead, they code the data accord ing to ideas arising from 
those data. This process is often referred to as induct ive.
• There is no use of stat ist ics in qual it at ive research; the results are descript ive 
and inter pret at ive.
• Sample sizes tend to be small. A small sample is required because in- 
depth under stand ing (rather than stat ist ical analysis) is sought from the 
inform a tion- rich parti cipants in the study.
• Qualitative studies are not directly gener al iz able in a stat ist ical sense (see 
the section on stat ist ics later in this chapter) but their results can be used 
and inter preted by others. This is some times called trans fer ab il ity.
Data collec tion and analysis in qual it at ive research
In- depth inter views are gener ally used to collect data. These can be conduc ted 
with indi vidu als or ‘focus groups’. Qualitative research is useful when you 
are looking for in- depth answers to ques tions that cannot be answered in 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 61
numer ical form. The aim of most qual it at ive data analysis is to study, for 
example, the inter view scripts obtained and develop an under stand ing of the 
data. The data are organ ized through coding and themes are then gener ated 
from the data set. For this reason, large numbers of parti cipants are rarely 
used (and are not neces sar ily appro pri ate) in qual it at ive research. Qualitative 
data can also be collec ted by ques tion naires/surveys when there is space for 
free text (so people can express their thoughts and feel ings).
The data are gener ally analysed using the words of the original inter view 
tran scripts. The find ings or results are then coded and written up as themes, 
which describe the main find ings. Researchers usually provide examples of 
quotes from their parti cipants in the write up of their find ings. The results of 
such research are not usually presen ted numer ic ally or stat ist ic ally, and the 
find ings are not gener al iz able to other situ ations, indi vidu als or groups – that 
is, predic tions about the wider popu la tion cannot be made from the results of 
a small study. However, the results of qual it at ive studies are ‘stand- alone’ in 
the sense that the reader can trans fer the find ings of a study to help make 
sense of other compar able situ ations. What is import ant in a qual it at ive study 
is that the process used to under take it is trans par ent. The rela tion ship 
between the parti cipants and research ers should be described together with 
other factors that influ enced the find ings, such as the skill of the inter viewer 
and loca tion of the inter views.
How can you identify a good qual it at ive study?
In addi tion to the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’, you might also find it 
useful to use a crit ical appraisal tool that is specific ally inten ded for use with 
qual it at ive studies, such as the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP). 
This is a qual it at ive research appraisal tool, one of many such tools avail able 
at http://www.caspin ter na tional.org/?o=1012.
Remember that well- designed qual it at ive studies produce better data than 
poorly designed studies. Do not be put off by a small sample size – qual it-
at ive studies tend to be small. You would expect to read details of how the 
study was carried out and, if inter views were conduc ted, how these were 
tran scribed and analysed.
Quantitative research
If you are trying research aspects of health or social care that you can measure 
directly, such as compar ing the healing rate of a wound or recov ery after an 
injury, then you will need quant it at ive research. This is because quant it at ive 
research (some times called posit iv ist research) uses numer ical meas ure ment 
to explore research ques tions. For example, the ques tion ‘Does nicot ine 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

62 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
replace ment therapy help people stop smoking?’ can be answered numer ic ally 
by count ing the number of people who stop smoking when using nicot ine 
replace ment therapy versus those who do not. Quantitative research studies 
tend to involve larger numbers of parti cipants who are often selec ted at 
random.
If you wish to find out about the effect ive ness of – or compar ison between – 
treat ments or inter ven tions that can be directly meas ured or counted, then 
you need to look for quant it at ive research.
Approaches used in quant it at ive research
• Randomized controlled trials. Quantitative exper i mental methods can 
be used to measure the effect ive ness of an inter ven tion (in other words, 
studies that find out whether a specific inter ven tion really works). The 
most rigor ous form of study is the random ized control trial (RCT). Such a 
trial can be used to test the effect ive ness of many care or treat ment options 
where it is permiss ible and ethical to randomly divide the sample group and 
monitor the outcome. In an RCT, parti cipants are alloc ated at random into 
two or more groups – this is called random iz a tion. An inter ven tion is then 
given to only one of the groups and the outcomes in the differ ent groups are 
compared. One can then look at the differ ences between the groups at the 
end of the study and see whether those who received an inter ven tion fared 
better than those who did not. This is really the only way to tell whether an 
inter ven tion is effect ive.
• Other exper i mental methods. It is not always possible to under take an 
RCT because care or treat ment cannot be with held from indi vidu als in one 
group. Other quant it at ive research methods can be used for exper i mental 
research designs that are not RCTs. These are often called ‘quasi exper i-
ments’ because they are not carried out in the form of a true exper i ment (or 
RCT). Other types of studies are cohort studies and case control studies. 
These are studies that try to link the causes of diseases and/or inter ven tions 
and/or social situ ations. Cohort studies and case control studies were first 
used to observe the effects of an expos ure (e.g. smoking) on the health of 
those observed.
• Questionnaires and surveys. These are studies in which a sample is taken 
at any one point in time from a defined group of people and observed/
assessed. These studies tend to be quant it at ive, as it can be diffi cult to get 
good descript ive data from a ques tion naire. Questionnaires and surveys are 
useful when looking for evid ence about the preval ence of a partic u lar 
activ ity, or requir ing inform a tion about a large group of people. Remember 
If you wish to find out about the effect ive ness of – or compar ison between – 
treat ments or inter ven tions that can be directly meas ured or counted, then
you need to look for quant it at ive research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 63
that studies based on ques tion naires and surveys have many limit a tions, as 
outlined below, and their results should be viewed with caution. Electronic 
sources such as email are increas ingly being used as a cheaper and more 
access ible format for ques tion naires/surveys.
Characteristics of quant it at ive research
• Quantitative studies use methods of data collec tion that involve meas ur ing: 
size, amount, scales, frequency (e.g. how many?, how much?, how often?).
• They try to be object ive.
• Data are analysed using stat ist ical tests and results are presen ted using 
numbers.
• The studies tend to be large and involve many parti cipants so that the find-
ings can be applied in other contexts. This is called gener al iz ab il ity.
Data collec tion and analysis in quant it at ive research
Data are gener ally collec ted in numer ical form, for example, how many people 
respon ded to a partic u lar drug or exer cise used. The results of quant it at ive 
research are usually presen ted using numbers or stat ist ics. Sometimes it is really 
hard to under stand the stat ist ics and tables in quant it at ive research but there are 
a few key things you should be able under stand. Researchers them selves some-
times employ stat ist i cians to help them analyse and inter pret results.
When you next look at a quant it at ive research study, read the discus sion 
where the results are explained and then go back to the actual numbers to see 
if you can under stand them better.
Quantitative data are often presen ted as stat ist ics. There are two types of stat-
ist ics: descript ive and infer en tial.
Descriptive stat ist ics describe the data or results in a paper. These stat-
ist ics should describe clearly the main results, for example, how many people 
answered ‘yes’ to a partic u lar ques tion, or the most common response to a 
ques tion. Gill et al. (2011) explored whether train ing tradi tional birth attend-
ants in Zambia had any effect on neonatal mortal ity. This was clearly a quant-
it at ive study, as mortal ity rates can be counted. The research ers under took a 
trial in which Zambian birth attend ants were randomly alloc ated to receive 
inter ven tion train ing (which included resus cit a tion) or continue with their 
exist ing prac tice. The neonatal mortal ity rate of the babies delivered by those 
who prac tised in the stand ard way and those who had received train ing was 
compared. Data from 3497 births were recor ded and the results were presen ted 
When you next look at a quant it at ive research study, read the discus sion
where the results are explained and then go back to the actual numbers to see
if you can under stand them better.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

64 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
stat ist ic ally:
Among 3497 deliv er ies with reli able inform a tion, mortal ity at day 28 
after birth was 45% lower among live born infants delivered by inter ven-
tion birth attend ants.
(Gill et al. 2011)
Results presen ted in this way provide only a description of the outcome in 
that partic u lar study. The research should be clearly presen ted and you 
should be able to ascer tain easily what the results of the study were.
Inferential stat ist ics are used to make predic tions. Once we have a 
detailed descrip tion of an event (the more or the bigger the better; we would 
not be very confid ent in the results of a compar ison of one trained birth 
attend ant and one untrained attend ant), we can use the results of stat ist ical 
tests to make predic tions about the outcome of other similar events. We do 
this all the time in sport. If you follow a partic u lar sport, you will have noted 
that comment at ors make predic tions about who is going to win. These predic-
tions are based on many obser va tions of who won on previ ous occa sions. 
Although we cannot tell if an indi vidual or team will win again, if we have 
enough prior evid ence to go on, we can make a reas on able predic tion. This is 
what stat ist i cians do. They look at what has happened in a partic u lar event 
(such as in a study situ ation) and they then make a predic tion as to whether 
we are likely to see this result outside the research setting. The better the data 
they have to work from, the better the predic tions they can make.
In other words, stat ist ics can tell us how likely it would be for the find ings 
from Gill and colleagues’ study to be found in a larger popu la tion. From these 
stat ist ics we can then make gener al iz a tions about whether the results of the 
study are applic able more widely. You can see why this is import ant.
When predic tions are made about what is likely to happen in a larger popu-
la tion (not the sample used) on the basis of the find ings of a study, we call this 
making infer ence or using infer en tial stat ist ics. In other words, stat ist i cians 
try to determ ine the extent to which the data obtained from a sample is 
reflect ive of the wider popu la tion as a whole. They tell us what might be 
expec ted to happen in the wider popu la tion. In simple terms, the bigger the 
sample, the more certain you can be that the sample preval ence is close to the 
popu la tion preval ence. In other words, if the sample size in the research is 
large, it is more likely it can be applied to the whole popu la tion. For example, 
if you have a ques tion naire survey of 1000 people from around the country, of 
which 500 stated a pref er ence for holi day ing abroad, infer en tial stat ist ics can 
be used to determ ine whether this result would be likely to be accur ate for the 
whole popu la tion. But if the sample size was 50, it would be less likely that the 
results would repres ent national views.
When you read a quant it at ive research paper, these ideas are expressed as 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 65
confid ence inter vals and/or as p values. Confidence inter vals reflect 
the confid ence we can have that the sample is an accur ate indic a tion of the 
true popu la tion preval ence. Gill et al. (2011) report a risk reduc tion in 
the trained birth attend ants of 17.9 deaths per 1000. (This is a descript ive stat-
istic, the result found in their study.) They then report a 95 per cent confid ence 
inter val of 4.1–31.8, which means it is predicted that the risk reduc tion 
within the general popu la tion of Zambia would be between 4.1 deaths per 
1000 (very small risk reduc tion) and 31.8 deaths per 1000 (a much larger risk 
reduc tion).
In addi tion to confid ence inter vals, you might find prob ab il ity expressed as 
a p value (or prob ab il ity value). The p value expresses the prob ab il ity of the 
results shown in the paper being due to chance. It is import ant to determ ine 
the like li hood that the find ings are down to chance or whether they reflect 
what happened in the research.
The lower the p value, the less likely it is that the occur rence is due to chance. 
If a p value is less than 0.05 (1:20), we say the occur rence is unlikely to be 
due to chance. If the p value is say, 0.5, we would say that 50% of the time the 
occur rence would be due to chance and there fore not likely to be due to the 
inter ven tion in ques tion.
In their study of birth attend ants, Gill et al. (2011) did not calcu late p values. 
If they had, however, the values would tell us how likely it was that the differ-
ence between the outcomes in the two groups (those who had trained birth 
attend ants and those who did not) was due to chance or was really due to the 
train ing of the birth attend ants. Even if both groups had trained birth attend-
ants, you would likely see a variety of outcomes in the two groups due to 
natural differ ences between them. This could possibly be a chance vari ation, 
as no two groups are ever exactly the same, or it could be due to the inter ven-
tion. What we want to determ ine is whether the differ ence between those 
cared for by the trained birth attend ants and those cared for in the tradi tional 
manner can be attrib uted to the train ing of the birth attend ant or whether it is 
just a chance finding. The p value can then be calcu lated to determ ine whether 
the differ ences in outcomes observed is due to chance or not.
To calcu late the p value we use the null hypo thesis. This is a phrase that is 
used when you state (in order to test it) that there is no rela tion ship between 
the differ ent elements (or vari ables) under study. This can be calcu lated using 
a stat ist ical test, such as the chi- squared test. A p value of 0.05, for example, 
means that there is a 1:20 chance of seeing these results if the null hypo thesis 
were true, and is not gener ally low enough to rule out chance.
Let’s imagine that Gill et al. (2011) found a p value of 0.002. This would mean 
The lower the p value, the less likely it is that the occur rence is due to chance. 
If a p value is less than 0.05 (1:20), we say the occur rence is unlikely to be 
due to chance. If the p value is say, 0.5, we would say that 50% of the time the 
occur rence would be due to chance and there fore not likely to be due to the 
inter ven tion in ques tion.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

66 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
that there is a 2:1000 chance that the differ ences were due to chance alone. A 
p value expressed as p = 0.002 indic ates that it is unlikely that the improve-
ment in risk reduc tion in the women atten ded to by the trained birth attend ant 
was due to chance.
Here we have provided a brief over view of the commonly held beliefs about 
and ways of present ing infer en tial stat ist ics. Some people find these concepts 
easy to compre hend; others find it more diffi cult and need to read and re- read 
the points made several times before they begin to make sense. If this applies 
to you, then do re- read the section above. You might also find it useful to 
consult other texts that describe the use of stat ist ics. For those who find the 
concepts easy to follow, consider devel op ing your under stand ing through 
further reading of books on stat ist ics that are specific ally designed for health 
and social care profes sion als.
How can you identify a good quant it at ive study?
In addi tion to the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’, you might also find it 
useful to use a crit ical appraisal tool that is specific ally inten ded for use with 
quant it at ive studies, such as the Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP). 
This is a qual it at ive research appraisal tool, one of many such tools avail able 
at http://www.caspin ter na tional.org/?o=1012.
Remember that poorly designed quant it at ive studies produce weak data. To 
know if a study has been carried out well, you need to know the method 
used. In general, the study will be more reli able if the sample size is large, 
the results are stat ist ic ally signi fic ant and the method of study is appro-
pri ate to its aims and well described.
Some examples of qual it at ive and quant it at ive research
It is import ant to be clear in your mind about the differ ences between qual it-
at ive and quant it at ive research. To get you used to think ing about the differ-
ences, we provide some examples of topics you might want to find out about. 
Read each example care fully and decide whether you would be looking for 
qual it at ive or quant it at ive research to address the topic. The answers are 
given below.
Looking at the example ques tions below, decide which approach is 
best – qual it at ive or quant it at ive? Or maybe a mixture of the two (mixed 
methods)?
Looking at the example ques tions below, decide which approach is 
best – qual it at ive or quant it at ive? Or maybe a mixture of the two (mixed 
methods)?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 67
• What are the exper i ences of single mothers in an inner city?
• What types of illegal drugs are used by people aged between 18 and 21?
• Do anti bi ot ics shorten the length of an episode of tonsil litis?
• What factors lead to a student’s decision to leave univer sity in their first 
year?
• Which univer sit ies have the highest attri tion rates?
• Why do patients/clients prefer ‘single- sex’ wards?
The example ques tions and some possible research approaches
What are the exper i ences of single mothers in an inner city?
You would be looking for qual it at ive research because this inform a tion is 
likely to be obtained through in- depth inter views explor ing the exper i ences of 
single mums in detail.
What types of illegal drugs are used by people aged between 18 and 21?
You would be looking for quant it at ive research because this inform a tion can 
be meas ured numer ic ally – that is, the types of drugs and who takes them 
can be meas ured. Whether it is possible to get an accur ate answer to these 
ques tions is another matter!
Do anti bi ot ics shorten the length of an episode of tonsil litis?
Again, this would be explored using quant it at ive research because this inform-
a tion can be meas ured numer ic ally. In this case, you can measure the length 
of an illness and then find out whether the person had taken anti bi ot ics or not.
What factors lead to a student’s decision to leave univer sity in their first year?
This is not a ques tion that can be easily considered using exact numer ical 
meas ure ment. This is because the inform a tion is not easily quan ti fi able. The 
inform a tion is likely to be collec ted using in- depth inter views and there fore 
using a qual it at ive approach. However, you may also find that a mixed 
method approach is useful here as students might be able to rank their 
reasons for leaving univer sity on a ques tion naire.
Which univer sit ies have the highest attri tion rates?
This ques tion can be easily answered using quant it at ive methods – attri tion 
rates are straight for ward to measure and can be counted. This contrasts with 
the ques tion above, which neces sit ates a mixed method or qual it at ive approach.
Why do patients/clients prefer ‘single- sex’ wards?
This ques tion requires a qual it at ive approach to research because the focus 
is on the reasons for patients’/clients’ pref er ences (this ques tion assumes 
that we already know about patients’/clients’ pref er ences). Note, however, 
that if the ques tion were simply ‘Do patients/clients prefer “single- sex” 
wards?’, then a quant it at ive approach could be used.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

68 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Next time you come across some research, try and read around the type of 
research it is so you can more easily under stand the approach. You can use 
research text books and gloss ar ies such as http://www.cochrane.org/gloss ary 
to help you.
Many broad topic areas can be explored using both qual it at ive and quant it-
at ive approaches; it depends which aspect of the topic you are focus ing on or 
want to explore. Take the follow ing three topics and consider how each could 
be explored using either a qual it at ive or quant it at ive approach. We give some 
sugges tions below.
• Diabetes
• Young carers
• Binge drink ing in teen agers
Qualitative research ques tions
• What is an adult preg nant woman’s exper i ence of living with diabetes?
• What is it like to be a young carer?
• Why has the incid ence of binge drink ing escal ated in recent years?
Quantitative research ques tions
• Which drug is most effect ive in managing diabetes?
• How many young carers are there in Western Australia?
• At what age do people who binge drink start drink ing?
Think crit ic ally about how, depend ing on the ques tion being asked, some 
aspects of a topic are best explored using a quant it at ive approach and some 
a qual it at ive approach.
Once you have grasped these main types of research, begin think ing more 
deeply about the specific type of inform a tion/evid ence you would be looking 
for if you were conduct ing a search on one of the above topics. This will help 
you to be more select ive about what will be useful for your academic writing 
or your profes sional prac tice. These concepts can be diffi cult to under stand, 
espe cially if you are new to think ing and reading about research, and refin ing 
these concepts further can be confus ing. If this is the case, then you may want 
to re- focus on more simple consid er a tions such as whether the research you 
require is qual it at ive or quant it at ive.
Next time you come across some research, try and read around the type of 
research it is so you can more easily under stand the approach. You can use
research text books and gloss ar ies such as http://www.cochrane.org/gloss ary
to help you.
Think crit ic ally about how, depend ing on the ques tion being asked, some 
aspects of a topic are best explored using a quant it at ive approach and some
a qual it at ive approach.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 69
Will you always find up- to- date research and inform a tion for your 
prac tice?
While there has been a marked increase in the amount of avail able inform a-
tion, it is still the case that some areas of health and social care are under- 
researched or the research is not of high quality. Research is still devel op ing in 
some fields, and not all areas of health and social care are under pinned by a 
sound body of know ledge. So you might find your self in one of two situ ations 
– either:
• you are bombarded by a wealth of inform a tion that you need to make sense 
of, or
• you do not find any inform a tion, or only poor quality inform a tion, that 
relates to your selec ted topic.
If you can find a liter at ure review on your topic, then you have prob ably iden-
ti fied the best avail able evid ence. Failing that, the next best thing is to collate 
the avail able research evid ence on your topic. If no research can be iden ti fied, 
then guidelines or policy may help and if these are not avail able then profes-
sional and expert opinion should be drawn on. Although finding evid ence is 
very import ant, some times there is no specific evid ence for what we need and 
we have to rely on exper i ence and common sense.
The follow ing abstract from Smith and Pell (2003), taken from a Christmas 
edition of the British Medical Journal, and written some what in jest (we 
think!), illus trates this point perfectly (and also demon strates the process of 
under tak ing a system atic review).
Abstract
Objectives: To determ ine whether para chutes are effect ive in prevent ing 
major trauma related to grav it a tional chal lenge.
Design: Systematic review of random ised controlled trials.
Data sources: Medline, Web of Science, Embase, and the Cochrane Library 
data bases; appro pri ate inter net sites and cita tion lists.
Study selec tion: Studies showing the effects of using a para chute during 
free fall. Main outcome measure death or major trauma, defined as an injury 
sever ity score > 15.
Results: We were unable to identify any random ised controlled trials of para-
chute inter ven tion.
Conclusions: As with many inter ven tions inten ded to prevent ill health, the 
effect ive ness of para chutes has not been subjec ted to rigor ous eval u ation by 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

70 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
using random ised controlled trials. Advocates of evid ence- based medi cine 
have criti cised the adop tion of inter ven tions eval u ated by using only obser va-
tional data. We think that every one might benefit if the most radical prot ag on-
ists of evid ence- based medi cine organ ised and parti cip ated in a double blind, 
random ised, placebo controlled, cros sover trial of the para chute.
(Smith and Pell 2003)
We acknow ledge that this research paper is presen ted in jest, although it is 
evid ence that the research ers did carry out a real- life system atic review to 
study this topic. Their point is that you will not always find evid ence and this 
should not stop you carry ing out care that is based on common sense or obser-
va tions that if you jump from an aero plane without a para chute you are likely 
to suffer serious injury!
In summary
To adopt a crit ical approach to access ing the best avail able evid ence you need 
to think about how you can find high- quality, relev ant evid ence rather than 
relying only on readily avail able evid ence. To do this you need to search effect-
ively and this is a skill that takes time to develop. You need to be clear about 
what you need to find out. You also need to develop skill in under stand ing the 
differ ent types of research. We suggest you look for liter at ure reviews and 
system atic reviews in the first instance, as these will summar ize the avail able 
evid ence. If there are no reviews, then look for avail able research that has 
been done on your topic and collate all that is avail able. You need to think care-
fully about the type of research that is most useful to you and consider whether 
you are looking for qual it at ive, quant it at ive or mixed method approaches. We 
suggest that you get used to think ing crit ic ally about the type of research that 
is most useful to you. Try to follow what is going on in the research, rather 
than just relying on a summary or abstract. If you cannot identify any research, 
then draw on profes sional and expert opinion and other sources.
Key points
1 You need to under stand when you need to dig deeper for more or better 
quality evid ence.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

HOW YOU CAN FIND THE ‘BEST AVAILABLE’ EVIDENCE 71
2 You will find the best avail able evid ence through carry ing out a thor ough 
and system atic search.
3 Look for liter at ure reviews or system atic reviews in the first instance.
4 If you do not find a review paper, look for research papers.
5 Identify the type of research that will best address your ques tion.
6 Consider what inform a tion will be most useful to you if there is no research 
evid ence.
7 Finally, look for profes sional or expert opinion if there is no current 
research.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

4
How you can 
demon strate your 
crit ical think ing skills 
in your written work 
and present a tions
• Why it is import ant to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your writing 
and verbal present a tions
• When you need to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your writing and 
present a tions
• How you can develop good crit ical writing and present a tions
• The import ance of plan ning your work
• The import ance of devel op ing a clear, logical and thor ough approach 
to your work
• Using differ ent styles of writing and present ing
• An example of apply ing crit ical think ing skills to written academic work
• Demonstrating crit ical think ing in verbal present a tions
• A check list for assess ing your crit ical think ing in written work and 
present a tions
• In summary
• Key points
72
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 73
In this chapter, we will:
• Discuss why it is import ant to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your writing 
and present a tions (includ ing examined oral present a tions and vivas).
• Discuss how you can recog nize good crit ical writing and present a tions.
• Identify when you need to incor por ate crit ical think ing into your writing 
and present a tions.
• Explain how you can plan your written work and present a tions effect ively.
• Discuss how you can present your crit ical think ing skills effect ively in your 
writing and present a tions.
In Chapter 1, we discussed why crit ical think ing is import ant for academic 
work and ulti mately for your profes sional prac tice. In Chapters 2 and 3, we 
discussed why it is import ant to find the best avail able evid ence on a topic, 
and to think crit ic ally about what we read, see and hear. In this chapter, we 
explore how to demon strate these skills in your writing and in present a tions.
Why it is import ant to incor por ate crit ical 
think ing into your writing and verbal 
present a tions
You need to be able to commu nic ate your ideas effect ively both in writing and 
verbally. Showing that you have a crit ical approach to what you read, see and 
hear will greatly enhance the quality of your work, and will improve your 
grades. Using a crit ical approach will also lead you to develop your ideas and 
prac tice, ulti mately leading to signi fic ant, posit ive changes in client care. In 
your profes sional life, crit ical think ing is also essen tial for influ en cing changes 
in prac tice, policies and guidelines.
Reflect on why it is import ant for you to be able to demon strate your crit ical 
think ing and appraisal skills in your writing and verbal present a tions.
In both your writing and verbal present a tions, you need to show that you have 
accessed the best avail able evid ence and ques tioned and analysed what you 
have read, seen or heard, rather than accepted it at face value. You can achieve 
this by demon strat ing that you under stand the inform a tion or evid ence you 
use, rather than just report ing it and saying no more about it. This will give 
your work greater author ity.
Reflect on why it is import ant for you to be able to demon strate your crit ical
think ing and appraisal skills in your writing and verbal present a tions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

74 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
In your academic work and your profes sional role, you will need to express 
your ideas and argu ments both in writing and verbally, demon strat ing that 
you are well informed, able to identify relev ant inform a tion/evid ence and to 
appraise the sources of inform a tion/evid ence that you come across.
A much higher level of skill is there fore needed for crit ical writing and 
present ing than that needed for purely descript ive writing and present ing. 
This is often reflec ted in grading criteria, partic u larly once you move into 
higher levels of study. You are likely to be awarded higher grades if you 
clearly demon strate your skills of crit ical think ing within your work. In this 
chapter, we explain how to do that most effect ively.
When you need to incor por ate crit ical 
think ing into your writing and present a tions
There are a variety of reasons why you may need to write inform a tion or 
present it verbally, whether as a student or in your profes sional life within 
health and social care.
Written inform a tion
There are a variety of reasons why you might need to prepare written inform-
a tion, includ ing:
• Academic essays or assign ments.
• Dissertations, theses or research projects.
• Case studies.
• Reflective diaries or journ als.
• Reports for a variety of purposes, includ ing:
 Research reports, such as those relat ing to a partic u lar event, issue, 
aspect of care, inter ven tion or treat ment.
 Incident reports and state ments.
• Presenting and justi fy ing recom mend a tions regard ing appro pri ate inter-
ven tions for the care of a client.
• Policies or guidelines.
• Care plans or care path ways.
• Quality docu ment a tion and audits.
The import ance of skilfully crafted, know ledge able crit ical writing should 
not be under es tim ated – the ability to argue a case in writing can be the key 
to high- quality, profes sion ally account able prac tice and can lead to posit ive, 
creat ive devel op ments in health and social care.
The import ance of skilfully crafted, know ledge able crit ical writing should 
not be under es tim ated – the ability to argue a case in writing can be the key
to high- quality, profes sion ally account able prac tice and can lead to posit ive, 
creat ive devel op ments in health and social care.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 75
Verbal present a tions
There are also a variety of reasons why you might need to prepare and deliver 
a verbal present a tion, includ ing:
• Presenting a case study of a patient/client/family/incid ent to your colleagues.
• Giving a present a tion for an academic assign ment.
• Presenting a viva for a disser ta tion or thesis.
• Giving a teach ing session, or sharing new inform a tion/evid ence with 
colleagues in prac tice.
• You may also need to present your skills of crit ical think ing in less formal 
situ ations, such as when debat ing an issue with colleagues, or reflect ing on 
an incid ent with others – this will be discussed in Chapter 5.
Getting your ideas across in a present a tion is just as import ant as when you 
write them down. Don’t miss the oppor tun ity to demon strate your skills of 
crit ical think ing in your present a tions.
How you can develop good crit ical writing and 
present a tions
Demonstrating skills of crit ical think ing through your writing or your present a-
tions is a skill that can be learned and developed. You need to show that you can:
• Select the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence.
• Critically appraise these sources.
• Form a clear and logical argu ment.
• Challenge your own assump tions and broaden your perspect ives.
Have you ever come across a speaker or writer who was able to demon strate 
their skills of crit ical think ing clearly? Jot down what you noticed about the 
way they presen ted their ideas.
To demon strate your crit ical think ing skills in your writing and present a tions:
• Your writing should be clearly expressed and logic ally ordered.
• You should present the best avail able evid ence on a topic, issue or ques tion 
in a balanced way.
Getting your ideas across in a present a tion is just as import ant as when you 
write them down. Don’t miss the oppor tun ity to demon strate your skills of 
crit ical think ing in your present a tions.
Have you ever come across a speaker or writer who was able to demon strate 
their skills of crit ical think ing clearly? Jot down what you noticed about the 
way they presen ted their ideas.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

76 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• You need to show that you have assessed and eval u ated inform a tion, evid-
ence, view points and/or argu ments care fully, with a cautious and scep tical 
approach. Don’t assume that all of the ideas or views that you have read or 
heard are neces sar ily correct or well founded.
• You should give a well- balanced present a tion of what you think of differ ent 
ideas/view points/argu ments/conclu sions.
• As well as the above, it is import ant to acknow ledge the limit a tions of your 
own ideas and conclu sions.
Wellington et al. (2005: 84) suggest that good crit ical writing (and we think this 
also applies to present a tions) should include the follow ing features:
• 
Healthy scep ti cism . . . but not cynicism;
• 
Confidence . . . but not ‘cock i ness’ or arrog ance;
• 
Judgement which is crit ical . . . but not dismissive;
• 
Opinions . . . without being opin ion ated;
• 
Having a voice, without ‘sound ing off’;
• 
Careful eval u ation of published work;
• 
Being ‘fair’: assess ing fairly the strengths and weak nesses of other 
people’s ideas and writing . . . without preju dice;
• 
Having your own stand point and values with respect to an argu ment, 
research project or public a tion . . . without getting on a soap box;
• 
Making judge ments on the basis of consid er able thought and all the avail-
able evid ence . . . as opposed to asser tions without reason;
• 
Putting forward recom mend a tions and conclu sions, whilst recog nising 
their limit a tions.
Later in this chapter, we will provide some tips and strategies for how you can 
demon strate these features in your own work.
The import ance of plan ning your work
In order to demon strate your skills of crit ical think ing, plan ning is essen tial.
Think about the last time you had to write a profes sional or academic docu-
ment or an assign ment, whether a written piece of work or a verbal present-
a tion. Use the ques tions below to help you reflect on how you planned for 
your work.
Think about the last time you had to write a profes sional or academic docu-
ment or an assign ment, whether a written piece of work or a verbal present-
a tion. Use the ques tions below to help you reflect on how you planned for 
your work.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 77
• 
Were you clear in your aims and focus for your work?
• 
How did you carry out research into your topic?
• 
Did you consult anybody for advice or ideas? If so, who?
• 
Did you access any new inform a tion/evid ence?
• 
How confid ent were you in putting together your work?
• 
Were you able to express your ideas clearly and logic ally?
• 
Did you come across any new ideas or perspect ives while prepar ing 
your work? If so, did you incor por ate these into your work in any way?
The strategies in bold italics in the think bubbles in Figure 4.1 reflect a 
planned and stra tegic approach. If you adopt an unplanned and haphaz ard 
Figure 4.1 Strategies for prepar ing for an assign ment or project
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

78 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
approach to prepar ing your writing or present a tions, you are less likely to 
think crit ic ally about what you write. As a result, you are less likely to demon-
strate your crit ical think ing skills clearly and effect ively within your work.
You will be more able to adopt a crit ical approach if you plan your work effect-
ively before you start to work on your assign ment, present a tion or project.
Investing some time in research ing and in think ing care fully before you 
write or present your ideas will pay dividends.
Some ‘top tips’ to help you prepare your work:
Make sure you know exactly what it is that you need to do. Look at the 
ques tion and/or guid ance you have been given, and read it thor oughly. 
Underline any key words that help you identify what approach you should 
take (e.g. Discuss, Critically analyse, Reflect, Report, Identify, Explore, etc.).
Reflect on what you already know, have exper i enced or think about the 
topic. Do you have any precon ceived views or assump tions that could either 
inform or influ ence your approach?
Look at the marking criteria if your work is to be form ally assessed. This will 
help you find out what the markers are looking for when they assess your 
work, includ ing the skills of crit ical think ing they hope they will find in your 
writing or your present a tion. If you have been asked to do some thing on a 
more informal basis (e.g. writing a report or a set of guidelines, or present ing 
a brief report), try to get clear instruc tions and guid ance, in writing, regard ing 
exactly what is wanted – this way there is less room for misin ter pret ing what 
is expec ted of you.
Carry out a thor ough search for the best avail able evid ence, as discussed 
in Chapter 3. Select a range of relev ant and high- quality inform a tion/evid-
ence that will enable you to offer a balanced, well- informed argu ment within 
your work.
Read the inform a tion/evid ence care fully. Use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical 
think ing’ (see Chapter 1) to help you think crit ic ally about all the sources of 
inform a tion/evid ence you have found.
If you are unsure what to do for any form of assign ment or project, seek 
advice.
You will be more able to adopt a crit ical approach if you plan your work effect-
ively before you start to work on your assign ment, present a tion or project.
Investing some time in research ing and in think ing care fully before you 
write or present your ideas will pay dividends.
If you are unsure what to do for any form of assign ment or project, seek 
advice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 79
Consider new and altern at ive perspect ives on your topic area – don’t dismiss 
a source if it seems to you to be contro ver sial in its perspect ives, or if you 
disagree with it. Instead, find further evid ence to develop your discus sion.
Drawing a spider diagram (also known as a mind map) may help as you 
prepare and develop your work. For example, take a look at the simple spider 
diagram here repro duced in Figure 4.2, put together by a student prepar ing for 
a present a tion about the needs of carers of people with demen tia.
Consider new and altern at ive perspect ives on your topic area – don’t dismiss
a source if it seems to you to be contro ver sial in its perspect ives, or if you 
disagree with it. Instead, find further evid ence to develop your discus sion.
Figure 4.2 A spider diagram
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

80 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Completing a diagram like this could help you identify a clear focus for 
your work, and to identify differ ent sub- themes that need to be explored. You 
could extend the diagram further and use this to help you plan your research 
on the differ ent sub- themes, and to plan how you will focus and struc ture your 
writing. A variety of free mind mapping tools are widely avail able [see, for 
example, https://www.text2mindmap.com/].
The import ance of devel op ing a clear, logical 
and thor ough approach to your work
The follow ing nine strategies will help ensure a clear, logical and thor ough 
approach, which will help you demon strate crit ical think ing within your work: 
More detail is given below:
1 Ensure your focus is clear.
2 Use simple language and clear struc ture.
3 Use connect ing words.
4 Demonstrate your use of the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence.
5 Use your own words rather than direct quotes from authors.
6 Demonstrate your skills of crit ical appraisal and crit ical analysis.
7 Highlight altern at ive view points.
8 Bring your points together (synthes ize).
9 Summarize and conclude your work effect ively.
1 Ensure your focus is clear
You need to ensure that your audi ence/reader knows what the topic and/or 
focus is at the very begin ning of your present a tion or piece of work. You there-
fore need to set out your aims and object ives clearly – and the words that you 
use to do this will indic ate the level of crit ical think ing in your present a tion. 
For example:
• Describe, list and identify – all of these are descript ive and, if not developed 
further, indic ate a low level of crit ical think ing.
• Analyse, appraise and synthes ize and, where appro pri ate, reflect – all of 
these demon strate higher levels of crit ical think ing.
In the follow ing example, a student clearly outlines the aims and focus of their 
work:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 81
Example
In this present a tion, I will identify the causes of malaria. I will crit ic ally analyse 
the epidemi ology of this disease, focus ing partic u larly on those at risk of the 
disease who live in Latin America. I will then reflect on the implic a tions of my 
find ings for my work in my elect ive place ment next year.
2 Use simple language and clear struc ture
Sometimes the best writing and present a tions use very simple language. The 
author or speaker does not try to impress by using complic ated words or 
expres sions. This is a good aim to have in mind. You can achieve this by 
express ing your ideas simply, clearly and logic ally. You should also explain 
any complex terms and state what any abbre vi ations mean. Make sure you 
use profes sion- specific and up- to- date defin i tions of key terms, and for more 
complex ideas or concepts, you may need to use several defin i tions and 
compare/contrast them.
In your writing, make sure you have full and complete para graphs that 
present a point. Each para graph should focus on one topic, and should lead 
logic ally on to the next para graph. Sometimes it helps to include a heading or 
title for each para graph – this can help to keep you focused and keep your 
work struc tured. If you want to, you can remove these before you present 
your finished work.
Similarly, in your present a tions, you need to ensure that you use simple and 
clear language, and struc ture your present a tion in a logical way, so that your 
audi ence can follow your line of reas on ing.
3 Use connect ing words
You can help to lead or ‘sign post’ the reader or your audi ence through your 
written work or present a tion by ensur ing your ideas link together clearly. As 
well as setting out how you will struc ture your work, using certain words and 
phrases, such as the follow ing, will help:
To help put your ideas in a logical order, e.g. ‘first’, ‘to begin’, ‘I will start/
begin by’, ‘initially’, ‘secondly’, ‘next’, ‘then’, ‘subsequently’, ‘after wards’, 
‘lastly’, ‘finally’
To add to ideas/points you have already made, e.g. ‘addi tion ally’, ‘equally’, 
‘simil arly’, ‘also’, ‘moreover’, ‘like wise’, ‘further more’, ‘above all’
To give examples, ‘for example’, ‘for instance’, ‘such as’, ‘includ ing’
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

82 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
To emphas ize points or ideas, e.g. ‘most import antly’, ‘in partic u lar’
To demon strate your own think ing/view point, e.g. ‘in my view’, ‘from my 
perspect ive’, ‘having considered these ideas, I would suggest that . . .’
To show cause and effect, e.g. ‘because of’, ‘consequently’, ‘thus’, ‘as a 
result’, ‘in order that’
To compare or contrast, or intro duce an altern at ive view point, e.g. ‘in 
contrast’, ‘on the other hand’, ‘however’, ‘despite this’, ‘nonethe less’, ‘never-
the less’, ‘simil arly’, ‘equally’, ‘conversely’, ‘like wise’, ‘also’, ‘others argue 
that’, ‘in fact’
To high light simil ar it ies between perspect ives/view points/find ings (e.g. of 
differ ent authors/research ers), e.g. ‘simil arly, ‘in the same way’, ‘like wise’
To summar ize, e.g. ‘in summary’, ‘to sum up’
To conclude, e.g. ‘so’, ‘there fore’, ‘thus’, ‘hence’, ‘we can see’, ‘finally’, ‘in 
conclu sion’, ‘this evid ence indic ates that’, ‘because of this’, ‘my conclu sion 
is’, ‘overall’
4 Demonstrate your use of the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence
Select relev ant and high- quality research, theory and policy to use in your 
present a tion or writing. Demonstrate clearly why you have chosen to refer to 
these. Remember to search thor oughly as outlined in Chapter 3. When you 
have a wide range of evid ence, compare and contrast differ ent authors’ and 
research ers’ perspect ives when appro pri ate, then bring in your own thoughts 
on these, linking to your own exper i ences in prac tice if appro pri ate.
Make sure the sources you refer to are relev ant to your focus and to the 
argu ment you are making. You will start this process when you search for 
inform a tion/evid ence, but it is always worth recon sid er ing whether the 
inform a tion/evid ence you use is the most appro pri ate for your case, as you 
continue to write. Use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to help you 
to do this.
5 Use your own words rather than direct quotes from authors
It is much better to use your own words to describe an author’s work than to 
quote directly from their work. This is because when you cite a quota tion you 
do not demon strate your under stand ing, whereas when you put the ideas into 
your own words (para phrase) you show that you under stand what the author 
inten ded. In other words, you should analyse and inter pret (think crit ic ally 
about) what you have read, rather than simply copy down or read out what 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 83
other authors have said. This means that you need to break down their ideas 
in an attempt to discover the full meaning of what they are saying. In contrast, 
using a lot of quotes in your work will suggest to your reader that you struggle 
to put what others have said into your own words. It may also suggest that 
you do not in fact under stand what you have read, or that you find it hard to 
inter pret it.
6 Demonstrate your skills of crit ical appraisal and crit ical analysis
Give your reader or audi ence inform a tion about the types and quality of evid-
ence you are using. This will help to show them that you under stand and have 
thought care fully about the sources you are using, rather than just using the 
inform a tion/evid ence that is most readily avail able. It also demon strates that 
you are using the best avail able evid ence to support your academic work. You 
should avoid just citing a name and a date in your academic work with no further 
refer ence to the type of evid ence you are refer ring to; other wise, your reader or 
listener will not be able tell if you are using the best avail able refer ences. It is 
import ant to use the right type(s) of evid ence to back up your argu ments – for 
example, if you are making a claim about how to manage a partic u lar condi tion 
or situ ation effect ively, citing research evid ence will give you a much stronger 
case than if you cite someone’s opinion. You then need to let your reader/listener 
know that the refer ence you have cited is research rather than opinion.
The follow ing state ments provide much more inform a tion than just citing 
the name of an author or researcher:
• 
An expert on this topic, Braemar (2006) suggests that . . .
• 
As a result of a large- scale, high- quality system atic review, Jones et al. 
(2010) concluded that . . .
• 
In this small qual it at ive study, Griffiths (2009) suggests . . .
• 
In a multi- centred, inter na tional random ized controlled trial, Jacques et al. 
(2008) found that . . .
• 
In this brief news pa per report on miscar riage rates in the UK in 2007, 
Davies (2010) spec u lated that . . .
• 
Salkel (2013) bases her argu ments and conclu sions solely on her exper i-
ences of prac tice in hospit als as a student in the United States . . .
When you incor por ate crit ical appraisal of inform a tion/evid ence into your 
writing, you can also point out any flaws or strengths in the argu ments or 
ideas contained in what you have read, seen or heard, such as regard ing the 
meth od o logy of research studies, or the argu ments of people you have spoken 
to. For example:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

84 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
. . . although the study concludes that the treat ment is effect ive, the small 
sample size and lack of inclu sion of older people means it cannot be 
applied to the general popu la tion.
You will also demon strate that you are able to think crit ic ally by compar ing 
differ ent authors’ or research ers’ views, and by noting when their argu ments 
agree or disagree with each other. You need to analyse how strong their 
differ ent argu ments and conclu sions are, linking this to your own topic and to 
your own argu ments. Again, use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ to 
help you to do this.
7 Highlight altern at ive view points
It is always useful to high light altern at ive view points, which demon strates 
that you have looked at your topic from differ ent perspect ives. This will be 
discussed further in Chapter 6. Where applic able and where possible, you 
should come to a balanced view about the strength of the argu ments you have 
considered.
8 Bring your points together (synthes ize)
It is import ant to bring your argu ments together, or ‘synthes ize’. Synthesis is the 
process of build ing up differ ent ideas, evid ence and pieces of inform a tion and 
then connect ing them together into a coher ent whole, in order to create new 
and original ideas and conclu sions. This may include making recom mend a tions 
for new approaches to prac tice (Cottrell 2011; Atkins and Schutz 2013). This 
involves stating what you think overall, after you have considered the issue or 
ques tion as a whole, and weighed up the argu ments and evid ence you have 
analysed in detail. It is almost like taking a breath and saying ‘AND SO . . .’. You 
may use similar words to those you use in your final conclu sion, but you also 
need to do this after consid er ing each point or argu ment.
9 Summarize and conclude your work effect ively
In your conclu sion, you need to bring together all the differ ent synthes ized 
points you have made; your conclu sion should be clear, concise and based on 
the evid ence you have presen ted. There should be no new inform a tion in a 
conclu sion. Instead, you should be summing up the key points you wish to 
high light, and ending with any recom mend a tions for future prac tice and/or 
future research. However, your conclu sion may be tent at ive, in which case 
you will need to indic ate this by using qual i fy ing state ments, phrases or words 
such as ‘most’, ‘some’, ‘gener ally’, ‘it is possible that’, ‘in most cases’, ‘indic-
ates’, ‘it would appear that’, ‘in a few cases’ or ‘it is unlikely that’. Don’t be 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 85
afraid to state that there is no clear or convin cing evid ence for an issue. In 
fact, being tent at ive may demon strate greater academic skill than coming to 
a strong conclu sion for which you do not really have suffi cient evid ence.
It is not enough to report what you see, hear or read. You need to incor por ate 
all the strategies above to demon strate your crit ical think ing skills.
Review some thing you have written (e.g. an essay, assign ment or report) or 
a present a tion you have given. Do you think you you demon strated good crit-
ical think ing skills? How do you think you could have developed your work 
further?
Using differ ent styles of writing and 
present ing
If you want to demon strate crit ical think ing in your writing and present a-
tions, you need to use the most appro pri ate writing or present a tion style.
It is import ant to consider the types of writing styles that you can use in order 
to demon strate your crit ical think ing effect ively within your written work. 
The main writing styles are:
• Description
• Explanation
• Evaluation
• Analysis
• Reflection
Most good work that adopts a crit ical approach will incor por ate all of the 
above styles of writing. Some will in addi tion require a more personal reflect ive 
approach, which we discuss later in this chapter.
Description
This is where inform a tion/evid ence is given (verbally or in writing) in a factual 
manner. Description contains only inform a tion and facts – for example, 
It is not enough to report what you see, hear or read. You need to incor por ate 
all the strategies above to demon strate your crit ical think ing skills.
Review some thing you have written (e.g. an essay, assign ment or report) or 
a present a tion you have given. Do you think you you demon strated good crit-
ical think ing skills? How do you think you could have developed your work 
further?
If you want to demon strate crit ical think ing in your writing and present a-
tions, you need to use the most appro pri ate writing or present a tion style.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

86 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
saying what has happened, what some thing is like, what a theory says, or how 
some thing works. Description is useful to set the scene with back ground 
inform a tion about a topic/issue or problem, a patient/client, a situ ation or an 
envir on ment. Purely descript ive writing or present ing does not contain any 
explan a tion, eval u ation, analysis or reflec tion, although descrip tion may be 
the start ing point for leading into these other styles of writing.
Description should be concise. For example, when crit ic ally apprais ing a 
piece of research, it is import ant to briefly describe the key points of the study 
first, before moving on to apprais ing and eval u at ing it. When reflect ing on an 
event in prac tice, it is import ant to describe the event clearly and concisely 
first, before you go on to eval u ate and analyse it in detail.
In using only descrip tion, you would be present ing and report ing inform a-
tion/ideas, but not trans form ing or devel op ing them.
Examples of descript ive language
• 
Mrs Granta was a 56- year- old woman living alone in her one- bedroom flat. 
She had long- stand ing rheum at oid arth ritis. She had been unem ployed 
for six years and had been receiv ing bene fits during this time. She was 
unable to walk far enough to reach her local shop, and relied on the 
support of her neigh bour for shop ping.
• 
Tang (2011) states that many univer sity students exper i ence stress regu-
larly during their studies.
• 
Many carers of people with long- term condi tions state that they exper i-
ence feel ings of frus tra tion and isol a tion.
Introducing too much descrip tion into your writing or present ing will not 
give you the oppor tun ity to incor por ate eval u ation, explan a tion, analysis or 
reflec tion. As a result, you will not have as much oppor tun ity to demon strate 
your skills of crit ical think ing.
Explanation
When using an explan at ory style of writing or present ing, you provide justi-
fic a tion or reasons for your actions, views and argu ments. Explanation is 
used when you need to explain why you believe some thing, or why you have 
chosen to act in a certain way. For example, when eval u at ing research you 
cannot simply say ‘the research study was of high quality’ – you also need to 
justify your comment by provid ing further inform a tion, and by refer ring to 
Introducing too much descrip tion into your writing or present ing will not 
give you the oppor tun ity to incor por ate eval u ation, explan a tion, analysis or 
reflec tion. As a result, you will not have as much oppor tun ity to demon strate 
your skills of crit ical think ing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 87
liter at ure on research meth od o logy. You should use the best avail able evid-
ence to justify your views or conclu sions.
Explaining may also involve giving further inform a tion about a word, 
phrase, focus or idea. For example, if given a broad topic area to explore, 
you may wish to explain why you have focused on certain issues.
You may be asked to provide a ‘rationale’ for your argu ments and conclu sions 
within your writing and present a tions – this means that you need to give clear 
reasons and/or evid ence to back up what you say. As a result, you will need to 
use words/phrases such as ‘because’, ‘as’ and ‘due to’ to back up your argu ments.
Examples of an explan at ory style (in bold)
• 
Travellers from non- endemic coun tries are at heightened risk of malaria 
because they lack immunity (WHO 2014).
• 
Because Mr Khan did not have capa city to consent to his treat ment and 
care, I followed appro pri ate guid ance from the Mental Capacity Act 2005 
and ensured that we worked care fully as a team to act in his best interests.
• 
It was essen tial to use a non- confront a tional and respect ful approach 
when speak ing to Mrs Oliver, as I needed to minim ize the tension and 
stress during our initial meeting.
• 
As Coddulph’s small- scale quant it at ive study (2012) suggests that this 
inter ven tion is inef fect ive, I believe that a more extens ive study should 
be carried out to confirm whether this is the case.
Evaluation
Evaluation is about judging and forming opinion, based on a sound argu-
ment – this involves the appraisal of inform a tion or evid ence. This style of 
writing is useful because it allows the writer or presenter to demon strate skills 
in eval u at ing and apprais ing what they read, see or hear. This is import ant in 
all forms of writing and present a tions includ ing essays, formal and informal 
reports, written and verbal reflec tions and present a tions.
The char ac ter ist ics of and key points about eval u ation in your writing and 
present a tions are:
• You can demon strate skills in weigh ing up the posit ive and negat ive aspects 
of an exper i ence, concept or argu ment.
• You need to justify your view, giving a reason for your judge ment – in other 
words, you need to combine eval u ation with explan a tion (see above).
• Evaluation is likely to be combined with analysis and explan a tion, and it is 
also an essen tial part of reflec tion, which is discussed briefly below and in 
more depth in Chapter 5.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

88 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
When eval u at ing inform a tion/evid ence, refer to the ‘Six ques tions for 
crit ical think ing’.
Examples of an eval u at ive style (eval u at ive words in bold)
• 
I feel that the strategies I used to estab lish rapport with Mrs Gonzales 
were appro pri ate, as she appeared to be relaxed during my visit, and she 
asked me if I could return to see her again – this, I feel, is an indic ator of 
a success ful first visit.
• 
While Barker et al. (2009) give a detailed account of their research meth-
od o logy, and have a large sample size of parti cipants, making their find-
ings more cred ible, their final conclu sions are not fully justi fied.
Analysis
Analysis is about break ing down a topic, a concept, an issue, a ques tion or an 
exper i ence into parts. When analys ing a topic, concept, issue, ques tion or 
exper i ence, you need to break down and explore in depth all the relev ant 
inform a tion/evid ence avail able to you.
The char ac ter ist ics of and key points about analysis are:
• Analysis can offer a more object ive, system atic and in- depth break down of 
an issue.
• Analysis is likely to be combined with descrip tion, eval u ation and explan a-
tion.
• Analysis helps you to answer ques tions such as ‘What is going on here?’, 
‘Why has this happened?’ and ‘What is this about?’
• If you use an analyt ical style of writing or present a tion, you can compare 
differ ent views or perspect ives on a topic, issue or exper i ence, and identify 
the differ ences between them. For example, in your writing or present a-
tions, you may give two or three defin i tions of a key concept, refer en cing 
them. Then, by compar ing and contrast ing them, you can explain what is 
similar and what is differ ent about the defin i tions.
• You can also show how differ ent issues inter re late or influ ence each other.
• Analysis is a key part of crit ical appraisal and of reflec tion.
Example of an analyt ical style of language (analyt ical words in bold)
There are many, varied defin i tions of health. For example, Evans and Udal 
(2012: 15) focus merely on phys ical aspects includ ing ‘the absence of 
disease’. In contrast, the World Health Organisation (WHO 2006) gives a more 
holistic perspect ive, taking into account the phys ical, social, mental and
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 89
spir itual aspects of a person’s well being. Reflecting this, in its Constitution, the 
WHO (2006) defines health as ‘a state of complete phys ical, mental and social 
well- being and not merely the absence of disease or infirm ity’.
Good writing and present a tion may include all of the compon ents described 
above: descrip tion, eval u ation, explan a tion and analysis in differ ent meas ures 
depend ing on what is required.
Reflection
You may also need to use a reflect ive approach in your writing or present a tions 
to explore your own and others’ exper i ences and feel ings related to an event or 
issue being discussed. Reflective approaches to develop your prac tice are 
discussed further in Chapter 5. Reflection is about review ing an exper i ence in 
order to learn from it. Bulman et al. (2012: e12) describe reflec tion as ‘a process of 
search ing for solu tions to prac tice exper i ences, in order to make sense of them’.
The char ac ter ist ics of and key points about reflec tion are:
• Using reflec tion can help you explore a complex issue in greater depth.
• Using reflec tion can help you to develop your self- aware ness.
• By think ing crit ic ally and reflect ing about an issue or event, you may be 
able to make more sense of it.
• If you write your reflec tions down, you are more likely to follow a struc ture.
• There are many reflect ive frame works avail able (see Chapter 5). Most 
reflect ive frame works involve descrip tion, analysis, eval u ation, conclu-
sions and plan ning, or a variety of prompts or ques tions to help you think 
in more depth about an issue.
• In addi tion to descrip tion, analysis and eval u ation, you will need to explore 
your own and others’ feel ings and involve ment in a situ ation or event.
• Reflection should involve creat ive think ing and may result in new under-
stand ing of an area or problem you are facing.
An example combin ing the above styles of writing
As stated above, you will most likely combine the above styles in your writing 
and present a tions and, having done so, reach conclu sions. In the simple 
extract below from a reflect ive essay or discus sion (it is in the first person, 
using ‘I’), the differ ent styles used are high lighted.
My appoint ment to visit Stephanie was sched uled at 10 am (descrip-
tion); we had agreed that this would be best, as her young daugh ter would 
be at nursery then (explan a tion). The aim of the visit was to explore 
Stephanie’s feel ings about foster ing a child (descrip tion).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

90 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
 Overall, although I was nervous (feel ings – part of reflec tion), I felt 
(feel ings – part of reflec tion) that the visit was success ful (eval u-
ation). There are several reasons (explan a tion) why I have come to this 
conclu sion. First, Stephanie said that she felt able to express her hopes, 
ques tions and concerns openly to me (explan a tion). This demon strates 
that we had started to develop a thera peutic rela tion ship, as described by 
Roberts (2013) (analysis). However, I do not believe that we had yet 
developed a true part ner ship. Secondly, I concluded that this visit 
partially met (eval u ation) the local stand ards for good prac tice for 
home visits that my local author ity (MCC 2011) has set out. However, we 
had not yet set goals as MCC (2011) indic ates should be done on a first 
visit (analysis). Comparing this (analysis) visit to other similar 
visits that I have conduc ted in the past, I believe that this was one of the 
most satis fact ory visits that I have ever conduc ted (eval u ation).
An example of apply ing crit ical think ing skills 
to written academic work
Imagine that a student called Michael has been asked to write a short academic 
report on the follow ing topic:
Discuss the preval ence of smoking among preg nant women living in England, 
and analyse strategies currently used to reduce this, linking to relev ant 
research, theory, policy and guidelines.
Michael begins to research the topic area, and writes the first draft of his 
essay, which he shows to his tutor. An extract from this draft, along with his 
tutor’s feed back, is shown below. Note how the tutor’s comments link to the 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ and to the language styles listed in this 
chapter. The super script numbers in the extract refer to the tutor’s comments 
below the extract.
Extract 1 – from Michael’s first draft of his assign ment
According to Action on Smoking and Health (2010),1 just over 24 per cent of 
adults smoke. It is a well- known fact2 that smoking in preg nancy is detri mental 
to the health of both preg nant women and their unborn chil dren. Experts state3 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 91
that smoking during preg nancy can cause miscar riage, still birth and under- 
developed babies, and can also increase the risk of cot death. According to 
Booth (2010),4 chil dren of women who smoke during preg nancy are also far 
more likely to be ill more often and are also much more likely to end up in 
hospital during the early stages of their lives.
It is essen tial, there fore, that all smokers who find them selves to be preg-
nant should be encour aged to quit smoking. According to O’Connell (2009),5 
there are many ways to give up smoking, for example using nicot ine replace-
ment therapy (NRT) via patches, gum, inhal at ors, lozenges or nasal sprays.6 A 
variety of strategies can be used to deal with crav ings, such as chewing gum, 
having a healthy drink or snack, or using some form of medit a tion, or focus ing 
on the posit ive impact that giving up smoking will have on the foetus’s health 
and devel op ment.7
Recent guidelines8 state that women should be given a carbon monox ide 
breath test when they first book into mater nity services, and should be asked 
if they smoke.9 Women who say that they smoke should be referred to the 
NHS Stop Smoking Services, and should be given the tele phone number of the 
NHS Pregnancy Smoking Helpline.10
There is much research on the effect ive ness of differ ent tech niques to 
promote smoking cessa tion. Recent research suggests11 that indi vidu al ized 
approaches should be used in order to meet smokers’ varying needs (O’Connell 
2009).
This extract may at first glance appear to be well written and to incor por ate 
a crit ical approach. The tutor’s comments below, however, show how Michael’s 
work could be developed further to enhance his crit ical skills within his 
writing.
Tutor’s comments
1 
What is this organ iz a tion? Where did you find this inform a tion? You are 
quoting stat ist ics from Scotland, related to the general popu la tion – 
could you ‘dig deeper’ to find a stat istic more relev ant to the focus of 
preg nant mothers, in England?
2 
Who has stated this fact? You need to back up this state ment with evid-
ence – you need to demon strate that you have carried out a system atic 
search for inform a tion and evid ence related to your specific topic area.
3 
Who has said this – which experts? You need to give refer ences when 
you refer to others’ work, and give more detailed inform a tion about your 
sources of evid ence – remem ber the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’!
4 
What type of writing is this? I think this is a news pa per article, and it 
doesn’t appear to be evid ence- based inform a tion. Could you find a 
better source of evid ence?
5 
Who is this author, and where did you find this inform a tion? Is their work 
of good quality?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

92 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
6 
What exactly do the authors say about these differ ent approaches 
in rela tion to preg nant mothers? Expand on this, intro du cing more 
analysis.
7 
This is very descript ive. Do authors/research ers have any views about 
these? What are your own thoughts about these differ ent options?
8 
When were these guidelines written? Who has devised them, and how 
have they come up with these recom mend a tions? You need to give a 
refer ence, and explain their context in more detail.
9 
What do you think of this approach? Have you had any exper i ence of 
this strategy? If so, what are your thoughts?
10 Whose recom mend a tion this is – is it your own? You need to be clear.
11 Is this research specific ally related to smoking in preg nancy, or is it 
more general? You need to explain the context of these differ ent pieces 
of research, and their meth od o logy, analys ing them in more depth, 
linking clearly to the focus of your assign ment – smoking cessa tion by 
preg nant women in England.
Having read the above extract, and the tutor’s comments, and bearing in 
mind what you have read so far in this chapter, write down how you think 
Michael could develop his work to demon strate his skills of crit ical think ing 
more effect ively in his writing.
There are a variety of ways that Michael could enhance his work in order to 
demon strate his skills of crit ical think ing more effect ively in his writing. Here, 
we apply the prin ciples of how to write crit ic ally and the ‘top tips’ we mentioned 
earlier in this chapter to this example.
To enhance his work, Michael could:
• Plan his work more effect ively before he starts.
• Clearly identify the focus of his assign ment. Michael needs to start by 
analys ing the assign ment title/guidelines. He needs to note the key words 
within the title: for this assign ment, he needs main tain his focus on preg-
nant women who smoke within England; and on discuss ing strategies for 
promot ing cessa tion within this specific group of people. By doing this he 
will imme di ately demon strate his skills of crit ical think ing, by showing that 
he can keep to this focus through out his work.
• Carry out an effect ive search for the best avail able evid ence and 
inform a tion about his topic. Michael needs to search for relev ant and 
high- quality research, liter at ure, stat ist ics, policy and guidelines linking to 
his focus. He there fore needs to have skills in search ing effect ively and in 
Having read the above extract, and the tutor’s comments, and bearing in 
mind what you have read so far in this chapter, write down how you think
Michael could develop his work to demon strate his skills of crit ical think ing 
more effect ively in his writing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 93
digging deeper for relev ant and high- quality inform a tion/evid ence. He may 
need to contact a librar ian for help with this.
• Critically appraise the sources he finds as he researches the topic. 
Michael then needs to crit ic ally appraise the inform a tion/evid ence that he 
has iden ti fied in his search, sifting through all the inform a tion sources that 
he reads, sees and hears, such as research data, inform a tion from books, 
policy docu ments, and any inform a tion that he has been told in the prac tice 
setting. He could use the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ from 
Chapter 1 to help him identify the sources of inform a tion that are most 
relev ant to his focus, and that provide the highest quality, author it at ive 
evid ence related to the topic.
• Compare and contrast differ ent ideas/perspect ives/research find-
ings that he finds in the inform a tion/evid ence he reads. To enhance 
his work, Michael needs to demon strate his ability to recog nize and compare 
differ ent view points – for example, among authors, research find ings and 
stat ist ics – and to analyse and eval u ate these in a balanced way, where 
appro pri ate compar ing them with his own exper i ences, ideas and views.
• Back up state ments with evid ence. Michael needs to ensure that any 
state ments he makes in his work are backed up with good quality evid ence 
such as research and high- quality sources of inform a tion/evid ence that are 
clearly refer enced.
• Analyse the inform a tion/evid ence he reads in greater depth. Rather 
than just report ing inform a tion, Michael needs to analyse it in more depth, 
giving greater detail about what authors/research ers/report ers say, and 
discuss ing it in greater detail.
• Ensure that his work is clearly and logic ally argued. This will make it 
easier for the reader to under stand Michael’s ideas and follow his argu-
ments.
• Give a clear conclu sion to sum up what he has learned. Having 
considered the inform a tion/evid ence he has read and linked it to his own 
exper i ences and obser va tions, Michael needs to write a strong conclu sion. 
It is import ant that he makes it clear how/whether his find ings and conclu-
sions will impact on his own and others’ future prac tice – for further inform-
a tion on this, see the final section of the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical 
think ing’, ‘So What?’
Having taken his tutor’s comments into account, Michael then works on a 
second draft of the assign ment. He starts by ensur ing that he is clear about 
what the assign ment ques tion is telling him to focus on; he then writes a plan 
or draws a spider diagram and finds author it at ive, relev ant inform a tion and 
evid ence relev ant to this topic. He takes time to write care fully in order to try 
to put his ideas across as clearly and logic ally as possible, demon strat ing his 
skills of crit ical think ing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

94 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
What elements of effect ive crit ical writing that have been discussed in this 
chapter can you recog nize in Michael’s second draft of his work?
Extract 2 – from Michael’s final draft of his assign ment, demon strat ing a 
higher level of crit ical think ing
In this assign ment I will discuss the preval ence of smoking among preg nant 
women in England. I will then explore the strategies used to encour age preg-
nant women to give up smoking.1 To set the scene, The Information Centre 
(2006) stated that in 2005, 32 per cent of mothers who had recently given 
birth in England2 said that they had smoked in the 12 months before or during 
preg nancy; 17 per cent of these mothers contin ued to smoke through out their 
preg nancy. Younger mothers are more likely to smoke through out preg nancy. 
These stat ist ics indic ate a contin ued need for action against mater nal tobacco 
smoke expos ure in order to elim in ate harm to both the mother and the foetus 
that results from this.3 However, these stat ist ics should be read with a degree 
of caution, as smoking may be under re por ted by preg nant mothers4 (Shipton 
et al. 2009; NICE 2010). The reasons for poten tial under re port ing of smoking 
by preg nant mothers should be iden ti fied and considered care fully. By doing 
this it may be possible to encour age more preg nant women to be open about 
their smoking, so that they can be suppor ted to quit.
There is growing evid ence from epidemi olo gical studies that smoking in 
preg nancy can be detri mental to the health of both preg nant women and their 
unborn chil dren (NICE 2010). While the effects of smoking are not the focus of 
this report,5 it is clear that those who run health and social services in England 
should see the promo tion of smoking cessa tion in preg nant mothers, and in 
women contem plat ing getting preg nant, as a high prior ity.
Lumley et al. (2009), in a system atic review of 72 random ized controlled 
trials where smoking cessa tion during preg nancy was a primary aim of the 
inter ven tion,6 concluded that smoking cessa tion inter ven tions in preg nancy 
are success ful in redu cing the propor tion of women who continue to smoke in 
late preg nancy, and reduce the incid ence of low birth weight and prema ture 
births. They suggest that smoking cessa tion inter ven tions should be imple-
men ted in all mater nity care settings, and that atten tion should also be given 
to the preven tion of relapse. Given the diffi culty that many preg nant women 
have in quit ting smoking during preg nancy, Lumley et al. (2009) recom mend 
that broader inter ven tions are needed to prevent people from start ing to 
smoke, for example through the preven tion of sales of tobacco products to 
younger people, increases in tobacco taxa tion, and the intro duc tion of work- 
based smoking cessa tion programmes. They also emphas ize a need for sens-
it ive and non- discrim in at ory approaches to the preven tion of smoking and 
promo tion of smoking cessa tion.
What elements of effect ive crit ical writing that have been discussed in this 
chapter can you recog nize in Michael’s second draft of his work?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 95
It is inter est ing to note that as a result of a review of 23 papers7 related to 
smoking cessa tion services offered to preg nant women, Baxter et al. (2010) 
sugges ted that vari ation occurs in the prac tice of differ ent profes sional groups 
and services, and that as a result preg nant women may receive contra dict ory 
advice about quit ting smoking from profes sion als. Their review there fore suggests 
that there may be a need for greater staff train ing in this area, and that the use 
of clearer proced ures and proto cols for staff to follow might be bene fi cial.8
In June 2010, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence published 
offi cial guidelines for assist ing women to quit smoking during preg nancy and 
follow ing child birth. The guidelines are aimed at managers and profes sion als 
working in England and Wales in health care services, local author it ies, educa-
tion, and the private, volun tary and community sectors. The guidelines promote 
a sens it ive, client- centred approach, acknow ledging that some women may be 
reluct ant to say that they smoke.
In summary,9 it is clear that there is much effort taking place to reduce the 
incid ence of smoking in preg nant women in England. Health and social care 
prac ti tion ers, myself included, will benefit from keeping up to date with devel-
op ments in research and policy in rela tion to this aspect of their prac tice, in 
order to identify success ful evid ence- based strategies that may assist preg-
nant women to quit smoking.
Tutor’s comments
1 
Good – you have clearly set out your focus at the begin ning of your work, 
and set out your plans for how you will struc ture your report.
2 
Good – this stat istic is specific to England, directly relev ant to your focus. 
In a longer piece, you could expand further on this to compare differ ent 
stat ist ics.
3 
Good – you have set the scene for your work with relev ant stat ist ics.
4 
Well done – you have noted the poten tial limit a tions of the stat ist ics you 
have cited, demon strat ing the ability to crit ic ally appraise and crit ic ally 
analyse what you read.
5 
Good – you are ensur ing that you keep your work relev ant to the focus of 
the ques tion you have been set.
6 
Again, you are demon strat ing that you have iden ti fied high- quality evid-
ence relev ant to the ques tion you have been set, and that you have been 
able to under stand the key conclu sions from their research. Well done.
7 
This is relev ant to your focus, which is good; but do you know where these 
papers came from? Were the papers all based on smoking cessa tion 
services in England?
8 
The conclu sions you draw from this paper are tent at ive, which shows that 
you are able to distin guish between strong evid ence and less decis ive 
evid ence. Well done.
9 
Good – you are summing up your work here.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

96 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Michael has now developed his work to demon strate a more crit ical approach 
in his writing – he has ensured that his work is relev ant to the ques tion he 
has been set, and he has linked to relev ant and high- quality sources of 
inform a tion/evid ence, demon strat ing that he has crit ic ally appraised them. As 
a result, his tutor’s feed back is far more posit ive.
Michael’s work could be developed further – this is just a small extract, but 
if he was able to write a longer piece, he could analyse the issues in even more 
depth, incor por at ing more crit ical analysis of a wider range of stat ist ics, 
research and liter at ure.
Demonstrating crit ical think ing in verbal 
present a tions
We will now look at how you can demon strate your skills of crit ical appraisal 
in your verbal present a tions, and how you can prepare for deliv er ing a present-
a tion.
Many people struggle to demon strate their skills of crit ical think ing and 
crit ical appraisal in their verbal present a tions, and lack confid ence in their 
abil it ies. It can be tempt ing to focus on what content to include in a present a-
tion, rather than on how the content should be delivered. But both of these are 
import ant things to consider. It is easy to focus on just present ing or describ ing 
the inform a tion/evid ence, rather than on explain ing, eval u at ing, crit ic ally 
analys ing or reflect ing on it.
Many of the prin ciples for incor por at ing crit ical think ing into your writing 
are also relev ant to verbal present a tions, and we covered these earlier in this 
chapter. It is worth revis it ing them and think ing about how they might relate 
to present ing your ideas verbally.
Some ‘top tips’ for prepar ing and deliv er ing a present a tion
Before consid er ing how to incor por ate crit ical appraisal into your present a-
tion, here are some top tips you should consider when prepar ing to deliver a 
verbal present a tion. These will help you develop confid ence and compet ence 
when present ing.
• 
Check where your present a tion will be delivered and at what time it is to 
start – can you access the venue in advance to set up?
• 
Check whether you have access to, and permis sion to use, audio- visual 
aids and other equip ment – you may need to book it/bring your own.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 97
• 
Check that you know how to use any equip ment, so that you are not 
unduly nervous or distrac ted about using it – if you need help, find 
someone to show you.
• 
Rehearse! Ask some body to listen to you if possible, to give you feed-
back on the content, pace and deliv ery of your present a tion and to 
check your timings.
• 
Time your self so you know how long it will take; be aware of any time 
limit you need to keep to, and don’t overrun – part of the skill of being 
crit ical is being select ive in what you say.
• 
Face the front, so that your audi ence can hear you, and speak clearly 
and slowly. Use notes rather than turn round to read your slides.
• 
Ensure you have some extra notes prepared in case you need to give 
addi tional inform a tion during or after the present a tion.
• 
If you are using audio- visual aids, don’t put too much inform a tion on 
each slide, and don’t read off each slide word for word – this will make 
your present a tion less inter est ing and less anim ated for the audi ence, 
and will not give you the oppor tun ity to demon strate your skills of crit-
ical think ing. Make sure the size of the print is large enough to be seen 
at the back of the room.
• 
Use a variety of approaches to break up your present a tion (e.g. some 
ques tions, discus sion, etc.).
• 
Consider letting your audi ence know in advance whether you will be 
giving out handouts/refer ence lists so that they don’t have to take 
copious notes.
• 
If possible, you may wish to record your rehearsal and watch the 
record ing your self – this may help you to see how you need to develop 
your present a tion skills.
Ensure you prepare for your present a tion, rehearse, and take into account the 
points made earlier in this chapter and the prac tical tips above. You should 
also bear in mind the follow ing, to ensure that your skills of crit ical think ing 
are demon strated clearly in your present a tions.
• Be clear about the focus of your present a tion, and keep to this focus 
through out – avoid getting ‘distrac ted’ and discuss ing inform a tion and 
ideas that are not relev ant to this.
• Express your self clearly, using simple terms – do not assume that your 
audi ence will under stand complex language and termin o logy, or abbre vi-
ations.
• Link to relev ant research, theory and policy, demon strat ing your skills of 
crit ical analysis and appraisal as you do so. Demonstrate that you have 
thought broadly about your topic and chal lenged your own assump tions 
and perspect ives on the topic.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

98 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Figure 4.3
• Be prepared to invite ques tions from the audi ence, using them as an oppor-
tun ity to demon strate your skills of crit ical appraisal further. Be ready to 
link your answers/responses to relev ant theory and research, and ensure 
that you link the ques tions back to your focus.
• Elaborate on some of the points in your present a tion – this is where you can 
use your crit ical think ing skills. For example, you can eval u ate inform a-
tion/evid ence, analyse a defin i tion and explain complex terms.
• Ensure that your argu ment is logical and that your conclu sion is clear, 
result ing from the process of synthesis.
A check list for assess ing your crit ical 
think ing in written work and present a tions
It is import ant to apply the same rigour to your own writing and present ing as 
you do when analys ing source mater i als. Below is a simple check list to help 
you ensure you are demon strat ing your skills of crit ical think ing in your 
writing and present a tions. It can help you to see how you can develop your 
work further. You could also adapt this check list and ask your peers to crit ic-
ally appraise your work and give you feed back – you may then get fresh ideas 
about how you can enhance your work.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

CRITICAL THINKING SKILLS IN YOUR WRITTEN WORK 99
A check list for assess ing your crit ical think ing 
in written work and present a tions
Yes
No
Not sure
Have you set out clear aims?
Have you explained your focus clearly to the 
reader/listener?
Have you kept to this focus through out your 
work?
Have you selec ted sources of inform a tion/
evid ence that are relev ant?
Have you chosen high- quality sources of 
inform a tion/evid ence, and where required, 
justi fied your choices?
Have you demon strated your skills of crit ical 
appraisal of research and other evid ence? See 
the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’
Have you put together a clear and logical 
argu ment, so that it is easy to follow your 
ideas?
Have you demon strated your ability to 
compare and contrast differ ent authors’/
research ers’/policy- makers’ perspect ives in a 
balanced way?
Have you put authors’/research ers’ ideas into 
your own words, to demon strate your under-
stand ing of their ideas?
Have you appraised authors’/research ers’ 
find ings, ideas and perspect ives in a balanced 
way, even when these contra dict your own?
Have you refer enced all resources you have 
referred to in a system atic way in your text/
present a tion and in your refer ence list?
Is your conclu sion clear, and based on the 
evid ence you refer to?
Can you think of any ways that you could 
develop your work further? If so, note your 
ideas:
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

100 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
In summary
In this chapter, we have discussed why it is import ant to incor por ate crit ical 
think ing into your writing and present a tions. We have explained how you can 
recog nize crit ical think ing in your writing and present a tions. We have also 
explored how you can plan your written work and present a tions effect ively. 
Finally, we have discussed how you can present your crit ical think ing skills 
effect ively in your writing and verbal present a tions. We have given some 
examples of crit ical writing for you to look at, to help you to develop your 
writing skills further. We have also provided some ‘top tips’ and a check list to 
help you to plan your writing and your verbal present a tions, and to help you 
demon strate your ability to be crit ical in your work.
Key points
1 Incorporating a crit ical approach in your writing and present a tions will 
demon strate that you are well informed, and that you are able to identify 
relev ant inform a tion/evid ence and appraise the sources of inform a tion/
evid ence that you come across.
2 You will be more able to adopt a crit ical approach if you plan your work 
effect ively before you start to write or put together your present a tion.
3 Remember that plan ning includes under tak ing a system atic search of the 
liter at ure and being crit ical of what you find, using our ‘Six ques tions for 
crit ical think ing’ (see Chapter 1).
4 When citing a refer ence, try to give some inform a tion about the quality of 
the source and why it backs up the point you are making. Note the quality 
and type of source – for example, is it research or opinion  based?
5 Ensure that your work is logic ally struc tured and well argued.
6 Seek feed back on your writing and your present a tions from those around 
you, and crit ic ally appraise your own work to help you to develop it further.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

5
How you can adopt 
crit ical think ing in 
your profes sional 
prac tice
• The profes sional context and complex ity of crit ical think ing – 
connect ing theory and prac tice
• How you can think crit ic ally about the influ ences on your profes sional 
prac tice: routine, relying on your exper i ence, using profes sional 
judge ment and learn ing from others
• Assessing and devel op ing your skills as a crit ical thinker
• Using ques tions to develop a more in- depth approach to crit ical 
think ing
• Influencing the ‘crit ical think ing’ culture of your work place
• In summary
• Key points
In this chapter, we will:
• Discuss the context and complex ity of crit ical think ing in profes sional 
prac tice.
101
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

102 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• Explore how you can think crit ic ally about routine, relying on your exper i-
ence, using profes sional judge ment and learn ing from others.
• Discuss how you can start to assess and develop skills for crit ical think ing 
in deliv er ing safe and effect ive person- centred prac tice.
• Discuss how you can develop and use skills of reflec tion.
• Consider what aspects of your prac tice you do well and what aspects you 
may need to develop and how you can do this.
• Seek out evid ence to inform your prac tice.
• Examine how you can use ques tions to develop a more in- depth approach 
to crit ical think ing.
• Offer top tips for influ en cing the ‘crit ical think ing’ culture of your work-
place.
The profes sional context and complex ity of 
crit ical think ing – connect ing theory and 
practice
As discussed in Chapter 1, crit ical think ing is about having a curious, invest ig-
at ive and ques tion ing atti tude. Critical think ing involves having an approach 
to your profes sional prac tice that is thor ough and analyt ical. These char ac ter-
ist ics and approaches should be adopted in your prac tice incor por at ing where 
possible a crit ical approach to reading and apprais ing inform a tion/evid ence. 
In the health and social care profes sions, there is little point in being able to 
under stand and crit ic ally appraise sources of inform a tion/evid ence (see 
Chapters 2 and 3), or in being skilled at using crit ical think ing in your writing 
and present ing (see Chapter 4), if it makes no differ ence to the decisions you 
make and the manage ment or care of your patients/clients. This is where 
theory and prac tice collide.
Similarly, there is no point having the sound qual it ies to be an excel lent 
health or social care profes sional if you don’t have the skills to think crit ic ally 
about inform a tion/evid ence that under pins what you do. The idea that 
academic skills relate only to work within classrooms is unsafe and outdated. 
Thomson et al. (2014) suggest that one way to bridge the theory–prac tice gap 
might be to increase the collab or a tion between univer sit ies and clini cians. 
Flood and Robinia (2014) recog nize that wherever students are placed, they 
may need help to connect theory and prac tice both in the work place and in 
univer sity. For example, use of real case studies or drawing on crit ical incid-
ents may help in the classroom, and prac ti tion ers facil it at ing student learn ing 
may need to become aware of the taught programme so they can connect 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 103
more expli citly with it. Flood and Robinia assert that this may benefit learners 
and ulti mately patient or client care.
In envir on ments that are often pres sured and chal len ging, profes sion als 
need to adopt prac tical ways of incor por at ing a crit ical approach to prac tice 
into their every day working lives. We offer some initial ideas for profes sion als 
and go on to suggest ways of devel op ing further as a crit ical thinker.
In addi tion to the focus on evid ence- based prac tice, there have been recent 
remind ers that as profes sion als we should deliver safe and person- centred 
care (Fawcett et al. 2014), as well as compas sion ate care (Crawford et al. 
2014). As outcomes and stand ards for health and social care are increas ingly 
under scru tiny, it is import ant that as a student or qual i fied profes sional you 
adopt a crit ical think ing approach in your every day prac tice. This will ensure 
you deliver safe and effect ive prac tice, as you will be fully consid er ing what 
you do and why you do it. Standards that under pin health and social care 
prac tice are avail able widely and from all the coun tries of the UK (see useful 
web links section in this book). A major report by Francis (2013) in the UK has 
high lighted some defi cien cies in stand ards of care, and noted how the organ-
iz a tion in ques tion had lost sight of the patient as it concen trated on targets to 
be met. To avoid such poor prac tice and organ iz a tional fail ings, profes sion als 
are more likely to meet high stand ards of health and social care by adopt ing a 
crit ical think ing approach. Indeed, to continue to develop person ally and 
profes sion ally, we need to strive to be crit ical thinkers.
See if there are quality stand ards for your own health and social care 
services and consider how, as a prac ti tioner, think ing crit ic ally will help 
you meet such stand ards.
We referred to Price and Harrington’s (2013: 11) detailed defin i tion of crit ical 
think ing in Chapter 1. It is the latter part of their defin i tion that connects 
more expli citly with profes sional prac tice. They say that crit ical think ing 
enables us to:
act as a know ledge able doer – someone who selects, combines, judges and 
uses inform a tion in order to proceed in a profes sional manner.
This is partic u larly pertin ent as it asserts that we need to adopt the skills of 
crit ical think ing in order to prac tise profes sion ally. The profes sional bodies in 
the UK make a clear connec tion with this in their stand ards of profes sional 
and ethical conduct. Other coun tries around the world may also have access 
to profes sional stand ards and policies that allude to some of these crit ical 
think ing attrib utes and skills.
See if there are quality stand ards for your own health and social care 
services and consider how, as a prac ti tioner, think ing crit ic ally will help 
you meet such stand ards.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

104 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
What do the profes sional bodies say?
Access the stand ards or guidelines from your own profes sional body to see 
what they say about the need to be a crit ical thinker in profes sional prac tice.
In Chapter 1, we outlined that all health and social care profes sions are 
account able for their prac tice. In addi tion, in the UK the Health and Care 
Professions Council (HCPC 2012) and the Nursing and Midwifery Council 
(NMC 2015) state in their codes of conduct that profes sion als need to ensure 
their prac tice is safe and effect ive. The HCPC (2012) adds that if you make 
informed, reas on able and profes sional judge ments in the best interests of 
service users, you are likely to meet the stand ards of your profes sion. Here 
there is recog ni tion that the judge ment of profes sion als is an essen tial part of 
the care process. This involves crit ical think ing.
The NMC (2010), in its ‘essen tial skills clusters’, states that to offer holistic 
care and a range of treat ment options, a newly registered nurse should:
• Question
• Critically appraise evid ence
• Take into account ethical consid er a tions
• Take into account the indi vidual pref er ences of the person receiv ing care
• Use evid ence to support argu ments.
These char ac ter ist ics clearly relate to crit ical think ing.
The NMC (2008) provides further guid ance on this by stating that nurses 
and midwives should parti cip ate in appro pri ate learn ing and prac tice activ-
it ies to main tain and develop their compet ence and perform ance.
 Consider the follow ing and jot down your initial thoughts:
If you are a student OR a prac tice assessor/mentor, you may wish to consider 
whether there is an emphasis on crit ical think ing, evid ence- based prac tice and 
account ab il ity in the current pre- regis tra tion curriculum for your profes sion. 
You can usually estab lish this from your profes sional body website. If you 
qual i fied a while ago, you may wish to see how this emphasis has changed 
over time. As a qual i fied profes sional, you will not be able to main tain your 
profes sional know ledge and status by relying on your initial pre- regis tra tion 
educa tion – you will need to consider a ‘lifelong learn ing’ and ‘continu ous 
profes sional devel op ment’ (CPD) approach. In order to do this, we now 
consider how you can think crit ic ally about routine, your own exper i ence and 
learn ing from others.
Access the stand ards or guidelines from your own profes sional body to see
what they say about the need to be a crit ical thinker in profes sional prac tice.
Consider the follow ing and jot down your initial thoughts:
If you are a student OR a prac tice assessor/mentor, you may wish to consider 
whether there is an emphasis on crit ical think ing, evid ence- based prac tice and 
account ab il ity in the current pre- regis tra tion curriculum for your profes sion. 
You can usually estab lish this from your profes sional body website. If you 
qual i fied a while ago, you may wish to see how this emphasis has changed 
over time. As a qual i fied profes sional, you will not be able to main tain your 
profes sional know ledge and status by relying on your initial pre- regis tra tion 
educa tion – you will need to consider a ‘lifelong learn ing’ and ‘continu ous 
profes sional devel op ment’ (CPD) approach. In order to do this, we now 
consider how you can think crit ic ally about routine, your own exper i ence and
learn ing from others.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 105
How you can think crit ic ally about the influ-
ences on your profes sional prac tice: routine, 
relying on your exper i ence, using profes sional 
judge ment and learn ing from others
Before you read this section, take some time to consider whether you adopt a 
crit ical approach to the influ ences on your profes sional prac tice. For 
example, do you think crit ic ally about and reflect on your role in deliv er ing 
safe, effect ive and compas sion ate care, or do you just follow routines and/or 
rely on your own or others’ exper i ences?
Thinking crit ic ally about routine
In our busy day- to- day working lives (as students or profes sion als), it is some-
times prac tical to adopt the prac tices that are used by those more exper i enced 
than us. This is, of course, useful when we have little or no know ledge or skill 
ourselves or need to act quickly or want to fit into a working envir on ment. 
However, when we think crit ic ally, we shouldn’t just carry on adopt ing 
these approaches without ques tion, and do things the way they have always 
been done.
Using the follow ing table we have developed, think about some recent 
working days/prac tice shifts and assess on the scale between 5 and 1 
to what extent you feel you demon strate a crit ical atti tude/approach to 
your prac tice.
Approaches to prac tice: ‘crit ical think ing’ or relying on routine
 Identify where your prac tice lies 
on a scale of 5 to 1
I do this
I do this
5
4
3
2
1
I often chal lenge the 
routine and try to be 
flex ible in how I work to 
meet the needs of my 
clients
I do as I am told to do 
and keep to the routine
Before you read this section, take some time to consider whether you adopt a 
crit ical approach to the influ ences on your profes sional prac tice. For 
example, do you think crit ic ally about and reflect on your role in deliv er ing 
safe, effect ive and compas sion ate care, or do you just follow routines and/or 
rely on your own or others’ exper i ences?
Using the follow ing table we have developed, think about some recent 
working days/prac tice shifts and assess on the scale between 5 and 1
to what extent you feel you demon strate a crit ical atti tude/approach to 
your prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

106 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
I am proact ive in seeking 
out new prac tices
I do as I have been 
taught in the past
I see my work as a profes-
sion with respons ib il it ies
I see my work as a job
I am able to confid ently 
ques tion the ideas/prac tices 
of others
I would not feel 
confid ent ques tion ing 
the ideas or prac tices of 
others
I welcome construct ive 
chal lenge of my prac tice
I would be upset or 
angry if someone 
ques tioned what I did
I proact ively seek out and 
take up oppor tun it ies to 
attend a wide range of 
devel op ment activ it ies
I only attend essen tial 
train ing and devel op-
ment, even when other 
oppor tun it ies for 
devel op ment are 
avail able to me
I have read a variety of 
research and/or new policy 
in the last 12 months
I have not read research 
or new policy in the last 
12 months
I feel confid ent explain ing 
the reasons for my 
decisions
I avoid offer ing more 
than basic explan a tions 
for my decisions
I often look up new 
know ledge in books, 
journ als or profes sional 
online resources
I rarely access a book, 
journal or profes sional 
online resource
I often reflect on my day/
shift
I forget about work once 
I have finished my day/
shift
I regu larly ask colleagues 
for feed back on my prac tice
I rarely ask for feed back 
on my prac tice
If in the main you scored your self towards the left, with high scores, then you 
are prob ably think ing crit ic ally about your prac tice. If you tended towards 
scoring your self towards the right- hand state ments, then you may be adopt ing 
more routin ized – and there fore less crit ical – approaches to your prac tice. In 
either case, you may want to consider how you might further develop a crit-
ical approach by reading the ‘top tips’ later in this chapter.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 107
Spot what you and others say. Highlight which of the quotes below might 
indic ate a crit ical approach to prac tice versus a routine and unques tion ing 
approach:
‘I often wonder why we do things a certain way.’
‘I am inter ested in what is going on in the world.’
‘This is how we do it here.’
‘We have always done it like this.’
‘If I spot incon sist en cies I ask why?’
‘In my exper i ence . . .’
‘I read recently that there is a new approach to . . .’
‘I do the same as my colleagues, so it must be all right.’
‘We often discuss what the best prac tice is, and someone usually offers to find 
out more if need be.’
‘No one has complained.’
‘I regu larly look things up on the inter net if I am not sure.’
‘I heard about it at a confer ence/seminar.’
‘It is in the guidelines/policy/stand ards.’
‘I don’t really have a say in how it’s done.’
‘I asked my student and he told me this is how they are taught.’
‘A prac tice assessor/mentor told me this is how they do it!’
‘I’ve got a really “diffi cult” student who asks ques tions all the time.’
‘We can’t use the best . . . we don’t have the money for it.’
There is no right answer for each of the quotes above, and for many we could 
say that ‘it all depends’. If we have considered things crit ic ally, then our prac-
tice should be safe and effect ive. For example, ‘doing the same as colleagues’ 
may indeed be best prac tice, if you have ques tioned what informed their prac-
tice. It is fine to ‘follow policy and guidelines’ if you have thought crit ic ally 
about how up to date and relev ant they are. However, if you just do as someone 
tells you to do without ques tion, then you would not be think ing crit ic ally. 
For example, imagine the follow ing scen ario.
Scenario: Mark
Mark (a health or social care profes sional) is confid ent and comfort able in is 
role. He works hard, is well liked and responds to requests for help from 
colleagues. He arrives at work and is clear about what needs to be done. 
However, he some times struggles to respond to students’ queries about the 
reasons for certain inter ven tions.
He then decides to apply for funding to go to a confer ence. He meets other 
profes sion als in similar roles to his own. He discusses his working prac tices 
Spot what you and others say. Highlight which of the quotes below might 
indic ate a crit ical approach to prac tice versus a routine and unques tion ing 
approach:
‘I often wonder why we do things a certain way.’
‘I am inter ested in what is going on in the world.’
‘This is how we do it here.’
‘We have always done it like this.’
‘If I spot incon sist en cies I ask why?’
‘In my exper i ence . . .’
‘I read recently that there is a new approach to . . .’
‘I do the same as my colleagues, so it must be all right.’
‘We often discuss what the best prac tice is, and someone usually offers to find 
out more if need be.’
‘No one has complained.’
‘I regu larly look things up on the inter net if I am not sure.’
‘I heard about it at a confer ence/seminar.’
‘It is in the guidelines/policy/stand ards.’
‘I don’t really have a say in how it’s done.’
‘I asked my student and he told me this is how they are taught.’
‘A prac tice assessor/mentor told me this is how they do it!’
‘I’ve got a really “diffi cult” student who asks ques tions all the time.’
‘We can’t use the best . . . we don’t have the money for it.’
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

108 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
and through sharing ideas, discov ers that several inter ven tions or approaches 
he has been using are out of date. Mark comes to realize that these may have 
been delay ing the recov ery or support of his patients/clients. It was only 
through discus sion with colleagues and by finding new inform a tion that he 
was able to chal lenge his approach to his work and become more crit ical about 
his prac tice. He came back to work ener gized and motiv ated to keep learn ing 
and to learn from, and with, his future students.
People who think crit ic ally are aware that there is a lot to learn, that they 
don’t know everything and that they are on a profes sional journey. Being 
comfort able in your work may indic ate that you are settled into a routine and 
adopt ing a ritu al istic approach.
Some bene fits of routine working
• It provides struc ture to your day.
• You may feel comfort able and in control, knowing what to expect.
• It can improve effi ciency of tasks.
• You and your colleagues can work out time- frames and know what to 
expect from each other.
• When new members join a team, it can make it easier for them to ‘pick up’ 
what needs to be done, where and how.
Wolf (2014) discusses the import ance of rituals in nursing and says that 
nursing owns its rituals in the same way that it has a culture. He explores how 
some cultural groups have rituals to develop their iden tity and social inter ac-
tions. Carrying out ritu al istic prac tice can be a response to anxiety, as it is 
often comfort ing to do the famil iar. However, in the context of prac tice devel-
op ment, McCormack et al. (2013) suggest that there has been a shift away 
from ritual and routine as health and social care profes sion als embrace the 
more indi vidual and context- based approaches to care.
Negative things about routine working
There are also some negat ive aspects of continu ing with routine working and 
ignor ing or failing to access new evid ence. Greenway (2014) discusses rituals 
in nursing and specific ally intra mus cu lar injec tions. Despite the fact that the 
evid ence suggests a partic u lar site for such injec tions, she notes that prac ti-
tion ers are reluct ant to change and they continue to adopt famil iar and dated 
prac tices.
If you always do things the same way:
• You may not develop new and creat ive approaches to your prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 109
• You may not meet the indi vidual needs of your patients/clients.
• Your work may be boring and predict able and you may not get job satis fac-
tion.
• When the unex pec ted happens, you may not be able to adapt.
• You may not be able to cope well with fluc tu at ing work loads.
Example: A change in routine . . .
A patient/client is confused and aggress ive and is disturb ing others. The 
approach most often used to deal with such a situ ation is to call secur ity or 
sedate the client. Many staff assume that these are the only ways to deal 
with aggres sion. A new member of staff who has worked in other settings 
suggests adopt ing a more person- centred approach, and says they have 
used distrac tion as a success ful approach in similar situ ations in the past. 
She has applied her personal know ledge, chal lenged the assump tions of the 
accep ted prac tice and tried an altern at ive tech nique to try to meet this 
patient’s/client’s interests. This shows a crit ical think ing approach.
Rather than conclud ing that the there is only one way to deal with a situ-
ation, it is better to be open to, and actively seek, altern at ives. This requires 
crit ical think ing.
Thinking crit ic ally about exper i ence
You may be an exper i enced prac ti tioner or even a final- year student and feel 
that what you have learned from your past exper i ence enables you to func tion 
to a reas on able level in your profes sional role. The devel op ment from novice 
to expert has been discussed widely in both educa tion and prac tice since 
Patricia Benner wrote her book in 1984 (Gardner 2012). However, while the 
devel op ment of exper i ence is a hugely valu able resource, on its own it is not 
enough. In a cross- sectional study, Lang et al. (2013) found that there was no 
signi fic ant asso ci ation between crit ical think ing skills and years of exper i-
ence, and in a study compar ing students with qual i fied and more exper i enced 
profes sion als, Thompson et al. (2012) found that the exper i enced staff were 
stat ist ic ally more confid ent than students, but no more accur ate at detect ing 
risk in a simu lated envir on ment.
We would there fore argue that safe and effect ive prac tice is achieved not 
only by relying on exper i ence, but also devel op ing skill in making effect ive 
judge ments and decisions using evid ence. Just as you need to be crit ical of 
the inform a tion/evid ence you have, you also need to be crit ical of using 
your own exper i ence to guide prac tice. Thinking back to the defin i tion of 
Rather than conclud ing that the there is only one way to deal with a situ-
ation, it is better to be open to, and actively seek, altern at ives. This requires
crit ical think ing.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

110 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
evid ence- based prac tice given in Chapter 1, you will remem ber that using 
evid ence, profes sional judge ment and patient/client pref er ence contrib utes 
to an evid ence- based approach.
Experience alone is not enough. Our profes sional judge ment is likely to 
be most effect ive when it is based on the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence 
so that we can consider a wide range of altern at ives, assump tions and 
include the perspect ive of patients/clients.
Defining profes sional judge ment
Thompson et al. (2013: 1721) simplify the notion of making judge ments as 
‘the assess ment of altern at ives’. They give ‘is this patient/client deteri or-
at ing or not?’ as an example of when you might need to make an eval u ation. 
This assess ment of altern at ives will usually need to be followed by the 
making of a decision as to which direc tion to take. A crit ical thinker will be 
open to a wider range of altern at ives and ques tion their own and other’s 
assump tions and so is there fore more likely to make sound judge ments and 
decisions.
Standing (2011: 7) defines profes sional judge ment as:
‘Informed opinion (using intu ition, reflec tion and crit ical think ing) that relates 
obser va tion and assess ment . . . to identi fy ing and eval u at ing altern at ive . . . 
options.’
In health and social care prac tice, there are many instances of uncer tainty 
and so there are likely to be many oppor tun it ies to use our profes sional 
judge ment. As Standing (2011) notes, this includes crit ical think ing and 
reflec tion. We will discuss reflec tion later in this chapter.
Thinking crit ic ally about learn ing from others
When you don’t have much exper i ence your self (maybe as a student or as a 
qual i fied profes sional in a new envir on ment), you may learn by working 
along side others. However, even when you are working with exper i enced and 
respec ted colleagues or prac tice assessors/mentors, you need to think crit ic-
ally about how you use them as role models. Over the years, there has been 
much written about ‘role model ling’. Bandura (1965) described how indi-
vidu als tend to adopt the prac tices demon strated by those they hold in high 
regard. This approach to learn ing may be useful in some situ ations, such as 
when learn ing complex skills or beha viours. Baldwin et al. (2014) report that 
Experience alone is not enough. Our profes sional judge ment is likely to
be most effect ive when it is based on the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence 
so that we can consider a wide range of altern at ives, assump tions and 
include the perspect ive of patients/clients.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 111
there is some research on role model ling in medi cine and nursing but little in 
other profes sions, although most profes sion als can recall someone who they 
looked up to, respec ted and wanted to emulate. Jochemsen- van der Leeuw et 
al. (2013) carried out a system atic review of role model ling in clin ical teach ers 
and found that many of the char ac ter ist ics of both posit ive and negat ive role 
models came under the categor ies of patient/client care qual it ies, teach ing 
qual it ies, and personal qual it ies. For example, a posit ive role model displays 
profes sional beha viours and is support ive, whereas negat ive role models can 
be unfair or cynical.
You may use role models for your profes sional prac tice, or you may be able 
to select a role model for crit ical think ing. Lovatt (2014) explores, summar izes 
and applies to profes sional educa tion the work of Brookfield (2012), who 
argues that educat ors could be role models for crit ical think ing by using 
personal examples of how they have sought out and checked assump tions and 
demon strated that they can be crit ical thinkers them selves. The other way 
educat ors can model crit ical think ing is by being clear about the purpose of 
activ it ies or assign ments – so that learners are clear about what is expec ted of 
them. Felstead (2013) adds that if learners can see educat ors demon strat ing 
their thought patterns, they are more likely to model that beha viour. So as 
well as model ling safe, effect ive and compas sion ate prac tice, profes sional 
educat ors can model their think ing too.
Positive role models possess profes sional compet ence, crit ical think ing skills 
and personal qual it ies that you may want to adopt. But you should think 
crit ic ally about the cred ib il ity of the role models them selves. If you are a role 
model to others, you should think crit ic ally about how you may be seen, both 
posit ively and negat ively.
By reflect ing on this, you may become more self- aware of how you 
come across to others as a role model. Although you may learn excel lent 
approaches to your profes sional prac tice from others, it is not good prac tice 
to accept/emulate others’ prac tice without ques tion, as their approach may 
not be the most suit able. As profes sion als or students, we should be aware of 
the poten tial danger of model ling from, or being a role model for, negat ive 
attrib utes.
Try to identify someone in an educa tion setting or in profes sional prac tice 
who is a crit ical thinker. What qual it ies and beha viours do they demon strate 
that you can emulate?
Positive role models possess profes sional compet ence, crit ical think ing skills 
and personal qual it ies that you may want to adopt. But you should think 
crit ic ally about the cred ib il ity of the role models them selves. If you are a role
model to others, you should think crit ic ally about how you may be seen, both 
posit ively and negat ively.
Try to identify someone in an educa tion setting or in profes sional prac tice 
who is a crit ical thinker. What qual it ies and beha viours do they demon strate 
that you can emulate?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

112 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
You may also be a role model your self to others now or in the future. This 
makes it even more import ant to adopt a crit ical think ing approach to your 
profes sional prac tice.
‘Top tips’ for think ing crit ic ally when learn ing from others
If you are seeking advice from colleagues or prac tice assessors/mentors 
about an issue in prac tice, you may want to consider using all the ‘Six ques-
tions for crit ical think ing’, but specific ally the ones high lighted here.
Question 3 asks: Who has said this? You should consider if the person you 
are learn ing from:
• 
Has expert ise? How do they keep up to date? Can they give a clear 
rationale for their advice? What qual i fic a tions do they have?
• 
Is trust worthy? Do they have any reason (e.g. pride, own agenda, embar-
rass ment, concern about status, etc.) to ‘bluff’ or give you false inform a-
tion or advice? Consider if they readily admit to being wrong or are open 
to chal lenge.
• 
Models a crit ical think ing approach?
• 
Is reflect ive?
• 
Seeks out and chal lenges assump tions?
Regarding the inform a tion/evid ence they are giving you, Question 1 asks, 
What is it?, while Question 6 asks, How do you know it is good quality? You 
should consider the follow ing:
• 
How full and detailed is the inform a tion/evid ence they have provided? 
Do you have the full picture? Where does the inform a tion/evid ence come 
from? Request the source of the inform a tion they are giving you (e.g. 
policy, guidelines, research, review) and look at it your self.
• 
What are the risks or consequences involved in accept ing or reject ing 
their advice? Can you check it out from other sources? Are there any 
policies, guidelines or research evid ence to help in the decision- making?
We have explored how relying on routine, exper i ence and learn ing from 
others without ques tion can lead to an uncrit ical approach. You are likely 
to be think ing crit ic ally if you ques tion and consider fully all aspects of 
your prac tice, includ ing when you might be adopt ing routines, rituals or the 
advice or exper i ence of role models. We will now consider further how you 
can think more crit ic ally about your profes sional prac tice and explore what 
you can do as an indi vidual to develop a crit ical approach in your day- to- day 
prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 113
Assessing and devel op ing your skills as a 
crit ical thinker
Self- assess ment tools
Facione (2013: 13) offers a ‘crit ical think ing dispos i tion self- rating form’ that 
can help you determ ine whether you have a posit ive or adverse approach to 
crit ical think ing based on your actions in the previ ous few days. Paul and 
Elder (2014) also offer a variety of tools to develop your self as a crit ical 
thinker and say it needs to be prac tised to be fully developed (although their 
writing does not relate specific ally to health and social care). Many employ ers 
in industry use crit ical think ing tools such as that of Watson and Glaser (2012), 
which tests for ability to recog nize the skills of infer ence, assump tion, deduc-
tion, inter pret a tion and eval u ation. See our useful websites appendix for links 
to down load tests/tools.
Beginning to think crit ic ally
Once you have assessed your crit ical think ing abil it ies, we suggest three ways 
that you can start (or further develop) how you think about your profes sional 
prac tice in a more crit ical way:
1 Develop and use skills of reflec tion.
2 Consider what aspects of your prac tice you do well and what aspects you 
may need to develop and how you can do this.
3 Seek evid ence to inform your prac tice.
Developing and using skills of reflec tion
Facione (2013: 16) describes how crit ical think ing is ‘purpose ful, reflect ive 
judge ment that is focused on decid ing what to believe or what to do’. Reflection 
is some thing that can be done by an indi vidual or a group of indi vidu als. 
Facione asserts that if we are being reflect ive and balanced in our views, we 
are using our crit ical think ing skills. However, it is not enough to have crit ical 
think ing skills; we also need the dispos i tion or tempera ment to become a crit-
ical thinker. Critical think ing and reflec tion don’t just happen – you need to be 
motiv ated and determ ined to make the best judge ments you can. Barnett 
(1997:1) advoc ates the devel op ment of ‘crit ical being’, which includes the 
devel op ment of self. He argues that, ‘Critical persons are more than just crit ical 
thinkers. They are able crit ic ally to engage with the world and with them selves 
as well as with know ledge.’ We would argue that the skills of crit ical think ing 
are needed to reflect, and the skills of reflec tion are needed for crit ical think ing! 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

114 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Therefore, if we adopt a crit ical approach to review ing our exper i ences, then 
this should enhance our learn ing and prac tice. Reflection requires us to demon-
strate several of the same skills and qual it ies needed for crit ical think ing, 
includ ing self- aware ness, the ability to eval u ate and analyse (Atkins and 
Schutz 2013).
Mann et al. (2009: 597) carried out a system atic review of reflec tion and 
comment that several defin i tions of reflec tion from the earli est to the more 
recent ‘emphas ise purpose ful crit ical analysis of exper i ence and know ledge in 
order to achieve deeper meaning and under stand ing’. This is because defin i-
tions of reflec tion and of crit ical think ing gener ally incor por ate active mental 
processes (consid er ing, review ing, think ing) that involve some break ing 
down or analysis of the evid ence or exper i ence within a partic u lar context 
and then reach ing a conclu sion or outcome.
Defining reflec tion
There are many defin i tions of reflec tion but they tend to encom pass such 
things as consid er ing feel ings, exper i ences and moving towards a change or 
action (Bulman 2013a). The one below is useful in that it captures the prac tical 
nature of learn ing from reflec tion.
Reflection is a complex, widely defined and inter preted concept but, simply 
put, it is an approach to review ing an exper i ence in order to learn from it. 
(Reid 1993)
In their qual it at ive study explor ing the concept of reflec tion from the 
perspect ive of both student and teacher, Bulman et al. (2012: e12) explain how:
Reflection was seen as a process of search ing for solu tions to prac tice 
exper i ences, in order to make sense of them. Student and teacher percep-
tions of reflec tion included the crit ical analysis of feel ings and know-
ledge in order to lead to new perspect ives about prac tice. Ultimately, 
reflec tion was connec ted with a profes sional motiv a tion to ‘move on’ and 
‘do better’ within prac tice in order to learn from exper i ence and crit ic-
ally examine ‘self’.
Hargreaves and Page (2013) add that for health and social care profes sion als, 
intu it ive and self- reflect ive beha viour is assumed and so there is an emphasis 
on deep personal and crit ical reflec tion.
There are many excel lent texts and journal articles on reflec tion, and for a 
more in- depth insight it is sugges ted you read more widely (see, for example, 
Reflection is a complex, widely defined and inter preted concept but, simply
put, it is an approach to review ing an exper i ence in order to learn from it. 
(Reid 1993)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 115
Bulman and Schutz 2013; Jasper 2013). Reflective writing is discussed briefly 
in Chapter 4. In this chapter, we discuss further the types of reflect ive writing 
you may find useful specific ally for your prac tice devel op ment. Although we 
are unable to discuss all aspects of reflec tion in this book, we suggest you 
consider the follow ing areas to facil it ate and incor por ate reflec tion into your 
every day profes sional life. It is a good idea to check out your self- aware ness.
Develop and assess your self- aware ness
One of the skills or attrib utes of reflec tion is self- aware ness. According to 
Goleman et al. (2013: 40), self- aware ness involves ‘having a deep under-
stand ing of one’s emotions, one’s strengths and limit a tions as well as one’s 
values and motives’. And Atkins and Schutz (2013: 28) state being ‘self- aware 
involves being conscious of one’s char ac ter, includ ing beliefs, values, qual-
it ies, strengths and limit a tions’.
You prob ably think you have a good under stand ing of your personal 
strengths, qual it ies and skills and perhaps think you are aware of your limit a-
tions or weak nesses, but how do you know if your self- assess ment is accur ate? 
Part of crit ical think ing is to consider your own perform ance crit ic ally too. 
Goleman et al. (2013) note that a telling, but not always visible, sign of self- 
aware ness is the ability to be reflect ive and thought ful.
To check the accur acy of your own self- aware ness, you could assess your 
own skills, know ledge, qual it ies, strengths and limit a tions in rela tion to an 
issue and then ask others for their perspect ives. This will help identify whether 
your perspect ive is the same or differ ent from that of others. If many other 
people see a situ ation differ ently or see your qual it ies and skills very differ-
ently from how you see your self, you may want to ques tion your self- aware-
ness more closely. Most profes sion als have an annual appraisal or perform ance 
review, and this can help check out if our own self- assess ment of our job 
perform ance is accur ate. Students are often encour aged to self- assess before 
receiv ing feed back on a place ment and this can achieve the same purpose 
when compared against the feed back. You may also be asked to be involved in 
360- degree appraisal. This is where you are asked to make a self- assess ment, 
which is then compared to the opinion of others such as peers, managers and 
subor din ates.
Invite feed back on your strengths and areas for devel op ment from those you 
work with – those more senior to your self, peers and/or more junior 
colleagues, as they will all offer differ ent perspect ives. If you are a student, 
work with differ ent members of staff and see if they identify similar or 
differ ent areas of strength and areas that you can develop further.
Invite feed back on your strengths and areas for devel op ment from those you 
work with – those more senior to your self, peers and/or more junior 
colleagues, as they will all offer differ ent perspect ives. If you are a student,
work with differ ent members of staff and see if they identify similar or 
differ ent areas of strength and areas that you can develop further.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

116 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Use reflect ive frame works
There are a variety of reflect ive frame works avail able (e.g. Driscoll 2007; 
Johns 2010; and Gibbs 1988, which has now been adapted and updated by 
Bulman 2013b). Most incor por ate an element of eval u ation and analysis and 
so, as we have indic ated through out this book, using these approaches will 
ensure you are being crit ical in your day- to- day prac tice. Driscoll’s (2007) 
‘What?’ model of struc tured reflec tion, shown below (Figure 5.1), is a tool you 
can use easily in prac tice to enhance your crit ical think ing skills (see Chapter 
4 for more ideas on descrip tion, analysis, eval u ation and explan a tion). You 
can use reflect ive frame works or models indi vidu ally or with others, privately, 
or in some cases you may want to share your reflec tions.
Figure 5.1 Driscoll’s (2007) ‘What?’ model of struc tured reflec tion
Bolton (2010), however, has sugges ted that the use of frame works may be 
restrict ive and that a free, less struc tured approach to reflec tion may be more 
creat ive. It may be worth trying differ ent approaches to see what works for 
you.
Mann et al. (2009) reviewed 29 studies on reflec tion and found there was a 
lack of research on the outcomes of reflec tion. The authors also found, 
however, that reflec tion appears to make the meaning of complex situ ations 
clearer and so enables learn ing from exper i ence. In other words, reflec tion 
helps you to be crit ical. You may want to consider how you can adopt a more 
reflect ive approach to your prac tice in a conscious and proact ive way. We 
offer some sugges tions below.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 117
Keep a reflect ive diary or learn ing journal
This may help you work through and learn from issues from your profes sional 
working life, and by being aware of the compon ents of a reflect ive frame work 
(in any order) you are more likely to incor por ate a ques tion ing approach that 
will ensure you are being crit ical. You may find that writing reflect ive accounts, 
even brief ones, can help you see things a little differ ently as you commit your 
thoughts and ideas to text. Once famil iar with the compon ents of struc tured 
reflec tion, you may find you don’t need to use a frame work and can just write 
free style. Tate (2013) says that that writing a personal journal should be about 
the journey or process rather than the outcome and each indi vidual needs to 
find out what works best for them. If you want to expand your writing, Johns 
(2010) offers a frame work that moves you from just record ing your exper i-
ences to examin ing them in more depth, includ ing reflect ing with others.
Keep a reflect ive diary for a few days. Use a struc tured approach and see if 
it impacts on the way you think about your prac tice.
Possible diary struc ture
Initial reflec tion
Additional thoughts/
reading
Example 1
Today I saw a colleague move a patient/
client without using a slide sheet. The patient 
looked uncom fort able and I was concerned 
for my colleague’s own safety. I have had my 
own train ing on moving and hand ling and 
know that a slide sheet should be used. I 
didn’t feel able to say anything as I was busy 
and didn’t feel confid ent in how to chal lenge 
her . . .
Consider how I might 
chal lenge the prac tice of 
colleagues – maybe discuss 
in the depart ment meeting 
so we all agree that we will 
do it??
Read more about local policy 
and guidelines.
Example 2
I was visit ing a family in their home; the 
mother appeared reserved and nervous. Her 
husband tended to answer the ques tions I had 
and he didn’t leave the room at all. I just felt 
some thing was wrong and couldn’t say why. I 
noticed bruis ing on her lower arm, even though 
she had tried to cover it up. I felt I needed a 
way of offer ing her an oppor tun ity to talk . . .
I need to explore family risk 
factors in more detail and 
make sure I am aware of the 
safe guard ing policies and 
proced ures. We could 
discuss as a team how to get 
inform a tion to clients who 
are vulner able.
Keep a reflect ive diary for a few days. Use a struc tured approach and see if 
it impacts on the way you think about your prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

118 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
You could also identify a ‘crit ical friend’ or engage in ‘profes sional/clin ical 
super vi sion’ in order to gain more struc tured support for your reflec tion. 
Sometimes a more formal arrange ment exists in the form of profes sional 
super vi sion and this can be with one other person or within groups, such as in 
action learn ing sets. These approaches are now discussed in a little more 
detail.
Find a ‘crit ical friend’
A crit ical friend can help you as a profes sional or a student to make sense of 
a situ ation by comment ing on and ques tion ing your reflec tions. Bulman 
(2013b) notes that a reflect ive colleague can help open up differ ent perspect-
ives, act as a sound ing board, provide support and guide you. This requires a 
rela tion ship of trust, honesty and open ness. You will enhance your crit ical 
think ing by having your assump tions chal lenged and widen ing the perspect-
ives you have.
Take part in profes sional/clin ical super vi sion or person- centred 
devel op ment
Bond and Holland (2010: 15) explain that clin ical super vi sion is used to facil-
it ate ‘in- depth reflec tion on complex issues . . . this reflec tion is facil it ated by 
one or more exper i enced colleagues’.
Professional/clin ical super vi sion has been seen as a way of promot ing 
personal devel op ment and regular reflec tion, usually between two people 
focus ing on learn ing (Elliott 2013). You may want to identify someone to 
discuss your prac tice with whose view you respect. If two or more profes-
sion als explore their think ing together, it can broaden perspect ives, chal lenge 
assump tions and encour age ques tion ing. Supervision can be achieved by 
meeting to discuss profes sional and prac tice issues in a non- threat en ing, 
support ive envir on ment. The devel op ment of a trust ing rela tion ship is crucial. 
This can help produce a crit ical approach to profes sional prac tice in the 
follow ing ways:
• By ‘chal len ging’ in a support ive way.
• By acting as a sound ing board (so you can offer creat ive ideas and 
thoughts).
• By asking probing ques tions.
• By listen ing to each other’s perspect ives.
• By offer ing an expert opinion on a situ ation.
• By consid er ing altern at ive options for solving an issue/problem.
• By using the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’.
• By giving time and atten tion to explor ing signi fic ant profes sional issues.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 119
• By acknow ledging the emotional impact of chal len ging profes sional 
situ ations.
However, Elliott (2013) argues that clin ical super vi sion is an outdated term 
and should be replaced by ‘person- centred devel op ment’ – this then reflects 
the fact that the rela tion ship can be mutu ally bene fi cial and that personal 
devel op ment is the aim. He asserts that each indi vidual brings a unique set of 
feel ings, values, beliefs and ideas. This is more likely to help with crit ical 
think ing.
Take part in ‘action learn ing sets’
Action learn ing sets are one way of organ iz ing group- based reflect ive learn ing. 
From our exper i ence, it can be useful to reflect and discuss in groups when 
there is a partic u lar common focus or area of interest. Dunphy et al. (2010) 
describe how when action learn ing was used as part of a course, parti cipants 
were able to discuss real prob lems that concerned them, although they did 
note some prob lems regard ing parti cipants’ commit ment to working in action 
learn ing sets. Carter (2013) describes how with group reflec tion there are 
bene fits, such as learn ing from others; risks, such as indi vidu als feeling 
anxious; and chal lenges, such as finding protec ted time.
Undertake ‘crit ical incid ent analysis’ or debrief ing
According to Vachon and LeBlanc (2011: 894), ‘Critical incid ent analysis (CIA) 
is one of the strategies frequently used to facil it ate reflect ive learn ing. It 
involves the thor ough descrip tion and analysis of an authen tic and exper i-
enced event within its specific context.’ The analysis of person ally signi fic ant 
(or ‘crit ical’) situ ations can be valu able in terms of identi fy ing reasons why 
we act in certain ways or make certain decisions, in order to learn from those 
situ ations. The crit ical incid ent tech nique has been around for many years 
and Flanagan (1954) described how it was used to learn from the success or 
fail ures of pilots in flight train ing schools. It has been widely used in many 
profes sions, as a tool in educa tion (Tripp 2011) and in health care and social 
work prac tice to aid crit ical reflec tion. It can help prac ti tion ers to uncover 
why they may have acted in a certain way and what has influ enced their 
decision- making. It is also used as a research approach (see Hosie et al. 2014).
Debriefing is used in stress ful or unusual situ ations in partic u lar to learn 
from them. For example, Keene et al. (2010) discuss bereave ment debrief ing 
where profes sion als use a clear struc ture to explore specific cases. This 
involves explor ing coping strategies and lessons learned using a series of 
prompt ques tions. Debriefing is often used follow ing trau matic or unusual 
events.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

120 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Even a simple prompt such as ‘tell me about it’ can help a profes sional or 
student to discuss an issue, an incid ent or prac tice situ ation in their own way. 
Further prompt ques tions can be used once the reflec tion starts, as Brotherton 
and Parker (2008) suggest:
• What was the context?
• How were you feeling before or after the event or issue?
• What were you think ing?
• How did others see the event or issue?
• What were the consequences?
Developing your reflec tion further
There is much written about reflec tion and we recom mend Bulman and Schutz 
(2013) for a more in- depth explor a tion. We would strongly assert that by 
adopt ing such reflect ive approaches, you will be think ing more crit ic ally 
about your profes sional prac tice. All of these reflect ive approaches are 
enhanced if you incor por ate sound evid ence at the analysis stage.
Consider what aspects of your prac tice you may need to develop
To identify which aspects of your profes sional prac tice you may need to 
develop, you can start by purpose fully and crit ic ally think ing about, or 
reflect ing on, all aspects of your own work – this means adopt ing a ques-
tion ing approach to all that you read, see, hear and do in rela tion to your prac-
tice. To ensure this you could:
• Imagine you are new to a job (or as a student/learner new to a place ment). 
What would your impres sions be and would you see anything that you 
might consider to be unpro fes sional, unjus ti fied or routine?
• Use team discus sions and obser va tions to identify which areas of prac tice 
you and your colleagues approach in an uncer tain or incon sist ent way.
• Consider and reflect upon what the reasons are for the way you carry out 
your prac tice and then consider how you can move to a more crit ical and 
evid ence- based approach.
• Reflect on the manage ment of a patient/client to see how you could improve 
this.
• Consider any feed back you have from patients/clients and how person- 
centred your approach to care is.
• Undertake a SWOT analysis (explained below).
In Chapter 1, we intro duced the term ‘crit ical analysis’ and explained how it 
involves break ing down a situ ation or the written word. Although the origin of 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 121
the SWOT analysis tool is unknown and there are some that criti cize its theor-
et ical under pin nings, it is often used as an eval u ation and plan ning tool in 
busi ness, the profes sions and educa tion (Helms and Nixon 2010). We have 
found it to be a useful tool for explor ing profes sional prac tice. It provides a 
simple frame work for you to consider an issue or an aspect of prac tice.
Undertake a SWOT analysis (see below) of a partic u lar aspect of your prac-
tice within your work place. You could look at any of the follow ing: commu-
nic a tion with patients/clients; team working; docu ment a tion; patient/client 
exper i ences of care; or manage ment of a partic u lar patient/client inter ven-
tion or problem. The Mindtools website offers some helpful explan a tions of 
doing a personal SWOT analysis or a profes sional one of your work envir on-
ment [http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_05.htm]
SWOT analysis tool
Strengths
Weaknesses
Opportunities
Threats
Seek out and explore the evid ence for your prac tice
In Chapters 2 and 3, we explored differ ent types of inform a tion/evid ence and 
distin guished between ‘readily avail able’ and ‘best avail able’ evid ence. If you 
wish to develop as a crit ical thinker in prac tice, you need to be ques tion ing 
and strive to find the best avail able evid ence for your inter ven tions. It isn’t 
possible to suddenly be able to give solid evid ence- based reasons for 
everything (big and small) that you do on a daily basis, and so it may be better 
to start with some small changes. Being a crit ical thinker involves you being 
thought ful and ques tion ing about inform a tion/evid ence but also discuss ing 
your prac tices with your colleagues.
Think more crit ic ally about your profes sional know ledge base – use any of 
the follow ing ideas to make even a small change in way you think crit ic ally 
about the inform a tion/evid ence you use in prac tice:
• Ask WHY? more often!
• Use our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’.
• Get train ing in using profes sional data bases to search for evid ence.
• Look initially to see if there are any system atic reviews that are relev ant. 
For example, see http://www.cochrane.org/cochrane- reviews or http://
www.camp bellcol lab or a tion.org/.
Undertake a SWOT analysis (see below) of a partic u lar aspect of your prac-
tice within your work place. You could look at any of the follow ing: commu-
nic a tion with patients/clients; team working; docu ment a tion; patient/client 
exper i ences of care; or manage ment of a partic u lar patient/client inter ven-
tion or problem. The Mindtools website offers some helpful explan a tions of 
doing a personal SWOT analysis or a profes sional one of your work envir on-
ment [http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_05.htm]
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

122 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• See if your work place or place ment area has a library or offers online 
access to resources.
• Start prac tising system atic search ing for just one or two import ant issues as 
discussed in Chapter 3. This is so that you access the ‘best avail able’ inform-
a tion/evid ence rather than relying on what comes most easily to hand.
• Determine whether there are any national guidelines on key areas of your 
profes sional prac tice. For example, in the UK: NHS evid ence, avail able to 
every one in health and social care (see www.evid ence.nhs.uk/default.
aspx); NICE (www.nice.org.uk); Bandolier, which has a know ledge library 
relat ing to differ ent clin ical condi tions (www.medi cine.ox.ac.uk/bando lier/
know ledge.htm). There are also National Service Frameworks for partic-
u lar popu la tions or condi tions (http://www.nhs.uk/NHSEngland/NSF/
Pages/Nationalserviceframeworks.aspx).
• Look one thing up every day. Try to use profes sional and good quality 
sources of inform a tion/evid ence.
• Visit other similar special ties or areas, and network with colleagues who do 
similar jobs (at confer ences and train ing sessions or inform ally). This will 
enable you to ‘check out’ what is considered best prac tice.
• Be open to the fact that ‘you may not know what you don’t know’. Exposure 
to other people, educa tion or organ iz a tions may help ensure you are not 
missing out on key know ledge or perspect ives.
• Set up a journal club. Such clubs can be useful to inform profes sion als and 
embed evid ence- based prac tice, and are increas ingly using social media as 
a plat form (Leung et al. 2013).
• Reflect on your prac tice regu larly.
• Ask experts or students to share their know ledge with your team through 
teach ing sessions or present a tions (remem ber to think crit ic ally about what 
they say!).
• Identify study days, courses and confer ences relev ant to your prac tice and 
ask for study leave and/or funding to attend.
• Follow the news for health or social care stories that widen your perspect ive.
• Ensure that indi vidu als who attend any devel op ment oppor tun it ies feed 
back to the whole team.
If possible, use a profes sional data base and search system at ic ally for evid-
ence for your prac tice as discussed in Chapter 3
Positive approaches to ques tion ing/chal len ging prac tice
We are likely to be part of small and local or larger teams when working in 
health and social care. There are ways in which you can use these teams to 
ask ques tions, share ideas and prac tices. You could discuss with colleagues 
If possible, use a profes sional data base and search system at ic ally for evid-
ence for your prac tice as discussed in Chapter 3
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 123
how you might develop a ‘ques tion ing culture’. This is where every one 
considers it posit ive to ask each other why certain approaches are adopted. If 
you are taking a crit ical think ing approach your self, you are likely to feel the 
need to ques tion or chal lenge the prac tice of others in your work place. We are 
often threatened by being chal lenged, partic u larly if it is unex pec ted or at the 
wrong time or in the wrong place, and in some cases we may be defens ive.
During a normal working day, consider what your reac tion would be if a 
colleague, student or prac tice assessor/mentor chal lenged you on why you 
were doing some thing in a certain way.
During a normal working day, consider what your reac tion would be if a 
colleague, student or prac tice assessor/mentor chal lenged you on why you 
were doing some thing in a certain way.
Figure 5.2
How you can reduce the need to chal lenge the prac tice of others
Where possible, reduce the need to chal lenge others by being proact ive in 
your approach:
• Agree a regular time slot such as team meet ings, case present a tions or 
handovers when prac tice decisions and rationale can be discussed.
• Invite students/colleagues to ques tion you (appro pri ately) and let them 
know how and when to do this.
• Encourage any new staff and students to share with you any new ideas, 
inform a tion/evid ence they may have.
• Either pick a small and easily researched area to focus on first; or
• Consider some larger issue that may have incon sist ent or unclear rationale 
and identify what the avail able evid ence is in rela tion to it.
• Practise ‘think ing out loud’ to each other to share your rationale and 
decision- making in a safe and support ive way
Try to adopt any of the approaches above next time you are working.
Try to adopt any of the approaches above next time you are working.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

124 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Tactfully chal len ging or ques tion ing the prac tice of others
Don’t forget that it is easier to chal lenge or ques tion prac tice if you also regu-
larly offer praise when you see good prac tice. The follow ing are some general 
tips:
• Ask others for their perspect ive on the issue/your obser va tions.
• Consider asking ques tions rather than making accus a tions.
• Consider whether the prac tice is unsafe or inap pro pri ate and what your 
role might be as an advoc ate for your patients/clients. Addressing the issue 
becomes urgent if unsafe prac tice is observed.
• Before you chal lenge the prac tice of others, consider whether you have all 
the evid ence you need – are there things you might be unaware of, for 
example, context, more than one approach or differ ent personal/profes-
sional values?
• Access and supply evid ence to support your argu ment or perspect ive 
before you chal lenge others (e.g. showing someone the guid ance or policy).
• Consider the setting: avoid chal len ging another profes sional in public 
unless the prac tice is unsafe. Ask to speak to them privately.
• Assess risk – you should not delay if anyone is putting others at risk. You 
should seek guid ance on this from your profes sional body.
• Give them oppor tun ity and time to respond; people are often more 
defens ive if they are expec ted to respond imme di ately. Listen to their 
perspect ive.
• Think care fully about the words you use. For example: ‘Why are you 
doing it that way?’ sounds rather like an accus a tion, whereas ‘I haven’t 
seen it done like that before, I’d be inter ested in knowing if there are any 
reasons for that approach’ sounds more like an enquiry and is there fore less 
threat en ing.
Raising and escal at ing concerns about prac tice
There may be instances when, depend ing on the issue, you may need to raise 
concerns in a more formal way. You should raise your concern first with the 
person in ques tion and then with your line manager. Your organ iz a tion or profes-
sional body may stip u late who you should go to next. This process is often 
called ‘escal at ing concerns’. We have discussed account ab il ity earlier in this 
book and part of being an account able profes sional is identi fy ing and raising 
concerns if we see or hear about unsafe prac tice. To avoid ‘whis tleblowers’, 
teams should adopt a proact ive approach to avoid ing unsafe prac tice.
In the UK, the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC 2013a) has produced 
guidelines for nurses and midwives [http://www.nmc- uk.org/Nurses- and- 
midwives/Raising- and- escal at ing- concerns/]. Remember that if others see you 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 125
prac tising in an unsafe way, then these may apply to you. The Health and Care 
Professions Council (HCPC 2014) also has guid ance for raising and escal at ing 
concerns in the work place and this is avail able on their website [http://www.
hcpc- uk.org.uk/regis trants/rais ing con cerns/].
Using ques tions to develop a more in- depth 
approach to crit ical think ing
Once you have embraced some of the ideas for crit ical think ing outlined in the 
earlier part of this chapter, you may want to develop a more in- depth approach 
to think ing crit ic ally. You may want to consider Brookfield’s (2012) four key 
ques tions for crit ical think ing:
1 What assump tions am I making about the situ ation or topic?
2 How can I check out these assump tions for accur acy and truth?
3 What altern at ives perspect ives are there?
4 What action should I take follow ing my analysis?
For specific inform a tion/evid ence that you see, hear or read, you could then 
apply the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ (see Chapter 1).
Questions to ask when think ing about chal len ging situ ations
Delany et al. (2013) conduc ted a survey of exper i enced profes sion als to 
determ ine what ques tions they asked when think ing about a chal len ging 
patient/client situ ation. We have adapted them below for more general situ-
ations. Delany et al. placed them in three categor ies which relate clearly to 
defin i tions given earlier of ‘evid ence- based prac tice’ that include research 
evid ence, judge ment and patient/client pref er ences:
1 
Professional/clin ical role
• 
What is the scope of my role?
• 
What is the scope of my prac tice?
• 
Is it appro pri ate for me to be involved?
• 
Should I accept or decline this refer ral?
• 
What options do I have to treat these prob lems?
2 
Knowledge
• 
What can I see?
• 
What does not look right or not normal?
• 
How does this deviate from normal?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

126 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• 
What inform a tion/evid ence do I have or what do I know about this 
condi tion/situ ation?
• 
What inform a tion/evid ence or know ledge do I need?
• 
What know ledge do I have access to?
• 
How would I acquire extra know ledge about this condi tion/situ ation?
• 
Where can I get more inform a tion/evid ence?
• 
Who or what can provide this know ledge?
• 
How can I confirm this know ledge is correct/reli able?
3 
Patient/client perspect ive: profes sional reas on ing ques tions based on 
the patient/client narrat ive and context
• 
What symp toms/prob lems does the patient/client present with?
• 
What effect is this having on their activ it ies/life?
• 
What are the patient/clients goals?
(Adapted from Delany et al. 2013)
More ‘ques tions for crit ical think ing in prac tice’
In addi tion to the above, we have developed the follow ing detailed table: 
‘Questions for crit ical think ing in prac tice’ (drawn from a variety of 
sources, includ ing: Paul and Elder 2005; Huckabay 2009; Golding 2011; Facione 
2013). It should help you to think crit ic ally about the complex it ies of profes-
sional prac tice. The ques tions may help you to consider issues that you come 
across in prac tice settings. The second section relates to gath er ing inform a-
tion/evid ence and is prob ably the most import ant, as in our busy profes sional 
lives we may be pres sured into making decisions before we have gained suffi-
cient inform a tion/evid ence.
Questions for crit ical think ing in prac tice
1 
Diagnosing and assess ing prob lems or issues/setting goals or 
object ives
• 
What is the problem or ques tion and is it clearly stated?
• 
Do you under stand the complex ity of the issue?
• 
Could you assess the cause of the actual or poten tial problem?
• 
Are you picking up relev ant cues (e.g. reading body language or 
more subtle inform a tion)?
• 
Can you invite others to ques tion your prac tice and share with 
you if they have seen differ ent approaches to the same issue/
problem?
• 
What are your motiv a tions for chan ging or chal len ging this aspect 
of prac tice?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 127
• 
Do you need to ask further ques tions of your patients/clients/
colleagues to get a fuller picture?
• 
Are you open to the possib il ity that you may be wrong?
• 
If setting goals, are they relev ant and clearly stated?
• 
How will you judge the effect ive ness of your decisions and inter ven-
tions?
2 
Gathering inform a tion/evid ence and further assess ment
• 
Can you define key ideas/issues?
• 
Consider the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’, Questions 1 
and 2.
• 
Have you searched for the best avail able inform a tion/evid ence? 
Could you consider using decision analysis tools to identify your 
options (e.g. Banning 2008) or ethical reas on ing frame works (e.g. 
Seedhouse 2009)?
• 
Do you need to categor ize, using frame works or scales (e.g. risk 
assess ment tools)?
• 
Can you identify what is object ive and what is subject ive about your 
reas on ing?
• 
Do you have enough inform a tion/evid ence on which to form a reas-
on able opinion?
• 
Do you need to ask your self and others if there is anything else to 
consider?
3 
Evaluating the evid ence
• 
Consider the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’, Questions 3, 4, 5 
and 6.
• 
Make sure you under stand all the evid ence you have.
• 
Have you judged the cred ib il ity and strength of the argu ments 
presen ted and are they convin cing?
• 
How signi fic ant is the inform a tion/evid ence?
• 
Is all the evid ence relev ant? Reject anything that isn’t.
• 
Can you compare or contrast perspect ives?
4 
Reaching conclu sions/imple ment ing
• 
Consider all of the ‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ and the final 
section: So what?
• 
What are the implic a tions and consequences of your find ings?
• 
What conclu sions might you draw?
• 
Have you got enough inform a tion/evid ence?
• 
Have you considered whether any bias, preju dices or emotions 
have impacted on your conclu sions? (For example, might you make 
a decision to act in a certain way based on what it might involve you 
having to do?)
• 
Are your conclu sions relev ant to the context in which you are 
working?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

128 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• 
Have you considered the implic a tions of these conclu sions for 
others?
• 
What might you need to consider regard ing imple ment ing your 
find ings?
5 
Giving rationale for actions/sharing with colleagues
• 
Could you give a clear rationale for your decisions?
• 
Could you explain to your employ ers, profes sional body, colleagues 
and clients why you acted, or decided not to act, in a situ ation or 
set of circum stances?
• 
Have you docu mented your reasons?
• 
Could you explain why you rejec ted altern at ive actions or 
approaches?
• 
If you are facil it at ing the learn ing of others (e.g. colleagues, 
students or patients/clients), are you present ing the inform a tion/
evid ence in a way that they will easily under stand?
Examples of crit ical think ing in prac tice
To illus trate how you can incor por ate our ‘Six ques tions for crit ical 
think ing’ or some of above ques tions into your daily prac tice in a more prac-
tical way, we will now provide some examples of how you can think more 
crit ic ally about the issues in ques tion.
Example 1: Thinking crit ic ally about what you write
Take the state ment ‘We deliver person- centred care’. A team of profes sion als 
may plan to incor por ate this into written mater ial they provide to clients 
about their service. However, without some crit ical think ing by all concerned, 
the state ment could be inter preted differ ently by differ ent people or really 
have little value. To avoid any misin ter pret a tion and make it relev ant, the 
team could:
• 
Discuss their reasons for wanting to adopt the state ment.
• 
Access any relev ant frame works or guid ance on ‘person- centred care’.
• 
Explore what the team’s inter pret a tion of ‘person- centred care’ is. This 
may involve discus sion and search ing the liter at ure. They then may 
want to agree (as a team) an accept able defin i tion (or indeed write a new 
one) to use in their public a tion. It then becomes much more expli cit and 
so can be applied and inter preted better by staff.
• 
Discuss and explore with patients/clients/stake hold ers any poten tial 
areas of conflict in apply ing the concept of ‘person- centred care’ in 
advance of adopt ing it in their written mater ial.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 129
• 
Clearly discuss and identify what deliv er ing ‘person- centred care’ will mean 
in prac tice and how it will influ ence ways of working with patients/clients.
Example 2: Thinking crit ic ally about what you see
Imagine that you do not know how to handle a partic u lar profes sional or clin-
ical issue, but you observe a senior and respec ted colleague dealing with 
such a situ ation in a partic u lar way. Before adopt ing their approach, you 
could:
• 
Clarify with your colleague the nature of the issue or problem.
• 
Discuss with your colleague their reasons for the approach they took.
• 
Ask them if there is any evid ence and eval u ate it.
• 
Discuss with other colleagues if there are any altern at ive approaches.
• 
Decide what prac tice to adopt.
Example 3: Thinking crit ic ally about sources of evid ence you may hear or 
read about
A student/colleague rather reluct antly says they have seen you carry out a 
partic u lar inter ven tion differ ently from how they have seen it done before. 
You could:
• 
Invite the student/colleague to discuss differ ent prac tices they have 
seen.
• 
Ask if they searched for or have access to any addi tional inform a tion/
evid ence relat ing to the approach(es) they have seen previ ously.
• 
Justify your reasons for your own approach to the inter ven tion and see 
if and how your reasons are similar or differ ent from theirs.
• 
With the student/colleague, search for and appraise the ‘best avail able 
evid ence’ related to how to perform the skill.
• 
Proactively continue to discuss with the student/colleague the inter ven-
tion in order to identify whether there are incon sist en cies in the approach 
and then together you can agree and adopt ‘best prac tice’.
From the ques tions and examples, you can see that a wide range of skills is 
needed to be a crit ical thinker. But many of them can be incor por ated into 
your work, requir ing little extra time.
Critical think ing in prac tice is key to provid ing safe and effect ive evid ence- 
based care. It is not satis fact ory to work as a profes sional without ques-
tion ing your self and others.
Critical think ing in prac tice is key to provid ing safe and effect ive evid ence- 
based care. It is not satis fact ory to work as a profes sional without ques-
tion ing your self and others.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

130 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Influencing the ‘crit ical think ing’ culture of 
your work place
It may be diffi cult to more broadly influ ence profes sional prac tice if you are 
the only ‘crit ical thinker’ in the work place! We now offer some ‘top tips’ for 
influ en cing those you work with in order to change the culture of your work-
place to a ‘learn ing organ iz a tion’. The Social Care Institute for Excellence 
(2008) has an online resource pack that is designed to allow organ iz a tions to 
assess whether they are learn ing organ iz a tions – that is, organ iz a tions that 
use evid ence- based prac tice and informed decision- making [see http://www.
scie.org.uk/public a tions/learnin gorgs/].
‘Top tips’ for influ en cing your organ iz a tional culture to develop a more crit-
ical approach to profes sional prac tice
• 
Find out who the most posit ive and influ en tial people are (it may not be 
the people at the top!).
• 
With these posit ive influ en tial people on your side, talk to your managers 
and colleagues, or your mentor, about what makes a learn ing organ iz a-
tion and how you can develop a more crit ical approach to profes sional 
prac tice.
• 
Identify those who are reluct ant to adopt a ques tion ing and learn ing 
approach, and try and find out what their concerns are. You may need to 
help them see the bene fits of safe and effect ive patient/client care.
• 
Find out what areas of prac tice in your work place are incon sist ent or 
frus trat ing for your colleagues/learners (see previ ous sections of this 
chapter).
• 
Ask students or visit ors to your work place what prac tices they have 
seen performed differ ently in other areas or with other profes sion als.
• 
Involve and encour age your colleagues/students in devel op ing a crit ical 
approach to prac tice.
• 
The move towards becom ing a ‘learn ing organ iz a tion’ will not happen 
overnight and you may need to make small changes, one at a time.
In summary
In this chapter, we have shown that to be account able, we need to demon-
strate crit ical think ing in order to be safe and effect ive. We have looked at the 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

ADOPTING CRIT ICAL THINK ING IN YOUR PROFES SIONAL PRAC TICE 131
complex it ies of profes sional life and explored the pros and cons of basing 
your prac tice on routine, exper i ence, using profes sional judge ment and 
learn ing from others. We have iden ti fied three ways you can start to incor-
por ate crit ical think ing into your profes sional prac tice: using reflec tion; 
identi fy ing what aspects of your prac tice may need to change; and seeking 
out evid ence for profes sional prac tice and discuss ing this within your team. 
We then considered how to develop more in- depth approaches to crit ical 
think ing using ques tions, before finally explor ing how to identify and promote 
a crit ical approach in your organ iz a tion.
Key points
1 Critical think ing is more complex in profes sional prac tice than in academic 
writing or present ing.
2 Many factors affect our prac tice, includ ing follow ing routine, relying on 
exper i ence and the influ ence of others.
3 You can start to think more crit ic ally by reflect ing on your prac tice and by 
consid er ing your prac tice and the evid ence you use to under pin it.
4 Asking ques tions will help you to facil it ate deeper crit ical think ing within 
profes sional prac tice.
5 It is useful to identify whether your work place/place ment has a crit ical 
approach to learn ing and consider how to influ ence it.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

6
Shaping the future: 
what is the role of 
crit ical think ing in the 
devel op ment of health 
and social care 
services?
• Why is crit ical think ing import ant for devel op ing a broader 
perspect ive in your personal, profes sional and academic life?
• What are the changes influ en cing health and social care in the 
twenty- first century, and how can crit ical think ing help you respond to 
these?
• How can you think more crit ic ally about these changes?
• Skills and qual it ies needed to promote crit ical think ing in rela tion to 
broader perspect ives in health and social care
• Broadening your hori zons in health and social care in your academic 
work and prac tice
• In summary
• Key points
132
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 133
In this chapter, we will:
• Explore why crit ical think ing is import ant for devel op ing a broader 
perspect ive in your personal, profes sional and academic life.
• Discuss the changes influ en cing health and social care in the twenty- first 
century, and explore ways to respond to these as a crit ical thinker.
• Describe what qual it ies and skills are needed to think crit ic ally from a 
broader perspect ive in rela tion to health and social care.
• Discuss how you can broaden your hori zons through network ing with 
profes sion als and academ ics in differ ent discip lines, profes sions and 
special ist fields.
Why is crit ical think ing import ant for 
devel op ing a broader perspect ive in your 
personal, profes sional and academic life?
As stated in previ ous chapters, there is no point in being able to demon strate 
your skills of crit ical think ing in the classroom or in your academic work if it 
ulti mately makes no differ ence to the care you offer to patients and clients.
So far in this book, we have discussed how you can develop your crit ical 
think ing skills in rela tion to your academic work, and in rela tion to your own 
prac tice. A ques tion ing and open- minded approach can contrib ute not only 
to the improve ment of your academic grades and to the devel op ment of 
your own prac tice, it can also lead to devel op ments in prac tice at organ iz a-
tional, regional, national and even inter na tional level. It can also influ ence 
the devel op ment of new theory related to health and social care prac tice. 
We now discuss how you can enhance your crit ical think ing skills by 
consid er ing broader perspect ives that are relev ant to health and social care 
prac tice.
Influences on your skills of crit ical think ing
Many factors may have influ enced the devel op ment – or other wise – of your 
skills of crit ical think ing, includ ing your upbring ing, as well as the content and 
design of any educa tion or train ing that you have atten ded, and the teach ing/
train ing approaches you have exper i enced through out your life. Consideration 
of these factors may assist you now, as you continue to build on and apply the 
skills for crit ical think ing to your academic and profes sional life.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

134 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
At this point in your life, what do you think have been the key influ ences – in 
your day- to- day life, your upbring ing and your educa tion – on the devel op-
ment of your skills of crit ical think ing? Have you been encour aged to ques-
tion what you read, see and hear? Have you been encour aged to chal lenge 
your beliefs, values and assump tions?
Important ques tions to consider include:
• Did your parents/guard i ans punish you as a child if you got an answer 
wrong?
• Throughout your educa tion, were you ever been humi li ated by a teacher/
lecturer for getting an answer wrong?
• Was asking ques tions seen as a sign of interest and enthu si asm, or was it 
discour aged?
• Were you encour aged to be ‘seen and not heard’?
• Have you been encour aged by teach ers to ques tion, chal lenge and debate 
what you were being taught?
• Have you been encour aged to explore and find things out for your self?
• In your profes sional train ing and/or career, have you been encour aged to 
consider and suggest new ways of working? Have those around you been 
willing to consider change and/or chal lenges to their prac tice?
When you consider these ques tions, you may begin to recog nize how your 
previ ous exper i ences – personal, academic and/or profes sional – may have 
influ enced your approach and atti tude to crit ical think ing.
Many writers have argued that in recent years, in further and higher profes-
sional educa tion in many coun tries, there has been an emphasis on the devel-
op ment of specific skills, focus ing on the devel op ment of ‘compet ence’ and 
‘employ ab il ity’ (Bridges 2000; Brunt 2005; Gallacher and Osborne 2005). 
Generally, these terms relate to the mastery of ‘instru mental’ skills and related 
know ledge, for example, the devel op ment of specific prac tical skills and 
proced ures required for a partic u lar profes sional role, or of skills related to 
numer acy or inform a tion tech no logy. However, many authors argue that 
devel op ing ‘higher- order’ skills such as crit ical think ing, includ ing the skills 
required to respond effect ively to change, to manage complex situ ations, to 
appraise inform a tion and to make judge ments and choices, is extremely 
import ant in the educa tion of health and social care profes sion als. In this 
chapter, we argue that think ing crit ic ally should be an endless process in the 
chan ging world that health and social care profes sion als are facing.
Related to this, Sterling (2012), Lunn (2008), Harrison and Melville (2010) 
and Bourn et al. (2006) argue that students in higher educa tion should be 
encour aged to consider broader issues, such as ethics, polit ical issues, sustain-
At this point in your life, what do you think have been the key influ ences – in
your day- to- day life, your upbring ing and your educa tion – on the devel op-
ment of your skills of crit ical think ing? Have you been encour aged to ques-
tion what you read, see and hear? Have you been encour aged to chal lenge 
your beliefs, values and assump tions?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 135
ab il ity and envir on mental issues related to their field of study, in order to 
under stand their prac tice and studies in a wider context. They main tain that 
taking a wider perspect ive prepares students to think more broadly, to be 
more cultur ally sens it ive and to be better able to deal with complex prob lems 
and chal lenges in a crit ical manner.
The contri bu tion of thought ful and ques tion ing indi vidu als to the process of 
change and devel op ment in health and social care is pivotal to the devel op ment 
of prac tice and theory. Seifert (2010) suggests that a ‘healthy scep ti cism’ will 
promote better decision- making and in turn will result in posit ive solu tions to 
issues that profes sion als may face. Personal traits that are required in order to 
think crit ic ally are, first of all, a crit ical approach to what one sees, hears and 
reads, and secondly, a crit ical approach to one’s own prac tice (Dawes et al. 2005).
We there fore believe that a focus on specific facts, skills and proced ures and 
on a compet ency- based approach to profes sional educa tion leads to a 
narrow ing of students’ educa tional exper i ences. This is why it can be frus-
trat ing to be told as a student (or at any stage of your career!), ‘This is how it 
is done’, without any oppor tun ity for discus sion or debate.
In profes sional educa tion there should be an emphasis on devel op ing creat ive 
and flex ible profes sion als who are able to think crit ic ally, ques tion, and 
respond effect ively to rapid change.
Brookfield (2012) suggests that the ability to think crit ic ally is essen tial in our 
working life. Many other authors have suppor ted this view (e.g. Higgs and 
Hunt 1999; Simpson and Courtney 2002; Castledine 2010), stating that health 
and social care profes sion als should be equipped not merely with inform a tion 
and skills to ensure their compet ence in rela tion to prac tice- based skills, but 
also with the follow ing skills and qual it ies:
• Skills for crit ical think ing.
• The ability to reflect on issues and incid ents.
• Flexibility, includ ing the ability to consider differ ent view points and 
approaches.
• The ability to chal lenge their own assump tions and ways of think ing.
The Higher Education Academy (HEA/HSP 2005) adds that health care profes-
sion als need to be able to:
• Critically analyse and inter pret data.
• Apply creat ive solu tions to prob lems.
• Take a broader view of situ ations and of poten tial courses for action.
In profes sional educa tion there should be an emphasis on devel op ing creat ive 
and flex ible profes sion als who are able to think crit ic ally, ques tion, and 
respond effect ively to rapid change.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

136 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
What are the changes influ en cing health 
and social care in the twenty- first century, 
and how can crit ical think ing help you 
respond to these?
Being a crit ical thinker has never been so import ant in the fast-chan ging, flex-
ible and respons ive world we live in. Many changes taking place at local, national 
and global level are impact ing signi fic antly on the plan ning and deliv ery of 
health and social care in the twenty- first century. These are leading to new 
oppor tun it ies for posit ive change, but also to a variety of chal lenges. It is worth 
taking stock of these changes, as they will affect your role as a health and social 
care profes sional in the future, as well as your future studies and research.
What changes are you are aware of that are taking place locally, nation ally 
and glob ally that are impact ing on the plan ning and deliv ery of health and 
social care in the twenty- first century?
You may have thought of some or all of the follow ing:
• Advances in inform a tion access and commu nic a tion tech no logy.
• Increasing diversity of popu la tions.
• Limitations in finan cial and mater ial resources to provide health and social 
care.
• Inequalities in health and in social well- being.
• Political changes, includ ing changes in policy at local, national and inter na-
tional level.
• Environmental issues.
• Globalization.
Advances in inform a tion access and commu nic a tion tech no logy
As discussed in Chapter 1, advances in tech no logy and commu nic a tion, partic-
u larly those related to the devel op ment of the inter net, have led to increas-
ingly soph ist ic ated ways of access ing inform a tion easily and to the 
devel op ment of many new forms of commu nic a tion. These have led to 
dramatic changes in how know ledge and inform a tion can be trans ferred, and 
how people can inter act.
Increasing access to a wide range of inform a tion from differ ent discip lines 
offers health and social care profes sion als the oppor tun ity to broaden and 
What changes are you are aware of that are taking place locally, nation ally 
and glob ally that are impact ing on the plan ning and deliv ery of health and
social care in the twenty- first century?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 137
update their know ledge and apply this new know ledge to their prac tice. 
Professional know ledge in health and social care is devel op ing constantly. As 
we discussed in Chapter 1, keeping up to date with all the inform a tion avail-
able to us, and knowing how to make the most of it, can be over whelm ing. As 
prac ti tion ers account able for their own actions, health and social care profes-
sion als may find it chal len ging to keep abreast of rapid changes in theory, 
research and prac tice. In addi tion, patients/clients now have access to inform-
a tion about services, condi tions and treat ments, making many of them more 
informed and ‘expert’ in rela tion to their care, poten tially leading them to have 
higher expect a tions of the care and treat ment they receive. This can there fore 
lead to chal lenges for health and social care profes sion als.
An ever- expand ing variety of forms of inform a tion tech no logy has also 
brought new ways to seek, share and store inform a tion, offer ing us new 
methods for research ing issues that may be encountered in our studies and 
prac tice.
A wider choice of avenues of commu nic a tion can be advant age ous for many 
reasons. First, growing networks of commu nic a tion enable the rapid dissem-
in a tion of know ledge includ ing research find ings, leading to the poten tial for 
more rapid devel op ments in prac tice and in clin ical tech no logy. Secondly, we 
can commu nic ate in much more flex ible ways with others, includ ing profes-
sion als and patients/clients, at local and much broader levels, using differ ent 
forms of commu nic a tion. For example:
• Emailing other indi vidu als.
• Instant messaging.
• Online discus sion forums.
• Chat rooms.
• Skype.
• Wikis.
• Twitter.
• E mail discus sion groups.
These can all provide the oppor tun ity for network ing among students, prac ti-
tion ers and research ers in order to share know ledge and expert ise. Clients can 
also use these forms of commu nic a tion as means of finding out about services 
and gaining advice and inform a tion. However, keeping up to date with rapid 
devel op ments in commu nic a tion tech no logy, and knowing how to make the 
most of these and how to use them can be chal len ging, and as a health or social 
care student/profes sional you need to think crit ic ally about their use.
An ever- expand ing variety of forms of inform a tion tech no logy has also 
brought new ways to seek, share and store inform a tion, offer ing us new
methods for research ing issues that may be encountered in our studies and 
prac tice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

138 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
In summary, rapidly advan cing tech no logy offers many oppor tun it ies for 
devel op ments in commu nic a tion, research and prac tice. You will, however, 
need to think crit ic ally about what forms of commu nic a tion you choose to 
use, and which sources of inform a tion are avail able to you to access.
Increasing diversity of popu la tions
Planning and deliv er ing services to suit the needs of a popu la tion, whether at 
a local level or more broadly, can prove chal len ging. As a result of glob al iz a-
tion, popu la tion migra tion and a variety of social factors, most popu la tions 
through out the world have become increas ingly diverse in rela tion to, for 
example, culture, age and ethni city. For example, the 2011 census in England 
and Wales indic ated a rise in ethnic and racial diversity, with increased 
numbers of mixed- herit age chil dren, increased numbers of older people from 
minor ity back grounds, and concen tra tions of people from differ ent ethnic and 
racial back grounds in partic u lar cities, such as Birmingham and London (ONS 
2012). The popu la tion of England and Wales was also shown to have a signi fic-
antly higher propor tion of older people than in 2001, and other changes were 
high lighted, includ ing a signi fic ant increase in the propor tion of people who 
stated that they have no reli gious affil i ation. Such changes pose new chal-
lenges in terms of how health and welfare services are planned to meet the 
needs of differ ent local it ies.
From a wider perspect ive, accord ing to the United Nations (2009), signi fic ant 
popu la tion ageing is occur ring in most coun tries world wide; this again has a 
major impact on demands for health and social care services as well as on 
economic growth, consump tion and labour markets, and will influ ence family 
compos i tion and epidemi ology. In the polit ical arena, this may in turn influ ence 
voting patterns and polit ical repres ent a tion. Increasing popu la tion diversity 
will there fore have many poten tial implic a tions for plan ning health and social 
care services in differ ent popu la tions, locally, nation ally and glob ally.
Health and social care profes sion als have had to respond to – and think crit-
ic ally about – the increas ing diversity of popu la tions, ensur ing that appro-
pri ate services are planned and delivered appro pri ately, taking the diversity 
of clients within a local popu la tion into account. They there fore need to under-
stand differ ent world- views and appre ci ate the complex ity of notions of 
culture and the increas ing inter con nec ted ness between differ ent nations and 
cultures through out the world (Department of Health 2009; Harrison and 
Melville 2010; Holland 2010). The profes sional regu lat ory bodies govern ing 
and guiding health and social care prac tice in the UK, such as the Nursing and 
Midwifery Council (2008), the Health and Care Professions Council (2012) and 
the British Association of Social Workers (2012), high light that it is vital to 
under stand and respect differ ent perspect ives, values and world- views, appre-
ci at ing the complex it ies of differ ent cultures and recog niz ing how inter cul-
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 139
tural issues may be relev ant to profes sional prac tice – this is likely to become 
even more import ant as popu la tions become increas ingly diverse.
Limitations in finan cial and mater ial resources to provide 
health and social care
Although patterns of public spend ing vary widely across differ ent coun tries, 
health and social care prac ti tion ers working in all settings are likely to have 
finite resources – finan cial and mater ial – avail able to them when plan ning 
and deliv er ing services. As a result, they may need to make diffi cult choices 
regard ing how to best meet the needs of the popu la tions they serve (Blakemore 
and Griggs 2007; Alcock and May 2014). Spending has to be reviewed on a 
regular basis; chan ging budgets and blur ring between health and social care 
services may lead to diffi cult decisions regard ing the funding of services, 
such as home care and day centres, reduced funding for which will remove 
support for older people. Cuts of this type may lead to the devel op ment of 
more health and social prob lems in the long term.
Health and social care profes sion als may have to justify their requests for 
more funding for resources or services; at other times, they may be able to 
make creat ive sugges tions for more effect ive ways to use limited resources, 
finan cial or other wise, based on their exper i ences in prac tice or on research 
find ings. Critical think ing skills are there fore essen tial to ensure that effect ive 
care is provided in a way that is respons ive to clients’ needs, taking into 
account any constraints in rela tion to funding and resources.
Inequalities in health and in social well- being
Some differ ences in health status between indi vidu als are biolo gical in origin, 
linking to age and genetic differ ences. However, many dispar it ies in popu la-
tion health and social well- being between social groups, and also between 
nations, are largely soci etal in origin. They are influ enced by the way soci et ies 
are organ ized along social, economic and polit ical lines and reflect the 
power ful strat i fy ing forces that differ en ti ate life oppor tun it ies and social 
need, both within and between coun tries. The United Nations/WHO (UNEP/
WHO 2008) state that there are dramatic inequal it ies in health within and 
between coun tries that are closely linked with degrees of social disad vant age. 
Similarly, in 2010 the Department of Health acknow ledged that health inequal-
it ies in the UK between rich and poor were widen ing, and that certain condi-
tions that were increas ing, such as child hood obesity, are linked closely to 
social inequal it ies. Aiming to promote social justice and reduce health inequal-
it ies glob ally, the Commission on Social Determinants of Health was set up by 
WHO in 2005 to identify what can be done to promote health and social equity, 
and to foster a global move ment to achieve it. Linking to this, in many 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

140 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
coun tries and regions, strategies have been developed with the aim of redu-
cing inequal it ies in health and social well- being and working at various levels 
to influ ence this (Commission on Social Determinants of Health 2008). Their 
aim is to:
• Reduce ill health, disab il ity and mortal ity.
• Increase access to effect ive health care.
• Influence life styles and healthy beha viours.
• Improve people’s socioeco nomic well- being, such as in rela tion to employ-
ment, housing and educa tion, taking into account factors relat ing to age, 
sex, culture/reli gion, race, disab il ity and geography.
Initiatives targeted at specific groups to meet health and/or social needs
An example of a national strategy for target ing famil ies in poorer areas is the 
setting up of Sure Start Local Programmes (SSLPs) in England, with the aim 
of enhan cing the life chances of young chil dren growing up in disad vant aged 
neigh bour hoods. Centres were stra tegic ally set up in areas of high depriva-
tion, with an emphasis on community outreach and community devel op ment, 
aiming to provide all parents and carers with advice and support on health, 
early learn ing, child care and finances, and to provide them with access to 
other services includ ing employ ment advice. There is much work being done 
to assess the impact of these programmes in differ ent local it ies, which may 
impact on whether this service is reduced or cut in the future (Melhuish et al. 
2010).
Another example of a global initi at ive targeted at the most needy, led by 
the WHO, is their programme aiming to enhance services for people with 
mental and neurological disorders in low-income settings across the world 
(WHO 2008).
Health and social care profes sion als, and all those who plan health and social 
care services, may have to respond to inequal it ies in health and social well- 
being at local, national and global level, and may be involved in making diffi-
cult decisions about how care is to be rationed. Critical think ing is essen tial in 
order to respond to such chal lenges effect ively.
Political changes, includ ing changes in policy at local, national and 
inter na tional level
Political changes at local, national and global level will impact on how health 
and social care services are planned, funded and run. It is there fore import ant 
that those working in the fields of health and social care have a crit ical aware-
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 141
ness of how policies are created and reviewed, and that they are able to crit ic-
ally appraise exist ing policy, and analyse propos als for new policy.
Health and social care profes sion als may be involved in the process of 
formu lat ing policy, either form ally or inform ally. An under stand ing of current 
affairs in health and social policy, and an involve ment in shaping policy, can 
there fore be an import ant aspect of a profes sional’s role. Clients/service users/
patients and carers are having an increas ing role in shaping devel op ments in 
many health and social care services, to ensure that their perspect ives are 
taken into account.
An example from the UK of when current affairs have influ enced health 
and social care policy and prac tice is the impact of the invest ig a tion into 
issues relat ing to manage ment and deliv ery of care within the Mid Staffordshire 
NHS Foundation Trust. A report summar iz ing the issues raised during this 
invest ig a tion (Francis 2013) has led to a wide range of recom mend a tions for 
new manage ment prac tices and for changes in how NHS care is organ ized 
and delivered, in order to promote higher quality care for patients, prior it iz ing 
their safety and well- being. This report has had a consid er able impact on the 
work of those working in NHS services at all levels.
It is essen tial that people working in health and social care services remain 
alert to issues relat ing to their own prac tice, and keep abreast of current 
affairs and of recom mend a tions for changes in policy and prac tice in order to 
remain account able for their prac tice. Health and social care profes sion als 
should read policies and recom mend a tions for prac tice with a crit ical eye. 
They should also observe whether propos als set out in policies, at local, 
regional, national or inter na tional level, are always trans lated into prac tice.
What might be poten tial barri ers to the recom mend a tions set out in policies 
(e.g. national or local) becom ing trans lated into prac tice in health and social 
care services? How should health and social care profes sion als act if they are 
respons ible for imple ment ing recom mend a tions but are faced with such 
barri ers?
Environmental issues
There is increas ing acknow ledge ment of the impact of envir on mental issues, 
at both local and wider levels, on indi vidu als’ and popu la tions’ health and 
social well- being. As long ago as 1987 the United Nations stated that, ‘All 
human beings have the funda mental right to an envir on ment adequate for 
their health and well- being’. More recently, the Sustainable Development 
Commission (2008) carried out a review of evid ence suggest ing that the 
outdoor and built envir on ment has a signi fic ant impact on indi vidual health. 
What might be poten tial barri ers to the recom mend a tions set out in policies
(e.g. national or local) becom ing trans lated into prac tice in health and social 
care services? How should health and social care profes sion als act if they are 
respons ible for imple ment ing recom mend a tions but are faced with such 
barri ers?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

142 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
The Department of Health (2010) has recently acknow ledged the import ance 
of clean air and water for public health in the UK.
At a global level, the World Health Organization (2011) has recently high-
lighted the impact of envir on mental factors on death and disease, stating that 
envir on mental hazards are respons ible for around a quarter of the total 
burden of disease world wide, and that in the devel op ing world one- third of 
death and disease is the result of envir on mental factors. The WHO also 
suggests that in developed coun tries, health ier envir on ments could signi fic-
antly reduce the incid ence of cancers, cardi ovas cu lar disease, asthma, lower 
respir at ory infec tions, muscu lo skeletal diseases, road traffic injur ies, pois-
on ing and drown ing. Policy- makers at local, national and global level may be 
charged with tack ling issues related to envir on mental sustain ab il ity and 
climate change, and with monit or ing how these factors may impact on the 
health and social well- being of popu la tions.
The WHO has set up a variety of regional initi at ives world wide, such as the 
European Healthy Cities Network in 1997. This consists of cities around the 
WHO European Region that are commit ted to health and sustain able devel op-
ment (WHO 2009). More than 90 cities and towns from 30 coun tries have 
joined this initi at ive and are also linked through national, regional and metro-
pol itan networks. The three key themes are caring and support ive envir on-
ments, healthy living and healthy urban design. In 2008, leaders of over 50 
coun tries in Africa signed an agree ment to secure polit ical commit ment to 
policy, insti tu tional and invest ment changes needed to reduce envir on mental 
threats to health in order to achieve sustain able devel op ment (UNEP/WHO 
2008). Health and social care profes sion als there fore need to be aware of the 
poten tial impact of envir on mental issues on indi vidual and popu la tion health, 
and think crit ic ally about how this might be relev ant to their prac tice.
Globalization
The growing speed and intens ity of global inter ac tions due to the broad en ing 
of social, polit ical and economic activ it ies across polit ical fron ti ers, regions 
and contin ents means that the effects of distant events can be highly signi-
fic ant else where and poten tially have enorm ous global consequences (Held et 
al. 1999). As a result, there is an ever- increas ing inter de pend ence between 
differ ent communit ies around the world – what happens to one community 
will have implic a tions for others, at all levels, locally, nation ally and glob ally 
(Harrison and Melville 2010). For example, economic issues in one country 
will impact on others around the world; and envir on mental issues in one 
region will affect those around it, whether locally or more widely. Those plan-
ning and deliv er ing health and social care services there fore need to under-
stand the wider context of their work, making connec tions between local and 
global events and issues.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 143
How can you think more crit ic ally 
about these changes?
There is clearly a need for health and social care profes sion als to respond to 
the above changes, taking into account broader perspect ives when plan ning 
and deliv er ing care and services.
A broader view is needed, beyond a focus on the care of indi vidu als and on 
one’s own profes sion and special ism. This requires a crit ical perspect ive.
Below are two frame works that can help you identify what broader issues 
may influ ence health and social care for indi vidu als and communit ies. The 
first is adapted from an unpub lished MSc disser ta tion by Woolliams (2007); 
the second is a model by Dahlgren and Whitehead (1993), who were commis-
sioned by the WHO to identify the social determ in ants of health, upon which 
public health policy could be based.
Widening perspect ives: factors that might impact on health and social care 
issues (Woolliams 2007)
Example
Social factors
•  Inequalities in health and well- being at local and at 
broader levels
•  The impact of social back ground on a person’s under-
stand ing of social, mental and phys ical well- being
Economic factors
•  The impact of indi vidual wealth on a person’s well- being
•  International and regional vari ations in wealth and the 
impact of this on the health and social well- being of 
popu la tions
• Funding/resourcing of health and social care services
Environmental 
factors
•  The impact of local envir on mental factors on a person’s 
health and social well- being, includ ing housing, plan ning 
processes and local envir on mental issues
•  The impact of wider envir on mental factors on a popu la-
tion’s well- being, includ ing at the global level
• Issues relat ing to sustain ab il ity and climate change
A broader view is needed, beyond a focus on the care of indi vidu als and on 
one’s own profes sion and special ism. This requires a crit ical perspect ive.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

144 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Political factors
•  The organ iz a tion of health and social care services and 
facil it ies – differ ent under ly ing models, under ly ing polit-
ical philo sophies – locally, nation ally and glob ally
Cultural factors
•  Different cultural perspect ives on the meaning of health 
and social well- being
•  Different models of health and social care
•  Different perspect ives on how to promote health and 
social well- being
•  Cultural diversity within communit ies/regions
International 
factors
•  Variations in popu la tion health and well- being in differ ent 
coun tries
•  Different ways of organ iz ing health and social care 
services in differ ent coun tries
•  Different models of health and social care in differ ent 
coun tries
Dahlgren and Whitehead (1993) outlined a thought- provok ing ‘rainbow 
model’ depict ing the ‘social determ in ants of health’ (see below), suggest ing 
that there is a strong rela tion ship between the indi vidual, their envir on ment, 
social factors and their health status. They saw the indi vidual (e.g. client/
patient or family) as being at the centre, with a set of fixed factors (e.g. 
genetic make- up, age and sex) impact ing on their health that cannot be 
changed. Perhaps in our profes sional prac tice these are the first things we 
notice when we assess our patients/clients. Surrounding them, however, are 
‘layers of influ ence’ that affect the health of indi vidu als in popu la tions – 
these can be modi fied, and it is perhaps these broader issues that we should 
think more crit ic ally about as we assess and plan the care for our patients/
clients and their famil ies.
First, an indi vidual’s personal beha viour and their ways of living can either 
promote or damage their health. For example, an indi vidual may choose to 
smoke tobacco or drink alcohol, both of which are likely to impact negat ively 
on their health. Dahlgren and Whitehead suggest that targeted health promo-
tion aiming to influ ence indi vidu als’ life styles and atti tudes may be an effect ive 
strategy to improve the health and well- being of indi vidu als and communit ies.
Secondly, Dahlgren and Whitehead (1993) suggest that a person’s well- being 
will also be affected by their social support network, such as their family, 
friends and community networks. They suggest that strength en ing community 
support could be an effect ive way to improve the health and well- being of 
indi vidu als and popu la tions.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 145
Thirdly, Dahlgren and Whitehead suggest that struc tural factors, such as 
housing, access to employ ment, working condi tions, access to services and to 
essen tial facil it ies (e.g. sanit a tion and clean water), will also influ ence an indi-
vidual’s health and how they respond to ill health. They thus argue that 
improv ing living and working condi tions will have a posit ive impact on the 
health and well- being of indi vidu als and communit ies.
Finally, these authors suggest that broader factors – socioeco nomic, 
cultural and envir on mental – can also impact on an indi vidual’s health. They 
suggest that atten tion should be given to these factors and to how ill-health 
can be preven ted through focus ing on them as well as the ‘inner layers’ of the 
‘rainbow’. This reflects some of the broader issues we have been explor ing in 
this chapter.
As these two models clearly illus trate, we need to think more crit ic ally 
about all these issues when assess ing and plan ning health and social care for 
indi vidu als and communit ies. You could use these models along side either the 
‘Six ques tions for crit ical think ing’ from Chapter 1 or the ‘Questions for 
crit ical think ing in prac tice’ from Chapter 5, as prompts to help you to think 
more broadly about issues you wish to analyse in your studies or in rela tion to 
your prac tice.
Figure 6.1 The social determ in ants of health (Dahlgren and Whitehead 
1993, 2007)
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

146 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
Skills and qual it ies needed to promote 
crit ical think ing in rela tion to broader 
perspect ives in health and social care
As a result of the changes and chal lenges outlined above, profes sion als will be 
expec ted to have skills and qual it ies to enable them to work flex ibly, as 
reflect ive and adapt able team players, able to deal with the increas ingly 
complex issues that may be encountered in health and social care prac tice. 
This requires skills of crit ical think ing.
Facione (2011) suggests that the approaches that char ac ter ize crit ical 
think ing include inquis it ive ness in rela tion to a wide range of issues, flex ib-
il ity when consid er ing altern at ives and opin ions, and open- minded ness 
regard ing diver gent world- views. Barnett (2000, 2004) suggests that profes-
sion als working in the ‘super complex world’ of the twenty- first century must 
be equipped with skills to think broadly about the issues they face, and to 
think flex ibly in order to solve prob lems. He suggests that they need to be crit-
ical thinkers in order to contrib ute posit ively to an unpre dict able and ever- 
chan ging world.
To improve your under stand ing of diversity of popu la tions, you could seek 
out and take up any oppor tun ity to learn with, from and about other profes-
sion als and service users in a variety of communit ies, cultures and coun-
tries. If you have the oppor tun ity to take part in an exchange system to go 
abroad, or to exper i ence working in new envir on ments, you should consider 
parti cip at ing in such activ it ies.
In addi tion to the qual it ies and skills required for crit ical think ing discussed in 
previ ous chapters, there are other qual it ies and skills needed to incor por ate 
broader issues that will help you to work posit ively in a rapidly chan ging and 
unpre dict able health and social care envir on ment. These are as follows:
• Flexibility: as health and social care profes sion als, you need to be reflect ive 
and adapt able team players, able to deal with the complex issues you may 
encounter in your prac tice. You need to be flex ible in your think ing, open 
minded, able to ques tion your own values and assump tions, and able to 
ques tion what you read, see and hear.
• Creativity: this will assist the devel op ment of new approaches to your prac-
tice, studies and research. A creat ive approach is needed to your own prac-
tice in order to tackle issues you may face.
To improve your under stand ing of diversity of popu la tions, you could seek 
out and take up any oppor tun ity to learn with, from and about other profes-
sion als and service users in a variety of communit ies, cultures and coun-
tries. If you have the oppor tun ity to take part in an exchange system to go 
abroad, or to exper i ence working in new envir on ments, you should consider 
parti cip at ing in such activ it ies.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 147
• Sound coping strategies: these are required to assist you to cope posit ively 
with complex ity, uncer tainty and unpre dict ab il ity (Barnett 2000, 2004).
• Responsiveness: this will enable you to respond appro pri ately to rapid 
changes and devel op ments in health and social care prac tice.
Expanding on these, the follow ing skills and qual it ies will be invalu able if you 
wish to develop your skills of crit ical think ing within your prac tice and within 
your studies:
• A will ing ness to ques tion the breadth of your own know ledge about 
health and social care: it is import ant to recog nize that you may have a 
narrow view point, if you have no know ledge or exper i ence of other 
cultures. For example, you may have beliefs about bereave ment that are 
related to your own culture, or you may select research that was carried out 
in a culture similar to your own rather than looking for broader perspect-
ives on the topic.
• A will ing ness to engage with students and profes sion als from over-
seas who may be working with you: there are likely to be many differ-
ences between your own and their prac tices. Promote posit ive debate about 
why these differ ences exist, and encour age an atmo sphere where people 
can learn ‘with, from and about’ each other, sharing good prac tice.
• A will ing ness to reflect upon and think crit ic ally about how your 
beliefs and values influ ence your profes sional decision- making: 
acknow ledge that your beliefs will be influ enced by many factors, includ ing 
your culture, gender, age, and social and economic circum stances – be 
prepared to ques tion and chal lenge them.
• An open ness to new ideas and perspect ives from a diverse range of 
people: be willing to actively listen to differ ent view points and theor ies and 
to consider their merits, even when they are differ ent from your own. For 
example, when research ing a topic, you could consider pieces of research 
undertaken in a variety of cultures, to compare these with what you find in 
your own culture.
• The ability and will ing ness to work effect ively in envir on ments that 
are inter na tional and inter cul tural in nature – devel op ing skills to work 
effect ively with people from differ ent cultures and nation al it ies and care 
sens it ively for people from differ ent cultures and nation al it ies.
• The ability to inter pret local prob lems within a broad, inter na tional 
and inter cul tural context, taking into account differ ent perspect ives in 
rela tion to issues and prob lems.
• A broader ques tion ing approach, includ ing:
– Questioning what you read, see or hear, taking into account the cultural 
influ ences, the setting and/or other poten tial back ground influ ences.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

148 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
– The ability and will ing ness to recog nize and to ques tion your own and 
others’ poten tial agendas and biases.
Broadening your hori zons in health and social 
care in your academic work and prac tice
Thinking crit ic ally about health and social care issues from a wider view point 
can help you to gain new perspect ives and develop your own and others’ prac-
tice. It could also lead to higher grades in your academic work.
Linking to broader perspect ives in your academic work
Depending on the focus of your studies, ways to link to broader perspect ives 
in your academic work may include:
• Consideration of the issues raised earlier in this chapter within your 
academic work:
– Advances in inform a tion access and commu nic a tion tech no logy.
– Increasing diversity of popu la tions.
– Limitations in finan cial and mater ial resources to provide health and 
social care.
– Inequalities in health and social well- being.
– Political changes.
– Environmental issues.
– Globalization.
• Researching for inform a tion from differ ent discip lines and special ist areas 
that are relev ant to your field of prac tice or your area of academic focus, in 
order to identify differ ent factors that can impact on health and social care 
issues – see the two frame works above by Woolliams (2007) and Dahlgren 
and Whitehead (1993).
• Researching for inform a tion/research from differ ent cultures and back-
grounds, includ ing from differ ent coun tries that you might not normally 
access, to take into account wider perspect ives on your topic.
• Networking with people such as prac ti tion ers, special ists, profes sion als 
and academ ics working in your own and other fields, speci al it ies and 
discip lines, or who are working in differ ent settings, whose expert ise may 
contrib ute to your area of interest (see later in the chapter for more inform-
a tion on this).
• Accessing as appro pri ate a wide range of liter at ure and research relev ant 
to your topic, to take account of broader perspect ives.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 149
Bearing in mind the above sugges tions, consider what approach you might 
use to research the follow ing ques tion:
What strategies can be used to prevent depres sion in older people 
within the UK?
Your initial thoughts may have included the follow ing:
• Accessing stat ist ics on the preval ence of depres sion in older people within 
the UK – for example, National Statistics website; search ing for inform a-
tion in journ als/text books.
• Carrying out a system atic search for text books/journal articles on the causes 
of depres sion in older people, using the strategies outlined in Chapter 3.
• Carrying out a system atic search for text books/journal articles on strategies 
for the preven tion of depres sion in older people in the UK, includ ing 
relev ant policy and guidelines, using the strategies outlined in Chapter 3.
• Carrying out a search for relev ant websites that may provide high- quality 
inform a tion on the topic, such as those belong ing to Age UK, MIND, the 
Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE) and the Department of Health.
Did you think of any other strategies for search ing for inform a tion, or any 
other poten tial sources of inform a tion on this topic? If so, what were they?
Now think more crit ic ally about strategies you could use to broaden your 
search to gain a better perspect ive on the topic of the preven tion of depres-
sion in older people within the UK. You could use the two frame works by 
Woolliams (2007) and Dahlgren and Whitehead (1993) to help you think 
about this.
There are many sources of inform a tion that you could refer to in rela tion to 
the subject of the preven tion of depres sion in older people in the UK. Alongside 
the ideas listed above, you could take a broader approach to your search – 
you may have thought of some ideas already. Some ques tions that might be 
useful to ask in order to gain a broader perspect ive are:
• How does the preval ence of depres sion in older people in the UK compare 
with that in other coun tries glob ally?
• How does the preval ence of depres sion in older people vary between 
differ ent cultural and social groups within the UK? Why might this vari-
ation exist?
Bearing in mind the above sugges tions, consider what approach you might 
use to research the follow ing ques tion:
What strategies can be used to prevent depres sion in older people 
within the UK?
Now think more crit ic ally about strategies you could use to broaden your 
search to gain a better perspect ive on the topic of the preven tion of depres-
sion in older people within the UK. You could use the two frame works by
K
Woolliams (2007) and Dahlgren and Whitehead (1993) to help you think 
about this.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

150 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• Do any cultures have a signi fic antly higher or lower rate of depres sion in 
older people than others and, if so, why might that be?
• Are there any strategies that are used success fully in other cultures and 
coun tries for prevent ing depres sion and promot ing well- being in older 
people? Could these be applied success fully, or adapted, within the UK?
• Why might the preval ence of depres sion vary between differ ent coun tries 
or cultural groups, and what factors may contrib ute to these vari ations?
• What policies and guidelines does the current UK govern ment promote? 
Has this changed, or is it likely to with a change in govern ment?
• Do any other coun tries have active programmes for prevent ing depres sion 
in older people? If so, what do they consist of, and how effect ive are they? 
Could they be applied success fully, or adapted, within the UK?
• What factors beyond your own special ist area of know ledge might be 
import ant to consider – medical factors, social factors, economic factors, 
envir on mental factors, polit ical factors? How could you search for inform-
a tion on these?
You will, of course, need to crit ic ally appraise and analyse all the stat ist ics 
and sources that you read – for example, stat ist ics on depres sion might not 
be collec ted and monitored in the same way in differ ent coun tries, so it’s 
import ant to analyse them very care fully. Nevertheless, you may find enlight-
en ing inform a tion that could help you to view the topic in a differ ent way. This 
broader approach could help you to widen your perspect ives, leading to new 
ideas that you could apply to your own and others’ prac tice, your academic 
work and future research.
Taking a broader perspect ive will involve think ing about search ing for 
inform a tion from a broader range of sources. However, you need to ensure 
that that you keep focused on your topic or ques tion, as high lighted in 
Chapter 4.
Having read the above section, now consider the wider range of strategies 
you could use to research one of the follow ing ques tions:
What are the causes of child hood obesity?
or
What might be effect ive strategies for promot ing smoking cessa tion in 
young adults?
Taking a broader perspect ive will involve think ing about search ing for 
inform a tion from a broader range of sources. However, you need to ensure 
that that you keep focused on your topic or ques tion, as high lighted in 
Chapter 4.
Having read the above section, now consider the wider range of strategies 
you could use to research one of the follow ing ques tions:
What are the causes of child hood obesity?
or
What might be effect ive strategies for promot ing smoking cessa tion in
young adults?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 151
You should have discovered that you can really expand the breadth of inform-
a tion you use in order to gain a broader perspect ive on the topics you address. 
We will now offer another way you can widen your hori zons – by network ing.
Networking
As well as asking broader ques tions about your topic, you can also widen your 
know ledge and perspect ives relat ing to a topic by making links with health 
care prac ti tion ers, research ers and service users based in differ ent discip-
lines, profes sions, speci al it ies, cultures and coun tries. These people may be 
able and willing to share their ideas and perspect ives with you in order to shed 
more light on the issue you are invest ig at ing.
You will find many oppor tun it ies to commu nic ate with people in order to 
share ideas and perspect ives on topics related to health and social care, on a 
formal and informal basis, as discussed earlier in this chapter. Thanks to the 
inter net, it is now easier than ever to contact people anywhere in the world to 
seek their expert know ledge and perspect ives. Even if you are unable to meet 
face to face with people easily, for example, by attend ing confer ences and 
meet ings, you can still use other means such as through Skype, email groups, 
wikis, or joining an online discus sion forum.
Within your own discip line, specialty or area of interest, you may have 
oppor tun it ies to join specific networks. For example:
• For details of some inter na tional nursing research networks, see http://
www.rcn.org.uk/devel op ment/research_and_innov a tion/networks/
overarch ing_- _europe_and_inter na tional.
• For details of an inter na tional social work network, see www.socialworknet work.
com/home.php.
Many profes sional bodies have interest groups that you can join, and these 
can provide the start ing point for discus sions and useful exchange of inform-
a tion and ideas. You may also wish to make more perman ent links with other 
academ ics and profes sion als, for example, estab lish ing exchange schemes 
with people working in differ ent health care systems and differ ent discip lines, 
so that you can learn with, from and about each other’s areas of expert ise, 
sharing good prac tice.
What discip lines and subject areas could help you to broaden your perspect-
ives in rela tion to your areas of interest/expert ise in health and social care?
You may have thought of some or all of the follow ing: philo sophy, ethics, 
psycho logy, soci ology, life sciences, econom ics, polit ics, geography, envir on-
mental sciences, forensic medi cine, child protec tion, and so on. You will be 
What discip lines and subject areas could help you to broaden your perspect-
ives in rela tion to your areas of interest/expert ise in health and social care?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

152 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
able to think of others. Sometimes, there fore, you may need to widen your 
search strategy to look for relev ant inform a tion from these discip lines 
and subject areas. You could also consider approach ing experts in these 
fields.
The bene fits of network ing: a case study
John is an exper i enced nurse special iz ing in derma to logy (skin care). He has 
a partic u lar interest in the preven tion of skin cancers related to sun expos ure. 
He has had the oppor tun ity to develop his know ledge and skills in a variety 
of ways:
• 
He has joined a derma to logy interest group in his local area, linking with 
other profes sion als with an interest in this topic. They hold regular meet-
ings where they share their know ledge and exper i ences, and have an 
inter net discus sion forum through which they can commu nic ate ideas 
and inform a tion.
• 
He is a member of a national derma to logy forum open to prac ti tion ers, 
academ ics and research ers inter ested in this topic. They hold regular 
meet ings and an annual national confer ence where they can share their 
know ledge, ideas and exper i ences.
• 
He is able to contact profes sion als and academ ics working in the field 
of derma to logy through out the world on a day- to- day basis through a 
variety of means, includ ing emails, online discus sion forums and by 
phone.
• 
He is also a member of an inter na tional derma to logy research forum, 
whose website is updated regu larly with the latest devel op ments in 
research in his special ist field. Every other year, John goes to an inter-
na tional confer ence organ ized by this forum, where he can network with 
profes sion als from all over the world.
• 
John can access inform a tion via a variety of journ als, both national and 
inter na tional, to update his know ledge.
• 
He has a link with a research centre based in a hospital in Australia that 
special izes in preven tion and treat ment of skin cancers. John has visited 
the centre three times over the past 10 years, to learn from their good 
prac tice and to share his know ledge and exper i ence.
• 
He also has a link with a hospital in Africa where he has set up an 
exchange system between their team and his own – they share ideas for 
how to prevent and treat skin cancers, and benefit from each other’s 
know ledge, exper i ence and ideas.
• 
John has a devel op ing interest in the impact of genetic factors on the 
incid ence of skin cancer glob ally, and he is involved in research on this 
topic with colleagues in the UK, Africa and Australia. The team members 
have fed back their initial find ings to the various forums and interest 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 153
groups they are involved with locally, nation ally and glob ally. They have 
written a variety of papers on the preven tion of skin cancer aimed at a 
global audi ence, which has led to posit ive changes in the preven tion of 
skin cancer at many levels, and new approaches to research ing the 
issues related to this topic.
John’s example illus trates how an indi vidual health or social care prac ti tioner 
can incor por ate broader, global perspect ives within their prac tice, poten tially 
linking these to their studies and research. This can poten tially lead to changes 
in prac tice and theory at a variety of levels and requires a creat ive and ques-
tion ing approach to prac tice and research, and open ness to altern at ive ideas 
and perspect ives.
The impact of crit ical think ing on the devel op ment of prac tice
To sum up the ideas within this chapter, we will conclude with a very short and 
simple case study that illus trates the poten tial bene fits of crit ical think ing, 
combined with broader perspect ives in rela tion to health and social care.
Case study
A motiv ated inter- profes sional team of health and social care profes sion als 
was involved in running a large nursing home for the long- term care of older 
people with demen tia. Some staff felt increas ingly concerned by the number 
of clients who appeared to be bored and rest less during the daytime. Client 
and carer surveys sugges ted a low level of satis fac tion with care in rela tion 
to the mental stim u la tion of clients in the home.
The team decided to explore how they could improve the care offered. Their 
lead manager was fully support ive of their plans, and encour aged them to 
take some time to work on this project, as well as offer ing a small amount of 
finan cial support.
The approach the team decided to take was as follows:
• 
First, they met together, along with client and carer repres ent at ives, and 
with an expert in demen tia care who was based at their local univer sity. 
They shared their initial concerns, and discussed their ideas for how 
they could enhance the care on offer. Each person present discussed 
how he or she felt they could contrib ute to the project.
• 
Two members of the team offered to carry out a thor ough search for 
research, articles and reports high light ing recom mend a tions for good 
prac tice. Through this they iden ti fied a variety of sources of inform a tion, 
which they crit ic ally appraised in order to decide which sources were 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

154 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
relev ant to their setting. They put together a summary of the key find-
ings of their review to present to the team.
• 
Other members of the team joined an inter na tional online discus sion 
forum for profes sion als caring for people with demen tia. They posted a 
request for sugges tions for improv ing their prac tice. A lively debate 
ensued, and as a result they engaged in live discus sions with profes-
sion als working in a variety of coun tries, includ ing the USA, Bolivia, 
India and Sweden. They received some construct ive sugges tions from 
all of these people, who sugges ted many ideas for how they could 
enhance client care, for example:
 
Involving clients in day- to- day activ it ies around the home.
 
Staff, clients and carers sharing meal times, to promote more social 
inter ac tion.
 
Using new approaches for assess ing clients’ interests and past 
histor ies in more depth.
 
Using simple ways to engage clients such as the use of music, 
talking books, etc.; the staff were given useful inform a tion about 
how to access good resources.
 
Using a variety of simple strategies to commu nic ate with clients 
more effect ively.
 
Suggestions were made for how to encour age the local community 
to become more engaged with people living in the home.
 
Suggestions were made for how to decor ate and lay out the home 
in order to enhance clients’ sense of freedom, while maxim iz ing 
their safety.
A year after the first meeting, having intro duced these ideas and others, care 
in the home had improved so signi fic antly that it had become a model for 
good prac tice in the local area. Staff from other homes in the region visited 
to learn from their expert ise. One member of the team sugges ted that they 
should write an account of the changes they had made, linking to relev ant 
liter at ure, and making recom mend a tions for other profes sion als contem-
plat ing similar changes. The public a tion of this article in a social care journal 
led to further devel op ments: staff members working in the home were invited 
to assist in a Department of Health working party aiming to formu late new 
stand ards for demen tia care through out the UK.
One of the people they had been in contact with, who was based in Sweden, 
asked to visit their home, and an exchange was then arranged. As a result, 
one of the team had the oppor tun ity to visit some care homes in Sweden. 
She was able to compare their approaches and share ideas for good prac-
tice. While in Sweden, she also gave a present a tion at a confer ence for 
health and social care profes sion als, to dissem in ate good prac tice, and at 
the confer ence she had the oppor tun ity to attend other present a tions and 
learn from demen tia care special ists based in differ ent parts of Europe.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 155
In the years follow ing this, the team contin ued to develop their prac tice. They 
were keen to continue to improve their care, and did not ‘rest on their laurels’. 
One member of the team left to set up a consultancy busi ness, with the aim 
of helping similar homes to enhance their care. As new members of staff 
joined the home, they fed in their ideas for how to improve and develop care 
further. The manager contin ued to foster an open atmo sphere where staff 
members were encour aged to develop their know ledge and to share their 
ideas for good prac tice, and also to chal lenge each other’s prac tice in a 
posit ive and construct ive manner.
This case study high lights the value of working with others who are prepared 
to chal lenge their own and others’ prac tice, and illus trates the poten tial 
posit ive effects of think ing crit ic ally and seeking ideas from a broader 
perspect ive when analys ing one’s prac tice. It also shows that academic 
research feeds into the process of chan ging prac tice. It can be extremely 
fruit ful to look further afield beyond one’s usual sources of support and 
inform a tion to gain new perspect ives on an issue or problem.
‘Top tips’ for broad en ing your perspect ives in rela tion to your prac tice and 
your academic work
• 
Look beyond the reading list: don’t restrict your reading to what is in 
your reading list! Read more broadly in rela tion to your topic and, where 
appro pri ate, look for inform a tion and research from other discip lines, 
other speci al it ies, other coun tries and other profes sions.
• 
Ask broader ques tions of what you read, see and hear: use the ‘Six 
ques tions for crit ical think ing’ from Chapter 1 and the ‘Questions for 
crit ical think ing in prac tice’ from Chapter 5 as a basis to help you 
consider the follow ing ques tions:
 
Are there any altern at ive perspect ives/view points in rela tion to the 
topic/issue you are focus ing on?
 
What have differ ent authors/research ers/prac ti tion ers/theor ists 
said – within your own profes sion/setting/speci al ity and in other 
profes sions/settings/speci al it ies?
 
What are your own thoughts and ideas, having read differ ent 
perspect ives in research and liter at ure?
 
Do any ethical issues need to be considered? Would the same 
ethical issues apply else where (e.g. in other coun tries or settings)?
 
What can you learn from approaches used in other coun tries and 
cultures?
 
What can you learn from research carried out in other coun tries and 
cultures?
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

156 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
• 
Where appro pri ate, look at broader perspect ives related to health and 
social care: social, economic, polit ical and/or cultural.
• 
Look at other work from other discip lines/speci al it ies to see what they 
have to say about the issues you are research ing.
• 
Become more self- aware: try to become more aware of your own values, 
atti tudes, beliefs and biases, and think about how these may impact on 
your think ing and your prac tice.
• 
Make links with other prac tice areas/speci al it ies: locally, region ally, 
nation ally, glob ally – share ideas, learn ‘with, from and about’ others’ 
approaches to prac tice issues, includ ing models of health and social care.
• 
Discuss issues with peers and colleagues, at local level and more 
widely: this will help you to chal lenge the taken- for- granted assump-
tions, beliefs and values that you hold, and to share ideas for devel-
op ing theory and prac tice.
• 
Consider whether there may be altern at ive ways of viewing/
approach ing the issue or problem you are looking at: consider your own 
thoughts, your colleagues’ and peers’ perspect ives, and those of 
authors and research ers.
• 
Continually ques tion your know ledge, values and assump tions.
The import ance of people exchan ging ideas and valuing altern at ive 
perspect ives to their own cannot be under es tim ated, and we believe that this 
is the key to devel op ment of prac tice and the promo tion of posit ive changes in 
health and social care. Professionals should be equipped to be flex ible, 
creat ive and innov at ive thinkers in order to solve prob lems through ques-
tion ing. Critical thinkers are more likely to engage in product ive and posit ive 
activ ity due to their continual ques tion ing of their know ledge, assump tions 
and perspect ives.
Brookfield (2012) suggests that crit ical think ing takes place when we do 
four things:
• Hunt assump tions – we need to try to uncover the assump tions that influ-
ence the way we think and act – often these assump tions are not as accur ate 
as we think they may be, and we need to try to identify what they are.
• Check assump tions – once we are aware of the assump tions that influ-
ence our actions and think ing, we need to assess whether they are valid and 
reli able guides for action. We there fore need to look for evid ence, through 
our exper i ences, through others’ guid ance, or through cred ible research/
inform a tion.
• See things from differ ent view points – we need to try to see our assump-
tions/actions from differ ent points of view – what might other people think 
about this ques tion/issue? Sometimes it’s import ant to try and see ourselves 
as others might view us.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

SHAPING THE FUTURE 157
• Take informed action – having done the three things above, we need to 
review our actions and take new approaches that are based on convin cing 
evid ence, so that we can explain and justify our actions/choices/decisions 
to others.
Critical think ing enables profes sion als to chal lenge their own and others’ 
beliefs and habits, and not take things for granted. A crit ical thinker will look 
to broader perspect ives to help them develop their know ledge, prac tice and 
perspect ives. This curi os ity and open- minded ness will lead to a more 
reward ing and innov at ive approach both to your profes sional prac tice and to 
your academic studies.
It is import ant, however, to remem ber that crit ical think ing skills need to 
be developed over time, and do not always come easily. We hope that this 
book will help you as you set out on your journey as a crit ical thinker, in order 
to enhance your own and others’ prac tice in health and social care in the 
future.
In summary
In this chapter, we have explored why crit ical think ing is import ant for devel-
op ing a broader perspect ive in your personal, profes sional and academic life, 
noting that there is a need glob ally for creat ive and flex ible profes sion als who 
are able to think crit ic ally and respond effect ively to rapid change. We have 
discussed the many changes influ en cing health and social care in the twenty- 
first century, and explored how health and social care profes sion als can 
respond to these as crit ical thinkers. We have described the qual it ies and skills 
that are needed to think crit ic ally from a broader perspect ive in rela tion to 
health and social care. We have also discussed how you can broaden your 
hori zons through network ing with profes sion als and academ ics in differ ent 
discip lines, profes sions and special ist fields.
Key points
1 Thinking crit ic ally and taking a broad perspect ive when analys ing theory or 
prac tice in rela tion to health and social care issues can lead to posit ive 
devel op ments to your own and others’ prac tice, at local, national and much 
broader levels, as well as to the devel op ment of your academic skills.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

158 CRITICAL THINKING AND WRITING IN HEALTH AND SOCIAL CARE
2 Health and social care profes sion als need to be crit ical thinkers to be able to 
respond effect ively to the rapid changes occur ring in the twenty- first 
century. A broad perspect ive is required, taking into account the various 
factors impact ing on health and social care at local, regional, national and 
global levels.
3 There are key qual it ies and skills that will enable you to take a broader 
perspect ive in rela tion to your prac tice and your studies – in partic u lar flex-
ib il ity, creativ ity and respons ive ness to change.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Appendix: useful websites
All websites were access ible at the time of writing.
Agree Collaboration. An inter na tional collab or a tion of research ers and 
policy- makers who seek to improve the quality and effect ive ness of clin ical 
prac tice guidelines, by estab lish ing a shared frame work for their devel op-
ment, report ing and assess ment [http://www.agreetrust.org/]
Bad Science. Author Ben Goldacre discusses many of the myths about health 
and social care, espe cially those repor ted in the media [http://www.badscience.
net/]
Bandolier. A useful and easy- to- read inde pend ent journal on evid ence- based 
prac tice [www.medi cine.ox.ac.uk/bando lier]
Best Health. An evid ence- based patient website, based on the British Medical 
Journal’s Clinical Evidence. It explains chronic condi tions and rates the 
effect ive ness of treat ments. A subscrip tion is required for access to some 
inform a tion [http://besthealth.bmj.com/btuk/home.jsp]
British Broadcasting Corporation. (BBC) health news [http://www.bbc.
co.uk/news/health/]
Campbell Collaboration. The Campbell Collaboration is an inter na tional 
research network that produces system atic reviews of the effects of social 
inter ven tions [http://www.camp bellcol lab or a tion.org/]
Centre for Evidence- Based Medicine (CEBM). The aim is to provide all 
the tools, resources and learn ing oppor tun it ies asso ci ated with evid ence- 
based health care [www.cebm.net/]
Citizens Advice. Useful for a wide range of issues/advice [http://www.
citizensad vice.org.uk/]
Clinical Evidence. An inter na tional data base of high- quality, rigor ously 
developed system atic over views assess ing the bene fits and harms of treat-
ments, and a suite of evid ence- based medi cine resources and train ing mater-
i als [http://clin icalevid ence.bmj.com/ceweb/index.jsp]
Cochrane Collaboration. For system atic reviews, clin ical trials and other 
sources [www.cochrane.org]
159
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

160 APPENDIX
Cochrane Collaboration Glossary. Provides explan a tions and defin i tions 
of research terms [http://www.cochrane.org/gloss ary]
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme (CASP) International. The CASP 
International Network (CASPin) is an inter na tional collab or a tion that 
supports the teach ing and learn ing of crit ical appraisal skills, and in partic-
u lar helps other people set up sustain able train ing programmes [http://www.
caspin ter na tional.org/]
Critical Thinking Community. The Center for Critical Thinking works 
under the auspices of the Foundation for Critical Thinking, an educa tional 
non- profit organ iz a tion, to promote essen tial change in educa tion and society 
through the cultiv a tion of fair- minded crit ical think ing. There are a variety of 
resources and web links but do check the date of some of them [http://www.
crit ic al think ing.org/]
Critical Thinking on the Web. A direct ory of quality online resources [http://
austhink.com/crit ical/pages/defin i tions.html]
Department of Health. Access to national guid ance, bench mark ing stand-
ards and policy relat ing to health care [www.dh.gov.uk/en/index.htm]
DISCERN. Ascertains the quality of written inform a tion on treat ment choices 
[www.discern.org.uk]
Evidence- based Answers to Clinical Questions for Busy Clinicians. A 
work book published in 2009 by The Centre for Clinical Effectiveness, Southern 
Health, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia [www.south ernhealth.org.au/icms_
docs/2145_EBP_work book.pdf]
Evidence Search: Health and Social Care [www.evid ence.nhs.uk/default.
aspx]. NICE Evidence Services are a suite of services that provide inter net 
access to high quality author it at ive evid ence and best prac tice. The services 
cover health, social care and public health evid ence. Evidence Services aims 
to help profes sion als make better and quicker evid ence- based decisions. 
NICE Evidence Services consists of the follow ing six resources:
• 
Evidence Search, which provides free open access to a unique index 
of selec ted and author it at ive health and social care evid ence- based 
inform a tion.
• 
Healthcare Database Advanced Search (HDAS), which provides access 
to an extens ive set of journ als and bibli o graphic data bases. These are 
purchased by NICE on behalf of the NHS.
• 
Clinical Knowledge Summaries (CKS), which provide primary care prac ti-
tion ers with access to evid ence- based guid ance on over 300 key condi-
tions present ing in primary care.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

APPENDIX 161
• 
BNF micros ite, which provides open access to British National Formulary 
content across the UK.
• 
UK DUETS, a data base of Evidence Uncertainties that provides research 
funders and research ers access to the ‘known unknowns’ in the evid-
ence base.
• 
Bulletins, Alerts and Evidence, an aware ness service that helps busy 
profes sion als keep up to date with import ant new evid ence.
Foundation for Critical Thinking. A range of video clips on YouTube from 
key 
authors 
in 
crit ical 
think ing 
[https://www.youtube.com/user/
CriticalThinkingOrg]
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC). [http://www.hcpc- uk
.org.uk/]
Health and Social Care Information Centre (HSCIC). The trusted 
national provider of high- quality inform a tion, data and IT systems for health 
and social care [http://www.hscic.gov.uk/]
Health Information Research Unit (HIRU). Conducts research in the 
field of health inform a tion science and is dedic ated to the gener a tion of new 
know ledge about the nature of health and clin ical inform a tion prob lems. 
Based at the Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics Department at McMaster 
University, Canada, the unit conducts research in the field of health inform a-
tion science [http://hiru.mcmas ter.ca/hiru]
Internet for Health and Social Care. Designed to help univer sity students 
develop their inter net research skills [http://www.vtstutori als.co.uk/tutorial/
healthand so cial care]
Joanna Briggs Institute. Designed to provide you with the best avail able 
evid ence to inform your clin ical decision- making at the point of care [http://
joan nab riggs.org/]
Mind Tools. A range of inform a tion includ ing SWOT analysis [http://www.
mindtools.com/pages/article/newTMC_05.htm]
National Guideline Clearinghouse. A public resource for evid ence- based 
clin ical prac tice guidelines [www.guideline.gov]
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). An inde-
pend ent organ iz a tion respons ible for provid ing national guid ance on promot ing 
good health and prevent ing and treat ing ill health [www.nice.org.uk]
NHS Centre for Reviews and Dissemination. Provides research- based 
inform a tion about the effects of health and social care inter ven tions via its 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

162 APPENDIX
data bases, and under takes system atic reviews eval u at ing the research evid-
ence on health and public health ques tions of national and inter na tional 
import ance [http://www.york.ac.uk/inst/crd/]
NHS Choices. Information on condi tions and healthy living for the public 
[http://www.nhs.uk/Pages/HomePage.aspx]
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC). [www.nmc- uk.org]
Patient.co.uk. One of the most trusted medical resources online, supply ing 
evid ence- based inform a tion on a wide range of medical and health topics to 
patients and health profes sion als [http://www.patient.co.uk/]
Patient opinion. Patient Opinion is about honest and mean ing ful conver sa-
tions between patients and health services. They believe that patients’ stories 
can help make health services better [https://www.patien topin ion.org.uk/]
Social Care Online. The UK’s largest data base of inform a tion and research 
on all aspects of social care and social work [http://www.scie- social careon-
line.org.uk/]
Text 2 Mind Map. A free online mind- mapping programme [https://www.
text2mindmap.com/]
WeNurses. Twitter- based site that hosts ‘chats’ and has a ‘twit terversity’ to 
help those new to Twitter. Various profes sion als engage with this [http://www.
wenurses.co.uk/]
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Glossary
Abstract: A short summary of what a paper is about, usually printed at the 
begin ning of the paper.
Accountable: To be answer able for your acts and your omis sions.
Analysis: Breaking down a concept or an exper i ence into parts.
Anecdotal evid ence: Where personal opinion or inform a tion not based on 
proven facts is used as evid ence.
Best avail able evid ence: This is evid ence that is found through a 
profes sional data base search. It will depend on the ques tion you are 
asking.
Campbell Collaboration: A world wide collab or a tion that commis sions and 
main tains system atic reviews in social care.
Case control study: A study in which people with a specific condi tion (cases) 
are compared with people without this condi tion (controls) to determ ine 
the frequency of occur rence of the expos ure that might have caused the 
condi tion.
Cochrane Collaboration: A world wide collab or a tion that commis sions and 
main tains system atic reviews in health care.
Cohort study: A study in which two or more groups or cohorts are followed 
up to examine whether expos ures meas ured at the begin ning lead to 
outcomes, such as disease.
Confidence inter vals: Confidence inter vals are usually (but arbit rar ily) 95 
percent confid ence inter vals. A reas on able, though strictly incor rect inter-
pret a tion is that the 95 percent confid ence inter val gives the range in which 
the popu la tion effect lies. A wide confid ence inter val implies a lack of 
certainty or preci sion about the true popu la tion effect and is commonly 
found in studies with too few parti cipants.
Critical analysis: Where you break down or explore in depth all the inform-
a tion avail able relat ing to an issue or ques tion. This may involve explor ing 
what is happen ing and the reasons why. You may need to consider and 
access altern at ive perspect ives includ ing theory.
Critical appraisal: Where you consider the strengths and limit a tions of each 
piece of evid ence you use.
Critical incident technique: When a significant is explored and analysed in 
order to improve decision-making and promote learning (see also critical 
analysis).
163
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

164 GLOSSARY
Critical think ing: Where you adopt a ques tion ing approach and thought ful 
atti tude to what you read, see or hear, rather than accept ing things at face 
value. It relates to both academic work and profes sional prac tice.
Database: Subject- specific data bases hold the refer ences for, and often the 
abstracts or full text for, journal articles and many other texts, for which 
you can search using key words.
Debriefing: A structured facilitated approach often following stressful 
experiences. It can involve exploring coping strategies and lessons learned.
Description: Where inform a tion is given (verbally or in writing) in a factual 
manner.
Descriptive stat ist ics: Statistics such as means, medians and stand ard devi-
ations that describe aspects of the data, such as central tend ency (mean or 
median) or its disper sion (stand ard devi ation).
Discussion paper: A paper present ing an argu ment or discus sion.
Dissertation: A docu ment present ing the method and the main find ings from 
a piece of academic work.
Essay: A short piece of academic writing on a selec ted topic.
Ethnography: A qual it at ive research approach that involves the study of the 
culture or way of life of parti cipants.
Evaluation: Judging and forming opinion, based on a sound argu ment – this 
involves the appraisal of inform a tion or evid ence.
Evidence- based prac tice: Practice that is suppor ted by clear reas on ing, 
taking into account the patient’s or client’s pref er ences and using your own 
judge ment.
Experiential knowledge: Knowledge gained by experience.
Experimental research: A study designed to test whether a treat ment or 
inter ven tion is effect ive.
Explanation: When using an explan at ory style of writing or present ing, you 
provide justi fic a tion or reasons for your actions, views and argu ments.
Generalizability: Where the find ings from a research study can be applied in 
other contexts.
Grounded theory: Qualitative research approach that involves the gener a-
tion of theory.
Guideline: A system at ic ally developed state ment to assist prac ti tion ers in the 
deliv ery of evid ence- based care.
Hierarchy of evid ence: Strong evid ence is at the top of the hier archy and 
weaker evid ence is at the bottom. Classifications as to what counts as 
strong evid ence vary accord ing to what you are endeav our ing to find out.
Inferential stat ist ics: Statistics that are used to infer find ings from the 
sample popu la tion to the wider popu la tion, usually meaning stat ist ical tests.
Inquisitive and open minded: Aspects of critical thinking.
Intervention: An activ ity that intends to improve or effect health or social 
care outcomes.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

GLOSSARY 165
Journal: An academic public a tion in which research ers publish their research.
Key words: Terms used when search ing that repres ent the focus of the topic 
you wish to study.
Literature review: A collec tion of evid ence on a partic u lar topic (see 
systematic review).
Medical subject headings (MeSH): A thesaurus of medical terms used to 
index medical inform a tion in some data bases.
Mixed methods research: Research which incorporates qualitative and 
quantitative research.
Narrative review: A liter at ure review that is not under taken accord ing to a 
predefined and system atic approach.
Null hypothesis: A hypothesis stated in a neutral language, i.e. ‘there is no 
difference between . . .’
Open access journals: Journals which are freely available online rather than 
through an academic library.
p values: The p (prob ab il ity) value is the prob ab il ity of observing results 
more extreme than those observed if the null hypo thesis were true.
Peer review: The process by which experts in a subject area are invited to 
review the academic work of an author, often prior to public a tion in a 
journal.
Phenomenology: Qualitative research approach in which the parti cipants’ 
‘lived exper i ence’ is explored.
PICOT: Acronym whose initials repres ent Population, Intervention/Issue, 
Comparison/Context, Outcome and Time – some times shortened to PICO.
Professional judge ment: The eval u ation of inform a tion/evid ence and the 
extent it is relev ant to the care of your patients/clients. The end result of 
profes sional judge ment is usually a decision.
Qualitative research: Generally uses inter views to explore the exper i ence or 
meaning of an issue in depth. The results are presen ted as words.
Quantitative research: Generally used to explore if some thing is effect ive or 
not, or is used to measure the amount of some thing. Results are gener ally 
presen ted using numbers or stat ist ics.
Questionnaires/surveys: Studies in which a sample is taken at any one point 
in time from a defined group of people and observed/assessed.
Randomization: The process of alloc at ing indi vidu als randomly to groups, 
usually in a random ized controlled trial.
Randomized controlled trial (RCT): A trial involving randomly assigned 
groups in order to determ ine the effect ive ness of an inter ven tion(s) given to 
one (or more) of the groups.
Rationale: Where you give clear reasons for your prac tice decisions or 
actions.
Readily avail able inform a tion: Information that you encounter on an 
every day basis and do not need to look too hard for.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

166 GLOSSARY
Reflection: Reflection is about review ing an exper i ence in order to learn 
from it.
Research: The systematic study developed from a research question to find 
out new knowledge.
Research ques tion: A ques tion set by research ers at the outset of a study, to 
be addressed in the study (see PICOT).
Research study/primary study: A study under taken using a planned and 
meth od o lo gical approach.
Reviews of research: see Systematic review.
Sample: The parti cipants in a study.
Search strategy: A planned strategy to ensure a search is compre hens ive.
Snowballing: A method of finding more liter at ure by looking at the refer ence 
lists of papers you have found through a data base search.
Students/learners: Any indi vidual, pre- or post- qual i fy ing, under tak ing a 
course of study, either form ally or inform ally.
Systematic review: A very detailed liter at ure review that seeks to summar ize 
all avail able evid ence on a topic with clear explan a tions of the approach 
taken (meth od o logy). It is the most detailed type of review.
Transferability: In qual it at ive studies, the find ings may be used and inter-
preted by others, although the aim in qual it at ive research is not to 
gener al ize.
Truncation: The identification of a trunk of a word that is a stem for different 
words of similar meaning, e.g. nurs* (nurses/nursing/nurse).
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

References
All websites were access ible at the time of writing.
Action on Smoking and Health (2010) Smoking Rates: Adults [www.ashscot land.org.
uk/ash/4320].
Alcock, P. and May, M. (2014) Social Policy in Britain (4th edn.). Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan.
Atkins, S. and Schutz, S. (2013) Developing skills for reflect ive prac tice, in C. Bulman and 
S. Schutz (eds.) Reflective Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Aveyard, H. (2014) Doing a Literature Review in Health and Social Care (3rd edn.). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Aveyard, H. and Sharp, P. (2013) A Beginner’s Guide to Evidence Based Practice (2nd 
edn.). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Baldwin, A., Bentley, K., Langtree, T. and Mills, J. (2014) Achieving gradu ate outcomes 
in under gradu ate nursing educa tion: follow ing the Yellow Brick Road, Nurse 
Education in Practice, 14 (1): 9–11.
Bandura, A. (1965) Influence of models’ rein force ment contin gen cies on the acquis i tion 
of imit at ive responses, Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1 (6): 589–95.
Banning, M. (2008) A review of clin ical decision making: models and current research, 
Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17 (2): 187–95.
Barnett, R. (1997) Higher Education: A Critical Business. Buckingham: SRHE/Open 
University Press.
Barnett, R. (2000) Realizing the University in an Age of Supercomplexity. Buckingham: 
SRHE/Open University Press.
Barnett, R. (2004) Learning for an unknown future, Higher Education Research and 
Development, 23 (3): 247–56.
Baxter, S., Blank, L., Guillaume, L., Messina, J., Everson- Hock, E. and Burrows, J. (2010) 
Systematic Review of How to Stop Smoking in Pregnancy and Following Childbirth. 
Sheffield: University of Sheffield School of Health and Related Research.
Bender, J.L., Jimenez- Marroquin, M.C. and Jadad, A.R. (2011) Seeking support on 
Facebook: a content analysis of breast cancer groups, Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, 13 (1): e16.
Benner, P. (1984) From Novice to Expert. Menlo Park, CA: Addison- Wesley.
Blakemore, K. and Griggs, E. (2007) Social Policy: An Introduction (3rd edn.). 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Bolton, G. (2010) Reflective Practice: Writing and Professional Development (3rd edn.). 
London: Paul Chapman.
Bond, M. and Holland, S. (2010) Skills of Clinical Supervision for Nurses: A Practical 
Guide for Supervisees, Clinical Supervisors and Managers (Supervision in Context 
Series). Maidenhead: Open University Press.
167
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

168 REFERENCES
Booth, S. (2010) Pregnant and can’t give up smoking . . . despite son’s pleas and risks to 
unborn baby, Daily Record, 29 June [http://www.dailyre cord.co.uk/news/real- life/
preg nant- and- cant- give- up- smoking- 1062988].
Bourn, D., McKenzie, A. and Shiel, C. (2006) The Global University: The Role of the 
Curriculum. London: Development Education Association.
Bridges, D. (2000) Back to the future: the higher educa tion curriculum in the twenty- 
first century, Cambridge Journal of Education, 30 (1): 37–55.
British Association of Social Workers (BASW) (2012) The Code of Ethics for Social 
Workers: Statement of Principles. Birmingham: BASW.
Brookfield, S. (2012) Teaching for Critical Thinking: Tools and Techniques to Help 
Students Question Their Assumptions. San Francisco, CA: Jossey- Bass.
Brotherton, G. and Parker, S. (2008) Your Foundation in Health and Social Care. 
London: Sage.
Brunt, B.A. (2005) Critical think ing in nursing: an integ rated review, Journal of 
Continuing Education in Nursing, 36 (2): 60–7.
Bulman, C. (2013a) An intro duc tion to reflec tion, in C. Bulman and S. Schutz (eds.) 
Reflective Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Bulman, C. (2013b) Getting started on a journey with reflec tion, in C. Bulman and 
S. Schutz (eds.) Reflective Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Bulman, C. and Schutz, S. (eds.) (2013) Reflective Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). 
Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Bulman, C., Lathlean, J. and Gobbi, M. (2012) The concept of reflec tion in nursing: qual-
it at ive find ings on student and teacher perspect ives, Nurse Education Today, 32 (5): 
e8–13.
Bulman, C., Lathlean, J. and Gobbi, M. (2013) The process of teach ing and learn ing about 
reflec tion: research insights from profes sional nurse educa tion, Studies in Higher 
Education [http://www.tand fon line.com/doi/abs/10.1080/03075079.2013.777413].
Burnett, D. (2014) Hard to swallow: the world’s first drink able sunscreen, The Guardian, 
20 May [http://www.theguard ian.com/science/brain- flap ping/2014/may/20/hard- to- 
swallow- the- worlds- first- drink able- sunscreen].
Carter, B. (2013) Reflecting in groups, in C. Bulman and S. Schutz (eds.) Reflective 
Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Cases, M., Furlong, L.I., Albanell, J., Altman, R.B., Bellazzi, R., Boyer, S. et al. (2013) 
Improving data and know ledge manage ment to better integ rate health care and 
research, Journal of Internal Medicine, 274 (4): 321–8.
Castledine, G. (2010) Critical think ing is crucial, British Journal of Nursing, 19 (4): 271.
Commission on Social Determinants of Health (2008) Closing the Gap in a Generation: 
Health Equity through Action on the Social Determinants of Health. Final Report of 
the Commission on Social Determinants. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Cottrell, S. (2011) Critical Thinking Skills: Developing Effective Argument and 
Analysis. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Crawford, P., Brown, B., Kvangarsnes, M. and Gilbert, P. (2014) The design of compas-
sion ate care, Journal of Clinical Nursing (DOI: 10.1111/jocn.12632).
Dahlgren, G. and Whitehead, M. (1993) Policies and Strategies to Promote Health and 
Social Equity in Europe. Stockholm: Institute of Futures Studies.
Dahlgren, G. and Whitehead, M. (2007) European Strategies for Tackling Social 
Determinants of Inequities in Health: Levelling Up Part 2: Studies in Social and 
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

REFERENCES 169
Economic Determinants of Population Health, 3. Copenhagen: European Regional 
Office of the World Health Organization [http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/
pdf_file/0018/103824/E89384.pdf].
Dawes, M., Davies, P., Gray, A., Mant, J., Seers, K. and Snowball, R. (2005) Evidence Based 
Practice: A Primer for Health Care Professionals. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone.
Deer, B. (2011) Secrets of the MMR scare: The Lancet’s two days to bury bad news, 
British Medical Journal, 342: c7001.
Delany, C., Golding, C. and Bialocerkowski, A. (2013) Teaching for think ing in clin ical 
educa tion: making expli cit the think ing involved in allied health clin ical reas on ing, 
Focus on Health Professional Education: A Multi- discip lin ary Journal, 14 (2): 
44–56 
[http://www98.grif fith.edu.au/dspace/bitstream/handle/10072/56167/89314_1.
pdf?sequence=1].
Demicheli, V., Rivetti, A., Debalini, M.G. and Di Pietrantonj, C. (2012) Vaccines for 
measles, mumps and rubella in chil dren, Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 
2: CD004407.
Department of Health (2009) Religion or Belief: A Practical Guide for the NHS. London: 
Department of Health.
Department of Health (2010) Healthy Lives, Healthy People: Our Strategy for Public 
Health in England. London: Department of Health.
Driscoll, J. (2007) Practising Clinical Supervision: A Reflective Approach for 
Healthcare Professionals. Edinburgh: Baillière Tindall/Elsevier.
Dunphy, L., Proctor, G., Bartlett R., Haslam, M. and Wood, C. (2010) Reflections and 
learn ing from using action learn ing sets in a health care educa tion setting, Action 
Learning, Research and Practice, 7: 303–14.
Elliott, P. (2013) Moving from clin ical super vi sion to person- centred devel op ment: a 
paradigm, in M. Jasper, M. Rosser and G. Mooney (eds.) Professional Development, 
Reflection and Decision- Making in Nursing and Health Care (2nd edn.). Chichester: 
Wiley- Blackwell.
Facione, P.A. (1990) Critical Thinking: A Statement of Expert Consensus for Purposes 
of Educational Assessment and Instruction. Executive Summary ‘The Delphi 
Report’. Millbrae, CA: California Academic Press.
Facione, P.A. (2011) Think Critically. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Pearson Education.
Facione, P. (2013) Critical Thinking: What It Is and Why It Counts [http://www.insigh-
tassess ment.com/CT- Resources/Critical- Thinking- What- It- Is- and- Why- It- Counts].
Fawcett, T.J.N., Rhynas, S.J. and Fawcett, T. (2014) Re- finding the ‘human side’ of 
human factors in nursing: helping student nurses to combine person centered care 
with the rigours of patient safety, Nurse Education Today, 34 (9): 1238–41.
Felstead, I. (2013) Role model ling and students’ profes sional devel op ment, British 
Journal of Nursing, 22 (4): 223–7.
Flanagan, J.C. (1954) The crit ical incid ent tech nique, Psychological Bulletin, 51 (4): 
327–59.
Flood, L.S. and Robinia, K. (2014) Bridging the gap: strategies to integ rate classroom 
and clin ical learn ing, Nurse Education in Practice, 14: 329–32.
Forgie, S.E., Duff, J.P. and Shelley, R. (2013) Twelve tips for using Twitter as a learn ing 
tool in medical educa tion, Medical Teacher, 35 (1): 8–14.
Francis, R. (chair) (2013) Report of the Mid Staffordshire NHS Foundation Trust 
Public Inquiry. London: TSO.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

170 REFERENCES
Fraser, A.G. and Dunstan, F.D. (2010) On the impossib il ity of being expert, British 
Medical Journal, 341: c7126.
Gallacher, J. and Osborne, M. (2005) A Contested Landscape: International Perspectives 
on Diversity in Mass Higher Education. Leicester: National Institute for Adult and 
Continuing Education.
Gardner, L. (2012) From novice to expert: Benner’s legacy for nurse educa tion, Nurse 
Education Today, 32 (4): 339–40.
Gibbs, G. (1988) Learning by Doing: A Guide to Teaching and Learning Methods. 
Oxford: Further Education Unit, Oxford Polytechnic.
Gill, C.J., Phiri- Mazala, G., Guerina, N.G., Kasimba, J., Mulenga, C., MacLeod, W.B. et al. 
(2011) Effect of train ing tradi tional birth attend ants on neonatal mortal ity 
(Lufwanyama Neonatal Survival Project): random ised controlled study, British 
Medical Journal, 342: d346.
Goldacre, B. (2009) Bad Science. London: Harper Perennial.
Golding, C. (2011) Educating for crit ical think ing: thought- encour aging ques tions in a 
community of inquiry, Higher Education Research & Development (Special Issue: 
Critical Thinking in Higher Education), 30 (3): 357–70.
Goleman, D., Boyatzis, R. and McKee A. (2013) Primal Leadership: Unleashing the 
Power of Emotional Intelligence. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing.
Grajales, F.J., III, Sheps, S., Ho, K., Novak- Lauscher, H. and Eysenbach, G. (2014) Social 
media: a review and tutorial of applic a tions in medi cine and health care, Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, 16 (2): e13.
Greenway, K. (2014) Rituals in nursing: intra mus cu lar injec tions, Journal of Clinical 
Nursing (DOI: 10.1111/jocn.12627).
Hargreaves, J. and Page, L. (2013) Reflective Practice. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Harrison, G. and Melville, R. (2010) Rethinking Social Work in a Global World. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) (2012) Standards of Conduct, 
Performance and Ethics. London: HCPC [http://www.hcpc- uk.org/assets/docu-
ments/10003B6EStand ard sof con duct,perform ancean de th ics.pdf].
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) (2014) Raising and Escalating Concerns 
London: HCPC [http://www.hcpc- uk.org.uk/regis trants/rais ing con cerns/].
Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) (undated) Focus on Standards – Social 
Media Sites. London: HCPC [http://www.hcpc- uk.org/Assets/docu ments/100035B7 
Social_media_guid ance.pdf].
Held, D., McGrew, A., Goldblatt, D. and Perraton, J. (1999) What is Globalization? 
[www.polity.co.uk/global/what is g lob al iz a tion.asp; accessed 20 April 2011].
Helms, M.M. and Nixon, J. (2010) Exploring SWOT analysis – where are we now? A 
review of academic research from the last decade, Journal of Strategy and 
Management, 3 (3): 215–51.
Higgs, J. and Hunt, A. (1999) Rethinking the begin ning prac ti tioner: intro du cing the 
‘inter ac tional profes sional’, in J. Higgs and H. Edwards (eds.) Educating Beginning 
Practitioners: Challenges for Professional Education. Melbourne, VIC: Butterworth 
Heinemann.
Higher Education Academy/Health Sciences and Practice (HEA/HSP) (2005) Health 
Sciences and Practice: Nursing Student Employability Profile. London: Higher 
Education Academy/Health Sciences and Practice.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

REFERENCES 171
Holland, K. (2010) Culture, race and ethni city: explor ing the concepts, in K. Holland and 
C. Hogg, Cultural Awareness in Nursing and Health Care: An Introductory Text 
(2nd edn.). London: Hodder Arnold.
Hosie, A., Agar, M., Lobb, E., Davidson, P.M. and Phillips, J. (2014) Palliative care nurses’ 
recog ni tion and assess ment of patients with deli rium symp toms: a qual it at ive study 
using crit ical incid ent tech nique, International Journal of Nursing Studies, 51 (10): 
1353–65.
Househ, M. (2014) Empowering patients through social media: the bene fits and chal-
lenges, Health Informatics Journal, 20 (1): 50–8.
Huckabay, L.M. (2009) Clinical reasoned judge ment and the nursing process, Nursing 
Forum, 44 (2): 72–8.
Information Centre (2006) Statistics on Smoking: England, 2006 [http://www.hscic.
gov.uk/cata logue/PUB00662/smok- eng- 2006- rep.pdf].
Jasper, M. (2013) Beginning Reflective Practice (2nd edn.). Andover: Cengage Learning.
Jochemsen- van der Leeuw, R., van Dijk, N., van Etten- Jamaludin, F.S. and Wieringa- de 
Waard, M. (2013) The attrib utes of the clin ical trainer as a role model: a system atic 
review, Academic Medicine, 88 (1): 26–34.
Johns, C. (2010) Guided Reflection (2nd edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Kamhi, A.G. (2011) Balancing certainty and uncer tainty in clin ical prac tice, Language, 
Speech and Hearing in Schools, 15: 226–34.
Kedmey, D. (2014) Do mammo grams save lives? ‘Hardly’, a new study finds, Time 
Magazine, 12 February [http://time.com/7117/do- mammo grams- save- lives- hardly- a- 
new- study- finds/].
Keene, E.A., Hutton, N., Hall, B. and Ruston, C. (2010) Bereavement debrief ing sessions: 
an inter ven tion to support health care profes sion als in managing their grief after the 
death of a patient, Pediatric Nursing, 36 (4): 185–9.
Keogh, K. (2013) Nurses warned of discip lin ary risk over improper Facebook post ings, 
Nursing Standard, 27 (52): 7.
Kida, T. (2006) Don’t Believe Everything You Think: The Six Basic Mistakes We Make 
in Thinking. Amherst, NY: Prometheus.
Killam, L.A., Carter, L.M. and Graham, R. (2013) Facebook and issues of profes sion-
al ism in under gradu ate nursing educa tion: risky busi ness or risk worth taking?, 
International Journal of E- Learning and Distance Education, 27 (2) [http://www.
ijede.ca/index.php/jde/article/view/849/1514].
Lang, G.M., Beach, N.L., Patrician, P.A. and Martin, C. (2013) A cross- sectional study 
examin ing factors related to crit ical think ing in nursing, Journal for Nurses in 
Professional Development, 29 (1): 8–15.
Leung, E.Y.L., Tirlapur, S.A., Siasssakos, D. and Khan, K.S. (2013) #BlueJC: BJOG and 
Katherine Twining Network collab or ate to facil it ate post- public a tion peer review 
and enhance research liter acy via a Twitter journal club, BJOG: An International 
Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, 120 (6): 657–60.
Levati, S. (2014) Professional conduct among Registered Nurses in the use of online 
social network ing sites, Journal of Advanced Nursing, 70 (10): 2284–92.
Lovatt, A. (2014) Defining crit ical thoughts, Nurse Education Today, 34: 670–2.
Lumley, J., Chamberlain, C., Dowswell, T., Oliver, S., Oakley, L. and Watson, L. (2009) 
Interventions for promot ing smoking cessa tion during preg nancy, Cochrane 
Database of Systematic Reviews, 3: CD001055.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

172 REFERENCES
Lunn, J. (2008) Global perspect ives in higher educa tion: taking the agenda forward in 
the United Kingdom, Journal of Studies in International Education, 12 (3): 231–54.
Maclean, F., Jones, D., Carin- Levy, G. and Hunter, H. (2013) Understanding Twitter, 
British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 76 (6): 295–8.
Mann, K., Gordon, J. and MacLeod, A. (2009) Reflection and reflect ive prac tice in 
health profes sions: a system atic review, Advances in Health Science Education, 14: 
595–621.
McCormack, B., Kim Manley, K. and Titchen, A. (eds.) (2013) Practice Development in 
Nursing and Healthcare (2nd edn.). Oxford: Wiley.
Melhuish, E., Belsky, J. and Leyland, A. (2010) The Impact of Sure Start Local Programmes 
on Five Year Olds and Their Families. London: Birkbeck, University of London, 
Department of Education [www.ness.bbk.ac.uk/impact/docu ments/RR067.pdf].
Miller, A.B., Wall, C., Baines, C.J., Sun, P., To, T. and Narod, S.A. (2014) Twenty five 
year follow- up for breast cancer incid ence and mortal ity of the Canadian National 
Breast Screening Study: random ised screen ing trial, British Medical Journal, 
348: g366.
Moore, T. (2013) Critical think ing: seven defin i tions in search of a concept, Studies in 
Higher Education, 38 (4): 506–22.
Morrall, P. and Goodman, B. (2013) Critical think ing, nurse educa tion and univer sit ies: 
some thoughts on current issues and implic a tions for nursing prac tice, Nurse 
Education Today, 33 (9): 935–7.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) (2010) Quitting Smoking in 
Pregnancy and Following Childbirth: Quick Reference Guide. London: NICE.
Nicolini, D., Powell, J., Conville, P. and Martinez- Solano, L. (2008) Managing know ledge 
in the health care sector: a review, International Journal of Management Reviews, 
10 (3): 245–63.
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) (2010) Essential Skills Clusters [http://stand-
ards.nmc- uk.org/PublishedDocuments/Annexe%203%20- %20Essential%20skills%20
cluster%20and%20guidance%2020100916.pdf].
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) (2013a) Raising Concerns: Guidance for 
Nurses and Midwives. London: NMC [http://www.nmc- uk.org/Nurses- and- midwives/
Raising- and- escal at ing- concerns/].
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) (2013b) Social Networking Sites [http://www.
nmc- uk.org/nurses- and- midwives/advice- by- topic/a/advice/social- network ing- sites/].
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) (2015) The Code: Standards for Conduct, 
Performance and Ethics for Nurses and Midwives. London: NMC [http://www.
nmc- uk.org/Publications/Standards/The- code/Introduction/].
O’Connell, N. (2009) Smoking cessa tion manage ment must become more indi vidu al-
ised, Nurse Prescribing, 7 (11): 486–8.
Office for National Statistics (ONS) (2012) 2011 Census: Key Statistics for England 
and Wales, March 2011, Statistical Bulletin [http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171778_
290685.pdf].
Paul, R. and Elder, L. (2005) Critical Thinking: Tools for Taking Charge of Your 
Professional and Personal Life. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice- Hall.
Paul, R. and Elder, L. (2014) Critical Thinking: Tools for Taking Charge of Your 
Professional and Personal Life (2nd edn.). Boston, MA: Pearson Education.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

REFERENCES 173
Pawson, R. (2005) Evidence- Based Policy: A Realist Perspective. London: Sage.
Perry, B. (2009) Role model ling excel lence in clin ical nursing prac tice, Nurse Education 
in Practice, 9: 36–44.
Prescott, J., Wilson, S. and Beckett, G. (2013) Facebook use in the learn ing envir on-
ment, do students want this?, Learning, Media and Technology, 38 (3): 345–50.
Price, B. and Harrington, A. (2013) Critical Thinking and Writing for Nursing Students 
(2nd edn.). Exeter: Learning Matters.
Reid, B. (1993) ‘But we’re doing it already’: explor ing a response to the concept of reflect ive 
prac tice in order to improve its facil it a tion, Nurse Education Today, 13: 305–9.
Roberts, D. (2013) Psychosocial Nursing Care: A Guide to Nursing the Whole Person. 
Maidenhead: Open University Press.
Seedhouse, D. (2009) Ethics: The Heart of Healthcare (3rd edn.). Chichester: Wiley.
Seifert, P.C. (2010) Thinking crit ic ally, AORN Journal, 91 (2): 197–9.
Shipton, D., Tappin, D., Vadiveloo, T., Crossley, J., Aitken, D. and Chalmers, J. (2009) 
Reliability of self repor ted smoking status by preg nant women for estim at ing 
smoking preval ence: a retro spect ive, cross sectional study, British Medical Journal, 
339: b4347.
Simone, B., Carrillo- Santistere, P. and Lopalco, P.L. (2012) Health care workers’ role in 
keeping MMR vaccin a tion uptake high in Europe, Eurosurveillance, 17 (26): art. 2.
Simpson, E. and Courtney, M. (2002) Critical think ing in nursing educa tion: liter at ure 
review, International Journal of Nursing Practice, 8 (2): 89–98.
Smith, G.C.S. and Pell, J.P. (2003) Parachute use to prevent death and major trauma 
related to grav it a tional chal lenge: system atic review of random ised controlled trials, 
British Medical Journal, 327 (7429): 1459–61.
Smith, R. (2010) Strategies for coping with inform a tion over load, British Medical 
Journal, 341: c7126.
Social Care Institute for Excellence (SCIE) (2008) Learning Organisations: A 
Self- Assessment Resource Pack [http://www.scie.org.uk/public a tions/learnin gorgs/
index.asp].
Standing, M. (2011) Clinical Judgement and Decision Making for Nursing Students. 
Exeter: Learning Matters.
Sterling, S. (2012) The Future Fit Framework: An Introductory Guide to Teaching and 
Learning for Sustainability in Higher Education. York: Higher Education Academy 
[http://scot land.heacademy.ac.uk/assets/docu ments/esd/The_Future_Fit_
Framework.pdf].
Stillwell, S.B., Finehout- Overholt, E., Mazurek, B. and Williamson, K. (2010) Evidence- 
based prac tice, step by step; asking the clin ical ques tion: a key step in evid ence- 
based prac tice, American Journal of Nursing, 110 (3): 58–61.
Sustainable Development Commission (SDC) (2008) Health, Place and Nature: How 
Outdoor Environments Influence Health and Wellbeing – A Knowledge Base. London: 
SDC.
Tate, S. (2013) Writing to learn: writing reflect ively, in C. Bulman and S. Schutz (eds.) 
Reflective Practice in Nursing (5th edn.). Oxford: Wiley- Blackwell.
Thompson, C., Yang, H. and Crouch, S. (2012) Clinical simu la tion fidel ity and nurses’ 
iden ti fic a tion of crit ical event risk: a signal detec tion analysis, Journal of Advanced 
Nursing, 68 (11): 2477–85.
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

174 REFERENCES
Thompson, C., Aitken, L., Doran, D. and Dowding, D. (2013) An agenda for clin ical 
decision making and judge ment in nursing research and educa tion, International 
Journal of Nursing Studies, 50 (12): 1720– 6.
Thomson, D., Boyle, D., Legg, C., Owen, M., Newman, M. and Cole, M.J. (2014) Clinical 
place ments: the perspect ives of UK physio ther apy students on how prepared they 
were by their univer sity for their first clin ical place ments: an example of one HEI, 
International Journal of Practice- Based Learning in Health and Social Care, 2 (1): 
69–79.
Tripp, D. (2011) Critical Incidents in Teaching: Developing Professional Judgement 
(Classic Edition). London: Routledge.
United Nations (1987) Report of the World Commission on Environment and 
Development. General Assembly Resolution 42/187, 9th Plenary Meeting,11 December 
1987 [http://www.un.org/docu ments/ga/res/42/ares42- 187.htm].
United Nations (2009) World Population Ageing 2009 [http://www.un.org/esa/
popu la tion/public a tions/WPA2009/WPA2009- report.pdf].
United Nations Environment Programme/World Health Organization (UNEP/WHO) 
(2008) Libreville Declaration on Health and Environment in Africa. Libreville, 
Gabon: WHO Regional Office for Africa.
Vachon, B. and LeBlanc, J. (2011) Effectiveness of past and current crit ical incid ent 
analysis on reflect ive learn ing and prac tice change, Medical Education, 45 (9): 
894–904.
Wade, C. and Tarvis, C. (2008) Psychology (9th edn.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice- 
Hall.
Wakefield, A.J., Murch, S.H., Anthony, A. and Linnell, J. (1998) Ileal- lymph oid- nodular 
hyper plasia, non- specific colitis and pervas ive devel op mental disorder in chil dren, 
The Lancet, 351: 637–41 (paper now with drawn).
Watson, G. and Glaser, E. (2012) Watson–Glaser Critical Thinking Appraisal – User 
Guide and Technical Manual. London: Pearson Education [http://www.talen tlens.
co.uk/assets/news- and- events/watson- glaser- user- guide- and- tech nical- manual.pdf].
Wellington, J., Bathmaker, A., Hunt, C., McCulloch, G. and Sikes P. (2005) Succeeding 
with Your Doctorate. London: Sage.
Wolf, Z.R. (2014) Exploring Rituals in Nursing. New York: Springer.
Woolliams, M. (2007) The incor por a tion of global perspect ives into the higher profes-
sional educa tion of health care profes sion als: an analysis of the inten tions of 
teach ers in rela tion to student learn ing. Unpublished MSc disser ta tion, Oxford 
Brookes University School of Health and Social Care.
Woolliams, M., Williams, K., Butcher, D. and Pye, D. (2009) Be More Critical! A Practical 
Guide for Health and Social Care Students. Oxford: Oxford Brookes University.
World Health Organization (WHO) (2006) Constitution of the World Health Organization. 
Geneva: WHO [http://www.who.int/governance/eb/who_consti tu tion_en.pdf].
World Health Organization (WHO) (2008) mhGAP: Mental Health Gap Action 
Programme: Scaling Up Care for Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders. 
Geneva: WHO [http://www.who.int/mental_health/evid ence/mhGAP/en/].
World Health Organization (WHO) (2009) Phase V (2009–2013) of the WHO European 
Healthy Cities Network: Goals and Requirements. Copenhagen: WHO Regional 
Office for Europe [http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0009/100989/
E92260.pdf].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

REFERENCES 175
World Health Organization (WHO) (2011) 10 Facts on Preventing Disease from Healthy 
Environments. 
Geneva: 
WHO 
[www.who.int/features/fact files/envir on mental_
health/envir on mental_health_facts/en/index5.html].
World Health Organization (WHO) (2014) Malaria. Fact sheet No. 94. Geneva: WHO 
[http://www.who.int/medi a centre/factsheets/fs094/en/].
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

176
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Index
 Bold numbers indicate Glossary entry.
Abstract 48, 50, 51, 53, 69, 163
Accountability 24, 104, 124, 163
Action learning sets 118, 119
Aims see also research question
of academic writing 77, 80, 99
of literature reviews 39, 54, 56
of research studies 56, 66
Analysis 55, 60, 61, 63, 163
in academic argument 80, 83, 85–90, 
96–97
in practice 114, 116, 119, 120, 121, 125, 
127 
see also critical analysis, critical 
incident analysis, data analysis, 
decision analysis, SWOT analysis
Anecdotal evidence see evidence
Argument 10–11, 18, 20, 28, 36–38, 44–45, 
74–76
in practice 124, 127
in presentations 74–76, 82
in writing 82–84, 99, 104
Assessor, see practice 
assessor/mentor
Assignments see chapter 4 written work 
and presentations 2, 6–7, 9, 26, 33, 
36, 43, 74, 111
Assumptions generally 7, 9–10, 16–17, 30
In academic writing 75, 78, 97
In practice 109, 112, 118, 125, 134, 135, 
146, 156
Audit 74
Beliefs/value 8–9, 14, 24, 28, 60, 66, 115, 
119, 134, 147, 156
Best available evidence, see evidence
Best practice 107, 122, 129, 156, 160
Bias 7, 14, 16, 28, 127, 148, 156
in websites 32, 33, 45
in unsystematic or descriptive 
reviews or opinion papers 40–41,
56
Blogs see social media
Boolean operators 50, 51
Case control study 62, 163
Case study 62, 163
CASP, see Critical Appraisal Skills 
Programme
Change 130–136, 138, 140
influencing health and social care 56, 
109, 121
managing change 121, 130
thinking critically about change 20, 
143, 144, 147
Challenge 7, 9–10, 16, 34, 36, 69
In academic writing 75, 97
In practice 105–106, 109, 112, 
117–119, 123–124, 134–136, 146, 
155–157
Client see patient/client
Cochrane 39, 54, 55, 68, 69, 121, 159 163
Cohort study 62, 163
Competence /expertise 96, 104, 111, 134, 
135
Creative approaches 23, 48, 74, 89, 
108, 116, 118, 135, 139, 146, 156, 
157
Critical analysis 17, 80, 83, 96, 97, 108, 
163
Critical Appraisal Skills Programme 
(CASP) 61, 66, 160
Critical friend 118
Critical incident technique/analysis/ 119, 
163, debrief 164
177
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

178 INDEX
Critical thinking 164 see chapter outlines
Checklist for assessing critical 
thinking in written work 72, 98, 99, 
100
‘Questions for critical thinking in 
practice’ 100, 112, 118, 121, 125–128, 
145, 155
‘Six Questions to Trigger Critical 
Thinking’ 3, 6, 7, 16–19
Campbell Collaboration 39, 54, 55, 121, 
163
Case controlled study 62, 163
Cochrane Collaboration 39, 54, 55, 68, 69, 
121, 159, 163
Cohort study 62, 163
Confidence intervals 65, 163
Cultures 13, 60, 138, 140, 146, 147, 148, 
150
organizational culture 101, 102, 108, 
123, 130, 151, 155 see also 
ethnography
Data analysis
in qualitative research 61
in quantitative research 61
Data collection
in qualitative research 60
in quantitative research 60, 63
in questionnaires and surveys 61–63
Databases 3, 32, 44, 45, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 
55, 59, 121, 160, 164
Debate 134, 135, 147, 154
Debriefing see critical incident analysis
Decision analysis 127
making in practice 7, 8, 112, 119, 123, 
130, 135
Descriptive or narrative reviews see 
literature reviews
Descriptive statistics see statistics
Descriptive writing 74, 86
Diary, see reflection
Discussion 164
Discussion or opinion papers 41, 56, 79, 
89, 97, 164
forums or groups 137, 151, 152, 154
in systematic reviews and research 
papers 39, 40, 59, 63
with colleagues 10, 18, 21, 32, 34, 36, 
37, 108, 120, 128, 135
Dissertation 18, 74, 75, 143, 164
Diversity 4, 136, 138, 144, 146, 148
e-books 37, 53
Editorials 39
Employability 134
Environmental issues 135, 136, 141–143, 
143–145, 148
Essay 20, 74, 85, 87, 89–90, 164
Ethics 25, 104, 127, 134, 155
Ethnography 60, 164
Evaluation 14, 121, 164
of guidelines 42
of interventions 27
of websites 32–33
in writing and presentations 76, 85–90, 
110
Evidence see also information
Anecdotal 18, 20, 22, 58, 59, 163
readily available see chapter 2
best available 163 see chapter 3
quality of 7–10
Evidence-based 70, 
practice 20–21, 27–28, 30, 164 see 
chapter 5
book ‘A beginners guide to. . .’ 18, 20, 49 
useful websites see Appendix
Experience 105–110 
in qualitative research 49, 57–60
others 18, 25, 35, 110 
own/personal/past 7, 9, 23, 82, 88, 92, 134 
reflecting on 89, 114–116
Experiential knowledge 164
Experimental research methods 62–63, 
164
Experts/expertise 18, 25, 27, 33–37, 41, 
52, 69, 109, 112, 118
patient 137
in peer review 165
in research 18, 39
sharing 137, 148, 151–152
Explanation 
in academic writing and presentations 
85–90, 164
in practice 106
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX 179
Facebook 34–35 see also social media
Feedback
on academic writing 90–96
in practice 106, 115, 120
Findings, see results
Flexibility 14, 135, 146, 156
Generalization/generalizability 50, 60–61, 
63, 64, 164
Globalization 136, 138, 142–143, 148
Grounded theory 60, 164
Guidelines see policy and guidelines
Health and Care Professions Council 
(HCPC) 24, 35, 104, 125, 138
website 161
Hierarchy of evidence 53, 57–59, 164
Higher Education Academy (HEA) 1
35
HCPC see Health & Care Professions 
Council
Inequalities 136, 139–140, 143, 148
Inferential statistics 64, 66, 164
Information
in critical thinking 10–11 
leaflets 31
overload 21
readily available see chapter 2, 
165
types of 39
International 55, 133, 140–141, 143–144, 
147, 151
Internet search engines 30, 32, 
46–47
Interventions 49, 54, 57–58, 164
Interviews 57, 59–61, 67, 165
Intuition 110, 114
Journal/s 30, 38–39, 52–53, 165
clubs 122
electronic 38
learning 117
open access 38, 165
Keywords 48–52, 78, 92, 165
Knowledge summaries 41, 160
Law see legal
Learning organization 130
Lecture/rs 20, 23–24, 30, 36–37
Legal 2, 25–26
Library 45, 46, 48, 53, 122
Limitations see strengths and 
weaknesses 
Limits, setting of 50–51
Literature reviews see also Cochrane
descriptive or narrative reviews 39–40, 
55–56, 165
systematic 41–42, 53–56, 58–59, 121, 
166
Lived experience 60, 165
Marking in academic work 26, 78
Media 7, 12–13, 30–32 see also social 
media
Medical subject heading (MeSH) 165
Mentor see practice assessor/mentor
Method 20, 39, 54, 56, 62, 63
Methodology 54, 59, 83, 87, 92
Mixed Methods research 57, 165
Narrative review see literature reviews
National Institute of Health and Clinical 
Excellence (NICE) 55, 122
Networking 34, 133, 137, 148, 151–152
Newspapers see media
NICE see National Institute of Health and 
Clinical Excellence
NMC see Nursing and Midwifery 
Council
Null hypothesis 65, 165
Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) 
24, 104, 124
Objectives 54, 69, 80, 126
Observation 60, 64, 110
Open access journals see journals
Opinion papers 41
p values 65, 66, 165
Participant observation 60
Patient /client 4, 126
Phenomenology 60, 165
PICO/PICOT questions 49, 165
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

180 INDEX
Planning
Services/care 121, 136–140, 142–145
to search 49–50
to write and present see chapter 4: 
76–80, 92–93, 95, 99–100
Policy and guidelines 24–25, 31–32, 
34–35, 41–43, 45, 49, 69, 73, 74, 78, 82, 
90–93, 95, 97, 99, 104, 106–107, 112, 
117, 122, 124, 136, 140–3, 149–150, 
161, 164
Political changes 136, 140, 148
Practice assessor/mentor 
Definition 1, 4
Responding to advice from 23, 30, 
35–36, 43, 107, 110, 112, 123, 130
Presentations 73–89, 96–100, 122
Checklist for assessing critical 
thinking in your presentations 99
Professional
bodies/organizations 24–27, 104, 124, 
128, 138, 151
development 73, 89, 103–112, 115, 
120–124, 130–131, 133–134, 147–148, 
152, 155
judgement 165
Qualitative research 57–61, 68, 165
Quantitative research 57, 62–63, 68, 
165
Quasi experiment 62
Questions
‘Questions for critical thinking in 
practice’ 126–128
for research questions see PICOT
‘Six questions for critical thinking’ 
17–19
Questionnaires and surveys 61–64, 165
Rainbow Model (Dahlgren & Whitehead, 
1993) 143–145, 148–149
Randomization 165
Randomized controlled trial (RCT) 58, 62, 
165
Rationale 21, 24, 87, 112, 123, 128, 165
Reflection 7, 11, 33–36, 75, 80, 85–86, 
89–90, 96, 105–106, 111–122, 131, 135, 
146–147
definition 189, 114, 166
skills for reflection 113–114
Reflective diary/journal 117
Reflective frameworks 116
Reliability of information 156
Research questions 166 see PICOT
Results or findings 14, 22, 32, 39, 
40, 47, 52–53, 56–57, 60–61, 63–66, 
93
Reviews see literature reviews
Rigour
in research 47
in writing and presenting 98
Ritual see routine 
Role modelling 23, 35, 110–112
Routine or ritual 21, 102, 104–109, 112, 
120, 131
Sample size
in qualitative research 60–61
in quantitative research 63–64, 66
Search engines see internet 15, 22, 30, 32, 
34, 46–47, 53
Searching 
search strategy 166
Self-assessment 113–115
Self-awareness 89, 105–106, 111, 113–116, 
156
Self assessment tools 105–106
‘Six Questions for Critical Thinking’ tool 
19 
Snowballing 52, 166
Social determinants of health 143–145, 
148–149
Social media (including Facebook, 
Twitter) 3, 32–35, 42–44, 45, 122, 137, 
162
Statistics
descriptive 63, 164
inferential 64, 164
Strengths and weaknesses/limitations of 
evidence 17, 31, 34, 55, 63, 76, 83, 
115, 136 
Survey see questionnaires
Sustainability 134, 141–143
SWOT analysis 120–121, 161
Systematic review see reviews, 166
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

INDEX 181
Technology
Communication/information 
21–23, 
136–138
‘Top Tips’
for broadening your perspectives 
155–156
to help you prepare your work 78
for influencing your organizational 
culture 130
for preparing and delivering 
presentations 96
for thinking critically when learning 
from others 112
Transferability 166
Truncation 166
Twitter see social 
media
Values see beliefs/values
based care 
Validity 18, 156
Verbal presentations see 
presentations
World Health Organization (WHO) 34, 
139, 140, 142, 143
Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

Downloaded by [ Faculty of Nursing, Chiangmai University 5.62.158.117] at [07/18/16]. Copyright © McGraw-Hill Global Education Holdings, LLC. Not to be redistributed or modified in any way without permission.

