
A CAREER IN STATISTICS 

A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
Beyond the Numbers 
GERALD J. HAHN 
Retiree, GE Company, Schenectady, New York 
NECIP DOGANAKSOY 
GE Company, Schenectady, New York 
Contributing Authors 
Carol Joyce Blumberg 
Leonard M. Gaines 
Lynne B. Hare 
William Q. Meeker 
Josef Schmee 
)WILEY 
A JOHN WILEY & SONS, INC., PUBLICATION 

Copyright © 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved. 
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey. 
Published simultaneously in Canada 
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, except as 
permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without either the 
prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the appropriate per-copy 
fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, 
fax (978) 750-4470, or on the web at www.copyright.com. Requests to the Publisher for permission 
should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Ill River Street, Hoboken, 
NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) 748-6008, or online at http://www.wiIey.com/go/permission. 
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best efforts 
in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or 
completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by 
sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained herein may not 
be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where appropriate. Neither 
the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, 
including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other damages. 
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please contact 
our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the United States 
at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002. 
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print 
may not be available in electronic formats. For more information about Wiley products, visit our 
web site at www.wiley.com. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Pubtication Data: 
Hahn, Gerald J. 
A career in statistics / Gerald J. Hahn, Necip Doganaksoy. 
p. cm. 
Summary: "This book serves as an excellent companion to its predecessor, The Role of Statistics in 
Business and Industry. In this volume, the authors help readers decide whether a career in statistics is 
appropriate for them and what to expect once in it. They provide insights into the work environment and 
how students and entry-level statisticians can best prepare themselves to succeed, offering hints for 
success in training, career paths, and lifelong learning. This book is a must-have for anyone considering 
a career in statistics, as well as for faculty who prepare students for such a career"- Provided by 
publisher. 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
ISBN 978-0-470-40441-6 (pbk.) 
1. Mathematical statistics. 2. Commercial statistics. 3. Statistics-Vocational guidance. 
4. 
Statisticians-Vocational guidance. I. 
Doganaksoy, Necip, 1960- II. Title. 
QA276.17.H34 2011 
519.5023-dc22 
2011008253 
Printed in the United States of America 
10 
9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 

To Bea, Adrienne and Lou, Susan and John, Judy and Ben, and 
Zachary, Eli, Leah, Sam, and Eliza. 
—G.J.H. 
To my parents Sami and Mediha Doganaksoy, my wife Reyhan, 
and my children Hakan and Levent. 
—N.D. 

CONTENTS 
■ 
PREFACE 
XIII 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
XVII 
CHAPTER 1 
PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
1 
1.1 About This Chapter 1 
1.2 What is Statistics? 1 
1.3 Who is a Statistician? 2 
1.4 Who Employs Statisticians? 3 
1.5 The Statistical Thought Process and What Makes it Special 4 
1.6 Many Skills Required 7 
1.7 Beyond the Workplace 8 
1.8 Some Downsides of a Career in Statistics 9 
1.9 The Excitement of a Career in Statistics 10 
1.10 Embarking on a Career in Statistics 11 
1.11 Accreditation 
15 
1.12 Professional Societies 16 
1.13 A Preview 16 
1.14 Further Reading 17 
1.15 Major Takeaways 18 
Discussion Questions 19 
PART I THE WORK OF A STATISTICIAN 
J! 
CHAPTER 2 
WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
23 
2.1 About This Chapter 23 
2.2 Manufactured Product Applications 
23 
2.3 Service Business Applications 28 
2.4 Process Improvement 30 
2.5 Further Applications 31 
2.6 Major Takeaways 32 
Discussion Questions 32 
CHAPTER 3 
WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT 
STATISTICS DO 
35 
3.1 About This Chapter 35 
3.2 The Scope of Official Statistics 36 
3.3 Examples of the Work 39 
3.4 Challenges of the Work 41 
3.5 Research Opportunities 45 
vii 

viii 
CONTENTS 
3.6 Some Major Employers in the U.S. Federal Government 
46 
3.7 Required Credentials 47 
3.8 Integration of U.S. Government Statistical Activities 49 
3.9 Local Official Government Statistics Activities 50 
3.10 Government Statisticians Outside The United States 51 
3.11 Compensation and Other Considerations 52 
3.12 Sources of Further Information 
53 
3.13 Major Takeaways 53 
Discussion Questions 54 
CHAPTER 4 
WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
57 
4.1 About This Chapter 57 
4.2 Regulatory Activities 57 
4.3 Health 59 
4.4 National Defense 61 
4.5 Other Scientific Research 62 
4.6 Social and Behavioral Sciences 65 
4.7 Teaching (in Nonacademic Settings) 71 
4.8 Some Further Institutes for Research in the United States 71 
4.9 Major Takeaways 73 
Discussion Questions 73 
CHAPTER 5 
THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
75 
5.1 About This Chapter 75 
5.2 Receptiveness to Statistics and Statisticians 75 
5.3 Where do Statisticians Fit into the Organization? 79 
5.4 Two Modes of Operation 
80 
5.5 Grading Systems 82 
5.6 Globalization 
83 
5.7 Hail to Our Managers! 84 
5.8 Some Challenges 86 
5.9 Women in Statistics 90 
5.10 Major Takeaways 93 
Discussion Questions 94 
: 
ART II 
PREPARING 
FOR A 
SUCCESSFUL 
CAREER 
IN STATISTICS 
97 
CHAPTER 6 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
99 
6.1 About This Chapter 99 
6.2 Analytical and Technical Skills 100 
6.3 Communication and Interpersonal Skills 100 
6.4 Ability to Size Up Problems and See the "Big Picture" 101 
6.5 Flexibility 102 
6.6 A Proactive Mindset 102 
6.7 Persistence 103 
6.8 A Realistic Attitude 104 
6.9 Enthusiasm and Appropriate Self-Confidence 
105 

CONTENTS 
IX 
6.10 Ability to Prioritize, Manage Time, and Cope with Stress 105 
6.11 Team Skills 106 
6.12 Leadership Skills 106 
6.13 Ability to Properly Apply and Adapt Knowledge 107 
6.14 Passion for Lifelong Learning 108 
6.15 Further Reading 108 
6.16 As Others See It 108 
6.17 Major Takeaways 
m 
Discussion Questions 
m 
CHAPTER 7 
EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
113 
7.1 About This Chapter 113 
7.2 The Statistics Advanced Placement Course and Other 
High School Programs 114 
7.3 Degrees in Statistics: The Numbers 114 
7.4 How Far To Go: Bachelor's, Master's, or Ph.D. Degree? 116 
7.5 Selecting the Right School and Program 
120 
7.6 Statistical Education: Setting the Foundations 125 
7.7 Coursework in Statistics 126 
7.8 Statistical Computing and Software 
131 
7.9 Some Other Recommendations 
134 
7.10 Internships and University Consulting 
138 
7.11 Entering Statistics from Other Fields 141 
7.12 Further Resources 142 
7.13 Concluding Comment: The Limits of Formal Statistical Education 
142 
7.14 As Others See It 143 
7.15 Major Takeaways 145 
Discussion Questions 146 
CHAPTER 8 
GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
149 
8.1 About This Chapter 149 
8.2 Defining Career Goals 149 
8.3 Identifying Opportunities 151 
8.4 Resume Writing 
154 
8.5 The Job Interview 
157 
8.6 Follow-Up 164 
8.7 Providing References 
165 
8.8 Some Further Hints 165 
8.9 Assessing Job Offers 
166 
8.10 Major Takeaways 170 
Discussion Questions 171 
PART III BUILDING A SUCCESSFUL CAREER 
ASA STATISTICIAN 
173 
CHAPTER 9 
ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 175 
9.1 About This Chapter 175 
9.2 Project Initiation 
175 

X 
CONTENTS 
9.3 
Project Execution 
184 
9.4 
As Others See It 
190 
9.5 
Major Takeaways 
194 
Discussion Questions 
194 
CHAPTER 10 
ON-THE-JOB 
STRATEGIES: 
COMMUNICATION, 
PUBLICIZING, 
AND 
ETHICS 
197 
10.1 
About This Chapter 
197 
10.2 
Communication, Communication, Communication 
197 
10.3 
Publicizing Statistics (And Statisticians) 
205 
10.4 
Ethical Considerations 
207 
10.5 
Major Takeaways 
216 
Discussion Questions 
216 
CHAPTER 11 
GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
219 
11.1 
About This Chapter 
219 
11.2 
Designed Experiments 
220 
11.3 Census and Random Sampling Studies of Human and Other Populations 
221 
11.4 
Systems Development Studies 
224 
11.5 
Observational Studies 
225 
11.6 
Hints for Getting the Right Data 
233 
11.7 
A Process for Data Gathering 
240 
11.8 
Major Takeaways 
247 
Discussion Questions 
248 
CHAPTER 12 
CAREER PATHS 
251 
12.1 
About This Chapter 
251 
12.2 
Some Roles for Applied Statisticians 
251 
12.3 
Other Major Roles to which Applied Statisticians Might Aspire 
253 
12.4 
Some Career Paths 
256 
12.5 
More on Statistical Leadership 
258 
12.6 
Contributions Beyond the Workplace 
259 
12.7 
Some More Career Examples 
261 
12.8 
Putting It All Together 
264 
12.9 
Major Takeaways 
265 
Discussion Questions 
265 
PART IV FURTHER PERSPECTIVES: CAREERS IN A CA DEMI A 
AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT 
»r 
CHAPTER 13 
CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
269 
13.1 
About This Chapter 
269 
13.2 
What Statisticians in Academia do: An Overview 
270 
13.3 Types of Positions 
273 
13.4 
Location within the Institution 
277 
13.5 
More on Tenure 
277 
13.6 
Life Beyond Tenure 
279 
13.7 Teaching Challenges 
280 

CONTENTS 
XI 
13.8 Research Challenges 286 
13.9 Consulting Challenges 292 
13.10 Administrative Service Challenges 294 
13.11 Professional Service Challenges 295 
13.12 More on the Academic Environment 
296 
13.13 Training to Become an Academic Statistician 
298 
13.14 Career Paths 300 
13.15 Downsides of a Career as an Academic Statistician 
303 
13.16 Bright Sides of a Career as an Academic Statistician 
304 
13.17 A Career as a Statistician in Academia: A Summary Comparison 
305 
13.18 Major Takeaways 305 
Discussion Questions 307 
CHAPTER 14 
MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
309 
14.1 About This Chapter 309 
14.2 Some Internet Resources 310 
14.3 Formal Education 311 
14.4 Technical and Professional Journals 312 
14.5 Technical Conferences 
315 
14.6 Future Opportunity Areas 318 
14.7 Major Takeaways 319 
Discussion Questions 319 
REFERENCES 
INDEX 
321 
331 

PREFACE 
Many years ago, we decided on a career in statistics. It turned out to be one of the two 
best decisions we evermade (second, of course, only to our choices of spouses). In this 
book, we try to impart our enthusiasm for statistics1 and help readers determine 
whether a career in statistics is for them, tell them what to expect, and provide hints for 
their success. We call upon our (and others') extensive practical experience to give 
important career guidance that goes beyond the technical tools discussed in most 
courses and texts on statistics. 
This book complements The Role of Statistics in Business and Industry (Wiley, 
2008). Our earlier book described how statistical concepts and methods help 
companies to improve performance and to address problems in a wide range of 
operations involving products and services. In this volume, we broaden our horizon to 
include all application areas of statistics and focus on helping readers build successful 
careers. 
DISCUSSION OUTLINE 
We begin with a prologue chapter that lays the foundation for a career in statistics and 
provides an overview of the field. The bulk of the book is organized into four parts: 
• Part I: The Work of a Statistician. 
• Part II: Preparing for a Successful Career in Statistics. 
• Part III: Building a Successful Career as a Statistician. 
• Part IV: Further Perspectives: Careers in Academia and Professional 
Development. 
We conclude with two more chapters (Part IV). The first of these provides an in-depth 
examination of careers for statisticians in academia. The last chapter describes ways 
statisticians can stay on top of their field throughout their careers and ensure their 
continued effectiveness. 
Each chapter concludes with a summary of "major takeaways" and a series of 
discussion questions. Most of these questions do not have "right" or "wrong" answers; 
instead, they are aimed at provoking the reader to think through the broader 
implications of the subject. We indicate with an asterisk those questions that do not 
require any past statistical training. Some of those that do are designed to challenge 
more advanced students. 
We reserve for a future volume a discussion of our enthusiasm for our spouses. 
xiii 

XIV 
PREFACE 
TARGET AUDIENCE 
This book should be of high interest to those around the world who 
• Have decided on a career in statistics and would like to prepare themselves in 
the best possible manner. 
• Have been intrigued by statistics, perhaps after taking an introductory course in 
high school or college, are considering a career in statistics, and would like to 
know more of what it is all about. 
• Are starting on their first jobs as statisticians and want to be more effective—or 
have been on the job for a while and want to accelerate their paths to success. 
The book lends itself well as a text or supplementary text for 
• A course in statistical consulting. 
• A seminar course dealing with career opportunities, especially in mathematics 
and/or statistics. 
• An independent study course preparing students for the workplace. 
It is also suited, together with The Role of Statistics in Business and Industry (also 
soft-cover), for a course on statistical practice that provides aspiring statisticians 
insights, typically not provided in other courses, to help them succeed in their careers. 
In addition, the book can serve as a supplementary text for a variety of courses to 
complement more technical material, for example, in conjunction with a second 
course on statistical methods directed at statistics majors. 
Some might acquire this book to help them decide whether or not they would 
like to make statistics their careers. Once so decided, our comments will help them 
plot a path through college and beyond. And upon completion of their formal 
education, it should assist them in building a successful career—with the confidence 
of knowing at least some of the things to expect in an uncertain world. 
Finally, this book can help teachers and counselors in both high schools and 
colleges direct and guide students who may be suited for careers as statisticians. 
We assume in some of the discussion that readers have had a one-semester 
introductory course in statistics, but we do not require any knowledge beyond this— 
even though many readers will have such added knowledge. 
OUR SOURCES 
This book leverages insights gained during our combined 75 years of experience as 
applied statisticians—including, for one of us, managing a corporate statistics group 
for 28 years. Much of our work has been in the United States. We have, however, 
recently witnessed and participated in the globalization of many of our activities. We 
also have some academic experience gained on sabbaticals and as adjunct professors. 
To broaden the scope further, we have invited five contributing authors with 
wide experience in academia and/or government to write two chapters and to provide 
us their inputs and perspectives on the others. They are 

PREFACE 
X V 
• Carol Joyce Blumberg, Mathematical Statistician, U.S. Energy Information 
Administration and Professor Emerita of Mathematics and Statistics, Winona 
State University. 
• Leonard M. Gaines, Program Research Specialist, Empire State Development, 
New York State (Chapter 3). 
• Lynne B. Hare, Principal, Statistical Strategies, LLC; Director (retired), 
Applied Statistics, Kraft Foods; and former Chief, Statistical Engineering 
Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology. 
• William Q. Meeker, Distinguished Professor, Statistics Department, Iowa State 
University (Chapter 13). 
• Josef Schmee, K.B. Sharpe Professor of Management (emeritus), Union 
College (Chapter 13). 
We also allow readers to avail themselves of diverse viewpoints by 
• Soliciting comments from 24 eminent statisticians on the traits that they regard 
as most important for success and on the key advice that they would give to 
aspiring statisticians. Their responses, appearing at the end of three chapters, 
reiterate or amplify points that we make and add further insights. 
• Liberally quoting others, typically from previously published or presented 
materials; such quotes introduce many of the book's sections. 
• Inviting numerous colleagues to read and critically comment on earlier drafts 
(see "Acknowledgments"). 
• Providing extensive references and suggesting web sites2 to which readers can 
turn for further elaboration and viewpoints. 
OTHER FEATURES 
We consider topics that are rarely discussed in other books. A few examples are the 
downsides (as well as the excitement) of a career in statistics; the important role that 
our managers play in our careers; women in statistics; what courses to take; assessing 
job offers; a comprehensive comparison of a career as a statistician in academia versus 
one in business and industry and in official government statistics; different ways 
statisticians become involved in projects; criteria for project selection, the "elevator 
speech"; and a critical assessment of the yearly Joint Statistical Meetings. We also 
place heavy emphasis on the statistician's role in getting the right data—a funda-
mental subject that is often brushed aside, under the assumption that the needed data 
are just there (which is infrequently the case). 
We use examples based on our and the contributing authors' experience to 
illustrate important points, and at times use the language of the workplace. Some 
typical examples are the use of such terms as added value, bottom line, and payoff. 
All web sites were in working condition at the time that this manuscript was in production for publication 
(April 2011); some may, undoubtedly, not stand the test of time. 

X V I 
PREFACE 
This should help prepare readers for the jargon that they can expect to encounter 
during the course of their careers." 
With the increasing role of globalization, more and more students throughout 
the world will be considering statistics as a career. We take a global perspective by, for 
example, including a section on government statistics outside the United States and 
discussing effective communication in a global environment. 
Wiley has created an ftp site for our book.4 This provides further details on 
selected topics, as noted in individual chapters. We will also post on this site thoughts 
that occur to us after this book goes into production (as well as relevant new links 
and publications), errors and corrections (hopefully few), and reader comments 
(hopefully many). 
AN INVITATION 
In our continuing search for improvement (in possibly future editions and, in the 
meantime, for posting on the book's ftp site), we invite and welcome reader 
comments and suggestions. We can be reached at gerryhahn@yahoo.com and 
necipdoganaksoy@yahoo.com. 
Gerald J. Hahn 
Necip Doganaksoy 
Schenectady, New York 
3 The serious reader is referred to Dilbert™ cartoons as the ultimate guide. 
4 ftp://ftp.wiley.com/public/sci_tech_med/career_statistics. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We have benefited greatly from the critical assessments and helpful inputs of 
numerous colleagues, friends, and (even) relatives and we thank them all for their 
interest and contributions. 
This book would not have been possible without the work of contributing 
authors Carol Joyce Blumberg, Leonard Gaines, Lynne Hare, William Q. Meeker, and 
Josef Schmee. 
We were also most fortunate to have received detailed and highly useful inputs 
on extensive parts of the manuscript from Rich Allen, Michael Chernick, Ron Fecso, 
and Gipsie Ranney. 
Many others provided us valuable comments. We thank Christine Anderson 
Cook, Tom Boardman, Christy Chuang-Stein, Cynthia Clark, Keith Crank, Len Cook, 
George Domingo, John Espy, Cathy Furlong, Martha Gardner, Adrienne Hahn, Bea 
Hahn, Judy Hahn, Ted Hardwicke, Bill Hill, Roger Hoerl, Bob Hogg, Yili Hong, 
Ronald Iman, Ron Kenett, Tim Keyes, John Kovar, Diane Lambert, Jerry Lawless, 
Vincent Lee, Ramon Leon, Alson Look, Juanita Lott, Fang Liu, Bill Makuch, Harry 
Martz, Diane Michelson, David Moore, Carolyn Morgan, Sally Morton, Vijay Nair, 
Lloyd Nelson, Margaret Nemeth, Barry Nussbaum, William Parr, Charles Pfeiffer, 
Antonio Possolo, Charles Sampson, Nozer Singpurwalla, Edward Spar, Bob 
Starbuck, Stan Strauss, Katherine Wallman, Ron Wasserstein, and Joanne 
Wendelberger for their contributions. 
We thank Jackie Palmieri and Steve Quigley, our editors at Wiley, and their 
colleagues for their encouragement and help. 
We also greatly appreciate the unwavering support and encouragement by 
Necip's Manager at GE, Roger Hoerl. 
Finally, we thank our wives, Bea Hahn and Reyhan Doganaksoy, for their 
continued encouragement, strong support, and remarkable perseverance over the 
many hours we spent in writing this book. 

CHAPTER 
/ 
PROLOGUE: A CAREER 
IN STATISTICS 
1.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
We begin this introductory chapter with a brief examination of what is statistics, who 
is a statistician, and who employs statisticians. We then comment on the statistical 
thought process and what makes it special, the many skills required to be a successful 
statistician, and the role of statistics beyond the workplace. We provide "equal time" 
to presenting some downsides of a career in statistics and counter this with a brief 
summary of the excitement of such a career. We then indicate some alternative paths 
for embarking on a career in statistics, comment on ongoing efforts for accreditation, 
and review professional societies for statisticians. We conclude the chapter with 
a preview of what is to follow. 
1.2 WHAT IS STATISTICS? 
The rational basis for change is data. Data means statistical methods. 
—W. Hunter 
Some informal definitions of statistics, provided by various well-known 
statisticians, are 
• The science of learning from (or making sense out of) data (J. Kettenring). 
• The theory and methods of extracting information from observational data for 
solving real-world problems (C.R. Rao). 
• The science of uncertainty (D.J. Hand). 
• The quintessential interdisciplinary science (S. McNulty). 
• The art of telling a story with data (L. Gaines). 
We prefer the preceding over the more formal definitions found online,1 such as 
statistics is "the science that deals with the collection, classification, analysis, and 
interpretation of numerical facts or data, and that, by use of mathematical theories 
1 For example, http://dictionary.reference.com/. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
1 

2 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
of probability, imposes order and regularity on aggregates of more or less disparate 
elements." And we note that Brown and Kass (2009) devote a 19-page article 
(including discussion) to an in-depth examination of "What is Statistics?" 
Statistics has applicability in almost all areas of human endeavor. To take just 
a few examples: 
• Economists need to understand statistical concepts to make predictions. 
• Psychologists need to be able to interpret empirical relationships between 
variables. 
• Business executives need to appreciate the role of uncertainty in decision 
making. 
• Biologists need to understand that the reactions of organisms to stimuli are not 
deterministic and that there will be variation among individuals. 
• Design engineers need to know how to conduct statistically valid experiments 
to develop the best possible products. 
We also note with interest that in 2010 Britain joined other countries in asking their 
statisticians to develop a "happiness index" to be added to their existing national 
household survey. 
The diversity of applications is further illustrated by the 24 sections of the 
American Statistical Association (ASA) as of the end of 2010. These include those 
that deal with biopharmaceutical applications, business and economics, defense and 
national security, education, environmental applications, epidemiology, government, 
health policy, marketing, physical and engineering sciences, quality and productivity, 
social statistics, and sports.2 
We will defer discussing specifics to the next three chapters, but note that Tanur 
et al. (1972) and Peck et al. (2006) provide 15 and 25 (different) articles, respectively, 
that demonstrate the use of statistics in a wide variety of application areas. 
Some areas of application have taken on lives of their own. Thus, biostatistics is 
the application of statistics to the analysis of biological and medical data. Going even 
further, actuarial science—the application of mathematical and statistical methods to 
assess insurance risk—has become a separate profession. 
Statisticians at a particular point in their careers are commonly engaged in one or a 
few of these application areas. It is, however, not unusual for individuals to become 
involved in an appreciable number of such areas during the course of their careers. 
1.3 WHO IS A STATISTICIAN? 
Professional statisticians are trained in statistics and actively use statistics and 
statistical concepts and thinking in much of their work. 
The ASA now has a program of accreditation for its members (Section 1.11) and 
such programs exist in various other countries. The ASA accreditation program has 
2 Other ASA sections focus on more specialized topics such as Bayesian statistical science, nonparametric 
methods, statistical consulting, statistical computing, and statistical graphics. 

1.4 WHO EMPLOYS STATISTICIANS? 
3 
high requirements (e.g., 5 years of documented experience in practicing statistics) and 
is completely voluntary. We anticipate that there will be many statisticians in the 
United States, especially until accreditation becomes popular, who have not been 
formally accredited. 
Moreover, what constitutes as adequate education in statistics to qualify an 
individual to be a statistician is highly job dependent (and somewhat controversial), 
although there are some communalities (Section 7.4). Thus, to simplify matters, we 
will just assume statisticians to be those who regard themselves as such. 
One does not have to be a statistician to use statistics. The use of statistical 
methods by nonstatisticians—whom we will refer to as "practitioners"—is at an all-
time high and will likely continue to increase. This places additional responsibilities on 
statisticians. We shall return to these topics at various junctures throughout this book. 
1.4 WHO EMPLOYS STATISTICIANS? 
Data are widely available; what is scarce is the ability to extract wisdom from them. 
—Hal Varian (2010) 
A simple, and perhaps somewhat exaggerated, answer to the question "who 
employs statisticians?" is "essentially all large and some medium-sized, and even 
small, organizations." Somewhat arbitrarily, we categorize employers of statisticians 
as follows: 
• Business and industry that manufacture products and/or provide services 
(Chapter 2). 
• (Mostly government) agencies engaged in gathering, analyzing, and reporting 
official statistics or in related statistical activities (Chapter 3). 
• Organizations involved in various other application areas, including those 
engaged in regulatory activities, health, national defense, other scientific 
research, and the social and behavioral sciences. Employers include govern-
ment, research institutes, and universities (Chapter 4). 
• Self-employed (typically private statistical consultants). Discussion of these is 
postponed to Chapter 12 since this is a role unlikely to be taken by statisticians 
early in their careers. 
• Academia (Chapter 13). 
The ASA estimates that its membership is broken down approximately as follows: 
• 47%: Business, industry, nonprofit (other than government and academia), self-
employed, or other. 
• 42%: Academia. 
• 11%: Government (national, state, provincial, or local).3 
3 In considering the preceding numbers, note that not all statisticians in the United States are members of 
ASA. The numbers might, for example, overrepresent the proportion of statisticians in academia since 
academicians may be more likely to become members of ASA. 

4 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
In any case, like other professionals, statisticians work for customers who benefit from 
their work. These customers might be direct, such as a client who has commissioned 
specific work, or indirect, such as users of the Consumer Price Index or students in a 
professor's class. 
1.5 THE STATISTICAL THOUGHT PROCESS AND 
WHAT MAKES IT SPECIAL4 
1.5.1 The Scientific Method 
Almost 500 years ago, during the reign of Queen Elizabeth I, Sir Francis Bacon, an 
English philosopher, lawyer, and statesman, addressing the Royal Society, proposed a 
new way to gain increased understanding of nature. Instead of drawing conclusions 
from their own preconceived notions, religion, or other traditional sources stemming 
from Aristotelian thinking, scientists should engage themselves in observation and 
experience. He didn't take the idea much further than that, but others built on it, and, a 
few centuries later, it led to the formal development of the scientific method. 
Basically, the scientific method calls for starting with a conjecture about the 
state of nature, cause and effect relationships, or differences among phenomena (e.g., 
animal typing by physical characteristics, medical treatment differences, or rates of 
differently induced chemical reactions). We then make observations, that is, gather 
data, in order to confirm or deny that conjecture. This must be done in such a way that 
the results are reproducible by others. Thus, we build knowledge about the state of the 
universe by confirming or denying conjectures. 
All of this may not sound like rocket science today, but at the time it was truly 
revolutionary, and the results have been spectacular. The scientific method has, for 
example, guided the increase of crop yields to help feed starving populations. It has 
led medical researchers to understand the causes of diseases and find cures. And it 
has resulted in electrical engineers learning how to produce microchips efficiently in 
mass quantities, allowing access to such modern technologies as laptop computers, the 
Internet, computer-based controls, and safety mechanisms in planes and automobiles. 
The applicability of the scientific method is, moreover, not limited to the hard 
sciences, such as chemistry and physics. Our understanding of sociology and 
psychology and other social or human sciences has relied on its use as well. 
The list of beneficial applications is endless. It seems safe to say that the overwhelm-
ing majority of advances in human civilization have taken place as a consequence of 
the application of the scientific method. 
1.5.2 Where Statistics Fits In 
But what does this have to do with statistics and the way statisticians think? 
Put simply, we assert that statisticians, in many ways, might be considered 
gatekeepers of the scientific method. There are good reasons for this lofty claim. After 
4 This section was written by contributing author Lynne Hare. 

1.5 THE STATISTICAL THOUGHT PROCESS AND WHAT MAKES IT SPECIAL 
5 
all, a key factor in any scientific endeavor is a concern for obtaining unbiased results 
with a wide range of applicability. 
In many, or even most, situations, it is impractical or even impossible to 
enumerate completely an entire population. Thus, you need to develop precise and 
accurate estimates from a well-selected sample. Say, for example, that we want to 
characterize the mean weight of salmon in a lake. You can't get all the salmon in the 
lake and weigh them—but you can take an appropriately selected sample and use its 
mean weight as an estimate of the mean weight of all salmon in the lake. But to draw 
correct conclusions, you must concern yourself with the representativeness (as well as 
the size) of the sample. Does it, for instance, include only farmed or only Northern 
Pacific salmon? If so, the estimate is clearly biased with regard to determining the 
lake's entire salmon population and applies only to the limited portion of the 
population under examination. So, when statisticians are called upon to propose a 
sampling study, they ask all sorts of (both) broad and specific questions, which may 
perhaps initially seem impertinent, and then use the answers to help develop a plan 
that is maximally informative under the circumstances. When the results of the study 
become available, statisticians then quantify the uncertainty in the findings and 
provide warnings about the generality of the results. And this is where the gatekeeper 
status comes in. 
Of course, statistics and statistical thinking are more complicated than that. 
Many studies are observational, and others involve designed experiments (Sec-
tion 11.2). But because statistics—in light of its reliance on scientific sampling— 
is, in a large part, the science of making decisions under uncertainty introduced by 
the sampling process, and because sampling applies to almost all intellectual 
scientific pursuits, one could assert that statistics is relevant to just about every 
discipline. 
1.5.3 A Peek into How Statisticians Work 
It AH Starts with the Theory. Statistics, just as other scientific disciplines, has 
theoretical components, many of which have roots in mathematics. Theoretical 
statisticians conduct important work in developing new methods, improving on 
existing ones, and coming up with novel ways to address applied problems. 
Expanding the theory is essential to the health and well-being of the field and requires 
strong mathematical skills. Most statisticians receive training in basic statistical 
theory and rely on such theory in applications—many of which are not straight-
forward textbook situations—and in understanding the basic assumptions underlying 
the methods that they are using (even though they are generally not conducting 
research in theoretical statistics). 
A Traditional View. Applied statisticians work primarily on using statistics to 
address issues in other disciplines, generally at the behest of what we will refer to as 
"problem owners." These may be administrators, economists, engineers, scientists, 
social scientists, or others, who are typically leaders or representatives of a larger 
project team. 

6 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
In the past, problem owners often came to statisticians with a/α/ί accompli; that 
is, they had already conducted a study and gathered data, and wanted to know what it 
all meant. In response, statisticians typically asked questions about the study 
objectives, the data gathering process, the measurement methods, and so on. 
This was often followed by the unenviable task of sorting through the data structure, 
and then the data themselves, attempting to extract meaningful findings. Sometimes, 
this was not possible, resulting in much wasted effort. This unfortunate situation was a 
consequence of a frequently held misunderstanding (often furthered by what was 
taught in school) of statisticians as merely appliers of a series of tools to evaluate 
already collected data—as opposed to being purveyors of the scientific method who 
concern themselves with the entire problem and the gathering of the appropriate 
information to address it. 
A Collaborative Step-by-Step Approach. A much preferred alternative route for 
statisticians' participation—and one that, fortunately, is becoming increasingly 
prevalent—is that of collaboration. Effective collaboration takes the form of close 
involvement by the statistician with, and as part of, the project team from the 
beginning to the end of the project. In this context, the statistician is an advocate, 
working to assure unassailable results and aiding in the discovery process. 
Contrary to popular opinion, discovery is not a one-time event. Instead, it is an 
iterative process progressing from synthesis to analysis to the next synthesis and the 
next analysis, and so on, all the while building knowledge and leading to scientific 
advances. Project objectives are reviewed and shared initially with all stakeholders, 
including the statistician, who then typically proposes sampling, data gathering, or 
experimentation strategies. These need to take into consideration such matters as 
sources of variation to be overcome and the precision and accuracy of the measure-
ment process—in addition to numerous practical considerations, such as time, 
financial, and facility constraints. 
Team members then review the statistician's proposed plan with regard to its 
feasibility, ability to meet objectives, expense, and various operational details—based 
on their own technical backgrounds and roles in the project. In this manner, 
the combined knowledge of the team is thrust at the problem and effectively utilized. 
This may lead to the statistician modifying the plan and the conduct of an initial "pilot 
study" to test out the recommended approach. 
At the end of the study, and often at strategic times during its execution, the 
statistician conducts appropriate analyses to extract information from the data. And it 
doesn't end there; the entire team, statistician included, is typically involved in 
reporting the results to management in a readily understandable manner, quantifying 
benefits, explaining limitations, conducting follow-up investigations, and implement-
ing the findings. 
We discuss the need for statisticians to be proactive team members throughout 
this book, and especially in Chapters 5 and 9. 
Gaining a Common Understanding. Statisticians strive to ensure that there is a 
common understanding by all involved—and most importantly by management—of 
the problem to be addressed and of objectives and strategies. If there is lack of 

1.6 MANY SKILLS REQUIRED 
7 
agreement on these, then the team members are likely to be working at cross purposes, 
impairing the likelihood of success. So, in the initial discussions, the statistician 
strives to ensure that all involved are moving in the same direction. Do we agree on 
the project objectives and guidelines, including the time schedule? Do all the 
stakeholders see eye to eye? Do we have approval from oversight agencies, if any? 
Recognition of Variability. Statisticians, perhaps more than most others, think 
about variation and its impact on the findings of the study. They strive to understand 
the overall process and especially the sources of variability. 
The data gathering needs to be planned so as to apply as broadly as possible to 
the population or process of interest, as illustrated by the salmon sampling problem. 
Are the data truly representative of the population or process of interest and will all 
known relevant sources of variation be taken into account? And, consistent with the 
scientific method, can we expect the results to be reproducible? 
In short, the statistician seeks to ensure that, despite the underlying variability 
and the study limitations, the right amount of the right kind of data will be acquired. 
We will return to this important topic in Chapter 11. 
Statistical Thinking. The recognition of variability has, in turn, led to the concept of 
statistical thinking. In contrast to deterministic thinking, statistical thinking recog-
nizes that 
• All work occurs in a system of interconnected processes. 
• Variation exists in all processes. 
• Using data to understand and reduce variation is key to success. 
Statistical thinking has especially broad applicability in situations in which 
there is an opportunity to reduce variation, rework, and waste and improve quality and 
productivity. And, even though our comments have been in terms of industrial 
settings, statistical thinking applies to all areas of application of statistics. See Britz 
et al. (2000) and Hoerl and Snee (2001) for further discussion. 
1.6 MANY SKILLS REQUIRED 
Many students are attracted to statistics because they like and are good at mathe-
matics. Mathematical ability—supplemented by sound statistical training—though 
certainly a necessary requirement for a successful statistician is far from being a 
sufficient one.5 
Successful statisticians need to be skilled in many areas. We summarize some of 
these briefly in this section and provide further elaboration throughout the book, 
especially in Chapters 6 and 7. 
Thus, we have some difficulty with a definition of a statistician that we found online as "a mathematician 
who specializes in statistics" (http://www.thefreedictionary.com/statistician). 

8 
CHAPTER 1 
PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
1.6.1 Interpersonal Skills 
Numerous interpersonal skills, starting with ability to communicate effectively, are 
essential for a successful career in statistics. 
1.6.2 Knowledge in Related Technical Fields 
Statisticians need to be comfortable with computers and computer software. Those 
working in business and industrial settings, especially, need to be trained in operations 
research/management science/decision theory and be knowledgeable in various 
statistics-related methods developed by engineers and computer scientists, such as 
artificial intelligence, knowledge discovery in databases and data mining, and neural 
networks. 
1.6.3 Application Area Knowledge 
Statistics does not exist in a vacuum. It is employed in many different areas. To be 
credible, statisticians need to be familiar with the application areas in which they are 
involved. Having a minor, or even an undergraduate degree, in the field in which you 
hope to be employed will provide you an important advantage.6 Many statisticians 
learn about their chosen application area on the job, but the more prepared they are to 
get up to speed rapidly, the better. 
1.7 
BEYOND THE WORKPLACE 
1.7.1 Impact on One's Thinking 
Statistics is more than a career. It is a way of looking at situations that pervade our 
daily lives. Statisticians tend to think in terms of probabilities and variation, search 
for the data that might support specific contentions, and assess their validity. This is 
why some claim that statisticians—perhaps like scientists, engineers, and lawyers— 
are more rational (and possibly less emotional) in their lives—or, at least, their 
reasoning—than many in other fields. 
In assessing the safety of different forms of travel, for example, statisticians 
might estimate the probabilities associated with each of the alternatives, such as flying 
commercially, driving, taking a bus, or taking a train, based upon available data, and 
then tailor the results to their specific situations (such as driving skill and road 
conditions). 
Training in statistics also gets one to look critically at studies reported in the 
media. Many statisticians enjoy leisurely discussions of the potential pitfalls of such 
studies with colleagues, friends, neighbors, and family. 
6 Alson Look tells the following story, which he attributes to Lloyd Nelson, a one-time Ph.D. chemist who 
became a well-known industrial statistician. A junior statistician once came to Lloyd and showed him a 
designed experiment that he was proposing. After reviewing the plan, Lloyd urged him not to go forward 
with it. "Why not?" the statistician asked. "Because—based on my knowledge of chemistry—it might blow 
up the plant," Lloyd responded—while running in the other direction. 

1.8 SOME DOWNSIDES OF A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
9 
With an appreciation for statistics, there comes a passion for procuring as much 
useful data as possible before making a decision. In purchasing a car, we may avidly— 
some might say obsessively—seek data on repair frequency to guide our selection. 
Statisticians typically do not salt their meals before tasting them. You are unlikely to 
hear a statistician (or a mathematician) say something like "This object is perfectly 
round!" If told that a particular community has over 300 days of sunshine yearly, a 
statistician might assert that this statement has little meaning without a definition of 
exactly how a "day of sunshine" is defined and measured. And only a statistician, 
when told that a bird in the hand is better than two in the bush, might respond, perhaps 
somewhat facetiously, with "that depends upon the probability that you can capture 
the two birds in the bush and your risk function (what, for example, if the proverbial 
birds are actually your pair of shoes?)." 
1.7.2 Promoting Statistical Literacy 
Our society is flooded by statistics and claims based thereon, often by advocates who 
may be more interested in making a point than in a valid and fair assessment of the data 
upon which their claim is based. A key mistake, for example, is to infer causation from 
association (Section 11.5.1). 
A responsibility of statisticians is to promote statistical literacy among the 
general public. This means, in general, helping others become more aware of the uses 
and misuses of statistics, and, in particular, pointing out the fallacies of claims or 
studies of questionable validity. 
A number of books have pointed the way—even though sometimes in a 
somewhat negative manner—following in the steps of the classic How to Lie with 
Statistics (Huff, 1954), and with equally intriguing titles including Best (2001,2004), 
Hooke (1983), and Levitt and Dubner (2005, 2009). We report on our experiences in 
teaching a short course on statistical literacy targeted at adults in Hahn et al. (2009). 
1.8 SOME DOWNSIDES OF A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
If it moves, it's biology; if it stinks, it's chemistry; if it doesn't work, it's physics; 
if it puts you to sleep, it's statistics. 
—Anonymous student 
There must be some downsides associated with being a professional statistician. 
What are they? 
Start with the name and the general perception. Let's face it—the public's 
image of a statistician, though generally improving, is not in the same league as that of 
an astronaut, biotechnologist, or physicist. Statisticians are associated with 
"statistics"—and statistics are often regarded as boring or deceptive or both. It will 
not take long for you to hear the worn quote that Mark Twain attributed to Benjamin 
Disraeli that there are "three kinds of lies: lies, damn lies, and statistics," or the story 
about the chap who became a statistician because he did not have the personality to be 
an accountant. 

10 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
Initial negative impressions are furthered by the often less than exciting 
introductory statistics course that many have taken in college. Such courses may 
have focused on the mechanics of the calculations or the mathematical theory, at the 
expense of demonstrating the broad applicability of statistical concepts. The ASA and 
many colleagues are working hard to help make introductory courses more appealing 
and to place greater emphasis on statistical concepts and statistical thinking. There has 
been important progress in recent years, including the publication of some down-to-
earth introductory texts and the introduction in the United States of the Advanced 
Placement (AP) course in statistics for high school students (Section 7.2). As in any 
subject, knowledgeable, enthusiastic instructors are essential; see Section 13.7.1 for 
further discussion. 
Another concern is that, under some organizational structures, statisticians are 
viewed as "outsiders." This can make them vulnerable to budget cuts and undermine 
their effectiveness. It is one further reason why we advocate throughout this book that 
statisticians strive to become proactive participants and team members in the 
activities in which they are involved. 
Because the value of statistics is not universally recognized, many statisticians, 
especially early in their careers, spend much time marketing themselves and the added 
value they provide—often in a "soft sell" mode. This can be unappealing to those who 
prefer to focus on their technical work and development. 
1.9 THE EXCITEMENT OF A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
A degree in statistics is one of the top degrees to have in terms of getting good and 
secure jobs. On top of that, it offers many opportunities for a challenging and 
rewarding career. 
—Sarah Needleman 
The downsides of statistics as a profession warranted mention. But the percep-
tion may be changing. Lynne Hare reports "In years past, I used to get nerd-associations 
with statistics. Now I get mostly awe. Wow, you can understand that stuff? And you 
make money doing it? 'Yup,' I say. 'Not many people can do it, the demand is high, and 
I can make a bundle.'" This viewpoint (also expressed in the January 2009 Wallstreet 
Journal article by Sarah Needleman cited at the beginning of this section) has been 
reinforced by recent articles in such publications as the New York Times (2009) and the 
Washington Post (2009). We have, in fact, found it highly gratifying to note the 
increased recognition that statistics has been accorded over the course of our careers. 
We remain convinced that for many the negatives of our profession are far 
overshadowed by the excitement, opportunities, and challenges. We wake up, at least 
most days, eager to face the challenges of our jobs—a key criterion in selecting a 
career. Some of the reasons that statistics continues to excite us are 
• The diversity of problems in which we become involved. As per our earlier 
discussion, statistics deals with just about everything. Or quoting a comment 
attributed to the famed statistician John Tukey, "the best thing about being a 

1.10 EMBARKING ON A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
11 
statistician is that you get to play in everyone's backyard. In an age of 
specialization, we might be the remaining scientific generalists." Most statis-
ticians eventually focus on one or a few application areas, at least for a while— 
but even within these there is much diversity. 
• The intellectual challenge of the work. Statisticians have been called data 
detectives (and, as per Section 1.5.2, gatekeepers of the scientific method). 
Problems are rarely clear-cut, and often part of our challenge is to define "the 
real problem." There is ample opportunity to be imaginative. 
• The importance to our employer and often to society of what we do. 
• The opportunity to interact with a wide variety of interesting people with 
different professional and personal backgrounds. 
It should be no surprise, therefore, that CareerCast.com rated statistics as #4 in its 
2011 best jobs ratings (of 200 jobs).7 
1.10 EMBARKING ON A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
1.10.1 Some Alternative Paths 
Individuals with a variety of backgrounds choose careers in statistics. These range from 
people interested in the field from early on and others originally trained in mathematics 
seeking an applications oriented career to those whose work has led to an appreciation 
of the importance and excitement of statistics and the opportunities it provides. 
Here are a few examples: 
• Eliza enjoyed mathematics in high school. She decided early on to be a 
mathematics major in college. However, she did not want to go into teaching 
and was always driven by practical problems. Her high school mathematics 
teacher suggested she take the AP course in statistics. She became fascinated by 
the many areas in which statistics could be applied and decided to minor 
in statistics in college. Eventually, she decided that statistics provided the 
opportunity to combine her mathematics skills with her interest in real-world 
problems. So she enrolled as a Ph.D. student in the subject, specialized in 
biostatistics, took added coursework in biology and other sciences, and upon 
graduation accepted a job with a pharmaceutical company. 
• Juan majored in electrical engineering as an undergraduate. He took an 
introductory course in statistics and was fascinated by its many applications. 
At the end of his junior year, he took a summer internship in the research and 
development division of a semiconductor company. He worked closely with the 
division statistician who helped him plan a test program to assess a proposed 
new transistor fabrication process and analyze the results. These experiences 
The top three jobs were software engineer, mathematician, and actuary. The three worst jobs were 
roustabout (performs routine physical labor and maintenance on oil rigs and pipelines), ironworker, and 
lumberjack. The #4 rating for statistician was an advance over the #8 rating in 2010; the rating in 2009 
was #3. 

12 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
made him decide to obtain a master's degree in statistics. Upon graduation, he 
returned to the semiconductor company as a statistician. 
• Boris held an undergraduate degree in psychology with the career goal of 
going into human resources. On his first job with a large company, he became 
heavily involved in a study to gain a better understanding of characteristics 
of job applicants that could predict on-the-job success. Working with a 
statistician, he came to appreciate the statistical intricacies of conducting 
such a study and the many ways in which statistics can help organizations to 
be successful. He enrolled in a part-time program in statistics at a local 
university. This eventually led Boris to a master's degree in statistics, a 
career shift, and a position with a government agency responsible for 
conducting statistical surveys. 
• Leah had a Ph.D. in chemistry; she had taken a couple of statistics courses. Upon 
graduation, she took a job with a large brewery. With some guidance from her 
former statistics professor, she became engaged in planning and analyzing a 
statistically based test to help ensure that a proposed new brew would consistently 
meet customer taste criteria. After a while, people began to come to her for help 
on statistical problems. Over a period of years, Leah became heavily engaged in 
the self-study of statistics and took a few courses at a local college. She started 
attending statistical conferences and taking short courses on selected topics, such 
as the design of experiments. Eventually, her knowledge matched that of a 
master's degree graduate in statistics. When the company set up a Six Sigma 
program, she was chosen to become a technically oriented black belt and was 
responsible for teaching the statistics part of the training program to her fellow 
employees. Eventually, she was officially designated the company statistician.8 
1.10.2 How We Got to be Statisticians 
And how did we become statisticians? We hasten to say that neither approach is 
suggested as an ideal, or even a recommended, path. 
Gerry Hahn 
As an undergraduate, I commuted to the School of Business at the City 
College of New York (now Baruch College). I was studying to be an accountant, like 
the majority of students there. But my (unofficial) mentor (2 years older than me) 
advised me otherwise. "Do something different and more imaginative," he suggested. 
(He became a successful stockbroker). Besides, there was then an oversupply of 
accountants; entry job accountants typically earned $55 per week (in 1950). Statis-
ticians were making at least $60! 
So I took an introductory course in statistics and found it most interesting. 
I decided to major in statistics, and after graduation enrolled in Columbia University's 
School of Business, where I received a master's degree in statistics. 
8 Leah's career resembled that of the early statistician William Sealy Gossett, who started as a scientist at 
the Guinness brewing company, where he derived the statistical /-test (and was identified as "Student" in 
publishing his work in a scholarly journal). 

1.10 EMBARKING ON A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
13 
An advantage of living in New York City was that, while still going to school, 
I was able to get hands-on experience working in the market research department of an 
advertising agency (the now defunct Biow Company). One of my tasks was to help 
evaluate the effectiveness of different advertising methods in the then hot emerging 
field of television. In one study, we polled a random sample of New Yorkers to assess 
the relationship between people's recollection of advertising messages and their 
product use. The results were reported by the New York Times (the only time in my 
career that I made the Times). 
Shortly thereafter, I was drafted into the U.S. Army (the Korean War ended 
while I was in basic training). I was assigned to the Chemical Corps and was 
stationed at Dugway Proving Ground in the Utah desert. I became involved in 
analyzing field test data to assess the impact of chemical weapons under different 
environmental conditions. This experience got me interested in more physically 
based applications of statistics. I was also recruited to teach an introductory 
statistics course on base. 
Returning from duty and still wearing my army uniform (I had made it to the 
lofty rank of corporal), I stopped off in Schenectady, NY, to interview at GE. It was 
the company's patriotic duty not to turn me down. So began a 46-year career with the 
company! While working at GE, I was able to extend my technical knowledge in 
statistics, via a summer stint at Virginia Tech, a master's degree in mathematics at 
Union College, and, finally in 1971, a Ph.D. in operations research and statistics from 
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. 
Looking back, my entrance into statistics was more a fortunate set of circum-
stances than a planned strategy. A significant deficiency, for which I have tried to 
compensate with subsequent courses and spare time reading, was my relatively 
limited training in the sciences. 
P.S. One of my three daughters, despite the bad example set by her father, 
received her bachelor's degree in statistics at the School of Agriculture at Cornell 
University, followed by a master's degree from the School of Public Health at the 
University of California in Berkeley. She went to work at the March of Dimes and, 
subsequently, the Medical School of the University of California in San Francisco 
(UCSF). This provided an entry into the field of epidemiology, in which, after a 
number of years of part-time study, she received a Ph.D. degree from Berkeley. As 
a faculty member at UCSF, she is currently working on studies of HIV/AIDS 
(especially in Africa) and of the homeless. 
Necip Doganaksoy 
I did my undergraduate study at the Management Depart-
ment of the Middle East Technical University in Ankara, Turkey, graduating in 
1983. As part of a traditionally strong science and engineering school, the 
curriculum was heavily loaded with courses on quantitative topics. I was drawn 
to these since I liked applied mathematics and also wanted to learn more about 
computer applications, which were rapidly being integrated into my courses. 
After an introductory course on probability and statistics, I went on to take 
elective courses on topics such as econometrics, forecasting, and operations research. 
During my senior year, I took a course on statistical quality control that was taught by 
a professor who had recently received his Ph.D. in statistics at Union College in 

14 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
Schenectady. This course was my first exposure to the industrial applications of 
statistics and I found it fascinating. 
One feature of the course was the additional reading material handed out by 
the instructor. These papers carried titles such as "Coefficient of Determination 
Exposed!" and "How Abnormal is Normality?" Compared to the orderly textbooks to 
which I had been accustomed, these papers raised some thought-provoking issues 
about the applications of statistics. I was destined to meet the author, Gerry Hahn, 
a few years later and to become his colleague. 
I became increasingly interested in advanced study in statistics. A graduate 
degree in statistics would most likely lead me toward an academic career. 
Employment at a government agency would have been another possibility, but 
between the two, the academic path seemed more appealing to me at the time. In 
contrast, opportunities in statistics in the business and industrial sector in Turkey 
were limited. 
I decided to follow the lead of my professor and apply to Union College for 
graduate study. Union College, at the time, had a graduate program in applied 
statistics and operations research. One of its major purposes was to serve the large GE 
engineering and scientific community in Schenectady. In addition to its own small 
full-time faculty, statisticians from (what is now) the GE Global Research Center were 
actively involved with the program, teaching courses and guiding graduate students. 
This program provided a nice balance between applications and theory, and suited 
me well. 
My first 2 years at Union were very intense and led to a master's degree. 
In addition to the regular coursework, I undertook an aggressive study program to 
further my background in mathematics. As a consequence of my association with the 
adjunct faculty, I also became interested in industrial and engineering applications of 
statistics. While working on my dissertation, I started an internship with the GE 
Statistics Program. I became a full-time member of the group in 1990 after finishing 
my Ph.D. Given GE's diverse business interests, I wanted to have the opportunity to 
work on a wide array of projects and benefit from the experienced statisticians in the 
group. This required me to abandon, at least for the time being (20+ years and still 
counting), my plans to go into academia. 
P.S. One is never too young to get started. My two young sons are already being 
presented with play situations to develop their statistical thinking skills, even though 
their true passions are space travel and driving a school bus. We will update their 
progress in future editions of this book. 
1.10.3 Some Further Insights 
In an article in Amstat News9 (2009a), five statisticians (four of whom are in 
academia) respond to a variety of challenging questions starting with "what or who 
inspired you to be a statistician?" Amstat News and the ASA's Statisticians in the 
News web site'0 periodically feature articles on the careers of successful statisticians. 
9 The membership magazine of ASA (Section 14.4.1). 
10 http://www.amstat.org/about/statisticiansinthenews.cfm. 

1.11 ACCREDITATION 
15 
For example, see Bruce and Bose (2010). The story of Jim Goodnight—one 
statistician who made it big—is portrayed in Sidebar 1.1. 
SIDEBAR / . / 
A GOOD HOLE MODEL 
Jim Goodnight, a Fellow of ASA, holds a Ph.D. degree in statistics from North Carolina 
State University and was a faculty member there from 1972 to 1976, In 1976, he cofounded 
the SAS Institute, wiih fellow statistician John Sail and others, to analyze agricultural 
research data. Today. SAS is a world-renowned software giant, with over 10,000 employees 
and $2.3 billion in revenues in 2009. The company culture has received much acclaim and 
made various "Best Places to Work" lists. Goodnight was #33 on the Forbes Magazine list of 
the 400 richest Americans in 2009 and has become renowned for his philanthropy. 
Once in statistics, there are again different paths to success. We discuss some 
of these in Section 12.4. 
1.11 ACCREDITATION 
Unlike some other professions, including actuarial science, there was no formal 
program of accreditation or certification of statisticians in the United States for many 
years. In 2009-2010, however, the ASA Board of Directors endorsed a program of 
individual accreditation for its members and for testing procedures for its imple-
mentation; see Amstat News (2009b) and Johnston (2010). 
The general criteria for accreditation" include 
• An advanced degree in statistics or a related quantitative field with sufficient 
concentration in statistics. 
• At least 5 years of documented experience in the practice of statistics. 
• Evidence that the applicant's work as an applied statistician is of high quality, 
• Effective communication skills. 
• Adherence to the ASA's "Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice" (Section 
10.4). 
• An ongoing record of professional growth. 
• At least two supporting letters from persons of substantial stature who have 
firsthand knowledge of the work and skills of the applicant. 
Once granted, accreditation is for 5 years, after which it may be renewed. 
In announcing this program, (then) ASA President Sally Morton emphasized 
that it is voluntary, and not the same as certification, which, in other professions, may 
be required before one can practice and which may require taking an exam. 
http://www.amstat.org/accreditation/index.cfm. 

16 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
Other countries that offer accreditation programs through their statistical 
societies include Australia, Canada (Gibbs and Reid, 2009), and the United Kingdom 
(Lee, 2008). 
1.12 PROFESSIONAL SOCIETIES 
There are numerous professional societies worldwide that provide guidance to 
aspiring statisticians and opportunities to stay abreast, grow professionally, and 
network with others throughout their careers. 
The mainstream organization of professional statisticians in the United States is 
the approximately 18,000-member American Statistical Association. There is also a 
much smaller (about 3000-member) Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS), made 
up principally of academicians. 
Many other countries have their own statistical associations, such as the Royal 
Statistical Society (of the United Kingdom), the New Zealand Statistical Association, 
the Swedish Statistical Association, and the Statistical Society of Canada. There are 
also regional organizations for statisticians, such as the European Network of 
Business and Industrial Statisticians. The International Statistical Institute (ISI) is 
a global organization, founded in 1885, with 2000 elected members from more than 
133 countries "who are internationally recognized as the definitive leaders in the field 
of statistics." Election to membership is based on an individual's professional 
achievements. In addition, there are many more statisticians that are involved in ISI 
through its seven sections. ISI activities, such as its World Statistics Congress and 
other meetings, are open to all. 
Statisticians, especially in business and industry, might also be active in closely 
related organizations, such as the American Society for Quality and its Statistics 
Division,'2 the Institute for Operations Research and the Management Sciences, and 
the Decision Sciences Institute, or more specialized groups such as the International 
Biometrics Society. 
Others might belong to the mainline organization in their fields of application, 
such as the American Association for Public Opinion Research, the American 
Chemical Society, the American Economics Association, the American Educational 
Research Association, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and the 
Society for Clinical Trials. 
We discuss some ways in which statisticians avail themselves of professional 
societies and their offerings in Sections 14.4 and 14.5. 
1.13 A PREVIEW 
Is a career in statistics right for you? If so, what can you expect, how can you be best 
prepared, and what are some things you need to know to succeed? Our goal is to help 
you answer these questions. 
' http://www.asqstatdiv.org/. 

1.14 FURTHER READING 
1 7 
We have organized the book into three major parts, plus this introductory 
chapter and two supplementary chapters (Part IV). The three parts deal with 
• Part I: The Work of a Statistician. 
• Part II: Preparing for a Successful Career in Statistics. 
• Part III: Building a Successful Career as a Statistician. 
In Part I, we describe what statisticians do in business and industry (Chapter 2), in 
gathering, analyzing, and reporting official government statistics (Chapter 3), and in a 
variety of other application areas (Chapter 4). We then comment on the general 
environment in which statisticians work and the challenges that they face on the job 
(Chapter 5). 
We begin Part II with a discussion of the essential personal traits of a successful 
statistician (Chapter 6). We then describe the technical knowledge that aspiring 
statisticians need to acquire in their education (Chapter 7) and suggest strategies for 
getting the right job (Chapter 8). 
In Part III, we provide guidance on how to succeed on the job. We propose on-
the-job strategies dealing with project initiation and execution (Chapter 9) and 
consider communication, publicizing, and ethical considerations (Chapter 10). The 
statistician's all-important, and frequently underappreciated, role in getting good data 
is then presented (Chapter 11). We conclude this part of the book by describing 
alternative career paths for statisticians (Chapter 12). 
Our major focus in the preceding chapters is on a career in applied statistics.13 
Many of our comments also apply to statisticians in academia. Academia, however, 
also has some distinct characteristics of its own. In the first chapter of Part IV 
(Chapter 13), we describe these characteristics and extend our discussion from the 
earlier chapters to the academic world. 
In the final chapter (Chapter 14), we stress the importance of maintaining 
momentum through lifelong learning and indicate some ways statisticians continue to 
stay abreast and move ahead. 
1.14 FURTHER READING 
The Amstat News provides a wealth of further information on a monthly basis. This 
includes the results of periodic salary surveys, such as those for business, industry, and 
government statisticians by Dias et al. (2009) and for statisticians in academia by 
Crank (2010a, 2011). The publication's Member Spotlight series is also of strong 
interest to aspiring statisticians. 
Various other publications and web sites—including that of the ASA—provide 
further information (Section 14.2). 
13 In this book, we use the term "applied statistics" to refer to work conducted by statisticians outside of 
academia and refer to those who do the work as "applied statisticians." We recognize, however, that 
much work conducted in academia is applied and that many in academia consider themselves to be 
applied statisticians. 

18 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
1.15 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Statistics has been broadly defined as "the science of learning from data." It has 
applicability in almost all fields of human endeavor. 
• Professional statisticians are trained in statistics and actively use statistics and 
statistical concepts and thinking in much of their work. 
• The chief employers of statisticians are business and industry; government 
and other agencies engaged in gathering, analyzing, and reporting official 
statistics; and academia. Organizations involved in various other under-
takings, such as social science research, also employ statisticians. Other 
statisticians are self-employed, typically working as private statistical 
consultants. 
• Statisticians can, in many ways, be considered as gatekeepers of the scientific 
method. When feasible, they develop studies, often based on sampling or 
experimentation that are maximally informative. When the data become 
available, they analyze the results, quantify the associated uncertainty, and 
provide appropriate warnings about the generality of the findings. 
• Applied statisticians work primarily at the behest of problem owners and are 
most effective when involved from the outset as team members in a collab-
orative step-by-step approach to addressing problems, beginning with gaining a 
common problem understanding. 
• Statisticians focus on the impact of variability in all phases of a study. This has 
motivated the concepts that are part of statistical thinking. 
• Successful statisticians need much more than mathematical ability and statis-
tical training. They require important nontechnical skills, knowledge in related 
technical fields, and familiarity with their areas of application. 
• Statistics is more than a career. It is a way of looking at situations that pervade 
our daily lives. Also, statisticians strive to promote statistical literacy among the 
general public. 
• Statistics has traditionally not been as well recognized as some other profes-
sions and has been negatively impacted by less than exciting introductory 
courses. This might require statisticians to engage in appreciable "soft selling" 
to overcome. 
• However, for the right person, the preceding downsides of a career in 
statistics are far overshadowed by the excitement, opportunities, and chal-
lenges of such a career. These include the diversity of problems, the 
intellectual challenges, the importance of the work, and the chance to interact 
closely with others. 
• Many roads can lead to a career in statistics. Some initially set out to study 
statistics, perhaps spurred on by an interest in applying their mathematical 
training and skills. Others are led to statistics by witnessing its importance, 
excitement, and opportunities. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
1 9 
• The American Statistical Association has embarked on a program of individual 
voluntary accreditation for its members. Similar programs exist in some other 
countries. 
• There are numerous professional societies worldwide that provide guidance to 
aspiring statisticians and opportunities to stay abreast, grow professionally, and 
network with others throughout their careers. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. Statistics has been defined as "the science of learning from data." What are 
some of the data with which citizens are confronted daily? How are such data 
typically obtained and analyzed? 
2. In the example(s) that you provided in response to the preceding question, 
what were some deficiencies in the data gathering and analysis and how might 
these be overcome? 
3. What are some of the issues that statisticians who are asked to develop a 
national happiness index need to address? 
4. When did you/will you regard yourself to be a professional statistician? 
Explain. 
5. Give examples of statistical practitioners that you have encountered and their 
work. Comment on how they benefited (or might have benefited) in their work 
from guidance by a professional statistician. 
6. * Provide some examples of how statistics has been used to further the 
scientific method. 
7. *Cite some problems in which you have been involved, or of which you are 
aware, that were addressed by an iterative approach, and describe that 
approach. 
8. Statisticians focus on variability. Measurement error is an important source 
of variability in many applications. What is meant by measurement error? 
How can it be assessed and controlled in a particular application? 
9. We assert that "initial negative impressions are furthered by the often less than 
exciting introductory statistics course that many have taken in college." What 
have been your and your friends' experiences in this regard? How can the 
introductory course be made more appealing? 
10. Research and comment on the methodology used by CareerCast.com in its 
ratings of best (and worst) jobs. What are some issues that might be raised 
about this methodology? Does the methodology provide any clues of 
why statistics dropped from #3 in 2009 to #8 in 2010 and then back up to 
#4 in 2011? 

2 0 
CHAPTER 1 PROLOGUE: A CAREER IN STATISTICS 
11. *Consider the career paths of Eliza, Juan, Boris, Leah, Gerry, and Necip. What 
are the pros and cons of each of these paths? Which of the paths, or 
modifications thereof, do you feel most comfortable with? 
12. "Check out and report on the current status of the American Statistical 
Association's accreditation efforts. 
13. *Which professional society(ies) do you belong to or might you consider 
joining in the future? What specific benefits do these provide to students and, 
subsequently, statistics professionals? 

PART M 
THE WORK OF A 
STATISTICIAN 
I HEPURPOSEofthis part of the book is to provide a comprehensive description 
of what statisticians do in different application areas. 
We describe what statisticians do in business and industry (Chapter 2), in 
official government statistics (Chapter 3), and in various other application areas 
(Chapter 4). We then comment on the environment in which statisticians work and the 
challenges they face on the job (Chapter 5). (We defer the major discussion of 
careers in academia to Chapter 13.) 
Our breakdown of areas in which statisticians are engaged is somewhat arbitrary. 
There is also some overlap. For example, new product development conducted by 
business and industry (Chapter 2) involves scientific research (Chapter 4). And much 
scientific research leads to manufactured products (e.g., nanotechnology and molec-
ular pathology) that are likely to be built by industry. Statisticians engaged in 
gathering, analyzing, and reporting official statistics (Chapter 3) are often doing so 
as a prelude to formulating regulations, providing information to improve public 
health, or supporting scientific or social research (Chapter 4). Also, applied statis-
ticians working in any setting may develop new statistical techniques or extend 
existing one to address problems that they encounter. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
21 

CHAPTER 
£Λ 
WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN 
BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
2.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Bear in mind that not only is the corporate world different from the academic one, but 
it itself also varies according to the type of company: from products to services, 
aerospace to commerce, manufacturing to marketing, research-oriented to results-
oriented, and so on. 
—Arnold Goodman 
Our earlier book (Hahn and Doganaksoy, 2008) describes the role of statistics in 
business and industry in detail. Also see the series of articles in Coleman et al. (2010). 
We, therefore, provide only a brief overview in this chapter of 
• Manufactured product applications. 
• Service business applications. 
• Process improvement. 
• Further applications. 
2.2 MANUFACTURED PRODUCT APPLICATIONS 
Failure to understand variation is the top problem in U.S. industry today. 
—Lloyd Nelson 
2.2.1 Evolution 
Statistics first gained popularity in business and industry in the early twentieth century 
in what was then referred to as statistical quality control. This principally dealt with 
ensuring the stability of manufacturing processes (using control charts, building on 
the pioneering work of Walter Shewhart) and with sampling incoming materials and 
outgoing product to identify and act upon defective batches (acceptance sampling). 
Defense industry applications during World War II subsequently led to the formation 
of central statistical groups in business and industry. Much of the early work of these 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
23 

2 4 
CHAPTER 2 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
groups tended to be reactive or "firefighting," such as responding to a field perfor-
mance or reliability problem. 
The use of statistics, and a broader appreciation of what it can do, received a 
significant boost in the United States in the 1980s, as a result of the internationally 
recognized work of W. Edwards Deming' (see Sidebar 2.1). This built upon the 
success of his and others' work in helping Japan use statistical methods to build high-
quality products. 
DEMING'S CONTRIBUTION 
A major thrust of Deming's message was the importance of understanding the sources of 
variability and its reduction through statistically based approaches (subsequently incorporated 
into the concepts of statistical thinking, see Section 1.5.3). Deming stressed the importance of 
enhancing one's process knowledge and the need for continuous improvement. He claimed 
that management's lack of understanding variability often leads to unnecessary tampering 
with the process. For example, Deming strongly criticized the overemphasis placed on the 
"most recent numbers" (e.g., last quarter sales by region) in management decision making. 
Deming was a proponent of a proactive role for statisticians, saying, for example, 
"if I had been waiting for them to come for help, I'd still be waiting" (Deming, 1986). He also 
had strong ideas about statistical leadership roles {Section 12.5). Deming had much more to 
say to management—who flocked to his seminars—as laid out in his 14 points; see Deming 
(1986, 1993). 
Further impetus to the use of statistics was provided in the 1990s by the 
popularization of Six Sigma (Section 5.2.2). 
As a consequence of these developments, management came to realize that 
waiting to address quality in manufacturing (and reliability based upon field perfor-
mance) is too late. Instead, the most cost-effective approach, and the one that maximizes 
customer satisfaction, is to build high quality (and reliability) into the initial design of 
products and processes. It became clear that statistical concepts, in general, and the 
statistical design of experiments, in particular, can play an important role in helping 
design high-quality (and reliable) products and in their subsequent validation. 
Thus, though firefighting problems still arise, a greater proportion of industrial 
statisticians' work today is focused on ensuring high quality and reliability in product 
or process introduction and in continuous product and process improvement. 
2.2.2 Product Design, Reliability Assurance, and Scale-Up 
Under the new philosophy, statisticians help design engineers develop the best 
possible product and guide its successful transition to manufacturing. This includes 
1 The quality improvement movement was significantly impacted by a number of "gurus." In the United 
States, in addition to Deming, these included Phil Crosby, Armand Feigenbaum, Bill Golomski, Joe Juran, 
and Dorian Shainin. 

2.2 MANUFACTURED PRODUCT APPLICATIONS 
2 5 
participation in setting the design goals, ensuring measurement capability, designing 
a product that meets or exceeds its performance goals, design validation, and 
transition to manufacturing. 
Some typical applications of statistics are to help 
• Determine customer needs and expectations through market research studies. 
• Evaluate the impact of critical variables on product characteristics and assess 
their robustness to variability in manufacturing conditions and in product use 
through designed experiments. 
• Plan validation and scale-up test programs and analyze the results. 
An especially important element of successful product design is to ensure 
high product reliability. Reliability is defined formally as "the probability that 
a product will satisfactorily perform its intended function under field conditions 
for a specified period of time." It has been referred to, less formally, as "quality over 
time." 
Ensuring high reliability typically includes planning statistically based accel-
erated test programs to provide an early indication of failures and their causes so that 
these can be addressed in a timely manner. For example, light bulb manufacturers 
might make design changes to improve average product life and/or reduce variability 
using the results of a statistically planned experiment that assesses the impact of 
different design variables on product life. Another illustration, dealing with washing 
machine reliability, is given in Section 11.7. 
2.2.3 
Manufacturing 
Variations in manufacturing processes increase variability in product performance 
and costs and hurt productivity. Today, a major goal of statistics during manufacturing 
is to improve both quality and productivity by reducing variability. 
Some typical applications of statistics are to help 
• Assess manufacturing stability and capability. 
• Evaluate and remove measurement bias and quantify and reduce measurement 
variability. 
• Identify the reasons for deviations from target performance and act thereon. 
• Devise ways to study the structure of variation, identify its sources, and act to 
reduce undesirable variability. 
• Monitor the process and signal significant changes, identify and remove special 
causes of variation, and provide the path to permanent improvement. 
2.2.4 Field Support 
The major goal of statistics during field support is to help develop an optimum 
servicing and problem avoidance strategy and leverage the information on field 
performance to build improved product in the future. 

2 6 
CHAPTER 2 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
Some typical applications of statistics are to help 
• Establish proactive product servicing initiatives, such as preventive mainte-
nance and parts replacement to avoid field failures, and mitigate the impact of 
those failures that do occur. 
• Track product field reliability, provide early identification of failures and their 
causes, address these in a timely manner (including recall of selected product), 
and avoid their repetition.2 
• Compare field performance of a product with that of competitive products and 
help make statistically valid advertising claims based on the results. 
2.2.5 Some Specific Product Applications 
Statistics has traditionally been applied in highly diverse manufacturing industries 
such as 
• Discrete parts assembly, involving products or systems with varying complex-
ity, ranging from light bulbs and motors to automobiles, electronic equipment, 
locomotives, airplanes, and turbines. 
• Process industries, involving such products as chemicals, petroleum and 
plastics, foods and beverages, textiles, and pharmaceuticals. 
• Products that require both discrete parts assembly and processing, such as 
semiconductor manufacturing. 
Different statistical methods are typically used in discrete parts assembly and process 
industries. The approach employed often varies by type of business and manufactur-
ing operation. We briefly describe some prominent product applications and suggest a 
few of the statistical challenges that they present. 
Pharmaceutical Industry. The 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments to the Food, 
Drug, and Cosmetics Act of 1938 requires U.S. pharmaceutical products to be proven 
safe and effective to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) before they can be put 
on the market.3 To achieve such proof, preclinical and clinical trials need to be 
designed, executed, and the results reported. This requires the design and analysis of 
carefully controlled statistically planned investigations as part of a multiphase 
approval process. As a result, the pharmaceutical industry is one of the largest 
employers of statisticians in the United States today. Additional statisticians are 
employed by regulatory agencies such as the FDA (Section 4.2.1) and contract 
research organizations that perform work for pharmaceutical companies. 
Statisticians in the pharmaceutical industry are engaged most extensively in the 
design and analysis of preclinical and clinical studies. These focus initially on the 
2 Such analysis of field data was traditionally a major task of many industrial statisticians. Though 
(unfortunately) still important today, the focus, as per our earlier discussion, has shifted to averting such 
problems through improved product design and by proactive product servicing. 
3 Similar initiatives have been implemented or are underway throughout the world; see Hamasaki et al. 
(2009) for developments in Japan. 

2.2 MANUFACTURED PRODUCT APPLICATIONS 
2 7 
impact of a new drug on animals and on healthy volunteers. If the preliminary results 
appear promising, they are followed by in-depth evaluations to assess the impact of 
the drug on humans and patients with the targeted disease. See Turner (2007) and 
Cleophas et al. (2006) for detailed descriptions of the design, methodology, and 
analysis methods in new drug development and of the use of statistics for clinical 
trials. We discuss ethical considerations in the design and analysis of clinical trials 
in Section 10.4.5. 
Some other activities conducted by statisticians in the pharmaceutical industry 
include 
• Support of Basic Research: Help identify potential new drugs from a vast 
library of compounds and perform in vitro (test tube) and in vivo (in the body— 
animal or human) studies on promising candidates. 
• Pharmaceutical Development: Determine how to make a new chemical or 
biological compound and explore what process steps maximize product yield 
and minimize cost. 
• Marketing and Commercialization: Conduct scientific studies to characterize 
a new product, survey physicians and patients, prepare publications, and give 
public presentations. 
• Manufacturing: Guide the production of the drug in final market formulation, 
usually, in large quantities (e.g., assessing uniformity of drug content, stability, 
and dissolution). 
• Field Tracking: The assessment of the field performance of approved drugs or 
other medications, for example, the evaluation of the long-term health impact of 
taking large doses of a vitamin. Such studies have become increasingly 
important in recent years. 
See Peterson et al. (2009) for an in-depth discussion of the use of statistics in 
pharmaceutical applications beyond clinical trials and Buncher and Tsay (2005) and 
Millard and Krause (2001) for more general discussions of statistics in the 
pharmaceutical industry. Also, the American Statistical Association publishes a 
quarterly journal Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research and has a Biopharma-
ceutical Section. 
Semiconductor Industry. The semiconductor business is characterized by its many 
process steps and efforts to improve product yield and is consequently highly data-
intensive. Some typical applications of statistics are 
• Study of the impact that process variables at one stage of production have on the 
performance at subsequent stages. 
• Monitoring and controlling critical process variables. 
• Product burn-in to weed out likely early field failures. 
Czitrom and Spagon (1997) and Czitrom (2003) provide detailed discussions of 
statistical approaches and methods dealing with process improvement for the 
semiconductor industry. 

2 8 
CHAPTER 2 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
Food and Beverage Industry. The highly competitive food and beverage industry 
often calls for direct interactions with customers and searching for ways of providing 
them maximum satisfaction, while still maintaining a healthy profit. Some typical 
challenges are 
• Minimizing the variability that customers experience in repeat purchases of the 
same product. 
• Monitoring food safety and spoilage. 
• Making customer preference assessments based on data that are typically 
ordinal (e.g., preference scale from 1 to 5) or categorical (e.g., fruity, acidity, 
or bitter taste). 
• Obtaining appropriate data and using the results in a valid and defensible 
manner to make advertising claims about the product. 
2.3 
SERVICE BUSINESS APPLICATIONS 
There has been growing recognition that statistical concepts can play an important 
role in business and industry beyond manufactured products, notably in the improve-
ment of service businesses and functions and in the development and improvement of 
business processes (discussed in the next section). 
2.3.1 Traditional Applications 
Some service businesses have been using statistics for a long time. As indicated 
earlier, the success of the insurance business, and especially life insurance, is based 
upon statistical assessments and has led to the development of actuarial science as a 
separate profession; see Szabo (2004) and Lakshminarayanan (2008a). Airlines have, 
to a large degree, built their scheduling and dynamic ticket pricing strategies on 
statistical and related operations research methods. More recently, online retailers 
have used information on past purchases to identify potential future customers and to 
construct appropriate messages targeted at such customers. 
2.3.2 Financial Services Applications 
The financial services industry is ... one of the most information-driven industries, 
where analytics and statistical analysis play a key role in decision making every day. 
—Sami Huovilainen (2010) 
The large amount of money at stake in financial transactions has made finance 
an especially attractive area for statistical modeling. A key role of statistics in 
financial services is to help quantify risk and uncertainty. Some typical applications 
are the development of 
• Credit scores to determine which future applicants for credit should be approved 
and, if so, for how large a line of credit. 

2.3 SERVICE BUSINESS APPLICATIONS 
2 9 
• Default risk modeling for mortgages and commercial loans. 
• Fraud detection schemes (e.g., of improper auto insurance claims) that max-
imize the identification of culprits, while minimizing the number of falsely 
suspected innocent individuals. 
• Risk assessment as, for example, in loan portfolio acquisition. 
The 2000s witnessed historic levels of consumer and commercial lending, a rapid 
proliferation of new financial products (e.g., derivatives and securitization of bonds), 
and the rise of "financial engineering" as a new field. During the global recession, 
starting in 2008, financial service companies received much of the blame and the need 
for improved statistical models for assessing and managing risks became evident; see, 
for example, Hutchinson (2010). 
2.3.3 Communications Industry 
The communications industry is another highly data-intensive business that has 
traditionally been a heavy user of statistics. Typical applications include 
• Identification of peak usage times and evaluation of the capability to provide 
normal service during such times. 
• Assessments of software reliability. 
• Evaluation of the impact of alternative pricing strategies. 
• Studies of Internet traffic patterns. 
2.3.4 Statistical Software Development and Support 
The revolutionary advances in computing technology have been a key driving force 
behind the use of statistics by statisticians and practitioners alike. We discuss and 
differentiate between different types of statistical software in Section 7.8. 
The development of statistical software (and of general purpose software with 
statistical features) provides significant opportunities and challenges for statisticians. 
An obvious requirement for all such software is technical correctness—but much 
more is needed. Statisticians want their software to include the latest state-of-the-art 
methodologies and to provide the flexibility to allow them to build in their own 
features and to adapt existing features to address the idiosyncrasies of individual 
problems. 
More recently, the so-called "democratization of statistics" (Section 5.2) has 
led to greater accessibility and use of statistical software by nonstatisticians, together 
with online information on how to use such software. Statisticians involved in the 
development of software to be used by practitioners need to ensure that the software is 
easy to use and that the information about it is not only technically correct but also 
easily understandable and helpful to those with limited background in statistics. 
Another goal is to make the software robust to potential misuse by those who do not 
have an intimate knowledge of the underlying methodology. This suggests empha-
sizing graphical methods (and supplementing statistical analyses with graphical 
displays) and, when possible, encouraging users to focus on methods that require 

3 0 
CHAPTER 2 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
minimal assumptions. In addition, it calls for internal checks and warning messages as 
well as clear statements of the statistical assumptions that remain. 
In addition to the development of statistical software, statisticians provide 
support to users. This involves helping them apply the software successfully and 
responding to questions related to both technical features and product use, as well as 
teaching and marketing activities; see Kiernan (2009). 
2.3.5 Internet Operations 
What makes a winning Google statistician? First and foremost, the love of data. What 
our data lacks in quality, we make up for in quantity. 
—Daryl Pregibon (2009) 
The emergence of the Internet has led to a wealth of new applications for 
statisticians. Some of these, such as helping advertisers determine the optimum timing 
for the purchase and placement of ads, are similar to those encountered and addressed 
by statisticians in traditional media, that is, print, radio, and TV. They are charac-
terized by vast databases. 
The new technology has also led to a variety of new problems calling for the use 
of statistical and related methods, such as 
• Directing advertisers to web pages based upon key words. 
• Optimally updating the repository of Internet pages by "refreshing" current web 
pages (i.e., balancing the cost of having a stale web page against that of fetching 
a new page). 
• Optimizing when to purchase online ads (in advance or on the spot) and how to 
price these. 
• Helping a computer search engine provider assess the effectiveness of different 
search techniques, model user behavior, and evaluate the effectiveness of 
different advertising strategies. 
Pregibon (2009) provides an overview of the use of novel experimental design 
approaches (e.g., "random cookie" experiments to assess the effectiveness of different 
advertising messages) and of observational studies (Section 11.5) in online applications. 
2.4 
PROCESS IMPROVEMENT 
The success of any organization—be it product manufacturer or service operation— 
depends heavily on how well its processes perform. These may involve 
• Taking and fulfilling customer orders for products and services. 
• Employee recruitment, orientation, and retention. 
• Accounting and financial reporting. 
• Customer service. 
• Procurement of goods and services. 

2.5 FURTHER APPLICATIONS 
3 1 
The failures of a business process, unlike that of many products or services, may not 
always be immediately apparent, especially if these are not continuously tracked and 
measured. Customers, for example, experience problems in the form of delayed or 
incorrect shipments, multiple referrals to different departmental units, or inadequately 
addressed complaints (including those that the customers themselves did not vocalize— 
but will remember in making future purchases). Improving business processes increases 
customer satisfaction, reduces internal costs, and raises productivity. 
Statistics plays an important role in improving existing business processes and 
developing new ones for both manufacturing and service operations. Some examples 
are helping 
• Improve a billing process to eliminate errors and collect revenues faster. 
• Increase a call center's accuracy and timeliness in addressing customer issues. 
• Improve an order fulfillment process by reducing cycle time and errors in 
product shipments. 
• Reduce placement errors in TV advertising (e.g., avoid back-to-back airing of 
commercials of competing brands). 
See Sidebar 2.2 for another example. 
ARE THE CAPTIONS UNDERSTANDABLE? 
Word captioning of TV broadcasts for the hearing impaired is mandatory in the United States. 
For live programming, this is typically done manually by using stenographers who, to keep up 
with the broadcast, sometimes need to paraphrase rather than provide verbatim captioning. 
Large fines may be imposed for what regulators deem to be inadequate captioning, especially 
during critical events (e.g., weather emergencies). Broadcasters need to measure, improve, 
and track the "quality" of their closed captions and to uncover the root causes of the word 
inaccuracy rate (i.e., fraction of incorrect words) in captions. To address these issues, we were 
asked by a broadcast network to develop a statistical study to (I} quantify the word inaccuracy 
rate and its variability for different broadcast offerings and to (2) break down the variability by 
contributing components, such as program, speaker, background noise, stenographer, and so 
on. The results were then used to reduce inaccuracy rates and to establish controls that would 
help minimize future inaccuracies. 
2.5 FURTHER APPLICATIONS 
Peck et al. (2006) include chapters showing how statistical methods are used in or 
apply to 
• Detecting cell phone fraud. 
• Reducing junk mail. 

3 2 
CHAPTER 2 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO IN BUSINESS AND INDUSTRY 
• Improving the accuracy of a newspaper. 
• Assuring product reliability and safety. 
• Randomness in the stock market. 
• Advertising as an engineering science. 
2.6 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Applications of statistics for manufactured products start with product design, 
reliability assurance, and scale-up (increasingly important areas) and continue 
on to manufacturing and field support. The assessment of the efficacy and 
safety of new drugs is a key application area; two other important application 
areas are semiconductor products and food and beverage products. 
• The use of statistics to support service businesses has expanded appreciably in 
recent years. Application areas include finance, communications, statistical 
software development and support, and Internet operations. 
• The improvement of processes—including both internal operations and the 
servicing of customers—provides another fertile area for the application of 
statistics. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. *Check out Deming' s teachings and report on how and the degree to which these 
are being used in business and industry (and in other places) today. 
2. Statistical reliability analysis calls for approaches that differ, in a variety of 
ways, from those taught in elementary statistics courses. Describe these 
differences. 
3. We assert in Section 2.2.5 that "different statistical methods are typically used 
in discrete parts assembly and process industries." Elaborate. 
4. In Section 2.5.5, we state that product burn-in is used to weed out likely early 
failures for semiconductor products. How is statistics used in establishing 
appropriate burn-in procedures? What are the advantages and disadvantages of 
doing such burn-ins? What would a cost model for burn-in and product 
performance take into account? 
5. 'Report on some recent pharmaceutical studies in the news that required 
statistical planning and analysis and describe how statistics was used. 
6. In Section 2.2.5, we suggest that statistics is used in the food and beverage 
industries to minimize the variability that customers experience in repeat 
purchases of the same product. Describe statistical approaches that are em-
ployed for this purpose. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
3 3 
7. Check out and describe how statistics is used in the development of scoring 
methods to determine which future applicants should be approved for credit 
and, if so, for how large a line of credit. 
8. Select an area in which statistics is being used to improve Internet operations 
and describe the statistical approach used. 
9. Determine an area in which statistics is used to help improve a process and 
describe the statistical approach used. 

CHAPTER 
WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED 
IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT 
STATISTICS DO1 
3.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Official statistics provide an indispensable element in the information system 
of a society, serving the government, the economy and the public with data 
about the economic, demographic, social and environmental situation. 
—United Nations Statistics Division 
Historically, governments have depended on statistics to understand their 
populations and the resources available to them. Early examples include a census 
in the Old Testament Book of Numbers for determining military resources; the New 
Testament's Roman census for taxation; and William the Conqueror's Domesday 
Book, a census designed to learn about the resources available in the recently 
conquered Anglo-Saxon lands. All of these are examples of official statistics. 
Governments and their administrative arms need official statistics for policy 
development, implementation, and evaluation. The public at large has similar needs 
for information to be able to evaluate government policy, to ensure public account-
ability, and to be adequately informed about social and economic conditions in order 
to make informed decisions.2 
Statisticians play a critical role in the collection, analysis, and reporting of 
official government statistics. In this chapter, we describe this role. Statisticians 
engaged in official statistics are typically government employees. There are, in 
addition, many other statisticians employed by government whose principal function 
involves duties other than official statistics, such as drug safety and environmental 
protection. We will discuss their work in Chapter 4. 
' This chapter was written largely by contributing author Leonard M. Gaines. It also benefited greatly from 
inputs by Rich Allen, Cynthia Clark, Len Cook, Ron Fecso, Juanita Lott, and (Catherine Wallman. 
This statement and part of the first statement in the next section were adapted from the United Nations 
Statistics Division Fundamental Principles of Official Statistics, //unstats.un.org/unsd/methods/statorg/ 
FP-English.htm. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
35 
3 

3 6 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
There are also many statisticians working outside of government—mostly in 
academic institutions, national laboratories, and research institutes (Section 4.8)— 
engaged in official statistics, especially in research activities. They may also be 
collecting official statistics under contract with a government agency. 
In this chapter, we consider 
• The scope of official statistics. 
• Examples of the work. 
• Challenges of the work. 
• Research opportunities. 
• Some major employers in the U.S. federal government. 
• Required credentials. 
• Integration of U.S. government statistical activities. 
• Local official government statistics activities. 
• Government statisticians outside the United States. 
• Compensation and other considerations. 
• Sources of further information. 
We will describe characteristics of the job (such as ensuring confidentiality, privacy, 
and security in gathering and reporting official statistics) and various other con-
siderations in subsequent chapters. 
3.2 THE SCOPE OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS 
Statistics are integral to governance of the state. Federal statisticians heed that 
call every day. 
—Juanita Lott 
3.2.1 Diversity of Needs 
Government statisticians around the world develop and administer surveys to gather, 
analyze, and report data periodically (monthly, quarterly, yearly, etc.) on a wide variety 
of subjects. Some examples are population counts and characteristics, education 
performance results, disease occurrence, poverty levels, traffic and transportation 
patterns, and inflation and (un)employment numbers. The subjects surveyed might be 
people or organizations such as companies. The information obtained from such 
surveys is often referred to as "official statistics." These data are used, for example, to 
• Shed light on economic and social conditions. 
• Develop, implement, and monitor government policies. 
• Inform decision making, debate, and discussion both within government and in 
the wider community. 
• Allocate federal and state funds. 

3.2 THE SCOPE OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS 
3 7 
In addition to designing and implementing surveys and reporting their results, 
government statisticians work extensively with existing administrative records— 
information collected routinely as part of a program's operations, such as school 
enrollment records, and income and property tax records. Crime rates, based on police 
agency arrests, are another example of official statistics obtained from administrative 
records. 
There are a number of official statistical data series that result from statistical 
models relying on both administrative records and sample data. The unemployment 
rates and related data produced by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) (and by 
state labor departments for smaller geographic areas) and the Census Bureau's Small 
Area Health Insurance Estimates are two of the many examples. 
3.2.2 Diversity of Customers 
There are typically multiple audiences, or customers, for official statistics. The 
immediate customers might be a government agency, often the one in which the 
participating statisticians are "housed"; another agency might be paying for the work; 
and a Congressional committee might use the results to frame legislation. 
Businesses are also majorusers of official statistics. Forexample, data on population 
change can provide important inputs in making decisions about retail store location. 
The general public, or a segment thereof, is frequently another customer— 
usually after filtering of the information through the media. 
Most government agencies also provide public access to key data sets and 
reports through their web sites—such as the National Center for Health Statistics' data 
on birth and deaths or the National Center for Education Statistics' annual summary of 
education data. In addition, statisticians in government agencies are often asked to 
give further background information in response to direct inquiries. 
In light of the wide audience for official statistics, the data and findings that are 
provided need to be reported in a comprehensive, transparent, and unbiased manner 
that is readily understood by each customer. 
3.2.3 Different Types of Studies 
The decennial population census, the monthly Current Population Survey (CPS), the 
monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI, see Section 3.3.1), and the quarterly Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) are four well-known examples of U.S. official statistics. 
These differ from one another in that the decennial population census, conducted by 
the U.S. Census Bureau,' aims for a complete enumeration, or count, of every person 
residing in the nation. The CPS, on the other hand, is a monthly sampling study of 
people, also conducted by the Census Bureau. Meanwhile, the CPI is based upon a 
sampling of prices conducted by the BLS. The GDP is produced by the Bureau of 
" Various studies cited in this chapter are, in fact, administered by the U.S. Census Bureau. Due to its 
expertise in and infrastructure for efficient data collection, the Census Bureau frequently conducts statistical 
surveys on behalf of other government agencies, including other statistical agencies. It also has limited 
access to selected confidential administrative records (for statistical purposes only). 

38 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENCAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
Economic Analysis and relies on a number of statistical models, which make use of 
the results of various sample surveys, and on administrative records collected by 
several different agencies. 
Special one-time or occasional surveys are undertaken to gather information to 
address key issues and to gain the needed understanding to take appropriate actions. 
For example, the U.S. Department of Labor conducts special surveys to explore 
characteristics of the labor force, such as the number of people with disabilities, union 
membership, and how respondents balance work and family life. Also, in addition to 
routine studies of diseases, government health organizations identify and track the 
spread of epidemics. 
3.2.4 Importance of the Work 
Public policy decisions should be driven by evidence. 
—Peter Orszag 
The important role that official statistics plays in society is emphasized in 
Sidebar 3.1 through quotes from two leaders in the field: Janet Norwood, a former 
Commissioner of the BLS, and Len Cook, former National Statistician of the United 
Kingdom and Government Statistician of New Zealand. 
THE IMPORTANCE OF OFFICIAL STATISTICS 
Janet Norwood expressed the need for government statistics as follows (Norwood, 2006): 
"Those who make governmental decisions need to be informed of the facts: they require 
objective knowledge of what is actually happening, because only ihen can government act 
wisely. . .. Statistical measurement is an important pari of that knowledge. .. .You cannot 
have a democracy without a sound statistical system that is objective and relevant 
The 
statistical system in a democracy has a heavy responsibility. More and more government 
policy is run by the numbers. Voting districts depend on Census results. Social Security 
payments are increased as die CPI rises, and people's view of the success or failure of 
a government policy frequently depend on whether GDP or the unemployment rate goes up. 
Our view of what is happening in almost every aspect of everyday life is in some way 
affected by the numbers." 
Len Cook adds (in a persona! communication) that statisticians responsible for official 
statistics '"work in a unique context, as they operate with a strong statutory authority to 
gather information about the lives of citizens, and of the nature of business and other 
organizations, in order to report on the condition of the population, and the nature of 
commerce. ... Their work is always visible in some way." 
4 It should be noted, however, that the main point of Norwood's article is to argue that the system, "while 
giving tremendous value, also shows signs of wear and tear" and many parts "need refurbishing and 
bolstering," requiring "sustained research and development to guide improvement and innovations." 
Reamer (2009) provides a number of specific examples of the system's alleged wear and tear. 

3.3 EXAMPLES OF THE WORK 
3 9 
3.3 
EXAMPLES OF THE WORK 
Statistics is a guide in the journey from evidence to policy. 
—Sally Morton 
While at first glance, the work of those engaged in official statistics might not 
seem very enticing, those actually engaged in it typically insist otherwise. As another 
leader in the field (the Chief Statistician of the United States) puts it (Wallman, 2008) 
"no matter how long I sit at the helm, I am always enchanted to learn of the fascinating 
activities that engage my fellow (government) statisticians." She provides the 
following (and other) examples: 
• Gathering the needed data to help policy makers propose laws to reduce school 
class size. This might include data on the impact of class size on testing 
results. 
• Using survey data, statistical regression models, and administrative records to 
estimate the number of poor, school-aged children for each of the nation's 
approximately 14,000 school districts. 
• Conducting tutorials for reporters and administration officials about the sta-
tistical profiles of the income and tax distributions of individuals and 
households. 
This section provides some further examples of official statistics and the work of 
official statisticians. 
3.3.1 Measuring Inflation 
The CPI, reported monthly by the BLS, is a statistical measure used to gauge inflation 
or deflation. It is based upon the market price of a fixed basket of goods and services 
purchased by consumers. The CPI is used to calculate cost of living adjustments 
(COLA) for government programs, such as Social Security, and it is often the basis 
for making cost of living adjustments in setting wages. The index is calculated as the 
weighted average of the prices of designated products from a random sample of 
businesses. Statisticians are actively involved in helping ensure that proper sampling 
methods are used and that the weights continue to reflect an ever-changing product 
purchasing environment (Section 3.4.3). 
Similar indexes, though not always based upon random sampling, are used to 
calculate the cost of living in countries around the world. 
3.3.2 Tracking Crimes5 
The U.S. Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS) collects data on 
various aspects of the judicial system. For example, its National Crime Victimization 
Survey measures the national rate of personal and property crime victimization (both 
5 The discussion of the BJS data is based on a description by Sinclair (2009). 

4 0 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
reported and unreported) and the characteristics and consequences.6 The BJS also 
tracks various other statistics, such as the number of law enforcement officers, the rate 
of convictions, the flow of inmates through prisons, and the rate at which those 
released from jail return to crime. In addition, the Federal Bureau of Investigation 
tracks certain reportable crimes, based upon police department arrest records. 
Such data are used, for example, to determine the need for new prisons, where to 
place police, and the effectiveness of different programs aimed at crime prevention or 
rehabilitation. 
3.3.3 Improving Tax Collection7 
The Statistics of Income (SOI) Division of the U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS) 
collects and disseminates information on the operation of U.S. tax laws. The Division 
also conducts specialized studies to help policy makers assess, for example, the 
impact of tax law changes and their effect on tax collections. 
Statisticians in the Mathematical Statistics Section of SOI develop sample 
designs for studies dealing with tax collection and monitor their execution. This often 
involves the development of new methods targeted at improving the sample design 
and/or the subsequent estimation methods. Help is also provided, on occasion, to 
economists in data management and in the analysis of empirical studies. 
Statisticians in SOI's Statistical Support Section provide statistical consultation 
to other divisions in the IRS in studies that are often of high interest to or affect the 
general public. Some typical projects are 
• Study of alternative methods for filing federal taxes. 
• Assessment of the quality of IRS responses to customers. 
• Evaluation of proposed methods for reducing the time it takes the IRS to process 
taxpayer remittances. 
3.3.4 Assessing Gender Pay Equality (and Other GAO 
Projects)8 
The Government Accountability Office (GAO) is an independent, nonpartisan agency 
that works for the U.S. Congress and acts as a watchdog on how government money is 
spent. GAO's work is conducted at the request of Congressional committees or 
subcommittees or is mandated by law and provides helps in framing new laws. 
One recent project was directed at the question "to what extent has the pay gap 
between men and women in the federal workforce changed over the past 20 years and 
what factors account for the gap?" GAO statisticians worked with the study team to 
analyze U.S. workforce pay data over multiple years and studied a cohort (Sec-
tion 11.5.5) of those workers who entered the workforce in 1988. Using regression and 
6 The data collection for this study is conducted by the U.S. Census Bureau. 
7 This discussion is based on a description by Petska et al. (2001) of the work conducted by mathematical 
statisticians at the IRS. 
8 This discussion is based on information provided by Schwartz and Shipman (2009). 

3.4 CHALLENGES OF THE WORK 
41 
other methods, they quantified some possible explanations for gender pay gap 
differences. The results were summarized in a report to a Congressional committee 
and to subcommittee chairpersons Kennedy, Harkin, and Maloney. 
3.3.5 Some Other Examples 
Some further examples of projects in which government statisticians collect and 
report official statistics are 
• Evaluating the hazard associated with having infants sleep in an adult bed (by 
the Consumer Product Safety Commission). 
• Tracking citizen complaints about police use of force (by the BJS). 
• Developing models for forecasting future energy prices and allowing users to 
apply these models online to create their own forecasts, based upon up-to-date 
data provided by the U.S. Energy Information Administration. 
On a lighter note, as noted in Section 1.2, statisticians in the United Kingdom have 
recently been commissioned to develop a population "happiness index" (and pre-
sumably asked to conduct a sampling study to arrive at a number). 
In addition to activities at the federal level, statistical work in the United States 
also takes place at the state and local levels of government. Some examples are 
• Collecting birth, marriage, divorce, and death statistics (by county and state 
health departments). 
• Calculating the odds of lottery games sponsored by state governments. 
• Monitoring and reporting on government operations dealing with, for example, 
the weekly number of new unemployment claims or monthly tax revenues. 
• Evaluating the validity of standardized education tests and civil service 
examinations. 
Summing up the roles of statisticians in the federal government, Ron Fecso, chief 
statistician at the U.S. Government Accountability Office, asserts (Fecso, 2008) that 
"work in the federal government provides you the opportunity to have an impact on... 
major (national) policy issues." A similar comment can be made about statisticians 
working for state or local governments. 
3.4 
CHALLENGES OF THE WORK 
3.4.1 Systems Development and Updating 
Statisticians are frequently engaged in the initial development and implementation 
of systems for gathering, storing, processing, and making accessible needed data. 
Developing statistically sound systems and ensuring that the work is conducted as 
The full report "Women's Pay: Gender Pay Gap in the Federal Workforce Narrows as Differences in 
Occupation, Education, and Experience Diminish" (GAO-09-279) is available at //www.gao.gov/new. 
items/d09279.pdf. 

4 2 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
planned—while watching out for the unexpected—is an important responsibility of 
government statisticians. This can involve the development of new statistical tech-
niques, evaluation studies during both the study planning and implementation phases, 
and quality assurance evaluations once systems for gathering official statistics are in 
place. A good background in computing is extremely helpful for such work. 
3.4.2 Ensuring Statistical Validity 
Most statistical methods rely on assumptions about statistical practices that do 
not always hold. It may, for example, not be possible to include some groups, 
such as the homeless, in the survey. Low response rates to surveys are another 
problem commonly faced by government statisticians. This becomes especially 
complicated when nonresponse tends to be concentrated in some segments of a 
sampled population such as young males, or in some types of businesses, but not 
in others. 
When the statistical assumptions on which the methods are based cannot be 
met, government statisticians have to develop reasonable adjustments to the proce-
dures or data to account for such concerns and to justify, implement, and document 
these. 
We provide a more detailed discussion of getting good data in Chapter 11. 
3.4.3 Responding to Changing Environments 
The Challenge. A system that makes sense and provides useful results today may, 
in light of changing circumstances, no longer be appropriate tomorrow. Therefore, an 
important continuing task, beyond routine system development and implementation, 
is that of monitoring the continued adequacy of existing systems and modifying them, 
when needed. Precisely what the CPI is measuring, at any given time, needs, for 
example, to be reviewed periodically as social and economic conditions change; see 
Norwood (2006). Great care must be exercised in so doing to ensure, among other 
things, comparability of results across time. 
Consider specifically the impact of the personal computer on the CPI. Since 
the 1980s, home computers have become increasingly common and sophisticated, 
while their prices have continuously declined. Thus, provisions need to be made in 
the CPI to appropriately add home computers—including changes in their perfor-
mance and quality, as well as their price—to the index so that it continues to be 
representative of consumer purchases.10 
Impact of Advances in Technology. Continuous improvements in technology 
provide further reasons for modifying a statistical system. The Internet has from its 
earliest days led to faster transfer of data to statistical agencies. It has also presented 
important new challenges and opportunities for data gathering and analysis. 
10 A description of how the BLS updates the CPI is included in Chapter 17 of the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics BLS Handbook (2007). 

3.4 CHALLENGES OF THE WORK 
4 3 
Government agencies, for example, work under tight laws to guarantee the 
confidentiality 
of the information 
they receive from survey participants 
(Section 10.4.4). The ability to assure respondents that their confidentiality would 
be fully protected in an Internet environment has been questioned. As a consequence, 
some government statistical agencies have been reluctant to use the Internet to 
collect data. 
The Internet and the expansion of microcomputing have also had tremendous 
impact on the tabulation and dissemination of official statistics." From the 1960s 
through the 1990s, many statistical summaries were distributed as tables on magnetic 
tapes for use on mainframe computers. The users of these data tended to be trained 
data analysts who had a good understanding of the underlying statistical issues. 
Today, many more people—often with little or none of the needed understanding of 
statistical subtleties—are able to access and manipulate the data. To address this 
situation, statisticians are spending increasingly more time working on ways to 
present data and background information to make these readily understandable to 
users with limited technical background. 
Impact of Changes in Sociological Environment. The ever-changing environment, 
such as the growing influence of service businesses in the United States and the 
increasing role of globalization, creates the need for revising existing systems and 
developing new ones. In addition, since stability and comparability over time of the 
data being collected are of clear importance to all involved, there is a need to 
anticipate relevant sociological, as well as technological, changes. This includes the 
public's perception of the importance of government data gathering and reporting, 
and the ability to keep the data secure. Those who plan to work in these areas will 
benefit from an educational background that is strong in the social sciences, as well 
as statistics. 
The U.S. Census Bureau's American Community Survey (ACS) is one example 
of official statistics responding to both changing societal needs and the long 
development times sometimes required to bring a new official statistics program to 
life. This survey was designed to address the increasingly rapid changes in socio-
economic conditions by providing information on age, race, income, commute time to 
work, home value, and so on more frequently than afforded by the decennial census's 
long-form questionnaire. 
The ACS replaces the once-every-10-year sampling study (about 18.3 million 
homes in 2000) with an ongoing monthly sample of 250,000 housing units, 
allowing yearly release of results, based on 12, 36, and 60 months of pooled 
observations. It calls for a new way of collecting and reporting data for very small 
geographic areas. Because of this and other reasons, it took from (the initial 
discussions about data collection and presentation methods in) the mid-1980s to 
2006 for full implementation for data collection and 2010 for the initial release of 
small area data. 
The needs of official statistics and the changing environment have, in themselves, led to technological 
advance. Herman Hollerith, for example, developed punch card technology as a tool for processing the 1890 
Census. 

4 4 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
Another example of the need for federal statistical agencies (or programs) to 
respond to changing environments is provided by the North American Industry 
Classification System (NAICS); see Sidebar 3.2. 
THE NORTH AMERICAN INDUSTRY CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM 
The North American Industry Classification System, a standard issued by the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB) for classifying business establishments, was developed 
during the laie 1980s and early 1990s. In 1997, it replaced the Standard Industrial 
Classification (SIC) system, which had been used since the early 1940s by U.S. federal 
statistical agencies to classify business establishments for the purpose of collecting. 
analyzing, and publishing statistical data related to the business economy. NAJCS addressed 
I he bet that the SIC system, with its very strong bias toward manufacturing reflecting the 
economy of the 1930s and 1940s, could no longer be modified to present meaningful 
information about the emerging service-based economy. Also with the increased economic 
relationships between the United States, Canada, and Mexico, there was a need for 
a common classification system that could be used by all three nations. 
Statisticians from the three countries worked together to develop NAICS. One of its 
particularly useful aspects is the built-in recognition of the importance of the system 
remaining current—requiring that NAICS be reviewed and revised, as needed, every 
5 years, 
3.4.4 Serving as Official Data Intermediaries 
Another major duty of many government statisticians, especially those in federal 
agencies not primarily charged with producing official statistics and those in state and 
local governments, is serving as data intermediaries. This function involves deter-
mining the needs of the ultimate user, finding and often reformatting the data, 
interpreting the data and the associated statistical limitations, and explaining to 
users how the data respond to their needs and what it all means. 
The ultimate users, within the statistician's agency or elsewhere, may be 
looking for data to help design a program or develop some new legislation over 
the next few months. Or they may be senior officials requiring inputs for a speech to be 
given in an hour. They can also be members of the general public seeking official 
statistics for almost any reason imaginable, ranging from settling a bet to helping 
develop a business plan. 
As data intermediaries, government statisticians must understand the data 
users' needs. They must also know where to find a wide variety of official statistics 
and how to access and use such data. On other occasions, they may have to 
compensate for a lack of official statistics by going to private data providers, such 
as in securing data on local home sale prices. It may also be necessary to make 
estimates based on available official statistics, for example, estimating the square 
footage of grocery stores in a local area from national information about average 

3.5 RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES 
4 5 
square footage per employee—subject to the stated assumption that the national 
figures can appropriately represent local conditions. 
All of this requires an understanding of all aspects of the data being used, 
including why and how the data are collected and processed (and such subtleties 
as adjustments for missing data and methods for protecting respondent confi-
dentiality) and delivered. This knowledge also helps the statistician understand 
and communicate the data's limitations, as well as usefulness for the purpose 
at hand. 
This role, like others, while requiring good technical statistical abilities, also 
calls for a variety of other skills. These include understanding computer programs that 
can be used to present the data in various ways (such as spreadsheets for creating 
tables and graphs, and geographic information systems for mapping the data 
spatially), as well as outstanding communication abilities. We will return to these 
topics in later chapters. 
3.5 RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES 
Many U.S. federal statistical agencies conduct ongoing research. Statisticians in such 
agencies work on conceiving new programs, improving existing programs and 
procedures, and making them more efficient. They also help develop and evaluate 
new technologies. As a result, government statisticians conduct research in numerous 
areas of statistics. 
Common research topics include developing improved methods for creating 
small area estimates, evaluation of data suppression and publication alternatives (to 
protect confidentiality without sacrificing key information), and data mining of 
agency databases. Seasonal adjustment of time series data is an especially important 
topic—and one that is often not well understood by the general public. As a 
consequence, development of the best possible adjustments—and their defense— 
is a very active field for researchers. 
Many official statistics are based on surveys and there is a constant need to 
improve these in response to social and budgetary pressures. Thus, many statistical 
agencies are actively involved in survey methodology research. 
Research in official statistics can be truly groundbreaking. For example, the 
National Aeronautics and Space Agency (NASA) began exploring practical appli-
cations of aerospace remote sensing in 1968, some 4 years before the first earth 
resources satellite was launched. Today, remote sensing data are obtained by various 
agencies and contribute to our knowledge about such issues as climate change and 
land utilization. 
A few government statisticians engaged in official statistics spend much of 
their time in conducting research. For many others, research studies provide an 
occasional change of pace and an opportunity to develop additional technical 
skills that are then leveraged in applied work. In conducting such research, 
government statisticians often collaborate with academic statisticians who may 
spend time with their agency through fellowships, sabbaticals, or other contrac-
tual arrangements. 

4 6 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
3.6 SOME MAJOR EMPLOYERS IN THE U.S. FEDERAL 
GOVERNMENT 
Statisticians in the United States are employed by various federal agencies that have 
responsibility for gathering and reporting data. Their specific number depends upon 
one's definitions of an agency and of a statistician. The BLS reports that in 2009 
statisticians held about 4400 jobs in the federal government, with the highest 
concentration in the Departments of Commerce (especially the Census Bureau), 
Agriculture, and Health and Human Services. 
FedStats12 lists well over 100 U.S. federal agencies with statistics programs and 
gives brief descriptions of the statistics they provide (and links to their web sites), as 
well as contact information and key statistics. 
Citro (2009) lists the 14 principal U.S. statistical agencies and their parent 
organization; see Table 3.1. These are members of the Interagency Council on 
Statistical Policy, established by the OMB to coordinate statistical policy and 
operations among agencies and to advise the OMB on major statistical policy issues. 
The budgets of these agencies are approved by seven different Congressional 
appropriations subcommittees, and their operations are monitored by a variety of 
Congressional oversight committees. In addition, numerous other agencies have 
budgets for statistical activities. 
The 14 principal statistical agencies have various types of statistical activities 
among their primary duties. Nine of them have "statistics" in their titles. Together, 
they employ more than 10,000 permanent staff members, including approximately 
2000 people who are classified as statisticians and many more with backgrounds in 
computer science, economics, and demography (Wallman, 2008). 
TABLE 3.1 Principal U.S. Federal Statistical Agencies 
Bureau of Economic Analysis (Department of Commerce) 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (Department of Justice) 
Bureau of Labor Statistics (Department of Labor) 
Bureau of Transportation Statistics (Department of Transportation) 
Census Bureau (Department of Commerce) 
Department of Environmental Information (Environmental Protection Agency) 
Economic Research Service (Department of Agriculture) 
Energy Information Administration (Department of Energy) 
National Agricultural Statistics Service (Department of Agriculture) 
National Center for Education Statistics (Department of Education) 
National Center for Health Statistics (Department of Health and Human Services) 
Office of Research, Evaluation, and Statistics (Social Security Administration) 
Science Resource Statistics Division (National Science Foundation) 
Statistics of Income Division (Treasury Department) 
From Citro (2009). 
12 //fedstats.gov/agencies/. 

3.7 REQUIRED CREDENTIALS 
4 7 
In addition to those in official statistics, there are many opportunities for 
statisticians in federal agencies that have other primary missions, such as adminis-
tration of benefits (e.g., Medicare and Medicaid) and regulation (Section 4.2)—as 
well as in such agencies as the Federal Highway Administration, the Federal Reserve 
System, and the U.S. Geological Survey. These agencies are often heavy consumers of 
the data produced by the principal statistical agencies, combining such data with their 
own both for monitoring their own operations and for establishing policy. 
Many, but not all, federal government statisticians are located in the 
Washington, DC, area. This high concentration of statisticians and of related 
professionals provides those involved the opportunity to be stimulated by, learn 
from, and interact with other statisticians from many different agencies, academia, 
and consulting firms and to actively participate in professional activities (see Fecso, 
2008).13 Several of the principal statistical agencies also employ statisticians in their 
regional offices, which tend to be in the nation's major cities or state capitals. 
In addition, many consulting firms, such as Mathematica Policy Research, the 
National Opinion Research Center, the Research Triangle Institute, and Westat, have 
the federal government as a major client and hire statisticians to work on projects. 
3.7 REQUIRED CREDENTIALS 
The Office of Personnel Management states that, in general, U.S. federal professional 
positions require 
Successful completion of a full 4-year course of study in an accredited college or 
university leading to a bachelor's or higher degree.14 
Statisticians responsible for the collection and reporting of official statistics 
often hold a bachelor's or master's degree. Those involved in applied research, 
however, often have a master's or, occasionally, Ph.D. degree. Federal government 
classification standards, moreover, differentiate between statisticians and mathemat-
ical statisticians. 
Degree Requirements for U.S. Federal Statisticians. Government regulations 
require statisticians to hold a degree that 
Included 15 semester hours in statistics (or in mathematics and statistics, provided at 
least 6 semester hours were in statistics), and 9 additional semester hours in one or more 
of the following: physical or biological sciences, medicine, education, or engineering; 
or in the social sciences including demography, history, economics, social welfare, 
geography, international relations, social or cultural anthropology, health sociology, 
' The Washington Statistical Society is the ASA chapter with the largest membership; it usually has several 
seminar programs every month. 
U.S. Office of Personnel Management. Group Coverage Qualification Standards for Professional and 
Scientific Positions, //www.opm.gov/qualifications/Standards/group-stds/gs-prof.asp. 

4 8 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
political science, public administration, psychology, etc. Credit toward meeting 
statistical course requirements should be given for courses in which 50 percent of the 
course content appears to be statistical methods, e.g., courses that included studies in 
research methods in psychology or economics such as tests and measurements or 
business cycles, or courses in methods of processing mass statistical data such as 
tabulating methods or electronic data processing.15 
The degrees possessed by those hired as statisticians are sometimes in subjects 
other than statistics, such as mathematics, applied mathematics, operations research, 
economics, business, computer science, sociology, or urban and environmental 
studies—although such individuals must still meet the cited basic requirements. 
Degree Requirements for U.S. Federal Mathematical Statisticians. Most statis-
ticians working in the major U.S. federal statistical agencies are hired as mathematical 
statisticians. They are expected to perform a much broader array of statistical work 
than statisticians. Their degree requirements are specified to include 
24 semester hours of mathematics and statistics, of which at least 12 semester hours were 
in mathematics and 6 semester hours were in statistics.16 
While the preceding are the minimum requirements, those with only a 
bachelor's degree are encouraged to earn a master's degree in statistics or in a 
closely related area, such as survey methodology. Such additional education is 
especially important for gaining promotions. (See Section 7.4 for further discussion 
on how far statisticians should take their formal education.) 
Those hired as mathematical statisticians typically have statistics degrees 
or a degree in a highly quantitative field such as operations research or applied 
mathematics. 
Citizenship Requirements. U.S. citizenship is a requirement for permanent U.S. 
government positions. There are, however, several hiring mechanisms for permanent 
residents and other noncitizens in some agencies (see O'Neill et al., 2008). 
Degree Requirements for State and Local Statisticians. The requirements for 
statisticians working in state and local government in the United States vary greatly. 
New York State's requirements for statisticians, for example, are similar to the federal 
government's requirements. Thus, New York State requires a statistician to have 
Either 
1. A bachelor's degree or higher in statistics; or 
2. A bachelor's degree or higher including or supplemented by 24 semester credit hours 
in statistics, biostatistics, computer science, economics/econometrics, mathematics, 
15 U.S. Office of Personnel Management. Statistics Series, //www.opm.gov/qualifications/standards/iors/ 
gsl50O/1530.asp. 
16 U.S. Office of Personnel Management. Mathematical Statistics Series, //www.opm.gov/qualifications/ 
standards/iors/gs 1500/1529.asp. 

3.8 INTEGRATION OF U.S. GOVERNMENT STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES 
4 9 
operations research, or research methods, 3 of which must be in statistics or 
biostatistics and 9 more of which must be from among: differential or integral 
calculus, econometrics, biostatistics, or statistics.17 
Variations of these requirements are used for biostatisticians and for program 
research specialists. 
In contrast, the State of Oregon uses the broader Research Analyst title to 
encompass statistical and other related positions. The minimum requirements for 
a Research Analyst are 
College-level coursework that includes at least three quarter units in business or 
technical report writing, three quarter units in quantitative analysis or statistical 
principles, and six quarter units in computer concepts and microcomputer applications 
such as word-processing, spread sheet and database. 
OR 
One year of experience in work that included gathering data from various sources and 
usi ng software appl ications to retrieve, edit or tabu late data i nto forms or reports.18 
3.8 INTEGRATION OF U.S. GOVERNMENT 
STATISTICAL ACTIVITIES 
In contrast to many other countries, federal statistical activities in the United States are 
basically decentralized; each agency has prime jurisdiction over its own activities. 
This decentralization may, in part, be a consequence of the fact that the system grew 
by adding separate agencies whenever congress and the executive branch felt these 
were needed (Norwood, 1995). 
There are various other organizations dedicated to integrating and/or coordi-
nating statistical activities involving official statistics in the United States. For 
example, 
• The Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology, an interagency committee 
operating under the auspices of the OMB, brings together experienced repre-
sentatives from different government agencies to identify and document best 
practices and to encourage improvements. 
• The Council of Professional Associations on Federal Statistics disseminates 
information on developments in federal statistics and on educational pro-
grams about how official statistics are used; see Shipp and Cohen (2009, 
2010). 
17 New York State Department of Civil Service. "Statistician/Statistician Trainee/Biostatistician/Biostat-
istician Trainee" Recruitment Announcement, //www.cs.state.ny.us/announarchive/announcements/25-
280.cfm. 
State of Oregon. "Classification Specification Library." Research Specialist I, //agency.govemmentjobs. 
com/oregon/default.cfm?action=viewclassspec&classSpecID=733810&agency= 1807&viewOnly=yes. 

50 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
• The Association of Public Data Users promotes communication between 
federal statistical agencies and data users. 
See the book's ftp site for more details. 
3.9 LOCAL OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS 
ACTIVITIES 
In addition to the federal government, numerous state and local governments in the 
United States employ statisticians in the collection and reporting of statistics. They 
are engaged in addressing topics of local interest and in gathering and analyzing data 
needed to help develop agency policies. 
However, unlike the federal government, most local governments do not have 
their own statistical agencies. Instead, their statisticians are likely to belong to a 
general policy and research unit or to an operational group. For example, this 
chapter's author works in the policy and research division of his state's economic 
development agency. In this position, he assists other analysts in finding data to help 
evaluate proposed programs or legislation or to promote the state's interests. 
There are also many cooperative agreements between federal and state agencies 
aimed at meeting the statistical needs of both. These can take many forms, as 
suggested by the examples in Sidebar 3.3. 
EXAMPLES OF COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS BETWEEN U.S. FEDERAL 
AND STATE AGEN1CES 
• Michigan's Department of Agriculture, through a cooperative agreement with the 
National Agricultural Statistics Service (NASS), collects and analyzes data on 
agricultural characteristics to help the state's farmers make informed decisions on 
the type and amount of crop to grow.1'' Many state agricultural statistical services 
operate under joint funding from NASS, share office space, and get directions from 
the same person. 
• State employment security agencies collect, summarize, and disseminate data about 
employment, such as the number of jobs and the unemployment rate, undera contract 
with the BLS. The BLS determines the statistical methods to he employed, in 
consultation with the states' statisticians, who then implement the program. 
• Each of me states and U.S. territories participates in the Census Bureau's State Data 
Center program. The Census Bureau provides the states ready data access. In return, the 
states disseminate the data and answer technical questions for a minimal charge {or no 
I
cost at all). They also provide the Census Bureau information about user needs to help it 
improve its data and products. 
• The New York State Department of Labor, in partnership with the U.S. Census 
Bureau's Local Employment Dynamics program, develops in-depth information 
1 http://michigan.gov/mda/. 

3.10 GOVERNMENT STATISTICIANS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES 
51 
about local employment conditions and trends. Under a strict confidentiality agree-
ment, the state provides the Census Bureau with information about state employment. 
The Census Bureau then combines such data with other information to produce and, 
after review by state 
characteristics.2' 
statisticians, issue integrated synthetic data 
on worker 
In addition to cooperating with the federal government, state agencies often 
work with their counterparts in other states. Such cooperative efforts help statisticians 
who might otherwise be working in isolation to develop collegial relationships with 
their peers and to stay current. 
The number of statisticians employed at the state and local levels varies greatly 
based on perceived needs. Also, some state and local government agencies that lack 
in-house statistical expertise seek help from other sources, such as statisticians at local 
universities or private consultants. 
3.10 GOVERNMENT STATISTICIANS OUTSIDE THE 
UNITED STATES 
National Agencies. Similar to the United States, countries around the world have 
agencies employing statisticians. The International Statistical Institute's (ISI) web 
site22 provides one-stop access to the central statistical agencies of all countries. 
There is much variation in different nations' statistical structures. Canada has a 
more centralized statistical system than the United States, with Statistics Canada as 
the primary statistical agency (see Sidebar 3.4). But, like the United States, the 
Canadian statistical system is divided between levels of government, with statisticians 
working for provinces (or territories), as well as for the federal government. 
SIDEBAR 
CANADA'S STATLSTICAL SYSTEM2 
Canada's Statistics Act establishes a mandate for Statistics Canada, its statistical office, with 
virtually unlimited subject coverage. The Act also makes information requests by this 
agency compulsory unless specifically designated otherwise, providing Statistics Canada 
blanket access to many administrative records held by governments—including taxation 
and customs and court records. At the same time, the Act imposes an ironclad guarantee of 
confidentiality. 
The synthetic data are respondent-level data that have been altered slightly for public use to protect 
respondent confidentiality, but that retain the statistical distributional characteristics of the original data. 
' http://lehd.did.census.gov/led/. 
2 http://isi-web.org/statsoc/directory. 
23 This sidebar is adapted from Fellegi (1996). Also see Denis et al. (2002) for a discussion on preparing 
statisticians for a career in Statistics Canada. 

52 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
However, the Act dees not establish a central statistical agency per se. Instead, it requires 
Statistics Canada to coordinate the national statistical system. As a result, Statistics Canada 
enters into joint collection and data sharing agreements with both federal government 
departments and the statistical agencies of individual provinces, subject to strict confi-
dentiality protection. 
In the United Kingdom, legislation in 2007 established an independent 
Statistics Board that reports directly to parliament. The Office for National Statistics 
is the nation's single largest producer of official statistics with approximately 4000 
employees. The National Statistician oversees the decentralized government statis-
tical service and the Office for National Statistics. 
Even Singapore, a small country, established under a Statistics Act its own 
Department of Statistics to serve as the national authority and coordinator responsible 
for economic and population statistics. 
Each country has structured its statistical system to be in line with its culture and 
data needs, and the major means of collecting data must do likewise. For example, 
some countries, such as The Netherlands and the Nordic countries, rely heavily on 
national register systems for their sources of data. 
International Agencies. Many international (and "supranational") organizations, 
such as the United Nations and its component agencies and Eurostat (the European 
Union's statistical agency), have their own statistical systems. The ISI web site again 
provides access to UN agencies and other international statistical agencies (such as 
those of the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank). 
Sometimes, such agencies meet administrative, as well as statistical, needs. 
The Harmonized System was developed by the World Trade Organization to provide 
all of the organization's member nations a common way to classify exports and 
imports. Eurostat also has numerous statistical requirements designed to integrate the 
use of statistics across the European Union. 
Other international organizations, like the World Bank, employ data produced 
by different national systems (e.g., gross domestic product). This often requires 
working with data using different collection methods and trying to reconcile these to 
achieve a reasonable degree of comparability. Just as elsewhere (Section 11.6.7), this 
can be a difficult task. 
3.11 COMPENSATION AND OTHER 
CONSIDERATIONS 
The monetary compensation of government statisticians may not always match that 
provided by industry—especially at higher levels and in management positions. In 
addition, government statistical agencies often go through periods of virtually flat 
operating budgets and budget freezes, placing an added strain on operations (and even 
greater pressure for improved efficiency). 
But there are other compensating benefits. Quoting Fecso (2008), "although the 
starting salary (in government) can be a little lower than what other employers offer, 

3.13 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
5 3 
the leave and retirement program, steady employment, challenging problems and 
other pluses even the score. If you are motivated by service and want to like what you 
do and know it is important, then government may be the place for you." While Fecso 
was describing working for the federal government, the same comments apply, to 
varying degrees, for state and local governments. 
3.12 SOURCES OF FURTHER INFORMATION 
The articles by Norwood (2006) and the presentation by Fecso and Olson (2006) 
provide further details about the variety of work conducted by U.S. federal statistical 
agencies. Fecso (2008) and Wallman (2008) describe their careers culminating as 
chief statisticians of the U.S. legislative and executive branches, respectively. Also, 
Beale (2004), Clark (2008), Lott (2008), Schenker (2008), and Siegel (2005) provide 
insights from successful government statisticians and Fellegi (1996,2004) comments 
on effective statistical systems and the pressures and challenges of official statistics. 
Periodic articles in Amstat News describe statistics in different government agencies; 
see, for example, Davis (2010). Also see Section 14.4.2 for information on current 
journals and other ongoing sources of information about official statistics. 
3.13 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• The proper collection, analysis, and reporting of official statistics by govern-
ment and other organizations is a vast, and critically important, challenge. 
Customers for the resulting information include government agencies, busi-
nesses, and the general public. 
• Official statistics involves all areas of society. Some typical examples, in 
addition to the all-important national censuses, are measuring inflation, track-
ing crimes, improving tax collection, and assessing gender equality. 
• In the United States, 14 major federal statistical agencies are heavily engaged in 
statistics; much additional work is conducted by various other federal, state, and 
local agencies. 
• Similar work is conducted by governments worldwide, using structures and 
methods built around each nation's culture—as well as by international 
agencies, such as the United Nations. 
• Statisticians are frequently engaged in the development, implementation, and 
updating of systems, or surveys, for gathering, storing, processing, and making 
accessible needed data. 
• Many of the surveys government statisticians work on are ongoing; others are 
one-time. Systems development time can range from a few months to decades. 
• Systems need to be monitored and modified over time to ensure that they remain 
relevant in the face of changing needs and accurate and efficient despite 
advances in technology and changes in society. 

54 
CHAPTER 3 WHAT STATISTICIANS ENGAGED IN OFFICIAL GOVERNMENT STATISTICS DO 
• Some statisticians, especially outside the 14 statistically focused agencies, 
work principally as data intermediaries. 
• Statisticians involved in official statistics are engaged, to varying degrees, in 
conducting research to conceive new programs and improve existing ones and 
in developing and evaluating new technologies. 
• Federal government job classifications differentiate between statisticians and 
mathematical statisticians. Most statisticians working in the major U.S. federal 
statistical agencies are hired as mathematical statisticians. They are expected to 
perform a much broader array of statistical work than statisticians. 
• Although there is some variation, a bachelor's degree in statistics or a closely 
related field, including several statistics and advanced mathematics courses, is 
typically the minimum requirement for government statisticians engaged in 
official statistics. Some, especially those engaged in research, hold advanced 
degrees; mathematical statisticians are encouraged to get master's degrees. 
• In contrast to many other countries, U.S. government statistical activities are 
basically decentralized. Coordination is provided by the OMB. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. What are some challenges that face the planners of the next national 
(decennial) U.S. census in light of advances in technology and changes in 
society? 
2. * What are some issues that statisticians at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
are facing today (or will be expected to face soon) to ensure that the CPI 
continues to accurately reflect consumer prices? 
3. *One of the "fascinating activities" in which statisticians are engaged, 
mentioned in Section 3.3, is "gathering the needed data to help policy makers 
propose laws to reduce school class size." Consider a law in this area that 
policy makers might be (or should be) contemplating. What information 
would you propose be obtained to help frame the law and how would you 
proceed to get the needed data? 
4. How would you go about getting appropriate data to respond to the question 
concerning gender pay gaps in Section 3.3.4? Compare your approach to that 
used by the Government Accountability Office, as described in the web-
accessible report GAO-09-279.24 
5. In Section 3.5, we state that "seasonal adjustment of time series data is an 
especially important topic 
As a consequence, development of the best 
possible adjustments—and their defense—is a very active field forresearchers." 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09279.pdf. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
55 
Explain the need for seasonal adjustments in government time series data and 
provide some specific examples. How are such adjustments made? 
6. Select one or more of the 14 principal U.S. federal statistical agencies 
enumerated in Table 3.1 (other than those discussed in this chapter) and 
research and report on the agency's major statistical tasks and challenges. 
7. "Research and describe the statistical system for gathering and reporting 
official statistics used in the United Kingdom (or some other country than the 
United States and Canada). 
8. Select a U.S. state, province, or other locality. Determine and report on the 
capacities in which statisticians are used and by which agencies. Where might 
they be used where they currently do not seem to be? 
9. *On May 8, 2010, newspapers in the United States reported that the most 
recent U.S. government survey showed that employment was up by almost 
300,000, but that the jobless rate also rose from 9.7% to 9.9% (giving 
ammunition to contrary political viewpoints). Explain how this discrepancy 
can happen and suggest some issues that need to be addressed in obtaining, 
analyzing, and reporting employment data. 
10. How does the statistical system for measuring employment in the United 
States differ from that in other countries and to what degree are the resulting 
numbers comparable? 
11. "Compare the jobs of statisticians engaged in official statistics with those in 
business and industry. What are some of the similarities and differences? 
Which area seems more appealing to you and why? 

C H A P T E R 
WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME 
OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
4.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
In this chapter, we consider some added application areas in which statisticians 
are engaged: regulatory activities, health, national defense, other scientific research, 
social and behavioral sciences, and teaching (in nonacademic settings). We conclude 
with a brief description of some further institutes that conduct various types of 
research in the United States. 
Some of the statisticians involved in these areas are government employees. 
But their work is often quite different from that of government statisticians who are 
principally involved in gathering, analyzing, and reporting official statistics, as 
described in Chapter 3. They are also more likely to hold Ph.D. degrees than their 
counterparts involved in official statistics.' 
The application of statistics, together with other quantitative approaches in 
some of these and other areas, has given rise to a new nomenclature of professional 
fields, such as biostatistics, chemometrics, econometrics, and psychometrics.2 
4.2 REGULATORY ACTIVITIES 
Numerous government agencies are engaged in a variety of regulatory activities. 
In the United States, these include the Food and Drug Administration, the Environ-
mental Protection Agency, the Federal Communications Commission, and the 
Consumer Product Safety Commission. Their work includes helping 
• Establish laws and regulations to protect, for example, the general public 
(or particular segments) or the environment. 
• Develop processes and procedures to assess that existing laws and regulations 
are being followed. 
• Monitor to rapidly identify, and lead to correction of, specific violations. 
Government statisticians engaged in official statistics and those engaged in other activities also have some 
communalities, including the job grading system (Section 5.5) and restrictions on employment of noncitizens. 
Some, together with Technometrics, have also become the names of professional journals. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
57 
4 

58 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
Such activities are of strong interest to those directly impacted by them, especially 
business and industry, as well as the general public. We provide some further details 
about two such agencies. 
4.2.1 Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 
The U.S. FDA's mission, according to its web site, is to 
• Promote and protect the public health by helping safe and effective products 
reach the market in a timely way. 
• Monitor products for continued safety after they are in use. 
• Help the public get the accurate, science-based information needed to improve 
health. 
The FDA is the oversight agency to which pharmaceutical companies in the United 
States submit their plans for the testing of a proposed new drug, medical device, and 
vaccine, among others, for approval. Then, after they obtain and analyze the results, 
the companies submit their findings to the FDA requesting approval for market release 
(or further study), when this is felt to be warranted. 
According to O'Neill et al. (2008), the FDA employs more than 200 Ph.D. or 
master's level statisticians, most of whose work is concentrated in the evaluation of 
applications for approval of new products. Their task is to ensure the statistical 
validity of the planned studies of a product's safety and effectiveness and to assess the 
company's analyses of the results of such studies. In this manner, statisticians play an 
important role in framing recommendations concerning the approval for market 
release of a new drug or medical product. 
Statisticians' activities at the FDA are currently focused in three groups, whose 
titles summarize their basic missions: 
• The Center for Drug Evaluation and Research. 
• The Center for Devices and Radiological Health. 
• The Center for Biologies Evaluation and Research. 
4.2.2 Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
The U.S. EPA's mission is to protect human health and the environment. Its tasks 
include developing and enforcing environmental regulations and in general studying 
environmental issues. 
Much of the work of EPA's statisticians involves helping obtain valid measure-
ments of hazardous exposure in water, in air, and in the ground and then analyze the 
resulting data to quantify the associated risks to humans, animals, vegetation, and so 
on. Like statisticians engaged in official statistics, EPA's statisticians are involved in 
the design and analysis of sampling studies. However, the sampling is typically of 
"things" rather than of people (or organizations). Thus, major challenges tend to deal 
with such factors as measurement capability, rather than questionnaire construction or 
the impact of nonresponse. 

4.3 HEALTH 
5 9 
Specific applications, cited by Nussbaum (2008), are to 
• Derive the relationship between childhood leukemia and environmental 
pollutants. 
• Trace the movement of chemicals through the environment. 
• Quantify fluid runoff from airplane deicing. 
• Assess compliance with auto emission standards. 
• Estimate automobile fuel economy. 
• Evaluate drinking water safety. 
• Measure and assess the hazards from toxic chemicals in soil. 
The use of statistics to address environmental issues is not limited to the EPA. Industry 
employs statisticians to monitor and address potential environmental hazards; see 
Section 13.6.6 of Hahn and Doganaksoy (2008) and the comments on climate science 
later in this chapter. 
4.3 
HEALTH 
Statisticians are heavily engaged in a wide variety of health issues. We have already 
suggested some of these in our earlier discussions of pharmaceutical products, official 
government statistics, and the work conducted by the FDA and EPA. The National 
Institutes of Health of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is a major 
employer of statisticians; see Ellenberg et al. (1997). 
As we indicated in Section 1.2, the application of statistics to the analysis of 
biological and medical data is often referred to as biostatistics, and statisticians who 
work in this area are often referred to as biostatisticians; see Piccolo (2010). 
Some further applications are suggested in this section. See Section 13.6.1 of 
Hahn and Doganaksoy (2008) for added examples. 
4.3.1 Disease Prediction, Control, and Prevention 
The prediction, control, and prevention of diseases, and especially the spread of 
infectious diseases, has given rise to the field of epidemiology, see Aschengrau and 
Seage III (2008), and presents numerous statistical challenges. 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), an agency of the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, strive to protect public health and safety 
by appropriate and timely studies. Their concerns include infectious diseases, 
environmental health, and occupational safety. 
According to the CDC web site, statisticians at CDC have been engaged in such 
projects as 
• Estimating the probability of West Nile virus infection from blood transfusion. 
• Monitoring the health and health care of people with HIV. 
• Tracing the source of anthrax in mailings. 

6 0 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
• Studying the effectiveness of school violence prevention programs. 
• Evaluating causes of infant mortalities. 
• Evaluating laboratories that test human serum and urine specimens for illegal 
drugs. 
• Identifying genetic markers in parents of children with Down's syndrome. 
4.3.2 Health Research 
Important health research is conducted at major hospitals and clinics in the United 
States, such as the Cleveland Clinic Foundation and the Mayo Clinic, as well as 
various smaller institutions. O'Brien (2002) describes such nonprofit health science 
centers as "academic institutions, hybrids of industry and academia." Health research 
is also conducted at medical schools throughout the world. 
Keller and Sargent (2010) state that the Mayo Clinic's Division of Biomedical 
Statistics and Informatics employs more than 175 statisticians—approximately 30 
with a Ph.D. degree, 55 with a master's degree, and the rest with a bachelor's degree.3 
Bot (2009) indicates that problems addressed include responding to questions such as 
• What is the risk of having a heart attack for a particular population? 
• Can genetic information be used to give patients prognostic information and 
help determine which drug(s) to use? 
• What is the effect of metastatic colorectal cancer on patients' well-being and 
ability to carry out daily activities? 
Statistical modeling and analysis of DNA data is a rapidly advancing field. Genetic 
research experiments now routinely collect over 300,000 measurements per subject, 
leading to significant computational and statistical challenges; see Siegmund and 
Yakir (2007) and the journal Statistical Applications in Genetics and Molecular 
Biology for recent developments. 
4.3.3 Health Care Improvement 
Health care costs place a heavy burden on citizens of all countries. It is estimated that 
such expenditures in the United States account for 16% of the gross domestic 
product.4 Administrators are, therefore, constantly seeking ways to improve pro-
cesses and reduce costs through the use of disciplined, data-based approaches. 
This often provides huge opportunities for statisticians; see Valentine et al. (2010). 
Some typical applications are 
• Scheduling of physicians in a hospital emergency room so as to provide 
optimum care, while avoiding doctor fatigue. 
• Comparison of the effectiveness of alternative treatments of a disease. 
1 Some of the 90 bachelor's degree level statisticians might have degrees in mathematics or computer 
science, rather than statistics. 
4 OECD Health Data 2010; key indicators at http://www.oecd.org/. 

4.4 NATIONAL DEFENSE 
61 
• Assessment of different approaches to patient care, for example, studying 
alternatives to C-sections and episiotomies and determining the optimum 
length of hospital stays at childbirth. 
• Measurement of waiting times in physicians' offices and hospitals and of 
potential contributing factors to gain understanding of how waiting times can 
be reduced. 
• Evaluation and reduction of errors in filling prescriptions, in administering 
medications, in performing surgeries, and in diagnoses. 
Comparative effectiveness research is receiving particular attention (and funding) in 
the United States; see Morton (2009a) and Slutsky and Clancy (2009). This deals with 
making evidence-based determinations of which (medical) treatments work best, for 
whom, and under what circumstances. It might, for example, call for comparing two 
treatments of a disease, each of which had been compared in separate clinical trials 
against placebos. 
Some health care improvement applications involve conducting a statistically 
designed experiment. Often, however, experimentation is inappropriate and we must 
instead rely on data from observational studies (Section 11.5). As always, an essential 
element is careful planning of the study to get good data. 
Health care practitioners have come to use quality improvement methodolo-
gies, such as Six Sigma (Section 5.2.2), as well as statistical and operations research 
methods. Articles dealing with applications, such as those by Van Den Heuvel et al. 
(2005) and Bisgaard and Does (2009), appear in Quality Engineering, Quality 
Progress, and Six Sigma Forum Magazine. 
4.3.4 Added Examples 
Peck et al. (2006) provide examples of the use of statistics in biology and medicine in 
chapters that deal with 
• Modeling an outbreak of anthrax. 
• Understanding the human mind. 
• Leveraging change in HIV research. 
• Statistical genetics. 
• DNA fingerprinting. 
• How many genes? 
• Mapping mouse traits. 
4.4 NATIONAL DEFENSE 
Statisticians around the world are engaged in national defense and security applica-
tions. In the United States, their employers are often one of the branches of the armed 
forces, a specific government agency—such as the Federal Bureau of Investigation 

6 2 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
(FBI)—or one of the national laboratories (Section 4.8.1). Alternatively, such work 
might be conducted in industry or academia under contract with the government. 
The work performed might range from support in the development of defense 
strategies to reliability assurance in the production of munitions. Some typical 
applications are 
• Helping predict (and avert) terrorist attacks. 
• Evaluating the effectiveness of a military defense system. 
• Monitoring munitions stockpiles. 
• Tracking global epidemics. 
• Searching for potential computer network security threats. 
Spruill and Wilson (2009) provide some discussion. However, the specifics of such 
activities are frequently government classified information. 
The U.S. Army Conference on Applied Statistics (ACAS) has since 1995 served 
as a forum for the presentation and discussion of theoretical and applied papers related 
to the use of probability and statistics in solving defense problems. The American 
Statistical Association (ASA)'s Section on Defense and National Security sponsors 
various activities that spotlight the role of statistics and its applications in furthering 
national defense. 
4.5 OTHER SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
Statisticians contribute extensively to scientific research in numerous application 
areas. Early applications were in a variety of fields, but the most prominent effort was 
in agriculture; see Sidebar 4.1. 
STATISTICS IN AGRICULTURAL RESEARCH 
In agriculture, the extensive use of statistics in scientific research dates back to the first part 
of the twentieth century when it was introduced by such luminaries as the tamed statistician/ 
geneticist Sir Ronald A. Fisher at the RoLhamsted Agricultural Experimental Station in 
Hertfordshire, United Kingdom. 
Forward-minded farmers and researchers used statistically designed experiments to 
compare alternative crop growing methods, such as evaluating the impact of different 
fertilizers on crop yields. Various popular statistical designs—such as incomplete 
block, Latin square, and split plot designs—had their origins in agriculture. These 
designs were based upon the realization that crop yield and product quality differences 
were due not only to the growing methods or the fertilizers being compared, but also to 
natural variation in soil (even over a small area of land), weather conditions, and other 
extraneous factors. Statistical methods were similarly used to compare animal breeding 
methods, 

4.5 OTHER SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
6 3 
This led to the formation of agricultural extension services in countries throughout the 
world and in the establishments of university departments of statistics, especially in land-
grant universities in the United States. It has been credited as a significant factor in the rapid 
advance of agriculture in the United States and elsewhere. 
The use of statistics in agricultural research continues today, but it is only one of 
many statistical application areas. Scientific research is conducted in academia or 
industry, sometimes with government support, or directly by government agencies. 
In addition, numerous national laboratories and research institutes conduct scientific 
(as well as other) research in the United States. Their activities are described in 
Section 4.8. Also, the ASA conducts an active program that concerns itself with 
national science efforts; see Pierson (2010). 
We briefly describe a few current areas of application in this section. 
4.5.1 
Nanotechnology 
Research in nanotechnology—an emerging field dealing with the study of matter at 
the molecular level—is directed mainly at developing new products and improving 
existing ones. 
Statistics can contribute to such research in many ways. Lu et al. (2009) cite 
specific opportunities involving 
• Specially tailored designed experiments to help learn more about the formu-
lation process of nanocomposites (i.e., multiphase solid materials where one of 
the phases has at least one dimension of less than lOOnm). 
• Modeling and analysis methods for working with high frequency and/or spatial 
data. 
• Statistical and automatic process control methods for addressing low-quality 
and high-defect processes. 
• Reliability analysis methods for low, and sometimes unpredictable, product 
reliability. 
Some of this research resembles that undertaken in the past in other areas—such as 
the early work on semiconductors that also resulted initially in low yield (i.e., high 
end-of-line reject rate) processes. 
4.5.2 Space Exploration 
Space exploration presents special challenges because human life is frequently at 
stake. Ensuring high reliability for "manned" space vehicles is critical. Statisticians at 
the U.S. National Aeronautics and Space Administration address such problems as 
• Evaluating the risk caused by external factors, such as ice and insulation foam, 
striking a shuttle during launch. 
• Quantifying the uncertainty in the physical models that predict where a 
launched space vehicle will be at a particular point in time. 

64 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
• Designing experiments to identify and rank the primary contributors to 
integrated drag during a space vehicle's ascent trajectory (Rhew and 
Parker, 2007). 
One notorious example in which statistics was improperly applied in space explo-
ration was in an analysis preceding the 1986 Challenger space shuttle disaster (Dalai 
et al., 1989). The low temperature predicted for the launch date was believed by some 
to be detrimental to the O-rings that were used to hold critical joints in place during 
launch. An analysis based on data from previous flights with O-ring failures led to the 
conclusion that low temperatures did not present a hazard to the O-rings. As a result, 
NASA proceeded with the launch the next day at an unusually low temperature of 
31 °F. Regrettably, the shuttle blew up and the entire crew died. The subsequent review 
determined that the analysis was flawed. This was because 17 additional past flights 
that had no O-ring incidents were incorrectly deemed to be irrelevant and were 
excluded from the analysis. A proper analysis of data from all previous flights showed 
a strong association between temperature and number of O-ring incidents, with low 
temperatures being particularly risky. 
4.5.3 The Environment and Climate Science 
The environment in general and climate science in particular are rapidly emerging 
areas of interest for applied statisticians. The Board of Directors of the ASA 
(endorsing the Fourth Assessment Report of the United Nations' Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change) in November 2007 urged that statisticians become more 
involved in the assessment of climate change. They cited various technical challenges, 
including 
• How best to combine climate data from different sources. 
• How to identify biases (and adjust for them) in measurement systems. 
• Estimating regional and local effects of climate change from global models. 
• Evaluating the human health effects of climate change. 
In November 2009, ASA President Sally Morton—based on a recommendation by 
ASA's Climate Change Policy Advisory Committee—joined leaders of 17 other 
science organizations in signing a letter to all U.S. senators summarizing their 
consensus views on climate change. The committee's justification for their recom-
mendation is reviewed by Smith et al. (2010) (and commented on in various letters to 
the editor in the June 2010 Amstat News).5 
The 2010 Joint Statistical Meetings featured invited presentations on such 
topics as climate change-caused shifts in forest fire ignitions, modeling of 
environmental extremes, and analysis of global climate change data. Also, 
Crawford (2008) describes her career in environmental statistics. Finally, we note 
5 The committee concluded, based upon their statistical evaluations, that there was "strong scientific 
evidence that climate change is happening and that human activities are the primary driver." Also see 
Amstat News (2010a) for a statistician's briefing to the U.S. Congress on climate change. 

4.6 SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 
65 
that the ASA has a section on Statistics and the Environment that issues news-
letters periodically. 
4.5.4 Added Examples 
Peck et al. (2006) provide further examples of the use of statistics in science and 
technology in chapters that deal with 
• Monitoring tiger prey abundance in the Russian Far East. 
• Predicting the Africanized bee invasion. 
• Combating electronically transmitted spam. 
• Should you measure the radon concentration in your home? 
• Statistical weather forecasting. 
• Space debris assessment. 
4.6 
SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 
The number of statisticians currently engaged in work in the social and behavioral 
sciences is relatively small compared to some other areas. Their work, however, 
encompasses a wide variety of applications, a few of which we describe in this 
section. Also, many professionals in demography, economics, psychology, sociology, 
and other social sciences are highly trained in statistical methods and concepts, even 
though they may not regard themselves principally as statisticians. 
4.6.1 Public Opinion Polls and Other People 
Sampling Studies 
Knowing statistics helps one to sort out the reliable from the unreliable information 
that comes at us. 
—Cipsie Ranney 
Measuring public opinion by a scientifically (i.e., randomly) selected sample 
across a country, or over a particular region or for a particular demographic group, has 
become a big business. Studies undertaken prior to elections that try to predict the 
winner (see Ratledge, 2006) receive much media attention as do studies to assess the 
public's opinion on specific issues, such as the state of the economy. Various 
companies conduct such studies and employ statisticians and/or statistical consultants 
to help ensure their validity. 
Drawing correct conclusions from sampling studies is critically dependent upon 
exactly how the study is conducted. A key issue is that of selecting a random sample 
from the available "sampling frame" (i.e., listing of the units from which the sample 
can be drawn) that ideally is identical to the population of interest but in practice only 
coincides as closely as is practically feasible, at best. Such issues as how to pose 
questions in an unbiased manner and how to handle nonrespondents also need to be 

66 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
addressed. Failure to do so can introduce bias in the results. Such bias, moreover, is not 
reflected in the calculated statistical "margin of error."6 
When the polls make incorrect predictions, statistics is viewed suspiciously by 
the public; see Sidebar 4.2. 
WHEN THE POLLS WERE WRONG 
How far would Moses have gone, if he had taken a poll in Egypt? 
—Harry S. Truman 
NationaJ polls use statistical sampling to draw inferences. As a result, the findings are 
typically reported, subject lo a stated '"statistical margin of {sampling) error." When the 
predictions are found to be seriously in error—as the election results become known— 
statistical sampling, in particular, and statistics, in general, are sometimes blamed, even 
though generally it is not statistics per se that is at fault. 
The polls have over time become increasingly accurate. This in part has undoubtedly 
been a consequence of learning from past mistakes such as 
• In 1936, the Literary Digest magazine predicted that Alf Landon would be elected 
President of the United States. Two major problems with this poll were that it relied 
principally on a telephone sample {in 1936 only more affluent people had telephones) 
and the low response rate (together with failure to properly account for nonrespon-
dems); see Squire (1988). 
• In 1948, the polls conftdendy predicted that Dewey would beat Truman for the U.S. 
Presidency. A major contributor to this error was the fact that most of the polls were 
taken insufficiently close to die election and did not detect the swing in voter 
sentiment that occurred just prior to the election. 
• In 2004, exit polls (taken as voters left the polls after voting) tended to predict a Kerry 
victory over Bush for the U.S. Presidency. The error was subsequently attributed, by 
some, to faulty interviewing techniques (lengthy questionnaires, inexperienced 
interviewers, etc.). 
In each of these cases, it was die specifics of the survey, and not the concept of statistical 
sampling, that seemed to have led to the errors. This is, however, a detail of which most 
people are unaware. 
As indicated in Section 2.2.2, sample studies of consumers are used by 
manufacturers of a product or providers of a service in their market research. These 
might have the goal of assessing potential customer interest in the product or service, 
6 Not all sample studies portend to be random. A notable example is polls conducted by radio or TV stations 
urging listeners to call in with their opinions on a stated question. The opinions of such self-selected (and 
typically highly motivated) individuals can differ appreciably from those of the population at large, and 
especially so, when a viewpoint on the issue has just been suggested by the radio or TV host conducting the 
survey. Likewise, respondents to Internet surveys are typically self-selected. 

4.6 SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 
6 7 
evaluating the attractiveness of specific offerings or features, or measuring the 
effectiveness of an advertising message or slogan. 
In addition, television and other rating studies involve the sampling of a 
specified population. The results of these studies are followed intensely by TV 
networks and advertisers, as well as the general public. 
We comment further on sampling studies in Section 11.3. 
4.6.2 Education and Educational Testing 
K to 12 Education. Hill (2006) describes statistical issues in studies to evaluate 
school choice programs, contrasting the use of observational studies with the use of 
randomized experiments (see Chapter 11), and describes challenges in designing and 
analyzing social experiments, in general. 
Testing of children from kindergarten to 12th grade has become a frequently 
used (and highly controversial) way for evaluating, among other things, how different 
schools (and sometimes teachers) are faring in meeting mandated goals. Children, 
however, are not randomly assigned to schools; they enter different schools with 
varying starting abilities and are exposed to differing home environments. Making 
valid comparisons between schools (as well as teachers), therefore, becomes a 
complex statistical problem that calls for sophisticated statistical evaluations. The 
results of such assessments need, nevertheless, to be made transparent and justifiable 
to school administrators, politicians, and the public at large. 
Higher Education. Educational testing has traditionally involved the develop-
ment of tests used for college and graduate school admissions assessment. The 
Educational Testing Service (ETS) is the best known organization in this field. It is 
a private, nonprofit institution with primary focus on educational measurement and 
research through testing. In the United States, it produces and administers the SAT, 
GRE, and TOEFL examinations. ETS also designs and implements achievement 
and admissions tests in over 180 countries. 
A major concern for statisticians working for ETS and similar organizations is 
to design standardized tests in a manner that ensures their validity, reliability, 
consistency, and fairness. In addition, statisticians get involved in research studies 
dealing with such topics as comparing performance differences between genders on 
standardized tests, assessing the association between college admission test scores 
and subsequent performance, and evaluating the effect of classroom teaching methods 
on student performance. 
4.6.3 Sports Strategy and Assessment 
Outcomes and performance in sports are expressed by numbers. It follows almost 
invariably that statistics plays an important role. This is heightened by the extraor-
dinary interest in sports by much of the general public worldwide. Many think of 
sports statisticians in rather mundane terms as the keepers of the numbers who might 
be called upon during a rain break or a highly one-sided game to provide the 
announcers some interesting trivia. There is much more that statisticians can and 

6 8 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
do contribute, such as the development of optimum strategies in playing the game and 
of improved ways of measuring players' performance—whatever the game may be. 
Some sports teams have, in fact, hired professional statisticians for this purpose. 
Baseball and Statistics. Baseball, a sport that seems to especially relish numbers, 
has availed itself of statistical concepts through the work of Bill James7 and the 
development of what has been called sabermetrics—the analysis of baseball through 
objective evidence. Sabermetrics is concerned with the development of realistic 
measurements of the contribution of individual players. In assessing the number of 
games won by a pitcher or the number of runs batted in or scored by a batter, one would 
take into consideration the support the player received from other members of the 
team (such as the batting performance of other players) and the dimensional 
differences between ball parks. All of this has led to various books on the subject, 
such as Schell (2005) and Thorn and Palmer (1985). 
Besides providing more incisive information to fans, the use of statistics in 
baseball has also impacted both the front office and the on-field playing strategy of 
forward-looking teams. The book Moneyball (Lewis, 2004) generated high public 
interest in describing how the Oakland Athletics built a highly competitive team on a 
relatively low budget by the strategic acquisition of players, based upon an analytic 
assessment of their past performance. 
Further Examples. Albert et al. (2005) have compiled mainly previously published 
articles in a total of 44 chapters devoted to football, baseball, basketball, ice hockey, 
multiple sports, and miscellaneous sports. The titles (some erudite sounding; others 
down-to-earth) of some of the chapters suggest the diversity of applications: 
• Did Shoeless Joe Jackson throw the 1919 World Series? 
• Improved NCAA basketball tournament modeling via point spread and team 
strength information. 
• Simpson's8 Paradox and the hot hand in basketball. 
• Adjusting golf handicaps for the difficulty of the course. 
• Modeling scores in the Premier League: is Manchester United really the best? 
• Heavy defeats in tennis: psychological momentum or random effect? 
• Who is the fastest man in the world? 
A subsequent more advanced volume (Albert and Koning, 2008) aims "to 
provide an accessible survey of current research in statistics and sports ... and to 
explain how statistical thinking can be used to answer interesting questions about a 
particular sport." Its chapters deal with such subjects as 
• Modeling the development of world records in running. 
• Odds betting market in Scottish league football. 
7 A well-known U.S. baseball writer, historian, and statistician. 
8 Not OJ's. 

4.6 SOCIAL AND BEHAVIORAL SCIENCES 
6 9 
• Measurement and interpretation of home advantage. 
• Myths in tennis. 
• Optimal drafting in hockey pools. 
Some further interesting applications of statistics in sports deal with 
• Assessment of nationalistic favoritism in judging the 2000 Olympic games 
(Emerson et al. 2009). 
• Assessment of the impact of racial bias on basketball betting (Larsen et al. 2008). 
• Monitoring batting performance in cricket using control chart methods 
(Bracewell and Ruggiero, 2009). 
• Applying Markov Chain models in predicting tennis game outcomes (Newton 
and Aslam, 2009). 
Other Sources of Information. The ASA Section on Statistics in Sports organizes 
sessions at the Joint Statistical Meetings and publishes a newsletter. The International 
Statistics Institute also has a Sports Statistics Committee. The journal Quantitative 
Analysis in Sports has been published since 2004. 
4.6.4 Legal Applications 
Statisticians are frequently called upon to provide legal support, ranging from 
commenting to "their side's" legal staff on the efficacy of the available data to giving 
courtroom evidence, possibly as expert witnesses subject to cross-examination. We 
will discuss the role of expert witnesses (and the ethical issues presented by them) in 
Section 10.4.6. Some typical topics in which statisticians might become involved are 
the evaluation of statistical evidence concerning the commitment of a crime (see 
Sidebar 4.3), assessment of alleged workplace discrimination, and claimed negligence 
in ensuring consumer safety for products ranging from toasters to automobiles. 
GUILTY OR INNOCENT? 
Lucia de Berk, a Dutch nurse, was found guilty of murder and attempted murder and received 
a life sentence in prison. The evidence against her was principally statistical: her physical 
presence at a series of suspicious deaths and near deaths in hospital wards in which she had 
worked. The prosecution successfully claimed that the odds of this occurring hy coincidence 
were extraordinarily low (one in 342 million) and de Berk was sentenced to life impris-
onment. Subsequent examination questioned the validity and relevance of the statistical 
evidence against de Berk and the case was reopened in 2008 by the Dutch Supreme Court, 
receiving much public attention. De Berk was set free and retried, and in April 2010 was 
exonerated. See Buchanan (2009) and relevant weh sites* for further discussion and updates. 
Also see Cobb and Geh 1 bach (2006) for a somewhat similar example. 
9 For example, Wikipedia. 

70 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
Books about statistics and the law include DeGroot et al. (1994), Finkelstein 
(2009), Gastwirth (2000), Good (2001), and Kadane (2008). Also see Gastwirth and 
Pen (2010) for a discussion of statistical reasoning presented to and used by the U.S. 
Supreme Court in cases dealing with equitable jury representation. 
4.6.5 Some Further Applications 
There are numerous other applications of statistics in social science and behavioral 
research; see Sidebar 4.4 for an example of a political analysis. 
U.S. HEALTH CARE. POLITICS, AND STATISTICS 
An article entitled 'The Senate's Health Care Calculations" by Gelman el al. (2009) 
appeared prominently on a New York Times Op-Ed page. {The lead author is a Professor of 
Statistics and Political Science at Columbia University.) The article dealt mainly with 
Congressional support for and opposition to the then pending health care bill in the U.S. 
Congress. Ilprovided statistical evidence to support the claim that "in general, senators seem 
to be less interested in what their constituents, old and young, rich and poor, might think 
about health care, and more interested in how they feel about President Obama." The 
analysis rated individual senators on their level of support for the pending proposed health 
care initiative on a scale from I to 5 (based on their public statements and their committee 
votes). It then related these evaluations to their constituents* polled views on health care 
reform and to President Obama's margin of victory (or defeat) in their home stales during the 
2008 election. The authors' evaluation was based on what was described in the article as "a 
statistical method called multilevel regression and post-stratification" and included incisive 
graphical displays of the results. 
Some other examples that illustrate the wide applicability of statistical methods 
in the social and behavioral sciences are 
• Dating medieval manuscripts (Feuerverger et al. 2008). 
• Studying the impact of religion in everyday life (Emerson and Sikkink, 2006). 
• Understanding gender birth disparity in China (Hesketh, 2009). 
• Estimating the damage to homes and displacement of people resulting from the 
2010 Haitian earthquake (Cochran, 2010). 
• Identifying changes in the incidence of crime in London (Spiegelhalter and 
Barnett, 2009). 
• Reforming U.S. foreign assistance policy (Asher, 2010a). 
Gelman and Cortina (2009) describe the use of quantitative methods in history, 
economics, sociology, political science, and psychology, considering such topics as 
• Historical data and demography in the United States and the Americas (e.g., 
quantifying the slave trade). 

4.8 SOME FURTHER INSTITUTES FOR RESEARCH IN THE UNITED STATES 
71 
• Econometric forecasting and the flow of information. 
• Explanation of the racial disturbances of the 1960s. 
• Modeling strategy in Congressional hearings. 
• Formulating and testing theories in psychology. 
4.7 TEACHING (IN NONACADEMIC SETTINGS) 
Statisticians are almost invariably involved in teaching. We discuss the teaching of 
statistics in academia in Chapter 13. 
Teaching is, however, not limited to academic settings. Applied statisticians are 
frequently involved in various teaching activities. Some of these are highly informal 
and part of the normal communication process—typically requiring technical con-
cepts to be made understandable to those with limited training and/or interest in the 
subject. In addition, statisticians outside of academia are also frequently called upon 
to give talks or teach short courses on topics of interest, such as sampling studies, the 
design of experiments, categorical data analysis, and the use of a statistical software 
package. These activities may be closely integrated with specific on-the-job issues. 
For example, design engineers concerned with product reliability might be exposed to 
a short course on life data analysis. 
Unlike academia, teaching statistics in business and industry and in government 
generally requires only a master's degree in statistics. 
4.8 SOME FURTHER INSTITUTES FOR RESEARCH 
IN THE UNITED STATES 
In this chapter, we have described a wide variety of application areas in which 
statisticians are engaged. Much of this work is conducted in academia, by business 
and industry or by government agencies. Some of it is undertaken by statisticians in 
national laboratories and research institutions. These tend to conduct a mix of 
scientific and social research and provide an environment that combines features of 
academia, business and industry, and government. We describe statistical activities in 
national laboratories and research institutions in the United States briefly in this 
section. We also comment on the National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), which, although a government agency, functions in many ways in a manner 
similar to national labs and research institutes. 
4.8.1 National Laboratories 
The U.S. Department of Energy funds and oversees various national laboratories, such 
as Brookhaven, Lawrence Livermore, Los Alamos, Oak Ridge, Pacific Northwest, 
and Sandia, for the purpose of advancing science and helping promote economic and 
national defense interests. Most of these laboratories are administered and operated in 

72 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
conjunction with universities or corporations, in which case those doing the work are 
typically employees of these institutions rather than the government. 
Statisticians support such research in partnership with scientists and engineers. 
Examples of the work conducted at one of these laboratories (Los Alamos) include 
helping in the design of surveillance systems, biological risk assessment, develop-
ment of energy data collection systems, and various national defense projects. 
4.8.2 Research Institutes 
The online encyclopedia Wikipedia lists a multitude of nonprofit research institutes in 
the United States, some of which are affiliated with universities. Some of these 
organizations, such as the Electric Power Research Institute, principally support 
specific business segments. Others are engaged in a wide variety of scientific and 
social research, usually sponsored by industry or government. Many of these 
institutions have statistical groups or employ statisticians. Some examples are the 
Battelle Memorial Institute, the Research Triangle Institute (RTI),'° the RAND 
Corporation, and the Southwest Research Institute. 
The National Institute of Statistical Sciences (NISS) was established in 1990 as 
an independent research institute by various U.S. statistical societies and the (North 
Carolina) Research Triangle universities to identify, catalyze, and foster high-impact, 
cross-disciplinary research involving the statistical sciences. Its research encom-
passes such areas as bioinformatics (the application of statistics and computer science 
to molecular biology), data confidentiality, statistics integration, data quality, infor-
mation technology, the environment, educational statistics, and large and complex 
databases; see Pantula (2010a). 
A few examples of research studies in which statisticians at such institutions are 
involved are 
• Coordination of a large multiyear observational patient registry study of a new 
cancer treatment (RTI). 
• Measuring the incidence and effects of sexual assaults in correctional facilities 
(RTI). 
• Providing comprehensive and reliable data on early child development (RTI). 
• Quantifying normal variation in EKGs (NISS). 
• Assessing online reading comprehension (NISS). 
• Developing reliable ways of measuring highway travel time (NISS). 
4.8.3 National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) 
NIST is the United States' national metrology institute. Statisticians typically support 
the development of measurement standards, calibration services, and studies that 
substantiate claims published in calibration and measurement certificates. Extensive 
work goes into quantifying the uncertainty in standards. 
RTI lists Statistics Research and Survey Research & Services as two of its 11 key activity areas. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
73 
Other statistical activities involve the support of a wide variety of NIST 
activities in physics, chemistry, information technology, and other scientific 
endeavors. 
4.9 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Statistics is playing an ever-increasing role in regulatory activities, such as in 
the work conducted at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
• Statisticians are heavily engaged in a wide variety of health issues, in addition to 
the assessment of proposed pharmaceutical products. These include disease 
prediction, control, and prevention; health research; and health care 
improvement. 
• Statisticians are involved worldwide in national defense and security applica-
tions in work ranging from the development of defense strategies to the 
production of reliable munitions. 
• Scientific applications of statistics started with principally agricultural applica-
tions. Today, statistics contributes to scientific research in many areas including 
nanotechnology, space exploration, and environmental and climate science 
studies. 
• The social and behavioral sciences provide challenging opportunities in public 
opinion surveys, education and educational testing, sports strategy and assess-
ment, legal applications, and many other areas. 
• Some applied statisticians are heavily involved in teaching, both informally and 
through short courses and similar undertakings. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. What would you expect to be some major technical and nontechnical 
challenges faced by statisticians working for the FDA? 
2. Select one or more of the applications of statistics at the EPA cited by 
Nussbaum (2008) and suggest a statistical approach for addressing the 
problem. 
3. Select one or more of the examples provided in Section 4.3 and suggest how 
statistics might be used in addressing the question posed. 
4. Significant effort is currently underway to have health care providers (i.e., 
physicians, hospitals, etc.) "digitize" their records dealing with patient care in 
a manner that permits ready and useful retrieval of information, while 
protecting confidentiality. What are some of the statistical evaluations to help 
improve patient care that such digitization suggests? Elaborate on how you 

74 
CHAPTER 4 WHAT STATISTICIANS DO: SOME OTHER APPLICATION AREAS 
might go about such assessments. Also, indicate some likely obstacles and 
how you would try to address these. 
5. Research and report on recent statistical evaluations that have been conducted 
on climate change. What were the methods used and what did the studies 
conclude? 
6. A major concern in traditional landline telephone sampling for public opinion 
polls is the increasing number of homes that rely on cell phones exclusively. 
Why is this a concern? How is this concern being (or might be) addressed? 
What are some of the challenges? 
7. *How have public opinion polls forecasting election outcomes fared recent-
ly? Have there been any seriously incorrect predictions? If so, to what might 
these be ascribed? 
8. A sophisticated statistical approach for making comparisons between 
schools (and between teachers) based on student test results, developed 
originally for the State of Tennessee school system and gaining national 
attention, is known as value-added modeling. Research and report on this 
approach and comment on how it tries to address the controversial issues 
raised by K to 12 educational testing. 
9. Look into one or more of the topics dealing with sports applications of 
statistics suggested in Section 4.6.3. Report on how the problem was addressed 
statistically. 
10. Assume that you have been asked to develop a short introductory course for 
practitioners in one of the areas mentioned in Section 4.7 or some other area 
that might be of interest to a (potential) employer. Prepare a course outline. 
11. Some of the examples given in this chapter involve the use of operations 
research and other analytical methods, as well as statistics. Give some 
examples of uses of operations research, indicating the specific approach 
and how it might be employed. 

CHAPTER 
3 
THE WORK ENVIRONMENT 
AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
5.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
In this chapter, we describe the environment in which applied statisticians work. We begin 
with a brief discussion of the varying degree of recepti veness to statistics and statisticians 
in different segments of the workplace. We then describe where statisticians fit into 
organizations, contrast the consulting and team member modes of operation, and 
overview job grading systems. We then briefly discuss the impact of globalization on 
our work and the important role that managers play in our lives. We consider next a variety 
of challenges that contribute to making the work of statisticians both challenging and 
interesting. We conclude the chapter by commenting on the role of women in statistics. 
5.2 RECEPTIVENESS TO STATISTICS 
AND STATISTICIANS 
5.2.1 A Mixed Bag 
The value of statistics, unlike that of many other fields from accounting to physics, is 
not always evident to management and to our nonstatistical colleagues and varies 
widely. 
A few arenas, such as gambling and insurance (fields that have some commu-
nalities), have their fundamental roots in probability and statistics. To remain com-
petitive and profitable, both require an understanding of the probabilities associated 
with events of interest—such as the rate of occurrence and severity of accidents and 
natural disasters in the case of insurance and the odds associated with games of chance 
in gambling. Also, for some government agencies, such as the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics and the Census Bureau, the gathering, interpreting, and reporting of data is a 
prime mission and, therefore, the need for statistics is unquestioned in such agencies. 
In some other fields, the use of statistics is, to a large degree, the consequence of 
mandates by government or other regulatory agencies. In the United States, for example, 
as a result of the 1962 Kefauver-Harris Amendments (Section 2.2.5), pharmaceutical 
products must undergo rigorous statistically based testing before they can receive 
approval by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Statistics, thus, provides the 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
75 

76 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-|OB CHALLENGES 
fundamental underpinning for most pharmaceutical testing. The pharmaceutical indus-
try is, in fact, one of the largest employers of statisticians. Some other data-intensive 
businesses, such as semiconductors (Section 2.2.5) and communications (Section 2.3.3), 
also use statistics extensively. Banking and finance is another important area driving the 
demand for statisticians over the past 15 years. 
In many other fields, the acceptance of statistics is based upon the perceived 
added value that it provides and the hiring and retention of statisticians needs to be 
justified (and rejustified) by tangible payoffs. In these areas, especially, statisticians 
need to sell themselves and their contributions. 
5.2.2 Trends 
The use of statistics and the recognition accorded to statisticians have sharply 
increased over the course of our careers. 
Government has been a user of statistics since at least the early 1800s. 
Manufacturing industries have made some use of statistics since the early 1900s, 
based, to a large measure, on the work on control charts by Walter Shewhart and the 
development of acceptance sampling concepts by Dodge and Romig. 
Interest across the board, however, has soared since World War II and the 
emergence of high-speed computing capabilities. As a consequence, today 
• Many popular statistical methods are computer-intensive. Simulation, boot-
strapping, and modern Bayesian analysis are some typical examples. Increas-
ingly faster computers allow the use of powerful new statistical methods. 
• Massive data sets are becoming increasingly commonplace, especially in such 
areas as financial services, genomics, and measurement-intensive manufactur-
ing environments, such as in the process industries. 
• Data exploration, especially through the use of graphical displays, is becoming 
more and more commonplace. 
In addition, the emergence of new technologies, ranging from modern genetics to 
nanotechnology, has provided important new application areas of statistics. 
The attention accorded to improving the quality of products and services in the 
1980s, with statistician W. Edwards Deming as one of its leading and most articulate 
proponents, provided additional impetus to the use of statistics, especially in business 
and industry. Subsequently, the Six Sigma initiative, mounted by various large 
companies, with its (adopted) slogan "In God we trust—all others bring data," gave 
statistics a further boost (see Sidebar 5.1). 
SIX SIGMA 
Ov e r the y e ars, vari ou s st rate g ie s f o r de pi oy i n g qu al i ty i m pro vemcnt—w ith vary i n g degree s 
of emphasis on statistics—have commanded attention. The Six Sigma initiative is one of the 

5.2 RECEPTIVENESS TO STATISTICS AND STATISTICIANS 
77 
most far-reaching and influential of such approaches. Introduced at Motorola in the mid-
1980s, Six Sigma achieved national prominence about a decade later when Honeywell, GE, 
and various other large companies publicly embraced it. The Six Sigma effort is perhaps best 
known for its laudable—but not always attainable or even practical-—goal to reduce the level 
of defective products and services to "3.4 defects per million opportunities." 
More importantly. Six Sigma provides a highly disciplined approach involving a series of 
steps (see Hahn and Doganaksoy, 2008, Sections 3.2.2 and 6.5) for achieving quality 
improvement. It also places heavy emphasis on basing decisions on data and the use of 
statistical techniques. Employees are trained in Six Sigma methodology and upon com-
pletion of training designated as Six Sigma green belts, black belts, master black belts, or 
champions. 
Six Sigma gained further momentum through its integration with lean manufacturing 
(sometimes referred to simply as "lean"). Lean manufacturing aims to identify and 
minimize process activities that do not directly add value lo the final product (e.g., storage, 
transportation, rework, duplicate data entry, and testing). Its integration with Six Sigma calls 
for using Six Sigma concepts and tools, including statistical methods, to implement lean 
manufacturing: see Snee and Hoer) (2007). 
In many companies, the initial focus is on applying Six Sigma in manufacturing {often 
hecause of the frequently rapid and quantifiable payoffs). Based on successful results, its use 
is then extended to other operations, such as product design, information systems, business 
processes, and customer service. 
The use of Six S i g m a h as spread bey ond bus i ne ss an d i n d u stry i nto nu merous othe r areas, 
such as health care and education, and even into some government organizations. For 
example, the city of Fort Wayne, IN, claims that its use of Six Sigma helped reduce lot trash 
pickups hy 50%, avoided $1.7 million waste water plant expenditures, and reduced the time 
to issue building permits from 47 days to 12 days. 
The Six Sigma Forwn Magazine (SSFM) regularly publishes articles that describe new 
developments in Six Sigma, as well as successful applications and lessons learned. 
Over time, the work conducted by statisticians in many organizations has 
become more problem-oriented with major research efforts being left principally to 
academia. In this vein, Hoerl and Snee (2010a, 2010b) call for greater emphasis on 
what they term statistical engineering over statistical science. Statistical science 
focuses on advancing the fundamental laws and knowledge of statistics. Statistical 
engineering, in contrast, concentrates on how to best utilize the principles and 
techniques of statistical science for the benefit of humankind. 
5.2.3 Statistics is for Everybody 
Some of the most innovative and important new techniques have come from 
researchers who would not identify themselves as statisticians. 
—Brown and Kass (2009) 
Today, easy-to-use statistical software and online tutorials are readily acces-
sible to practitioners and are often used in introductory courses in statistics. Web-
based guidance can respond to technical questions about statistics. On-the-job 
training programs, such as Six Sigma, provide further statistical instruction to many. 
As a result, nonstatisticians now have the basic tools, motivation, and self-confidence 

78 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
to conduct their own statistical analyses' and often do so. This has been referred to as 
"the democratization of statistics" and has led to what some refer to as parastatis-
ticians—individuals who without formal academic degrees in statistics frequently 
employ statistical methodology and software in the workplace. 
In addition, many prominent tools currently used in data analysis, such as neural 
nets, data mining, Taguchi methods, Kaiman filtering, and fuzzy logic, have been 
developed, principally by engineers and computer scientists (as suggested by the 
quote at the beginning of this subsection). 
5.2.4 Impact of Democratization of Statistics 
The ever-increasing use of statistical tools by nonstatisticians has, indeed, made this a 
golden age for statistics. But it is not necessarily a golden age for statisticians (as my 
manager reminded one of us when I asked for a salary increase). The employment of 
professional statisticians in business and industry, for example, does not seem to have 
increased in recent years—with some exceptions, such as pharmaceuticals and 
finance. The democratization of statistics has, nevertheless, created exciting and 
important new opportunities for our profession. 
Freedom from the nitty-gritties of conducting routine statistical analyses allows 
us to work on more complex problems, and especially on those projects that are most 
important to our organizations. It provides us the opportunity to look at problems 
more holistically (see Snee, 2008) and to focus on projects, at their most important 
stages—such as in the planning of the data acquisition and in reviewing the 
conclusions. The new environment also provides statisticians opportunities for 
greater involvement in the development of organization-wide solutions as opposed 
to responding to narrow technical questions (see Sidebar 5.2). 
AN ANALOGY BETWEEN COMPUTER SCIENTISTS AND STATISTICIANS 
The field of computer science provides an analogy to the statistics profession. At one lime, 
most software development was limited to specialists in computer programming. With the 
development of more user-friendly programming loots, this has changed. Today, much 
software is developed by practitioners, rather than professional computer programmers. 
This has allowed computer programmers to become computer scientists, providing guid-
ance to users on higher level technical issues (such as system architecture, network 
reliability, and enterprise-level system security) and staking out greater leadership roles 
for themselves. Such individuals remain in high demand. 
In a similar manner, statisticians today can leave many of the more routine tasks, 
especially of data analysis, lo non statisticians and, instead, focus on higher level and more 
challenging, more proactive, and more visible work than before. We elaborate on this 
broader perspective for statisticians throughout this book. 
1 A possible exception is the drug approval process, an area in which most statistical analyses are still 
conducted by statisticians. 

5.3 WHERE DO STATISTICIANS FIT INTO THE ORGANIZATION? 
7 9 
The democratization of statistics carries significant risks of misuse if the tools 
are applied uncritically. Thus, as statisticians, we need to focus on providing statistical 
methods, often in graphical form, that are robust to possible misuse by those with less 
technical knowledge than ourselves. We need to help ensure that practitioners have an 
appreciation of the basic underlying concepts—and especially the inherent assump-
tions and pitfalls—of the tools they may be using. At the same time, we should strive 
to collaborate with engineers and scientists involved in the development of data 
analysis methods to help make such methods better. 
5.2.5 Public Exposure 
The public visibility accorded to statisticians varies among application areas. 
Statisticians in business and industry may have appreciable exposure within their 
own companies, but typically not externally. Exceptions include testifying in a public 
lawsuit, such as an alleged discrimination case, or responding to a Congressional 
committee that is developing legislation to change the regulations for drug approval. 
Government statisticians work for the community at large. Many of their reports 
are of strong public interest and are heavily scrutinized by the media. The release of 
periodic economic indexes is awaited with much anticipation, not only by economists 
and financial analysts but also by the general public, and can have an important impact 
on the stock market and the economy. It is not unusual for senior statisticians to be 
interviewed and questioned by the media about the results and implications of 
recently released official statistics. 
5.3 WHERE DO STATISTICIANS FIT 
INTO THE ORGANIZATION? 
Some statisticians are "one of a kind" in their workplace. This is especially the case 
in small organizations. We discuss "isolated statisticians" (mostly from the perspective 
of academia) in Section 13.12.3. Others may be one of a (possibly large) number of 
statisticians in an organization. They may be bunched together organizationally in a 
statistics or general support group. Or they may be dispersed throughout the organization. 
5.3.1 Statistics (and General Analytical Support) Groups 
Sometimes, all or most of an organization's statisticians are members of a statistics 
group. Thus, pharmaceutical companies, large government agencies, and national 
laboratories frequently have statisticians working together in the same group. Such 
groups often service the entire organization, even though individual departments 
within the organization may themselves have one or a small number of statisticians. 
The authors' company (GE) currently has in its Global Research Center a 14-person 
centralized statistics laboratory in the United States and a similar size sister 
organization located in India. These two groups, in addition to participating in 
projects within their own organizations, support the entire company and especially 
those departments that do not have their own professional statistician(s). 

8 0 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
Other organizations may have many or all of their statisticians "housed" 
together in a general analytical support group or information technology section. 
In this case, the group may include other professionals with backgrounds in, for 
example, mathematics, operations research, or possibly such areas as artificial 
intelligence, computer science, or machine learning. 
5.3.2 Statisticians in Functional Groups 
In some organizations, statisticians are members of the group to which they are most 
likely to contribute, such as a quality control group in industry or in that part of a 
government agency that is directly engaged in survey studies. At Google, for example, 
there is no statistics department per se; instead, statisticians work on project teams 
(Pregibon, 2009). 
In some of these cases, statisticians work mainly on tasks within the organi-
zation in which they are housed. For example, statisticians located in engineering, 
manufacturing, and marketing units in a company may work principally on projects 
involving product development, quality control, or consumer survey projects, re-
spectively. In many other cases, such statisticians support other organizations within 
or even outside their own departments. A statistician in a research and development 
(R&D) group may, for example, be asked to work on a manufacturing problem or even 
on an employee opinion survey. 
5.3.3 Local Statistical Experts 
There are in addition individuals (previously referred to as parastatisticians) with a strong 
statistical orientation, such as Six Sigma black belts or master black belts, typically 
spread throughout the organization in business, industry, and government. In some cases, 
these are professionals who have acquired an interest in statistics and serve as local 
statistical experts, even though this may not, at least initially, be part of their formal 
job descriptions. They are an important resource for furthering statistical thinking, as 
well as providing statistical support, especially for organizations that do not have a 
professional statistician. Some of these individuals may, overtime, become professional 
statisticians; Leah's career path summarized in Section 1.10.1 provides an example. 
5.4 TWO MODES OF OPERATION 
A simple test (if your name is Joe): There is a very tough investigation coming up, and 
engineers and scientists say, "We've got to have Joe on the team," then you have 
arrived. 
—George Box 
5.4.1 The Consulting Mode 
Traditionally, statisticians have served as "consultants" on projects. In this mode, they 
are asked to provide expertise on specific, often technical, questions. These questions 

5.4 TWO MODES OF OPERATION 
81 
might be relatively minor or they may have important implications for the project. 
Occasionally, consultants are also asked to conduct a broad project overview and 
make open-ended recommendations. The responsibility for deciding whether or not a 
consultant's recommendations are followed and their actual implementation resides 
with the project owners. Consultants are often minimally involved in the day-to-day 
conduct of the project. 
The consulting mode is a common model for statisticians who are in organiza-
tions different from the one from which the project originates. College professors and 
retirees often serve as external consultants. 
There is an aura of prestige associated with the title "consultant." This tends to 
increase the further removed the consultant's home base happens to be from the 
project and the further the person is removed organizationally. This is somewhat 
ironic, since geographical proximity (and maybe even "rubbing elbows") can be a 
distinct advantage in successful project work. 
5.4.2 The Team Member Mode 
As their roles and contributions become more evident to the project team, and 
depending upon organizational and geographical considerations, statisticians may be 
invited to become members of the team. 
Hoerl (2008a) has suggested the following characteristics of team members that 
differentiate them from consultants: 
• Attend team meetings. 
• Are on the "To" list, rather than the "cc" list for project mailings. 
• Are coauthors of project reports, rather than acknowledged contributors. 
• Contribute in multiple areas rather than only statistics. 
• Share in the rewards for success and the consequences of failure. 
Hoerl summarized the difference by saying that under consulting one thinks of a 
project as belonging to somebody else, as opposed to being an equal partner in its 
implementation. 
The team member mode tends to be especially prominent in the pharmaceutical 
industry. As part of the team, statisticians typically participate in specific deliverables, 
such as the planning, analysis, and reporting of the results of a pharmaceutical trial. 
The increased involvement that comes with being a team member can lead to 
better understanding, compared with the consulting mode, and, thus, enhances 
statisticians' ability to contribute. It also makes it easier to be proactive and sometimes 
even to assume a leadership role. Thus, you can frequently be more effective as a team 
member than as a consultant. 
5.4.3 Fusion of Roles 
There is not always a clear distinction between the consulting and team member 
modes. An individual may be considered to be part of a team, and provide technical 
guidance, but, unlike some other team members, may not be held responsible for 

8 2 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
the project outcome. Also, a particular individual may take on different roles on 
different projects. 
5.5 GRADING SYSTEMS 
Most jobs, at least in large organizations, come with official job descriptions. Many 
also have an associated job grade that reflects the responsibility, and often the salary 
range and privileges, associated with the position. The importance of these varies 
from one organization to the other. 
Governments typically place heavy emphasis on grading systems. The U.S. 
government assigns grade levels to its professional employees as follows: 
• Grade levels 5-7: Apprentice.2 
• Grade levels 9-12: Journeyman. 
• Grade level 13: Team leader. 
• Grade levels 14 and 15: Manager. 
• SES: Senior Executive Service. 
• S/L: Senior Level Technologists. 
The description of the tasks associated with each of these grade levels is somewhat 
subjective, but responsibilities and required substantive knowledge increase with the 
grade level. Typical entry positions for those with bachelor's degrees are at levels 5-7 and 
for those with master's degrees are at levels 7-11. At least at one government agency 
(National Institutes of Health), some new Ph.D.'s start at a grade level 13. Current 
salaries3 and descriptions of the responsibilities4 that are associated with different 
grade levels can be found at the U.S. Office of Personnel Management web site. 
Government statisticians' positions and the associated responsibilities are 
defined within this system for each position. Statisticians and mathematical statis-
ticians (Section 3.7) tend to be at grade levels 5-7 and grade level 11 or above, 
respectively. As new jobs arise, these are assigned grade levels and their responsi-
bilities stated. 
State governments in the United States use similar grading systems, but with 
different numbering systems to identify the grades. For example, the New York State 
structure for statisticians is 
• Grade 14: Entry-level statistician (apprentice). 
• Grade 18: Senior statistician (journeyman). 
• Grade 23: Associate statistician (team leader). 
• Grade 27: Principal statistician (manager). 
• Grade 31: Chief statistician. 
2 Professional grade levels start with level 5. 
1 http://opm.gov/oca/10tables/index.asp. 
4 http://www.opm.gov/fedclass/. 

5.6 GLOBALIZATION 
8 3 
Pay scale ranges, as well as various privileges, are typically associated with each 
grade level. 
Large businesses have established somewhat similar, but often less formal and 
less emphasized systems. A typical career progression in an R&D organization, for 
example, involves the categories scientist, lead scientist, senior scientist, principal 
scientist, and chief scientist. 
5.6 
GLOBALIZATION 
Companies in the United States and in other industrialized countries came to realize 
some time ago the cost advantages of having repetitive work performed in less 
developed countries. The resulting globalization has changed the working environ-
ment of many professionals, including statisticians, especially in business and 
industry. 
5.6.1 Evolution 
The offshore outsourcing of statistical work initially focused on routine analyses. 
Financial services companies pioneered moving simple data analysis projects, 
typically involving large data sets, to low labor cost countries. The globalization of 
many manufacturing activities, and subsequently some design and technology, also 
led to the associated statistical support becoming outsourced. The tasks that have been 
sent offshore have expanded in scope overtime to include more challenging activities. 
5.6.2 Some Consequences and Impact 
Globalization provides important new opportunities for statisticians in developing 
countries around the world. It also presents some challenges and opportunities for 
statisticians in developed countries. Some of these are similar to the impact of 
democratization in that the relief from more routine tasks that globalization provides 
allows statisticians to work more broadly and on more important issues. 
Another result has been that statisticians are frequently involved in projects that 
require integration over continents and working closely with their offshore counter-
parts. This often requires the bridging of language, culture, and time differences. 
See Sidebar 5.3 for a recent example that illustrates the scope and cooperative nature 
of a globalized project and Lakshminarayanan (2008b) for further discussion. 
STATISTICS 24 x 7 
This project (described in greater detail in Sidebar 2.5 of Hahn and Doganaksoy, 2008) 
involved the development of a web-based system to enable a (job shop) plastic pellet 
manufacturer's design teams to develop product manufacturing specifications and fill 

8 4 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-)OB CHALLENGES 
requests for parts with specified characteristics faster and more efficiently. This was to be 
accomplished by the sharing of past product data, gathered globally through statistically 
designed experimentation, and then estimating relationships between properties from the 
resulting data. 
The business had design sites and manufacturing plants in the United States, Germany, 
Japan, and China. The core project team consisted of 
• Two statisticians—one in the United States (who was also the team leader) and 
another in Bangalore, India. 
• A product design expert in the United States. 
• A system architect and two software engineers in Bangalore. 
and 
In addition, product experts from various global business sites were consulted 
participated, as needed, 
The core team and key stakeholders from the business met in Germany for the project 
kickoff. Agreement was reached on project goals, assignment of responsibilities, timing of 
deliverables, and a plan for communicating among team members and with stakeholders. 
During the course of the project, the team kept in close contact through frequent 
teractions via teleconferencing and electronic file exchanges. At each critical project 
lestone, the project status and next steps were reviewed with stakeholders at the various 
business sites hy videoconferencing. The project continued over a period of 2 years and led 
to a successful implementation of the web-based tool. 
Time differences (Bangalore runs 10.5 hours ahead of the Eastern United States) resulted 
in teleconferences taking place at the beginning of the workday in one country and at the end 
of the day in the other and required some adjustments of work schedules. 
One issue raised by globalization that sometimes needs to be addressed is the 
difference in regulations in different countries. Export control laws might prohibit the 
sharing of some data and software that are felt to be sensitive. The project leader needs 
to clear up such issues early on and ensure adherence throughout the project. 
A frequent benefit of global interactions is the diversity of ideas that it 
generates—often as a result of the camaraderie established among participants; this 
expedites the successful implementation of such efforts. 
5.7 HAIL TO OUR MANAGERS! 
Companies are not democracies. 
—Popular saying 
If you plan to be a self-employed consultant, you may want to skip this section. 
It also has less applicability to those in academia. But all others need to recognize the 
high impact managers have on their professional lives. Managers determine, or have 
an important say in, what you work on (especially early in your career), what you get 
paid, how rapidly you advance, and your overall job security. They are generally 
5 Keep in mind, however, as discussed in Section 5.4.1, that self-employed consultants have managers also, 
namely their clients. 

5.7 HAIL TO OUR MANAGERS! 
85 
second only to the work itself in determining job satisfaction (perhaps, closely 
followed by compatibility with colleagues). Good managers challenge you to do 
better, help you in doing so, and can play a role in advancing your career. 
5.7.1 The Performance Evaluation 
In most organizations, managers meet periodically with those who work for them to 
discuss their performance—when this is not the case, it could be a reason for concern. 
The evaluation usually involves a verbal discussion, often accompanied by a written 
statement that becomes part of the employee's record. The specifics vary from one 
organization to the other but typically include 
• Various aspects of performance (e.g., successful projects, teamwork, bringing 
in contracts) and success in meeting previously stated objectives (often based 
upon feedback from customers). In some organizations, these are summarized 
in a report card format on, say, a scale from 1 to 5. 
• Future objectives. 
• Personal strengths and weaknesses. 
• Long-term goals. 
• Follow-up actions. 
Employees are often asked to prepare a similar statement with their self-evaluation. 
Formal evaluations are usually conducted yearly. Some managers follow these 
up with less formal discussions during the course of the year, especially with new 
employees. The performance evaluation typically forms the basis of subsequent 
training, project assignment, and salary action. 
Some statisticians, such as Deming, dislike the subjective nature of perfor-
mance appraisals. Still, they are part of the work culture in most large organizations, 
provide you a realistic assessment of where you stand, a path to self-improvement and 
advancement of your career goals, and an opportunity to raise questions and issues. 
5.7.2 Many Managers 
In large organizations, your manager is, in turn, dependent on his or her manager, and 
so on. Often the written evaluation of your performance is reviewed and approved by 
your manager's manager. As a consequence, you are impacted not only by your 
immediate manager but by all above you in the management chain. This requires you 
to know and be attentive to the goals and expectations of management up the line. 
Especially as you take on increasing responsibility, your day-to-day work might 
be led by somebody other than your direct manager. A "matrixed" structure is 
commonplace in many organizations. Those working on multiple projects might well 
have multiple project managers. Others have direct contact with the ultimate 
customers of the product or service being provided. Thus, to be successful, and 
build a high professional reputation, you need to keep many masters happy. Change in 
management along the line can, moreover, have an important impact on you 
(Section 5.8.2). 

8 6 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
5.8 
SOME CHALLENGES 
In this section, we briefly describe some of the things that make a career in statistics 
especially challenging and interesting. 
5.8.1 Time Accounting 
In some organizations, statisticians are paid fully out of an organization's overhead 
funds. In many others, especially in business and industry, statisticians charge most of 
their time against the specific projects on which they are working; see Sidebar 5.4 for a 
comparison of these two modes of operation. 
WORKING ON OVERHEAD VERSUS CHARGING TIME TO PROJECTS 
Work i ng o n ov erhead rel i e ves y ou fro m t he respon si b i I i ty o f hav i ng to de vote ti me to de ve I op 
formal work proposals. It usually provides you (and your management) a greater say in 
the specific work in which you are engaged. This allows you to focus on those activities 
that are in the organization's best long-term interest. It avoids the cost and bureaucracy 
involved in moving money from one pocket to another within the same organization. 
Requiring you to charge your time against specific projects focuses your attention on the 
areas for which your guidance, at least in the short run, is felt to be most needed (and often 
most appreciated). You will usually have clearly defined customers and they are likely to 
give greater attention to your results than they would if they did not have to pay for them. 
Also, since your customers have a greater stake in your being successful, they are more 
willing to gather and provide you the data and other relevant information that you need. 
Having you charge time against projects forces you to focus on, and stay abreast of, 
customers' key objectives. It also makes you more conscious of the need to quantify 
the specific benefits resulting from your participation. Finally, this mode of operation is 
likely to provide you greater job security since overhead activities are especially vulnerable 
to cutbacks in times of economic uncertainty. 
The process of obtaining authorization for the time (and other costs) to be 
charged against a particular project might be quite informal, such as the person 
requesting your support simply providing you a charge number. At many other times, 
it requires your developing a formal work proposal and securing formal approval 
before your work can begin (see Section 9.2.5). 
5.8.2 A Dynamic Work Environment 
Change is the name of the game. 
—Popular saying 
Statisticians in academia can, by and large, expect a reasonably stable work 
environment (see Chapter 13). This is hardly ever the case in most other organizations. 

5.8 SOME CHALLENGES 
8 7 
A day (and, even more so, a month or year) in the life of a statistician in business and 
industry is often highly unpredictable, due to both changes of people and changes in 
the business or political environment. The dynamics of the work environment in 
government are typically somewhere between that encountered in business and 
industry and that in academia, involving a fair amount of stability and some significant 
unpredictability. 
People Changes. Your manager may change overnight. One of us (GH) had 17 
immediate managers during his 46-year career—without himself changing jobs. 
Similarly, project leaders or key working partners, or even entire organizations (both 
ours and our customer's) may change suddenly. Such changes are frequently 
accompanied by a major recalibration of focus and objectives, reflecting the views 
of the new leaders. 
Statisticians working in government witness major changes in direction with 
the appointment of a new agency head; see Sidebar 5.5. 
PEOPLE CHANCES IMPACTING FEDERAL STATISTICIANS 
Most U.S. federal government statisticians are career civil servants who work for the agency 
(or department) that employs them [and, ultimately, "the people" whose taxes support the 
agency). Various procedures are used for selecting the heads of federal statistical agencies. 
The Director of the U.S. Census Bureau, for example, serves at the pleasure of the President, 
subject to Senate confirmation, and is likely to change with change in administration. The 
heads of various other U.S. agencies are appointed by the President, again subject to Senate 
confirmation, for specified terms (typically 5 years). 
The U.S. Chief Statistician (Section 3.8) and the heads of some other agencies are also 
appointed by the President and again require confirmation by the U.S. Senate—but then 
serve permanently without the need for «appointment. Selection of yet other agency heads 
follows the selection processes of their parent organiKations; such agency heads are often 
civil servants, rather than political appointments. 
Statisticians working in government often witness major changes in direction, and 
sometimes funding, with the appointment of anew agency head. See Wallman (2008) for a 
description of the impact of reorganizations on the career path of one eminent government 
statistician. This situation is not much different from [he impact un company statisticians of 
a change in, say. top management or division leadership.7 
More locally, our colleagues and working partners, as well as our customers, 
also invariably change over time, due to promotions, resignations, retirements, and so 
on, requiring us to adapt to new personalities and work patterns. 
This led to the nomination, and subsequent confirmation of a new director of the Census Bureau in July 
2009—only months prior to the start of field activity for the 2010 census. 
The unpredictability in government may, however, be somewhat more "predictable" than that in business 
and industry because the timing of a key underlying factor (at least in the United States)—the date of the next 
election—is known. 

8 8 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
Changes in Business and Political Environment. Goals and priorities also change 
as a result of various other factors beyond our control, such as economic conditions, 
competitive pressures, new organizational initiatives, reorganizations (again both 
at our end and by the customer), or some external happening. The work of 
statisticians engaged in air traffic control problems in the United States was 
appreciably altered overnight by the decrease in air traffic resulting from the 
events of September 11, 2001. Statisticians working in the investment community 
are especially impacted by the rise and fall of the stock market. Businesses are often 
reorganized, merged, or bought out, and as a result, their mission is altered. 
Changes in the economic climate and budget cuts may have a profound impact 
on your work. And even without such evident changes, priorities may be altered 
simply by the emergence of the latest "hot problem" or directive from top 
management, or a change in direction by a key customer. 
One of us (ND) notes that, even while writing this book, his project portfolio has 
changed drastically largely as a direct consequence of external events. My company 
has significantly extended its presence in the health and biomedical sciences and in 
clean energy through both growth and acquisitions. These changes were accompanied 
by expansion of the company's global reach through increased worldwide 
manufacturing operations and broader international markets. At the same time, the 
company significantly reduced its involvement in some other areas, including those 
that provided sustained support of my activities for many years. These changes 
required me to become knowledgeable in new application areas and technologies— 
and to understand how a statistical approach can benefit them. 
Finally, changes in budget can be a constant problem for government statis-
ticians, especially when budgets are cut for statistical activities to release funds for 
politically more popular, and perhaps more visible and more immediate, programs. 
5.8.3 Deadlines 
There is generally much pressure on statisticians to get answers in a timely manner. 
As a result, you will often be subject to significant time pressures. U.S. federal 
agencies that have data series designated as "Principal Federal Economic Indicators" 
are required (by the Office of Management and Budget) to have a calendar of release 
dates and to carry out a number of best practices for informing the public. The Bureau 
of Economic Analysis provides a release schedule in which it posts dates and times 
at which it will release specified reports, such as quarterly estimates of gross national 
product. These releases are watched very closely by the Congress, media, and the 
business world in general. 
Businesses frequently strive to shorten lead times in new product introduction 
so as to beat the competition. Thus, top management might set new product release 
dates based heavily upon business as well as product considerations. Since these dates 
are usually known in advance, it is possible to plan for them. Meeting required, and not 
always reasonable, deadlines can nevertheless get hectic. In dealing with manufac-
tured products, time-urgent "crises"—such as premature product failures—arise 
unexpectedly and need to be addressed urgently. Time pressures may also be created 
by sudden requests to provide inputs for a forthcoming presentation to a company 

5.8 SOME CHALLENGES 
8 9 
CEO or testimony to a Congressional or other governmental committee. As a 
consequence, statisticians' findings are often needed by a date set principally by 
circumstances; this timing infrequently coincides with the one that is most conducive 
for an optimum analysis. 
In addition, government statisticians are often required to produce data for 
policy analysis on short notice, possibly only hours. Also, extraneous events or 
emergency situations sometimes lead to the need to obtain and report data rapidly. 
A typical example is the assessment of housing needs as a consequence of a hurricane 
or other natural disaster. 
All of this requires statisticians to work, at least on occasion, long hours to meet, 
especially unanticipated, deadlines. 
5.8.4 Multiple Projects 
Statisticians frequently work on multiple projects at the same time. This is one 
consequence of an iterative approach to problem solving. There may be relatively 
quiet times on a particular project while the experiment or sampling study that you 
helped to plan is being conducted or the findings that you provided are being digested. 
During such times you may work on other projects. But you might be interrupted 
unpredictably by a new issue arising in the conduct of the experiment or sampling 
study or by a request from management for a project update. It is not unusual for the 
urgent needs of multiple projects to coincide in time, requiring you to "juggle many 
balls in the air" simultaneously. 
Working on a single major project allows you to focus your efforts on that 
project. Multiple projects, however, often can add interest to your work and might 
provide greater job security in times of change. Also, working on multiple projects 
sometimes allows you to see and act upon a synergy between projects to the benefit of 
all concerned. 
5.8.5 Statisticians' Roles as Technical Arbitrators 
Statisticians are often asked to be technical arbitrators. When a controversy arises 
that involves a probabilistic or data-driven issue, the statistician may be asked to 
help decide who is "right." Thus, statisticians may find themselves in the center of 
disputes. Sometimes, these are within their own organizations; at other times, an 
external organization, such as a supplier, customer, or government organization, is 
involved. 
Here are two examples: 
• A thermoplastic resin manufacturer made regular product shipments to one of 
its major customers, an automotive parts producer. Both the manufacturer and 
the customer conducted their own testing on the same product properties. In 
general, the two sets of test results were in close agreement. Over a short time 
period, however, the customer returned three shipments that, though passing 
the manufacturer's test, were found to be unacceptable on the customer's tests. 
A statistician was asked to participate in a team effort to uncover the source of 
the discrepancy. 

9 0 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-JOB CHALLENGES 
• A financial lending business was made up of eight different operations (e.g., 
small business lending, consumer lending, etc.). Individual business units 
had adopted different methodologies to score the risk levels of their custo-
mers. Management wanted to unify the scoring system across the businesses. 
Each business provided a credible reason why their method was best suited. 
It was not clear if one of the existing methods could be used for this purpose. 
A statistician was asked to actively participate in a study to evaluate the 
relative merits of the methodologies and make a recommendation toward 
unifying these. 
Often, rather than being the arbitrator, the statistician is in the employ of one of the 
parties to a dispute. We consider in Section 10.4 such situations and the ethical 
challenges that they present. 
5.9 WOMEN IN STATISTICS 
5.9.1 Looking at the Numbers 
In the Old Days. In the past, women statisticians were vastly outnumbered by their 
male counterparts. Starbuck (2010) reports, for example, that of current American 
Statistical Association (ASA) members who joined the ASA prior to 1984 and prior to 
1999, only 17% and 23%, respectively, are women. As a consequence (and in light 
of the criterion for election of sustained contribution to the profession), only 20% of 
ASA Fellow nominations and 22% of the actual awards in the years 2004-2010 went 
to women. 
In addition, Crank (2010b) reports that in a salary survey of biostatistics faculty, 
broken down by professor, associate professor, and assistant professor and years of 
rank, full professors with 7 or more years in rank (who presumably joined the 
workforce some years ago) were the least gender-equal group; only 17 of the 90 
professors were female. The median salary for these 17 women, moreover, was 13% 
below that for the 73 men. 
Some women statisticians still managed to become distinguished—even in 
the early days. An ASA flyer on women in statistics points to Florence 
Nightingale (the first female member of the Royal Statistical Society), Gertrude 
Cox (an eminent statistician in academia, elected to fellowship in 1944, and 
the 1956 ASA President), and Janet Norwood (the first woman commissioner 
of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, serving from 1979 to 1991, and President of 
ASA in 1989). 
The Situation Today. Figure 5.1 displays the percentage of degrees in statistics 
(and biostatistics) conferred to women from 2000 to 2009. This plot is based on 
summaries by the ASA from data obtained—sorry for the mouthful—by the 
National Center for Education Statistics, via their Integrated Postsecondary 
Education Data System.8 
8 http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/. 

5.9 WOMEN IN STATISTICS 
91 
Master's 
^ Ph.D. 
Bachelor's 
2000 
2003 
2006 
2009 
Year 
Figure 5.1 Percentage of bachelor's, master's, and Ph.D. degrees in statistics conferred to 
women in the United States: 2000-2009. 
This plot shows that, of the degrees in statistics awarded in 2009, women 
received 
• 38% of the bachelor's degrees (dropping from near 50% in 2000). 
• 52% of the master's degrees (dropping slightly over the years). 
• 47% of the Ph.D. degrees (up from below 40% in 2000). 
We also note that an approximately equal number of males and females currently 
participate in the high school advanced placement course in statistics. 
The ASA estimates that in 2010 approximately one-third of its membership, and 
about 40% of the new members over the past 5 years, are women. 
The previously cited salary survey (Crank, 2010b) also shows assistant pro-
fessors with 1-3 years in rank (presumably the most recent to join the workforce) to be 
the most gender-equal group with 36 women and 41 men. The salary statistics for 
these 36 women, moreover, were essentially identical to those of their male 
counterparts. 
A woman president of ASA is no longer an unusual happening; three of the four 
presidents from 2006 to 2009 were women. We also note—although we have no 
numbers to substantiate it—that women statisticians have played especially important 
leadership roles in U.S. government official statistics. This includes Katherine 
Wallman, the current Chief Statistician of the United States, who has held this 
position since 1992. 
5.9.2 Some Personal Assessments 
The topic "Being a Female Industrial Statistician" was discussed at a roundtable 
luncheon at the 2008 Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM). We interviewed the discussion 
leader (Diane K. Michelson) immediately after that gathering. From her comments, 
we prepared the summary, shown as Sidebar 5.6, of views expressed by the nine 
women (from industry and students) who participated in this informal meeting. 

9 2 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-IOB CHALLENGES 
SIDEBAR 
VIEWS EXPRESSED AT 2008 JSM ROUND TABLE ON "BEING A FEMALE 
INDUSTRIAL STATISTICIAN" 
• Women have a greater need than men to prove themselves and to gain the respect of 
colleagues, customers, and management. 
• It is more difficult for women than for men to get merited promotions. 
• Women have an advantage over men in thai they tend to be more talented in 
communication, organization, multitasking, problem-solving, and people skills— 
all highly important to success as a statistician, 
• A particular challenge is to dispel the assertion that women are noi good at 
mathematics, a notion that was found to be incorrect in a recent study. 
Most of these observations apply to women in various professions and are not unique to 
statisticians. However, they may be especially relevant for women statisticians, since 
statistics is not as well recognized a profession as some others (making it more difficult 
to break the barriers). 
5.9.3 Some Comments and Tips from Women to (Mostly) 
Women 
We assemble a variety of quotes from accomplished women statisticians aimed at 
helping other women. Many of these were in response to our request for comments on 
women in statistics. Some, like those in Sidebar 5.6, are possibly controversial: 
• For every bad experience I've had with a male colleague, there have been 
90 good ones.... I have run into situations... where being an assertive female 
has caused male colleagues to be uncomfortable or to turn away or to be, 
frankly, rather rude and almost abusive. You have to let these go and keep doing 
the work you think is important because there are plenty of colleagues that 
won't treat you that way. (Jana Asher) 
• Be ready to be a little aggressive and make your opinions known. (Martha 
Gardner) 
• Learn to keep your emotions in check. (Leslie Fowler) 
• Dress appropriately. (Martha Gardner) 
• Seek out good mentors. (Joanne Wendelberger) 
• Have confidence and don't be critical of yourself. Don't constantly seek 
external approval or affirmation. We give others the benefit of the doubt; why 
not do so for ourselves? (Christy Chuang-Stein) 
• Don't be offended if you are mistaken as a secretary—but don't be afraid to push 
back if inappropriately asked to do secretarial tasks. (Christine Anderson Cook 
and others) 
• Men often talk easily to other men as colleagues, but talk to women about 
family or other nonwork topics. Learn how to graciously and smoothly 

5.10 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
9 3 
convert a nonwork conversation into a work-related one. (Christine Anderson 
Cook) 
• Female statisticians are often challenged to demonstrate that they are 
"statistically significant." To successfully address the challenge even the most 
confident and talented person must find a supportive and mentoring environ-
ment at work and home. (Carolyn Morgan) 
• Don't compromise your statistical integrity to be agreeable. (Christine 
Anderson Cook) 
• Always behave as a professional person, which is not the same as a professional 
woman. (Gibbons, 2009) 
• Help promote other women statisticians. (Christy Chuang-Stein) 
Despite these challenges, most commentators agreed that statistics is a profession that 
offers women many and increasingly attractive opportunities. 
5.9.4 Further Reading 
In a general vein, Valian (1999) talks about the many small areas in which women 
were felt to be at a disadvantage in the workplace and cites scientific studies to show 
that these are real. 
Jean Dickinson Gibbons reflects on her experiences as a female statistician 
(Gibbons, 2009). She also authored a chapter on statistics for a 1973 book that dealt 
with what were then regarded as nontraditional careers for women (Splaver, 1973). 
Asher (2008) offers some hints for "all those statistician mom and dads ... 
contemplating a short-term or several-year 'vacation' from gainful employment." 
Her message is that "life at home with the kids does not mean that life as a statistician 
ends." 
The Caucus for Women in Statistics is a source for current information. 
According to its web site,9 this group was formed in 1970 to focus on specific 
problems associated with the participation of women in statistically oriented profes-
sions. Its activities include the issue of a quarterly newsletter (including job wanted 
advertisements) and the organization of technical sessions and social gatherings at 
statistical meetings. 
5.10 
MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• The value of statistics is well recognized in some fields, such as pharmaceutical 
studies and official statistics, but needs to be sold to nonstatistical colleagues 
and management in many other areas. 
• The use of statistics has sharply increased over the years with the rise of high-
speed computing capabilities. The work of Deming and the emergence of Six 
Sigma have also been important factors contributing to the increased use, 
especially in business and industry. 
http://caucusforwomeninstatistics.com/. 

9 4 
CHAPTER 5 THE WORK ENVIRONMENT AND ON-THE-)OB CHALLENGES 
• Vastly improved accessibility to statistics and statistical software has resulted in 
the "democratization of statistics." The use, and even development of, statistical 
methods is no longer limited to mainly statisticians. This has created new 
challenges and opportunities for statisticians to work on more complex and 
more important problems and to look at situations more holistically—as well as 
to guide practitioners and help them avoid pitfalls. 
• Statisticians fit into organizations in a variety of ways. Some serve mainly one 
or only a few functions and are often organizationally members of one such 
function. Others may be part of a central statistics or analytical group serving 
multiple functions in the organization. 
• Traditionally, statisticians have worked as consultants providing technical 
expertise. Increasingly, they are striving for and becoming project team 
members with broader responsibilities. 
• Jobs in many large organizations are categorized by formal grades with official 
job descriptions. Grading systems are especially important in government 
positions. 
• Globalization has impacted statisticians, especially in industry, and has pro-
vided new opportunities around the world. It has also changed the way many 
statisticians in outsourcing countries work. 
• Managers play an important role in your on-the-job well-being, especially early 
in your career, and in your success and are responsible for the periodic 
evaluation of your work performance. 
• Some challenges faced by statisticians in the workplace are 
- The need for charging their time against projects (and securing the autho-
rization to do so). 
- A dynamic work environment. 
- The need to meet sometimes tight and unanticipated deadlines. 
- The need to juggle multiple projects. 
• Statisticians sometimes serve as arbitrators on contentious issues. 
• Women statisticians encounter some special challenges. The statistics profes-
sion, however, offers many attractive opportunities for women. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. Describe your experience to date of the receptiveness to statistics and 
statisticians. 
2. The emergence of Six Sigma was suggested as providing impetus to the use of 
statistics in the workplace. Research and report on how Six Sigma is being 
used directly and indirectly today. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
9 5 
3. Today statistics is used in business and industry more extensively than ever 
before, but often without the involvement of statisticians. This has elevated the 
role of statisticians and allows them to engage in higher level efforts. Discuss 
and provide some examples in actual or hypothetical situations. 
4. We indicated in Section 5.2.4 that "the democratization of statistics carries 
significant risks of misuse if the tools are applied uncritically." Describe one or 
more examples from your or others' experience or from the media in which 
this has been the case. 
5. Explore further the analogy between computer scientists and statisticians 
in broadening their horizons as a consequence of the popularization of their 
fields. What are some key similarities and differences and how might 
statisticians address and leverage these? 
6. What are the pros and cons of having statisticians organized in a centralized 
statistics group versus being embedded in individual operations of an orga-
nization? If possible, provide some examples. 
7. Discuss the pros and cons of involvement in a project as a statistical consultant 
versus a team member, using a specific application in which you may have 
been involved or of which you are aware. How could the statistician's 
involvement have been improved? 
8. *Consider managers that you have had on jobs to date. How have they 
impacted your accomplishments, your enjoyment of the job, and the degree 
to which the job was (or is) a learning experience? What did you learn from this 
experience? 
9. *Give one or more examples of how things changed unexpectedly during the 
(perhaps short) time you were on a job. How did it impact you and how did you 
react? 
10. 'Assess your ability to handle unexpected changes, meet deadlines, and juggle 
multiple tasks. What can you do to improve on these? 
11. Consider the example in Section 5.8.5 dealing with the situation in which a 
supplier and customer disagree on whether or not a product is meeting 
specifications, based upon their respective data analyses. What might be the 
reason(s) for these two analyses disagreeing? How would you find out? 
Suggest a specific action plan to help resolve the disagreement. 
12. To what degree do you (as a woman or a man) feel the personal assessments 
and tips for success for (mostly) women, in Section 5.9, still apply today? Add 
to our discussion based upon your own experiences. 

P A R T 
— 
/
/ 
PREPARING FOR 
A SUCCESSFUL 
CAREER IN STATISTICS 
I HIS PART of the book provides guidance on how to best prepare for a 
successful career in statistics. 
We describe the essential personal traits required of a successful 
statistician (Chapter 6) and the technical knowledge that aspiring statisticians 
need to acquire through their education (Chapter 7). We then suggest various 
strategies to employ in getting the right job (Chapter 8). 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
97 

CHAPTER 
\ß 
CHARACTERISTICS OF 
SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
6.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Your hard skills will get you an interview, but it is your soft skills that will land you 
a job. 
—Sastry Pantula (2010b) 
Statistical leaders possess the so-called soft skills in abundance. 
—Ron Snee (1998) 
Do you have the makings of a successful statistician? This chapter should help 
you decide. 
We begin by amplifying on the obvious. You must have strong analytical and 
technical skills (Chapter 7). This is, however, only a necessary, and not a sufficient, 
condition. To succeed (and be happy) on the job, you also need to possess a variety of 
the so-called "soft skills." We will discuss the importance of communication and 
interpersonal skills; the ability to size up problems; flexibility; a proactive mindset; 
persistence; a realistic attitude; enthusiasm and appropriate self-confidence; the 
ability to prioritize tasks, manage time, and cope with stress; team and leadership 
skills; the ability to properly adapt and apply knowledge; and passion for lifelong 
learning. We supplement our comments with the observations of some other 
statisticians. 
Most of these traits do not apply to statisticians alone; they are required for 
success in many professions. But they are especially important for statisticians. 
Our comments are made principally with applied statisticians in business, 
industry, and government in mind. However, they also have much applicability to 
academia, as further discussed in Chapter 13. 
Expecting any single individual to possess all of these traits is unrealistic. 
However, the more of them that you have, the better will be your chances 
of success. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
99 

100 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
6.2 ANALYTICAL AND TECHNICAL SKILLS 
A successful statistician needs to have an analytical mind. You require the ability to 
quickly grasp and properly apply highly technical concepts and be able to carefully 
examine, absorb, and sometimes question what is presented to you. 
Mathematics provides the foundation of the theory of statistics. You need to like 
mathematics and be good at it. In your training you will be exposed to much 
mathematics while learning the fundamentals and the nitty-gritty of statistical 
methodology. On the job, you will often need to bend or extend a particular method 
to fit the problem at hand. This requires mathematical skills. 
Agility on the computer is a further technical skill important for successful 
statisticians. This requires, for example, familiarity with common database formats 
and an ability to write custom codes for data preprocessing and nonstandard analyses. 
In addition, you will need to rapidly gain an understanding of the application 
area in which you are involved. Thus, the ability to quickly learn, at least, the 
fundamentals of a new field and becoming conversant in it is another important 
requirement for success. 
We will elaborate on these comments in Chapter 7. 
6.3 COMMUNICATION AND INTERPERSONAL SKILLS 
Good presentations are a key component of almost any success story. 
—David Banks (2008) 
Your customers, and sometimes even your management, often start with little 
understanding and a limited view of the potential contributions of statistics and 
statisticians. This requires you to teach and "sell" the value of statistics—as well as of 
yourself. Throughout your career, there will be a need to explain concepts and 
methods in laymen's terms. To do so effectively, you must have excellent oral and 
written communication and interpersonal skills. 
You must speak in the language of your customers—and not expect them to be 
proficient in yours—statistical jargon must be subverted in favor of your clients. You 
need to initially assess their level of sophistication and then calibrate what you say 
accordingly. You will have to be able to get across key ideas, conclusions, and 
recommendations succinctly and effectively in both informal one-on-one or small 
group settings, in more formal presentations, and in written communication. 
A genuine interest in others, an outgoing personality, and diplomatic skills are 
also highly important. So is the ability to network with others with backgrounds and 
training that may be quite different from your own. 
The ability to be "quick on your feet" is another important element of 
communicating effectively. This is especially important in such settings as fielding 
questions from your CEO, agency head, or department head; when, as an expert 
witness, you are under cross-examination; or when, as a government statistician, you 
need to respond to questions from the media or the public. 
We elaborate on the preceding points and provide hints for success in 
Section 10.2. 

6.4 ABILITY TO SIZE UP PROBLEMS AND SEE THE "BIG PICTURE" 
101 
6.4 ABILITY TO SIZE UP PROBLEMS AND SEE THE 
"BIG PICTURE" 
Statisticians must grit their teeth and also become practitioners. Only then will they 
discover where the truly novel problems are. 
—George Box 
You need to be good at sizing up and diagnosing problems, appreciating their 
context and broader implications and assessing their importance. 
Most problems that will come your way will not be well defined or articulated. 
Often, we encounter narrowly phrased technical questions, such as 
• "How large a sample do I need to ..." 
• "What is good software to ..." 
• "How come my regression analysis yields an R2 of 0.9, but I still get a very wide 
prediction interval?" 
As another example, we were often asked early in our careers to "design a Latin square 
experiment." Later requests were for "Taguchi" experiments. Most problems have 
much broader implications than suggested by their initial statements; see Section 9.2.1 
for an example. It is your job to ferret out these implications and to understand the real 
problem and its significance to the organization. 
Occasionally, you may be asked questions that are of little importance to 
anybody other than the person posing the question. (Of course, if this person happens 
to be your CEO or agency head that likely makes it an important question per se). 
Or you may be called upon to give "statistical blessing" to a fait accompli, and an 
objective evaluation is less than welcome. It is important for you to appreciate such 
situations and act accordingly. 
The ability to size up a situation astutely requires you to be able to rapidly gain 
an understanding of the underlying politics and history and to have a "good nose" for 
sensing management interest and support. It calls for an inquisitive mind and the 
ability to frame—and the confidence to (politely) ask—fundamental questions that 
might challenge underlying, and often not stated, assumptions, and listening closely 
to the answers. It may also require some independent digging and keen evaluation, as 
illustrated by the example in Sidebar 6.1. 
DEVELOPMENT OF A SALES FORECASTING SYSTEM 
A service business relied on a sales forecasting system to make inventory and pricing 
decisions. The existing forecasting tool was cumbersome to use, poorly documented, and 
prone to providing inaccurate forecasts. Our initial study indicated that markedly better 
results could he obtained by an alternative approach based on a combination of statistical 
techniques. The need to replace the current method seemed evident to us. There were some 
technical challenges to overcome, but we were confident of our ability, with some effort, of 
addressing these satisfactorily. 

102 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
Further discussion revealed thai a key and highly placed manager who had championed 
the development of the existing method thought otherwise and fell dial all that was needed 
were a few"frxes." Selling an improved new approach called for more than demonstrating its 
technical superiority. It required us to establish a close relationship with key direct reports of 
the manager and to gain their help in securing eventual project approval. 
A further important element of sizing up a problem successfully is your 
assessment of the chances that you will be able to make a significant contribution 
and that the project itself will succeed (Section 9.2.4). 
6.5 FLEXIBILITY 
Don't put all your eggs in one basket. 
—Popular saying 
Applied statisticians work in a dynamic environment, as discussed in Section 
5.8.2. The strategic importance of the work we are doing may be downgraded (or 
upgraded) at any time due to, say, a change in management or in the business climate. 
You need to be prepared for things to change abruptly, to anticipate and recognize 
change, and to have the vigor to roll with the punches. 
Therefore, while weighting heavily the demands of your current customers, 
managers, and projects, you need to frame your work to make it as robust to change as 
possible. This requires a good understanding of the business environment and the 
information (and imagination) to recognize how this environment might change. 
It makes it important for you to have some knowledge of, and possibly involvement in, 
a variety of projects and opportunities beyond those in which you are currently 
engaged—so as to be able to switch over to, if need be. In other words, always have a 
Plan B in mind. 
Some of us enjoy change and thrive on it. But it is not everybody's cup of tea. 
Those who would like their work to be fully predictable need to think twice before 
embarking on a career as an applied statistician. 
6.6 A PROACTIVE MINDSET 
Merriam-Webster defines proactive as acting in anticipation of future problems, 
needs, or changes. The democratization of statistics—resulting in today's statisticians 
being relieved of much routine number-crunching activities—and the dynamic 
environment make it essential for statisticians to be proactive. As a statistician, you 
need to actively seek and leverage opportunities for improvement and to engage in 
out-of-the-box thinking. This requires you to search for the important opportunities 
that are lurking around the proverbial corner and to identify, assess, and communicate 
your potential role and contributions. 
Once on a project, a proactive mindset will push you to look at things 
holistically—and to seek out important aspects of the problem and novel ways of 

6.7 PERSISTENCE 
103 
addressing it to attain the best possible results. On a technical level, this may call for 
you to creatively apply existing methodology in a nontraditional area or manner or 
even to develop a new approach to fit the situation, as in the example in Sidebar 6.2. 
EARLY IDENTIFICATION OF POPULAR VIDRO CUPS 
Businesses are becoming increasingly interested in the number of visitors to their web sites 
and the number ot'clicks that a particular link (e.g., for an item on sale or a request for further 
information) will attract. A media company had accumulated data on the number of viewers 
of various video clipsat its web site. There were, at any time, hundreds of such clips available 
for viewing. While a handful of these attracted many viewers, the large majority laid 
essentially dormant. 
The business sought our help in using the data to identify the factors thai accounted for 
the large variability in video view counts. The findings were to be used in site redesign and 
management decision making, with the ultimate goal of identifying and increasing the 
number of "hil" videos. 
A surprising discovery was made in the early stages of our analysis: the eventual success 
of a video clip could be determined with high accuracy within a few days, if not hours, after 
posting. This potential capability was highly appealing. We, therefore, proposed a new 
project to develop, validate, and implement methodology for early prediction of video clip 
popularity—in place of the originally commissioned work. The new project was approved 
and successfully conducted. The resulting advantage to the business far exceeded that 
achievable by the original approach. 
6.7 PERSISTENCE 
Statisticians should be adept at removing barriers that impede success. 
—Peterson et al. (2009) 
Statistical concepts—because they tend to be "different" from the norm of 
deterministic thinking—often require reinforcement at strategically selected times 
before they take hold. Once on a project, action by others is often required for you to be 
able to make meaningful contributions. You typically need to rely on working partners 
to provide existing data, to collect new information, or, perhaps even, to execute 
designed experiments. 
You need to persist in driving toward what you believe to be in the best 
interest of the project and the organization, and not give up easily when you are 
convinced you are on the right path. At the same time, you need to appreciate the 
fine line between persistence (or tenaciousness) and obstinacy. You need to listen 
carefully why others might think that what you are advocating might not work or 
be practical, and consider modifying your ideas accordingly so as to still achieve 
your major goals. 

104 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
6.8 A REALISTIC ATTITUDE 
The best business solution is more important than the best statistical solution, and you 
need to know the difference. 
—Roger Hoerl 
You need to focus on both the immediate requirements of the project and the 
long-term goals of the organization, and not let marginal issues divert you. 
It might seem cool to try out a new method that you learned in school, heard 
about recently, or even developed yourself—but you should do so only to the degree 
that this is relevant and useful for the problem at hand. You may determine that the 
available data are inadequate to serve the immediate needs of the project, but are 
tempted to apply advanced modeling with the thought that this might, just possibly, 
provide a rescue. But your time and efforts might be better spent in working toward 
procuring improved data. 
We all derive satisfaction from a job well done. In a result-oriented environ-
ment, however, you can be a perfectionist only up to a point. Cost and practical 
considerations dictate how far to take a project. In the example presented in Sidebar 
6.2, the methodology proposed to predict the ultimate success of a video clip was 
based solely on using data on view counts over time. More accurate and timely 
predictions could be obtained by utilizing further data from other sources (e.g., the 
genre of the clip, video quality, and language). However, this would require 
substantial methodological development and be more difficult and expensive to 
implement. It would also be harder to explain to management. The potential benefits 
of a more advanced approach did not seem to justify the time required and cost that 
would be incurred for development and implementation. Consequently, it was 
decided against moving beyond the initially proposed methodology. 
You need to have the ability to carry your work forward only as far as it is of 
practical usefulness and to be able to recognize and to let go when you have reached a 
point of diminishing returns. Those who tend not to be satisfied until they have driven 
a problem to its ultimate optimal solution need to learn how to adjust their thinking so 
as to accommodate the practical needs of the problems that they encounter; see 
Sidebar 6.3. 
SIMPLE SOLUTIONS VERSUS HfGH-POWERED STATISTICS 
High payoff applications are not necessarily the ones that involve the most advanced or 
complex statistical techniques. There may be little, if any, correlation between the 
sophistication of the tools used for analysis and the payoff from their use. There are many 
situations for which simple and easy-to-understand methods—and often elementary 
statistical thinking—-do the job. 
At the same time, there are other cases for which simple methods alone are insufficient. 
A plot of the residuals from a fitted model may, for example, be critical to gaining 

6.10 ABILITY TO PRIORITIZE, MANAGE TIME, AND COPE WITH STRESS 
105 
understanding. This, however, may have to be preceded by fitting a sophisticated statistical 
model from which these residuals are obtained, 
You need to understand the arsenal of tools available 10 you so ihat you can properly 
leverage these when appropriate—often adapting them to the problem at hand—and dismiss 
them when they are not. However, even when advanced tools are being used, the results need 
to be presented in a maximally understandable manner. This frequendy calls for incisive 
graphical displays. In addition, although the technical details of the underlying method 
generally do not need to be explained to your customers (except, perhaps, in a technical 
appendix of the project report), the key underlying assumptions and die ir consequences need 
to be clearly conveyed. 
We continue this discussion in Section 9.3. 
6.9 ENTHUSIASM AND APPROPRIATE 
SELF-CONFIDENCE 
A certain amount of self-promotion is an important part of building a career. 
—Joanne Wendelberger 
A key challenge facing many statisticians is to sell themselves and statistics. 
A prerequisite to making others enthusiastic about what you do is for you to be 
enthusiastic and have a positive "can do" attitude, conveying passion for your work. 
This calls for a high level of self-confidence. 
At the same time, you need to be able to differentiate self-assuredness from 
arrogance. Not taking yourself too seriously, and especially maintaining a sense of 
humor, is helpful. So is an appreciation of the ego of others. 
Even the most successful statisticians—and especially the most resourceful 
ones—encounter occasional setbacks. You may find yourself proposing (what you 
regard to be) a great idea but meet pushback from colleagues or management. The 
resistance may have technical merit or there may be other things going on behind the 
scenes, as in the example in Sidebar 6.1. 
At other times, you may be doing outstanding work, but get little recognition for 
it—perhaps, because the overall project did not succeed. Or a promising project might 
be cut off in midstream due to extraneous factors. You need to be able to cope with 
such occasional setbacks, learn from them, and move forward. On the other hand, if 
you find yourself consistently not succeeding, you need to take a close and candid 
look, perhaps with a trusted friend or mentor, at how you go about doing things and 
carefully consider what changes you need to make. 
6.10 ABILITY TO PRIORITIZE, MANAGE TIME, 
AND COPE WITH STRESS 
The fact that you are frequently working on multiple projects, and the need to respond 
to unanticipated crises and requests, can result in an overload work situation. This 

1 0 6 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
makes it especially important for you to be able to manage and allocate time 
effectively. Unanticipated demands can be better met, and the resulting stress reduced, 
by scheduling yourself to meet with time to spare those demands that are known or can 
be readily anticipated. You need to be able to skillfully prioritize tasks—based upon 
their importance, their deadlines, and the time required to do the work—and be ready 
to reprioritize as situations change. 
If you find that your proverbial plate seems to be flowing over all the time, we 
propose that you take a close look at your work patterns. You may be overcommitting 
yourself or being too generous in taking on nonessential tasks or not sufficiently 
delegating work that can be delegated. Or perhaps you are not working efficiently or 
allowing yourself to be diverted from the main goals of a project by tangential issues. 
A look at whether your colleagues have similar issues, and how they cope with the 
demands on them, might be instructive. 
6.11 TEAM SKILLS 
In the long history of humankind (and animal kind, too) those who learned to 
collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed. 
—Charles Darwin 
Statisticians frequently work as members of a project team or collaborators—a 
mode that we strongly advocate (Section 5.4). In this capacity, you need to provide 
important added value to the team and at the same time be easy to work with. It might 
require you to suppress some of your personal aspirations for the sake of team 
harmony and success. 
Team efforts can present thorny issues that you need to address. For example, how 
do you handle a potential problem that you feel merits being brought to the attention of 
management, but the team feels it can fix on its own? Or what should you do when a team 
member, whose inputs are critical to the work, is consistently missing deadlines 
(and make sure that you are not that person)? There are no set answers to such questions. 
Each needs to be addressed on its own merits and good judgment applied. 
6.12 
LEADERSHIP SKILLS 
Don't allow the label of "statistician" limit your thinking about how you can 
contribute and add value to the organization. 
—Roger Hoerl 
The previously discussed evolution of statistics, and the resulting more 
proactive roles proposed for statisticians, calls for them to exert greater leadership 
than in the past. This may be informally or through a specific role, such as project team 
leader or manager of an organization. This requires you to have the strong personal 
and organizational skills that characterize a successful leader. 
We discuss the concept of the statistical leader in more detail in Chapter 12. 

6.13 ABILITY TO PROPERLY APPLY AND ADAPT KNOWLEDGE 
1 0 7 
6.13 ABILITY TO PROPERLY APPLY AND ADAPT 
KNOWLEDGE 
You don't need to be an expert in everybody else's field, but some level of detailed 
understanding is critical. 
—Martha Gardner 
The unique contribution that statisticians make is, of course, their knowledge of 
statistical concepts and tools and their ability to apply these effectively. 
Raw knowledge in itself, however, is not enough. You need to integrate and 
synthesize what you know and apply it appropriately to the problem at hand. In a 
classroom setting, you can expect the problems at the end of a chapter (or on the final 
exam) to deal with topics that are discussed in the chapter. But on the job, you do not 
know to which chapters of which book—or to which course, if any—the problem that 
you are facing pertains. It is your job to select—from your reservoir of knowledge— 
the appropriate technical approach to use in a given application. Frequently, a 
"canned" method fails to address the specific needs of a given application. It is your 
job to tailor existing methods—or to develop an appropriate new method and, 
perhaps, the associated software—to fit the problem. 
Consider the following example. The managers of a web site desired to estimate 
the total number of users who downloaded a particular file over a 1-month period. 
Unfortunately, the available data on file download activity were sparse and do not 
readily yield the desired information. Instead, new data about user characteristics 
were collected and recorded on a random sample of 50 users over 1 hour time periods. 
In this manner, the same user could, however, be sampled more than once and, thus, 
multiply counted—unless appropriate adjustments are made. It was noted that this 
sampling scenario closely resembles the capture-recapture approach commonly used 
to estimate the number of wild animals in a forest (or the number offish in a lake); see 
Sidebar 6.4. The methodology used for estimating animal populations was, therefore, 
adapted to provide an estimate of the number of users who downloaded the specified 
file during the course of a month. 
CAPTURE-RECAPTURE METHODOLOGY TO ESTIMATE THE NUMBER 
OF WILD ANIMALS IN A FOREST 
In its basic form (see Lohr, 2010), the goal of the capture-recapture methodology is to 
estimate the total number (Af) of animals in a defined area. A random sample of nl animals 
is capiured, tagged, and released back into the forest. In a later time period, n2 animals are 
captured. Suppose ihat m out of these n2 animals are found to be carrying the tag from the 
previous sample. /Vis then estimated by equating the (unknown) proportion of marked 
animals in the population to those in the second sample and solving for N, that is, setting 
(πι/Ν) -(m/n^ 
and then estimating N as N = r\yn2jm. This method assumes a well-
mixed static population during the sampling period. The application of the methodology to 
changing populations {i.e., due to death, birth, and migration) often involves several cycles 
of capture and recapture. 

108 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
6.14 PASSION FOR LIFELONG LEARNING 
The statistics profession is constantly changing, as are the application areas in which 
many of you will be involved. You need to keep abreast of the latest developments in 
both. We suggest some ways for doing this in Chapter 14. 
6.15 FURTHER READING 
For further discussion on what makes a successful statistician, see Banks (2008), 
Hoerl et al. (1993), Kenett and Thyregod (2006), Kotz et al. (2005), McDonald (1999), 
O'Brien (2002), Snee (1998), and Chapters 3 and 4 in Coleman et al. (2010). Also, the 
Amstat News frequently carries articles on this subject. 
In addition, various books consider some of the topics discussed in this chapter. 
For example, 
• Boen and Zahn (1982), Cabrera and McDougall (2002), and Derr (2000) focus 
on statistical consulting. 
• Spurrier (2000) considers the practice of statistics. 
• Szabo (2004), though directed at actuaries, provides comments with general 
applicability. 
6.16 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
To supplement our comments, and to get more inputs, we asked some eminent applied 
statisticians: 
• What, in your opinion, are the most important traits of a successful applied 
statistician? 
• What key advice would you give to an aspiring statistician planning or 
embarking on their career? 
We present below responses (some abridged or edited) to these questions. More 
responses are shown at the end of Chapters 7 and 9 and in quotes in various other 
chapters. Some of these responses bring out new points (or subtleties) that add to 
our comments. Other responses reiterate points that we make and may be 
somewhat repetitive. But, as one of our respondents suggests, if it's that important, 
it might warrant repetition.1 
' Many of the respondents have held multiple positions during their careers. We generally show their 
present (or last prior to retirement) positions. 

6.16 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
1 0 9 
Successful statisticians need good communications skills in both oral and written 
form and a keen interest in helping others understand how statistical thinking 
applies to all aspects of the enterprise. 
—Thomas J. Boardman, Professor Emeritus, Colorado State University; 
Consultant 
To be successful, an applied statistician has to have strong negotiation and 
communication skills, a firm grasp of the scientific method, a shameless curiosity 
and a willingness to walk miles in the shoes of clients. 
—Lynne Hare, Director (retired), Applied Statistics, Kraft Foods 
Bottom line to being successful is a keen sense of customer focus and returning 
value for their investment. 
—William Hill, Six Sigma Leader (retired), Center for Applied Mathematics, Honeywell 
Company 
Ability to work as an equal partner on a team with non-statisticians; desire to 
become a subject matter expert in the domains where statistics is being applied. 
—Bruce Hoadley, Research Statistician (retired), Fair, Isaac and Co. Inc. 
(FICO) 
Successful statisticians require solid technical skills in broad areas of applied and 
theoretical statistics, and the inclination to learn new areas. Necessary soft skills 
include the ability to team and communicate with non-statisticians; leadership 
ability to determine what needs to be done; and the ability to energize yourself and 
others to get it done. 
—Roger Hoerl, Manager, Applied Statistics Laboratory, GE Global Research 
Center 
The most important trait is the ability to communicate clearly the spoken and 
written word to your customer. 
—Ronald Iman, President, Southwest Technology Consultants; past President of 
the American Statistical Association 
I have never felt limited by a lack of understanding of statistics. The larger challenge 
was translating statistical findings into concise information that is easily and 
accurately understood. 
—William Makuch, Managing Director (retired), Structured Transactions and 
Analytical Research, Wachovia Corporation 
An applied statistician must be able to see and appreciate a client's problem from 
the client's viewpoint. The less you appear to be and act like a statistician, and the 
more you appear to be intimately familiar and interested in the client's problem 
area, the more successful the interaction will probably be. Three things are 
extremely important: The ability to listen and to ask the right questions, so that the 
client's statistical needs become crystal clear; the ability to choose and use the 

CHAPTER 6 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
simplest, most appropriate statistical tools for addressing the problem; and the 
ability to translate the statistical results into the practical, action-oriented 
(non-statistical) implicative language of the client. Finally, when interacting with 
clients don't forget to be friendly, pleasant and to smile—you'd be surprised how 
much this ensures success. 
—Harry Martz, Laboratory Associate in Statistics (retired), Los Alamos National 
Laboratory 
Everyone says that communicating (listening, cooperating, asking and hearing, 
speaking and writing) are important. But it's true even though everyone says it, so 1 
will say it again. 
—David S. Moore, Shanti S. Gupta Distinguished Professor (retired), Purdue University; 
past President of the American Statistical Association 
Successful statisticians need strong knowledge and understanding of statistics; the 
ability to apply their knowledge and training to a diverse array of problems and 
applications; the ability to interact well with others; good computer and 
mathematics skills; good oral and written communication skills; and the ability to 
work well with others. They should be prepared to work in teams consisting of 
other scientists, engineers, managers, etc. 
—Carolyn B. Morgan, Professor, Hampton University; formerly, Statistician, CE 
Corporate Research and Development 
Communication, communication, communication! This includes being a good 
listener; the ability to ask the right questions; and the ability to communicate 
statistical concepts at the client's level. Ability to adapt to changing situations. 
Willingness to learn and apply new methods, and to look at problems outside the 
realm of their current knowledge. 
—Margaret A. Nemeth, Statistics Center Lead, Regulatory, Monsanto Company 
I want the kind of applied statistician w h o realizes that nature abhors a vacuum. 
He/she is part of a team trying to attain an objective in the subject matter, not sitting 
in a lonely corner analyzing data. The good applied statistician puts the emphasis 
on "applied" and not on the "statistics." 
—Barry D. Nussbaum, Chief Statistician, Environmental Protection Agency 
A successful applied statistician is a good communicator. This includes being a 
good listener, as well as being able to communicate ideas effectively to non-
statisticians. 
—William C. Parr, Professor, China Europe International Business School, 
Consultant 
While there are many necessary traits for success, there are only two that really 
discriminate good and excellent applied statisticians: proactive leadership and 
strong interpersonal skills. I view ultimate success as a demonstration of the 
footprint that an applied statistician has left behind in integrating statistics into the 
culture, strategies and decision-making of an organization. Large footprints 
invariably require initiative and influence. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
111 
—Charles G. Pfeifer, Principal Consultant, DuPont Quality Management and 
Technology 
Have broad interests. Maintain high self esteem in difficult situations. Be an 
excellent communicator and thought of as one more good mind on a project team 
(rather than some sort of mathematical geek kept to run the formulas). 
—Charles B. Sampson, Director of Statistics (retired), Eli Lilly and Company 
A successful statistician needs a sharp mind, an absence of rigidity, the ability to 
wink at p-values, and an appreciation of the foundations of statistics. 
—Nozer D. Singpurwalla, Professor, The George Washington University; 
Consultant 
6.17 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
Technical knowledge is a necessary but not sufficient condition for the success of an 
applied statistician on the job. Successful statisticians also need to possess important 
soft skills: 
• Strong communication and interpersonal skills. 
• The ability to size up problems and see the big picture. 
• Flexibility: the ability to anticipate and adapt to change. 
• A proactive mindset. 
• Persistence in pursuing what is right for the organization. 
• A realistic attitude and readiness to quit at the point of diminishing returns. 
• Enthusiasm and appropriate self-confidence. 
• The ability to prioritize, manage time, and cope with stress. 
• Team skills. 
• Leadership skills. 
• The ability to properly apply and adapt knowledge. 
• A passion for lifelong learning. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. *Based on the discussion in this chapter, what would you say are the three most 
important traits of a successful applied statistician? Are there any traits—or 
degrees of emphasis—which the respondents to our questions in Section 6.16 
appear to disagree on, either among themselves or with the authors? 

112 
CHAPTER 6 CHARACTERISTICS OF SUCCESSFUL STATISTICIANS 
2. 'Rate yourself (e.g., on a score from 1 to 5) on each of the characteristics of a 
successful statistician described in this chapter. What can you do to improve 
yourself on characteristics on which you do not score well? 
3. 'Describe situations in which you have been involved, either in a personal or in a 
professional context, in which you needed to do one or more of the following: 
be fast on your feet, size up the situation differently from that described to you, 
be flexible, be proactive, and be persistent. 
4. 'Consider a work or school (e.g., your thesis) situation in which you are 
currently or have recently been involved. What changes, beyond your control, 
happened (or might happen) to impact your work and its success? How can you 
make sure that what you are doing is as robust as possible to such changes? 
5. 'Consider a specific project in which you have been involved. How can you 
determine when your work has reached a point of diminishing returns? 
6. 'How good a job do you think you are doing in prioritizing your work, managing 
your time, and coping with stress? How can you do better? 
7. 'Do you enjoy and thrive in working on team projects or do you feel more 
comfortable doing things on your own? What might you do to become a better 
team player? 
8. 'You are collaborating with a human resources specialist to design and conduct 
a survey to assess employee job satisfaction and will need to jointly present your 
findings to management by a specified date. Your working partner seems unable 
to find the time needed to devote to this project. He consistently apologizes and 
promises to get his part done right away, but does not come through. 
What approaches might you use to foster progress, without unduly creating 
ill feelings? 
9. Elaborate on the application of the capture-recapture methodology described in 
Sidebar 6.4 and the underlying assumptions. 

■7 
CHAPTER 
/ 
EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
7.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
There is no substitute for knowledge. 
—W. Edwards Deming 
We stress throughout this book that successful statisticians require competen-
cies that stretch far beyond technical knowledge of statistics. That, however, in no way 
detracts from the need for them to have sound in-depth understanding of their subject. 
Competence in statistics is, after all, the key added value that statisticians provide. 
Our nonstatistical colleagues, as a consequence of the democratization of 
statistics, have become increasingly familiar with statistical concepts and methods, 
and are building self-confidence in performing their own statistical analyses. When 
they turn to professional statisticians, they expect them to be more knowledgeable 
than ever. 
You need to plan in advance to ensure that you acquire the right education so 
that—when the time comes—you will be in a position to put together an attractive 
resume and embark on a rewarding career. Needless to say, this calls for such basics as 
working hard and striving to get top grades. But it also requires you to make good 
decisions on a variety of matters—such as selecting the courses that are best for you, 
building evidence that you possess broad personal and leadership skills, and, if 
possible, gaining relevant job experience. 
In this chapter, we provide guidance to help you acquire the educational 
foundation that best meets your needs for a successful career in statistics. We consider 
• The Statistics Advanced Placement course and other high school programs. 
• Degrees in statistics: the numbers. 
• How far to go: bachelor's, master's, or Ph.D. degree? 
• Selecting the right school and program. 
• Statistical education: setting the foundations. 
• Coursework in statistics. 
• Statistical computing and software. 
• Some other recommendations. 
• Internships and university consulting. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
113 

114 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
• Entering statistics from other fields. 
• Further resources. 
• The limits of formal statistical education. 
• As others see it. 
7.2 THE STATISTICS ADVANCED PLACEMENT COURSE 
AND OTHER HIGH SCHOOL PROGRAMS 
We urge students to avail themselves of opportunities to learn about statistics even 
before entering college. 
In the United States, many are introduced to statistics in high school through the 
Advanced Placement (AP) course on the subject, and take the nationally offered AP 
Statistics exam at the end of the course. Typically taught as a 1-year offering by the 
Mathematics Department, students who complete the course and pass the exam may 
receive college credit for a one-semester introductory statistics course or advanced 
placement (i.e., waiving of requirement to take the introductory statistics course, 
possibly as a prerequisite for more advanced courses). 
Started in 1997, in 2009 almost 100,000 students took the AP Statistics exam 
and it was the eighth most frequently taken of the 37 AP courses.' Not all students take 
the exam, making the total number taking the course even higher. About three-
quarters of those who take the course do so in their senior year in high school. See The 
College Board (2010) for a more detailed description. 
Some high schools offer a "university in the high school" program as an 
alternative to the AP program. Students pay tuition to a local college or university 
that works with the high school to provide courses that meet the institution's academic 
requirements. Upon successful course completion, students receive credit from 
the institution, which may be transferable to whatever college or university they 
choose to attend. 
Many who study statistics in high school do so because of their curiosity about 
the subject and/or their interest in mathematics and do not, at least initially, think of it 
as a career opportunity. However, we hope and expect that at least some will be turned 
on sufficiently to want to consider statistics as their potential profession. See Patterson 
(2009) for further discussion. 
7.3 DEGREES IN STATISTICS: THE NUMBERS 
7.3.1 The Big Picture 
Figure 7.1 shows the number of degrees in statistics conferred at the bachelor's, 
master's, and Ph.D. degree levels from 2000 to 2009. These graphs were prepared 
1 U.S. history, English literature and composition, English language and composition, calculus AB, U.S. 
government and politics, biology, and psychology were the seven most popular courses. 

7.3 DECREES IN STATISTICS: THE NUMBERS 
115 
Figure 7.1 Bachelor's, master's, and Ph.D. degrees in statistics in the United States, 
2000-2009. 
from data compiled by the American Statistical Association, based on numbers 
obtained from the National Center for Education Statistics (NCES).2 
The same person can appear multiple times in these plots—as a recipient of a 
bachelor's degree goes on to get a higher degree or a Ph.D. earns a master's degree 
along the way. 
We note from Figure 7.1 that the preponderance of degrees in statistics is at the 
master's level. Also noteworthy is the approximate doubling in master's degrees from 
2000 to 2009. During the same period, the number of bachelor's degrees in statistics 
rose only modestly, and the number of Ph.D. degrees remained about the same, though 
fluctuating over the period. Landes (2009), moreover, shows that an increasing 
proportion of, at least, Ph.D. degrees awarded in the United States are conferred 
to non-U.S. residents. 
It should be noted that just as it is difficult to measure precisely how many 
practicing statisticians there are at any given time in the United States, so it is also hard 
to estimate how many degrees are conferred yearly in the subject. This is due, in part, 
to differences in opinion as to exactly what constitutes a degree in statistics.4 
7.3.2 A Further Breakdown 
A further study, the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Survey of Earned Doc-
torates (using somewhat different program inclusion criteria and data gathering 
methods5), arrived at a total of 579 Ph.D. degrees in statistics in 2007 and 510 
in 2008.6 
2 http://nces.ed.gov/ipeds/. 
3 The proportion of Ph.D. degrees awarded to non-U.S. residents increased from under 40% to about 70% 
from 1997 to 2006, whereas the actual number of such degrees granted to U.S. residents over the same years 
decreased. 
The ASA compilation used general and other statistics, biometry/biometrics, biostatistics, business 
statistics, educational statistics and research methods, health and medical biostatistics, mathematical 
statistics, and probability. It did not include econometrics, management information systems/business 
statistics, and psychometrics. 
" For NCES, the institution granting the degree provides the information. The NSF data comes from the 
forms that Ph.D. students are required to submit to their institution before they graduate. (This illustrates 
how different data gathering methods can result in different findings.) 
There were an additional 142 and 156 Ph.D. degrees in management information systems/business 
statistics and 30 and 35 Ph.D. degrees in econometrics in 2007 and 2008, respectively. 

116 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
tn 
(1) 
n> 
-a 
Q 
r 
n 
u 
ω 
U) 
r Φ 
o 
Φ 
n 
60-
5 0 -
4 0 -
: ■« ) -
2 0 -
1 0 -
o-l 
, - - - " · - - . . Mathematical statistics/ 
physical sciences 
Biometrics and biostatistics 
Educational statistics 
and research methods 
Social science statistics 
Ί 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Γ 
1998 
2000 
2002 
2004 
2006 
2008 
Year 
Figure 7.2 Percentage of Ph.D. degrees in statistics by area of specialization. 
This survey, moreover, broke down the 510 Ph.D. degrees awarded in 2008 by 
area of specialization (or school granting degree); see Figure 7.2. 
We note from Figure 7.2 that 
• The percentage of degrees in mathematical statistics and the physical sciences 
has constantly been around 50% or above, and is on the rise (59% in 2008). 
• The percentage of degrees in biometrics and biostatistics has been about 20% 
and has been rising slowly, but not consistently (24% in 2008). 
• The percentage of degrees in educational statistics and research methods has 
been around 15% and is dropping slowly (13% in 2008). 
• The percentage of degrees in social science statistics has dropped sharply to 
below 5% (4% in 2008). 
7.4 
HOW FAR TO GO: BACHELOR'S, MASTER'S, 
OR PH.D. DEGREE? 
How far should you, as a potentially aspiring statistician, take your formal education? 
The answer depends heavily on your specific career aspirations, and especially 
whether your long-term goal is pursuing an increasingly more responsible technical 
career as a statistician in an application area or academia (for both of which in-depth 
technical training will be especially important) or a broader career leading to a 
position in management or in an application area (see Chapter 12). 
7.4.1 Bachelor's Degrees in Statistics 
Students that take a bachelor's degree in statistics fall roughly into three categories: 
• Those who consider it as their terminal degree and seek employment in the field, 
or related fields, after graduation. 
• Those who seek employment upon graduation, but are planning to continue 
their education part-time, possibly with financial (and other) support from their 

7.4 HOW FAR TO GO: BACHELOR'S, MASTER'S, OR PH.D. DECREE? 
1 1 7 
employers (and, in some cases, eventually switch to full-time study to complete 
their degrees). 
• Those who are planning to go on to graduate school upon getting their 
bachelor's degree and want to build an early solid technical foundation in 
statistics. 
Undergraduate programs in statistics are generally highly applied, but can cover the 
key methods and concepts. In addition, some 4-year colleges have programs to 
provide students with research experience. Such programs are especially attractive to 
those who aspire to continue their education beyond a bachelor's degree; see Bryce 
et al. (2001) and Tarpey et al. (2002) for curriculum guidelines. 
Those who do seek a job upon getting an undergraduate degree in statistics 
(the first two categories) are typically asked by their employers to conduct 
statistical analyses using statistical software. A good understanding of such 
software and competence with computers, in general, is therefore especially impor-
tant (Section 7.8). 
The ASA conducted a symposium on "Improving the Work Force of the Future: 
Opportunities in Undergraduate Statistics Education" in 2000; see Bryce (2002). 
7.4.2 How Far Will a Bachelor's Degree in Statistics Get You? 
Many students go to work after completing their bachelor's degrees for financial or 
personal reasons—or because they are tired of school and want to explore the world 
beyond. In some cases, an undergraduate degree in statistics may be a stepping-stone 
for a career in an application area. 
But is an undergraduate degree, with a major in statistics, sufficient for a career 
in applied statistics? This is a somewhat controversial subject. 
In Favor of a Bachelor's Degree. Bryce et al. (2001) maintain that "Many employ-
ers have discovered that graduates of strong BA/BS programs (in statistics) possess 
skills that make them valuable entry-level employees." As we noted in Section 4.3.2, 
approximately 90 of the more than 175 statisticians employed by the Mayo Clinic 
hold only bachelor's degrees (although not all of those degrees were in statistics). 
Also, many of the statisticians engaged in official statistics have only bachelor's 
degrees. 
Scheaffer and Lee (2000) further state the case for undergraduate statistics. 
Bryce (2005) argues in favor of a strong bachelor's degree in statistics, either as a 
terminal degree or, perhaps for the top 25% of such students, as a foundation for 
graduate education in statistics. 
A Bachelor's Degree Is Insufficient. Moore (2001), a former President of the AS A, 
maintains that "no undergraduate program is intended to train professional statis-
ticians. For better or worse, statisticians are defined as having at least a master's 
degree or equivalent experience. Holders of a bachelor's degree may eventually 
reach this status via on the job training and practical experience, but their degree 
does not equip them for professional practice." Ritter et al. (2001) add, "There are 

118 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
very few positions exclusively for BS-statisticians. More common are positions (in 
statistics) for which BS-statisticians qualify, but for which statistics is only one of 
several appropriate types of preparation." Also, as we noted in Section 3.7, most 
statisticians working in the major U.S. federal statistical agencies are hired as 
mathematical statisticians and are encouraged to get master's degrees to further 
their advancement. 
Our Assessment. There are entry-level job opportunities for those with just 
bachelor's degrees in statistics (or closely related subjects). The work, at least 
initially, is likely to be more routine and less challenging than for those with more 
advanced degrees. There are also fewer opportunities for advancement for individuals 
who wish to remain principally statisticians (as opposed to moving into an application 
area or management). Thus, a bachelor's degree may get you into the field, but a 
higher degree, and certainly the equivalent knowledge, is often needed to advance 
within the field. 
7.4.3 Master's Versus Ph.D.? 
You have decided to extend your education beyond a bachelor's degree. How far do 
you need to go? 
A permanent faculty position at a 4-year college, and especially at a research 
university, almost always requires a Ph.D. degree, as further discussed in Chapter 13. 
However, for most statisticians outside academia, the typical requirement is a 
master's degree in statistics. 
So, if you are not planning a career in academia why might you want to go on for 
a Ph.D.? 
Well, for one thing, Ph.D.'s tend to get paid better, especially in an entry-level 
position. (But they often delay their working careers, thereby reducing their total 
career incomes, by having to go to school longer.) 
A Ph.D. program provides the opportunity for more extensive study, for 
taking or auditing more advanced courses, and for deeper research. The more you 
know, the better prepared you generally are. A Ph.D. degree provides more 
opportunities for internships and to explore academic areas outside statistics. The 
discipline required to write a scholarly dissertation can be highly beneficial. As a 
result, Ph.D.'s tend to address problems with greater confidence and are better 
equipped to handle difficult technical problems—even though many problems 
often can (and should) be addressed by relatively elementary methods. In orga-
nizations that have multiple statisticians, those with Ph.D. degrees are, at least 
initially, more likely to become involved in more challenging activities than those 
who do not have such degrees. 
A Ph.D. is also highly desirable for certain jobs—the so-called "union card" 
factor. It may be important, or even a prerequisite, for a position that requires dealing 
with regulatory or law enforcement agencies, especially in a leadership role. 
Statisticians working on clinical trials in the pharmaceutical industry, or presenting 
briefs to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, are more likely to have Ph.D. 

7.4 HOW FAR TO GO: BACHELOR'S, MASTER'S, OR PH.D. DEGREE? 
119 
degrees than their counterparts working in an internal quality or reliability assurance 
operation. Similar considerations apply for statisticians involved in writing proposals 
to government agencies or giving testimony, both in a legal and in a governmental 
setting. And if you are an independent statistical consultant, a Ph.D. is likely to be 
helpful in attracting customers. 
A Ph.D. is also useful if you are seeking a job in an organization, such as many 
research and development laboratories, in which colleagues in other fields have such 
degrees, for example, in science or engineering. The trend in many places, however, is 
toward employment based upon what you have to offer in totality, including relevant 
experience, rather than the degrees that you hold. 
In a few organizations, a Ph.D. degree might even be somewhat of a liability. 
Employers might regard Ph.D.'s as overqualified and too far removed from the real 
world to be motivated by, or effective at, addressing day-to-day problems. Other 
employers, especially those with few Ph.D.'s in their organizations, might feel 
intimidated, or just not willing to pay the higher salary. 
In summary, for entry-level positions in applied statistics—especially in 
areas such as manufacturing, official statistics, and finance—the education provided 
by a strong master's degree is often sufficient, with much of the rest being learned on 
the job. A Ph.D., on the other hand, in addition to the further knowledge that comes 
with it, might lead to greater growth opportunities, especially for those who plan to 
remain in statistics. And, who knows, perhaps some time down the road, you might 
want to go into academia—for which a Ph.D. is highly important. 
See Crank (2009) for further comments. 
7.4.4 Some Alternative Routes 
From School to School. Many students start their graduate education immediately 
after getting their undergraduate degrees. This is the traditional route. 
Taking a Breather. Others decide to take a breather, and earn some money, by 
taking a full-time job before continuing their education, perhaps taking some 
advanced courses while on the job. Others still might take a break between their 
master's and Ph.D. degrees. Such an interruption can provide an opportunity for 
informed reflection in helping you decide whether a career in statistics and/or 
pursuing a higher degree is really for you. On-the-job experience can also help 
you target better the educational program that suits you best. Returning full time 
to school is, however, likely to result in, at least a temporary, reduction in income 
and may, when the time comes, not be practical for financial, family, or other 
reasons. 
Time Sharing. You might consider getting an advanced degree in statistics by taking 
courses over a number of years while working full-time (or part-time)—if your job 
allows. Many employers encourage this practice by paying your tuition fee and, 
possibly, allowing you some time off to take such courses, especially if you can show 
their relevance to the job. 

120 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
Do not, however, underestimate the difficulty of going to school and succeeding 
on a demanding job at the same time. Trying to do both is likely to be strenuous and 
can interfere with other life activities. It requires an appropriate school to be 
geographically close to your home and/or place of employment. Long-distance and 
web-based learning programs increasingly provide an alternative, but some require 
time on campus, ranging from a few weekends to several weeks. 
Other Possibilities. You might decide to pursue further coursework beyond the 
master's degree, but not write a dissertation and, thereby, not obtain a formal Ph.D. 
degree. In this way, you get the benefit of the education, without the prestige and 
financial advantages that are often associated with having a Ph.D. This path is 
especially appropriate for those for whom having a degree per se is not that important, 
but having the technical knowledge is. Others still get a second master's degree, 
perhaps in an allied field or application area. 
Irrespective of the specific path, learning is a lifetime activity and needs to be 
continued, formally or informally, while on the job. We will return to this theme in 
Chapter 14. 
7.5 SELECTING THE RIGHT SCHOOL AND PROGRAM 
7.5.1 A Wide Choice 
Before the middle of the past century, the choice of a university to study statistics was 
relatively simple—there were only a handful of schools that offered degrees, or even 
formal education, in statistics, and many of these emphasized agricultural applications. 
Today, you have a wide choice of schools both at the undergraduate and at the 
graduate level. 
Bachelor's Degree. Bryce (2005) cites a one-time (but not currently accessible) 
ASA web site, indicating 97 undergraduate degree programs in statistics, some of 
which might be quite small. Ritteret al. (2001) note that almost half of the bachelor's 
degrees in statistics granted in 1996-1997 were from 15 cited universities. 
Graduate Programs. The ASA informs us that in 2010 there were 95 statistics and 
biostatistics departments in the United States offering Ph.D. degrees. 
The U.S. News & World Report provided a ranking of graduate schools in statistics 
and biostatistics in the United States in 2010. This ordered 69 schools and listed 6 further 
unranked schools (some schools with multiple departments, offering, for example, 
degrees in both statistics and biostatistics, had multiple listings).7 
A further assessment of Ph.D. programs in the United States is provided 
periodically by the National Research Council (NRC). Its 2010 study8 included 
61 departments with Ph.D. programs in statistics. 
7 http://grad-schools.usnews.rankingsandreviews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-statistics-schools/rankings/. 
8 http://www.nap.edu/rdp/. 

7.5 SELECTING THE RIGHT SCHOOL AND PROGRAM 
121 
Making a Choice. In the balance of this section, we present a variety of factors that 
we propose you consider in selecting a school. Our comments are especially relevant 
in selecting a graduate school, but most apply also for undergraduate studies. 
There are in addition numerous personal factors that will undoubtedly enter into 
your choice, such as the school's location and cost (including the school's willingness 
to provide you a scholarship, assistantship, or other financial support). 
7.5.2 School Rankings 
The aforementioned school rankings may provide one input to your selection. In using 
such rankings, you need to be aware of the criteria and weightings employed in 
arriving at them. 
In explaining how the rankings of statistics graduate schools were obtained, the 
U.S. News & World Report indicated that they were "based solely on the ratings of 
academic experts. To gather the peer opinion data, we asked deans, program directors, 
and senior faculty to judge the academic quality of programs in their field on a scale of 
1 ('marginal') to 5 ('outstanding')." 
Generally speaking, the higher ranked schools tend to be the more prestigious 
national institutions—and are likely to be the hardest to get in to (and the most 
demanding once you are there). 
In its evaluation of graduate schools, NRC considered 20 factors that include 
characteristics of the faculty (e.g., number of publications and citations, number of 
awards) and of the students (e.g., GRE scores, percent fellowships), as well as average 
time to complete a degree, ethnic and gender diversity, and various other measures. 
NRC then produced two rankings based on different weighting schemes. The 
weightings used in arriving at the preceding ratings may or may not correlate well 
with your own. 
Most significantly, you can develop your own weighting scheme using the 
20 factors considered by NRC and apply this to the NRC response summaries to arrive 
at your personally customized ranking of schools. 
In passing, we note that U.S. News & World Report also ranks undergraduate 
schools in general categories, such as business schools, engineering schools, and 
liberal arts programs. These rankings are based on a combination of peer assessments 
and responses by the individual schools in response to a questionnaire sent to them; 
see Sidebar 7.1. 
CRITERIA AND WEIGHTINGS FOR U.S. NEWS & WORLD REPORT 2010 
UNDERGRADUATE SCHOOL RANKINGS 
The foliowing are the criteria used by U.S. News & World Report, and the weight assigned to 
each, in ranking national (as opposed to regional) undergraduate schools: 
• Peer asse ssment (from re v ie ws by c ol 1 ege presidents, pro vests, deans of admi s s i on): 

122 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
« Various numbers (based on responses to 
- Graduation and retention rate; 
- Student selectivity (SAT/ACT 
15%. 
- Faculty resources (class size, 
faculty ratio); 20%. 
- Financial resources: 10%. 
- Alumni giving: 5%. 
- Graduate performance: 5%. 
20%. 
scores. 
questionnaires sent to colleges): 
high i 
compensation 
school standing, acceptano 
, top degree, % full-time, 
5 rates): 
student/ 
7.5.3 Relative Emphasis on Bachelor's, Master's, and Ph.D. 
Programs 
If a school offers a Ph.D. in statistics, master's degrees are also frequently given, as 
well as, in some cases, bachelor's degrees. Schools that offer Ph.D.'s in statistics are 
likely to have greater strength and provide a larger choice of coursework and more 
flexibility, even for students who do not go on for a Ph.D. 
At the same time, schools that offer Ph.D.'s in statistics might give prime 
emphasis to such programs, possibly at the expense of other degree programs. For 
example, graduate students might have varying degrees of responsibility for teaching 
less advanced courses. 
If you are going for a bachelor's degree in statistics in an institution that does not 
offer a higher degree in the subject, you may receive greater personal attention. For 
example, you may have the opportunity to get involved (sometimes even for pay) in 
consulting projects in which faculty members are engaged. This is much less likely in 
an institution in which candidates for master's and Ph.D. degrees are available for 
such assignments. 
7.5.4 Department and School Offering Degrees 
There is much variability in the departments that offer degrees in statistics. Many 
universities have Departments of Statistics or some variation thereof, for example, the 
Department of Applied Statistics or the Department of Statistical Sciences. 
In other universities, the degree in statistics is offered by the Mathematics 
Department (or the Department of Mathematical Sciences) or by the Mathematics and 
Statistics Department. 
In some schools, the statistics department tends to focus on an education 
reflected by its name. Most prominent amongst these is the Department of Biosta-
tistics. The Department of Experimental Statistics is a more specialized example. In 
some cases, the statistics department may be joined with another area, such as the 
Department of Statistics and Computer Science, the Department of Statistics and 
Operations Research, the Center for Quality and Applied Statistics, and the Depart-
ment of Statistics and Actuarial Sciences. 

7.5 SELECTING THE RIGHT SCHOOL AND PROGRAM 
123 
In yet other cases, a statistics degree, or something closely resembling it, is 
offered directly by a department in an application area. Some examples are 
the Department of Decision Sciences and Engineering Systems, the Industrial 
Engineering Department, the Economics Department, the Psychology or Educational 
Psychology Department, the Department of Management Sciences, the Department 
of Public Health, and the Department of Information Systems and Quantitative 
Sciences. 
In a few universities, there is more than one department that offers a statistics 
degree (e.g., a degree in statistics in the college of arts and sciences, and a degree in 
biostatistics in the school of public health). In some cases, these departments are well 
integrated and might even offer a joint degree. But in others, the programs operate 
independent (or almost independent) of each other. 
In addition to the department that offers degrees in statistics, you should 
consider the school within the university in which the department is located. 
Examples are the School of Liberal Arts and Sciences, the School of Business, and 
the School of Engineering. 
The department and the school offering the degree in statistics are important 
because they suggest the emphasis in the courses offered. Statistics degrees from the 
School of Engineering or the School of Business are, for example, likely to stress 
applications in their respective areas. These departments may also have closer ties to 
employers of applied statisticians (and provide more internship opportunities) in their 
respective areas than, say, the Department of Mathematics. 
Schools that have their own statistics department vary in the degree of emphasis 
that they place on theory versus applications. Some departments are highly theoretical 
(these are often highly ranked in the U.S. News & World Report survey). Others, 
especially those that are located in an applications-oriented school, such as the school 
of public health, the business school, or an engineering school, tend to be more 
applied. 
7.5.5 Size of the Program 
Statistics programs vary considerably in size. Schools with formal departments of 
statistics are more likely to have a larger number of faculty and students in statistics 
than those in which statistics is offered by some other department. Small versus large, 
however, is a matter of personal choice. 
Larger programs are likely to provide both a greater selection of courses and 
activities, such as seminars, and an exposure to a more varied faculty. They tend to 
have better name recognition within the statistical community and, possibly, offer 
more opportunities upon graduation (including more graduates returning to campus 
on recruiting trips) than more modest-sized programs. 
Smaller departments, on the other hand, are likely to provide a greater chance 
for personal expression, more camaraderie, and, possibly, depending on the student/ 
faculty ratio, a more personalized touch. The degree of cordiality and personal 
attention accorded to students, however, is not always reflected by the size of the 
department. Some departments, irrespective of size, have an open-door culture with 
professors spending considerable time in their offices. 

124 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
7.5.6 Strength of the Faculty 
The strength of the statistics faculty can be an important factor in selecting a school. 
The professors' reputation and professional accomplishments are generally relatively 
easy to determine. Some of the factors that may impact you more directly, such as their 
teaching ability and accessibility, are more difficult to evaluate. Current students and 
recent graduates may be a useful source of information. 
Sometimes, students are attracted to a university by the opportunity to take 
courses from and perhaps work with one or more renowned professors—both a 
potentially great experience in itself and a neat thing to have on your resume. You need 
to assess, in advance, how realistic this expectation might be. For example, are these 
professors teaching courses that you are likely to take? How many students are doing 
research with them and are they open to taking on more students? What are the 
chances that the professor(s) will leave the school before you complete your studies? 
7.5.7 Dissertation Options 
Ph.D. degree programs culminate with the writing of a dissertation. Some schools 
allow students to parse their dissertation into three or four papers (corresponding to 
chapters) on related topics instead of the traditional one-topic dissertation. This may 
resemble more closely what students will encounter in the workplace. This practice 
might also increase the number of publications resulting from your Ph.D. work. 
Master's degrees at some schools may require a thesis, have a thesis option, or 
call for the completion of a substantive project. These are typically less intensive and 
may be less research-oriented than a Ph.D. dissertation. There may be a trade-off 
between courses and a thesis/project. Programs that require a substantive project for a 
master's degree may require fewer formal courses. 
We will comment further on the importance of thesis topic and advisor selection 
in Section 7.9.2. 
7.5.8 Strength in Other Areas 
In selecting a school, you need to also consider its strength in areas other than 
statistics, and especially in the one(s) in which you wish, or are likely, to apply 
statistics upon graduation. If you have not selected such an area, as is frequently the 
case especially early on, you may prefer a school that is strong in many different areas. 
Also, you would want to explore the degree of encouragement (and associated credit) 
that you would receive in venturing beyond the statistics program for some of your 
coursework. 
7.5.9 Internship Opportunities 
We discuss the importance of hands-on experience via an internship in Section 7.10. 
You should try to determine the degree to which a school encourages internships and 
whether it has an established process to help students set them up. Similarly, you 
would want to determine whether the school has an active consulting center that 
provides challenging (including outside campus) opportunities. If you are considering 

7.6 STATISTICAL EDUCATION: SETTING THE FOUNDATIONS 
125 
year-round part-time employment, you might favor schools that will provide help in 
securing such positions and that are located in geographical areas that are likely to 
provide such opportunities. 
7.6 
STATISTICAL EDUCATION: SETTING 
THE FOUNDATIONS 
Warning: Doing everything that we suggest in this chapter may not be practical 
within the confines of one person's college career. You will likely need to select from 
among our recommendations, or at least prioritize them, based upon your personal 
interests and aptitudes. 
7.6.1 Training in Application Area 
As we have maintained from the outset, applied statisticians need to be familiar with 
the application area in which they are involved. Often, this familiarity is obtained on 
the job. But it is much easier to gain such understanding if you come equipped with a 
good foundation. Thus, an advanced degree in statistics is a highly viable option for 
those with undergraduate degrees in an application area, such as biology, chemistry, 
physics, engineering, psychology, sociology, or economics, with a minor (or part of a 
double major) in statistics. This tends to defer intensive study of statistics to graduate 
school. Another possibility is for a statistics major to get a minor in an application area 
as an undergraduate. Yet others major or minor in mathematics or computer science as 
undergraduates. 
The earlier quoted statistics showing more than three master's degrees in 
statistics being awarded by U.S. universities for every bachelor's degree suggest that 
many graduate students in statistics, indeed, have undergraduate backgrounds in other 
areas.9 The common factor is often a strong interest in, and aptitude for, quantitative 
thinking. For others, the path from application area to statistics is the consequence of 
an evolution, rather than a deliberate plan—as students get to appreciate the value of 
statistics through an introductory course and/or work experience. 
Finally, those who do not get training in an application area as undergraduates 
might compensate for this by taking courses in graduate school, or even while on the 
job, and possibly by self-study. 
7.6.2 Mathematical Foundation 
Even though I don't solve differential equations anymore, I use the reasoning process 
that I learned in the Math Department at Dartmouth every day. 
—CE CEO Jeff Immelt 
Statistics is based upon mathematics. A good background in mathematics is, 
therefore, required of those embarking on a major in statistics. It is often ability and 
This result is also attributable to students with undergraduate degrees from other countries receiving their 
advanced degrees in the United States. 

126 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
interest in mathematics that draws students to statistics in the first place. Courses in 
calculus and linear algebra (including matrix theory) are generally prerequisites for a 
statistics major. Additional courses in numerical methods, discrete mathematics, 
differential equations, and real analysis also warrant consideration. 
Statisticians, mostly in academia, who are dedicated to extending the frontiers 
of statistics and to developing new methods need to be especially well trained in 
mathematics. 
7.6.3 Other Fundamentals 
As we emphasize in Section 6.3 and throughout this book, excellent communication 
skills—both written and verbal—are essential for aspiring statisticians. We urge you 
to focus on improving your ability to communicate effectively, including one-on-one 
interactions, public speaking, and technical writing. This may be done by taking 
courses in these areas (and in statistical consulting), seizing opportunities to engage in 
formal communication (not necessarily on technical topics), and actively seeking 
criticism of and suggestions on your communication abilities. 
If you are planning a career in academia, you should also try to gain some 
teaching experience while still at school. Finally, if you are aspiring to an eventual 
management position, you should consider coursework that will help build your 
organizational skills. 
Statisticians also need to be knowledgeable in statistical computing and 
software (Section 7.8). This knowledge is generally acquired both in courses on 
statistical computing and in general statistics courses. Becoming computer savvy 
early on will bring about important payoffs later. 
7.7 COURSEWORK IN STATISTICS 
Statisticians require an education that instills skill in applying (and sometimes 
furthering) the concepts and tools of statistics, while still providing a solid theoretical 
base. Such training needs to lead to an in-depth understanding of 
• The mathematical foundations of statistics. 
• The underlying concepts of statistics and statistical models, statistical reason-
ing, and underlying assumptions. 
• Basic tools (and software) for data analysis. 
• More advanced tools relevant to likely application areas. 
• How to rapidly and effectively acquire knowledge in areas that were not studied. 
• How to adapt existing methods and develop new ones to address problems. 
7.7.1 Required Courses 
A major in statistics generally requires, at least, a 1-year sequence in applied statistics 
(or statistical methods) and a 1-year course in the theory of probability and statistics 

7.7 COURSEWORK IN STATISTICS 
1 2 7 
(sometimes called mathematical statistics). Various additional courses such as 
statistical computing, general linear models (or regression analysis), sampling, and 
time series analysis are sometimes also required and highly recommended. 
7.7.2 Elective Courses 
A typical statistics program, especially in a large statistics department, provides a 
choice from among a wide variety of courses dealing with advanced methods and 
theory. Courses targeting specific methodology areas (in addition to those already 
listed as required in some institutions) such as Bayesian methods, categorical 
data analysis, design of experiments, multivariate analysis, and nonparametric 
methods are just a few examples. Additional courses provide training in application 
areas, such as industrial statistics and quality improvement, and statistical methods for 
clinical trials. There are also courses in such areas as statistical computing and 
statistical consulting, and on theoretical topics in mathematical statistics and prob-
ability theory. 
TABLE 7.1 Authors' Assessment of Importance of Course for Various Application Areas 

128 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
7.7.3 Our Assessment 
Of the wide spectrum of courses often available to students, which ones are most useful 
in planning careers in different application areas? We provide our (highly subjective) 
perspective, tempered by the inputs of colleagues, in Table 7.1. This tabulation aims to 
show the importance of various frequently offered courses, from analysis of variance to 
times series analysis (shown in the rows of the tabulation), in different application areas 
(shown by columns).1() For each application area, we placed each of the courses into one 
of five categories, ranging from questionable usefulness to essential; however, no course 
was felt to be of questionable usefulness in any area. 
The table lists courses included in many programs in applied statistics, although 
the specific course titles may vary. We omit courses directed at specific application 
areas, such as biostatistics, business statistics, and engineering statistics. We do, 
however, include courses that tend to be heavily oriented to a specific area of 
application, such as quality assurance and survival data analysis. The list is far from 
complete; universities, especially those with large statistics departments, provide 
various electives beyond those on our list. 
Our scores in many of the application areas are based upon our discussion and 
examples in Hahn and Doganaksoy (2008). Some of the reasoning that led to our 
assessment with regard to official statistics is provided in Sidebar 7.2. 
TRAINING FOR A CAREER IN OFFICIAL STATISTICS: SOME COMMENTS 
Many government statisticians engaged in the collection and reporting of official statistics 
make extensive use of sampling and need to be highly knowledgeable in that area. It is also 
useful to have an understanding of the intricacies of such matters as questionnaire 
construction and handling of nonresponse—topics that are not always taught in courses 
on sampling and are, instead, frequently learned on the job. 
Official statistics are typically collected repetitively over time (e.g., monthly) and 
describe the past. Predictions of the future are, however, of strong interest as, for example, 
in population projections by the U.S. Census Bureau, future mortality estimates by the 
Social Security Administration, and forecasts of energy demand by the U.S. Energy 
Information Administration (EIA). Thus, many government statisticians need expertise in 
methodologies, such as regression and time series analysis, for making such predictions and 
in recognizing their limitations.11 
An understanding of quality assurance systems is useful for the development and 
implementation of reliable data gathering systems. And, since the conduct of a survey 
orten requires the optimal allocation of limited resources to achieve high quality within 
budget, organizational, and other constraints, knowledge of operations research is helpful. 
10 Our assessments are based upon our understanding of the topics that are currently included in such 
courses (rather than what, in some cases, we feel the course should contain). 
1' Such work frequently results in close interactions between statisticians and economists. In fact, the use of 
statistical and mathematical methods in addressing economic problems has given rise to the field of 
econometrics. 

7.7 COURSEWORK IN STATISTICS 
129 
Like other applied statisticians, those working on government statistics frequently guide 
colleagues in other fields and, iherefore, would benefit from a course on statistical consulting. 
And, again like their colleagues, they use regression analysis, simulation, and statistical 
computing in a variety of situations, calling for courses in these areas, if time permits. 
■^mBBBi 
We note from Table 7.1 that a few courses are highly relevant to all, or almost all, 
application areas. These are regression analysis (including general linear models), 
statistical computing (Section 7.8), and statistical consulting. Other courses receive a 
high score for some application areas, but a lesser score in other areas, for example, the 
related areas of survival analysis (most relevant for pharmaceutical product applica-
tions) and life data analysis (most pertinent in product design, reliability, and field 
support applications). 
7.7.4 Alternative Assessments 
Each experienced statistician would likely score the relevance of courses to different 
application areas somewhat differently and some may, in fact, strongly disagree with 
our evaluation. Thus, Table 7.1 should be taken as a starting point for further 
discussion, rather than as the definitive answer. 
Some other assessments are provided in Sidebar 7.3. 
SIDEBAR / 
.3 
OTHER ASSESSMENTS 
In discussing (undergraduate) "most desirable course work" for a position at the El A, 
Blumberg (2009) lists 
» Mathematical statistics. 
• Regression (with a little bit of analysis of variance). 
• Data analysis coursework that includes some "dirty" data and multiple analyses. 
• Matrix algebra. 
• A computing course (either statistical or nonstatistical). 
• Economics. 
Nancy Buderer (in an unpublished presentation) suggests that for a career in health care 
statistics, students should have at least an MS in statistics or bio statistics, with courses in 
mathematics. epidemiology, biology, and computer programming, and advanced coarse-
work in survival data analysis (including Cox proportional hazard models), categorical data 
analysis (including logistic regression), analysis of variance (including repealed measure-
ment analyses and mixed models), nonparametrics, statistical power analysis, and sample 
size esdmation. 
Meeker (2009) lists the following "as tools needed by industrial stadsticians": Bayesian 
statistics, categorical data methods, censored data analysis, design of experiments, graphical 
methods, image analysis, multivariate analysis, optimization, regression analysis (linear and 
nonlinear), reliability theory, response surface methods, simulation, spatial statistics, 
statistical computing and programming, survey sampling, and time series analysis, 

130 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
TABLE 7.2 Specialized Methods that Have Particular Applicability in Selected 
Application Areas 
Application area 
Specialized method(s) 
Clinical studies for pharmaceutical products 
Developing new food products or chemicals 
Marketing studies or financial modeling 
Product reliability 
Planning clinical trials 
Mixture experiments 
Multivariate classification, clustering analyses 
Censored data analysis 
7.7.5 Some Specialized Methods 
Individual application areas come with their own technical approaches and meth-
odologies. See Table 7.2 for a few examples. 
Some technical challenges that are frequently encountered in working with 
official statistics, and that those engaged in this area should be especially familiar 
with, are presented in Sidebar 7.4. 
SIDEBAR 
/ . * f 
SOME TECHNICAL CHALLENGES IN OFFICIAL STATISTICS 
The following are a few of the technical challenges frequently encountered in official 
statistics: 
• Handling missing data. 
• "Breaks" or changes in time series data. These may be either due to small changes in 
the methodology for collecting data or due to major changes in the system. The latter 
occurred in 1997 when the North American Industrial Classification System replaced 
ihe Standard Industrial Classification System (Section 3.4.3). 
• The assessment, for example, in much census data, of spatial components in time 
series data (thus requiring an understanding of geographic information systems). 
• Mathematical models based on a combination of sample and administrative data (as, 
for example, in the U.S. Census Bureau's Small Area Income and Poverty estimates). 
• Methods to combine various data sources to produce synthetic data (Section 3.9). 
Most of these topics are not sufficient to merit a full course, but are (or 
should be) topics in various individual courses. 
We urge you to determine the specialized methods that you need to know in 
your likely application area and learn about them (especially prior to relevant job 
interviews).12 
12 One of the authors remembers, many years ago, studying up on the then hot, new topic of response surface 
experiments prior to an interview with a prominent food processing company. (Despite this, he did not get 
the job.) 

7.8 STATISTICAL COMPUTING AND SOFTWARE 
131 
7.7.6 Some Further Pointers 
Based upon our experiences, and those of colleagues, we feel that there are some 
important concepts that statisticians need to know on the job that are often not 
sufficiently emphasized in their education. We urge you to ensure that, in one way or 
another, you learn from your studies to 
• Recognize that getting the right data is frequently a statistician's biggest 
challenge. 
• Always, always, always plot the data in different ways and look at the plots— 
and do so prior to conducting any formal statistical analyses. 
• Appreciate the importance of percentiles. 
• Understand the limitations of the normal distribution. 
• Appreciate the time dependence of much data. 
• Recognize and appropriately handle censored data. 
• Not take outliers lightly. 
• Beware of extrapolation. 
• Appreciate the difference between statistical significance and practical 
importance. 
• Be able to differentiate between confidence, tolerance, and prediction intervals. 
• Recognize that statistical precision (in taking a random sample) is determined 
by the actual sample size (and not by the size of the sample relative to that of the 
population). 
• Be able to respond to the question you are likely to be asked most frequently: 
"how large a sample do I need?" (and to recognize that usually this is only part of 
the larger question of planning a study). 
To keep the length of this volume under control, we do not discuss the preceding 
points further—with one exception: our first point. We feel this subject is so 
important, and often so much neglected in much of the standard education, that we 
devote all of (lengthy) Chapter 11 to getting good data. We provide further elaboration 
on the other points stated above on the book's ftp site. 
7.8 
STATISTICAL COMPUTING AND SOFTWARE 
Anyone who can do solid statistical programming will never miss a meal. 
—David Banks (2008) 
Computational literacy and programming are as fundamental to statistical practice 
and research as mathematics. 
—Nolan and Lang (2010)u 
Nolan and Lang also advocate a major redesign, broadening (to include advances in modern computing 
beyond traditional numerical algorithms), and integration of statistical computing in the traditional statistics 
curriculum to better prepare students to handle very large data files and computationally intensive analyses. 

132 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
You need to be knowledgeable in statistical computing and software to meet 
both your customers' and your own computing needs. This requires a good apprecia-
tion of the statistical packages that your customers are using or that you might 
recommend for a particular application. It calls for you to be knowledgeable about the 
main features, technical correctness, and ease of use of popular offerings. Such 
knowledge is acquired from various courses in statistical methods in which such 
products are used, as well as courses in statistical computing, and must be maintained 
throughout your career as software features change and new products become 
available. 
Software with statistical capabilities can be conveniently categorized as 
• General purpose software with statistical features. 
• General purpose statistical software. 
• Specialized statistical software. 
• Statistical programming environments. 
This differentiation is sometimes quite blurred—and is continuously becoming 
more so. 
7.8.1 General Purpose Software with Statistical Features 
Popular general purpose programs, such as Microsoft Excel™, now come with a 
variety of statistical features and add-ons (see Berk and Carey, 2009). McKenzie 
(2008) asserts that "today more statistical analyses are done on Excel than any other 
software." Unfortunately, some significant technical problems have been found in the 
statistical features of this program; see Sidebar 7.5. 
ADVANTAGES AND LIMITATIONS OF EXCEL FOR STATISTICAL 
ANALYSES 
Although professional statisticians generally favor the more specialized and advanced 
software offerings described later in this section for their own use. Excel is highly attractive 
to practitioners who conduct statistical analyses. Most are already familiar with the 
program's spreadsheet features, have ready access, and generally do not incur added costs 
to use it. Excel, moreover, greatly facilitates data preprocessing and cleanup. Also, various 
commercially available packages are designed as add-ons to Excel for specialized analyses. 
Various articles in the June 2008 issue (Vol. 52, Issue 10) of Computational Statistics 
and Data Analysis examined the technical adequacy of Microsoft Excel 2007. Some 
criticisms voiced in these assessments were 
L
· "Excel 2007, like its predecessors, fails a standard set of intermediate level accuracy 
tests in three areas: statistical distributions, random number generation, and 
estimation" (McCullough and Heiser, 2008). 
• 'The accuracy of various statistical functions in Excel 2007 range from un acceptably 
bad to acceptable" (Yalta, 2008). 

7.8 STATISTICAL COMPUTING AND SOFTWARE 
133 
• "It's easy to produce Chartjunk using Microsoft Excel 2007 but hard to make good 
graphs" (Sung, 2008). 
• "Persons who wish to conduct statistical analyses shouSd use some other package" 
(McCullough and Heiser, 2008). 
It is possible that these problems will be addressed in future versions of Excel and there has 
been some progress from earlier versions. {Problems with the statistical features of earlier 
versions of Excel were noted by McCullough and Wilson (2002).) See McKenzie (2008) for 
a historical perspective and a summary of some of the remaining deficiencies. 
7.8.2 General Purpose Statistical Software 
Numerous statistical software packages have been developed over time to permit 
users to conduct a wide variety of standard analyses (e.g., multiple regression and 
analysis of variance). Some of these also offer scripting languages that let users add 
their own code for more specialized analyses. 
Many of these packages are directed principally at practitioners and focus on 
ease of use via point-and-click type interactions. Some packages include more 
advanced features and often serve the basic needs of nonstatisticians—as well as, 
on occasion, statisticians—with small to medium size data sets. Students are often 
introduced to one of these packages in introductory course in statistics. Popular 
offerings include JMP, Minitab, Statgraphics, Stata, and SYSTAT. 
In addition, powerful and versatile packages have been developed for use by 
statisticians and more sophisticated practitioners who need to do advanced analyses 
and/or have large data sets. Such packages offer a variety of features, including 
management of large databases, a highly diverse suite of statistical methods, and data 
visualization. Students typically become acquainted with such software in more 
advanced courses in statistics. Popular long-standing offerings include SAS and, 
especially for social science applications, SPSS. SAS is considered essential for 
students with terminal master's degrees. 
7.8.3 Specialized Statistical Software 
Specialized packages have been developed for various application areas, such as the 
design of experiments and reliability analysis. Such offerings are generally 
directed at and frequently, but not exclusively, used by practitioners. There are 
additional packages, used by both practitioners and statisticians, for special statistical 
evaluations, such as Bayesian analyses, categorical data analysis, classification 
and regression trees, nonparametric data analyses, resampling, and survey design 
and analysis. 
7.8.4 Statistical Programming Environments 
Powerful high-level languages allow users to perform creative computational and 
graphical analyses that are appropriate for the application at hand, in addition to 
containing extensive standard preprogrammed features. The open-source R 

134 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
programming environment—based on the S programming language originally de-
veloped at Bell Labs—is available for free'4 and has gained much popularity among 
statisticians. R was initially written by Robert Gentleman and Ross Ihaka of the 
Statistics Department of the University of Auckland. It continues to evolve as a result 
of a collaborative effort of a core group of statisticians from all over the world. There 
is also a commercially supported version of S, called S-Plus, which, in addition to the 
S-based programming environment, has a point-and-click graphical user interface for 
many commonly used statistical procedures. 
In addition to providing statistical functionality, programming environments let 
users customize their analyses to the problem at hand and incorporate new methods, 
thus giving them the freedom to go beyond the capabilities of standard software. For 
example, SPLIDA and RSPLIDA were developed as add-ons to S-Plus and R, 
respectively, to address some of the important, but specialized, questions that are 
encountered in product life data analysis. 
Students are frequently required to use one of these languages in more advanced 
statistical methods courses and in courses in statistical computing. They are often the 
programming tools of choice by Ph.D. students and professors in their research. 
Outside academia, such languages are used most frequently by statisticians who have 
the knowledge and motivation to go beyond conventional data analyses. 
7.9 
SOME OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
Once you have selected an institution and developed a proposed list of courses you 
wish to take, there are still a variety of other decisions that you will need to make—or 
initiatives that you might want to consider along the way—that can add to the 
effectiveness of your education. We mention a few of these in this section. 
7.9.1 Instructor, Instructor, Instructor 
As always, an inspiring instructor makes a vast difference. A marginally important 
course with a great teacher—and especially one who can provide insights into 
practical applications and issues—often trumps a possibly more pertinent course 
with an indifferent instructor. We advise you to explore the track record of instructors 
of elective courses, through past teacher evaluations and talking to other students, 
before signing up for courses. 
7.9.2 Be Prudent in Dissertation Advisor, Topic, 
and Committee Selection 
The selection of a dissertation/thesis advisor, topic, and committee involves key 
decisions that most Ph.D. and some master's degree students need to make. These 
decisions, together with steering the thesis to its successful completion, not only 
provide significant intellectual challenges but can also test your strategic planning and 
diplomatic skills. They warrant your careful attention. 
14 http://www.r-project.org/. 

7.9 SOME OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
135 
Advisor Selection. In selecting an advisor, students need to understand the 
environment in which professors (and especially those seeking promotion and/or 
tenure) operate (see Chapter 13). A highly important criterion for faculty advance-
ment in many universities is successful research, as evidenced by publications in 
scholarly journals. The joint research involved in guiding the dissertations of 
graduate students often provides a major vehicle for helping professors meet their 
research aspirations. 
Successful research, or promise thereof, is also important in your advisor's 
securing of funding. Such funding is often required to support your (or the next 
student's) further research. 
The eventual goal of most Ph.D. theses is research that culminates in peer-
reviewed publications (typically authored jointly by the student and the professor) in 
esteemed refereed journals (Section 13.8.4). Such publications enhance students' 
credentials, as reflected in their resumes—even though, due to the lengthy refereeing 
process, publication might be after graduation. 
Your advisor may select, or at least suggest to you, one or more dissertation 
topics—more on that shortly—and will be the major person deciding when your 
research is complete and you can graduate. 
You need to assess carefully and realistically how well you will be able to work 
with a potential advisor. This relationship, in fact, provides you useful experience for 
working for a future manager or department chair. 
The professional reputation of your advisor also warrants consideration. 
Consider, for example, how your career might have been enhanced if you could 
have laid claim to having been one of Albert Einstein's students. Keep in mind 
contacts that your advisor might have that can be helpful to you in seeking an 
internship and in looking for a job upon graduation. At the same time, you need to 
check whether a professor—eminent or not—has a reputation for giving students the 
attention that they seek and require. 
To make a good selection, you should get to know your department's faculty 
members and their research interests. An obvious way to do this, and for potential 
advisors to get to know you, is to take courses from them. Also, we propose you try 
to talk to students (some of whom may have graduated) who have worked 
under potential advisors about their experiences. Were they able to complete their 
theses in a reasonable time? Did they receive helpful guidance and attention, 
when needed? Was working with the advisor a pleasant and productive learning 
experience? 
We recommend that you try to find out the likely plans of your advisor for the 
next few years. More than one promising dissertation has been derailed by an advisor 
moving to another institution or retiring'5 or significantly delayed by an advisor going 
on sabbatical. 
Finally, matching students with advisors is a two-way street. The advisor 
also needs to want you. So it is important for you to impress potential advisors 
favorably. Again, the classroom provides an opportunity to do this. 
1 Although many professors continue their work to completion with selected students after moving or 
retirement. 

136 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
Dissertation Topic Selection. Professors typically suggest as dissertation topics 
extension of their previous research and/or that of past students. The proposed 
research may be part of a research grant or proposal. In this case, you should 
determine whether the proposal has actually been funded, and if not, the chances 
that it will be, and how dependent you will be on such funding. 
Also consider making your own proposal for a dissertation topic. A problem 
encountered during, or motivated by, an internship may provide an excellent subject in 
that it may have greater relevance and impact and you are likely to have a good 
understanding of what it is all about. Possibly you (and perhaps even your advisor) can 
receive funding or other support to conduct some or all of the research from the 
organization from which the problem originated. 
A project developed by you might provide you more independence than one 
"owned" by your advisor, while still allowing you to benefit from your advisor's 
inputs (although these may be less than those on a subject in which the advisor has 
been previously directly involved). At the same time, a project selected by you, 
especially one emanating from an internship, might be more applied than one 
proposed by your advisor. A possible negative consequence of this, especially from 
your advisor's perspective, is that the results of such research might have a smaller 
chance of being accepted for publication in an esteemed journal than would be those 
from a more scholarly topic. 
In any case, you and your advisor need to assess realistically your ability to 
undertake and complete the required work to your advisor's satisfaction. We suggest 
that you don't be overly ambitious. Successful completion of the dissertation is a 
requirement for graduation. Thus, in selecting a dissertation topic, one of your goals 
should be successful completion within a reasonable time frame compatible with 
your life schedule. You need to understand—and possibly negotiate with your 
advisor, as early as possible—what is required of you for successful dissertation 
completion. Keep in mind that you can always conduct added research after 
graduation when you are no longer obligated to follow the dictates, and possible 
whims, of your professors—but might still benefit from their insights—and can do 
so on your own time schedule. Also, if you take a job in academia, you should be 
aware that many universities will only count research conducted after completion of 
your Ph.D. toward promotion and tenure, suggesting that you keep something in 
reserve. 
Finally, keep in mind that the selection of a dissertation topic can have an 
important bearing on your career. It might determine the application area in which you 
get your first job—since it is, after all, the area in which you are most knowledgeable 
and are likely to have most to offer a prospective employer. Writing a dissertation that 
develops new methodology for analysis and modeling of product degradation data 
should, for example, improve your chances of obtaining a position with an industrial 
operation concerned with product reliability—especially if you can successfully 
relate your work to a likely business concern. 
Dissertation Committee Selection. A dissertation committee is typically selected 
after an advisor and topic have been, at least tentatively, agreed upon. Committee 
members are picked to provide both added value and ability to evaluate your work. It 

7.9 SOME OTHER RECOMMENDATIONS 
1 3 7 
can be said that the committee is there, in part, to exercise quality control. Typically, 
but not always, committee members go along with the wishes of the dissertation 
advisor with regard to successful completion of the work. 
Our comments on advisor selection also hold for committee members. It is often 
advantageous to include at least one knowledgeable member from outside your 
department, especially if such a person can provide added application area insights. 
If your topic is based upon a problem generated by an internship, you might want to 
have your internship mentor or supervisor, or some other person involved, be invited 
to be a member of your committee. 
Overall, you should seek to have your committee consist of individuals who are 
likely to provide added and constructive insights and ideas, but are not likely to 
unreasonably obstruct your forward path. 
Note on Dissertation Execution. Once your advisor, dissertation, and committee 
have been selected, you will want to move forward expeditiously in conducting your 
research. In so doing, you should communicate frequently with your advisor to ensure 
that you continue to be on track and that you can overcome possible technical or other 
stumbling blocks in a timely manner. 
If you should find that, despite your careful initial evaluation and subsequent 
work, you have selected a topic that is intractable (or already solved by somebody 
else) or there has been a significant change in your or your advisor's status, 
we propose that you face up to this as early as possible and appropriately recalibrate 
your plans. 
7.9.3 Explore Life Outside the Statistics Program 
Graduate students in statistics (and often their professors) may be inclined to become 
immersed exclusively within the small world around them. This does not have to be. 
We recommend that you learn about and avail yourself of the diverse academic 
activities on campus. 
Attending seminars in other departments, especially ones presented by those 
from application areas or institutes that might be of future interest to you, can open 
new horizons—including possible research topics. Such seminars are, sometimes, 
scantily publicized outside the sponsoring department, and might have to be sought 
out by you. 
Consider collaborating in relevant research with people in other areas, for 
example, working with chemistry students to quantify sources of variability in their 
lab trials or assisting in the design of a sampling study for a social science project. This 
can provide important insights into application areas (and those who work in them) 
and might enhance your future employment opportunities. It can also help prepare you 
for the teamwork that will be so important to your future success. 
Finally, you might consider participating in the activities, such as meetings 
and short courses, of a local chapter of the ASA and other professional societies. 
In addition to being informative, these could result in useful interactions and present 
important future leads for internships and permanent employment. Many chapters 
extend membership to students for free or for a nominal fee. 

138 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
7.10 INTERNSHIPS AND UNIVERSITY CONSULTING 
There's no experience like real experience. 
—Adaptation of popular show song 
7.10.1 Importance 
We strongly urge students, even undergraduates, to get professional experience 
outside the university through an internship (or apprenticeship) or similar program. 
This should be in a challenging position involving statistical work, preferably with 
professional statisticians, or individuals knowledgeable in statistics, who can serve 
as mentors. 
An internship allows you to assess firsthand whether the challenges and 
excitement of a career as an applied statistician are really for you. It may help you 
select an application area on which you would like to focus your career. It can 
demonstrate the relevance of your coursework and allow you to tailor better your 
remaining courses to your needs. And it may provide you ideas for a dissertation topic, 
and possibly even financial support should you proceed with this topic. 
Most importantly, work experience provides students an edge in getting a job 
upon graduation. Employers prefer students with some experience, both because of 
the added knowledge this provides and for the interest it portrays. Such experience 
will allow you to talk at job interviews about real-world problems and how you 
have helped address them—topics that might interest potential employers more than 
the details of your dissertation. Finally, your internship employer might even come up 
with an offer for a full-time job upon graduation. (Identifying promising future hires 
is often a major reason for an organization having an internship program.) 
An internship may delay your graduation, unless you can get course credit for it. 
This is a worthwhile trade-off for most students, and especially those with no other 
relevant experience. Income earned from such employment should help offset the 
additional costs of staying in school longer. 
7.10.2 Opportunities 
Companies, government agencies, and other institutions offer internship programs to 
students. Blumberg (2009) reports that the EIA hired 54 interns during the (recession) 
summer of 2009 with a variety of backgrounds, including six undergraduates with a 
major interest in statistics. 
Each year, the ASA invites organizations with statistical internship 
opportunities to provide a brief description of these, as well as their location, 
the number of positions, the type of student desired (e.g., graduate, Ph.D.), the 
deadline for application, and contact information. These are then published in Amstat 
News (e.g., December 2010, pp. 9-15) and listed online together with subsequent 
additions.16 
16 www.amstat.org/education. 

7.10 INTERNSHIPS AND UNIVERSITY CONSULTING 
139 
The most recent listing (in the December 2010 issue of Amstat News) shows 
35 employers with a total of more than 330 openings, with the following 
breakdown: 
• Pharmaceuticals and health sciences: 16 employers. 
• Business, industry, and research: 5 employers. 
• Education research: 4 employers. 
• Government: 4 employers. 
• Software: 3 employers. 
• Other: 3 employers. 
See Habiger et al. (2009), Huiras et al. (2009), and Rossetti (2010) for students' 
descriptions of their statistical consulting experiences. 
7.10.3 Implementation 
When to Take an Internship. The summer is an obvious time for internships, and 
this is what is sought in many of the ASA listed opportunities. Employment over 
multiple summers, with either the same or different employers, is especially desirable. 
Some employers prefer around the year part-time internships of, say, 
12-20 hours per week because of the continuity they provide. Such internships allow 
you to witness the unfolding of projects over time and to become more directly 
involved. You need to ensure, at the same time, that the job does not become so 
demanding that it detracts you from schoolwork. 
To qualify for a statistics internship position you need to have some background 
in statistics. You might, however, try to get started reasonably early—at a time when 
your internship experience can have the most impact on your choice of courses and 
potential dissertation topic. Most internships are for pay. These have the added 
advantage that your employer is likely to assign you to more meaningful work than if 
your services were for free. On the other hand, an opportunity might be so enticing, 
and so much in your long-term benefit, that it warrants your taking it on, at least for a 
short time, even without financial compensation. 
Seeking an Internship. How do you get an internship? Some universities offer these 
through a formal internship program. In other cases, your involvement may be 
through a faculty member engaged in external consulting. You may start by working 
directly for a professor and then transition to employment by the organization—while 
perhaps still receiving professorial guidance. 
In other cases, you might be principally on your own seeking an internship, 
especially when it involves a summer job. The aforementioned ASA site 
provides a great starting point for identifying opportunities for students in the United 
States, as do more general web sites and other methods for seeking jobs discussed in 
Chapter 8. 
Family, friends, and graduates who have held such jobs in the past might 
provide leads. The contacts you may have established at local chapters of the ASA and 

140 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
other professional societies, or possibly through attendance at national statistical 
meetings, might prove to be helpful. 
Seeking an internship can be a mini-version of searching for a full-time job and 
can provide good experience for what lies ahead. Just as for a full-time job, it will be 
important for you to get a good understanding of what the job is all about and what the 
expectations on you will be—and, more generally, how you can make it a true learning 
experience and stepping-stone for the future. For example, will you be assigned to a 
specific project with specific "deliverables" or will you be providing general support 
as the need arises? What kind of mentoring can you expect? To what degree will you 
be part of a project team? Will you be responsible for interpreting and reporting the 
results of your work and, if so, in what manner? How will your performance be 
assessed and documented? 
7.10.4 University Consulting 
Many universities have statistical consulting centers. They provide an important 
service to the university and useful hands-on experience to students. 
Such experience, however, may not always be an adequate substitute for an 
internship within an organization outside academia—because of the differences in 
environments and in criteria for success—and may not be so regarded by 
organizations in hiring new employees. As indicated, the ultimate goal of uni-
versity research typically is to have the resulting work published in a scholarly 
journal.'7 These objectives are markedly different from those of companies that 
want to be profitable or government organizations that need to generate useful 
information for use by lawmakers, regulating agencies, and the general public. An 
ideal path might be to start off with on-campus consulting and follow this up with 
an external internship. 
The recently developed STATCOM program, offered at a (growing) number of 
universities, provides an experience somewhere in between university consulting and 
a formal internship; see Sidebar 7.6. 
THE STATCOM PROGRAM 
The Statistics in the Community (STATCOM) program is a student-run volunteer effort, 
started in 2001 at Purdue University and expanded in 2006 with the help of the ASA into a 
network to include other schools. This program has students provide free statistical 
consulting to local nonprofit, government, and community service organizations. Ochsen-
feld and Ulbricht (2009) describe STATCOM and list seven universities that have taken up 
this program and indicate continuing interest from other institutions. 
17 There are exceptions. Some professors and even some students are engaged in research contracts that are 
tied to specific application deliverables. 

7.11 ENTERING STATISTICS FROM OTHER FIELDS 
141 
Some typical STATCOM projects are 
« A survey to solicit residents' opinions on issues (e.g., traffic, pedestrian, develop-
mental, and financing) concerning a stretch of a nearby major local highway. 
■ Assessment for a local library of the popularity (based on number of times checked 
out) of different types of loan offerings, as a function of such factors as price, year of 
issue, and nature of offering. 
L
· Development of methodology to predict future cash flow from donations for a 
nonprofit organization. 
7.11 
ENTERING STATISTICS FROM OTHER FIELDS 
7.11.1 The Path 
Many practitioners have a background in areas other than statistics, but became 
interested in the subject by discovering its applicability to their work. This route was 
especially popular before statistics programs and departments became common in 
universities. It is how such eminent statisticians as Sir Ronald Fisher (former 
geneticist), Ed Deming (former physicist), and George Box (aspiring chemist) entered 
the field (as did Leah and Boris in the examples in Section 1.10.1). Deming (1967), 
describing the statistical quality control pioneer Walter Shewhart, said, "As a 
statistician, he was, like so many of us, self-taught on a good background of physics 
and mathematics." 
Today, many individuals become involved in statistics as a result of special 
initiatives within their organizations. For example, Six Sigma black belts or master 
black belts, across the world, are frequently asked to give statistical guidance— 
especially in organizations without professional statisticians. They witness the 
usefulness of statistics firsthand, become engrossed in it, and over time acquire 
significant statistical knowledge and expertise. 
Your transformation from being a chemist, biologist, financial analyst, or social 
researcher to a statistician is likely to be gradual—and you will continue to benefit 
from your education and experience in your original discipline. 
7.11.2 Education Avenues 
If you discovered statistics on the job, you may have received much of your initial 
statistical education in one of a variety of ways, such as short courses, targeted at 
making you more effective. Over time, this may suggest new career opportunities— 
leveraging a combination of your formal education and work experience in another 
field and your increasing knowledge of statistics. 
You might decide to go back to school full-time to get a degree in statistics. 
More likely, you might get formal education in statistics by taking courses at a local 
college or university, or even via long-distance or web-based training, while staying 
on the job. Or you might select a less formal route, getting your education through a 
combination of disciplined self-study, short courses, and participation at professional 
society meetings; see our comments in Chapter 14. 

142 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
7.12 FURTHER RESOURCES 
The ASA's web site on education and its monthly Amstat News publication provide a 
wealth of further information on statistical education. The web site currently lists (in 
addition to the links mentioned earlier) 
• Opportunities for undergraduate students. 
• Scholarships, awards and competitions, and fellowships. 
• Continuing education offerings, including courses at the Joint Statistical 
Meetings (JSM) and forthcoming web-based lectures. 
A typical article in Amstat News (Crank, 2010c) discusses government funding 
opportunities for training programs in statistics (principally in biostatistics) at various 
levels. Hedin and Vock (2010) provide advice and professional development tips for 
graduate students. 
A detailed discussion identifying obstacles to and strategies for recruiting 
students of statistics is provided by Landes (2009). 
To broaden your horizons, we urge you to consider attending the annual JSM 
and other national (in addition to local) professional society meetings (Sections 
8.3.2 and 14.5). When ready to do so, you might take the opportunity at such a 
meeting to give a contributed paper on your dissertation or other research. Often, 
you may be able to use your (or your professor's) research grant to pay for your 
travel expenses. 
7.13 CONCLUDING COMMENT: THE LIMITS 
OF FORMAL STATISTICAL EDUCATION 
Nearly every problem is different from what you learn in formal statistics courses. 
—Lonnie Vance 
We repeat a comment with which we started the preface of our earlier book 
(Hahn and Doganaksoy, 2008): We asked a recent Ph.D. in statistics what was the 
biggest surprise in her first year working as an applied statistician. "I was amazed at 
how little I really knew, even about subjects about which I felt I knew a lot," she 
answered unhesitatingly. 
There is no way you can learn in school all the things that you will need to know 
to address the problems that you will encounter in the workplace. A goal of your 
education then is not just the acquisition of knowledge per se, but to help you learn 
how to work successfully on your own over a lifetime. This will include the ability of 
gaining an understanding of application areas in which you may become involved, 
becoming aware of new developments in your own field, learning how to use new 
software, and adapting what you already know to the problem at hand. We have, 
during the course of our careers, seen tremendous changes in the way statisticians 
work. Readers can expect no less during theirs. This will require continued training, 
either formal or informal—a subject we will return to in Chapter 14. 

7.14 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
143 
Society, moreover, tends to assume that you, as a statistician, are knowledgeable 
in all areas of statistics. You may frequently be asked to respond, both on and off the 
job, to a wide variety of questions, some of which may be far removed from your 
current area of application or any that you have worked on in the past. A broad 
education in statistics should put you in a good position to be responsive in a wide 
variety of contexts. 
The successful completion of even an advanced degree in statistics is only 
a first—though essential—step in the path to a successful career in statistics. Statistics 
graduates need to approach the workplace not only with confidence that they are 
well armed but also with humility, recognizing that they still have much to learn. 
7.14 
AS OTHERS SEE IT 
We present below some of the responses (sometimes in abridged or edited 
form) pertaining to education to the question that we posed to a number of eminent 
statisticians: What key advice would you give to an aspiring statistician? As those 
listed in other chapters, these comments reiterate or amplify points we make within 
the chapter and add some others. 
Statisticians require strong knowledge of how to use statistical methods in many 
subject areas and a keen interest in helping others understand how statistical 
thinking applies to all aspects of an enterprise. 
Strive to obtain an internship with a company or with some other institution, such 
as a government agency, a non-profit organization, or working on an applied 
university project. 
—Thomas J.Boardman, Professor (retired), Colorado State University; Consultant 
Take courses in graduate school that give you a broad understanding of statistics 
rather than just concentrating on the latest hot topic ... Getting a broad outlook 
makes it easier to adapt to different jobs. 
—Michael R. Chernick, Director, Biostatistical Services, Lankenau Institute for Medical 
Research 
A solid background in science/engineering is of immeasurable help in 
understanding the problem of interest in many application areas and buys instant 
credibility in the eyes of your customer. 
—Ronald Iman, President, Southwest Technology Consultants; past President of the 
American Statistical Association 
Be familiar with the techniques used in applied statistics and have a good 
command of the software necessary to implement them. If specializing in an area, 
such as the analysis of clinical trials, then be familiar with both successful and 
unsuccessful case studies in that area. Also, be willing to learn a sufficient amount 
of the application area to allow you to judge how to apply statistics wisely. Be 

144 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
willing to keep current on new methodology, such as the bootstrap and Bayesian 
Markov Chain Monte Carlo methods. 
—Ramon Leon, Associate Professor, University of Tennessee; formerly, technical 
supervisor at Bell Laboratories 
For a position in business and industry, get as much training as you can in science and 
engineering. This training will be invaluable in communicating with your clients. 
Take lots of applied statistics courses, such as hierarchical Bayesian methods, 
regression analysis, experimental design, reliability, and quality assurance. 
—Harry Martz, Laboratory Associate in Statistics (retired), Los Alamos National 
Laboratory 
Mathematical theorems are true; statistical methods are effective when used with 
judgment. But you can never know too much mathematics. It's amazing what 
someone with real modeling and analyzing power can do—if he/she also has the 
right traits. 
Statistics is an art as wel I as a mathematical science. Arts are learned by experience, 
preferably apprenticeship. 
Be sure that in grad school you learn at least a little about lots of things. If you can 
recognize a setting, you can learn more as needed: the main purpose of grad school 
is to teach you how to learn. 
—David S. Moore, Shanti S. Gupta Distinguished Professor (retired), Purdue University; 
past President of the American Statistical Association 
As part of your academic training, endeavor to participate in internships or other 
programs that provide experience in statistical consulting. 
—Carolyn B. Morgan, Professor, Hampton University; formerly, Statistician, CE 
Corporate Research and Development 
Get as much statistical consulting experience as possible. Get some teaching 
experience. If you can teach successfully then you can consult successfully. 
—Margaret A. Nemeth, Statistics Center Lead, Regulatory, Monsanto Company 
Learn about leadership and about working with other people. If you aim to go into 
business and industry, learn something about marketing, management and 
financial analysis. In the area of financial analysis, in particular, learn how to 
evaluate the financial viability of efforts that have benefit and cost streams. 
Understand how to do sensitivity analyses on these. 
—William C. Parr, Professor, China Europe International Business School; 
Consultant 
It seems that, in many courses, techniques are emphasized over ideas and 
concepts. It is only as a Bayesian that I have come to understand what lurks behind 
the techniques used. 
—Nozer D. Singpurwalla, Professor, The George Washington University; 
Consultant 

7.15 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
145 
7.15 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• The democratization of statistics makes it more important than ever for 
statisticians to be highly knowledgeable in their field. 
• The Advanced Placement course in statistics and similar programs let 
high school students in the United States get an early taste of the 
subject. 
• A bachelor's degree (alone) in statistics may get you an entry-level 
position, but may limit your advancement. Most professional statisticians 
need to have the knowledge (and recognition) that comes with graduate 
training. 
• Most permanent faculty positions in academia require a Ph.D. The typical 
requirement for most other positions in statistics is a master's degree, although 
it is important for some to go further. The preponderance of degrees in statistics 
in the United States is at the master's level. 
• Selection of the "right school" for you is important. Considerations include the 
relative emphasis given to the degree program of interest to you (bachelor's, 
master's, or Ph.D.), the department and school within the institution in which 
the degree is offered, the size of the program, the strength of the faculty, the 
available dissertation options, strength in areas other than statistics, and 
internship opportunities. 
• A good foundation in mathematics is a prerequisite for a career in 
statistics. 
• Some elective courses are highly important in most application areas. 
Your anticipated application area should be considered in selecting your 
electives. 
• Statisticians need to be computer savvy and have a broad knowledge of the 
applicability and limitations of general purpose software with statistical 
features, general purpose statistical software, specialized statistical software, 
and statistical programming environments. 
• Students should give careful consideration to their selection of instructors, 
dissertation advisors, committee members, and dissertation topic, and are urged 
to explore life outside the statistics program. 
• Job experience while in school, preferably through a well-structured off-
campus internship (perhaps preceded by on-campus consulting), can add 
significantly to your academic experience and can help you select an application 
area and find a job upon graduation. 
• Many professionals have successfully transitioned into statistics after starting 
their careers in other fields. 
• Even the best education will not prepare you fully for a career in statistics. But it 
should provide you the knowledge to adapt what you know and to learn rapidly 
needed things that you don't know. 

146 
CHAPTER 7 EDUCATION FOR SUCCESS 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. *How far do you feel you should take your formal education to meet your 
career goals? Explain. 
2. 'In Section 7.5.2, we state that "Most significantly, you can develop your 
own weighting scheme using the 20 factors considered by NRC, and apply this to 
the NRC response summaries to arrive at your personally customized ranking of 
schools." Go to the NRC web site to determine the factors considered by NRC, 
develop your own weights for each of these factors, and indicate how you would 
use these weights, together with the NRC data, to arrive at your personally 
customized ranking of the 61 departments with Ph.D. programs in statistics. 
3. 'Return to the preceding question. Suggest some other applications for which 
a personally customized ranking would be informative and describe how you 
might go about developing such schemes. 
4. 'Critique the U.S. News & World Report's method for ranking undergraduate 
schools shown in Sidebar 7.1. How might you improve the approach? What 
added criteria would you propose? 
5. *What opportunities are there for you to get on-the-job experience in your 
current school? To what degree have you, or are you planning to, avail yourself 
of these? 
6. 'Prepare a list of questions that students should ask in evaluating the 
attractiveness of a school and its statistics program. 
7. Identify boxes in Table 7.1 where you (or your professor) disagree with our 
assessments of the importance of different courses for different application 
areas. 
8. What courses should be added to the list in Table 7.1 and how would you (and 
your professor) rate their importance for different application areas? 
9. Select one (or more) of the challenges stated in Sidebar 7.4 and research and 
report on methods for addressing it. 
10. Select one (or more) of the technical pointers in Section 7.7.6 and elaborate on 
its meaning and importance. Which of these do you feel have been emphasized 
insufficiently in your education to date? 
11. What is your assessment of the statistical software that you have encountered 
to date? How would you rate each offering's correctness, completeness of 
features, documentation, and ease of use for yourself and for practitioners? 
What changes/improvements do you recommend? 
12. Determine and report on the degree to which the technical concerns stated 
about Excel 2007 in Sidebar 7.5 have been addressed in subsequent versions of 
the program. 
13. 'Identify activities at your school outside the statistics program in which it 
would be useful for you to participate. Have you taken advantage of these? Did 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
1 4 7 
this result in worthwhile experiences and why or why not? What are your plans 
for the future? 
14. Assume that you are involved in one (or more) of the past STATCOM projects 
briefly mentioned in Sidebar 7.6. What are some of the questions that you 
would ask to gain an understanding of the problem? What specific data are 
needed to make the desired assessments and how would you recommend 
acquiring such data? What analyses might you conduct on the resulting data? 
How would you expect the results of the study to be used? 
15. Describe situations that you (or others) have encountered that require adapting 
existing methodology to fit the problem at hand. How well were you equipped 
to do so? 
16. What would you add to our recommendations in this chapter to help others 
make the most of their academic experience? 

CHAPTER 
GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
8.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
In this chapter, we provide some hints to help you get the right (for you) job as a 
statistician. We consider 
• Defining career goals. 
• Identifying opportunities. 
• Resume writing. 
• The job interview. 
• Follow-up. 
• Providing references. 
• Some further hints. 
• Assessing job offers (hopefully, the fun part). 
8.2 DEFINING CAREER GOALS 
The first step in seeking a position is having, at least, a general career goal. 
Defining your career goal calls for you to decide, and perhaps document, what 
you wish to accomplish during the course of your professional career. In so doing, 
you should try to sketch out both your immediate objectives and what you would like 
to be doing in, say, 5, 10, 25, and 40 years from now. Clearly, the further out you go 
in time, the vaguer will be your objectives. You may aspire to eventually become 
(see Chapter 12) 
• A renowned statistician in academia, government or industry. 
• A corporate vice president with oversight responsibility for activities in 
statistics and related areas. 
• CEO of your own statistical consulting company. 
Or you may just not yet know. 
Students seeking their first full-time job as statisticians are often unsure even 
of their immediate objectives (other than gaining experience and making some 
money)—to say nothing of long-term career goals. For most individuals, career goals 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
149 
8 

150 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
evolve over time as they encounter different environments and experiences—and as 
opportunities arise. The job search itself, and the clarification of available oppor-
tunities that comes with it, is often an important catalyst in helping define one's goals. 
Formulating career goals nevertheless merits your attention at the start of your 
job search—if for no other reason than that you will likely be asked about them in your 
job interviews. You should have at least a first cut career plan—even though this will 
likely change and be refined over time. 
8.2.1 Some Key Considerations 
Business and Industry, Government, or Academia? We hope that our discussion in 
preceding chapters, and especially our description of what statisticians do in different 
application areas (together with our comments about academia in Chapter 13), is 
helpful to readers in deciding upon at least their initial career direction. 
For those with Ph.D.'s—a requirement for most permanent faculty positions in 
academia—an important first question is whether to pursue a career in academia or to 
venture into the outside world. This does not have to be a complete one or the other 
decision. Industrial and government statisticians frequently serve as adjunct profes-
sors, teaching an evening course at a local university (something both authors have 
done). And many academically based statisticians consult extensively in government 
and industry. Such cross-fertilization is beneficial to all. 
However, (like the majority of statistics graduates) you may not have a Ph.D. in 
statistics and will be seeking a career outside academia. You will need to decide 
between business and industry versus government or, possibly, one of the other 
options described in Chapter 4. Even within these, you might have a favored 
application area, perhaps a field in which you have minored or taken courses. And 
if you are planning to go into government, you might have a preference between 
national and state government. 
Your eventual choice will, undoubtedly, be driven by available opportunities; 
for example, heavy demand for statisticians by the pharmaceutical industry or the fact 
that in the United States the federal government employs more statisticians than do 
state governments. 
8.2.2 Role Aspirations 
You also need to think about the role to which you would like to aspire, at least 
eventually, within an organization. For example, 
• Do you wish to focus on the technical aspects of statistics, eventually becoming 
a "master statistician"? 
• Do you wish to become heavily involved in an application area, such as product 
design, finance, or marketing—which will call for you to take on a broader role, 
beyond being a statistician? 
• Do you aspire, at least eventually, to take on a managerial or administrative role? 
We discuss alternative career paths in Chapter 12. 

8.3 IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES 
151 
8.2.3 The Path Forward 
Defining your career goals as a statistician will be an iterative process that is 
constantly refined as you gain more information and experience. An important first 
step is the realization of the need for having career goals. You will then want to size up 
your own skills (see Chapter 6) and likes and dislikes, as well as talk with your 
professors and some that have traveled the road before you. 
Some of the suggestions that we have made in Chapter 7, such as taking courses 
in application areas, exploring life outside the Statistics Department, taking on an 
external internship, and attending (and possibly participating in) professional meet-
ings, will be helpful in developing your goals. And the job seeking and interviewing 
process can in itself help you define better what you want to do—one reason for 
approaching the process with an open mind and closely examining the alternatives 
open to you. 
Armed with, at least a rough, definition of your career goals, you can then 
proceed to look for a job. In addition to seeking a position that matches your 
goals and appears to provide you great growth opportunities, there will, un-
doubtedly, be a variety of other, mostly practical, considerations, such as where 
the job is located and how well it pays, subjects we will comment on further in 
Section 8.9. 
Whether or not your dream job exists and it will be offered to you depends upon 
the job market, and on what you have to offer—as well as how practical your dreams 
may be. Most likely, you will have to compromise and at least initially settle for 
something less than your ideal. Being realistic, however, does not mean that it is not 
useful to have aspirations. 
8.2.4 Opportunity for Change 
No career is frozen in stone. As we shall see in Chapter 12, many statisticians, either as 
part of a preconceived plan or as a consequence of circumstances, change roles during 
the course of their careers. Some start their careers in industry or government, and then 
leverage their experience by moving into academia. Others travel the opposite path. 
Also, it is very common for statisticians to move among application areas during the 
course of their careers—either because they enjoy diversity and different experiences 
or because of new opportunities. 
8.3 
IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES 
Environments that stretch personal development and provide for diverse application 
opportunities make for satisfying and rewarding careers. 
—Edward J. Spar 
You are now poised to seek a (first) job as a statistician. We suggest that you 
explore a variety of opportunities. The interviewing process provides you a unique 

152 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
chance—that you may never again have during the course of your career—to witness 
different organizations from the inside. 
We recommend that you start your job search early and work diligently 
to seek out opportunities. For federal government jobs, especially, you should 
start the process as much as 9 months before you graduate. Do not restrict 
your search to immediate advertised openings. Forward-looking organizations 
try to keep their pipeline filled and are receptive to initiatives by attractive 
candidates. 
8.3.1 General Job Search Approaches 
There are a variety of standard ways in which students, irrespective of their fields, go 
about identifying opportunities. We suggest that you 
• Talk to professors, and especially those who would likely recommend you to 
colleagues in the workforce, updating them on your interests, aspirations, and 
accomplishments. 
• Sign up for on-campus interviews. You may need to be a bit creative here since 
some employers will not advertise for statisticians, but the positions they have 
open can often be filled by someone with a degree in statistics; or the interest you 
show can lead to an "unadvertised" opportunity. 
• Respond to Internet job postings and post your own resume on applicant job 
search sites. Online professional networking sites can also be utilized for this 
purpose. 
• Respond to newspaper ads (in the United States in the Sunday New York 
Times, Washington Post, and other big city papers, and the Wall Street 
Journal). 
• Contact statisticians or managers in organizations of interest to you. (One of the 
authors got his job interview with GE through a letter to a GE statistician/ 
manager whom he had identified through the membership listing of the 
American Statistical Association (ASA).) 
• Attend professional meetings and get to know people in the field. 
• Contact authors of technical papers that deal with application areas that interest 
you. 
• Establish contact with a recruiting agency (sometimes referred to as a 
"headhunter"). These typically provide free services to applicants, making 
their revenues from the hiring companies. They might also review your resume 
and provide you useful suggestions. 
Different organizations use different hiring practices and it is important to 
understand these differences. Sidebar 8.1 summarizes the process used by the 
U.S. federal government and by one U.S. state. Those interested in a government 
position might, in addition, check out the web sites of individual agencies and 
contact these directly. 

8.3 IDENTIFYING OPPORTUNITIES 
153 
Blumberg (2009) reports that almost all U.S. federal government agencies now use the 
USAJobs' system; she also provides statisticians helpful hints for its use. 
To become part of the system, applicants create an account and enter their resumes for 
different positions. Once your resumes are created, you can then authorize potential 
recruiters to contact you. 
Applicants are screened and receive a numerical ranking based upon how their 
knowledge, skills, and abilities seem to match the job requirements. The highest ranked 
individuals are likely to be contacted. Government agencies are not allowed to contact 
applicants directly except for those ranked the highest, but you can track your applications 
via USAJobs. Each vacancy announcement has a contact person listed to whom you can 
address questions. 
You can also search USAJobs for opportunities (via a vacancy announcement) by 
government agency, occupation, location, and so on, learn about the government hiring 
process, receive automated job alerts, and apply for a posted job. 
New York State, through its Civil Service Department, typically gives examinations once 
every 4 years for statistician and related positions in state agencies and local governments. In 
the past, these examinations have been multiple-choice tests covering such topics as 
knowledge of statistics, research methods, reading comprehension, writing skills, and 
other subjects based on the skiUsneeded for the position (e.g., administrative skills for senior 
positions; statistical questions tailored to the position's application area). When an agency 
has an opening, the state's Civil Service Department ranks the applicants who passed the test 
for that position and provides this information to the hiring agency. If asuitable candidate for 
a position is not identified, the agency has the option of hiring anyone meeting the minimum 
requirements on a provisional basis, subject to that person taking the exam for the position 
the next time it is given. 
8.3.2 Job Search Approaches for Statisticians 
Some approaches used specifically by statisticians in the United States are to 
• Respond to job listings posted online at ASA's web site and advertised in 
Amstat 
News. 
• Attend the annual Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM, see Section 14.5) and 
participate in their placement service. Typically, there are more than 50 em-
ployer listings. You fill out an information form to briefly describe your 
qualifications (attaching a resume). This lets interested employers contact you 
for an interview at the meetings and permits you to request an interview with any 
listed employer (who also posts a job description). If you fill out your 
application in advance, it will be available to employers (who, in turn, might 
make advance plans to meet you). To find information on the ASA Job 
' http://www.usajobs.gov/firsttimevisitors.asp. 

154 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
Placement Service, go to the home page for the next JSM meeting and click on 
the Placement menu. 
While at the JSM, attend the business meetings and mixers of the ASA sections 
and special interest groups related to your interest areas and try to talk to 
attendees about their work and possible job opportunities. 
8.4 RESUME WRITING 
It is essential that you put together an appealing resume and cover letter. These are often 
the first things about you that a potential employer sees and on which the decision 
whether or not to follow up further with you is based. Even in a highly test-based setting, 
such as New York State's, resumes are reviewed by the hiring manager and provide a 
critical first impression, as well as information that helps guide the interview. 
Throughout the interviewing process, you need to put yourself into the shoes of 
potential employers and identify those things about you that they might find attractive. 
We suggest that you desist from stating in your resume (or in an interview) that your 
goal is to "gain job experience" or the like. Consider instead something more targeted 
at your potential employer's interests, such as "leverage my passion and talent for 
helping address tough technical problems with useful practical solutions and grow on 
the job." Also, we recommend that you 
• For business and industry positions, be brief and to the point (usually one page 
for a resume with perhaps a short attachment providing added details, such as 
papers published or submitted for publication). 
• For federal government positions, make sure your resume is complete and gives 
detailed descriptions of important relevant experiences. 
• Be specific in describing your experience and accomplishments. Do not 
exaggerate (unduly) or undersell yourself. 
• Make sure to describe relevant professional experiences indicating your role 
and accomplishments. List these in sequence of importance and relevance to an 
employer, not chronological order, unless the application process specifically 
requires otherwise. 
• Briefly include nonprofessional accomplishments that demonstrate your lead-
ership capabilities and interests, for example, captain of the baseball team, 
member of the debating society, and senior counselor at summer camp for 
disadvantaged children. 
• State your personal skills, for example, excellent communicator, interested in 
solving problems, and ability to get along well with others. 
• Make it attractive looking and easy to read. 
• Be ready in an interview to describe and elaborate on anything that you state in 
the resume. 
• Modify your resume and cover letter to address the needs and likely interests of 
different potential positions and employers. 

8.4 RESUME WRITING 
155 
Sidebar 8.2 shows what one government agency looks for in evaluating resumes. 
Blumbcrg (2009) in discussing opportunities at the U.S. Energy Information Administration 
points to the importance of 
• Correei grammar and spelling. 
• Thoughtfulness of answers. 
• Accuracy of answers {do answers match the resume and experiences?)—exagger-
ation should be avoided. 
• The more experience the better (realizing that many applicants are just starting their 
careers). 
We have2 constructed in Sidebar 8.3 an example resume for an individual 
with limited experience seeking a position in industry. More experienced people 
would further highlight such experience and, likely, place it ahead of education. 
Jimmy Applicant 
Address, e-mail, phone number 
Career Goal 
Make important contributions to the success of a business as a team member and statistical 
leader. 
Education 
Ph. D. and MS in Statistics, Graduate University, GPA 3.9/4.0, 2011. 
Course work included industrial si at indes, design of experiments, biostatistics, 
Bayesian analysis, survey sampling, time series analysis, reliability, and statistical 
consulting. Research focused on the development of efficient and robust multivariate 
control charts. 
BS in Electrical Engineering, Undergraduate College, Minor in Mathematics, GPA 
3.7/4.0, 2007. 
Professional Experience 
Statistical Consulting Intem, Great Company I, Applied Statistics Laboratory, Summer 
2009. 
Helped develop an experimental program to reduce variability in the performance 
of a new chemical compound. Analyzed resulting data and participated in presenting 
' Inspired by actual resumes of recent graduates. 

156 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
results to customer. Co-taught course on experimental design to company Six Sigma black 
belts. Consulted with Manufacturing Department on development of multivariate control 
charts (leading to thesis topic). 
Statistical Analysis Intern. Great Company 2, Financial Services, Summer 2008. 
Conducted data analysis to develop financial rusk model tinder direction of senior 
statistician. Received special award for excellence of work. 
Statistical Consulting Intern. Graduate University, Department of Statistics, 2009-2011. 
Provided guidance to 5 professors and 15 graduate students throughout the university 
on various research topics. 
Publications and Presentations 
• Co-author of three papers in refereed journals. 
• Book review in Journal of die American Statistical Association. 
• Three contributed presentations at national statistical meetings. 
Professional Contributions 
• President (2010/11) and Vice-President (2009/10), Statistics Club, Gradual* 
University. 
• Session Chair at Joint Statistical Meetings (2010). 
Student Honors and Scholarships 
• Graduate University: Outstanding Graduate Student Award, 2010. 
• Student Scholarship to attend ASA/ASQ Fall Technical Conference, 2009. 
Skills 
• Statistical computing. 
• Excellent communicator (oral and written). 
• Passion for successfully solving real problems. 
• Some proficiency in Chinese. 
Personal Accomplishments 
• President, Student Council, Undergraduate College. 
• Community service volunteer: Two summers in inner city day nursery and in el· 
care home. 
Attachments: List of references and details of publications. 
For some further hints to statisticians on writing a resume and some added 
references, see O'Brien (2000). 
The cover letter, when applicable,3 should briefly highlight the key points made 
in the resume, show your enthusiasm, and interest the reader in you. It should be 
specifically targeted at the position for which you are applying. 
3 Cover letters are generally not allowed for federal government job vacancies, using US AJobs. However, 
you can insert parts of your cover letter at various points within your resume(s). 

8.5 THE JOB INTERVIEW 
1 5 7 
8.5 THE JOB INTERVIEW 
OK—you have identified a job that interests you and you have been able to 
secure an interview. This may be in the form of a preliminary screening 
interview on the telephone, to be followed, if successful, by an in-person on-
site interview. 
Your next challenge is to succeed in the interview or round of interviews. 
Success is measured by getting a job offer, and by the attractiveness of such an 
offer—in terms of both the nature of the job and the associated compensation and 
benefits. (The specifics of an offer are sometimes adjusted to meet your qualifica-
tions, as well as the importance that the employer places on having you accept 
the offer.) 
8.5.1 Do Your Homework 
It is important for you to gain as good an advance understanding as possible of the job 
for which you are applying, the organization to which it belongs, and the interviewing 
process. This will help you calibrate your comments, as well as demonstrate your 
diligence. 
The Job and the Organization. Research the organization and the group within 
the organization, with which you are interviewing. If you are applying to a 
corporation, you might find reviewing recent annual reports to stockholders 
instructive. 
It is especially helpful to have a good understanding of what an organization is 
specifically seeking from those that they wish to hire. You might get some idea of this 
from the job description and get further insight through the process of researching the 
organization, and possibly by just asking. See Keller and Sargent (2010) for a 
description of what it takes to be one of the top candidates for one employer (Mayo 
Clinic). 
Publications by members of the group with which you are interviewing provide 
another useful source of information. Your showing awareness of these will also be 
flattering to your interviewers (but do not overdo the flattery). 
The Interviewing Process. Leading organizations recognize that good people are 
essential to their long-term success. Hiring "the right people" is, therefore, critical 
to them. Just as you are eager to get the job that is right for you, they are anxious to 
hire people that best meet their needs. 
Some organizations train their employees in recruiting and interviewing 
techniques; their human resources group may even have developed a formal inter-
viewing process; see Sidebar 8.4 for one example. 
You should try to learn the process used by the organization with which you are 
interviewing—perhaps, by asking discreetly in advance. Identifying and talking to 
others who have recently interviewed with the organization, perhaps for different 
positions, can also be helpful. 

158 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
SIDEBAR 
Ö.*t 
SEEING IT FROM THE OTHER SIDE: INSIGHTS INTO THE RECRUITING 
PROCESS 
The following illustrates one organization's (highly disciplined) interviewing process. The 
process employed by many other organizations is less formal, and might involve more one-
on-one interviews. It is. however, likely to have, at least, some of the features described 
below. See Tanenbaum (2010a) for some further insights. 
Identifying Potential Candidates. Candidates for a job as a statistician are identified by a 
process similar to that for job seekers (college recruiting, statistical meetings, advertising in 
the AmMut JVetr.v, write-ins. recruiters, etc). 
The "Preinterview Interview1'. Before inviting a potential candidate for a formal on-site 
interview, a preinterview is conducted. This may be through a university recruitment visit, a 
society meeting, or by telephone, or a combination of these. On-campus interviews are 
frequently conducted by graduates from the institution, often majoring in some field other 
than statistics, or by a human resources specialist. Such initial interviews lend to focus on 
n on statistical skills, and might be followed by one or more statistically oriented telephone 
interviews. If a candidate is located nearby, one or a series of preinterview interviews might 
be conducted on site to screen candidates. 
Formal interviews are scheduled with the most promising candidates from such 
preinterview interviews. 
The Formal Interview. Attractive candidates are generally invited on site for one or more 
interviews at the hiring organization's expense. A typical 1 -day interview might proceed as 
follows: 
• Arrival on the evening prior to the interview (for out-of-towners) and, if time allows, 
informal dinner with a potential future colleague. 
• Early breakfast with the hiring manager. 
• Applicant gives technical presentation for master's and Ph.D. level positions. 
The typical time allowed for this is 1 hour, including ample time for questions. 
• Technical group interview with two to four potential future colleagues. 
• Lunch with one or two potential future colleagues and/or clients, 
• Nontechnical group interview with two to four potential future colleagues 
• Meeting with human resources representative. 
• Meeting with hiring manager (and, possibly, brief meetings with one or more higher 
level managers). 
• Meeting with a recent hire and/or brief tour of facility. 
All those involved will have received a copy of the candidate's resume and the hiring 
manager's description of the position to be filled. 
The Evaluation. Those who participated in the interviewing process meet to discuss the 
candidate's strengths and weaknesses and general suitability for the job (perhaps while the 
candidate is still on site and meeting with a recent hire or touring the facility). All complete a 

8.5 THE |OB INTERVIEW 
1 5 9 
form to provide their impressions, including a ranking, on a scale from 1 to 5, on whether 
they would recommend an offer be made. 
The "Send-Off." The hiring manager takes the candidate to dinner and to the airport or 
hotel. This provides an opportunity to ask questions raised at the evaluation meeting, to 
assess a candidate's stamina, and to respond to questions. If ii seems likely that an offer is to 
be made, it also allows the manager to, at least subtly, "sell" the job. This part of the day 
should be less formal and more relaxed than what preceded it (and might be omitted if the 
candidate does not look promising). 
Checking References. A check of references is conducted, usually by phone. One obvious 
purpose is to verify the correctness of the factual information provided by the candidate. In 
addition, it provides an opportunity for the employer to probe in depth how others perceive 
the applicant and can be more informative lhan formal letters of recommendation. 
Employers are used to getting enthusiastic responses from references. Skillful enquirers 
make a special effort to seek out and pick up on possible negatives by 
• Asking such questions as "'what do you view as the candidate's key strengths and 
limitations?'' (and trying to make sure that the response includes both limitations and 
strengths). 
• Listening carefully to identify what is not said, as well as what is said, 
• Taking note of any verbal cues, such as hesitation in response to a question. 
Making an Offer. Hiring managers in consultation with their management make the final 
decision on whether or not to make a job offer. They then work with human resources to 
arrive at the proposed compensation and/or grade level (if not initially specified) and those 
fringe benefits for which there may be some flexibility (e.g., moving expenses). A formal 
offer letter is prepared and sent. When the details have been worked out, the hiring manager 
calls the candidate, offers congratulations, solicits questions, and works on convincing the 
candidate to accept the offer. 
8.5.2 Demonstrate Your Personal Skills 
Interviews are as much about chemistry among people as about completing a 
technical checklist. 
—Gary McDonald 
The job interview is your opportunity to sell yourself as a person, as well as 
technically, and to demonstrate that you possess the characteristics for success 
described in Chapter 6. The employer will look for these traits in you. Some, such 
as your listening and communication skills, will be relatively easy for you to exhibit. 
Demonstrating other skills, such as your ability to serve as a contributing and 
congenial team member, may require more planning and subtlety on your part. 
Some employers, at the advice of their legal departments, refuse to provide references, other than 
verification of employment. 

160 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT |OB 
Before the interview, think about experiences that you might use to illustrate 
your personal skills and strengths as they may relate to the job. Concrete examples that 
demonstrate your collaborative and leadership abilities are far better than general 
statements like "I am a committed team player." Think, for example, about volunteer 
projects in which you have been involved (and might even have led), and your dealings 
with, perhaps sometimes difficult, fellow students and faculty. Be prepared to provide 
thoughtful answers to questions about your career goals, short-term objectives, and 
accomplishments to date. Be ready to respond to questions (raised explicitly or 
implicitly) such as 
• Do you feel you are well qualified for this position and, if so, why? 
• What special skills do you have that will allow you to provide important added 
value? 
• What would you enjoy most in this job? 
• Provide an example from your previous work or life experiences in which 
you had to respond to a delicate situation or resolve a conflict and how you 
handled it. 
• Give an example of a team effort in which you were involved and describe your 
role in the team. 
Keep in mind that your interviewers will likely be evaluating you from the 
perspective of both how well you are suited for the job and how effective and 
congenial a potential colleague you are likely to be. Be honest, but make sure your 
positives stand out. 
Most importantly, always look at things from your potential employer's 
perspective. The example in Sidebar 8.5 compares, in a somewhat exaggerated 
manner, ways in which two candidates might address the same questions in an 
interview for a job as a statistician. We will leave it to you to determine which 
candidate received a job offer. 
SIDEBAR 
A COMPARISON OF TWO INTERVIEW RESPONSE STYLES 
In the following example, two candidates respond to questions posed by a potential hiring 
manager. 
Manager 
Candidate I 
Candidate 2 
Good morning, 1 am 
delighted that you are 
interested in working in our 
group. But what makes you 
want a job with us in the first 
place? 
Well, 1 have been going to 
school for all these years 
and learning about all the 
wonderful methods of 
statistics. Now I would 
like to learn about how 
Well, I have a passion for 
addressing real problems 
and working with people. 
[ have learned all this good 
stuff in school—and now I 
want to put it to use and help 

8.5 THE JOB INTERVIEW 
161 
Thanks. OK, what would 
you say was the most 
exciting thing you learned in 
school? 
OK, then, what do you think 
is the most important thing 
that statisticians do? 
Thanks, Now tell me, how 
did you spend your summers 
in college? 
Thanks. I asked you to bring 
a copy of something that you 
have done that you were real 
proud of. What did you 
bring? 
they are used in the real 
world. 
Well, I felt I had a real 
revelation the day I got 
to understand the 
relationship between the 
Ney man-Pearson theorem 
and the Cramer-Rao 
inequality. 
Only we have the expertise 
for conducting statistical 
analyses. For example, we 
alone know how to calculate 
the expected value of the 
mean square in an analysis 
of variance so thai we 
perform the correct 
significance test. 
Well. 1 stayed in school 
and took this cool course 
on measure theory. 
Well, here is a copy of my 
thesis. It extends my 
advisor's work on optimal 
estimation of the kurlosis of 
the gamma distribution 
when the data are grouped in 
unequal intervals. I have 
proven the asymptotic 
consistency of this estimator 
(shows voluminous report). 
make a difference. From 
what I have heard I am 
convinced that your 
company will provide me the 
opportunity to do just that. 
I'd say it is appreciating the 
concept of thinking 
statistically and 
understanding the role of 
uncertainty and variability 
jn all we do. 
Well, I would say it is 
working with a project team 
helping define the real 
problem, planning to gel the 
right data, and serving as a 
resource in helping 
understand the results and 
their implications. 
1 worked as an intern in a 
company to learn whal a 
job in industry is all about. 
From this, I decided the 
challenges and excitement 
of industry are, indeed, my 
cup of tea. 1 also made some 
money to help me stay in 
school a little longer to 
make up for the summers I 
spent away. 
My thesis was based upon a 
problem 1 ran into on one of 
my summer projects. It deals 
with ways of reducing 
impurities in the waste water 
recycle stream (shows copy 
of presentation). I had to 
come up with a plan to get 
the right data, and had to do a 
lot of complex mathematics 
to perform the correct 
analyses. But in this 
presentation I try to explain 
to a plant manager in 
15 minutes why the results 
merit her attention. 

162 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
OK. I'd like to end with a 
technical question. My wife 
and I plan to buy a new car of 
a particular model. She is 
concerned with gasoline 
consumption. So, before 
giving me the cash for the car, 
she asked me to do a statistical 
study to provide her an 
estimate with 95% 
assured nes s of the poorest g as 
consumption that we can 
expect for the car we are 
buying. I sample five cars 
of the same model and from 
these estimate an average 
gasoline consumption of 
30 miles per gallon, with a 
standard deviation of 2 miles 
per gallon. How would you 
use this data to answer my 
wife's question? 
(Saying to herself: I wonder 
why he is giving me such an 
easy question.) I would 
obtain a lower confidence 
hound on the mean; that is 
the mean of 30 minus the 5% 
r-value with 4 degrees of 
freedom times the standard 
deviation of 2 divided by the 
square root of 5, the sample 
size. Comes out to around 
2S miles per gallon. 
Well, I'd first like to ask 
some questions about how 
the five cars were selected, 
and how you measured gas 
consumption (asks further 
questions). Your question 
calls for a prediction interval 
on a future observation— 
since I assume you are 
buying only one car. 1 bet 
] can work out the answer 
and check, out my approach 
in the book on statistical 
intervals by Hahn and 
Meeker (199!). My method 
will also assume a normal 
distribution for gasoline 
consumption for cars of 
the given model. I need to 
validate this assumption 
also, 1 would probahly 
have to do this principally 
based upon the physical 
background of the problem 
and, perhaps, some similar 
data because of the small 
sample size in this example. 
Thank you very much. 
■ 
8.5.3 Demonstrate Your Technical Skills 
Demonstrating your technical skills is a necessary, though not sufficient, condition 
for getting a job offer. Your resume and academic transcripts provide the broad 
outline. You need to demonstrate understanding of what you have learned and how 
to apply it successfully. You are likely to be asked technical questions if there are 
statisticians on your interviewing team. Some may ask direct questions; for 
example: "How would you develop a fractional factorial experimental design with 
six variables so that all two-factor interactions can be estimated without any 
confounding among them or with any main effects and with the minimum number 
of test runs?" Others may prefer questions that describe a specific scenario and ask 
you how you might address it (like the example in Sidebar 8.5). Yet other questions 
may be more open-ended such as "Describe technical work that you have done and 
that you are especially proud of, indicating your role and contribution." 
In general, employers are not seeking complete on-the-spot answers. They are 
looking more for your ability to grasp the question, show good statistical insights, and 
communicate effectively, especially to management. 

8.5 THE JOB INTERVIEW 
1 6 3 
You may be asked to give a seminar on a technical topic. This will provide you 
an opportunity to demonstrate your technical skills to a possibly mixed-background 
audience (see Sidebar 8.6). 
SIDEBAR tf. Ö 
THE TECHNICAL PRESENTATION 
The first step in preparing for a technical presentation is to determine the likely makeup, 
statistical sophistication, and interests of your audience, and what they aim to get from the 
presentation. Management might be interested principally in the bottom-line actual or 
potential impact of youi work. Others with a background in statistics may ask you to provide 
some technical details. All would want to know how much of the work that you describe was 
conducted by you personally (or under your direction). 
You generally have the opportunity to select your presentation topic. If you are an 
advanced degree candidate, you will most likely think first of basing your presentation on 
your thesis. This may be a reasonable choice; it is, after all, a topic about which you know 
much (and your audience might know little). You may have previously prepared material 
from a presentation to your committee or from a department seminar. 
You need to recognize, however, the difference in the background and interests of your 
audience in contrast to that in school and adapt accordingly. You will need to describe the 
motivation for and the practical applicability of your research and specifically what you 
have accomplished and how this has been or might be applied in practice. The fact that 
you have solved some interesting (to you and your professors) theoretical problem is 
usually insufficient. You need to convince others of the practical benefits of your work. 
You may even decide to deemphasize the technical details—making sure, however, that 
the fact that your work required innovative research and high technical skill is not lost on 
the audience. Also, an example using real or, possibly, synthetic data is often especially 
effective. 
If you have had past work experience, you may, instead, want to base your presentation 
on a project in which you have been directly involved. This may especially make sense 
when you feel that the audience, or an important part of it, has only a limited interest in your 
thesis topic.5 
In summary, irrespective of the topic, your presentation should be at a level, and degree of 
detail, appropriate to your audience, and include 
• How you came upon the problem and why it is important. 
• The technical and nontechnical challenges that you had to overcome. 
• The results and their practical consequences and application. 
• Your specific contributions. 
Your ability to respond to questions on your work will also be important. Be sure to inv 
(and leave enough time for) these and to provide clear and meaningful responses. Perhaps 
even consider holding back some "nuggets" during your presentation for appropriate 
injection into your answers to questions. 
In some cases, you may have to change the details, or even the numbers to protect confidentiality, but 
usually your audience will understand the need for your doing this. 

164 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
8.5.4 Ask Good Questions 
The interview will focus on asking you questions. This does not preclude you from 
asking appropriate questions to the appropriate people at appropriate times. Good 
questions demonstrate that you have an inquisitive mind and think ahead. 
Your questions should be principally job-related, rather than dealing with, say, 
housing or the community. The focus of the interview is to assess your suitability for 
the job and your main goal is to sell yourself as a potential employee. It is likely that 
questions that are important to you—especially those that are not job related—will 
not be answered during the interview. But make clear that you will need such 
information before making a decision if a job offer is to be made. We will return to 
this subject shortly. 
8.5.5 Some Less Structured Interviewing Modes 
The process that we have described, or some variation thereof, is most common for 
larger organizations in business and industry. For most government groups and many 
smaller organizations, the approach might be much less structured and the formal 
interview might be as short as l to 3 hours, with all interested parties participating. 
In this case, the major focus will likely be on describing the job, assessing your 
suitability for it based on your past experience and responses, and evaluating the 
chemistry between you and the hiring manager. However, the general guidelines that 
we have proposed still hold. 
8.6 
FOLLOW-UP 
If the job appeals to you, be sure to communicate your enthusiasm and express your 
thanks for the interview by a written note shortly after your return home.6 If you expect 
an offer to be forthcoming, you need to be careful not to overdo this, so as not to leave 
the impression that you would accept any offer, thereby possibly compromising the 
terms. (During the interview, you might also subtly suggest that you are considering 
other offers, should this be the case.) 
If you have promised to provide further information on a topic, supply this 
rapidly—or indicate when your response will be forthcoming—and make sure that 
you meet this commitment. If you feel that there is something important that you 
failed to convey during the interview, your follow-up provides an opportunity to 
do so. You may also try to amplify, perhaps based on further research, your 
responses to questions that you feel you could have answered better. This can 
demonstrate your diligence and persistence in addressing problems—but needs to 
be balanced against drawing undue attention to things that you may not have gotten 
quite right. 
6 It is also a good idea to write thank you notes for positions that you do not find attractive in the recognition 
that these might interest you some time in the future. 

8.8 SOME FURTHER HINTS 
165 
8.7 PROVIDING REFERENCES 
Employers may check out your references carefully and, on a close call, might base 
their decision as to whether to make an offer on these—especially if one or more of the 
responses is less than enthusiastic. You will want to identify individuals who are well 
acquainted with you and (except for personal references) your work and who are 
likely to speak highly about you. People of stature in the profession are especially 
desirable as references. Individuals who already know the person who will be 
contacting them can be especially convincing and candid references. 
Graduate students would most likely use their advisors as references (and need 
to keep this in mind from the outset in their dealings with them). Past or present 
employers and clients are also obvious references. A prospective employer might be 
suspicious if you excluded these from your list. 
Be sure to contact your references in advance to get their permission to serve as 
references and perhaps to get a better handle on how enthusiastic their recommen-
dation might be. Apprise them of your interviewing plans. Provide them with your 
resume and perhaps subtly make them aware of relevant positives about you, such as 
difficulties that you might have overcome, of which they may not be aware. Also, 
update them promptly after your interview and share with them your impressions of 
the job—keeping in mind that they might relay these to your potential employer when 
they are contacted. 
8.8 SOME FURTHER HINTS 
Here are some added suggestions that may help you in seeking the right job: 
• Try to use your initial interviews to build up your interviewing skills and avoid, 
if possible, having (what you regard to be) your most important interview first. 
You need to balance this against the following dilemma. You receive a job offer 
from one of your early interviews and are asked to make a decision by a 
specified date. But you have not yet interviewed (or heard from) your "first 
choice" potential employer. One way around this problem might be to apprise 
all, up front, of the time frame in which you will be making your decision. 
• Dress appropriately. Even though your interviewers might be dressed casually, 
it is good practice for you to be dressed smartly and be well groomed. 
• Keep in mind the need to be on your toes throughout what might be a trying and 
lengthy interview. Make sure you are well rested and interview-focused—avoid 
scheduling your interview immediately after taking (and cramming for) an 
important exam. 
• Do not let modesty get in the way of talking about your accomplishments; 
however, avoid appearing brash or to appear to know it all. 
• If you have changed jobs in the past, or are now planning to do so, try to 
provide a good explanation for this and to dispel any incorrect suspicions 
that the change might be due to less than outstanding performance on the job 

166 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
(or that you are a job-hopper who uses one job merely as a stepping-stone to 
the next). 
• Maintain good spirits and your sense of humor—after all, it is only an interview. 
As in other areas, the Amstat News provides further, and current, perspectives on how 
statisticians proceed in searching for a job; see, for example, Gauvin (2007). 
8.9 ASSESSING JOB OFFERS 
You have followed all our advice and succeeded in lining up a number of attractive job 
offers. Congratulations! 
Now you have the pleasant, but difficult, task of deciding which one to accept. 
If you have well laid-out career plans one of the first things you will undoubtedly do 
is assess how well each offer addresses these. In so doing, there are some specifics 
about the job that you will want to consider. There are also a variety of other 
considerations that you will want to explore in making your decision. 
8.9.1 Job Growth Opportunities 
Clearly, a major criterion for your first full-time job will be the degree to which it 
provides learning opportunities that will expedite your growth and advancement. You 
will want to consider 
• The nature and breadth of the job. Is it likely to provide you wide exposure to 
different problems or is it a "cubbyhole" position, such as performing strictly 
supervised computer analyses in a single application area? Will you be included 
in key meetings and have the chance to witness how experienced professionals 
operate? 
• Your level of responsibility. Is it commensurate with your abilities? 
• Opportunities to learn from others and potential mentors. Will you be working 
with statisticians from whom you can learn? To what degree are there others 
who would be willing to serve as mentors, either informally or formally, and 
how helpful is their guidance likely to be? 
• Opportunity for further formal learning. Will the organization encourage and 
support (both time-wise and financially) you in taking courses at a local 
university or remotely, or attending intensive short courses and professional 
society meetings? 
• What will be the mechanism and timing for formal assessment of your 
performance and what will be the nature of the feedback you will receive? 
• The path forward: Is there a clear path for continuing to learn and advance 
on the job? Will your responsibilities increase as you gain increased ability 
and confidence and demonstrate your worth? Is there a defined or likely 
stream of advancement opportunities with increasing challenges and 
responsibilities? 

8.9 ASSESSING JOB OFFERS 
1 6 7 
8.9.2 Some Other Considerations 
In every job I've had, I've gone in thinking I was there to work and then realized it is 
impossible to separate work from the people with whom you work. 
—-J- Bose(2010) 
You will also want to try to assess how a specific job offer stacks up on 
• Personal chemistry. How do you think you will hit it off with your future 
coworkers and, especially, your future manager? 
• Management commitment. Does your potential manager have a realistic 
appreciation of your capabilities and aspirations and is he/she committed to 
advancing these? 
• Stability. How secure do the position and the company appear to be? Is the job in 
a growing field? To what degree will it hinge on one or two individuals—and 
how will you be impacted if they change jobs? How likely does this seem to be? 
• Opportunities for and recognition given to statistical research and professional 
engagement (Section 12.6). 
Reiterating some of our earlier points, you will also want to consider the 
• Areas of activity in which the organization is engaged. If you are considering 
a position in business and industry, you might want to be in finance because of the 
high potential monetary impact of (and rewards for) your work. Or you might want 
to be in pharmaceuticals because it is a large, well-established, and well-defined 
opportunity area for statisticians or because of the opportunities it provides to help 
improve people's health. Or you might select an emerging area, such as genetics or 
nanotechnology, because of its excitement and growth potential. 
• Function within an organization. Different operations within a company, such 
as research, engineering, manufacturing, and marketing, present different 
challenges to applied statisticians. 
• Size of organization. A large organization might, arguably, provide more 
opportunities than a small one. A small organization might offer more of a 
personal touch and offer broader immediate involvement. 
• Travel. Is there much travel associated with the job and, if so, where to and for 
how long? 
• Working hours. To what degree is there flexibility in working hours? How 
frequently do crash projects and demands call for what is euphemistically 
referred to as "casual overtime?" 
• The general morale of the "troops." More on that shortly. 
Different individuals will weight the preceding criteria differently. Some might regard 
the ability to do statistical research highly; others might not. And some will find the 
opportunity to travel invigorating; others will regard it as a time-absorbing burden that 
intrudes on family and personal life. 
See Nyberg (2010) for some further comments concerning finding your fit. 

168 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
8.9.3 Geographical Considerations 
A new job often calls for moving to a new community. This affects not only you but 
also your entire family, and can profoundly impact your entire life. This is especially 
so if you are moving to a new and, perhaps, unfamiliar, part of the country or even the 
world. Thus, where the job is located is a highly important personal and family 
consideration. 
Small communities typically offer fewer job alternatives (and fewer educa-
tional opportunities) for statisticians—as well as their family members—than large 
metropolitan areas. This means that changing jobs in the future will likely require a 
further move for you and your family. Also, your children are less likely to stay in 
the community when they grow up. On the other hand, smaller communities might 
provide greater intimacy for a newcomer and be easier to settle into than larger 
ones. 
We will comment further shortly on getting needed information about a new 
community. 
8.9.4 The Money Factor 
Last but not least, there is remuneration in the form of salary (taking into consideration 
local living costs) and other benefits (health plan, vacation, payment of moving 
expenses, etc.). Important as these are (and anxious, as you may be to pay off student 
loans), we advise that you do not focus on this unduly on your first job. Instead, we 
propose you give heavy weight to growth (including potential monetary growth) and 
other important professional and personal considerations.7 
8.9.5 Getting the Needed Information 
As already suggested, the prime purpose of the interview is for the prospective 
employer to evaluate your suitability for the job and for you to sell yourself. You are, 
therefore, often limited in asking questions, especially about topics not directly 
related to the job. 
Once an offer has been extended, however, you become the boss. If you have the 
opportunity to decide among multiple offers, it is especially important for you to have 
a good understanding about each—and everything that comes with it. After all, it is 
your future that is at stake. 
Your decision needs to be based upon a realistic assessment, rather than wishful 
thinking. You will never have perfect information to make your decision, but you want 
to have as full and accurate answers to your questions and concerns as possible. Or, 
statistically speaking, you want to have as much relevant data as possible in making 
your decision. 
7 One of the authors (GH) accepted his first full-time job as a statistician in 1955 paying $4800 yearly over a 
$6300 offer with another organization (in locations with comparable living costs), perceiving, correctly, that 
the first offer provided great growth opportunities (as indeed it did and which—in a reasonably short time— 
was also reflected in his paycheck). 

8.9 ASSESSING JOB OFFERS 
1 6 9 
The Reverse Interview. Ideally, your potential employer will invite you back for 
a reverse on-site interview. Such reverse interviews are not uncommon in 
business and industry. If not extended, do not hesitate to request such an 
interview. (Should your request not be granted this would speak for itself.) 
However, in academia, government, and nonprofit organizations, such reverse 
interviews are quite rare. Reverse interviews also need to be differentiated from 
invitations after accepting the job offer to return to a new community for house 
hunting. 
Your return visit provides you the opportunity to learn about the details of the 
job and to talk further with your potential manager and future colleagues. This should 
help you better assess the chemistry factor (are these people that you would enjoy 
working for and with?) and the likelihood of mentor support. More informal meetings 
also help you assess the morale of the organization. Are your potential colleagues 
enthusiastic about their jobs or do they seem to be holding something back? If you 
have not met colleagues with whom you are likely to interact closely, request to be 
able to do so. 
Assessing a New Community. If the job involves moving to a new geographical 
location, hopefully, your partner will be invited to join you on the reverse interview 
and have the chance to look over the community and, if relevant, assess work 
opportunities, while you are further exploring the job. 
There are some obvious things to consider, such as cost of housing, quality of 
the school system, and educational, recreational, cultural, and religious activities. 
Meeting with real estate agents might be a good idea even if you expect to rent 
initially. In addition to providing housing information that might be of long-term 
interest, they can inform you about schools and local activities. You may also want to 
explore some less tangible factors, such as the degree to which newcomers are 
welcomed into the community and the apparent conduciveness for building social 
relationships. The hiring organization's human resources group might also help in 
this exploration. 
You can learn much about a community by searching the Internet. You may 
want to subscribe to the local newspaper8 and seek out information about local 
attractions and issues. 
Other Information. Try to identify people who previously worked for the 
organization, and especially in the group in which you would be working— 
one of whom you may even be replacing—and, if possible, talk with them 
directly. They may be more likely than current employees to give you frank 
assessments. A key question is why they left the job. Some may have been 
promoted within the company. Others might have sought greater opportunity 
elsewhere. Yet others might have been asked to leave. What did each like and 
dislike about the job? 
Some companies automatically provide subscriptions to those to whom they make offers. 

170 
CHAPTER 8 GETTING THE RIGHT JOB 
8.9.6 Making the Decision 
Once you have the needed information, you will have to sort it out and come to a 
decision. How well does each offer match up to your dream job? What are the pros 
and cons associated with each offer? In making a decision, you need to assess to 
what degree you would consider each position as a potential long-term career 
opportunity versus a short-term stepping-stone, and the relative importance of these 
to you. 
Don't regard offers, and especially those in business and industry, as nonne-
gotiable. Employers who make you an offer want you to accept. Say you like the job 
with Company A, but Company B offered you more money. Then don't hesitate to tell 
Company A about your alternatives, and respectfully ask them to reconsider salary. 
You might not succeed (and still take the job)—but you will have made your point.9 
Also, your discussion might lead to some other improvement, such as a more generous 
package for reimbursement of moving expenses or more vacation time—especially if 
you make clear that these are important to you. There is generally less flexibility for 
government jobs, in light of the grading system and fixed rules on vacation time, 
among other factors. 
If possible, do not allow yourself to be rushed. Offers come with a specified 
decision date. But you can politely request a short extension if you need more time to 
evaluate alternatives. 
8.10 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Strive to define your career goals and your immediate objectives before 
embarking on your job search. Refine these as you gain further information. 
• Start your job search early and avail yourself of different channels for 
identifying job opportunities. 
• Develop an informative and appealing resume and tailor it to each job for which 
you are applying. 
• Get good advance understanding of the job for which you are interviewing and 
of the interviewing process. Prepare carefully for the interview and work toward 
selling yourself both technically and as an effective and congenial colleague 
who possesses the needed personal characteristics for success. 
• Follow up all interviews with thank you letters and promptly provide further 
promised information. 
• Pay careful attention to who you give as references and keep these individuals 
updated. 
• In selecting among job offers, closely assess the pros and cons associated with 
each. A reverse interview can be especially useful. 
9 Your coauthor failed in a request to improve on the $4800 offer, but was promised reconsideration after 6 
months, and received a $500 raise then. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
171 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. *In Section 7.1, we noted the importance of planning ahead, while still a 
student, to acquire skills that will be attractive to a future employer. What 
actions might you want to take to potentially add to your resume and improve 
your credentials in a future job search? 
2. State your current long-term career goals and short-term aspirations. 
3. *What is commendable about the resume for Jimmy Applicant, shown in 
Sidebar 8.3? Is there anything that you recommend Jimmy do to further 
improve it? 
4. 'Develop your own one-page resume. Exchange this with other class mem-
bers. Critique their resumes (while they critique yours) from the perspective of 
a potential employer, and suggest improvements. Then improve your own 
resume. 
5. What are some specific organizations and positions within organizations that 
especially appeal to you for your first job? Why? 
6. How might you tailor your resume to make your credentials maximally 
attractive to the needs of the organizations that you identified in response 
to the last question? 
7. You now have been invited to interview for a position with the organization 
that you identified in response to Question 5, or some other specific organi-
zation. Study the organization, and develop some questions that you might 
want to ask prior to and during your interview. Suggest one or more seminar 
topics that you might present that you expect to be of strong interest to the 
organization. 
8. Assume again that you have been invited for a job interview with the 
organization that you identified in response to Question 5, or some other 
specific organization. How would you respond to the questions raised in 
Section 8.5.2? 
9. 'Critique the responses to the interview questions of the two candidates shown 
in Sidebar 8.5. What are the key points that we are trying to make in this 
example? 
10. 'Assume that you have received a job offer from a number of organizations of 
interest to you and have been granted a reverse interview. What are some of the 
questions you would ask? 
11. 'How would you rate, on a scale from 1 to 5, the importance to you of the 
various considerations for assessing a job offer that we discussed in Sec-
tion 8.9? What other factors would you want to consider and how would you 
weight these? 

PART /
/
/ 
BUILDING A 
SUCCESSFUL CAREER 
AS A STATISTICIAN 
I HE PURPOSE of this part of the book is to provide hints to help 
statisticians succeed on the job. 
We propose strategies dealing with project initiation and execution 
(Chapter 9) and with communication, publicizing, and ethical considerations 
(Chapter 10). We discuss the statistician's all-important, and frequently 
underappreciated, role in getting good data (Chapter 11). We then present 
alternative career paths that statisticians follow (Chapter 12). 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
173 

CHAPTER 
ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: 
PROJECT INITIATION 
AND EXECUTION 
9.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Nothing is less common than common sense. 
—George Box 
In our earlier chapters, especially those on the environment in which 
statisticians work (Chapter 5) and the characteristics of successful statisticians 
(Chapter 6), we have tried to convey some tips to success for statisticians. In this 
and the next chapter, we present what we believe to be some useful on-the-job 
strategies. We comment on project initiation and execution in this chapter and on 
communication, publicizing statistics and statisticians, and ethical considerations 
in Chapter 10. 
9.2 PROJECT INITIATION 
Early in your career, your manager may assign you to specific projects. As you 
advance, you will likely have more choice—both through your own initiative and, 
hopefully, because of the excellent reputation that you have established. Potential 
customers may, in fact, be approaching you directly. As a result, you will have a 
greater say about the work in which you become engaged. 
The specific way in which you become involved in projects depends upon many 
factors, including the nature of the problem, the culture of the operation, management 
acceptance, organizational and geographical considerations, and, often, your own 
initiative. In a reactive environment, statisticians usually enter a project after the data 
have been gathered and help is sought for analysis. In the more proactive environment 
that we advocate throughout this book—and that we believe is becoming increasingly 
more prevalent—you may be recruited initially as part of the project team and even 
asked to propose projects. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
©2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
175 
9 

176 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
9.2.1 Statisticians Recruited During the Course of a Project 
As indicated in Section 6.4, statisticians are often contacted during the course of a 
project to respond to narrowly stated technical questions, sometimes in a vacuum and 
with limited description of the real problem. Often data have been collected and those 
responsible realize that they do not have the expertise to conduct a proficient analysis. 
In its extreme form, this is the "if all fails call in the statistician" scenario. 
Entering a project in midstream puts you at a disadvantage. You need to play 
catch-up to understand the project goal and its general context. The available data may 
be inadequate, incomplete, or ambiguous and there may be insufficient time and 
budget for additional data acquisition. 
Excellence in your reactive work, to the degree possible, and some prodding can 
lead others to appreciate that, to really contribute effectively, you need to have a fuller 
understanding. This may result in requests for you to review the project in its entirety, 
to propose data acquisition and data analysis schemes, and, perhaps eventually, to 
your direct involvement as a member of the project team. 
Example. One of us was contacted by a biologist who had been working on the 
development of materials used in the manufacture of surgical tools. He presented us 
with data on "counts" from a trial consisting of a sequence of readings on 16 repeat 
samples from each of 10 materials; see Table 9.1. He requested a formula to test the 
TABLE 9.1 Counts on Repeat Samples from Each of 10 Materials 
Materials 
Position 
I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
Mean 
Std. Dev. 
A 
4191 
5429 
4467 
4973 
4553 
4499 
3356 
2885 
3045 
4499 
5258 
4665 
3544 
5005 
4507 
4454 
4333 
755 
B 
5409 
5187 
4727 
5752 
4355 
3355 
3109 
3323 
3585 
5504 
5131 
4374 
5374 
4866 
6565 
4995 
4726 
981 
C 
3077 
1875 
2399 
2803 
3469 
501 
1033 
353 
1175 
3786 
3734 
2815 
3912 
3342 
1796 
3187 
2454 
1189 
D 
5457 
4522 
5710 
5143 
5483 
3448 
4351 
3784 
4637 
4953 
4285 
6041 
4556 
4447 
4561 
4079 
4716 
706 
E 
3935 
5311 
4827 
4868 
4767 
2913 
4464 
4140 
3740 
4561 
4928 
4,453 
3720 
5182 
5281 
6768 
4616 
869 
F 
5229 
7001 
5540 
6128 
5684 
3606 
4175 
5007 
3604 
4788 
5943 
5389 
4926 
5881 
6080 
4358 
5209 
946 
G 
5394 
3930 
3952 
4880 
4530 
2772 
3612 
4474 
2926 
4750 
3336 
5471 
3277 
5283 
4977 
5225 
4299 
909 
H 
5122 
4906 
4354 
5536 
5916 
3709 
3809 
3567 
3304 
6432 
5251 
4868 
5402 
4724 
4927 
5350 
4824 
879 
I 
2641 
3147 
2702 
2082 
1941 
131 
1351 
1148 
282 
1765 
2175 
2301 
2151 
1224 
638 
1620 
1706 
866 
J 
6266 
6139 
6182 
6635 
5817 
4979 
5167 
5603 
5054 
6303 
6044 
6612 
6003 
6942 
5554 
6736 
6002 
602 

9.2 PROJECT INITIATION 
177 
7000— 
6000— 
_ 5000— 
g 4000— 
° 
3000· 
2000— 
1000— 
0-
"Ί 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1~ 
1 2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
—i 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 — 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
Position 
Figure 9.1 Plot of counts against sample position for each of 10 materials. 
statistical equivalence of the sample means for the counts of the 10 materials. He was 
planning to continue this type of testing on additional materials. 
Based on limited exposure to the problem, one may be tempted to suggest 
one of the several well-established statistical tests that respond to the biologist's 
direct question. After a quick glance at the tabulations—which also identified the 
position of each sample—we decided to first plot the readings for each sample 
against its position number, connecting the sample values from each material; 
see Figure 9.1. 
This plot clearly revealed differences between materials, with materials C and I 
yielding consistently lower counts than the other materials and material J having 
typically above average counts. 
In addition, the plots showed distinct differences among positions. The 
readings in Position 6, for example, were lower than those for Position 5 for each 
material. 
This discovery came as a surprise to the biologist and changed the tone of our 
discussions. While some variability was anticipated, there was no reason to expect a 
systematic difference among the positions. We began to talk about what the data 
actually represented and how the data had been gathered. 
It soon became evident that a better understanding of experimental and 
measurement variability was needed. We were asked to make recommendations to 
plan a further study to obtain data to help make such evaluations. This, in turn, led to an 
invitation to serve as a mentor to the project and to participate in the design and 
analyses of subsequent experiments. 
9.2.2 Statisticians Recruited Up Front as Part of Project Team 
In some application areas, statisticians are routinely sought and included as part of the 
project team from the outset. This is often the case in situations that involve a formal 
regulatory process, such as in obtaining approval from a regulatory agency for market 
release of a pharmaceutical product. In other cases, you might have contributed 
significantly to past projects, and therefore are a natural candidate for participation in 
subsequent ones. 

178 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
Up-front involvement, starting at the project proposal stage, carries with it some 
distinct advantages. It provides you a say in the essential tasks of developing a clear 
and quantitative problem definition and in getting the best possible data. 
Example. We had a long-standing relationship with a team developing new chemicals 
used in electronics applications. Along the way, we gained good understanding of the 
business, ranging from appreciation of the jargon to knowledge of the potential business 
applications and issues. When a key team member was promoted to lead supply chain 
management for the business, she decided to undertake a comprehensive study of the 
current supply chain so as to understand potential problem areas for improvement. From 
our past involvement, she recognized that we could be important contributors to the 
project. She invited us to participate in the kickoff meeting, even though our specific 
role was not yet known. Being involved from the outset allowed us to provide help in 
defining the problem quantitatively, bringing to bear statistical thinking and, most 
significantly, contributing to the study planning and data acquisition. 
9.2.3 Projects Initiated by Statisticians 
The job of a statistician is to find problems that other people cannot be expected to 
perceive. 
—W. Edwards Deming 
As statisticians become more proactive, they seek to identify opportunities and 
initiate projects that they believe to be of critical business importance and to which 
they think they can make an important contribution. Such projects are often best 
driven in collaboration with working partners from the application area, as in the 
following two examples. 
Example 1. A commercial lending business provided loans involving tens of 
millions of dollars. An accurate assessment of potential risk for each loan was, 
therefore, critical to the overall success of the business. Statisticians who had 
intimate knowledge of the business believed that a statistically based algorithm, 
constructed from data on past loan performance, could be used to predict, based on 
various loan default predictors, the potential vulnerability of each loan currently on 
the books. The statisticians partnered with colleagues from the operation to prepare 
a proposal (Section 9.2.5) for the development of a system to routinely assess and 
update the probability of default of individual loans. The proposal was funded and 
the resulting work and its implementation led to a significant savings to the business 
(see Neagu and Hoerl, 2005). 
Example 2. We had been involved for some time in helping plastics development 
engineers, in different locations around the world, plan designed experiments to 
determine the product formulation that best met individual customers' product 
performance specifications. 
All concerned realized that conducting isolated experiments was repetitive and 
inefficient. Instead, one should be able to leverage information on the relationship 

9.2 PROJECT INITIATION 
1 7 9 
between process settings and product performance, based on past test data collected 
throughout the business. We, therefore, proposed a web-based system with searching 
capabilities that would permit sharing the large amounts of previously obtained data, 
and, for each new order, supplement such data, with additional runs, as needed, to fill 
in holes in the available information and to provide validation information (such data 
would, in turn, be fed back into the system); see Sidebar 2.5 of Hahn and Doganaksoy 
(2008) for further details. This idea was then formalized in a work proposal 
(Section 9.2.5). The effort was funded and led to the successful development and 
implementation of the proposed system. 
9.2.4 Project Selection 
Avoid doomed projects. 
—David Banks (2008) 
(Our addition: Unless you are confident that you can save them.) 
Successful statisticians often find there are more opportunities than time to 
pursue them. Even though at the outset of your career you may have limited choice 
in picking the projects that you work on, we recommend that you start early in 
developing a system that will, at least eventually, help you to be selective. 
So how might you go about deciding whether or not to pursue a project? We 
suggest four major criteria: 
• Importance of the Work: This might be measured by the potential benefits or 
"payoff from successful execution of the project (Section 9.2.5). Important 
work is often readily recognized. But occasionally the likely benefits need to 
be sold to management and/or the appropriate funding agency. When the payoff 
is mainly long term, some short-term benefits should also be identified, if at 
all possible. 
• Likelihood of Success of Your Work: This involves both technical considera-
tions, such as the difficulty of the task, and nontechnical ones, such as timing 
restrictions and the opportunities for getting needed data. You also need 
to assess the ability, interest, and commitment of your likely colleagues on 
the project and whether you will be comfortable working with them (and 
they with you). Can you expect free and constructive flow of information? 
Are the expectations placed upon you realistic? How will success be 
measured? 
• Likelihood of Success of the Overall Project: Doing your part successfully may 
be of limited benefit—and receive little recognition—if the overall project fails 
or the results are not successfully implemented. 
• Project Appeal: Does the project have potential for "opening the door" to other 
desirable work? Will it provide opportunities for learning and advancement? 
Will it be fun? 
Going a step further, you may wish, for a proposed project, to score each of the 
preceding criteria on a scale from 1 to 10, and then multiply the resulting four scores 

180 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
(possibly assigning different weights to each criterion) to arrive at an overall 
attractiveness index for the project. You can then use the resulting attractiveness 
indexes to compare and rank proposed projects. 
Admittedly, it might be difficult for you to assess each of the criteria in advance 
(even without quantifying them) for a proposed project—and especially the likeli-
hood of overall project success. The closer you are to the action, the better are the 
chances that you will be able to make reasonable assessments. But even if you do not 
go through the preceding process formally, it will be helpful for you to acquire the line 
of thinking it suggests. 
The actual selection of a "portfolio" of projects will depend, in addition, upon 
such factors as funding, timing, and your availability—and, of course, your manage-
ment's wishes. If a project seems worthwhile, but does not make your personal cutoff, 
you might try to provide a qualified colleague the opportunity to become involved. 
For a related discussion, see Kenett et al. (2003), who propose assessment of 
"practical statistical efficiency" in project selection. 
9.2.5 The Proposal Process 
Requirements. A new project, or even the renewal of an existing one, generally 
requires the development of a proposal to do the work for approval by management 
and/or a funding agency. This may be the case even if the work has been requested by 
others. Statisticians in academia, research organizations, and consulting companies 
typically spend substantial time in developing detailed formal proposals for submittal 
to government or other agencies often closely following the guidelines of a RFP 
(Request for Proposal). 
Key prerequisites for a successful proposal are a good idea that addresses an 
important need and an agency or organization that is likely to be interested and has 
the resources to provide the needed funding. A good understanding of how the 
proposal process works for the agency to which it is being submitted and of the 
submittal process and timeline is also required. Typically, the proposal includes a 
statement of the reason for the work, the specific work to be performed, potential 
benefits that would result, the resources required for successful implementation, 
milestones along the way, the planned work completion date, and, of course, the 
cost. The specific requirements vary among application areas and organizations; see 
Hulley et al. (2006) for a discussion of writing and funding research proposals for 
clinical research. 
Effective selling of a work proposal through formal as well as informal means is 
frequently required. This typically calls for eliciting support from those directly 
involved and presenting the idea to key stakeholders and management. A long-
standing working relationship and an appreciation of organizational issues are 
important advantages. 
Short Proposals. Work proposals within an organization tend to be more informal and 
briefer than those submitted to an external party. They may, therefore, be less 
burdensome—or at least less bureaucratic (since the basic ideas still need to be 

9.2 PROJECT INITIATION 
181 
TABLE 9.2 Short Proposal 1 
Proposal: Early warning system to predict loan 
Objective 
Develop a system to assess the probability of 
individual loan default 
Work to be performed 
Build and validate an early warning system for 
loan default prediction based on past loan 
performance 
(Scope: North American, public, nonfinancial 
companies) 
Benefits 
• Estimated reduction of 15-25% in current 
yearly losses of $625MM by appropriately 
acting on likely defaults 
• Greater focus by narrowing the "watch list" 
• Improved consistency and objectivity in 
decision making 
defaults for commercial lending operation 
Completion date 
• 1 year effort 
Required resources (in person-years) 
• 1.5 statisticians 
• 1 system architect (25%) 
• 1 software developer 
• 1 portfolio manager (50%) 
Funding request 
$800K (including overhead) 
Project leaders 
C. Diverse, Portfolio Management 
A. Skew, Statistics Group 
developed)—than those required in other areas. In some cases, the written documen-
tation in support of the project may be limited to a one-page standard proposal sheet. 
Two such short proposals are shown in Tables 9.2 and 9.3, based on the 
examples dealing with loan default prediction and custom design of plastics products, 
described in Section 9.2.3. 
TABLE 9.3 Short Proposal 2 
Proposal: System to expedite custom design of plastics 
Objective 
Develop a web-based system to expedite the 
custom design of plastic products that meet 
customer specifications of physical properties 
Work to be performed 
Use data based on past experiments throughout 
business to establish relationship between 
process settings and product performance; 
utilize these relationships to establish process 
setting for new design and determine needed 
added experimentation, as necessary 
Benefits 
• Reduce development cycle time for custom 
products by an average of 3 weeks; cut costs for 
such development by 25% 
• Create capacity for $20MM/year new product 
sales 
products 
Completion date 
• 1.5 years effort 
Required resources (in person-years) 
• 2 statisticians 
• 1 system architect (30%) 
• 2 web developers 
• 1 product designer (25%) 
Funding request 
$900K (including overhead) 
Project leader 
G. Kurtosis, Statistics Group 

182 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
TABLE 9.4 Deliverables Timetable for Early Warning System to Predict Loan Defaults 
End of Month 1 
• Define data requirements and data gathering 
process 
• Begin data gathering 
End of Month 3 
• Complete data gathering and data cleaning 
• Begin development of statistical model for 
loan performance 
• Define software requirements for 
implementation 
End of Month 5 
• Complete development of statistical model 
End of Month 6 
• Complete validation of statistical model 
• Begin development of implementation 
software 
End of Month 9 
• Complete development of implementation 
software 
• Begin software testing 
• Begin user training 
End of Month 12 
• Complete software testing and 
user training 
• Begin routine system implementation 
A more detailed short proposal might include a planned "deliverables" time-
table; see Table 9.4 for an example. 
Initial Project Benefits Estimation. An important element in preparing a proposal 
is making a first cut, preferably quantified, estimate of the benefits that will result from 
successful project conduct and implementation. The magnitude and credibility of 
such claimed benefits are important elements in determining whether a proposed 
project is to be funded. 
In Sidebar 9.1, we provide an example dealing with estimating the potential 
savings associated with developing a system that can successfully distinguish real 
helicopter malfunctions from false alarms. 
We will discuss the challenge of quantifying the benefits of our work in greater 
detail in Section 9.3.7. 
SIDEBAR 
" . 
/ 
QUANTIFYING THE EXPECTED SAVINGS FROM DEVELOPMENT 
OF A SENSOR WARNING VERIFICATION SYSTEM 
The sensing equipment fora fleet of newly designed helicopters recorded about 30suspccted 
engine malfunctions during the first 3 months of operation. Each time this happened, the 
helicopter's mission had to be aborted and the engine inspected at an average cost of $25,000 
per incident. On each such occasion, the "problem" turned out to be a false alarm. Due to the 
serious consequences of missing a true engine malfunction, such alarms could not be 
ignored. They were expected to increase rapidly, due to new additions to the fleet, at least 
until the difficult long-term task of designing, building, and installing a more precise sensor 
could be successfully completed. Thus, the development of a statistically based algorithm 
thai could consistently distinguish between sensor warnings signaling real engine mal-
functions and false alarms was proposed. 

9.2 PROJECT INITIATION 
183 
In quantifying the benefits associated with successful implementation of this project, the 
expected savings needed to be assessed. This included estimating the expected cost of not 
proceeding wilh such development (i.e., ihe cost of the resulting unnecessary mission 
abortions), the likelihood of project success (i.e., developing an algorithm with an extremely 
high probability of clearly distinguishing engine malfunctions from false alarms and its 
unequivocal validation), and the anticipated timing of both the implementation of the new 
algorithm and the successful development and installation of a new sensor to replace the 
faulty one. 
Project Cost Estimation. A further task in preparing a proposal is to provide a cost 
estimate for the work. This is a task that building contractors are skilled at doing, but is 
generally more difficult for many statisticians. Unlike building contractors, statis-
ticians do not have a blueprint of the job to be done. Instead, they are often faced with a 
less than well-defined problem and a limited understanding of the perplexities that 
may lie ahead. Moreover, in addition to their own costs, they may have to estimate 
those of others, such as subcontractors, that the job might require. 
A frequent mistake is to assume everything goes right, resulting, when it 
does not, in an underestimate of the actual cost and in missed timelines. 
(Something that is also known to happen to building contractors.) As a result, 
some add a percentage, ranging from 10% to 30%, to the initial cost estimate to 
take into account unforeseen happenings and higher than anticipated inflation. 
Increasing the cost estimate in this manner, however, decreases the chances of the 
proposal being accepted. 
Sometimes it may be possible to conduct an initial scoping study to hone in on 
cost estimates; see Sidebar 9.2. 
SCOPING STUDIES 
One way to help address the uncertainties of up-front project cost estimates that is 
sometimes used in business and industry is to propose and conduct a preliminary scoping 
study. The goals of such a study are generally to 
• Define the problem as precisely and quantitatively as possible. 
• Develop an initial detailed plan for the gathering and analysis of the needed data. 
• Describe, in some detail, the specific work that remains to be done, the approaches to 
be used, and the associated costs and timing. 
The scoping study might include a preliminary analysis of currently available data. 
In a typical application, you may suggest a 10-day effort over a 1-month time span tor 
such a scoping study. In so doing, you might also provide an initial "ballpark" range for the 
entire project cosi—to be refined as part of the scoping study. 
Prospective customers mighi be willing to fund a scoping study—if there are no severe 
time pressures—because ii provides an opportunity to get a better understanding of you and 
the proposed work. 

184 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
Do not take the task of developing cost estimates lightly. Strive to base your 
estimate on as much relevant information as possible. And bear in mind that you may 
have to live with the consequences. 
9.3 
PROJECT EXECUTION 
Consider yourself a business partner—put your skin in the game. 
—David Coleman 
9.3.1 Use a Disciplined Approach 
It takes some art to tease a clear statement of the goals of their studies from clients. 
—Peter Wludyka 
Disciplined use of project management and tracking tools, such as Six Sigma 
(Section 5.2.2), is key to successful project execution. A disciplined approach starts 
with developing a clearly stated, and generally agreed upon, definition of the 
problem or purpose of the project, the objectives of the work to be done, and what 
will constitute successful conclusion of the effort. An important next step is to 
establish appropriate metrics and getting the right data—a subject to which we 
devote Chapter 11. 
It is often helpful to break a project down into small, realizable parts or building 
blocks, and address these separately—while still keeping the whole in mind. This can 
make seemingly daunting projects seem more doable. For example, a project aimed at 
reducing the time to make loan approval decisions was "piloted" at one of the eight 
divisions of a financial services company. Once shown to be successful there, it 
became easier to convince other divisions to adopt the approach. 
9.3.2 Understand the Process or Product 
The statistician cannot evade the responsibility for understanding the process he 
applies or recommends. 
—Sir R.A. Fisher 
An essential first step in addressing a problem is to gain a good appreciation of 
the process or product with which you are dealing. For example, 
• New Product Development: Get to know the fundamentals of how the product 
works, to whom it is to be sold, and how it is to be used. 
• Development of a Quality Assurance System: Gain an appreciation of what 
constitutes a defect, how defects arise, and how they are found. This should 
include a tour of the production facility, paying particular attention to the 
measurement process, and talking to those who do the measuring about possible 
problems in the process (and carefully listening to their responses). 

9.3 PROJECT EXECUTION 
185 
• Development of a System to Minimize Unscheduled Field Maintenance: Learn 
how malfunctions occur, how they are detected, and how they are addressed. 
This might call for accompanying a member of the maintenance team on field 
trips. 
• New Drug Approval: Learn the basic biology underlying the disease or 
condition being treated and the underlying chemistry of the drug that has been 
proposed to address it. This might require reading up and/or taking a (short) 
course(s) on these subjects. 
• Development of a System that Automates Approval of Credit Applications: Get 
to know how the current system works and how it can be improved. This might 
involve visits to local branch offices to observe operations. 
• Planning a Sampling Study: Seek an understanding of the procedure 
for conducting the study, the population to be sampled, the sampling frame, 
and how similar surveys have been conducted in the past (and might be 
improved). 
9.3.3 Gain a Clear Understanding of the Problem and Its 
Significance and Dynamics 
A problem well defined is a problem half solved. 
—Popular saying 
We discussed in Section 6.4 the importance of statisticians being able to 
size up problems and see the big picture. These skills need to be applied to a 
project from its outset to ensure a clear understanding of the real problem and 
the associated nuances (and the personalities and idiosyncrasies of those 
involved). 
You need to gain a good holistic appreciation of the business/organiza-
tional implications and of the management expectations from your work. For 
example, 
• How does the problem relate to the overall business/organizational 
strategy? 
• How does it tie in with other parts or aspects of the operation? 
• What will be the impact of your work, if successful, and how will the results be 
implemented and measured? 
• Who are the key players and what are their roles? 
You also need to recognize, as discussed in Section 5.8.2, that the focus of your work 
and the associated expectations are liable to change over time. You need to keep apace 
with the dynamics of the environment in which you are working. All of this requires 
your continued immersion, or at least careful attention. 
Gaining and maintaining the required understanding is easier if you are 
physically and organizationally colocated with your working partners and, in general, 
close to the scene of the action; see Sidebar 9.3. 

186 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
ON-SITE AND OFF-SITE INVOLVEMENT 
Statisticians learn faster when they get their hands dirty. 
—Martha Gardner 
On-site presence at the facility that is the focal point of your work enhances your 
effectiveness by allowing you to interact continuously with others involved in the project 
and to witness the actual operation with which you are dealing (sometimes referred to as 
"kicking the tires") and to witness its evolution over time. 
Statisticians working in a pharmaceutical company are often located at the site at 
which the test of a new drug is being conducied. They can take advantage of this presence 
by stepping out of their offices to witness the process firsthand and interact with all 
involved. Such direct participation was also easy for traditional plant statisticians since 
they were generally integral members of the operation where the work was being 
conducted, 
In contrast, in today's global operations, there is often not a single facility at which 
the work is focused. Different factories, sometimes located long distances apart, might 
be responsible for different stages of the development and manufacture of a product. 
Similarly, users of a system that automates and expedites credit approval are likely tobe 
spread out in branch offices throughout the world. Official statistics (e.g., gathering of 
agricultural data) might be sought nation-wide and their collection administered at 
various local offices. In each of these situations, it is useful to meet personally early in 
the project with the key individuals from different locations with whom you are working. 
This allows you to size them up, both technically and personally, and to establish good 
working relationships. You can then establish a system for continuous two-way flow of 
information, perhaps via routinely scheduled video/teleconferences, with only occa-
sional direct meetings. 
9.3.4 Be Strategically Proactive 
We have emphasized throughout this book, the importance of today's statisticians 
having a proactive mindset and being on the lookout for new opportunities that will 
best serve their employers and society. We add a few practical hints here. 
Be Realistic. Put yourself into the proverbial shoes of your management and 
customers and look at things from their perspectives. The problem of projects with 
long-term payoffs often is this. The costs for undertaking the work are incurred 
immediately, and get charged directly against this year's profits. The benefits, in the 
form of increased revenues or future cost avoidance, will, though possibly substantial, 
be realized only a few years hence. The manager who is to fund the project hopes to be 
promoted shortly in light of excellent current performance—as reflected by this 
year's balance sheet. In short, the manager will bear the costs of the proposed work, 
but a successor will be the direct beneficiary. Understanding this situation will lead 
you to think of ways of making your proposal more immediately attractive. 

9.3 PROJECT EXECUTION 
1 8 7 
Watch Your Timing. Timing might make the difference between success and 
failure in being strategically proactive. Slow periods (e.g., annual scheduled 
manufacturing shutdowns) may provide an opportunity to conduct investigations 
that might not be feasible at other times. Or it might be possible to "piggyback" an 
important special feature on to a study that is scheduled to be conducted anyway. The 
Current Population Survey used to track the unemployment rate in the United States 
includes, most months, at least one supplement1 on a topic of special interest. 
Leverage Reactive Successes. Circumstances and management requests some-
times dictate involvement in reactive efforts. The contacts and goodwill gained 
from succeeding in such work provide you the opportunity to promote more 
proactive approaches in support of the long-range goals of the organization. 
Immediately after helping identify and remove a serious existing problem is an 
ideal time to suggest the implementation of processes to avoid future problems. 
The projects summarized in Tables 9.2 and 9.3 were both outgrowths of helping 
resolve narrower more immediately focused issues. The personal relationships 
established and the insights gained into core operational issues through past 
activities paved the way for us to take a lead role in proposing and working on 
the subsequent projects. 
9.3.5 Stay Focused 
You need to stay focused on the immediate requirements of the project and the long-
term goals of the organization, and not let marginal issues divert you. Cost and 
practical considerations dictate how far to take a project. Carry your work forward 
only as far as it is of practical usefulness to your client—keeping in mind that often 
80% of the value of the work may be gained by 20% of the effort (known as the Pareto 
rule). That last 20% often may not be warranted pursuing, based on economic 
considerations; see Section 6.8 for an example. Of course, an important requirement 
in all of this is to understand what the 80% point represents and to know when you 
have reached it. More fundamentally, the issue is determining the point of diminishing 
returns—it might be the 90% or 70% or even the 50%, rather than the 80% point—and 
then being able to recognize when you are there. 
9.3.6 Perform 
Take responsibility and deliver ... do what you say you will. 
—Martha Gardner 
All that we have said so far is prologue. What you will eventually be judged on is 
the perceived quality, effectiveness, and timeliness of your work. This means providing 
results that successfully address your clients' needs (and, perhaps, go beyond). 
For example, the Annual Social and Economic Supplement obtains added information on income, health 
insurance coverage, and education, every March. 

188 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
Based on his extensive life experiences Starbuck (2009) urges you to 
• Keep commitments. Nothing turns people off more than you agreeing to do 
something and then not delivering. 
• Ask for feedback from colleagues and for help from people inside and outside 
your circle or comfort zone. 
• Deliver value that far exceeds your cost of employment. 
• Make yourself invaluable to a few good influential people. 
It is especially important that, during the course of a project, you have a realistic 
perception of how well you are doing. You need to recognize rapidly if and when you 
are not meeting your customers' highest expectations—and, if so, why not. Such 
understanding allows you to correct course expeditiously if needed. 
All of this requires ongoing communication—including keeping your customers 
abreast of your progress (and possible setbacks) and striving to obtain, and then listen 
carefully to, their feedback. Such communication also provides you an opportunity to 
bring to the forefront any potential obstacles, as a first step to resolving them. 
9.3.7 Quantify Benefits 
Make your boss aware of your accomplishments. 
—Nancy Geller 
Applied statisticians are evaluated by the contributions that they make. 
Estimates of the benefits associated with the successful execution of a project are 
required both at the project proposal stage and upon completion of the work. 
Business and Industry. In business and industry, a statistician's contributions are 
typically stated in terms of their payoff or bottom-line impact, as measured by the 
resulting increase in income, market share, or asset growth or by the resulting cost 
reduction. 
In many, mostly reactive, projects aimed at addressing existing problems, the 
benefits of successful project execution can be readily quantified—at least if one is 
willing to make some assumptions. The savings from work aimed at reducing scrap 
and rework or the added income from increasing market penetration can often be 
readily measured. 
Quantifying benefits is also frequently possible in financial services applica-
tions since these generally deal directly with money. In the proposal for developing an 
early warning system to predict loan defaults (Table 9.2), savings were estimated from 
• Predictions of defaults under the existing system. 
• An assessment of the effectiveness of the proposed system in averting such 
defaults. 
• An evaluation of the revenues that might be gained or lost by the specific actions 
that are taken as a consequence of replacing the existing system with the 
proposed new one. 

9.3 PROJECT EXECUTION 
1 8 9 
Government. Government projects have bottom-line payoffs too, but these are often 
more subtle and can only occasionally be readily expressed in monetary terms, such as 
savings to the taxpayer. They may result in faster execution of a survey or more 
informative and/or precise estimates of an important statistic, such as the national 
unemployment rate. These, in turn, may lead to better decisions, improved drafting of 
legislation, and a better informed public. Translating such benefits into meaningful 
monetary terms is often not possible. 
Need for Early Planning. To quantify the benefits gained from a project, one needs 
to put in place, as early as possible, a mechanism for measuring such benefits, as 
precisely, honestly, and convincingly as possible. 
In many applications, the system originally developed to obtain data to diagnose 
the problem may be adapted to quantify savings. This holds true for projects ranging 
from reducing scrap and rework to minimizing waiting time in a doctor's office. 
Challenges. For proactively oriented projects, the biggest gains often come from cost 
avoidance such as averted field repairs and recalls and from greater customer satisfaction. 
The resulting savings from such work are more speculative than those from most reactive 
projects, take more time to accrue, and, sometimes, are unknown or unknowable. 
Consider a project to improve a product feature. Successful execution will 
likely result in increased sales. But sales volume is a function of many factors, and it is 
difficult or impossible to ferret out the impact of any particular one of them. 
Measuring project impact becomes especially difficult in trying to quantify 
product reliability improvement for two major reasons. It often takes considerable 
time for the impact of the work, such as increased product life, to be realized. In 
addition, the consequence frequently is the avoidance of a serious problem, such as 
premature field failures. But how can you quantify the impact of avoiding a problem 
that, due to your (and others') efforts, did not happen? 
Similarly, as we have already suggested, improved official statistics—such as 
the development of a more accurate consumer price index—carries with it many 
benefits to society that do not lend themselves to precise measurement. 
Surmounting the Challenges. Difficulties in quantifying the impact of your con-
tributions should not dissuade you from striving to develop some credible (even if 
approximate) assessment of the payoffs to your client, employer, or society of your 
work—even though such assessments may not always be monetary, or even quantitative. 
Consider again the problem of measuring the payoff from a project to help 
redesign a product to avoid a previously observed field failure mode. Data on past 
failures might be used to predict the expected number of failures had the redesign not 
been implemented. One can then compare these with the number of failures that 
actually occurred (or are predicted to occur) for the new design. 
The process of estimating expected benefits accruing from successful execution 
of a proposed effort can in itself be instructive in gaining an improved understanding 
of the underlying dynamics. In order to help ensure objectivity and improve 
credibility, it is, moreover, useful to involve knowledgeable outsiders, such as 
auditors, in helping develop measures of improvement. 

190 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
Many of the projects in which statisticians participate—such as product 
redesign—are team efforts. In such cases, there is often no direct way of isolating 
the statistician's direct contributions, nor should there be. But statisticians are in a 
good position to help quantify the team's overall contributions to help ensure that 
all contributing team members will be able to share in the glory (and rewards) of 
project success. 
9.3.8 Report 
No one will know what you have done unless you tell/show them. 
—Martha Gardner 
Your work, including its quantification, is of little value to others if you don't 
effectively communicate your findings, especially to your clients and management— 
both during the course of a project and at its conclusion. We will discuss the challenges 
of communicating effectively in the next chapter. 
9.3.9 Help Implement 
To help make sure that your work comes to its full fruition, you often need to participate 
in its implementation. Guiding implementation may be a formal part of the project 
itself, such as in developing a quality assurance system or in conducting a survey. In 
other cases, implementation might be the major responsibility of others. It might take 
place after you have presented your findings, but may still require your involvement. 
See Snee (1999) for some examples of projects—ranging from product 
development to reducing newspaper copy errors—for which, to achieve success, 
statisticians had to go beyond developing solutions and needed to participate in 
implementation. 
9.4 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
We present below some of the responses (sometimes, in slightly abridged or edited 
form) that pertain to on-the-job strategies to our question, posed to a number of 
eminent statisticians: What key advice would you give to an aspiring statistician 
planning or embarking on a career? These comments, like those provided in other 
chapters, reiterate or amplify points we make in the current chapter and add some 
further perspectives. 
Listen first, then communicate well and be creative enough to find the tool that 
gives roughly the right answer. There are always practical considerations of time 
pressure and available funds that affect what is the "best" solution. Be tactful, 
explain your reasons in a soft-spoken unemotional manner and be patient. 
Compromise is sometimes necessary. But firmness is important too. 

9.4 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
1 9 1 
—Michael R. Chernick, Director, Biostatistical Services, Lankenau Institute for Medical 
Research 
Strive to become an expert on something of importance to your organization. 
—Martha Gardner, Six Sigma Leader, GE Global Research Center 
Statisticians have no authority of their own but should position themselves as the 
advocates of the client. 
—Lynne Hare, Director (retired), Applied Statistics, Kraft Foods 
Early on identify one or more mentors who can advise you and support your 
development. Don't try to do itallonyourown savvy. Then, first and foremost, focus 
on the customer and his/her needs by delivering results. Use the 80/20 Pareto rule. 
Don't get enamored by the beauty of the methodology and end up spending a lot of 
customer-funded time in overdoing what is needed to deliver the results. Meet with 
the customers in their workplaces and don't expect them to come to you. 
Communicate frequently so the customer and your supervisor know where you are 
on a project. Listen to their inputs. Don't assume they will be patient and wait. Also, 
share your success and recognition with others that were instrumental in the project. 
—William Hill, Six Sigma Leader (retired), Center for Applied Mathematics, Honeywell 
Company 
Re-think everything that you have learned about statistics and adapt it to the 
specific environment in which you work. There is a good chance that some of what 
you have learned is irrelevant. Identify a killer application where good statistical 
thinking is under-utilized, and then focus on making a large impact, which is 
visible to upper management. Remain ethical in all that you do. 
—Bruce Hoadley, Research Statistician (retired), Fair, Isaac and Co. Inc. (FICO) 
Don't allow the label "statistician" to limit your thinking about how you can 
contribute and add value to your organization. Be prepared to "de-program" 
yourself from some of what you have been taught (common assumptions of 
normality, independence, random data, etc.). In the real world, the "best business 
solution" is more important than the "best statistical solution"; know the 
difference. Always question the data (How were the data collected and by whom? 
How were measurements taken? Were there any data you couldn't obtain, or that 
were not included? Can I speak to those involved?) and assume data are "guilty" 
until proven "innocent." Always plot the data; over time if possible. 
—Roger Hoerl, Manager, Applied Statistics Laboratory, CE Global Research 
Center 
When I describe what statisticians and actuaries do, I emphasize the need to be to 
the point and brief (KISS—Keep It Simple Statistician) and to avoid being boring! 
—Robert Hogg, Professor (retired), University of Iowa; past President of the American 
Statistical Association 
Always remember that the goal is to show the customer the impact of statistics on 
the company's bottom line—not how much you know. 

192 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
—Ronald Iman, President, Southwest Technology Consultants; past President of the 
American Statistical Association 
Listen, learn, reflect (i.e., confirm understanding by restating in your own words), 
interact (get intimate with the business problem, not just "arms length"). Fine-tune 
the ability to assess the practical problem (not just the statistical problem) and drive 
to the practical solution (not just the statistical solution). Employ the principle of 
parsimony to gauge the level of technical sophistication required . . . technical 
marvels are not a requirement. Strive for enterprise-wide statistical thinking over 
the long haul. 
—Tim Keyes, Manager, Strategic Portfolio Decisioning, GE Corporate Financial 
Services 
Be willing to really listen and be quick at extracting the essence of a problem. Have 
the courage to take on a problem, before knowing how to solve it, and then the 
courage to meet a deadline, before having solved the problem completely. It's 
easier to be successful if you have a network, and it's easier to bui Id a network if you 
maintain a reputation for being open to listening to problems and to treating people 
fairly and openly. 
—Diane Lambert, Research Scientist, Google 
Learn to "see" statistical problems from a more macroscopic, as opposed to 
microscopic, point-of-view. Always look for the "bigger picture" in which smaller 
statistical problems are imbedded. 
—Harry Martz, Laboratory Associate in Statistics (retired), Los Alamos National 
Laboratory 
Be willing to ask questions and listen rather than leap to conclusions. (The worst 
mistakes I've made came when I thought I knew what the client was saying, but 
didn't. I should have started at the very beginning.) Use flexibility and 
judgment in choosing appropriate methods that fit the design, the problem, and 
the client's level of sophistication. Simpler is better unless complexity is truly 
demanded. 
—David S. Moore, Shanti S. Gupta Distinguished Professor (retired), Purdue 
University; past President of the American Statistical Association 
Avoid appearing to tell clients how to do their jobs. Recognize, for instance, that 
some engineers feel that they were hired to plan and carry out experiments—and 
not to go to someone to tell them how to do this. 
—Lloyd S. Nelson, Statistical Leader (retired), Nashua Corporation 
Learn the regulatory, policy, economic, legal, technical, and enforcement 
ramifications of the problem and 
1. Realize you have to get out in the field to see how your survey or application is 
working. You probably can't see it from the office. 
2. Carefully hone your communication skills. You have to explain and convince 
someone about your approach, analysis, conclusions, and recommendations 

9.4 AS OTHERS SEE IT 
193 
3. Get proactive. In applications, frequently the statistician is the last to be 
included in the team. If data have already been collected, "Better late than 
never may not be good enough." 
4. Learn to explain you work SIMPLY. See if the other guy can "play it back to 
you." Keep your eye on the prize; not the maximum likelihood estimator of the 
fourth moment. 
—Barry D. Nussbaum, Chief Statistician, Environmental Protection Agency 
Understand that companies, as opposed to statistics research institutions, view 
statistics as a means to an end and not the end itself. Strong impact requires 
developing and honing your soft skills and learning about the products and 
processes of your clients. While a sound background and competency in statistics 
is needed and advantageous, your advancement will be judged by the business 
impact of your work. 
Corporate environments that stretch personal development and provide for diverse 
application opportunities make for satisfying and rewarding careers. 
—Charles G. Pfeifer, Principal Consultant, DuPont Quality Management and 
Technology 
Read the Wall Street Journal, Fortune and/or Harvard Business Review to find out 
what direction managers might turn to next; take some business courses to find out 
how managers think. Learn how to explain to managers how they could more 
effectively interpret performance indicators (profit, costs, hours of overtime, cost 
per unit, etc.); i.e., explain that a period-to-period increase or decrease is not 
necessarily indicative of a change. There is enormous waste in business 
organizations due to demands for explanations of why a particular measure 
went up or down this period compared to last period. 
—Cipsie Ranney, Statistical Consultant 
Learn to: Listen, coach (without seeming like a coach), present in front of groups, 
communicate in as jargon-free manner as possible, hold a strongly felt position in a 
graceful manner. 
—Charles B. Sampson, Director of Statistics (retired), Eli Lilly & Company 
Learn the nomenclature of the business world and/or government. Don't get 
pigeon-holed. 
Learn what product or service you are dealing with and see statistics within the 
context of that entity. Do not be afraid to ask questions! Theory is fine, but the 
real ities of what you have to work with take precedence. Accept that the statistical 
issues are only one part of a set of complex decisions by "management." Final ly, be 
prepared to make a definitive statement. Management has no use for equivocation. 
Understanding that there's statistical error is important but eventually, to be useful, 
the applied statistician has to reach conclusions. 
—Edward ). Spar, Executive Director, Council of Professional Association on Federal 
Statistics 

194 
CHAPTER 9 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: PROJECT INITIATION AND EXECUTION 
9.5 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• To be most effective, statisticians should be part of the project team from the 
outset. Sometimes you need to work to make this happen. Eventually, you may 
propose important work yourself. 
• As you advance, you will have greater opportunity to select the specific work in 
which to become involved. We propose the following criteria for project 
selection: the importance of the work, the likelihood of success of both your 
work and of the project overall, and the project's general appeal. 
• Most projects require an up-front proposal for approval by management and/or a 
funding agency. This can involve a lengthy and highly formal process or a shorter, 
more informal one. It calls for skill in proposal writing, in estimating the cost to 
conduct the project, and in stating the benefits that would result from the work. 
• Successful project execution requires you to use a disciplined approach; 
understand the underlying process or product; gain a clear understanding of 
the problem and its significance and dynamics; be strategically proactive; stay 
focused on the work; (most importantly) effectively perform the promised tasks 
(and maybe more) in a timely manner; quantify the benefits (monetarily if 
possible); clearly report your findings and recommendations; and, often, 
participate in their implementation. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. Describe a situation in which you have been asked a narrow technical question 
that led to a deeper engagement. How did you handle it? 
2. Study and report on the approach used by Neagu and Hoerl (2005) in 
developing a system to predict the vulnerability to default of existing loans 
for a commercial lending operation (Section 9.2.3). 
3. * How would you weight each of the four criteria suggested for consideration in 
project selection in Section 9.2.4? What further criteria would you add? How 
might the relative weighting of the criteria change at different stages of 
your career? 
4. "Consider one of the projects mentioned in this chapter, or a project that you 
are familiar with. How might you go about assessing its importance? 
5. Consider the quantification of expected savings from the development of the 
sensor warning verification system, described in Sidebar 9.1. Elaborate on 
how to get the information needed to quantify the benefits of developing such a 
system, both at the proposal stage and after the project has been completed. 
6. Think of a study that you feel warrants conducting. Identify a potential 
funding agency (e.g., parents, school administrators, government). Prepare a 
short proposal to request approval and funding of the study. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
1 9 5 
7. In the last bullet point in Section 9.3.2, we enumerated some of the steps 
required in planning a sampling study. Assume that you want to survey students' 
satisfaction with the education that they receive at your school. Describe how 
you would apply the stated steps (and possibly others) for such a study. 
8. *We have tried to emphasize that performance is the key to (though not the sole 
requirement for) success. Discuss a project in which you have been involved 
and what you did to deliver on what was expected from you (and more). 
9. *Describe a situation in business, government, or public life in which a 
particular course of action might detract from the measured performance of 
current management, but enhance that of their successors. How might this be 
rectified? 
10. *In Section 9.3.7, we ask "How can you quantify the impact of avoiding a 
problem that, due to your (and others') efforts, did not happen?" Consider a 
specific example and discuss the difficulties in quantifying the impact of your 
work on this problem and how you might try to overcome such difficulties. 

CHAPTER 10 
ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: 
COMMUNICATION, 
PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
10.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
■■■M B ^ B H M M V B M B H H H M B i 
I want to talk to an expert—not a know-it-all. 
—Charles Schwab advertisement 
In this chapter, we discuss important on-the-job strategies for statisticians that 
pertain to 
• Communication. 
• (Subtly) publicizing statistics and statisticians. 
• Ethical considerations. 
10.2 COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION, 
COMMUNICATION 
The ability to communicate effectively at all levels is essential to a statistician's 
success, as we have tried to make clear throughout this book, and especially in 
Section 6.3. In this section, we provide some hints for effective communication. 
10.2.1 Adjust to the Environment 
Statisticians can become enamored with statistics. 
—Scott Pardo 
Most students of statistics are surrounded by other students and professors who 
talk the same technical language and think along similar quantitatively oriented lines 
as themselves. Moving to an environment where statistical jargon is an unfamiliar 
language, and statistics itself may be viewed as a boring discipline, often comes as an 
unpleasant surprise. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
197 

198 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
There is much variability in the level of interest and understanding of statistics 
among those with whom we interact. Some rely heavily on gut feeling assessments 
and have limited knowledge of—or interest in—statistical concepts. In contrast, 
others, such as many quantitatively trained financial analysts, engineers, and scien-
tists, have a good appreciation of and a high interest in using a statistical approach. 
You need to gauge the technical sophistication and level of interest in statistics 
of those with whom you are working. Often, this can be gained by informal 
conversation. A good strategy may be to assume that others have minimal statistical 
knowledge and gradually become more technical in what you say—to the point that it 
continues to be well received (and is needed). We also suggest that you ask to be 
interrupted when you use terminology or discuss concepts with which those whom 
you are addressing are unfamiliar (but don't rely on this happening). 
Effective communication is a particular challenge in working in a global work 
environment; see Sidebar 10.1. 
EFFECTIVE COMMUNICATION IN A GLOBAL WORK ENVIRONMENT 
Sometimes those with whom you are communicating have a different native language from 
your own. This is becoming increasingly frequent as a consequence of globalization. 
English is the generally accepted international language for communication. Fluency in 
English is an essential skill; professional meetings are typically conducted in English. In 
fact, you will often find participants from different non-English-speaking countries con-
versing with each other in English! The problem of communicating comprehensively and 
effectively is especially acute for those for whom English is not a native tongue, but who are 
working in an English-speaking country. 
At the same lime, being able to speak with others and perhaps even address a foreign 
audience effectively in their native tongue (when this is not English) can gain you 
appreciation and respect—and perhaps enhance understanding. 
We have the following suggestions for individuals who, such as one of the authors (ND), 
need or want to communicate in a language different from their native tongue (whether that 
native tongue be English or some other language): 
• Try to obtain relevant written background documentation; this is often easier for you 
to follow and can aid subsequent oral communication. 
• In giving a formal presentation, provide sufficient detail in your slides to make them 
as self-explanatory as possible. 
• Speak slowly and clearly. 
• Check to ensure that you are being understood (recognizing that others are often 
reluctant to tell you if you are not). 
• Get a mentor with whom you can rehearse your comments in advance, who can point 
out difficulties and help make your written communication more understandable. 
• In transmitting your talk (or providing handouts), add further explanatory comments 
next to your presentation slides. 

10.2 COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION 
199 
10.2.2 The Art of Listening 
The first step in effective communication is to listen carefully to others, understand 
their priorities, and elicit the information that you need to be most effective. 
Addressing a problem requires a solid understanding of your customers' 
perception of the situation and their expectations concerning your contributions. 
Problems are often not clearly stated, and may be understood differently by different 
people. As indicated earlier (Section 9.3.3), helping define the problem and doing so 
as quantitatively as possible is a key part of what statisticians do. This is often an 
iterative process requiring skillful probing, asking the "right" questions—at well-
selected times—and carefully listening to the answers, including all accompanying 
nuances. 
Different people often have different perceptions of the goals of a project and of 
what has to be done. You need to understand such differences, and sort them out in 
your own mind—as well as help narrow possible gaps in perception. It is often wise at 
the beginning of an interaction—after you have established your credibility—to focus 
on listening rather than talking. 
10.2.3 Opportunities for Communication 
Statisticians should be heard as well as seen. 
—Gerald Van Belle (2002) 
Project Meetings. Project meetings offer an opportunity for exchanging ideas, 
providing updates, jointly addressing issues, and in general fostering progress. They 
also allow you to explain important concepts, such as the need for obtaining well-
targeted data. When the participants are at the same location, such meetings allow 
you to observe others' body language. 
Meetings need to be well planned in advance and well managed to avoid 
becoming a bureaucratic drag; see Sidebar 10.2. 
TIPS FOR EFFECTIVE MEETINGS 
Statisticians are someiimes responsible for organizing and leading project meetings. The 
following are some simple guidelines for conducting meetings effectively: 
»
· Invite the key participants—balancing the desirability of including all involved 
against the need to conserve people's time and the recognition that the larger the 
meeting, the harder it might be to get things done. 
• Schedule the meeting sufficiently in advance to avoid conflicts and whenever possible 
negotiate the date, time, and place with those whose participation is most important. 
• Have a meeting goal; this might be as general as "Project Update." 

CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
■ Prepare an agenda for advance distribution, indicating allocated time to each subject. 
• Consider requiring brief written reports in advance. 
• Set ground rules for the conduct of the meeting (e.g., no speeches, one person speaks 
at a time) and enforce them. 
• In conducting the meeting, be fair, but insist on brevity and keeping to the point. Also, 
keep an eye on the clock and strive to enforce the time allocated to each subject (while 
allowing some flexibility when this seems appropriate). Use judgment as to what can 
be addressed constructively at this meeting, and what cannot. 
• For larger meetings, consider splitting into working groups, possibly after some 
initial discussion involving everybody. Then reassemble to allow each group to report 
its conclusions and recommendations and to discuss these briefly. 
• Focus on action and what is to happen next. 
• Conclude with a clear statement of the agreed-upon actions and who will follow up on 
each. 
• Doc ument major resu I ts and action ite m s and di stri buie them to attendee s {and othe rs 
involved) in a timely manner. 
Project Progress Reports. Project progress reports provide important vehicles for 
communicating the current status of the work and for updating all involved. They can 
build enthusiasm, elicit feedback, and lead to corrections if some aspects of the work 
may have gone offtrack. They also provide an opportunity to identify, articulate, and 
respond to problems that might arise. Most importantly, such progress reports serve to 
keep everybody updated and interested. They can be helpful, irrespective of whether 
or not they are a formal requirement. 
Quarterly, monthly, weekly, or even daily progress reports have been employed 
historically. Online postings, when important results become available, make this 
process more dynamic. E-mail can apprise all or a targeted group of important 
developments, but see Sidebar 10.3 for a note of caution. 
Electronic communication tools can simplify transfer and sharing of information with others 
anywhere in the world, Instant messaging enables rapid access to those whose inputs are 
needed to speedily address a question. E-mail is minimally intrusive and is especially useful 
for transmitting (or soliciting) factual, and often routine, information or when a considered, 
but not necessarily immediate, response is desired. 
These tools are, however, not well suited for give-and-take discussion and should not 
replace more direct interactions, especially on controversial issues. The speed with which 
messages can be composed and transmitted can lead to your using wording or sending 
messages that you might later regret. Whenever possible, compose important, and especially 
controversial, messages in draft form and reexamine them after a "cooling ofT' period before 
transmitting them. In fact, some advise against engaging in any disagreement electronically. 
200 

10.2 COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION 
201 
We also suggest moving to a more direct form of communication if an issue has not been 
resolved after two or three e-mail exchanges. 
Compared to in-person and oral coin muni cat ion, electronic communication lacks the 
ability to easily and dearly get across nuances of meaning and emotions. When these 
are important, try, if possible, not to use electronic or any oüier written form of 
com muni catt on, 
Final Reports. Traditionally, statisticians wrote formal and detailed project reports 
documenting their findings at the conclusion of a study. This is still done today in some 
areas—such as dossiers prepared for regulatory agencies by drug companies. In many 
other areas, the emphasis on speed and simplicity has led to the formal report being 
supplemented with or even replaced by a verbal presentation. The slides prepared for 
this presentation (to be discussed shortly) may then serve as the formal project 
documentation. This is especially the case in areas in which formal written docu-
mentation is not mandated. 
When writing a project report, keep foremost in mind the needs and level of 
sophistication of those to whom the report is being addressed, recognizing that this is 
often a diverse audience. Stress the bottom-line findings up front (in perhaps an 
executive summary) and generally relegate the technical details to a later section or an 
appendix. 
Especially avoid statistical jargon that might be unfamiliar to your readers. 
Strive for completeness and precision in what you state. If possible, give your mentor 
or possibly your manager the opportunity to review your report in draft form. 
For some further advice to statisticians on preparing written communication, 
see Fenn-Buderer (2000). 
Informal Opportunities. Communication can also be less formal, such as luncheon 
meetings or just dropping by a colleague's office. Some important encounters arise by 
chance—and you need be prepared for these; see Sidebar 10.4. 
SIDEBAR 
f ( / . r f 
THE ELEVATOR SPEECH 
The best spontaneous remarks are practiced ahead of time. 
—Bill Cheetham 
You find yourself going up an elevator with your CEO or division chief—whose office is 
typically on the lop floor—and who, noting your presence, asks "So what is new in the world 
of statistics?" This and similar occasions are your chance to convey concisely what you are 
doing and its significance.1 
If your office is on the second floor, we propose that you go along for the ride rather than truncate your 
comments. 

2 0 2 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBtlCIZING, AND ETHICS 
Do not take the question literally. Unless you are close to retirement or have lined up your 
next job, we suggest that you refrain from responding, for example, L'I have an elegant new 
proof for the independence of the sample mean and standard deviation from a normal 
distribution." Also, you might, not necessarily, want to respond with what happens to he on 
ihe lop of your mind (most likely, today's project) and certainly not with "nothing much." 
Instead, select a subject of interest and concern to your CEO or division chief in which 
you played an important role—although your participation might come as a surprise. Your 
comments should describe some significant—maybe even exciting—recent results, subtly 
suggesting the part that you played together with others, such as 
• Working with Joe Smith, we have conducted a market study that suggests that the 
proposed overhaul of our XYZ product is expected to result in a 15% increase in 
market share. 
• Following uponourpresentation to you a few weeks ago, we have been working with 
design engineering to assess the damage that a humid environment might do to our 
new superwidget. The news is "so far, so good." Our accelerated test of 10 widgets has 
shown no appreciable degradation after the equivalent of 3 years in the toughest 
environment that we can expect in the field. 
• Initial evaluations of our new drug suggest that its cure rate might be between 75% 
and 150% higher than that of a placebo, with no evidence of adverse reactions during 
its first year of application. 
We propose that you always have an elevator speech in mind for use when appropriate—and 
periodically update it. If it presents an unexpected finding, all the better. 
10.2.4 Giving Effective Presentations 
Statisticians, like many other professionals, are called upon frequently to give 
presentations. These might be in the form of a project proposal, a progress update 
during the course of the project, or a final briefing at the end of a project. There are also 
other situations that require presentations, for example, as part of a job interview or at 
a technical professional society meeting. 
The presentation may be directly to a "live" audience or it may be to a remote 
audience— possibly involving participants throughout the world—or some combi-
nation of the two. 
We briefly discuss some concepts that we have found helpful in giving effective 
presentations. Courses on this subject provide further suggestions and practice. 
Joining a local chapter of Toastmasters or a similar group that provides speaking 
practice can prove to be helpful for those with little experience in giving presentations. 
Tailor Comments to Audience. Statisticians, like doctors, lawyers, and many other 
professionals, face the challenge of explaining complex technical concepts to others 
in simple terms. You need to talk in your customers' language, instead of your own 
jargon—and do so in a nonconfrontational and informal manner without seeming to 
lecture. In structuring what you say and how you say it, always use your assessment of 
the knowledge and interests of your audience. A compliment sometimes paid to 
statisticians who have mastered the ability to communicate is that they do not sound 
like statisticians! 

10.2 COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION, COMMUNICATION 
2 0 3 
Your contact with higher levels of management is especially important. You 
need to be crisp and to the point—as in the elevator speech. One of us (GH) was 
required to present yearly to his Vice President the highlights of the past year's work 
of 16 statistics professionals—and had 20 minutes (possibly cut to 10 or 15 minutes 
if the program was running late) to do so! 
Preparing Presentation Charts. Formal presentations are typically built around 
initially prepared charts/graphics viewed on a screen while you give the verbal 
presentation. These charts allow you to emphasize key points. They also provide cues 
to you as you give the presentation, and sometimes serve as a summary to those 
attending and to others who may not be there. 
Preparing the presentation charts and graphics is often tantamount to preparing 
the presentation itself. We recommend that you 
• Initially state the objective of the presentation and outline what you are planning 
to present. 
• Include graphics to enliven the presentation. Well-selected and correctly 
executed graphics can significantly enhance communication from the early 
stages of discovery to the presentation of the final results of a project. 
• Do not cram too much material on a single page and make sure that your 
presentation is readable. This might require your checking in advance on 
projection capabilities. 
• Consider including some of the more technical material as an appendix for 
subsequent reading or as backup. 
• Don't let background graphics drown out your presentation. 
• Conclude with a summary of the key points that you want your audience to 
remember. 
Sidebar 10.5 addresses the question of how much detail to include in your charts. 
HOW DETAILED SHOULD YOUR PRESENTATION CHARTS BE? 
b
Make slides that reinforce your words rather than repeat them, 
—S. Godin 
An initial inclination is to have your presentation charts contain essentially your entire 
verbal presentation. But keep in mind that your charts are competing with your oral 
comments for attention; the audience may be split between listening to you and reading 
your charts. It is usually advisable to keep the presentation charts succinct to emphasize 
key points in abbreviated form—keeping separate notes as cues for your own reference. 
Your presentation will then elaborate on your charts and not make them (or you) seem 
redundant. 

204 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-IOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
A possible exception, calling for more detailed presentation charts, is the situation in 
which it may be difficult for some to understand you, such as when, as previously mentioned. 
you are giving a presentation to people whose native language differs from the one you 
are using. 
You might also strive to include more detail in the slides if the presentation is to serve as a 
final report of project findings, if the presentation is to be read by important people who were 
unable to attend the presentation, or if the presentation is likely to be referred to in the future. 
In these cases, a better alternative might be to make up two sets of slides—One for 
presentation and one for reference. Another possibility is to use the notes section accom-
panying your slides to include additional information. 
Giving the Presentation. Having good presentation charts is a necessary but not 
sufficient condition for giving a good presentation. The focus needs to be on you; your 
charts are only a vehicle for making your comments more effective. We propose 
that you 
• Start off with a light initial comment—referred to as the "ho-hum crasher" in 
effective presentation courses. (This also gives your audience a chance to adjust 
to your speech if your native language is different from the one in which you are 
giving the presentation.) 
• Decide in advance how much emphasis to give to each point in your 
presentation. 
• Depending upon your style and spontaneity, and the importance of the 
presentation, consider preparing a written version of your comments. Avoid 
reading this—or, at least, making it seem that is what you are doing.2 
• Similarly, do not read your presentation charts—your audience can generally do 
so faster than you—instead amplify on the charts (another reason for keeping 
them concise). 
• Keep eye contact with your audience—not your charts. This will help you 
maintain interest and let you gauge reaction to what you are saying. 
• Pace yourself to meet time requirements—but be ready to adjust, based upon 
what you observe to be your audience's interest. Keep track of your remaining 
time and retain ample time for discussion. 
• In addressing an audience whose native language is different from the one you 
are using, speak especially clearly and more slowly than you might otherwise. 
Avoid examples to which other cultures might not relate, for example, unfa-
miliar baseball or cricket slang.3 
• Consider inviting audience questions as you go along (another voice can enliven 
things). Answering questions also provides you an opportunity to amplify 
2 Politicians are skilled in reading prepared remarks from a teleprompter, often without the audience 
noticing. 
3 One of us (GH) experienced some blank looks in talking about the reliability of an electric dishwasher in a 
presentation in a developing country. 

10.3 PUBLICIZING STATISTICS (AND STATISTICIANS) 
2 0 5 
points that might not be clear to all (or you might have forgotten to make). 
However, feel free to delay (perhaps for a subsequent one-on-one discussion) 
responding to questions that are likely to interest only the person asking the 
question—unless that person happens to be your manager, CEO, division chief, 
or a key customer. 
• For an important presentation, rehearse your comments with knowledgeable 
and critical colleagues who can put themselves into your audience's shoes. This 
also provides a good check on your timing. 
10.2.5 Further Reading 
Numerous articles have been written in Amstat News and other publications to guide 
statisticians to be effective communicators; see, for example, Tanenbaum (2010b) and 
Younger (2009). 
10.3 
PUBLICIZING STATISTICS (AND STATISTICIANS) 
Statisticians need to publicize what statistics (and they themselves) have to offer. Your 
best advertisement, unquestionably, is a record of past accomplishments. Once you 
have proven your worth, your services are likely to be in high demand. The hardest 
task is, therefore, often that faced by newly hired statisticians on their first jobs. In this 
section, we suggest a few subtle approaches. 
10.3.1 Short Courses and Workshops 
Teaching short (and sometimes not so short) courses within your organization on 
topics in statistics or on the use of software gives you a chance to demonstrate the 
excitement and relevance of the field and to present yourself as an accessible and easy 
to communicate with source of expertise. Such courses are often offered on special 
subjects that are not typically covered in introductory courses, but are important to the 
organization; for example, teaching design and analysis of accelerated life tests to 
design engineers or mixture experiments to chemical engineers involved in product 
development. 
You might also have the opportunity to participate in more general courses 
taught by others. Our company for many years offered a 3-week Modern Engineering 
Course. The purpose was to provide senior professionals and aspiring managers with 
insights into important developments in science and engineering, focusing on subjects 
that have come to the forefront in the years since many of the course participants went 
to school. Typical topics were modern physics and computer science, often taught by 
college professors. We were invited to give two 3 hour presentations on the use of 
statistical methods to address important company problems. We tried to demystify the 
subject and provided introductions to such topics as product reliability, planning 
investigations, and simulation, and illustrated these with company application. The 
course gave us excellent exposure to future company leaders, who often contacted us, 

2 0 6 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
years later, when a problem arose in their operations.4 Six Sigma (Section 5.2.2) 
training programs provide similar opportunities for teaching statistical concepts 
and tools. 
10.3.2 Newsletters 
For many years our organization published what we called Statogram Newsletters, 
distributed widely across the company, providing information on statistical concepts 
(e.g., Don't Let Statistical Significance Fool You!; Confidence Intervals, Tolerance 
Intervals and Prediction Intervals—Vive La Difference; the Ubiquitous Mr. Markov 
and His Remarkable Chain; and Removing Measurement Error in Assessing Con-
formance) or on recent successful applications (e.g., Scrap Reduced 77% in 6 Weeks; 
Complete Reliability Data System Installed; and A System for Proposal Risk 
Analysis). Some of these were subsequently published, over a period of 15 years, 
starting in 1973, in a series of articles entitled "Random Samples" in Chemtech 
magazine. This followed an approach pioneered by Jack Youden in Industrial and 
Engineering Chemistry from 1954 to 1959.5 
Today's statistics newsletters have gone electronic and can be posted on web 
sites (and announced by e-mail notifications). Contributing author Leonard Gaines 
frequently posts briefs on his New York State agency's site based on recently 
released data, highlighting findings of interest to members of his agency. These 
typically consist of up to one page of bulleted news items, graphs, maps, and 
tables. 
Like company courses, newsletters and bulletins can inform potential clients of 
the power of statistics and point to you as a source of knowledge. 
10.3.3 Building on Casual Questions 
Timely and effective responses to casual consulting requests provide you the 
opportunity to broaden the discussion of what statistics really has to offer and also 
open the door for your more extensive involvement. A casual technical question about 
software to do curve fitting might, for example, lead to your participation in 
addressing a much bigger problem (Section 9.2.1). 
10.3.4 Further Informal Contacts 
Informal conversations, such as casual chats with office neighbors and interactions at 
receptions, provide further opportunities for telling others about statistics and 
4 Many remembered best our demonstration of the Poisson distribution by counting the number of chips on 
the faces of a randomly selected sample of chocolate chip cookies. 
5 The American Society for Quality's publication Quality Progress currently carries, most months, a 
similar column entitled "Statistics Roundtable" written by various statisticians (including authors of this 
book who contribute a yearly article, together with Bill Meeker, on product reliability improvement using 
statistical methods). 

10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
2 0 7 
establishing potentially useful contacts. You might develop a repertoire of interesting 
and informative stories (similar to the elevator speech) for this purpose. Some of our 
favorites are 
• An experimental program to assess the claim that birds mistake jet engine noise 
for mating calls (and, as a result, are ingested into the engines). 
• A study to assess dogs' preferences among various brands of dog food. 
• The ability of public opinion polls, especially prior to elections, to accu-
rately gauge public sentiments. (How can a random sample of 1200 provide 
valid information about a potential electorate of about 27 million in 
California?) 
• The statistical validity of a study recently highlighted in the news (e.g., 
children with big feet read better, tall people earn more, married people live 
longer). 
• The estimation of the number of wild animals in a forest through capture-
recapture studies (Section 6.13). 
10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
Statistical tools and methods, as with many other technologies, can be employed 
either for social good or evil.. .all practitioners of statistics... have social obligations 
to perform their work in a professional, competent, and ethical manner. 
—ASA Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice 
10.4.1 The Challenge 
Your employer and/or customer often have a vested interest in your findings. Typical 
examples, some of which we have discussed in earlier chapters, are 
• Disputes between manufacturers or service providers and their customers on 
whether a product or service meets claimed or agreed-upon specifications; see 
Sidebar 10.6. 
• Reports by a government agency, in response to a request by a Congressional 
committee, of the anticipated costs and consequences of proposed 
legislation. 
• Demonstration to regulators by a financial services company of compliance 
with international standards of capital requirements for risk management. 
• Assessment of the performance of a company' s product, perhaps in comparison 
with that of competitors, in making an advertising claim and the appropriate 
wording of the claim. 
• Planning and evaluation of clinical trials to demonstrate the effectiveness (and 
assess the side effects) of a new drug and to obtain regulatory permission to 
market the drug. 

208 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-IOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
• Assessment of claims concerning illegal discrimination in an organization's 
hiring, retention, or compensation practices. 
• Evaluation of the environmental impact of a product or undertaking. 
In some such situations, you may be asked to examine (or refute) another analyst's 
statistical findings. Often you may be working in support of a lawyer, on either side of 
an issue. You may on such occasions feel pressured, either directly or indirectly, to 
skew your findings in a certain direction or simply to bless somebody else's findings. 
ADDRESSING PRODUCT DISPUTES 
It is not uncommon for a customer to claim that a product does not meet specifications 
and for the product manufacturer to dispute the claim. Resolution of such disputes 
frequently hinges on an analysis of all the available data and/or the procurement of new 
data. In Section 5.8.5, we briefly described a situation in which a statistician was called 
upon to serve as a technical arbitrator. Often, however, the statistician does not represent 
a neutral party, but is in the employ of one of the participants to the dispute. 
Statisticians need in such situations to have a thorough understanding of both the 
manufacturer's and the customer's data. Contributing factors for the differences in con-
clusions—in addition to statistical variation and differences in analysis methods—might be 
the manufacturer and customer interpreting the specifications differently, different product 
subpopulations, different measurement techniques or calibration methods, or different test 
environments. 
For example, both the manufacturer and the customer might have data on product life. 
The manufacturer's data might be based on in-house testing that the customer claims does 
not adequately represent the field environment. The customer's data might be from the field 
and the manufacturer might claim that the observed failures were due to improper use of the 
product. To complicate matters further, the manufacturer might have tested units from an 
earlier production period than thai for most of the units shipped to the customer. 
As in most other situations in which statisticians become involved, resolution of this 
problem requires knowledge of both statistics and various other disciplines. One of the 
statistician's responsibilities is to ensure that statistics is used properly and that the 
principles laid out in this chapter are strictly followed. 
It is highly desirable in such cases for the statisticians from the opposing sides to get 
together to review the existing data and, most likely, propose the judicious gathering and 
analysis of further data. This has. in the past, helped diffuse some highly contentious disputes 
and forge a common approach that was then jointly presented to, and eventually accepted by, 
In this section, we discuss general ethical issues that govern your work as a 
statistician, and then elaborate on their relevance to some specific application areas. 
10.4.2 Statisticians' Responsibilities and Guidelines 
The statistician's job frequently resembles that of a lawyer hired to support and often 
argue a particular case—recognizing that the other side is likely engaging their own 

10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
2 0 9 
statistician. Your employer and clients merit strong support. How can you represent 
them most effectively—and still do so with the highest ethical standards? 
To respond to this and other questions, the American Statistical Association 
(ASA) in 1999 developed Ethical Guidelines for Statistical Practice6 to help statis-
ticians make and communicate ethical decisions. These guidelines comprehensively 
address eight areas: 
• Professionalism in our work. 
• Responsibilities to funders, clients, and employers. 
• Responsibilities in publications and testimony. 
• Responsibilities to research subjects. 
• Responsibilities to research team colleagues. 
• Responsibilities to other statisticians or statistical practitioners. 
• Responsibilities regarding allegations of misconduct. 
• Responsibilities of employers, including organizations, individuals, attorneys, 
or other clients employing statistical practitioners. 
A further (and more compact) code of ethical statistical practice was developed in 
2004 by the Statistical Society of Canada.7 It deals with statisticians' responsibilities 
to society, their employers, and clients, and to other statistical practitioners and with 
professionalism. Other statistical societies around the world have similar guidelines. 
The International Statistical Institute (2010) recently revised and updated its 
Declaration of Professional Ethics. It considers "the obligations and responsibilities 
of—as well as the resulting conflicts faced by—statisticians to forces and pressures 
outside of their own performance, namely to and from society; employers, clients and 
funders; colleagues; and subjects." This document enumerates ethical principles in 12 
areas, such as guarding privileged information, avoiding preempted outcomes, and 
protecting the interests of human and animal subjects. 
A key statement in the ASA guidelines is "All statistical practitioners are 
obliged to conduct their professional activities with responsible attention to the 
avoidance of any tendency to slant statistical work toward predetermined outcomes. It 
is acceptable to advocate a position; it is not acceptable to misapply statistical 
methods in doing so." 
The various guidelines have numerous practical implications, some of which 
we briefly consider below. 
Up-Front Avoidance. Ethical problems can often be avoided by early judicious 
action. Before accepting an assignment, strive to determine whether it might create 
potential ethical conflicts. Make your stance clear to your customer (or potential 
employer) at the outset. In the words of the ASA guidelines, "Do not join a research 
project unless you can expect to achieve valid results and unless you are confident that 
your name will not be associated with project or resulting publications without your 
6 www.amstat.org/about/ethicalguidelines.cfm. 
7 http://www.ssc.ca/en/webfm_send/3. 

210 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
explicit consent." Also, make sure your manager is aware of potential ethical 
conflicts. If necessary, consult with your organization's legal staff.8 
Getting the Data. One of your first responsibilities is to help ensure that the data that 
are to be obtained will lead to as complete and fair an assessment as possible. A 
sampling study of a human population, for example, requires careful consideration of 
such issues as sample size, selection of participants (and sampling frame), and how 
questions are worded. In some other cases, assessment of the possible bias and 
precision of measurements and when and where to conduct the study is highly 
important. 
We discuss getting the right data and data quality further in Chapter 11. 
Performing the Analyses. Data analysis requires you to make some subjective 
decisions, not only with regard to the prime analysis methods themselves but also with 
regard to such issues as the handling of missing data and outliers and distributional 
model assumptions. You need to ensure that the data are analyzed completely and 
objectively using the most appropriate and up-to-date statistical methodology. Your 
analysis must be directed at obtaining the most meaningful information possible, 
irrespective of how the chips might fall. You need to ensure that the analysis does not 
"cherry-pick" data or analysis methods to slant the results. On a more technical level, 
you should strive to remove the impact of possibly confounding variables 
(Section 11.5.2) and clearly state which confounding variables were addressed. And 
you need to document and justify any subjective decisions that you have made. 
In some situations—such as the analysis of clinical trials—it is appropriate, and 
even sometimes required, for you to decide upon and document the analysis methods 
in advance of obtaining the data. Unforeseen circumstances, as well as examination of 
the data themselves, occasionally impact and change these initial plans. In such cases, 
you again need to carefully document such changes and their justification. 
Presenting the Results. Just as you need to avoid selecting your analysis methods to 
further a desired conclusion, you need to avoid cherry-picking from your results to 
slant the reported outcome. 
Your presentation of findings, both verbal and written, need to be easily 
understandable to your targeted audience at their level of statistical sophistication. 
Refrain from "snowing" others with statistical jargon and technicalities beyond their 
grasp. At the same time, convey in a clearly understandable manner the key 
assumptions that underlie your analyses and the consequences thereof—as well as 
how the data were obtained. 
Do not expect nonstatisticians to appreciate the statistical limitations of a study 
or to understand important technical subtleties—without these being made explicit. 
For example, 
8 Most large organizations have one or more lawyers on their staff who are experts both in ethical issues and 
in related legal issues. 

10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
211 
• Make clear that the establishment of a statistical relationship in an observa-
tional study cannot be interpreted per se as proof of a causal relationship 
(Section 11.5.1). 
• If you use statistical significance tests, explain what such tests convey. Most 
nonstatisticians do not understand the difference between statistical signifi-
cance and practical importance and the impact of sample size on the results of 
such tests; see the book's ftp site for further discussion and Hahn and 
Doganaksoy (2008, Section 9.8.3) for an example dealing with formulating 
an advertising claim. 
• If you are conducting multiple significance tests, make clear how this increases 
the likelihood that one or more tests might show statistical significance just due 
to chance. 
Occasionally, there is a need to convey unfavorable results. This presents additional 
issues; see Sidebar 10.7. 
CONVEYING UNFAVORABLE RESULTS: DON'T SHOOT THE MESSENGER 
Statisticians need at times to be the bearers of unfavorable or unexpected results. During up-
front evaluations, such as in product design or the initial stages of planning a survey, clients 
often accept potential setbacks or bad news gracefully and are anxious to rectify the 
underlying problems. Matters often become more complex in dealing with a finished 
product or a long-established procedure that might be difficult, expensive, time-consuming, 
or embarrassing to change. This may especially be the case in situations that involve a 
customer or a regulatory agency. Statisticians need to convey the findings in a timely, clear, 
and objective manner, possibly providing suggestions on how to proceed from a technical 
perspective. 
Make the Details Available. You need to make available the details of your 
analyses, including the raw data or links thereto, subject to confidentiality and 
proprietary restrictions. This information should be in a sufficiently specific form to 
allow other statisticians to evaluate, and check, your work. You also need to make 
clear the source(s) of your data, how you went about "cleaning" the data, and how 
you handled missing data and outliers. Such information is often best provided in the 
form of a technical appendix to your reported findings. 
10.4.3 Other Considerations 
We emphasize in this brief discussion ethical considerations that have particular 
relevance to statisticians. In addition, you need to be governed by considerations that 
apply to all professionals, such as revealing possible conflicts of interest, avoiding 
plagiarism, striving to ensure that your name is not being used without your full 

212 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
involvement and consent, protecting confidentiality and classified information (see 
Sidebar 10.8), and giving appropriate credit to others. 
PROTECTING CONFIDENTIALITY AND CLASSIFIED INFORMATION 
Statisticians in business and industry often work with information that is company 
confidential, possibly to maintain a competitive advantage. In addition, those working on 
defense-related projects are often required to work with government classified information 
(after obtaining security clearance). In dealing with official government statistics (discussed 
further in Section 10,4.4), the raw data often need to be considered as highly confidential 
with severe penalties, including prison sentences for violating such confidentiality. In all 
situations, it is your responsibility to know what information is confidential and to fully 
protect such data's confidentiality. 
10.4.4 Official Government Statistics 
Government statisticians provide the facts upon which many political claims and 
decisions are based. As a result, government statisticians, especially at a senior level, 
may be especially subject to political or other pressures to skew official statistics (and 
other findings) to support a particular cause or candidate. Like their colleagues 
elsewhere, they must have the highest level of integrity and backbone to resist such 
pressures.9 Janet Norwood (former Commissioner of the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics) offers the following advice (in a 2006 unpublished presentation), based 
on her firsthand high-level experience: "The best defense against the politicization of 
data has to be the professional quality and the integrity of those who compile our 
statistical information.... The professionals who compile the nation's statistics must 
be courageous enough to insist their own work remains free of political influence; they 
must refrain from participating in political discussion, and they must insist on 
following careful, objective procedures for the manner in which their work in 
compiling the data is carried out."10 
Who can view the data before it is released to the public, and when, is of special 
significance. In part, to prevent pressuring an agency to change the data for political 
purposes, it is important that nobody—even the President and members of 
9 Senior statisticians in the federal government have resigned from their positions to avoid having to 
change statistical procedures in a way that could have politicized the data. 
ιυ Len Cook, former National Statistician of the United Kingdom, adds (in a personal communication): 
"However, based on my experience, the protection of the independence and integrity of official statistics 
needs also to rest on the articulation of good practice, in legislation, protocols or codes, so that it is not 
simply the judgment of the statistician that is seen to be tested at any time of challenge, but the accumulated 
wisdom of legislators, statistical users and leaders collectively." 

10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
2 1 3 
Congress—receives the information until shortly before it is officially reported. 
Statistical agencies in the United States have strict rules to accomplish this, based on a 
policy developed by the Office of Management and Budget. For further details, see 
this book's ftp site. 
Other major ethical and legal issues in gathering and reporting official statistics 
include ensuring confidentiality, privacy, and security. Sidebar 10.9 describes the 
constraints imposed on government statisticians in dealing with these important 
matters in gathering and reporting official statistics and the general manner in which 
such issues are addressed. 
ENSURING CONFIDENTIALITY, PRIVACY, AND SECURITY IN GATHERING 
AND REPORTING OFFICIAL STATISTICS11 
Government statisticians collect and have access to extremely sensitive individual and 
business data in many of the studies that they conduct, such as the decennial census. Nearly 
all of the data must be protected to ensure that the source of individual observations cannot 
be determined when released to the public. Government agencies are usually successful in 
collecting sensitive data, even in voluntary surveys, because respondents are assured and 
understand that their information will be used only for summary purposes and is protected 
from individual release. 
Some federal statistical agencies such as the Bureau of the Census and the National 
Agricultural Statistics Service have long operated under legislated privacy authorizations. 
These allow the agencies to withstand requests for release of identifiable data under the 
Freedom of Information Act, court subpoenas, and Congressional committee requests. The 
2002 Confidential Information Protection and Statistical Efficiency Act extended such 
confidentiality requirements to all statistical agencies. Snider (2009) describes how the U.S. 
Census Bureau protects the confidentiality of respondents' information while releasing as 
much high-quality data as possible. This requires modification of the data in a way that 
provides reliable aggregate information, while ensuring that individual responses are not 
identifiable. Many states have similar regulations covering the data collected by state 
agencies. 
A second privacy aspect is prevention of inadvertent release of an individual's or a 
company's data in summary statistics. Most agencies, for that reason, use a "zero tolerance'" 
approach in publishing information on data cells that provide absolute or approximate size 
information for any entity or organization. Thus, they go to great lengths to identify and 
suppress summary data cells that are based on data reported by a very few entities or that are 
so dominated by one entity that a knowledgeable party could closely surmise the data for that 
entity. See the book's ftp site for further details. 
A complete issue (Volume 27, Number 1-2) of the Statistical Journal of the Interna-
tional Association of Official Statistics (2011) was dedicated to the topic of "Statistical 
Ethics and Official Statistics." 
1' This sidebar is based upon material prepared by Rich Allen. 

214 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
10.4.5 Clinical Trials 
Ethical considerations are of particular concern to statisticians working for pharma-
ceutical companies preparing dossiers for approval of a drug by a regulatory agency based 
upon the results of clinical trials. This is due to the critical human benefits and risks often 
associated with such trials and the fact that humans, as well as animals, are often the direct 
subjects of the study. Such concerns are a key reason for requiring statisticians to 
document the proposed analysis methods prior to the conduct of a clinical trial. In 
addition, important ethical questions arise in the selection of human participants in such 
trials, in the incentives offered for participation, and in the information that such subjects 
receive prior to, during, and at the conclusion of such trials. 
Whether or not to terminate a clinical trial in response to early findings is 
especially wrought with ethical concerns. If a treatment appears to be beneficial, 
members of the placebo group should reap the benefit as early as possible, thus 
generally ending the study. If the treatment appears to be ineffective, and especially if 
it has potentially harmful side effects, it should be discontinued. 
Unfortunately, the right decision is often far from clear at a given point in time. 
A treatment might have a mild bad effect initially but could be beneficial in the long 
run, at least for some patient groups. Early termination of a trial results in the loss of 
data concerning the impact of an extended treatment and can result in what would 
eventually be regarded as a faulty decision if all were known. 
A report by the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (2009) 
discusses this difficult topic and deals with 
• Protecting research participants. 
• Conduct of clinical trials. 
• Ensuring objectivity in research. 
• Disclosure of clinical trial results. 
This report calls for timely communication of study results, regardless of the outcome, 
and that these be reported in an objective, accurate, balanced, and complete manner, 
including a discussion of the limitations of the study. Where differences of opinion or 
data exist, the parties are asked to try to resolve disputes through honest scientific 
debates. These specifications are especially cogent in light of the fact that statisticians 
in the pharmaceutical industry are typically called upon to assess their own 
company's products. 
For further discussion of ethics and stopping rules in clinical trials and other 
technical details, see Nguyen and Fan (2009). For some more general discussions, see 
Chapter 14 (on addressing ethical issues in designing clinical research studies) of 
Hulley et al. (2006) and Chapter 17 (on ethics in research involving human popula-
tions) of Aschengrau and Seage III (2008). 
10.4.6 Serving as an Expert Witness 
Statisticians are often called upon and paid by one of the parties to be expert witnesses 
at—or to prepare information for—courtroom trials. As Kadane (2008) makes clear, 

10.4 ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 
2 1 5 
such witnesses still have the responsibility "to tell the truth, and nothing but the truth" 
and not just "those truths that help my client." 
In such situations, you must first determine if there is any possible conflict 
of interest in your serving as an expert witness for the client due, for example, to 
a prior association with, or employment by, the other party. Absent a conflict of 
interest, you need to have a frank exchange with your client both preceding your 
involvement and after you have closely examined all the relevant data (as well as 
at various times along the way). At the first of these discussions, you need to 
make clear your professional ethical obligations and be sure, before signing on, 
that your client understands and is agreeable to them. Kadane (2008) cites an 
example of a situation in which he was expected (and refused) to testify that 
sampling could not possibly be relied upon. In the second discussion, you need to 
clearly lay out your technical assessment of the issues, including pointing out 
weaknesses of your client's, as well as the opponent's, case from a statistical 
perspective. 
The climax of your involvement in a courtroom situation will likely occur 
when—after preparing a written report of your findings (which in a judicial court or 
quasi-judicial proceeding in the United States would be made available to the other 
side), testifying, and being asked friendly questions by your side's attorney—you will 
be vigorously cross-examined by the opposing attorneys. It is at that stage that you 
will be especially challenged to support your client's case in a manner that remains 
fully ethical and not lose "your cool" in the process. In so doing, note Easton's (2006) 
comments and recommendations concerning ethical issues associated with giving 
testimony: 
• Be truthful. 
• Answer questions asked. 
• (You have) no duty to answer questions not asked. 
• Be willing to testify and base overall opinions on all analyses done. 
• What analysis you choose not to do is an important issue. 
• (You have) no duty to represent the other side's case—that is their 
responsibility. 
Fienberg (1997) comments on "how the statistician can attempt to protect against the 
most pernicious aspects of the game associated with the use of expert witnesses in the 
adversarial process." 
10.4.7 Further Reading 
Deming (1972) was among the first to highlight the importance of statistical ethics. 
Subsequent discussions include articles by Lesser (2001) and Vardeman and Morris 
(2004), an invited address by Bacon (2000), and chapters in the books by Utts (2005, 
Chapter 26) and Spurrier (2000, Chapter 15). 
The ASA's Committee on Professional Ethics continues to address issues 
pertinent to statisticians, including the posting of case studies, general comments on 

216 
CHAPTER 10 ON-THE-JOB STRATEGIES: COMMUNICATION, PUBLICIZING, AND ETHICS 
statistical ethics, and links to numerous relevant articles and presentations; see Amstat 
News (2009c) and the committee's web site.12 
10.5 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• The ability to communicate at all levels is an essential requirement for success 
for applied statisticians. To contribute effectively, you need to gain a thorough 
understanding of, and adjust to, the application environment. You must listen 
carefully, and skillfully avail yourself of all opportunities for communication, 
including project meetings, written reports, and informal contacts. Also make 
sure that your clients and your management are, and remain, fully informed of 
your progress and accomplishments. 
• You need to build your skills in communicating orally and to tailor your 
comments to your audience. In a formal presentation, you need to develop well-
targeted charts that support, rather than compete with your comments, and 
acquire an effective style of verbal presentation. 
• You can publicize statistics (and make others aware of you) by teaching short 
courses and workshops, writing and transmitting newsletters, and building on 
casual questions and informal contacts. 
• Like other professionals, statisticians need to have the highest ethical standards. 
This requires refusing to be pressured by employers or customers and following 
practices that apply to all professionals, such as ensuring privacy and proper 
handling of confidential and classified information. The American Statistical 
Association, the International Statistical Institute, and various other profes-
sional groups have developed formal guidelines of ethical conduct for statis-
ticians. Special challenges are presented in the gathering and reporting of 
official government statistics, in dealing with clinical trials, and in serving as an 
expert witness. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. Prepare and deliver to your class, or other designated audience, a presentation 
on a technical topic (possibly your thesis subject), in a manner that is 
understandable and motivational to an audience that has little training and/ 
or interest in statistics, and is concerned only with the practical significance of 
your findings. 
2. Consider the same scenario as in the preceding question, but now prepare a 
written report. 
12 http://www.amstat.org/committees/ethics/index.html. 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
2 1 7 
3. 'Describe specific (different) examples of situations in which it would seem 
appropriate and inappropriate to communicate electronically. 
4. Consider a person whom you would like to impress with your professional 
credentials and whom you may encounter on brief occasions. Develop your 
elevator speech— addressed to that person (and similar persons). 
5. Imagine that you are at a party and are introduced to a leader of a company with 
which you might like to interview. The conversation, perhaps with your help, 
turns to your career goals and your relevant training, experience, and personal 
qualifications. What would you say? 
6. Prepare some examples that you might use at a party to demonstrate the 
vitality, excitement, and value of statistics. 
7. Propose an experimental study to assess the claim that birds mistake jet engine 
noise for mating calls or to assess dogs' preferences among various brands of 
dog foods. 
8. Explain how a random sample of 1200 can provide valid information about a 
potential electorate of about 27 million people in California. 
9. Your company would like to claim in their advertising that their washing 
machine removes x% more stains than that of a competitor. How would you go 
about getting valid data to potentially support such a claim? What analyses 
would you conduct on the resulting data? What issues might you expect to 
encounter and how might these be addressed? 
10. In connection with the preceding example, assume you have collected and 
analyzed the appropriate data. How might you use different assumed results to 
word potential advertising claims? 
11. * You have been asked by a lawyer to be an expert witness in a case involving 
alleged discriminatory practices. We suggest assessment and discussion of 
potential ethical issues before agreeing to pursue a project. How might you go 
about making such an assessment in this situation and what are some of the 
points/questions that you might raise in your preliminary discussion? 
12. *Seek a recent example in the news in which a decision was made, or might 
have been made, concerning the early termination of a clinical trial. What 
decision was made (or might have been made) and what was its justification? 

CHAPTER 
GETTING GOOD DATA: 
A KEY CHALLENGE 
11.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER1 
The most important information about any statistical study is how the data were 
produced. 
—David Moore 
Rational decisions require transforming data into useful information. Your 
analyses, however, can be only as good as the data upon which they are based. Given 
good data, it is frequently possible to extract much meaning from graphical displays 
and simple analyses. But even the world's most sophisticated statistical analysis 
cannot compensate for or rescue inadequate data. 
Statisticians expend much effort, often with limited payoff, in trying to 
understand and to compensate for poor data. DeVeaux and Hand (2005) provide a 
detailed discussion of different types of "bad data," including numerous examples, 
and claim that common wisdom puts the extent of the total project effort spent in 
cleaning the data before doing any analysis to be as high as 60-95%. 
Examples of the undesired consequences of inadequate data abound. Some-
times, these are evident, such as a recent report that Japanese official records show 
numerous 150 year-olds and one 200 year-old! At other times, faulty data are far from 
obvious, especially to the casual observer. 
Having the right, or at least the best possible, data is critical to the successful use 
of statistics. Bad data are often a consequence of the practice, discussed earlier, of 
statisticians being called in only after the data have been gathered—instead of 
involving them in the planning of the study and the data gathering. One reason for this 
unfortunate practice is that training in statistics has traditionally focused principally 
on the analysis of data with little attention given to their effective procurement and 
This chapter is in places more detailed and technical than the other chapters of this book. It deals with a 
fundamental topic that is not sufficiently emphasized in most curricula and one to which even beginners 
should be exposed. It also provides a further taste of some practical problems in which statisticians are 
engaged. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
219 
11 

2 2 0 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
handling.2 Typically, it is assumed that the right data are just there. This, sadly, is 
hardly ever the case. As a statistician, one of your major responsibilities will be to 
ensure that the best possible data are obtained—subject to practical constraints—to 
address the problem at hand. 
Different situations call for different kinds of investigations. The type of inves-
tigation depends on the goal of the study and the nature of the underlying processes and/or 
populations. In addition, the choice depends on a variety of practical factors—such as 
economic and timing limitations and, often, ethical and legal considerations. 
We briefly describe four different types of investigations that involve the 
gathering of data: 
• Designed experiments. 
• Census and random sampling studies. 
• Systems development studies. 
• Observational studies. 
We focus especially on observational studies and on systems development studies since 
these are not discussed prominently in many introductory courses, yet arise frequently in 
practice. We then turn to a major theme of this chapter—hints for getting the right data. 
We conclude by proposing a disciplined step-by-step process for data gathering, 
illustrating this with a study to assess the reliability of a newly designed washing machine. 
We should emphasize at the outset that investigations typically involve an 
iterative learning process (see Box et al., 2005) and therefore are multiphased. One 
might, for example, start with an observational study (using readily accessible 
existing data) and use the results to subsequently conduct a planned experiment or 
frequently a series of such experiments. 
11.2 DESIGNED EXPERIMENTS 
A designed experiment is a planned study in which one employs randomization 
methods to systematically assign various treatments or conditions to a group of 
objects or participants so as to evaluate the impact of potential explanatory variables 
on one or more measured response variables. 
A well-known early application of a designed experiment, stemming from the 
1920s, by Sir Ronald Fisher dealt with determining whether a lady drinking tea could 
distinguish between the milk being placed in the cup before as opposed to after the tea 
is poured; see Salsburg (2001). 
Some more recent examples of designed experiments are to 
• Determine the effects of such factors as construction methods, material 
properties, usage and environment, and levels of maintenance on pavement 
durability. 
2 The planning of investigations is addressed in specialized courses on topics such as the design of 
experiments, sampling studies, and the planning of clinical trials. These, however, are typically advanced 
elective courses and frequently devote considerable time to the associated data analyses (such as analysis of 
variance for designed experiments), as opposed to the practical details of planning the investigation to get 
the best possible data. 

11.3 CENSUS AND RANDOM SAMPLING STUDIES OF HUMAN AND OTHER POPULATIONS 
221 
• Compare the effectiveness of different "skip tracing" strategies for locating a 
missing debtor. 
• Evaluate the impact of product strength, bottle size, and variability between 
batches on drug stability. 
• Assess the effectiveness of different layouts and content alternatives on hits 
registered for a web page advertisement. 
The design of an experiment involves specifying for each planned observation the 
experimental conditions to be applied, as well as a variety of other details, such as material 
or subject selection, testing sequence, and the measurement of response variables. 
Some designed experiments involve comparative investigations. For example, 
pharmaceutical studies often call for evaluating the performance and safety of a 
new drug versus that of a placebo, or some other appropriate reference (such as an 
existing drug). Participants in the experiment are randomly assigned to receive either 
the new drug or the placebo/reference drug. Such studies are regarded as the gold 
standard in evaluating a new drug or medical device. 
Because designed experiments are controlled, they can generally be set up so as to 
avoid biased results. It should be noted, however, that even controlled studies are not 
immune to misleading conclusions. One reason for this is the inability of such studies to 
always provide a realistic representation of the real-life situation of interest.3 
There are numerous texts on design of experiments (often abbreviated as DOE). 
Popular books, tending to focus on industrial applications, include Box et al. (2005), 
Mason (2003), and Montgomery (2009). Various other books address the use of 
designed experiments in the social sciences (e.g., Maxwell and Delaney, 2004; 
Kirk, 1995) and in other areas such as marketing and service applications (Ledolter 
and Swersey, 2007). Articles by Coleman and Montgomery (1993) and Hahn (1977) 
focus on the steps involved in designing an industrial experiment. 
11.3 CENSUS AND RANDOM SAMPLING STUDIES 
OF HUMAN AND OTHER POPULATIONS 
Designed experiments deal principally with the study of processes. Other applications 
(and ones upon which much traditional work in statistics is based) deal with 
characterizing a finite identifiable collection of units or population4 with regard to 
one or more variables of interest. 
" Meeker and Escobar (1998b) provide examples dealing with accelerated stress life testing of products 
(a specialized type of controlled study). In one example, the results led the experimenters to predict a high 
5-year product reliability for an automobile air conditioning system. Yet the subsequent field experience 
resulted in a substantial fraction of units failing within 2 years. Physical evaluations showed that the field 
failures were caused by the drying out of materials during the seasons when the air conditioner was not in use. 
This long-term dormant condition was excluded from the continuously conducted accelerated stress life test, 
either because the experimenters did not recognize it or because of time limitations in conducting the study. 
Deming (1975) emphasized the difference between enumerative studies, which deal with characterizing a 
population, or finite identifiable collection of units, and analytic studies, in which one typically uses the results 
from a current process and environment to draw inferences about a future process and environment. Estimating 
the proportion of defective units in a production lot, based on a sample from that lot, is an example of an 
enumerative study. The washing machine example, presented later in this chapter, illustrates an analytic study. 

222 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
Populations of interest are often specified groups of humans, such as all 
residents aged 18-45 of the U.S. State of Nebraska on July 15, 2011. Other 
populations may consist of objects, such as all the cars of a particular model that 
came off a specified assembly line on a specified day. 
Further examples of studies of nonhuman populations are 
• Estimating the percentage of defective units in a manufacturing lot. 
• Estimating the error rate in bills sent to customers. 
• Evaluating the delay time in processing orders. 
• Conducting surveys on agricultural output, air traffic volume, or new housing 
starts. 
Studies might entail a census of all members of a specified population or, more often, 
an appropriately selected random sample that is to be used to draw inferences about a 
population (sometimes referred to as "survey sampling"). 
11.3.1 Census Studies 
A census involves obtaining (or attempting to obtain) information on one or more 
characteristics for every member of a specified population. 
In some applications, it is easy to conduct a census. This may often be the case if 
the population is small. Sometimes it is important to obtain a complete enumeration of 
a population. We generally would not want to limit measurements of a potentially life-
threatening property of an aircraft engine to a sample of engines. In other cases, a 
census might be mandated by law, such as the census of the U.S. population conducted 
every 10 years. 
11.3.2 Random Sampling Studies 
If you don't like sampling, next time you have a blood test, tell them to take it all. 
—CBS News (quoted by Katherine Cramer Walsh) 
In many situations, it is impossible, impractical, or uneconomical to conduct 
a census study. Measuring the size of movie and television audiences provides a 
comparison of a sampling and a census study—see Sidebar 11.1. 
MEASURING AUDIENCE SIZES: MOVIES VERSUS TV 
Surveys of movie and television viewing in the United States are similar in that weekly 
results of the most viewed productions are identified and widely publicized in the media. The 
types of data upon which these results are based are, however, quite different, 

11.3 CENSUS AND RANDOM SAMPLING STUDIES OF HUMAN AND OTHER POPULATIONS 
2 2 3 
For movies, the results generally come from box office receipts from theaters nation-
wide, and these are used to infer audience size. In this case, we are dealing with a census 
study since the entire population is presumably being surveyed. Because no (deliberate) 
sampling is involved, it would be wrong to construct a statistical confidence interval to 
contain the true, or actual, number of viewers in the population. These are known exactly— 
at least if all movie theaters responded and did so correctly (if they did not, it would be highly 
questionable to treat those that responded as a random sample). A census study is 
appropriate in this example since information has already been acquired about every 
member of the population for other purposes (i.e., sales of movie tickets). 
In contrast, in television viewership surveys, the results may be based on a random 
sample of say 7000 households from the population of approximately 110 million house-
holds with television sets in the United States. The results from this sample are then used to 
draw inferences about the number of viewers of different programs in the population from 
which the sample has been selected. The random sampling process introduces statisiica) 
uncertainty that is typically quantified by a statistical confidence interval. 
Statisticians have developed scientific methods for conducting sampling studies 
of defined populations using random sampling. These are directed at providing 
unbiased estimates of quantities of interest, together with their estimated margins 
of statistical error (often expressed in the form of confidence intervals). Public 
opinion polls are sampling studies that generally use some form of random sampling 
(Section 4.6.1). 
Texts on how to conduct random sampling studies and the analysis of the 
resulting data include Kish (1995), Lohr (2010), Groves et al. (2009), and Scheaffer 
et al. (2005). These books describe both different random sampling methods (e.g., 
simple random sampling, stratified sampling, and cluster sampling) and common 
pitfalls to avoid in conducting such studies (also see Sidebar 11.2). Asher (2010b) 
considers some of the challenges in collecting data in sampling studies in general 
and in the underdeveloped world in particular. Lampone (2009) discusses ensuring 
high-quality data from online studies. 
SOME NONSAMPLING PITFALLS IN STUDIES OF HUMAN POPULATIONS 
The following are some frequently encountered flaws that need to be addressed in many 
census and sampling studies: 
• "Loaded' wording of questions either purposefully or inadvertently; see Churchill 
and lacobucci (2010, Chapter 8). 
• Nonresponsebi as—those whochoosetoparticipatedifferiniheiranswers from those 
who do not. 
• Differences between the sampling frame and the target population, as in the Literary 
Digest example (Section 4.6.1). 
• Changes over time, as in the 1948 Presidential preelection poll (Section 4.6.1). 

224 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
Such noasampling flaws add, usually nonmcasurable, uncertainty to the results of both 
census and random sampling studies. For random sampling studies, this further uncertainty 
is in addition to the statistical uncertainty due to sampling variability. Helping to avoid or 
minimize the impact of nonsamp] in g errors is one of the statistician's major (but not always 
recognized) responsibilities in planning census or sampling studies. 
11.4 SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT STUDIES 
Statisticians, especially those in business and industry, frequently become involved in 
investigations that cannot be neatly classified as designed experiments, census or 
sampling studies, or observational studies (to be discussed in the next section)—or at 
least are not given much consideration under these headings—but still require the 
judicious gathering of data. 
For lack of a better title, we will refer to these as "systems development studies" 
since they typically lead to the development or validation of a system. They are often 
action-oriented in that they result in a specific action or decision that relies heavily 
upon analysis of the gathered data. Such studies frequently allow at least some degree 
of control over the data acquisition process. 
The following are some examples of systems development studies for which the 
gathering of data is required: 
• Estimating the reliability of a newly designed product. Frequently, testing is 
conducted on a new product, prior to going into high-volume manufacture, to 
demonstrate that the product meets customer reliability requirements. We 
provide an illustration dealing with a washing machine in Section 11.7.2. 
• Many web sites utilize automated advisory systems that recommend selected 
products and/or services to users. Such systems are generally built from 
appropriately gathered data about the user's recent browsing patterns and 
purchases, or from purchases by other users with "similar" profiles. 
• Many modern products (e.g., automobiles, medical scanners, locomotives, 
aircraft engines, and power generation equipment) are equipped with sensors 
that enable real-time data gathering on the state of health and the operating 
environment of the product. Such information is used for proactive servicing 
(e.g., maintenance scheduling, parts replacement, etc.) and automated moni-
toring for impending failures. Appropriate data need to be gathered to establish 
(and validate) the rules that are used in these systems. 
• Control charts signal when a measured product property is no longer in 
statistical control and corrective action is needed.5 Appropriate data on past 
product performance are required to establish and validate the system. 
In Section 11.7.1, we propose a five-step data gathering process that has particular 
applicability to systems development studies. 
5 Control charts had their origin in industry, but today are used in more general applications, such as 
tracking response rates to a weekly government survey or studying the monthly variation in retail prices of a 
product. 

11.5 OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES 
2 2 5 
11.5 OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES6 
The combination of some data and an aching desire for an answer does not ensure 
that a reasonable answer can be extracted from a given body of data. 
— John Tukey 
Designed experiments and random sampling studies are characterized by 
randomization in the selection of test subjects or objects. Such studies also aim to 
control identified potentially important explanatory variables other than those under 
investigation. They are highly desirable if the goal is to establish unambiguous cause 
and effect relationships—as is often the case. 
In many applications, it is, however, impossible, impractical, or even unethical 
to conduct a randomized study. Obvious examples are assessing the effect of 
cigarette smoking or of alcohol abuse on one's health, or evaluating the impact of 
alternative forms of punishment for certain crimes on the incidence of future crimes. 
In developing a credit score to differentiate between desirable and undesirable future 
applicants for credit based upon the payment performance of past credit applicants, 
it would be informative to grant credit to some randomly selected poor-risk 
applicants—so as to obtain a sample that is representative of all future applicants. 
However, the costs due to defaults from such poor-risk applicants make it unlikely for 
a business to be willing to include them in the study. 
Because randomized studies are often not feasible, a frequent alternative is to 
conduct a so-called "observational study." Rosenbaum (2002) defines an observa-
tional study as "an empirical investigation of the effects caused by a treatment, policy, 
or intervention in which it is not possible to assign subjects at random to treatment 
or control, as would be done in a controlled experiment." Such studies often involve 
the analysis of data that were obtained principally for purposes other than to conduct 
analyses thereon. Flanagan-Hyde (2006) provides a brief overview of observational 
studies and Hulley et al. (2006) describe their application to clinical studies.7 
Advances in computer technology and in the instrumentation for taking 
measurements have significantly enhanced the ability to generate massive data-
bases—and, therefore, the opportunity and urge to conduct observational studies. This 
has led to the emergence of the field of data mining. As its name suggests, data mining 
typically involves tapping into existing databases to gain understanding or, as a 
minimum, to establish clues that can be pursued by further research. 
As we will try to show, improper analyses of data from observational studies can 
lead to erroneous conclusions. But observational studies, in addition to being feasible 
in many situations for which randomized studies are not, are often also less expensive 
to conduct than randomized trials. Furthermore, observational studies when analyzed 
6 This section benefited greatly from inputs provided by contributing author Carol Joyce Blumberg and by 
Judy Hahn. 
http://www.medpagetoday.com/Medpage-Guide-to-Biostatistics.pdf provides a comprehensive summa-
ry, directed at workers in the field, of how research is classified in clinical studies and the applicable 
terminology. 

2 2 6 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
appropriately—and their findings reported responsibly—can lead to useful (even if 
often not definitive) findings and open the door to important further investigation, 
sometimes using designed experiments or random sampling studies. To achieve 
success, it is again essential to pay careful and early attention to the data gathering 
process—even though what one can do in an observational study is more limited and 
passive than in a controlled study. 
11.5.1 Limitations of Observational Studies 
Evidence of statistical correlation in an observational study is NOT per se indicative 
of a cause and effect relationship. 
The limitations of observational studies in establishing cause and effect 
relationships are illustrated by the examples in Sidebars 11.3 and 11.4. The first of 
these examples deals with a study resulting in an ambiguous finding. It did, however, 
succeed in narrowing the focus of subsequent investigations. The second example 
illustrates a situation in which the analysis of data from an observational study led to 
incorrect conclusions. 
PINPOINTING THE SOURCE OF COMPRESSOR FAILURES 
Compressors Tor a new line of residential air conditioners experienced an excessive number 
of failures in the first year following the introduciion of a new product line by its 
manufacturer. There was an urgent need to understand the root cause of the problem so 
that steps could be taken to mitigate its adverse effects and, ultimately, to eliminate me 
failure mode altogether. The available data revealed that nearly all failures occurred in one 
particular region of the country, which was characterized by high humidity and high air 
conditioner usage. Most of the units installed in this region were manufactured at the same 
plant (one of three plants that built the product). It was not clear from this observational study 
of the available data to what degree the source of the problem was heavy usage of the air 
conditioners in a high-humidity environment or the manufacturing plant at which the units 
were built. This question was not fully resolved until a randomly selected sample of units 
from each of the plants was subjected to an accelerated life test under various operating 
regimes and then closely examined. The resulting analyses indicated that die major culprit 
was the more severe operating conditions. This led to a redesign that made the product more 
robust to heavy usage in a high-humidity environment. 
THE IMPACT OF HORMONE REUACEMENT THERAPY 
The Nurses Health Study was an observational study, started in 1976, with a questionnaire to 
170,000 married registered nurses in II states of the United States; approximately 122,000 

11.5 OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES 
2 2 7 
nurses responded. Follow-up questionnaires were subsequently mailed to these study 
participants every 2 years. This provided extensive information on incidence of diseases 
and health-related issues, including hormone use. 
Grodstein et ai (1997), on the basis of analysis of data from 1976 to 1994 from this 
observational study, noted that "on the average, mortality among women who use post-
menopausal hormones is lower than among nonusers." Hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), in general, appeared to have a number of beneficial effects, including helping 
prevent heart attacks and strokes. This, at that time, led to a large number of women to turn to 
such therapy. 
Subsequently, a statistically conn-oiled study involving the random assignment of either 
hormone replacement therapy or a placebo to participants was conducted. This resulted in 
findings contrary to those of the earlier study with regard to the ability of hormone therapy to 
combat heart attacks, strokes, and other diseases. 
The earlier incorrect conclusions were attributed to the fact that, unlike the subsequent 
randomized study, the comparison of results from the observational study was between 
women who voluntarily chose to go on hormone replacement therapy versus those who did 
not. It seems, in retrospect, that those women who chose the therapy might also have been 
healthier and led a better lifestyle than those who did not.M irrespective of the specific 
reason, the inherent differences between the two groups of women, rather than their use of 
hormone therapy, led to what is now felt to be the initially incorrect conclusions in the 
interpretation of the results of this observational study. 
11.5.2 Lurking Variables: A Key Culprit 
The HRT example illustrates the important point that evidence of statistical 
association in an observational study should not be mistaken as evidence of a cause 
and effect relationship between the explanatory variables (X) and the response 
variables (Y). In fact, Ymight be the cause of X, rather than the reverse. Or, frequently, 
one or more intermediate, or lurking, variable(s) (Z) that are themselves related to 
bothX and Kare the true causal variables, but have been excluded from the analysis— 
often because their values have not been recorded and might not be known. 
Sometimes, Z might not even be suspected to impact Y. In that case, X serves merely 
as a surrogate for the actual causal variable(s) Z. In the HRT example, Y was the 
incidence of heart attacks and strokes, X was the use of HRT, and Z might be 
measurements of the individual's general health and lifestyle. Using common 
statistical terminology, the variables X and Z, in this situation, are said to be 
"confounded." 
A simpler example is the association between a child's foot size (X) and reading 
ability (Y). In that case, the lurking variable (Z) is likely to be the child's age. Some 
further examples are provided in Sidebar 11.5. 
Another study (Herman et al, 2008), using methodology aimed at analyzing observational studies as if 
they had been conducted in the same manner as randomized experiments, attributed the discrepancy in 
conclusions between those obtained by Goldstein et al (1967) and those in the subsequent statistically 
controlled study to be due to differences between the two groups of women (i.e., the women who used 
hormone replacement therapy and the women who did not use such therapy) in the distribution of the time 
since menopause and in the distribution of the length of follow-up. 

228 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
CONFUSING CORRELATION WITH CAUSE AND EFFECT: SOME FURTHER 
EXAMPLES 
Schield (2006) noted that, according to UN estimates for 2005-2010, the death rate in 
the United States (8.4 per 1000) was 80% higher than that in Mexico (4.7 per 1000). 
The United Stales fared even worse when compared with Ecuador (4.3 per 1000) and 
Saudi Arabia (2.7 per 1000). So what do these statistics mean? They should not 
necessarily be interpreted as establishing that the health care system in the United States 
is inferior. One important lurking variable in these comparisons is the age distributions 
within each country, widi the United States having an appreciably older population. 
(This lurking variable might be addressed by making separate comparisons over different 
age groups, assuming the availability of such data; there might, however, be added lurking 
variables.) 
Some further examples of (the many) media headline-grabbing stories that tend to 
suggest cause and effect relationships based on observational studies are 
• Married people live longer. 
• People who spend considerable time watching TV weigh more. 
• Tall people earn more money. 
See Joiner (1981) and Andrade (2007) for further discussion and additional examples and 
Weisberg (2010) for some added thoughts on bias and causation. 
The cause and effect relationship that is frequently concluded or implied by 
such examples may, of course, be correct—and there may not be any important 
lurking variable. The problem is that often the potential lurking variables are not 
identified, and when they are, have not been measured.9 
11.5.3 Combating Lurking Variables 
As suggested in the example in Sidebar 11.5, the impact of lurking variables 
can sometimes be neutralized by statistical analysis. Thus, if both the cause 
variables (X) and the true lurking variables (Z) were included as explanatory 
variables for the response variable (Y) in, say, a statistical regression analysis, an 
unbiased estimate of the impact of X on Y is obtained. This requires identifying 
lurking variables, measuring them, and including them in the analysis as 
covariates. The last step—the statistical analysis—is usually the easiest to 
implement. The major challenge is generally in identifying and measuring 
lurking variables. And even if you feel that you have been able to do so, you can 
never be quite sure that there are not some added lurking variables that you may have 
missed. 
9 One might also suspect that some reporters who believe they have a hot story may be less than highly 
motivated to dig deeper and uncover what might be a less interesting explanation. 

11.5 OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES 
2 2 9 
11.5.4 Some Other Limitations of Observational Studies 
Limited Variability. Another problem that is sometimes encountered in observa-
tional studies, especially in manufacturing, is that there is limited variability 
(sometimes referred to as restriction of range) in the explanatory variables (i.e., the 
A"s) in the data, thereby impeding the ability to establish meaningful relationships. 
Say, for example, that you are using data from a manufacturing process to relate 
in-process variables (e.g., raw material properties, processing conditions, ambient 
temperature, and humidity) to end-of-line product performance. Specification limits 
may exist on each of these process variables that restrict their variability. This makes it 
difficult to establish statistically significant relationships, especially from small 
samples, and might lead some to incorrectly conclude that such variables are 
unimportant—even over a broader range—in impacting performance. In a somewhat 
similar vein, humans at one time believed that the earth was flat. 
Inadequate Understanding. Since those who conduct observational studies are 
often not directly involved in the process that they are studying, they may not fully 
understand it. This can lead to faulty conclusions; see Sidebar 11.6. 
SIDEBAR 
1 I 
,U 
AN EXAMPLE EROM INDUSTRY 
An anaiyst desired to quantify the relationship between the amount of catalyst added to a 
chemical reaction and the viscosity of the manufactured material. Theory suggested thai 
increasing the amount of catalyst reduces the viscosity of the material. The analyst used 
available data on past manufactured batches to construct a scatter plot of the two variables. 
The plot (see Figure 11.1) suggested, surprisingly, that there was little association between 
the two factors. 
0.66 —f 
0.60 
H 
1
40 
45 
50 
Catalyst charge (lb) 
Figure 11.1 Scatter plot of viscosity versus amount of catalyst added. 

2 3 0 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
Further discussion revealed that the process engineers had adjusted the amount of 
catalyst added to a manufacturing batch based on early readings from a sample taken from 
that batch, so as to achieve the target viscosity. These adjustments compensated for various 
other variables that affected viscosity (e.g., incoming raw material quality, reactor tem-
perature, etc.) and succeeded in keeping the final viscosity relatively constant from batch to 
batch, This masked the true relationship between catalyst addition and viscosity. Only the 
final data (i.e., after adjustments had been made) on viscosity and catalyst addition were 
available; the initial measurements and subsequent adjustments were not recorded (and, 
therefore, could not be included in further statistical analysis). 
Overall Quality of Data. The data that are often available from observational 
studies—at least without proper advance planning—are sometimes deficient in 
various other ways. Typical problems are inconsistent, inaccurate, and incomplete 
data recording and storage; see DeVeaux and Hand (2005). Of course, this can also 
happen in designed experiments, when those involved in the data collection and 
storage have not been well trained or fail to follow instructions. 
11.5.5 Making the Best of Observational Studies 
Observational Studies for Prediction. Much of the preceding discussion dealt with 
the sometimes questionable use of the results of observational studies to explain how 
some explanatory variables impact one or more response variables, that is, to establish 
"cause and effect." 
There are other situations for which the major goal is to predict future 
performance, rather than to establish cause. The use of credit scoring models 
constructed from past data to determine to which future applicants to grant credit 
and how much credit to extend, using legally permissible predictor variables, provides 
an example. Another illustration is that of college admissions officers using obser-
vational data to relate students' high school grades and test results to college grades in 
order to predict performance at their institutions, and then using the resulting models 
to make admissions decisions on future applicants. 
Models constructed from observational data can be effective in providing 
useful predictions as long as the structure of past relationships holds into the future, 
irrespective of whether or not the true causal variables have been included. This 
requires that the population or process for which predictions are to be made and the 
underlying environment remain unchanged from—or, in many practical situations, 
stay reasonably close to—those of the observational study; see Sidebar 11.7. 
THE PROBLEM OF DIFFERING POPULATIONS 
A frequently encountered problem in using data from observational studies to make future 
predictions is that the population or process concerning which one wishes to make 

11.5 OBSERVATIONAL STUDIES 
231 
predictions differs in some important ways from the one from which data are available. In the 
credit scoring example, the population of applicants for whom you are likely to have data— 
namely, those past applicants who were previously accepted—is, as already suggested, 
differeni from mat of the future ''walk in the door" applicants for which the model is to be 
used (see Hand, 2001). 
Similarly, the pasi data on college grades available to the college admissions officer is 
limited to those students who were accepted by the college and chose to attend. This 
is clearly a differeni population from that of all future applicants for which the model 
was developed,l0 
Observational Studies as Research Catalysts. Well-conducted observational 
studies often suggest patterns or provide clues that—when followed up by more 
rigorous investigations—can lead to important findings. An early example is an 
investigation by Dr. John Snow that identified the Broad Street pump as the source of 
the cholera epidemic in London in the 1850s, resulting in action by the authorities to 
end the outbreak (Tufte, 1997, Chapter 2). 
A later example is the research in the 1950s and 1960s (itself conducted, based 
upon some earlier limited study) that linked smoking to lung cancer; see Sidebar 11.8. 
SMOKING AND LUNG CANCER 
Various observational studies during the middle of the past century suggested a strong 
relationship between cigarette smoking and lung cancer. These studies did not show 
definitively that smoking "caused'' lung cancer. One could always argue that smokers 
engage in less healthy behavior and/or are exposed to more dangerous environments than 
nonsmokers and that diese rather than smoking are the true "cause" factors. In fact. Sir 
Ronald Fisher argued that those with a genetic predisposition to lung cancer could also have 
a genetic predisposition to smoking (Salsburg, 2001). 
The findings from these observational studies, however, spurred on scientists to conduct 
more definitive research, including both physical evaluations and animal studies.1' Based on 
such research, the causal link between smoking and lung cancer (as well as various other 
diseases) is now widely accepted; see Freedman 0999) for further discussion and 
references. 
Leveraging Observational Studies. Observational studies might not provide ideal 
data, but, as we have seen, they are often all we can get, especially early in an 
Similar problems can arise even in randomized experiments on humans aimed, for example, at evaluating 
the effectiveness of a proposed new drug. Those willing to participate in such studies and adhere to their 
regimens over time may be a select group that differs from the general population for which the drug is 
intended. 
It also led to additional observational studies to assess Fisher's argument further, including studies on 
monozygotic twins, only one of which smoked. 

2 3 2 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
investigation, and can provide important clues. Also, statisticians have developed 
schemes for leveraging such studies to provide the best possible analyses. This has 
resulted in various approaches, such as case-control and cohort studies, that are used 
extensively especially in medical and social science applications. Detailed discussion 
of these methods is beyond the scope of this book. However, we provide a brief 
description in Sidebar 11.9. 
CASE-CONTROL AND COHORT STUDIES 
Case-Control Studies. In a case-control study, a group of individuals, the case 
group, with certain characteristics (e.g., diseased) is compared with a control group that 
does not possess such characteristics {e.g., not diseased) but is otherwise essentially 
equivalent in all other ways that can be measured. Then it is determined whether the 
exposure of interest, for example, some element of the environment, is more common in 
the case group than the control group. The impact of other explanatory variables that can 
be identified and measured, for example, age and gender, is presumably removed by 
comparing individuals from the diseased and nondiseased groups that are similar with 
regard to such factors. 
Getting a control group that is "otherwise equivalent" to the case group can be difficult. 
It may, however, in some cases, such as the study of some rare diseases with long latency 
periods, be the best way to proceed. 
Cohort Studies. In a cohort study, an initially "good" sample of individuals or objects is 
selected and tracked over lime with regard to bom its "deterioration" and characteristics that 
might be related to that deterioration. Thus, in a medical study, initially disease-free 
individuals are observed over a reasonably long period of time. Measurements are taken 
both on the degree to which such individuals develop the disease under study and on 
characteristics of the individuals and of the environments in which they operate. These 
characteristics are then related statistically to disease onset and/or severity. A disadvantage 
of cohort studies is the long time thai mey typically take to conduct and the associated 
expense. 
Focus on Data Gathering. The essential key to conducting the preceding studies 
successfully, as well as for correcting for identified and measured lurking variables, is 
again early and careful planning of the data gathering process. We cannot adjust for a 
lurking variable that has not been measured. And we cannot compare groups that are 
equivalent in all respects except for the characteristic under study (as in a case-control 
study) if we have not taken the measurements that allow us to establish such 
equivalent groupings. 
Much progress has been made, over recent decades, in gaining recognition 
of the importance of conducting investigations in a statistically sound manner. DOE 
has become a buzzword in business and industry; approval of a drug requires a 
statistically based comparative study; and statistically based public opinion polls 
are the norm. 

11.6 HINTS FOR GETTING THE RIGHT DATA 
2 3 3 
In contrast, the need for statistically directed advance planning for observa-
tional studies has traditionally received less attention, with some notable exceptions, 
such as in much medical research. Flanagan-Hyde (2006) characterized observational 
studies as "the neglected stepchild in the family of data gathering." One reason for this 
is that, as already noted, obtaining data so as to subsequently conduct analyses that 
might provide insights is generally not considered as one of the prime purposes of the 
underlying process or operation. 
In summary, in observational studies, as much as in randomized trials, up-front 
development of a sound data gathering process—keeping in mind the analyses that 
may be conducted on the resulting data—is imperative. We provide some specific 
hints for doing this in the next section. 
11.6 HINTS FOR GETTING THE RIGHT DATA 
Some have characterized the statistician's role as that of a "data detective." When the 
needed data are not there, the detective is operating without any clues. 
This is especially the case for some observational studies. Often analysis of 
existing data is the consequence of some unanticipated, and frequently undesirable, 
event—such as inconsistent or poor product performance, an environmental issue, or 
an unanticipated epidemic. Because the underlying databases were often constructed 
with other goals in mind, such as to meet financial, legal, or management reporting 
requirements, they often fail to contain much of the information needed to address the 
specific questions of interest in the study. 
In this section, we make some specific suggestions for improved data gathering. 
Our comments are especially applicable, but not limited, to observational studies in 
business and industry. Sidebar 11.10 indicates some guidelines for government 
agencies. 
In 2002 (based upon a iaw passed the preceding year), the U.S. Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) was asked to provide policy and procedural guidelines to federal agencies 
for ensuring and maximizing the quality, objectivily, utility, and integrity of information 
(including statistical information) disseminated by such agencies. At the same time, 
individual agencies were directed to issue their own guidelines for implementation. The 
procedures that were developed have been posted by OMB11 and on the web sites of 
individual agencies, such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the National 
Institutes of Health. 
2 http://www.whitehouse.gov/omb/fedreg_finaIJnformation_quality_guidelines. 

234 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
11.6.1 Strive to Obtain Information on Key Variables 
and Events 
Obtaining information on key variables and events that may impact the process under 
study is essential to successful data analysis. Recording information on potential 
lurking variables in observational studies will allow these to be included in the 
analysis and improve the chances of establishing meaningful relationships, as in the 
examples that follow. 
Determining the Root Causes of Field Failures. When unanticipated product 
failures occur in the field, the manufacturer wants both to address the immediate 
problem (by, for example, selective recall) and to gain a rapid understanding of the 
cause(s) of the problem to avert its future occurrence. As suggested in Section 2.2.4, 
this frequently calls for analyses of the available data. To maximize the likelihood that 
such analyses will succeed, provisions need to be made to routinely and consistently 
obtain and record data on such factors as 
• Parts identification and manufacturing history. 
• Processing conditions during manufacture. 
• Product usage. 
• Product performance measurements over time. 
• Specifics of product failures. 
The gathering of such information can be considered as insurance. You hope that you 
will not need to use it—but it is prudent to obtain it in case you do. 
Developing a Credit Scoring Model for Consumer Loan Approval. Your ability 
to develop a useful credit scoring model for future consumer loan approval, based 
upon the performance of past loans and their characteristics, requires the gathering 
of information on variables that may be predictive of loan repayment performance. 
This calls for identifying potential predictive variables—such as past payment 
history, applicant family earnings, and other existing debts—and then developing 
and implementing a system for consistently recording such information from 
applicants. 
Assessing the Impact of Processing Conditions on Product Performance. One 
often wants to use data from a manufacturing process to relate potentially important 
in-process variables or ambient conditions to end-of-line product performance. This 
requires recording information on such variables as humidity, operator, and raw 
material lot. 
Many unplanned events typically take place during product manufacture. 
Machines may be upgraded, test methods are changed, voltage surges occur, labor 
strikes take place, and so on. Such events may impact the performance and quality of 
the resulting product. Their occurrence needs to be conscientiously recorded, together 
with relevant qualitative and quantitative information on them. 

11.6 HINTS FOR GETTING THE RIGHT DATA 
2 3 5 
Note on Controlled Studies. In controlled studies, the attained values of the 
controlled variables, such as a pressure setting, often differ somewhat from those 
that were planned. The actual values should be recorded and used in the analysis. In 
addition, there may be important uncontrolled variables, such as temperature and 
other environmental conditions, which also impact the results but had not been 
included formally as variables in the study. Advance plans should be made for these to 
be measured and recorded so that they can also be included in the analyses. 
11.6.2 Strive to Obtain Continuous Data 
A fundamental and frequent issue is to obtain continuous, as opposed to attribute or 
go/no-go, measurements. Measurements on a continuous scale have greater infor-
mational value than their attribute counterparts; see Sidebar 11.11. 
FLAMMABILITY TEST STUDY 
Plastic material used to make parts for automobiles, computers, and other products must 
pass a flammabilky test prior to acceptance. The standard test for this situation is to burn five 
specially produced bars from each manufactured lot. If the flame on at least four of these five 
bars extinguishes in less than 5 seconds, the manufactured lot is deemed to meet tlamma-
bility requirements. 
This test was adequate for a materials acceptance test for individual lots. However, it was 
severely limited in providing information for new product development, such as in evaluating 
the flammabihty characteristics of alternative materials and For comparing processing 
methods. The simple pass/fail results on five bars often were insufficient to detect small, but 
potentially important,differences, Toobtain improved precision, it was initially suggested that 
the number of bars to be tested be increased to 30. This would have been quite expensive and 
would have resulted in an unreasonably increased load on the quality assurance lab. 
Itwasdecided instead to stay with the five samples and to conduct each test until burnout, 
or up to 20 seconds, whichever came first. The time to burnout for each sampled unit was 
then recorded and subsequent evaluations were based upon these observed times. The new 
measurements added only slightly to the cost and were much more informative in comparing 
the ftammability of different materials than the previous binary data. 
11.6.3 Strive to Avoid Systematically Unrecorded 
Observations 
Unplanned data are often deficient due to systematically unrecorded observations. 
These arise, for example, 
• When information is recorded on failed units (or on people with some disease) 
only and little is known about unfailed units (or about healthy people). 
• Information is available on only those units of a product that are still under 
warranty. 

2 3 6 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
• Observations felt to be outliers are excluded from the data, or changed, 
without recording that this has been done and the rationale for the exclusion 
or change.13 
In some instances (e.g., information available only on units under warranty), what can 
be done to restore systematically unrecorded observations is limited by practical 
constraints. In many situations, early planning of the data to be gathered can avoid 
subsequent ambiguities. 
11.6.4 Strive for Precise Measurements 
An important part of planning to get good data is paying attention to the quality of 
the measurements that are obtained. Instruments used for measurement might 
have varying levels of precision, may be biased if not calibrated, and may drift 
over time. It is therefore important at the outset, to evaluate and, if needed, improve 
the precision and/or accuracy of the measurements and to establish procedures 
for periodic assessment and recalibration; see Hahn and Doganaksoy (2008, 
Section 3.4). 
11.6.5 Strive for Consistent and Accurate Data Recording 
Missing Values. In addition to unrecorded observations (Section 11.6.3), unplanned 
data may contain missing values (i.e., missing results on some variables for some 
observations). Some general guidelines for addressing these are 
• Understand the reasons for a value (or group of values) being missing (and, if 
possible and appropriate, restore them to the database). 
• Use this understanding to help minimize the future occurrence of missing 
values. 
• Appropriately handle in the statistical analysis those missing values that still 
remain (Gelman and Hill, 2006, Chapter 25). 
Missing values could be due to poor communication of what needs to be 
recorded or indifferent attitudes by those responsible for taking or recording the 
measurements or many other reasons. Such situations can likely be avoided with good 
planning and management support. 
In other situations, the fact that values on some observations are missing 
might relate directly to their values. For example, a reading might be incorrectly 
omitted because it is outside the measurement range. Such situations call for clear 
recording of this fact and for treating the observation as censored in the subsequent 
analysis (See O-ring example in Section 4.5.2). 
Missing values may also be due to some completely extraneous reason, such as a 
malfunction of the measuring equipment. This reason also needs to be recorded. 
13 If the outliers are due to recording errors, they most likely warrant exclusion or correction. If they are real, 
they might be providing important information that needs to be factored into the analysis of the data. 

11.6 HINTS FOR GETTING THE RIGHT DATA 
2 3 7 
Inconsistent Data Recording. When good recording practices are not specified, 
data may be recorded haphazardly, or even arbitrarily. For example, 
• Some people are more conscientious than others in taking measurements and 
recording information. 
• Different individuals might interpret a checklist differently. For example, classi-
fication of the condition of a part on a scale from 1 to 5 might be interpreted 
differently by different operators, especially if there are no detailed instructions on 
how to classify a part. 
• Different individuals might without further instructions use different 
recording conventions. A recorded date of 2/8 generally designates February 
8 in the United States, but means August 2 in many other countries. Confusion 
between conventional U.S. and metric measurement systems has led to serious 
blunders. 
Inconsistencies can be minimized by developing and documenting data re-
cording protocols and by appropriate training. Instructions should be as specific and as 
user-friendly as possible. If, for example, the condition of a part is to be classified on a 
numerical scale (say from 1 to 5), it might be helpful to have photographs that 
illustrate specific parts that meet each of the values on the scale. 
Avoiding Errors in Data Recording Some errors in data recording are clearly 
obvious (e.g., a date of 15/32 or a male pregnancy) and can often be corrected, 
especially if they are scrutinized in a timely manner. Other observations may be 
suspect (e.g., a temperature of 60°F in January in Schenectady, NY), but not obviously 
incorrect. In other situations, errors in recording the observation (e.g., a moved 
decimal point, a missing minus sign, and failure to denote that an observation is 
censored) might not be readily discernible. 
Careful planning and documentation of the data recording process and periodic 
audits can help to minimize data recording errors. 
Data Collection Instrument Considerations. There are various mechanisms for 
collecting data. These range from manual entry on paper forms to automated instru-
mentation, and include such vehicles as data-entry screens and touch-tone telephones. 
Modern data collection instruments can refuse to accept invalid data entries (e.g., 
ineligible dates) and might provide user prompts to promote entry of valid data. 
The sooner that data-entry errors or inconsistencies are detected, the greater is 
the likelihood that they can be corrected. One of many arguments against manual 
recording on paper forms is that there is often significant elapsed time between 
when the data are recorded and when their consistency and credibility are evaluated 
(if evaluated at all). 
Data Cleaning. Careful up-front planning should help to reduce the onerous and 
time-consuming task of data cleaning, but does not generally eliminate its need 
altogether. Data cleaning efforts are typically twofold: the detection of (possibly) 
erroneous recorded data and their (to the best of your ability) correction. 

2 3 8 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
Some hints for effective data cleaning are provided in Sidebar 11.12. 
SIDEBAR 
SOME HINTS FOR EFFECTIVE DATA CLEANING 
• Check numbers for consistency and credibility; for example, 
- Are dates (say of various steps in the production of a product) in a logical sequence? 
- Do the individual recorded values appear reasonable? 
- Do the data, when taken together, make sense (e.g., do all the ingredients of a mix 
add up lo 100%)? 
• Check for missing information or codes such as 0 or 999 that might be used to 
designate missing information (and ensure that such codes are not taken literally in 
the analysis). 
■ Plot the data (e.g., in histograms and scatter plots) to identify outliers that might 
suggest recording errors (such as incorrect decimal places). 
• Query the data recorders to obtain explanations for, possibly, incorrect values; correct 
identified errors. 
• Perform the preceding checks as soon as possible after the data have been recorded to 
minimize the impact of memory loss (or data dumping), 
• Automate as much of the preceding as possible. 
In summary, 
• Data cleaning is a reactive process. The best strategy is to avoid or minimize the 
need for it by establishing, documenting, and providing training early on of 
complete, consistent, and easy-to-follow data gathering procedures. 
• A disciplined, thorough, and timely data cleaning effort can help to detect and 
correct remaining errors. 
• Dubious or missing data may still remain—despite your best efforts. Some of 
these may be addressed in the statistical analysis (e.g., methods for handling 
missing data). We also suggest that you conduct analyses under various, 
possibly extreme, assumptions with regard to such dubious or missing 
data—and assess the sensitivity of your conclusions to such assumptions. 
11.6.6 Resist Purging of Potentially Useful Data 
Data are sometimes purged when no longer felt to be useful for their original purpose. 
Information on credit payment history may be removed when applicants close their 
accounts. Some data are routinely removed from the database after a specified elapsed 
time. Such data purging might be a holdover from earlier days when data storage 
capabilities were more limited than they are now. 
Care needs to be exercised to retain data that, though no longer of interest with 
regard to their original purpose, might still be useful in future analyses. 

11.6 HINTS FOR GETTING THE RIGHT DATA 
2 3 9 
11.6.7 Strive for Compatibility and Integration of Databases 
In many studies, the relevant data may be spread over different data sets or databases 
with different formats that do not readily "talk" to each other. In developing a credit 
scoring model payment history, demographic data, and information on past 
credit performance may all reside in different databases. Traceability may be impeded 
by people who have common names; who have changed names or sometimes use 
nicknames; who on some occasions use their middle names, at other times use only a 
middle initial, and at still other times exclude their middle name altogether; or who 
have changed addresses. 
Government statisticians dealing with official statistics need to be especially 
facile in understanding and integrating various types of data—including primary data 
(such as from several surveys and geospatial data) and secondary data (such as 
administrative records and synthetic or model-based data) in order to provide policy 
makers sound and real-time knowledge to make informed and/or evidence-based 
decisions. 
Traceability is also a key concern in medical studies that involve tracking 
patients whose records are likely to be stored in various facilities (and where 
integration of such records may raise confidentiality issues). 
All of this makes it important to ensure early on that the data sets that are to be 
used in a study are as compatible as possible. Whenever feasible, the best solution is 
generally to have a single common database. When this is not possible or practical, 
provisions need to be made to help ensure compatibility of different databases. 
11.6.8 The Challenge 
Throughout this chapter, we urge early and detailed planning of the data gathering 
process. This is often easier said than done for a variety of reasons: 
• Added Cost and Delayed Payoff: Obtaining good data almost always costs 
money. Moreover, the benefits for getting the right data may be realized only in 
the distant future (and may be difficult to quantify), while the costs are incurred 
now (Section 9.3.4). 
• Added Bureaucracy: The data gathering process adds bureaucracy and can 
slow down operations. If repair staff have to conduct inspections beyond those 
needed for an immediate repair, to document their work, and to send back failed 
parts for engineering assessment, they have less time to do repairs. 
• Diversity of Ownership: In many situations, the data analyses are sponsored 
and undertaken by parties different from those in charge of the data gathering 
process. The needed communication between all involved—that is required to 
ensure that data on the correct variables are collected using proper data 
collection methods—does not always take place. 
You need to be keenly aware of such obstacles and work to overcome them. This 
requires you to be sensitive to the perspectives of plant managers or managers of 
service departments whose priorities may be different from yours and to understand 
their possible misgivings. You must carefully think through what you request, 

2 4 0 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
consider how it may impact and possibly interfere with operations, ensure that it is 
practical and doable, and be able and ready to justify it. 
Keep in mind that the quality of data is generally more important than the 
quantity. A relatively small but carefully selected and well-documented sample may 
often meet your needs—recalling the comment in Section 7.7.6 that the actual, rather 
than the relative (to the population), size of a random sample is what counts in 
determining statistical precision.14 
11.7 A PROCESS FOR DATA GATHERING 
We now propose a five-step process for getting the right data. We then illustrate these 
steps by applying them to the assessment of the reliability of a newly designed 
washing machine, an example of a systems development study. Details will vary for 
different types of applications, such as observational studies. We feel, however, that 
the procedure that we propose, although it will require some modification to fit any 
given situation, has much general applicability. 
Steiner and MacKay (2005) present a somewhat similar process, which they 
characterize as QPDAC (question, plan, data, analysis, and conclusion). 
11.7.1 The Proposed Five-Step Process 
Step 1: Define the Problem. The first step calls for seeking a clear definition of the 
purpose of the study. This includes your determining 
• The specific questions to be addressed by the study, by when, and with what 
precision. 
• The type of actions that will be undertaken as a consequence of the findings. 
• The specific population(s) or process(es) about which it is desired to draw 
conclusions. 
• The data that you would gather if you could readily obtain whatever data you 
wanted (and how you would use such data)?15 
Step 2: Evaluate the Existing Data. The second step involves your getting a good 
understanding of what is already known and what is not known. It includes 
• Gaining an appreciation of the process or operation under study and its 
intricacies. 
14 There are some exceptions. One example arises in assessing a highly unusual, but very important, event, 
such as the occurrence of a rare disease or an infrequent, but costly, product failure. In this case, you might 
want to strive to use the entire population to estimate the occurrence probability, get detailed information on 
each of the diseased or failures, but obtain such information on only a random sample of the healthy or 
unfailed members of the population. 
15 We thank our former colleague, Wayne Nelson, for suggesting this question. 

11.7 A PROCESS FOR DATA GATHERING 
241 
• Understanding and possibly analyzing the existing data and reporting the 
findings. 
• Identifying gaps and inadequacies in the existing data in addressing the needs of 
the study. 
Sometimes this step reveals that the existing data allow one to respond 
satisfactorily to the question(s) at hand. Often the available data are found to be 
insufficient. Gaining an understanding of the inadequacies of the existing data may 
also provide an initial appreciation of the opportunities and limitations for future data 
gathering. 
Step 3: Understand the Data Gathering Opportunities and Limitations. The next 
step is to obtain a detailed understanding of the opportunities and methods for 
acquiring needed added data and the associated costs and limitations. This includes 
your determining 
• The nature of the data that can be gathered and how such data would be 
obtained. 
• The errors in measurement associated with obtaining future data. If the 
measurement error appears to be unacceptable, work is required to reduce it. 
• The practical considerations and limitations in gathering new data, such as 
budget and timing restrictions and facility limitations. 
• The "representativeness" of the data that can be gathered and the limitations on 
the more general inferences that might be drawn from such data. Identification 
of these limitations can help in their mitigation and in gaining a realistic 
understanding of what can and cannot be determined from further data 
gathering. 
Step 4: Plan the Data Gathering and Analysis. You are now ready to prepare a 
specific plan for data gathering. This involves working with the project team to 
• Develop the details of the proposed data gathering process. The nature of these 
varies depending upon the type of study. In some situations, such as the washing 
machine example, it includes specifying the test conditions and operational 
environments for the study as well as the sample size and sample selection 
method. In other cases, it might call for the design of an experiment or of a 
random sampling study or the specifics of gathering data from an existing 
database. For some studies, it also includes specifying the measurements to be 
taken, as well as the data collection instruments and the data recording process 
to be used. 
• Outline at least the general nature of the analyses to be performed on the 
resulting data. In some cases, such as many clinical trials, the details of such 
analyses need to be provided. 
• Assess the statistical properties of the proposed plan to determine whether 
the inferences that are to be drawn from the results will have a sufficient degree 

2 4 2 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
of statistical precision to meet the goals of the study. Revise the plan if 
necessary. 
• Establish any further required specifics of the testing protocol and the oper-
ational details. 
• Develop a pilot study (i.e., a miniature version of the proposed study) to identify 
and remove possible bugs in the plan. 
The proposed data gathering process is presented to and evaluated by the 
project leadership and by management and may be amended based upon their 
assessments. 
Step 5: Monitor, Clean Data, Analyze, and Validate. Depending upon the 
situation, you may be directly engaged in the study implementation and data 
gathering. As a minimum, you need to be sufficiently on top of things to ensure 
that the data gathering plan is meeting its goals and that unforeseen issues are 
addressed speedily. This will require you to 
• Monitor the implementation of the study to ensure that the specified data 
gathering process is understood and being followed, to identify any unantic-
ipated problems, and to speedily amend the plan if this appears necessary. 
• Ensure needed data cleaning. Most of the effort up to this point has been to get 
the best possible data so as to minimize the required data cleaning. The degree to 
which this is feasible depends upon the nature of the study. Significant data 
cleaning is still likely to be required, especially for observational studies. 
• Conduct a preliminary analysis and possibly subsequent interim analyses of the 
data and speedily feed back the results to all concerned. Amend the data 
gathering process if this is suggested by the initial analyses; this is especially 
important in clinical studies in which the health of humans may be at stake. 
• Perform the "final" data analyses and report the findings. We will not elaborate 
further here—this is what most books and courses in statistics are about. 
• Propose added data gathering for further validation or extension of the findings 
and/or to monitor future performance (or to launch the next phase of the study). 
11.7.2 Application to Washing Machine Example 
A manufacturer has designed a new washing machine. It provides customers with 
useful new features, such as devices for sensing and adjusting for different types of 
fabrics and for varying degrees of soiling to give a better wash. Various design changes 
were made to improve reliability by addressing some previously discovered failure 
modes. A particular concern is to ensure that these improvements and other changes, 
or interactions between them and existing features, do not introduce new failure 
modes. 
High reliability (i.e., failure-free operation over the life of the product) is an 
important customer concern and a key criterion in deciding which brand to buy. Many 

11.7 A PROCESS FOR DATA GATHERING 
2 4 3 
potential buyers consult consumer magazines'6 to obtain information on quality, 
reliability, and other features of a product versus those of competitors. 
The manufacturer wishes to validate that the new design has an acceptable level 
of reliability (e.g., at least 80%) over a 10-year lifetime. To meet the production 
schedule, the desired validation needs to be completed within an elapsed time of 6 
months (plus a short time for pilot testing). 
Appropriate data need to be gathered to assess the reliability of the new design 
and to ensure that it meets requirements (and if not, to act accordingly). In addition, it 
is desired to establish an ongoing process to obtain timely and relevant updated 
information about the reliability of the machine immediately after manufacture and 
during field use. 
Step 1: Define the Problem. The manufacturer wishes to show with 95% confidence 
and within an elapsed testing time of 6 months (preceded possibly by a 1-month pilot 
study) that the new machine meets or exceeds the following reliability goals: 
• 95% reliability during the first year of operation. 
• 90% reliability during the first 5 years of operation. 
• 80% reliability during the first 10 years of operation. 
Reliability is defined as the washing machine requiring no repair or unusual servicing 
over the specified time period. 
If the reliability goals appear to be met, full-scale production will proceed. If the 
test reveals any problems, the results should provide information about such problems 
to help design engineers correct these in a speedy manner. 
The population of interest is the approximately 6 million washing machines to 
be built over the next 5 years. Thus, the ideal (and obviously unattainable at this time) 
information would be knowledge of the 10-year reliability performance for each of 
the 6 million future units—and information on the nature and root causes of any 
failures that might take place. 
Step 2: Evaluate the Existing Data. To assess the reliability of the new design, an 
understanding of the changes from the previous design is needed. Engineering 
analyses and design reviews were conducted to assess the degree to which the design 
changes addressed past reliability problems and their potential for introducing new 
failure modes. The statistician participated in the reviews. 
Three potentially useful sources of existing data were identified: 
• Results of in-house testing on the previous design. The component and 
subassembly testing on the previous design was similar to that to be conducted 
on the new design, except that improved physical evaluation methods and 
16 Such magazines typically base their evaluations on information obtained from a sample of past 
purchasers of the product and/or testing a typically small number of units of the product. In either case, 
the results are likely to come from units from early production, providing the manufacturer further 
motivation to ensure high quality and reliability from the start. 

244 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
instrumentation are now available. Systems testing on assembled previous 
design washing machines had also been performed. 
• Field data on previous designs. The data identified some failure modes that had 
not been caught by the earlier in-house testing and allowed quantification of the 
field reliability of the previous design, subject to the limitations of the data. It also 
permitted an assessment of how the field reliability of the previous design differed 
from that estimated from in-house test data at the time of product launch. 
• Results from some initial component and subassembly tests for the new design. 
Analysis of the available data led to the following conclusions: 
• The earlier design failed to meet current reliability goals. The need to correct 
previous reliability problems was one of the reasons for the redesign. 
• The component and subassembly tests, taken together with the failure modes 
and effects analysis (FMEA), indicated that the new design should eliminate or 
mitigate the reliability problems encountered in the previous design. One newly 
introduced failure mode was discovered during early testing and was corrected 
by some further redesign. 
The major missing needed information is on the performance over time of the fully 
assembled (new design) washing machine in the use environments. 
Step 3: Understand the Data Gathering Opportunities and Limitations. Infor-
mation on system reliability can be obtained through testing assembled washing 
machines using in-house testing facilities. Such testing involves use-rate acceleration, 
that is, using the product (much) more frequently than in normal operation; see 
Doganaksoy et al. (2007). By running washing machines continuously (with only short 
breaks between usages to allow the machines to cool down), it is possible to simulate 3.5 
years of product life in each month of testing, and 21 years of field operation in 6 months, 
assuming, conservatively, four washes per week in normal use.17 
It was also determined that, with good instructions and a precise definition of 
what constitutes a failure, time to failure can be measured precisely. In addition, a 
measure of the degree of product degradation (and therefore an estimate of how much 
longer an unfailed unit would be expected to run before failing) could be obtained 
from disassembling various critical parts of unfailed washing machines and mea-
suring the wear on them. 
Thirty-six stands are available to conduct such testing. Three prototype 
production lots, involving about 30 machines each, had been manufactured and were 
available for testing. A fourth prototype lot was to be built in about 3 months. 
Budgetary provisions had been made for conducting such tests over a 6-month period 
(plus a short time for pilot testing). 
The statistical analyses likely to be conducted on the system test results 
assume that 
17 A more sophisticated evaluation would take the probability distribution of product usage into consid-
eration in assessing actual product usage and evaluating product reliability. 

11.7 A PROCESS FOR DATA GATHERING 
2 4 5 
• Units from the four prototype lots are from the same "population" (at least with 
regard to their reliability) as those from high-volume production over the 
forthcoming 5-year period. 
• Time to failure is determined by operating cycles of product usage, and not by 
elapsed time.18 
• A "harsh" field operating environment can be realistically simulated by 
in-house testing. 
All concerned were apprised of these assumptions and the importance of making the 
study as broad as possible. (This resulted in increasing the number of prototype lots to 
four, instead of the one lot that had originally been suggested.) 
Step 4: Plan the Data Gathering and Analysis. Based upon the previously gathered 
background information and discussions, the following data gathering plan and 
analysis was proposed to the project leader and (after some amendments) to 
management: 
• A test program, calling for running washing machines with a full load of 
soiled towels, mixed with sand, wrapped in a bag to accentuate moisture, is to 
be performed. This is the "harsh" environment referred to previously. In 
particular, 
- Select 12 units at random from each of the three initial prototype lots and place on 
test. 
- After 3 months, remove from the test four randomly selected unfailed units from each 
of the three lots, and disassemble these to obtain degradation measurements. Place 12 
randomly selected units from the fourth prototype lot on test to replace the removed 
units. 
- Continue testing for 6 months from the start of the test program. 
- Replace each failed unit with a randomly selected unit from the prototype lot from 
which the failed unit came. 
- Obtain parts degradation measurements on all units removed from test. 
• The following major analyses are to be performed on the results of the study: 
- Statistical Evaluation: Estimate 10-year reliability and associated lower 95% 
confidence bound using standard statistical procedures for such data; see Meeker 
and Escobar (1998a). Conduct various more detailed analyses, as appropriate. 
- Physical Evaluation: Conduct physical evaluations of all failed units to understand 
the root causes of failure and act thereon.19 
• Assessment of statistical properties of the proposed plan. This involves an 
evaluation (using simulation or advanced statistical methods) of the statistical 
This would be an incorrect assumption if, for example, corrosion were a significant failure mode. 
It is also frequently useful to conduct such evaluations on a sample of unfailed units. Such evaluations 
might show one or more impending failure modes. Also, they might provide a useful comparison with failed 
units, giving insights into what has been done right in the design and manufacture of the product. 

2 4 6 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
uncertainty that is anticipated from an analysis of the resulting data and an 
assessment of whether the proposed plan provides the desired level of statistical 
precision. 
• Development of test protocol and operational details. These include 
- A definition of product failure. 
- A plan for the weekly evaluations of the state (i.e., failed or unfailed) of all test units. 
- A data recording process geared to entering data rapidly in a computer file established 
for this purpose. 
- A process for operators to obtain and record degradation measurements. 
- A procedure for immediately notifying the responsible engineer of all failures and the 
details thereof. 
• Pilot study. An initial run of three washing machines (one from each of the three 
initial production lots) is to be conducted over a period of 1 month to identify 
possible bugs in the proposed study and to permit these to be addressed. 
Step 5: Monitor, Clean Data, Analyze, and Validate. The statistician is to review 
the implementation of the test initially and monitor it periodically thereafter, paying 
particular attention to the quality of the data being gathered. Special consideration is 
to be given to any missing or questionable data. Particular attention is to be given to 
ensuring that the failure times on failed units and the running times on still functioning 
units are recorded accurately. 
Preliminary analyses are to be conducted 1 week, 1 month, and 3 months after 
the start of the testing and the findings reported to all involved. A final analysis is to be 
conducted and reported after 6 months. 
In light of the previously identified limitations of this study, special attention is 
to be given to validating the results. Specifically, 
• A random sample of 6 of the 36 test units is to be continued on test for up to an 
additional year to identify long-life failure modes and to gain improved 
reliability estimates (especially for longer lifetimes). 
• An additional 100 washing machines randomly selected from prototype 
production are to be given to selected company employees who were expected 
to be heavy users, under the condition that they record usage, that periodic 
inspections be allowed for up to 5 years, and that all malfunctions and 
observations on performance be reported immediately. Ten of these machines 
are to be randomly selected to be returned for teardown and further evaluation 
after 3 months. Another 60 randomly selected washing machines are to be 
installed in laundromats and similarly monitored. 
• Six more washing machines are to be randomly selected each week from 
production. Five of these are to be life tested for 1 week under the previous 
testing regimen; the remaining unit is to be tested for 3 months. The results are to 
be compared with those from earlier tested units both to assess whether the 
production units maintain the previously established reliability performance 
and to provide early warning when this is not the case. 

11.8 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
2 4 7 
• A process was developed and put in place for rapidly capturing, analyzing, and 
feeding back to responsible engineers and management information on all 
failures. 
11.8 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Any statistical analysis can be only as good as the data upon which it is based. 
Careful advance planning of the data gathering is often a statistician's most 
important (and often insufficiently recognized) contribution. The earlier the 
statistician becomes involved in the study and in planning the data gathering, 
the better. 
• A designed experiment is a planned study in which one employs randomization 
methods to systematically assign various treatments or conditions to a group of 
objects or participants so as to evaluate the impact of potential explanatory 
variables on one or more measured response variables. Randomized controlled 
trials are the gold standard in evaluating a new drug or medical device. 
• Random sampling (and census) studies are typically conducted to characterize a 
defined population with respect to one or more variables of interest. Public 
opinion polls are well-known sampling studies that generally use some form of 
random sampling. 
• Systems development (or action-oriented) studies, such as in reliability testing, 
typically lead to the development or validation of a system and generally result 
in a specific action or decision that relies heavily upon analysis of the gathered 
data. Such studies frequently involve at least some degree of control over the 
data acquisition process. 
• It is often impossible, impractical, or even unethical to conduct a randomized 
study and one is limited to observational studies on existing or forthcoming 
data. Such studies cannot provide definitive cause and effect conclusions due to 
the existence of often unmeasured, and possibly unidentified, lurking variables, 
which, in fact, might be the true explanatory variables. When such lurking 
variables are believed to be known and measured, they can and generally should 
be included in the analysis. 
• Observational studies, when analyzed appropriately—and their results reported 
responsibly—can lead to useful findings and open the door to important further 
investigation. Case-control and cohort studies are two approaches, used 
extensively in medical and social science applications, for leveraging obser-
vational studies to provide the best possible analyses. 
• Observational studies can also be effective in predicting future outcomes (under 
comparable conditions). 
• We provide the following hints for getting the right data: 
- Strive to obtain information on key variables and events. 
- Strive to obtain continuous data. 

2 4 8 
CHAPTER 11 GETTING GOOD DATA: A KEY CHALLENGE 
- Strive to avoid systematically unrecorded observations. 
- Strive for precise measurements. 
- Strive for consistent and accurate data recording. 
- Resist purging of potentially useful data. 
- Strive for compatibility and integration of databases. 
• We propose the following five-step process for data gathering: 
- Define the problem. 
- Evaluate the existing data. 
- Understand the data gathering opportunities and limitations. 
- Plan the data gathering and analysis. 
- Monitor, clean data, analyze, and validate. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. *In discussing questionnaire construction, we asserted that the phrasing of 
questions can impact the results. Provide an example of how alternative 
phrasings of a question (e.g., concerning the imposition of a new tax) can 
impact the findings. Then suggest (seemingly) neutral phrasing. 
2. Presidential elections in the United States are based upon an electoral college 
of 538 delegates selected by a statewide winner-take-all system in most of the 
50 states and the District of Columbia. As a consequence, the (winning) 
candidate with the highest number of electoral college votes will not neces-
sarily be the one with the most total actual votes (as was the case in the 2000 
election). Most public opinion polls typically report the estimated percentage 
of the total actual vote, rather than the estimated electoral college vote, for 
each candidate. Propose a process for using the results of a national public 
opinion poll to project the electoral college winner (including an estimate of 
statistical uncertainty). Why do you think pollsters often do not provide this 
kind of estimate? 
3. * Provide one or more examples of situations in which the media descriptions 
of the results of an observational study have suggested cause and effect 
relationships. What are some other possible explanations for the observed 
relationships in these studies? 
4. We state that "models constructed from observational data can be effective in 
providing useful predictions as long as the structure of past relationships holds 
into the future, irrespective of whether or not the true causal variables have 
been included." Explain and justify this statement. 
5. Comment on some of the things that you might suggest in both the data 
gathering and the data analysis in the hormone replacement therapy study or 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
2 4 9 
some other specific example to enhance the ability to uncover cause and effect 
relationships. 
6. In the flammability evaluation described in Sidebar 11.11, it was decided to 
stay with five samples but conduct each test until burnout or 20 seconds, 
whichever came first. How would you estimate the average and standard 
deviation of the distribution for time to burnout from the resulting data? 
7. The manufacturer of a razor blade wishes to conduct a study to determine the 
effective life (in number of shaves) of a disposable razor. The findings are to be 
used to make an advertising claim that the razor is "good for x shaves" so as to 
withstand possible attack by a regulatory agency or by a competitor. Develop a 
detailed plan for conducting such a study, perhaps using the five-step process 
described in Section 11.7. 
8. * Assume that you are working for a telephone call-in center that takes 
customer orders. You have been asked to evaluate whether or not the center 
should install a system that advises callers who cannot be serviced immedi-
ately as to how long they will have to wait for service and provides them the 
option of an automatic callback. The major criterion is maximizing revenue. 
Propose an investigation to provide data to make this assessment, perhaps 
using the five-step process described in Section 11.7. 
9. Identify a problem of personal interest to you that will require data gathering. 
(For some typical examples, see Hunter, 1977). Develop a plan to obtain data 
that will be responsive to your problem. If feasible, conduct the study, analyze 
the results, perhaps graphically, and present these for discussion and critique. 
10. In Step 3 in the washing machine example in Section 11.7.2, we state in a 
footnote "A more sophisticated evaluation would take the probability distri-
bution for product usage into consideration in assessing actual product usage 
and evaluating product reliability." How would you do this? 
11. In Step 4 in the washing machine example in Section. 11.7.2, we state that the 
assessment of the statistical properties of the proposed plan "involves an 
evaluation (using simulation or advanced statistical methods) of the statistical 
uncertainty that is anticipated from an analysis of the resulting data and an 
assessment of whether the proposed plan provides the desired level of 
statistical precision." How would you do this? 

12 
CHAPTER 
CAREER PATHS 
12.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Are we there yet? 
—Sally Morton (2009b) 
In this chapter, we elaborate on career paths for applied statisticians. These 
paths are generally less formally defined than those for statisticians in academia that, 
in many cases, are heavily dependent upon the tenure system (see Chapter 13). 
In the first two sections, we describe roles for those who choose to remain 
applied statisticians (outside of academia) and for those who decide to move into 
academia, an application area, or management. We then describe typical career 
paths for applied statisticians and comment further on statistical leadership and 
statisticians' contributions beyond the workplace. We illustrate with the career paths 
of three statisticians. 
12.2 
SOME ROLES FOR APPLIED STATISTICIANS 
We differentiate among the following roles or steps in the career ladder that 
statisticians may take during the course of their careers within the field: statistical 
analyst, applied statistician, senior statistician, statistical manager, and private 
statistical consultant. This breakdown, however, is somewhat arbitrary, and there is 
often no clear delineation as individuals move from one role to the other. 
12.2.1 Statistical Analyst 
Many trained in statistics, and especially those with a bachelor's, or possibly master's, 
degree, begin their careers as statistical analysts. This principally entry-level (or foot-
in-the-door) position typically involves conducting data analyses, often under the 
supervision of an applied or senior statistician—or a knowledgeable practitioner— 
who might also serve as a mentor and role model. Over time, many statistical analysts 
strive to move from principally "backroom" positions to taking on increasingly 
more responsibility, conducting more advanced technical tasks, and working more 
independently. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 20! I John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
251 

252 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
12.2.2 Applied Statistician 
Applied statisticians bear prime responsibility for everything from helping ensure that 
the right data are collected to analyzing the data (or directing such analyses) and 
reporting the findings, interacting closely with other technical staff. Ideally, the 
applied statistician is an integral member of the project team (Section 5.4.2). 
12.2.3 Senior Statistician 
Senior statisticians, in addition to taking on all or most of the roles of the applied 
statistician, also assume broader responsibilities. They look at problems holistically 
and strive to relate them to the general goals of the organization. Senior statisticians 
also play a proactive role in proposing new projects and ventures that will benefit their 
organizations or clients in the future. 
Senior statisticians are especially involved in the early and final stages of a project. 
Initially, they help to define a problem quantitatively and present the path forward to senior 
management. At the conclusion of the work, they participate in putting together and 
presenting the findings. Senior statisticians, thus, provide statistical leadership—a topic 
that we will return to in Section 12.5. They are sometimes considered by their colleagues 
and clients as the ultimate source of knowledge and wisdom in all statistical matters. 
12.2.4 Statistical Manager 
In organizations that have statistical groups, a possible career path for some is to aspire 
to leadership of such a group. Managers of statistical groups are typically involved in 
securing work projects—especially for the more junior members of the group who 
have, as yet, not built up their own clientele—and helping define such projects. They 
then frequently select one or more members of the group to do the work, provide 
guidance, as needed, and take on overall responsibility for successful implementation. 
The manager of the statistics group also has various administrative responsi-
bilities such as recruitment, development, and evaluation of staff, and ensuring that the 
group has state-of-the-art computational and other needed resources. Group managers 
also periodically apprise management of the group's technical accomplishments, help 
foster the interests and aspirations of the group, and develop a vision for the future. 
The number of such positions is limited. 
12.2.5 Private Statistical Consultant 
Many successful applied statisticians, possibly nearing the end of their formal careers, 
retire or just decide to leave their current employer and go into business on their own 
as private statistical consultants. This carries with it the obvious advantages of not 
needing to satisfy the possible whims and timetables of an official manager (your 
customers now become your sole managers) and provides more opportunity to work 
on those projects that interest you most. 
Being a private statistical consultant also carries with it added uncertainty—an 
important factor if you are relying on such work as a major source of income. You may 

12.3 OTHER MAJOR ROLES TO WHICH APPLIED STATISTICIANS MIGHT ASPIRE 
2 5 3 
be the first to be cut in bad times. But you might also be the first to be back to work in 
times of economic recovery since often the internal statistical skills of organizations 
have been depleted as a consequence of a downturn. 
Your employment might be on a retainer, calling for you to overview an 
organization's work periodically. Or it might be on a project-by-project basis. As an 
outsider, you might be asked to provide a broad assessment of a problem and have 
appreciable liberty to think proactively, ask probing questions, and voice opinions. 
Also, as an external expert, your assessment may be given greater credence. 
At other times, you might be asked to respond to narrow technical questions. As 
a consultant, you are unlikely to be a member of the team and might have limited 
opportunity to fully understand the business environment. And, although your advice 
might be given more weight initially, it is also more likely to be forgotten, due to lack 
of reinforcement, once you leave the premises. 
As a consultant, you may also be called upon to review the work of practitioners 
or of other statisticians. A frequent use of statistical consultants is in lawsuits (or 
potential lawsuits), possibly as expert witnesses' (Section 4.6.4). 
See Cabrera and McDougall (2002) and Goldstein (2008) for some further 
comments on the life of a statistical consultant. 
12.2.6 Overview of Roles 
We show in Table 12.1 some typical tasks and interface opportunities for statisticians 
in various roles. 
12.3 OTHER MAJOR ROLES TO WHICH APPLIED 
STATISTICIANS MIGHT ASPIRE 
In this section, we briefly describe three further roles that, during the course of your 
career, you might pursue and that may take you beyond being an applied statistician. 
12.3.1 Moving into Academia 
Some statisticians, after a stint in an application area, take a position in academia. 
They might do so early in their careers after getting a taste of life in business, industry, 
and/or government. Others make this move later, possibly while also working as 
statistical consultants. Academia might recognize extensive experience, and espe-
cially research accomplishments, by offering a higher entry-level appointment and in 
some cases even tenure. 
Going into academia may be appealing in light of its somewhat less stressful 
pace (see Chapter 13). Learning about "real-life" experience—directly from 
Organizations like to hire external consultants as expert witnesses because of the unpredictable timing in 
which lawsuits arise and the supposed greater objectivity of an "outside voice," even though this voice is 
being paid by an interested party. 

254 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
TABLE 12.1 Typical Tasks and Interface Opportunities for Statisticians in Business, Industry, 
and Government 
Role 
Typical tasks 
Interface opportunities 
Statistical 
Combines data from multiple databases 
analyst 
(e.g., raw material properties, processing 
conditions, and final product measurements) 
and cleans data; conducts exploratory data 
analyses, or analyses of results of designed 
experiment, sampling study, or observational 
study, typically with guidance from applied or 
senior statistician or practitioner 
Applied 
Develops statistical plan for life test of a new 
statistician 
product, follows program during its 
implementation, conducts (or directs) 
analysis of resulting data, and reports findings. 
Develops new or revised questions on surveys 
or works on redesign of questionnaires 
typically as member of a multidisciplinary 
team 
Senior 
Helps define a new measurement system 
statistician 
(e.g., credit scoring system for a new market 
segment), develops and oversees data 
gathering process, specifies and supervises 
algorithm development, helps to achieve 
successful implementation, and provides 
periodic status reports to management. In 
government, designs major data products 
(e.g., characterization of high schools in the 
United States) and oversees evaluations of key 
aspects of official statistical systems (e.g., the 
quality of the decennial census) 
Statistical 
Negotiates group's role in design and analysis of 
manager 
projects (e.g., test program for product 
reliability assessment) and designates who 
will do the work. In government, oversees all 
aspects of major official statistical products 
(e.g., the American Community Survey or 
a toxic waste monitoring system study) 
Private statistical 
Develops test plan or sample study or reviews 
consultant 
plan developed by others, and/or guides 
analysis of the resulting data 
Often has limited contact, 
initially, with others 
than task assigners. 
Gradually interacts 
directly with technical 
teams, participates in 
presentations, and 
becomes more broadly 
involved 
Works closely with other 
team members and 
builds ever-increasing 
credibility with 
colleagues and 
management 
Has close contact with 
technical staff and 
management. 
Responsible for specific 
deliverables. Looked to 
as a generator of ideas to 
move the organization 
forward and as a guide 
in project 
implementation 
Relates to management at 
all levels. Helps develop 
and sell technical vision, 
and understands both 
business and technical 
aspects of problems 
May have access to top 
management 
somebody who has lived it—may also be attractive to the institution and its students, 
making it a "win-win" situation for all. 
Apossible first step might be taking on an adjunct professorship (Section 13.3.2). 
This may involve teaching a course, often in the evening, at a local college or 

12.3 OTHER MAJOR ROLES TO WHICH APPLIED STATISTICIANS MIGHT ASPIRE 
2 5 5 
university. It can provide you a taste of academia while you continue your day job and an 
opportunity to determine whether you would eventually like to move into academia. 
12.3.2 Moving into an Application Area 
Some statisticians, and especially those with past training in an application area, may 
decide to move into that area. Likely positions include jobs as quality assurance or 
reliability engineers, epidemiologists, economists, market research analysts, and risk 
analysts. The switch might be a gradual one or it might involve a formal job change. It 
is often an outgrowth of your extensive involvement in one or more projects in a 
particular area, as well as your past training. For example, following up your work in 
developing and implementing a credit scoring system and leveraging your past 
training in business administration, you might be asked to oversee the system's 
continued growth and further evolution. Your major tasks may become more and more 
applications oriented and less focused on the statistical aspects. This evolution may 
eventually be reflected by a change in your formal job title. You might continue to be 
regarded as a statistical expert and on occasion called upon in that capacity. 
12.3.3 Moving into Management 
Still others use their positions as statisticians as a springboard for a management 
position. Their new roles may not call for them to do much statistics, although their 
ability to deal with numbers and to explain empirical facts in context are highly useful 
skills for an administrator and leader. 
For higher level management and executive jobs, the role of statistics is mostly 
about applying statistical thinking at a conceptual level rather than in the application 
of statistical methods per se. This includes an appreciation of the importance of 
effective data gathering and of the ever presence of variability. One consequence of 
statistical training is the ability not to overreact to the most recent numbers, such as 
last week's sales, and instead to look at the bigger picture. 
In Section 1.10.3, we briefly described the career of Jim Goodnight, a statistician 
who became a successful entrepreneur. In Sidebar 12.1, we summarize the career of 
another statistician (Lawrence Garfinkel) who distinguished himself by first applying 
his statistical skills in an application area (epidemiology), and then moving into that 
area and ending his career as a research administrator. A further example, this one 
from academia (Albert Bowker), is provided in the next chapter. 
THE CAREER OF LAWRENCE GARFINKEL2 
Lawrence Garfinkel received a bachelor's degree in statistics from the City College of New 
York and a master's from Columbia. He started his career as a "statistical clerk" with the 
Much of this description is taken directly from an obituary, published in the New York Times on January 
27, 2010. 

2 5 6 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
American Cancer Society on a "temporary job" thai lasted tor 43 years. He advanced to the 
role of biostatistician and, together with colleagues, was instrumental in designing a massive 
study that demonstrated the correlation between smoking and lung cancer. 
Garfinkel subsequently collaborated in an examination of tissues from deceased smokers 
that showed that the degree of precancerous change was related to how much and how long 
an individual had smoked. This supplemented the earlier statistical evidence by providing 
physical evidence of what smoke could do to the lungs and gained Garfinkel recognition as 
an epidemiologist. 
His work eventually led Garfinkel to roles in management and he was promoted to 
become the society's research director, a position he held for the last I0 years of his career. 
12.4 SOME CAREER PATHS 
Figure I2.l shows some likely entry-level career opportunities in statistics for 
graduates with degrees in statistics at various levels. 
Figure 12.2 shows some typical paths of progression among the roles described 
in the previous two sections. The complex nature of this chart demonstrates the wide 
variety of paths statistically trained individuals can travel. 
As suggested in Section 8.2, the path that any particular individual takes may be 
the consequence of a deliberate plan, based on carefully laid out aspirations. At other 
times, it may be principally the result of circumstances or even happenstance. 
Frequently, it is a combination of all of these. Making a transition may call for 
additional training, for example, to move from statistical analyst to application area 
analyst. 
Often the transition from one role to the next is gradual rather than sudden. It 
may reflect growth within a particular job, rather than a change of jobs. When a change 
of jobs is involved, this may be within an organization (especially for those in large 
Highest degree in statistics 
Careers in statistics 
Minor' 
Bachelor's" 
Master's 
Statistical analyst 
Applied statistician 
Academia: 
community college 
Ph.D. 
Academia: 4-year college 
or university 
' Might also take position in an application area 
that is likely to require some statistical training. 
Figure I2.l Entry-level career opportunities for statistics graduates. 

12.4 SOME CAREER PATHS 
2 5 7 
Careers in applied statistics 
Careers beyond applied statistics 
Statistical analyst 
Applied statistician 
Senior statistician 
Manager of statistics group 
Academia 
Application area 
Management 
Private statistical consultant 
Figure 12.2 Some typical career paths for applied statisticians. 
organizations), or in a new organization; see Sidebar 12.2 for comments on job 
mobility. You may, moreover, wear two or more hats at any given time. Or you might 
zigzag in your path, at least for a while, in probing what you feel is the most suitable 
eventual role for you. 
SIDEBAR \ 
Z.Z 
COMMENTS ON JOB MOBILITY 
At one time, people joined an organization upon graduation and—especially those who 
entered a large organization—wiih the expectation that if things went well they would be 
spending the rest of their careers wiih lhal organization. Those with an organization for over 
5-10 years were likely to remain there until retirement. This level of'loyalty, both on the part 
of the organization to the employee and on the part of the employee to the organization, tends 
tobe a thing of the past in our highly mobile society. Your relationship with your employer 
today is a contract that is subject to constant review and renewal by both parties. 
Employers, especially in business and industry, continuously examine what their 
employees have done for them recently, while employees ask themselves whether their 
current position is still in their best interest or whether they could do better in another 
capacity or somewhere else. 
Employees today, thus, constantly "review the field" to determine whether there are other 
opportunities that might be belter for them. Those in government might seek out oppor-
tunities either within dieir own agency or in oiher agencies. As a result, some resumes show 
a relatively large number of different positions, often over a relatively brief time period. This 
might be especially the case for statisticians because of the large choice and diversity of 
attractive alternatives open to them. 
Job changes might also be triggered by changes in the environmenl, as reflected by 
changes in business conditions, changes in governmental administrations and funding 
policies, corporate takeovers, or even innovation. Some statisticians in the telecom industry 
have, over the years, moved to Intern el-based businesses. 

2 5 8 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
An advantage of frequent job changes is that it is likely to resuit in a wider diversity of 
experiences. Also, promotions and salary increases often accompany such changes. Thus. 
job change can accelerate your growth. 
Frequent job changes, on the other hand, might be taken as a negative by a potential 
employer. They might suggest that you are difficult to please and cannot be relied on to stay 
on the job for very long. It might also raise the question as to whether the frequent changes 
are an indication of poor performance on the job and to what degree they were voluntary. 
The general message conveyed by Figures 12.1 and 12.2 is that statistically 
trained individuals have the opportunity to leverage their training and experience in 
a wide variety of ways. Some aspire to take on increasingly greater technically 
focused roles and responsibilities, perhaps culminating their careers as their 
organization's recognized statistical guru. Others may wish to become more deeply 
involved in an application area and, perhaps even, in a management role. 
12.5 MORE ON STATISTICAL LEADERSHIP 
The preceding discussion and our comments in earlier chapters have made clear our 
opinion (and that of many others) that a career goal for today's statisticians should be 
to exert leadership and be proactive. 
Deming wrote and spoke extensively about the concept of a statistical leader. He 
wanted statisticians to be advisors to top management, reporting directly to the 
company CEO, and given a great deal of independence; see Sidebar 12.3. 
DEMING'S STATISTICAL LEADER 
W. Edwards Deming had strong ideas about statistical leadership. In Deming (1986), he 
asserts (with our apologies for his lack of gender sensitivity) 
There will be a leader of statistical methodology, responsible to top management. He 
must be a man of unquestioned ability. He will assume leadership in statistical 
methodology throughout ihe company. He will have authority from top management 
tobe a participant in any activity that in his judgment is worth his pursuit. He will be a 
regular participant in any major meeting of the president and staff. He has the right 
and obligation to ask questions about any activity, and he is entitled to responsible 
answers. The choice of application for him to pursue must be left to his judgment, not 
to the judgment of others, though he will, of course, try to be helpful to anyone that 
asks for advice. The non-statistic!an can not always recognize a statistical problem 
when he sees one. 
What would be the minimum qualifications lor this job? (1) equivalent of a master's 
degree in statistical theory; (2) experience in industry or in government; (3) 
authorship of published papers in theory and in practice of statistical methodology; 
(4) demonstrated ability to teach and to lead top management toward constant 

12.6 CONTRIBUTIONS BEYOND THE WORKPLACE 
2 5 9 
I
improvement of quality and productivity. He himself will constantly improve his 
education. 
In addition, Deming shows an organizational chart under which the position of 
"Leadership in statistical methodology" reports directly to the company president. More-
over, in a subsequent section entitled "Where may you find the right man," Deming states 
The combination of knowledge and leadership is exceedingly rare, and will require 
patience and earnest prayer to find ... You may have to interview many applicants to 
find the right one. 
An incumbent as head of statistical methodology will command a high salary. 
(A recommendation that we heartily endorse). The problem will be to find someone 
competent, not what his pay will be. 
Deming's ideas concerning the role in organizations for statisticians, 
although suitable for a person of his stature, are, in our opinion, too ambitious 
for most others and are not well suited to our times (or quoting Lynne Hare, "If the 
rest of us acted like Deming, we would have been fired long ago."). But Deming 
was right on target when he urged statisticians to exert leadership and suggested 
that they be proactive. Statisticians today are more engaged in the projects in which 
they are involved and in taking a leadership role than they were in the past—even 
though this role may be from a more modest base in the organization than that 
envisaged by Deming. 
12.6 CONTRIBUTIONS BEYOND THE WORKPLACE 
Statisticians as they move forward in their careers have the opportunity to contribute 
beyond the workplace. This can involve technical contributions or "giving back" to 
their profession or to society as a whole. 
12.6.1 Technical Contributions 
Statisticians advance their profession technically by publications in the statistical and 
application area literatures and by presentations at professional society meetings. 
Publications, especially in scholarly journals, are a key requirement for advancement 
in universities and 4-year colleges, as we will see in the next chapter. They may also be 
important for those in some research organizations, such as national laboratories, 
outside academia. 
In most other organizations, you are not expected to publish. Should you choose 
to do so, you are likely to contribute your own time for this activity—although your 
employer might permit and possibly even encourage you to present your results at 
professional meetings and pay your expenses. 
Publications can help you gain increased stature and recognition on the job and 
in your dealings with colleagues and customers. They are usually regarded positively, 

2 6 0 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
but may not carry much weight, in your job performance evaluation. Publications, 
however, are likely to be highly beneficial if you are planning a move into academia. 
Your technical contributions may be of a theoretical or methodological nature. 
Many recent Ph.D.'s publish work based on their dissertations after graduation 
(sometimes due to the time lag between submittal of a paper and its publication). 
Later in your career, your publications might be work that you conduct independently 
from the job or, more likely, are based on your ongoing work. They might deal directly 
with an interesting application or case study and may be principally expository. 
Your publications need to be reviewed and approved by your employer and 
may not include any information deemed confidential. This presents a barrier to some 
professionals, such as many physical scientists. Statisticians can often readily disguise 
the specific application, and thereby its confidential aspects, without seriously 
compromising the usefulness or "publishability" of their work. This gives them an 
advantage over colleagues in many other areas. 
12.6.2 Professional Participation 
Professional societies provide an excellent venue in which to contribute and to 
become known in your profession. 
—Robert Starbuck (2009) 
Statisticians can through the course of their careers contribute to the profession in 
a variety of ways, in addition to their direct technical contributions. Some examples are 
• Membership on an editorial board of a professional journal or willingness 
to referee papers submitted to such journals (a moral obligation for those who 
publish). 
• Participation in sections of a national statistical society such as the Section on 
Government Statistics or on Quality and Productivity of the American Statis-
tical Association (ASA), or of an application area-oriented society. 
• Contribution to the local activities of national associations such as your local 
chapter of the ASA. 
Over time, you are likely to be asked to take on leadership roles in such organizations, 
such as editorship of a journal or as an officer in a national society or its local chapter. 
Participation in such activities is again likely to be mostly on your own time, 
with your employer possibly supporting associated travel expenses, and giving you 
modest credit in your performance evaluation. 
12.6.3 Contributions to Community and Society 
Statisticians hope to understand enough about nature and the underlying laws to 
improve the lot of mankind. 
—William Colomski 
As we have tried to make clear throughout this volume, the applications of 
statistics are almost endless. You may be asked, on different occasions, to volunteer 

12.7 SOME MORE CAREER EXAMPLES 
261 
your time and expertise to a wide variety of worthy community activities. Some 
examples are helping design a membership satisfaction study for a social or religious 
organization and analyzing the results, helping measure teacher effectiveness for a 
local school district, or guiding a candidate seeking political office in conducting a 
public opinion survey. 
Your contributions might extend beyond your own community and could have 
national or even international implications. Scheuren (2007) describes five applica-
tions in which his volunteer work helped enhance human welfare in Cambodia, 
Switzerland, (the former) Yugoslavia, Afghanistan, and the United States. The first of 
these dealt with compiling and evaluating evidence of civilian casualties resulting 
from the hostilities in Cambodia. Statisticians have also been involved since the late 
1970s, through the auspices of the ASA, in projects such as helping obtain accurate 
counts of human rights violations (see Asher, 2009). 
Statistics Without Borders, an ASA affiliated group of volunteers, was formed 
in 2008 to provide "pro-bono statistical consulting and assistance to organizations and 
government agencies in support of these organizations' not-for-profit efforts to deal 
with international health issues (broadly defined)"; see Amstat News (2010b). One of 
the initial projects was to help develop reliable estimates of the extent of damage to 
homes and displacement of people (and the nature of that displacement) resulting 
from an immense earthquake in January 2010 in Haiti; see Cochran (2010). 
A further international study co-led by a statistician and dealing with estimating 
the number of people living with AIDS is described in Sidebar 12.4. 
A STATISTICIAN STUDIES THE GLOBAL AIDS PANDEMIC 
Roger Hoerl, Manager of the Applied Statistics Laboratory of GE Global Research, in 
collaboration with research partner Presha Neidermeyer, used a 6-month sabbatical {fully 
supported and paid by his company) to study the global AIDS epidemic. Some of their 
findings are reported in Hoerl and Neidermeyer (2009). 
One of the key goals of the study was to estimate the number of people living with the 
HIV virus in different parts of the world. Getting good estimates is of critical importance in 
helping decide how to allocate AIDS relief funding between and within countries, and in 
addressing the hroad er question of how to balance funding for AIDS relief with funding to 
fig hi other preventable diseases; see Hoerl (2008b). In doing this work, Hoerl found his 
statistical background to be invaluable, enabling him to take an objective view of a very 
emotional topic, lo gather relevant data firsthand, and to weight conflicting and sometimes 
contradictory evidence to arrive at actionable conclusions. 
12.7 SOME MORE CAREER EXAMPLES 
In Chapter 1, we provided some examples of how different individuals might enter 
a career in statistics. In this section, we describe the different career paths (to date) of 
three statisticians, principally after they entered the workforce. 

262 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
Statistician A. Statistician A received an undergraduate degree in mechanical 
engineering. Upon graduation, he took a job with a semiconductor company. This 
position got him to appreciate the importance of statistics. He was an excellent 
mathematician and returned to school to get a Ph.D. from the Statistics Department 
of a large university. In his graduate work, he became involved in the statistical 
aspects of oil exploration and filed a patent application in that area. He accepted a 
job as an applied statistician in the then small statistical group of a large company 
and became involved in a wide variety of applications. His engineering background, 
his love for real problems, his extraordinary statistical knowledge, his ability to 
apply this knowledge in actual situations, and his interest in working with people 
made him an outstanding technical contributor. Over time, he took on more and 
more challenging projects and his services were in constantly increasing demand, as 
he built a reputation as a technical expert. 
As the group to which he belonged grew in size, Statistician A also took on the 
role of technical mentor to less experienced statisticians. In this manner, he evolved 
into a statistician's statistician, as colleagues came to him for guidance on tough 
technical problems. 
Statistician A published papers in statistical journals, based upon his work, and 
actively participated in the yearly Joint Statistical Meetings (Section 14.5.1). He was 
elected a Fellow of the ASA (in recognition of his substantial contributions 
to spreading the use of statistical methodology successfully in a wide variety of 
application areas) and as a member of the International Statistical Institute. In 
addition, his contributions to his company were recognized by a number of prestigious 
internal awards. 
Statistician A stayed in essentially the same job, and grew steadily in it over 
a period of over 25 years until his retirement. He gained satisfaction and recognition 
by continuingly increasing his skills as a senior statistician, applying these skills to 
help address more important and challenging problems, and doing so in a steadily 
more proactive manner. 
Statistician B. A career choice came easily for statistician B. His father, who had 
started his career as a mechanical engineer, took up statistics and became world 
renowned for his work. Statistician B also went into statistics and got a Ph.D. in the 
field. He was always strongly interested in practical applications and interned with a 
large chemical company while still in school. 
Statistician B was always keen at looking at problems conceptually and 
holistically. He also had outstanding personal and communication skills. He focused 
on statistical thinking and regarded statistical tools as an important means to an end, 
rather than as an end in itself. After graduation, his first job was with a chemical 
company where he divided his time between research and development and the 
corporate quality group. After 4 years in that position, he accepted a job with a paper 
goods company and worked on a variety of quality improvement applications, rising 
to become the manager of a small statistical group. 
When his company was bought out, Statistician B took a job with the same 
statistical group as Statistician A. In this position, he got to learn the company culture 
and became acquainted with many of its businesses. His capabilities were rapidly 

12.7 
SOME MORE CAREER EXAMPLES 
2 6 3 
recognized and, as the Six Sigma initiative emerged, Statistician B became a master 
black belt. 
He thenjoined the company's corporate audit staff—an organization responsible 
for improving operations throughout the company's businesses worldwide. Although 
he was formally a manager in this group, Statistician B's major responsibilities 
involved hands-on support to businesses that were learning how to apply Six Sigma 
successfully. He specialized in, but did not limit himself to, statistical applications. 
Statistician B subsequently returned to the statistical group that he had joined 
originally—but this time as its manager. In this role, he maintained his statistical roots, 
while guiding a group of other statisticians in a broad range of applications. Among 
other things, he advanced the stature of the group by ensuring that it becomes involved 
in key company problems to which it can contribute significantly and by drawing its 
accomplishments and future potential to the attention of higher management. He 
frequently is engaged directly in the start-up phase of important new projects. This, 
together with his broad business knowledge, makes him an important resource to 
those in his group who subsequently work on such projects. His contributions have 
also been recognized by a prestigious company award. 
Statistician B has also achieved high professional visibility. He has written 
extensively about his work. He is also a highly sought keynote speaker at statistical 
and quality assurance meetings, at which he talks, among other matters, about what 
statisticians should aspire to be. He, too, was elected a Fellow of the ASA (for his 
substantial contributions and insights in furthering the role of statistics in industry), 
a Fellow of the American Society for Quality, a member of the International Statistical 
Institute, and an Academician in the International Academy of Quality, and is the 
recipient of numerous important professional and company awards. He has also 
actively involved himself in projects, beyond his work, to help society. 
Statistician B is still professionally (very) active. We look forward to updating 
his progress in forthcoming editions of this book. 
Statistician C. Statistician C also holds a Ph.D. in applied statistics (others with 
similar career paths might be at the master's degree level). She, too, has outstanding 
personal and communication skills and upon graduation joined the statistical group of 
the same company as Statisticians A and B. Her ability to address business problems 
and to respond to them effectively became apparent immediately. She also became a 
Six Sigma master black belt—and was besieged by job offers from the company 
businesses with which she worked. 
Like Statistician B, she also went to work for the company's corporate audit 
group and assumed Statistician B's managerial role when he left. Thejob provided her 
valuable experience and business insights that were rare for a person only a few years 
out of school. 
Statistician C, however, aspired to take a different, and less statistically 
oriented, career path than Statistician B. Her next position was as Six Sigma leader 
for one of the company's businesses, reporting directly to the CEO ofthat business. 
In her next advancement, Statistician C left the company to assume a position in 
another large organization where she led company-wide Six Sigma implementation 
and quality efforts. 

2 6 4 
CHAPTER 12 CAREER PATHS 
Unlike Statisticians A and B, Statistician C no longer works as a statistician 
or statistics manager. She is rarely involved in professional statistical activities. 
However, she has leveraged statistical thinking and her personal skills into 
a highly successful early career in management—which is still evolving. Her 
statistical background and knowledge of the role of uncertainty continue to serve 
her well. 
Statistician C, in some ways, illustrates Deming's concept of a statistical leader. 
She, however, also bears significant day-to-day responsibilities as a leader in her own 
right (rather than as an advisor) and no longer is regarded principally as a statistician 
by her colleagues. 
12.8 PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
Ask yourself what you like and don't like about your job and act on those that you can 
do something about. 
—Leslie Fowler 
So what should be your career path as a statistician? That, of course, is 
a question that only you can answer. It depends heavily on your personal aspirations 
and skills, and on how you prioritize different criteria for success. Ideally, your career 
will lead not only to fame and fortune but also to a high degree of job satisfaction. 
Fortune is the easiest of these criteria to quantify since it can be measured by 
your paycheck and other job benefits. 
Your fame as a statistician is reflected by your reputation as an effective on-the-
job contributor and, somewhat more quantitatively, by your publication (and speak-
ing) record, the professional awards and honors bestowed upon you (e.g., election to 
fellowship of the ASA), and the offices in professional societies to which you have 
been elected. Your reputation could be national or even international, as evidenced by 
such statisticians as Bowker (Section 13.14.2), Deming, Garfinkel, and Goodnight 
(Section 1.10). 
Job satisfaction is more personal and the hardest to quantify. You might seek 
a high level of predictability and stability in your job (which might, perhaps, 
eventually lead you to seek a tenured position in academia), or you may thrive on 
change. Many statisticians gain high satisfaction in successfully addressing real-life 
challenges and in the variety of their work and contributions. Others get their 
proverbial kicks from solving tough technical problems. Yet others want their 
work—perhaps in addition to all of the preceding—to be beneficial to their com-
munities and to society. 
The beauty of our field is that it can accommodate a great variety of aspirations 
and provide career paths that have at least the potential of coming close to satisfying 
all of these criteria. 
In any case, as we indicated in Section 8.2, it is helpful for you to define initially 
your personal career goals as a statistician—even though you will likely modify these 
as time goes by. With these in mind, you can then seek tasks and strive to drive them to 
successful completion that will help you in advancing your goals. And, on a more 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
2 6 5 
immediate basis, it is always a good idea for you to keep your resume up to date, just in 
case some new attractive, and perhaps unexpected, opportunities should arise. 
12.9 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• We have somewhat arbitrarily categorized statisticians (outside of academia) 
during the course of their careers as statistical analysts, applied statisticians, 
senior statisticians, statistical managers, and private statistical consultants. 
• Some applied statisticians might choose to move into academia, into an 
application area, or into management. 
• The specific path followed by any particular individual is typically gradual and 
may be a consequence or combination of a deliberate plan, circumstances, or 
even happenstance. 
• We urge statisticians to take increasingly proactive leadership roles as they 
move up the career ladder. 
• In addition to their direct on-the-job roles, many statisticians also make 
important technical contributions through publications and presentations, work 
to advance their profession, and apply their knowledge to help their commu-
nities and society. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. * We suggest that the specific path followed by any particular individual may be 
the result of circumstances or even happenstance. What are some of the special 
circumstances (or happenstances) that might significantly impact an in-
dividual's career path? 
2. * Suggest some ways in which some of the career paths suggested in Figure 12.2 
might come about in practice. 
3. We state "Deming's ideas concerning the organizational role for statisticians, 
although suitable for a person of his stature, are ... too ambitious for most 
others and may not be well suited to our times." Discuss. 
4. * What are you doing now to lay the foundation for achieving your career goals 
and aspirations? What else might you do now and in the future to improve your 
chances of success? 
5. Comment on how statisticians can be more proactive in each of the roles (i.e., 
statistical analyst, applied statistician, etc.) that we have described. 
6. What are some ways that statisticians are contributing—or should be—in 
addressing problems that face your community and/or society today? 
7. *Contrast the different ways in which Statisticians A, B, and C exert leadership. 
Which of these paths seems most appealing to you? 

PART IV 
FURTHER 
PERSPECTIVES: 
CAREERS IN 
AC ADEMI A AND 
PROFESSIONAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
I N THIS final part of the book, we consider two topics: 
• Chapter 13 puts the spotlight on careers in academia for statisticians. 
• Chapter 14 describes strategies for lifelong learning (and other activities) that 
allow statisticians, through the course of their careers, to maintain and build 
upon the momentum that they acquired through their education and earlier 
experiences. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
267 

13.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Throughout this volume, we have made occasional reference to a career in statistics in 
academia. We feel that this subject is sufficiently important—and certainly suffi-
ciently different from most careers of nonacademic statisticians—to warrant an entire 
(and lengthy) chapter of its own. A career in academia may be selected by a statistician 
upon graduation. Or, as we have noted in Section 12.3.1, it may be chosen after a stint 
in a nonacademic setting. 
In this chapter, we consider how subjects similar to those discussed in earlier 
chapters apply to academia: 
What statisticians in academia do. 
Types of positions. 
Location within the institution. 
More on tenure. 
Life beyond tenure. 
Teaching challenges. 
Research challenges. 
Consulting challenges. 
Administrative service challenges. 
Professional service challenges. 
More on the academic environment. 
Training to become an academic statistician. 
Career paths. 
Downsides of a career as an academic statistician. 
Bright sides of a career as an academic statistician. 
A career as a statistician in academia: a summary comparison. 
Our discussion is heavily centered on practices in the United States; these may be 
somewhat different in other countries. 
This chapter was written largely by contributing authors Josef Schmee and William Meeker. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
269 
11 
i 
CHAPTER 
f 
<J 
CAREERS IN ACADEMIAl 

2 7 0 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
We provide more detail in this chapter than in most others. We hope this will be 
useful to those who have decided on a career in academia. Readers who wish a 
comprehensive summary of how life in academia compares with that in business and 
industry and government might want to look at Table 13.1 and at the major takeaways 
section at the end of this chapter and skip some of the other detail on a first reading. 
13.2 WHAT STATISTICIANS IN ACADEMIA DO: 
AN OVERVIEW 
The term university, derived from a Latin phrase for "the community of teachers and 
scholars," suggests the two most important responsibilities of an academician: to 
teach and conduct research. In addition, the collegial nature of modern academic 
institutions suggests that faculty participate, mostly through service on advisory 
committees and student advisement, in the academic administration of their 
institution. To these three basic responsibilities should be added the derivative 
ones of consulting (including community service) and service to the profession. 
These five areas often compete for an academician's time. The specific mix depends 
on the type of institution and, to some degree, where within the institution you are 
"housed." The mix will also vary among similar types of institutions, and can vary 
between, and even, within departments in the same institution. We provide a brief 
overview below and discuss in further detail later in this chapter. 
Research Universities. A large research university may, for example, have three 
openings for statisticians. One is in the statistics department with a very strong and 
highly regarded Ph.D. program. The second is in a separate biostatistics department 
(which might be part of the university's medical school), and the third is in a school of 
business. 
The position in the statistics department will likely have a high statistical 
research orientation. With increasing seniority, the supervision of master's theses and 
Ph.D. dissertations will be added. The position will also require teaching graduate, 
and possibly undergraduate, courses. 
The teaching focus of the position in the biostatistics department is on master's 
and Ph.D. students. Research is also expected, but should be oriented toward medical 
or biological applications of statistics and is often done in collaboration with 
medical professionals. 
The position in the school of business is strongly focused on teaching a large 
number of undergraduate business majors and MBAs, even though the school may 
offer a Ph.D. Some research is also expected, but this is likely to be directed at 
applications in business and economics. 
Four-Year and 2-Year Colleges. In contrast to research universities, 4-year col-
leges generally place more emphasis on teaching and may expand their definition of 
research to include a wider variety of activities. For example, papers and talks about 
teaching innovations and literature reviews may be acceptable and treated as equal to 
more traditional research in statistical theory or methodology. 

TABLE 13.1 Summary Comparison of a Career as a Statistician in Academia Versus Business and Industry and Government 
Topic 
Academia 
Business and industry 
Government 
Individual characteristics 
Need for Ph.D. 
Need for communication 
ability (oral) 
Need for communication 
ability (written) 
Entrepreneurship 
Nature of work 
Freedom to select work 
projects 
Marketing needs 
Independence 
Depth of work 
Pressures/deadlines 
Predictability of work 
Publications and professional 
society involvement 
Essential for tenure-track 
positions and research 
universities 
Essential for teaching; 
important in other contexts 
Important; emphasis on 
scholarly writing 
Frequent need to get research 
grants 
Generally extensive 
Often requires extensive 
proposal writing 
Generally appreciable 
Can focus deeply on narrow 
area; often limited only by 
(often broad) grant and 
publication criteria 
Often self-disciplined and long 
range in research work 
Generally predictable 
Essential, especially in research 
universities 
Important in some areas, not in others 
Essential 
Important; emphasis on clarity, 
conciseness, and impact 
Frequent need to sell services and 
programs 
Restricted to business needs 
Often requires selling of technical 
discipline and ideas 
Need to be responsive to direct manager, 
higher level managers, and project 
managers 
Can be broad and multidisciplinary; 
limited mainly by practical situation and 
by 80/20 rule: quit upon getting 80% of 
answer for 20% of cost 
Frequent; dictated by business needs 
Often quite unpredictable 
Usually nice to do—sometimes gains "extra 
credit" (but often done on own time) 
Helpful in some areas, not in others 
Essential 
Important; emphasis on clarity, 
conciseness, and impact 
Varies with organization and level. May 
need to sell services and programs 
Restricted to governmental needs 
(especially the specific agency) 
Often requires selling of technical 
discipline and ideas 
Need to be responsive to direct manager, 
higher level managers, project 
managers, and various public officials 
Can be broad and multidisciplinary; 
limited mainly by practical situation and 
by 80/20 rule: quit upon getting 80% of 
answer for 20% of cost 
Dependent on political needs, laws, and 
program requirements 
Sometimes predictable, sometimes not 
Usually nice to do—sometimes gains "extra 
credit" (but often done on own time) 
(continued) 

Nj 
TABLE 13.1 (Continued) 
KS 
Topic 
Academia 
Business and industry 
Government 
Consequences 
Major criteria for success 
Compensation for similar 
background (12 months) 
Job security 
Some possible frustrations 
Other positive elements 
For research: peer recognized 
research, evidenced by peer-
reviewed scholarly 
publications; for teaching: 
teaching ability, evidenced by 
positive course evaluations 
and other assessments. 
Median salaries fairly similar at 
especially for persons willing 
Excellent after achieving tenure 
for tenure-track positions; 
generally limited otherwise; 
often defined by contract 
Transitioning research results to 
real-world applications 
Opportunity to work on 
intellectually challenging 
problems; interact with 
students and faculty; high 
level of prestige; great 
environment 
Success in solving company problems in 
timely manner, with demonstrable 
"payoffs" and ability to communicate 
these to management 
Success in solving agency problems, 
production of statistical analyses on 
time, ability to communicate these to 
management and the public 
start, but more opportunity to do very well for those in business and industry, 
to go into management 
Dependent on performance, as well as 
fortunes of business, acquisitions, and 
the economy 
Excellent after probationary period, but 
dependent on type of appointment, size 
of organization, and the economy 
Inability to pursue problems to their 
ultimate completion 
Opportunity to work on real problems and 
business issues; dynamic and 
challenging nature of work; broad 
interactions; team and leadership 
opportunities; sometimes to do research 
on intellectually challenging problems. 
Inability to pursue problems to completion; 
some assignments can become routine 
Opportunity to improve public policy and 
decisions and impact lives; sometimes to 
do research on intellectually challenging 
problems 
Note: These are "on the average" comparisons; there is appreciable "within-group" variability. 

13.3 TYPES OF POSITIONS 
2 7 3 
Two-year community colleges are typically not research-oriented and generally 
require professors2 to teach more hours per week than 4-year colleges and univer-
sities. They may require little or no research. 
Teaching Loads. There are usually no hard and fast rules for specifying a particular 
professor's course load during the academic year (running from late August to early 
May for institutions that operate on a semester basis). But some institutions, and 
especially community colleges, have strict rules (often as part of a union contract) on the 
number of credit hours taught. 
Teaching loads at a university or 4-year college using a semester system 
typically range from three to eight courses or 9 to 24 credit hours, per academic 
year, depending on the research orientation of the institution. At colleges with no 
research expectations, and especially community colleges, a professor may some-
times teach up to 32 credit hours per year. 
Professors whose work is heavily supported by grants or external consulting 
agreements may be allowed course buyouts. Some institutions offer course reductions 
to professors with a highly distinguished ongoing record of research or who are 
guiding a large number of graduate students. Course releases may also be offered for 
performing certain academic duties, such as temporarily stepping into an adminis-
trative assignment within the institution or serving as an editor of a prestigious 
research journal. Other professors may teach more than their normal course load, 
possibly for extra pay. 
The effective workload on professors also depends upon the level of the courses 
they are teaching and their frequency; effective load tends to be reduced when professors 
are teaching multiple sections of the same course or teaching a course repeatedly. 
During the semester, professors typically divide their time between classroom 
preparation and teaching, grading papers, helping students who need added attention, 
guiding graduate students in their research, conducting their own research and 
consulting, and attending faculty and committee meetings. At other times, such as 
between semesters or during the summer, when professors do not have to teach or 
attend formal meetings, their day may be devoted mostly to their research, future class 
preparation, and consulting. 
Because time is limited—and different undertakings invariably conflict with 
one another—it is critical that you understand specifically what is required in any 
academic position that you are considering, and how this mix factors into your 
performance evaluation. 
13.3 TYPES OF POSITIONS 
13.3.1 Tenure-Track Positions 
Tenure-track appointments come with the expectation of future consideration for 
tenure. Faculty members who are granted tenure can be removed from their positions 
Following standard practice, we will refer to all faculty involved in academic endeavors as professors, 
irrespective of their official rank. 

274 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
only under very special circumstances that are generally specified in the institution's 
faculty manual. Most tenure-track appointments are made to individuals who are near 
the beginning of their career, usually at the rank of Assistant Professor. Typically, an 
initial contract for a period of, for example, 3 years is granted and, upon review, 
extended to 7 years. Granting of tenure is considered at approximately the end of 
the sixth year (extensions are occasionally given under extenuating circumstances). 
Most universities promote Assistant Professors to Associate Professor when tenure 
is awarded. 
In some institutions, individuals with previous experience may be offered 
a tenure-track position at the Associate Professor or even the (full) Professor level. 
This might occur, for example, in hiring a renowned scholar from outside academia 
(such as from a national laboratory) or somebody who had been previously tenured 
at another institution. 
Some, but not all, institutions limit the number of tenure-track positions, either 
by department or by college. 
13.3.2 Nontenure-Track Positions 
Nontenure-track positions may be long-term or temporary. Many long-term nonten-
ured appointments are at the rank of lecturer or instructor. Others are designated as 
"clinical" or by some other term to distinguish them from tenure-track appointments. 
Temporary appointments are appropriately called visiting (or fixed-term or tempo-
rary) or, when applicable, postdoc. In addition, there are adjunct appointments that 
usually involve teaching half-time or less. 
Some institutions make nontenure-track appointments when it is not possible to 
add tenure-track positions or, perhaps, to save money. Others use nontenure-track 
positions as a trial period and then encourage promising appointees to apply for 
tenure-track positions. Many community colleges, instead of tenure, offer long-term 
contracts to their full-time faculty members. 
We provide a brief description of the various types of appointments, noting that 
their definition and prominence vary from school to school. 
Lecturer/Instructor Appointments. In U.S. universities,3 lecturers are usually 
nontenure-track appointees, chosen for their teaching skills and engage principally 
in teaching and, perhaps, in providing some departmental services. Lecturers are 
particularly common in statistics departments that are responsible for teaching 
introductory statistics courses, often with a large number of students, to nonstatistics 
majors. Lecturers may also coordinate such courses and supervise graduate students 
who act as teaching assistants and may be responsible for lab sections or even teaching 
courses on their own. 
Clinical Appointments. The term clinical professor, as the name suggests, originated in 
medical schools, but has found its way into other institutions. Other names, such as 
3 The term lecturer has a different meaning in some countries, such as the United Kingdom, from what it 
does in the United States. 

13.3 TYPES OF POSITIONS 
2 7 5 
research professor, are also used. Such positions may or may not involve teaching 
responsibilities. The job may be quite similar to that of a tenure-track position, without 
providing the same potential job security. 
Clinical professor appointments are, sometimes, linked to specific externally 
funded projects. When the grants for such projects are not renewed, the positions may 
be terminated. Holders of such positions may be invited to apply for tenure-track 
positions as these become available. 
Visiting Appointments. Visiting appointments are mainly for a specified short time 
period, typically one or two semesters, but might extend up to 2 years. They may be 
offered to replace professors on leave or to hire professors with specialties that are 
needed only for a short time. Visiting appointments provide a mechanism for 
bringing in experts, perhaps in new areas, or individuals with special skills and new 
ideas. Some institutions use visiting appointments in the same manner as clinical 
appointments or lecturer/instructor appointments. 
Visiting appointments may be attractive to experienced statisticians, possibly 
on sabbatical from other institutions. They allow them to engage in specific research, 
to interact with other professors who are experts in a field in which they want to 
conduct research, or simply to experience life in a different institution. Also, visiting 
appointments occasionally provide a refreshing short-term change and broadening of 
perspective (and, possibly, a first step in a potential career change) to applied 
statisticians in government or business and industry. 
Postdoc Appointments. Postdoc positions are similar to visiting positions, but tend 
to be aimed at recent Ph.D.s and are research-focused. The major purpose of a 
postdoc position is to allow individuals to demonstrate high potential for research, 
independent of their dissertation supervisors. Some postdoc positions also provide 
opportunities to obtain teaching experience. 
In many scientific disciplines (other than statistics), a postdoc appointment is 
the most common path to a tenure-track position at a research university. Some 
academic departments will not even consider individuals for tenure-track positions 
unless they have successfully finished a stint as a postdoc. 
Postdocs seem to be less common in statistics—perhaps because of the nature 
of research funding and because top students from top programs are often able to 
secure tenure-track positions without such experience. On the other hand, a recent 
statistics Ph.D. with a successful 2-year record as a postdoc will often make the short 
list of tenure-track candidates at many universities. 
Adjunct Appointments. Adjunct positions are generally part-time and entail 
some well-defined—but limited—duties, usually the teaching of a specific—and 
sometimes specialized—class or classes. Such positions may be offered at 
ranks ranging from adjunct instructor to adjunct professor. They are attractive to 
many institutions, especially community colleges, because of their relatively low 
costs. 
Adjunct professors often teach courses in the evening and hold full-time jobs. (Like 
visiting professorships, such positions provide outsiders a glimpse into academia.) 

2 7 6 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
Some adjuncts are retired. Others take multiple appointments until an appropriate 
full-time opportunity at a single institution presents itself. 
Adjunct professors are generally not asked to perform duties beyond teaching4 
and do not share in the financial and other benefits accorded to most other professors. 
Their research credentials may not be equivalent to those of full-time faculty, and they 
may not be required to have Ph.D. degrees. However, their practical experience may 
compensate for this and make them good role models for students. 
13.3.3 Nine-Month Versus 12-Month Positions 
Because academic institutions tend to have much smaller educational programs 
during the summer months, most appointments are for the academic year (9 months) 
only, although benefits are on a 12-month basis. This is not to imply that professors get 
an extended summer vacation. Especially at research universities, professors gener-
ally find the summer months, when they often do not teach, the most productive time 
of the year for research and consulting. One important motivation for seeking external 
funding is, in fact, to help support summer research. 
13.3.4 The Formalities 
Job offers are made by letters of appointment; see Sidebar I3.l. Their terms can 
protect professors against an institution reneging on its promises, especially when 
changes of administration occur. 
LETTER OF APPOINTMENT 
Academic instiruiions make job offers to candidates in a letter of appointment. While many 
of the features of the appointment letter (e.g., specification of salary) are similar to those in 
industry and government, an academic appointment letter typically also specifies 
the academic rank associated with a position and whether or not it is tenure track. The 
appointment letter also provides a general description of the job and the department and 
school in which it is located. The letter should also indicate the teaching load expected (or 
refer to the faculty manual for this information). If the appointment is time-limited, the 
letter specifics its length. 
The letter also needs to spell out any special employment arrangements negotiated with 
the administration, such as extra resources or course reductions during the initial break-in 
years. As a legally binding contract, the appointment letter also describes or refers to 
general employment conditions, such as those specified in a faculty manual. Finally, the 
appointment letter indicates wheüier the appointment is for the academic year or the 
calendar year. 
4 Occasionally (and especially in Canada), adjunct appointments are granted, somewhat similar to visiting 
professorships, to eminent researchers who visit an institution periodically or are engaged in supervising 
graduate students. 

13.5 MORE ON TENURE 
2 7 7 
13.4 LOCATION WITHIN THE INSTITUTION 
Typically, economists have appointments in economics departments, psychologists in 
psychology departments, engineers in engineering schools, and so on. Similarly, 
many statisticians in research-oriented institutions have appointments in statistics 
departments. Such departments offer courses and majors in statistics at the graduate, 
and sometimes the undergraduate, level and engage in statistical research. In addition, 
department members often teach introductory courses aimed at students in other 
departments—for example, students in the school of liberal arts, the business school, 
or the engineering school—or for the institution as a whole. 
However, not all universities and few 4-year and 2-year colleges have 
statistics departments. In such cases, statisticians may be faculty members in one 
of a number of departments, notably the mathematics department, a combined 
mathematics and statistics department, a department of information science, or an 
application area school or department. At some institutions, statisticians are 
grouped into academic units together with operations research and other decision 
sciences faculty or with computer science under, possibly, a general umbrella name 
such as informatics. Such groupings also sometimes offer degree programs in 
statistics or, more often, in an area such as data mining, with important statistical 
overtones. 
In institutions that do not have statistics departments or quantitatively-oriented 
groupings, as well as some that do, statisticians have appointments in a variety of 
different schools or departments. For example, business schools may have statisti-
cians in a department specializing in quantitative methods or a psychology depart-
ment may hire statisticians into their department to teach courses in statistics and 
research methods. Also, some institutions that do not have formal statistics depart-
ments might offer majors or minors in statistics through one of a variety of other 
academic departments or, possibly, through interdisciplinary programs that are 
linked across two or more departments. 
Most medical schools have statisticians on their staff, often organized in 
a department of biostatistics within a school of public health, working on research, 
assisting with grants, and teaching courses. Some business or engineering schools hire 
statisticians to teach introductory statistics courses and to complement their offerings 
with such topics as design of experiments, times series analysis, or forecasting. 
In some institutions, statisticians may be formally listed as members of more 
than one department or of an interdisciplinary program. In such cases, however, there 
is often one department with which the faculty member is primarily associated. 
Sometimes, especially in smaller or 2-year community colleges, statisticians 
may be the only members of their profession within the department, or even in the 
entire institution. 
13.5 MORE ON TENURE 
Tenure was introduced to help guarantee academic freedom. It was felt that, for the 
institution to thrive, academicians need to have the right to openly disagree with 

2 7 8 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
predominant opinions and theories and be able to pursue their research without 
interference. 
Gaining tenure is a key early goal of many statisticians who seek a career in 
academia. 
13.5.1 The Stakes and the Consequences 
Tenure provides a high level of job security and independence. If a professor is 
denied tenure, employment is typically terminated no later than at the end of the 
following academic year. Denial of tenure can be a substantial career setback and 
even the end of a planned academic career. There are, nevertheless, many examples 
of prominent statisticians who though denied tenure at one institution went on to 
thrive at another. 
The period leading up to the tenure decision can be especially harrowing, even 
for those considered shoo-ins. Tenure-track candidates need to pursue the goal of 
achieving tenure with acuity and a single-minded determination from the very 
beginning of their appointments. Their teaching and research efforts, especially, 
need to match the institution's expectations and be of top quality, as judged by their 
peers, both inside and outside their departments. 
Also, just as outside of academia (Section 5.8.2), expectations may change over 
time with, for example, a change in administration. You need to be prepared for such 
changes by constantly seeking answers to such questions as "has the recent appoint-
ment of an influential new dean altered the ground rules or focus" or "has the 
institution changed its research emphasis in, perhaps, seeking a new form of 
accreditation or new contract opportunities?" Also, there is much subjectivity in the 
assessment of a candidate's teaching and research performance. The best strategy is to 
anticipate unexpected developments, strive to exceed expectations, and, like outside 
academia, try to follow a strategy that is robust to change. 
13.5.2 Criteria 
The three main criteria for tenure are performance in research, teaching, and service to 
the institution. At many universities, the ability to generate external funding for your 
(and others') research may also be an important criterion for promotion and tenure. 
Different institutions weight the importance of each criterion differently, although, 
with the possible exception of 2-year community colleges, service is typically the 
least important of the three criteria. Some prestigious research universities value 
research so highly that tenure is awarded only to candidates who have achieved 
some degree of national stature in their fields. Other well-regarded universities and 
some 4-year colleges have more balanced requirements and may assign approxi-
mately equal weight to research and teaching in awarding tenure. Yet other 4-year 
colleges and community colleges tend to be focused on teaching and may require only 
limited demonstrated research or other scholarly achievements. 
There is much variability in how different institutions, and schools and 
departments within an institution, make the determination of what constitutes 
a good research record and a good teaching record. A school with focus on teaching 

13.6 LIFE BEYOND TENURE 
2 7 9 
might consider a total of two to six publications over a period of 6 years as sufficient. 
But to be considered a good teacher, a candidate is required to have attained very 
good teaching evaluations from students and positive assessments from peers who are 
assigned to evaluate teaching performance. 
In contrast, research universities typically require more published papers and/or 
papers in highly ranked journals for demonstration of superior research. At the same 
time, evidence of good teaching at such institutions might require only a prepon-
derance of reasonably good teaching evaluations. 
Expectations for tenure are typically stated in general terms in the institution's 
faculty manual. However, important specifics, such as the number of publications 
required and the minimum average teaching performance score on student ques-
tionnaires, will not be stated at most institutions. This lack of specificity allows the 
institution to judge the entire person applying for tenure and leads to some leeway in 
applying the criteria. 
13.5.3 Process 
It is clearly important for an aspiring tenure-track assistant professor to understand 
the mechanics involved in the tenure-granting process. We summarize this process on 
the book's ftp site. 
13.6 
LIFE BEYOND TENURE 
The path forward in academia does not end with the granting of tenure. Quite to the 
contrary, tenure offers a more unconstrained pursuit of professional goals offered by 
few other career paths. Newly tenured professors have many reasons to keep up the 
good work—if for no other reason than professional pride and personal satisfaction. 
They are also now in a position to assume greater risks, such as taking on more 
challenging and longer term research projects in which success may be less likely, but 
the payoff, if successful, is higher. 
There are also important tangible incentives for maintaining high performance 
after tenure. Annual merit reviews by department chairs, deans, and, in some cases, 
committees are designed to determine whether a professor maintains a level of 
performance that meets the expectation of the institution. These reviews typically 
focus on the professor's teaching and research record, but may also consider 
collegiality and service and are used in determining merit increases in a professor's 
salary. They may also initiate serious conversations with professors who fail to meet 
expectations. 
Further in-depth post-tenure reviews are conducted periodically, such as 
every 5 years, as a basis for recommendations of promotions in rank. Promotion to 
full professor, and especially the award of an endowed or distinguished chair, 
requires a record of substantial achievement—but one to which most academics 
aspire. Evaluations for promotion are not unlike tenure evaluations in that outside 
reviews and support are frequently sought and accomplishments are carefully 
scrutinized. 

2 8 0 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
The respect accorded to you by your colleagues and the chances of your work 
being judged exemplary are enhanced by the external acclaim accorded to your 
work through continued and increased funding, professional invitations to give 
presentations, awards, and various other recognitions. 
13.7 TEACHING CHALLENGES 
Statistics professors tend to teach a mix of introductory (so-called "service") courses 
to nonstatistics majors and more advanced courses to students with a greater interest in 
a particular aspect of statistics or—in those institutions where they exist—to statistics 
majors (or minors). 
13.7.1 Teaching Introductory Courses 
The first courses in statistics, regardless whether at the high school or college level, 
are absolutely critical, and we need substantially more passionate and skilled 
educators in order to maximize their positive impact. 
—X. L. Meng (2009) 
The Challenge. Many academic departments require, or strongly encourage, a 
course in introductory statistics, and for good reason. As discussed in Section 1.7, 
statistics helps people better understand numerous matters that impact their daily 
lives. It is equally important in a large number of professions and, especially, for 
disciplines in which data and empirical models play an important role. 
Unfortunately, many students find their introductory course in statistics less 
than exciting. Poor experience in such courses drives students away from taking 
additional statistics courses and, more significantly, might close their minds to 
statistical thinking. Some applied statisticians, in fact, claim that the bad memories 
associated with the introductory statistics course to which their clients were exposed 
represent the first obstacle that they must overcome in their dealings with them. One of 
the causes for such low esteem may be that statistics, being methodological in nature, 
can be somewhat dry when taught abstractly. 
It is helpful to differentiate among three situations: an undergraduate general 
"liberal arts" course, a more professionally or applications-oriented course directed at 
students in a particular subject matter area, and an omnibus course that tries to 
combine the two. The latter two courses might be at either the undergraduate or the 
graduate level. 
The General Audience Introductory Course. Many institutions and departments 
require their students to take one or more courses in quantitative thinking as 
undergraduates. A general statistics course that emphasizes statistical literacy and 
statistical thinking is often one of the courses that will satisfy this requirement. Such 
courses have been characterized as being aimed mainly at consumers of statistics. 
Their focus should be on illustrating statistical issues in the information provided to 

13.7 TEACHING CHALLENGES 
281 
the general public by the media and on using statistical concepts and statistical 
thinking in daily decision making. The resulting course should emphasize statistical 
concepts, assumptions, interpretations, and common misuses. When appropriate, 
actual case studies with real data should be included. 
The Application Area-Oriented Introductory Course. As we have tried to make 
clear in the first part of this book, statistics and statistical concepts have relevance 
to most application areas and call for, at least, a minimal level of understanding by 
the numerous professionals that work in these areas. Such understanding has, 
moreover, become increasingly important with the democratization of statistics 
(Section 5.2). 
Many institutions offer courses in statistics targeted at specific application 
areas as part of students' professional educations. Sometimes, these courses are 
developed and taught by nonstatisticians from within the department. But 
frequently the department calls upon statisticians, often from outside the department, 
to do so. 
The resulting courses need to be closely attuned to students' backgrounds and 
application areas. There is typically a big difference in past coursework and skills, 
especially in mathematics, between, say, engineering students and social science 
students. Moreover, the type of problems encountered most often and the statistical 
approaches used for addressing them tend to differ among application areas. Thus, 
courses for economics and business majors need to emphasize regression and time 
series analysis, those for psychology majors would stress association among qual-
itative variables and experimental design, and those for engineers might have 
significant focus on methods for quality and reliability improvement. Also, such 
courses need to be made more appealing to students by using examples from their 
particular application area. 
The Omnibus Course. Specialized courses directed at a specific application area 
are typically practical only in institutions with large enrollments in such areas. The 
hardest situation that you are likely to face in teaching an introductory statistics course 
is that in which those taking the course are a mix of students from the liberal arts and 
various application areas and where there is appreciable variability in analytical skills 
among students.5 In such cases especially, you need to gain a good appreciation of the 
backgrounds and interests of students, and then to develop a course that is best suited 
and most beneficial to the class as a whole. 
Large Class Challenges. Many introductory courses, and especially general and 
omnibus courses in large institutions, are often taught in a large lecture hall 
environment, and then broken down into laboratory or recitation sections, often led 
by graduate student teaching assistants. Thus, one of the important responsibilities of 
the professor is to help ensure that their teaching assistants are knowledgeable and 
Some 4-year colleges, and even some research-oriented universities, now offer two introductory omnibus 
courses—one that has elementary algebra as its main prerequisite and the other requiring a course in 
introductory calculus. 

282 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
effective communicators. This requires meeting with them periodically to make sure 
they understand what they need to communicate, foster a common approach, provide 
pointers for explaining difficult technical concepts, coordinate instructional tasks, 
ensure that grading is fair and consistent, and resolve issues. 
The electronic classroom (Section 13.7.3) has helped make teaching large 
classes more manageable. "Clicker technology" allows a lecturer to obtain on-the-
spot reactions from students, including level of comprehension, and to act accord-
ingly. This provides some compensation for the inability to communicate with most 
students individually. 
Some large lecture classes employ machine grading of multiple-choice 
examinations. This reduces the amount of time required for grading, but limits the 
scope of questions that can be asked. 
Meeting the Challenge. To improve the quality of statistics courses, teachers must 
communicate the relevance and excitement of the subject by using enlightening and 
relevant examples that demonstrate its importance—without being bogged down in 
details that are not essential to understanding. 
Fortunately, the statistical community, in general, and various statistical 
organizations, in particular, have become keenly aware of the need for improving 
the teaching of the introductory statistics course. Recently published texts have 
become more user-friendly and provide a rich collection of important and relevant 
examples of the practice of statistics. Also, numerous papers have been written on how 
to design and teach more effective statistics courses (e.g., Brown and Kass, 2009; 
Easterling, 2010; Meng, 2009) in The American Statistician and elsewhere. 
We highly recommend that new teachers of statistics regularly skim issues of 
the four major journals devoted to the teaching of statistics: 
• The Journal of Statistics Education. 
• Teaching Statistics. 
• Statistics Education Research Journal. 
• Technology Innovations in Statistics Education. 
All of these journals (except Teaching Statistics) are free and easily accessible on the 
Internet. Moreover, the Teaching Statistics web site has a wealth of free information 
related to introductory statistics. 
In addition, the American Statistical Association (ASA) has two sections that 
focus on teaching: the Section on Statistical Education6 and the Section on Teaching 
Statistics in Health Sciences.7 Internationally, the major organization concerned with 
teaching statistics is the International Association for Statistics Education. Finally, 
two magazines (Chance and Significance) and various Internet sites (such as Chance 
News) provide numerous examples of the use and misuse of statistics in everyday life; 
see Sections 14.4 and 14.2, respectively. 
6 http://www.amstat.org/sections/educ/. 
7 http://www.bio.ri.ccf.org/ASA_TSHS/html/index.html. 
8 http://www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~iase/. 

13.7 TEACHING CHALLENGES 
283 
The availability of student versions and institution-wide site licenses of 
sophisticated statistical software has meant that most introductory statistics courses 
have become more problem and data oriented, instead of formula based. Such 
software also allows striking graphical and animated demonstrations of data and 
statistical concepts. In addition, instructors need to develop relevant case studies and 
data sets that require limited explanation and that readily lend themselves to out-of-
the-classroom analysis (see Shutes, 2009). The various resources mentioned in the 
previous paragraphs are sources for such case studies and data sets. 
Teaching introductory statistics might seem easy from a technical point of view. 
Yet it usually presents formidable pedagogical challenges in explaining relatively 
complex statistical concepts, such as sampling error and confidence intervals, to 
beginners. Making the introductory course interesting and relevant to students often 
with a diversity of backgrounds requires considerable work. It should not be taken 
lightly or regarded as secondary to, say, teaching advanced seminars and doing 
research. 
13.7.2 Teaching Beyond the Introductory Course 
A further responsibility for some statisticians in academia is teaching a second course 
in statistics, often directed at a specific methodology area. Some schools or depart-
ments within schools might encourage, and occasionally require, students to take such 
a course. A business school may, for example, offer a second statistics course devoted 
principally to regression analysis, quantitative finance, or quality management. There 
may, in fact, be a variety of such courses offered within a school or department, aimed 
mainly at nonstatistics majors with different specialties. 
In addition, statisticians in universities with a major or specialization in 
statistics teach more advanced courses at the graduate and sometimes undergraduate 
level. In fact, this is, in some cases, their major teaching responsibility. The wide, and 
ever-increasing, spectrum of statistics courses was discussed in Section 7.7. 
Teaching more advanced courses in statistics might, in some ways, be easier 
than teaching introductory courses because you can generally expect more motivated 
students and less variability in their abilities. Instead, a major challenge is to provide 
students the knowledge and understanding to be effective applied statisticians and/or 
teachers of statistics and researchers. This requires not only imparting technical 
knowledge but also, and most importantly, helping students learn how to adapt that 
knowledge to address new problems, differing from standard classroom examples, 
that they may encounter in the course of their careers. In addition, you need to prepare 
students for the nontechnical challenges that they are likely to face and that we have 
strived to describe throughout this volume, such as building written and oral 
communication skills. 
13.7.3 Some Further Tips for Effective Teaching 
If all students do not get a grade of A, the professor flunks. 
—W. Edwards Deming 

284 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
While the preceding statement, attributed to Deming, is extreme, it expresses 
the need for a good teacher to be driven to engage all students at their highest 
individual levels. 
In addition to being a good communicator, a successful teacher must have 
a sense of what students can absorb and how rapidly they can absorb it. Students 
have much variability with regard to both their innate ability and their interest in the 
subject—particularly, if they are required to take the course. 
Good teachers, especially of the introductory course in statistics, are able to 
simplify complex subjects, reduce the material to essential concepts, and possess 
much patience. They need to be willing to help students succeed and to strive to 
motivate those who are less interested to realize the importance of statistics and 
statistical thinking in their daily lives and careers. 
Planning and Organization. Effective teaching requires more than just lecturing in 
class and interaction with students. Before a course can be offered, it needs to be 
planned. The teaching approach and the selection of a textbook and coverage of topics 
must match the course prerequisites and requirements, and anticipated student 
abilities and needs. Relevant examples and/or case studies must be assembled and 
problem sets that support learning developed. Such advance planning culminates in 
a syllabus containing, at a minimum, weekly topics and assignments, dates of tests, 
and grading policy. For most courses, students will require affordable and easy access 
to statistical software. 
Assignments, tests, and papers need to be graded in a timely manner. For 
courses with large enrollments especially, some or most grading may be done by a 
graduate assistant, who, in turn needs to provide appropriate feedback to the professor. 
The Electronic Classroom. The emergence of the electronic classroom has aided 
communication between students and teachers, especially in large classroom 
situations. 
Internet-based software makes it easier to communicate and update course 
information. It allows posting and downloading of supplementary course notes, 
homework assignments, and associated data sets and clarification of issues that arise 
both in class and outside of class. Completed assignments may be submitted 
electronically and returned graded. Online quizzes are used in some classes. Dis-
cussion groups can communicate with each other on group projects, allowing all 
group members to work on a single up-to-date version of the project document. 
Soliciting Timely Feedback. One proactive move for improvement (in addition to 
the feedback provided by clicker technology) is for a professor to administer 
periodically a short questionnaire, perhaps electronically. This might ask students 
to comment on how well they understand the material, topic by topic, and solicit 
suggestions for improvement in the way the class is being taught. Questions should be 
formulated so as to lead to constructive suggestions. The resulting information allows 
the instruction to be recalibrated in a manner that lets students benefit immediately 
from the feedback they provide. Also, reviewing the results with students can be used 
as an example of statistics in action. 

13.7 TEACHING CHALLENGES 
2 8 5 
All of this does not mean that professors need to act on every suggestion made; 
students' short-term goals are, after all, not always purely to improve the eventual 
learning experience—but all should be considered. 
Summary. No simple formula defines a successful teacher of statistics. You need 
to communicate your enthusiasm about the subject to students in both introduc-
tory and more advanced courses. In return, you should derive much satisfaction 
from motivating students and from observing their growth. You need to focus on 
the essential concepts that students must grasp—whatever their level—to sense 
what they are able to do within a reasonable time, and to challenge them to do 
their best. 
13.7.4 Teaching Evaluations 
How is a professor's teaching effectiveness evaluated in making tenure and other 
promotion decisions? A short answer may be "with some difficulty." 
Questionnaire Evaluations. Student course evaluations are a common tool for 
assessing teaching performance. Some institutions, in fact, require students to 
complete such questionnaires before releasing course grades. Questionnaires are 
typically completed anonymously at the end of a semester by students rating the 
professor on, say, a score from l to 5, and providing further comments in response to 
such statements as 
• The professor was effective in teaching the class. 
• The professor presented the material in a manner that raised my interest in the 
subject. 
• The professor explained concepts clearly. 
• The professor graded my work fairly. 
• The weekly workload for the course was appropriate. 
• Overall, this course was worthwhile. 
The response scores are then typically summarized in the form of histograms 
and averages, and communicated, together with comments, to the professor and the 
department chair. 
There is much controversy as to what student questionnaires actually measure 
and how they reflect and impact teaching quality. But they are easy to administer and 
consequently are widely used. See the book's ftp site for further discussion. 
Using Questionnaires as a Tool for Improvement. Teaching evaluations can serve 
as an important tool for improving teaching effectiveness. This may be helped by 
adding questions whose answers can provide specific suggestions on how improve-
ments might be achieved. Two questions that often lead to useful insights are 
• What three things did you like most about this course? 
• What three things did you like least about this course? 

2 8 6 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
Other Evaluation Tools. A further, but somewhat time-absorbing, teacher assess-
ment tool, sometimes used in tenure evaluations, is to have an independent skilled 
person (e.g., someone from an institutional research office) conduct personal 
interviews with former students. More commonly, junior professors' in-class 
performance may be directly observed by one or more senior colleagues, say, once 
a year or before tenure or other performance reviews. In addition, there may be an 
accumulation of anecdotal evidence, such as letters from students or parents. How 
an institution handles such information varies greatly, but has become increasingly 
transparent in most institutions by being specified in faculty manuals and similar 
documents. 
13.8 RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
Publish or perish. 
—Familiar saying 
Research-oriented statistics departments, especially in research-oriented uni-
versities, require their faculties to produce research of both high quality and quantity. 
A college dedicated to teaching, although usually requiring evidence of some 
scholarship, might regard research accomplishments as secondary to inspired and 
committed teaching. A 2-year community college may acknowledge research by its 
faculty, but often does not require it for faculty promotion. 
13.8.1 Types of Statistical Research 
Just as the relative emphasis given to research versus teaching and other responsi-
bilities varies from one institution to the other, and even between departments within 
the same institution, so does the type of research undertaken. 
Professors in a research-oriented statistics department often conduct work that 
is highly theoretical and methodological. Examples of some topics that appeared 
during 2010 in the theoretically motivated Annals of Statistics are 
• High-dimensional Ising model selection using i\ -regularized logistic 
regression. 
• Adjusted empirical likelihood with high-order precision. 
• Exact properties of Efron's biased coin randomization procedure. 
• Quantile calculus and censored regression. 
At the same time, many statistics departments place a high premium on having their 
faculty engaged in applications, as well as theory and methods development. This 
often makes for better teachers and opens a wider range of grant funding opportu-
nities. In addition, statisticians outside of statistics departments in, say, a business or 
medical school or in an engineering department might be engaged in research targeted 
at their department interests or interdisciplinary research. The results may be 

13.8 RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
2 8 7 
published in one of the journals of the ASA or in a highly regarded journal 
associated with some other professional organization. Some examples, also published 
in 2010, are 
• How Many People Do You Know? Efficiently Estimating Personal Network 
Size, Journal of the American Statistical Association. 
• Statistical Methods for Fighting Financial Crimes, Technometrics. 
• Optimal Binary Prediction for Group Decision Making, Journal of Business 
and Economic Statistics. 
• Joint Inference on HIV Viral Dynamics and Immune Suppression in Presence of 
Measurement Errors, Biometrics. 
There are again no hard and fast rule governing the type of research conducted in 
a particular department and institution. It is not unusual for a theoretically 
oriented professor in a statistics department to be engaged on an important practical 
problem in collaboration with academic colleagues from another discipline. Also, 
many professors actively seek and work on problems that are motivated, and 
sometimes supported, by government, nonprofit organizations, educational institu-
tions, or business and industry. 
13.8.2 Identifying Research Projects 
An important part of professors' jobs in a research-oriented environment is often 
to identify potential areas of research for themselves and graduate students. In making 
a selection from among alternative areas of research, you need to ask yourself 
questions such as 
• Does the proposed research address an important (applied or theoretical) 
problem? 
• Are you confident that others have not already solved the problem (or are 
about to do so)? Have you conducted an adequate search of the relevant 
literature? 
• What are the chances that you (or one of your students) will succeed in making 
an important contribution in a reasonable amount of time? Is the problem too 
hard to be tractable or too simple to be regarded important? 
• How "publishable" will this work be, when completed, and in which journals? 
• How much time and effort will doing the work take? 
• How much help will you need from others to complete the work successfully? 
• Who are some candidates who might help you and how likely is it that they are 
willing and able to do so? Can you enlist their help in preparing a proposal for 
the work? 
• Do you need funding to perform the research? If so, which agencies might you 
approach (or respond to) and how likely is it that you will be able to secure such 
funding or other needed support? 

2 8 8 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
• Is successful completion of the work likely to generate more (funded) 
research? 
The answers to the preceding questions should help you target in on the specific 
research topics that you will decide to pursue. For example, the need for funding can 
significantly narrow the list and focus of potential research topics. 
Hamada and Sitter (2004) provide further guidance on how to get started in 
research. 
13.8.3 Securing Research Grants 
Importance. The need for obtaining external funding for the research conducted 
by professors and their students plays an increasingly important role in many research-
oriented universities; in many cases, it is a prerequisite for doing substantial work on 
a problem. Many universities rely heavily on funding to support graduate 
programs, especially in science and engineering. Sometimes, such funding also supports 
summer salaries and attendance at conferences by faculty members9 and their students. 
The ability to attract external funding, moreover, provides tangible evidence of 
the importance of the work and how highly it is regarded. Thus, all research-oriented 
universities consider success in procuring funding, along with publication of the 
research, in tenure and merit evaluations. The award of a large research grant can be 
a major boost to a professor's career. 
As a consequence, the development and writing of proposals for funding future 
research is a significant, and often highly time-consuming, activity for many 
university professors. 
Funding Agencies. Statisticians in academia typically seek grants from government 
agencies that have ongoing research support programs, such as the National Science 
Foundation and the National Institutes of Health in the United States. Some U.S. 
organizations have Young Investigator Programs, described on their web sites, 
specifically designed for researchers with less experience who need to establish 
themselves. 
Other possible sources of support might be a business or other agency with 
a particular interest in the solution of a particular problem. Typical examples might be 
a proposal to an appropriate agency for a new method for the analysis of data to assess 
the quality of health care or for handling nonrespondents in census or sample studies. 
In some other cases, statistical research or other work may be conducted in support of 
funded projects within the university. 
Preparing the Proposal. Our comments about the preparation of proposals for 
project funding in Section 9.2.5 were mainly addressed to business and industry. But 
9 Many universities or departments pay expenses for attendance at conferences only for faculty who present 
papers or perform some important professional function. Others may have some faculty development funds 
available for this purpose. Since attendance at conferences is often extremely important to advance careers, 
some professors decide, if need be, to shoulder personally part, or even all, of the expenses. 

13.8 RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
2 8 9 
many of these comments also hold for academic research. Proposals developed in 
academia and addressed to government agencies, however, are typically more formal, 
and often longer, than those for, say, securing internal funding in business and 
industry. 
Due to the highly competitive nature of many research grant programs, awards 
often can be made to only a small fraction of those who apply. However, the success 
rate varies across agencies and across programs within agencies. In some situations, 
you might consider submitting a revised proposal for a particular segment or 
extension of the work, if your original proposal is not funded—and if the feedback 
that you receive from the funding agency appears to provide you encouragement to 
do so. 
In light of the potentially extensive time commitment that many proposals 
require, it is imperative that you be judicious and realistic in the selection of the 
research projects that you pursue. Rather than proposing a new line of research, your 
chances might be better if you respond to an agency's request to conduct statistical 
research in support of some project known to be of interest to the agency. For example, 
in developing a proposal directed at an agency that is strongly concerned with 
reliability assessment, you might focus on work dealing with improving the infor-
mation that can be gained from nondestructive testing. 
Many universities and colleges have offices that can help you identify funding 
sources (and sometimes also project opportunities), write proposals, prepare budgets, 
and help ensure that your proposal is maximally effective and properly submitted. Do 
not be discouraged if you do not succeed initially—and always have an alternative 
Plan B in mind or, better still, underway. 
13.8.4 Assessment of the Quality of Research 
You need to know how the quality and quantity of your research will be evaluated by 
your institution in tenure, promotion, and other performance evaluations. 
Success in Securing Research Funding. Success in securing funding is measured 
by the prestige of the funding agency,' ° the scholarly nature of the work, and the size 
of support that you were able to obtain. 
Success in Publishing Research. Published research provides a tangible way of 
measuring your academic research accomplishments. What counts as published 
research, however, and how much weight it is given, based upon its perceived level 
of recognized and distinguished scholarship, varies from one institution and from one 
department to the other. 
Publication or acceptance of papers in high-quality peer-reviewed refereed 
journals is used as prima facie evidence of successful research. Publication of 
a scholarly book, or, possibly, of a chapter in a book, is also generally regarded 
highly, but is a route that is likely to be premature, too risky, and too time-consuming 
for most seeking tenure. 
Grants from the National Science Foundation tend, for example, to be rated especially highly. 

2 9 0 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
Other work that is generally not taken as prima facie evidence of research or 
scholarly contributions by a professor at a research-oriented institution, but might be 
given varying degrees of weight elsewhere include. 
• Invited keynote address at a national conference. 
• Invited paper (or participation in a panel) at a national research conference. 
• Incorporation of a method (developed by the professor) in a well-known 
software package. 
• Contributed paper presented at a national research conference. 
• Report of research findings to a funding agency. 
• Publication in a nonrefereed journal or conference proceedings." 
• Invited presentation to a local chapter of a professional society, such as the AS A 
or the American Society for Quality. 
The preceding activities are listed in approximate sequence of importance, but this 
also varies between and within institutions. Some universities may not count any of 
them as evidence of successful research. 
Moreover, even refereed journals are often tiered based upon their perceived 
intellectual level with heavier weight given to publications in journals that are 
regarded as prestigious (see Sidebar 13.2). 
TIERING STATISTICAL JOURNALS 
The medical profession tends to recognize publications in a few journals, such as the Journal 
of the American Medical Association and the New England Journal of Medicine, as being 
more noteworthy than those in some others. Similarly, statistics departments tend to regard 
highly publications in, for example, the Annals of Statistics, the Journal of the American 
Statistical Association. Biometrika, or the Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B. 
University adminisü-ators may seek a list of the most prestigious journals, via a web site 
ranking, and use these in evaluating the worthiness of an applicant's research in tenure and 
promotion assessments. 
Another alternative might be to rank journals by "impact factor" metrics, such as how 
frequently papers in the journal are referenced. However, articles may be cited for a variety 
of reasons—such as ringing endorsements, minor refinements, and critical assessments— 
some of which are not indicators of high quality or importance. There may. in addition, be 
differences among disciplines and biases introduced by some journals that tend to favor 
publishing papers that reference articles published in that journal. 
In addition, many applied journals are held in high regard by, at least, the researchers who 
work in these areas. Examples are Technometrics for engineering statistics. Biometrics 
for biological statistics, and the Journal of Computational and Graphical Statistics for 
computing statistics. 
'' Some conference proceedings are refereed, but the rigor of the refereeing processes varies and tends to be 
less stringent than that used by highly regarded journals. 

13.8 RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
291 
When publishing in lesser known journais, it may be the author's responsibility to 
demonstrate the reputation of the journal. The same may hold, even for highly regarded 
statistical journals, for statisticians located in an application area department. Some business 
schools use the list of the Financial Times Top Academic Journals in the Business to 
establish top tier status. Of the 40 journals currently on this list, ihc Journal ofthe American 
Statistical Association is the only statistics journal. The scholarly credentials of other 
journals might need to be demonstrated. This may involve providing evidence of the 
strictness of the refereeing process or pointing to publications in the journal by distinguished 
colleagues. 
Actual Impact of Research. One way of assessing the perceived contribution of 
your research is how frequently it has been cited by others in the published literature. 
Such information is provided by several citation indexes.'2 This, however, carries 
with it some of the same problems as cited in Sidebar 13.2 and it usually takes several 
years before an article becomes widely cited. 
Another measure of the potential importance of research in some scientific areas 
is the application and/or issuance of patents resulting from the work. Although not 
unheard of for statistics, this has greater applicability in some other disciplines, such as 
engineering. It is also more conducive to research in an industrial or business 
environment in which a major goal is for a company to benefit monetarily from the 
research, as opposed to making the work readily accessible to as many others as 
possible. 
A further measure of the impact of a (applications oriented) professor's research 
is the degree to which it has actually been used by the sponsoring agencies and others. 
Such information is, however, often difficult to obtain and even more difficult to 
measure. In addition, especially for highly theoretical work, there may be a significant 
time lag between when the research was conducted and its successful use in 
applications or in the development of new theory. 
Summary. Some specific issues concerning how your research is to be evaluated that 
you need to have a good feel for, from the start of your appointment, include 
• What is the importance of publications in prestigious journals versus success in 
securing research grants? 
• What is the weight given to different journals in which you might wish to 
publish (both in statistical and in application area journals)? 
• To what degree can lack of publication in perceived top-tier journals be 
compensated for by a higher number of lower tier publications? 
• How much does writing chapters in other authors' books, edited collections, 
and encyclopedias count? What are the weights, if any, assigned to writing 
textbooks and research monographs that are not subject to the usual peer-review 
process? 
" For example, see http://www.harzing.com/pop.htm. 

292 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
• How is (possibly multiple) coauthored work assessed versus solely authored 
work? 
• What weight, if any, is given to citations, evidence of applications of your work, 
and possible other criteria? 
• Are other scholarly activities, such as serving as a reviewer of manuscripts 
submitted to journals, given any consideration, and if so, how much weight do 
they receive in rating your research/scholarship? If these activities do not 
count as research/scholarship, do they count as service to the profession? 
13.9 CONSULTING CHALLENGES 
We have already commented on some of the opportunities and challenges of within-
the-institution (or internal) consulting from students' perspectives in Section 7.10 and 
of private statistical consulting in Section 12.2.5. In this section, we briefly discuss 
consulting—or, more broadly, project collaboration—from a faculty member's 
perspective. 
If you are to be engaged in consulting, you should strive to settle up front 
(preferably in writing) the terms of your involvement, such as authorship and 
compensation, and understand how such work impacts tenure and promotion 
evaluations. 
13.9.1 Internal Consulting 
Statisticians in academia are frequently asked to guide students working on a thesis or 
help colleagues from throughout the institution. 
Such activity can arise in various ways. For example, a faculty member in 
another department may request help on a paper that referees have criticized for 
inadequate statistical analysis. You may be asked to rectify the problem expeditiously 
without being given needed background information on the purpose of the study and 
how the data were collected. As is the case outside academia (Section 5.2.4 and 
Chapter 11), a more productive arrangement arises when you are invited, at the outset, 
to participate as a collaborator with responsibilities that include helping to plan all 
aspects of the data gathering. 
Some universities, especially those with departments of statistics, operate 
statistical consulting centers to help graduate students or faculty from throughout 
the institution in the design of statistical studies and the analysis of the resulting data 
(Section 7.10). As a faculty member, you may be part of that center or even be leading 
its activities. Frequently, rather than addressing problems directly yourself, you may 
funnel them to students, whom you would guide and supervise. 
13.9.2 External Consulting 
As a statistician in academia, you may be called upon to help a business, government 
agency, or other external organization as a consultant, or possibly collaborator. You 

13.9 CONSULTING CHALLENGES 
2 9 3 
might also be asked to be an expert witness in a lawsuit (Section 4.6.4) or to provide 
instruction (e.g., through a short course) to your clients' staff in a specialized area, 
such as product life data analysis, analysis of spatial data, or sampling. 
Most universities have provisions that allow professors to spend a limited 
amount of time (e.g., 2 days per month) on such external activities. Many professors 
find it useful to involve students in such work—although this is not always possible in 
light of confidentiality considerations. 
13.9.3 Some Pros and Cons of Academic Consulting 
Consulting can be beneficial to you as an academician because of the resulting 
contacts across campus and externally, the contributions that you might make by such 
work, and the goodwill and enhancement of your reputation that it can create. 
Interesting research challenges often grow out of such consulting. These can help 
broaden your horizon, provide practical examples for class discussion, and result in 
publications. External consulting may also lead to added funding that can supplement, 
or serve as a substitute for, research funding or, in some cases, provide additional 
personal income. Many such projects involve a healthy mix of consulting and applied 
research. 
It is also possible for consulting, and especially external consulting, to 
become a distraction from the traditional and immediate requirements in aca-
demia of teaching and research; see Sidebar 13.3. Before getting too heavily 
engaged in external consulting, you need to understand fully what you will gain 
from such work, how it might add to and detract from your other responsibilities, 
and how it can be best scheduled so as to minimize the interference with other 
commitments. 
THE CONFLICT BETWEEN CONSULTING AND OTHER ACADEMIC 
RESPONSreiLITUiS: A CASE STUDY 
A lawyer, defending a client who is potentially liable for a large sum of money for alleged 
improper conduct, engages a professor of statistics to review a sampling procedure that had 
been performed by the prosecution on the client's records. She finds important defects in 
how the survey had been conducted and is asked to present these in court. Some strict time 
deadlines are associated with the work and the court's calendar is beyond the professor's 
control. At the last minute, the hearings are delayed and the professor needs to sit around 
waiting for her tum to testify. 
As a consequence, the professor is forced to miss classes and cancel office appointments. 
Colleagues have to pitch in lo answer student questions. Time originally planned for putting 
together a conference presentation and finalizing a paper for publication is lost. The 
professor begins to wonder, but somewhat too late, whether the benefits of her participation 
are sufficient to compensate for the associated disruption. 

294 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
13.10 ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICE CHALLENGES 
Academic institutions generally have a high degree of self-governance. Overall 
policy is typically set by a governing board, often called the Board of Trustees. The 
details and implementation are largely in the hands of the administration—as 
represented by the president, academic vice presidents, deans, department chairs, 
and so on. In addition, in many institutions, the faculty has considerable influence, 
especially in some areas, through committees or governance bodies such as the 
faculty senate. 
At most institutions, committee service is required of all permanent faculty, 
including junior faculty. The quantity of such service is measurable; its quality is more 
difficult to assess. One common mistake made by junior faculty is to take on too much 
committee (and similar) service. We suggest that you talk to senior colleagues before 
agreeing to committee service, especially outside of your department. 
13.10.1 Responsibilities of Faculty Committees 
Academic policies frequently begin with an initiative from the administration. The 
appropriate committee then studies and discusses the proposal and makes recom-
mendations to the faculty of the involved department, school, or, even, the entire 
college or university. Faculty committees are generally responsible for making 
recommendations about the academic curriculum and related matters (see the next 
subsection). Institution administrators often are ex-officio committee members to 
ensure that the committee's recommendations conform to practical constraints and 
to institutional policy and in light of their subsequent responsibilities in imple-
mentation. Thus, such administrators often assert much influence on committee 
recommendations. 
13.10.2 Types of Committees 
In many institutions, two of the most important standing committees are those on 
setting curricular policy and on granting tenure and promotion. The committee on the 
curriculum (other names such as academic affairs are quite common) examines and 
approves (or disapproves) requests for new courses. Such a committee also generally 
reviews proposals for a new major or minor and makes recommendations to higher 
administrative units in (and in some cases beyond) the institution. 
The committee on promotion and tenure assesses teaching, research, and other 
performance. It may, for example, develop guidelines on what type of work counts as 
research and how various types of research are to be weighted in tenure and other 
decisions. Based upon these guidelines, such committees then make the all-important 
recommendations on granting tenure or promotion of individual faculty members. In 
some institutions, such committees also conduct periodic merit reviews of faculty 
members. In most institutions, administrators, such as department chairs and deans, 
then use such information to make the final decisions or recommendations concern-
ing, say, salary increases and promotions. 

13.11 PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CHALLENGES 
2 9 5 
Other committees deal with such diverse matters as deciding whether under-
performing or troublesome students should remain in the institution, how the 
intellectual life of students can be enhanced, athletics, and a host of other topics. 
Much of the work of standing committees is conducted in subcommittees. For 
example, the curriculum committee may have a subcommittee for the approval of 
new courses. Faculty may also serve on the faculty senate or a similar body. In 
addition, faculty may be asked to be on search committees for open faculty positions 
or for important positions in the administration, such as Dean and Provost. 
13.10.3 Appointment to Committees 
The composition of standing committees is generally specified in the institution's 
governance agreement. If you wish to be on a particular committee, you need to 
determine what you have to do or whom you need to contact to make this happen. Most 
important faculty committee positions are filled through elections. Members of some 
committees in some institutions are appointed by the administrators such as a provost, 
dean, or department chair. In other cases, appointments are made by elected faculty 
leaders. Some committee positions may be reserved for junior faculty. 
13.10.4 The Pros and Cons of Administrative Service 
Administrative service can provide you useful insights into—and a (small) say 
about—the workings of the institution that you serve. It also provides you the chance 
to get to know senior faculty outside your department who might be helpful to you as 
you seek tenure and promotion. 
The biggest disadvantage of committee service is that it can be time-consuming 
and could, possibly, detract you from your research and teaching. As a consequence, 
some junior professors limit their service on committees, at least initially, only to that 
which is expected of them. 
13.11 
PROFESSIONAL SERVICE CHALLENGES 
Service to the profession (Section 12.6), through organizations such as the ASA, 
editorial work, and organizing conferences or sessions at conferences, can 
enhance your professional life and visibility. In addition to providing satisfaction 
in "paying back" the profession that has nurtured you, such involvement can help 
you identify potential areas of research and new teaching approaches, as well as 
potential future research collaborators. Such exposure might also lead to invita-
tions to present or publish your research. Involvement in the publications process 
can, moreover, provide you insights that may be helpful in getting your own 
research published. 
Professional service, however, typically counts only modestly, at best, in most 
tenure evaluations. It may be more important when you are seeking promotion to full 
professor. Significant leadership roles such as election to be an officer of a profes-
sional society and, especially, editorship of a prestigious journal may count more. 

2 9 6 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
Such leadership opportunities are, however, not readily available to junior professors 
and typically require prerequisite work in the trenches. 
13.12 MORE ON THE ACADEMIC ENVIRONMENT 
13.12.1 Relationships with Colleagues 
The collegial nature of academic institutions brings faculty members together within 
and across departments, especially in their service on administrative or thesis 
committees. At the same time, in conducting their research, professors often work 
on selected projects alone or in small teams, often with a small group of graduate 
students. 
Professors often need to coordinate their teaching with other instructional 
activities inside and outside the department. This is especially important when 
different professors are teaching the same course. In teaching more advanced 
courses, professors need to ensure that important prerequisites are covered in 
earlier courses. Also, coordination is required to eliminate redundancy and to 
maintain consistency in program offerings, and to adhere to departmental academic 
policy. 
Collegiality works best when all show mutual respect. As a flourishing 
academician, you can and should have your own ideas, but you should try to ensure 
that they have merit in the eyes of others and that, while voicing them strongly, you 
also do so constructively. However, you should be willing to compromise. As a young 
faculty member, you should especially strive to avoid conflict with colleagues and 
administrators, keeping in mind, if nothing else, that some of your fellow committee 
members (or their close colleagues) may sit in judgment of you during the tenure, 
promotion, or contract renewal decision process. 
13.12.2 Relationship with Students 
Students come to an "institution of higher learning" to be educated and to graduate. 
Contact with students i s an essential part of your job as a professor and is not limited to 
classroom teaching. It requires making yourself available to students during office 
hours and beyond, responding to e-mails concerning class work, and, in general, 
helping students become motivated, successful, and ethical statisticians or discrim-
inating and savvy users of statistics. 
Your relationship differs among different student groups. It is impossible for 
you to get to know each student personally in a large lecture class. However, if your 
department offers a statistics major, you do get to know well a, usually relatively 
small, cadre of undergraduate and/or graduate students, and especially those who 
are conducting research with you or writing a thesis under your direction. You may, 
in fact, be an important influence, and even a character building force, for such 
students. 
You might also get to know students personally through department and 
institution-sponsored social functions and clubs. Many students enjoy participating 

13.12 MORE ON THE ACADEMIC ENVIRONMENT 
2 9 7 
in the social life that universities and colleges offer and like to mingle with faculty 
outside the classroom. Thus, many departments and colleges set up events to enhance 
the sense of community between students and faculty, such as dinners, parties, and 
other gatherings. In such more relaxed settings, you need to continue to serve as a role 
model to students—be it in leading discussions or in showing proper conduct. 
Moreover, you need to ensure that your relationship remains professional and does 
not create a potential conflict of interest. 
After students graduate, the situation may well change. Former graduate 
students might eventually become collaborators—or even lifelong friends—with 
their ex-professors. 
13.12.3 Isolated Statisticians 
The Challenge. Some major universities have large and thriving statistics depart-
ments. But at other universities, many 4-year colleges, and most 2-year community 
colleges, statisticians might find themselves professionally isolated—at least within 
their departments—among, say, business faculty, medical researchers, mathemati-
cians, or engineers. 
The result is a very different environment from that in, say, a large statistics 
department. Not having statistical colleagues may make you feel lonely, especially if 
you have recently graduated from a school with a significant statistical presence. 
You may miss having technical discussions with colleagues on whom you can 
bounce off ideas, and participating in statistical seminars. The library may be 
reluctant to buy advanced statistics books or subscribe to journals on statistics. Other 
faculty may not readily understand the importance and quality of your research or 
appreciate the significance of your accomplishments; see Sidebar 13.4 for an 
example. 
RECOGNITION FROM NONSTATISTICAL COLLEAGUES; AN EXAMPLE 
Election to fellowship in the ASA is a unique honor and may be the pinnacle of your career. 
Your feeling of euphoria upon receiving this award may be dampened by the "so what" 
response from colleagues outside your field. This is because in some other professions 
becoming a fellow might amount to litLle more than being certified as professionally 
qualified and payment of dues,13 and does noi require the rigorous process of evaluation 
thai precedes such bestowment on a small fraction of statisticians. 
13 This is also the case for some statistical societies outside the United States, such as the Royal Statistical 
Society. 

2 9 8 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMlA 
Addressing the Challenge. Statisticians strive to overcome isolation by expanding 
their horizons. In some universities, there may be other statisticians, or member of a 
closely related discipline, such as operations research, possibly elsewhere on campus. 
Or there may be statisticians in nearby institutions or professional activities outside 
academia. Many metropolitan areas in the United States, for example, have local 
chapters of the ASA. 
Attending conferences is another good way to meet other statisticians and learn 
what they are doing. Sessions sponsored by the ASA Section on Statistical Education 
are a good place to start. Also, an informal group of Isolated Statisticians'4 organizes 
get-togethers at the Joint Statistical Meetings and engages in subsequent 
communication. 
Finally, we note that there are also advantages to being embedded in an 
environment that is not dominated by statistics. Contact and collaboration with 
nonstatistical colleagues may expedite identifying important practical research 
opportunities, enhance communication skills, and, in general, help get you involved 
in addressing important real problems. 
13.13 TRAINING TO BECOME AN ACADEMIC 
STATISTICIAN 
What background and training should an academic statistician have? The short 
answer is one that supports all aspects of an academic career; that is, whatever is 
necessary to conduct research, teach, and, on occasion, consult. 
Much of what we say in Chapter 7 also applies for academic statisticians. As just 
one example, judicious selection of your dissertation topic is highly important since it 
might define, at least, your early career research and publications. 
13.13.1 Degree Requirements 
As previously indicated, universities and most 4-year colleges require full-time 
faculty to hold doctoral degrees for tenure-track positions.1 Two-year community 
colleges generally do not require a Ph.D., although some faculty members have such 
degrees. 
Most statistics professors hold their final degrees in statistics. Degrees in other 
fields are also sometimes acceptable or even desirable. For example, individuals with 
majors in operations research, applied mathematics, computer science, decision 
sciences, or a similar discipline and strong training and/or experience in statistics 
may be hired as statistics professors. 
14 http://www.lawrence.edu/fast/jordanj/isostat.html. 
15 Offers are often made to candidates close to finishing their degrees, subject to successful 
completion. 

13.13 TRAINING TO BECOME AN ACADEMIC STATISTICIAN 
2 9 9 
13.13.2 Courses to Take 
It is essential for academic statisticians, and especially those who expect to be heavily 
engaged in research and in extending the frontiers of statistics, to have a solid 
background in statistical theory. While a 1-year sequence in mathematical statistics 
may be sufficient to teach an introductory statistics course, it is not enough to read and 
fully understand some published statistical research or satisfactorily conduct your 
own research. Consequently, many Ph.D. programs in statistics require added courses 
in statistical theory. 
Like their colleagues outside academia, prospective statistical academicians 
also need to study the core subjects suggested in Table 7.1, such as Monte Carlo 
simulation, (advanced) regression analysis, time series, and sampling. Furthermore, 
early exposure to specialized areas, such as multivariate analysis and nonparametric 
theory, can prove useful throughout your career. Finally, recent trends in statistics 
indicate an increasing importance of certain aspects of statistical computing and 
numerical analysis that many will want to explore in formal coursework. 
13.13.3 Application Area Knowledge 
A new Ph.D. with well-honed knowledge in a very narrow field may do well in 
a research environment, usually in the statistics department of a large university that 
seeks that individual's highly specific skills. But for many going into academia, 
narrow training in statistics is not sufficient. A professor in a business school or 
a school of public health will be much more effective with some substantive 
background in the field of application (e.g., economics and marketing for a business 
professor and biology and genetics for a professor in a school of public health). 
A good understanding of application areas also allows researchers to identify 
important unsolved problems, thus presenting potential research topics. Application 
area knowledge will also make you a more effective collaborator and consultant, as 
well as help improve your classroom examples and your ability to motivate students. 
To further such understanding, we urge you, like your colleagues who are 
planning on nonacademic positions, to seek internships in application areas while still 
a student. It may, after all, be the only opportunity you will have in your career to get 
close to the source of real problems. 
13.13.4 Teaching Experience 
Teaching experience is, understandably, also highly important, especially for posi-
tions with a strong teaching emphasis and may be weighted heavily in hiring new 
professors. 
Many students gain useful experience by serving as teaching assistants and 
helping their professors with many of the chores that come with teaching. In some 
universities, you may also be asked to teach a course or help conduct sessions or lead 
discussion sections, using your professor as a coach and role model. 
Some Ph.D. programs also offer or recommend useful courses on effective 
teaching. 

3 0 0 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
13.13.5 Achieving a Compromise 
We prescribe a proverbially large order in suggesting that, even though bound for 
academia, you should strive to have not only a solid theoretical and methodological 
background in statistics but also application area knowledge and teaching expe-
rience. Gaining all of these, and also graduating on time, may not be possible. You 
will, instead, need to tailor your priorities to best accommodate your career plans. 
You may, for example, have built significant application area knowledge as an 
undergraduate. In that case, you might, as a graduate student, choose to just nourish 
and update this knowledge by informal reading and participation in relevant 
seminars throughout campus. 
You also need to recognize that your education, by no means, ends upon 
graduation (see Chapter 14). As a young professor, you may still audit courses in 
important subjects with which you are not familiar. Also, we urge you to consider 
a summer internship in industry or government, particularly if you did not do this 
earlier. At the same time, especially if you are in a tenure-track position, you need to 
ensure that such activities add to, and do not seriously detract from, the success of your 
research and teaching. 
13.14 CAREER PATHS 
Much of our discussion in this chapter has focused on achieving early success in an 
academic position. We now briefly consider some alternative career paths for 
statisticians who have established themselves in academia, extending our earlier 
discussion in Section 13.6. 
13.14.1 Senior Academician 
Many statisticians who have chosen to go into academia continue their research, 
teaching, administrative, and consulting activities throughout their careers. They 
strive to do bigger and better work, address greater intellectual challenges, and gain 
continued and higher recognition as authorities in their field. Such recognition may 
be within their own institution, such as being named a distinguished professor or 
gaining an endowed chair (which typically also comes with added funding). It may 
also be external to the institution, such as being elected to an important position 
or as a Fellow in the ASA, or being appointed to a prestigious government 
advisory panel. 
13.14.2 Academic Leader 
Managing academics is like herding cats. 
—Popular saying 
Another alternative is that of taking on an administrative leadership position in 
(or outside of) academia. 

13.14 CAREER PATHS 
301 
The First Step: Department Chairperson. Senior professors are sometimes asked 
to take on the role of department chair, often for a specified period of time. This 
position calls for leading, and often being deeply involved in, a wide variety of 
administrative functions, such as hiring new faculty, preparing evaluations of 
faculty performance, and interfacing with higher levels of the administration. It 
might also include making teaching assignments, recommending new courses 
for consideration by the curriculum committee, negotiating sometimes conten-
tious issues with deans and chairs of other departments, representing the 
department at various internal and external functions, promoting the department 
and publicizing its activities, fund-raising, and addressing a wide variety of, often 
unpredictable, issues. To find the needed time, department chairs are almost 
always relieved of some, or perhaps most, of their normal teaching and research 
responsibilities. 
Many academic statisticians regard being a department chairperson as an 
intrusion on what they really like doing most and do best: research and 
teaching. But they still take on the position for a limited time because they 
regard it their responsibility and also might like the change of pace and insights 
it provides. Some chairs still manage to undertake constructive research, 
teaching, and student guidance and, in general, ensure that, while doing their 
share for the department, they do not fall behind in pursuing their ultimate 
career goals. After completing their tour of duty, many happily return to their 
previous positions. 
Some departments rotate the chairmanship among qualified senior faculty for, 
say, 3-year stints. In other departments, successful chairs may be reappointed for 
multiple terms. 
Although department chair is the most common administrative position in 
which a faculty member might serve, other opportunities, such as associate dean or 
associate provost, may also present themselves. 
Higher Leadership Positions. Other statisticians in academia enjoy their first 
academic leadership experiences as, say, department chairs. They may have made 
some widely recognized contributions, enjoy the challenges of academic admin-
istration, and feel ready to take on further leadership responsibilities. Such 
individuals may respond positively to invitations to consider, or may even apply 
for, jobs in, say, the dean's or the provost's office, either within their current 
institution or at a different one. In such positions, they will be dealing with 
challenges that cut across the campus. For example, associate deans may need to 
resolve a sensitive issue in a department whose faculty view them with suspicion in 
light of their earlier association with a different, and perhaps competing, depart-
ment. A successful associate dean will also have an inside track to apply for a full 
dean position. 
Some may eventually rise to become the institution's president or beyond, and 
will then have to assume such further responsibilities as setting long-range direction 
and raising funds. The career path of Albert Bowker, a highly regarded statistician 
who took on important leadership roles in academia, is described in Sidebar 13.5. 

302 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
ALBERT H. BOWKER: FROM RESEARCH STATISTICIAN 
TO UNIVERSITY CHANCELLOR 
Alben H. Bowker earned a B.Sc. in mathematics at MIT and a Ph.D. in statistics from 
Columbia University. He joined Stanford University as an assistant professor in I947 and 
wrote numerous scholarly articles and various books, including coauthoring an early, 
popular text on engineering statistics (Bowker and Lieberman, 1972). 
Bowker helped establi sh Stan ford's Siati sties Department in 1948, and served as its chair 
until 1959. He developed and directed the Applied Mathematical and Statistics Laboratory 
from 1951 to 1963. His leadership was recognized in 1958 by his appointment as Stanford's 
Dean of Graduate Studies. In 1963, Bowker took on the position of Chancellor of the City 
University of New York. In 1971, he returned to California to become Chancellor of the 
University of California at Berkeley. 
During his administrative career, Bowker found time to serve as President of the 
Institute of Mathematical Statistics (1961-1962) and of the American Statistical Asso-
ciation (1964). 
At the 50th anniversary of the founding of the Stanford Statistics Department, Bowker 
said: "I am prouder of ihe formation of this department than anything else I have done." 
Some Consequences. The greater and the more extensive your administrative 
responsibilities, the less time you will have to teach or perform research. In fact, 
if you try, for an extended period, to be an administrator and a statistics teacher/ 
researcher, you may end up failing at both. Therefore, at some point, you will need to 
decide what you want your top priority to be. This is not much different from the 
decision that statisticians in industry and government make when they are offered 
management positions. 
Permanent administrators generally do not, per se, have tenure and serve at 
the pleasure of, say, the institution's president or Board of Trustees. Those who 
progress to an administrative position after receiving tenure may be able to retain their 
tenure—and possibly use it as fallback should they lose interest or favor in their 
administrative roles. Often a tenured faculty member or administrator at one 
institution is accorded a tenured position when moving to an administrative position 
at a new institution. 
Administrative positions in academia can be both satisfying and challenging. 
They place you at the crossroads of many diverging institutional interests and provide a 
fulfilling experience for those with the right temperament and leadership qualities. 
13.14.3 Moving Beyond Academia 
We noted in Section 12.3.1 that some statisticians, after spending some or much of 
their careers in business or government, leverage their knowledge and insights to 
move to a second career in academia. The reverse is also possible. For example, some 
academicians move to a research-oriented organization or advisory position outside 
academia, such as an industrial or government research lab or a private research 
foundation. There have also been statisticians at all levels who have taken positions in 

13.15 DOWNSIDES OF A CAREER AS AN ACADEMIC STATISTICIAN 
3 0 3 
industry or government in a less research-oriented environment. Still others, and 
especially those who had been heavily involved in consulting, might, like colleagues 
in business and industry, become private consultants and/or teachers of short courses. 
13.15 
DOWNSIDES OF A CAREER AS AN ACADEMIC 
STATISTICIAN 
A career in academia is not appealing to all statisticians. We summarize here various 
downsides, some of which have already been suggested. 
13.15.1 Research 
As we have seen, many academic statisticians have to actively seek, or sometimes 
postulate, research problems and then return to their offices to work out the solutions. 
This may not be as satisfying as, for example, being part of a hands-on team that helps 
build a more efficient and reliable jet engine or is responsible for approval of a new 
drug that can potentially treat a deadly disease. 
The requirements to secure funding for research and to support graduate 
students' research—together with the high level of competition for grants and frequent 
low success rate—are also unattractive to some, especially when they find themselves 
devoting nearly as much time to this activity as to doing the research itself. 
Finally, given a peer-review system that invites critical reviews, academics, like 
many other professionals, need a thick skin and high endurance and energy levels to be 
successful researchers. Despite their somewhat flexible official schedule, they may— 
like their colleagues in business and industry or government—have to work long 
hours to be successful. 
13.15.2 Teaching 
The challenges in teaching an introductory course to nonstatisticians and getting 
students interested in statistics are inspirational to some. To others, teaching students 
with limited motivation who just want to get through a required course with a passing 
grade can be a less than satisfying experience. This is especially so if you have to teach 
large classes without much opportunity to get to know students individually, and have 
to do so term after term. Some also feel that, despite its importance, teaching 
introductory statistics courses interferes with their prime interest of conducting 
research and teaching advanced courses to more motivated students. 
13.15.3 Service 
Some professors enjoy committee work, regard it as a change of pace, and 
appreciate its importance and the interesting insights into the operation of the 
institution that it can provide. Others, however, find such activities to be somewhat 
of a drudgery and overly political, and resent the time it takes away from their 
research and teaching. 

3 0 4 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
13.16 
BRIGHT SIDES OF A CAREER AS AN ACADEMIC 
STATISTICIAN 
It should be evident from our earlier discussion that there is also much to be said in 
favor of a career as an academic statistician. We reiterate some of the reasons in 
this section. 
13.16.1 Freedom of Research 
Academia can be a world in which one can engage in theoretical work, selected from 
one's own broad list of potential topics without necessarily having to be concerned 
about immediate—or, in some cases, even eventual—applicability. The major 
criterion for success of your work is having your results published in an esteemed 
journal. Beyond that, you can enjoy the thrill of discovery. This is attractive to many 
scholars. Your freedom is, however, on occasion, constrained by the requirement to 
secure funding to conduct the research, and, subsequently, to follow the guidelines 
and expectations of your funding agencies. 
13.16.2 The Joys of Teaching 
One of the invigorating things about academia is that even though I keep on getting 
older, the students remain the same age. 
—Stephen Berk 
For many professors, teaching and interacting with learners at all levels—and 
especially young and fresh minds—is a major attraction of academic life. Teaching 
statistics challenges you to explain statistical concepts in a way that makes sense to 
students, while still being true to your subject. This often leads you to new insights and 
increased understanding. Most importantly, seeing students succeed as a result, at 
least partially, of your teaching and guidance can be a great source of satisfaction. 
13.16.3 Service Opportunities 
For many professors, the free administrative structure of academia is a major 
attraction. Each professor, irrespective of rank, can have a say in determining the 
direction of the institution. In your committee work, you can contribute your share in 
shaping your institution. 
13.16.4 Limited Supervision 
Department chairs, deans, and even sometimes the institution president have some say 
in what you do and especially the courses that you teach (and how many). But, unlike 
the nonacademic world, there are usually no strong bosses or managers in academia 
that dictate your workday or, in general, tell you what to do—and especially so, after 
you have gained tenure. Moreover, being your own boss to a great degree also offers 
you much flexibility in arranging your work schedule. 

13.18 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
3 0 5 
13.16.5 Sabbaticals 
In many institutions, there is a long-standing practice that faculty may apply period-
ically (e.g., every 7 years) for a sabbatical, ranging in length from a few months to a 
year.16 Faculty members usually receive full salary (often for a one-semester leave) 
or a substantial fraction of their regular salary (typically for a full-year leave). 
A sabbatical provides you a respite from normal duties and allows you to focus 
on a particular project, such as writing a book or completing a major research task. It 
also presents an opportunity to pursue new interests, visit other academic institu-
tions, or work in industry or government to gain insight into application areas (see 
Iglewicz, 2009)—an option that, in our opinion, not enough academicians consider. 
Award of sabbaticals is often competitive and might be restricted by resource 
limitations. Eligible faculty typically submit a proposal describing, in some detail, the 
purpose of the sabbatical, the proposed plan of execution, and the expected results. 
In many institutions, there is a further requirement to provide a summary report of 
accomplishments at the end of the leave. 
13.16.6 Prestige 
Academics are, in light of their positions, typically accorded a high level of public 
recognition and respect—at least, outside of their own university. 
13.16.7 Great Environment 
Last but not least, in academia you can enjoy the advantages and inspiration of an 
academic environment and the company of colleagues, many with great minds, who, 
like you, have chosen a scholarly career. 
13.17 A CAREER AS A STATISTICIAN IN ACADEMIA: 
A SUMMARY COMPARISON 
Table I3.l (Section I3.l) provided a detailed summary comparison of a career as a 
statistician in academia (as described in this chapter) with that in other areas. 
13.18 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Statisticians in academia may be located in a university statistics department, 
a closely related department—such as mathematics or information science—or 
in an application area, such as the business school or the school of public health. 
Some large schools have many statisticians. Smaller institutions, and especially 
Some institutions give different names to such programs to convey their purpose, for example, Faculty 
Improvement Leave or Faculty Professional Development Assignment. 

3 0 6 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
community colleges, may have only a single statistician in a department or on 
campus. 
• Teaching and research are the two major responsibilities of statisticians in 
academia, followed by participation in administration through committee 
activities. Statisticians are also engaged, to varying degrees, in consulting and 
in service to the profession. The specific mix and emphasis varies greatly 
between institutions and schools within an institution. 
• Tenure-track positions are typically sought by those who aspire to a career as 
statisticians in academia. It is essential that you understand the process and 
criteria for granting tenure, such as the relative emphasis on research versus 
teaching, at your institution and how your performance on each will be assessed. 
• Granting of tenure opens new horizons and allows you to engage in riskier and 
longer term activities. 
• Major nontenure-track positions include lecturer/instructor, clinical, visiting, 
postdoc, and adjunct appointments. 
• Statisticians teach introductory statistics courses (presenting some important 
challenges) to the general student body and advanced courses (especially in 
schools that offer degrees or minors in statistics). Course evaluations are an 
important tool for assessing teaching performance. 
• The conduct of successful research is a key requirement in many universities. 
Publication in scholarly journals is a major measure of success. Obtaining 
funding from a government or other agency to support research has become 
increasingly important. 
• Statisticians in academia are engaged both in consulting within the institution 
(perhaps through a statistical consulting center) and with external customers in 
business, industry, or government. 
• Much of the governance of an academic institution is channeled through 
committees of faculty members—such as those on setting curricular policy 
and on granting tenure and promotion. 
• Universities and most 4-year colleges require full-time faculty to hold Ph.D. 
degrees, especially for tenure-track positions. All academic statisticians need 
a firm foundation in statistical methodology. Those who expect to become 
engaged in research, in addition, need a strong background in statistical theory. 
Knowledge of an application area and teaching experience are also important. 
• Many statisticians in academia aspire to be recognized for their sustained and 
continually more significant research, teaching, and professional accomplish-
ments. Some aspire to leadership positions. 
• The disconnect from real-world problems, the frequent requirement to seek 
research funding, the peer-review process, the repeat teaching of introductory 
courses, and the occasional drudgery of committee work have been cited as 
downsides of a career as a statistician in academia. 
• The freedom and research opportunities, the challenge of engaging students, 
the opportunity of having a say through committee activities, the limited 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
3 0 7 
supervision, the opportunity for sabbaticals, the associated prestige, and the 
inspirational nature of the campus environment are among the bright sides of 
a career as a statistician in academia. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. 'What is the mix of academic appointments within the institution that you are 
attending or recently attended? Based on your perspective, what recommen-
dations do you have for changing this mix? 
2. 'Discuss the pros and cons of a statistics professor being located within versus 
outside a statistics department. What would be your preference? 
3. 'What are the criteria for granting tenure, and how are they weighted, at an 
institution to which you might apply (or that you currently or recently 
attended)? 
4. Critique your first course in statistics. In which of the three categories 
described in Section 13.7.1 did this course fall? How would you improve 
the course? 
5. 'Consider one or more course evaluations that you have been asked to 
complete. How might you change these to help improve the course and the 
professor's performance? 
6. Identify one or more research topics that you might want to pursue in a tenure-
track position and agencies that you might approach to support such research. 
7. For the research topic(s) that you identified in response to the preceding 
question, how would you respond to the questions that "you need to ask 
yourself," raised in Section 13.8.2. 
8. 'How does consulting in academia tend to differ from that in business and 
industry and government? 
9. *What is the faculty committee structure in the university or college that you 
are attending or recently attended? How are appointments to committees 
made? 
10. How should the training for a statistician aiming to go into academia 
differ from that for one who is planning to go into business and industry or 
government? 
11. 'Should you decide to go into academia, what career path is most attractive to 
you and why? 
12. 'What aspects of academia do you personally find most and least appealing? 
13. 'Consider the comparison of the environment in academia versus that in 
business, industry and government in Table 13.1. How does this correlate with 
your experience to date? What changes and additions would you suggest in 
this comparison? 

3 0 8 
CHAPTER 13 CAREERS IN ACADEMIA 
14. *In the comparison of the environment in academia versus that in business, 
industry, and government given in Table 13.1, for each topic rate your 
preference according to the following score: 
2: Strong preference for business, industry, and government. 
1: Modest preference for business, industry, and government. 
0: Indifferent. 
— 1: Modest preference for academia. 
- 2: Strong preference for academia. 
Then, for each item listed, assign a weight from 1 (unimportant) to 5 (highly 
important) that measures the importance that you would assign to that item, and obtain 
a weighted average score for your overall preference. What does that tell you? 

CHAPTER 
f 
^ 
MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
14.1 ABOUT THIS CHAPTER 
Your formal schooling may be over, but your education never ends. 
—Popular saying 
Statisticians, no matter how well trained, need to invest in continuing self-
development. We are in a rapidly advancing field. Those who do not stay abreast will 
be left behind. In this way, statisticians do not differ from professionals in other 
rapidly advancing fields, such as medicine, biology, and computer science. 
New methods and tools are being developed all the time. Those who received 
their formal coursework some time ago were, most likely, not trained in such areas as 
simulation-based inference, statistical learning theory, spatial analysis, and Markov 
chain Monte Carlo methods for Bayesian analysis, which are now part of the standard 
curriculum at many graduate statistics departments. In addition, there are numerous 
emerging applications—in such areas as biology and genetics, environment and 
ecology, atmospheric sciences, and Internet social networks—that were essentially 
unknown some years ago, and in which practicing statisticians are involved today. In 
the same way, you can expect numerous new technical developments that you will 
need to keep up with through the course of your career. 
In addition, you will need to learn about specialized tools that pertain partic-
ularly to your selected application area and/or job that you did not study during your 
formal education, as discussed in Section 7.7.5. And if all of that is not enough, 
you also need to stay abreast of new developments in software and hardware as well as 
new technology. 
Less tangible, but equally important, is the need to network and to get to know 
others engaged in similar types of work, as well as technical leaders in your fields of 
application. This can provide you the chance to learn of emerging new directions, 
play off ideas on others, and exchange experiences. It may even lead to new career 
opportunities. Such networking is especially important if you are an isolated 
statistician with limited peer contact in your work environment. 
There are various ways that you can acquire new knowledge. We will discuss 
• Some Internet resources. 
• Formal education. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
309 

3 1 0 
CHAPTER 14 MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
• Technical and professional journals. 
• Technical conferences. 
In the final section, we briefly speculate on some exciting future opportunity areas for 
statisticians. We apologize if much of this chapter sounds like a catalog of offerings. 
But we hope it does convey the wealth of learning opportunities available to you and 
will serve you as a useful reference guide for the future. 
14.2 SOME INTERNET RESOURCES 
The Internet provides a useful and constantly expanding source of information about 
statistical concepts, tools, and applications to update your knowledge base. The sites 
briefly described here are just a few examples of the diverse sources of available 
technical information. The web site of the American Statistical Association (ASA), as 
well as those of other professional societies, provides current information of interest 
to the statistical community. 
Chance News.1 Chance News reviews current issues in the news that use probability 
or statistical concepts. A typical issue included 
• Thought-provoking quotations, for example, "Like dreams, statistics are a form 
of wish fulfillment."—Jean Baudrillard. 
• Forsooth (i.e., some questionable assertions), for example, "People who live 
longer have a greater chance of developing cancer in old age." Heard on the 
"Today" news program on BBC Radio 4. 
• Recent news items (many with discussion questions), for example, 
- How Did the Polls Do? (A discussion of 2010 preelection polls), Huffing ton 
Post, November 3, 2010. 
- Mammogram Benefit Seen for Women in Their 40s, New York Times, 
September 29, 2010. 
- Using Facebook Updates to Chronicle Breakups, New York Times, Bits Blog, 
November 3, 2010. 
The Engineering Statistics Handbook.2 The stated goal of this handbook is to help 
scientists and engineers incorporate statistical methods in their work as efficiently as 
possible. It was developed jointly by SEMATECH and the U.S. National Institute of 
Standards and Technology and contains many case studies, especially from the 
semiconductor industry. It provides a useful reference guide for practitioners and 
statisticians. The discussion is in eight sections: Explore, Measure, Characterize, 
Model, Improve, Monitor, Compare, and Reliability. 
1 http://www.causeweb.org/wiki/chance/index.php/Main_Page. 
2 http://www.itl.nist.gov/div898/handbook/index.htm. 

14.3 FORMAL EDUCATION 
311 
The Current Index to Statistics.3 The Current Index to Statistics (CIS), a joint 
venture of ASA and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics (IMS), has since 1975 
provided a bibliographic index to publications in statistics, probability, and 
related fields. ASA members have free access to CIS. The online CIS extended 
database examines the entire contents of 160 "core journals" and selected articles 
from about 1200 additional journals and, to date, over 11,000 books, published 
since 1975. 
14.3 
FORMAL EDUCATION 
Recently I attended a lecture on biology and genetics. It was eye-opening for 
me to see how much of the material that is currently taught in high school was totally 
new to me. 
—Michael Chernick 
14.3.1 Courses and Degree Programs 
You can continue your education while on the job by taking selected courses at a local 
college or university, subject to the school's accessibility and your time constraints. 
Many schools provide part-time evening or distance education programs to attract 
those with full-time jobs. Online courses and programs offer more flexibility and 
continue to gain popularity. 
Your studies may be part of an advanced degree program either in statistics or in 
an application area. Some with master's, and even Ph.D., degrees in statistics have 
gone on to obtain MBA degrees. Your goals may be less ambitious—such as taking 
a relevant course or two in an area of special pertinence to your current work or your 
desired career path. 
14.3.2 Short Courses 
Short courses on specialized topics provide another alternative for enhancing your 
knowledge. The duration of short courses typically ranges from half a day to a week. 
These generally deal with specialized subjects (e.g., design of experiments, reliability, 
and life data analysis) or emerging areas (e.g., hierarchical Bayes methods) and new 
software packages. Such courses are often given in conjunction with professional 
meetings—such as the Continuing Education courses offered at the Joint Statistical 
Meetings (Section 14.5.1). Others are offered by universities or by consulting, 
software, or other companies. 
Short courses are also offered increasingly online in single shots or installments. 
For example, various ASA sections offer webinars on a regular schedule.4 
http://www.statindex.org/. 
4 http://www.amstat.org/education/weblectures/index.cfm. 

312 
CHAPTER 14 MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
14.4 TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL JOURNALS 
Your first exposure to professional journals will likely occur as a student. A good way 
of keeping yourself up to date is by regularly reading current issues of journals. Many 
journals are published by professional societies; others are issued by publishing 
houses or other companies or institutions. Online (only) journals are also rapidly 
gaining popularity. 
14.4.1 General Interest Statistical Journals and Newsletters 
The ASA issues general interest publications at various levels.5 
Amstat News is issued monthly both in an abridged hard copy version, sent to all 
ASA members, and in a longer online version,6 which is accessible free of charge to 
the general public. It provides news items of interest to ASA members, including 
announcements and descriptions of forthcoming meetings and events, chapter and 
section news, job postings, and a summary of articles appearing in other ASA 
journals. Additional features include messages from the ASA President, results of 
salary surveys, stories of successful statisticians, and numerous articles about 
the practice of statistics (many of which have been referenced or quoted in this 
book). There are also occasional articles dealing with issues of general interest 
(such as statisticians' comments on the status of climate change science; see Smith 
et al., 2010). 
ASA members currently receive Significance, issued quarterly under a joint 
agreement between ASA and the Royal Statistical Society (RSS). This magazine-like 
journal aims "to communicate and demonstrate in an entertaining and thought-
provoking way the practical use of statistics in all walks of life and to show how 
statistics benefit society." Articles in a typical issue included ones on 
• London murders: a predictable pattern? 
• Too many males in China: the causes and the consequences. 
• Safety in numbers: how human beings react to fire. 
• The flavor of whiskey. 
• Big Brother and state control—a new career for statisticians. 
ASA members also have free electronic access to 
• The American Statistician, published quarterly: This journal publishes articles 
of general interest to the statistical profession. It includes sections dealing with 
Statistical Practice, General (Topics), History Corner, Teacher's Corner, 
Interdisciplinary (subjects), Statistical Computing and Graphics, and Reviews 
of Books and Teaching Materials. 
5 ASA also published 51 issues of STATS, The Magazine for Students of Statistics, up to 2009. STATS 
strived to provide "a lively and entertaining look at how statistics can be used to study everyday questions." 
This magazine also featured articles of particular interest to students. These past issues of STATS are worth 
looking at to get a better feel for the breadth of applications of statistics. 
6 http://magazine.amstat.org/. 

14.4 TECHNICAL AND PROFESSIONAL JOURNALS 
3 1 3 
• The Journal of the American Statistical Association (JASA), also published 
quarterly: This journal describes itself to be "long ... considered the premier 
journal of statistical science. Established in 1888, JASA focuses on statistical 
applications, theory, and methods in economic, social, physical, engineering, 
and health sciences and on new methods of statistical education." JASA also 
claims to be the most frequently cited journal in the mathematical sciences. In 
general, articles in JASA are more theoretical than those in The American 
Statistician. It also includes an extensive book review section. 
Also published by ASA, and available by subscription, Chance magazine "is intended 
for everyone interested in the analysis of data. Articles showcase statistical methods in 
the social, biological, physical, and medical sciences." Typical articles deal with such 
subjects as 
• Using statistics to uncover cheating on an exam. 
• Predicting whether a kicker in (American) football will make the extra point. 
• How to improve your odds of winning the office pool. 
• The role of statistics in the analysis of functional magnetic resonance images. 
• Finding cancer signals in mass spectrometry data. 
• Using statistics in war crimes trials. 
The RSS also publishes three general interest journals (Series A: Statistics in Society, 
Series B: Statistical Methodology, and Series C: Applied Statistics), as do individual 
national statistical societies and organizations, for example, Sankhya (from the Indian 
Statistical Institute), the Canadian Journal of Statistics, and the Scandinavian 
Journal of Statistics (from the statistical societies of Denmark, Finland, Norway, 
and Sweden). 
The Institute of Mathematical Statistics publishes several journals. Statistical 
Science is mainly a review journal, containing both methodological and applied 
expository papers. Annals of Applied Statistics publishes papers in "all areas of 
applied statistics." Some other IMS journals (e.g., Annals of Statistics) tend to be 
highly theoretical and aimed mainly at statisticians conducting research, principally 
in academia. 
Further, the International Statistical Institute (ISI) publishes the International 
Statistical Review (ISR). The ISR is the flagship journal of ISI and publishes a wide 
variety of articles from very applied to very theoretical submitted by authors from 
around the world. An added feature of ISR is its extensive "Short Book Reviews" 
section, which gives one- to three-paragraph reviews of recently released books in all 
areas of statistics. While full access to the journal is restricted to members of ISI and its 
sections, important articles are often made available to the general public. 
14.4.2 Specialized Journals 
From the ASA. The ASA also publishes (or copublishes) numerous journals that 
pertain to specific application or technical areas. Online access is currently provided 
to ASA members to 

314 
CHAPTER 14 MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
• Statistics in Biopharmaceutical Research. 
• The Journal of Agricultural, Biological, and Environmental Statistics. 
• The Journal of Business and Economic Statistics. 
• The Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports. 
• Statistical Analysis and Data Mining. 
• Journal of Statistics Education 
In addition, the ASA is involved in the publication of various other specialized 
journals, such as the Journal of Nonparametric Statistics, the Journal of Statistical 
Software, and Technometrics (published jointly with the American Society for 
Quality (ASQ)); see the ASA web site for a current complete list of such publications. 
ASA also partners with the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) 
on joint publications of books on "hot topics" in applied statistics under the 
ASA-SIAM Series. 
From Other Societies or Organizations. Societies in various application areas also 
publish journals that frequently have extensive statistical content. The ASQ publishes 
the Journal of Quality Technology, Quality Engineering, and Six Sigma Forum 
Magazine and includes a Statistics Roundtable series in Quality Progress, its flagship 
publication. 
Publications from the Institute for Operations Research and the Management 
Sciences (INFORMS) include Decision Analysis, Interfaces, Management Science, 
Operations Research, and OR/MS Today (its general magazine for its approximately 
10,000 members). Articles in these publications frequently contain much statistical 
content. 
The Statistical Journal of the IAOS (International Association for Official 
Statistics) publishes "articles to promote the understanding and advancement of 
official statistics and to foster the development of effective and efficient official 
statistical services on a global basis." Statistics Sweden's Journal of Official 
Statistics contains "articles on statistical methodology and theory, with an emphasis 
on applications." 
Other professional organizations in various application areas also publish 
journals that contain articles of interest to statisticians working in these areas. 
Journals dealing with pharmaceutical applications include Applied Clinical Trials, 
Biostatistics, Statistics in Medicine, the Drug Information Journal, the Journal of 
Biopharmaceutical Statistics, Pharmaceutical Statistics, Statistics Issues in Drug 
Development, and Statistical Methods in Medical Research. Also, the Institute of 
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) publishes more than 100 journals, 
including the IEEE Transactions on Reliability, IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering, and IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks. 
Various sections of ASA (Section 14.5.1) issue newsletters that describe recent 
or forthcoming events of interest to their readers and often also include brief technical 
articles, as do section or division newsletters of other societies. For example, the ASQ 
Divisions on Reliability and on Statistics publish newsletters of interest to statisticians 
working in quality and reliability improvement. 

14.5 TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
3 1 5 
14.5 TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
14.5.1 National Society Meetings 
The yearly Joint Statistical Meetings (JSM) are the largest gathering of statisticians 
in the world, regularly attracting over 5000 attendees. It currently takes place over 
a 5-day period during early August in different locations in the United States and 
Canada. It is the annual national meeting of ASA and is typically held jointly with 
the International Biometrie Society (IBS), the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, the 
Statistical Society of Canada, the International Indian Statistical Association, and the 
International Chinese Statistical Association. Formal meeting activities include oral 
presentations, panel discussion sessions, poster presentations, and ASA section 
business meetings, as well as continuing education courses. The meetings also 
feature an extensive exhibit hall, a job placement service (Section 8.3.2), and various 
social activities. 
Based upon the authors' combined attendance at over 70 such meetings (and 
still counting), we present, in Sidebar 14.1, our assessment of the pros and cons of 
attending the JSM—and propose some strategies should you decide to do so.7 
THE JOINT STATISTICAL MEETINGS: A CRITIAL ASSESSMENT 
The Pros. The JSM provides a great opportunity for intellectual lubrication—a one-shot 
yearly glimpse at some of the new developments in the field and an opportunity to see the 
leaders in your profession in action. It also allows you, at least, a fleeting glance, hallway 
conversation, or even a meal with professional colleagues that you may not have seen since 
the last time that you both attended the JSM. The exhibition area provides you an update of 
recently published books and software. The placement service allows job seekers and 
employers to identify and get to know each other and often provides candidates a gateway to 
on-site job interviews. Also, you may avail yourself of the opportunity to present a 
contributed paper on some of your recent work or might even find yourself invited to give 
a paper or to participate in a session as a panel member or chairperson. This provides you 
professional exposure and a chance to meet oLhers with similar interests. 
The Cons. Critics of the JSM describe them as a madhouse with so much going on that it is 
difficult to focus on anything. There may be as many as 10 continuing education events, 
8 invited technical paper sessions, 15 technical contributed sections, and 5 business 
meetings all going on at the same time—in addition to 120 exhibitors, the job placement 
service, and various other activities. 
Our Recommendations. Both of the preceding assessments are correct; how to weight 
diem is a matter of personal choice. We encourage you to attend, al least, one JSM early in 
your career, and use Ulis experience as a basis for your future decisions. To gain maximum 
7 Also see http://www.chrisbilder.com/what/jsm.htm for further suggestions. 

3 1 6 
CHAPTER 14 MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
benefit, we propose that you plan your tentative schedule in advance—deciding from the 
program and online published abstracts of papers, which sessions or parts of sessions you 
plan to attend in each time slot. Make sure thai your schedule also includes an opportunity to 
visit the exhibit area, participate in the business and social meetings of the ASA sections that 
interest you, and "visit" with colleagues. When you arrive at the meeting, get acquainted 
with the layout and how to get from one place to the next between meetings (or even between 
talks) expeditious I y.a Try to keep good notes, especially of ideas and contacts dial you wish 
to follow up. And go with the recognition that, invariably, you will not be able to cover 
e very Uli ng Üiat you would like. 
Other national associations, such as ASQ, INFORMS, and the Decision 
Sciences Institute, hold annual meetings similar to the JSM, as do the statistical 
societies of various other countries. In addition, the International Statistical Institute 
World Statistics Congress meets in different locations throughout the world every 
2 years. 
The 3-day Annual Conference of the European Network of Business and 
Industrial Statisticians (ENBIS), held since 2001, aims to bring together statistical 
practitioners, academic statisticians, consultants, Six Sigma black belts, and other 
professionals who are involved in business and industrial statistics in Europe. This 
meeting typically involves a mix of plenary and parallel sessions. 
14.5.2 Other National Meetings 
There are numerous smaller and more specialized national or regional meetings 
worldwide of interest to applied statisticians. Such meetings are typically more 
limited and focused than the JSM. Many of these are sponsored or cosponsored by one 
or more sections of ASA (in the United States) or by a section of some other 
professional society; see Sidebar 14.2. 
SIDEBAR 
AMERICAN STATISTICAL ASSOCIATION AND OTHER PROFESSIONAL 
SOCIETIES 
;
—
■
— 
Chapter i provided a brief description of professional societies in which statisticians 
become involved—such as the ASA, the statistical associations of other countries, the ASQ, 
and INFORMS. 
These and various other professional societies also have divisions, sections, orgroupings 
of special interest to statisticians. Some examples are the Statistics Division of ASQ and 
the IAOS, a section of the ISI that strives to "bring together producers and users of official 
statistics ... to promote the understanding and advancement of official statistics and to 
foster the development of effective and efficient official statistical services on a global 
basis." 
8 Your path might, however, be slowed down as you encounter a former schoolmate or colleague along the 
way. 

14.5 TECHNICAL CONFERENCES 
3 1 7 
A few examples of such meetings are 
• The Fall Technical Conference: Sponsored by the Chemical and Process 
Industry Division and the Statistics Division of ASQ and the Sections on 
Physical and Engineering Sciences and on Quality and Productivity of ASA. 
This meeting, conducted yearly since 1947, runs for 2 days. Three technical 
sessions take place simultaneously. 
• The Quality and Productivity Research Conference: Sponsored by the Quality 
and Productivity Section of ASA. This conference, held each spring since 1984, 
typically features two or three sessions conducted in parallel over a 2.5-day 
period. 
• The Annual Deming Conference on Applied Statistics: Cosponsored by 
the NY/NJ Metropolitan Section and the Statistics Division of ASQ and the 
Biopharmaceutical Division of ASQ. This 3-day conference, held yearly since 
1946 and meeting in early December in Atlantic City, NJ, emphasizes phar-
maceutical applications. It features two parallel sessions each with single 
half-day expository presentations. 
• The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) Industry Statistics Workshop: 
Cosponsored by the FDA and the ASA Biopharmaceutical Section. This 3-day 
meeting features presentations and short courses on statistical topics of interest 
to statisticians supporting the pharmaceutical industry. It is usually held in 
September. 
• The Spring Meeting of the Eastern North American Region of the International 
Biometrie Society: This annual meeting (held usually in March) focuses on 
biostatistics. 
For statisticians in government and official statistics, major conferences include 
• The Annual Conference of the Association of Public Data Users (Section 3.8). 
• Conferences organized by the Council of Professional Associations on Federal 
Statistics and the Federal Committee on Statistical Methodology, as well as 
meetings of the National Academy of Sciences' Committee on National 
Statistics. 
In addition, some organizations sponsor sessions or satellite conferences in conjunc-
tion with meetings of national societies. The International Conference on Statistics in 
Business and Industry, sponsored by the International Society on Industrial and 
Business Statistics (a section of ISI), has, since 1999, held both its own meetings 
and satellite meetings in conjunction with ISI World Statistics Congresses. 
Amstat News and the ISI online calendar9 provide an update on meetings 
worldwide of interest to statisticians. The following is a sample of some recently listed 
meeting announcements: 
• Workshop on Statistical Challenges and Biomedical Applications of Deep 
Sequencing Data, Ascona, Switzerland. 
9 http://isi.cbs.nl/calendar.htm. 

3 1 8 
CHAPTER 14 MAINTAINING THE MOMENTUM 
• University of Florida Annual Winter Workshop: Emerging Methods in Envi-
ronmental Statistics. 
• Annual Symposium on the Interface: Computing Science and Statistics. 
• International Conference on Design of Experiments. 
• Federal Forecasters Conference. 
• Living to 100 Symposium (our favorite). 
There are also a variety of other yearly national meetings sponsored by various 
organizations that although not directed at statisticians are of interest to those engaged 
in different application areas. For example, 
• The Reliability, Availability, and Maintainability Symposium: This 4-day 
symposium is jointly sponsored by 10 professional organizations, including 
the Electronics and Reliability Divisions of ASQ and the Reliability Society 
of the IEEE. 
• The Drug Information Association Annual Meeting: This 3-day conference 
deals with topics in drug development and with a variety of other related subjects. 
• The Society for Clinical Trials Annual Meeting: This 4-day meeting brings 
together individuals from various disciplines involved in conducting clinical 
trials. 
14.5.3 Local Meetings 
The ASA has over 75 chapters spread throughout the United States. These typically 
hold monthly meetings on selected technical topics. Some chapters also conduct 
symposia or special courses. Involvement in chapter activities provides an easy 
vehicle for updating yourself and interacting with local colleagues. Other profes-
sional organizations, such as the ASQ, operate similarly. IBS and IMS jointly 
organize the WNAR (Western North American Region) Annual Meeting. In Europe, 
ENBIS also sponsors periodic local meetings through its local networks (e.g., 
bENBIS in Belgium). 
14.6 
FUTURE OPPORTUNITY AREAS 
The sexy job in the next ten years will be statistician—and I'm not kidding. 
—Hal Varian 
We have described in various places, such as in Chapter 2, the evolution of the 
application of statistics as new areas have emerged. This evolution, triggered by 
advances in information science and technology, will, undoubtedly, continue; see 
Lindsay et al. (2003/2004), Raftery et al. (2001), and Straf (2003). 
In Hahn and Doganaksoy (2008), we briefly identify a number of new statistical 
application areas. These include bioinformatics and statistical genetics, nanotech-
nology, and automated tracking. We should add environmental science in general and 
climate change in particular to this list (Section 4.5.3). 

DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
3 1 9 
And the list continues to grow. To maintain the momentum, you need, through 
the course of your career, to be on your toes to recognize new opportunity areas, as 
they arise, and even consider moving into them. Also, new resources will become 
available to you. We hope that the many channels that we have identified in this 
chapter will be helpful in bringing these to your attention rapidly and allow you to take 
advantage of them. 
14.7 MAJOR TAKEAWAYS 
• Statistics is a dynamic field. Advances will continue to be driven by progress in 
information technology and in application areas, as well as by new theoretical 
developments. Statisticians need to stay abreast so as not to fall behind. 
• The Internet is an important source of information. There are numerous sites of 
special interest to statisticians. 
• Some statisticians continue their education by taking courses (and even degree 
programs) or short courses in specialized areas. 
• A large number of general interest and specialized technical journals and 
magazines provide updates on recent developments. 
• Professional society meetings are an important vehicle for learning about recent 
advances and provide important networking opportunities. Such meetings 
range from small highly focused and local get-togethers to large society 
gatherings such as the Joint Statistical Meetings. 
• New areas, such as bioinformatics and statistical genetics, nanotechnology, 
automated tracking, and environmental science, will provide new opportunities 
for statisticians. Others will continue to emerge and new resources will become 
available. You need to position yourself to take advantage of these. 
DISCUSSION QUESTIONS 
(* indicates that question does not require any past statistical training) 
1. What specific steps are you taking, or contemplating, to keep abreast (and stay 
ahead) in your career? 
2. What are some web sites that you have found to be especially useful for your 
professional growth? 
3. What technical journals and statistical meetings seem most beneficial for your 
professional development both now and potentially in the future? 
4. Describe any professional meetings that you have attended and your experi-
ences and recommendations to others who are considering attending similar 
meetings in the future. 
5. *What are some emerging technical areas that you especially want to keep 
abreast of in future years. Are there any that you would add to our list? 

Albert, J., J. Bennett, and J.J. Cochran (Editors) (2005). Anthology of Statistics in Sports, ASA-SIAM 
Series on Statistics and Applied Probability, Philadelphia, PA: S1AM. 
Albert, J., and R.H. Koning (Editors) (2008). Statistical Thinking in Sports, Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & 
Hall/CRC. 
Amstat News (2009a). "A Statistician's Life (featuring J.M. Gonzales, N. Kannan, J.L. Moreno, J. Tooze 
and G. Verbeke)," Amstat News, September Issue (#387), 56-62. 
Amstat News (2009b). "American Statistical Association to Begin Program of Voluntary Individual 
Accreditation of Statisticians," Amstat News, September Issue (#387), 8. 
Amstat News (2009c). "Professional Ethics: Committee Updates Goals and Guidelines," Amstat News, 
December Issue (#390), 61. 
Amstat News (2010a). "Statistician's View Given at Congressional Briefing on Climate Science," Amstat 
News, July Issue (#397), 14. 
Amstat News (2010b). "Statistics Without Borders Pushes Forward," Amstat News, January Issue 
(#391), 31. 
Andrade, C. (2007). "Confounding," Indian Journal of Psychiatry, Volume 49, Number 2, 129-131. 
Aschengrau, A., and G.R. Seage III (2008). Essentials of Epidemiology in Public Health, Second Edition, 
Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett. 
Asher, J. (2008). "A Statistician at Home," Amstat News, June Issue (#372), 7-8. 
Asher, J. (2009). "Statisticians Seen, Heard at Human Rights Coalition Launch," Amstat News, April Issue 
(#382), 17-19. 
Asher, J. (2010a). "The Role of Statistics in Reforming U.S. Foreign Assistance Policy," Amstat News, 
January Issue (#391), 11-12. 
Asher, J. (2010b). "Collecting Data in Challenging Settings," Chance, Volume 12, Number 2, 6-13. 
Bacon, D. (2000). "Integrity in Statistics," W.J. Youden Memorial Address at the 43rd Annual Fall 
Technical Conference, ASQ Statistics Division Newsletter, Winter Issue, 5-10. 
Banks, D. (2008). "Snakes and Ladders: Building a Career in Statistics," Amstat News, September Issue 
(#375), 34-37. 
Beale, C. (2004). "Reflections on 50 + Years as a Demographic Statistician," Statistical Research Division 
Seminar, U.S. Census Bureau, February 25. (Reprinted in the April 2004 issue of Amstat News.). 
Berk, K.N., and P.M. Carey (2009). Data Analysis with Microsoft Excel: Updated for Office 2007, Third 
Edition, Boston, MA: Brooks/Cole. 
Best, J. (2001). Dammed Lies and Statistics: Underlying Numbers from the Media, Politicians, and 
Activists, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. 
Best, J. (2004). More Damned Lies and Statistics: How Numbers Confuse Public Issues, Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press. 
Bisgaard, S„ and R.J.M.M. Does (2009). "Health Care Quality—Reducing the Length of Stay at a 
Hospital," Quality Engineering, Volume 21, Number 1, 117-131. 
Blumberg, C.J. (2009). "Opportunities in the Department of Energy for Graduates with Bachelor's Degrees 
in Science and Mathematics," Invited presentation at the Joint Statistical Meetings, Washington, DC. 
The web sites referenced here were in working condition as of April 2011. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
321 
REFERENCES1 

3 2 2 
REFERENCES 
Böen, J.R., and D.A. Zahn (1982). The Human Side of Statistical Consulting, Belmont, CA: Lifetime 
Learning Publications. 
Bose, J. (2010). "Why Statistics," Amstat News, September Issue (#399), 27-29. 
Bot, B.M. (2009). "What Can I Do with an Undergraduate Degree in Statistics?" Discussion, Joint 
Statistical Meetings, Washington, DC. 
Bowker, A.H., and G.J. Lieberman (1972). Engineering Statistics, Second Edition, Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
Box, G.E.P., J.S. Hunter, and W.G. Hunter (2005). Statistics for Experimenters: Design, Innovation, and 
Discovery, Second Edition, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Bracewell, P.J., and K. Ruggiero (2009). "A Parametric Control Chart for Monitoring Individual 
Performance in Cricket," Journal of Quantitative Analysis in Sports, Volume 5, Number 3, Article 5. 
Britz, G.C., D.W. Emerling, L.B. Hare, R.W. Hoerl, S.J. Janis, and J.E. Shade (2000). Improving 
Performance Through Statistical Thinking, Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. 
Brown, E., and R. Kass (2009). "What is Statistics?" (with discussion), The American Statistician, Volume 63, 
Number 2, 105-123. 
Bruce, P., and J. Bose (2010). "Taking a Chance on Statistics," Amstat News, September Issue (#399), 24-29. 
Bryce, G.R. (2002). "Undergraduate Statistics Education: An Introduction and Review of Selected 
Literature," Journal of Statistics Education, Volume 10, Number 2. Retrieved from http://www. 
amstat.org/publications/jse/vl0n2/bryce.html. 
Bryce, G.R. (2005). "Developing Tomorrow's Statisticians," Journal of Statistics Education, Volume 13, 
Number 1. Retrieved from http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/vl3nl/bryce.html. 
Bryce, G.R., R. Gould, W.I. Notz, and R.L. Peck (2001). "Curriculum Guidelines for Bachelor of Science 
Degrees in Statistical Science," The American Statistician, Volume 55, Number 1, 7-14. 
Buchanan, M. (2009). "The Prosecutor's Fallacy," Presented at the Joint Statistical Meetings, 
Washington, DC. 
Buncher, C.R., and J.-Y. Tsay (2005). Statistics in the Pharmaceutical Industry, Third Edition, Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press. 
Cabrera, J., and A. McDougall (2002). Statistical Consulting, New York, NY: Springer. 
Churchill, G.A., and D. Iacobucci (2010). Marketing Research: Methodological Foundations, Tenth 
Edition, Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage. 
Citro, C.F. (2009). "The Federal Statistical System: R&D to Bolster a National Treasure," Amstat News, 
May Issue (#383), 28-30. 
Clark, C. (2008). "Official Statistics: Diverse Opportunities and Challenges," Amstat News, October Issue 
(#376), 39^0. 
Cleophas, T.J., A.H. Zwinwemn, and T.F. Cleophas (2006). Statistics Applied to Clinical Trials, Third 
Edition, New York, NY: Springer. 
Cobb, G., and S. Gehlbach (2006). "Statistics in the Courtroom," Chapter 1 in Statistics: A Guide to the 
Unknown, Fourth Edition, edited by R. Peck, G. Casella, G.W. Cobb, R. Hoerl, and D. Nolan, Belmont, 
CA: Duxbury Press. 
Cochran, J.J. (2010). "Statistics Without Borders Assists with Haitian Data Collection Project," Amstat 
News, May Issue (#395), 18-19. 
Coleman, D.E., and D.C. Montgomery (1993). "A Systematic Approach Planning for a Designed Industrial 
Experiment," Technometrics, Volume 35, Number 1, 1-12. 
Coleman, S., T. Greenfield, D. Stewardson, and D.C. Montgomery (2010). Statistical Practice in Business 
and Industry, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Crank, K. (2009). "What Do Statisticians and Biostatisticians Do?" Amstat News, January Issue (#379), 19. 
Crank, K. (2010a). "Academic Salary Survey," Amstat News, December Issue (#402), 4-5. 
Crank, K. (2010b). "More on Biostatistics," Amstat News, January Issue (#391), 19. 
Crank, K. (2010c). "Funding Opportunities: Who Wants to be a Biostatistician (or Environmental 
Statistician, or Social Science Statistician, or ...)," Amstat News, June Issue (#396), 31-32. 
Crank, K. (2011). "Salary Survey of Biostatistics and Other Biomedical Statistics Departments," Amstat 
News, January Issue (#403), 8-10. 
Crawford, CG. (2008). "My Career in Environmental Statistics: Luck, Timing and Other People," 
Newsletter of the American Statistical Association Section on Statistics and the Environment, 
Volume 10, Number I, 2-3. 

REFERENCES 
3 2 3 
Czitrom, V. (2003). "Guidelines for Selecting Factors and Factor Levels for an Industrial Designed 
Experiment," Chapter 1 in Handbook of Statistics, Volume 22: Statistics in Industry, edited by R. 
Khattree and C.R. Rao, Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier Science B.V. 
Czitrom, V, and P.D. Spagon (1997). Statistical Case Studies for Industrial Process Improvement, 
ASA-SIAM Series on Statistics and Applied Probability, Philadelphia, PA: SIAM. 
Dalai, S.R., E.B. Fowlkes, and B. Hoadley (1989). "Risk Analysis of the Space Shuttle: Pre-Challenger 
Prediction of Failure," Journal of the American Statistical Association, Volume 84, Number 408, 
945-957. 
Davis, W.W. (2010). "Statisticians Thriving at the Social Security Administration," Amstat News, April 
Issue (#394), 21-22. 
DeGroot, M.H., S.E. Fienberg, and J.B. Kadane (Editors) (1994). Statistics and the Law, New York, NY: 
Wiley. 
Deming, W.E. (1967). "Walter A. Shewhart, 1891-1967," The American Statistician, Volume 21, Number 
2, 39^10. 
Deming, W.E. (1972). "Code of Professional Conduct," International Statistical Review, Volume 40, 
Number 2, 215-219. 
Deming, W.E. (1975). "On Probability as a Basis for Action," The American Statistician, Volume 29, 
Number 4, 146-152. 
Deming, W.E. (1986). Out of the Crisis, Cambridge, MA: MIT Center for Advanced Engineering Study. 
Deming, W.E. (1993). The New Economics for Industry, Government, Education, Second Edition, 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press. 
Denis, J., D. Dolson, J. Dufour, and P. Whitridge (2002). "Preparing Statisticians for a Career at Statistics 
Canada," Working Paper No. HSMD-2001-006E/F, Ottawa, CA: Statistics Canada. 
Derr, J. (2000). Statistical Consulting: A Guide to Effective Communication, Pacific Grove, CA: Duxbury. 
DeVeaux, R.D., and DJ. Hand (2005). "How to Lie with Bad Data," Statistical Science, Volume 20, Number 3, 
231-238. 
Dias, J., K. Miller, and V. George (2009). "Salary Survey of Business, Industry and Government 
Statisticians," Amstat News, October Issue (#388), 5-9. 
Doganaksoy, N., G. Hahn, and W.Q. Meeker (2007). "Reliability Assessment by Use-Rate Acceleration," 
Quality Progress, June Issue, 74-76. 
Easterling, R.G. (2010). "Passion-Driven Statistics," The American Statistician, Volume 64, Number 1, 
1-5. 
Easton, G.S. (2006). "Expert Witness Testimony: A Discussion," Conference on Making Statistics More 
Effective in Schools and Businesses, Chicago, IL. 
Ellenberg, J.H., M.H. Gail, and N.L. Geller (1997). "Conversations with NIH Statisticians: Interviews 
with the Pioneers of Biostatistics at the United States National Institute of Health," Statistical Science, 
Volume 12, Number 2, 77-81. 
Emerson, J.W., M. Seltzer, and D. Lin (2009). "Assessing Judging Bias: An Example from the 2000 
Olympic Games," The American Statistician, Volume 43, Number 2, 124—131. 
Emerson, M.O., and D. Sikkink (2006). Panel Study of American Religion and Ethnicity, 1st Wave. 
Retrieved from http://www.ps-are.org/about/overview.asp. 
Fecso, R.S. (2008). "A 'Random Walk': My Statistics Career in Federal Government," Amstat News, 
July Issue (#373), 27-29. 
Fecso, R.S., and T. Olson (2006). "Statisticians in the Federal Government," Presented at the Joint 
Statistical Meetings, Seattle, WA. Retrieved from http://www.amstat.org/careers/statisticiansingovern-
ment.ppt. 
Fellegi, I.P. (1996). "Characteristics of an Effective Statistical System" (with discussion), International 
Statistical Review, Volume 64, Number 2, 165-197. 
Fellegi, I.P. (2004). "Official Statistics: Pressures and Challenges," International Statistical Review, 
Volume 72, Number 1, 139-155. 
Fenn-Buderer, N. (2000). "Written Communication Skills for Consulting Statisticians: Creating a 
Collaborative Environment with Clients," The Statistical Consultant, Volume 17, Number 1, 5-10. 
Feuerverger, A., P. Hall, G. Tilahun, and M. Gervers (2008). "Using Statistical Smoothing to Date Medieval 
Manuscripts," in Beyond Interdisciplinary Research: Festschrift in Honor of Professor Pranab K. Sen, 
IMS Collections, Volume 1, Beachwood, OH: Institute of Mathematical Statistics. 

324 
REFERENCES 
Fienberg, S.E. (1997). "Ethics and the Expert Witness: Statistics on Trial," Journal of the Royal Statistical 
Society, Series A, Volume 160, Number 2, 321-331. 
Finkelstein, M.O. (2009). Basic Concepts of Probability and Statistics in the Law, New York, NY: Springer. 
Flanagan-Hyde, P. (2006). "Observational Studies: The Neglected Stepchild in the Family of Data 
Gathering," Stats, Issue 46 (Fall), 19-21. 
Freedman, D.A. (1999). "From Association to Causation: Some Remarks on the History of Statistics," 
Statistical Science, Volume 14, Number 3, 243-258. 
Gastwirth, J.L. (Editor) (2000). Statistical Science in the Courtroom, New York, NY: Springer. 
Gastwirth, J.L., and Q. Pen (2010). "Careful Statistical Reasoning Can Provide Support for Supreme Court 
Decisions," Amstat News, July Issue (#397), 23-24. 
Gauvin, J.L.S. (2007). "One Statistician's Perspective on Getting a Job," Amstat News, November Issue 
(#365), 31-32. 
Gelman, A, and J. Cortina (Editors) (2009). A Quantitative Tour of the Social Sciences, New York, NY: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gelman, A., and J. Hill (2006). Data Analysis Using Regression and Multilevel/Hierarchical Models, 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Gelman, A., N. Silver, and D. Lee (2009). "The Senate's Health Care Calculations," Op-Ed article, New 
York Times, November 19, A35. 
Gibbons, J.D. (2009). "Membership Spotlight," Amstat News, November Issue (#389), 16-17. 
Gibbs, A., and H. Reid (2009). Comment on "What is Statistics?" by E.N. Brown and R.E. Kass, The 
American Statistician, Volume 63, Number 2, 112-113. 
Goldstein, R. (2008). "Hanging Out the Shingle: The Life of a Statistical Consultant," President's Invited 
Column, Amstat News, June Issue (#372), 2-4. 
Good, P.I. (2001). Applying Statistics in the Courtroom: A New Approach for Attorneys and Expert 
Witnesses, Boca Raton, FL: Chapman & Hall/CRC. 
Grodstein, F., M.J. Stampfer, G.A. Colditz, W.C. Willett, J.E. Manson, M. Joffe, B. Rosner, C. Fuchs, S.E. 
Hankinson, D.J. Hunter, C.H. Hennekens, and F.E. Speizer (1997). "Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy 
and Mortality," New England Journal of Medicine, Volume 336, Number 25, 1769-1775. 
Groves, R.M., F.J. Fowler, M.P. Couper, J.M. Lepkowski, E. Singer, and R. Tourangeau (2009). Survey 
Methodology, Second Edition, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Habiger, J., K. Lopiano, and C. Tot (2009). "Three Interns Share Insights from NISS-NASS Projects," 
Amstat News, December Issue (#402), 49-51. 
Hahn, G.J. (1977). "Some Things Engineers Should Know About Experimental Design," Journal of Quality 
Technology, Volume 9, Number 1, 13-20. 
Hahn, G.J., and N. Doganaksoy (2008). The Role of Statistics in Business and Industry, Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley. 
Hahn, G.J., N. Doganaksoy, R. Lewis, J.E. Oppenlander, and J. Schmee (2009). "Numbers in Everyday Life: 
A Short Course for Adults," Amstat News, February Issue (#380), 16-19. 
Hahn, G.J., and W.Q. Meeker (1991). Statistical Intervals: A Guide for Practitioners, New York, 
NY: Wiley. 
Hamada, M., and R. Sitter (2004). "Statistical Research: Some Advice for Beginners," The American 
Statistician, Volume 58, Number 2, 93-101. 
Hamasaki, T, S. Evans, and G. Molenberghs (2009). "Biostatistics on the Rise in Japan," Amstat News, 
November Issue (#389), 25-26. 
Hand, D.J. (2001). "Reject Inference in Credit Operations," in Handbook of Credit Scoring, edited by 
E. Mays, London, UK: Glenlake. 
Hedin, H., and D. Vock (2010). "Advice, Professional Development Tips for Graduate Students, Amstat 
News, December Issue (#402), 19-20. 
Hernan, M.A., A. Alonso, R. Logan, F. Grodstein, K.B. Michels, W.C. Willett, J.E. Manson, and J.M. 
Robins (2008). "Observational Studies Analyzed Like Randomized Experiments: An Application to 
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy and Coronary Heart Disease," Epidemiology, Volume 19, Number 6, 
766-779. 
Hesketh, T (2009). "Too Many Males in China: The Causes and the Consequences," Significance, Volume 6, 
Number 1,9-13. 

REFERENCES 
3 2 5 
Hill, J. (2006). "Evaluating School Choice Programs," Chapter 4 in Statistics: A Guide to the Unknown, 
Fourth Edition, edited by R. Peck, G. Casella, G.W. Cobb, R. Hoerl, and D. Nolan, Belmont, CA: 
Duxbury Press. 
Hoerl, R.W. (2008a). "Statistical Leadership: From Consultant to Effective Leader," Presented at the 
European Network for Business and Industrial Statistics (ENBiS), Athens, Greece. 
Hoerl, R.W. (2008b). "Speaking Out and Reaching Out on Global Health Policy—The Case of HIV/AIDS," 
Amstat News, July Issue (#373), 31-32. 
Hoerl, R.W., J.H. Hooper, P.J. Jacobs, "Skills for Industrial Statisticians to Survive and Prosper in the 
Emerging Quality Environment," The American Statistician, Volume 47, Number 4, 280-291. 
Hoerl, R.W., and P. Neidermeyer (2009). Use What You Have: Resolving the HIV/AIDS Pandemic, 
Bloomington, IN: Xlibris. 
Hoerl, R.W., and R.D. Snee (2001). Statistical Thinking: Improving Business Performance, Pacific Grove, 
CA: Duxbury Press. 
Hoerl, R.W., and R.D. Snee (2010a). "Moving the Statistics Profession Forward to the Next Level," 
The American Statistician, Volume 64, Number 1, 10-14. 
Hoerl, R.W., and R.D. Snee (2010b). "Statistical Thinking and Methods in Quality Improvement: A Look 
into the Future" (with discussion), Quality Engineering, Volume 22, Number 3, 119-129. 
Hooke, R. (1983). How to Tell the Liars from the Statisticians, New York, NY: Marcel Dekker. 
Huff, D. (1954). How to Lie with Statistics, New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company. Reprinted 
in 1993. 
Huiras, S., K. Virkler, and L. Zahn (2009). "A Day in the Life of an Undergraduate Statistical Consultant," 
Amstat News, September Issue (399), 47-50. 
Hulley, S.B., S.R. Cummings, W.S. Browner, G.D.G. Grady, and T.B. Newman (2006). Designing Clinical 
Research: An Epidemiological Approach, Third Edition, Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins. 
Hunter, W. (1977). "Some Ideas About Teaching Design of Experiments, with 25 Examples of Experiments 
Conducted by Students," The American Statistician, Volume 31, Number 1, 12-17. 
Huovilainen, S. (2010). "Statistics Key in Financial Services Industry," Amstat News, March Issue 
(#393), 39. 
Hutchinson, M. (2010). "A Finer Formula for Assessing Risk," New York Times, May 11, B2. 
Iglewicz, B. (2009). "Faculty Sabbaticals at Government, Industrial Organizations: A Different Approach," 
Amstat News, October Issue (#388), 10-11. 
International Statistical Institute (2010). Declaration of Professional Ethics for Statisticians. Retrieved 
from http://isi-web.org/images/about/DeclarationOfProfEthics.pdf. 
Johnston, I. (2010). "Board Approves Accreditation Guidelines," Amstat News, June Issue (#396), 10-11. 
Joiner, B.L. (1981). "Lurking Variables: Some Examples," The American Statistician, Volume 35, Number 
4, 227-233. 
Kadane, J.B. (2008). "Ethical Issue in Being an Expert Witness," in Statistics in the Law: A Practitioner's 
Guide, Cases, and Materials, edited by J.B. Kadane, New York, NY: Oxford University Press. 
Keller, J.L., and D.J. Sargent (2010). "Getting a Job: What Distinguishes You?" Amstat News, September 
Issue (#399), 44-46. 
Kenett, R.S., S. Coleman, and D. Stewardson (2003). "Statistical Efficiency: The Practical Perspective," 
Quality and Reliability Engineering international, Volume 19, Number 4, 265-272. 
Kenett, R„ and P. Thyregod (2006). "Aspects of Statistical Consulting not Taught by Academia," Statistica 
Neerlandica, Volume 60, Number 3, 396-411. 
Kiernan, K. (2009). "Master's Notebook: Opportunities Abound for Statisticians in Tech Support," Amstat 
News, December Issue (#390), 35-36. 
Kirk, R.E. (1995). Experimental Design: Procedures for the Behavioral Sciences, Third Edition, Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Kish, L. (1995). Survey Sampling, Second Edition, New York, NY: Wiley. 
Kotz, S., B. Campbell, N. Read, and B.V. Balakrishnan (2005). Encyclopedia of Statistical Sciences, Second 
Edition, New York, NY: Wiley. 
Lakshminarayanan, M. (2008a). "Statistics in the Insurance Industry," Amstat News, August Issue 
(#374), 29. 

3 2 6 
REFERENCES 
Lakshminarayanan, M. (2008b). "Consulting in an Outsourcing Environment... Collaboration is the Key," 
Amstat News, November Issue (#377), 21. 
Lampone, V. (2009). "A Quick Guide to Online Data Quality," Stats, Issue 51 (Fall), 5-9. 
Landes, R.D. (2009). "Passing on the Passion for the Profession," The American Statistician, Volume 63, 
Number 2, 163-172. 
Larsen, T., J. Price, and J. Wolfers (2008). Racial Bias in the NBA: Implications in Betting Markets, Journal 
of Analysis in Sports, Volume 4, Number 2, Article 7. 
Ledolter, J., and A. Swersey (2007). Testing 1-2-3: Experimental Design with Applications in Marketing 
and Service Operations, Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
Lee, M.L. (2008). "Statistical Accreditation: The Royal Statistical Society Experience," Amstat News, 
October Issue (#376), 11. 
Lesser, L.M. (2001). "Ethical Statistics and Statistical Ethics: The Experience of Creating an Interdisci-
plinary Module," Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the American Statistical Association, 
Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association 
Levitt, S.S., and S.J. Dubner (2005). Freakonomies: A Rogue Economist Explains the Hidden Side of 
Everything, New York, NY: HarperCollins. 
Levitt, S.S., and Dubner, S.J. (2009). Super Freakonomies: Global Cooling, Patriotic Prostitutes, and Why 
Suicide Bombers Should Buy Life Insurance, New York, NY: HarperCollins. 
Lewis, M. (2004). Moneyball: The Art of Winning an Unfair Game, New York, NY: W.W. Norton & 
Company. 
Lindsay, B., J. Kettenring, and D. Siegmund (2003). "A Report on the Future of Statistics," Statistical 
Science, Volume 19, Number 3, 387-^113. 
Lindsay, B., J. Kettenring, and D. Siegmund (Editors) (2004). Statistics: Challenges and Opportunities for 
the Twenty-First Century, National Science Foundation—American Statistical Association Report. 
Lohr, S. (2010). Sampling: Design and Analysis, Second Edition, Boston, MA: Brooks/Cole Cengage. 
Lott, J.T. (2008). "Statistical Opportunities Abound in Federal Government," Amstat News, January Issue 
(#367), 23. 
Lu, J., S. Jeng, and K. Wang (2009). "A Review of Statistical Methods for Quality Improvement and Control 
in Nanotechnology," Journal of Quality Technology, Volume 41, Number 2, 148-164. 
Mason, R.L., R.F. Gunst, and J.L. Hess (2003). Statistical Design and Analysis of Experiments, Second 
Edition, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Maxwell, S.E., and H.D. Delaney (2004). Designing Experiments and Analyzing Data: A Model 
Comparison Perspective, Second Edition, Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
McCullough, B.D., and D.A. Heiser (2008). "On the Accuracy of Statistical Procedures in Microsoft Excel 
2007," Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, Volume 52, Number 10, 4570-4578. 
McCullough, B.D., and B. Wilson (2002). "On the Accuracy of Statistical Procedures in Microsoft Excel 
2000 and Excel XP," Computational Statistics & Data Analysis, Volume 40, Number 4, 713-721. 
McDonald, G.C. (1999). "Shaping Statistics for Success in the 21st Century: The Needs of Industry," The 
American Statistician, Volume 53, Number 3, 203-207. 
McKenzie, J.D. (2008). "The Use of Microsoft Excel for Statistical Analysis—An Update," Proceedings of 
the 2008 Joint Statistical Meetings, Alexandria, VA: American Statistical Association. 
Meeker, W.Q. (2009). "The Effective Industrial Statistician: Necessary Knowledge and Skills," Presented at 
the Quality and Productivity Research Conference, Yorktown Heights, New York. 
Meeker, W.Q., and L.A. Escobar (1998a). Statistical Methods for Reliability Data, New York, NY: Wiley. 
Meeker, W.Q., and L.A. Escobar (1998b). "Pitfalls of Accelerated Testing," IEEE Transactions on 
Reliability, Volume 47, Number 2, 114-118. 
Meng, X.-L. (2009). "Desired and Feared—What Do We Do Now and Over the Next 50 Years?" The 
American Statistician, Volume 63, Number 3, 202-210. 
Millard, S.P, and A. Krause (2001). Applied Statistics in the Pharmaceutical Industry, New York, NY: 
Springer. 
Montgomery, D.C. (2009). Design and Analysis of Experiments, Seventh Edition, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Moore, D.S. (2001). "Undergraduate Programs and the Future of Academic Statistics," The American 
Statistician, Volume 55, Number 1, 1-6. 
Morton, S. (2009a). "Statistics and Statisticians: Essential to Evidence-Based Decisionmaking," Amstat 
News, October Issue (#388), 3^t. 

REFERENCES 
3 2 7 
Morton, S. (2009b). "Presidential Address, American Statistical Association," Joint Statistical Meetings, 
Washington, DC. 
Neagu, R., and R. Hoerl (2005). "A Six Sigma Approach to Predicting Corporate Defaults," Quality and 
Reliability Engineering International, Volume 21, Number 3, 293-309. 
Newton, P.K., and K. Aslam (2009). "Monte Carlo Tennis: A Stochastic Markov Chain Model," Journal of 
Quantitative Analysis in Sports, Volume 5, Number 3, Article 7. 
New York Times (2009). "For Today's Graduate, Just One Word: Statistics," New York Times, August 5. 
Nguyen, A., and S.K. Fan (2009). "Ethics and Stopping Rules in a Phase II Clinical Trial," Chance, Volume 
22, Number 4, 39-M. 
Nolan, D., and D.T. Lang (2010). "Computing in the Statistics Curricula," The American Statistician, 
Volume 64, Number 2, 97-107. 
Norwood, J.L. (1995). Organizing to Count: Change in the Federal Statistical System, Washington, DC: 
Urban Institute Press. 
Norwood, J.L. (2006). Wise Elder Lecture, Washington, DC: Bureau of the Census. 
Nussbaum, B. (2008). "Statistics Counts at the Environmental Protection Agency," Amstat News, 
November Issue (#377), 23-24. 
Nyberg, J. (2010). "Find Your Fit," Amstat News, June Issue (#396), 35-36. 
O'Brien, R.G. (2000). "Applying for a Job: Your Curriculum Vitae and Cover Letter," Amstat News, September 
Issue (#279), 15-20. Retrieved from http://www.bio.ri.ccf.org/ASA_TSHS/mockCV/mock.html. 
O'Brien, R.G. (2002). "The Completely Sufficient Statistician," Keynote Address, 14th Annual Kansas 
State University Conference on Applied Statistics in Agriculture, Manhattan, KS. 
Ochsenfeld, CA., and G.R. Olbricht (2009). "Statistical Community Service: What Role Can Students 
Play?" Amstat News, December Issue (#402), 11-12. 
O'Neill, R., G. Campbell, and H. Hsu (2008). "Statisticians at the Food and Drug Administration," Amstat 
News, October Issue (#376), 2-3. 
Pantula, S. (2010a). "Celebrating Anniversaries and Achievements," Amstat News, July Issue (#397), 3. 
Pantula, S. (2010b). "Soft Skills Just as Important as Core, Computational Skills When Looking for a Job," 
Amstat News, September Issue (#399), 3 ^ . 
Patterson, B.F. (2009). "AP Statistics: Students Choices After High School," Amstat News, May Issue 
(#383), 6-12. 
Peck, R., G. Casella, G. Cobb, R. Hoerl, D, Nolan, R. Starbuck, and H. Stern (Editors) (2006). Statistics: A 
Guide to the Unknown, Fourth Edition, Belmont, CA: Duxbury Press. 
Peterson, J.J., R.D. Snee, P.R. McAllister, T.L. Schoheld, and A.J. Carella (2009). "Statistics in Pharma-
ceutical Development and Manufacturing," Journal of Quality Technology, Volume 41, Number 2, 
111-147. 
Petska, T.. J. Hobbs, and F. Scheuren, F. (2001). Statistical Operations and Studies in the SOl Program of 
the IRS, Statistics of Income Division, Internal Revenue Service. Retrieved from http://www.oecd.org/ 
dataoecd/57/62/36237450.pdf. 
Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America (PhRMA) (2009). PhRMA Principles on Conduct 
of Clinical Trials and Communication of Clinical Trial Results, accessible via http://www.phrma.org/ 
sites/default/hles/105/042009_clinical_trial_principles_final.pdf. 
Piccolo, R.S. (2010). "Biostatisticians: Do You Know What They Do?" Amstat News, August Issue 
(#398), 26. 
Pierson, S. (2010). "Members Affect ASA Science Policy," Amstat News, June Issue (#396), 33-34. 
Pregibon, D. (2009). "Statistics @ Google," Amstat News, May Issue (#383), 3-5. 
Raftery, A.E., M.A. Tanner, and M.T. Wells (Editors) (2001). Statistics in the 21st Century, Boca Raton, FL: 
Chapman & Hall/CRC. 
Ratledge, E.C. (2006). "The Anatomy of a Pre-election Poll," Chapter 2 in Statistics: A Guide to the 
Unknown, Fourth Edition, edited by R. Peck, G. Casella, G.W. Cobb, R. Hoerl, and D. Nolan, Belmont, 
CA: Duxbury Press. 
Reamer, A. (2009). "In Dire Straits: The Urgent Need to Improve Economic Statistics," Amstat News, 
March Issue (#381). 33-35. 
Rhew. R.D., and P.A. Parker (2007). "A Parametric Geometry Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) Study 
Utilizing Design of Experiments (DOE)," A/AA 2007-1615, U.S. Air Force Test and Evaluation Days, 
Destin, FL. 

328 
REFERENCES 
Ritter, M.A., R.R. Starbuck, and R.V. Hogg (2001). "Advice from Prospective Employers on Training BS 
Statisticians," The American Statistician, Volume 55, Number 1, 14-18. 
Rosenbaum, P.R. (2002). Observational Studies, Second Edition, New York, NY: Springer. 
Rossetti, G. (2010). "Nuclear Engineering to Ultimate Frisbee: A Conversation with an Intern at the Energy 
Information Administration," Amstat News, September Issue (#399), 21-22. 
Salsburg, D. (2001). The Lady Tasting Tea: How Statistics Revolutionized Science in the Twentieth 
Century, New York, NY: Holt. 
Scheaffer, R.L., and C. Lee (2000). "The Case for Undergraduate Statistics," Presented at the Joint 
Statistical Meetings, Indianapolis, IN. Retrieved from http://www.amstat.org/meetings/jsm/2000/usei/ 
case.html. 
Scheaffer, R.L., W. Mendenhall, and R.L. Ott (2005). Elementary Survey Sampling, Sixth Edition, Belmont, 
CA: Duxbury Press. 
Schell, M. (2005). Baseball's All-Time Best Sluggers, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Schenker, N. (2008). "Statistics in Monitoring the Nation's Health," Amstat News, September Issue 
(#375), 2-3. 
Scheuren, F. (2007). "The ProBonoSVdtistk'vdn,"Journalof the American Statistical Association, Volume 102, 
Number 477, 1-6. 
Schieid, M. (2006). "Beware the Lurking Variable," Stats, Issue 46 (Fall), 14-18. 
Schwartz, S., and S. Shipman (2009). Using Program Evaluation and Statistical Analysis to Inform Policy 
Decisions. (Handout to talk given by N. Kingsbury at 2009 Joint Statistical Meetings.). 
Shipp, S., and S. Cohen (2009). "COPAFS Focuses on Statistical Activities," Amstat News, December 
Issue (#390), 17-20. 
Shipp, S., and S. Cohen (2010). COPAFS Focuses on Statistical Activities, Amstat News, March Issue 
(#393), 25-29. 
Shutes, K. (2009). "A Note on Using Individualised Data Sets for Statistics Coursework," Technology 
Innovations in Statistics Education, Volume 3, Number 2. Retrieved from http://escholarship.org/uc/ 
item/7d02d6hd. 
Siegel, J.S (2005). "Pursuing Non-Census Stuff in the Census," Newsletter of the Sections on Government 
Statistics and Social Statistics, June Issue, American Statistical Association. Retrieved from http://www. 
amstat.org/secttons/sgovt/news0605.pdf. 
Siegmund, D., and B. Yakir (2007). The Statistics of Gene Mapping, New York, NY: Springer. 
Sinclair, N. (2009). "A Practitioner's Reflections to Motivate a Career in Statistics," Amstat News, July 
Issue (#385), 56. 
Slutsky, J.R., and CM. Clancy (2009). "AHRQ's Effective Health Care Program: Why Comparative 
Effectiveness Matters," American Journal of Medical Quality, Volume 24, Number 1, 67-70. 
Smith, R.L., L.M. Berliner, and P. Guttorp (2010). "Statisticians Comment on Status of Climate Change 
Science," Amstat News, March Issue (#393), 13-17. 
Snee, R. (1998). "Non-Statistical Skills that Can Help Statisticians Become More Effective," Total Quality 
Management Journal, Volume 9, Number 8, 711-722. 
Snee, R. (1999). "Meeting the Challenge of Improving Business Performance," Presented at the Joint 
Statistical Meetings, Baltimore, MD. 
Snee, R. (2008). "W. Edwards Deming's Making Another World: A Holistic Approach to Performance 
Improvement and the Role of Statistics," The American Statistician, Volume 62, Number 3, 251-255. 
Snee, R.D., and R.W. Hoerl (2007). "Integrating Lean and Six Sigma—A Holistic Approach," Six Sigma 
Forum Magazine, Volume 6, Number 3, 15-21. 
Snider, V. (2009). "Nancy M. Gordon: Informing Decisions," Amstat News, September Issue (#387), 11-13. 
Spiegelhalter, D., and A. Barnett (2009). "London Murders: A Predictable Pattern," Significance, Volume 6, 
Number 1,5-8. 
Splaver, S. (Editor) (1973). Nontraditional Careers for Women, New York, NY: Julian Messner. 
Spruill, N., and A. Wilson (2009). "Statistics in Defense and National Security: Lesson in Outreach to 
Policymakers," Amstat News, December Issue (#390), 31-33. 
Spurrier, J. (2000). Practice of Statistics: Putting the Pieces Together, Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. 
Squire, P. (1988). "Why the 1936 Literary Digest Poll Failed," Public Opinion Quarterly Volume 52, 
Number 1, 125-133. 

REFERENCES 
3 2 9 
Starbuck, R. (2009). "Journey to a Career in Industry: Robert Starbuck Tells His Story," Amstat News, 
September Issue (#387), 51-53. 
Starbuck, R. (2010). "Fellow Award: Revisited (Again)," Amstat News, August Issue (#398), 6-9. 
Statistical Journal of the International Association ofOfficial Statistics (2011). Volume 27, Number 1-2. 
Steiner, S.H., and R.J. MacKay (2005). Statistical Engineering: An Algorithm for Reducing Variation in 
Manufacturing Processes, Milwaukee, WI: ASQ Quality Press. 
Straf, M.L. (2003). "Statistics: The Next Generation," Journal of the American Statistical Association, 
Volume 98, Number 461, 1-6. 
Sung, Y. (2008). "It's Easy to Produce Chartjunk Using Microsoft Excel 2007 but Hard to Make Good 
Graphs," Computational Statistics and Data Analysis, Volume 52, Number 10, 4594-4601. 
Szabo, F.E. (2004). Actuaries' Survival Guide: How to Succeed in One of the Most Desirable Professions, 
Boston, MA: Academic Press. 
Tanenbaum, E. (2010a). "In the Hot Seat: Two Experienced Consultants Discuss Hiring Statisticians," 
Amstat News, July Issue (#397), 27-31. 
Tanenbaum, E. (2010b). "Statistical Communications Anonymous," Amstat News, April Issue (#394), 
37-38. 
Tanur, J.M., F. Mosteller, W.H. Kruskal, R.F. Link, R.S. Pieters, and G.R. Rising (Editors) (1972). Statistics: 
A Guide to the Unknown, San Francisco, CA: Holden-Day. 
Tarpey, T, C. Acuna, G. Cobb, and R. DeVeaux (2002). "Curriculum Guidelines for Bachelor of Arts 
Degrees in Statistical Science," Journal of Statistical Education, Volume 10, Number 2. Retrieved from 
http://www.amstat.org/publications/jse/vl0n2/tarpey.html. 
The College Board (2010). Statistics Course Description. Retrieved from http://apcentral.collegeboard. 
com/apc/public/repository/ap-statistics-course-description.pdf. 
Thorn, J., and P. Palmer (1985). The Hidden Game of Baseball: A Revolutionary Approach to Baseball and 
its Statistics, Revised and Updated Edition, Garden City, NY: Dolphin Book. 
Tufte, E.R. (1997). Visual Explanations: images and Quantities, Evidence and Narrative, Cheshire, CT: 
Graphics Press. 
Turner, K.R. (2007). New Drug Development: Design, Methodology and Analysis, Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (2007). "The Consumer Price Index," Chapter 17 in BLS Handbook. 
Retrieved from http://www.bls.gov/opub/hom/pdf/homchl7.pdf. 
Utts, J.M. (2005). Seeing Through Statistics, Third Edition, Belmont, CA: Thomson Brooks/Cole. 
Valentine, K., R. James, and C. Martial (2010). "The Statistician's Role in an Integrated Health Care 
System," Amstat News, November Issue (#401), 17-19. 
Valian, V. (1999). Why So Slow? The Advancement of Women, Boston, MA: The MIT Press. 
Van Belle, G. (2002). Statistical Rules of Thumb, New York, NY: Wiley. 
Van Den Heuvel, J., R.J.M.M. Does, and S. Bisgaard (2005). "Dutch Hospital Implements Six Sigma," Six 
Sigma Forum Magazine, Volume 4, Number 2, 11-14. 
Vardeman, S., and M. Morris (2004). "Statistics and Ethics: Some Advice for Young Statisticians," The 
American Statistician, Volume 57, Number 1, 21-26. 
Varian, H. (2010). Quoted in "Data, Data Everywhere," The Economist, February 25. 
Wallman, K.K. (2008). "Government Statistics: Bold Ventures, Interesting Challenges," Amstat News, June 
Issue (#372), 26-29. 
Washington Post (2009). "In D.C., Statisticians Flex Their Strength in Numbers," Washington Post, 
August 5. 
Weisberg, H.I. (2010). Bias and Causation: Models and Judgment for Valid Comparisons, Hoboken, NJ: 
Wiley. 
Yalta, A.T. (2008). "The Accuracy of Statistical Distributions in Microsoft Excel 2007," Computational 
Statistics and Data Analysis, Volume 52, Number 10, 4579^1586. 
Younger, N. (2009). "Is That Clear: Communicating Effectively," Amstat News, November Issue (#389), 
11-12. 

It 
INDEX1 
Academia 
administrative service, 294-295 
careers in, 269-308 
comparison with business, industry and 
government, 271-272, 305 
department chair, 301 
location within, 277 
teaching challenges, 280-285 
tenure, see Tenure 
training for, 298-300 
types of positions, 273-276 
what statisticians do, 270-273 
Academic appointment 
adjunct professor, 274-276 
assistant professor, 274 
associate professor, 274 
clinical professor, 274-275 
distinguished chair, 300 
endowed chair, 300 
full professor, 274 
instructor, 274-275 
lecturer, 274 
letter, 276 
2-month, 276 
9-month, 276 
postdoc, 274-275 
temporary, 274 
visiting professor, 275-276 
Academic career 
bright sides, 304 
downsides, 303 
Academic freedom, 277, 304 
Academic leader, 300 
Academic year, 273, 276 
Accelerated life testing, 25, 202, (footnote) 
221,226 
Acceptance sampling, 23, 76, 127 
Accreditation, 2, 15-16 
Actuarial science, 2, 15 
Adjunct professor, 150, 254 
Advanced Placement course in statistics, 10, 
114 
Advertising claim, 13, 26, 28, 30, 67, 207, 
211,217,249 
Agricultural research, 62-63 
Agriculture Department, Economic Research 
Service, 46 
AIDS epidemic, 261 
Allen, R., (footnote) 35 
American Association for Public Opinion 
Research, 16 
American Chemical Society, 16 
American Community Survey (ACS), 43 
American Economics Association, 16 
American Educational Research 
Association, 16 
American Society for Quality (ASQ), 16, 
(footnote) 206, 263, 290, 314 
Statistics Division, 316 
American Statistical Association (ASA), 2, 
16, 27, 90, 115, 152, 209, 282, 302, 
310, 316-317 
Biopharmaceutical Section, 27 
Committee on Professional Ethics, 215 
Ethical Guidelines for Statistical 
Practice, 207, 209 
Fellow, 297, 300 
Job Placement Service, 153 
Section on Statistics and the 
Environment, 65 
Section on Statistics in Sports, 69 
Section on Teaching Statistics in Health 
Sciences, 282 
Section on Statistical Education, 282, 298 
Also see References for authors of referenced works. 
A Career in Statistics: Beyond the Numbers, Gerald J. Hahn and Necip Doganaksoy. 
© 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2011 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
331 

332 
INDEX 
The American Statistician, 312 
AmstatNews, 
14, 17, 53, 64, 108, 138, 142, 
153, 158, 166,205,312,317 
Analysis of variance, 127-129, (footnote) 
220 
Analytic study, (footnote) 221 
Anderson Cook, C, 92-93 
Annals of Applied Statistics, 313 
Annals of Statistics, 286, 290, 313 
Artificial intelligence, 8 
Asher, J., 92 
Association of Public Data Users, 50 
Annual Conference, 317 
Attribute measurement, 235 
Automated tracking, 318 
Bacon, F., 4 
Banks, D., 100 
Baseball, 68 
Battelle Memorial Institute, 72 
Baudrillard, J., 310 
Bayesian methods, 127 
Benefits, quantification, 188-190 
Berk, S., 304 
Bioinformatics, 72, 318 
Biometrics, 287 
Biometrika, 290 
Biostatistician, 59 
Biostatistics, 2, 11, 48^9, 57, 59, 90, 
(footnote) 115, 116, 120, 123, 
128-129,270, 317 
Blumberg, C.J., xv, (footnote) 225 
Boardman, T.J., 109, 143 
Bowker, A.H., 255, 264, 302 
Box, G.E.P., 80, 101, 141, 175 
Brown, E., 77 
Buderer, N., 129 
Bureau of Economic Analysis, 37-38, 
46,88 
Bureau of Justice Statistics (BJS), 39, 40, 
41,46 
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS), 37, 38, 39, 
(footnote) 42, 46, 50, 75, 213 
Bureau of the Census, 37, (footnote) 40, 46, 
51,75, 87, 128-130,213 
Local Employment Dynamics 
program, 50-51 
State Data Center program, 50 
Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 46 
Burn-in. see Product, burn-in 
Canada 
statistical system, 51-52 
Statistics Act, 51-52 
Capture-recapture methodology, 107 
Career goals, defining, 149-151 
Career paths 
academic statistician, 300-302 
statistician 251-264 
CareerCast.com, 11 
Case-control study, 232 
Categorical data, 28, 71, 127, 129, 133 
Caucus for Women in Statistics, 93 
Causation, 9 
Cause and effect relationship, 225-228, 230 
Censored data analysis, 130-131 
Census, 221-224 
Census Bureau, see Bureau of the Census 
Centers for Disease Control and Protection 
(CDC), 59 
Challenger space shuttle, 64 
Chance, 282,313 
Chance News, 282,310 
Cheetham, B., 201 
Chemtech, 206 
Chernick, M. R., 143, 191,311 
Chief statistician, U.S., 39,87,91 
Chuang-Stein, C, 92-93 
Citation index, 291 
Classified information, 212 
Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 60 
Climate change, see Climate science 
Climate science, 45, 64-65, 312, 318 
Clinical trials, 26-27,61, 118,127,207, 210, 
214, (footnote) 220, 243, 318 
ethical considerations, 214, 242 
Cluster sampling, 223 
Clustering analysis, 130 
Cohort study, 232 
Coleman, D., 184 
Colleges 
admission, 230-231 
comparison of, 121-125 
ranking, 121-122 
selection of, 120-125 
size of statistics program, 123 
2-year, 270, 273, 277 
4-year, 270-273, 277 
Communications, 197-205 
ability, 8, 126, 197 
electronic, 200-201,206 

INDEX 
333 
in a global environment, 198 
industry, 29, 76 
informal, 201 
need for, 190 
opportunities for, 199-201 
Community college, 273-275, 278, 286 
Comparative effectiveness research, 61 
Comparative investigation, 221 
Computer program, see Software 
Computer scientist, 78 
Computer skills, 8,45, 100, 117, 126 
Computing, see Statistical computing 
Conferences, professional, see Conferences, 
technical 
Conferences, technical, 315-318 
Confidence interval, 131,223,265 
Confidential information, 43, (footnote) 163, 
211-213,239,293 
Confidential Information Protection and 
Statistical Efficiency Act, 213 
Confidentiality, see Confidential information 
Confounding, 210, 227 
Consultant, see Statistical consultant 
Consulting, see Statistical consulting 
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 37, 38, 39, 42 
Consumer Product Safety Commission, 41, 
57 
Continuing education, 311 
Continuous measurement, 235 
Control chart, 23, 69, 76, 155, 156, 224 
Controlled study, (footnote) 221, 
225-226 
Cook, L., (footnote) 35, 38, (footnote) 212 
Correlation, 226, 228 
Cost of Living Adjustments (COLA), 39-41 
Council of Professional Associations on 
Federal Statistics, 49, 317 
Cox, G., 90 
Credit approval, see Loan approval 
Credit score, 28, 225 
Crosby, P., 24, (footnote) 24 
Current Index to Statistics (CIS), 311 
Current Population Survey (CPS), 37, 187 
Darwin, C, 106 
Data detective, 233 
Datagathering, 219-247 
Data mining, 8, 78, 127, 225, 277 
Data quality, 223, 230, 233, 240 
De Berk, L., 69 
Deadlines, meeting of, 88-89 
Decision Sciences Institute, 16 
Decision theory, 8, 127 
Default risk modeling, 29, 178, 181-182, 
188, 194,225 
Degrees in statistics, see Statistics, 
degrees in 
Deming Conference on Applied 
Statistics, 317 
Deming, W. E., 24, 76, 93, 113, 141, 178, 
258-259, 264, 265, 283, 284 
Democratization of statistics, 29, 78-79, 83, 
94,95, 102, 113, 145,287 
Design of experiments, 12, 24, 25, 30, 
220-221 
Deterministic thinking, 7, 103 
Discrete parts assembly, 26 
Discrimination claim, assessment, 208 
Disease prediction, control and 
prevention, 59-60 
Disputes, assessment of, 208 
Disraeli, B., 9 
Dissertation, 124, 134-135 
advisor, selection of, 134-135 
committee, selection of, 136-137 
topic, selection of, 136 
Dodge, H.F., 76 
Doganaksoy, N., 13-14 
Domesday Book, 35 
Drug approval, 26 
Drug Information Association Annual 
Meeting, 318 
Dynamics of work environment, 87, 185 
Econometric forecasting, 71 
Education, 67 
Educational testing, 67 
Educational Testing Service (ETS), 67 
Electric Power Research Institute, 72 
Electronic classroom, 282, 284 
Electronic communication, see 
Communications, electronic 
Elevator speech, 201-203, 207 
Energy Information Administration (EIA), 
41,46, 128, 129, 138, 155 
Engineering Statistics Handbook, 310 
Enthusiasm, need for, 105 
Enumeration, complete, 222 
Enumerative study, (footnote) 221 
Environment, 64-65 

334 
INDEX 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), 
46, 57, 58-59, 233 
Department of Environmental 
Information, 46 
Epidemiology, 59 
Ethical conflicts, up-front 
avoidance, 209-210 
Ethical considerations, 207-216 
European Network of Business and Industrial 
Statisticians (ENBIS), 16,316 
Eurostat, 52 
Excel, 133. .see Microsoft Excel 
Exit poll, 66 
Experimental design, see Design of 
experiments 
Expert witness, 69, 100, 214-215, 217, 
253, 293 
Explanatory variable, 220, 225, 227-230, 
232 
Extrapolation, 131 
Faculty committee, 294-295 
Faculty manual, 274, 276, 279 
Failure mode, 226, 242-246 
Failure modes and effects analysis 
(FMEA), 244 
Fall Technical Conference (FTC), 317 
Fecso, R., (footnote) 35, 41 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 40 
Federal Committee on Statistical 
Methodology, 49, 317 
Federal Communications Commission, 57 
Federal Highway Administration, 46 
Federal Reserve System, 46 
Feigenbaum, A., (footnote) 24 
Field support, 25-26 
Financial services applications, 28-29 
Financial Times Top Academic 
Journals, 291 
Firefighting, 24 
Fisher, R.A., 62, 141, 184, 220, 231 
Flammability test, 235 
Flexibility, need for, 102 
Food and beverage industry, 26, 28 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 26, 
57,58,59,75, 118,317 
Food and Drug Administration Industry 
Statistics Workshop, 317 
Food Drug and Cosmetics Act, 26 
Fort Wayne, Indiana, use of Six Sigma, 77 
Fowler, L., 92, 264 
Fractional factorial experiment, 162 
Fraud detection, 29-31 
Ftp site, xiv, 50, 131,211,213, 279, 285 
Fuzzy logic, 78 
Gaines, L., xv, 1, (footnote) 35, 206 
Gardner, M., 92, 107, 186-187, 190-191 
Garfinkel, L., 255, 256, 264 
GE, 77 
GE Global Research Center, 79 
Geller, N„ 188 
Genetic predisposition, 231 
Genetic research, 60 
Gentleman, R., 134 
Geographical considerations, in job 
assessment, 168 
Global environment, communicating in. see 
Communications, in a global 
environment 
Globalization, 83-84, 198 
consequences and impact, 83-84 
evolution, 83 
Godin, S., 203 
Golomski, W., (footnote) 24, 260 
Go/no-go measurement, 235 
Goodman, A., 23 
Goodnight, J., 15, 255, 264 
Google, 30, 80 
Gossett, W.S., (footnote) 12 
Government Accountability Office 
(GAO), 40-41 
Government, job grading, see Job grading 
systems 
Graphical methods, 29 
Gross Domestic Product (GDP), 37, 38, 52 
Hahn, G.J., 12-13 
Hahn, J., (footnote) 225 
Hand, D.J., 1 
Happiness index, 2, 41 
Hare, L., xv, (footnote) 4, 10, 109, 191, 259 
Health, 59-61,77 
care, 60-61 
research, 60 
High school programs, 114 
Hill, W., 109, 191 
Hiring process 
New York State, 153 
U. S. government, 153 

INDEX 
335 
Hoadley, B., 191 
Hoerl. R., 104, 106, 109, 191,261 
Hogg, R., 191 
Hollerith, H., (footnote) 43 
Honeywell, 77 
Hormone replacement therapy, 226-227 
Hunter, W., 1 
Ihaka, R., 134 
Iman, R., 109, 143, 192 
In vitro studies, 27 
In vivo studies, 27 
Incomplete block design, 62 
Industrial and Engineering Chemistry, 206 
Informatics, 277 
Institute for Operations Research and the 
Management Sciences 
(INFORMS), 16,314 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers (IEEE), 16,314 
Institute of Mathematical Statistics 
(IMS), 16,302,311,313,315 
Integrated Postsecondary Education Data 
System, 90 
Interagency Council on Statistical Policy, 46 
Interdisciplinary program, 277 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 40 
International Association for Official 
Statistics (IAOS), 314 
International Association for Statistics 
Education, 282 
International Biometrie Society, 16 
Eastern North American Region Spring 
Meeting, 317 
International Conference on Statistics in 
Business and Industry, 317 
International Monetary Fund, 52 
International Statistical Institute (ISI), 16, 
51,209,216,262,263, 313,316 
Declaration of Professional Ethics, 209 
Sports Statistics Committee, 69 
International Statistical Review (ISR), 313 
Internet operations, 30 
Internet resources, 310-311 
Internship, 11, 14, 118, 123-124, 135-140, 
299 
Interpersonal skills, 8, 100 
Introductory statistics course, 280-283 
applications-area oriented, 281 
liberal arts, 280-281 
Introductory statistics course, omnibus, 281 
Isolated statistician, 297-298, 309 
Iterative learning process, 220 
James, W., 68 
JMP, 133 
Job grading systems, 82-83 
Job growth opportunities, assessment of, 166 
Job interview, 157-164 
follow up, 164 
Job mobility, 257 
Job offers, assessment, 166-170 
Job search 
approaches, 152-153 
identifying opportunities, 151-154 
Joint Statistical Meetings, 64, 69, 91, 142, 
153,262,298,311,315-316 
Journal of Business and Economic 
Statistics, 287 
Journal of Computational and Graphical 
Statistics, 290 
Journal of the American Medical 
Association, 290 
Journal of the American Statistical 
Association, 287, 290 
Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 290 
The Journal of Statistics Education, 282 
Journals 
general interest, 312-313 
professional and technical, 312-314 
specialized, 313-314 
tiering, 290-291 
Juran, J., (footnote) 24 
Kaiman filtering, 78 
Kass, R., 77 
Kefauver-Harris Amendments, 26, 75 
Kettenring, J., 1 
Keyes, T„ 192 
Knowledge 
adaption, skill for, 107 
discovery in databases, 8 
Lambert, D., 192 
Latin Square design, 62 
Leadership skills, see Statistical leadership 
Lean manufacturing, 77 
Legal applications, 69-70 
Leon, R., 144 
Life data analysis, 127 

336 
INDEX 
Lifelong learning, 108,309-319 
Listening, art of, 199 
Literary Digest Magazine, 66 
Loan approval, 178, 184, 188 
Loan default prediction, 181-182, 188 
London cholera epidemic, 231 
Look, A., (footnote) 8 
Los Alamos National Laboratory, 72 
Lott, J., (footnote) 35 
Lurking variable, 227-228, 232 
Makuch, W., 109 
Management science, 8 
Managers, impact of, 84-85 
Manufactured product applications, 23-28 
Margin of error, 66, 223 
Market research, 25, 66 
Markov chain models, 69 
Martz, H., 110, 144, 192 
Mathematica Policy Research, 47 
Mathematical statistician, 47, 48 
Mathematics 
skill, 7, 12,48,54, 100, 125, 126 
training, 114 
Mayo Clinic, 60, 117, 157 
McDonald, G., 159 
McNulty, S., I 
Measurement 
error, 25 
precision, 236 
Meeker, W. Q., xv, (footnote) 206, (footnote) 
269 
Meetings 
national societies, 315 
tips for running, 199-200 
Michelson, D.K., 91 
Michigan, Department of Agriculture, 50 
Microsoft Excel, 132-133 
Minitab, 133 
Missing data, 130,236 
Mixture experiment, 130, 205 
Money considerations, in job 
assessment, 168 
Monitoring process or product, 27, 28, 41 
Moore, D.S., 144, 192,219 
Morgan, C, 93, 110, 144 
Morton, S., 15, 39, 64 
Motorola, 77 
Multiple projects, 89 
Multivariate methods, 127, 299 
Nanotechnology, 63, 76, 167, 318 
National Academy of Sciences, Committee 
on National Statistics, 317 
National Aeronautics and Space Agency 
(NASA), 46, 63, 64 
National Agricultural Statistics Service 
(NASS), 46, 50, 213 
National Center for Education Statistics, 37, 
90, 115 
National Center for Health Statistics, 37, 46 
National Crime Victimization Survey, 39 
National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (NIST), 72-73,310 
National Institute of Statistical Sciences 
(NISS), 72 
National Institutes of Health, 59, 82,233,288 
National laboratories, 71-72 
National Opinion Research Center, 47 
National Research Council (NRC), 120-121 
National Science Foundation, 115, 288, 
(footnote) 290 
Science Research Statistics Division, 46 
Needleman, S., 11 
Neidermeyer, P., 261 
Nelson, L., (footnote) 8, 23, 192 
Nelson, W., (footnote) 240 
Nemeth, M.A., 110, 144 
Neural networks, 8, 78 
New England Journal of Medicine, 290 
New Testament, 35 
New York State 
hiring process (see Hiring process, New 
York State) 
job grading (see Job grading systems) 
statistician requirements, 48-49 
New Zealand Statistical Association, 16 
Newsletters, 206 
Nightingale, F., 90 
Nonlinear estimation, 127 
Nonparametric methods, 127, 299 
Non-response bias, 223 
Nontenure-track position, 274—276 
Normal distribution, 131 
North American Industry Classification 
System, 44, 130 
North Carolina State University, 15 
Nortwood, J., 38, 90, 212 
Numerical analysis, 299 
Nurses Health Study, 226 
Nussbaum, B.D., 110, 193 

INDEX 
337 
Oakland Athletics, 68 
Observational study, 5, 30, 225-233 
Office of Management and Budget 
(OMB), 44, 46, 49, 88, 233 
Office of Personnel Management, 47, 82 
Office of Research, Evaluation and 
Statistics, 46 
Official statistics, 35-56, 79, 186 
challenges, 41-45 
compensation, 52-53 
examples, 39-41 
integration of activities, 49-50 
local government activities, 48-51 
major employers, 46-47 
outside the U.S., 51-52 
protecting confidentiality of, 212-213 
required credentials, 47^49 
research opportunities, 45 
scope, 36-38 
some technical challenges, 130 
training for, 130 
Old Testament, 35 
On-site involvement, 186 
Operations research, 8, 28, 48, 61, 
127-128 
Ordinal data, 28 
Oregon, statistician requirements, 49 
OR/MS Today, 314 
Orszag, P., 38 
Outlier, 131 
Outsourcing, see Globalization 
Pantula, S., 99 
Parastatistician, 78, 80 
Pardo, S., 197 
Pareto Rule, 187 
Parr, W.C., 110, 144 
Patents, 291 
Peer-review, 291, 303 
Percentile, 131 
Performance 
evaluation, 85 
need for, 187-188 
Persistence, need for, 103 
Peterson, J.J., 103 
Pfeifer, CG., Ill, 193 
Pharmaceutical industry, 26-27, 58, 75, 76, 
78, 80, 81 
Population, 221-223, 230-231, 243-244 
Post-stratification, 70 
Practical statistical efficiency, 180 
Practitioner, definition, 3 
Pre-clinical trial, 26 
Prediction, 230 
interval, 131 
Presentation 
charts, preparation, 203-204 
effective, 202-205 
hints for giving, 204-205 
Principal Federal Economic Indicators, 88 
Privacy protection, 213 
Proactive role, 6, 10, 24, 106, 252 
Probability, 127 
Problem assessment skills, 101-102 
Problem owners, definition, 5 
Process 
control, 63 
improvement, 24, 27, 30-31 
industry, 26 
knowledge, 24 
and product understanding, 184 
Product 
burn-in, 28 
design, 24—25 
scale-up, 24-25 
servicing, 25-26 
Professional participation, see Statistician, 
professional participation 
Professional societies, 16 
Professor, selection of, 134 
Project attractiveness index, 180 
Project benefits estimation, 182-183 
Project cost estimation, 183-184 
Project execution, 184-190 
Project implementation, 190 
Project initiation, 175-184 
by statistician, 178-179 
statistician recruited during course of 
project, 176-177 
statistician recruited up-front, 177-178 
Project report, 201 
Project scoping study, 183 
Project selection, 179-180 
Proposal 
development, 288-289 
process, 180-184 
request for, 180 
typical requirements, 180 
within an organization, 180-184 
Public opinion poll, 65-67, 223, 232 

338 
INDEX 
Publicizing statistics and statisticians, 
205-207 
Quality and Productivity Research 
Conference, 317 
Quality assurance, 127-128, 190, 255, 263 
Quality control, see Quality assurance 
Quality improvement, (footnote) 24, 61, 
76-77 
Quality Progress, (footnote) 206, 314 
R programming environment, 133-134 
RAND Corporation, 72 
Random sampling, 65, 221-226, 241 
Randomization, 220, 225 
Randomized trial, 225, 233 
Ranney, G., 65, 193 
Rao, C.R., 1 
Realistic attitude, need for, 104 
Recruiting process, insights into, 158 
References, for job applications, 165-166 
Regression analysis, 127-129, 133,281 
Regulatory activities, 57-59 
Reliability, 24-25, 26, 29, (footnote) 221 
Reliability, Availability and Maintainability 
Symposium, 318 
Research, see Statistical research 
grant, 288-289 
institutes, 72 
university, 270, 275 
Research Triangle Institute (RTI), 47, 72 
Response variable, 220-221, 227-228, 230 
Resume writing, 154-156 
Reverse interview, 169 
Risk assessment, 29 
Robust products, 25 
Role, see Statistician, roles 
Romig, H., 76 
Rothamsted Agriculture Experimental 
Station, 62 
Royal Statistical Society, 16, 90, 290, 
(footnote) 297, 312 
RSPLIDA, 134 
S programming environment, 134 
Sabbatical, 275, 305 
Sabermetrics, 68 
Sail, J., 15 
Sample size, 144 
Sampling frame, 65, 223 
Sampling studies, 5, 37, 41, 43, 65-67, 89, 
127, 137, 185, 195,210,221-224, 
241,293,299 
response rate, 66 
Sampson, C.B., 111, 193 
SAS, 15, 133 
Schmee, J., xv, (footnote) 269 
Schwab, C, 197 
Scientific method, 4-7, 11 
Self-confidence, need for, 105 
Sematech, 310 
Semiconductor industry, 26, 27, 63, 76, 310 
Senior academician, 300 
Service business, 28-30 
Shainin, D., (footnote) 24 
Shewhart, W., 23,76, 141 
Short course, 205-206, 311 
Significance, 282, 312 
Simple random sampling, 223 
Simpson's Paradox, 68 
Simulation, 127,245,299 
Singapore, Statistics Act, 52 
Singpurwalla, N.D., 111, 161 
Six Sigma, 12,24,61,76-77, 80,93,94,141, 
184,206,263,264 
Six Sigma Forum Magazine, 11 
Small Area Health Insurance Estimates, 37 
Smoking and lung cancer, 231 
Snee, R.D., 99 
Snow, J., 231 
Social and behavioral sciences, 65-71 
Social Security Administration, 128 
Society for Clinical Trials, 16 
Society for Clinical Trials Annual 
Meeting, 318 
Society for Industrial and Applied 
Mathematics (SIAM), 314 
Software, 29-30, 131-135 
development and support of, 29-30 
general purpose statistical, 133 
general purpose with statistical 
features, 132-133 
specialized statistical, 133 
statistical, 131-135 
programming environment, 133-134 
Southwest Research Institute, 72 
Space exploration, 63-64 
Spar, E.J., 151 
Spatial statistics, 63, 127 
SPLIDA, 134 

INDEX 
339 
Split plot design, 62 
S-Plus programming environment, 134 
Sports strategy and assessment, 67-69 
SPSS, 133 
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) 
System, 44, 130 
Stata, 133 
STATCOM, 140 
Statgraphics, 133 
Statistical advocate, 6 
Statistical analyst, 251, 254, 256-257 
Statistical computing, 127, 299 
Statistical consultant, 251-254, 257 
Statistical consulting, 126-129 
center, 140 
external, 139,273,292-293 
internal, 292 
Statistical engineering, 77 
Statistical genetics, 318 
Statistical group, 23 
Statistical Journal of the IAOS, 314 
Statistical journals, tiering, see Journals, 
tiering 
Statistical leadership, 24 
Statistical literacy, 9, 280 
Statistical manager, 252, 254 
Statistical precision, 240 
Statistical quality control, see Quality 
assurance 
Statistical research, 286-292 
assessment of quality, 289 
grants for, 288-289 
identifying projects, 287-288 
publishing, 289 
types of, 286-287 
Statistical science, 77 
Statistical significance, 131, 211 
Statistical Society of Canada, 16 
code of ethical statistical practice, 209 
Statistical software, see Software 
Statistical theory, 5 
Statistical thinking, 7, 255 
Statistical uncertainty, 223-224, 235 
Statistician 
in academia, 269-305 
applied, moving into application 
area, 255, 256-257 
applied, moving into management, 255, 
257 
in business and industry, 23-33 
career paths (see Career paths, statistician) 
contribution beyond the 
workplace, 259-261 
contributions to community and 
society, 260-261 
definition, 2-3 
in government, 35-56 
place in an organization, 79-80 
preparing for a successful career 
as, 110-185 
professional participation, 260 
receptiveness to, 75-76 
roles, 251-258 
aspirations, 150 
as technical arbitrator, 89-90 
senior, 251-252,254, 257,262 
technical contributions, 259-260 
traits for success, 99-111 
work environment, 75-93 
work of, 37-109 
Statistics 
bachelor's degree in, 114-118, 120, 122, 
125 
beyond the workplace, 8-9 
Canada, 51-52 
career downsides, 9-10 
career, excitement of, 10-11 
definition, 1-2 
degrees in, 90-91, 114-116, 256, 298 
department offering degree in, 122-123 
education, 113-145 
limits of, 142-143 
entering from other fields, 141 
groups, 79-80 
introductory course, 10 
job rating, 11 
master degree in, 114-120, 122, 124, 125, 
133 
Ph.D. degree in, 114-120, 122, 124, 
134-136, 138, 142 
receptiveness to, 10, 75-79 
recognition (see Statistics, receptiveness to) 
Roundtable, (footnote) 206 
selection of courses, 126-131 
without Borders, 261 
women in (see Women in statistics) 
Statistics Education Research Journal, 282 
STATS, (footnote) 312 
Stochastic processes, 127 
Stratified sampling, 223 

340 
INDEX 
Student, see Gossett, W.S. 
Student questionnaire, 279, 284-285 
Study planning, 219 
Subject selection, 221 
Survey sampling, see Sampling studies 
Survival data analysis, 127 
Swedish Statistical Association, 16 
Synthetic data, 51, 131, 163 
SYSTAT, 133 
Systems development study, 224 
Taguchi methods, 78 
Target population, 223 
Teaching 
evaluation of, 285-286 
experience, 299 
in non-academic settings, 71 
load, 273, 276 
Teaching Statistics, 282 
Team 
member, 6, 81 
skills, 106 
Technology Innovations in Statistics 
Education, 282 
Technometrics, 287, 290 
Tenure, 273-276, 277-279 
criteria for, 278-279 
granting of, 274 
life beyond, 279-280 
track position, 273-275, 278-279 
Testing 
component, 243-244 
in-house, 243-244 
subassembly, 243-244 
Theoretical statistics, see Statistical theory 
Thesis, see Dissertation 
Time accounting, 86 
Time management ability, 105-106 
Time series, 127, 130,281 
data, seasonal adjustments, 45 
Toastmasters, 202 
Tolerance interval, 131 
Traceability, 239 
Travel safety, 8 
Treasury Department, Statistics of Income 
Division, 46 
Treatment, 220, 225 
Truman, H. S., 66 
Tukey, 1, 10,225 
Twain, M., 9 
Unbiased estimate, 223, 228 
Unfavorable results, conveying of, 211 
United Kingdom 
Office for National Statistics, 52 
Statistics Board, 52 
United Nations, 35, 52, 64 
U.S. citizenship requirement, 48 
U.S. Geological Survey, 46 
U.S. government agencies, see Individual 
agency name 
U.S. News & World Report, college 
rankings, 120-121, 123 
U.S. Supreme Court, 70 
US AJobs, 153, (footnote) 156 
Use-rate acceleration, 244 
Validation, 24, 25 
Value-added modeling, 74 
Variability, 7, 18, 24, 25, 28, 31, 137, 177, 
224, 229, 255 
limited, 229 
Varian. H., 318 
Volunteer activities, see Statistician, 
contributions to community and 
society 
Wallman, K., (footnote) 35, 91 
Walsh, K. C., 87, 222 
Washing machine reliability, 240 
Washington Statistical Society, (footnote) 47 
Wendelberger, J., 92, 105 
Westat, 47 
Wludyka, P., 184 
Women in statistics, 90-93 
World Bank, 52 
World Statistics Congress, 16, 316-317 
World Trade Organization, Harmonized 
System, 52 
Youden, J., 206 
Young Investigator Programs, 288 

