
A Concise Introduction to
Hypercomplex
Fractals


CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
Andrzej Katunin
A Concise Introduction to
Hypercomplex
Fractals

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20170315
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-138-63342-1 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable 
efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and 
publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication 
and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any 
copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any 
future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, 
transmitted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access 
www.copyright.com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. 
(CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization 
that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted 
a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and 
are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com

Contents
Preface
vii
Chapter
1 ■Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
1
1.1
BIRTH OF COMPLEX FRACTALS – JULIA AND
FATOU SETS
3
1.1.1
Preliminaries
3
1.1.2
Coloring Fractal Sets on a Complex Plane
6
1.1.3
Julia and Fatou Sets within the Polynomials of
Various Orders
12
1.1.4
Other Variations of Julia and Fatou Sets on a
Complex Plane
16
1.2
FRACTAL REVOLUTION – THE MANDELBROT SET
19
1.2.1
History and Concept of the Mandelbrot Set
19
1.2.2
Geometrical Structure and Atoms of the
Mandelbrot Set
20
1.2.3
Mandelbrot Set within the Polynomials of
Various Orders and Other Variations
25
1.3
SEARCHING FOR THE HOLY GRAIL – 3-D
MANDELBROT SET
29
1.4
WHAT’S NEXT? FURTHER EXTENSIONS OF THE
MANDELBROT SET
33
Chapter
2 ■Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division
and Clifford Algebras
37
v

vi
■Contents
2.1
QUATERNIONIC FRACTAL SETS
38
2.1.1
History and Preliminaries of Quaternion Calculus
38
2.1.2
Quaternionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
39
2.2
OCTONIONIC FRACTAL SETS
49
2.2.1
History and Preliminaries of Octonions
49
2.2.2
Octonionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
51
2.3
IS THERE ANYTHING ALIVE IN HIGHER-
DIMENSIONAL HYPERCOMPLEX SPACES?
55
2.3.1
Preliminaries to Clifford Algebras
56
2.3.2
Cliffordean Hypercomplex Fractal Sets
57
2.4
THE PLACES (AND HYPERSPACES) WHERE
FRACTALS CANNOT LIVE
58
Chapter
3 ■Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
63
3.1
BICOMPLEX, TRICOMPLEX, ... MULTICOMPLEX
FRACTAL SETS
63
3.1.1
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Bicomplex Vector
Space
63
3.1.2
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Tricomplex Vector
Space
70
3.1.3
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Multicomplex
Vector Space
72
3.2
TENSOR PRODUCT HYPERCOMPLEX AND
MULTIHYPERCOMPLEX FRACTAL SETS
73
3.2.1
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Biquaternionic
Vector Space
73
3.2.2
Beyond Biquaternionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
78
Bibliography
81
Index
93

Preface
Since I started working with fractals, my family, friends, colleagues, and
students were puzzled hearing about hypercomplex fractals. This is mainly
due to the specific nomenclature used both in the fractal theory as well as
in the hypercomplex number theory, with all of their attractors, repellers,
octonions, zero divisors, and nilpotents. These words naturally scare
them! And at the same time, they love colorful images generated by
my computer simulations. These images, however, are just nice pictures
to them. I am convinced that many non scientists, who had contact with
complex and hypercomplex fractals have the same feelings. Therefore, I
decided to write a book which would present complex and hypercomplex
fractals in a concise and comprehensible manner omitting mathematical
formalism as much as possible. This idea has germinated in my mind for
a few years, and finally I can place the fruit of a few years’ work into your
hands.
This book concisely presents the complete story on complex and
hypercomplex fractals, starting from the very first steps in complex
dynamics and resulting complex fractal sets, through the generalizations
of Julia and Mandelbrot sets on a complex plane and the Holy Grail of
fractal geometry – a 3-D Mandelbrot set, and ending with hypercomplex,
multicomplex, and multihypercomplex fractal sets that are still under
consideration of scientists. I tried to write this book in a simple way in
order to make it understandable to most people whose math knowledge
covers the fundamentals of complex numbers only. Moreover, the book
is full of illustrations of generated fractals and stories about great
mathematicians, number spaces, and related fractals. In most cases, only
information required for proper understanding of a nature of a given vector
space or a construction of a given fractal set is provided; nevertheless, a
more advanced reader may treat this book as a fundamental compendium
on hypercomplex fractals, with references to purely scientific issues like
dynamics and stability of hypercomplex systems.
The preparation of this book would not be possible without the
reviewers: Professor Wojciech Chojnacki from the University of Adelaide,
vii

viii ■Preface
Australia, who is an outstanding specialist in computer science, computer
graphics, and mathematics related to these disciplines, and Dr. Krzysztof
Gdawiec from the University of Silesia, Poland, who is the eminent fractal
researcher working on developing new types of fractal sets. They both
contributed many corrections and additions to make this book even
better, and I am very grateful to them for their valuable comments and
discussion.
I would like to thank my dear fianc´ee, Angelika, who supported me
during my writing of this book, read its draft version, and provided a great
feedback. I am very grateful to her for this help.
Finally, I would like to thank CRC editorial staff, especially Rick Adams,
Jessica Vega, and Robin Lloyd-Starkes, for their great and professional
support during the entirety of the publishing process.
Andrzej Katunin
January, 2017

C H A P T E R 1
Introduction to Fractals
on a Complex Plane
Fractal. This mysterious word penetrates modern pop-culture and society.
But what does it mean? What is the definition of a fractal?
Actually, considering a great variety of types, shapes, and properties
of objects that are called fractals, it is really hard to formulate a universal
definition. In 1975, the word “fractal” was introduced by Benoit B.
Mandelbrot, the father of a fractal geometry, and popularized in his
famous book, The Fractal Geometry of Nature [79]. It comes from the
Latin fractus, which means “broken” or “fractured.” This name explains
its nature, which is usually characterized by a very complex shape and, in
most cases, fractional dimension. Beyond this property, fractals have few
other differences from other geometrical objects. The next property is the
self-similarity of fractals, which means that they looks exactly the same
no matter how big the magnification of the fractals are. Roughly speaking,
fractals are constructed from smaller copies of themselves. And the last
thing that characterizes a fractal (which results from already presented
properties) – it cannot be represented by a closed form expression, but
by a recurrent dependency.
However, fractals and hierarchical structure of objects were known
a long time before the Mandelbrot. The best examples are the Indian
temples built in the Middle Ages1 (see example in Figure 1.1). Many
proofs of self-similarity of Hindu temples were given by numerous
1Striking examples of Indian temples that use self-similarity in their constructions are
the Kandariya Mahadeva Temple built in 1030 in Khajuraho, the towers of Meenakshi
Amman Temple built in 1623–1655 in Madurai, the Shveta Varahaswamy Temple built in
1673–1704 in Mysore, and many others.
1

2
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Figure 1.1: A view of Chennakesava Temple, Somanathapura, India, built
in 1268 (photo courtesy of Arlan Zwegers).
researchers [31, 106, 117]. Additional proofs were provided by Ron
Eglash, who works in the area of ethnomathematics, and are outlined
in his book [36]. He wrote that Africans have been widely using fractals in
their culture (e.g., in architecture and textile design) for centuries. In the
20th century, fractals conquered arts, they appeared in works of artists
who used the decalcomania technique; several paintings of the 20th-
century surrealists also consist of a fractal hierarchy (e.g. The Face of War
painted in 1940 by Salvador Dal´ı).
The first objects that we call now fractals appeared at the turn of
the 19th and 20th centuries, and started from the simplest fractal — the
Cantor set, named after Georg Cantor, a German mathematician. This
fractal was constructed by Cantor in 1883, and inspired by earlier studies
of Karl Weierstrass, a German mathematician who introduced everywhere
continuous but nowhere differentiable function (which is known now as
the Weierstrass function), the prototype of a fractal. Two decades later,
the next fractal function appeared — the Koch curve, and then Koch
snowflake, which was proposed by Swedish mathematician Helge von
Koch in 1904.
In the meantime, two fractal curves of a special type appeared,

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■3
the so-called space-filling curves. One of them was constructed by
Giuseppe Peano in 1890, and the other one by David Hibert in 1891.
After introducing these two curves, shortly thereafter many other self-
similar space-filling curves appeared in the near time. One can get more
information on these curves from [4].
The next step in fractals theory was made by Wacław Sierpi´nski, Pol-
ish mathematician, representative of the Warsaw school of mathematics,
when he proposed his famous triangle in 1915, named after him. A year
after, Sierpi´nski presented his carpet, which was originally discovered
by his PhD student, Stefan Mazurkiewicz, in 1913. A few years later, a
great milestone in fractals came through the work of two French math-
ematicians, Gaston Julia and Pierre Fatou. They performed investigations
on properties of dynamical systems and fractal behavior associated with
mapping complex numbers. This was the first step to appearance fractals
on a complex plane with much greater geometrical complexity than the
above presented deterministic fractals.
1.1
BIRTH OF COMPLEX FRACTALS – JULIA AND FATOU
SETS
This section introduces the fundamental concepts of recursive functions
that were used by Julia and Fatou to generate fractals on the complex
plane as well as their properties and the simplest generalizations.
1.1.1
Preliminaries
The studies of Julia and Fatou on complex dynamic systems during the first
decades of the 20th century resulted in sets with truly unique properties,
which were defined from a simple recursive function, which can be written
as:
zn+1 = z2
n + c,
(1.1)
where zn ∈C is an iterated element, while c ∈C is a constant parameter.
Alternatively, the form (1.1) can be presented as:
z →z2 + c or f(z) = z2 + c.
Here, we need to introduce the complex numbers C, which can be
expressed in the form of a + bi, where a, b ∈R, and i is an imaginary unit,
which satisfies the equation i2 = −1.
The field C of complex numbers is a 2-algebra with basis e0 = 1,
e1 = i, which holds three important conditions (the importance of

4
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
these conditions will be highlighted in the next chapters, when the
hypercomplex numbers will be discussed in detail):
• commutativity
xy = yx,
(1.2)
• associativity
(xy)z = x(yz), and
(1.3)
• alternativity
(yx)x = y(xx),
(1.4)
where x, y, z ∈C (the books [98, 110] are recommended for further
reading).
The behavior of the system described by (1.1) during the iteration
process is like a competition between two forces. If we map the
successively generated points on the complex plane (or simply a C-plane
formed by real and imaginary parts of complex numbers), we will see
this battle from the top. The battlefield is divided into regions of various
sizes and importance for the competing forces. In some places, a border
between their territories is strait and smooth, while in other ones, a
shape of a border is very complex, and each force wants to seize at least
the smallest part of a territory. This border between territories of the
mentioned forces is a fractal, indeed.
In the case of dynamical complex systems, these forces are the sets of
points — some of them tend to infinity (escapees), while the other group
of points is located in some restricted area (prisoners). The boundary
between these two groups is a Julia set J or Fatou set F , depending on
their properties. This depends on the value of the initial point z0 in (1.1),
namely, if the generated sequence z0, z1, z2, . . . , zn = f(zn−1) behaves
periodically or constantly, the point z0 ∈F (f), where F (f) denotes the
set of Fatou functions, while if the mentioned sequence reveals irregular
and highly nonlinear oscillations, in other words, behaves chaotically, then
the point z0 ∈J(f), where J(f) denotes the set of Julia functions. Such
sequences for every z0 are called the orbits. If such an orbit is attracting,
then it is contained in F ; while it is repelling, then it is contained in J.
Considering that we must deal with the escapees and the prisoners,
the first group must escape somewhere, while the second one should
occupy some area on the C-plane. In the case of the escapees, the
successive values in the iterated sequence, starting from z0, tend to
infinity. It is convenient to present the location of these points on the

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■5
Riemann sphere, which is the representation of a C-plane in spherical
coordinates. In this case, the infinity can be represented by a single point
— the north pole of the Riemann sphere. The prisoners represent periodic
points, which means that there exists such a transform that f m (z0) = z0
(note that f m (·) denotes a function composition performed m times),
i.e., after m iterations, the sequence reaches exactly the same point as
an initial point z0. Here, the period of such a periodic orbit is defined
as the smallest value of m having the property f m (z0) = z0. The special
case is a fixed point that appears when m = 1. In fractals theory, the
existence of two subsets of escapees and prisoners is called a structural
dichotomy. This is also related to properties of F - and J-sets, i.e., the
first one is a totally disconnected set (which can be considered as a
generalized Cantor dust [98]), while the second one is a connected set,
i.e., the J-set encircles the subset of the prisoners. Moreover, in the
case of J-sets, there exist the so-called fixed points associated with c
values in (1.1). These points define attractors of the considered complex
dynamical system, i.e., the points that attract other points and form the
subset of the prisoners. The area occupied by the prisoners is called the
basin of attraction. However, there is a second basin of attraction for the
escapees. Recalling the previously mentioned Riemann sphere, it is easy
to see that the fixed point for the subset of escapees is the point at infinity
— the north pole of the Riemann sphere, which attracts the escapees.
Special attention should be paid to prisoner points with m = 1.
These points are the fixed points, which means that no matter how many
times the iteration procedure f m (·) is applied to z0, the resulting point
is always z0. These points form J-set that are invariant with respect
to the transformation f m (·). The resulting curve of a boundary between
prisoners and escapees (which is the J-set) is infinitely complex and
self-similar, which means that J is a fractal, except for two cases: when
c = 0 (in this case, (1.1) reduces to zn+1 = z2
n and the boundary has a
circular shape), and when c = −2 (in this case, J-set is a straight line).
In order to show the existence of self-similarity in these sets, an example
with several magnifications of various regions of a C-plane was presented
in Figure 1.2. The pictures represent successive magnifications, and the
red frame depicts the region of the fragment of a C-plane presented
in the next picture. One can observe that the structure and degree of
complexity remain the same under various magnifications. Several other
examples of various J-sets of the family defined by (1.1) are presented in
Figure 1.3. In this case, the black areas are the prisoners, while the white
areas are the escapees. Many of J-sets achieved their own names, e.g.,

6
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
the sets presented in Figures 1.3a–d are called San Marco fractal, Siegel
Disk, Dendrite, and Douady rabbit, respectively. A reader interested in the
history of these sets and their importance for development of the theory
of complex dynamical systems is referred to [3, 11]. Some of the above-
described cases have interesting properties, e.g., Dendrite (Figure 1.3c)
is a filled J-set without interior (the prisoner points do not exist for this
case). Note that the filled J-set is a set of points z obtained during the
iteration of a recursive mapping function that does not escape to infinity;
this set is identical to the set of prisoners described above. In observing
J-sets, one can see that sets with axial symmetry reflect an absence of the
imaginary unit in c, while the rotational symmetry is characteristic for J-
sets containing the imaginary unit in c. Moreover, depending on the sign of
the imaginary unit, “swirls” of J-sets are oriented in different directions,
i.e., for negative i “swirls” are oriented clockwise (see Figures 1.3b, e),
while for positive i they are oriented counter-clockwise (see Figures 1.3c,
d, f).
The points that belong to a J-set are the neutral points or neutral
orbits. The dynamics of the neighborhood of neutral periodic orbits is
more complicated than the dynamics of attracting or repelling orbits. In
fact, they attract the points in the local neighborhood, and depending on
the number of periods the characteristic trajectories (in the form of petals
of flowers) appear. Their behavior is described by the so-called Flower
Theorem (see [11] for details).
The J-sets presented in Figure 1.3 are black and white; however,
most readers familiar with fractals on a complex plane, or those who
at least have seen such fractals before, remember these sets as images
full of beautiful colors. A color representation is also very useful in some
cases, e.g., when filled J-sets can be easily presented in black and white,
the F -sets need to be presented with some surroundings, otherwise we
will obtain just a set of disconnected points on a C-plane. Therefore, it is
necessary to introduce here how to obtain the colorful C-plane with J-
and F -sets.
1.1.2
Coloring Fractal Sets on a Complex Plane
In order to obtain colorful representations of J- and F -sets several
algorithms have been developed to date. The most popular one is the
escape-time algorithm widely used in fractal generating and rendering
software. The escape-time algorithm discretely colors pixels of a C-plane,
and the colors denote how quickly a given point escapes to infinity. The

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■7
Figure 1.2: J-set with c = 0.3 + 0.022i under various magnifications.
black color is usually used for the representation of prisoner points (i.e.,
the interior of a J-set). The algorithm works as follows. Starting from
the initial point z0, a sequence is generated, and at every iteration, the
conditions for this sequence are checked. The first condition is a criticality
of achieved values called bailout condition. When the critical value is
reached, the algorithm stops, and a pixel is assigned with a defined color,
and the next point is checked. Since |z0| > 2 and 2 < J, usually the bailout
value is assumed to be equal 2. In other words, the color of a given pixel is

8
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) c = −0.75
(b) c = −0.390541 −0.586788i
(c) c = i
(d) c = −0.123 + 0.745i
(e) c = 0.27334 −0.00742i
(f) c = −1 + 0.1i
Figure 1.3: Examples of J-sets for various values of c.

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■9
related to the number of iterations that allow escaping of a given point to
infinity. Obviously, during coloring of such sets using computer software,
the number of iterations should be finite. However, the selected number
of iterations is related to the accuracy of the obtained approximation of a
fractal boundary, i.e., the higher number of iterations the more accurate
the boundary is, but the more computational time is required.
Although the escape-time algorithm is very simple and effective, the
fact that the number of iterations is always an integer value causes that the
aliasing effect may appear in the escaping area, i.e., this area is divided
into bands of constant colors (see Figure 1.4a). For the presented J-
set in Figure 1.4, the parameter c = 0.29 + 0.01i. In order to avoid
this effect and enable coloring a C-plane in a continuous way, several
techniques have been developed. Most of them are based on the distance
estimators concept. Barrallo and Jones [7] mentioned three types of
distance estimators: classical distance estimation algorithm, continuous
potential algorithm, and normalized iteration count algorithm. All of them
are based on continuous interpolation of colors in bands. The results of
such interpolation are presented in Figure 1.4b.
A group of escape-angle algorithms (or binary decomposition
algorithms) was introduced in order to represent not only the velocity,
but also the angles of escape. The example of using this algorithm
with quaternary decomposition (the black and white colors are assigned
alternately to each quadrant of a C-plane) is presented in Figure 1.4c.
Similarly to the escape-time algorithm, the escape-angle algorithm can
be transformed into a continuous decomposition algorithm by applying
distance estimators or other interpolation techniques.
The other coloring techniques include statistical transformations of
sequences z0, z1, z2, . . . , zn = f(zn−1), i.e., the statistical functions like
mean, median, standard deviation, etc., are applied to the obtained
magnitudes of these sequences, and the resulting values are directly
applied for coloring. This approach is often available in the fractal
generating and rendering software. Another popular family of coloring
algorithms is orbit traps. The simplest version of the algorithm from this
family is based on selection of a region in a C-plane and observation
of the relationship between zn values and values from this region. Such
a region is usually defined as a simple shape and a threshold distance.
If zn falls inside the trap, the iterating procedure stops and the pixel is
colored based on the determined distance to the trap. The examples of
the application of orbit trap algorithms can be found in [14, 121].
In addition, Barrallo and Jones [7] mentioned coloring of fractals

10
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) escape-time algorithm (b)
distance
estimation
algorithm
(c) escape-angle algorithm
Figure 1.4: Coloring of fractal sets on a complex plane using various
techniques.
using the finite attractor algorithm. Recalling the fixed points discussed
in section 1.1.1, one can remember that the fractal sets contain such
points that attract the other and create the basin of attraction. This
property is used for coloring both the interiors and exteriors of fractal
sets on a C-plane. The value used for assigning a color for a given
point is the convergence rate to the nearest fixed point. More advanced
techniques (already used in many fractal generating and rendering
software) consider combining the above-presented ones. Following the
nomenclature introduced in [8], such algorithms are called the multilayer
coloring algorithms. The examples of using these algorithms can be found
in the above-cited literature.
Using the most common escape-time algorithm, some visually
attractive F - and J-sets described by (1.1) are visualized in Figure 1.5
with various color palettes.
Additionally, the algorithms for coloring the interiors of filled J-sets
have been developed. The color palette is applied based on velocity of
attracting to critical points (the points where the function’s derivatives
vanish), and most of the above-mentioned algorithms are applicable for
this purpose. Another way of coloring the interior of filled J-sets is based
on the number of periods of orbits. In this case, the interior of each single
area (like in Douady rabbit, presented in Figure 1.3d) is filled by one color.

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■11
(a) c = −0.4 + 0.6i
(b) c = −0.835 −0.2321i
(c) c = −0.8 + 0.156i
(d) c = 0.3 + 0.022i
(e) c = −1.3 + 0.06i
(f) c = 0.35 + 0.45i
Figure 1.5: Examples of colored F - and J-sets for various values of c.

12
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
1.1.3
Julia and Fatou Sets within the Polynomials of Various Orders
Previously, we considered the complex quadratic polynomial given
by (1.1), which is the most popular form of polynomial maps of fractal
sets on a C-plane, but it is only a special case of a general form
z →zp + c for p ≥2,
(1.5)
where p denotes the power of z. Taking into consideration such a
generalization allows for sufficiently enlarging the number of possible
F - and J-sets. Several studies of these functions were performed and
described in [47, 48].
The generalized form of J- and F -sets given by (1.5) has many
interesting properties. The point at infinity for (1.5) is a super-attracting
fixed point (its derivative is equal 0 and it belongs to F -set — see [76] for
details), and considering that for every z , ∞Equation (1.5) has a finite
value, this fixed point is also an exceptional point. Moreover, in open
C-plane there exists only one singular point and at most p−1 critical fixed
points. Thus, at most p −1 stable orbits (the orbits that remain almost
invariant around a fixed point independently of a value of an iterated
function) [70]. The discussion with proofs of the above statements can
be found in [11].
The selected J-sets for various orders of an iterated polynomial are
presented in Figure 1.6. For clarity, the symbols describing these sets
are introduced, e.g., J3 (−0.19, 0.86) denotes a J-set with p = 3, and
c = −0.19 + 0.86i. The order of rotational symmetry for J- and F -sets
with imaginary unit in c is equivalent to p, i.e., the sets with an exponent p
have p−1-order rotational symmetry with respect to their origin; while for
sets with a real part of c, only the axial symmetry is preserved. Moreover,
the directionality of “swirls” remains the same as in the quadratic family
(see Section 1.1.1).
Considering the increased order of symmetry of a J-set with an
increase of p, the natural question is what a C-plane will look like when
p →∞. When analysing J-sets of polynomials of lower-order (see
Figures 1.7a–d), it is difficult to deduce what a shape of J-set it is for
higher values of p; however, when looking at J-set with higher value of
p (see Figures 1.7e–h), one can observe that a shape of a J-set tends
to be a circle. In fact, for very high values of p, a J-set looks like a
circle more and more. However, if p is finite, the resulting boundary is
still a fractal. But if p →∞, then the resulting boundary is a circle, and,
obviously, stops being a fractal. What is also interesting, when p →∞,

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■13
the resulting boundary is always circular, regardless of c (see [13] for
details). This phenomenon has quite a simple explanation. For p →∞,
the resulting successive values of zn rapidly increase with the increase of n
when |zn| > 1, and rapidly decrease with the decrease of n when |zn| < 1.
The influence of the parameter c becomes insignificant when considering
sequences zn. Following this, when p →∞, the resulting boundary is
a unit circle. Despite this, the behavior of orbits that belong to this set
remains chaotic.
The next, quite natural, question is why (1.5) is limited by the condition
for p. Let us consider three cases for p value: (1) when 0 ≤p < 1, (2)
when p = 1, and (3) when 1 < p < 2. In the first case, the critical point is
no longer located in zero (for sets described by (1.5), we have a critical
point in zero), the critical point is located at infinity. The parameter c
is not on the trajectory of ∞, therefore, the J-set does not exist for
0 ≤p < 1. In the second case, the critical point does not exist, so the
J-set also does not exist [118]. In the third case, the critical point comes
back to zero, the resulting structures resemble the integer-valued J- and
F -sets and hold the axial symmetry (along the axis of reals), while the
rotational symmetry is broken. The resulting sets, however, hold their
fractal properties for arbitrary p > 1, p ∈Q (Q denotes the rational
numbers), which was proven by Liu et al. [77]. The pioneering studies on
fractional p were performed by Gujar et al. [34, 48], where they explored
the structure of fractal sets on a complex plane for p ∈R. In the interval
1 < p < 2, there is a family of graphically interesting fractal sets — the
Glynn sets, named after E. F. Glynn [42, 102]. This family is based on
p = 1.5, which creates tree-like fractal sets (see Figure 1.8).
And finally, let us consider the case when p is negative. This case was
studied by Shirriff [115], who was probably the first investigator of J-sets
for negative p. Considering the nonexistence of J-sets for −1 < p < 0
(similarly to 0 ≤p < 1), and broken symmetry for −2 < p < −1, let
us consider the case when p < −2, p ∈Q. Surprisingly, the dynamics
of complex systems for p < −2 is completely different with respect to
positive exponents of an iterated variable. In analyzing such systems, one
can observe that the critical point of such a set is at infinity, while there is
no critical point at zero, as in systems described by (1.5), and it is true for
all p < −1, p ∈Q. Recalling the Riemann sphere, the resulting set looks
like it was turned inside out. This means that the set of prisoners has
an attractor at the infinity point on the Riemann sphere, and its basin of
attraction covers the whole Riemann sphere except some small regions
near c. Therefore, the obtained sets are not J-sets by the definition (the

14
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) J3 (−0.19, 0.86)
(b) J3 (−0.12, 0.8)
(c) J3 (−0.63, 0.29)
(d) J4 (−0.6, 0.4)
(e) J4 (−0.3, 0.46)
(f) J5 (−0.74, 0.81)
(g) J6 (−0.5, 0.58)
(h) J6 (−0.7, 0.3)
(i) J8 (0, 0.82)
(j) J8 (−0.65, 0.52)
(k) J12 (−0.69, 0.52)
(l) J20 (−0.46, 0.8)
Figure 1.6: Examples of J-sets of various polynomial orders.

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■15
(a) J2 (−0.5, 0.5)
(b) J3 (−0.5, 0.5)
(c) J5 (−0.5, 0.5)
(d) J10 (−0.5, 0.5)
(e) J20 (−0.5, 0.5)
(f) J50 (−0.5, 0.5)
(g) J100 (−0.5, 0.5)
(h) J1000 (−0.5, 0.5)
Figure 1.7: Tending of Jp(−0.5, 0.5) to a circular-like shape.
J-sets must have two critical points in zero and infinity). Such sets will be
further called the degenerated J-sets. However, these sets hold several
properties of positive exponent-J-sets. The obtained sets are rotationally
symmetric, i.e., the sets generated with an exponent −p, p ∈Z, have
p-order rotational symmetry with respect to their origin. But, in general,
these sets are not axially symmetric unless c is real [115].
Coloring of degenerated J-sets with negative exponents also differs.
Since the only critical point is located at infinity, the classical escape-
time algorithm generates artefacts. Therefore, it is suitable to start a
sequence not from z0 = ∞, but from z0 = c, which, in fact, yields the
same result. Shirriff [115] proposed two alternative methods of coloring
of such sets: based on Lyapunov exponents determined for the mapping,
which reflects stability or chaotic behavior in particular regions of a C-
plane; and based on periodicity of resulting sequences, assigning the
color depending on the number of cycles. The examples of such sets are
presented in Figure 1.9. More information on analysis and coloring of
negative exponent-J-sets can be found in [48, 115].
In conclusion, we can say that the J-sets or degenerated J-sets with
fractal properties can be constructed using the following formula:
z →zp + c for p < −1 ∨p > 1, p ∈Q.
(1.6)

16
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) c = −0.1948
(b) c = −0.2 + 0.014i
Figure 1.8: Examples of Glynn sets.
1.1.4
Other Variations of Julia and Fatou Sets on a Complex Plane
Besides the discussed classical J- and F -sets given by (1.1) or their
generalization with respect to the exponent of polynomials given by (1.6),
a lot of studies were performed in order to find other forms of polynomials
and perform their mathematical and geometrical analysis. However, the
main reason is to find aesthetically pleasing and visually interesting
patterns. With the development of computational technologies, and
the appearance of fractal generation and rendering software, many
enthusiasts started working on searching for newer and newer formulas
for complex dynamical systems.
A class of such systems is based on transcendental functions, i.e.,
the exponential, logarithmic, trigonometric, hyperbolic, and several other
functions as well as inverses of all of the mentioned ones. Due to
the great variety of possible modifications of (1.6) by applying various
transcendental functions, only few cases will be introduced here. A
reader interested in such a class of functions is referred to several
papers that present analysis of dynamics of systems described by
these functions [9, 37, 54, 55, 83, 111, 113] and some visualization
studies [93, 105]. It was proven that sine-, cosine-, and exponential-based
functions have an infinite number of critical points [33, 83]. Moreover,
the point at infinity becomes an essential singularity. Several examples
of J- and F -sets based on transcendental functions are presented in
Figure 1.10.
Besides the Picard iteration scheme presented above (iterating the
recursive functions in the form zn+1 = f(zn)), several other schemes have
been introduced to date. The oldest and the most known iteration scheme

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■17
(a) p = −2,
c = 0.72 + 1.05i
(b) p = −2,
c = 0.106 + 0.619i
(c) p = −2,
c = −0.73 + 0.22i
(d) p = −4,
c = −0.791
Figure 1.9: Examples of degenerated J-sets with negative exponents.
besides the Picard iteration is the Mann iteration, named after W. Robert
Mann [80]. It is given by
zn+1 = (1 −an) zn + an f (zn) for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
(1.7)
where an ∈(0, 1] is a certain parameter. If the sequence an = λ (const),
λ ∈[0, 1], the Mann iteration reduces to Kransosel’ski iteration (named
after the scheme presented in [67]), and when an = 1, it reduces to the

18
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Picard iteration [104]. The Mann iteration scheme, in the context of the
generation of J-sets, was discovered by Rani and Kumar [104], who call
them "superior Julia sets."
The next iteration scheme, introduced by Ishikawa [56] and named
after him, uses two parameters and is presented in the form

zn+1 = (1 −an) zn + an f (vn) ,
vn = (1 −bn) zn + bn f (zn) for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . ,
(1.8)
where an ∈(0, 1] and bn ∈[0, 1]. The generation of J-sets using this
iteration scheme was described in [20]. Both Mann and Ishikawa iteration
schemes were modified in several ways, which resulted in the appearance
of the modified Mann and Ishikawa iterations (obtained by replacing
operator f(·) by its m-th iterate f m(·)), Mann and Ishikawa iterations with
errors (obtained by setting certain parameters to zero), and others. For
more information on these iterations and full mathematical descriptions,
the reader is referred to Berinde’s book [10].
Furthermore, several other iterations were used for generation of J-
sets, namely, Noor iteration [92], Jungck Mann and Jungck Ishikawa [91],
Jungck Noor [60], etc. As one can see, the structure of a recursive formula
can be constructed in on almost arbitrary way, so the possibilities of
creation of new fractal shapes are huge.
The last group of J-sets worth attention is a group of biomorphs
introduced by Pickover. The biomorphs are certain modifications of
J-sets (see [101] for mathematical details). Following the idea of
Pickover, the biomorphs mimic simple biological systems. Biomorphs
are found accidentally as a programming bug [57]. Besides their aesthetic
values [75], they have several other applications: the authors of [85]
used biomorphs to examine the evolution of unicellular organisms,
while Levin [73] used biomorphs to describe and model embryogenesis
processes. The recent studies of Gdawiec et al. [40] link the modified
Pickover iterations (Mann and Ishikawa iterations) and biomorphs to
generate new fractal patterns. Several examples of the new biomophs
generated following these iteration schemes can be found in the latter
reference.

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■19
(a) z →sin  z2 + c, c = 0.3
(b) z →cos (z) ic, c = −1 + 0.29i
(c) z →1/ sinh  z2 + c, c = 0.01i
(d) z →exp  c/z2, c = −0.4 + 0.7i
Figure 1.10: Examples of J based on transcendental functions.
1.2
FRACTAL REVOLUTION – THE MANDELBROT SET
1.2.1
History and Concept of the Mandelbrot Set
Despite the majority of contributions Gaston Julia and Pierre Fatou made
to the understanding of complex dynamical systems behavior, their
studies had been ignored and forgotten by the mathematical community,
until Mandelbrot started working on fractals and dynamical systems in
late 1970s. From the previous section, one knows that the behavior and

20
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
resulting distribution of subsets of prisoners and escapees on a C-plane
depend on c values. By changing the c value in (1.1), one can generate
countably infinitely many different patterns on a C-plane. Mandelbrot
analyzed the resulting Julia and Fatou sets based on (1.1) and decided
to index all possible J- and F -sets with respect to varying c. When
he mapped the result during his experiment in 1979, the general set
containing all possible Julia and Fatou sets appeared. Nowadays, this set
is called after its creator — the Mandelbrot set or, simply, M-set.
The M-set is probably the most recognizable mathematical picture
ever created by a human, and it has the most complex shape that can
ever be seen [98]. It is presented as a collection of points on a C-plane,
where each point is related to J- or F -set for a specific c. J- and F -sets
are closely related to the M-set, i.e., the M-set consists of all possible
J-sets (which are connected), while F -sets are located outside the M-
set on a C-plane (which are totally disconnected) — see Figure 1.11.
Moreover, there are other relations between J- and M-sets: the shape
of a J-set is related to the shape of an M-set corresponding with a c value
of J-set, e.g., the J-sets with horizontally oriented elongated shapes are
related to the values on the very left of a C-plane, the circular-like shaped
J-sets are related to regions of the M-set near the origin of a C-plane,
and the Dendrite J-set (for c = i) is located on the ”antenna“ of one
of the ”bulbs.“ The M-set can also be presented in the form of kind of
a map that contains J- and F -sets depending on a discretised c value
(see Figure 1.12). One can observe that J-sets form an approximation of
the shape of an M-set, and this approximation appears when the net of
J-sets on a C-plane is denser.
1.2.2
Geometrical Structure and Atoms of the Mandelbrot Set
From the geometrical analysis of the M-set, one can find out that it
contains a large cardioid, slightly moved to the left from the origin of a
C-plane (which ranges from −0.75 to 0.25 on the real axis), the largest
bulb on the left (with a circular shape of radius 0.25 centred at −1 + 0i),
and countably infinitely many bulbs around the perimeter of the cardioid
and the largest bulb. Moreover, every bulb has its own antennas (also
called filaments). When magnifying the M-set near its antennas, one can
observe the smaller copies of itself (known as secondary M-sets). The
largest secondary M-set is located on its antenna (see Figure 1.11). The
complexity of the M-set becomes even higher than its initial form when it
is magnified. Several fragments obtained from magnification of the M-set

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■21
Figure 1.11: An M-set with corresponding J- and F -sets on a C-plane.
are presented in Figures 1.13–1.15. Some of them obtained their own
names, like the Seahorse Valley (a portion of the M-set centred at around
−0.75 + 0.1i; see Figure 1.16) or the Elephant Valley (a portion of the
M-set centred at around 0.1 + 0.1i; see Figure 1.17).
Probably the most frequently appearing elements of the M-set are its
bulbs (secondary, tertiary, etc.); which clearly point to the self-similarity of
the M-set. They are attached directly to the main cardioid and have several
interesting properties. The obvious one is that the M-set is symmetric
with respect to the axis of reals, and, thus, bulbs above and below the axis

22
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Figure 1.12: Mapping of Julia sets with varying c on a C-plane. The values
on the horizontal axis denote real parts of c, while on the vertical axis they
denote imaginary parts of c.
look exactly the same. The bulbs of the M-set can be considered as its
atoms, which are connected with periods of periodical orbits generated
by the sequence (1.1). The cardioid (which can be considered as a primary
bulb or a primary atom) is related to a cycle of a period 1; next, the biggest
bulb on the left of the cardioid is related to a cycle of a period 2; two
smaller bulbs located perpendicularly to the axis of reals and attached to
the cardioid are related to a cycle of a period 3, etc. Obviously, there are
the cycles of higher periods attached to the cardioid and the biggest bulb
(see Figure 1.18, for instance).
One can also observe that the bulbs are directed in a different

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■23
Figure 1.13: Magnifying the M-set: secondary M-sets.
Figure 1.14: Magnifying the M-set: filaments.
manner, and analyzing Figure 1.18, one can notice the relationship of
their orientation with the periods. Indeed, the bulbs are attached to the
cardioid and the largest bulb at an internal angle φ = 2π (m/n), where m/n
is a rotation number that corresponds to certain angles, e.g., 1/2 →180◦,
1/3 →120◦, 1/4 →90◦, etc. [32]. Moreover, it is possible to obtain mx/nx

24
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Figure 1.15: Magnifying the M-set: bulbs.
Figure 1.16: Magnifying the M-set: Seahorse Valley.
rotation number for the bulb located between m1/n1 and m2/n2 bulbs by
adding their numerators and denominators following the Farey addition
rule [32], e.g., 3/8 = 1/3 + 2/5. This is related to the Fibonacci property,
e.g., the largest bulb between the bulb of a period 2 and the bulb of a
period 3 has a period 5; the largest bulb between two bulbs of periods

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■25
Figure 1.17: Magnifying the M-set: Elephant Valley.
3 and 5 has a period 8, etc. This property is satisfied for secondary and
higher-degree bulbs in the M-set.
1.2.3
Mandelbrot Set within the Polynomials of Various Orders and
Other Variations
Similarly, as for J- and F -sets, the M-set can be described within the
higher-order polynomials given by (1.5). What is interesting, is the higher-
order M-sets remain connected regardless of the order, which means that
they have many common properties with higher-order J- and F -sets
described in Section 1.1.3, as well as with a classical M-set. Additionally,
the generalized M-sets reveal p−1-order rotational symmetry with respect
to the origin, and some of the higher-order M-sets are presented in
Figure 1.19. Considering the case where p →∞, the M-set tends to a
circle on a C-plane [66, 96].
One can see that the higher-order M-sets have components
corresponding to the classical M-set, i.e., the bulbs and filaments. They
also have Seahorse and Elephant Valleys. However, the rule of appearance
of secondary bulbs for higher-order M-sets slightly differs. While the
secondary bulbs increase according the power series 2, 4, 8, 16, . . . (i.e.,
21, 22, 23, 24, . . .), the secondary bulbs of the higher-order M-sets increase
according the series p1, p2, p3, p4, . . ., that is, correspond to the order p.
The formulation of the M-set can be generalized with respect to

26
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Figure 1.18: Periods of the atoms of the M-set.
the order of a polynomial for the cases where p ∈Z−, as well as for
the cases given by (1.6). The behavior of the resulting generalized M-
sets is the same as for their analogues of the generalized J- and F -
sets (see Section 1.1.3). Several examples of M-sets of negative-order
polynomials are presented in Figure 1.20. In contrast to positive-order
M-sets, negative-order ones have p + 1-order rotational symmetry with
respect to the origin. However, similarly to the positive-order M-sets,
the axial symmetry along the axis of reals is preserved for all p ∈Z−,
and, additionally, the axial symmetry along the axis of imaginaries occurs
for even values of p. The properties of the negative-order M-sets (M−-
sets), with respect to the positive-order analogues, are different, e.g.,
the M−-sets are not compact and extend out to infinity (see details in
Section 1.1.3).
Among the discussed modifications of the M-sets, there are several
variations that became popular. The example of such variations is the

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■27
(a) M3
(b) M4
(c) M5
(d) M8
(e) M12
(f) M20
Figure 1.19: Higher-order M-sets.
family of Mandelbar sets introduced by Crowe et al. [29], sometimes
called the Tricorn T , due to the characteristic shape of this set. The T -set
is given by
z →¯z2 + c,
(1.9)
where ¯z is a complex conjugate of z, i.e., ¯z ≡a −bi. The T -set satisfies
several properties of the M-set, e.g., it is connected [89] and can be
generalized with respect to the degree of antiholomorphic polynomials
that describe them. Several studies of such generalizations were presented
by Nakane and Schleicher [90]. Several examples of the higher-order T -
sets are shown in Figure 1.21. Some visually interesting higher-order
T -sets can also be found in [61]. Similarly to M−-sets, the T -sets have
p + 1-order rotational symmetry with respect to the origin and the same
axial symmetries depending on parity of p.
Several geometrical objects that imitate M-set are known. One of
them is a Randelbrot set which is an object obtained in the same way as

28
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) M−2
(b) M−3
(c) M−4
(d) M−8
(e) M−12
(f) M−20
Figure 1.20: Examples of the M-sets of negative-order polynomials.
(a) T2
(b) T3
(c) T5
Figure 1.21: Examples of the higher-order T -sets.
the classical M-set, with an additional random component R added to
the recursive sequence proposed by Robert M. Dickau:
z →z2 + c + R, R ∈C, R ≡Rx + iRy.
(1.10)

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■29
1.3
SEARCHING FOR THE HOLY GRAIL – 3-D
MANDELBROT SET
After introducing the M-set by Mandelbrot, numerous scientists and
enthusiasts tried to find a 3-D extension of this set. However, they
encountered a problem — the complex numbers cannot be directly
extended to the 3-D space. This problem originates from the times of Sir
W. R. Hamilton, the inventor of the algebra of quaternions. Working with
problems of plane geometry and mechanics, he clarified the formulation
of complex numbers, and then tried to expand the algebra of complex
numbers to a 3-D space. His idea was to construct a complete number
system from the triples of the real numbers. He spent a few years on
this idea without success, and finally abandoned efforts on solving this
problem. The main problem lies in the multiplication operation of such
triples — like in the case of complex numbers this operation needed to be
componentwise, but it was not possible to extend the complex numbers.
After the unsuccessful studies on the complex triplets, he discovered the
4-D extension — the quaternions.
Obtaining the 3-D analogue of the M-set was an obsession for many
mathematicians [6]. Fortunately, several studies led to discovery of quasi-
3-D M-sets. The first studies were generally based on mapping the M-
set into the 3-D space using simple and well-known mapping functions.
Barrallo [6] mentioned two examples: the height field based on potential
of the M-set, and projection of a C-plane with the M-set onto the
Riemann sphere.
The breakthrough in this matter was made by a fractal enthusiast,
Daniel White, in 2007. He proposed a method of implementing (1.1) in
R3 under the assumption that the rotation appearing during squaring of
a complex number (as in (1.1)) is equivalent to representation of this
operation using the spherical coordinate system. Following this, triplet
value in the spherical coordinate system is given by
n
ρ, φ, θ
o
, where ρ is
a modulus, φ is a longitude angle, and θ is a latitude angle. The squaring
operation of such value gives [6]
n
ρ, φ, θ
o2 =
n
ρ2, 2φ, 2θ
o
.
(1.11)
The final set of recursive equations that allow reproducing the M-set in a

30
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
3-D space is given by

xn+1 = x2
n −y2
n −z2
n + c1,
yn+1 = 4xnynzn/
q
y2
n + z2
n + c2,
zn+1 = 2xn

−y2
n + z2
n

/
q
y2
n + z2
n + c3,
(1.12)
which gives an original 3-D M-set presented in Figure 1.22a, and
Figures 1.22b–d represent its modified versions with swapped sine and
cosine functions in (1.12).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 1.22: Original (a) and modified (b–d) versions of the 3-D M-set.
One should mention the second contributor to the 3-D M-set, Paul
Nylander, also a fractal enthusiast, who improved a formulation made by

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■31
White. This is the reason why (1.12) is often called the White–Nylander
formula. The obtained object is not a direct extension of the M-set in
a mathematical sense. The procedure of an extension of a product of
two complex numbers is just an assumption made by White. Moreover,
applying rotations in different order, from different axes and different
angles, one obtains different results (many variations appeared based on
this phenomenon). However, this geometrical object has become the new
icon among the fractal community, after the original M-set.
Further studies of Nylander gave the higher-order extension of (1.11)–
(1.12), which is given by
n
ρ, φ, θ
op =
n
ρp, pφ, pθ
o
,
(1.13)
n
ρ, φ, θ
op = ρp n
cos  pθ cos

pφ

, sin  pθ cos

pφ

, −sin

pφ
o
, (1.14)
where ρ =
p
x2 + y2 + z2, φ = arctan  y/x,
and θ = arctan
 p
x2 + y2/z

.
This type of geometric structure achieves the name Mandelbulbs, due
to its relation to the M-set and similarity to a bulb (especially for higher-
order structures). Probably the most popular graphical representation
of these objects is a Mandelbulb of the order 8. Several Mandelbulbs
generated using (1.14) are presented in Figure 1.23. Note that the
Mandelbulb of order 2 presented in Figure 1.23 (note that z denotes
there an iterated element — do not confuse with a Cartesian coordinate
z) is quite different with respect to those presented in Figure 1.22. This is
because the distance estimation in this case was calculated based on
analytic formulas that are used quite often in 3-D fractal generation
software in order to speed up the algorithm. However, the drawback
of this algorithm is lower accuracy, especially in the case of lower-order
3-D M-sets.
The analysis of the case when p →∞gives similar results as in the
case of M-set on the C-plane, i.e., when p →∞the parameter c becomes
insignificant and a shape of the resulting object tends to a sphere [66].
Several other research studies have been performed to date in order
to obtain complex triplets with properties similar to C algebra or visualize
the 3-D M-set (see, e.g., [21, 88]), but without much success.
Obviously, the original White-Nylander formula (1.14) has been
modified by numerous scientists and fractal enthusiasts. As a result, many
interesting shapes with a fractal hull were obtained. One can mention

32
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
the so-called Juliabulb family obtained by applying (1.14) to J-sets, 3-
D T -sets, Mandelbox family with multifractal properties discovered by
Tom Lowe, and many others. Several examples of such modifications are
shown in Figures 1.24 and 1.25. As one can observe, the Mandelboxes
do not contain smaller copies of themselves. They are Cantor dust-
type fractals, and unlike the M-set, they can be generalized to higher-
dimensional spaces.
(a) z →z2 + c
(b) z →z3 + c
(c) z →z4 + c
(d) z →z5 + c
(e) z →z8 + c
(f) z →z20 + c
Figure 1.23: Higher-order Mandelbulbs.
Coloring of 3-D fractals is slightly different than in case of fractals on a
C-plane, because now a surface of a 3-D object is to be colored, although
some of the methods described in Section 1.1.2 are also applicable for
3-D fractals (e.g., assigning colors based on the number of iterations).
The simplest coloring methods available in most of 3-D fractal generating
and rendering software are the gradients across the axes or orbit distance,
and radial mapping with linear and nonlinear functions. More advanced
coloring algorithms use an extended version of escape-time algorithm,
and sometimes coloring is enriched by the translucency for the voxels that

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■33
Figure 1.24: Examples of Juliabulbs.
Figure 1.25: Examples of Mandelboxes.
exceed bailout value, which allows the introduction of pleasantly looking
ambient occlusion effects. Additionally, the fog and lighting effects are
applied in several rendering algorithms of 3-D fractals.
1.4
WHAT’S NEXT? FURTHER EXTENSIONS OF THE
MANDELBROT SET
Years
after
Mandelbrot
had
discovered
his
set,
its
numerous
generalizations appeared, and there are still new directions to extend
classic M- and J-sets. Most of them are the higher-dimensional
generalizations of M- and J-sets defined on the C-plane, therefore, such
fractals can be classified as hypercomplex fractals. In the next chapters,
the possible ways of extensions of M- and J-sets are discussed in detail.
But now, let us briefly define these directions of such extensions.
The first extension of M- and J-sets is related to the algebra
of quaternions H (the natural extension of the algebra of complex

34
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
numbers C), which was proposed by Norton [94, 95] and further
developed by Gomatham et al. [43]. Such generalization gives the
new class of hypercomplex fractals and a rich range of possibilities for
further generalizations in terms of variations of a form of the recursive
equation (1.1) for z, c ∈H, as well as generalizations with respect
to the order of z, similarly as for classic M- and J-sets (see (1.6)).
Such a generalization was described by Wang and Sun [120]. The
next hypercomplex algebra generalized the H-algebra is the algebra
of octonions O, and the generalized M- and J-sets in terms of
octonions were described in [44, 45, 46], shortly after introducing
quaternionic M- and J-sets. Since further generalizations in terms
of dimensionality of hypercomplex vector spaces were not possible,
the Clifford algebras were used for construction of higher-dimensional
hypercomplex M- and J-sets. The first studies in this matter were
performed by Dixon et al. [35]. Based on this work, Wang and Jin [118]
presented an extended mathematical analysis of such a generalization.
With the help of hypercomplex algebras and advanced computer graphics
tools, the new fractal beasts were born. These beasts are the subject
of the second chapter of this book. However, there is also a group
of vector spaces in which the mathematical rules are not the same
as in the previously discussed spaces, i.e., the fractals in these spaces
are degenerated or cannot be constructed at all. The analysis of such
degenerated structures is performed, and based on results of this analysis,
it is possible to conclude which spaces can be used for construction of
higher-dimensional hypercomplex fractals, and which of them cannot.
In other words, this chapter completes the list of algebras that are
appropriate for construction of generalized M- and J-sets.
And finally, the last considered group of spaces where the fractals
based on M- and J-sets can be constructed are the spaces constructed
from the tensor product of algebras. The first study on generalized
bicomplex C ⊗C M- and J-sets was presented by Rochon [107]. The
bicomplex M- and J-sets have unique properties. The deep studies on
these properties were performed by the authors of [82, 119]. Another
interesting study on polynomial version of M-set for bicomplex numbers
was presented by Zireh [123]. The higher-dimensional generalizations
of M- and J-sets were studied for quaternion and biquaternion
C ⊗H algebras [12], as well as for octonion [71] and bioctonion
C ⊗O algebras [62]. Another type of generalized M- and J-sets was
presented in [39], where the authors considered multicomplex numbers
for construction of M- and J-sets. Naturally, one can easily obtain

Introduction to Fractals on a Complex Plane
■35
multihypercomplex vector spaces and use them for construction of
appropriate M- and J-sets. Additionally, all of these algebras can be
generalized with respect to the polynomial order. A group of tensor
product algebras creates a possibility to construct a lot of new classes
of hypercomplex and multihypercomplex M- and J-sets with fascinating
properties and geometry. Due to how they are constructed, let us call
them fractal mutants. They are described in the third chapter.
In the following chapters, both mathematical and visualization aspects
are analyzed. For every considered vector space, a reader will find a
detailed mathematical description as well as many rendered aesthetic
fractal objects with a discussion on their visualization features.


C H A P T E R 2
Fractal Beasts in
Terms of Normed
Division and Clifford
Algebras
In the previous chapter, we discussed the history of appearance and
fundamentals of fractals on a C-plane, and different types of their
generalizations. However, we did not discuss their extension into higher-
dimensional spaces (except the fractal-like 3-D M-set). In this chapter, we
will move to the world of creatures and beasts living in higher-dimensional
vector spaces, which sometimes have weird, but still self-similar and very
complex in a geometrical sense, shapes. In spite of their young age,
such hypercomplex fractals gained great popularity among the fractal
community, both scientists and computer graphics artists.
One of the approaches to constructing hypercomplex fractals uses
hypercomplex vector spaces, namely, the spaces defined by the algebra
of quaternions and octonions. The higher-dimensional algebras in this
approach cannot be used for construction of hypercomplex fractals, which
will be discussed further. The second approach assumes the construction
of hypercomplex fractals using Clifford algebras, which are not limited as
the normed division ones. In the next three sections, we will analyse the
hypercomplex numbers and a specificity of construction of fractals based
on them. And we will try to imagine these higher-dimensional beasts!
37

38
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
2.1
QUATERNIONIC FRACTAL SETS
2.1.1
History and Preliminaries of Quaternion Calculus
The beginning of quaternions was introduced in Section 1.3 when
discussing the unsuccessful attempts of Sir William R. Hamilton to extend
the complex numbers to their 3-D analogues. He spent a couple of years
on this problem and later wrote to his son, "Every morning in the early
part of the above-cited month, on my coming down to breakfast, your
(then) little brother William Edwin, and yourself, used to ask me: ‘Well,
Papa, can you multiply triplets?’ Whereto I was always obliged to reply,
with a sad shake of the head: ‘No, I can only add and subtract them.’" [5].
Fortunately, Hamilton abandoned work on this issue, and on October
16, 1843, he discovered quaternions while he walked with his wife along
the Royal Canal to a meeting of the Royal Irish Academy in Dublin [5].
When the concept of quaternions took a shape in his mind, he carved the
identity equation
i2 = j2 = k2 = ijk = −1
(2.1)
in the stone of the Broome Bridge. This action was commemorated by
a stone plaque on the northwest corner of the underside of the bridge
that exhibits the famous equation, which has been there until now. For
more details, readers are referred to [28]. Readers interested in more
information on wide applicability and several curiosities with quaternions
is referred to [50].
The skew field of quaternions H (H after his discoverer — Hamilton)
is a 4-algebra with basis e0 = 1, e1 = i, e2 = j, and e3 = k, where i,j, and k
are the imaginary units. The set of quaternions has the form
H :=
n
a1 + a2i + a3j + a4k
 an ∈R
o
.
(2.2)
Quaternions can be regarded as vectors in R4. The main difference
in properties of quaternions with respect to complex numbers is that
quaternions do not fulfill the condition (1.2) for x, y ∈H, i.e., they
are not commutative. This means that the rules of multiplication of
two quaternions are somewhat different than the rules to which we
are accustomed to, e.g. xy = z, while yx = −z, for x, y, z ∈H.
Since in the problem of construction of hypercomplex fractals we use
addition and multiplication operations only (see (1.1)), let us analyze these
operations in terms of quaternions. Considering H as a set of quadruples:
H = {(a1, a2, a3, a4)| a1, . . . , a4 ∈R}, the basis elements can be presented

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■39
TABLE 2.1
Multiplication Table for
Quaternions.
×
1
i
j
k
1
1
i
j
k
i
i
−1
k
−j
j
j
−k
−1
i
k
k
j
−i
−1
as 1 = (1, 0, 0, 0), i = (0, 1, 0, 0), j = (0, 0, 1, 0), and k = (0, 0, 0, 1). The
addition is performed element-wise and has a form
(a1, a2, a3, a4) + (b1, b2, b3, b4) = (a1 + b1, a2 + b2, a3 + b3, a4 + b4) .
(2.3)
The multiplication of two quaternions is ruled by a distributive law that
can be realized using the special multiplication table (see Table 2.1), and
has a form
(a1, a2, a3, a4) (b1, b2, b3, b4) = (a1b1 −a2b2 −a3b3 −a4b4,
a1b2 + a2b1 + a3b4 −a4b3,
a1b3 −a2b4 + a3b1 + a4b2,
a1b4 + a2b3 −a3b2 −a4b1) .
(2.4)
The relation of quaternions to complex numbers can also be
considered through the Cayley–Dickson construction, which means
that quaternions can be represented by pairs of complex numbers:
(a1 + a2i) + (a3 + a4i) j, i.e., H = C ⊕C.
2.1.2
Quaternionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
Considering the relations between quaternions and complex numbers
described previously, the formulations applicable to fractal sets on a
C-plane can be extended to their analogues in an H-space. Two sets
of prisoners and escapees also exist in an H-space, and the boundary
between these sets can be interpreted as a boundary of basin of attraction
in the hypercomplex 4-space or the quaternionic J-set – JH. Similarly,
as for J-sets on a complex plane – JC-sets, the bailout condition is
preserved for JH-sets with the bailout value equal 2, since |z0| > 2
and 2 < JH, z0 ∈H. A reader interested in hypercomplex dynamics
of such systems (and several subtle differences with respect to JC-sets)
is referred to [72, 99, 100].

40
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
In fact, since the resulting sets are four-dimensional they cannot
be graphically presented in a direct way due to the fact that
humans’ perception is limited to only three dimensions. Therefore, the
visualizations of 4-D objects can be presented as 3-D “shadows” of these
objects. In order to understand this limitation, one can recall a planar
projection of a 3-D object. Suppose we have a 3-D object illuminated
from the one side. The shadow of this object on a wall is its silhouette
or, technically speaking, its planar projection. Now, let us extend this
operation to the case of 4-D→3-D projection, i.e. in this case, the “shadow
on a wall” is a 3-D spatial projection of a 4-D illuminated object. We can
also follow the suggestion of Hart et al. [53] and exclude the fourth
element of H from consideration, which gives us a 3-D subspace of a H-
space and a 3-D picture of a JH-set. The exemplary JH-sets are presented
in Figure 2.1. As mentioned before, JC- and JH-sets are related, and
this relation is clearly visible when coefficients at a3 and a4 in (2.2) of
the quaternionic constant c in the recurrence quadratic polynomial (1.1)
equal zero. If the 3-D projection of a JH-set (see Figure 2.2a) is cross-
sectioned along the C-plane, one can achieve the related JC-set in the
plane of cross-section (see Figure 2.2b) — compare the resulting cross-
section with Figure 1.7a. For clarity of representation, we introduce here
the symbol JH (a1, a2, a3, a4), which denotes JH-set with coefficients of
c, c ∈H, given in brackets. In other words, if c ∈C instead of c ∈H, the
resulting JH-set is trivial, which was proven by Bogush et al. [12]. Several
other cross-sectioned analogues of complex fractal sets in the H-space
are presented in Figure 2.3.
Nowadays, for graphical representation of quaternionic fractal sets,
the ray-tracing approach is used in most computer programs to generate
and render fractals due to the ability to generate very realistic renderings,
including complex lighting, transparency,reflection, and refraction effects.
The other previously used techniques, like boundary tracking or inverse
iteration algorithm, are rarely used to render quaternionic fractal sets. The
history of developing of visualization techniques of quaternionic fractals
can be found in [51, 52, 109]. The theory and modern techniques of
visualizing quaternions can also be found in [50].
Using the analogy with 3-D “shadows,” we can also define the slices
of 4-D objects. The slice of a 3-D object is planar. One can imagine the
process of performing slicing of a 3-D object as follows: first, cut 3-D
object into two pieces, then put one of these pieces into a paint, and,
finally, make an imprint on a paper. In the case of a 4-D object, we have a
3-D cutting hyperplane, which allows obtaining 3-D slices of the object.

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■41
(a) c = −0.2 + 0.8i
(b) c = −0.9 + 0.4i
(c) c = −0.1 + 0.6i −0.5j + 0.3k
(d) c = −0.3 −0.3i −0.6j −0.4k
Figure 2.1: Examples of 3-D projections of JH-sets.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2.2: 3-D projection of JH (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0) and its cross-section
along the C-plane.

42
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) c = i
(b) c = 0.27 + 0.07i
(c) c = −0.75
(d) c = −1 −0.4i
Figure 2.3: Examples of cross-sectioned JH-sets.
Obviously, when we make such a slice, one of coordinates of a 4-space
(i.e., the element of a quaternion) is constant. Of course, in this case, our
image of the 4-D object will be limited to a single slice. In order to get
greater insight on how this object looks in 4-space, one needs to generate
a sequence of 3-D slices with a discrete stepping of a position of a cutting
hyperplane. The examples of such a procedure are presented in Figure 2.4
for slicing along axis of reals and i-axis, and in Figure 2.5 for slicing along
i-axis and j-axis.
An interesting observation can be made when rotating JH-set. Since
a rotation is performed in a 4-space a 3-D projection of a JH-set acquires
completely different shapes and topology [53]. This behavior is resulted
by the “shadow effect,” i.e., when we rotate a 3-D object with complex
geometry, its shadow on a wall is different. The same happens when
we rotate a 4-D object and observe its 3-D shadow [63]. However, the
rotation of JH-sets in an H-space is not so obvious due to the lack of
commutativity of a multiplied pair of quaternions. The rotations in 4-D
can be considered as a multiplication of a point in a 4-space q by a unit
quaternion (which can be obtained by dividing the nonzero quaternion
by its norm: q/
q
). Depending on the direction of rotation, the left-

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■43
Figure 2.4: Slices of JH (−1, 0.1, 0, 0) along axis of reals (from −1 to −0.6)
and i-axis (from 0.1 to 0.5) with a step of 0.1.
Figure 2.5: Slices of JH (−1, −0.5, 0.1, 0) along i-axis (from −0.5 to −0.1)
and j-axis (from 0.1 to 0.5) with a step of 0.1.

44
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
multiplication by a unit quaternion q1 = b1 + b2i + b3j + b4k


a′
1
a′
2
a′
3
a′
4


=


b1
−b2
−b3
−b4
b2
b1
−b4
b3
b3
b4
b1
−b2
b4
−b3
b2
b1




a1
a2
a3
a4


,
(2.5)
or the right-multiplication by a unit quaternion q2 = c1 + c2i + c3j + c4k


a′
1
a′
2
a′
3
a′
4


=


c1
−c2
−c3
−c4
c2
c1
c4
−c3
c3
−c4
c1
c2
c4
c3
−c2
c1




a1
a2
a3
a4


,
(2.6)
should be performed. This can be simplified to the symbolic form
q′ = q1qq2.
(2.7)
This rotation, however, is still performed in 4-space, and the explicit
result of rotation in 3-space is difficult to obtain. Therefore, it is essential
to apply the 3-D rotation matrix to the point in 4-space mapped into
3-space (given by x, y, z	) using the Hamilton–Cayley formula [28]


x′
y′
z′

=


d2
1 + d2
2 −d2
3 −d2
4
2 (d2d3 −d1d4)
2 (d2d4 + d1d3)
2 (d2d3 + d1d4)
d2
1 −d2
2 + d2
3 −d2
4
2 (d3d4 −d1d2)
2 (d2d4 −d1d3)
2 (d3d4 + d1d2)
d2
1 −d2
2 −d2
3 + d2
4




x
y
z

,
(2.8)
where dn’s are the multipliers of the elements of a quaternion.
An even simpler method used in most computer programs for
generation of JH-sets considers (2.7) as a rotation performed in a 3-
space by an angle θ around the axis ξ, so the rotation of a point r around
the axis ξ can be expressed as p′ = gpg−1, where p is a quaternion
containing r,
g = cos (θ/2) + sin (θ/2) ξ.
(2.9)
Here, ξ defines a vector direction in a 3-space. This has a consequence
that any quaternion can be rotated into a complex number by conjugation
with the appropriate unit quaternion [30].
Sometimes, it is convenient to define JH-sets in hyperspherical
coordinates. The Euclidean coordinates of an H-space (2.2) are related
to hyperspherical coordinates as follows:
a1 = A cos θ1, a2 = A sin θ1 cos θ2,
a3 = A sin θ1 sin θ2 cos θ3, a4 = A sin θ1 sin θ2 sin θ3,
(2.10)

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■45
where A =
pP
n a2
n, θ1 is the amplitude of quaternion, and θ2 and θ3
are the latitude and longitude, respectively. In analogy to the Euclidean
coordinates, θ1, θ2 and θ3 are the angular coordinates.
Similarly, as
for fractal sets on a C-plane, the Mandelbrot set defined on a C-plane,
MC-set, can be extended to quaternions. However, it is difficult to fully
describe the MH-set when the connected JH-sets for f(z) = z2 + c,
z, c ∈H for c < MH. Considering the definition of the MH-set with
respect to f(z) [122],
MH =
n
c ∈H| f (s)(z) ↛∞as s →∞
o
.
(2.11)
In these cases, the connected JH-sets are infinite disjointed unions of
sets, since the derivative of f(z) is not defined and there are no critical
points. Therefore, there is no analogue to the classification theorem for
JC-sets in terms of the MC-set in quaternions [30]. In order to evaluate
JH, we assume the seed of z0 = 0, hoping that by iteration really all
cycles are reached [122]. The MH-set is usually presented using the
above-described technique of excluding a k-element from consideration.
Obviously, the resulting object is trivial (see Figure 2.6), and, in fact,
represents a rotation of the MC-set around the axis of reals. This fact was
proven by Zeitler [122] and known as the extended apple theorem. Yet,
as Barrallo [6] emphasizes, the appropriate choice of cutting hyperplane
orientation can give more interesting 3-D slices of the MH-set.
Figure 2.6: 3-D projection of the MH-set along the C-plane.

46
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Obviously, J-sets in H can be considered in terms of higher-order
polynomials that describe them. Let us first consider the recursive
equation in the form (1.5), when z, c ∈H, p ∈Z. The resulting slices
for various values of p are presented in Figure 2.7, similarly to the case of
J-sets on a C-plane presented in Figure 1.7. One can observe that the
3-D projections of JH
p (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0) for increasing p tend to a 2-sphere.
Indeed, when p →∞, the shape of JH
p (a1, a2, a3, a4) tends to a 3-sphere
for arbitrary an, which was proven in [66].
(a) p = 2
(b) p = 3
(c) p = 5
(d) p = 10
(e) p = 20
(f) p = 50
(g) p = 100
(h) p = 1000
Figure 2.7: Tending of JH
p (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0) to a 2-sphere.
The mystery of quaternionic fractal sets does not end at a class of
polynomials of the form (1.5). The 4-space gives even more possibilities
of creating amazing shapes by modified recursive equations only. But only
the few examples of such modifications can be found in the literature,
e.g., in [109], the author visualized transcendental quaternionic functions
and quasi-MH-sets with modified critical points; Halayka [49] presented
several visually interesting JH-sets based mostly on transcendental
functions; and Sun et al. [116] presented JH- and MH-sets perturbed
by dynamical noises. Several examples of visually interesting variations of
JH-sets are presented in Figures 2.8 and 2.9.

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■47
(a) z →z2 −c/z,
c = 0.5 + 0.3i −0.1j
(b) z →cz2 −cz−2,
c = 0.3 + 0.3i −0.5j −0.2k
(c) z →cz−2 −c2z + c,
c = 0.3i −0.3j
(d) z →ln (c) /z −z−4,
c = 0.3 −1.9i + 1.1j −0.2k
(e) z →c2/ ln (c) + z−4,
c = 0.55 + 0.4i −0.5j + 0.5k
(f) z →z/ ln (c) −(zc)2,
c = 0.6 + 0.6i −0.4j
Figure 2.8: Variations of JH-sets (part 1 of 2).

48
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) z →1/ ln (c) + ln  z2 + c,
c = 0.4 + 0.4i −0.6j
(b) z →(1 −z −c)2 −(zc)2,
c = 0.5 −0.3i + 0.3j −0.1k
(c) z →1 −c + (ln (z) + c)2,
c = 0.6 −0.29j
(d) z →(z/c)4 −z/c,
c = 0.27 + 0.35i −0.5j
(e) z →c ln(c) + z2/c,
c = 0.75 + 0.67i −0.34j
(f) z →1.6/ ln (c) + ln  z2 + c,
c = 0.1 + 1i + 0.1j + 0.1k
Figure 2.9: Variations of JH-sets (part 2 of 2).

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■49
2.2
OCTONIONIC FRACTAL SETS
2.2.1
History and Preliminaries of Octonions
The history of octonions is not less interesting than the history of
quaternions. In fact, this history is a continuation of the story of
Hamilton’s discovery of quaternions. Despite the fact that the octonions
are known also as Cayley numbers after British mathematician Arthur
Cayley, they were first discovered by John T. Graves, Hamilton’s friend
from college [5]. After discovering quaternions on October 16, 1843,
Hamilton wrote a letter to Graves with their description. Graves replied
to this letter suggesting to expand quaternions to higher-dimensional
hypercomplex vector spaces. Since Hamilton was obsessed with his
quaternions, Graves started working on such an extension on his own.
And on December 26, 1843, he wrote a letter to Hamilton, in which he
described a new 8-algebra that he called the octaves (however, this name
was supplanted by the “Cayley numbers”), which was a direct extension
of quaternions. Hamilton suggested that Graves publish his discovery, but
being busy with his work on quaternions, he put it on the back burner. In
July 1844, Hamilton wrote to Graves about his finding on octonions — in
contrast to quaternions, they are not associative.
In the meantime, Arthur Cayley, freshly graduated from Cambridge,
had been working with quaternions since Hamilton’s announcement. In
March 1845, he published a paper [16], where, among other things, he
presented a brief description on octonions. Both Graves and Hamilton
published notes in well recognizable mathematical journal claiming
Graves’ priority in discovering the octonions, but it was too late — the
octonions became known as “Cayley numbers” [5]. For more information
on the details of this story, a reader is referred to [5, 50].
The octonions O is an 8-algebra with the basis of e0 = 1, e1 = i, e2 = j,
e3 = k, e4 = l, e5 = r, e6 = s, e7 = t, e2
n = −1, n = 1, . . . , 7, which lose both
commutativity (1.2) and associativity (1.3) conditions, i.e., this algebra is
anticommutative and antiassociative. The only condition that O-algebra
holds is the alternativity (1.4). The set of octonions has the following
symbolic form:
O :=
n
a1 + a2i + a3j + a4k + a5l + a6r + a7s + a8t
 an ∈R
o
.
(2.12)
Similarly, as for the H-algebra, the addition of two octonions is
element-wise, i.e., considering O as a set of octuples in R8, the basis

50
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
elements can be presented as
e0 = (1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0), e1 = (0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0),
e2 = (0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0), e3 = (0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0, 0),
e4 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0, 0), e5 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, 0),
e6 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0), e7 = (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 1);
(2.13)
and then, the addition has a form
(a1, . . . , a8) + (b1, . . . , b8) = (a1 + b1, . . . , a8 + b8) .
(2.14)
Again, similarly to H-algebra, the multiplication is realized using the
multiplication table (see Table 2.2 after Cayley [16]). The table can be
expressed by the following relations [5, 112]:
emen = −δmne0 + ǫmnpep,
(2.15)
where δ is the Kronecker delta, ǫmnp = 1, when mnp takes the values of
123, 145, 176, 246, 257, 347, 365,
eme0 = e0em = em, e0e0 = e0,
(2.16)
emen = −enem for m , n,
(2.17)
and two additional identities called index cycling,
emen = ep ⇒em+1en+1 = ep+1,
(2.18)
and index doubling,
emen = ep ⇒e2me2n = e2p.
(2.19)
Even
considering
relations
and
identities
(2.15)–(2.19),
the
multiplication matrix for octonions is still difficult to remember.
Fortunately, Freudenthal [38] proposed a mnemonic based on the
Fano plane concept (Figure 2.10). This structure contains 7 nodes and
lines connecting them. Every path contains 3 nodes that define the
multiplication (see Table 2.2 and Figure 2.10). When following the
direction of the arrows, the product is positive, e.g., e3e4 = e7. While when
following the opposite direction, the product is negative, e.g., e4e3 = −e7.
Each of the 7 lines (i.e., any two elements) generates a subalgebra of O
isomorphic to all other normed division algebras, namely R, C, and H.
The octonions are related to H- and C-algebras through the Cayley–
Dickson construction, which means that octonions can be represented
by pairs of quaternions:  a1 + a2i + a3j + a4k +  a5 + a6i + a7j + a8k l.

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■51
TABLE 2.2
Multiplication Table for Octonions.
×
e0
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e0
e0
e1
e2
e3
e4
e5
e6
e7
e1
e1
−e0
e3
−e2
e5
−e4
−e7
e6
e2
e2
−e3
−e0
e1
e6
e7
−e4
−e5
e3
e3
e2
−e1
−e0
e7
−e6
e5
−e4
e4
e4
−e5
−e6
−e7
−e0
e1
e2
e3
e5
e5
e4
−e7
e6
−e1
−e0
−e3
e2
e6
e6
e7
e4
−e5
−e2
e3
−e0
−e1
e7
e7
−e6
e5
e4
−e3
−e2
e1
−e0
Figure 2.10: Fano plane — a mnemonic for multiplication of octonions.
2.2.2
Octonionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
In the case of octonions, the formulation of the recursive formula
for J- and M-sets defined in octonions, JO- and MO-sets, is much
more complicated than for their lower-dimensional analogues defined in
quaternions and complex numbers. This is because of the nonassociativity
of the O-algebra. Following this, the recursive equation (1.1) takes a
form [1]:
z →(zo) (¯oz) + c, z, o, c ∈O,
(2.20)
where o is a constant unit octonion that has a form of (2.12) for an = 1,
and ¯o is a hypercomplex conjugate of o, i.e., ¯o ≡a1 −a2i −a3 j −a4k −a5l −
a6r −a7s −a8t. The multiplication in (2.20) is performed using a concept
of octonionic cross-product proposed by Cederwall and Preitschopf [17].
Note that (2.20) is reduced to the form given by (1.1) for z, c ∈H.
The nonassociativity drives the properties of JO- and MO-sets, which

52
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
was the subject of intensive investigations by Griffin and Joshi [44, 45, 46],
and later by Kricker and Joshi [69], where they studied dynamics of these
sets, and found that they reveal chaotic and even hyperchaotic regimes.
The attractive structures of JO- and MO-sets, as well as the fixed points,
depend on the bifurcation parameter, which is related to nonassociativity
of the O-algebra, as observed in [69]. Though, Chaitin-Chatelin [18]
demonstrated that (2.20) may generate trivial solutions, similarly th JH-
and MH-sets. This means that when an = 0 for n = 3, . . . , 8 in (2.12), i.e.,
c ∈C instead of c ∈O, the resulting set can be obtained by rotation of its
analogue in a C-plane.
The visualization of octonionic JO- and MO-sets is a serious problem,
since having only thee geometrical dimensions (naturally resulting from
humans’ perception), the visualization of an 8-D object results in a huge
loss of information. First of all, there is no way to visualize the 8-D
object entirely. Thus, several tricky techniques were developed for this
purpose. The most obvious way is to visualize 2-D or 3-D slices of an
8-D object in various planes, similar to quaternionic fractal sets (see
Figures 2.4 and 2.5). An interesting approach to overcome this problem
was presented by Carter [15]. The hypercomplex spaces are divided
following the Cayley–Dickson construction onto quaternionic 4-spaces,
and then the resulting quaternions are mapped on a 3-space separately
and composed in a single image using the depths property of this 3-
space. In the case of visualization of a quaternionic fractal set by 2-D
cross-sections, 28 combinations of elements of O that form cutting planes
should be considered. Some of the exemplary sets of 2-D cross-sections of
the quadratic JO-set described by (2.20) are presented in Figures 2.11–
2.14. In each case, we start from JO (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) and cut it by
different planes.
The MO-set can be described similarly as its lower-dimensional
analogues by (2.11) for z, c ∈O and, as in the case of the MH-set, the
derivative of f(z) is undefined, since no critical points can be determined
for this set. The exemplary visualization of one of cross-sections of the
MO
2 -set is shown in Figure 2.15.
Generalizations of the quadratic MO-set with respect to its polynomial
degree, as well as general form of a recursive equation, is also possible.
However, due to the lack of appropriate visualization of such structures,
their presentation is omitted. In the same way as previously, the MO
p -
set tends to the 7-sphere when p →∞. The analysis and results on the
generalized MO-set can be found in [45].

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■53
Figure 2.11: Slices of JO (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) along axis of reals (from 0 to
0.3) and i-axis (from 0 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.
Figure 2.12: Slices of JO (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) along j-axis (from 0 to 0.3)
and k-axis (from 0 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.

54
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
Figure 2.13: Slices of JO (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) along l-axis (from 0 to 0.3)
and r-axis (from 0 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.
Figure 2.14: Slices of JO (0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0, 0) along axis of reals (from −0.3
to 0) and t-axis (from 0 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■55
Figure 2.15: Exemplary cross-section of MO
2 .
2.3
IS THERE ANYTHING ALIVE IN
HIGHER-DIMENSIONAL HYPERCOMPLEX SPACES?
Since we have already known that M- and J-sets can be generalized up to
octonionic hypercomplex 8-space, the natural question is whether we can
perform their further generalizations. In order to answer this question, let
us get back to the story of two friends, Hamilton and Graves. Immediately
after Graves had sent his letter with the description of octonions, he
sent a few more letters, where he presented a concept of “2m-ions,”
i.e., further generalizations of the O-algebra. The first of them was the
16-algebra of sedenions S (also called the hexadecanions [19]), which
should be the next normed division algebra, according to the Graves’
conception. However, “he met with an unexpected hitch” and discovered
that this cannot be possible [5]. In fact, the O-algebra can be generalized
considering the Cayley–Dickson construction in such a way that every
next algebra doubles dimension of its vector space. In such a way,
one can obtain the mentioned sedenions S, 32-algebra of pathions P,
and so on. However all of these algebras starting from S are neither
commutative, nor associative, nor alternative (sedenions have only a weak
form of associativity known as power associativity). This means that all of
the mentioned algebras are not the division algebras, thus contain zero
divisors. From the point of view of constructing generalized hypercomplex
M- and J-sets, this means that the multiplication operation cannot
be performed in such space, since it is possible that the multiplication
operation of two nonzero sedenions or higher-dimensional vectors gives

56
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
zero as a result. This has far-reaching consequences when iterating the
higher-dimensional analogue of (1.1). Let us consider a case when for c
one obtains a sequence that tends to infinity (assuming the existence of
a critical point at infinity). In this case, the appearance of zero in such
a sequence results in changing the type of trajectory from repelling to
the attractive one, and the starting point located outside the boundary of
M- and J-sets, then belongs to the subset of prisoners, which causes
a singularity of dynamical behavior of such a system. Similarly, when
c belongs to the subset of prisoners, the singularity may be produced
inside this subset. This implies that generalizations of M- and J-sets
to the vector spaces constructed using the Cayley–Dickson construction
that are not described by normed division algebras are not possible. The
sets generated using the analogous form of (1.1) in higher-dimensional
vector spaces constructed using the Cayley–Dickson construction are not
M- and J-sets and will be called here degenerated quasi-fractal M- and
J-sets. Fortunately, there is another class of algebras that generalizes
previously discussed algebras, and which is the subject of this subsection
— the Clifford algebras.
2.3.1
Preliminaries to Clifford Algebras
The Clifford algebras (also called the alternions [110] or the hypercomplex
numbers
[35,
118])
are
named
after
their
discoverer,
William
Kingdon Clifford, who worked on higher-dimensional generalizations of
quaternions proposed by Hamilton. He described his invention in [23].
In general, the Clifford algebra Kn is a 2n-algebra with the basis of
1, e1, e2, . . . , en, and its elements satisfy the conditions of associativity (1.3)
and alternativity (1.4). The Kn is generated by n anticommuting (xy =
−yx) imaginary units en following the doubling construction. One can
see that in this case, several Kn-algebras coincide with several normed
division algebras, i.e., K0 = R, K1 = C, K2 = H, but K3 , O, since O is
not an associative algebra. K3 coincides with the direct sum H ⊕H (the
direct sum of an n-algebra A and an m-algebra B, with bases e1, e2, . . . , en
and f1, f2, . . . , fn is defined as the (n + m)-algebra A ⊕B, with the basis
e1, e2, . . . , en, f1, f2, . . . , fn, where eα fβ = fβeα = 0 [110]). Further, higher-
dimensional relations are as follows: K4 = H⊗R2 = H2, K5 = R4⊗C = C4,
K6 = R2 ⊗R4 = H8, and K7 = R8 ⊗R8 [110]. The form A ⊗B denotes
a tensor product of an n-algebra A and an m-algebra B, with bases
e1, e2, . . . , en and f1, f2, . . . , fn, which results in the nm-algebra A ⊗B,
with basis elements eα fβ = fβeα [110]. For n ≥8, the following relation

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■57
occurs [5]:
Kn+8  Kn ⊗R16.
(2.21)
This behavior of Kn≥8 is known as the Bott periodicity.
The general symbolic form of a Clifford algebra can be given by
Kn := {a1 + a2e1 + a3e2 + . . . + an+1en| an ∈R} .
(2.22)
Since Kn are associative algebras, they are closed under addition and
multiplication, which is crucial for performing the iteration procedure
of a recursive equation of the type (1.1). The addition of two generalized
hypercomplex numbers is performed, as in previous cases, element-wise:
(a1 + a2e1 + . . . + an+1en) + (b1 + b2e1 + . . . + bn+1en) =
(a1 + b1) + (a2 + b2) e1 + . . . + (an+1 + bn+1) en,
(2.23)
while the squaring operation (multiplication by itself) yields [35]
(a1 + a2e1 + . . . + an+1en)2 =

a2
1 −a2
2 −. . . −a2
n+1

+
(2a1a2) e1 + (2a1a3) e2 + . . . + (2a1an+1) en.
(2.24)
The definition of these operations is enough to formulate the JKn- and
MKn-sets, i.e., J- and M-sets defined in Cliffordean algebras.
2.3.2
Cliffordean Hypercomplex Fractal Sets
Consider the function of a type
z →zp + c for z, c ∈Kn, p ≥2,
(2.25)
since for −1 ≤p ≤1, the JKn
p
does not exist, and for 1 ≤p ≤2 ∨p < −1,
it is a degenerated JKn
p
(see Section 1.1.3 for details), so the generalized
JKn
p -set can be formulated as
JKn
p (c) = {z ∈Kn| ∀m∈N |zm| < B} ,
(2.26)
where B ∈R is a bailout value usually equal to 2. Thus, the MKn
p -set is
given by:
MKn
p
=
n
c ∈Kn| f (s)(z) ↛∞as s →∞
o
,
(2.27)
where f (s)(·) denotes a function composition performed s times.
As presented above, the complex numbers and the quaternions

58
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
coincide with the Clifford number systems, therefore, their description
is omitted. The higher-dimensional Clifford algebras, due to the
impossibility of proper visual representation, are not presented here.
The only studies in the area of higher-dimensional Cliffordean fractal
sets performed so far are the studies of Dixon et al. [35] and Wang
and Jin [118]. The authors of both studies proposed an interesting
approach to obtain higher-dimensional hypercomplex sets other than
those obtained from the Cayley–Dickson construction. They selected
the higher-dimensional vector space and then truncated the elements of
a hypercomplex number of the form (2.22) by setting the associators
an to zero, starting from the last one, an, until reaching the desired
dimension. This operation allows avoiding the problems of multiplication
of hypercomplex numbers, but, in fact, this process is a trivialization of a
given hypercomplex vector space. Following this algorithm, we need to
consider at least 8-D hypercomplex vector space in order to obtain 5-D
JKn- and MKn-sets. Continuing the truncation process, we can obtain 4-
D quaternionic vector space, and then 2-D complex plane. Thus, the JKn-
and MKn-sets obtained from the truncation procedure are not the new
classes of hypercomplex fractal sets, but the trivialized JKn- and MKn-
sets of a vector space from which the truncation process started, similar to
the cases described for quaternions (see Section 2.1.2) and octonions (see
Section 2.2.2). Obviously, the graphical analysis presented in [35, 118]
shows that the hypercomplex sets generated from (2.26) and (2.27) are
graphically fractals.
2.4
THE PLACES (AND HYPERSPACES) WHERE
FRACTALS CANNOT LIVE
Until now, we have analyzed the algebras and number systems that define
appropriate spaces and hyperspaces for construction of M- and J-sets in
them. The general condition for these number spaces is that they should
be closed under addition and multiplication operations, thus, should fulfill
at least one of three conditions: commutativity (1.2), associativity (1.3),
or alternativity (1.4). Since we have already defined most of such number
spaces, let us define such ones where the mentioned algebraic operations
do not work well. The algebras defined in the previous chapters have a
lot of derivative algebras with the same dimensions, but with varying
properties.
Let us start from the derivatives of the C-algebra. This algebra has
two derivative algebras: the algebra of split complex numbers C′, and

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■59
(a) MC′
2
(b) MC0
2
Figure 2.16: Exemplary sets in a C′-plane and in a C0-plane.
the algebra of dual numbers C0 (both introduced by Clifford — see [22]
for details). A 2-algebra C′ is a commutative algebra with a basis 1, j,
where, unlike for C-algebra, j2 = 1. Therefore, this algebra is defined
over reals and coincides the direct sum R ⊕R. This algebra contains
nontrivial idempotents, i.e., the product of a number x multiplied by
itself is the same number (xx = x). The second algebra considered here,
a C0-algebra, is also a commutative 2-algebra with a basis 1, ǫ, where
ǫ2 = 0 is a nilpotent. The nilpotent is an element that gives 0 during
raising it to a positive integer power, i.e., ǫp = 0 for p ∈Z+. Both of these
algebras contain zero divisors, which exclude them from consideration as
candidates of a space for constructing fractal sets. The definition of sets
in C′ can be found in [84, 114], and their generalized version in [97]. The
authors called the resulting sets obtained from the recursive equation of
type (1.5) the hyperbrot, referring to the name of the Mandelbrot set.
However, as the authors proved [97], the resulting set has the shape of
a square, with a side length of 2
√
2/3
√
3 (see Figure 2.16a), thus, it has
no fractal properties. The sets defined in C0 are not connected, and, thus,
cannot form M- and J-sets. An example of such a set of type (1.1), where
z, c ∈C0 is presented in Figure 2.16b.
The H-algebra has more derivative associative 4-algebras. The first
considered algebra is an algebra of split quaternions (or coquaternions)
H′, with a basis 1, i, j1, j2, where i2 = −1, j2
1 = j2
2 = 1. Similarly, as for
C-algebra, which has a derivative C0, the H-algebra has its derivative
H0, known as semiquaternions, with a basis 1, i, κ, η, where i2 = −1,
κ2 = η2 = 0, iκ = −κi = η, ηi = −iη = κ, κη = ηκ = 0. The next algebra

60
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
is an algebra of split semiquaternions H′0, with a basis 1, j, κ, η, where
j2 = 1, κ2 = η2 = 0, jκ = −κj = η, ηj = −jη = −κ, κη = ηκ = 0.
The last derivative of H is an algebra of 1
4-quaternions H00, with a basis
1, κ, η, ω, where κ2 = η2 = ω2 = 0, κη = −ηκ = ω, κω = ωκ = ηω =
ωη = 0. These algebras contain zero divisors, nilpotents, and nontrivial
idempotents, thus, cannot be considered as appropriate vector spaces
for construction of fractal sets. Similarly, as in the case of split complex
numbers, the recursive equation of type (1.5) produces regularly shaped
geometrical structures that have no fractal properties. The examples of
such sets constructed in H′-space are presented in Figure 2.17. Next, the
semiquaternionic sets can be constructed from the rules described in [87]
(see Figure 2.18). Analogously, the set constructed in H′0-space can be
visualized (see Figure 2.19). The details on algebraic operations on split
semiquaternions can be found in [58].
(a) JH′
2 (0, 0, 0, 0)
(b) JH′
5 (0, 0, 0, 0)
(c) JH′
10 (0, 0, 0, 0)
Figure 2.17: Exemplary 3-D projections of sets in an H′-space.
(a) JH0
2
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(b) JH0
5
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(c) JH0
10 (0, 0, 0, 0)
Figure 2.18: Exemplary 3-D projections of sets in an H0-space.
Finally, the sets constructed in H00-space do not give any resulting

Fractal Beasts in Terms of Normed Division and Clifford Algebras
■61
(a) JH′0
2
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(b) JH′0
5
(0, 0, 0, 0)
(c) JH′0
10 (0, 0, 0, 0)
Figure 2.19: Exemplary 3-D projections of sets in an H′0-space.
shape during visualization. The description on algebraic operations of
1
4-quaternions can be found in [59].
Using the same transition processes, one can obtain derivatives of
O — the alternative 8-algebras of split octonions O′, semioctonions
O0, split semioctonions O′0,
1
4-octonions O00, split
1
4-octonions O′00,
and
1
8-octonions O000. All of these algebras contain zero divisors.
These transition processes are also applicable for the higher-dimensional
algebras, but due to failing of conditions (1.2)–(1.4), they cannot generate
the normed division algebras without zero divisors. Now, we can finalize
the list of vector spaces appropriate for construction of M- and J-sets.
However, there is another way to get new classes of vector spaces with
desired properties: the already mentioned tensor product of algebras
described in detail in the next chapter.


C H A P T E R 3
Tensor Product Fractal
Mutants
The tensor product operation on algebras mentioned in the previous
chapter gives us a wide range of possibilities of construction of new vector
spaces with unique properties. Due to the desired properties, like closing
under addition and multiplication, some of them can be considered for a
construction of M- and J-sets. In this chapter, we will take a closer look
at rich possibilities given by a tensor product operation performed on
algebras, and discuss in detail several vector spaces resulting from tensor
product algebras, as well as M- and J-sets constructed in them. Since
such vector spaces are composed from at least two elementary vector
spaces, we can facetiously call the fractal structures generated in these
spaces fractal mutants.
3.1
BICOMPLEX, TRICOMPLEX, ... MULTICOMPLEX
FRACTAL SETS
3.1.1
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Bicomplex Vector Space
Considering the definition of a tensor product presented in Section 2.3.1,
one can obtain the simplest hypercomplex tensor product algebra C ⊗C,
the algebra of bicomplex numbers (known also as tessarines) proposed
by James Cockle in a series of papers [24, 25, 26, 27]. It is a 4-algebra with
a basis of 1, i1, i2, j, where i2
1 = i2
2 = −1, j2 = 1, i1i2 = i2i1 = j. Here, we
can introduce the following notation of bicomplex numbers: C2, which is
equivalent to C⊗C. This algebra has properties similar to H: Both algebras
are four-dimensional and have a symbolic form given by (2.2), and both
63

64
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
TABLE 3.1
Multiplication Table for
Bicomplex Numbers.
×
1
i1
i2
j
1
1
i1
i2
j
i1
i1
−1
j
−i2
i2
i2
j
1
i1
j
j
−i2
i1
−1
are associative and alternative; however, the difference is in the type of
imaginary units (cf. basis of C2 and H) and the commutativity property of
C2. Due to the existence of idempotents for C2,
z1 + z2i2 = (z1 −z2i1) e1 + (z1 + z2i1) e2,
(3.1)
where z1, z2 ∈C1 :=
n
x + yi1
 i2
1 = −1
o
(or just C, since C ≡C1),
e1 =  1 + j /2, e2 =  1 −j /2, the addition, multiplication, and division
operations become much easier, since they can be performed element-
wise. Considering that z1 = z11 + iz12, z2 = z21 + iz22, zm ∈C2, and
zmn ∈C1, the addition of two bicomplex numbers is very similar to the
addition of quaternions given by (2.3) (see [78] for details):
z1 + z2 := (z11 + z21) + i (z12 + z22) ,
(3.2)
while the multiplication is given by:
z1 · z2 := (z11 + iz12) (z21 + iz22) = (z11z21 −z12z22) + i (z11z22 + z21z12) ,
(3.3)
and is ruled by the multiplication table (see Table 3.1) of bicomplex
numbers (see Table 2.1).
Due to the mentioned similarity of C2 to H, one could expect
subsequent similarities in construction, properties, and visualization of
M- and J-sets in C2. Indeed, these spaces and fractal sets have a lot
of common properties. But let us start from the formal definition of the
generalized JC2
p -sets [107]:
JC2
p
=
n
c ∈C2| f (s)(z) ↛∞as s →∞
o
, for p ≥2,
(3.4)
and, subsequently, the generalized MC2
p -set
MC2
p =
n
c ∈C2| f (s)(0) ↛∞as s →∞
o
, for p ≥2,
(3.5)

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■65
where f (s)(·) denotes a function composition performed s times.
Similarly to JC-, MC-, JH-, and MH-sets, the bailout value for JC2-
and MC2-sets equals 2 [107]. Moreover, as it was proven by Rochon [108],
the MC2
p -set is connected, while for JC2
p -sets, in contrast to JC
p -sets, there
are the following three cases:
1. For c ∈MC2
p , the JC2
p -sets are connected.
2. For c < MC2
p and c ∈SAC2(∞), the JC2
p -sets are totally disconnected
(i.e., homeomorphic to the Cantor dust).
3. For all other cases of c, the JC2
p -sets are disconnected, but not
totally.
Note that SAC2(∞) is a strong basin of attraction at infinity:
SAC2(∞) = Ac1−c2i1(∞) × Ac1+c2i1(∞),
(3.6)
for z →z2 + c, where c ∈C2 is given by (3.1), following the definition of
Rochon [108].
The visualization techniques used for JC2- and MC2-sets (or
bicomplex filled Julia sets and the Tetrabrot, respectively, following the
nomenclature introduced by Rochon [107, 108]) are quite similar to
quaternionic fractal sets, since both types of fractal sets are represented
in a 4-space. An interesting approach of bicomplex distance estimation
and ray-tracing techniques for JC2- and MC2-sets was proposed in [81].
The exemplary JC2-sets are presented in Figure 3.1.
Similarly to the case of JH-sets, the JC2-sets are trivial when in the
recurrence equation of a type (1.1), the constant c ∈C instead of c ∈C2,
i.e., when the last two coefficients of the c ∈C2 equal zero. This triviality
is even better observed in the case of bicomplex fractal sets, since a 3-D
projection of a quaternionic trivial fractal set is obtained from the rotation
of a fractal set in a C-plane around the axis of reals, while in the case
of trivial bicomplex fractal sets, their 3-D projections are obtained from
extrusion of a fractal set in a C-plane (see Figure 3.2 and Figure 2.2).
Several other examples of trivial JC2-sets, similar to previously analyzed
JH-sets (presented in Figure 2.2) with respect to the value of c, are
presented in Figure 3.3.
Now, let us consider a case of JC2
p -sets with various p values. The
recursive equation considered here is of a type of (1.5). Analogously to
the quaternionic fractal sets, a few bicomplex fractal sets with various p

66
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) c = i1
(b) c = −0.4−0.2i1+0.3i2+0.5j
(c) c = −0.2 + 0.8i1
(d) c = 0.2+0.1i1 +0.1i2 −0.2j
(e) c = 0.31
(f) c = −1.2
Figure 3.1: Examples of JC2
2 -sets.
values were generated and presented in Figure 3.4. Surprisingly, a shape
of resulting 3-D projection of a fractal set is not the (n −1)-sphere, but
is the Steinmetz solid (see Figure 3.4f), known also as a bicylinder. This
solid results from the intersection of two cylinders at right angles. More
information on this solid and its properties can be found in [86]. One can
observe in Figure 3.4 that the convergence of the tending of JC2
p -sets to
the Steinmetz solid is quicker than in the case of quaternionic analogue
(see Figure 2.7). The results of studies on the convergence of MC2
p - and
JC2
p -sets can be found in [65].
Considering that visual representation conditions of bicomplex fractal
sets are identical to those of quaternionic fractal sets, since both types of 4-
space fractals are mapped into the 3-D Euclidean space, the relations (2.5)-
(2.8) are also true for bicomplex fractals. The method of setting the last
element of a bicomplex number to zero (j = 0) is also applicable for

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■67
(a)
(b)
Figure 3.2: 3-D projection of JC2 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0) and its cross-section
along the C-plane.
(a) c = i
(b) c = 0.27 + 0.07i
(c) c = −0.75
(d) c = −1 −0.4i
Figure 3.3: Examples of cross-sectioned JC2-sets.
visual representation of the bicomplex fractal sets that where used by
Rochon [107]. In order to present what a bicomplex fractal set looks like,
the sequences of 3-D slices with a discrete step were generated. These
slices obtained while moving the cutting hyperplane along the axis of
reals and i1-axis are presented in Figure 3.5. The slices obtained while
moving the cutting hyperplane along i1-axis and i2-axis are presented in
Figure 3.6.
The MC2
p -set defined by (3.5) is a kind of generalization of JC2
p -sets,

68
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) JC2
2 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
(b) JC2
3
(−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
(c) JC2
5 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
(d) JC2
10 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
(e) JC2
20 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
(f) JC2
50 (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0)
Figure 3.4: Tending of 3-D projections of JC2
p (−0.5, 0.5, 0, 0) to the
Steinmetz solid.
since, as Rochon stated in [107], there exists a dichotomy between the
above-mentioned sets, similar to their analogues on a C-plane. The MC2
2 -

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■69
Figure 3.5: Slices of JC2 (−1, 0.1, 0, 0) along axis of reals (from −1 to −0.6)
and i1-axis (from 0.1 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.
Figure 3.6: Slices of JC2 (0, −0.5, 0.1, 0) along i1-axis (from −0.5 to −0.1)
and i2-axis (from 0.1 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.

70
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
set is presented in Figure 3.7. Analogously to JC2
p -sets, when p →∞, the
3-D projection of a shape of the MC2
p -set tends to the Steinmetz solid.
Figure 3.7: 3-D projection of the MC2
2 -set (the Tetrabrot).
Several studies on generalizations of the MC2
p -set for p ∈Z+ were
performed by Wang and Song [118]. They studied the dynamics of the
MC2
p -set and proved that considering the bicomplex map of type (1.1) for
z, c ∈C2 and p > 1, the critical point of f(z) is zero, and for p ∈[0, 1], the
resulting set is a degenerated MC2
p -set. They also showed particular cases:
When p = 1, the critical point does not exist for f(z), and for 0 ≤p < 1,
the critical point is at the infinity. Several examples of the MC2
p -set of
higher order polynomials are available in [118].
3.1.2
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Tricomplex Vector Space
Developing the idea of tensor product algebras, the next hypercomplex
tensor product algebra after C2 is a tricomplex algebra C ⊗C ⊗C, or
simply C3. This is an 8-algebra introduced by Corrado Serge with a basis
1, i1, i2, j1, i3, j2, j3, i4, where i2
1 = i2
4 = −1, i4 = i1 j3 = i1i2i3, j2 = i1i3 = i3i1,
j2
2 = 1, j1 = i1i2 = i2i1, and j2
1 = 1 [97]. This 8-algebra is similar in some
ways to the algebra of octonions, however, a C3-algebra is commutative,
in contrast to an O-algebra, which is alternative only (compared with the
properties described in Section 2.2.1). The set of tricomplex numbers can
be presented using the following equivalent representations [97]:
C3 :=
n
η = ς1 + ς2i3
 ς1, ς2 ∈C2
o
=
n
z1 + z2i2 + z3i3 + z4j3
 z1,...,4 ∈C
o
=
n
a1 + a2i1 + a3i2 + a4i3 + a5i4 + a6j1 + a7j2 + a8j3
 a1,...,8 ∈R
o
. (3.7)

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■71
Due to the existence of idempotents in C3, which can be represented
in terms of two bicomplex elements [97],
η = (ς1 −ς2i2) γ2 + (ς1 + ς2i2) ¯γ2, ς1, ς2 ∈C2,
(3.8)
where γ2 =  1 + j3
 /2 and ¯γ2 =  1 −j3
 /2, or, in terms of four complex
elements [97],
η = w1γ1γ2 + w2γ1 ¯γ2 + w3 ¯γ1γ2 + w4 ¯γ1 ¯γ2, w1,...,4 ∈C
(3.9)
where w1 = (z1 + z4) −(z2 −z3) i1, w2 = (z1 + z4) + (z2 −z3) i1, w3 =
(z1 −z4) −(z2 + z3) i1, and w4 = (z1 −z4) + (z2 + z3) i1, the addition
and multiplication of tricomplex numbers can be performed element-
wise. These operations on two tricomplex numbers η1 and η2 (which
are necessary for construction of JC3- and MC3-sets) are defined as
follows [97]:
η1 + η2 := (ς1 + ς3) + (ς2 + ς4) i3,
(3.10)
η1 · η2 := (ς1ς3 −ς2ς4) + (ς1ς4 + ς2ς3) i3.
(3.11)
The multiplication is ruled by the special multiplication table (see
Table 3.2) of tricomplex numbers (compared to Table 2.2).
TABLE 3.2
Multiplication Table for Tricomplex
Numbers.
×
1
i1
i2
i3
i4
j1
j2
j3
1
1
i1
i2
i3
i4
j1
j2
j3
i1
i1
−1
j1
j2
−j3
−i2
−i3
i4
i2
i2
j1
−1
j4
−j2
−i1
i4
−i3
i3
i3
j2
j3
−1
−j1
i4
−i1
−i2
i4
i4
−j3
−j2
−j1
−1
i3
i2
i1
j1
j1
−i2
−i1
i4
i3
1
−j3
−j2
j2
j2
−i3
i4
−i1
i2
−j3
1
−j1
j3
j3
i4
−i3
−i2
i1
−j2
−j1
1
Since
tricomplex
numbers
are
closed
under
addition
and
multiplication, the JC3- and MC3-sets can be defined in the same way
as previously, i.e., replacing C2 by C3 in (3.4) and (3.5). As the authors
of [97] proved, the MC3
p -sets are connected for p ≥2. Considering also the
generalized Fatou–Julia theorem [39] one can state the existence of three
types of connectedness of JC3
p -sets, similar to JC2
p -sets (see Section 3.1.1
for details). The extended analysis presented in [39] shows that c values
corresponding to connected JC3-sets are inside the MC3-set, while the

72
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
other two types of JC3-sets (totally disconnected, and disconnected, but
not totally) are out of the MC3-set.
The visualization of JC3- and MC3-sets seems to be problematic due
to the same reasons as for octonionic sets, i.e., the mentioned sets exist
in 8-D vector spaces, while only three-dimensional combinations of 8-
Delements can be presented. This results in most information about the
geometry of these objects to be lost. Nevertheless, Paris´e and Rochon
performed extended geometrical analysis of JC3- and MC3-sets in their
paper [97]. The approach applied by the authors in [39, 97] is based
on selection of particular triplets from the eight available elements of a
tricomplex number and visualisation a 3-D slice of a given set. In the
case of JC3- and MC3-sets, there are 56 possible combinations of such
triplets [97]. The authors studied symmetries and relationships between
these 3-D slices, and defined four principal types of such slices, which are
related to imaginary units selected for a given triplet. Examples of these
slices can be found in [97].
3.1.3
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Multicomplex Vector Space
The previously discussed bicomplex and tricomplex algebras can be
generalized to a multicomplex algebra defined by n-tensor product of
complex vector spaces C ⊗C ⊗. . . ⊗C and denoted by Cn. The symbolic
form of a set of multicomplex numbers is given by [103]:
Cn :=
n
ξn = ξn−1,1 + ξn−1,2in
 ξn−1,1, ξn−1,2 ∈Cn−1
o
,
(3.12)
where i2
n = −1. The symbolic representation (3.12) can be decomposed
to the form [39]
Cn :=
n
ξn = ξn−2,1 + ξn−2,2in−1 + ξn−2,3inξn−2,4jn
 ξn−2,1,...,4 ∈Cn−2
o
,
(3.13)
where jn = inin−1 = in−1in, j2
n = 1. Thus, every multicomplex number in Cn
contains 2n elements, with the associators defined in R, or equivalently,
2n−m elements defined in Cm for 0 ≤m ≤n.
Similarly to (3.1), (3.8), and (3.9), it is possible to generalize an
idempotent representation of (3.12) as follows [39]:
ξn =  ξn−1,1 −ξn−1,2in−1
 γn−1 +  ξn−1,1 + ξn−1,2in−1
 ¯γn−1,
(3.14)
where
γn−1 := 1 + in−1in
2
= 1 + jn
2
,
¯γn−1 := 1 −in−1in
2
= 1 −jn
2
.
(3.15)

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■73
The idempotents have the following properties [39]:
γ2
n−1 = γn−1, ¯γ2
n−1 = ¯γn−1, γn−1 + ¯γn−1 = 1, γn−1 ¯γn−1 = ¯γn−1γn−1 = 0.
(3.16)
Considering (3.14)–(3.16), one can state that Cn is commutative
and associative. Due to these properties, the multicomplex numbers are
closed under addition and multiplication for n ∈Z+, which means that
addition and multiplication of two multicomplex numbers, ξn,1 and ξn,2,
can be performed element-wise:
ξn,1 + ξn,2 :=  ξn−1,1 + ξn−1,3
 +  ξn−1,2 + ξn−1,4
 in,
(3.17)
ξn,1 · ξn,1 :=  ξn−1,1ξn−1,3 −ξn−1,2ξn−1,4
 +  ξn−1,1ξn−1,4 + ξn−1,2ξn−1,3
 in.
(3.18)
These properties lead to a possibility of generalizing fractal sets to the
form of JCn- and MCn-sets,
JCn
p
=
n
c ∈Cn| f (s)(z) ↛∞as s →∞
o
, for p ≥2,
(3.19)
and, subsequently, the generalized MC2
p -set,
MCn
p =
n
c ∈Cn| f (s)(0) ↛∞as s →∞
o
, for p ≥2,
(3.20)
where f (s)(·) denotes a function composition performed s times.
As the authors of [39] proved, the MCn
p -sets are connected, and,
following the generalized Fatou–Julia theorem presented in the same
paper, the JCn
p -sets reveal three types of connectedness (see Section 3.1.1
for details).
3.2
TENSOR PRODUCT HYPERCOMPLEX AND
MULTIHYPERCOMPLEX FRACTAL SETS
3.2.1
Julia and Mandelbrot Sets in Biquaternionic Vector Space
Obviously, one can construct a great variety of tensor product algebras
that create vector spaces with appropriate conditions for the existence
of fractal sets. One such tensor product algebras interesting to us due
to its properties is the algebra of biquaternions C ⊗H, known also as an
algebra of complex quaternions or complexified quaternions ˜q, since any
˜q ∈C ⊗H can be presented as [68]
˜q = ℜ(˜q) + iℑ(˜q),
(3.21)

74
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
TABLE 3.3
Multiplication Table for
Biquaternions for the
Representation (3.22).
×
1
i1
i2
i3
1
1
i1
i2
i3
i1
i1
−1
−i2
−i3
i2
i2
−i3
1
i1
i3
i3
−i2
i1
1
where ℜ(˜q) = P3
n=0 ℜ(˜qnin) and ℑ(˜q) = P3
n=0 ℑ(˜qnin). This is a 4-algebra
with a basis 1, i1, i2, i3 with a symbolic representation
C ⊗H :=
n
˜q = a1 + a2i1 + a3i2 + a4i3
 an ∈C
o
,
(3.22)
proposed by Hamilton in 1844 as an alternative form of the previously
developed “real” quaternions. The symbolic representation (3.22) can be
also presented in the alternative form
C ⊗H := ˜q =  b1 + d1j +  b2 + d2j i1 +  b3 + d3j i2
+  b4 + d4j i3
 bn, dn ∈R
o
,
(3.23)
where j2 = −1, i2
1 = i2
2 = i2
3 = i1i2i3 = −1.
The biquaternions retain the properties of quaternions, i.e., they
are associative and alternative, thus, the operation of addition and
multiplication of biquaternions can be defined in the same way as for
quaternions, and are given by (2.3) and (2.4), respectively. Depending
on the chosen symbolic representation (given by (3.22) and (3.23)), the
multiplication tables can be presented as follows (Tables 3.3 and 3.4).
The MC⊗H- and JC⊗H-sets can be defined as their quaternionic and
bicomplex analogues, similarly to, e.g., (3.4) and (3.5). Both of these
sets are bounded by the definition. This introduces the generalized M-J
sets in terms of biquaternions, with dynamics similar to the previously
presented MH-, JH-, MC2-, and JC2-sets. Finally, the MC⊗H
p
-set can be
alternatively presented for a certain bailout value B as follows:
MC⊗H
p
=
n
c ∈C ⊗H| f (s)
c (0) ≤B ∀s ∈N
o
for p ≥2,
(3.24)
where f (s)
c (·) denotes a function composition performed s times.
Similarly, as in the previous cases, it is suitable to limit MC⊗H
p
- and
JC⊗H
p
-sets by a 3-sphere with a radius of 2.

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■75
TABLE 3.4
Multiplication Table for Biquaternions for the
Representation (3.23).
×
1
j
i1
ji1
i2
ji2
i3
ji3
1
1
j
i1
ji1
i2
ji2
i3
ji3
j
j
1
−i3
ji2
−ji3
ji1
−i1
−i2
i1
i1
i3
1
−i2
−ji1
−ji3
j
−ji2
ji1
ji1
−ji2
i2
1
i1
−j
−ji3
−i3
i2
i2
−ji3
ji1
−i1
−1
i3
−ji2
j
ji2
ji2
−ji1
−ji3
j
−i3
−1
i2
i1
i3
i3
i1
−j
−ji3
ji2
−i2
−1
ji1
ji3
ji3
−i2
−ji2
−i3
j
i1
ji1
−1
Only a few mentions on biquaternionic fractal sets can be found in the
available literature. Gintz [41] introduced these fractal sets and presented
preliminaries on them and several of their 3-D cross-sections, as well
as performed their graphical analysis. A year later, the authors of [12]
studied symmetry properties of biquaternionic J-sets. The mathematical
fundamentals on biquaternionic fractal sets with appropriate graphical
analysis were introduced in [64].
The connectedness of MC⊗H
p
- and JC⊗H
p
-sets is similar to those
of JC2- and MC2-sets (see Section 3.1.1), i.e., MC⊗H
p
-sets are
connected, while JC⊗H
p
-sets can be connected, totally disconnected,
and disconnected, but not totally. The examples of the last type of
connectedness are shown in Figure 3.8.
Analyzing the geometrical structure of JC⊗H-sets, one can observe
similarities in the shapes of resulting fractal sets comparable with JC2-
sets and JH-sets. This is due to the similarity of construction of algebraic
formulas between these sets. Similarly, as in the case of bicomplex J-
sets, by cutting the JC⊗H-sets along the axis of reals, one can obtain
the well-known J-sets on a C-plane. The biquaternionic analogues of
J-sets are presented in Figure 3.9. One can observe similarities with J-
sets on a C-plane (compare to Figure 1.3), as well as with quaternionic
(compare to Figure 2.3) and bicomplex (compare to Figure 3.3) fractal
sets. When analysing the shapes of 3-D cross-sections of biquaternionic
J-sets one can observe that their symmetry properties are broken with
respect to quaternionic analogues of these J-sets. This is very well visible
in Figures 3.9b and 3.9f which are neither as rotationally symmetric
as their quaternionic analogues, nor as quadrilaterally symmetric as
their bicomplex analogues, which results from the complexification of

76
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) p = 2, c = 0.4 + 0.4i1
(b) p = 2, c = −0.3i1 −0.3i2
(c) p = 3, c = −0.82i1
(d) p = 3, c = 0.435
Figure 3.8: Examples of disconnected, but not totally, biquaternionic J-
sets.
a quaternion. For visual representation of the shape variability of the
biquaternionic J-set, the sets of 3-D cross-sections are presented in
Figure 3.11, and in Figure 3.12, while moving the cutting hyperplane
along i1-axis and i2-axis, respectively.
Considering the generalized version of biquaternionic J-sets, JC⊗H
p
,
with various p values, described by the recursive equation of type (1.5),
one can observe several interesting properties. First of all, the shape of
JC⊗H
p
-sets for c = 0 does not tend to regular shapes, as in the case
of JC
p -sets (see Figure 1.7), JH
p -sets (see Figure 2.7), or JC2
p -sets (see
Figure 3.4). The resulting shapes remain irregular, and, surprisingly, they
also remain fractal (see Figure 3.10).
In the case of a biquaternionic quadratic map, the resulting set (see
Figure 3.10a) is not a 3-sphere (like in the case of JH
p -sets) and is not
the 4-dimensional Steinmetz solid (like in the case of JC2
p -sets) due to

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■77
(a) JC⊗H (0, 1, 0, 0)
(b) JC⊗H (−0.75, 0, 0, 0)
(c) JC⊗H (−0.390541, −0.586788, 0, 0)
(d) JC⊗H (0.15, 0.4, 0.1, 0)
(e) JC⊗H (−0.6, 0.2, 0.7, 0)
(f) JC⊗H (−1, −0.1, 0, 0)
Figure 3.9: Examples of JC⊗H-sets.
the tensor product of dimensionally unequal algebras. When the order of
an iterated polynomial increases, the resulting J-sets resemble a shape
of a pillow with multiple horn-like protruding geometric structures on

78
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
(a) p = 2
(b) p = 3
(c) p = 6
(d) p = 10
(e) p = 50
(f) p = 100
Figure 3.10: Examples of JC⊗H
p
-sets for various values of p and with c = 0.
the boundaries. Therefore, these sets can be introduced with the name
of the Devil’s pillows. The Devil’s pillows are not rotationally symmetric;
however, they retain several symmetry planes.
3.2.2
Beyond Biquaternionic Julia and Mandelbrot Sets
Increasing the dimensionality of the multiplied algebras (that form tensor
product algebras) used for the construction of hypercomplex fractal sets,
the number of possibilities also increases; however, there are several
limitations, e.g., resulted from the conditions (1.2)–(1.4). Thus, the
number of possibilities is limited. The other higher-dimensional tensor
product algebras are described much less than the previously analyzed
ones, while the fractal sets that can (or cannot) be constructed using them
are not described at all in the literature. Due to the high dimensionality of
these algebras (which starts from 8), it is difficult to construct fractal sets
of the M- and J-type, as well as investigate their properties. However,
let us try to analyze such tensor product algebras and perform at least
their preliminary selection.
Starting from tensor products of algebras of quaternions, let us
first consider the quaterquaternions. The 8-algebra of quaterquaternions
H2
contains
zero-divisors
[2],
however,
there
is
a
possibility

Tensor Product Fractal Mutants
■79
Figure 3.11: Slices of JC⊗H2 (−1, 0, 0, 0) along the axis of reals (from −1
to −0.7) and i1-axis (from 0 to 0.4), with a step of 0.1.
Figure 3.12: Slices of JC⊗H2 (−0.5, 0.1, 0.1, 0) along i1-axis (from 0.1 to
0.4) and i2-axis (from 0.1 to 0.5), with a step of 0.1.

80
■A concise introduction to hypercomplex fractals
that nondegenerated MH2- and JH2-sets can be constructed. The
multiquaternion algebra Hn can be also considered for the construction
of MHn- and JHn-sets, since it can be regarded as the Clifford algebra of
a suitable nondegenerate quadratic form over the base field [74], which
initiates appropriate conditions of existence of nondegenerated fractal
sets.
The next group of tensor product algebras is the group of octonionic
tensor products, where the first of such algebras is the 16-algebra of
bioctonions C ⊗O. This algebra is a simple alternative algebra [110] that
contains zero-divisors [5], however, as the previous analysis showed [62],
it is appropriate for constructing bioctonionic M- and J-sets. Other two
tensor product algebras, which can be constructed over octonions, are
the 32-algebra quateroctonions H⊗O and the 64-algebra of octooctonions
O2. These algebras are not even alternative [110], thus, we cannot obtain
nondegenerated quateroctonionic and octooctonionic M- and J-sets.
This is also applicable for the multioctonions On.
Of course, many other tensor product algebras can be constructed
from split algebras obtained from complex numbers, quaternions, and
octonions. However, as it was shown in several examples on split algebra
derived from complex numbers (see Section 2.4 for details), due to
their properties, these algebras cannot create conducive conditions for
obtaining nondegenerated M- and J-sets. Therefore, considering also
the fractal sets of M- and J-type based on the Cliffordean algebras
(which were previously discussed in Section 2.3), our journey through
the world of hypercomplex fractals has come to end.

Bibliography
[1] O. Aam. Principia cybernetica mailing-list archive: Liquid fractals,
1995. http://cfpm.org/∼bruce/prncyb-l/0279.html.
[2] A. A. Albert. Tensor products of quaternion algebras. Proceedings
of the American Mathematical Society, 35(1):65–66, 1972.
[3] D. S. Alexander, F. Iavernaro, and A. Rosa. Early Days in Complex
Dynamics: A History of Complex Dynamics in One Variable During
1906–1942, volume 38 of History of Mathematics.
American
Mathematical Society, Providence, 2012.
[4] M. Bader. Space-Filling Curves: An Introduction With Applications
in Scientific Computing. Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin
Heidelberg, 2012.
[5] J. C. Baez. The octonions. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society, 39(2):145–205, 2002.
[6] J. Barrallo. Expanding the Mandelbrot set into higher dimensions.
In G. W. Hart and R. Sarhangi, editors, Bridges 2010: Mathematics,
Music, Art, Architecture, Culture, pages 247–254, P´ecs, 2010.
[7] J. Barrallo and D. M. Jones. Coloring algorithms for dynamical
systems in the complex plane. In ISAMA 99 Proceedings, pages
31–38, San Sebasti´an, 1999. The University of the Basque Country.
[8] J. Barrallo and S. Sanchez.
Fractals and multi layer coloring
algorithms. Visual Mathematics, 3(10):0–0, 2001.
[9] T. Bedford, F. A. M., and M. Urba´nski.
The scenery flow for
hyperbolic Julia sets.
Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society, 85(2):467–492, 2002.
[10] V. Berinde. Iterative Approximation of Fixed Points, volume 1912
of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2nd
edition, 2007.
81

82
■Bibliography
[11] P. Blanchard. Complex analytic dynamics on the Riemann sphere.
Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 11(1):85–141, 1984.
[12] A. A. Bogush, A. Z. Gazizov, Y. A. Kurochkin, and V. T. Stosui.
Symmetry properties of quaternionic and biquaterionic analogs of
Julia sets. Ukrainian Journal of Physics, 48(4):295–299, 2003.
[13] S. H. Boyd and M. J. Schultz. Geometric limits of Mandelbrot and
Julia sets under degree growth. International Journal of Bifurcation
and Chaos, 22(12):1250301, 2012.
[14] P. W. Carlson. Two artistic orbit trap rendering methods for newton
M-set fractals. Computers & Graphics, 23(6):925–931, 1999.
[15] M. Carter. Visualization of the Cayley-Dickson hypercomplex num-
bers up to the chingons (64D), 2011. http://www.mapleprimes.
com/posts/124913-Visualization-Of-The-CayleyDickson.
[16] A. Cayley.
On Jacobis elliptic functions, in reply to the
Rev. B. Bronwin; and on quaternions.
Philosophical Magazine,
26(172):208–211, 1845.
[17] M. Cederwall and C. R. Preitschopf. s7 and ˆS7. Communications
in Mathematical Physics, 167(2):373–393, 1995.
[18] F. Chaitin-Chatelin. The computing power of geometry. In G. A.
Watson and D. F. Griffiths, editors, Numerical Analysis 1999,
Chapman & Hall/CRC Research Notes in Mathematics Series, pages
83–92. CRC Press LLC, Boca Raton, FL, 2000.
[19] F. Chaitin-Chatelin and T. Meˇskauskas.
Computation with
hypercomplex numbers.
Nonlinear Analysis, 47(5):3391–3400,
2001.
[20] Y. S. Chauhan, R. Rana, and A. Negi. New Julia sets of Ishikawa
iterates. International Journal of Computer Applications, 7(13):34–
42, 2010.
[21] J. Cheng and J. Tan. Generalization of 3D Mandelbrot and Julia sets.
Journal of Zhejiang University SCIENCE A, 8(1):134–141, 2007.
[22] W. K. Clifford. Preliminary sketch on biquaternions. Proceedings
of the London Mathematical Society, s1–4(1):381–395, 1871.

Bibliography
■83
[23] W. K. Clifford.
Applications of Grassmann’s extensive algebra.
American Journal of Mathematics, 1(4):350–358, 1878.
[24] J. Cockle. On certain functions resembling quaternions and on a
new imaginary in algebra. London-Dublin-Edinburgh Philosophical
Magazine, 3(33):43–59, 1848.
[25] J. Cockle.
On a new imaginary in algebra.
London-Dublin-
Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine, 3(34):37–47, 1849.
[26] J. Cockle.
On the symbols of algebra and on the theory
of tessarines. London-Dublin-Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine,
3(34):406–410, 1849.
[27] J. Cockle. On impossible equations, on impossible quantities and
on tessarines. London-Dublin-Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine,
3(37):281–283, 1850.
[28] J. H. Conway and D. A. Smith. On Quaternions and Octonions:
Their Geometry, Arithmetic, and Symmetry. A K Peters, Wellesley,
MA, 2003.
[29] W. D. Crowe, R. Hasson, P. Rippon, and P. E. D. Strain-Clark. On
the structure of the Mandelbar set. Nonlinearity, 2(4):541–553,
1989.
[30] Y. Dang, L. H. Kauffman, and D. J. Sandin. Hypercomplex Iterations.
Distance Estimation and Higher Dimensional Fractals, volume 17 of
Series on Knots and Everything. World Scientific, Singapore, 2002.
[31] S. Datta. Infinite sequences in the constructive geometry of tenth-
century Hindu temple superstructures. Nexus Network Journal,
12(3):471–483, 2010.
[32] R. L. Devaney. The fractal geometry of the Mandelbrot set 2: How
to count and how to add. Fractals, 3(4):629–640, 1995.
[33] R. L. Devaney and F. Tangerman. Dynamics of entire functions near
the essential singularity. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems,
6(4):489–503, 1986.
[34] S. V. Dhurandhar, V. C. Bhavsar, and U. G. Gujar. Analysis of
z-plane fractal images from z ←zα + c for α < 0. Computers &
Graphics, 17(1):89–94, 1993.

84
■Bibliography
[35] S. L. Dixon, K. L. Steele, and R. P. Burton. Generation and graphical
analysis of Mandelbrot and Julia sets in more than four dimensions.
Computers & Graphics, 20(3):451–456, 1996.
[36] R. Eglash.
African Fractals: Modern Computing and Indigenous
Design. Rutgers University Press, New Brunswick, NJ, 1999.
[37] N. Fagella. Dynamics of the complex standard family. Journal of
Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 229(1):1–31, 1999.
[38] H. Freudenthal. Oktaven, Ausnahmegruppen und Oktavengeomet-
rie. Geometriae Dedicata, 19(1):7–63, 1985.
[39] V. Garant-Pelletier and D. Rochon. On a generalized Fatou-Julia
theorem in multicomplex spaces. Fractals, 17(3):241–255, 2009.
[40] K. Gdawiec, W. Kotarski, and A. Lisowska. Biomophs via modified
iterations. Journal of Nonlinear Science and Applications, 9:2305–
2315, 2016.
[41] T. W. Gintz. Artist’s statement CQUATS — a non-distributive quad
algebra for 3D renderings of Mandelbrot and Julia sets. Computers
& Graphics, 26(2):367–370, 2002.
[42] E. F. Glynn. The evolution of the Gingerbread Man. Computers &
Graphics, 15(4):579–582, 1991.
[43] J. Gomatham, J. Doyle, B. Steves, and M. I. Generalization of the
Mandelbrot set: Quaternionic quadratic maps. Chaos Solitons and
Fractals, 5(6):971–986, 1995.
[44] C. J. Griffin and G. C. Joshi. Octonionic Julia sets. Chaos Solitons
and Fractals, 2(1):11–24, 1992.
[45] C. J. Griffin and G. C. Joshi. Associators in generalized octonionic
maps. Chaos Solitons and Fractals, 3(3):307–319, 1993.
[46] C. J. Griffin and G. C. Joshi. Transition points in octonionic Julia
sets. Chaos Solitons and Fractals, 3(1):67–88, 1993.
[47] U. G. Gujar and V. C. Bhavsar. Fractals from z ←zα + c in the
complex c-plane. Computers & Graphics, 15(3):441–449, 1991.
[48] U. G. Gujar, V. C. Bhavsar, and N. Vangala. Fractals from z ←zα+c
in the complex z-plane. Computers & Graphics, 16(1):45–49, 1992.

Bibliography
■85
[49] S. Halayka.
Some visually interesting non-standard quaternion
fractal sets. Chaos Solitons and Fractals, 41(5):2842–2846, 2009.
[50] A. J. Hanson.
Visualizing Quaternions.
The Morgan Kaufmann
Series in Interactive 3D Technology. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers,
San Francisco, CA, 2006.
[51] J. C. Hart, L. H. Kauffman, and D. J. Sandin. Interactive visualization
of quaternion Julia sets. In Proceedings of the First IEEE Conference
on Visualization, pages 209–218, San Francisco, CA, 1990.
[52] J. C. Hart, G. W. Lescinsky, D. J. Sandin, T. A. DeFanti, and L. H.
Kauffman. Scientific and artistic investigation of multi-dimensional
fractals on the AT & T pixel machine.
The Visual Computer,
9(7):346–355, 1993.
[53] J. C. Hart, D. J. Sandin, and L. H. Kauffman.
Ray tracing
deterministic 3-D fractals.
Computer Graphics, 23(3):289–296,
1989.
[54] S.-M. Heinemann and B. O. Stratmann. Geometric exponents for
hyperbolic Julia sets. Illinois Journal of Mathematics, 45(3):775–
785, 2001.
[55] Z. Huang and J. Wang. On the radial distribution of Julia sets of
entire solutions of f (n) +a(z)f = 0. Journal of Mathematical Analysis
and Applications, 387(2):1106–1113, 2012.
[56] S. Ishikawa. Fixed points by a new iteration method. Proceedings
of the American Mathematical Society, 44:147–150, 1974.
[57] V. G. Ivancevic and T. T. Ivancevic. Complex Nonlinearity: Chaos,
Phase Transitions, Topology Change and Path Integrals. Springer,
Berlin, 2008.
[58] M. Jafari. Split semi-quaternions algebra in semi-Euclidean 4-space.
Cumhuriyet Science Journal, 36(1):70–77, 2015.
[59] M. Jafari and Y. Yayli.
Generalized quaternions and their
algebraic properties. Communications de la Facult´e des Sciences
de l’Universit´e d’Ankara. S´eries A1. Mathematics and Statistics,
64(1):15–27, 2015.

86
■Bibliography
[60] S. M. Kang, W. Nazeer, M. Tanveer, and A. A. Shahid. New fixed
point results for fractal generation in Jungck Noor orbit with s-
convexity. Journal of Function Spaces, 2015:963016, 2015.
[61] S. M. Kang, A. Rafiq, A. Latif, A. A. Shahid, and Y. C. Kwun. Tricorns
and Multicorns of s-iteration scheme. Journal of Function Spaces,
2015:417167, 2015.
[62] A. Katunin. On the symmetry of bioctonionic Julia sets. Journal of
Applied Mathematics and Computational Mechanics, 12(2):23–28,
2013.
[63] A. Katunin.
Visualization of fractals based on regular convex
polychora. Journal for Geometry and Graphics, 19(1):1–17, 2015.
[64] A. Katunin. Analysis of 4D Hypercomplex generalizations of Julia
sets, volume 9972 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages
627–635. Springer International Publishing, 2016.
[65] A. Katunin.
On the convergence of multicomplex M–J sets to
the Steinmetz hypersolids. Journal of Applied Mathematics and
Computational Mechanics, 15(3):67–74, 2016.
[66] A. Katunin and K. Fedio. On a visualization of the convergence
of the boundary of generalized Mandelbrot set to (n −1)-sphere.
Journal of Applied Mathematics and Computational Mechanics,
14(1):63–69, 2015.
[67] M. A. Krasnosel’ski.
Two observations about the method of
succesive approximations.
Uspekhi Matematicheskikh Nauk,
10:123–127, 1955.
[68] V. V. Kravchenko. Applied Quaternionic Analysis, volume 28 of
Research and Exposition in Mathematics.
Heldermann Verlag,
Lemgo, 2003.
[69] A. Kricker and G. C. Joshi. Bifurcation phenomena of the non-
associative octonionic quadratic.
Chaos Solitons and Fractals,
5(5):761–782, 1995.
[70] J. Kudrewicz.
Fractals and Chaos.
Wydawnictwa Naukowo-
Techniczne, Warsaw, 4th edition, 2007. [in Polish].

Bibliography
■87
[71] Y. A. Kurochkin and S. Y. Zhukovich. Set symmetry, generated
by octonion analog of Julia–Fatou algorithm. Vestnik Brestskaga
Universiteta — Serya 4. Fizika Matematyka, 2:74–49, 2010.
[in
Russian].
[72] M. Lakner and P. Petek. The one-equator property. Experimental
Mathematics, 6(2):109–115, 1997.
[73] M. Levin. Morphogenetic fields in embryogenesis, regeneration,
and cancer: non-local control of complex patterning. Biosystems,
109(3):243–261, 2012.
[74] D.
W.
Lewis.
A
note
on
Clifford
algebras
and
central
division algebras with involution. Glasgow Mathematical Journal,
26(2):171–176, 1985.
[75] J. Leys.
Biomorphic art: An artist’s statement.
Computers &
Graphics, 26:977–979, 2002.
[76] I.-H. Lin.
Classical Complex Analysis: A Geometric Approach,
volume 2. World Scientific, Singapore, 2011.
[77] S. Liu, X. Cheng, C. Lan, W. Fu, J. Zhou, Q. Li, and G. Gao. Fractal
property of generalized M-set with rational number exponent.
Applied Mathematics and Computation, 220:668–675, 2013.
[78] M. E. Luna-Elizarrar´as, M. Shapiro, D. C. Struppa, and A. Vajiac.
Bicomplex numbers and their elementary functions.
CUBO A
Mathematical Journal, 14(2):61–80, 2012.
[79] B. B. Mandelbrot. The Fractal Geometry of Nature. W. H. Freeman
and Co., New York, NY, 1982.
[80] W. R. Mann. Mean value methods in iteration. Proceedings of the
American Mathematical Society, 4:506–510, 1953.
[81] E. Martineau and D. Rochon. On a bicomplex distance estimation
for the Tetrabrot. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos,
15(9):3039–3050, 2005.
[82] C. Matteau and D. Rochon.
The inverse iteration method for
Julia sets in the 3-dimensional space. Chaos Solitons and Fractals,
75:272–280, 2015.

88
■Bibliography
[83] C. McMullen. Area and Hausdorff dimension of Julia sets of entire
functions.
Transactions of the American Mathematical Society,
300(1):329–342, 1987.
[84] W. Metzler.
The ‘mystery’ of the quadratic Mandelbrot set.
American Journal of Physics, 62(9):813–814, 1994.
[85] N. S. Mojica, J. Navarro, P. C. Mariju´an, and R. Lahoz-Beltra.
Cellular ‘bauplants’: Evolving unicellular forms by means of Julia
sets and Pickover biomorphs. Biosystems, 98:19–30, 2009.
[86] M. Moore. Symmetrical intersections of right circular cylinders.
The Mathematical Gazette, 58(405):181–185, 1974.
[87] H. Mortazaasl and M. Jafari. A study on semi-quaternions algebra
in semi-Euclidean 4-space. Mathematical Sciences and Applications
E-Notes, 1(2):20–27, 2013.
[88] K. Nagashima and H. Morimatsu.
3D representation of the
Mandelbrot set. The Visual Computer, 10(6):356–359, 1994.
[89] S. Nakane.
Connectedness of the tricorn.
Ergodic Theory and
Dynamical Systems, 13(2):349–356, 1993.
[90] S. Nakane and D. Schleicher.
On Multicorns and Unicorns
I: Antiholomorphic dynamics, hyperbolic components and real
cubic polynomials. International Journal of Bifurcation and Chaos,
13(10):2825–2844, 2003.
[91] W. Nazeer, S. M. Kang, M. Tanveer, and A. A. Shahid. Fixed point
results in the generation of Julia and Mandelbrot sets. Journal of
Inequalities and Applications, 2015:298, 2015.
[92] A. Negi, M. Rani, and R. Chugh. Julia and Mandelbrot sets in Noor
orbit. Applied Mathematics and Computation, 228:615–631, 2014.
[93] A. Negi, M. Rani, and P. K. Mahanti. Computer simulation of the
behaviour of Julia sets using switching processes. Chaos Solitons
and Fractals, 37(4):1187–1192, 2008.
[94] A. V. Norton. Generation and display of geometric fractals in 3-D.
Computer Graphics, 16(3):61–67, 1982.
[95] A. V. Norton. Julia sets in the quaternions. Computers & Graphics,
13(2):267–278, 1989.

Bibliography
■89
[96] T. V. Papathomas and B. Julesz.
Animation with fractals from
variations on the Mandelbrot set. The Visual Computer, 3(1):23–26,
1987.
[97] P.-O. Paris´e and D. Rochon. A study on dynamics of the tricomplex
polynomial ηp + c. Nonlinear Dynamics, 82(1):157–171, 2015.
[98] H.-O. Peitgen, H. Jurgens, and D. Saupe. Chaos and Fractals: New
Frontiers of Science. Springer Science & Business Media, New York,
NY, 2013.
[99] P. Petek. Chaotic Dynamics. Theory and Practice, volume 298 of
NATO ASI Series, chapter On the quaternionic Julia sets, pages
53–58. Springer Science & Business Media, New York, NY, 1992.
[100] P. Petek. Circles and periodic points in quaternionic Julia sets.
Open Systems & Information Dynamics, 4(4):487–492, 1997.
[101] C. A. Pickover. Biomorphs: Computer displays of biological forms
generated from mathematical feedback loops. Computer Graphics
Forum, 5:313–316, 1986.
[102] C. A. Pickover, editor. The Pattern Book: Fractals, Art, and Nature.
World Scientific, Singapore, 1995.
[103] G. B. Price. An Introduction to Multicomplex Spaces and Functions,
volume 140 of Pure and Applied Mathematics. Marcel Dekker Inc.,
New York, NY, 1991.
[104] M. Rani and V. Kumar.
Superior Julia set.
Journal of the
Korea Society of Mathematical Education Series D: Research in
Mathematical Education, 8(4):261–277, 2004.
[105] M. Rani and A. Negi. New Julia sets for complex Carotid-Kundalini
function. Chaos Solitons and Fractals, 36(2):226–236, 2008.
[106] I. M. Rian, J.-H. Park, H. U. Ahn, and D. Chang. Fractal geometry as
the synthesis of Hindu cosmology in Kandariya Mahadev temple,
Khajuraho. Building and Environment, 42(12):4093–4107, 2007.
[107] D. Rochon. A generalized Mandelbrot set for bicomplex numbers.
Fractals, 8(4):355–368, 2000.
[108] D. Rochon.
On a generalized Fatou-Julia theorem.
Fractals,
11(3):213–219, 2003.

90
■Bibliography
[109] A. Rosa. Methods and applications to display quaternion Julia sets.
Differential Equations and Control Processes, 4:1–22, 2005.
[110] B. Rosenfeld. Geometry of Lie Groups, volume 393 of Mathematics
and its applications. Springer Science & Business Media, Dordrecht,
Holland, 1997.
[111] G. Rottenfusser and D. Schleicher.
Escaping points of the
cosine family.
In P. J. Rippon and G. M. Stallard, editors,
Transcendental Dynamics and Complex Analysis, volume 348 of
London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, pages 396–424.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA, 2008.
[112] L. Sabinin, L. Sbitneva, and I. Shestakov, editors. Non-Associative
Algebra and Its Applications, volume 246 of Lecture Notes in Pure
and Applied Mathematics. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2006.
[113] D. Schleicher and J. Zimmer. Escaping points of exponential maps.
Journal of the London Mathematical Society, 67(2):380–400, 2003.
[114] P. Senn. The Mandelbrot set for binary numbers. American Journal
of Physics, 58(10):1018, 1990.
[115] K. W. Shirriff. An investigation of fractals generated by z ←1/zn+c.
Computers & Graphics, 17(5):603–607, 1993.
[116] Y.-Y. Sun, P. Li, and Z.-X. Lu. Generalized quaternion M sets and
Julia sets perturbed by dynamical noises.
Nonlinear Dynamics,
82(1):143–156, 2015.
[117] K. Trivedi. Hindu temples: Models of a fractal universe. The Visual
Computer, 5(4):243–258, 1989.
[118] X. Wang and T. Jin.
Hyperdimensional generalized M–J sets in
hypercomplex number space.
Nonlinear Dynamics, 73(1):843–
852, 2013.
[119] X.-Y. Wang and W. J. Song. The generalized M-J sets for bicomplex
numbers. Nonlinear Dynamics, 72(1):17–26, 2013.
[120] X.-Y. Wang and Y.-Y. Sun. The general quaternionic M–J sets on
the mapping z ←zα + c (α ∈N). Computers & Mathematics with
Applications, 53(11):1718–1732, 2007.

Bibliography
■91
[121] R. Ye. Another choice for orbit traps to generate artistic fractal
images. Computers & Graphics, 26(4):629–633, 2002.
[122] H. Zeitler. Iterations over quaternions. Mathematica Pannonica,
15(1):85–103, 2004.
[123] A. Zireh. A generalized Mandelbrot set of polynomials of type ed for
bicomplex numbers. Georgian Mathematical Journal, 15(1):189–
194, 2008.


Index
Biquaternions, 73–74
Cantor, Georg, 2
Cayley numbers, see Octonions
Cayley, Arthur, 49
Cayley–Dickson construction, 39,
50, 52, 55, 56, 58
Clifford algebras, 56–57
Dendrite, 6, 20
Douady rabbit, 6
Fano plane, 50
Fatou sets, 3–6, 12, 16
Fatou, Pierre, 3
Fractal, 1
San Marco, 6
Glynn sets, 13
Graves, John T., 49, 55
Hamilton, William R., 38, 49, 55
Hilbert, David, 3
Hyperbrot, 59
Iteration
Ishikawa, 18
Mann, 16–18
Noor, 18
Picard, 16
Julia sets
Cliffordean, 57–58
bicomplex, 65–70
biquaternionic, 74–78
complex, 4–6
multicomplex, 73
octonionic, 51–52
quaternionic, 39–46
tricomplex, 71–72
Julia, Gaston, 3
Juliabulb, 32, 33
Koch, Helge von, 2
Mandelbar, 27, 28
Mandelbox, 32, 33
Mandelbrot sets
3-D quasi, 29–33
Cliffordean, 57–58
bicomplex, 65–70
biquaternionic, 74–78
complex, 19–26
multicomplex, 73
octonionic, 52
quaternionic, 45–46
tricomplex, 71–72
Mandelbrot, Benoit B., 1, 19–20
Mandelbulb, 31, 32
Numbers
bicomplex, 63–65
complex, 3–4
multicomplex, 72–73
tricomplex, 70–71
Octaves, see Octonions
Octonions, 49–50
Peano, Giuseppe, 3
Quaternions, 38–39
Randelbrot, 27
Siegel Disk, 6
Sierpi ´nski, Waclaw, 3
Tricorn, see Mandelbar
93


