VOLUME II
A Comparative History 
of Commerce and Industry
CONVERGING TRENDS AND 
THE FUTURE OF THE 
GLOBAL MARKET
David E. McNabb

A Comparative History of 
Commerce and Industry, Volume II

Also by David E. McNabb
Nation-Building in the Baltic States (with Gundar J. King)
Nonsampling Error in Social Surveys
Research Methods for Public Administration and Nonprofit 
Organizations
Energy Policy in the U.S. (with Laurence Geri)
Case Research in Public Management
The New Face of Government
Research Methods in Political Science: Quantitative and Qualitative 
Approaches
Knowledge Management in the Public Sector: Blueprint for Innovation 
in Government
Public Utilities: Management Challenges for the 21st Century

A Comparative History of 
Commerce and Industry, Volume II
Converging Trends and the Future  
of the Global Market
David E. McNabb
palgrave
macmillan

A COMPARATIVE HISTORY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY, VOLUME II 
Copyright © David E. McNabb 2016
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2016 978-1-137-50328-2
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this publication 
may be made without written permission. No portion of this publication 
may be reproduced, copied or transmitted save with written permission. In 
accordance with the provisions of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 
1988, or under the terms of any licence permitting limited copying issued by 
the Copyright Licensing Agency, Saffron House, 6-10 Kirby Street, London 
EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
First published 2016 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
The author has asserted his right to be identiﬁed as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers 
Limited, registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, 
Basingstoke, Hampshire, RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of Nature America, Inc., One New 
York Plaza, Suite 4500, New York, NY 10004-1562.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
ISBN 978-1-349-55223-8
E-PDF ISBN: 978-1-137-50330-5
DOI: 10.1057/9781137503305
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
McNabb, David E.
 A comparative history of commerce and industry / David E. McNabb.
   volumes cm
 Contents: Volume II. Converging Trends and the Future of the Global 
Market —
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
 1. Commerce—History. 2. Industries—History. 3. International 
trade—History. I. Title. 
 HF352.M36 2015
 338.09—dc23
 
 
2015020056
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

For my family

This page intentionally left blank

Contents
List of Figures 
ix
List of Tables 
xi
List of Boxes 
xv
Preface 
xvii
Acknowledgments 
xix
Part I: Transition to an Industrial Society 
 1 The Evolution of Commerce and Industry 
3
 2 The Path to Industrialization 
13
Part II:  Transformation of British Commerce  
and Industry 
 3 Rebuilding British Commerce and Industry 
25
 4 Postwar Commerce and Industry in Britain 
35
 5 UK Commerce and Industry in the New Millennium 
55
Part III:  German Commerce and Industry in War  
and Peace 
 6 German Commerce and Industry in the Interwar Years 
79
 7 The Germany Economy After Reunification 
97
 8 Commerce and Industry in a United Germany 
113
Part IV: Japan’s Path to a Modern Industrial State 
 9 Commerce and Industry in the Meiji Period 
137

C o n t e n t s
viii
10 Twentieth-Century Japanese Commerce and Industry 
159
11 Japan in the Twenty-First Century 
181
Part V:  U.S. Commerce and Industry in a  
 
Global Economy 
12 U.S. Commerce and Industry in Crisis and Renewal 
207
13 Postwar Industrial Leadership 
227
14 U.S. Commerce and Industry in the Global Economy 
245
About the Author 
269
References 
271
Index 
297

List of Figures
 6.1 
 Map of Europe showing Germany’s central position  
on the continent 
80
 9.1 
Map of Japan showing the location of major cities 
138
11.1 Japanese committee corporate governance system 
198
12.1 Map of North America 
208
14.1 U.S. employment by sector, 1970–2010 
257

This page intentionally left blank

List of Tables
2.1 
GDP for selected countries, 1700–2012  
($ millions or trillions world) 
19
2.2 
Ranks of top 10 industrial countries, 1980–2014 
20
3.1 
Annual growth rates, Germany and Great Britain 
26
3.2 
Employment in specific industries (in millions) 
28
4.1 
Volume of Britain’s trade from 1910 to 1992  
(£ millions) 
37
4.2 
Ten-year changes in UK exports by area,  
1985–1994 (£ millions) 
49
4.3 
Ten-year history of selected UK imports  
by origin (£ millions) 
50
5.1 
Employment by UK firm size, 1991 census 
56
5.2 
Number of firms in selected UK industries,  
1988–1992 
57
5.3 
UK employment by sector, 1980–1998 
58
5.4 
UK service sector growth, 1984–1999 
61
5.5 
Index of output per hour in manufacturing  
industries, 1999 (UK = 100) 
65
6.1 
Employment in German businesses by gender  
and company size, 1907 
82
7.1 
GDP per capita in West Germany compared  
with communist states, 1980–1989 
98
7.2 
GDP and productivity changes in East Germany,  
1989–1993 
102
7.3 
Real GDP growth and unemployment in  
East and West Germany, 1990–2000 
103
7.4 
Export market shares of top exporters in selected  
sectors (% of total) 
104
8.1 
Program objectives in four D21 policy areas 
121
8.2 
German development indicators, 2006–2013 
123
8.3  
Shares and values of Germany’s top 10 exports  
in 2013 (in 2014 Euros) 
129
8.4 
Population projections for Germany, 2020–2100 
131

L i s t  o f  Ta b l e s
xii
 9.1 Gross values of selected staple crops in Japan  
in 1900 (current yen) 
145
 9.2 Motor-powered industries in Japan by size  
and sector, 1899 
148
 9.3 Gender distribution in Japanese workshops with  
10 or more employees, 1896–99 
149
 9.4 Value of Japan’s exports and imports for selected  
countries, 1875–1901 ($ 000) 
155
10.1 Shares of Japanese exports, 1925–1935 
166
10.2 The six major Japanese business networks (keiretsu),  
1980–1993 
170
11.1 Top 10 country markets for Japan’s exports in 2012 
189
11.2 First-tier suppliers of Japanese automobile  
manufacturers 
192
11.3 Numbers of mergers, acquisitions, and sales  
of banks by type, 1990–2004 
193
11.4 Japan’s exports and imports by principal  
commodity, 2004 and 2013 (US$ thousands) 
202
12.1 Changes in top-seven countries’ industrial  
production, 1930–1933 
210
12.2 Weekly wages for office workers in New York factories 
211
12.3 Average weekly or daily wages for selected  
occupations, 1920–1930 (1929 $) 
223
12.4 Region and country of birth of foreign-born  
Americans, 1850–1930 
224
13.1 Comparison of WWII aircraft production,  
1939 to 1945 
229
13.2 Partial list of regional war production investments  
(thousands of 1972 dollars) 
231
13.3 Statistical areas with gains or losses in growth  
in manufacturing, 1947–1972 
231
13.4 Earnings of all firms in five business sectors,  
1955–1965 ($ billions) 
233
13.5 Contribution to GDP from sales of computers,  
software, and telecommunications 
237
13.6 Annual retail sales, totals and non-store and  
food service shares 2000–2013 ($ millions) 
240
13.7 U.S. e-commerce total sales and % of total retail sales,  
1998–2013 ($ millions) 
242
14.1 Predicted best and worst industries in the United  
States, 2010–2019 
251

L i s t  o f  Ta b l e s
xiii
14.2 Numbers of the top 150 R&D firms by sectors  
in four counties, 2004 
253
14.3 Top 10 innovation leaders in the pharmaceutical/ 
medical devices sector in 2004 
253
14.4 Employment in selected industry sectors,  
2002–2014 (in thousands) 
257
14.5 Top 10 world vehicle producers in 1994 (in thousands) 
259
14.6 The world’s top 10 economies, 2009–2019  
(GDP in US$ trillions) 
260
14.7 Contributions to deindustrialization by three  
causality factors, 1970–2003 (%) 
265

This page intentionally left blank

List of Boxes
 5.1 UK service knowledge economy business:  
Games software 
70
 7.1 Missing venture capital for entrepreneurs 
108
 8.1 German entrepreneurs fight red tape to succeed 
117
 8.2 German retailer expands in China 
124
 9.1 Working hours in Japanese industries in 1900 
149
11.1 A brief history of Japan’s “bubble economy” 
186
11.2 Status of accounting standard reforms in  
postwar Japan 
195
11.3 Surviving Japan’s retail crisis 
199
12.1 Henry Ford, the great innovator 
221
13.1 U.S. business in the affluent society of 1964 
238
14.1 Forces behind declining employment  
in U.S. manufacturing 
254
14.2 The future of manufacturing in the United States 
255
14.3 The U.S. automobile industry in 2012 
262

This page intentionally left blank

Preface
This series is pointedly a subjective review of how the cultural, social, 
and economic institutions of commerce and industry evolved in the 
four industrialized nations of Great Britain, Germany, Japan, and the 
United States. The product of that evolution was the institution we 
now know as the business enterprise. The book is a synthesis of ideas 
and concepts about this evolution taken from a variety of streams of 
scholarship. This book, the second of two volumes, brings this com-
parative history discussion to a point in the early years of the twenty-
first century. The first volume dealt with the divergent paths taken by 
these four industrialized nations. This volume addresses the conver-
gence in style and structure of the business enterprise brought about 
by the interconnections of firms in the global marketplace.
My efforts to chronicle the national cultural foundations and tradi-
tions of the four nations led me to searches of sources in anthropol-
ogy, history, sociology, applied psychology, organizational dynamics, 
and political economy, among others. My search for an understand-
ing of national character required investigations into the literature of 
culture, religion, philosophy, political science, and economic history. 
In looking at how ideology shaped national character, it was neces-
sary to examine each nation’s economic systems from the viewpoints 
of philosophy, political science, anthropology, sociology, politics, 
and social psychology. Richard Lehne’s Government and Business 
(2006) touched on the focus problem: “In designing [and describ-
ing] national business systems, there are no permanent solutions and 
no final victories.” He included comparisons between the U.S. busi-
ness system and those of Great Britain, Germany, and Japan, as I have 
sought to do here.
The research focus follows an investigation of multisource contri-
butions for answers to these chief research questions: (1) how and 
why did each nation’s economic systems evolve in the way that it has 
and (2) to what extent does the development of the business sys-
tem of the countries examined reflect their individual cultural and 
social foundations? No single disciplinary point of view could supply 

P r e fac e
xviii
a complete answer, nor was any contribution excluded a priori. This 
focus could only be maintained by following a multidisciplinary 
approach. Throughout the work my goal has been to describe in the 
best way possible how human thought and deed have shaped—and 
continue to shape—national character in the context of the social, 
cultural, and economic institutions they adopt.

Acknowledgments
I owe a great debt of gratitude to Dr. Gundar J. King, Professor and 
Dean Emeritus of the PLU School of Business, and to the PLU busi-
ness school’s founding Dean Emeritus Dr. Dwight J. Zulauf, for their 
support and encouragement for this and other research projects and 
publications. Those two visionary leaders kept me at my academic 
endeavors through their inspiration and continuous encouragement 
for research and writing. As the result of generous summer research 
grants awarded by the School of Business at Pacific Lutheran Univer-
sity, for example, I was able to benefit from extended periods of post-
doctoral research at the library of Harvard University’s Baker Business 
School, the British Library in London, and the library of Cambridge 
University in the United Kingdom. I wish also to thank the current 
Dean of the School of Business Administration, Dr. Nancy Albers-
Miller, for her support for this and other research.
Neither of these two volumes would have seen the light of publi-
cation without the unflagging encouragement and assistance of the 
editorial staff at Palgrave Macmillan. Bradley Showalter marshaled this 
and the first volume in the series through the many trials involved in 
getting books through the publishing process. I wish also thank Casie 
Vogel, my original editor, for her belief in and encouragement for the 
series. She will be missed.

4
P a r t  I
Transition to an  
Industrial Society

4
C h a p t e r  1
The Evolution of Commerce  
and Industry
Historical accounts of social institutions such as commerce and 
history are, inherently, selective. Moreover, they reflect the experi-
ences, background, and points of view of the analyst. This history of 
the institution of business is no exception. This, the second of two 
volumes, continues the review of the same four leaders of industrial 
society: the United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, and the United States. 
I have included the historical events and trends that I feel have con-
tributed most to making each country’s business system what it is 
today. If others’ explanations or preferences have been omitted, there 
remains room in the fertile, but often ignored, field of business his-
tory for yet another treatment of the material.
From the conceptual base described in the Preface, the final form 
and structure of the volumes has been framed from my research and 
writing with separate but related points of view. The book is a broadly 
based, but necessarily selective, analysis and interpretation of two core 
aspects—commerce and industry—of the societies studied. I have 
selected aspects of the four nations’ underlying economic ideology, 
social structure, institutions, and management philosophy. Thus, nei-
ther of the two books in this set is intended to be a comprehensive, 
point-by-point comparative evaluation of all of the components that 
together influence a nation’s business system. My research and writ-
ing focuses on the topics that my academic and business experience 
have led me to believe are important. The points included in the com-
parison reflect my own interests and biases. I have benefited much 
from the research carried out by others on ideas, culture, values, and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
4
national character. However, any sins of omission or commission are 
mine and mine alone.
It has been said that the process of coming to understanding a 
society today best begins by looking at earlier manifestations of the 
society in its historical context. It therefore follows that the way to 
understand an institutional system in a society is to begin by look-
ing at earlier manifestations of the institution for, as Trygve Tholf-
sen (1984) pointed out in his study of modern business systems in 
Europe, every society is the product of its own history, and each is 
formed by permanence and change through time. Moreover, each 
continues to embody elements created in the past.
Careful readers will note that woven throughout the narrative is 
the common warp of political economy. It is no accident that much 
of today’s best research and writing on the history of business has 
been done by economic historians. If we are to believe Van Doren 
(1991), all serious history is economic history—any history worthy of 
the name must deal with economic facts, whatever else it deals with. It 
has certainly been my intent throughout the endeavor of researching 
and writing that this work be considered serious.
The 150 or so years from about 1600 until the 1750s stands 
between what is considered by many to be the end of the Middle 
Ages and the beginning of the Modern Age. Containing many ele-
ments of both periods, it is a difficult period to classify. According 
to G. N. Clark (1957), this century and a half was a transitional—
if not pivotal—period in history. The period stands alone; it cannot 
be placed within any single, distinct phase of the West’s economic 
development. It is neither part of the medieval nor of the renaissance 
eras, although it contains elements of both. Perhaps its most salient 
characteristic was the emergence in Europe of early capitalism, a new 
social institution rooted in trade and discovery that grew out of the 
earlier, precapitalistic world. This was also the fertile soil in which the 
seeds of an industrial revolution were planted. Out of this relatively 
brief transitional period emerged the fully developed business system 
we recognize today.
In Europe it was the beginning of mercantilism, an economic 
and political philosophy heavily influenced by the sudden flood of 
New World gold and silver. In Japan, 1600 was the beginning of the 
Tokugawa or Edo period, which saw the more or less complete col-
lapse of foreign trade that had grown so rapidly during the first quar-
ter of the seventeenth century. Japan began more than two centuries 
of self-imposed economic and cultural isolation. Beginning in 1467 
and throughout most of the sixteenth century, Japan was wracked 

Th e  E v o lu t i o n  o f  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
5
by civil war among feudal barons. The age of war ended with victory 
over the feudal barons in 1600, and the ushering in of two centuries 
of relative calm and peace that made possible small-scale growth in 
trade and commerce.
In the New World colonies of Great Britain, France, Spain, and 
Portugal, this was a time when a few entrepreneurial settlers, many 
of whom were driven by a search for religious freedom, began their 
efforts to carve out a livelihood in the new lands thinly populated by a 
technologically weak indigenous population. Nearly all things manu-
factured in the New World were made in the settlers’ home country, 
with investments in developing the colonial enclaves focused on pro-
ducing a return on the sponsors’ investments.
The Institutions of Commerce
The growth of trade that took place in Europe from the fifteenth cen-
tury to the middle of the eighteenth century was most often the result 
of the labor of private individual traders, usually operating under shift-
ing and complex relations with their local political authorities. When 
they conducted their businesses legally, they operated under licenses 
awarded by their local sovereign, religious or secular. The most com-
mon payment demanded for the license was one-fifth of the proceeds. 
The license had to be renewed for each voyage or overland journey. 
As such, the system was inadequate for the tremendous expansion 
of trade that would take place in the fifteenth and sixteenth centu-
ries. As a result, many new or changed procedures, rules, laws, and 
institutions had to be invented or put into place during this 150-year 
period. Among the most important of these key institutional system 
ingredients were:
1. A legal system with predictable rather than discretionary decisions
2. Improved trading conditions with the development of bills of 
exchange and a credit system
3. Development of a market for insurance on goods and property
4. A shift in government revenue systems from taking by force to 
regular taxation
5. Legitimization of private property ownership and a heightened 
interest in entrepreneurship
Two very important management functions or tools must be 
added to these innovations in economic institutions: First, the inven-
tion of double entry bookkeeping, and second, the invention of 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
6
the corporation. Corporate ownership first appeared in the form of 
a joint-stock enterprise, often managed by someone who might or 
might not be a principle owner in the venture, but who was not a 
principal owner. These were the first professional managers.
The growth in business activity created a need for a body of com-
mercial law to bring order to the system.
Early Commercial Law
From the dawn of recorded time until the fifteenth century in Europe 
and the eighteenth century in Japan, business ventures were typically 
family firms, with internal loyalties based on kinship. In Europe, the 
concept of limited partnerships emerged in the late Middle Ages when 
the size and value of ventures outgrew many families’ ability to finance 
the venture, or risked too much of their still limited capital on the 
one activity. From these early limited partnerships there eventually 
developed the idea of a joint-stock company, with ownership spread 
among many investors, few of whom would have any active operating 
interest in the venture. These new institutions themselves evolved into 
the great merchant companies of the eighteenth century and beyond.
Importance of Roman Law
Laws regulating commerce across Europe had existed from at least the 
Roman period, and probably earlier. The Romans developed an intri-
cate body of commercial law to govern business activities through-
out their empire. They also introduced a uniform currency system. 
However, the order and stability that made it possible for business 
to function effectively began to collapse even before the Rome fell in 
476. The decline in commercial and legal order followed a collapse of 
the Roman political system. What resulted was another 500 years of 
waiting before modern business would take shape.
From the fifth through the ninth century Western Europe 
remained largely a vast, underpopulated wilderness. In the Mediter-
ranean region, commerce was essentially driven from the seas as the 
Ottoman Empire took control over its eastern and southern shores, 
as well as a large proportion of its northern coast. Bands of brigands 
roamed Europe’s forests, cutting off travel and killing traders. With 
little access to products from outside, people of all ranks across Europe 
were forced to rely on their own natural resources and skills. Out of 
this emerged the self-reliant feudal manorial and monastic systems.
In time, population increased enough for towns to grow around 
local market areas. As old towns reestablished themselves and new 

Th e  E v o lu t i o n  o f  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
7
towns were built, over several centuries a more complex economy 
developed; demand for such things as harnesses, flour, spices, armor, 
shoes and clothing brought craftsmen to the larger towns. Skills such 
as dyeing, weaving, carpentry and masonry, metalworking, tanning 
and a host of others were best developed and honed where demand 
for their function resided. Although the supply of goods was still 
strictly regulated by closely held monopolies under the system of 
guilds, eventually enough of a surplus was produced for trade to again 
occur and expand.
By the thirteenth century, in an expansion of the guild system, a 
few towns in northern Germany joined together to guarantee free 
trade, and to safeguard trade routes throughout the Baltic Sea region. 
These few towns eventually formed the Hanseatic League, which by 
1350 included trade centers in London, southern Europe and the 
Mediterranean, including Turkey, and Russia.
By the middle of the fifteenth century, however, trade had slowly 
been reestablished. The hearty survivors of a series of plague epidem-
ics, pillage, and rapine emerged from the depopulated farms, cities, 
and towns eager to profit from the resulting dissolution of social and 
legal restraints on personal liberty.
Formation of Commercial Institutions
The next hundred years were spent in rebuilding a business system 
that the previous hundred years had devastated. A key to the suc-
cess of these new trading ventures were laws that made widespread 
creation of joint-stock companies possible. Although similar group 
ventures had existed before the seventeenth century, they usually 
remained together for only a single or brief related series of ventures. 
The joint-stock company first appeared in its modern form in England 
in 1553, with establishment of the Russian Company, followed by 
formation of the African Company the same year. These “companies” 
merged the association idea of the guilds with the principles of group 
ownership.
For the first time, capitalists could profit (or lose) from private 
ventures without taking an active role in the management of the 
enterprise. Once it appeared, this organizational system grew rapidly. 
Among some of the better known early joint-stock companies to be 
formed were the East India Company, the Bank of England, and the 
South Seas Company. Nor did it did take long for the idea to spread 
to the rest of Western Europe, led first by the Dutch and later by the 
French.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
8
Birth of a Financial Infrastructure
The introduction of bills of exchange in Italy in the thirteenth century 
as a substitute for payment in coin allowed for the transfer of amounts 
owed in much the same way as bank balances are exchanged today 
by check. In Antwerp and later Amsterdam, markets developed for 
the buying and selling of bills of exchange. These markets supplied 
the short-term credit needed by increasing volume of commerce. 
Banks and deposit banking developed along with markets for bills of 
exchange, as the new bills could be discounted when bought, circum-
venting the Church’s bans on interest.
The earliest form of commercial insurance was a loan system used 
by the ancient Greeks. The loan, fully repayable with a high premium, 
was due if the trading venture succeeded, but not repayable if the 
ship carrying the cargo was lost in transit. Later, Italian merchants in 
the twelfth century were the first to separate insurance from financ-
ing, developing a system of marine insurance that was adopted by 
all Western trading nations. Policies written by Lloyds in eighteenth-
century London were little different from the Italian policies of two 
or three centuries earlier. Major marine insurance markets soon devel-
oped in London and Amsterdam, in competition with those in Italy 
and elsewhere.
Prior to the sixteenth century, and in some places even later, it was 
not uncommon for kings and other sovereigns to force merchants, 
guilds, or towns to place ruinous levies on themselves for funds to 
pay for government, which too often meant to finance another war. 
Or, they would periodically either repudiate all their debts or devalue 
their currency to the point that repayment was meaningless. Eventu-
ally, the pluralism that characterized the period gave lesser lords and 
towns power enough to demand that such arbitrary expropriation be 
replaced with predictable, systematic taxation.
Structure of This Book
The book is organized into five sections. The first includes this intro-
duction and a chapter that reviews events contributing to the shape 
and conduct of early commerce and trade, and serves as a means to 
organizing and guiding the story of economic and social conduct. 
The second section turns to the story of how the economic system of 
Great Britain slid from world dominance to become a victim of its own 
successes, attacked on all sides by commercial and imperial rivals. The 
third section focuses on the early industrial development in Germany, 

Th e  E v o lu t i o n  o f  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
9
which was, along with the United States, the chief great industrial 
competitor of Britain. The fourth section looks at the trade and com-
merce system of Japan, which in many ways is an Eastern mirror of 
all that is both good and bad in the business systems of all business 
systems, but which is at the same time clearly a unique creation of its 
own cultural and economic antecedents. Twenty-first century Japan 
has yet to find a way out of several decades of slow or negative eco-
nomic growth. In addition, Japan now faces stiff competition in all its 
markets from its giant neighbor China. The final systems of commerce 
and industry examined are those of the United States. After achieving 
global economic leadership following World War II, the United States 
became firmly established as the world’s leading economy.
Part 1, “Transition to an Industrial Economy,” is an overview of 
where modern business has gone since the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury and early decades of the twentieth century. Chapter 1 introduces 
the topic and sets out the structure of the book. The second chapter 
begins with an economic history explanation of why commerce and 
trade emerged and flourished when and where it did.
Part 2, “Transformation of British Commerce and Industry,” begins 
in Chapter 3 with a description of socioeconomic factors that helped 
shape the changing institutions of commerce and industry in Great 
Britain near the end of the 1800s and into the early 1900s. Chapter 4 
then takes the story to Great Britain’s slow revival after World War II 
in the recovering world of global economic and manufacturing com-
petiveness. Chapter 5 describes Britain’s reduced but still important 
position as one of Europe’s major economies. Although it no longer 
maintains a position of dominance in commerce and industry, the UK 
remains a strong, innovative leader in selected new industries. The 
chapter concludes with a look at Britain’s future prospects as a lead-
ing member of the world’s largest trading block, the European Union 
(EU) which welcomed Croatia as its twenty-eighth member in 2013.
Part 3, “German Commerce and Industry in War and Peace,” 
begins in Chapter 6 with the story of Germany’s rise to leadership in 
the coal, iron, and steel industries from the 1890s to the close of World 
War I. Chapter 7 then describes German business between the two 
World Wars (1919–1939), and the shift from its traditional system of 
“organized capitalism” to what became known as social capitalism. In 
Chapter 8, the discussion picks up the story of German business after 
World War II, when Germany’s experiment in what today is called 
welfare capitalism came into full bloom after Germany’s postwar eco-
nomic miracle. This part closes with a somewhat pessimistic look at 
the state of the new, united Germany as it struggles to maintain its 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
10
role as the major economic engine driving the economic well-being 
of all EU member states. Germany’s industrial economy is dependent 
upon Russia for the largest proportion of its energy supplies. A newly 
militaristic stance of a revanchist Russia and the subsequent potential 
threat of reduced access to those supplies hangs as a sword over the 
economic head of Germany.
Part 4, “Japan’s Path to a Modern Industrial State,” examines in 
Chapter 9 the evolution of the business system in Japan from the end 
of the Meiji period. The Japanese economy rose from nearly total 
destruction at the close of World War II to become the second larg-
est economy in the world. Chapter 10 is a discussion of how Japan 
opened its doors to Western technology and business management, 
in the process becoming a partner of the allied powers in World War 
I. This period describes how late modern Japan developed its strong 
network of kaisha and zaibatsu, the immensely powerful international 
business networks that dominate commerce and industry in this island 
nation. The section closes with a pessimistic forecast in Chapter 11 
of Japan’s ability to retain its overwhelmingly dominant role among 
tomorrow’s global business systems without significant reforms of its 
business system.
In Part 5, “U.S. Commerce and Industry Competing in a Global 
Economy,” the history of business activity begins in Chapter 12 with 
the rapid growth and emergence of big business. The next chapter 
describes the business system between the two World Wars, and is 
followed by a description of the system that evolved after 1945. The 
section concludes in Chapter 14 with a discussion of some of the chal-
lenges faced by U.S. business during the early decades of the twenty-
first century.
Events that shape commerce and industry are moving far more rap-
idly today than they ever have done before. Therefore, any projection 
of the future of the business system and business institutions must 
be seen as simply one author’s prognostication. However, historical 
trends do tend to follow relatively constricted pathways, moving in 
one direction within a limited range of variation. This work is my 
interpretation of the evolution of the business systems of the past and 
present in the four cases analyzed.
Conclusion
Commerce and industry have evolved along with civilization from 
small-scale trade among prehistoric tribes to become the engine 
that drives the style of life enjoyed by a large portion of the world’s 

Th e  E v o lu t i o n  o f  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
11
population. Driving that success has been what Adam Smith described 
as the primeval drive of self-interest. As most societies of the world 
embrace some form of capitalism, living standards continued to 
improve. Of course, the system is not perfect; its evils are often as 
widespread as its benefits. The benefits of capitalism have never been 
shared equally; there are very few wealthy and it is impossible to esti-
mate the number of poor. However, society has not yet come up with 
a system better able to produce and distribute the fruits of human 
labor. In the chapters that follow, my goal is to describe how the 
systems of commerce and industry have evolved from the twentieth 
century to the early years of the twenty-first century.
Discussion Questions
1. How were commerce and industry shaped during the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries?
2. Why did the economy of Japan begin its growth in trade and com-
merce after 1600?
3. Why was it important to commerce and industry for societies to 
develop a system of commercial law?
4. What role did early financial institutions play in the growth of 
commerce and industry?
5. How does capitalism help in improving societies’ standard of 
living?

4
C h a p t e r  2
The Path to Industrialization
The growth of a system of commerce and trade was the driving force 
behind the emergence of modern capitalism. This does not mean that 
it did not exist in many guises for many centuries before this transi-
tional period. Certainly, trade and commerce must have taken place 
as early as the dawn of civilization and the first cities. Townsfolk need 
to trade with people outside of their walls for much of their food and 
most of their luxuries. We know that small-scale businesses were oper-
ating even before the Golden Age of Greece and the flowering of the 
Roman Empire. For the Romans, the Mediterranean was one large, 
watery trading highway. Early on, their commerce reached fairly sub-
stantial proportions and included trade with such then-distant lands 
as North Africa, Asia, and the British Isles. Such products as olive oil, 
wine, grain, slaves, and metals were regularly traded by the Romans 
for amber, jewels, gold, timber, wool, silk, and a host of other goods.
Merchants and traders, most often acting alone but sometimes in 
temporary partnership with others, had long provided a small but 
wealthy urban elite with luxury goods. However, the great majority 
of the world remained almost exclusively agrarian and poor, with mass 
consumption requiring centuries to emerge. It was a time of what 
Clark (1957) identified as “pre-capitalism.” What finally made it pos-
sible for our business systems to appear was first a change in the legal 
foundations for business organization, and second, the emergence of 
new technology in transportation and agricultural production.
Europe’s growth in trade that came during the sixteenth and sev-
enteenth centuries was built on a technological advance in transporta-
tion: the introduction of the three-masted trading vessel in the late 
fifteenth century. Although the size of these vessels alone made it 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
14
feasible for great increases in the volume of trade, the new transporta-
tion and shipping technology had even greater impact: the ships made 
possible the great voyages of discovery that soon followed. Trade not 
only followed discovery, it was typically a major instigator of voyages 
and journeys to distant lands.
The growth in trade that occurred after the fifteenth century 
was both a quantitative and qualitative change. Not only was there 
more trade volume, but what was carried also became more valuable. 
Prices that had once been set according to custom or religious man-
date could no longer be maintained and were soon replaced by prices 
based on negotiation between traders as interpreted by perceptions of 
supply and demand.
The major technological change taking place in Japan during this 
period occurred in agriculture rather than trade or transportation. The 
water wheel was introduced in China about this time, and not long 
afterward was operating in Japan. These water wheels were not the 
great wind-driven engines appearing in Europe about this time, but 
instead were driven by human or animal power. However, they had a 
tremendous impact on Japanese agriculture and, eventually, popula-
tion growth. Water wheels made terracing possible. In turn, terracing 
of Japan’s mountainous territory brought about great expansion in 
rice production. Another important change that occurred at about 
the same time was more intensive use of existing land from introduc-
tion of a double cropping system—two crops were grown on the same 
land. In Europe, the first three-plot rotation system began to appear, 
increasing yields even more than the two-plot rotation system.
Effects of Demographics
Another important factor in the development of trade during these 
years of transition was growth in the total population. In Western 
Europe, this growth had a powerful and pervasive effect on all aspects 
of economic activity, from farming to commerce and early manufac-
turing. The outbreak of plague in the mid-fourteenth century had 
greatly reduced the population of Europe; possibly as much as 30 
percent of the population died before the series of plagues ended. 
However, by the end of the fourteenth century, population growth 
had resumed, so that by about 1600 Europe’s population had again 
reached the pre-plague level, which is estimated to have been some-
where around 90 million.
Similarly, the two centuries of peace during Japan’s Tokugawa 
period that followed the century and a half of civil wars resulted in 

Th e  Pat h  t o  I n du s t r i a l i z at i o n
15
population growth. Growing and trading in rice, the nation’s staple 
crop, also fueled the economy. Taxes, loans, and wages were paid in 
rice, with even some futures speculation taking place. Little or no 
money circulated.
Most of the growth that occurred in Europe from the end of the 
Middle Ages occurred in towns and cities. Great increases in trade 
were necessary just to meet the most basic food and shelter needs of 
these growing urban populations, in addition to the need to export 
their finished goods to other markets. This growth in markets and 
commercial activities was intensified in the urban centers as manufac-
turing specialization came into being (Rosenberg and Birdzell 1986). 
The primary centers of this new specialized production were the low 
countries—Belgium, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands—and North-
ern Italy. These regions were primarily known for their dominance in 
the textile industry. Together, they contributed to a new north-south 
trade in such products as woolens, lace, silk, and linen, an early substi-
tute for cotton. Along with this trade in goods came a need for such 
facilitating institutions as banking and insurance, so that by the six-
teenth century most of the ingredients necessary for modern business 
to appear were in place, or not long in coming.
Mercantalism
By the end of this period, the direction of trade had shifted from 
north-south to east-west, with the great trading centers of Europe 
moving from the Mediterranean ports to cities on the Atlantic sea-
board. Trade also shifted from bartered commodities to luxuries 
traded for specie. The gold and silver—once rare commodities—
flooding into Spain and Portugal from the New World soon found its 
way into the heart of Europe, fueling tremendous inflationary pres-
sures and giving birth to the economic system known as mercantil-
ism. Mercantilism is based on the theory that national wealth and 
power are attained by increasing exports, limiting imports, and col-
lecting as much gold and silver—eventually including paper money 
backed by precious metals or property was added—as possible.
This period also saw the emergence of absolute monarchies, char-
acterized by highly centralized government, a professional bureau-
cracy, and a shift of power and autonomy from the local lords and 
cities of feudalism to the hands of the central state. Powerful cen-
tral governments were a way of controlling the many violent wars of 
religion, civil unrest, and despotism that followed the Reformation. 
People were willing to give up their autonomy for peace and safety. 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
16
This resulted in the military, tax collection, and the judicial system, all 
of which had been the rights of the nobility, falling under the abso-
lute control of the king. This age of absolutism died with the French 
Revolution.
The newly emerging absolutist states, led by France under Louis 
XIV, came to control economic life, often through chartered corpo-
rations or trading organizations. It was not long before mercantilist 
thinking expanded into finding and securing sources of raw materi-
als for domestic factories and markets for their products. This led to 
a drive for colonies in Asia, Africa, North and South America, and 
elsewhere. The citizens of these colonies could only receive imported 
goods carried on ships and/or goods manufactured in the mother 
country. Great Britain’s global reach and economic power at this 
time was fueled by mercantilist policies. Through a series of Navi-
gation Acts, England was eventually able to destroy the commerce 
of Holland, its chief economic rival during the seventeenth century. 
Thus, England was able to become the preeminent trading nation of 
the West.
The Focus of Early Economic Policies
The policies of almost every European trading state in the seventeenth 
century were framed around the following social goals:
t Capture and keep as much gold and silver as possible.
t Enact protectionist policies in the form of export promotion and 
import restrictions to secure a permanent trade balance surplus.
t Encourage and financially support the industries that transform 
raw materials into exportable finished products, such as textiles and 
iron products.
t Encourage a large population for two reasons: First, to make avail-
able a large workforce for the export-oriented factories, and, later, 
to provide enough soldiers for the large armies that would be need-
ed to protect the nation’s interest at home and abroad, and to 
maintain domestic tranquility.
t Develop a skilled bureaucracy large enough to monitor the process 
and interfere in the economy whenever necessary.
Birth of Industrial Institutions
For large-scale trade to develop, a new concept was needed: the idea of 
a firm as an entity distinct from its proprietor or the founding family; 

Th e  Pat h  t o  I n du s t r i a l i z at i o n
17
an entity with a continuity of association, but with a capacity to create 
feelings of loyalty and duty similar to those of a family enterprise. It 
was necessary that such an entity be separated from investors’ other 
property and that transactions take place in the name of the entity 
itself. The successes of the venture had to be recorded in such a way as 
to be separate from the records of the operating individuals, enhanc-
ing the assets of the enterprise, and failures having an opposite effect, 
again only for the enterprise. The Protestant ethic helped make loyalty 
to the firm possible. Double entry bookkeeping was the tool invented 
for keeping a record of the firm’s financial activities separate from the 
owner’s family accounts.
The feudal ethical system, built around the needs of a military hier-
archy, did not meet the needs of many individuals in the growing 
class of merchants. Nor could the medieval Church, which prohib-
ited interest as usury and dictated what were appropriate “just prices” 
and “just wages,” meet the needs of the emerging business system. 
A system of ethics that could meet the needs of the new merchant 
class eventually came out of a merging of the ideas of Martin Luther 
and John Calvin. For business, the most important aspect of the Prot-
estant Reformation instigated by Luther was Calvinism. Calvin urged 
that individuals dedicate themselves to their endeavors, thus dem-
onstrating their membership in the Elect—those few of the world’s 
population who would escape eternal damnation.
To become one of the Elect, a person needed only to be com-
mitted to work, to accumulation, and to economic success. Godly 
worthiness became synonymous with possession of material goods. 
With Calvinism, wealth was not to be used for ostentation, but rather 
as capital for future needs. Thrift, not poverty, and trust and hon-
esty, not distrust nor chicanery, were to be the major virtues of man. 
Prosperity on Earth became the key to entering God’s Kingdom after 
death. Thus, the Protestant ethic soon came to dominate the secu-
lar attitudes of most European Protestant traders, and soon, most of 
Western society.
Double entry bookkeeping, probably invented in Italy sometime 
before the late fifteenth century, introduced a system that supplied a 
financial record and financial picture of the enterprise. This financial 
picture enabled other traders to deal with the firm as an entity, and 
with some understanding of its capacity to meet its commitments. A 
Franciscan monk, Fra Luca Pacioli, the “father of the balance sheet,” 
published the first known major work on double entry bookkeep-
ing in 1494. Many of the accounting methods he described in that 
work are considered to be just as applicable today as they were in 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
18
the fifteen century. The importance of this invention cannot be over-
emphasized. According to Werner Sombart (1953), it is impossible to 
imagine what capitalism would be without double entry bookkeeping.
Role of Human Factors
The relative surge in economic growth that began during the eigh-
teenth century has been attributed to many different factors, among 
which are an entrepreneurial drive fostered by such personal, psycho-
logical, or ideological dynamics as:
t a puritan or Protestant work ethic,
t the desire to compete,
t a personal drive to amass wealth and/or the power that wealth 
brings, and
t the application of science to industry.
Along with these “positive” personal factors, misconduct—or, 
simply, greed—has also been mentioned as a major cause of economic 
growth. The types of misconduct most often mentioned include the 
increased inequalities of income and wealth, exploitation of workers, 
colonialism and imperialism, and slavery. Inequalities of income and 
wealth may, indeed, be a necessary condition for economic growth; 
investment capital must be amassed, and individuals do make uneven 
marginal contribution to an economy, resulting in unequal rewards. 
Exploitation is the use of resources, including labor. However, such 
use is not nor need be inherently invidious.
On the other hand, neither is exploitation of other people a guar-
antee of success. Colonialism may have helped Great Britain’s econ-
omy during the seventeenth and eighteen centuries, but it did not 
do so for Portugal, Spain, or France. Slavery may have contributed 
to production of cotton and rice in the American South and in the 
production of cane sugar in the West Indies. However, slaves were 
rarely used in Western industry; the labor of free men and women was 
generally available at much lower cost. Slaves had to be cared for and 
represented a capital cost. Employees, on the other hand, could be left 
to their own resources when not actually on the job.
Although British slavers, ship owners, and British West Indian 
planters were heavily involved in the slave trade to the New World, 
slavery as an institution did not exist at all in Great Britain at this 
time, so it did not contribute much at all, if anything, to the Industrial 
Revolution. Nor was slavery a factor in advances in agriculture that 

Th e  Pat h  t o  I n du s t r i a l i z at i o n
19
made it possible to feed a rapidly growing world population. In short, 
slavery was an economic and social bust.
The Economic Benefits of Industrialization
Industrialization of production came about because of the bring-
ing together of all of these factors. Of particular importance was the 
serendipity of these factors coming together when raw materials, 
accessible sources of energy, and the entrepreneurial spirit appeared 
alongside rapidly growing populations that drove demand for ever 
greater amounts of supply. The Industrial Revolution began in Britain 
in the last half of the eighteenth century.
In 1700, more than a half-century before the acknowledged begin-
nings of the Industrial Revolution, as measured in millions of 1999 
dollars gross domestic product (GDP) indicated that Great Britain 
had a distinctly weaker economy than its two continental competi-
tors, Germany and France. The economy of the still relatively isolated 
Japan was a full 50 percent greater than that of Britain. The economy 
of the British colonies that together would become the United States 
was comparatively miniscule (Table 2.1).
By the end of the Napoleonic Wars, around 1820, only the econ-
omy of France was greater than that of Britain; again, the economy of 
the United States still lagged behind that of the other four countries, 
and less than a third that of Britain. By 1870, one year later after the 
beginning of the Industrial Age, Britain was still the dominant global 
economy, something like 25 percent greater than that of Germany or 
France, and four times as great as that of Japan. In the same year, how-
ever, the economy of the United States was very nearly as large as that 
Table 2.1 GDP for selected countries, 1700–2012 ($ millions or trillions world)
Year
Country
1700
($ million)
1820
($ million)
1913
($ million)
1990
($ trillion)
2000
($ trillion)
2013
($ trillion)
UK
10,706
36,232
224,618
1,019
1,493
2,522
Germany
13,410
26,349
237,332
1,714
1,886
3,634
Japan
15,390
20,739
71,653
3,103
4,731
4,901
United 
States
547
12,548
517,383
5,979
10,249
16,800
Source: OECD 2014 and World Bank 2014.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
20
of Britain. By 1913 the U.S. economy was more than twice as large as 
any of the five industrialized nations, with Britain the third largest fol-
lowing the United States and Germany. France’s economy, while still 
substantially larger than it had been in 1870, had fallen to half that of 
Britain. The GDP of each of the countries in 1950 reflect the results 
of two major wars and the early recovery that occurred in Japan. The 
1950 GDP of the United States reflects its global economic leadership 
at that time.
While the United States has maintained the world’s largest econ-
omy since just prior to World War I, it is important to keep in mind 
that not all countries have been so fortunate. Change is, indeed, a 
constant, as the changes in the list of the top 10 countries with the 
largest economies since 1980 shown in Table 2.2.
Conclusion
The surge in economic growth that began during the Renaissance was 
a consequence of what Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986), Van Doren 
(1991), and others described as a series of “beneficent revolutions,” 
which occurred over five centuries. These include the voyages of dis-
covery and expansion of trade and commerce that began in the fifteenth 
century and might legitimately be called a mercantile revolution.
Second, in the seventeenth century, the invention of scientific 
method contributed to economic growth. Third, the application 
Table 2.2 Ranks of top 10 industrial countries, 1980–2014
RANK
1980
1990
2000
2014
 1
United States
United States
United States
United States
 2
Germany
Japan
Japan
China
 3
Japan
Germany
Germany
Japan
 4
United Kingdom
Italy
China
Germany
 5
France
United Kingdom
United Kingdom
Italy
 6
Italy
France
Italy
Brazil
 7
China
China
France
South Korea
 8
Brazil
Brazil
South Korea
France
 9
Spain
Spain
Canada
United Kingdom
10
Canada
Canada
Mexico
India
Source: World Bank 2014.

Th e  Pat h  t o  I n du s t r i a l i z at i o n
21
of science to business and industry—including agriculture—that 
occurred during the eighteenth century saw the extensive use of steam 
power in mining and industry. Together, these factors helped make 
possible what we now call the Industrial Revolution.
Fourth, the introduction of electrical power in the nineteenth 
century and of the internal combustion engine in the early twenti-
eth century brought about a revolution in energy application and 
transportation brought. Finally, today’s developments in electronic 
storage and dissemination of data through communications systems 
and computers have led to what is now recognized as an information 
revolution.
The world has evolved in shorter and shorter periods, from an 
agriculture economy in the 1800s to the industrial economy of the 
first half of the 1900s, and from the industrial economy to a service 
economy that characterized the period from the 1960s to the 1990s. 
The service economy itself had evolved into the information economy 
extant by 2000, and in 2005 many observers felt that the information 
economy should more appropriately considered to have evolved into 
a knowledge economy.
The scene was set, then, by the early 1900s with the effects of the 
Industrial Revolution on the economic and social institutions of com-
merce and industry in the United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, and the 
United States, for these nations to take their place as industrial leaders 
in the business systems of the world. The chapters in this work describe 
the divergent paths taken by these four economic powerhouses to 
bring them into a world of global competition and opportunity.
Discussion Questions
1. When and where did the socioeconomic activity recognized as 
business begin?
2. How did mercantilism effect the growth of the economy of the 
United States?
3. For what reasons were early towns and villages established?
4. How did the concept of human rights emerge out of the feudal 
period and how did it effect the subsequent conduct of commerce 
and industry?
5. How and why did the Industrial Revolution occur in the eigh-
teenth century?

4
P a r t  I I
Transformation of British 
Commerce and Industry

4
C h a p t e r  3
Rebuilding British Commerce  
and Industry
What happened to the British business system after the great 
depression of the late 1800s? Did this nation’s economic position 
decline as a consequence of overproduction or growing international 
competition? Was it true that British entrepreneurs were unable or 
unwilling to adopt the many technological and managerial advances 
coming out of Germany and the United States? Or did the costs in 
human resources and capital caused by the long First World War send 
the economy into a tailspin from which it would never completely 
recover? The consensus answer for these questions is a qualified “yes.” 
Britain’s rate of growth did become slower in the last quarter than it 
had been during the Victorian boom years. Still, this could in no way 
be considered a failure. While this slowing of growth in the British 
economy was occurring, other nations’ economies were speeding up. 
Britain remained the world’s most powerful economy, although her 
competitors were growing closer. The slower growth rate was not a 
major blow for Britain’s businesses, but it did make it easier for other 
nations to catch up (Table 3.1). Attempts to determine why this hap-
pened have not been conclusive. Later authors will look upon the 
losses in the value of Britain’s manufacturing and exports as a myth; 
the changes that did occur were seen as more appropriately an indica-
tion of faster growth by other countries rather than failures in British 
industry (Bernstein 2005).
The reasons often cited for the reduction in Britain’s rate of 
growth at this time include the following: poor productivity perfor-
mance, a natural “wearing down” after her early headstart, failure of 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
26
entrepreneurship, unwillingness to invest in basic research and devel-
opment and in new technology, and failure to innovate in the new 
industries of the second industrial revolution. If British business lead-
ership in the last quarter of the nineteenth century did not disappear, 
its position at the head of the industrial pack was certainly joined by 
others. Ravaged by its involvement in two world wars and loss of its 
empire, British commerce and industry in the twentieth century faced 
dramatic challenges. Great Britain began the century as one of the 
world’s largest exporters of manufactured goods and ended the cen-
tury as a second-tier economy.
Industries of the Second 
Industrial Revolution
The major industries of the second Industrial Revolution included 
chemicals, electricity, glass and optics, motor vehicles (which was 
quickly followed by the petroleum industry), construction, nonfer-
rous metals, and the new and growing photographics industry. Later, 
the consumer appliances and agricultural product processing and 
food packaging industries also became important. By the first half of 
the twentieth century these were joined by the pharmaceutical, alu-
minum, communication, and aviation industries, as well as the early 
entertainment industry—movies and radio—and retail distribution. 
Britain’s old industries—textiles, iron and steel, and coal—suffered 
greatly.
Why did the decline in the British business system that occurred in 
the great depression of the 1870s and 1880s continue into the early 
nineteenth century? Was it a consequence of the long labor unrest, 
failure of British business leaders to invest in new technology and new 
businesses, or was it the huge cost in manpower and capital of the 
First World War that sent the economy into a tailspin from which it 
Table 3.1 Annual growth rates, Germany and Great Britain
Annual Growth (%)
Period
Germany
Britain
1860–1880
1.55%
1.65%
1880–1913
1.65%
1.10%
Source: Pollard 1989, 263.

R e bu i l d i n g  B r i t i s h  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
27
would never completely recover? Did the British economy decline, 
fail, or recover?
As summarized by Rostow (1948), Tames (1972), and Crafts, 
Leybourne, and Mills (1991), among others, the evidence supports 
a contention that during the late Victorian and Edwardian eras, busi-
ness did indeed slow down, but it did not “fail.” Agreement on the 
significance of the decline, its causes, and how rapid it occurred is 
another matter, however. Along with most of the industrialized world, 
the country did face economic decline after 1919, but began a recov-
ery in the heady 1920s. That recovery ended with the depression of 
the 1930s.
Many attempts have been made to explain why Britain’s once 
world-leading economy declined after the last decade of the nine-
teenth century. Elbaum and Lazonick (1986) described three of these 
justifications. One traditional explanation was that the decline was due 
to the failure of the British government and industry leaders to coun-
ter growing trade union power. The British government, in an effort 
to avoid political unrest and violent worker’s strikes, intervened in 
management-labor battles. In opposition to government’s obstruc-
tion in the self-regulating economy, this theory holds that if left alone, 
the power of free market competition as described by Adam Smith 
would readily resolve worker-management conflicts and result in eco-
nomic prosperity for all.
A second theory explains the decline of the British economy using 
a noneconomic or social rationale. This theory holds that the decline 
was a natural phenomenon: failure of free market competition in Brit-
ain was a natural result of either naturally occurring imperfections in 
the market or in the distinct conservative cultural characteristics of 
British business owners and managers or workers.
Elbaum and Lazonick suggested that the real reason for the decline 
lay in what they described as the “rigid persistence of economic and 
social institutions from the nineteenth century era of atomistic com-
petition.” In this type of business system, the number of firms in an 
industry is high enough to bring about perfect competition. The 
characteristics of atomistic competition are: (1) existence of many 
small firms; (2) little or no economies of scale; (3) no firm is strong 
enough to set prices (they are instead price takers); and (4) the many 
small firms result in low prices for consumers and low profits for 
suppliers. Atomistic competition in Britain was a consequence of 
the industrial revolution. As manufacturers transitioned from serv-
ing local markets from small artisan shops and home production to 
slowly industrialize, there were few barriers to entry and little reason 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
28
for small firms to become large firms. Only as Britain developed its 
system of colonial markets did change begin to creep into manage-
ment thinking. Thus,
Entrenched institutional structures—including the structures of [small 
scale] industrial relations, industrial organization, educational systems, 
financial intermediation, international trade, and state-enterprise rela-
tions—constrained the ability of individuals, groups, or corporate enti-
ties to transform the productive system . . . Britain’s problem was that 
economic decision makers, lacking the individual or collective means to 
alter prevailing institutional constraints, in effect took them as “given.” 
In failing to confront institutional constraints, British businessmen can 
justifiably be accused of “entrepreneurial failure.” But the cause of the 
failure was not simply cultural conservatism, as some historians have 
implied. (Elbaum and Lazonick 1984, 568)
Economic growth continued throughout the 1800s, although 
other nations, particularly Germany and the United States, were 
beginning to grow at a faster rate. The cost of building and maintain-
ing the world’s largest and most powerful navy for keeping the sea 
lanes open to and from her widespread colonies was beginning to be 
a drag on the economy. It was not until the First World War that the 
slower rate of growth was considered by some to be a decline.
Textiles, iron, coal, steam engines and railways have typically 
been seen as the foundations upon which Britain’s first industrial 
revolution was built (Hudson 1983). Their importance continued 
well into the first third of the new century. The growth of employ-
ment in mining and manufacturing in Britain from 1871 to 1931 
seen in Table 3.2 shows the importance of these two critical indus-
tries. Great Britain led technological developments in these indus-
tries and, in the process, became the first nation to industrialize. 
The second industrial revolution, on the other hand, left the British 
Table 3.2 Employment in specific industries (in millions)
Industry
1871
1901
1931
Agriculture
1.8
1.5
1.3
Mining
0.6
0.9
1.2
Manufacturing
3.9
5.5
7.2
Construction
0.8
1.3
1.1
Source: from Robbins 1994, 419.

R e bu i l d i n g  B r i t i s h  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
29
business system still struggling to retain its earlier lead in the indus-
tries of an earlier age. The second industrial revolution was to a large 
extent characterized by the gradual loosening of a dependence on 
traditional raw materials, such as coal and iron ore. New materials, 
processes, and technology were grafted upon the old industrial base 
and, in many places, supplanted them.
An example is the chemical industry. The major feedstock for the 
early chemical industry was coal; the first major value-added prod-
ucts of the coal commodity were synthetic dyes for the textile indus-
try. At first the leader in the production of coal tar dies, Britain’s 
budding chemical industry quickly lost its leadership position to 
Germany, which maintained a comprehensive scientific and techni-
cal education system that Great Britain did not have. By the 1890s, 
German-trained chemists were the finest in the world, employed by 
British as well as German firms. The chemical industry had moved far  
beyond its dependence upon coal for its raw material and textiles for 
its major market, and Britain never regained the lead it once held in 
this sector.
Falling Behind in New Industries
Britain left much of the innovation in the new industries to others; 
the electricity industry was an important example. What Hennessey 
(1971) termed “the Electric Revolution” began around 1880 and 
ended in 1930, when Britain’s original national power grid was nearly 
complete. Arc lights were first used in London in 1878, but failed 
to replace gaslights because of their high cost and the short life of 
available light bulbs. In one of British industry’s few successes in this 
sector, the incandescent lamp was apparently simultaneously invented 
by Joseph Wilson Swan in Britain and Thomas Alva Edison in the 
United States. Swan and Edison joined forces in 1882 to establish the 
Swan and Edison United Electric Light Company, and by 1883 were 
producing as many as 10,000 light bulbs a week in Britain.
In its first years as an industry, electricity was used almost exclu-
sively for lighting. Before long, however, it was put to use for traction, 
powering tramways and underground railways. By 1914, electricity 
had been applied to many other uses, as well as opening up many new 
areas of its own. What started as a way of providing cheap and safe 
light was soon powering streetcars and subways, projecting motion 
pictures, heating stoves and ovens, and driving tens of thousands of 
electric motors in all kinds of industrial applications. Within 50 years, 
the Electric Revolution was over. Electricity was here to stay.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
30
A partial list of the explanations for Britain’s business community 
to make these important investments includes: (1) the unwillingness 
of Britain’s small, family-owned manufacturers to invest in modern 
production technology and product research; (2) the City of Lon-
don’s (i.e., banking and investment community) preference for mak-
ing foreign investments—such as railroads in the United States and 
elsewhere—rather than providing funds necessary for industrial mod-
ernization at home; and (3) an elitist educational system, with insuf-
ficient emphasis on science and engineering.
Additional suggestions include public attitudes that considered 
business and industry as “undesirable money grubbing” or just 
“dirty,” something that gentlemen just don’t do; and a lack of pro-
fessional managers and management expertise because of insufficient 
management education programs or business schools.
Finally, three political and social factors are also often mentioned: 
a hands-off attitude toward entrepreneurial activity, with little or no 
support or encouragement from the British government; a shift from 
a national emphasis on manufacturing to service industries, such as 
banking, insurance, and the like; and the high cost of maintaining a 
navy to protect its global empire and free trade policies.
Not only did Britain fail to make leadership investments in the sec-
ond generation industries, it also failed to innovate in older staple 
industries. According to Tames (1972) and others, these two factors 
helped British business lose its dominance of the global market for 
manufactured goods and contributed to a long slide of decline. Also 
seeking an answer to the question of why Britain failed to maintain its 
industrial leadership, Chandler (1990) attributed the stagnation in the 
British economy to three fundamental errors:
1. Failure to invest in production facilities large enough to benefit 
from economies of scale and/or scope
2. Failure to develop comprehensive marketing and distribution sys-
tems for the same economies
3. Failure by the owners of private, family-operated firms to employ 
professional managers in sufficient quantity to enable the firm to 
grow beyond its relatively narrow, myopic concentration on the 
domestic market.
British business had been slow to adopt the newest technology in 
its staple industries, textiles, coal, and iron and steel. As a result, by 
1913 there were few industries in which British producers maintained 
a technological lead. On the other hand, Britain did lead the world in 

R e bu i l d i n g  B r i t i s h  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
31
the shift from an industrial economy to one founded on the provision 
of services. It has been suggested that this change possibly occurred 
too early and may have exacerbated the decline resulting from dein-
dustrialization. Still, in 1913, Britain led the world in such services as 
banking and finance, insurance, and shipping. These and other “invis-
ible” exports made up for a negative balance of payments in her goods 
exports, and funded the extensive direct foreign investment carried 
out by British businesses (Tames 1972). Regardless of what might 
have been the cause or causes of Britain’s decline, economic statistics 
clearly reveal that a deceleration of the British economy did take place 
after 1880.
Despite the slowing down of her economic growth rate, the value 
of Britain’s exports remained far greater than that of her rivals, the 
United States and Germany. Additionally, Britain’s exports, which had 
declined slightly in the 1870s, regained their growth after the depres-
sion of the 1880s.
Relinquishing Leadership
According to Harley (1991), Britain’s relinquishing of industrial 
leadership to the United States and Germany was brought on by 
the reduction in her rate of growth and reluctance to change her 
business system. Of the two, the more important may have been 
failure to implement institutional change. In 1913, and even into 
the 1930s, Britain’s industry was largely composed of small firms. 
These tended to focus on serving a limited number of markets. 
Meanwhile, in the United States and Germany, mergers, syndicates, 
and cartels were creating large, integrated international corpora-
tions. Furthermore, in Britain, firms continued to rely on labor- and 
skill-intensive production methods, delaying adoption of labor-sav-
ing machinery and “high-throughput” technology. The tradition 
of “hands-off” lending followed by Britain’s banks, as opposed to 
German banks, which acquired partial ownership and served on the 
management boards of their borrowers, further limited innovation 
in British business.
By the 1980s and 1990s, other “causes” had been added to the list 
reasons for Britain’s decline. Among these are: draining the Treasury 
by funding unprofitable nationalized industries; caving into excessive 
and irrational labor union demands, both in wages and work rules; 
and the high cost of two world wars and a series of “adventures” after-
ward, including the Suez crisis of the 1950s and the Falklands War 
in 1982. Pollard (1989, 265) determined that although growth did 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
32
slow, Britain’s growth after 1880 should not be considered a decline 
by any meaning of the word. Instead, he argued that,
Above all . . . the debate on entrepreneurship in much of the literature 
is fundamentally misconceived. Great Britain was not a backward coun-
try steeped in traditionalism which had to wait for its entrepreneurs to 
awaken it to economic opportunities. It was the most advanced country 
of the day, the country in which the breakthrough to the modern econ-
omy had occurred first, in which, therefore, certain inhibiting elements 
of traditionalism had the weakest hold in Europe. There was no lack of 
entrepreneurial spirit in Britain; on the contrary, from the nobility on 
downwards, all were keen to make money . . . If there was a lack, it was 
in certain sectors only, a failure to reach particular decisions, in particu-
lar contexts, for particular reasons, not a failure in entrepreneurship as 
a weakness in British society.
Pollard conceded that a major change in the global economy was 
also underway at this time. Britain lost its solitary preeminence in 
industry and mining production and, instead, was forced to compete 
with several newly industrialized countries. Each of her new competi-
tors had access to similar capital resources, industrial technology, and 
scientific knowledge. Giving up its leadership may have been a trau-
matic experience for many Britons, and one they had not yet fully 
absorbed when the devastation of World War II made it clear that 
Britain would never regain its old industrial superiority. The slide 
of Britain’s businesses after 1945 was not, according to Pollard, the 
result of the actions of earlier generations. Rather, that decline must 
clearly remain the responsibility of the nation’s leadership in the post-
war years. This is discussed in detail in chapter 3.
Phases of Overall Slower Growth
The slowdown in the rate of growth of Britain’s economic leadership 
was not something that happened overnight, nor was it a continuous 
phenomenon. After 1870, Britain passed through three main phases: 
depression, competition, and war.
The Great Depression of the 1800s: The first phase occurred during 
the 23 years from 1873 to 1896, when the great depression saw a 
nearly continuous drop in prices, wages, and industrial profit margins 
(Rostow 1948). Prices fell in this period because of lower production 
and raw material costs, exacerbated by growing foreign competition. 
Costs dropped because of increased productivity, which resulted from 
the great investment period that preceded the depression. The most 

R e bu i l d i n g  B r i t i s h  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
33
important investment factors were the railway network, which made 
transportation fast and cheap, and steam power applied to all types of 
manufacturing processes.
Stiff Competition: The second period of decline occurred between 
1880 and 1914, when British businesses first encountered stiff com-
petition from her two biggest industrial rivals of the time, Germany 
and the United States. More importantly, both of these rivals were 
competing from behind high tariff walls, while Britain tried to main-
tain her free trade policies.
Two World Wars: The third period of decline consisted of the years 
between World War I and II. After each of the two wars a much weak-
ened Britain tried but failed to resume her former world standing. The 
interwar period in Britain was marked by an extensive merger move-
ment as firms fought for survival. As Blackford (1988, 103) explained, 
“[Between World War I and II] British businessmen were . . . not 
totally successful in their efforts to improve the efficiency of industry. 
It proved difficult to attract the necessary financing from the City 
of London, which was often more interested in overseas investments 
than domestic ones. Moreover, the government often was at best 
lukewarm to proposals designed to spur business expansion. The feel-
ing that business, and especially industry, were somehow ‘dirty’ hin-
dered the full development of a business rationalization movement.”
The third industrial revolution, which emerged in the last decades 
of the twentieth century, is being paced by firms based in nations 
other than Great Britain, particularly in the United States, Japan, and 
the faster-growing nations such as the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, 
China, and South Korea). This apparent change in industrial focus has 
been characterized by many as the Communications Age, the Computer 
Age, or the Information Technology Age. Like much of Europe, Britain 
does not play a leadership role in the continued development of many 
of these new technologies.
Conclusion
Crafts, Leybourne and Mills (1991) reminded us it is important to 
remember that much of British business, and particularly manufactur-
ing, during the last half of the 1800s and for the first 13 years of the 
twentieth century consisted of traditional, small-scale firms, a great 
many of which were still family owned. These businesses catered to 
local markets without entering into international trade.
These small, domestic-market-oriented firms provided employ-
ment for some 60 percent of Britain’s total industrial workers, and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
34
probably experienced no productivity gains whatsoever from 1760 to 
1860, and little thereafter. These industries waxed and waned with 
economic conditions at home. They were often the first to feel the 
pinch of economic decline, and the last to benefit from a turnaround.
That the British business system and its pattern of growth were 
strikingly different from the experiences of most other nations at the 
time cannot be questioned. Nor should it be a surprise that other 
nations, hiding behind tariff walls and national industrial policies that 
targeted specific areas of British economic strength, could catch up 
with Britain and then overtake her. A pattern similar appeared after 
World War II when nations like Japan and Germany did the same to 
the economies of the United States and Great Britain. One only has 
to think of the fate of the once-strong British motorcycle business 
and the U.S. television and home electronics industries, as well as the 
world’s steel, chemicals, and automobile industries, to see parallels. 
What’s important is to learn how, if at all, the British business system 
has reacted to those challenges, what has been done to counteract 
their severity, and what path British business will take in the twenty-
first century.
The first half of the twentieth century was exceptionally trying for 
the United Kingdom. Drawn into two world wars, dragged down by 
one of the deepest and longest lasting global depressions, loss of an 
empire, and near destruction by government over-regulation and take-
overs of major sectors of the economy, industry was unable to meet 
the social and economic requirements to retain its global leadership.
Discussion Questions
1. From the end of the Napoleonic Wars in 1815 up to the start 
of World War I in 1914, British manufacturing and international 
trade dominated the rest of the world. What were the causes of its 
long-term slide in leadership in these businesses after 1890?
2. How was British commerce and industry affected by World War I 
and II?
3. What are some of the reasons often cited for the reduction in Brit-
ain’s rate of growth after the last two decades of the nineteenth 
century?
4. Why was Great Britain unable to gain a foothold in the new indus-
tries that were forming in the last half of the nineteenth century?
5. What were some of the reasons for Britain’s failure to implement 
institutional change in her commerce and industry?

4
C h a p t e r  4
Postwar Commerce and  
Industry in Britain
The twentieth century has been one of almost continuous turmoil 
for the businesses of Great Britain. If we grant the first 13 years of 
the century to really belong to the “long nineteenth century,” the 
modern period can be said to have begun in 1914. Between 1914 and 
1918, the nation suffered the loss of millions of lives in World War I. 
This was followed 10 years later by a deep and nearly universal eco-
nomic depression that began in 1929 and lasted through most of the 
decade of the 1930s. Then, the nation became embroiled in an even 
more devastating global conflict, World War II, again with Germany 
the enemy. In this war, Japan and Italy were also Germany’s allies.
Britain emerged from this near half-century of conflict shorn of her 
empire and well on a slide to becoming a second-rate, unimportant 
“spectator island” stuck somewhere off the coast of Europe. Britain’s 
slide into further decline was arrested during the decade of the 1970s, 
however, and in the last two decades of the twentieth century the 
nation has reestablished itself as one of the leading economies of the 
world.
The experiences of British business during the twentieth century fit 
neatly into three disproportionate periods. The first began after World 
War I and continued to 1939 and the start of World War II in Europe. 
During these years British business was involved first in a transforma-
tion from the production of wartime products to producing industrial 
and consumer products for the global boom that began after 1921. 
During this period she attempted to reclaim the industrial leadership 
she had lost to her rivals Germany and the United States.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
36
The second period began in 1950, several years after the end of 
World War II, with slow rebuilding and further consolidation of Brit-
ain’s business structure. Full recovery did not begin until passage of 
the European Recovery Act in the United States and Marshall Plan aid 
that first began in 1948. This rebuilding period lasted until approxi-
mately 1973.
The most recent period under which the British business system 
was shaped in the twentieth century began in 1973, after the Arab 
oil embargo and Britain’s membership in the European Economic 
Community (EEC). The rate of growth was further accelerated after 
North Sea oil began to flow in the late 1970s. First gas and then 
oil had been found offshore. These new sources of relatively cheap 
and clean energy fueled Britain’s economic renaissance. This period 
continued to about 1995, although the rate of growth slowed after 
the 1980s. Deregulation and privatization during this period helped 
maintain Britain’s economic growth. Another factor was access to the 
more than 380 million consumers in the expanded European Union 
(EU) and associated nations of eastern Europe.
The Interwar Years, 1918–1939
British business was strong at the start of the interwar period. None 
of Britain’s productive capacity had been destroyed by the war, and 
transition to a peacetime economy was relatively painless. A world-
wide postwar slump bottomed out by 1921, and by the middle of the 
1920s the British business system had fully recovered from the disrup-
tions of 1914–1919. However, the steep depression that descended 
on the world in 1929 and continued through most of the 1930s 
made it impossible for recovery to continue. The depression years 
were marked by economic hardship everywhere, and Britain’s interna-
tional trade was severely cut by a series of disastrous trade wars among 
the developed nations. Governments everywhere tried to revive their 
domestic industries by erecting very high tariffs against foreign manu-
factures. This only resulted in retaliatory tariffs and further depression 
of the industrial sector.
Consolidations and mergers, often to avoid bankruptcy, were the 
norm for large businesses during these years. Thousands of small and 
midsized businesses were less fortunate and were forced to close their 
doors for good. Unemployment at the depth of the depression in 
Britain exceeded 25 percent. The economy only recovered when Brit-
ain began to slowly re-arm following Germany’s aggression in the 
demilitarized Rhineland in 1934 and in Austria and Czechoslovakia 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
37
in  1938. Full wartime production did not start until Britain and 
France declared war on Germany in September 1939.
Return to a Peacetime Economy
The transition from a total mobilization for the production of arms 
and armaments to a peacetime economy may have seemed painless on 
the surface, but deep problems with the overall economy were soon 
to have dramatic effects on Britain’s business system. One of the most 
profound changes was a remnant of the war: the government had 
adopted a series of production controls to ensure a steady supply of 
war goods, together with sufficient consumer goods to avoid social 
upheaval. At first, the government did not change its stance toward 
foreign trade. As it had prior to World War I, the British government 
continued to support a free trade policy and exercised only limited 
control over businesses. A consequence in the drift downward in the 
growth of Britain’s exports was that the value of imports continued to 
exceed exports. Table 4.1 shows this trend continued until well after 
the end of World War II.
During World War I, British businesses had been forced to curtail 
their exports to many of their traditional markets, and both Japan 
and the United States quickly jumped in to meet that demand. Thus, 
after the war, one of the greatest difficulties facing business in Britain 
was how to regain much if not all of her former export dominance in 
the staple industries. In Asian markets, Japan’s new industries were 
particularly successful, while in Europe, revitalized German indus-
tries and U.S. firms captured much of Britain’s old markets for steel 
and coal. Coal exports, while still high, were declining as oil and gas 
were replacing coal as the preferred fuel for ocean shipping, power-
ing electrical generators, and in industry. The greatest market for coal 
from Britain’s mines soon became domestic electrical power-gener-
ating plants. In industrial goods, particularly in Latin America, U.S. 
Table 4.1 Volume of Britain’s trade from 1910 to 1992 (£ millions)
1910
1925
1930
1950
1975
1992
Total imports
678.3
1,320.0
919.5
2,602.9
24,037.0
120,453.0
Total exports and 
re-exports
522.0
927.4
523.3
2,255.0
19,761.0
107,047.0
Source: Robbins 1994, 428.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
38
businesses were squeezing many British firms out of the market. By 
1920, Britain’s exports were some 60 percent below what they had 
been in 1913 (Musson 1978). They were no greater in 1938.
A radical shift occurred in the export component Britain’s business 
system during the interwar period. The stagnation of exports after 
1913 was not all lost business. Domestic demand had grown and all 
but absorbed the lost export activity. This growth was largely in the 
new industries, including chemicals, synthetic dyes, pharmaceuticals, 
glass and optics, aircraft and motor vehicles, artificial silk (rayon), elec-
trical goods, building construction, and distribution. Social and pub-
lic services also increased during this period, although Britain began 
to lag far behind in other services, except for banking and insurance.
Britain’s free-enterprise capitalist economy had been almost fully 
restored by 1924. By then, the new industries were growing fast 
enough to counterbalance some of the stagnation in the old staple 
industries. Overall growth was enough to ensure that the great major-
ity of Britons were enjoying a clearly improved quality of life. Still, for 
most of the 1920s, unemployment remained around the 10 percent 
figure. It ballooned to over 23 percent in the early 1930s.
The Great Depression that began in 1929 put a halt to any hope 
of a return to the government’s old laissez-faire polices toward busi-
ness and its related policy of free trade. An Import Duties Act passed 
in 1932, setting a 10 percent tax by value on most imports, initiated a 
trend of ever higher tariffs and new nontariff barriers such as quotas. 
These barriers to imports were passed in the mistaken belief that Brit-
ain’s businesses, thus sheltered behind a high tariff wall, would revive 
sooner from the effects of the depression. Instead, the reverse was true; 
Britain’s trading partners themselves set up retaliatory tariffs and other 
barriers, defeating any advantage British firms had hoped to gain.
During the 1930s many industries rationalized, consolidated, or 
joined formal trade organizations that functioned something like Ger-
many’s great industrial cartels. As a result, by 1939 a large portion of 
British industry had become more or less controlled by trade associa-
tions. In many cases, the rules and regulations of the association had 
been built upon controls that had been in effect since World War I. 
In place of individual firms competing against one another, there now 
existed in Britain an extensive system of licensing, quotas, marketing 
agreements, and delegated authority over resource allocation. Many of 
those complex control systems remained in effect until long after 1950.
Britain’s new industries were among the first in Britain to adopt 
new developments in the management of organizations. Most of these 
new techniques were invented in the United States, and were placed 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
39
under the catch-all label of “scientific management” (Musson 1978, 
272). They began with what in Europe was called Fordism, after the 
automobile assembly line process that was introduced in Britain before 
1914. In the United States, this system was known as Taylorism after 
its inventor, Frederick Taylor, who referred to the system as scientific 
management. Whatever the name, it soon resulted in a greater empha-
sis on managerial efficiency, scientific selection of employees, staff 
training and management development, cost accounting, improve-
ments in factory design and layout, and a general improvement of 
firms’ organization and control. Few of these developments had been 
adopted by British businesses prior to the outbreak of World War II, 
and many would have a long way to go before their acceptance was 
general. Management education was a rarity in Britain; for example, 
the country did not have a single full-time, day professional man-
agement school until 1960, although a few night and short course 
programs were available. Few of Britain’s managers took advantage of 
them, however.
By and large, the interwar period can be described as a time of Brit-
ain’s transition from an older heavy industrial base toward a modern 
economy founded on success in the industries of the second industrial 
revolution. Much of British industry had to completely retool or find 
a new niche in which to compete. The predicament of British business 
between the wars was described by Professor A. J. Youngson of the 
University of Edinburgh (1960, 35–6):
The task which faced British industry in the years between the wars 
was to adapt itself to novel economic conditions, both of demand and 
of supply. New products had become or were becoming important, 
techniques of production were altering, and markets were changing, 
often radically, in size, nature and location. As a result, a great number 
of workpeople had to switch their jobs—this often required them to 
leave the district in which they lived and go elsewhere—while much 
capital became unrenumerative and had to be written off, a process 
naturally disappointing to entrepreneurs and shareholders, and resisted 
by them accordingly. The numbers of people and the sums of money 
involved were large, and the task of adaptation was therefore a great 
one. . . . The core of the trouble lay in two industries, coal and cotton; 
especially in coal.
Although British businesses trailed in the development of most of 
the new industries, there were enough successes to enable this aspect 
of the economy to thrive all the way up to the outbreak of World 
War II. Despite their very real successes, Britain’s second generation 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
40
industries were never global leaders, as had been textiles, coal, ship-
building, and iron and steel. The big problem was that for most of its 
new industries, British businesses never captured large enough mar-
ket shares to benefit from economies of scale. In automobile produc-
tion, Britain’s performance took a backseat to its major competitors. 
While both Ford and General Motors established production plants 
in Britain, quickly gaining a large share of the British market, British 
motor car makers retained production in Britain. In addition, many 
European manufacturers successfully imported their automobiles into 
Britain, despite a steep 33 percent protective tariff.
Consolidations marked Britain’s chemical industry during the 
interwar years. Even then, the industry was in bad shape by the middle 
of the 1930s, and had to be given subsidies from the government to 
survive. The many mergers and consolidations that had begun as early 
as the 1880s in the industry culminated in the formation of the giant 
Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI) in 1926. Chemical production 
required large sums for capital investments. The only way British firms 
could complete with German cartels, such as I. G. Farben and Bayer, 
and protected American companies, such as Du Pont, was if they 
became large themselves (Robbins 1994). The ICI mergers enabled 
Britain to compete in the changed environment for chemicals.
Another spate of mergers brought together most of Britain’s 
sugar producers, while they also continued in the brewing and dis-
tilling industries. Similar competitive pressures resulted in a merger 
of Britain’s Lever Brothers with Dutch firms in 1929 to create the 
Anglo-Dutch Unilever Corporation, producers of a large portion of 
Europe’s oleomargarine and soaps. A similar combination resulted in 
the formation of Royal-Dutch Shell in petroleum and petro-chemi-
cals. Before World War I, there had been very few large corporations 
in Britain: there were just seven firms capitalized at more than eight 
million pounds sterling in 1907. By 1925, the number had reached 
25, and more were being formed.
As the 1930s were coming to a close, the business system of Britain 
was loosely divided into three broad groups or categories (Walshe 
1991). First, there was a small collection of cartel-monopolies and 
near monopolies. Most of these functioned in relatively small markets, 
and many were formed after a round of rationalizations during the 
rough interwar and depression years. They never controlled much in 
the way of the British economy, making up less than 10 percent of 
total output in 1935. Second was a large group of concentrated busi-
nesses across a broad spectrum of the economy. Making up from 50 
to 85 percent of industrial capacity in their respective industries, they 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
41
produced such goods as rayon, dyes, tires, cameras and related equip-
ment and supplies, electrical supplies and equipment, and motor vehi-
cles. The third group consisted of the vast bulk of the older industries. 
These were in such industries as iron and steel, shipbuilding, textiles, 
brewing, furniture, leather, and construction. This structure of the 
business system was not changed much during the war, and further 
consolidation did not begin until after the 1950s. By then, Britain’s 
nationalization program was well underway.
Business during Reconstruction, 1945–1972
The second phase of the twentieth‐century evolution of the business 
system in Britain began after Marshall Plan aid appeared in the late 
1940s and early 1950s. By contributing as much as 2.5 percent of the 
total to the economy, that aid made up for some lost export earnings 
and enabled the country’s reconstruction to begin in earnest. During 
the war, many of Britain’s markets were lost to neutral countries, and, 
immediately after the war, to competitors in the United States. In fact, 
as the 1950s progressed, Britain became increasingly dependent upon 
the United States both financially and militarily. Britain’s factories were 
worn out after six or more years of wartime production, during which 
time few if any replacement parts or machines had been available.
The war had placed the nation deeply in debt, so no government 
aid to hard-pressed industries could be expected for recovery. Britain 
was forced to withdraw from her empire and, eventually, to establish 
stronger ties with the nations of the European continent. In return for 
aid, the United States demanded that Britain open up its Common-
wealth markets to American producers. In this way, the United States 
quickly surpassed Britain as the primary supplier of most of Canada’s 
imported manufactured goods.
While her enemies Germany and Italy embarked on slow but steady 
recoveries after the war, Britain’s businesses were forced to endure an 
extended period of dissolution and displacement. Old work and man-
agement systems were inefficient, while foreign competition, particu-
larly in all of Britain’s old staple industries, was steadily cutting Britain 
out of markets she once dominated. In addition, work stoppages were 
becoming endemic. Overall, these factors combined to drive Brit-
ish businesses further into decline. Reinforcing that decline was the 
precipitous drop in Britain’s exports. Possibly the only encouraging 
development of the period, coming in 1967, more than 20 years after 
the end of the war, was when production began in Britain’s newly 
discovered North Sea gas and oil fields.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
42
During the first 20 years of the postwar period, Britain also embarked 
on an extensive experiment in social planning and spending. This 
included nationalizing many of the major industries, including steel, 
coal, shipbuilding, aerospace, energy production, transportation, and 
health care. Reconstruction and redevelopment in all these industries 
was financed by high levels of taxation and inflationary spending. In 
addition, the country was beset by serious and almost constant labor 
unrest. However, by the middle of the 1970s, it became apparent to 
some in Britain that a rethinking of this level of government involve-
ment in the economy was necessary. This eventually resulted in the 
start of privatization of most of the nationalized industries, or a policy 
of permitting private enterprises to compete alongside government 
firms, as became the case in Britain’s radio and television broadcasting 
industries.
Structural Change in the Business System
A major change in the structure of the British business system took 
place after 1945. For a long time after the end of World War II, the 
British business system was composed of three sectors or categories: 
First was the declining number of rationalized large industries that 
were still in private ownership. The second was the disappearance 
of many of the traditional small, family-run businesses that at one 
time predominated in the country. And finally, there were the newly 
nationalized, “mega-businesses” that emerged under a consecu-
tive series of Labor governments. Of the three, the most important 
were the nationalized firms, for they controlled the majority of the 
nation’s productive capacity, although generally not very efficiently, 
and seemed to be increasing in number.
Britain’s nationalized industries were concentrated in three broad 
sectors of the economy: energy, transportation, and communication. 
They controlled gas, oil and coal production; electricity generation 
and distribution; water supply and waste disposal; rail, bus, and airline 
transportation; and telephone, telegraph, radio, television, and related 
communications industries. In many cases, they also included the pro-
ducers of materials and equipment used by those industries. Wherever 
total government ownership was not in place, the government was 
often a major stockholder in many of the firms, or competed with 
private business in parallel operations.
After World War II the policy of nationalization of a wider range of 
Britain’s productive and service sectors began to mushroom. Public 
ownership did not begin in 1945 by any means, however. Industries 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
43
already nationalized before 1939 under Conservative governments 
included the telephone and telegraph systems, which were run by the 
Royal Mail; radio broadcasting; the London transport system (buses, 
trams, and subways); and most of the supply of electrical power. 
Underground mineral rights were also nationalized. In addition, the 
government had initiated an extensive system of controls and subsi-
dies for a wide spectrum of the business sector.
During the interwar period, nationalization had most often been 
seen as a way to save threatened industries. It was never a part of 
an overall plan of establishing public ownership of the nation’s pro-
ductive capacity that it became after 1945. Early takeovers simply 
provided a change of ownership, without making any of the changes 
needed to revive the firm and make it profitable again. Thus, a major-
ity of those early nationalizations were unsatisfactory, disappointing to 
both the government and the general public alike. After the first rush 
of nationalizations in the late 1940s and 1950s, “nationalization-as-
rescue” became a more or less regular occurrence. Some of the larger 
industries taken over this way included the automobile maker British 
Leyland and the aerospace industry, led by the jet-engine maker Rolls 
Royce. Britain’s shipbuilding and ship-repair industry was national-
ized for a similar purpose in 1974.
From their earliest appearance in the 1920s and 1930s nationalized 
industries were not subjected to direct ministerial control. Rather, 
public corporations were formed to manage them, thus sheltering 
them from any regional or special interest group pressure. Indepen-
dent boards with membership from within and without the indus-
try were formed to manage the daily operations, and to do so first 
and foremost in the public’s interest. The first boards to be formed 
were the Central Electricity Board, the British Broadcasting Company 
(later the British Broadcasting Corporation), and the London Pas-
senger Transport Board. This system came to be known as corporate 
socialism, and became the pattern followed in postwar nationaliza-
tions. After 1945, all nationalized industries were established by acts 
of Parliament as public corporations (Dunkerley and Hare 1991).
An acceleration of nationalization began after the Labor govern-
ment took control of the country. Nationalization began with the 
Bank of England, overseas cable and radio services, and civil aviation 
all in 1946. In 1947, operations of coal mines, railroads, canals and 
docks, and road haulage were taken under government ownership. 
In the next year, the last of the electrical supply and gasworks distri-
bution systems were nationalized. Also in 1948, the last of a series 
of social welfare bills were passed, greatly expanding the role of the 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
44
British government in the lives of its citizens, as well as its business. 
Among these expanded social programs were completely free medical 
care, including doctors’ services, medical supplies and prescriptions, 
hospital care and nursing, for all British citizens. Also included were 
expanded old age and unemployment benefits.
In every case of nationalization, the government paid fair prices for 
the nationalized firms, rather than simply confiscating them. Many of 
the acquired firms were badly in need of capital investment, or had 
been kept operating long after their useful economic life. The gov-
ernment was forced to immediately close many of the most serious 
problem firms, and make heavy investment in others. Many unions 
also struck for unjustifiably higher wages. Together with the high pur-
chase prices, high costs and declining overseas markets, far-reaching 
and expensive wage settlements placed an immediate drag on the Brit-
ish economy.
An example of the turmoil British businesses were forced to 
undergo at this time is the case of the iron and steel industry. One 
of Britain’s healthier industries in 1950 because of the rebuilding of 
merchant vessels lost during the war, it still faced growing competi-
tion from the United States and many new, smaller steel producing 
states. The industry was nationalized by the Labor government early 
in 1951. However, defeat of the Labor party later that same year saw it 
denationalized by a Conservative government in the fall. Then, when 
Labor regained control of government in 1967, it was again national-
ized. It was finally denationalized for good under the Prime Minister 
Margaret Thatcher’s government.
A similar fate of nationalization, denationalization, and renational-
ization was suffered in the 1960s by the British road haulage industry. 
After those two major shifts and reshifts, subsequent Conservative 
governments became discouraged to the point that no further dena-
tionalizations were attempted until after Margaret Thatcher became 
prime minister in 1979. In just one year after taking office, the state 
oil firm, Britoil (now British Petroleum), and the national commercial 
airline, British Airways, together with some smaller firms were again 
placed in the hands of private investors. The policy continued under 
John Major, Thatcher’s Conservative party replacement. Dunkerley 
and Hare (1991, 416) summed up this episode in Britain’s busi-
ness history thus: “Britain’s approach to nationalization, which was, 
initially very appealing politically, as well as being based on a clear, 
simple, and administratively neat model, eventually ran up against an 
increasing number of difficulties which could not be resolved merely 
by tinkering with the established model. This model has had its day.”

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
45
Decline of UK Exports
While nationalization of much of Britain’s large productive sector was 
taking place, Britain’s share of world exports of manufactured goods 
fell from 20.4 percent of the world total in 1954 to 17.7 percent 
in 1959. By 1967, the UK share had further declined to 11.9 per-
cent, and reached its lowest point, 8.8 percent, in 1974. After 1975, 
Britain’s share stabilized at an average of around 9 percent for the 
rest of the 1970s and into the 1980s. Britain’s decline in share of 
world exports was accompanied by an equally dramatic increase in 
the imports of manufactured goods, particularly in such sectors as 
motor vehicles, office equipment, construction equipment, and mis-
cellaneous metal goods.
Two reasons have been suggested for the shift that occurred at that 
time: (1) an increasing inability of Britain’s nationalized and privately 
owned industries to be price competitive and (2) a failure to produce 
and market products of the right quality, in the face of rapidly chang-
ing technologies and world demand structures.
By the start of the 1970s, Britain’s business system had nearly come 
apart. A series of wildcat strikes, widespread social unrest, growing 
unemployment, tax increases, steadily increasing prices, and contin-
ued national withdrawal from international markets and international 
involvement threatened to rend the last ties holding British society 
together. The few remaining binding threads were stretched even 
tighter in 1973 when an Arab oil embargo more than quadrupled the 
cost of energy overnight. But, political and economic changes were 
about rescue Britain’s business system from the pit in which it found 
itself. The first of these was Britain’s entry into the common market. 
The second was the Thatcher government’s new focus on ways to 
enable Britons to help themselves, rather than be “helped” by an all-
embracing government.
Focus on European Markets
Beginning in the nineteenth century, the traditional structure of Brit-
ain’s trade with the rest of the world was such that British manu-
factured goods were exchanged for tariff-free imports of foodstuffs 
and raw materials. By the end of the century, Britain dominated 
world industrial production, although she was being challenged in 
many areas by businesses in Germany and the United States. It was 
impossible to continue this traditional trade structure after the 1950s. 
The bulk of that trade had shifted to between Britain and the Com-
monwealth and Overseas Sterling Area (OSA) countries, which were 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
46
predominantly lesser developed and newly developing countries in 
the Middle and Far East and the Caribbean. Beginning around 1955, 
however, the focus of Britain’s trade switched toward a greater depen-
dence on the industrial, urbanized, high per-capita income countries 
of Western Europe, Japan, and North America.
By 1972, the year before Britain joined the EEC, trade with the 
then nine-country EU countries accounted for some 30 percent of 
UK exports. And by 1985, the EU’s share of Britain’s exports had 
risen to 46.3 percent, and the import share to 46 percent. Over this 
same period, imports from Japan rose from just a little more than one-
half of 1 percent in 1955 to 3.4 percent in 1980 and 4.9 percent in 
1985. Exports to Japan also grew, but at a lower rate than imports. In 
1955 exports to Japan constituted some six-tenths of 1 percent; it was 
1.8 percent of Britain’s exports in 1970 and declined to 1.3 percent 
in both 1980 and 1985.
During the 1960s the changing structure of Britain’s foreign trade 
made it clear that the European Economic Community (EEC) was 
quickly becoming one of the greatest contributors to growth and sta-
bility that the Old World had ever experience. Britain’s first effort 
to join the new common market was thwarted by France, however. 
Instead, Britain became a member of the rival European Free Trade 
Association (EFTA). While both the EEC and EFTA had common 
internal tariffs, EFTA permitted its members the right to establish uni-
lateral external trade agreements. To become a member of the EEC 
would have meant cutting herself off from the remaining economic 
ties with her former empire, which was no longer an empire in the 
traditional sense. Rather, it had become an association of independent 
states with some common traditions and a common language. The 
empire was now a Commonwealth of Nations that agreed to maintain 
preferential trade conditions among themselves.
By 1991, the Commonwealth consisted of 50 independent states. 
Individual member states are not required to follow a single domes-
tic or foreign policy, and are free to join other regional economic 
organizations; Canada’s membership in the North American Free 
Trade Association is an example. However, the trade preference policy 
within the Commonwealth, along with many of the same social tradi-
tions and the English language, are strong bonds serving to hold the 
group together (Black et. al. 1992).
Britain’s membership in EFTA allowed her to retain strong eco-
nomic ties with the Commonwealth. However, as the 1960s pro-
gressed, it became apparent to Britain’s leaders that she could no 
longer afford to remain outside of the common market, which was 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
47
increasingly coming to dominate trade in Europe. Commonwealth 
nations wanted access to the British markets, but were less interested 
in permitting British business free access to theirs, a policy that could 
no longer be subsidized by the weakened state of Britain’s export 
sector. The country’s economic future was clearly tied to the Euro-
pean continent. France vetoed a second UK effort to join, but a new 
French government withdrew its objection when Britain tried a third 
time. The UK withdrew from EFTA in 1973 to join the EEC.
The revitalization of manufacturing in Great Britain can be traced 
in large part to the benefits of common market membership. In addi-
tion to access to that very large market, competition between coun-
tries was leveled somewhat as no EU country could negotiate a more 
favorable trade agreement with competitors outside of the EU. When 
Britain adopted the final stages of the common external tariff clause 
(CET) on all trade with non-EEC countries in 1977, all tariffs on 
trade between the United Kingdom and each of the other members 
of the European Union were reduced to zero. EEC membership 
alone, however, was not enough to stop Britain’s further decline in 
the 1970s.
UK Business after 1973
In 1970, Britain’s Conservative Party regained control of the govern-
ment. Two events highlight their short four-year control: the first was 
passage of legislation to limit the tendency of unions to strike almost 
on whim; and the second was Prime Minister Edward Heath’s suc-
cess in negotiating Britain’s way into the European Union. But the 
1973 oil embargo quickly limited any short-term effects these might 
have had on Britain’s businesses. As a result of the huge increases in 
the cost of energy, together with continued inflationary spending by 
government, by 1974 inflation in Britain had reached as high as 26 
percent a year. An election was called in 1974 and the Conservative 
Party lost control of government. Labor was again in control, but 
could do little more than their Conservative opponents to turn the 
British economy around.
Nearly everything the government did during the 1970s to revital-
ize British business, while maintaining a strong commitment to social 
welfare programs, failed. Unemployment, taxes, and prices continued 
to escalate. Black et al. (1992) described the situation at the time thus,
In retrospect, it appears that the failure of the economic and social for-
mulas of both Labor and the Conservatives in the 1970s had brought 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
48
Britain to the brink of economic and even civil chaos. Economic iso-
lation had not worked; membership in the EEC had proved helpful 
but was not a cure-all. Old socialism mounted on new technology had 
not succeeded either. Tough labor-control measures and nurturing of 
uninspired management had merely brought strikes, downturns in pro-
duction, and (class) division. Political, social, and economic difficulties 
prevented any of the programs from being tried for very long. (306–7)
The failed attempts to right the country required new thinking, 
together with a radical transformation of the political, social, and busi-
ness systems. It came in 1979 when the Labor Party lost an elec-
tion and the supporters of Margaret Thatcher beat back efforts by the 
incrementalists in her party to put Edward Heath back in the prime 
minister’s seat. Britain’s middle class and skilled workers agreed with 
Thatcher, who argued that earlier governments had been spending 
too much attention on the redistribution of wealth instead of focusing 
on its creation.
Although females had served as members of parliament since 1919, 
Margaret Thatcher was the first woman ever to hold the office of 
Prime Minister of Great Britain. She took over in May of 1979 and 
held that office until November of 1990. One of the first tasks she set 
for herself was to reduce the role—and, hence, the cost—of govern-
ment. To do so, she initiated a broad program of privatization, dereg-
ulation and, except for defense, decreased government spending. One 
after another, most government-owned or controlled manufacturing 
operations, together with government-owned housing operations, 
and water, gas, electricity, and telephone systems were privatized. The 
policy continued after Thatcher was replaced by John Major. By 1996, 
most if not all of the railroads and bus transportation systems had 
been sold, and the hydro and nuclear-powered electrical generating 
authorities were also privatized, or were about to be.
During the mid to late 1980s, Britain’s economy enjoyed a period 
of prosperity it had not known for 50 or more years. Productivity in 
the country was growing at a rate that outpaced the rest of Europe 
and the United States. Interest rates were kept low and the pound 
was strong. Stock prices were increasing and many workers enjoyed 
an increase in their take-home pay due to a tax cut (Black et al. 1992). 
While Britain’s businesses as a group might never again dominate the 
world market, their future appeared brighter in the late 1980s and 
early 1990s than it had for years if not decades.
Britain’s membership in the European Union has been marked by a 
host of disagreements and periodic trade disputes, such as the German 
and French-led EU ban placed on all imports of British beef because 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
49
of what has been called “mad cow disease.” Britain was also dragging 
its heels on the single currency initiative. However, Britain is and will 
more than likely remain a full member of the European common mar-
ket. Through that membership, Britain’s businesses have essentially 
duty-free access to a market of some 380 million or more consumers, 
when Central Europe is included with the EU’s population of some-
thing near 320 million. A comparison of Britain’s exports and imports 
with selected international regions is presented in Tables 4.2 and 4.3.
However, a byproduct of EU membership for Britain’s commerce 
and industry has been a heightened level of international competi-
tion, not only from the other 14 EU member states, but also from 
Japanese, Korean, American, and other nation’s businesses that have 
established positions in one or more of the community’s countries, 
thus gaining the privileges of duty-free access to other EU markets. 
British businesses have been forced to learn how to compete with 
European as well as global competitors. All indications suggest that 
many have learned their lessons well.
The Continuing Importance of Europe
Despite the many trade and political differences still remaining 
between Britain and the European Union, Europe is by far Britain’s 
most important trading partner. In 1994, the other 14 members of 
the EU took 57 percent of all Britain’s exports, and were responsible 
for nearly 60 percent of all of her imports. North America, the second 
Table 4.2 Ten-year changes in UK exports by area, 1985–1994 (£ millions)
Year
European Union
North America
Japan
1985
42,329
13,515
1,011
1986
38,393
12,229
1,182
1987
43,079
13,192
1,495
1988
45,324
12,984
1,741
1989
52,007
14,641
2,308
1990
59,789
15,235
2,632
1991
63,823
13,409
2,257
1992
65,465
14,262
2,233
1993
66,550
17,721
2,655
1994
77,090
19,436
2,990
Source: Central Statistical Office 1996, 266.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
50
largest market for British goods and import source, took a little more 
than 14 percent of Britain’s exports and provided 13.3 percent of her 
imports. Imports from Japan were almost 6 percent in the same year, 
while purchasing just 2.2 percent of British exports.
Changes in the National Character
In addition to structural changes in Britain’s business system at this 
time, an important change also occurred in the attitudinal or ideo-
logical makeup of many Britons (Kreiger 1987). Prior to the 1980s, 
Britain’s fundamental ideology endorsed a merger of the interests of 
many groups, and was expressed in a comprehensive system of cradle-
to-grave social welfare and extensive government controls. How-
ever, under the impetus of the government’s actions to deregulate 
and privatize business during the 1980s and 1990s, values have been 
rechanneled toward individualism and reliance on market mecha-
nisms. This reinforced a view of society in Britain as being composed 
of many self-interested competitive actors, rather than the composite 
body of persons willing to place their own interests behind those of a 
greater good of a larger society that it had once been.
This has resulted in a rise in what Kreiger called the “managerial 
right” (50). What this means is that there were fewer British gov-
ernment controls on business, and the ownership of economic insti-
tutions is rapidly being put back into the hand of private investors. 
Table 4.3 Ten-year history of selected UK imports by origin (£ millions)
Year
European Union
North America
Japan
1985
46,259
11,931
4,115
1986
49,532
10,112
4,936
1987
55,021
11,024
5,464
1988
62,020
13,064
6,531
1989
70,674
16,094
7,104
1990
72,802
16,924
6,760
1991
67,471
15,887
9,753
1992
71,931
15,872
7,443
1993
72,758
18,464
8,517
1994
83,764
19,892
8,898
Source: Central Statistical Office 1996, 266.

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
51
Attempts have been made to lower government spending by either 
reducing or limiting expenditures on social programs, including the 
National Health Service and higher education. Users’ fees and co-
payments are also becoming common. It appears as if the British busi-
ness system has thrived in this new environment; some two million 
new businesses were established in Britain between 1980 and 1990, 
although some 1.5 million of them did not survive the decade (Leigh 
1996). The bulk of new employment over the same period occurred 
in these new businesses.
There is strong reason to believe that the two decades of deregula-
tion and privatization policies, together with a significant turn away 
from what was deemed to be excessive social spending, helped many 
of Britain’s businesses to regain much of their former competitive-
ness. In addition, repatriated profits from centuries of foreign direct 
investments are now being reinvested at home, further helping Brit-
ish producers regain the levels of quality and innovation necessary 
in today’s marketplace. Great Britain welcomed and actively sought 
foreign direct investment. This attitude has brought many foreign 
manufacturing firms into the country, providing jobs and increasing 
the country’s exports (Holden, Matthews, and Thompson 1995).
A major impetus toward greater economic activity and opportunity 
for British businesses, as well those in the other states of the Euro-
pean Union, was the comprehensive drive toward final economic inte-
gration that began in 1987 with passage of the Single European Act 
(SEAct).
UK Business Integration after 1987
SEAct was designed to break up what had become a logjam of legisla-
tion that had piled up over 10 or more years. In passing the act, the 
member states went on record claiming their intention to fully open 
all markets within the European Community, and free the movement 
of goods, capital, and people across all internal borders. On a higher 
plane, its aim was to unify the community, turning it into a true eco-
nomic—and eventually political—union. This included providing a 
body of law that would strengthen the power of the organization’s 
governing bodies, including the commission, council, and European 
parliament, which is now directly elected. The act spelled out some 
300 particular issues that still separated members and hindered the 
flow of goods, people, and money across internal borders.
By 1992, most of the former barriers to trade had been removed 
and agreements reached on many of the necessary steps required to 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
52
integrate the market’s economies. Examples include conformity in 
many product standards; a common system of transeuropean trans-
portation documents for shippers; liberalization of air transport 
between member countries; removal of barriers to television and 
radio broadcasting and advertising; removal of customs and emigra-
tion barriers at most inter-European borders and internal entry ports; 
and opening of public supply contracts to bidders from any EU mem-
ber nation. In addition, the act included provisions for harmonizing 
efforts to control drugs, crime, and terrorism within the European 
Union. Monetary reform—that is, the movement toward a single 
currency—occurred on January 1, 1999, with the introduction of 
the euro.
Another major provision was a program to reduce, if not eliminate, 
economic disparities between regions within the European Union. 
Social funds were established to provide grants for economic devel-
opment in depressed areas, in addition to providing for preferences 
in governments’ purchasing to firms in depressed areas. In Britain, 
this meant significant development assistance became available for 
depressed older industrial areas in Scotland, Wales, and Britain’s Mid-
lands, the old industrial heartland of the country. Most investment 
in the new second and third generation industries has occurred in 
the south and southeast of England, while London continues to be 
the focal point of the nation’s service, publishing, and entertainment 
industries.
Conclusion
It is important to keep in mind that if, indeed, the business system 
of Great Britain did suffer 100 years of decline, it did not leave her 
an impoverished nation. Many of Britain’s businesses, both in manu-
facturing and the increasingly important services sector, remained 
strong domestic, regional, and global competitors. Britain’s more 
than 200 years as an advocate of free trade helped to make London 
one of the major banking, insurance, and investment capitals of the 
world.
Britain also maintains a technologically advanced and diversified 
manufacturing base, one that is periodically enriched by her relatively 
open attitudes toward foreign investment on British soil. Many foreign 
firms, including American, Japanese, and Korean firms, have made 
significant investments in Great Britain, and use those operations for 
sales across Europe and beyond. As a direct result of uncertainty over 
what will happen after control of Hong Kong is returned to China, 

P o s t wa r  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  B r i ta i n
53
large sums from the Colony have been pulled out and reinvested in 
Britain’s economy, as well as in Canada, Australia, and the United 
States. This investment activity has included relocating businesses to 
Britain or elsewhere, starting new businesses, and purchasing stock in 
existing British firms.
In addition, the country has redeveloped its agricultural industry 
to the point where it is self-sufficient in a wide variety of food product 
categories, as well as being a major exporter of many food items. The 
country’s transportation and communications networks are complete 
and are constantly being enhanced. The nation’s transport system has 
been deregulated and, in most cases, privatized. Final privatization 
of the rail network occurred in 1996. The deregulation of transport, 
broadcasting, and advertising and other industries has increased Brit-
ish firms’ ability to compete. Strong competition at home and abroad 
has helped to improve the quality of British products and raise the 
levels of customer service and buyer satisfaction higher than they have 
been for decades, if not centuries. Quality and service, together with 
lower labor costs than many of the country’s major competitors, have 
kept the prices of British goods low in the global marketplace. Sig-
nificant reserves of North Sea oil and gas remain under British con-
trol. And finally, a revitalized education system, including scientific, 
technical, and management education, has helped Britain to retain an 
educated and productive workforce. Finally, what can be said about 
the future of the business system of Great Britain? What is the likeli-
hood of the country’s still fragile economy entering on a new era of 
disintegration and decline?
There are good reasons to conclude that Great Britain will be able 
to ride the wave of modest economic success that it enjoyed over the 
last two decades of the twentieth century. There are a number of rea-
sons that this success should extend at least until the year 2020, and 
most likely, beyond. First, the country’s population is aging slower 
than the other large countries in Europe. This means an available 
labor force and lower social costs in the form of social security and 
medical care. Second, Britain has already gone through the painful 
restructuring process from older technology manufacturing to infor-
mation-based industries, and did so faster than her continental neigh-
bors. And third, Britain was able to successfully walk the tightrope 
of becoming increasingly involved in European affairs, while retain-
ing the close historical ties with the Commonwealth and the United 
States. Should conditions change and EU integration slow or reverse 
itself, British businesses have a “fall-back” position that few other EU 
member states possess.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
54
Discussion Questions
1. The evolution of British business during the middle of the 
twentieth century occurred in three distinct periods. Name and 
describe each.
2. How did aid from the United States affect Britain after World War II?
3. What is social planning and how did it affect the British economy 
after 1945?
4. What happened to Britain’s share of exports after World War II? 
Why did this happen?
5. How did the Single European Act (SEAct) affect British com-
merce and industry?

4
C h a p t e r  5
UK Commerce and Industry  
in the New Millennium
On a quiet Thursday in May of 1994, John Smith, the leader of 
Britain’s Labor Party, a likable, quiet Scot, died unexpectedly. Under 
Smith’s leadership, the country had severed its ties with the Euro-
pean Economic Community (EEC) and joined the European Union 
in 1992. With Smith’s sudden passing, Labor said its final goodbyes 
to the ties of the past and stepped out into a bright new future. Smith 
was succeeded in July by Tony Blair, a man more comfortable with the 
middle-class thinking of his background than the public ownership 
policies of the party’s labor union beginnings. The event essentially 
marked an end to the painful and calamitous days of the twentieth 
century, notable for two of the deadliest wars in all history, the loss of 
most of Britain’s empire and the island nation’s world leadership in 
manufacturing. Although Blair would have to wait to take office for 
two more years when Labor won the next general election, 1995 was 
the year that the British Labor Party formally parted company with 
thinking that emerged a century earlier and moved into the twenti-
eth century. Blair, stumping the country in support of Labor Party 
candidates, was successful in getting the party membership to remove 
Clause Four, the section of the Labor Party constitution that called 
for public ownership of the country’s major industries. In so doing, 
he did away with the last major obstacle in the minds of voters and 
helped make the party electable once more.
The Conservative government of John Major, in office since 1992, 
had not been able to find a solution to the country’s economic woes. 
For most of this term, Major had to cope with economic stagnation, 
rising prices, growing unemployment, and electorate disenchantment 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
56
with Conservative Party infighting. When the results of the general 
election were counted on May 1, 1997, Labor took control of the 
government with a landslide victory at both the national and regional 
(Council) levels.
Beginning a Period of Transition
This was also the start of a quiet transitional period for the British 
business system. In the middle of the last decade of the twentieth 
century the structure of the British business system continued to be 
characterized by a mix of a few very large firms and a huge body of 
small businesses. In the past, small firms had employed the majority of 
British workers, but by the 1990s that honor fell upon the country’s 
middle-sized businesses. Britain’s 1991 census of economic activity 
reported that 94 percent of all businesses in Britain had fewer than 
99 employees and 68 percent of all firms had fewer than 10 workers 
(Table 5.1).
In the first half of the 1990s, more than half of all Britain’s work-
ers (54.5%) were employed in firms with fewer than 500 employees; 
small and midsize firms combined employed 26.7 million workers. 
The largest single category was the 99- to 499-workers group, which 
employed nearly 12.9 million workers.
Table 5.1 Employment by UK firm size, 1991 census
Firm Size
Number of 
employees
Number  
of firms
Percent  
of total
Total Number  
of employees
1-9
95,142
68.1%
2,975,000
10-19
17,203
12.3%
2,412,000
20-49
13,925
10.0%
4,336,000
50-99
5,877
6.2%
4,110,000
100-499
6,123
4.4%
12,850,000
500-999
825
0.6%
5,642,000
1000-1999
306
0.2%
4,158,000
2000-4999
138
-
8,881,000
5000-9999
25
-
1,614,000
Over 10,000
9
-
1,637,000
Source: UK Office for National Statistics 1998.

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
57
The process of consolidation and mergers that had characterized 
the 1930s and 1950s seems to be continuing in Britain. Except for the 
construction industries, the number of firms in most of the country’s 
production industries declined over the five-year period from 1988 to 
1992 (Table 5.2).
The construction industry (not shown in Table 5.2), contained 
the largest number of individual firms. This is, of course, reflective of 
the nature of this industry: many individual craftsmen functioning as 
independent contractors, doing most if not all of the work themselves, 
and owning all their own tools. Hence, while their numbers are many 
(210,813 in 1992), the average size of each individual construction 
firm is extremely small.
The agriculture, oil, and coal industries—Britain’s primary indus-
tries—require relatively large capital investments, and are thus far 
fewer in number. The decline in the numbers of coal firms reflected 
the continuing decline in the importance of the British coal industry; 
pit closings and consolidations have reduced this industry to a tiny 
fragment of what it once was. Also of note is the continual decline in 
the number of firms in the textile industries, while the machinery and 
equipment group is apparently holding its own. The electrical equip-
ment group had 14,404 firms in 1988 and 14,417 firms in 1992.
The big gainer in employment and number of firms was the ser-
vice sector. Table 5.3 shows the changes in employment for the three 
major sectors of the economy: primary, secondary (mostly manufac-
turing), and services. The share of employment represented by the 
primary and secondary sectors declined from 4.7 and 33.7 percent 
in 1980 to 2.3 percent and 22.2 percent respectively in 1998. The 
secondary sector, made up mostly of manufacturing workers, declined 
by nearly 2.5 million jobs between 1980 and 1998. A similar decline 
Table 5.2 Number of firms in selected UK industries, 1988–1992
Year
Electric 
Machinery
Coal  
and Oil 
Chemicals
Food 
Products
Textiles
Machinery 
and 
Equipment
1988
14,404
320
3,627
9,852
15,707
25,655
1989 
14,723
293
3,616
9,819
15,684
25,508
1990 
13,777
255
3,320
9,267
14,675
24,808
1991 
13,417
222
3,177
8,991
13,828
23,417
1992 
14,112
215
3,281
8,856
13,098
24,139
Source: HMSO. 1995.

Table 5.3 UK employment by sector, 1980–1998
1980
1985
1990
1995
1998
Primary
1,104,34
917,317
719,364
509,055
536,954
 (percent of total)
4.7
4.2
3.1
2.3
2.3
 Agriculture, forestry, fishing
390,270
358,462
315,453
272,429
320,497
 Mining/quarrying, oil and gas, resource supply
714,064
558,855
403,911
236,627
216,457
Secondary
 (percent of total)
7,864,382
33.7
6,186,436
28.3
6,002,313
25.7
4,981,139
22.2
5,264,656
22.2
 Manufacturing
6,512,378
5,037,063
4,755,963
4,063,985
5,264,656
 Construction
1,382,044
1,149,373
1,246,349
917,154
1,079,941
Service Sector
 (percent of total)
14,434,218
61.6
14,732,928
67.5
16,642,731
71.2
19,963,741
75.5
17,963,523
75.6
 Distribution, hotels, catering, repairs
4,500,011
4,423,175
4,950,718
5,000,834
5,347,128
 Transport, storage, post, telecommunications
1,511,360
1,350,255
1,413,524
1,326,878
1,372,737
 Financial intermediation, real estate, renting  
and business service activities
2,566,154
2,897,190
3,669,378
3,847,301
4,337,114
 Public administration, national defense, and 
social security
1,593,256
1,473,879
1,435,961
1,399,060
1,391,266
 Education
1,610,968
1,635,140
1,873,182
1,857,886
1,867,570
 Community, health, social and personal services
2,652,469
2,935,285
3,299,967
3,531,782
3,647,708
Totals
23,432,934
21,836,678
23,364,408
22,453,935
23,765,133
Source: UK Office of National Statistics and DTI 2003a.

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
59
occurred in the primary sector, which lost more than a half million 
jobs over the same period. In contrast, the service sector grew from 
61.6 percent of the total employment in 1980 to 75.6 percent of the 
total in 1998. Over this same period, the service sector added more 
than 3.5 million workers.
Growth of the UK Service Sector
Data on Britain’s extensive service industry are much harder to come 
by, despite the fact that services probably generate upwards of three-
fifths of all private sector output (Walshe 1991). A joint British and 
French taskforce completed a comprehensive study of both countries’ 
service sectors two years into the new century (Department of Trade 
and Industry [DTI] 2003a). The study was a segment of a special 
program announced in March 2000 to make the EU member states 
the most competitive in the world. The European Council consid-
ered the service sector to be a major engine of economic growth and 
employment opportunities for the future. The health of the service 
sector was recognized as being especially important in light of the 
structural changes occurring in the industrialized nations. Productiv-
ity growth in manufacturing and shifting of manufacturing jobs to 
lower wage countries offshore has made it particularly important that 
the service sector continue to be the source of job creation. The joint 
UK/French study was carried out in order to identify barriers to the 
growth of output and employment in their service sectors. The study 
team came up with nine major findings, as follows:
t The service sector was the dominant source of job creation; in fact, 
the rate of growth in the European service exceeded overall job 
growth.
t Information and communications technology (ICT) and knowl-
edge-based services are becoming increasingly important sources 
of new jobs.
t The service sector includes a wide range of activities. Some of these 
require highly skilled workers, while others remain predominantly 
the source of jobs for low-skilled workers.
t A larger percentage of women are employed in service sector jobs 
than in the economy as a whole, and account for a large proportion 
of part-time employment.
t Business services have been the main employment-generating ac-
tivity in the sector. One of the reasons for this is that more employ-
ers are outsourcing activities once carried out in-house.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
60
t The type of services that society will demand in the future cannot 
be predicted or determined by government. Future service sector 
growth will be the result of the interplay of such forces as devel-
opments in technology, customer demand and market forces, and 
national and supranational labor market policies.
t In order to take full advantage of service sector employment poten-
tial, government policies should eliminate current and expected bar-
riers to growth and employment. An environment must be created 
that encourages and facilitates development of new service industries.
Contribution to the UK Economy
The sector covers a wide range of enterprises that include high tech-
nology, knowledge-intensive, labor-intensive, and low-skill industries. 
An accepted definition of a service is the result of labor that does not 
produce a tangible commodity (DTI 2003a). Table 5.4 shows the 
average annual growth of UK service industries during the last half 
of the 1980s and in the 1990s. The table shows that the industries 
with the greatest growth included computer services, waste disposal, 
air transport, and real estate. The growth in waste disposal services 
most likely occurred following the growing practice of municipalities 
contracting out for these services.
In 1995, services accounted for more than 66 percent of the eco-
nomic output in the United Kingdom as measured by contribution 
to gross domestic product (GDP). Continuing its steady growth over 
the last half of the twentieth century, this contribution grew steadily 
from only 53.2 percent in 1970. In the 20 years between 1980 and 
2000, the service sector added a net increase of more than 3.75 mil-
lion jobs to the UK economy. Business services alone created more 
than one million jobs.
Barriers to Service Sector Growth
Continued growth of the services sector in the United Kingdom is 
subject to removal of a number of economic, political, and structural 
barriers to trade. Among the chief factors limiting international trade 
in services are:
1. Bars to importation of services provided from outside the State 
because they do not fall under the jurisdiction of regulatory agencies 
in the country of consumption. An example is the insurance trade.
2. Nontariff barriers such as limits on new foreign firms, maximum 
foreign equity participation, quotas, and licensing restrictions 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
61
applied to potential new entrants. Other barriers include minimum 
capitalization requirements.
3. Limits on the movement of people, including nationality or resi-
dence requirements for key personnel managing a local estab-
lishment. National qualification requirements for suppliers of 
professional services and needs tests for work permits are addi-
tional barriers.
Table 5.4 UK service sector growth, 1984–1999
Average Annual Growth (% per year)
Service Type
1984–89
1989–94
1994–99
1984–99
Computer services
8.6
8.7
8.7
10.8
Air transport
9.0
6.8
6.8
8.8
Post and telecommunications
5.5
3.4
3.4
6.7
Financial auxiliaries
12.4
3.3
3.3
6.5
Domestic services
14.8
6.4
6.4
6.2
Sewage and refuse disposal
4.6
7.7
7.7
6.0
Other business activities
6.5
1.3
1.3
5.3
Rental machinery
6.6
1.5
1.5
5.1
Membership groups (clubs, etc.)
4.7
6.6
6.6
4.3
Insurance and pension funds
9.9
1.6
1.6
4.1
Land transport
4.8
2.6
2.6
3.8
Financial intermediation
7.1
0.6
0.6
3.7
Retail
4.5
2.6
2.6
3.6
Transport auxiliary services
8.2
0.9
0.9
3.4
Wholesale
6.0
2.3
2.3
3.3
Recreational and cultural
3.8
2.5
2.5
3.3
Health and social work services
1.7
3.6
3.6
3.0
Motor distribution
5.7
–1.9
–1.9
2.4
Hotels and catering
5.3
–0.9
–0.9
1.8
Real estate
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.7
Education
0.9
2.4
2.4
1.4
Personal services
3.3
–4.2
–4.2
0.9
Water transport
–0.4
1.1
1.1
0.7
Public administration and defense
–0.5
90.2
–0.2
–0.6
R&D services
–1.7
–0.6
–0.6
–2.5
Source: DTI 2003a.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
62
Retailing at the End of the Century
As the twentieth century was coming to a close, retailing continued 
to be an exceptionally vigorous element in the UK business system. 
At the end of the 1990s, there were nearly 200,000 retail-related 
businesses and more than 300,000 retailing outlets in Great Britain, 
together making up more than 5 percent of total UK output and more 
than 7 percent of the total UK service sector output. More than half of 
all retail establishments in the UK employed fewer than five workers.
In 1998, retailing employed nearly 2.5 million people—10 per-
cent of the total workforce. More than half of the people working 
in retail were part-time employees, and more than two-thirds were 
women. Total employment in retailing grew by an average of 1.7 per-
cent per year over the 10 years since 1988. Since 1950, the govern-
ment exercised a constraint on the growth of retailing by restricting 
the number of hours and days of the week that retailing establish-
ments could remain open. In 1994, parliament passed the Deregula-
tion and Contracting-Out Act, allowing retailers to stay open without 
any restriction between Monday and Saturday. Shops with floor space 
of 600 square meters or less could also open on Sundays. This had a 
tremendous impact on the gross value added (GVA) from retailing 
and retail sales. GVA grew more than 1.5 percent faster between 1994 
and 1999 than it had in the five years prior to the change.
Another development contributing to improved performance by 
UK retailers has been advances in information and communications 
technology (ICT) and the advent of e-commerce. Retail sales over 
the Internet were rising rapidly during the last half of the 1990s, but 
not for all retailers. Many small firms lacked the necessary skills and 
technological knowledge to take advantage of this new opportunity.
Finally, compliance with European directives under the Single 
European Market initiative has been both a blessing and a curse for 
UK retailing. On the positive side, conformity in product safety and 
hygiene, packaging, and recycling have helped make trade easier by 
improving acceptance of standardized products and brands. On the 
negative side, the cost of complying with these directives has been a 
major concern for many small retailers.
Continued Decline of Manufacturing
The decade of the 1980s was a period of rapid and nearly complete 
deindustrialization in the United Kingdom. This was only the most 
intense time of decline in a trend of relative economic decline that had 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
63
been going on since the end of World War II. This decline—called the 
English Disease—was most pronounced during the 1950s to 1970s. 
Moreover, it was particularly hard on Great Britain’s manufacturing 
sector (Crafts 1996; Kitson and Michie 1996; Broadberry 1997). 
The UK economy fell from second place in real income per capita in 
Europe in 1950 to tenth place by 1979. Many authors have suggested 
reasons for this decline.
Manchester University economist Paul Hare (1985) identified 10 
reasons variously given for Britain’s slow growth over those 20 years, 
some of which are sociopolitical and others economic in nature:
1. Britain’s rigid class structure, which inhibits cooperation between 
workers and enterprise managers and owners
2. The British public’s feelings of hostility to industry in general
3. The failure of the British educational system to provide sufficient 
vocational and technical education programs
4. An adversarial political system that is not conducive to developing 
and implementing a long range economic and industrial policy, 
concentrating instead on short-term “quick fixes”
5. A low and declining rate of research and development expendi-
tures, with greater emphasis on “pure” research and not enough 
on applied research. Added to this were Britain’s disproportion-
ately large sums devoted to defense research.
6. Modern Britain’s weak interest in entrepreneurship and a com-
mensurate small number of entrepreneurs
7. The dominant role of the “City” in leaning away from enterprise 
and research and development financing, instead focusing on finan-
cial markets and opportunities abroad (The City of London refers to 
a region in London that is the center of capital distribution in the 
UK economy. Because of its long history as the “financial center of 
the world,” the City is able to exert disproportionate pressure on 
UK governments to go along with “financial orthodoxy and the 
general interests and demands” of the financial houses” [Kitson 
and Michie 1996]. As a result, insufficient sums were available for 
industrial investments.)
8. Associated with the preceding point are the weaknesses in the tax-
ing system, which tended to encourage financial and real estate 
investments and discourage investments in industry.
9. Also associated with City shortsightedness was a banking system 
with an inordinate emphasis on short-term lending, with little 
long-term capital available. This was exacerbated by a general lack 
of British bank involvement in business affairs in general.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
64
10. Finally, organizational factors that limited the effectiveness with 
which existing resources—financial, human, and physical—are 
used in manufacturing, while also inhibiting investors’ awareness 
and interest in manufacturing investment opportunities
Manufacturing, while declining in overall contribution to GDP, 
still plays a significant role in the economy of the nation. It employs 
four million workers—one in every seven persons in the workforce. It 
creates 20 percent of the national output, and still accounts for some-
thing like 60 percent of the country’s exports (DTI 2002b). Making 
manufacturing even more important to the UK economy is the coun-
try’s position as a member of the world’s largest single market: the 
now 28-nation-strong European Union.
Despite the continued significant contribution to the economy of 
the nation, manufacturing output has been declining since 2000, fol-
lowing a trend existing in most of the world’s industrialized nations. 
The Blair government made improving the UK manufacturing sec-
tor a salient component is its twenty-first century economic strategy. 
Central to developing the new manufacturing strategy are programs 
designed to build on what the DTI calls “the seven pillars for manu-
facturing success.” The UK Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, 
Patricia Hewitt, described the program’s limitations and the govern-
ment’s role in and objectives for the new manufacturing strategy in 
the following way:
This strategy is not designed to be the last word on the subject. It is 
neither a hard and fast prescription, nor a formula for instant initia-
tives. Instead, we offer it as the basis for continuing to develop a robust 
partnership with management, employees and their unions—a manu-
facturing partnership based on best practices that must be effective at 
the national, regional and sectoral level. Long-standing problems of 
investment, innovation and skills will not be cured overnight. They will 
require consistent and determined effort over a sustained period. In 
order to focus our activities more effectively, [the government] will 
work with industry to develop firmer benchmarks against which to 
measure and report on progress. (DTI 2002b, 5)
The United Kingdom was not alone in suffering another slowdown 
in its manufacturing sector as the new century began. Manufacturing 
output declined 6.7 percent over the 12 months of 2001, with the 
loss of 150,000 manufacturing jobs. During this same period, manu-
facturing output fell 6 percent in the United States, 14 percent in 
Japan, and 5 percent in Germany. Fortunately for these countries, 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
65
a partial recovery was underway by late 2002, although not nearly 
what it had been over the preceding decade. Reasons cited for this 
widespread decline in manufacturing included partial collapse of the 
equity and slowing of the boom in information and communications 
technology in the United States, continued recession in Japan, and 
weaker demand growth in Europe, particularly in Germany.
A key component in the new manufacturing strategy focused on 
eliminating the long-time productivity gap between the United King-
dom and its major industrial competitors. Table 5.5 compares the 
relative output per hour worked in the basic manufacturing industries 
at the end of the twentieth century. Clearly, the UK manufacturing 
sector must make some dramatic changes in investments and labor 
practices if this is going to be turned around. The UK does not lead 
the United States in any sector, leads France only in paper, printing, 
Table 5.5 Index of output per hour in manufacturing industries, 1999 (UK = 100)
US
France
Germany
All manufacturing
155
132
129
Electrical and electronic equipment
273
145
135
Wood products
218
169
240
Petroleum products
210
218
92
Basic metals
198
148
199
Chemicals
169
141
104
Mineral products
168
142
121
Textiles, clothing and footwear
159
196
129
Motor vehicles
150
200
111
Machinery
146
107
123
Rubber and plastics
140
119
111
Paper, printing and publishing
139
90
115
Miscellaneous manufacturing
138
125
136
Food, drink and tobacco
136
108
92
Instruments
133
129
125
Metal products
100
160
138
Other transport equipment
100
109
140
Office equipment
—
—
161
Market economy total
139
122
119
Source: DTI 2002b, 7.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
66
and publishing; and leads Germany in only petroleum products and 
the food, drink, and tobacco category.
These and other factors led to a distinct gap in manufacturing 
productivity between the United Kingdom and its three major com-
petitors. With the United Kingdom at 100, productivity index values 
for the three competing nations are: the United States, 155; France, 
132; and Germany, 129. The government’s strategy is designed to 
narrow this productivity gap. The strategy to build a vibrant, knowl-
edge-intensive, high-skilled manufacturing base in Great Britain was 
constructed upon the following seven pillars:
1. Maintaining macroeconomic stability. The government must stick 
with its successful macroeconomic management strategy; attempt-
ing to manipulate the exchange rate would risk undermining gains 
in keeping inflation and interest rates low.
2. Investment in key industries. All UK manufacturing industries 
have the opportunity to narrow the productivity gap by increas-
ing investment in new technology, new products, and advanced 
processes. When the market is unable to meet demands, the gov-
ernment must help it function more efficiently. The government 
is improving access to finance for small and medium sized enter-
prises, both through the tax system and through direct support.
3. Science and innovation. The goal is to raise innovation in UK 
manufacturing by making the best use of the nation’s excellent 
science base, by applying technology from a variety of sources, and 
by demonstrating the benefits generated by innovation in industry. 
Greater investment in R&D must be encouraged.
4. World-class best practices. Adoption of best practices is founded 
on a culture of continuous product and process improvement. 
Trade unions and employers must work in partnership to ensure 
adoption of best practices in management and workplace practices.
5. Skills development and lifting education levels. The quality of labor 
input is a key driver of productivity growth in manufacturing as 
well as in the rest of the economy. However, UK manufacturing is 
relatively lower-skilled in comparison with manufacturing in both 
the United States and Germany, and lower skills on average with 
the rest of the economy. This skills gap accounts for approximately 
4 percent of the overall manufacturing productivity gap with the 
United States, and 25 percent of the gap with Germany.
6. Strong infrastructure. The United Kingdom needs to modern-
ize and make more efficient its public infrastructure. This will 
enable business to reduce costs, increase efficiency, and improve 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
67
its competitiveness. This is seen as a “major challenge,” given the 
decades of under-investment that has characterized most of the 
nation. Of particular importance are improvements in the trans-
port system and developing a thriving broadband market to sup-
port growing e-business in all sectors.
7. The “right” market framework. This refers to the government’s 
desire to make the United Kingdom the best place in the world 
to do business, where manufacturing innovates and thrives. This 
requires dynamic, competitive markets and well-informed, moti-
vated, and confident stakeholders. The government’s role is to 
set the market framework, including eliminating anticompetitive 
behavior, economic reform at the EU level, free and fair world 
trade, better regulation, and a modern planning system.
Britain’s New Manufacturing Strategy
Commerce and industry in Great Britain entered a new phase with the 
coming of the twenty-first century. The new government manufactur-
ing strategy was implemented in May 2003, although many of the 
program’s policies and procedures were already functioning. A critical 
part of the program is the regular analysis of its progress on each of 
seven pillars and publication of regular reports on those achievements. 
Two conclusions stand out. First, many stakeholders—managers, 
employees, union leaders, etc.—believe that the government’s manu-
facturing strategy is doing what it was intended to do: address the 
barriers limiting growth in this sector of the economy. Second, UK 
manufacturing has a negative public image, and this bad image is the 
root cause of a numbers of problems facing the sector. Good univer-
sity students and school-leavers alike show a reluctance to seek careers 
in manufacturing. Moreover, neither students nor teachers have a real 
awareness of the opportunities available in a career in manufacturing. 
This poor public image also reinforces the unwillingness of the stock 
market to invest in manufacturing enterprises (DTI 2004). Selected 
two-year progress examples in each of the seven pillars of the manu-
facturing strategy include the following:
Maintaining Employment Stability
The government’s macroeconomic framework has helped growth in 
UK GDP (estimated to be 2.3 percent per year in 2003) to be sig-
nificantly higher than the country’s European competitors. Employ-
ment increased by more than 1.9 million since spring of 1997 and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
68
unemployment, at around 4.7 percent, was dropping in every region 
of the country. The country was experiencing the longest period of low 
inflation since the 1960s, and interest rates were near historic low levels.
Investing in Key Industries
The starting corporation tax rate was cut from 10 percent to near zero 
in the 2002 budget, with the amount of investment eligible for first-
year capital allowances doubled for small and medium-sized businesses 
(SMEs). In addition, an Early Growth Funding program was started 
to make risk capital investments in amounts averaging £100,000 to 
£200,000. This has been matched with small firms’ loan guarantees 
and selective financing for investments in businesses in targeted areas.
Encouraging and Facilitating Science and Innovation
The science budget doubled from £1.3 billion ($2.44 billion) in 
1997/98 to £3 billion ($5.64 billion) in 2005/06. Additional 
resources were directed toward improving the transfer of knowledge 
from a science base to a focus on growing the nation’s business and 
industry. A tax credit for research and development expenditures was 
introduced for all companies.
Adopting World-Class Best Practices
Applications of best practices in businesses have proven to be an 
immediate and significant way to improve productivity and profitabil-
ity. In April 2004, the government introduced a new best practices 
initiative for all UK businesses. This included establishing a Manufac-
turing Advisory Service to provide practical help to manufacturers. By 
March 2004, the service had responded to 27,000 inquiries, carried 
out more than 6,400 diagnoses, and completed more than 1,400 in-
depth consultancy projects.
Skills Development and Lifting Education Levels
A first step in improving skills and education was the formation of the 
Skills Alliance with members from government, employers, and trade 
unions to identify and coordinate the match between skills needed and 
supply of skilled workers to meet those needs. Electronic databases 
and websites for employment opportunities have been established. 
A network of 26 specialist engineering colleges focusing on science, 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
69
mathematics, design, and technology was established. Pilot employer 
training programs were implemented, together with improvements in 
vocational and workplace-based training programs.
Maintaining a Strong, Modern Infrastructure
Following through on a 10-year transport plan, the government 
invested more than £180 billion (US$3.4 billion) in long-term fund-
ing for transport improvements. A new Channel Tunnel Rail Link—
the first new rail link in more than a century—opened in 2003, on 
time and on budget; 1,500 new railway cars entered service and a 
Train Protection and Warning System was fitted to the entire national 
railway network. The Midlands Expressway, a new toll road, was 
opened ahead of schedule and on budget, easing pressure on a cru-
cial part of the national roadway network. Significant investments in 
broadband installation and implementation were also achieved.
A key accomplishment for the United Kingdom was enactment of 
the 2002 Enterprise Act. This act increased resources for competition 
improvement programs, and brought down barriers to innovation. 
The UK government retains its policy of commitment to free and 
open trade, while at the same time working toward making Europe 
the most competitive and knowledge-based economy in the world.
The Future for UK Commerce and Industry
The new manufacturing strategy outlined above is indicative of the 
government’s policy direction. Rather than focusing on regulation 
and limitation as was once the focus of many Labor Party policies, the 
Blair government was actively working to support and shape the UK 
business system to be more in keeping with the nature of the current 
world economy. The keys to this policy were (1) closing the produc-
tivity gap and improving competitiveness, (2) reemphasizing the com-
mitment to maintaining a world-class manufacturing sector through 
greater innovation and application of the country’s leadership in 
science, and (3) supporting growth in knowledge-based businesses, 
which includes improvements in education, implementing policies 
supporting entrepreneurship, and designing financial incentives for 
entrepreneurs.
Box 5.1 is an extract from a special UK government report on the 
status of one of its small but important knowledge-based industries, the 
computer games software industry. Britain’s share of this global busi-
ness ranks it third in the world after only the United States and Japan.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
70
Box 5.1 UK service knowledge economy business: Games software
The world software industry is clearly a product of the 
knowledge economy. One small segment of this industry is 
the global games software industry—estimated to be worth 
more than $20.7 billion in 2001 and projected to grow to 
$37.6 billion annually. Importantly for global competitors, 
this industry is spread around the globe, with approximately 
$8.65 billion centered in the United States, $4.7 billion in 
Japan, and $8.65 billion in Europe. The United Kingdom has 
a strong presence in this industry; the domestic market is the 
third largest in the world (after the US and Japan). Sales of 
UK-produced games generated $2.2 billion from retail, dis-
tribution and publishing margins, development advances, and 
royalties. In 2000, the UK games industry employed more 
20,000 people, 6,000 of whom worked in the development 
sector. This compares with 2,600 in this sector in France and 
580 in Germany.
The UK games industry is made up of two components. 
First, a small base of UK-owned publishers (in 2000, there were 
only eight firms) competing in the increasingly global market 
dominated by US, Japanese, and French giants. The second 
component of the UK industry is a fragmented development 
sector, made up of independent studios with an average of 22 
employees, and the in-house development staffs or wholly-
owned subsidiaries of UK and foreign publishers. A major dif-
ficulty holding back continued growth of the UK game software 
industry is a general feeling among investors that it is not a 
“serious” business, and therefore should be left to the nega-
tively described industry pioneers.
Despite its small size, the games software industry has been 
a significant contributor to the United Kingdom’s balance of 
trade, producing a positive trade balance of nearly $350 million 
in 2000. Between 1977 and 1999, this positive trade balance 
totaled more than $1.4 billion.
A policy white paper prepared for the UK Department of 
Trade and Industry (DTI) in 2002 concluded that the UK game 
software industry was at a turning point, with no models for it 
to emulate. No other country has as strong a development sec-
tor with a comparatively weak home-country publishing sector. 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
71
To retain its strong position in the global market, the United 
Kingdom was urged to continue to attract inward investment of 
overseas publishers, while also promoting the underdeveloped 
games investment industry.
Source: DTI (2002a).
£1 = $1.88US in 2002
Improving Productivity and Competitiveness
The low skills-level of many UK workers has been cited as a major 
contributor to both the relatively low productivity and uncompeti-
tive nature of much of the UK manufacturing sector. This is not a 
slight directed at the workers, but instead points to weaknesses in 
the national educational system and to the general unwillingness of 
industry and labor unions to invest in training and apprenticeship 
programs. It is, therefore, a major component in the government’s 
productivity and competitiveness policy emphasis.
There is some contention that the UK business system is in what 
has been termed a “low skills equilibrium” (LSEq), and that the econ-
omy is trapped in a “vicious cycle” of low value added production, low 
worker skills, and low wages (Wilson et al. 2003). Moreover, critics 
of government’s policies assert that this is a reflection of a failure of 
the UK business system in general. They lay the blame for this situa-
tion on two prior policies of the British government: not making nec-
essary investment to improve the vocational education and training 
system and a tradition of an overly restrictive regulatory environment 
directed at business in general and particularly toward the manufac-
turing sector. Others argue that, in comparison to its major economic 
competitors, the United Kingdom may indeed be closer to the low 
end of the LSEq spectrum, but that the problem is more regional than 
national in scope.
The UK Department of Trade and Industry funded a study of two 
traditionally low-skill, low-wage industries in the country’s industrial 
heartland, the East and West Midlands. Businesses in the food process 
and hospitality industries were studied. The researchers concluded 
that these sectors fit the assumed stereotype of low value added, low 
skills, and low wage industries. However, they also concluded that 
raising the LSEq level of these industries may be difficult at best, 
and may not be worth the investment required. In a conclusion that 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
72
reflects a sense of complacency that may be held by many UK busi-
nesses, the DTI study added:
The evidence that emerges from examining these two sectors suggests 
that quick and easy solutions to moving the United Kingdom closer 
towards being a knowledge driven, high wage, high skill, and high pro-
ductivity economy may not be available. Generally the organizations 
studied are content with their product market positions and are not 
contemplating anything like . . . change in investment, skills, or prod-
uct market strategies. Moreover, for many of these organizations, their 
current strategies are, at least for the time being, delivering the desired 
results, in terms of profitability and business success. They are not fail-
ing businesses. (Wilson and Hogarth 2003, xv)
Knowledge-based Manufacturing
As the twentieth century came to a close, the UK government 
embarked on a five-point program to exploit the business oppor-
tunities emerging with the global transition to a knowledge-based 
economy. Underlying this program was the conviction that in the 
knowledge economy a firm’s most important assets are not machines 
and physical properties, but rather the knowledge that resides in the 
minds and experiences of their employees. In September 1999, the 
secretary of state for trade and industries met with key business leaders 
and trade unionists to explore how industry and government could 
cooperate to improve the competitiveness of UK manufacturing. The 
group agreed that these four related themes were pressing for imme-
diate group action: (1) manufacturing profit increasingly depends on 
high value added production achieved through developing and apply-
ing new knowledge; (2) a need exists to create a strong climate for 
investments in R&D; (3) manufacturers need to adopt a culture of 
continuous improvement and best practice; and (4) all levels of the 
workforce must have the right skills and training.
A DTI manufacturing white paper published a month later identi-
fied the following action-plan points to be addressed by joint govern-
ment-management-union policy and programs:
t Formulate and implement the programs, policies, and activities 
required to revitalize and redirect the moribund UK vocational and 
technical education system.
t Plan and put into action the changes necessary to ensure a con-
sistent supply of people with the knowledge and skills needed to 
succeed in modern, innovative engineering and applied scientific 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
73
careers. This included strengthening government, university, and 
enterprise-funded education, training and management develop-
ment programs to meet industry’s needs in the new economy, and 
a comprehensive program to hatch and nurture a new body of en-
trepreneurs. Reversing the bad image that careers in manufacturing 
have among people entering the workforce was a critical compo-
nent of this initiative.
t Design and reinforce government and industry programs to im-
prove UK business competitiveness in all manufacturing businesses 
by application of the latest information and communications tech-
nologies (ICTs). ICTs, including greater use of the Internet, hold 
significant promise for improving competitiveness and productiv-
ity by making it possible for firms to identify gaps and reinforce 
strengths in the manufacturing value chain. ICTs were seen as 
particularly important for gaining world-class competitiveness in 
such key business activities as supplier relations, product design and 
manufacture, wholesale and retail distribution networks, and mar-
keting and sales and after-sales care, among others.
t By building networks and applying best practices, UK manufactur-
ers will be better able to make the most of their existing and future 
investments and capabilities in people and technology. The govern-
ment, industry, and labor must continue to identify and implement 
programs to improve manufacturer’s supply chain, including trans-
portation infrastructure and financing availability. Best practices—a 
program out of the global total quality management movement—
are a quick and efficient way for manufacturers to improve long-
term sustainable competitive advantage.
t Identifying and implementing consistent, rational fiscal and indus-
try and export support programs that contribute to maintaining 
competitive modern markets at home in the EU Single Market by 
pressing for improvements and needed modifications in the sys-
tem of world trade. This includes maintaining stable and support-
ive fiscal programs at home, continued negotiations for removing 
trade barriers and subsidies, and for continued reductions in tariffs 
and nontariff barriers at World Trade Organization negotiation 
rounds.
Promoting Entrepreneurship and Improving Education
According to a 2004 study on global entrepreneurship, Great Brit-
ain is among the world’s leading nations in generating and sus-
taining entrepreneurial activity (Kautz 2005). The study defined 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
74
entrepreneurship as attempts to create new businesses or new ven-
tures as in self-employment, a new business organization, or expan-
sion of an existing business by individuals, teams, or established 
firms. Canada, Israel, and the United States have the highest levels 
of entrepreneurship, followed by Italy and the United Kingdom. 
Several of Britain’s industrial competitors rank among the lowest 
in this sector, including Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, and 
Japan. The government, universities, and industry are cooperating 
to ensure that Britain’s high level of entrepreneurial activity is main-
tained and expanded.
Among the more successful entrepreneurship programs has been 
the government’s drive to reduce red tape and eliminate barriers to 
business startups. As a result, in 2004, the Center for Strategy and 
Evaluation Services for the European Commission considered the 
United Kingdom to be the least difficult of all EU countries in which 
to start a business. The government has developed a variety of entre-
preneurship websites and online organizations to help, inform, and 
give advice to people who own or are thinking about starting a new 
business. In addition, the government has worked to include entrepre-
neurship education into schools, colleges, and universities. Students 
are now taught at an early age about the opportunities and risks asso-
ciated with creativity and owning a business. Finally, the government 
has developed programs to support minority and women-owned busi-
nesses in all regions of the country.
Conclusion
In the middle of the last decade of the twentieth century the British 
business system continued to be characterized by a mix of a few very 
large firms and a huge body of small businesses. In the past, small and 
owner-operated firms had employed the majority of British workers, 
but by the 1990s the country’s middle-sized businesses took over the 
lead. Britain’s 1991 census of economic activity reported that 94 per-
cent of all businesses in Britain had fewer than 99 employees and 68 
percent of all firms had fewer than 10 workers.
The share of employment represented by the primary and second-
ary sectors declined in 1980 and again in 1998. The primary sector, 
which includes agriculture and mining, lost more than a half million 
jobs over this period. A similar decline occurred in secondary sec-
tor, made up mostly of manufacturing workers, which declined by 
nearly 2.5 million jobs between 1980 and 1998. In contrast, the 
service sector grew from 61.6 percent of the total employment in 

U K  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
75
1980 to 75.6 percent of the total in 1998, adding more than 3.5 mil-
lion more workers.
Retailing continued to be an exceptionally vigorous element in 
the UK business system. At the end of the 1990s, there were nearly 
200,000 businesses and more than 300,000 retailing outlets in Great 
Britain, together making up more than 5 percent of total UK output 
and more than 7 percent of the total UK service sector output. More 
than half of all retail establishments in the United Kingdom employed 
fewer than five workers. In 1998, retailing employed nearly 2.5 mil-
lion people—10 percent of the total workforce. More than half of the 
people working in retail are part-time employees, and more than two-
thirds are women. Total employment in retailing grew by an average 
of 1.7 percent per year over the 10 years after 1988.
Manufacturing, while declining in overall contribution to GDP, 
still plays a significant role in the UK economy. It employs four mil-
lion workers—one in every seven persons in the workforce—creates 
20 percent of the national output, and still accounts for something 
like 60 percent of the country’s exports. Despite the continued sig-
nificant contribution to the economy of the nation, manufacturing 
output has been declining since 2000, following a trend existing in 
most of the world’s industrialized nations. The UK government has 
made improving the manufacturing sector a salient component is its 
twenty-first century economic strategy.
The government initiated a new Manufacturing Strategy plan 
in 2002. Rather than focusing on regulation and limitation as the 
major focus of government, the Labor Party is working to support 
and reshape the UK business system to be more in keeping with the 
nature of the current world economy. The keys to this new policy are 
(1) closing the productivity gap and improving competitiveness, (2) 
reemphasizing the commitment to maintaining a world-class manu-
facturing sector through greater innovation and application of the 
country’s leadership in science, and (3) supporting growth in knowl-
edge-based businesses, which includes improvements in education, 
implementing policies supporting entrepreneurship, and designing 
financial incentives for entrepreneurs.
Discussion Questions
1. What major changes were happening to British industry during the 
1980s and 1990s?
2. Describe what was happening to Britain’s three primary industries 
during the 1980s and 1990s.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
76
3. What changes were occurring to the country’s service industry 
during the 1980s and 1990s?
4. Economist Paul Hare (1985) identified a list of reasons variously 
given for Britain’s slow growth during the 1980s and 1990s. Name 
those reasons.
5. What is the benefit of Britain’s status as a member of the European 
Union?

4
P a r t  I I I
German Commerce and  
Industry in War and Peace

4
C h a p t e r  6
German Commerce and Industry  
in the Interwar Years
The history of the German business system from 1920 to 1990 
can conveniently be grouped into four periods. The first, from 1919 
through the 1920s, was the painful period of demobilization and con-
version after Germany’s defeat in World War I. Terms of the Allies’ 
peace treaty forced overnight redirection of the German economy 
from its more than 90 percent involvement in war-related produc-
tion to a peacetime economy under the short-lived Weimar Repub-
lic, which was Germany’s first attempt at parliamentary democracy. 
The second period, which roughly corresponds to the decade of the 
1930s, saw German commerce and industry undergo for the second 
time a complete transition from a peacetime economy to a full war 
footing under Adolph Hitler and the Nazis.
The third period, from the 1950s to the late 1970s, saw German 
business rebuild from the devastation of World War II. In this period, 
German business produced an “economic miracle” which enabled 
it to once again take a leadership position in the global economy. 
The fourth period, which began after the series of energy-related 
upheavals of the 1970s, brought about a reunified Germany and a 
strengthened European Union. German businesses had to learn to 
compete under the regulations and limitations of an expanded Euro-
pean Union. Figure 6.1 shows Germany in relation to its close neigh-
boring nations.
Some say that Germany’s business system is now entering a fifth 
phase, one marked by declining but stable global market share, exces-
sive social spending, shorter and shorter working hours that are 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
80
Figure 6.1 Map of Europe showing Germany’s central position on the continent.
Source: The World Factbook 2013–14 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world 
-factbook//graphics/ref_maps/political/jpg/europe.jpg.
pushing down productivity, and the sell-off of many of the coun-
try’s most vibrant small and middle-sized companies as second and 
third generations show unwillingness to labor as hard as their par-
ents and grandparents did. However, this suggestion does not take 
into consideration Germany’s role as an economic leader and finan-
cial powerhouse of the euro zone. The one element that could derail 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
81
the German economic locomotive—and the economy of European 
Union for that matter—is their near total dependence upon Russian 
oil and natural gas.
German Commerce and Industry 
After World War I
Business in Germany after World War I was a reflection of trends that 
began in the late nineteenth century and were accelerated during the 
war. Most business was big business, made up of firms with a capital-
ization of 20 million or more post-1924 marks (Turner 1985). These 
large firms, competing either as cartels or syndicates, operated in 
finance, industry, insurance, and commerce. Virtually all of the largest 
firms were joint-stock corporations. Other than a few large steel and 
mining operations taken over by the government after the war, only 
public facilities such as rail and bus lines, public utilities, and city tram 
systems were government owned.
The concentration and combining of German industry had been 
accelerated during World War I. Although industry remained almost 
exclusively in private hands, it was subject to an increasing system of 
authoritarian government controls. Industry, entirely under wartime 
restrictions, was directed by innumerable local boards, agencies, and 
bureaus, all of which were subordinate to a higher authority. This 
authority was either national or local. The local administrative districts 
are called “Länder,” and correspond roughly to American states in a 
similar federal system. With the unification of East and West Germany 
on October 3, 1990, East Germany reconstituted the administrative 
districts formed during the Communist era into five Länder according 
to their former boundaries, with Berlin as its own independent Län-
der. These six then joined the 10 in West Germany to bring the total 
to 16. The smallest of the German states or Länder is the old free city 
of Bremen, with some 660,000 citizens. The largest and most heavily 
urbanized is North Rhine-Westphalia. This traditional coal-and-iron, 
heavy industry heartland of the northwest had a 2010 population of 
more than 17.5 million.
The great majority of the growth of German industry before 1914 
was based on its success in the export market for chemicals, steel, 
machinery, and, increasingly, electrical equipment. Once the war 
began, however, one of the first areas to suffer disruption was foreign 
trade. The export-oriented German manufacturers and trading houses 
immediately lost their overseas markets and physical assets. For the 
next five long years they remained cut off from foreign markets by the 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
82
British and her allies’ blockade. German manufacturers were unable to 
obtain raw materials or foreign investment capital, and were isolated 
from almost all foreign markets. Employment statistics published in 
the 1914 statistical yearbook for Germany show employment statistics 
as of 1907. While there were nearly 3.5 million women employed, 
most appeared to be working in very small service industries; only 
32,000 were employed in large industrial organizations (Table 6.1).
Before and after World War I, German business functioned in a sys-
tem of organized capitalism in which a few powerful groups competed 
for international dominance in their specific industries. Most of Ger-
many’s exporters were large, primary-industry manufacturers, closely 
tied together in cartels and syndicates, operating in close association 
with the nation’s large commercial banks. The banking system was 
severely disrupted early in the war because of the close ties between 
the two groups. Germany’s financial institutions may have emerged 
from the defeat of World War I harmed far more than any other indus-
try of the time.
The German economy was further disrupted when factories stopped 
making consumer or industrial goods and shifted to making guns and 
ammunition. Instead of the short, sharp, one-front war that was envi-
sioned by Prussian generals, the conflict quickly became a two-front 
war with stagnation of the trenches and attrition of the nation’s man-
power in badly planned, wasteful offensives against well-entrenched 
British, French, and American troops. It was simply not possible for 
Germany to out-produce England, France, and the United States. As 
the war continued, Germany’s economy slipped slowly but surely into 
collapse; austerity and hunger became a way of life for all Germans 
(Berghahn 1982).
Germany emerged from World War I smaller and poorer. Its losses 
in the Versailles treaty included some 13 percent of its territory and 
almost 10 percent of its population, in addition to all its colonies. 
Table 6.1 Employment in German businesses by gender and company size, 1907
Classification by size
Females
Males
Small (1–5 workers)
3,124,198
5,353,576
Medium (6–50 workers)
267,410
3,644,415
Large (more than 50 workers)
32,107
5,350,025
Total
3,423,715
14,448,016
Source: Gaulke 2001.

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
83
German industry was severely weakened in comparison to its competi-
tors in world markets. The country lost all of its big merchant ships, 
half of the smaller ones, one-quarter of its fishing fleet, one-fifth of 
its river and canal fleet, 5,000 locomotives and 150,000 railway cars 
(Laqueur 1974).
On the political side, however, the Weimar constitution that was 
adopted in July of 1919 was the most democratic the world had seen at 
that time. Women were given the vote and equal rights with men. The 
state was made responsible for a wide range of social functions, includ-
ing all levels of education. The constitution established a strong federal 
government, enabling the Länder to retain much of their old powers. 
However, the central power of the federal government was guaranteed 
by retaining the right to veto any laws passed by the Länder.
When the war ended in 1919, the German economy faced huge 
difficulties. And because she had lost the war, these problems had to 
be solved almost immediately. Instead of being able to systematically 
discharge veterans as the economy could absorb them, almost imme-
diately jobs had to be found for some six million demobilized German 
soldiers and three million workers who had been employed in the 
armaments industry. The peace treaty signed a year after the armistice 
limited Germany’s army to just 100,000 men, did not allow an air 
force, and limited her navy to small coastal defense vessels.
The Shift to Postwar Production
Production had to be shifted from war products to goods and services 
for consumers and new markets found for the lost foreign markets. 
The country faced critical shortages of coal and other important raw 
materials. In 1919, national income had declined by a third of what it 
had been in 1913. In short, the war left Germany significantly poorer 
by every economic measure than before fighting began (Bessel 1993).
As a group, Germany’s largest manufacturers were the least affected 
by the war. In fact, they were the only group whose economic position 
was actually improved. No German factories were destroyed by bomb-
ing, nor had any important German infrastructure been destroyed. 
The German government had paid good prices for war goods. German 
industries came out of the war with relatively large financial reserves, 
and were thus able to quickly rebuild. By 1922, German business 
had nearly completed the required process of restructuring, and was 
in many ways well on the path to full recovery. The nation had rees-
tablished her international leadership in such important industries as 
chemicals, optics, and electrical machinery.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
84
German industry had become characterized by a multiplicity of ties 
and webs long before the disruption of World War I. The country’s 
largest firms did not compete as independent, autonomous units in a 
freely competitive market. Rather, Weimar Germany inherited what 
Turner (1985) described as one of the most cartelized economies in 
the world. Cartels were designed to “stabilize” the market by agree-
ments to set prices and limit production levels. Although some of the 
cartels faded away after the end of the war, most remained, so that by 
the mid-1920s there were some 1,500 in industry alone.
Vertical Integration of German Business
Another characteristic of German big business under the Weimar 
republic was its high level of vertical integration. By the 1920s, most 
major industrial firms themselves produced many of the raw materials 
and components needed for their end products. In addition, many 
produced their own energy from their own coal mines. For example, 
the huge chemical concern I. G. Farben and many of the iron steel 
producers ranked among Germany’s largest coal mining firms. The 
integrated Krupp steel works produced pig iron, bars and sheets of 
steel, weapons, vehicles, and machines.
The recovery of the German economy before 1923 was made pos-
sible by the existence of a skilled labor force and by the adoption 
of modern production methods in Germany’s large businesses. Some 
leading firms continued the merger trend that had characterized 
industry before the war started. The giant firms that came into being, 
such as I. G. Farben in chemicals and Vereinigte Stahlwerke in heavy 
industry, were able to operate more efficiently than the smaller units 
of an earlier period.
As business success returned, cash flowed back into the banking sys-
tem. Entrepreneurs were soon able to finance improvements and new 
factories. Financing was made even easier because inflation-affected 
values of the mark made it possible to pay back what was borrowed in 
much cheaper currency. Greatly helping to fund Germany’s expansion 
was an influx of foreign capital, first and foremost from the United 
States. That investment capital continued to aid Germany’s expansion 
until the Great Depression of the 1930s. Behind the facade of prosper-
ity and unrestrained optimism, however, Germany’s economic condi-
tion remained weak, largely because of a continuing lack of investment 
capital and the resulting dependence on foreign loans. American loans 
also enabled the German government to continue to pay its large repa-
rations debts. The Weimar government had to take the role of the 
nation’s leading investment banker; private banks, no matter how hard 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
85
they tried or wished to help, simply did not have sufficient means to 
finance the needs of the modern national economy (Laqueur 1974).
The Ruhr Occupied
Germany’s relatively rapid turnaround came to a complete halt in 
January of 1923 when France, supported by Belgian troops, occupied 
the Ruhr, Germany’s industrial heartland, as a reaction to Germany’s 
failure to meet reparations payments and shipments of coal and wood 
to France. The French government decided to take matters into its 
own hands and manage the Ruhr’s mines and factories itself, mak-
ing sure they paid themselves first. They did not leave until 1925. 
Germany responded with a policy of passive resistance in the region; 
most economic activity in the area ceased. Workers received support 
payments from Weimar, which put a further strain of the country’s 
over-strained fiscal and financial systems. The exchange rate in 1913 
had been 4.2 marks to the dollar; in December of 1913 it was 4,200 
billion marks to the dollar.
The 1923 occupation of the Ruhr was followed by a series of 
inconclusive political upheavals by supporters of both the Left and 
the Right, including the ill-fated beer-hall putsch by Hitler’s National 
Socialist Workers Party—the Nazis—in November of that year. By the 
end of November, the value of the mark had declined from 65 to the 
dollar in 1921 to 6.6 trillion to the dollar. But as the year came to a 
close, the political conflicts had pretty much run their course, as had 
the horrendous inflation that had crippled the German economy.
The hard-pressed Weimar government was able to bring a measure 
of stability to German life only when it introduced the new Reich-
mark in 1924. By then, the warring political parties had more or less 
retreated from the streets, bloody and exhausted. That stability lasted 
only for the rest of the decade, however. The Great Depression of 
the 1930s threw the German economy once again into turmoil, but 
this time the country would be accompanied on the way down by her 
former enemies.
Mergers and even greater cartelization of the economy were offi-
cially encouraged by the Weimar government. With the revalued 
currency and renewed stability, industry profits soared. During the 
period from 1924 to 1929, German businesses’ steadily increasing 
profits enabled the Weimar government to push through a number 
of laws improving working conditions and quality of life for work-
ers. Included were better health and accident insurance and medical 
care, construction of badly needed public housing, unemployment 
benefits, and pensions.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
86
The biggest supporters of these social changes were leaders of Ger-
many’s newest large businesses, the industries of the second industrial 
revolution—including chemicals, optics, electrical equipment, and 
industrial machinery. Managers of the older heavy industries (coal, iron, 
steel, and mining) were less inclined to support concessions to “socialist” 
labor unions. Faced by significant global competition and over-capacity, 
they were convinced such concessions would only further erode their 
competitive positions. Instead, they wanted wage reductions, longer 
working hours, protective tariffs, and high prices maintained by cartels. 
Such attitudes soon resulted in renewed labor unrest and confrontation, 
culminating in violent street riots and murders, particularly between 
Germany’s communists and the parties of the far Right.
As the disastrous effects of the Depression deepened after 1930, 
German society was wracked by severe unemployment, political riots, 
hate-mongering, and anti-Semitism. Many but by no means all of the 
leaders of Germany’s large cartelized industries supported the “return 
to order” and the Nazis’ promise of renewed control over spreading 
communism (Turner 1985). The social turmoil of the first years of 
the 1930s resulted in the beginning of Germany’s unspeakable night-
mare: Adolph Hitler came to power in January of 1933.
Business During the Depression Years
Soon after the Nazis took control of Germany in 1933 the Party 
quickly moved to take control of most aspects of political, legal, artis-
tic, military, and social life. The one major exception was the German 
economy. Instead, the old entrenched bureaucracy, often without 
party interference, continued to direct and manage economic affairs. 
In this, they were fully supported by the leaders of big business. 
Throughout the life of the Third Reich, big business and the Nazi 
party maintained a close relationship, with many businessmen named 
to head government agencies and boards, and Party leaders moving 
into management and boardroom positions.
Hitler used the first two years in power to consolidate his political 
control of the country, which was still far from absolute (Fulbrook 
1991). Many bitter rivalries for power remained, sustained by power 
brokers in the army and heavy industry, both of which had much to 
gain from Hitler’s rise to power. The Party’s major sphere of control 
over business was exercised in the area of foreign trade. The Reich 
government soon controlled all of Germany’s foreign commerce. 
Gold and foreign currencies had to be paid into the federal bank. 
All purchases of German products by foreign firms had to go through 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
87
a government clearinghouse, which then paid the German producer 
in Reichmarks. A barter system of foreign raw materials traded for 
German finished products also flourished. Soon, however, foreign 
buyers could find few German goods of any kind available, for more 
and more of the country’s industrial capacity was being redirected to 
production of military goods (Maehl 1979).
Production of war material began in earnest just six months after 
Hitler took control of the government. Hidden behind a jobs program 
called the “agricultural tractor program,” the Krupp steelworks began 
producing tanks in July 1933. Naturally, German heavy industry was 
elated over the new government. By 1934, airplanes, ships, guns, and 
ammunition were all being made in German factories; although all 
were expressly forbidden under the Versailles treaty. Even earlier than 
this, in May 1933, the first concentration camp, Dachau, was opened 
near Munich.
The structured, protected, collective capitalism that characterized 
the German business system after World War I was simply a further 
manifestation of a process that had been underway since the 1880s. 
Large, powerful businesses, combined in cartels and syndicates, domi-
nated their industries, including coal, iron and steel, electrical prod-
ucts, chemicals, and transportation. Although these firms formed 
the groundwork for what Glouchevitch (1992) almost 80 years later 
would characterize as the German juggernaut of the post–World War 
II period, they almost immediately began to decline in overall impor-
tance to Germany’s economy.
While entrepreneurship and the entrepreneurial spirit were, indeed, 
present in Germany in the 1920s and 1930s, for most of that time 
there was insufficient investment capital for a vibrant small- and mid-
dle-size business tradition to develop. These smaller businesses did not 
become an important force in the German economy until after 1950.
Germany’s Postwar Economy
Germany’s defeat and occupation by the Allies in 1945 began a major 
shift in the nation’s character (Allen 1987). A new ideological divi-
sion was added to the traditional economic, political, and geographic 
framework. The role of the United States as the leading occupation 
power in West Germany helped to expand a movement toward indi-
vidualism, one expression of which was a retreat from cartelization 
and a reawakening of an entrepreneurial spirit. Americans were quick 
to push for a breakup of the largest cartels and passage of antitrust 
legislation. The social traditions of the Center and Left resulted in 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
88
passage of much legislation to help the individual in a modern, indus-
trialized, capitalist economy. That legislation became the hallmark of 
Germany’s social market economy.
The extent of damage done by the Allies’ bombing turned out to 
be far less than assumed as had appeared to be from the air. Repairs 
to many industrial operations could be carried out relatively quickly, 
and the smaller firms particularly found it easy to shift from the pro-
duction of armaments to civilian products. Funds to replace worn-out 
machinery became available after 1950. In just a few short years, high-
quality German goods soon reappeared on the world market. The 
stage was set, then, for the economic transformation that completely 
changed Germany over the next 10 years.
The Economic Miracle
Germany’s economic miracle began in a brutal fashion after three 
years of protracted misery and starvation. By 1948, the old currency 
no longer had any value. Although wages and prices remained fixed 
as they had been under the Nazis, inflation had destroyed the value of 
the currency. No one with anything to sell would accept marks in pay-
ment. Three full years after the end of the war, apathy reigned. Pro-
duction was still only half of what it had been the year the war started. 
When Russian pressure to force the Americans and English out of 
Berlin peaked in June 1947, the Western Allies—Britain, France, and 
the United States—announced an immediate reform of the currency 
in the Western Zone, replacing the Reichmark with the Deutschmark. 
In one day, people’s money became worth only one-tenth of what it 
had been the day before (Crawley 1973; Grotewold 1973).
To protect the poor from total destitution, a minor exception was 
permitted: everyone could exchange 40 of their old marks for 40 of 
the new marks, and two months later, trade 20 more at the same 
one-to-one exchange rate. On one hand, overnight, people’s savings 
were wiped out; on the other hand, however, those savings had been 
worthless anyway. The hardship also affected business and govern-
ment. Businesses were permitted 60 new marks per employee. Gov-
ernment bodies were given an allowance of just one month’s income. 
The remainder of their reserves was canceled outright. Germany’s 
social market economy emerged out of this hardship.
Although savage in appearance, the move had an immediate ben-
eficial outcome, traceable to the fact that the old currency had been 
deemed worthless. Overnight, it seemed, goods reappeared in the 
marketplace. The German people accepted the new currency without 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
89
question. The quantity of currency in circulation was so drastically 
reduced that people believed the values printed on the new bills. 
People began to buy things: food, medicines, clothing, shoes, office 
equipment, radios—all the things that just weeks earlier had seemed 
lost to them forever.
The German government under Dr. Ludwig Erhard added fuel to 
the recovery by offering strong support to anyone desiring to rebuild 
or start a new enterprise. At the same time, import duties were drasti-
cally cut, along with rationing on a number of food items. Although 
prices for these items increased, they never reached as high as they 
had been under black market conditions. More importantly, they were 
now available to German consumers.
The number of new businesses formed after 1948 soon mush-
roomed. Investment rose from practically nothing in 1948 to a yearly 
amount of over 30 billion Deutschmarks by 1953. Furthermore, 
companies were allowed to revalue their assets arbitrarily with cur-
rency reform. This enabled them to write off huge amounts each year, 
generating badly needed cash reserves. Special depreciation rates for 
replacing war damage encouraged further investment.
Heavy industry, as it had since the late 1800s, led the recovery 
miracle. Independent banks offered exceptionally liberal terms for 
new business ventures as well, thus helping a new business sector to 
emerge: the Mittelstand, or small to middle-size firm. These family-
owned or entrepreneurial enterprises flourished under the liberal busi-
ness conditions. Favorable tax rates for export revenues and seemingly 
insatiable demand at home and across the globe enabled Germany to 
re-enter the international market. Much of Germany’s postwar rapid 
recovery was due to these small and middle-sized family-owned and 
often family-operated firms.
During the 1950s and 1960s, Germany’s economy grew faster than 
other European nations, averaging around 8 percent a year for the 
first 10 years, and close to that in the second decade. German industry 
was particularly successful in the export market; exports amounted to 
as much as 30 percent of GNP (Ardagh 1987). When Marshall Plan 
aid began in the 1950s, the United States also opened its market to 
German products.
Reasons for High Growth
There are many reasons for the success of Germany’s economy after 
1950. Initially, of course, the urge to rebuild the nation was a power-
ful motivator. The rebuilders did not have to start completely from 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
90
scratch, either. Despite war damage to many factories, Germany’s 
industrial capacity remained surprisingly intact. Hundreds of small 
and middle-sized industries were tucked into small towns and villages, 
and did not suffer war damage at all. Thus, in 1945, only about half 
of German industry had been destroyed.
Prior to World War II, the German economy had been held in a 
strangle hold by cartels and syndicates. As a result, internal competi-
tion in the marketplace had virtually disappeared. Both the production 
and marketing of goods were completely controlled. The Allies, led 
by the United States, were anxious that Germany never again slip into 
the state it was in the 1930s when Hitler came to power. Although 
cartels were deeply entrenched in German industry, the Americans 
believed that for Germany to take its place in the competitive world 
economy that was envisioned, cartels had to be destroyed (Berghahn 
1982).
A number of German economic leaders supported the Allies’ decar-
telization concept. They were also concerned with wealth distribution. 
Agreeing that the errors of the Weimar period must not be repeated, 
they recommended removing protective tariffs, centralized planning, 
and mercantilist nationalism that had characterized German business 
before the war. Although cartels disappeared, the cartel mentality did 
not; it was 1957 before a weakened version of a bill outlawing them 
was adopted. Since then, several additional bills have strengthened 
German anti-cartel laws, as have recent EU programs.
German Commerce and Industry after 1950
A new force for economic stability appeared in Germany in 1951: The 
European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC). This new program 
combined the heavy industries of Belgium, West Germany, France, 
Italy, Luxembourg, and the Netherlands in a common market, begin-
ning a rationalization of the industry. The program proved so suc-
cessful that the members decided to expand the union to other areas 
of business activity. The Treaty of Rome, signed in 1957, formally 
established the European Economic Community (EEC), as well as 
the European Atomic Energy Community (EURATOM). Comple-
tion of the customs union envisioned in the Rome treaty occurred 
in 1968. Five years later, in 1973, three additional nations joined: 
Great Britain, Denmark, and Ireland. Greece became the tenth mem-
ber in 1981, and Spain and Portugal joined in 1986. A year later, the 
Single European Act, calling for full integration of the economies of 
the 12 members of the now-called European Community (EC), was 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
91
enacted. Finally, Finland, Sweden, and Austria became members in 
1994, bringing the membership to 15 and another name change, this 
time to the European Union (EU). Full monetary and political union 
was proposed for the future.
Overall, business in Germany since 1950 evolved along four 
roughly parallel lines (Allen 1987). The first includes the old tradi-
tional heavy industries such as coal, iron and steel, and also includes 
Germany’s textile industry. The number and size of these industries 
have in many cases been severely reduced; in some cases, they may 
disappear altogether.
The second consists of newer industries such as computer hardware 
and software, microelectronics and consumer electronics. This seg-
ment, while relatively small compared to the Japanese or American 
industries, is still growing. The third segment continues to dominate 
German industry; it contains the more mature but less high-technology 
industries such as transportation parts, components and equipment, 
machinery, and other light industrial products. The bulk of this group 
is made up of the dynamic Mittelstand. Somewhere in between the 
first and second group is the fourth grouping. These are the industries 
in which Germany remains an international leader, and include auto-
mobiles, chemicals, industrial electronics, and machine tools. While 
their growth is no longer spectacular, they remain particularly impor-
tant to the German economy.
The success of German business since 1950 has been attributed in 
large part to two of what on the surface may appear to be conflicting 
social forces (Smyser 1992). One is the fact that most non-German 
businesses compete fiercely, both domestically and in foreign mar-
kets, for market share and to produce the best products in their class. 
The second factor is the continuing system of close relationships and 
cooperation among managers, through such business organizations as 
trade associations, chambers of commerce, and other industry group-
ings. In addition, many firms maintain relatively large ownership 
shares not only in their customers’ or suppliers’ firms, or both, but 
also in competing firms. In Germany, competitors may compete, but 
they do so as social partners in a broader socioeconomic sphere, and 
on a level playing field where everyone knows the rules and plays by 
them. Joined in this cooperative-but-competitive effort by federal and 
regional governments, the German business system became a closely 
monitored, collaborative environment of relationships that came to be 
known, rightly or wrongly, as Germany, Inc.
These factors allowed Germany’s Mittelstand to develop and grow 
during the Economic Miracle and its aftermath. However, today these 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
92
same factors are making it extremely difficult for this sector of the 
German economy. The Mittelstand have relied on debt rather than 
equity to fund growth. German managers have distrusted equity 
financing, seeing it as a threat to their personal control, and the disclo-
sure requirements of equity as an invitation for the German govern-
ment to tax them more than they are already. As a result, the venture 
capital industry plays a minor role in Germany, and is still not fully 
established.
German managers also have a reputation for being autocratic, 
rather than democratic; they have been unwilling to empower their 
employees and, as a result, have lost out on potential flexibility in their 
labor force. The German management culture has been serene, refus-
ing to be ruffled. It is not eager to accept or adopt change in any of its 
many faces today, including reengineering or down-sizing.
Possibly the greatest difficulty faced by German businesses, and 
particularly the many small and mid-sized firms, was the combination 
of very high wages and taxes, and decreasing productivity driven by 
shorter and shorter work weeks. German workers typically work no 
more than 35 hours a week, with the trend continuing to move down-
ward to 30 hours—with no reduction in pay. For Germany’s family-
owned businesses, succession is another huge problem.
Partners in Germany’s Successes (and Failures)
The major players in the business system’s comprehensive network 
of relationships are German banks, trade and industry associations, 
chambers of commerce, management and labor, and government. 
Banks play a critical role in the system. Rather than acquiring funds 
through the sale of stock or bonds, most firms turn to their local 
banks for capital. Typically, the banks in turn acquire some degree 
of ownership in their borrowers’ firms, and serve on their boards of 
directors.
Over a quarter of Germany’s banks are commercial banks, while 
most of the rest are local or regional savings banks. Nearly all offer a 
complete range of business services. Policy is set by Germany’s pow-
erful central bank, the Bundesbank. Others, led by the “big three”—
the Commerzbank, the Deutsche Bank, and Dresdner Bank—own or 
control somewhere near 25 percent of all voting stock in Germany’s 
largest firms, including Daimler-Benz, Siemens, Krupp, Bayer, and 
many others. They own shares in manufacturers, insurance compa-
nies, retail stores and chains, wholesale distributors, utilities, con-
struction firms and real estate syndicates, shipping companies, and 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
93
publishers. They are equally represented if not more so on the boards 
of Germany’s small and mid-sized firms, the Mittelstand.
German trade and industry associations and chambers of commerce 
also play a deciding role in the country’s business system; more than 
1,200 such groups are registered. The most powerful are the Fed-
eration of German Industry (BDI), the German Industry and Trade 
Association (DIHT), and the Federation of German Employers’ Asso-
ciation (BDA). Representing the interests of labor is the Federation 
of German Trade Unions (DGB), while the agricultural industry is 
represented by the German Farmers’ Union (DBV).
The largest organization is the BDI, which is a cooperative body 
representing some 34 different trade associations. These associations 
represent more than 500 smaller trade and regional business associa-
tions. Altogether, after reunification, some 100,000 separate business 
firms are represented by the BDI. Because of its size and broad mem-
bership base, BDI influence upon government policy is tremendous.
The DIHT is another association of organizations; it represents all 
of Germany’s local and regional chambers of commerce. By law, all 
German businesses must become a member of their local chamber of 
commerce. Thus, the DIHT represents all businesses, but it is par-
ticularly important as the voice of small and mid-sized business. Its 
members administer the country’s vocational training programs, run 
stock exchanges, help shape regional economic policy through their 
Länder governments, issue licenses and work permits, set store hours, 
and resolve disputes between their members. In sum, by forming and 
controlling rules for production and trade, they shape and set most 
of the regulations controlling how German business is conducted 
(McRae 1995).
The third major business organization is the BDA, which coordi-
nates the collective bargaining strategy of most German employers, 
administers a strike fund, and offers legal and social welfare advice 
and guidance. It represents more than 80 percent of all German 
employers. Its counterpart on the labor side is the federation of labor 
unions. German trade unions serve two roles: first, they negotiate with 
employers for their members on matters of pay and working condi-
tions and hours. Second, they serve to integrate German workers into 
the broader economy, thus avoiding confrontation, dissatisfaction, and 
violence such as occurred in the 1930s. Through these efforts, they 
have won for their workers one of the world’s most comprehensive—
and most costly—social security systems, including health, accident 
and old-age insurance programs, safe working conditions, longer holi-
days, and shorter and shorter working hours.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
94
Representing German farmers, the DBV has a membership of more 
than one million agricultural workers. Through its efforts, prices for 
German farm products have been kept artificially high, thus ensuring 
that Germany’s tiny agricultural sector also participates in the coun-
try’s economic success.
In the late 1990s, the German business system continued its empha-
sis on the manufacturing industry, as opposed to services, which were 
becoming increasingly important in Great Britain, Japan, and the 
United States. The German economy remained basically a processing 
economy. Acting in concert with this still-strong foundation is a large 
foreign trade component. Although it is declining in importance, the 
industrial sector continued to represent nearly 40 percent of the GNP. 
Manufacturing also accounted for nearly 39 percent of employment 
in Germany.
German manufacturing is no longer dominated by large cartels or 
syndicates. Rather, German business today is overwhelmingly made 
up of small and medium-sized firms with fewer than 500 employ-
ees. These make up some 98 percent of all German businesses and 
contribute significantly to Germany’s export strength. This are where 
most new jobs are created and where most innovation takes place, 
both in production techniques and in products themselves.
Policy of Co-determination
One of the most distinctive ways in which German businesses func-
tioned at the end of the century can be seen in the institution of 
co-determination. German law requires all firms with at least five 
employees to establish permanent workers’ councils, the purpose of 
which is to ensure that workers have a voice in (but not control over) 
company policy. This does not mean that they can interfere in tradi-
tional management functions. However, they are important in that 
they serve to eliminate many sources of labor-management tension 
before the issues erupt into costly strikes or other disruptive behav-
ior. More than 85 percent of German employees are so represented. 
Many firms also have workers sitting on their governing boards as 
well. German unions have also lobbied strongly to have similar laws 
adopted by the European Union, which would extend the policy to 
all 25 member nations.
To a degree much greater than either the United States or the 
United Kingdom, in the last decade of the twentieth century the Ger-
man business system continued to depend upon industry for much 
of its economic strength. Its service sector was not as developed 
as it might be, nor possibly even as much as it should have been. 

G e r m a n  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
95
German  industrialists from large and middle-sized manufacturing 
concerns remain exceptionally export-minded. There is little ques-
tion that, at least within the confines of the European Union and its 
affiliate nations, it will continue to do so. And, until the government’s 
proposed economic and labor market reforms kick in, the German 
business system will continue on the road to mediocrity.
Conclusion
Until 1990, two Germanys existed: West and East. East Germany with 
its command economy remained under the ideological and economic 
sway of the Soviet Union, while West Germany became a dominant 
force in the Western capitalist system. West Germany functioned as 
a mixed economy, as does the unified Germany today. In West Ger-
many, a government-mandated, wide-spread and very expensive social 
welfare system was built up over the years, but unlike Great Britain 
after World War II, the German government did not become heavily 
involved in public ownership. Rather, it has exercised only a modest 
level of intervention in the economy
During the 80 years from the end of World War I and the close of 
the twentieth century, the German business system suffered through 
several catastrophic upheavals. The history of the German business 
system in this period can be grouped into four periods. First, from 
1919 through the 1920s, was the painful period of demobilization 
and conversion after Germany’s defeat in World War I. Terms of 
the Allies’ peace treaty forced overnight redirection of the German 
economy from its more than 90 percent involvement in war-related 
production to a peacetime economy under the short-lived Weimar 
Republic. The second period, which roughly corresponds to the 
decade of the 1930s, saw German business undergo for the second 
time a complete transition from a peacetime economy to a full war 
footing under the Nazis. The third period, from the late 1940s to 
the late 1970s, saw German business rebuild from the devastation of 
World War II. In this period, German business experienced an “eco-
nomic miracle,” which enabled it to once again take a leadership role 
in the global economy. The fourth period, which began after the series 
of energy-related upheavals of the 1970s, brought about a reunified 
Germany and a strengthened European Union.
In 2015, the German economy continued to be one of the world’s 
largest, ranking in fourth place after the United States, China, and 
Japan. Moreover, Germany has come out of the deep recession of 
2008–2012 with a much strengthened position as the political leader 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
96
and economic engine driving of all of European. While much of its 
large-scale manufacturing has gone offshore, the many German mid-
sized, export-focused manufacturers remained at home and continue 
to produce products and services considered to be among the world’s 
finest. Problems with a weakened Euro and dependence upon energy 
from Russia threaten the German economy as much if not more than 
most of Europe.
Discussion Questions
1. What were the products that accounted for most of the growth in 
German trade in the years following World War I?
2. What were some of the problems restricting German growth dur-
ing the Weimar period?
3. What is hyperinflation and how did it affect the German economy 
in the 1920s?
4. Discuss the effects of the nationalism movement that occurred in 
Europe in the early and middle nineteenth century.
5. Describe the events that made the so-called German miracle pos-
sible during the early years following World War II.

4
C h a p t e r  7
The Germany Economy  
After Reunification
From the 1950s through the 1980s, West German industry, with less 
than a third of the population and limited natural resources compared 
with the United States, was able to dominate global markets in a host 
of manufactured market categories. Through much of the last part 
of this period, German labor costs were much higher; paid vacations 
often ran as long as six weeks; strong unions became heavily involved 
in the prerogatives of management and company policy; and unions 
consistently pressured employers to drive the work week down to 
around 35 to 30 hours with no reduction in wages. However, despite 
these economic millstones, up until the 1990s Germany was able to 
sustain its position as one of the strongest economies in Europe and 
in the world, eclipsed only by the United States and Japan. It was able 
to sustain that growth by supportive government actions and high 
demand for both industrial and consumer products in the aftermath 
of the dramatic destruction of World War II.
Business and Government Collaboration
Government and business in the Federal Republic of Germany (West 
Germany) were highly collaborative. Coalitions among the Län-
der and the federal government resulted in what Anderson (1992, 
197) referred to as Germany’s “marble cake federalism.” This sys-
tem encouraged overlapping and supportive coalitions that work for 
a common set of policies. These policies tend also to over-protect 
and over-regulate the German business system. The system worked 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
98
well for the 1980s, as the West German economy in terms of GDP 
per capita far exceeded that of most nearby countries behind the Iron 
Curtain. The data in Table 7.1 show the effects of the mid-1980s 
recession in all countries listed.
Managed Capitalism
Under this overly regulated business system, determining whether 
German business is able to maintain its leadership position in the 
highly competitive global economy of the future depends on the point 
of view of the person asked, although a growing consensus holds that 
it cannot under the present model (Wever and Allen 1992; Dyson 
2001; Kitschelt and Streek 2003). The earlier, successful model of 
the German business system reached its zenith in the 1980s, when 
Germany’s managed capitalism appeared to be perfectly suited to the 
postwar economic recovery of Europe and growing world trade. Post-
war political, business, and labor leaders had come to a phenomenal 
level of agreement on wages, social programs, product quality, and 
worker productivity.
The West German central government remained small, functioning 
as a captain of policy, with implementation in most cases residing in the 
hands of local Länder governments. Social support tended to be in the 
form of transfers financed by social security payments, rather than in 
programs managed and operated by large bureaucracies. This federal 
model limited the national government’s ability to enact innovative 
policies, since Länder governments and the many private nonprofit 
organizations with implementation responsibility retained “multiple 
institutional veto” power. In the 1990s, with the unification of the 
Table 7.1 GDP per capita in West Germany compared with communist states, 
1980–1989
Country
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
West Germany
13340 13290 12270 11450 11230 10970 12000 14430 18320 20520
Bulgaria
n/a
n/a
2450
2260
2150
2040
2170
2560
2750
2320
Czechoslovakia
n/a
n/a
2980
3000
2860
2740
2790
3030
3060
3460
Hungary
1930
2150
2260
2150
2050
1940
2020
2250
2450
2580
Poland
n/a
n/a
1540
1800
2060
2080
2030
1850
1850
1780
Yugoslavia
3250
3450
3230
2640
2270
2040
2290
2510
2720
2920
Source: Kelly 2014. Data from World Bank World Facts 1988.

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
99
East and West Germany, this system began to unravel. The external 
forces of globalization, changing market dynamics, economic union, 
reunification, and demographic shifts exerted pressures that require 
major adjustments to the business system—reform that consensus 
politics has not been able to effect. The picture of Germany’s system 
of managed capitalism a little more than 10 years after reunification 
has been described thus:
The overall picture, then, is one of a German political economy 
that produces only slow innovation and adjustment. Growth trailed 
most other major economies in the 1990s and the gap has recently 
widened. Industrial employment has fallen slower than one might 
have expected, given its comparatively high level in the 1980s; simi-
larly, consumer-oriented service employment has grown more slowly 
than the relatively small size of the sector would have led one to 
believe. . . . The German economy encounters difficulties entering 
new and technologically advanced industries and the growing sector 
of business services. Slow political and economic change coincides 
with a pattern of continued wage compression in industry accompa-
nied, however, by rising inequality of household incomes. (Kitschelt 
and Streek 2003, 18)
Reunification of East and West Germany
History is typically written as a sequence of game-changing events. 
Bernd Hüppauf and his fellow analysts (1993) recognized this but 
then added a caveat that a difficulty in writing modern history is that 
these important events have a habit of moving faster and faster. This 
is particularly true of the history of Germany after 1945. One way 
to look at this brief time period is to divide that history in four or 
five convenient sections: demobilization and separation from 1945 
to 1950; recovery and accelerated growth, 1950 to 1989; unifica-
tion and rebuilding, 1990 to 2008; and stabilization and leadership,  
2008 and beyond. Each of these periods can be broken down into 
smaller salient sections. For example, the period of unification and 
rebuilding can be addressed in four subsections: unification boom and 
bust, a new economic miracle, long stagnation, and a weaker, echo 
recovery (Groˉmling 2008; Sinn 2000).
Prior to the initial boom that occurred at the time of the unifica-
tion of East and West Germany almost all East German producers 
were required to sell to and secure their supplies and raw materials 
from domestic suppliers or sources controlled by the USSR through 
the Soviet Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (Collier and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
100
Siebert 1991; Smyser 1992). East Germany’s manufacturers were 
organized into 316 Kombinate (conglomerates), 221 of which were 
vertically and horizontally integrated industrial groups. The Kom-
binate were protected from domestic and foreign competition, but 
starved for investment capital and technological and managerial inno-
vation. West German industry, on the other hand, had benefited from 
access to Western industrial advances and global investment capital. 
The United Nations and the U.S. Marshall Fund had helped trigger 
and support West Germany’s economic miracle.
Completion of three processes was necessary to transform the East 
German production system from central command and control to the 
West German government’s social-market system with full economic 
partnership. First, all units in the conglomerates and legally sanctioned 
trusts had to be divested and reestablished as independent economic 
entities. Second, the productive efficiency in the now independent 
enterprises had to be improved and raised to West German standards. 
Third, all state-owned enterprises were to be either returned to their 
owners or sold to private owners.
To achieve these objectives, some 8,000 Kombinate units were 
declared legally independent enterprises, able to buy and sell in an 
open market. Improving efficiency was a tougher task (Bryson and 
Melzer 1987). Among other changes, it required significant structural 
and managerial changes that included opening suppliers to competi-
tion; producing components and products in-house where economi-
cally justified rather than through forced outside acquisition; shutting 
down of obsolete product lines and complete enterprises; and cur-
tailment of the provision of social services by firms. Organizational 
restructuring meant privatization wherever possible. A new govern-
ment agency, the Treuhandanstalt, was originally established by the 
East German government to oversee the transfer and sale of state-
owned properties to private owners and operators. After reunifica-
tion the agency and the process were taken over by the West German 
government, which was from then on the government for both areas. 
In addition, privatization meant state help in forming new small busi-
nesses. These were patterned after the Mittelstand, the heart of the 
West German economy. In the first 10 months of 1990, more than 
220,000 new businesses were established, about half of which were in 
retailing and food and beverage services. Over this same period, close 
to 3,000 of the 12,000 small businesses that had been nationalized 
were returned intact to their original owners. Another approximately 
3,000 firms were providers of public utilities or other services that 
were not to be privatized (Smyser 1993).

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
101
The unification of East and West Germany proceeded remarkably 
quickly. On March 18, 1990, general elections in East Germany put 
in office a new government that promised to adopt the West German 
economic, political, and social systems. It would take place by unifica-
tion with the West. This meant that the West German Deutschmark 
(D-mark) was the only legal tender in both East and West Germany, 
and that from then on responsibility for East German economic pol-
icy was to be in the hands of the Bundesbank and the Ministries of 
Finance, Economics, Labor, and Social Affairs. Financial support for 
East Germany was to be provided by the German Unity Fund’s dis-
tribution of 120 billion D-marks over a five-year period from 1990 to 
1994 (Kro¨ger and Teutemann 1992).
The Treuhandanstalt was taken over by the West German govern-
ment on June 17, and on July 1 the two governments agreed to a mon-
etary, economic, and social union with the West German Bundesbank 
becoming the central bank for both East and West. On the same day 
East German marks were to be converted to West German D-marks 
on a one-for-one basis for most personal accounts. The Treuhandan-
stalt then began the task of modernizing East German commerce and 
industry. In May 1990 the West German government established a 
special Fund for German Unity with 122 billion D-marks to fund the 
privatization process until 1994. Political union took place on Octo-
ber 3, 1990. A united German tax code went into effect on January 1, 
1991, along with a number of measures to support the growth of 
businesses and investments in the former East German states. The 
Treuhandanstalt completed its work by 1995 and was replaced by a 
smaller agency charged with managing and enforcing the hundreds of 
privatization contract sales of state-owned businesses that had taken 
place in the previous five years.
Effects of Unification on East German Commerce and Industry
The events of 1990 had a disastrous effect on East German producers 
and distributors. Almost overnight they lost nearly all their domestic 
and foreign markets. Unemployment soared while economic growth 
nosedived (Table 7.2). Industrial production in the remaining facto-
ries fell by two-thirds of their preunification levels in the 18 months 
after the fall of the wall separating the two Germanys (Burda and 
Hunt 2001). The result was bankruptcy for hundreds of East Ger-
man suppliers and unemployment for millions of East German work-
ers. West Germany softened the unemployment blow somewhat by 
extending social safety net programs to East Germans and initiating 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
102
worker retraining programs. East German producers were unable to 
meet the quality or productivity levels of West German manufacturers. 
The conversion to D-marks together with inefficient production cost 
them their price advantages.
At the same time, access to markets controlled by the Soviet orga-
nization Comecon—a group formed ostensibly to provide economic 
assistance to Russia’s European satellites after World War II—ended 
with conversion to a hard-currency system. Exports of East German 
goods to Eastern European markets essentially ended completely after 
January 1991. East German retailers, however, quickly substituted 
Western goods for domestic products. The collapse of demand for 
exports and shift in domestic demand to Western products resulted in 
dramatic declines in industrial production. At the same time, failures 
in the distribution system and lack of investment capital caused cuts in 
agriculture production and more unemployment. From 1989 to 1991 
GDP in East Germany dropped by roughly 30 percent, value added in 
industry declined by more than 60 percent. Unemployment increased 
from an official rate of zero to more than 15 percent.
The effects of reunification on West German businesses were clearly 
positive. At the time of the merging of the two economies, the global 
demand for German exports of consumer products was weak. Open-
ing the border and immediate conversion of individuals’ East German 
Ostmarks for West German D-marks at a one-for-one basis triggered 
a rapid increase in sales for West German producers. That growth 
continued until 1993 (Table 7.3).
The decline in GDP in East Germany in 1990 was 15.6 per-
cent, whereas in West Germany the positive impact of reunification 
contributed to a 5.7 percent rate of growth for the same year. The 
pattern repeated itself in 1991, when East Germany experienced 
a decline of nearly 23 percent in GDP while in West Germany an 
Table 7.2 GDP and productivity changes in East Germany, 1989–1993
Factor
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
GDP (billion D-marks)
234
178
159
213
262
GDP growth (%)
–
–19
–20
  7
  9
GDP deflator (% change)
–
–6
 12
 25
 13
Productivity (% per capita)
–
–9
 13
 13
  9
as a % of West German productivity
32
29
 32
 36
 38
Source: Kro¨ger and Teutemann 1992, 7. European Commission forecast data.

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
103
increase of 4.6 percent was reported. As noted in Table 7.3, the dif-
ferences began to reverse themselves in 1993, when East Germany 
enjoyed a rise in GDP of 7.3 percent while that of West Germany 
declined to 1.5 percent. GDP growth continued in this way until 
1997 when modest differences were reported for both regions. 
Similar patterns existed for rates of unemployment, with the unem-
ployment rate peaking at 19.5 percent for East Germany in 1997 
and 1998 (Table 7.3).
Germany’s Slower Growth Rates
By the early years of the new century, no German firm would be 
a leader in the important new industries of the future: electronics, 
computers and software, biotechnology, and information and com-
munications technology (ICT). The country was still too dependent 
upon the old industrial model that enabled it to achieve the economic 
miracle after 1950. While productivity growth in German ICT manu-
facturing increased faster than in other industries; the share of ICT 
products produced in Germany remained relatively small. The pro-
portion of workers with strong ICT skills in the German workforce 
Table 7.3 Real GDP growth and unemployment in East and West Germany, 
1990–2000 (%)
GDP
Unemployment
Year
East
West
East
West
1990
–15.6
5.7
n/a
n/a
1991
–22.7
4.6
10.3
6.3
1992
7.3
1.5
14.8
6.6
1993
8.7
–2.6
15.8
8.2
1994
8.1
1.4
16.0
9.2
1995
3.5
1.4
14.9
9.3
1996
1.7
06
16.7
10.1
1997
0.3
1.6
19.5
11.1
1998
0.6
2.3
19.5
10.5
1999
1.0
1.6
19.0
9.9
2000
1.1
3.3
n/a
n/a
Source: Burda and Hunt 2001, 6.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
104
remains below the EU average; one-third of German businesses sur-
veyed in a 2003 EU study reported that lack of ICT skills prevented 
their making ICT investments. In the early 2000s, critics of the Ger-
man business system were calling for the government to back away 
from its paternalistic control of business and, in the process, develop 
in a manner similar to what had befallen British industry after the war. 
Table 7.4 shows the decline in relative market share of the top five 
German exporters after reunification for a number of leading indus-
trial sectors in 1991, 1995, and 2002.
Table 7.4 Export market shares of top exporters in selected sectors (% of total)
1991
1995
2002
(%)
(%)
(%)
Pharmaceuticals
 Germany
17.0
14.4
10.2
 United States
12.1
9.2
9.8
 Switzerland
12.1
10.6
9.6
 United Kingdom
11.3
10.6
9.1
 France
10.2
9.6
9.1
Chemical (other than pharmaceuticals)
 Germany
18.4
14.9
12.1
 United States
15.9
13.9
13.6
 France
10.2
8.9
7.2
 Netherlands
7.3
6.4
5.0
 Japan
6.7
7.2
6.2
Machinery
 Germany
20.2
17.2
16.1
 United States
16.1
15.1
16.3
 Japan
14.0
15.1
10.4
 Italy
8.7
8.3
7.9
 United Kingdom
7.4
6.1
6.2
Vehicles
 Japan
18.5
19.5
13.4
 Germany
18.2
15.7
16.7
 United States
16.8
14.1
13.8
 France
8.8
8.7
8.1
 Canada
7.3
8.6
8.1
Sources: Fuentes, Wurzel and Morgan 2004; UN COMTRADE database.

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
105
The German Disease
At the turn of the century, German business, like the German govern-
ment, was feeling the effects of bad case of “the German disease,” 
the symptoms of which included sluggish growth, inflexibility, lack of 
innovation, and emphasis on the technologies of the future, very high 
labor costs, and even higher taxes to support a “cradle to the grave” 
social welfare system. Some of the key problems facing the German 
business system included the following:
t German business had the highest labor costs and among the short-
est working hours of any industrial nation.
t German industry was highly imbalanced, with a heavy dependence 
on chemicals and electromechanical manufacturing, and weak in 
electronics.
t German business, supported by a complacent and compliant 
government and reinforced by powerful trade associations, had 
developed a highly inflexible manufacturing technology and 
organizational structure.
t The German economy maintained a disproportionate reliance on 
capital goods, on mechanical engineering products such as motor 
vehicles, and on basic commodities such as chemicals.
t Demand for almost all Germany’s manufactured products was 
reaching saturation, in both the domestic and export markets; little 
or no growth was expected in these mature industries.
Calls for Structural Reform
Germany, in 2000 still the third largest economy in the world, was also 
the largest European economy in which business institutions suffered 
from high-wage, high-unemployment economic malaise. In 2005, the 
business system of the Federal Republic of Germany faced a number 
of significant challenges. Like firms in many industrial nations, Ger-
man businesses were struggling to find a way to deal effectively with 
intense competitive pressures brought about by the emerging global 
economy.
Germany, where the overwhelming majority of businesses are small 
and medium-sized enterprises, has been less effective in exploiting 
business opportunities formed by the explosion in ICT and expan-
sion of knowledge-based industries. The German economy has 
remained disproportionately dependent upon its manufacturing sec-
tor. This is supported by the history of Germany’s patent application. 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
106
Germany ranks second, behind only Ireland, in the number of manu-
facturing patents filed per capita and first in services, and ranks third 
among Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) member nations in the amount spent on innovation in both 
manufacturing and services. However, most of the money spent on 
patents and R&D in Germany happens in industrial sectors. Patenting 
is concentrated in transportation equipment (including automobiles) 
and in chemical manufacturing. A large share of German patenting 
occurs in industries considered to be medium-to-high–tech, with a 
very small proportion of innovative activity occurring in high-tech 
industries (Fuentes, Wurzel, and Morgan 2004).
Germany’s share of the world export market in pharmaceuticals—
long one of the major pillars of German industry—declined signifi-
cantly during the 1990s. Medium-to-high–tech industries such as 
pharmaceuticals have long been major drivers of the country’s export 
success. However, declines in patents and R&D expenditures in this 
sector and in machinery production are an indicator of major changes 
to the relative leadership of German industry. Moreover, the numbers 
of new firms established in the country have declined since the mid-
1990s—particularly in the number of new firms in the medium-to-
high–tech sector. New knowledge- and technology-intensive services 
experienced substantial growth after 1995, but not enough to com-
pensate for the losses in the medium-to-high–tech sector.
Structural problems with its educational system placed Germany in 
the unenviable position in 2005 of having the highest unemployment 
rate since the 1930s—12.1 percent—while many German businesses 
were unable to attract the skilled workers they needed to compete in 
the knowledge economy (FRG 2005b; Richardson 2005). In 2004, 
the German education system was reported to not be providing new 
job entrants the education and training in the skills needed by indus-
tries in the knowledge-based economy (OECD 2004). Graduate rates 
in German higher education continue to be very low. However, the 
vocational training system, jointly administered by industries and local 
education administrators, appeared to have solved many of its earlier 
problems. In 2012, despite the deep recession that had affected all of 
Europe and the United States, the 7.8 percent rate of German youth 
unemployment was among the lowest of all developed nations. By 
2015, the greatest problem facing German education was a surplus of 
teachers, a decline of traditional students, and a surge in the numbers 
of non-German immigrant children. To help improve the school-to-
work situation for young school graduates, industry agreed in 2004 to 
fund another 40,000 paid apprenticeship positions.

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
107
Of 30 OECD countries, only Turkey, Greece, France, Spain, the 
Slovak Republic, and Poland had higher 2004 unemployment rates 
than Germany. One of the reasons for the unemployment problem 
is the structural disincentive inherent in the labor market/social wel-
fare system. Roughly two-thirds of the country’s social expenditures 
were paid by social security contributions of employers and employ-
ees, which raised employers’ nonwage labor costs to a very high level. 
It also encouraged labor unions to demand higher wage increases to 
compensate for the large deductions from workers’ paychecks. As a 
result, employers had strong incentive for capital-intensive and labor-
saving investments and an equally strong disincentive for adding more 
workers. Together, these factors contribute strongly to the high rate 
of unemployment (Schmidt 2001).
Since the 1950s, German political leaders have been guided by 
four key economic goals: (1) price stability (low inflation); (2) achiev-
ing economic efficiency with an expansive program of social and 
economic equality; (3) a strong central government with a focus on 
transfers rather than a large bureaucracy; and (4) delegation of many 
state functions to nongovernment institutions and quasi-public soci-
etal associations (Schmidt 2001). The chief element in these policy 
directives has been maintaining price stability at all costs, even at the 
cost of growing unemployment.
Until the 1990s, the German government’s policy was highly suc-
cessful; Germany’s rate of inflation from 1950 to 1989 was the lowest 
in the world. The country was able to fund a growing pro-welfare 
policy, such that by 1990, Germany had become one of the strongest 
welfare states in the world. Germany was able to combine a high level 
of public expenditure without a large expansion of the public work-
force by emphasizing such income transfers as old age pensions, rather 
than on funding such programs as the United Kingdom’s national 
health service. Other functions have been delegated to quasi-public 
institutions such as the German Bundesbank and others.
For many reasons—not the least of which was the high cost of 
assimilating the bankrupt East German economy to that of West 
Germany—the old four-pillar economic policy has not been able to 
maintain the high rate of growth the country experience from 1950 
to 1990. While price stability has been maintained, it has also been 
achieved in many other countries, thus eliminating one leg of the for-
mer competitive advantage of many German industries. The cost of 
integrating the economies of the two Germanys has been far greater 
than anticipated, resulting in high tax increases to pay for the integra-
tion. This has reduced discretionary income and lowered consumer 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
108
purchasing, which in years past was an important driver of economic 
growth. The cost of maintaining the exceptionally generous social 
protection and welfare system has also become onerous, particularly 
since such a large portion of the programs are funded by employers’ 
and workers’ social security contributions and the aging workforce has 
left fewer younger workers to carry a disproportionately large share of 
the social payments burden.
Building a Future for German Business
Although its share of the global total continues to decline, German 
business as the twentieth century came to an end remained strong 
in those sectors it considers its manufacturing export core: pharma-
ceuticals, chemicals, machinery, and vehicles (Kalmbach et al. 2003). 
From 1991 to 2000 German manufacturing’s share of GDP declined 
by three percentage points. Despite this drop, the share of the export 
core industries increased somewhat during the decade. However, 
recent events have effectively eliminated high-tech IPOs and essen-
tially closed entrepreneurs’ access to venture capital, as the story in 
Box 7.1 illustrates.
Box 7.1 Missing venture capital for entrepreneurs
The successful growth of entrepreneurial activity requires a 
ready source of risk capital. In the United States, this usually 
takes the form of venture capital financing. In both the United 
Kingdom and Germany, the availability of private venture capi-
tal is exceptionally weak. This is one reason there has been rela-
tively little participation in the rapidly advancing information 
and communications technology (ICT) sector. As a percentage 
of GDP, venture capital financing in Germany was roughly a 
fifth of what it was in the United States during the years 1998 
to 2001. Moreover, the size of the venture capital market in 
Germany is smaller than in many of its European competitors, 
despite government support.
The 2003 closure of the Neuer Markt segment of the stock 
exchange (the Deutsche Borse) further weakened entrepreneur-
ial activity in Germany. The Neuer Markt provided something 
like 75 percent of the initial public offerings (IPOs) for venture 

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
109
capital–backed businesses between 1998 and 2000. The Neuer 
Markt was launched in March of 1997 with the hot IPOs for 
MobilCom, the telecommunications provider partially owned 
by France, and T-Online, Deutsche Telekom’s Internet divi-
sion. The Neuer Markt was established by the Borse to com-
pete with  the U.S. NASDAQ. However from 2000 to 2002 
the value of the 264 stocks lined on the exchange fell approxi-
mately 96 percent. In May 2002, while NASDAQ stock valua-
tions were only one-third of their March 2000 peak, the Neuer 
Markt was one-tenth of its value at the 2000 peak. After plung-
ing a few months later to less than one-twentieth of its peak 
value, Germany’s stock exchange operator, Deutsche Borse, 
AG, announced that it would shut the Neuer Markt down at 
the end of 2003.
Another weakness in the German venture capital market 
is the relatively small contribution made by German pension 
funds. In both the United Kingdom and the United States, pen-
sion funds contribute a large portion of the capital for IPOs. 
Assets of private pension funds represent nearly 60 percent of 
GDP in those countries, but only account for something like 17 
percent in Germany. Moreover, German industry retains more 
than one-third of private pension wealth as retained earnings, 
making it unavailable for venture capital investments. Finally, 
in Germany, more than half of the capital available for new ven-
ture investments is provided by German banks, an amount far 
greater than in the United Kingdom and the United States. 
German banks tend to be far more risk-averse than UK or U.S. 
venture capitalists.
Sources: Fuentes et al. 2004; Minesite 2002; and Ryan 2003.
As might be expected, the German government focused on taking 
an active role in improving the percentage of the ICT industry served 
by German industry—and gains are being achieved. For example, the 
OECD reported that Germany’s position advanced to 10 from 17 on 
an 80-nation list of networked readiness index from 2002 to 2003. 
In 2004, the ICT industry in Germany employed some 750,000 
employees and an annual turnover of 130 billion euros. Continuing 
its tradition of private/public sector cooperative efforts, among the 
more active programs designed to improved Germany’s ICT business 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
110
are the D21 Initiative, the German Broadband Initiative, and the Dig-
ital Broadcasting Initiative.
The German government’s approach emphasized cooperation 
within the inter-sector (i.e., federal and Länder governments) public 
and private partnerships (PPPs). Initiative D21 was Germany’s larg-
est public-private partnership. Launched in 1999, D21 is a registered 
nonprofit association with no commercial interests. It is funded from 
membership fees and donations and has its head office in Berlin. Its 
managing board consists of 25 members and in 2004 was chaired by 
Thomas Ganswindt, a member of Siemens AG’s corporate executive 
committee. It is designed to be a noncompetitive arena with more 
than 400 representatives of enterprises, associations, parties, political 
institutions, and other organizations involved, including global com-
panies such as Alcatel, AOL, Cisco Systems, IBM, Microsoft, and Sie-
mens (InitativeD21 2005). The chief coal of the program is to make it 
easier for German business to move successfully into the information 
and knowledge economy and to make Germany more internationally 
competitive and ready for the future.
D21 is designed to promote skills in the use of information and 
communications technologies among all social groups and genders, 
in schools, government agencies, associations and businesses. To 
facilitate these broad goals, the work of the initiative is focused on 
four subject areas that include a number of specific objectives and 
subinitiatives:
t Education, training, qualification and equality of opportunity
t eGovernment and security and confidence in the Internet
t Information and communications technologies in health care
t Growth and competitiveness, with the focus on broadband and the 
mobile society
Conclusion
The evolution of German commerce and industry from rock bottom 
in 1945 to one of the world’s leading manufacturers and exporters in 
a host of business sectors resulted from the commitment of a small 
number of personal managers, many of whom were products of engi-
neering training and experience. Georgetown University professor 
W. R. Smyser (1992 and 1993), after having lived, worked, and stud-
ied in postwar Germany for many years, identified what he claimed 
was a distinctive German management style. It blends aspects of con-
servatism and dynamism in often unpredictable ways, always with an 

Th e  G e r m a n y  E c o n o m y  A f t e r  R e u n i f i c at i o n
111
eye for the future and long-term results. Managers are likely to have 
had experience in production and pride themselves on attaining supe-
rior quality of products and services. They are highly competitive, but 
in the sense of niche markets and market share rather than market 
dominance. They do not see government as the enemy but instead are 
prone to work closely with government for the benefit of everyone. 
They do not plan for product obsolescence, but rather for items to 
last as long as possible. Relations between managers and workers are 
not adversarial. Rather, managers know, respect, and listen to their 
workers. Some of the characteristics of what Smyser (1993, 74) saw as 
making up the German management style are:
t Management tends to be more collegial rather than hierarchical or 
individualistic.
t Managers achieve consensus rather than issuing orders.
t They are conscious of the employees and respectful of their knowl-
edge.
t They are concerned with the company’s product, its quality, preci-
sion, and service.
t They tend to be loyal to one company and its long-term prospects.
t Because they are long-term oriented, they are less likely than Asian 
or U.S. managers to react quickly to innovation or new develop-
ments.
t They are committed to maintaining market position, even if main-
taining it means temporary losses.
The highly efficient manufacturing sector that developed in West 
Germany from 1950 to 1990 gave the recovered nation world export 
leadership—but often at the cost of overly burdened and obsolescent 
business enterprises in the old industries. As the old century moved 
on, German industry continued to be a leading exporter of indus-
trial products, but it also encountered growing competition in almost 
all of its once-dominant positions. All sectors from automobiles to 
chemicals, electrical machinery and machine tools were affected. By 
the 1980s, much of this competition was coming from Asia as well 
as the United States. Whether the German business system is able to 
maintain its global leadership position as the new century progresses 
depends upon the ability of German policy makers to transform the 
economy from the beautifully organized, social market industrial 
economy it was in the 1970s into a flexible, knowledge-based, quick-
reacting business system that is more appropriate for the next century. 
This means developing greater flexibility, reducing production costs, 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
112
and moving heavily into new technologies such as computers and 
biotechnology. The next chapter follows the German government’s 
attempts to improve the competitiveness of existing German busi-
nesses while at the same time encouraging investment in new infor-
mation and communication technologies.
Discussion Questions
1. Do you agree or disagree that German businesses were in need of 
structural reform? Explain the reasons for your opinion.
2. What were some of the key strengths of the German economy in 
the early 2000s?
3. Germany has had four key policy goals for its economy. Name these 
and describe how relevant they are in the twenty-first century.
4. What effect do EU growth programs have on growth in Germany?
5. Why has the growth of the economy of the former East German 
states lagged behind that of West Germany despite reunification?

4
C h a p t e r  8
Commerce and Industry  
in a United Germany
In 2011, 20 years after Germany’s reunification, survey results pub-
lished by the Center for Eastern Studies reported that a number of 
assimilation problems continue to plague the unified of East and West 
Germany. These included mutually negative stereotypes and strong 
disagreement in interpretation of different versions of German his-
tory after 1945. Another factor contributing to misconceptions is that 
things in the eastern Länder (the “new” states) are not as bad as they 
are reported to be by the Western-based press. Moreover, the new 
states are growing faster than the old (Western) states, although they 
are still not as well off as the old state. Also, both left and right radical 
political parties are much stronger in the five new states than the older 
states of the West.
For this analysis, however, the most relevant differences are those 
in perceptions of distribution of benefits of reunification. The think-
ing in the West is that companies and citizens in the East are the main 
beneficiaries of reunification. Since 1990 the new states have received 
funds from the federal government and from individual Western 
states. It is estimated that by 2019, these aid funds will total three tril-
lion euros. Often forgotten is that West German companies benefited 
significantly from the opening of the market of 16 million-plus con-
sumers in the East. Because modernization occurred in the East 40 or 
so years later than it did in the West, the roads, railroads, and telecom-
munications networks are in much better condition than those in the 
West, making it easier and less costly to serve those markets.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
114
Over the more than 20 years since reunification, East and West 
Germany remain one society, but with two distinct societies within it 
(Zawilska-Florczuk and Ciechanowicz 2011). The process of merg-
ing the political, legal and administrative institutions of the East with 
those of the West was accomplished quickly. However, bridging the 
deep divide in the cultural and economic differences has been more 
difficult. Industrial development benefited some but not all regions 
of the East.
Germany’s Weakening Traditional Strengths
Twenty years after reunification, West Germany’s traditional economic 
strengths began to be weakened by a number of important changes 
taking place in the world economy. Challenges facing the German 
business leaders in the new century are led by changes in the nature 
of a market driven by rapidly changing technologies, globally inter-
connected economies, and shifts in customer demand. Long produc-
tion runs of high-quality products have been replaced by constant and 
rapid changes in customer values; this has necessitated German indus-
tries to develop an ability to change rapidly to meet shifts in demand. 
Germany’s traditional leadership in the chemical, transportation, and 
machinery markets is being challenged by manufacturing advances in 
the newly industrializing nations, leading to reductions in size of many 
international markets. These difficulties would be exacerbated by the 
deep global recession that began in 2008 and bankrupted several EU 
member states, causing a drop in the world’s confidence in the euro.
According to some analysts, by 2003, the system of German com-
merce and industry—and of many other European nations as well—
was in need of structural reform. Symptoms making this need apparent 
included endemic high unemployment, low gains in productivity, and 
the low number of hours worked by the labor force (labor force partic-
ipation). While some critics lay the blame for these conditions on many 
European workers’ reputation for preferring more leisure over work, 
others see the problem as more systemic, caused by economic distor-
tions brought about by welfare state policies and institutions (Duval 
and Elmeskov 2005). There was general agreement that the major 
demographic shifts then well underway, particularly the aging of the 
population and low or negative population growth, are sure to exac-
erbate the economic difficulties facing much of Europe. Population 
aging in many of these countries is already signaling a coming con-
frontation between the large number of pensioners and the younger 
cohorts who finance most of the country’s social spending through 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
115
high social security contributions and taxes. Germany’s economy as 
the twenty-first century began was described as being out of balance:
Post-unification Germany continues to be one of the world’s top wel-
fare states. Relative to Gross domestic product [GDP] per capita, the 
share of social spending as a percentage of GDP is even higher than in 
most other industrial countries, and so, too, is the level of employment 
protection. But in terms of the control of inflationary pressure, Ger-
many is no longer top but rather a middleweight . . . one could argue 
that the effort to achieve efficiency and equality in post-unification 
Germany is out of equilibrium. (Schmidt 2001, 9–10)
The OECD economic survey of Germany for 2004 reported that 
the German economy was successful in dealing with the severe shocks 
suffered by most of the European Union at the end of the twenti-
eth century, but still had far to go before it could assume its former 
position as the engine driving EU growth. The OECD survey report 
described Germany’s recovery from the bursting of the 1990s bubble 
economy this way: “With the effects of adverse external shocks dimin-
ishing, the German economy is currently recovering, ending a couple 
of years in stagnation on the back of its traditionally strong, competi-
tive and innovative export-oriented manufacturing sector. However, 
the economy is far from operating at full strength due to the weakness 
of final domestic demand. Poor labor market performance continues 
to weigh on consumer sentiment and business confidence remains 
volatile. The labor market suffers from weak growth and distorted 
incentives, with both contributing to problems in taking up work and 
providing employment” (OECD 2004).
By early 2005, the OECD could report that the German econ-
omy was at last emerging from a three-year period of near stagnation, 
with a strong and competitive export industry helping the economy 
recover it strength. The OECD also expected some rising demand 
at home, but predicted the construction industry to remain in the 
doldrums, and no early turnaround in the nation’s labor market. Ger-
many’s high labor costs were driving many manufacturers to seek off-
shore production.
Germany regularly produces some of the best industrial products in 
the world. It is a global leader in chemicals and pharmaceuticals, and 
makes some of the finest automobiles in the world. It has arguably one 
of the world’s best industrial vocational training systems and the banks 
most closely aware of commerce and industry problems and most for-
ward-looking banks.. Its small and middle-size industries continue to 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
116
develop innovative products and production technology. Germany is a 
land of social stability and high living standards for most if not all of its 
citizens, although her many “guest workers” remaining from the labor 
shortages during the postwar economic miracle do not share in all of 
this good life. German workers may be seen as overpaid, but they were 
also recognized as among the most productive in the world.
What Went Wrong?
So, with a record like this what cause the economy to slow? In the 
first place, Germany has become a land of high unemployment, inflex-
ible work standards enforced by powerful intransigent labor unions, 
strong trade associations, and government bureaucrats. The result 
was a system in which consecutive German governments attempted to 
overprotect everyone and everything in society.
German industry, the economy’s most important sector, was long 
characterized as unwilling to adopt such often-critical management 
practices as downsizing and transformation. Strong regulatory restric-
tions on genetic research most likely resulted in the slow shift of the 
strong pharmaceutical industry to biotechnological techniques from 
traditional chemical methods. Although the regulations were eased 
in the mid-1990s, Germany has not made up lost ground (Fuentes, 
Wurzel, and Morgan 2004).
A Way Out
One of the approaches Germany hoped would re-energize the busi-
ness system in the new millennium was to make it easier for entre-
preneurs to start their own businesses. Making sure that funds are 
available for new ventures and investment in innovative products and 
process is a plank in the government’s reform package. However, it 
was not going to be a total answer to the problem. Until the income 
tax reductions of 2004 and 2005, Germany’s high taxation of high 
incomes made it difficult for individuals to amass discretionary sums 
that could be used for new venture capital investments, and difficult 
to use high wages as incentive for attracting the highly skilled workers 
needed by German businesses. A survey conducted in six EU coun-
tries, the United States, and Switzerland revealed that Germany was 
one of the countries with the highest average effective taxation of 
wages of highly qualified personnel such as engineers and scientists.
Despite the federal government’s promise in 2002 to reduce the 
red-tape barriers that have made the country one of the most difficult 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
117
in which to start a new business, the structure of the German political 
system continues to restrict entrepreneurial activity. For example, the 
Agenda 2010 plan (Me-plc or Ich-AG) to encourage the unemployed 
to start their own businesses is often effectively cancelled out by regu-
latory actions taken at the Länder, city, or quasi-public agency level 
(see Box 8.1).
Box 8.1 German entrepreneurs fight red tape to succeed
Johanna Ismayr, an unemployed resident of Berlin, decided 
to take advantage of a new government program to help the 
chronically unemployed get off welfare by helping them start 
their own small businesses. Ms. Ismayr signed up for the Me-plc 
(Ich-AG) program included in the government’s Agenda 2010 
Plan. The government’s Agenda 2010 included a number of 
reforms that would change the political and economic system 
in order to reduce unemployment and put people back to work.
Ms. Ismayr was both innovative and successful—so much 
so that it became an exemplar for others wishing to follow in 
her footsteps. Her idea was to bring the seacoast to the people, 
instead of forcing them to travel long distances. She imported 
sand from Germany’s Baltic Sea coast and created a temporary 
artificial beach near the Reichstag (Germany’s capitol building). 
She then added tourist attractions such as bars and restaurants.
Ms. Ismayr’s Berlin beach resort was an immediate success. 
Open for two summers, her new business employed up to 30 
people. But the bureaucrats are snapping at her heels; she might 
not be able to open for the third year. She must apply to the 
city of Berlin each year for a new permit. The city government 
does not like the idea. The reason for their unwillingness is that 
the park is a “green area;” the city does not want businesses or 
events in the area. Getting a city permit has become more dif-
ficult each year. Ms. Ismayr and her 30 employees could find 
themselves back among the unemployed.
According to news accounts, attempts to cut the amount of 
regulation in the German economy have been blocked by the 
complex parliamentary process. Programs of the party in office 
at the federal level can be blocked by the opposition part or by 
the governments of the 12 federal states, the Länder. For exam-
ple, recent attempts by the current government to liberalize 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
118
rules for doing business in a number of occupations, from car-
penter to butcher, the opposition party refused to go along with 
the plan. To become a “master” carpenter or butcher takes years 
of apprenticeship and a special certificate of authorization called 
a “Meisterbrief.” Some critics of the system see this as restraint 
of initiative that adds to Germany’s growing uncompetitiveness.
With these and many, many other examples of red tape and 
over-regulation, the 2005 BBC report concluded that there was 
little sign that Europe’s biggest economy would get back on 
track any time soon.
Source: Furlong 2005.
Agenda 2010
On March 14, 2003, German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder 
announced an ambitious government program designed to deal with 
the problems of the German business system and implement some 
degree of structural reform primarily by reforming fiscal policy and 
labor markets. The plan was designed to stimulate economic growth, 
ensure the long-term stability of the social systems, and strengthen 
Germany as an economic location (Deutschland Magazine 2004). 
The program, called Agenda 2010, is based on the assumption that 
a welfare state like Germany is not equipped to deal with the demo-
graphic changes in society. Furthermore, during an economic crisis 
like the one Germany found itself in at the start of the twenty-first 
century, the huge welfare state costs are an insurmountable burden on 
the already-fragile economy. Key goals of the Agenda 2010 initiative 
included (1) reductions in nonwage labor costs, (2) boosting domes-
tic demand and capital spending, (3) helping the unemployed find a 
job more quickly, and (4) making the labor market more flexible. By 
2014, most of these initiatives had been implemented.
To accomplish these goals, the Agenda 2010 program focused on 
macroeconomic conditions by cutting taxes and subsidies, expanding 
worker education by encouraging businesses to provide more train-
ing opportunities, loosening Germany’s rigid labor market regula-
tions, and reengineering the ailing health care and pension systems 
to improve everyone’s health, pensions, and family benefits. Eight of 
the 12 laws of the Agenda 2010 came into force in January 2004. In 
addition to a 15 billion euro tax cut, the joint government-industry 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
119
Agenda 2010 initiatives to resurrect the economy included the fol-
lowing (FRG 2004):
t Commissions of experts have been formed to propose ways to 
reduce unemployment and modernize the social security systems 
in Germany. Some of the results were incorporated into the federal 
government’s reform concept and the laws passed by parliament in 
December 2004.
t A commission named after its chairman, Volkswagen manager Pe-
ter Hartz, submitted proposals to reform the labor market. These 
have since become legislation. Its goals are to create new jobs by 
liberalizing temporary and agency work and regulate mini-jobs 
held by self-employed entrepreneurs. In January 2004, unemploy-
ment benefits were merged with income supports.
t The Rürup Commission proposed ways to adapt German social 
systems to future needs. The key proposals were: the gradual rais-
ing of the statutory retirement age from 65 to 67 starting in 2011; 
a reduction in the gross level of pensions; introduction of a basic 
sustainability factor; a new health insurance program to which civil 
servants and self-employed people would also contribute; and sim-
plified health premiums with everyone paying a lump-sum contri-
bution irrespective of income.
t Under a new Me-plc (Ich-AG) program, business start-up 
grants have been introduced to promote self-employment among 
the unemployed. A Minijob program allows deduction-free em-
ployment for employees who earn up to 400 euros a month. Em-
ployers pay a lump sum of 25 percent of the amount paid to the 
worker.
t Pension adjustments include an annual increase in retirement pen-
sions, which is generally linked to the increase in wages. In 2002, 
the pension rate was 68.2 percent of average net earnings.
t Unemployment benefits: Job seekers receive benefits up to 60 per-
cent of their previous net earnings if they were employed and liable 
to pay contributions for at least one year in the three years before 
they became unemployed. From 2006, benefits would normally be 
paid for up to 12 months.
As of 2005, some 20 percent of the Ich-AG units started under 
Agenda 2010 auspices had gone bankrupt—which to U.S. eyes 
probably does not seem as bad as it is perceived in Germany. Con-
ventional wisdom in the United States holds that as high a propor-
tion as 80 percent of all new business ventures fail within two years 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
120
of their formation. The U.S. CIA’s World Factbook identified the 
German economy as the fifth largest economy in the world in pur-
chasing power parity (PPP) terms: the unified country benefits from 
a highly skilled labor force and is Europe’s largest and a leading 
exporter of machinery, vehicles, chemicals, and household equip-
ment. However, as noted earlier, Germany and the other EU mem-
ber states face great demographic challenges to sustained long-term 
growth. These include low fertility rates and declining net immigra-
tion. Together these factors are placing heavy pressure on all social 
welfare systems.
Reforms launched by the government of Chancellor Gerhard Schroeder, 
deemed necessary to address chronically high unemployment and low 
average growth, contributed to strong growth and falling unemploy-
ment in 2006 and 2007. Those advances, as well as a government subsi-
dized, reduced working hour scheme, help explain the relatively modest 
increase in unemployment during the 2008-09 recession—the deepest 
since the end of World War II—and its decrease to 6.5 percent in 2012. 
GDP contracted 5.1 percent in 2009 but grew by 4.2 percent in 2010, 
and 3.0 percent in 2011, before dipping to 0.7 percent in 2012. The 
decline was a reflection of low investment spending due to crisis-induced 
uncertainty and the decreased demand for German exports from reces-
sion-stricken periphery countries. (World Factbook 2013)
Economic stimulus efforts begun in 2008 and 2009 and tax cuts 
introduced in Chancellor Angela Merkel’s second term increased 
Germany’s total budget deficit to 4.1 percent in 2010, but slower 
spending and higher tax revenues reduced the deficit to 0.8 percent 
in 2011. In 2012 Germany reported a budget surplus of 0.1 percent. 
A constitutional amendment approved in 2009 limits the federal gov-
ernment to structural deficits of no more than 0.35 percent of GDP 
per year as of 2016. This target was reached in 2012. Following the 
March 2011 nuclear disaster in Fukushima, Japan, Chancellor Merkel 
announced that eight of the country’s 17 nuclear reactors would be 
shut down immediately and the remaining plants would be closed by 
2022. The plan is for Germany to replace the lost nuclear power with 
renewable energy—an ambitious plan indeed. Before the shutdown of 
the eight reactors, Germany relied on nuclear power for 23 percent 
of its electricity generating capacity and 46 percent of its base-load 
electricity production.
Funding of ICT research in universities and private and public 
research institutions is focused on areas of the industry that hold 
promise of creating jobs in the small and medium-sized sector and 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
121
establishing German industry’s technological leadership in the sec-
tor. The OECD predicted in 2003 that future innovation for German 
industry is likely to occur in such fast-growing areas as mobile Inter-
net/ambient intelligence, IT system reliability and security, nanoelec-
tronics (including displays), and knowledge management. A selected 
list of digital economy program objectives is shown in Table 8.1.
Table 8.1 Program objectives in four D21 policy areas
Policy Area
Examples of Program Objectives
Education, 
training, equal 
opportunity 
t 6TFBOEHSFBUFSBWBJMBCJMJUZPGOFXNFEJBJOTDIPPMT
vocational training centers, and universities
t %FWFMPQNFOUBOEFOIBODFNFOUPGFTDJFODFBQQMJDBUJPOCZ
2004
t *ODSFBTFJO*OUFSOFUQFOFUSBUJPOBOEVTFVTFBNPOHPWFS
year-olds increase to 75% by 2005
t &WFONBMFGFNBMFQSPQPSUJPOPG*OUFSOFUVTFBOESBJTJOH
proportion of women in IT training to 40% as soon as 
possible
eGovernment 
and trust in the 
Internet
t $SFBUJPOPGBUPUBMMZJOUFHSBUFEF(PWFSONFOUCSJOHJOH
federal, Länder, and local governments online through 
“Germany On-Line”
t *NQMFNFOUBUJPOPGPG(FSNBOZ0O-JOFQSPKFDUTCZFOE
of 2005
t "MMPGGFEFSBMHPWFSONFOUT*OUFSOFUDBQBCMFTFSWJDFTPOMJOF
by end of 2005
t $PNNPOCVTJOFTTNPEFMTUPFOBCMFGFEFSBM-ÊOEFSBOEMPDBM
government s to use each others’ eGovernment solutions
Greater use of 
ICTs in health 
care
t 5FTUJOHPGFMFDUSPOJDIFBMUIDBSEGSPNXJUIOBUJPOXJEF
use by January 1, 2006; issue of 300,000 identity cards for 
members of the healing occupations by 2006
t $SFBUFDPOEJUJPOTOFDFTTBSZGPSQBUJFOUNFEJBM
documentation accessible by all healthcare institutions
t &OBCMFFMFDUSPOJDTVCTDSJQUJPOTCZ
t $SFBUFXPSLTUSVDUVSFTGPSPOHPJOHTUBOEBSEJ[BUJPOPG*$5
in the healthcare sector; architecture agreement as of 2004
Growth and 
competitiveness
t .PSFUIBONJMMJPOCSPBECBOEMJOFTJO(FSNBOZCZ
t $POUJOVFEHSPXUIJOUIFNPCJMFUFMFDPNNVOJDBUJPOTNBSLFU
t 3BQJEJOUSPEVDUJPOPGEJHJUBMCSPBEDBTUJOHTIJGUGSPN7)'
to digital radio by 2015
t #PPTUTNBMMBOENFEJVNTJ[FFOUFSQSJTF	4.&
BOEDSBGU
trade sectors’ use of e-business; 40% of companies use by 
2008
Source: OECD 2004.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
122
Both complicating and enhancing Germany’s efforts at bringing 
greater emphasis on these and other ICT industry products and pro-
grams are the activities of institutions at the EU level. One of these 
programs was the eEurope 2005 action plan. This initiative was imple-
mented to make it possible for EU nations to create a business envi-
ronment that fosters private investment and job creation, modernizes 
public administration and health care, and gives all citizens the pos-
sibility of participating in the global information society. The Ger-
man government is also participating in similar job-creation programs 
directed by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU), 
the United Nations, the OECD, and other regional, national, and 
international government, labor union, and nonprofit organizations 
(OECD 2004).
The 2008 Recession
Despite the ambitious goals, without additional structural reforms 
there was little significant near-term improvement in Germany’s 
economic outlook. Progress was halted by the Great Recession of 
2008–2010 and subsequent problems in the euro zone. “Managed 
capitalism” is about coordination and slow, incremental and undra-
matic change in order to retain the consensus. As Dyson (2001, 142) 
explained, the reform logic of managed capitalism is “modernization 
by stealth.” Growth in most of Europe over the early 2000s was gla-
cial. Although Germany remains Europe’s strongest economy, its rate 
of growth in GDP from 2005 to 2013 followed the same pattern 
(Table 8.2). GDP growth slipped into negative numbers at the bot-
tom of the recession in 2009; after a brief 4.0 percent increase in 
2010 it declined in the next three contiguous years. A rate of growth 
in GDP of 1.5 percent was forecast for 2014, half a percentage point 
below the average for all industrial countries.
The nearly flat rate in 2007 and negative rate in 2009 were prod-
ucts of the three-year global recession. That recession was consid-
ered by many to have been the deepest drop that many countries 
had experienced since the 1930s. The industrial producing sector 
is the most important contributor to Germany’s economic health. 
Hence, the slowdown in the European economy, and particularly the 
Eurozone countries, hit Germany harder that otherwise might be 
expected. Manufacturing output declined in both 2012 and 2013, 
and was expected to decline or be flat again in 2012. One of the few 
bright spots was the predicted 3 percent growth in the pharmaceutical 
industry.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
123
German Commerce
Outside of Germany, an often ignored sector also contributing to the 
vigor of the German economy and, increasingly, to exports, is the 
retailing sector (also referred to as the tertiary sector). At annual sales 
exceeding US$370 billion in 2005 or 430 billion euros in 2013, Ger-
many represents the world’s third largest retail market, following only 
the United States and Japan. Retail trade is the third largest economic 
sector in Germany.
In 2014 there were something like 400,000 retail establishments 
in Germany (the actual number varies regularly due to the relatively 
inexpensive and easy entry and subsequent high failure rate of small 
retail establishments everywhere). This does not include restaurants, 
taverns, or bars, which are considered to be in the service sector. 
Inside Germany, however, this sector remains the country’s clearest 
examples of the traditional “organized capitalism” approach. This 
philosophy results in the retail sector being one of the most struc-
tured and regulated sectors of the German business system, as the fol-
lowing Euromonitor statement notes: “The retail sector in Germany 
remains extremely traditional, with a high level of control through 
government legislation, trade associations, trade [labor] unions, con-
sumer groups, environmental groups, and even the church. This is in 
spite of rapid changes in its structure. Rigid control is restricting the 
modernization of the retail sector and curtailing the flexibility that is 
Table 8.2 German development indicators, 2006–2013
Year
Factor
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
GNI per capita,
PPP in current 
international $ 34,260 36,120 37,550 36,860 39,150 41,910 42,860 44,540
Population 
(million)
82.4
82.3
82.1
81.9
81.8
81.8
80.4
80.6
GDP in current 
US$ (billion)
2.903
3.324
3.624
3.298
3.304
3.628
3.423
3.635
GDP annual % 
growth
4.0
3.0
1.0
-5.0
4.0
3.3
0.7
0.4
Abbreviations: GDP, gross domestic product; GNI, gross national income; PPP, purchasing power 
parity.
Source: World Bank 2014.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
124
needed to respond to a highly dynamic market environment. Strict 
shop opening hours, for example, have hampered growth in the con-
venience store sector, which is showing popularity to a mobile popula-
tion” (Euromonitor 2004).
Germany’s retail sector has joined the four core industrial sectors 
in making its presence felt in international markets. German retailers 
are increasingly expanding in such foreign markets as China (See Box 
8.2), and the United States, where the German steep discounter Aldi 
has continued to expand. Aldi announced in 2013 that it planned to 
expand by 50 percent more outlets in the United States over the next 
five years, which would make it the largest discount grocery store 
chain in the country.
The structure of the German retail industry changed dramatically 
over the last quarter of the twentieth century (Euromonitor 2004). 
At the end of the 1970s, more than three-quarters of retail outlets in 
German cities were small independent specialty shops. In 2004, that 
percentage had dropped to less than 25 percent, with specialist super-
stores operated by large retail chains taking their place. By the second 
decade of the 2000s, the bulk of growth in new retail outlet loca-
tions had shifted from individual stores to outlets in suburban centers. 
By 2014, fully a third of the 400,000 retail outlets in the country 
indicated they had begun to include Internet sales in their business 
models. German retailers also expanded their global operations, as the 
example in Box 8.2 illustrates.
Box 8.2 German retailer expands in China
Metro Cash & Carry opened its third outlet in China in May 
of 2014. Metro, a German retailing giant, continues to expand 
around the world. Metro is in 29 countries with over 750 self-
service wholesale stores. With more than 120,000 employees 
worldwide, the wholesale division achieved sales of about 31 
billion euros in the financial year 2012–2013 (a short finan-
cial year 2013). The Metro Cash & Carry division is part of 
Metro Group, one of the world’s largest and most international 
retailing companies. The group had sales of around 66 billion 
euros in the financial year 2012–2013 (the short financial year 
2013). Metro Group has around 265,000 employees and oper-
ates around 2,200 stores in 32 countries. Group units include 
Metro/Makro Cash & Carry (the self-service wholesaler), Real 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
125
hypermarkets, Media Markt, Saturn (European marketer of 
retail consumer electronics), and Galeria Kaufhof department 
stores.
The retail division entered China in 1995 by founding Metro 
Jinjiang Cash & Carry Co., Ltd., in cooperation with Shanghai-
based Jinjiang Group. The joint venture has expanded across 
China since 1996 when the first such outlet was founded in 
Shanghai. The joint venture also contributes to China’s exports; 
over 10,000 different commodities made by Chinese producers 
have been sold worldwide via Metro’s global supply network.
Metro has clearly been a success in China, according to Jean-
Luc Tuzes, president of Metro Jinjiang Cash & Carry Co., Ltd. 
Tuzes said in 2003 that the company would open more new 
stores in cities such as Dongguan of south China’s Guangdong 
Province and Dalian of northeast China’s Liaoning Province, 
and he hoped the number of Metro chain stores in China would 
number 40 in three to five years. They have clearly met if not 
exceeded their expectations: the 2014 cash and carry store is its 
seventy-seventh outlet in China.
Source: China Daily 2003 and 2013; Yahoo Finance 2014.
Over the 1980s and 1990s, retail outlets in the cities came to be 
dominated by outlets owned by these large chains, particularly in the 
nonfood sector; in 2004 they controlled from 50 to 60 percent of all 
outlet space in cities and towns. Shopping centers and huge hyper-
markets in out-of-town locations became increasingly popular, with 
large specialty stores selling garden products, furniture, toys, office 
equipment, sporting goods, consumer electronics, and footwear lead-
ing the growth. The trends toward more and larger “big box” stores, 
franchise outlets, discounters, factory outlets, and e-commerce are 
expected to continue for the foreseeable future.
Many U.S., UK, and other European retailers have a strong pres-
ence in the German retailing sector. Not all these retailers are equally 
successful, however. German consumers have adopted the furniture 
retail giant IKEA as their own, but have not been as eager to shop at 
Walmart stores. Walmart management has had difficulty determin-
ing how to function in Germany. Clearly, attempts to transplant the 
Bentonville, Arkansas, model have not worked. Since entering the 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
126
German market in 1997, Walmart has captured just 2 percent of food 
sales and is a marginal player in nonfood retail items.
In just a few short years, Walmart’s presence had dropped from the 
95 supercenters it operated in 2002, to 91 in April of 2005—a fifth 
the size of its largest German rival Kaufland. To do justice to the com-
pany, the stores closed may have been the most inefficient and money-
losing outlets of the acquired chains. Walmart acquired the 21-store 
Wertkauf chain in 1997 and 74 Interspar hypermarkets a year later. At 
the low end of the market, Walmart must compete with the 4,000-
plus steep discounters, the Aldi Group (Business Week 2005a and b; 
Economist 2005; Troy 2000). Aldi stores stock a limited selection of 
high quality but very inexpensive products—estimated to average no 
more than 900—compared with the more than 20,000 items in a 
typical German super store. In 2004, analysts estimated that Walmart 
was losing around $200 to $200 million per year in Germany—with 
harsher critics estimating the losses to be greater than $600 million 
per year (ICFA 2004).
Walmart’s Failure to Understand German Culture
Failure to understand the German culture has further contributed to 
Walmart’s difficulties (ICFA 2004). For example, in 2004 the com-
pany distributed a personal ethics manual to all employees—a practice 
that would raise no eyebrows in the United States. However, in Ger-
many the document resulted in widespread turmoil, where German 
workers perceived it as a slap in the face. The policy document warned 
against supervisor-employee personal relationships and required 
employees to report their co-workers whenever they saw an ethics 
infraction. Moreover, employees were told to not kiss other employ-
ees on the job. The caution of relationships was seen as a “puritani-
cal ban on interoffice romance,” and reporting ethics breeches as an 
order to spy on their fellow workers in a way similar to what occurred 
in the 1930s and for decades after World War II in East Germany. 
Workers also balked at orders to smile at customers because it smacked 
of a sexual come-on.
Walmart closed the last of its 85 stores in Germany in 2006. It 
reported the experiment cost in the neighborhood of $1 billion. 
Although Walmart ran into a brick wall in the German retail market, 
it has succeeded very well in China, where as of January 2014 they 
operated a total of 400 outlets. These included 358 Walmart Super-
centers, 10 Sam’s Clubs, 2 Neighborhood Markets, 5 Smart Choice 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
127
outlets (discount compressed hypermarkets), and 25 Trust Mart 
hypermarkets.
Reforms in Industry and Banking
From the last half of the 1990s until 2004 Germany was considered 
by many to be the “sick man of Europe,” suffering from chronic 
“Eurosclerosis,” a stagnant economy shackled by high long-term 
unemployment, overregulation, and overly generous social benefits—
primarily in the former East German states. The old German model 
was unable to generate the impetus necessary to turn the economy 
around. However, beginning around 2004, the effects of a series of 
transformational changes in the structure of German commerce and 
industry began to take effect. The changes that began in the 1990s 
included the following:
t A decline in the power of industrial unions to negotiate sector-wide 
wage and hour agreements with producers’ associations.
t A shift away from policy makers’ focus on long-term stability, full 
employment, homogeneity in incomes, and government protection 
from competitors to a focus on market share and higher profits.
t A shift by industry from investing in domestic innovation and pro-
ductivity improvement to investing in foreign low-cost or rapidly 
growing markets that meant a move from domestic production to 
participating in global supply chains.
t An end to the old “hausbank” partnership of banks with a few non-
competing industrial firms and low profits from long-term loans 
by commercial banking to higher profits from independent invest-
ment banking.
t A shift from focus on EU and Eurozone markets to developing na-
tion markets and the emerging former Soviet Central and North-
ern Europe states.
t A drop in consumer good purchases produced by EU states to de-
mand for lower cost products from Asian suppliers.
t A shift from rigid, sectorwide labor union contracts to individual 
company contracts or non-union operations that resulted in new, 
flexible wage and hours agreements. Flex-time provisions provided 
the means for maintaining employment during economic down-
turns.
t Decline in both the number of individual firms in industry associa-
tions and the number of workers covered by union contracts.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
128
t Changes in tax laws that eliminated or lowered capital gains taxes 
on banks divestures of holdings in enterprise shares common dur-
ing the house bank era.
Possibly the most important changes in the postunification Ger-
man economy was the shift from commercial “house” banking to 
independent investment banking and the rapid globalization of indus-
try. Brookings Institute analyst Carlo Bastasin (2013) summarized the 
resulting impact of changes facing German commerce and industry:
In summary, the change [in the social market economy of Germany 
before reunification] was catalyzed by the reaction of the country’s 
major banks and companies to the loss of competitiveness caused by the 
wage and tax consequences of German reunification. The effect of the 
Neue Länder depressed productivity in the German economy, which 
declined to reach a historic low in 1996. Around the mid-nineties . . . 
companies and private banks accelerated the process of internal reform, 
allowing them to shift the focus of their activities abroad by the end 
of the nineties in response to the rigidities of the domestic economy 
and expectations of falling demand. Since the 1990s, this process of 
economic “openness” also extended to the majority of medium-sized 
companies. (2013, 4)
The shift to a global supply system to match its enhanced atten-
tion to serving a global market resulted in German industry’s ability 
to maintain stable employment during the deep recession that began 
in 2008. German industry had long focused on exports, so much so 
that by the start of its turnaround in 2005 German firms controlled 
large market shares in its traditional heavy industries such as capital 
goods, consumer durable goods, and pharmaceuticals. In 2013, Ger-
man exports totaled US$1.453 trillion, an increase of 28.8 percent 
since 2009. Exports contributed approximately 45 percent to Ger-
many’s total GDP of US$3.227 trillion in 2013. Values for the top 10 
German exports in 2013 are shown in table 8.3.
The internationalization of German industry after 2004 consisted 
of offshore production as well as exports from Germany. The estab-
lishment of the European Single market in 1986 eliminated many of 
the internal nontariff rules and regulations that curtailed European 
growth and protected domestic industries. By 2000, almost all large 
industries and nearly 60 percent of medium-sized companies had 
established production facilities outside the EU. Much of that invest-
ment occurred in the again independent former Soviet countries in 
central and northern Europe.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
129
Changes in German Banking
Growth in German industry after World War II was financed by a 
triangular system of cooperative capitalism. One leg was the German 
government; the second was the large banks that became partners 
as much as banker; the third was the distinctive structured system of 
large, medium, and small businesses. Both the federal government 
and individual states contributed to the success of Germany’s social 
market economy. One of the underlying principles of the system was 
stability in prices and employment. To ensure stability, the market 
had to conform to a social policy established and guaranteed by cen-
tral authority while enterprises had to be protected from their own 
cutthroat competition and monopolistic tendencies (Siebert 2005). 
A bank-based financial system provided the financial framework for 
German recovery to happen. Cooperative banks functioned as part-
ners to industry. They were, in fact, house banks (Hausbanken). Their 
major role was to provide financing for industries through long-term, 
low-interest loans. They functioned as universal banks, performing a 
wide range of financial services as both commercial and investment 
bank services. House banks ensured their loans by representation 
on company boards and through what became “relationship bank-
ing.” Loans were based on personal relationships rather than market 
Table 8.3 Shares and values of Germany’s top 10 exports in 2013 (in 2014 euros)
Product Group
Value
Share of 1,134 
billion total
Motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-trailers
203 billion
17.9%
Machinery and equipment
166 billion
14.6%
Chemicals and chemical products
107 billion
9.4%
Computers, electronics, and optics
90 billion
7.9%
Electrical equipment
68 billion
6.0%
Pharmaceutical products
62 billion
5.5%
Other transport equipment
51 billion
4.5%
Basic metals
50 billion
4.4%
Food products
49 billion
4.3%
Rubber and plastic products
40 billion
3.5%
Totals
886 billion
78.1%
Source: Stastiches Bundesamt, from official German Federal Statistics Office data 2015.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
130
studies. House banks and companies often shared ownership in each 
other’s enterprises.
The house banking system began to come apart in the 1980s. Ger-
many’s largest bank, Deutsche Bank, chose to phase out its house 
banking business when it found itself in the middle of an attempted 
takeover of Germany’s Continental Group by the Italian Pirelli tire 
maker. Deutsche Bank was house bank for both companies. This put 
it in a conflict of interest position. Deutsche Bank decided to get out 
of the house banking business and reinvented itself as predominantly 
an investment bank. To emphasize the shift, it moved the headquar-
ters of its capital market operations from Frankfurt to London in 
1989. In 1996 the presidents of nearly a third of 100 major German 
industries were Deutsche Bank managers; in 1998, the number had 
dropped to just 17.
Other German banks followed this transformation, particularly 
after a series of political and administrative changes occurred in the 
German financial system. In 1994 a law was passed banning insider 
trading, which had been common under the house banking system. 
This was followed in 1995 with a change in the security trading laws 
that required disclosure of ownership by institutions that owned large 
shares of a company. In 1998, firms were required to adopt interna-
tional or U.S. accounting principles. Further changes in voting rights 
and non-voting shares system followed. In 2000, the German govern-
ment repealed the law requiring capital gains taxes on sales of shares 
acquired by banks under the old house banking system.
Demographic Problems
The ability of Germany to sustain its leadership in Europe and the 
global marketplace is threatened by its continued population decline. 
The 12 Länder of what was West Germany include Schleswig-
Holstein, Bremen, Lower Saxony, North Rhine-Westphalia, Hesse, 
the Rheinland-Palatinate, Saarland, Baden-Württemberg, Bavaria, 
and Hamburg; the end of East Germany added six more Länder 
to the federation: Mecklenburg-Western Pomerania, Brandenburg, 
Berlin, Saxony-Anhalt, Saxony, and Thuringia. Population decline is 
greatest in the eastern six Länder as residents there took advantage of 
unification to flee to the West in search of a better economic future, 
despite the country’s efforts to improve working and living conditions 
in the East.
In 2013 the total population of unified Germany was estimated 
to be 82.7 million; it is estimated that Germany has lost 1.5 million 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
131
people since the last census. The country’s birthrate is among the 
lowest in Europe. If 2013 projections are correct, its population could 
drop to close to 69 million over the next 50 years (Table 8.4). In 
2013, of the 27 countries then in the European Union, Germany had 
the highest percentage of immigrants in its population; it was also 
actively encouraging even greater immigration.
Conclusion
Until the 1990s, Germany was able to sustain its position as one of the 
strongest economies in Europe and the world, led only by the United 
States and Japan. But in the 1990s, Germany’s traditional strengths 
were weakened by the revolutionary changes taking place in the world 
economy. Among the challenges facing the German business system 
are changes in the market that are driven by rapidly changing tech-
nologies and dramatic changes in customer demand. Long produc-
tion runs of high quality products have been replaced by constant and 
rapid changes in customer values, necessitating the ability to change 
rapidly to meet shifts in demand. Germany’s traditional market leader-
ship in the pharmaceutical, chemical, transportation, and machinery 
markets is being challenged by manufacturing advances in the newly 
industrializing nations, leading to reductions in size of many interna-
tional markets. Major demographic shifts are now beginning, includ-
ing aging of the population and low or negative population growth, 
which adds to the economic difficulties facing Germany and much of 
Table 8.4 Population projections for Germany, 2020–2100
Year
Population
Percent change
2020
81,431,000
–1.91
2030
78,275,000
–3.88
2040
74,106,000
–5.33
2050
69,004,000
–6.89
2060
63,173,000
–8.45
2070
57,812,000
–8.49
2080
52,820,000
–8.64
2090
47,942,000
–9.23
2100
43,364,000
–9.55
Source: World Population Review 2013.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
132
Europe where most of the social spending has been financed through 
high social security contributions and taxes.
For most of the years following its economic miracle after World 
War II, Germany regularly produced some of the best industrial prod-
ucts in the world. It has been a global leader in chemicals and pharma-
ceuticals, and made some of the world’s finest automobiles. It had the 
world’s best industrial vocational training system and the most under-
standing and long-term thinking banks. Its schools and universities 
were admired everywhere, and served as the model adopted by many 
developing nations. Its small and middle-size industries continued to 
develop innovative products and production technology. Germany 
has become a land of social stability and high living standards for most 
if not all of its citizens—many “guest workers” do not share in all of 
this good life. German workers may have been seen as overpaid, but 
they were also recognized as among the most productive in the world.
However, as the twentieth century drew to a close, much of this 
enviable picture faded. Germany has become a land of high unem-
ployment, inflexible work standards enforced by powerful intransigent 
labor unions, strong trade associations, and government bureaucrats. 
The result is a system that overprotects everyone in society.
In 2003, Germany began an ambitious program to deal with 
the problems of the German business system and implement some 
degree of structural reform primarily by reforming fiscal policy and 
labor markets. The plan was designed to stimulate economic growth, 
ensure the long-term stability of the social systems and strengthen 
Germany as an economic location. Called Agenda 2010, the program 
recognized that a welfare state like Germany was not equipped to deal 
with the global demographic and economic changes occurring in soci-
ety. Key goals of the Agenda 2010 initiative included: (1) reductions 
in nonwage labor costs, (2) boosting domestic demand and capital 
spending, (3) helping the unemployed find jobs more quickly, and (4) 
making the labor market more flexible. The effects of these and ear-
lier changes began to take effect by 2004 and the German economy 
began a remarkable recovery that lasted until the recession of 2004, 
but began to gain after just a year or two.
Germany, like most industrialized nations, experienced a deep 
recession in 2008 and 2009. GDP dipped 6.6 percent from its peak 
in the fourth quarter of 2007. Yet, the overall impact of that recession 
was far less in Germany that in most other nations. A series of political 
and economic restructuring actions that began in the 1990s cush-
ioned the effects of the recession in Germany. Although hours worked 
declined somewhat, unemployment barely changed at all. By 2009, 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  a  U n i t e d  G e r m a n y
133
the German economy was again the leading economy in Europe and 
one of the world’s strongest economies, although most of its major 
industrial capacity had been disbursed to wherever a market justified 
the investment. There was little place for a social market economy 
anymore. Growth in Germany’s GDP was again less than 1 percent in 
both 2012 and 2013.
Discussion Questions
1. What role did the high cost of unification have on the economy of 
West German?
2. How did government barriers to entrepreneurship affect the Ger-
man economy as the twenty-first century began? What did the 
German government decide to do about the problem?
3. What did Germany decide to do about strengthening its informa-
tion and communication technology industry?
4. How badly did the Recession of 2008 and 2009 affect the German 
economy? What role did its industrial exports play in its recovery?
5. What role did changes in Germany’s banking system have in the 
country’s renewed industrial strength?

4
P a r t  I V
Japan’s Path to a Modern 
Industrial State

4
C h a p t e r  9
Commerce and Industry  
in the Meiji Period
The emergence of Japan as a modern industrial state began with the 
demise of the Tokugawa shogunate and the formation of a govern-
ment that restored leadership to the imperial family. The last of the 
shoguns was forced to relinquish power in 1867, after which time 
control of the government was put back into the hands of the Meiji 
emperor, although members of the three powerful clans initiating the 
Restoration retained control of government policy. From that date it 
took only 20 years for the Japanese to completely change their coun-
try. The map in Figure 9.1 shows Japan and its Pacific islands.
During those two decades, Japanese leaders searched the world 
for the best institutions and systems in business, government, edu-
cation, the army and navy, and the arts (Vogel 1979). Putting the 
best of these to work, they took the nation from what had been a 
feudal agricultural society with a technologically simple manufactur-
ing and cottage-industry nation of lords, vassals, and peasants, and 
forcibly turned it into a modern industrial power. This was Japan’s 
first economic miracle.
The appearance of an American fleet of war ships off the Japanese 
shore, demanding that Japan open her ports to Western trade, forced 
the Japanese to recognize that they could not continue their centuries-
old system of isolation. A group of young dissatisfied middle-caste 
samurai began by destroying the ancient four-level social system, 
eliminating their own samurai class in the process. They introduced 
a series of borrowed social institutions from Europe and the United 
States, and then turned their hands to shaping a modern industrial 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
138
Figure 9.1 Map of Japan showing the location of major cities.
Source: The World Factbook 2013–14 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world 
-factbook/graphics/maps/ja-map.gif.
economy. It was a remarkable performance, unprecedented in the his-
tory of world at that time. Eleanor Westney (1987, 1) described the 
nearly 55 years from the opening of Japan in 1859 to the end of 
the Meiji era in 1912 as “one of the most remarkable social trans-
formations in modern history.” The transformation of Japan in that 
short period was largely due to the deliberate application of what were 
deemed to be the best examples of Western organizational structure 
and processes. For example, the Japanese communications system was 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
139
patterned after the British, banking on the American, and the legal 
system first on the French then the German. Other emulations are 
reviewed later in this chapter.
Revolution and Restoration
The restoration of imperial rule began with a coup d’etat on January 
3, 1868. The shogunate was abolished and all lands were confiscated 
by the state. The samurai who led the revolution and restored the 
15-year-old Meiji emperor to power were low-ranking members of 
three clans: the Satsuma, Chosu, and Tosa. The aims of the govern-
ment they helped to establish were proclaimed in a five-article mani-
festo that the emperor read to the public that April. These called for:
1. All matters of consequence to the people to be openly discussed in 
assembly, with decisions reached democratically.
2. All classes to work together to carry out the administration of the 
state.
3. All people, regardless of rank or caste, to be permitted to choose 
their own occupation and place of residence.
4. Any unjust custom to cease forthwith; all relationships to be based 
on the laws of nature.
5. The people to actively seek knowledge from outside the country so 
as to protect and strengthen the imperial rule.
The revolution that made the restoration of the imperial system 
possible was led by a small group of young middle-status samurai 
from the rural west. These young idealists believed that the only 
way for their country to become strong enough to deal with the 
increasingly domineering foreign traders was a return of power to 
the emperor, who would be advised in governing the nation by an 
elected chief administrator. This would be the first official ever to 
be elected to such a high-level position in Japan. According to Reis-
chauer (1970, 122), the young samurai leaders of the revolution were 
a “group [with] extraordinary ability, the products of an age of tur-
bulence and rapid change, when only the ablest and most flexible 
could hope to succeed. Ranging in age from twenty-seven to forty-
one in 1868, they were remarkably young, and thus able to adapt to 
the new conditions.”
The young men who led the revolution were not seeking to benefit 
themselves nor their class. Instead, their goal was to eliminate all sam-
urai privileges. They wanted to free farmers from life-long servitude, 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
140
and substitute merit and ability for class position as the criterion for 
advancement in the service of the country. More important, perhaps, 
they wanted a Japan that was strong enough to avoid the overbearing 
foreign intervention that China had been forced to suffer through. 
They were remarkably quick in achieving these goals. In 1869, they 
simplified the class system of the Tokugawa period, guaranteeing all 
citizens freedom of choice both in occupation and marriage. In 1871, 
they eliminated the right of dominance still held by clan lords and did 
away with clan domains, replacing them with the present-day prefec-
ture system and bureaucratic administrators. Initially, the Meiji gov-
ernment also restored old titles and offices that had existed during 
the eighth century, the last period of strong imperial rule. However, 
since no special privileges were attached to the titles, they never really 
caught on and were soon forgotten.
Civil war followed the coup, but troops loyal to the emperor and 
his advisors were able to quickly defeat the rebels and restore order. 
Edo, a small town some distance away from the old Imperial City of 
Kyoto, was renamed Tokyo and became the capital city of the restored 
Empire.
In 1869, the Meiji government initiated the first of a series of 
changes in the daimyos’ status. They would no longer be lords of their 
domains, but instead were appointed as imperial governors. Distribu-
tion of the rice tax was not changed until later. In 1871, the domain 
system was completely abolished, replaced by a system of prefectures 
that still exists today. The administration of the prefectures was to be 
based on merit and ability, rather than inheritance.
In 1873, the Meiji government initiated a revolutionary change in 
the social structure of the country: they replaced the ancient warrior-
samurai system with universal military service. The new professional 
army was initially established on a pattern similar to the French army, 
but was soon changed to follow a German model. Annual stipends 
that the samurai had received from clan lords were taken over by the 
government and, beginning in 1873, were gradually abolished. They 
ceased entirely in 1876. In place of the annual rice payments, the war-
riors were paid one lump sum in government bonds.
Despite their many successes, the early years of the new Meiji gov-
ernment were marked by a series of domestic conflicts led by disgrun-
tled samurai and their retainers. The young government leaders were 
able to successfully put down all rebellions, and grew stronger with 
each new victory. The citizen army they had created proved equal to 
the task they had envisioned for it. The last rebellion by conservative, 
traditionalist samurai was crushed in 1877.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
141
Developing a System of Commerce  
and Industry
The Meiji government quickly embarked on a process of modernizing 
all of Japan’s basic institutions. At that time, this meant adopting what 
it could from Europe and the United States. The government sent 
fact-finding missions abroad as fast as it could. These brought back 
what they believed to be the best the West had to offer. Eclectically 
selecting the best from any source enabled the Japanese economy to 
grow very rapidly, so that in just 20 years it had become a modern 
industrial state. It did not matter that to the outside world the new 
Japan appeared to be a hodgepodge of assorted, unrelated ideas. It 
worked.
Some examples of the more successful social borrowings included 
the nation’s new education system, the army and navy, and the civil 
and criminal codes. The education system, established in 1872, was 
patterned on the French district-based structure. Universities were 
patterned after those in the United States. The Imperial Japanese 
Navy was almost a carbon copy of the British Royal Navy. The army, 
initially patterned after the French army, was changed to mirror the 
Prussian system. The new civil code was of also German origin; the 
criminal code was adopted from France; the early Japanese rail system 
was designed and built by British engineers; and British textile equip-
ment firms set up entire cotton spinning factories.
To speed up the country’s modernization process, many govern-
ment officials were sent abroad after the restoration to study the 
best social institutions and to determine which should be imported 
into Japan. The government also paid for private industrialists’ trips 
overseas to study foreign industry and technology. A large number 
of young people were sent abroad to attend foreign universities. The 
country also hired many foreign experts to guide them in moderniza-
tion of the government and industrialization.
By the end of the nineteenth century, Japan had settled more or less 
into the mold it was to follow into the twentieth century. The educa-
tional system was completed with establishment of a number of col-
leges to provide technical education, culminating in the founding of 
Tokyo Imperial University in 1886. The old system of patronage and 
personal connections as the basis for government employment was 
replaced by recruitment by examination and educational qualifications.
Japan’s efforts to modernize its industrial base was at first less suc-
cessful than its public administration programs. Few of the model 
enterprises set up by the government proved to be economically 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
142
viable. Often they were too small to compete on price against West-
ern imports, or the lack of management expertise resulted in severe 
mismanagement. The government’s heavy expenditures in these new 
industries contributed significantly to a budgetary crisis in the 1880s. 
In contrast to its costly start-up businesses, a substantial number of 
the successful small, privately owned businesses that had been estab-
lished during the Tokugawa period were flourishing.
Rather than continue to throw money at the government-owned 
factories, the Meiji administrators turned to the country’s new entre-
preneurs and offered them the factories at bargain prices, with oper-
ating subsidies thrown in for good measure. Although some of the 
newly privatized firms never did prove to be profitable, the many that 
did survive eventually became some of the largest and most powerful 
businesses in Japan. An important side effect from this process was the 
strengthening of bonds between the bureaucracy and industry leaders.
The government’s determination to modernize its economy also 
resulted in the establishment of a national industrial policy. This was 
formalized in 1881 with the formation of a Ministry of Agriculture 
and Commerce. This agency’s primary function was to coordinate all 
state efforts at promoting those two sectors of the economy. Out of 
this early effort there evolved the pre-1945 Ministry of Commerce 
and Industry, and the powerful, postwar Ministry of International 
Trade and Industry (MITI).
Although early entrepreneurs were able to obtain some low-cost 
loans and subsidies through these bureaucracies, the bulk of the coun-
try’s development passed into the hands of private investors and banks. 
Almost all of the growth in the major nineteenth century industries, 
and particularly silk and cotton, was privately funded, although gov-
ernment-owned demonstration plants did serve as models of the latest 
technology.
The transportation infrastructure, on the other hand, was almost 
entirely funded by the government, either directly, as in railroad con-
struction, or indirectly in the form of subsidies, as in shipbuilding and 
ocean transport. The government also established a modern postal 
and telegraph network. It would later build the nation’s electricity-
generating and distribution system.
Government Railway Construction
Railway construction was one of the first industries to receive the 
attention of the Meiji reformers. They recognized that, initially at 
least, all such major construction had to be done by the government if 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
143
it was going to be done at all. No group of entrepreneurial capitalists 
existed to make such investments. The first rail line built by the new 
government opened in 1872, just four years after the Restoration. 
The 18-mile line connected Tokyo with Yokohama. Construction of 
the line was guided by British engineers, used British equipment, and 
was paid for by a loan raised in London. The first line built without 
any foreign assistance was a 10-mile stretch connecting Kyoto with 
Otsu. Private companies were formed after 1880, but additional con-
struction was slow at best; in 1884 Japan still had only 76 miles of 
track installed and functioning. The railway boom took off during 
the 1890s. The national network was not completed until after 1910.
Developing Ocean Shipping
As late as the 1890s, only about 10 percent of Japan’s foreign trade 
was transported in Japanese flag vessels. Of 74 shippers licensed in 
Japan at the time, only four were Japanese. The government set out 
to rectify this weakness by setting up a joint government and pri-
vate-sector agency to operate the country’s few ships. Managing this 
agency proved difficult, so after acquiring 13 more vessels to transport 
a military venture against Taiwan, it was reorganized into the Depart-
ment of Ships within the Bureau of Posts and Communication. The 
decision was made in 1875 to transfer ownership and operation of the 
ships to a private company, Mitsubishi, along with an annual subsidy, 
provided the firm opened new routes. The line connecting Yokohama 
to Shanghai was the first of these.
In the meantime, the Mitusi Company, whose officers had com-
prised the bulk of the managers in the ill-fated first shipping venture, 
set up a new government-sponsored shipping line to challenge the 
Mitsubishi monopoly. The Mitusi Company’s fortunes were founded 
on an extensive retailing network. A fierce competitive rate war raged 
between these two firms until 1885, when they merged to form Nip-
pon Yusen Kaisha (NYK), which is still Japan’s major shipping line.
Overhaul of Agriculture and Commerce
The Japanese economy prior to the Meiji period was overwhelmingly 
agricultural. However, many of the preconditions for industrializa-
tion had been firmly set in place during the 250 years of Tokugawa 
era stability. A diverse and active commercial sector thrived in nearly 
all parts of the nation, but was particularly strong in the major cities 
and towns. The first businesses with liability shared beyond the family 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
144
house—the first companies in the modern sense—were established 
in 1867, the final year of the Tokugawa shogunate. The government 
allowed groups of wealthy merchants to join together to form ven-
tures large enough to compete with the new products pouring into 
the newly opened country. These early businesses were not limited 
liability joint-stock corporations, but simply cooperative enterprises 
set up as import/export trading companies. Although they were rela-
tively ineffective and did not last long, they did pave the way for the 
joint-stock companies formed after the 1868 Meiji Restoration. By 
1871, none of these early ventures were operating (Clark 1979).
Japan’s first effective commercial code, in which the legal rights 
and responsibilities of joint-stock companies and other types of busi-
ness organizational structures were set forth, was enacted in 1899. 
The focus of the new law was not to control private influence or excess 
as were similar laws in the United States and Great Britain, but rather 
to permit and promote the growth of large, powerful businesses that 
could be compared with the biggest and best of such firms in the 
West.
In the rural areas, improvements in farming practices, new seeds, 
and fertilizers resulted in expanded yields of such staple crops as rice, 
millet, and soy beans. Rising production costs and growing demand 
for cash encouraged many landowners to diversify into high-demand, 
high-value cash crops such as cotton, hemp, potatoes, tea, tobacco, 
ginseng, sugar cane, dye plants, and oil seeds. Mulberry leaves for 
silk production was also a growing source of farm income. Some 
daimyo further increased their income by processing these and other 
crops, and by setting up small manufacturing operations. Samurai 
were appointed as managers of these activities in addition to becom-
ing local civil administrators. Out of these initial commercial activities 
there emerged a new rural middle class made up of wealthy farmers 
and former samurai. Values of the most important crops in 1900 are 
shown in Table 9.1.
Centers of Commerce
The three largest cities, Osaka, Kyoto, and Edo (Tokyo), had formed 
the core of Tokugawa Japan’s political, economic, and artistic devel-
opment. In these and other commercial centers, Tokugawa merchants 
and craftsmen created such business enterprises as copper refining, 
printing, paper making, spinning, weaving and apparel production, 
musical instrument making, cabinetry, building construction, gold 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
145
and silver jewelry making, iron and steel smelting, toy making, brew-
ing and food processing, as well as the transportation, storage, and 
sale of these and other domestic and imported items.
After the Restoration, Meiji reformers moved forward quickly with 
the changes they believed were necessary if Japan was to avoid being 
degraded in the same way that the Western powers had forced con-
cessions from China. They were convinced that only a nation that 
was truly modern and strong militarily and economically could stand 
against the West. Becoming modern in this sense meant developing an 
economy based on industrial capitalism and a government based on 
a constitutional foundation. Of the two, possibly the most important 
decisions they made were in the area of economic policy and the busi-
ness system.
After taking control of the government, the reformers expanded 
the few industrial experiments started during the Tokugawa shogu-
nate. These introduced new textile factories, modern shipbuilding, and 
weapons production. A number of other important economic devel-
opments had begun during the Tokugawa period, including a network 
of coastal shipping with port and harbor improvements, warehous-
ing and distribution systems including retail chains operations, and a 
Table 9.1 Gross values of selected staple crops in Japan in 1900 (current yen)
Crop
Average value in 1900 ¥
Rice
155,439,087
Grains (wheat and barley)
124,069,274
Beans
35,952,282
Silkworm cocoons
93,618,991
Silkworm eggs
3,844,126
Mulberry twigs and silkworm litters
7,953,103
Cured tea
9,037,545
Livestock
4,953,533
Misc. butchered meats
12,540,394
Dairy products
4,128,017
Poultry and eggs
17,281,419
Miscellaneous other
153,872,649
Source: Yamawaki 1903, Ministry of Agriculture and Industry data.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
146
nationwide system of credit and bills of exchange. In addition, a strong 
tradition of handicrafts and cottage industries produced cotton, silk, 
and flax textiles and many other items. Entrepreneurship thrived both 
in the countryside and in the centers of daimyo consumption.
At the time of the Restoration, some 80 percent of the coun-
try’s population earned their livelihood from agricultural pursuits, 
although the country had a long history of absentee land ownership. 
The government’s plan to replace the crop tax with a land tax could 
not occur until land ownership was established. A survey of the land 
holdings of individual households was undertaken and title to those 
lands passed to the farmers of the parcels. After that step was accom-
plished each family’s tax burden could be assessed on the value of their 
land. Initially, the tax was assessed at 3 percent of land value; this was 
lowered in a few years to 2.5 percent (Franks, 1992). In this way, the 
government gave legal sanction to the private ownership by peasants 
of plots they had formerly farmed only with their lords’ permission, 
thereby instituting land reform.
The new government also initiated a complete overhaul of the 
country’s communications system, beginning with construction 
of a nationwide telegraph network, followed soon afterward by an 
improved road network. Port facilities throughout the country were 
modernized.
A New Financial System
The new government quickly realized that changes in the way revenue 
was collected and distributed were necessary if the country was to 
have modern budgetary and monetary policies. Thus, one of the first 
priorities of the new government was to restructure the basis of its 
revenues. Nearly all of the country’s income came from taxes on farm 
production, particularly taxes on the rice crop. The daimyo collected 
all farm production and paid a collective tax for his entire domain. In 
1871, the new government successfully introduced a stable base for 
future modernization when it formed a modern currency system. The 
yen was made the basic monetary unit. At the same time, they set up 
a modern banking system, at first based heavily on government bonds 
issued to deposed samurai.
Changes in Banking
In 1881, serious inflation forced further changes in Japan’s finan-
cial system. The new finance minister, Matsukata Masayoshi, slashed 
government spending and sold off to private owners most of the 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
147
government’s pilot factories in nonstrategic industries, retaining only 
munitions and shipbuilding operations. Many of these privatized fac-
tories were successful, and taxes on their revenues eased the govern-
ment’s budget crises. In this one quick move, an entrepreneur class 
was firmly established in Japan. Many of the new owners became 
enormously wealthy and had significant impact on the future growth 
of the Japanese business system. These benefits were limited to only a 
few privileged families, however.
The new finance minister’s program included establishment of the 
Bank of Japan. The main purpose of the bank was to withdraw all 
the earlier inflationary, nonconvertible paper money the new govern-
ment had issued, replacing it with a more stable, deflated currency. 
He also set up a number of other important financial institutions, 
including clearinghouses for foreign exchange dealings and a net-
work of national and rural banks to make loans to the new industrial 
and agricultural entrepreneurs. Also included were cuts in govern-
ment spending and programs to expand exports while reducing 
imports.
Over the rest of the 1880s and into the 1890s, these reforms suc-
cessfully established the financial stability necessary for the Japanese 
business system to flourish. This was not done without a cost, how-
ever. Deflation drove many small businesses and farms into bank-
ruptcy and further strengthened the grip of the large firms on the 
national economy, while large firms continued to grow. By the end of 
the nineteenth century, there were more than 40 industries employing 
more than 1,000 employees. More than three-quarters of these were 
still in the textiles (fibers) industries (Table 9.2).
Creating a Modern Industrial System
The Meiji government established a number of modern factories to 
serve as models for Japanese businessmen, as well as a way to hurry 
the country’s industrialization process. Since few wealthy private 
investors existed in Japan at the beginning of the country’s move 
toward industrialization, the government felt forced to establish 
the factories themselves. Most important were industries regarded 
at the time as critical for nation-building: shipbuilding, iron and 
steel manufacturing, textiles, chemicals, arms and munitions, and 
mining.
As it was in many industrial nations at the close of the nineteenth 
century, working conditions in the Japanese industrial sector at this 
time were particularly harsh. It was not uncommon for workers in 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
148
Table 9.2 Motor-powered industries in Japan by size and sector
Number of Employees
Industry Sector
1900
Total
100
or less
More
than 100
More
than 500
More
than 1,000
Fiber industry
 Filature1
 Spinning
 Weaving
 Other
1,722
137
52
10
1,527
261
21
8
188
90
23
2
 5
62
 7
—
 2
27
 1
—
 Total
1,921
1,514
303
74
30
Machinery
 Machine making
 Shipbuilding
 Vehicles
 Other
114
18
13
63
97
5
2
56
14
8
8
7
 3
 3
 2
—
—
2
1
—
 Totals
208
160
37
 8
 3
Chemical
 Cement
 Paper mills
 Leather
 Matches
 Other
37
11
4
5
103
27
11
4
5
94
10
12
2
3
7
—
—
—
 1
—
—
—
—
—
—
—
 Totals
190
155
34
 1
—
Miscellaneous
 Breweries
 Tobacco
 Printing
 Other
21
91
65
171
19
82
52
169
2
7
13
2
—
 2
—
—
—
—
—
—
 Totals
348
312
34
 2
—
Special
 Smelting
 Other (includes 
electrical)
96
89
7
21
16
5
49
47
2
16
16
—
10
10
—
Notes: 1Filature = drawing silk thread from cocoons
Source: Yamawaki 1903, data from Ministry of Agriculture and Industry.
some seasonable industries to remain at their jobs for 16 or more 
hours each day (Box 9.1). Japan’s textile industries employed the larg-
est number of workers in the last years of the 1800s. By 1899, the 
number of women workers employed in Japan was nearly double that 
of the number of male workers (Table 9.3).

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
149
Table 9.3 Gender distribution in Japanese workshops with 10 or more employees, 
1896–99
Motorized
workshops
Meiji 
restoration
year
Western 
calendar
year
Number of
workshops
Males
Females
Total number 
of workers
29
1896
1,967
104,164
169,735
273,889
30
1897
1,971
117,081
174,154
291,235
31
1898
2,003
118,251
171,095
289,246
32
1899
2,736
96,187
184,111
280,292
Nonmotorized
workshops
Meiji 
restoration
year
Western 
calendar
year
Number of
workshops
Males
Females
Total number 
of workers
29
1896
n/a
76,509
76,309
104,631
30
1897
n/a
82,554
82,554
149,331
31
1898
n/a
81,328
81,320
139,551
32
1899
n/a
70,679
70,679
112,617
Source: Yamawaki 1903, data from Ministry of Agriculture and Industry.
Box 9.1 Working hours in Japanese industries in 1900
Writing in 1903, Yamawaki of the Ministry of Agriculture and 
Industry described the working hours of industrial laborers as 
being more or less typical of many industrial workers. Work in 
the textile industry, where large numbers of females and chil-
dren younger than nine years of age had long been employed 
in most of the industrializing nations, conditions appear to have 
been particularly harsh, as Yamawaki described in his exhaustive 
report of Japanese culture and industry:
“In general, the working-hours of operatives are 12 hours 
a day, but sometimes they extend as long as 16 or 17 hours. 
In cotton mills 12 hours are standard, both for day and night 
workers, they being made to take day and night work by turns 
every two days. In filatures [unwinding, collecting and spin-
ning fibers from silkworm cocoons] regular hours are 13 to 14, 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
150
Beginnings of the Zaibatsu System
Japan was well on the way to industrialization by the end of the nine-
teenth century. This was largely because of the government’s sales of 
established factories to a few selected entrepreneurs. In this way, the 
country’s new industrial wealth became concentrated in the hands of 
a relatively few businessmen. Some of these newly formed businesses 
were later to evolve into the great family-owned diversified conglom-
erates known as the zaibatsu.
As the government’s pilot factories passed into private ownership, 
a historical accident resulted in a surge of economic activity for Japan. 
This fortuitous event enabled the new owners to quickly expand their 
companies, providing economies of scale that made them profitable 
ventures far more quickly than might otherwise had been the case. 
The incident that kicked off Japan’s rapid industrial growth at this 
time had to do with the silk industry. Raw silk had been one of Japan’s 
most important exports for many years. Silkworm blight in Europe 
in the 1860s destroyed most of the French and Italian silk produc-
tion industry, thereby creating a strong demand for Japanese silk and 
silkworm eggs.
Japanese silk production had been almost entirely in the hands of 
peasants in the central highlands. Silk production was typically a cot-
tage industry, much like the English wool spinning and weaving indus-
try of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. Farmers augmented 
their farm incomes by participating in silk production, but only after 
their regular farm chores were completed. Merchants farmed out 
production, retaining ownership of the raw material at all stages of 
in power-loom factories 12. But in hand-weaving workshops a 
great diversity prevails, the general rule being 12 to 15, accord-
ing to the season, though in some rare cases the hours are as 
long as 16 or 17. In bigger workshops such as shipbuilding 
yards, vehicle, and machine shops, the working hours are far 
more regular, being in general 10 hours, with one or two hours 
of overtime. In such chemical workshops as cement, glass, and 
paper in which work is carried on all through the 24 hours, 12 
hours is a regular shift both day and night. In general the regular 
working-hours in Japanese workshops may be put at 12, with 
overtime of one or two hours.”
Source: Yamawaki 1903, 423.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
151
production. With the rise in prices resulting from increased demand, 
these entrepreneurs were able to move quickly to expand production. 
Growth in demand also resulted in discovering new ways of wind-
ing silk thread by mechanical means, making it cheaper to produce. 
Lower prices further improved Japan’s share of the global market. 
Eventually, new strains of silkworms were found that produced longer 
and stronger thread.
Although the blight in Europe faded by the 1870s, Japanese silk 
reeled by mechanical power proved to be more uniform than other 
Asian-produced silk, thereby producing a superior thread that was 
preferred by the fashion industries in both the United States and 
Europe. Before long, Japan controlled the lion’s share of the market 
for raw silk in the West. By the 1870s, silk made up 36 percent of the 
value of all Japanese exports; it was still 30 percent of the value in the 
1880s. Silk remained Japan’s largest single export until well into the 
twentieth century; as late as the 1930s, it still represented a 26 percent 
share of total exports. Between the 1880s and 1930s, the acreage of 
fields devoted to mulberry plants (silkworms only eat mulberry leaves) 
grew by 2.6 times, and silkworm cocoon production increased seven 
and a half times (Minami 1986).
Investments in Mining
Mining was another activity that was financed and expanded by the 
Meiji government. Copper and precious metal mining had been oper-
ated successfully by some daimyo prior to the Meiji Restoration; sev-
eral family zaibatsu were founded on copper mining and smelting 
fortunes. However, most private operators lacked the investment capi-
tal necessary to bring the older, often worked-out or flooded mines 
back into profitable operations.
Coal, although generally poor in quality, had long been mined in the 
northern islands, and was available in sufficient quantities to fuel the 
nation’s new railways and steamships. After 1870, government loans 
and investments enabled mining production to expand, so that after 
1900 Japan’s iron and steel works were fueled by Japanese coal. As with 
their investments in manufacturing plants, the government permitted 
private operators to take control of the country’s mining industry.
The Textile Industry
As they had in Great Britain and the United States, textiles provided 
much of the initial impetus for industrialization during the early Meiji 
period. Silk production had long been an established industry in Japan. 
The drop in European silk production resulted in greatly increased 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
152
demand for Japanese silk and silkworms. Rising prices resulted in 
increased production and, more important, widespread application of 
machine silk-thread reeling. Both private enterprise and government 
investment in advanced methods and machinery helped the industry 
to expand to meet demand. By the 1880s, machine reeling had almost 
completely replaced hand reeling.
For the first decades of the Meiji period, Japan’s domestically grown 
cotton was rare, expensive, and relatively unsuited to power spinning 
or weaving. By the late 1870s, however, Japanese textile entrepre-
neurs were importing raw cotton from the United States and India in 
ever-increasing quantities. In 1878, the Meiji government purchased 
cotton spinning machinery from Britain. Most of this equipment was 
resold to domestic industrialists, although a small facility was retained 
by the government for further experimentation and demonstration of 
innovative processes. In 1877 there were just 8,000 power spindles in 
operation in Japan. By 1913, this number had grown to more than 
2.4 million power spindles, and cotton textiles had become one of 
Japan’s most important exports.
Businesses Structure in Meiji Japan
Structurally, three types of businesses emerged under the Meiji res-
toration and reformation: (1) large, predominantly heavy industries, 
many of which evolved into the zaibatsu conglomerates; (2) a large 
group of small independent businesses, many of which evolved out 
of the old cottage industries such as textiles; and (3) a group of mid-
sized industrial firms that tended to be closely associated with the first 
group and who often served as subcontractors to the largest firms.
The first group, Japan’s largest businesses, mainly produced heavy 
industrial goods, such as iron and steel, coal, shipbuilding, and chem-
icals, although communications and shipping were also important 
members of this group. Many were initially set up by the govern-
ment and then sold to private investors. These firms had to be large in 
order to compete effectively in the global marketplace. These were the 
“nation-building” industries. Because of their rapid growth and the 
lack of a large pool of educated, skilled workers, the largest of these 
firms inaugurated a lifetime employment system in order to retain 
their trained workforce. In management style, these firms tended to 
be paternalistic, with a sense of being a member of the same family 
characterizing both management and labor (Morishima 1982).
The second group was a large body of privately owned and oper-
ated independent small businesses. Many of these evolved out of the 

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
153
earlier merchant-traders that appeared during the Tokugawa period. 
Some had been cottage industry producers of domestic consumer 
goods, including textiles, leather goods, wood products, and food and 
beverage items. Because of little consumer buying power during the 
Tokugawa and early Meiji periods, no large untapped domestic mar-
ket existed to fuel the growth of these businesses. Tokugawa isolation 
had cut them off entirely from international markets. Thus, without 
a large market for their products, these companies were unable to 
benefit from economies of scale. Sales were limited and profit margins 
were small. Workers’ wages in these firms never approached those in 
the largest businesses, nor did any life-long employment system exist. 
Most were destined to remain small.
Also included among these small businesses were the thousands 
of family-owned retail shops and small supply chain organizations. 
Together, these evolved into Japan’s extremely complex physical dis-
tribution system. In addition to the bulk of the nation’s retailers, this 
group also included most of the agricultural sector as well. Most farm-
ers worked extremely small plots, and, until reform occurred under 
the Meiji Restoration, were generally forbidden from engaging in any 
activity other than farming.
The third category constituted a growing body of small and 
medium-sized manufacturing or processing industries. These tended 
to function as subcontractors for the large industrial concerns. Few 
of these producers were large or stable enough to offer their workers 
life-long employment. Wages in these firms were consistently lower 
than in the big industrial firms. These subcontractors existed mostly in 
such fields as machine manufacture, shipbuilding, vehicles and electri-
cal goods, and similar manufacturing industries.
These firms were very important to the Japanese economy, lower-
ing the large firms’ production costs and thus enabling them to effec-
tively compete in the global market. At the same time, however, they 
operated under a number of severe handicaps. In the majority of cases, 
since many of the firms of the first category had been established by 
the government and remained important for achieving national devel-
opment and industrialization targets, they enjoyed close connections 
with the government. This often meant they had access to loans at 
very low interest rates, as well as significant government subsidies. 
The subcontracting firms remained completely independent compa-
nies, not qualifying for government aid or support. They did receive 
important technical guidance and some small financial assistance from 
the central company, and enjoyed something of a captive market. In 
good times, they did reasonably well, in a few cases growing into large 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
154
firms themselves. But in bad times, they bore the full brunt of the 
larger firm’s retrenchment measures, and were often on the verge of 
bankruptcy (Morishima 1982).
Modern Factories Appear
Modern factories, equipped with the latest machinery powered by 
steam engines, began to appear in the 1880s in Japan. Initially, these 
were the nation-building industries, beginning with textiles, then 
iron and steel production, shipbuilding, and railway construction. 
Japan’s first modern cotton spinning factories were established by 
the government in 1878, then expanded a year later. This enterprise 
failed for a number of reasons, however. First, production was not 
large enough to benefit from economies of scale. Second, Japan did 
not have enough trained engineers to maintain the machinery and 
design new equipment. Third, the location selected for the water-
powered plant did not supply enough water in the dry months to 
keep operating.
The lessons learned from those failures were enough to make the 
next effort, the privately-owned Osaka Spinning Company founded in 
1882, successful. The firm trained a cadre of engineers and machinery 
operators before starting production; they imported a better grade 
of raw cotton; and, they substituted steam engines for water power. 
Eventually, this firm operated a plant with 10,000 cotton spinning 
spindles. Other private ventures followed, so that by 1897 Japan’s 
exports of cotton thread exceeded imports for the first time. Japan 
captured much of the Asian market that had been dominated by Brit-
ish textile firms.
Japan’s modern iron and steel industry grew out of a need to pro-
vide cannon for the defense of the port of Nagasaki. The Saga daimyo, 
responsible for that defense, established the country’s first modern 
reverberatory furnace in 1850 to manufacture weapons, following 
plans and instructions contained in a Dutch book. Prior to the Meiji 
Restoration, Dutch traders working out of a compound at Naga-
saki had long been the only source of information about the West, 
and books in Dutch were the daimyos’ only source of technologi-
cal information. The Saga clan, together with the Satsuma and Mito 
daimyos, also engaged in modern shipbuilding, competing against 
the Tokugawa shipyard. After the opening of the country to Western 
influence, European engineers and craftsmen were hired to construct 
modern iron and steel furnaces, rolling mills, and shipyards, and to 
train Japanese workmen in their operation.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
155
Growth in Export/Import Trade
Overall, agricultural goods made up the largest single share of Japan’s 
exports at the time of the Restoration, although their importance 
would decline rapidly as industrialization took root. In 1870, agri-
cultural products constituted 38 percent of Japan’s exports; in 1890, 
it had declined to just 11 percent, and by the 1930s, only made up 
some 3 percent of the total. In 1870, Japan’s main exports were tea 
and silkworm eggs and cocoons.
Rice was not exported until after World War II, when consumption 
of bread and other wheat products replaced much of the rice that had 
made up the bulk of the Japanese diet. By 1970, rice consumption 
had decreased to the point where the government cut the rice grow-
ing acreage 7.4 percent in an attempt to deal with the surplus. Japan 
has long augmented local production of wheat, barley, and soybeans 
with imports (Minami 1986).
As the nineteenth century was coming to a close, the United States 
had become Japan’s largest trading partner. The value of Japan’s 
annual exports to the United States in 1901 had reached ¥72.3 mil-
lion, and imports exceeded ¥42.7 million. Exports and imports from 
1875 to 1901 for trade with Britain, British India, Germany, and 
China are listed in Table 9.4.
Table 9.4 Value of Japan’s exports and imports for selected countries, 1875–1901 
($ 000)
Country
1875
1880
1885
1890
1895
1900
1901
Britain
Exports
Imports
 2,513.0
14,689.7
2,596,7
16,626,4
2,453.2
12,775.1
5,640.00
26,619.1
7,883.1
45,172.1
11,293.0
71,628.2
11,482.5
50,575.8
Br. India
Exports
Imports
—
—
123.4
1,591.0
493.2
3,398.7
950.8
8,910.9
4,359.2
12,001.8
8,704.3
23,516.3
9,657.6
42,449.9
Germany
Exports
Imports
19.8
813.5
34.9
1,745.1
470.3
1,672.0
846.9
6,856.9
3,340.0
12,233.2
3,555.6
29,199.7
5,251.1
28,320.1
USA
Exports
Imports
6,890.1
1,920.3
12,041.2
2,669.3
15,639.0
2,751.3
19,821.4
6,874.5
54,029.0
9,276.4
52,516.4
62,761.2
72,309.4
42,769.4
China
Exports
Imports
4,186.6
8,200.4
6,320.6
5,846.2
8,242.8
6,342.2
5,223.5
8,849.7
9,135.1
22,985.1
31,876.6
29,960.7
42,925.6
27,256.9
Source: Yamawaki 1903, 468–472; data from Ministry of Agriculture and Industry.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
156
Conclusion
Japan had a long history of adopting the best of what China, Europe, 
and the United States had to offer. It is also important to recall that 
in every case, the adoptions were altered to fit the unique character-
istics and needs of Japan and the Japanese people. The same type of 
modified “Japanization” took place with the institutions adopted by 
the Meiji reformers. Their goal was very rapid modernization; eclectic 
adoption was one way to go about accomplishing that goal.
From roughly 1870 to the end of the nineteenth century, Japan 
and the Japanese people were thrust forcibly into the modern age. 
From a backward, isolated agricultural nation that Commodore Mat-
thew C. Perry forced open in the 1850s, a dedicated group of civil 
servants and entrepreneurs created a modern industrial power. Their 
success may be seen in the ability of the newly established military to 
win a war against a much larger China, and to thoroughly destroy a 
Russian fleet in a short war against Russia.
More important, the country established a modern manufacturing 
economy, using the latest and best technology available in the world at 
the time. This enabled it to surpass many European nations in indus-
trial production, and, by the turn of the century, to become a serious 
rival to Great Britain and Germany in many manufacturing sectors.
During World War I, Japan was able to avoid any fighting or costly 
war production. At the close of that war, however, Japan was awarded 
trusteeship of Germany’s far-flung Pacific colonies. Japan entered the 
1930s committed to a policy of further expansion throughout the 
Pacific region. This policy would lead it to war for control of China’s 
raw material resources, and eventually into headlong conflict with the 
United States and Britain for dominance in Asia.
The Meiji emperor died in 1912, making way for the ascension 
to the throne of crown prince Taisho. Emperor Taisho reigned until 
1926, when his son Hirohito came to power. This was the start of the 
Showa period. Under the Showa emperor, Japan would embark on a 
period of military adventures and colonial expansion that would end 
with total defeat after a brutal war against the western Allies—only to 
see Japan rise from that defeat to build the second strongest economy 
in the world.
Discussion Questions
1. Describe how the Meiji government modernized all of Japan’s 
basic institutions.

C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  t h e  M e i j i  P e r i o d
157
2. How did the Meiji government use entrepreneurs to kick-start the 
economy?
3. Why did the Meiji government decide to use public funds instead 
of private investors to modernize its transportation network?
4. What are the zaibatsu? How did they affect industry and com-
merce in Japan?
5. Name and describe the three types of business organizations that 
emerged during the early years of the Meiji period.

4
C h a p t e r  1 0
Twentieth-Century Japanese 
Commerce and Industry
The modern Japanese business system evolved through three peri-
ods of expansion and retraction in the twentieth century. The first 
period began in 1896 after Japan’s success in the Sino-Japanese War of 
1894–95. A large portion of the $75 million Chinese war indemnity 
was used by the Japanese government to set up model industrial plants 
and to provide entrepreneurs in selected strategic industries with 
subsidies. Industries that benefited most from this early investment 
included metallurgy, electrical equipment and electrical wire manufac-
turing, and machinery and machine tool production. With her current 
account in balance, Japan went on the gold standard in 1897, further 
stabilizing the modern financial system. This period came to a close in 
1920 when, after the end of World War I, foreign producers returned 
to peacetime economies, resulting in a global glut of consumer and 
industrial goods. This glut drove down prices and profits in Japan as 
well as elsewhere, forcing many firms to merge or fail.
The second period in the twentieth-century development of the 
modern Japanese business system, 1920–1945, coincides with the 
country’s shift to an expansionist colonial and militaristic political 
policy that led it into war against China in the late 1930s and into war 
with Great Britain and the United States in the 1940s.
Over the more than two decades of war and expansion, the Japa-
nese business system underwent an extensive rationalization and car-
telization process. The business system came to be dominated by a 
few very large, family-owned, diversified holding companies, the zai-
batsu. These giant firms controlled production in most of the basic 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
160
industries of Japan: mining, heavy construction, shipbuilding, iron 
and steel production, and banking. They also established a major 
presence in many other modern industries. These depended upon an 
extensive network of semi-independent subcontracting firms, with the 
entire network held together by the holding company, or through 
a system of ownership of each others’ shares. This period saw the 
Japanese government fall into the hands of ultra-traditionalists and 
the military, which used the protection of markets and raw material 
sources as justification for leading the country into the devastating 
Second World War. Preparation for war in the 1930s resulted in a 
rapid increase in Japan’s GDP.
The third period, often referred to as Japan’s second economic 
miracle, began after 1952 when the postwar occupation ended. Char-
acterized by rates of economic growth much higher than any country 
in the West with the possible exception of Germany, Japan’s economy 
was sparked by purchases of war materials for the United Nations’ 
peace action in South Korea. This growth was endorsed by the U.S. 
occupying force, which saw an economically strong and stable Japan 
as an effective bulwark against communist expansion in Asia. Japanese 
manufacturers got their first push with Korean War purchases, fol-
lowed by unprecedented access to the huge U.S. market.
By the 1970s, Japanese textiles, consumer electrical goods and 
entertainment equipment, motorcycles and automobiles, and eventu-
ally machinery and machine tools were competing successfully with 
the best of American and European manufacturers. Over the next 
20 to 30 years, the Japanese business system enjoyed phenomenal 
growth. By the 1980s, Japan’s economic miracle had produced huge 
trade surpluses with most of the developed world. Japan entered the 
1980s with the second or third most powerful economy in the world, 
and Japanese-style management was being exported along with its 
high-quality industrial goods.
Japan may have entered into a fourth period during the late 1980s, 
when its bubble economy collapsed. This forced many firms to rethink 
their lifetime employment policies, Japanese banks to curtail their 
aggressive lending practices, and the Japanese government to begin 
to rethink its expansionist industrial policies (Wood 1994). In 2015, 
Japan had still not completely regained its high-growth status.
Japanese Commerce and Industry Before 1920
The evolution of Japan’s commerce and industry was occurring simul-
taneously with the formation of the country’s political system. Basic 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
161
rights of the people were established with the emperor’s agreement in 
1889 to a formal constitution. Democracy, tempered by retention of 
controls in the hands of the emperor and the aristocracy, had finally 
come to Japan. The right to vote was given to all males who paid a 
minimum income tax; this was something like 1 or 2 percent of the 
total population. Universal male suffrage was granted in 1925. One 
of the most important clauses of the constitution formally established 
the emperor’s personage as sacred, and anything said to be done in 
the name of the emperor could not be discussed or rejected. The 
constitution also removed the Japanese army from civilian control, 
granting it independent status.
The following year, 1890, saw the establishment of a two-house 
legislature, or Diet, elected in the country’s first general election. The 
lower house, representing each prefecture, was directly elected. The 
upper house was similar to the British House of Lords, with member-
ship drawn from a newly resurrected peerage system. Transition to 
democracy was not without its difficulties, however. A series of riots 
that broke out during the run-up to the 1882 election was ruthlessly 
put down by government troops and resulted in the loss of many lives.
Internationally, 1899 was a watershed year in the development of 
the Japanese business system. In that year Britain became the first 
foreign power to renegotiate the odious trade treaties that had been 
forced upon Japan in the 1860s and 1870s. Other countries soon 
followed Britain’s lead, so that by 1910 Japan had regained complete 
control over its own tariffs and customs systems. Japan abolished all 
taxes on its exports and installed import taxes ranging from 5 to 40 
percent. The average tax on imports in 1911 was 20 percent (Hirsch-
meier and Yui 1975).
The Japanese business system entered the twentieth century with 
a pluralistic structure that was similar to that which had characterized 
the system since the beginning of the country’s modern industrial-
ization in the 1880s. Business was still divided into two broad seg-
ments: the large, modern firms in such industries such as iron and 
steel, and the smaller, traditional industries such as textiles and agri-
cultural product processing, distribution, and retailing. Agriculture, 
upon which the majority of the economy had been based prior to the 
Meiji Restoration, lagged far behind the industrial sector in terms of 
productivity growth and income generation.
Throughout World War I, Japanese industries enjoyed an unprec-
edented boom period. Global demand soared as the more mature 
European economies placed embargoes on exports and geared up 
for wartime production. At home, two wars fought against powerful 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
162
neighbors, China in 1894–95 and Russia in 1904–5, had resulted 
in the rapid expansion of Japan’s heavy industries, so that they were 
prepared to take up the slack when the warring European countries 
ceased to export. The Yawata Steel Works, which began production in 
1901, was typical of the industries benefiting from the war. Between 
1914 and 1919, Yawata met the demand for armaments to fight the 
country’s own wars. Japan’s first modern naval ships had been pro-
duced by British shipyards, but by 1906 domestic yards were building 
modern naval vessels as large and as powerful as those made anywhere 
in the world, using high-grade steel from the Yawata Steel Works. 
Many of the European ships lost to German submarine warfare were 
replaced by vessels built in Japanese yards using Japanese-produced 
steel.
Four-part Structural Evolution
By 1915, the Japanese business system had evolved into a four-part 
structure. At the top were a small number of very large and pow-
erful family owned firms, the zaibatsu. After these came a group of 
joint-stock companies that operated in many of the second-generation 
industries, such as electrical machinery and chemicals. Often, these 
followed management practices that were similar to the zaibatsu, 
including lifetime employment for skilled workers. The third group 
was made up of a great many sole proprietorships. The owner-manag-
ers of these firms were typically involved to some degree with the old 
traditional industries, such as the building trades and textiles. Another, 
growing group of sole proprietorships were established by inventor-
entrepreneurs in the higher technology industries, such as equipment 
and machinery, cosmetics, publishing, pharmaceuticals, and the like. 
Most retailing establishments were also sole proprietorships.
A fourth group consisted of rapidly growing firms in the second 
wave of industrialization. Called the new zaibatsu, they tended to be 
firms requiring large amounts of capital, including chemicals, electri-
cal and transportation equipment, arms and armaments. These grew 
rapidly after 1900 and, encouraged by the government, underwent 
extensive mergers and rationalizations after the economic declines in 
1920s and 1930s. By and large, these new zaibatsu were established 
with investment capital, either public or private or both, rather than 
with family money, and were managed almost exclusively by profes-
sional managers rather than family members. During the 1930s, por-
tions of this fourth group and the military had adopted similar aims 
and functioned very closely together.

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
163
Two years after the Meiji period came to a close, World War I 
began in Europe. Japan, a member of an Anglo-Japanese Alliance, 
declared war on Germany and her allies. Japan immediately took over 
Germany’s interests in China, while German possessions in the cen-
tral Pacific, including the Mariana, Marshall, and Caroline Islands, 
became Japanese protectorates (Spector 1985). As European indus-
trial competitors pulled out of Asian markets, redirecting their econo-
mies toward war production, Japanese businesses moved in, initiating 
a tremendous export boom. When the armistice was signed in 1919, 
Japan’s economy had become thoroughly industrialized, the country 
had acquired a colonial empire, and the Japanese military had proven 
itself capable of fighting and winning wars against such giants as China 
and Russia. Japan’s military and industrial leaders felt able to take on 
the world.
Japanese Commerce and Industry after 1920
During the five years of World War I, Japan’s industrial production 
increased five-fold. From a large deficit in foreign trade built up dur-
ing the first decades of its industrialization, the nation developed a 
large trade surplus. Almost all businesses benefited from the boom, 
but shipbuilding showed the greatest expansion. At the beginning of 
the century, Japanese shipyards produced little more than 10,000 tons 
a year. In 1919, 600,000 tons of shipping was constructed. Immedi-
ately after 1919, shipbuilding dropped to less than 50,000 tons, and 
never exceeded 150,000 tons until the 1930s.
The boom-to-bust experiences of the shipbuilding industry were 
mirrored by the bulk of Japanese business after 1920. Only a few of the 
second-generation industries, such as chemicals and electrical equip-
ment, along with retail trade, continued to grow. Exports plummeted 
during the early postwar period. Agriculture, while benefiting from 
new artificial fertilizers and early mechanization, suffered from a pre-
cipitous drop in commodity prices. Since more than 50 percent of the 
total workforce was still engaged in agricultural production, this drop 
in farm income caused untold misery across Japan’s rural areas. On 
top of this economic disruption, the Tokyo-Yokohama area suffered a 
devastating earthquake in 1923; nearly 150,000 people died from the 
quake or the fires that followed it (Kosaka 1992; Dower 1992).
After the 1921 collapse many industries returned to the cartel-like 
systems they had abandoned during the heady days of the war boom. 
With European and American competitors returning to Asian mar-
kets, the smaller Japanese firms felt they could not compete without 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
164
some sort of protection. Cartels were reestablished in the spinning, 
paper, grain milling, sugar refining, petroleum, fertilizer, mining, rail-
way equipment, and shipping industries. The Japanese government 
supported these rationalizations and, in fact, forced cartelization in 
some industries after 1925 when it passed the Law on Organization 
of Important Industries. By 1932, all major industrial sectors were 
cartelized. Heavy industry was organized into 32 cartels; the chemical 
industry formed 31; textiles, 11; food processing, 8; finance, 18; and 
seven in other, less important sectors (Hirschmeier and Yui 1975).
Growth of Japan’s Trading Companies
The interwar period in Japan also saw a tremendous rise in the power 
and influence of Japan’s great trading companies. Japan’s rapid indus-
trialization had not included total modernization of its marketing and 
distribution system. Manufacturers concentrated on production and 
on maintaining supplies of resources. They called on the long-estab-
lished international trading companies—some tracing their history 
back to the sixteenth century—to handle the distribution of their final 
products, as well as to locate and manage acquisition of raw mate-
rials. The trading companies soon handled sales and distribution of 
products in the home market as well as internationally. These compa-
nies became so successful that, early in the twentieth century, some of 
the larger zaibatsu began setting up their own trading organizations, 
handling not only their own products, but those produced by other 
manufacturers as well. The Mitsubishi Company’s trading operation 
was established in 1918; Sumitomo’s in 1919.
The 1920s were particularly hard on certain elements of the Japa-
nese financial system. This system was organized into three sections 
or components: insurance companies, a core of very large “city” banks 
(actually, national banks) that were typically closely tied to specific 
industries or zaibatsu, and a large number of smaller commercial 
and savings banks. The government, with its extensive postal savings 
system similar to Great Britain’s, also played a significant role in the 
financial system.
Insurance firms survived the economic bust relatively unscathed, 
but Japan’s banking system was severely damaged. Commercial banks 
had been forbidden to make long-term loans to industries. Many 
were the principal or captive lender to a specific business; they got 
around this restriction by making short-term loans and continually 
rolling them over into new loans. Most of Japan’s largest industries 
obtained the bulk of their capital either from within their zaibatsu 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
165
system or from their own banks, rather than from the sale of securities 
on the open market. To secure their lending capital, the banks were 
forced to borrow for longer periods. During the industrial boom of 
the 1914–1919 war they borrowed huge sums at high interest rates to 
finance their borrowers’ expansion. The interest rates on the amounts 
they loaned plummeted, while the rates on the funds they had bor-
rowed remained high. The result was a rash of bank closings over the 
decade of the 1920s. By 1927, the government felt it had to step in to 
avoid complete collapse of the system. Many smaller banks were forc-
ibly merged with larger ones. In the end, this served to strengthen the 
already powerful zaibatsu banks and cement the close relationships 
between large industries, banks, and the government. By the 1930s, 
four of Japan’s five largest banks were zaibatsu banks.
In many ways, Japan’s large family-owned zaibatsu were the most 
distinctive characteristic of the Japanese business system until after 
1945. Consisting of 10 to 20 interlocking business groups, depend-
ing on how and when they were measured, the zaibatsu were associa-
tions of business ventures dominated by a single family. The largest 
zaibatsu had begun as early as the seventeenth century as trading or 
commercial houses formed to dispose of the annual rice crop, or as 
merchants, acquiring and distributing the many necessities of life to 
farmers, samurai, and daimyo houses. Initially, their operations were 
controlled by the house of the first son, the patriarch of the clan, but 
as they grew they came to rely more and more on professional man-
agers who, under the Confucian ethic, gave their complete, life-long 
loyalty to the house enterprise (Lockwood 1979).
New Organizational Structures
As Japanese firms grew in size and took on additional operations 
after the Meiji Restoration, new organizational structures were neces-
sary to effectively and efficiently manage the organizations’ far-flung 
enterprises. Passage of the Company Law in 1893 made the neces-
sary changes possible. The law established three legal forms of busi-
ness enterprises: the joint-stock limited liability company, the limited 
partnership, and the unlimited partnership. The zaibatsu reorganized 
so that by the 1920s, most had become central holding companies 
controlling a set of joint-stock operating companies. Most if not all 
of the stock in the holding companies remained in the hands of the 
controlling family. Holding company ownership of stock in operating 
companies ranged from minority positions of less than 20 percent to 
total ownership.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
166
Central to the functioning of the zaibatsu were the organizations’ 
banks. By the sheer size of the conglomerate and because their own-
ers did not require that they make a profit, these banks were able to 
weather the collapse of the Japanese economy after 1920 and the even 
deeper plunge of the Great Depression in the early 1930s. During the 
1920s, many nonzaibatsu banks failed, taking down with them the 
small to middle-sized enterprises that depended on them. In 1920, 
Japan had 2,036 banks. By 1930, this number was reduced to only 
895, and by the 1940s only 69 banks remained (Lockwood 1979; 
Minami 1986).
The Great Depression of the early 1930s caused severe economic 
and social disruption across Japan, just as it did in Europe and the 
United States. The pace of business consolidations through mergers 
and government-forced rationalizations accelerated. Thousands of 
smaller firms were eliminated, while the zaibatsu, through their great 
size, financial strength, diversification and the practice of subcontract-
ing, were able to adjust.
Continued industrialization and militarization of the productive 
economy resulted in significant changes in Japan’s exports from 
1925 to 1935. The large firms emerged from the depression stron-
ger than they had ever been as global recovery began; the textile 
industry enjoyed particularly rapid growth from 1933 to 1935. In 
1925, 70 percent of the value of Japan’s exports was textiles, and 
nearly 50 percent of these were raw silks (Table 10.1). However, by 
1935, the value of textiles had declined to 55 percent of the total, 
while metals, metal products, and machinery exports increased in 
value from a combined total of 5 percent to 15 percent. The export 
Table 10.1 Shares of Japanese exports, 1925–1935
Commodity
1925 (% of total)
1935 (% of total)
Textiles
70
51
Chemicals
6
10
Metal and metal products
3
8
Machinery
2
7
Miscellaneous
4
7
Others
15
17
Totals
100
100
Source: Hatase 2002.

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
167
of raw silk dropped to 25 percent. The greatest change occurred in 
the exports of other textile products from 16 percent in 1925 to 40 
percent of the total in 1935; these included rayon yarns and fabrics 
and woolens.
Financial power became concentrated in the hands of a few banks, 
financial institutions, and zaibatsu. Most of these had long maintained 
strong ties with the government. When a tide of militarism swept into 
the Japanese government, the zaibatsu, with control of most of the 
nation’s heavy industries, were in position to benefit greatly from gov-
ernment purchases of arms and armaments. The managers of these 
firms supported the aims of the increasingly powerful army and the 
country’s expansionist policies. This would lead to the forced dissolu-
tion of the zaibatsu after World War II, as occupation administrators 
placed much of the blame for Japan’s military adventures on the backs 
of these firms’ managers (Hadley 1974).
As the worst of the depression eased and the economy renewed its 
growth, the zaibatsu dominated the Japanese business system. Their 
control of the country’s financial, industrial, and trading sectors was 
in stark contrast to a much weaker but still widespread small-scale plu-
ralistic production sector, which also included agriculture (Lockwood 
1979).
A wide disparity had existed in wages and working conditions 
in Japan throughout its industrialization and military power-build-
ing. Growing social tensions were shunted aside as the country 
expanded its overseas military activities. Japan had acquired For-
mosa (Taiwan) in 1895 as part of the Chinese war indemnity and 
officially annexed Korea in 1910. She had joined the Western 
powers in China putting down the Boxer Rebellion in 1900, and 
expanded that presence thereafter. Japan established a puppet state 
in Manchuria in 1932, renaming it Manchukuo, effectively tak-
ing control of this resource-rich Chinese territory. Japanese firms 
established mines and factories in all of these annexed territories. 
Pressure from the League of Nations for Japan’s withdrawal from 
China resulted in Japan’s resignation from the league. By 1936, 
extreme nationalist factions had taken control of the government; 
the economy was put on a semi-wartime footing, and raw material 
allocations were strictly rationed by government controls. A year 
later, Japan and China were at war. Japan’s war aims were to gain 
control of China’s enormous natural resources. As a result, govern-
ment bureaucrats and industry representatives moved into China 
with the Japanese army.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
168
Japan in the 1930s and Early 1940s
The period from 1936 to 1945 saw Japan’s business system forced to 
devote itself almost exclusively to the production of goods for the mil-
itary. Strategic industries, such as shipbuilding and iron and steel pro-
duction, joined the railways as nationalized enterprises. The military 
government took on almost complete control of productive capac-
ity. In 1940, Japanese troops, now allied with Germany, moved into 
French Southeast Asian territories with permission from the French 
Vichy government. A year later, Japanese war planes attacked the U.S. 
naval base at Pearl Harbor, the Philippine Islands, the British at Singa-
pore and Hong Kong, and oil-rich Dutch territories in Indonesia. War 
with the United States and the British empire had begun. At the peak 
of its military successes, the Japanese empire controlled nearly all of 
Southeast Asia and much of China, and her armed forces were poised 
to invade India and Australia.
When the war ended in August 1945, almost all of Japan’s pro-
ductive infrastructure had been destroyed, her merchant fleet sunk, 
and the economy forced to absorb some six million returning soldiers 
and civilians, many of whom had been gone from the Japanese home 
islands for more than 10 years. The occupying forces were particularly 
interested in ensuring that Japan not be able to wage aggressive war 
again, and began a series of revolutionary changes in the economic and 
political structure of the nation. They deemed the zaibatsu’s power to 
be excessive, and blamed them for much of the army’s expansionist 
activities. Controlling families were forced out of the holding compa-
nies and zaibatsu operating companies. The conglomerates were then 
broken up into smaller, independent operations. U.S.-type antitrust 
laws were enacted to prevent future conglomerations, cartels, and 
monopolies. Holding companies were forbidden.
The Japanese business system was in an extreme state of flux until 
outbreak of the Korean War, which, with U.S. efforts to control the 
spread of communism, resulted in an easing of restrictions on Japa-
nese businesses. A surge of orders followed for goods and services 
for supporting UN actions on the Korean peninsula. In addition to 
the billions spent by the UN for war materials, the United States 
continued to provide more billions in foreign aid to Japan. These 
financed almost all of Japan’s early postwar reconstruction and recov-
ery (Whitehall 1991).
Japan’s postwar economic miracle began with America’s involve-
ment in the Korean War. The post–World War II economic rate of 
growth of the Japanese economy increased rapidly in the 1950s, and 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
169
was maintained at more than 10 percent a year over most of that 
decade and the next. By the late 1970s, Japan had built the third larg-
est economy in the world.
A Familiar Pattern
The business system that emerged in Japan after 1952 followed the 
dual structure that had existed since the beginning of the century. 
Most of the country’s businesses are very small; more than 67 percent 
of all private firms employ between one and four workers and more 
than 85 percent of Japan’s 856,896 manufacturers employ fewer than 
20 workers. Less than two-tenths of 1 percent employ more than 300 
workers. In between the many very small and few very large businesses 
are the middle-sized, subcontracting-type firms. The great majority of 
these are members of some group of businesses led either by a bank or 
a large manufacturer, such as Toyota, Honda, Nissan, Matsushita, and 
Canon. Together, the small and mid-sized firms produce more than 
half of the products made in Japan. The services sector remains largely 
underdeveloped in Japan, or continues to operate under cumbersome, 
archaic conditions, as with the nation’s complex distribution system.
Some of the larger firms are reincarnations of the old zaibatsu, 
including Mitsubishi, Mitsui, and Sumitomo, which were allowed to 
reform after the occupation ended in 1952. Three other large groups 
are centered on Japan’s biggest banks: Fuji, Dai Ichi Kangyo, and 
Sanwa. Together, these six largest conglomerates make up a major 
portion of Japan’s total assets. These clusters—the keiretsu—of indus-
trial, commercial, and financial businesses are characteristic of the 
Japanese business model. Lincoln and Gerlach (2004, 15) suggest the 
following definition for keiretsu: “clusters of independently managed 
firms maintaining close and stable business ties, cemented by gover-
nance mechanisms such as president’s councils, partial cross-owner-
ship, and interlocking directories.” Each group had 20 or more major 
satellite firms in its network, with as many as 200 or more smaller, 
less important member firms attached. The enterprise groups were 
once considered to be as important to the Japanese business system as 
were the zaibatsu during the first half of the century (Dower 1992). 
However, the dominance of the model has faded as globalization, 
deregulation, and economic stagnation have forced major changes in 
the Japanese business system. In 1991, the “Big Six” that dominated 
the Japanese economy in the postwar period each included from 20 
to 46 major member firms; their growth from 1980 to 1993 is shown 
in Table 10.2.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
170
Importance of Group Identification
Many theories have been put forth to explain the success of the post-
war Japanese business system. These range from the social-cultural 
traits of the Japanese people to a conspiracy of the Japanese govern-
ment, working with Japanese industry, to dominate the global econ-
omy. Neither of these can really explain why the modern Japanese 
corporation, or kaisha, achieved its position of strength in the global 
marketplace during the short quarter of a century following the end 
of World War II. Understanding the kaisha concept, however, may 
help to achieve some understanding of Japan’s business successes 
(Abegglen and Stalk 1985).
In Japan, the need for group identification is extremely important. 
Association with or membership in a particular organization or insti-
tution provides much of the basis for self-esteem. Such association or 
membership excludes others who are not part of the same institution. 
This is exemplified in the words Japanese workers use when referring 
to their company: the word uchi, which means “my house,” is used 
to refer to one’s place of work or organization, whereas otaku (“your 
house”) refers to another person’s place of employment.
In this manner, the word kaisha is used to denote a Japanese 
corporation. In its broader sense it means “my company” or “our 
company.” However, it means more than this. It connotes the com-
munity to which one belongs and that is primary in one’s life. It is not 
synonymous with “corporation” as it is commonly used in English. 
Kaisha is a fundamental social group in Japanese society. Thus, the 
company does not belong to its shareholders as it does in the United 
States or Great Britain, but to its employees. The company satisfies 
the total social existence of a person and, in turn, has authority over 
Table 10.2 The six major Japanese business networks (keiretsu), 1980–1993
Keiretsu
Major firms in 1980
Major firms in 1993
Mitsui group
24
26
Mitsubishi group
28
29
Sumitomo group
21
20
Fuyo group
29
29
Sanwa group
40
44
DKB group
43
46
Source: Lincoln and Gerlach 2004, Fair Trade Commission data.

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
171
all aspects of the employee’s life (Nakome 1974). Changes in the 
system to increase shareholders’ rights have been underway in Japan 
since 2000.
The practice of considering one’s place of employment as personal 
and as family has roots that reach back long before the Meiji Restora-
tion. When merchants first emerged during the Tokugawa era mer-
chant firms were closely held family operations. The business was more 
a social group than a simple family, for it included persons who were 
not related. Together, the group was referred to as an ie, or “house.” 
House in this context meant both the physical structure in which the 
business was located and all the people associated with it. The house 
consisted of a male head of household, his wife, their oldest son and 
his wife, any unmarried younger sons and daughters. Upon marry-
ing, younger sons typically left the house to set up a branch operation 
or joined the house of his wife. Husbands of daughters were often 
adopted into the family (Clark 1979).
The Tokugawa merchant’s house was his place of business. Within 
the house, the entire family and the business were united as one. The 
head of the house lived on the premises and controlled all the assets 
of the business as the property of the house. The business’s liabili-
ties were the responsibility of all members of the house. As the busi-
ness grew and more help was needed for its expanding operations, 
husbands of daughters were often adopted into the family, as were 
trusted, nonrelated clerks.
This system only developed among merchant establishments, 
whose activities were restricted to trading, warehousing, and distri-
bution, and banking services. As the lowest of the four classes in the 
social ranking system that began with samurai, then included farmers, 
followed by craftsmen, merchants were expressly forbidden to become 
manufacturers; that activity was reserved for the craftsman class. Near 
the end of the Tokugawa period, this system was breaking down, and 
many merchants were making their own merchandise. A number of 
samurai were also setting up or helping to finance manufacturing 
enterprises.
The Modern Japanese Kaisha
The modern Japanese kaisha is considered an evolutionary product 
of the old feudal village (mura) community system of loyalties. All 
employees belong to the company in much the same way ancient 
Japanese belonged to their village community and later family work-
ers belonged to one house. It exists as a mutual relationship, and is 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
172
expressed in the paternalistic way companies look after all aspects of 
their employees’ welfare. It has been called enlightened feudalism 
(Woods 1995, 24).
When Japan’s industrialization speeded up after 1900, many grow-
ing manufacturing firms found themselves facing severe labor short-
ages. There was a particularly critical shortage of workers with skills 
in modern manufacturing and engineering activities. As farm workers 
left their villages and their families to find employment in Japan’s new 
factories, the old Confucian-influenced, all-embracing community-
family loyalty structure could no longer meet the needs of the new 
society. The largest of the industrial firms adopted paternalistic poli-
cies to keep their workers, including life-long employment, company 
housing, commissaries, and extensive group recreational and learning 
opportunities. Workers transferred the loyalties they had held toward 
their families, clans, and communities to the company. In this way, the 
deep-seated drive for group consciousness was satisfied.
Although only about 40 percent or less of the Japanese workforce 
was involved in the large-firm, paternalistic system, it remains one 
of the most characteristic features of the Japanese business system. 
Regardless of their position in the organization, white collar or blue 
collar, manager or janitor, Japanese workers tend to hold a person-
alized relationship to their corporate groups. This may spring from 
the Confucian concept of striving for harmony in social relationships, 
personal loyalty, and paternalistic concern for all members of one’s 
“family.”
In addition to the importance of group consciousness, other com-
ponents of the Japanese national character considered to have con-
tributed much to the success of Japanese businesses include: (1) the 
homogeneity of the society, (2) a nonconfrontational climate of dis-
cussion and decision making within businesses, (3) deep personal loy-
alty to the organization and team, (4) willingness to work hard for 
long hours to achieve a communal goal, and (5) a national sense of 
purpose. These are said to have generated helpful government bureau-
cracies and paternalistic corporate cultures. Japanese employees are 
said to have a greater commitment to their jobs and, therefore, a con-
siderably higher level of productivity (Lincoln and Kalleberg 1992).
The Role of MITI
The success of the kaisha is directly traceable to close cooperation 
between the Japanese government, corporations, and groups closely 
associated with businesses, such as trade associations and chambers of 
commerce, banks, labor unions, and subcontractors. The participants 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
173
in this combined effort are said to be managed by the Ministry of 
International Trade and Industry (MITI).
MITI targets specific segments of industry and subsidizes the efforts 
of companies to gain dominance in these industries with grants, tax 
relief, tariff protection, and market sharing agreements. The group 
then presses into global markets until all effective opposition has been 
destroyed. This theory holds that after the war and occupation, the 
Japanese first targeted the textile industry, then the shipbuilding and 
steel industries, then transportation and consumer electronics. The 
microchip, computer, aerospace and pharmaceutical sectors were 
among the next to receive an attack on industry by the agency, which 
in 2001 was under a new name, the Ministry of Economy, Trade and 
Industry (METI). It must also be said that as Japan’s economy has 
slowed since the late 1980s, and as American and European firms 
have become better at meeting competition from Japanese firms, the 
MITI-led conspiracy theory has lost much of its former attraction.
There is some truth in these explanations, but they do not go far 
enough to explain why Japanese firms have been so successful (Abeg-
glen and Stalk 1985). MITI has, indeed, been able to target specific 
industries for special guidance and support. But overall, MITI’s poli-
cies and the national character theories fail because they do not address 
the realities of international business. It is companies, not societies or 
nations, that compete for markets in today’s world. Companies, not 
governments, conduct foreign trade. And companies, not govern-
ments, determine whether a society prospers or fails in the global mar-
ketplace. The breakup of the former Soviet Union is a good example 
of what happens when countries try to replace market mechanisms 
with commands. In the long run, it hasn’t worked yet.
Japan succeeded because the Japanese business system was led by a 
group of particularly talented and dedicated managers at a time when 
a particular set of circumstances existed to permit the combination of 
national character and government policies to achieve success beyond 
the dreams of anyone involved. These managers adopted a competi-
tive focus that was available to all companies in all countries; nothing 
Japan did was exclusively Japanese. Many of the actions taken were the 
same actions that first saw the British, German, and then the American 
business systems to grow powerful in the nineteenth century.
Postwar Business Changes
The actions of postwar Japanese managers included four cultural con-
cepts or tendencies. First, Japanese managers are said to have a bias 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
174
toward growth that includes taking a long-term approach to return 
on investments. Second, the entire export sector maintains a preoc-
cupation with the actions of competitors; this results in pressures on 
the government to erect barriers to entry into the domestic market 
for foreign competition while at the same time doing all it could to 
capture export markets.
A third focus is the creation and ruthless exploitation of competitive 
advantage. This is established by maintaining artificially high prices in 
the domestic market to offset low export prices, a preoccupation with 
quality, and by cartel-like industry agreements on market share and 
exports targets. This has also resulted in many charges of dumping 
levied against Japanese manufacturers selling abroad at prices that are 
obviously below the cost of production. The final factor includes close 
cooperation between the government and private industry on policies 
that are consistent with the preceding three factors.
The growth bias maintained by Japanese corporations is linked to 
a nearly overwhelming drive to survive. Japan’s kaisha have seen the 
fate of companies that failed to grow faster than their competitors. 
For example, at one time nearly 50 firms produced motorcycles in 
postwar Japan. Now, two or three dominate the market. In the late 
1950s Honda increased its production 50 percent faster than demand 
required. Unit production costs dropped dramatically with economies 
of scale. The five-year goal of the company at the time was to replace 
Tohatsu as Japan’s leading manufacturer of motorcycles. The motor-
cycle manufacturers who were unwilling to make a similar investment 
saw their market lead soon taken over by Honda. Tohatsu declared 
bankruptcy not long afterward and soon 45 other Japanese companies 
quit making motorcycles.
Another example of a Japanese corporations’ willingness to take a 
long-term approach to investment rather than insisting on immedi-
ate returns, is the experience of the Komatsu Electronics Materials 
(KEM) Company—a subsidy of the large prewar zaibatsu Komatsu, 
Ltd. Komatsu became a major competitor of the U.S. Caterpillar Cor-
poration in the global heavy construction equipment market. KEM is 
also an example of the way many Japanese businesses are owned by 
other businesses; 90 percent of KEM is owned by Komatsu, while 10 
percent is owned by Tokuyama, a Japanese chemical company that 
sells to Komatsu. In 1990, at a low period in the sales of computers, 
KEM acquired Advanced Silicon Materials, a U.S. company founded 
in 1984 by Union Carbide Corporation. Advanced Silicon produces 
pure silicon, the foundation material used in all computer chips. In 
1990, Union Carbide believed that growth in demand for computer 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
175
chips would be slower than what they felt would produce a rate of 
return satisfactory to their stockholders, so they sold the company 
for something like 30 cents on the dollar. Komatsu was willing to 
wait. They believed that growth would skyrocket. KEM was a major 
customer of Union Carbide, even closing down their own factory in 
Japan to be supplied by the Union Carbide plant.
A year or so after the sale of Advanced Silicon Materials to Kom-
atsu, computer sales took off. The demand for KEM’s product grew 
by 35 percent a year for three years in a row, and at 18 percent a year 
for the next two years. KEM planned to double production and build 
another plant to produce four times the amount in another US loca-
tion as well. More than 60 percent of the KEM plant’s production was 
sold to buyers in Europe and Asia. Demand permitted KEM to raise 
prices; quantity production has lowered costs.
This drive to survive is also tied to standards and values of the 
Japanese society. Wholesale layoffs by a company in response to weak-
ening demand for a product are a sign of management failure and a 
loss of prestige. The practice of life-long employment affects some 40 
percent of the Japanese workforce, but indirectly influences the fate 
of many others. It is management’s responsibility to increase demand 
or find another product for which the capacity of the organization can 
be gainfully used.
For example, the camera company Canon responded to weaken-
ing world demand for cameras by diversifying into printers, comput-
ers, word processors, facsimile machines, copiers, and semiconductor 
manufacturing equipment. Today, cameras represent less than one-
third of Canon’s total sales. The Matsushita Company, known for its 
consumer electronics and entertainment products, has a business plan 
that looks ahead, 200 years into the future. In these companies and 
the many others like them, management decisions and planning all 
focus on what can be done to produce growth. Sony has moved from 
a producer of entertainment hardware into movie production and 
music publishing.
To the kaisha, the risk of falling behind a major competitor is con-
sidered to be a risk with greater impact than a drop in profits. To fall 
behind means that future profit will never materialize. In this light, 
the kaisha’s preoccupation with competitors has two objectives. The 
first is to be better, but never behind. The second is: if one cannot be 
better, be different. “Being better” means producing better products; 
this is manifested in the Japanese corporations’ postwar compulsion 
with quality and continuous improvement. “Being different” means 
finding a niche that is out of the mainstream of competition; this 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
176
is exemplified in the high level of investments in R&D by Japanese 
corporations.
The third management focus is on the creation and exploitation 
of competitive advantage. Initially, this meant taking advantage of 
Japan’s low-cost manufacturing and maximum use of labor. Today, 
however, this has shifted to included greater product-line variety—a 
concept that has gone to the extreme in some instances—and con-
tinued emphasis on product quality and technological innovation. 
These strategic advantages, used with market targeting, are behind 
the reputation for the Japanese business system’s ruthless attack on 
foreign competition in specific industries. Of course, there is no deny-
ing MITI’s direct and powerful influence in helping to establish and 
maintain the country’s industrial policy.
Importance of Linkages
A key feature of the Japanese business system has been the tendency of 
firms of all sizes to be linked together in a cohesive networked group: 
the keiretsu. The firms in a keiretsu have typically been tied together 
through a major bank, with all firms depending on that bank for oper-
ating and investment capital.
There are three main types of keiretsu. One, the horizontal or 
intermarket type is a group centered on a large industrial company, 
with many different unrelated firms as members of the group. This 
type is also known as an “enterprise group.” Some of the firms in 
the enterprise groups are also members of a second type, the vertical 
supply keiretsu. This type is like a pyramid of large manufacturers, 
their suppliers, and their suppliers’ suppliers. The large Japanese auto-
mobile firms are examples of this type. A third type, the distribution 
keiretsu, is a descendant of the old merchant or trading house for 
family business. These are semi-independent subsidies, affiliates, or 
subcontractors who produce more or less exclusively for one large 
retail customer or a larger producer that is the leader of the group. 
Other types of networks also referred to as keiretsu are retailers with 
railroad and amusement parks, large firms and spin-offs affiliated with 
new industries such as information technology, and bank and non-
bank financial networks (Lincoln and Gerlach 2004).
These types of business groups have four features in common. First 
is their shared sense of community. They “belong” to one another and 
share common goals, ideals, and strategies. A second feature is their 
hierarchical organization. A single major firm, either a manufacturer 
or a bank, dominates the group and its strategic thinking. Lesser firms 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
177
fall under this central leader and respond to the leader’s directives in 
much the same way a regional daimyo lord dominated his lesser samu-
rai followers. The third common feature is a tendency for the groups 
to specialize in a particular field of business or industry. In this way, 
the scope of the firm tends to be narrow and more focused than might 
be the case in a typical large American or European corporation. The 
fourth feature is the practice of buying and selling shares in each oth-
er’s companies as a reflection of their fealty and loyalty to one another.
Much more so than their counterparts in the United States, for 
example, Japanese corporations depend on retained earnings to fund a 
large part of their investment. Rather than selling stock or bonds, they 
tend to borrow for the rest of their needs. Thus, the kaisha depend on 
greater use of debt financing than almost all their foreign competitors. 
The high rate of personal savings in Japan, running in excess of 25 
percent per year, gives financial institutions the wherewithal to meet 
the kaishas’ borrowing needs. Government policy further supports 
this trend; owners of kaisha stock are taxed on dividend income but 
not on capital gains. Hence, the idea of borrowing and investing earn-
ings receives little opposition from Japanese stockholders.
The personnel policies of most Japanese corporations include a 
real effort to avoid surges in hiring and firing. In addition, Japanese 
unions tend to be cooperative company or enterprise unions, rather 
than industry or trade unions. Typically nonconfrontational, unions 
focus on seniority benefits rather than working conditions or the like. 
Other policies include cross-functional training and compensation 
plans with large variable components (bonuses and profit sharing). In 
times of a recession, these variable components can reduce labor costs 
20–30 percent without layoffs.
Conclusion
The future of the Japanese business system is not as clear as it seemed 
to be during the heady days of growth in the 1970s and early 1980s. 
The engine driving the growth that enabled the country’s second 
economic miracle to occur was exports of high quality manufactured 
goods. Today, however, many of the countries with which Japanese 
businesses had a trade surplus are fighting back with restrictions, limi-
tations, and pressures for Japan to reciprocate by opening its market to 
more foreign competition. In many ways, the Japanese home market 
remains largely undeveloped. For years, Japanese consumers tended 
to spend less and save more than consumers in the United States. 
When they did make purchases, they were often forced to spend more 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
178
than they might have had their market been open to outside competi-
tors. Japan’s trade surpluses generated political pressure for a greater 
balance. At the same time, foreign competitors, such as the American 
automobile industry, have made the changes needed to bring their 
products up to Japanese quality standards. As we will see in the next 
chapter, the inattention given to the consumer market in Japan failed 
to result in the stimulus to the economy needed when exports sales 
turned flat during the 1990s.
These improvements, together with the strength of the yen and 
high production costs in Japan, have resulted in loss of market share 
for Japanese manufacturers or significant declines in profit margins. 
To continue to grow as it has in the past, Japan is being urged to allow 
its domestic market to expand. Only growth in domestic demand, 
coupled of course with retention of already strong overseas markets, 
will keep Japan focused on its path to a position as the most powerful 
economy of the twenty-first century.
During Japan’s strongest decades of growth, there were few who 
would have argued that such a goal as world leadership by Japan would 
not come to pass. Some went so far as to predict that Japan would 
“own” the twenty-first century, much as Britain had “owned” the 
nineteenth century and the United States “owned” most of the twen-
tieth. However, a number of factors have contributed to making that 
achievement far less likely than it once seemed. One of these is the rise 
of the Korean and Chinese business systems, as well as those of other 
Asian newly developed nations.
Many of the markets once dominated by manufacturers in Japan are 
now produced by Korean, Taiwanese, Chinese, Malaysian, or other 
Asian competitors, or by branch facilities of Japanese firms located in 
those countries (McRae 1995; Horn and Cross 2009). A hollowing 
out of the Japanese business system has been underway for nearly two 
decades, as Japanese producers move more and more of their pro-
duction to lower cost locations overseas. Ironically, the United States 
has become one of these lower cost countries; a significant portion 
of Japanese automobiles sold in Japan were manufactured in plants 
in the United States. Today, however, those same cars sold in Japan 
might be manufactured or assembled in South America, the United 
States, or Southeast Asia. China is clearly more likely to take the lead-
ing economic position in Asia for the rest of the twenty-first century.
A second factor is the combined weight of a series of actions and 
behaviors that enabled Japanese business to reach its present high posi-
tion. These include the close cooperation—the exclusion of all outside 
firms—among Japanese kaisha, exclusion of foreign competitors and 

T w e n t i e t h - C e n t u r y  Ja pa n e s e  C o m m e r c e
179
foreign investors from the home market, clamping down of domes-
tic demand, a paternalistic and aggressive economic policy, excessive 
government rules, regulations, and restrictions, price controls, unwar-
ranted subsidies, and practices permitting corruption between the 
government and business leaders (Ohmae 1995; Wood 1994).
The third set of factors affecting the Japanese business system is 
the emergence of strong trading blocs, such as the European Com-
mon Market or European Union and the North American Free Trade 
Agreement, which has set up the common market among the United 
States, Canada, and Mexico. Other Latin American nations are 
expected to join NAFTA in the near future. These trading blocs have 
a common external tariff and low or nonexistent internal tariffs. Com-
petitors outside of the bloc are at an economic disadvantage (Thurow 
1992; Drucker 2005).
Discussion Questions
1. Describe the defining characteristics of the three periods through 
which the modern Japanese business system emerged.
2. Why was 1899 considered a watershed year in the development of 
the Japanese business system?
3. By 1915, the Japanese business system had evolved into a four-
part structure. What were the defining characteristics of these four 
components?
4. What is the meaning of cartelization? When did it happen to 
Japan’s manufacturers? Why?
5. Trace the growth and importance of Japan’s great trading 
companies.

4
C h a p t e r  1 1
Japan in the Twenty-First Century
Writing in 1979 at a high point of Japan’s postwar economic recov-
ery, Harvard professor Ezra F. Vogel saw Japan’s trade, business, 
government, and education systems as models that the United States 
and Europe would be well to emulate. The successes of the Japanese 
business system were not caused as much by protectionist policies of 
the Japanese government as many competitors complained, but rather 
to what Vogel saw as a more realistic and efficient way of coping in 
the modern, highly competitive global economy. Vogel pointed to 
the particular successes enjoyed by Japan’s steel, shipbuilding, auto-
mobile, and consumer electronic industries. This became what many 
analysts considered a preferred “third way,” a compromise between 
the unbridled competition of the United States and the overt control 
of the Communist Soviet Union. Of course at this writing, the Soviet 
Union is no more and the Japanese economy has been stagnant for 
more than twenty years.
In 2006 another professor Vogel, this one Steven K. Vogel of the 
University of California at Berkeley, summarized in just three sen-
tences the remarkable change that had brought Japan’s enviable posi-
tion to an end:
Japan astounded the world with its economic performance not once, 
but twice. Japan performed its economic “miracle” from the 1950s 
through the 1980s, and then it produced an equally stunning descent 
into crisis in the 1990s. In the former period Japan had the strongest 
economic performance in the industrialized world; in the latter it had 
the worst. (2006, 22)

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
182
What Went Wrong?
As Ezra Vogel’s book was being published, Japan was enjoying at least 
a large annual trade surplus with the United States and comparable 
surpluses with the rest of the industrialized world. Vogel claimed that 
these surpluses were not due to Japan’s protectionist policies but were 
instead a reflection of American and European industries’ own wrong 
path and their “inferior competitiveness and lack of interest in cul-
tivating exports to Japan.” Vogel quoted a Japanese research center 
official’s boast that the United States had by then replaced Japan’s 
prewar colonies as the primary supplier of agricultural goods and raw 
materials. He then added:
It (has been) comfortable to overlook Japan’s continued modernization 
decades after rebuilding from World War II, its effective organization, 
its genius in adapting technology, its patience in marketing, its disci-
plined workforce. It is more comfortable not to ask how its business-
men could remain so zealous in selling goods to America if they were 
basically selling below cost. It is disquieting to admit that the Japanese 
have beaten us in economic competition because of their superior plan-
ning, organization, and effort. To the extent that our government and 
business enterprises have begun to study their Japanese counterparts, it 
is often only to gather information that might prove charges of dump-
ing or antitrust violations. One wonders at our lack of interest in profit-
ing from Japanese successes. (1979, 225–226)
The pinnacle of Japan’s economic success was reached in the late 
1980s, with the nation’s pride in the achievements of the economic 
miracle expressed in Ishihara’s 1989 controversial in America but cel-
ebrated in Japan book, The Japan That Can Say No. In this book 
Ishihara urged Japan to stop feeling inferior to the United States, 
and to say no to U.S. government pressures for opening its market 
to American imports, to eliminate trade barriers, revise its difficult 
and complex distribution system, and to take steps to voluntarily 
reduce its trade surplus with the United States. The book’s subtitle, 
“Why Japan will be the First among Equals,” summarized Ishihara’s 
beliefs. Japan’s lesser equals would be the United States and Europe, 
although he added that the recent unification of Germany would pos-
sibly generate resentment from such other large European countries 
as France and Britain, thus weakening Europe’s economic hegemony. 
Of course, Ishihara’s book was published before the collapse of the 
stock and real estate markets.

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
183
By the end of the 1980s Japanese postwar business successes had 
become fully entrenched in much of the industrialized world. Writing 
in 1992, University of Southern California professor S. Mark Young 
found that Japanese manufacturing methods had taken a “signifi-
cant role” in U.S. manufacturing, and that American industries were 
adopting the practices because they helped establish “Japanese pre-
eminence” in such areas as automobile manufacturing and consumer 
electronics (1992, 677). He identified six core characteristics of the 
Japanese manufacturing system that were being adopted by businesses 
in the United States and other industrialized nations:
1. The just in time (JIT) manufacturing system, including cross train-
ing and team development
2. Kaizen, or continuous improvement of a worker’s knowledge, 
skills, commitment, and productivity.
3. Total quality control (TQC) or total quality management (TQM), 
with peer pressure to encourage individual workers to identify and 
report quality problems and make corrections if necessary. Often 
referred to as “statistical process control” due to statistical analysis 
and decision making.
4. JIT purchasing, where parts and components are available only as 
needed to maintain consistent production; minimal inventory is 
maintained thus reducing production costs; with responsibility of 
supply maintenance pushed backed to suppliers.
5. Behavioral control through consensual management and worker 
teams acting cooperatively; includes avoiding union work rules 
and job classifications that function as barriers to production 
flow-through.
6. Development of mathematical cost management and performance 
measurement (evaluation) systems, involving application of man-
agement systems, electronic data control, and statistical analysis, 
and cost management systems that reflect alignment with corpo-
rate strategy, value added and non–value added activities, product 
life cycle costs, and other success measures.
By 1993, the great boom of the 1970s and 1980s for Japanese 
business was at an end. Japan’s prime minister, Kiichi Miyazawa, 
acknowledged on January 29, 1993, that the collapse of Japan’s bub-
ble economy had occurred (Wood 1994). Growth for the rest of the 
century would remain flat. Miyazawa admitted that changes in the 
economy were needed. As late as 2014, Japan was still trying to find 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
184
the right combination of government and private sector reforms to 
make needed change happen.
The problems faced by smaller firms in the close, long-term sup-
plier networks were also experienced by larger, core firms in the 
keiretsu system. From the emergence of the keiretsu in response to 
U.S. elimination of the family-held zaibatsu, Japanese business had 
been greatly admired for its good relations between management and 
labor, its efficient use of resources, long-term relationships with a net-
work of closely aligned suppliers, successful adaptation of the Japanese 
management system—or J-System—to global manufacturing and dis-
tribution locations and differences in consumer needs and wants, and 
continuous emphasis on innovation. However, the peak in the sys-
tem’s success and popularity was reduced significantly following the 
collapse of Japan’s bubble economy. The failure to recover from 20 
years of deflation resulted in the Japanese management model losing 
much of its former appeal (Aoki 2009; Buckley 2009; Horn and Cross 
2009; von Staden 2012).
By the late 1990s and into the new century, things had changed 
for Japanese managers, so much so that by 2010 the Japanese econ-
omy underwent its second decade of stagnation with no end in 
sight. Internationally, the Japanese networked industrial model lost 
much of its former glow. The Japanese economy was facing an aging 
population and an unwillingness to modify the banking and indus-
try structure that had generated the recovery miracle. The Japanese 
industrial system of lean management meant the loss of institutional 
memory and inefficient services. Hence, managers and bureaucrats 
looked to past procedures and policies, particularly in financing and 
their focus on exports. The small number of managers in the gov-
ernment sector wore similar blinders in their analyses of economic 
problems.
An example of the difference in management focus that character-
izes many twenty-first-century Japanese managers is Toyota’s clumsy 
and very expensive handling of a series of alleged technological faults 
with several of its automobile models, including the highly popu-
lar Camry, Corolla, and the Prius hybrid. With annual sales from its 
global business reach, Toyota is the largest single firm in Japan. Its 
global 2014 sales were expected to exceed 10 million vehicles, more 
than any other car maker. The firm was formed in the Meiji era as the 
Toyoda Automatic Loom Works. Japan’s first major export, silk cloth, 
was largely woven on looms produced by the Toyoda family. Once a 
part of the Mitsui group, in the 1970s Toyota broke away to become 
its own keiretsu. In addition to many other businesses, more than 230 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
185
primary parts suppliers and nearly 80 production equipment manufac-
turers exist in the Toyota pyramid.
The behavior of Toyota’s management with this problem exem-
plifies the failure of the firm to adapt to changes in its environment 
(Fischer, 2010; Industrial Engineer 2010a and 2010b). Toyota’s 
management was looking more like the General Motors management 
of the 1960s, 1970s, and again in 2013 and 2014, than the hugely 
successful Toyota of the 1980s and 1990s. The behavior of Toyo-
ta’s senior managers in wake of the U.S. recall problem was certainly 
not the same attitude that helped to make Japanese management 
so admired in the 1960s, 1970s, and early 1980s. Robert Cole and 
Michael Flynn (2009), quoting from an interview conducted nearly 
20 years earlier with Nakatsuka Isao, then-director of the total qual-
ity management office at one of the original Toyota firms, compared 
sales successes for U.S. and Japanese automakers. During the inter-
view Isao explained the Japanese automobile industry’s commitment 
to quality and how that commitment had influenced the sales success 
the Japanese industry was having in the U.S. market: “[Our] most 
important objective is to deliver superior products to satisfied cus-
tomers whose trust we must win . . . if we deliver a product to the 
customer whose quality creates trouble for them, this will affect their 
trust in us. If we betray their trust, they will not buy our products for a 
long time!” Cole and Flynn—writing just before the quality problems 
Toyota and other Japanese automakers encountered a few months 
later—added that this breakdown in the commitment to providing 
high quality products was the main reason for the long decline in sales 
by U.S. automakers, and why the decline was continuing despite the 
great quality improvement strides U.S. firms had made over the previ-
ous 30 years.
The economy of Japan, like that of Japan’s economic rivals Great 
Britain and Germany, had become mature. The heady days of double-
digit growth fueled by seemingly ever-expanding exports, were over. 
The Japanese business system needed to adjust its industrial struc-
ture—that is, do away with such costly paternalistic practices as 
life-long employment and captive banking financing—and to begin 
preparing for a future of slower growth and continued rapid techno-
logical change. In addition, Japan needed to reduce its dependence 
upon industrial exports, expand the portion of services in its eco-
nomic mix, take steps to stimulate domestic growth, and to lower its 
politically dangerous trade surpluses. For many, the 1990s were the 
semi-official beginning of end of the postwar boom of the Japanese 
economy. Something of a consensus has finally been reached on the 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
186
point that after 20-plus years of economic stagnation the 1993 col-
lapse of the economy may have been a logical result of the inherent 
structural and ideological weaknesses of the Japanese business system. 
Moreover, the depth of the collapse was reinforced by the successes 
Japan enjoyed from the 1960s through the 1980s (Parker 2011; 
Cowling and Tomlinson 2011; Black and Morrison 2012; von Staden 
2012). Another consensus reached among analysts of the Japanese 
business system is that a complete picture of the system’s success or its 
failures has not as yet been painted.
Box 11.1 A brief history of Japan’s “bubble economy”
The term bubble economy refers to a period of rapid expansion 
and sudden collapse in a nation’s economy. The rapid growth 
is often fueled by excessive speculation in the stock or a com-
modity market. One of the earliest modern bubble economies 
occurred in Holland in 1637 when investors, fearing a shortage 
due to a plant disease, bid up the prices of tulip bulbs. The mar-
ket for tulip flowers and their bulbs led to the creation of a new 
occupation: professional tulip traders, men who put buyers and 
sellers of the plant together.
The next historically significant bubble economy occurred in 
Great Britain with the rapid run-up of prices for shares in the 
South Sea Company—formed in anticipation of generating the 
same phenomenal profits enjoyed by the founders of the British 
East India Company. When the South Sea bubble burst it led 
to the collapse of the company and passage of an anti-panic bill 
in 1720. This bill made it almost impossible to form joint-stock 
companies in Britain for more than 150 years.
The bubble economy in Japan was caused by the collapse of 
the extreme run-up in prices on the Japanese stock market for 
real estate. Prices reached an all-time high in 1989. The losses 
resulted in deflation of the Japanese economy, very low or nega-
tive growth in GDP, and high unemployment as producers and 
sellers had to cut prices to avoid business failure. Economists 
now refer to the 10 and more years of stagnation of the Japanese 
economy as the “lost decades.” In 2008, a similar real estate 
bubble crisis occurred in the United States—this time launching 
a global rather than a regional recession.

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
187
The greatest change in Asian business is currently taking place in 
China, where the economy is growing at a more rapid rate than most 
industrialized nations—often at double-digit rates. In 2010 China 
passed Japan to become the second largest economy in the world. 
Even so, Japan remains a dominant economic power in Asia and much 
of the lesser developed world with an economy that is behind only that 
of the United States and China in size and power. Japan’s industrial 
strengths have enabled it to maintain its power well into the twenty-
first century, although its lead is maintained by a declining margin.
The very Japanese management practices, such as total quality 
management, just-in-time inventory systems, concern for employees’ 
welfare, and strong group-firm business relationships that were once 
eagerly adopted by businesses around the globe are no longer as new 
as they were in the 1970s and 1980s. Competitors around the globe 
adopted them to fit their circumstances and use them to compete with 
Japanese businesses.
By the second decade of the new century, Japan’s lost decade 
had turned into a lost almost 30 years. The record of Japan’s annual 
growth in GDP reveals the flat or negative growth record over the 30 
years from 1981 to 2011 and the steep decline from the middle of the 
1970s. The very strengths of the Japanese economy that Ezra Vogel 
and others admired in the 1970s are now considered to have contrib-
uted to the malaise of the economy from the 1990s. Writing in 2006, 
Steven Vogel, for example, concluded that attempts to reform the 
Japanese economy after the Asian financial crises of the 1990s were 
constricted by the government’s commitment to historic policies, the 
legacies of its banking system, the supplier-manufacturer loyalty that 
included following them in international expansion, and the keiretsu 
network economy industrial system. This thesis would be endorsed by 
many analysts in the next decade (e.g., see Cowling and Tomlinson 
2011; Black and Morrison 2012; von Staden 2012).
Government as a Partner to Business
Japanese manufacturing practices were generally admired and emu-
lated by firms in much of the industrialized world in the last two or 
three decades of the twentieth century. Japanese managers seemed to 
have solved many of the problems facing many of their global com-
petitors. Their focus on product quality, competitive pricing, just-
in-time manufacturing, and other practices contributed to Japan’s 
phenomenal recovery after World War II. Underneath that suc-
cess was a partnering with the Japanese government by protecting 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
188
the domestic market against foreign competition while subsidizing 
industry’s expanding exports of high value added industrial products. 
The close relationship between businesses and the government was 
a reflection of the postwar corporate culture in Japan, and particu-
larly important in the dominant network business system, the keiretsu. 
Understanding of the keiretsu system is best achieved by looking at it 
as an “intricate web of relationships that links banks, manufacturers, 
suppliers, and distributors with the Japanese government” (Debnath 
and Tokuda (2013, 51).
The Japanese government contributed significantly to the early 
success of the postwar economy, as well as the lingering stagnation of 
the economy after the Asian economic crises. From the early days of 
the recovery the government’s economic policy focused on encourag-
ing industrial growth by promoting expansion of exports, investing in 
war-devastated infrastructure, adopting appropriate fiscal and mon-
etary policies, prioritizing industrial sectors in which to invest, and 
maintaining a stable, pro-business economy (Hoffert 2014). Three 
important institutions were established to administer government’s 
administrative action: the Construction Ministry, which controlled 
most infrastructure spending; the Finance Ministry, which among 
other responsibilities managed the government’s tax policy and, from 
an export policy point, the government’s customs and tariffs policies 
and programs. Clearly the most important early addition to the gov-
ernment’s industrial policy was the Ministry of International Trade 
and Industry (MITI). MITI was reorganized in 2001 as the Ministry 
of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI). The coordinated industrial 
expansion and sector growth targets of the ministry worked in the 
following ways:
The importance of MITI reflected the crucial role of foreign trade in 
Japan’s economy and the determination of the government to oversee 
the country’s economic and political relations with other countries. By 
deploying foreign exchange allocations, manipulating quotas, and 
establishing barriers protecting native capital from foreign competi-
tion, the government channeled the flow of investment funds. It could 
also extend or deny tax privileges. It thus had at its disposal a variety 
of weapons to bring recalcitrant firms into line if persuasion, pressures, 
or both failed. Generally, it preferred to rely on discussion and to act 
as much as possible on the basis of a shared government-business con-
sensus. . . . Consensus was possible not only because of the shared 
aims and interest of government and business but also because of ties 
between the government and the business community. Often these ties 
were personal, because the men at the top in the private sector and 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
189
Table 11.1 Top 10 country markets for Japan’s exports in 2012
Rank
Country
Percent of total
Volume
(US$ billion)
 1
China
19.0
147.4
 2
United States
18.3
140.1
 3
South Korea
7.8
62.0
 4
Thailand
5.4
43.1
 5
Other Asian countries
4.7
37.5
 6
Hong Kong
4.3
34.3
 7
Germany
3.3
26.5
 8 
Indonesia
2.6
20.4
 9
Australia
2.5
19.6
10
Singapore
2.4
19.4
Source: MIT 2014.
those heading the influential and prestigious government ministries 
tended to share similar backgrounds; both included a high proportion 
of Tokyo University graduates. (Hoffert 2014, np)
Before 1989 Japan maintained a positive balance of trade. The 
total value of exports more than doubled from US$145.6 million in 
1983 to US$330.9 million in 1992, the value of imports only grew 
from US$114.0 million to US$198.5 million over the same period. 
After adjustments, the total current balance grew from 20.8 million 
to 117.6 million over this period. Steep drops in the current balance 
were experienced from 1988 to 1991. A large increase in the value of 
exports coupled with a small drop in imports in 1992 turned the cur-
rent balance trend around.
Japan’s economic recovery after World War II was based upon an 
economic policy that aimed to gain world leadership in selected sec-
tors of industrial production and growth in exports of high quality 
products of Japanese manufacturing. Table 11.1 identifies the top 
10 country markets for Japan’s exports both in US$ volume and 
percentages.
The reestablished network firms would concentrate on local 
growth; networks would reinforce this focus by eliminating the need 
for acquisitions to ensure production supplies. Government subsi-
dies would kick-start the recovery process, ensuring the long-term 
economic objective would be achieved by maintaining a stable and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
190
dedicated workforce and protection from foreign competition. Work-
ers’ commitment to success would be rewarded by cradle to the grave 
social protection and life-long employment. Secure profits would be 
gained through restricting competition through monopoly participa-
tion in a network or alliance corporate structure.
The system succeeded as planned during the first three decades of 
recovery. Authors like Vogel saw this as an alternative economic sys-
tem to the aggressive competition of the United States and the total 
state control of Soviet communism. The methods of Japanese manag-
ers were studied by Western business leaders and integrated into the 
curricula of professional management schools.
The chief problem with the government’s insistence on main-
taining the existing system was that many additional countries had 
industrialized and become low-cost producers, able to compete in the 
global market. What Japan needed was to increase domestic demand, 
and that wasn’t happening. The aging population maintained its pro-
pensity to save; the insistence of growing exports of high value added 
manufacturing products had led major manufacturers to make invest-
ment in foreign production facilities rather than improvements to their 
domestic plants. The result was a hollowing out of the Japanese man-
ufacturing base. For the first time ostensibly since the 1950s, Japan 
suffered from high and increasing unemployment. While government 
revenues declined, the need to spend on social welfare programs grew. 
Government borrowing increased. And, despite announced inten-
tions to reform the system, backward-thinking government leaders 
were unwilling to make the needed changes to a system that had made 
everyone rich and increased the average life span to the mid-eighties.
Fading of the Keiretsu System
The keiretsu intercompany network manufacturer and supplier system 
that was long considered to be a key contributor to the cost advantage 
of Japanese manufacturers is no longer as important as it was in the 
30 years following World War II. Many observers believed that Japa-
nese manufacturers owed their postwar success to the system. This 
was particularly true for the Japanese steel, automobile, and heavy 
machinery industries. By 2009, however, some analysts were suggest-
ing that a number of intrinsic long-term problems were contributing 
to the collapse of the system. Cross-ownership, joint share holdings, 
common trademarks, and financing among themselves and low-cost 
loan financing by a network bank are some of the characteristics of the 
firms in the system of related organizations that are thought to make 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
191
it harder for strong individual companies to lead the way out of the 
country’s economic doldrums.
Lincoln and Gerlach (2004) and Lincoln and Shimotani (2009) 
have researched reasons for what they consider to be the breakdown 
in the keiretsu system that began in the 1980s. Among the many fac-
tors they found to be contributing to the “withering away” of the 
system, five stand out: globalization of business, consolidation of the 
banking system, accounting rule changes, reform of the corporate 
governance system, and rapid changes in information and technology.
Changes in Japan’s Economic System
An important element in the success of Japanese manufacturers has 
been the willingness of their more important network suppliers to 
follow them in foreign direct investments (FDIs) in overseas mar-
kets. Also driving the willingness to invest abroad is the decision by 
major manufacturers to outsource parts and supplies. High labor and 
transportation costs, plus regular fluctuations in currency exchange 
rates, contributed to major manufacturers’ shift from keiretsu partners 
to more domestic suppliers in their overseas markets. Moreover, as 
Japanese manufacturers entered foreign markets the requirement for 
local content opened the door to entry into the Japanese market by 
domestic competitors. An automobile industry example of offshore 
expansion is seen in Table 11.2. By the 1990s, nearly 500 indepen-
dent first-tier firms had opened production facilities abroad to serve 
foreign production by their keiretsu core manufacturers. However, 
the first-tier system did not provide equal payoffs for the second, 
third, or fourth tier subassembly contractors in the system (Holzhau-
sen 2002). When a global recession coupled with already flat domes-
tic sales hit the industry hard, the major manufacturers countered by 
cutting costs. This often meant forcing lower prices, with lower profit 
margins, onto their suppliers’ shoulders. Many of these small, typically 
labor-intensive or small-lot shops, often with 10 or fewer employ-
ees, were forced into receivership, further increasing the numbers of 
unemployed in Japan.
Consolidation in the Banking Sector
Few bank mergers, failures, or sales occurred in Japan until after the 
collapse of the bubble economy in 1993, leaving many banks with an 
excessive number of nonperforming loans (Park 2013). The number 
of major banks remained relatively stable from 22 in 1990 until they 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
192
declined from 18 in 2000 to 15 in 2001 and 13 in 2002 (Table 11.3). 
The number of regional banks followed a similar pattern, dropping 
from 132 in 1990 to 123 in 1999 and to 107 in 2004. The small-
est financial institutions, Shinkin banks—also known as credit coop-
eratives—are local area, nonprofit cooperative institutions that accept 
deposits from their members and make loans to local small businesses. 
Their numbers declined precipitously from their peak of 451 in 1990 
to 298 by 2004 and to 280 in 2007. Not included in Table 11.3 are a 
number of special financial institutions that serve special groups with 
long-term working capital, such as agriculture banks and others that 
serve the shipbuilding industry, petroleum industry, and others (Lin-
coln and Shimotani 2009).
Several banking crises took place as the 1990s were coming to an 
end. Three large banks failed in 1997; two long-term credit banks 
failed in 1998. A wave of mergers began in 2000 as the Japanese 
economy remained in its doldrums and prices continued to fall. The 
Japanese government took steps to strengthen the financial industry 
with passage of a financial rehabilitation plan in 2002. Major banks 
Table 11.2 First-tier suppliers of Japanese automobile manufacturers
Manufacturer
Total 
number of 
first-tier 
suppliers
Number 
of first-tier 
suppliers 
with 
investments 
in the U.S.
Investments 
in the U.S. 
prior to 
1980
Investments 
in the 
U.S. made 
between 
1980 and 
1988
Investments 
in the U.S. 
by suppliers 
after 
core firm 
investment
Toyota
69
24
1
23
21
Nissan
85
43
5
38
37
Honda
40
28
1
27
24
Mitsubishi
24
8
0
8
7
Isuzu
24
3
0
3
0
Mazda
20
10
0
10
8
Others
28
0
0
0
0
Independent 
firms
180
14
5
9
9
Foreign 
subsidiaries
12
0
0
0
0
Total firms
482
130
12
118
106
Source: Banerji and Sambharya 1996, data collected from various sources.

Table 11.3 Numbers of mergers, acquisitions and sales of banks by type, 1990–2004
Major banks1
Regional banks2
Shinkin banks3
Year
Total
Mergers
Sale of 
business
Total
Mergers
Sale of 
business
Total
Mergers
Sale of 
business
1990
22
1
0
132
0
0
451
3
0
1991
21
1
0
132
1
0
440
3
0
1992
21
0
0
130
1
1
435
4
0
1993
21
0
0
129
1
0
428
5
0
1994
21
0
0
129
0
0
421
8
0
1995
21
0
0
129
0
1
416
4
0
1996
20
1
0
128
0
0
410
5
1
1997
19
0
1
126
0
1
401
8
0
1998
19
0
0
124
0
3
396
3
0
1999
19
0
0
123
0
1
386
5
1
2000
18
1
0
119
1
1
371
7
9
2001
15
3
0
117
0
0
349
11
5
2002
13
3
0
116
0
0
326
15
6
2003
13
0
0
110
2
0
306
14
0
2004
13
0
0
107
3
0
298
7
0
Totals
10
1
9
8
102
22
Notes: 1City banks, long-term credit banks and trust banks; 2First-tier and second-tier regional banks; 3Prefecture deposit-taking cooperative banks.
Source: Research Institute of Economy, Trade and Industry 2007.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
194
were forced to follow strict accounting standards and reduce their bad 
loans by half. Weaker banks were forced to consolidate or be acquired. 
Healthy banks were encouraged to rescue weaker banks when they 
became distressed (Hosono, Sakai, and Tsuru 2007). The outcome 
from the banking crisis and restructuring is fewer, stronger banks. 
Commercial banks were allowed to merge with investment banks.
Changes in Accounting Rules
Partially as a consequence of the government’s efforts to stimulate 
economic growth and encourage foreign investment, the accounting 
function of business in Japan has undergone a host of changes since 
the 1990s. Japan adopted a certified public accountant approach with 
provision for an audit system in 1948, followed by formal adoption 
of its postwar accounting principles and rules for financial statements. 
The new system existed alongside accounting principles first adopted 
along with Commercial Code standards in effect prior to World 
War II. The purpose of the new system was to make available more 
company-value information to potential investors, while the earlier 
system focused on disclosure regulation and dividend restrictions.
Although modified periodically from then on, the next big change 
occurred in 1999, when public firms were required for the first time 
to include in their financial reports the results of affiliates they con-
trolled, regardless of the size of any equity they held in the affiliate. 
The next big accounting rule change came into effect on April 1, 
2001. Corporations were required to report assets at market value 
rather than at purchase value. This hit banks particularly hard. With 
the economy still in the doldrums, severely depreciated business val-
ues and nonperforming loans revealed many banks to be capitalized at 
a rate lower than what was needed to support lending. Many keiretsu 
banks dumped their cross-share holdings—further adding to the slow 
fading of the system. Accounting change information of interest to 
foreign investors is included in Box 11.3.
Reforms in Corporate Governance
One of the important changes underway in Japan is implementation of 
reforms aimed at revitalizing the economy by improving the way busi-
nesses are managed and administered. Corporations are regulated by 
the Companies Act, by the Financial Instruments and Exchange Law, 
and the Tokyo Stock Exchange’s securities listing regulations. How-
ever, no all-inclusive corporate governance codes for all businesses 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
195
have been adopted. Companies have been tightly controlled, with 
boards of directors consisting entirely of insiders. Attempts at reform-
ing this system have been underway since the early 2000s as part of 
the Japanese government’s on-going effort to revitalize business in 
Japan. A key element of the reform is implementing changes in the 
way standard joint-stock companies—kabushiki are kaisha or simply 
kaisha or KK—are governed. A new Companies Act that amends 
sections of the Commercial Code of 1899 was written in 2005 and 
adopted in May of 2006 (ACGA 2011). Although the change is not 
legally binding, an aim of the restructuring law is to have all kaisha 
either “comply or explain” their decision to comply or not. Changes 
in the governance system included in the act:
t Changes the types of companies that can be created.
t Eliminates the minimum capital requirement.
t Reforms the internal structure of companies, including their size 
and public or private status.
t Allows companies to extend the term of office for directors and 
statutory auditors.
t Relaxes requirements for a general meeting to dismiss a director.
t Provided all members agree to a proposal, allows the board to pass 
a resolution in writing.
The change receiving the greatest attention relates to changes in 
the composition of boards of directors. Most developed countries 
require publicly traded stock companies to include a majority of their 
board members from outside the company. In Japan, that has not 
been required. Instead, it was common as late as 2013 for boards 
to be made up of insiders such as company officers, officers of other 
firms in their network, family members, or house bank personnel; less 
than 3 percent had boards with a majority from outside the company. 
With the new governance law, Japanese companies are required to 
have at least one outside board member.
Box 11.2 Status of accounting standard reforms in postwar Japan
The U.S. Department of State’s investment climate report on 
Japan concluded that reforms in the business system since 1998 
significantly improved Japan’s accounting standards. The fol-
lowing paragraphs from that report describe the changes and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
196
their impact on business in Japan. The changes have contrib-
uted significantly to the fading of the keiretsu system:
“Consolidated accounting has been mandatory since 1999 and 
‘effective control and influence’ standards have been introduced 
in place of conventional holding standards, expanding the range 
of subsidiary and affiliated companies included for the settlement 
of accounts. Consolidated disclosure of contingent liabilities, such 
as guarantees, is also mandatory. All marketable financial assets 
held for trading purposes, including cross-shareholdings and 
other long-term securities holdings, are recorded at market value.
“Companies are required to disclose unfunded pension liabil-
ities by valuing pension assets and liabilities at fair value. Fixed 
asset impairment accounting, in effect since 2005, requires 
firms to record losses if the recoverable value of property, plant, 
or equipment is significantly less than book value.
“The greater focus on consolidated results and mark-to-
market accounting had a significant effect in encouraging the 
unwinding of cross-shareholdings and the “main bank” system. 
Corporate restructuring has taken place, in many cases with 
companies reducing pension under-funding and banks’ disposal 
of many low-yield assets.
“The Accounting Standards Board of Japan (ASBJ) and the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) began dis-
cussions on the convergence of Japanese both accounting stand-
ards and IFRS practices in March 2005 and, in March 2006, 
further agreed to accelerate the process of convergence. . . . 
In December 2009, the FSA issued an order allowing compa-
nies to submit their financial statements based on international 
accounting standards. This order prepares the legal groundwork 
for a complete switch to IFRS in the future, but no decision has 
been made on the mandatory introduction of IFRS. Previously, 
the FSA accepted only Japanese or U.S. standards for consoli-
dated accounting.”
Source: U.S. Department of State 2011.
In June 2014, Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe announced that 
acceptance of the proposed corporate governance changes by kaisha 
firms would be the key to the needed revitalization of the country’s 
moribund economy (Box 11.2). He added that the changes would 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
197
usher in a new era of transparency and company stewardship that has 
long been needed in Japan. The lack of independence of companies’ 
boards of directors has resulted in misappropriation of company funds, 
hiding losses, owners’ malfeasance, and company-political party cro-
nyism, and lower profit margins than common in the United States or 
the United Kingdom. The new corporate governance will be based on 
a U.S. model that is referred to as the “Company with Committees” 
model (Chizema and Shinozawa 2012).
The continuing globalization of capital markets and investors’ 
lobbying for change has contributed to the need for reform of the 
Japanese corporate governance system. The Japanese government 
began amending the commercial code in 2001 by providing statu-
tory (internal) auditor boards—kansayaku—with a greater role in 
their corporations while making external auditors more independent 
(Lee and Allen 2013). Patterned after a system used in Germany, the 
main function of the (internal) audit board is to monitor the board 
of directors’ compliance with laws and to review internally prepared 
financial statements; they are not formally charged with represent-
ing shareholder or employee interests. Another change made in 2002 
introduced the idea of a committee system as an option to the statu-
tory auditor system. A third change came in 2005 with passage of the 
new Corporation Law.
The new governance system replaces the kansayaku system with 
three committees and a stronger external auditor (Figure 11.1). 
Members of the kansayaku are not part of the board of directors’ 
decision-making or approval processes, although they do sit in on 
board meetings and some function as advisors to senior officers. 
They provide business audits rather than accounting audits while also 
ensuring the firm adheres to relevant laws and regulations (Lee and 
Allen 2013). Under this system, the audit committee monitored the 
performance of executives and the board of directors. Functioning 
much like corporate auditors, the committee proposed new members 
for the board of directors. They also selected outside certified public 
accountants and outside auditors. The nomination committee deter-
mines possible board members or recommends members for dismissal 
to the board. The compensation committee establishes compensation 
and related matter policies for directors and executive managers.
Technological Changes
The close interaction between suppliers and manufacturers did not 
always produce the new products or innovative production processes 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
198
many assumed it did. The long-term history of cooperation and con-
sensual relationships that characterized the keiretsu system reduced 
supplier-buyer confrontation. However, it also had negative reper-
cussions for producers, particularly when the failing economy forced 
them to reduce their cooperative new product research efforts with 
suppliers. To reduce the effects of slower sales on their own bottom 
line, major manufacturers also forced suppliers to reduce their own 
margins, further reducing spending on new technology. The adverse 
effects of long-term close relationships described below can also be 
said to have contributed to the lethargic unwillingness to reform 
Japan’s political, banking, and industrial policies during the long 20 
years and more of slow growth in the economy.
The close interaction of the partners leads to a growing stock of accumu-
lated common knowledge which [could] be easily used to optimize the 
operation of the partnership in terms of better communication, improved 
logistics and synchronized production. On the other hand, this stock 
of knowledge defines the boundaries of action: shared experience and 
memories can translate in conservative behavior; changes and new ideas 
which are sure to alter the nature of the relationship are intentionally or 
unintentionally blocked by the partners. This is particularly important in 
the development stage where access to advanced knowledge outside the 
firm or group plays a crucial role. (Holzhausen 2002, 94)
Board of Directors
(must be from outside the company)
Compensation 
Committee
(minimum of 3 
outside directors)
Nomination 
Committee
(minimum of 3 
outside directors)
Audit 
Committee
(minimum of 3 
outside directors)
External
Accounting Auditor
Executive officers/directors
(appointed by the Board of directors)
Figure 11.1 Japanese committee corporate governance system.
Source: Chizema and Shinozawa 2012.

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
199
It had long been believed prior to the 1990s that because Japanese 
investment in research and development was second to none, it would 
enable its manufacturers and suppliers to remain at the cutting edge 
of new technologies. Japanese companies’ extensive foreign direct 
investment in factories and distribution networks and other assets, 
including investments in “soft” industries like music production and 
commercial films, would also help the Japanese economy to continue 
to grow and prosper. But after 1993, all of this positive reputation 
would begin to fade; it was, as Christopher Wood’s 1994 book title 
suggested, The End of Japan, Inc. Economic growth in Japan declined 
to near zero. As late as 2014, Japanese leaders were still trying to 
find the magic way out of their economy’s stagnation. Invigorating 
consumer spending was hoped to revitalize the economy. However, 
retailing was facing its own problems; it also looked to overseas mar-
kets for resolution.
Challenges Facing Japanese Retailing
Japan’s commercial sector has suffered through the same stagnation 
that the rest of the economy has endured since the 1990s (see Box 
11. 3). For example, sales at department stores in Japan are nearly half 
of what they were at their peak in 1991. Similar declines have also 
occurred at hypermarkets and big box retailers. However, for the many 
Japanese retailers that have expanded overseas, their successes appear 
to be one bright spot in the Japanese globalized business scene. The 
major focus of that expansion since 2000 has been on opening stores 
in China, where the size of the market and underdeveloped domestic 
retailing industry make this an extremely important market (Larke 
2004; Wilson 2013). A 2013 retail marketing survey named China as 
the leading developing market for expansion by apparel retailers.
Box 11.3 Surviving Japan’s retail crisis
The 2013 Deloitte Planet Retail report on the present and 
future state of retailing in 10 national markets included a sec-
tion on the short-term prospects of retailing in Japan. Sections 
of that report are included here:
Japanese retailing may finally be emerging from an “almost 
20-year period of gloom” that was linked to the depressed 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
200
economy and negative consumer expectations. From 1996 to 
2002, retail sales dropped by 9.3 percent and are not expected 
to reach 1996 levels until 2019, despite a modest revival that 
began in 2009. Sales have been particularly bad in non-food 
retailing, with growth in convenience store and drug store 
sales being the only exception. As of 2012, the top six con-
venience store chains had 43,500 outlets, and are expected to 
have nearly 59,000 by 2018. E-commerce sales are still rela-
tively weak, but are expected to grow to 12 percent of sales by 
2020 when broadband expansion is complete. In food retailing, 
margins remain low, deflation has kept prices at or near 1992 
levels. Traditionally, this sector has been highly fragmented with 
many small local outlets. This has been changing, however, as 
concentration continues.
Japan is facing significant demographic changes that will 
have a big impact on retailing in the country. Its population is 
expected to fall by 2.8 percent between 2008 and 2020. The 
aging population will require heavy pension and medical expen-
ditures in the future. Meanwhile, domestic demand remains 
weak. The result is an economy that is close to 25 percent 
smaller than it would have been had the two decades of defla-
tion and stagnation had not occurred.
Source: Deloitte Global Services 2013.
As of 2014, more than 50,000 retail outlets had been opened by in 
China by Japanese corporations. Online sales are particularly impor-
tant in China, having reached 6 percent of some retailer’s sales, among 
the highest in the world, where Internet sales typically are less than 
1 percent of sales. A key reason for this is Chinese consumers’ eager 
following of the “fast fashion” fashion market trend. “Fast fashion” 
in apparel retailing is the strategy of rapidly changing fashion styles to 
encourage consumers to buy more low-cost items in order to keep up 
with the fashion “trend of the week.”
Uniglo is among the Japanese fashion retailers rapidly expanding in 
China. The firm opened 65 stores in China in 2012, bringing its total 
to 145. The company announced plans to open 100 new outlets in 
China each year, eventually reaching at least 1,000 stores in that mar-
ket. MUJI, the Japanese household items and clothing chain, opened 

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
201
42 stores in China it its rapidly expanding outlet expansion strategy. In 
terms of adding store numbers, however, the convenience store model is 
the leader. Two former U.S. convenience store chains now under Japa-
nese ownership are Lawson and 7-Eleven (7-11 in China). 7-11 opened 
its first franchised store in China in 2004; by 2012, it had expanded to 
855 stores and by 2014 had opened nearly 2,000 franchise outlets. Law-
son, which owned its convenience store outlets, has grown at a slower 
pace, opening 40 stores each in 2012 and 2013 while closing a number 
of low-profit outlets. In 2014, Lawson had a network of 550 stores in 
China and announced plans to open another 180 stores in 2014.
The path of overseas expansion of Japanese retailers has been said 
to have occurred over three phases: first, Japanese department stores 
led the expansion in the 1980s, largely occurring in the West; second, 
a slowing of large-store expansion with trial efforts by smaller spe-
cialty stores in the 1990s in Japan and in nearby Asian markets; and 
third, the current rapid expansion in emerging markets in Asia and 
Latin America as trading houses opened nonretail supply facilities in 
the market into which retailers wanted to expand and the domestic 
market experienced a long-term “retail crisis” (Larke 2004; Deloitte 
Global Services 2013).
Conclusion
The business system of Japan continues to be one of the most success-
ful of the world’s industrial giants. Its position as the second largest 
economy in the world may have been taken over by its Asian neighbor 
China, but it retains a solid hold on its position as the third largest 
economy. Although Japan no longer has an industry in the list of the 
world’s 10 largest privately held companies, it still has six private com-
panies in the Forbes Top 100 (Table 11.4). In 2005 only one Japanese 
manufacturer, Toyota, was in the top 100 firms. In 2014, Toyota was 
joined by Honda, also primarily an international automobile maker 
and considered by many to be at the head of a keiretsu of its own. The 
2014 Forbes list included three Japanese banking houses among the 
top 100 firms.
Despite the continued success of much of Japan’s business sector, 
concerns about the stagnant economy and industrial sector have been 
growing. Among the problems facing Japan 20 years after the col-
lapse of its bubble economy are the high cost of importing energy, 
uncertainty in the supply of electrical power due to closings of nuclear 
power plants, a shrinking domestic market resulting from an aging 
and declining population, and the hollowing out of its industrial base. 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
202
Exports have long been an important contributor to Japan’s economic 
growth. However, globalization has led Japanese industry to shift 
investment away from the home market to low wage and fast grow-
ing markets in overseas locations. Cowling and Tomlinson (2012, 
12) pointed out the dangers commensurate with this type of indus-
trial policy: “In the long run, the diversion of investment in favor of 
cheaper overseas sites diminishes both the level and quality of Japan’s 
capital stock, and thus initiates and exacerbates a cumulative process 
of decline in Japan’s industrial regions. The growing evidence is that 
corporate Japans’ overseas investments are primarily a substitute for 
domestic production rather than to support complementary produc-
tion activities. A consequence of this has been the dramatic decline in 
employment within Japan’s domestic manufacturing industry over the 
last decade, with registered manufacturing employment falling from 
175.69 million in 1992 to 12.22 million in 2003, and to 9.98 million 
a decade later, the lowest it has been since 1961.” As manufacturing 
jobs in Japan are being shifted overseas, retailing has followed.
Commerce and industry in Japan have been under tremendous pres-
sure since the Asian financial crises of 1991 and 1997–1998 to change 
the way manufacturing and value chain operations are managed. The 
Table 11.4 Japan’s exports and imports by principal commodity, 2004 and 2013 
(US$ thousands)
2004
2013
Item
Exports
Imports
Exports
Imports
Mineral fuels
2,477,191
98,635,507
15,726,607
283,817,233
Electrical machinery
122,375,830
56,202,249
124,110,547
106,299,668
Foodstuffs
2,387,421
48,984,150
4,480,793
66,807,478
Chemicals
47,140,242
35,245,180
77,421,418
66,778,353
Manufactured goods
23,066,9072
38,260,413
94,625,517
64,413,550
Machinery
116,453,190
126,720,9803
137,644,799
61,577,765
Raw Materials
5,694,663
28,429,183
12,458,244
55,291,324
Transport equipment
134,859,3241
12,461,995
168,499,243
28,707,648
Others
25,494533
45,283,578
84,237,691
105,196,057
Notes: 1includes motor vehicles, motorcycles, bicycles and transport equipment
2includes only consumer durable and nondurable manufactures
3includes all machinery and equipment less motor vehicles and aircraft
Source: Compiled from various Japanese External Trade Organization JETRO statistics 2015.

Ja pa n  i n  t h e  T w e n t y - Fi r s t  C e n t u r y
203
problems did not begin with the financial crisis; some analysts trace 
the conditions that led to the more than two decades of stagnant eco-
nomic growth as far back as the 1970s, when Japanese manufacturing 
industries began to invest heavily in overseas production facilities. As 
their major suppliers followed Japan’s large manufacturing compa-
nies overseas, more and more jobs were lost. By 2013, manufacturing 
employment in Japan had shrunk by about 40 percent of it its peak of 
16 million workers in 1992.
Although their importance seems to be declining in the wake of 
rapid globalization of commerce and industry, the keiretsu network 
system is likely to remain an important feature of the Japanese busi-
ness system long into the twenty-first century. The 2014 scope of 
the global Mitsubishi group can be considered an example of their 
strength. In June 2014, the group included 400 subsidiaries and 215 
affiliates. There were 5,651 employees in the parent firm and a total of 
68,383 employees in the parent company and all its subsidiaries. The 
group consists of seven business groups: global environmental and 
infrastructure; industrial finance, logistics and development; energy; 
metals; machinery; chemicals; and living essentials (includes retailing). 
In addition, a new business service group was formed in 2014. Similar 
diverse operations controlled by the other major keiretsu are undergo-
ing the same globalization and other pressures that have contributed 
to the reduced importance of keiretsu networks. The system is too 
entrenched to disappear entirely.
Discussion Questions
1. In what way were businesses in the United States influenced by 
management policies and procedures common in the Japanese 
business system?
2. Describe how the tight networks of a leading industry, body of 
captive suppliers, family bank financing, and government admin-
istrative guidance by MITA and later METI shaped the keiretsu 
network system in Japanese commerce and industry.
3. What has been the effect of globalization on Japanese industrial 
keiretsu?
4. How has Japan’s retailing sector been affected by the more than 
two decades of slow or negative economic growth?
5. China supplanted Japan as the world’s second largest economy in 
2010. Do you see any industrial nation pulling ahead of Japan’s 
position as the world’s third largest economy in the near future? 
Why or why not?

4
P a r t  V
U.S. Commerce and Industry  
in a Global Economy

4
C h a p t e r  1 2
U.S. Commerce and Industry in 
Crisis and Renewal
For most of the nineteenth century and well into the first decades 
of the twentieth, manufacturing in American was for the most part 
focused on processing the products of farms, forests, and a few raw 
materials; most were family businesses (Chandler 1969). American 
commerce also consisted for the most part of small retailing shops 
in relatively isolated small towns. The nation’s transportation system 
was only just being established. Most people either walked or traveled 
by horsepower if they traveled much at all. Travel of any distance was 
slow, tiresome, and noisy by horse-drawn stage; short journeys on a 
new railroad network; or, in some privileged locations, on quiet and 
slow boats on canals or natural waterways. There was little need to 
travel, since very town had its own small bank, its own doctor, and its 
own livery stable. The bulk of the country’s population resided in the 
eastern regions of the North American continent (Figure 12.1).
However, a number of important developments were contribut-
ing to the increasingly rapid evolution of U.S. business during the 
last decades of the nineteenth century and first several decades of the 
twentieth century. First, in the 1880s the nation suffered through a 
decade- long economic depression that drove many out of business 
or led to mergers with other firms in the same business. As businesses 
grew larger the need for employees with accounting, advertising, 
distribution, purchasing, mass production, and overall management 
skills increased. Business management came to be recognized as a full-
fledged profession, one worthy of academic education. University pro-
grams in these disciplines as well as the new science and engineering 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
208
Figure 12.1 Map of North America.
Source: The World Factbook, 2013–14 https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world 
-factbook//graphics/ref_maps/political/jpg/north_america.jpg.
education programs related to the needs of larger and larger busi-
nesses. Associated with this transformation in the structure of business 
in America was a growing shift from central control of all operations 
to decentralized organizational operations, with branch plants and 
distribution centers serviced by the growing railroad network.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
209
Another development that began near the end of the 1800s was the 
beginnings of a surge in a great merger and trust movement. This began 
with larger manufacturers needing large distribution networks and 
warehousing facilities. Another development was the emergence of 
new industries such as the telephone and electric light and power. As 
more jobs in industries made more money available, consumers began 
to demand new and better products. This shift occurred despite two 
world wars in the twentieth century, a severe, decade-long, global 
depression, and the emergence of the Soviet Union as a world super-
power and a political and military competitor with which the United 
States remained engaged in a 30-year-long cold war.
Effects of a Global Depression
The business system of the United States was hit particularly hard by 
the onset of the Great Depression of the 1930s. The nation experi-
enced a decline of 21 percent in industrial production—the largest 
decline of the world’s leading industrial nations. When industrial pro-
duction is measured from the economic peak of 1929 to the lowest 
point in 1932, the decline of 61 percent suffered by the United States 
was again the greatest among the same group of nations. Most of 
these nations experienced a small increase in industrial production in 
1933, led by the United States with its increase of over 15 percent 
(Table 12.1).
From the peak in 1929 to late 1930, the nation’s GNP declined 
by 29 percent, spurred by a 78 percent decline in construction. Con-
sumer spending declined by 18 percent and industrial investment by 
a full 98 percent (McElvaine 1984). This decline in production and 
consumer purchasing had a heavy impact on the country’s employ-
ment. At its lowest point, a quarter of the working population was 
unemployed.
Although the trend began as early as the 1870s, the depression saw 
acceleration of the shift to female employment as businesses worked 
to find ways to reduce their operating costs. By 1930, the number of 
women employed in clerical occupations was slightly more than half 
of all clerical workers in country, and was becoming the most impor-
tant occupation for females. In New York City, for example, nearly 
half of the 250,000 clerical workers were females (Simon 2001). As 
the depression continued, average wages for men in the state of New 
York dropped from a high of $49.34 per week in 1930 to $41.52 in 
1933. Wages for women were half that of male clerical workers, drop-
ping from $24.42 in 1930 to 20.63 in 1933. Wages for both men and 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
210
Table 12.1 Changes in top-seven countries’ industrial production, 1930–1933
Period
Percentage change
Countries
A. 1930
5.1 to 10.0%
0.0 to 5.0%
–0.1 to –5.0%
–5.1 to –10.0%
–10.1 to –15.0%
–15.1 to –20.0%
–21.0 to –25.0%
Denmark, South Africa, New Zealand
Chile, France, Greece, Norway, Sweden
Estonia, Romania
Finland, Hungary, Italy, Japan, 
Netherlands, UK
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Germany
Austria, Canada, Poland
United States
B. Peak-to-trough
–0.1to –10.0%
–10.0 to –20.0%
–20.1 to –30.0%
–30.1 to –40.0%
–40.1 to –50.0%
–50.1 to –60.0%
–61.0 to –70.0%
Greece, Japan, New Zealand
Denmark, Romania, Sweden, UK
Chile, Estonia, Finland, Hungary, 
Norway
Belgium, France, Italy
Austria, Netherlands
Canada, Czechoslovakia, Germany
Poland, United States
C. 1933
15.1 to 20.0%
10.1 to 15.0%
5.1 to 10.0%
0.0 to 5.0%
–5.0 to –10.0%
United States
Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, 
Japan, Netherlands, Romania
Chile, Greece, Hungary, Italy, UK
Austria, Belgium, Canada, Estonia, New 
Zealand, Norway, Poland, Sweden
Czechoslovakia
Source: Romer 1993, from League of Nations data.
women in clerical occupations were slightly higher in New York City 
(Table 12.2).
Of all sectors, agriculture and banking were hit particularly hard by 
the depression. During World War I, the government had encouraged 
unbridled increases in farm production; not only were the products of 
American farms important to the buildup in armed forces, they were 
also feeding many of America’s allies. Moreover, prices for agricul-
tural products were uncharacteristically high during this period. To 
cash in on this windfall, farmers invested heavily in new equipment 
and additional farm acreage, incurring heavy debt from small, local 
banks eager to make loans. Farm mortgages doubled from $3.3 bil-
lion in 1910 to $6.7 billion in 1920, with another $2.7 billion added 
over the next five years. Prior to the war, farm production throughout 
the world increased faster than markets could absorb the surpluses. 
The perils of overproduction combined with heavy debt began to 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
211
take their toll in the last years of the 1920s. Farm foreclosures were 
becoming a common occurrence across the Farm Belt, adding to the 
economic pressures that would culminate in the stock market crash in 
1929. With their own economies in shambles and unable to sell their 
products in American markets, European customers were unable to 
buy America’s surplus farm products at any price.
The rash of bank failures beginning in the late 1920s have been 
singled out as one of several economic events that triggered the Octo-
ber 1929 stock market crash and the Great Depression that followed 
(Calomiris and Mason 1997; Basu 2003). Not surprisingly, difficulties 
in the agriculture sector contributed to the banks’ problems. Among 
the causes that have been suggested for the many bank failures that 
took place from 1925 to 1933 are the following:
t Banking is inherently fragile as loans are considered assets. When 
bad loans occur, banks’ asset base drops accordingly.
t Banks that failed in the years prior to the Depression did so because 
they were weak and likely to fail anyway.
t The existence of too many banks made the industry ripe for a 
shakeout.
t Government’s antibranching laws kept weak banks from being able 
to diversify themselves by opening branches in new, faster-growing 
markets.
Table 12.2 Weekly wages for office workers in New York factories
New York State
New York City Only
Year
All
(dollars)
Men
(dollars)
Women
(dollars)
Men
(dollars)
Women
(dollars)
Women 
(percentage)
1928
36.37
46.70
24.05
47.98
26.55
45.6
1929
36.94
48.24
24.38
50.45
27.57
47.4
1930
37.48
49.34
24.42
52.80
27.57
47.6
1931
35.49
46.22
23.35
50.90
26.31
46.7
1932
31.86
42.14
20.49
45.92
23.04
47.5
1933
31.85
41.52
20.63
44.85
22.73
46.3
1934
32.45
42.71
21.15
44.03
22.76
47.6
1935
32.71
42.04
21.23
42.84
22.97
44.8
1936
33.05
42.67
21.31
43.99
22.49
45.0
Source: Simon 2001, Monthly Labor Review data.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
212
t When branch banking restrictions were eased, too many under-
capitalized banks opened too many branches. When capitaliza-
tion minimums and branch banking restrictions were eased in the 
1920s, many new banks were established without sufficient capital 
to weather the collapse of the economy.
t Runs on weaker banks resulted in panic runs on healthier banks 
whose ready cash, invested in loans, was unavailable to deal with 
runs—the process called contagion.
Rapid growth in the number of banks in the United States from 
1897 to 1921 occurred largely in response to changes in banking 
laws that reduced the minimal capital required to open a bank. The 
growth of the economy that followed the depression of the 1870s 
also spurred growth in the number of banks. Their numbers reached 
something like 31,000 by 1921, after which they fell consistently until 
banking reform and deposit insurance began in 1934. From more 
than 500 failures in 1921, another thousand or so failed each year. 
Between 1920 and 1932 an average of 1,700 banks failed; the peak 
year in failures was 1933, when more than 4,000 failed.
Emergence of New Industries
Also among the changes occurring in business in the early twentieth 
century was the rapid growth of a number of new industries along 
with rapid consolidation of the old industries. Among the new indus-
tries with the greatest impact on the United States in the last years 
of the nineteenth century and first 30 years of the twentieth century 
were advertising, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, electricity and elec-
trical products, radio broadcasting, petroleum, and motor vehicles.
The Advertising Industry
The move to greater professionalism in commerce and industry meant 
an increase in the value of knowledge. The growth of industry in the 
early years of the twentieth century and its dependence on collect-
ing and applying information about the consumer market provides 
an example of the trend toward a knowledge economy that would 
appear in the last half of the century. Two important examples of 
where knowledge came to play an increasingly important role in the 
pharmaceutical and chemical industries were marketing and advertis-
ing. Marketing emerged as a conscious business strategy during the 
1920s as a way of gaining market share in the highly competitive era 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
213
of mass consumption. The practice of advertising—later recognized as 
an integral tool of marketing strategy—evolved from earliest notices 
of the availability of a product or service to a means of gaining the 
attention of and promoting mass-produced products to the millions 
of Americans pouring into the nation’s industrial cities and towns.
During the first decade of the twentieth century advertisements 
were mostly informational—as they had been since the Industrial 
Revolution and the dawn of early newspapers. Usually, sufficient 
demand existed among the growing middle classes of merchants and 
entrepreneurs for the limited number of consumer products compet-
ing for consumers’ attention for products to be sold without exces-
sive effort. Advertising generally had only to tell consumers about the 
availability of the product for it to move off the shelves. However, 
after 1910 and particularly after the war ended in 1918, production 
began to exceed demand. Many new products regularly appeared on 
the shelves of America’s increasing number of retail outlets. As more 
money was made available to pay for advertisements, a plethora of 
new media vehicles followed: workers in newspapers, magazines, and 
radio all depended upon advertising for their livelihood.
The Chemical and Pharmaceutical Industry
The history of the chemical and pharmaceutical industry in the first 
half of the twentieth century is an example of the growth in new 
industries and the importance of knowledge. The pharmaceutical 
industry grew from a scattering of small companies and snake-oil itin-
erant merchants after the Civil War to become by the first decade of 
the twentieth century a major component of the American manufac-
turing economy. Big changes in the industry had appeared as early 
as the 1880s as firms grew to meet the demand of a rapidly growing 
population. Firms began to hire scientifically trained personnel to help 
find and improve products. Others began cooperating with college 
and university science departments in contract research. By 1910, 
the largest firms, such as Parke-Davis, E. R. Squibb, DuPont, Smith-
Kline, and Lederle had become large firms employing mass produc-
tion processes. Biological science in the industry was new in 1900, 
but soon came to be the norm in research and production. Growth 
in population also drove firms to seek new and more effective drugs. 
Over the next two decades, industry leaders were employing large 
numbers of trained chemists, albeit as trained technical workers rather 
than as scientific researchers. That would have to wait until the World 
War I (Liebenau 1985).

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
214
The Electrical Industry
The birth and infant years of the U.S. electrical energy and equipment 
industries occurred from 1880 to 1914, roughly corresponding to 
the Progressive Era of trust busting and beginning of government 
oversight of business. The industry has four main sectors: generation, 
transmission, distribution, and application. Early electrical power was 
produced by some other energy source—wind, water, steam—turning 
a dynamo that generate direct current (DC) electricity. The first 
dynamo was invented in France in 1832. Edison saw his first dynamo 
at the 1876 Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia. In 1880 he formed 
the Edison Machine Works to produce dynamos, which were used to 
drive industrial motors and to produce energy for electric (traction) 
streetcars. He formed the Edison Illuminating Company in December 
of 1880; his first generating plant began operations in Manhattan in 
September of 1882. The complete generating and distributing system 
produced electric light for one square mile of businesses and resi-
dences, using Edison’s incandescent filament light bulbs. Light bulbs 
were the only consumer products available until household appliances 
were invented in the two decades before World War I. The success of 
that system essentially ended the use of gaslight illumination. The two 
companies and several other firms were merged in 1885 to form the 
Edison General Electric Company. By 1890, alternating current (AC) 
provided a more efficient and serviceable system. In 1892, Edison’s 
company merged with an AC competitor, the Thomas-Houston Elec-
tric Company, to form the General Electric Company (GE). The new 
company dominated the industry; sales were more than twice that of 
Westinghouse, its only substantial competitor. Electricity had become 
a global industry, with growth and new innovative uses and devices 
driven by monopoly profits gained by sales of the carbon-filament 
light bulb invented by Edison (Reich 1992).
By the end of the 1890s, GE had used the same trust system per-
fected by John D. Rockefeller in the petroleum industry to negoti-
ate an agreement with Westinghouse and 16 smaller firms to capture 
95 percent of the light bulb business. GE, because of its patents and 
size, was allotted 50 percent of the business; Westinghouse 12 percent; 
and the rest was divided among the smaller firms. Prices immediately 
increased 30 percent. GE then made agreements with the produc-
ers of lamp-making equipment and glass bulbs, further increasing its 
hold on the industry. By the 1920s, electric lamp sales made up about 
20 percent of the company’s sales, which meant about $20 million in 
annual profits. During the depression years of the 1930s, GE lamp 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
215
sales actually increased rather than decreased. Lamps were developed 
for many different special applications, advertising expenditure pro-
moting GE bulbs remained high, and more people were staying at 
home at night. For the last half of the 1930s, as much as two-thirds of 
the company’s profits were from the electric lamp division.
One of the problems with the carbon filament system was inef-
ficiency; only 5 percent of the energy needed to produce light was 
produced by the filament. However, with the high monopoly (cartel) 
profits ensuing, GE did little to find new and more efficient meth-
ods. Other firms in the United States and abroad were having suc-
cess with heating gasses (the fluorescent lights so popular later), while 
inventors abroad were finding successes with more efficient metal fila-
ments, such as the tungsten lights used for streetlamps. GE was forced 
to acquire the rights to metal filament bulbs to remain in control 
of the market. Meanwhile new company leadership in 1922 resulted 
in greater emphasis on expansion into many different industries and 
consumer products. In addition to the many heavy industrial products 
from generators to industrial motors and aircraft engines, GE began 
producing kitchen stoves, toasters, refrigerators, and industrial ver-
sions of the same products. After more than two decades of fighting 
an antitrust case over the company’s dominance of the lamp business, 
the case was finally resolved in 1953. GE was required to end all of 
its license agreements, give free access to all its existing lamp patents, 
and lower other license rates, thus ending the company’s control of 
the U.S. market for lamps.
The Radio Broadcasting Industry
The histories of few industries are as closely related as those of the 
advertising, electrical, and radio broadcasting businesses during 
the 1920s and 1930s. Radio depended upon advertising to pay for the 
people, products, and programs it supported and offered to the public, 
and upon the electrical industry to produce and distribute the offer-
ings. Prior to the 1920s, the radio industry in the United States was 
largely the purview of a few research scientists and talented hobbyists 
(Scott 2008). After 1920, it passed into the hands of large corpora-
tions such as General Electric and Westinghouse. That radio com-
munication could be transmitted through the air was demonstrated 
by Guglielmo Marconi when his 1884 broadcast from Great Britain 
was heard in the United States (Douglas 1987). Until World War I, 
Marconi’s British-based company dominated radio research and sales 
in the United States. However, during the war, it was felt that it would 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
216
be more appropriate for an American company to be involved. The 
U.S. Navy and Merchant Marine were particularly interested in U.S. 
ownership. The navy had sponsored a radio station operated by the 
American Telephone and Telegraph Company (AT&T) at its Arling-
ton, Virginia, naval base beginning in 1915. Before long, for the first 
time the Navy was able to achieve immediate long-distance commu-
nication with its deployed ships; signals were received in Europe and 
Hawaii. Unable to move ahead with his American company, Marconi 
sold his U.S. manufacturing interests to General Electric and others.
In 1913, there were 322 licensed ratio amateurs on the air in the 
United States (White 1996). By 1917, their numbers had grown to 
more than 13,500. The first radio transmission in the America took 
place in 1910 with the airing of a New York City opera company per-
formance. The first commercial radio broadcast had to wait 10 years 
for WWJ in Detroit to come on the air on November 20, 1920. By 
1926, there were 671 licensed U.S. commercial stations. Before cre-
ation of the Federal Radio Commission in 1927 and later the Federal 
Communication Commission, the U.S. Department of Commerce 
was responsible for bringing order to the fast-growing industry.
By the 1920s, large corporations were dominating the radio equip-
ment manufacturing industry, with GE leading in many fields of elec-
tricity and radio. GE would soon come to be an important force in 
the broadcasting industry. After the war, GE formed a partnership 
with Westinghouse, AT&T, Western Electric, United Fruit, and a few 
other smaller partners to form Radio Corporation of America (RCA). 
The senior partner, GE, manufactured the first radios sold under the 
RCA brand. In time, RCA would expand into most areas of commu-
nications and electronics.
Although GE had experimented with radio broadcasting briefly in 
1913, it was not until 1921 that it opened its first commercial radio 
station, WGY, at its manufacturing plant in Schenectady, New York 
(Schneider 2011). By this time, radio station owners had discovered 
they could make money selling air time for advertising and for spon-
soring radio programs. With their first station a success, GE opened a 
second station in Oakland, California, in 1923 and a third in Denver, 
Colorado, in 1924. In 1923, WGY was one of the first stations to 
broadcast the same program at the same time on the regularly sched-
uled day of the week, planting the seed of radio networks that would 
follow. GE’s stations joined in forming the network, the National 
Broadcasting Company (NBC) in 1926. GE and Westinghouse each 
owned 30 percent of this network. Other independent networks soon 
followed, including CBS and ABC.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
217
Many small, independent stations failed during the Depression, 
but the large network-affiliated stations flourished. Radios were inex-
pensive and ratio programs were free. Programs designed for all fam-
ily members were available, all paid for by advertisers. However, the 
Depression brought on another surge of Progressive-era trust busting 
in the country. In another antitrust case was brought against GE, the 
Supreme Court upheld the decision to “clean up” broadcasting. In 
1930, GE and Westinghouse sold their interests in both NBC and 
RCA. Later, GE also sold its Denver and Oakland stations, keeping 
only WGY, its home station.
The Oil Industry
The U.S. oil industry can be said to have begun in 1854, when 
Abraham Gesner patented a process for producing kerosene from coal 
and, later, from oil. Kerosene was a cheaper and safer means of provid-
ing lighting in homes and business than the existing use of coal gas. 
An almost immediate success, Gesner and others who copied his pro-
cess found that oil was a better and less expensive feedstock for kero-
sene than coal. A shallow well funded by George Bissell was drilled in 
1859 in Titusville, Pennsylvania, and found oil, thereby jump-starting 
the country’s first oil boom. Just two years later, the first free-flowing 
geyser, producing some 3,000 gallons of oil a day, was discovered in 
the same field. In no time the task shifted from finding oil to stor-
ing, transporting, refining, and marketing its main product. An Ohio 
entrepreneur named John D. Rockefeller and his partner Maurice 
Clark created the means for solving these problems.
Rockefeller and Clark took advantage of a new rail link from the 
Pennsylvania oil fields to Cleveland to build what was in 1863 the 
country’s largest and most efficient refinery for the production of ker-
osene. Rockefeller bought out his partner in 1865 in an act that was 
the first step in the eventual forming of the Standard Oil Company in 
1870. He secured deals with railroads to carry his products cheaper 
than competitors, built additional refineries, and either acquired or 
forced out of business weaker competitors. In just 10 years, Standard 
would control more than 90 percent of the country’s kerosene refin-
ing capacity, including being dominant in the transportation, stor-
age, and marketing of kerosene. When competitors found a way to 
undercut his rail prices by building a 110-mile pipeline, Rockefeller 
responded with three of his own.
In 1882, Rockefeller formed a holding company, Standard Oil 
Trust, with a first issue of 700,000 shares of stock. He then traded 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
218
trust shares for those of operating companies Standard Oil owned or 
acquired, with nearly 200,000 shares issued to him personally. The 
Standard Oil Trust controlled the oil industry for the next 20 years, 
and was in place to benefit from the phenomenal growth in oil 
demand as the automobile became affordable to nearly every family 
in the country. At its cheapest, the Ford Model T could be had for 
just $260. However, just when that success was about to take place, 
in 1911 the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of the government’s 
antitrust case to unravel the Standard Oil Trust by breaking it into 
separate corporations.
The structure of the oil industry changed dramatically in just a few 
years after the breakup of Standard Oil. Great Britain’s need to main-
tain a large navy to protect the sea lanes to its global empire resulted 
in changing the fleet’s fuel from coal to oil. Winston Churchill, First 
Lord of the Admiralty, was instrumental in the British government 
taking a controlling interest in what became the Anglo-Persian Oil 
Company. With their fuel supplies assured, the British Royal Navy 
would survive World War I. The land war fought by Britain, France, 
and the United States became the first mechanized war. The allies 
required vehicles of all types, and nearly all of the fuel to run them was 
supplied by the United States. The transformation to motor vehicles 
continued at home after the armistice.
The motor vehicle industry, still in its infancy prior to World War I, 
grew rapidly during the war and afterward. In the United States, pro-
duction line innovations, triggered by Frederick Taylor’s time and 
motion studies, and the scientific management movement lowered 
production costs. As demand for vehicles soared, the demand for fuel 
followed. In 1919, the United States used 1.03 million barrels per 
day; in 1929, demand increased to 2.58 million barrels per day. By the 
1930s, the major oil fields in the Ohio Valley, Texas, California, and 
Oklahoma were in near peak production that would slow only with 
the dawn of the Great Depression. With supply and retail competition 
increases and demand declines, consolidation of the oil industry began 
in earnest. Some major oil companies grew through acquisitions and 
mergers, other expanded through vertical or horizontal integration of 
the supply chain (Ollinger 1994). Severely curtailed demand during 
the early years of the Depression resulted in an acceleration of this 
consolidation of the industry. Only the buildup to World War II and 
military demand saw prosperity return to the industry.
The most successful efforts at consolidation of the industry were 
into related fields and sectors of the industry understood by company 
managers. The petrochemical industry best fits this description. Exxon 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
219
was one of the first oil companies to see the connection between 
developing new fuels needed for aircraft engines and petrochemicals. 
In the late 1920s Exxon worked with the German chemical company 
I. G. Farben to study ways that petroleum might be used in Farben’s 
chemical processes. Exxon used this experience to produce high grade 
fuels during the 1930s and to develop technology for producing syn-
thetic rubber and plastics during World War II and beyond.
The Automobile Industry
The biggest spur to growth of the U.S. oil industry was the invention 
and public acceptance of the automobile. By the end of the 1920s 
close to 80 percent of all automobiles in the world were registered in 
the United States. Automobile registrations would increase faster than 
population until the 1980s when the two would increase at about the 
same pace. The annual production of U.S. automobiles in 1920 was 
close to 2.3 million vehicles, whereas the rest of the world produced 
40,000 units. Annual U.S. production increased to 3.7 million vehi-
cles in 1923 and 4 million in 1926. In 1929, 4.9 million American-
made automobiles were sold in the United States, with a total of 26.7 
million vehicles registered.
The automobile industry, possibly more than most other new 
industries of the early twentieth century, evolved through a long series 
of consolidations (Edmonds 1923). The public flocked to this new 
means of transportation despite the early lack of roadways. Two U.S. 
producers of automobiles and trucks emerged as global leaders in the 
industry: General Motors (GM) and Ford. These two firms took dif-
ferent paths toward achieving their goal of industry dominance. GM 
elected to grow by a combination of horizontal and vertical integra-
tion. Their means of achieving that goal was to provide one or more 
models in all segments of demand. To produce these vehicles they 
purchased parts from thousands of different suppliers. Ford, on the 
other hand, grew by extreme vertical integration, starting or acquiring 
suppliers of everything needed to produce a motor vehicle. Ford went 
so far as to acquire the means to produce or fabricate the materials 
needed to make the parts. This included acquiring forests, coal and 
iron ore mines and the ore carriers to carry the ores, railroads, glass 
makers, and rubber plantations for tires. The emphasis on cutting 
production costs as severely as possible enabled Ford to achieve over-
whelming dominance in the low-cost segment of the industry with its 
Model T. Selling for a short time for as little as $260 made it possible 
for the Ford Motor Company to capture 95 percent of this market.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
220
The General Motors Corporation
General Motors was established my W. C. Durant in New Jersey in 
1908, in time to catch the increase in automobile sales that followed 
a brief recessing in 1907 and rising farm income. Durant’s experience 
running the Buick Automobile Company helped him see the great 
future in store for the industry and he wanted to be a big part of it. 
With profits from sales of Buick cars, Durant acquired Cadillac, Oak-
land, Oldsmobile, and several smaller auto makers. By 1909, GM had 
amassed 11 car companies, two truck companies, and eight parts mak-
ers. Together, the companies produced 28,500 cars for 24.5 percent 
of all cars make in the United States that year.
GM underwent reorganizations in 1913 and 1916. They consoli-
dated company holding and reduced the number of vehicle brands 
made to five automobiles, one truck, and a smaller group of parts sup-
pliers. The next major change occurred in 1918 when GM acquired 
the Chevrolet Motor Company, a major supplier of lower cost cars. 
Chevrolet had produced 125,000 cars in 1917 and controlled a num-
ber of parts and supplies producers. A major addition of the Fisher 
Body Corporation in 1919 made it possible for GM to stop purchas-
ing auto bodies from outside suppliers, greatly increasing its earn-
ings. Fisher was the largest maker of auto bodies in the country. The 
Fisher purchase included the National Plate Glass Company, producer 
of glass windows for vehicles. The final big change in GM occurred 
in 1920. Durant was forced out of his company when the DuPont 
de Nemours maker of chemicals and explosives and a group of bank-
ers led by J. P. Morgan and British and Canadian interests acquired 
controlling interest in GM. By 1923, GM was producing 400,000 
cars a year.
The Ford Motor Company
The Ford Motor Company was incorporated in 1903. At first, the 
company was primarily an assembler of parts that were made by 
other companies. However, by 1914, Ford sales were strong enough 
to enable the company to stop buying motors and other major parts. 
Henry Ford began his strategy to eventually control all aspects of 
production: producing iron and steel from the company’s own smelt-
ers from iron ore and coal mined in its own mines and carried to its 
River Rouge factory in Detroit by its own ore-carrying ships, using 
the wood used in auto frames harvested by Ford-owned forests, auto 
glass from his own plate glass company and, eventually, tires from his 
own rubber plantations. In the early 1920s, however, world demand 
for his cars outpaced his ability to produce everything needed to 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
221
Box 12. 1 Henry Ford, the great innovator
Harvard economic history professor emeritus Stuart Bruchey 
described Henry Ford in the following mixture of vitriol and 
admiration in his 1990 book Enterprise: the Dynamic Economy 
of a Free People:
Barely literate, bigoted, and ruthless in his labor relations 
(said to be the worst in the auto industry), a man ignorant of 
the complexities of worlds beyond his chosen domain, Ford was 
nevertheless an extremely important innovator. He may have 
been the greatest manufacturer of all time . . . As a rule, one car 
came out of the Ford factory about every 45 seconds. By 1926, 
when Ford discontinued production of his famous Model T, he 
had sold 15 million cars, half of the nation’s entire output of new 
cars, more than double that of his nearest competitor, General 
Motors. In 1923 alone, Ford had made and sold 1.7 million.
make a car. He continued to buy some motors from the Dodge 
Brothers and car bodies from GM’s Fisher Body subsidiary. Parts 
manufacture and final assembly was farmed out to more than 30 
different factories located across the country, in Canada, the United 
Kingdom, Spain, Denmark, France, and elsewhere. Construction of 
the River Rouge complex began in 1917. When completed in 1928, 
it was the largest integrated manufacturing facility in the country, if 
not the world.
Other than the purchase of the Lincoln Motor Company in 1922 
for $8 million, Ford’s early growth strategy was not to grow by merg-
ers and acquisitions, but to do so by vertical integration, and to make 
that possible by complete domination of a single segment of the mar-
ket. That strategy was clearly successful; it remained largely unchanged 
until May, 25, 1927, when the 15 millionth and last Model T rolled 
off the assembly line. The line remained closed until December, when 
the first Model A appeared.
Other Car Makers
GM and Ford were not the only U.S. automobile makers during the 
1920s. After being ousted from General Motors by the DuPont group, 
W. C. “Billy” Durant formed a new company in 1921, the Durant 
Motor Company. Durant attempted to produce a line of cars that 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
222
would compete with the GM line, and was partially successful. The 
company produced six different models, ranging from the $10,000 
Locomobile to compete with GM’s Cadillac, Ford’s Lincoln, and the 
British Rolls-Royce, to the $438 Star. By 1923 there were 106 differ-
ent car makers in the United States. Some of the better known names 
included Dodge, Studebaker, Hudson, Packard, and Willys-Overland. 
Dodge became a model in the Chrysler line, Studebaker and Packard 
continued through the Depression years to have some success during 
World War II, and Willys-Overland designed and manufactured the 
World War II Jeep. The Durant Company, already weakened by slow 
sales, closed its doors in 1931.
Emergence of a Consumer Society
Business opportunities changed significantly following World War I, 
as America evolved from a producer-dominated, agrarian-centered 
society to one that was becoming consumer oriented. During the 
interwar period the country became a strong creditor nation. Amer-
ican agricultural and industrial exports exceeded imports in all but 
the deepest depression years from 1934 to 1939. Exports shifted in 
importance from farm products to manufactured items, while imports 
consisted mostly of raw materials. Exports of agricultural products 
remained important, but less so than before the war, further curtail-
ing farm income. The Depression had emboldened protectionists in 
Congress, using high tariffs in order to protect American businesses. 
A tariff war was the result.
Despite the growing importance of world trade, the internal domes-
tic market remained the most important factor in the economic pros-
perity of the United States, as it had been in the nineteenth century. 
The national market became even more lucrative as it was brought 
closer together in the late nineteenth century through advances in 
transportation and communications. In the twentieth century, auto-
mobiles, trucks, airplanes, telephones, and the radio would all help to 
make distribution more efficient and effective.
The 1920s were a period of impressive economic growth. Wage 
earners could afford and were buying automobiles, new electrical 
household appliances, and moving into new homes (Smiley 1996). 
Despite the general prosperity that characterized all but the agricul-
tural sector during the 1920s, wage rates for factory workers remained 
relatively stable, except for a short dip in 1921. Female manufacturing 
workers were earning roughly two-thirds as much as male workers 
(Table 12.3). Farm workers continued to be at the low end of earning 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
223
scale, with earnings averaging close to $2.30 per day or $13.80 for a 
six-day work week. However, many farm jobs included housing and 
some meals.
Although immigration had slowed during the Depression years, the 
population of the country continued to grow, rising from 106 million 
in 1920 to 141 million in 1946, fueled by the influx of migrants from 
Central and Southern Europe. These shifts in the origin of immi-
grants to the United Sates are shown in Table 12.4. The 1930 cen-
sus revealed that the number of migrants from Southern and Eastern 
Europe finally exceeded those coming from Northern Europe. The 
small totals for migrants from Asia are also included for comparison.
Among the working classes, habits of self-denial, although declin-
ing as affluence continued to expand, were still common among the 
bulk of new immigrants. Advertising needed to break down those 
attitudes and to assure these consumers that instant gratification was 
morally acceptable and worthy of their hard-earned dollars. Market-
ing and marketing research provided advertisers with the knowledge 
and tools needed to accomplish its new task: advertising had to be 
persuasive as well as informational.
Table 12.3 Average weekly or daily wages for selected occupations, 1920–1930 
(1929 $)
Year
Weekly:
Male skilled 
manufacturing 
workers
Weekly: Male 
semiskilled 
manufacturing 
workers
Weekly: 
Female 
manufacturing 
workers
Weekly:
Coal mine 
workers
Daily wage 
rate:
Farm 
workers
1920
29.16
22.28
15.14
–
2.82
1921
26.19
19.41
14.96
–
1.96
1922
28.73
20.74
16.19
–
2.04
1923
30.93
22.37
17.31
25.51
2.36
1924
30.61
22.45
16.78
23.47
2.40
1925
30.57
22.41
16.78
25.64
2.30
1926
30.60
22.47
16.72
27.51
2.32
1927
31.09
23.22
17.14
23.85
2.32
1928
31.94
23.89
17.15
24.46
2.30
1929
32.60
24.40
17.61
25.11
2.30
1930
29.63
22.47
16.40
22.61
2.21
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the United 
States, 1976.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
224
As competition for consumers’ attention and favor increased after 
the turn of the century, a few firms began investigating consumers’ 
needs and wants before designing and producing new products and 
to increase the effectiveness of their increasingly large advertising 
expenditures. The first market research department in a manufactur-
ing company was established by U.S. Rubber in 1916. The Swift meat 
packing company followed in 1917. For consumer goods manufactur-
ers, style was becoming an important selling tool.
Also helping to serve the needs of the emerging consumer soci-
ety in the 1920s was an increasing availability of consumer credit. 
Paying for goods in monthly installments rather than in one lump 
sum became common. Some companies, such as General Electric and 
General Motors, established financing subsidiaries to support credit 
sales. By 1929, installment buying accounted for some 90 percent of 
sewing machine and washing machine purchases, about 80 percent of 
the sale of radios, refrigerators, and vacuum cleaners, and 60 percent 
of all new automobile sales.
Conclusion
The 1920s, 1930s, and early 1940s were pivotal years in the evolution 
of business in the United States. As American companies improved 
and diversified their produces and reached out to new markets, many 
found their earlier systems of centralized management proved to be 
inadequate to handle the growing complexity of their operations. 
Some leading companies began to adopt decentralized business struc-
tures to better deal with that complexity.
Table 12.4 Region and country of birth of foreign-born Americans, 1850–1930
Year
Region of birth
1850
1890
1900
1910
1920
1930
Total foreign-born
2,244,602
9,249,547 10,341,276 13,515,886
13,920,692 14,204,149
Born in Europe
2,031,867
8,030,347
8,881,548 11,810,115
11,916,048 11,784,010
Northern and 
Western Europe
2,022,195
7,288,917
7,204,649
7,306,325
6,241,916
5,850,256
Southern and 
Eastern Europe
9,672
728,851
1,674,648
4,500,932
5,670,927
5,918,982
Asia
1,135
113,383
120,248
191,484
237,950
275,665
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2011b.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y  i n  C r i s i s
225
Three crises dramatically changed business in America during the 
first half of the twentieth century: two world wars and a crippling 
global depression. Out of these came greater oligopoly and signifi-
cantly altered business operations. Managers who were not owners 
sought other new and different markets to serve and products to pro-
vide. They developed concepts of professionalism in management and 
supported the provision of professional business management higher 
education to achieve their aims.
The interwar period also saw the nation nearly forced to its knees 
when it suffered through 10 years of what became the Great Depres-
sion. It began with the 1929 stock market crash and continued until 
a pre-World War II military buildup that began in 1939. This was 
before most of the social welfare safety net was established in the 
1940s and 1950s. During what has been described as the greatest 
domestic crisis in the United States since the Civil War, “between 
1929 and 1932, 110,000 businesses failed in the United States, and 
industrial production fell by one-half. By the winter of 1932–1933, at 
least one quarter of the work force was unemployed—some 14 mil-
lion people, with many others employed only part-time” (Blackford 
and Kerr 1990, 321).
Until the last years of the 1930s, American business was unable 
to reorganize itself and climb out of the deep pit of the Depression, 
despite the sweeping changes brought on by New Deal reforms. 
Businesses—and the American public—needed a helping hand to 
get back to work and the wheels of commerce and industry turn-
ing again; they turned to the federal government for that help. For 
the first time in American history, the federal government began 
assuming responsibility for the economic health of the nation as a 
whole—a trend that was to become even more pronounced—and 
more controversial—after World War II. The mass production skills 
of America’s manufacturing industry went on to arm the Allies in 
World War II and to become the world’s largest economy after 
that war.
Discussion Questions
1. What were the changes reshaping U.S. commerce and industry 
after 1900?
2. How did the Great Depression affect the structure of U.S. com-
merce and industry?
3. What factors in the years before and after World War I contributed 
to the large number of farm foreclosures in the 1920s?

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
226
4. How did the continuing trend in mergers and trusts change the 
structure of U.S. commerce and industry in the first half of the 
twentieth century?
5. In what way did consumer spending come to influence the health 
of the U.S. economy?

4
C h a p t e r  1 3
Postwar Industrial Leadership
The structure of American business began to change dramatically 
during the first half of the twentieth century. Mergers and internal 
growth resulted in a few very large corporations with fewer and fewer 
competitors taking the place of the traditional small, family-owned 
business that had characterized American business. In 1909, oligop-
olistic industries controlled production in 16 percent of America’s 
production of industrial goods; by 1929 that control had increased 
to 21 percent, and by 1930 nearly half of all U.S. industry was con-
trolled by just 200 corporations (McElvaine 1984). The intrusion of 
government into business management that had emerged in the trust-
busting Progressive era and again in the years of the Great Depression 
was placed on the back burner during the booming years of World 
War II.
Many of the mergers and trusts that took place during the boom 
years of the 1920s had been between medium-sized and already large 
companies. Many of the weakest of these did not survive the Great 
Depression. As a result, industrial production became increasingly con-
centrated in the factories of very large businesses. The hundred largest 
American companies in 1925 controlled 36 percent of the nation’s 
manufacturing assets. By 1931, this had increased to 44 percent.
Still, it must be remembered that even despite this shift to ever 
larger businesses, small businesses remained an important part of 
the American system of commerce and industry. Small businesses 
remained strongest in areas where they could carve out a market niche 
for their specialty products and in industries in which there were few if 
any inherent economies of scale. Examples include fine furniture mak-
ing, leatherworking, garment and jewelry making, and similar opera-
tions that were always more labor than capital intensive.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
228
New Management Models
The greater number of consumer goods produced in America after 
World War I required the institution of new management methods 
and organizational structures. Even as late as 1910, most large firms 
still produced only one or two major items for a few key markets. 
Although the idea of functional departmentalization had become read-
ily accepted, centralized management systems were considered ade-
quate for such product-market focus. Professional officers in the head 
office could handle the relatively uncomplicated operations of their 
firms. However, as the companies grew in size to serve ever-larger mar-
kets and increased the diversity of their product lines, problems with 
centralized management structures appeared. The problems of central-
ized management were revealed in a relatively minor recession in the 
early 1920s. They would become even more problematic after 1930.
With centralized management all major decisions were made at the 
head office, where the focus of management decisions was more often 
than not based solely on financial considerations. Decentralized man-
agement retained responsibility for planning for the entire company, 
but delegated authority over most daily operations to what became 
semiautonomous divisions. These divisions were typically arranged 
along product lines. The railroads had pioneered decentralized man-
agement in the nineteenth century, but it was not until the 1920s that 
many major manufacturing firms followed suit. Led by DuPont and 
General Motors, the more diverse and complex industries adopted 
decentralized structures.
Firms in industries with diverse and widespread markets that were 
most likely to have adopted this type of structure include electrical 
products, led by Westinghouse in 1934 and followed by General Elec-
tric in 1950; the chemical industry, which DuPont led with Hercules 
and Monsanto following in the 1930s. In the power machinery and 
automobiles industries, International Harvester reorganized in 1943, 
with Ford and Chrysler following after World War II. Not all large 
companies adopted decentralized management structures. Standard 
Oil affiliates and other petroleum corporations, companies in the met-
als and mining industries such as Anaconda, Kennecott, and Interna-
tional Nickel, retained their centralized structures.
U.S. Industry During and After World War II
The ability of the U.S. manufacturing industry to meet the materiel 
needs of the Allies in World War II is clearly seen in the aircraft 

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
229
production statistics for the United States, the United Kingdom, 
Japan, and Germany in Table 13.1. Before the war, the United 
States produced just close to 2,000 aircraft compared to Germa-
ny’s 2,265, the Britain’s 7,740, and Japan’s 1,467. U.S. produc-
tion rose to 19,433 in 1941, nearly 85,000 in 1943, and more 
than 96,000 in 1944 (National WWII Museum 2014). U.S. indus-
try also produced close to three times as many tanks (60,973) as 
Britain (23,202) and Germany (19,926), and 30 times as many as 
Japan (2,464).
During World War II the U.S. government made significant invest-
ments in a wide variety of defense-oriented and consumer goods indus-
tries. Investments in these industries made up nearly 65 percent of all 
war-related spending. Many of those investments were made in areas  
outside of the traditional Northeast and Central U.S. industrial areas. 
After the war, most of the factories, shipyards, air fields, and train-
ing facilities were sold to public or private companies in the region. 
The organizations that benefited from those government investments 
were in a position to contribute to faster economic growth in their 
regions than would have been possible without the new or expanded 
facilities (Hooks and Bloomquist 1992). Among the best and most 
readable histories of the success of American industry’s rapid shift to 
becoming the arsenal of democracy during World War II is Arthur 
Herman’s 2012 book, Freedom’s Forge. Led by the nation’s automo-
bile industry but eventually including all the very large and the small-
est manufacturers, American factories out-produced Germany, Japan, 
and Italy combined.
In 1939, close to half of the country’s in-place manufacturing 
base was in the iron and steel and related metal fabricating indus-
tries. Moreover, the technology employed in defense-related mate-
riel was similar to what had been employed in earlier wars. It was, 
therefore, an industrial war, and the U.S. was the leading industrial 
Table 13.1 Comparison of WWII aircraft production from 1939 to 1945
Country
1939
1945
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
United States
2,141
6,068
19,433
47,836
85,868
96,318
46,001
Japan
4,467
4,768
5,048
8,861
16,693
28,180
8,263
Germany
8,295
10,862
12,401
15,409
24,807
40,593
4,540
United Kingdom
7,940
15,049
20,064
23,672
26,263
26,461
12,070
Source: National WWII Museum 2014.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
230
nation. The aircraft, ships and submarines, rifles, machine guns, 
and cannon of World War II were largely just improvements of the 
same weapons used in the World War I. These two factors made 
it relatively effortless to shift from producing goods for the con-
sumer market to manufacturing the weapons of war. The techniques 
involved in making artillery shells were, for example, not much dif-
ferent than what was needed to produce automobile engines. Tanks 
were in many ways just larger tractors with guns, and the new fac-
tories put up to make them would be easily converted to making 
automobiles.
All told, close to $21 billion was invested by the government in 
physical assets for the war effort. More than $15 billion was spent in 
defense industries; close to $5 billion was invested in helping mak-
ers of consumer goods supply the many goods and services needed 
for military uses. Government financial investments in productive 
infrastructure prior to and during World War II not only brought the 
country out of the Great Depression for good, but also contributed 
significantly to growth after the war.
Hooks and Bloomquist (1992) identified a little-discussed afteref-
fect of the government’s investments in war production facilities and 
processes. Because of the distinct regional preferences for government 
investments, after the war the areas benefiting from those investments 
grew at a disproportionate rate than most other areas of the country. 
In general, the traditional heartland of the country benefited least 
from war-related government investments. The data in Table 13.2 
show the top five regions that received larger shares of the govern-
ment’s investments during the war. Table 13.3 reveals which areas 
benefited most and which benefited least after the war as a result of 
those investments.
Sales of the government’s wartime investments to private firms 
began almost immediately after the end of the war, although some 
sales and additional investments were made during the early stages of 
the war in Korea. Of the 238 sales of industrial facilities made right 
after the war, most were spread across the country; in nearly 75 per-
cent of the total, a single sale was made. In only four areas were there 
more than four sales: Philadelphia (14), Norfolk (10), Chicago (8), 
and Detroit (7). Sales tended to be made to firms in areas where that 
particular industry had been concentrated prior to the war. The petro-
leum industry is an example: of the 26 sales in this industry, 16 were 
in Louisiana, Oklahoma, or Texas.

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
231
Table 13.2 Partial list of regional war production investments (thousands of 1972 
dollars)
All defense-specific industries
All civilian-oriented industries
Aircraft
Shipbuilding
Ordnance
Aircraft 
parts
Petroleum
Miscellaneous
Dallas
San Francisco St. Louis
Chicago
Houston
Philadelphia
208,798
513,895
571,146
741,249
370,738
689,155
Los Angles
New York
Detroit
New York
Beaumont, TX Chicago
179,382
494,521
564,562
477,588
241,785
640,646
Detroit
Philadelphia
Chicago
Detroit
Louisville
Pittsburgh
178,958
349,916
464,086
474,449
180,637
422,828
New York
Boston
Minneapolis
Buffalo
Los Angeles
Houston
138,350
289,805
386,069
299,846
169,251
431,987
Atlanta
Norfolk, VA
Kansas City
Cincinnati Lk. Charles, LA Salt Lake
108,018
193,629
376,573
290,416
156,787
417,554
Source: Hooks and Bloomquist 1992, from U.S. War Production Board data and other government 
sources.
Table 13.3 Statistical areas with gains or losses in growth in manufacturing, 
1947–1972
Top 10 winning
regions
Relative gain
($ billions)
Top 10 losing
regions
Relative loss
($ billions)
 1
Los Angeles
9.6
New York
–15.80
 2
Houston
2.72
Chicago
–6.43
 3
Dallas-Fort Worth
2.37
Pittsburgh
–4.40
 4
Memphis
2.00
Boston
–4.13
 5
Miami
1.73
Philadelphia
–4.04
 6
San Francisco
1.60
Hartford-New Haven
–2.64
 7
Rochester, NY
1.58
Cleveland
–2.37
 8
Phoenix
2.39
Detroit
–2.13
 9
Atlanta
1.35
Buffalo
–2.07
10
Nashville
1.26
Providence, RI
–1.34
Source: Hooks and Bloomquist 1992, from U.S. War Production Board data and other government 
sources.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
232
Postwar Economic Growth
The U.S. commerce and industrial sectors enjoyed global dominance 
in the early years after the end of World War II. Over the next half-
century U.S. firms underwent a period of tremendous growth. Goods 
manufactured in the United States became available throughout the 
world, enabling more business executives to begin thinking about 
their businesses in global terms. Americans had created a new type 
of business firm before the war—the multidivisional, decentralized 
corporation—to take advantage of new business opportunities in the 
Roaring Twenties. After World War II they forged additional types of 
business structures to benefit from the opportunities in the postwar 
period. American business during the 1950s and 1960s were the larg-
est and most successful businesses in the world (Blackford and Kerr 
1990; Bryant and Dethloff 1990). However, at the same time the divi-
sion between center and peripheral firms was widening. Big business 
was becoming the dominant pattern in both commerce and industry.
A Period of Unparalleled Growth
The economy of the United States was the envy of the world dur-
ing the two decades following the war; it enjoyed what was clearly a 
period of unparalleled economic growth. Between 1945 and 1960, for 
example, America’s GNP rose by 52 percent and its per capita GNP 
increased by 19 percent. Over the next 10 years, the economy rose an 
additional 46 percent and per capita GNP increased by 29 percent. By 
1969, the United States’ share of global industrial output exceeded 
42 percent of the world total. It stayed there well into the 1970s.
By the mid-1980s, big businesses in the United States had changed 
considerably from that of just 30 or 40 years earlier. Above all, they 
were more diversified. They produced and sold a broader range of 
products for a wider range of consumer markets both at home and 
abroad. Many made significant foreign direct investments, in the pro-
cess evolving into multinational corporations (MNCs). Despite the 
significant growth, the period was not without its problems; nor was 
this period to end on as positive note as it had begun.
Postwar Consumer Demand
Driving the economy after the war was a vast array of consumer dura-
bles such as automobiles, television sets, and household appliances. 
Americans had the money to buy it all—and they tried to. Unem-
ployment was low and wages were high and growing higher. What 
industrial capacity that was not used to supply the increasingly affluent 

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
233
American society was put to use producing industrial materials for the 
rebuilding of the economies of the war-torn world.
Increased income together with the earnings of five years of pent-
up consumer demand resulted in tremendous growth in the trade and 
service sectors of the economy after the end of the war. Both the 
industrial and commercial sectors were enjoying substantial growth 
from 1955 to 1965. In 1955 the top 500 industrial corporations 
reported combined sales of $161.4 billion. During the same period, 
the nation’s 50 largest merchandising firms, including all forms of 
retailing and wholesaling, reported combined sales of $25.6 billion. 
By 1965 the top 500 industrial corporations reported combined sales 
of $298.1 billion, while combined sales for the top 50 merchandising 
firms in 1965 was just a little less than $49 billion (Table 13.4).
Of the 36 million new jobs created in the United States between 
1957 and 1987, a full 90 percent were in the services. Among the 
many different occupations listed as services to citizens and businesses, 
this sector includes wholesale and retail trade, transportation, publish-
ing, entertainment, financial and accounting services, legal and medi-
cal services, and others. Of the 23 million women who found jobs 
during this period, 97 percent went to work in the service industries. 
By 1980, the United States was the world’s largest single exporter of 
services, accounting for 12 percent of the total world export trade.
Diversification, Mergers, and Trusts
American business diversified along four different paths during the last 
half of the twentieth century. Some firms diversified through inter-
nal development. They added products, product lines, or businesses 
Table 13.4 Earnings of all firms in five business sectors, 1955–1965 ($ billions)
Year
Sector
1955
1957
1959
1961
1963
1964
1965
Wholesale and 
retail trade
205,1531
365,436
386,918
389,449
428,849
457,796
489,738
Services
13,8751
45,154
53,479
54,643
68,220
73,386
78,778
Banks and 
insurance
13,9221
18,1261
32,355
35,160
40,636
45,153
49,703
Real Estate
7,3381
7,8601
13,200
14,417
17,772
19,239
20,634
Manufacturing
601,7201
342,024
371,400
383,357
431,825
466,408
515,848
Note: 1Data for corporations only; all others are corporate and noncorporate organizations
Source: U.S. Internal Revenue Service 1966.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
234
from a base in technology or a narrow specialty. For example, internal 
research led the rubber products manufacturers into related fields of 
chemicals, plastics, and fibers. Other firms diversified by purchasing 
companies that complemented their existing lines of business in some 
way. For example, Continental Can purchased metal lid manufactur-
ers and glass and paper container companies, making it possible for 
them to offer their customers a wider variety of container choices. 
Still other companies expanded by buying companies that sold prod-
ucts using the same or similar channels of distribution. For example, 
American Tobacco became American Brands after acquiring com-
panies that made prepackaged food and beverages sold in the same 
mass-distribution outlets that sold tobacco products. Finally, other 
firms elected to grow following a conglomerate diversification strat-
egy. They purchased any type of company they could get their hands 
on, regardless of its technology or distribution method. They did so 
convinced that good managers could manage any kind of company.
Conglomerates and multinationals were two variations of big busi-
ness in the United States at the end of the twentieth century. The devel-
opment of these business forms was not really new. Rather, they were 
natural developments and continuations of a pattern in firm growth 
that began in the mid-nineteenth century. They followed the evolving 
structure of U.S. commerce and industry of a few, relatively small num-
ber of big businesses dominating key segments of the U.S. economy 
coinciding with large numbers of small businesses. In 1982, small busi-
nesses accounted for 38 percent of the nation’s GDP. That proportion 
was maintained at about the same rate through the end of the century. 
More than 90 percent of all businesses in the United States were and 
still are small businesses. As a result, small businesses generated the 
bulk of new jobs. They were particularly important as employers of 
women, young workers, and minorities. In numbers, small businesses 
have long dominated the service industry, and continue to be key per-
formers in the retail side of the commerce sector. With the prevalence 
of off-shore production, the number of small manufacturers and their 
importance to growth in GDP continued to decline. Taking their place 
would be a large increase in public-sector spending as the impact of the 
“age of entitlements” began to be felt in the economy.
Birth of the Conglomerate
Conglomerate growth became increasingly popular during the late 
1950s and 1960s. The aerospace company Ling-Temco-Vought 
(LTV) was an example of a conglomerate organization. As a diversified 

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
235
conglomerate that traced its history to a Texas electrical contractor 
that began shortly after World War II, the firm existed from 1961 to 
2000. Among its unaligned parts were aerospace products, electron-
ics, wire and cable making, steel manufacturing, sporting goods, an 
airline, meat packing, car rentals, pharmaceuticals, and others.
As the story of LTV illustrates, they grew by putting together dif-
ferent types of unrelated companies under one corporate umbrella. 
One company, Norton Simon Industries, started in 1934 when Simon 
started Val Vita Food Products in an unused orange packing shed in 
Fullerton, California. He acquired the California tomato processing 
firm of Hunt Brothers Fruit Packing Company in 1943, forming a 
new company, Hunt Foods. For the next decade Simon expanded 
in the canning industry, purchasing a metal can-making plant and a 
glass container manufacturer. From this base he acquired other food 
products firms. In the mid-1950s the name was changed to Hunt 
Foods and Industries to reflect its diversified nature. In the 1960s, 
Hunt Foods merged with Wesson Oil and Snowdrift; the name was 
changed to Hunt-Wesson Foods in 1964. In 1968, Hunt-Wesson, the 
Canada Dry beverage company, and the McCall Publishing Corpora-
tion merged to form Norton Simon, Inc., a $1 billion company with 
headquarters in New York City. The firm then continued to expand 
both internally through further acquisitions in the foods industry. The 
firm was purchased by the Esmark Corporation in 1983 and moved to 
Chicago; Esmark was a diversified holding company that controlled 
the Swift & Company meat-packing firm, Playtex, Tropicana, a steel 
maker, and a car rental firm, among others. Esmark was acquired by 
the Beatrice food products company in 1984; Beatrice then became 
a private company in 1985, functioning as the BCI Holding Com-
pany. This firm continued to grow during the changes of ownership 
with sales topping $2 billion in 1989. In 1990, BCI was acquired by 
the Omaha food products giant ConAgra (Funding Universe 1997). 
Swift & Company later became a Brazilian conglomerate.
Conglomerates became increasingly common as the third major 
merger movement accelerated after 1950. Mergers in manufacturing 
and mining industries reached a peak of 2,500 per year in 1968; 75 
of those mergers were conglomerate types. Still, despite the interest 
in the approach, it never became the dominant type of consolidation 
and it became even less popular after the spectacular collapse of several 
very large groups. A minor recurrence occurred in the 1980s, led by 
a rash of leveraged buy-outs and the use of junk-bond financing. At 
their peak, however, only 46 of the 500 largest industrial companies 
in the United States were conglomerates.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
236
The conglomerate form fell into disrepute in the early 1970s as 
several failed or were forced to divest large portions of their empires 
for cash to pay down tremendous debt. The hoped-for synergy did 
not appear; conglomerates were not any more profitable than any 
other type of big business, and often one sector’s management skills 
were not readily transferable to others. During the renewed economic 
growth that occurred in the late 1970s and 1980s, conglomerates 
contributed only a minor portion.
Growth during the Long Expansion
Businesses in the United States benefited from a long expansion that 
began in 1991. Economic conditions over more than five years of 
unprecedented growth saw significant increases in GDP, productiv-
ity, profitability, rates of investment, low inflation and unemployment, 
and more equitable gains in income (Landefeld and Fraumeni 2001). 
Advances in technology and drops in technology prices resulting 
from increased competition in computers, cell phones, and Internet 
browser services were important drivers of growth. These phenomena 
gave several names for the period: the Internet Age, e-Business Age, 
the Information Technology Revolution, the Digital Economy, and 
collectively, the New Economy. Table 13.5 displays the impact on 
GDP of sales of computers, software, and telecommunications ser-
vices from 1995 to 2000. Sales of these products and services con-
tributed nearly 1.5 percentage points to the growth in GDP in 2000.
Globalization Spurs Diversification
Just as the tremendous growth in the American economy after World 
War II fueled additional diversification of business in the domestic 
market, the expansion of the global economy encouraged worldwide 
business diversification. A large number of firms were soon consid-
ered multinational enterprises (MNEs). To be considered an MNE 
a firm needed to do more than a million dollars business in each of 
five or more countries. By the 1970s, at least 3,500 U.S. companies 
had direct foreign investments in some 15,000 enterprises around the 
globe. During the decade of the 1970s, however, a decline occurred 
as more foreign businesses also expanded into the multinational 
marketplace. Between 1971 and 1975, for example, American mul-
tinational corporations divested themselves of 1,359 foreign subsid-
iaries—nearly 10 percent of the total held by U.S. firms. Most of those 
divestitures were made voluntarily because of declining profits in the 

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
237
foreign markets, although some in developing nations were forced to 
sell to local owners or were taken over by foreign governments. By 
2001, MNCs represented less than 1 percent of all U.S. companies, 
but accounted for 23 percent of the country’s private sector GDP 
(MGI 2010).
Growth in Selected Industries
By 2001, the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) forecast that firms 
in the computer and data processing services industry (e.g., software, 
systems design, computer-related consulting) would be the fast-
est growing industry in the United States, increasing by 86 percent 
from 2000 to 2010. This was following residential care (expected to 
increase by 64 percent) and health services industries (to grow by 57 
percent). A similar forecast in 2001 predicted that home health care 
would grow by nearly 49 percent between 2002 and 2022. Other 
health-related fast growing industries included physical therapists 
and aides, occupational therapy, medical secretaries, and many other 
medical/dental special occupations, including biotechnology.
Table 13.5 Contribution to GDP from sales of computers, software, and tele- 
communications
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
Average
1995–2000
Percent change at 
annual rate:
Real gross domestic 
product
2.7
3.6
4.4
4.4
4.2
5.0
4.1
Contribution in 
percentage pts:
Computers and 
software1
.62
.74
.90
.94
1.04
1.10
.89
Telecommunications 
services2
.10
.14
.11
.13
.14
.13
.13
Communication 
equipment3
.19
.15
.17
.10
.24
.25
.18
Total:
.91
1.03
1.18
1.17
1.42
1.48
1.20
1Includes computers, software, and audio and video products
2Includes cable TV and local and long distance telephone
3Includes personal and commercial equipment, net exports, and government
Source: Landefeld and Fraumeni 2001, 27.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
238
The Healthcare Industry
As the country continues to exhibit an aging population, the health-
care and social assistance sectors are expected to continue to be 
among the nation’s fasting growing industries. Sector employment 
is projected to grow at a sustained rate of 2.6 percent each year until 
2022. The industry will add some 5 million new jobs to the economy 
over the period—accounting for nearly one-third of all the projected 
growth in employment over the period. Despite the demand for work-
ers, many of these are among the lowest paid jobs in the country. For 
example, in 2022 the median annual wage for personal care aides will 
be $19,910, $20,820 for home health care aides, $23,880 for physical 
therapy aides, and $31, 350 for medical secretaries.
The Manufacturing Industry
By the end of 1960s, the U.S. manufacturing industry was at its peak 
of postwar progress and global influence. It would remain so until the 
gasoline crises of the 1970s, when the price of oil quadrupled almost 
overnight. But at the beginning of the 1960s, the future for Ameri-
can businesses looked exceptionally bright, as Joseph McGuire, then 
Dean of the University of Kansas’s School of Business wrote in 1964 
(Box 13.1).
Box 13.1 U.S. business in the affluent society of 1964
Business school dean Joseph McGuire argued in 1964 that: 
“Our American business system, in the years since the end of 
World War II, has made our nation truly an affluent society. As 
we look about us we find that our people are better clothed, 
fed, and sheltered than the people of any other nation, past or 
present. We enjoy a wide range of goods and services.
“The abundance which the business institutions of our 
nation have produced, furthermore, has left its mark upon the 
American character. It has altered our goals and changed our 
standards. It has caused us to be mobile, to be consumption-
oriented, and to be insecure. It has produced a novel sort of 
democracy, different from that possessed by other countries of 
the world. It has not produced a people who can look upon 
their lot with equanimity and satisfaction. On the contrary, it 

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
239
has brought forth a horde of social critics to remind us that 
things could still be better than they are. Some of these nagging 
voices tell us that things are good indeed, but that they are not 
so good as they seem.
“We are an affluent society afraid of its own affluency, much 
in the way that [child actress] Shirley Temple once depicted in 
Poor Little Rich Girl. Yet, instead of worrying about its side 
effects, we should rejoice in our affluency. We should cast aside 
guild complexes constructed by our moral “super ego” and be 
happy in our economic “id” for the latter drive has brought us 
a greater prosperity than has been enjoyed by any other nation 
at any other time. What we require is not psychoanalytical intro-
spection, but rather a spreading out of the benefits of our mate-
rial success. In brief, what we need is a new ideology to fit a 
successful business society, not a new business society to fit an 
old ideology.”
Source: J. W. McGuire 1964, 269.
Although the U.S. Department of Labor predicts that manufac-
turing will have a decline in industry employment of nearly 600,000 
from 2012 to 2022, aspects of the sector continue to do well. A 
2012 report in Forbes (Biery 2012) predicted that several manufac-
turing sectors would be among the fastest growing from 2014 on. 
The three fastest growing industries associated with energy develop-
ment in the upper Midwest: support activities for mining, with a 
twelve-month 32 percent increase in sales; petroleum and petroleum 
product merchant wholesalers, 27 percent increase; and industrial 
machine manufacturing, 25 percent increase. Other fast growing 
manufacturing industries on the list of top 10 industries include 
architectural and structural metals manufacturing, metalworking 
machinery, machine shop products, and machinery, equipment, and 
supplies wholesalers.
The Retailing Sector
Retailing, while continuing to undergo significant changes, contin-
ues to make a significant contribution to the economy of the United 
States; retail sales were 27 percent of GDP in 2013, up from 26.8 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
240
percent in 2012. Total retail sales exceeded $4.3 trillion in 2012 and 
$4.5 trillion in 2013. Total retail sales are projected to be $5.1 trillion 
in 2016, $5.3 trillion in 2017, and $5.5 trillion in 2018 (Table 13.6).
In the four decades after World War II, retailing in the United 
States came to be dominated by very large chains. These chains are 
among the largest businesses in the world. Walmart, the largest chain 
in the United States with 2013 sales of $334 billion, is also the larg-
est in the world. Others among the 10 largest U.S. retailers in 2013 
included Kroger, $93.6 billion; Costco, $74.7 billion; Target. $71.3 
billion; the Home Depot, $69.9 billion; Walgreen, $68.1 billion; CVS 
Caremark, $65.6 billion; Lowe’s, $52.2 billion; Amazon.com, $43.9 
billion; and Safeway, $37.5 billion (Elejade-Ruiz 2014). In 2013 
Amazon, a purely e-commerce retailer, made the top 10 retailers list 
for the first time.
This evolution of retailing began with a few small, locally owned 
and operated trading posts and a few farm stores selling a little of 
everything the expanding population needed; in the new century, 
it is now a sector dominated by a relatively few very large retailers 
Table 13.6 Annual retail sales, totals and non-store and food service shares 2000–
2013 ($ millions)
Year
Total all retail sales
All nonstore retailing
Food and beverage service
2000
3,287,537
180,453
304,261
2001
3,378,906
180,563
316,638
2002
3,459,077
189,279
330,525
2003
3,612,457
206,359
349,726
2004
3,846,605
228,977
373,557
2005
4,085,746
255,579
396,463
2006
4,294,359
284,343
422,786
2007
4,439,733
308,767
444,551
2008
4,392,750
319,223
456,442
2009a
4,066,822
311,230
452,370
2010
4,288,339
340,902
467,476
2011
4,601,788
376,058
495,798
2012
4,831,131
406,420
524,894
2013
5,011,740
432,759
542,718
a2009 declines in all sales due to recession
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2015, http://www.census.gov/retail/index.html.

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
241
in almost every class of goods sold. The evolution of retailing in 
America occurred in five clearly discerned stages (Linneman and 
Moy 2002; Smyyth 2011). The first was the pre-1945, premodern, 
stage of mostly small independent stores in rural America and a few 
large department stores in urban areas. The second, postwar period 
occurred from 1945 to 1975. In this period, rapid growth in all forms 
of retailing resulted in a fading away of the old “mom-and-pop” 
stores, and de-retailing of many small towns. Much of the growth 
in new stores followed the movement of consumers from urban to 
suburban areas. Many well known stores opened some of the first 
large stores in suburbia, including Sears, J.C. Penney, Woolworth’s, 
Kress, and Montgomery Ward. As new malls were built in suburban 
areas, stores like Macy’s became the large-store anchor, with smaller 
specialty shops following. By the end of the period, discount stores, 
hypermarkets, and warehouse clubs were biting deep into the busi-
ness of the mall department store.
The third stage in the evolution of U.S. retailing, from 1975 to 
1990, saw several new models come into maturity, including the Big 
Box and Category Killer models. Supercenters and warehouse clubs 
continued to expand. Discount store chains and superstores that 
offered products and services that covered an entire category range 
also cut into the range of products sold in department stores. Exam-
ples include Office Depot and Staples in the business supply field; 
Home Depot and Lowe’s in home improvement; CVS, Walgreen, 
and Rite Aid in pharmacies; Best Buy and Circuit City in electronic 
equipment; and Walmart, Kroger, Safeway, and Costco in groceries. 
Another new model that became common in this period was the man-
ufacturer’s outlet store, where seconds or overstocks could be pur-
chased at bargain prices.
The fourth period, from 1990 to 2000, saw a speeding up of the 
evolutionary process in retailing. This was a period of consolidation in 
all retail channels with the big chains getting bigger and weaker stores 
either absorbed or simply disappearing. By the end of the decade, in 
nearly every channel, a few giants control the bulk of market share. 
Retailing was overbuilt; old malls were emptying out and the country 
could no longer support new malls. Few consumers could take the 
time to leisurely stroll from shop to shop in a large mall. Instead, they 
flocked to stores like Walmart and Costco where they could purchase 
everything from hotdogs to automobiles. Existing stores looked for 
new ways to increase their earnings. One way was to add groceries 
to their merchandise. Grocery sales represent the closest thing to a 
dominant commodity across the country’s major retailers; eight of 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
242
the top 10 chains earn some of their sales from groceries, as do 37 of 
the top 100 chains.
The fifth stage, 2000 to 2010, has been characterized by further 
consolidation in nearly every retailing channel, globalization of the 
supply chain, expansion into overseas markets, and by the success of 
the greatest change to occur in retailing since the Sears catalog: the 
advent of electronic, nonstore, retailing, or e-commerce. E-commerce 
has, without a doubt, become big business; sales in 2013 were nearly 
$40 trillion, up from $2.3 trillion in 2012. This accounts for a signifi-
cant portion of the sector’s growth since the turn of the century. As 
seen in Table 13.7, the share of total sales attributed to e-commerce 
has increased every year since 1998. The e-commerce share of total 
retail sales has been projected to continue to grow by double digits, 
from 16.2 percent in 2012 and 16.9 in 2013. Although that annual 
growth will decline slightly thereafter, it is forecast to remain above 
10 percent per year and to be 11.6 percent in 2018.
Table 13.7 U.S. e-commerce total sales and % of total retail sales, 1998–2013 
($ millions)
Year
Total retail sales
E-commerce retail sales
Share of total sales
2013
4,469,022
260,669
5.8%
2012
4,306,237
229,440
5.3%
2011
4,105,990
199,704
4.9%
2010
3,820,863
170,184
4.5%
2009
3,614,452
145,770
4.0%
2008
3,936,308
141,969
3.6%
2007
3,995,182
136,586
3.4%
2006
3,871,573
113,586
2.9%
2005
3,686,283
91,532
2.5%
2004
3,473,048
72,678
2.1%
2003
3,262,731
57,204
1.8%
2002
3,128,552
44,650
1.4%
2001
3,062,268
34,276
1.1%
2000
2,983,276
27,616
0.9%
1999
2,803,090
14,492
0.5%
1998
2,581,762
4,984
0.1%
Source: U.S. Census Bureau 2014.

P o s t wa r  I n du s t r i a l  L e a d e r s h i p
243
Conclusion
U.S. commerce and industry has undergone a series of transforma-
tional changes since the end of World War II. Deindustrialization has 
thinned the nation’s industrial base from its peak contribution of more 
than 24 percent of GDP to less than 14 percent in 2013; thousands of 
high paid industrial jobs have been lost forever as factory after factory 
in the industrial heartland closed its doors, leaving behind what came 
to be known as the Rust Belt.
The nation was engaged in two major and several minor wars in 
the twentieth century, one of which, the war in Vietnam, caused a 
deep schism in the electorate. Americans suffered through a number 
of deep recessions, none of which, however, came close to the dev-
astation caused by the Great Depression of the 1930s. Yet prosperity 
always seemed to return after the fall. Wages were high and getting 
higher, unions were strong, and the door to middle class life styles 
opened for millions of Americans. Not all industries experienced the 
return to the prosperity of the 1980s; many manufacturing industries 
never recovered, while others did so with fewer workers (Plunkert 
1990). The slow shifting of manufacturing jobs to low-wage countries 
and increasing automation of the factory floor was not seen as a threat 
to the maintaining of the “American Way of Life” until well into the 
twenty-first century. Deindustrialization had occurred and the new 
Information Age industries were not growing fast enough to replace 
them.
A bright spot in the economy after World War II has been retail-
ing. It has undergone what Linneman and Moy (2002) called a major 
evolution, rocked by “pop culture, suburbanization, and increased 
competition.” Retailing, following the migration from central cities, 
changed from an urban to a suburban activity. Retailers have had 
to contend with an aging population, the growing purchasing power 
of children, abbreviated retail cycles, greater female workforce partici-
pation, and greater competitive pressures. The new trend in fashion 
merchandising has become “fast fashion,” following a pattern of rap-
idly changing fads influenced by teenaged trendy fashion makers and 
spread through social media, only to die a quick death and be replaced 
by the next hot fad, and the next, and the next.
The major life-changing event of the postwar period was adoption 
of the personal computer by young and old alike. E-commerce now 
contributes more than 10 percent of annual retail sales and is growing 
at from 10 to 16 percent a year. This, along with social networking, 
has both simplified and added complexity to commerce and industry.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
244
Discussion Questions
1. What factors shaped the tremendous growth in the trade and ser-
vice sectors of the economy after the end of World War II?
2. Describe the four different paths American businesses followed in 
diversifying during the last half of the twentieth century.
3. Why did the conglomerate form of diversification fall into disre-
pute in the early 1970s?
4. Describe the postwar evolution of retailing in the United States.
5. How has the digital revolution changed the structure of retailing 
in the United States?

4
C h a p t e r  1 4
U.S. Commerce and Industry  
in the Global Economy
The history of the U.S. commerce and industry systems and those 
of the other three industrial economies described in these volumes has 
moved beyond the time when their organizational managers only had 
to worry about competition from other companies in their own coun-
tries. Today they must often vie with competitors scattered among the 
old industrialized countries and powerful new international competi-
tors like the BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Korea). 
Business in the twenty-first century has reached and passed the half-
way point in its first quarter. Already the commercial and industrial 
firms of the last half of the twentieth century have been transformed 
to the degree that their like 70 years ago would have difficulty rec-
ognizing them. Four sweeping changes have altered commerce and 
industry forever.
First, the old competitive nation-state industrialized business sys-
tem under which firms in Europe and the United States struggled 
against one another to attain economic leadership has been replaced 
by a global marketplace in which all sectors and societies of the world 
are interconnected. Businesses can no longer just focus their attention 
on their own national or regional markets; the systems of manufactur-
ing, marketing, and distributing of goods and services are now global 
and seldom permanent. The Internet has made doing business with 
a firm halfway around the globe as simple as if the firm was in the 
next county. On the other hand, some analysts believe that this new 
globalized economy may instead be evolving into one in which firms 
in a small number of closely aligned blocs of trading partners compete 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
246
against one another. Individual businesses are seldom called upon 
to deal with others doing business in their own large trading bloc. 
Rather, competition may be between blocs such as NAFTA, the EU, 
and the increasingly important ASEAN and Latin American groups. 
Drucker (2005) suggested that eventually there may be just six or 
seven of these blocs competing against one another for markets, with 
the huge nations of China and India constituting blocks of their own. 
In that world it will be difficult if not impossible for the business sys-
tem of one nation to go it alone.
Second, the old industrial economy under which the four countries 
studied in these volumes rose to their positions of global leadership 
has been replaced by an information or knowledge-based economy. 
Now, to gain and maintain leadership, innovation through the appli-
cation of science and technology are paramount and what you know 
and how fast you know it is more important than what you know or 
what you make or sell. Any company can now share equally in the 
e-business opportunities inherent in the new information economy.
Advances in information and communications technology (ICT) 
now make it possible for customer values, likes, or purchases to be 
instantaneously known and reacted to in businesses a world away. In 
this postindustrial world, the countries with strong positions in ICT, 
pharmaceuticals, and other knowledge industries will most likely be 
the leaders of tomorrow. E-government and e-business systems are 
among these new structures. At the same time, advances in biomedical 
technology are reshaping people’s lives, and in turn, exacerbating the 
need for new and different forms of governance. Huge sums are being 
invested around the world on research into new medicines and ways 
medicines are developed and administered. This research extends to 
the way the world develops and grows its food (Allen et al. 2002). 
For some economies, their future will depend on the investments they 
make today in these and related innovative technologies.
A third major force shaping the economy of the future of com-
merce and industry in the United States is rooted in the unprec-
edented changes now taking place in the demographic and social 
characteristics of the world’s populations. These changes include such 
key uncontrollable forces as the graying of the workforce, very low 
fertility rates causing zero or negative population growth, and the 
potential for massive waves of immigration from the poorer regions 
of the world to areas of greater opportunity. For example, the United 
States has clearly had difficulty dealing with the more than 12 mil-
lion undocumented migrants living in all regions of the country. 
Old political structures and gender traditions are being reshaped as 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
247
governments evolve to better manage the demands of their present 
and future citizens.
The fourth system-shaping force is the environmental impact of 
industry and the burning of fossil fuels . The effects of global warming 
are very real, even if they are often ignored or denied by some of the 
world’s business and political leaders. However, since 2000, more of 
the world’s attention has turned to concern about the effects of our 
use of hydrocarbons as a source of energy and the resulting damage it 
is having on the environment. Whether countries do or do not change 
the way they pursue economic growth depends on a rethinking of 
how the global business system should operate.
The Continuing Evolution of Management
Prior to the Industrial Revolution, managers and owners usually 
worked alongside their employees. Businesses were small and focused. 
Good craftsmen were more important than good managers. There 
was little or no specialization of tasks. Following the ideas of Adam 
Smith, work slowly became specialized. Supervision was needed to 
coordinate progress. Goods were made one at a time by a craftsman or 
artisan. Workers were apprentices to the master craftsman. The revo-
lution occurred when mechanization was applied to the production 
process.
In the second revolution, products were mass produced, often 
on an assembly line. Scientific management was applied to produce 
greater efficiency and improve productivity. The watchword was 
interchangeable parts and identical products. Managers who owned 
little stock or had a personal stake in the success of their firms were 
hired to support over-worked entrepreneurs for whom building the 
business had been their one great, overpowering dream. In consid-
ering themselves “professionals,” these new business leaders were 
guided by several ideas. First, achieving success in business meant that 
they would receive the same recognition and financial success as the 
founders. Second, their success would substantiate the effort and cost 
invested in formal education and training in business. Moreover, they 
would become members in an exclusive club; only they possessed the 
knowledge and technical expertise required to successfully run a big 
business.
As big business in the United States entered maturity, a separation 
between those who managed the very large firms that were evolving 
and those who owned the firms became nearly universal. The result 
was a revolution in business governance—a managerial revolution. 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
248
Stock markets in Europe and Asia are now followed as religiously as 
those in the United States. As Alfred Chandler (1977) has described, 
the first management revolution that occurred in the United States 
changed the way business was managed. The second revolution has 
required that managers look to global markets and embrace technol-
ogy in their daily operations.
Being recognized as a professional meant that government and 
society in general would not equate these individuals with the unscru-
pulous, money-grubbing, robber barons of an earlier generation. 
Instead, they could say they operated their firms in ways beneficial to 
all Americans; their business decisions and actions were carried out to 
serve society. To accomplish those goals, a profit was essential. There 
have always been others for whom managing a successful business 
simply meant making as much money out of the business as possible. 
However, there have also been men and women in America for whom 
business has meant producing or providing products of superior qual-
ity and making them available at affordable prices. This, they con-
cluded, was itself not a bad philosophy for anyone, and the art and 
science of business ethics was born. As managers developed codes of 
ethics, they have assured everyone they and their firms would follow 
the same standards. Finally, they began to increase their involvement 
in and support for community affairs and corporate philanthropy.
Contributing to the rise in professionalism among managers in U.S. 
business organizations has been the professional business schools that 
were formed in the nation’s most prestigious universities. American 
entrepreneur and industrialist Joseph Wharton established the world’s 
first collegiate school of business at the University of Pennsylvania in 
1881. The Association for the Advancement of Collegiate Schools of 
Business (AACSB), established in 1916, set minimum standards for 
granting business education program accreditation. The early leaders 
were soon followed by similar departments and schools in state and 
smaller colleges and universities.
As business management became more departmentalized, profes-
sional managers who were more interested in improving profitabil-
ity of their diverse businesses replaced the entrepreneurial “empire 
builders” of the late nineteenth century. This new generation of man-
agers usually had less personal stake in the companies they ran than 
the business founders had during the formative years. And, as the 
separation of ownership and management continued, business execu-
tives began claiming the mantle of professionalism. They maintained 
that their mission was not simply to make a profit but was rather to 
serve society. Far-sighted professional managers developed codes of 
ethics (albeit too often ignored) and began making large corporate 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
249
contributions to causes they believed in. They became involved in 
professional education for business. Some of today’s biggest and best 
universities and their schools of business administration bear their 
names: Duke, Carnegie-Mellon, and Stanford are examples.
The Ongoing Transformation of Business
The evolution of commerce and industry in America is still underway; 
it now involves the application of computers and the Internet. It is 
common for new products to be designed on a computer using three-
dimensional software. The outcome is saved digitally and sent directly 
to the appropriate production process. Mass production has given way 
to customized production.
Rather than one new world economy emerging, these global trends 
have forced business and political leaders to learn how to cope with 
one or more distinctly different world economic outcomes. The digi-
tal revolution has produced an economy based on information and 
the technology needed to create and store that information. Informa-
tion and knowledge disseminated through the Internet is exerting a 
major influence on businesses. Much of the world’s business is now 
conducted via the Internet; everyone with a personal computer and a 
smart phone now has access to everyone else in the world with Internet  
access. Not only does everyone now have access to information, they 
are also able to create knowledge just as quickly.
Another possible outcome is a world economy dictated by money. 
This ready flow of information and continual advances in communi-
cations technologies have brought about significant changes in the 
world’s system of money and credit. Today, money flows just as easily 
and as rapidly as information, typically using the same media. U.S. 
securities are sold overnight and banks transfer balances 24 hours a 
day to earn interest on large balances. Meanwhile banks and other 
financial institutions become “too big to fail.”
The downside of this outcome is the potential blow to the world’s 
monetary system that the continued weakness of the U.S. dollar brought 
about by the government’s deficit spending and negative balance of 
payments. The United States is rapidly becoming what a great many 
domestic and international critics have referred to as the “sinkhole of 
the world financial economy” as it grows increasingly dependent upon 
short-term foreign purchases of U.S. securities. The global economy 
would quickly collapse if foreign buyers of U.S. securities were to dump 
their holdings for some reason. Because many of these holders are Japa-
nese and European, a collapse of the U.S. economy would drag down 
much of the rest of the global economy with it. If this were to happen, 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
250
businesses would find themselves in the same fix their forbearers suf-
fered through during the Great Depression of the 1930s.
A third outcome is the globalized world of a few very large busi-
nesses dominant in every sector of the economy. Our earlier system of 
many independent businesses competing with one another has evolved 
into what is today a relatively small number of very large, diversified 
multinational enterprises that are located anywhere while conducting 
business everywhere. These few large businesses now control most 
world trade. The 63,000 largest businesses in the world account for 
more than 80 percent of the world’s production. Most of the world’s 
multinational enterprises (MNEs) are growing outside of the United 
States. Of the 500 largest multinationals, 185 are U.S. based; 126 
are spread across the European Union; and 108 are headquartered in 
Japan. The United Kingdom, Germany, Japan, and the United States 
are no longer the exclusive homes of the world’s manufactured goods; 
the newly industrialized nations of the world, particularly China and 
South Korea, are eagerly taking on that role.
The fourth outcome is what has been described as the potential for 
a return to a political distrust and aggressive diplomacy in the mold of 
the Cold War between the West and the Soviet Union. Such a world 
would be characterized by mercantilist philosophies and saber rattling. 
Mercantilism is based on the theory that national wealth and power 
are attained by increasing exports, limiting imports, and collecting as 
much gold and silver—eventually including paper money backed by 
precious metals or property was added—as possible. The mercantilist 
political philosophy emerged in France during the sixteenth century 
when France needed to find a source of income to fund her wars with 
Spain, then rich with the plunder of the New World. Most Western 
nations practiced one form or another of mercantilism until the last 
half of the twentieth century, when the great experiment in free trade 
captured the imaginations of the leaders of the industrialized econo-
mies. They believed that nations that traded with one another were 
unlikely to go to war with each other.
The core of mercantilism is protection of one’s home markets while 
exporting as much as possible. And, despite the half-century of trade 
negotiations held under the auspices of first the General Agreement 
on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and now the World Trade Organiza-
tion, mercantilist protectionism is still alive and well. Today’s mer-
cantilism has taken the form of several large blocs of nations with free 
trade between them and external trade barriers against the exports of 
countries outside of the bloc. The leading example of the new mer-
cantilism is, of course, the European Union, where 28 nations are 
rapidly becoming a single market, including a common currency and, 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
251
eventually, the free movement of people, goods, and money across 
all internal boundaries. The EU has made a number of moves to 
strengthen its cohesiveness, including a European parliament, a Euro-
pean central bank, a European cartel office, and the preliminary steps 
toward a common defense force.
Changes in Selected Industries
Corporate investments in research and development provide a good 
indication of the composition of the industries that continue to invest 
in their quest to dominate the global business system of tomorrow. An 
example of how analysts predict which industries are likely to do well 
in the future and which are likely to fail is the 2010 list published in 
Inc. magazine and repeated in Table 14.1. The industry leading the list 
of best performers was voice over Internet protocol providers (VoIPs), 
which was predicted to grow by 149.6 per cent by 2019. According to 
Table 14.1 Predicted best and worst industries in the United States, 2010–2019
Rank
Best Performing Growth rate
Rank
Worst performing
Growth rate
1
VoIP Providers
149.6%
1
Wired communications 
carriers
–52.0%
2
Retirement and 
pension plans
133.7%
2
Tank and armored 
vehicle manufacturers
–51.9%
3
Biotechnology
127.6%
3
Vacuum, fan and small 
household appliance 
makers
–34.4%
4
E-commerce and 
online auctions
124.7%
4
DVD, game and video 
rental
–32.8%
5
Environmental 
consulting
120.3%
5
Photofinishing
–31.5%
6
Video games
112.9%
6
Lighting and bulb 
makers
–26.8%
7
Trusts and 
estates
105.7%
7
Telecommunications 
resellers
–26.4%
8
Search engines
100.9%
8
Laminated plastics 
manufacturing
–25.3%
9
Recycling 
facilities
80.9%
9
Synthetic fiber 
manufacturing
–24.6%
10
Land 
development
72.7%
10
Wire and spring 
manufacturing
–24.5&
Source: Spiro 2010.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
252
the Federal Communications Commission, VoIP “is a technology that 
allows you to make voice calls using a broadband Internet connection 
instead of a regular (or analog) phone line. Some VoIP services may 
only allow you to call other people using the same service, but others 
may allow you to call anyone who has a telephone number—including 
local, long distance, mobile, and international numbers. Also, while 
some VoIP services only work over your computer or a special VoIP 
phone, other services allow you to use a traditional phone connected 
to a VoIP adapter” (FCC 2003). Satellite entertainment providers are 
typical of firms in this business. Not surprisingly, the industry leading 
the list of predicted worst performing industries was wired telecom-
munications carriers, expected to decline 52 percent by 2019. Tradi-
tional telephone companies are examples of this industry.
MIT’s innovation magazine Technology Review annually publishes 
a global scorecard of corporate investments in research and develop-
ment. The index considers total R&D spending, spending increases, 
and R&D as a proportion of sales (Brody 2005). The survey ranks 
150 industries in 14 major industrial sectors according to their 
research and innovation rankings. For example, R&D investments 
in the biotech industry increased by an average of 69 percent, while 
telecommunications and computer hardware companies as a group 
spent less than they did in the past. Computer software companies, 
led by Microsoft with a 67 percent increase, increased their R&D 
investments by 20 percent. The energy and the chemical sectors had 
the lowest ranking. Table 14.2 shows the number of British, German, 
Japanese, and U.S. R&D investment leaders in each of the 14 indus-
try sectors. Important firms in the industry are also based in other 
countries that include France, Switzerland, the Netherlands, Korea, 
Belgium, Italy, Canada, and Sweden. One, the conglomerate Tyco 
International, has its headquarters in Bermuda.
The Technology Review R&D scorecard not only indicates which 
industries investors believe will dominate their future business sec-
tors, it also gives an indication of which national business systems are 
likely to hold leadership positions in those industries in the future. For 
example, the huge sums being invested in research by pharmaceuti-
cal companies clearly indicate that this sector will remain a leading 
industry far into the twenty-first century. Of the top 15 firms on the 
150-firm innovation leaders list, eight are in the pharmaceuticals and 
medical devices sector. Of the 10, five are U.S. firms, two are located 
in the United Kingdom, two are Swiss, and one, the sector leader, is 
French. Table 14.3 shows the top 10 innovation leaders in the phar-
maceutical and medical sectors.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
253
Table 14.2 Numbers of the top 150 R&D firms by sectors in four counties, 2004
Sector
Number in
category
United 
Kingdom
Germany
Japan
United 
States
Aerospace/defense
8
2
–
–
4
Biotechnology
4
–
–
–
3
Chemicals
10
–
2
2
3
Computer hardware
8
–
–
4
4
Computer software
6
–
1
–
5
Consumer products
5
–
–
–
2
Electronics/electrical
19
–
–
11
3
Energy
3
–
–
–
1
Heavy machinery
5
–
–
–
3
Industrial conglomerates
5
–
1
–
2
Pharmaceuticals/medical devices
27
2
3
5
12
Semiconductors
12
–
1
1
8
Telecommunications
13
1
1
2
4
Transportation (automotive)
25
–
5
9
4
Totals
150
5
14
34
62
Source: Technology Review, September 2005.
Table 14.3 Top 10 innovation leaders in the pharmaceutical/medical devices sector 
in 2004
Company
Rank
R&D Spending
(millions)
Research Focus:
Sanofi-Aventis (France)
1
$9,483
Cardiovascular, central nervous 
system, oncology, internal 
medicine
Merk (US)
5
3,885
13 therapeutic areas including 
arthritis, asthma, cancer, 
cardiovascular
Pfizer (US)
6
6,613
18 therapeutic areas including 
oncology, cardiovascular
Johnson & Johnson (US)
7
5,203
9 therapeutic areas including 
central nervous system, 
gastrointestinal
Glaxosmithkline (UK)
10
5,275
Cardiovascular, infectious 
diseases, gastrointestinal, 
oncology
(Continued )

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
254
Company
Rank
R&D Spending
(millions)
Research Focus:
Novartis (Switzerland)
12
4,207
10 therapeutic areas including 
metabolic disorders, 
ophthalmics
Astrazeneca (UK)
13
3,803
Cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, 
infection, neuroscience, 
oncology
Roche (Switzerland)
14
4,210
12 therapeutic areas anemia, 
virology, infectious disease
Eli Lilly (US)
20
2,691
Diabetes, genitourinary disorders, 
central nervous system
Wyeth (US)
26
2,461
Women’s health, cardiovascular, 
musculoskeletal, 
gastrointestinal
Source: Technology Review 2005.
Table 14.3 (Continued )
Box 14.1 Forces behind declining employment in U.S. manufacturing
In 2011, Secretary of Commerce Gary Locke testified in a hear-
ing before the U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, 
and Transportation. He discussed changes in the U.S. economy 
that have contributed to the decline in the number of jobs in the 
American manufacturing sector:
“First, we have seen a dramatic improvement in productiv-
ity in the manufacturing sector, a resulting rapid technological 
change in how we make products. This was most recently evi-
denced by the introduction of computerized ‘smart’ produc-
tion processes. Second, the growth in worldwide manufacturing 
capacity and trade has presented challenges in a world of every 
increasing competition . . . overlaid on these two fundamental 
shifts is the rapid evolution of consumer demand for what is 
produced—products have ever shorter life cycles and consum-
ers expect new, improved versions to roll out with increasing 
regularity. . . .
“In 1979, there were 19.4 million manufacturing jobs in the 
United States. In 2010 there were only 11.5 million workers 
employed in the manufacturing sector. Moreover, the skill mix 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
255
of manufacturing workers has also shifted. The need for highly 
skilled workers in the manufacturing sector is growing as a result 
of changes in technology . . . Factories that once needed 1,000 
people to build a product can now do it with 100.
“The future of manufacturing will be fundamentally reliant 
on the ability of U.S. businesses to access and thrive in overseas 
markets. . . . If we are serious about fighting for American jobs 
and American businesses, one of the most important things we 
can do is open up more markets to American goods around the 
world.”
Source: Locke 2011.
Changes in Manufacturing
Manufacturing has long been a major contributor to the economy 
of the United States. Although global competition has resulted in its 
share of economic growth being diminished, it is still important to the 
economy. Research has shown that one job in primary manufacturing 
creates 4.2 jobs in the services sector (Baker and Lee 1993; Hersh and 
Weller 2003; Green and Sanchez 2007; McCormack 2009). However, 
since the 1970s, the number of workers employed in manufacturing 
has declined dramatically. According to U.S. Secretary of Commerce 
Gary Locke (2011), in 1979, the peak year of manufacturing employ-
ment, there were close to 21 million workers in manufacturing jobs in 
the United States; by 2011, that number had dropped to 11.5 million. 
Manufacturing employment increased somewhat after the 2008–2009 
recession so that by the first quarter of 2014, it had reached 12.1 mil-
lion (BLS 2014). Elements of Secretary Locke’s testimony before a 
2011 U.S. Senate committee hearing are included in Box 14.1 and 
touch on some of the reasons for this decline. An optimistic view of the 
future of manufacturing in the United States is included in Box 14.2.
Box 14.2 The future of manufacturing in the United States
The future of manufacturing is not in China. Rather, it is, 
instead, America, according to Foreign Policy writer Vivek 
Wadhwa. “The real threat to China comes from technology. 
Technical advances will soon lead to the same hollowing out of 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
256
China’s manufacturing industry that they have to U.S. indus-
try over the past two decades,” Wadhwa explained in 2012. A 
number of firms are already bringing manufacturing back to the 
United States, finding rising costs and managerial difficulties 
make China a less competitive production source.
Among the technological developments driving the shift in 
competitiveness are robotics, artificial intelligence (AI), addi-
tive manufacturing, mass customization, nanotechnology, 
and molecular manufacturing. Advanced manufacturing using 
robotics is already making it cheaper than using human labor 
in many industries. Artificial intelligence and mass customiza-
tion technologies are replacing mass production with custom-
ized production using designs downloaded from the Internet; 
3-D printers are already providing three-dimensional models for 
such products as medical implants, clothing, and components 
for other products. Nanotechnology is producing new types of 
materials that are stronger, lighter, cheaper, and more energy 
efficient than traditional material. One example is new carbon 
fibers with application in the manufacture of aircraft.
Wadhwa included this prediction: “It’s a near certainty that 
robotics, AI, and 3-D printing technology will advance rapidly 
and converge. American companies are already finding the ris-
ing cost of labor, shipping costs, and time lags, and intellec-
tual-property protection to be major issues in doing business 
in China.” The return of manufacturing to the United States is 
already occurring, and it is likely to continue with the country 
maintaining its lead in technology.
Source: V. Wadhwa 2012.
An undesirable artifact of globalization has been deindustrializa-
tion in most of the former industrial leaders. The United States has 
been in a long, slow period of deindustrialization since the 1960s, 
when it first gained recognition as the world’s strongest industrial 
economy. This has been a trend affecting most of the major industri-
alized nations. The chart in Figure 14.1 traces the sharp decline from 
when more than 25 percent of all nonfarm workers were employed in 
manufacturing jobs to 10.2 percent in 2002 and 8.2 percent in 2012. 
The U.S. Department of Labor predicts a further decline to just 7.1 
percent in 2022 (Table 14.4).

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
257
Figure 14.1 U.S. employment by sector, 1970–2010.
Table 14.4 Employment in selected industry sectors, 2002–2014 (in thousands)
Sector and industry
2002
2012
20141
2022 
forecast
Goods producing
Manufacturing
15,258.7
11,916.9
12,158.0
11,369.4
Construction
6,715.7
5,640.9
6,068.0
7,263.0
Mining
512.3
800.5
918.0
921.2
Selected services
Wholesale trade
5,652.4
5,672.8
5,884.6
6,143.2
Retail trade
15,025.1
14,875.3
15,366.4
15,966.2
Transportation and 
warehousing
4,223.8
4,414.7
4,633.4
4,742.0
Information
3,394.6
2,677.6
2,667.0
2,612.4
Financial activities
7,847.1
7,786.3
7,963.0
21,413.0
Professional and business services
15,976.2
17,930.2
19,302.0
4,022.2
Health care and social assistance
13,555.6
16,971.8
18,147.7
21,965.2
Leisure and hospitality
11,986.0
13,745.8
14,651.0
15,035.0
Federal, state and local 
government2
21,512.7
21,917.2
21,305.7
22,438.7
Notes:
1Seasonally adjusted as of August 2014
2Excluding post office and military
Source: US Bureau of Labor Statistics 2013, 2014.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
258
Economists and other researchers have identified a number of 
what they believe to be principal causal factors for this deindustri-
alization of the industrialized nations. Green and Sanchez (2007) 
looked at globalization, technological change, and the decline in 
unionization. A point related to the effect of globalization often 
does more than result in the movement of low-skilled, low-wage 
jobs overseas; it also changes the character of the jobs that remain. 
These are often high-wage, high-skilled jobs that are less likely to 
be shifted overseas or to foreign competition. The decline in manu-
facturing unionization has made it easier for firms to shift jobs to 
areas where workers have fewer benefits and less job security. Over-
all, however, the result is the same: fewer manufacturing jobs in the 
United States.
Kollmeyer (2009) examined three factors contributing to deindus-
trialization in the major industrialized nations: (1) rising affluence of 
consumers that has resulted in increasing demand for services and less 
for manufacturing items, particularly durable goods; (2) the advent 
of greater growth in manufacturing sector productivity relative to 
other sectors of the economy; and (3) globalization of commerce and 
industry, which in turn has resulted in greater trade between industri-
alized and industrializing countries. Kollmeyer assessed the causality 
of the three factors for the 18 nations of the Organization for Eco-
nomic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and for seven indi-
vidual nations, and found that for the four countries examined here, 
the factor with the greatest effect on deindustrialization is the increase 
in affluence among consumers in the United Kingdom, 32.5 percent; 
Germany, 26.0 percent; Japan, 38.9 percent, and the United States, 
40.2 percent.
After a relatively brief period when pent-up demand is satisfied, 
affluent consumers tend to shift their spending patterns from acquir-
ing manufactured goods such as refrigerators and washing machines 
toward purchases of services such as medical care and entertain-
ment. As sales drop, manufacturers seek ways to reduce their costs; 
outsourcing supply to low-cost foreign suppliers or to foreign direct 
investment of their own factories in overseas. Declining investment in 
domestic factories is followed by declines in domestic manufacturing 
employment (Table 14.5). U.S. commerce and industry must con-
tinue to adjust if it is going to meet the twenty-first century competi-
tive challenge of larger and faster-growing economies. Following the 
changes that have taken place in the auto industry since the 1970s 
provides a broad view of the challenges U.S. manufacturers have had 
to surmount over in the last 50 years.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
259
Table 14.5 Top 10 world vehicle producers in 1994 (in thousands)
Company
Country
Passenger 
cars
Light trucks 
and commercial 
vehicles
Total
General Motors
U.S.
2,604
1,845
4,450
Ford
U.S.
1,661
2,073
3,734
Toyota
Japan
2,769
739
3,508
Peugeot-Citroën
France
1,770
121
1,892
Chrysler
U.S.
551
1,142
1,693
Renault
France
1,365
261
1,656
Nissan
Japan
1,341
268
1,609
Volkswagen/Audi
Germany
1,516
85
1,601
Fiat
Italy
1,231
127
1,358
Mitsubishi
Japan
891
414
1,306
Source: Fine, Lafrance and Hillebrand 1996.
The Automobile Industry
In the United States and much of the industrialized West the auto-
mobile industry is the leading industry in the manufacturing sector; it 
has been so in America since World War II. However, the 1980s were 
troublesome years for this sector of the economy. Difficulties would 
have a major impact on the industry again 30 years later when two of 
the nation’s top three auto makers came close to bankruptcy. It was a 
high point in what has been a major shift in the industry that began a 
decade earlier (Fieleke 1982).
The more than doubling of the price of gasoline and shortages 
during the 1970s changed people’s preferences for the large “gas 
guzzlers” being produced by the Big Three: General Motors, Ford, 
and Chrysler. Foreign automakers, already producing small, relatively 
inexpensive, and fuel-efficient vehicles for their home markets, were 
quick to answer the demand for their products in the United States. 
The biggest winners of the demand for high-quality, fuel-efficient 
cars were the Japanese automakers, particularly Toyota, Datsun (later 
Nissan), and Honda, followed by German and French firms. Two-
way trade in automobiles and auto parts grew rapidly. Exports of U.S. 
cars and parts in 1980 totaled $16 billion, whereas imports of mostly 
fully assembled vehicles amounted to $27 billion. In 1965, nearly 
50 percent of the 24 million vehicles produced globally were made 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
260
in America. By 1979, the U.S. share had declined to 28 percent; the 
next year Japan became the world’s leading exporter of automobiles.
The growing demand for cars and light trucks manufactured in 
Japan and Europe continued throughout the rest of the 1980s. Dur-
ing this time, nearly all of the imports were complete vehicles that had 
been assembled in the producers’ home market factories. In a major 
change in the industrial policy of Japan, Honda, the world’s largest 
motorcycle maker, announced plans in 1980 to begin manufacturing 
automobiles in the United States. The plant, opened in 1982, would 
be located in Nashville, Tennessee, far from the Detroit capital of the 
U.S. automotive industry. At the time, the German company Volkswa-
gen had also been experimenting with assembling cars at its plant in 
Pennsylvania. Relative competitive positions are shown in Table 14.6.
The U.S. Automotive Industry in the 1990s
By the 1990s, the intrusion of global automobile manufacturers into 
the U.S. market had progressed far from its first forays, when one of 
the first boatloads of one Japanese firm exported to the United States 
failed to pass safety requirements and, rather than ship them back 
to Japan, were all destroyed. By 1994, the Japanese auto industry 
was well established in the United States and other national markets; 
Table 14.6 The world’s top 10 economies, 2009–2019 (GDP in US$ trillions)
Country
2009
2010
2013
2014
2015
(projected)
2018
(projected)
2019
(projected)
US
14.4
15.0
16.8
17.5
18.9
21.2
22.1
China
5.0
5.5
9.2
10.0
10.4
14.2
14.8
Japan
5.0
5.9
4.9
4.8
5.0
5.5
5.7
Germany
3.3
3.3
3.6
3.9
4.1
4.7
4.9
France
2.6
2.6
2.7
2.9
3.0
3.5
3.6
UK
2.2
2.3
2.5
2.8
3.0
3.5
3.8
Brazil
1.6
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.8
2.9
Italy
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.5
3.6
Russia
–
–
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.4
2.5
India
–
1.7
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.8
3.1
Spain
1.5
–
–
–
–
–
–
Canada
1.4
1.6
–
–
–
–
–
Source: IMF 2015.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
261
three Japanese firms had become members of the top 10 car makers in 
the world (Table 14.6). Toyota was third, surpassed only by General 
Motors and Ford.
By this time, through adopting Japanese methods, American car 
makers had progressed far enough along the quality and reliability 
path to be considered close to what the Japanese had been achiev-
ing for years. The U.S. economy during the 1990s had been display-
ing high growth and low unemployment, largely as a result of the 
growth of new businesses in the “dot.com” industry. The demand 
for small, fuel-efficient cars was fading, to be replaced by a return to 
demand for larger, more powerful passenger cars and sports utility 
vehicles (SUVs)—vehicles that were far more profitable for car makers 
than the smaller cars of the 1980s. The Big Three recaptured some of 
their lead in the design, manufacture, and marketing of the minivans, 
SUVs, and large family cars consumers desired. Moreover, as more 
women were returning to work the growth of two-car families spurred 
car sales. By 1994, the Big Three had improved their lead in the U.S. 
market for passenger cars from 61 percent in 1991 to 64 percent in 
1994, and GM continued to be the largest auto maker in the world.
Bailing Out the U.S. Car Industry
All was not to remain completely rosy for the industry for long, how-
ever. The Big Three now experience increased competition from for-
eign producers whose new luxury brands nearly drove Cadillac and 
Lincoln out of the market entirely. Meanwhile, the average price for a 
new car had increased from $8,850 in 1981 to $19,820 in 1991 and 
$21,050 in 1999, threatening to take a big bite out of new car sales.
Disaster for the U.S. car industry followed the great recession of 
2008–2009. When President Barak Obama took office in January 
2009, the U.S. industry was close to complete collapse. The home 
mortgage debacle and housing bubble collapse hit auto sales hard: 
a 40 percent drop in auto sales followed the housing decline and 
the large number of unemployed. Both General Motors and Chrys-
ler needed large infusions of cash to avoid bankruptcy. Beginning in 
December 2008, the U.S. government had to bail both companies out 
with billions of taxpayers’ dollars; GM received a loan of $13.4 billion 
in 2008 and another $51 billion in 2009; Chrysler received a loan of 
$4 billion in 2998 and another $8.5 million in 2009. Only Ford was 
strong enough to survive the recession without loans from the gov-
ernment. Under the new Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP), the 
government purchased both companies’ common stock; the govern-
ment’s purchase of 500 million GM shares, giving it 31.9 percent of 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
262
all outstanding stock in the company. The recovery that followed the 
deep recession enabled Chrysler to pay of its loans by 2011, six years 
before they were due. GM paid off its loans in 2013. The government 
has sold most of its holdings in GM.
The U.S. Auto Industry after 2010
With the help of the government, the Big Three survived the great 
recession and were in a position to meet a return in market demand 
that occurred during the recession. Competition remained high, how-
ever: the country was now home to 13 auto makers. From 2008 to 
2012 their combined production averaged more than eight million 
passenger vehicles per year (U.S. Department of Commerce 2012). 
In 2014, every major European, Japanese, and Korean auto maker 
produced vehicles at one or more U.S. assembly plants, and many 
exported U.S.-made cars back to their home country. Approximately 
2.6 million vehicles made in the United States, valued at close to $63 
billon, were exported in 2012; another $75 billion in auto parts were 
exported the same year. Continuing the trend in 2013, for the first 
time since opening its Ohio plant, Honda exported more U.S-made 
cars than it imported from Japan; 108,705 Honda and Acura vehicles 
were exported, while 88,537 vehicles were imported from Japan.
Box 14.3 The U.S. automobile industry in 2012
The U.S. Department of Commerce issued the following report 
in 2012:
“The United States . . . is home to 13 auto manufacturers. 
From 2008 to 2012, [they] produced an average of [more than] 
8 million passenger vehicles annually in the United States.
“Since Honda opened its first U.S. plant in 1982, almost 
every major European, Japanese, and Korean automaker has 
produced vehicles at one or more U.S. assembly plants. In addi-
tion to Honda and the big three U.S. auto companies—General 
Motors, Ford, and Chrysler—Toyota, Nissan, Hyundai-Kia, 
BMW, Mercedes-Benz, Mazda, Mitsubishi, and Subaru all have 
U.S. manufacturing facilities. In May 2011, Volkswagen opened 
a new U.S. plant, bringing the manufacturer count to 13. In 
addition, many manufacturers also have engine and transmission 
plants and are conducting research and development, design, 
and testing in the United States. The automotive industry, 

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
263
including dealerships accounts for approximately 3.5 percent of 
U.S. [GDP]. Motor vehicles and parts manufacturers directly 
employed 786,000 people [in] 2012.
“There is an extensive network of auto parts suppliers serv-
ing the industry. Suppliers produced $225.2 billion in industry 
shipments in 2012, accounting for nearly 4 percent of total U.S. 
manufacturing. According to a study by the Motor & Equip-
ment Manufacturers Association in collaboration with Informa-
tion Handling Services, the total employment impact of the auto 
parts industry was estimated at over 3.62 million jobs directly 
and indirectly nationwide in 2012 - more jobs and economic 
wellbeing than any other manufacturing sector.
“In 2012, the United States exported approximately 2.6 mil-
lion vehicles valued at $63 billion to more than 200 countries 
around the world, with additional exports of automotive parts 
valued at approximately $75 billion.”
Source: U.S. Department of Commerce 2012.
In addition to final assembly plants, many auto makers have engine 
and transmission plants in the United States. They manufacture parts 
and components ranging from tires to spark plugs and many of the 
30,000 individual parts in a modern automobile (Marsh 2012). Many 
also operate research, design, and testing facilities in the United States.
In addition to the network of auto manufacturers and dealers, the 
industry includes a large number of auto parts suppliers and local and 
regional auto repair shops. Suppliers had sales of $225.2 billion in 
2012, which was nearly 4 percent of all manufacturing in the United 
States. According to the suppliers association, an estimated 3.62 mil-
lion jobs were generated directly and indirectly by suppliers—more 
than any other manufacturing sector. Before the recession, more than 
a million men and women were employed by the motor vehicle indus-
try. In 2012, the industry, including dealers, employed 786,000 peo-
ple; in May of 2013, industry employment had increased to 796,600.
Predicting the Future of U.S. 
Commerce and Industry
As these two volumes of the history of the four pioneer industrialized 
nations have shown, commerce and industry have undergone many 

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
264
changes over centuries of evolution. The closer one gets to the Modern 
Age, the more one sees an acceleration in the rate of that change. There 
is no reason not to expect that rate of change to diminish. This discus-
sion on business history ends with a brief look at what experts in their 
fields see happening to commerce and industry in the immediate future.
The Future of Retailing
The large U.S. computer maker and computing services provider 
IBM, together with the New York University Stern School of Busi-
ness, have conducted a series of studies on the past, present, and future 
of the U.S. retailing industry. In their 2012 white paper on retailing 
they describe the four external factors that are contributing to changes 
now underway in this business sector: economic conditions, demo-
graphic changes, consumer behavior, and technology innovations. 
Possibly the event with the greatest impact on the industry was the 
1962 repeal of fair trade laws, thereby making it possible for discount 
retailers to thrive. Four pioneers of the discount industry opened 
stores that year: Walmart, Kmart, Target, and Woolco. By 1976, there 
were more than 100 discount chains operating in the country; by 
1992, only 24 remained in business. The 1960s were also the begin-
ning of the box store and category killer operations described earlier.
The baby boom demographic expansion and movement from both 
rural and central urban areas to suburban communities brought on 
the next big changes; businesses followed the migration and soon 
deserted central cities to open stores in large suburban shopping 
malls. Advances in computer technology were the next factor driving 
change. The advent of e-commerce has made shopping from home 
more convenient, faster, and in many ways, easier. The share of retail 
sales conducted as e-business continues to grow.
The deep recession of 2008–2009 and the aging population have had 
a great impact on retailing. First, the recession has made everyone real-
ize that the country is “over retailed.” There are too many malls for the 
buying public and many of them have closed or been converted to other 
uses. The rate of increases in numbers of stand-alone, big box retailer 
chain stores has also declined, with stores in marginal locations being 
abandoned. Looking at the near future for retailing, the IBM-Stern 
report listed six factors that are continuing to shape U.S. commerce:
t The roughly 80 million consumers in their late thirties in 2012, 
the so-called millennials, will have a disproportionate influence on 
product preferences.

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
265
t The price mid-range group of shoppers—the middle market—is 
giving way to shoppers trading up and another group trading down.
t Foreign, emerging market opportunities will provide excellent op-
portunities for U.S. retailers.
t The over-building of retail space will require consolidation and 
closer attention to expansion probabilities.
t Great opportunities for shopping on mobile devices will influence 
personal technology to greater advantage.
t These four Internet institutions will reshape the retail marketplace: 
Amazon, Google, Facebook, and Apple
The Future of Industry
Each year, CNN Money publishes a list of the world’s top 10 econo-
mies by GDP in trillions of U.S. dollars and in their growth rates 
(Table 14.7). The top economy has long been the United States. 
Moreover, its lead over its closest rival, China, may be growing; in 
2013, the $16.8 trillion U.S. economy was $7.6 trillion dollars larger 
than second place China. In 2019 the U.S. GDP is projected to be 
$8.3 trillion larger than China’s. In 2010, Japan, for decades the 
second largest economy, slipped to third position after China. The 
German economy places it consistently in fourth place. In 2013 and 
2014, the economy of France was larger than its continental Euro-
pean rival the United Kingdom. However, by 2019 the UK economy 
Table 14.7 Contributions to deindustrialization by three causality factors, 1970–
2003 (%)
Percent change Attributable
Country and 
OECD total
Percent drop in 
manufacturing 
employment
National
affluence
Unbalance
productivity
growth
Trade growth
(globalization)
United States
–12.1
40.2
12.9
30.5
Germany
–17.5
26.0
 9.7
19.4
Japan
–8.6
38.9
 7.3
14.7
United Kingdom
–19.3
32.5
16.0
28.8
OECD-18 
average
–12.4
34.3
15.1
24.4
Source: Kollmeyer 2003, 1667.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
266
is projected to outpace that of France by close to US$ 1 trillion. Four 
of the five BRICS countries are also among the 10 nations with the 
largest economies this same period.
Despite the continuing strength of its economy, there is no ques-
tion in anyone’s mind that the United States, along with the rest of 
the industrialized world, is in the midst of a new industrial revolu-
tion. The force behind this transformation is the Internet and the 
technology that makes the Internet possible. In describing this revo-
lution, Peter Marsh talks about interconnected manufacturing and 
the global convergence of skills and abilities in the manufacturing-
capable countries. This makes it possible for U.S. companies in the 
computer business to concentrate on research, design, and market-
ing of products that are assembled in technologically and quality 
savvy low-wage countries from parts and components made in a 
variety of other low-wage countries. It also makes it possible for 
the U.S., Japanese, German, and French automobile industries to 
assemble automobiles almost anywhere in the world from parts such 
as motors, transmissions, and computer controls in a few countries 
with special technical capabilities. Also, discovering and producing 
many new products in the industries of tomorrow requires connect-
ing the innovative skills of people in such different technologies as 
biotechnology, electrical and electronic engineering, physics, soft-
ware, engineering, nanotechnology, and others. The changes under-
way in the global manufacturing business require a transformation 
in the thinking of managers accustomed to mass production. The 
process is evolutionary and fast paced. As Marsh explained, “as com-
panies evolve they realize their products and processes will work 
better if they treat technology as a ‘systemic’ resource—built up 
from knowledge in dozens of areas—rather than as a collection of 
individual ideas. . . . In the new industrial revolution, the prizes for 
developing new ideas, collaborating with partners and applying the 
results in new products will be greater than ever before” (Marsh 
2012, 41).
Which industries will benefit from this new technology-driven 
industrial revolution? Robotic technology, 3-D printers, and numeri-
cally controlled machine tools are helping to make this the age of 
mass-specialization, the extreme example of this is what Wired maga-
zine editor Chris Anderson (2012) called hyperspecialization. It is not 
the end of mass production; rather, there is room for both approaches. 
There is a market for more expensive, custom designed and manufac-
tured products, just as there is a market for standardized, low cost 
products. He explained that

U. S.  C o m m e r c e  a n d  I n du s t r y
267
General Motors and General Electric aren’t disappearing . . . the 
new era will not mark the end of the blockbuster, but the end of the 
monopoly of the blockbuster. More innovation, in more places, from 
more people, focused on more narrow niches. Collectively, all these 
new producers will reinvent the industrial economy, often with just a 
few thousand units at a time—but exactly the right products for an 
increasingly discriminating consumer. For every [off shore producer] 
with a half-million employees making mass-market goods, there will be 
thousands of new companies with just a few targeted niches. Together 
they will reshape the world of making. (Anderson 2012, 229; emphasis 
in the original)
Conclusion
In 1982, Loyola University philosophy professor Thomas Donaldson 
answered a question he had asked earlier in a Journal of Business Ethics 
paper: What is business in America? His answer is included here as a 
suggested capstone to this book and could easily be addressed to the 
business leaders of the countries included in this brief two-volume 
history:
And so we are brought to the crux of our discussion. Having asked the 
question, “What is business in America?” we have sketched a rudimen-
tary answer. American business is an evolutionary system influenced by 
a series of historical forces, and owes its success to such varied factors as 
inventiveness, good government, and good luck. It possesses enormous 
power—over employees, political processes, and other countries—but 
it is a power which, to date, is backed by no fully coherent philosophy. 
American business lacks a guiding conception of its own direction, and 
this is its pressing need. If the question, “What is business in America” 
has an answer, it is one which points directly to a second question, 
namely, “Where should business in America be going?” (Donaldson 
1982, 266)
American commerce and industry are in the midst of tremendous 
change in the first half of the twenty-first century. At the same time, 
the strength of its economy, low inflation, positive population growth, 
and entrepreneurial spirit will enable it to survive these challenges. For 
commerce, a large and growing market, a highly educated and mobile 
population, combined with the willingness of industry leaders to try 
new retailing strategies, promise a stable future, but one in which 
changes will occur at a rapid pace. No retailer, regardless of its size or 
popularity, can afford to remain complacent. The long list of familiar 
stores that no longer operate can be expected to grow.

A Comparative History of Commerce and Industry
268
U.S. manufacturing is a bright spot in the economy. Although the 
number of manufacturing jobs has declined close to one-third since 
the 2008 recession, unemployment continues to decline. As wages 
in foreign countries increase and the price of transportation grows, 
many manufacturers can be expected to bring some, if not all, of their 
manufacturing activity by to the United States. The many Japanese 
and German auto makers and their home country suppliers who find 
it desirable to make vehicles in the U.S. constitute just one example of 
offshore suppliers locating manufacturing plants in the United States. 
The influence the computer and Internet e-commerce have on manu-
facturing will continue to stimulate growth in these sectors.
Discussion Questions
1. Explain why the economic systems of the last half of the twentieth 
century are being transformed by sweeping changes affecting the 
world economy.
2. What socioeconomic trends have been suggested as causes of 
deindustrialization?
3. Name and discuss the four potential economic outcomes described 
in this chapter.
4. What happens to consumer spending patterns when citizens 
become more affluent?
5. How will commerce and industry in America meet the challenges 
of the twenty-first century?

About the Author
David E. McNabb, Pacific Lutheran University School of Busi-
ness professor emeritus, is the author of seven books and coauthor 
of two others, including two comprehensive research methods texts. 
The first edition of his Research Methods in Public Administration 
and Nonprofit Organizations was awarded the 2004 John Grenze-
bach Research Award for Research in Philanthropy. He continues to 
teach at colleges and universities in the United States and interna-
tionally. He is an adjunct professor at Olympic College. He has been 
an adjunct professor in Public Administration at The Evergreen State 
College, the University of Maryland–University College, the Univer-
sity of Washington–Tacoma, Olympic College, the Stockholm School 
of Economics in Riga, Latvia, a visiting professor at the American 
University in Bulgaria, and a Fulbright Senior Specialist in Latvia. He 
earned a bachelor of arts degree from California State University–
Fullerton, a master’s in communications from the University of Wash-
ington, and a PhD in administration and marketing from Oregon 
State University.

References
Abe, Shinzo. 2014. Japan’s economic revival. OECD Yearbook 2014.
Abegglen, J. C., and G. Stalk Jr. 1985. Kaisha: The Japanese Corporation. 
New York: Basic Books.
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. A. Robinson. 2001. The colonial origins of 
comparative development: an empirical investigation. The American Eco-
nomic Review, 91 (5): 1369–1401.
Aldcroft, D. H. 1982. Britain’s economic decline, 1870–1980. In G. W. 
Roderick and M. D. Stephens, eds. The British Malaise: Industrial Perfor-
mance, Education and Training in Britain Today. Barcombe, UK: Falmer 
Press.
Alexander, A. J. 2000. Japan’s economy in the 20th century. Japan Economic 
Institute, 3 (January). Retrieved July 30, 2014, from http://www.jei.org 
/Restricted/JEIR00/0003f.html.
———. 2002. In the Shadow of the Miracle. Lanham, UK: Lexington Books.
Allen, C. S. 1987. Germany: competitive communitarianism. In G. C. Lodge 
and E. F. Vogel, eds., Ideology and Natural Competitiveness, pp. 79–102. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Allen, K. E., J. Bordas, G. R. Hickman, L. R. Matusak, G. J. Sorenson, and 
K. J. Whitmire. 2002. Leadership in the twenty-first century. In Rethink-
ing Leadership Working Papers. College Park, MD: University of Maryland 
Academy of Leadership. Retrieved September 1, 2014, from http://www 
.academy.und.edu/publications/klspdocs/21stcen.html.
Anderson, C. 2012. Makers: The New Industrial Revolution. New York: 
Crown Business.
Anderson, J. J. 1992. The Territorial Imperative: Pluralism, Corporatism, and 
Economic Crisis. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Andrews, C. M. 1914. Colonial commerce. The American Historical Review, 
20 (1): 43–63.
Aoki, H. 2009. The decrease in diversification and corporate governance: 
evidence from Japanese firms. Corporate Ownership & Control, 6 (4): 
28–39.
Ardagh, J. 1987. Germany and the Germans: An Anatomy of Society Today. 
New York: Harper & Row.
Asami, U. 2006. The changes of accounting standards and structural reform 
in Japanese companies. Public Policy Review, 2 (1): 233–282.
Ashley, M. 1961. Great Britain to 1688. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
272
Asian Corporate Governance Association (ACGA). 2011. Codes and Rules: 
Japan. www.acga-asia.org/content.cfm?SITE_CONTENT_TYPE_ID= 
12&COUNTRY_ID=267#TOP.
Baehler, J., J. A. Hall, and M. Mann. 1988. Europe and the Rise of Capitalism. 
Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Baker, D., and T. Lee. 1993. Employment multipliers in the U.S. economy. 
Working paper 107. Washington, DC: Economic Policy Institute.
Baldwin, S. 1937. Business in the Middle Ages. New York: Henry Holt.
Banerji, K., and R. B. Sambharya. 1996. Vertical keiretsu and international 
market entry: the case of the Japanese automobile ancillary industry. Jour-
nal of International Business Studies, 27 (1): 89–113.
Barkin, K. D. 1970. The Controversy over German Industrialization, 1890–
1902. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Barnes, I. R. 1938. Munn v. Illinois: a landmark case. Cases on Public Utility 
Regulation. 3–7. New York: Crofts.
Baron, H. 1957. Fifteenth-century civilization and the Renaissance. In The 
New Cambridge Modern History, vol. VI, G. R. Potter, ed., pp. 50–75. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bastasin, C. 2013. Germany: A Global Miracle and a European Challenge. 
Brookings Global Economy and Development Working paper 62. Washing-
ton, DC: Brookings Institution. Retrieved August 1, 2015, from http://
www.brookings.edu/research/papers/2013/05/09-germany-economy 
-european-challenge-bastasin
Basu, S. 2003. Why do banks fail? International Review of Applied Economics, 
17 (3): 231–248.
Beasley, W. G. 1981. The Modern History of Japan. 3rd ed. London: 
Weudenfeld and Nicolson.
———. 1989. The foreign threat and the opening of the ports. In The Cam-
bridge History of Japan, vol. V: The Nineteenth Century, M. B. Jensen, 
ed., pp. 259–307. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bendix, R. 1967. Preconditions of development: a comparison of Japan and 
Germany. In Aspects of Social Change in Modern Japan, R. P. Dore, ed., 
pp. 27–68. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Berghahn, V. R. 1975. The Americanization of West German Industry, 1945–
1973. Leamington Spa, UK: Berg Publishers.
———. 1982. Modern Germany: Society, Economy and Politics in the Twenti-
eth Century. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bergmann, A. 2014. The World’s largest economies. CNN Money. Retrieved 
July 19, 2014, from http://money.cnn.com/news/economy/world 
_economies_gdp/.
Bernstein, G. L. 2005. The Myth of Decline: The Rise of Britain Since 1945. 
London: Pimlico.
Bessel, R. 1993. Germany After the First World War. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Biery, M. E. 2012. In 2013, check out these fast-growing industries. Forbes 
(December 31). Retrieved August 2, 2015, from http://www.forbes 
.com/sites/sageworks/2012/12/31/in-2013-check-out-these-fast 
-growing-industries/

R e f e r e n c e s
273
Bibbee, A. I. 1994. Germany: Overcoming Structural Hurdles. OECD 
Observer, no. 190 (October-November): 35–37.
Black, C. E., J. E. Helmreich, P. C. Helmreich, C. P. Issawi, and A. J. McAd-
ams. 1992. Rebirth: A History of Europe Since World War II. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press.
Black, J. S., and A. J. Morrison. 2012. The Japanese global leadership chal-
lenge: what it means for the rest of the world. Asia Pacific Business Review, 
18 (4): 551–566.
Blackford, M. G. 1988. The Rise of Modern Business in Great Britain, the 
United States and Japan. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
———. 2010. American manufacturing, 1850–1930: a business history 
approach. OAH Magazine of History, 24 (1): 17–22.
Blackford, M. G.. and K. S. Kerr. 1990. Business Enterprise in American His-
tory, 2nd ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
BLS. 2014. Industries at a glance: manufacturing. Washington, DC: Bureau 
of labor Statistics. Retrieved April 10, 2014, from http://www.bls.gov 
/iag/tgs/iag31-33.htm
Bon-Kwan, K. 2013. Abenamics, finally a solution to revive Japan? SERI 
Quarterly (July): 31–37.
Brady, T. A. Jr. 1996. Economic and social institutions. In Germany: A New 
Social and Economic History: 1450–1630, B. Scribner, ed., pp. 259–290. 
London: Arnold.
Braudel, F. 1992. The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization & Capitalism, 15th–
18th Century. Translated from the French by S. Reynolds. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Brenner, R. 2005. The world economy at the turn of the millennium: toward 
boom or crisis? Review of International Political Economy, 8 (1): 6–45.
Briggs, A. 1983. A Social History of England. New York: The Viking Press.
Broadberry, S. N. 1997. The long run growth and productivity performance 
of the United Kingdom. Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 44 (4): 
403–424.
Brody, H., ed. 2005. R&D outlook. Technology Review, 108 (9): 50–61.
Brown, D. M. 1933. The Cambridge History or Japan, vol. 1: Ancient Japan. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Brown, M., and C. Dennison. 1998. Integrating radio into the home, 1923–
1929. Studies in Popular Culture, 20 (3): 1–17.
Bruchey, S. 1990. Enterprise: The Dynamic Economy of a Free People. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Bryant, A. 1984. Set In a Silver Sea: The Island Peoples from the Earliest Times 
to the Fifteenth Century. London: Collins.
Bryant, K. L. Jr., and H. C. Dethloff. 1990. A History of American Business, 
2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: PrenticeHall.
Bryson, P. J., and M. Melzer. 1987. The Kombinate in GDR economic 
organization. In The East German Economy, I. Jeffries and M. Melzer, eds., 
pp. 51–68. London: Croom Helm.
Buckley, P. J. 2009. The rise of the Japanese multinational enterprise: then 
and now. Asia Pacific Business Review, 15 (3): 309–321.

R e f e r e n c e s
274
Buford, W. H. 1957. The organization and rise of Prussia. In The New 
Cambridge Modern History, vol. VII, J. O. Lindsay, ed., pp. 292–317. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burda, M. C., and J. Hunt. 2001. From reunification to economic integra-
tion: productivity and the labor market in eastern Germany. Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity. Washington, DC: Brookings Institute.
Business Week Online. 2005a. The next Walmart? (April 16). Retrieved 
August 23, 2005 from www.businessweek.com/magazine/content/04 
/b3880010.htm.
Business Week Online. 2005b Walmart: struggling in Europe (April 11). 
Retrieved August 23, 2005 from www.businessweek.com/magazine 
/content/05_15/b3928086_mz054.htm.
Cable, J. R. 1986. Industry. In The UK Economy: A Manual of Applied 
Economics, 11th ed., M. J. Artis, ed. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Cairncross, A. 1991. Reconversion, 1945–1951. In The British Economy Since 
1945. N. F. R. Crafts and Nicholas Woodward, eds., pp. 25–31. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press.
Calleo, D. 1978. The German Problem Reconsidered. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Calomaris, C. W., and J. R. Mason. 1997. Contagion and bank failures during 
the Great Depression: the June 1932 Chicago banking panic. American 
Economic Review, 87 (5): 863–883.
Cameron, K. N. 1973. Humanity and Society: A World History. Bloomington: 
Indiana University Press.
Carlile, L. E., and M. C. Tilton, eds. 1998. Is Japan Really Changing Its 
Ways? Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Press.
Central Statistical Office (CSO). 1996. Annual Abstract of Statistics. London: 
HMSO.
———. 1993a, Report on the Census of Production: Woolen and Worsted Indus-
try. London: HMSO.
———. 1993b. Report on the Census of Production: Cotton and Silk Industry. 
London: HMSO.
Chandler, A. D. Jr. 1969. The structure of American industry in the twentieth 
century. The Business History Review, 43 (3): 255–298.
———. 1977. The Visible Hand: The Managerial Revolution in American 
Business. Cambridge, UK: Belknap.
———. 1990. Scale and Scope: The Dynamics of Industrial Capitalism. Cam-
bridge, MA: Belknap.
———. 1991. Creating competitive capacity: innovation and investment in 
the United States, Great Britain, and Germany from the 1870s to World 
War I. In Favorites of Fortune: Technology, Growth, and Economic Devel-
opment Since the Industrial Revolution, P. Higonnet, D. S, Landes, and 
H. Rosovsky, eds., pp. 432–458. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press.
Chapman, S. 1992. The Early Factory Masters: The Transition to the Factory 
System in the Midlands Textile Industry. Aldershot: Gregg Revivals.

R e f e r e n c e s
275
China Daily. 2003. German retailing giant opens 18th chain store in Xi’an 
(August 21). Retrieved August 23, 2005, from www2.chinadaily.com.cn 
/en/doc/2003-08/21/content_257052.htm.
Chizema, A., and Y. Shinozawa. 2012. The “Company with committees”: 
change or continuity in Japanese corporate governance? Journal of Man-
agement Studies, 49 (1): 77–101.
CIA World Factbook. 2013. Germany economy profile 2013. Retrieved 
December 12, 2013, from http://www.indexmundi.com/germany 
/economy_profile.html.
Cipolla, C. M. 1993. Before the Industrial Revolution, 3rd ed. London: 
Routledge.
Clapham, J. H. 1926. An Economic History of Modern Britain. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
———. 1957. Commerce and industry in the Middle Ages. In The Cambridge 
Medieval History, vol. VI, pp. 433–504. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press.
Clark, G. N. 1957. The Seventeenth Century. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Clark, R. 1979. The Japanese Company. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Cochran, T. C. 1977. 200 Years of American Business. New York: Dell.
Cole, R. E., and M. S. Flynn. 2009. Automotive quality reputation: hard 
to achieve, hard to lose, still harder to win back. California Management 
Review, 52 (1): 67–93.
Colley, L. 1992. Britons: Forging the Nation, 1707–1837. London: Pimlico.
Collier, Irwin L. Jr., and Horst Siebert. 1991. The economic integration of 
post-wall Germany. The American Economic Review, 81 (2): 196–201.
Collins, I. 1964. The Age of Progress: A Survey of European History from 1789 
to 1870. London: Edward Arnold.
Cooke, J., A. Chrome, and T. Rowland-Entwistle. 1981. History’s Timeline. 
New York: Crescent Books.
Cornwell, E. L. 1976. History of Railways. London: Hamlyn Publishing.
Court, W. H. A. 1954. Concise Economic History of Britain from 1780 to 
Recent Times. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cowling, K., and P. R. Tonlinson. 2011. The Japanese model in retrospective: 
industrial strategies, corporate Japan and the “hollowing out” of Japanese 
industry. Policy Studies, 32 (6): 569–583.
Crafts, N. 1996. Deindustrialization and economic growth. The Economic 
Journal, 106 (434): 172–183.
Crafts, N. F. R., S. J. Leybourne, and T. C. Mills. 1991. Britain. In Patterns 
of European Industrialization: the Nineteenth Century, R. Sylla and G. 
 Toniolo, eds., pp. 109–152. London: Routledge.
Crafts, N. F. R., and N. Woodward, eds. 1991. The British Economy Since 
1945. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Crawcour, E. S. 1988. Industrialization and technological change, 1885–
1920. In The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. VI: The Twentieth 
Century, P. Duus, ed., pp. 385–450. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
276
———. 1989. Economic change in the nineteenth century. In The Cam-
bridge History of Japan, vol. V: The Nineteenth Century, M.B. Jensen, ed., 
pp. 569–617. London: Cambridge University Press.
Crawley, A. 1973. The Rise of Western Germany, 1945–1972. London: 
Collins.
Crouzet, F. 1982. The Victorian Economy. London: Routledge.
Dahmus, J. 1968. The Middle Ages. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Darby, H. C. 1957. The face of Europe on the eve of the great discoveries. 
In The New Cambridge Modern History, G. R. Potter, ed., pp. 20–49. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Day, L. 1985. Broad Gauge. London: HMSO.
Deane, P. 1979. The First Industrial Revolution, 2nd ed. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
DeBary, W. T., ed. 1958. Sources of Japanese Tradition, vol. II. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Debnath, S. C., and Akio Tokuda. 2013. Value-based management in Japanese 
keiretsu and Korean chaebols. Ritsumeikan International Affairs, 11 (1): 
45–70.
Deloitte Global Services. 2013. Planet Retail: The Path to 2020. Retrieved 
September 2, 2014, from https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/... 
/dttl_cb_Path-to-2020_WEB.pdf.
DeMente, B. 1987. Japan Almanac. Lincolnwood, IL: Passport Books.
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI). 1999. Manufacturing in the 
Knowledge Driven Economy (November 22). London: Department of 
Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 16, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk 
/comp/competitive/pdfs/man.pdf?pubpdfload=99%2F1205.
———. 2002a. From Exuberant Youth to Sustainable Maturity: Competitive 
Analysis of the UK Games Software Sector (October 24). London: Department 
of Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 12, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk 
/industry_files/pdf/computergames_main.pdf?pubpdfload=02%2F1428
———. 2002b. The Government’s Manufacturing Strategy, (May 16). London: 
Department of Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 13, 2005, from 
www.dti.gov.uk/manufacturing/strategy.pdf?pubpdfload=02%2F782.
———. 2003a. The Service Sector in the UK and France: Addressing Barri-
ers to the Growth of Output and Employment (May). London: Department 
of Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 12, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk 
/europe/servicesector.pdf?pubpdfload=01%2F748.
———. 2003b. Tackling the Low Skills Equilibrium: A Review of Issues 
and Some New Evidence (November). London: Department of Trade 
and Industry. Retrieved August 12, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk/traing 
_development/tac_the_low_exe.pdf?pubpdfload=o3%2F1587.
———. 2004. Review of the Government’s Manufacturing Strategy (July 15). 
London: Department of Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 15, 2005, 
from www.dti.gov.uk/manufacturing/strategy_review.pdf?pubpdfload=04% 
2F1254.

R e f e r e n c e s
277
———. 2005. Competing in the Global Economy–The Innovation Chal-
lenge (July 15). DTI Economics Paper No. 7. London: Department of 
Trade and Industry. Retrieved August 16, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk 
/manufacturing/strategy_review.pdf?pubpdfload=04%2F1254.
Deutschland Magazine. 2004. Agenda 2010: glossary. Federal Republic of 
Germany (January). Retrieved August 21, 2005, from www.german 
-embassy.org.uk/agenda_2010/glossary_of_terms.html.
Dill, M. Jr. 1961. Germany. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan.
Donaldson, T. J. 1982. What is business in America? Journal of Business Eth-
ics, 1 (4): 259–266.
Dore, R. 2000. Stock Market Capitalism: Welfare Capitalism: Japan and Ger-
many versus the Anglo-Saxons. Cambridge: Oxford University Press.
Douglas, S. J. 1987. Inventing American Broadcasting, 1899–1922. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University.
Dower, J. W. 1992. The Useful War. In C. Gluck and S. R. Graubard, eds., 
pp. 49–70. Showa: The Japan of Hirohito. New York: W. W. Norton.
Drucker, P. F. 2005. Trading places. The National Interest, 79 (Spring): 
101–107.
Duce, J. T. 1962. The changing oil industry. Foreign Affairs, 40 (4): 627–634.
Dumont, L. 1994. German Ideology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dunkerley, J., and P. C. Hare. 1991. Nationalized industries. In The British 
Economy Since 1945. N. F. R. Crafts and Nicholas Woodward, eds., 
pp. 381–416. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Durmke, R. H. 1977. Intra-German trade in 1837 and regional economic 
development. VSWG: Vierteljahrschrift für Sozial-und Wirtschaftsge-
schichte, 64 (4): 468–496.
Duval, R., and J. Elmeskov. 2005. The Effects of EMU on Structural Reforms 
in Labour and Product Markets. Paper presented at the European Central 
Bank conference: What effect is EMU having on the Euro Area and its 
member countries? June 16–17, Frankfurt, Germany.
Dyson, K. 2001. The German model revisited: from Schmidt to Schroder. 
German Politics, 10 (2): 135–154.
Economic Outlook. 2012. Japan’s annual growth. Retrieved August 1, 2014, 
from http://bilbo.economicoutlook.net/blog/wp-content/uploads/2012 
/06/Japan_Annual_Inflation_Rate_1971_2011.jpg.
Economist. 2005. Walmart: how big can it grow? Retrieved August 23, 
2005, from www.economist.com/printedition/display/story.cfm?story 
_ID=2593089.
Economist Atlas. 1992. Germany. New York: Henry Holt. 197–202.
Edens, C. 1992. Dynamics of trade in the ancient Mesopotamian “world sys-
tem.” American Anthropologist, 94 (1): 118–139.
Edmonds, C.C. 1923. Tendencies in the automobile industry. The American 
Economic Review, 13 (3): 422–441.
Elbaum, Bernard and William Lazonick, eds. 1986. The Decline of the British 
Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
278
Elejade-Ruiz, A. 2014. Amazon joins ranks of top 10 retailers, McDonald’s 
falls off. Chicago Tribune (July 3). Retrieved September 21, 2014, from 
http://www.chicagotribune.com/business/breaking/chi-amazon-top 
-10-retailers-20140703-story.html.
Emarket.com. 2014. Total U.S. retail sales top $4.5 trillion in 2013, outpace 
GDP growth. Retrieved September 21, 2014, from www.emarketer.com 
/Articles/Print.aspx?R=1010756.
Encyclopæda Britannica (Online). 2014a. Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act. Retrieved 
February 8, 2014, from http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked 
/topic/550096/Smoot-Hawley-Tariff-Act.
———. 2014b. Daimyo (Japanese social class). Retrieved February 28, 2014, 
from http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/149919/daimo.
Ensor, R. C. K. 1992. England, 1870–1914. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Euromonitor. 2004. Retailing in Germany (April). Retrieved August 23, 
2005. www.euromonitor.com/repor_print.asp?docid=32236.
Fagan, B. M., and C. R. De Corse. 2008. In the Beginning: An Introduction 
to Archeology, 12th ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 2003. Voice Over Internet 
Protocol (VoIP). Retrieved October 3, 2014, from http://www.fcc.gov 
/encyclopedia/voice-over-internet-protocol-voip.
Ferneyhough, F. 1975. The History of Railways in Britain. Reading, UK: 
Osprey Publishing.
Fieleke, N. S. 1982. The automobile industry. Annals of the American Acad-
emy of Political and Social Science, 460 (1982): 83–91.
Fine, C. H., J. C. Lafrance, and D. Hillebrand. 1996. The U.S. Automobile 
Manufacturing Industry. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Com-
merce Office of Technology Policy.
Fischer, B. 2010. That was Kaizen; this is now. Financial Management 
(April): 12.
Fishlow, A. 1965. American Railroads and the Transformation of the Ante-
bellum Economy. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Flath, D. 2000. The Japanese Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Flenley, R. 1963. Modern German History. London: J. M. Dent & Sons.
Flershem, R. G. 1964. Some aspects of the Japan Sea trade in the Tokugawa 
period. The Journal of Asian Studies, 23 (3): 405–416.
Florence, P. S. 1953. The Logic of British and American Industry. London: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Floud, R. 1997. The People and the British Economy. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Fortune. 1966. Business Enterprise. The Fortune Directory (p. 490). Retrieved 
January 24, 2014, from ftp://ftp2.census.gov/prod2/statcomp/documents 
/1967–07.pdf.
Franks, P. 1992. Japanese Economic Development. London: Routledge.
———. 2009. Inconspicuous consumption: sake, beer, and the birth of the 
consumer in Japan. The Journal of Asian Studies, 68 (1): 135–164.

R e f e r e n c e s
279
Fremdling, R. 1991. Foreign competition and technological change: Brit-
ish exports and the modernization of the German iron industry from the 
1820s to the 1860s. In German Industry and German Industrialization, 
W. R. Lee, ed., pp. 47–76. London: Routledge.
FRG. 2004. Agenda 2010: Questions and Answers. Federal Republic of Ger-
many white paper, (February). Retrieved August 21, 2005 from www 
.german-embassy.org.uk/agenda_2010_Brochurengl.pdf.
———. 2005a. Agenda 2010: Economic Trends. Washington DC. Germany. 
Retrieved August 21, 2005 from www.germany-info.org/relaunch 
/business/new/bus_agenda2010-profile.htm
———. 2005b. Package for reform. Federal Republic of Germany: Economic 
Trends. Washington DC. Retrieved August 21, 2005 from www.germany 
-info.org/relaunch/business/trends/basics_reform.html
Fuentes, A., E. Wurzel, and M. Morgan. 2004. Improving the Capacity to 
Innovate in Germany. OECD Economics Department working paper no. 
407 (October 22).
Fulbrook, M. 1990. A Concise History of Germany. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
———. 1991. The Fontana History of Germany, 1918–1990. London: Fon-
tana Press.
Funding Universe. 1997. Hunt-Wesson, Inc. history. Retrieved January 
21, 1914, from http://www.fundinguniverse.com/company-histories 
/hunt-wesson-inc-history/.
Furlong, R. 2005. Germany’s economy fights red tape. BBC News World Edi-
tion, (February 21).
Gagliardo, J. 1991. Germany Under the Old Regime, 1600–1790. London: 
Longman Group.
Gamble, A. 1981. Britain in Decline. Boston: Beacon Press.
Gaulke, R. 2001. A statistical look at 1914 Germany. Retrieved August 5, 
2015, from http://replications.com/8KR/krstats.htm
Geri, L. R., and D. E. McNabb. 2011. Energy Policy in the U.S. Boca Raton, 
FL: CRC Press.
Gies, F., and J. Gies. 1990. Life in a Medieval Village. New York: 
HarperCollins.
Gimpel, J. 1976. The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the 
Middle Ages. London: Penguin Books.
Glouchevitch, P. 1992. Juggernaut: The German Way of Business. New York: 
Simon & Schuster.
Gluck, C. 1992. The idea of Showa. In Showa: The Japan of Hirohito. C. 
Gluck and S. R. Graubard, eds., pp. 1–26. New York: W. W. Norton.
Green, C. J., and J. S. Metcalf. 1986. Foreign trade and the balance of pay-
ments. In The UK Economy: A Manual of Applied Economics, 11th ed., M. 
J. Artis, ed., pp. 130–202. London: Weidenfeld and Nicolson.
Green, G. P., and L. Sanchez. 2007. Does manufacturing still matter? Popula-
tion Research and Policy Review, 26 (5/6): 529–551.

R e f e r e n c e s
280
Gregory, P. R., and R. C. Stuart. 1999. Comparative Economic Systems, 6th 
ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Groˉmling, M. 2008. Reunification, restructuring, recessions and reforms: 
the German economy over the past two decades. Working paper 102. 
Würzburg, Germany: Bayerische Julius Maximilians Uiversitaˉt Würzburg. 
Retrieved July 21, 2014, from http://hdl.handle.net/10419/32466.
Grotewold, A. 1973. West Germany’s economic growth. Annals of the Asso-
ciation of American Geographers, 63 (3): 353–365.
Hadley, E. 1979. The Zaibatsu and the war. In Imperial Japan, 1800–1945, 
J. Livingston, J. Moore and F. Oldfeather, eds., pp. 452–456. New York: 
Pantheon Books.
Hahn, H. J. 1995. German Thought and Culture. Manchester, UK: Manches-
ter University Press.
Halliday, S. 2009. The first common market? History Today, 59 (7): 31–37.
Hancock, M. D., and H. A. Welsh, eds. 1994. German Unification: Processes 
and Outcomes. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Hane, M. 1972. Japan: A Historical Survey. New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons.
Hare, P. 1985. Planning the British Economy. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Harley, C. K. 1991. Substitution for prerequisites: endogenous institutions 
and comparative economic history. In Patterns of European Industrializa-
tion; the Nineteenth Century, R. Sylla and G. Toniolo, eds., pp. 29–44. 
London: Routledge.
Harris, J. R. 1988. The British Iron Industry, 1700–1850. London: Macmillan.
Harrison, J. F. C. 1973. The Birth and Growth of Industrial England, 1714–
1867. New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Hatasa, M. 2002. Devaluation and exports in interwar Japan: the effects of 
sharp depreciation of the yen in the early 1930s. Monetary and Economic 
Studies, 20 (3): 143–180.
Havercamp, A. 1988. Medieval Germany, 1956–1273. Trans. by Helga Braus 
and Richard Mortimer. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hayami, A., O. Saitô, and R. P. Toby, eds. 2003. Emergence of Economic 
Society in Japan 1600–1859, vol. II: Early Modern. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.
Hennessey, R. A. S. 1971. The Electric Revolution. Newcastle Upon Tyne: 
Oriel Press.
Herman, A. 2012. Freedom’s Forge: How American Business Produced Victory 
to World War II. New York: Random House.
Hersh, A., and C. Weller. 2003. Does manufacturing matter? Challenge, 46 
(2): 59–79.
Hills, R. L. 1989. Power from Steam: A History of the Steam Engine. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hirschmeier, J., and T. Yui. 1975. The Development of Japanese Business, 
1600–1973. London. George Allen & Unwin.
Hobsbawm, E. J. 1965. The Age of Revolution, 1789–1948. New York: 
Mentor Books.

R e f e r e n c e s
281
———. 1968. Industry and Empire: From 1750 to the Present Day. London: 
Penguin.
Hoffert, B. 2014. The economic miracle. Retrieved August 1, 2014, from 
http://bhoffert.faculty.noctrl.edu/HST263/23.EconomicMiracle.html.
Holborn, H. 1973. A History of Modern Germany. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf.
Holden, K., K. Matthews, and J. Thompson. 1995. The UK Economy Today. 
Manchester, UK: Manchester University Press.
Holley, S. E. 2014. Nano revolution: big impact: how emerging nanotechnol-
ogies will change the future of education and industry in America (more 
specifically in Oklahoma): an abbreviated account. The Journal of Technol-
ogy Studies, 35 (1): 9–19.
Hollister, C. W. 1990. Medieval Europe: A Short History. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Holzhausen, A. 2002. Japanese supplier relationships under pressure: restruc-
turing of the car industry in the 1990s. Management International Review, 
42 (1): 91–103.
Hooker, R. 1996. World Civilizations: Pre-enlightenment Europe. Pullman: 
Washington State University. Retrieved August 7, 2005, from www.wsu 
.edu:8080/~dee/Enlight/pre.htm.
Hooks, G., and L. E. Bloomquist. 1992. The legacy of World War II for 
regional growth and decline: the cumulative effects of wartime invest-
ments on U.S. manufacturing, 1947–1972. Social Forces, 71 (2): 303–337.
Hoover, E. M. Jr. 1933. The location of the shoe industry in the United 
States. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 47 (2): 254–276.
Hoover, T. 1977. Zen Culture. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Horn, S. A., and A. R. Cross. 2009. Japanese management at a crossroads? 
The changing role of China in the transformation of corporate Japan. Asia 
Pacific Business Review, 15 (3): 285–308.
Hosono, K., K. Sakai, and K. Tsuru. 2007. Consolidation of banks in Japan: 
causes and consequences. discussion paper 07-E-059. Research Institute 
of Economy, Trade and Industry, Tokyo, Japan.
Hower, R. M. 1932. The Wedgwoods: ten generations of potters, 1795–
1920. Journal of Economic and Business History. 4 (May): 665–690.
Huber, T. M. 1981. The Revolutionary Origins of Modern Japan. Stanford: 
Stanford University Press.
Hudson, K. 1983. The Archaeology of the Consumer Society: The Second Indus-
trial Revolution in Britain. London: Heinemann.
Hudson, P. 1986. The Genesis of Industrial Capital: A Study of the West Riding 
Wool Textile Industry, 1750–1850. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Humphrey, T. M. 1999. Mercantilist and classicals: insights from doctrinal 
history. Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. Economic Quarterly, 85 (2): 
55–82.
Hunter, J. 1989. The Emergence of Modern Japan: An Introductory History 
Since 1853. London: Longman.

R e f e r e n c e s
282
Hüppauf, B. 1993. Europe, the imagined space of a continent. In United 
Germany and Europe: Towards 1990 and Beyond, B. Hüppauf, R.  Bubser 
and S. Wildner eds. Special issue of the European Studies Journal, 10 
(1–2): 11–44.
Hurst, H. W. 1980. Business and businessmen in pre-civil war Georgetown, 
1840–1870. Records of the Columbia Historical Society of Washington, 
D.C., 50 (1980): 161–171.
Hyde, C. K. 1977. Technological Change and the British Iron Industry, 1700–
1870. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
International Business Machines (IBM). 2012. Retail 2020: Reinventing 
retailing—once again. Retrieved October 1, 2014, from www.stern.nyu 
.edu/cons/groups/content/documents/webasset/con_033838.pdf.
International Center for Management Research (ICFA). 2004. Walmart’s 
German misadventure. Retrieved August 23, 2005, from http://icmr 
.icfai.org/casestudies/catalogue/Business%29Strategy2/BSTR082,htm
Ichihashi, Y. 1931/2. Economic life in Japan. Journal of Economic and Busi-
ness History, 4: 156–167.
Industrial Engineer. 2010a. Toyota’s main problem? Management. Indus-
trial Engineer, 42 (4): 17.
Industrial Engineer. 2010b. Toyota’s quality lapse. Industrial Engineer, 42 
(3): 14–13.
InitativeD21. 2005. InitiativeD21: Home Page. Retrieved August 29, 2005, from 
http://www.arbeitgeber.de/www/arbeitgeber.nsf/id/en_initiative-d21.
Inoguchi, T. 2014. Japan in 2013: Abenomics and Abegeopolitics. Asian 
Survey, 54 (1): 101–112.
International Monetary Fund (IMF). 2015. World Economic Outlook Data-
base, April 2015 ed. Retrieved May 2, 2015, from www.imf.org/external 
/pubs/ft/weo/data/changes.htm.
Iriye, A. 1989. Japan’s drive to great power status. In The Cambridge History 
of Japan, vol. V: The Nineteenth Century, M.B. Jansen, ed., pp. 721–782. 
London: Cambridge University Press.
Irokawa, D. 1985. The Culture of the Meiji Period. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
Ishihara, S. 1989. The Japan That Can Say No. New York: Simon & Schuster.
James, H. 1989. A German Identity, 1770–1990. New York: Routledge.
Jansen, M. B. 1989. The Meiji Restoration. In The Cambridge History of 
Japan, vol. V: The Nineteenth Century, pp. 308–366. London: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Japanese External Trade Organization (JETRO). 2015. Japan Ministry of 
Trade statistics. Retrieved May 1, 2015, from http://www.jetro.go.jp 
/en/reports/statistics.html.
Jenkins, D. T., and K. G. Ponting 1982. The British Wool Textile Industry, 
1770–1914. London: Heinemann.
Jeremy, D. J. 1991. The hundred largest employers in the United Kingdom 
in manufacturing and non-manufacturing industries, in 1907, 1935 and 
1955. Business History, 33 (1): 93–111.

R e f e r e n c e s
283
Johnson, N. 1991. Territory and power: some historical determinants of the 
constitutional structure of the Federal Republic of Germany. In German 
Federalism Today, C. Jeffery and P. Savigear, eds., pp. 8–22. Leicester: 
Leicester University Press.
Kalmbach, P., R. Franke, K. Knottenbauer, H. Krämer, and H. Schaefer. 
2003. The significance of competitive manufacturing industries for 
the development of the service sector. Executive Summary, Project 
22/02 (December). Bremen, Germany: Institut für Konjunktur-und 
Strukturforschung.
Kanefsky, J., and J. Robey. 1980. Steam engines in 18th century Britain: a 
quantitative assessment. Technology and Culture, 21 (2): 161–186.
Kautz, J. 2005. Small Business Notes: Entrepreneurs Add Vitality to the Econ-
omy. Retrieved August 19, 2005, from www.smallbusinessnotes.com/
aboutsb/vitality.html.
Kelly, T. Mills. 2014. GDP in Easter Europe: 1980–1989. In Making the His-
tory of 1989, Item 667. Retrieved July 20, 2014, from http://chnm.gmu 
.edu/1989/items/show/667.
Kemmerer, D. L. 1949. The pre-civil war South’s leading crop: corn. Agricul-
tural History, 23 (4): 236–239.
Kennedy, C. 2003. From Dynasties to Dotcoms: The Rise, Fall and Reinvention 
of British Business in the Past 100 Years. London: Directors Publications, 
Ltd.
Kitschelt, H., and W. Streek. 2003. From stability to stagnation: Germany at 
the beginning of the twenty-first century. West European Politics, 26 (4): 
1–34.
Kitson, M., and J. Michie. 1996. Britain’s industrial performance since 1960: 
underinvestment and relative decline. The Economic Journal, 106 (434): 
196–213.
Kocka, J. 1993. Revolution and nations: 1989/1990 in historical perspective. 
In United Germany and Europe: towards 1990 and beyond, B. Hüppauf, R. 
Bubser and S. Wildner eds. Special issue of the European Studies Journal, 
10 (1–2): 45–56.
Kollmeyer, C. D. 2009. Explaining deindustrialization: how affluence, pro-
ductivity growth, and globalization diminish manufacturing employment. 
American Journal of Sociology, 114 (6): 1644–1674.
Koontz, H. D. 1941. Government Control of Business. Boston: Houghton- 
Mifflin.
Kosai, Y. 1988. The post-war economy, 1945–1973. In The Cambridge His-
tory of Japan, vol. VI: The Twentieth Century, P. Duus, ed., pp. 494–540. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kosaka, M. 1992. The Showa Era (1926–1989). In Showa: The Japan of 
Hirohito, C. Gluck and S. R. Graubard, eds, pp. 27–48. New York: W. W. 
Norton.
Kreiger, J. 1987. The United Kingdom: symbiosis or division? In Ideology and 
National Competitiveness, G. C. Lodge and E. F. Vogel, eds., pp. 29–53. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Business School Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
284
Kro¨ger, J., and M. Teutemann. 1992. The German economy after unification: 
domestic and European aspects. Working paper 91 (April). Brussels: Com-
mission of the European Communities (European Union).
Kuper, A. 1994. The Chosen Primate: Human Nature and Cultural Diversity. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Landefeld, J. S., and B. M. Fraumeni. 2001. Measuring the new economy. 
Survey of Current Business. 2001 (3): 23–40.
Landes, D. S. 1993. The fable of the dead horse: or, the industrial revolution 
revisited. In The British Industrial Revolution: An Economic Perspective, J. 
Wokyr, ed., pp. 132–170. Boulder: Westview Press.
Laqueur, W. 1974. Weimar: A Cultural History, 1918–1933. New York: G. 
P. Putnam’s Sons.
Larke, R. 2004. Expansion of Japanese retailers overseas. Journal of Global 
Marketing, 18 (1/2): 99–120.
Latourette, K. S. 1964. A Short History of the Far East. 4th ed. New York: 
Macmillan.
Lee, C. 1999. This Sceptred Isle: Twentieth Century. London: Penguin Books.
Lee, C., and J. Allen. 2013. The Roles and Functions of Kansayaku Boards 
Compared to audit Committees. Hong Kong: Asian Corporate Governance 
Association.
Lee, W. R. 1991. The paradigm of German industrialization: some recent 
issues and debates in the modern historiography of German industrial 
development. In German Identity and German Industrialization., W. R. 
Lee, ed., pp. 1–46. London: Routledge.
Le Goff, J. 1964. Medieval Civilization, 400–1500. Trans. Julia Barrow. New 
York: Barnes & Noble Books.
Lehne, R. 2006. Government and Business. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: CQ Press.
Leigh, H. 1996. UK “Mittelstand” ventures back. The (London) Sunday 
Times, June 20: Sec. II, 10.
Lew, B., and B. Cater. 2006. The telegraph, co-ordination of tramp shipping 
and growth in world trade 1870–1910. European Review of Economic His-
tory, 10: 147–173.
Liebenau, J. M. 1985. The pharmaceutical industry, 1900–1920. Pharmacy 
in History, 27 (1): 3–11.
Lincoln, E. J. 1992. The Showa economic experience. In C. Gluck and S R. 
Graubard, eds. Showa: The Japan of Hirohito. New York: W. W. Norton. 
191–208.
Lincoln, J. R. 2009. Whither the Keiretsu, Japan’s business networks? How 
were they structured? What did they do? Why are they gone? IRLE work-
ing paper no. 188–09. Retrieved September 10, 2014, from http://irle 
.berkeley.edu/workingpapers/188-09.pdf.
Lincoln, J. R., and M. L. Gerlach. 2004. Japan’s Network Economy: Structure, 
Persistence, and Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lincoln, J. R., and A. L. Kalleberg. 1992. Culture, control and commitment. 
In Showa: The Japan of Hirohito, C. Gluck and S R. Graubard, eds. New 
York: W. W. Norton.

R e f e r e n c e s
285
Lincoln, J. R., and M. Shimotani. 2009. Whither the Keiretsu, Japan’s busi-
ness networks? How were they structured? What did they do? Why are 
they gone? IRLE Working Paper No. 188-09. Retrieved September 10, 
2014, from http://irle.berkeley.edu/workingpapers/188-09.pdf
Lindberg, E. 2008. The rise of Hamburg as a global marketplace in the seven-
teenth century: a comparative political economy perspective. Comparative 
Studies in Society and History, 50 (3): 641–662.
Linneman, P., and D. C. Moy. 2002. The evolution of retailing in the United 
States. University of Pennsylvania, Wharton School of Business work-
ing paper 443. Retrieved September 22, 2014, from realestate.wharton 
.upenn.edu/research/papers/full/443.pdf.
Lippmann, S. 2007. The institutional context of industry consolidation: 
radio broadcasting in the United States, 1920–1934. Social Forces, 86 (2): 
467–495.
Livingston, J., J. Moore, and F. Oldfeather, eds. 1979. Imperial Japan, 1800–
1945. New York: Pantheon Books.
Lloyd, T. H. 1991. England and the German Hanse, 1057–1611: A Study of Their 
Trade and Commercial Diplomacy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Locke, G. 2011. Statement to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, 
and Transportation. The Future of American Manufacturing. Hearing 
March 2. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office.
Lockwood, W. 1979. The economic development of Japan. In Imperial 
Japan, 1800–1945, J. Moore Livingston and F. Oldfeather, eds. New York: 
Pantheon Books.
Lutge, F. 1958. Economic change—agriculture. In The New Cambridge Mod-
ern History, vol. II: 1520–1529, G. R. Elton, ed., pp. 23–50. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Macfarlane, A. 1988. The cradle of capitalism: the case of England. In Europe 
and the Rise of Capitalism, J. Baechler, J. A. Hall, and M. Mann, eds., 
pp. 185–203. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Maehl, W. H. 1979. Germany in Western Civilization. Tuscaloosa, AL: Uni-
versity of Alabama.
Mahoney, J., and D. Rueschemeyer. 2003. Comparative Historical Analysis in 
the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Marsh, P. 2012. The New Industrial Revolution. New Haven: Yale University 
Press.
Marshall, D. 1962. Eighteenth Century England. Harlow, UK: Longman Group.
Mason, R. H. P., and J. G. Caiger. 1972. A History of Japan. New York: The 
Free Press.
Mass, J. P. 1990. The Kamakura Bakufu. In The Cambridge History of Japan, 
vol. III: Medieval Japan, Kozo Yamamura, ed., pp. 46–85. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT). Japan. Retrieved September 1, 
2014, from http://atlas.media.mit.edu/profile/country/jpn/.
Mathias, P. 1983. The First Industrial Nation: An Economic History of Brit-
ain, 1700–1914. London: Routledge.

R e f e r e n c e s
286
McAllister, J. 1989. Colonial America, 1607–1776. The Economic History 
Review, 42 (2): 245–259.
McCloskey, D. N. 1981. Enterprise and Trade in Victorian Britain. London: 
Allen & Unwin.
McCormack, Richard, ed. 2009. Manufacturing a Better Future for America. 
Washington, DC: Alliance for American Manufacturing.
McCusker, J. J, and R. R. Menard. 1991. The Economy of British America, 
1607–1789. Chappel Hill: University of North Carolina.
McElvaine, R. S. 1984. The Great Depression. New York: Times Books.
McGuire, J. W. 1964. Business and Society. New York: McGraw-Hill.
McKendrick, N., J. Brewer, and J. H. Plumb. 1982. The Birth of a Consumer 
Society. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
McNabb, D. E. 1991. Shaping the 18th century consumer society: The London  
Post and General Advertiser, 1734–1809. Proceedings of the 16th Annual 
European Studies Conference. (October). Omaha, NE.
McRae, H. 1995. The World in 2020. London: HarperCollins Publishers.
Mead, M. 1953. National character. In Anthropology Today, A. L. Kroeber, 
ed., pp. 642–647. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
MGI. 2010. Global and competitiveness in the United States: the role of its  
multinational companies. McKinsey Global Institute. Retrieved January 24,  
2014, from http://www.mckinsey.com/insights/americas/growth_and 
_competitiveness_in_us.
Miller, J. S. 2004. The uncertainty of forecasts. Public Roads, 68 (2).
Minami, R. 1986. The Economic Development of Japan. Houndmills, UK: 
Macmillan Academic.
Minesite. 2002. Closure of Neuer Markt in Germany confirms London as 
Europe’s mining finance centre (October 1). Retrieved August 22, 
2005,  from www.minesite.com/archives/features_archive/2002/Oct-2002 
/neuer-markt011002.htm.
Miskimin, H. A. 1969. The Economy of Early Renaissance Europe, 1300–1460. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Morishima, M. 1982. Why Has Japan “Succeeded?” Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Morison, S. E. 1965. The Oxford History of the American People. New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Munro, J. H. 1991. Industrial transformation in the North-West European 
textile trades, c. 1290–c. 1340: economic progress or economic crises? In 
Before the Black Death B. M. S. Campbell, ed., pp. 110–149. Manchester: 
Manchester University Press.
Musson, A. E. 1978. The Growth of British Industry. London: Batsford.
Mutel, J. 1988. The modernization of Japan: why has Japan succeeded in its 
modernization? In Europe and the Rise of Capitalism, J. Baechler, J. A. 
Hall and M. Mann, eds., pp. 136–158. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Nakamura, T., and K. Odaka, eds. 2003. Economic History of Japan, 1914–
1955, vol. 3: A Dual Structure. N. S. Brannen, trans. Oxford, UK: Oxford 
University Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
287
Nakamura, M. 2011. Adoption and policy implications of Japan’s new corpo-
rate governance practices after the reform. Asia Pacific Journal of Manage-
ment, 28 (1): 187–213.
Nakome, C. 1974. Criteria of group formation. In Japanese Culture and 
Behavior, T. S. Lebra and W. P. Lebra, eds., pp. 155–173. Honolulu: Uni-
versity Press of Hawaii.
Nanto, D. K. 1998. The 1997–98 Asian Financial Crisis. Washington, DC: 
Congressional Research Services report for congress. Retrieved September 
4, 2014, from http://fas.org/man/crs-asia2.html.
National WWII Museum. 2014. By the numbers: wartime production. 
Retrieved September 29, 2014, from www.nationalww2museum.org 
/learn/education/for-students/ww2-history/ww2-by-the-numbers 
/wartime-production.html.
Neill, T. P. 1980. Modern Europe. Garden City, NJ: Doubleday.
Nelson, D. 1974. Scientific management, systematic management, and labor, 
1880–1915. The Business History Review, 48 (4): 479–500.
Nitobe, I. 1969. Bushido: The Soul of Japan. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle.
Nowandfutures.com. 2014. Marks per dollar, Weimar Germany (data from 
public sources). Retrieved July 20, 2014, from http://www.nowand 
futures.com/weimar.html.
Ohmae, K. 1995. Letter from Japan. Harvard Business Review (May-June): 
154–163.
Ollinger, M. 1994. The limits of growth of the multidivisional firm: a case study 
of the U.S. oil industry. Strategic Management Journal, 15 (7): 503–520.
Ono, S. 1962. Shinto: The Kami Way. Rutland, VT: Charles E. Tuttle.
OPSC. 1994. Economic Activity of Great Britain. In 1991 Census. Office of 
Population Censuses and Surveys. London: HMSO.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 
2004. Economic survey—Germany 2004. Retrieved August 23, 2005, 
from www.oecd.org/documentprint/0,2744,en_2649_201185_336337 
72_1_1_1_1,00.html.
———. 2013. Economic survey—Japan. Retrieved February 22, 2014, from 
www.oecd.org/economy/surverys/japan-2013.htm.
———. 2014. World GDP, 20 countries and regional totals. Retrieved July 
20, 2014, from http://www.theworldeconomy.org/statistics.htm.
Ortmans, J. 2004. Government and Education Efforts to Further Entrepre-
neurship in the United Kingdom (July 23). Retrieved August 19, 2005, 
from www.publicforuminstitute.org/nde/sources/reports/uk-2005.pdf.
Owen, R., and M. Dynes. 1989. The Times Guide to 1992: Britain in a Europe 
Without Frontiers. London: Times Books.
Ozawa, T. 1996. The new economic nationalism and the “Japanese disease”: 
the conundrum of managed economic growth. Journal of Economic Issues, 
30 (2): 483–491.
Palais, H. 1959. England’s first attempt to break the commercial monopoly 
of the Hanseatic League, 1377–1380. The American Historical Review, 
64 (4): 852–865.

R e f e r e n c e s
288
Park, K. H. 2013. Bank mergers and competition in Japan. International 
Journal of Banking and Finance, 9 (2): 1–25. Retrieved September 11, 
2014, from http://epublications.bond.edu.au/ijbf/vol9/iss2/1.
Parker, E. 2011. Japan’s meltdown. World Affairs, 90 (4): 50–55.
Parnell, M. F. 1994. The German Tradition of Organized Capitalism: Self 
Government in the Coal Industry. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Parrington, V. L. 1963. The Progressive Era: a liberal renaissance. In The 
Progressive Era, Arthur Mann, ed., pp. 6–12. New York: Hold, Rinehart 
and Winston.
Payne, P. L. 1988. British Entrepreneurship in the 19th Century. London: 
Macmillan.
Perkin, H. 1969. Origins of Modern English Society. London: Ark Paperbacks.
Perkins, E. J. 1989. The entrepreneurial spirit in colonial America: the foun-
dations of modern business history. The Business History Review, 63 (1): 
160–186.
Pflanze, O. 1990. Bismarck and the Development of Germany, vols. I and II. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pirenne, H. 1933. Economic and Social History of Medieval Europe. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace and World.
Plumb, J. H. 1950. England in the Eighteenth Century. London: Penguin.
Plunkert, L. M. 1990. The 1980s: a decade of job growth and industry shifts. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics Monthly Labor Review (September): 3–16.
Pollard, S. 1989. Britain’s Prime and Britain’s Decline: The British Economy, 
1870–1914. London: Edward Arnold.
Poole, A. L. 1980. Germany in the reign of Frederick II. In The Cambridge 
Medieval History, vol. 6, W. Tanner, C. W. Previte-Orton and Z.N. Brook, 
eds., pp. 80–109. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Porter, M. E., and C. H. M. Ketels. 2003. UK Competitiveness: Moving to the 
Next Stage (May). London: Department of Trade and Industry. Retrieved 
August 12, 2005, from www.dti.gov.uk/economics/paper3-porter-ketels 
.pdf?pubpdfload=03%2F899.
Porter, R. 1982. English Society in the 18th Century. London: Penguin.
Powers, T. L., W. F. Koehler, and W. S. Martin. 1988. Selling from 1900 to 
1949. Journal of Personal Selling and Sales Management, 8 (3): 11–21.
Previts, G. J., and W. D. Samson. 2000. Exploring the contents of the Balti-
more and Ohio railroad annual reports. The Accounting Historians Jour-
nal, 27 (1): 1–42.
Pride, W. M., R. J. Hughes, and J. R. Kapoor. 2010. Business, 10th ed. Mason, 
OH: South-Western Cengage.
Pusateri, C. J. 1984. A History of American Business. Arlington Heights, IL: 
Harlan Davidson.
Rahula, W. 1978. Zen and the Taming of the Bull: Towards the Definition of 
Buddhist Thought. London: Gordon Fraser.
Ramm, A. 1982. The making of modern Germany, 1618–1870. In Germany, 
M. Pasley, ed., pp. 203–358. London: Methuen.

R e f e r e n c e s
289
Reich, L. S. 1992. Lighting the path to profit: GE’s control of the elec-
tric lamp industry, 1892–1941. Business History Review, 66 (Summer): 
305–334.
Reingold, E. M. 1992. Chrysanthemums and Thorns: The Untold Story of Mod-
ern Japan. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
Reischauer, E. O. 1970. Japan: The Story of a Nation. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf.
———. 1988. The Japanese Today. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Richardson, B. 2005. Germany’s jobless face tough choices. BBC News (Feb-
ruary 2). Retrieved August 20, 2005, from http://news.bbc.co.uk/go 
/pr/fr/-/3/hi/business/4228849.stm.
Robbins, K. 1994. The Eclipse of a Great Power: Modern Britain, 1870–1992. 
London: Longman.
Roff, D. 1988. A History of Germany from the Medieval Empire to the Present. 
Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Romer, C. D. 1993. The nation in depression. Journal of Economic Perspec-
tives, 7 (2): 19–39.
Rosefielde, S. 2002. Comparative Economic Systems: Culture, Wealth, and 
Power in the 21st Century. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Rosenberg, N., and L. E. Birdzell. 1986. How the West Grew Rich. London: 
I. B. Tauris.
Ro¨sener, W. 1996. The agrarian economy, 1300–1600. In Germany: A New 
Social and Economic History, 1450–1630, B. Scribner, ed., pp. 63–83. Lon-
don: Arnold.
Rostow, W. W. 1948. The British Economy of the Nineteenth Century. West-
port, CT: Greenwood Press.
Rotz, R. A. 1977. The Luˉbeck uprising of 1408 and the decline of the Hanse-
atic League. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 121 (1): 1–45.
Rubin, J. 1961. Canal or railroad? Imitation and innovation in the response to 
the Erie Canal in Philadelphia, Baltimore, and Boston. Transactions of the 
American Philosophical Society. New Series. 51 (7): 1–106.
Ruef, M., and K. Patterson. 2009. Organizations and local development: eco-
nomic and demographic growth among southern counties during Recon-
struction. Social Forces, 58 (4): 1743–1476.
Ryan, P. S. 2003. Understanding director and officer liability in Germany for 
dissemination of false information: perspectives from an outsider. German 
Law Journal, 4(5): 441–475.
Sagarra, E. 1977. A Social History of Germany, 1648–1914. London: Methuen.
Saito, O. 2005. Pre-modern economic growth revisited: Japan and the West. 
Department of Economic History Working Paper 16/05. London: Lon-
don School of Economics.
Sangford, P. 1989. A Polite and Commercial People: England 1727–1783. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sansom, G. 1963. A History of Japan, 1615–1867. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
University Press.

R e f e r e n c e s
290
Saunders, L. 2004. Blubber capitalism. Forbes 400, 174 (7): 96–100.
Sawers, L. 1992. The Navigation Acts revisited. Economic History Review, 45 
(2): 262–284.
Schein, E. H. 1991. Organizational Culture and Leadership. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass Publishers.
Schlesinger, A. M. 1957. The Colonial Merchants and the American Revolu-
tion, 1763–1776. New York: Frederick Ungar.
Schmidt, M. G. 2001. Still on the Middle Way? Germany’s political economy 
at the beginning of the twenty-first century. German Politics, 10 (3): 1–12.
Schmitz, C. 1993. The Growth of Big Business in the United States and Western 
Europe, 1850–1939. London: Macmillan.
Schneider, J. 2011. General Electric’s trio of pioneer radio broadcast stations. 
The Radio Historian. Retrieved September 26, 2014, from www.theradio 
historian.org/ge_stns.htm.
Schwartz, F. J., and S. J. Pharr, eds. 2003. The State of Civil Society in Japan. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Scott, C. E. 2008. The history of the radio industry in the United States 
to 1940. Economic History Association Encyclopedia. Retrieved September 
26, 2014, from http://eh.net/encyclopedia/the-history-of-the-radio 
-industry-in-the-united-states-to-1940/.
Scott, T., and B. Scribner. 1996. Urban networks. In Germany: A New Social 
and Economic History: 1450–1630, B. Scribner, ed., pp. 115–143. London: 
Arnold.
Seldon, M. 2009. East Asian regionalism and its enemies in three epochs: 
political economy and geopolitics, 16th to 21st centuries. Retrieved July 
30, 2014, from http://www.japanfocus.org/data/j.col.empire.jpg.
Sheehan, J. J. 1989. German History, 1770–1866. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
———. 1981. German History? Reflections on the role of the nation in Ger-
man history and historiography. The Journal of Modern History, 53 (1): 
1–23.
Shepherd, J. F., and G. M. Walton. 1972. Shipping, Maritime Trade and the 
Economic development of colonial North America. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Shively, D. H. 1971. The Japanization of the Middle Meiji. In Tradition 
and Modernization in Japanese Culture, D. H. Shively, ed., pp. 77–119. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Shultz, D. P. 2014. Amazon becomes first pure-play e-retailer to crash the top 
10. National Retail Federation (July 1). Retrieved September 21, 2014, 
from https://nrf.com/news/top-100-retailers.
Shumpeter, E. B. 1960. English Overseas Trade Structure, 1697–1808. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Siebert, H. 2005. The German Economy: Beyond the Social Market. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Simon, C. J. 2001. The supply side of labor during the Great Depression. The 
Journal of Economic History, 61 (4): 877–903.

R e f e r e n c e s
291
Sinn, H.-W. 2000. Germany’s economic unification: an assessment after ten 
years. Working paper 7586. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Eco-
nomic Research. Retrieved July 21, 2014, from www.nber.org/papers 
/w7586.
———. 2007. Can Germany Be Saved? The Malaise of the World’s First Welfare 
State. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Smellie, K. B. 1962. Great Britain Since 1688. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press.
Smiley, G. 1996. The U.S. economy in the 1920s. Economic History Associa-
tion online encyclopedia. Retrieved September 17, 2014, from http://
eh.net/encyclopedia/the-u-s-economy-in-the-1920s.
Smyth.com. 2011. History of retailing in North America. Retrieved Septem-
ber 22, 2014, from www.smyyth.com/Smyyth-White-Papers/History-of 
-US-Retailing.pdf.
Smyser, W. R. 1993. The Economy of United Germany. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press.
Snooks, G. D. 1996. The Dynamic Society: Exploring the Sources of Global 
Change. London: Routledge.
Snyder, L. L. 1978. Roots of German Nationalism. Bloomington: University 
of Indiana Press.
Snyder, W. R. 1993. The German Economy: Colossus at the Crossroads. Lon-
don: Longman.
Sombart, W. 1953. Medieval and modern commercial enterprise. In Enter-
prise and Secular Change F. C. Land and J. C. Riemersma, eds. Home-
wood, IL: Richard D. Irwin.
Spector, R. H. 1985. Eagle Against the Sun: The American War with Japan. 
New York: Vintage Books.
Spiro, J. 2010. The best and worst industries of the next decade. Retrieved 
September 22, 2014, from www.inc.com/news/articles/2010/01 
/best-and-worst-industries.html.
Stack, M. 2000. Local and regional breweries in America’s brewing industry, 
1965 to 1920. The Business History Review, 74 (3): 435–463.
Stark, G. D., and B. K. Lackner, eds. 1982. Essays on Culture and Society in 
Modern Germany. Arlington: University of Texas Press.
Statistiches Bundesamt (German Statistical Office). 2015. Foreign trade by 
sector. Retrieved May 1, 2015, from https://www.destatis.de/EN/Facts 
Figures/Indicators/LongTermSeries/ForeignTrade/lrahl03.html;jsessio
nid=00B16318011E3CE92BB002541AB13094.cae4
Stayer, J. M. 1991. The German Peasants’ War and Anabaptist Community of 
Goods. London: McGill-Queen’s University.
Stopler, G., K. Hauser, and K. Borchardt. 1967. The German Economy, 1870 
to the Present. New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
Sylla, R., and G. Toniolo. 1991. Patterns of European Industrialization; the 
Nineteenth Century. London: Routledge.
Tames, R. 1972. Economy and Society in Nineteenth-Century Britain. London: 
George Allen & Unwin.

R e f e r e n c e s
292
Tholfsen, T. R. 1984. Ideology and Revolution in Modern Europe. New York: 
Columbia University Press.
Thompson, C. B. 1915. Scientific management in practice. The Quarterly 
Journal of Economics, 29 (2): 262–307.
Thurow, L. 1992. Head to Head: The Coming Economic Battle Among Japan, 
Europe and America. New York: William Morrow.
Tilly, R. 1991. Germany. In Patterns of European Industrialization R. Sylla 
and G. Toniolo, eds., pp. 175–196. London: Routledge.
Tipton, F. B. 1993. Historical perspectives on the problem of regional inte-
gration in a united Germany. In United Germany and Europe: Towards 
1990 and Beyond, B. Hüppauf, R. Bubser and S. Wildner eds. Special issue 
of the European Studies Journal, 10 (1–2): 57–77.
Toira, K. 1988. Economic development, labor markets and industrial rela-
tions in Japan, 1905–1955. In The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. VI: 
The Twentieth Century. P. Duus, ed., pp. 606–653. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Trebilcock, C. 1981. The Industrialization of the Continental Powers, 1780–
1914. London: Longman.
Troy, M. 2000. Walmart Germany beefs up. Looksmart Articles. Retrieved 
August 23, 2005, from www.findarticles.com/p/articles.mi_m3092/
is_l_38/ai_53598975/print.
Turner, E. S. 1952. The Shocking History of Advertising. London: Michael Joseph.
Turner, H. A. Jr. 1985. German Big Business and the Rise of Hitler. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Turner, R. 1995. The British Economy in Transition. London: Routledge.
UK Office for National Statistics. 1998. Businesses by size. Retrieved August 
15, 2015, from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/taxonomy/search/index 
.html?pageSize=50&sortBy=none&sortDirection=none&newquery=data
+for+1991&content-type=publicationContentTypes&nscl=Businesses+by
+Size
U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2013. Employment projections. Retrieved 
September 20, 2014, from www.bls.gov/emp/ep_table_201.htm.
———. 2014. Employees on nonfarm payrolls by industry sector and selected 
industry detail, Table B-1. Retrieved September 20, 2014, from www.bls 
.gov/cgi-bin/print.pl/news.release/empsit.t17.htm.
U.S. Census Bureau. 1976. Historical statistics of the United States.
———. 2011a. Nativity of the population and place of birth of the native 
population: 1850 to 1990. Tech paper 29. Retrieved January 17, 2014, 
from 
http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentat9ion//
twps0029/tab01.html.
———. 2011b. Region and country or area of birth of the foreign-born 
population, 1850 to 1960. Tech paper 29. Retrieved January 17, 2014, 
from 
http://www.census.gov/population/www/documentat9ion//
twps0029/tab04.html.

R e f e r e n c e s
293
———. 2014. 2012 E-commerce multi-sector data tables (Released May 
22, 2014). Retrieved May 2, 2015, from www.census.gov/econj/estats 
/2012/all2012tables.html.
U.S. Department of Commerce. 2012. The automotive industry in the United 
States, retrieved August 12, 2015 from http://selectusa.commerce.gov 
/industry-snapshots/automotive-industry-united-states
U.S. Department of State: 2011 Investment Climate Statement—Japan. 
Bureau of Economic, Energy and Business Affairs. Retrieved September 
13, 2014, from www.state.gov/eb/ris/othr/ics/2011/157300.htm.
UsHistory.org. 2014. Early American railroads. In U.S. History Online 
Textbook. Retrieved January 13, 2014, from http://www.ushistory.org 
/us/25b.asp.
U.S. Internal Revenue Service (IRS). 1966. Statistics of Income Historical 
Summary 1916–1965. Washington, DC: U.S. Dept. of the Treasury IRS 
statistics division. Retrieved May 2, 2015, from www.irs.gov/pub/irs-soi 
/1665histsummary.pdf.
U.S. Senate, Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation. 2011. 
The Future of American Manufacturing: Maintaining America’s Competi-
tive Edge. Hearing, March 2, 2011. Washington, DC: Government Print-
ing Office.
Van Doren, C. 1991. A History of Knowledge: Past, Present and Future. New 
York: Ballantine Books.
Van Loon, H. 1999. The Story of Mankind. Retrieved August 7, 2005, from 
www.authorama.com/story-of-mankind-51.html.
Van Wolferen, K. 1989. The Enigma of Japanese Power. New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf.
Varley, H. P. 1984. Japanese Culture. 3rd ed. Honolulu: University of Hawaii 
Press.
Vogel, E.F. 1979. Japan as Number One: Lessons for America. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press.
Vogel, S. K. 2006. Japan Remodeled. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Von Staden, P. 2012. Fettered by the past in the march forward: ideology as 
an explanation for today’s malaise in Japan. Asia Pacific Business Review, 
18 (2): 187–202.
Wadhwa, V. 2012. The future of manufacturing is in America, not China. 
Foreign Policy (July 17). Retrieved August at 2, 2015 from http://
foreignpolicy.com/2012/07/17/the-future-of-manufacturing-is-in 
-america-not-china/
Walshe, J. G. 1991. Industrial organization and competitive policy. In The 
British Economy since 1945, N. F. R. Crafts and N. Woodward, eds., 
pp. 335–380. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Warsaw, S., C. D. Bromwell, and A. J. Tudisco. 1979. A Concise History of 
Japan from its Origin to the Present. Lanham, MD: University Press of 
America.

R e f e r e n c e s
294
Weber, M. 1958. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. New York: 
Scribner’s.
Weiner, A. 1968. The Hansa. In The Cambridge Medieval History, Vol. 2: 
Decline of Empire and Papacy, pp. 216–247. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. 216–247.
Westney, D. E. 1987. Imitation and Innovation: The Transfer of Western 
Organizational Patterns to Meiji Japan. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
Wever, K. S., and C. S. Allen. 1992. Is Germany a model for managers? Har-
vard Business Review (September-October): 36–43.
White, T. H. 1996. United States early radio history. Retrieved August 2, 
2915 from http://earlyradiohistory.us/index.html
Whitehall, A. M. 1991. Japanese Management: Tradition and Transition. 
London: Routledge.
Willcox, W. B. 1950. Star of Europe. New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Williams, E. E. 1896. Made in Germany. London: William Heinemann.
Wilson, C. 1962. Economic conditions. In The New Cambridge Modern His-
tory, vol. XI, F. H. Hinsley, ed., pp. 49–75. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Wilson, J. F. 1995. British Business History, 1720–1994. Manchester, UK: 
Manchester University.
Wilson, M. 2013. A. T. Kearney: China top market for expansion by apparel 
retailers. Retrieved September 2, 2014, from http://www.chainstoreage.
com/article/kearney-china-top-market-expansion-apparel-retailers.
Wilson, R., and Hogarth, T. with Bosworth, D., Dickerson, A., Green, A., 
Jacobs, C., Keep, E., Mayhew, K. and Watson, S. 2003. Tackling the Low 
Skills Equilibrium: A Review of Issues and Some New Evidence. London: 
Department for Trade and Industry.
Wood, C. 1994. The End of Japan Inc. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Woodward, L. 1962. The Age of Reform, 1815–1870. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
World Bank. 2014. World Development Indicators. Retrieved July 26, 2014, 
from http://databank.worldbank.org/data/views/reports/tableview.aspx.
World Population Review. 2013. Germany Population 2013. Retrieved 
December 10, 2013, from http://worldpopulationreview.com/countries 
/germany-population/.
Worldstopexports. 2014. Germany’s top 10 exports. Retrieved July 29, 2014, 
from www.worldstopexports.com/germanys-top-10-exports/2061.
Wright, W. J. 1996. The nature of early capitalism. In Germany: A New Social 
and Economic History, A. Ogilvie and B. Scribner, eds. pp. 181–208. Lon-
don: Arnold.
Yahoo Finance. 2014. Metro opens new store. Retrieved July 26, 2014, from 
http://finance.yahoo.com/news/metro-china-opens-store-haishu-070 
000855.html.

R e f e r e n c e s
295
Yamamura, K. 1990. The growth of commerce in medieval Japan. In K. Yamamura, 
ed. The Cambridge History of Japan, vol. III: Medieval Japan, pp. 344–395. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Yamawaki, H. 1903. Japan in the 
Beginning of the 20th Century. Tokyo: Ministry of Agriculture and Industry. 
Princeton University Library e-book digitized by Google. Retrieved Febru-
ary 2, 2014.
Yamazawa, I. 1998. The Asian economic crisis and Japan. The Developing 
Economies, 36 (3): 332–351.
Young, D., and P. Scott. 2004. Having their Cake . . . How the City and Big 
Bosses are Consuming UK Business. London: Kogan Page.
Youngson, A. J. 1960. The British Economy, 1920–1957. Cambridge: Harvard 
University.
Young, S. M. 1992. A framework for successful adoption ad performance of 
Japanese manufacturing practices in the United States. Academy of Man-
agement Review, 17 (4): 677–700.
Zawilska-Florczuk, M. and A. Ciechanowicz. 2011. One country, two socie-
ties? Germany twenty years after reunification. Warsaw: OSW Center for 
Eastern Studies.

AACSB (Association for the 
Advancement of Collegiate 
Schools of Business), 248
Abe, Shinzo, 196
absolute monarchies (absolutism), 
14–15
accounting reforms, Japan, 194, 
195–6
Advanced Silicone Materials, 174–5
advantage, competitive, 174, 175–6
advertising
consumer society and, 223–4
emergence in U.S., 212–13
radio broadcasting dependence 
on, 215
African Company, 7
Agenda 2010 (Germany), 118–19, 
132
agriculture
in Britain, redevelopment of, 53
double cropping system, 14
in Japan: farm income following 
World War I, 163; farming 
practices in Meiji period, 144, 
145t; innovations in 15th 
century, 14
three-plot rotation, 14
U.S., in 1930s, 210–11
water wheels and, 14
aircraft industry, 228–9, 229t
Aldi Group, 124, 126
American Telephone and Telegraph 
Company (AT&T), 216
Anderson, Chris, 266–7
Anderson, J. J., 97
Anglo-Dutch Unilever Corporation, 
40
Anglo-Japanese Alliance, 163
Anglo-Persian Oil Company, 218
Arab oil embargo (1973), 36, 45
artificial intelligence (AI), 256
Association for the Advancement of 
Collegiate Schools of Business 
(AACSB), 248
Association of Southeast Asian 
Nations (ASEAN), 246
atomistic competition, 27–8
AT&T (American Telephone and 
Telegraph Company), 216
automobile industry
in Britain, 40
consolidation of companies, 219
foreign car assembly in U.S., 260, 
262–3
globalization of, 259–63
Japanese, 191, 192t, 201, 
259–61, 260t
as leader in manufacturing sector, 
259
synergy with oil industry, 218
in U.S., 219–22, 259–63
Bank of England, 7
Bank of Japan, 147
banks and banking
Germany: commercial banks 
(Hausbanken), 92–3, 129–30; 
investment banking and 
globalization of industry, 128, 
129–30
Index
Figures are indicated by f, and tables by t following the page number.

I n d e x
298
history of, 8
Japan: banking sector 
consolidations, 191–4, 193t; 
Meiji period, 146–7; twentieth 
century, 164–5; zaibatsu banks, 
164–5, 166, 167
U.S.: bank failures during Great 
Depression, 211–12
Bastasin, Carlo, 128
BDA (Federation of German 
Employers’ Association), 93
BDI (Federation of German 
Industry), 93
beer-hall putsch (1923), 85
bills of exchange, 8
Birdzell, L. E., 20
Bissel, George, 217
Black, C. E., 47–8
Blair, Tony, 55
Bloomquist, L. E., 230
boards of directors, Japanese, 195
bookkeeping, double entry, 5, 
17–18
Boxer Rebellion (1900), 167
Bremen, Germany, 81
Britain. See Great Britain
British Airways, 44
British Broadcasting Corporation, 
43
British Petroleum (Britoil), 44
Bruchey, Stuart, 221
bubble economy
examples of, 186
in Japan, 183–4, 186
Bundesbank (Germany), 92
business management
codes of ethics, 248
education for, 248–9
professionalization of, 207–8, 
225, 247–9
Calvin, John, 17
Calvinism, 17
Canon, diversification of, 175
capitalism
in Europe, 4
managed, 98–9, 122
organized, 82, 87, 123–4
trade as driving force, 13
cartels
decartelization in postwar 
Germany, 90
Japanese, 159, 163–4
Weimar Republic, 84, 85, 86, 90
Central Electricity Board (Great 
Britain), 43
CET (common external tariff 
clause), 47
chambers of commerce, German, 93
Chandler, A. D. Jr., 30
Chandler, Alfred, 248
Channel Tunnel Rail Link, 69
chemical/pharmaceutical industry
consolidations in Britain, 40
emergence in U.S., 213
German leadership in, 29
globalization and, 252, 253t
Chevrolet Motor Company, 220
China
economic strength in 21st 
century, 187, 265
Japanese retail outlets in, 199–201
technology and hollowing of 
manufacturing industry in, 
255–6
as trading bloc, 246
war with Japan, 167
Chrysler Corporation, 261, 262
Churchill, Winston, 218
Clark, G. N., 4, 13
Clark, Maurice, 217
Cole, Robert, 185
colonial America, 5
commerce and industry
early commercial law, 6–7
evolution of, 3–11
financial infrastructure, birth of, 8
formation of commercial 
institutions, 7
banks and banking—continued

I n d e x
299
future of, 265–7
institutions of, 5–8
licenses for trade, 1600–1750, 5
technology-driven industrial 
revolution, 266–7
transition to modern age, 4–5
See also under names of individual 
countries; trade
commercial banks (Hausbanken), 
92–3, 129–30
commercial institutions, 7
commercial insurance, history of, 8
commercial law, 6–7
Commerzbank (Germany), 92
common external tariff clause 
(CET), 47
Commonwealth of Nations, 46
Company Law (Japan, 1893), 165
competitive advantage, 174, 175–6
concentration camps, German, 87
conglomerates
East Germany, 100
Japanese. See under Japan, 
twentieth century
U.S., 234–6
consensual management, 183
construction industry, British, 57
Construction Ministry (Japan), 188
consumer credit, 222–3
consumer society
Japanese, neglect by business 
system, 177–8, 190
postwar consumer demand and 
U.S. economic growth,  
222–4
wages and, 222–3, 223t
corporate governance
“Company with Committees” 
model, 197
Japanese reforms, 194–7, 198f
corporate socialism, 43
corporations, invention of, 5–6
cost management systems, 183
Cowling, K., 202
Crafts, N. F. R., 25, 33
D21 Initiative (Germany), 110, 121t
daimyos, status in Meiji period, 140
DBV (German Farmers’ Union), 
93, 94
deindustrialization
in Britain, 31, 62
changing character of jobs that 
remain, 258
declining domestic investment 
and employment, 259
factors contributing to, 258, 265t
globalization and, 256–8, 257f, 
257t
U.S., 243
demographics
changes in Germany, 114–15, 130–2
effects on trade, 14–15
globalization and, 246–7
See also population growth
deposit banking, 8
depressions, economic
Great Depression (1800s): in 
Britain, 26, 32–3; in U.S., 207
Great Depression (1930s): in 
Britain, 36, 38; industrial 
production changes, 210t; in 
Japan, 166; in U.S., 209–12
recession of 2008–2010: in 
Germany, 122, 123t, 132–3; in 
U.S., 261–2, 264
Deregulation and Contracting-Out 
Act (UK, 1994), 62
Deutsche Bank, 92, 130
Deutsche Borse (Neuer Markt), 
closure of, 101–2
DGB (Federation of German Trade 
Unions), 93
Digital Broadcasting Initiative 
(Germany), 110
DIHT (German Industry and Trade 
Association), 93
diversification of businesses
globalization and, 236–7
in Japan, 175
in U.S., 233–4

I n d e x
300
DKB group, 170t
double entry bookkeeping, 5, 17–18
Dresdener Bank, 92
Drucker, P. F., 246
Dunkerley, J., 44
Dunkerley and Hare, 44
Durant, W. C., 220, 221
Durant Motor Company, 221–2
e-commerce, 62, 124, 200, 242, 
242t, 243
East Germany. See under Germany, 
post-reunification
East India Company, 7
economic growth
“beneficent revolutions” in, 20
greed and, 18
human factors in, 18–19
industrialization and, 19–20, 19t
inequalities of income and wealth 
in, 18
scientific method and, 20
slavery not contributing to, 18–19
See also under names of specific 
countries
economic policies, in 17th century, 16
ECSC (European Coal and Steel 
Community), 90
Edison, Thomas Alva, 29, 214
educational systems
Germany, structural problems, 
106
Great Britain, 68–9
Japanese, modernization during 
Meiji period, 141
EEC. See European Economic 
Community (EEC)
EFTA (European Free Trade 
Association), 46, 47
Elbaum, Bernard, 25
Electric Revolution, 29
electrical industry
applications of electricity, 29
emergence in U.S., 214–15
sectors, 214
employment
deindustrialization and, 259
in Great Depression: female,  
209–10, 211t; U.S. 
unemployment, 225
lifetime, in Japan, 152, 175
See also under names of individual 
countries
English Disease, 63
Enterprise: the Dynamic Economy of 
a Free People (Bruchey), 221
Enterprise Act (UK, 2002), 69
entrepreneurship
in colonial America, 5
Germany: regulations and 
taxation as barriers for, 116–18; 
venture capital limitations, 
108–9, 116
Great Britain, 73–4
Japan: Meiji government support 
of, 142
Erhard, Ludwig, 89
EU. See European Union (EU)
European Atomic Energy 
Community (EURATOM), 90
European Coal and Steel 
Community (ECSC), 90
European Common Market, 179
European Community (EC), 90
European Economic Community 
(EEC)
British membership in, 36, 46k, 
47, 55
France’s opposition to British 
membership, 46, 47
Treaty of Rome establishing, 90
European Free Trade Association 
(EFTA), 46, 47
European Recovery Act (U.S.), 36
European Union (EU)
British membership in, 47, 48–9, 55
British trading partners before 
joining, 46
development assistance for 
depressed industrial areas, 52

I n d e x
301
entrepreneurship in, 74
EU ban on imports of British 
beef, 48–9
formation of, 90–1
mercantilist policies, 250–1
monetary reform and 
introduction of euro, 52
Single European Act (1987), 46, 
51–2, 90
as trading bloc, 246
Exxon Corporation, 218–19
factories, Japanese, 147, 154
Falklands War (1982), 31
“fast fashion,” 200, 243
FDIs (foreign direct investments), 191
Federal Republic of Germany (West 
Germany). See under Germany, 
post-reunification
Federation of German Employers’ 
Association (BDA), 93
Federation of German Industry 
(BDI), 93
Federation of German Trade Unions 
(DGB), 93
feudal system, 17
Finance Ministry (Japan), 188
financial infrastructure, birth of, 8
Fisher Body Corporation, 220
Flynn, Michael, 185
Ford, Henry, 220–1
Ford Motor Company, 219,  
220–1, 261
Fordism (Taylorism), 39
foreign direct investments (FDIs), 191
Formosa (Taiwan), 167
fossil fuels, 248
France
economic growth in 21st century, 
265–6
occupation of the Ruhr, 85
opposition to British membership 
in EEC, 46, 47
Freedom’s Forge (Herman), 229
French Revolution, 16
GDP. See gross domestic product 
(GDP)
General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT), 250
General Electric Company (GE), 
214–15
General Motors (GM), 219, 220, 
261, 262
Gerlach, M. L., 191
German Broadband Initiative, 110
“German disease,” 105
German Farmers’ Union (DBV), 
93, 94
German Industry and Trade 
Association (DIHT), 93
Germany
commerce and industry, 1 
920–1990, 79–96; business 
system periods, 79–81, 95, 99
commerce and industry,  
pre-World War I: administrative 
districts (Länder), 81; 
consolidation of industry, 81; 
employment and exports, 81–2, 
82t; leadership in chemical 
industry, 29. See also Weimar 
Republic
commerce and industry, after 
World War I, 81–6; beer-hall 
putsch (1923), 85; capturing 
British markets for steel and 
coal, 37; concentration camps, 
87; economic difficulties, 83; 
largest manufacturers not 
affected by war, 83–4; losses 
in Versailles treaty, 82–3; 
monetary inflation, 85; under 
Nazi government, 86–7; as 
organized capitalism, 82, 87; 
post-war recovery, factors 
contributing to, 84; production 
of war material in 1930s, 87; 
Ruhr occupation and, 85; 
vertical integration of business, 
84–5; war’s impact on, 82–3

I n d e x
302
commerce and industry, after 
1950, 90–5; banking system, 
92–3; chambers of commerce, 
93; co-determination policy, 
94; competitors as social 
partners, 91; continued 
emphasis on manufacturing, 
94; evolution of business 
system, 91; limited venture 
capital role in, 92; management 
culture, 92; Mittelstand in, 89, 
91–2, 94; strength of modern 
economy, 95–6; trade and 
industry associations, 93–4. 
See also postwar economy below
economic growth, 19–20, 19t, 
265, 265t
management style, 110–11
postwar economy, 1945–1950: 
currency reform in Western 
Zone, 88–9; decartelization 
process, 90; as economic 
miracle, 79, 80–1, 88–9, 
95; government support for 
entrepreneurism, 89; heavy 
industry leading recovery, 89; 
map of, 80f; reasons for high 
growth, 89–90; shift from war 
goods production to goods and 
services, 83–6; shift in national 
character following defeat by 
Allies, 87; as social market 
economy, 88
Germany, post-reunification, 
97–133
closure of Neuer Markt 
eliminating high-tech IPOs, 
101–2
core manufacturing sectors, 
strength of, 105–6, 108, 131
East Germany: changing 
production system from central 
command to social-market 
system, 100–1; impact of 
unification on commerce and 
industry, 101–3, 102t, 113; 
manufacturing conglomerates 
(Kombinate), 100; radical 
political parties in, 113; 
Soviet domination of trade 
before unification, 95, 99; 
Treuhandanstalt, 100, 101
economic growth, 2005–2013, 
122, 123t
economic policy goals, 107
export market shares by sector, 104t
globalization and. See 
globalization of commerce and 
industry
ICT industries: government 
initiatives supporting, 109–10, 
111–12, 120–2; weaknesses of 
sector, 103–4, 105
immigrant population, 131
limited access to venture capital, 
108–9, 116
managed capitalism of, 99, 122
population decline, 130–1, 131t
recession of 2008, 122, 123t, 128
reforms in industry and banking: 
change from house banks to 
investment banking, 128,  
129–30; globalization of 
industry, 128; laws and 
administrative changes, 130; 
stabilization of employment 
during recession, 128; structural 
changes in 1990s, 127–8
replacing nuclear power with 
renewable energy, 120
retail sector, 123–7; changes since 
1970s, 124–5; international 
markets, 124–5; Internet sales, 
124; mixed reception of foreign 
retailers in, 125–7; as organized 
capitalism, 123–4; size of, 123; 
Walmart’s failure to  
understand German culture, 
125–7
Germany—continued

I n d e x
303
reunification process: 
beneficiaries of, East vs. West 
German perceptions, 101–3, 
102t; costs of integrating 
economies, 107–8; GDP 
and unemployment changes, 
102–3, 103t; infrastructure 
differences, 113; ongoing 
assimilation problems, 113; 
societal differences, 114
shares and values of exports,  
128, 129t
slowing of economic growth rate, 
103–8; causes of, 116; medium-
to-high-tech sector losses, 106; 
patent applications reflecting, 
105–6; problems facing 
business system, 105; structural 
problems of educational system, 
106; taxation and regulations 
limiting entrepreneurism, 
116–18
social welfare systems: economic 
distortions of, 114–15, 118; 
increasing pressures on, 120; 
pension adjustments under 
Agenda 2010, 119; promoting 
high unemployment, 107–8, 
114, 132
structural reforms, economic and 
social: Agenda 2010, 118–19, 
132; calls for, 105–8; economic 
stimulus and tax cuts, 120; 
indications for, 114–15
weakening of traditional economic 
strengths, 114; changes in 
world economy affecting, 114; 
demographic changes and, 
114–15, 131–2; poor labor 
market performance, 115
West Germany: business/
government collaboration in, 
97–9; economy vs. communist 
states in 1980s, 97–8, 98t; 
impact of unification on 
commerce and industry, 102, 
113; managed capitalism of, 
98–9; as mixed economy, 95
Gesner, Abraham, 217
global warming, 248
globalization of commerce and 
industry, 245–68
automobile industry, 259–63
Britain: losing dominance in 
export of manufactured goods, 
30, 37–8; reshaping business 
system for global economy, 69
competition between trading 
blocs, 246
deindustrialization and, 256–8
diversification and, 236–7
forces shaping, 245–7
German industry and, 128
manufacturing, 255–8
multinational enterprises, 236–7
as technology-driven industrial 
revolution, 266–7
transformation of business, 
249–51; corporate investments 
in research and development, 
251–2, 253t; dependence 
on U.S. dollar, 249–50; re-
emergence of mercantilism, 
250–1; very large businesses 
dominating all economic 
sectors, 250
U.S. See under United States
Glouchevitch, P., 87
gold standard, 159
Great Britain—commerce and 
industry, 1918–1990, 35–54
about, 35–6
business during interwar 
years (1918–1939), 36–41; 
automobile production and 
sales, 40; business system 
categories, 40–1; chemical 
industry, 40; economic 
impact of 1929 depression, 
36, 38; export losses offset 

I n d e x
304
by domestic demands, 38; 
Import Duties Act (1932), 
38; loss of export dominance 
in staple industries, 37–8; 
mergers and consolidations, 
40; nationalization of 
threatened industries, 43; 
purchasing controlling 
interest in Anglo-Persian Oil 
Company, 218; restoration 
of capitalist economy, 38; 
return to peacetime economy, 
37–41; scientific management, 
38–9; second general industries, 
39–40
business during reconstruction 
(1945–1972), 41–5; business 
sectors, 42; as Commonwealth 
of Nations, 46; decline in 
exports, 45; dissolution and 
displacement of businesses, 
41; financial and military 
dependence on U.S., 41; 
Marshall Plan aid, 36, 41; 
near-failure of business system, 
45; opening Commonwealth 
markets to American producers, 
41; production of North Sea 
gas and oil, 41; structural 
changes in business system, 
42–5
business after 1973, 47–52; 
advanced and diversified 
manufacturing base, 52; 
agricultural industry, 53; 
business integration after 
1987, 49–50; changes in 
national character, 50–1; 
Conservative government 
economic and social policies, 
43, 44, 47, 55–6; deregulation 
and privatization policies, 51; 
economic prosperity in mid- to 
late 1980s, 48; EU ban on 
imports of British beef, 48–9; 
failed government attempts 
to revitalize economy, 47–8; 
foreign investment in, 51; 
inflation and, 47; international 
competition, 49; legislation 
restricting labor strikes, 47; 
retaining historical ties with 
Commonwealth and U.S., 
53; SEAct impact on, 51–2; 
strengths of, 53; Thatcher 
reducing role of government 
in, 48
economic decline: causes of, 
26–7, 31–2; competition and, 
33, 37; factors contributing 
to, 30, 41; failure to institute 
institutional change, 31, 
33–4; government funding 
of unprofitable nationalized 
industries, 31; impact of wars 
on, 31, 32, 33; labor union 
demands and, 27, 31, 44; 
lack of innovation in stable 
industries, 30, 41; losing 
dominance of global market 
for manufactured goods, 30, 
37–8; noneconomic causes, 
27; relinquishing industrial 
leadership to U.S. and 
Germany, 31–2; traditional 
small-scale firms contributing 
to, 33–4
international trade: EEC 
membership, 36, 46, 47; 
EFTA membership, 46, 47; 
EU membership, 47, 48–9, 
55; exports and imports by 
region, 49, 49t, 50t; focus 
on European markets, 45–7, 
49–50; in interwar years, 38; 
with Japan, 46; renegotiation  
of trade agreements with  
Japan, 161; trade volume, 
1910–1992, 37t
Great Britain—continued

I n d e x
305
nationalization of industries: 
as corporate socialism, 
43; denationalization and 
renationalization of, 44, 48; 
fair prices paid for nationalized 
firms, 44; iron and steel 
industry, 44; as protection of 
threatened industries, 31, 43; 
public corporations, 43
Navigation Acts, 16
second industrial revolution,  
28–9; attitudes limiting 
investment in second-
generation industries, 30; 
falling behind in new industries, 
29–31, 39–40; lack of 
technological innovation, 29
slowing of economic growth, 25–
6, 26t; cost of maintaining navy 
as drag on economy, 28; mining 
and manufacturing industries, 
importance of, 28, 28t; phases 
of, 32–3; shift from industrial 
to service economy, 30, 31
social welfare programs, 43–4, 47, 
50–1
Great Britain—commerce and 
industry after 1990, 55–76
business system transition, 
56–9; consolidation and 
mergers of firms, 57, 57t; 
deindustrialization, 31, 62
economic growth, 19–20, 19t, 
265–6, 265t
employment: changes by sector, 57–
9, 58t, 74; encouraging stability 
in, 67–8; manufacturing sector,  
Enterprise Act (2002), 69
future of, 69–74; 
improving productivity 
and competitiveness, 
69; knowledge-based 
manufacturing, 64, 
69–71, 72–3; promoting 
entrepreneurship, 73–4; 
reshaping UK business system 
for global economy, 69
globalization and. See 
globalization of commerce and 
industry
manufacturing sector: decline since 
end of World War II, 62–7, 
75; low skills equilibrium in, 
71–2; productivity gap, UK vs. 
industrial competitors, 65–6, 
65t; reasons for decline, 63–4
manufacturing strategy of 
Labor government (2003): 
encouraging science and 
innovation, 68; implementation, 
67; infrastructure and 
improvements, 69; investment in 
key industries, 68; knowledge-
based manufacturing, 64; 
reshaping business system, 75; 
seven pillars of, 66–7; skills 
development and education, 
68–9
rebuilding commerce and 
industry, 25–34
retailing sector, strength of, 62, 
75
service sector, 59–62; barriers 
to growth, 60–1; economic 
contributions, 60; growth of, 
60, 61t, 74–5; job creation, 59
Great Depressions. See depressions, 
economic
greed, and economic growth, 18
Green, G. P., 258
gross domestic product (GDP)
comparison by country,  
1700–2013, 19–20, 19t
industrialization and, 19–20, 20t
retailing sector contributions to, 
239–40, 240t
top economies in 21st century, 
265–6, 265t
unemployment changes and, East 
vs. West Germany, 102–3, 103t

I n d e x
306
group identification, in Japan, 170–1
guild system, 7
Hanseatic League, 7
Hare, P. C., 44
Hare, Paul, 63–4
Harley, C. K., 31
hausbanken (commercial banks), 
92–3, 129–30
healthcare industry, U.S., 238
Heath, Edward, 47, 48
Hennessey, R. A. S., 29
Herman, Arthur, 229
Hewitt, Patricia, 64
Hirohito, Emperor of Japan, 156
Hitler, Adolf, 86
Honda
export of U.S.–made autos to 
other countries, 262
keiretsu of, 201
motorcycle production, 174
Hooks, G., 230
human factors, in industrialization, 
18–19
Hüppauf, Bernd, 99
hyperspecialization, 266
I. G. Farben, 84, 219
ICTs. See information and 
communications technologies 
(ICTs)
immigration
consumer market and, 223, 224t
German population and, 131
social welfare systems and, 120
U.S. population and, 223, 224t, 
246–7
See also population growth
Imperial Chemical Industries (ICI), 
40
India, as trading bloc, 246
industrial institutions
birth of, 16–19
double entry bookkeeping, 5, 
17–18
human factors in, 18–19
Protestant ethic in, 17
Industrial Revolution(s)
business management  
and, 247
factors in, 20–1
second: impact on British 
economy, 28–9; industries of, 
28; loosening dependence on 
traditional raw materials, 29; 
scientific management in, 247
slavery not contributing to, 18
third, as technology-driven, 33, 
266–7
industrialization
demographics and, 14–15
economic benefits, 19–20
evolution of, 21
GDP for selected countries, 
1700–2013, 19–20, 19t
human factors in, 18–19
manufacturing specialization, 15
path to, 13–21
post-World War II, Japan and 
Germany vs. U.S. and Great 
Britain, 34
preconditions for, 139, 143–4
top ten industrial countries since 
1980, 20, 20t
See also deindustrialization
inflation, 47, 85
information and communications 
technologies (ICTs)
competitiveness and productivity 
improvements using, 73
economy based on, 249
European job creation programs, 
122
facilitating globalization, 246
Germany: government initiatives 
supporting, 109–10, 111–12, 
120–2; weakness of sector, 
103–4, 105
globalization: interconnectedness 
of technologies in, 266; 

I n d e x
307
performance of sector, 252
research and development, 
21–252, 251t, 253t
as third industrial revolution, 33, 
266–7
U.S. economic growth and, 236, 
237t
voice over Internet protocol 
(VoIP) providers, 251–2, 251t
information revolution, 21
institutional change, 31
insurance companies, 8, 164
International Telecommunication 
Union (ITU), 122
Internet
D21 Initiative (Germany), 110
mobile services, 121
transformation of business by, 
236, 245, 249, 266
VoIP providers, 251t, 252–2
See also e-commerce; information 
and communications 
technologies (ICTs)
iron and steel industry, British, 44
Isao, Nakatsuka, 185
Ishihara, S., 182
Japan
age of civil wars, 4–5
agricultural innovations, 15th 
century, 14
British exports and imports, 46
economic growth since 1700, 
19–20, 19t
emperor’s personage as  
sacred, 161
map, 138f
Tokugawa period: centers 
of commerce, 144–5; 
industrialization preconditions 
established during, 139, 143–4; 
iron and steel industry during, 
154; isolation during, 4, 154; 
merchant firms as social groups, 
171; population growth, 14–15
Japan, Meiji period, 137–57
after World War I, 156
agriculture and commerce, 
overhaul of, 143–52; centers 
of commerce, 144–6; 
commercial code enactment, 
144; communications and 
transportation systems, 146; 
creating modern industrial 
system, 147–52; economic 
policy changes, 146; farming 
practices and income, 144, 145t; 
financial system, 146–7; growth 
of large firms, 147, 148t; 
industrialization preconditions 
inherited from Tokugawa 
period, 143–4; privatization 
of factories establishing 
entrepreneur class, 147
business structure: family-
owned retail shops and supply 
chain organizations, 153; 
large industries (zaibatsu 
conglomerates), 150, 152; 
physical distribution system, 
153; privately owned small 
businesses, 152–3; small to 
mid-size manufacturing/
processing industries, 153–4
Company Law (1893), 165
modern industrial system, creation 
of, 147–52, 156; employment 
by gender, 149t; government-
owned factories as models for 
businessmen, 147; introduction 
of modern factories, 154; iron 
and steel industry, 154; major 
industries and employment, 
147, 148t; mining, 151; silk 
production, 150–1; textile 
industry, 151–2; transition from 
agricultural society to industrial 
power, 138–9, 143–4; women 
workers, 148, 149t; working 
conditions and hours, 147–50; 

I n d e x
308
zaibatsu system origins, 150
modernization of basic 
institutions, 141–3; adoption 
of Western organizational 
structure and processes, 138–9; 
development of ocean shipping, 
143; education system, 141; 
government employment 
processes, 141; models from 
other countries speeding 
economic growth, 141, 156; 
nationwide telegraph system, 
146; railway construction,  
142–3; road network 
improvements, 146; support  
for entrepreneurs, 142
opening ports to Western trade, 
137, 154, 156
revolution restoring imperial 
rule: civil wars following, 140; 
creating democratic political 
system, 160–1; daimyo status 
changes, 140; goals of, 139–40; 
replacing warrior-samurai 
system with universal military 
service, 140; samurai leaders of, 
137–8, 139
transition to Showa period, 156
Japan, twentieth century, 159–79
business system: corporate 
governance reforms, 194–7, 
198f; factors limiting 
growth of, 178–9; four-part 
structure, 162; hollowing 
out of manufacturing base, 
178, 190; importance of 
group identification, 170–1; 
joint-stock companies, 162; 
keiretsu (business networks), 
169, 170t, 176–7, 190–1; 
larger firms as reincarnations 
of zaibatsu, 169; legal forms 
of business enterprises, 165; 
MITI role in success of, 
172–3; modern Japanese 
kaisha, 171–3; neglecting 
Japanese consumer market, 
177–8, 190; new organizational 
structures, 165–7; outsourcing 
of manufacturing to other 
countries, 178, 191, 192t; 
periods of expansion and 
retraction, 159–60; postwar, 
169–71; sole proprietorships, 
162; strong trading blocs 
affecting, 179. See also 
postwar business concepts 
below; zaibatsu (family-owned 
conglomerates) below
commerce and industry, 
1890s–1920: business system, 
161, 162–3; capturing 
export markets from Britain 
following World War I, 36–7; 
government investment of 
Chinese war indemnity funds 
in industries, 159; political 
system formation parallel 
to, 160–1; renegotiation of 
trade agreements with foreign 
powers, 161; Sino-Japanese War 
(1894–1895), 159, 162; tariffs 
and customs systems, 161; war 
with Russia (1904–1905), 156, 
162; World War I as boom 
period for, 156, 161–2, 163
commerce and industry,  
1920–1945, 163–8; 
agricultural production, 163; 
business consolidations, 166; 
cartelization of industry, 159, 
163–4; economic disruptions 
following World War I, 
163; exports, 1925–1935, 
166–7, 166t; growth of 
second-generation industries, 
163; military buildup and 
expansionism of 1930s, 156, 
159, 160, 167; military 
Japan, Meiji period—continued

I n d e x
309
successes, 168; shipbuilding, 
163; trading companies, 164–5; 
war with China, 167; withdrawal 
from League of Nations, 167
commerce and industry, postwar 
recovery: auto sales in U.S., 
259–60; as bubble economy, 
183–4, 186; business system, 
169–71, 173–7; destruction of 
infrastructure, 168; economic 
and political structure, 168; 
economic growth in 1950s, 
168–9; forced dissolution of 
zaibatsu, 165, 168; government 
policies supporting, 189–90, 
189t; Korean War and easing of 
Japanese business restrictions, 
168; nationalization of 
strategic industries, 168; 
second economic miracle, 160, 
168–9. See also postwar business 
concepts below
financial system: banks and 
banking, 164–5, 191–4, 193t; 
downturn of 1920s, 164–5; 
gold standard stabilizing, 159; 
Great Depression and, 166; 
insurance companies, 164; 
zaibatsu and, 164–5, 166, 167
kaisha (Japanese corporation): 
authority over all aspects of 
employees’ lives, 170–1; as 
fundamental social group, 
171–2; MITI role in success of, 
172–3; paternalistic practices, 
172; workers’ identification 
with, 170–1
Law on Organization of 
Important Industries (1925), 
164
postwar business concepts, 
173–7; cooperation between 
government and industries 
in policy development, 174, 
187–90; cultural concepts and 
tendencies in, 173–4; drive to 
survive, 174, 175; exploitation 
of competitive advantage, 174, 
175–6; growth bias, 174–5; 
keiretsu linkage, 176–7; long-
term approach to investment, 
174–5; national character and 
business success, 172; personnel 
policies, 177; reliance on 
debt financing, 177; taxation 
policies, 177
zaibatsu (family-owned 
conglomerates): dominance of 
business system, 159–60, 162, 
167; forced dissolution after 
World War II, 165, 168; Great 
Depression and, 166; history 
of, 165; lifetime employment 
under, 152, 175; as nation-
building industries, 152, 154; 
new zaibatsu, 162; origins 
in Meiji period, 150, 152; 
profiting from government 
militarism, 167; trading 
companies of, 164
Japan, twenty-first century, 181–203
collapse of bubble economy, 
183–4, 186
economic stagnation since 1990s, 
181, 184–6, 187, 201, 203
economic system: changes in, 
191–9; accounting reforms, 
194, 195–6; audit boards, 
internal (kansayaku), 197; 
banking sector consolidations, 
191–4, 193t; commercial 
code amendments, 197; 
composition of boards of 
directors, 195; corporate 
governance reforms, 194–7, 
198f; export markets, 2012, 
189t; exports and imports 
by commodity, 202t; foreign 
direct investments, 191; 
keiretsu system delaying 

I n d e x
310
technological changes, 
197–9; maturing of economy, 
185; offshore expansion 
and outsourcing, 191, 
192t; overseas investments 
as substitute for domestic 
production, 202; strengths  
and challenges, 187,  
201–2, 202t
government as partner 
to business, 187–90; 
Construction Ministry, 
188; Finance Ministry, 
188; hollowing out of 
manufacturing base, 178, 190, 
201; MITI, 188–9; neglect of 
domestic market, 190; policies 
constraining economic reform, 
187; protection of domestic 
market against foreign 
competition, 188–9
keiretsu network in, 190–1, 203
retailing sector: acquisition of 
U.S. convenience store chains, 
201; domestic sales, 199; 
Internet sales, 200; overseas 
expansion of, 199–201
See also globalization of commerce 
and industry
The Japan That Can Say No 
(Ishihara), 182
Japanese management system, 
183, 184, 187. See also Japan, 
twentieth century, postwar 
business concepts
joint-stock companies
history of, 7
Japanese, 162, 165
limited liability, 165
as predecessors to corporations, 6
just in time (JIT) manufacturing, 183
kaisha (Japanese corporation). See 
under Japan, twentieth century
Kaizen (continuous worker 
improvement), 183
Kalleberg, A. L., 169
keiretsu (business networks)
common features, 176–7
continuing importance in 21st 
century, 203
fading of, 190–1
in Japanese business system, 169, 
170t
relationships in, 178
types of, 176
kerosene, 217
knowledge-based industries
Britain: computer games software, 
69–71; knowledge-based 
manufacturing, 64, 72–3
globalization and, 246
See also information and 
communications technologies 
(ICTs)
Kollmeyer, C. D., 258
Komatsu Electronics Materials 
(KEM), 174–5
Kombinate (manufacturing 
conglomerates), 100, 101
Korea, Japanese annexation of, 167
Korean War, 168
Kreiger, J., 50
Law on Organization of Important 
Industries (Japan, 1925), 164
Lazonick, William, 25
League of Nations, Japanese 
withdrawal from, 167
Leybourne, S. J., 25, 33
licenses for trade, 1600–1750, 5
limited partnerships, 6
Lincoln, J. R., 169, 191
Ling-Temco-Vought (LTV), 234–5
Linneman, P., 243
Lloyds of London, 8
Locke, Gary, 254–5
London Passenger Transport  
Board, 43
Japan, twenty-first century—continued

I n d e x
311
low skills equilibrium (LSEq), 71
Luther, Martin, 17
machine tools, numerically 
controlled, 266
mad cow disease, 49
Major, John, 44, 48, 55–6
management style, German, 110–11
Manchuria, 167
manufacturing sector
customized production via 3D 
printers, 249, 256, 266
decline in output since 2000, 64–5
globalization and changes in, 255–8
productivity gap, UK vs. industrial 
competitors, 65–6, 65t
specialization of, 15, 266
U.S., growth forecasts, 238–9
See also under names of specific 
countries
“marble cake federalism,” 97
Marconi, Guglielmo, 215, 216
marine insurance, 8
marketing industry, 212–13
Marsh, Peter, 266
Marshall Plan, 36, 41, 89
Matsukata Masayoshi, 146
Matsushita Company, 175
McGuire, Joseph, 238–9
Me-plc (Ich-AG) programs (Agenda 
2010), 119
mercantilism
European, 4, 15–16
globalization and reemergence of, 
250–1
mergers and consolidations
in Britain, 40, 57, 57t
in U.S., 227, 233–7
Merkel, Angela, 120
Mills, T. C., 25, 33
mining
in Britain, continuing importance 
of, 28, 28t
in Meiji Japan, 151
steam power in, 21
Ministry of Economy, Trade and 
Industry (METI), Japan, 188
Ministry of International Trade and 
Industry (MITI), Japan, 172–3, 
188–9
Mitsubishi group, 164, 169, 170t, 
203
Mitsui group, 169, 170t
Mittelstand (small to mid-size 
firms), 89, 91–2, 94
Miyazawa, Kiichi, 183
monarchies, absolute, 14–15
Moy, D. C., 243
multinational enterprises (MNEs), 
236–7
NAFTA (North American Free Trade 
Agreement), 46, 179, 246
National Broadcasting Company 
(NBC), 216
national character
British, changes after 1973, 50–1
German, following defeat by 
Allies, 87
Japanese, and business success, 172
National Plate Glass  
Company, 220
nationalized industries
in Britain, 42–5
as corporate socialism, 43
Navigation Acts, 16
Nazi Party, German business under, 
86–7
NBC (National Broadcasting 
Company), 216
Neuer Markt (Deutsche Borse), 
closure of, 101–2
New Economy, 236, 237t
Nippon Yusen Kaisha (NYK), 143
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA), 46, 179, 
246
North Rhine-Westphalia, Germany, 81
North Sea oil and gas production, 
36, 41

I n d e x
312
Obama, Barak, 261
ocean shipping, Japanese, 143
oil industry
automobile industry and growth 
of, 217–19
British investment in Anglo-
Persian Oil Company, 218
consolidation with related 
industries, 218
curtailed demand for oil during 
Depression, 218
North Sea oil and gas, 36, 41
U.S., 217–19
oligopolistic industries, U.S., 227
Osaka Spinning Company, 154
outsourcing, Japanese, 178, 191, 
192t
Overseas Sterling Area (OSA) 
countries, 45–6
Pacioli, Fra Luca, 17
patent applications, German,  
105–6
performance measurement systems, 
183
Perry, Matthew C. (Commodore), 
156
petrochemical industry, 218–19
pharmaceutical industry. See 
chemical/pharmaceutical 
industry
plague, 14th century, 14
political economics, 4
Pollard, S., 31–2
population growth
European, in cities and  
towns, 15
Germany, 130–1, 131t
impact on trade, 14–15
U.S., 223, 224t, 246–7
printing technology, 3D, 249, 256, 
266
Protestant ethic, 17
public corporations, nationalized 
industries as, 43
radio broadcasting
antitrust cases against, 217
dependence on advertising,  
215
emergence in U.S., 215–17
radio networks, 216
Radio Corporation of America 
(RCA), 216
railroads, Japanese, 142–3
recession of 2008–2010
in Germany, 122, 123t, 132–3
retail sector impact of, 264
in U.S., 261–2, 264
Reischauer, E. O., 139
retail sector
“fast fashion,” 200, 243
Germany, 123–7
Japan, 199–201
predicting future of, 264–5
repeal of fair trade laws and,  
264
Single European Market initiative 
and, 62
United Kingdom, 62
U.S., 239–42, 264–5
See also e-commerce
robotic technology, 256, 266
Rockefeller, John D., 214, 217–18
Roman empire, trade and, 13
Roman law, 6
Rosenberg, N., 20
Rostow, W. W., 25
Royal-Dutch Shell Corporation, 40
Russian Company, 7
samurai, 139–40
Sanchez, L., 258
Sanwa group, 170t
Schröder, Gerhard, 118
scientific management, 38–9, 247
scientific method, 20
SEAct (Single European Act), 1987, 
46, 51–2, 90
self-esteem, 170
Shimotani, M., 191

I n d e x
313
Shinkin banks (credit cooperatives), 
192
shipbuilding industry, in Japan, 162, 
163
silk production, 150–1
Single European Act (SEAct), 1987, 
46, 51–2, 90
Sino-Japanese War (1894–1895), 
159, 162
slavery, economic and social failures 
of, 18–19
Smith, Adam, 11, 25, 247
Smith, John (Labor Party leader), 55
Smyser, W. R., 110, 111
social market economy, German, 88
social welfare programs, British, 
43–4, 47, 50–1
socialism, corporate, 43
sole proprietorships, in Japan, 162
Sombart, Werner, 18
Sony Corporation, 175
South Seas Company, 7, 186
Soviet Council for Mutual 
Economic Assistance, 99
Standard Oil Trust, 217–18
steam power, in mining and 
industry, 21
Suez crisis (1950s), 31
Sumitomo group, 164, 169, 170t
Swan, Joseph Wilson, 29
Swan and Edison United Electric 
Light Company, 29
Taisho, Emperor of Japan, 156
Taiwan (Formosa), 167
Tames, R., 25, 30
tariffs, retaliatory, 38
TARP (Troubled Asset Relief 
Program), U.S., 261
taxation, systematic, 8
Taylor, Frederick, 39, 218
Taylorism (Fordism), 39
Technology Review, 252
tertiary sector. See retail sector
textile industry, 151–2
Thatcher, Margaret, 44, 48
Tholfsen, Trygve, 4
three-masted trading vessels, 13–14
Tokyo Imperial University, 141
Tonlinson, P. R., 202
total quality control (TQC), 183
total quality improvement (TQI), 183
towns and cities, trade and growth 
of, 15
Toyota, 184–5, 201
trade
demographics and, 14–15
globalization and competition 
between trading blocs, 245–6
growth of cities and towns 
stimulating, 15
industrial institutions and, 16–19
licenses for, 1600–1750, 5
manufacturing specialization 
stimulated by, 13
mercantilism and, 15–16
as pre-capitalism, 13
providing urban elite with luxury 
goods, 13
Roman empire and, 13
three-masted trading vessels and 
growth of, 13–14
trade associations, German,  
93–4
trade unions, 27, 93
Treaty of Rome (1957), 90
Treaty of Versailles, 82–3
Treuhandanstalt (East Germany), 
100, 101
Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(TARP), U.S., 261
tulip bulb speculation (Holland),  
186
Turner, H. A. Jr., 84
Uniglo (Japanese fashion retailer),  
200
United Kingdom. See Great Britain
United States
advertising and marketing, 212–13

I n d e x
314
automobile industry: after 2010, 
262–3; Big Three automakers, 
259; emergence of, 219–22; 
foreign car makers in, 260, 
262–3; globalization and, 
259–63; government bail-out 
in recession of 2008–2009, 
261–2; in 1990s, 260–1
banks and banking: failures during 
Great Depression, 211–12; 
rapid growth in 1800s, 212
business management: centralized 
vs. decentralized models, 
228; evolution of, 247–9; 
professionalization of, 248–9
business system: evolution in 
early 20th century, 224, 
227–8; factors shaping, 225; in 
Progressive era, 227
capturing export markets from 
Britain following World War I, 
36–7
commerce and industry, 
nineteenth century, 207–8
consumer society in, 222–4, 
232–3
deindustrialization, 243, 256–8, 
257f, 257t
diversification, mergers, and 
trusts, 233–7; conglomerates, 
234–6; globalization and, 
236–7; oligopolies, 227; paths 
for, 233–4
economic growth: forecasts for 
21st century, 237, 265–6, 265t; 
information technology sector, 
236, 237t; post-World War 
II, 34, 232–3, 233t; postwar 
consumer demand and, 232–3; 
during 1920s, 222–3, 223t; 
in selected industries, 237–43; 
since 1700, 19–20, 19t
electrical industry, 214–15
future of commerce and industry 
in, 263–7
globalization of commerce 
and industry: best and worst 
industries, 251–2, 251t, 253t; 
changes affecting business 
environment, 245–7; changes 
in selected industries, 251–63; 
world economy dependence on 
U.S. dollar, 249–50. See also 
globalization of commerce and 
industry
Great Depression (1930s), 209–
12; agriculture and banking 
sectors, 210–11; bank failures, 
211–12; business failures, 
225; decline in GPD, 209; 
protectionist tariffs, 222; radio 
broadcasting during, 217; shift 
to female employment as cost-
saving measure, 209–10, 211t; 
unemployment during, 225
healthcare industry, 238
immigration and population 
growth, 223, 224t, 246–7
industrial leadership, postwar, 
227–44; diversification, 
mergers, and trusts, 233–7; 
economic growth, 232–3; 
growth in selected industries, 
237–42
industry during and after World 
War II: aircraft production 
by country, 1939–1945, 
228–9, 229t; government 
investments in defense-related 
industries, 229–30, 231t; 
post-war sale of government 
wartime investments to private 
firms, 229, 230, 231t; shift 
from consumer goods to 
wartime production, 229–30; 
support for British post-war 
reconstruction, 41
manufacturing industry, 
238–9, 243; as bright spot in 
economy, 268; globalization 
and changes in, 255–8; return 
United States—continued

I n d e x
315
of outsourced manufacturing 
to U.S., 256
map of, 208f
multinational corporations, 237
New Deal reforms, 225
new industries, emergence of, 
212–22
oil industry, 217–19
radio broadcasting, 215–17
retailing sector, 239–42; 
contribution to GDP,  
239–40, 240t; deretailing of 
small towns, 241; e-commerce, 
242, 242t, 243; evolution  
of, 240–2; factors shaping, 
264–5; future of, 264–5; 
groceries as dominant 
commodity, 241–2; impact  
of 2008 recession on, 264; top 
ten retailers, 240
small businesses, 227, 234, 241
social welfare programs, 225
trade and service sectors, postwar 
growth, 233
Troubled Asset Relief Program 
(TARP), 261
Vietnam War, 243
Van Doren, C., 4, 20
venture capital financing, 108–9
Verfeinigte Stahlwerke, 84
Vietnam War, impact on U.S. 
electorate, 243
Vogel, Ezra F., 181, 182, 187
Vogel, Steven K., 181, 187
voice over Internet protocol 
providers (VoIPs), 251–2, 251t
Wadhwa, V ., 255–6
Walmart
cultural clash and failure of stores 
in Germany, 125–6
as leading U.S. retailer, 240
success in China, 126–7
water wheels, 14
Weimar Republic
cartelized economy of, 84, 85, 
86, 90
Constitution establishing federal 
government, 83
investments in businesses, 84–5
labor unrest, 86
as parliamentary democracy, 79
passive resistance to occupation of 
Ruhr, 85
social welfare reforms, 85–6
vertical integration of business, 84–5
West Germany (Federal Republic of 
Germany). See under Germany, 
post-reunification
Westney, Eleanor, 138
Wharton, Joseph, 248
World Trade Organization (WTO), 250
World War I
as first mechanized war, 218
Germany: consolidation of 
industry, 81
Japan: Anglo-Japanese Alliance, 
163; capturing export markets 
from Britain following, 36–7; 
as economic boom period for, 
156, 161–2, 163
See also under Great Britain; 
United States
World War II
aircraft production by country, 
1939–1945, 228–9, 229t
British economic decline 
following, 32, 34
Japan: infrastructure destroyed by, 
168; military successes, 168; 
postwar economic recovery, 
168–9
See also under United States
Yawata Steel Works, 162
Young, S. Mark, 183
Youngson, A. J., 39
zaibatsu (family-owned 
conglomerates). See under 
Japan, twentieth century

