
        
S
N
L
1
Basic Concepts
1.1
Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
Logic may be deﬁned as the science that evaluates arguments. All of us encounter
arguments in our day-to-day experience. We read them in books and newspapers,
hear them on television, and formulate them when communicating with friends and
associates. The aim of logic is to develop a system of methods and principles that we
may use as criteria for evaluating the arguments of others and as guides in constructing
arguments of our own. Among the beneﬁts to be expected from the study of logic is
an increase in conﬁdence that we are making sense when we criticize the arguments
of others and when we advance arguments of our own.
An argument, as it occurs in logic, is a group of statements, one or more of which
(the premises) are claimed to provide support for, or reasons to believe, one of the
others (the conclusion). All arguments may be placed in one of two basic groups:
those in which the premises really do support the conclusion and those in which they
do not, even though they are claimed to. The former are said to be good arguments
(at least to that extent), the latter bad arguments. The purpose of logic, as the science
that evaluates arguments, is thus to develop methods and techniques that allow us to
distinguish good arguments from bad.
As is apparent from the above deﬁnition, the term ‘‘argument’’ has a very speciﬁc
meaning in logic. It does not mean, for example, a mere verbal ﬁght, as one might
have with one’s parent, spouse, or friend. Let us examine the features of this deﬁnition
in greater detail. First of all, an argument is a group of statements. A statement is a
sentence that is either true or false—in other words, typically a declarative sentence
or a sentence component that could stand as a declarative sentence. The following
sentences are statements:
Aluminum is attacked by hydrochloric acid.
Broccoli is a good source of vitamin A.
Argentina is located in North America.
Napoleon prevailed at Waterloo.
Rembrandt was a painter and Shelley was a poet.

2
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
The ﬁrst two statements are true, the second two false. The last one expresses two
statements, both of which are true. Truth and falsity are called the two possible truth
values of a statement. Thus, the truth value of the ﬁrst two statements is true, the truth
value of the second two is false, and the truth value of the last statement, as well as
that of its components, is true.
Unlike statements, many sentences cannot be said to be either true or false.
Questions, proposals, suggestions, commands, and exclamations usually cannot,
and so are not usually classiﬁed as statements. The following sentences are not
statements:
What is the atomic weight of carbon?
Let’s go to the park today.
We suggest that you travel by bus.
Turn to the left at the next corner.
All right!
(question)
(proposal)
(suggestion)
(command)
(exclamation)
The statements that make up an argument are divided into one or more premises
and one and only one conclusion. The premises are the statements that set forth the
reasons or evidence, and the conclusion is the statement that the evidence is claimed
to support or imply. In other words, the conclusion is the statement that is claimed to
follow from the premises. Here is an example of an argument:
All crimes are violations of the law.
Theft is a crime.
Therefore, theft is a violation of the law.
The ﬁrst two statements are the premises; the third is the conclusion. (The claim that
the premises support or imply the conclusion is indicated by the word ‘‘therefore.’’) In
this argument the premises really do support the conclusion, and so the argument is a
good one. But consider this argument:
Some crimes are misdemeanors.
Murder is a crime.
Therefore, murder is a misdemeanor.
In this argument the premises do not support the conclusion, even though they are
claimed to, and so the argument is not a good one.
One of the most important tasks in the analysis of arguments is being able to
distinguish premises from conclusion. If what is thought to be a conclusion is really a
premise, and vice versa, the subsequent analysis cannot possibly be correct. Fre-
quently, arguments contain certain indicator words that provide clues in identifying
premises and conclusion. Some typical conclusion indicators are

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
3
S
N
L
therefore
wherefore
accordingly
we may conclude
entails that
hence
thus
consequently
we may infer
it must be that
whence
so
it follows that
implies that
as a result
Whenever a statement follows one of these indicators, it can usually be identiﬁed as
the conclusion. By process of elimination the other statements in the argument are the
premises. Example:
Corporate raiders leave their target corporation with a heavy debt burden and no
increase in productive capacity. Consequently, corporate raiders are bad for the
business community.
The conclusion of this argument is ‘‘Corporate raiders are bad for the business com-
munity,’’ and the premise is ‘‘Corporate raiders leave their target corporation with a
heavy debt burden and no increase in productive capacity.’’
Premises
Conclusion
Claimed
evidence
What is claimed to follow
from the evidence
If an argument does not contain a conclusion indicator, it may contain a premise
indicator. Some typical premise indicators are
since
as indicated by
because
for
in that
may be inferred from
as
given that
seeing that
for the reason that
inasmuch as
owing to
Any statement following one of these indicators can usually be identiﬁed as a premise.
Example:
Expectant mothers should never use recreational drugs, since the use of these
drugs can jeopardize the development of the fetus.

4
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
The premise of this argument is ‘‘The use of these drugs can jeopardize the develop-
ment of the fetus,’’ and the conclusion is ‘‘Expectant mothers should never use recre-
ational drugs.’’
One premise indicator not included in the above list is ‘‘for this reason.’’ This
indicator is special in that it comes immediately after the premise that it indicates. ‘‘For
this reason’’ (except when followed by a colon) means for the reason (premise) that
was just given. In other words, the premise is the statement that occurs immediately
before ‘‘for this reason.’’ One should be careful not to confuse ‘‘for this reason’’ with
‘‘for the reason that.’’
Sometimes a single indicator can be used to identify more than one premise. Con-
sider the following argument:
The development of high-temperature superconducting materials is technolog-
ically justiﬁed, for such materials will allow electricity to be transmitted without
loss over great distances, and they will pave the way for trains that levitate
magnetically.
The premise indicator ‘‘for’’ goes with both ‘‘Such materials will allow electricity to be
transmitted without loss over great distances’’ and ‘‘They will pave the way for trains
that levitate magnetically.’’ These are the premises. By process of elimination, ‘‘The
development of high-temperature superconducting materials is technologically justi-
ﬁed’’ is the conclusion.
Sometimes an argument contains no indicators. When this occurs, the reader/
listener must ask himself or herself such questions as: What single statement is claimed
(implicitly) to follow from the others? What is the arguer trying to prove? What is the
main point in the passage? The answers to these questions should point to the conclu-
sion. Example:
The space program deserves increased expenditures in the years ahead. Not only
does the national defense depend upon it, but the program will more than pay
for itself in terms of technological spinoffs. Furthermore, at current funding
levels the program cannot fulﬁll its anticipated potential.
The conclusion of this argument is the ﬁrst statement, and all of the other statements
are premises. The argument illustrates the pattern found in most arguments that lack in-
dicator words: the intended conclusion is stated ﬁrst, and the remaining statements are
then offered in support of this ﬁrst statement. When the argument is restructuredaccord-
ing to logical principles, however, the conclusion is always listed after the premises:
P1:
The national defense is dependent upon the space program.
P2:
The space program will more than pay for itself in terms of technological
spinoffs.
P3:
At current funding levels the space program cannot fulﬁll its anticipated
potential.
C:
The space program deserves increased expenditures in the years ahead.

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
5
S
N
L
When restructuring arguments such as this, one should remain as close as possible
to the original version, while at the same time attending to the requirement that prem-
ises and conclusion be complete sentences that are meaningful in the order in which
they are listed.
Note that the ﬁrst two premises are included within the scope of a single sentence
in the original argument. For the purposes of this chapter, compound arrangements of
statements in which the various components are all claimed to be true will be consid-
ered as separate statements.
Passages that contain arguments sometimes contain statements that are neither
premises nor conclusion. Only statements that are actually intended to support the
conclusion should be included in the list of premises. If a statement has nothing to do
with the conclusion or, for example, simply makes a passing comment, it should not
be included within the context of the argument. Example:
Socialized medicine is not recommended because it would result in a reduction in
the overall quality of medical care available to the average citizen. In addition,
it might very well bankrupt the federal treasury. This is the whole case against
socialized medicine in a nutshell.
The conclusion of this argument is ‘‘Socialized medicine is not recommended,’’ and
the two statements following the word ‘‘because’’ are the premises. The last statement
makes only a passing comment about the argument itself and is therefore neither a
premise nor a conclusion.
Closely related to the concepts of argument and statement are those of inference
and proposition. An inference, in the technical sense of the term, is the reasoning
process expressed by an argument. As we will see in the next section, inferences may
be expressed not only through arguments but through conditional statements as well.
In the loose sense of the term, ‘‘inference’’ is used interchangeably with ‘‘argument.’’
Analogously, a proposition, in the technical sense, is the meaning or information
content of a statement. For the purposes of this book, however, ‘‘proposition’’ and
‘‘statement’’ are used interchangeably.
Note on the History of Logic
The person who is generally credited as being the father of logic is the ancient Greek
philosopher Aristotle (384–322 B.C.). Aristotle’s predecessors had been interested in
the art of constructing persuasive arguments and in techniques for refuting the argu-
ments of others, but it was Aristotle who ﬁrst devised systematic criteria for analyzing
and evaluating arguments. Aristotle’s logic is called syllogistic logic and includes
much of what is treated in Chapters 4 and 5 of this text. The fundamental elements in
this logic are terms, and arguments are evaluated as good or bad depending on how
the terms are arranged in the argument. In addition to his development of syllogistic
logic, Aristotle cataloged a number of informal fallacies, a topic treated in Chapter 3 of
this text.

6
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
After Aristotle’s death, another Greek philosopher, Chrysippus (279–206 B.C.), one
of the founders of the Stoic school, developed a logic in which the fundamental
elements were whole propositions. Chrysippus treated every proposition as either true
or false and developed rules for determining the truth or falsity of compound propo-
sitions from the truth or falsity of their components. In the course of doing so, he laid
the foundation for the truth functional interpretation of the logical connectives pre-
sented in Chapter 6 of this text and introduced the notion of natural deduction, treated
in Chapter 7.
For thirteen hundred years after the death of Chrysippus, relatively little creative
work was done in logic. The physician Galen (A.D. 129–ca. 199) developed the theory
of the compound categorical syllogism, but for the most part philosophers conﬁned
themselves to writing commentaries on the works of Aristotle and Chrysippus. Boe-
thius (ca. 480–524) is a noteworthy example.
The ﬁrst major logician of the Middle Ages was Peter Abelard (1079–1142). Abelard
reconstructed and reﬁned the logic of Aristotle and Chrysippus as communicated by
Boethius, and he originated a theory of universals that traced the universal character
of general terms to concepts in the mind rather than to ‘‘natures’’ existing outside the
mind, as Aristotle had held. In addition, Abelard distinguished arguments that are valid
because of their form from those that are valid because of their content, but he held
that only formal validity is the ‘‘perfect’’ or conclusive variety. The present text follows
Abelard on this point.
After Abelard, the study of logic during the Middle Ages blossomed and ﬂourished
through the work of numerous philosophers. It attained its ﬁnal expression in the
writings of the Oxford philosopher William of Occam (ca. 1285–1349). Occam devoted
much of his attention to modal logic, a kind of logic that involves such notions as
possibility, necessity, belief, and doubt. He also conducted an exhaustive study of
forms of valid and invalid syllogisms and contributed to the development of the con-
cept of a metalanguage—that is, a higher-level language used to discuss linguistic
entities such as words, terms, propositions, and so on.
Toward the middle of the ﬁfteenth century, a reaction set in against the logic of the
Middle Ages. Rhetoric largely displaced logic as the primary focus of attention; the
logic of Chrysippus, which had already begun to lose its unique identity in the Middle
Ages, was ignored altogether, and the logic of Aristotle was studied only in highly
simplistic presentations. A reawakening did not occur until two hundred years later
through the work of Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716).
Leibniz, a genius in numerous ﬁelds, attempted to develop a symbolic language or
‘‘calculus’’ that could be used to settle all forms of disputes, whether in theology,
philosophy, or international relations. As a result of this work, Leibniz is sometimes
credited with being the father of symbolic logic. Leibniz’s efforts to symbolize logic
were carried into the nineteenth century by Bernard Bolzano (1781–1848).
With the arrival of the middle of the nineteenth century, logic commenced an
extremely rapid period of development that has continued to this day. Work in sym-

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
7
S
N
L
bolic logic was done by a number of philosophers and mathematicians, including
Augustus DeMorgan (1806–1871), George Boole (1815–1864), William Stanley Jevons
(1835–1882), and John Venn (1834–1923), some of whom are popularly known today
by the logical theorems and techniques that bear their names. At the same time, a
revival in inductive logic was initiated by the British philosopher John Stuart Mill
(1806–1873), whose methods of induction are presented in Chapter 9 of this text.
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, the foundations of modern mathematical
logic were laid by Gottlob Frege (1848–1925). His Begriffsschrift sets forth the theory
of quantiﬁcation presented in Chapter 8 of this text. Frege’s work was continued into
the twentieth century by Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) and Bertrand Russell
(1872–1970), whose monumental Principia Mathematica attempted to reduce the
whole of pure mathematics to logic. The Principia is the source of much of the
symbolism that appears in Chapters 6, 7, and 8 of this text.
During the twentieth century, much of the work in logic has focused on the formal-
ization of logical systems and on questions dealing with the completeness and consis-
tency of such systems. A now-famous theorem proved by Kurt Goedel (1906–1978)
states that in any formal system adequate for number theory there exists an undecidable
formula—that is, a formula such that neither it nor its negation is derivable from the
axioms of the system. Other developments include multivalued logics and the formal-
ization of modal logic. Most recently, logic has made a major contribution to technology
by providing the conceptual foundation for the electronic circuitry of digital computers.
EXERCISE 1.1
I. Each of the following passages contains a single argument. Using the letters ‘‘P’’
and ‘‘C,’’ identify the premises and conclusion of each argument, writing premises
ﬁrst and conclusion last. List the premises in the order in which they make the
most sense, and write both premises and conclusion in the form of separate
declarative sentences. Indicator words may be eliminated once premises and
conclusion have been appropriately labeled. The exercises marked with a star are
answered in the back of the text.
1.
#
Titanium combines readily with oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen, all of which
have an adverse effect on its mechanical properties. As a result, titanium must
be processed in their absence.
(Illustrated World of Science Encyclopedia)
2. Since the good, according to Plato, is that which furthers a person’s real
interests, it follows that in any given case when the good is known, men will
seek it.
(Avrum Stroll and Richard Popkin, Philosophy and the Human Spirit)
3. As the denial or perversion of justice by the sentences of courts, as well as in
any other manner, is with reason classed among the just causes of war, it will

8
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
follow that the federal judiciary ought to have cognizance of all causes in
which the citizens of other countries are concerned.
(Alexander Hamilton, Federalist Papers, No. 80)
4.
#
When individuals voluntarily abandon property, they forfeit any expectation of
privacy in it that they might have had. Therefore, a warrantless search or sei-
zure of abandoned property is not unreasonable under the FourthAmendment.
(Judge Stephanie Kulp Seymour, United States v. Jones)
5. Artists and poets look at the world and seek relationships and order. But they
translate their ideas to canvas, or to marble, or into poetic images. Scientists
try to ﬁnd relationships between different objects and events. To express the
order they ﬁnd, they create hypotheses and theories. Thus the great scientiﬁc
theories are easily compared to great art and great literature.
(Douglas C. Giancoli, The Ideas of Physics, 3rd edition)
6. The fact that there was never a land bridge between Australia and mainland
Asia is evidenced by the fact that the animal species in the two areas are very
different. Asian placental mammals and Australian marsupial mammals have
not been in contact in the last several million years.
(T. Douglas Price and Gary M. Feinman, Images of the Past)
7.
#
The psychological impact and crisis created by birth of a defective infant is
devastating. Not only is the mother denied the normal tension release from
the stress of pregnancy, but both parents feel a crushing blow to their dignity,
self-esteem, and self-conﬁdence. In a very short time, they feel grief for the
loss of the normal expected child, anger at fate, numbness, disgust, waves of
helplessness and disbelief.
(John A. Robertson, ‘‘Involuntary Euthanasia of Defective Newborns’’)
8. The classroom teacher is crucial to the development and academic success of
the average student, and administrators simply are ancillary to this effort. For
this reason, classroom teachers ought to be paid at least the equivalent of
administrators at all levels, including the superintendent.
(Peter F. Falstrup, Letter to the Editor)
9. An agreement cannot bind unless both parties to the agreement know what
they are doing and freely choose to do it. This implies that the seller who
intends to enter a contract with a customer has a duty to disclose exactly what
the customer is buying and what the terms of the sale are.
(Manuel G. Velasquez, ‘‘The Ethics of Consumer Production’’)
10.
#
Punishment, when speedy and speciﬁc, may suppress undesirable behavior,
but it cannot teach or encourage desirable alternatives. Therefore, it is crucial
to use positive techniques to model and reinforce appropriate behavior that
the person can use in place of the unacceptable response that has to be
suppressed.
(Walter Mischel and Harriet Mischel, Essentials of Psychology)

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
9
S
N
L
11. Proﬁt serves a very crucial function in a free enterprise economy, such as our
own. High proﬁts are the signal that consumers want more of the output of
the industry. High proﬁts provide the incentive for ﬁrms to expand output
and for more ﬁrms to enter the industry in the long run. For a ﬁrm of above-
average efﬁciency, proﬁts represent the reward for greater efﬁciency.
(Dominic Salvatore, Managerial Economics, 3rd edition)
12. Cats can think circles around dogs! My cat regularly used to close and lock
the door to my neighbor’s doghouse, trapping their sleeping Doberman in-
side. Try telling a cat what to do, or putting a leash on him—he’ll glare at you
and say, ‘‘I don’t think so. You should have gotten a dog.’’
(Kevin Purkiser, Letter to the Editor)
13.
#
Since private property helps people deﬁne themselves, since it frees people
from mundane cares of daily subsistence, and since it is ﬁnite, no individual
should accumulate so much property that others are prevented from accu-
mulating the necessities of life.
(Leon P. Baradat, Political Ideologies, Their Origins and Impact)
14. To every existing thing God wills some good. Hence, since to love any thing
is nothing else than to will good to that thing, it is manifest that God loves
everything that exists.
(Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica)
15. Women of the working class, especially wage workers, should not have
more than two children at most. The average working man can support
no more and the average working woman can take care of no more in de-
cent fashion.
(Margaret Sanger, Family Limitations)
16.
#
Radioactive fallout isn’t the only concern in the aftermath of nuclear explo-
sions. The nations of planet Earth have acquired nuclear weapons with an
explosive power equal to more than a million Hiroshima bombs. Studies
suggest that explosion of only half these weapons would produce enough
soot, smoke, and dust to blanket the Earth, block out the sun, and bring on a
nuclear winter that would threaten the survival of the human race.
( John W. Hill and Doris K. Kolb, Chemistry for Changing Times, 7th edition)
17. An ant releases a chemical when it dies, and its fellows then carry it away to
the compost heap. Apparently the communication is highly effective; a
healthy ant painted with the death chemical will be dragged to the funeral
heap again and again.
(Carol R. Ember and Melvin Ember, Cultural Anthropology, 7th edition)
18. Every art and every inquiry, and similarly every action and pursuit, is thought
to aim at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been declared
to be that at which all things aim.
(Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics)

10
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
19.
#
Poverty offers numerous beneﬁts to the nonpoor. Antipoverty programs pro-
vide jobs for middle-class professionals in social work, penology and public
health. Such workers’ future advancement is tied to the continued growth of
bureaucracies dependent on the existence of poverty.
(J. John Palen, Social Problems)
20. Corn is an annual crop. Butcher’s meat, a crop which requires four or ﬁve
years to grow. As an acre of land, therefore, will produce a much smaller
quantity of the one species of food than the other, the inferiority of the quan-
tity must be compensated by the superiority of the price.
(Adam Smith, The Wealth of Nations)
21. Neither a borrower nor lender be
For loan oft loses both itself and friend,
And borrowing dulls the edge of husbandry.
(William Shakespeare, Hamlet I, 3)
22.
#
The stakes in whistleblowing are high. Take the nurse who alleges that phy-
sicians enrich themselves in her hospital through unnecessary surgery; the
engineer who discloses safety defects in the braking systems of a ﬂeet of new
rapid-transit vehicles; the Defense Department ofﬁcial who alerts Congress to
military graft and overspending: all know that they pose a threat to those
whom they denounce and that their own careers may be at risk.
(Sissela Bok, ‘‘Whistleblowing and Professional Responsibility’’)
23. If a piece of information is not ‘‘job relevant,’’ then the employer is not entitled
qua employer to know it. Consequently, since sexual practices, political be-
liefs, associational activities, etc., are not part of the description of most jobs,
that is, since they do not directly affect one’s job performance, they are not
legitimate information for an employer to know in the determination of the
hiring of a job applicant.
(George G. Brenkert, ‘‘Privacy, Polygraphs, and Work’’)
24. Many people believe that a dark tan is attractive and a sign of good health,
but mounting evidence indicates that too much sun can lead to health prob-
lems. One of the most noticeable effects is premature aging of the skin. The
sun also contributes to certain types of cataracts, and, what is most worri-
some, it plays a role in skin cancer.
( Joseph M. Moran and Michael D. Morgan, Meteorology, 4th edition)
25.
#
Contrary to the tales of some scuba divers, the toothy, gaping grin on the
mouth of an approaching shark is not necessarily anticipatory. It is generally
accepted that by constantly swimming with its mouth open, the shark is sim-
ply avoiding suffocation. This assures a continuous ﬂow of oxygen-laden
water into their mouths, over their gills, and out through the gill slits.
(Robert A. Wallace et al., Biology: The Science of Life)

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
11
S
N
L
26. Not only is the sky blue [as a result of scattering], but light coming from it is
also partially polarized. You can readily observe this by placing a piece of
Polaroid (for example, one lens of a pair of Polaroid sunglasses) in front of
your eye and rotating it as you look at the sky on a clear day. You will notice
a change in light intensity with the orientation of the Polaroid.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd edition)
27. Since the secondary light [from the moon] does not inherently belong to the
moon, and is not received from any star or from the sun, and since in the
whole universe there is no other body left but the earth, what must we con-
clude? What is to be proposed? Surely we must assert that the lunar body (or
any other dark and sunless orb) is illuminated by the earth.
(Galileo Galilei, The Starry Messenger)
28.
#
Anyone familiar with our prison system knows that there are some inmates
who behave little better than brute beasts. But the very fact that these prison-
ers exist is a telling argument against the efﬁcacy of capital punishment as a
deterrent. If the death penalty had been truly effective as a deterrent, such
prisoners would long ago have vanished.
(‘‘The Injustice of the Death Penalty,’’ America)
29. Though it is possible that REM sleep and dreaming are not necessary in the
adult, REM deprivation studies seem to suggest otherwise. Why would REM
pressure increase with deprivation if the system is unimportant in the adult?
(Herbert L. Petri, Motivation: Theory and Research, 2nd edition)
30. World government and the balance of power are in many ways opposites.
World government means one central authority, a permanent standing world
police force, and clearly deﬁned conditions under which this force will go
into action. A balance of power system has many sovereign authorities, each
controlling its own army, combining only when they feel like it to control
aggression. To most people world government now seems unattainable.
(David W. Ziegler, War, Peace, and International Politics, 4th edition)
II. The following arguments were taken from magazine and newspaper editorials
and letters to the editor. In most instances the main conclusion must be rephrased
to capture the full intent of the author. Write out what you interpret the main
conclusion to be.
1.
#
University administrators know well the beneﬁts that follow notable success
in college sports: increased applications for admissions, increased income
from licensed logo merchandise, more lucrative television deals, post-season
game revenue and more successful alumni fund drives. The idea that there is
something ideal and pure about the amateur athlete is self-serving bunk.
(Michael McDonnell, Letter to the Editor)

12
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
2. In a nation of immigrants, people of diverse ethnic backgrounds must have a
common bond through which to exchange ideas. How can this bond be
accomplished if there is no common language? It is those who shelter the
immigrant from learning English by encouraging the development of a multi-
lingual society who are creating a xenophobic atmosphere. They allow the
immigrant to surround himself with a cocoon of language from which he
cannot escape and which others cannot penetrate.
(Rita Toften, Letter to the Editor)
3. The health and ﬁtness of our children has become a problem partly because
of our attitude toward athletics. The purpose of sports, especially for children,
should be to make healthy people healthier. The concept of team sports has
failed to do this. Rather than learning to interact and cooperate with others,
youngsters are taught to compete. Team sports have only reinforced the no-
tion that the team on top is the winner, and all others are losers. This approach
does not make sports appealing to many children, and some, especially
among the less ﬁt, burn out by the time they are twelve.
(Mark I. Pitman, ‘‘Young Jocks’’)
4.
#
College is the time in which a young mind is supposed to mature and acquire
wisdom, and one can only do this by experiencing as much diverse intellec-
tual stimuli as possible. A business student may be a whiz at accounting, but
has he or she ever experienced the beauty of a Shakespearean sonnet or the
boundless events composing Hebrew history? Most likely not. While many of
these neoconservatives will probably go on to be ﬁnancially successful, they
are robbing themselves of the true purpose of collegiate academics, a sacriﬁce
that outweighs the future salary checks.
(Robert S. Grifﬁth, ‘‘Conservative College Press’’)
5. History has shown repeatedly that you cannot legislate morality, nor does
anyone have a right to. The real problem is the people who have a vested
interest in sustaining the multibillion-dollar drug industry created by the laws
against drugs. The legalization of drugs would remove the thrill of breaking
the law; it would end the suffering caused by unmetered doses, impurities
and substandard paraphernalia. A huge segment of the underground and
extralegal economy would move into a legitimate economy, taking money
away from criminals, eliminating crime and violence, and restoring many
talented people to useful endeavor.
(Thomas L. Wayburn, Letter to the Editor)
6. Infectious disease is no longer the leading cause of death in this country,
thanks to antibiotics, but there are new strains of bacteria thatareresistantto—
and others that grow only in the presence of—antibiotics. Yet Congress wants
to cut the National Institutes of Health budget. Further cuts would leave us

Arguments, Premises, and Conclusions
13
S
N
L
woefully unprepared to cope with the new microbes Mother Nature has
cooking in her kitchen.
(Valina L. Dawson, Letter to the Editor)
7.
#
At a time when our religious impulses might help heal the pains and strains
in our society, today’s television pulpiteers preach intolerance, censure and
discrimination. They package a ‘‘believer life-style,’’ and rail against everyone
who doesn’t ﬁt it—homosexuals, communists, Jews and other non-Christians,
sex educators and so on. Such intolerance threatens to undermine the plural-
ism that marks our heritage. The packaging of that intolerance in slick
Hollywood programming or under the guise of patriotic fervor is skillfully
accomplished on many fronts. That, however, does not make it right.
(Peter G. Kreitler, ‘‘TV Preachers’ Religious Intolerance’’)
8. Ideally, decisions about health care should be based on the doctor’s clinical
judgment, patient preference and scientiﬁc evidence. Patients should always
be presented with options in their care. Elective Cesarean section, however,
is not used to treat a problem but to avoid a natural process. An elective
surgery like this puts the patient at unnecessary risk, increases the risk for
complications in future deliveries and increases health care costs.
(Anne Foster-Rosales, M.D., Letter to the Editor)
9. Parents who feel guilty for the little time they can (or choose to) spend with
their children ‘‘pick up’’ after them—so the children don’t learn to face the
consequences of their own choices and actions. Parents who allow their chil-
dren to fail are showing them greater love and respect.
(Susan J. Peters, Letter to the Editor)
10.
#
Most of the environmental problems facing us stem, at least in part, from the
sheer number of Americans. The average American produces three quarters
of a ton of garbage every year, consumes hundreds of gallons of gasoline and
uses large amounts of electricity (often from a nuclear power plant, coal
burning, or a dam). The least painful way to protect the environment is to
limit population growth.
(Craig M. Bradley, Letter to the Editor)
III. Deﬁne the following terms:
logic
argument
statement
premise
conclusion
conclusion indicator
premise indicator
inference
proposition
truth value
IV. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. The purpose of the premise or premises is to set forth the reasons or evidence
given in support of the conclusion.

14
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
2. Some arguments have more than one conclusion.
3. All arguments must have more than one premise.
4. The words ‘‘therefore,’’ ‘‘hence,’’ ‘‘so,’’ ‘‘since,’’ and ‘‘thus’’ are all conclusion
indicators.
5. The words ‘‘for,’’ ‘‘because,’’ ‘‘as,’’ and ‘‘for the reason that’’ are all premise
indicators.
6. In the strict sense of the terms, ‘‘inference’’ and ‘‘argument’’ have exactly the
same meaning.
7. In most (but not all) arguments that lack indicator words, the conclusion is
the ﬁrst statement.
8. Any sentence that is either true or false is a statement.
9. Every statement has a truth value.
10. The person usually credited with being the father of logic is Aristotle.
1.2
Recognizing Arguments
Not all passages contain arguments. Because logic deals with arguments, it is impor-
tant to be able to distinguish passages that contain arguments from those that do not.
In general, a passage contains an argument if it purports to prove something; if it does
not do so, it does not contain an argument. Two conditions must be fulﬁlled for a
passage to purport to prove something: (1) At least one of the statements must claim
to present evidence or reasons. (2) There must be a claim that the alleged evidence or
reasons supports or implies something—that is, a claim that something follows from
the alleged evidence. As we have seen, the statements that claim to present the evi-
dence or reasons are the premises, and the statement that the evidence is claimed to
support or imply is the conclusion. It is not necessary that the premises present actual
evidence or true reasons nor that the premises actually support the conclusion. But at
least the premises must claim to present evidence or reasons, and there must be a
claim that the evidence or reasons support or imply something.
The ﬁrst condition expresses a factual claim, and deciding whether it is fulﬁlled
usually presents few problems. Thus, most of our attention will be concentrated on
whether the second condition is fulﬁlled. This second condition expresses what is
called an inferential claim. The inferential claim is simply the claim that the passage
expresses a certain kind of reasoning process—that something supports or implies
something or that something follows from something. Such a claim can be either
explicit or implicit.

Recognizing Arguments
15
S
N
L
An explicit inferential claim is usually asserted by premise or conclusion indicator
words (‘‘thus,’’ ‘‘since,’’ ‘‘because,’’ ‘‘hence,’’ ‘‘therefore,’’ and so on). Example:
The human eye can see a source of light that is as faint as an ordinary candle from
a distance of 27 kilometers, through a nonabsorbing atmosphere. Thus, a pow-
erful searchlight directed from a new moon should be visible on earth with the
naked eye.
(Diane E. Papalia and Sally Wendkos Olds, Psychology)
The word ‘‘thus’’ expresses the claim that something is being inferred, so the passage
is an argument.
An implicit inferential claim exists if there is an inferential relationship between the
statements in a passage. Example:
The price reduction [seen with the electronic calculator] is the result of a techno-
logical revolution. The calculator of the 1960s used integrated electronic circuits
that contained about a dozen transistors or similar components on a single
chip. Today, mass-produced chips, only a few millimeters square, contain sev-
eral thousand such components.
(Robert S. Boikess and Edward Edelson, Chemical Principles)
The inferential relationship between the ﬁrst statement and the other two constitutes
an implicit claim that evidence supports something, so we are justiﬁed in calling the
passage an argument. The ﬁrst statement is the conclusion, and the other two are the
premises.
In deciding whether there is a claim that evidence supports or implies something,
keep an eye out for (1) indicator words and (2) the presence of an inferential relation-
ship between the statements. In connection with these points, however, a word of
caution is in order. First, the mere occurrence of an indicator word by no means
guarantees the presence of an argument. For example, consider the following passages:
Since Edison invented the phonograph, there have been many technological
developments.
Since Edison invented the phonograph, he deserves credit for a major technologi-
cal development.
In the ﬁrst passage the word ‘‘since’’ is used in a temporal sense. It means ‘‘from the
time that.’’ Thus, the ﬁrst passage is not an argument. In the second passage ‘‘since’’ is
used in a logical sense, and so the passage is an argument.
The second cautionary point is that it is not always easy to detect the occurrence
of an inferential relationship between the statements in a passage, and the reader
may have to review a passage several times before making a decision. In reaching
such a decision, it sometimes helps to mentally insert the word ‘‘therefore’’ before the
various statements to see whether it makes sense to interpret one of them as following

16
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
from the others. Even with this mental aid, however, the decision whether a passage
contains an inferential relationship (as well as the decision about indicator words)
often involves a heavy dose of interpretation. As a result, not everyone will agree
about every passage. Sometimes the only answer possible is a conditional one: ‘‘If this
passage contains an argument, then these are the premises and that is the conclusion.’’
To assist in distinguishing passages that contain arguments from those that do not,
let us now investigate some typical kinds of nonarguments. These include simple
noninferential passages, expository passages, illustrations, explanations, and condi-
tional statements.
Simple Noninferential Passages
Simple noninferential passages are unproblematic passages that lack a claim that any-
thing is being proved. Such passages contain statements that could be premises or
conclusions (or both), but what is missing is a claim that any potential premise sup-
ports a conclusion or that any potential conclusion is supported by premises. Passages
of this sort include warnings, pieces of advice, statements of belief or opinion, loosely
associated statements, and reports.
A warning is a form of expression that is intended to put someone on guard
against a dangerous or detrimental situation. Examples:
Watch out that you don’t slip on the ice.
Whatever you do, never conﬁde personal secrets to Blabbermouth Bob.
If no evidence is given to prove that such statements are true, then there is no argument.
A piece of advice is a form of expression that makes a recommendation about
some future decision or course of conduct. Examples:
You should keep a few things in mind before buying a used car. Test drive the car
at varying speeds and conditions, examine the oil in the crankcase, ask to see
service records, and, if possible, have the engine and power train checked by
a mechanic.
Before accepting a job after class hours, I would suggest that you give careful
consideration to your course load. Will you have sufﬁcient time to prepare for
classes and tests, and will the job produce an excessive drain on your energies?
As with warnings, if there is no evidence that is intended to prove anything, then there
is no argument.
A statement of belief or opinion is an expression about what someone happens
to believe or think at a certain time. Examples:
We believe that our company must develop and produce outstanding products
that will perform a great service or fulﬁll a need for our customers. We believe
that our business must be run at an adequate proﬁt and that the services and
products we offer must be better than those offered by competitors.
(Robert D. Hay and Edmund R. Gray, ‘‘Introduction to Social Responsibility’’)

Recognizing Arguments
17
S
N
L
I think a nation such as ours, with its high moral traditions and commitments, has
a further responsibility to know how we became drawn into this conﬂict, and
to learn the lessons it has to teach us for the future.
(Alfred Hassler, Saigon, U.S.A.)
Because neither of these authors makes any claim that his belief or opinion is sup-
ported by evidence, or that it supports some conclusion, there is no argument.
Loosely associated statements may be about the same general subject, but they
lack a claim that one of them is proved by the others. Example:
Not to honor men of worth will keep the people from contention; not to value
goods that are hard to come by will keep them from theft; not to display what
is desirable will keep them from being unsettled of mind.
(Lao-Tzu, Thoughts from the Tao Te Ching)
Because there is no claim that any of these statements provides evidence or reasons
for believing another, there is no argument.
A report consists of a group of statements that convey information about some
topic or event. Example:
Even though more of the world is immunized than ever before, many old diseases
have proven quite resilient in the face of changing population and environmen-
tal conditions, especially in the developing world. New diseases, such as AIDS,
have taken their toll in both the North and the South.
(Steven L. Spiegel, World Politics in a New Era)
These statements could serve as the premises of an argument; but because the author
makes no claim that they support or imply anything, there is no argument. Another
type of report is the news report:
A powerful car bomb blew up outside the regional telephone company headquar-
ters in Medellin, injuring 25 people and causing millions of dollars of damage to
nearby buildings, police said. A police statement said the 198-pound bomb was
packed into a milk churn hidden in the back of a stolen car.
(Newspaper clipping)
Again, because the reporter makes no claim that these statements imply anything,
there is no argument.
One must be careful, though, with reports about arguments:
‘‘The Air Force faces a serious shortage of experienced pilots in the years ahead,
because repeated overseas tours and the allure of high paying jobs with com-
mercial airlines are winning out over lucrative bonuses to stay in the service,’’
says a prominent Air Force ofﬁcial.
(Newspaper clipping)

18
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Properly speaking, this passage is not an argument, because the author of the passage
does not claim that anything is supported by evidence. Rather, the author reports the
claim by the Air Force ofﬁcial that something is supported by evidence. If such pas-
sages are interpreted as ‘‘containing’’ arguments, it must be made clear that the argu-
ment is not the author’s but one made by someone about whom the author is
reporting.
Expository Passages
An expository passage is a kind of discourse that begins with a topic sentence
followed by one or more sentences that develop the topic sentence. If the objective is
not to prove the topic sentence but only to expand it or elaborate it, then there is no
argument. Examples:
There are three familiar states of matter: solid, liquid, and gas. Solid objects ordi-
narily maintain their shape and volume regardless of their location. A liquid
occupies a deﬁnite volume, but assumes the shape of the occupied portion of
its container. A gas maintains neither shape nor volume. It expands to ﬁll com-
pletely whatever container it is in.
(John W. Hill and Doris K. Kolb, Chemistry for Changing Times, 7th ed.)
There is a stylized relation of artist to mass audience in the sports, especially in
baseball. Each player develops a style of his own—the swagger as he steps to
the plate, the unique windup a pitcher has, the clean-swinging and hard-driving
hits, the precision quickness and grace of inﬁeld and outﬁeld, the sense of sur-
plus power behind whatever is done.
(Max Lerner, America as a Civilization)
In each passage the topic sentence is stated ﬁrst, and the remaining sentences merely
develop and ﬂesh out this topic sentence. These passages are not arguments because
they lack an inferential claim. However, expository passages differ from simple non-
inferential passages (such as warnings and pieces of advice) in that many of them can
also be taken as arguments. If the purpose of the subsequent sentences in the passage
is not only to ﬂesh out the topic sentence but also to prove it, then the passage is an
argument. Example:
Skin and the mucous membrane lining the respiratory and digestive tracts serve as
mechanical barriers to entry by microbes. Oil gland secretions contain chemicals
that weaken or kill bacteria on skin. The respiratory tract is lined by cells that
sweep mucus and trapped particles up into the throat, where they can be swal-
lowed. The stomach has an acidic pH, which inhibits the growth of many types
of bacteria.
(Sylvia S. Mader. Human Biology, 4th ed.)
In this passage the topic sentence is stated ﬁrst, and the purpose of the remaining
sentences is not only to show how the skin and mucous membranes serve as barriers

Recognizing Arguments
19
S
N
L
to microbes but to prove that they do this. Thus, the passage can be taken as both an
expository passage and an argument.
In deciding whether an expository passage should be interpreted as an argument,
try to determine whether the purpose of the subsequent sentences in the passage is
merely to develop the topic sentence or also to prove it. In borderline cases, ask
yourself whether the topic sentence makes a claim that everyone accepts or agrees
with. If it does, the passage is probably not an argument. In real life situations authors
rarely try to prove something that everyone already accepts. However, if the topic
sentence makes a claim that many people do not accept or have never thought about,
then the purpose of the remaining sentences may be both to prove the topic sentence
as well as to develop it. If this be so, the passage is an argument.
Finally, if even this procedure yields no deﬁnite answer, the only alternative may
be to say that if the passage is taken as an argument, then the ﬁrst statement is the
conclusion and the others are the premises.
Illustrations
An illustration consists of a statement about a certain subject combined with a refer-
ence to one or more speciﬁc instances intended to exemplify that statement. Illustra-
tions are often confused with arguments because many of them contain indicator
words such as ‘‘thus.’’ Examples:
Chemical elements, as well as compounds, can be represented by molecular for-
mulas. Thus, oxygen is represented by ‘‘O2,’’ water by ‘‘H2O,’’ and sodium
chloride by ‘‘NaCl.’’
Whenever a force is exerted on an object, the shape of the object can change. For
example, when you squeeze a rubber ball or strike a punching bag with your
ﬁst, the objects are deformed to some extent.
(Raymond A. Serway, Physics For Scientists and Engineers, 4th ed.)
These selections are not arguments because they make no claim that anything is being
proved. In the ﬁrst selection, the word ‘‘thus’’ indicates how something is done—
namely, how chemical elements and compounds can be represented by formulas. In
the second selection, the example cited is intended to give concrete meaning to the
notion of a force changing the shape of something. It is not intended primarily to
prove that a force can change the shape of something.
However, as with expository passages, many illustrations can be taken as argu-
ments. Such arguments are often called arguments from example. Here is an in-
stance of one:
Water is an excellent solvent. It can dissolve a wide range of materials that will not
dissolve in other liquids. For example, salts do not dissolve in most common
solvents, such as gasoline, kerosene, turpentine and cleaning ﬂuids. But many

20
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
salts dissolve readily in water. So do a variety of nonionic organic substances,
such as sugars and alcohols of low molecular weight.
(Robert S. Boikess and Edward Edelson, Chemical Principles)
In this passage the examples that are cited can be interpreted as providing evidence
that water can dissolve a wide range of materials that will not dissolve in other liquids.
Thus, the passage can be taken as both an illustration and an argument, with the
second sentence being the conclusion.
In deciding whether an illustration should be interpreted as an argument one must
determine whether the passage merely shows how something is done or what some-
thing means, or whether it also purports to prove something. In borderline cases it
helps to note whether the claim being illustrated is one that practically everyone
accepts or agrees with. If it is, the passage is probably not an argument. As we have
already noted, in real life situations authors rarely attempt to prove what everyone
already accepts. But if the claim being illustrated is one that many people do not
accept or have never thought about, then the passage may be interpreted as both an
illustration and an argument.
Thus, in reference to the ﬁrst two examples we considered, most people are aware
that elements and compounds can be expressed by formulas—practically everyone
knows that water is H2O—and most people know that forces distort things—that
running into a tree can cause a dent in the car bumper. But people may not be aware
of the fact that water dissolves many things that other solvents will not dissolve. This
is one of the reasons for evaluating the ﬁrst two examples as mere illustrations and the
last one as an argument.
Explanations
One of the most important kinds of nonargument is the explanation. An explanation
is a group of statements that purports to shed light on some event or phenomenon.
The event or phenomenon in question is usually accepted as a matter of fact.
Examples:
The Challenger spacecraft exploded after liftoff because an O-ring failed in one of
the booster rockets.
The sky appears blue from the earth’s surface because light rays from the sun are
scattered by particles in the atmosphere.
Cows can digest grass, while humans cannot, because their digestive systems con-
tain enzymes not found in humans.
Every explanation is composed of two distinct components: the explanandum and
explanans. The explanandum is the statement that describes the event or phenom-
enon to be explained, and the explanans is the statement or group of statements that
purports to do the explaining. In the ﬁrst example above, the explanandum is the

Recognizing Arguments
21
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion
Accepted
facts
Claimed to
prove
Argument
Explanans
Explanandum
Accepted
fact
Claimed to
shed light on
Explanation
statement ‘‘The Challenger spacecraft exploded after liftoff,’’ and the explanans is ‘‘An
O-ring failed in one of the booster rockets.’’
Explanations are sometimes mistaken for arguments because they often contain the
indicator word ‘‘because.’’ Yet explanations are not arguments because in an expla-
nation the purpose of the explanans is to shed light on, or to make sense of, the
explanandum event—not to prove that it occurred. In other words, the purpose of the
explanans is to show why something is the case, while in an argument, the purpose of
the premises is to prove that something is the case.
In the ﬁrst example above, the fact that the Challenger exploded is known to
everyone. The statement that an O-ring failed in one of the booster rockets is not
intended to prove that the spacecraft exploded but rather to show why it exploded. In
the second example, the fact that the sky is blue is readily apparent. The intention of
the passage is to explain why it appears blue—not to prove that it appears blue.
Similarly, in the third example, virtually everyone knows that people cannot digest
grass. The intention of the passage is to explain why this is true.
Thus, to distinguish explanations from arguments, identify the statement that is
either the explanandum or the conclusion (usually this is the statement that precedes
the word ‘‘because’’). If this statement describes an accepted matter of fact, and if the
remaining statements purport to shed light on this statement, then the passage is an
explanation.
This method works for practically all passages that are either explanations or argu-
ments (but not both). However, as with expository passages and illustrations, there
are some passages that can be interpreted as both explanations and arguments.
Example:
Women become intoxicated by drinking a smaller amount of alcohol than men
because men metabolize part of the alcohol before it reaches the bloodstream
whereas women do not.
The purpose of this passage could be to prove the ﬁrst statement to those people who
do not accept it as fact, and to shed light on that fact to those people who do accept

22
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
it. Alternately, the passage could be intended to prove the ﬁrst statement to a single
person who accepts its truth on blind faith or incomplete experience, and simultane-
ously to shed light on this truth. Thus, the passage can be correctly interpreted as both
an explanation and an argument.
Perhaps the greatest problem confronting the effort to distinguish explanations
from arguments lies in determining whether something is an accepted matter of fact.
Obviously what is accepted by one person may not be accepted by another. Thus, the
effort often involves determining which person or group of people the passage is
directed to—the intended audience. Sometimes the source of the passage (textbook,
newspaper, technical journal, etc.) will decide the issue. But when the passage is taken
totally out of context, this may prove impossible. In those circumstances the only
possible answer may be to say that if the passage is an argument, then such-and-such
is the conclusion and such-and-such are the premises.
Conditional Statements
A conditional statement is an ‘‘if . . . then . . .’’ statement; for example:
If air is removed from a solid closed container, then the container will weigh less
than it did.
Every conditional statement is made up of two component statements. The compo-
nent statement immediately following the ‘‘if’’ is called the antecedent, and the one
following the ‘‘then’’ is called the consequent. (Occasionally, the word ‘‘then’’ is left
out, and occasionally the order of antecedent and consequent is reversed.) In the
above example the antecedent is ‘‘Air is removed from a solid closed container,’’ and
the consequent is ‘‘The container will weigh less than it did.’’ This example asserts a
causal connection between the air being removed and the container weighing less.
However, not all conditional statements express causal connections. The statement ‘‘If
yellow fever is an infectious disease, then the Dallas Cowboys are a football team’’ is
just as much a conditional statement as the one about the closed container.
Conditional
statements
If
then
.
Antecedent
Consequent
if
.
Consequent
Antecedent

Recognizing Arguments
23
S
N
L
Conditional statements are not arguments, because they fail to meet the criteria
given earlier. In an argument, at least one statement must claim to present evidence,
and there must be a claim that this evidence implies something. In a conditional
statement, there is no claim that either the antecedent or the consequent presents
evidence. In other words, there is no assertion that either the antecedent or the con-
sequent is true. Rather, there is only the assertion that if the antecedent is true, then so
is the consequent. Of course, a conditional statement as a whole may present evidence
because it asserts a relationship between statements. Yet when conditional statements
are taken in this sense, there is still no argument, because there is then no separate
claim that this evidence implies anything.
Some conditional statements are similar to arguments, however, in that they express
the outcome of a reasoning process. As such, they may be said to have a certain
inferential content. Consider the following:
If both Saturn and Uranus have rings, then Saturn has rings.
If iron is less dense than mercury, then it will ﬂoat in mercury.
The link between the antecedent and consequent of these conditional statements
resembles the inferential link between the premises and conclusion of an argument.
Yet there is a difference because the premises of an argument are claimed to be true,
whereas no such claim is made for the antecedent of a conditional statement. Accord-
ingly, these conditional statements are not arguments.* Yet their inferential content
may be reexpressed to form arguments:
Both Saturn and Uranus have rings.
Therefore, Saturn has rings.
Iron is less dense than mercury.
Therefore, iron will ﬂoat in mercury.
Finally, while no single conditional statement is an argument, a conditional state-
ment may serve as either the premise or the conclusion (or both) of an argument, as
the following examples illustrate:
If cigarette companies publish warning labels, then smokers assume the risk of
smoking.
Cigarette companies do publish warning labels.
Therefore, smokers assume the risk of smoking.
*In saying this we are temporarily ignoring the possibility of these statements being enthymemes. As
we will see in Chapter 5, an enthymeme is an argument in which a premise or conclusion (or both) is
implied but not stated. If, to the second example, we add the premise ‘‘Iron is less dense thanmercury’’
and the conclusion ‘‘Therefore, iron will ﬂoat in mercury,’’ we have a complete argument. To decide
whether a conditional statement is an enthymeme, we must be familiar with the context in which it
occurs.

24
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
If banks make bad loans, then they will be threatened with collapse.
If banks are threatened with collapse, then the taxpayer will come to the rescue.
Therefore, if banks make bad loans, then the taxpayer will come to the rescue.
The relation between conditional statements and arguments may now be summa-
rized as follows:
1. A single conditional statement is not an argument.
2. A conditional statement may serve as either the premise or the conclusion (or both)
of an argument.
3. The inferential content of a conditional statement may be reexpressed to form an
argument.
The ﬁrst two rules are especially pertinent to the recognition of arguments. Accord-
ing to the ﬁrst rule, if a passage consists of a single conditional statement, it is not an
argument. But if it consists of a conditional statement together with some other state-
ment, then, by the second rule, it may be an argument, depending on such factors
as the presence of indicator words and an inferential relationship between the
statements.
Conditional statements are especially important in logic because they express the
relationship between necessary and sufﬁcient conditions. A is said to be a sufﬁcient
condition for B whenever the occurrence of A is all that is needed for the occurrence
of B. For example, being a dog is a sufﬁcient condition for being an animal. On the
other hand, B is said to be a necessary condition for A whenever A cannot occur
without the occurrence of B. Thus, being an animal is a necessary condition for being
a dog. These relationships are expressed in the following conditional statements:
If X is a dog, then X is an animal.
If X is not an animal, then X is not a dog.
The ﬁrst statement says that being a dog is a sufﬁcient condition for being an animal
and the second that being an animal is a necessary condition for being a dog. How-
ever, a little reﬂection reveals that these two statements say exactly the same thing.
Thus each expresses in one way a necessary condition and in another way a sufﬁcient
condition. The terminology of sufﬁcient and necessary conditions will be used in later
chapters to express deﬁnitions and causal connections.
Summary
In deciding whether a passage contains an argument, one should look for three things:
(1) indicator words such as ‘‘therefore,’’ ‘‘since,’’ ‘‘because,’’ and so on; (2) an inferen-
tial relationship between the statements; and (3) typical kinds of nonarguments. But

Recognizing Arguments
25
S
N
L
remember that the mere occurrence of an indicator word does not guarantee the
presence of an argument. One must check to see that the statement identiﬁed as the
conclusion is intended to be supported by one or more of the other statements. Also
keep in mind that in many arguments that lack indicator words, the conclusion is
the ﬁrst statement. Furthermore it helps to mentally insert the word ‘‘therefore’’
before the various statements before deciding that a statement should be interpreted
as a conclusion. The typical kinds of nonarguments that we have surveyed are as
follows:
warnings
pieces of advice
statements of belief
statements of opinion
loosely associated statements
reports
expository passages
illustrations
explanations
conditional statements
Keep in mind that these kinds of nonargument are not mutually exclusive, and that,
for example, one and the same passage can sometimes be interpreted as both a report
and a statement of opinion, or as both an expository passage and an illustration. The
precise kind of nonargument a passage might be is nowhere near as important as
correctly deciding whether or not it is an argument.
After working the exercises in this section, you may, if you wish, proceed directly
to Section 1.6 (‘‘Extended Arguments’’).
EXERCISE 1.2
I. Determine which of the following passages are arguments. For those that are,
identify the conclusion. For those that are not, attempt to determine the kind of
nonarguments.
1.
#
Women tend to have higher pitched voices than men because they have
shorter vocal chords. Shorter vocal chords vibrate at a higher frequency than
longer ones.
2. If public education fails to improve the quality of instruction in both primary
and secondary schools, then it is likely that it will lose additional students to
the private sector in the years ahead.
3. Freedom of the press is the most important of our constitutionally guaranteed
freedoms. Without it, our other freedoms would be immediately threatened.
Furthermore, it provides the fulcrum for the advancement of new freedoms.
4.
#
Water is a good solvent for many different substances, and it picks them up
as it moves through the environment. Thus, rain water ﬂowing over and
under the ground dissolves minerals such as limestone.
(Gilbert Castellan et al., The World of Chemistry)

26
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
5. It is strongly recommended that you have your house inspected for termite
damage at the earliest possible opportunity.
6. Shut the cage door, you fool! The lions are escaping into the streets!
7.
#
If the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld disappears, then the Van Allen radiation belt will
be destroyed. If the Van Allen radiation belt is destroyed, then intense cosmic
rays will bombard the earth. Therefore, if the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld disap-
pears, then intense cosmic rays will bombard the earth.
8. Fictional characters behave according to the same psychological probabilities
as real people. But the characters of ﬁction are found in exotic dilemmas that
real people hardly encounter. Consequently, ﬁction provides us with the op-
portunity to ponder how people react in uncommon situations, and to deduce
moral lessons, psychological principles, and philosophical insights from their
behavior.
(J.R. McCuen and A.C. Winkler, Readings for Writers, 4th edition)
9. I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support free peoples
who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed minorities or by outside
pressures. I believe that we must assist free peoples to work out their own
destinies in their own way. I believe that our help should be primarily through
economic and ﬁnancial aid, which is essential to economic stability and or-
derly political processes.
(President Truman, Address to Congress, 1947)
10.
#
Five college students who were accused of sneaking into the Cincinnati Zoo
and trying to ride the camels pleaded no contest to criminal trespass yester-
day. The students scaled a fence to get into the zoo and then climbed another
fence to get into the camel pit before security ofﬁcials caught them, zoo
ofﬁcials said.
(Newspaper clipping)
11. Mortality rates for women undergoing early abortions, where the procedure
is legal, appear to be as low as or lower than the rates for normal childbirth.
Consequently, any interest of the state in protecting the woman from an
inherently hazardous procedure, except when it would be equally dangerous
for her to forgo it, has largely disappeared.
(Justice Blackmun, Roe v. Wade)
12. The pace of reading, clearly, depends entirely upon the reader. He may read
as slowly or as rapidly as he can or wishes to read. If he does not understand
something, he may stop and reread it, or go in search of elucidation before
continuing. The reader can accelerate his pace when the material is easy or
less than interesting, and can slow down when it is difﬁcult or enthralling. If
what he reads is moving he can put down the book for a few moments and
cope with his emotions without fear of losing anything.
(Marie Winn, The Plug-In Drug)

Recognizing Arguments
27
S
N
L
13.
#
Cancer is not one disease, but many. Some forms are particularly susceptible
to radiation therapy. Radiation is carefully aimed at the cancerous tissue, and
exposure of normal cells is minimized. If the cancer cells are killed by the
destructive effects of the radiation, the malignancy is halted.
(John W. Hill and Doris K. Kolb, Chemistry for Changing Times, 7th edition)
14. Lions at Kruger National Park in South Africa are dying of tuberculosis. ‘‘All of
the lions in the park may be dead within ten years because the disease is
incurable, and the lions have no natural resistance,’’ said the deputy director
of the Department of Agriculture.
(Newspaper clipping)
15. Economics is of practical value in business. An understanding of the overall
operation of the economic system puts the business executive in a better
position to formulate policies. The executive who understands the causes
and consequences of inﬂation is better equipped during inﬂationary periods
to make more intelligent decisions than otherwise.
(Campbell R. McConnell, Economics, 8th edition)
16.
#
Bear one thing in mind before you begin to write your paper: Famous literary
works, especially works regarded as classics, have been thoroughly studied
to the point where prevailing opinion on them has assumed the character of
orthodoxy.
(J.R. McCuen and A.C. Winkler, Readings for Writers, 4th edition)
17. Young people at universities study to achieve knowledge and not to learn a
trade. We must all learn how to support ourselves, but we must also learn
how to live. We need a lot of engineers in the modern world, but we do not
want a world of modern engineers.
(Winston Churchill, A Churchill Reader, ed. Colin R. Coote)
18. No business concern wants to sell on credit to a customer who will prove
unable or unwilling to pay his or her account. Consequently, most business
organizations include a credit department which must reach a decision on the
credit worthiness of each prospective customer.
(Walter B. Meigs and Robert F. Meigs, Accounting)
19.
#
For organisms at the sea surface, sinking into deep water usually means
death. Plant cells cannot photosynthesize in the dark depths. Fishes and other
animals that descend lose contact with the main surface food supply and
themselves become food for strange deep-living predators.
(David H. Milne, Marine Life and the Sea)
20. Since the 1950s a malady called whirling disease has invaded U.S. ﬁshing
streams, frequently attacking rainbow trout. A parasite deforms young ﬁsh,
which often chase their tails before dying, hence the name.
(‘‘Trout Disease—A Turn for the Worse,’’ National Geographic)

28
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
21. Dachshunds are ideal dogs for small children, as they are already stretched
and pulled to such a length that the child cannot do much harm one way or
the other.
(Robert Benchley, quoted in Cold Noses and Warm Hearts)
22.
#
Atoms are the basic building blocks of all matter. They can combine to form
molecules, whose properties are generally very different from those of the
constituent atoms. Table salt, for example, a simple chemical compound
formed from chlorine and sodium, resembles neither the poisonous gas nor
the highly reactive metal.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd edition)
23. The coarsest type of humor is the practical joke: pulling away the chair from
the dignitary’s lowered bottom. The victim is perceived ﬁrst as a person of
consequence, then suddenly as an inert body subject to the laws of physics:
authority is debunked by gravity, mind by matter; man is degraded to a
mechanism.
(Arthur Koestler, Janus: A Summing Up)
24. If a man holding a belief which he was taught in childhood or persuaded of
afterwards keeps down and pushes away any doubts which arise about it in
his mind, purposely avoids the reading of books and the company of men
that call in question or discuss it, and regards as impious those questions
which cannot easily be asked without disturbing it—the life of that man is
one long sin against mankind.
(W. K. Clifford, ‘‘The Ethics of Belief’’)
25.
#
It is usually easy to decide whether or not something is alive. This is because
living things share many common attributes, such as the capacity to extract
energy from nutrients to drive their various functions, the power to actively
respond to changes in their environment, and the ability to grow, to differen-
tiate, and to reproduce.
(Donald Voet and Judith G. Voet, Biochemistry, 2nd edition)
26. Words are slippery customers. The full meaning of a word does not appear
until it is placed in its context. . . . And even then the meaning will depend
upon the listener, upon the speaker, upon their entire experience of the lan-
guage, upon their knowledge of one another, and upon the whole situation.
(C. Cherry, On Human Communication)
27. Haydn developed the string quartet from the eighteenth century diverti-
mento, giving more substance to the light, popular form and scoring it for
two violins, a viola, and a cello. His eighty-three quartets, written over the
course of his creative lifetime, evolved slowly into a sophisticated form. To-
gether they constitute one of the most important bodies of chamber music
literature.
(Robert Hickok, Exploring Music)

Recognizing Arguments
29
S
N
L
28.
#
A person never becomes truly self-reliant. Even though he deals effectively
with things, he is necessarily dependent upon those who have taught him to
do so. They have selected the things he is dependent upon and determined
the kinds and degrees of dependencies.
(B. F. Skinner, Beyond Freedom and Dignity)
29. There is no doubt that some businessmen conspire to shorten the useful life
of their products in order to guarantee replacement sales. There is, similarly,
no doubt that many of the annual model changes with which American
(and other) consumers are increasingly familiar are not technologically
substantive.
(Alvin Tofﬂer, Future Shock)
30. If one knows the plant life of an area, certain assumptions can be made about
the climate and the animals that will be found there. For example, in grass-
lands the animal life typically includes large mammalian herbivores, insects,
and birds.
(King, Saunders, and Wallace, Biology: The Science of Life)
31.
#
In areas where rats are a problem, it is very difﬁcult to exterminate them with
bait poison. That’s because some rats eat enough poison to die but others eat
only enough to become sick and then learn to avoid that particular poison
taste in the future.
(Rod Plotnik, Introduction to Psychology, 4th edition)
32. Men are less likely to develop osteoporosis until later in life than women and
seldom suffer as severely because they have 30 percent more bone mass on
the average and don’t undergo the sudden drop in estrogen that occurs with
menopause.
(Matt Clark, ‘‘The Calcium Craze,’’ Newsweek)
33. Newspapers, radio, and television are essential for a democracy. They are the
critical link between the people and their government. They provide infor-
mation and analysis about policy issues, and they also sensitize policymakers
to public opinion—which enables them to respond to the needs and desires
of the population. Finally, the media play a critical role in reporting and
evaluating the decisions of government.
(Stephen J. Wayne et al., The Politics of American Government)
34.
#
Nations are made in two ways, by the slow working of history or the galvanic
force of ideas. Most nations are made the former way, emerging slowly from
the mist of the past, gradually coalescing within concentric circles of shared
sympathies, with an accretion of consensual institutions. But a few nations
are formed and deﬁned by the citizens’ assent to a shared philosophy.
(George Will, ‘‘Lithuania and South Carolina’’)
35. Although the plane mirror is perhaps the oldest optical instrument known to
man, it remains an important element in the modern arsenal of sophisticated

30
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
optical devices. For example, the earth-moon laser-ranging experiments, ini-
tiated in 1969, rely on high-quality reﬂectors.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd edition)
II. The following selections were originally submitted as letters to the editor of news-
papers and magazines. Determine which of them can, with good reason, be con-
sidered arguments. In those that can, identify the conclusion.
1.
#
What this country needs is a return to the concept of swift and certain justice.
If we need more courts, judges and prisons, then so be it. And as for capital
punishment, I say let the punishment ﬁt the crime. When criminals behave
more like humans, then we can start to treat them more humanely. In the
meantime, I would like to see the Night Stalkers of our society swiftly exe-
cuted rather than coddled by our courts and prisons.
(John Pearson)
2. The big problem with computers in elementary schools isn’t their minimal
educational value but the fact that they often replace science in the budget and
curriculum. Our local Parent Teachers Association is throwing away science
equipment as fervently as it raises money for more computers. I use computers
extensively in the college physics classes I teach, so I appreciate their value in
communications and advanced computation. But in elementary schools, too
much is being sacriﬁced so that children can have all those pricey beige boxes.
(Roger G. Tobin)
3. Is there any country in the world that worries more about its kids having fun
in school, making lessons exciting and relevant, and then is more disap-
pointed with the result than the United States? We think learning is like buying
a car or smoking a cigarette. Just get into the thing or draw a breath and you
will be effortlessly transported to lands of pleasure and excitement.
(Charles M. Breinin)
4.
#
After reading your cover story, I ﬁnd that cable TV has simply ﬂooded our
airwaves with more sex, violence and teen-age punk junk. Now our children
can spend even less time studying and we can spend more time in blank-
space stares at the idiot box. Cable would be ﬁne with more educational
channels—and fewer cheap thrills aimed at narrow-minded bubble brains.
( Jacqueline Murray)
5. In opposing obligatory prayer in the public schools, I am not deserting my god
(and I would like to think of myself as a Christian). On the contrary, it is per-
fectly possible that I am thus serving my god, who I believe wants his children
to pray to him of their own free will and not because some legislator, who may
or may not be motivated by truly religious considerations, forces them to.
(Philip D. Walker)

Recognizing Arguments
31
S
N
L
6. My own son returned from his public elementary school with a book on
dinosaurs loaned to him by his ﬁrst-grade ‘‘science’’ teacher. It depicted the
beasts as ﬁre-breathing dragons and said the Bible informs us they were this
way. God help us to achieve an educated and scientiﬁcally literate society,
because these narrow-minded cretins won’t.
(Bruce Strathdee)
7.
#
The poor quality of parenting and the lack in continuity of adult care provided
to many U.S. children contribute to a passivity and a sense of helplessness
that hobbles individuals for the remainder of their lives. Their subsequent
unemployment, lack of education, and inability to make necessary life-style
changes such as quitting an addiction can be attributed, in large part, to the
helplessness they learned from childhood.
(William J. McCarthy)
8. Forty-one million Americans cannot afford health insurance in this time of
global capitalism. At the same time, nine insurance executives earned more
than $10 million last year, according to a recent study. If this is the celebrated
triumph of capitalism over other forms of economic organization, what ex-
actly did we win? Have we gained the world at the cost of our souls?
(Jason Reynolds)
9. The suggestion by sociobiologists that stepparent child abuse has evolution-
ary advantages is superﬁcial. If there were evolutionary advantages to harm-
ing one’s mate’s offspring of a different parent, then by now there probably
wouldn’t be loving and generous stepparents around—and there are plenty.
I know. I have a loving stepparent and am one.
(Ronald Cohen)
10.
#
The voting public is as full of bull as the politicians. As a result, we get
the kind of ofﬁceholders we ask for. Show me a politician who will stand
up and tell Americans the truth, and I’ll show you a person who will never
be elected.
(Huie Dixon)
III. The following statements represent conclusions for arguments. Each is expressed
in the form of two alternatives. Select one of the alternatives for each conclusion,
and then jot down several reasons that support it. Finally, incorporate your rea-
sons into a written argument of at least 100 words that supports the conclusion.
Include premise and conclusion indicators in some of your arguments, but not in
all of them.
1. A constitutional amendment that outlaws ﬂag burning should/should not be
adopted.
2. Street drugs should/should not be legalized.

32
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
3. The death penalty should/should not be abolished.
4. Sanctions should/should not be imposed on students for using speech that is
offensive to minorities.
5. Free health care should/should not be guaranteed to all citizens.
6. Same-sex marriages should/should not be recognized by the state.
7. The possession, ownership, and sale of handguns should/should not be
outlawed.
8. Cigarettes should/should not be regulated as an addictive drug.
9. Afﬁrmative action programs should/should not be abolished.
10. Doctors should/should not be allowed to assist terminally ill patients in com-
mitting suicide.
IV. Deﬁne the following terms:
argument from example
conditional statement
antecedent
consequent
sufﬁcient condition
necessary condition
explanation
explanandum
explanans
illustration
expository passage
V. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. Any passage that contains an argument must contain a claim that something
is supported by evidence or reasons.
2. In an argument, the claim that something is supported by evidence or reasons
is always explicit.
3. Passages that contain indicator words such as ‘‘thus,’’ ‘‘since,’’ and ‘‘because’’
are always arguments.
4. In deciding whether a passage contains an argument, we should always keep
an eye out for indicator words and the presence of an inferential relationship
between the statements.
5. Some expository passages can be correctly interpreted as arguments.
6. Some illustrations can be correctly interpreted as arguments.
7. In deciding whether an expository passage or an illustration should be inter-
preted as an argument, it helps to note whether the claim being developed or
illustrated is one that is accepted by everyone.
8. Some conditional statements can be reexpressed to form arguments.
9. In an explanation, the explanandum usually describes an accepted matter of
fact.
10. In an explanation, the explanans is the statement or group of statements that
does the explaining.

Deduction and Induction
33
S
N
L
VI. Fill in the blanks with ‘‘necessary’’ or ‘‘sufﬁcient’’ to make the followingstatements
true. After the blanks have been ﬁlled in, express the result in terms of conditional
statements.
1.
#
Being a tiger is a
condition for being an animal.
2. Being an animal is a
condition for being a tiger.
3. Drinking water is a
condition for quenching one’s thirst.
4.
#
Having a racquet is a
condition for playing tennis.
5. Pulling the cork is a
condition for drinking an expensive
bottle of wine.
6. Stepping on a cat’s tail is a
condition for making the cat
yowl.
7.
#
Burning leaves is a
condition for producing smoke.
8. Paying attention is a
condition for understanding a lecture.
9. Taking a swim in the North Sea is a
condition for cooling
off.
10.
#
Opening a door is a
condition for crossing the threshold.
VII. Page through a book, magazine, or newspaper and ﬁnd two arguments, one with
indicator words, the other without. Copy the arguments as written, giving the
appropriate reference. Then identify the premises and conclusion of each.
1.3
Deduction and Induction
Arguments can be divided into two groups: deductive and inductive. A deductive
argument is an argument in which the premises are claimed to support the conclu-
sion in such a way that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion
false. In such arguments the conclusion is claimed to follow necessarily from the
premises. On the other hand, an inductive argument is an argument in which the
premises are claimed to support the conclusion in such a way that it is improbable that
the premises be true and the conclusion false. In these arguments the conclusion is
claimed to follow only probably from the premises. Thus, deductive arguments are
those that involve necessary reasoning, and inductive arguments are those that involve
probabilistic reasoning. Examples:
The meerkat is closely related to the suricat.
The suricat thrives on beetle larvae.
Therefore, probably the meerkat thrives on beetle larvae.

34
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
The meerkat is a member of the mongoose family.
All members of the mongoose family are carnivores.
Therefore, it necessarily follows that the meerkat is a carnivore.
The ﬁrst of these arguments is inductive, the second deductive.
The distinction between inductive and deductive arguments lies in the strength of
an argument’s inferential claim. In other words, the distinction lies in how strongly the
conclusion is claimed to follow from the premises. Unfortunately, however, in most
arguments the strength of this claim is not explicitly stated, so we must use our inter-
pretive abilities to evaluate it. Three factors that inﬂuence our decision about this claim
are (1) the occurrence of special indicator words, (2) the actual strength of the infer-
ential link between premises and conclusion, and (3) the character or form of argu-
mentation the arguer uses.
The occurrence of special indicator words is illustrated in the examples we just
considered. The word ‘‘probably’’ in the conclusion of the ﬁrst argument suggests that
the argument should be taken as inductive, and the word ‘‘necessarily’’ in the conclu-
sion of the second suggests that the second argument be taken as deductive. Addi-
tional inductive indicators are ‘‘improbable,’’ ‘‘plausible,’’ ‘‘implausible,’’ ‘‘likely,’’
‘‘unlikely,’’ and ‘‘reasonable to conclude.’’ Additional deductive indicators are ‘‘cer-
tainly,’’ ‘‘absolutely,’’ and ‘‘deﬁnitely.’’ (Note that the phrase ‘‘it must be the case that’’
is ambiguous; ‘‘must’’ can indicate either probability or necessity).
Inductive and deductive indicator words often suggest the correct interpretation.
However, if they conﬂict with one of the other criteria (discussed shortly), we should
probably ignore them. Arguers often use phrases such as ‘‘it certainly follows that’’ for
rhetorical purposes to add impact to their conclusion and not to suggest that the
argument be taken as deductive. Similarly, some arguers, not knowing the distinction
between inductive and deductive, will claim to ‘‘deduce’’ a conclusion when their
argument is more correctly interpreted as inductive.
The second factor that bears upon our interpretation of an argument as inductive
or deductive is the actual strength of the inferential link between premises and con-
clusion. If the conclusion actually does follow with strict necessity from the premises,
the argument is clearly deductive. In such an argument it is impossible for the premises
to be true and the conclusion false. On the other hand, if the conclusion does not
follow with strict necessity but does follow probably, it is usually best to consider the
argument inductive. Examples:
All saleswomen are extroverts.
Elizabeth Taylor is a saleswoman.
Therefore, Elizabeth Taylor is an extrovert.
The vast majority of saleswomen are extroverts.
Elizabeth Taylor is a saleswoman.
Therefore, Elizabeth Taylor is an extrovert.

Deduction and Induction
35
S
N
L
In the ﬁrst example, the conclusion follows with strict necessity from the premises. If
we assume that all saleswomen are extroverts and that Elizabeth Taylor is a sales-
woman, then it is impossible that Elizabeth Taylor not be an extrovert. Thus, we should
interpret this argument as deductive. In the second example, the conclusion does not
follow from the premises with strict necessity, but it does follow with some degree of
probability. If we assume that the premises are true, then based on that assumption it
is improbable that the conclusion is false. Thus, it is best to interpret the second
argument as inductive.
Occasionally, an argument contains no indicator words, and the conclusion does
not follow either necessarily or probably from the premises; in other words, it does
not follow at all. This situation points up the need for the third factor to be taken into
account, which is the character or form of argumentation the arguer uses. Five ex-
amples of argumentation that are typically deductive are arguments based on math-
ematics, arguments from deﬁnition, and categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive
syllogisms. Additional ones will be addressed in later chapters.
An argument based on mathematics is an argument in which the conclusion
depends on some purely arithmetic or geometric computation or measurement. For
example, a shopper might place two apples and three oranges into a paper bag and
then conclude that the bag contains ﬁve pieces of fruit. Or a surveyor might measure
a square piece of land and, after determining that it is 100 feet on each side, conclude
that it contains 10,000 square feet. Since all arguments in pure mathematics are deduc-
tive, we can usually consider arguments that depend on mathematics to be deductive
as well. A noteworthy exception, however, is arguments that depend on statistics. As
we will see shortly, such arguments are usually best interpreted as inductive.
An argument from deﬁnition is an argument in which the conclusion is claimed
to depend merely upon the deﬁnition of some word or phrase used in the premise or
conclusion. For example, someone might argue that because Claudia is mendacious,
it follows that she tells lies, or that because a certain paragraph is prolix, it follows that
it is excessively wordy. These arguments are deductive because their conclusions
follow with necessity from the deﬁnitions of ‘‘mendacious’’ and ‘‘prolix.’’
A syllogism, in general, is an argument consisting of exactly two premises and one
conclusion. Categorical syllogisms will be treated in greater depth in Chapter 5, but
for now we will say that a categorical syllogism is a syllogism in which each state-
ment begins with one of the words ‘‘all,’’ ‘‘no,’’ or ‘‘some.’’ Example:
All lasers are optical devices.
Some lasers are surgical instruments.
Therefore, some optical devices are surgical instruments.
Arguments such as these are nearly always best treated as deductive.
A hypothetical syllogism is a syllogism having a conditional statement for one or
both of its premises. Examples:

36
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
If electricity ﬂows through a conductor, then a magnetic ﬁeld is produced.
If a magnetic ﬁeld is produced, then a nearby compass will be deﬂected.
Therefore, if electricity ﬂows through a conductor, then a nearby compass will be
deﬂected.
If quartz scratches glass, then quartz is harder than glass.
Quartz scratches glass.
Therefore, quartz is harder than glass.
Although certain forms of such arguments can sometimes be interpreted inductively,
the deductive interpretation is usually the most appropriate.
A disjunctive syllogism is a syllogism having a disjunctive statement (i.e., an
‘‘either . . . or . . .’’ statement) for one of its premises. Example:
Either breach of contract is a crime or it is not punishable by the state.
Breach of contract is not a crime.
Therefore, it is not punishable by the state.
As with hypothetical syllogisms, such arguments are usually best taken as deductive.
Hypothetical and disjunctive syllogisms will be treated in greater depth in Chapter 6.
Now let us consider some typically inductive forms of argumentation. In general,
inductive arguments are such that the content of the conclusion is in some way in-
tended to ‘‘go beyond’’ the content of the premises. The premises of such an argument
typically deal with some subject that is relatively familiar, and the conclusion then
moves beyond this to a subject that is less familiar or that little is known about. Such
an argument may take any of several forms: predictions about the future, arguments
from analogy, inductive generalizations, arguments from authority, arguments based
on signs, and causal inferences, to name just a few.
In a prediction, the premises deal with some known event in the present or past,
and the conclusion moves beyond this event to some event in the relative future. For
example, someone might argue that because certain meteorological phenomena have
been observed to develop over a certain region of central Missouri, a storm will occur
there in six hours. Or again, one might argue that because certain ﬂuctuationsoccurred
in the prime interest rate on Friday, the value of the dollar will decrease against foreign
currencies on Monday. Nearly everyone realizes that the future cannot be known with
certainty; thus, whenever an argument makes a prediction about the future, one is
usually justiﬁed in considering the argument inductive.
An argument from analogy is an argument that depends on the existence of an
analogy, or similarity, between two things or states of affairs. Because of the existence
of this analogy, a certain condition that affects the better-known thing or situation is
concluded to affect the similar, lesser-known thing or situation. For example, someone
might argue that because Christina’s Porsche is a great handling car, it follows that
Angela’s Porsche must also be a great handling car. The argument depends on the
existence of a similarity, or analogy, between the two cars. The certitude attending
such an inference is obviously probabilistic at best.

Deduction and Induction
37
S
N
L
An inductive generalization is an argument that proceeds from the knowledge
of a selected sample to some claim about the whole group. Because the members of
the sample have a certain characteristic, it is argued that all the members of the group
have that same characteristic. For example, one might argue that because three or-
anges selected from a certain crate were especially tasty and juicy, all the oranges from
that crate are especially tasty and juicy. Or again, one might argue that because six
out of a total of nine members sampled from a certain labor union intend to vote
for Johnson for union president, two-thirds of the entire membership intend to vote for
Johnson. These examples illustrate the use of statistics in inductive argumentation.
An argument from authority is an argument in which the conclusion rests upon
a statement made by some presumed authority or witness. For example, a person
might argue that earnings for Hewlett-Packard Corporation will be up in the coming
quarter because of a statement to that effect by an investment counselor. Or a lawyer
might argue that Mack the Knife committed the murder because an eyewitness testiﬁed
to that effect under oath. Because the investment counselor and the eyewitness could
be either mistaken or lying, such arguments are essentially probabilistic.
An argument based on signs is an argument that proceeds from the knowledge
of a certain sign to a knowledge of the thing or situation that the sign symbolizes. For
example, when driving on an unfamiliar highway one might see a sign indicating that
the road makes several sharp turns one mile ahead. Based on this information, one
might argue that the road does indeed make several sharp turns one mile ahead.
Because the sign might be misplaced or in error about the turns, the conclusion is only
probable.
A causal inference underlies arguments that proceed from knowledge of a cause
to knowledge of the effect, or, conversely, from knowledge of an effect to knowledge
of a cause. For example, from the knowledge that a bottle of wine had been acciden-
tally left in the freezer overnight, someone might conclude that it had frozen (cause to
effect). Conversely, after tasting a piece of chicken and ﬁnding it dry and crunchy, one
might conclude that it had been overcooked (effect to cause). Because speciﬁc in-
stances of cause and effect can never be known with absolute certainty, one may
usually interpret such arguments as inductive.
It should be noted that the various subspecies of inductive arguments listed here
are not intended to be mutually exclusive. Overlaps can and do occur. For example,
many causal inferences that proceed from cause to effect also qualify as predictions.
The purpose of this survey is not to demarcate in precise terms the various forms of
induction but rather to provide guidelines for distinguishing inductionfromdeduction.
Keeping this in mind, we should take care not to confuse arguments in geometry,
which are always deductive, with arguments from analogy or inductive generaliza-
tions. For example, an argument concluding that a triangle has a certain attribute (such
as a right angle) because another triangle, with which it is congruent, also has that
attribute might be mistaken for an argument from analogy. Similarly, an argument that
concludes that all triangles have a certain attribute (such as angles totaling two right

38
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
angles) because any particular triangle has that attribute might be mistaken for an
inductive generalization. Arguments such as these, however, are always deductive,
because the conclusion follows necessarily and with complete certainty from the
premises.
One broad classiﬁcation of arguments not listed in this survey is scientiﬁc argu-
ments. Arguments that occur in science can be either inductive or deductive, depend-
ing on the circumstances. In general, arguments aimed at the discovery of a law of
nature are usually considered inductive. Suppose, for example, that we want to dis-
cover a law that governs the time required for a falling body to strike the earth. We
drop bodies of various weights from various heights and measure the time it takes
them to fall. Comparing our measurements, we notice that the time is approximately
proportional to the square root of the distance. From this we conclude that the time
required for any body to fall is proportional to the square root of the distance through
which it falls. Such an argument is best interpreted as an inductive generalization.
Another type of argument that occurs in science has to do with the application of
known laws to speciﬁc circumstances. Arguments of this sort are often considered to
be deductive—but only with certain reservations. Suppose, for example, that we want
to apply Boyle’s law for ideal gases to a container of gas in our laboratory. Boyle’s law
states that the pressure exerted by a gas on the walls of its container is inversely
proportional to the volume. Applying this law, we conclude that when we reduce the
volume of our laboratory sample by half, we will double the pressure. Considered
purely as a mathematical computation, this argument is deductive. But if we acknowl-
edge the fact that the conclusion pertains to the future and the possibility that Boyle’s
law may not work in the future, then the argument is best considered inductive.
A ﬁnal point needs to be made about the distinction between inductive and deduc-
tive arguments. There is a tradition extending back to the time of Aristotle which holds
that inductive arguments are those that proceed from the particular to the general,
while deductive arguments are those that proceed from the general to the particular.
(A particular statement is one that makes a claim about one or more particular
members of a class, while a general statement makes a claim about all the members
of a class.) It is true, of course, that many inductive and deductive arguments do work
in this way; but this fact should not be used as a criterion for distinguishing induction
from deduction. As a matter of fact, there are deductive arguments that proceed from
the general to the general, from the particular to the particular, and from the particular
to the general, as well as from the general to the particular; and there are inductive
arguments that do the same. For example, here is a deductive argument that proceeds
from the particular to the general:
Three is a prime number.
Five is a prime number.
Seven is a prime number.
Therefore, all odd numbers between two and eight are prime numbers.

Deduction and Induction
39
S
N
L
And here is one that proceeds from the particular to the particular:
Gabriel is a wolf.
Gabriel has a tail.
Therefore, Gabriel’s tail is the tail of a wolf.
Here is an inductive argument that proceeds from the general to the particular:
All emeralds previously found have been green.
Therefore, the next emerald to be found will be green.
The other varieties are easy to construct. Thus, the progression from particular to
general, and vice versa, cannot be used as a criterion for distinguishing inductionfrom
deduction.
In summary, to distinguish deductive arguments from inductive, we look for special
indicator words, the actual strength of the inferential link between premises and con-
clusion, and the character or form of argumentation. If the conclusion follows with
strict necessity from the premises, the argument is always deductive; if not, it could be
either deductive or inductive depending on the other factors. The deductive and in-
ductive arguments that we have surveyed in this section are as follows:
deductive arguments:
arguments based on mathematics
arguments from deﬁnition
categorical syllogisms
hypothetical syllogisms
disjunctive syllogisms
inductive arguments:
predictions
arguments from analogy
inductive generalizations
arguments from authority
arguments based on signs
causal inferences
EXERCISE 1.3
I. Determine whether the following arguments are best interpreted as being induc-
tive or deductive. Also state the criteria you use in reaching your decision (i.e., the
presence of indicator words, the nature of the inferential link between premises
and conclusion, or the character or form of argumentation).
1.
#
Because triangle A is congruent with triangle B, and triangle A is isosceles, it
follows that triangle B is isosceles.
2. The plaque on the leaning tower of Pisa says that Galileo performed experi-
ments there with falling objects. It must be the case that Galileo did indeed
perform those experiments there.
3. The rainfall in Seattle has been more than 15 inches every year for the past thirty
years. Therefore, the rainfall next year will probably be more than 15 inches.

40
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
4.
#
No E-mail messages are eloquent creations. Some love letters are eloquent
creations. Therefore, some love letters are not E-mail messages.
5. Amoco, Exxon, and Texaco are all listed on the New York Stock Exchange. It
must be the case that all major American oil companies are listed on the New
York Stock Exchange.
6. The longer a pendulum is, the longer it takes to swing. Therefore, when the
pendulum of a clock is lengthened, the clock slows down.
7.
#
Paying off terrorists in exchange for hostages is not a wise policy, since such
action will only lead them to take more hostages in the future.
8. The Matterhorn is higher than Mount Whitney, and Mount Whitney is higher
than Mount Rainier. The obvious conclusion is that the Matterhorn is higher
than Mount Rainier.
9. Although both front and rear doors were found open after the burglary, there
were pry marks around the lock on the rear door and deposits of mud near
the threshold. It must be the case that the thief entered through the rear door
and left through the front.
10.
#
The Encylopaedia Britannica has an article on symbiosis. The Encyclopedia
Americana, like the Britannica, is an excellent reference work. Therefore,
the Americana probably also has an article on symbiosis.
11. Cholesterol is endogenous with humans. Therefore, it is manufactured inside
the human body.
12. Either classical culture originated in Greece, or it originated in Egypt. Classical
culture did not originate in Egypt. Therefore, classical culture originated in
Greece.
13.
#
World-renowned physicist Stephen Hawking says that the condition of the
universe at the instant of the Big Bang was more highly ordered than it is
today. In view of Hawking’s stature in the scientiﬁc community, we should
conclude that this description of the universe is correct.
14. If Alexander the Great died from typhoid fever, then he became infected in
India. Alexander the Great did die from typhoid fever. Therefore, he became
infected in India.
15. It seems likely that young people will be at war with old people in another 15
or 20 years. You can see it coming in the numbers. In 1900 only 1 percent of the
population was older than 75. Today 4 percent of all Americans are more than
75 years old, and in a few years it’s going to be 5 percent . . . 13 million people.
(Newspaper editorial)
16.
#
Each element, such as hydrogen and iron, has a set of gaps—wavelengths that
it absorbs rather than radiates. So if those wavelengths are missing from the
spectrum, you know that that element is present in the star you are observing.
(Rick Gore, ‘‘Eyes of Science’’)

Deduction and Induction
41
S
N
L
17. Because the apparent daily movement which is common to both the planets
and the ﬁxed stars is seen to travel from the east to the west, but the far slower
single movements of the single planets travel in the opposite direction from
west to east, it is therefore certain that these movements cannot depend on
the common movement of the world but should be assigned to the planets
themselves.
( Johannes Kepler, Epitomy of Copernican Astronomy)
18. Reserves of coal in the United States have an energy equivalent 33 times that
of oil and natural gas. On a worldwide basis the multiple is about 10. By
shifting to a coal-based economy, we could satisfy our energy requirements
for at least a century, probably longer.
(William L. Masterson and Emil J. Slowinski, Principles of Chemistry)
19.
#
When the Romans occupied England, coal was burned. Since coal produces
quite a bit of soot and sulfur dioxide, there must have been days almost 2000
years ago when the air in the larger towns was badly polluted.
(Stanley Gedzelman, The Science and Wonders of the Atmosphere)
20. The graphical method for solving a system of equations is an approximation,
since reading the point of intersection depends on the accuracy with which
the lines are drawn and on the ability to interpret the coordinates of the point.
(Karl J. Smith and Patrick J. Boyle, Intermediate Algebra for College Students)
21. That [the moons of Jupiter] revolve in unequal circles is manifestly deduced
from the fact that at the longest elongation from Jupiter it is never possible to
see two of these moons in conjunction, whereas in the vicinity of Jupiter they
are found united two, three, and sometimes all four together.
(Galileo Galilei, The Starry Messenger)
22.
#
Lenses function by refracting light at their surfaces. Consequently, their action
depends not only on the shape of the lens surfaces, but also on the indices of
refraction of the lens material and the surrounding medium.
(Frank J. Blatt, Principles of Physics, 2nd edition)
23. Given present growth rates in underdeveloped countries, the limited practice
of birth control, and the difﬁculty of slowing the current growth momentum,
it can be said with virtual certainty that none of the people now reading this
book will ever live in a world where the population is not growing.
( J. John Palen, Social Problems)
24. The interpretation of the laws is the proper and peculiar province of the
courts. A constitution is, in fact, and must be regarded by the judges, as a
fundamental law. It therefore belongs to them to ascertain its meaning, as
well as the meaning of any particular act proceeding from the legislativebody.
(Alexander Hamilton, Federalist Papers, No. 78)
25.
#
The Simpson incident had shown me that a dog was kept in the stables, and
yet, though someone had been in and had fetched out a horse, he had not

42
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
barked enough to arouse the two lads in the loft. Obviously the midnight
visitor was someone whom the dog knew well.
(A. Conan Doyle, Memoirs of Sherlock Holmes)
26. Eternity is simultaneously whole. But time has a before and an after. There-
fore time and eternity are not the same thing.
(Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologica)
27. Ordinary things that we encounter every day are electrically neutral. There-
fore, since negatively charged electrons are a part of everything, positively
charged particles must also exist in all matter.
( James E. Brady and Gerard E. Humiston, General Chemistry)
28.
#
Animals that live on plant foods must eat large quantities of vegetation, and
this consumes much of their time. Meat eaters, by contrast, have no need to
eat so much or so often. Consequently, meat-eating hominines [early humans]
may have had more leisure time available to explore and manipulate their
environment; like lions and leopards, they would have time to spend lying
around and playing.
(William A. Haviland, Cultural Anthropology, 8th edition)
29. [Psychologists] Wirtshafter and Davis noted that the glycerol content of the
blood is related to the size of the fat cells [in the body]. Since the size of the
fat cells would indicate something about the amount of stored fats, increases
in blood glycerol should indicate increases in body weight.
(Herbert L. Petri, Motivation: Theory and Research, 2nd edition)
30. Because the moon moves relative to the earth so that it returns to the same
position overhead after about 25 hours, there are two high and two low tides
at any point every 25 hours.
(Douglas C. Giancoli, The Ideas of Physics, 3rd edition)
II. Deﬁne the following terms:
deductive argument
inductive argument
argument based on
mathematics
argument from deﬁnition
categorical syllogism
hypothetical syllogism
disjunctive syllogism
argument from analogy
inductive generalization
prediction
argument from authority
argument based on signs
causal inference
particular statement
general statement
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. In an inductive argument, it is intended that the conclusion contain more
information than the premises.
2. In a deductive argument, the conclusion is not supposed to contain more
information than the premises.

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
43
S
N
L
3. The form of argumentation the arguer uses may allow one to determine
whether an argument is inductive or deductive.
4. The actual strength of the link between premises and conclusion may allow
one to determine whether an argument is inductive or deductive.
5. A geometrical proof is an example of an inductive argument.
6. Most arguments based on statistical reasoning are deductive.
7. If the conclusion of an argument follows merely from the deﬁnition of a word
used in a premise, the argument is deductive.
8. An argument that draws a conclusion about a thing based on that thing’s
similarity to something else is a deductive argument.
9. An argument that draws a conclusion that something is true because someone
has said that it is, is a deductive argument.
10. An argument that presents two alternatives and eliminates one, leaving the
other as the conclusion, is an inductive argument.
11. An argument that proceeds from knowledge of a cause to knowledge of an
effect is an inductive argument.
12. If an argument contains the phrase ‘‘it deﬁnitely follows that,’’ then we know
for certain that the argument is deductive.
13. An argument that predicts what will happen in the future, based upon what
has happened in the past, is an inductive argument.
14. Inductive arguments always proceed from the particular to the general.
15. Deductive arguments always proceed from the general to the particular.
IV. Page through a book, magazine, or newspaper and ﬁnd two arguments, one
inductive and the other deductive. Copy the arguments as written, giving the
appropriate reference. Then identify the premises and conclusion of each.
1.4
Validity, Truth, Soundness,
Strength, Cogency
This section introduces the central ideas and terminology required to evaluate argu-
ments. We have seen that every argument makes two basic claims: a claim that evi-
dence or reasons exist and a claim that the alleged evidence or reasons support
something (or that something follows from the alleged evidence or reasons). The ﬁrst
is a factual claim, the second an inferential claim. The evaluation of every argument
centers on the evaluation of these two claims. The most important of the two is the
inferential claim, because if the premises fail to support the conclusion (that is, if the
reasoning is bad), an argument is worthless. Thus we will always test the inferential

44
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
claim ﬁrst, and only if the premises do support the conclusion will we test the factual
claim (that is, the claim that the premises present genuine evidence, or are true). The
material that follows considers ﬁrst deductive arguments and then inductive.
Deductive Arguments
The previous section deﬁned a deductive argument as one in which the premises are
claimed to support the conclusion in such a way that it is impossible for the premises
to be true and the conclusion false. If the premises do in fact support the conclusion
in this way, the argument is said to be valid. Thus, a valid deductive argument is an
argument such that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion
false. In these arguments the conclusion follows with strict necessity from the prem-
ises. Conversely, an invalid deductive argument is a deductive argument such that
it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. In invalid arguments
the conclusion does not follow with strict necessity from the premises, even though it
is claimed to.
An immediate consequence of these deﬁnitions is that there is no middle ground
between valid and invalid. There are no arguments that are ‘‘almost’’ valid and ‘‘al-
most’’ invalid. If the conclusion follows with strict necessity from the premises, the
argument is valid; if not, it is invalid.
To test an argument for validity we begin by assuming that all premises are true,
and then we determine if it is possible, in light of that assumption, for the conclusion
to be false. Here is an example:
All television networks are media companies.
NBC is a television network.
Therefore, NBC is a media company.
In this argument both premises are actually true, so it is easy to assume that they are
true. Next we determine, in light of this assumption, if it is possible for the conclusion
to be false. Clearly this is not possible. If NBC is included in the group of television
networks (second premise) and if the group of television networks is included in the
group of media companies (ﬁrst premise), it necessarily follows that NBC is included
in the group of media companies (conclusion). In other words, assuming the premises
true and the conclusion false entails a strict contradiction. Thus the argument is valid.
Here is another example:
All automakers are computer manufacturers.
United Airlines is an automaker.
Therefore, United Airlines is a computer manufacturer.
In this argument, both premises are actually false, but it is easy to assume that they are
true. Every automaker could have a corporate division that manufactures computers.
Also, in addition to ﬂying airplanes, United Airlines could make cars. Next, in light of

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
45
S
N
L
these assumptions, we determine if it is possible for the conclusion to be false. Again,
we see that this is not possible, by the same reasoning as the previous example.
Assuming the premises true and the conclusion false entails a contradiction. Thus, the
argument is valid.
Another example:
All banks are ﬁnancial institutions.
Wells Fargo is a ﬁnancial institution.
Therefore, Wells Fargo is a bank.
As in the ﬁrst example, both premises of this argument are true, so it is easy to as-
sume they are true. Next we determine, in light of this assumption, if it is possible
for the conclusion to be false. In this case it is possible. If banks were included in one
part of the group of ﬁnancial institutions and Wells Fargo were included in another
part, then Wells Fargo would not be a bank. In other words, assuming the premises
true and the conclusion false does not involve any contradiction, and so the argument
is invalid.
In addition to illustrating the basic idea of validity, these examples suggest an
important point about validity and truth. In general, validity is not something that is
determined by the actual truth or falsity of the premises and conclusion. Both the NBC
example and the Wells Fargo example have actually true premises and an actually true
conclusion, yet one is valid and the other invalid. The United Airlines example has
actually false premises and an actually false conclusion, yet the argument is valid.
Rather, validity is something that is determined by the relationship between premises
and conclusion. The question is not whether premises and conclusion are true or
false, but whether the premises support the conclusion. In the examples of valid
arguments the premises do support the conclusion, and in the invalid case they do not.
Nevertheless, there is one arrangement of truth and falsity in the premises and
conclusion that does determine the issue of validity. Any deductive argument having
actually true premises and an actually false conclusion is invalid. The reasoning be-
hind this fact is fairly obvious. If the premises are actually true and the conclusion is
actually false, then it certainly is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion
false. Thus, by the deﬁnition of invalidity, the argument is invalid.
The idea that any deductive argument having actually true premises and a false
conclusion is invalid may be the most important point in all of deductive logic. The
entire system of deductive logic would be quite useless if it accepted as valid any
inferential process by which a person could start with truth in the premises and arrive
at falsity in the conclusion.
Table 1.1 presents examples of deductive arguments that illustrate the various com-
binations of truth and falsity in the premises and conclusion. In the examples having
false premises, both premises are false, but it is easy to construct other examples
having only one false premise. When examining this table, note that the only combi-
nation of truth and falsity that does not allow for both valid and invalid arguments is

46
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Table 1.1 Deductive Arguments
Valid
Invalid
True
premises
True
conclusion
All wines are beverages.
Chardonnay is a wine.
Therefore, chardonnay is
a beverage.
[sound]
All wines are beverages.
Chardonnay is a beverage.
Therefore, chardonnay is a wine.
(unsound)
True
premises
False
conclusion
None exist
All wines are beverages.
Ginger ale is a beverage.
Therefore, ginger ale is a wine.
[unsound]
False
premises
True
conclusion
All wines are soft drinks.
Ginger ale is a wine.
Therefore, ginger ale is a
soft drink.
[unsound]
All wines are whiskeys.
Chardonnay is a whiskey.
Therefore, chardonnay is a wine.
[unsound]
False
premises
False
conclusion
All wines are whiskeys.
Ginger ale is a wine.
Therefore, ginger ale is
a whiskey.
[unsound]
All wines are whiskeys.
Ginger ale is a whiskey.
Therefore, ginger ale is a wine.
[unsound]
true premises and false conclusion. As we have just seen, any argument having this
combination is necessarily invalid.
The relationship between the validity of a deductive argument and the truth or
falsity of its premises and conclusion, as illustrated in Table 1.1, is summarized as
follows:
Premises
Conclusion
Validity
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
?
Invalid
?
?
A sound argument is a deductive argument that is valid and has all true premises.
Both conditions must be met for an argument to be sound, and if either is missing
the argument is unsound. Thus, an unsound argument is a deductive argument that
is invalid, has one or more false premises, or both. Because a valid argument is one
such that it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, and
because a sound argument does in fact have true premises, it follows that every
sound argument, by deﬁnition, will have a true conclusion as well. A sound argu-
ment, therefore, is what is meant by a ‘‘good’’ deductive argument in the fullest sense
of the term.

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
47
S
N
L
Sound
argument
Valid
argument
All true
premise
=
+
In connection with this deﬁnition of soundness, a single proviso is required: For an
argument to be unsound, the false premise or premises must actually be needed to
support the conclusion. An argument with a conclusion that is validly supported by
true premises but with a superﬂuous false premise would still be sound. Analogous
remarks, incidentally, extend to induction.
Inductive Arguments
Section 1.3 deﬁned an inductive argument as one in which the premises are claimed
to support the conclusion in such a way that it is improbable that the premises be true
and the conclusion false. If the premises do in fact support the conclusion in this way,
the argument is said to be strong. Thus, a strong inductive argument is an inductive
argument such that it is improbable that the premises be true and the conclusion false.
In such arguments, the conclusion follows probably from the premises. Conversely, a
weak inductive argument is an inductive argument such that the conclusion does
not follow probably from the premises, even though it is claimed to.
The procedure for testing the strength of inductive arguments runs parallel to the
procedure for deduction. First we assume the premises are true, and then we deter-
mine whether, based on that assumption, the conclusion is probably true. Example:
All dinosaur bones discovered to this day have been at least 50 million years old.
Therefore, probably the next dinosaur bone to be found will be at least 50
million years old.
In this argument the premise is actually true, so it is easy to assume that it is true.
Based on that assumption, the conclusion is probably true, so the argument is strong.
Here is another example:
All meteorites found to this day have contained gold. Therefore, probably the next
meteorite to be found will contain gold.
The premise of this argument is actually false. Few, if any, meteorites contain any
gold. But if we assume the premise is true, then based on that assumption, the conclu-
sion would probably be true. Thus, the argument is strong.
The next example is an argument from analogy:
When a lighted match is slowly dunked into water, the ﬂame is snuffed out. But
gasoline is a liquid, just like water. Therefore, when a lighted match is slowly
dunked into gasoline, the ﬂame will be snuffed out.

48
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
In this argument the premises are actually true and the conclusion is probably false.
Thus, if we assume the premises are true, then, based on that assumption, it is not
probable that the conclusion is true. Thus, the argument is weak.
Another example:
During the past ﬁfty years, inﬂation has consistently reduced the value of the
American dollar. Therefore, industrial productivity will probably increase in
the years ahead.
In this argument, the premise is actually true and the conclusion is probably true in
the actual world, but the probability of the conclusion is in no way based on the
assumption that the premise is true. Because there is no direct connection between
inﬂation and increased industrial productivity, the premise is irrelevant to the conclu-
sion and it provides no probabilistic support for it. The conclusion is probably true
independently of the premise. As a result, the argument is weak.
This last example illustrates an important distinction between strong inductive ar-
guments and valid deductive arguments. As we will see in later chapters, if the conclu-
sion of a deductive argument is necessarily true independently of the premises, the
argument will still be considered valid. But if the conclusion of an inductive argument
is probably true independently of the premises, the argument will be weak.
These four examples show that in general the strength or weakness of an inductive
argument results not from the actual truth or falsity of the premises and conclusion,
but from the probabilistic support the premises give to the conclusion. The dinosaur
argument has a true premise and probably true conclusion, and the meteorite argu-
ment has a false premise and a probably false conclusion; yet, both are strong because
the premise of each provides probabilistic support for the conclusion. The industrial
productivity argument has a true premise and a probably true conclusion, but the
argument is weak because the premise provides no probabilistic support for the con-
clusion. Analogously to the evaluation of deductive arguments, the only arrangement
of truth and falsity that establishes anything is true premises and probably false con-
clusion (as in the lighted match argument). Any inductive argument having true prem-
ises and a probably false conclusion is weak.
Table 1.2 presents the various possibilities of truth and falsity in the premises and
conclusion of inductive arguments. Note that the only arrangement of truth and falsity
that is missing for strong arguments is true premises and probably false conclusion.
The relationship between the strength of an inductive argument and the truth or falsity
of its premises and conclusion, as illustrated in Table 1.2, is summarized as follows:
Premises
Conclusion
Strength
T
T
F
F
prob. T
prob. F
prob. T
prob. F
?
Weak
?
?

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
49
S
N
L
Table 1.2 Inductive Arguments
Strong
Weak
True
premise
Probably
true
conclusion
All previous American presidents
were men.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a man.
[cogent]
A few American presidents were
Federalists.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a man.
[uncogent]
True
premise
Probably
false
conclusion
None exist
A few American presidents were
Federalists.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a
Federalist.
[uncogent]
False
premise
Probably
true
conclusion
All previous American presidents
were television debaters.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a
television debater.
[uncogent]
A few American presidents were
Libertarians.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a
television debater.
[uncogent]
False
premise
Probably
false
conclusion
All previous American presidents
were women.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a
woman.
[uncogent]
A few American presidents were
Libertarians.
Therefore, probably the next
American president will be a
Libertarian.
[uncogent]
Unlike the validity and invalidity of deductive arguments, the strength and weak-
ness of inductive arguments admit of degrees. To be considered strong, an inductive
argument must have a conclusion that is more probable than improbable. In other
words, the likelihood that the conclusion is true must be more than 50 percent, and as
the probability increases, the argument becomes stronger. For this purpose, consider
the following pair of arguments:
This barrel contains 100 apples.
Three apples selected at random were found to be ripe.
Therefore, probably all 100 apples are ripe.
This barrel contains 100 apples.
Eighty apples selected at random were found to be ripe.
Therefore, probably all 100 apples are ripe.
The ﬁrst argument is weak and the second is strong. However, the ﬁrst is not absolutely
weak nor the second absolutely strong. Both arguments would be strengthened or
weakened by the random selection of a larger or smaller sample. For example, if the

50
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
size of the sample in the second argument were reduced to 70 apples, the argument
would be weakened. The incorporation of additional premises into an inductive ar-
gument will also generally tend to strengthen or weaken it. For example, if the premise
‘‘One unripe apple that had been found earlier was removed’’ were added to either
argument, the argument would be weakened.
A cogent argument is an inductive argument that is strong and has all true prem-
ises; if either condition is missing, the argument is uncogent. Thus, an uncogent argu-
ment is an inductive argument that is weak, has one or more false premises, or both.
A cogent argument is the inductive analogue of a sound deductive argument and is
what is meant by a ‘‘good’’ inductive argument without qualiﬁcation. Because the
conclusion of a cogent argument is genuinely supported by true premises, it follows
that the conclusion of every cogent argument is probably true.
Cogent
argument
Strong
argument
All true
premises
=
+
There is a difference, however, between sound and cogent arguments in regard to
the true-premise requirement. In a sound argument it is only necessary that the prem-
ises be true and nothing more. Given such premises and good reasoning, a true
conclusion is guaranteed. In a cogent argument, on the other hand, the premises must
not only be true, they must also not ignore some important piece of evidence that
outweighs the given evidence and entails a quite different conclusion. As an illustra-
tion of this point, consider the following argument:
Swimming in the Caribbean is usually lots of fun. Today the water is warm, the
surf is gentle, and on this beach there are no dangerous currents. Therefore,
it would be fun to go swimming here now.
If the premises reﬂect all the important factors, then the argument is cogent. But if
they ignore the fact that several large dorsal ﬁns are cutting through the water, then
obviously the argument is not cogent. Thus, for cogency the premises must not only
be true but also not overlook some important factor that outweighs the given evidence
and requires a different conclusion.
In summary, for both deductive and inductive arguments, two separate questions
need to be answered: (1) Do the premises support the conclusion? (2) Are all the
premises true?
To answer the ﬁrst question we begin by assuming the premises to be true. Then,
for deductive arguments we determine whether, in light of this assumption, it neces-

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
51
S
N
L
sarily follows that the conclusion is true. If it does, the argument is valid; if not, it is
invalid. For inductive arguments we determine whether it probably follows that the
conclusion is true. If it does, the argument is strong; if not, it is weak. For inductive
arguments we keep in mind the requirements that the premises actually support the
conclusion and that they not ignore important evidence. Finally, if the argument is
either valid or strong, we turn to the second question and determine whether the
premises are actually true. If all the premises are true, the argument is sound (in the
case of deduction) or cogent (in the case of induction). All invalid deductive argu-
ments are unsound, and all weak inductive arguments are uncogent.
The various alternatives open to statements and arguments may be diagrammed as
follows. Note that in logic one never speaks of an argument as being ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false,’’
and one never speaks of a statement as being ‘‘valid,’’ ‘‘invalid,’’ ‘‘strong,’’ or ‘‘weak.’’
Statements
True
False
Deductive arguments
Inductive arguments
Valid
Invalid
(all are unsound)
Strong
Weak
(all are uncogent)
Sound
Unsound
Cogent
Uncogent
EXERCISE 1.4
I. The following arguments are deductive. Determine whether each is valid or in-
valid, and note the relationship between your answer and the truth or falsity of
the premises and conclusion. Finally, determine whether the argument is sound
or unsound.
1.
#
Since Moby Dick was written by Shakespeare, and Moby Dick is a science
ﬁction novel, it follows that Shakespeare wrote a science ﬁction novel.
2. Since London is north of Paris and south of Edinburgh, it follows that Paris is
south of Edinburgh.
3. If George Washington was beheaded, then George Washington died. George
Washington died. Therefore, George Washington was beheaded.

52
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
4.
#
The longest river in South America is the Amazon, and the Amazon ﬂows
through Brazil. Therefore, the longest river in South Africa ﬂows throughBrazil.
5. Since the Spanish American War occurred before the American Civil War, and
the American Civil War occurred after the Korean War, it follows that the
Spanish American War occurred before the Korean War.
6. The Empire State Building is taller than the Statue of Liberty, and the Statue of
Liberty is taller than the Eiffel Tower. Therefore, the Empire State Building is
taller than the Eiffel Tower.
7.
#
All leopards with lungs are carnivores. Therefore, all leopards are carnivores.
8. Chicago is a city in Michigan and Michigan is part of the United States. There-
fore, Chicago is a city in the United States.
9. If Galileo invented quantum mechanics, then he was familiar with physics in
the twentieth century. Galileo was not familiar with physics in the twentieth
century. Therefore, Galileo did not invent quantum mechanics.
10.
#
Every province in Canada has exactly one city as its capital. Therefore, since
there are thirty provinces in Canada, there are thirty provincial capitals.
11. Since the Department of Defense Building in Washington, D.C. has the shape
of a hexagon, it follows that it has seven sides.
12. Since Winston Churchill was English, and Winston Churchill was a famousstates-
man, we may conclude that at least one Englishman was a famous statesman.
13.
#
Since some fruits are green, and some fruits are apples, it follows that some
fruits are green apples.
14. All physicians are individuals who have earned degrees in political science,
and some lawyers are physicians. Therefore, some lawyers are persons who
have earned degrees in political science.
15. The United States Congress has more members than there are days in the
year. Therefore, at least two members of Congress have the same birthday.
II. The following arguments are inductive. Determine whether each is strong or
weak, and note the relationship between your answer and the truth or falsity of
the premise(s) and conclusion. Then determine whether each argument is cogent
or uncogent.
1.
#
The grave marker at Arlington National Cemetery says that John F. Kennedy is
buried there. It must be the case that Kennedy really is buried in that cemetery.
2. The ebb and ﬂow of the tides has been occurring every day for millions of
years. But nothing lasts forever. Therefore, probably the motion of the tides
will die out within a few years.
3. The vast majority of Rose Bowl games (in Pasadena, CA) have been played in
freezing cold weather. Therefore, probably the next Rose Bowl game will be
played in freezing cold weather.

Validity, Truth, Soundness, Strength, Cogency
53
S
N
L
4.
#
Franklin Delano Roosevelt said that we have nothing to fear but fear itself.
Therefore, women have no reason to fear serial rapists.
5. Most famous movie stars are millionaires. Leonardo Di Caprio is a famous
movie star. Therefore, probably Di Caprio is a millionaire.
6. Constructing the great pyramid at Giza required lifting massive stone blocks
to great heights. Probably the ancient Egyptians had some antigravity device
to accomplish this feat.
7.
#
People have been listening to rock and roll music for over a hundred years.
Probably people will still be listening to it a year from now.
8. Paleontologists have unearthed the fossilized bones of huge reptiles, which
we have named dinosaurs. Tests indicate that these creatures roamed the
earth more than 50 million years ago. Therefore, probably dinosaurs really
did roam the earth at that time.
9. The Declaration of Independence says that all men are endowed by their
creator with certain unalienable rights. Therefore it probably follows that a
creator exists.
10.
#
Coca-Cola is an extremely popular soft drink. Therefore, probably someone,
somewhere, is drinking a Coke right this minute.
11. Every map of the United States shows that Alabama is situated on the Paciﬁc
coast. Therefore, Alabama must be a western state.
12. When Neil Armstrong landed on the moon, he left behind a gold plated
Schwinn bicycle, which he used to ride around on the moon’s surface. Prob-
ably that bicycle is still up there on the moon.
13.
#
African American athlete Jerome Bettis is able to withstand tremendous im-
pacts on the football ﬁeld. However, Venus Williams, like Jerome Bettis, is a
great African American athlete. Therefore, Venus Williams should be able to
withstand tremendous impacts on the football ﬁeld.
14. Unlike monkeys, today’s humans have feet that are not suited for grasping
objects. Therefore, a thousand years from now, probably humans will still
have feet that are not suited for grasping objects.
15. A random sample of twenty-ﬁve famous country and western singers, includ-
ing Garth Brooks and Dolly Parton, revealed that every single one of them
studied music in Afghanistan. Therefore, probably the majority of famous
country and western singers studied in Afghanistan.
III. Determine whether the following arguments are inductive or deductive. If an
argument is inductive, determine whether it is strong or weak. If it is deductive,
determine whether it is valid or invalid.
1.
#
Since Agatha is the mother of Raquel and the sister of Tom, it follows that Tom
is the uncle of Raquel.

54
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
2. When a cook can’t recall the ingredients in a recipe, it is appropriate that she
refresh her memory by consulting the recipe book. Similarly, when a student
can’t recall the answers during a ﬁnal exam, it is appropriate that she refresh
her memory by consulting the textbook.
3. The sign on the highway leading into Denver, Colorado says that the city’s
elevation is 5280 feet. It must be the case that Denver is 1 mile high.
4.
#
Since Christmas is always on a Thursday, it follows that the day after Christmas
is always a Friday.
5. This ﬁgure is a Euclidean triangle. Therefore, the sum of its angles is equal to
two right angles.
6. By accident Karen baked her brownies two hours longer than she should
have. Therefore, they have probably been ruined.
7.
#
After taking LSD, Alice said she saw a ﬂying saucer land in the shopping
center parking lot. Since Alice has a reputation for always telling the truth, we
must conclude that a ﬂying saucer really did land there.
8. Since Phyllis is the cousin of Denise, and Denise is the cousin of Harriet, it
follows necessarily that Harriet is the cousin of Phyllis.
9. The picnic scheduled in the park for tomorrow will most likely be cancelled.
It’s been snowing for six days straight.
10.
#
Circle A has exactly twice the diameter of circle B. From this we may conclude
that circle A has exactly twice the area of circle B.
11. Robert has lost consistently at blackjack every day for the past several days.
Therefore, it is very likely that he will win today.
12. Since John loves Nancy and Nancy loves Peter, it follows necessarily that John
loves Peter.
13.
#
This cash register drawer contains over 100 coins. Three coins selected at
random were found to have dates earlier than 1945. Therefore, probably all
of the coins in the drawer have dates earlier than 1945.
14. The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor happened in either 1941 or 1951. But it
didn’t happen in 1941. Therefore, it happened in 1951.
15. Harry will never be able to solve that difﬁcult problem in advanced calculus
in the limited time allowed. He has never studied anything beyond algebra,
and in that he earned only a C.
16.
#
Since x  y  10, and x  7, it follows that y  4.
17. If acupuncture is hocus pocus, then acupuncture cannot relieve chronic pain.
But acupuncture can relieve chronic pain. Therefore, acupuncture is not
hocus pocus.
18. If inﬂation heats up, then interest rates will rise. If interest rates rise, then
bond prices will decline. Therefore, if inﬂation heats up, then bond prices
will decline.

Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
55
S
N
L
19.
#
Statistics reveal that 86 percent of those who receive ﬂu shots do not get the
ﬂu. Jack received a ﬂu shot one month ago. Therefore, he should be immune,
even though the ﬂu is going around now.
20. Since Michael is a Pisces, it necessarily follows that he was born in March.
IV. Deﬁne the following terms:
valid argument
invalid argument
sound argument
unsound argument
strong argument
weak argument
cogent argument
uncogent argument
V. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. Some arguments, while not completely valid, are almost valid.
2. Inductive arguments admit of varying degrees of strength and weakness.
3. Invalid deductive arguments are basically the same as inductive arguments.
4. If a deductive argument has true premises and a false conclusion, it is neces-
sarily invalid.
5. A valid argument may have a false premise and a false conclusion.
6. A valid argument may have a false premise and a true conclusion.
7. A sound argument may be invalid.
8. A sound argument may have a false conclusion.
9. A strong argument may have false premises and a probably false conclusion.
10. A strong argument may have true premises and a probably false conclusion.
11. A cogent argument may have a probably false conclusion.
12. A cogent argument must be inductively strong.
13. If an argument has true premises and a true conclusion, we know that it is a
perfectly good argument.
14. A statement may legitimately be spoken of as ‘‘valid’’ or ‘‘invalid.’’
15. An argument may legitimately be spoken of as ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false.’’
1.5
Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
The previous section showed that validity is determined by the truth of a deductive
argument’s inferential claim. If the inferential claim is true, then the conclusion follows
with strict necessity from the premises, and the argument is valid. For such an argu-
ment, it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.

56
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
This section shows that the truth of a deductive argument’s inferential claim (that
is, the correctness of the argument’s reasoning) is determined by the form of the
argument. In other words, validity is determined by form. For these purposes,consider
the following argument:
All adlers are bobkins.
All bobkins are crockers.
Therefore, all adlers are crockers.
Because the words ‘‘adlers,’’ ‘‘bobkins,’’ and ‘‘crockers’’ are nonsensical, we do not
know whether any of the statements in this argument are true or false. Yet, we do
know that if we assume that the premises are true, it is impossible for the conclusion
to be false. That is, if we assume that the adlers, whatever they might be, are included
in the bobkins and the bobkins in the crockers, then we must accept the conclusion
that the adlers are included in the crockers. According to the deﬁnition of validity,
therefore, the argument is valid.
This fact is important for understanding the nature of validity because it shows that
the validity of an argument has nothing to do with its speciﬁc subject matter. Even
though we know nothing about adlers, bobkins, and crockers, we still know that the
argument is valid. The validity of the argument arises from the way the terms ‘‘adlers,’’
‘‘bobkins,’’ and ‘‘crockers’’ are arranged in the statements. If we represent these terms
by their ﬁrst letters, we obtain the following argument form. We use a line to separate
the premises from the conclusion.
All A are B.
All B are C.
All A are C.
This is a valid argument form. Its validity rests purely upon the arrangement of the
letters within the statements, and it has nothing to do with what the letters might stand
for. In light of this fact, we can substitute any terms we choose in place of A, B, and C,
and as long as we are consistent, we will obtain a valid argument. For example, we
might substitute ‘‘daisies’’ for A, ‘‘ﬂowers’’ for B, and ‘‘plants’’ for C and obtain the
following valid argument:
All daisies are ﬂowers.
All ﬂowers are plants.
Therefore, all daisies are plants.
Any argument, such as this, that is produced by uniformly substituting terms or
statements in place of the letters in an argument form is called a substitution in-
stance of that form.
Let us turn now to the concept of invalidity. Consider the following argument:

Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
57
S
N
L
All adlers are bobkins.
All crockers are bobkins.
Therefore, all adlers are crockers.
As with the previous argument, we do not know whether the premises and conclusion
of this argument are true or false. But if we assume that the premises are true, it is
possible for the conclusion to be false. It might be the case, for example, that the adlers
make up one part of the bobkins, that the crockers make up another part, and that the
adlers and the crockers are completely separate from each other. In this case the
premises would be true and the conclusion false. The argument is therefore invalid. If
we represent the terms in this argument by their ﬁrst letters, we obtain the following
argument form:
All A are B.
All C are B.
All A are C.
This is an invalid form, and any argument that has this form is an invalid argument.
An argument is said to have a certain form if it is a substitution instance of that form.
In the case of invalid forms, we must add the proviso that an argument has an invalid
form only if it is not a substitution instance of any valid form.* The following argument
is a substitution instance of the invalid form just discussed and it is not a substitution
instance of any valid form. Thus, the following argument has the invalid form just
discussed:
All cats are animals.
All dogs are animals.
Therefore, all cats are dogs.
*The reason for this proviso is that some substitution instances of invalid forms are actually valid.
Example:
All bachelors are persons.
All unmarried men are persons.
Therefore, all bachelors are unmarried men.
This argument is a substitution instance of the invalid form discussed above, but the argument is valid
because its conclusion is true by deﬁnition. However, because ‘‘bachelors’’ is equivalent in meaning
to ‘‘unmarried men,’’ the argument is also a substitution instance of the valid form
All A are B.
All A are B.
All A are A.
Thus, by the stated proviso, the bachelors argument does not have the invalid form in question but
rather has this valid form. The exercises in this book avoid examples of this sort, where the form of
the argument is obscured by the meaning of the terms.

58
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Notice that this substitution instance has true premises and a false conclusion. It is
therefore clearly invalid, and it constitutes proof that the original argument is invalid.
The reasoning behind this proof is as follows. The substitution instance is invalid
because it has true premises and a false conclusion. Therefore, the substitution in-
stance has an invalid form. But the form of the substitution instance is identical to the
form of the (second) adler-bobkin argument. Therefore, the adler-bobkin argument is
invalid.
A substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion is called a
counterexample, and the method we have just used to prove the adler-bobkin argu-
ment invalid is called the counterexample method. The counterexample method
can be used to establish the invalidity of any invalid argument, but it cannot establish
the validity of any valid argument. Thus, before the method is applied to an argument,
the argument must be known or suspected to be invalid in the ﬁrst place. The counter-
example method consists in isolating the form of the argument and then constructing
a substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion. Let us apply it to
the following invalid categorical syllogism:
Since some employees are not social climbers and all vice-presidents are employ-
ees, we may conclude that some vice-presidents are not social climbers.
This argument is invalid because the employees who are not social climbers might
not be vice-presidents. Accordingly, we can prove the argument invalid by construct-
ing a substitution instance having true premises and a false conclusion. We begin by
isolating the form of the argument:
Some E are not S.
All V are E.
Some V are not S.
Next, we select three terms to substitute in place of the letters that will make the
premises true and the conclusion false. The following selection will work:
E  animals
S  mammals
V  dogs
The resulting substitution instance is:
Some animals are not mammals.
All dogs are animals.
Therefore, some dogs are not mammals.
The substitution instance has true premises and a false conclusion and is therefore, by
deﬁnition, invalid. Since it has the same form as the original argument, it constitutes
proof that the original argument is invalid.

Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
59
S
N
L
In applying the counterexample method to categorical syllogisms, it is useful to
keep in mind the following set of terms: ‘‘cats,’’ ‘‘dogs,’’ ‘‘mammals,’’ ‘‘ﬁsh,’’ and ‘‘ani-
mals.’’ Most invalid syllogisms can be proven invalid by strategically selecting three of
these terms and using them to construct a counterexample. Because everyone agrees
about these terms, everyone will agree about the truth or falsity of the premises and
conclusion of the counterexample. Also, in constructing the counterexample, it often
helps to begin with the conclusion. First, select two terms that yield a false conclusion,
and then select a third term that yields true premises. Another point to keep in mind
is that the word ‘‘some’’ in logic always means ‘‘at least one.’’ For example, the state-
ment ‘‘Some dogs are animals’’ means ‘‘At least one dog is an animal’’—which is true.
Also note that this statement does not imply that some dogs are not animals.
Not all deductive arguments, of course, are categorical syllogisms. Consider, for
example, the following hypothetical syllogism:
If the government imposes import restrictions, the price of automobiles will rise.
Therefore, since the government will not impose import restrictions, it follows
that the price of automobiles will not rise.
This argument is invalid because the price of automobiles might rise even though
import restrictions are not imposed. It has the following form:
If G, then P.
Not G.
Not P.
This form differs from the previous one in that its letters stand for complete statements.
G, for example, stands for ‘‘The government imposes import restrictions.’’ If we make
the substitution
G  Abraham Lincoln committed suicide.
P  Abraham Lincoln is dead.
we obtain the following substitution instance:
If Abraham Lincoln committed suicide, then Abraham Lincoln is dead.
Abraham Lincoln did not commit suicide.
Therefore, Abraham Lincoln is not dead.
Since the premises are true and the conclusion false, the substitution instance is clearly
invalid. Thus, it constitutes proof that the original argument is invalid.
When applying the counterexample method to an argument having a conditional
statement as a premise (such as the one above), it is recommended that the statement
substituted in place of the conditional statement express some kind of necessary
connection. In the Lincoln example, the ﬁrst premise asserts the necessary connection
between suicide and death. There can be no doubt about the truth of such a statement.

60
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Furthermore, if it should turn out that the conclusion is a conditional statement, note
that one sure way of producing a false conditional statement is by joining a true
antecedent with a false consequent. For example, the conditional statement ‘‘If Lassie
is a dog, then Lassie is a cat’’ is clearly false.
Being able to identify the form of an argument with ease requires a familiarity with
the basic deductive argument forms. The ﬁrst task consists in distinguishing the prem-
ises from the conclusion. Always write the premises ﬁrst and the conclusion last. The
second task involves distinguishing what we may call ‘‘form words’’ from ‘‘content
words.’’ To reduce an argument to its form, leave the form words as they are, and
replace the content words with letters. For categorical syllogisms, the words ‘‘all,’’
‘‘no,’’ ‘‘some,’’ ‘‘are,’’ and ‘‘not’’ are form words, and for hypothetical syllogisms the
words ‘‘if,’’ ‘‘then,’’ and ‘‘not’’ are form words. Additional form words for other types
of arguments are ‘‘either,’’ ‘‘or,’’ ‘‘both,’’ and ‘‘and.’’ For various kinds of hybrid argu-
ments, a more intuitive approach may be needed. Here is an example:
All movie stars are actors who are famous, because all movie stars who are famous
are actors.
If we replace ‘‘movie stars,’’ ‘‘actors,’’ and ‘‘famous’’ with the letters M, A, and F, this
argument has the following form:
All M who are F are A.
All M are A who are F.
Here is one possible substitution instance for this form:
All humans who are fathers are men.
Therefore, all humans are men who are fathers.
Because the premise is true and the conclusion false, the argument is invalid.
Using the counterexample method to prove arguments invalid requires a little in-
genuity because there is no rule that will automatically produce the required term or
statement to be substituted. Any term or statement will work, of course, provided that
it yields a substitution instance that has premises that are indisputably true and a
conclusion that is indisputably false. Ideally, the truth value of these statements should
be known to the average individual; otherwise, the substitution instance cannot be
depended upon to prove anything. If, for example, P in the earlier hypothetical syllo-
gism had been replaced by the statement ‘‘George Wilson is dead,’’ the substitution
instance would be useless, because nobody knows whether this statement is true
or false.
The counterexample method is useful only for proving invalidity, because the only
arrangement of truth and falsity that proves anything is true premises and false conclu-
sion. If a substitution instance is produced having true premises and a true conclusion,
it does not prove that the argument is valid. Furthermore, the method is only useful

Argument Forms: Proving Invalidity
61
S
N
L
for deductive arguments because the strength and weakness of inductive arguments
is only partially dependent on the form of the argument. Accordingly, no method that
relates exclusively to the form of an inductive argument can be used to prove the
argument weak.
One ﬁnal comment is needed regarding the form of an argument. It often happens
that the form is not explicit and that making it explicit requires an analysis of the
meaning of the language. Many of the arguments in Exercise 1.4 were of this sort.
Consider the following example:
This ﬁgure is a square.
Therefore, this ﬁgure has four sides.
The conclusion follows necessarily from the premise because every square, by deﬁ-
nition, has four sides. To make the form of the argument explicit, a premise must be
added stating this fact:
This ﬁgure is a square.
All squares have four sides.
Therefore, this ﬁgure has four sides.
As this example illustrates, the statement at the beginning of this section that the
validity of an argument is concerned not with the subject matter but rather with the
form of an argument needs qualiﬁcation. When the form of an argument is immedi-
ately clear, the subject matter is irrelevant to the question of validity. But when the
form is not clear, the subject matter may have to be analyzed to determine what the
form is.
EXERCISE 1.5
I. Use the counterexample method to prove the following categorical syllogisms
invalid. In doing so, follow the suggestions given in the text.
1.
#
All galaxies are structures that contain black holes in the center, so all galaxies
are quasars, since all quasars are structures that contain black holes in the
center.
2. Some evolutionists are not persons who believe in the Bible, for no creation-
ists are evolutionists, and some persons who believe in the Bible are not
creationists.
3. No patents are measures that discourage research and development, and all
patents are regulations that protect intellectual property. Thus, no measures
that discourage research and development are regulations that protect intel-
lectual property.

62
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
4.
#
Some farm workers are not persons who are paid decent wages, because no
illegal aliens are persons who are paid decent wages, and some illegal aliens
are not farm workers.
5. Some politicians are persons who will stop at nothing to win an election, and
no persons who will stop at nothing to win an election are true statesmen.
Hence, no politicians are true statesmen.
6. All meticulously constructed timepieces are true works of art, for all Swiss
watches are true works of art and all Swiss watches are meticulously con-
structed timepieces.
7.
#
No patrons of fast-food restaurants are health food addicts. Consequently, no
patrons of fast-food restaurants are connoisseurs of ﬁne desserts, since no
connoisseurs of ﬁne desserts are health food addicts.
8. Some toxic dumps are sites that emit hazardous wastes, and some sites that
emit hazardous wastes are undesirable places to live near. Thus, some toxic
dumps are undesirable places to live near.
9. All persons who assist others in suicide are persons guilty of murder. Accord-
ingly, some individuals motivated by compassion are not persons guilty of
murder, inasmuch as some persons who assist others in suicide are individu-
als motivated by compassion.
10.
#
Some school boards are not groups that oppose values clariﬁcation because
some school boards are not organizations with vision, and some groups that
oppose values clariﬁcation are not organizations with vision.
II. Use the counterexample method to prove each of the following arguments
invalid.
1.
#
If animal species are ﬁxed and immutable, then evolution is a myth. There-
fore, evolution is not a myth, since animal species are not ﬁxed and
immutable.
2. If carbon dioxide is present in the atmosphere, then plants have a source of
carbon. Hence, since plants have a source of carbon, carbon dioxide is pres-
ent in the atmosphere.
3. If gene splicing is successful, then disease-resistant livestock will be pro-
duced. If genetic defects can be eliminated, then disease-resistant livestock
will be produced. Thus, if gene splicing is successful, then genetic defects can
be eliminated.
4.
#
If energy taxes are increased, then either the deﬁcit will be reduced or con-
servation will be taken seriously. If the deﬁcit is reduced, then inﬂation will
be checked. Therefore, if energy taxes are increased, then inﬂation will be
checked.

Extended Arguments
63
S
N
L
5. All homeless people who are panhandlers are destitute individuals. There-
fore, all homeless people are destitute individuals.
6. Some diplomats are clever spies, since some diplomats are clever and some
diplomats are spies.
7.
#
All community colleges with low tuition are either schools with large enroll-
ments or institutions supported by taxes. Therefore, all community colleges
are institutions supported by taxes.
8. All merchandisers that are retailers are businesses that are inventory rotators.
Therefore, all merchandisers are inventory rotators.
9. All diabetes victims are either insulin takers or glucose eliminators. Some
diabetes victims are insulin takers. Therefore, some diabetes victims are glu-
cose eliminators.
10.
#
All reverse mortgages that are FHA loans are either living standard enhancers
or home equity depleters. All reverse mortgages are home equity depleters.
Therefore, all FHA loans are living standard enhancers.
1.6
Extended Arguments
The logical analysis of extended arguments, such as those found in editorials, essays,
and lengthy letters to newspaper editors, involves numerous difﬁculties. Such argu-
ments are often mixed together with fragments of reports, pieces of expositorywriting,
illustrations, explanations, and statements of opinion. Proper analysis involves weed-
ing out the extraneous material and isolating premises and conclusions. Another prob-
lem stems from the fact that lengthy arguments often involve complex arrangements
of subarguments that feed into the main argument in various ways. Distinguishing one
subargument from another is often a complicated task. And then there are some
argumentative passages that involve completely separate strands of argumentation
leading to separate conclusions. Again, distinguishing the strands and assigning prem-
ises to the right conclusion not only is problematic but often involves an element of
creativity on the part of the analyst.
To facilitate the analysis of extended arguments, we will assign numerals to the
various statements in the passage and use arrows to represent the inferential links.
Example:

1 The contamination of underground aquifers represents a pollution problem of
catastrophic proportions. 
2 Half the nation’s drinking water, which comes from
these aquifers, is being poisoned by chemical wastes dumped into the soil for
generations.

64
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
This argument is diagrammed as follows:

2


1
The diagram says that statement 
2 , the premise, supports statement 
1 , the
conclusion.
In extended arguments we can identify two distinct patterns of argumentation,
which we will name the vertical pattern and the horizontal pattern. The vertical pat-
tern consists of a series of arguments in which a conclusion of a logically prior argu-
ment becomes a premise of a subsequent argument. Example:

1 The selling of human organs, such as hearts, kidneys, and corneas, should be
outlawed. 
2 Allowing human organs to be sold will inevitably lead to a situation
in which only the rich will be able to afford transplants. This is so because 
3 when-
ever something scarce is bought and sold as a commodity, the price always goes
up. 
4 The law of supply and demand requires it.
This argument is diagrammed as follows:
Vertical
pattern

4


3


2


1
The diagram says that statement 
1 , which is the main conclusion, is supported by 
2 ,
which in turn is supported by 
3 , which in turn is supported by 
4 .
The horizontal pattern consists of a single argument in which two or more premises
provide independent support for a single conclusion. If one of the premises were
omitted, the other(s) would continue to support the conclusion in the same way.
Example:

1 The selling of human organs, such as hearts, kidneys, and corneas, should be
outlawed. 
2 If this practice is allowed to get a foothold, people in desperate ﬁnan-
cial straits will start selling their own organs to pay their bills. Alternately, 
3 those
with a criminal bent will take to killing healthy young people and selling their or-
gans on the black market. 
4 In the ﬁnal analysis, the buying and selling of human
organs comes just too close to the buying and selling of life itself.
The diagram for this argument is as follows:

Extended Arguments
65
S
N
L
Horizontal
pattern

2

3

4

1



This diagram says that statements 
2 , 
3 , and 
4 support 
1 independently.
Two variations on the horizontal and vertical patterns occur when two or more
premises support a conclusion conjointly, and when one or more premises supports
multiple conclusions. The ﬁrst variation occurs when the premises depend on one
another in such a way that if one were omitted, the support that the others provide
would be diminished or destroyed. The following argument illustrates the occurrence
of conjoint premises:

1 Getting poor people off the welfare rolls requires that we modify their behavior
patterns. 
2 The vast majority of people on welfare are high school dropouts, sin-
gle parents, or people who abuse alcohol and drugs. 
3 These behavior patterns
frustrate any desire poor people may have to get a job and improve their condition
in life.
Statement 
1 is the conclusion. Taken separately, statements 
2 and 
3 provide little or
no support for 
1 , but taken together they do provide support. That is, 
2 and 
3
support 
1 conjointly. This relationship between the premises is illustrated by the use
of the brace in the following diagram:
Conjoint
premises

2

3



1
The next example illustrates the occurrence of a multiple conclusion:

1 Dropping out of school and bearing children outside of marriage are two of the
primary causes of poverty in this country. Therefore, 
2 to eliminate poverty we
must offer incentives for people to get high school diplomas. Also, 
3 we must
ﬁnd some way to encourage people to get married before they start having
children.
In this passage statement 
1 supports both 
2 and 
3 . Since no single argument can
have more than one conclusion, the passage is correctly evaluated as consisting of
two arguments. For our purposes, however, we will treat it as if it were a single
argument by joining the two conclusions with a brace:
Multiple
conclusion

1



2

3

66
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Our symbolism is now sufﬁciently developed to analyze most arguments found in
editorials and letters to the editor of newspapers and magazines. Consider the follow-
ing argument, taken from a newspaper editorial:

1 Government mandates for zero-emission vehicles won’t work because 
2 only
electric cars qualify as zero-emission vehicles, and 
3 electric cars won’t sell. 
4 They
are too expensive, 
5 their range of operation is too limited, and 
6 recharging
facilities are not generally available.
(William Campbell, ‘‘Technology Is Not Good Enough’’)
We immediately see that 
1 is the main conclusion, and 
2 and 
3 support 
1 con-
jointly. Also, 
4 , 
5 , and 
6 support 
3 independently. The argument pattern is as
follows:

4

5

6

2

3

1





The next argument is taken from a letter to the editor:

1 Rhinos in Kenya are threatened with extinction because 
2 poachers are killing
them for their horn. Since 
3 the rhino has no natural predators, 
4 it does not
need its horn to survive. Thus 
5 there should be an organized program to capture
rhinos in the wild and remove their horn. 
6 Such a program would eliminate the
incentive of the poachers.
(Pamela C. Wagner, ‘‘Rhino Poaching’’)
First we search for the ﬁnal conclusion. We select 
5 , because it is the ultimate point
that the passage attempts to establish. Next we survey the premise and conclusion
indicators. From this, we see that 
2 supports 
1 and 
3 supports 
4 . Finally, we see
that 
1 , 
4 , and 
6 support 
5 . Yet these supporting statements depend on one another
for their effect. Thus they support the ﬁnal conclusion conjointly. The argument pat-
tern is as follows:

2

3



1

4

6


5

The next argument is taken from a magazine article:

1 Skating is a wonderful form of exercise and relaxation, but 
2 today’s roller-
bladers are a growing menace and 
3 something should be done to control them.

Extended Arguments
67
S
N
L

4 Rollerbladers are oblivious to trafﬁc regulations as 
5 they breeze through red
lights and 
6 skim down the wrong way on one-way streets. 
7 They pose a threat
to pedestrians because 
8 a collision can cause serious injury. 
9 Rollerbladers are
even a hazard to shopkeepers as 
10 they zoom through stores and 
11 damage
merchandise.
(Joan Schmidt, ‘‘Hell—On Wheels’’)
After reading the argument, we see that 
1 is merely an introductory sentence, and 
2
and 
3 together compose the main conclusion. Also, 
4 , 
7 , and 
9 support the main
conclusion independently, while 
5 and 
6 support 
4 independently, 
8 supports 
7 ,
and 
10 and 
11 support 
9 independently. The diagram is as follows:

5

6

8

10

11






4

7

9

2

3




The next argument is taken from the science column of a newspaper:

1 We can expect small changes to occur in the length of our calendar year for an
indeﬁnite time to come. 
2 This is true for two reasons. 
3 First, the rotation of the
earth exhibits certain irregularities. 
4 And why is this so? 
5 The rotation of any
body is affected by its distribution of mass, and 
6 the earth’s mass distribution is
continually subject to change. For example, 
7 earthquakes alter the location of the
tectonic plates. Also, 
8 the liquid core of the earth sloshes as the earth turns, and

9 rainfall redistributes water from the oceans. The second reason is that 
10 the
motion of the tides causes a continual slowing down of earth’s rotation. 
11 Tidal
motion produces heat, and 
12 the loss of this heat removes energy from the system.
(Isaac Asimov, ‘‘As the World Turns’’)
Preliminary analysis reveals that the ﬁnal conclusion is 
1 . Also, 
2 tells us that the
supporting statements are divided into two basic groups, but since 
2 does not add
any support, we can leave it out of the diagram. In the ﬁrst group, 
5 and 
6 support

3 conjointly, while 
7 , 
8 , and 
9 support 
6 independently. 
4 will not appear in the
diagram, because it serves merely as a premise indicator. In the second group, 
11 and

12 support 
10 conjointly. Thus the argument pattern is as follows:

7

8

9




5

6

11

12





3

10

1



68
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
Our last example is taken from a letter to the editor of a newspaper:

1 Community college districts save a great deal of money by hiring untenured
part-time instructors, but 
2 the extensive use of these instructors is a dis-
advantage to the students. 
3 Most part-time instructors are paid only 60 percent
of what a full-time teacher earns, and as a result, 
4 they are forced to teach ﬁve
or six courses just to survive. 
5 This detracts from the opportunity to consult with
students outside the classroom. To make matters worse, 
6 many part-timers are
not even given ofﬁce space. Furthermore, 
7 the lower pay demoralizes the part-
timer, and 
8 the lack of tenure makes for constant ﬁnancial insecurity. 
9 Obvi-
ously these conditions render the instructor less receptive to student needs. Lastly,
because 
10 these part-timers are burning the candle from both ends, 
11 they have
no spare energy to improve their courses, and 
12 many lack the enthusiasm to
motivate their students. As a result, 
13 the educational process is impaired.
(Gordon Dossett et al., ‘‘Part-Time College Instructors’’)
Preliminary analysis reveals that the main conclusion is not 
1 but 
2 . Also, we see
three main reasons why part-timers are a disadvantage to students: They have little
opportunity to consult with students, they are less receptive to student needs, and the
educational process is impaired by 
11 and 
12. In the ﬁrst main branch, the indicator
‘‘as a result’’ shows that 
3 supports 
4 , and 
4 and 
6 independently support 
5 . In
the second branch, 
7 and 
8 independently support 
9 . In the third, 
10 supports both

11 and 
12, which in turn support 
13 independently. Here is the argument pattern:

3

10




4

6

7

8

11

12







5

9

13

2



EXERCISE 1.6
I. The following arguments were abstracted from newspaper articles, editorials, and
letters to the editor. Use the method presented in this section to construct argu-
ment patterns. If a statement is redundant or plays no role in the argument, do not
include it in the pattern.
1.
#

1 The conditions under which many food animals are raised are unhealthy
for humans. 
2 To keep these animals alive, large quantities of drugs must be
administered. 
3 These drugs remain in the animals’ ﬂesh and are passed on
to the humans who eat it.
(Philip D. Oliver, ‘‘We Can Eat Ribs and Still Be Humane’’)

Extended Arguments
69
S
N
L
2. 
1 The development of carbon-embedded plastics, otherwise called ‘‘com-
posits,’’ is an important new technology because 
2 it holds the key for new
aircraft and spacecraft designs. This is so because 
3 these composits are not
only stronger than steel but lighter than aluminum.
(Thomas H. Maugh II, ‘‘Composits—The Lightweight Champs of Aircraft Industry’’)
3. 
1 Homework stiﬂes the thrill of learning in the mind of the student. 
2 It
instills an oppressive learn-or-else discipline. 
3 It quenches the desire for
knowledge and the love of truth. For these reasons 
4 homework should
never be assigned.
(Colman McCarthy, ‘‘Homework’s Tyranny Hobbles Promising Minds’’)
4.
#

1 When parents become old and destitute, the obligation of caring for them
should be imposed on their children. 
2 Clearly, children owe a debt to their
parents. 
3 Their parents brought them into the world and cared for them
when they were unable to care for themselves. 
4 This debt could be appro-
priately discharged by having grown children care for their parents.
(Gary Jones, ‘‘The Responsibility of Parents’’)
5. 
1 Deciphering the human genetic code will be expensive, but 
2 it will
certainly beneﬁt the human race. 
3 Humankind is currently afﬂicted with
3000 inherited disorders, and 
4 knowing the genetic code will pave the way
for cures.
(Robert Gillette, ‘‘Three Billion Dollar Effort’’)
6. 
1 The rain forest of Brazil produces oxygen for the whole world, yet 
2 it
yields no monetary return to that country. Given that 
3 the industrialized
nations consume the most oxygen, 
4 those nations ought to pay Brazil an
annual fee for the use of its rain forest.
(Diane B. Robinson, letter to the editor)
7.
#

1 It appears that animals may be able to predict earthquakes. 
2 Prior to a
major quake in China, hundreds of snakes suddenly appeared from hiberna-
tion and froze to death in the snow, 
3 ﬁsh were seen leaping from rivers and
lakes, and 
4 cows and horses refused to enter barns. Also, 
5 prior to a quake
in Fremont, California, a ﬂood of callers reported strange behavior from their
pets and domestic animals.
(Michael Bowker, ‘‘Can Animals Really Predict Earthquakes?’’)
8. 
1 It is important today that more of our college students study Russian. 
2 In
the years ahead, we will need to interact effectively with the Russian people,
so 
3 we must become familiar with their values and traditions. But this entails
that 
4 we must learn to speak the Russian language.
(James O. Freedman, ‘‘Our New Cultural Imperative’’)
9. 
1 Research leading to the development of a scramjet engine is worthwhile.

2 Commercial aircraft incorporating such an engine could cross the Paciﬁc
in as little as two hours. 
3 This would relieve the fatigue of ﬂights from

70
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
ew York to Tokyo. Also, 
4 such an engine could power future orbiting
spacecraft.
(T. A. Heppenheimer, ‘‘A Plane for Space’’)
10.
#

1 A worldwide ban on the sale of ivory is long overdue. 
2 Without it, the
African elephant will become virtually extinct by the year 2000. 
3 Today,
poachers armed with AK-47 automatic riﬂes kill 2000 elephants every week,
and 
4 only 600,000 remain in the wild.
(Allan Thornton, ‘‘The Ivory Trail’’)
II. The following arguments were abstracted from the same sources as those in Part I
of this exercise, but they are of gradually increasing difﬁculty. Use the method
presented in this section to construct argument patterns. If a statement is redun-
dant or plays no role in the argument, do not include it in the pattern.
1.
#

1 Many people believe that the crime of bribery cannot extend to campaign
contributions. 
2 From a legal standpoint, however, countless campaign con-
tributions are in fact bribes. 
3 A bribe is anything of value or advantage given
with the intent to unlawfully inﬂuence the person to whom it is given in his
ofﬁcial capacity. 
4 A campaign contribution is certainly something of value
or advantage. Furthermore, 
5 every contribution from a lobbyist or special
interest group is given with the intent to inﬂuence voting, and 
6 thousands
of such contributions are made in every important election.
(Daniel Hays Lowenstein, ‘‘Can Candidates Run for Political Ofﬁce Without Taking Bribes?’’)
2. 
1 America’s farm policy desperately needs revamping. 
2 Seventy-three cents
of every farm program dollar ends up in the pockets of the nation’s super-
farmers. As a result, 
3 the mid-sized family farms are being squeezed out of
existence. Also, 
4 our farm policy courts environmental disaster. 
5 Federal
subsidies encourage farmers to use enormous amounts of fertilizer and pes-
ticides. 
6 These chemicals percolate down through the soil and pollute lim-
ited groundwater.
(Osha Gray Davidson, ‘‘Rise of America’s Rural Ghetto’’)
3. 
1 Society values white lives more than black lives. This is clear from the fact
that 
2 killers of whites are much more likely to be sentenced to death than
killers of blacks. 
3 Of the 1788 people currently on death row, 1713 were
convicted of killing a white person. Yet 
4 blacks are six times more likely to
be murder victims than whites are. 
5 In Florida, no one has ever been exe-
cuted for murdering a black person, but 
6 dozens have been executed for
murdering white people.
(Los Angeles Times editorial, ‘‘Death and Race’’)
4.
#

1 Powerful new particle accelerators are important in high energy physics,
and 
2 they are worth their cost because 
3 they will allow scientists to pro-
duce and capture signiﬁcant quantities of Z particles. 
4 Z particles result from

Extended Arguments
71
S
N
L
the collision of positrons and electrons, and 
5 particle accelerators are needed
to achieve signiﬁcant numbers of these collisions. 
6 Z particles are thought
to be the bearers of the weak nuclear force, and 
7 learning the nature of this
force may lead to the development of entirely new sources of energy.
(Lee Dye, ‘‘Linear Collider: Bold Gamble in Atomic Physics’’)
5. 
1 For years our country has been providing Japan unlimited access to our
technology while getting little in return. 
2 Currently 7000 Japanese graduate
students study science and engineering in the U.S., 
3 while only 1000 Amer-
icans are engaged in similar studies in Japan. Also, 
4 our government labo-
ratories are open to the Japanese, but 
5 Japanese laboratories are not open
to Americans. 
6 To remedy this imbalance, Japan should subsidize our uni-
versities, and also 
7 it should help defray the costs of our laboratories.
(William C. Norris, ‘‘Technology Must Travel 2-Way Street’’)
6. 
1 All men crave material success because 
2 it serves as an insurance policy
against sexual rejection. This is true because 
3 women love men who are
successful. 
4 Both men and women want power, and 
5 success is the form
of power women feel most deprived of. Thus, 
6 women try to achieve it
vicariously through men. 
7 As the 5-foot 6-inch Dustin Hoffman once put it,
‘‘When I was in high school, women wouldn’t touch me with a 10-foot pole.
Now I can’t keep them away with a 10-foot pole.’’
(Warren Farrell, ‘‘Success Story: From Frog to Prince’’)
7.
#

1 Cigarette consumption could be easily reduced by simply outlawing tailor-
made cigarettes. 
2 The manufacture of tailor-made cigarettes to American
standards is a high-tech industry. 
3 It cannot be done in small illicit labs like
the processing of PCP, cocaine or heroin. 
4 The availability of quality tobacco
for hand-rolling would discourage the development of an illegal tailor-made
market. 
5 Most people would not pay the premium prices demanded by an
illicit market for a product of unknown quality. 
6 They could roll a high-
quality product for themselves. 
7 Truly addicted persons would continue to
smoke no matter how inconvenient. But 
8 most would give it up as too
much bother before it became a deeply ingrained habit.
(Richard Sand, ‘‘An Easy Way to Reduce Cigarette Consumption’’)
8. 
1 Flesh food is not a necessity in the human diet, as 
2 nutritionally adequate
alternatives are readily available. 
3 Many people in the world thrive on a
nonmeat diet. 
4 Indeed, vegetarian Seventh-Day Adventists in this country
live an average of six years longer than their meat-eating counterparts. 
5 The
National Academy of Science warns that our fat-laden diet is directly respon-
sible for much of the heart disease and cancer that afﬂict so many. 
6 At a
time when people are starving in certain parts of the world, it should be
noted that a steer must consume sixteen pounds of grain and soy to produce
one pound of meat. 
7 The grain and soybeans we feed our meat-producing

72
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
animals would feed every hungry mouth in the world many times over.

8 Cattle are competing with humans for food. 
9 Clearly, a reassessment of
the whole concept of killing and eating animals is in order.
(Suzanne Sutton, ‘‘Killing Animals for Food—Time for a Second Look’’)
9. 
1 The argument has been made that to cut down on teenage drunk driving
we should increase the federal excise tax on beer. 
2 Such a measure, how-
ever, would almost certainly fail to achieve its intended result. 
3 Teenagers are
notoriously insensitive to cost. 
4 They gladly accept premium prices for the
latest style in clothes or the most popular record albums. And then, 
5 those
who drink and drive already risk arrest and loss of driving privileges. 
6 They
would not think twice about paying a little more for a six-pack. Finally, 
7 the
situation is not as bleak as it has been made to appear. 
8 The fatality rate for
teenage drivers is lower today than it has been in years.
( James C. Sanders, ‘‘Increased U.S. Tax on Beer’’)
10.
#

1 It has been widely acknowledged that the quality of undergraduate edu-
cation in this country is diminishing. 
2 An often unrecognized cause of this
malady is the exploitative way that universities as employers treat their part-
time and temporary faculty members. 
3 In many universities there are no for-
mal guidelines for evaluating the work of these instructors. As a result, 
4 poor
instructors who solicit the favor of the department chairman are often re-
tained over better ones who do not. 
5 Another factor is the low pay given to
these instructors. 
6 In order to survive, many of them must accept heavy
teaching loads spread out over three or four institutions. 
7 The quality of
instruction can only suffer when faculty members stretch themselves so thin.
Lastly, because 
8 part-time and temporary faculty are rarely members of the
faculty senate, 
9 they have no voice in university governance. But 
10 withouta
voice, the shoddy conditions under which they work are never brought to light.
(Michael Schwalbe, ‘‘Part-Time Faculty Members Deserve a Break’’)
11. 
1 Doctors who attend elderly people in nursing homes often prescribe tran-
quilizers to keep these people immobile. 
2 This practice is often unwar-
ranted, and 
3 it often impairs the health of the patients. 
4 These tranquilizers
often have damaging side effects in that 
5 they accentuate the symptoms of
senility, and 
6 they increase the likelihood of a dangerous fall because 
7 they
produce unsteadiness in walking. Furthermore, since 
8 these medications
produce immobility, 
9 they increase the risk of bedsores. 
10 Doctors at the
Center for Aging and Health say that physicians who care for the elderly are
simply prescribing too much medication.
(Hal Willard, ‘‘At 90, the Zombie Shufﬂe’’)
12. 
1 All of us have encountered motorists who will go to any length to get a
parking spot within 20 feet of the door they expect to enter. 
2 This obsession
with good parking spots transcends all logic. 
3 It might take 5 minutes to

Extended Arguments
73
S
N
L
secure the ideal spot in a store parking lot, 
4 while a more distant spot that
is immediately available is only a 40-second walk from the door. 
5 Waiting
for that ideal spot also results in frenzied nerves and skyrocketing blood
pressure. 
6 Inevitably the occupant of the desired space will preen her hair
before departing, and 
7 all the while the cars backed up behind the waiting
driver are blaring their horns. 
8 Parking a little farther away is usually easier
and safer because 
9 you can pull out more quickly, and 
10 it avoids damage
to car doors by adjacent parkers.
(Gwinn Owens, ‘‘A Ridiculous Addiction’’)
13.
#

1 The state has a right to intervene on behalf of unborn children, and 
2 this
right should be implemented immediately. 
3 While it may be true that a
mere fetus has no rights, 
4 surely a born child does have rights, and 
5 these
rights project backward to the time it was in the womb. This is true because

6 what happens to the child in the womb can have an impact throughout the
child’s life. 
7 It is well known that alcohol and drug abuse by expectant
mothers cause birth defects, and 
8 these defects are not correctable after
birth. 
9 Granted, an expectant mother has the right to treat her own body as
she chooses, but 
10 this right does not extend to her unborn child. 
11 Once a
pregnant woman decides to give birth, she effectively transfers part of her
rights over to her unborn child. 
12 Unfortunately, however, the unborn child
is incapable of securing these rights for itself. Thus, 
13 the intervention of a
higher power is justiﬁed.
(Alan Dershowitz, ‘‘Drawing the Line on Prenatal Rights’’)
14. 
1 A manned trip to Mars is a justiﬁed scientiﬁc goal because 
2 it affords a
unique opportunity to explore the origins of the solar system and the emer-
gence of life. However, 
3 from a scientiﬁc standpoint, an initial landing on
the tiny Martian moons, Phobos and Deimos, would be more rewarding than
a landing on the planet itself. Because 
4 the Martian terrain is rugged, 
5
humans would not be able to venture far, 
6 nor could they operate a robot
vehicle without the use of a satellite, since 
7 Mars’s mountains would block
their view. 
8 Explorers on Phobos and Deimos could easily send robot ve-
hicles to the planet’s surface. 
9 Using Mars’s moons as a base would also be
better than unmanned exploration directed from the Houston space center.
Because 
10 the distance is so great, 
11 radio signals to and from Mars can take
as long as an hour. Thus, 
12 driving an unmanned rover from Earth, step by
step, would be a time-consuming operation. 
13 Sample returns to Earth would
take months instead of hours, and 
14 follow-on missions would be years apart
instead of days, further slowing the process of exploration.
(S. Fred Singer, ‘‘The Case for Going to Mars’’)
15. 
1 There are lots of problems with the U.S. airline system, but 
2 deregula-
tion isn’t one of them. 
3 Airline deregulation has delivered most of what it

74
Chapter 1: Basic Concepts
promised when enacted in 1978. 
4 It has held down fares, 
5 increased
competition, 
6 and raised the industry’s efﬁciency. 
7 Despite claims to the
contrary, airline safety has not suffered. And, 
8 with some exceptions, service
to some cities and towns has improved. 
9 On average, fares are lower today
than in 1980. 
10 Morrison and Winston estimate that fares are 20% to 30% below
what they would be under regulation. 
11 Competition has increased because

12 prior to deregulation airlines had protected routes. 
13 After deregulation this
changed. 
14 Efﬁciency has also improved. 
15 After deregulation the percent-
age of occupied seats jumped by 10% and miles traveled by 32%. 
16 Despite
fears that airlines would cut unproﬁtable service to small communities, most
smaller cities and towns experienced a 20% to 30% increase in ﬂight fre-
quency. Lastly, 
17 travel on U.S. airlines remains among the safest forms of
transportation. 
18 Between 1975 and 1985, deaths resulting from crashes to-
taled fewer than 3000.
(Robert J. Samuelson, ‘‘Let’s Not Regulate the Deregulated Airlines’’)
III. Turn to the editorial pages of a newspaper and select an editorial that contains an
argument. Keep in mind that some editorials are really reports and contain no
arguments at all. Also, few editorials are as neat and straightforward as the selec-
tions presented in parts I and II of this exercise. Guest editorials on the opinion-
editorial page (usually opposite the editorial page) are often better written than
those on the editorial page. Analyze the argument (or arguments) according to
the method presented in this section. Begin by placing a numeral at the beginning
of each statement. Compound statements having components that are claimed to
be true may be broken up into parts and the parts enumerated accordingly. Nu-
merals should usually be placed after genuine premise and conclusion indicators
even when they occur in the middle of a statement. Do not, however, break up
conditional statements into antecedent and consequent. Proceed to identify the
main conclusion (or conclusions) and determine how the other statements pro-
vide support. Any statement that does not play a direct role in the argument
should be left out of the ﬁnal argument pattern.
Summary
Logic is the study of the evaluation of arguments, which are lists of statements consist-
ing of one or more premises and one conclusion. Premises can be distinguished from
conclusion by the occurrence of indicator words (‘‘hence,’’ ‘‘therefore,’’ ‘‘since,’’ and
so on) or an inferential relation among the statements. Because not all groups of
statements are arguments, it is important to be able to distinguish arguments from
nonarguments. This is done by attending to indicator words, the presence of an infer-
ential relation among the statements, and typical kinds of nonarguments. Typical non-

Extended Arguments
75
S
N
L
arguments include warnings, loosely associated statements, reports, expository
passages, illustrations, conditional statements, and explanations.
Arguments are customarily divided into deductive and inductive. Deductive argu-
ments are those in which the conclusion is claimed to follow necessarily from the
premises, while inductive arguments are those in which the conclusion is claimed to
follow only probably from the premises. The two can be distinguished by attending to
special indicator words (‘‘it necessarily follows that,’’ ‘‘it probably follows that,’’ and
so on), the actual strength of the inferential relation, and typical forms or styles of
deductive and inductive argumentation. Typical deductive arguments include argu-
ments based on mathematics, arguments from deﬁnition, and categorical, hypotheti-
cal, and disjunctive syllogisms. Typical inductive arguments include predictions,
arguments from analogy, generalizations, arguments from authority, arguments based
on signs, and causal inferences.
The evaluation of arguments involves two steps: evaluating the link between prem-
ises and conclusion, and evaluating the truth of the premises. Deductive arguments in
which the conclusion actually follows from the premises are said to be valid, and those
that also have true premise are said to be sound. Inductive arguments in which the
conclusion actually follows from the premises are said to be strong, and those that
also have true premises are said to be cogent. The terms ‘‘true’’ and ‘‘false’’ apply not
to arguments, but to statements. The truth and falsity of premises and conclusion is
only indirectly related to validity, but any deductive argument having true premises
and false conclusion is invalid.
The validity of a deductive argument is determined by the form of the argument.
An argument form that allows for a substitution instance having true premises and a
false conclusion is an invalid form, and any argument having that form is an invalid
argument. This fact leads to the counterexample method for proving invalidity. The
method consists in identifying the form of a given invalid argument and thenconstruct-
ing a counterexample having premises that are indisputably true and a conclusion that
is indisputably false.
The structure of longer arguments may be disclosed by the application of a method
consisting of arrows and braces that show how the various premises support inter-
mediate conclusions, and how the latter in turn support the main conclusion. Four
basic argument patterns are the vertical pattern, horizontal pattern, conjoint premises,
and multiple conclusion.


   
2
Language: Meaning
and Deﬁnition
2.1
Varieties of Meaning
Ordinary language, as most of us are at least vaguely aware, serves various functions
in our day-to-day lives. The twentieth-century philosopher Ludwig Wittgenstein
thought the number of these functions to be virtually unlimited. Thus, among other
things, language is used to
ask questions
tell stories
tell lies
guess at answers
form hypotheses
launch verbal assaults
tell jokes
ﬂirt with someone
give directions
sing songs
issue commands
greet someone
and so on.
For our purpose, two linguistic functions are particularly important: (1) to convey
information and (2) to express or evoke feelings. Consider, for example, the following
statements:
The death penalty, which is legal in thirty-six states, has been carried out most
often in Georgia; however, since 1977 Texas holds the record for the greatest
number of executions.
The death penalty is a cruel and inhuman form of punishment in which hapless
prisoners are dragged from their cells and summarily slaughtered only to satiate
the bloodlust of a vengeful public.
The ﬁrst statement is intended primarily to convey information; the second is in-
tended, at least in part, to express or evoke feelings. These statements accomplish
their respective functions through the distinct kinds of terminology in which they are
phrased. Terminology that conveys information is said to have cognitive meaning,

Varieties of Meaning
77
S
N
L
and terminology that expresses or evokes feelings is said to have emotive meaning.
Thus, in the ﬁrst statement the words ‘‘legal,’’ ‘‘thirty-six,’’ ‘‘most often,’’ ‘‘Georgia,’’
‘‘record,’’ and so on have primarily a cognitive meaning, while in the second statement
the words ‘‘cruel,’’ ‘‘inhuman,’’ ‘‘hapless,’’ ‘‘dragged,’’ ‘‘slaughtered,’’ ‘‘bloodlust,’’ and
‘‘vengeful’’ have a strong emotive meaning. Of course, these latter words have cogni-
tive meaning as well. ‘‘Cruel’’ means tending to hurt others, ‘‘inhuman’’ means inap-
propriate for humans, ‘‘hapless’’ means unfortunate, and so on.
The emotively charged statement about the death penalty illustrates two important
points. The ﬁrst is that statements of this sort usually have both cognitive meaning and
emotive meaning. Therefore, since logic is concerned chieﬂy with cognitive meaning,
it is important that we be able to distinguish and disengage the cognitive meaning of
such statements from the emotive meaning. The second point is that part of the cog-
nitive meaning of such statements is a value claim. A value claim is a claim that
something is good, bad, right, wrong, or better, worse, more important or less impor-
tant than some other thing. For example, the statement about the death penalty asserts
the value claim that the death penalty is wrong or immoral. Such value claims are
often the most important part of the cognitive meaning of emotive statements. Thus,
for the purposes of logic, it is important that we be able to disengage the value claims
of emotively charged statements from the emotive meaning and treat these claims as
separate statements.
These observations suggest the reason that people use emotive terminology as
often as they do: Value claims as such normally require evidence to support them. For
example, the claim that the death penalty is immoral cannot simply stand by itself. It
cries out for reasons to support it. But when value claims are couched in emotive
terminology, the emotive ‘‘clothing’’ tends to obscure the fact that a value claim is
being made, and it simultaneously gives psychological momentum to that claim. As a
result, readers and listeners are inclined to swallow the value claim whole without any
evidence. Furthermore, the intellectual laziness of many speakers and writers, com-
bined with their inability to supply supporting reasons for their value claims, rein-
forces the desirability of couching such claims in emotive terminology.
Many people, for example, will refer to someone as ‘‘crazy,’’ ‘‘stupid,’’ or ‘‘weird’’
when they want to express the claim that what that person is doing is bad or wrong
and when they are unable or unwilling to give reasons for this claim. Also, many
people will refer to things or situations as ‘‘awesome’’ or ‘‘gross’’ for the same reasons.
Those who happen to be listening, especially if they are friendly with the speaker, will
often accept these claims without hesitation.
For a subtler example of emotive terminology, consider the word ‘‘harvest.’’ This
word evokes feelings associated with honest, hardworking farmers being rewarded
for their labor in planting and tending their crops. To capitalize on this positive feeling,
wood products companies speak of harvesting the trees in 200-year-old forests, even
though they had nothing to do with planting them, and surgeons speak of harvesting
the organs from the bodies of donors and the tissue from aborted fetuses. In all of

78
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
these cases, the use of the word ‘‘harvest’’ is speciﬁcally calculated to elicit a favorable
or agreeable response from the listener.
Let us now consider emotive terminology as it occurs in arguments. In arguments,
emotive terminology accomplishes basically the same function as emotive terminol-
ogy in statements. It allows the arguer to make value claims about the subject matter
of the argument without providing evidence, and it gives the argument a kind of
steamroller quality by which it tends to crush potential counterarguments before the
reader or listener has a chance to think of them. This steamroller quality also tends to
paralyze the logical thought processes of readers or listeners so that they are not able
to see illogical arguments in their true light. These effects of emotive terminology can
be avoided if the reader or listener will disengage the value claims and other cognitive
meanings from the emotive meaning of the language and reexpress them as distinct
premises.
Consider, for example, the following emotively charged argument taken from the
letters to the editor section of a newspaper:
Now that we know that the rocks on the moon are similar to those in our back-
yard and that tadpoles can exist in a weightless environment, and now that we
have put the rest of the world in order, can we concentrate on the problems
here at home? Like what makes people hungry and why is unemployment
so elusive?
(Robert J. Boland)
The conclusion of this argument is that our government should take money that has
been spent on the space program and on international police actions and redirect it to
solving domestic problems. The author minimizes the importance of the space pro-
gram by covertly suggesting that it amounts to nothing more than work on ordinary
rocks and tadpoles (which, by themselves are relatively insigniﬁcant), and he exag-
gerates the scope of the international effort by covertly suggesting that it has solved
every problem on earth but our own. Also, the phrase ‘‘put . . . in order’’ suggests that
the international effort has been no more important than restoring order to a room in
one’s house. We might rephrase the argument in emotively neutral language, making
the implicit suggestions and value claims explicit, as follows:
The space program has been conﬁned to work on ordinary rocks and tadpoles.
Ordinary rocks and tadpoles are less important than domestic hunger and
unemployment.
Our international efforts have restored order to every nation on earth but our own.
These efforts have been directed to problems that are less important than our own
domestic problems.
Therefore, our government should redirect funds that have been spent on these
projects to solving our own domestic problems.
By restructuring the argument in this way, we can more easily evaluate the degree
to which the premises support the conclusion. Inspection of the premises reveals that

Varieties of Meaning
79
S
N
L
the ﬁrst, third, and possibly fourth premises are false. Thus, the actual support pro-
vided by the premises is less than what we might have ﬁrst expected. If the argument
were to be rephrased a second time so that the premises turned out true (for example,
the ﬁrst premise might read ‘‘Part of the space program has been devoted to research
on ordinary rocks and tadpoles’’), the support given to the conclusion would still be
weaker than the author intended.
Now that we have distinguished emotive meaning from cognitive meaning, let us
explore some of the ways that cognitive meanings can be defective. Two of them are
vagueness and ambiguity. A linguistic expression is said to be vague if there are
borderline cases in which it is impossible to tell if the expression applies or does not
apply. Vague expressions often allow for a continuous range of interpretations. The
meaning is hazy, obscure, and imprecise. For example, words such as ‘‘love,’’ ‘‘happi-
ness,’’ ‘‘peace,’’ ‘‘excessive,’’ ‘‘fresh,’’ ‘‘rich,’’ ‘‘poor,’’ ‘‘normal,’’ ‘‘conservative,’’ and
‘‘polluted’’ are vague. We can rarely tell with any precision whether they apply to a
given situation or not. How fresh does something have to be in order to be called
fresh?
Vagueness can also affect entire statements. Such vagueness may arise not so much
from the individual words as from the way in which the words are combined. For
example, suppose someone were to say, ‘‘Today our job situation is more transparent.’’
First, what is the meaning of ‘‘job situation’’? Does it refer to ﬁnding a job, keeping a
job, ﬁlling a job, completing a job, or bidding on a job? And what exactly does it mean
for a job situation to be ‘‘transparent’’? Does it mean that the job is more easily per-
ceived or comprehended? That the job is more easily completed? That we can antici-
pate our future job needs more clearly? Or what else?
Not all cases of vagueness, however, are problematic. To describe an acquaintance
as ‘‘tall’’ or ‘‘thin’’ often causes no trouble in ordinary conversation. Indeed, it may be
overly burdensome to describe this person in more precise language. Trouble arises
only when the language is not sufﬁciently precise for what the situation demands.
The other way in which cognitive meanings can be defective is ambiguity. An
expression is said to be ambiguous when it can be interpreted as having more than
one clearly distinct meaning in a given context. For example, words such as ‘‘light,’’
‘‘proper,’’ ‘‘critical,’’ ‘‘stress,’’ ‘‘mad,’’ ‘‘inﬂate,’’ ‘‘chest,’’ ‘‘bank,’’ ‘‘sound,’’ and ‘‘race’’
can be used ambiguously. Thus, if one were to describe a beer as a light pilsner, does
this mean that the beer is light in color, light in calories, or light in taste? If one were to
describe an action as proper, does this mean proper in a moral sense or proper in the
sense of being socially acceptable? Or if one were to describe a person as critical, does
this mean that the person is essential for a certain task or that the person tends to
criticize others?
As is the case with vagueness, ambiguity can also affect entire statements. Such am-
biguity often results from the way in which certain words are combined. For example,
there was a newspaper headline that read, ‘‘Tuna are biting off the Washington coast.’’
Does this mean that the tuna are nibbling away at the coastline or that ﬁshermen

80
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
are catching them off the coast? Presumably it means the latter. And another headline
read, ‘‘College students are turning to vegetables.’’ Does this mean that the students
are metamorphosing into vegetables or that they are incorporating more vegetables
into their diet? Again, the intended meaning is probably the latter.
The difference between ambiguity and vagueness is that vague terminology allows
for a relatively continuous range of interpretations, whereas ambiguous terminology
allows for multiple discrete interpretations. In a vague expression there is a blur of
meaning, whereas in an ambiguous expression there is a mix-up of otherwise clear
meanings. However, there are many forms of expression that are ambiguous in one
context and vague in another. For example, the word ‘‘slow’’ in one context could
mean either mentally retarded or physically slow, but when the word refers to physical
slowness, it could be vague. How slow is slow? Similar remarks apply to ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘fast,’’
and ‘‘rich.’’
Ambiguity and vagueness are important in logic because there are countless occa-
sions in which the evaluation of an argument leads to the observation, ‘‘Well, that
depends on what you mean by . . .’’ Certain phraseology in the argument is vague or
ambiguous, and its meaning must be clariﬁed before any evaluation can proceed. For
example, Scientologists argue that their organization should be exempt from paying
taxes because, they claim, Scientology is a religion. Evaluating their argument requires
that we clarify the meaning of ‘‘religion.’’ Pro-life advocates argue that abortion is
wrong because it results in the killing of human beings. But what is the meaning of
‘‘human being’’? And feminists argue that leering glances constitute sexual harassment.
To evaluate their arguments we must clarify the meaning of ‘‘leering glances’’ and
‘‘sexual harassment.’’
The role of vagueness and ambiguity in arguments may be conveniently explored
in the context of conﬂicting arguments between individuals. Such conﬂicts are called
disputes:
CLAUDIA: Mrs. Wilson abuses her children. And how do I know that? I saw her spank
one of her kids the other day after the kid misbehaved.
JANE: Don’t be silly. Kids need discipline, and by disciplining her children, Mrs. Wilson
is showing that she loves them.
Here the problem surrounds the vagueness of the words ‘‘abuse’’ and ‘‘discipline.’’
When does discipline become abuse? The line separating the two is hazy at best, but
unless it is clariﬁed, disputes of this sort will never be resolved.
Another example:
BRENDA: I’m afraid that Smiley is guilty of arson. Last night he conﬁded to me that
he was the one who set ﬁre to the old schoolhouse.
WARREN: No, you couldn’t be more mistaken. In this country no one is guilty until
proven so in a court of law, and Smiley has not yet even been accused of anything.

Varieties of Meaning
81
S
N
L
In this case the dispute arises over the ambiguity of the word ‘‘guilty.’’ Brenda is using
the word in the moral sense. Given that Smiley has admitted to setting ﬁre to the old
schoolhouse, it is very likely that he did indeed set ﬁre to it and therefore is guilty of
arson in the moral sense of the term. Warren, on the other hand, is using the word in
the legal sense. Because Smiley has not been convicted in a court of law, he is not
legally guilty of anything.
Disputes that arise over the meaning of language are called verbal disputes. But not
all disputes are of this sort. Some disputes arise over a disagreement about facts, and
these are called factual disputes. Example:
KEITH: I know that Freddie stole a computer from the old schoolhouse. Barbara told
me that she saw Freddie do it.
PHYLLIS: That’s ridiculous! Freddie has never stolen anything in his life. Barbara hates
Freddie, and she is trying to pin the theft on him only to shield her criminal
boyfriend.
Here the dispute centers on the factual issues of whether Barbara told the truth and
whether Freddie stole the computer.
In dealing with disputes, the ﬁrst question is whether the dispute is factual, verbal,
or some combination of the two. If the dispute is verbal, then the second question to
be answered is whether the dispute concerns ambiguity or vagueness.
EXERCISE 2.1
I. The following selection is taken from a speech delivered by George C. Wallace,
former Governor of Alabama, on July 4, 1964. In this speech Wallace attacked
Lyndon Johnson’s signing of the Civil Rights Act. The speech is liberally sprinkled
with emotive terminology. Make a list of what you consider to be the twenty-ﬁve
most highly charged words or phrases, and then indicate whether they are in-
tended to evoke a favorable or an unfavorable attitude from the listener.
We come here today in deference to the memory of those stalwart patriots who on
July 4, 1776, pledged their lives, their fortunes, and their sacred honor to establish
and defend the proposition that governments are created by the people, empow-
ered by the people, derive their just powers from the consent of the people, and
must forever remain subservient to the will of the people.
Today, 188 years later, we celebrate that occasion and ﬁnd inspiration and deter-
mination and courage to preserve and protect the great principles of freedom enun-
ciated in the Declaration of Independence.
It is therefore a cruel irony that the President of the United States has only
yesterday signed into law the most monstrous piece of legislation ever enacted by
the United States Congress.
It is a fraud, a sham, and a hoax.

82
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
This bill will live in infamy. To sign it into law at any time is tragic. To do so upon
the eve of the celebration of our independence insults the intelligence of the Amer-
ican people.
It dishonors the memory of countless thousands of our dead who offered up
their very lives in defense of principles which this bill destroys.
Never before in the history of this nation have so many human and property
rights been destroyed by a single enactment of the Congress. It is an act of tyranny.
It is the assassin’s knife stuck in the back of liberty.
With this assassin’s knife and a blackjack in the hand of the federal force-cult,
the left-wing liberals will try to force us back into bondage. Bondage to a tyranny
more brutal than that imposed by the British Monarchy which claimed power to
rule over the lives of our forefathers under sanction of the omnipotent black-robed
despots who sit on the bench of the United States Supreme Court.
This bill is fraudulent in intent, in design and in execution.
It is misnamed. Each and every provision is mistitled. It was rammed through the
Congress on the wave of ballyhoo, promotions, and publicity stunts reminiscent of
P. T. Barnum.
It was enacted in an atmosphere of pressure, intimidation, and even cowardice,
as demonstrated by the refusal of the United States Senate to adopt an amendment
to submit the bill to a vote of the people.
To illustrate the fraud—it is not a civil rights bill. It is a federal penal code. It
creates federal crimes which would take volumes to list and years to tabulate be-
cause it affects the lives of 192 million American citizens. Every person in every walk
and station of life and every aspect of our daily lives become subject to the criminal
provisions of this bill.
It threatens our freedom of speech, of assembly, of association, and makes the
exercise of these freedoms a federal crime under certain conditions.
It affects our political rights, our right to trial by jury, our right to the full use and
enjoyment of our private property, the freedom from search and seizure of our
private property and possessions, the freedom from harassment by federal police
and, in short, all the rights of individuals inherent in a society of free men.
Ministers, lawyers, teachers, newspapers, and every private citizen must guard
his speech and watch his actions to avoid the deliberately imposed booby traps put
into this bill. It is designed to make federal crimes of our customs, beliefs, and
traditions. Therefore, under the fantastic powers of the federal judiciary to punish
for contempt of court and under their fantastic powers to regulate our most inti-
mate aspects of our lives by injunction, every American citizen is in jeopardy and
must stand guard against these despots.
II. The following selections were taken from the letters to the editor section of a
newspaper. Each can be interpreted as expressing one or more arguments. Begin
by identifying the conclusion of each. Then disengage the covert assumptions,
value claims, and other cognitive assertions from the emotive language and trans-
late them into emotively neutral premises. Use the two examples in the text as
models. Finally, evaluate the restructured arguments. Some may turn out to be
good ones.

Varieties of Meaning
83
S
N
L
1.
#
Why don’t animal lovers do something about these dog sled races? Have you
ever witnessed a race on television? Talk about torture. It’s sickening to watch
the dogs, panting and their tongues hanging out, pull a heavily laden sled
with a driver through snow and ice in bitter cold.
( Joe Shapiro)
2. How anyone who has seen even one photo of the ﬂy-covered, starving chil-
dren in Somalia can still believe in a loving, everpresent, omnipotent God is
beyond intelligent reasoning.
(William Blanchard)
3. The creationists have no right to impose their mistaken, ignorant, supersti-
tious beliefs on others. They claim the constitutional right to the free exercise
of religion. How about the rights of the majority of people who want their
children taught the scientiﬁc truth about evolution—not fallacious myths and
superstitions from primitive societies.
(Andrew M. Underhill, Jr.)
4.
#
God, guts, and guns made this great country of ours free, and you can bet
your buns it will take more of the same to keep it that way. One of the very
last things in this world we need is handgun control.
(R. Kinzie)
5. The insanity plea should be done away with; criminals should lose this easy
way out. Killers can theoretically spend as little as six months in a mental
hospital, then be released. It’s time to take a stand for safety and put psychotic
killers in prison.
(Keith Aikens)
6. Until now, the protest against the holocaust in our own nation has been vocal
but far too small. The massacre of an unwanted generation through abortion
and infanticide has sounded an alarm that should wake up every Christian.
Helpless and guiltless little infants are mercilessly butchered daily in hospitals
and clinics across our land. For the love of God, let us all urge the passage of
the Human Life Bill, now before Congress.
( Jim Key)
7.
#
It’s time to challenge all this nonsense about the ‘‘celebration of diversity’’ in
our society. The more the schizophrenics preach the glories of diversity, the
more we pull apart. This is not to deny appreciation of the ethnic roots,rituals,
and foods, which add color to life. But to lay undue emphasis upon diversiﬁ-
cation results in destruction of the ‘‘social glue’’ that binds us together. Our
forefathers framed one nation, indivisible. In the misguided effort to ‘‘cele-
brate’’ the uniqueness of every disparate culture and subculture, we betray
our heritage and dilute our identities as Americans.
(Ruth M. Armstrong)

84
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
8. A kind and loving God surely favors the pro-choice attitude. He wants his
world inhabited by happy, well-fed children with parents who love and care
for them.
Our burgeoning population in Third World nations with constant fam-
ine and disease, and many other human miseries, could be relieved if the
Catholic Church were to adjust more of its ancient policies to our current
civilization.
(Art Bates)
9. Thousands of years of organized religion have done nothing to solve any
problems and have almost always exacerbated them by promoting fear, su-
perstition and irrational mythologies. Kneeling in prayer to some supernatural
entity seeking ‘‘divine guidance’’ or, even more implausibly, ‘‘divine interven-
tion,’’ is not only a waste of time, it is counterproductive because it lulls the
supplicant into inactivity.
We must stand up, open our eyes and face life’s challenges head-on in a
problem-solving approach that is reality based, empirical, and above all,
rational.
( James W. Baugh)
10.
#
Liberalism has turned our welfare system from a social safety net into a ham-
mock. We hand out money with few questions asked. When welfare recipi-
ents are asked for some contribution to our society in return, liberals scream
that it’s unconstitutional.
Liberalism has transformed our criminal justice system into one that cares
more about the criminal’s past childhood problems than for the victim. Lib-
eralism in its never ending quest for ‘‘social justice’’ has sacriﬁced the rights
of the majority while continuing to push the rights of a few to new limits.
Liberalism has turned our school system from one of excellence to one
where condoms and metal detectors are more important than prayer.
(Marc Sexton)
III. Determine whether the following disputes are verbal, factual, or some com-
bination of the two. If verbal, discuss whether the dispute arises from vagueness
or ambiguity.
1.
#
FRANK: Look at that huge tree that fell last night. It must have made a tremen-
dous crash when it came down.
SHIRLEY: No, I’m afraid you’re quite wrong. Sound is a perception, and percep-
tions depend on a perceiver. Therefore, since nobody was around here last
night, there was no crash.
2. VICKIE: Yesterday I visited the exhibition of the work of Jean Michel Basquiat
at the Central Gallery. What an interesting artist he is!
BARBARA: Don’t be ridiculous! That’s not art, it’s just grafﬁti.

Varieties of Meaning
85
S
N
L
3. PHIL: That was a great basketball game last night. Shaquille O’Neal scored 37
points.
ARTHUR: Your statistics are all wet. O’Neal scored only 34 points.
4.
#
ROGER: I think modern society is becoming more and more violent every day.
Just look at the increase in murder, rape, and robbery. Violence is clearly an
evil that must be eradicated.
MARK: You might be right about the increase in crime, but the idea that vio-
lence is an evil is nonsense. Violence is quite natural. The universe was cre-
ated in a tremendously violent Big Bang, the nuclear reactions that bring us
sunlight are extremely violent, and insects and animals kill and devour one
another all the time.
5. KATHY: I was saddened to hear about the death of your uncle. He was such a
wonderful man. You must be consoled knowing that he’s enjoying his heav-
enly reward.
ANNE: Thanks, but I’m afraid I don’t know what you mean. If death is the end
of life, how could my uncle be alive right now in heaven?
6. HEIDI: This morning I heard a lecture on the life of Jane Austen. She was such
a wonderfully educated woman.
DAVID: That’s not true at all. Jane Austen dropped out of school when she
was only eleven, and she never even attended high school, much less college
or graduate school.
7.
#
LESLIE: Your friend Paul told us that he would be visiting his parents in Knox-
ville this weekend. Therefore, he must not be at home.
DIANA: I agree that Paul is probably not at home, but you didn’t hear him
right. He said that his parents live in Nashville.
8. KARL: There’s a euthanasia measure on the ballot today, and I think I’ll vote
for it. It seems reasonable that terminally ill patients should be allowed to be
disconnected from life-support systems so that they can die peacefully and
naturally.
SERGIO: You must be crazy! Euthanasia means giving people lethal injections,
and that’s clearly murder.
9. CHERYL: Tomorrow I’m going to the Megadeath concert. Their music is
fabulous.
OLIVER: You call that music? Really it’s just noise, and incredibly loud noise at
that.
10.
#
CAROL: Nelson could not have fought in the battle of Trafalgar, because that
battle occurred in 1806, and Nelson died in 1804.
JUSTIN: Your knowledge of history is atrocious! Nelson did ﬁght in Trafalgar,
and the date was October 21, 1805.

86
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
11. ERIC: I’ve just signed up for Philosophy 502—Dr. Peterson’s class in meta-
physics. I know I’m going to enjoy it because I’ve always been fascinated by
magic and ghosts.
LEAH: I’m afraid you’re in for a surprise.
12. HAROLD: Professor Steinbeck is the most intelligent man I know. His lecture
series on matter and consciousness was simply brilliant.
JOYCE: Steinbeck is actually an idiot. Yesterday I watched while he tried to get
his car started. When it wouldn’t start, he opened the hood, and he didn’t
even notice that someone had stolen the battery.
13.
#
THOMAS: George Foreman committed those crimes of child abuse through his
own free choice. Nobody put a gun to his head. Therefore he should be
punished for them.
EMILIE: That’s not true. It’s been established that Foreman was severely abused
himself when he was a child, and such children have an irresistible obsession
to abuse others when they grow up.
14. ANTHONY: The sun is much smaller than the earth. You see, it’s just a small
thing up there in the sky. Therefore, since the sun’s gravitational attraction is
proportional to its mass, the sun’s gravity is less than the earth’s.
CINDY: You are as stupid as they come. I agree the mass of the sun is less
than that of the earth, but its volume is greater. Therefore, since gravita-
tional attraction is proportional to volume, the sun’s gravity is greater than
the earth’s.
15. MINDY: President Clinton should have been removed from ofﬁce because he
lied about having sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky.
KAREN: Don’t be silly. President Clinton only had oral sex with Lewinsky, and
oral sex does not constitute sexual relations.
16.
#
FRED: Today’s professional athletes are overpaid. Many of them make millions
of dollars a year.
SHAWN: I don’t think they are overpaid at all. Just look at the owners of some
of these teams. They make ten times as much as the athletes do.
17. BRIAN: That new morning-after pill, RU-486, causes abortion. Therefore, since
abortion is wrong, you should never take that pill.
ELAINE: How ignorant you are! RU-486 merely prevents implantation of the
fertilized ovum. Therefore, since the woman never gets pregnant, there is no
abortion.
18. PENNY: In my mind, the use of marijuana should be legalized. After all, caf-
feine and alcohol are no less of a drug than marijuana, and it’s not illegal to
enjoy a glass of beer or drink a cup of coffee.
SAM: Your conclusion is way off. Beer and coffee are not drugs, they’re foods.

The Intension and Extension of Terms
87
S
N
L
19.
#
JERRY: In spite of the great strides technology has made in this country, pov-
erty remains a terrible problem. Why, some people earn less than $10,000 per
year. The government should do something about it.
FRANKIE: I hardly think that $10,000 per year constitutes poverty. Why, in many
third world countries the majority of inhabitants earn less than $1,000 per year.
20. JOSEPH: Adult human beings have the right to marry whomever they please,
as long as that person is not a close relative. From this it follows that homo-
sexuals have the right to marry someone of their own sex.
STEPHEN: Your argument makes no sense. Rights are created by laws, and
since there is no federal or state law that gives homosexuals the right to marry,
they have no such right.
2.2
The Intension and Extension of Terms
The main task of logic is the evaluation of arguments. However, as we saw in the
previous section, there are countless arguments in which this task leads to the obser-
vation, ‘‘Well, that depends on what you mean by . . .’’ Such an observation usually
indicates that the meaning of certain words in the argument is vague or ambiguous.
Clearing up the problem often involves supplying a deﬁnition. Thus, the study of
meaning and deﬁnition is closely related to the main task of logic. In this section we
continue our inquiry into aspects of linguistic meaning, and the results of this inquiry
provide the basis for the theory of deﬁnition in the next section.
The basic units of any ordinary language are words. Our main concern in this
chapter, however, is not with words in general but with terms. A term is any word or
arrangement of words that may serve as the subject of a statement. Terms consist of
proper names, common names, and descriptive phrases. Here are some examples:
Proper names
Common names
Descriptive phrases
Napoleon
North Dakota
The United States
Senate
Gore Vidal
Robinson Crusoe
animal
restitution
house
activity
person
ﬁrst president of the United
States
author of Hamlet
books in my library
ofﬁcers in the Swiss Navy
blue things
those who study hard
Words that are not terms include verbs, nonsubstantive adjectives, adverbs, prepo-
sitions, conjunctions, and all nonsyntactic arrangements of words. The following
words or phrases are not terms; none can serve as the subject of a statement:

88
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
dictatorial
runs quickly
above and beyond
moreover
craves
cabbages into again the forest
The last example is a nonsyntactic arrangement.
At this point it is important to distinguish the use of a word from the mention of a
word. Without this distinction any word can be imagined to serve as the subject of a
statement and, therefore, to count as a term. The word ‘‘wherever,’’ for example, is
not a term, but ‘‘wherever’’ (in quotes) can serve as the subject of a statement, such as
‘‘‘Wherever’ is an eight-letter word.’’ But in this statement, it is not the word itself that
is the subject but rather the quoted word. The word is said to be mentioned—not
used. On the other hand, ‘‘wherever’’ is used in this statement: ‘‘I will follow you
wherever you go.’’ In distinguishing terms from nonterms one must be sure that the
word or group of words can be used as the subject of a statement.
Words are usually considered to be symbols, and the entities they symbolize are
usually called meanings. Terms, being made up of words, are also symbols, but the
meanings they symbolize are of two kinds: intensional and extensional. The inten-
sional meaning consists of the qualities or attributes that the term connotes, and the
extensional meaning consists of the members of the class that the term denotes. For
example, the intensional meaning of the term ‘‘cat’’ consists of the attributes of being
furry, of having four legs, of moving in a certain way, of emitting certain sounds, and
so on, while the extensional meaning consists of cats themselves—all the cats in the
universe. The term connotes the attributes and denotes the cats.
The intensional meaning of a term is otherwise known as the intension, or con-
notation, and the extensional meaning is known as the extension, or denotation.
‘‘Intension’’ and ‘‘extension’’ are roughly equivalent to the more modern terms ‘‘sense’’
and ‘‘reference,’’ respectively. Also, it should be noted that logic uses the terms ‘‘con-
notation’’ and ‘‘denotation’’ differently from the way they are used in grammar. In
grammar, ‘‘connotation’’ refers to the subtle nuances of a word, whereas ‘‘denotation’’
refers to the word’s direct and speciﬁc meaning.
Thomas Edison
Alexander Graham Bell
Samuel F. B. Morse
Wright brothers
Class members
(extension)
Attributes
(intension)
Clever
Intuitive
Creative
Imaginative
c
o
n
n
o
t
e
s
d
e
n
o
t
e
s
“Inventor”

The Intension and Extension of Terms
89
S
N
L
Exactly how a term connotes a set of attributes allows for at least two different
interpretations. Some philosophers take an objective approach and hold that a term
connotes whatever attributes something must have in order to be denoted by the term.
Others take what might be called a subjective approach and hold that a term connotes
the attributes that occur in the minds of the people who use that term. This book takes
the latter approach.
In connection with this approach, however, we encounter the problem of terms
connoting different things to different people. Thus, to a cat lover the term ‘‘cat’’ might
connote the attributes of being cuddly and adorable, while to someone who hates cats
it might connote the attributes of being obnoxious and disgusting. To avoid this prob-
lem, we restrict the meaning of connotation to what is usually called the conventional
connotation. The conventional connotation of a term includes the attributes that
the term commonly calls forth in the minds of competent speakers of the language.
Under this interpretation, the connotation of a term remains more or less the same
from person to person and from time to time.
The denotation of a term also typically remains the same from person to person,
but it may change with the passage of time. The denotation of ‘‘currently living cat,’’
for example, is constantly ﬂuctuating as some cats die and others are born. The deno-
tation of the term ‘‘cat,’’ on the other hand, is presumably constant because it denotes
all cats, past, present, and future.
Sometimes the denotation of a term can change radically with the passage of time.
The terms ‘‘currently living dodo bird’’ and ‘‘current king of France,’’ for example, at
one time denoted actually existing entities, but today all such entities have perished.
Accordingly, these terms now have what is called empty extension. They are said to
denote the empty (or ‘‘null’’) class, the class that has no members. Other terms with
empty extension include ‘‘unicorn,’’ ‘‘leprechaun,’’ ‘‘gnome,’’ ‘‘elf,’’ and ‘‘grifﬁn.’’While
these terms have empty extension, however, they do not have empty intension. ‘‘Cur-
rently living dodo bird’’ and ‘‘current king of France,’’ as well as ‘‘unicorn,’’ ‘‘elf,’’ and
‘‘grifﬁn,’’ connote a variety of intelligible attributes.
The fact that some terms have empty extension leads us to an important connection
between extension and intension—namely, that intension determines extension. The
intensional meaning of a term serves as the criterion for deciding what the extension
consists of. Because we know the attributes connoted by the term ‘‘unicorn,’’ for
example, we know that the term has empty extension. That is, we know that there are
no four-legged mammals having a single straight horn projecting from their forehead.
Similarly, the intension of the word ‘‘cat’’ serves as the criterion for determining what
is and what is not a member of the class of cats.
One kind of term that raises problems for the intension-determines-extension rule
is proper names. For example, the name ‘‘David’’ might not appear to have any inten-
sion, but it denotes the person who has this name. Although philosophers have dis-
agreed about this, it would seem that proper names must have some kind of intension

90
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
or we would not know what persons, if any, they denote. One possible solution to
this problem is that names are shorthand symbols for descriptions or bundles of de-
scriptions. For example, ‘‘David’’ could be shorthand for ‘‘the person who lives next
door’’ or ‘‘the person who works at the corner store and who drives a green Chevy.’’
Another possible solution to the problem of proper names is that the intension of
proper names consists of the causal chain of events leading from the point at which
the name is ﬁrst assigned to the point at which a certain person learns about the name.
Thus, the ﬁrst link in such a chain might be the baptismal event at which the name
‘‘David’’ is given to a certain infant, the second link would be the event in which a
certain third party is informed of the ﬁrst event, and so on. This entire chain of events
extending through the linguistic community would then constitute the intension of
‘‘David.’’ Thus, we conclude that for all terms, including proper names, intension
determines extension.
The distinction between intension and extension may be further illustrated by com-
paring the way in which these concepts can be used to give order to random se-
quences of terms. Terms may be put in the order of increasing intension, increasing
extension, decreasing intension, and decreasing extension. A series of terms is in the
order of increasing intension when each term in the series (except the ﬁrst) con-
notes more attributes than the one preceding it. In other words, each term in the series
(except the ﬁrst) is more speciﬁc than the one preceding it. (A term is speciﬁc to the
degree that it connotes more attributes.) The order of decreasing intension is the
reverse of that of increasing intension.
A series of terms is in the order of increasing extension when each term in the
series (except the ﬁrst) denotes a class having more members than the class denoted
by the term preceding it. In other words, the class size gets larger with each successive
term. Decreasing extension is, of course, the reverse of this order. Examples:
increasing intension:
increasing extension:
decreasing intension:
decreasing extension:
animal, mammal, feline, tiger
tiger, feline, mammal, animal
tiger, feline, mammal, animal
animal, mammal, feline, tiger
These examples illustrate a fact pertaining to most such series: The order of increasing
intension is usually the same as that of decreasing extension. Conversely, the order of
decreasing intension is usually the same as that of increasing extension. There are
some exceptions, however. Consider the following series:
unicorn; unicorn with blue eyes; unicorn with blue eyes and green horn; unicorn
with blue eyes, green horn, and a weight of over 400 pounds
Each term in this series has empty extension; so, while the series exhibits the order of
increasing intension, it does not exhibit the order of decreasing extension. Here is
another, slightly different, example:

The Intension and Extension of Terms
91
S
N
L
living human being; living human being with a genetic code; living human being
with a genetic code and a brain; living human being with a genetic code, a
brain, and a height of less than 100 feet
In this series none of the terms has empty extension, but each term has exactly the
same extension as the others. Thus, while the intension increases with each successive
term, once again the extension does not decrease.
EXERCISE 2.2
I. The following exercises deal with words and terms.
1. Determine which of the following words or groups of words are terms and
which are nonterms.
extortion
laborious
cunningly
practitioner
seriousness
forever
whoever studies
interestingly impassive
scarlet
reinvestment
therefore
Thomas Jefferson
Empire State Building
annoy
render satisfactory
graceful dancer
wake up
not only
tallest man on the squad
mountaintop
between
since
2. Name some of the attributes connoted by the following terms. Express your
answer with adjectives or adjectival phrases. Example: The term ‘‘elephant’’
connotes the attributes of being large, having tusks, having
a trunk.
drum
politician
devil
wolf
Mona Lisa
Statue of Liberty
fanatic
carrot
riot
piano
3. Name three items denoted by the terms in the left-hand column below and
all items denoted by the terms in the right-hand column.
newspaper
scientist
manufacturer
river
opera
tallest mountain on earth
prime number less than 10
governor of New York
language of Switzerland
Scandinavian country
4. Put the following sequences of terms in the order of increasing intension:
a.
#
conifer, Sitka spruce, tree, spruce, plant
b. Italian sports car, car, vehicle, Maserati, sports car

92
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
c. doctor of medicine, person, brain surgeon, professional person, surgeon
d. wallaby, marsupial, mammal, animal, kangaroo
e. parallelogram, polygon, square, rectangle, quadrilateral
5. Construct a series of four terms that exhibits increasing intension but non-
decreasing extension.
II. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. All words have an intensional meaning and an extensional meaning.
2. The intensional meaning of a term consists of the attributes connoted by the
term.
3. The extensional meaning of a term consists of the members of the class
denoted by the term.
4. The extension of a term always remains the same with the passage of time.
5. Some terms have empty intension.
6. Some terms have empty extension.
7. The intension of a term determines the extension.
8. The intension of a term determines how speciﬁc the term is.
9. The order of increasing intension is always the same as that of decreasing
extension.
10. ‘‘Leprechaun’’ and ‘‘unicorn’’ have the same extension.
2.3
Deﬁnitions and Their Purposes
Over the years philosophers have held various conﬂicting views about the purpose of
deﬁnitions. For Plato, to mention just one, deﬁnitions were intended to explicate the
meaning of certain eternal essences or forms, such as justice, piety, and virtue. For
most logicians today, however, deﬁnitions are intended exclusively to explicate the
meaning of words. In conformity with this latter position, we may deﬁne deﬁnition
as a group of words that assigns a meaning to some word or group of words. Accord-
ingly, every deﬁnition consists of two parts: the deﬁniendum and the deﬁniens. The
deﬁniendum is the word or group of words that is supposed to be deﬁned, and the
deﬁniens is the word or group of words that does the deﬁning. For example, in the
deﬁnition ‘‘‘Tiger’ means a large, striped, ferocious feline indigenous to the jungles of
India and Asia,’’ the word ‘‘tiger’’ is the deﬁniendum, and everything after the word
‘‘means’’ is the deﬁniens. The deﬁniens is not itself the meaning of the deﬁniendum;
rather, it is the group of words that symbolizes (or that is supposed to symbolize) the

Deﬁnitions and Their Purposes
93
S
N
L
Definiendum
Word to be
defined
Words that do
the defining
=
Definiens
Deﬁnition
same meaning as the deﬁniendum. Because we presumably know in advance what
the deﬁniens symbolizes, we are led, via the deﬁnition, to understand what the deﬁn-
iendum symbolizes. It is in this way that the deﬁnition ‘‘assigns’’ a meaning to its
deﬁniendum.
Once it has been decided that deﬁnitions explicate the meaning of words, other
disagreements emerge among the philosophers. Some argue that since a deﬁnition is
merely a rule that allows one set of words (the deﬁniens) to be used in place of another
set (the deﬁniendum), deﬁnitions communicate no information at all about the subject
matter of the deﬁniendum. Others take the opposite tack and argue that since deﬁni-
tions result in a clariﬁcation of language, they provide a means for the discovery of
deeper philosophical truths. It seems, however, that neither of these approaches is
able to make good sense of all the various kinds of deﬁnitions that are actually em-
ployed in ordinary usage. As a result, instead of beginning their analysis of deﬁnitions
with a set of a priori criteria, many logicians take a pragmatic approach and begin with
a survey of the various kinds of deﬁnitions that are actually used and of the functions
that they actually serve. This is the approach taken here.
Stipulative Deﬁnitions
A stipulative deﬁnition assigns a meaning to a word for the ﬁrst time. This may
involve either coining a new word or giving a new meaning to an old word. The
purpose of a stipulative deﬁnition is usually to replace a more complex expression
with a simpler one.
The need for a stipulative deﬁnition is often occasioned by some new phenomenon
or development. For example, a few years ago the attempt was made at a certain zoo
to crossbreed tigers and lions. Because of the genetic similarity of the two species, the
attempt succeeded. Offspring were produced from a male tiger and a female lion and
from a male lion and a female tiger. When the offspring were born, it became appro-
priate to give them names. Of course, the names ‘‘offspring of male tiger and female
lion’’ and ‘‘offspring of male lion and female tiger’’ could have been used, but these
names were hardly convenient. Instead, the names ‘‘tigon’’ and ‘‘liger’’ were selected.

94
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
Any two new words would have sufﬁced equally well for naming the offspring—
‘‘topar’’ and ‘‘largine’’ for example—but ‘‘tigon’’ and ‘‘liger’’ were considered more
appropriate, for obvious reasons. ‘‘Tigon’’ was taken to mean the offspring of a male
tiger and a female lion, and ‘‘liger’’ the offspring of a male lion and a female tiger.
These assignments of meanings were accomplished through stipulative deﬁnitions.
Another use for stipulative deﬁnitions is to set up secret codes. For example, during
World War II, ‘‘Tora, Tora, Tora’’ was the code name Admiral Yamamoto transmitted to
the war ofﬁce in Tokyo signaling that the Japanese ﬂeet had not been spotted in the
hours preceding the bombing of Pearl Harbor; ‘‘Operation Barbarosa’’ was the name
the Germans gave to the invasion of Russia; and ‘‘Operation Overlord’’ was the name
the allied forces gave to the planned invasion of Normandy. More recently, ‘‘Operation
Desert Storm’’ was the code name given to the military invasion of Iraq. Law enforce-
ment organizations have adopted similar code names for sting operations against
organized crime.
Because people are continually coming up with new creations, whether it be new
food concoctions, new inventions, new modes of behavior, new kinds of apparel, new
dances, or whatever, stipulative deﬁnitions are continually being used to introduce
names for these things. Sometimes these deﬁnitions are only implicit and amount to
little more than the spontaneous association of the word with some action—as was
probably the case when the words ‘‘bop,’’ ‘‘twist,’’ ‘‘jerk,’’ and ‘‘chicken’’ came to be
known as names of dances a few decades ago. At other times, they are deﬁnitely
explicit, as when the word ‘‘penicillin’’ was selected as the name for an antibacterial
substance produced by certain Penicillium molds, or when the symbol ‘‘105’’ was
chosen as a simple substitute for ‘‘10  10  10  10  10.’’
Because a stipulative deﬁnition is a completely arbitrary assignment of a meaning
to a word for the ﬁrst time, there can be no such thing as a ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ stipulative
deﬁnition. Furthermore, for the same reason, a stipulative deﬁnition cannot provide
any new information about the subject matter of the deﬁniendum. The fact that the
word ‘‘tigon’’ was selected to replace ‘‘offspring of a male tiger and a female lion’’ tells
us nothing new about the nature of the animal in question. One stipulative deﬁnition
may, however, be more or less convenient or more or less appropriate than another.
Stipulative deﬁnitions are misused in verbal disputes when one person covertly
uses a word in a peculiar way and then proceeds to assume that everyone else uses
that word in the same way. Under these circumstances that person is said to be using
the word ‘‘stipulatively.’’ In such cases the assumption that other persons use the word
in the same way is rarely justiﬁed.
Lexical Deﬁnitions
A lexical deﬁnition is used to report the meaning that a word already has in a
language. Dictionary deﬁnitions are all instances of lexical deﬁnitions. Thus, in con-
trast with a stipulative deﬁnition, which assigns a meaning to a word for the ﬁrst

Deﬁnitions and Their Purposes
95
S
N
L
time, a lexical deﬁnition may be true or false depending on whether it does or does
not report the way a word is actually used. Because words are frequently used in
more than one way, lexical deﬁnitions have the further purpose of eliminating the
ambiguity that would otherwise arise if one of these meanings were to be confused
with another.
As we saw in the ﬁrst section of this chapter, an expression is ambiguous when it
can be interpreted as having two or more clearly distinct meanings in a given context.
Words such as ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘mad,’’ and ‘‘bank’’ can be used ambiguously. Because a lexical
deﬁnition lists the various meanings that a word can have, a person who consults such
a deﬁnition is better prepared to avoid ambiguous constructions of his or her own and
to detect those of others. Undetected ambiguity causes the most trouble. In many
cases the problem lies not with the obvious differences in meaning that words such as
‘‘light’’ and ‘‘bank’’ may have but with the subtle shadings of meaning that are more
likely to be confused with one another. For example, if a woman is described as
‘‘nice,’’ any number of things could be intended. She could be fastidious, reﬁned,
modest, pleasant, attractive, or even lewd. A good lexical deﬁnition will distinguish
these various shadings and thereby guard against the possibility that two such mean-
ings will be unconsciously jumbled together into one.
Precising Deﬁnitions
The purpose of a precising deﬁnition is to reduce the vagueness of a word. As we
saw in the ﬁrst section of this chapter, an expression is vague if there are borderline
cases in which it is impossible to tell if the word applies or does not apply. Words such
as ‘‘fresh,’’ ‘‘rich,’’ and ‘‘poor’’ are vague. Once the vagueness of such words is reduced
by a precising deﬁnition, one can reach a decision as to the applicability of the word
to a speciﬁc situation. For example, if legislation were ever introduced to give direct
ﬁnancial assistance to the poor, a precising deﬁnition would have to be supplied
specifying exactly who is poor and who is not. The deﬁnition ‘‘‘Poor’ means having
an annual income of less than $4,000 and a net worth of less than $20,000’’ is an
example of a precising deﬁnition.
Whenever words are taken from ordinary usage and used in a highly systematic
context such as science, mathematics, medicine, or law, they must always be clariﬁed
by means of a precising deﬁnition. The terms ‘‘force,’’ ‘‘energy,’’ ‘‘acid,’’ ‘‘element,’’
‘‘number,’’ ‘‘equality,’’ ‘‘contract,’’ and ‘‘agent’’ have all been given precising deﬁnitions
by speciﬁc disciplines.
Sometimes the substance of a court trial may revolve around the precise usage of a
term. A trial in California addressed the question of whether a man who had driven a
bicycle while intoxicated violated the motor vehicle code. The question concerned
whether, for these purposes, a bicycle could be considered a ‘‘vehicle.’’ The court
decided in the afﬁrmative, and the decision amounted to an incremental extension of
an already existent precising deﬁnition of the word ‘‘vehicle.’’

96
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
Another example involves the practice of surgical transplantation of vital organs.
Before a heart transplant can be conducted, the donor must be dead; otherwise the
surgeon will be accused of murder. If the donor is dead for too long, however, the
success of the transplant will be imperiled. But exactly when is a person considered
to be dead? Is it when the heart stops beating, when the person stops breathing, when
rigor mortis sets in, or some other time? The question involves the meaning of the term
‘‘moment of death.’’ The courts have decided that ‘‘moment of death’’ should be taken
to mean the moment the brain stops functioning, as measured by an electroenceph-
alograph. This decision amounts to the acceptance of a precising deﬁnition for ‘‘mo-
ment of death.’’
A precising deﬁnition differs from a stipulative deﬁnition in that the latter involves
a purely arbitrary assignment of meaning, whereas the assignment of meaning in a
precising deﬁnition is not at all arbitrary. A great deal of care must be taken to ensure
that the assignment of meaning in a precising deﬁnition is appropriate and legitimate
for the context within which the term is to be employed.
Theoretical Deﬁnitions
A theoretical deﬁnition assigns a meaning to a word by suggesting a theory that
gives a certain characterization to the entities that the term denotes. Such a deﬁnition
provides a way of viewing or conceiving these entities that suggests deductive conse-
quences, further investigation (experimental or otherwise), and whatever else would
be entailed by the acceptance of a theory governing these entities. The deﬁnition of
the term ‘‘heat’’ found in texts dealing with the kinetic theory of heat provides a good
example: ‘‘‘heat’ means the energy associated with the random motion of the mole-
cules of a substance.’’ This deﬁnition does more than merely assign a meaning to a
word; it provides a way of conceiving the physical phenomenon that is heat. In so
doing, it suggests the deductive consequence that as the molecules of a substance
speed up, the temperature of the substance increases. In addition, it suggests a number
of experiments—experiments investigating the relationship between molecular veloc-
ity and the phenomena of radiation, gas pressure, molecular elasticity, and molecular
conﬁguration. In short, this deﬁnition of ‘‘heat’’ provides the impetus for an entire
theory about heat.
Other examples of theoretical deﬁnitions are the deﬁnition of ‘‘light’’ as a form of
electromagnetic radiation and the deﬁnition of ‘‘force,’’ ‘‘mass,’’ and ‘‘acceleration’’ in
Newton’s second law of motion as expressed in the equation ‘‘F  MA.’’ The latter is
a kind of contextual deﬁnition in which each term is deﬁned in terms of the other two.
Both deﬁnitions entail numerous deductive consequences about the phenomena in-
volved and suggest numerous avenues of experimental investigation.
Not all theoretical deﬁnitions are associated with science. Many terms in philoso-
phy, such as ‘‘substance,’’ ‘‘form,’’ ‘‘cause,’’ ‘‘change,’’ ‘‘idea,’’ ‘‘good,’’ ‘‘mind,’’ and
‘‘God,’’ have been given theoretical deﬁnitions. In fact, most of the major philosophers

Deﬁnitions and Their Purposes
97
S
N
L
in history have given these terms their own peculiar theoretical deﬁnitions, and this
fact accounts in part for the unique character of their respective philosophies. For
example, Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz’s deﬁnition of ‘‘substance’’ in terms of what he
called ‘‘monads’’ laid the foundation for his metaphysical theory, and John Stuart Mill’s
deﬁnition of ‘‘good’’ as the greatest happiness of the greatest number provided the
underpinnings for his utilitarian theory of ethics.
Like stipulative deﬁnitions, theoretical deﬁnitions are neither true nor false, strictly
speaking. The reason is that theoretical deﬁnitions function as proposals to see or
interpret some phenomenon in a certain way. Since proposals have no truth value,
neither do theoretical deﬁnitions. They may, however, be more or less interesting or
more or less fruitful, depending on the deductive consequences they entail and on the
outcome of the experiments they suggest.
Persuasive Deﬁnitions
The purpose of a persuasive deﬁnition is to engender a favorable or unfavorable
attitude toward what is denoted by the deﬁniendum. This purpose is accomplished by
assigning an emotionally charged or value-laden meaning to a word while making it
appear that the word really has (or ought to have) that meaning in the language in
which it is used. Thus, persuasive deﬁnitions amount to a certain synthesis of stipula-
tive, lexical, and, possibly, theoretical deﬁnitions backed by the rhetorical motive to
engender a certain attitude. As a result of this synthesis, a persuasive deﬁnition mas-
querades as an honest assignment of meaning to a term while condemning or blessing
with approval the subject matter of the deﬁniendum. Here are some examples of
opposing pairs of persuasive deﬁnitions:
‘‘Abortion’’ means the ruthless murdering of innocent human beings.
‘‘Abortion’’ means a safe and established surgical procedure whereby a woman is
relieved of an unwanted burden.
‘‘Liberal’’ means a drippy-eyed do-gooder obsessed with giving away other
people’s money.
‘‘Liberal’’ means a genuine humanitarian committed to the goals of adequate
housing and health care and of equal opportunity for all of our citizens.
‘‘Capitalism’’ means the economic system in which individuals are afforded the
God-given freedom to own property and conduct business as they choose.
‘‘Capitalism’’ means the economic system in which humanity is sacriﬁced to the
wanton quest for money, and mutual understanding and respect are replaced
by alienation, greed, and selﬁshness.
‘‘Taxation’’ means the procedure by means of which our commonwealth is
preserved and sustained.
‘‘Taxation’’ means the procedure used by bureaucrats to rip off the people who
elected them.

98
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
The objective of a persuasive deﬁnition is to inﬂuence the attitudes of the reader or
listener; thus, such deﬁnitions may be used with considerable effectiveness in political
speeches and editorial columns. While persuasive deﬁnitions may, like lexical deﬁni-
tions, be evaluated as either true or false, the primary issue is neither truth nor falsity
but the effectiveness of such deﬁnitions as instruments of persuasion.
EXERCISE 2.3
I. Determine whether the following deﬁnitions are stipulative, lexical, precising,
theoretical, or persuasive.
1.
#
‘‘Blind’’ means, for federal income tax purposes, either the inability to see
better than 20/200 in the better eye with glasses or having a ﬁeld of vision of
20 degrees or less.
2. ‘‘Football’’ means a sport in which modern-day gladiators brutalize one an-
other while trying to move a ridiculously shaped ‘‘ball’’ from one end of the
playing ﬁeld to the other.
3. ‘‘Wristovision’’ means a miniature television set that can be worn on the wrist.
4.
#
‘‘Difﬁdent’’ means lacking conﬁdence in oneself; characterized by modest
reserve.
5. ‘‘Magnetism’’ means a property of certain substances such as iron, cobalt, and
nickel that arises from the spin of the electrons in the unﬁlled inner shell of
the atoms that compose the substance.
6. ‘‘Fiduciary’’ means having to do with a conﬁdence or trust; a person who
holds something in trust.
7.
#
‘‘Politician’’ means a person of unquestioned honesty and integrity whom the
people, in their collective wisdom, have duly elected to guide the ship of state
and protect it from the reefs and shoals that threaten it on every side.
8. ‘‘Intoxicated,’’ for purposes of driving a car in many states, means having a
blood-alcohol content of 0.1% (.001) or greater.
9. ‘‘Gweed’’ means a thoroughly immature person who feigns intellectual prow-
ess; a total loser.
10.
#
‘‘Sound’’ means a compression wave in air or some other elastic medium
having a frequency ranging (for humans) from 20 to 20,000 vibrations per
second.
11. ‘‘Radioactive area’’ means, for purposes of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Com-
mission, any area accessible to individuals in which there exists radiation at
such levels that a major portion of the body could receive in any one hour a
dose in excess of 5 millirems or in any ﬁve consecutive days a dose in excess
of 100 millirems.

Deﬁnitions and Their Purposes
99
S
N
L
12. ‘‘Neurosis’’ means a chronic emotional disturbance that arises from sup-
pressed or forgotten emotional stress (such as resentment, hostility, aggres-
sion, or guilt) experienced in early childhood.
13.
#
‘‘Scaling’’ means a sport in which people race four-wheel drive vehicles up
the face of boulder-strewn hillsides.
14. ‘‘Smoker’’ means a rude and disgusting individual who callously emits nox-
ious tobacco fumes into the air, threatening the health and comfort of every-
one in the vicinity.
15. ‘‘Diadem’’ means an ornamental headband worn as a badge of royalty; a
crown.
16.
#
‘‘Psychiatry’’ means the fortuitous melding of modern medicine with psychol-
ogy that promises relief to thousands of poor, desperate souls who suffer the
pains of emotional disorder.
17. ‘‘Gene’’ means the hereditary unit that occupies a ﬁxed chromosomal locus,
which through transcription has a speciﬁc effect on phenotype and which
can mutate to various allelic forms.
18. ‘‘Subgression’’ means moving oneself and one’s family to a subterranean
bomb shelter for the purpose of escaping nuclear attack.
19.
#
‘‘Intractable’’ means not easily governed; obstinate; unruly; not disposed to
be taught.
20. ‘‘Recession’’ means, for purposes of the National Bureau of Economic Re-
search, two consecutive quarters of negative growth in real GNP or in aggre-
gate output for the entire economy.
21. ‘‘Gravity’’ means a force that results from the universal attraction that every
particle of matter has for every other particle, and which varies directly with
the mass of the particles and inversely with the square of the distance be-
tween them.
22.
#
‘‘Assault’’ means, for legal purposes, an intentional and unprivileged act re-
sulting in the apprehension of an immediate harmful or offensive contact.
23. ‘‘Television’’ means the electronic medium that keeps an entire nation of
viewers in a state of seminarcosis by feeding them a steady stream of inane
drivel.
24. ‘‘Obelisk’’ means an upright, four-sided pillar that terminates in a pyramid; a
dagger.
25.
#
‘‘Aereomobile’’ means a vehicle that is normally driven on the ground but that
has the capability of ﬂying through the air to avoid trafﬁc congestion.
II. The following exercises involve constructing deﬁnitions:
1. Invent stipulative deﬁnitions for two new words that you wish to introduce
into the language for the ﬁrst time.

100
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
2. Construct lexical deﬁnitions for ‘‘capital’’ and ‘‘depression,’’ and indicate two
different meanings for each.
3. Construct precising deﬁnitions for ‘‘middle-aged’’ and ‘‘alcoholic.’’ Interpret
both words as relating to people and specify the purpose for which the deﬁ-
nitions are to be used.
4. Construct theoretical deﬁnitions for ‘‘energy’’ and ‘‘atom.’’
5. Construct opposing pairs of persuasive deﬁnitions for ‘‘conservative’’ and
‘‘socialism.’’
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. From the standpoint of logic, many deﬁnitions are concerned not with words
but with things.
2. The deﬁniendum is the word or term that is supposed to be deﬁned.
3. The deﬁniens is the word or group of words that assigns a meaning to the
word being deﬁned.
4. A stipulative deﬁnition is either true or false.
5. A lexical deﬁnition reports the way a word is actually used in a language.
6. One of the purposes of a lexical deﬁnition is to guard against the ambiguous
use of a word.
7. The meaning given to a word by a precising deﬁnition is completely arbitrary.
8. Theoretical deﬁnitions are either true or false, just as are lexical deﬁnitions.
9. Theoretical deﬁnitions provide a theoretical characterization of the entity or
entities denoted by the word being deﬁned.
10. The purpose of a persuasive deﬁnition is to inﬂuence attitudes.
2.4
Deﬁnitional Techniques
In the last section we presented a survey of some of the kinds of deﬁnitions actually
in use and the functions they are intended to serve. In this section we will investigate
some of the techniques used to produce these deﬁnitions. These techniques may be
classiﬁed in terms of the two kinds of meaning, intensional and extensional, discussed
in Section 2.2.
Extensional (Denotative) Deﬁnitions
An extensional deﬁnition is one that assigns a meaning to a term by indicating the
members of the class that the deﬁniendum denotes. There are at least three ways of
indicating the members of a class: pointing to them, naming them individually, and

Deﬁnitional Techniques
101
S
N
L
naming them in groups. The three kinds of deﬁnitions that result are called, respec-
tively, demonstrative or ostensive deﬁnitions, enumerative deﬁnitions, and deﬁnitions
by subclass.
Demonstrative (ostensive) deﬁnitions are probably the most primitive form of
deﬁnition. All one need know to understand such a deﬁnition is the meaning of
pointing. As the following examples illustrate, such deﬁnitions may be either partial
or complete, depending on whether all or only some of the members of the class
denoted by the deﬁniendum are pointed to:
‘‘Chair’’ means this and this and this—as you point to a number of chairs, one
after the other.
‘‘Washington Monument’’ means that—as you point to it.
If you were attempting to teach a foreigner your own native language, and neither of
you understood a word of each other’s language, demonstrative deﬁnition would
almost certainly be one of the methods you would use.
Because demonstrative deﬁnitions are the most primitive, they are also the most
limited. In addition to the limitations affecting all extensional deﬁnitions (which will
be discussed shortly), there is the obvious limitation that the required objects be
available for being pointed at. For example, if one wishes to deﬁne the word ‘‘sun’’
and it happens to be nighttime, or the word ‘‘dog’’ and none happens to be in the
vicinity, a demonstrative deﬁnition cannot be used.
Demonstrative deﬁnitions differ from the other kinds of deﬁnitions in that the deﬁn-
iens is constituted at least in part by a gesture—the gesture of pointing. Since the
deﬁniens in any deﬁnition is a group of words, however, a gesture, such as pointing,
must count as a word. While this conclusion may appear strange at ﬁrst, it is supported
by the fact that the ‘‘words’’ in many sign languages consist exclusively of gestures.
Enumerative deﬁnitions assign a meaning to a term by naming the members of
the class the term denotes. Like demonstrative deﬁnitions, they may also be either
partial or complete. Examples:
‘‘Actor’’ means a person such as Nick Nolte, Al Pacino, or Richard Gere.
‘‘Baltic state’’ means Estonia, Latvia, or Lithuania.
Complete enumerative deﬁnitions are usually more satisfying than partial ones
because they identify the deﬁniendum with greater assurance. Relatively few classes,
however, can be completely enumerated. Many classes, such as the class of real num-
bers greater than 1 but less than 2, have an inﬁnite number of members. Others, such
as the class of stars and the class of persons, while not inﬁnite, have still too many
members to enumerate. Therefore, anything approximating a complete enumerative
deﬁnition of terms denoting these classes is clearly impossible. Then thereareothers—
the class of insects and the class of trees, for example—the vast majority of whose

102
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
members have no names. For terms that denote these classes, either a demonstrative
deﬁnition or a deﬁnition by subclass is the more appropriate choice.
A deﬁnition by subclass assigns a meaning to a term by naming subclasses of the
class denoted by the term. Such a deﬁnition, too, may be either partial or complete,
depending on whether the subclasses named, when taken together, include all the
members of the class or only some of them. Examples:
‘‘Tree’’ means an oak, pine, elm, spruce, maple, and the like.
‘‘Flower’’ means a rose, lily, daisy, geranium, zinnia, and the like.
‘‘Cetacean’’ means either a whale, a dolphin, or a porpoise.
‘‘Fictional work’’ means either a poem, a play, a novel, or a short story.
The ﬁrst two are partial, the second two complete. As with deﬁnitions by enumeration,
complete deﬁnitions by subclass are more satisfying than partial ones; but because rela-
tively few terms denote classes that admit of a conveniently small number of subclasses,
complete deﬁnitions by subclass are often difﬁcult, if not impossible, to provide.
Extensional deﬁnitions are chieﬂy used as techniques for producing lexical and
stipulative deﬁnitions. Lexical deﬁnitions are aimed at communicating how a word is
actually used, and one of the ways of doing so is by identifying the members of the
class that the word denotes. Dictionaries frequently include references to the individ-
ual members (or to the subclasses) of the class denoted by the word being deﬁned.
Sometimes they even include a kind of demonstrative deﬁnition when they provide a
picture of the object that the word denotes. Not all lexical deﬁnitions have to occur in
dictionaries, however. A lexical deﬁnition can just as well be spoken, as when one
person attempts to explain orally to another how a word is used in a language. Such
attempts, incidentally, often have recourse to all three kinds of extensional deﬁnition.
Stipulative deﬁnitions are used to assign a meaning to a word for the ﬁrst time. This
task may be accomplished by all three kinds of extensional deﬁnition. For example, a
biologist engaged in naming and classifying types of ﬁsh might assign names to the
speciﬁc varieties by pointing to their respective tanks (demonstrative deﬁnition), and
then she might assign a class name to the whole group by referring to the names of
the speciﬁc varieties (deﬁnition by subclass). An astronomer might point via his tele-
scope to a newly discovered comet and announce, ‘‘That comet will henceforth be
known as ‘Henderson’s Comet’’’ (demonstrative deﬁnition). The organizer of a chil-
dren’s game might make the stipulation: ‘‘John, Mary, and Billy will be called ‘Bucca-
neers,’ and Judy, George, and Nancy will be ‘Pirates’’’ (enumerative deﬁnition).
Although it is conceivable that extensional deﬁnitions could also serve as tech-
niques for theoretical and persuasive deﬁnitions (though this would be highly unu-
sual), extensional deﬁnitions by themselves cannot properly serve as precising
deﬁnitions for the following reason. The function of a precising deﬁnition is to clarify
a vague word, and vagueness is a problem affecting intensional meaning. Because the
intension is imprecise, the extension is indeﬁnite. To attempt to render the intension

Deﬁnitional Techniques
103
S
N
L
precise by exactly specifying the extension (as with an extensional deﬁnition) would
be tantamount to having extension determine intension—which cannot be done.
The principle that intension determines extension, whereas the converse is not
true, underlies the fact that all extensional deﬁnitions suffer serious deﬁciencies. For
example, in the case of the demonstrative deﬁnition of the word ‘‘chair,’’ if all the
chairs pointed to are made of wood, observers might get the idea that ‘‘chair’’ means
‘‘wood’’ instead of something to sit on. Similarly, they might get the idea that ‘‘Wash-
ington Monument’’ means ‘‘tall’’ or ‘‘pointed’’ or any of a number of other things. From
the deﬁnition of ‘‘actor,’’ readers or listeners might think that ‘‘actor’’ means ‘‘famous
person’’—which would include Albert Einstein and Winston Churchill. From the deﬁ-
nition of ‘‘tree’’ they might get the idea that ‘‘tree’’ means ‘‘ﬁrmly planted in the
ground,’’ which would also include the pilings of a building. And they might think that
‘‘cetacean’’ means ‘‘fast swimmer’’ instead of ‘‘aquatic mammal.’’ In other words, it
makes no difference how many individuals or subclasses are named in an extensional
deﬁnition, there is no assurance that listeners or readers will get the intensional mean-
ing. Extensions can suggest intensions, but they cannot determine them.
Intensional (Connotative) Deﬁnitions
An intensional deﬁnition is one that assigns a meaning to a word by indicating the
qualities or attributes that the word connotes. Because at least four strategies may be
used to indicate the attributes a word connotes, there are at least four kinds of inten-
sional deﬁnitions: synonymous deﬁnition, etymological deﬁnition, operational deﬁni-
tion, and deﬁnition by genus and difference.
A synonymous deﬁnition is one in which the deﬁniens is a single word that
connotes the same attributes as the deﬁniendum. In other words, the deﬁniens is a
synonym of the word being deﬁned. Examples:
‘‘Physician’’ means doctor.
‘‘Intentional’’ means willful.
‘‘Voracious’’ means ravenous.
‘‘Observe’’ means see.
When a single word can be found that has the same intensional meaning as the
word being deﬁned, a synonymous deﬁnition is a highly concise way of assigning a
meaning. Many words, however, have subtle shades of meaning that are not connoted
by any other single word. For example, the word ‘‘wisdom’’ is not exactly synonymous
with either ‘‘knowledge,’’ ‘‘understanding,’’ or ‘‘sense’’; and ‘‘envious’’ is not exactly
synonymous with either ‘‘jealous’’ or ‘‘covetous.’’
An etymological deﬁnition assigns a meaning to a word by disclosing the word’s
ancestry in both its own language and other languages. Most ordinary English words
have ancestors either in old or middle English or in some other language such as

104
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
Greek, Latin, or French, and the current English meaning (as well as spelling and
pronunciation) is often closely tied to the meaning (and spelling and pronunciation)
of these ancestor words. For example, the English word ‘‘license’’ is derived from the
Latin verb licere, which means to be permitted, and the English word ‘‘captain’’derives
from the Latin noun caput which means head.
Etymological deﬁnitions have special importance for at least two reasons. The ﬁrst
is that the etymological deﬁnition of a word often conveys the word’s root meaning or
seminal meaning from which all other associated meanings are derived. Unless one is
familiar with this root meaning, one often fails to place other meanings in their proper
light or to grasp the meaning of the word when it is used in its most proper sense. For
example, the word ‘‘principle’’ derives from the Latin word principium, which means
beginning or source. Accordingly, the ‘‘principles of physics’’ are those fundamental
laws that provide the ‘‘source’’ of the science of physics. The English word ‘‘efﬁcient’’
derives from the Latin verb efﬁcere, which means to bring about. Thus, the ‘‘efﬁcient
cause’’ of something (such as the motion of a car) is the agent that actually brings that
thing about (the engine).
The second reason for the importance of etymological deﬁnitions is that if one is
familiar with the etymology of one English word, one often has access to the meaning
of an entire constellation of related words. For example, the word ‘‘orthodox’’ derives
from the two Greek words ortho, meaning right or straight, and doxa, meaning belief
or opinion. From this, one might grasp that ‘‘orthopedic’’ has to do with straight bones
(originally in children—pais in Greek means child), and that ‘‘orthodontic’’ has to do
with straight teeth (odon in Greek means tooth). Similarly, if one is familiar with the
etymological deﬁnition of ‘‘polygon’’ (from the Greek words poly, meaning many, and
ganos meaning angle), one might grasp the meanings of ‘‘polygamy’’ (from gamos,
meaning marriage) and ‘‘polygraph’’ (from graphein, meaning to write). A polygraph
is a lie detector that simultaneously records pulse rate, blood pressure, respiration,
and so on.
An operational deﬁnition assigns a meaning to a word by specifying certain
experimental procedures that determine whether or not the word applies to a certain
thing. Examples:
One substance is ‘‘harder than’’ another if and only if one scratches the other
when the two are rubbed together.
A subject has ‘‘brain activity’’ if and only if an electroencephalograph shows oscilla-
tions when attached to the subject’s head.
A ‘‘potential difference’’ exists between two conductors if and only if a voltmeter
shows a reading when connected to the two conductors.
A solution is an ‘‘acid’’ if and only if litmus paper turns red when dipped into it.
Each of these deﬁnitions prescribes an operation to be performed. The ﬁrst prescribes
that the two substances in question be rubbed together, the second that the electro-

Deﬁnitional Techniques
105
S
N
L
encephalograph be connected to the patient’s head and observed for oscillations, the
third that the voltmeter be connected to the two conductors and observed for deﬂec-
tion, and the fourth that the litmus paper be placed in the solution and observed for
color change. Unless it speciﬁes such an operation, a deﬁnition cannot be an opera-
tional deﬁnition. For example, the deﬁnition ‘‘A solution is an ‘acid’ if and only if it has
a pH of less than 7,’’ while good in other respects, is not an operational deﬁnition
because it prescribes no operation.
Operational deﬁnitions were invented for the purpose of tying down relatively
abstract concepts to the solid ground of empirical reality. In this they succeed fairly
well; yet, from the standpoint of ordinary language usage, they involve certain deﬁ-
ciencies. One of these deﬁciencies concerns the fact that operational deﬁnitions
usually convey only part of the intensional meaning of a term. Certainly ‘‘brain activ-
ity’’ means more than oscillations on an electroencephalograph, just as ‘‘acid’’ means
more than blue litmus paper turning red. This deﬁciency becomes more acute when
one attempts to apply operational deﬁnitions to terms outside the framework of sci-
ence. For example, no adequate operational deﬁnition could be given for such words
as ‘‘love,’’ ‘‘respect,’’ ‘‘freedom,’’ and ‘‘dignity.’’ Within their proper sphere, however,
operational deﬁnitions are quite useful and important. It is interesting to note that
Einstein developed his special theory of relativity in partial response to the need for
an operational deﬁnition of simultaneity.
A deﬁnition by genus and difference assigns a meaning to a term by identifying
a genus term and one or more difference words that, when combined, convey the
meaning of the term being deﬁned. Deﬁnition by genus and difference is more gen-
erally applicable and achieves more adequate results than any of the other kinds of
intensional deﬁnition. To explain how it works, we must ﬁrst explain the meanings of
the terms ‘‘genus,’’ ‘‘species,’’ and ‘‘speciﬁc difference.’’
In logic, ‘‘genus’’ and ‘‘species’’ have a somewhat different meaning than they have
in biology. In logic, ‘‘genus’’ simply means a relatively larger class, and ‘‘species’’
means a relatively smaller subclass of the genus. For example, we may speak of the
genus animal and the species mammal, or of the genus mammal and the species feline,
or of the genus feline and the species tiger, or the genus tiger and the species Bengal
tiger. In other words, genus and species are merely relative classiﬁcations.
The ‘‘speciﬁc difference,’’ or ‘‘difference,’’ for short, is the attribute or attributes that
distinguish the various species within a genus. For example, the speciﬁc difference that
distinguishes tigers from other species in the genus feline would include the attributes
of being large, striped, ferocious, and so on. Because the speciﬁc difference is what
distinguishes the species, when a genus is qualiﬁed by a speciﬁc difference, a species is
identiﬁed. Deﬁnition by genus and difference is based on this fact. It consists of combin-
ing a term denoting a genus with a word or group of words connoting a speciﬁc dif-
ference so that the combination identiﬁes the meaning of the term denoting the species.
Let us construct a deﬁnition by genus and difference for the word ‘‘ice.’’ The ﬁrst
step is to identify a genus of which ice is the species. The required genus is water.

106
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
Next we must identify a speciﬁc difference (attribute) that makes ice a special form of
water. The required difference is frozen. The completed deﬁnition may now be writ-
ten out:
Species
Difference
Genus
‘‘Ice’’
means
frozen
water.
A deﬁnition by genus and difference is easy to construct. Simply select a term that
is more general than the term to be deﬁned, then narrow it down so that it means the
same thing as the term being deﬁned. Examples:
Species
Difference
Genus
‘‘Daughter’’
‘‘Husband’’
‘‘Doe’’
‘‘Fawn’’
‘‘Skyscraper’’
means
means
means
means
means
female
married
female
very young
very tall
offspring.
man.
deer.
deer.
building.
Other examples are more sophisticated:
‘‘Tent’’ means a collapsible shelter made of canvas or other material that is
stretched and sustained by poles.
‘‘Tent’’ is the species, ‘‘shelter’’ is the genus, and ‘‘collapsible’’ and ‘‘made of canvas . . .’’
the difference.
Deﬁnition by genus and difference is the most effective of the intensional deﬁni-
tions for producing the ﬁve kinds of deﬁnition discussed in Section 2.3. Stipulative,
lexical, precising, theoretical, and persuasive deﬁnitions can all be constructed accord-
ing to the method of genus and difference. Lexical deﬁnitions are typically deﬁnitions
by genus and difference, but they also often include etymological deﬁnitions. Opera-
tional deﬁnition can serve as the method for constructing stipulative, lexical, precising,
and persuasive deﬁnitions, but because of the limitations we have noted, it typically
could not be used to produce a complete lexical deﬁnition. Other techniques would
have to be used in addition. Synonymous deﬁnition may be used to produce only
lexical deﬁnitions. Since, in a synonymous deﬁnition, the deﬁniendum must have a
meaning before a synonym can be found, this technique cannot be used to produce
stipulative deﬁnitions, and the fact that the deﬁniens of such a deﬁnition contains no
more information than the deﬁniendum prohibits its use in constructing precising,
theoretical, and persuasive deﬁnitions.
This account of deﬁnitions is inevitably incomplete. At the beginning of the chapter
we mentioned that all words—not just terms—stand in need of deﬁnitions, but the
account given here is based on the intension and extension of terms. Nevertheless,
many of the techniques developed here can be applied to words in general, and even
to symbols. For example, in Chapters 6 and 8 we will present deﬁnitions of various

Deﬁnitional Techniques
107
S
N
L
symbols that are used in modern logic to connect one statement with another and to
translate ordinary language statements into symbolic form. When these symbols were
introduced many years ago, it was accomplished through stipulative deﬁnitions. Also,
as we will see in Chapter 6, some of these symbols are deﬁned by certain tables, called
‘‘truth tables,’’ which establish each symbol’s meaning under all possible arrangements
of truth values. These deﬁnitions are probably best described as extensional, and they
are similar in some ways to demonstrative deﬁnitions and enumerative deﬁnitions.
EXERCISE 2.4
I. Determine whether the following are demonstrative deﬁnitions, enumerative def-
initions, deﬁnitions by subclass, synonymous deﬁnitions, etymological deﬁni-
tions, operational deﬁnitions, or deﬁnitions by genus and difference.
1.
#
‘‘Plant’’ means something such as a tree, a ﬂower, a vine, or a cactus.
2. ‘‘Hammer’’ means a tool used for pounding.
3. A triangle is ‘‘equilateral’’ if and only if a compass, when placed sequentially
on two vertices and properly adjusted, strikes through the other two vertices.
4.
#
‘‘State’’ means something such as Ohio, Arkansas, Minnesota, and Tennessee.
5. ‘‘Angel’’ is a word that originates from the Greek word angelos, which means
messenger.
6. ‘‘Neophyte’’ means beginner.
7.
#
‘‘House’’ means this:
8. ‘‘Painting’’ means something like da Vinci’s Mona Lisa, van Gogh’s Starry
Night, Botticelli’s Birth of Venus, or Rembrandt’s Night Watch.
9. ‘‘Dessert’’ means something such as pie, cake, cookies, or ice cream sundaes.
10.
#
‘‘Hot’’ means, for an electric iron, that your wetted ﬁnger sizzles when placed
momentarily in contact with it.
11. ‘‘Universe’’ originates from the Latin word universus, which means whole or
entire.
12. ‘‘Mountain’’ means something such as Everest, Rainier, Whitney, or McKinley.
13.
#
‘‘Hurricane’’ means a storm having winds of at least 73 miles per hour that
originates at sea.
14. A substance is ‘‘translucent’’ if and only if when held up to a strong light some
of the light comes through.
15. ‘‘Insect’’ means something such as a ﬂy, an ant, a wasp, or a caterpillar.
16.
#
‘‘Poignant’’ is a word derived from the Latin word pungere, which means to
prick, pierce, or sting.

108
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
17. ‘‘Facade’’ means face.
18. ‘‘Prime number’’ means a number greater than one that is divisible only by
itself and one.
19.
#
‘‘Language means something such as French, German, Spanish, English, and
so on.
20. ‘‘Tree’’ means this, and this, and this (as you point to a number of trees).
21. ‘‘Oak’’ means a tree that bears acorns.
22.
#
‘‘Rapier’’ means sword.
23. An ‘‘electric current’’ ﬂows in a circuit if and only if an ammeter connected in
series with the circuit shows a reading.
24. ‘‘Philosopher’’ means someone such as Plato, Aristotle, Descartes, or Kant.
25.
#
‘‘Professional person’’ means a person such as a doctor, a lawyer, a professor,
or an architect.
26. ‘‘Error’’ means mistake.
27. ‘‘Tale’’ is a word that derives from the Old English word talu, which means talk.
28.
#
‘‘Truck’’ means a vehicle used for hauling.
29. ‘‘Done’’ means, in reference to a baking cake, that a wooden toothpick poked
into the center comes out clean.
30. ‘‘Musical composition’’ means something such as a symphony, a concerto, a
sonata, or a toccata.
II. The following exercises involve constructing deﬁnitions.
1. Construct a partial enumerative deﬁnition for the following terms by naming
three members of the class the term denotes. Then ﬁnd a nonsynonymous
term that these members serve equally well to deﬁne. Example: ‘‘Poet’’ means
a person such as Wordsworth, Coleridge, or Shelley. A nonsynonymous term
is ‘‘Englishman.’’
a.
#
skyscraper
b. corporation
c. island
d. composer
e. novel
2. Construct a complete enumerative deﬁnition for the following terms:
a. ocean
b. continent
3. Construct a deﬁnition by subclass for the following terms by naming three
subclasses of the class the term denotes. Then ﬁnd a nonsynonymous term
that these subclasses serve equally well to deﬁne.

Deﬁnitional Techniques
109
S
N
L
a.
#
animal
b. ﬁsh
c. vehicle
d. gemstone
e. polygon
4. Construct a complete deﬁnition by subclass for the following terms:
a. quadrilateral
b. circulating American coin
5. Construct synonymous deﬁnitions for the following terms:
a.
#
intersection
b. fabric
c. nucleus
d. abode
e. wedlock
f. cellar
g. summit
h. apparel
6. Construct operational deﬁnitions for the following words:
a.
#
genius
b. ferromagnetic
c. ﬂuorescent
d. alkaline
e. polarized (light)
7. Construct deﬁnitions by genus and difference for the following terms. In each
deﬁnition identify the genus term.
a.
#
drake
b. biologist
c. felony
d. widow
e. library
8. Consult a dictionary to ﬁnd the etymological roots of the following words,
and then explain how they relate to the conventional meaning of these words.
a.
#
morphology
b. isomorphic
c. isotropic

110
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
d. phototropic
e. photography
f. lithography
g. lithology
h. psychology
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. The technique of extensional deﬁnition may be used to produce precising
deﬁnitions.
2. The technique of extensional deﬁnition may be used to produce stipulative
and lexical deﬁnitions.
3. Most extensional deﬁnitions convey the precise intensional meaning of a
term.
4. An intensional deﬁnition conveys the meaning of a term by indicating the
members of the class the term denotes.
5. In a synonymous deﬁnition the deﬁniens must be a single word.
6. The technique of synonymous deﬁnition may be used to construct precising
deﬁnitions.
7. Operational deﬁnitions typically convey the entire intensional meaning of a
word.
8. The species is a subclass of the genus.
9. The speciﬁc difference is an attribute or set of attributes that identiﬁes a
species.
10. Deﬁnition by genus and difference may be used to produce stipulative, lexi-
cal, precising, theoretical, and persuasive deﬁnitions.
2.5
Criteria for Lexical Deﬁnitions
Because the function of a lexical deﬁnition is to report the way a word is actually used
in a language, lexical deﬁnitions are the ones we most frequently encounter and are
what most people mean when they speak of the ‘‘deﬁnition’’ of a word. Accordingly,
it is appropriate that we have a set of rules that we may use in constructing lexical
deﬁnitions of our own and in evaluating the lexical deﬁnitions of others. While some
of these rules apply to the other kinds of deﬁnitions as well, the unique functions that
are served by stipulative, precising, theoretical, and persuasive deﬁnitions prescribe
different sets of criteria.

Criteria for Lexical Deﬁnitions
111
S
N
L
Rule 1: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Conform
to the Standards of Proper Grammar
A deﬁnition, like any other form of expression, should be grammatically correct. Ex-
amples of deﬁnitions that are grammatically incorrect are as follows:
Vacation is when you don’t have to go to work or school.
Furious means if you’re angry at someone.
Cardiac is like something to do with the heart.
The corrected versions are:
‘‘Vacation’’ means a period during which activity is suspended from work or school.
‘‘Furious’’ means a condition of being angry.
‘‘Cardiac’’ means pertaining to, situated near, or acting on the heart.
Technically the deﬁniendum should be put in quotation marks or italics, but this
convention is not always followed.
Rule 2: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Convey
the Essential Meaning of the Word Being Deﬁned
The word ‘‘human’’ is occasionally deﬁned as featherless biped. Such a deﬁnition fails
to convey the essential meaning of ‘‘human’’ as the word is used in ordinary English.
It says nothing about the important attributes that distinguish humans from the other
animals, namely, the capacity to reason and to use language on a sophisticated level.
A more adequate deﬁnition would be ‘‘‘human’ means the animal that has the capacity
to reason and to speak.’’
If a lexical deﬁnition is to be given in terms of an operational deﬁnition or in terms
of any of the forms of extensional deﬁnition, it should usually be supplemented by
one of the other forms of intensional deﬁnition, preferably deﬁnition by genus and
difference. As we have noted, from the standpoint of ordinary language usage an
operational deﬁnition often conveys only part of the intensional meaning of a word,
and this part frequently misses the essential meaning altogether. As for extensional
deﬁnitions, at best they can only suggest the essential meaning of a word; they cannot
determine it precisely. As a result, no adequate lexical deﬁnition can consist exclu-
sively of extensional deﬁnitions.
Rule 3: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Be
Neither Too Broad nor Too Narrow
If a deﬁnition is too broad, the deﬁniens includes too much; if it is too narrow, the
deﬁniens includes too little. If, for example, ‘‘bird’’ were deﬁned as any warm-blooded
animal having wings, the deﬁnition would be too broad because it would include
bats, and bats are not birds. If, on the other hand, ‘‘bird’’ were deﬁned as any

112
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
warm-blooded, feathered animal that can ﬂy, the deﬁnition would be too narrow
because it would exclude ostriches, which cannot ﬂy.
The only types of lexical deﬁnitions that tend to be susceptible to either of these
deﬁciencies are synonymous deﬁnitions and deﬁnitions by genus and difference. With
synonymous deﬁnitions, one must be careful that the deﬁniens really is a synonym of
the deﬁniendum. For example, the deﬁnition ‘‘‘king’ means ruler’’ is too broad because
many rulers are not kings. ‘‘Ruler’’ is not genuinely synonymous with ‘‘king.’’ As for
deﬁnitions by genus and difference, one must ensure that the speciﬁc difference nar-
rows the genus in exactly the right way. Both of the above deﬁnitions of ‘‘bird’’ are
deﬁnitions by genus and difference in which the speciﬁc difference fails to restrict the
genus in exactly the right manner.
Rule 4: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Avoid Circularity
Sometimes the problem of circularity appears in connection with pairs of deﬁnitions.
The following pair is circular:
‘‘Science’’ means the activity engaged in by scientists.
‘‘Scientist’’ means anyone who engages in science.
At other times a deﬁnition may be intrinsically circular. Of the following, the ﬁrst is a
synonymous deﬁnition, the second a deﬁnition by genus and difference:
‘‘Quiet’’ means quietude.
‘‘Silence’’ means the state of being silent.
Certain operational deﬁnitions also run the risk of circularity:
‘‘Time’’ means whatever is measured by a clock.
Surely a person would have to know what ‘‘time’’ means before he or she could
understand the purpose of a clock.
Rule 5: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Not Be Negative
When It Can Be Afﬁrmative
Of the following two deﬁnitions, the ﬁrst is afﬁrmative, the second negative:
‘‘Concord’’ means harmony.
‘‘Concord’’ means the absence of discord.
Some words, however, are intrinsically negative. For them, a negative deﬁnition is
quite appropriate. Examples:
‘‘Bald’’ means lacking hair.
‘‘Darkness’’ means the absence of light.

Criteria for Lexical Deﬁnitions
113
S
N
L
Rule 6: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Avoid Figurative,
Obscure, Vague, or Ambiguous Language
A deﬁnition is ﬁgurative if it involves metaphors or tends to paint a picture instead of
exposing the essential meaning of a term. Examples:
‘‘Architecture’’ means frozen music.
‘‘Camel’’ means a ship of the desert.
A deﬁnition is obscure if its meaning is hidden as a result of defective or inappro-
priate language. One source of obscurity is overly technical language. Compare these
two deﬁnitions:
‘‘Bunny’’ means a mammalian of the family Leporidae of the order Lagomorpha
whose young are born furless and blind.
‘‘Bunny’’ means a rabbit.
The problem lies not with technical language as such but with needlessly technical
language. Because ‘‘bunny’’ is very much a nontechnical term, no technical deﬁnition
is needed. On the other hand, some words are intrinsically technical, and for them
only a technical deﬁnition will sufﬁce. Example:
‘‘Neutrino’’ means a quasi-massless lepton obeying Fermi-Dirac statistics and hav-
ing one-half quantum unit of spin.
A deﬁnition is vague if it lacks precision or if its meaning is blurred—that is, if there
is no way of telling exactly what class of things the deﬁniens refers to. Example:
‘‘Democracy’’ means a kind of government where the people are in control.
This deﬁnition fails to identify the people who are in control, how they exercise their
control, and what they are in control of.
A deﬁnition is ambiguous if it lends itself to more than one distinct interpretation.
Example:
‘‘Triangle’’ means a ﬁgure composed of three straight lines in which all the angles
are equal to 180.
Does this mean that each angle separately is equal to 180 or that the angles taken
together are equal to 180? Either interpretation is possible given the ambiguousmean-
ing of ‘‘all the angles are equal to 180.’’
Rule 7: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Avoid Affective Terminology
Affective terminology is any kind of word usage that plays upon the emotions of the
reader or listener. It includes sarcastic and facetious language and any other kind of
language that is liable to inﬂuence attitudes. Examples:

114
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
‘‘Communism’’ means that ‘‘brilliant’’ invention of Karl Marx and other foolish po-
litical visionaries in which the national wealth is supposed to be held in
common by the people.
‘‘Theism’’ means belief in that great Santa Claus in the sky.
The second example also violates Rule 5 because it contains a metaphor.
Rule 8: A Lexical Deﬁnition Should Indicate the Context to Which
the Deﬁniens Pertains
This rule applies to any deﬁnition in which the context of the deﬁniens is important to
the meaning of the deﬁniendum. For example, the deﬁnition ‘‘‘Deuce’ means a tie in
points toward a game or in games toward a set’’ is practically meaningless without any
reference to tennis. Whenever the deﬁniendum is a word that means different things
in different contexts, a reference to the context is important. Examples:
‘‘Strike’’ means (in baseball) a pitch at which a batter swings and misses.
‘‘Strike’’ means (in bowling) the act of knocking down all the pins with the ﬁrst ball
of a frame.
‘‘Strike’’ means (in ﬁshing) a pull on a line made by a ﬁsh in taking the bait.
It is not always necessary to make explicit reference to the context, but at least the
phraseology of the deﬁniens should indicate the context.
EXERCISE 2.5
Criticize the following deﬁnitions in light of the eight rules for lexical deﬁnitions:
1.
#
A sculpture is a three-dimensional image made of marble.
2. ‘‘Elusory’’ means elusive.
3. ‘‘Develop’’ means to transform by the action of chemicals.
4.
#
A cynic is a person who knows the price of everything and the value of
nothing.
(Oscar Wilde)
5. ‘‘Semantics’’ is when somebody studies words.
6. A dustbuster is a hand-held, battery-powered device made of plastic that
produces a buzzing sound when the switch is actuated.
7.
#
A theist is anyone who is not an atheist or an agnostic.
8. ‘‘Intelligence’’ means whatever is measured by an IQ test.
9. A symphony is a musical piece written for full orchestra.
10.
#
Feminism is a militant movement originated by a group of deviant women for
the purpose of undermining the natural distinction between the sexes.

Criteria for Lexical Deﬁnitions
115
S
N
L
11. A radio is an electronic device consisting of an antenna, variable-frequency
oscillator, and mixer circuitry operating in conjunction with RF, IF, and AF
ampliﬁcation stages, the last of which feeds an AF transducer.
12. Logic is the study of arguments including deﬁnitions.
13.
#
‘‘Truculent’’ is if you’re cruel or ﬁerce.
14. A house is a structure made of wood or stone intended for human habitation.
15. Satire is a kind of glass, wherein beholders do generally discover everybody’s
face but their own.
( Jonathan Swift)
16.
#
A carpenter’s square is a square used by a carpenter.
17. ‘‘Safety’’ means a play in which a player grounds the ball behind his own goal
line when the ball was caused to cross the goal line by his own team.
18. Puberty: the time in life in which the two sexes begin ﬁrst to be acquainted.
( Johnson’s Dictionary)
19.
#
‘‘Normal’’ means an attribute possessed by people who are able to get on in
the world.
20. An organic substance is any substance that is not inorganic.
21. Faith is the bird that sings when the dawn is still dark.
(Rabindranath Tagore)
22.
#
‘‘Schooner’’ means sort of like a sailboat.
23. ‘‘Faith’’ means reason succumbing to insecurity.
24. ‘‘Gammon’’ means, in backgammon, a victory in which one player defeats
another before he can remove any of his men from the board.
25.
#
A cello is a stringed musical instrument played with a bow.
26. Tobacco is a plant grown in the southeastern United States that, when enjoyed
in the form of cigars and cigarettes, produces a most delightful and satisfying
taste and aroma.
27. History is the unfolding of miscalculations.
(Barbara Tuchman)
28.
#
‘‘Camera’’ means a device for taking photographs.
29. ‘‘Photograph’’ means an image produced by the combined action of electro-
magnetic radiation in the range of 4000 to 7000 Angstroms and certain organic
reducing agents such as diaminophenol hydrochloride on silver halide parti-
cles afﬁxed to a backing material of high alpha cellulose content.
30. Mackerel: a sea-ﬁsh.
( Johnson’s Dictionary)
31.
#
‘‘Anchor person’’ means an electronic media guru who has great looks but
less than average intelligence and who brings canned news to people inca-
pable of reading a newspaper.

116
Chapter 2: Language: Meaning and Deﬁnition
32. ‘‘Diet’’ means like when you cut back on your calories.
33. Animal: a living creature corporeal, distinct, on the one side, from pure spirit,
on the other, from pure matter.
( Johnson’s Dictionary)
34.
#
‘‘Pen’’ means an instrument used for writing on paper.
35. Wine is an alcoholic beverage made from grapes.
Summary
Terminology that conveys information is said to have cognitive meaning, and termi-
nology that expresses or evokes feelings is said to have emotive meaning. Statements
expressed in emotive terminology often make value claims; when these statements
occur in arguments, it is appropriate to disengage the value claims from the emotive
language and express them as separate premises. Two ways in which cognitive mean-
ings can be defective are vagueness and ambiguity. Vagueness involves a blur of
meaning, whereas ambiguity involves a mix-up of otherwise clear meanings.
A term is a word or group of words that can serve as the subject of a statement. All
terms have intensional meaning (intension or connotation), and those terms that refer
to actually existing things also have extensional meaning (extension or denotation).
The intensional meaning of a term consists of the attributes that the term connotes,
and the extensional meaning consists of the members of the class that the term de-
notes. Terms that refer to nonexistent things are said to have empty extension.
A deﬁnition is a group of words that assigns a meaning to a word or group of
words. The deﬁniendum is the word or group of words being deﬁned, and the deﬁni-
ens is the word or group of words that does the deﬁning. Because deﬁnitions can
serve different purposes, there are different kinds of deﬁnitions. Stipulativedeﬁnitions
assign a meaning to a word when it ﬁrst comes into use, lexical deﬁnitions report the
meaning that a word already has within a given linguistic community, precising deﬁ-
nitions reduce the vagueness of a word, theoretical deﬁnitions suggest a theory that
gives a certain characterization to the entities that the term denotes, and persuasive
deﬁnitions are used to inﬂuence the attitude of people in the community toward the
things the word denotes.
The two kinds of meaning that words have, intensional and extensional, can be
used as the basis for producing deﬁnitions. Extensional deﬁnitions assign a meaning
to a word by identifying the things that the word denotes, and intensional deﬁnitions
accomplish the same purpose by identifying the attributes that the word connotes.
Among the extensional deﬁnitions, demonstrative deﬁnitions ‘‘point’’ to the things
in question, enumerative deﬁnitions name various individuals in the class, and deﬁni-
tions by subclass identify subclasses of those things. Among the intensional deﬁni-
tions, synonymous deﬁnitions equate the word being deﬁned with another word that

Criteria for Lexical Deﬁnitions
117
S
N
L
connotes the same attributes, etymological deﬁnitions disclose the word’s ancestry,
operational deﬁnitions specify experimental procedures for determining whether the
word applies to a certain thing, and deﬁnitions by genus and difference identify a
larger class of things and then narrow it down so that it matches the class that the word
refers to.
There are rules that govern the construction of lexical deﬁnitions. Such deﬁnitions
should conform to grammatical standards, convey the essential meaning of the word
being deﬁned, be neither too broad nor too narrow, avoid circularity, avoid negative,
ﬁgurative, obscure, vague, ambiguous, and affective language, and indicate the con-
text to which the deﬁniniens pertains.

             
3
Informal Fallacies
3.1
Fallacies in General
A fallacy is a defect in an argument that consists in something other than merely false
premises. As we will see, fallacies can be committed in many ways, but usually they
involve either a mistake in reasoning or the creation of some illusion that makes a bad
argument appear good (or both). Both deductive and inductive arguments may con-
tain fallacies; if they do, they are either unsound or uncogent, depending on the kind
of argument. Conversely, if an argument is unsound or uncogent, it has one or more
false premises or it contains a fallacy (or both).
Fallacies are usually divided into two groups: formal and informal. A formal fal-
lacy is one that may be identiﬁed through mere inspection of the form or structure of
an argument. Fallacies of this kind are found only in deductive arguments that have
identiﬁable forms. Chapter 1 presented some of these forms: categorical syllogisms,
disjunctive syllogisms, and hypothetical syllogisms. The following categorical syllo-
gism contains a formal fallacy:
All bullﬁghts are grotesque rituals.
All executions are grotesque rituals.
Therefore, all bullﬁghts are executions.
This argument has the following form:
All A are B.
All C are B.
All A are C.
Through mere inspection of this form, one can see that the argument is invalid. The
fact that A, B, and C stand respectively for ‘‘bullﬁghts,’’ ‘‘grotesque rituals,’’ and ‘‘exe-
cutions’’ is irrelevant in detecting the fallacy. The problem may be traced to the second
premise. If the letters C and B are interchanged, the form becomes valid, and the
original argument, with the same change introduced, also becomes valid (but unsound).
Here is an example of a formal fallacy that occurs in a hypothetical syllogism:

Fallacies in General
119
S
N
L
If apes are intelligent, then apes can solve puzzles.
Apes can solve puzzles.
Therefore, apes are intelligent.
This argument has the following form:
If A then B.
B.
A.
In this case, if A and B are interchanged in the ﬁrst premise, the form becomes valid,
and the original argument, with the same change, also becomes valid. This fallacy and
the one that precedes it will be discussed in later chapters.
In distinguishing formal from informal fallacies, remember that formal fallacies
occur only in deductive arguments. Thus, if a given argument is inductive, it cannot
contain a formal fallacy. Also, keep an eye out for standard deductive argument forms
such as categorical syllogisms and hypothetical syllogisms. If such an argument is
invalid because of an improper arrangement of terms or statements, it commits a
formal fallacy. Section 1.5 investigated some of these forms and gave instruction on
distinguishing the form from the content of an argument. All of the exercises at the
end of that section commit formal fallacies.
Informal fallacies are those that can be detected only through analysis of the
content of the argument. Consider the following example:
All factories are plants.
All plants are things that contain chlorophyll.
Therefore, all factories are things that contain chlorophyll.
A cursory inspection of this argument might lead one to think that it has the follow-
ing form:
All A are B.
All B are C.
All A are C.
Since this form is valid, one might conclude that the argument itself is valid. Yet the
argument is clearly invalid because it has true premises and a false conclusion. An
analysis of the content—that is, the meaning of the words—reveals the source of the
trouble. The word ‘‘plants’’ is used in two different senses. In the ﬁrst premise it means
a building where something is manufactured, and in the second it means a life form.
Thus, the argument really has the following invalid form:
All A are B.
All C are D.
All A are D.

120
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
The various informal fallacies accomplish their purpose in so many different ways
that no single umbrella theory covers them all. Some fallacies work by getting the
reader or listener to feel various emotions, such as fear, pity, or camaraderie, and then
attaching a certain conclusion to those emotions. Others attempt to discredit an op-
posing argument by associating it with certain pejorative features of its author. And
then there are those that appeal to various dispositions on the part of the reader or
listener, such as superstition or mental laziness, to get him or her to accept a conclu-
sion. By studying the typical ways in which arguers apply these techniques, one is less
likely to be fooled by the fallacious arguments posed by others and is less likely to
stumble blindly into fallacies when constructing arguments for one’s own use.
Since the time of Aristotle, logicians have attempted to classify the various informal
fallacies. Aristotle himself identiﬁed thirteen and separated them into two groups. The
work of subsequent logicians has produced dozens more, rendering the task of clas-
sifying them even more difﬁcult. The presentation that follows divides twenty-two
informal fallacies into ﬁve groups: fallacies of relevance, fallacies of weak induction,
fallacies of presumption, fallacies of ambiguity, and fallacies of grammatical analogy.
The ﬁnal section of the chapter considers the related topics of detecting and avoiding
fallacies in the context of ordinary language.
EXERCISE 3.1
Determine whether the fallacies committed by the following arguments are formal
fallacies or informal fallacies.
1.
#
If Rasputin was really mad, then he deceived Czar Nicholas II. Rasputin was
not really mad. Therefore, he did not deceive Czar Nicholas II.
2. Everything that runs has feet. The Columbia River runs very swiftly.Therefore,
the Columbia River has feet.
3. All persons who believe we create our own reality are persons who lack
social responsibility. All persons governed by selﬁsh motives are persons who
lack social responsibility. Therefore, all persons who believe we create our
own reality are persons governed by selﬁsh motives.
4.
#
The ship of state is like a ship at sea. No sailor is ever allowed to protest
orders from the captain. For the same reason, no citizen should ever be
allowed to protest presidential policies.
5. Renowned violinist Pinchas Zukerman has said, ‘‘When it comes to vodka,
Smirnoff plays second ﬁddle to none.’’ We must therefore conclude that Smir-
noff is the best vodka available.
6. If the Chinese government systematically kills its unwanted orphans, then the
Chinese government is immoral. The Chinese government is indeed immoral.
Therefore, the Chinese government systematically kills its unwanted orphans.

Fallacies of Relevance
121
S
N
L
7.
#
Barbra Streisand, Paul Newman, and Julia Roberts are Democrats. Therefore,
it must be the case that all Hollywood stars are Democrats.
8. Rush Limbaugh has argued at length on radio and television that President
Clinton is doing a rotten job with the economy. Unfortunately, Limbaugh is
an ultra-right-wing fascist lunatic who has no knowledge of economics.
Therefore, we should dismiss his arguments forthright.
9. If plastic guns are sold to the public, then terrorists will carry them aboard
airliners undetected. If plastic guns are sold to the public, then airline hijack-
ings will increase. Therefore, if terrorists carry plastic guns aboard airliners
undetected, then airline hijackings will increase.
10.
#
Some corporate mergers are arrangements that produce layoffs. Some ar-
rangements that produce layoffs are occasions of economic unrest.Therefore,
some corporate mergers are occasions of economic unrest.
3.2
Fallacies of Relevance
The fallacies of relevance share the common characteristic that the arguments in
which they occur have premises that are logically irrelevant to the conclusion. Yet the
premises are relevant psychologically, so the conclusion may seem to follow from the
premises, even though it does not follow logically. In a good argument the premises
provide genuine evidence in support of the conclusion. In an argument that commits
a fallacy of relevance, on the other hand, the connection between premises and con-
clusion is emotional. To identify a fallacy of relevance, therefore, one must be able to
distinguish genuine evidence from various forms of emotional appeal.
1. Appeal to Force (Argumentum ad Baculum:
Appeal to the ‘‘Stick’’)
The fallacy of appeal to force occurs whenever an arguer poses a conclusion to
another person and tells that person either implicitly or explicitly that some harm will
come to him or her if he or she does not accept the conclusion. The fallacy always
involves a threat by the arguer to the physical or psychological well-being of the
listener or reader, who may be either a single person or a group of persons. Obviously,
such a threat is logically irrelevant to the subject matter of the conclusion, so any
argument based on such a procedure is fallacious. The ad baculum fallacy often
occurs when children argue with one another:
Child to playmate: ‘‘Teletubbies’’ is the best show on TV; and if you don’t believe it,
I’m going to call my big brother over here and he’s going to beat you up.

122
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Conclusion
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to force
Threatens
Poses
A
But it occurs among adults as well:
Secretary to boss: I deserve a raise in salary for the coming year. After all, you
know how friendly I am with your wife, and I’m sure you wouldn’t want her to
ﬁnd out what’s been going on between you and that sexpot client of yours.
The ﬁrst example involves a physical threat, the second a psychological threat. While
neither threat provides any genuine evidence that the conclusion is true, both provide
evidence that someone might be injured. If the two types of evidence are confused
with each other, both arguer and listener may be deluded into thinking that the con-
clusion is supported by evidence, when in fact it is not.
The appeal to force fallacy usually accomplishes its purpose by psychologically
impeding the reader or listener from acknowledging a missing premise that, if ac-
knowledged, would be seen to be false or at least questionable. The two examples
just given can be interpreted as concealing the following premises, both of which are
most likely false:
If my brother forces you to admit that ‘‘Teletubbies’’ is the best show on TV, then
‘‘Teletubbies’’ is in fact the best show.
If I succeed in threatening you, then I deserve a raise in salary.
The conclusion of the ﬁrst argument is that ‘‘Teletubbies’’ is the best show on TV.
But just because someone is forced into saying that it is does not mean that such is the
case. Similarly, the conclusion of the second argument is that the secretary deserves a
raise in salary. But if the boss is threatened into raising the secretary’s salary, this does
not mean that the secretary deserves a raise. Many of the other informal fallacies can
be interpreted as accomplishing their purpose in this way.
2. Appeal to Pity
(Argumentum ad Misericordiam)
The appeal to pity fallacy occurs when an arguer attempts to support a conclusion
by merely evoking pity from the reader or listener. This pity may be directed toward
the arguer or toward some third party. Example:

Fallacies of Relevance
123
S
N
L
Conclusion
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to pity
Poses
A
Evokes
pity
Taxpayer to judge: Your Honor, I admit that I declared thirteen children as depen-
dents on my tax return, even though I have only two. But if you ﬁnd me guilty
of tax evasion, my reputation will be ruined. I’ll probably lose my job, my poor
wife will not be able to have the operation that she desperately needs, and my
kids will starve. Surely I am not guilty.
The conclusion of this argument is ‘‘Surely I am not guilty.’’ Obviously, the conclusion
is not logically relevant to the arguer’s set of pathetic circumstances, although it is
psychologically relevant. If the arguer succeeds in evoking pity from the listener or
reader, the latter is likely to exercise his or her desire to help the arguer by accepting
the argument. In this way the reader or listener may be fooled into accepting a conclu-
sion that is not supported by any evidence. The appeal to pity is quite common and is
often used by students on their instructors at exam time and by lawyers on behalf of
their clients before judges and juries.
Of course, some arguments that attempt to evoke sympathetic feelings from the
reader or listener are not fallacious. We might call them arguments from compassion.
Such arguments differ from the fallacious appeal to pity in that, in addition to evoking
compassion on behalf of some person, they supply information about why that person
is genuinely deserving of help or special consideration. Whenever possible these
nonfallacious arguments should show that the person in question is a victim of circum-
stances and not responsible for the dire straights he ﬁnds himself in, that the recom-
mended help or special consideration is not illegal or inappropriate, and that it will
genuinely help the person in question. In contrast to such arguments, the appeal to
pity proceeds by ignoring all of these considerations and attempts to support a conclu-
sion by merely evoking pity from the reader or listener.
3. Appeal to the People
(Argumentum ad Populum)
Nearly everyone wants to be loved, esteemed, admired, valued, recognized, and ac-
cepted by others. The appeal to the people uses these desires to get the reader or
listener to accept a conclusion. Two approaches are involved, one of them direct, the
other indirect.

124
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
The direct approach occurs when an arguer, addressing a large group of people,
excites the emotions and enthusiasm of the crowd to win acceptance for his or her
conclusion. The objective is to arouse a kind of mob mentality. This is the strategy
used by nearly every propagandist and demagogue. Adolf Hitler was a master of the
technique, but it is also used with some measure of success by speechmakers at
Democratic and Republican national conventions. Waving ﬂags and blaring music add
to the overall effect. Because the individuals in the audience want to share in the
camaraderie, the euphoria, and the excitement, they ﬁnd themselves accepting any
number of conclusions with ever-increasing fervor.
The direct approach is not limited to oral argumentation, of course; a similar effect
can be accomplished in writing. By using such emotionally charged phraseology as
‘‘ﬁghter of communism,’’ ‘‘champion of the free enterprise system,’’ and ‘‘defender of
the working man,’’ polemicists can awaken the same kind of mob mentality as they
would if they were speaking.
In the indirect approach the arguer aims his or her appeal not at the crowd as a
whole but at one or more individuals separately, focusing on some aspect of their
relationship to the crowd. The indirect approach includes such speciﬁc forms as the
bandwagon argument, the appeal to vanity, and the appeal to snobbery. All are stan-
dard techniques of the advertising industry.
Here is an example of the bandwagon argument:
Of course you want to buy Zest toothpaste. Why, 90 percent of America brushes
with Zest.
The idea is that you will be left behind or left out of the group if you do not use the
product.
The appeal to vanity often associates the product with someone who is admired,
pursued, or imitated, the idea being that you, too, will be admired and pursued if you
use it. The current television and billboard ads for the U.S. Marine Corps provide an
example. The ads show a strong, handsome man in uniform holding a gleaming
sword, and the caption reads:
The Few, the Proud, the Marines.
The message is that if you join the Marines, then you, too, will be admired and re-
spected, just like the handsome man in the uniform.
The appeal to snobbery depends on a similar kind of association.
A Rolls Royce is not for everyone. If you qualify as one of the select few, this
distinguished classic may be seen and driven at British Motor Cars, Ltd.
(By appointment only, please.)
Needless to say, the indirect approach is used by others besides advertisers:

Fallacies of Relevance
125
S
N
L
Conclusion
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Appeal to
the people
Poses
A
Plays upon need
for security, etc.
Mother to child: You want to grow up and be just like Wonder Woman, don’t
you? Then eat your liver and carrots.
These examples illustrate how the indirect version of the appeal to the people can
overlap the false cause fallacy, which is presented in Section 3.3. Thus, the previous
example might be interpreted to suggest that eating liver and carrots will cause one to
become just like Wonder Woman. If so, the fallacy could be identiﬁed as false cause.
Both the direct and indirect approaches of the ad populum fallacy have the same
basic structure:
You want to be accepted/included-in-the-group/loved/
esteemed. . . . Therefore, you should accept XYZ as true.
In the direct approach the arousal of a mob mentality produces an immediate feeling
of belonging for each person in the crowd. Each person feels united with the crowd,
which evokes a sense of strength and security. When the crowd roars its approval of
the conclusions that are then offered, anyone who does not accept them automatically
cuts himself or herself off from the crowd and risks the loss of his or her security,
strength, and acceptance. The same thing happens in the indirect approach, but the
context and technique are somewhat subtler.
4. Argument Against the Person
(Argumentum ad Hominem)
This fallacy always involves two arguers. One of them advances (either directly or
implicitly) a certain argument, and the other then responds by directing his or her
attention not to the ﬁrst person’s argument but to the ﬁrst person himself. When this
occurs, the second person is said to commit an argument against the person.
The argument against the person occurs in three forms: the ad hominem abusive,
the ad hominem circumstantial, and the tu quoque. In the ad hominem abusive, the
second person responds to the ﬁrst person’s argument by verbally abusing the ﬁrst
person. Example:

126
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Before he died, poet Allen Ginsberg argued in favor of legalizing pornography. But
Ginsberg’s arguments are nothing but trash. Ginsberg was a marijuana-smoking
homosexual and a thoroughgoing advocate of the drug culture.
Because Ginsberg’s being a marijuana-smoking homosexual and advocate of the
drug culture is irrelevant to whether the premises of his argument support the conclu-
sion, this argument is fallacious.
Not all cases of the ad hominem abusive are as blunt as this one, but they are just
as fallacious. Example:
William Buckley has argued in favor of legalizing drugs such as cocaine and heroin.
But Buckley is just another one of those upper-crust intellectuals who is out of
touch with real America. No sensible person should listen to his pseudo-
solutions.
Again, whether Buckley is an upper-crust intellectual has nothing to do with whether
his premises support his conclusion.
The ad hominem circumstantial begins the same way as the ad hominem abu-
sive, but instead of heaping verbal abuse on his or her opponent, the respondent
attempts to discredit the opponent’s argument by alluding to certain circumstances
that affect the opponent. By doing so the respondent hopes to show that the opponent
is predisposed to argue the way he or she does and should therefore not be taken
seriously. Here is an example:
The Dalai Lama argues that China has no business in Tibet and that the West
should do something about it. But the Dalai Lama just wants the Chinese to
leave so he can return as leader. Naturally he argues this way. Therefore, we
should reject his arguments.
The author of this argument ignores the substance of the Dalai Lama’s argument and
attempts to discredit it by calling attention to certain circumstances that affect the Dalai
Lama—namely, that he wants to return to Tibet as its leader. But the fact that the Dalai
Lama happens to be affected by these circumstances is irrelevant to whether his prem-
ises support a conclusion. The ad hominem circumstantial is easy to recognize be-
cause it always takes this form: ‘‘Of course Mr. X argues this way; just look at the
circumstances that affect him.’’
The tu quoque (‘‘you too’’) fallacy begins the same way as the other two varieties
of the ad hominem argument, except that the second arguer attempts to make the ﬁrst
appear to be hypocritical or arguing in bad faith. The second arguer usually accom-
plishes this by citing features in the life or behavior of the ﬁrst arguer that conﬂict with
the latter’s conclusion. In effect, the second arguer says, ‘‘How dare you argue that I
should stop doing X; why, you do (or have done) X yourself.’’ Example:
Child to parent: Your argument that I should stop stealing candy from the corner
store is no good. You told me yourself just a week ago that you, too, stole
candy when you were a kid.

Fallacies of Relevance
127
S
N
L
Argument against
the person
Argument
A1 = Arguer 1
A2 = Arguer 2
(A2 commits the
fallacy)
A2
A1
Verbally
attacks
Presents
Rejects
Obviously, whether the parent stole candy is irrelevant to whether the parent’s prem-
ises support the conclusion that the child should not steal candy.
It is important to keep in mind that the purpose of an ad hominem argument is to
discredit another person’s argument by placing its author in a bad light. Thus, for the
fallacy to be committed, there must always be two arguers (at least implicitly). If it
should turn out that the person being attacked is not an arguer, then the personal
comments made by the attacker may well be relevant to the conclusion that is drawn.
In general, personal observations are relevant to conclusions about what kind of
person someone is (good, bad, stingy, trustworthy, and so forth) and whether a person
has done something. Example:
International terrorist Osama bin Laden planned the bombing of the U.S. embas-
sies in Kenya and Tanzania, killing over two hundred innocent people, and he
supports terrorist causes all over the world. Bin Laden is therefore a wicked and
irresponsible person.
The conclusion is not that Bin Laden’s argument is bad but that Bin Laden himself is
bad. Because the premises give relevant support to this conclusion, the argument
commits no fallacy. Another example:
Shakespeare cannot possibly have written the thirty-six plays attributed to him,
because the real Shakespeare was a two-bit country businessman who barely
ﬁnished the fourth grade in school and who never left the conﬁnes of his native
England.
The conclusion is not that some argument of Shakespeare’s is bad but that Shake-
speare did not write certain plays. Again, since the premises are relevant to this con-
clusion, the argument commits no ad hominem fallacy.
Determining what kind of person someone is includes determining whether that
person is trustworthy. Thus personal comments are often relevant in evaluating
whether a person’s proclamations or statements, unsupported by evidence, warrant
our belief. Examples of such statements include promises to do something, testimony

128
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
given by a witness, and testimonials in support of a product or service. Here is an
example of an argument that discredits a witness:
Mickey has testiﬁed that he saw Freddy set ﬁre to the building. But Mickey was
recently convicted on ten counts of perjury, and he hates Freddy with a passion
and would love to see him sent to jail. Therefore, you should not believe
Mickey’s testimony.
This argument commits no fallacy. The conclusion is not that you should reject
Mickey’s argument but rather that you should reject his testimony. Testimony is not
argument, and the fact that the witness is a known liar and has a motive to lie now is
relevant to whether we should believe him. Furthermore, note that the conclusion is
not that Mickey’s statement is literally false but rather that we should not believe the
statement. It is quite possible that Mickey really did see Freddy set ﬁre to the building
and that Mickey’s statement to that effect is true. But if our only reason for believing
this statement is the mere fact that Mickey has made it, then given the circumstances,
we are not justiﬁed in that belief. Personal factors are never relevant to truth and falsity
as such, but they are relevant to believability.
Yet there is often a close connection between truth and believability, and this pro-
vides one of the reasons why ad hominem arguments are often effective. In evaluating
any argument there are always two issues to be considered: the quality of the reason-
ing and the truth of the premises. As we have noted, both are irrelevant to the personal
characteristics of the arguer. But whether we accept the premises as true may depend
on the credibility of the arguer. Knowing that the arguer is biased or has a motive to
lie may provide good grounds for distrusting the premises. Another reason why ad
hominem arguments are effective is that they engage the emotions of readers and
listeners and thereby motivate them to transfer their negative feelings about the arguer
onto the argument.
5. Accident
The fallacy of accident is committed when a general rule is applied to a speciﬁc case
it was not intended to cover. Typically, the general rule is cited (either directly or
implicitly) in the premises and then wrongly applied to the speciﬁc case mentioned in
the conclusion. Two examples:
Freedom of speech is a constitutionally guaranteed right. Therefore, John Q. Radi-
cal should not be arrested for his speech that incited the riot last week.
Property should be returned to its rightful owner. That drunken sailor who is start-
ing a ﬁght with his opponents at the pool table lent you his .45-caliber pistol,
and now he wants it back. Therefore, you should return it to him now.
In the ﬁrst example, the general rule is that freedom of speech is normally guaranteed,
and the speciﬁc case is the speech made by John Q. Radical. Because the speech

Fallacies of Relevance
129
S
N
L
General rule
Specific case
Misapplied
Accident
incited a riot, the rule does not apply. In the second example, the general rule is that
property should be returned to its rightful owner, and the speciﬁc case is the sailor
who wants his gun returned. The rule does not apply because the return of the prop-
erty might result in serious injury or death.
The fallacy of accident gets its name from the fact that the speciﬁc case exhibits
some attribute, or ‘‘accident,’’ that prevents the general rule from applying. In the ﬁrst
example the accident is that the speech incited a riot; in the second example, the
accidents are that the sailor is drunk, that he is starting a ﬁght, and that the property in
question is dangerous.
6. Straw Man
The straw man fallacy is committed when an arguer distorts an opponent’s argument
for the purpose of more easily attacking it, demolishes the distorted argument, and
then concludes that the opponent’s real argument has been demolished. By so doing,
the arguer is said to have set up a straw man and knocked it down, only to conclude
that the real man (opposing argument) has been knocked down as well. Example:
Mr. Goldberg has argued against prayer in the public schools. Obviously Mr. Gold-
berg advocates atheism. But atheism is what they used to have in Russia.
Atheism leads to the suppression of all religions and the replacement of God by
an omnipotent state. Is that what we want for this country? I hardly think so.
Clearly Mr. Goldberg’s argument is nonsense.
Like the argument against the person fallacy, the straw man fallacy involves two
arguers. Mr. Goldberg, who is the ﬁrst arguer, has presented an argument against
prayer in the public schools. The second arguer then attacks Goldberg’s argument by
equating it with an argument for atheism. He then attacks atheism and concludes that
Goldberg’s argument is nonsense. Since Goldberg’s argument had nothing to do with
atheism, the second argument commits the straw man fallacy.

130
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Conclusion
A = Arguer
Op = Opponent’s
position
Op
Straw man
Poses
A
Distorts
As this example illustrates, the kind of distortion the second arguer resorts to is
often an attempt to exaggerate the ﬁrst person’s argument or make it look more
extreme than it really is. Here are two more examples:
The garment workers have signed a petition arguing for better ventilation on the
work premises. Unfortunately, air conditioning is expensive. Air ducts would
have to be run throughout the factory, and a massive heat exchange unit in-
stalled on the roof. Also, the cost of operating such a system during the sum-
mer would be astronomical. In view of these considerations the petition must
be rejected.
The student status committee has presented us with an argument favoring alcohol
privileges on campus. What do the students want? Is it their intention to stay
boozed up from the day they enter as freshmen till the day they graduate? Do
they expect us to open a bar for them? Or maybe a chain of bars all over
campus? Such a proposal is ridiculous!
In the ﬁrst argument, the petition is merely for better ventilation in the factory—maybe
a fan in the window during the summer. The arguer exaggerates this request to mean
an elaborate air conditioning system installed throughout the building. He then points
out that this is too expensive and concludes by rejecting the petition. A similar strategy
is used in the second argument. The arguer distorts the request for alcohol privileges
to mean a chain of bars all over campus. Such an idea is so patently outlandish that no
further argument is necessary.
7. Missing the Point (Ignoratio Elenchi)
All the fallacies we have discussed thus far have been instances of cases where the
premises of an argument are irrelevant to the conclusion. Missing the point illus-
trates a special form of irrelevance. This fallacy occurs when the premises of an argu-
ment support one particular conclusion, but then a different conclusion, often vaguely
related to the correct conclusion, is drawn. Whenever one suspects that such a fallacy
is being committed, he or she should be able to identify the correct conclusion, the
conclusion that the premises logically imply. This conclusion must be signiﬁcantly
different from the conclusion that is actually drawn. Examples:

Fallacies of Relevance
131
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion “B”
Actually entails
Conclusion “A”
Missing the point
Crimes of theft and robbery have been increasing at an alarming rate lately. The
conclusion is obvious: we must reinstate the death penalty immediately.
Abuse of the welfare system is rampant nowadays. Our only alternative is to abol-
ish the system altogether.
At least two correct conclusions are implied by the premise of the ﬁrst argument:either
‘‘We should provide increased police protection in vulnerable neighborhoods’’ or ‘‘We
should initiate programs to eliminate the causes of the crimes.’’ Reinstating the death
penalty is not a logical conclusion at all. Among other things, theft and robbery are
not capital crimes. In the second argument the premises logically suggest some sys-
tematic effort to eliminate the cheaters rather than eliminating the system altogether.
Ignoratio elenchi means ‘‘ignorance of the proof.’’ The arguer is ignorant of the
logical implications of his or her own premises and, as a result, draws a conclusion
that misses the point entirely. The fallacy has a distinct structure all its own, but in
some ways it serves as a catchall for arguments that are not clear instances of one or
more of the other fallacies. An argument should not be identiﬁed as a case of missing
the point, however, if one of the other fallacies ﬁts.
8. Red Herring
This fallacy is closely associated with missing the point (ignoratio elenchi). The red
herring fallacy is committed when the arguer diverts the attention of the reader or
listener by changing the subject to a different but sometimes subtly related one. He or
she then ﬁnishes by either drawing a conclusion about this different issue or by merely
presuming that some conclusion has been established. By so doing, the arguer pur-
ports to have won the argument. The fallacy gets its name from a procedure used to
train hunting dogs to follow a scent. A red herring (or bag of them) is dragged across
the trail with the aim of leading the dogs astray. Since red herrings have an especially
potent scent (caused in part by the smoking process used to preserve them), only the
best dogs will follow the original scent.

132
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Conclusion
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
R/L
Red herring
Poses
A
Draws
off track
To use the red herring fallacy effectively, the arguer must change the originalsubject
of the argument without the reader or listener noticing it. One way of doing this is to
change the subject to one that is subtly related to the original subject. Here are two
examples of this technique:
Environmentalists are continually harping about the dangers of nuclear power. Un-
fortunately, electricity is dangerous no matter where it comes from. Every year
hundreds of people are electrocuted by accident. Since most of these accidents
are caused by carelessness, they could be avoided if people would just exercise
greater caution.
There is a good deal of talk these days about the need to eliminate pesticides from
our fruits and vegetables. But many of these foods are essential to our health.
Carrots are an excellent source of vitamin A, broccoli is rich in iron, and oranges
and grapefruits have lots of vitamin C.
Both arguments commit the red herring fallacy. In the ﬁrst, the original issue is
whether nuclear power is dangerous. The arguer changes this subject to the danger of
electrocution and proceeds to draw a conclusion about that. The new subject is clearly
different from the possibility of nuclear explosion or meltdown, but the fact that both
are related to electricity facilitates the arguer’s goal of leading someone off the track.
In the second argument, the original issue is pesticides, and the arguer changes it to
the value of fruits and vegetables in one’s diet. Again, the fact that the second topic is
related to the ﬁrst assists the arguer in committing the fallacy. In neither case does the
arguer draw a conclusion about the original topic, but by merely diverting the attention
of the reader or listener, the arguer creates the presumption of having won the
argument.
A second way of using the red herring effectively is to change the subject to some
ﬂashy, eye-catching topic that is virtually guaranteed to distract the listener’s attention.
Topics of this sort include sex, crime, scandal, immorality, death, and any other topic
that might serve as the subject of gossip. Here is an example of this technique:
Professor Conway complains of inadequate parking on our campus. But did you
know that last year Conway carried on a torrid love affair with a member of the

Fallacies of Relevance
133
S
N
L
English Department? The two used to meet every day for clandestine sex in the
copier room. Apparently they didn’t realize how much you can see through that
fogged glass window. Even the students got an eyeful. Enough said about
Conway.
The red herring fallacy can be confused with the straw man fallacy because both
have the effect of drawing the reader/listener off the track. This confusion can usually
be avoided by remembering the unique ways in which they accomplish this purpose.
In the straw man, the arguer begins by distorting an opponent’s argument and con-
cludes by knocking down the distorted argument. In the red herring, on the other
hand, the arguer ignores the opponent’s argument (if there is one) and subtly changes
the subject. Thus, to distinguish the two fallacies, one should attempt to determine
whether the arguer has knocked down a distorted argument or simply changed the
subject. Also keep in mind that straw man always involves two arguers, at least implic-
itly, whereas a red herring often does not.
Both the red herring and straw man fallacies are susceptible of being confused with
missing the point, because all three involve a similar kind of irrelevancy. To avoid this
confusion, one should note that both red herring and straw man proceed by generat-
ing a new set of premises, whereas missing the point does not. Straw man draws a
conclusion from new premises that are obtained by distorting an earlier argument,
and red herring, if it draws any conclusion at all, draws one from new premises
obtained by changing the subject. Missing the point, however, draws a conclusion
from the original premises. Also, in the red herring and straw man, the conclusion, if
there is one, is relevant to the premises from which it is drawn; but in missing the
point, the conclusion is irrelevant to the premises from which it is drawn. Finally,
remember that missing the point serves in part as a kind of catchall fallacy, and a
fallacious argument should not be identiﬁed as a case of missing the point if one of
the other fallacies clearly ﬁts.
EXERCISE 3.2
I. Identify the fallacies of relevance committed by the following arguments, giving a
brief explanation for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write ‘‘no fallacy.’’
1.
#
The position open in the accounting department should be given to Frank
Thompson. Frank has six hungry children to feed, and his wife desperately
needs an operation to save her eyesight.
2. Publishing magnate Steve Forbes has argued at length that the fairest kind of
income tax is a ﬂat tax. But Forbes is a billionaire, and he stands to save
millions of dollars if a ﬂat tax is enacted. Therefore, we can hardly take
Forbes’s arguments seriously.
3. The school board argues that our schools are in desperate need of repair. But
the real reason our students are falling behind is that they spend too much

134
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
time with their computers. Becoming educated means a lot more than learn-
ing how to point and click. The school board should send a letter to the
parents urging them to monitor their kids’ computer time.
4.
#
Whoever thrusts a knife into another person should be arrested. But surgeons
do precisely this when operating. Therefore, surgeons should be arrested.
5. You should read Irving Stone’s latest novel right away. It’s sold over a million
copies, and practically everyone in the Manhattan cocktail circuit is talking
about it.
6. Friedrich Nietzsche’s philosophy is not worth the paper it’s printed on.
Nietzsche was an immoral reprobate who went completely insane from
syphilis before he died.
7.
#
Surely you welcome the opportunity to join our protective organization.
Think of all the money you will lose from broken windows, overturned
trucks, and damaged merchandise in the event of your not joining.
8. Senator Barrow advocates increased Social Security beneﬁts for the poor. It is
regrettable that the senator ﬁnds it necessary to advocate socialism. Socialism
defeats initiative, takes away promised rewards, and leads directly to inefﬁ-
ciency and big government. It was tried for years in Eastern Europe, and it
failed miserably. Clearly, socialism is no good.
9. Something is seriously wrong with high school education these days. After
ten years of decline, SAT scores are still extremely low, and high school
graduates are practically incapable of reading and writing. The obvious con-
clusion is that we should close the schools.
10.
#
The editors of the Daily Register have accused our company of being one of
the city’s worst water polluters. But the Daily Register is responsible for much
more pollution than we are. After all, they own the Western Paper Company,
and that company discharges tons of chemical residue into the city’s river
every day.
11. If 20 percent of adult Americans are functionally illiterate, then it’s no wonder
that morons get elected to public ofﬁce. In fact, 20 percent of adult Americans
are functionally illiterate. Therefore, it’s no wonder that morons get elected
to public ofﬁce.
12. Ladies and gentlemen, today the lines of battle have been drawn. When the
din of clashing armor has ﬁnally died away, the Republican party will emerge
victorious! We are the true party of the American people! We embody the
values that all real Americans hold sacred! We cherish and protect our found-
ing fathers’ vision that gave birth to the Constitution! We stand for decency
and righteousness; for self-determination and the liberty to conduct ouraffairs
as each of us freely chooses! In the coming election, victory will be ours, so
help us God!

Fallacies of Relevance
135
S
N
L
13.
#
We’ve all heard the argument that too much television is the reason our stu-
dents can’t read and write. Yet, many of today’s TV shows are excellent.
‘‘Seinfeld’’ explores important issues facing single people, ‘‘E.R.’’ presents
medical professionals in life-and-death situations, and ‘‘60 Minutes’’ exposes
a great variety of scams and illegal practices. Today’s TV is just great!
14. Surely architect Norris is not responsible for the collapse of the Central Bank
Tower. Norris has had nothing but trouble lately. His daughter eloped with a
child molester, his son committed suicide, and his alcoholic wife recently left
for Las Vegas with his retirement savings.
15. The First Amendment to the Constitution prevents the government from in-
terfering with the free exercise of religion. The liturgical practice of the Reli-
gion of Internal Enlightenment involves human sacriﬁce. Therefore, it would
be wrong for the government to interfere with this religious practice.
16.
#
Paula Anderson, spokesperson for State Farm Insurance, has argued that jury
awards for pain and suffering should be severely limited. But this is exactly
what you would expect her to say. After all, attorney fees come out of these
awards, and if the awards are limited, no one will ever sue her company.
17. Professor Pearson’s arguments in favor of the theory of evolution should be
discounted. Pearson is a cocaine-snorting sex pervert and, according to some
reports, a member of the Communist party.
18. Rudolf Ho¨ss, commandant of the Auschwitz concentration camp, confessed
to having exterminated one million people, most of whom were Jews, in the
Auschwitz gas chamber. We can only conclude that Ho¨ss was either insane or
an extremely evil person.
19.
#
Brewing magnate Joseph Coors has argued that government should get off the
back of the American businessman. Obviously, Coors wants to abolish govern-
ment altogether. Yet without government there would be no defense, no judi-
cial system, no Social Security, and no health and safety regulations. None of us
wants to forgo these beneﬁts. Thus we can see that Coors’s argument is absurd.
20. I know that some of you oppose the appointment of David Cole as the new
sales manager. Upon further consideration, however, I am conﬁdent you will
ﬁnd him well qualiﬁed for the job. If Cole is not appointed, it may become
necessary to make severe personnel cutbacks in your department.
21. Animal rights activists say that animals are abused in biomedical research
labs. But consider this: Pets are abused by their owners every day. Probably
25 percent of pet owners should never get near animals. Some cases of abuse
are enough to make you sick.
22.
#
Of course you want to buy a pair of Slinky fashion jeans. Slinky jeans really
show off your ﬁgure, and all the Hollywood starlets down on the Strip can be
seen wearing them these days.

136
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
23. Former football star Joe Namath says on television that Flexall 454 is the best
thing to relieve muscle pain. But Namath is paid thousands of dollars to make
these ads. Therefore, we should not take his testimonials too seriously.
24. Dr. Morrison has argued that smoking is responsible for the majority of health
problems in this country and that every smoker who has even the slightest
concern for his or her health should quit. Unfortunately, however, we must
consign Dr. Morrison’s argument to the trash bin. Only yesterday I saw none
other than Dr. Morrison himself smoking a cigar.
25.
#
Mr. Rhodes is suffering from amnesia and has no recollection whatever of the
events of the past two weeks. We can only conclude that he did not commit
the crime of murdering his wife a week ago, as he has been accused of doing.
II. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. In the appeal to force, the arguer physically attacks the listener.
2. In the direct variety of the appeal to the people, the arguer attempts to create
a kind of mob mentality.
3. If an arguer attempts to discredit a promise or court room testimony by pointing
out that the witness or the person making the promise is a liar, then the arguer
commits an argumentum ad hominem (argument against the person) fallacy.
4. The argumentum ad hominem always involves two arguers.
5. In the argumentum ad hominem circumstantial, the circumstances cited by
the second arguer are intended precisely to malign the character of the ﬁrst
arguer.
6. In the tu quoque fallacy, the arguer threatens the reader or listener.
7. In the fallacy of accident, a general rule is applied to a speciﬁc case where it
does not ﬁt.
8. In the straw man fallacy, an arguer often distorts another person’s argument
by making it look more extreme than it really is.
9. Whenever one suspects that a missing the point fallacy is being committed,
one should be able to state the conclusion that is logically implied by the
premises.
10. In the red herring fallacy, the arguer attempts to lead the reader or listener off
the track.
III. Identify the arguments in the following dialogue, then discuss each of them in
terms of the fallacies presented in this section. You should be able to ﬁnd at least
one case of each fallacy.
‘‘Thanks for saving us a seat,’’ Jodie says to her friend Frank, as she and Liz sit
down with coffee cups in hand in the crowded cafeteria.
‘‘No problem,’’ Frank says.

Fallacies of Relevance
137
S
N
L
‘‘We were late getting out of Professor Conklin’s social problems class,’’ Jodie
says disgustedly. ‘‘He’s such a jerk! He always keeps us late, and he’s the most
arrogant snob I’ve ever met.’’
‘‘I’ve heard that,’’ Frank says. ‘‘What’s he covering in class now?’’
‘‘Sexual harassment in the workplace,’’ Jodie replies. ‘‘But that is a real problem
these days.’’
‘‘How so?’’
‘‘Well, my friend Amelia is a dispatcher for a trucking company, and she’s told
me about dozens of times she’s been a victim of sexual harassment. The truckers
have Playboy centerfolds tacked up all over the place, they constantly leer at her,
they’re always asking her for dates. One of them even pats her rear when she
leans over at the drinking fountain.’’
Frank laughs. ‘‘Well, there is such a thing as the First Amendment, which sup-
posedly guarantees freedom of expression. You wouldn’t want to deny these guys
their freedom of expression, would you?’’
‘‘Freedom of expression, my eye!’’ explodes Jodie, looking incredulously at
Frank. ‘‘Patting someone’s rear isn’t freedom of expression, it’s abusive physical
contact. So it’s not protected by the First Amendment. Men! The trouble with you,
Frank, is you’re a typical man. If you were a woman, you’d see these things for
what they are,’’ she says, looking at Liz for support.
Liz nods her head in strong agreement.
‘‘Well,’’ says Frank, ‘‘I think your friend is lucky to have a job, what with all the
people out of work these days. I’ve got a friend who’s spent half his retirement
savings just putting food on the table for his family, after losing his job. He was in
the construction business, which is dead right now. And in other
parts of the country it’s even worse. You should tell Amelia to quit complaining.’’
‘‘Stop giving me the runaround,’’ demands Jodie, offended. ‘‘The trouble with
you men is, you always look at women as sex objects. That makes sexual harass-
ment inevitable.’’
‘‘What do you mean?’’ protests Frank. ‘‘It’s you women who treat us men like
sex objects. What about all your makeup and perfume? And the tight pants and all
the see-through stuff you wear? You think men are just a pack of animals—noth-
ing but instinct—and you think that will make us fall for you. Isn’t that how you
see us?’’
‘‘I won’t dignify that with a reply,’’ fumes Jodie. ‘‘Anyone who isn’t blind can
see that Amelia’s being victimized by those truckers. If you can’t see it, maybe
pouring this hot coffee over your thick head will wake you up!’’ she threatens.
‘‘Calm down,’’ says Frank with a startled look. ‘‘Everyone is beginning to stare
at us. Okay, suppose I agree that Amelia is a victim. The question is, what do we
do about it?’’
‘‘To begin with,’’ says Jodie ﬁrmly, ‘‘the trucking company should transfer Ame-
lia out of dispatch and give her a better job, like executive secretary in the regional
ofﬁce. Her husband ran out on her recently, leaving her with all ﬁve kids—and
little Tommy needs braces. She could really use the extra money.’’
‘‘You’re joking!’’ Frank laughs sarcastically. ‘‘Didn’t you tell me once that Amelia
never ﬁnished high school and is functionally illiterate? She could never handle a
job like that.’’

138
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Thinking for a moment, Jodie then replies, ‘‘Well, maybe you’re right. But at
least the company should adopt a policy forbidding all forms of sexual harassment.
Maybe that would make the truckers see how abusive they are, and then they
might stop acting that way. Practically every company in the country has such a
policy, but Amelia’s bosses are dragging their feet.’’
‘‘Okay. But then how do you deﬁne sexual harassment?’’ Frank asks. ‘‘’Cause if
you can’t deﬁne it, any policy is useless.’’
‘‘Well, I don’t exactly know,’’ Jodie hesitates. ‘‘I’ll have to think about that.’’
‘‘Aha! I knew it!’’ exclaims Frank, triumphantly. ‘‘You can’t deﬁne it, which
means you don’t even know if it exists! If you weren’t such a radical feminist, you
would see that all these claims of sexual harassment are hooey.’’
‘‘Me, radical?’’ Jodie explodes. ‘‘The truth is you’re a radical sexist. What you’re
saying is, women are only chattel, like they were 200 years ago, and men can use
or abuse them any way they please. Liz, that’s what he’s saying, isn’t it?’’
‘‘Absolutely,’’ Liz afﬁrms.
‘‘What a crazy argument,’’ says Frank scornfully. ‘‘What you’re saying is, we
should abolish all distinctions between men and women and create a unisex soci-
ety in which everyone acts like a bunch of robots. Isn’t that right, Liz?’’
‘‘No, not at all,’’ insists Liz. ‘‘She’s trying to
’’
‘‘You’re completely insane, Frank,’’ Jodie interrupts, rising determinedly from
her chair, ‘‘and your arguments are wacko!’’ She then throws the remains of her
coffee at Frank. The other students who have been listening to the heated argu-
ment rise up shouting, ‘‘Right on Jodie!’’ Some begin chanting, ‘‘End sex harass-
ment! End sex harassment!’’ As more students join the demonstration, they
surround Frank, gesturing crudely.
Angry and humiliated, he breaks away and dashes out the door.
3.3
Fallacies of Weak Induction
The fallacies of weak induction occur not because the premises are logically irrel-
evant to the conclusion, as is the case with the eight fallacies of relevance, but because
the connection between premises and conclusion is not strong enough to support the
conclusion. In each of the following fallacies, the premises provide at least a shred of
evidence in support of the conclusion, but the evidence is not nearly good enough to
cause a reasonable person to believe the conclusion. Like the fallacies of relevance,
however, the fallacies of weak induction often involve emotional grounds for believ-
ing the conclusion.
9. Appeal to Unqualiﬁed Authority
(Argumentum ad Verecundiam)
We saw in Chapter 1 that an argument from authority is an inductive argument in
which an arguer cites the authority or testimony of another person in support of some

Fallacies of Weak Induction
139
S
N
L
Conclusion
A = Arguer
Au = Unqualified
authority
Au
Appeal to unqualified
authority
Poses
A
Cites
conclusion. The appeal to unqualiﬁed authority fallacy is a variety of the argument
from authority and occurs when the cited authority or witness is not trustworthy.There
are several reasons why an authority or witness might not be trustworthy. The person
might lack the requisite expertise, might be biased or prejudiced, might have a motive
to lie or disseminate ‘‘misinformation,’’ or might lack the requisite ability to perceive
or recall. The following examples illustrate these reasons:
Dr. Bradshaw, our family physician, has stated that the creation of muonic atoms
of deuterium and tritium hold the key to producing a sustained nuclear fusion
reaction at room temperature. In view of Dr. Bradshaw’s expertise as a physi-
cian, we must conclude that this is indeed true.
This conclusion deals with nuclear physics, and the authority is a family physician.
Because it is unlikely that a physician would be an expert in nuclear physics, the
argument commits an appeal to unqualiﬁed authority.
David Duke, former Grand Wizard of the Ku Klux Klan, has stated, ‘‘Jews are not
good Americans. They have no understanding of what America is.’’ On the
basis of Duke’s authority, we must therefore conclude that the Jews in this
country are un-American.
As an authority, David Duke is clearly biased, so his statements cannot be trusted.
James W. Johnston, Chairman of R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Company, testiﬁed before
Congress that tobacco is not an addictive substance and that smoking ciga-
rettes does not produce any addiction. Therefore, we should believe him and
conclude that smoking does not in fact lead to any addiction.
If Mr. Johnston had admitted that tobacco is addictive, it would have opened the door
to government regulation, which could put his company out of business. Thus, be-
cause Johnston had a clear motive to lie, we should not believe his statements.
Old Mrs. Furguson (who is practically blind) has testiﬁed that she saw the defen-
dant stab the victim with a bayonet while she was standing in the twilight
shadows 100 yards from the incident. Therefore, members of the jury, you must
ﬁnd the defendant guilty.

140
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Premises:
Nobody has proved
that X is true.
Conclusion:
X is false.
Appeal to ignorance
Here the witness lacks the ability to perceive what she has testiﬁed to, so her testimony
is untrustworthy.
In deciding whether a person is a qualiﬁed authority, one should keep two impor-
tant points in mind. First, the person might be an authority in more than one ﬁeld. For
example, a chemist might also be an authority in biology, or an economist might also
be an authority in law. The second point is that there are some areas in which practi-
cally no one can be considered an authority. Such areas include politics, morals, and
religion. For example, if someone were to argue that abortion is immoral because a
certain philosopher or religious leader has said so, the argument would be weak
regardless of the authority’s qualiﬁcations. Many questions in these areas are so hotly
contested that there is no conventional wisdom an authority can depend on.
10. Appeal to Ignorance
(Argumentum ad Ignorantiam)
When the premises of an argument state that nothing has been proved one way or the
other about something, and the conclusion then makes a deﬁnite assertion about that
thing, the argument commits an appeal to ignorance. The issue usually involves
something that is incapable of being proved or something that has not yet been
proved. Example:
People have been trying for centuries to provide conclusive evidence for the claims
of astrology, and no one has ever succeeded. Therefore, we must conclude that
astrology is a lot of nonsense.
Conversely, the following argument commits the same fallacy.
People have been trying for centuries to disprove the claims of astrology, and no
one has ever succeeded. Therefore, we must conclude that the claims of astrol-
ogy are true.

Fallacies of Weak Induction
141
S
N
L
The premises of an argument are supposed to provide positive evidence for the
conclusion. The premises of these arguments, however, tell us nothing about astrol-
ogy; rather, they tell us about what certain unnamed and unidentiﬁed people have
tried unsuccessfully to do. This evidence may provide some slight reason for believing
the conclusion, but certainly not sufﬁcient reason.
These examples do, however, lead us to the ﬁrst of two important exceptions to the
appeal to ignorance. The ﬁrst stems from the fact that if qualiﬁed researchers investi-
gate a certain phenomenon within their range of expertise and fail to turn up any
evidence that the phenomenon exists, this fruitless search by itself constitutes positive
evidence about the question. Consider, for example, the following argument:
Teams of scientists attempted over a number of decades to detect the existence of
the luminiferous aether, and all failed to do so. Therefore, the luminiferous
aether does not exist.
The premises of this argument are true. Given the circumstances, it is likely that the
scientists in question would have detected the aether if in fact it did exist. Since they
did not detect it, it probably does not exist. Thus, we can say that the above argument
is inductively strong (but not deductively valid).
As for the two arguments about astrology, if the attempts to prove or disprove the
astrological claims had been done in a systematic way by qualiﬁed experts, it is more
likely that the arguments would be good. Exactly what is required to qualify someone
to investigate astrological claims is, of course, difﬁcult to say. But as these arguments
stand, the premises state nothing about the qualiﬁcations of the investigators, and so
the arguments remain fallacious.
It is not always necessary, however, that the investigators have special qualiﬁca-
tions. The kinds of qualiﬁcations needed depend on the situation. Sometimes the mere
ability to see and report what one sees is sufﬁcient. Example:
No one has ever seen Mr. Andrews drink a glass of wine, beer, or any other alco-
holic beverage. Probably Mr. Andrews is a nondrinker.
Because it is highly probable that if Mr. Andrews were a drinker, somebody would
have seen him drinking, this argument is inductively strong. No special qualiﬁcations
are needed to be able to see someone take a drink.
The second exception to the appeal to ignorance relates to courtroom procedure.
In the United States and Canada, among other countries, a person is presumed inno-
cent until proven guilty. If the prosecutor in a criminal trial fails to prove the guilt of
the defendant beyond reasonable doubt, counsel for the defense may justiﬁably argue
that his or her client is not guilty. Example:
Members of the jury, you have heard the prosecution present its case against the
defendant. Nothing, however, has been proved beyond a reasonable doubt.
Therefore, under the law, the defendant is not guilty.

142
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Specific case(s)
(not representative)
General rule
Generalization
Hasty
generalization
This argument commits no fallacy because ‘‘not guilty’’ means, in the legal sense, that
guilt beyond a reasonable doubt has not been proved. The defendant may indeed
have committed the crime of which he or she is accused, but if the prosecutor fails to
prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt, the defendant is considered ‘‘not guilty.’’
11. Hasty Generalization (Converse Accident)
Hasty generalization is a fallacy that affects inductive generalizations. In Chapter 1
we saw that an inductive generalization is an argument that draws a conclusion about
all members of a group from evidence that pertains to a selected sample. The fallacy
occurs when there is a reasonable likelihood that the sample is not representative of
the group. Such a likelihood may arise if the sample is either too small or not randomly
selected. Here are two examples:
After only one year the alternator went out in Mr. O’Grady’s new Chevrolet. Mrs.
Dodson’s Oldsmobile developed a transmission problem after six months. The
obvious conclusion is that cars made by General Motors are just a pile of junk
these days.
Six Arab fundamentalists were convicted of bombing the World Trade Center in
New York City. The message is clear: Arabs are nothing but a pack of religious
fanatics prone to violence.
In these arguments a conclusion about a whole group is drawn from premises that
mention only two instances. Because such small, atypical samples are not sufﬁcient to
support a general conclusion, each argument commits a hasty generalization. The
second example indicates how hasty generalization plays a role in racial (and reli-
gious) prejudice.
The mere fact that a sample may be small, however, does not necessarily mean that
it is atypical. On the other hand, the mere fact that a sample may be large does not
guarantee that it is typical. In the case of small samples, various factors may intervene
that render such a sample typical of the larger group. Examples:

Fallacies of Weak Induction
143
S
N
L
Ten milligrams of substance Z was fed to four mice, and within two minutes all
four went into shock and died. Probably substance Z, in this amount, is fatal
to the average mouse.
On three separate occasions I drank a bottle of Figowitz beer and found it ﬂat and
bitter. Probably I would ﬁnd every bottle of Figowitz beer ﬂat and bitter.
Neither of these arguments commits the fallacy of hasty generalization because in
neither case is there any likelihood that the sample is atypical of the group. In the ﬁrst
argument the fact that the mice died in only two minutes suggests the existence of a
causal connection between eating substance Z and death. If there is such a connection,
it would hold for other mice as well. In the second example the fact that the taste of
beer typically remains constant from bottle to bottle causes the argument to be strong,
even though only three bottles were sampled.
In the case of large samples, if the sample is not random, it may not be typical of
the larger group. Example:
One hundred thousand voters from Orange County, California, were surveyed on
their choice for governor, and 68 percent said they intend to vote for the Re-
publican candidate. Clearly the Republican candidate will be elected.
Even though the sample cited in this argument is large, the argument commits a hasty
generalization. The problem is that Orange County is overwhelmingly Republican, so
the mere fact that 68 percent intend to vote for the Republican candidate is no indica-
tion of how others in the state intend to vote. In other words, the survey was not
conducted randomly, and for this reason the argument is fatally ﬂawed. The need for
randomness in samples is discussed further in Section 9.4 of this book.
Hasty generalization is otherwise called ‘‘converse accident’’ because it proceeds in
a direction opposite to that of accident. Whereas accident proceeds from the general
to the particular, converse accident moves from the particular to the general. The
premises cite some characteristic affecting one or more atypical instances of a certain
class, and the conclusion then applies that characteristic to all members of the class.
12. False Cause
The fallacy of false cause occurs whenever the link between premises and conclusion
depends on some imagined causal connection that probably does not exist. Whenever
an argument is suspected of committing the false cause fallacy, the reader or listener
should be able to say that the conclusion depends on the supposition that X causes Y,
whereas X probably does not cause Y at all. Examples:
During the past two months, every time that the cheerleaders have worn blue
ribbons in their hair, the basketball team has been defeated. Therefore, to
prevent defeats in the future, the cheerleaders should get rid of those blue
ribbons.

144
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Successful business executives are paid salaries in excess of $50,000. Therefore,
the best way to ensure that Ferguson will become a successful executive is to
raise his salary to at least $50,000.
There are more laws on the books today than ever before, and more crimes are
being committed than ever before. Therefore, to reduce crime we must elimi-
nate the laws.
The ﬁrst argument depends on the supposition that the blue ribbons caused the defeats,
the second on the supposition that a high salary causes success, and the third on the
supposition that laws cause crime. In no case is it likely that any causal connection exists.
The ﬁrst argument illustrates a variety of the false cause fallacy called post hoc ergo
propter hoc (‘‘after this, therefore on account of this’’). This variety of the fallacy
presupposes that just because one event precedes another event the ﬁrst event causes
the second. Obviously, mere temporal succession is not sufﬁcient to establish a causal
connection. Nevertheless, this kind of reasoning is quite common and lies behind
most forms of superstition. (Example: ‘‘A black cat crossed my path and later I tripped
and sprained my ankle. It must be that black cats really are bad luck.’’)
The second and third arguments illustrate a variety of the false cause fallacy called
non causa pro causa (‘‘not the cause for the cause’’). This variety is committed when
what is taken to be the cause of something is not really the cause at all and the mistake
is based on something other than mere temporal succession. In reference to the sec-
ond argument, success as an executive causes increases in salary—not the other way
around—so the argument mistakes the cause for the effect. In reference to the third
argument, the increase in crime is, for the most part, only coincidental with the in-
crease in the number of laws. Obviously, the mere fact that one event is coincidental
with another is not sufﬁcient reason to think that one caused the other.
A third variety of the false cause fallacy, and one that is probably committed more
often than either of the others in their pure form, is oversimpliﬁed cause. This variety
occurs when a multitude of causes is responsible for a certain effect but the arguer
selects just one of these causes and represents it as if it were the sole cause. Here are
some examples:
The quality of education in our grade schools and high schools has been declining
for years. Clearly, our teachers just aren’t doing their job these days.
Today, all of us can look forward to a longer life span than our parents and grand-
parents. Obviously, we owe our thanks to the millions of dedicated doctors
who expend every effort to ensure our health.
In the ﬁrst argument, the decline in the quality of education is caused by many
factors, including lack of discipline in the home, parental uninvolvement, too much
television, and drug use by students. Poor teacher performance is only one of these
factors and probably a minor one at that. In the second argument, the efforts of doctors
are only one among many factors responsible for our longer life span. Other, more

Fallacies of Weak Induction
145
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion
Depends on nonexistent or
minor causal connection
False cause
important factors include a better diet, more exercise, reduced smoking, safer high-
ways, and more stringent occupational safety standards.
The oversimpliﬁed cause fallacy is usually motivated by self-serving interests.
Sometimes the arguer wants to take undeserved credit for himself or give undeserved
credit to some movement with which he or she is afﬁliated. At other times, the arguer
wants to heap blame on an opponent or shift blame from himself or herself onto some
convenient occurrence. Instances of the fallacy can resemble either the post hoc or the
non causa pro causa varieties in that the alleged cause can occur either prior to or
concurrently with the effect. It differs from the other varieties of false cause fallacy in
that the single factor selected for credit or blame is often partly responsible for the
effect, but responsible to only a minor degree.
The false cause fallacy is often convincing because it is often difﬁcult to determine
whether two phenomena are causally related. A lengthy time lapse between the op-
eration of the cause and the occurrence of the effect can exacerbate the problem. For
example, the thirty-year interval between exposure to asbestos and the onset of asbes-
tosis impeded the recognition of a causal connection. Also, when two events are
causally related, it may be hard to determine the degree of relatedness. Thus, there
may be some connection between the electromagnetic ﬁeld produced by high voltage
transmission lines and leukemia, but the connection may be extremely slight. Finally,
when a causal connection is recognized, it may be difﬁcult to determine which is the
cause and which is the effect. For example, an allergic reaction may be connected
with an episode of anxiety, but it may be hard to tell if the allergy causes the anxiety
or if the anxiety causes the allergy.
The realm of human action constitutes another area in which causal connections
are notoriously difﬁcult to establish. For example, the attorneys for accused murderer
Dan White argued that Twinkies, Coke, and potato chips caused him to kill San Fran-
cisco Mayor George Moscone. Other attorneys have blamed their clients’ crimes on
PMS, rap music, childhood abuse, mental retardation, and hallucinations. The com-
plex nature of human motivation renders all such causal claims difﬁcult to evaluate.

146
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Chain reaction
(not likely to occur)
Slippery slope
Disaster
Innocent
first step
The situation may become even worse when a whole nation of people are involved.
Thus, the recent drop in crime rates has been attributed to ‘‘three strikes’’ laws, but it
is difﬁcult to say whether this or some other factor is really responsible.
One point that should be kept in mind when establishing causal connections is that
statistical correlations by themselves often reveal little about what is actually going on.
For example, if all that we knew about smoking and lung cancer was that the two
frequently occur together, we might conclude any number of things. We might con-
clude that both have a common cause, such as a genetic predisposition, or we might
conclude that lung cancer is a disease contracted early in life and that it manifests itself
in its early stages by a strong desire for tobacco. Fortunately, in the case of smoking
and lung cancer there is more evidence than a mere statistical correlation. This addi-
tional evidence inclines us to believe that the smoking is a cause of the cancer.
13. Slippery Slope
The fallacy of slippery slope is a variety of the false cause fallacy. It occurs when the
conclusion of an argument rests upon an alleged chain reaction and there is not
sufﬁcient reason to think that the chain reaction will actually take place. Here is an
example:
Immediate steps should be taken to outlaw pornography once and for all. The
continued manufacture and sale of pornographic material will almost certainly
lead to an increase in sex-related crimes such as rape and incest. This in turn
will gradually erode the moral fabric of society and result in an increase in
crimes of all sorts. Eventually a complete disintegration of law and order will
occur, leading in the end to the total collapse of civilization.
Because there is no good reason to think that the mere failure to outlaw pornography
will result in all these dire consequences, this argument is fallacious. An equally falla-
cious counterargument is as follows:
Attempts to outlaw pornography threaten basic civil rights and should be summar-
ily abandoned. If pornography is outlawed, censorship of newspapers and

Fallacies of Weak Induction
147
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion
Depends on inadequate
analogy
Weak analogy
news magazines is only a short step away. After that there will be censorship of
textbooks, political speeches, and the content of lectures delivered by university
professors. Complete mind control by the central government will be the inevi-
table result.
Both arguments attempt to persuade the reader or listener that the welfare of society
rests on a ‘‘slippery slope’’ and that a single step in the wrong direction will result in
an inevitable slide all the way to the bottom.
Deciding whether a slippery slope fallacy has been committed can be difﬁcultwhen
there is uncertainty whether the alleged chain reaction will or will not occur. This
question is discussed in Section 3.5. But many slippery slopes rest on a mere emotional
conviction on the part of the arguer that a certain action or policy is bad, and the
arguer attempts to trump up support for his or her position by citing all sorts of dire
consequences that will result if the action is taken or the policy followed. In such cases
there is usually little problem in identifying the argument as a slippery slope.
14. Weak Analogy
This fallacy affects inductive arguments from analogy. As we saw in Chapter 1, an
argument from analogy is an argument in which the conclusion depends on the exis-
tence of an analogy, or similarity, between two things or situations. The fallacy of
weak analogy is committed when the analogy is not strong enough to support the
conclusion that is drawn. Example:
Harper’s new car is bright blue, has leather upholstery, and gets excellent gas mile-
age. Crowley’s new car is also bright blue and has leather upholstery. Therefore,
it probably gets excellent gas mileage, too.
Because the color of a car and the choice of upholstery have nothing to do with
gasoline consumption, this argument is fallacious.
The basic structure of an argument from analogy is as follows:

148
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Entity A has attributes a, b, c, and z.
Entity B has attributes a, b, c.
Therefore, entity B probably has attribute z also.
Evaluating an argument having this form requires a two-step procedure: (1) Identify the
attributes a, b, c, . . . that the two entities A and B share in common, and (2) determine
how the attribute z, mentioned in the conclusion, relates to the attributes a, b, c, . . .
If some causal or systematic relation exists between z and a, b, or c, the argument is
strong; otherwise it is weak. In the argument above, the two entities share the attrib-
utes of being cars; the attributes entailed by being a car, such as having four wheels;
and the attributes of color and upholstery material. Because none of these attributes is
systematically or causally related to good gas mileage, the argument is fallacious.
As an illustration of when the requisite systematic or causal relation does and does
not exist, consider the following arguments:
The ﬂow of electricity through a wire is similar to the ﬂow of water through a pipe.
Obviously a large-diameter pipe will carry a greater ﬂow of water than a pipe of
small diameter. Therefore, a large-diameter wire should carry a greater ﬂow of
electricity than a small-diameter wire.
The ﬂow of electricity through a wire is similar to the ﬂow of water through a pipe.
When water runs downhill through a pipe, the pressure at the bottom of the
hill is greater than it is at the top. Thus, when electricity ﬂows downhill through
a wire, the voltage should be greater at the bottom of the hill than at the top.
The ﬁrst argument is good and the second is fallacious. Both arguments depend on
the similarity between water molecules ﬂowing through a pipe and electrons ﬂowing
through a wire. In both cases there is a systematic relation between the diameter of
the pipe/wire and the amount of ﬂow. In the ﬁrst argument this systematic relation
provides a strong link between premises and conclusion, and so the argument is a
good one. But in the second argument a causal connection exists between difference
in elevation and increase in pressure that holds for water but not for electricity. Water
molecules ﬂowing through a pipe are affected by gravity, but electrons ﬂowing
through a wire are not. Thus, the second argument is fallacious.
The theory and evaluation of arguments from analogy is one of the most complex
and elusive subjects in all of logic. Additional material on arguments from analogy
appears in Sections 3.5 and 9.1 of this text.
EXERCISE 3.3
I. Identify the fallacies of weak induction committed by the following arguments,
giving a brief explanation for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write ‘‘no
fallacy.’’

Fallacies of Weak Induction
149
S
N
L
1.
#
The Daily News carried an article this morning about three local teenagers
who were arrested on charges of drug possession. Teenagers these days are
nothing but a bunch of junkies.
2. If a car breaks down on the freeway, a passing mechanic is not obligated to
render emergency road service. For similar reasons, if a person suffers a heart
attack on the street, a passing physician is not obligated to render emergency
medical assistance.
3. There must be something to psychical research. Three famous physicists,
Oliver Lodge, James Jeans, and Arthur Stanley Eddington, took it seriously.
4.
#
The secretaries have asked us to provide lounge areas where they can spend
their coffee breaks. This request will have to be refused. If we give them
lounge areas, next they’ll be asking for spas and swimming pools. Then it will
be racquetball courts, tennis courts, and ﬁtness centers. Expenditures for
these facilities will drive us into bankruptcy.
5. The accumulation of pressure in a society is similar to the build-up of pressure
in a boiler. If the pressure in a boiler increases beyond a critical point, the
boiler will explode. Accordingly, if a government represses its people beyond
a certain point, the people will rise up in revolt.
6. A few minutes after Governor Harrison ﬁnished his speech on television, a
devastating earthquake struck southern Alaska. For the safety of the people
up there, it is imperative that Governor Harrison make no more speeches.
7.
#
No one has ever been able to prove the existence of extrasensory perception.
We must therefore conclude that extrasensory perception is a myth.
8. Lester Brown, universally respected author of the yearly State of the World
report, has said that the destruction of tropical rain forests is one of the ten
most serious worldwide problems. Thus, it must be the case that this is indeed
a very serious problem.
9. Federal ofﬁcers assaulted the family of Randy Weaver in northern Idaho,
killing his wife, and they were also involved in the destruction of the Branch
Davidian compound in Waco, Texas, with great loss of life. The conclusion is
clear that federal ofﬁcials are just a pack of killers.
10.
#
Pianist Ray Charles says that Sinclair paints are groovy. We can only conclude
that Sinclair paints are very groovy indeed.
11. Probably no life exists on Venus. Teams of scientists have conducted exhaus-
tive studies of the planet’s surface and atmosphere, and no living organisms
have been found.
12. We don’t dare let the animal rights activists get their foot in the door. If they
sell us on the idea that dogs, cats, and dolphins have rights, next it will be
chickens and cows. That means no more chicken Kiev or prime rib. Next it

150
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
will be worms and insects. This will lead to the decimation of our agricultural
industry. The starvation of the human race will follow close behind.
13.
#
No one would buy a pair of shoes without trying them on. Why should
anyone be expected to get married without premarital sex?
14. No one has proved conclusively that America’s nuclear power plants consti-
tute a danger to people living in their immediate vicinity. Therefore, it is
perfectly safe to continue to build nuclear power plants near large metropol-
itan centers.
15. There are more churches in New York City than in any other city in the nation,
and more crimes are committed in New York City than anywhere else. So, if
we are to eliminate crime, we must abolish the churches.
II. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. If an arguer cites a statement by a recognized expert in support of a conclu-
sion and the statement falls within the expert’s range of expertise, then the
arguer commits an appeal to unqualiﬁed authority.
2. If an arguer cites a statement in support of a conclusion and the statement
reﬂects the strong bias of its author, then the arguer commits an appeal to
unqualiﬁed authority.
3. In the appeal to ignorance, the arguer accuses the reader or listener of being
ignorant.
4. If an attorney for the defense in an American or Canadian criminal trial
argues that the prosecution has proved nothing beyond a reasonable doubt
about the guilt of the defendant, then the attorney commits an appeal to
ignorance.
5. Hasty generalization always proceeds from the particular to the general.
6. The post hoc ergo propter hoc variety of the false cause fallacy presumes that
X causes Y merely because X happens before Y.
7. If an argument concludes that X causes Y simply because X and Y occur over
the same time interval, then the argument commits the non causa pro causa
variety of the false cause fallacy.
8. If the conclusion of an argument depends on the occurrence of a chain reac-
tion of events, and there is good reason to believe that the chain reaction will
actually occur, the argument commits a slippery slope fallacy.
9. The fallacy of weak analogy always depends on an alleged similarity between
two things or situations.
10. If an argument from analogy depends on a causal or systematic relationship
between certain attributes, and there is good reason to believe that this rela-
tionship exists, then the argument commits no fallacy.

Fallacies of Weak Induction
151
S
N
L
III. Identify the fallacies of relevance and weak induction committed by the following
arguments. If no fallacy is committed, write ‘‘no fallacy.’’
1.
#
On our ﬁrst date, George had his hands all over me, and I found it nearly
impossible to keep him in his place. A week ago Tom gave me that stupid
line about how, in order to prove my love, I had to spend the night with him.
Men are all alike. All any of them want is sex.
2. Tagging by grafﬁti artists has become a terrible problem in recent years. Ob-
viously our schools are stiﬂing the creative spirit of these young people.
3. Iraqi dictator Saddam Hussein has promised to treat the Kurds and Suni Mus-
lims in Iraq with respect and dignity. Also, he has promised to abandon his
earlier plans for becoming the dominant power in the Middle East. However,
Hussein is a notorious liar and an outright murderer. Therefore, we should
not trust these promises for a minute.
4.
#
For many years, Senator Phil Gramm has argued in favor of increased expen-
ditures for NASA. But remember that NASA is situated in Houston, in Gramm’s
home state. Obviously he supports these expenditures. In view of these con-
siderations, we should ignore Gramm’s arguments.
5. What the farmer sows in the spring he reaps in the fall. In the spring he sows
$8-per-bushel soybeans. Therefore, in the fall he will reap $8-per-bushel
soybeans.
6. World-famous paleontologist Stephen Jay Gould says that the dinosaurs were
killed by a large asteroid that collided with the earth. Furthermore, many
scientists agree with Gould. Therefore, we conclude that the dinosaurs were
probably killed by an asteroid.
7.
#
Animals and humans are similar in many ways. Both experience sensations,
desires, fears, pleasures, and pains. Humans have a right not to be subjected
to needless pain. Does it not follow that animals have a right not to be sub-
jected to needless pain?
8. Johnny, of course I deserve the use of your bicycle for the afternoon. After
all, I’m sure you wouldn’t want your mother to ﬁnd out that you played hooky
today.
9. As a businessperson you certainly want to subscribe to Forbes magazine.
Virtually all the successful business executives in the country subscribe to it.
10.
#
Ellen Quinn has argued that logic is not the most important thing in life.
Apparently Ellen advocates irrationality. It has taken two million years for the
human race to achieve the position that it has, and Ellen would throw the
whole thing into the garbage. What utter nonsense!
11. When water is poured on the top of a pile of rocks, it always trickles down to
the rocks on the bottom. Similarly, when rich people make lots of money, we
can expect this money to trickle down to the poor.

152
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
12. Extensive laboratory tests have failed to prove any deleterious side effects of
the new pain killer lexaprine. We conclude that lexaprine is safe for human
consumption.
13.
#
Environmentalists accuse us of blocking the plan to convert Antarctica into a
world park. In fact, nothing could be further from the truth. Antarctica is a
huge continent teeming with life. It is the home of millions of penguins, seals,
sea birds, and sea lions. Also, great schools of ﬁnﬁsh and whales inhabit its
coastal waters.
14. Marge Schott, minority owner of the Cincinnati Reds, has argued that profes-
sional baseball should be exempt from federal antitrust legislation. But con-
sider this: Schott is a disgusting racist bigot who speaks approvingly of Adolf
Hitler. Clearly, we should ignore her antitrust arguments.
15. The operation of a camera is similar in many ways to the operation of an eye.
If you are to see anything in a darkened room, the pupils of your eyes must
ﬁrst dilate. Accordingly, if you are to take a photograph (without ﬂash) in a
darkened room, the aperture of the camera lens must ﬁrst be opened.
16.
#
Certainly Miss Malone will be a capable and efﬁcient manager. She has a
great ﬁgure, a gorgeous face, and tremendous poise, and she dresses very
fashionably.
17. Television evangelist Pat Robertson has said that there is no constitutional
basis for separation of church and state. In view of Robertson’s expertise, we
have no alternative but to abandon this longstanding principle of government.
18. Dear Internal Revenue Service: I received a notice that my taxes are being
audited for last year. But you have no right to do this. The deadline for ﬁling
a return was April 15, and I ﬁled my tax return on April 12—a full three days
before the deadline.
19.
#
To prevent dangerous weapons from being carried aboard airliners, those
seeking to board must pass through a magnetometer and submit to a possible
pat-down search. Therefore, to prevent alcohol and drugs from being carried
into rock concerts, it is appropriate that those entering submit to similar
search procedures.
20. Mr. Flemming’s arguments against the rent control initiative on the September
ballot should be taken with a grain of salt. As a landlord he would naturally
be expected to oppose the initiative.
21. India is suffering a serious drought, thousands of children are dying of star-
vation in their mothers’ arms, and homeless beggars line the streets of the
major cities. Surely we must give these poor downtrodden people the chance
of bettering their condition in America, the land of wealth and opportunity.
22.
#
Members of the jury, you have heard Shirley Gaines testify that she observed
the entire scene and that at no time did the defendant offer to perform acts of

Fallacies of Weak Induction
153
S
N
L
prostitution for the undercover police ofﬁcer. But Gaines is a known prosti-
tute herself and a close friend of the defendant. Also, only a year ago she was
convicted of twelve counts of perjury. Therefore, you should certainly dis-
count Gaines’s testimony.
23. It is ridiculous to hear that man from Peru complaining about America’s pov-
erty. Peru has twice as much poverty as America has ever had.
24. Angela complains that the problems on the algebra test were too hard. But
have you ever seen the way Angela ﬂirts with that good-looking quarterback
on the football team? She’s constantly batting those long, black eyelashes at
him, and her tight-ﬁtting sweaters leave nothing to the imagination. Angela
should pay more attention to her studies.
25.
#
Nobody has ever proved that immoral behavior by elected ofﬁcials erodes
public morality. Therefore, we must conclude that such behavior does not
erode public morality.
26. Freedom of speech is guaranteed by the First Amendment. Therefore, your
friend was acting within his rights when he shouted ‘‘Fire! Fire!’’ in that
crowded theater, even though it was only a joke.
27. No one, upon encountering a watch lying on a forest trail, would expect that
it had simply appeared there without having been made by someone. For the
same reason, no one should expect that the universe simply appeared with-
out having been made by some being.
28.
#
On Monday I drank ten rum and Cokes, and the next morning I woke up with
a headache. On Wednesday I drank eight gin and Cokes, and the next morn-
ing I woke up with a headache. On Friday I drank nine Bourbon and Cokes,
and the next morning I woke up with a headache. Obviously, to prevent
further headaches I must give up Coke.
29. Senate majority leader Trent Lott announced in a press conference that ho-
mosexuality is a sin. In view of Mr. Lott’s expertise in religious matters, we
must conclude that homosexuality is a sin, just as he claims.
30. Some of the parents in our school district have asked that we provide bilin-
gual education in Spanish. This request will have to be denied. If we provide
this service, then someone will ask for bilingual education in Greek. Then it
will be German, French, and Hungarian. Polish, Russian, Chinese, Japanese,
and Korean will follow close behind. We certainly can’t accommodate all
of them.
IV. Identify the arguments in the following dialogue, then discuss each of them in
terms of the fallacies presented in this section and the previous section. You
should be able to ﬁnd at least one case of each fallacy.
‘‘Hi! Glad you could make it,’’ Ralph says to his friend Claudia at a Friday night
party. ‘‘Hey, you just missed a great discussion that Tom, Ruben, and I were having

154
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
about abduction by extraterrestrials. Ruben just left, but he said he’s been reading
this book by Whitley Strieber—I think it’s called Transformation—in which Strieber
describes being kidnapped by creatures from outer space.’’
‘‘Good grief! You don’t actually believe that nonsense, do you?’’ Claudia asks
incredulously.
‘‘Well, I don’t think Strieber would lie. Also, Ruben told us an amazing personal
story. He was out camping a year ago, and after he’d killed off a couple of six
packs of Moosehead, he says he saw a UFO. So, I think we have to conclude there
really are UFOs.’’
‘‘What a joke!’’ Claudia laughs scornfully. ‘‘Ruben was probably hallucinating.
By the way, didn’t he fail most of his classes last semester? His parents are spend-
ing a fortune for his education, and all he does is party, sleep, and ignore his
studies. I think that’s immoral. As for Strieber, does he give any evidence?’’
‘‘As a matter of fact, he does,’’ Ralph replies smugly. ‘‘Apparently, a few years
ago, he was driving with his wife on some country road, when both of them expe-
rienced an unusual blackout. When they woke up, they were thirty-ﬁve miles further
down the road, and they had no recollection of how they got there. Later, both
began having dreams about extraterrestrials performing experiments on them
while they were on board their spacecraft. Extraterrestrials must have abducted
them, then hypnotized them so they wouldn’t remember what had happened.’’
‘‘Oh yeah, now I remember who Strieber is,’’ answers Claudia, caustically. ‘‘He’s
that weirdo who dreams up all kinds of fantastic stories just so he can write books
about them and make lots of money. If you give that sickie one minute of your
time, then you’re crazier than he is.’’
‘‘I think you’re prejudiced,’’ Ralph says. ‘‘Why, recent surveys show that 64 per-
cent of the American public believe in UFOs, and the number is growing every day.
That alone should convince you they’re real.’’
‘‘You’ve got to be kidding,’’ Claudia mutters, shaking her head in disbelief.
‘‘Well then, consider this,’’ insists Ralph. ‘‘There are hundreds of people out
there who’ve had similar dreams and the same unaccounted for time lapses. They
can’t all be fantasizing.’’
‘‘I know that Strieber is a kook,’’ Claudia persists, ‘‘so all the others must be, too.’’
‘‘Now, now, aren’t we jumping to conclusions?’’ her friend asks
condescendingly.
‘‘Not at all. First it was UFOs and little green men. Now those little creatures are
abducting people and experimenting on them. Before long they’ll be manipulating
our genes and trying to inﬁltrate the human race. In the end, everyone will suspect
everyone else of being an alien, mass terror will prevail, and civilization will col-
lapse!’’ Claudia exclaims in mock horror.
‘‘Don’t be a fool!’’ Ralph barks, irritated. ‘‘The problem with you is, you’re an
agnostic. Obviously, you’re saying we should refuse to believe in anything we can’t
clearly see or touch. So, logically, God doesn’t exist, and there is no immortal soul.
Tom, that’s what she’s saying, isn’t it?’’
‘‘More or less,’’ Tom agrees halfheartedly.
‘‘Again, not at all,’’ Claudia responds. ‘‘What I’m saying is, people have to be
just a little bit critical about what they believe. Apparently you believe any cocka-
mamie story that comes your way. You’re just so gullible. If you keep it up, every-
one and their dog will take you for a ride.’’

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
155
S
N
L
‘‘Oh yeah? If I were you, I’d take a close look at my own beliefs,’’ Ralph gibes.
‘‘Didn’t I see you reading the astrology column just the other day? Nobody in
their right mind believes in astrology. Maybe I should start screaming ‘Claudia
believes in astrology! Claudia believes in astrology!’ Then everyone will gawk at
you, and that sexy physics major you’re dying to get a date with will think you’re
a nut.’’
‘‘Oh, shut up!’’ says Claudia, blushing. ‘‘I may read the astrology column, but I
certainly don’t believe it. I just read it for fun. But, the fact is, during the past
twenty-ﬁve years there have been thousands of alleged sightings of UFOs, and not
a single one has led to any solid evidence of their existence. What do you make of
that?’’
‘‘I think we should look at this situation the other way around,’’ Ralph says. ‘‘Up
until now, nobody has shown that UFOs don’t exist, so I think we should give
those people who claim they have seen them the beneﬁt of the doubt. We should
believe in UFOs and extraterrestrials until the sightings are proven false.’’
‘‘Well, okay. Let’s suppose, just for the sake of argument, that I admit the exis-
tence of UFOs and their little green drivers. How are we supposed to respond to
them? What are we supposed to do?’’ Claudia asks.
‘‘For starters, we should extend an open invitation to them,’’ answers Ralph.
‘‘They may come from a dying planet where millions of their compatriots desper-
ately struggle for survival. Their sun may be burning out, their water supply ex-
hausted, and their soil poisoned with toxic chemicals. Surely they deserve a second
chance on a new planet.’’
‘‘Maybe so,’’ Claudia says in a patronizing tone. ‘‘And now that you mention it,
we probably have a legal obligation to let them in. Our current immigration laws say
that we have to admit at least ten thousand applicants annually, from every major
nation. If those aliens would just sign the right papers, we’d have to give them
permanent residency. However, what worries me is, they may have the wrong inten-
tions. After all, didn’t they conduct experiments on those people they abducted?’’
‘‘Yes, but don’t we experiment on animals? If the animals don’t complain, why
should we? Also, medical experimentation often leads to wonderful new cures.
I’m certain we have nothing to worry about,’’ says Ralph, proud of his logic.
‘‘Humph! I hope you’re right. Well, I’ve got to go now—and don’t let any
green men kidnap you,’’ Claudia says with a barb.
‘‘And you, either,’’ Ralph answers.
3.4
Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity,
and Grammatical Analogy
The fallacies of presumption include begging the question, complex question,
false dichotomy, and suppressed evidence. These fallacies arise not because the prem-
ises are irrelevant to the conclusion or provide insufﬁcient reason for believing the
conclusion but because the premises presume what they purport to prove. Begging
the question presumes that the premises provide adequate support for the conclusion

156
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Premises:
Key premise ignored
Conclusion
Premises
Conclusion
Begging the question
S
u
p
p
o
r
t
s
P
r
o
v
e
s
v
a
li
d
i
t
y
when in fact they do not, and complex question presumes that a question can be
answered by a simple ‘‘yes,’’ ‘‘no,’’ or other brief answer when a more sophisticated
answer is needed. False dichotomy presumes that an ‘‘either . . . or . . .’’ statement pre-
sents mutually exhaustive alternatives when in fact it does not, and suppressed evi-
dence presumes that no important evidence has been overlooked by the premises
when in fact it has.
The fallacies of ambiguity include equivocation and amphiboly. These fallacies
arise from the occurrence of some form of ambiguity in either the premises or the
conclusion (or both). As we saw in Section 2.1, an expression is ambiguous if it is
susceptible to different interpretations in a given context. The words ‘‘light’’ and
‘‘bank’’ are ambiguous, as is the statement ‘‘Tuna are biting off the Washington coast.’’
When the conclusion of an argument depends on a shift in meaning of an ambiguous
word or phrase or on the wrong interpretation of an ambiguous statement, the argu-
ment commits a fallacy of ambiguity.
The fallacies of grammatical analogy include composition and division. Argu-
ments that commit these fallacies are grammatically analogous to other arguments that
are good in every respect. Because of this similarity in linguistic structure, such falla-
cious arguments may appear good yet be bad.
15. Begging the Question (Petitio Principii)
The fallacy of begging the question is committed whenever the arguer creates the
illusion that inadequate premises provide adequate support for the conclusion by
leaving out a key premise, by restating the conclusion as a premise, or by reason-
ing in a circle. The latin name for this fallacy, petitio principii, means ‘‘request for
the source.’’ The actual source of support for the conclusion is not apparent, and
so the argument is said to beg the question. After reading or hearing the argument,
the observer is inclined to ask, ‘‘But how do you know X?’’ where X is the needed
support.

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
157
S
N
L
The ﬁrst, and most common, way of committing this fallacy is by leaving a key
premise out of the argument while creating the illusion that nothing more is needed
to establish the conclusion. Examples:
Murder is morally wrong. This being the case, it follows that abortion is morally
wrong.
Of course humans and apes evolved from common ancestors. Just look how simi-
lar they are.
It’s obvious that the poor in this country should be given handouts from the gov-
ernment. After all, these people earn less than the average citizen.
Clearly, terminally ill patients have a right to doctor assisted suicide. After all, many
of these people are unable to commit suicide by themselves.
The ﬁrst of these arguments begs the question ‘‘How do you know that abortion is
a form of murder?’’ The second begs the question ‘‘Does the mere fact that humans
and apes look similar imply that they evolved from common ancestors?’’ And the third
and fourth beg the questions ‘‘Just because the poor earn less than the average citizen,
does this imply that the government should give them handouts?’’ and ‘‘Just because
terminally ill patients cannot commit suicide by themselves, why does it follow that
they have a right to a doctor’s assistance?’’
These questions indicate that something has been left out of the original arguments.
Thus, the ﬁrst argument is missing the premise, ‘‘Abortion is a form of murder’’; the
second is missing the premise, ‘‘The fact that humans and apes look similar implies
that they have common ancestors’’; and so on. These premises are crucial for the
soundness of the arguments. If the arguer is unable to establish the truth of these
premises, then the arguments prove nothing. However, in most cases of begging the
question, this is precisely the reason why such premises are left unstated. The arguer
is not able to establish their truth, and by employing rhetorical phraseology such as
‘‘of course,’’ ‘‘clearly,’’ ‘‘this being the case,’’ and ‘‘after all,’’ the arguer hopes to create
the illusion that the stated premise, by itself, provides adequate support for the conclu-
sion when in fact it does not.
The same form of begging the question often appears in arguments concerning
religious topics, to justify conclusions about the existence of God, the immortality of
the soul, and so on. Example:
The world in which we live displays an amazing degree of organization. Obviously
this world was created by an intelligent God.
This argument begs the question, ‘‘How do you know that the organization in the
world could only have come from an intelligent creator?’’ Of course the claim that it
did come from an intelligent creator may well be true, but the burden is on the arguer
to prove it. Without supporting reasons or evidence, the argument proves nothing.
Yet, most people who are predisposed to believe the conclusion are likely to accept

158
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
the argument as a good one. The same can be said of most arguments that beg the
question, and this fact suggests another reason why arguers resort to this fallacy: Such
arguments tend to reinforce preexisting inclinations and beliefs.
The second form of petitio principii occurs when the premise of an argument
merely restates the conclusion in slightly different language. Examples:
Capital punishment is justiﬁed for the crimes of murder and kidnapping because it
is quite legitimate and appropriate that someone be put to death for having
committed such hateful and inhuman acts.
Anyone who preaches revolution has a vision of the future for the simple reason
that if a person has no vision of the future he could not possibly preach
revolution.
In the ﬁrst argument, saying that capital punishment is ‘‘justiﬁed’’ means the same
thing as saying that it is ‘‘legitimate and appropriate,’’ and in the second argument the
premise and the conclusion say exactly the same thing. However, by repeating the
same thing in slightly different language, the arguer creates the illusion that indepen-
dent evidence is being presented in support of the conclusion, when in fact it is not.
Both arguments contain rhetorical phraseology (‘‘hateful and inhuman,’’ ‘‘simple rea-
son,’’ and ‘‘could not possibly’’) that help effect the illusion. The ﬁrst argument begs
the question, ‘‘How do you know that capital punishment really is legitimate and
appropriate?’’ and the second begs the question, ‘‘How do you know that people who
preach revolution really do have a vision of the future?’’
The third form of petitio principii involves circular reasoning in a chain of infer-
ences. Here is an example:
Ford Motor Company clearly produces the ﬁnest cars in the United States. We
know they produce the ﬁnest cars because they have the best design engi-
neers. This is true because they can afford to pay them more than other manu-
facturers. Obviously they can afford to pay them more because they produce
the ﬁnest cars in the United States.
Upon encountering this argument, the attentive reader is inclined to ask, ‘‘Where does
this reasoning begin? What is its source?’’ Since the argument goes in a circle, it has no
beginning or source, and as a result it proves nothing. Of course, in this example the
circularity is rather apparent, so the argument is not likely to convince anyone. Cases
in which circular reasoning may convince involve long and complex arguments hav-
ing premises that depend on one another in subtle ways and a key premise that
depends on the conclusion.
In all cases of begging the question, the arguer uses some linguistic device to create
the illusion that inadequate premises provide adequate support for a conclusion.With-
out such an illusion, the fallacy is not committed. Thus, the following arguments
commit no fallacy:

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
159
S
N
L
No dogs are cats.
Therefore, no cats are dogs.
London is in England and Paris is in France.
Therefore, Paris is in France and London is in England.
In both of these examples, the premise amounts to little more than a restatement of
the conclusion. Yet, both arguments are sound because they are valid and have true
premises. No fallacy is committed because no illusion is created to make inadequate
premises appear as adequate. We will study arguments of this sort in Chapters 4 and 7.
Here is another example:
Rome is in Germany or Rome is in Germany.
Therefore, Rome is in Germany.
This argument is valid, but it is unsound because it has a false premise. However, it
commits no fallacy because, again, no illusion is created to cover anything up. Argu-
ments having this form also appear in Chapter 7.
As with these examples, arguments that beg the question are normally valid. This
is easy to see. Any argument that includes the conclusion as one of the premises is
clearly valid, and those forms of the fallacy that leave a key premise out of the argu-
ment become valid when that key premise is introduced. The problem with arguments
that beg the question is that they are usually unsound, or at least not clearly sound,
because the premise needed to provide adequate support for the conclusion is, at
best, of uncertain truth value. Because such arguments presume the truth of this prem-
ise, begging the question is called a fallacy of presumption.
16. Complex Question
The fallacy of complex question is committed when a single question that is really
two (or more) questions is asked and a single answer is then applied to both questions.
Every complex question presumes the existence of a certain condition. When the
respondent’s answer is added to the complex question, an argument emerges that
establishes the presumed condition. Thus, although not an argument as such, a com-
plex question involves an implicit argument. This argument is usually intended to trap
the respondent into acknowledging something that he or she might otherwise not
want to acknowledge. Examples:
Have you stopped cheating on exams?
Where did you hide the cookies you stole?
Let us suppose the respondent answers ‘‘yes’’ to the ﬁrst question and ‘‘under the bed’’
to the second. The following arguments emerge:

160
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Completed
argument
A = Arguer
R/L = Reader/
Listener
Complex
question
Responds
A
Attempts to trap
by asking question
R/L
You were asked whether you have stopped cheating on exams. You answered
‘‘yes.’’ Therefore, it follows that you have cheated in the past.
You were asked where you hid the cookies you stole. You replied ‘‘under the bed.’’
It follows that you did in fact steal the cookies.
On the other hand, let us suppose that the respondent answers ‘‘no’’ to the ﬁrst ques-
tion and ‘‘nowhere’’ to the second. We then have the following arguments:
You were asked whether you have stopped cheating on exams. You answered
‘‘no.’’ Therefore, you continue to cheat.
You were asked where you hid the cookies you stole. You answered ‘‘nowhere.’’
It follows that you must have stolen them and eaten them.
Obviously, each of the questions is really two questions:
Did you cheat on exams in the past? If you did cheat in the past, have you stopped
now?
Did you steal the cookies? If you did steal them, where did you hide them?
If respondents are not sophisticated enough to identify a complex question when
one is put to them, they may answer quite innocently and be trapped by a conclusion
that is supported by no evidence at all; or, they may be tricked into providing the
evidence themselves. The correct response lies in resolving the complex question into
its component questions and answering each separately.
The fallacy of complex question should be distinguished from another kind of
question known in law as a leading question. A leading question is one in which the
answer is in some way suggested in the question. Whether or not a question is a
leading one is important in the direct examination of a witness by counsel. Example:
Tell us, on April 9, did you see
the defendant shoot the
deceased?
(leading question)
Tell us, what did you see on
April 9?
(straight question)

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
161
S
N
L
Leading questions differ from complex questions in that they involve no logical falla-
cies; that is, they do not attempt to trick the respondent into admitting something he
or she does not want to admit. To distinguish the two, however, it is sometimes
necessary to know whether prior questions have been asked. Here are some addi-
tional examples of complex questions:
Are you going to be a good little boy and eat your hamburger?
Is George Hendrix still smoking marijuana?
How long must I put up with your snotty behavior?
When are you going to stop talking nonsense?
17. False Dichotomy
The fallacy of false dichotomy (otherwise called ‘‘false bifurcation’’ and the ‘‘either-
or fallacy’’) is committed when one premise of an argument is an ‘‘either . . . or . . .’’
(disjunctive) statement that presents two alternatives as if they were jointly exhaustive
(as if no third alternative were possible). One of these alternatives is usually preferred
by the arguer. When the arguer then proceeds to eliminate the undesirable alternative,
the desirable one is left as the conclusion. Such an argument is clearly valid; but since
the disjunctive premise is usually false, the argument is almost always unsound. Of
course, not all unsound arguments are fallacious. The fallacious nature of false dichot-
omy lies in the attempt by the arguer to delude the reader or listener into thinking that
the disjunctive premise presents jointly exhaustive alternatives and is therefore true
by necessity. The fallacy is commonly committed by children and adolescents when
arguing with their parents, by advertisers, and by adults generally. Here are some
examples:
Either you let me attend the Garth Brooks concert or I’ll be miserable for the rest
of my life. I know you don’t want me to be miserable for the rest of my life, so
it follows that you’ll let me attend the concert.
Either you use Ultra Guard deodorant or you risk the chance of perspiration odor.
Surely you don’t want to risk the chance of perspiration odor. Therefore, you
will want to use Ultra Guard deodorant.
Either you buy only American-made products or you don’t deserve to be called a
loyal American. Yesterday you bought a new Toyota. It’s therefore clear that you
don’t deserve to be called a loyal American.
None of the disjunctive premises in these arguments presents alternatives that are
jointly exhaustive. Yet in each case the arguer wants to make it appear that it does. For
example, in the ﬁrst argument the arguer wants to convey the illusion that either he or
she goes to the concert or faces a lifetime of misery, and no other alternatives are
possible. Clearly, however, such is not the case.
False dichotomy is classiﬁed as a fallacy of presumption because the soundness of
the argument depends on the presumption that the two alternatives presented are the

162
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
only ones that exist. If they are not the only ones that exist, the ‘‘either . . . or . . .’’
statement is false, and the argument is unsound.
Most instances of false dichotomy are not presented as complete arguments. Only
the disjunctive premise is expressed, and the arguer leaves it to the reader or listener
to supply the missing parts:
Either you buy me a new mink coat, or I’ll freeze to death when winter comes.
Either I continue smoking, or I’ll get fat and you’ll hate to be seen with me.
The missing premise and conclusion are easily introduced.
18. Suppressed Evidence
Chapter 1 explained that a cogent argument is an inductive argument with good rea-
soning and true premises. The requirement of true premises includes the proviso that
the premises not ignore some important piece of evidence that outweighs the pre-
sented evidence and entails a very different conclusion. If an inductive argument does
indeed ignore such evidence, then the argument commits the fallacy of suppressed
evidence. Consider, for example, the following argument:
Most dogs are friendly and pose no threat to people who pet them. Therefore, it
would be safe to pet the little dog that is approaching us now.
If the arguer ignores the fact that the little dog is excited and foaming at the mouth
(which suggests rabies), then the argument commits a suppressed evidence fallacy.
This fallacy is classiﬁed as a fallacy of presumption because it works by creating the
presumption that the premises are both true and complete when in fact they are not.
Perhaps the most common occurrence of the suppressed evidence fallacy appears
in inferences based on advertisements. Nearly every ad neglects to mention certain
negative features of the product advertised. As a result, an observer who sees or hears
an advertisement and then draws a conclusion from it may commit the fallacy of
suppressed evidence. Example:
The new RCA Digital Satellite System delivers sharp TV reception from an 18-inch
dish antenna, and it costs only $199. Therefore, if we buy it, we can enjoy all
the channels for a relatively small one-time investment.
The ads for the Digital Satellite System fail to mention that the user must also pay a
substantial monthly fee to the satellite company and that none of the local channels
are carried by the system. Thus, if the observer takes the ads at face value and uses
them as the basis for such an argument, the argument will be fallacious.
Another way that an arguer can commit the suppressed evidence fallacy is by
ignoring important events that have occurred with the passage of time that render an
inductive conclusion improbable. Here is an example:

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
163
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion
Ignores stronger evidence that
supports a different conclusion
Suppressed evidence
During the past ﬁfty years, Poland has enjoyed a rather low standard of living.
Therefore, Poland will probably have a low standard of living for the next ﬁfty
years.
This argument ignores the fact that Poland was part of the Soviet bloc during most of
the past ﬁfty years, and this fact accounts for its rather low standard of living. However,
following the collapse of the Soviet Union, Poland became an independent nation,
and its economy is expected to improve steadily during the next ﬁfty years.
Yet another form of suppressed evidence is committed by arguers who quote pas-
sages out of context from sources such as the Bible, the Constitution, and the Bill of
Rights to support a conclusion that the passage was not intended to support. Consider,
for example, the following argument against gun control:
The Second Amendment to the Constitution states that the right of the people to
keep and bear arms shall not be infringed. But a law controlling handguns
would infringe the right to keep and bear arms. Therefore, a law controlling
handguns would be unconstitutional.
In fact, the Second Amendment reads, ‘‘A well regulated militia, being necessary to the
security of a free state, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be
infringed.’’ In other words, the amendment states that the right to bear arms shall not be
infringed when the arms are necessary for the preservation of a well-regulated militia.
Because a law controlling handguns (pistols) would have little effect on the preserva-
tion of a well-regulated militia, it is unlikely that such a law would be unconstitutional.
The suppressed evidence fallacy is similar to the form of begging the question in
which the arguer leaves a key premise out of the argument. The difference is that
suppressed evidence leaves out a premise that requires a different conclusion, while
that form of begging the question leaves out a premise that is needed to support the
stated conclusion. However, because both fallacies proceed by leaving a premise out
of the argument, there are cases where the two fallacies overlap.

164
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
Word or phrase
used in two senses
Equivocation
Premises
Conclusion
19. Equivocation
The fallacy of equivocation occurs when the conclusion of an argument depends on
the fact that a word or phrase is used, either explicitly or implicitly, in two different
senses in the argument. Such arguments are either invalid or have a false premise, and
in either case they are unsound. Examples:
Some triangles are obtuse. Whatever is obtuse is ignorant. Therefore, some trian-
gles are ignorant.
Any law can be repealed by the legislative authority. But the law of gravity is a law.
Therefore, the law of gravity can be repealed by the legislative authority.
We have a duty to do what is right. We have a right to speak out in defense of the
innocent. Therefore, we have a duty to speak out in defense of the innocent.
A mouse is an animal. Therefore, a large mouse is a large animal.
In the ﬁrst argument ‘‘obtuse’’ is used in two different senses. In the ﬁrst premise it
describes a certain kind of angle, while in the second it means dull or stupid. The
second argument equivocates on the word ‘‘law.’’ In the ﬁrst premise it means statutory
law, and in the second it means law of nature. The third argument uses ‘‘right’’ in two
senses. In the ﬁrst premise ‘‘right’’ means morally correct, but in the second it means a
just claim or power. The fourth argument illustrates the ambiguous use of a relative
term. The word ‘‘large’’ means different things depending on the context. Other rela-
tive terms that are susceptible to this same kind of ambiguity include ‘‘small,’’ ‘‘good,’’
‘‘bad,’’ ‘‘light,’’ ‘‘heavy,’’ ‘‘difﬁcult,’’ ‘‘easy,’’ ‘‘tall,’’ ‘‘short,’’ and so on.
To be convincing, an argument that commits an equivocation must use the equiv-
ocal word in ways that are subtly related. Of the three examples given above, only the
third might fulﬁll this requirement. Since both uses of the word ‘‘right’’ are related to
ethics, the unalert observer may not notice the shift in meaning. Another technique is
to spread the shift in meaning out over the course of a lengthy argument. Political

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
165
S
N
L
Premises
Conclusion
Mentions ambiguous
statement
Misinterprets
that statement
Amphiboly
speechmakers often use phrases such as ‘‘equal opportunity,’’ ‘‘gun control,’’ ‘‘national
security,’’ and ‘‘environmental protection’’ in one way at the beginning of a speech and
in quite another way at the end. A third technique consists in using such phrases one
way in a speech to one group and in a different way in a speech to an opposing group.
If the same people are not present at both speeches, the equivocation is not detected.
20. Amphiboly
The fallacy of amphiboly occurs when the arguer misinterprets a statement that is
syntactically ambiguous and proceeds to draw a conclusion based on this faulty in-
terpretation. The original statement is usually asserted by someone other than the
arguer, and the syntactical ambiguity usually arises from a mistake in grammar or
punctuation—a missing comma, a dangling modiﬁer, an ambiguous antecedent of a
pronoun, or some other careless arrangement of words. Because of this ambiguity, the
statement may be understood in two clearly distinguishable ways. The arguer typically
selects the unintended interpretation and proceeds to draw a conclusion based upon
it. Here are some examples:
The tour guide said that standing in Greenwich Village, the Empire State Building
could easily be seen. It follows that the Empire State Building is in Greenwich
Village.
John told Henry that he had made a mistake. It follows that John has at least the
courage to admit his own mistakes.
Professor Johnson said that he will give a lecture about heart failure in the biology
lecture hall. It must be the case that a number of heart failures have occurred
there recently.
The premise of the ﬁrst argument contains a dangling modiﬁer. Is it the observer or
the Empire State Building that is supposed to be standing in Greenwich Village? The
correct interpretation is the former. In the second argument the pronoun ‘‘he’’ has an

166
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
ambiguous antecedent; it can refer either to John or to Henry. Perhaps John told Henry
that Henry had made a mistake. In the third argument the ambiguity concerns what
takes place in the biology lecture hall; is it the lecture or the heart failures? The correct
interpretation is probably the former. The ambiguity can be eliminated by inserting
commas (‘‘Professor Johnson said that he will give a lecture, about heart failure, in the
biology lecture hall’’) or by moving the ambiguous modiﬁer (‘‘Professor Johnson said
that he will give a lecture in the biology lecture hall about heart failure’’).
Two areas where cases of amphiboly cause serious problems involve contracts and
wills. The drafters of these documents often express their intentions in terms of ambig-
uous statements, and alternate interpretations of these statements then lead to differ-
ent conclusions. Examples:
Mrs. Hart stated in her will, ‘‘I leave my 500-carat diamond necklace and my pet
chinchilla to Alice and Theresa.’’ Therefore, we conclude that Alice gets the
necklace and Theresa gets the chinchilla.
Mr. James signed a contract that reads, ‘‘In exchange for painting my house, I
promise to pay David $5000 and give him my new Cadillac only if he ﬁnishes
the job by May 1.’’ Therefore, since David did not ﬁnish until May 10, it follows
that he gets neither the $5000 nor the Cadillac.
In the ﬁrst example, the conclusion obviously favors Alice. Theresa is almost certain
to argue that the gift of the necklace and chinchilla should be shared equally by her
and Alice. Mrs. Hart could have avoided the dispute by adding either ‘‘respectively’’ or
‘‘collectively’’ to the end of the sentence. In the second example, the conclusion favors
Mr. James. David will argue that the condition that he ﬁnish by May 1 affected only the
Cadillac and that he therefore is entitled to the $5000. The dispute could have been
avoided by properly inserting a comma in the language of the promise.
Amphiboly differs from equivocation in two important ways. First, equivocation is
always traced to an ambiguity in the meaning of a word or phrase, whereas amphiboly
involves a syntactical ambiguity in a statement. The second difference is that amphib-
oly usually involves a mistake made by the arguer in interpreting an ambiguous state-
ment made by someone else, whereas the ambiguity in equivocation is typically the
arguer’s own creation. If these distinctions are kept in mind, it is usually easy to
distinguish amphiboly from equivocation. Occasionally, however, the two fallacies
occur together, as the following example illustrates:
The Great Western Cookbook recommends that we serve the oysters when thor-
oughly stewed. Apparently the delicate ﬂavor is enhanced by the intoxicated
condition of the diners.
First, it is unclear whether ‘‘stewed’’ refers to the oysters or to the diners, and so the
argument commits an amphiboly. But if ‘‘stewed’’ refers to the oysters it means
‘‘cooked,’’ and if it refers to the diners it means ‘‘intoxicated.’’ Thus, the argument also
involves an equivocation.

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
167
S
N
L
Whole
Attribute is
improperly transferred.
Composition
Parts
21. Composition
The fallacy of composition is committed when the conclusion of an argument de-
pends on the erroneous transference of an attribute from the parts of something onto
the whole. In other words, the fallacy occurs when it is argued that because the parts
have a certain attribute, it follows that the whole has that attribute too and the situation
is such that the attribute in question cannot be legitimately transferred from parts to
whole. Examples:
Maria likes anchovies. She also likes chocolate ice cream. Therefore, it is certain
that she would like a chocolate sundae topped with anchovies.
Each player on this basketball team is an excellent athlete. Therefore, the team as
a whole is excellent.
Each atom in this piece of chalk is invisible. Therefore, the chalk is invisible.
Sodium and chlorine, the atomic components of salt, are both deadly poisons.
Therefore, salt is a deadly poison.
In these arguments the attributes that are transferred from the parts onto the whole are
designated by the words ‘‘Maria likes,’’ ‘‘excellent,’’ ‘‘invisible,’’ and ‘‘deadly poison,’’ re-
spectively. In each case the transference is illegitimate, and so the argument is fallacious.
Not every such transference is illegitimate, however. Consider the following
arguments:
Every atom in this piece of chalk has mass. Therefore, the piece of chalk has mass.
Every component in this picket fence is white. Therefore, the whole fence is white.

168
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
In each case an attribute (having mass, being white) is transferred from the parts onto
the whole, but these transferences are quite legitimate. Indeed, the fact that the atoms
have mass is the very reason why the chalk has mass. The same reasoning extends to
the fence. Thus, the acceptability of these arguments is attributable, at least in part, to
the legitimate transference of an attribute from parts onto the whole.
These examples illustrate the fact that the fallacy of composition is indeed an infor-
mal fallacy. It cannot be discovered by a mere inspection of the form of an argument—
that is, by the mere observation that an attribute is being transferred from parts onto
the whole. In addition, detecting this fallacy requires a general knowledge of the
situation and of the nature of the attribute being transferred. The critic must be certain
that, given the situation, the transference of this particular attribute is not allowed.
Further caution is required by the fact that composition is sometimes confused with
hasty generalization. The only time this confusion is possible is when the ‘‘whole’’ is a
class (such as the class of people in a city or the class of trees in a forest), and the
‘‘parts’’ are the members of the class. In such a case composition proceeds from the
members of the class to the class itself. Hasty generalization, on the other hand,
proceeds from the speciﬁc to the general. Because it is sometimes easy to mistake a
statement about a class for a general statement, composition can be mistaken for hasty
generalization. Such a mistake can be avoided if one is careful to keep in mind the
distinction between these two kinds of statements. This distinction falls back on the
difference between the collective and the distributive predication of an attribute.
Consider the following statements:
Fleas are small.
Fleas are numerous.
The ﬁrst statement is a general statement. The attribute of being small is predicated
distributively; that is, it is assigned (or distributed) to each and every ﬂea in the class.
Each and every ﬂea in the class is said to be small. The second statement, on the other
hand, is a statement about a class as a whole, or what we will call a ‘‘class statement.’’
The attribute of being numerous is predicated collectively; in other words, it is as-
signed not to the individual ﬂeas but to the class of ﬂeas. The meaning of the statement
is not that each and every ﬂea is numerous but that the class of ﬂeas is large.
To distinguish composition from hasty generalization, therefore, the following pro-
cedure should be followed. Examine the conclusion of the argument. If the conclusion
is a general statement—that is, a statement in which an attribute is predicated distrib-
utively to each and every member of a class—the fallacy committed is hasty generali-
zation. But if the conclusion is a class statement—that is, a statement in which an
attribute is predicated collectively to a class as a whole—the fallacy is composition.
Example:
Less gasoline is consumed by a car than by a truck. Therefore, less gasoline is
consumed in the United States by cars than by trucks.

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
169
S
N
L
Whole
Attribute is
improperly transferred.
Division
Parts
At ﬁrst sight this argument might appear to proceed from the speciﬁc to the general
and, consequently, to commit a hasty generalization. But in fact the conclusion is not
a general statement at all but a class statement. The conclusion states that the whole
class of cars uses less gas than does the whole class of trucks (which is false, because
there are many more cars than trucks). Since the attribute of using less gasoline is
predicated collectively, the fallacy committed is composition.
22. Division
The fallacy of division is the exact reverse of composition. As composition goes from
parts to whole, division goes from whole to parts. The fallacy is committed when the
conclusion of an argument depends on the erroneous transference of an attribute from
a whole (or a class) onto its parts (or members). Examples:
Salt is a nonpoisonous compound. Therefore, its component elements, sodium
and chlorine, are nonpoisonous.
This jigsaw puzzle, when assembled, is circular in shape. Therefore, each piece is
circular in shape.
The Royal Society is over 300 years old. Professor Thompson is a member of the
Royal Society. Therefore, Professor Thompson is over 300 years old.
In each case the attribute, designated respectively by the terms ‘‘nonpoisonous,’’ ‘‘cir-
cular in shape,’’ and ‘‘over 300 years old,’’ is illegitimately transferred from the whole
or class onto the parts or members. As with the fallacy of composition, however, this

170
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
kind of transference is not always illegitimate. The following arguments contain no
fallacy:
This piece of chalk has mass. Therefore, the atoms that compose this piece of
chalk have mass.
This ﬁeld of poppies is uniformly orange in color. Therefore, the individual poppies
are orange in color.
Obviously, one must be acquainted with the situation and the nature of the attribute
being transferred to decide whether the fallacy of division is actually committed.
Just as composition is sometimes prone to being confused with hasty generalization
(converse accident), division is sometimes prone to being confused with accident. As
with composition, this confusion can occur only when the ‘‘whole’’ is a class. In such
a case, division proceeds from the class to the members, while accident proceeds from
the general to the speciﬁc. Thus, if a class statement is mistaken for a general state-
ment, division may be mistaken for accident. To avoid such a mistake, one should
analyze the premises of the argument. If the premises contain a general statement, the
fallacy committed is accident; but if they contain a class statement, the fallacy is divi-
sion. Example:
Stanley Steamers have almost disappeared.
This car is a Stanley Steamer.
Therefore, this car has almost disappeared.
The ﬁrst premise is not a general statement but a class statement. The attribute of
having almost disappeared is predicated collectively. Accordingly, the fallacy commit-
ted is division, not accident.
This example also illustrates how cases of division that involve class statements can
include a subtle form of equivocation. In the conclusion, the word ‘‘disappeared’’
means fading from vision, as when the lights are turned down; but in the ﬁrst premise
it means rarely seen. The equivocation is a kind of secondary fallacy that results from
the primary fallacy, which is division.
The next example shows how division turns up in arguments dealing with averages.
The average American family has 2.5 children.
The Jones family is an average American family.
Therefore, the Jones family has 2.5 children.
The statement ‘‘The average American family has 2.5 children’’ is not a general state-
ment, but rather a class statement. The sense of the statement is not that each and every
family has 2.5 children, but that the class of families is reducible to 55 percent children
and 45 percent adults. Thus, once again, the fallacy is division, and not accident.
In our account of composition and division, we have presented examples of argu-
ments that commit these fallacies in conjunction with other, structurally similar argu-

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
171
S
N
L
ments that do not. Because of the structural similarity between arguments that do and
do not commit these fallacies, composition and division are classiﬁed as fallacies of
grammatical analogy.
SUMMARY OF INFORMAL FALLACIES
Fallacies of Relevance
Appeal to force: Arguer threatens reader/listener.
Appeal to pity: Arguer elicits pity from reader/listener.
Appeal to the people (direct): Arguer arouses mob mentality.
Appeal to the people (indirect): Arguer appeals to reader/listener’s desire for
security, love, respect, etc.
Argument against the person (abusive): Arguer verbally abuses other arguer.
Argument against the person (circumstantial): Arguer presents other arguer
as predisposed to argue this way.
Argument against the person (tu quoque): Arguer presents other arguer as
hypocrite.
Accident: General rule is applied to a speciﬁc case it was not intended to
cover.
Straw man: Arguer distorts opponent’s argument and then attacks the dis-
torted argument.
Missing the point: Arguer draws conclusion different from that supported
by premises.
Red herring: Arguer leads reader/listener off track.
Fallacies of Weak Induction
Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority: Arguer cites untrustworthy authority.
Appeal to ignorance: Premises report that nothing is known or proved, and
then a conclusion is drawn.
Hasty generalization: Conclusion is drawn from atypical sample.
False cause: Conclusion depends on nonexistent or minor causal
connection.
Slippery slope: Conclusion depends on unlikely chain reaction.
Weak analogy: Conclusion depends on defective analogy.
Fallacies of Presumption
Begging the question: Arguer creates the illusion that inadequate premises
are adequate by leaving out a key premise, by restating the conclusion
as a premise, or by reasoning in a circle.
Complex question: Multiple questions are concealed in a single question.

172
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
False dichotomy: ‘‘Either . . . or . . .’’ statement hides additional alternatives.
Suppressed evidence: Arguer ignores important evidence that requires a
different conclusion.
Fallacies of Ambiguity
Equivocation: Conclusion depends on a shift in meaning of a word or phrase.
Amphiboly: Conclusion depends on the wrong interpretation of a syntacti-
cally ambiguous statement.
Fallacies of Grammatical Analogy
Composition: Attribute is wrongly transferred from parts to whole.
Division: Attribute is wrongly transferred from whole to parts.
EXERCISE 3.4
I. Identify the fallacies of presumption, ambiguity, and grammatical analogy com-
mitted by the following arguments, giving a brief explanation for your answer. If
no fallacy is committed, write ‘‘no fallacy.’’
1.
#
Either we require forced sterilization of Third World peoples or world popu-
lation will explode and all of us will die. We certainly don’t want to die, so we
must require forced sterilization.
2. Every sentence in this paragraph is well written. Therefore, the paragraph is
well written.
3. An athlete is a human being. Therefore, a good athlete is a good human being.
4.
#
James said that he saw a picture of a beautiful girl stashed in Stephen’s locker.
We can only conclude that Stephen has broken the rules, because girls are
not allowed in the locker room.
5. Why is it so difﬁcult for you to reach a decision?
6. Water will quench one’s thirst. Water is composed of hydrogen and oxygen.
Therefore, hydrogen and oxygen will quench one’s thirst.
7.
#
People who lack humility have no sense of beauty because everyone who
has a sense of beauty also has humility.
8. Butane is combustible. Therefore, it burns.
9. This letter from the National Gift Distribution Center says that we have deﬁ-
nitely won a free gift, and to claim it we need to call the phone number given
in the letter. Apparently if we call that number, they will send the gift rightaway.
10.
#
If Thomas gives Marie a ring, then Thomas and Marie will be engaged.
Thomas did give Marie a ring. In fact, he phoned her just the other night.
Therefore, Thomas and Marie are engaged.

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
173
S
N
L
11. Why did you lie on the witness stand?
12. Johnson is employed by the General Services Administration, and everyone
knows that the GSA is the most inefﬁcient branch of the government. There-
fore, Johnson must be an inefﬁcient worker.
13.
#
All men are mortal. Therefore, some day man will disappear from the earth.
14. Each and every cell in this carrot is 90 percent water. Therefore, the entire
carrot is 90 percent water.
15. George said that he was interviewing for a job drilling oil wells in the super-
visor’s ofﬁce. We can only conclude that the supervisor must have an awfully
dirty ofﬁce.
16.
#
This ad says that we can buy a new Sprint cell phone for only $99. That
sounds like a great bargain. For a single outlay of less than $100 we can make
all the phone calls we want!
17. Either you marry me right now or I’ll be forced to leave you and never speak
to you again. I’m sure you wouldn’t want me to do that. Therefore, you’ll
marry me right now.
18. Either human beings evolved from more primitive life forms or they were
created in their current state. But human beings were not created in their
current state. Therefore, human beings evolved from more primitive life
forms.
19.
#
Switzerland is 48 percent Protestant. Heidi Gilsing is a Swiss. Therefore, Heidi
Gilsing is 48 percent Protestant.
20. Picasso is the greatest artist of the twentieth century. We know that this is so
because art critics have described him in these terms. These art critics are
correct in their assessment because they have a more keenly developed sense
of appreciation than the average person. This is true because it takes a more
keenly developed sense of appreciation to realize that Picasso is the greatest
artist of the twentieth century.
21. An atomic bomb causes more damage than a conventional bomb. Therefore,
during World War II more damage was caused by atomic bombs than by
conventional bombs.
22.
#
Are you still drinking excessively?
23. The author warns about numerous computational errors in his accounting
text. Therefore, he must have written it very carelessly.
24. Emeralds are seldom found in this country, so you should be careful not to
misplace your emerald ring.
25.
#
Of course abortion is permissible. After all, a woman has a right to do as she
pleases with her own body.

174
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
II. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. Arguments that commit the fallacy of begging the question are normally valid.
2. The effect of begging the question is to hide the fact that a premise may not
be true.
3. The correct way of responding to a complex question is to divide the question
into its component questions and answer each separately.
4. False dichotomy always involves an ‘‘either . . . or . . .’’ statement, at least
implicitly.
5. The fallacy of equivocation arises from a syntactical defect in a statement.
6. The fallacy of amphiboly usually involves the ambiguous use of a single word.
7. Amphiboly usually arises from the arguer’s misinterpreting a statement made
by someone else.
8. The fallacy of composition always proceeds from whole to parts.
9. The fallacy of division always proceeds from parts to whole.
10. A general statement makes an assertion about each and every member of a
class.
11. A class statement makes an assertion about a class as a whole.
12. In the statement ‘‘Divorces are increasing,’’ an attribute is predicated
distributively.
13. In the statement ‘‘Waistlines are increasing,’’ an attribute is predicated
distributively.
14. Composition and division involve the distributive predication of an attribute.
15. Equivocation and amphiboly are classiﬁed as fallacies of ambiguity.
III. Identify the fallacies of relevance, weak induction, presumption, ambiguity, and
grammatical analogy committed by the following arguments, giving a brief expla-
nation for your answer. If no fallacy is committed, write ‘‘no fallacy.’’
1.
#
In his History of the American Civil War, Jeffry Noland argues that the war
had little to do with slavery. However, as a historian from Alabama, Noland
could not possibly present an accurate account. Therefore, his arguments
should be discounted.
2. Mr. Wilson said that on July 4 he went out on the veranda and watched the
ﬁreworks go up in his pajamas. We conclude that Mr. Wilson must have had
an exciting evening.
3. Television evangelist Jimmy Swaggart has said that sex education classes in
our public schools are promoting incest. Given Swaggart’s expertise in these
matters, we have no alternative but to abolish these classes.
4.
#
A crust of bread is better than nothing. Nothing is better than true love.
Therefore, a crust of bread is better than true love.

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
175
S
N
L
5. Every member of the Delta Club is over 70 years old. Therefore, the Delta
Club must be over 70 years old.
6. Of course you should eat Wheaties. Wheaties is the breakfast of champions,
you know.
7.
#
Of course animals have rights. Just look at how powerless they are in com-
parison with modern humans.
8. The twenty-story Carson Building is constructed of concrete blocks. Each and
every concrete block in the structure can withstand an earthquake of 9.5 on
the Richter scale. Therefore, the building can withstand an earthquake of 9.5
on the Richter scale.
9. No one has ever proved that the human fetus is not a person with rights.
Therefore, abortion is morally wrong.
10.
#
California condors are rapidly disappearing. This bird is a California condor.
Therefore, this bird should disappear any minute now.
11. When a car breaks down so often that repairs become pointless, the car is
thrown on the junk heap. Similarly, when a person becomes old and diseased,
he or she should be mercifully put to death.
12. The idea that black people in this country live in poverty is ridiculous. Look
at Bill Cosby. He’s a millionaire. And so are Denzell Washington and Oprah
Winfrey.
13.
#
Domestic terrorism (e.g., the bombing in Oklahoma City) is on the increase
nowadays. Apparently those right-wing radio talk shows are starting to bear
fruit.
14. This administration is not anti-German, as it has been alleged. Germany is a
great country. It has contributed immensely to the world’s artistic treasury.
Goethe and Schiller made magniﬁcent contributions to literature, and Bach,
Beethoven, Wagner, and Brahms did the same in music.
15. Paul, it was great to see you at the party the other night. Everyone there was
doing crack. Incidentally, how long have you been dealing that stuff?
16.
#
Pope John Paul II has stated that artiﬁcial insemination of women is immoral.
We can only conclude that this practice is indeed immoral.
17. Senator Kennedy’s arguments in favor of health care for the poor and aged
should be ignored. Kennedy is a do-gooder who supports this kind of legis-
lation only to get his name in the newspapers.
18. Professor Andrews, surely I deserve a B in logic. I know that I have gotten F’s
on all the tests, but if you give me an F for my ﬁnal grade, I will lose my
scholarship. That will force me to drop out of school, and my poor, aged
parents, who yearn to see me graduate, will be grief-stricken for the rest of
their lives.

176
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
19.
#
Molecules are in constant random motion. The Statue of Liberty is composed
of molecules. Therefore, the Statue of Liberty is in constant random motion.
20. Either we have prayer in our public schools or the moral fabric of society will
disintegrate. The choice should be obvious.
21. White sheep eat more than black sheep (because there are more of them).
Therefore, this white sheep eats more than that black sheep.
22.
#
If someone rents a piece of land and plants crops on it, the landlord is never
permitted to come and take those crops for himself when harvest time arrives.
Similarly, if couples enlist the services of a surrogate mother to provide them
with a baby, the mother should never be allowed to welch on the deal and
keep the baby for herself once it is born.
23. Motives and desires exert forces on people, causing them to choose one thing
over another. But force is a physical quantity, governed by the laws of phys-
ics. Therefore, human choices are governed by the laws of physics.
24. Each and every brick in the completely brick-faced Wainright Building has a red-
dish brown color. Therefore, the Wainright Building has a reddish brown color.
25.
#
Humanitarian groups have argued in favor of housing for the poor. Appar-
ently what they want is another high-density project. Unfortunately, these
projects have been tried in the past and have failed. In no time they turn into
ghettos with astronomical rates of crime and delinquency. Chicago’s Cabrini-
Green is a prime example. Clearly, these humanitarian arguments are not
what they seem.
26. Pauline said that after she had removed her new mink coat from the shipping
carton she threw it into the trash. We conclude that Pauline has no apprecia-
tion for ﬁne furs.
27. We know that induction will provide dependable results in the future because
it has always worked in the past. Whatever has consistently worked in the
past will continue to work in the future, and we know that this is true because
it has been established by induction.
28.
#
What goes up must come down. The price of gold has been going up for
months. Therefore, it will surely come down soon.
29. Mr. Prime Minister, I am certain you will want to release the members of our
National Liberation Group whom you currently hold in prison. After all, I’m
sure you will want to avoid having car bombs go off in the centers of your
most heavily populated cities.
30. San Diego has the same latitude as Yuma, Arizona, and San Diego enjoys
moderate temperatures through the summer months. Therefore, probably
Yuma enjoys moderate temperatures through the summer months.
31.
#
Gay and lesbian groups have argued in favor of legislation to prevent their
people from being discriminated against. But we must remember that a ge-

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
177
S
N
L
netic basis for homosexuality has yet to be discovered. Granted, some studies
indicate that homosexuality has a biological origin, but these studies are too
limited to be conclusive. Thus, the safest policy right now is to take no action
at all on these questions.
32. The Japanese argue that our import restrictions on steel, autos, and textiles
are protectionist and threaten a trade war. What hypocrisy! The Japanese use
hundreds of covert schemes to block the import of dozens of products, in-
cluding supercomputers, rice, beef, lumber, and citrus fruits.
33. The farmers of our state have asked that we introduce legislation to provide
subsidies for soybeans. Unfortunately, we will have to turn down their re-
quest. If we give subsidies to the soybean farmers, then the corn and wheat
growers will ask for the same thing. Then it will be the cotton growers, citrus
growers, truck farmers, and cattle raisers. In the end, the cost will be
astronomical.
34.
#
The travel brochure states that walking up O’Connell Street, the statue of
Parnell comes into view. Apparently that statue has no trouble getting around.
35. Criminals are basically stupid, because anyone who isn’t basically stupid
wouldn’t be a criminal.
36. Professor Glazebrooks’s theory about the origin of the Martian craters is un-
doubtedly true. Rudolph Orkin, the great concert pianist, announced his sup-
port of the theory in this morning’s newspaper.
37.
#
During the ﬁfty years that Mr. Jones worked, he contributed $90,000 to Social
Security. Now that he is retired, he stands to collect $200,000 from the system.
Obviously he will collect much more than he contributed.
38. Raising a child is like growing a tree. Sometimes violent things, such as cutting
off branches, have to be done to force the tree to grow straight. Similarly,
corporal punishment must sometimes be inﬂicted on children to force them
to develop properly.
39. Good steaks are rare these days, so don’t order yours well done.
40.
#
The Book of Mormon is true because it was written by Joseph Smith. Joseph
Smith wrote the truth because he was divinely inspired. We know that Joseph
Smith was divinely inspired because the Book of Mormon says that he was,
and the Book of Mormon is true.
41. The students attending Bradford College come from every one of the ﬁfty
states. Michelle attends Bradford College. Therefore, Michelle comes from
every one of the ﬁfty states.
42. Rhubarb pie is a dessert. Therefore, whoever eats rhubarb pie eats a dessert.
43.
#
The vast majority of car accidents occur within twenty miles of one’s home.
Apparently it is much more dangerous to drive close to home than far away
from home.

178
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
44. Either the government imposes price controls on the cost of prescription
drugs, or the pharmaceutical companies will continue to reap huge proﬁts.
Therefore, price controls must be imposed, because we cannot tolerate these
huge proﬁts any longer.
45. No one has ever proved that taking vitamins actually improves a person’s
health. Therefore, we can conclude that vitamins are simply a waste of money.
46.
#
On Friday I took Virginia out to dinner. She told me that if I wasn’t interested
in a serious relationship, I should forget about dating her. On Saturday I took
Margie to a ﬁlm. When we discussed it afterward over a drink, she couldn’t
understand why I wasn’t interested in babies. Women are all alike. All they
want is a secure marriage.
47. Dozens of species of plants and animals are being wiped out every year, even
though we have laws to prevent it. Clearly, we should repeal the Endangered
Species Act.
48. People are driving their cars like maniacs tonight. There must be a full moon.
49.
#
A line is composed of points. Points have no length. Therefore, a line has no
length.
50. Are you in favor of the ruinous economic policy of the Democratic Platform
Committee?
IV. Identify the arguments in the following dialogue, then discuss each of them in
terms of the fallacies presented in this section and the previous section. You
should be able to ﬁnd at least one case of each fallacy.
‘‘Thanks for giving me a lift home,’’ Paul says to his friend Steve, as they head
toward the freeway.
‘‘No problem; it’s on my way,’’ says Steve.
‘‘Uh oh,’’ warns Paul suddenly, ‘‘watch out ahead. Looks like the police have
pulled somebody over.’’
‘‘Thanks,’’ Steve says. ‘‘Hope they don’t beat the guy up.’’
‘‘Not a chance,’’ says Paul. ‘‘Why would you say that?’’
‘‘You’re an optimist,’’ answers Steve. ‘‘Most cops are animals; they beat up on
anybody they want to. You remember Rodney King, don’t you? Those cops
in L.A. put King in the hospital for no reason at all. That should prove I’m right.’’
‘‘I think you’re overreacting,’’ Paul says. ‘‘Daryl Gates, the L.A. police chief at the
time, said the King incident was an aberration. Since he was chief, I think we
should take him at his word.’’
‘‘But Gates was a lunatic who refused to acknowledge even our most basic
rights,’’ Steve persists. ‘‘Also, if you recall, he was forced to resign after the King
incident. I know we don’t live in L.A., but our police department is just as bad as
theirs. So you can bet that our friend back there is just as abusive as any of them.’’
‘‘Wait a minute,’’ Paul argues. ‘‘As far as I know, nobody has ever proved that
our police force is the slightest bit violent. You’ve no right to draw such a
conclusion.’’

Fallacies of Presumption, Ambiguity, and Grammatical Analogy
179
S
N
L
‘‘Well, listen to this,’’ Steve counters, as he changes lanes and turns onto the
freeway. ‘‘About a week ago, I was with my friend Casey. When I left him, he was
perfectly okay, but he was picked up for going through a stop sign on the way
home. I saw him a couple of days later, and he had a big bruise under his right eye.
The cop who stopped Casey must have hit him with his baton.’’
‘‘Hold on. Did you ask Casey what happened?’’
‘‘No. I didn’t have to,’’ says Steve, a bit righteously. ‘‘I asked Casey’s wife what
happened between Casey and the cop, and she said he hit him. Those were her
exact words, so that was good enough for me. I bet the cop’s a maniac.’’
‘‘Good grief,’’ answers his friend. ‘‘How long will it take you to get over your
warped view of things?’’
‘‘My way of looking at things isn’t warped,’’ Steve insists. ‘‘The problem is, you
and I are both white. If you were black, you’d see things differently. Police brutality
toward African Americans is way out of hand.’’
‘‘Well,’’ counters Paul, ‘‘a study done recently by an independent agency might
interest you. According to that study, for every African American whom the police
use force against, there’s a white person they also use force against. That proves
the police treat African Americans no worse than they do whites.’’
‘‘I’ve never heard of that study, but it seems to me there must be something
wrong with it,’’ insists Steve.
‘‘Well, the results of that study are borne out in my experience,’’ says Paul. ‘‘I’ve
been pulled over three or four times in the past couple of years, and the ofﬁcers
have always been extremely courteous. I can only conclude that the vast majority
of these allegations of police brutality are the product of fertile imaginations.’’
‘‘Again, your naivete´ amazes me,’’ Steve answers, dumbfounded. ‘‘First of all,
you forget that you’re white and you drive a new Mercedes. Don’t you think that
makes a difference? In fact, that’s the trouble with all these arguments that down-
play police brutality. They’re all concocted by white people.’’
‘‘Well, the fact remains that we have a major crime problem in this country,’’
Paul argues. ‘‘Combating crime requires a few concessions, and you do want to
combat crime, don’t you?’’
‘‘Sure,’’ Steve replies grudgingly, ‘‘but at what expense? Do innocent people
have to get their heads bashed in?’’
‘‘Well, I think what it comes down to is this,’’ says Paul. ‘‘Either you allow the
police to use whatever force they ﬁnd necessary, or the criminals will take over this
country. Now you certainly don’t want that to happen, do you?’’
‘‘No, but that’s the crucial question,’’ Steve says, exiting from the freeway.
‘‘When and how much force is necessary?’’
‘‘Well, you remember when the police apprehended that serial killer a few
weeks ago? When the police made the arrest, the killer attacked them. So, the
police can use force when attacked.’’
‘‘I agree,’’ responds Steve thoughtfully. ‘‘But what about the way the police
treated those peaceful right-to-lifers who were demonstrating in front of the abor-
tion clinic the other day? Many of them were elderly and posed no physical threat.
But the cops used those contraptions—what do you call them, nimchucks, nom-
chucks, I don’t know—to squeeze the old folks’ wrists, causing great pain and
injury, and they hit the old people on the head with their batons. Do you think that
was necessary?’’

180
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
‘‘Of course it was,’’ answers Paul, agitatedly. ‘‘Those people attacked the police—
they hurled epithets at them.’’
‘‘Honestly, I don’t know how we’ve managed to stay friends all these years,’’
Steve says with some frustration. ‘‘By the way, do you know what it says on the
back of all police cars? It says ‘To Protect and Serve.’ Now if you hired a servant
to take care of you, you’d get rid of him if he disobeyed you. Right?’’
‘‘Probably.’’
‘‘Well, isn’t it true,’’ Steve asks, ‘‘that whenever a police ofﬁcer disobeys one of
us taxpayers, that ofﬁcer should be ﬁred?’’
‘‘That may be stretching it a bit,’’ Paul laughs.
‘‘But seriously,’’ continues Steve, ‘‘I think what we need is some screening de-
vice to keep violent types from ever becoming cops.’’
‘‘Well, you’ll be happy to know that exactly such a device has been used for the
past twenty-one years,’’ Paul states. ‘‘Before entering the police academy, every
applicant goes through a battery of psychological tests that positively eliminates all
the macho types and the ones prone to violence. This ensures the individual ofﬁcers
are nonviolent, so we know the entire police force is nonviolent.’’
‘‘Hmm. Maybe your so-called solution is really the problem,’’ Steve suggests, as
he pulls up in front of Paul’s house. ‘‘We’ve had psychological testing for twenty-
one years, and all that time, police violence has been on the rise. Perhaps we
should get rid of the testing program.’’
‘‘Well, I don’t know about the logic of that,’’ Paul muses, stepping out of the
car. ‘‘But like you said, we’ve been friends for a long time, so I guess we can
disagree. Thanks for the ride and the discussion. See you tomorrow!’’
‘‘Sure,’’ Steve murmurs. ‘‘Tomorrow.’’
3.5
Fallacies in Ordinary Language
This section addresses two topics. The ﬁrst concerns the challenge of detecting the
fallacies of others in ordinary language, and the second relates to the goal of avoiding
fallacies in one’s own arguments.
Detecting Fallacies
Most of the informal fallacies that we have seen thus far have been clear-cut, easily
recognizable instances of a speciﬁc mistake. When fallacies occur in ordinary usage,
however, they are often neither clear-cut nor easily recognizable. The reason is that
there are innumerable ways of making mistakes in arguing, and variations inevitably
occur that may not be exact instances of any speciﬁcally named fallacy. In addition,
one fallacious mode of arguing may be mixed together with one or more others, and
the strands of reasoning may have to be disentangled before the fallacies can be
named. Yet another problem arises from the fact that arguments in ordinary language

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
181
S
N
L
are rarely presented in complete form. It often happens that a premise or conclusion
is left unexpressed, which may obscure the nature of the evidence that is presented or
the strength of the link between premises and conclusion.
Consider, for example, the following letter that appeared in a newspaper:
God, I am sick of ‘‘women’s rights’’! Every time one turns on the news we hear
about some form of discrimination against some poor female who wants to be a
ﬁreman—or some ‘‘remark’’ that suggests or implies women are inferior to men.
I, for one, do not want to be rescued by a ‘‘woman ﬁreman,’’ especially if I am a
6-foot-2 male and she is a 5-foot-6 female.
Why is it that women ﬁnd their ‘‘role’’ so degrading? What
is wrong with being a wife and mother, staying home while the male goes out and
‘‘hunts for food’’ and brings it home to his family?
I don’t think women have proven themselves to be as inventive, as capable (on
the average) of world leadership, as physically capable, or as ‘‘courageous’’ as
men. They have yet to ﬁght a war (the average American woman) and let’s face it
ladies, who wants to?
Whether a person is female, black, white, handicapped—whatever—ability is
what counts in the ﬁnal analysis. Women cannot demand ‘‘equality’’—no one can—
unless it is earned.
When push comes to shove and a damsel is in distress, she is hard-pressed to
protect herself and usually has to be rescued by a man. Until I can move a piano,
beat off a potential robber or rapist, or ﬁght a war, I am quite content to be a
woman, thank you.
(Patricia Kelley)
This letter can be interpreted as committing a number of fallacies. The phrase ‘‘poor
female who wants to be a ﬁreman’’ suggests a mild ad hominem abusive, and equating
women’s rights in general with the right to be a ﬁreman suggests a straw man. The
second paragraph commits another straw man fallacy by supposing that the job of
ﬁreman inevitably entails such activities as climbing up ladders and rescuing people.
Surely there are many male ﬁremen who cannot do this. The same paragraph also can
be interpreted as begging the question: Do women who want to be ﬁremen want the
speciﬁc job of rescuing tall men?
The third paragraph throws out a red herring. The issue is whether women have
the right to be considered for a job of their choice and whether they must be paid as
much as a man in the same situation. Whether there is something wrong with being
a wife and mother is quite a different issue. Also, the reference to men hunting for
food suggests a possible begging of the question: Are we still locked into a ‘‘hunter-
gatherer’’ social structure?
The paragraph about whether women have proved themselves to be as inventive,
capable, and courageous as men begs yet another question: Assuming, for the sake of
argument, that this is true, have women been allowed to occupy roles in society where
such inventiveness, capability, and courageousness can be demonstrated? Further-
more, this paragraph commits a red herring fallacy and/or misses the point: Even if

182
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
women have not proved this, what does that have to do with the issue? Most jobs do
not require any high degree of inventiveness or courage or a capacity for world
leadership.
The paragraph about ability begs yet another question: Is it in fact the case that
women have less ability? I am not aware that anything of the sort has ever been
proved. Finally, the last paragraph throws out another red herring. What does moving
pianos (bare handed?) and beating off rapists have to do with most jobs or the question
of equal pay for equal work?
Probably the single most important requirement for detecting fallacies in ordinary
language is alertness. The reader or listener must pay close attention to what the arguer
is saying. What is the conclusion? What are the reasons given in support of the con-
clusion? Are the reasons relevant to the conclusion? Do the reasons support the conclu-
sion? If the reader or listener is half asleep, or lounging in that passive, drugged out
state that attends much television viewing, then none of these questions will receive
answers. Under those circumstances the reader or listener will never be able to detect
informal fallacies, and he or she will accept even the worst reasoning without the
slightest hesitation.
Avoiding Fallacies
Why do people commit informal fallacies? Unfortunately, this question admits of no
simple, straightforward answer. The reasons underlying the commission of fallacies
are complex and interconnected. However, we can identify three factors that lead to
most of the informal mistakes in reasoning. The ﬁrst is intent. Many fallacies are
committed intentionally. The arguer may know full well that his or her reasoning is
defective but goes ahead with it anyway because of some beneﬁt for himself or herself
or some other person. All of the informal fallacies we have studied can be used for
that purpose, but some of them are particularly well suited. These include the appeal
to force, appeal to pity, appeal to the people, straw man, ad hominem, complex
question, false dichotomy, and suppressed evidence. Here is such a case of appeal to
force:
I deserve a chocolate sundae for dessert, and if you don’t buy me one right now,
I’ll start screaming and embarrass you in front of all of the people in this
restaurant.
And here is a case of false dichotomy that conveys the appearance of being inten-
tionally committed:
Either you take me on a Caribbean cruise, or I’ll have a nervous breakdown. It’s up
to you.
The key to avoiding fallacies that are intentionally committed probably lies in some
form of moral education. The arguer must come to realize that using intellectually

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
183
S
N
L
dishonest means to acquire something he or she does not deserve is just another form
of cheating.
The situation becomes more complicated, however, when the sought-after goal is
morally justiﬁed. Arguers sometimes use fallacious reasoning intentionally to trick a
person into doing something that is really for that person’s own good. Here is a false
dichotomy of that sort:
Either you control your eating and get regular exercise, or you’ll have a heart at-
tack and die. The choice is yours.
Given the beneﬁcial consequences of controlled eating and regular exercise, some
moral philosophers will ﬁnd nothing wrong with this argument. Others will contend
that manipulating someone into doing something violates human dignity. In either
event, such arguments are logically unacceptable.
The second factor that leads to the commission of informal fallacies is a careless
mental posture combined with an emotional disposition favoring or opposing some
person or thing. The careless mental posture opens the door, so to speak, to fallacious
reasoning, and the emotional disposition pushes the arguer through it. Even people
who are thoroughly versed in the informal fallacies occasionally succumb to the
deadly combination of mental carelessness and emotional impetus. For example, ar-
guments such as the following ad hominem abusive can sometimes be heard in the
halls of university philosophy departments:
Professor Ballard’s argument in favor of restructuring our course offering isn’t
worth a hoot. But what would you expect from someone who publishes in such
mediocre journals. And did you hear Ballard’s recent lecture on Aristotle? It was
total nonsense.
When people who should know better are confronted with the fact that their argu-
ment commits a common fallacy, they often admit with embarrassment that they have
not been thinking and then revise their argument according to logical principles. In
contrast, people who are not familiar with the distinction between good and fallacious
reasoning will likely deny that there is anything wrong with their argument. Thus, the
key to avoiding fallacies that arise from mental carelessness lies in developing a thor-
ough familiarity with the informal fallacies combined with a habitual realization of
how emotions affect people’s reasoning. Everyone should realize that unchecked
emotions are an open invitation to illogical reasoning, and they can lead a person to
commit quite blindly every one of the fallacies we have studied thus far.
The third factor that leads to the commission of informal fallacies is far more difﬁ-
cult to contend with than the ﬁrst two. It consists in the inﬂuence of what we might
call the ‘‘worldview’’ of the arguer. By worldview we mean a cognitive network of
beliefs, attitudes, habits, memories, values, and other elements that conditions and
renders meaningful the world in which we live. Beginning in infancy, our worldview

184
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
emerges quietly and unconsciously from enveloping inﬂuences—culture, language,
gender, religion, politics, and social and economic status. As we grow older, it contin-
ues to develop through the shaping forces of education and experience. Once it has
taken root, our worldview determines how each of us sizes up the world in which we
live. Given a set of circumstances, it indicates what is reasonable to believe and what
is unreasonable.
In connection with the construction and evaluation of arguments, an arguer’s
worldview determines the answer to questions about importance, relevance, causal
connections, the qualiﬁcations of authorities, whether a sample is typical or atypical
of a group, what can and cannot be taken for granted, and other factors. However,
because these determinations inevitably involve unexamined presuppositions, the
arguer’s worldview can lead to the commission of informal fallacies. All of the fallacies
we have studied so far are likely candidates, but the ones especially susceptible are
appeal to pity, straw man, missing the point, appeal to unqualiﬁed authority, hasty
generalization, false cause, slippery slope, weak analogy, begging the question, false
dichotomy, and suppressed evidence.
Thus, a person with a victim mentality may think that his pathetic circumstances
really justify some favorable treatment; an uncritical conservative may cite with com-
plete conﬁdence the authority of Rush Limbaugh; a person with a racist worldview
may conclude that the errant behavior of a handful of Asians, African Americans, or
Hispanics really is typical of the larger class; a person with a liberal worldview may
quite innocently distort an opponent’s argument by equating it with fascism; a pro-life
arguer may consider it obvious that the fetus is a person with rights, while a pro-choice
arguer may take it for granted that the fetus is not a person with rights, and so on.
Consider, for example, the following argument from analogy:
A court trial is like a professional football game. In a professional football game,
the most important thing is winning. Similarly, in a trial, the most important
thing is winning.
This argument is consistent with the worldview of many, if not most, lawyers.
Lawyers are trained as advocates, and when they enter a courtroom they see them-
selves going into battle for their clients. In any battle, winning is the most important
objective. But this viewpoint presupposes that truth and justice are either unattainable
in the courtroom or of secondary importance. Thus, while many lawyers would eval-
uate this argument as nonfallacious, many nonlawyers would reject it as a weak
analogy.
For another example, consider the following causal inference:
After enslaving most of Eastern Europe for nearly ﬁfty years, the evil Soviet empire
ﬁnally collapsed. Obviously God listened to our prayers.
This argument reﬂects the worldview of many theists. It presupposes that there is a
God, that God listens to prayers, that God is affected by prayers, that God has the

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
185
S
N
L
power to inﬂuence the course of history, and that God does inﬂuence the course of
history. While the theist is likely to consider this argument a good one, the atheist will
reject it as a blatant case of false cause.
To avoid fallacies that arise from the inﬂuence of worldviews, the arguer must
acknowledge and critique his or her presuppositions. Doing so inclines the arguer to
couch his or her arguments in language that takes those presuppositions into account.
The result is nearly always an argument that is more intelligently formed, and, it is
hoped, more persuasive. However, the task of recognizing and critiquing one’s pre-
suppositions is not easy. Presuppositions are intrinsically linked to one’s worldview,
and many people are not even aware that they have a worldview. The reason is that
worldviews are formed through a process that is largely unconscious. Thus, the arguer
must ﬁrst recognize that he or she has a worldview and must then exercise constant
vigilance over the presuppositions it comprises.
Even after one’s presuppositions have been exposed and thoroughly critiqued,
however, there is no guarantee that one’s arguments will agree with the arguments of
others who have critiqued their worldviews. This is because a person’s worldview
reﬂects the unique perspective that person has on the world. No two people share
exactly the same perspective. Nevertheless, disclosing and critiquing the presupposi-
tions in one’s worldview lays a foundation for meaningful communication with other
reasonable arguers, and it provides a context of reasonableness for working out
disagreements.
In summary, the three factors that are probably responsible for most informal falla-
cies are intention, mental carelessness combined with emotional dispositions, and
unexamined worldviews. However, these factors rarely occur in isolation. In the vast
majority of cases, two, or all three, conspire to produce fallacious reasoning. This fact
exacerbates the difﬁculty in avoiding informal fallacies in one’s own arguments and in
detecting fallacies in the arguments of others.
Now let us consider some cases of real-life arguments in light of the factors we have
just discussed. All are taken from letters to the editors of newspapers and magazines.
The ﬁrst relates to afﬁrmative action programs:
I’m a nonracist, nonsexist, white male born in 1969, who has never owned a slave,
treated anyone as inferior because of his or her race, or sexually harassed a
female co-worker. In other words, I don’t owe women or minorities a thing.
Since when are people required to pay for the sins of their predecessors simply
because they belong to the same race or gender.
(Ben Gibbons)
The author of this argument presupposes that racist and sexist patterns in society
have not beneﬁtted him in any way. Among other things, he presupposes that his
white ancestors in no way beneﬁtted from their being white and that none of these
beneﬁts passed down to him. On the other hand, given that he has received such
beneﬁts, he may presuppose that he is not obligated to pay any of them back. Of

186
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
course none of these things may have occurred, but the author should at least address
these issues. Because he does not address them, the argument begs the question.
The next argument relates to second-hand smoke from cigarettes:
Now, besides lung cancer and other nasty business, second-hand smoke causes
deafness and impotence. Was second-hand smoke a problem when people
heated their homes solely by ﬁreplaces? How about those romantic teepees
with the smoke hole at the top? And what about ﬁreplaces in new homes?
Let’s have some research about the problems caused by these as well as barbe-
cues. A little cancer with your hot dog, anyone?
(Pat Sharp)
This argument seems to commit the fallacy of equivocation. The arguer begins by
using ‘‘second-hand smoke’’ to refer to the smoke from burning tobacco, and then
uses the term to refer to the smoke from ﬁreplaces, teepee ﬁres, and barbecues.Smoke
from burning tobacco is clearly not the same thing as smoke from burning wood or
charcoal. Alternately, the argument might be seen to beg the question: ‘‘But do people
burn tobacco in their ﬁreplaces and barbecues?’’ These fallacies probably arise either
from the intentions of the author or from carelessness in failing to distinguish the two
kinds of second-hand smoke. In either event, the author is probably hostile to govern-
ment efforts to control second-hand tobacco smoke in conﬁned areas.
The next argument deals with gun control:
Detroit, the seventh largest city and one with strict gun laws, had 596 homicides in
1992. In the same year Phoenix, the ninth largest city and one that at the time
did not require gun owners to be licensed, had 136 homicides. Criminals don’t
fear the toothless criminal-justice system, but they do fear armed citizens.
(Paul M. Berardi)
This argument commits a false cause fallacy. The author presupposes that the avail-
ability of guns caused Phoenix to have a lower homicide rate than Detroit. The arguer
also presupposes that Detroit and Phoenix are comparable as to homicide rate merely
because they are roughly the same size. As a result, the argument also begs the ques-
tion. The additional factors of emotion and intent may also be present. The arguer
probably hates the prospect of gun control, and he may be fully aware of the fact that
Phoenix and Detroit are not comparable for his purpose, but he went ahead with the
comparison anyway.
The next argument deals with religious fundamentalism:
If we compromise God’s word, we compromise the truth. To say that the funda-
mentalist is a loud shrill voice drowning out religious moderation implies that
diluted truth is better than absolute truth.
(Gerald Gleason)
This argument begs the question. The arguer presupposes that there is a God, that
God has spoken, that God has revealed his intentions to fundamentalist preachers,

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
187
S
N
L
and that those preachers accurately report the word of God. The argument also seems
to reﬂect an emotional disposition in favor of religious fundamentalism.
The last argument we will consider relates to English as the ofﬁcial U.S. language:
This great country has been held together for more than 200 years because of one
simple thing: the English language.
There are two things we must do: Make English the ofﬁcial language of the
United States and do away with bilingual education.
(David Moisan)
This argument misses the point. The arguer presupposes that making English the
ofﬁcial language would guarantee that all citizens speak it and that doing away with
bilingual education would accelerate the learning process of immigrant children. The
argument may also reﬂect the fear that many feel in connection with the changes our
society is experiencing as a result of recent immigration.
EXERCISE 3.5
I. Most of the following selections were taken from letters to the editors of news-
papers and magazines. Identify any fallacies that may be committed, giving a brief
explanation for your answer. Then, if a fallacy is identiﬁed, discuss the possible
factors that led the arguer to commit the fallacy.
1.
#
Exporting cigarettes [to Asia] is good business for America; there is no reason
we should be prohibited from doing so. Asians have been smoking for dec-
ades; we are only offering variety in their habit. If the Asians made tobacco
smoking illegal, that would be a different situation. But as long as it is legal,
the decision is up to the smokers. The Asians are just afraid of American
supremacy in the tobacco industries.
(Pat Monohan)
2. When will these upper-crust intellectuals realize that the masses of working
people are not in cozy, cushy, interesting, challenging, well-paying jobs, pro-
fessions and businesses? My husband is now 51; for most of the last 33 years
he has worked in the same factory job, and only the thought of retiring at 62
has sustained him. When he reaches that age in 11 years, who will tell him
that his aging and physically wracked body must keep going another two
years? My heart cries out for all the poor souls who man the assembly lines,
ride the trucks or work in the ﬁelds or mines, or in the poorly ventilated, hot-
in-summer, cold-in-winter factories and garages. Many cannot afford to retire
at 62, 65, or even later. Never, never let them extend the retirement age. It’s a
matter of survival to so many.
(Isabel Fierman)

188
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
3. Women in military combat is insane. No society in its right mind would have
such a policy. The military needs only young people and that means the only
women who go are those in their child-bearing years. Kill them off and soci-
ety will not be able to perpetuate itself.
(Jack Carman)
4.
#
Dear Ann: I’ve read that one aspirin taken every other day will reduce the risk
of heart attack. Why not take two and double the protection?
(Boston)
5. The American Civil Liberties Union did a study that found that in the last 80
years it believes twenty-ﬁve innocent people have been executed in the
United States. This is unfortunate. But, there are innocent people who die
each year in highway accidents. Out of 40,000 deaths, how many deaths are
related to driving while intoxicated? How many more thousands are injured
and incur ﬁnancial ruin or are invalids and handicapped for the remainder of
their lives?
(Mahlon R. Braden)
6. Mexico’s president expresses legitimate concern when he questions supply-
ing oil to Americans who are unwilling to apply ‘‘discipline’’ in oil consump-
tion. In view of the fact that his country’s population is expected to double in
only twenty-two years, isn’t it legitimate for us to ask when Mexicans will
apply the discipline necessary to control population growth and quit dump-
ing their excess millions over our borders?
(Wayne R. Bartz)
7.
#
A parent would never give a ten-year-old the car keys, ﬁx him or her a martini
or let him or her wander at night through a dangerous part of town. The same
holds true of the Internet. Watch what children access, but leave the Net
alone. Regulation is no substitute for responsibility.
(Bobby Dunning)
8. How would you feel to see your children starving, and have all doors
slammed in your face? Isn’t it time that all of us who believe in freedom and
human rights stop thinking in terms of color and national boundaries? We
should open our arms and hearts to those less fortunate and remember that a
time could come when we might be in a similar situation.
(Lorna Doyle)
9. A capital gains tax [reduction] beneﬁts everyone, not just the ‘‘rich,’’ because
everyone will have more money to invest or spend in the private economy,
resulting in more jobs and increasing prosperity for all. This is certainly better
than paying high taxes to a corrupt, self-serving and incompetentgovernment
that squanders our earnings on wasteful and useless programs.
(David Miller)

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
189
S
N
L
10.
#
After reading ‘‘Homosexuals in the Churches,’’ I’d like to point out that I don’t
know any serious, capable exegetes who stumble over Saint Paul’s denunci-
ation of homosexuality. Only a fool (and there seem to be more and more
these days) can fail to understand the plain words of Romans, Chapter one.
God did not make anyone ‘‘gay.’’ Paul tells us in Romans 1 that homosexuals
become that way because of their own lusts.
(LeRoy J. Hopper)
11. When will they ever learn—that the Republican Party is not for the people
who voted for it?
(Alton L. Stafford)
12. Before I came to the United States in July, 1922, I was in Berlin where I visited
the famous zoo. In one of the large cages were a lion and a tiger. Both
respected each other’s strength. It occurred to me that it was a good illustra-
tion of ‘‘balance of power.’’ Each beast followed the other and watched each
other’s moves. When one moved, the other did. When one stopped, the other
stopped.
In today’s world, big powers or groups of powers are trying to maintain
the status quo, trying to be as strong as or stronger than the other. They realize
a conﬂict may result in mutual destruction. As long as the countries believe
there is a balance of power we may hope for peace.
(Emilie Lackow)
13.
#
Doctors say the birth of a baby is a high point of being a doctor. Yet a medical
survey shows one out of every nine obstetricians in America has stopped
delivering babies.
Expectant mothers have had to ﬁnd new doctors. In some rural areas,
women have had to travel elsewhere to give birth.
How did this happen? It’s part of the price of the lawsuit crisis.
The number of lawsuits Americans ﬁle each year is on the rise. Obstetri-
cians are among the hardest hit—almost three out of four have faced a mal-
practice claim. Many have decided it isn’t worth the risk.
(Magazine ad by the Insurance Information Institute)
14. The conservative diatribe found in campus journalism comes from the
mouths of a handful of afﬂuent brats who were spoon-fed through the ’80s.
Put them on an ethnically more diverse campus, rather than a Princeton or a
Dartmouth, and then let us see how long their newspapers survive.
(David Simons)
15. I see that our courts are being asked to rule on the propriety of outlawing
video games as a ‘‘waste of time and money.’’
It seems that we may be onto something here. A favorable ruling would open
the door to new laws eliminating show business, spectator sports, cocktail

190
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
lounges, the state of Nevada, public education and, of course, the entire
federal bureaucracy.
(A. G. Dobrin)
16.
#
The death penalty is the punishment for murder. Just as we have long jail
terms for armed robbery, assault and battery, fraud, contempt of court, ﬁnes
for speeding, reckless driving and other numerous trafﬁc violations, so must
we have a punishment for murder. Yes, the death penalty will not deter mur-
ders any more than a speeding ticket will deter violating speed laws again,
but it is the punishment for such violation!
(Lawrence J. Barstow)
17. Would you rather invest in our nation’s children or Pentagon waste? The
choice is yours.
(Political ad)
18. My gun has protected me, and my son’s gun taught him safety and responsi-
bility long before he got hold of a far more lethal weapon—the family car.
Cigarettes kill many times more people yearly than guns and, unlike guns,
have absolutely no redeeming qualities. If John Lennon had died a long,
painful and expensive death from lung cancer, would you have devoted a
page to a harangue against the product of some of your biggest advertisers—
the cigarette companies?
(Silvia A. DeFreitas)
19.
#
If the advocates of prayers in public schools win on this issue, just where will
it end? Perhaps next they will ask for prayers on public transportation?Prayers
by government workers before they start their job each day? Or maybe, man-
datory prayers in public restaurants before starting each meal might be a good
idea.
(Leonard Mendelson)
20. So you want to ban smoking in all eating establishments? Well, you go right
ahead and do that little thing. And when the 40 percent of smokers stop eating
out, the restaurants can do one of two things: close, or raise the price of a $20
dinner 40 percent to $28.
(Karen Sawyer)
21. Pigeons are forced to leave our city to battle for life. Their struggle is an
endless search for food. What manner of person would watch these hungry
creatures suffer from want of food and deny them their survival? These help-
less birds are too often ignored by the people of our city, with not the least
bit of compassion shown to them. Pigeons are God’s creatures just as the so-
called human race is. They need help.
(Leslie Ann Price)

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
191
S
N
L
22.
#
You take half of the American population every night and set them down in
front of a box watching people getting stabbed, shot and blown away. And
then you expect them to go out into the streets hugging each other?
(Mark Hustad)
23. So you think that putting the worst type of criminal out of his misery is wrong.
How about the Americans who were sent to Korea, to Vietnam, to Beirut, to
Central America? Thousands of good men were sacriﬁced supposedly for the
good of our country. At the same time we were saving and protecting Charles
Manson, Sirhan Sirhan [Robert Kennedy’s murderer], and a whole raft of oth-
ers too numerous to mention.
(George M. Purvis)
24. The fact is that the hype over ‘‘acid rain’’ and ‘‘global warming’’ is just that:
hype. Take, for example, Stephen Schneider, author of Global Warming. In
his current ‘‘study’’ he discusses a ‘‘greenhouse effect of catastrophic propor-
tions,’’ yet twenty years ago Schneider was a vocal proponent of the theory
of a ‘‘new ice age.’’
(Urs Furrer)
25.
#
Just as our parents did for us, my husband and I rely solely on Christian
Science for all the health needs of our four sons and ﬁnd it invaluable for the
quick cure of whatever ailments and contagions they are subject to. One
particular healing that comes to mind happened several years ago when our
youngest was a toddler. He had a ﬂu-type illness that suddenly became quite
serious. We called a Christian Science practitioner for treatment and he was
completely well the next morning.
(Ellen Austin)
26. As somebody who has experienced the tragedy of miscarriage—or sponta-
neous abortion—at eight weeks, I greatly resent the position that a fetus is
not a baby. I went through the grief of losing a baby, and no one should tell
me otherwise.
(Ann Fons)
27. How can we pledge allegiance to the ﬂag of the United States of America, and
not establish laws to punish people who burn the ﬂag to make a statement?
We are a people who punish an individual who libels another person, but
will not seek redress from an individual who insults every citizen of this great
country by desecrating the ﬂag.
(William D. Lankford)
28.
#
The notion of ‘‘buying American’’ is as misguided as the notion of buying
Wisconsin, or Oshkosh, Wisconsin, or South Oshkosh, Wisconsin. For the
same reasons that Wisconsin increases its standard of living by trading with

192
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
the rest of the nation, America increases its standard of living by trading with
the rest of the world.
(Phillip Smith)
29. We’ve often heard the saying, ‘‘Far better to let 100 guilty men go free than to
condemn one innocent man.’’ What happens then if we apply the logic of this
argument to the question, ‘‘Is a fetus an unborn human being?’’ Then is it not
better to let 100 fetuses be born rather than to mistakenly kill one unbornhuman
being? This line of reasoning is a strictly humanist argument against abortion.
( James Sebastian)
30. In our society it is generally considered improper for a man to sleep, shower,
and dress amid a group of women to whom he normally would be sexually
attracted. It seems to me, then, to be equally unacceptable that a gay man
sleep, shower, and dress in a company of men to whom, we assume, he
would be no less sexually attracted.
(Mark O. Temple)
31.
#
I say ‘‘bravo’’ and ‘‘right on!’’ Now we have some real-life humane heroes to
look up to! These brave people [a group of animal liberators] went up against
the insensitive bureaucratic technology, and won, saving former pet animals
from senseless torture.
If researchers want to experiment, let them use computers,orthemselves—
but not former pet animals! I know it’s bad enough they use monkeys and
rats, but if those animals are bred knowing nothing else but these Franken-
steins abusing them it’s different (but not better) than dogs or cats that have
been loved and petted all their lives to suddenly be tortured and mutilated in
the name of science. End all animal research! Free all research animals!
Right on animal liberators!
(Linda Magee)
32. Dear Ann: Recently I was shopping downtown in 20-below-zero weather. A
stranger walked up to me and said, ‘‘I wonder how many beautiful rabbits
died so you could have that coat?’’ I noticed she was wearing a down coat, so
I asked if the geese they got the down from to make her coat were still alive.
She looked surprised. Obviously she had never given it a thought.
If people are so upset about cruelty to animals, why don’t they go after the
folks who refuse to spend the money to have their pets neutered and spayed?
Thousands of dogs are put to death every year because the animal pounds
can’t feed and house them. Talk about cruelty to animals, that’s the best
example there is.
(‘‘Baby It’s Cold Outside’’)
33. I prayed for the U.S. Senate to defeat the prayer amendment—and it did.
There is a God.
(Richard Carr)

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
193
S
N
L
34.
#
People of the Philippines, I have returned! The hour of your redemption
is here! Rally to me! Let the indomitable spirit of Bataan and Corregidor
lead on! As the lines of battle roll forward to bring you within the zone of
operations, rise and strike! For future generations of your sons and daugh-
ters, strike! Let no heart be faint! Let every arm be steeled! The guidance of
divine God points the way! Follow in his name to the Holy Grail of righteous
victory!
(General Douglas MacArthur)
35. As the oldest of eleven children (all married), I’d like to point out our com-
bined family numbers more than 100 who vote only for pro-life candidates.
Pro-lifers have children, pro-choicers do not.
(Mrs. Kitty Reickenback)
36. I am 12 years old. My class had a discussion on whether police used unnec-
essary force when arresting the people from Operation Rescue.
My teacher is an ex-cop, and he demonstrated police holds to us. They
don’t hurt at all unless the person is struggling or trying to pull away. If
anybody was hurt when they were arrested, then they must have been strug-
gling with the ofﬁcers trying to arrest them.
(Ben Torre-Bueno)
37.
#
As corporate farms continue to gobble up smaller family farms, they control
a larger percentage of the grain and produce raised in the United States. Some
have already reached a point in size where, if they should decide to withhold
their grain and produce from the marketplace, spot shortages could occur
and higher prices would result. The choice is to pay us family farmers now or
pay the corporations later.
(Delwin Yost)
38. If you buy our airline ticket now you can save 60%, and that means 60% more
vacation for you.
(Radio ad)
39. Why all the ﬂap about atomic bombs? The potential for death is always with
us. Of course, if you just want something to worry about, go ahead. Franklin
D. Roosevelt said it: ‘‘The only thing we have to fear is fear itself.’’
(Lee Flemming Reese)
40.
#
September 17 marked the anniversary of the signing of the U.S. Constitution.
How well have we, the people, protected our rights? Consider what has hap-
pened to our private-property rights.
‘‘Property has divine rights, and the moment the idea is admitted into
society that property is not as sacred as the laws of God, anarchy and tyranny
begin.’’ John Quincy Adams, 1767–1848, Sixth President of the United States.
Taxes and regulations are the two-edged sword which gravely threatens
the fabric of our capitalistic republic. The tyranny of which Adams speaks is

194
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
with us today in the form of government regulators and regulations which
have all but destroyed the right to own property. Can anarchy be far behind?
(Timothy R. Binder)
41. Evolution would have been dealt serious setbacks if environmentalists had
been around over the eons trying to save endangered species.
Species are endangered because they just do not ﬁt the bigger picture any
more as the world changes. That’s not bad. It’s just life.
In most cases we have seen the ‘‘endangered species’’ argument is just a
ruse; much deeper motives usually exist, and they are almost always selfish
and personal.
(Tom Gable)
42. The problem that I have with the pro-choice supporters’ argument is that they
make ‘‘choice’’ the ultimate issue. Let’s face facts. No one has absolute free-
dom of choice sanctioned by the law. One can choose to rob a bank, but it’s
not lawful. Others can choose to kill their one-year-old child, but it is not
legal. Why then should a woman have the legal right to take the life of her
unborn child?
(Loretta S. Horn)
43.
#
If a car or truck kills a person, do politicians call for car control or truck
control? And call in all cars/trucks?
If a child burns down a house do we have match control or child control
and call in all of each?
Gun control and conﬁscation is equally as pathetic a thought process in an
age of supposed intelligence.
(Pete Hawes)
44. I was incensed to read in your article about the return of anti-Semitism that
New York City Moral Majority Leader Rev. Dan C. Fore actually said that ‘‘Jews
have a God-given ability to make money, almost a supernatural ability . . .’’ I
ﬁnd it incredibly ironic that he and other Moral Majority types conveniently
overlook the fact that they, too, pack away a pretty tidy sum themselves
through their fund-raising efforts. It is sad that anti-Semitism exists, but to
have this prejudice voiced by leaders of religious organizations is deplorable.
These people are in for quite a surprise come Judgment Day.
( John R. Murks)
45. Are Americans so stupid they don’t realize that every time they pay thousands
of dollars for one of those new ‘‘economical’’ Japanese cars, they are simul-
taneously making the U.S. bankrupt and giving the Japanese enough money
to buy all of America?
(Sylvia Petersen Young)
46.
#
Why are people so shocked that Susan Smith apparently chose to kill her
children because they had become an inconvenience? Doesn’t this occur

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
195
S
N
L
every day in abortion clinics across the country? We suspect Smith heard very
clearly the message many feminists have been trying to deliver about the
expendable nature of our children.
(Kevin and Diana Cogan)
47. What’s wrong with kids today? Answer: nothing, for the majority of them.
They are great.
Witness the action of two San Diego teenage boys recently, when the
Normal Heights ﬁre was at its worst. They took a garden hose to the roof of a
threatened house—a house belonging to four elderly sisters, people they
didn’t even know. They saved the house, while neighboring houses burned
to the ground.
In the Baldwin Hills ﬁre, two teenage girls rescued a blind, retired Navy
man from sure death when they braved the ﬂames to ﬁnd him, confused,
outside his burning house. He would probably have perished if they hadn’t
run a distance to rescue him.
(Theodore H. Wickham)
48. Now that Big Brother has decided that I must wear a seatbelt when I ride in
a car, how long will it take before I have to wear an inner tube when I swim
in my pool, a safety harness when I climb a ladder, and shoes with steel-
reinforced toecaps when I carry out the garbage?
(G. R. Turgeon)
49.
#
Dear Ann: I was disappointed in your response to the girl whose mother used
the strap on her. The gym teacher noticed the bruises on her legs and back-
side and called it ‘‘child abuse.’’ Why are you against strapping a child when
the Bible tells us in plain language that this is what parents should do?
The Book of Proverbs mentions many times that the rod must be used.
Proverbs 23:13 says: ‘‘Withhold not correction from the child for if thou be-
atest him with the rod he shall not die.’’ Proverbs 23:14 says: ‘‘Thou shalt beat
him with the rod and shalt deliver his soul from death.’’
There is no substitute for a good whipping. I have seen the results of trying
to reason with kids. They are arrogant, disrespectful and mouthy. Parents may
wish for a more ‘‘humane’’ way, but there is none. Beating children is God’s
way of getting parents to gain control over their children.
(Davisville, W. Va.)
50. The Fourth Amendment guarantees our right to freedom from unreasonable
search and seizure. It does not prohibit reasonable search and seizure. The
matter of sobriety roadblocks to stop drunk drivers boils down to this: Are
such roadblocks reasonable or unreasonable? The majority of people answer:
‘‘Reasonable.’’ Therefore, sobriety roadblocks should not be considered to be
unconstitutional.
(Haskell Collier)

196
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
51. The Supreme Court recently ruled that a police department in Florida did not
violate any rights of privacy when a police helicopter ﬂew over the back yard
of a suspected drug dealer and noticed marijuana growing on his property.
Many people, including groups like the Anti-Common Logic Union, felt that
the suspect’s right to privacy outweighed the police department’s need to
protect the public at large.
The simple idea of sacriﬁcing a right to serve a greater good should be
allowed in certain cases. In this particular case the danger to the public wasn’t
extremely large; marijuana is probably less dangerous than regular beer. But
anything could have been in that back yard—a load of cocaine, an illegal
stockpile of weapons, or other major threats to society.
(Matt Cookson)
52.
#
I am 79 and have been smoking for 60 years. My husband is 90 and has
inhaled my smoke for some 50 years with no bad effects.
I see no reason to take further steps to isolate smokers in our restaurants
and public places, other than we now observe.
Smokers have taken punishment enough from neurotic sniffers, some of
whom belong in bubbles. There are plenty of injudicious fumes on our streets
and freeways.
(Helen Gans)
53. The mainstream press ﬁnds itself left behind by talk radio, so they try to
minimize its importance. Americans are ﬁnding the true spirit of democracy
in community and national debate. Why should we be told what to believe
by a news weekly or the nightly news when we can follow public debate as
it unfolds on talk radio?
(Adam Abbott)
54. The issue is not whether we should subsidize the arts, but whether anyone
should be able to force someone else to subsidize the arts. You and I are free
to give any amount of our money to any artistic endeavor we wish to support.
When the government gets involved, however, a group of bureaucrats is
given the power to take our money and give it to the arts they wish to support.
We are not consulted. That is not a way to promote a responsible culture.
That is tyranny.
( Jerry Harben)
55.
#
Who are these Supreme Court justices who have the guts to OK the burning
of our ﬂag?
If the wife or daughter of these so-called justices were raped, could the
rapist be exonerated because he took the First Amendment? That he was just
expressing himself ? How about murder in the same situation?
(Robert A. Lewis)

Fallacies in Ordinary Language
197
S
N
L
56. I have one question for those bleeding hearts who say we should not have
used the atomic bomb: if the nation responsible for the Rape of Nanking, the
Manchurian atrocities, Pearl Harbor and the Bataan Death March had in-
vented the bomb ﬁrst, don’t you think they would have used it? So do I.
(Bill Blair)
57. Since when did military service become a right, for gays or anyone else? The
military has always been allowed to discriminate against people who don’t
meet its requirements, including those who are overweight or too tall or too
short. There is an adequate supply of personnel with the characteristics they
need. And there is no national need for gays in the military.
(William R. Cnossen)
58.
#
Let me get this straight about Senator Phil Gramm. He thinks that government
is the problem, but he has sucked on it all his life. He thinks politicians who
did not serve in the military should be defeated, but he himself used ﬁve
student deferments to avoid military service during the Vietnam War. What do
we have here—political schizophrenia?
(Bob Mulholland)
59. Most Americans do not favor gun control. They know that their well-being
depends on their own ability to protect themselves. So-called ‘‘assault riﬂes’’
are used in few crimes. They are not the weapon of choice of criminals, but
they are for people trying to protect themselves from government troops.
(Larry Herron)
60. Holding a gun, a thief robs John Q. Public of thousands of dollars. Holding a
baby, an unmarried mother robs taxpayers of thousands of dollars. If one
behavior is considered a crime, then so should the other.
(Louis R. Ward)
II. Turn to the editorial pages of a newspaper or the letters column of a magazine
and ﬁnd an instance of a fallacious argument in the editorials or letters to the
editor. Identify the premises and conclusion of the argument and write an analysis
at least one paragraph in length identifying the fallacy or fallacies committed and
the factors that may have led the arguer to commit them.
Summary
A fallacy is a mistake in an argument that arises from something other than merely
false premises. Usually fallacies involve defects in reasoning or the creation of an
illusion that makes a bad argument appear good. Fallacies can be either formal or
informal. A formal fallacy is one that can be detected by analyzing the form of an

198
Chapter 3: Informal Fallacies
argument; such fallacies affect only deductive arguments. An informal fallacy is one
that can be identiﬁed only by analyzing the content of an argument; such fallacies can
affect both deductive and inductive arguments.
The fallacies of relevance occur when the premises of an argument are not relevant
to the conclusion. Cases of such irrelevance occur in premises that threaten the ob-
server, elicit pity from the observer, create a mob mentality in a group of observers,
appeal to the observer’s desire for security, verbally abuse an opposing arguer, present
an opposing arguer as predisposed to argue as he does, present an opposing arguer
as a hypocrite, misapply a general rule, distort an opponent’s argument, or lead the
observer off the track. A kind of catch-all fallacy, missing the point, occurs when an
arguer draws a conclusion different from the one implied by the premises.
The fallacies of weak induction occur when the premises, although possibly rele-
vant to the conclusion, provide insufﬁcient support for the conclusion. Cases of such
inadequate support occur when the arguer cites an authority who is not qualiﬁed,
draws a conclusion from premises that give no positive evidence, draws a conclusion
from an atypical sample, depends on a nonexistent or minor causal connection, de-
pends on a chain reaction that is unlikely to occur, or draws a conclusion from an
analogy that is not close enough to support it.
The fallacies of presumption occur when the premises presume what they purport
to prove. Such presumptions occur when the arguer creates the illusion that inade-
quate premises are adequate, asks a question that masquerades as two or more ques-
tions, uses a disjunctive statement that falsely claims to exhaust the available
alternatives, or ignores important evidence that requires a different conclusion.
The fallacies of ambiguity occur when the conclusion depends on some form of
linguistic ambiguity. Either a word or phrase is used in more than one sense or the
wrong interpretation is given to an ambiguous statement.
The fallacies of grammatical analogy occur when a defective argument appears
good owing to a grammatical similarity to some argument that is not fallacious. Such
grammatical similarities occur in arguments that wrongly transfer an attribute from
parts to a whole or from a whole to its parts.
Fallacies that occur in real-life argumentation are harder to detect than those in
manufactured examples because they may not exactly ﬁt the structure of the named
fallacies and because several fallacies can be woven together in a single passage.
Three factors that underlie the commission of fallacies in real-life argumentation are
the intent of the arguer, mental carelessness combined with unchecked emotions, and
unexamined worldviews.


 
S
N
L
4
Categorical Propositions
4.1
The Components of Categorical
Propositions
In Chapter 1 we saw that a proposition (or statement—here we are ignoring the
distinction) is a sentence that is either true or false. A proposition that relates two
classes, or categories, is called a categorical proposition. The classes in question
are denoted respectively by the subject term and the predicate term, and the
proposition asserts that either all or part of the class denoted by the subject term is
included in or excluded from the class denoted by the predicate term. Here are some
examples of categorical propositions:
Light rays travel at a ﬁxed speed.
Radical ideologues do not ﬁnd it easy to compromise.
Sea lions inhabit the coast of California.
Not all convicted murderers get the death penalty.
Cinnabar always contains mercury.
Humphrey Bogart starred in Casablanca.
The ﬁrst statement asserts that the entire class of light rays is included in the class of
things that travel at a ﬁxed speed, the second that the entire class of radical ideologues
is excluded from the class of persons who ﬁnd it easy to compromise, and the third
that part of the class of sea lions is included in the class of things that inhabit the coast
of California. The fourth statement asserts that part of the class of convicted murderers
is excluded from the class of persons who get the death penalty, and the ﬁfth asserts
that the entire class of things consisting of cinnabar is included in the class of things
that contain mercury. The last example asserts that the single individual denoted by
the name ‘‘Humphrey Bogart’’ is included in the class of persons who starred in the
movie Casablanca.
Since any categorical proposition asserts that either all or part of the class denoted
by the subject term is included in or excluded from the class denoted by the predicate
term, it follows that there are exactly four types of categorical propositions: (1) those

200
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
that assert that the whole subject class is included in the predicate class, (2) those that
assert that part of the subject class is included in the predicate class, (3) those that
assert that the whole subject class is excluded from the predicate class, and (4) those
that assert that part of the subject class is excluded from the predicate class. A categor-
ical proposition that expresses these relations with complete clarity is one that is in
standard form. A categorical proposition is in standard form if and only if it is a
substitution instance of one of the following four forms:
All S are P.
No S are P.
Some S are P.
Some S are not P.
Many categorical propositions, of course, are not in standard form because, among
other things, they do not begin with the words ‘‘all,’’ ‘‘no,’’ or ‘‘some.’’ In the ﬁnal
section of this chapter we will develop techniques for translating categorical proposi-
tions into standard form, but for now we may restrict our attention to those that are
already in standard form.
The words ‘‘all,’’ ‘‘no,’’ and ‘‘some’’ are called quantiﬁers because they specify
how much of the subject class is included in or excluded from the predicate class. The
ﬁrst form above asserts that the whole subject class is included in the predicate class,
the second that the whole subject class is excluded from the predicate class, and so
on. (Incidentally, in formal deductive logic the word ‘‘some’’ always means at least
one.) The letters ‘‘S’’ and ‘‘P’’ stand respectively for the subject and predicate terms,
and the words ‘‘are’’ and ‘‘are not’’ are called the copula because they link (or ‘‘cou-
ple’’) the subject term with the predicate term.
Consider the following example:
All members of the American Medical Association are persons holding degrees
from recognized academic institutions.
This standard-form categorical proposition is analyzed as follows:
quantiﬁer:
subject term:
copula:
predicate term:
all
members of the American Medical Association
are
persons holding degrees from recognized academic
institutions
In resolving standard-form categorical propositions into their four components,
one must keep these components separate. They do not overlap each other. In this
regard it should be noted that ‘‘subject term’’ and ‘‘predicate term’’ do not mean the
same thing in logic that ‘‘subject’’ and ‘‘predicate’’ mean in grammar. The subject of the

The Components of Categorical Propositions
201
S
N
L
above statement includes the quantiﬁer ‘‘all,’’ but the subject term does not. Similarly,
the predicate includes the copula ‘‘are,’’ but the predicate term does not.
Two additional points should be noted about standard-form categorical proposi-
tions. The ﬁrst is that the form ‘‘All S are not P’’ is not a standard form. This form is
ambiguous and can be rendered as either ‘‘No S are P’’ or ‘‘Some S are not P,’’ depend-
ing on the content. The second point is that there are exactly three forms of quantiﬁers
and two forms of copulas. Other texts allow the various forms of the verb ‘‘to be’’
(such as ‘‘is,’’ ‘‘is not,’’ ‘‘will,’’ and ‘‘will not’’) to serve as the copula. For the sake of
uniformity, this book restricts the copula to ‘‘are’’ and ‘‘are not.’’ The last section of this
chapter describes techniques for translating these alternate forms into the two ac-
cepted ones.
The theory of categorical propositions was originated by Aristotle, and it has con-
stituted one of the core topics in logic for over 2,000 years. It remains important even
today because many of the statements we make in ordinary discourse are either cate-
gorical propositions as they stand or are readily translatable into them. Standard-form
categorical propositions represent an ideal of clarity in language, and a familiarity with
the relationships that prevail among them provides a backdrop of precision for all
kinds of linguistic usage. In Chapter 5 we will see how categorical propositions may
be combined to produce categorical syllogisms, a kind of argumentation that is closely
related to the most basic forms of human reasoning.
EXERCISE 4.1
In the following categorical propositions identify the quantiﬁer, subject term, copula,
and predicate term.
1.
#
Some college students are avid devotees of soap operas.
2. No persons who live near airports are persons who appreciate the noise of
jets.
3. All oil-based paints are products that contribute signiﬁcantly to photochemical
smog.
4.
#
Some preachers who are intolerant of others’ beliefs are not television
evangelists.
5. All trials in which a coerced confession is read to the jury are trials in which a
guilty verdict can be reversed.
6. Some artiﬁcial hearts are mechanisms that are prone to failure.
7.
#
No sex education courses that are taught competently are programs that are
currently eroding public morals.
8. Some universities that emphasize research are not institutions that neglect
undergraduate education.

202
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
4.2
Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
Quality and quantity are attributes of categorical propositions. In order to see how
these attributes pertain, it is useful to rephrase the meaning of categorical propositions
in class terminology:
Proposition
Meaning in class notation
All S are P.
Every member of the S class is a member of the P class;
that is, the S class is included in the P class.
No S are P.
No member of the S class is a member of the P class;
that is, the S class is excluded from the P class.
Some S are P.
At least one member of the S class is a member of the P
class.
Some S are not P.
At least one member of the S class is not a member of
the P class.
The quality of a categorical proposition is either afﬁrmative or negative depending
on whether it afﬁrms or denies class membership. Accordingly, ‘‘All S are P’’ and
‘‘Some S are P’’ have afﬁrmative quality, and ‘‘No S are P’’ and ‘‘Some S are not P’’
have negative quality.
The quantity of a categorical proposition is either universal or particular depend-
ing on whether the statement makes a claim about every member or just some member
of the class denoted by the subject term. ‘‘All S are P’’ and ‘‘No S are P’’ each assert
something about every member of the S class and thus are universal. ‘‘Some S are P’’
and ‘‘Some S are not P’’ assert something about one or more members of the S class
and hence are particular.
Note that the quantity of a categorical proposition may be determined throughmere
inspection of the quantiﬁer. ‘‘All’’ and ‘‘no’’ immediately imply universal quantity,while
‘‘some’’ implies particular. But categorical propositions have no ‘‘qualiﬁer.’’ In univer-
sal propositions the quality is determined by the quantiﬁer, and in particular proposi-
tions it is determined by the copula.
It should also be noted that particular propositions mean no more and no less than
the meaning assigned to them in class notation. The statement ‘‘Some S are P’’ does
not imply that some S are not P, and the statement ‘‘Some S are not P’’ does not imply
that some S are P. It often happens, of course, that substitution instances of these state-
ment forms are both true. For example, ‘‘Some apples are red’’ is true, as is ‘‘Some apples
are not red.’’ But the fact that one is true does not necessitate that the other be true.
‘‘Some zebras are animals’’ is true (because at least one zebra is an animal), but ‘‘Some
zebras are not animals’’ is false. Similarly, ‘‘Some turkeys are not ﬁsh’’ is true, but ‘‘Some
turkeys are ﬁsh’’ is false. Thus, the fact that one of these statement forms is true does
not logically imply that the other is true, as these substitution instances clearly prove.

Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
203
S
N
L
Since the early Middle Ages the four kinds of categorical propositions have com-
monly been designated by letter names corresponding to the ﬁrst four vowels of the
Roman alphabet: A, E, I, O. The universal afﬁrmative is called an A proposition, the
universal negative an E proposition, the particular afﬁrmative an I proposition, and
the particular negative an O proposition. Tradition has it that these letters were derived
from the ﬁrst two vowels in the Latin words afﬁrmo (‘‘I afﬁrm’’) and nego (‘‘I deny’’),
thus:
n
Universal
A
E
f
f
g
Particular
I
O
r
m
o
The material presented thus far in this section may be summarized as follows:
Proposition
Letter name
Quantity
Quality
All S are P.
No S are P.
Some S are P.
Some S are not P.
A
E
I
O
universal
universal
particular
particular
afﬁrmative
negative
afﬁrmative
negative
Unlike quality and quantity, which are attributes of propositions, distribution is an
attribute of the terms (subject and predicate) of propositions. A term is said to be
distributed if the proposition makes an assertion about every member of the class
denoted by the term; otherwise, it is undistributed. Stated another way, a term is
distributed if and only if the statement assigns (or distributes) an attribute to every
member of the class denoted by the term. Thus, if a statement asserts something about
every member of the S class, then S is distributed; if it asserts something about every
member of the P class, then P is distributed; otherwise S and P are undistributed.
Let us imagine that the members of the classes denoted by the subject and predicate
terms of a categorical proposition are contained respectively in circles marked with
the letters ‘‘S’’ and ‘‘P.’’ The meaning of the statement ‘‘All S are P’’ may then be
represented by the following diagram:
S P

204
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
The S circle is contained in the P circle, which represents the fact that every member
of S is a member of P. (Of course, should S and P represent terms denoting identical
classes, the two circles would overlap exactly.) Through reference to the diagram, it is
clear that ‘‘All S are P’’ makes a claim about every member of the S class, since the
statement says that every member of S is in the P class. But the statement does not
make a claim about every member of the P class, since there may be some members
of P that are outside of S. Thus, by the deﬁnition of ‘‘distributed term’’ given above, S
is distributed and P is not. In other words, for any universal afﬁrmative (A) proposition,
the subject term, whatever it may be, is distributed, and the predicate term is
undistributed.
Let us now consider the universal negative (E) proposition. ‘‘No S are P’’ states that
the S and P classes are separate, which may be represented as follows:
P
S
This statement makes a claim about every member of S and every member of P. It
asserts that every member of S is separate from every member of P, and also that every
member of P is separate from every member of S. Accordingly, by the deﬁnitionabove,
both the subject and predicate terms of universal negative (E) propositions are
distributed.
The particular afﬁrmative (I) proposition states that at least one member of S is a
member of P. If we represent this one member of S that we are certain about by an
asterisk, the resulting diagram looks like this:
P
*S
Since the asterisk is inside the P class, it represents something that is simultaneously
an S and a P; in other words, it represents a member of the S class that is also a member
of the P class. Thus, the statement ‘‘Some S are P’’ makes a claim about one member
(at least) of S and also one member (at least) of P, but not about all members of either
class. Hence, by the deﬁnition of distribution, neither S nor P is distributed.
The particular negative (O) proposition asserts that at least one member of S is not
a member of P. If we once again represent this one member of S by an asterisk, the
resulting diagram is as follows:

Quality, Quantity, and Distribution
205
S
N
L
P
*S
Since the other members of S may or may not be outside of P, it is clear that the
statement ‘‘Some S are not P’’ does not make a claim about every member of S, so S is
not distributed. But, as may be seen from the diagram, the statement does assert that
the entire P class is separated from this one member of S that is outside; that is, it does
make a claim about every member of P. Thus, in the particular negative (O) proposi-
tion, P is distributed and S is undistributed.
At this point the notion of distribution may be somewhat vague and elusive. Unfor-
tunately, there is no simple and easy way to make the idea graphically clear. The best
that can be done is to repeat some of the things that have already been said. First of
all, distribution is an attribute or quality that the subject and predicate terms of a
categorical proposition may or may not possess, depending on the kind of proposi-
tion. If the proposition in question is an A type, then the subject term, whatever it may
be, is distributed. If it is an E type, then both terms are distributed; if an I type, then
neither; and if an O type, then the predicate. If a certain term is distributed in a
proposition, this simply means that the proposition says something about every mem-
ber of the class that the term denotes. If a term is undistributed, the proposition does
not say something about every member of the class.
An easy way to remember the rule for distribution is to keep in mind that universal
(A and E) statements distribute their subject terms and negative (E and O) statements
distribute their predicate terms. As an aid to remembering this arrangement, the following
mnemonic may be useful: ‘‘Unprepared Students Never Pass.’’ Attending to the ﬁrst
letter in these words may help one recall that Universals distribute Subjects, and Neg-
atives distribute Predicates. Another mnemonic that accomplishes the same purpose is
‘‘Any Student Earning B’s Is Not On Probation.’’ In this mnemonic the ﬁrst letters may
help one recall that A statements distribute the Subject, E statements distribute Both
terms, I statements distribute Neither term, and O statements distribute the Predicate.
Two mnemonic devices for distribution
”Unprepared Students Never Pass“
Universals distribute Subjects.
Negatives distribute Predicates.
”Any Student Earning B’s
Is Not On Probation“
A distributes Subject.
E distributes Both.
I distributes Neither.
O distributes Predicate.

206
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
Finally, we note that the attribute of distribution, while not particularly important to
subsequent developments in this chapter, is essential to the evaluation of syllogisms
in the next chapter.
The material of this section may now be summarized as follows:
Proposition
Letter
name
Quantity
Quality
Terms
distributed
All S are P.
No S are P.
Some S are P.
Some S are not P.
A
E
I
O
universal
universal
particular
particular
afﬁrmative
negative
afﬁrmative
negative
S
S and P
none
P
EXERCISE 4.2
I. For each of the following categorical propositions identify the letter name, quan-
tity, and quality. Then state whether the subject and predicate terms are distributed
or undistributed.
1.
#
No mobsters are persons who make good Labor Secretaries.
2. All governments that bargain with terrorists are governments that encourage
terrorism.
3. Some symphony orchestras are organizations on the brink of bankruptcy.
4.
#
Some Chinese leaders are not thoroughgoing opponents of capitalist economics.
5. All human contacts with benzene are potential causes of cancer.
6. No labor strikes are events welcomed by management.
7.
#
Some hospitals are organizations that overcharge the Medicare program.
8. Some afﬁrmative action plans are not programs that result in reverse
discrimination.
II. Change the quality but not the quantity of the following statements:
1.
#
All drunk drivers are threats to others on the highway.
2. No wildlife refuges are locations suitable for condominium developments.
3. Some slumlords are persons who eventually wind up in jail.
4.
#
Some CIA operatives are not champions of human rights.
III. Change the quantity but not the quality of the following statements:
1.
#
All owners of pit bull terriers are persons who can expect expensive lawsuits.
2. No tax proposals that favor the rich are fair proposals.
3. Some grade school administrators are persons who choke the educational
process.
4.
#
Some residents of Manhattan are not people who can afford to live there.

Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition
207
S
N
L
IV. Change both the quality and the quantity of the following statements:
1.
#
All oil spills are events catastrophic to the environment.
2. No alcoholics are persons with a healthy diet.
3. Some Mexican vacations are episodes that end with gastrointestinal distress.
4.
#
Some corporate lawyers are not persons with a social conscience.
4.3
Venn Diagrams and the Modern
Square of Opposition
Consider the following nonsensical proposition borrowed from Chapter 1:
All adlers are bobkins.
Assuming that we know nothing whatever about adlers or bobkins, it is clear that this
statement claims that the entire class of adlers is included in the class of bobkins. But
does the statement also imply that adlers actually exist? Indeed, some universal afﬁr-
mative statements do appear to imply such a thing. Suppose, for example, that your
logic instructor were to make this announcement to the class: ‘‘All students who stud-
ied are persons who got good grades.’’ You probably would think that there actually
were some students who studied. On the other hand, suppose you were to read the
following statement about unicorns: ‘‘All unicorns are one-horned animals.’’ Youprob-
ably would consider this statement true, because ‘‘unicorn,’’ by deﬁnition, means
having one horn. But you would not read the statement as suggesting that unicorns
actually exist.
As this example illustrates, an ambiguity exists in the meaning of A-type (and also
E-type) categorical propositions. When we say, ‘‘All S are P,’’ do we assume that S
denotes something that actually exists (as in the case of students), or do we make no
such assumption (as in the case of unicorns)? In response to this question, logicians
have developed two different interpretations of categorical propositions. Aristotle re-
stricted his theory to things that actually exist. Thus, according to the Aristotelian
interpretation, the statement form ‘‘All S are P’’ asserts that all members of the S class
are included in the P class, and it is assumed that members of S actually exist.
The other interpretation of categorical propositions, which is neutral about exis-
tence, arose in the nineteenth century from the work of the logician George Boole.
According to the Boolean interpretation, the statement form ‘‘All S are P’’ asserts that
all members of the S class are included in the P class, and it is not assumed that mem-
bers of S actually exist. Another way of expressing this concept is by saying that no
members of the S class are excluded from the P class.

208
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
The difference between the Aristotelian and the Boolean interpretations also ex-
tends to E-type propositions. Thus, under the Aristotelian interpretation, ‘‘No S are P’’
asserts that no members of the S class are included in the P class, and it is assumed
that members of S actually exist. Under the Boolean interpretation, however, it asserts
that no members of the S class are included in the P class, and it is not assumed that
members of S actually exist.
The Aristotelian interpretation and the Boolean interpretation differ from each
other only with regard to universal (A and E) propositions. The two interpretations
are in agreement with regard to particular (I and O) propositions. Thus, for both
interpretations, ‘‘Some S are P’’ asserts that at least one member of the S class exists,
and it is also a member of the P class. And ‘‘Some S are not P’’ asserts that at least one
member of the S class exists, and it is not a member of the P class. Thus, under both
the Aristotelian and the Boolean interpretations, I and O statements make positive
claims about existence.*
Because the Boolean interpretation of universal propositions is neutral about exis-
tence, it is simpler than the Aristotelian, which involves an assumption about exis-
tence. For this reason, we will direct our attention ﬁrst to the Boolean interpretation,
and later (in Section 4.5) introduce the Aristotelian as an extension of the Boolean. Let
us begin by reiterating the Boolean interpretation of the four kinds of categorical
propositions:
All S are P.  No members of S are outside P.
No S are P.  No members of S are inside P.
Some S are P.  At least one S exists, and that S is a P.
Some S are not P.  At least one S exists, and that S is
not a P.
Adopting this interpretation of categorical propositions, the nineteenth-century lo-
gician John Venn developed a system of diagrams to represent the information they
express. These diagrams have come to be known as Venn diagrams.
A Venn diagram is an arrangement of overlapping circles in which each circle
represents the class denoted by a term in a categorical proposition. Because every
categorical proposition has exactly two terms, the Venn diagram for a single categori-
cal proposition consists of two overlapping circles. Each circle is labeled so that it
represents one of the terms in the proposition. Unless otherwise required, we adopt
the convention that the left-hand circle represents the subject term, and the right-hand
circle the predicate term. Such a diagram looks like this:
*In ordinary language, the word ‘‘some’’ occasionally implies something less than actual existence.
For example, the statement ‘‘Some unicorns are tender-hearted’’ does not seem to suggest that uni-
corns actually exist, but merely that among the group of imaginary things called ‘‘unicorns,’’ there is a
subclass of tender-hearted ones. In the vast majority of cases, however, ‘‘some’’ in ordinary language
implies existence. The logical ‘‘some’’ conforms to these latter uses.

Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition
209
S
N
L
P
S
The members of the class denoted by each term should be thought of as situated
inside the corresponding circle. Thus, the members of the S class (if any such members
exist) are situated inside the S circle, and the members of the P class (if any such
members exist) are situated inside the P circle. If any members are situated inside the
area where the two circles overlap, then such members belong to both the S class and
the P class. Finally, if any members are situated outside both circles, they are members
of neither S nor P.
Suppose, for example, that the S class is the class of Americans and the P class is
the class of farmers. Then, if we select A and F to label the two circles, and if we use
numerals to identify the four possible areas, the diagram looks like this:
1
2
3
4
F
A
Anything in the area marked ‘‘1’’ is an American but not a farmer, anything in the
area marked ‘‘2’’ is both an American and a farmer, and anything in the area marked
‘‘3’’ is a farmer but not an American. The area marked ‘‘4’’ is the area outside both
circles; thus, anything in this area is neither a farmer nor an American.
We can now use Venn diagrams to represent the information expressed by the
four kinds of categorical proposition. To do this we make a certain kind of mark
in a diagram. Two kinds of marks are used: shading an area and placing an ‘‘X’’ in
an area. Shading an area means that the shaded area is empty,* and placing an ‘‘X’’
*In many mathematics texts, shading an area of a Venn diagram indicates that the area is not empty.
The signiﬁcance of shading in logic is exactly the opposite.

210
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
in an area means that at least one thing exists in that area. The ‘‘X’’ may be thought
of as representing that one thing. If no mark appears in an area, this means that
nothing is known about that area; it may contain members or it may be empty. Shading
is always used to represent the content of universal (A and E) propositions, and
placing an ‘‘X’’ in an area is always used to represent the content of particular (I and
O) propositions. The content of the four kinds of categorical propositions is repre-
sented as follows:
P
S
E: No S are P.
P
S
X
X
I: Some S are P.
P
S
O: Some S are not P.
P
S
A: All S are P.
Recall that the A proposition asserts that no members of S are outside P. This is
represented by shading the part of the S circle that lies outside the P circle. The E
proposition asserts that no members of S are inside P. This is represented by shading
the part of the S circle that lies inside the P circle. The I proposition asserts that at least
one S exists and that S is also a P. This is represented by placing an ‘‘X’’ in the area
where the S and P circles overlap. This ‘‘X’’ represents an existing thing that is both an
S and a P. Finally, the O proposition asserts that at least one S exists, and that S is not
a P. This is represented by placing an ‘‘X’’ in the part of the S circle that lies outside the
P circle. This ‘‘X’’ represents an existing thing that is an S but not a P.
Because there is no ‘‘X’’ in the diagrams that represent the universal propositions,
these diagrams say nothing about existence. For example, the diagram for the A prop-

Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition
211
S
N
L
osition merely asserts that nothing exists in the part of the S circle that lies outside the
P circle. The area where the two circles overlap and the part of the P circle that lies
outside the S circle contain no marks at all. This means that something might exist in
these areas, or they might be completely empty. Similarly, in the diagram for the E
proposition, no marks appear in the left-hand part of the S circle and the right-hand
part of the P circle. This means that these two areas might contain something or, on
the other hand, they might not.
Now let us compare the diagram for the A proposition with the diagram for the O
proposition. The diagram for the A proposition asserts that the left-hand part of the S
circle is empty, whereas the diagram for the O proposition asserts that this same area
is not empty. These two diagrams make assertions that are the exact opposite of each
other. As a result, their corresponding statements are said to contradict each other.
Analogously, the diagram for the E proposition asserts that the area where the two
circles overlap is empty, whereas the diagram for the I proposition asserts that the area
where the two circles overlap is not empty. Accordingly, their corresponding propo-
sitions are also said to contradict each other. This relationship of mutually contradic-
tory pairs of propositions is represented in a diagram called the modern square of
opposition. This diagram, which arises from the modern (or Boolean) interpretation
of categorical propositions, is represented as follows:
A
E
O
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
If two propositions are related by the contradictory relation, they necessarily
have opposite truth value. Thus, if a certain A proposition is given as true, the corre-
sponding O proposition must be false. Similarly, if a certain I proposition is given as
false, the corresponding E proposition must be true. However, given the truth value
of an A or O proposition, nothing can be determined about the truth value of the
corresponding E or I propositions. These propositions could be either true or false
depending on whether their subject terms denote actually existing things. Thus,
from the Boolean standpoint, which is neutral about existence, they are said to have
logically undetermined truth value. Like all propositions, they do have a truth
value, but logic alone cannot determine what it is. Similarly, given the truth value

212
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
of an E or I proposition, nothing can be determined about the truth value of the
corresponding A or O propositions. They, too, are said to have logically undetermined
truth value.
Since the modern square of opposition provides logically necessary results, we can
use it to test certain arguments for validity. We begin by assuming the premise is true,
and we enter the pertinent truth value in the square. We then use the square to
compute the truth value of the conclusion. If the square indicates that the conclusion
is true, the argument is valid; if not, the argument is invalid. Here is an example:
Some trade spies are not masters at bribery.
Therefore, it is false that all trade spies are masters at bribery.
Arguments of this sort are called immediate inferences because they have only one
premise. Instead of reasoning from one premise to the next, and then to the conclu-
sion, we proceed immediately to the conclusion. To test this argument for validity, we
begin by assuming that the premise, which is an O proposition, is true, and we enter
this truth value in the square of opposition. We then use the square to compute the
truth value of the corresponding A proposition. By the contradictory relation, the A
proposition is false. Since the conclusion claims that the A proposition is false, the
conclusion is true, and therefore the argument is valid.
Note that the conclusion of this argument has the form ‘‘It is false that all S are P.’’
Technically, statements of this type are not standard-form propositions because,
among other things, they do not begin with a quantiﬁer. To remedy this difﬁculty we
adopt the convention that statements having this form are equivalent to ‘‘‘All S are P’
is false.’’ Analogous remarks apply to the negations of the E, I, and O statements.
Here is another example:
It is false that all meteor showers are common spectacles.
Therefore, no meteor showers are common spectacles.
We begin by assuming that the premise is true. Since the premise claims that an A
proposition is false, we enter ‘‘false’’ into the square of opposition. We then use the
square to compute the truth value of the corresponding E proposition. Since there is
no relation that links the A and E propositions, the E proposition has undetermined
truth value. Thus, the conclusion of the argument has undetermined truth value, and
the argument is invalid.
We can also use Venn diagrams to test immediate inferences for validity. To do so
we begin by symbolizing the argument, representing the terms by letters, and then we
draw a Venn diagram for the premise and a Venn diagram for the conclusion. If the
information expressed by the conclusion diagram is contained in the premise diagram,
the argument is valid; if not, it is invalid. Here is the symbolized form of the trade spies
argument that we tested earlier.

Venn Diagrams and the Modern Square of Opposition
213
S
N
L
Some T are not M.
Therefore, it is false that all T are M.
The next step is to draw two Venn diagrams, one for the premise and the other for
the conclusion. The premise diagram is easy; all we need do is place an ‘‘X’’ in the left-
hand part of the T circle. But drawing the conclusion is a bit more complicated. First
we consider how we would diagram ‘‘All T are M.’’ We would shade the left-hand part
of the T circle. But since the conclusion asserts that ‘‘All T are M’’ is false, we do just
the opposite: we place an ‘‘X’’ in the left-hand part of the T circle. Here are the
completed diagrams:
M
T
Some T are not M.
M
T
X
X
It is false that all T are M.
Now, to evaluate the argument, we look to see whether the information expressed
by the conclusion diagram is also expressed by the premise diagram. The conclusion
diagram asserts that something exists in the left-hand part of the T circle. Since this
information is also expressed by the premise diagram, the argument is valid. In this
case, the diagram for the conclusion is identical to the diagram for the premise, so it is
clear that premise and conclusion assert exactly the same thing. However, as we will
see in Section 4.5, for an argument to be valid, it is not necessary that premise and
conclusion assert exactly the same thing. It is only necessary that the premise assert at
least as much as the conclusion.
Here is the symbolized version of the second argument evaluated earlier:
It is false that all M are C.
Therefore, no M are C.
In diagramming the premise, we do just the opposite of what we would do to
diagram ‘‘All M are C.’’ Instead of shading the left-hand part of the M circle, we place
an ‘‘X’’ in that area. For the conclusion we shade the area where the two circles
overlap:

214
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
C
M
It is false that all M are C.
C
M
X
No M are C.
Here, the conclusion diagram asserts that the overlap area is empty. Since this
information is not contained in the premise diagram, the argument is invalid.
Finally, it should be realized that the modern square of opposition and the Venn
diagram technique for evaluating arguments are applicable regardless of whether the
terms in a particular argument denote actually existing things. In other words, these
techniques yield unconditional results in argument evaluation.
EXERCISE 4.3
I. Draw Venn diagrams for the following propositions.
1.
#
No life decisions are happenings based solely on logic.
2. All electric motors are machines that depend on magnetism.
3. Some political campaigns are mere attempts to discredit opponents.
4.
#
Some rock music lovers are not fans of Madonna.
5. All redistricting plans are sources of controversy.
6. No tax audits are pleasant experiences for cheaters.
7.
#
Some housing developments are complexes that exclude children.
8. Some cruise ships are not steam-driven vessels.
II. Use the modern square of opposition to determine whether the following argu-
ments are valid or invalid.
1.
#
No sculptures by Rodin are boring creations.
Therefore, all sculptures by Rodin are boring creations.
2. It is false that some lunar craters are volcanic formations.
Therefore, no lunar craters are volcanic formations.
3. All dry martinis are dangerous concoctions.
Therefore, it is false that some dry martinis are not dangerous concoctions.
4.
#
It is false that no jazz musicians are natives of New Orleans.
Therefore, some jazz musicians are not natives of New Orleans.

Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
215
S
N
L
5. Some country doctors are altruistic healers.
Therefore, some country doctors are not altruistic healers.
6. It is false that no credit cards are things that contain holograms.
Therefore, some credit cards are things that contain holograms.
7.
#
It is false that some stunt pilots are not colorful daredevils.
Therefore, it is false that some stunt pilots are colorful daredevils.
8. No vampires are avid connoisseurs of garlic bread.
Therefore, it is false that some vampires are avid connoisseurs of garlic bread.
9. Some stellar constellations are spiral-shaped objects.
Therefore, no stellar constellations are spiral-shaped objects.
10.
#
It is false that all weddings are light-hearted celebrations.
Therefore, some weddings are not light-hearted celebrations.
III. Use Venn diagrams to evaluate the arguments in Part II of this exercise.
4.4
Conversion, Obversion,
and Contraposition
Many statements expressed in ordinary English contain negated terms that may ob-
scure the meaning of the statements. Consider the following example:
Some employees who are not currently on the payroll are not ineligible for
workers’ beneﬁts.
As it stands, this statement is rather complicated, and its meaning may not be imme-
diately clear; but it may be shown to be equivalent to the much simpler statement:
Some of those eligible for workers’ beneﬁts are not currently on the payroll.
To justify this equivalence, and others like it, we need the operations of conversion,
obversion, and contraposition.
Conversion
The simplest of the three operations is conversion, and it consists in switching the
subject term with the predicate term. For example, if the statement ‘‘No foxes are
hedgehogs’’ is converted, the resulting statement is ‘‘No hedgehogs are foxes.’’ This
new statement is called the converse of the given statement. To see how the four types
of categorical propositions relate to their converse, compare the following sets of Venn
diagrams:

216
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
B
A
B
A
Some B are
not A.
Some B are A.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
B
A
B
A
No B are A.
All B are A.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
Converse
Given statement form
If we examine the diagram for the E statement, we see that it is identical to that of
its converse. Also, the diagram for the I statement is identical to that of its converse.
This means that the E statement and its converse are logically equivalent, and the I
statement and its converse are logically equivalent. Two statements are said to be
logically equivalent when they necessarily have the same truth value. Thus, con-
verting an E or I statement gives a new statement that always has the same truth value
(and the same meaning) as the given statement. These equivalences are strictly proved
by the Venn diagrams for the E and I statements.
(quantifier)
(copula)
P
Conversion
S
Switch
On the other hand, the diagram for the A statement is clearly not identical to the
diagram for its converse, and the diagram for the O statement is not identical to the
diagram for its converse. Also, these pairs of diagrams are not the exact opposite of

Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
217
S
N
L
each other, as is the case with contradictory statements. This means that an A statement
and its converse are logically unrelated as to truth value, and an O statement and its
converse are logically unrelated as to truth value. In other words, converting an A or
O statement gives a new statement whose truth value is logically undetermined in
relation to the given statement. The converse of an A or O statement does have a truth
value, of course, but logic alone cannot tell us what it is.
Because conversion yields necessarily determined results for E and I statements, it
can be used as the basis for immediate inferences having these types of statements as
premises. The following argument forms are valid:
No A are B.
Therefore, no B are A.
Some A are B.
Therefore, some B are A.
Since the conclusion of each argument form necessarily has the same truth value as
the premise, if the premise is assumed true, it follows necessarily that the conclusion
is true. On the other hand, the next two argument forms are invalid. Each commits the
fallacy of illicit conversion:
All A are B.
Therefore, all B are A.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some B are not A.
Obversion
Obversion is more complicated than conversion, and it requires two steps: (1) chang-
ing the quality (without changing the quantity), and (2) replacing the predicate with
its term complement. The ﬁrst part of this operation was treated in Exercise 4.2. It
consists in changing ‘‘No S are P’’ to ‘‘All S are P’’ and vice versa, and changing ‘‘Some
S are P’’ to ‘‘Some S are not P’’ and vice versa.
The second step requires understanding the concept of class complement. The
complement of a class is the group consisting of everything outside the class. For
example, the complement of the class of dogs is the group that includes everything
that is not a dog (cats, ﬁsh, trees, and so on). Now the term complement is the word
or group of words that denotes the class complement. For terms consisting of a single
word, the term complement is usually formed by simply attaching the preﬁx ‘‘non’’ to
the term. Thus, the complement of the term ‘‘dog’’ is ‘‘non-dog,’’ the complement of
the term ‘‘book’’ is ‘‘non-book,’’ and so on.
The relationship between a term and its complement can be illustrated by a Venn
diagram. For example, if a single circle is allowed to represent the class of dogs, then
everything outside the circle represents the class of non-dogs:

218
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
dogs
non-dogs
We now have everything we need to form the obverse of categorical propositions.
First we change the quality (without changing the quantity), and then we replace the
predicate term with its term complement. For example, if we are given the statement
‘‘All horses are animals,’’ then the obverse is ‘‘No horses are non-animals’’; and if we
are given the statement ‘‘Some trees are maples,’’ then the obverse is ‘‘Some trees are
not non-maples.’’ To see how the four types of categorical propositions relate to their
obverse, compare the following sets of Venn diagrams:
B
A
B
A
All A are
non-B.
No A are
non-B.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
B
A
B
A
Some A are
non-B.
Some A are
not non-B.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
Obverse
Given statement form
To see how the obverse diagrams are drawn, keep in mind that ‘‘non-B’’ designates
the area outside the B circle. Thus, ‘‘No A are non-B’’ asserts that the area where A
overlaps non-B is empty. This is represented by shading the left-hand part of the A
circle. ‘‘All A are non-B’’ asserts that all members of A are outside B. This means that

Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
219
S
N
L
no members of A are inside B, so the area where A overlaps B is shaded. ‘‘Some A are
not non-B’’ asserts that at least one member of A is not outside B. This means that at
least one member of A is inside B, so an ‘‘X’’ is placed in the area where A and B
overlap. Finally, ‘‘Some A are non-B’’ asserts that at least one member of A is outside
B, so an ‘‘X’’ is placed in the left-hand part of the A circle.
Now if we examine these pairs of diagrams, we see that the diagram for each given
statement form is identical to the diagram for its obverse. This means that each of the
four types of categorical proposition is logically equivalent to (and has the same
meaning as) its obverse. Thus, if we obvert an A statement that happens to be true,
the resulting statement will be true; if we obvert an O statement that happens to be
false, the resulting statement will be false, and so on.
(quantifier)
(copula)
Replace with
term complement
Change
quality
P
Obversion
S
(for A and E)
(for I and O)
It is easy to see that if a statement is obverted and then obverted again, the resulting
statement will be identical to the original statement. For example, the obverse of ‘‘All
horses are animals’’ is ‘‘No horses are non-animals.’’ To obvert the latter statement we
again change the quality (‘‘no’’ switches to ‘‘all’’) and replace ‘‘non-animals’’ with its
term complement. The term complement is produced by simply deleting the preﬁx
‘‘non.’’ Thus, the obverse of the obverse is ‘‘All horses are animals.’’
When a term consists of more than a single word, more ingenuity is required to
form its term complement. For example, if we are given the term ‘‘animals that are not
native to America,’’ it would not be appropriate to form the term complement by
writing ‘‘non-animals that are not native to America.’’ Clearly it would be better to
write ‘‘animals native to America.’’ Even though this is technically not the complement
of the given term, the procedure is justiﬁed if we allow a reduction in the scope of
discourse. This can be seen as follows. Technically the term complement of ‘‘animals
that are not native to America’’ denotes all kinds of things such as ripe tomatoes,
battleships, gold rings, and so on. But if we suppose that we are talking only about
animals (that is, we reduce the scope of discourse to animals), then the complement
of this term is ‘‘animals native to America.’’
As is the case with conversion, obversion can be used to supply the link between
the premise and the conclusion of immediate inferences. The following argument
forms are valid:

220
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
All A are B.
Therefore, no A are non-B.
No A are B.
Therefore, all A are non-B.
Some A are B.
Therefore, some A are not non-B.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some A are non-B.
Because the conclusion of each argument form necessarily has the same truth value
as its premise, if the premise is assumed true, it follows necessarily that the conclusion
is true.
Contraposition
Like obversion, contraposition requires two steps: (1) switching the subject and
predicate terms and (2) replacing the subject and predicate terms with their term
complements. For example, if the statement ‘‘All goats are animals’’ is contraposed,
(quantifier)
(copula)
P
Contraposition
S
S
wi
tc
h
&
re
pl
ac
e
wi
th
te
r
m
c
o
m
pl
e
m
e
nt
the resulting statement is ‘‘All non-animals are non-goats.’’ This new statement is called
the contrapositive of the given statement. To see how all four types of categorical
propositions relate to their contrapositive, compare the following sets of diagrams:
B
A
B
A
No non-B
are non-A.
All non-B are
non-A.
B
A
B
A
No A are B.
All A are B.
Contrapositive
Given statement form

Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
221
S
N
L
B
A
B
A
Some non-B
are not non-A.
Some non-B
are non-A.
B
X
X
X
X
A
B
A
Some A are
not B.
Some A are B.
To see how the ﬁrst diagram on the right is drawn, remember that ‘‘non-A’’ desig-
nates the area outside A. Thus, ‘‘All non-B are non-A’’ asserts that all members of non-B
are outside A. This means that no members of non-B are inside A. Thus, we shade
the area where non-B overlaps A. ‘‘No non-B are non-A’’ asserts that the area where
non-B overlaps non-A is empty. Since non-B is the area outside the B circle and
non-A is the area outside the A circle, the place where these two areas overlap is the
area outside both circles. Thus, we shade this area. ‘‘Some non-B are non-A’’ asserts
that something exists in the area where non-B overlaps non-A. Again, this is the area
outside both circles, so we place an ‘‘X’’ in this area. Finally, ‘‘Some non-B are not
non-A’’ asserts that at least one member of non-B is outside non-A. This means that at
least one member of non-B is inside A, so we place an ‘‘X’’ in the area where non-B
overlaps A.
Now, inspection of the diagrams for the A and O statements reveals that they are
identical to the diagrams of their contrapositive. Thus, the A statement and its contra-
positive are logically equivalent (and have the same meaning), and the O statement
and its contrapositive are logically equivalent (and have the same meaning). On the
other hand, the diagrams of the E and I statements are neither identical to nor the
exact opposite of the diagrams of their contrapositives. This means that contraposing
an E or I statement gives a new statement whose truth value is logically undetermined
in relation to the given statement.
As with conversion and obversion, contraposition may provide the link between
the premise and the conclusion of an argument. The following argument forms are
valid:
All A are B.
Therefore, all non-B are non-A.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some non-B are not non-A.
On the other hand, the following argument forms are invalid. Each commits the
fallacy of illicit contraposition:

222
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
Some A are B.
Therefore, some non-B are non-A.
No A are B.
Therefore, no non-B are non-A.
Both illicit conversion and illicit contraposition are formal fallacies: they can be
detected through mere examination of the form of an argument.
Finally, it should be noted that the Boolean interpretation of categorical proposi-
tions has prevailed throughout this section. This means that the results obtained are
unconditional, and they hold true regardless of whether the terms in the propositions
denote actually existing things. Thus, they hold for propositions about unicorns and
leprechauns just as they do for propositions about dogs and animals. These results are
summarized in the following table.
Conversion: Switch subject and predicate terms.
Given statement
Converse
Truth value
E: No S are P.
I: Some S are P.
No P are S.
Some P are S. }
Same truth value as given
statement
A: All S are P.
O: Some S are not P.
All P are S.
Some P are not S. }
Undetermined truth value
Obversion: Change quality, replace predicate with term complement.
Given statement
Obverse
Truth value
A: All S are P.
E: No S are P.
I: Some S are P.
O: Some S are not P.
No S are non-P.
All S are non-P.
Some S are not non-P.
Some S are non-P. }
Same truth value as given
statement
Contraposition: Switch subject and predicate terms, and replace each with its term
complement.
Given statement
Contrapositive
Truth value
A: All S are P.
O: Some S are not P.
All non-P are non-S.
Some non-P are not non-S.}
Same truth value as given
statement
E: No S are P.
I: Some S are P.
No non-P are non-S.
Some non-P are non-S.}
Undetermined truth value
EXERCISE 4.4
I. Exercises 1 through 6 provide a statement, its truth value in parentheses, and an
operation to be performed on that statement. Supply the new statement and the truth
value of the new statement. Exercises 7 through 12 provide a statement, its truth
value in parentheses, and a new statement. Determine how the new statement was
derived from the given statement and supply the truth value of the new statement.

Conversion, Obversion, and Contraposition
223
S
N
L
Given statement
Operation
New statement
Truth
value
#1.
2.
3.
#4.
5.
6.
#7.
8.
9.
#10.
11.
12.
No A are non-B. (T)
Some A are B. (T)
All A are non-B. (F)
All non-A are B. (F)
Some non-A are not B. (T)
Some non-A are non-B. (T)
No non-A are non-B. (F)
Some A are not non-B. (T)
All A are non-B. (F)
No non-A are B. (F)
Some non-A are not B. (T)
Some A are non-B. (F)
conv.
contrap.
obv.
contrap.
conv.
obv.
No B are A.
Some A are B.
All non-B are A.
All non-A are non-B.
Some non-B are not A.
Some non-B are A.
II. Perform the operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition as indicated.
1. Convert the following propositions and state whether the converse is logically
equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
a.
#
All homes contaminated by radon gas are potential causes of lung cancer.
b. No sex-change operations are completely successful procedures.
c. Some murals by Diego Rivera are works that celebrate the revolutionaryspirit.
d. Some forms of carbon are not substances with a crystalline structure.
2. Obvert the following propositions and state whether the obverse is logically
equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
a.
#
All radically egalitarian societies are societies that do not preserve individ-
ual liberties.
b. No cult leaders are people who fail to brainwash their followers.
c. Some college football coaches are persons who do not slip money to their
players.
d. Some budgetary cutbacks are not actions fair to the poor.
3. Contrapose the following propositions and state whether the contrapositive
is logically equivalent or not logically equivalent to the given proposition.
a.
#
All physicians whose licenses have been revoked are physicians ineligible
to practice.
b. No gases are incompressible substances.
c. Some politicians who do not defend Social Security are politicans who do
not want to increase taxes.
d. Some people who decline to support mandatory busing are not those who
fail to advocate integrated schools.

224
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
III. Use conversion, obversion, and contraposition to determine whether the follow-
ing arguments are valid or invalid. For those that are invalid, name the fallacy
committed.
1.
#
All commodity traders are gamblers who risk sudden disaster.
Therefore, all gamblers who risk sudden disaster are commodity traders.
2. No child abusers are persons who belong in day-care centers.
Therefore, all child abusers are persons who do not belong in day-care centers.
3. Some states having limited powers are not slave states.
Therefore, some free states are not states having unlimited powers.
4.
#
Some insane people are illogical people.
Therefore, some logical people are sane people.
5. Some organ transplants are not sensible operations.
Therefore, some organ transplants are senseless operations.
6. No individuals who laugh all the time are persons with a true sense of humor.
Therefore, no persons with a true sense of humor are individuals who laugh
all the time.
7.
#
All periods when interest rates are high are times when businesses tend not
to expand.
Therefore, all times when businesses tend to expand are periods when inter-
est rates are low.
8. Some swimsuits are not garments intended for the water.
Therefore, some garments intended for the water are not swimsuits.
9. No promises made under duress are enforceable contracts.
Therefore, no unenforceable contracts are promises made in the absence of
duress.
10.
#
All ladies of the night are individuals with low self-esteem.
Therefore, no ladies of the night are individuals with high self-esteem.
11. Some grafﬁti writers are artists relieving pent-up frustrations.
Therefore, some artists relieving pent-up frustrations are grafﬁti writers.
12. Some peaceful revolutions are episodes that erupt in violence.
Therefore, some episodes that do not erupt in violence are nonpeaceful
revolutions.
13.
#
Some insurance companies are not humanitarian organizations.
Therefore, some humanitarian organizations are not insurance companies.
14. Some ﬁre-breathing dragons are lizards that languish in soggy climates.
Therefore, some ﬁre-breathing dragons are not lizards that ﬂourish in soggy
climates.
15. All hired killers are criminals who deserve the death penalty.
Therefore, all criminals who deserve the death penalty are hired killers.

The Traditional Square of Opposition
225
S
N
L
16.
#
No nonprescription drugs are medicines without adverse effects.
Therefore, no medicines with adverse effects are prescription drugs.
17. All fossil fuels are unrenewable energy sources.
Therefore, no fossil fuels are renewable energy sources.
18. Some distant galaxies are not spiral-shaped arrangements.
Therefore, some spiral-shaped arrangements are not distant galaxies.
19.
#
All unpleasant experiences are things we do not like to remember.
Therefore, all things we like to remember are pleasant experiences.
20. Some pro-lifers are not people concerned with child welfare.
Therefore, some pro-lifers are people unconcerned with child welfare.
4.5
The Traditional Square
of Opposition
Like the modern square, the traditional square of opposition is an arrangement of
lines that illustrates logically necessary relations among the four kinds of categorical
propositions. However, the two squares differ in that the modern square depends on
the Boolean interpretation of categorical propositions, whereas the traditional square
depends on the Aristotelian interpretation. As we saw in Section 4.3, the Boolean
interpretation is neutral about whether universal (A and E) propositions make claims
about actually existing things, whereas the Aristotelian interpretation assumes that the
subject terms of these propositions denote things that actually exist. Because of this
existential assumption, the traditional square contains more relations than the modern
square. The traditional square is represented as follows:
A
E
O
F
T
F
T
Subalternation
Contrary
Subcontrary
Subalternation
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
The four relations in the traditional square of opposition may be characterized as
follows:

226
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
Contradictory  opposite truth value
Contrary  at least one is false (not both true)
Subcontrary  at least one is true (not both false)
Subalternation  truth ﬂows downward, falsity ﬂows upward
The contradictory relation is the same as that found in the modern square. Thus,
if a certain A proposition is given as true, the corresponding O proposition is false,
and vice versa, and if a certain A proposition is given as false, the corresponding O
proposition is true, and vice versa. The same relation holds between the E and I
propositions. The contradictory relation thus expresses complete opposition between
propositions.
The contrary relation differs from the contradictory in that it expresses only partial
opposition. Thus, if a certain A proposition is given as true, the corresponding E
proposition is false (because at least one must be false), and if an E proposition is
given as true, the corresponding A proposition is false. But if an A proposition is given
as false, the corresponding E proposition could be either true or false without violating
the ‘‘at least one is false’’ rule. In this case, the E proposition has logically undeter-
mined truth value. Similarly, if an E proposition is given as false, the corresponding A
proposition has logically undetermined truth value.
These results are borne out in ordinary language. Thus, if we are given the actually
true A proposition ‘‘All cats are animals,’’ the corresponding E proposition ‘‘No cats
are animals’’ is false, and if we are given the actually true E proposition ‘‘No cats are
dogs,’’ the corresponding A proposition ‘‘All cats are dogs’’ is false. Thus, the A and E
propositions cannot both be true. However, they can both be false. ‘‘All animals are
cats’’ and ‘‘No animals are cats’’ are both false.
The subcontrary relation also expresses a kind of partial opposition. If a certain I
proposition is given as false, the corresponding O proposition is true (because at least
one must be true), and if an O proposition is given as false, the corresponding I
proposition is true. But if either an I or an O proposition is given as true, then the
corresponding proposition could be either true or false without violating the ‘‘at least
one is true’’ rule. Thus, in this case the corresponding proposition would havelogically
undetermined truth value.
Again, these results are borne out in ordinary language. If we are given the actually
false I proposition ‘‘Some cats are dogs,’’ the corresponding O proposition ‘‘Some cats
are not dogs’’ is true, and if we are given the actually false O proposition ‘‘Some cats
are not animals,’’ the corresponding I proposition ‘‘Some cats are animals’’ is true.
Thus, the I and O propositions cannot both be false, but they can both be true. ‘‘Some
animals are cats’’ and ‘‘Some animals are not cats’’ are both true.
The subalternation relation is represented by two arrows: a downward arrow
marked with the letter ‘‘T’’ (true), and an upward arrow marked with an ‘‘F’’ (false).
These arrows can be thought of as pipelines through which truth values ‘‘ﬂow.’’ The
downward arrow ‘‘transmits’’ only truth, and the upward arrow only falsity. Thus, if an

The Traditional Square of Opposition
227
S
N
L
A proposition is given as true, the corresponding I proposition is true also, and if an I
proposition is given as false, the corresponding A proposition is false. But if an A
proposition is given as false, this truth value cannot be transmitted downward, so the
corresponding I proposition will have logically undetermined truth value. Conversely,
if an I proposition is given as true, this truth value cannot be transmitted upward, so
the corresponding A proposition will have logically undetermined truth value. Analo-
gous reasoning prevails for the subalternation relation between the E and I
propositions.
Now that we have explained these four relations individually, let us see how they
can be used together to determine the truth values of corresponding propositions.The
ﬁrst rule of thumb that we should keep in mind when using the square to compute
more than one truth value is always to use contradiction ﬁrst. Now, let us suppose that
we are told that the nonsensical proposition ‘‘All adlers are bobkins’’ is true. Suppose
further that adlers actually exist, so we are justiﬁed in using the traditional square of
opposition. By the contradictory relation, ‘‘Some adlers are not bobkins’’ is false. Then,
by either the contrary or the subalternation relation, ‘‘No adlers are bobkins’’ is false.
Finally, by either contradictory, subalternation, or subcontrary, ‘‘Some adlers are bob-
kins’’ is true.
Next, let us see what happens if we assume that ‘‘All adlers are bobkins’’ is false. By
the contradictory relation, ‘‘Some adlers are not bobkins’’ is true, but nothing more
can be determined. In other words, given a false A proposition, both contrary and
subalternation yield undetermined results, and given a true O proposition (the one
whose truth value we just determined), subcontrary and subalternation yield undeter-
mined results. Thus, the corresponding E and I propositions have logically undeter-
mined truth value. This result illustrates two more rules of thumb. Assuming that we
always use the contradictory relation ﬁrst, if one of the remaining relations yields a
logically undetermined truth value, the others will as well. The other rule is that
whenever one statement turns out to have logically undetermined truth value, its
contradictory will also. Thus, statements having logically undetermined truth value
will always occur in pairs, at opposite ends of diagonals on the square.
Testing Immediate Inferences
Next, let us see how we can use the traditional square of opposition to test immediate
inferences for validity. Here is an example:
All Swiss watches are true works of art.
Therefore, it is false that no Swiss watches are true works of art.
To evaluate this argument, we begin, as usual, by assuming the premise is true. Since
the premise is an A proposition, by the contrary relation the corresponding E propo-
sition is false. But this is exactly what the conclusion says, so the argument is valid.

228
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
Here is another example:
Some viruses are structures that attack T-cells.
Therefore, some viruses are not structures that attack T-cells.
Here the premise and conclusion are linked by the subcontrary relation. According to
that relation, if the premise is assumed true, the conclusion has logically undetermined
truth value, and so the argument is invalid. It commits the formal fallacy of illicit
subcontrary. Analogously, arguments that depend on an incorrect application of the
contrary relation commit the formal fallacy of illicit contrary, and arguments that
depend on an illicit application of subalternation commit the formal fallacy of illicit
subalternation. Some forms of these fallacies are as follows:
Illicit contrary
It is false that all A are B.
Therefore, no A are B.
It is false that no A are B.
Therefore, all A are B.
Illicit subcontrary
Some A are B.
Therefore, it is false that some A are not B.
Some A are not B.
Therefore, some A are B.
Illicit subalternation
Some A are not B.
Therefore, no A are B.
It is false that all A are B.
Therefore, it is false that some A are B.
Cases of the incorrect application of the contradictory relation are so infrequent
that an ‘‘illicit contradictory’’ fallacy is not usually recognized.
As we saw at the beginning of this section, the traditional square of opposition
depends on the Aristotelian interpretation of categorical propositions, which assumes
that the subject terms of universal propositions denote actually existing things. What
happens, it may now be asked, if the traditional square of opposition is used (in a way
that would normally yield a determinate truth value) with propositions about things
that do not exist? The answer is that another formal fallacy, the existential fallacy, is
committed. In other words, the existential fallacy is committed whenever contrary,
subcontrary, and subalternation are used (in an otherwise correct way) on proposi-
tions about things that do not exist. The following arguments commit the existential
fallacy:

The Traditional Square of Opposition
229
S
N
L
All witches who ﬂy on broomsticks are fearless women.
Therefore, some witches who ﬂy on broomsticks are fearless women.
No wizards with magical powers are malevolent beings.
Therefore, it is false that all wizards with magical powers are malevolent beings.
The ﬁrst depends on an otherwise correct use of the subalternation relation, and
the second on an otherwise correct use of the contrary relation. If ﬂying witches and
magical wizards actually existed, both arguments would be valid. But since they do
not exist, both arguments are invalid and commit the existential fallacy.
The existential fallacy can be conceived in either of two ways. On the one hand, it
appears as a kind of metalogical fallacy that results from an incorrect adoption of the
Aristotelian standpoint: using it to draw conclusions about things that do not exist. In
contrast, the other fallacies just discussed are logical fallacies. They occur after the
Aristotelian standpoint has been correctly adopted, and they result from a mistaken
application of contrary, subcontrary, and subalternation. Alternately, the existential
fallacy can be conceived as a logical fallacy that occurs after the Boolean standpoint
has been adopted and that results from the use of relationships (contrary, subcontrary,
subalternation) that do not exist in that standpoint.
Now that we have seen how the traditional square of opposition, by itself, is used
to test arguments for validity, let us see how it can be used together with the operations
of conversion, obversion, and contraposition to prove the validity of arguments that
are given as valid. Suppose we are given the following valid argument:
All inappropriate remarks are faux pas.
Therefore, some faux pas are not appropriate remarks.
To prove this argument valid, we select letters to represent the terms, and then we
use some combination of conversion, obversion, and contraposition together with the
traditional square to ﬁnd the intermediate links between premise and conclusion:
All non-A are F.
Some non-A are F.
Some F are non-A.
Therefore, some F are not A.
(assumed true)
(true by subalternation)
(true by conversion)
(true by obversion)
The premise is the ﬁrst line in this proof, and each succeeding step is validly derived
from the one preceding it by the relation written in parentheses at the right. Since the
conclusion (which is the last step) follows by a series of three necessary inferences,
the argument is valid.
Various strategies can be used to construct proofs such as this, but one useful
procedure is to concentrate ﬁrst on obtaining the individual terms as they appear in
the conclusion, then attend to the order of the terms, and ﬁnally use the square of
opposition to adjust quality and quantity. As the above proof illustrates, however,
variations on this procedure are sometimes necessary. The fact that the predicate of

230
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
the conclusion is ‘‘A,’’ while ‘‘non-A’’ appears in the premise, leads us to think of
obversion. But using obversion to change ‘‘non-A’’ into ‘‘A’’ requires that the ‘‘non-A’’
in the premise be moved into the predicate position via conversion. The latter opera-
tion, however, is valid only on E and I statements, and the premise is an A statement.
The fact that the conclusion is a particular statement suggests subalternation as an
intermediate step, thus yielding an I statement that can be converted.
EXERCISE 4.5
I. Use the traditional square of opposition to ﬁnd the answers to these problems.
When a statement is given as false, simply enter an ‘‘F’’ into the square of opposi-
tion and compute (if possible) the other truth values.
1.
#
If ‘‘All fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing’’ is true, what is
the truth value of the following statements?
a. No fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
b. Some fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
c. Some fashion fads are not products of commercial brainwashing.
2. If ‘‘All fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing’’ is false, what is
the truth value of the following statements?
a. No fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
b. Some fashion fads are products of commercial brainwashing.
c. Some fashion fads are not products of commercial brainwashing.
3. If ‘‘No sting operations are cases of entrapment’’ is true, what is the truth value
of the following statements?
a. All sting operations are cases of entrapment.
b. Some sting operations are cases of entrapment.
c. Some sting operations are not cases of entrapment.
4.
#
If ‘‘No sting operations are cases of entrapment’’ is false, what is the truth
value of the following statements?
a. All sting operations are cases of entrapment.
b. Some sting operations are cases of entrapment.
c. Some sting operations are not cases of entrapment.
5. If ‘‘Some assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions’’ is true, what is the
truth value of the following statements?
a. All assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions.
b. No assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions.
c. Some assassinations are not morally justiﬁable actions.

The Traditional Square of Opposition
231
S
N
L
6. If ‘‘Some assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions’’ is false, what is the
truth value of the following statements?
a. All assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions.
b. No assassinations are morally justiﬁable actions.
c. Some assassinations are not morally justiﬁable actions.
7.
#
If ‘‘Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are not curable diseases’’ is true,
what is the truth value of the following statements?
a. All obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
b. No obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
c. Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
8. If ‘‘Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are not curable diseases’’ is false,
what is the truth value of the following statements?
a. All obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
b. No obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
c. Some obsessive-compulsive behaviors are curable diseases.
II. Use the traditional square of opposition to determine whether the following ar-
guments are valid or invalid. Name any fallacies that are committed.
1.
#
All advocates of school prayer are individuals who insist on imposing their
views on others.
Therefore, some advocates of school prayer are individuals who insist on
imposing their views on others.
2. It is false that no jailhouse informants are persons who can be trusted.
Therefore, some jailhouse informants are not persons who can be trusted.
3. All homemakers are persons with real jobs.
Therefore, it is false that no homemakers are persons with real jobs.
4.
#
It is false that some trolls are not creatures who live under bridges.
Therefore, it is false that no trolls are creatures who live under bridges.
5. Some campus romances are episodes plagued by violence.
Therefore, some campus romances are not episodes plagued by violence.
6. Some pornographic publications are materials protected by the First
Amendment.
Therefore, it is false that no pornographic publications are materialsprotected
by the First Amendment.
7.
#
It is false that all mainstream conservatives are persons who support free legal
services for the poor.
Therefore, no mainstream conservatives are persons who support free legal
services for the poor.

232
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
8. It is false that some forms of human creativity are activities amenable to
mathematical analysis.
Therefore, it is false that all forms of human creativity are activities amenable
to mathematical analysis.
9. It is false that some tooth fairies are daytime visitors.
Therefore, some tooth fairies are not daytime visitors.
10.
#
It is false that some orthodox psychoanalysts are not individuals driven by a
religious fervor.
Therefore, it is false that some orthodox psychoanalysts are individualsdriven
by a religious fervor.
11. Some starship captains are not members of the Federation.
Therefore, it is false that all starship captains are members of the Federation.
12. It is false that some network news programs are exercises in mediocrity.
Therefore, it is false that no network news programs are exercises in mediocrity.
13.
#
No ﬂying reindeer are animals who get lost in the fog.
Therefore, it is false that all ﬂying reindeer are animals who get lost in the fog.
14. It is false that no leveraged buyouts are deals unfair to workers.
Therefore, all leveraged buyouts are deals unfair to workers.
15. It is false that some wood ticks are not carriers of Lyme disease.
Therefore, some wood ticks are carriers of Lyme disease.
III. Exercises 1 through 10 provide a statement, its truth value in parentheses, and an
operation to be performed on that statement. Supply the new statement and the
truth value of the new statement. Exercises 11 through 20 provide a statement, its
truth value in parentheses, and a new statement. Determine how the new state-
ment was derived from the given statement and supply the truth value of the new
statement. Take the Aristotelian standpoint in working these exercises.
Given statement
Operation/
relation
New statement
Truth
value
#1.
2.
3.
#4.
5.
6.
#7.
8.
9.
#10.
11.
12.
13.
All non-A are B. (T)
Some A are non-B. (F)
No A are non-B. (T)
Some non-A are not B. (T)
No A are non-B. (F)
No A are B. (T)
All non-A are B. (T)
Some A are not non-B. (F)
No A are non-B. (F)
Some non-A are non-B. (F)
Some non-A are not B. (T)
Some A are non-B. (T)
All non-A are B. (F)
contrap.
subalt.
obv.
subcon.
contradic.
contrap.
contrary
obv.
conv.
subcon.
All non-A are B.
Some non-B are A.
No non-A are non-B.

The Traditional Square of Opposition
233
S
N
L
Given statement
Operation/
relation
New statement
Truth
value
#14.
15.
#16.
17.
18.
#19.
20.
Some non-A are not B. (T)
All A are non-B. (F)
Some non-A are non-B. (F)
Some A are not non-B. (T)
No non-A are B. (T)
No A are non-B. (F)
Some non-A are B. (F)
No non-A are B.
All non-B are A.
No non-A are non-B.
Some B are not non-A.
Some non-A are not B.
All A are non-B.
Some non-A are not B.
IV. Use either the traditional square of opposition or conversion, obversion, or con-
traposition to determine whether the following arguments are valid or invalid. For
those that are invalid, name the fallacy committed.
1.
#
It is false that some jogging events are not aerobic activities.
Therefore, it is false that no jogging events are aerobic activities.
2. No meat-eating vegetarians are individuals with a high protein diet.
Therefore, no individuals with a high protein diet are meat-eatingvegetarians.
3. Some jobs in health care are not glamorous occupations.
Therefore, some jobs in health care are glamorous occupations.
4.
#
Some terminally ill patients are patients who do not want to live.
Therefore, some patients who want to live are recovering patients.
5. All Barbie dolls are toys that engender a false sense of values.
Therefore, no Barbie dolls are toys that engender a true sense of values.
6. All ﬂying elephants are jolly pachyderms.
Therefore, some ﬂying elephants are jolly pachyderms.
7.
#
It is false that some international terrorists are political moderates.
Therefore, some international terrorists are not political moderates.
8. No pet hamsters are animals that need much attention.
Therefore, it is false that all pet hamsters are animals that need much attention.
9. Some hedge fund managers are not responsible investors.
Therefore, some responsible investors are not hedge fund managers.
10.
#
It is false that all substances that control cell growth are hormones.
Therefore, no substances that control cell growth are hormones.
11. Some cases of whistle blowing are actions disloyal to employers.
Therefore, some cases of whistle blowing are not actions loyal to employers.
12. No stolen computer chips are easy items to trace.
Therefore, no difﬁcult items to trace are computer chips that are not stolen.
13.
#
Some economists are followers of Ayn Rand.
Therefore, some economists are not followers of Ayn Rand.
14. All porcelain ﬁgurines are fragile artifacts.
Therefore, it is false that some porcelain ﬁgurines are not fragile artifacts.

234
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
15. Some pleasant recollections are not missed opportunities.
Therefore, some availed opportunities are not unpleasant recollections.
V. Use the traditional square of opposition together with conversion, obversion, and
contraposition to prove that the following arguments are valid. Show each inter-
mediate step in the deduction.
1.
#
All insurance policies are cryptically written documents.
Therefore, some cryptically written documents are insurance policies.
2. No gemstones that do not contain chromium are emeralds.
Therefore, some stones that are not emeralds are not gemstones that contain
chromium.
3. It is false that some ﬁcus benjaminas are untemperamental house plants.
Therefore, all ﬁcus benjaminas are temperamental house plants.
4.
#
All exogenous morphines are addictive substances.
Therefore, it is false that all addictive substances are endogenous morphines.
5. No persons who do not advocate free-enterprise economics are fundamen-
talist Christians.
Therefore, it is false that some fundamentalist Christians are not persons who
advocate free enterprise economics.
6. It is false that some Gothic cathedrals are buildings that do not feature pointed
arches.
Therefore, some buildings that feature pointed arches are Gothic cathedrals.
7.
#
Some persons who recognize paranormal events are not non-scientists.
Therefore, it is false that no scientists are persons who recognize paranormal
events.
8. It is false that no unhealthy things to ingest are food additives.
Therefore, some food additives are not healthy things to ingest.
9. It is false that some illegal searches are not sobriety checkpoints.
Therefore, some sobriety checkpoints are not legal searches.
10.
#
It is false that some feminists are not advocates of equal pay for equal work.
Therefore, it is false that all advocates of equal pay for equal work are non-
feminists.
4.6
Venn Diagrams and the Traditional
Standpoint
Earlier in this chapter we saw how Venn diagrams can be used to represent the content
of categorical propositions from the Boolean standpoint. With a slight modiﬁcation

Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint
235
S
N
L
they can also be used to represent the content of categorical propositions from the
traditional, or Aristotelian, standpoint. These modiﬁed Venn diagrams can then be
used to prove the relationships of the traditional square of opposition, and also to test
the validity of immediate inferences from the traditional standpoint.
Proving the Traditional Square of Opposition
The difference between the Boolean standpoint and the Aristotelian standpoint con-
cerns only universal (A and E) propositions. The Boolean interpretation of these
propositions makes no assumption that the subject term denotes actually existing
things, whereas the Aristotelian interpretation does. For example, if we are given the
universal statement ‘‘All baboons are pesky creatures,’’ the Boolean standpoint does
not assume that baboons actually exist, whereas the Aristotelian standpoint doesmake
this assumption. Therefore, if we are to construct a Venn diagram to represent the
Aristotelian interpretation of such a statement, we need to introduce some symbol that
represents this assumption of existence.
The symbol that we will introduce for this purpose is an ‘‘X’’ surrounded by a circle.
Like the ‘‘X’’s that we have used up until now, this circled ‘‘X’’ signiﬁes that something
exists in the area in which it is placed. However, the two symbols differ in that the
uncircled ‘‘X’’ represents the positive claim of existence made by particular (I and O)
propositions, whereas the circled ‘‘X’’ represents the assumption of existence made by
universal (A and E) propositions. The Aristotelian interpretation of universal proposi-
tions may now be diagrammed as follows:
P
S
A: All S are P
P
S
X
E: No S are P
X
In the diagram for the A statement, the left-hand part of the S circle is shaded, so if
there are any members of S, they must be in the area where the two circles overlap.
Thus, a circled ‘‘X’’ is placed in the overlap area. In the diagram for the E statement,
the overlap area is shaded, so if there are any members of S they must be in the left-
hand part of the S circle. Thus, a circled ‘‘X’’ is placed in this area.
The diagrams for the I and O statements are the same from the Aristotelian stand-
point as they are from the Boolean:

236
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
P
S
I: Some S are P.
P
S
X
O: Some S are not P.
X
We can now use this modiﬁed Venn diagram technique to prove the relations of the
traditional square of opposition. Having such a proof is important because up until now
these relations have only been illustrated with various examples; they have not been
proved. Before beginning, however, we can note that the contradictory relation is not
dependent on any assumption of existence, and it was proved earlier in connectionwith
the modern square of opposition. Thus, we need not prove it a second time. The accom-
panying ﬁgure reproduces the traditional square of opposition together with Venn dia-
grams that represent the Aristotelian interpretation of the four standard form propositions.
P
S
X
P
S
X
P
S
X
P
S
X
A
E
O
F
T
F
T
Subalternation
Contrary
Subcontrary
Subalternation
I
Contra
dictory
Contra
dictory
Let us begin with the contrary relation. If the A statement is given as true, then the
overlap area is not empty, which makes the E statement false. By analogous reasoning,
if the E statement is given as true, the overlap area is empty, which makes the A

Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint
237
S
N
L
statement false. However, if the A statement is given as false (making the O statement
true), then the E statement could be either true or false depending on whether or not
the overlap area is empty. Thus, in this case the E statement would have logically
undetermined truth value. By analogous reasoning, if the E statement is given as false
(making the I statement true), the A statement could be either true or false depending
on whether or not the left-hand part of the S circle is empty. Thus, the A statement
would have logically undetermined truth value.
Turning now to the subcontrary relation, if the I statement is given as false, then the
area where the S and P circles overlap is empty. But since it is assumed that at least one
S exists, there must then be something in the left-hand part of the S circle, which makes
the O statement true. By analogous reasoning, if the O statement is given as false,
there must be something in the overlap area, making the I statement true. But if the I
statement is given as true, then the O statement could be either true or false depending
on whether something exists in the left-hand part of the S circle. Thus the O statement
would have undetermined truth value. Similarly, if the O statement is given as true,
then the I statement could be either true or false depending on whether something
exists in the overlap area. Thus, the I statement would have undetermined truth value.
Finally, we consider subalternation. If the A statement is given as true, then some-
thing exists in the area where the S and P circles overlap, which makes the I statement
true as well. And if the I statement is given as false, then the overlap area is empty,
making the A statement false. But if the A statement is given as false (making the O
statement true), then the I statement could be either true or false depending on whether
something exists in the overlap area. Thus, the I statement would have logically unde-
termined truth value. And if the I statement is given as true, then the A statement could
be either true or false depending on whether or not the left-hand part of the S circle is
empty. Thus, the A statement would have logically undetermined truthvalue.Analogous
reasoning applies for the subalternation relation between the E and O statements.
Testing Immediate Inferences
The modiﬁed Venn diagram technique involving circled ‘‘X’’s can be used to test
immediate inferences from the Aristotelian standpoint. The only requirement is that
the subject and predicate terms of the conclusion be the same as those of the premise.
Such inferences depend on the square of opposition and do not involve the operations
of conversion, obversion, and contraposition. Venn diagrams can also be used to test
inferences involving these latter operations, but a further modiﬁcation must be intro-
duced. To test the former kind of inferences from the Aristotelian standpoint, follow
these three steps:
1. Symbolize the argument and test it from the Boolean standpoint. If the argument is
valid, proceed no further; the argument is unconditionally valid.
2. If the argument is invalid from the Boolean standpoint and the left-hand premise
circle is partly shaded, enter a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded part of that circle. Enter
no circled ‘‘X’’s for the conclusion. Retest the argument for validity.

238
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
3. If the diagram indicates the argument is valid, determine if the circled ‘‘X’’ repre-
sents something that exists. If it does, the argument is valid from the Aristotelian
standpoint. If it does not, the argument is invalid and commits the existentialfallacy.
In regard to the second step, if the left-hand premise circle contains no shading,
then the argument is invalid from the Aristotelian standpoint as well, and no further
steps should be taken. In reference to the third step, determining whether the circled
‘‘X’’ represents something that exists is equivalent to determining whether the subject
of the premise denotes existing things. If the subject of the premise is ‘‘dogs,’’ then a
circled ‘‘X’’ in the left-hand Venn circle represents something that exists; but if the
subject is ‘‘unicorns,’’ then it does not.
Here is an example of the evaluation process:
No military assault riﬂes are guns useful for hunting.
Therefore, it is false that all military assault riﬂes are guns useful for hunting.
First we symbolize the argument and test it from the Boolean standpoint:
G
M
No M are G.
G
M
X
It is false that
all M are G.
Inspecting the diagrams, we see that the argument is invalid from the Boolean stand-
point. Thus, we proceed to the second step and place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded
part of the left-hand premise circle:
G
M
No M are G.
G
M
X
It is false that
all M are G.
X

Venn Diagrams and the Traditional Standpoint
239
S
N
L
Now the diagram indicates that the argument is valid, so we proceed to the third step
and see whether the circled ‘‘X’’ represents something that actually exists. Since the
circled ‘‘X’’ is in the M circle, and M denotes military assault riﬂes, the circled ‘‘X’’ does
represent something that exists. Thus, the argument is valid from the Aristotelian
standpoint.
Another example:
All sugar plum fairies are delicate creatures.
Therefore, some sugar plum fairies are delicate creatures.
First we test the argument from the Boolean standpoint:
D
S
All S are D.
D
S
X
Some S are D.
Again the argument is invalid from the Boolean standpoint, so we proceed to the
second step and place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded part of the left-hand premise
circle:
D
S
All S are D.
D
S
X
Some S are D.
X
Since the diagrams indicate that the argument is valid, we proceed to the third step
and determine whether the circled ‘‘X’’ represents something that actually exists. Since
the circled ‘‘X’’ is in the S circle, and since S stands for sugar plum fairies, the circled
‘‘X’’ does not represent something that actually exists. In other words, we are not

240
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
justiﬁed in taking the Aristotelian standpoint for this argument. Thus, the argument is
invalid, and it commits the existential fallacy. If sugar plum fairies actually existed, the
argument would be valid.
In determining whether a circled ‘‘X’’ represents something that actually exists, we
look to the subject of the premise. If this term denotes existing things, then the circled
‘‘X’’ stands for one of those things, and the argument is valid. If the subject of the
premise does not stand for existing things, then the circled ‘‘X’’ does not represent
something that exists, and the argument is invalid.
EXERCISE 4.6
Use the modiﬁed Venn diagram technique to test the following immediate inferences
from the Aristotelian standpoint.
1.
#
No summer romances are banal pastimes.
Therefore, it is false that some summer romances are banal pastimes.
2. It is false that some people who hunger for wealth are not victims of their
obsession.
Therefore, some people who hunger for wealth are victims of their obsession.
3. No lamps containing genies are ordinary sources of light.
Therefore, some lamps containing genies are not ordinary sources of light.
4.
#
It is false that some duck hunters are animal rights activists.
Therefore, some duck hunters are not animal rights activists.
5. All repressive political regimes are insults to human dignity.
Therefore, no repressive political regimes are insults to human dignity.
6. It is false that all skating rinks are playgrounds for amateurs.
Therefore, some skating rinks are not playgrounds for amateurs.
7.
#
All pixies who slide down moonbeams are fun-loving daredevils.
Therefore, it is false that no pixies who slide down moonbeams are fun-loving
daredevils.
8. It is false that some graduate teaching assistants are not underpaid laborers.
Therefore, it is false that no graduate teaching assistants are underpaid
laborers.
9. Some housing projects are developments riddled with crime.
Therefore, it is false that no housing projects are developments riddled with
crime.
10.
#
It is false that some thunderstorms are quiescent phenomena.
Therefore, all thunderstorms are quiescent phenomena.
11. No ﬂower gardens are creations that feature skunk weed.
Therefore, it is false that all ﬂower gardens are creations that feature skunk
weed.

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
241
S
N
L
12. It is false that no incendiary devices are contraptions that misﬁre.
Therefore, some incendiary devices are not contraptions that misﬁre.
13.
#
It is false that some pet lovers are people who think that animals are mere
machines.
Therefore, it is false that all pet lovers are people who think that animals are
mere machines.
14. No werewolves are creatures who lurk about in the daytime.
Therefore, it is false that all werewolves are creatures who lurk about in the
daytime.
15. Some soccer games are not thrilling events to watch.
Therefore, no soccer games are thrilling events to watch.
4.7
Translating Ordinary Language
Statements into Categorical Form
Although few statements that occur in ordinary written and oral expression are cate-
gorical propositions in standard form, many of them can be translated into standard-
form propositions. Such translation has two chief beneﬁts. The ﬁrst is that the
operations and inferences pertinent to standard-form categorical propositions (con-
trary, subcontrary, etc.) become applicable to these statements. The second is that
such statements, once translated, are completely clear and unambiguous as to their
meaning. Many statements in ordinary language are susceptible to multiple interpre-
tations, and each interpretation represents one possible mode of translation. The effort
to translate such statements discloses the various interpretations and thus helps pre-
vent misunderstanding and confusion.
Translating statements into categorical form is like any other kind of translation in
that no set of speciﬁc rules can be given that will cover every possible form of phrase-
ology. Yet one general rule always applies: Understand the meaning of the given
statement, and then reexpress it in a new statement that has a quantiﬁer, subject term,
copula, and predicate term. Some of the forms of phraseology that are typically en-
countered are terms without nouns, nonstandard verbs, singular propositions,adverbs
and pronouns, unexpressed and nonstandard quantiﬁers, conditional statements, ex-
clusive propositions, ‘‘the only,’’ and exceptive propositions.
1. Terms Without Nouns
The subject and predicate terms of a categorical proposition must contain either a
plural noun or a pronoun that serves to denote the class indicated by the term. Nouns
and pronouns denote classes, while adjectives (and participles) connote attributes. If

242
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
a term consists of only an adjective, a plural noun or pronoun should be introduced
to make the term genuinely denotative. Examples:
Some roses are red.
All tigers are carnivorous.
Some roses are red ﬂowers.
All tigers are carnivorous
animals.
2. Nonstandard Verbs
According to the position adopted earlier in this chapter, the only copulas that are
allowed in standard-form categorical propositions are ‘‘are’’ and ‘‘are not.’’ Statements
in ordinary usage often incorporate other forms of the verb ‘‘to be.’’ Such statements
may be translated as the following examples illustrate:
Some persons who go to college
will become educated.
Some persons who go to college are
persons who will become educated.
Some dogs would rather bark
than bite.
Some dogs are animals that would
rather bark than bite.
In other statements no form of the verb ‘‘to be’’ occurs at all. These may be trans-
lated as the following examples indicate:
Some birds ﬂy south during the
winter.
All ducks swim.
Some birds are animals that ﬂy south
during the winter.
All ducks are swimmers.
or
All ducks are animals that swim.
3. Singular Propositions
A singular proposition is a proposition that makes an assertion about a speciﬁc person,
place, thing, or time. Singular propositions are typically translated into universals by
means of a parameter. A parameter is a phrase that, when introduced into a state-
ment, affects the form but not the meaning. Some parameters that may be used to
translate singular propositions are:
persons identical to
places identical to
things identical to
cases identical to
times identical to
For example, the statement ‘‘Socrates is mortal’’ may be translated as ‘‘All persons
identical to Socrates are persons who are mortal.’’ Because only one person is identical
to Socrates, namely Socrates himself, the term ‘‘persons identical to Socrates’’ denotes

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
243
S
N
L
the class that has Socrates as its only member. In other words, it simply denotes
Socrates. Note that the parameter ‘‘persons identical to’’ is not the same as ‘‘persons
similar to’’ or ‘‘persons like.’’ There may be many persons like Socrates, but there is
only one person identical to Socrates. The same goes for the other parameters involv-
ing the word ‘‘identical.’’ Here are some examples:
George went home.
All persons identical to George are per-
sons who went home.
Sandra did not go shopping.
No persons identical to Sandra are per-
sons who went shopping.
There is a radio in the back
bedroom.
All places identical to the back bedroom
are places where there is a radio.
or
Some radios are things in the back
bedroom.
The moon is full tonight.
All things identical to the moon are
things that are full tonight.
or
All times identical to tonight are times
the moon is full.
I hate gin.
All persons identical to me are persons
who hate gin.
or
All things identical to gin are things that
I hate.
One additional point to keep in mind about the use of these parameters is that they
should not be used when the term in question already has a plural noun (or pronoun)
that denotes the intended class. Such use is not wrong, technically, but it is redundant.
Example:
Diamonds are carbon allotropes.
Correct: All diamonds are carbon
allotropes.
Redundant: All things identical to
diamonds are things
identical to carbon
allotropes.
4. Adverbs and Pronouns
When a statement contains a spatial adverb such as ‘‘where,’’ ‘‘wherever,’’‘‘anywhere,’’
‘‘everywhere,’’ or ‘‘nowhere,’’ or a temporal adverb such as ‘‘when,’’ ‘‘whenever,’’
‘‘anytime,’’ ‘‘always,’’ or ‘‘never,’’ it may be translated in terms of ‘‘places’’ or ‘‘times,’’
respectively. Statements containing pronouns such as ‘‘who,’’ ‘‘whoever,’’ ‘‘anyone,’’

244
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
‘‘what,’’ ‘‘whatever,’’ or ‘‘anything’’ may be translated in terms of ‘‘persons’’ or ‘‘things,’’
respectively. Examples:
He always wears a suit to work.
All times he goes to work are times
he wears a suit.
He is always clean shaven.
All times are times he is clean
shaven.
She never brings her lunch
to school.
No times she goes to school are
times she brings her lunch.
Nowhere on earth are there
any unicorns.
No places on earth are places there
are unicorns.
Whoever works hard will succeed.
All persons who work hard are per-
sons who will succeed.
He glitters when he walks.
All times he walks are times he
glitters.
She goes where she chooses.
All places she chooses to go are
places she goes.
She does what she wants.
All things she wants to do are things
she does.
Notice the order of the terms in the last three examples. When one of the aforenamed
adverbs or pronouns occurs in the middle of a statement, the adverb or pronoun
(together with what follows it) should be mentally moved to the front, and the state-
ment should then be translated like the statements that begin with adverbs or
pronouns.
5. Unexpressed Quantiﬁers
Many statements in ordinary usage have quantiﬁers that are implied but not expressed.
In introducing the quantiﬁers one must be guided by the most probable meaning of
the statement. Examples:
Emeralds are green gems.
All emeralds are green gems.
There are lions in the zoo.
Some lions are animals in the zoo.
A tiger is a mammal.
All tigers are mammals.
A ﬁsh is not a mammal.
No ﬁsh are mammals.
A tiger roared.
Some tigers are animals that roared.
Children are human beings.
All children are human beings.
Children live next door.
Some children are persons who live
next door.

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
245
S
N
L
6. Nonstandard Quantiﬁers
In some ordinary language statements the quantity is indicated by words other than
the three standard form quantiﬁers. Such words include ‘‘few,’’ ‘‘a few,’’ ‘‘not every,’’
‘‘anyone,’’ and various other forms. Another problem occurs when the quantiﬁer ‘‘all’’
is combined with the copula ‘‘are not.’’ As we have already seen, statements of the
form ‘‘All S are not P’’ are not standard-form propositions. Depending on their mean-
ing, they should be translated as either ‘‘No S are P’’ or ‘‘Some S are not P.’’ When the
intended meaning is ‘‘Some S are not P,’’ the meaning may be indicated by placing
oral emphasis on the word ‘‘All.’’ For example, ‘‘All athletes are not superstars’’ means
‘‘Some athletes are not superstars.’’ Here are some additional examples:
A few soldiers are heroes.
Some soldiers are heroes.
Anyone who votes is a citizen.
All voters are citizens.
Not everyone who votes is a
Democrat.
Some voters are not Democrats.
Not a single dog is a cat.
No dogs are cats.
All newborns are not able to talk.
No newborns are people able to talk.
All prisoners are not violent.
Some prisoners are not violent
persons.
Few sailors entered the regatta.
Some sailors are persons who en-
tered the regatta and some sailors
are not persons who entered the
regatta.
Notice that this last statement beginning with ‘‘few’’ cannot be translated as a single
categorical proposition. Such statements (and some beginning with ‘‘a few’’) must be
translated as a compound arrangement of an I proposition and an O proposition.
Statements beginning with ‘‘almost all’’ and ‘‘not quite all’’ must be handled in the
same way. When these statements occur in arguments, the arguments must be treated
in the same way as those containing exceptive propositions, which will be discussed
shortly.
7. Conditional Statements
When the antecedent and consequent of a conditional statement talk about the same
thing, the statement can usually be translated into categorical form. The Boolean
interpretation of categorical propositions provides the key: such statements are always
rendered as universals. Examples:
If it’s a mouse, then it’s a mammal.
All mice are mammals.
If an animal has four legs, then it is
not a bird.
No four-legged animals are birds.

246
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
If Los Angeles is in California, then
Los Angeles is a large city.
All California cities identical to Los
Angeles are large cities.
When the word ‘‘if’’ occurs in the middle of a conditional statement, the statement
must be restructured so that it occurs at the beginning. For example, ‘‘An animal is a
ﬁsh if it has gills’’ means ‘‘If an animal has gills, then it is a ﬁsh.’’ This is then translated,
‘‘All animals having gills are ﬁsh.’’ Other examples:
A person will succeed if he or she
perseveres.
All persons who persevere are per-
sons who will succeed.
Jewelry is expensive if it is made of
gold.
All pieces of jewelry made of gold
are expensive things.
In translating conditional statements it is sometimes useful to employ a rule called
transposition. According to this rule, the antecedent and consequent of a conditional
statement may switch places if both are negated. For example, the statement ‘‘If some-
thing is not valuable, then it is not scarce’’ is logically equivalent to ‘‘If something is
scarce, then it is valuable.’’ This is then translated as ‘‘All scarce things are valuable
things.’’ Examples:
If it’s not a mammal, then it’s not a
mouse.
All mice are mammals.
If a company is not well managed,
then it is not a good investment.
All companies that are good invest-
ments are well-managed companies.
The word ‘‘unless’’ means ‘‘if not.’’ For example, the statement ‘‘A car will not run
unless there is gas in the tank’’ means ‘‘A car will not run if there is not gas in the tank,’’
which means, ‘‘If there is not gas in the tank, then a car will not run.’’ By transposition,
this means, ‘‘If a car runs, then there is gas in the tank,’’ which is translated as ‘‘All cars
that run are cars with gas in the tank.’’ Although ‘‘unless’’ sometimes has the stronger
sense of ‘‘if and only if not,’’ the weaker sense of ‘‘if not’’ can always be depended on.
Here are some additional examples:
Tomatoes are edible unless they are
spoiled.
All inedible tomatoes are spoiled
tomatoes.
or
All unspoiled tomatoes are edible
tomatoes.
Unless a boy misbehaves he will be
treated decently.
All boys who do not misbehave are
boys who will be treated decently.
8. Exclusive Propositions
Many propositions that involve the words ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘none but,’’ ‘‘none except,’’ and
‘‘no . . . except’’ are exclusive propositions. Efforts to translate them into categorical

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
247
S
N
L
propositions frequently lead to confusion of the subject term with the predicate term.
Such confusion can be avoided if the statement is phrased as a conditional statement
ﬁrst, then as a categorical statement. For example, the statement ‘‘Only executives can
use the silver elevator’’ is equivalent to ‘‘If a person can use the silver elevator, he is
an executive.’’ The correct categorical proposition is ‘‘All persons who can use the
silver elevator are executives.’’ If the statement were translated ‘‘All executives are
persons who can use the silver elevator,’’ it would clearly be wrong. Thus, the occur-
rence of ‘‘only’’ and ‘‘none but’’ at the beginning of a statement indicates a reversal in
the order of the terms when the statement is translated into categorical form.
Examples:
Only elected ofﬁcials will attend the
convention.
All persons who will attend the con-
vention are elected ofﬁcials.
None but the brave deserve the fair.
All persons who deserve the fair are
brave persons.
No birds except peacocks are proud
of their tails.
All birds proud of their tails are
peacocks.
For a statement involving ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘none but,’’ ‘‘none except,’’ and ‘‘no . . . except’’
to be a genuinely exclusive proposition, the word that follows these words must be a
plural noun or pronoun. If the word that follows ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘none but,’’ or the like
designates an individual, the statement really asserts two things. For example, the
statement ‘‘Only Megan painted a picture’’ asserts that Megan painted a picture and
that no other person painted a picture. Thus it would be translated as two statements:
‘‘All persons identical to Megan are persons who painted a picture, and all persons
who painted a picture are persons identical to Megan.’’ This section of the book will
ignore cases where the word following ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘none but,’’ or the like designates an
individual.
When ‘‘only’’ and ‘‘none but’’ occur in the middle of a statement, the statement must
ﬁrst be restructured so that the term preceded by ‘‘only’’ or ‘‘none but’’ occurs ﬁrst.
Then the statement can be translated as those above. For example, the statement
‘‘Executives can use only the silver elevator’’ is equivalent to ‘‘Only the silver elevator
can be used by executives.’’ This, in turn, is equivalent to ‘‘If an elevator can be used
by executives, then it is the silver elevator,’’ which is translated: ‘‘All elevators that can
be used by executives are elevators identical to the silver elevator.’’ Other examples:
He owns only blue-chip stocks.
All stocks owned by him are blue-
chip stocks.
She invited only wealthy socialites.
All persons invited by her are
wealthy socialites.
Note that many English statements containing ‘‘only’’ are ambiguous owing to the
fact that ‘‘only’’ can be interpreted as modifying alternate words in the statement.
Consider, for example, the statement ‘‘He only jogs after sunset.’’ Does this mean ‘‘He

248
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
is the only person who jogs after sunset’’ or ‘‘He jogs and does not walk after sunset’’
or ‘‘The only time he jogs is after sunset’’? If the statement’s context does not provide
an answer, the translator is free to pick any of these senses for translation. This same
ambiguity, incidentally, affects the last two examples above. Accordingly, they might
also be translated ‘‘All things owned by him are blue-chip stocks’’ and ‘‘All socialites
invited by her are wealthy persons.’’
9. ‘‘The Only’’
Statements beginning with the words ‘‘the only’’ are translated differently from those
beginning with ‘‘only.’’ For example, the statement ‘‘The only cars that are available
are Chevrolets’’ means ‘‘If a car is available, then it is a Chevrolet.’’ This in turn is
translated as ‘‘All cars that are available are Chevrolets.’’ In other words, ‘‘the only,’’
when it occurs at the beginning of a statement, can simply be replaced with ‘‘all,’’ and
the order of the terms is not reversed in the translation.
When ‘‘the only’’ occurs in the middle of a statement, the statement must be restruc-
tured so that it occurs at the beginning. For example, ‘‘Romances are the only books
he sells’’ is equivalent to ‘‘The only books he sells are romances.’’ This is then trans-
lated as ‘‘All books that he sells are romances.’’ Other examples:
The only animals that live in this
canyon are skunks.
All animals that live in this canyon
are skunks.
Accountants are the only ones who
will be hired.
All those who will be hired are
accountants.
Statements involving ‘‘the only’’ are similar to those involving ‘‘only’’ in this one
respect: When the statement is about an individual, two statements are needed to
translate it. For example, ‘‘The only person who painted a picture is Megan’’ means
that Megan painted a picture, and no other person painted a picture. The statement is
equivalent in meaning to ‘‘Only Megan painted a picture.’’ Thus it is translated ‘‘All
persons identical to Megan are persons who painted a picture, and all persons who
painted a picture are persons identical to Megan.’’ Statements involving ‘‘the only’’ that
refer to individuals are ignored throughout the remainder of this chapter.
10. Exceptive Propositions
Propositions of the form ‘‘All except S are P’’ and ‘‘All but S are P’’ are exceptive
propositions. They must be translated not as single categorical propositions but as
pairs of conjoined categorical propositions. Statements that include the phrase ‘‘none
except,’’ on the other hand, are exclusive (not exceptive) propositions. ‘‘None except’’
is synonymous with ‘‘none but.’’ Some examples of exceptive propositions are:
All except students are invited.
No students are invited persons, and
all nonstudents are invited persons.

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
249
S
N
L
All but managers must report to the
president.
No managers are persons who must
report to the president, and all non-
managers are persons who must re-
port to the president.
Because exceptive propositions cannot be translated into single categorical propo-
sitions, many of the simple inferences and operations pertinent to categorical propo-
sitions cannot be applied to them. Arguments that contain exceptive propositions as
premises or conclusion can be evaluated only through the application of extended
techniques. This topic is taken up in the next chapter.
Key word (to be eliminated)
Translation hint
whoever, wherever, always, anyone,
never, etc.
use ‘‘all’’ together with persons,
places, times
a few
‘‘some’’
if . . . then
use ‘‘all’’ or ‘‘no’’
unless
‘‘if not’’
only, none but, none except,
no . . . except
use ‘‘all’’ and switch order of
terms
the only
‘‘all’’
all but, all except, few
two statements required
not every, not all
‘‘some . . . are not’’
there is, there are
‘‘some’’
EXERCISE 4.7
I. Translate the following into standard-form categorical propositions:
1.
#
Any bank that makes too many risky loans will fail.
2. Women military ofﬁcers are not eligible for combat duty.
3. Terrorist attacks succeed whenever security measures are lax.
4.
#
Bromine is extractable from seawater.
5. Not all guilt feelings are psychological aberrations.
6. Every jazz fan admires Duke Ellington.
7.
#
If it’s a halogen, then it isn’t chemically inert.
8. A television show that depicts violence incites violence.
9. Manipulators do not make good marriage partners.
10.
#
None but pirate ships ﬂy the Jolly Roger.

250
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
11. Warmth always relieves pain.
12. Joseph J. Thomson discovered the electron.
13.
#
A few organic silicones are used as lubricants.
14. Only nuclear-powered vehicles are suitable for deep space exploration.
15. Comets are the only heavenly bodies with tails.
16.
#
There is a giant star in the Tarantula Nebula.
17. If a pregnant woman drinks alcohol, she risks giving birth to a deformed child.
18. No shellﬁsh except oysters make pearls.
19.
#
Only those given to ﬂights of fancy believe Noah’s ark lies beneath the snows
of Ararat.
20. The electroscope is a device for detecting static electricity.
21. Occasionally there are concerts in Central Park.
22.
#
Berlin was the setting for the 1936 Olympic Games.
23. The Kentucky Derby is never run in January.
24. The only way to get rid of a temptation is to yield to it.
25.
#
Where there’s smoke, there’s ﬁre.
26. Lunar eclipses do not occur unless the moon is full.
27. Radio transmissions are disrupted whenever sunspot activity increases.
28.
#
If an ore isn’t radioactive, then it isn’t pitchblende.
29. All but the rats left the sinking ship.
30. A pesticide is dangerous if it contains DDT.
31.
#
James Michener wrote only historical novels.
32. He who hesitates is lost.
33. Modern corporations are all run in the interest of their managers.
34.
#
Unless the sun is shining, a rainbow cannot occur.
35. Whoever suffers allergic reactions has a weakened immune system.
36. All fruits except pineapples ripen after they are picked.
37.
#
Few corporate raiders are known for their integrity.
38. Monkeys are found in the jungles of Guatemala.
39. Monkeys are mammals.
40.
#
I like strawberries.
41. All passengers are not allowed to smoke on board the aircraft.
42. All ﬂowers are not fragrant.
43.
#
Cynthia travels where she wants.
44. Bats are the only true ﬂying mammals.
45. Not every river runs to the sea.

Translating Ordinary Language Statements into Categorical Form
251
S
N
L
46.
#
Physicists do not understand the operation of superconductors.
47. A few apartment dwellers are victimized by incessant noise.
48. There are forced labor camps in China.
49.
#
Whatever increases efﬁciency improves proﬁtability.
50. Dolphins are swimming between the breakers.
51. Feathers are not heavy.
52.
#
Few picnics are entirely free of ants.
53. A civil right is unalienable if it is a human right.
54. She says what she pleases.
55.
#
None but computer buffs are Net surfers.
II. The following exercises contain typical mistakes that students make in attempting
to translate statements into standard form. Correct the errors and redundancies in
these attempted translations.
1.
#
Some of the third-generation computers are things that are machines that take
dictation.
2. All cars identical to BMWs are the only cars that young lawyers drive.
3. All vertebrates except cartilaginous ﬁshes are animals with a bony skeleton.
4.
#
No downhill skiers are effective competitors if they suffer from altitude
sickness.
5. All substances like cobalt are things that are substances identical to ferromag-
netic metals.
6. No persons identical to nuclear passivists are persons who believe a just war
is possible.
7.
#
All persons identical to matadors are not performers who succumb easily to
fear.
8. All companies identical to Microsoft are looking forward to a bright future.
9. No toxic dumps are ecological catastrophes unless they leak.
10.
#
All crocodiles are things identical to dangerous animals when they are hungry.
Summary
A categorical proposition is a proposition that relates two classes (or categories).
Standard-form categorical propositions occur in four forms and are composed of a
quantiﬁer (‘‘all,’’ ‘‘no,’’ ‘‘some’’), a subject term, a copula (‘‘are,’’ ‘‘are not’’) and a
predicate term. A standard-form categorical proposition has either afﬁrmative or neg-
ative quality, depending on whether it joins or separates the subject and predicate
classes, and universal or particular quantity, depending on whether it relates all or

252
Chapter 4: Categorical Propositions
only a part of the subject class to the predicate class. The subject and predicate terms
are said to be distributed or undistributed depending on whether the proposition
makes an assertion about all or only a part of the class denoted by the term in question.
Each standard-form proposition is given a letter name (A, E, I, O) that reﬂects its
quantity and quality.
Categorical propositions having universal quantity admit of two different interpre-
tations. The Aristotelian interpretation assumes that the subject term denotes actually
existing things, while the Boolean interpretation makes no such assumption. The
content of a standard-form proposition may be represented in a Venn diagram, which
consists of two overlapping circles. Placing an X in an area indicates that the area is
not empty, and shading an area indicates that the area is empty. The modern square
of opposition is a diagram that applies to the Boolean interpretation; it indicates that
the A and O propositions contradict each other and that the E and I propositions
contradict each other.
Conversion, obversion, and contraposition are operations that can be performed
on standard-form propositions; they result in a new proposition that is either logically
equivalent or not logically equivalent to the original proposition. Two propositions
that are logically equivalent necessarily have the same truth value. Conversion gives
logically equivalent results for E and I propositions, obversion does so for all four, and
contraposition, for A and O. The formal fallacies of illicit conversion and illicit contra-
position result from the application of conversion and contraposition to propositions
that do not yield logically equivalent results.
The traditional square of opposition applies to the Aristotelian interpretation of cate-
gorical propositions; it shows how each kind of proposition relates to the other three.
The contrary relation, holding between the A and E propositions, asserts that at least one
is false. Subcontrary, holding between I and O, asserts that at least one is true. Subalter-
nation, holding between A and I and between E and O, indicates that truth ‘‘ﬂows’’
downward and falsity upward. Contradiction holds as in the modern square. The formal
fallacies of illicit contrary, illicit subcontrary, and illicit subalternation result from incor-
rect applications of these relations. The existential fallacy results from applying the
traditional square to propositions whose subject terms denote nonexistent things.
The Venn diagram technique, which typically applies to the Boolean interpretation
of categorical propositions, can be modiﬁed to apply to the Aristotelian interpretation.
The modiﬁcation consists in introducing a circled ‘‘X,’’ which represents the assump-
tion of existence, into the unshaded part of the subject circle for A and E propositions.
Once modiﬁed, the Venn diagram technique can be used to prove the relationships of
the traditional square of opposition and to test immediate inferences from the Aristo-
telian standpoint.
Categorical propositions that are not in standard form can be translated into stan-
dard-form propositions. The chief requirements are that the new proposition have a
proper quantiﬁer, subject term, copula, and predicate term and that it have the same
meaning as the original proposition.

    
S
N
L
5
Categorical Syllogisms
5.1
Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
In the general sense of the term, a syllogism is a deductive argument consisting of
two premises and one conclusion. Provisionally we shall deﬁne a categorical syllo-
gism as a syllogism consisting of three categorical propositions and containing a total
of three different terms, each of which appears twice in distinct propositions. (We will
give a more precise deﬁnition shortly.) The following argument is a categorical
syllogism:
All soldiers are patriots.
No traitors are patriots.
Therefore, no traitors are soldiers.
The three terms in a categorical syllogism are given names depending on their posi-
tion in the argument. The major term, by deﬁnition, is the predicate of the conclu-
sion, and the minor term is the subject of the conclusion. The middle term, which
provides the middle ground between the two premises, is the one that occurs once in
each premise and does not occur in the conclusion. Thus, for the argument above, the
major term is ‘‘soldiers,’’ the minor term is ‘‘traitors,’’ and the middle term is ‘‘patriots.’’
The premises of a categorical syllogism are also given names. The major premise,
by deﬁnition, is the one that contains the major term, and the minor premise is the
one that contains the minor term. Thus, in the syllogism above, the major premise is
‘‘All soldiers are patriots,’’ and the minor premise is ‘‘No traitors are patriots.’’ Now that
we are supplied with these deﬁnitions, we may proceed to the idea of standard form.
A categorical syllogism is said to be in standard form when the following four
conditions are met:
1. All three statements are standard-form categorical propositions.
2. The two occurrences of each term are identical.
3. Each term is used in the same sense throughout the argument.
4. The major premise is listed ﬁrst, the minor premise second, and the conclusion
last.

254
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
The ﬁrst condition requires that each statement have a proper quantiﬁer, subject
term, copula, and predicate term. The second condition is clear. The third rules out
the possibility of equivocation. For example, if a syllogism containing the word ‘‘men’’
used that term in the sense of human beings in one statement and in the sense of male
human beings in another statement, the syllogism would really contain more than
three terms and would therefore not be in standard form. Finally, the fourth condition
merely requires that the three statements be listed in the right order.
The syllogism about soldiers is in standard form because all four conditions are
fulﬁlled. However, the following syllogism is not in standard form because the fourth
condition is violated:
All watercolors are paintings.
Some watercolors are masterpieces.
Therefore, some paintings are masterpieces.
To put this syllogism into standard form the order of the premises must be reversed.
The major premise (the one containing ‘‘masterpieces,’’ which is the predicate of the
conclusion) must be listed ﬁrst, and the minor premise (the one containing ‘‘paint-
ings,’’ which is the subject of the conclusion) must be listed second.
Now that we have a deﬁnition of ‘‘standard form,’’ we can give a more precise
deﬁnition of categorical syllogism. A categorical syllogism is a deductive argument
consisting of three categorical propositions that is capable of being translated into
standard form. For an argument to qualify as a categorical syllogism it is not necessary
that all three statements be standard-form categorical propositions, but if they are, the
analysis is greatly simpliﬁed. For this reason, all of the syllogisms presented in the ﬁrst
four sections of this chapter will consist of statements that are in standard form. In
later sections, techniques will be developed for translating non-standard-form syllo-
gisms into equivalent arguments that are in standard form.
1. Quantifier
copula
2. Quantifier
copula
3. Quantifier
copula
Minor
term
Standard form of a syllogism
Minor premise
(contains minor term)
Conclusion
Major premise
(contains major term)
Major
term
After a categorical syllogism has been put into standard form, its validity or invalid-
ity may be determined through mere inspection of the form. The individual form of a

Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
255
S
N
L
syllogism consists of two factors: mood and ﬁgure. The mood of a categorical syllo-
gism consists of the letter names of the propositions that make it up. For example, if
the major premise is an A proposition, the minor premise an O proposition, and the
conclusion an E proposition, the mood is AOE. To determine the mood of a categorical
syllogism, one must ﬁrst put the syllogism into standard form; the letter name of the
statements may then be noted to the side of each. The mood of the syllogism is then
designated by the order of these letters, reading the letter for the major premise ﬁrst,
the letter for the minor premise second, and the letter for the conclusion last.
The ﬁgure of a categorical syllogism is determined by the location of the two
occurrences of the middle term in the premises. Four different arrangements are pos-
sible. If we let S represent the subject of the conclusion (minor term), P the predicate
of the conclusion (major term), and M the middle term, and leave out the quantiﬁers
and copulas, the four possible arrangements may be illustrated as follows:
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
M
P
P
M
M
P
P
M




S
M
S
M
M
S
M
S




S
P
S
P
S
P
S
P
In the ﬁrst ﬁgure the middle term is top left, bottom right; in the second, top right,
bottom right, and so on. Example:
No painters are sculptors.
Some sculptors are artists.
Therefore, some artists are not painters.
This syllogism is in standard form. The mood is EIO and the ﬁgure is four. The form
of the syllogism is therefore designated as EIO-4.
To assist in remembering how the four ﬁgures are deﬁned, imagine the four possi-
ble arrangements of the middle term as depicting the outline of a shirt collar:
2
1
4
3
The only problem with this device is that it may lead you to confuse the second ﬁgure
with the third. To avoid this confusion, keep in mind that for these two ﬁgures the S

256
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
and P terms go on the same ‘‘collar ﬂap’’ as the middle term. Thus, for the second
ﬁgure, S and P are to the left of the middle term, and for the third ﬁgure they are to
the right.
Since there are four kinds of categorical propositions and there are three categorical
propositions in a categorical syllogism, there are 64 possible moods (4  4  4  64).
And since there are four different ﬁgures, there are 256 different forms of categorical
syllogisms (4  64  256).
Once the mood and ﬁgure of a syllogism is known, the validity of the syllogism can
be determined by checking the mood and ﬁgure against a list of valid syllogistic forms.
The syllogistic forms presented in the list that follows are called unconditionallyvalid,
because they are valid from both the Boolean and the Aristotelian standpoints. In
other words, they are valid regardless of whether their terms denote actually existing
things.
Unconditionally valid
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
AAA
EAE
AII
EIO
EAE
AEE
EIO
AOO
IAI
AII
OAO
EIO
AEE
IAI
EIO
The next list includes an additional nine syllogistic forms that become valid if the
Aristotelian standpoint can be taken. This, in turn, depends on whether a certain term
in the syllogism denotes actually existing things. The term in question is stated in the
right-hand column under ‘‘required condition.’’ Thus, if the required condition is ful-
ﬁlled, the forms on this list become valid; if not, they are invalid:
Conditionally valid
Figure 1
Figure 2
Figure 3
Figure 4
Required
condition
AAI
EAO
AEO
EAO
AEO
S exists
AAI
EAO
EAO
M exists
AAI
P exists
The reason these additional forms become valid is that the Aristotelian standpoint
(when properly adopted) recognizes that the premises of a syllogism convey infor-
mation about existence, whereas the Boolean standpoint does not. This additional
information allows for additional inferences. The relationship between the two stand-
points is illustrated in the following bar graph:

Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
257
S
N
L
Boolean
Number of va id forms
Aristotelian
Conditionally
valid
Unconditionally
valid
Information conveyed by premises
15
24
To see how the two lists are applied, suppose we are given an AEO-2 syllogism.
Because this form is missing from the ﬁrst list, we know that the syllogism is invalid
from the Boolean standpoint. However, the form is included in the second list. This
means that if we are justiﬁed in taking the Aristotelian standpoint (that is, if S, the
subject of the conclusion, denotes at least one existing thing), the syllogism is valid.
Analogously, AAI-3 is invalid from the Boolean standpoint, but if M (the middle term)
denotes at least one existing thing, the syllogism is valid. Stated otherwise, if S in the
ﬁrst syllogism and M in the second stand for a word such as ‘‘dogs’’ or ‘‘cats,’’ the
syllogism is valid; but if they stand for a word such as ‘‘unicorns’’ or ‘‘leprechauns,’’
the syllogism is invalid. On the other hand, a syllogism such as AII-1 is valid from both
the Aristotelian and the Boolean standpoints; that is, it is valid regardless of whether
its terms denote actually existing things.
It is interesting, from a historical perspective, to recall that logic students during the
Middle Ages used to memorize a little poem that served as a rule of thumb for distin-
guishing valid from invalid syllogisms. The vowels in the words identiﬁed the mood,
and the words ‘‘prioris,’’ ‘‘secundae,’’ and so on the ﬁgure.
Barbara, Celarent, Darii, Ferioque prioris;
Cesare, Camestres, Festino, Baroco secundae;
Tertia, Darapti, Disamis, Datisi, Felapton,
Bocardo, Ferison habet: quarta insuper addit
Bramantip, Camenes, Dimaris, Fesapo, Fresison.
For example, the ‘‘Barbara’’ syllogism (this designation is still encountered today)
is AAA-1, ‘‘Celarent’’ is EAE-1, and so on. This poem conforms substantially to the
two lists above, except that ﬁve forms have been left out. The reason these forms
were left out is that the logicians of that time considered them weak: They draw
a particular conclusion from premises that would support a (stronger) universal

258
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
conclusion. For example, the weaker AAI-1 is left out in favor of the stronger AAA-1.
Needless to say, few students today depend on this poem to distinguish valid from
invalid syllogisms.
We have seen how, given the syllogism, we can obtain the mood and ﬁgure. But
sometimes we need to go in the reverse direction: from the mood and ﬁgure to the
syllogistic form. Let us suppose we are given the form EIO-4. To reconstruct the
syllogistic form is easy. First use the mood to determine the skeleton of the form:
E
I
O
No
are
.
Some
are
.
Some
are not
.
Then use the ﬁgure to determine the arrangement of the middle terms:
E
I
O
No
are M.
Some M are
.
Some
are not
.
Finally, supply the major and minor terms, using the letters ‘‘S’’ and ‘‘P’’ to designate
the subject and predicate of the conclusion. The predicate of the conclusion is always
repeated in the ﬁrst premise, and the subject of the conclusion is repeated in the
second premise:
E
I
O
No P are M.
Some M are S.
Some S are not P.
EXERCISE 5.1
I. The following syllogisms are in standard form. Identify the major, minor, and
middle terms, and the mood and ﬁgure of each. Then determine whether each is
valid or invalid by checking the mood and ﬁgure against the two lists of valid
syllogistic forms.
1.
#
All neutron stars are things that produce intense gravity.
All neutron stars are extremely dense objects.
Therefore, all extremely dense objects are things that produce intense gravity.
2. No insects that eat mosquitoes are insects that should be killed.
All dragonﬂies are insects that eat mosquitoes.
Therefore, no dragonﬂies are insects that should be killed.
3. No environmentally produced diseases are inherited afﬂictions.
Some psychological disorders are not inherited afﬂictions.
Therefore, some psychological disorders are environmentally produced
diseases.

Standard Form, Mood, and Figure
259
S
N
L
4.
#
No persons who mix fact with fantasy are good witnesses.
Some hypnotized persons are persons who mix fact with fantasy.
Therefore, some hypnotized persons are not good witnesses.
5. All ozone molecules are good absorbers of ultraviolet rays.
All ozone molecules are things destroyed by chlorine.
Therefore, some things destroyed by chlorine are good absorbers of ultravi-
olet rays.
II. Put the following syllogisms into standard form using letters to represent the
terms, name the mood and ﬁgure, and determine whether each is valid or invalid
by checking the mood and ﬁgure against the two lists of valid syllogistic forms.
1.
#
No Republicans are Democrats, so no Republicans are big spenders, since all
big spenders are Democrats.
2. Some latchkey children are not kids who can stay out of trouble, for some
youngsters prone to boredom are latchkey children, and no kids who can
stay out of trouble are youngsters prone to boredom.
3. No rent control proposals are regulations welcomed by landlords, and all
regulations welcomed by landlords are measures that allow a free hand in
raising rents. Therefore, some rent control proposals are measures that allow
a free hand in raising rents.
4.
#
Some insects that feed on milkweed are not foods suitable for birds, inasmuch
as no monarch butterﬂies are foods suitable for birds and all monarch butter-
ﬂies are insects that feed on milkweed.
5. No illegal aliens are persons who have a right to welfare payments, and some
migrant workers are illegal aliens. Thus, some persons who have a right to
welfare payments are migrant workers.
6. Some African nations are not countries deserving military aid, because some
African nations are not upholders of human rights, and all countries deserving
military aid are upholders of human rights.
7.
#
All pranksters are exasperating individuals, consequently some leprechauns
are exasperating individuals, since all leprechauns are pranksters.
8. Some racists are not persons suited to be immigration ofﬁcials, given that
some humanitarians are not persons suited to be immigration ofﬁcials, and
no humanitarians are racists.
9. No persons who respect human life are terrorists, and all airline hijackers are
terrorists. Hence, no airline hijackers are persons who respect human life.
10.
#
Some silicates are crystalline substances, because all silicates are oxygencom-
pounds, and some oxygen compounds are not crystalline substances.
III. Reconstruct the syllogistic forms from the following combinations of mood and
ﬁgure.

260
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
1.
#
OAE-3
2. EIA-4
3. AII-3
4.
#
IAE-1
5. AOO-2
6. EAO-4
7.
#
AAA-1
8. EAO-2
9. OEI-3
10.
#
OEA-4
IV. Construct the following syllogisms:
1.
#
An EIO-2 syllogism with these terms: major: dogmatists; minor: theologians;
middle: scholars who encourage free thinking.
2. An unconditionally valid syllogism in the ﬁrst ﬁgure with a particular afﬁr-
mative conclusion and these terms: major: persons incapable of objectivity;
minor: Supreme Court justices; middle: lock step ideologues.
3. An unconditionally valid syllogism in the fourth ﬁgure having two universal
premises and these terms: major: teenage suicides; minor: heroic episodes;
middle: tragic occurrences.
4.
#
A valid syllogism having mood OAO and these terms: major: things capable of
replicating by themselves; minor: structures that invade cells; middle: viruses.
5. A valid syllogism in the ﬁrst ﬁgure having a universal negative conclusion and
these terms: major: guarantees of marital happiness; minor: prenuptial agree-
ments; middle: legally enforceable documents.
V. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. Every syllogism is a categorical syllogism.
2. Some categorical syllogisms cannot be put into standard form.
3. The statements in a categorical syllogism need not be expressed in standard
form.
4. The statements in a standard-form categorical syllogism need not be ex-
pressed in standard form.
5. In a standard-form categorical syllogism the two occurrences of each term
must be identical.
6. The major premise of a standard-form categorical syllogism contains the sub-
ject of the conclusion.
7. To determine the mood and ﬁgure of a categorical syllogism, the syllogism
must ﬁrst be put into standard form.

Venn Diagrams
261
S
N
L
8. In a standard-form syllogism having Figure 2, the middle terms are on the
right.
9. The unconditionally valid syllogistic forms remain valid when existential con-
ditions are fulﬁlled.
10. The conditionally valid syllogistic forms are invalid if no existential conditions
are fulﬁlled.
5.2
Venn Diagrams
Venn diagrams provide the most intuitively evident and, in the long run, easiest to
remember technique for testing the validity of categorical syllogisms. The technique is
basically an extension of the one developed in Chapter 4 to represent the information
content of categorical propositions. Because syllogisms contain three terms, whereas
propositions contain only two, the application of Venn diagrams to syllogisms requires
three overlapping circles.
These circles should be drawn so that seven areas are clearly distinguishable within
the diagram. The second step is to label the circles, one for each term. The precise
order of the labeling is not critical, but we will adopt the convention of always assign-
ing the lower left circle to the subject of the conclusion, the lower right circle to the
predicate of the conclusion, and the top circle to the middle term. This convention is
easy to remember because it conforms to the arrangement of the terms in a standard-
form syllogism: The subject of the conclusion is on the lower left, the predicate of the
conclusion is on the lower right, and the middle term is in the premises, above the
conclusion.
P
M
1
2
4
5
6
7
3
S
Anything in the area marked ‘‘1’’ is an M but neither an S nor a P, anything in the area
marked ‘‘2’’ is both an S and an M but not a P, anything in the area marked ‘‘3’’ is a
member of all three classes, and so on.

262
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
The test procedure consists of transferring the information content of the premises
to the diagram and then inspecting the diagram to see whether it necessarily implies
the truth of the conclusion. If the information in the diagram does do this, the argu-
ment is valid; otherwise it is invalid.
The use of Venn diagrams to evaluate syllogisms usually requires a little practice
before it can be done with facility. Perhaps the best way of presenting the technique
is through illustrative examples, but a few preliminary pointers are needed:
1. Marks (shading or placing an ‘‘X’’) are entered only for the premises. No marks
are made for the conclusion.
2. If the argument contains one universal premise, this premise should be entered ﬁrst
in the diagram. If there are two universal premises, either one can be done ﬁrst.
3. When entering the information contained in a premise, one should concentrate
on the circles corresponding to the two terms in the statement. While the third
circle cannot be ignored altogether, it should be given only minimal attention.
4. When inspecting a completed diagram to see whether it supports a particular
conclusion, one should remember that particular statements assert two things.
‘‘Some S are P’’ means ‘‘At least one S exists and that S is a P’’; ‘‘Some S are not
P’’ means ‘‘At least one S exists and that S is not a P.’’
5. When shading an area, one must be careful to shade all of the area in question.
Examples:
Right:
Wrong:
6. The area where an ‘‘X’’ goes is always initially divided into two parts. If one of
these parts has already been shaded, the ‘‘X’’ goes in the unshaded part.
Examples:
Right:
X
X
If one of the two parts is not shaded, the ‘‘X’’ goes on the line separating the
two parts. Examples:

Venn Diagrams
263
S
N
L
Right:
X
X
This means that the ‘‘X’’ may be in either (or both) of the two areas—but it is
not known which one.
7. An ‘‘X’’ should never be placed in such a way that it dangles outside of the
diagram, and it should never be placed on the intersection of two lines.
Wrong:
X
Wrong:
X
Let us now consider some examples.
1. No P are M.
All S are M.
No S are P.
EAE-2
Since both premises are universal, it makes no difference which premise we enter ﬁrst
in the diagram. To enter the major premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and
P circles, which are highlighted with color:
P
M
S
No P are M
We now complete the diagram by entering the minor premise. In doing so, we con-
centrate our attention on the S and M circles, which are highlighted with color:

264
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
P
M
S
All S are M
The conclusion states that the area where the S and P circles overlap is shaded. In-
spection of the diagram reveals that this area is indeed shaded, so the argument is valid.
Here is another example:
2. All M are P.
No S are M.
No S are P.
AEE-1
Again, both premises are universal, so it makes no difference which premise we enter
ﬁrst in the diagram. To enter the major premise, we concentrate our attention on the
M and P circles:
P
M
S
All M are P
To enter the minor premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and S circles:
P
M
S
No S are M
Again, the conclusion states that the area where the S and P circles overlap is shaded.
Inspection of the diagram reveals that only part of this area is shaded, so the syllogism
is invalid.

Venn Diagrams
265
S
N
L
Another example:
3. Some P are M.
All M are S.
Some S are P.
IAI-4
We enter the universal premise ﬁrst. To do so, we concentrate our attention on the M
and S circles:
P
M
S
All M are S
To enter the particular premise, we concentrate our attention on the M and P circles.
This premise tells us to place an ‘‘X’’ in the area where the M and P circles overlap.
Because part of this area is shaded, we place the ‘‘X’’ in the remaining area:
P
M
S
Some P are M
X
The conclusion states that there is an ‘‘X’’ in the area where the S and P circles overlap.
Inspection of the diagram reveals that there is indeed an ‘‘X’’ in this area, so the
argument is valid.
The examples that follow are done in a single step.
P
M
S
All P are M.
Some S are not M.
Some S are not P.
AOO-2
X
4.

266
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
The universal premise is entered ﬁrst. The particular premise tells us to place an ‘‘X’’
in the part of the S circle that lies outside the M circle. Because part of this area is
shaded, we place the ‘‘X’’ in the remaining area. The conclusion states that there is an
‘‘X’’ that is inside the S circle but outside the P circle. Inspection of the diagram reveals
that there is indeed an ‘‘X’’ in this area, so the syllogism is valid.
P
M
S
Some M are P.
All S are M.
Some S are P.
IAI-1
5.
X
1
2
As usual, we enter the universal premise ﬁrst. In entering the particular premise, we
concentrate on the area where the M and P circles overlap. (For emphasis, this area
is colored in the diagram.) Because this overlap area is divided into two parts (the
areas marked ‘‘1’’ and ‘‘2’’), we place the ‘‘X’’ on the line (arc of the S circle) that
separates the two parts. The conclusion states that there is an ‘‘X’’ in the area where
the S and P circles overlap. Inspection of the diagram reveals that the single ‘‘X’’ is
dangling outside of this overlap area. We do not know if it is in or out. Thus the
syllogism is invalid.
P
M
S
All M are P.
Some S are not M.
Some S are not P.
AOO-1
X
1
2
6.
In entering the particular premise, we concentrate our attention on the part of the S
circle that lies outside the M circle (colored area). Because this area is divided into two
parts (the areas marked ‘‘1’’ and ‘‘2’’), we place the ‘‘X’’ on the line (arc of the P circle)
separating the two areas. The conclusion states that there is an ‘‘X’’ in the S circle that
is outside the P circle. There is an ‘‘X’’ in the S circle, but we do not know whether it is
inside or outside the P circle. Hence, the argument is invalid.

Venn Diagrams
267
S
N
L
P
M
S
All M are P.
All S are M.
All S are P.
AAA-1
7.
This is the ‘‘Barbara’’ syllogism. The conclusion states that the part of the S circle that
is outside the P circle is empty. Inspection of the diagram reveals that this area is
indeed empty. Thus, the syllogism is valid.
P
M
S
Some M are not P.
Some S are M.
Some S are not P.
OIO-1
X
X
1
2
b
a
8.
In this diagram no areas have been shaded, so there are two possible areas for each of
the two ‘‘X’’s. The ‘‘X’’ from the ﬁrst premise goes on the line (arc of the S circle)
separating areas 1 and 2, and the ‘‘X’’ from the second premise goes on the line (arc of
the P circle) separating areas a and b. The conclusion states that there is an ‘‘X’’ in the S
circle that is outside the P circle. We have no certainty that the ‘‘X’’ from the ﬁrst premise
is inside the S circle, and while the ‘‘X’’ from the second premise is inside the S circle,
we have no certainty that it is outside the P circle. Hence, the argument is invalid.
We have yet to explain the rationale for placing the ‘‘X’’ on the boundary separating
two areas when neither of the areas is shaded. Consider this argument:
P
M
S
No P are M.
Some S are not M.
Some S are P.
P
M
S
P
X
X
M
Right:
Wrong:
Wrong:
S
X

268
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
In each of the three diagrams the content of the ﬁrst premise is represented correctly.
The problem concerns placing the ‘‘X’’ from the second premise. In the ﬁrst diagram
the ‘‘X’’ is placed inside the S circle but outside both the M circle and the P circle. This
diagram asserts: ‘‘At least one S is not an M and it is also not a P.’’ Clearly the diagram
says more than the premise does, and so it is incorrect. In the second diagram the
‘‘X’’ is placed inside the S circle, outside the M circle, and inside the P circle. This
diagram asserts: ‘‘At least one S is not an M, but it is a P.’’ Again, the diagram says more
than the premise says, and so it is incorrect. In the third diagram, which is done
correctly, the ‘‘X’’ is placed on the boundary between the two areas. This diagram
asserts: ‘‘At least one S is not an M, and it may or may not be a P.’’ In other words,
nothing at all is said about P, and so the diagram represents exactly the content of the
second premise.
All the examples of syllogisms considered thus far are valid or invalid regardless of
whether the Boolean or the Aristotelian standpoint is taken. In other words, it makes
no difference to their validity whether their terms denote actually existing things. Let
us now consider an example where the standpoint does make a difference. To test
such an argument from the Aristotelian standpoint, we follow basically the same pro-
cedure that we used in Section 4.5 to test immediate inferences:
1. Symbolize the argument and test it from the Boolean standpoint. If the argument is
valid, proceed no further; the argument is unconditionally valid.
2. If the argument is invalid from the Boolean standpoint, examine the diagram and
see if there is a Venn circle that is completely shaded except for one area. If there is
such a circle, place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded part of that Venn circle. Retest the
argument for validity.
3. If the diagram indicates that the argument is valid, determine if the circled ‘‘X’’
represents something that actually exists. If it does, the argument is valid from the
Aristotelian standpoint.
In regard to step 2, if the diagram contains no Venn circle completely shaded except
for one area, then the syllogism is invalid from the Aristotelian standpoint. However,
if it does contain such a Venn circle, then we place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the one unshaded
area. This circled ‘‘X’’ represents the assumption that the Venn circle in question is not
empty.
Step 3 determines whether this assumption is justiﬁed. In other words, it determines
if we are justiﬁed in taking the Aristotelian standpoint for that argument. If we are
justiﬁed, the argument is valid; if not, it is invalid. As we will see in Section 5.3, such
invalid arguments commit the existential fallacy for syllogisms.
The list of conditionally valid syllogisms presented in Section 5.1 names nine forms
that are invalid from the Boolean standpoint but valid from the Aristotelian. The fol-
lowing syllogism has one of those forms:

Venn Diagrams
269
S
N
L
9. No ﬁghter pilots are tank commanders.
All ﬁghter pilots are courageous individuals.
Therefore, some courageous individuals are not tank commanders.
First we test the syllogism from the Boolean standpoint:
T
F
C
No F are T.
All F are C.
Some C are not T.
EAO-3
The conclusion asserts that there is an ‘‘X’’ that is inside the C circle and outside the T
circle. Inspection of the diagram reveals no ‘‘X’’s at all, so the syllogism is invalid from
the Boolean standpoint. However, proceeding to step 2, we notice that the F circle is
all shaded except for one area. Thus, we place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the one remaining area
of the F circle:
T
F
C
X
Now the diagram indicates that the argument is valid, so we proceed to step 3 and
determine whether the circled ‘‘X’’ represents something that actually exists. This is
equivalent to determining whether F denotes something that exists. Since F stands for
ﬁghter pilots, which do exist, the circled ‘‘X’’ does represent something that exists.
Thus, the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint.
Here is another example:
10. All reptiles are scaly animals.
All currently living tyrannosaurs are reptiles.
Therefore, some currently living tyrannosaurs are scaly animals.
First we test the syllogism from the Boolean standpoint:

270
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
S
R
C
All R are S.
All C are R.
Some C are S.
AAI-1
The conclusion asserts that there is an ‘‘X’’ in the area where the C and S circles
overlap. Since the diagram contains no ‘‘X’’s at all, the argument is invalid from the
Boolean standpoint. Proceeding to step 2, we notice that the C circle is all shaded
except for one area. Thus, we place a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded area of the C circle:
S
R
C
X
The diagram now indicates that the syllogism is valid, so we proceed to the third step
and determine whether the circled ‘‘X’’ stands for something that actually exists. In
other words, we determine whether C denotes existing things. Returning to the origi-
nal argument, we see that C stands for currently living tyrannosaurs, which do not
exist. Thus, the circled ‘‘X’’ does not stand for something that actually exists, so the
syllogism is invalid.
In determining whether the circled ‘‘X’’ stands for something that exists, we always
look to the Venn circle that is all shaded except for one area. If the term corresponding
to that circle denotes existing things, then the circled ‘‘X’’ represents one of those
things. In some diagrams, however, there may be two Venn circles that are all shaded
except for one area, and each may contain a circled ‘‘X’’ in the unshaded area. In these
cases we direct our attention only to the circled ‘‘X’’ needed to draw the conclusion. If
that circled ‘‘X’’ stands for something that exists, the argument is valid; if not, it is
invalid.
EXERCISE 5.2
I. Use Venn diagrams to determine whether the following standard-form categorical
syllogisms are valid or invalid. In some cases validity depends on whether the

Venn Diagrams
271
S
N
L
Aristotelian standpoint can be taken. Then, identify the mood and ﬁgure, and
cross-check your answers with the lists of valid syllogisms found in Section 5.1.
1.
#
All corporations that overcharge their customers are unethical businesses.
Some unethical businesses are investor-owned utilities.
Therefore, some investor-owned utilities are corporations that overcharge
their customers.
2. No AIDS victims are persons who pose an immediate threat to the lives of
others.
Some kindergarten children are AIDS victims.
Therefore, some kindergarten children are not persons who pose an imme-
diate threat to the lives of others.
3. No individuals truly concerned with the plight of suffering humanity are per-
sons motivated primarily by self-interest.
All television evangelists are persons motivated primarily by self-interest.
Therefore, some television evangelists are not individuals truly concerned
with the plight of suffering humanity.
4.
#
All high-fat diets are diets high in cholesterol.
Some diets high in cholesterol are not healthy food programs.
Therefore, some healthy food programs are not high-fat diets.
5. No concertos are symphonies.
No symphonies are string quartets.
Therefore, no string quartets are concertos.
6. All compounds that destroy the ozone layer are environmental hazards.
All chloroﬂuorocarbons are compounds that destroy the ozone layer.
Therefore, all chloroﬂuorocarbons are environmental hazards.
7.
#
No pediatricians are individuals who jeopardize the health of children.
All faith healers are individuals who jeopardize the health of children.
Therefore, no faith healers are pediatricians.
8. Some individuals prone to violence are not men who treat others humanely.
Some police ofﬁcers are individuals prone to violence.
Therefore, some police ofﬁcers are not men who treat others humanely.
9. Some automated teller machines are places criminals lurk.
All places criminals lurk are places to be avoided at night.
Therefore, some places to be avoided at night are automated teller machines.
10.
#
No corporations that defraud the government are organizations the govern-
ment should deal with.
Some defense contractors are not organizations the government should deal
with.
Therefore, some defense contractors are not corporations that defraud the
government.

272
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
11. All circular triangles are plane ﬁgures.
All circular triangles are three-sided ﬁgures.
Therefore, some three-sided ﬁgures are plane ﬁgures.
12. All supernovas are objects that emit massive amounts of energy.
All quasars are objects that emit massive amounts of energy.
Therefore, all quasars are supernovas.
13.
#
No persons who proﬁt from the illegality of their activities are persons who
want their activities legalized.
All drug dealers are persons who proﬁt from the illegality of their activities.
Therefore, no drug dealers are persons who want their activities legalized.
14. Some individuals who risk heart disease are persons who will die young.
Some smokers are individuals who risk heart disease.
Therefore, some smokers are persons who will die young.
15. Some communications satellites are rocket-launched failures.
All communications satellites are devices with antennas.
Therefore, some devices with antennas are rocket-launched failures.
16.
#
All currently living dinosaurs are giant reptiles.
All giant reptiles are ectothermic animals.
Therefore, some ectothermic animals are currently living dinosaurs.
17. All survivalists are persons who enjoy simulated war games.
No persons who enjoy simulated war games are soldiers who have tasted the
agony of real war.
Therefore, all soldiers who have tasted the agony of real war are survivalists.
18. No persons majoring in greed are individuals concerned about the welfare of
society.
Some college students are persons majoring in greed.
Therefore, some college students are not individuals concerned about the
welfare of society.
19.
#
No aspirin-based pain relievers are ibuprofens.
All aspirin-based pain relievers are analgesics.
Therefore, some analgesics are not ibuprofens.
20. Some snowﬂakes are not uniform solids.
All snowﬂakes are six-pointed crystals.
Therefore, some six-pointed crystals are not uniform solids.
II. Use Venn diagrams to obtain the conclusion that is validly implied by each of the
following sets of premises. If no conclusion can be validly drawn, write ‘‘no
conclusion.’’
1.
#
No P are M.
All S are M.

Venn Diagrams
273
S
N
L
2. Some P are not M.
Some M are S.
3. Some M are P.
All S are M.
4.
#
Some M are not P.
All M are S.
5. Some P are M.
All M are S.
6. No M are P.
Some S are not M.
7.
#
All M are P.
All S are M.
8. All P are M.
All S are M.
9. No P are M.
Some M are S.
10.
#
No P are M.
No M are S.
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. In the use of Venn diagrams to test the validity of syllogisms, marks are some-
times entered in the diagram for the conclusion.
2. When an ‘‘X’’ is placed on the arc of a circle, it means that the ‘‘X’’ could be in
either (or both) of the two areas that the arc separates.
3. If an ‘‘X’’ lies on the arc of a circle, the argument cannot be valid.
4. When representing a universal statement in a Venn diagram, one always
shades two of the seven areas in the diagram (unless one of these areas is
already shaded).
5. If a completed diagram contains two ‘‘X’’s, the argument cannot be valid.
6. If the conclusion asserts that a certain area is shaded, and inspection of the
diagram reveals that only half that area is shaded, the argument is valid.
7. If the conclusion asserts that a certain area contains an ‘‘X’’ and inspection of
the diagram reveals that only half an ‘‘X’’ appears in that area, the argument is
valid.
8. If the conclusion is in the form ‘‘All S are P,’’ and inspection of the diagram
reveals that the part of the S circle that is outside the P circle is shaded, then
the argument is valid.

274
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
9. If, in a completed diagram, three areas of a single circle are shaded, and
placing an ‘‘X’’ in the one remaining area would make the conclusion true,
then the argument is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint but not from the
Boolean standpoint.
10. If, in a completed diagram, three areas of a single circle are shaded, but the
argument is not valid from the Boolean standpoint, then it must be valid from
the Aristotelian standpoint.
5.3
Rules and Fallacies
The idea that valid syllogisms conform to certain rules was ﬁrst expressed by Aristotle.
Many such rules are discussed in Aristotle’s own account, but logicians of today gen-
erally settle on ﬁve or six.* If any one of these rules is violated, a speciﬁc formal fallacy
is committed and, accordingly, the syllogism is invalid. Conversely, if none of the rules
is broken, the syllogism is valid. These rules may be used as a convenient cross-check
against the method of Venn diagrams. Of the ﬁve rules presented in this section, the
ﬁrst two depend on the concept of distribution, the second two on the concept of
quality, and the last on the concept of quantity. In applying the ﬁrst two rules it may
help to recall either of the two mnemonic devices presented in Chapter 4: ‘‘Unpre-
pared Students Never Pass’’ and ‘‘Any Student earning B’s Is Not On Probation.’’ These
mnemonics help one remember that the four categorical propositions distribute their
terms as follows:
Statement type
Terms distributed
A
E
I
O
subject
subject, predicate
none
predicate
Here is the ﬁrst rule.
Rule 1:
The middle term must be distributed at least once.
Fallacy:
Undistributed middle.
*Some texts include a rule stating that the three terms of a categorical syllogism must be used in the
same sense throughout the argument. In this text this requirement is included as part of the deﬁnition
of ‘‘standard form’’ and is subsequently incorporated into the deﬁnition of ‘‘categorical syllogism.’’See
Section 5.1.

Rules and Fallacies
275
S
N
L
Example:
All sharks are ﬁsh.
All salmon are ﬁsh.
All salmon are sharks.
In this standard-form categorical syllogism the middle term is ‘‘ﬁsh.’’ In both premises
‘‘ﬁsh’’ occurs as the predicate of an A proposition and therefore it is not distributed in
either premise. Thus, the syllogism commits the fallacy of undistributed middle and is
invalid. If the major premise were rewritten to read ‘‘All ﬁsh are sharks,’’ then ‘‘ﬁsh’’
would be distributed in that premise and the syllogism would be valid. But, of course,
it would still be unsound because the rewritten premise would be false.
The logic behind Rule 1 may be explained by recounting how the middle term
accomplishes its intended purpose, which is to provide a common ground between
the subject and predicate terms of the conclusion. Let us designate the minor, major,
and middle terms by the letters ‘‘S,’’ ‘‘P,’’ and ‘‘M,’’ respectively, and let us suppose that
M is distributed in the major premise. By deﬁnition, P is related to the whole of the M
class. Then, when the M class is related either in whole or in part to S, S and P
necessarily become related. Analogous reasoning prevails if we suppose that M is
distributed in the minor premise. But if M is undistributed in both premises, S and P
may be related to different parts of the M class, in which case there is no common
ground for relating S and P. This is exactly what happens in our ﬁsh example. The
terms ‘‘salmon’’ and ‘‘sharks’’ are related to different parts of the ﬁsh class, so no
common ground exists for relating them together.
Rule 2:
If a term is distributed in the conclusion, then it must be
distributed in a premise.
Fallacies:
Illicit major; illicit minor.
Examples:
All horses are animals.
Some dogs are not horses.
Some dogs are not animals.
All tigers are mammals.
All mammals are animals.
All animals are tigers.
In the ﬁrst example the major term, ‘‘animals,’’ is distributed in the conclusion but not
in the major premise, so the syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major, or, more
precisely, ‘‘illicit process of the major term.’’ In the second example the minor term,
‘‘animals,’’ is distributed in the conclusion but not in the minor premise. The second
example therefore commits the fallacy of illicit minor, or ‘‘illicit process of the minor
term.’’
In applying this rule, one must always examine the conclusion ﬁrst. If no terms are
distributed in the conclusion, Rule 2 cannot be violated. If one or both terms in the
conclusion are distributed, then the appropriate premise must be examined. If the

276
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
term distributed in the conclusion is also distributed in the premise, then the rule is
not violated. But, if the term is not distributed in the premise, the rule is violated and
the syllogism is invalid. In applying Rule 2 (and also Rule 1), you may ﬁnd it helpful
to begin by marking all the distributed terms in the syllogism—either by circling them
or by labeling them with a small letter ‘‘d.’’
The logic behind Rule 2 is easy to understand. Let us once again designate the
minor, major, and middle terms by the letters ‘‘S,’’ ‘‘P,’’ and ‘‘M,’’ respectively, and let
us suppose that a certain syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major. The conclusion
of that syllogism then makes an assertion about every member of the P class, but the
major premise makes an assertion about only some members of the P class. Because
the minor premise, by itself, says nothing at all about the P class, the conclusionclearly
contains information not contained in the premises, and the syllogism is therefore
invalid. Analogous reasoning applies to the fallacy of illicit minor.
Rule 2 becomes intuitively plausible when it is recognized that distribution is a
positive attribute. Granting this, an argument that has a term distributed in the conclu-
sion but not in the premises has more in the conclusion than it does in the premises
and is therefore invalid. Of course, it is always permissible to have more in a premise
than appears in the conclusion, so it is perfectly all right for a term to be distributed in
a premise but not in the conclusion.
Rule 3:
Two negative premises are not allowed.
Fallacy:
Exclusive premises.
Example:
No ﬁsh are mammals.
Some dogs are not ﬁsh.
Some dogs are not mammals.
This syllogism may be seen to be invalid because it has true premises and a false
conclusion. The defect is attributable to the fact that it has two negative premises.
Upon reﬂection, Rule 3 should be fairly obvious. Let ‘‘S,’’ ‘‘P,’’ and ‘‘M’’ once again
designate the minor, major, and middle terms. Now, if the P class and the M class are
separate either wholly or partially, and the S class and the M class are separate either
wholly or partially, nothing is said about the relation between the S class and the P
class. These two classes may be either distinct or identical in whole or in part. Venn
diagrams may be used effectively to illustrate the fact that no conclusion can be validly
drawn from two negative premises.
Rule 4:
A negative premise requires a negative conclusion, and a
negative conclusion requires a negative premise.
Fallacy:
Drawing an afﬁrmative conclusion from a negative
premise.
or
Drawing a negative conclusion from afﬁrmative premises.

Rules and Fallacies
277
S
N
L
Examples:
All crows are birds.
Some wolves are not crows.
Some wolves are birds.
All triangles are three-angled polygons.
All three-angled polygons are three-sided polygons.
Some three-sided polygons are not triangles.
These arguments may be seen to be invalid because each has true premises and a false
conclusion. The ﬁrst draws an afﬁrmative conclusion from a negative premise, and
the second draws a negative conclusion from afﬁrmative premises.
An alternate formulation of Rule 4 is: Any syllogism having exactly one negative
statement is invalid. Thus, if the conclusion alone is negative, or if one premise is
negative while the other premise and the conclusion are afﬁrmative, the syllogism is
invalid.
The logic behind Rule 4 may be seen as follows. If ‘‘S,’’ ‘‘P,’’ and ‘‘M’’ once again
designate the minor, major, and middle terms, an afﬁrmative conclusion always states
that the S class is contained either wholly or partially in the P class. The only way that
such a conclusion can follow is if the S class is contained either wholly or partially in
the M class, and the M class wholly in the P class. In other words, it follows only when
both premises are afﬁrmative. But if, for example, the S class is contained either wholly
or partially in the M class, and the M class is separate either wholly or partially from
the P class, such a conclusion will never follow. Thus, an afﬁrmative conclusion can-
not be drawn from negative premises.
Conversely, a negative conclusion asserts that the S class is separate either wholly
or partially from the P class. But if both premises are afﬁrmative, they assert class
inclusion rather than separation. Thus, a negative conclusion cannot be drawn from
afﬁrmative premises.
As a result of the interaction of these ﬁrst four rules, it turns out that no valid
syllogism can have two particular premises. This result is convenient to keep in mind,
because it allows us to identify as invalid any standard-form syllogism in which both
premises start with ‘‘some.’’ We will not give any separate rule to this effect, however,
because it is logically derivable from the ﬁrst four rules.
Rule 5:
If both premises are universal, the conclusion cannot be
particular.
Fallacy:
Existential fallacy.
Examples:
All mammals are animals.
All unicorns are mammals.
Some unicorns are animals.
All mammals are animals.
All tigers are mammals.
Some tigers are animals.

278
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
If a categorical syllogism breaks only Rule 5, it is valid from the Aristotelian standpoint
but not from the Boolean standpoint. The nine syllogistic forms that fall into this
category are those that are included in the ‘‘conditionally valid’’ list in Section 5.1. For
each of these forms, the list speciﬁes one term that must denote existing things before
the syllogism will be valid. In the ﬁrst example above, the critical term is ‘‘unicorns.’’
If unicorns existed, the syllogism would be valid from the Aristotelian standpoint; but
since they do not exist, it is invalid. It commits the existential fallacy. In the second
example, the critical term is ‘‘tigers.’’ Since tigers exist, the argument is valid from the
Aristotelian standpoint. From the Aristotelian standpoint there is no such thing as an
existential fallacy, and the syllogism breaks no other rules.
In addition to consulting the list, one way of identifying the critical term is to draw
a Venn diagram. The critical term is the one that corresponds to the circle that is all
shaded except for one area. In the case of two such circles, it is the one that corre-
sponds to the Venn circle containing the circled ‘‘X’’ upon which the conclusion de-
pends. Another way of identifying the critical term is through examination of the
distributed terms in the syllogism. The critical term is the one that is superﬂuously
distributed. In other words, it is the term that, in the premises, is distributed in more
occurrences than is necessary for the syllogism to obey all the rules. Here are three
examples:
All Md are P.
All Sd are M.
Some S are P.
No Md are P d.
All Md are S.
Some S are not P d.
All P d are M.
All Md are S.
Some S are P.
The distributed terms are tagged with a small ‘‘d.’’ In the ﬁrst syllogism, M must be
distributed to satisfy Rule 1, but S, in the second premise, need not be distributed to
satisfy any rule. Thus, by the superﬂuous distribution rule, S is the term that must
denote actually existing things for the syllogism to be valid from the Aristotelian stand-
point. In the second syllogism, P must be distributed in the ﬁrst premise to satisfy Rule
2, and M must be distributed once to satisfy Rule 1; but M is distributed twice. Thus, M
is the term that must denote existing things for the syllogism to be valid from the
Aristotelian standpoint. In the third syllogism, M must be distributed to satisfy Rule 1,
but P need not be distributed to satisfy any rule. Thus, in this syllogism, P is the criti-
cal term.
The rationale behind Rule 5 is quite easy to understand. From the Boolean stand-
point, universal statements make no assertions about existence, while particular state-
ments do. Thus, if a syllogism is made up of universal premises and a particular
conclusion, the conclusion asserts that something exists, while the premises do not.
Thus the conclusion contains more information than the premises, and the syllogism
is invalid. From the Aristotelian standpoint, on the other hand, the assumption is made
that the subject term of a universal statement denotes at least one existing thing. Thus,
under this assumption the mere fact that a syllogism has universal premises and a
particular conclusion is not sufﬁcient grounds for claiming that the conclusioncontains

Rules and Fallacies
279
S
N
L
more information than the premises. Provided that such a syllogism breaks no other
rules, therefore, it is valid.
You may recall that the existential fallacy ﬁrst appeared in Section 4.5, where it was
seen to result from either an unjustiﬁed adoption of the Aristotelian standpoint or an
appeal to a nonexistent form of inference in the Boolean standpoint. The existential
fallacy that appears in connection with Rule 5 stems from the same mistake, applied
in this case to syllogisms.
The foregoing discussion has shown that if a syllogism breaks any one of the ﬁve
rules, it cannot be valid from the Boolean standpoint. Thus, we have shown that each
of the rules is a necessary condition for validity. The question remains, however,
whether a syllogism’s breaking none of the rules is a sufﬁcient condition for validity.
In other words, does the fact that a syllogism breaks none of the rules guarantee its
validity? The answer to this question is ‘‘yes,’’ but unfortunately there appears to be no
easy, shortcut method for proving this fact. Therefore, if you are willing to take your
instructor’s word for it, you may stop reading this section now and proceed to the
exercises. The proof that follows is somewhat tedious, and it proceeds by considering
four classes of syllogisms having A, E, I, and O propositions for their conclusions.
Let us ﬁrst suppose we are given a valid syllogism having an A proposition for its
conclusion. Once again, suppose that ‘‘P,’’ ‘‘S,’’ and ‘‘M’’ designate the major, minor,
and middle terms, respectively. Then, by Rules 1 and 2, both M and S are distributed
in the premises. Further, by Rule 4, both premises are afﬁrmative. Now, since I prop-
ositions distribute neither term, and A propositions distribute only one term, both
premises must be A propositions, and S must be distributed in one and M in the other.
Accordingly, the premises are ‘‘All S are M’’ and ‘‘All M are P.’’ If we now combine
these premises with the conclusion, ‘‘All S are P,’’ we can determine by simple reason-
ing or a Venn diagram that the syllogism is valid. Note that only Rules 1, 2, and 4 were
used in producing this ﬁrst step in our proof, but the resulting syllogism obeys the
unused rules as well. A similar process applies to the steps that follow.
Next, we consider a syllogism having an E proposition for its conclusion. By Rules
1 and 2, all three terms are distributed in the premises, and by Rules 3 and 4, one
premise is negative and the other afﬁrmative. Because three terms are distributed in
the premises and there are only two premises, one of the premises must distribute two
terms. Accordingly, this premise must be an E proposition. Furthermore, the other
premise, which is afﬁrmative, and which distributes the third term, must be an A
proposition. From this we conclude that there are four possible sets of premises: ‘‘All
S are M’’ and ‘‘No M are P’’ (or its converse), and ‘‘All P are M’’ and ‘‘No M are S’’ (or
its converse). Since converting an E proposition has no effect on validity, we may
ignore the converse of these propositions. If we now combine the two given sets of
premises with the conclusion, ‘‘No S are P,’’ simple reasoning or a pair of Venn dia-
grams will establish the validity of the two resulting syllogisms.
Next, consider a syllogism having an I proposition for its conclusion. By Rule 1, M
is distributed in at least one premise, and by Rule 4, both premises are afﬁrmative.

280
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
Further, by Rule 5, both premises cannot be universal. Thus, at least one premise is an
I proposition. However, since the other premise distributes a term, that premise must
be an A proposition. Accordingly, the four possible sets of premises are ‘‘All M are S’’
and ‘‘Some M are P’’ (or its converse), and ‘‘All M are P’’ and ‘‘Some M are S’’ (or its
converse). Again, since converting an I proposition has no effect on validity, we may
ignore the converse of these propositions. Then if we combine the two given pairs of
premises with the conclusion, ‘‘Some S are P,’’ simple reasoning or a pair of Venn
diagrams will establish the validity of the two resulting syllogisms.
Last, we consider a syllogism having an O proposition for its conclusion. By Rules
1 and 2, both M and P are distributed in the premises. Also, by Rules 3 and 4, one
premise is negative and the other afﬁrmative, and by Rule 5, both premises cannot be
universal. However, both premises cannot be particular (I and O), because then only
one term would be distributed. Therefore, the premises are either A and O or E and I.
In regard to the ﬁrst of these alternatives, either M is the subject of the A statement and
P is the predicate of the O, or P is the subject of the A statement and M is the predicate
of the O. This gives the premises as ‘‘All M are S’’ and ‘‘Some M are not P,’’ and ‘‘All P
are M’’ and ‘‘Some S are not M.’’ When these pairs of premises are combined with the
conclusion, ‘‘Some S are not P,’’ simple reasoning or a pair of Venn diagrams will
establish the validity of the two resulting syllogisms. Finally, considering the other alter-
native (E and I), the resulting four sets of premises are ‘‘No M are P’’ (or its converse)
and ‘‘Some M are S’’ (or its converse). Again ignoring the converted propositions,simple
reasoning or a Venn diagram will establish the validity of the single resulting syllogism.
This procedure proves that the ﬁve rules collectively provide a sufﬁcient condition
for the validity of any syllogism from the Boolean standpoint. Since eight distinct
inferences or Venn diagrams were needed to accomplish it, this shows that there are
really only eight signiﬁcantly distinct syllogisms that are valid from the Boolean stand-
point. The other seven are variations of these that result from converting one of the
premises. For syllogisms having particular (I or O) conclusions, an analogous proce-
dure can be used to prove that the ﬁrst four rules collectively provide a sufﬁcient
condition for the validity of any syllogism from the Aristotelian standpoint.
EXERCISE 5.3
I. Reconstruct the following syllogistic forms and use the ﬁve rules for syllogisms to
evaluate their validity from the Boolean standpoint. For those that are invalid,
name the fallacy or fallacies committed. Check your answers by constructingVenn
diagrams. Finally, for those forms that are conditionally valid, use the Venn dia-
grams to determine the existential assumption that must be made if they are to be
considered valid.
1.
#
AAA-3
2. IAI-2
3. EIO-1
4.
#
AAI-2

Rules and Fallacies
281
S
N
L
5. IEO-1
6. EOO-4
7.
#
EAA-1
8. AII-3
9. AAI-4
10.
#
IAO-3
11. AII-2
12. AIO-3
13.
#
AEE-4
14. EAE-4
15. EAO-3
16.
#
EEE-1
17. EAE-1
18. OAI-3
19.
#
AOO-2
20. EAO-1
II. Use the ﬁve rules to determine whether the following standard-form syllogisms
are valid or invalid. For those that are invalid, name the fallacy or fallacies com-
mitted. Check your answer by constructing a Venn diagram for each.
1.
#
Some nebulas are clouds of gas.
Some clouds of gas are objects invisible to the naked eye.
Therefore, some objects invisible to the naked eye are nebulas.
2. No individuals sensitive to the difference between right and wrong are people
who measure talent and success in terms of wealth.
All corporate takeover experts are people who measure talent and success in
terms of wealth.
Therefore, no corporate takeover experts are individuals sensitive to the dif-
ference between right and wrong.
3. No endangered species are creatures loved by the timber industry.
All spotted owls are endangered species.
Therefore, some spotted owls are not creatures loved by the timber industry.
4.
#
Some cases of afﬁrmative action are not measures justiﬁed by past dis-
crimination.
No cases of afﬁrmative action are illegal practices.
Therefore, some illegal practices are not measures justiﬁed by past dis-
crimination.
5. All transparent metals are good conductors of heat.
All transparent metals are good conductors of electricity.
Therefore, some good conductors of electricity are good conductors of heat.
6. All members of the National Riﬂe Association are persons opposed to gun
control.
All members of the National Riﬂe Association are law-abiding citizens.
Therefore, all law-abiding citizens are persons opposed to gun control.
7.
#
No searches based on probable cause are violations of Fourth Amendment
rights.
Some warrantless searches are violations of Fourth Amendment rights.

282
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
Therefore, some warrantless searches are not searches based on probable
cause.
8. All war zones are places where abuse of discretion is rampant.
Some places where abuse of discretion is rampant are international borders.
Therefore, some international borders are war zones.
9. All inside traders are persons subject to prosecution.
Some executives with privileged information are not persons subject to
prosecution.
Therefore, some executives with privileged information are inside traders.
10.
#
All successful ﬂirts are masters at eye contact.
All masters at eye contact are persons genuinely interested in others.
Therefore, some persons genuinely interested in others are successful ﬂirts.
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1. If an argument violates one of the ﬁrst four rules, it may still be valid.
2. If a valid syllogism has an E statement as its conclusion, then both the major
and minor terms must be distributed in the premises.
3. If a syllogism has two I statements as premises, then its middle term is
undistributed.
4. If a syllogism has an E and an O statement as premises, then no conclusion
follows validly.
5. If a syllogism has an I statement as its conclusion, then Rule 2 cannot be
violated.
6. If a valid syllogism has an O statement as its conclusion, then its premises can
be an A and an I statement.
7. If a valid syllogism has an E statement as a premise, then its conclusion can
be an A statement.
8. If a syllogism breaks only Rule 5 and its three terms are ‘‘dogs,’’ ‘‘cats,’’ and
‘‘animals,’’ then the syllogism is valid.
9. If a syllogism breaks only Rule 5 and its three terms are ‘‘elves,’’ ‘‘trolls,’’ and
‘‘gnomes,’’ then the syllogism is valid.
10. Some syllogisms that are valid from the Boolean standpoint are not valid from
the Aristotelian standpoint.
5.4
Reducing the Number of Terms
Categorical syllogisms, as they occur in ordinary spoken and written expression, are
seldom phrased according to the precise norms of the standard-form syllogism. Some-

Reducing the Number of Terms
283
S
N
L
times quantiﬁers, premises, or conclusions are left unexpressed, chains of syllogisms
are strung together into single arguments, and terms are mixed together with their
negations in a single argument. The ﬁnal four sections of this chapter are concerned
with developing techniques for reworking such arguments in order to render them
testable by Venn diagrams or by the rules for syllogisms.
In this section we consider arguments that contain more than three terms but that
can be modiﬁed to reduce the number of terms to three. Consider the following:
All photographers are non-writers.
Some editors are writers.
Therefore, some non-photographers are not non-editors.
This syllogism is clearly not in standard form because it has six terms: ‘‘photogra-
phers,’’ ‘‘editors,’’ ‘‘writers,’’ ‘‘non-photographers,’’ ‘‘non-editors,’’ and ‘‘non-writers.’’
But because three of the terms are complements of the other three, the number of
terms can be reduced to a total of three, each used twice in distinct propositions. To
accomplish the reduction, we can use the three operations of conversion, obversion,
and contraposition discussed in Chapter 4. But, of course, since the reworked syllo-
gism must be equivalent in meaning to the original one, we must use these operations
only on the kinds of statements for which they yield equivalent results. That is, we
must use conversion only on E and I statements and contraposition only on A and O
statements. Obversion yields equivalent results for all four kinds of categorical
statements.
Let us rewrite our six-term argument using letters to represent the terms, and then
obvert the ﬁrst premise and contrapose the conclusion in order to eliminate the ne-
gated letters:
Symbolized argument
Reduced argument
All P are non-W.
Some E are W.
Some non-P are not non-E.
No P are W.
Some E are W.
Some E are not P.
Because the ﬁrst premise of the original argument is an A statement and the conclusion
an O statement, and because the operations performed on these statements yield
equivalent results, the reduced argument is equivalent in meaning to the original
argument. The reduced argument is in standard syllogistic form and may be evaluated
either with a Venn diagram or by the ﬁve rules for syllogisms. The application of these
methods indicates that the reduced argument is valid. We conclude, therefore, that the
original argument is also valid.
It is not necessary to eliminate the negated terms in order to reduce the number of
terms. It is equally effective to convert certain nonnegated terms into negated ones.
Thus, instead of obverting the ﬁrst premise of the above argument and contraposing
the conclusion, we could have contraposed the ﬁrst premise and converted and then
obverted the second premise. The operation is performed as follows:

284
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
Symbolized argument
Reduced argument
All P are non-W.
Some E are W.
Some non-P are not non-E.
All W are non-P.
Some W are not non-E.
Some non-P are not non-E.
The reduced argument is once again equivalent to the original one, but now we must
reverse the order of the premises to put the syllogism into standard form:
Some W are not non-E.
All W are non-P.
Some non-P are not non-E.
When tested with a Venn diagram or by means of the ﬁve rules, this argument will, of
course, also be found valid, and so the original argument is valid. When using a Venn
diagram, no unusual method is needed; the diagram is simply lettered with the three
terms ‘‘W,’’ ‘‘non-E,’’ and ‘‘non-P.’’
The most important point to remember in reducing the number of terms is that
conversion and contraposition must never be used on statements for which they yield
undetermined results. That is, conversion must never be used on A and O statements,
and contraposition must never be used on E and I statements. The operations that are
allowed are summarized as follows:
Conversion:
No S are P.
Some S are P.
No P are S.
Some P are S.
Obversion:
All S are P.
No S are P.
Some S are P.
Some S are not P.
No S are non-P.
All S are non-P.
Some S are not non-P.
Some S are non-P.
Contraposition:
All S are P.
Some S are not P.
All non-P are non-S.
Some non-P are not non-S.
EXERCISE 5.4
Rewrite the following arguments using letters to represent the terms, reduce the num-
ber of terms, and put the arguments into standard form. Then test the new forms with
Venn diagrams or by means of the ﬁve rules for syllogisms to determine the validity or
invalidity of the original arguments.
1.
#
Some intelligible statements are true statements, because all unintelligible
statements are meaningless statements and some false statements are mean-
ingful statements.
2. Some persons who do not regret their crimes are convicted murderers, so
some convicted murderers are persons insusceptible of being reformed, since
all persons susceptible of being reformed are persons who regret their crimes.

Ordinary Language Arguments
285
S
N
L
3. All Peace Corps volunteers are persons who have witnessed poverty and
desolation, and all persons insensitive to human need are persons who have
failed to witness poverty and desolation. Thus, all Peace Corps volunteers are
persons sensitive to human need.
4.
#
Some unintentional killings are not punishable offenses, inasmuch as all cases
of self-defense are unpunishable offenses, and some intentional killings are
cases of self-defense.
5. All aircraft that disintegrate in ﬂight are unsafe planes. Therefore, no poorly
maintained aircraft are safe planes, because all well-maintained aircraft are
aircraft that remain intact in ﬂight.
6. No objects that sink in water are chunks of ice, and no objects that ﬂoat in
water are things at least as dense as water. Accordingly, all chunks of ice are
things less dense than water.
7.
#
Some proposed ﬂights to Mars are inexpensive ventures, because all un-
manned space missions are inexpensive ventures, and some proposed ﬂights
to Mars are not manned space missions.
8. All schools driven by careerism are institutions that do not emphasize liberal
arts. It follows that some universities are not institutions that emphasizeliberal
arts, for some schools that are not driven by careerism are universities.
9. No cases of AIDS are infections easily curable by drugs, since all diseases that
infect the brain are infections not easily curable by drugs, and all diseases that
do not infect the brain are cases other than AIDS.
10.
#
Some foreign emissaries are persons without diplomatic immunity, so some
persons invulnerable to arrest and prosecution are foreign emissaries, be-
cause no persons with diplomatic immunity are persons vulnerable to arrest
and prosecution.
5.5
Ordinary Language Arguments
Many arguments that are not standard-form categorical syllogisms as written can be
translated into standard-form syllogisms. Such translation often utilizes techniques
developed in the last section of Chapter 4—namely, inserting quantiﬁers, modifying
subject and predicate terms, and introducing copulas. The goal, of course, is to pro-
duce an argument consisting of three standard-form categorical propositions that con-
tain a total of three different terms, each of which occurs twice in distinct propositions.
Once translated, the argument can be tested by means of a Venn diagram or the rules
for syllogisms.

286
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
Since the task of translating arguments into standard-form syllogisms involves not
only converting the component statements into standard form but adjusting these
statements one to another so that their terms occur in matched pairs, a certain amount
of practice may be required before it can be done with facility. In reducing the terms
to three matched pairs it is often helpful to identify some factor common to two or all
three propositions and to express this common factor through the strategic use of
parameters. For example, if all three statements are about people, the term ‘‘people’’
or ‘‘people identical to’’ might be used; or if they are about times or places, the term
‘‘times’’ or ‘‘times identical to’’ or the term ‘‘places’’ or ‘‘places identical to’’ might be
used. Here is an example:
Whenever people put off marriage until they are older, the divorce rate decreases.
Today, people are putting off marriage until they are older. Therefore, the di-
vorce rate is decreasing today.
The temporal adverbs ‘‘whenever’’ and ‘‘today’’ suggest that ‘‘times’’ should be used
as the common factor. Following this suggestion, we have:
All times people put off marriage until they are older are times the divorce rate
decreases. All present times are times people put off marriage until they are
older. Therefore, all present times are times the divorce rate decreases.
This is a standard-form categorical syllogism. Notice that each of the three terms is
matched with an exact duplicate in a different proposition. To obtain such a match-
up, it is sometimes necessary to alter the meaning of the original statement just slightly.
Now if we adopt the convention
M  times people put off marriage until they are older
D  times the divorce rate decreases
P  present times
the syllogism may be symbolized as follows:
All M are D.
All P are M.
All P are D.
This is the so-called ‘‘Barbara’’ syllogism and is, of course, valid. Here is another
example:
McDonnell Douglas must be a manufacturer because it hires riveters, and anyone
who hires riveters is a manufacturer.
For this argument the parameter ‘‘companies’’ suggests itself:

Ordinary Language Arguments
287
S
N
L
All companies identical to McDonnell Douglas are manufacturers, because all com-
panies identical to McDonnell Douglas are companies that hire riveters, and all
companies that hire riveters are manufacturers.
The ﬁrst statement, of course, is the conclusion. When the syllogism is written in
standard form, it will be seen that it has, like the previous syllogism, the form AAA-1.
Another example:
If a piece of evidence is trustworthy, then it should be admissible in court.
Polygraph tests are not trustworthy. Therefore, they should not be admissible
in court.
To translate this argument it is not necessary to use a single common factor:
All trustworthy pieces of evidence are pieces of evidence that should be admissible
in court. No polygraph tests are trustworthy pieces of evidence. Therefore, no
polygraph tests are pieces of evidence that should be admissible in court.
This syllogism commits the fallacy of illicit major and is therefore invalid.
As was mentioned in Section 4.7, arguments containing an exceptive proposition
must be handled in a special way. Let us consider one that contains an exceptive
proposition as a premise:
All prominent nations except Switzerland are members of the U.N. Therefore,
since Bulgaria is not the same nation as Switzerland, it must be a member.
The ﬁrst premise is translated as two conjoined categorical propositions: ‘‘No nations
identical to Switzerland are U.N. members and all prominent nations not identical to
Switzerland are U.N. members.’’ These in turn give rise to two syllogisms:
No nations identical to Switzerland are U.N. members.
No nations identical to Bulgaria are nations identical to Switzerland.
Therefore, all nations identical to Bulgaria are U.N. members.
All prominent nations not identical to Switzerland are U.N. members.
No nations identical to Bulgaria are prominent nations identical to Switzerland.
Therefore, all nations identical to Bulgaria are U.N. members.
The ﬁrst syllogism, which is in standard form, is invalid because it has two negative
premises. The second one, on the other hand, is not in standard form, because it has
four terms. If the second premise is obverted, so that it reads ‘‘All nations identical to
Bulgaria are prominent nations not identical to Switzerland,’’ the syllogism becomes
an AAA-1 standard-form syllogism, which is valid.
Each of these two syllogisms may be viewed as a pathway in which the conclusion
of the original argument might follow necessarily from the premises. Since it does

288
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
follow via the second syllogism, the original argument is valid. If both of the resulting
syllogisms turned out to be invalid, the original argument would be invalid.
EXERCISE 5.5
Translate the following arguments into standard-form categorical syllogisms, then use
Venn diagrams or the rules for syllogisms to determine whether each is valid or invalid.
See Section 4.7 for help with the translation.
1.
#
Physicists are the only scientists who theorize about the nature of time, and
Stephen Hawking certainly does that. Therefore, Stephen Hawking must be a
physicist.
2. Whenever suicide rates decline, we can infer that people’s lives are better
adjusted. Accordingly, since suicide rates have been declining in recent years,
we can infer that people’s lives have been better adjusted in recent years.
3. Environmentalists purchase only fuel-efﬁcient cars. Hence Rolls Royces must
not be fuel-efﬁcient, since environmentalists do not purchase them.
4.
#
Whoever wrote the Declaration of Independence had a big impact on civili-
zation, and Thomas Jefferson certainly had that. Therefore, Thomas Jefferson
wrote the Declaration of Independence.
5. There are public schools that teach secular humanism. Therefore, since sec-
ular humanism is a religion, there are public schools that teach religion.
6. Anyone who led America into the space age will live in history. Therefore,
John Glenn will live in history, because he led America into the space age.
7.
#
Kathleen Battle sings what she wants. Therefore, since Kathleen Battle sings
Puccini arias, it follows that she must want to sing Puccini arias.
8. Not all interest expenses are tax-deductible. Home mortgage payments are
interest expenses. Thus, they are not tax-deductible.
9. If a marriage is based on a meshing of neuroses, it allows little room for
growth. If a marriage allows little room for growth, it is bound to fail. There-
fore, if a marriage is based on a meshing of neuroses, it is bound to fail.
10.
#
Television viewers cannot receive scrambled signals unless they have a de-
coder. Whoever receives digital satellite signals receives scrambled signals.
Therefore, whoever receives digital satellite signals has a decoder.
11. Wherever icebergs are present, threats to shipping exist. Icebergs are not
present in the South Paciﬁc. Hence, there are no threats to shipping in the
South Paciﬁc.
12. According to surveys, there are college students who think that Africa is in
North America. But anyone who thinks that has no knowledge of geography.
It follows that there are college students who have no knowledge of
geography.

Enthymemes
289
S
N
L
13.
#
Diseases carried by recessive genes can be inherited by offspring of two
carriers. Thus, since cystic ﬁbrosis is a disease carried by recessive genes, it
can be inherited by offspring of two carriers.
14. All metals except mercury are solids at room temperature. Hence, cadmium
is a solid at room temperature, because it is not the same metal as mercury.
15. Autistic children are occasionally helped by aversive therapy. But aversive
therapy is sometimes inhumane. Thus, autistic children are sometimes helped
by inhumane therapy.
5.6
Enthymemes
An enthymeme is an argument that is expressible as a categorical syllogism but that
is missing a premise or a conclusion. Examples:
The corporate income tax should be abolished; it encourages waste and high
prices.
Animals that are loved by someone should not be sold to a medical laboratory, and
lost pets are certainly loved by someone.
The ﬁrst enthymeme is missing the premise ‘‘Whatever encourages waste and high
prices should be abolished,’’ and the second is missing the conclusion ‘‘Lost pets
should not be sold to a medical laboratory.’’
Enthymemes occur frequently in ordinary spoken and written English for a number
of reasons. Sometimes it is simply boring to express every statement in an argument.
The listener or reader’s intelligence is called into play when he or she is required to
supply a missing statement, and his or her interest is thereby sustained. On other
occasions the arguer may want to slip an invalid or unsound argument past an unwary
listener or reader, and this aim may be facilitated by leaving a premise or conclusion
out of the picture.
Many enthymemes are easy to convert into syllogisms. The reader or listener must
ﬁrst determine what is missing, whether premise or conclusion, and then introduce
the missing statement with the aim of converting the enthymeme into a good argu-
ment. Attention to indicator words will often provide the clue as to the nature of the
missing statement, but a little practice can render this task virtually automatic. The
missing statement need not be expressed in categorical form; expressing it in the
general context of the other statements is sufﬁcient and is often the easier alternative.
Once this is done, the entire argument may be translated into categorical form and
then tested with a Venn diagram or by the rules for syllogisms. Example:

290
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
Venus completes its orbit in less time than the Earth, because Venus is closer to the
sun.
Missing premise:
Any planet closer to the sun completes its orbit in less time
than the Earth.
Translating this argument into categorical form, we have
All planets closer to the sun are planets that complete their orbit in less time than
the Earth.
All planets identical to Venus are planets closer to the sun.
All planets identical to Venus are planets that complete their orbit in less time than
the Earth.
This syllogism is valid (and sound).
If, after a little practice, one still has difﬁculty in supplying an enthymeme’s missing
statement, a more systematic approach may be necessary. The ﬁrst step is to determine
whether the missing statement is a premise or a conclusion. As suggested earlier,
indicator words will usually give a clue. For example, the presence of a conclusion
indicator such as ‘‘therefore’’ followed by some statement means that the conclusion
is given, so the missing statement is a premise. On the other hand, if a premise
indicator such as ‘‘for’’ or ‘‘because’’ occurs between two statements, the ﬁrst statement
is the conclusion and the second is a premise. Thus, the missing statement is again a
premise.
If, however, an enthymeme contains no indicator words at all (such as the two
enthymemes at the beginning of this section), then the missing statement could be
either a premise or a conclusion. If the two given statements are joined by a word
such as ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘but,’’ ‘‘moreover,’’ or some similar conjunction, the missing statement
is usually a conclusion. If not, the ﬁrst statement is usually the conclusion, and the
missing statement is a premise. To test this latter alternative, it may help to mentally
insert the word ‘‘because’’ between the two statements. If this insertion makes sense,
the missing statement is a premise.
After the nature of the missing statement has been determined, the next task is to
write it out. To do so, one must ﬁrst identify its terms. This can be done by taking
account of the terms that are given. Two of the terms in the given statements will
match up with each other. Once this pair of terms is found, attention should be focused
on the other two terms. These are the ones that will be used to form the missing
statement. In constructing the missing statement, attention to the rules for syllogisms
may be helpful (if the resulting syllogism is to be valid). For example, if the missing
statement is a conclusion and one of the given premises is negative, the missing
conclusion must be negative. Or if the missing statement is a premise and the stated
conclusion is universal, the missing premise must be universal.
The enthymemes that we have considered thus far have been fairly straightforward.
The kinds of enthymemes that occur in letters to the editor of magazines and news-

Enthymemes
291
S
N
L
papers often require a bit more creativity to convert into syllogisms. Consider the
following:
The motorcycle has served as basic transportation for the poor for decades. It
deserves to be celebrated.
(William B. Fankboner)
The conclusion is the last statement, and the missing premise is that any vehicle that
has served as basic transportation for the poor for decades deserves to be celebrated.
The enthymeme may be written as a standard form syllogism as follows:
All vehicles that have served as basic transportation for the poor for decades are
vehicles that deserve to be celebrated.
All vehicles identical to the motorcycle are vehicles that have served as basic trans-
portation for the poor for decades.
Therefore, all vehicles identical to the motorcycle are vehicles that deserve to be
celebrated.
The syllogism is valid and arguably sound. Here is another example:
I know several doctors who smoke. In a step toward my own health, I will no
longer be their patient. It has occurred to me that if they care so little about
their own health, how can they possibly care about mine?
(Joan Boyer)
In this argument the author draws three connections: the connection between doctors’
smoking and doctors’ caring about their own health, between doctors’ caring about
their own health and doctors’ caring about the author’s health, and between doctors’
caring about the author’s health and doctors who will have the author as a patient.
Two arguments are needed to express these connections:
All doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about their own health.
All doctors who do not care about their own health are doctors who do not care
about my health.
Therefore, all doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about my health.
And,
All doctors who smoke are doctors who do not care about my health.
All doctors who do not care about my health are doctors who will not have me as
a patient.
Therefore, all doctors who smoke are doctors who will not have me as a patient.
Notice that the conclusion of the ﬁrst argument becomes a premise in the second
argument. To put these arguments into ﬁnal standard form the order of the premises
must be reversed. Both arguments are valid, but probably not sound.

292
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
EXERCISE 5.6
I. In the following enthymemes determine whether the missing statement is a prem-
ise or a conclusion. Then supply the missing statement, attempting whenever
possible to convert the enthymeme into a valid argument. The missing statement
need not be expressed as a standard-form categorical proposition.
1.
#
Some police chiefs undermine the evenhanded enforcement of the law, be-
cause anyone who ﬁxes parking tickets does that.
2. Any drastic decline in animal life is cause for alarm, and the current decline
in frogs and toads is drastic.
3. Douglas Barry is a highly accomplished pianist; after all, he can play the
‘‘Hammerklavier’’ sonata.
4.
#
A few fraternities have dangerous initiation rites, and those that do have no
legitimate role in campus life.
5. Only nonproﬁt organizations are exempt from paying taxes, so churches must
be exempt.
6. All of the operas except Mozart’s were well performed, and Carmen was not
written by Mozart.
7.
#
Not all chardonnays are good wines, but all of them are expensive.
8. Higher life forms could not have evolved through merely random processes,
because no organized beings could have evolved that way.
9. None but great actors can bring Hamlet to life, and Kenneth Branagh is a
great actor.
10.
#
The humpback whale population has been decreasing in recent years be-
cause the humpback is being overhunted.
11. Wherever water exists, human life can be sustained, and water exists on the
moon.
12. If a symphony orchestra has effective fund raisers, it will survive; and the
Cleveland symphony has survived for years.
13.
#
Mechanistic materialists do not believe in free will because they think that
everything is governed by deterministic laws.
14. A contract to buy land is not enforceable unless it’s in writing; but our client’s
contract to buy land is in writing.
15. The only telescopes that are unaffected by the atmosphere are orbiting tele-
scopes, and the Hubble telescope is in orbit.
II. Translate the enthymemes in Part I of this exercise into standard-form categorical
syllogisms and test them for validity.

Enthymemes
293
S
N
L
III. The following enthymemes were originally submitted as letters to the editor of
magazines and newspapers. Convert them into valid standard-form syllogisms. In
some cases two syllogisms may be required.
1.
#
If the Defense Department is so intent on ﬁghting alcohol abuse, why does it
make alcohol so readily available and acceptable? Alcohol is tax free at post
liquor stores, and enlisted men’s and ofﬁcers’ clubs make drinking almost a
mandatory facet of military life.
(Diane Lynch)
2. All aid to Israel should be stopped at once. Why should the American tax-
payer be asked to send billions of dollars to Israel when every city in the
United States is practically broke and millions of people are out of work?
(Bertha Grace)
3. Suicide is not immoral. If a person decides that life is impossible, it is his or
her right to end it.
(Donald S. Farrar)
4.
#
The best way to get people to read a book is to ban it. The fundamentalist
families in Church Hill, Tennessee, have just guaranteed sales of
Macbeth, The Diary of Anne Frank, The Wizard of Oz and other stories.
(Paula Fleischer)
5. The budget deﬁcit will not be brought under control because to do so would
require our elected leaders in Washington to do the unthinkable—act coura-
geously and responsibly.
(Bruce Crutcher)
6. The Constitution bans any law that is so vague that ‘‘men of common intelli-
gence must necessarily guess at its meaning.’’ Sexual harassment laws, how-
ever, are so vague that no one knows what they mean.
(Hans Bader)
7.
#
College students of today are the higher-income taxpayers of tomorrow. Con-
gress should consider ﬁnancial aid as an investment in the ﬁnancial future of
our country.
(Carol A. Steimel)
8. Our genes and our environment control our destinies. The idea of conscious
choice is ridiculous. Yes, prisons should be designed to protect society, but
they should not punish the poor slobs who were headed for jail from birth.
(Paul R. Andrews)
9. Encouraging toy-gun play gives children a clear message that the best way to
deal with frustration and conﬂict is with a gun. Is this the message that we
want to be sending our kids?
(Patricia Owen)

294
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
10.
#
The U.S. surgeon general’s latest report on cigarettes and cancer is an inter-
esting example of natural selection in the late twentieth century. The intelli-
gent members of our species will quit smoking, and survive. The dummies
will continue to puff away.
(Kelly Kinnon)
5.7
Sorites
A sorites is a chain of categorical syllogisms in which the intermediate conclusions
have been left out. The name is derived from the Greek word soros, meaning ‘‘heap,’’
and is pronounced ‘‘so¯ rı¯ te¯z.’’ The plural form is also ‘‘sorites.’’ Here is an example:
All bloodhounds are dogs.
All dogs are mammals.
No ﬁsh are mammals.
Therefore, no ﬁsh are bloodhounds.
The ﬁrst two premises validly imply the intermediate conclusion ‘‘All bloodhoundsare
mammals.’’ If this intermediate conclusion is then treated as a premise and put to-
gether with the third premise, the ﬁnal conclusion follows validly. The sorites is thus
composed of two valid categorical syllogisms and is therefore valid. The rule in eval-
uating a sorites is based on the idea that a chain is only as strong as its weakest link.
If any of the component syllogisms in a sorites is invalid, the entire sorites is invalid.
A sorites is in standard form when each of the component propositions is in
standard form, when each term occurs twice, when the predicate of the conclusion is
in the ﬁrst premise, and when each successive premise has a term in common with
the preceding one.* The sorites presented above, for example, is in standard form.
Each of the propositions is in standard form, each term occurs twice, the predicate of
the conclusion, ‘‘bloodhounds,’’ is in the ﬁrst premise, the other term in the ﬁrst
premise, ‘‘dogs,’’ is in the second premise, and so on.
The procedure to be followed in evaluating a sorites is (1) put the sorites into
standard form, (2) introduce the intermediate conclusions, and (3) test each compo-
nent syllogism for validity. If each component is valid, the sorites is valid. Consider the
following sorites form:
*Actually, there are two deﬁnitions of standard form: the Goclenian and the Aristotelian. The one
given here is the Goclenian. In the Aristotelian version, the premises are arranged so that the subject
of the conclusion occurs in the ﬁrst premise.

Sorites
295
S
N
L
No B are C.
Some E are A.
All A are B.
All D are C.
Some E are not D.
To put the sorites form into standard form, the premises must be rearranged:
All D are C.
No B are C.
All A are B.
Some E are A.
Some E are not D.
Next, the intermediate conclusions are drawn. Venn diagrams are useful in performing
this step, and they serve simultaneously to check the validity of each component
syllogism:
D
A
E
All D are C.
No B are C.
All A are B.
Some E are A.
Some E are not D.
(1) No B are D.
D
B
A
D
C
B
X
(2) No A are D.
(3) Some E are not D.
The ﬁrst intermediate conclusion, ‘‘No B are D,’’ is drawn from the ﬁrst two premises.
The second, ‘‘No A are D,’’ is drawn from the ﬁrst intermediate conclusion and the
third premise. And the third conclusion, which is identical to the ﬁnal conclusion, is
drawn from the second intermediate conclusion and the fourth premise. Since all
conclusions are drawn validly, the sorites is valid.
If, at any designated step in the procedure, no conclusion can be validly drawn—
as, for example, if the ﬁrst two premises are negative or contain undistributed middle
terms—then the sorites is invalid. Sometimes immediate inspection will disclose that
a certain sorites is invalid. For example, any sorites having two (or more) negative
premises or two (or more) particular premises is invalid. Before any such inspection
is attempted, however, one must be certain that the terms occur in pairs. Sometimes
the operations of conversion, obversion, and contraposition must be used to reduce
the number of terms in a sorites, and obversion, of course, affects the quality of the
statements on which it is used.

296
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
EXERCISE 5.7
I. Rewrite the following sorites in standard form, reducing the number of terms
when necessary. Then supply the intermediate conclusions and test with Venn
diagrams.
1.
#
No B are C.
Some D are C.
All A are B.
Some D are not A.
2. No C are D.
All A are B.
Some C are not B.
Some D are not A.
3. No S are M.
All F are S.
Some M are H.
All E are F.
Some H are not E.
4.
#
Some T are K.
No K are N.
Some C are Q.
All T are C.
Some Q are not N.
5. No A are non-B.
No C are B.
All non-A are non-D.
No D are C.
6. All M are non-P.
Some M are S.
All K are P.
Some non-K are not non-S.
7.
#
All non-U are non-V.
No U are non-W.
All V are Y.
No X are W.
All Y are non-X.
8. All D are non-C.
All non-B are non-A.
Some E are D.
All B are C.
Some non-A are not non-E.
9. All non-L are non-K.
Some K are M.
All P are non-L.
No non-N are M.
No Q are non-P.
Some N are not Q.
10.
#
All R are S.
No non-V are T.
No Q are non-R.
No non-Q are P.
All T are non-S.
All V are non-P.
II. The following sorites are valid. Rewrite each sorites in standard form, using letters
to represent the terms and reducing the number of terms whenever necessary.
Then use Venn diagrams to prove each one valid.
1.
#
Whatever produces oxygen supports human life.
Rain forests produce oxygen.
Nothing that supports human life should be destroyed.
Rain forests should not be destroyed.
2. No restrictive trade policies fail to invite retaliation.
Trade wars threaten our standard of living.

Sorites
297
S
N
L
Some Japanese trade policies are restrictive.
Policies that invite retaliation lead to a trade war.
Some Japanese trade policies threaten our standard of living.
3. Anything that poisons drinking water causes disease and death.
Chemicals percolating through the soil contaminate aquifers.
Dumped chemicals percolate through the soil.
Whatever contaminates aquifers poisons drinking water.
Dumped chemicals cause disease and death.
4.
#
Nothing that is brittle is ductile.
Superconductors are all ceramics.
Only ductile things can be pulled into wires.
Ceramics are brittle.
Superconductors cannot be pulled into wires.
5. Some college students purchase their term papers.
Any cheat is expelled from college.
No one will achieve his career goals who is expelled.
No one who purchases term papers is other than a cheat.
Some college students will not achieve their career goals.
6. Creation science does not favor the teaching of evolution.
Nothing should be taught that frustrates the understanding of life.
Whatever opposes the teaching of evolution impedes the learning of biology.
Anything that enhances the understanding of life fosters the learning of biology.
Creation science should not be taught.
7.
#
Whoever gives birth to crack babies increases future crime rates.
Some pregnant women use crack.
None but criminals increase future crime rates.
Pregnant crack users never give birth to anything but crack babies.
Some pregnant women are criminals.
8. Whatever retards population growth increases food availability.
Anything that prevents starvation enhances life.
Birth control measures never accelerate population growth.
Anything that enhances life should be encouraged.
Whatever increases food availability prevents starvation.
Birth control measures should not be discouraged.
9. A few countries allow ivory trading.
Whatever country resists elephant killing discourages poachers.
Any country that allows ivory trading encourages poachers.
No country that promotes the extinction of elephants should escape the con-
demnation of the civilized world.
Any country that supports elephant killing promotes the extinction of elephants.
A few countries should be condemned by the civilized world.

298
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
10.
#
Anything that promotes skin cancer causes death.
Whatever preserves the ozone layer prevents the release of
chloroﬂuorocarbons.
Nothing that resists skin cancer increases ultraviolet radiation.
Anything that destroys the ozone layer increases ultraviolet radiation.
There are packaging materials that release chloroﬂuorocarbons.
Nothing that causes death should be legal.
Some packaging materials should be illegal.
III. The following sorites are taken from Lewis Carroll’s Symbolic Logic. All are valid.
Rewrite each sorites in standard form, using letters to represent the terms and
reducing the number of terms whenever necessary. Then use Venn diagrams to
prove each one valid.
1.
#
No ducks waltz.
No ofﬁcers ever decline to waltz.
All my poultry are ducks.
My poultry are not ofﬁcers.
2. No experienced person is incompetent.
Jenkins is always blundering.
No competent person is always blundering.
Jenkins is inexperienced.
3. No terriers wander among the signs of the zodiac.
Nothing that does not wander among the signs
of the zodiac is a comet.
Nothing but a terrier has a curly tail.
No comet has a curly tail.
4.
#
All hummingbirds are richly colored.
No large birds live on honey.
Birds that do not live on honey are dull in color.
All hummingbirds are small.
5. All unripe fruit is unwholesome.
All these apples are wholesome.
No fruit grown in the shade is ripe.
These apples were grown in the sun.
6. All my sons are slim.
No child of mine is healthy who takes no exercise.
All gluttons who are children of mine are fat.
No daughter of mine takes any exercise.
All gluttons who are children of mine are unhealthy.
7.
#
The only books in this library that I do not recommend for
reading are unhealthy in tone.

Sorites
299
S
N
L
The bound books are all well-written.
All the romances are healthy in tone.
I do not recommend you to read any of the unbound books.
All the romances in this library are well-written.
8. No interesting poems are unpopular among people of real taste.
No modern poetry is free from affectation.
All your poems are on the subject of soap bubbles.
No affected poetry is popular among people of real taste.
No ancient poem is on the subject of soap bubbles.
All your poems are uninteresting.
9. All writers who understand human nature are clever.
No one is a true poet unless he can stir the hearts of men.
Shakespeare wrote Hamlet.
No writer who does not understand human nature can
stir the hearts of men.
None but a true poet could have written Hamlet.
Shakespeare was clever.
10.
#
I trust every animal that belongs to me.
Dogs gnaw bones.
I admit no animals into my study unless they beg when told to do so.
All the animals in the yard are mine.
I admit every animal that I trust into my study.
The only animals that are really willing to beg when told to do so are dogs.
All the animals in the yard gnaw bones.
Summary
A categorical syllogism is a deductive argument consisting of three categorical propo-
sitions and containing a total of three different terms, each of which appears twice in
distinct propositions. In a standard-form categorical syllogism, the propositions are all
in standard form, the two occurrences of each term are identical, each term is used in
the same sense throughout the argument, and the major premise is listed ﬁrst, the
minor premise second, and the conclusion last. The major premise is the one that
contains the major term (which by deﬁnition is the predicate of the conclusion), and
the minor premise is the one that contains the minor term (which by deﬁnition is the
subject of the conclusion). The middle term is the one that appears twice in the
premises.
The validity of a standard-form syllogism is determined by its form, and the form is
identiﬁed in terms of mood and ﬁgure. The mood consists of the letter names of the
propositions that compose the syllogism, and the ﬁgure is determined by the location

300
Chapter 5: Categorical Syllogisms
of the two occurrences of the middle term in the premises. A syllogism is said to be
unconditionally valid if it is valid from the Boolean standpoint, and conditionally valid
if it is valid only from the Aristotelian standpoint.
Venn diagrams for syllogisms consist of three overlapping circles, with each circle
representing a term. To test a syllogism for validity, the content of the premises is
represented in the diagram, and the diagram is then inspected to see if it supports the
conclusion. In representing the content of the premises, ‘‘X’’s and shading are entered
into the diagram in basically the same way as they are for two-circle diagrams. The
Venn diagram technique applies immediately to syllogisms interpreted from the Bool-
ean standpoint, but it can be modiﬁed to test syllogisms from the Aristotelian
standpoint.
The validity of categorical syllogisms can also be tested by the application of ﬁve
rules. A syllogism is valid if and only if (1) its middle term is distributed in at least one
premise, (2) a term distributed in the conclusion is also distributed in the premise,
(3) at least one premise is afﬁrmative, (4) a negative conclusion occurs with a negative
premise and vice versa, and (5) a particular conclusion occurs with one particular
premise. If only the last rule is violated, the syllogism is valid from the Aristotelian
standpoint but not from the Boolean.
An argument containing more than three terms, wherein one is a complement of
another, may be reduced to a standard-form syllogism by applying the operations of
conversion, obversion, and contraposition. These operations must be used only when
they yield logically equivalent results, and the goal is to produce an argument contain-
ing three terms wherein each is matched with an identical term in a different
proposition.
Syllogisms expressed in ordinary language can be translated into standard form by
applying the techniques developed in Section 4.7. Enthymemes are quasi-syllogisms
that are missing a premise or conclusion. They can be converted into syllogisms by
supplying the missing statement. A sorites is a chain of syllogisms in which the inter-
mediate conclusions have been deleted. Testing a sorites consists in putting it into
standard form, supplying the intermediate conclusions, and testing each syllogism in
the chain.

          
S
N
L
6
Propositional Logic
6.1
Symbols and Translation
Earlier chapters showed that the validity of a deductive argument is purely a function of
its form. By knowing the form of an argument, we can often tell immediately whether
it is valid or invalid. Unfortunately, however, ordinary linguistic usage often obscures
the form of an argument. To dispel this obscurity, logic introduces various simplifying
procedures. In Chapter 5, letters were used to represent the terms in a syllogism, and
techniques were developed to reduce syllogisms to what is called standard form. In
this chapter, form recognition is facilitated through the introduction of special symbols
called operators, or connectives. When arguments are expressed in terms of these
symbols, determining validity often becomes a matter of mere visual inspection.
In the two previous chapters, the fundamental elements were terms. In proposi-
tional logic, however, the fundamental elements are whole statements (or proposi-
tions). Statements are represented by letters, and these letters are then combined by
means of the operators to form more complex symbolic representations.
To understand the symbolic representation used in propositional logic, it is neces-
sary to distinguish what are called simple statements from compound statements. A
simple statement is one that does not contain any other statement as a component.
Here are some examples:
Butane is a hydrogen compound.
James Joyce wrote Ulysses.
Parakeets are colorful birds.
The monk seal is threatened with extinction.
Any convenient upper-case letter may be selected to represent each statement. Thus
B might be selected to represent the ﬁrst, J the second, P the third, and M the fourth.
As will be explained shortly, lower-case letters are reserved for use as statement
variables.
A compound statement is one that contains at least one simple statement as a
component. Here are some examples:

302
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
It is not the case that Emily Bronte wrote Jane Eyre.
The Boston Symphony will perform Mozart, and the Cleveland Symphony will
perform Strauss.
Either private air trafﬁc will be restricted or mid-air collisions will continue.
If IBM introduces a new line, then Apple will also.
The Giants will win if and only if their defense holds up.
Using letters to stand for the simple statements, these compound statements may be
represented as follows:
It is not the case that E.
B and C.
Either P or M.
If I then A.
G if and only if D.
In the ﬁrst example, note that the statement is compound even though it contains
only a single component (E). In general, negative statements are interpreted as com-
pound units consisting of an afﬁrmative statement and the phrase ‘‘it is not the case
that.’’
The expressions ‘‘it is not the case that,’’ ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘or,’’ ‘‘if . . . then . . . ,’’ and ‘‘if and
only if’’ are translated by logical operators. The ﬁve logical operators are as follows:
Operator
Name
Logical
function
Used to translate

tilde
negation
not, it is not the case that
•
dot
conjunction
and, also, moreover
v
wedge
disjunction
or, unless
⊃
horseshoe
implication
if . . . then . . . , only if
≡
triple bar
equivalence
if and only if
Saying that logical operators are used to ‘‘translate’’ these English expressions does
not mean that the expressions and the operators are identical. As in any translation
(from English to French, for example), a certain distortion of meaning occurs. The
meaning of such English expressions as ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘or,’’ and ‘‘if and only if’’ are often
vague and may vary with context, whereas the meaning of the logical operators is
clear, precise, and invariable. Thus, when we say that the logical operators may be
used to translate expressions in ordinary language, we mean that the operatorscapture
a certain aspect of their correlative English expressions. The precise character of this
aspect is spelled out in the next section of this chapter. The purpose of this section is
to develop a familiarity with the logical operators through practice in translation.

Symbols and Translation
303
S
N
L
When we use the operators to translate the previous examples of compound state-
ments, the results are as follows:
It is not the case that E
E
B and C
B • C
Either P or M
P v M
If I then A
I ⊃A
G if and only if D
G ≡D
The statement E is called a negation. The statement B • C is called a conjunctive
statement (or a conjunction), and the statement P v M is called a disjunctive
statement (or a disjunction); in the conjunctive statement, the components B and C
are called conjuncts, and in the disjunctive statement the components P and M are
called disjuncts. The statement I ⊃A is called a conditional statement, and it
expresses the relation of material implication. Its components are called antece-
dent (I) and consequent (A). Lastly, G ≡D is called a biconditional statement, and
it expresses the relation of material equivalence.
Let us now use the logical operators to translate additional English statements. The
tilde symbol is used to translate any negated simple proposition:
Rolex does not make cornﬂakes.
R
It is not the case that Rolex makes cornﬂakes.
R
It is false that Rolex makes cornﬂakes.
R
As these examples show, the tilde is always placed in front of the expression it
negates. In contrast, all of the other operators are placed between two expressions.
The expressions in question may be either simple statements or compound state-
ments. Thus, in the Rolex examples we used the tilde to negate a simple statement;
but we could also use it to negate a compound statement; for example, (G • F). In
this case the tilde negates the entire expression inside the parentheses.
This last example allows us the opportunity to deﬁne what is called the main
operator in a statement. The main operator is that operator in a compound statement
that governs the largest component(s) in the statement. In the example just given, the
main operator is the tilde, because it governs everything that follows it—namely,
(G • F). The dot, on the other hand, is not the main operator because it governs only
the two simple statements inside the parentheses. On the other hand, in the statement
H •  (K v M), the dot is the main operator because it governs both H and (K v M),
whereas the tilde governs only the expression in parentheses.
These statements are all negations. The main operator is a tilde.
B
(G ⊃H)
[(A ≡F) • (C ≡G)]

304
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
The dot symbol is used to translate such conjunctions as ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘also,’’ ‘‘but,’’
‘‘however,’’ ‘‘yet,’’ ‘‘still,’’ ‘‘moreover,’’ ‘‘although,’’ and ‘‘nevertheless’’:
Ford builds trucks, and Chrysler builds minivans.
F • C
Ford builds trucks, but Chrysler builds minivans.
F • C
Ford builds trucks; however, Chrysler builds minivans.
F • C
Honda and Suzuki build motorcycles.
H • S
Note that the last example is equivalent to the statement ‘‘Honda builds motorcycles,
and Suzuki builds motorcycles.’’ To translate such a statement as a conjunction of two
simple statements, the original statement must be equivalent to a compound statement
in English. For example, the statement ‘‘Mary and Louise are friends’’ is not equivalent
in meaning to ‘‘Mary is a friend, and Louise is a friend,’’ so this statement cannot be
translated as M • L.
These statements are all conjunctions. The main operator is a dot.
K • L
(E v F) • (G v H)
[(R ⊃T) v (S ⊃U)] • [(W ≡X) v (Y ≡Z)]
The wedge symbol is used to translate ‘‘or’’ and ‘‘unless.’’ A previous chapter ex-
plained that ‘‘unless’’ is equivalent in meaning to ‘‘if not.’’ This equivalence holds in
propositional logic as well, but in propositional logic it is usually simpler to equate
‘‘unless’’ with ‘‘or.’’ For example, the statement ‘‘You won’t graduate unless you pass
freshman English’’ is equivalent to ‘‘Either you pass freshman English or you won’t
graduate’’ and also to ‘‘If you don’t pass freshman English, then you won’t graduate.’’
As the next section demonstrates, the wedge symbol has the meaning of ‘‘and/or’’—
that is, ‘‘or’’ in the inclusive sense. Although ‘‘or’’ and ‘‘unless’’ are sometimes used in
an exclusive sense, the wedge is usually used to translate them.
The word ‘‘either,’’ which is often used to introduce disjunctive statements, has
primarily a punctuational meaning. The placement of this word often tells us where
parentheses and brackets must be introduced in the symbolic expression. If parenthe-
ses or brackets are not needed, ‘‘either’’ does not affect the translation. A similar point
applies to the word ‘‘both,’’ which is often used to introduce conjunctive statements.
Here are some disjunctive statements:
Boeing assembles planes or Lockheed constructs
rockets.
B v L
Either Boeing assembles planes or Lockheed constructs
rockets.
B v L

Symbols and Translation
305
S
N
L
Boeing assembles planes unless Lockheed constructs
rockets.
B v L
Unless Boeing assembles planes, Lockheed constructs
rockets.
B v L
From the English sense of these statements, it should be clear that B v L is logically
equivalent to L v B. Similarly, F • C is logically equivalent to C • F.
These statements are all disjunctions. The main operator is a
wedge.
C v D
(F • H) v (K • L)
[S • (T ⊃U)] v [X • (Y ≡Z)]
The horseshoe symbol is used to translate ‘‘if . . . then . . . ,’’ ‘‘only if,’’ and similar
expressions that indicate a conditional statement. The expressions ‘‘in case,’’ ‘‘pro-
vided that,’’ ‘‘given that,’’ and ‘‘on condition that’’ are usually translated in the same
way as ‘‘if.’’ By customary usage, the horseshoe symbol is also used to translate ‘‘im-
plies.’’ Although ‘‘implies’’ is used most properly to describe the relationship between
the premises and conclusion of an argument, we may accept this translation as an
alternate meaning for ‘‘implies.’’
The function of ‘‘only if’’ is, in a sense, just the reverse of ‘‘if.’’ For example, the
statement ‘‘You will catch a ﬁsh only if your hook is baited’’ does not mean ‘‘If your
hook is baited, then you will catch a ﬁsh.’’ If it meant this, then everyone with a baited
hook would catch a ﬁsh. Rather, the statement means ‘‘If your hook is not baited, then
you will not catch a ﬁsh,’’ which is logically equivalent to ‘‘If you catch a ﬁsh, then
your hook was baited.’’ To avoid mistakes in translating ‘‘if’’ and ‘‘only if’’ remember
this rule: The statement that follows ‘‘if’’ is always the antecedent, and the statement
that follows ‘‘only if’’ is always the consequent. Thus ‘‘C only if H’’ is translated C ⊃H,
whereas ‘‘C if H’’ is translated H ⊃C. Additional examples:
If Guinness brews beer, then Jameson distills whiskey.
G ⊃J
Guinness brews beer if Jameson distills whiskey.
J ⊃G
Guinness brews beer only if Jameson distills whiskey.
G ⊃J
Schweppes makes tonic provided that Beefeater
makes gin.
B ⊃S
Schweppes makes tonic on condition that Beefeater
makes gin.
B ⊃S
Schweppes’s making tonic implies that Beefeater
makes gin.
S ⊃B

306
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
In translating conditional statements, it is essential not to confuse antecedent with
consequent. The statement A ⊃B is not logically equivalent to B ⊃A.
These statements are all conditionals (material implications). The
main operator is a horseshoe.
H ⊃J
(A v C) ⊃(D • E)
[K v (S • T)] ⊃[F v (M • O)]
The horseshoe symbol is also used to translate statements phrased in terms of
sufﬁcient conditions and necessary conditions. Event A is said to be a sufﬁcient
condition for event B whenever the occurrence of A is all that is required for the
occurrence of B. On the other hand, event A is said to be a necessary condition for
event B whenever B cannot occur without the occurrence of A. For example, having
the ﬂu is a sufﬁcient condition for feeling miserable, whereas having air to breathe is
a necessary condition for survival. Other things besides having the ﬂu might cause a
person to feel miserable, but that by itself is sufﬁcient; other things besides having air
to breathe are required for survival, but without air survival is impossible. In other
words, air is necessary.
To translate statements involving sufﬁcient and necessary conditions into symbolic
form, place the statement that names the sufﬁcient condition in the antecedent of the
conditional and the statement that names the necessary condition in the consequent.
The mnemonic device ‘‘SUN’’ may be conveniently used to keep this rule in mind. Turn-
ing the ‘‘U’’ sideways creates S ⊃N, wherein S and N designate sufﬁcient and necessary
conditions, respectively. Whatever is given as a sufﬁcient condition goes in the place
of the S, and whatever is given as a necessary condition goes in the place of the N:
Hilton’s opening a new hotel is a sufﬁcient condition
for Marriott’s doing so.
H ⊃M
Hilton’s opening a new hotel is a necessary condition
for Marriott’s doing so.
M ⊃H
The triple bar symbol is used to translate the expressions ‘‘if and only if’’ and ‘‘is a
necessary and sufﬁcient condition for’’:
Kodak introduces a new ﬁlm if and only if Fuji does.
K ≡F
Kodak’s introducing a new ﬁlm is a sufﬁcient and
necessary condition for Fuji’s doing so.
K ≡F
Analysis of the ﬁrst statement reveals that K ≡F is logically equivalent to (K ⊃F) •
(F ⊃K). The statement ‘‘Kodak introduces a new ﬁlm only if Fuji does’’ is translated

Symbols and Translation
307
S
N
L
K ⊃F, and ‘‘Kodak introduces a new ﬁlm if Fuji does’’ is translated F ⊃K. Combining
the two English statements, we have (K ⊃F) • (F ⊃K), which is just a longer way of
writing K ≡F. A similar analysis applies to the second statement. Because the order of
the two conjuncts can be reversed, K ≡F is logically equivalent to F ≡K. However,
when translating such statements, we adopt the convention that the letter representing
the ﬁrst English statement is written to the left of the triple bar, and the letter repre-
senting the second English statement is written to the right of the triple bar. Thus, the
examples above are translated K ≡F, and not F ≡K.
These statements are all biconditionals (material equivalences).
The main operator is a triple bar.
M ≡T
(B v D) ≡(A • C)
[K v (F ⊃I)] ≡[L • (G v H)]
Whenever more than two letters appear in a translated statement, parentheses,
brackets, or braces must be used to indicate the proper range of the operators. The
statement A • B v C, for example, is ambiguous. When parentheses are introduced, this
statement becomes either (A • B) v C or A • (B v C). These two statements are not
logically equivalent. Thus, with statements such as these, some clue must be found in
the English statement that indicates the correct placement of the parentheses in the
symbolic statement. Such clues are usually given by commas and semicolons, by such
words as ‘‘either’’ and ‘‘both,’’ and by the use of a single predicate in conjunction with
two or more subjects. The following examples illustrate the correct placement of
parentheses and brackets:
Compaq makes computers and Intel designs chips, or
Adobe writes software.
(C • I) v A
Compaq makes computers, and Intel designs chips or
Adobe writes software.
C • (I v A)
Either Compaq makes computers and Intel designs
chips or Adobe writes software.
(C • I) v A
Compaq makes computers and either Intel designs
chips or Adobe writes software.
C • (I v A)
Compaq makes computers or both Intel designs chips
and Adobe writes software.
C v (I • A)
Compaq makes computers or Lotus and Adobe write
software.
C v (L • A)
If Maxell makes disks, then if Sony produces monitors,
then Epson makes printers.
M ⊃(S ⊃E)

308
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
If Maxell’s making disks implies that Sony produces
monitors, then Epson makes printers.
(M ⊃S) ⊃E
If either Philips and Sony produce monitors or Epson
makes printers, then Fujitsu makes keyboards.
[(P • S) v E] ⊃F
Do not confuse these three statement forms:
A if B
B ⊃A
A only if B
A ⊃B
A if and only if B
A ≡B
When a tilde appears in a symbolic expression, by convention it is considered to
affect only the unit that immediately follows it. For example, in the expression K v M
the tilde affects only the K; in the expression (K v M) it affects the entire expression
inside the parentheses. In English, the expression ‘‘It is not the case that K or M’’ is
ambiguous, because the range of the negating words is indeﬁnite. To eliminate this
ambiguity, we now adopt the convention that the negating words are considered to
affect only the unit that follows them. Thus ‘‘It is not the case that K or M’’ is translated
K v M.
The statement ‘‘Not both S and T ’’ is translated (S • T ). By an important rule called
DeMorgan’s rule, this statement is logically equivalent to S v T. For example, the
statement ‘‘Not both Steven and Thomas were ﬁred’’ is equivalent in meaning to
‘‘Either Stephen was not ﬁred or Thomas was not ﬁred.’’ Because the former statement
is not equivalent in meaning to ‘‘Stephen was not ﬁred and Thomas was not ﬁred,’’
(S • T ) is not logically equivalent to S • T. Analogously, the statement ‘‘Not either
S or T ’’ is translated (S v T ), which by DeMorgan’s rule is logically equivalent to
S • T. For example, ‘‘Not either Steven or Thomas was ﬁred’’ is equivalent in
meaning to ‘‘Steven was not ﬁred and Thomas was not ﬁred.’’ Thus (S v T ) is not
logically equivalent to S v T. The following examples illustrate these points:
It is not the case that Shell is responsible, but Exxon is.
S • E
Not both Shell and Exxon are responsible.
(S • E)
Both Shell and Exxon are not responsible.
S • E
Not either Shell or Exxon is responsible.
(S v E)
Neither Shell nor Exxon is responsible.
(S v E)
Either Shell or Exxon is not responsible.
S v E
The symbolic expressions that we have used throughout this section to
translate meaningful, unambiguous English statements are called well-formed for-
mulas (WFFs). A well-formed formula is a syntactically correct arrangement of sym-
bols. In English, for example, the expression ‘‘there is a cat on the porch’’ is

Symbols and Translation
309
S
N
L
syntactically correct, but ‘‘Porch on the is cat a there’’ is not syntactically correct. Some
examples of symbolic arrangements that are not well-formed formulas are ‘‘A ⊃v B,’’
‘‘A • B (v C),’’ and ‘‘v B ≡⊃C.’’
Summary
Operator
not, it is not the case that, it is false that

and, yet, but, however, moreover, nevertheless,
still, also, although, both, additionally,
furthermore
•
or, unless
v
if, only if, given that, in case, provided that, on
condition that, sufﬁcient condition for, necessary
condition for (Note: Do not confuse antecedent
with consequent!)
⊃
if and only if, sufﬁcient and necessary condition
for
≡
EXERCISE 6.1
I. Translate the following statements into symbolic form using capital letters to rep-
resent afﬁrmative English statements:
1.
#
New Zealand does not have nuclear weapons.
2. Turkey is a member of NATO but Iraq is not.
3. Either Brazil or Argentina destroys its rain forests.
4.
#
Both Poland and Ireland outlaw abortion.
5. If Scotland declares independence, then England reduces imports.
6. Scotland declares independence if England reduces imports.
7.
#
Scotland declares independence if and only if England reduces imports.
8. Scotland declares independence only if England reduces imports.
9. Tanzania becomes a banking center given that Zanzibar attracts foreign capital.
10.
#
Greenland’s protecting its ﬁshing rights implies that Iceland repays its debt.
11. China does not export nuclear technology unless Russia does.
12. Belarus creates a welfare system only if Latvia and Estonia do, too.
13.
#
Hungary adopts political reforms and either Romania freezes wages or Bul-
garia broadens services.
14. Either Hungary adopts political reforms and Romania freezes wages or Bul-
garia broadens services.

310
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
15. Not both Pakistan and India take political prisoners.
16.
#
Both Pakistan and India do not take political prisoners.
17. Either Sweden or Norway reduces deﬁcit spending.
18. Not either Sweden or Norway reduces deﬁcit spending.
19.
#
Neither Sweden nor Norway reduces deﬁcit spending.
20. Peru increases military spending unless Guyana and Bolivia do not improve
health care.
21. If Canada creates jobs, then if the United States raises taxes, then Mexico
stabilizes its currency.
22.
#
If Canada’s creating jobs implies that the United States raises taxes, then Mex-
ico stabilizes its currency.
23. Libya abandons terrorism if and only if neither Egypt nor Saudi Arabia closes
its embassy.
24. If the United States freezes drug assets, then either Colombia or Ecuador
prosecutes drug dealers.
25.
#
Either Guatemala does not end its civil war or if Honduras reduces poverty
then so does Nicaragua.
26. If either Uganda or Rwanda receives increased aid, then neither Kenya nor
Burundi protects endangered species.
27. If both Niger and Chad suppress free speech, then either Sudan or Zaire
suffers tribal conﬂicts.
28.
#
Either Spain or Portugal combats air pollution given that both Germany and
Austria do not improve water quality.
29. Argentina exports beef, and Brazil exports coffee or Chile exports wood
products.
30. Argentina exports beef and Brazil exports coffee, or Chile exports wood
products.
31.
#
Germany and France support a common currency unless Switzerland and
Italy do not.
32. Holland raises interest rates provided that Denmark does, but Belgium
does not.
33. Either Nigeria or Angola rejects human rights, but it is not the case that both do.
34.
#
Japan does not acknowledge its war crimes; however, if Taiwan remains
independent, then either Guam or the Philippines receives bank credits.
35. It is not the case that both Andora promotes hydroelectric power and San
Marino or Liechtenstein controls inﬂation.
36. It is not the case that either Malta subsidizes wine production or Corsica and
Sardinia subsidize cork production.

Symbols and Translation
311
S
N
L
37.
#
If Thailand combats corruption, then if Burma allows elections, then Laos and
Cambodia adopt a market economy.
38. If Ghana balances its budget, then if Liberia constructs low-cost housing,
then Chad’s recognizing minority rights implies that Somalia disarms its tribal
leaders.
39. It is not the case that either Georgia and Armenia conduct nuclear tests or
Ukraine and Slovakia abandon nuclear power.
40.
#
It is not the case that both Oman or Qatar closes its borders and Kuwait or
Iran redistributes its wealth.
41. China’s abandoning communism is a sufﬁcient condition for Tibet’s regaining
its freedom.
42. China’s abandoning communism is a necessary condition for Tibet’sregaining
its freedom.
43.
#
China’s abandoning communism is a sufﬁcient and necessary condition for
Tibet’s regaining its freedom.
44. Israel’s arresting fanatics is sufﬁcient condition for Syria’s making peace, only
if Lebanon’s disbanding militias is a necessary condition for Jordan’s receiving
increased aid.
45. Croatia and Bosnia violate the cease-ﬁre if and only if either Serbia or Mon-
tenegro incur international sanctions.
46.
#
It is not the case that both Mali’s attacking government corruption implies
that Niger does and Gabon’s reducing unemployment implies that Camaroon
does.
47. Greece allows free trade if Macedonia changes its ﬂag, provided that Albania
ends hostilities.
48. Belize’s issuing bonds implies that Costa Rica improves welfare, given that El
Salvador’s preventing arms smuggling implies that neither Nicaragua nor Pan-
ama hires mercenaries.
49.
#
If Indonesia’s attracting investments and Malaysia’s relaxing tariffs are sufﬁ-
cient and necessary conditions for Australia’s stimulating exports, thenneither
Japan nor Taiwan opens its markets.
50. Algeria’s rejecting fundamentalism is a necessary condition for France’s send-
ing arms; moreover, Morocco’s controlling inﬂation and Tunisia’s promoting
tourism together imply that Egypt’s modernizing its industry is a sufﬁcient
condition for Saudi Arabia’s increasing oil production.
II. Translate the following statements into symbolic form using capital letters to rep-
resent afﬁrmative English statements.
1.
#
Unless we reduce the incidence of child abuse, future crime rates will
increase.

312
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
2. If pharmaceutical makers conceal test results, they are subject to substantial
ﬁnes.
3. High-deﬁnition television is a technological marvel, but it is expensive.
4.
#
Cigarette manufacturers are neither honest nor socially responsible.
5. Psychologists and psychiatrists do not both prescribe antidepressant drugs.
6. If health maintenance organizations cut costs, then either preventive medi-
cine is emphasized or the quality of care deteriorates.
7.
#
A necessary condition for a successful business venture is good planning.
8. If cocaine is legalized, then its use may increase but criminal activity will
decline.
9. Ozone depletion in the atmosphere is a sufﬁcient condition for increased
cancer rates.
10.
#
If afﬁrmative action programs are dropped, then if new programs are not
created, then minority applicants will suffer.
11. If Internet use continues to grow, then more people will become cyber ad-
dicts and normal human relations will deteriorate.
12. Human life will not perish unless either we poison ourselves with pollution
or a large asteroid collides with the earth.
13.
#
Cooling a group of atoms to absolute zero and keeping them bunched to-
gether is a necessary and sufﬁcient condition for producing a Bose-Einstein
condensate.
14. If motion pictures contain subliminal sex messages or if they challenge the
traditional family, then conservative politicians call for censorship.
15. Either clear-cutting in national forests is halted and old growth trees are al-
lowed to stand, or salmon runs will be destroyed and bird habitats obliterated.
16.
#
Three strikes laws will be enforced and longer sentences imposed only if
hundreds of new prisons are built, and that will happen only if taxes are
increased.
17. The Ebola virus is deadly, but it will become a major threat to humanity if and
only if it becomes airborne and a vaccine is not developed.
18. If evolutionary biology is correct, then higher life forms arose by chance, and
if that is so, then it is not the case that there is any design in nature and divine
providence is a myth.
19.
#
If banks charge fees for teller-assisted transactions, then more people will use
ATMs; and if that happens and ATM fees increase, then banks will close
branches and proﬁts will skyrocket.
20. If corporate welfare continues, then taxpayer interests will be ignored and
billions of tax dollars will go to giant corporations; and if the latter occurs,
then there will not be anything left for the poor and the budget will not be
balanced.

Truth Functions
313
S
N
L
III. Determine which of the following are not well-formed formulas.
1. (S • T ) v (U • W)
2. (K v L) • (⊃G v H)
3. (EF) v (W ≡X)
4. (B ⊃T ) ≡(C ⊃U)
5. (F ≡Q) • (A ⊃E v T )
6. D v [(P ⊃Q) • (T ⊃R)]
7. [(D • v Q) ⊃(P v E)] v [A ⊃(• H)]
8. M(N ⊃Q) v (C • D)
9. (F vG) ⊃[(A ≡E) • H]
10. (R ≡S • T ) ⊃(W • X)
6.2
Truth Functions
The truth value of a compound proposition expressed in terms of one or more logical
operators is said to be a function of the truth values of its components. This means
that the truth value of the compound proposition is completely determined by the
truth values of its components. If the truth values of the components are known, then
the truth value of the compound proposition can be calculated from the deﬁnitions of
the logical operators. To point up the signiﬁcance of this fact we need only note that
many compound statements in ordinary language are not truth functional. For exam-
ple, the statement ‘‘Mary believes that Paul is dishonest’’ is compound because it
contains the statement ‘‘Paul is dishonest’’ as a component. Yet, the truth value of the
compound statement is not determined by the truth value of the component, because
Mary’s beliefs about Paul are not compelled by any attribute that Paul may or may not
possess.
The ﬁrst part of this section presents the deﬁnitions of the ﬁve logical operators, the
second part shows how they are used to compute the truth values of more compli-
cated propositions, and the third examines further the degree to which symbolized
expressions match the meaning of expressions in ordinary language.
Deﬁnitions of the Logical Operators
The deﬁnitions of the logical operators are presented in terms of statement vari-
ables, which are lower-case letters (p, q, r, s) that can stand for any statement. For
example, the statement variable p could stand for the statements A, A ⊃B, B v C, and
so on.

314
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
Statement variables are used to construct statement forms. A statement form is
an arrangement of statement variables and operators such that the uniform substitu-
tion of statements in place of the variables results in a statement. For example, p and
p ⊃q are statement forms because substituting the statements A and B in place of
p and q, respectively, results in the statements A and A ⊃B. A compound statement
is said to have a certain form if it can be produced by substituting statements in place
of the letters in that form. Thus A, (A v B), and [A • (B v C)] are negations because
they can be produced by substituting statements in place of p in the form p.
Now let us consider the deﬁnition of the tilde operator (negation). This deﬁnition
is given by a truth table, an arrangement of truth values that shows in every possible
case how the truth value of a compound proposition is determined by the truth values
of its simple components. The truth table for negation shows how any statement
having the form of a negation (p) is determined by the truth value of the statement
that is negated (p):
Negation
p
p
T
F
F
T
The truth table shows that p is false when p is true and that p is true when p is
false. This is exactly what we would expect, because it perfectly matches ordinary
English usage. Examples:
It is not the case that Richard Wagner wrote operas.
R
It is not the case that Pablo Picasso wrote operas.
P
The ﬁrst statement is false because R is true, and the second is true because P is false.
Let us now consider the deﬁnition of the dot operator (conjunction). The truth table
that follows shows how any statement having the form of a conjunction (p • q) is
determined by the truth values of its conjuncts (p, q):
Conjunction
p
q
p • q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
This truth table shows that a conjunction is true when its two conjuncts are true and is
false in all other cases. This deﬁnition reﬂects ordinary language usage almost as
perfectly as negation. Consider the following conjunctive statements:
Claude Monet and Vincent van Gogh were painters.
C • V
Claude Monet and Ludwig van Beethoven were
painters.
C • L
Ludwig van Beethoven and Johannes Brahms were
painters.
L • J

Truth Functions
315
S
N
L
The ﬁrst statement is true, because both conjuncts are true; but the second and third
statements are false because at least one of their conjuncts is false.
Turning now to the deﬁnition of the wedge operator (disjunction), the truth table
is as follows:
Disjunction
p
q
p v q
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
F
The truth table indicates that the disjunction is true when at least one of the disjuncts
is true and that otherwise it is false. The truth functional interpretation of ‘‘or’’ is that
of inclusive disjunction: Cases in which the disjunction is true include the case when
both disjuncts are true. This inclusive sense of ‘‘or’’ corresponds to many instances of
ordinary usage, as the following examples illustrate:
Either Jane Austen or Rene´ Descartes was a novelist.
J v R
Either Jane Austen or Charlotte Bronte was a novelist.
J v C
Either Rene´ Descartes or David Hume was a novelist.
R v D
The ﬁrst two statements are true, because in each case at least one of the disjuncts is
true. The third is false, because both disjuncts are false.
The match between the truth functional deﬁnition of disjunction and ordinaryusage
is not perfect, however. Sometimes the sense of a statement in ordinary language is
that of exclusive disjunction. Examples:
The Orient Express is on either track A or track B.
You can have either soup or salad with this meal.
Tammy is either ten or eleven years old.
The sense of these statements excludes the possibility of both alternatives being true.
Thus, if these statements were translated using the wedge, a portion of their ordinary
meaning would be lost. If the exclusive aspect of these ‘‘either . . . or . . .’’ statements is
essential, the symbolic equivalent of ‘‘but not both’’ can be attached to their transla-
tions. Thus the ﬁrst statement could be translated (A v B) • (A • B).
Let us now consider the horseshoe operator (material implication). Its truth table is
as follows:
Conditional
(material implication)
p
q
p ⊃q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T

316
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
The truth table shows that a conditional statement is false when the antecedent is true
and the consequent false and is true in all other cases. This truth functional interpre-
tation of conditional statements conforms in part with the ordinary meaning of ‘‘if . . .
then . . .’’ and in part it diverges. Consider the following examples:
If Isaac Newton was a scientist, then so was Albert
Einstein.
I ⊃A
If Isaac Newton was a scientist, then so was Emily
Dickinson.
I ⊃E
If Emily Dickinson was a scientist, then so was Albert
Einstein.
E ⊃A
If Emily Dickinson was a scientist, then so was John
Maseﬁeld.
E ⊃J
In these statements I and A are true and E and J are false. Thus, according to the truth
functional interpretation, the ﬁrst statement is true and the second false. This result
conforms in large measure to our expectations. But the truth functional interpretation
of the last two statements is true. Although this result may not conﬂict with our expec-
tations, it is not at all clear why these statements should be considered true.
For an intuitive approach to this problem, imagine that your logic instructor made
the following statement: ‘‘If you get an A on the ﬁnal exam, then you will get an A for
the course.’’ Under what conditions would you say that your instructor had lied to
you? Clearly, if you got an A on the ﬁnal exam but did not get an A for the course, you
would say that she had lied. This outcome corresponds to a true antecedent and a
false consequent. On the other hand, if you got an A on the ﬁnal exam and also got an
A for the course, you would say that she had told the truth (true antecedent, true
consequent). But what if you failed to get an A on the ﬁnal exam? Two alternatives are
then possible: Either you got an A for the course anyway (false antecedent, true
consequent) or you did not get an A for the course (false antecedent, false conse-
quent). In neither case, though, would you say that your instructor had lied to you.
Giving her the beneﬁt of the doubt, you would say that she had told the truth.
Lastly, let us consider the deﬁnition of the triple bar operator (material equivalence,
or biconditional). Its truth table is as follows:
Biconditional
(material equivalence)
p
q
p ≡q
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
The truth table shows that the biconditional is true when its two components have the
same truth value and that otherwise it is false. These results conform reasonably well
with our expectations. However, given that p ≡q is simply a shorter way of writing

Truth Functions
317
S
N
L
(p ⊃q) • (q ⊃p), the truth table results are required by the deﬁnition of material
implication. If p and q are either both true or both false, then p ⊃q and q ⊃p are both
true, making their conjunction true. But if p is true and q is false, then p ⊃q is false,
making the conjunction false. Similarly, if p is false and q is true, then q ⊃p is false,
again making the conjunction false. Thus p ≡q is true when p and q have the same
truth value and false when they have opposite truth values.
The truth table deﬁnition of the triple bar symbol conforms quite closely with
ordinary usage, as the following examples illustrate:
George Patton was an Army general if and only if
Omar Bradley was.
G ≡O
George Patton was an Army general if and only if
Leonardo da Vinci was.
G ≡L
Leonardo da Vinci was an Army general if and only if
Michelangelo was.
L ≡M
In these statements, G and O are true and L and M false. Thus, from the truth functional
standpoint, the ﬁrst is true and the second false. This is what we would ordinarily
expect. The third statement, however, turns out to be true because both of its compo-
nents are false. While this result may not be what we would expect, it does not violate
our expectations either. Other biconditional statements having false components are
more obviously true. Example:
Ross Perot was elected president if and only if he received a majority vote from the
electoral college.
This statement asserts what is required for any candidate to be elected or not elected,
and so it is clearly true.
In summary, the deﬁnitions of the ﬁve logical operators conform reasonably well
with ordinary linguistic usage. However, as the last part of this section shows, the
match is less than perfect. Before considering this question, though, let us use the
operator deﬁnitions to compute the truth values of more complicated statements.
Application to Longer Propositions
To compute the truth value of a more complicated expression, use this procedure:
Enter the truth values of the simple components directly beneath the letters. Then use
these truth values to compute the truth values of the compound components. The
truth value of a compound statement is written beneath the operator representing it.
Let us suppose, for example, that we are told in advance that the simple propositions
A, B, and C are true and D, E, and F are false. We may then compute the truth value of
the following compound proposition:
(A v D) ⊃E

318
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
First we write the truth values of the simple propositions immediately below the
respective letters and bring the operators and parentheses down:
(A v D) ⊃E
( T v F ) ⊃F
Next we compute the truth value of the proposition in parentheses and write it be-
neath the operator to which it pertains:
(A v D) ⊃E
( T v F ) ⊃F
T
⊃F
Finally, we use the last-completed line to obtain the truth value of the conditional,
which is the ‘‘main operator’’ in the proposition:
(A v D) ⊃E
( T v F ) ⊃F
T
⊃F
F
The ﬁnal answer is circled. This is the truth value of the compound proposition given
that A is true and D and E are false.
The general strategy is to build the truth values of the larger components from the
truth values of the smaller ones. In general, the order to be followed in entering truth
values is this:
1. Individual letters representing simple propositions
2. Tildes immediately preceding individual letters
3. Operators joining letters or negated letters
4. Tildes immediately preceding parentheses
5. And so on
Here are some additional examples. As above, let A, B, and C be true, D, E, and F
false. Note that the computed truth values are written beneath the operators to which
they pertain. The ﬁnal answers, which are written beneath the main operators, are
circled.
(B • C ) ⊃(E ⊃A)
(T • T ) ⊃(F ⊃T )
T
⊃
T
T

Truth Functions
319
S
N
L
(C v A) ⊃B
( T v  T ) ⊃T
( T v F)
⊃F

T
⊃F
F
⊃F
T
[(D v F ) • (B v  A) ] ⊃(F ⊃ C )
[( F v F ) • (T v  T ) ] ⊃(F ⊃ T )
[( F v F ) • (T v F
) ] ⊃(F ⊃F
)
[
F
•
T
] ⊃
T
[ T
•
T
] ⊃F
T
⊃F
F
If preferred, the truth values of the compound components may be entered directly
beneath the operators, without using the line-by-line approach illustrated in these
examples. The following examples illustrate this second approach, which is used in
the next section:
[(D ≡ A ) •  (C •  B)] ≡ [(A ⊃ D) v (C ≡E )]
F T
F
T
T T
T F F T
F F
T T
T
F
T
T F F
 {[(C •  E ) ⊃ (A •  B)] T [  (B v D) ≡(  C v E )]}
F
T T T F
T
T
T F F T
T
F
T T F
T
F T F F
Further Comparison with Ordinary Language
The ﬁrst part of this section showed that the deﬁnitions of the ﬁve logical operators
conform reasonably well with ordinary linguistic usage. This part further examines the
extent of this match in meaning.
In regard to the dot operator, which is used to translate ‘‘and’’ and ‘‘but,’’ the match
is very good, but less than perfect. Consider the following statements:
This car is ugly, but it’s economical to drive.
This car is economical to drive, but it’s ugly.
U • E
E • U
If these statements are taken as single premises of separate arguments, they might
suggest different conclusions. The ﬁrst suggests ‘‘Therefore, we should buy this car,’’
whereas the second suggests ‘‘Therefore, we shouldn’t buy this car.’’ Yet given that the
word ‘‘but’’ is translated in the same way as ‘‘and,’’ the two statements are logically
equivalent when interpreted truth functionally. That is, U • E is logically equivalent to

320
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
E • U. When subtleties of expression are important in the interpretation of a statement,
using logical operators to translate the statement may not be appropriate.
Another instance where the truth functional interpretation of ‘‘and’’ differs from the
ordinary linguistic meaning is offered by slang statements like this one:
You go for that gun, and you’ll regret it.
The sense of this statement is not that you will in fact go for the gun but rather that, if
you go for that gun, then . . . Accordingly, if this statement were interpreted as a truth
functional conjunction, its meaning would be distorted.
In regard to the wedge operator, which is used to translate ‘‘or’’ and ‘‘unless,’’ we
saw that the wedge is deﬁned as inclusive disjunction, but we observed that the
English word ‘‘or’’ sometimes has the sense of exclusive disjunction. This same obser-
vation applies to ‘‘unless.’’ In the following statements, ‘‘unless’’ has an inclusive sense:
You won’t win the lottery unless you buy a ticket.
It will not rain unless there are clouds in the sky.
The meaning of the ﬁrst statement includes the case of buying a ticket and not win-
ning, and the meaning of the second includes the case of there being clouds and no
rain. In statements like these, where ‘‘unless’’ has an inclusive sense, using the wedge
symbol to translate ‘‘unless’’ results in no loss of meaning.
On the other hand, in the following statements ‘‘unless’’ is used in the exclusive
sense:
Pork is not properly cooked unless the meat is white.
These logs will make a nice campﬁre unless they are wet.
The ﬁrst statement suggests that the meat cannot be white and at the same time not be
properly cooked, and the second suggests that the logs cannot be wet and at the same
time be used to make a nice campﬁre. Thus, if these statements are translated using
the wedge operator, part of the meaning will be left out. If this additional part is
essential, it can be included by adding the symbolic equivalent of ‘‘but not both’’ to
the translation.
In connection with the horseshoe operator, we saw that a question arose when the
antecedent of a conditional statement turned out to be false. Why, under this circum-
stance, should the conditional statement be said to be true? For an example of some
conditional statements that clearly remain true even though their antecedents might
be false, consider the following:
If the temperature rises above 32F, then the snow will begin to melt.
If Figure A is a triangle, then Figure A has three sides.
If all A are B and all B are C, then all A are C.

Truth Functions
321
S
N
L
In all three examples the statement remains true even though the antecedent might be
false. In the ﬁrst, even though the temperature does not rise above 32F at any partic-
ular moment, the law that governs the melting point of snow holds true. In other words,
the statement (which expresses this law) is true regardless of the truth value of the
antecedent. In the second, the mere fact that Figure A might not be a triangle does not
affect the fact that a triangle, by deﬁnition, has three sides. Thus, the statement (which
expresses this fact) is true regardless of the truth value of the antecedent. The third
statement expresses a logical relationship between statements. This logical relationship
remains unchanged regardless of what the terms A, B, and C are taken to represent.
Thus, if A, B, and C represent ‘‘dogs,’’ ‘‘cats,’’ and ‘‘birds,’’ respectively, both antece-
dent and consequent turn out to be false, but the conditional statement remains true.
As these examples illustrate, the deﬁnition of the horseshoe operator matches the
meaning of some conditional statements in ordinary language very well. However, in
general, the match is far from perfect. The source of the mismatch stems from the fact
that the horseshoe operator designates the material conditional, or truth functional
conditional. The material conditional is a kind of conditional statement whose truth
value depends purely on the truth or falsity of the antecedent and consequent and not
on any inferential connection between antecedent and consequent. Since many con-
ditional statements in ordinary language express such an inferential connection, when
the horseshoe operator is used to translate them, part of their meaning is left out.
Consider, for example, the following two statements:
If Shakespeare wrote Hamlet, then the sun rises in the east.
If ice is lighter than water, then ice ﬂoats in water.
The ﬁrst statement expresses no inferential connection between antecedent and con-
sequent, so using the horseshoe operator to translate it results in no loss of meaning.
However, the second statement does express such a connection. The fact that ice is
lighter than water is the reason why it ﬂoats. Accordingly, when the horseshoe opera-
tor is used to translate the second statement, this special meaning is lost.
The fact that the material conditional ignores inferential connections between an-
tecedent and consequent allows for conﬂicts between the truth functional interpreta-
tion of a conditional statement and the ordinary interpretation. Consider, for example,
the following:
If Barbara Boxer advocates the use of cocaine, then she is a good senator.
If Chicago is in Michigan, then Chicago is very close to Miami.
According to their ordinary language interpretation, both of these statements are false.
Good senators do not advocate the use of cocaine, and Michigan is far from Miami.
Yet, when these statements are interpreted as material conditionals, both turn out
to be true, because their antecedents are false. In cases like these, when the truth

322
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
functional interpretation of a conditional statement conﬂicts with the ordinary language
interpretation, using the horseshoe operator to translate it may not be appropriate.
While inferential relations between antecedent and consequent often play some
role in conditionals expressed in the indicative mood (such as those we just consid-
ered), they play a dominant role in conditional statements expressed in the subjunctive
mood. Consider, for example, the following:
If I were the Sultan of Brunei, then I would be rich.
If dolphins were ﬁsh, then they would be cold-blooded.
If the Washington Monument were made of lead, then it would be lighter than air.
If President Kennedy had committed suicide, then he would be alive today.
Subjunctive conditionals are often called counterfactual conditionals because their
antecedents are typically false. As a result, the only way of determining their truth
value in ordinary language is through some kind of inference. Thus, from our knowl-
edge that the Sultan of Brunei is rich, we reason that if I were the Sultan, then I would
be rich. Similarly, from our knowledge that all ﬁsh are cold-blooded, we conclude that
if dolphins were ﬁsh, then they would be cold-blooded. On the other hand, we reason
that the second two are false from our knowledge that lead is heavier than air and our
knowledge that suicide results in death. Because the truth value of subjunctive condi-
tionals is so closely tied to inferences like these and is so unrelated to the truth or
falsity of the components, subjunctive conditionals are generally not considered to be
truth functional at all, and the horseshoe operator is not used to translate them. But if
they were interpreted truth functionally, note that all four of these statements would
turn out true, because they have false antecedents.
These observations about conditional statements apply equally to biconditionals.
Just as the horseshoe operator expresses material implication, the triple bar operator
expresses material equivalence. As such, it ignores any inferential connection between
its component statements, and, as a result, conﬂicts can arise between the ordinary
meaning of a biconditional and its truth functional meaning. Here are two examples
of biconditionals expressed in the indicative mood that illustrate such a conﬂict:
Adolf Hitler was justiﬁed in killing millions of Jews if and only if he always con-
fessed his sins to a priest.
The Department of Defense building is a hexagon if and only if it has eight sides.
According to the ordinary interpretation, these statements are false. Confessing
one’s sins to a priest does not justify anything, and hexagons, by deﬁnition, have six
sides, not eight. Yet, when these statements are interpreted as expressing material
biconditionals, both are true, because in each case the component statements are
false. In cases like these, when the ordinary meaning of a biconditional conﬂicts with
the truth functional meaning, using the triple bar operator to translate it may not be

Truth Functions
323
S
N
L
appropriate. Furthermore, as with subjunctive conditionals, subjunctivebiconditionals
are generally not considered to be truth functional at all, so the triple bar operator is
not used to translate them.
EXERCISE 6.2
I. Identify the main operator in the following propositions:
1.
#
(A v M) • (C ⊃E)
2. (G • P) ⊃(H v W)
3. [P • (S ≡K)]
4.
#
(K • O) ≡(R v B)
5. (M • B) v [E ≡(C v I)]
6. [(P • R) ⊃(E v F)]
7.
#
[(S v L) • M] ⊃(C v N)
8. [F v (N • U)] ≡H
9. E • [(F ⊃A) ≡(G v H)]
10.
#
[(X v T) • (N v F)] v (K ⊃L)
II. Write the following compound statements in symbolic form, then use your knowl-
edge of the historical events referred to by the simple statements to determine the
truth value of the compound statements.
1.
#
It is not the case that Hitler ran the Third Reich.
2. Nixon resigned the presidency and Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address.
3. Caesar conquered China, or Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic.
4.
#
Hitler ran the Third Reich and Nixon did not resign the presidency.
5. Edison invented the telephone, or Custer was killed by the Indians.
6. Alexander the Great civilized America if Napoleon ruled France.
7.
#
Washington was assassinated only if Edison invented the telephone.
8. Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address if and only if Caesar conquered China.
9. It is not the case that either Alexander the Great civilized America or Washing-
ton was assassinated.
10.
#
If Hitler ran the Third Reich, then either Custer was killed by the Indians or
Einstein discovered aspirin.
11. Either Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic and Edison invented the telephone or
both Nixon resigned the presidency and it is false that Edison invented the
telephone.
12. Lincoln’s having written the Gettysburg Address is a sufﬁcient condition for
Alexander the Great’s having civilized America if and only if Washington’s

324
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
being assassinated is a necessary condition for Custer’s having been killed by
the Indians.
13.
#
Both Hitler ran the Third Reich and Lindbergh crossed the Atlantic if neither
Einstein discovered aspirin nor Caesar conquered China.
14. It is not the case that Custer was killed by the Indians unless both Nixon
resigned the presidency and Edison invented the telephone.
15. Custer was killed by the Indians, and Lincoln wrote the Gettysburg Address
only if either Washington was assassinated or Alexander the Great civilized
America.
III. Determine the truth values of the following symbolized statements. Let A, B, and
C be true and X, Y, and Z be false. Circle your answer.
1.
#
A • X
2. B • Y
3. X v Y
4.
#
C v Z
5. B ⊃Z
6. Y ⊃A
7.
#
X ⊃Z
8. B ≡Y
9. C ≡Z
10.
#
(A • Z)
11. B v (Y ⊃A)
12. A ⊃(Z v Y)
13.
#
(A • Y) v (Z • C)
14. (X v B) • (Y v A)
15. (Y ⊃C) • (B ⊃X)
16.
#
(C ≡A) v (Y ≡Z)
17. (A • C) ⊃(X ⊃B)
18. [(B v C) • (X v Z)]
19.
#
[(X ⊃C) ≡(B ⊃Z)]
20. (X ⊃Z) ⊃[(B ≡X) • (C v A)]
21. [(X v Z) ⊃(C v B)] • [(X • A) ⊃(Y • Z)]
22.
#
[(A ≡X) v (Z ≡Y)] v [(Y ⊃B) • (Z ⊃C)]
23. [(B • C) v (X • Y)] ⊃[(Y • X) v (A • Z)]
24. {[(C v B) • (Z v A)] • [(B v Y) • (X v Z)]}
25.
#
(Z ⊃C) ⊃{[(X ⊃B) ⊃(C ⊃Y)] ≡[(Z ⊃X) ⊃(Y ⊃Z)]}

Truth Tables for Propositions
325
S
N
L
IV. When possible, determine the truth values of the following symbolized state-
ments. Let A and B be true, Y and Z false. P and Q have unknown truth value. If
the truth value of the statement cannot be determined, write ‘‘undetermined.’’
1.
#
A v P
2. Q v Z
3. Q • Y
4.
#
Q • A
5. P ⊃B
6. Z ⊃Q
7.
#
A ⊃P
8. P ≡P
9. (P ⊃A) ⊃Z
10.
#
(P ⊃A) ≡(Q ⊃B)
11. (Q ⊃B) ⊃(A ⊃Y)
12. (P ⊃Y) v (Z ⊃Q)
13.
#
(Q • Y) ≡(Q v A)
14. [(Z ⊃P) ⊃P] ⊃P
15. [Q ⊃(A v P)] ≡[(Q ⊃B) ⊃Y]
6.3
Truth Tables for Propositions
As we have seen, a truth table is an arrangement of truth values that shows how the
truth value of a compound proposition depends on the truth values of its simpler
components. The previous section showed how the truth value of a compound prop-
osition could be determined, given a designated truth value for each simple compo-
nent. A truth table gives the truth value of a compound proposition for every possible
truth value of its simple components. Each line in the truth table represents one such
possible arrangement of truth values.
In constructing a truth table the ﬁrst factor that must be determined is the number
of lines. Because each line represents one possible arrangement of truth values, the
total number of lines is equal to the number of possible combinations of truth values
for the simple propositions. Where L designates the number of lines and n the number
of different simple propositions, the number of lines may be computed by the follow-
ing formula:
L  2n

326
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
By means of this formula we obtain the following table:
Number of different
simple propositions
Number of lines in
truth table
1
2
3
4
5
6
2
4
8
16
32
64
Let us now construct a truth table for a compound proposition. We may begin with
a fairly simple one:
(A v B) ⊃B
The number of different simple propositions is two. Thus the number of lines in the
truth table is four. We draw these lines beneath the proposition as follows:
(A v  B) ⊃B
The next step is to divide the number of lines in half and assign ‘‘T’’ to the ﬁrst half of
the lines beneath A and ‘‘F’’ to the remaining half. Since the number of lines is four,
we have two ‘‘T’’s and two ‘‘F’’s:
(A v  B) ⊃B
T
T
F
F
Next we divide that number (two) in half and, since the result is one, write one T, one
F, one T, and one F beneath B:
(A v  B ) ⊃B
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
Inspection of the truth table at this stage reveals that every possible combination of
truth and falsity has now been assigned to A and B. In other words, the truth table

Truth Tables for Propositions
327
S
N
L
exhausts the entire range of possibilities. The next step is to duplicate the B column
under the second B.
(A v  B ) ⊃B
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
This much has been automatic.
Now, using the principles developed in the previous section, we compute the
remaining columns. First, the column under the tilde is computed from the column
under B:
(A v  B ) ⊃B
T
F T
T
T
T F
F
F
F T
T
F
T F
F
Next, the column under the wedge is computed from the column under A and the
column under the tilde:
(A v  B ) ⊃B
T T F T
T
T T T F
F
F F F T
T
F T T F
F
Last, the column under the horseshoe is computed from the column under the wedge
and the column under B:
(A v  B ) ⊃B
T T F T
T T
T T T F
F
F
F F F T
T T
F T T F
F
F
The column under the main operator is outlined to indicate that it represents the entire
compound proposition. Inspecting the completed truth table, we see that the truth
value of the compound proposition is true when B is true and false when B is false,
regardless of the truth value of A.
Let us consider another example: (C • D) ⊃E. The number of different letters is
three, so the number of lines is eight. Under C we make half this number true, half false
(that is, four true, four false). Then, under D we make half this number true, half

328
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
false, and so on (two true, two false, two true, two false). Finally, under E the truth
value alternates on every line. The truth table thus exhausts every possible arrange-
ment of truth values:
(C •  D ) ⊃E
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
Now we compute the truth values for the remaining columns—ﬁrst for the tilde, then
for the dot, and ﬁnally for the horseshoe:
(C •  D ) ⊃E
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
Inspecting the completed truth table, we see that the compound proposition is false
only when C is true and D and E are false.
Classifying Statements
Truth tables may be used to determine whether the truth value of a compound state-
ment depends solely on its form or whether it also depends on the speciﬁc truth values
of its components. A compound statement is said to be logically true or tautologous
if it is true regardless of the truth values of its components. It is said to be logically
false or self-contradictory if it is false regardless of the truth values of its compo-
nents. And it is said to be contingent if its truth value varies depending on the truth
values of its components. By inspecting the column of truth values under the main
operator, we can determine how the compound proposition should be classiﬁed:
Statement classiﬁcation
Column under main operator
tautologous (logically true)
all true
self-contradictory (logically false)
all false
contingent
at least one true, at least one false
As the truth table we developed indicates, (C • D) ⊃E is a contingent proposition.
The column under the main operator contains at least one T and at least one F. In other

Truth Tables for Propositions
329
S
N
L
words, the truth value of the compound proposition is ‘‘contingent’’ upon the truth
values of its components. Sometimes it is true, sometimes false, depending on the
truth values of the components.
On the other hand, consider the following truth tables:
[(G ⊃H ] • G ] ⊃H
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
(G v H ) ≡( G •  H )
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
The proposition on the left is tautologous (logically true or a tautology) because the
column under the main operator is all true. The one on the right is self-contradictory
(logically false) because the main operator column is all false. In neither case is
the truth value of the compound proposition contingent upon the truth values of
the components. The one on the left is true regardless of the truth values of its
components—in other words, necessarily true. The one on the right is necessarily false.
If a proposition is either logically true or logically false, its truth value depends
merely upon its form and has nothing to do with its content. As a result, such state-
ments do not make any genuine assertions about things in the world. For example, the
tautologous statement ‘‘It is either raining or it is not raining’’ provides no information
about the weather. Similarly, the self-contradictory statement ‘‘It is raining and it is not
raining’’ provides no information about the weather. On the other hand, thecontingent
statement ‘‘It is raining in the mountains’’ does provide information about the weather.
Comparing Statements
Truth tables may also be used to determine how two propositions are related to each
other. Two propositions are said to be logically equivalent if they have the same
truth value regardless of the truth values of their simple components, and they are
contradictory if they have opposite truth values regardless of the truth values of their
simple components. Two (or more) propositions are consistent if there is at least one
line on which both (or all) of them turn out to be true, and they are inconsistent if
there is no line on which both (or all) of them turn out to be true. By comparing the
main operator columns, one can determine which is the case. However, because the
ﬁrst two relations are stronger than (and may overlap) the second two, the ﬁrst two
relations should be considered ﬁrst.
Relation
Columns under
main operators
logically equivalent
same truth value on each line
contradictory
opposite truth value on each line
consistent
there is at least one line on which
the truth values are both true
inconsistent
there is no line on which the truth values are both true

330
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
For example, the following two propositions are logically equivalent. The main oper-
ator columns of their respective truth tables are identical. Note that for proper com-
parison the columns under K must be identical and the columns under L must be
identical.
K ⊃L
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
 L ⊃ K
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
Logically equivalent
The next two propositions are contradictory:
K ⊃L
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
K •  L
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
Contradictory
The next two propositions are consistent. On the ﬁrst line of each truth table the
column under the main operator turns out true. This means that it is possible for both
propositions to be true, which is the meaning of consistency:
K v L
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
K • L
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
Consistent
Finally, the next two propositions are inconsistent. There is no line, in the columns
under the main operators, where the truth values are both true:
K ≡L
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
K •  L
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
Inconsistent
Any pair of propositions is either consistent or inconsistent. Furthermore, some
consistent propositions are also logically equivalent, and some inconsistent proposi-
tions are either contradictory or logically equivalent. Because of this partial overlap,
pairs of propositions are usually ﬁrst classiﬁed in terms of the stronger of these rela-
tions, which are logical equivalence and contradiction. If neither of these stronger
relations applies, then the pair of propositions is classiﬁed in terms of the weaker
relations, consistency and inconsistency.

Truth Tables for Propositions
331
S
N
L
Unlike logical equivalence and contradiction, which usually relate exactly two
propositions, consistency and inconsistency often apply to larger groups of proposi-
tions. For consistency, the only requirement is that there be at least one line in the
group of truth tables where all of the propositions are true, and for inconsistency
the only requirement is that there be no such line. As a result of these requirements, the
statement consisting of the conjunction of a group of inconsistent propositions will
always be self-contradictory, whereas the statement consisting of the conjunction of a
group of consistent propositions will never be self-contradictory.
Consistency and inconsistency are important because, among other things, they
can be used to evaluate the overall rationality of a person’s stated position on some-
thing. If the statements expressing such a position are consistent, then there is at least
a possibility that the position makes sense. This is so because there will be at least one
line in the group of truth tables where all of the person’s statements are true. On the
other hand, if the statements are inconsistent, then there is no possibility that the posi-
tion makes sense. In this case there is no line in the truth tables where all of the
statements are true. The group of statements, conjoined together, amounts to a self-
contradiction.
The truth tables for consistency and logical equivalence also illustrate the important
difference between two propositions being factually true and their being logically
equivalent. For example, the statements ‘‘Water boils at 100 C’’ and ‘‘The current
population of the United States is over 200 million’’ are both true in the present actual
world. This real-world situation conforms to the one truth table line on which both
statements are true. As a result of this line, the two statements are consistent. However,
they are not logically equivalent because their truth values are not necessarily the
same. The truth value of the second proposition might change in the future, while that
of the ﬁrst would remain the same. An analogous distinction, incidentally, holds be-
tween two statements having actually opposite truth values and their being
contradictory.
EXERCISE 6.3
I. Use truth tables to determine whether the following symbolized statements are
tautologous, self-contradictory, or contingent:
1.
#
N ⊃(N ⊃N)
2. (G ⊃G) ⊃G
3. (S ⊃R) • (S • R)
4.
#
[(E ⊃F) ⊃F] ⊃E
5. (K ⊃H) ≡(H v K)
6. (M ⊃P) v (P ⊃M)
7.
#
[(Z ⊃X) • (X v Z)] ⊃X

332
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
8. [(C ⊃D) • C] ⊃D
9. [X ⊃(R ⊃F)] ≡[(X ⊃R) ⊃F]
10.
#
[G ⊃(N ⊃G)] • [(N ≡G) • (N v G)]
11. [(Q ⊃P) • (Q ⊃R)] • (P v R)
12. [(H ⊃N) • (T ⊃N)] ⊃[(H v T) ⊃N]
13.
#
[U • (T v S)] ≡[(T v U) • (S v U)]
14. {[(G • N) ⊃H] • [(G ⊃H) ⊃P]} ⊃(N ⊃P)
15. [(F v E) • (G v H)] ≡[(G • E) v (F • H)]
II. Use truth tables to determine whether the following pairs of symbolized state-
ments are logically equivalent, contradictory, consistent, or inconsistent. First
determine whether the pairs of propositions are logically equivalent or contradic-
tory; then, if these relations do not apply, determine if they are consistent or
inconsistent.
1.
#
D v B
(D • B)
2. F • M
(F v M )
3. K ⊃L
K ⊃L
4.
#
R v S
S • R
5. A ≡X
(X • A) v (A • X)
6. H ≡G
(G • H) v (G • H)
7.
#
(E ⊃C) ⊃L
E ⊃(C ⊃L)
8. N • (A v E)
A • (E v N)
9. M ⊃(K ⊃P)
(K • M) ⊃P
10.
#
W ≡(B • T )
W • (T ⊃B)
11. G • (E v P)
(G • E) • (G • P)
12. R • (Q v S)
(S v R) • (Q v R)
13.
#
H • (K v J)
( J • H) v (H • K)
14. Z • (C ≡P)
C ≡(Z • P)
15. Q ⊃(K v F)
(K • Q) v (F • Q)
III. Use truth tables to obtain the answers to the following exercises.
1.
#
Renowned economist Harold Carlson makes the following prediction: ‘‘The
balance of payments will decrease if and only if interest rates remain steady;
however, it is not the case that either interest rates will not remain steady or
the balance of payments will decrease.’’ What can we say about Carlson’s
prediction?
2. A high school principal made this statement to the school board: ‘‘Either
music is not dropped from the curriculum or the students will become cultural

Truth Tables for Propositions
333
S
N
L
philistines; furthermore, the students will not become cultural philistines if
and only if music is dropped from the curriculum.’’ Assuming the principal is
correct, what has she told us about music and the students? (Hint: Construct
a truth table for the principal’s statement and examine the line on which the
statement turns out true.)
3. Christina and Thomas are having a discussion about their plans for the eve-
ning. Christina: ‘‘If you don’t love me, then I’m certainly not going to have sex
with you.’’ Thomas: ‘‘Well, that means that if I do love you, then you will have
sex with me, right?’’ Is Thomas correct? (Hint: Construct a truth table for each
statement and compare them.)
4.
#
Two astronomers are discussing supernovas. Dr. Frank says, ‘‘Research has
established that if a supernova occurs within ten light years of the earth, then
life on earth will be destroyed.’’ Dr. Harris says, ‘‘Research has also established
that either a supernova will not occur within ten light years of the earth or life
on earth will not be destroyed.’’ Is it possible that both astronomers are cor-
rect? If so, what can we determine about the occurrence of a supernova?
5. Antonia Martinez, who is running for the state senate, makes this statement:
‘‘Either a tax reduction is feasible only if both educational costs do not in-
crease and the welfare program is abolished, or a tax reduction is feasible and
either the welfare program will not be abolished or educational costs will
increase.’’ What has Martinez told us about taxes, educational costs, and
welfare?
6. Automotive expert Frank Goodbody has this to say about Japanese imports:
‘‘If Mitsubishi is the sportiest, then both Toyota is the most trouble-free and
Isuzu is not the lowest priced. If Isuzu is the lowest priced, then both Toyota
is not the most trouble-free and Mitsubishi is the sportiest.’’ Is it possible that
Goodbody is correct in his assessment? If so, what may we conclude about
Mitsubishi, Toyota, and Isuzu?
7.
#
Two stockbrokers are having a discussion. One claims that Netmark will
introduce a new product if and only if both Datapro cuts its workforce and
Compucel expands production. The other claims that Datapro will cut its
workforce, and Compucel will expand production if and only if Netmark
introduces a new product. Is it possible that both stockbrokers are right? If so,
what have they told us about these companies?
8. Eric Carson sums up his beliefs about God as follows: ‘‘God exists if and only
if either life is meaningful or the soul is not immortal. God exists and the soul
is immortal. If God exists, then life is not meaningful.’’ Is it possible that Eric’s
beliefs make sense?
9. Cindy, Jane, and Amanda, witnessed a bank robbery. At trial, Cindy testiﬁed
that Lefty did not enter the bank, and if Howard pulled a gun, then Conrad

334
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
collected the money. Jane testiﬁed that if Howard did not pull a gun, then
Lefty entered the bank. Amanda testiﬁed that if Conrad collected the money,
then Howard pulled a gun. Is it possible that all three witnesses told the truth?
If so, what can we conclude about Lefty, Howard, and Conrad?
10.
#
Nicole Evans expresses her philosophy as follows: ‘‘If the mind is identical to
the brain, then personal freedom does not exist and humans are not respon-
sible for their actions. If personal freedom does not exist, then the mind is
identical to the brain. Either humans are responsible for their actions or the
mind is not identical to the brain. If personal freedom exists, then humans
are responsible for their actions.’’ Is it possible that Nicole’s philosophy
makes sense? If so, what does it say about the mind, personal freedom, and
responsibility?
6.4
Truth Tables for Arguments
Truth tables provide the standard technique for testing the validity of arguments in
propositional logic. To construct a truth table for an argument, follow these steps:
1. Symbolize the arguments using letters to represent the simple propositions.
2. Write out the symbolized argument, placing a single slash between
the premises and a double slash between the last premise and the conclusion.
3. Draw a truth table for the symbolized argument as if it were a proposition broken
into parts, outlining the columns representing the premises and conclusion.
4. Look for a line in which all of the premises are true and the conclusion is false. If
such a line exists, the argument is invalid; if not, it is valid.
For example, let us test the following argument for validity:
If juvenile killers are as responsible for their crimes as adults, then execution is a
justiﬁable punishment.
Juvenile killers are not as responsible for their crimes as adults.
Therefore, execution is not a justiﬁable punishment.
The ﬁrst step is to symbolize the argument:
J ⊃E
J
E

Truth Tables for Arguments
335
S
N
L
Now a truth table may be constructed. Since the symbolized argument contains two
different letters, the truth table has four lines. Make sure that identical letters have
identical columns beneath them. Here are the columns for the individual letters:
J ⊃E /  J / /  E
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
The truth table is now completed, and the columns representing the premises and
conclusion are outlined:
J ⊃E /  J / /  E
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
Inspection of the third line reveals that both of the premises are true and the conclu-
sion is false. The argument is therefore invalid.
Another example:
If insider trading occurs, then investors will not trust the securities markets. If in-
vestors do not trust the securities markets, then business in general will suffer.
Therefore, if insider trading occurs, then business in general will suffer.
The completed truth table is:
O ⊃ T /  T ⊃B / / O ⊃B
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
Inspection of the truth table reveals that there is no line on which both premises are
true and the conclusion is false. The argument is therefore valid.
The logic behind the method of truth tables is easy to understand. By deﬁnition, a
valid argument is one in which it is not possible for the premises to be true and the
conclusion false. A truth table presents every possible combination of truth values that
the components of an argument may have. Therefore, if no line exists on which the
premises are true and the conclusion false, then it is not possible for the premises to

336
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
be true and the conclusion false, in which case the argument is valid. Conversely, if
there is a line on which the premises are true and the conclusion false, then it is
possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, and the argument is
invalid. We therefore have the following rules for testing arguments by truth tables:
If there is no line on which all the premises are true and the
conclusion false, the argument is valid.
If there is at least one line on which all the premises are true and
the conclusion false, the argument is invalid.
Truth tables provide a convenient illustration of the fact that any argument having
inconsistent premises is valid regardless of what its conclusion may be, and any argu-
ment having a tautologous conclusion is valid regardless of what its premises may be.
Example:
The sky is blue.
The sky is not blue.
Therefore, Paris is the capital of France.
S /  S / / P
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
Since the premises of this argument are inconsistent, there is no line on which the
premises are both true. Accordingly, there is no line on which the premises are both
true and the conclusion false, so the argument is valid. Of course, the argument is
unsound, because it has a false premise. Another example:
Bern is the capital of Switzerland. Therefore, it is either raining or it is not raining.
B / / R v  R
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
The conclusion of this argument is a tautology. Accordingly, there is no line on which
the premise is true and the conclusion false, and so the argument is valid. Incidentally,
it is also sound, because the premise is true.
EXERCISE 6.4
I. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then determine whether
each is valid or invalid by constructing a truth table for each.

Truth Tables for Arguments
337
S
N
L
1.
#
If national elections deteriorate into TV popularity contests, then smooth-
talking morons will get elected. Therefore, if national elections do not deteri-
orate into TV popularity contests, then smooth-talking morons will not get
elected.
2. Brazil has a huge foreign debt. Therefore, either Brazil or Argentina has a
huge foreign debt.
3. If fossil fuel combustion continues at its present rate, then a greenhouse effect
will occur. If a greenhouse effect occurs, then world temperatures will rise.
Therefore, if fossil fuel combustion continues at its present rate, then world
temperatures will rise.
4.
#
If there are dried-up riverbeds on Mars, then water once ﬂowed on the Mar-
tian surface. There are dried-up riverbeds on Mars. Therefore, water once
ﬂowed on the Martian surface.
5. If high school graduates are deﬁcient in reading, they will not be able to
compete in the modern world. If high school graduates are deﬁcient in writ-
ing, they will not be able to compete in the modern world. Therefore, if high
school graduates are deﬁcient in reading, then they are deﬁcient in writing.
6. The disparity between rich and poor is increasing. Therefore, political control
over economic equality will be achieved only if restructuring the economic
system along socialist lines implies that political control over economic equal-
ity will be achieved.
7.
#
Einstein won the Nobel Prize either for explaining the photoelectric effect or
for the special theory of relativity. But he did win the Nobel Prize for explain-
ing the photoelectric effect. Therefore, Einstein did not win the Nobel Prize
for the special theory of relativity.
8. If chromosome mapping is successful, then the human genetic code will be
deciphered. The human genetic code will not be deciphered and chromo-
some mapping will be successful. Therefore, new treatments will be devel-
oped for hereditary diseases.
9. Either the USS Arizona or the USS Missouri was not sunk in the attack on
Pearl Harbor. Therefore, it is not the case that either the USS Arizona or the
USS Missouri was sunk in the attack on Pearl Harbor.
10.
#
If racial quotas are adopted for promoting employees, then qualiﬁed employ-
ees will be passed over; but if racial quotas are not adopted, then prior dis-
crimination will go unaddressed. Either racial quotas will or will not be
adopted for promoting employees. Therefore, either qualiﬁed employees will
be passed over or prior discrimination will go unaddressed.
II. Determine whether the following symbolized arguments are valid or invalid by
constructing a truth table for each:

338
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
1.
#
K ⊃K
K
2. R ⊃R
R
3. P ≡N
N v P
4.
#
(G • M)
M v G
G
5. K ≡L
(L • K)
K ⊃L
6. Z
E ⊃(Z ⊃E)
7.
#
(W • X)
(X • W)
X v W
8. C ≡D
E v D
E ⊃C
9. A ≡(B v C)
C v B
A ⊃B
10.
#
J ⊃(K ⊃L)
K ⊃( J ⊃L)
( J v K) ⊃L
11. (K ≡S)
S ⊃(R v K)
R v S
12. E ⊃(F • G)
F ⊃(G ⊃H)
E ⊃H
13.
#
A ⊃(N v Q)
(N v A)
A ⊃Q
14. G ⊃H
R ≡G
H v G
R ≡H
15. L ⊃M
M ⊃N
N ⊃L
L v N
16.
#
S ⊃T
S ⊃T
T ⊃S
S v T
17. W ⊃X
X ⊃W
X ⊃Y
Y ⊃X
W ≡Y
18. K ≡(L v M)
L ⊃M
M ⊃K
K v L
K ⊃L
19.
#
A ⊃B
(A • B) ⊃C
A ⊃(C ⊃D)
A ⊃D
20. A v R
(N • C)
R ⊃C
C ⊃N
A v C
6.5
Indirect Truth Tables
Indirect truth tables provide a shorter and faster method for testing the validity of
arguments than that provided by ordinary truth tables. This method is especially ap-

Indirect Truth Tables
339
S
N
L
plicable to arguments that contain a large number of different simple propositions.For
example, an argument containing ﬁve different simple propositions would require an
ordinary truth table having thirty-two lines. The indirect truth table for such an argu-
ment, on the other hand, would usually require only a single line and could be con-
structed in a fraction of the time required for the ordinary truth table.
Indirect truth tables can also be used to test a series of statements for consistency. In
Section 6.3 we showed how ordinary truth tables are used to test pairs of statements for
consistency and we noted that consistency was a relation that applied to any group of
propositions. In this section we use indirect truth tables to test groups of three, four, ﬁve,
and six propositions for consistency. Given the abbreviated nature of indirect truth tables,
this evaluation can usually be done much faster than it can with ordinary truth tables.
Testing Arguments for Validity
To construct an indirect truth table for an argument, we begin by assuming that the
argument is invalid. That is, we assume that it is possible for the premises to be true
and the conclusion false. Truth values corresponding to true premises and false con-
clusion are entered beneath the symbols corresponding to the premises and conclu-
sion. Then, working backward, the truth values of the separate components are
derived. If no contradiction is obtained in the process, this means that it is indeed
possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, as originally assumed,
so the argument is therefore invalid. If, however, the attempt to make the premises
true and the conclusion false leads to a contradiction, it is not possible for the premises
to be true and the conclusion false, in which case the argument is valid. Consider the
following symbolized argument:
A ⊃(B v C)
 B
C ⊃A
We begin as before by writing the symbolized argument on a single line, placing a
single slash between the premises and a double slash between the last premise and
the conclusion. Then we assign T to the premises and F to the conclusion, thus:
 A ⊃
T
(B v C )
/

T
B
/ /
C ⊃
F
A
We can now obtain the truth values of B, C, and A, as follows:
 A ⊃
T
(B v C )
/

T
B
F
/ /
C
T
⊃
F
A
F
These truth values are now transferred to the ﬁrst premise:

T
A
F
⊃
T
(B
F
v
T
C
T
)
/

T
B
F
/ /
C
T
⊃
F
A
F

340
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
We thus have a perfectly consistent assignment of truth values, which makes the
premises true and the conclusion false. The argument is therefore invalid. If an ordi-
nary truth table were constructed for this argument, it would be seen that the argument
fails on the line on which A is false, B is false, and C is true. This is the exact arrange-
ment presented in the indirect truth table above.
Here is another example. As always, we begin by assigning T to the premises and
F to the conclusion:
A ⊃
T
(B v C )
/
B ⊃
T
D
/
A
T
/ /  C ⊃
F
D
From the conclusion we can now obtain the truth values of C and D, which are then
transferred to the ﬁrst two premises:
A ⊃
T
(B v C
F
)
/
B ⊃
T
D
F
/
A
T
/ / 
T
C
F
⊃
F
D
F
The truth value of B is now obtained from the second premise and transferred, to-
gether with the truth value of A, to the ﬁrst premise:
A
T
⊃
T
(B
F
v
F
C
F
)
/
B
F
⊃
T
D
F
/
A
T
/ / 
T
C
F
⊃
F
D
F
A contradiction now appears in the truth values assigned to the ﬁrst premise, since
T ⊃F is F. The inconsistent truth values are circled. These results show that it is
impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false. The argument is
therefore valid.
Sometimes a single row of truth values is not sufﬁcient to prove an argument valid.
Example:
 A ⊃
T
B
/
B ⊃
T
A
/
A ⊃
T
 B
/ /
A •
F
 B
Since a conditional statement can be true in any one of three ways, and a conjunctive
statement can be false in any one of three ways, merely assigning truth to the premises
and falsity to the conclusion of this argument is not sufﬁcient to obtain the truth values
of any of the component statements. When faced with a situation such as this, we
must list all of the possible ways that one of the premises can be true or the conclusion
false, and proceed from there. If we list all of the possible ways the conclusion may
be false, we obtain the following:
 A ⊃B
/
B ⊃A
/
A ⊃ B
/ /
A •  B
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T

Indirect Truth Tables
341
S
N
L
Argument is
valid
Assume argument
invalid (true premises,
False conclusion)
Argument is
as assumed
(i.e., invalid)
No contradiction
Contradiction
Extending the truth values of A and B to the premises, we obtain the following result:
 A ⊃B
/
B ⊃A
/
A ⊃ B
/ /
A •  B
T
T
T T
F T
T F F T
T
F
T F
T
T
F F T F
T
T T
F
T
F F F T
Since a contradiction is obtained on each line, the argument is valid. If a contradiction
had not been obtained on every line, the argument would, of course, be invalid,
because it would be possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false.
Note that in this argument it is not necessary to ﬁll out all the truth values on any one
line to be forced into a contradiction. On each line the contradiction is obtained within
the context of a single premise.
If an indirect truth table requires more than one line, the method to be followed is
this. Either select one of the premises and compute all of the ways it can be made true,
or select the conclusion and compute all of the ways it can be made false. This
selection should be dictated by the requirement of simplicity. For example, if the
conclusion can be made false in only two ways, while each of the premises can be
made true in three ways, then select the conclusion. On the other hand, if one of the
premises can be made true in only two ways while the conclusion can be made false
in three ways, then select that premise. If neither of these situations prevails, then
select the conclusion.
Having made your selection, proceed to compute the truth values of each line,
beginning with the ﬁrst. If no contradiction is obtained on this line, stop! The argument
has been proved invalid. If a contradiction is obtained on the ﬁrst line, proceed to the
second line. If no contradiction is obtained on this line, then, again, the argument has
been proved invalid. If a contradiction is obtained, proceed to the third line, and so
on. Remember, the objective is to produce a line having no contradiction. Once such
a line is produced, the argument has been proved invalid, and no further work need
be done. If, on the other hand, a contradiction appears on every line, the argument
is valid.
Three ﬁnal points need to be made about indirect truth tables for arguments. First,
if a contradiction is obtained in the assignment of truth values, it is essential that every

342
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
step leading to it be logically implied by some prior step. In other words, the contra-
diction must be unavoidable. If a contradiction is obtained after truth values are as-
signed haphazardly or by guessing, then nothing has been proved. The objective is
not to produce a contradiction but to avoid one (if possible).
For example, in the following indirect truth table a contradiction is apparent in the
ﬁrst premise:
A ⊃B
/
C ⊃B
/ /
A ⊃C
T T F
F
T F
T
F
F
Yet the argument is invalid. The contradiction that appears is not required by the
assignment of truth to the premises and falsity to the conclusion. The following indi-
rect truth table, which is done correctly, proves the argument invalid:
A ⊃B
/
C ⊃B
/ /
A ⊃C
T T T
F
T T
T
F
F
The second point is that for valid arguments the order in which the truth values are
assigned may affect where the contradiction is obtained. That is, depending on the
order of assignment, the contradiction may appear in the ﬁrst premise, second prem-
ise, third premise, and so on. But, of course, the order of assignment does not affect
the ﬁnal determination of validity.
The last point is that it is essential that identical letters be assigned identical truth
values. For example, if the letter A appears three times in a certain symbolized argu-
ment and the truth value T is assigned to it in one occurrence, then the same truth
value must be assigned to it in the other occurrences as well. After the truth table has
been completed, each letter should be rechecked to ensure that one and the same
truth value has been assigned to its various occurrences.
Testing Statements for Consistency
The method for testing a series of statements for consistency is similar to the method
for testing arguments. We begin by writing the statements on a line, separating each
with a single slash mark. (Since we have no conclusion, we use no double slash
marks.) Then we assume that the statements are consistent. We assign a T to the main
operator of each, and we then compute the truth values of the components. If this
computation leads necessarily to a contradiction, the statements are not as we as-
sumed them to be. That is, they are inconsistent. But if no contradiction is reached,
the statements are consistent. Here is an example:
A v B
B ⊃(C v A)
C ⊃B
A

Indirect Truth Tables
343
S
N
L
Statements are
inconsistent
Assume statements
consistent (assume all
of them true)
Statements
are as assumed
(i.e., consistent)
No contradiction
Contradiction
First, we write the statements on a single line separated by a single slash mark; we
then assign T to each of the main operators:
A v B / B ⊃(C v A )
/
C ⊃ B /  A
T
T
T
T
The next step is to compute the truth values of the components. First we compute the
truth value of A. Next, we enter this truth value in the ﬁrst statement and compute the
truth value of B. Next, we enter the truth value of B in the second statement and
compute the truth value of C. Finally, the truth values of C and B are carried to the
third statement:
A v B
/
B ⊃(C v A )
/
C ⊃ B
/
 A
F T T
T T
T T F
T T
F T
T
F
Since this computation leads necessarily to a contradiction (third statement), the group
of statements is inconsistent.
Here is another example. The statements are written on a single line, and a T is
assigned to each of the main operators:
A ⊃(B • C )
/
C ⊃ A
/
B v A
/
B ⊃C
T
T
T
T
Since all of the statements can be true in three ways, we select one of them (the fourth)
and ﬁgure all of the ways it can be true:
A ⊃(B • C )
/
C ⊃ A
/
B v A
/
B ⊃C
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
Filling out the ﬁrst line leads to no contradiction, so the statements are consistent:
A ⊃(B • C )
/
C ⊃ A
/
B v A
/
B ⊃C
F
T
T T T
T T
T
F
T T F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F

344
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
As with testing arguments, the objective is to avoid a contradiction. As soon as no
contradiction is reached, we stop. The statements are consistent. Only if all three lines
had led to a contradiction would these statements be inconsistent.
EXERCISE 6.5
Use indirect truth tables to determine whether the following arguments are valid or
invalid:
1.
#
B ⊃C
C
B
2. E v F
E
F
3. P ⊃(Q • R)
R ⊃S
P ⊃S
4.
#
(I ≡J)
(I ⊃J)
5. W ⊃(X ⊃Y)
X ⊃(Y ⊃Z)
W ⊃(X ⊃Z)
6. A ⊃(B v C)
C ⊃(D • E)
B
A ⊃E
7.
#
G ⊃H
H ⊃I
J ⊃G
I
J
8. J ⊃(L ⊃K)
K ⊃(L ⊃M)
(L v M) ⊃N
J ⊃N
9. P • (Q v R)
(P • R) ⊃(S v T )
(S v T ) ⊃(P • Q)
S ≡T
10.
#
(M v N) ⊃O
O ⊃(N v P)
M ⊃(Q ⊃N)
(Q ⊃M) ⊃P
N ≡O
11. (A v B) ⊃(C • D)
(A v B) ⊃E
(C v D) ⊃E
12. F ⊃G
H v I
(G v I) ⊃J
J
(F v H)
13.
#
(A v B) ⊃(C • D)
(X v Y) ⊃(C • W )
(X v Z) ⊃(A • E)
X
14. G ⊃(H • I)
J ⊃H
K ⊃(L • M )
K v J
L • G
15. N v O
P v O
P ⊃Q
(N v Q) ⊃(R • S)
S ⊃(R ⊃T )
O ⊃(T ⊃U)
U

Argument Forms and Fallacies
345
S
N
L
II. Use indirect truth tables to determine whether the following groups of statements
are consistent or inconsistent.
1.
#
K ≡(R v M )
K • R
M ⊃K
2. F ≡(A • P)
A ⊃(P • S)
S ⊃F
A • F
3. (G v Q) ⊃(F v B)
(F v Q)
B ⊃N
(F v N) ⊃Q
4.
#
(N v C ) ≡E
N ⊃(C v H )
H ⊃E
C ⊃H
5. P v S
S v T
T v X
X v J
J v P
6. (Q v K ) ⊃C
(C • F) ⊃(N v L)
C ⊃(F • L)
Q • N
7.
#
S ⊃(R ≡A)
A ⊃(W • R)
R ≡(W v T )
S • U
U ⊃T
8. (E v H) ⊃(K • D)
D ⊃(M • B)
B ⊃E
(H v K)
D ⊃B
9. G ⊃P
P ⊃(A • G)
(R v T ) ⊃G
Y ⊃R
B ⊃T
Y v B
10.
#
A v Z
A ⊃(T • F)
Z ⊃(M • Q)
Q ⊃F
T ⊃M
M ⊃A
6.6
Argument Forms and Fallacies
Many of the arguments that occur in propositional logic have forms that bear speciﬁc
names and can be immediately recognized as either valid or invalid. The ﬁrst part of
this section presents some of the more common ones and explains how they are
recognized. The second part discusses ways of refuting two of these forms, construc-
tive and destructive dilemmas. Finally, the third part applies to real-life arguments
some of the principles developed in the ﬁrst part.

346
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
Common Argument Forms
An argument form is an arrangement of statement variables and operators such that
the uniform replacement of the variables by statements results in an argument. A valid
argument form is any argument form that satisﬁes the truth table test.
The ﬁrst valid argument form to consider is disjunctive syllogism, which is de-
ﬁned as follows:
disjunctive syllogism (DS):
p v q
p
q
The validity of this form can be easily checked by a truth table. Now, given that validity
is purely a function of the form of an argument, any argument produced by uniformly
substituting statements in place of the variables in this argument form is a valid argu-
ment. Such an argument is said to have the form of a disjunctive syllogism. The
following argument was produced in this way and is therefore valid:
Either Marcel Proust or Thomas Hardy
was British.
Marcel Proust was not British.
Therefore, Thomas Hardy was British.
M v T
M
T
The validity of a disjunctive syllogism arises from the fact that one of the premises
presents two alternatives and the other premise eliminates one of those alternatives,
leaving the other as the conclusion. This so-called ‘‘method of elimination’’ is essential
to the validity of a disjunctive syllogism. If one premise should present two alternatives
and the other premise should afﬁrm one of those alternatives, the argument is invalid
(unless the conclusion is a tautology). Example:
Either Charlotte Bronte or Harriet Beecher Stowe
was British.
Charlotte Bronte was British.
Therefore, Harriet Beecher Stowe was British.
C v H
C
H
Since Charlotte Bronte was British and Harriet Beecher Stowe was not British, the
premises are true and the conclusion is false. Thus, the argument is invalid. Even if the
conclusion of this argument were H, the argument would be invalid as translated.
Because the wedge symbol designates inclusive disjunction, the disjunctive premise
includes the possibility of both disjuncts being true. Thus for the argument to be valid,
the other premise must eliminate one of the disjuncts.
The next valid argument form to consider is pure hypothetical syllogism. It
consists of two premises and one conclusion, all of which are hypothetical (condi-
tional) statements, and is deﬁned as follows:

Argument Forms and Fallacies
347
S
N
L
pure hypothetical syllogism (HS):
p ⊃q
q ⊃r
p ⊃r
Any argument that has the form of a pure hypothetical syllogism (that is, any argument
that can be produced by uniformly substituting statements in place of the variables in
the form) is a valid argument. Example:
If world population continues to grow, then cities will
become hopelessly overcrowded.
W ⊃C
If cities become hopelessly overcrowded, then pollution
will become intolerable.
C ⊃P
Therefore, if world population continues to grow,
then pollution will become intolerable.
W ⊃P
The validity of a pure hypothetical syllogism is grounded in the fact that the prem-
ises link together like a chain. In the population argument, the consequent of the ﬁrst
premise is identical to the antecedent of the second. If the premises fail to link together
in this way, the argument may be invalid. Example:
If Napoleon was a man, then Napoleon was a human
being.
M ⊃H
If Napoleon was a woman, then Napoleon was a hu-
man being.
W ⊃H
Therefore, if Napoleon was a man, then Napoleon was
a woman.
M ⊃W
The premises of this argument are true, and the conclusion is false. Thus the argument
is invalid.
Another important valid argument form is called modus ponens (‘‘asserting
mode’’). It consists of a conditional premise, a second premise that asserts the antece-
dent of the conditional premise, and a conclusion that asserts the consequent:
modus ponens (MP):
p ⊃q
p
q
Any argument having the form of modus ponens is a valid argument. Example:
If twelve million children die yearly from starvation, then
something is wrong with food distribution.
T ⊃S
Twelve million children die yearly from starvation.
T
Therefore, something is wrong with food distribution.
S
Closely associated with modus ponens is modus tollens (‘‘denying mode’’). Modus
tollens is a valid argument form consisting of one conditional premise, a second

348
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
premise that denies the consequent of the conditional premise, and a conclusion that
denies the antecedent. It is deﬁned as follows:
modus tollens (MT):
p ⊃q
q
p
Modus tollens is a little harder to understand than modus ponens, but it can be under-
stood by the following reasoning process: The conclusion states that we do not have
p, and this is so, because if we did have p, then (by the ﬁrst premise) we would have
q, and we do not have q (by the second premise). Any argument that has the form of
modus tollens is a valid argument. Example:
If Japan cares about endangered species, then it has
stopped killing whales.
C ⊃S
Japan has not stopped killing whales.
S
Therefore, Japan does not care about endangered
species.
C
Two invalid forms are closely associated with modus ponens and modus tollens.
These are afﬁrming the consequent and denying the antecedent. Afﬁrming the
consequent consists of one conditional premise, a second premise that asserts the
consequent of the conditional, and a conclusion that asserts the antecedent:
afﬁrming the consequent (AC):
p ⊃q
q
p
Any argument that has the form of afﬁrming the consequent is an invalid argument.*
The following argument has this form and is therefore invalid:
If Napoleon was killed in a plane crash, then Napoleon is
dead.
K ⊃D
Napoleon is dead.
D
Therefore, Napoleon was killed in a plane crash.
K
Given that this argument has true premises and a false conclusion, it is clearly invalid.
Denying the antecedent consists of a conditional premise, a second premise that
denies the antecedent of the conditional, and a conclusion that denies the consequent:
denying the antecedent (DA):
p ⊃q
p
q
Any argument that has the form of denying the antecedent is an invalid argument.
Example:
*See ‘‘Note on Invalid Forms’’ later in this section.

Argument Forms and Fallacies
349
S
N
L
If Napoleon was killed in a plane crash, then Napoleon
is dead.
K ⊃D
Napoleon was not killed in a plane crash.
K
Therefore, Napoleon is not dead.
D
Again, this argument has true premises and a false conclusion, so it is clearly invalid.
A constructive dilemma is a valid argument form that consists of a conjunctive
premise made up of two conditional statements, a disjunctive premise that asserts the
antecedents in the conjunctive premise (like modus ponens), and a disjunctive conclu-
sion that asserts the consequents of the conjunctive premise. It is deﬁned as follows:
constructive dilemma (CD):
( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
p v r
q v s
Any argument that has the form of a constructive dilemma is a valid argument.
Example:
If we choose nuclear power, then we increase the risk
of a nuclear accident; but if we choose conventional
power, then we add to the greenhouse effect.
(N ⊃I ) • (C ⊃A)
We must choose either nuclear power or conven-
tional power.
N v C
Therefore, we either increase the risk of nuclear
accident or add to the greenhouse effect.
I v A
The destructive dilemma is also a valid argument form. It is similar to the con-
structive dilemma in that it includes a conjunctive premise made up of two conditional
statements and a disjunctive premise. However, the disjunctive premise denies the
consequents of the conditionals (like modus tollens), and the conclusion denies the
antecedents:
destructive dilemma (DD):
( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
q v s
p v r
Any argument that has the form of a destructive dilemma is a valid argument.
Example:
If we are to reverse the greenhouse effect, then we
must choose nuclear power; but if we are to
lower the risk of a nuclear accident, then we must
choose conventional power.
(R ⊃N ) • (L ⊃C )
We will either not choose nuclear power or not
choose conventional power.
N v C
Therefore, we will either not reverse the greenhouse
effect or not lower the risk of a nuclear accident.
R v L

350
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
Refuting Constructive and Destructive Dilemmas
Now that we are familiar with a number of argument forms in propositional logic, we
may return for a closer look at two of them, constructive and destructive dilemmas.
Arguments having these forms occur frequently in public debate, where they may be
used by an arguer to trap an opponent. Since both forms are valid, the only direct
mode of defense available to the opponent is to prove the dilemma unsound. This can
be done by proving at least one of the premises false. If the conjunctive premise
(otherwise called the ‘‘horns of the dilemma’’) is proven false, the opponent is said to
have ‘‘grasped the dilemma by the horns.’’ This, of course, may be done by proving
either one of the conditional statements false. If, on the other hand, the disjunctive
premise is proven false, the opponent is said to have ‘‘escaped between the horns of
the dilemma.’’ The latter strategy often involves ﬁnding a third alternative that ex-
cludes the two that are given in the disjunctive premise. If such a third alternative can
be found, both of the given disjuncts will be proved false. Consider the following
constructive dilemma:
If taxes increase, the economy will suffer, and if taxes decrease, needed govern-
mental services will be curtailed. Since taxes must either increase or decrease, it
follows that the economy will suffer or that needed governmental services will
be curtailed.
It is easy to escape between the horns of this dilemma by arguing that taxes could be
kept as they are, in which case they would neither increase nor decrease.
Grasping by the horns:
Prove the conjunctive
premise false by proving
either conjunct false
e.g.: ( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
T F
F
F
Escaping between the horns:
Prove the disjunctive
premise false
e.g.: p v r
F F F
Some dilemmas, however, do not allow for the possibility of escaping between the
horns. Consider the following constructive dilemma:
If we encourage competition, we will have no peace, and if we do not encourage
competition, we will make no progress. Since we must either encourage com-
petition or not encourage it, we will either have no peace or make no progress.
Since the disjunctive premise of this dilemma is a tautology, it cannot be proven false.
This leaves the strategy of grasping the dilemma by the horns, which may be done by

Argument Forms and Fallacies
351
S
N
L
proving either of the conditional statements in the conjunctive premise false. One
debater might want to attack the ﬁrst conditional and argue that competition andpeace
can coexist, while another might want to attack the second and argue that progress
can be achieved through some means other than encouraging competition.
The strategy to be followed in refuting a dilemma is therefore this: Examine the
disjunctive premise. If this premise is a tautology, attempt to grasp the dilemma by the
horns by attacking one or the other of the conditional statements in the conjunctive
premise. If the disjunctive premise is not a tautology, then either escape between the
horns by, perhaps, ﬁnding a third alternative, or grasp the dilemma by the horns—
whichever is easier.
A third, indirect strategy for refuting a dilemma involves constructing a counter-
dilemma. This is typically done by changing either the antecedents or the consequents
of the conjunctive premise while leaving the disjunctive premise as it is, so as to obtain
a different conclusion. If the dilemma in question is a constructive dilemma, the con-
sequents of the conjunctive premise are changed. Here are possible counterdilemmas
for the two dilemmas presented above:
If taxes increase, needed governmental services will be extended, and if taxes de-
crease, the economy will improve. Since taxes must either increase or decrease,
it follows that needed governmental services will be extended or the economy
will improve.
If we encourage competition, we will make progress, and if we do not encourage
competition, we will have peace. Since we must either encourage competition
or not encourage it, we will either make progress or have peace.
Constructing a counterdilemma does not accomplish a complete refutation of a given
dilemma because it merely shows that a different approach can be taken to a certain
problem. Nevertheless, this strategy is often quite effective because it testiﬁes to the
cleverness of the debater who can accomplish it successfully. In the heat of debate the
attending audience is often persuaded that the original argument has been thoroughly
demolished.
Note on Invalid Forms
Throughout this book we have seen that any substitution instance of a valid argument
form is a valid argument. For example, consider modus ponens:
p ⊃q
p
q
Literally any two statements uniformly substituted in the place of p and q will result in
a valid argument. Thus, the following symbolized arguments both have the form of
modus ponens, and are accordingly valid:

352
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
S ⊃T
S
T
(K v B) ⊃(N • R)
K v B
N • R
In the ﬁrst argument S and T are uniformly substituted in the place of p and q, and
in the second argument K v B and N • R are uniformly substituted in the place of
p and q.
However, this result does not extend to invalid argument forms. Consider, for ex-
ample, afﬁrming the consequent:
p ⊃q
q
p
Sometimes the uniform substitution of statements in the place of p and q results in an
invalid argument, and sometimes it does not. Both of the following symbolized argu-
ments are substitution instances of afﬁrming the consequent, but the one on the left is
invalid while the one on the right is valid:
G ⊃N
N
G
(F v D) ⊃(F • D)
F • D
F v D
To deal with this problem we adopt a convention about when an argument will be
said to have an invalid form. We will say that an argument has an invalid form if it is a
substitution instance of that form and it is not a substitution instance of any valid form.
According to this convention only the argument on the left has the form of afﬁrming
the consequent. The argument on the right does not have this form because it is a
substitution instance of the following valid form:
( p v q) ⊃( p • q)
p • q
p v q
The validity of this form results from the fact that the conclusion follows from the
second premise alone, without any involvement of the ﬁrst premise. This fact may be
easily checked with a truth table.
Here is another invalid form:
p ⊃q
r ⊃q
p ⊃r
Both of the following symbolized arguments are substitution instances of this form,
but only the one on the left is invalid:

Argument Forms and Fallacies
353
S
N
L
K ⊃L
R ⊃L
K ⊃R
C ⊃A
(C ⊃E ) ⊃A
C ⊃(C ⊃E )
The argument on the right is valid because its conclusion is a tautology. Accordingly,
only the argument on the left will be said to have the invalid form in question.
The point of this discussion is that when we attempt to determine the validity of
arguments through mere inspection, we have to exert caution with invalid forms. The
mere fact that an argument is a substitution instance of an invalid form does not
guarantee that it is invalid. Before judging it invalid we must make sure that it is not
valid for some other reason, such as its conclusion being a tautology. However, as
concerns the exercises at the end of this section, all of the arguments that are substi-
tution instances of invalid forms are invalid. In other words, none of them is like either
of the right-hand examples considered in these paragraphs.
Summary and Application
Any argument having one of the following forms is valid:
p v q
p
q
disjunctive
syllogism
(DS)
p ⊃q
q ⊃r
p ⊃r
pure hypothetical
syllogism (HS)
p ⊃q
p
q
modus ponens
(MP)
p ⊃q
q
p
modus tollens
(MT)
( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
p v r
q v s
constructive
dilemma
(CD)
( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
q v s
p v r
destructive
dilemma (DD)
Any argument having either of the following forms is invalid:
p ⊃q
q
p
afﬁrming the
consequent (AC)
p ⊃q
p
q
denying the
antecedent (DA)
In identifying arguments as having these argument forms, use the following proce-
dure. First symbolize the argument, using upper-case letters for the simple proposi-
tions. Then see whether the symbolized argument ﬁts the pattern of one of these
forms. In doing so, keep four points in mind. The ﬁrst is that the statement form p v q
is logically equivalent to q v p. This equivalence can be easily proved by a truth table,
and in the next chapter it will be expressed as a rule. As a result of this equivalence,
an argument having the form

354
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
A v B
B
A
may be reexpressed in the form
B v A
B
A
This second version has the form of disjunctive syllogism, and so the originalargument
may also be considered to be a disjunctive syllogism.
The second point is that negated letters, as well as non-negated letters, may be
interpreted as substitution instances of the p, q, r, and s in the argument forms. Con-
sider, for example, the following argument:
A ⊃B
A
B
When A is substituted in the place of p and B in the place of q, the above argument
will be seen to have the form of modus ponens.
The third point to remember is that the simple statement form p is logically equiv-
alent to p. Like the previous equivalence, this one will be expressed as a rule in
the next chapter, but if there is any doubt about it, it can be proved by a truth table. In
view of this equivalence, an argument having the form
A ⊃B
B
A
may be reexpressed as
A ⊃B
B
A
Now, when A is substituted in place of p and B in place of q, this argument will be
seen to have the form of modus tollens.
Finally, the fourth point is that the order of the premises does not affect the form of
an argument. Consider the following arguments:
A
B ⊃A
B
B ⊃C
A ⊃B
A ⊃C
The argument on the left is modus tollens, and the one on the right is pure hypothetical
syllogism.

Argument Forms and Fallacies
355
S
N
L
Here are some additional examples. In some cases the symbolized argument may
have to be reexpressed, using either or both of the just mentioned logical equiva-
lences, before it ﬁts the pattern of the argument form indicated in parentheses:
A ⊃B
B ⊃C
(HS)
A ⊃C
A ⊃B
B ⊃C
A ⊃C
invalid
A ⊃B
B
(MT)
A
A ⊃B
A
(DA—invalid)
B
A v B
A
(DS)
B
A v B
A
invalid
B
(A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
A v C
(CD)
B v D
(A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
B v D
invalid
A v C
A v B
B
(DS)
A
A ⊃B
B
(AC—invalid)
A
A
A ⊃B
(MP)
B
A v C
(A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
(CD)
B v D
Let us now see how the argument forms presented in this section can be used to
interpret the structure of some real-life arguments. Consider the following letter to the
editor of a newspaper:
If U.S. servicemen are indeed being held in Southeast Asia, what is the motivation
of their captors? No government there has asked for anything in return, as
might be expected if they were deliberately holding Americans.
(Norm Oshrin)
This argument is enthymematic; in other words, it is missing certain parts. The author
intends to prove that U.S. servicemen are not being held in Southeast Asia—because
if they were, their captors would be demanding something for their return. The argu-
ment can thus be structured as a modus tollens:
If U.S. servicemen are being held in Southeast Asia, then their captors have
demanded something for their return.
Their captors have not demanded something for their return.
Therefore, U.S. servicemen are not being held in Southeast Asia.
Here is another example:

356
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
In a time when an entire nation believes in Murphy’s law (that if anything can go
wrong, it surely will) and has witnessed serious accidents in the highly regu-
lated, supposedly fail-safe nuclear industry, it’s fascinating that people can per-
sist in the fantasy that an error will not occur in the area of nuclear weaponry.
(Burk Gossom, Newsweek)
Although this argument allows for more than one analysis, it is clear that the arguer
presents two main reasons why we can expect an accident in the area of nuclear
weaponry: ‘‘Murphy’s law’’ (which everyone believes to be true) dictates it, and acci-
dents have occurred in the area of nuclear power (which is presumed fail-safe). Thus,
at the very least, we can extract two modus ponens arguments from this selection:
If everyone believes Murphy’s law, then we can expect accidents in nuclear
weaponry.
Everyone believes Murphy’s law.
Therefore, we can expect accidents in nuclear weaponry.
If accidents have occurred in nuclear power, then we can expect accidents in nu-
clear weaponry.
Accidents have occurred in nuclear power.
Therefore, we can expect accidents in nuclear weaponry.
Many arguments that we encounter in ordinary life can be interpreted as instances
of valid argument forms. After being so interpreted, however, not all will turn out
sound. The invalid forms (denying the antecedent and afﬁrming the consequent)
should be reserved for the relatively few arguments that are clearly invalid as originally
expressed.
EXERCISE 6.6
I. Identify the forms of the following symbolized arguments. All of the ones without
a speciﬁc name are invalid. For these, write ‘‘invalid form.’’
1.
#
N ⊃C
C
N
2. S ⊃F
F ⊃L
S ⊃L
3. A v Z
Z
A
4.
#
(S ⊃P) • (S ⊃D)
S v S
P v D
5. N
N ⊃T
T
6. M v B
M
B
7.
#
(E ⊃N) • (L ⊃K)
N v K
E v L
8. W ⊃M
M
W

Argument Forms and Fallacies
357
S
N
L
9. B ⊃L
G ⊃B
G ⊃L
10.
#
F ⊃O
F
O
11. (K v B) • (N v Q)
K v N
B v Q
12. X ⊃E
X
E
13.
#
P v S
S
P
14. B • T
T
B
15. R v Q
(G ⊃Q) • (H ⊃R)
G v H
16.
#
G ⊃H
H
G
17. K ⊃C
C
K
18. (I ⊃M) • (O ⊃A)
O v I
M v A
19.
#
X ⊃F
W ⊃F
W ⊃X
20. L ⊃U
L
U
II. Identify the forms of the following arguments. All of the ones without a speciﬁc
name are invalid. For these write ‘‘invalid form.’’
1.
#
Future presidents will be allowed to serve a third term only if the Twenty-
second Amendment is repealed. The Twenty-second Amendment will not be
repealed. Therefore, future presidents will not be allowed to serve a third
term.
2. If Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, then he was familiar
with stories from the Old Testament. Michelangelo was familiar with stories
from the Old Testament. Therefore, Michelangelo painted the ceiling of the
Sistine Chapel.
3. If you enter the teaching profession, you will have no money for vacations;
and if you do not enter the teaching profession, you will have no time for
vacations. Since you must either enter or not enter the teaching profession, it
follows that either you will have no money or no time for vacations.
4.
#
Either the wealthiest people are the happiest, or it is not the case that money
can buy everything. The wealthiest people are not the happiest. Therefore,
money cannot buy everything.
5. Either tortured political prisoners in Turkey can openly complain of their
mistreatment or Turkey is not a democracy. Tortured political prisoners in
Turkey can openly complain of their mistreatment. Therefore, Turkey is a
democracy.

358
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
6. If the sun is a variable star, then its energy will drop drastically at some point
in the future. If the sun’s energy drops drastically at some point in the future,
then the earth will become a giant iceball. Therefore, if the sun is a variable
star, then the earth will become a giant iceball.
7.
#
Twenty percent of America’s children have never seen a dentist. But if that is
so, health care in America is not properly distributed. Therefore, health care
in America is not properly distributed.
8. If TV viewing provides genuine relaxation, then TV enhances the quality of
life. But TV viewing does not provide genuine relaxation. Therefore, TV does
not enhance the quality of life.
9. If high school clinics are to stem the tide of teenage pregnancy, then they
must dispense birth control devices; but if they want to discourage illicit sex,
then they must not dispense these devices. Since high school clinics must
either dispense or not dispense birth control devices, either they will not stem
the tide of teenage pregnancy, or they will not discourage illicit sex.
10.
#
If limits are imposed on medical malpractice suits, then patients will not be
adequately compensated for their injuries; but if the cost of malpractice insur-
ance continues to rise, then physicians will be forced out of business. Limits
will not be imposed, and the cost of malpractice insurance will not continue
to rise. Therefore, patients will be adequately compensated and physicians
will not be forced out of business.
11. If Prohibition succeeded in the 1920s, then the war on drugs will succeed in
the 1990s. But Prohibition did not succeed in the 1920s. Therefore, the war
on drugs will not succeed in the 1990s.
12. If life is always better than death, then people do not commit suicide. People
do commit suicide. Therefore, life is not always better than death.
13.
#
If we want to prevent foreign subsidies and dumping, then we must have
tariffs and quotas; but if we want to avoid an international trade war, then we
must have no tariffs or quotas. Since we must either have tariffs and quotas
or not have them, we will either have foreign subsidies and dumping or an
international trade war.
14. Either industrial pollutants will be more stringently controlled, or acid rain
will continue to fall. Industrial pollutants will be more stringently controlled.
Therefore, acid rain will not continue to fall.
15. Insurance companies contribute millions of dollars to political campaigns.
But if that is so, then meaningful insurance reform is impossible. Therefore,
meaningful insurance reform is impossible.
16.
#
If Mexico does not get its population growth under control, then its unem-
ployment problem will never be solved. Mexico’s unemployment problem
will never be solved. Therefore, Mexico will not get its population growth
under control.

Argument Forms and Fallacies
359
S
N
L
17. Either the dinosaurs were not cold-blooded or they were not the ancestors of
modern birds. The dinosaurs were the ancestors of modern birds. Therefore,
the dinosaurs were not cold-blooded.
18. If coal burning continues, then heavy metals will be released into the atmo-
sphere. If heavy metals are not released into the atmosphere, then nervous
system damage will decrease. Therefore, if coal burning does not continue,
then nervous system damage will decrease.
19.
#
If sea levels rise twenty feet worldwide, then coastal cities from New York to
Sydney will be inundated. If the ice sheets on Antarctica slip into the sea, then
sea levels will rise twenty feet worldwide. Therefore, if the ice sheets on
Antarctica slip into the sea, then coastal cities from New York to Sydney will
be inundated.
20. If tax credits are given for private education, then the government will be
supporting religion; but if tax credits are not given for private education, then
some parents will end up paying double tuition. Either tax credits will or will
not be given for private education. Therefore, either the government will be
supporting religion, or some parents will end up paying double tuition.
III. Identify the following dilemmas as either constructive or destructive. Then sug-
gest a refutation for each by either escaping between the horns, grasping by the
horns, or constructing a counterdilemma.
1.
#
If Melinda spends the night studying, she will miss the party; but if she does
not spend the night studying, she will fail the test tomorrow. Melinda must
either spend the night studying or not studying. Therefore, she will either
miss the party or fail the test.
2. If we build our home in the valley, it will be struck by ﬂoods; and if we build
it on the hilltop, it will be hit by lightning. Since we must either build it in the
valley or on the hilltop, our home will either be struck by ﬂoods or hit by
lightning.
3. If psychotherapists respect their clients’ right to conﬁdentiality, then they will
not report child abusers to the authorities; but if they have any concern for
the welfare of children, then they will report them. Psychotherapists must
either report or not report child abusers to the authorities. Therefore, psycho-
therapists either have no respect for their clients’ right to conﬁdentiality or no
concern for the welfare of children.
4.
#
If corporations are to remain competitive, then they must not spend money
to neutralize their toxic waste; but if the environment is to be preserved, then
corporations must spend money to neutralize their toxic waste. Corporations
either will or will not spend money to neutralize their toxic waste. Therefore,
either they will not remain competitive, or the environment will be destroyed.
5. If physicians pull the plug on terminally ill patients, then they risk being
charged with murder; but if they do not pull the plug, they prolong their

360
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
patients’ pain and suffering. Since physicians with terminally ill patients must
do one or the other, either they risk being charged with murder or they
prolong their patients’ pain and suffering.
6. If the Mitchels get a divorce, they will live separately in poverty; but if they
stay married, they will live together in misery. Since they must either get a
divorce or stay married, they will either live separately in poverty or together
in misery.
7.
#
If college students want courses that are interesting and rewarding, then they
must major in liberal arts; but if they want a job when they graduate, then
they must major in business. College students will either not major in liberal
arts, or they will not major in business. Therefore, either they will not take
courses that are interesting and rewarding, or they will not have a job when
they graduate.
8. If merchants arrest suspected shoplifters, then they risk false imprisonment;
but if they do not arrest them, they risk loss of merchandise. Merchants must
either arrest or not arrest suspected shoplifters. Therefore, they will either risk
false imprisonment or loss of merchandise.
9. If women threatened with rape want to avoid being maimed or killed, then
they must not resist their assaulter; but if they want to ensure successful
prosecution of the assailant, they must resist him. Since women threatened
with rape must do one or the other, either they will risk being maimed or
killed or they will jeopardize successful prosecution of the assailant.
10.
#
If we prosecute suspected terrorists, then we risk retaliation by other terror-
ists; but if we release them, then we encourage terrorism. Since we must
either prosecute or release suspected terrorists, we either risk retaliation by
other terrorists or we encourage terrorism.
IV. The following selections were taken from letters to the editor of newspapers. Each
contains one or more arguments, but the exact form of the argument may be
hidden or ambiguous. Use the argument forms presented in this section to struc-
ture the selections as speciﬁcally named arguments.
1.
#
Anyone who is wondering how well Oral Roberts receives messages from
God will be interested in our experience. Two weeks after my mother died, a
letter came from Oral Roberts saying God had told him to write to her that
day and ask for money! It makes one wonder.
(Hazel Woodsmall)
2. OK, I’ve tried it for a week again this year, but I still don’t like daylight-saving
time. My grass is brown enough already—it doesn’t need another hour of
daylight each day. Let’s turn the clocks back to the way God intended—
standard time.
( Jim Orr)

Argument Forms and Fallacies
361
S
N
L
3. The religious right, in its impassioned fervor to correct our alleged moral
wrongs and protect the rights of our unborn ‘‘children,’’ may one day realize
its ultimate goal of a constitutional amendment banning abortion. And what
will the punishment be for those caught performing or receiving an abortion?
The death penalty, of course.
(David Fisher)
4.
#
Most educators believe math instructors ought to emphasize group problem
solving. If group problem solving is so important (and I think it is), why do
we place such emphasis on individual testing? The national math test is a
mistake.
(Frederick C. Thayer)
5. If voluntary school prayer for our children is going to make them more moral,
then just think what mandatory church attendance on Sunday could do for
the rest of us.
(Roderick M. Boyes)
6. A country that replaces the diseased hearts of old white men but refuses to
feed schoolchildren, pay women adequately, educate adolescents, or care for
the elderly—that country is doomed. We are acting as if there is no tomorrow.
Where is our shame?
(Robert Birch)
7.
#
We cannot afford to close the library at Central Juvenile Hall. These young
people in particular need to have access to ideas, dreams, and alternative
ways of living. It can make the difference for many students who might be-
come interested in reading for the ﬁrst time in their lives while in Juvenile
Hall.
(Natalie S. Field)
8. If the death penalty deters one person from becoming a murderer, it is ef-
fective. There are also some other important reasons for having the death
penalty. First, the families and friends of innocent victims have the right to
see effective retribution. Second, terminating the life of a killer is more
economical than keeping him in jail at the taxpayer’s expense. Third, every-
one will have greater respect for the judicial system when justice is car-
ried out.
(Doug Kroker)
9. Regarding the bill to require parental consent for a minor’s abortion, I would
like to point out that the pious platitudes about parental authority quickly fall
by the wayside when the minor wants to keep the baby and the parents say,
‘‘Don’t be silly! You have an abortion and ﬁnish your education.’’ If theparents
can veto a minor’s abortion, shouldn’t they also be able to require one? Better
the choice, either pro or con, be left to the girl/woman herself.
( Jane Roberts)

362
Chapter 6: Propositional Logic
10.
#
More than a million adult videocassettes are rented each week. Nor, as the
propagandists would have you believe, does viewing such material lead to
violent sex crimes. If it did, there would be over one million such crimes
per week.
(Lybrand P. Smith)
Summary
Propositional logic is characterized by the fact that the fundamental units are whole
statements. Simple statements, represented by capital letters, are combined through
the use of logical operators to form compound statements. The ﬁve operators are the
tilde, which is used to form negations; the dot, which forms conjunctions; the wedge,
which forms disjunctions; the horseshoe, which forms conditional statements; and the
triple bar, which forms biconditional statements. These operators roughly translate the
English words ‘‘not,’’ ‘‘and,’’ ‘‘or,’’ ‘‘if . . . then . . . ,’’ and ‘‘if and only if,’’ respectively.
The truth functional meaning of the logical operators is deﬁned in terms of truth
tables. A truth table is an arrangement of truth values that shows in every possible case
how the truth value of a compound statement is determined by the truth value of its
simple components. The truth value of longer statements is computed by assigning
truth values to the simple components and then working outward to the larger ones.
The meaning of statements symbolized in terms of the logical operators conforms
fairly closely to that of English statements, but it occasionally breaks down, especially
with conditional and biconditional statements.
Truth tables can be used to classify individual compound statements and to com-
pare one compound statement with another. A compound statement is tautologous if
the truth values under the main operator are all true, it is self-contradictory if they are
all false, and it is contingent if at least one is true and at least one is false. Two
statements are logically equivalent if the truth values under the main operators are the
same on each line, and they are contradictory if they are the opposite on each line.
Two or more statements are consistent if there is at least one line under the main
operators where all of the truth values are true, and they are inconsistent if there is no
such line.
Arguments may be tested for validity using either ordinary truth tables or indirect
truth tables. For the ordinary method, if there is a line on which the premises turn out
true and the conclusion false, the argument is invalid; if not, the argument is valid. The
indirect method begins by assuming the premises true and the conclusion false. If this
assumption leads necessarily to a contradiction, the argument is valid; if not, it is
invalid. To use the indirect method to test a series of statements for consistency, the
statements are assumed to be true. If this assumption leads necessarily to a contradic-
tion, the statements are inconsistent; if not, they are consistent.
Once an argument is symbolized, mere inspection will often determine whether it
is valid or invalid. This determination is facilitated by a familiarity with a few common

Argument Forms and Fallacies
363
S
N
L
argument forms. Six such forms that are valid are disjunctive syllogism, pure hypo-
thetical syllogism, modus ponens, modus tollens, constructive dilemma, and destruc-
tive dilemma. Two common invalid forms are afﬁrming the consequent and denying
the antecedent. A dilemma expressed in ordinary language may be refuted by proving
it unsound. Two methods are grasping the dilemma by the horns and escaping be-
tween the horns. A third method, which falls short of strict refutation, is constructing
a counterdilemma.


          
7
Natural Deduction in
Propositional Logic
7.1
Rules of Implication I
Natural deduction is a method for establishing the validity of propositional type
arguments that is both simpler and more enlightening than the method of truth tables.
By means of this method, the conclusion of an argument is actually derived from the
premises through a series of discrete steps. In this respect natural deductionresembles
the method used in geometry to derive theorems relating to lines and ﬁgures; but
whereas each step in a geometrical proof depends on some mathematical principle,
each step in a logical proof depends on a rule of inference. Eighteen rules of infer-
ence will be set forth in this chapter. The ﬁrst four should be familiar from the previous
chapter:
1. Modus ponens (MP):
p ⊃q
p
q
3. Hypothetical syllogism (HS):
p ⊃q
q ⊃r
p ⊃r
2. Modus tollens (MT):
p ⊃q
q
p
4. Disjunctive syllogism (DS):
p v q
p
q
In constructing proofs, modus ponens and modus tollens are used to ‘‘break up’’
conditional statements. Modus ponens allows us to assert the consequent of the con-
ditional on a line by itself, and modus tollens allows us to assert the negation of the
antecedent. Hypothetical syllogism, on the other hand, is used to ‘‘produce’’ a condi-
tional statement from two other conditionals. Finally, disjunctive syllogism is used to
break up a disjunctive statement. It allows us to assert the right-hand disjunct on a line
by itself.

Rules of Implication I
365
S
N
L
These four rules will be sufﬁcient to derive the conclusion of many simple argu-
ments in propositional logic. Further, once we are supplied with all eighteen rules
together with conditional proof, the resulting system will be sufﬁcient to derive the
conclusion of any valid argument in propositional logic. Conversely, since each rule is
a valid argument form unto itself, any conclusion derived from their correct use results
in a valid argument. The method of natural deduction is thus equal in power to the
truth table method as far as proving validity is concerned. However, since natural
deduction cannot be used with any facility to prove invalidity, we still need the truth
table method for that purpose.
A proof in natural deduction consists of a sequence of propositions, each of which
is either a premise or is derived from preceding propositions by application of a rule
of inference and the last of which is the conclusion of the original argument. For an
example of how the rules of inference are used in constructing such a proof, consider
the following argument:
If the Astros win the playoff, then the Braves will lose the pennant. If the Astros do
not win the playoff, then either Connolly or Davis will be ﬁred. The Braves will
not lose the pennant. Furthermore, Connolly will not be ﬁred. Therefore, Davis
will be ﬁred.
The ﬁrst step is to symbolize the argument, numbering the premises and writing the
conclusion to the right of the last premise, separated by a slash mark:
1. A ⊃B
2. A ⊃(C v D)
3. B
4. C
/ D
The conclusion is now derived from the premises via steps 5 through 7. The justiﬁca-
tion for each line is written to the immediate right:
5. A
1, 3, MT
6. C v D
2, 5, MP
7. D
4, 6, DS
Line 5 is obtained from lines 1 and 3 via modus tollens. In other words, when A and B
in these lines are substituted respectively for the p and q of the modus tollens rule, line
5 follows as the conclusion. Then, when A and C v D in lines 2 and 5 are substituted
respectively for the p and q of the modus ponens rule, line 6 follows as the conclusion.
Finally, when C and D in lines 4 and 6 are substituted respectively for the p and q of
the disjunctive syllogism rule, line 7 follows as the ﬁnal conclusion. These lines con-
stitute a valid derivation of the conclusion from the premises because each line is a
substitution instance of a valid argument form.

366
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
These arguments are all instances of modus ponens (MP)
F ⊃(G ≡H)
F
G ≡H
(A v B) ⊃(C • D)
A v B
(C • D)
K • L
(K • L) ⊃[(R ⊃S) • (T ⊃U)]
(R ⊃S) • (T ⊃U)
Here is an example of another completed proof. The conclusion to be obtained is
written to the right of the last premise (line 4). Lines 5 through 7 are used to derive the
conclusion:
1. F ⊃G
2. F v H
3. G
4. H ⊃(G ⊃I)
/ F ⊃I
5. F
1, 3, MT
6. H
2, 5, DS
7. G ⊃I
4, 6, MP
8. F ⊃I
1, 7, HS
When the letters in lines 1 and 3 are substituted into the modus tollens rule, line 5 is
obtained. Then, when the letters in lines 2 and 5 are substituted into the disjunctive
syllogism rule, line 6 is obtained. Line 7 is obtained by substituting H and G ⊃I from
lines 4 and 6 into the modus ponens rule. Finally, line 8 is obtained by substituting the
letters in lines 1 and 7 into the hypothetical syllogism rule. Notice that the conclusion,
stated to the right of line 4, is not (and never is) part of the proof. It merely indicates
what the proof is supposed to yield in the end.
These arguments are all instances of modus tollens (MT)
(D v F ) ⊃K
K
(D v F )
G ⊃(M v N )
(M v N )
G
T
[(H v K ) • (L v N )] ⊃T
[(H v K ) • (L v N )]
The successful use of natural deduction to derive a conclusion from one or more
premises depends on the ability of the reasoner to visualize more or less complex
arrangements of simple propositions as instances of the basic rules of inference. Here
is a slightly more complex example:
1. (A • B) v [(E • F ) ⊃(C ⊃D)]
2. (A • B)
3. (E • F )

Rules of Implication I
367
S
N
L
4. D ⊃G
/ C ⊃G
5. (E • F ) ⊃(C ⊃D)
1, 2, DS
6. C ⊃D
3, 5, MP
7. C ⊃G
4, 6, HS
Line 4 is the last premise. To obtain line 5, (A • B) and [(E • F) ⊃(C ⊃D)]
are substituted respectively for the p and q of the disjunctive syllogism rule, yielding
[(E • F) ⊃(C ⊃D)] as the conclusion. Next, (E • F) and C ⊃D are substituted
respectively for the p and q of modus ponens, yielding C ⊃D on line 6. Finally, lines 6
and 4 are combined to yield line 7 via the hypothetical syllogism rule.
These arguments are all instances of pure hypothetical syllogism (HS)
A ⊃(D • F )
(D • F ) ⊃H
A ⊃H
M ⊃(R ⊃S)
(C v K ) ⊃M
(C v K ) ⊃(R ⊃S)
(L ⊃N ) ⊃[(S v T ) • K ]
(C ≡F ) ⊃(L ⊃N )
(C ≡F ) ⊃[(S v T ) • K ]
The proofs that we have investigated thus far have been presented in ready-made
form. We turn now to the question of how the various lines are obtained, leading in the
end to the conclusion. What strategy is used in deriving these lines? While the answer
is somewhat complex, there are a few basic rules of thumb that should be followed.
Always begin by looking at the conclusion and by then attempting to locate the con-
clusion in the premises. Let us suppose that the conclusion is a single letter L. We
begin by looking for L in the premises. Let us suppose we ﬁnd it in a premise that reads:
K ⊃L
Immediately we see that we can obtain L via modus ponens if we ﬁrst obtain K. We
now begin searching for K. Let us suppose that we ﬁnd K in another premise that reads
J v K
From this we see that we could obtain K via disjunctive syllogism if we ﬁrst obtain J.
The process continues until we isolate the required statement on a line by itself. Let us
suppose that we ﬁnd J on a line by itself. The thought process is then complete, and
the various steps may be written out in the reverse order in which they were obtained
mentally. The proof would look like this:
1. J
2. J v K
3. K ⊃L
/ L
4. K
1, 2, DS
5. L
3, 4, MP

368
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
These arguments are all instances of disjunctive syllogism (DS)
U v (W • X )
U
(W • X )
(E v F )
(E v F ) v (N ⊃K )
N ⊃K
B v [(H ⊃M) • (S ⊃T )]
B
(H ⊃M) • (S ⊃T )
Turning now to a different example, let us suppose that the conclusion is the
conditional statement R ⊃U. We begin by attempting to locate R ⊃U in the premises.
If we cannot ﬁnd it, we look for its separate components, R and U. Let us suppose we
ﬁnd R in the antecedent of the conditional statement:
R ⊃S
Furthermore, let us suppose we ﬁnd U in the consequent of the conditional statement:
T ⊃U
We then see that we can obtain R ⊃U via a series of hypothetical syllogism steps if we
ﬁrst obtain S ⊃T. Let us suppose that we ﬁnd S ⊃T on a line by itself. The proof has
now been completely thought through and may be written out as follows:
1. S ⊃T
2. T ⊃U
3. R ⊃S
/ R ⊃U
4. R ⊃T
1, 3, HS
5. R ⊃U
2, 4, HS
At this point a word of caution is in order about the meaning of a proposition
being ‘‘obtained.’’ Let us suppose that we are searching for E and we ﬁnd it in a
premise that reads E ⊃F. The mere fact that we have located the letter E in this line
does not mean that we have obtained E. E ⊃F means that if we have E, then we have
F; it does not mean that we have either E or F. From such a line we could obtain F
(via modus ponens) if we ﬁrst obtain E, or we could obtain E (via modus tollens) if
we ﬁrst obtain F. The proposition E ⊃F by itself gives us nothing, and even if we
combine it with other lines, there is no way that we could ever obtain E from such
a line.
Here is a sample argument:
1. A v B
2. C ⊃A
3. C ⊃D
4. D
/ B
We begin by searching for B in the premises. Finding it in line 1, we see that it can be
obtained via disjunctive syllogism if we ﬁrst obtain A. This in turn can be gotten

Rules of Implication I
369
S
N
L
from line 2 via modus ponens if we ﬁrst obtain C, and this can be gotten from line 3
via modus tollens once D is obtained. Happily, the latter is stated by itself on line 4.
The proof has now been completely thought through and can be written out as
follows:
1. A v B
2. C ⊃A
3. C ⊃D
4. D
/ B
5. C
3, 4, MT
6. A
2, 5, MP
7. B
1, 6, DS
Another example:
1. E ⊃(K ⊃L)
2. F ⊃(L ⊃M)
3. G v E
4. G
5. F
/ K ⊃M
We begin by searching for K ⊃M in the premises. Not ﬁnding it, we search for the
separate components, K and M, and locate them in lines 1 and 2. The fact that K
appears in the antecedent of a conditional statement, and M in the consequent of
another, immediately suggests hypothetical syllogism. But ﬁrst we must obtain these
conditional statements on lines by themselves. We can obtain K ⊃L via modus ponens
if we ﬁrst obtain E. This, in turn, we can obtain from line 3 via disjunctive syllogism if
we ﬁrst obtain G. Since G appears by itself on line 4, the ﬁrst part of the thought
process is now complete. The second part requires that we obtain L ⊃M. This we can
get from line 2 via modus ponens if we can get F, and we do have F by itself on line 5.
All of the steps leading to the conclusion have now been thought through, and the
proof can be written out:
1. E ⊃(K ⊃L)
2. F ⊃(L ⊃M)
3. G v E
4. G
5. F
/ K ⊃M
6. E
3, 4, DS
7. K ⊃L
1, 6, MP
8. L ⊃M
2, 5, MP
9. K ⊃M
7, 8, HS
The thought process behind these proofs illustrates an important point about the
construction of proofs by natural deduction. Ideally, we should never write down a

370
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
line in a proof unless we know why we are doing it and where it leads. Typically,
good proofs are not produced haphazardly or by luck; rather, they are produced by
organized logical thinking. Occasionally, of course, we may be bafﬂed by an especially
difﬁcult proof, and random deductive steps noted on the side may be useful. But we
should not commence the actual writing out of the proof until we have used logical
thinking to discover the path leading to the conclusion.
We end this section with some strategies for applying the ﬁrst four rules of
inference:
Strategy 1: Always begin by attempting to ‘‘ﬁnd’’ the conclusion in the premises.
Strategy 2: If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in the consequent of a
conditional statement in the premises, consider obtaining that letter via
modus ponens:
1. A ⊃B
2. C v A
3. A
4. B
/ B
1, 3, MP
Strategy 3: If the conclusion contains a negated letter and that appears in the ante-
cedent of a conditional statement in the premises, consider obtaining the
negated letter via modus tollens:
1. C ⊃B
2. A ⊃B
3. B
4. A
/ A
2, 3, MT
Strategy 4: If the conclusion is a conditional statement, consider obtaining it via hy-
pothetical syllogism:
1. B ⊃C
2. C ⊃A
3. A ⊃B
4. A ⊃C
/ A ⊃C
1, 3, HS
Strategy 5: If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in a disjunctive statement
in the premises, consider obtaining that letter via disjunctive syllogism:
1. A ⊃B
2. A v C
3. A
4. C
/ C
2, 3, DS
Of course, these strategies apply to obtaining any line prior to the conclusion, just
as they apply to obtaining the conclusion.

Rules of Implication I
371
S
N
L
EXERCISE 7.1
I. Supply the required justiﬁcation for the derived steps in the following proofs. No
justiﬁcation, of course, is required for the premises. The last premise is always the
line adjacent to the required conclusion.
(1)
#
1. J ⊃(K ⊃L)
2. L v J
3. L
/ K
4. J
5. K ⊃L
6. K
(2) 1. (S ≡T ) ⊃(P ⊃Q)
2. (S ≡T ) ⊃P
3. P
/ Q
4. (S ≡T )
5. P ⊃Q
6. Q
(3) 1. A ⊃(B ⊃C)
2. D ⊃(C ⊃A)
3. D v A
4. D
/ B
5. A
6. B ⊃C
7. C ⊃A
8. B ⊃A
9. B
(4)
#
1. G ⊃[G v (S ⊃G)]
2. (S v L) ⊃G
3. S v L
/ L
4. G
5. G v (S ⊃G)
6. S ⊃G
7. S
8. L
(5) 1. H ⊃[E ⊃(C ⊃D)]
2. D ⊃E
3. E v H
4. E
/ C
5. H
6. E ⊃(C ⊃D)
7. C ⊃D
8. C ⊃E
9. C

372
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
II. Use the ﬁrst four rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following
symbolized arguments:
(1)
#
1. (D • E) v (B ⊃P)
2. (D • E)
/ B ⊃P
(2) 1. (K • O) ⊃(N v T )
2. K • O
/ N v T
(3) 1. (M v P) ⊃K
2. D ⊃(M v P)
/ D ⊃K
(4)
#
1. (R v W)
2. S ⊃(R v W)
/ S
(5) 1. C ⊃(A ⊃C)
2. C
/ A
(6) 1. F v (D ⊃T )
2. F
3. D
/ T
(7)
#
1. (K • B) v (L ⊃E)
2. (K • B)
3. E
/ L
(8) 1. P ⊃(G ⊃T )
2. Q ⊃(T ⊃E)
3. P
4. Q
/ G ⊃E
(9) 1. W ⊃[W ⊃(X ⊃W)]
2. W
/ X
(10)
#
1. S ⊃D
2. S v (D ⊃K)
3. D
/ K
(11) 1. A ⊃(E ⊃F)
2. H v (F ⊃M)
3. A
4. H
/ E ⊃M
(12) 1. N ⊃(J ⊃P)
2. ( J ⊃P) ⊃(N ⊃J)
3. N
/ P
(13)
#
1. G ⊃[O ⊃(G ⊃D)]
2. O v G
3. O
/ D
(14) 1. M v (B v T )
2. B ⊃W
3. M
4. W
/ T
(15) 1. (L ≡N) ⊃C
2. (L ≡N) v (P ⊃E)
3. E ⊃C
4. C
/ P
(16)
#
1. J ⊃[A ⊃(D ⊃A)]
2. J v A
3. J
/ D
(17) 1. (B ⊃M) ⊃(T ⊃S)
2. B ⊃K
3. K ⊃M
4. S ⊃N
/ T ⊃N
(18) 1. (R ⊃F) ⊃[(R ⊃G) ⊃(S ⊃Q)]
2. (Q ⊃F) ⊃(R ⊃Q)
3. G ⊃F
4. Q ⊃G
/ S ⊃F
(19)
#
1. A ⊃[A v (T ⊃R)]
2. R ⊃[R v (A ⊃R)]
3. (T v D) ⊃R
4. T v D
/ D
(20) 1. N ⊃[(B ⊃D) ⊃(N v E)]
2. (B ⊃E) ⊃N
3. B ⊃D
4. D ⊃E
/ D
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the ﬁrst four rules
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. The letters to be used for the simple
statements are given in parentheses after each exercise. Use these letters in the
order in which they are listed.

Rules of Implication I
373
S
N
L
1.
#
If the average child watches more than ﬁve hours of television per day, then
either his power of imagination is improved or he becomes conditioned to
expect constant excitement. The average child’s power of imagination is not
improved by watching television. Also, the average child does watch more
than ﬁve hours of television per day. Therefore, the average child is condi-
tioned to expect constant excitement. (W, P, C)
2. If a tenth planet exists, then its orbit is perpendicular to that of the other
planets. Either a tenth planet is responsible for the death of the dinosaurs, or
its orbit is not perpendicular to that of the other planets. A tenth planet is not
responsible for the death of the dinosaurs. Therefore, a tenth planet does not
exist. (E, O, R)
3. If quotas are imposed on textile imports only if jobs are not lost, then the
domestic textile industry will modernize only if the domestic textile industry
is not destroyed. If quotas are imposed on textile imports, the domestic textile
industry will modernize. The domestic textile industry will modernize only if
jobs are not lost. Therefore, if quotas are imposed on textile imports, the
domestic textile industry will not be destroyed. (Q, J, M, D)
4.
#
If teachers are allowed to conduct random drug searches on students only if
teachers are acting in loco parentis, then if teachers are acting in loco paren-
tis, then students have no Fourth Amendment protections. Either students
have no Fourth Amendment protections or if teachers are allowed to conduct
random drug searches on students, then teachers are acting in loco parentis.
It is not the case that students have no Fourth Amendment protections.There-
fore, teachers are not allowed to conduct random drug searches on students.
(R, L, F)
5. Either funding for nuclear fusion will be cut or if sufﬁciently high tempera-
tures are achieved in the laboratory, nuclear fusion will become a reality.
Either the supply of hydrogen fuel is limited, or if nuclear fusion becomes a
reality, the world’s energy problems will be solved. Funding for nuclearfusion
will not be cut. Furthermore, the supply of hydrogen fuel is not limited.
Therefore, if sufﬁciently high temperatures are achieved in the laboratory, the
world’s energy problems will be solved. (C, H, R, S, E)
6. Either the continents are not subject to drift or if Antarctica was always located
in the polar region, then it contains no fossils of plants from a temperate
climate. If the continents are not subject to drift, then Antarctica contains no
fossils of plants from a temperate climate. But it is not the case that Antarctica
contains no fossils of plants from a temperate climate. Therefore, Antarctica
was not always located in the polar region. (D, L, F)
7.
#
If terrorists take more hostages, then terrorist demands will be met if and only
if the media give full coverage to terrorist acts. Either the media will voluntarily

374
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
limit the ﬂow of information or if the media will recognize they are being
exploited by terrorists, they will voluntarily limit the ﬂow of information.
Either the media will recognize they are being exploited by terrorists or ter-
rorists will take more hostages. The media will not voluntarily limit the ﬂow
of information. Therefore, terrorist demands will be met if and only if the
media give full coverage to terrorist acts. (H, D, A, V, R)
8. Either we take recycling seriously or we will be buried in garbage. If we
incinerate our garbage only if our health is jeopardized, then we do not take
recycling seriously. If our landﬁlls are becoming exhausted, then if we incin-
erate our garbage, then toxic ash will be produced. If toxic ash is produced,
then our health is jeopardized. Our landﬁlls are becoming exhausted. There-
fore, we will be buried in garbage. (R, B, I, H, L, T )
9. If the drug interdiction program is strengthened only if cocaine becomes
more readily available, then either the number of addicts is decreasing or the
war on drugs is failing. If the drug interdiction program is strengthened, then
smugglers will shift to more easily concealable drugs. If smugglers shift to
more easily concealable drugs, then cocaine will become more readily avail-
able. Furthermore, the number of addicts is not decreasing. Therefore, the
war on drugs is failing. (D, C, N, W, S)
10.
#
If the death penalty is not cruel and unusual punishment, then either it is
cruel and unusual punishment or if society is justiﬁed by using it, then it will
deter other criminals. If the death penalty is cruel and unusual punishment,
then it is both cruel and unusual and its use degrades society as a whole. It is
not the case that both the death penalty is cruel and unusual and its use
degrades society as a whole. Furthermore, the death penalty will not deter
other criminals. Therefore, society is not justiﬁed in using the death penalty.
(C, J, D, U)
7.2
Rules of Implication II
Four additional rules of inference are listed below. Constructive dilemma should be
familiar from Chapter 6. The other three are new.*
*Some texts include a rule called ‘‘absorption’’ by which the statement form p ⊃(q • p) is deduced
from p ⊃q. This rule is necessary only if conditional proof is not presented. This text opts in favor of
conditional proof.

Rules of Implication II
375
S
N
L
5. Constructive dilemma (CD):
( p ⊃q) • (r ⊃s)
p v r
q v s
7. Conjunction (Conj):
p
q
p • q
6. Simpliﬁcation (Simp):
p • q
p
8. Addition (Add):
p
p v q
Like the previous four rules, these four are fairly easy to understand, but if there is any
doubt about them their validity may be proven by means of a truth table.
Constructive dilemma can be understood as involving two modus po-
nens steps. The ﬁrst premise states that if we have p then we have q, and if we have r
then we have s. But since, by the second premise, we do have either p or r, it follows
by modus ponens that we have either q or s. Constructive dilemma is the only form of
dilemma that will be included as a rule of inference. By the rule of transposition,
which will be presented in Section 7.4, any argument that is a substitution instance
of the destructive dilemma form can be easily converted into a substitution instance
of constructive dilemma. Destructive dilemma, therefore, is not needed as a rule of
inference.
These arguments are both instances of constructive dilemma (CD)
M v N
(M ⊃S) • (N ⊃T )
S v T
[(K ⊃T ) ⊃(A • B)] • [(H ⊃P) ⊃(A • C )]
(K ⊃T ) v (H ⊃P)
(A • B) v (A • C )
Simpliﬁcation states that if two propositions are given as true on a single line,
then each of them is true separately. According to the strict interpretation of the sim-
pliﬁcation rule, only the left-hand conjunct may be stated in the conclusion. Once the
commutativity rule for conjunction has been presented, however (see Section 7.3), we
will be justiﬁed in replacing a statement such as H • K with K • H. Having done this,
the K now appears on the left, and the appropriate conclusion is K.
These arguments are all instances of simpliﬁcation (Simp)
F • (U ≡E )
F
(M v T ) • (S ⊃R)
(M v T )
[(X ⊃Z ) • M] • (G ⊃H )
[(X ⊃Z ) • M]

376
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Conjunction states that two propositions—for example, H and K—asserted sep-
arately on different lines may be conjoined on a single line. The two propositions may
be conjoined in whatever order we choose (either H • K or K • H) without appeal to
the commutativity rule for conjunction.
These arguments are all instances of conjunction (Conj)
E
G
E • G
C ⊃M
D ⊃N
(C ⊃M) • (D ⊃N)
R ⊃(H • T )
K ⊃(H • O)
[R ⊃(H • T )] • [K ⊃(H • O)]
Addition states that whenever a proposition is asserted on a line by itself it may
be joined disjunctively with any proposition we choose. In other words, if G is as-
serted to be true by itself, it follows that G v H is true. This may appear somewhat
puzzling at ﬁrst, but once one realizes that G v H is a much weaker statement than G
by itself, the puzzlement should disappear. The new proposition must, of course,
always be joined disjunctively (not conjunctively) to the given proposition. If G is
stated on a line by itself, we are not justiﬁed in writing G • H as a consequence of
addition.
These arguments are all instances of addition (Add)
S
S v T
C • D
(C • D) v (K • P)
W ≡Z
(W ≡Z ) v [A ⊃(M ⊃O)]
The use of these four rules may now be illustrated. Consider the followingargument
form:
1. A ⊃B
2. (B v C ) ⊃(D • E )
3. A
/ D
As usual, we begin by looking for the conclusion in the premises. D appears in the
consequent of the second premise, which we can obtain via simpliﬁcation if we ﬁrst
obtain B v C. This expression as such does not appear in the premises, but from lines
1 and 3 we see that we can obtain B by itself via modus ponens. Having obtained B,
we can get B v C via addition. The proof has now been thought through and can be
written out as follows:

Rules of Implication II
377
S
N
L
1. A ⊃B
2. (B v C ) ⊃(D • E)
3. A
/ D
4. B
1, 3, MP
5. B v C
4, Add
6. D • E
2, 5, MP
7. D
6, Simp
Another example:
1. K ⊃L
2. (M ⊃N) • S
3. N ⊃T
4. K v M
/ L v T
Seeing that L v T does not appear as such in the premises, we look for the separate
components. Finding L and T as the consequents of two distinct conditionalstatements
causes us to think that the conclusion can be obtained via constructive dilemma. If a
constructive dilemma can be set up, it will need a disjunctive statement as its second
premise, and such a statement appears on line 4. Furthermore, each of the compo-
nents of this statement, K and M, appears as the antecedent of a conditional statement,
exactly as they should for a dilemma. The only statement that is missing now is
M ⊃T. Inspecting line 2 we see that we can obtain M ⊃N via simpliﬁcation, and
putting this together with line 3 gives us M ⊃T via hypothetical syllogism. The com-
pleted proof may now be written out:
1. K ⊃L
2. (M ⊃N ) • S
3. N ⊃T
4. K v M
/ L v T
5. M ⊃N
2, Simp
6. M ⊃T
3, 5, HS
7. (K ⊃L) • (M ⊃T )
1, 6, Conj
8. L v T
4, 7, CD
Another example:
1. M • N
2. P ⊃M
3. Q • R
4. (P • Q) ⊃S
/ S v T
When we look for S v T in the premises we ﬁnd S in the consequent of line 4 but no T
at all. This signals an important principle: Whenever the conclusion of an argument
contains a letter not found in the premises, addition must be used to introduce the
missing letter. Addition is the only rule of inference that can introduce new letters. To

378
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
introduce T by addition, however, we must ﬁrst obtain S on a line by itself. S can be
obtained from line 4 via modus ponens if we ﬁrst obtain P • Q. This, in turn, can be
gotten via conjunction, but ﬁrst P and Q must be obtained individually on separate
lines. Q can be obtained from line 3 via simpliﬁcation and P from line 2 via modus
tollens, but the latter step requires that we ﬁrst obtain M on a line by itself. Since this
can be gotten from line 1 via simpliﬁcation, the proof is now complete. It may be
written out as follows:
1. M • N
2. P ⊃M
3. Q • R
4. (P • Q) ⊃S
/ S v T
5. M
1, Simp
6. P
2, 5, MT
7. Q
3, Simp
8. P • Q
6, 7, Conj
9. S
4, 8, MP
10. S v T
9, Add
Addition is used together with disjunctive syllogism to derive the conclusion of
arguments having inconsistent premises. As we saw in Chapter 6, such arguments are
always valid. The procedure is illustrated as follows:
1. S
2. S
/ T
3. S v T
1, Add
4. T
2, 3, DS
With arguments of this sort the conclusion is always introduced via addition and then
separated via disjunctive syllogism. Since addition can be used to introduce any letter
or arrangement of letters we choose, it should be clear from this example that incon-
sistent premises validly entail any conclusion whatever.
To complete this presentation of the eight rules of implication, let us consider some
of the typical ways in which they are misapplied. Examples are as follows:
1. A ⊃(B ⊃C )
2. B
3. C
1, 2, MP (invalid—B ⊃C must ﬁrst be ob-
tained on a line by itself )
1. P v (S • T )
2. S
1, Simp (invalid—S • T must ﬁrst be obtained
on a line by itself )
1. K
2. K • L
1, Add (invalid—the correct form of addition
is ‘‘K v L’’)

Rules of Implication II
379
S
N
L
1. M v N
2. M
1, Simp (invalid—simpliﬁcation is possible
only with a conjunctive premise; line 1 is a
disjunction)
1. G ⊃H
2. G ⊃(H v J )
1, Add (improper—J must be added to the
whole line, not just to the consequent:
(G ⊃H ) v J
1. (W ⊃X ) ⊃Y
2. X
3. W
1, 2, MT (invalid—W ⊃X must ﬁrst be ob-
tained on a line by itself )
1. L ⊃M
2. L ⊃N
3. M • N
1, 2, Conj (invalid—M and N must ﬁrst be
obtained on lines by themselves)
1. (P • Q)
2. P
1, Simp (invalid—parentheses must be re-
moved ﬁrst)
1. (P v Q)
2. P
3. Q
1, 2, DS (invalid—parentheses must be re-
moved ﬁrst)
The use of addition in the G ⊃H example is called ‘‘improper’’ because the letter
that is added is not added to the whole line. It turns out, however, that even though
the addition rule is not correctly applied here, the inference is still valid. Hence, this
inference is not called ‘‘invalid,’’ as the others are. As for the last two examples, a rule
will be presented in the next section (DeMorgan’s Rule) that will allow us to remove
parentheses preceded by negation signs. But even after the parentheses have been
removed from these examples, the inferences remain invalid.
As with the previous section, we end this one with a few strategies for applying the
last four rules of implication:
Strategy 6: If the conclusion contains a letter that appears in a conjunctive statement
in the premises, consider obtaining that letter via simpliﬁcation:
1. A ⊃B
2. C • B
3. C ⊃A
4. C
/ C
2, Simp
Strategy 7: If the conclusion is a conjunctive statement, consider obtaining it via
conjunction by ﬁrst obtaining the individual conjuncts:

380
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
1. A ⊃C
2. B
3. C
4. B • C
/ B •  C
2, 3, Conj
Strategy 8: If the conclusion is a disjunctive statement, consider obtaining it via con-
structive dilemma or addition:
1. (A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
2. B ⊃C
3. A v C
4. B v D
/ B v D
1, 3, CD
1. A v C
2. B
3. C ⊃D
4. B v D
/ B v D
2, Add
Strategy 9: If the conclusion contains a letter not found in the premises, addition must
be used to obtain that letter. (See the second example under Strategy 8.)
EXERCISE 7.2
I. Supply the required justiﬁcation for the derived steps in the following proofs:
(1)
#
1. (M • N) ⊃[(M v H) ⊃(K • L)]
2. M • (C ⊃D)
3. N • (F ≡G)
/ K • N
4. M
5. N
6. M • N
7. (M v H) ⊃(K • L)
8. M v H
9. K • L
10. K
11. K • N
(2)
1. (P v S) ⊃(E ⊃F)
2. (P v T ) ⊃(G ⊃H)
3. (P v U) ⊃(E v G)
4. P
/ F v H
5. P v S
6. E ⊃F
7. P v T
8. G ⊃H

Rules of Implication II
381
S
N
L
9. P v U
10. E v G
11. (E ⊃F) • (G ⊃H)
12. F v H
(3)
1. (S ⊃Q) • (Q ⊃S)
2. S v Q
3. Q
/ P • R
4. Q v S
5. S
6. Q
7. Q v (P • R)
8. P • R
(4)
#
1. (D ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
2. (B ⊃D) • (E ⊃C)
3. B v E
/ D v B
4. D v C
5. B v D
6. B ⊃D
7. D ⊃B
8. (B ⊃D) • (D ⊃B)
9. D v B
(5)
1. (R ⊃H) • (S ⊃I)
2. (H • L) ⊃(R v S)
3. H • (K ⊃T )
4. H v L
/ I v M
5. H
6. L
7. H • L
8. R v S
9. H v I
10. I
11. I v M
II. Use the ﬁrst eight rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following
symbolized arguments:
(1)
#
1. M ⊃Q
2. R ⊃T
3. M v R
/ Q v T
(2) 1. E ⊃(A • C)
2. A ⊃(F • E)
3. E
/ F
(3) 1. G ⊃(S • T )
2. (S v T ) ⊃J
3. G
/ J
(4)
#
1. (L v T ) ⊃(B • G)
2. L • (K ≡R)
/ L • B

382
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
(5) 1. (F v X) ⊃(P v T )
2. F ⊃P
3. P
/ T
(6) 1. (N ⊃B) • (O ⊃C)
2. Q ⊃(N v O)
3. Q
/ B v C
(7)
#
1. (U v W) ⊃(T ⊃R)
2. U • H
3. R • J
/ U • T
(8) 1. (D v E) ⊃(G • H)
2. G ⊃D
3. D • F
/ M
(9) 1. (B v F) ⊃(A ⊃G)
2. (B v E) ⊃(G ⊃K)
3. B • H
/ A ⊃K
(10)
#
1. (P ⊃R) ⊃(M ⊃P)
2. (P v M) ⊃(P ⊃R)
3. P v M
/ R v P
(11) 1. (C ⊃N) • E
2. D v (N ⊃D)
3. D
/ C v P
(12) 1. [A v (K • J)] ⊃(E • F)
2. M ⊃[A • (P v R)]
3. M • U
/ E • A
(13)
#
1. H ⊃(T ⊃R)
2. H v (E ⊃F)
3. T v E
4. H • D
/ R v F
(14) 1. (U • P) ⊃Q
2. O ⊃U
3. P ⊃O
4. O • T
/ Q
(15) 1. (M v N) ⊃(F ⊃G)
2. D ⊃C
3. C ⊃B
4. M • H
5. D v F
/ B v G
(16)
#
1. (F • M) ⊃(S v T )
2. (S v A) ⊃F
3. (S v B) ⊃M
4. S • G
/ T
(17) 1. (K • N ) ⊃
[(P ⊃K) • (R ⊃G)]
2. K ⊃N
3. N • B
4. P v R
/ G
(18) 1. (A v D) ⊃(B ⊃F)
2. (B v C) ⊃(A ⊃E)
3. A v B
4. A
/ E v F
(19)
#
1. ( J ⊃K) • (O ⊃P)
2. (L ⊃J) • (M ⊃O)
3. K ⊃(L v M)
4. K • G
/ P
(20) 1. (W • X) ⊃(Q v R)
2. (S v F) ⊃(Q v W )
3. (S v G) ⊃(Q ⊃X)
4. Q v S
5. Q • H
/ R
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the ﬁrst eight rules
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the letters in the order in which
they are listed.
1.
#
If topaz is harder than quartz, then it will scratch quartz and also feldspar.
Topaz is harder than quartz and it is also harder than calcite. Therefore, either
topaz will scratch quartz or it will scratch corundum. (T, Q, F, C, O)
2. If clearcutting continues in primary forests and the Endangered Species Act is
not repealed, then either the Endangered Species Act will be repealed or
thousands of animal species will become extinct. Clearcutting continues in

Rules of Implication II
383
S
N
L
primary forests. The Endangered Species Act will not be repealed. Therefore,
thousands of animal species will become extinct. (C, E, T)
3. If the rate at which rubidium becomes strontium or the rate at which potas-
sium becomes argon are accurate indicators of age, then rocks from Green-
land are 3.8 billion years old or rocks from the moon are 4.6 billion years old.
The rate at which rubidium becomes strontium and the rate at which uranium
becomes lead are accurate indicators of age. If rocks from Greenland are 3.8
billion years old, then the earth was formed more than 3.8 billion years ago;
also, if rocks from the moon are 4.6 billion years old, then the earth was
formed 4.6 billion years ago. If either the earth was formed more than 3.8
billion years ago or 4.6 billion years ago, then the Creationists are wrong.
Therefore, the Creationists are wrong. (R, P, G, M, U, E, F, C)
4.
#
Either animals are mere mechanisms or they feel pain. If either animals feel
pain or they have souls, then they have a right not to be subjected to needless
pain and humans have a duty not to inﬂict needless pain on them. It is not
the case that animals are mere mechanisms. Therefore, animals have a right
not to be subjected to needless pain. (M, P, S, R, D)
5. If half the nation suffers from depression, then if either the insurance compa-
nies have their way or the psychiatrists have their way, then everyone will be
taking antidepressant drugs. If either half the nation suffers from depression
or sufferers want a real cure, then it is not the case that everyone will be
taking antidepressant drugs. Half the nation suffers from depression. There-
fore, it is not the case that either the insurance companies or the psychiatrists
will have their way. (H, I, P, E, W)
6. If either parents get involved in their children’s education or the school year
is lengthened, then if the children learn phonics, their reading will improve
and if they are introduced to abstract concepts earlier, their math will im-
prove. If either parents get involved in their children’s education or nebulous
subjects are dropped from the curriculum, then either the children will learn
phonics or they will be introduced to abstract concepts earlier. Parents will
get involved in their children’s education, and writing lessons will be inte-
grated with other subjects. Therefore, either the children’s reading or their
math will improve. (P, S, L, R, I, M, N, W)
7.
#
If either manufacturers will not concentrate on producing a superior productor
they will not market their product abroad, then if they will not concentrate on
producing a superior product, then the trade deﬁcit will worsen. Either manu-
facturers will concentrate on producing a superior product or the trade deﬁcit
will not worsen. Manufacturers will not concentrate on producing a superior
product. Therefore, today’s business managers lack imagination. (C, M, T, B)
8. If either medical fees or malpractice awards escape restrictions, then health
care costs will soar and millions of poor will go uninsured. If the lawyers get

384
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
their way, then malpractice awards will escape restrictions. If the doctors get
their way, then medical fees will escape restrictions. Either the doctors or the
lawyers will get their way, and insurance companies will resist reform. There-
fore, health care costs will soar. (F, A, H, P, L, D, I)
9. If we are less than certain the human fetus is a person, then we must give it
the beneﬁt of the doubt. If we are certain the human fetus is a person, then
we must accord it the right to live. If either we must give the fetus the beneﬁt
of the doubt or accord it the right to live, then we are not less than certain the
fetus is human and it is not merely a part of the mother’s body. Either we are
less than certain the human fetus is a person or we are certain about it. If we
are certain the human fetus is a person, then abortion is immoral. Therefore,
abortion is immoral. (L, G, C, A, M, I)
10.
#
If the assassination of terrorist leaders violates civilized values and also is not
effective in the long run, then if it prevents terrorist atrocities, then it is effec-
tive in the long run. If the assassination of terrorist leaders violates civilized
values, then it is not effective in the long run. The assassination of terrorist
leaders violates civilized values and is also illegal. If the assassination of ter-
rorist leaders is not effective in the long run, then either it prevents terrorist
atrocities or it justiﬁes acts of revenge by terrorists. Therefore, the assassina-
tion of terrorist leaders justiﬁes acts of revenge by terrorists and also is not
effective in the long run. (V, E, P, I, J)
7.3
Rules of Replacement I
The ten rules of replacement are stated in the form of logical equivalences. For this
purpose, a new symbol consisting of four dots (::) will be used to designate logical
equivalence. This symbol is a metalogical symbol in that it makes an assertion not
about things but about symbolized statements: It asserts that the expressions on either
side of it have the same truth value regardless of the truth values of their components.
Underlying the use of the rules of replacement is an axiom of replacement, which
asserts that within the context of a proof, logically equivalent expressions may replace
one another. The ﬁrst ﬁve rules of replacement are as follows:
9. DeMorgan’s Rule (DM):
( p • q) :: (p v q)
( p v q) :: (p • q)
10. Commutativity (Com):
( p v q) :: (q v p)
( p • q) :: (q • p)

Rules of Replacement I
385
S
N
L
11. Associativity (Assoc):
[ p v (q v r)] :: [( p v q) v r]
[p • (q • r)] :: [( p • q) • r]
12. Distribution (Dist):
[p • (q v r)] :: [( p • q) v ( p • r)]
[p v (q • r)] :: [( p v q) • ( p v r)]
13. Double negation (DN):
p :: p
DeMorgan’s Rule (named after the nineteenth-century logician Augustus DeMorgan)
was discussed in Section 6.1 in connection with translation. There it was pointed out
that ‘‘Not both p and q’’ is logically equivalent to ‘‘Not p or not q,’’ and that ‘‘Not either
p or q’’ is logically equivalent to ‘‘Not p and not q.’’ When applying DeMorgan’s Rule,
one should keep in mind that it holds only for conjunction and disjunction (not for
implication or equivalence). The rule may be summarized as follows: When moving a
tilde inside or outside a set of parentheses, a dot switches with a wedge and vice versa.
The commutativity rule asserts that the meaning of a conjunction or disjunction
is unaffected by the order in which the components are listed. In other words, the
component statements may be commuted, or switched for one another, without af-
fecting the meaning. The validity of this rule should be immediately apparent. You
may recall from arithmetic that the commutativity rule also applies to addition and
multiplication and asserts, for example, that 3  5 equals 5  3, and that 2  3 equals
3  2. However, it does not apply to division; 2  4 does not equal 4  2. A similar
lesson applies in logic: The commutativity rule applies only to conjunction and dis-
junction; it does not apply to implication.
The associativity rule states that the meaning of a conjunction or disjunction is
unaffected by the placement of parentheses when the same operator is used through-
out. In other words, the way in which the component propositions are grouped, or
associated with one another, can be changed without affecting the meaning. The
validity of this rule is quite easy to see, but if there is any doubt about it, it may be
readily checked by means of a truth table. You may recall that the associativity rule
also applies to addition and multiplication and asserts, for example, that 3  (5  7)
equals (3  5)  7, and that 2  (3  4) equals (2  3)  4. But it does not apply to
division; (8  4)  2 does not equal 8  (4  2). Analogously, in logic, the associativity
rule applies only to conjunction and disjunction; it does not apply to implication. Also
note, when applying this rule, that the order of the letters remains unchanged; only
the placement of the parentheses changes.
The distribution rule, like DeMorgan’s Rule, pertains only to conjunction and
disjunction. When a proposition is conjoined to a disjunctive statement in parentheses
or disjoined to a conjunctive statement in parentheses, the rule allows us to put that
proposition together with each of the components inside the parentheses, and also to

386
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
go in the reverse direction. In the ﬁrst form of the rule, a statement is distributed
through a disjunction, and in the second form, through a conjunction. While the rule
may not be immediately obvious, it is easy to remember: The operator that is at ﬁrst
outside the parentheses goes inside, and the operator that is at ﬁrst inside the paren-
theses goes outside. Note also how distribution differs from commutativity and asso-
ciativity. The latter two rules apply only when the same operator (either a dot or a
wedge) is used throughout a statement. Distribution applies when a dot and a wedge
appear together in a statement.
The double negation rule is fairly obvious and needs little explanation. The rule
states simply that pairs of tildes immediately adjacent to one another may be either
deleted or introduced without affecting the meaning of the statement.
There is an important difference between the rules of implication, treated in the
ﬁrst two sections of this chapter, and the rules of replacement. The rules of implica-
tion derive their name from the fact that each is a simple argument form in which the
premises imply the conclusion. To be applicable in natural deduction, certain lines in
a proof must be interpreted as substitution instances of the argument form in question.
Stated another way, the rules of implication are applicable only to whole lines in a
proof. For example, step 3 in the following proof is not a legitimate application of
modus ponens, because the ﬁrst premise in the modus ponens rule is applied to only
a part of line 1.
1. A ⊃(B ⊃C )
2. B
3. C
1, 2, MP (incorrect)
The rules of replacement, on the other hand, are not rules of implication but
rules of logical equivalence. Since, by the axiom of replacement, logically equivalent
statement forms can always replace one another in a proof sequence, the rules of
replacement can be applied either to a whole line or to any part of a line. Step 2 in the
following proof is a quite legitimate application of DeMorgan’s Rule, even though the
rule is applied to only part of line 1:
1. S ⊃(T • U )
2. S ⊃(T v U )
1, DM (valid)
Another way of viewing this distinction is that the rules of implication are ‘‘one-
way’’ rules, whereas the rules of replacement are ‘‘two-way’’ rules. The rules of impli-
cation allow us to proceed only from the premise lines of a rule to the conclusion line,
but the rules of replacement allow us to replace either side of an equivalence expres-
sion with the other side.
Application of the ﬁrst ﬁve rules of replacement may now be illustrated. Consider
the following argument:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. A • C
/ B

Rules of Replacement I
387
S
N
L
Examining the premises, we ﬁnd B in the consequent of line 1. This leads us to suspect
that the conclusion can be obtained via modus ponens. If this is correct, the tilde would
then have to be taken inside the parentheses via DeMorgan’s Rule and the resulting
C eliminated by disjunctive syllogism. The following completed proof indicates that
this strategy yields the anticipated result:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. A • C
/ B
3. A
2, Simp
4. (B • C )
1, 3, MP
5. B v C
4, DM
6. C • A
2, Com
7. C
6, Simp
8. C
7, DN
9. C v B
5, Com
10. B
8, 9, DS
The rationale for line 6 is to get C on the left side so that it can be separated via
simpliﬁcation. Similarly, the rationale for line 9 is to get C on the left side so that it
can be eliminated via disjunctive syllogism. Line 8 is required because, strictly speak-
ing, the negation of C is C—not simply C. Thus, C must be replaced with C
to set up the disjunctive syllogism. For brevity, however, these steps may be combined
together with other steps, as the following shortened proof illustrates:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. A • C
/ B
3. A
2, Simp
4. (B • C )
1, 3, MP
5. B v C
4, DM
6. C
2, Com, Simp
7. B
5, 6, Com, DN, DS
Another example:
1. D • (E v F )
2. D v F
/ D • E
The conclusion requires that we get D and E together. Inspection of the ﬁrst premise
suggests distribution as the ﬁrst step in achieving this. The completed proof is as
follows:
1. D • (E v F )
2. D v F
/ D • E
3. (D • E ) v (D • F )
1, Dist
4. (D • F )
2, DM
5. D • E
3, 4, Com, DS

388
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Some proofs require that we use distribution in the reverse manner. Consider this
argument:
1. (G • H ) v (G • J)
2. (G v K ) ⊃L
/ L
The conclusion can be obtained from line 2 via modus ponens if we ﬁrst obtain G v K
on a line by itself. Since K does not occur in the ﬁrst premise at all, it must be intro-
duced by addition. To do this requires in turn that we obtain G on a line by itself.
Distribution applied to line 1 provides the solution:
1. (G • H ) v (G • J )
2. (G v K ) ⊃L
/ L
3. G • (H v J )
1, Dist
4. G
3, Simp
5. G v K
4, Add
6. L
2, 5, MP
Application of the associativity rule is illustrated in the next proof:
1. M v (N v O)
2. O
/ M v N
3. (M v N ) v O
1, Assoc
4. O v (M v N )
3, Com
5. M v N
2, 4, DS
Before O can be eliminated via disjunctive syllogism from line 1, it must be moved
over to the left side. Associativity and commutativity together accomplish this
objective.
In some arguments the attempt to ‘‘ﬁnd’’ the conclusion in the premises is not
immediately successful. When confronted with such an argument, it is often best to
begin by ‘‘deconstructing’’ the conclusion using the rules of replacement. In other
words, one should ﬁrst apply the rules of replacement to the conclusion to see how
it is put together. After this is done it may be evident how the premises entail
the conclusion. This procedure is justiﬁed by the fact that the rules of replacement
are two-way rules. As a result, after the conclusion is deconstructed, it can be de-
rived by using the same rules in the reverse order. Here is an example of such an
argument:
1. K ⊃(F v B)
2. G • K
/ (F • G) v (B • G )
If immediate inspection does not reveal how the conclusion should be derived, we
may begin by applying the rules of replacement to the conclusion. The form of the
conclusion suggests the distribution rule, but ﬁrst we must use commutativity to move
the Gs to the left-hand side. The deconstruction proceeds as follows:

Rules of Replacement I
389
S
N
L
(F • G) v (B • G)
(G • F) v (G • B)
G • (F v B)
Com, Com
Dist
Now we see that if we can obtain G on a line by itself, and F v B on a line by itself, we
can combine them on a single line via the conjunction rule. We can then obtain the
conclusion via distribution and commutativity. Inspection of the premises reveals that
G can be obtained from line 2 of the premises by simpliﬁcation, and F v B can be
obtained from line 1 by modus ponens. The completed proof is as follows:
1. K ⊃(F v B)
2. G • K
3. G
4. K • G
5. K
6. F v B
7. G • (F v B)
8. (G • F) v (G • B)
9. (F • G) v (B • G)
/ (F • G) v (B • G)
2, Simp
2, Com
4, Simp
1, 5, MP
3, 6, Conj
7, Dist
8, Com, Com
Here are some strategies for applying the ﬁrst ﬁve rules of replacement. Most of
them show how these rules may be used together with other rules.
Strategy 10: Conjunction can be used to set up DeMorgan’s Rule:
1. A
2. B
3. A • B
4. (A v B)
1, 2, Conj
3, DM
Strategy 11: Constructive dilemma can be used to set up DeMorgan’s Rule:
1. (A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
2. A v C
3. B v D
4. (B • D)
1, 2, CD
3, DM
Strategy 12: Addition can be used to set up DeMorgan’s Rule:
1. A
2. A v B
3. (A • B)
1, Add
2, DM
Strategy 13: Distribution can be used in two ways to set up disjunctive syllogism:
1. (A v B) • (A v C)
2. A
3. A v (B • C)
4. B • C
1, Dist
2, 3, DS

390
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
1. A • (B v C )
2. (A • B)
3. (A • B) v (A • C )
4. A • C
1, Dist
2, 3, DS
Strategy 14: Distribution can be used in two ways to set up simpliﬁcation:
1. A v (B • C )
2. (A v B) • (A v C )
3. A v B
1, Dist
2, Simp
1. (A • B) v (A • C )
2. A • (B v C )
3. A
1, Dist
2, Simp
Strategy 15: If inspection of the premises does not reveal how the conclusion should
be derived, consider using the rules of replacement to ‘‘deconstruct’’ the
conclusion. (See the previous example.)
EXERCISE 7.3
I. Supply the required justiﬁcations for the derived steps in the following proofs:
(1)
#
1. ( J v F) v M
2. ( J v M) ⊃P
3. F
/ (F v P)
4. (F v J) v M
5. F v ( J v M)
6. J v M
7. P
8. F • P
9. (F v P)
(2)
1. (K • P) v (K • Q)
2. P ⊃K
/ Q v T
3. K • (P v Q)
4. K
5. K
6. P
7. (P v Q) • K
8. P v Q
9. Q
10. Q v T
(3)
1. E v (D v C)
2. (E v D) ⊃C
/ E

Rules of Replacement I
391
S
N
L
3. E v (D • C)
4. (E v D) • (E v C)
5. E v D
6. C
7. (E v C) • (E v D)
8. E v C
9. C v E
10. C
11. E
(4)
#
1. A • (F • L)
2. A ⊃(U v W)
3. F ⊃(U v X)
/ U v (W • X)
4. (A • F) • L
5. A • F
6. A
7. U v W
8. F • A
9. F
10. U v X
11. (U v W ) • (U v X)
12. U v (W • X)
(5)
1. (T • R) ⊃P
2. (P • R) • G
3. (T v N) ⊃H
/ H
4. P • (R • G)
5. P
6. (T • R)
7. T v R
8. R v T
9. (R • P) • G
10. R • (P • G)
11. R
12. R
13. T
14. T v N
15. H
II. Use the ﬁrst thirteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the
following symbolized arguments:
(1)
#
1. (M ⊃P) • (N ⊃Q)
2. (M • N)
/ P v Q

392
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
(2) 1. J v (K • L)
2. K
/ J
(3) 1. R ⊃B
2. D v R
3. B
/ D
(4)
#
1. (O v M) ⊃S
2. S
/ M
(5) 1. Q v (L v C)
2. C
/ L v Q
(6) 1. (E • N) ⊃T
2. G ⊃(N v E)
/ G ⊃T
(7)
#
1. H • (C • T )
2. (F • T )
/ F
(8) 1. (E • I) v (M • U)
2. E
/ M
(9) 1. ( J v K)
2. B ⊃K
3. S ⊃B
/ S • J
(10)
#
1. (G • H) v (M • G)
2. G ⊃(T • A)
/ A
(11) 1. (D • S) v (C • T )
2. T
/ S
(12) 1. (U v R)
2. (R v N) ⊃(P • H)
3. Q ⊃H
/ Q
(13)
#
1. (F • A)
2. (L v A)
3. D ⊃(F v L)
/ D
(14) 1. [(I v M) v G] ⊃G
2. M v G
/ M
(15) 1. E ⊃B
2. U ⊃C
3. (E • U)
/ (B • C)
(16)
#
1. (K v F)
2. F ⊃(K v C)
3. (G v C) ⊃H
/ (K v H)
(17) 1. S v (I • J)
2. S ⊃R
3. J ⊃Q
/ (R • Q)

Rules of Replacement I
393
S
N
L
(18) 1. P v (I • L)
2. (P v I) ⊃(L v C)
3. (P • C) ⊃(E • F)
/ F v D
(19)
#
1. B v (S • N)
2. B ⊃S
3. S ⊃N
/ B v W
(20) 1. (M v E) ⊃(S ⊃U)
2. (Q v E) ⊃(U ⊃H)
3. (M v Q)
/ S ⊃H
(21) 1. (R v D) ⊃(F • G)
2. (F • R) ⊃S
3. F • S
/ (S v G)
(22)
#
1. Q ⊃(C • B)
2. T ⊃(B • H)
3. (Q • T )
/ B
(23) 1. (A • G)
2. (A • E)
3. G v E
/ (A • F)
(24) 1. (M • N) v (O • P)
2. (N v O) ⊃P
/ N
(25)
#
1. (T • K) v (C • E)
2. K ⊃E
3. E ⊃C
/ T • K
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the ﬁrst thirteen
rules of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the translation letters in
the order in which they are listed.
1.
#
Either health care costs are skyrocketing and they are attributable to greedy doc-
tors, or health care costs are skyrocketing and they are attributable to greedy
hospitals. If health care costs are skyrocketing, then both the government should
intercede and health care may have to be rationed. Therefore, health care
costs are skyrocketing and health care may have to be rationed. (S, D, H, I, R)
2. Either the ancient Etruscans were experienced city planners and they in-
vented the art of writing or they were highly skilled engineers and they in-
vented the art of writing. If the ancient Etruscans were bloodthirsty
numbskulls (as scholars once thought), they did not invent the art of writing.
Therefore, the ancient Etruscans were not bloodthirsty numbskulls (as schol-
ars once thought). (C, I, H, B)
3. It is not the case that either the earth’s molten core is stationary or that it
contains no iron. If it is not the case that both the earth’s molten core is

394
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
stationary and has a regular topography, then either the earth’s core con-
tains no iron or the direction of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is subject to change.
Therefore, the direction of the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld is subject to change.
(S, C, R, D)
4.
#
Either mosquito genes can be cloned or mosquitoes will become resistant to
all insecticides and the incidence of encephalitis will increase. If either mos-
quito genes can be cloned or the incidence of encephalitis increases, then
mosquitoes will not become resistant to all insecticides. Therefore, either
mosquito genes can be cloned or mosquitoes will multiply out of control.
(G, R, E, M)
5. Protein engineering will prove to be as successful as genetic engineering, and
new enzymes will be developed for producing food and breaking down
industrial wastes. If protein engineering proves to be as successful as genetic
engineering and new enzymes are developed for breaking down industrial
wastes, then it is not the case that new enzymes will be developed for pro-
ducing food but not medicines. Therefore, protein engineering will prove to
be as successful as genetic engineering and new enzymes will be developed
for producing medicines. (E, P, B, M)
6. If workers have a fundamental right to a job, then unemployment will be
virtually nonexistent but job redundancy will become a problem. If workers
have no fundamental right to a job, then production efﬁciency will be
maximized but job security will be jeopardized. Workers either have or
do not have a fundamental right to a job. Therefore, either unemployment
will be virtually nonexistent or production efﬁciency will be maximized.
(F, U, R, P, S)
7.
#
If Japan is to reduce its huge trade surplus, then it must either convince its
citizens to spend more or it must move its manufacturing facilities to other
countries. It is not the case that Japan will either increase its imports or con-
vince its citizens to spend more. Furthermore, it is not the case that Japan will
either allow foreign construction companies to compete on an equal footing
or move its manufacturing facilities to other countries. Therefore, Japan will
not reduce its huge trade surplus. (R, C, M, I, A)
8. If women are by nature either passive or uncompetitive, then it is not the case
that there are lawyers who are women. If men are by nature either insensitive
or without the ability to nurture, then it is not the case that there are kinder-
garten teachers who are men. There are lawyers who are women and kinder-
garten teachers who are men. Therefore, it is not the case that either women
by nature are uncompetitive or men by nature are without the ability to
nurture. (P, U, L, I, W, K)
9. It is not the case that either the sun’s interior rotates faster than its surface or
Einstein’s general theory of relativity is wrong. If the sun’s interior does not

Rules of Replacement II
395
S
N
L
rotate faster than its surface and eccentricities in the orbit of Mercury can be
explained by solar gravitation, then Einstein’s general theory of relativity is
wrong. Therefore, eccentricities in the orbit of Mercury cannot be explained
by solar gravitation. (S, E, M)
10.
#
Either school dropout programs are not as effective as they could be, or they
provide basic thinking skills and psychological counseling to their students.
Either school dropout programs are not as effective as they could be, or they
adequately prepare their students for getting a job and working effectively
with others. Either school dropout programs do not provide psychological
counseling to their students or they do not provide adequate preparation for
working effectively with others. Therefore, school dropout programs are not
as effective as they could be. (E, B, P, G, W )
7.4
Rules of Replacement II
The remaining ﬁve rules of replacement are as follows:
14. Transposition (Trans):
17. Exportation (Exp):
( p ⊃q) :: (q ⊃p)
[( p • q) ⊃r] :: [p ⊃(q ⊃r)]
15. Material implication (Impl):
18. Tautology (Taut):
( p ⊃q) :: (p v q)
p :: ( p v p)
p :: ( p • p)
16. Material equivalence (Equiv):
( p ≡q) :: [( p ⊃q) • (q ⊃p)]
( p ≡q) :: [( p • q) v (p • q)]
Transposition was ﬁrst mentioned in Section 6.1, where it was introduced to assist
in translation. The rule is fairly easy to understand and is easily provable by a truth
table. In applying the rule one need only remember that antecedent and consequent
may switch places if and only if both are negated.
The rule of material implication is less obvious than transposition, but it can be
illustrated by substituting actual statements in place of the letters. A little reﬂection
should disclose that the statement ‘‘If you don’t leave me alone, then I’ll punch you in
the nose’’ (D ⊃P) is logically equivalent to ‘‘Either you leave me alone or I’ll punch
you in the nose’’ (D v P). The rule states that a horseshoe may be replaced by a
wedge sign if the left-hand component is negated, and the reverse replacement is
allowed if a tilde is deleted from the left-hand component.

396
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
The material equivalence rule has two formulations. The ﬁrst is the same as the
deﬁnition of material equivalence given in Section 6.1. The second formulation is easy
to remember through recalling the two ways in which p ≡q may be true. Either p and
q are both true or p and q are both false. This, of course, is the meaning of [(p • q) v
(p • q)].
The exportation rule is also fairly easy to understand. It asserts that the statement
‘‘If we have p, then if we have q we have r’’ is logically equivalent to ‘‘If we have both
p and q, we have r.’’ Upon consideration, this rule should appear reasonable.
The last rule, tautology, is obvious. Its effect is to eliminate redundancy in disjunc-
tions and conjunctions.
The following proofs illustrate the use of these ﬁve rules.
1. A
/ A ⊃B
In this argument the conclusion contains a letter not found in the premise. Obviously,
addition must be used to introduce the B. The material implication rule completes the
proof:
1. A
/ A ⊃B
2. A v B
1, Add
3. A ⊃B
2, Impl
Here is another example:
1. F ⊃G
2. F v G
/ G
To derive the conclusion of this argument, some method must be found to link the
two premises together and eliminate the F. Hypothetical syllogism provides the solu-
tion, but ﬁrst the second premise must be converted into a conditional. Here is the
proof:
1. F ⊃G
2. F v G
/ G
3. F ⊃G
2, DN, Impl
4. G ⊃F
3, Trans, DN
5. G ⊃G
1, 4, HS
6. G v G
5, Impl, DN
7. G
6, Taut
Another example:
1. J ⊃(K ⊃L)
/ K ⊃( J ⊃L)
The conclusion can be obtained by simply rearranging the components of the single
premise. Exportation provides the simplest method:

Rules of Replacement II
397
S
N
L
1. J ⊃(K ⊃L)
/ K ⊃( J ⊃L)
2. ( J • K ) ⊃L
1, Exp
3. (K • J ) ⊃L
2, Com
4. K ⊃( J ⊃L)
3, Exp
Another example:
1. M ⊃N
2. M ⊃O
/ M ⊃(N • O)
As with the second example above, some method must be found to link the two
premises together. In this case, however, hypothetical syllogism will not work. The
solution lies in setting up a distribution step:
1. M ⊃N
2. M ⊃O
/ M ⊃(N • O)
3. M v N
1, Impl
4. M v O
2, Impl
5. (M v N ) • (M v O)
3, 4, Conj
6. M v (N • O)
5, Dist
7. M ⊃(N • O)
6, Impl
Another example:
1. P ⊃Q
2. R ⊃(S • T )
3. R ⊃Q
4. S ⊃(T ⊃P)
/ P ≡R
The conclusion is a biconditional, and there are only two ways that a biconditional
can be obtained—namely, via the two formulations of the material equivalence rule.
The fact that the premises are all conditional statements suggests the ﬁrst formulation
of this rule. Accordingly, we must try to obtain P ⊃R and R ⊃P. Again, the fact that
the premises are themselves conditionals suggests hypothetical syllogism to accom-
plish this. Premises 1 and 3 can be used to set up one hypothetical syllogism; premises
2 and 4 provide the other. Here is the proof:
1. P ⊃Q
2. R ⊃(S • T )
3. R ⊃Q
4. S ⊃(T ⊃P)
/ P ≡R
5. Q ⊃R
3, Trans
6. P ⊃R
1, 5, HS
7. (S • T ) ⊃P
4, Exp
8. R ⊃P
2, 7, HS
9. (P ⊃R) • (R ⊃P)
6, 8, Conj
10. P ≡R
9, Equiv

398
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
As we showed in Section 7.3, if it is not readily apparent how the conclusion should
be derived, we can use the rules of replacement to deconstruct the conclusion. This
will usually provide insight on how best to proceed. Again, this technique is justiﬁed
because the rules of replacement are two-way rules. As a result, they can be applied
in reverse order in the completed proof. Here is an example:
1. S ⊃K
2. S ⊃(R v M )
/ R ⊃(M ⊃K )
In deconstructing the conclusion, the form of the conclusion suggests exportation,
and the result of this step suggests DeMorgan’s rule. For further insight, we apply
transposition to the latter step. Each step follows from the one preceding it:
R ⊃(M ⊃K )
(R • M ) ⊃K
(R v M ) ⊃K
K ⊃(R v M )
Exp
DM
Trans
Now, examining the premises in light of the deconstruction suggests that we begin by
setting up a hypothetical syllogism. This will give us the last step in the deconstruction.
We can then obtain the conclusion by repeating the deconstruction steps in reverse
order. The completed proof is as follows:
1. S ⊃K
2. S ⊃(R v M )
3. K ⊃S
4. K ⊃(R v M )
5. (R v M ) ⊃K
6. (R • M ) ⊃K
7. R ⊃(M ⊃K )
/ R ⊃(M ⊃K )
1, Trans, DN
2, 3, HS
4, Trans, DN
5, DM
6, Exp
Here is another example:
1. K ⊃M
2. L ⊃M
/ (K v L) ⊃M
In deconstructing the conclusion, the form of the premises suggests that we use some
procedure that will combine M separately with K and L. This, in turn, suggests distri-
bution; but before we can use distribution, we must eliminate the horseshoe via im-
plication. The deconstruction is as follows:
(K v L) ⊃M
(K v L) v M
(K • L) v M
(K v M ) • (L v M )
(K ⊃M ) • (L ⊃M )
Impl
DM
Com, Dist, Com, Com
Impl, Impl

Rules of Replacement II
399
S
N
L
Now, examining the premises in light of the last line of the deconstruction suggests
that we begin by joining the premises together via the conjunction rule. The conclu-
sion can then be obtained by reversing the steps of the deconstruction:
1. K ⊃M
2. L ⊃M
/ (K v L) ⊃M
3. (K ⊃M) • (L ⊃M)
1, Conj
4. (K v M) • (L v M)
3, Impl, Impl
5. (K • L) v M
4, Com, Com, Dist, Com
6. (K v L) v M
5, DM
7. (K v L) ⊃M
6, Impl
It is important to realize that whenever we use this strategy of working backward from
the conclusion, the rules of replacement are the only rules we may use. We may not
use the rules of implication, because these rules are one-way rules.
We end this section with some strategies that show how the last ﬁve rules of re-
placement can be used together with various other rules.
Strategy 16: Material implication can be used to set up hypothetical syllogism:
1. A v B
2. B v C
3. A ⊃B
4. B ⊃C
5. A ⊃C
1, Impl
2, Impl
3, 4, HS
Strategy 17: Exportation can be used to set up modus ponens:
1. (A • B) ⊃C
2. A
3. A ⊃(B ⊃C )
4. B ⊃C
1, Exp
2, 3, MP
Strategy 18: Exportation can be used to set up modus tollens:
1. A ⊃(B ⊃C )
2. C
3. (A • B) ⊃C
4. (A • B)
1, Exp
2, 3, MT
Strategy 19: Addition can be used to set up material implication:
1. A
2. A v B
3. B v A
4. B ⊃A
1, Add
2, Com
3, Impl

400
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Strategy 20: Transposition can be used to set up hypothetical syllogism:
1. A ⊃B
2. C ⊃B
3. B ⊃C
4. A ⊃C
2, Trans
1, 3, HS
Strategy 21: Transposition can be used to set up constructive dilemma:
1. (A ⊃B) • (C ⊃D)
2. B v D
3. (B ⊃A) • (D ⊃C )
4. A v C
1, Trans, Trans
2, 3, CD
Strategy 22: Constructive dilemma can be used to set up tautology:
1. (A ⊃C ) • (B ⊃C )
2. A v B
3. C v C
4. C
1, 2, CD
3, Taut
Strategy 23: Material implication can be used to set up tautology:
1. A ⊃A
2. A v A
3. A
1, Impl
2, Taut
Strategy 24: Material implication can be used to set up distribution:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. A v (B • C )
3. (A v B) • (A v C )
1, Impl
2, Dist
EXERCISE 7.4
I. Supply the required justiﬁcations for the derived steps in the following arguments.
(1)
#
1. K ≡R
2. K ⊃(R ⊃P)
3. P
/ R
4. (K • R) v (K • R)
5. (K • R) ⊃P
6. (K • R)
7. K • R
8. R • K
9. R

Rules of Replacement II
401
S
N
L
(2)
1. C ⊃(L ⊃Q)
2. L ⊃C
3. Q
/ C
4. (C • L) ⊃Q
5. (C • L)
6. C v L
7. C v L
8. C ⊃L
9. C ⊃C
10. C v C
11. C
(3)
1. (E ⊃A) • (F ⊃A)
2. E v G
3. F v G
/ A
4. E v G
5. E ⊃G
6. F v G
7. F ⊃G
8. G ⊃F
9. E ⊃F
10. E v F
11. E v F
12. A v A
13. A
(4)
#
1. (F • H) ⊃N
2. F v S
3. H
/ N v S
4. (H • F) ⊃N
5. H ⊃(F ⊃N)
6. F ⊃N
7. N ⊃F
8. F v S
9. F ⊃S
10. N ⊃S
11. N v S
12. N v S
(5)
1. T ⊃(H • J)
2. (H v N) ⊃T
/ T ≡H
3. T v (H • J)
4. (T v H) • (T v J)
5. T v H

402
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
6. T ⊃H
7. (H v N) v T
8. (H • N) v T
9. T v (H • N)
10. (T v H) • (T v N)
11. (H v T ) • (T v N)
12. H v T
13. H ⊃T
14. (T ⊃H) • (H ⊃T )
15. T ≡H
II. Use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following
symbolized arguments:
(1)
#
1. (S • K) ⊃R
2. K
/ S ⊃R
(2) 1. G ⊃E
2. H ⊃E
/ G ⊃H
(3) 1. N v P
2. (N ⊃P) ⊃T
/ T
(4)
#
1. (B ⊃M) • (D ⊃M)
2. B v D
/ M
(5) 1. Q ⊃(F ⊃A)
2. R ⊃(A ⊃F)
3. Q • R
/ F ≡A
(6) 1. (B ⊃G) • (F ⊃N)
2. (G • N)
/ (B • F)
(7)
#
1. ( J • R) ⊃H
2. (R ⊃H) ⊃M
3. (P v J)
/ M • P
(8) 1. T
/ S ⊃T
(9) 1. (O ⊃C) • (S ⊃D)
2. (E ⊃D) • (E ⊃C)
/ O ⊃S
(10)
#
1. (U • W ) ⊃X
2. U ⊃U
/ (U v X)
(11) 1. T ⊃R
2. T ⊃R
/ T
(12) 1. S v N
2. S v Q
/ N ⊃Q
(13)
#
1. M ⊃(U ⊃H)
2. (H v U) ⊃F
/ M ⊃F

Rules of Replacement II
403
S
N
L
(14) 1. R v P
2. R v P
/ R ≡P
(15) 1. B ⊃H
2. D ⊃H
3. (B • D)
/ H
(16)
#
1. J ⊃(G ⊃L)
/ G ⊃(J ⊃L)
(17) 1. S ⊃(L • M)
2. M ⊃(L ⊃R)
/ S ⊃R
(18) 1. F ⊃(A • K)
2. G ⊃(A • K)
3. F v G
/ A ≡K
(19)
#
1. (I ⊃E) ⊃C
2. C ⊃C
/ I
(20) 1. T ⊃G
2. S ⊃G
/ (T v S) ⊃G
(21) 1. H ⊃U
/ H ⊃(U v T )
(22)
#
1. Q ⊃(W • D)
/ Q ⊃W
(23) 1. P ⊃(E ⊃B)
2. (B v E)
/ P
(24) 1. (G ⊃J) ⊃(H ⊃Q)
2. J • Q
/ H
(25)
#
1. I v (N • F)
2. I ⊃F
/ F
(26) 1. T ⊃(A ⊃N)
2. T v N
/ T ≡N
(27) 1. (D ⊃E) ⊃(E ⊃D)
2. (D ≡E) ⊃(G • H)
3. E • G
/ G • H
(28)
#
1. (O ⊃R) ⊃S
2. (P ⊃R) ⊃S
/ R
(29) 1. (L v P) ⊃U
2. (M ⊃U) ⊃I
3. P
/ I
(30) 1. A ≡W
2. A v W
3. R ⊃A
/ (W v R)
(31)
#
1. (S v T ) ⊃(S ⊃T )
2. (S ⊃T ) ⊃(T ⊃K)
3. S v T
/ S v K

404
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
(32) 1. G ≡M
2. G v M
3. G ⊃(M ⊃T )
/ T
(33) 1. O ⊃(Q • N)
2. (N v E) ⊃S
/ O ⊃S
(34)
#
1. H ≡I
2. H ⊃(I ⊃F)
3. (H v I) ⊃F
/ F
(35)
#
1. P ⊃A
2. Q ⊃B
/ (P v Q) ⊃(A v B)
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form and use the eighteen rules
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Use the translation letters in the
order in which they are listed.
1.
#
If sports shoe manufacturers decline to use kangaroo hides in their products,
then Australian hunters will cease killing millions of kangaroos yearly. It is
not the case that both Australian hunters will cease killing millions of kanga-
roos yearly and the kangaroo not be saved from extinction. Therefore, if
sports shoe manufacturers decline to use kangaroo hides in their products,
then the kangaroo will be saved from extinction. (D, C, S)
2. If there is a direct correlation between what a nation spends for health care
and the health of its citizens, then America has the lowest incidence of disease
and the lowest mortality rates of any nation on earth. But America does not
have the lowest mortality rates of any nation on earth. Therefore, there is not
a direct correlation between what a nation spends for health care and the
health of its citizens. (C, D, M)
3. It is not the case that strict controls exist on either the manufacture or the sale
of handguns. Therefore, if strict controls exist on the sale of handguns, then
the use of handguns in the commission of crimes has decreased. (M, S, U)
4.
#
If birth control devices are made available in high school clinics, then the
incidence of teenage pregnancy will decrease. Therefore, if both birth control
information and birth control devices are made available in high school clin-
ics, then the incidence of teenage pregnancy will decrease. (D, P, I)
5. If Congress enacts a law that either establishes a religion or prohibits the free
exercise of religion, then that law is unconstitutional. Therefore, if Congress
enacts a law that establishes a religion, then that law is unconstitutional.
(E, P, U)
6. If cigarette smokers are warned of the hazards of smoking and they continue
to smoke, then they cannot sue tobacco companies for any resulting lung
cancer or emphysema. Cigarette smokers are warned of the hazards of smok-

Conditional Proof
405
S
N
L
ing. Therefore, if cigarette smokers continue to smoke, they cannot sue to-
bacco companies for any resulting lung cancer or emphysema. (W, C, S)
7.
#
If grade-school children are assigned daily homework, then their achieve-
ment level will increase dramatically. But if grade-school children are as-
signed daily homework, then their love for learning may be dampened.
Therefore, if grade-school children are assigned daily homework, then their
achievement level will increase dramatically but their love for learning may
be dampened. (G, A, L)
8. If a superconducting particle collider is built, then the data yielded will beneﬁt
scientists of all nations and it deserves international funding. Either a super-
conducting particle collider will be built, or the ultimate nature of matter will
remain hidden and the data yielded will beneﬁt scientists of all nations.There-
fore, the data yielded by a superconducting particle collider will beneﬁt sci-
entists of all nations. (S, D, I, U)
9. If parents are told that their unborn child has Tay-Sachs disease, then if they
go ahead with the birth, then they are responsible for their child’s pain and
suffering. Therefore, if parents are not responsible for their child’s pain and
suffering, then if they go ahead with the birth, then they were not told that
their unborn child had Tay-Sachs disease. (T, G, R)
10.
#
Vitamin E is an antioxidant and a useless food supplement if and only if it
does not reduce heart disease. It is not the case either that vitamin E does not
reduce heart disease or is not an antioxidant. Therefore, vitamin E is not a
useless food supplement. (A, U, R)
7.5
Conditional Proof
Conditional proof is a method for obtaining a line in a proof sequence (either the
conclusion or some intermediate line) that frequently offers the advantage of being
both shorter and simpler to use than the direct method. Moreover, there are a number
of arguments having conclusions that cannot be derived by the direct method, so some
form of conditional proof must be used on them. While in theory the method of
conditional proof can be used to derive any line in a proof sequence, in practice it is
usually reserved for obtaining lines that are expressed in the form of conditional
statements. The method consists of assuming the antecedent of the required condi-
tional statement on one line, deriving the consequent on a subsequent line, and then
‘‘discharging’’ this sequence of lines in a conditional statement that exactly replicates
the one that was to be obtained.

406
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Any argument whose conclusion is a conditional statement is an immediate candi-
date for conditional proof. Consider the following example:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. (B v D) ⊃E
/ A ⊃E
Using the direct method to derive the conclusion of this argument would require a proof
having at least twelve lines, and the precise strategy to be followed in constructing it
might not be immediately obvious. Nevertheless, we need only give cursory inspection
to the argument to see that the conclusion does indeed follow from the premises. The
conclusion states that if we have A, we then have E. Let us suppose, for a moment, that
we do have A. We could then obtain B • C from the ﬁrst premise via modus ponens.
Simplifying this expression we could obtain B, and from this we could get B v D via
addition. E would then follow from the second premise via modus ponens. In other
words, if we assume that we have A, we can get E. But this is exactly what the con-
clusion says. Thus, we have just proved that the conclusion follows from the premises.
The method of conditional proof consists of incorporating this simple thought pro-
cess into the body of a proof sequence. A conditional proof for this argument requires
only eight lines and is substantially simpler than a direct proof:
1. A ⊃(B • C )
2. (B v D) ⊃E
/ A ⊃E
3. A
ACP
4. B • C
1, 3, MP
5. B
4, Simp
6. B v D
5, Add
7. E
2, 6, MP
8. A ⊃E
3–7, CP
Lines 3 through 7 are indented to indicate their hypothetical character: they all depend
on the assumption introduced in line 3 via ‘‘ACP’’ (assumption for conditional proof).
These lines, which constitute the conditional proof sequence, tell us that if we assume
A (line 3), we can obtain E (line 7). In line 8 the conditional sequence is discharged in
the conditional statement A ⊃E, which simply reiterates the result of the conditional
sequence. Since line 8 is not hypothetical, it is written adjacent to the original margin,
under lines 1 and 2. A vertical line is added to the conditional sequence to emphasize
the indentation.
The ﬁrst step in constructing a conditional proof is to decide what should be as-
sumed on the ﬁrst line of the conditional sequence. While any statement whatsoever
can be assumed on this line, only the right statement will lead to the desired result.
The clue is always provided by the conditional statement to be obtained in the end.
The antecedent of this statement is what must be assumed. For example, if the state-
ment to be obtained is (K • L) ⊃M, then K • L should be assumed on the ﬁrst line. This
line is always indented and tagged with the designation ‘‘ACP.’’ Once the initial as-
sumption has been made, the second step is to obtain the consequent of the desired

Conditional Proof
407
S
N
L
conditional statement at the end of the conditional sequence. To do this, we simply
apply the ordinary rules of inference to any previous line in the proof (including the
assumed line), writing the result directly below the assumed line. The third and ﬁnal
step is to discharge the conditional sequence in a conditional statement. The ante-
cedent of this conditional statement is whatever appears on the ﬁrst line of the
conditional sequence, and the consequent is whatever appears on the last line. For
example, if A v B is on the ﬁrst line and C • D is on the last, the sequence is discharged
by (A v B) ⊃(C • D). This discharging line is always written adjacent to the original
margin and is tagged with the designation ‘‘CP’’ (conditional proof) together with the
numerals corresponding to the ﬁrst and last lines of the sequence.
It was suggested earlier that conditional proof can be used to obtain a line other
than the conclusion of an argument. The following proof, which illustrates this fact,
incorporates two conditional sequences one after the other within the scope of a single
direct proof:
1. G ⊃(H • I )
2. J ⊃(K • L)
3. G v J
/ H v K
4. G
ACP
5. H • I
1, 4, MP
6. H
5, Simp
7. G ⊃H
4–6, CP
8. J
ACP
9. K • L
2, 8, MP
10. K
9, Simp
11. J ⊃K
8–10, CP
12. (G ⊃H ) • ( J ⊃K)
7, 11, Conj
13. H v K
3, 12, CD
The ﬁrst conditional proof sequence gives us G ⊃H, and the second J ⊃K. These two
lines are then conjoined and used together with line 3 to set up a constructive di-
lemma, from which the conclusion is obtained.
This proof sequence provides a convenient opportunity to introduce an important
rule governing conditional proof. The rule states that after a conditional proof se-
quence has been discharged, no line in the sequence may be used as a reason for a
subsequent line in the proof. If, for example, line 5 in the above proof were used as a
reason in support of line 9 or line 12, this rule would be violated, and the correspond-
ing inference would be invalid. Once the conditional sequence is discharged, it is
sealed off from the remaining part of the proof. The logic behind this rule is easy to
understand. The lines in a conditional sequence are hypothetical in that they depend
on the assumption stated in the ﬁrst line. Because no mere assumption can provide
any genuine support for anything, neither can any line that depends on such an
assumption. When a conditional sequence is discharged, the assumption upon which
it rests is expressed as the antecedent of a conditional statement. This conditional

408
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
statement can be used to support subsequent lines because it makes no claim that its
antecedent is true. The conditional statement merely asserts that if its antecedent is
true, then its consequent is true, and this, of course, is what has been established by
the conditional sequence from which it is obtained.
Just as a conditional sequence can be used within the scope of a direct proof to ob-
tain a desired statement form, one conditional sequence can be used within the scope of
another to obtain a desired statement form. The following proof provides an example:
1. L ⊃[M ⊃(N v O)]
2. M ⊃N
/ L ⊃(M v O)
3. L
ACP
4. M ⊃(N v O)
1, 3, MP
5. M
ACP
6. N v O
4, 5, MP
7. N
2, 5, MP
8. O
6, 7, DS
9. M ⊃O
5–8, CP
10. M v O
9, Impl
11. L ⊃(M v O)
3–10, CP
The rule introduced in connection with the previous example applies unchanged to
examples of this sort. No line in the sequence 5–8 could be used to support any line
subsequent to line 9, and no line in the sequence 3–10 could be used to support any
line subsequent to line 11. Lines 3 or 4 could, of course, be used to support any line in
the sequence 5–8.
One ﬁnal reminder regarding conditional proof is that every conditional proof must
be discharged. It is absolutely improper to end a proof on an indented line. If this rule
is ignored, any conclusion one chooses can be derived from any set of premises. The
following invalid proof illustrates this mistake:
1. P
/ Q ⊃R
2. Q
ACP
3. Q v R
2, Add
4. Q ⊃R
2, Impl
EXERCISE 7.5
I. Use conditional proof and the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclu-
sions of the following symbolized arguments. Having done so, attempt to derive
the conclusions without using conditional proof.
(1)
#
1. N ⊃O
2. N ⊃P
/ N ⊃(O • P)
(2) 1. F ⊃E
2. (F • E) ⊃R
/ F ⊃R

Conditional Proof
409
S
N
L
(3) 1. G ⊃T
2. (T v S) ⊃K
/ G ⊃K
(4)
#
1. (G v H) ⊃(S • T )
2. (T v U) ⊃(C • D)
/ G ⊃C
(5) 1. A ⊃(A v E)
/ A ⊃F
(6) 1. J ⊃(K ⊃L)
2. J ⊃(M ⊃L)
3. L
/ J ⊃(K v M)
(7)
#
1. M v (N • O)
/ N ⊃M
(8) 1. P ⊃(Q v R)
2. (P ⊃R) ⊃(S • T )
3. Q ⊃R
/ T
(9) 1. H ⊃(I ⊃N)
2. (H ⊃I) ⊃(M v N)
3. N
/ M
(10)
#
1. C ⊃(A • D)
2. B ⊃(A • E)
/ (C v B) ⊃A
(11) 1. M ⊃(K ⊃L)
2. (L v N) ⊃J
/ M ⊃(K ⊃J)
(12) 1. F ⊃(G • H)
/ (A ⊃F) ⊃(A ⊃H)
(13)
#
1. R ⊃B
2. R ⊃(B ⊃F)
3. B ⊃(F ⊃H)
/ R ⊃H
(14) 1. (F • G) ≡H
2. F ⊃G
/ F ≡H
(15) 1. C ⊃(D v E)
2. E ⊃(D ⊃F)
/ C ⊃(E ⊃F)
(16)
#
1. Q ⊃(R ⊃S)
2. Q ⊃(T ⊃U)
3. U ⊃(R v T )
/ Q ⊃(U ⊃S)
(17) 1. N ⊃(O • P)
2. Q ⊃(R • S)
/ (P ⊃Q) ⊃(N ⊃S)
(18) 1. E ⊃(F ⊃G)
2. H ⊃(G ⊃I)
3. (F ⊃I) ⊃( J v H)
/ (E • H) ⊃J
(19)
#
1. P ⊃[(L v M) ⊃(N • O)]
2. (O v T) ⊃W
/ P ⊃(M ⊃W)
(20) 1. A ⊃[B ⊃(C • D)]
2. (B v E) ⊃(D v E)
/ (A • B) ⊃(C • E)

410
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
II. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form, using the letters in the
order in which they are listed. Then use conditional proof and the eighteen rules
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Having done so, attempt to derive
the conclusion without using conditional proof.
1.
#
If high-tech products are exported to Russia, then domestic industries will
beneﬁt. If the Russians can effectively utilize high-tech products, then their
standard of living will improve. Therefore, if high-tech products are exported
to Russia and the Russians can effectively utilize them, then their standard of
living will improve and domestic industries will beneﬁt. (H, D, U, S)
2. If the police take you into custody, then if they inform you that you have the
right to remain silent, then whatever you say will be used against you. If the
police inform you that you have the right to remain silent, then if whatever
you say will be used against you, then you should not say anything. There-
fore, if the police take you into custody, then if they inform you that you have
the right to remain silent, then you should not say anything. (P, I, W, S)
3. A doctor must disconnect a dying patient from a respirator if and only if the
fact that patients are self-determining implies that the doctor must follow the
patient’s orders. If a dying patient refuses treatment, then the doctor must
disconnect the patient from a respirator and the patient will die peacefully.
Patients are self-determining. Therefore, if a dying patient refuses treatment,
then the doctor must follow the patient’s orders. (D, S, F, R, P)
4.
#
If jails are overcrowded, then dangerous suspects will be released on their
own recognizance. If jails are overcrowded and dangerous suspects are re-
leased on their own recognizance, then crime will increase. If no new jails
are built and crime increases, then innocent victims will pay the price of
crime. Therefore, if jails are overcrowded, then if no new jails are built, then
innocent victims will pay the price of crime. (J, D, C, N, I)
5. If astronauts attempt interplanetary space travel, then heavy shielding will be
required to protect them from solar radiation. If massive amounts of either
fuel or water are carried, then the spacecraft must be very large. Therefore, if
heavy shielding is required to protect the astronauts from solar radiation only
if massive amounts of fuel are carried, then if astronauts attempt interplane-
tary space travel, then the spacecraft must be very large. (A, H, F, W, L)
7.6
Indirect Proof
Indirect proof is a technique similar to conditional proof that can be used on any
argument to derive either the conclusion or some intermediate line leading to the con-

Indirect Proof
411
S
N
L
clusion. It consists of assuming the negation of the statement form to be obtained, using
this assumption to derive a contradiction, and then concluding that the original as-
sumption is false. This last step, of course, establishes the truth of the statement form to
be obtained. The following proof sequence uses indirect proof to derive the conclusion:
1. (A v B) ⊃(C • D)
2. C ⊃D
/ A
3. A
4. A v B
5. C • D
6. C
7. D
8. D
9. D • D
AIP
3, Add
1, 4, MP
5, Simp
2, 6, MP
5, Com, Simp
7, 8, Conj
10. A
3–9, IP
The indirect proof sequence (lines 3–9) begins by assuming the negation of the con-
clusion. This assumption, which is tagged ‘‘AIP’’ (assumption for indirect proof), leads
to a contradiction in line 9. Since any assumption that leads to a contradiction is false,
the indirect sequence is discharged (line 10) by asserting the negation of the assump-
tion made in line 3. This line is then tagged with the designation ‘‘IP’’ (indirect proof)
together with the numerals indicating the scope of the indirect sequence from which
it is obtained.
Indirect proof can also be used to derive an intermediate line leading to the conclu-
sion. Example:
1. E ⊃[(F v G) ⊃(H • J )]
2. E • ( J v K )
/ (F v K )
3. E
2, Simp
4. (F v G) ⊃(H • J )
1, 3, MP
5. ( J v K )
2, Com, Simp
6. J • K
5, DM
7. F
8. F v G
9. H • J
10. J
11. J
12. J • J
AIP
7, Add
4, 8, MP
9, Com, Simp
6, Simp
10, 11, Conj
13. F
14. K
15. F • K
16. (F v K )
7–12, IP
6, Com, Simp
13, 14, Conj
15, DM
The indirect proof sequence begins with the assumption of F (line 7), leads to a
contradiction (line 12), and is discharged (line 13) by asserting the negation of the

412
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
assumption. One should consider indirect proof whenever a line in a proof appears
difﬁcult to obtain.
As with conditional proof, when an indirect proof sequence is discharged, no line
in the sequence may be used as a justiﬁcation for a subsequent line in the proof. In
reference to the above proof, this means that none of the lines 7–12 could be used as
a justiﬁcation for any of the lines 14–16. Occasionally, this rule requires certain priori-
ties in the derivation of lines. For example, for the purpose of deriving the contradic-
tion, lines 5 and 6 could have been included as part of the indirect sequence. But this
would not have been advisable because line 6 is needed as a justiﬁcation for line 14,
which lies outside the indirect sequence. If lines 5 and 6 had been included within the
indirect sequence, they would have had to be repeated after the sequence had been
discharged to allow K to be obtained on a line outside the sequence.
Just as a conditional sequence may be constructed within the scope of another
conditional sequence, so a conditional sequence can be constructed within the scope
of an indirect sequence, and, conversely, an indirect sequence may be constructed
within the scope of either a conditional sequence or another indirect sequence. The
next example illustrates the use of an indirect sequence within the scope of a condi-
tional sequence:
1. L ⊃[M ⊃(N • O)]
2. N • P
/ L ⊃(M • P)
3. L
4. M ⊃(N • O)
ACP
1, 3, MP
5. M
6. N • O
7. N
8. N
9. N • N
AIP
4, 5, MP
6, Simp
2, Simp
7, 8, Conj
10. M
11. M
12. P
13. M • P
5–9, IP
10, DN
2, Com, Simp
11, 12, Conj
14. L ⊃(M • P)
3–13, CP
The indirect sequence (lines 5–9) is discharged (line 10) by asserting the negation of
the assumption made in line 5. Technically, the double negation step (line 11) is
required, but it could be incorporated into line 10. The conditional sequence (lines 3–
13) is discharged (line 14) in the conditional statement that has the ﬁrst line of the
sequence as its antecedent and the last line as its consequent.
Indirect proof provides a convenient way for proving the validity of an argument
having a tautology for its conclusion. In fact, the only way in which the conclusion of
many such arguments can be derived is through either conditional or indirect proof.
For the following argument, indirect proof is the easier of the two:

Indirect Proof
413
S
N
L
1. S
/ T v T
2. (T v T )
3. T • T
AIP
2, DM
4. (T v T )
5. T v T
2–3, IP
4, DN
Here is another example of an argument having a tautology as its conclusion. In
this case, since the conclusion is a conditional statement, conditional proof is the
easier alternative:
1. S
/ T ⊃T
2. T
3. T v T
4. T
ACP
2, Add
3, Taut
5. T ⊃T
2–4, CP
The similarity of indirect proof to conditional proof may be illustrated by returning
to the ﬁrst example presented in this section. In the proof that follows, conditional
proof—not indirect proof—is used to obtain the conclusion:
1. (A v B) ⊃(C • D)
2. C ⊃D
/ A
3. A
4. A v B
5. C • D
6. C
7. D
8. D
9. D v A
10. A
ACP
3, Add
1, 4, MP
5, Simp
2, 6, MP
5, Com, Simp
8, Add
7, 9, DS
11. A ⊃A
12. A v A
13. A
3–10, CP
11, Impl
12, Taut
This example illustrates how a conditional proof can be used to derive the conclusion
of any argument, whether or not the conclusion is a conditional statement. Simply
begin by assuming the negation of the conclusion, derive contradictory statements on
separate lines, and use these lines to set up a disjunctive syllogism yielding the nega-
tion of the assumption as the last line of the conditional sequence. Then, discharge the
sequence and use tautology to obtain the negation of the assumption outside the
sequence.
Indirect proof can be viewed as a variety of conditional proof in that it amounts to
a modiﬁcation of the way in which the indented sequence is discharged, resulting in
an overall shortening of the proof for many arguments. The indirect proof for the
argument above is repeated below, with the requisite changes noted in the margin:

414
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
1. (A v B) ⊃(C • D)
2. C ⊃D
/ A
3. A
4. A v B
5. C • D
6. C
7. D
8. D
9. D • D
AIP
3, Add
1, 4, MP
5, Simp
2, 6, MP
5, Com, Simp
7, 8, Conj
10. A
3–9, IP
changed
}
The reminder at the end of the previous section regarding conditional proof per-
tains to indirect proof as well: It is essential that every indirect proof be discharged.
No proof can be ended on an indented line. If this rule is ignored, indirect proof, like
conditional proof, can produce any conclusion whatsoever. The following invalid
proof illustrates such a mistake:
1. P
/ Q
2. Q
3. Q v Q
4. Q
AIP
2, Add
3, Taut
EXERCISE 7.6
I. Use either indirect proof or conditional proof (or both) and the eighteen rules of
inference to derive the conclusions of the following symbolized arguments. Hav-
ing done so, attempt to derive the conclusions without using indirect proof or
conditional proof.
(1)
#
1. (S v T ) ⊃S
/ S
(2) 1. (K ⊃K) ⊃R
2. (R v M) ⊃N
/ N
(3) 1. (C • D) ⊃E
2. (D • E) ⊃F
/ (C • D) ⊃F
(4)
#
1. H ⊃(L ⊃K)
2. L ⊃(K ⊃L)
/ H v L
(5) 1. S ⊃(T v U)
2. U ⊃(T v R)
3. (S • U) ⊃R
/ S v U
(6) 1. A ⊃(B • C)
2. D ⊃C
/ D ⊃A
(7)
#
1. (E v F) ⊃(C • D)
2. (D v G) ⊃H
3. E v G
/ H

Indirect Proof
415
S
N
L
(8) 1. M ⊃(N • O)
2. N ⊃P
3. O ⊃P
/ M
(9) 1. (R v S) ⊃T
2. (P v Q) ⊃T
3. R v P
/ T
(10)
#
1. K
/ S ⊃(T ⊃S)
(11) 1. (A v B) ⊃C
2. (A v D) ⊃E
/ C v E
(12) 1. (K v L) ⊃(M • N)
2. (N v O) ⊃(P • K)
/ K
(13)
#
1. [C ⊃(D ⊃C)] ⊃E
/ E
(14) 1. F
/ (G ⊃H) v (G ⊃J)
(15) 1. B ⊃(K • M)
2. (B • M) ⊃(P ≡P)
/ B
(16)
#
1. (N v O) ⊃(C • D)
2. (D v K) ⊃(P v C)
3. (P v G) ⊃(N • D)
/ N
(17) 1. (R • S) ≡(G • H)
2. R ⊃S
3. H ⊃G
/ R ≡H
(18) 1. K ⊃[(M v N) ⊃(P • Q)]
2. L ⊃[(Q v R) ⊃(S • N)]
/ (K • L) ⊃N
(19)
#
1. A ⊃[(N v N) ⊃(S v T )]
2. T ⊃(F v F)
/ A ⊃S
(20) 1. F ⊃[(C ⊃C) ⊃G]
2. G ⊃{[H ⊃(E ⊃H)] ⊃(K • K)}
/ F
II. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form, using the letters in the
order in which they are listed. Then use indirect proof and the eighteen rules of
inference to derive the conclusion of each. Having done so, attempt to derive the
conclusion without using indirect proof.
1.
#
If government deﬁcits continue at their present rate and a recession sets in,
then interest on the national debt will become unbearable and the govern-
ment will default on its loans. If a recession sets in, then the government will
not default on its loans. Therefore, either government deﬁcits will not con-
tinue at their present rate or a recession will not set in. (C, R, I, D)
2. If either the sea turtle population continues to decrease or rescue efforts are
commenced to save the sea turtle from extinction, then nesting sanctuaries
will be created and the indiscriminate slaughter of these animals will be

416
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
halted. If either nesting sanctuaries are created or poachers are arrested, then
if the indiscriminate slaughter of these animals is halted, then the sea turtle
population will not continue to decrease. Therefore, the sea turtle population
will not continue to decrease. (C, R, N, I, P)
3. If asbestos workers sue their employers, then if punitive damages are
awarded, then their employers will declare bankruptcy. If asbestos workers
sue their employers, then punitive damages will be awarded. If asbestos
workers contract asbestosis, then either they will sue their employers or
their employers will declare bankruptcy. Therefore, either asbestos work-
ers will not contract asbestosis or their employers will declare bankruptcy.
(S, P, B, C)
4.
#
If astronauts spend long periods in zero gravity only if calcium is resorbed
in their bodies, then astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle
bones. If astronauts attempt a voyage to Mars only if they spend long periods
in zero gravity, then astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle
bones. Therefore, astronauts on a Mars voyage will arrive with brittle bones.
(Z, C, B, V )
5. Either deposits should be required on beer and soft drink containers, or these
containers will be discarded along highways and the countryside will look
like a dump. If these containers will be discarded either in parks or along
highways, then deposits should be required on soft drink containers. There-
fore, deposits should be required on soft drink containers. (B, S, H, C, P)
7.7
Proving Logical Truths
Both conditional and indirect proof can be used to establish the truth of a tautology
(logical truth). Tautological statements can be treated as if they were the conclusions
of arguments having no premises. Such a procedure is suggested by the fact that any
argument having a tautology for its conclusion is valid regardless of what its premises
are. As we saw in the previous section, the proof for such an argument does not use
the premises at all but derives the conclusion as the exclusive consequence of either
a conditional or an indirect sequence. Using this strategy for logical truths, we write
the statement to be proved as if it were the conclusion of an argument, and we indent
the ﬁrst line in the proof and tag it as being the beginning of either a conditional or an
indirect sequence. In the end, this sequence is appropriately discharged to yield the
desired statement form.

Proving Logical Truths
417
S
N
L
Tautologies expressed in the form of conditional statements are most easily proved
via a conditional sequence. The following example utilizes two such sequences, one
within the scope of the other:
/ P ⊃(Q ⊃P)
1. P
ACP
2. Q
3. P v P
4. P
ACP
1, Add
3, Taut
5. Q ⊃P
2–4, CP
6. P ⊃(Q ⊃P)
1–5, CP
Notice that line 6 restores the proof to the original margin—the ﬁrst line is indented
because it introduces the conditional sequence.
Here is a proof of the same statement using an indirect proof. The indirect sequence
begins, as usual, with the negation of the statement to be proved:
/ P ⊃(Q ⊃P)
1. [P ⊃(Q ⊃P)]
2. [P v (Q v P)]
3. P • (Q v P)
4. P • (Q • P)
5. (P • P) • Q
6. P • P
AIP
1, Impl, Impl
2, DM, DN
3, DM, DN
4, Com, Assoc
5, Simp
7. [P ⊃(Q ⊃P)]
8. P ⊃(Q ⊃P)
1–6, IP
7, DN
More complex conditional statements are proved by merely extending the tech-
nique used in the ﬁrst proof above. In the proof that follows, notice how each condi-
tional sequence begins by asserting the antecedent of the conditional statement to be
obtained:
/ [P ⊃(Q ⊃R)] ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃(P ⊃R)]
1. P ⊃(Q ⊃R)
ACP
2. P ⊃Q
ACP
3. P
ACP
4. Q ⊃R
1, 3, MP
5. Q
2, 3, MP
6. R
4, 5, MP
7. P ⊃R
3–6, CP
8. (P ⊃Q) ⊃(P ⊃R)
2–7, CP
9. [P ⊃(Q ⊃R)] ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃(P ⊃R)]
1–8, CP

418
Chapter 7: Natural Deduction in Propositional Logic
Tautologies expressed as equivalences are usually proved using two conditional
sequences, one after the other. Example:
/ P ≡[P • (Q ⊃P)]
1. P
ACP
2. P v Q
1, Add
3. Q v P
2, Com
4. Q ⊃P
3, Impl
5. P • (Q ⊃P)
1, 4, Conj
6. P ⊃[P • (Q ⊃P)]
1–5, CP
7. P • (Q ⊃P)
ACP
8. P
7, Simp
9. [P • (Q ⊃P)] ⊃P
7–8, CP
10. P ≡[P • (Q ⊃P)]
6, 9, Conj, Equiv
EXERCISE 7.7
Use conditional proof or indirect proof and the eighteen rules of inference to establish
the truth of the following tautologies:
1.
#
P ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃Q]
2. (P ⊃Q) v (P ⊃R)
3. P ≡[P v (Q • P)]
4.
#
(P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P • R) ⊃(Q • R)]
5. (P v Q) ⊃[(P v R) ⊃(Q ⊃R)]
6. P ≡[P • (Q v Q)]
7.
#
(P ⊃Q) v (Q ⊃P)
8. (P ⊃Q) ≡[P ⊃(P • Q)]
9. [(P ⊃Q) • (P ⊃R)] ⊃[P ⊃(Q • R)]
10.
#
[(P • Q) • Q] ⊃P
11. (P ⊃Q) v (Q ⊃P)
12. [P ⊃(Q ⊃R)] ≡[Q ⊃(P ⊃R)]
13.
#
(P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃P]
14. [(P ⊃Q) ⊃R] ⊃[(R ⊃R) ⊃P]
15. (P v Q) ⊃[(P v Q) ⊃(P ≡Q)]
16.
#
[(P ⊃P) • (P ⊃P)]
17. P ⊃[(Q • Q) ⊃R]
18. [(P • Q) v R] ⊃[(R v Q) ⊃(P ⊃Q)]
19.
#
P ≡[P v (Q • Q)]
20. P ⊃[Q ≡(P ⊃Q)]

Proving Logical Truths
419
S
N
L
Summary
Natural deduction is a method for establishing the validity of arguments symbolized in
terms of the ﬁve logical operators. The method consists in applying one or more rules
of inference to the premises and deriving the conclusion as the last line in a sequence
of lines. By studying such a derivation, one can see exactly how the premises imply
the conclusion. Success in using the rules of inference depends on an intimate famil-
iarity with the rules themselves and a working knowledge of how one rule can be
used in conjunction with other rules.
The eight rules of implication are ‘‘one-way’’ rules because the premises of each
rule can be used to derive the conclusion, but the conclusion cannot be used to derive
the premises. On the other hand, the ten rules of replacement are ‘‘two-way’’ rules.
These rules are expressed as logical equivalences, and the axiom of replacementstates
that logically equivalent expressions may replace each other in a proof. Thus, if one
of these rules is used to derive a conclusion, the process can be reversed, and the rule
can be used to derive the premise. This fact allows us to use the rules of replacement
to ‘‘deconstruct’’ the conclusion for insight into how best to derive it in a proof
sequence.
Conditional proof is a simple procedure for deriving a line in a proof sequence—
either the conclusion or some other line. The procedure consists in assuming a certain
statement as the ﬁrst line in a conditional sequence, using that line to derive one or
more additional lines, and then discharging the conditional sequence in a conditional
statement having the ﬁrst line of that sequence as antecedent and the last line as
consequent. The procedure expresses the basic idea that if the antecedent of a true
conditional statement is true, then so is the consequent.
Indirect proof is another simple procedure for deriving a line in a proof sequence.
It consists in assuming the negation of the line to be obtained as the ﬁrst line in an
indirect sequence, using that line to derive a contradiction, and then discharging the
indirect sequence in a statement that is the negation of the ﬁrst line in that sequence.
The procedure expresses the idea that any assumption that necessarily leads to a
contradiction is false.
Natural deduction can also be used to prove logical truths. The technique employs
conditional proof and indirect proof. Conditional proof is often used for logical truths
expressed as conditionals. The antecedent of the logical truth is assumed as the ﬁrst
line of a conditional sequence, the consequent is derived, and the sequence is then
discharged in a statement that expresses the logical truth to be proved. Indirect proof
can be used for proving any logical truth. The negation of the logical truth is assumed
as the ﬁrst line of an indirect sequence, a contradiction is derived, and the sequence is
then discharged in a statement consisting of the negation of the ﬁrst line in that
sequence.

              
8
Predicate Logic
8.1
Symbols and Translation
Techniques were developed in earlier chapters for evaluating two basically different
kinds of arguments. The chapter on categorical syllogisms dealt with arguments such
as the following:
All plays by Ibsen are serious dramas.
No serious dramas are light-hearted comedies.
Therefore, no plays by Ibsen are light-hearted comedies.
In such arguments the fundamental components are terms, and the validity of the ar-
gument depends on the arrangement of the terms within the premises and conclusion.
The chapter on propositional logic, on the other hand, dealt with arguments such
as this:
If the control rods fail, then the reactor will run wild and the core will melt. If the
core melts, radiation will be released into the atmosphere. Therefore, if the
control rods fail, radiation will be released into the atmosphere.
In such arguments the fundamental components are not terms but statements. The
validity of these arguments depends not on the arrangement of the terms within the
statements but on the arrangement of the statements themselves as simple units.
Not all arguments, however, can be assigned to one or the other of these two
groups. There is a third type that is a kind of hybrid, sharing features with both cate-
gorical syllogisms and propositional arguments. Consider, for example, the following:
Morgan Fairchild is rich and beautiful.
If a woman is either rich or famous, she is happy.
Therefore, Morgan Fairchild is happy.
The validity of this argument depends both on the arrangement of the terms and on
the arrangement of the statements. Accordingly, neither syllogistic logic nor proposi-
tional logic alone is sufﬁcient to establish its validity. What is needed is a third kind of

Symbols and Translation
421
S
N
L
logic that combines the distinctive features of syllogistic logic and propositional logic.
This third kind is called predicate logic.
The fundamental component in predicate logic is the predicate, symbolized by
upper-case letters (A, B, C, . . . X, Y, Z). Here are some examples of bare predicates:
English predicate
Symbolic
predicate
is a rabbit
is gigantic
is a doctor
is helpless
R
G
D
H
The blank space immediately following the predicate letter is not part of the predicate;
rather, it indicates the place for some lower-case letter that will represent the subject
of the statement. Depending on what lower-case letter is used, and on the additional
symbolism involved, symbolic predicates may be used to translate three distinct kinds
of statements: singular statements, universal statements, and particular statements.
A singular statement, you may recall from Section 4.7, is a statement that makes
an assertion about a speciﬁcally named person, place, thing, or time. Translating a
singular statement involves writing a lower-case letter corresponding to the subject of
the statement to the immediate right of the upper-case letter corresponding to the
predicate. The letters that are allocated to serve as names of individuals are the ﬁrst
twenty-three letters of the alphabet (a, b, c, . . . u, v, w). These letters are called
individual constants. Here are some examples of translated statements:
Statement
Symbolic
translation
Socrates is mortal.
Tokyo is populous.
The Sun-Times is a newspaper.
King Lear is not a fairy tale.
Berlioz was not a German.
Ms
Pt
Ns
Fk
Gb
Compound arrangements of singular statements may be translated by using the
familiar connectives of propositional logic. Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic
translation
If Paris is beautiful, then Andre told
the truth.
Bp ⊃Ta
Irene is either a doctor or a lawyer.
Di v Li
Senator Wilkins will be elected only
if he campaigns.
Ew ⊃Cw

422
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
Statement
Symbolic
translation
General Motors will prosper if either
Ford is crippled by a strike or
Chrysler declares bankruptcy.
(Cf v Dc) ⊃Pg
Indianapolis gets rain if and only if
Chicago and Milwaukee get snow.
Ri ≡(Sc • Sm)
A universal statement is a statement that makes an assertion about every member
of its subject class. Such statements are either afﬁrmative or negative, depending on
whether the statement afﬁrms or denies that the members of the subject class are
members of the predicate class. The key to translating universal statements is provided
by the Boolean interpretation of these statements (see Section 4.3):
Statement form
Boolean interpretation
All S are P.
No S are P.
If anything is an S, then it is a P.
If anything is an S, then it is not a P.
According to the Boolean interpretation, universal statements are translated as condi-
tionals. Now that we have a symbol (the horseshoe ‘‘⊃’’) to translate conditional
statements, we may use it to translate universal statements. What is still needed, how-
ever, is a symbol to indicate that universal statements make an assertion about every
member of the S class. This symbol, which we introduce now, is called the universal
quantiﬁer. It is formed by placing a lower-case letter in parentheses, (x), and is
translated as ‘‘for any x.’’ The letters that are allocated for forming the universal quan-
tiﬁer are the last three letters of the alphabet (x, y, z). These letters are called individ-
ual variables.
The horseshoe operator and the universal quantiﬁer are combined to translate
universal statements as follows:
Statement form
Symbolic translation
Verbal meaning
All S are P.
(x)(Sx ⊃Px)
For any x, if x is an S,
then x is a P.
No S are P.
(x)(Sx ⊃Px)
For any x, if x is an S,
then x is not a P.
An individual variable differs from an individual constant in that it can stand for any
item at random in the universe. Accordingly, the expression (x)(Sx ⊃Px) means ‘‘If
anything is an S, then it is a P,’’ and (x)(Sx ⊃Px) means ‘‘If anything is an S, then it
is not a P.’’ The fact that these expressions are equivalent to the Boolean interpretation
of universal statements may be seen by recalling how the Boolean interpretation is
represented by Venn diagrams (see Section 4.3). The Venn diagrams corresponding to
the two universal statement forms are as follows:

Symbols and Translation
423
S
N
L
P
S
All S are P
P
S
No S are P
Where shading designates emptiness, the diagram on the left asserts that if anything is
in the S circle, it is also in the P circle, and the one on the right asserts that if anything
is in the S circle, it is not in the P circle. This is exactly what is asserted by the symbolic
expressions above. These symbolic expressions may therefore be taken as being ex-
actly synonymous with the Boolean interpretation of universal statements.
A possible source of confusion at this point concerns the fact that both S and P in
the symbolic expressions are predicates, whereas in the original statement forms S is
the subject and P is the predicate. Any problem in this regard vanishes, however, once
one understands what happens when universal statements are converted into condi-
tionals. When so converted, S becomes the predicate of the antecedent and P becomes
the predicate of the consequent. In other words, in the conditional ‘‘If anything is an
S, then it is a P,’’ both S and P are predicates. Thus, using predicate symbolism to
translate universal statements leads to no difﬁculties. When translating these state-
ments, the point to remember is simply this: The subject of the original statement is
represented by a capital letter in the antecedent, and the predicate by a capital letter
in the consequent. Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
All skyscrapers are tall.
No frogs are birds.
All ambassadors are statesmen.
No diamonds are rubies.
(x)(Sx ⊃Tx)
(x)(Fx ⊃Bx)
(x)(Ax ⊃Sx)
(x)(Dx ⊃Rx)
In these examples, the expressions Sx ⊃Tx, Fx ⊃Bx, and so on are called state-
ment functions. A statement function is a mere pattern for a statement. It makes no
deﬁnite assertion about anything in the universe, has no truth value, and cannot be
translated as a statement. The variables that occur in statement functions are called
free variables because they are not bound by any quantiﬁer. In contrast, the variables
that occur in statements are called bound variables.
In using quantiﬁers to translate statements, we adopt a convention similar to the
one adopted for the tilde operator. That is, the quantiﬁer governs only the expression
immediately following it. For example, in the statement (x)(Ax ⊃Bx) the universal
quantiﬁer governs the entire statement function in parentheses—namely, Ax ⊃Bx.
But in the expression (x)Ax ⊃Bx, the universal quantiﬁer governs only the statement
function Ax. The same convention is adopted for the existential quantiﬁer, which will
be introduced presently.

424
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
Particular statements are statements that make an assertion about one or more
unnamed members of the subject class. As with universal statements, particular state-
ments are either afﬁrmative or negative, depending on whether the statement afﬁrms
or denies that members of the subject class are members of the predicate class. Also,
as with universal statements, the key to translating particular statements is provided
by the Boolean interpretation:
Statement
form
Boolean interpretation
Some S are P.
At least one thing is an S and it is also a P.
Some S are not P.
At least one thing is an S and it is not a P.
In other words, particular statements are translated as conjunctions. Since we are
already familiar with the symbol for conjunction (the dot), the only additional symbol
that we need in order to translate these statements is a symbol for existence. This is
provided by the existential quantiﬁer, formed by placing a variable to the right of a
backward ‘‘E’’ in parentheses, thus: (∃x). This symbol is translated ‘‘there exists an x
such that.’’ The existential quantiﬁer is combined with the dot operator to translate
particular statements as follows:
Statement form
Symbolic
translation
Verbal meaning
Some S are P.
(∃x)(Sx • Px)
There exists an x such that
x is an S and x is a P.
Some S are not P.
(∃x)(Sx • Px)
There exists an x such that
x is an S and x is not a P.
As in the symbolic expression of universal statements, the letter x is an individual
variable, which can stand for any item in the universe. Accordingly, the expression
(∃x)(Sx • Px) means ‘‘Something exists that is both an S and a P,’’ and (∃x)(Sx • Px)
means ‘‘Something exists that is an S and not a P.’’ To see the equivalence of these
expressions with the Boolean (and Aristotelian) interpretation of particularstatements,
it is again useful to recall how these statements are represented by Venn diagrams:
P
S
Some S are P
P
S
Some S are not P
X
X

Symbols and Translation
425
S
N
L
Where the ‘‘X’’ designates at least one existing item, the diagram on the left asserts that
something exists that is both an S and a P, and the one on the right asserts that
something exists that is an S and not a P. In other words, these diagrams assert exactly
the same thing as the symbolic expressions above. These symbolic expressions, there-
fore, exactly express the Boolean (and Aristotelian) interpretation of particular state-
ments. Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Some men are paupers.
(∃x)(Mx • Px)
Some diseases are not
contagious.
(∃x)(Dx • Cx)
Some jobs are boring.
(∃x)(Jx • Bx)
Some vehicles are not
motorcycles.
(∃x)(Vx • Mx)
The general rule to follow in translating statements in predicate logic is always to
make an effort to understand the meaning of the statement to be translated. If the
statement makes an assertion about every member of its subject class, a universal
quantiﬁer should be used to translate it; but if it makes an assertion about only one or
more members of this class, an existential quantiﬁer should be used.
Many of the principles developed in syllogistic logic (see Section 4.7) may be
carried over into predicate logic. Speciﬁcally, it should be understood that statements
beginning with the words only and none but are exclusive propositions. When these
statements are translated, the term occurring ﬁrst in the original statement becomes
the consequent in the symbolic expression, and the term occurring second becomes
the antecedent. One of the few differences in this respect between predicate logic and
syllogistic logic concerns singular statements. In syllogistic logic singular statements
are translated as universals, while in predicate logic, as we have seen, they are trans-
lated in a unique way. Here are some examples of a variety of statements:
Statement
Symbolic translation
There are happy marriages.
(∃x)(Mx • Hx)
Every pediatrician loses sleep.
(x)(Px ⊃Lx)
Animals exist.
(∃x)Ax
Unicorns do not exist.
(∃x)Ux
Anything is conceivable
(x)Cx
Sea lions are mammals.
(x)(Sx ⊃Mx)
Sea lions live in these caves.
(∃x)(Sx • Lx)
Egomaniacs are not pleasant
companions.
(x)(Ex ⊃Px)

426
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
Statement
Symbolic translation
A few egomaniacs did not arrive
on time.
(∃x)(Ex • Ax)
Only close friends were invited
to the wedding.
(x)(Ix ⊃Cx)
None but citizens are eligible
to vote.
(x)(Ex ⊃Cx)
It is not the case that every Girl
Scout sells cookies.
(x)(Gx ⊃Sx)
or
(∃x)(Gx • Sx)
Not a single psychologist at-
tended the convention.
(∃x)(Px • Ax)
or
(x)(Px ⊃Ax)
As these examples illustrate, the general procedure in translating statements in
predicate logic is to render universal statements as conditionals preceded by a univer-
sal quantiﬁer, and particular statements as conjunctions preceded by an existential
quantiﬁer. However, as the third and ﬁfth examples indicate, there are exceptions to
this procedure. A statement that makes an assertion about literally everything in the
universe is translated in terms of a single predicate preceded by a universal quantiﬁer,
and a statement that asserts that some class of things simply exists is translated in terms
of a single predicate preceded by an existential quantiﬁer. The last two examples
illustrate the fact that a particular statement is equivalent to a negated universal, and
vice versa. The ﬁrst of these is equivalent to ‘‘Some Girl Scouts do not sell cookies’’
and the second to ‘‘No psychologists attended the convention.’’ Actually, any quanti-
ﬁed statement can be translated using either a universal or an existential quantiﬁer,
provided that one of them is negated. The equivalence of these two forms of expres-
sion will be analyzed further in Section 8.3.
More complex statements may be translated by following the basic rules just pre-
sented. Examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
1. Only snakes and lizards
thrive in the desert.
(x)[Tx ⊃(Sx v Lx)]
2. Oranges and lemons are
citrus fruits.
(x)[(Ox v Lx) ⊃Cx]
3. Ripe apples are crunchy
and delicious.
(x)[(Rx • Ax) ⊃(Cx • Dx)]
4. Azaleas bloom if and only
if they are fertilized.
(x)[Ax ⊃(Bx ≡Fx)]

Symbols and Translation
427
S
N
L
5. Peaches are edible unless
they are rotten.
(x)[Px ⊃(Rx ⊃Ex)]
or
(x)[Px ⊃(Ex v Rx)]
6. Cats and dogs bite if they
are frightened or harassed.
(x){(Cx v Dx) ⊃[(Fx v Hx) ⊃Bx]}
Notice that the ﬁrst example is translated in terms of the disjunction Sx v Lx even
though the English statement reads ‘‘snakes and lizards.’’ If the translation were ren-
dered as (x)[Tx ⊃(Sx • Lx)] it would mean that anything that thrives in the desert is
both a snake and a lizard (at the same time). And this is surely not what is meant. For
the same reason, the second example is translated in terms of the disjunction Ox v Lx
even though the English reads ‘‘oranges and lemons.’’ If the statement were translated
(x)[(Ox • Lx) ⊃Cx], it would mean that anything that is simultaneously an orange and
a lemon (and there are none of these) is a citrus fruit. The same principle is used in
translating the sixth example, which, incidentally, reads ‘‘If anything is a cat or a dog,
then if it is frightened or harassed, it bites.’’ The third example employs the conjunction
Rx • Ax to translate ripe apples. This, of course, is correct, because such a thing is both
ripe and an apple at the same time. The ﬁfth example illustrates the fact that ‘‘unless’’
may be translated as either ‘‘if not’’ or ‘‘or.’’
The operators of propositional logic can be used to form compound arrangements
of universal and particular statements, just as they can be used to form compound
arrangements of singular statements. Here are some examples:
Statement
Symbolic translation
If Elizabeth is a historian,
then some women are historians.
He ⊃(∃x)(Wx • Hx)
If some cellists are music direc-
tors, then some orchestras are
properly led.
(∃x)(Cx • Mx) ⊃(∃x)(Ox • Px)
Either everything is alive or
Bergson’s theory is not correct.
(x)Ax v Cb
All novels are interesting if and
only if some Steinbeck novels are
not romances.
(x)(Nx ⊃Ix) ≡(∃x)[(Nx • Sx) • Rx)]
Green avocados are never pur-
chased unless all the ripe ones
are expensive.
(x)[(Gx • Ax) ⊃Px] v (x)[(Rx • Ax) ⊃Ex]
We have seen that the general procedure is to translate universal statements as
conditionals preceded by a universal quantiﬁer, and to translate particular statements
as conjunctions preceded by an existential quantiﬁer. Let us see what happens to these

428
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
translations when they are preceded by the wrong quantiﬁer. Consider the false state-
ment ‘‘No cats are animals.’’ This is correctly translated (x)(Cx ⊃Ax). If, however, it
were translated (∃x)(Cx ⊃Ax), the symbolic statement would turn out to be true.
This may be seen as follows. (∃x)(Cx ⊃Ax) is equivalent via material implication to
(∃x)(Cx v Ax), which in turn is equivalent via DeMorgan’s Rule to (∃x)(Cx • Ax).
The latter statement, however, merely asserts that something exists that is not both a
cat and an animal—for example, a dog—which is true. Again, consider the true state-
ment ‘‘Some cats are animals.’’ This is correctly translated (∃x)(Cx • Ax). If, however,
it were translated (x)(Cx • Ax), the symbolic statement would assert that everything in
the universe is both a cat and an animal, which is clearly false. Thus, as these examples
illustrate, it is imperative that the two quantiﬁers not be confused with each other.
One ﬁnal observation needs to be made. It was mentioned earlier that the letters x,
y, and z are reserved for use as variables for translating universal and particular state-
ments. In accord with this convention, the other twenty-three lower-case letters (a, b,
c, . . . u, v, w) may be used as names for translating singular statements. Thus, for
example, ‘‘Albert is a scientist’’ is translated Sa. But a question naturally arises with
statements such as ‘‘Xerxes was a king.’’ Should this statement be translated Kx? The
answer is no. Some other letter, for example the second letter in the name, should be
selected instead of x. Maintaining this alphabetical convention will help us avoid
mistakes in the next section when we use natural deduction to derive the conclusions
of arguments.
EXERCISE 8.1
Translate the following statements into symbolic form. Avoid negation signs preceding
quantiﬁers. The predicate letters are given in parentheses.
1.
#
Elaine is a chemist. (C)
2. All maples are trees. (M, T )
3. Some grapes are sour. (G, S)
4.
#
No novels are biographies. (N, B)
5. Some holidays are not relaxing. (H, R)
6. If Gertrude is correct, then the Taj Mahal is made of marble. (C, M)
7.
#
Gertrude is not correct only if the Taj Mahal is made of granite. (C, G)
8. Tigers exist. (T )
9. Anything that leads to violence is wrong. (L, W)
10.
#
There are pornographic art works. (A, P)
11. Not every smile is genuine. (S, G)
12. Every penguin loves ice. (P, L)
13.
#
There is trouble in River City. (T, R)
14. Whoever is a socialite is vain. (S, V)

Symbols and Translation
429
S
N
L
15. Nobody consumed by jealousy is happy. (C, H)
16.
#
Everything is imaginable. (I)
17. Ghosts do not exist. (G)
18. A thoroughbred is a horse. (T, H)
19.
#
A thoroughbred won the race. (T, W)
20. Not all mushrooms are edible. (M, E)
21. Not any horse chestnuts are edible. (H, E)
22.
#
A few guests arrived late. (G, A)
23. None but gentlemen prefer blondes. (G, P)
24. The only musicians that are available are trombonists. (M, A, T )
25.
#
Only talented musicians perform in the symphony. (T, M, P)
26. Any well-made car runs smoothly. (W, C, R)
27. Not every foreign car runs smoothly. (F, C, R)
28.
#
A good violin is rare and expensive. (G, V, R, E)
29. Violins and cellos are stringed instruments. (V, C, S, I)
30. A room with a view is available. (R, V, A)
31.
#
A room with a view is expensive. (R, V, E)
32. Some French restaurants are exclusive. (F, R, E)
33. Some French cafes are not recommended. (F, C, R)
34.
#
Taylor is guilty if and only if all the witnesses committed perjury. (G, W, C)
35. If any witnesses told the truth, then either Parsons or Harris is guilty. (W, T, G)
36. If all mysteries are interesting, then Rebecca is interesting. (M, I)
37.
#
If there are any interesting mysteries, then Rebecca is interesting. (M, I)
38. Skaters and dancers are energetic individuals. (S, D, E, I)
39. Swiss watches are not expensive unless they are made of gold. (S, W, E, M)
40.
#
If all the buildings in Manhattan are skyscrapers, then the Chrysler building is
a skyscraper. (B, M, S)
41. Experienced mechanics are well paid only if all the inexperienced ones are
lazy. (E, M, W, L)
42. Balcony seats are never chosen unless all the orchestra seats are taken. (B, S,
C, O, T )
43.
#
Some employees will get raises if and only if some managers are overly
generous. (E, R, M, O)
44. The physicists and astronomers at the symposium are listed in the program if
they either chair a meeting or read a paper. (P, A, S, L, C, R)
45. If the scientists and technicians are conscientious and exacting, then some of
the mission directors will be either pleased or delighted. (S, T, C, E, M, P, D)

430
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
8.2
Using the Rules of Inference
The chief reason for using truth functional operators (the dot, wedge, horseshoe, and
so on) in translating statements into the symbolism of predicate logic is to allow for
the application of the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of arguments
via natural deduction. Since, however, the ﬁrst eight of these rules are applicable only
to whole lines in an argument, as long as the quantiﬁer is attached to a line these rules
of inference cannot be applied. To provide for their application, four additional rules
are required to remove quantiﬁers at the beginning of a proof sequence and to intro-
duce them, when needed, at the end of the sequence. These four rules are called
universal instantiation, universal generalization, existential instantiation, and existen-
tial generalization. The ﬁrst two are used to remove and introduce universal quantiﬁ-
ers, respectively, and the second two to remove and introduce existential quantiﬁers.
Let us ﬁrst consider universal instantiation. As an illustration of the need for this
rule, consider the following argument:
All economists are social scientists.
Milton Friedman is an economist.
Therefore, Milton Friedman is a social scientist.
This argument, which is clearly valid, is symbolized as follows:
1. (x)(Ex ⊃Sx)
2. Em
/ Sm
As the argument now stands, none of the ﬁrst eight rules of inference can be applied;
as a result, there is no way in which the two premises can be combined to obtain the
conclusion. However, if the ﬁrst premise could be used to obtain a line that reads
Em ⊃Sm, this statement could be combined with the second premise to yield the
conclusion via modus ponens. Universal instantiation serves exactly this purpose.
The ﬁrst premise states that for any item x in the universe, if that item is an E, then
it is an S. But since Milton Friedman is himself an item in the universe, the ﬁrst premise
implies that if Milton Friedman is an E, then Milton Friedman is an S. A line stating
exactly this can be obtained by universal instantiation (UI). In other words, universal
instantiation provides us with an instance of the universal statement (x)(Ex ⊃Sx). In
the completed proof, which follows, the m in line 3 is called the instantial letter:
1. (x)(Ex ⊃Sx)
2. Em
/ Sm
3. Em ⊃Sm
4. Sm
1, UI
2, 3, MP

Using the Rules of Inference
431
S
N
L
At this point the question might arise as to why modus ponens is applicable to lines
2 and 3. In Chapter 7 we applied modus ponens to lines of the form p ⊃q, but are we
justiﬁed in applying it to a line that reads Em ⊃Sm? The answer is yes, because Em
and Sm are simply alternate ways of symbolizing simple statements. As so understood,
these symbols do not differ in any material way from the p and q of propositional
logic.
We may now give a general deﬁnition of instantiation. Instantiation is an operation
that consists in deleting a quantiﬁer and replacing every variable bound by that quan-
tiﬁer with the same instantial letter. For an example of an operation that violates the
rule expressed in this deﬁnition, consider line 3 of the foregoing proof. If this line
were instantiated as Em ⊃Sx, it would not be correct because the x in Sx was not
replaced with the instantial letter m.
Let us now consider universal generalization. The need for this rule may be
illustrated through reference to the following argument:
All psychiatrists are doctors.
All doctors are college graduates.
Therefore, all psychiatrists are college graduates.
This valid argument is symbolized as follows:
1. (x)(Px ⊃Dx)
2. (x)(Dx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Px ⊃Cx)
Once universal instantiation is applied to the two premises, we will have lines that can
be used to set up a hypothetical syllogism. But then we will have to reintroduce a
universal quantiﬁer to obtain the conclusion as written. This ﬁnal step is obtained by
universal generalization (UG). The justiﬁcation for such a step lies in the fact that both
premises are universal statements. The ﬁrst states that if anything is a P, then it is a D,
and the second states that if anything is a D, then it is a C. We may therefore conclude
that if anything is a P, then it is a C. But because of the complete generality of this
reasoning process, there is a special way in which we must perform the universal
instantiation step. Instead of selecting a speciﬁcally named instance, as we did in the
previous example, we must select a variable that can range over every instance in the
universe. The variables at our disposal, you may recall from the previous section, are
x, y, and z. Let us select y. The completed proof is as follows:
1. (x)(Px ⊃Dx)
2. (x)(Dx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Px ⊃Cx)
3. Py ⊃Dy
4. Dy ⊃Cy
5. Py ⊃Cy
6. (x)(Px ⊃Cx)
1, UI
2, UI
3, 4, HS
5, UG

432
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
As noted earlier, the expressions in lines 3, 4, and 5 are called statement functions. As
such, they are mere patterns for statements; they have no truth value and cannot be
translated as statements. Yet if we take certain liberties, we might characterize line 5
as saying ‘‘If it is a P, then it is a C, where ‘‘it’’ designates any item at random in the
universe. Line 6 can then be seen as reexpressing this sense of line 5.
As the two previous examples illustrate, we have two ways of performing universal
instantiation. On the one hand, we may instantiate with respect to a constant, such as
a or b, and on the other, with respect to a variable, such as x or y. The exact way in
which this operation is to be performed depends on the kind of result intended. If we
want some part of a universal statement to match a singular statement on another line,
as in the ﬁrst example, we instantiate with respect to a constant. But if, at the end of
the proof, we want to perform universal generalization over some part of the state-
ment we are instantiating, then we must instantiate by using a variable. This latter
point leads to an important restriction governing universal generalization—namely,
that we cannot perform this operation when the instantial letter is a constant. Consider
the following erroneous proof sequence:
1. Ta
2. (x)Tx
1, UG (invalid)
If Ta means ‘‘Albert is a thief,’’ then on the basis of this information, we have concluded
(line 2) that everything in the universe is a thief. Clearly, such an inference is invalid.
This illustrates the fact that universal generalization can be performed only when the
instantial letter (in this case a) is a variable.
Let us now consider existential generalization. The need for this operation is
illustrated through the following argument:
All tenors are singers.
Placido Domingo is a tenor.
Therefore, there is at least one singer.
This argument is symbolized as follows:
1. (x)(Tx ⊃Sx)
2. Tp
/ (∃x)Sx
If we instantiate the ﬁrst line with respect to p, we can obtain Sp via modus ponens.
But if it is true that Placido Domingo is a tenor, then it certainly follows that there is at
least one singer (namely, Placido Domingo). This last step is accomplished by existen-
tial generalization (EG). The proof is as follows:
1. (x)(Tx ⊃Sx)
2. Tp
/ (∃x)Sx
3. Tp ⊃Sp
4. Sp
5. (∃x)Sx
1, UI
2, 3, MP
4, EG

Using the Rules of Inference
433
S
N
L
There are no restrictions on existential generalization, and the operation can be per-
formed when the instantial letter is either a constant (as above) or a variable. As an
instance of the latter, consider the following sequence:
1. (x)(Px ⊃Qx)
2. (x)Px
3. Py ⊃Qy
4. Py
5. Qy
6. (∃x)Qx
/ (∃x)Qx
1, UI
2, UI
3, 4, MP
5, EG
Line 5 states in effect that everything in the universe is a Q. From this, the much weaker
conclusion follows (line 6) that something is a Q. If you should wonder how an
existential conclusion can be drawn from universal premises, the answer is that pred-
icate logic assumes that at least one thing exists in the universe. Hence, line 2, which
asserts that everything in the universe is a P, entails that at least one thing is a P. Without
this assumption, universal instantiation in line 4 would not be possible.
We may now give a deﬁnition of generalization that covers both varieties. Gener-
alization is an operation that consists in (1) introducing a quantiﬁer immediately prior
to a statement, a statement function, or another quantiﬁer, and (2) replacing one or
more occurrences of a certain instantial letter in the statement or statement function
with the same variable that appears in the quantiﬁer. For universal generalization, all
occurrences of the instantial letter must be replaced with the variable in the quantiﬁer,
and for existential generalization, at least one of the instantial letters must be replaced
with the variable in the quantiﬁer. Thus, both of the following cases of existential
generalization are valid (although the one on the left is by far the more common
version):
1. Fa • Ga
2. (∃x)(Fx • Gx)
1, EG
1. Fa • Ga
2. (∃x)(Fx • Ga)
1, EG
On the other hand, only one of the following cases of universal generalization is
valid:
1. Fx ⊃Gx
2. (y)(Fy ⊃Gy)
1, UG
1. Fx ⊃Gx
2. (y)(Fy ⊃Gx)
1, UG (invalid)
The inference on the right is invalid because the x in Gx was not replaced with the
variable in the quantiﬁer (that is, y).
Of course, it may happen that the instantial letter is the same as the variable that
appears in the quantiﬁer. Thus, the operation ‘‘Gx, therefore (x)Gx’’ counts as a gen-
eralization. Cases of generalization where a quantiﬁer is introduced prior to another
quantiﬁer will be presented in Section 8.6.

434
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
The need for existential instantiation can be illustrated through the following
argument:
All attorneys are college graduates.
Some attorneys are golfers.
Therefore, some golfers are college graduates.
The symbolic formulation is as follows:
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Gx)
/ (∃x)(Gx • Cx)
If both quantiﬁers can be removed, the conclusion can be obtained via simpliﬁcation,
modus ponens, and conjunction. The universal quantiﬁer can be removed by universal
instantiation, but to remove the existential quantiﬁer we need existential instantiation
(EI). Line 2 states that there is something that is both an A and a G. Existential instan-
tiation consists in giving this something a name, for example, ‘‘David.’’ We will call
this name an ‘‘existential name’’ because it is obtained through existentialinstantiation.
The completed proof is as follows:
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Gx)
/ (∃x)(Gx • Cx)
3. Ad • Gd
4. Ad ⊃Cd
5. Ad
6. Cd
7. Gd
8. Gd • Cd
9. (∃x)(Gx • Cx)
2, EI
1, UI
3, Simp
4, 5, MP
3, Com, Simp
6, 7, Conj
8, EG
Examination of this proof reveals an immediate restriction that must be placed on
existential instantiation. The name that we have assigned to the particular something
in line 2 that is both an A and a G is a hypothetical name. It would be a mistake to
conclude that this something really has that name. Accordingly, we must introduce a
restriction that prevents us from ending the proof with some line that includes the
letter d. If, for example, the proof were ended at line 8, we would be concluding that
the something that is a G and a C really does have the name d. This, of course, would
not be legitimate, because d is an arbitrary name introduced into the proof for mere
convenience. To prevent such a mistake, we require that the name selected for exis-
tential instantiation not appear to the right of the slanted line adjacent to the last
premise that indicates the conclusion to be obtained. Since the last line in the proof
must be identical to this line, such a restriction prevents us from ending the proof with
a line that contains the existential name.
Further examination of this proof indicates another important restriction onexisten-
tial instantiation. Notice that the line involving existential instantiation is listed before

Using the Rules of Inference
435
S
N
L
the line involving universal instantiation. There is a reason for this. If the order were
reversed, the existential instantiation step would rest upon the illicit assumption that
the something that is both an A and a G has the same name as the name used in the
earlier universal instantiation step. In other words, it would involve the assumption
that the something that is both an A and a G is the very same something named in the
line Ad ⊃Cd. Of course, no such assumption is legitimate. To keep this mistake from
happening, we introduce the restriction that the name introduced by existentialinstan-
tiation be a new name not occurring earlier in the proof sequence. The following
defective proof illustrates what can happen if this restriction is violated:
1. (∃x)(Fx • Ax)
2. (∃x)(Fx • Ox)
/ (∃x)(Ax • Ox)
3. Fb • Ab
4. Fb • Ob
5. Ab
6. Ob
7. Ab • Ob
8. (∃x)(Ax • Ox)
1, EI
2, EI (invalid)
3, Com, Simp
4, Com, Simp
5, 6, Conj
7, EG
To see that this proof is indeed defective, let F stand for fruits, A for apples, and O for
oranges. The argument that results is:
Some fruits are apples.
Some fruits are oranges.
Therefore, some apples are oranges.
Since the premises are true and the conclusion false, the argument is clearly invalid.
The defect in the proof occurs on line 4. This line asserts that the something that is
both an F and an O is the very same something that is both an F and an A. In other
words, the restriction that the name introduced by existential instantiation be a new
name not occurring earlier in the proof is violated.
The ﬁrst restriction on existential instantiation requires that the existential name not
occur in the line that indicates the conclusion to be obtained, and the second restric-
tion requires that this name be a new name that has not occurred earlier in the proof.
These two restrictions can easily be combined into a single restriction that requires
that the name introduced by existential instantiation be a new name that has not
occurred in any previous line, including the line adjacent to the last premise that
indicates the conclusion to be obtained.
One further restriction that affects all four of these rules of inference requires that
the rules be applied only to whole lines in a proof. The following sequence illustrates
a violation of this restriction:
1. (x)Px ⊃(x)Qx
2. Py ⊃Qy
1, UI (invalid)

436
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
In line 2 universal instantiation is applied to both the antecedent and consequent of
the ﬁrst line. To obtain line 2 validly the ﬁrst line would have to read (x)(Px ⊃Qx).
With this ﬁnal restriction in mind, the four new rules of inference may now be sum-
marized. In the formulation that follows, the symbols x and y represent any state-
ment function—that is, any symbolic arrangement containing individual variables,
such as Ax ⊃Bx, Cy ⊃(Dy v Ey), or Gz • Hz. And the symbol a represents any
statement; that is, any symbolic arrangement containing individual constants (or
names), such as Ac ⊃Bc, Cm ⊃(Dm v Em), or Gw • Hw:
1. Universal instantiation (UI):
(x)x
y
(x)x
a
2. Universal generalization (UG):
y
(x)x
not
allowed:
a
(x)x
3. Existential instantiation (EI):
(∃x)x
a
not
allowed:
(∃x)x
y
Restriction: The existential name a must be a new name
that has not occurred in any previous line.
4. Existential generalization (EG):
a
(∃x)x
y
(∃x)x
The not allowed version of universal generalization recalls the already familiar fact
that generalization is not possible when the instantial letter is a constant. In other
words, the mere fact that the individual a is an  is not sufﬁcient to allow us to
conclude that everything in the universe is an . At present this is the only restriction
needed for universal generalization. In Sections 8.4 and 8.6, however, two additional
restrictions will be introduced. The not allowed version of existential instantiation
merely recalls the fact that this operation is a naming process. Because variables
(x, y, and z) are not names, they cannot be used as instantial letters in existential
instantiation.
Let us now investigate some applications of these rules. Consider the following
proof:
1. (x)(Hx ⊃Ix)
2. (x)(Ix ⊃Hx)
3. Hx ⊃Ix
4. Ix ⊃Hx
5. (Hx ⊃Ix) • (Ix ⊃Hx)
3, 4, Conj
/ (x)(Hx ≡Ix)
1, UI
2, UI

Using the Rules of Inference
437
S
N
L
6. Hx ≡Ix
7. (x)(Hx ≡Ix)
5, Equiv
6, UG
Because we want to perform universal generalization on the last line of the proof, we
instantiate in lines 3 and 4 using a variable, not a constant. Notice that the variable
selected is the same letter that occurs in lines 1 and 2. While a new letter (y or z) could
have been selected, this is never necessary in such a step. It is necessary, however,
since we want to combine lines 3 and 4, that the same variable be selected in obtaining
these lines. Another example:
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (∃x)Ax
3. Am
4. (Am v Bm) ⊃Cm
5. Am v Bm
6. Cm
7. (∃x)Cx
/ (∃x)Cx
2, EI
1, UI
3, Add
4, 5, MP
6, EG
In conformity with the restriction on existential instantiation, the EI step is performed
before the UI step. The same letter is then selected in the UI step as was used in the EI
step. In line 5, Bm is joined disjunctively via addition to Am. This rule applies in
predicate logic in basically the same way that it does in propositional logic. Any
statement or statement function we choose can be joined disjunctively to a given line.
Another example:
1. (∃x)Kx ⊃(x)(Lx ⊃Mx)
2. Kc • Lc
3. Kc
4. (∃x)Kx
5. (x)(Lx ⊃Mx)
6. Lc ⊃Mc
7. Lc
8. Mc
/ Mc
2, Simp
3, EG
1, 4, MP
5, UI
2, Com, Simp
6, 7, MP
Since the instantiation (and generalization) rules must be applied to whole lines, it is
impossible to instantiate line 1. The only strategy that can be followed is to use some
other line to obtain the antecedent of this line and then obtain the consequent via
modus ponens. Once the consequent is obtained (line 5), it is instantiated using the
same letter that appears in line 2. The following example incorporates all four of the
instantiation and generalization rules:
1. (x)(Px ⊃Qx) ⊃(∃x)(Rx • Sx)
2. (x)(Px ⊃Sx) • (x)(Sx ⊃Qx)
3. (x)(Px ⊃Sx)
4. (x)(Sx ⊃Qx)
/ (∃x)Sx
2, Simp
2, Com, Simp

438
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
5. Py ⊃Sy
6. Sy ⊃Qy
7. Py ⊃Qy
8. (x)(Px ⊃Qx)
9. (∃x)(Rx • Sx)
10. Ra • Sa
11. Sa
12. (∃x)Sx
3, UI
4, UI
5, 6, HS
7, UG
1, 8, MP
9, EI
10, Com, Simp
11, EG
As with the previous example, line 1 cannot be instantiated. To instantiate the two
conjuncts in line 2, they must ﬁrst be separated (lines 3 and 4). Because UG is to be
used in line 8, lines 3 and 4 are instantiated using a variable. On the other hand, a
constant is used to instantiate line 9 because the statement in question is a particular
statement.
Another example:
1. [(∃x)Ax • (∃x)Bx] ⊃Cj
2. (∃x)(Ax • Dx)
3. (∃x)(Bx • Ex)
4. Am • Dm
5. Bn • En
6. Am
7. Bn
8. (∃x)Ax
9. (∃x)Bx
10. (∃x)Ax • (∃x)Bx
11. Cj
/ Cj
2, EI
3, EI
4, Simp
5, Simp
6, EG
7, EG
8, 9, Conj
1, 10, MP
When line 2 is instantiated (line 4), a letter other than j, which appears in line 1, is
selected. Then, when line 3 is instantiated (line 5), another new letter is selected. The
conclusion is obtained, as in earlier examples, via modus ponens by obtaining the
antecedent of line 1.
The following examples illustrate invalid or improper applications of the instantia-
tion and generalization rules:
1. Fy ⊃Gy
2. (x)(Fx ⊃Gy)
1, UG (invalid—every instance of y must be
replaced with x)
1. (x)Fx ⊃Ga
2. Fx ⊃Ga
1, UI
(invalid—instantiation can be applied
only to whole lines)
1. (x)Fx ⊃(x)Gx
2. Fx ⊃Gx
1, UI
(invalid—instantiation can be applied
only to whole lines)
1. Fc
2. (∃x)Gx
3. Gc
2, EI
(invalid—c appears in line 1)

Using the Rules of Inference
439
S
N
L
1. Fm ⊃Gm
2. (x)(Fx ⊃Gx)
1, UG (invalid—the instantial letter must be a
variable; m is a constant)
1. (∃x)Fx
2. (∃x)Gx
3. Fe
4. Ge
1, EI
2, EI
(invalid—e appears in line 3)
1. Fs • Gs
2. (∃x)Fx • Gs
1, EG (improper—generalization can be
applied only to whole lines)
1. (x)Fx
2. Fy
1, UI
(invalid—lines involving negated
quantiﬁers cannot be instantiated;
see Section 8.3)
EXERCISE 8.2
I. Use the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusions of the following
symbolized arguments. Do not use either conditional proof or indirect proof.
(1)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
(2) 1. (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
/ (∃x)(Ax • Cx)
(3) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Bm
/ (∃x)Ax
(4)
#
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. Ag • Bg
/ Cg
(5) 1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (∃y)(Ay • Dy)
/ (∃y)Cy
(6) 1. (x)[Jx ⊃(Kx • Lx)]
2. (∃y)Ky
/ (∃z)Jz
(7)
#
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. (∃x)(Ax • Cx)
/ (∃x)Bx
(8) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Am • An
/ Bm • Bn
(9) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Am v An
/ Bm v Bn
(10)
#
1. (x)(Bx v Ax)
2. (x)(Bx ⊃Ax)
/ (x)Ax
(11) 1. (x)[(Ax • Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
/ (∃x)Ax

440
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
(12) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. Am • Bm
/ Cm
(13)
#
1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)Bx
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(∃x)Dx
3. An • Cn
/ (∃x)(Bx • Dx)
(14) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Cx ⊃Bx)
2. (∃x)(Ax v Bx)
3. (x)(Bx ⊃Ax)
/ (x)(Cx ⊃Ax)
(15) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Dx ⊃(∃x)Cx
3. (∃x)(Ax • Dx)
/ (∃x)Bx
II. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use the eighteen rules
of inference to derive the conclusion of each. Do not use conditional or indirect
proof.
1.
#
Oranges are sweet. Also, oranges are fragrant. Therefore, oranges are sweet
and fragrant. (O, S, F)
2. Tomatoes are vegetables. Therefore, the tomatoes in the garden are vegeta-
bles. (T, V, G)
3. Apples and pears grow on trees. Therefore, apples grow on trees. (A, P, G)
4.
#
Carrots are vegetables and peaches are fruit. Furthermore, there are carrots
and peaches in the garden. Therefore, there are vegetables and fruit in the
garden. (C, V, P, F, G)
5. Beans and peas are legumes. There are no legumes in the garden. Therefore,
there are no beans in the garden. (B, P, L, G)
6. There are some cucumbers in the garden. If there are any cucumbers, there
are some pumpkins in the garden. All pumpkins are vegetables. Therefore,
there are some vegetables in the garden. (C, G, P, V)
7.
#
All gardeners are industrious persons. Furthermore, any person who is indus-
trious is respected. Therefore, since Arthur and Catherine are gardeners, it
follows that they are respected. (G, I, P, R)
8. Some huckleberries are ripe. Furthermore, some boysenberries are sweet. If
there are any huckleberries, then the boysenberries are edible if they are
sweet. Therefore, some boysenberries are edible. (H, R, B, S, E)
9. If there are any ripe watermelons, then the caretakers performed well. Fur-
thermore, if there are any large watermelons, then whoever performed well
will get a bonus. There are some large, ripe watermelons. Therefore, the
caretakers will get a bonus. (R, W, C, P, L, B)
10.
#
If the artichokes in the kitchen are ripe, then the guests will be surprised.
Furthermore, if the artichokes in the kitchen are ﬂavorful, then the guests will

Change of Quantiﬁer Rules
441
S
N
L
be pleased. The artichokes in the kitchen are ripe and ﬂavorful. Therefore,
the guests will be surprised and pleased. (A, K, R, G, S, F, P)
8.3
Change of Quantiﬁer Rules
The rules of inference developed thus far are not sufﬁcient to derive the conclusion of
every argument in predicate logic. For instance, consider the following:
(∃x)(Px • Qx)
(x)(Rx v Qx)
(∃x)Px
Both premises have negation signs preceding the quantiﬁers. As long as these nega-
tion signs remain, neither statement can be instantiated; and if these statements cannot
be instantiated, the conclusion cannot be derived. What is needed is a set of rules that
will allow us to remove the negation signs. These rules, which we will proceed to
develop now, are called change of quantiﬁer rules.
Happily, the change of quantiﬁer rules have a solid basis in intuition. Suppose we
are given the statement, ‘‘It is not the case that everything is beautiful.’’ We immediately
recognize that this statement is equivalent in meaning to ‘‘Something is not beautiful.’’
And if we are given the statement, ‘‘It is not the case that something is beautiful,’’ we
recognize that this is equivalent in meaning to ‘‘Nothing is beautiful.’’ These equiva-
lences can be represented as follows:
(x)Bx :: (∃x)Bx
(∃x)Bx :: (x)Bx
Now if we take this pair of equivalences and negate the statement functionthrough-
out, we obtain the following:
(x)Bx :: (∃x)Bx
(∃x)Bx :: (x)Bx
Now, applying the double negation rule to the right-hand side, we obtain:
(x)Bx :: (∃x)Bx
(∃x)Bx :: (x)Bx
These equivalences are nearly as recognizable in English as the ﬁrst pair. Thus, we
recognize that the statement ‘‘It is not the case that nothing is beautiful’’ is equivalent

442
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
to ‘‘Something is beautiful,’’ and we recognize that ‘‘It is not the case that something is
not beautiful’’ is equivalent to ‘‘Everything is beautiful.’’
The ﬁrst and third pair of these equivalences provide all that we need for the four
change of quantiﬁer rules. If we reverse the order (right to left) of the last pair and
generalize both pairs by letting x represent any statement function, we obtain:
(x)x :: (∃x)x
(x)x :: (∃x)x
(∃x)x :: (x)x
(∃x)x :: (x)x
These are the change of quantiﬁer rules (CQ). Since they are stated as logical equiva-
lences, they apply to parts of lines as well as to whole lines. They can be summarized
into a single rule that reads:
One type of quantiﬁer can be replaced by the other type if and only if immediately
before and after the new quantiﬁer:
1. Tilde operators that were originally present are deleted.
2. Tilde operators that were not originally present are inserted.
To see how the change of quantiﬁer rules are applied, let us return to the argument
at the beginning of this section. The proof is as follows:
1. (∃x)(Px • Qx)
2. (x)(Rx v Qx)
/ (∃x)Px
3. (x)(Px • Qx)
1, CQ
4. (∃x)(Rx v Qx)
2, CQ
5. (Ra v Qa)
4, EI
6. (Pa • Qa)
3, UI
7. Ra • Qa
5, DM, DN
8. Pa v Qa
6, DM, DN
9. Qa
7, Com, Simp
10. Pa
8, 9, Com, DS
11. (∃x)Px
10, EG
Before either line 1 or line 2 can be instantiated, the tilde operators preceding the
quantiﬁers must be removed. In accordance with the change of quantiﬁer rule, tilde
operators are introduced immediately after the new quantiﬁers in the expressions on
lines 3 and 4.
Another example:
1. (∃x)(Hx • Gx) ⊃(x)Ix
2. Im
/ (x)(Hx ⊃Gx)
3. (∃x)Ix
2, EG
4. (x)Ix
3, CQ
5. (∃x)(Hx • Gx)
1, 4, MT

Change of Quantiﬁer Rules
443
S
N
L
6. (x)(Hx • Gx)
5, CQ
7. (x)(Hx v Gx)
6, DM
8. (x)(Hx ⊃Gx)
7, Impl
The statement that m is not an I (line 2) intuitively implies that not everything is an I
(line 4); but existential generalization and change of quantiﬁer are needed to get the
desired result. Notice that lines 7 and 8 are obtained via DeMorgan’s Rule and the rule
of material implication, even though the quantiﬁer is still attached. Since these rules
are rules of replacement, they apply to parts of lines as well as to whole lines. The
following example illustrates the same point with respect to the change of quantiﬁer
rules:
1. (∃x)Jx ⊃(∃x)Kx
2. (x)Kx ⊃(x)Lx
/ (∃x)Jx ⊃(∃x)Lx
3. (∃x)Jx ⊃(x)Kx
1, CQ
4. (∃x)Jx ⊃(x)Lx
2, 3, HS
5. (∃x)Jx ⊃(∃x)Lx
4, CQ
The change of quantiﬁer rule is applied to only the consequent of line 1, yielding line
3. Similarly, the change of quantiﬁer rule is then applied to only the consequent of line
4, yielding line 5.
EXERCISE 8.3
I. Use the change of quantiﬁer rules together with the eighteen rules of inference to
derive the conclusions of the following symbolized arguments. Do not use either
conditional proof or indirect proof.
(1)
#
1. (x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
2. (x)Bx
/ (∃x)Ax
(2) 1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)Bx
2. (x)Bx
/ (x)Ax
(3) 1. (∃x)Ax / (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
(4)
#
1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)Ax
(5) 1. (x)(Ax • Bx) v (x)(Cx • Dx)
2. (x)Dx
/ (x)Bx
(6) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (x)(Ax v Cx)
/ (x)Bx
(7)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)Cx v (x)Ax
3. (x)Bx
/ (∃x)Cx

444
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
(8) 1. (x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
2. (x)Bx ⊃(∃x)Cx
/ (x)Cx ⊃(∃x)Ax
(9) 1. (∃x)(Ax v Bx) ⊃(x)Cx
2. (∃x)Cx
/ (∃x)Ax
(10)
#
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
(11) 1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Cx)
/ (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)]
(12) 1. (x)[(Ax • Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)Bx
(13)
#
1. (x)(Ax • Bx) ⊃(∃x)Cx
2. (∃x)(Cx v Bx)
/ (x)Ax
(14) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)Bx
2. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
3. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)Cx
(15) 1. (∃x)(Ax v Bx)
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(∃x)Ax
3. (∃x)Dx ⊃(∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)(Cx v Dx)
II. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use the change of
quantiﬁer rules and the eighteen rules of inference to derive the conclusion of
each. Do not use either conditional proof or indirect proof.
1.
#
If all the physicians are either hematologists or neurologists, then there are
no cardiologists. But Dr. Frank is a cardiologist. Therefore, some physicians
are not neurologists. (P, H, N, C)
2. Either Dr. Adams is an internist or all the pathologists are internists. But it is
not the case that there are any internists. Therefore, Dr. Adams is not a pathol-
ogist. (I, P)
3. If some surgeons are allergists, then some psychiatrists are radiologists. But no
psychiatrists are radiologists. Therefore, no surgeons are allergists. (S, A, P, R)
4.
#
Either some general practitioners are pediatricians or some surgeons are en-
docrinologists. But it is not the case that there are any endocrinologists.
Therefore, there are some pediatricians. (G, P, S, E)
5. All physicians who did not attend medical school are incompetent. It is not
the case, however, that some physicians are incompetent. Therefore, all phy-
sicians have attended medical school. (P, A, I)
6. It is not the case that some internists are not physicians. Furthermore, it is not
the case that some physicians are not doctors of medicine. Therefore, all
internists are doctors of medicine. (I, P, D)

Conditional and Indirect Proof
445
S
N
L
7.
#
All pathologists are specialists and all internists are generalists. Therefore,
since it is not the case that some specialists are generalists, it is not the case
that some pathologists are internists. (P, S, I, G)
8. If some obstetricians are not gynecologists, then some hematologists are ra-
diologists. But it is not the case that there are any hematologists or gynecolo-
gists. Therefore, it is not the case that there are any obstetricians. (O, G, H, R)
9. All poorly trained allergists and dermatologists are untrustworthy specialists.
It is not the case, however, that some specialists are untrustworthy.Therefore,
it is not the case that some dermatologists are poorly trained. (P, A, D, U, S)
10.
#
It is not the case that some physicians are either on the golf course or in the
hospital. All of the neurologists are physicians in the hospital. Either some
physicians are cardiologists or some physicians are neurologists. Therefore,
some cardiologists are not on the golf course. (P, G, H, N, C)
8.4
Conditional and Indirect Proof
Many arguments with conclusions that are either difﬁcult or impossible to derive by
the conventional method can be handled with ease by using either conditional or
indirect proof. The use of these techniques on arguments in predicate logic is basi-
cally the same as it is on arguments in propositional logic. Arguments having conclu-
sions expressed in the form of conditional statements or disjunctions (which can be
derived from conditional statements) are immediate candidates for conditional proof.
For these arguments, the usual strategy is to put the antecedent of the conditional
statement to be obtained in the ﬁrst line of an indented sequence, to derive the con-
sequent as the last line, and to discharge the conditional sequence in a conditional
statement that exactly matches the one to be obtained. Here is an example of such
a proof:
1. (x)(Hx ⊃Ix)
/ (∃x)Hx ⊃(∃x)Ix
2. (∃x)Hx
ACP
3. Ha
2, EI
4. Ha ⊃Ia
1, UI
5. Ia
3, 4, MP
6. (∃x)Ix
5, EG
7. (∃x)Hx ⊃(∃x)Ix
2–6, CP
In this argument the antecedent of the conclusion is a complete statement consisting
of a statement function, Hx, preceded by a quantiﬁer. This complete statement is

446
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
assumed as the ﬁrst line in the conditional sequence. The instantiation and generaliza-
tion rules are used within an indented sequence (both conditional and indirect) in
basically the same way as they are in a conventional sequence. When the consequent
of the conclusion is obtained, the conditional sequence is completed, and it is then
discharged in a conditional statement having the ﬁrst line of the sequence as its ante-
cedent and the last line as its consequent.
The next example differs from the previous one in that the antecedent of the
conclusion is a statement function, not a complete statement. With arguments such as
this, only the statement function is assumed as the ﬁrst line in the conditional se-
quence. The quantiﬁer is added after the sequence is discharged.
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
2. Ax
ACP
3. Ax v Bx
2, Add
4. (Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx
1, UI
5. Cx
3, 4, MP
6. Ax ⊃Cx
2–5, CP
7. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
6, UG
This example leads to an important restriction on the use of universal generalization.
You may recall that the x in line 2 of this proof is said to occur free because it is not
governed by any quantiﬁer. (In contrast, the x’s in lines 1 and 7 are said to occur
bound.) The restriction is as follows:
UG:
y
(x)x
Restriction: UG must not be used within the scope
of an indented sequence if the instantial
variable occurs free in the ﬁrst line of
that sequence.
The above proof does not violate this restriction because UG is not used within the
scope of the indented sequence at all. It is used only after the sequence has been
discharged, which is perfectly acceptable. If, on the other hand, UG had been applied
to line 5 to produce a statement reading (x)Cx, the restriction would have been vio-
lated because the instantial variable x occurs free in the ﬁrst line of the sequence.
To understand why this restriction is necessary, consider the following defective
proof:
1. (x)Rx ⊃(x)Sx
/ (x)(Rx ⊃Sx)
2. Rx
ACP
3. (x)Rx
2, UG (invalid)
4. (x)Sx
1, 3, MP
5. Sx
4, UI
6. Rx ⊃Sx
2–5, CP
7. (x)(Rx ⊃Sx)
6, UG

Conditional and Indirect Proof
447
S
N
L
If Rx means ‘‘x is a rabbit’’ and Sx means ‘‘x is a snake,’’ then the premise translates ‘‘If
everything in the universe is a rabbit, then everything in the universe is a snake.’’ This
statement is true because the antecedent is false; that is, it is not the case that every-
thing in the universe is a rabbit. The conclusion, on the other hand, is false, because it
asserts that all rabbits are snakes. The argument is therefore invalid. If the restriction
on UG had been obeyed, UG would not have been used on line 3 and, as a result, the
illicit conclusion would not have been obtained.
It is interesting to see what happens when the premise and the conclusion of
this defective argument are switched. The proof, which is perfectly legitimate, is
as follows:
1. (x)(Rx ⊃Sx)
/ (x)Rx ⊃(x)Sx
2. (x)Rx
ACP
3. Rx
2, UI
4. Rx ⊃Sx
1, UI
5. Sx
3, 4, MP
6. (x)Sx
5, UG
7. (x)Rx ⊃(x)Sx
2–6, CP
Notice in this proof that UG is used within the scope of a conditional sequence, but
the restriction is not violated because the instantial variable x does not occur free in
the ﬁrst line of the sequence.
Let us now consider some examples of indirect proof. We begin an indirect
sequence by assuming the negation of the statement to be obtained. When a con-
tradiction is derived, the indirect sequence is discharged by asserting the denial of
the original assumption. In the examples that follow, the negation of the conclu-
sion is assumed as the ﬁrst line of the sequence, and the change of quantiﬁer rule
is then used to eliminate the negation sign. When the resulting statement is then
instantiated, a new letter, m, is selected that has not appeared anywhere in a
previous line. The same letter is then selected for the universal instantiation of
line 1:
1. (x)[(Px ⊃Px) ⊃(Qx ⊃Rx)]
/ (x)(Qx ⊃Rx)
2.  (x)(Qx ⊃Rx)
AIP
3. (∃x)(Qx ⊃Rx)
2, CQ
4. (Qm ⊃Rm)
3, EI
5. (Pm ⊃Pm) ⊃(Qm ⊃Rm)
1, UI
6. (Pm ⊃Pm)
4, 5, MT
7. (Pm v Pm)
6, Impl
8. Pm • Pm
7, DM, DN
9. (x)(Qx ⊃Rx)
2–8, IP
10. (x)(Qx ⊃Rx)
9, DN

448
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
The next example has a particular statement for its conclusion:
1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)Fx
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Fx)
/ (∃x)Fx
3. (∃x)Fx
AIP
4. (∃x)Ax
1, 3, Com, DS
5. Ac
4, EI
6. Ac ⊃Fc
2, UI
7. Fc
5, 6, MP
8. (x)Fx
3, CQ
9. Fc
8, UI
10. Fc • Fc
7, 9, Conj
11. (∃x)Fx
3–10, IP, DN
Since indirect proof sequences are indented, they are subject to the same restriction
on universal generalization as conditional sequences. The following proof, which is
similar to the previous one, violates this restriction because the instantial variable x
occurs free in the ﬁrst line of the sequence. The violation (line 4) allows a universal
statement to be drawn for the conclusion, whereas only a particular statement (as
above) is legitimate:
1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)Fx
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Fx)
/ (x)Fx
3. Fx
AIP
4. (x)Fx
3, UG (invalid)
5. (∃x)Fx
4, CQ
6. (∃x)Ax
1, 5, Com, DS
7. Ac
6, EI
8. Ac ⊃Fc
2, UI
9. Fc
7, 8, MP
10. Fc
4, UI
11. Fc • Fc
9, 10, Conj
12. Fx
3–11, IP, DN
13. (x)Fx
12, UG
To see that this argument is indeed invalid, let Ax stand for ‘‘x is an apple’’ and Fx for
‘‘x is a fruit.’’ The ﬁrst premise then reads ‘‘Either an apple exists or a fruit exists’’
(which is true), and the second premise reads ‘‘All apples are fruits’’ (which is also
true). The conclusion, however, reads ‘‘Everything in the universe is a fruit,’’ and this,
of course, is false.
As in propositional logic, conditional and indirect sequences in predicate logic may
include each other. The following proof uses an indirect sequence within the scope of
a conditional sequence.

Conditional and Indirect Proof
449
S
N
L
1. (x)[(Px v Qx) ⊃(Rx • Sx)]
/ (∃x)(Px v Sx) ⊃(∃x)Sx
2. (∃x)(Px v Sx)
ACP
3. (∃x)Sx
AIP
4. (x)Sx
3, CQ
5. Pa v Sa
2, EI
6. Sa
4, UI
7. Pa
5, 6, Com, DS
8. Pa v Qa
7, Add
9. (Pa v Qa) ⊃(Ra • Sa)
1, UI
10. Ra • Sa
8, 9, MP
11. Sa
10, Com, Simp
12. Sa • Sa
6, 11, Conj
13. (∃x)Sx
3–12, IP, DN
14. (∃x)(Px v Sx) ⊃(∃x)Sx
2–13, CP
The conditional sequence begins, as usual, by assuming the antecedent of the condi-
tional statement to be obtained. The objective, then, is to obtain the consequent. This
is accomplished by the indirect sequence, which begins with the negation of the
consequent and ends (line 12) with a contradiction.
EXERCISE 8.4
I. Use either indirect proof or conditional proof to derive the conclusions of the
following symbolized arguments:
(1)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)]
(2) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (∃x)(Cx v Dx) ⊃(x)Ex
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
(3) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (∃x)Cx
/ (x)Ax
(4)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(∃x)(Bx • Dx)
/ (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
(5) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)[(Ax • Bx) ⊃Cx]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
(6) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)Bx
2. An ⊃Bn
/ An
(7)
#
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)[(Cx v Dx) ⊃Ex]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
(8) 1. (∃x)(Ax v Bx) ⊃(∃x)Ax
/ (x)Ax
(9) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Cx ⊃Dx)
/ (∃x)(Ax v Cx) ⊃(∃x)(Bx v Dx)

450
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
(10)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Am v An
/ (∃x)Bx
(11) 1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)[(Cx v Dx) ⊃Ax]
/ (x)Ax
(12) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Dx ⊃(x)Cx
/ (x)[(Ax • Dx) ⊃Bx]
(13)
#
1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Dx ⊃(∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)(Ax • Dx) ⊃(∃x)Cx
(14) 1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (∃x)Cx
(15) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(x)(Dx • Ex)
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
(16)
#
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (∃x)(Ax v Dx) ⊃(x)Ex
/ (x)Cx v (x)Ex
(17) 1. (x)Ax ≡(∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (x)(Cx ⊃Bx)
/ (x)Ax ≡(∃x)Cx
(18) 1. (x)(Ax ≡Bx)
2. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx ⊃Cx)]
3. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)Cx
(19)
#
1. (x)[Bx ⊃(Cx • Dx)]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Bx) ⊃(x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
(20) 1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)]
2. (x)[Dx ⊃(Ex • Fx)]
/ (x)(Cx ⊃Dx) ⊃(x)(Ax ⊃Fx)
(21) 1. (∃x)(Ax v Bx)
2. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Cx ⊃Bx)
3. (∃x)Cx
/ (∃x)Bx
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use conditional or
indirect proof to derive the conclusion of each.
1.
#
All ambassadors are wealthy. Furthermore, all Republicans are clever. There-
fore, all Republican ambassadors are clever and wealthy. (A, W, R, C)
2. All senators are well liked. Also, if there are any well-liked senators, then
O’Brien is a voter. Therefore, if there are any senators, then O’Brien is a voter.
(S, W, V)
3. If all judges are wise, then some attorneys are rewarded. Furthermore, if there
are any judges who are not wise, then some attorneys are rewarded. There-
fore, some attorneys are rewarded. ( J, W, A, R)
4.
#
All secretaries and undersecretaries are intelligent and cautious. All those who
are cautious or vigilant are restrained and austere. Therefore, all secretaries
are austere. (S, U, I, C, V, R, A)

Proving Invalidity
451
S
N
L
5. All ambassadors are diplomats. Furthermore, all experienced ambassadors
are cautious, and all cautious diplomats have foresight. Therefore, all experi-
enced ambassadors have foresight. (A, D, E, C, F)
6. If there are any senators, then some employees are well paid. If there is
anyone who is either an employee or a volunteer, then there are some legis-
lative assistants. Either there are some volunteers or there are some senators.
Therefore, there are some legislative assistants. (S, E, W, V, L)
7.
#
If there are any consuls, then all ambassadors are satisﬁed diplomats. If no
consuls are ambassadors, then some diplomats are satisﬁed. Therefore, some
diplomats are satisﬁed. (C, A, S, D)
8. If there are any voters, then all politicians are astute. If there are any politi-
cians, then whoever is astute is clever. Therefore, if there are any voters, then
all politicians are clever. (V, P, A, C)
9. Either no senators are present or no representatives are present. Furthermore,
either some senators are present or no women are present. Therefore, none
of the representatives who are present are women. (S, P, R, W)
10.
#
Either some governors are present or some ambassadors are present. If any-
one is present, then some ambassadors are clever diplomats. Therefore, some
diplomats are clever. (G, P, A, C, D)
8.5
Proving Invalidity
In the previous chapter we saw that natural deduction could not be used with any
facility to prove invalidity in propositional logic. The same thing can be said about
natural deduction in predicate logic. But in predicate logic there is no simple and auto-
matic technique such as truth tables or Venn diagrams to fall back on. However, thereare
two methods for proving invalidity in predicate logic that are just as effective as these
other techniques, even though they may not be as convenient. One is the method used
in Chapter 1 to prove the invalidity of various kinds of syllogisms—namely, the counter-
example method. The other is what we will call the ﬁnite universe method. Both
appeal to the basic idea underlying most proofs of invalidity: Any argument is proved
invalid if it is shown that it is possible for it to have true premises and a false con-
clusion. Both methods are aimed at disclosing a situation that fulﬁlls this requirement.
Counterexample Method
Application of the counterexample method consists in ﬁnding a substitution in-
stance of a given invalid argument form that has actually true premises and a false
conclusion. For an example of its use, consider the following invalid form:

452
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
(∃x)(Ax • Bx)
(x)(Cx ⊃Bx)
/ (∃x)(Cx • Ax)
In creating a substitution instance it is often easiest to begin with the conclusion.
The conclusion is translated as ‘‘Some C are not A.’’ Thus, to make this statement false,
we need to ﬁnd an example of a class (for C) that is included in another class (for A).
Cats and animals will serve this purpose. A little ingenuity provides us with the follow-
ing substitution instance:
Some animals are not mammals.
All cats are mammals.
Therefore, some cats are not animals.
In producing such a substitution instance it is important that the premises turn out
to be indisputably true in the actual world, and the conclusion indisputably false.
Statements involving the names of animal classes are convenient for this purpose,
because everyone agrees about cats, dogs, mammals, ﬁsh, and so on. Also, it should
be noted that several different substitution instances can usually be produced that
sufﬁce to prove the argument form invalid. Finally, it goes without saying that any
substitution instance that results in true premises and a true conclusion (or any ar-
rangement other than true premises and false conclusion) proves nothing.
Here is an example of an invalid form that includes a singular statement:
(x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
Ac
/ Bc
This argument form commits the fallacy of denying the antecedent. Producing a sub-
stitution instance is easy:
All cats are animals.
Lassie is not a cat.
Therefore, Lassie is not an animal.
In selecting the name of an individual for the second premise, it is again necessary
to pick something that everyone agrees on. Since everyone knows that Lassie is a dog,
this name serves our purpose. But if we had selected some other name, such as Trixie
or Ajax, this would hardly sufﬁce, because there is no general agreement as to what
these names denote.
Here is a slightly more complex example:
(x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
(x)[Bx ⊃(Cx • Dx)]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
A little ingenuity produces the following substitution instance:

Proving Invalidity
453
S
N
L
All dogs are either sharks or animals.
All sharks are animals that are ﬁsh.
Therefore, all dogs are ﬁsh.
The counterexample method is effective with most fairly simple invalid argument
forms in predicate logic. Since its application depends on the ingenuity of the user,
however, it is not very well suited for complex argument forms. For those forms, the
ﬁnite universe method is probably a better choice.
Finite Universe Method
The ﬁnite universe method can be used to establish the invalidity of any invalid
argument expressed in terms of a single variable. It depends on the idea that a valid
argument remains valid no matter how things in the actual universe might be altered.
Accordingly, if we are given a valid argument form, then that form remains valid if it
should happen that the universe is contracted so that it contains only a single member.
On the other hand, if it should turn out that an argument has true premises and false
conclusion in a universe consisting of only one or a few members, then that argument
has been proved invalid.
To see how this method works, it is important to understand what happens to the
meaning of universal and particular statements when the universe is shrunk in size.
Accordingly, let us imagine that the universe contains only one thing instead of the
billions of things that it actually contains. Let us name that one thing ‘‘Abigail.’’ The
statement ‘‘Everything in the universe is perfect’’ is then equivalent to ‘‘Abigail is
perfect’’ (because Abigail is all that there is), and the statement ‘‘Something in the
universe is perfect’’ is also equivalent to ‘‘Abigail is perfect’’ (because Abigail is that
‘‘something’’).
To represent this equivalence symbolically, we need a new metalogical symbol that
asserts that the expressions on either side of it necessarily have the same truth value
given a universe of a designated size. Although this equivalence bears a close resem-
blance to logical equivalence, it is not identical to it because logical equivalence holds
independently of any alterations in the universe. The concept that we need to repre-
sent is a kind of conditional logical equivalence. Accordingly, we will select the four
dot symbol superscribed with a ‘‘c’’ (for ‘‘conditional’’). For our purpose here, ::c has
the same effect as ::. Using the former symbol, we have for a universe consisting of
one member:
(x)Px ::
c Pa
(∃x)Px ::
c Pa
Proceeding, if we imagine that the universe contains exactly two things—let us name
them ‘‘Abigail’’ and ‘‘Beatrice’’—the statement ‘‘Everything in the universe is perfect’’
is equivalent to ‘‘Abigail is perfect and Beatrice is perfect.’’ Conversely, the statement
‘‘Something in the universe is perfect’’ is equivalent to ‘‘Abigail is perfect or Beatrice is

454
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
perfect’’ (because ‘‘some’’ means at least one). In other words, the universal statement
is equivalent to a conjunction of singular statements, and the particular statement is
equivalent to a disjunction of singular statements. In symbols:
(x)Px ::
c (Pa • Pb)
(∃x)Px ::
c (Pa v Pb)
If the universe is increased to three—let us call the new member ‘‘Charmaine’’—we
have:
(x)Px
(∃x)Px
::
c
::
c (Pa • Pb • Pc)
(Pa v Pb v Pc)
This equivalence continues indeﬁnitely as more and more members are added to the
universe.
Extending this treatment to the more typical kinds of universal and particular state-
ments, we have, for a universe of three:
(x)(Px ⊃Qx)
(∃x)(Px • Qx)
::
c
::
c [(Pa ⊃Qa) • (Pb ⊃Qb) • (Pc ⊃Qc)]
[(Pa • Qa) v (Pb • Qb) v (Pc • Qc)]
For expressions involving combinations of quantiﬁed statements, each of the compo-
nent statements is translated separately and the resulting statement groups are linked
together by means of the connective appearing in the original statement. Here are two
examples for a universe of three:
[(x)Px ⊃(∃x)Qx] ::
c [(Pa • Pb • Pc) ⊃(Qa v Qb v Qc)]
[(x)(Px ⊃Qx) v (∃x)(Rx • Sx)] ::
c [(Pa ⊃Qa) • (Pb ⊃Qb) • (Pc ⊃Qc)]
v [(Ra • Sa) v (Rb • Sb) v (Rc • Sc)]}
The method for proving an argument invalid consists in translating the premises
and conclusion into singular statements, as per the above examples, and then testing
the result with an indirect truth table (see Section 6.5). First a universe of one is tried.
If it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false in this universe, the
argument is immediately identiﬁed as invalid. If, on the other hand, a contradiction
results from this assumption, a universe of two is then tried. If, in this second universe,
it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, the argument is
invalid. If not, a universe of three is tried, and so on.
Consider the following argument:
(x)(Gx ⊃Hx)
(∃x)Hx
/ (∃x)Gx
For a universe having one member—call this member ‘‘Abigail’’—the argument trans-
lates into:

Proving Invalidity
455
S
N
L
Ga ⊃Ha
Ha
/ Ga
Testing with an indirect truth table, we have
Ga ⊃Ha
/
Ha
/ /
Ga
F
T
T
T
F
Because it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false, the argu-
ment is invalid. Another example:
(x)(Jx ⊃Kx)
(∃x)Jx
/ (x)Kx
For a universe having one member, the indirect truth table is as follows:
Ja ⊃Ka
/
Ja
/ /
Ka
T
T
F
T
F
Since it is impossible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false for this
universe, we try a universe having two members, a and b:
( Ja ⊃Ka) • ( Jb ⊃Kb)
/
Ja v Jb
/ /
Ka • Kb
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T T F
T
F
F
Since it is possible for the premises to be true and the conclusion false for this universe,
the argument is invalid.
Here is an example involving compound statements:
(∃x)Hx ⊃(x)(Fx ⊃Gx)
(∃x)Fx
/ (∃x)Hx ⊃(x)Gx
The indirect truth table for a universe having one member is as follows:
Ha ⊃(Fa ⊃Ga)
/
Fa
/ /
Ha ⊃Ga
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
A contradiction results, so we try a universe having two members. The resulting indi-
rect truth table, which follows, proves the argument invalid:
(Ha v Hb) ⊃[(Fa ⊃Ga) • (Fb ⊃Gb)] / Fa v Fb / / (Ha v Hb) ⊃(Ga • Gb)
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T T F
T
F
T F
F
The next example involves singular statements:
(∃x)Mx • (∃x)Nx
Md
/ Nd

456
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
The second premise asserts that something named d is an M. For this argument, the
assumption that the universe contains only one member entails that this one member
is named d. Here is the indirect truth table for such a universe:
Md • Nd
/
Md
/ /
Nd
T
T
F
T
F
When the universe is expanded to include two members, we are free to give any name
we wish to the second member. Let us call it e. The resulting indirect truth table, which
follows, shows that the argument is invalid. Notice that the second premise and the
conclusion remain the same:
(Md v Me) • (Nd v Ne)
/
Md
/ /
Nd
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
The basic concept behind this method of proving invalidity rests on the fact that a
valid argument is valid in all possible universes. Consequently, if an argument fails in
a universe consisting of one, two, or any number of members, it is invalid.
While this method is primarily intended for proving arguments invalid, theoretically
it can also be used to prove arguments valid. Several years ago a theorem was proved
to the effect that an argument that does not fail in a universe of 2n members, where n
designates the number of different predicates, is valid.* According to this theorem,
establishing the validity of an argument containing two different predicates requires a
universe having four members, establishing the validity of an argument containing
three different predicates requires a universe having eight members, and so on. For
most arguments, however, a universe having four members is unwieldy at best, and a
universe having eight members approaches the impossible (although a computer could
handle it easily). Thus, while this method is usually quite convenient for proving in-
validity, its usefulness in establishing validity is impeded by certain practical limitations.
EXERCISE 8.5
I. Use the counterexample method to prove that the following symbolized argu-
ments are invalid.
(1)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Cx ⊃Bx)
(2) 1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (x)(Cx ⊃Ax)
/ (∃x)(Cx • Bx)
(3) 1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Bc
/ Ac
*See Wilhelm Ackermann, Solvable Cases of the Decision Problem (Amsterdam: North-Holland Pub-
lishing Co., 1954), Chapter 4. This theorem, incidentally, holds only for monadic predicates.

Proving Invalidity
457
S
N
L
(4)
#
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Cx)
/ (∃x)[Ax • (Bx • Cx)]
(5) 1. (x)[Ax v (Bx v Cx)]
/ (x)Ax v [(x)Bx v (x)Cx]
(6) 1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. (x)[(Bx • Cx) ⊃Dx]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
(7)
#
1. (∃x)Ax
2. (∃x)Bx
3. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
(8) 1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)[(Cx • Dx) ⊃Ex]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
(9) 1. (x)[(Ax • Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)[(Ax • Cx) ⊃Dx]
/ (x)[(Ax • Dx) ⊃Cx]
(10)
#
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Cx • Bx)
3. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (∃x)[(Cx • Bx) • Ax]
II. Use the ﬁnite universe method to prove that the following symbolized arguments
are invalid.
(1)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
(2) 1. (x)(Ax v Bx)
2. An
/ (x)Bx
(3) 1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)Bx
2. (∃x)Ax
/ (∃x)Bx
(4)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (∃x)Ax
/ (x)Bx
(5) 1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. (∃x)Ax
/ (∃x)Bx
(6) 1. (∃x)Ax
2. (∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
(7)
#
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (∃x)Bx ⊃(∃x)Cx
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
(8) 1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx) ≡(∃x)Cx
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
/ (x)Ax ≡(∃x)Cx
(9) 1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Bx • Ax)
/ (x)(Ax v Bx)
(10)
#
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
/ (x)(Ax ≡Bx)

458
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then use either the coun-
terexample method or the ﬁnite universe method to prove that each is invalid.
1.
#
Violinists who play well are accomplished musicians. There are some violinists
in the orchestra. Therefore, some musicians are accomplished. (V, P, A, M, O)
2. Pianists and harpsichordists are meticulous. Alfred Brendel is a pianist. There-
fore, everyone is meticulous. (P, H, M)
3. If there are any oboists, there are some bassoonists. If there are any clarinet-
ists, there are some ﬂutists. Amelia is both an oboist and a clarinetist. There-
fore, some bassoonists are ﬂutists. (O, B, C, F)
4.
#
All tympanists are haughty. If some tympanists are haughty, then some percus-
sionists are overbearing. Therefore, all tympanists are overbearing. (T, H, P, O)
5. All cellists and violinists are members of the string section. Some violinists are
not cellists. Also, some cellists are not violinists. Therefore, everyone is a
member of the string section. (C, V, M)
8.6
Relational Predicates and
Overlapping Quantiﬁers
Even the logical machinery developed thus far is not adequate for deriving the conclu-
sions of a number of arguments. Consider, for example, the following:
All dogs are animals. Therefore, whoever owns a dog owns an animal.
If there are any butterﬂies, then if all butterﬂies are free, they are free. There are
butterﬂies in the garden. Therefore, if all butterﬂies are free, something in the
garden is free.
The ﬁrst argument involves a relation—the relation of ownership—and we have yet
to see how relations can be dealt with. The second argument, while not involving any
relations, involves a quantiﬁer that overlaps another quantiﬁer. In this section the
apparatus of predicate logic will be extended to cover examples such as these.
The predicates we have used thus far are called monadic predicates, or one-
place predicates, because they are used to assign an attribute to individual things. A
relational predicate (or relation) is a predicate that is used to establish a connection
between or among individuals.
Relations occur in varying degrees of complexity, depending on the number of
individuals related. The simplest, called binary (or dyadic) relations, establish a con-
nection between two individuals. Some examples are the relation of being taller than,
as expressed in the statement ‘‘Steve is taller than David,’’ and the relation of being a
friend, as expressed in ‘‘Sylvia is a friend of Olivia.’’ Trinary (or triadic) relations

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
459
S
N
L
establish a connection among three individuals. For example, the relation of being
between, as in ‘‘St. Louis is between Chicago and New Orleans,’’ and the relation of
reading something to someone, as in ‘‘George read Othello to Madeline.’’ Quaternary
(or tetradic) relations link four individuals together—for example, the relation of
reading something to someone at a certain time, as in ‘‘George read Othello to Made-
line on Thursday.’’ The complexity increases until we have what are called n-ary (or
n-adic) relations, which link n things together. In this section we will restrict our
attention to binary relations.
Translating Relational Statements
Relations are symbolized like other predicates except that two lower-case letters,
representing the two related individuals, are written to the immediate right of the
upper-case letter representing the relation. Here are some examples of relational state-
ments involving speciﬁcally named individuals:
Statement
Symbolic translation
Anthony is married to Cynthia.
Mac
Deborah loves physics.
Ldp
The Sears Tower is taller than
the Empire State Building.
Tse
Donald is the father of Jim.
Fdj
Notice that the order in which the lower-case letters are listed often makes a differ-
ence. If the third statement were translated Tes, the symbolic statement would read
‘‘The Empire State Building is taller than the Sears Tower,’’ which is false. Quantiﬁers
are attached to relational predicates in the same way they are to monadic predicates.
Some examples of relational statements involving quantiﬁers are as follows:
Statement
Symbolic
translation
Thomas knows everything.
(x)Ktx
Thomas knows something.
(∃x)Ktx
Everything is different from
everything.
(x)(y)Dxy
Something is different from
something.
(∃x)(∃y)Dxy
Everything is different from
something (or other).
(x)(∃y)Dxy
Something is different from
everything.
(∃x)(y)Dxy

460
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
The last four statements involve overlapping quantiﬁers. We may read these
symbols as follows:
(x)(y)
For all x and for all y . . .
(∃x)(∃y)
There exists an x such that there exists a y such that . . .
(x)(∃y)
For all x there exists a y such that . . .
(∃x)(y)
There exists an x such that for all y . . .
Applying this phraseology to the last statement above, for example, we have ‘‘There
exists an x such that for all y, x is different from y’’—which is simply another way of
saying ‘‘Something is different from everything.’’
When two quantiﬁers of the same sort appear adjacent to each other, the order in
which they are listed is not signiﬁcant. In other words, the statement (x)(y)Dxy is logi-
cally equivalent to (y)(x)Dxy, and (∃x)(∃y)Dxy is logically equivalent to (∃y)(∃x)Dxy.
A little reﬂection on the meaning of these statements should justify this equivalence.
But when different quantiﬁers appear adjacent to each other, the order does make a
difference, sometimes even when the statement function is nonrelational.Accordingly,
(x)(∃y)Dxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Dxy. This fact can be seen more
clearly in terms of a different example. If Lxy means ‘‘x loves y’’ and we imagine the
universe restricted to persons, then (x)(∃y)Lxy means ‘‘Everyone loves someone (or
other),’’ while (∃y)(x)Lxy means ‘‘There is someone whom everyone loves.’’ Clearly
these two statements are not equivalent.
Relational predicates can be combined with ordinary predicates to translate state-
ments having varying degrees of complexity. In the examples that follow, Px means
‘‘x is a person.’’ The meaning of the other predicates should be clear from the context:
1. Any heavyweight can defeat any lightweight.
(x)[Hx ⊃(y)(Ly ⊃Dxy)]
2. Some heavyweights can defeat any lightweight.
(∃x)[Hx • (y)(Ly ⊃Dxy)]
3. No heavyweight can defeat every lightweight.
(x)[Hx ⊃(∃y)(Ly • Dxy)]
or
(∃x)[Hx • (y)(Ly ⊃Dxy)]
4. Everyone cares for someone (or other).
(x)[Px ⊃(∃y)(Py • Cxy)]
5. Someone does not care for anyone.
(∃x)[Px • (y)(Py ⊃Cxy)]
6. Anyone who cares for someone is cared for himself.
(x){[Px • (∃y)(Py • Cxy)] ⊃(∃z)(Pz • Czx)}

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
461
S
N
L
7. Not everyone respects himself.
(∃x)(Px • Rxx)
or
(x)(Px ⊃Rxx)
8. Anyone who does not respect himself is not respected by anyone.
(x)[(Px • Rxx) ⊃(y)(Py ⊃Ryx)]
The same general rule applies in translating these statements as applies in translat-
ing any other statement in predicate logic: Universal quantiﬁers go with implications
and existential quantiﬁers go with conjunctions. Every one of the symbolic expres-
sions above follows this rule. For example, in the ﬁrst statement, both quantiﬁers are
universal and both operators are horseshoes. In the second statement, the main quan-
tiﬁer is existential and the subordinate quantiﬁer universal; accordingly, the main
operator is a dot and the subordinate operator is a horseshoe. Among these state-
ments, number 6 is the most complex. The symbolic translation of this statement reads,
‘‘For all x, if x is a person and there exists a y such that y is a person and x cares for y,
then there exists a z such that z is a person and z cares for x.’’ Upon reﬂection it should
be clear that this is simply another way of expressing the original English statement.
Another important rule to keep in mind when translating statements of this kind is
that every variable must be bound by some quantiﬁer. If a variable is left dangling
outside the scope of its intended quantiﬁer, the translation is defective. For example,
if the second statement were translated (∃x)Hx • (y)(Ly ⊃Dxy), then the x in Dxy
would not be bound by the existential quantiﬁer. As a result, the translation would be
defective. To correct it, brackets must be inserted that provide for the existential quan-
tiﬁer to range over Dxy.
The same techniques used to translate these eight statements are also used to trans-
late certain statements involving monadic predicates throughout. Consider the following:
If anything is good and all good things are safe, then it is safe.
(x){[Gx • (y)(Gy ⊃Sy)] ⊃Sx}
If anything is good and some good things are dangerous, then
it is dangerous.
(x){[Gx • (∃y)(Gy • Dy)] ⊃Dx}
Since the ‘‘it’’ at the end of these statements refers to one of the ‘‘good’’ things men-
tioned at the beginning, the quantiﬁer that binds the x in Gx must also bind the x in Sx
and Dx. The set of braces in the symbolic expressions ensures this.
Another point to notice regarding statements such as these is that the quantiﬁed
expression inside the brackets is expressed in terms of a new variable. This procedure
is essential to avoid ambiguity. If instead of y, x had been used, the variable in this
expression would appear to be bound by two different quantiﬁers at the same time.

462
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
In other statements, the one or more individuals mentioned at the end are not
necessarily the same ones mentioned at the beginning. In such cases the quantiﬁer
that binds the individuals at the beginning should not bind those at the end. Compare
the next pair of statements with those we have just considered.
If anything is good and all good things are safe, then some-
thing is safe.
[(∃x)Gx • (y)(Gy ⊃Sy)] ⊃(∃z)Sz
If anything is good and some good things are dangerous, then
something is dangerous.
[(∃x)Gx • (∃y)(Gy • Dy)] ⊃(∃z)Dz
In these cases the ‘‘something’’ at the end is not necessarily one of the ‘‘good’’ things
mentioned at the beginning. Accordingly, the quantiﬁer that binds the x in Gx does
not range all the way to the end of the statement. Furthermore, the quantiﬁer in
question is now an existential quantiﬁer. In the previous pair of statements the quan-
tiﬁer had to be universal because it ranged over the main operator, which was a
horseshoe. In the new pair, however, no quantiﬁer ranges over the implication sym-
bol. As a result, the sense of these statements has shifted to mean ‘‘If something is
good . . .’’
Note that, although a different variable is used to express each of the three different
components in the pair of statements above, this is not required. Because in this case
no quantiﬁer ranges over any other quantiﬁer, it would be perfectly appropriate to use
the same variable throughout.
The next pair of statements involve relational predicates. Like the previous pair, no
single quantiﬁer ranges over the entire statement because the individuals mentioned
at the end are not necessarily the same ones mentioned at the beginning:
If everyone helps himself, then everyone will be helped.
(x)(Px ⊃Hxx) ⊃(x)[(Px ⊃(∃y)Hyx)]
If someone helps himself, then someone will be helped.
(∃x)(Px • Hxx) ⊃(∃x)(∃y)(Px • Hyx)
This completes our explanation of how to translate statements involving relational
predicates and overlapping quantiﬁers. You may, if you wish, proceed directly to
Exercise 8.6 Part I before completing the remainder of this section.
Using the Rules of Inference
Let us ﬁrst see how the various quantiﬁer rules apply to overlapping quantiﬁers. The
change of quantiﬁer rule is applied in basically the same way as it is with single
quantiﬁers. The following short sequence illustrates its application:

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
463
S
N
L
1. (x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃x)(∃y)Pxy
3. (∃x)(y)Pxy
1, CQ
2, CQ
As the tilde operator is moved past a quantiﬁer, the quantiﬁer in question is switched
for its correlative. With the exception of a restriction on universal generalization,
which we will introduce presently, the instantiation and generalization rules are also
used in basically the same way as they are with single quantiﬁers. Example:
1. (∃x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃y)Pay
3. Pab
4. (∃x)Pxb
5. (∃y)(∃x)Pxy
1, EI
2, EI
3, EG
4, EG
With each successive instantiation the outermost quantiﬁer drops off. Generalization
restores the quantiﬁers in the reverse order.
This proof demonstrates our earlier observation that the order of the quantiﬁers is
not signiﬁcant when the same kind of quantiﬁer is used throughout. We also observed
that the order does make a difference when different quantiﬁers appear together.
Accordingly, the statement (x)(∃y)Pxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Pxy. As the
instantiation and generalization rules now stand, however, it is quite possible, with a
proof similar to the one above, to establish the logical equivalence of these two ex-
pressions. Therefore, to keep this from happening we now introduce a new restriction
on universal generalization:
UG:
y
(x)x
Restriction:
UG must not be used if y contains
an existential name and y is free in the
line where that name is introduced.
To see how this restriction applies, let us attempt to deduce (∃y)(x)Pxy from (x)
(∃y)Pxy:
1. (x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃y)Pxy
3. Pxa
4. (x)Pxa
5. (∃y)(x)Pxy
1, UI
2, EI
3, UG (invalid)
4, EG
The proof fails on line 4 because y (that is, Pxa) contains a name introduced by
existential instantiation (namely, a), and x is free in line 3 where that name is intro-
duced. Our new restriction is required precisely to prevent this kind of proof sequence
from occurring. The reasonableness of the restriction may be seen once it is realized
what happens in this proof. Line 1 asserts that for every x in the universe there exists
some y that has relation P to it. This does not mean that there is one single thing that

464
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
is so related to every x but that each x has, perhaps, a different thing so related to it.
On line 2 we select one of these x’s at random, and on line 3 we give the name a to
the thing so related to it. Then on line 4 we draw the conclusion that everything in the
universe has relation P to a. But this, as we just saw, is precisely what line 1 does not
say. Line 4, therefore, is fallacious.
In summary, we now have two restrictions on universal generalization. The ﬁrst
concerns only conditional and indirect sequences and prevents UG from occurring
within the scope of such a sequence when the instantial variable is free in the ﬁrst
line. The second restriction concerns only arguments involving overlapping quantiﬁ-
ers. With these two restrictions in hand, we may now proceed to illustrate the use of
natural deduction in arguments involving relational predicates and overlapping quan-
tiﬁers. The example that follows does not include any relational predicates, but it does
involve overlapping quantiﬁers:
1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
/ (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃By)
2. Ax
3. (∃x)Ax
4. (∃x)Bx
5. Bc
ACP
2, EG
1, 3, MP
4, EI
6. Ax ⊃Bc
7. (x)(Ax ⊃Bc)
8. (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃By)
2–5, CP
6, UG
7, EG
Conditional and indirect proof are used in the same way with relational predicates
and overlapping quantiﬁers as they are with monadic predicates and nonoverlapping
quantiﬁers. The conditional proof above begins, as usual, by assuming the antecedent
of the conclusion. When line 7 is reached, we must be careful that neither of the
restrictions against universal generalization is violated. While the instantial variable x
is free in the ﬁrst line of the conditional sequence, line 7 does not lie within that
sequence, so the ﬁrst restriction is obeyed. And while line 7 does include the existen-
tial name c, x is not free in line 5 where that name is introduced. Thus, the second
restriction is obeyed as well.
The next proof involves a relational predicate. The proof shows that while (x)(∃y)
Dxy is not logically equivalent to (∃y)(x)Dxy, it can be deduced from that statement:
1. (∃y)(x)Dxy
2. (x)Dxm
3. Dxm
4. (∃y)Dxy
5. (x)(∃y)Dxy
/ (x)(∃y)Dxy
1, EI
2, UI
3, EG
4, UG
The next example concludes with a line in which an individual is related to itself.
Since there are no restrictions on universal instantiation, the procedure leading up to

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
465
S
N
L
this line is perfectly legitimate. Notice in line 4 that tautology is used with relational
predicates in the same way that it is with monadic predicates:
1. (∃y)(x)(Exy v Eyx)
2. (x)(Exa v Eax)
3. Eaa v Eaa
4. Eaa
5. (∃z)Ezz
/ (∃z)Ezz
1, EI
2, UI
3, Taut
4, EG
Sometimes the order in which instantiation steps are performed is critical. The
following proof provides an example:
1. (x)(∃y)(Fxy ⊃Gxy)
2. (∃x)(y)Fxy
3. (y)Fmy
4. (∃y)(Fmy ⊃Gmy)
5. Fmo ⊃Gmo
6. Fmo
7. Gmo
8. (∃y)Gmy
9. (∃x)(∃y)Gxy
/ (∃x)(∃y)Gxy
2, EI
1, UI
4, EI
3, UI
5, 6, MP
7, EG
8, EG
Line 2 must be instantiated before line 1 because the step introduces a new existential
name. For the same reason, line 4 must be instantiated before line 3.
The next proof involves an indirect sequence. Such sequences often make use of
the change of quantiﬁer rule, as this proof illustrates:
1. (∃x)(∃y)(Jxy v Kxy) ⊃(∃x)Lx
2. (x)(y)(Lx ⊃Ly)
/ (x)(y)Jxy
3. (x)(y)Jxy
4. (∃x)(y)Jxy
5. (∃x)(∃y)Jxy
6. (∃y)Jmy
7. Jmn
8. Jmn v Kmn
9. (∃y)(Jmy v Kmy)
10. (∃x)(∃y)(Jxy v Kxy)
11. (∃x)Lx
12. Lo
13. (y)(Lo ⊃Ly)
14. Lo ⊃Lo
15. Lo
16. Lo • Lo
AIP
3, CQ
3, CQ, DN
5, EI
6, EI
7, Add
8, EG
9, EG
1, 10, MP
11, EI
2, UI
13, UI
12, 14, MP
12, 15, Conj
17. (x)(y)Jxy
3–16, IP, DN
Because line 1 cannot be instantiated, the only strategy is to obtain the antecedent of
the conditional with the aim of obtaining the consequent via modus ponens. This is

466
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
accomplished on line 10 via indirect proof. Notice on line 8 that addition is used with
relational predicates in the same way that it is with monadic predicates.
A ﬁnal word of caution is called for regarding universal instantiation and the two
generalization rules. First, when UI is used to introduce variables into a proof, it is
important that these variables end up free and that they not be captured in the process
by other quantiﬁers. The following examples illustrate both correct and incorrect ap-
plications of this rule:
1. (x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃y)Pyy
1, UI (invalid—the instantial variable y has been
captured by the existential
quantiﬁer)
1. (x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃y)Pxy
1, UI (valid—the instantial variable x is
free)
1. (x)(∃y)Pxy
2. (∃y)Pzy
1, UI (valid—the instantial variable z is
free)
An analogous caution applies to the two generalization rules. When UG and EG are
used, it is important that the instantial letter be replaced by a variable that is captured
by no previously introduced quantiﬁer and that no other variables be captured by the
newly introduced quantiﬁer. The following examples illustrate both correct and incor-
rect applications of this rule:
1. (∃x)Pxy
2. (x)(∃x)Pxx
1, UG (invalid—the new x has been captured by
the existential quantiﬁer)
1. (∃x)Pxy
2. (∃x)(∃x)Pxx
1, EG (invalid—the new x has been captured by
the old existential quantiﬁer)
1. (∃x)Pxy
2. (∃y)(∃x)Pxy
1, EG (valid)
1. (x)(∃y)Lxy
2. (∃y)Lxy
3. Lxa
4. (∃x)Lxx
1, UI
2, EI
3, EG (invalid—the quantiﬁer has captured
the x immediately adjacent to the L)
1. (x)(∃y)Lxy
2. (∃y)Lxy
3. Lxa
4. (∃z)Lxz
1, UI
2, EI
3, EG (valid—the x remains free)

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
467
S
N
L
1. (x)(y)Kxy
2. (y)Kxy
3. Kxx
4. (x)Kxx
1, UI
2, UI
3, UG (valid)
To see that the fourth example is indeed invalid, let Lxy stand for ‘‘x is larger than
y,’’ and let the variables range over the real numbers. The statement (x)(∃y)Lxy then
means that there is no smallest number—which is true. But the statement (∃x)Lxx
means that there is a number that is larger than itself—which is false.
EXERCISE 8.6
I. Translate the following statements into symbolic form:
1.
#
Charmaine read Paradise Lost. (Rxy: x read y)
2. Whoever reads Paradise Lost is educated. (Rxy: x reads y; Ex: x is educated)
3. James is a friend of either Ellen or Connie. (Fxy: x is a friend of y)
4.
#
If James has any friends, then Marlene is one of them. (Fxy: x is a friend of y)
5. Dr. Jordan teaches only geniuses. (Txy: x teaches y; Gx: x is a genius)
6. Dr. Nelson teaches a few morons. (Txy: x teaches y; Mx: x is a moron)
7.
#
Every person can sell something or other. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: x can sell y)
8. Some people cannot sell anything.
9. No person can sell everything.
10.
#
Some people can sell anything.
11. The Royal Hotel serves only good drinks. (Sxy: x serves y; Gx: x is good;
Dx: x is a drink)
12. The Clark Corporation advertises everything it produces. (Axy: x advertises y;
Pxy: x produces y)
13.
#
Peterson can drive some of the cars in the lot. (Dxy: x can drive y; Cx: x is a
car; Lx: x is in the lot)
14. Jones can drive any car in the lot.
15. Sylvia invited only her friends. (Ixy: x invited y; Fxy: x is a friend of y)
16.
#
Christopher invited some of his friends.
17. Some people break everything they touch. (Px: x is a person; Bxy: x breaks y;
Txy: x touches y)
18. Some people speak to whoever speaks to them. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: x
speaks to y)
19.
#
Every person admires some people he or she meets. (Px: x is a person; Axy: x
admires y; Mxy: x meets y)

468
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
20. Some people admire every person they meet.
21. Some policemen arrest only trafﬁc violators. (Px: x is a policeman; Axy: x
arrests y; Tx: x is a trafﬁc violator)
22.
#
Some policemen arrest every trafﬁc violator they see. (Px: x is a policeman;
Axy: x arrests y; Tx: x is a trafﬁc violator; Sxy: x sees y)
23. If there are cheaters, then some cheaters will be punished. (Cx: x is a cheater;
Px: x will be punished)
24. If there are any cheaters, then if all the referees are vigilant they will be
punished. (Cx: x is a cheater; Rx: x is a referee; Vx: x is vigilant; Px: x will be
punished)
25.
#
Every lawyer will represent a wealthy client. (Lx: x is a lawyer; Rxy: x will
represent y; Wx: x is wealthy; Cx: x is a client)
26. Some lawyers will represent any person who will not represent himself. (Lx: x
is a lawyer; Px: x is a person; Rxy: x represents y)
27. Some children in the third grade can read any of the books in the library.
(Cx: x is a child; Tx: x is in the third grade; Rxy: x can read y; Bx: x is a book;
Lx: x is in the library)
28.
#
All children in the fourth grade can read any of the books in the library.
29. If there are any safe drivers, then if none of the trucks break down they will
be hired. (Sx: x is safe; Dx: x is a driver; Tx: x is a truck; Bx: x breaks down;
Hx: x will be hired)
30. If there are any safe drivers, then some safe drivers will be hired.
II. Derive the conclusion of the following symbolized arguments. Use conditional
proof or indirect proof as needed.
(1)
#
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(y)Bxy]
2. Am
/ (y)Bmy
(2) 1. (x)[Ax ⊃(y)(By ⊃Cxy)]
2. Am • Bn
/ Cmn
(3) 1. (∃x)[Ax • (y)(By ⊃Cxy)]
2. (∃x)Ax ⊃Bj
/ (∃x)Cxj
(4)
#
1. (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃By)
/ (x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
(5) 1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
/ (∃y)(x)(Ax ⊃By)
(6) 1. (x)(y)(Ax ⊃By)
2. (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃Cy)
/ (x)(∃y)[Ax ⊃(By • Cy)]
(7)
#
1. (∃x)[Ax • (y)(Ay ⊃Bxy)]
/ (∃x)Bxx
(8) 1. (∃x)[Ax • (y)(By ⊃Cxy)]
2. (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃By)
/ (∃x)(∃y)Cxy

Relational Predicates and Overlapping Quantiﬁers
469
S
N
L
(9) 1. (∃x)(y)(Axy ⊃Bxy)
2. (x)(∃y)Bxy
/ (x)(y)Axy
(10)
#
1. (x)(∃y)Axy ⊃(x)(∃y)Bxy
2. (∃x)(y)Bxy
/ (∃x)(y)Axy
(11) 1. (∃x){Ax • [(∃y)By ⊃Cx]}
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
/ (∃x)Cx
(12) 1. (∃x)(y)[(Ay • By) ⊃Cxy]
2. (y)(Ay ⊃By)
/ (y)[Ay ⊃(∃x)Cxy]
(13)
#
1. (∃x){Ax • (y)[(By v Cy) ⊃Dxy]}
2. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
/ (∃x)(∃y)Dxy
(14) 1. (x){Ax ⊃[(∃y)(By • Cy) ⊃Dx]}
2. (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx ⊃Dx)]
(15) 1. (∃x)(y)(Ayx ⊃Axy)
/ (x)Axx
(16)
#
1. (x)(∃y)(Ax • By)
/ (∃y)(x)(Ax • By)
(17) 1. (x)(∃y)(Ax v By)
/ (∃y)(x)(Ax v By)
(18) 1. (x)[Ax ⊃(∃y)(By • Cxy)]
2. (∃x)[Ax • (y)(By ⊃Dxy)]
/ (∃x)(∃y)(Cxy • Dxy)
(19)
#
1. (x)(∃y)Axy v (x)(y)Bxy
2. (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃Bxy)
/ (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃Axy)
(20) 1. (x)(y)[Axy ⊃(Bx • Cy)]
2. (x)(y)[(Bx v Dy) ⊃Axy]
/ (∃x)(∃y)Axy
III. Translate the following arguments into symbolic form. Then derive the conclusion
of each, using conditional proof or indirect proof when needed.
1.
#
Any professional can outplay any amateur. Jones is a professional but he
cannot outplay Meyers. Therefore, Meyers is not an amateur. (Px: x is a pro-
fessional; Ax: x is an amateur; Oxy: x can outplay y)
2. Whoever is a friend of either Michael or Paul will receive a gift. If Michael has
any friends, then Eileen is one of them. Therefore, if Ann is a friend of Michael,
then Eileen will receive a gift. (Fxy: x is a friend of y; Rx: x will receive a gift)
3. A horse is an animal. Therefore, whoever owns a horse owns an animal.
(Hx: x is a horse; Ax: x is an animal; Oxy: x owns y)
4.
#
O’Brien is a person. Furthermore, O’Brien is smarter than any person in the
class. Since no person is smarter than himself, it follows that O’Brien is not in
the class. (Px: x is a person; Sxy: x is smarter than y; Cx: x is in the class)
5. If there are any honest politicians, then if all the ballots are counted they will
be reelected. Some honest politicians will not be reelected. Therefore, some
ballots will not be counted. (Hx: x is honest; Px: x is a politician; Bx: x is a
ballot; Cx: x is counted; Rx: x will be reelected)

470
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
6. Dr. Rogers can cure any person who cannot cure himself. Dr. Rogers is a
person. Therefore, Dr. Rogers can cure himself. (Px: x is a person; Cxy: x can
cure y)
7.
#
Some people are friends of every person they know. Every person knows
someone (or other). Therefore, at least one person is a friend of someone.
(Px: x is a person; Fxy: x is a friend of y; Kxy: x knows y)
8. If there are any policemen, then if there are any robbers, then they will arrest
them. If any robbers are arrested by policemen, they will go to jail. There are
some policemen and Macky is a robber. Therefore, Macky will go to jail.
(Px: x is a policeman; Rx: x is a robber; Axy: x arrests y; Jx: x will go to jail)
9. If anything is missing, then some person stole it. If anything is damaged, then
some person broke it. Something is either missing or damaged. Therefore,
some person either stole something or broke something. (Mx: x is missing;
Px: x is a person; Sxy: x stole y; Dx: x is damaged; Bxy: x broke y)
10.
#
If there are any instructors, then if at least one classroom is available they will
be effective. If there are either any textbooks or workbooks, there will be
instructors and classrooms. Furthermore, if there are any classrooms, they
will be available. Therefore, if there are any textbooks, then some instructors
will be effective. (Ix: x is an instructor; Cx: x is a classroom; Ax: x is available;
Ex: x is effective; Tx: x is a textbook; Wx: x is a workbook)
8.7
Identity
Many arguments in ordinary language involve a special relation called identity, and
translating this relation requires special treatment. Consider, for example, the follow-
ing argument:
The only friend I have is Elizabeth. Elizabeth is not Nancy. Nancy is a Canadian.
Therefore, there is a Canadian who is not my friend.
The peculiar feature of this argument is that it involves special statements about indi-
viduals. To translate such statements, we adopt a symbol from arithmetic, the equal
sign (), to represent the identity relation. We can use this symbol to translate a large
variety of statements, including simple identity statements, existential assertions about
individuals, statements involving ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘the only,’’ ‘‘no . . . except,’’ and ‘‘all except,’’
and statements involving superlatives, numerical claims, and deﬁnite descriptions.
After seeing how the identity relation is used to translate such statements, we will see

Identity
471
S
N
L
how natural deduction is used to derive the conclusions of arguments involving
identity.
Simple Identity Statements
The simplest statements involving identity are those asserting that a named individual
is identical to another named individual. Here are some examples:
Samuel Clemens is Mark Twain.
c  t
Woody Allen is Allen Konigsberg.
a  k
Dr. Jekyll is Mr. Hyde.
j  h
The ﬁrst statement asserts that Samuel Clemens is identically the same person as Mark
Twain, the second that Woody Allen is the same person as Allen Konigsberg, and the
third that Dr. Jekyll is the same person as Mr. Hyde. In other words, the statements
claim that the names ‘‘Samuel Clemens’’ and ‘‘Mark Twain’’ designate the same person,
‘‘Woody Allen’’ and ‘‘Allen Konigsberg’’ designate the same person, and so on.
To translate a negated identity statement, we simply draw a slash through the
identity symbol. Thus ‘‘Beethoven is not Mozart’’ is translated b / m. The expression
b / m is just an abbreviated way of writing (b  m). Here are some additional
examples:
William Wordsworth is not John Keats.
w / k
Jodie Foster is not Meryl Streep.
f / s
Peter Jennings is not Dan Rather.
j / r
The kinds of statements we will consider next are more complicated, and to facili-
tate their translation a set of conventions governing conjunctions, disjunctions, and
simple identity statements will now be introduced. Many of our translations will in-
volve lengthy strings of conjunctions, such as Pm • Km • Pn • Kn. Instead of introducing
parentheses and brackets into these expressions, we may simply write them as a string
of conjuncts. Lengthy disjunctions may be treated the same way. In simple identity
statements, the identity symbol controls only the letters to its immediate left and right.
Accordingly, instead of writing (c  n) • (e  p) • (s  t), we may write c  n •
e  p • s  t, and instead of writing P ⊃(a  m), we may write P ⊃a  m. Let us now
use these conventions to translate some special kinds of statements involving identity.
‘‘Only,’’ ‘‘The Only,’’ and ‘‘No . . . Except’’
Section 4.7 explained that the words ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘the only,’’ and ‘‘no . . . except’’ signal an
ordinary categorical proposition when the word that follows is a plural noun or pro-
noun. For example, the statement ‘‘Only relatives are invited’’ means simply ‘‘All in-
vited persons are relatives,’’ and ‘‘The only animals in this canyon are skunks’’ means
‘‘All animals in this canyon are skunks.’’ However, when the word that follows ‘‘only,’’

472
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
‘‘the only,’’ or ‘‘no . . . except’’ designates an individual, something more is intended.
Thus the statement ‘‘Only Nixon resigned the presidency’’ means (1) that Nixon re-
signed the presidency and (2) that if anyone resigned the presidency, that person is
Nixon. Thus the general form of such statements is that a designated individual has a
stated attribute and anything having that attribute is identical to the designated individ-
ual. Here are some examples:
Only Nolan Ryan has pitched
5000 strikeouts.
Pn • (x)(Px ⊃x  n)
The only opera written by
Beethoven is Fidelio.
Of • Bf • (x)[(Ox • Bx) ⊃x  f ]
No nation except Australia is a
continent.
Na • Ca • (x)[(Nx • Cx) ⊃x  a]
The only presidents who were
Whigs were Taylor and Fillmore.
Pt • Wt • Pf • Wf • (x)[(Px • Wx) ⊃
(x  t v x  f)]
The ﬁrst translation may be read as ‘‘Nolan Ryan has pitched 5000 strikeouts, and if
anyone has pitched 5000 strikeouts, then he is identical to Nolan Ryan.’’ The last part
of the translation ensures that no other person has pitched 5000 strikeouts. The second
translation may be read as ‘‘Fidelio is an opera, and Fidelio was written by Beethoven,
and if anything is an opera written by Beethoven, then it is identical to Fidelio.’’
Analogous remarks pertain to the other two statements. The third statement is equiv-
alent to ‘‘The only nation that is a continent is Australia.’’
‘‘All Except’’
Statements beginning with ‘‘all except’’ are similar to those beginning with ‘‘the only’’
in that they, too, assert something about a designated individual (or individuals). For
example, the statement ‘‘All presidents except Washington had a predecessor’’ means
that Washington did not have a predecessor but all other presidents did. Thus the
general form of such statements is that a designated individual lacks a stated attribute
and anything not identical to the designated individual has the stated attribute.
Examples:
All painters except Jackson
Pollock make sense.
Pj • Mj • (x)[(Px • x / j) ⊃Mx]
All continents except Antarctica
are heavily populated.
Ca • Ha • (x)[(Cx • x / a) ⊃Hx]
All states except Alaska and
Hawaii are contiguous with
their sister states.
Sa • Ca • Sh • Ch •
(x)[(Sx • x / a • x / h) ⊃Cx]
The ﬁrst translation may be read as ‘‘Jackson Pollock is a painter who does not make
sense, and every painter not identical to Jackson Pollock makes sense.’’

Identity
473
S
N
L
Superlatives
Statements containing superlative adjectives are yet another kind of statement that can
be translated by using the identity relation. These are statements asserting that, of all
the members of a class, something is the largest, tallest, smallest, heaviest, lightest, and
so on. To translate these statements, ﬁrst give the designated item the class attribute,
and then say that, if anything else has that attribute, it is somehow exceeded by the
designated item. Here are some examples:
The largest planet is
Jupiter.
Pj • (x)[(Px • x / j) ⊃Ljx]
The deepest lake is
Ozero Baykal.
Lo • (x)[(Lx • x / o) ⊃Dox]
The highest peak in
North America is
Mt. McKinley.
Pm • Nm • (x)[(Px • Nx • x / m) ⊃Hmx]
The ﬁrst translation may be read as ‘‘Jupiter is a planet, and if anything is a planet and
not identical to Jupiter, then Jupiter is larger than it.’’ The second may be read as
‘‘Ozero Baykal is a lake, and if anything is a lake and not identical to Ozero Baykal,
then Ozero Baykal is deeper than it.’’
Numerical Statements
One of the more interesting uses of the identity symbol is to translate certain kinds of
numerical statements, such as ‘‘There are three people in this room.’’ In particular, the
identity symbol allows us to translate such statements without the use of numerals.
There are three types of numerical statements: those that assert a property of at most
n items, those that assert a property of at least n items, and those that assert a property
of exactly n items.
The ﬁrst group does not assert that there actually are any items that have the stated
property but only that, if there are any with the stated property, then the maximum
number is n. Accordingly, for ‘‘at most’’ statements we use universal quantiﬁers. Here
are some examples:
There is at most one god.
(x)(y)[(Gx • Gy) ⊃x  y]
There is at most one U.S.
Representative from
Alaska.
(x)(y)[(Ux • Ax • Uy • Ay) ⊃x  y]
There are at most two
superpowers.
(x)(y)(z)[(Sx • Sy • Sz) ⊃
(x  y v x  z v y  z)]
There are at most two
cities in Kuwait.
(x)(y)(z)[Cx • Kx • Cy • Ky • Cz • Kz) ⊃
(x  y v x  z v y  z)]

474
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
It can be seen from these examples that to translate ‘‘at most n’’ is to say that, if there
are n  1 items that have the stated property, then at least one of them is identical to
at least one of the ‘‘others.’’ The result is to limit the number of such items to n. Thus,
to translate ‘‘at most one,’’ we need two quantiﬁers; to translate ‘‘at most two,’’ we
need three quantiﬁers; and so on. We could use this procedure to translate statements
about any number of items, but because such translations become rather lengthy, this
discussion is limited to statements about at most one or two items.
Unlike ‘‘at most’’ statements, statements that assert something about at least n items
do claim that the items actually exist. Thus to translate ‘‘at least’’ statements we need
to use existential quantiﬁers. The number of quantiﬁers must be equal to the number
of items asserted. Examples:
There is at least one city in
Monaco.
(∃x)(Cx • Mx)
There are at least two
women in Hamlet.
(∃x)(∃y)(Wx • Hx • Wy • Hy • x / y)
There are at least three sat-
ellites of Neptune.
(∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Sx • Sy • Sz • x / y •
x / z • y / z)
The ﬁrst of these examples merely asserts that some city is in Monaco. Thus it is
translated without any inclusion of the identity relation. When the stated number is
greater than one, however, the translation must incorporate one or more negative
identity statements to ensure that the items referred to are distinct. Thus in the second
statement, if x and y should be identical, then there would actually be only one woman
(at least) in Hamlet. To ensure that there are at least two distinct women, we must
conjoin the assertion that x and y are not identical. Similarly, when we assert some-
thing about at least three items, we must conjoin the assertion that none of them is
identical to either of the other two.
A statement about exactly n items can be seen to be the conjunction of a statement
about at least n items and a statement about at most n items. For example, the state-
ment ‘‘There are exactly three cars in the lot’’ means that there are at least three cars in
the lot and at most three cars in the lot. Thus a statement about exactly n items requires
n existential quantiﬁers to ensure the existence of the items, one or more negated
identity statements to ensure their distinctness (assuming n is greater than 1), and a
universally quantiﬁed statement to limit the group to at most n items. Here are some
examples:
There is exactly one city
in Grenada.
(∃x){Cx • Gx • (y)[(Cy • Gy) ⊃x  y]}
There are exactly two
houses of Congress.
(∃x)(∃y){Hx • Hy • x / y •
(z)[Hz ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}
There are exactly
two sopranos in
La Boheme.
(∃x)(∃y){Sx • Lx • Sy • Ly • x / y •
(z)[(Sz • Lz) ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}

Identity
475
S
N
L
Deﬁnite Descriptions
The last form of phraseology considered here is the deﬁnite description. A deﬁnite
description is a group of words of the form ‘‘The such-and-such’’ that identiﬁes an
individual person, place, or thing. Here are some examples:
The author of Evangeline
The capital of Nebraska
The mother of John F. Kennedy
The ﬁrst designates Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, the second the city of Lincoln, and
the third Rose Fitzgerald Kennedy. Deﬁnite descriptions are like names in that they
identify only one thing, but unlike names they do so by describing a situation or
relationship that only that one thing satisﬁes.
Statements incorporating deﬁnite descriptions have given rise to disputes in logic,
because alternate interpretations of such statements can lead to conﬂicts in truth value.
Suppose, for example, we are given the statement ‘‘The queen of the United States is
a woman.’’ Should we consider this statement to be true, because every queen is a
woman, or should we consider it to be false, because there is no queen of the United
States? In response to this question, most logicians today accept an interpretation of
deﬁnite descriptions originally proposed by Bertrand Russell. According to this inter-
pretation, a statement that incorporates a deﬁnite description asserts three things: an
item of a certain sort exists, there is only one such item, and that item has the attribute
assigned to it by the statement. If we accept this interpretation, the statement about
the queen of the United States is false, because no such person exists.
Here are some additional examples with their translations:
The inventor of the phono-
graph was an American.
(∃x)[Ixp • (y)(Iyp ⊃y  x) • Ax]
The author of Middlemarch
was a Victorian freethinker.
(∃x)[Wxm • (y)(Wym ⊃y  x) •
Vx • Fx]
The painter of The Starry Night
was Van Gogh.
(∃x)[Pxs • (y)(Pys ⊃y  x) • x  v]
The ﬁrst translation may be read as ‘‘There is someone who invented the phonograph,
and if anyone invented the phonograph, then that person is identical to the ﬁrst, and
the ﬁrst person is an American.’’ The second may be read as ‘‘There is someone who
wrote Middlemarch, and if anyone wrote Middlemarch, then that person is identical
to the ﬁrst, and the ﬁrst person is a Victorian freethinker.’’ The third may be read as
‘‘There is someone who painted The Starry Night, and if anyone painted The Starry
Night, then that person is identical to the ﬁrst, and the ﬁrst person is identical to Van
Gogh.’’
This completes our explanation of how to translate statements involving the iden-
tity relation. At this point, you may, if you wish, proceed to Exercise 8.7 Part I before
completing the remainder of this section.

476
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
Using the Rules of Inference
Now that we have seen how to translate statements involving the identity relation, let
us use natural deduction to derive the conclusions of arguments that include state-
ments of this sort. Before doing so, however, some special rules governing the identity
relation must be introduced. These rules, which are collectively designated ‘‘Id,’’ are
as follows:
Id:
(1)
Prem.
a  a
(2)
a  b :: b  a
(3)
a
a  b
b
(a, b are any individual constants)
The ﬁrst rule expresses the idea that anything is identical to itself; it asserts what is
called the reﬂexive property of the identity relation. The rule allows us to insert a self-
identity statement after any premise (that is, on any line in a proof). It is most useful
in proving logical equivalences involving identity, and it is not needed for any of the
exercises following this section. The rule is included here chieﬂy to enable the deri-
vation of logical equivalences that you may want to prove for yourself.
The second rule is a rule of replacement; it expresses what is called the symmetric
property of the identity relation. It states, very simply, that the letters on either side of
the equal sign can be switched. An immediate use of this rule is to prove that a / b is
logically equivalent to b / a. Recall that a / b is simply an abbreviation for (a  b).
If we apply the rule to the latter expression, we obtain (b  a), which, in its abbre-
viated form, is b / a.
The third rule expresses the intuitively obvious idea that, if something is true of x
and x is identical to y, then that something is true of y. This rule is the basis of what is
called the transitive property of identity, which allows us to infer from a  b and
b  c that a  c. If we suppose that the  in this rule stands for the expression ‘‘a ’’,
that a is b, and that b is c, then the ﬁrst line of the rule reads a  b, the second line
reads b  c, and the conclusion is a  c. This inference is used often in the derivation
of the conclusions of arguments.
In general, the rules of inference used earlier apply to arguments containingidentity
statements in the same way they apply to any other arguments. Also, conditional proof
and indirect proof are used in the same way. We need only note that because a and b
in these rules represent only individual constants (a, b, . . . v, w) they cannot be ap-
plied to variables (x, y, z).
Suppose, now, that we want to derive the conclusion of the argument given at the
beginning of this section. The argument is repeated as follows:
The only friend I have is Elizabeth. Elizabeth is not Nancy. Nancy is a Canadian.
Therefore, there is a Canadian who is not my friend.
If we use Fx to translate ‘‘x is my friend’’ and Cx to translate ‘‘x is a Canadian,’’ this
argument may be translated as follows:

Identity
477
S
N
L
1. Fe • (x)(Fx ⊃x  e)
/ (∃x)(Cx • Fx)
2. e / n
3. Cn
Inspecting the second line, we see a negated identity statement involving e and n. This
suggests that we instantiate the universal statement in the ﬁrst line with respect to n.
The proof is as follows:
1. Fe • (x)(Fx ⊃x  e)
2. e / n
3. Cn
/ (∃x)(Cx • Fx)
4. (x)(Fx ⊃x  e)
1, Com, Simp
5. Fn ⊃n  e
4, UI
6. n / e
2, Id
7. Fn
5,6, MT
8. Cn • Fn
3,7, Conj
9. (∃x)(Cx • Fx)
8, EG
Line 6 is justiﬁed by the second rule for identity. Also, since n / e is simply an
abbreviation for (n  e), line 7 follows directly from lines 5 and 6.
Here is another example:
The only person who invested is Ms. Snyder. Cathy is one of the persons who lost
money. Some persons who invested did not lose money. Therefore, Cathy is not
Ms. Snyder.
The translation is as follows:
1. Ps • Is • (x)[(Px • Ix) ⊃x  s]
2. Pc • Lc
3. (∃x)(Px • Ix • Lx)
/ c / s
Cursory inspection reveals no easy way to obtain the conclusion. This suggestsindirect
proof:
1. Ps • Is • (x)[(Px • Ix) ⊃x  s]
2. Pc • Lc
3. (∃x)(Px • Ix • Lx)
/ c / s
4. c  s
AIP
5. Pa • Ia • La
3, EI
6. (x)[(Px • Ix) ⊃x  s]
1, Com, Simp
7. Pa • Ia ⊃a  s
6, UI
8. Pa • Ia
5, Simp
9. a  s
7, 8, MP
10. s  c
4, Id
11. a  c
9, 10, Id
12. La
5, Com, Simp
13. Lc
11, 12, Id

478
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
14. Lc
2, Com, Simp
15. Lc • Lc
13, 14, Conj
16. c / s
4–15, IP
As usual, the existential statement is instantiated ﬁrst, then the universal. Line 10 is
obtained by commuting line 4 by the second rule of identity, and line 11 is obtained
from lines 9 and 10 by applying the third rule of identity. Line 13 is obtained by
substituting c in the place of a in line 12 according to the third rule of identity. The
indirect sequence is discharged in line 16 in the normal way.
In arguments involving identity, especially more complicated ones, it is often difﬁ-
cult or impossible to see by mere inspection how to obtain the conclusion. A good
general procedure is to begin with instantiation. Always instantiate the existential
statements ﬁrst, then the universals. When instantiating the universal statements, nor-
mally pick the letter (or one of the letters) used to instantiate the existential state-
ment(s). If there are no existential statements, pick one of the letters appearing in the
singular statements. If the conclusion is still not apparent, try indirect proof. In general,
whenever the conclusion is a complicated statement, it is best to start out with indirect
proof. Developing facility in proving arguments involving identity requires a little
practice, but adequate skill should not take too long to acquire.
Translation hints
Only i is F.
Fi • (x)[Fx ⊃x  i ]
The only F that is G is i.
Fi • Gi • (x)[(Fx • Gx) ⊃x  i ]
No F except i is G.
Fi • Gi • (x)[(Fx • Gx) ⊃x  i ]
All F except i are G.
Fi • Gi • (x)[(Fx • x / i) ⊃Gx]
i is the F that is most so-and-so.
Fi • (x)[(Fx • x / i) ⊃i is more
so-and-so than x]
There is at most one F.
(x)(y)[(Fx • Fy) ⊃x  y]
There are at least two Fs.
(∃x)(∃y)[Fx • Fy • x / y]
There are exactly two Fs.
(∃x)(∃y){Fx • Fy • x / y •
(z)[Fz ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}
The F is G.
(∃x)[Fx • (y)(Fy ⊃y  x) • Gx]
EXERCISE 8.7
I. Translate the following:
Simple identity statements
1.
#
Dr. Seuss is Theodore Geisel. (s, g)

Identity
479
S
N
L
2. Auguste Renoir is not Claude Monet. (r, m)
3. Marilyn Monroe is Norma Jean Baker. (m, b)
4.
#
Hermann Hesse is not Andre´ Gide. (h, g)
Statements involving ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘the only,’’ and ‘‘no . . . except’’
5.
#
Only Linus Pauling has won two Nobel prizes. (Wx: x has won two Nobel
prizes; p: Linus Pauling)
6. Only Don Larsen has pitched a perfect World Series game. (Px: x has pitched
a perfect World Series game; l: Don Larsen)
7. The only national park in Maine is Acadia. (Nx: x is a national park; Mx: x is
in Maine; a: Acadia)
8.
#
The only nation having a maple leaf ﬂag is Canada. (Nx: x is a nation; Mx: x
has a maple leaf ﬂag; c: Canada)
9. The only U.S. presidents who were Federalists were Washington and Adams.
(Ux: x is a U.S. president; Fx: x is a Federalist; w: Washington; a: Adams)
10. No state except Hawaii is surrounded by water. (Sx: x is a state; Wx: x is
surrounded by water; h: Hawaii)
11.
#
No sport except hockey uses a puck. (Sx: x is a sport; Px: x uses a puck;
h: hockey)
Superlative statements
12.
#
Hydrogen is the lightest element. (Ex: x is an element; Lxy: x is lighter than y;
h: hydrogen)
13. The smallest planet is Pluto. (Px: x is a planet; Sxy: x is smaller than y;
p: Pluto)
14. Harvard is the oldest American university. (Ax: x is American; Ux: x is a
university; Oxy: x is older than y; h: Harvard)
15.
#
Death Valley is the lowest region in North America. (Rx: x is a region; Nx: x is
in North America; Lyx: x is lower than y; d: Death Valley)
Statements involving ‘‘all except’’
16.
#
All actors except Peter Lorre speak normally. (Ax: x is an actor; Sx: x speaks
normally; l: Peter Lorre)
17. Every U.S. President except Ford won a national election. (Ux: x is a U.S.
president; Wx: x won a national election; f: Ford)
18. All prominent nations except Switzerland are members of the United Nations.
(Nx: x is a nation; Px: x is prominent; Mx: x is a member of the United Nations;
s: Switzerland)
19.
#
Every pitcher except Cy Young has won fewer than 500 games. (Px: x is a
pitcher; Wx: x has won fewer than 500 games; c: Cy Young)

480
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
Numerical statements
20.
#
There is at most one city in Belize. (Cx: x is a city; Bx: x is in Belize)
21. There are at most two national parks in South Dakota. (Nx: x is a national
park; Sx: x is in South Dakota)
22. There is at most one national holiday in July. (Nx: x is a national holiday;
Jx: x is in July)
23.
#
There are at most two cities in Malta. (Cx: x is a city; Mx: x is in Malta)
24. There is at least one quarterback on a football team. (Qx: x is a quarterback;
Fx: x is on a football team)
25. There are at least two atoms in a water molecule. (Ax: x is an atom; Wx: x is
in a water molecule)
26.
#
There are at least three carbon allotropes. (Cx: x is a carbon allotrope)
27. There is exactly one U.S. Supreme Court. (Ux: x is a U.S. Supreme Court)
28. There is exactly one natural satellite of the earth. (Sx: x is a satellite of the
earth; Nx: x is natural)
29.
#
There are exactly two bright stars in Gemini. (Sx: x is a star; Bx: x is bright;
Gx: x is in Gemini)
Statements containing deﬁnite descriptions
30.
#
The author of Vanity Fair was born in India. (Wxy: x wrote y; Bx: x was born
in India; v: Vanity Fair)
31. The wife of Othello is Desdemona. (Wxy: x is the wife of y; o: Othello;
d: Desdemona)
32. The man who composed The Nutcracker suffered acute nervous disorders.
(Mx: x is a man; Cxy: x composed y; Sx: x suffered acute nervous disorders;
n: The Nutcracker)
33.
#
The artist who painted the Allegory of Spring was Botticelli. (Ax: x is an artist;
Pxy: x painted y; a: the Allegory of Spring; b: Botticelli)
34. The capital of Georgia is not Savannah. (Cxy: x is the capital of y, g: Georgia;
s: Savannah)
Assorted statements
35.
#
The smallest state is Rhode Island. (Sx: x is a state; Sxy: x is smaller than y;
r: Rhode Island)
36. There is at least one newspaper in St. Louis. (Nx: x is a newspaper; Sx: x is in
St. Louis)
37. Cary Grant is Archibald Leach. (g: Cary Grant; l: Archibald Leach)
38.
#
The only American president elected to a fourth term was Franklin D. Roo-
sevelt. (Ax: x is an American president; Ex: x was elected to a fourth term;
r: Franklin D. Roosevelt)
39. There are at least two cities in Qatar. (Cx: x is a city; Qx: x is in Qatar)

Identity
481
S
N
L
40. Only George Blanda has played 340 professional football games. (Px: x has
played 340 professional football games; b: George Blanda)
41.
#
Hamlet had at most one sister. (Sxy: x is a sister of y; h: Hamlet)
42. No baseball player in the major leagues has hit 70 homeruns except Mark
McGuire. (Bx: x is a baseball player in the major leagues; Hx: x has hit 70
homeruns; m: Mark McGuire)
43. There are at most two Senators from New Hampshire. (Sx: x is a Senator;
Nx: x is from New Hampshire)
44.
#
Gustav Mahler is not Anton Bruckner. (m: Gustav Mahler; b: Anton Bruckner)
45. The explorer who discovered the North Pole was Admiral Peary. (Ex: x is an
explorer; Dxy: x discovered y; n: the North Pole; a: Admiral Peary)
46. Hinduism is the oldest religion. (Rx: x is a religion; Oxy: x is older than y;
h: Hinduism)
47.
#
There are exactly two tenors in Carmen. (Tx: x is a tenor; Cx: x is in Carmen)
48. Every recent pope except John Paul II was Italian. (Px: x is a pope; Rx: x is
recent; Ix: x is Italian; j: John Paul II)
49. The person who discovered relativity theory was an employee in the Swiss
patent ofﬁce. (Px: x is a person; Dxy: x discovered y; Ex: x is an employee in
the Swiss patent ofﬁce; r: relativity theory)
50.
#
There are at least three stars in Orion. (Sx: x is a star; Ox: x is in Orion)
II. Use natural deduction to derive the conclusions of the following arguments:
1.
#
Some of Jane Collier’s novels are interesting. The only novel Jane Collier
wrote is The Cry. Therefore, The Cry is interesting. (Nx: x is a novel; Wxy: x
wrote y; Ix: x is interesting; j: Jane Collier; c: The Cry)
2. Ronald Reagan was the oldest U.S. president. Woodrow Wilson was a U.S.
president. Woodrow Wilson is not Ronald Reagan. Therefore, Ronald Reagan
was older than Woodrow Wilson. (Ux: x is a U.S. president; Oxy: x is older
than y; r: Ronald Reagan; w: Woodrow Wilson)
3. The artist who painted the Mona Lisa was a Florentine. Leonardo is the artist
who painted the Mona Lisa. Therefore, Leonardo was a Florentine. (Ax: x is
an artist; Pxy: x painted y; Fx: x was a Florentine; m: the Mona Lisa; l:
Leonardo)
4.
#
The novel on the table was written by Margaret Mitchell. The only novel
Margaret Mitchell wrote is Gone with the Wind. Therefore, the novel on the
table is Gone with the Wind. (Nx: x is a novel; Tx: x is on the table; Wxy: x
wrote y; m: Margaret Mitchell; g: Gone with the Wind)
5. The author of King Lear was an English actor. John Milton was English but
not an actor. Therefore, John Milton is not the author of King Lear. (Wxy: x
wrote y; Ex: x is English; Ax: x is an actor; k: King Lear; m: John Milton)

482
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
6. The dog that bit the letter carrier is a large terrier. Ajax is a small dog. There-
fore, Ajax did not bite the letter carrier. (Dx: x is a dog; Bx: x bit the letter
carrier; Lx: x is large; Tx: x is a terrier; a: Ajax)
7.
#
Every member except Ellen sang a song. Every member except Nancy gave a
speech. Ellen is not Nancy. Therefore, Ellen gave a speech and Nancy sang a
song. (Mx: x is a member; Sx: x sang a song; Gx: x gave a speech; e: Ellen;
n: Nancy)
8. The only person who ordered ﬁsh is Astrid. The only person who suffered
indigestion is Ms. Wilson. Some person who ordered ﬁsh also suffered indi-
gestion. Therefore, Astrid is Ms. Wilson. (Px: x is a person; Ox: x ordered ﬁsh;
Sx: x suffered indigestion; a: Astrid; w: Ms. Wilson)
9. The highest mountain is in Tibet. Therefore, there is a mountain in Tibet that
is higher than any mountain not in Tibet. (Mx: x is a mountain; Hxy: x is
higher than y; Tx: x is in Tibet)
10.
#
The tallest building in North America is the Sears Tower. The tallest building
in North America is located in Chicago. If one thing is taller than another, then
the latter is not taller than the former. Therefore, the Sears Tower is located in
Chicago. (Bx: x is a building in North America; Txy: x is taller than y; Cx: x is
located in Chicago; s: the Sears Tower)
11. There are at least two philosophers in the library. Robert is the only French
philosopher in the library. Therefore, there is a philosopher in the library who
is not French. (Px: x is a philosopher; Lx: x is in the library; Fx: x is French;
r: Robert)
12. The only dogs that barked were Fido and Pluto. Fido is not Pluto. Every dog
except Fido ran on the beach. Therefore, exactly one barking dog ran on the
beach. (Dx: x is a dog; Bx: x barked; Rx: x ran on the beach; f: Fido; p: Pluto)
13.
#
There are at least two attorneys in the ofﬁce. All attorneys are professionals.
There are at most two professionals in the ofﬁce. Therefore, there are exactly
two professionals in the ofﬁce. (Ax: x is an attorney; Ox: x is in the ofﬁce;
Px: x is a professional)
14. There are at most two scientists in the laboratory. At least two scientists in the
laboratory are Russians. No Russians are Chinese. Therefore, if Norene is a
Chinese scientist, then she is not in the laboratory. (Sx: x is a scientist; Lx: x is
in the laboratory; Rx: x is Russian; Cx: x is Chinese; n: Norene)
15. Every candidate except Mary was elected. The only candidate who was
elected is Ralph. Mary is not Ralph. Therefore, there were exactly two candi-
dates. (Cx: x is a candidate; Ex: x was elected; m: Mary; r: Ralph)
16.
#
Every student except Charles and Norman passed the course. The only stu-
dent who was dismissed was Norman. Every student retook the course if and
only if he/she was not dismissed and did not pass. Charles is not Norman.

Identity
483
S
N
L
Therefore, exactly one student retook the course. (Sx: x is a student; Px: x
passed the course; Dx: x was dismissed; Rx: x retook the course; c: Charles;
n: Norman)
Summary
Predicate logic combines the ﬁve operators of propositional logic with symbols for
predicates and quantiﬁers to produce a more powerful symbolic system for represent-
ing the content of ordinary language statements and arguments. Once an argument is
translated into the symbols of predicate logic, natural deduction can be used to derive
its conclusion.
Predicates, represented by capital letters, are combined with individual constants
(a, b, c . . . u, v, w) to translate singular statements. Thus, ‘‘Abigail is a Canadian’’ is
translated Ca. The universal and existential quantiﬁers (x) and (∃x), are combined
with predicate symbols and individual variables (x, y, z) to translate universal and
particular statements. Universal statements are normally rendered as conditionals, and
particular statements as conjunctions. Thus, ‘‘All Canadians are patriotic’’ is translated
(x)(Cx ⊃Px), and ‘‘Some Canadians are women’’ is translated (∃x)(Cx • Wx).
Rules for removing and introducing quantiﬁers are introduced to allow the appli-
cation of the rules of inference. Universal instantiation and universal generalization
remove and introduce universal quantiﬁers, respectively, and existential instantiation
and existential generalization remove and introduce existential quantiﬁers.
The change of quantiﬁer rules allow a universal quantiﬁer to be replaced by an
existential quantiﬁer, and vice versa, provided that tildes preceding quantiﬁers be
either deleted or introduced. By deleting tildes, these rules allow for the application
of the instantiation rules. Conditional and indirect proof are used in predicate logic in
basically the same way as they are in propositional logic, but certain restrictions apply
to the use of universal generalization within such sequences.
The counterexample method, introduced in Chapter 1, is adapted to proving the
invalidity of invalid arguments. The method consists in ﬁnding a substitution instance
of a symbolized argument that has indisputably true premises and an indisputably
false conclusion. The ﬁnite universe method is used for the same purpose; it consists
in showing that an invalid argument is susceptible to having true premises and a false
conclusion when the universe is contracted to a ﬁnite number of members.
Relational predicates, symbolized by upper-case letters followed by spaces for two
or more lower-case letters, are used to translate statements expressing relations. For
example, ‘‘Peter is taller than Cynthia’’ is translated Tpc. Relational predicates are com-
bined with overlapping quantiﬁers to translate complex statements involving relations.
Thus, ‘‘Some man is taller than every woman’’ is translated (∃x)[Mx • (y)(Wy ⊃Txy)].
The identity relation, represented by an equal sign (), is used to translate state-
ments claiming that one person or thing is identical to another. It is also used to

484
Chapter 8: Predicate Logic
translate statements involving ‘‘only,’’ ‘‘the only,’’ ‘‘no . . . except,’’ and ‘‘all except’’
when these expressions are used with individuals, and to translate superlative state-
ments, numerical statements, and deﬁnite descriptions. A special rule of inference for
identity is introduced to allow the application of the other rules.


                 
S
N
L
9
Induction
Unlike deductive logic, the logic of induction offers no neat, harmonious system of
ideas agreed upon by all logicians. Rather, it consists of several independently devel-
oped areas of thought about which there is little agreement. The sections in this
chapter touch upon six such areas. The ﬁrst section deals with analogy and its relation
to legal and moral reasoning, the second deals with causality and John Stuart Mill’s
methods for discovering causal connections, and the third with probability. The fourth
section deals with statistical methods of reasoning, the ﬁfth with hypothetical and
scientiﬁc reasoning, and the sixth with the difference between science and superstition.
Except for Section 9.6, which depends in part on Section 9.5, these six sections are
basically independent of one another, so they can be read in any order. Furthermore,
the material presented is only slightly dependent on ideas developed earlier in this
book. In addition to material from Chapter 1, which is presupposed by all six sections,
Sections 9.2 and 9.3 presuppose only a few ideas from Chapter 6, and Section 9.4
extends the material developed in Chapter 3.
9.1
Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
Analogical reasoning may be the most fundamental and the most common of all
rational processes. It stands at the basis of many ordinary decisions in life. For exam-
ple, a woman wanting to buy a can of soup might deliberate between Campbell’s and
Brand X and, after recalling that other varieties of Campbell’s were good, decide in
favor of that brand. A man contemplating a haircut might recall that a friend got an
especially good cut at the Golden Touch and as a result decide to go there himself. A
woman selecting a plant for her garden might observe that gardenias grow well at the
house next door and conclude that gardenias would grow well at her house, too. A
man thinking of reading a novel by Stephen King might recall that King’s last three
novels were thrilling and conclude that his latest novel is also thrilling.

486
Chapter 9: Induction
Analogical reasoning is reasoning that depends on a comparison of instances. If the
instances are sufﬁciently similar, the decision reached in the end is usually a good one;
but if they are not sufﬁciently similar, the decision may not be good. When such a
reasoning process is expressed in words, the result is an argument from analogy.
Simple arguments from analogy have the following structure:
Entity A has attributes a, b, c, and z.
Entity B has attributes a, b, c.
Therefore, entity B probably has attribute z also.
If the attributes a, b, and c are connected in some important way to z (that is, are rel-
evant to z), the argument is usually strong. If they are not so connected (that is, are
irrelevant to z), the argument is usually weak.
Analogical arguments are closely related to generalizations. In a generalization, the
arguer begins with one or more instances and proceeds to draw a conclusion about
all the members of a class. The arguer may then apply the generalization to one or
more members of this class that were not noted earlier. The ﬁrst stage of such an
inference is inductive, and the second stage is deductive. For example, the man think-
ing of reading a Stephen King novel might argue that because the last three novels by
King were thrilling, all King novels are thrilling (inductive argument). Applying this
generalization to the latest novel, he might then conclude that it too is thrilling (deduc-
tive argument). In an argument from analogy, on the other hand, the arguer proceeds
directly from one or more individual instances to a conclusion about another individ-
ual instance without appealing to any intermediate generalization. Such an argument
is purely inductive. Thus the arguer might conclude directly from reading three earlier
King novels that the latest one is thrilling.
In any argument from analogy, the items that are compared are called analogates.
Thus if one should argue that Whitney Houston’s latest CD is probably good because
her two previous CDs were good, the three CDs are the analogates. The two earlier
CDs are called the primary analogates, and the latest CD is called the secondary
analogate. With these deﬁnitions in mind, we may now examine a set of principles
that are useful for evaluating most arguments from analogy. They include (1) the
relevance of the similarities shared by the primary and secondary analogates, (2) the
number of similarities, (3) the nature and degree of disanalogy, (4) the number of
primary analogates, (5) the diversity among the primary analogates, and (6) the spec-
iﬁcity of the conclusion.
1. Relevance of the similarities. Suppose a certain person—let us call her Lucy—is
contemplating the purchase of a new car. She decides in favor of a Chevrolet
because she wants good gas mileage and her friend Tom’s new Chevy gets good
gas mileage. To support her decision, Lucy argues that both cars have a padded
steering wheel, tachometer, vinyl upholstery, tinted windows, cassette player, and
white paint. Lucy’s argument is weak because these similarities are irrelevant to gas
mileage. On the other hand, if Lucy bases her conclusion on the fact that both cars

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
487
S
N
L
have the same size of engine, her argument is relatively strong, because engine size
is quite relevant to gas mileage.
2. Number of similarities. Suppose, in addition to the same-size engine, Lucy notes
further similarities between the car she intends to buy and Tom’s car: curb weight,
aerodynamic body, gear ratio, and tires. These additional similarities, all of which
are relevant to gas mileage, tend to strengthen Lucy’s argument. If, in addition, Lucy
notes that she and Tom both drive about half on city streets and half on freeways,
her argument is strengthened even further.
3. Nature and degree of disanalogy. On the other hand, if Lucy’s car is equipped with
a turbocharger, if Lucy loves to make jackrabbit starts and screeching stops, if Tom’s
car has overdrive but Lucy’s does not, and if Lucy constantly drives on congested
freeways while Tom drives on relatively clear freeways, Lucy’s argument is weak-
ened. These differences are called disanalogies. Depending on how they relate to
the conclusion, disanalogies can either weaken or strengthen an argument. If we
suppose instead that Tom’s car has the turbocharger, that Tom loves jackrabbit
starts, and so on, then Lucy’s argument is strengthened, because these disanalogies
tend to reduce Tom’s gas mileage.
4. Number of primary analogates. Thus far, Lucy has based her conclusion on the
similarity between the car she intends to buy and only one other car—Tom’s. Now
suppose that Lucy has three additional friends, that all of them drive cars of the same
model and year as Tom’s, and that all of them get good gas mileage. These addi-
tional primary analogates strengthen Lucy’s argument because they lessen the like-
lihood that Tom’s good gas mileage is a freak incident. On the other hand, suppose
that two of these additional friends get the same good gas mileage as Tom but that
the third gets poor mileage. As before, the ﬁrst two cases tend to strengthen Lucy’s
argument, but the third now tends to weaken it. This third case is called a counter-
analogy because it supports a conclusion opposed to that of the original analogy.
5. Diversity among the primary analogates. Suppose now that Lucy’s four friends (all
of whom get good mileage) all buy their gas at the same station, have their cars
tuned up regularly by the same mechanic, put the same friction-reducing additive
in their oil, inﬂate their tires to the same pressure, and do their city driving on
uncongested, level streets at a fuel-maximizing 28 miles per hour. Such factors
would tend to reduce the probability of Lucy’s conclusion, because it is possible
that one or a combination of them is responsible for the good mileage and that this
factor (or combination of them) is absent in Lucy’s case. On the other hand, if
Lucy’s friends buy their gas at different stations, have their cars tuned up at different
intervals by different mechanics, inﬂate their tires to different pressures, drive at
different speeds on different grades, and have different attitudes toward using the
oil additive, then it is less likely that the good gas mileage they enjoy is attributable
to any factor other than the model and year of their car.
6. Speciﬁcity of the conclusion. Lucy’s conclusion is simply that her car will get ‘‘good’’
mileage. If she now changes her conclusion to state that her car will get gas mileage

488
Chapter 9: Induction
‘‘at least as good’’ as Tom’s, then her argument is weakened. Such a conclusion is
more speciﬁc than the earlier conclusion and is easier to falsify. Thus if her mileage
were only one-tenth of a mile per gallon less than Tom’s, her conclusion would
turn out to be false. Now suppose that Lucy changes her conclusion to state that
her car will get exactly the same gas mileage as Tom’s. This conclusion is even
more speciﬁc than the ‘‘at least as good’’ conclusion, and it is easier still to falsify.
Thus such a conclusion renders Lucy’s argument much weaker than her original
argument.
Let us now use these six principles to evaluate an argument from analogy. Suppose
that you want to shade a bedroom window from the intense western sun. To accom-
plish this purpose, you decide to plant some trees, but the trees must be narrow ones
that will grow approximately 25 feet tall. Recalling that a friend has some Italian
cypresses that are almost exactly 25 feet tall, you conclude that this variety of tree will
do the job. Thus far, your argument is based on a single similarity, the species of the
tree. Because this similarity is very relevant to height, your argument is fairly strong.
Now if, in addition, it turns out that your friend lives in the same city and has the same
kind of soil as you have, your argument is strengthened. However, if it happens that
your friend has a knack for growing trees while you have a knack for killing them,
your argument is weakened.
To this set of facts, suppose we add the observation that four of your neighbors
have Italian cypresses and that all of their trees are approximately 25 feet tall. This fact
tends to strengthen your argument. Also, if all four neighbors planted their trees in
different years, use different kinds of fertilizers on them, and give them different
amounts of water, your argument is further strengthened. Finally, should you broaden
your conclusion to state that your trees will grow to between 22 and 28 feet, your
argument is strengthened even further. But if you narrow your conclusion to state that
your trees will grow to between 241⁄2 and 251⁄2 feet, your argument is weakened.
Legal Reasoning
Many of the arguments used by lawyers in the United States and Canada to support a
case at trial are analogical arguments. The reason is that the legal systems of these
countries were derived many years ago from the English system, and an essential
feature of the English system is its dependence on precedent. According to the require-
ment of precedent, similar cases must be decided similarly. Thus, in arguing a case, a
lawyer will often attempt to show that the case is analogous to some earlier case that
was decided in a favorable way. Sometimes, even today, these precedents go back to
early English law.
For example, suppose that you own a factory and one of your machines, a drill
press, breaks down, causing the entire operation to come to a halt. Urgently you call
a repair company and explain the whole situation. The spokesperson for the company
promises to have the drill press back in operation within two days. Unfortunately,
however, there are delays, and two weeks elapse before the drill press is repaired. In

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
489
S
N
L
the meantime your company loses an additional $10,000 in proﬁts. Because you relied
on the spokesperson’s assurance that the drill press would be ﬁxed in two days, you
demand that the repair company reimburse you for the additional lost proﬁts. When
the repair company refuses your demand, you ﬁle suit.
The lawyer who argues your case will probably make reference to a much earlier
case, Hadley v. Baxendale, decided in Gloucester, England in 1854. In that case the
operation of a mill was halted because of a broken crankshaft, and the owner of the
mill (Hadley) employed a shipping company (Baxendale) to return the crankshaft to
the manufacturer. Hadley informed Baxendale that the broken crankshaft had inter-
rupted the operation of the mill, and Baxendale replied that the broken crankshaft
would be in the hands of the manufacturer within one day. As it turned out, however,
the shipment was delayed by several days, and Hadley incurred lost proﬁts from the
additional time the mill was shut down. Hadley demanded reimbursement from
Baxendale, and when Baxendale refused, Hadley ﬁled suit. The court ruled that Bax-
endale should pay only if he foresaw when he agreed to do the work that delays
would result in lost proﬁts for Hadley.
Applying this result to the drill press case, your lawyer will argue that because the
repair company was informed that delays in repairing the drill press would result in
lost proﬁts, it should reimburse you for the losses incurred.
In the early days, much of English law was the direct result of judges rendering
decisions in particular cases. This judge-made law is otherwise called common law.
However, today many of our laws are not the direct product of judges but rather of
legislative bodies. These laws, called statutes, are codiﬁed in books that are periodi-
cally revised. Can it be said that precedent plays a central role in decisions involving
statutory law in the same way that it does in decisions involving common law? The
answer is a deﬁnite yes. Statutory laws are invariably phrased in relatively general
language, and precedent is required to determine how the statutes should be inter-
preted and applied.
Consider, for example, a ‘‘law’’ that we are all familiar with, the First Amendment to
the U.S. Constitution, which provides for freedom of speech and religious expression.
Suppose that you decide, in reliance on the First Amendment, to pass out religious
pamphlets on a downtown street corner. Suppose further that most of the people you
hand your pamphlets to merely glance at them and then throw them on the street and
that the gathering litter makes the area look like a garbage dump. To prevent the litter,
the police tell you that you can hand out your pamphlets only in the vicinity of public
garbage cans, so that those who do not want the pamphlets can properly dispose of
them. You object that such a restriction violates your First Amendment rights, and you
take the issue to court.
In presenting your case, your lawyer will argue that the case is analogous to a
number of other cases where the state attempted to limit not the content of religious
expression, but the time, place, and manner of its expression. Next, your lawyer will
note that in such cases the state is allowed to restrict the expression only if the restric-
tion is ‘‘narrowly tailored’’ to serve a ‘‘signiﬁcant government interest.’’ Finally, your

490
Chapter 9: Induction
lawyer will attempt to show that your case is analogous to cases in which the govern-
ment failed to prove that the restriction was so tailored.
As these examples illustrate, many of the arguments that occur in law are argu-
ments from analogy, and the principles developed at the beginning of this section
can be used to evaluate them. The ﬁrst principle, which deals with the relevance
of the similarities, has an obvious application to legal arguments. Suppose, for ex-
ample, that two cases are similar in that each involves a burning building, the building
in each case is located in Chicago, and in each case ten people died. The com-
parison is pointless if the issue in the ﬁrst case is whether an insurance company is
liable to pay damages while the issue in the second is whether somebody is guilty
of arson.
The second and third principles, which deal with the number of similarities and the
nature and degree of disanalogy, are also applicable. If a preceding case resembles
the case at hand in virtually all important details, then the preceding case is said to be
‘‘on point’’ and, given certain other requirements (discussed shortly), will dictate the
outcome of the case to be decided. As for the nature and degree of disanalogy, if a
preceding case deals with fraud by a stockbroker while the case to be decided deals
with fraud by a real estate broker, the precedent may be more or less controlling,
depending on such circumstances as applicable statutory law.
As applied to legal analogies, the fourth principle (number of primary analogates)
usually determines how well established a legal precedent is. If ﬁfty previous courts
have followed a certain rule, the precedent is stronger (everything else being equal)
than if only two courts have followed that rule. The ﬁfth principle (diversity of primary
analogates) is also applicable. If a certain rule turns up in a broad range of cases, it
provides a stronger precedent (other things being equal) than a rule that turns up in
a narrow range of cases. For example, the principle underlying the inadmissibility
of hearsay testimony is well established because it appears in a broad cross section
of cases.
Finally, the sixth principle states that the more speciﬁc a conclusion is, the weaker
the argument becomes. Suppose, in an earlier case, a person is awarded half a million
dollars for injuries inﬂicted by a surgeon who, during an appendix operation, left a
stethoscope in the body opening. The argument that another person injured in the
same way by another doctor should be awarded exactly the same amount of money
is relatively weak in comparison with the argument that the person should be awarded
approximately the same amount of money.
Analogical arguments that occur in law differ from the fairly simple analogies con-
sidered earlier in at least two important ways. In the analogy dealing with gas mileage,
the modes of similarity that linked the analogates (number of engine cylinders, curb
weight, and the like) were clearly deﬁned by conventional thinking, and their rele-
vance to the conclusion has been established by scientiﬁc principles. In law, however,
clarity of this sort is seldom to be found. Modes of similarity between cases are often
the result of highly creative thinking by lawyers and judges, and the relevance of these

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
491
S
N
L
similarities to the proposed conclusion is nearly always debatable. These differences
render analogical arguments in law considerably more elusive than those dealing with
subjects such as gas mileage.
The other difference between simple analogical arguments and those found in law
is that the primary analogates in law (earlier cases) do not all have equal weight. The
reason is that our courts operate in different jurisdictions. The system of federal courts
is totally separate from the system of state courts. As a result, a case that might have
considerable weight as a precedent in one system might have little or no weight in the
other. In addition, within these systems there are different circuits, and a case that is
controlling in one circuit may not be in another. Lastly, within these systems, the courts
exist on different levels. For example, within the federal system there are the district
courts, courts of appeals, and the U.S. Supreme Court. A case that is binding on a
lower court may not be binding on a higher court.
Let us now illustrate the process of legal reasoning with a hypothetical example.
Suppose a certain vagrant—let us call him Blake—attempted to earn some pocket
change by breaking into a cigarette vending machine and stealing the cash. The police
apprehended Blake in the act, and the district attorney charged him with burglary.
Blake had one prior conviction for breaking into a cigarette machine.
The ﬁrst thing that any lawyer would do with this case is to recall the deﬁnition of
‘‘burglary.’’ According to the traditional deﬁnition, ‘‘burglary’’ means ‘‘the trespassory
breaking and entering of a dwelling house of another at night with the intent to commit
a felony therein.’’ Under many modern statutes, ‘‘dwelling house’’ has been replaced
by ‘‘structure’’ and ‘‘at night’’ has been deleted.
There is little doubt that Blake has broken into a structure. The question is, is a
cigarette machine the kind of structure intended by the statute? A second question is,
did Blake intend to commit a felony when he broke into the cigarette machine? To
answer these questions a lawyer would consult additional statutes and relevant cases.
Let us suppose that our jurisdiction has a statute that deﬁnes felony theft as theft of
$400 or more. Also, let us suppose that the cash box of this particular machine con-
tained $450 but most similar machines can hold no more than $350.
As for cases, let us suppose that our jurisdiction has two controlling precedents. In
People v. Harris, Harris broke into a warehouse with the intent of stealing its contents.
The warehouse contained microwave ovens valued at $10,000, and Harris was found
guilty of burglary. In People v. Sawyer, Sawyer broke into a newspaper vending ma-
chine with the intent to steal the cash in the cash box. The maximum capacity of the
cash box was $20, and Sawyer was found not guilty of burglary.
Relying on these facts and preceding cases, the district attorney might present the
following argument to the judge (or jury):
In breaking into the cigarette machine, Blake is guilty of burglary for the following
reasons. In People v. Harris, the defendant was found guilty of burglary for break-
ing into a warehouse. A cigarette vending machine is like a warehouse in that it
contains goods stored for resale. Furthermore, like a warehouse, people’s livelihoods

492
Chapter 9: Induction
depend on the goods stored therein. Also, the vending machine contained over
$400, and Blake intended to steal this money. Stealing over $400 is a felony. There-
fore, Blake intended to commit a felony when he broke into the machine. Also, by
placing his hand into the machine, he ‘‘entered’’ it. A cigarette machine differs
from a newspaper machine in that it can hold goods valued much more than a
stack of newspapers. Thus all the requirements are met for conviction.
Defense counsel, on the other hand, might argue as follows:
In breaking into the cigarette machine, Blake is not guilty of burglary for the fol-
lowing reasons. The original crime of burglary extended only to dwelling houses
because people live in dwelling houses and it is important that their lives be pro-
tected. Modern law has extended the kind of structure requisite for burglary to
include warehouses because people work and live in them. A cigarette machine is
unlike a warehouse in that a person is not capable of working and living in it. Also,
for the crime of burglary to be committed, the burglar must enter the structure.
A cigarette machine differs from a warehouse in that a person is not capable of
entering it with his whole body.
On the contrary, a cigarette vending machine is very similar to a newspaper
vending machine in that it contains relatively small quantities of products for re-
sale. In People v. Sawyer, the defendant was found not guilty of burglary in break-
ing into a newspaper vending machine. Finally, Blake was familiar with cigarette
machines (he broke into one once before), and he therefore knew that their cash
boxes are usually limited to holding less than $400. Therefore, when he broke into
this particular machine, Blake intended to steal less than $400, and therefore he
did not intend to commit a felony.
In deciding whether Blake is guilty, the judge or jury will have to evaluate these
analogical arguments by determining which analogies are the strongest.
Sometimes lawyers and judges are confronted with cases for which there is no clear
precedent. Such cases are called cases of ﬁrst impression, and the attempt to deal with
them by appeal to analogous instances involves even more creativity than does the
attempt to deal with ordinary cases. In deciding cases of ﬁrst impression, judges often
resort to moral reasoning, and they grope for any analogy that can shed light on the
issue. The reasoning process in such a decision often involves a sequence of analogies
followed by disanalogies and counteranalogies. These analogies present the issue in
a continually shifting light, and the experience of coming to grips with them expands
the outlook of the reasoner. New perspectives are created, attitudes are changed, and
world views are altered.
Moral Reasoning
As in law, arguments from analogy are also useful in deciding moral questions. Such
arguments often occur in the context of a dialogue. As an example of a dialogue that
includes a number of arguments from analogy, consider the following one between

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
493
S
N
L
two ﬁctional characters, Jason and Deirdre. The dialogue deals with the morality and
legality of fetal abuse.
‘‘Jason, I read an article in this morning’s newspaper about fetal abuse—you
know, expectant mothers who take drugs or drink alcohol during pregnancy and
cause damage to their fetus. The article said that 11 percent of all babies currently
born in this country have traces of alcohol or illegal drugs in their blood. I think
such women should be shot!’’
‘‘I can see that you’re pretty worked up about this, Deirdre, but don’t you think
you’re being a bit prudish? After all, what’s so bad about a little alcohol or a few
drugs?’’
‘‘I can’t believe you said that!’’ Deirdre scolds. ‘‘The alcohol and drugs cause
permanent brain damage to the fetus and leave the child maimed for life. Many of
these kids will grow up retarded, and many will become criminals and end up in
jail. The burden on society will be incredible! Women who treat their unborn child
in this way are utterly immoral, and they ought to be sent to jail.’’
‘‘Let’s take these claims one at a time,’’ Jason responds. ‘‘First, why do you think
feeding alcohol or drugs to a fetus is immoral, Deirdre?’’
‘‘Because I think the fetus has rights.’’
‘‘But wait a minute,’’ counters Jason. ‘‘According to Roe v. Wade, the mother
can abort the fetus. That must mean the fetus has no right to life; and if it has no
right to life, surely it has no rights at all.’’
Deirdre scratches her head. ‘‘It seems to me you’re overlooking something,’’
she says. ‘‘When a mother intends to abort her fetus, it’s one thing. But when she
intends to bring it to term, it’s quite another thing. It’s almost as if she has ex-
tended a contract to the fetus. Look, suppose I tell a house painter, ‘You paint my
house, and I’ll pay you $1000.’ If the painter fulﬁlls his end of the bargain but I
refuse to pay, clearly I am doing something wrong. In the same way, the mother
who intends to bear her child in effect tells the fetus, ‘You agree to grow and
develop in a normal way, and I’ll provide you with a healthy environment.’ If the
fetus grows and develops normally and then the mother feeds it drugs, she
welches on the deal.’’
‘‘I agree with you about the house painter,’’ Jason answers. ‘‘But it seems to me
that you can only enter into contracts with human beings. You don’t enter into
contracts with dogs and cats, and you don’t enter into contracts with fetuses
either.’’
‘‘A fetus is very much like a complete human being, though,’’ Deirdre replies.
‘‘It’s made up of human ﬂesh and blood, it has the same genetic code as a human
being, and as it develops, it has the same organization of internal organs as a
human being and it even looks like a human being. Isn’t this enough?’’
‘‘And because of these similarities you think the fetus has rights?’’
‘‘Yes, I do.’’
‘‘Well, I think your analogy is nice,’’ Jason replies, ‘‘but I don’t think the similari-
ties you cite are relevant to your conclusion. The reason human beings have rights
and can enter into contracts is because they are rational and have the power of
speech. They demonstrate these powers by proving theorems in geometry and
engaging in conversations. I’ve never seen a fetus do either of these things.’’

494
Chapter 9: Induction
‘‘No,’’ replies Deirdre, ‘‘but neither do people when they’re asleep. Do you think
a sleeping person is not human? Would you take a sleeping person and sweep him
out the door like a clump of dust because he wasn’t at that moment demonstrat-
ing rational powers?’’
‘‘Of course not,’’ Jason replies. ‘‘But unlike a sleeping person, a fetus has never
demonstrated rational powers.’’
‘‘But neither has a newborn baby,’’ Deirdre argues. ‘‘When do you think a new-
born baby becomes human? Does it happen at the moment it’s born? Was it not a
human being one hour before birth? Isn’t a tomato growing on a vine as much a
tomato one day before it ripens as it is when it’s ripe? Isn’t an apple growing on a
tree as much an apple when it’s green as it is after it turns red?’’
‘‘That’s a good analogy,’’ says Jason.
‘‘Also, even if a fetus can’t be proved beyond any uncertainty to be fully hu-
man, don’t you think it should be given the beneﬁt of the doubt? When a person
falls through the ice on a frozen lake, don’t the rescuers who pull the person out
rush him to a hospital even though no signs of life remain? Isn’t the person,
whether dead or alive, treated as if he were still alive? Similarly, shouldn’t a fetus,
who shows no signs of rationality, be treated as if it had rationality?’’
‘‘Perhaps,’’ Jason answers, ‘‘but I have trouble attributing humanity or person-
hood to a mere lump of ﬂesh. This wart on the back of my hand is made of human
ﬂesh and blood, and its cells carry the same genetic code as I do. Of course it’s not
shaped like a human being, but neither is a fetus in the early stages of develop-
ment. Does this mean that I should consider this wart to be human or a person?’’
‘‘So what you’re saying,’’ Deirdre replies, ‘‘is that the fetus is just a part of its
mother’s body, like that wart is part of yours?’’
‘‘Exactly,’’ he says. ‘‘And that means the fetus can have no rights or interests
distinct from those of the mother, any more than someone’s liver can have rights
distinct from the person who has the liver. When an alcoholic abuses his liver by
excessive alcohol consumption, we don’t say that he is immoral and incarcerate
him for liver abuse. Similarly, we don’t say that smokers are immoral for abusing
their lungs and put them in jail for lung abuse. Accordingly, we shouldn’t call preg-
nant women immoral and put them in jail for fetal abuse.’’
‘‘Your analogy has one fatal ﬂaw,’’ Deirdre answers with a smile. ‘‘If the fetus is
merely part of its mother’s body, then it would have exactly the same genetic code
as the mother. Every ordinary body part—heart, liver, lungs, and so on—carries
the same genes as the host organism. But the fetus has its own unique genetic
code. Also, it’s meant to develop and separate from the body of its host, unlike a
liver or a lung. Therefore, a fetus is not merely a part of the mother’s body.’’
‘‘Well, perhaps you’re right,’’ Jason says. ‘‘But I have a better analogy. The fetus
is like a seed planted in the ground or a group of cells growing in a petri dish.
Imagine you were walking down the street and a little seed shouted up at you,
‘Help! Get me out of this soil! It’s too acidic!’ What would you do? Would you
reach down, lift the seedling up, and transplant it elsewhere? Of course not. You’d
say to the seed, ‘Be quiet! It’s lucky you found any soil at all to grow in.’ Isn’t that
what you’d say?’’
‘‘Maybe I would,’’ she says, ‘‘but not if I expected the seed to grow into a hu-
man being. And incidentally, don’t ever accuse me of anthropomorphizing! I think

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
495
S
N
L
a far better analogy is that of someone who perpetrates a battery on another
person. I was reading about a famous case where a man approached a woman in
her sleep and gave her a kiss on the cheek. The man was someone the woman
despised, and when she woke up and found out what had happened, she was so
furious that she sued the man for battery—and she won. A battery, you know, is
any intentionally produced harmful or offensive contact. The case establishes the
principle that the target of a battery need not be aware of it at the time it hap-
pens. Now if a kiss can be a battery, how much more so is being drowned in drugs
and booze. The fetus might not be able to sue till after it’s born, but the battery
was nevertheless committed before birth.’’
‘‘Very clever,’’ Jason responds. ‘‘However, I don’t think you can say someone’s
asleep if that person has never been awake. A fetus has never been awake.’’
‘‘I see you’re still harping on whether the fetus has human thought processes,’’
replies Deirdre. ‘‘Well, consider this. After the child is born, everyone agrees it’s a
full-ﬂedged human being. When that child enters the world with drugs in its body,
we can appropriately ask where those drugs came from. The answer, of course, is
the mother. Thus the mother has given drugs not to a mere fetus but to a real
child. The situation would be exactly the same as if a common drug dealer had
given drugs to the kid. Thus the mother should be treated the same way as any
drug dealer.’’
‘‘I think you’ve got me there,’’ Jason admits. ‘‘But your analogy holds only for
kids who are actually born with drugs or alcohol in their system. What about fe-
tuses who are fed drugs or alcohol weeks before birth but who are delivered with-
out any trace of them?’’
‘‘Suppose,’’ replies Deirdre, ‘‘a doctor who is treating a pregnant woman peri-
odically injects cocaine into the fetus using a long hypodermic needle. Not only
would everyone consider the doctor ﬁendish and immoral, but the doctor would
be liable for civil and criminal sanctions. Is the mother who feeds cocaine to her
fetus any different from this doctor?’’
‘‘Interesting point,’’ says Jason. ‘‘I expect, however, that the doctor would be
subject to liability for acting without the mother’s consent—not for acting without
the fetus’s consent.’’
‘‘I hope you’re wrong,’’ says Deirdre. ‘‘But you know how I feel about these
fetal abusers? I see a child in a playpen near a window. Outside the window other
kids are playing on the grass. The child in the playpen is excited and happy when it
sees them and can’t wait until it’s big enough to go out and join them. Then one
day the mother comes in with a baseball bat and smashes the child’s legs, and the
child is never able to walk from that day on. That’s what fetal abuse does, as far as
I’m concerned.’’
‘‘Getting a little emotional, aren’t we, Deirdre?’’
‘‘Maybe. But I don’t think morality is something devoid of feeling. Morality con-
cerns life and life is feeling, and the two can’t be separated.’’
‘‘Well, even if I agreed with you that fetal abuse is immoral, that doesn’t mean
I think it should be made illegal. I know our criminal laws are closely tied to public
morality, but that’s true only up to a point. I think making fetal abuse a crime
might be going too far.’’
‘‘Why is that?’’ asks Deirdre.

496
Chapter 9: Induction
‘‘Because it’s so invasive,’’ Jason responds. ‘‘Like a rapist, the state would be
invading the most private aspects of a woman’s life. Also, it would be patronizing.
The state would be treating the pregnant woman like an errant, recalcitrant child
who’s done something wrong and needs to be punished.’’
‘‘But there is a long history of state intervention in the lives of people who are a
danger to themselves or others,’’ Deirdre observes. ‘‘For example, people who at-
tempt suicide are sometimes institutionalized to prevent them from killing them-
selves. Also, mental deviants are often committed to mental institutions for their
own beneﬁt. The theory is that, if these people were in their right minds, they
would want the state to do exactly that. Women who abuse their fetuses are very
similar to mental deviants. If these women were in their right minds, they would
want the state to intercede and prevent them from injuring their fetuses.’’
‘‘Still,’’ replies Jason, ‘‘I think a law criminalizing fetal abuse would be unenforce-
able. It would be just like the law against alcohol during prohibition. That law was
eventually repealed because, among other things, it was impossible to enforce. A
law against fetal abuse would suffer the same fate. It would require that police
ofﬁcers snoop into the homes and bedrooms of every pregnant woman reasonably
suspected of abusing her fetus. Such action would violate one of our most cher-
ished values, the right to privacy, and it would require massive additions to our
police force.’’
‘‘Yes,’’ answers Deirdre, ‘‘but the problem is so signiﬁcant that I think some-
thing must be done. You can look at the whole of society as a single human body
grown large. Women who abuse their unborn children are like spiders who inject
venom into the body of society. This venom creates a sore that lasts for seventy
years or more. Now I ask you, what person threatened by such a spider would not
go to any lengths to prevent its bite? What rational person would stand idle, let
the spider inject its venom, and then tolerate the resulting canker for seventy
years?’’
‘‘Yes,’’ agrees Jason, ‘‘but unfortunately, getting rid of fetal abuse is harder than
simply brushing off a spider. I think the solution is to stress educational programs
and provide prenatal care for every expectant mother. After all, you catch more
ﬂies with honey than you do with vinegar. Such programs might reduce the prob-
lem of fetal abuse to a point where it becomes tolerable.’’
‘‘I think any amount of fetal abuse is intolerable,’’ Deirdre replies.
‘‘Society is like a water supply,’’ Jason says. ‘‘Public health ofﬁcials test it for
contaminants and ﬁnd microscopic amounts of this and microscopic amounts of
that. If these amounts are within acceptable limits, they pronounce the water sup-
ply potable. Yes, the thought of any fetal abuse is disturbing, but we can never
eliminate it entirely. The best we can hope for is to reduce it to a point where it
won’t cripple society as a whole.’’
‘‘Perhaps you’re right,’’ concludes Deirdre, ‘‘but the thought of that child in the
playpen still bothers me.’’
This dialogue contains numerous analogies and counteranalogies. The modes of
similarity between the many primary analogates and the secondary analogates (the
fetus, women who commit fetal abuse, laws against fetal abuse, and so on) are never
relevant beyond dispute, and the nature and degree of disanalogy rarely has undis-

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
497
S
N
L
puted consequences. However, the dialogue serves to illustrate the subtle effect that
analogies have on our thought processes and the power they have to alter our attitudes
and perspectives.
EXERCSISE 9.1
I. Evaluate the arguments from analogy contained in the dialogue between Jason
and Deirdre. First identify the primary and secondary analogates in each analogy
and counteranalogy. Next list the similarities between the primary and secondary
analogates and note their relevance to the conclusion. Add any additional similar-
ities you can think of. Finally, identify the disanalogies associated with each anal-
ogy or counteranalogy, and evaluate their effectiveness in destroying the original
analogy.
II. Work the following problems.
1.
#
Rebecca is anticipating the purchase of a new TV set, and she notices that her
friend Anastasia’s new Sony gets the ﬁnest picture she has ever seen. Rebecca
concludes that if she buys a Sony, her set will get approximately the same pic-
ture as Anastasia’s. How do the following facts bear on Rebecca’s argument?
a. The model Rebecca is planning to buy has the same color of cabinet, the
same size of speakers, the same remote control, and the same stand as
Anastasia’s model.
b. The model Rebecca is planning to buy has the same picture tube and same
electronic circuitry as Anastasia’s.
c. Rebecca plans to use the rabbit-ear antenna that comes with the set. She
lives in a fourth-ﬂoor apartment in Manhattan, while Anastasia lives in a
seventieth-ﬂoor penthouse.
d. Anastasia’s transmission is supplied by a cable company.
e. Rebecca changes her mind and decides to hook up with the same cable
company as Anastasia.
f. Rebecca knows of ﬁve other people who own the same Sony model as
Anastasia and who get approximately the same picture quality.
g. These ﬁve people live in the same apartment building.
h. Rebecca discovers four additional people who live in various parts of Man-
hattan and who all own the same model Sony and get approximately the
same picture quality as Anastasia.
i. Rebecca changes her conclusion to state that she will get at least as good a
picture as Anastasia.
j. Rebecca changes her conclusion to state that she will get exactly the same
picture as Anastasia.

498
Chapter 9: Induction
2. Harold needs to have his rugs cleaned, and his friend Veronica reports that
Ajax Carpet Service did an excellent job on her rugs. From this, Harold con-
cludes that Ajax will do an equally good job on his rugs. How do the following
facts bear on Harold’s argument?
a. Veronica hired Ajax several times, and Ajax always did an excellent job.
b. Veronica’s rugs are wool, whereas Harold’s are nylon.
c. Veronica’s carpets never had any stains on them before they were cleaned,
but Harold’s have several large stains.
d. Veronica always had her rugs cleaned in mid-October, whereas Harold
wants his done just a week before Easter.
e. Harold knows of six additional people who have had their carpets cleaned
by Ajax, and all six have been very pleased.
f. All six own rugs made of different material.
g. All six were born in Massachusetts.
h. Ajax has recently undergone a change in management.
i. The Environmental Protection Agency recently banned the cleaning solu-
tion Ajax has used for many years.
j. Harold changes his conclusion to state that Ajax will get his carpets approx-
imately as clean as it has gotten Veronica’s.
3. Kristin is president of a corporation that operates a chain of clothing stores,
and she faces the task of hiring a manager for one of the stores to replace a
man who retired. The former manager increased sales by 15 percent every
year for the past ﬁve years. Kristin concludes that Roger Benson, a recent
graduate of Wharton School of Business, will duplicate the former manager’s
performance. How do the following facts bear on Kristin’s argument?
a. The manager who retired was a graduate of Wharton.
b. The manager who retired liked tennis and drove a Jaguar, whereas Benson
dislikes tennis and drives a BMW.
c. Unlike the manager who retired, Benson formerly managed a shoe store,
where he increased sales 20 percent for each of the two years he was there.
d. A labor dispute has recently erupted in the store Benson will manage.
e. The manager who retired was an alcoholic, whereas Benson is a moderate
drinker.
f. The government has approved a 10 percent increase in federal income
taxes that takes effect at the beginning of the year.
g. Three additional stores owned by Kristin’s company are managed by re-
cent Wharton graduates, and all three managers have increased sales by 18
percent for each of the past three years.

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
499
S
N
L
h. These three stores are located in the city’s three wealthiest suburbs.
i. The store Benson will manage is located in a neighborhood that has re-
cently begun to decline.
j. Kristin changes her conclusion to state that Benson will increase sales by
at least 10 percent for the ﬁrst year.
4.
#
Sam has planned a one-day ﬁshing trip in Alaska. He intends to ﬁsh off Rocky
Point, where he ﬁshed last year. Because he caught ﬁve ﬁsh in a one-day
outing last year, Sam concludes that he will catch ﬁve ﬁsh this year. How do
the following facts bear on Sam’s argument?
a. Last year Sam used a wooden boat, but this year he will use a ﬁberglass boat.
b. Sam used herring for bait last year, but this year he will use anchovies.
c. Sam ﬁshed with four friends last year, and each of them caught more than
ﬁve ﬁsh on that day.
d. This year Sam will ﬁsh on July 15, but last year he ﬁshed on August 1.
e. Last year these four friends caught an average of ﬁve ﬁsh per day from July
15 to August 1.
f. These four friends are women.
g. These four friends used various kinds of bait—herring, squid, anchovies,
and artiﬁcial lures.
h. It is now July 12. Yesterday, ten people ﬁshed off Rocky Point, and none
caught any ﬁsh.
i. A ﬂeet of commercial ﬁshing boats has been ﬁshing the area near Rocky
Point for the ﬁrst time.
j. Sam changes his conclusion to state that he will catch at least one ﬁsh.
5. Susan is considering a job as public relations specialist with the Chamber of
Commerce. Her friend Terry took such a job one year ago, and within nine
months her annual salary was $50,000. Susan argues that if she takes this job,
then her annual salary will be at least $50,000 within nine months. How do
the following facts bear on Susan’s argument?
a. Susan is beautiful and outgoing, whereas Terry is average looking and
introverted.
b. Susan is a Democrat, but Terry is a Republican.
c. Like Terry, Susan is 5 feet 4 inches tall and has blonde hair.
d. Susan’s parents are elementary school teachers, but Terry’s parents are
prominent businesspeople.
e. One year ago, Cindy, April, Elizabeth, and Jackie accepted jobs as public
relations specialists with the Chamber of Commerce, and today all are
earning $44,000.

500
Chapter 9: Induction
f. April is a Republican, Cindy is a Democrat, Elizabeth is a Libertarian, and
Jackie is a member of the Peace and Freedom Party.
g. Cindy, April, Elizabeth, and Jackie are beautiful and outgoing.
h. Susan has ﬁve years experience as a public relations specialist, whereas
Terry, when she was hired, had only two years experience in that area.
i. There is a shortage of public relations specialists in the local job pool.
j. Susan changes her conclusion to state that after nine months she will be
earning at least $47,000.
6. Paul is searching for a puppy that will grow up to be friendly with his children.
His friend Barbara has an Airedale that is good with her children. From this,
Paul concludes that an Airedale puppy would make a good choice. How do
the following facts bear on Paul’s argument?
a. Barbara’s dog is a female, but Paul plans to get a male.
b. Tim, Ed, and Irene have male Airedales that are friendly with their children.
c. Tim’s, Ed’s, and Irene’s dogs all came from the same litter.
d. Fran, Penny, and Bob have Airedales that snap at their children.
e. Fran’s, Penny’s and Bob’s Airedales all came from different litters.
f. The puppy that Paul plans to get was born in June, just as Barbara’s was.
g. The puppy that Paul plans to get is of the same subspecies as Barbara’s dog.
h. The puppy that Paul plans to get had a littermate that was vicious and had
to be destroyed. Barbara’s dog had no such littermates.
i. Paul plans to give his dog special training, but Barbara’s dog received no
such training.
j. Paul changes his conclusion to state that if he gets an Airedale puppy, it
will grow up at least to tolerate children.
7.
#
Laura is considering taking Calculus I from Professor Rogers. Her friend Gina
took Professor Rogers for this class and got an ‘‘A.’’ Laura concludes that she,
too, will get an ‘‘A’’ from Professor Rogers. How do the following facts bear
on Laura’s argument?
a. Gina earned straight ‘‘A’’s in high school math, whereas Laura got ‘‘B’’s.
b. Laura took pre-calculus in high school, but Gina took no pre-calculus class.
c. Laura is a Buddhist, whereas Gina is a Protestant.
d. Kevin, Toni, and Samantha took pre-calculus in high school, and all of them
received ‘‘A’’s in Professor Rogers’ Calculus I class.
e. Kevin, Toni, and Samantha all have different majors.
f. Kevin, Toni, and Samantha attended Franklin High School.
g. Laura attended Roosevelt High School.
h. Kevin, Toni, and Samantha took pre-calculus from different instructors.

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
501
S
N
L
i. Laura and Gina earned equal scores on the college math entrance exam.
j. Laura changes her conclusion to state that she will receive an ‘‘A’’ in
Professor Rogers’ class.
8. Andrew is thinking about buying stock in E-Tron, a new company that sells
electronic equipment over the Internet. Six months ago, he bought shares in
E-Boot, a new company that sells shoes over the Internet, and the price of the
stock doubled in two months. Andrew argues that if he buys E-Tron, the stock
will double in two months. How do the following facts bear on Andrew’s
argument?
a. Stocks in Internet companies have been in a steep decline for the past two
weeks, whereas they were rising six months ago.
b. E-Tron will be run by the same management team that runs E-Boot.
c. During the past year, the stock of ﬁve other new companies that sell over
the Internet doubled within two months of their initial offering.
d. These ﬁve companies market Swiss chocolates, tires, appliances, furniture,
and luggage.
e. A survey was taken of E-Boot customers, and 90 percent said they would
not consider buying electronic equipment over the Internet.
f. Two other companies that market jewelry and lingerie over the Internet
have done poorly.
g. America Online, the most widely used Net service provider, just increased
its monthly service charge by 50 percent.
h. E-Boot is incorporated in New Jersey, whereas E-Tron is incorporated in
Delaware.
i. E-Boot introduced its products with a major ad campaign, whereas E-Tron
plans no such campaign.
j. Andrew changes his conclusion to state that E-Tron stock will triple within
the next two months.
9. According to the doctrine of adverse possession, a person occupying a piece
of land in a way that is open, notorious, and hostile to the owner’s rights can
claim ownership of the land after a certain number of years of continuous
occupancy. In this connection, Dr. Wacko, a mad scientist, hauled telescopes
and radio antennas to the top of Mica Peak every night for twenty years to
detect extraterrestrial life. At the end of the period he petitioned the court for
a decree stating that he owned Mica Peak under the theory of adverse pos-
session. Tom Bell, the owner of Mica Peak, attempts to defeat Dr. Wacko’s
petition.
Construct two arguments, one supporting Dr. Wacko’s position, the other
supporting Tom Bell’s position. The statutory period for adverse possession
in this jurisdiction is twenty years, and there are two controlling cases:

502
Chapter 9: Induction
Crick v. Hoskins: Crick occupied a house in Centerville that was owned by
Hoskins. She lived in the house continuously, mowed the lawn weekly,
and parked her car in front. After twenty years she petitioned the court for
a decree stating that she owned the property under the theory of adverse
possession, and the court granted the decree against the objections of
Hoskins.
Raymond v. McBride: Raymond set up a large tent on a piece of rural property
owned by McBride and lived in it for nine months each year. During the
remaining three months, heavy snow made the property inaccessible.After
twenty years Raymond petitioned the court for a decree stating that he
owned the property under the theory of adverse possession, and the court
denied Raymond’s petition.
10.
#
The Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution prohibits unreasonable
searches and seizures. A ‘‘search’’ is deﬁned as a ‘‘violation of a person’s
reasonable expectation of privacy by the police.’’ Legal issues dealing with
searches usually turn on the question of whether the person who was
searched had a reasonable expectation of privacy at the time and place the
search was conducted. In this connection, consider the following set of facts.
Maxie was lining up drug contacts from his car phone while he was driving
on the freeway. Without obtaining a search warrant, federal agents inter-
cepted one of his messages and used it to locate Maxie’s car and arrest Maxie.
Maxie argues that the federal agents violated his reasonable expectation of
privacy, and the government denies it.
Your task is to construct two arguments, one supporting Maxie’s position,
the other supporting the position of the federal agents. There are three con-
trolling cases in this jurisdiction:
U.S. v. Taylor: Federal agents suspected Taylor of illegal distribution of
ﬁrearms. Without obtaining a search warrant, they planted a listening de-
vice on the phone in Taylor’s home and used the evidence obtained to
arrest Taylor. The court ruled that their action violated Taylor’s reasonable
expectation of privacy and disallowed the evidence.
U.S. v. Weber: Without obtaining a search warrant, federal agents operating
inside U.S. borders intercepted a radio transmission from a plane ﬂying
over Mexico. The message mentioned drugs, and it disclosed the location
of a landing strip inside the United States. Using this information, the
agents met the plane and arrested its pilot for drug smuggling. The court
ruled that their action did not violate the pilot’s reasonable expectation of
privacy.
U.S. v. Robinson: Federal agents were using a telescope to conduct surveil-
lance on the resident of a distant apartment building. Inadvertently they
noticed some teenagers smoking crack in a car parked in the lot near the

Analogy and Legal and Moral Reasoning
503
S
N
L
building, and they proceeded to arrest them. The court ruled that their
action did not violate the teenagers’ reasonable expectation of privacy.
11. The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution states that Congress shall make
no law abridging the freedom of speech or the right to peaceable assembly.
This ‘‘law’’ applies to states (and cities) as a result of the adoption of the
Fourteenth Amendment. In reliance on the First Amendment, a group of gays
and lesbians apply for a permit to march on Gay Freedom day. Similar pa-
rades in other cities have been calm and orderly, but the police chief denies a
parade permit to this group.
Construct two arguments, one supporting the position of the group, the
other supporting the position of the police chief. There are three controlling
cases in this jurisdiction:
Lester v. City: Police seized an art collection displayed in a public park be-
cause it depicted heterosexuals in nude poses. The court ruled that the
display was protected by the First Amendment.
Byron v. City: Police denied a parade permit to a Nazi group that wanted to
march on Hitler’s birthday. The court ruled that the denial violated the
group’s rights under the First Amendment.
Stone v. City: Police closed down a theater showing an erotic gay ﬁlm because
they claimed that the ﬁlm promoted the spread of AIDS. The court ruled
that the action of the police was allowed under the First Amendment.
12. Constructive eviction is a legal doctrine by which a landlord who substantially
interferes with a tenant’s use and enjoyment of the premises will be consid-
ered to have evicted the tenant. Such a landlord cannot collect rent from the
tenant. In this connection, Isabel signed a lease for an apartment owned by
Carolyn. A clause in the lease stated that all tenants must keep noise to a
minimum during evening hours. After moving in, Isabel found that another
tenant played his stereo all night long at ear-splitting levels. Carolyn declined
to enforce the noise clause in the lease. After one week without sleep, Isabel
moved out, and Carolyn now sues Isabel for rent.
Construct two arguments, one supporting Isabel’s position, the other sup-
porting Carolyn’s. There are two controlling cases in this jurisdiction:
Garvin v. Linder: Linder rented an apartment from Garvin, and the lease
stated that Garvin would provide heat during the winter. When winter
arrived, Garvin provided heat for only one hour per day, and the inside
temperature sometimes dropped to 50F. Linder moved out, and Garvin
sued Linder for rent. The court ruled in favor of Linder.
Quincy v. Fulton: Fulton rented a tenth-ﬂoor apartment from Quincy. Shortly
thereafter Quincy decided to have repairs made on the elevator, causing it
to be shut down for a month. Because Fulton had arthritis, he had great

504
Chapter 9: Induction
difﬁculty climbing ten ﬂights of stairs. Fulton moved out, and Quincy sued
Fulton for rent. The court ruled in favor of Quincy.
13.
#
A negligent person who causes an injury to another person is liable for the
latter’s injuries. Because it is sometimes very difﬁcult to determine the causal
extent of a negligent action, courts have developed the theory of proximate
cause, which limits the scope of liability. In this connection, Liz Shaffer negli-
gently failed to maintain the brakes on her car, and as a result her car crashed
into one driven by Mary Vassar. Mary was taken to the hospital for bumps and
bruises, but while she was there, doctors mistakenly amputated her perfectly
healthy leg. Mary sues Liz for loss of her leg.
Construct two arguments, one supporting Mary’s position, the other sup-
porting Liz’s position. The only issue is whether Liz proximately caused the
loss of the leg. There are two controlling cases in this jurisdiction:
Sacco v. Lane: Lane negligently used gasoline to light his barbecue in a strong
wind. The ﬂames from the barbecue ignited nearby trees and then spread
to ten houses in the neighborhood, burning them to the ground. The court
ruled that Lane was liable for damage to the houses.
Hunt v. Gomez: Hunt was a passenger in a taxi driven by Gomez. Gomez
was drunk and negligently let Hunt out at the wrong corner. While Hunt
was walking home, a worker dropped a brick from a building that was
under construction, injuring Hunt. Hunt sued Gomez for injury resulting
from the falling brick. The court ruled in favor of Gomez.
14. Lynn Dodd, age twenty, has become a member of New Age Enlightenment, a
religious cult group. The group has convinced Lynn to sell all her worldly
possessions and give the proceeds to the group. The group forbids any con-
tact between Lynn and her relatives and friends. On one occasion Lynn’s
parents encountered Lynn on a street corner, and they tried to persuade her
to leave the group and return home, but she refused. The parents fear that
some form of mind control is being used to keep Lynn in the group, and they
plan a rescue operation.
Write a dialogue, similar to the dialogue in the text, examining the morality
and legality of such an operation. Include in your dialogue analogiesbetween
the proposed rescue operation and the following: rescuing an adult who has
been hypnotized by captors, kidnapping someone against his or her will,
rescuing a child who has been kidnapped, spiriting away a novice who has
joined a Jesuit seminary or Franciscan convent, coercing an alcoholic to enter
a detoxiﬁcation center, forcing a child to attend a certain school, preventing
someone from committing suicide, forcing a child to attend a certain church,
rescuing an eighteen-year-old from a Nazi youth group, removing one’s
daughter from the Girl Scouts, and any other pertinent analogy that comes to
mind.

Causality and Mill’s Methods
505
S
N
L
15. During ﬁfteen years of marriage, James and Leslie Knox had not succeeded
in having a baby. As a last resort, they tried in vitro fertilization. Doctors
surgically removed nine eggs from Leslie and fertilized them with James’s
sperm. The embryos were then placed in a freezer until the proper time for
them to be implanted in Leslie’s womb. In the meantime, James and Leslie
came to realize that their marriage was going nowhere, and they decided to
get a divorce. The couple has had no trouble arriving at a settlement concern-
ing the house, cars, bank accounts, and other possessions, but they cannot
agree on the disposition of the frozen embryos. James is adamant about not
wanting to have any children by Leslie, and he wants the embryos destroyed.
Leslie, on the other hand, realizing that she is getting older, thinks that the
frozen embryos offer her the best chance of having a baby, and she wants
them implanted.
Write a dialogue, similar to the one in the text, examining the moral and/
or legal ramiﬁcations of this dispute. Include in your dialogue analogies be-
tween this situation and the following: killing a fetus, killing a baby, forcing
your wife to have an abortion, having an abortion against the wishes of your
husband, owning a dog or cat, owning a child, determining custody of a child
upon divorce, dividing a bank account, determining ownership of a unique
and valuable painting produced jointly by two people, implanting an embryo
in a surrogate mother, and any other analogies that come to mind, including
analogies that show that the embryos have or do not have rights and analo-
gies that illustrate the investment that James and Leslie have in the embryos.
9.2
Causality and Mill’s Methods
A knowledge of causal connections plays a prominent role in our effort to control the
environment in which we live. We insulate our homes because we know insulation
will prevent heat loss, we vaccinate our children because we know vaccination will
protect them from polio and diphtheria, we practice the piano and violin because we
know that by doing so we may become proﬁcient on these instruments, and we cook
our meat and ﬁsh because we know that doing so will make them edible.
When the word ‘‘cause’’ is used in ordinary English, however, it is seriously affected
by ambiguity. For example, when we say that sprinkling water on the ﬂowers will
cause them to grow, we mean that water is required for growth, not that water alone
will do the job—sunshine and the proper soil are also required. On the other hand,
when we say that taking a swim on a hot summer day will cause us to cool off, we
mean that the dip by itself will do the job, but we understand that other things will

506
Chapter 9: Induction
work just as well, such as taking a cold shower, entering an air-conditioned room, and
so on.
To clear up this ambiguity affecting the meaning of ‘‘cause,’’ it is useful to adopt the
language of sufﬁcient and necessary conditions. When we say that electrocution is a
cause of death, we mean ‘‘cause’’ in the sense of sufﬁcient condition. Electrocution is
sufﬁcient to produce death, but there are other methods equally effective, such as
poisoning, drowning, and shooting. On the other hand, when we say that the presence
of clouds is a cause of rain, we mean ‘‘cause’’ in the sense of necessary condition.
Without clouds, rain cannot occur, but clouds alone are not sufﬁcient. Certain combi-
nations of pressure and temperature are also required.
Sometimes ‘‘cause’’ is used in the sense of necessary and sufﬁcient condition, as
when we say that the action of a force causes a body to accelerate or that an increase
in voltage causes an increase in electrical current. For a body to accelerate, nothing
more and nothing less is required than for it to be acted on by a net force; and for an
electrical current to increase through a resistive circuit, nothing more and nothing less
is required than an increase in voltage.
Thus, as these examples illustrate, the word ‘‘cause’’ can have any one of three
different meanings:
1. Sufﬁcient condition
2. Necessary condition
3. Sufﬁcient and necessary condition
Sometimes the context provides an immediate clue to the sense in which ‘‘cause’’
is being used. If we are trying to prevent a certain phenomenon from happening, we
usually search for a cause that is a necessary condition, and if we are trying to produce
a certain phenomenon we usually search for a cause that is a sufﬁcient condition. For
example, in attempting to prevent the occurrence of smog around cities, scientists try
to isolate a necessary condition or group of necessary conditions that, if removed, will
eliminate the smog. And in their effort to produce an abundant harvest, farmers search
for a sufﬁcient condition that, given sunshine and rainfall, will increase crop growth.
Another point that should be understood is that whenever an event occurs, at least
one sufﬁcient condition is present and all the necessary conditions are present. The con-
junction of the necessary conditions is the sufﬁcient condition that actually produces
the event. For example, the necessary conditions for lighting a match are heat (pro-
duced by striking) and oxygen. Combining these two necessary conditions gives the
sufﬁcient condition. In other words, striking the match in the presence of oxygen is suf-
ﬁcient to ignite it. In cases where the sufﬁcient condition is also a necessary condition,
there is only one necessary condition, which is identical with the sufﬁcient condition.
We can now summarize the meaning of cause in the sense of a sufﬁcient condition
and a necessary condition:
A is a sufﬁcient condition for B: A’s occurrence requires B’s occurrence.
A is a necessary condition for B: B’s occurrence requires A’s occurrence.

Causality and Mill’s Methods
507
S
N
L
According to these statements, if A occurs and B does not occur, then A is not a suf-
ﬁcient condition for B, and if B occurs and A does not occur, then A is not a necessary
condition for B. Thus:
A is not a sufﬁcient condition for B: A is present when B is absent.
A is not a necessary condition for B: B is present when A is absent.
These results will serve as important rules in the material that follows.
In his System of Logic, the nineteenth-century philosopher John Stuart Millcompiled
ﬁve methods for identifying causal connections between events. These he called the
method of agreement, the method of difference, the joint method of agreement and
difference, the method of residues, and the method of concomitant variation. In the
years that have elapsed since the publication of Mill’s Logic, the ﬁve methods have
received a good deal of philosophical criticism. Today most logicians agree that the
methods fall short of the claims made for them by Mill, but the fact remains that the
methods function implicitly in many of the inductive inferences we make in ordi-
nary life.
In addition to criticizing these methods, modern logicians have introduced many
variations that have multiplied their number beyond the original ﬁve. Some of these
variations have resulted from the fact that Mill himself failed to distinguish causes that
are sufﬁcient conditions from causes that are necessary conditions. The account that
follows introduces this distinction into the ﬁrst three methods, but apart from that, it
remains faithful to Mill’s own presentation.
Method of Agreement
Suppose that ﬁve people eat dinner in a certain restaurant, and a short while later all
ﬁve become sick. Suppose further that these people ordered an assortment of items
from the menu, but the only food that all of them ordered was vanilla ice cream for
dessert. In other words, all of the dinners were in agreement only as to the ice cream.
Such a situation suggests that the ice cream caused the sickness. The method of
agreement consists in a systematic effort to ﬁnd a single factor (such as the ice cream)
that is common to a number of occurrences for the purpose of identifying that factor
as the cause of a phenomenon present in the occurrences (such as the sickness).
The method of agreement identiﬁes a cause in the sense of a necessary condition.
To see how this method works, let us develop the restaurant example a bit further.
Five people eat dinner in a restaurant. Jack has salad, French fries, a hamburger,
ice cream, and mixed vegetables; Bob has salad, French fries, soup, ice cream,
ﬁsh, and mixed vegetables; Mary has a hamburger, soup, and ice cream; Tim
has ﬁsh, mixed vegetables, ice cream, salad, and soup; and Gail has mixed veg-
etables, ﬁsh, ice cream, French fries, and salad. Afterwards all of them became
sick from something they ate. What food caused the sickness?
If we let occurrences 1 through 5 stand for Jack, Bob, Mary, Tim, and Gail, respectively,
and let A through G represent salad, soup, French fries, a hamburger, ﬁsh, ice cream,

508
Chapter 9: Induction
and mixed vegetables, respectively, we can construct a table that reﬂects what these
ﬁve people ate. In this table an asterisk means that a certain food was eaten, and a
dash means that it was not eaten.
Table 9.1
Occurrence
Possible necessary conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phenomenon
(sickness)
1
*
-
*
*
-
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
-
*
*
*
*
3
-
*
-
*
-
*
-
*
4
*
*
-
-
*
*
*
*
5
*
-
*
-
*
*
*
*
Now, since the method of agreement identiﬁes a cause in the sense of a necessary
condition, we begin by eliminating from this table the conditions that are not neces-
sary for the occurrence of the phenomenon. In doing so, we use the rule that a
condition is not necessary for the occurrence of a phenomenon if that condition is
absent when the phenomenon is present. Thus, occurrence 1 eliminates condition B
and condition E; occurrence 2 eliminates D; occurrence 3 eliminates A, C, E (again),
and G; occurrence 4 eliminates C (again) and D (again), and occurrence 5 eliminates
B (again) and D (again). This leaves only F (the ice cream) as a possible necessary
condition. The conclusion is therefore warranted that the ice cream caused the sick-
ness of the diners.
This conclusion follows only probably for two reasons. First, it is quite possible that
some condition was overlooked in compiling conditions A through G. For example, if
the ice cream was served with contaminated spoons, then the sickness of the diners
could have been caused by that condition and not by the ice cream. Second, if more
than one of the foods were contaminated (for example, both soup and French fries),
then the sickness could have been caused by this combination of foods and not by the
ice cream. Thus, the strength of the argument depends on the nonoccurrence of these
two possibilities.
It is also important to realize that the conclusion yielded by Table 9.1 applies
directly only to the ﬁve diners represented in the ﬁve occurrences, and not to everyone
who may have eaten in the restaurant. Thus, if some food other than those listed in
the table—for example, spaghetti—were contaminated, then only if they avoided
both spaghetti and ice cream could the other diners be assured of not getting sick. But
if, among all the foods in the restaurant, only the ice cream was contaminated, the
conclusion would extend to the other patrons as well. This last point illustrates the fact
that a conclusion reached by the method of agreement has limited generality. It applies
directly only to those occurrences listed, and only indirectly, through a second induc-
tive inference, to others.

Causality and Mill’s Methods
509
S
N
L
Furthermore, because the conclusion yields a cause in the sense of a necessary
condition, it does not assert that anyone who ate the ice cream would get sick. Many
people have a natural immunity to food poisoning. What the conclusion says is that
patrons who did not eat the ice cream would not get sick—at least not from the food.
Thus, the method of agreement has a certain limited use. Basically what it says, in
reference to the above example, is that the ice cream is a highly suspect factor in the
sickness of the patrons, and if investigators want to track down the cause of the
sickness, this is where they should begin.
An example of an actual use of the method of agreement is provided by the discov-
ery of the beneﬁcial affects of ﬂuoride on teeth. It was noticed several decades ago
that people in certain communities were favored with especially healthy teeth. In
researching the various factors these communities shared in common, scientists dis-
covered that all had a high level of natural ﬂuoride in their water supply. The scientists
concluded from this evidence that ﬂuoride causes teeth to be healthy and free of
cavities.
Method of Difference
For an example of how this method works, let us modify our earlier case of people
becoming sick from eating food in a restaurant. Instead of ﬁve people, suppose that
identical twins, who have identical susceptibilities to food poisoning, go to that restau-
rant for dinner. Each of them orders identical meals except that one orders ice cream
for dessert while the other does not. The ice cream is the only way that the two meals
differ. Later the twin who ordered the ice cream gets sick, whereas the other twin does
not. The natural conclusion is that the ice cream caused the sickness.
The method of difference consists in a systematic effort to identify a single factor
that is present in an occurrence in which the phenomenon in question is present, and
absent from an occurrence in which the phenomenon is absent. The method is con-
ﬁned to investigating exactly two occurrences, and it identiﬁes a cause in the sense of
a sufﬁcient condition. For a clearer illustration of how this method works, let us add a
few details to the twin example:
A pair of twins, Jane and Jan, have dinner in a restaurant. The twins have identical
susceptibilities to food poisoning. Jane orders soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice,
and ice cream. Jan orders soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice, and no ice cream.
Later, Jane gets sick from something she ate, but Jan does not. What food
caused Jan’s sickness?
If we let Jane and Jan stand for occurrences 1 and 2, respectively, and let A stand for
the speciﬁc susceptibility to food poisoning shared by Jane and Jan, and B through G
stand for soup, salad, chicken, carrots, rice, and ice cream, respectively, we can pro-
duce the following table. Again, an asterisk indicates that a certain condition is present,
and a dash indicates it is absent:

510
Chapter 9: Induction
Table 9.2
Occurrence
Possible sufﬁcient conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phenomenon
(sickness)
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
-
As with the method of agreement, we proceed to eliminate certain conditions, but in
this case we use the rule that a condition is not sufﬁcient for the occurrence of a
phenomenon if it is present when the phenomenon is absent. Accordingly,occurrence
2 eliminates A, B, C, D, E, and F. This leaves only G as the sufﬁcient condition for the
phenomenon. Thus, G (ice cream) is the cause of Jan’s sickness.
Since the result yielded by the method of difference applies to only the one occur-
rence in which the phenomenon is present (in this case, Jane), it is often less suscep-
tible to generalization than the method of agreement, which usually applies to several
occurrences. Thus, the mere fact that the ice cream may have caused Jane to become
sick does not mean that it caused other patrons who ate ice cream to get sick. Perhaps
these other people have a higher resistance to food poisoning than Jane or Jan. But
given that the others are similar to Jane and Jan in relevant respects, the result can
often be generalized to cover these others as well. At the very least, if others in the
restaurant became sick, the fact that the ice cream is what made Jane sick suggests
that this is where investigators should begin when they try to explain what made the
others sick.
The conclusion yielded by the method of difference is only probable, however,
even for the one occurrence to which it directly applies. The problem is that it is
impossible for two occurrences to be literally identical in every respect but one. The
mere fact that two occurrences occupy different regions of space, that one is closer to
the wall than the other, amounts to a difference. Such differences may be insigniﬁcant,
but therein lies the possibility for error. It is not at all obvious how insigniﬁcant differ-
ences should be distinguished from signiﬁcant ones. Furthermore, it is impossible to
make an exhaustive list of all the possible conditions; but without such a list there is
no assurance that signiﬁcant conditions have not been overlooked.
The objective of the method of difference is to identify a sufﬁcient conditionamong
those that are present in a speciﬁc occurrence. Sometimes, however, the absence of a
factor can count as something positive that must be taken into account. Suppose, for
example, that both of the twins who dined in the restaurant are allergic to dairy
products, but they can avoid an allergic reaction by taking Lactaid tablets. Suppose
further that both twins ordered ice cream for dessert, but only Jan took the tablets.
After the meal, Jane got sick. We can attribute Jane’s sickness to the absence of the
Lactaid.
We can illustrate this situation by modifying Table 9.2 as follows. Let A stand for the
allergy to dairy products, let B through G stand for the same foods as before, and let

Causality and Mill’s Methods
511
S
N
L
H stand for Lactaid tablets. Then H will stand for the absence of Lactaid (the symbol
 means ‘‘not’’). As before, let occurrence 1 stand for Jane, and occurrence 2 for Jan.
The modiﬁed table is as follows.
Table 9.3
Occurrence
Possible sufﬁcient conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Phenomenon
(sickness)
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
-
Using the same rule for elimination as with Table 9.2, we see that Occurrence 2
eliminates A through G as sufﬁcient conditions. This leaves H (the absence of Lactaid)
as the cause of Jane’s sickness. In this case, the ice cream is not identiﬁed as the cause
because Jan (occurrence 2) ate ice cream (G) but did not get sick.
The method of difference has a wide range of applicability. For example, a farmer
might fertilize one part of a ﬁeld but not the other part to test the beneﬁt of using
fertilizer. If the fertilized part of the crop turns out to be fuller and healthier than the
nonfertilized part, then the farmer can conclude that the improvement was caused by
the fertilizer. On the other hand, a cook might leave some ingredient out of a batch of
biscuits to determine the importance of that ingredient. If the biscuits turn out dry and
crunchy, the cook can attribute the difference to the absence of that ingredient.
Joint Method of Agreement and Difference
To illustrate the joint method, we can once again modify the example of the diners
who got sick by eating food in a restaurant. In place of the original ﬁve diners and the
pair of twins, suppose that six people eat dinner in the restaurant. Among the ﬁrst
three, suppose that a variety of meals are eaten but that only ice cream is consumed
by all, and later all three get sick. And among the other three, suppose that a variety
of meals are eaten but that none of these diners eats any ice cream, and later none of
them gets sick. The conclusion is warranted that the ice cream is what made the ﬁrst
three diners sick.
The joint method of agreement and difference consists of a systematic effort
to identify a single condition that is present in two or more occurrences in which the
phenomenon in question is present and that is absent from two or more occurrences
in which the phenomenon is absent. This condition is then taken to be the cause of
the phenomenon in the sense of a necessary and sufﬁcient condition. To see more
clearly how this method works, let us add some deatils to the example:
Six people eat dinner in a restaurant. Liz has soup, a hamburger, ice cream, French
fries, and mixed vegetables. Tom has salad, soup, ﬁsh, mixed vegetables, and
ice cream. Andy has salad, a hamburger, French fries, and ice cream. Sue has

512
Chapter 9: Induction
French fries, a hamburger, and salad. Meg has ﬁsh and mixed vegetables. Bill
has French fries, a hamburger, and soup. Later Liz, Tom, and Andy get sick from
something they ate, but Sue, Meg, and Bill do not. What food made the ﬁrst
three diners sick?
Let occurrences 1 through 6 stand for Liz, Tom, Andy, Sue, Meg, and Bill, respectively.
And let A through G stand for salad, soup, a hamburger, ﬁsh, ice cream, French fries,
and mixed vegetables. The ﬁnished table is as follows:
Table 9.4
Occurrence
Possible necessary or sufﬁcient conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phenomenon
(sickness)
1
-
*
*
-
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
-
*
*
-
*
*
3
*
-
*
-
*
*
-
*
4
*
-
*
-
-
*
-
-
5
-
-
-
*
-
-
*
-
6
-
*
*
-
-
*
-
-
In the ﬁrst three occurrences the phenomenon is present, so we proceed by eliminat-
ing possible necessary conditions. Using the rule that a condition is not necessary if it
is absent when the phenomenon is present, occurrence 1 eliminates A and D, occur-
rence 2 eliminates C and F, and occurrence 3 eliminates B, D (again), and G. This
leaves only E as the necessary condition. Next, in the last three occurrences the phe-
nomenon is absent, so we use the rule that a condition is not sufﬁcient if it is present
when the phenomenon is absent. Occurrence 4 eliminates A, C, and F; occurrence 5
eliminates D and G; and occurrence 6 eliminates B, C (again), and F (again). This
leaves only E as the sufﬁcient condition. Thus, condition E (ice cream) is the cause in
the sense of both a necessary and sufﬁcient condition of the sickness of the ﬁrst three
diners.
Since the joint method yields a cause in the sense of both a necessary and sufﬁcient
condition, it is usually thought to be stronger than either the method of agreement by
itself, which yields a cause in the sense of a necessary condition, or the method of
difference by itself, which yields a cause in the sense of a sufﬁcient condition. How-
ever, when any of these methods is used as a basis for a subsequent inductive gener-
alization, the strength of the conclusion is proportional to the number of occurrences
that are included. Thus, an application of the method of agreement that included, say,
one hundred occurrences might offer stronger results than an application of the joint
method that included, say, only six occurrences. By similar reasoning, multiple appli-
cations of the method of difference might offer stronger results than a single applica-
tion of the joint method.
As with the other methods, the conclusion yielded by the joint method is only
probable because some relevant condition may have been overlooked in producing

Causality and Mill’s Methods
513
S
N
L
the table. If, for example, both salad and soup were contaminated, then the ice cream
could not be identiﬁed as a necessary condition for the sickness, and if one of the last
three diners was naturally immune, then the ice cream could not be identiﬁed as a
sufﬁcient condition. Obviously the attempt to extend the results of this example to
other patrons of the restaurant who may have gotten sick is fraught with other
difﬁculties.
Lastly, we note that even though the name of the joint method suggests that it results
from a mere combination of the method of agreement with the method of difference,
this is not the case—at least not as Mill presented it. Such a combination would consist
of one occurrence in which the phenomenon is present, one occurrence in which the
phenomenon is absent and which differs from the former occurrence as to only one
condition, and one occurrence in which the phenomenon is present and which agrees
with the ﬁrst occurrence in only one condition. However, according to Mill, the joint
method requires ‘‘two or more’’ occurrences in which the phenomenon is present,
and ‘‘two or more’’ occurrences in which the phenomenon is absent.* His further
description of the method accords with the foregoing account.
Method of Residues
This method and the one that follows are used to identify a causal connection between
two conditions without regard for the speciﬁc kind of connection. Both methods may
be used to identify conditions that are sufﬁcient, necessary, or both sufﬁcient and
necessary. The method of residues consists of separating from a group of causally
connected conditions and phenomena those strands of causal connection that are
already known, leaving the required causal connection as the ‘‘residue.’’ Here is an
example:
After occupying his new house Mr. Smith found it drafty. He traced the source of
the draft to three conditions: a broken window in the garage, a crack under the
front door, and a broken damper in the ﬁreplace. When the window was re-
placed he noticed an improvement, and a further improvement when weather
stripping was installed on the door. He concluded that the draft that remained
was caused by the broken damper in the ﬁreplace.
The method of residues as illustrated in this example may be diagramed as follows:
A B C causes a b c.
A causes a.
B causes b.
Therefore, C causes c.
*A System of Logic, Book III, Chapter VIII, Sect. 4, Third Canon.

514
Chapter 9: Induction
In reference to the draft example, A B C is the combination of possible conditions
producing a b c , the total draft. When A (the broken window) is separated out, it
is found to cause a (a portion of the draft). When B (the crack) is separated out, it is
found to cause b (another portion of the draft). The conclusion is that C (the broken
damper) causes c (the remaining portion of the draft). The conclusion follows only
probably because it is quite possible that a fourth source of the draft was overlooked.
Here is another example:
After realizing a loss of $100,000 a department store’s chief accountant could
suggest only three causes: an excessive number of clerks, increases in utility
rates, and damage to merchandise caused by a ﬂood. These expenses were
estimated at $25,000, $30,000, and $10,000, respectively. Since no other ordi-
nary sources could be found, the accountant attributed the remaining $35,000
to shoplifting.
In this case A B C D is the combination of conditions consisting of the number of
clerks, the utility rate increases, the ﬂood, and shoplifting; and a b c d is the total
loss of $100,000. After A, B, and C are separated out, the conclusion is that D (shop-
lifting) caused d (the remaining loss). Because the estimates might have been incorrect
and because additional sources of ﬁnancial loss might have been overlooked, the
conclusion is only probable.
Some procedures that, at least on the face of it, appear to utilize the method of resi-
dues come closer to being deductive than inductive. A case in point is the procedure
used to determine the weight of the cargo carried by a truck. First, the empty truck is
put on a scale and the weight recorded. Then the truck is loaded and the truck together
with the cargo is put on the same scale. The weight of the cargo is the difference be-
tween the two weights. If, to this procedure, we add the rather unproblematicassump-
tions that weight is an additive property, that the scale is accurate, that the scale
operator reads the indicator properly, that the truck is not altered in the loading process,
and a few others, the conclusion about the weight of the cargo follows deductively.
To distinguish deductive from inductive uses of the method of residues, one must
take into account such factors as the role of mathematics. If the conclusion depends
on a purely arithmetical computation, the argument is probably best characterized as
deductive. If not, then it is probably inductive.
Method of Concomitant Variation
The method of concomitant variation identiﬁes a causal connection between two
conditions by matching variations in one condition with variations in another. Accord-
ing to one formulation, increases are matched with increases and decreases with
decreases. Example:
In attempting to diagnose Mrs. Thompson’s high blood pressure, a cardiologist
noticed a correlation between ﬂuctuations in blood pressure and certain brain

Causality and Mill’s Methods
515
S
N
L
waves. As the blood pressure increased, so did the intensity of the brain waves,
and as the blood pressure decreased, the intensity of the brain waves decreased.
The cardiologist concluded that the two conditions were causally related.
The method of concomitant variation as illustrated in this example may be diagramed
as follows:
A B C is coincident with X Y Z.
A B C is coincident with X Y Z
A B C is coincident with X Y Z
Therefore, B is causally connected to Y.
Here, A B C is a set of observable conditions such as cholesterol level, liver func-
tion, basal metabolism, etc., with B representing blood pressure; and X Y Z is an-
other set of observable conditions with Y representing certain brain waves. In the
second and third rows, B and B represent increases and decreases in blood pres-
sure, and Y and Y represent increases and decreases in the intensity of the brain
waves. The conclusion asserts that either B causes Y, Y causes B, or B and Y have a
common cause. Determining which is the case requires further investigation; but of
course if B occurs earlier in time than Y, then Y does not cause B, and if Y occurs
earlier in time than B, then B does not cause Y.
The blood pressure example matches increases in one condition with increases in
another. For an example that matches increases in one condition with decreases in
another consider the following:
A sociologist studying divorce noticed a correlation between changes in the na-
tional divorce rate and ﬂuctuations in the gross domestic product. As the GDP
increases, the divorce rate decreases, and when the GDP sags, the divorce rate
goes up. The sociologist concluded that the two phenomena are causally
connected.
This second version of the method of concomitant variation may be diagramed as
follows:
A B C is coincident with X Y Z.
A B C is coincident with X Y Z
A B C is coincident with X Y Z
Therefore, B is causally connected to Y.
In this example A B C is a set of economic conditions such as stock exchange
indexes, interest rates, commodity prices, etc., with B representing gross domestic
product; and X Y Z is a set of social conditions such as birth rates, employment
rates, immigration numbers, etc., with Y representing the national divorce rate. The

516
Chapter 9: Induction
conclusion is that B is somehow causally connected to Y. However, in this example an
even stronger conclusion could probably be drawn—namely, that decreases in the
GDP cause increases in the divorce rate, and not conversely. That changes in eco-
nomic prosperity (which is indicated by GDP) should affect the divorce rate is quite
plausible, but the converse is less so.
At this point we should note that the existence of a mere correlation between two
phenomena is never sufﬁcient to identify a causal connection. In addition, the causal
connection suggested by the correlation must at least make sense. Consider the fol-
lowing example:
After an in-depth study researchers discovered a correlation between the price of
pork belly futures on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and earthquake activity
in Japan. As the number and intensity of the quakes increased, the future prices
also increased, and vice versa. The researchers concluded that the two phe-
nomena were causally connected.
The argument is clearly weak. Because it is virtually inconceivable that either phenom-
enon could cause a change in the other, or that changes in both could have a common
cause, it is most likely that the correlation is purely coincidental.
The method of concomitant variation is useful when it is impossible for a condition
to be either wholly present or wholly absent, as was required for the use of the ﬁrst
three of Mill’s methods. Many conditions are of this sort—for example, the tempera-
ture of the ocean, the price of gold, the incidence of crime, the size of a mountain
glacier, a person’s cholesterol level, and so on. If some kind of correlation can be
detected between variations in conditions such as these, the method of concomitant
variation asserts that the two are causally connected. The method has been used
successfully in the past to help establish the existence of causal connections between
smoking and lung cancer, nuclear radiation and leukemia, and alcohol consumption
and cirrhosis of the liver.
Mill’s Methods and Science
Mill’s methods closely resemble certain scientiﬁc methods that are intended to estab-
lish causal connections and correlations. For example, the method of difference is
virtually identical to the method of controlled experiment employed in such ﬁelds as
biology, pharmacology, and psychology. A controlled experiment is one that involves
two groups of subjects, an experimental group and a control group. The experimental
group includes the subjects that receive a certain treatment, and the control group
includes the subjects that do not receive the treatment but are otherwise subjected to
the same conditions as members of the experimental group.
The simplest type of controlled experiment involves an experimental group and a
control group each consisting of just one member. Example:
Two mice were used in a controlled experiment to determine whether a certain
substance was carcinogenic. The two mice had identical genes, were the same

Causality and Mill’s Methods
517
S
N
L
age, were placed in identical cages in the same location, were subjected to the
same environmental conditions, and were fed the same food, over the same
period of time. One mouse was injected with the suspected carcinogen, and
the other was not. After two months, the injected mouse developed cancerous
tumors, but the other mouse did not.
To summarize the results of this experiment we can construct a table just like the one
for the method of difference. If we let occurrence 1 represent the injected mouse and
occurrence 2 the mouse that was not injected, and let A through F represent the
conditions common to the two mice (genes, age, cage, etc.) and G represent the
injection, we have:
Table 9.5
Occurrence
Possible sufﬁcient conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phenomenon
(tumors)
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
-
Using the rule that a condition is not sufﬁcient if it is present when the phenomenon
is absent, Occurrence 2 eliminates A through F, leaving G (the suspected carcinogen)
as the cause of the phenomenon.
The principal drawback of this experiment is that the suspected carcinogen was
given to only one mouse. As a result, the experiment offers relatively weak evidence
that any mouse injected with this substance would develop tumors. Perhaps the in-
jected mouse had some hidden defect that would have caused tumors even without
the injection. Scientists address this problem by increasing the size of the experimental
group and the control group. Thus, suppose the same experiment were performed on
one hundred mice, of which ﬁfty were injected and ﬁfty were not. Suppose that after
two months all ﬁfty injected mice developed tumors and none of the control subjects
did. Such a result would constitute much stronger evidence that the injected substance
was carcinogenic.
This expanded experiment can be considered to be a case of multiple uses of Mill’s
method of difference. Since the method of difference always involves just two occur-
rences, mouse #1 could be matched with mouse #51 for one use of the method, mouse
#2 with mouse #52 for a second use of the method, and so on. Although this expanded
experiment might look like a case of the joint method, it is not (at least not a successful
one). Any successful application of the joint method includes occurrences in which
certain conditions are absent when the phenomenon is present. Those conditions are
then eliminated as possible necessary conditions. The expanded experiment with the
mice includes no such occurrences.
This fact points up an important difference between Mill’s joint method and his
method of difference. The purpose of the method of difference is to determine

518
Chapter 9: Induction
whether a pre-selected condition is the cause of a phenomenon. This pre-selected
condition is present in one of the two occurrences and absent from the other. On the
other hand, the purpose of the joint method is to determine which condition, among
a selected class of conditions, is a cause of a phenomenon. The joint method applies
rules for sufﬁcient conditions and necessary conditions to (one hopes) reduce the
class of conditions to just one.
Returning to the expanded experiment with the mice, let us suppose that only forty
of the mice in the experimental group developed tumors, and none of those in the
control group did. From Mill’s standpoint, this would be equivalent to forty uses of the
method of difference yielding positive results and ten yielding negative results. On
the basis of such an outcome, the experimenter might conclude that the likelihood of
the suspected carcinogen producing tumors in mice was 80 percent (4050).
Controlled experiments such as the one involving a hundred mice are often con-
ducted on humans, but with humans it is never possible to control the circumstances
to the degree that it is with mice. Humans cannot be put in cages, fed exactly the same
food for any length of time, are not genetically identical to other humans, etc. Also,
humans react to their environment in ways that cannot be anticipated or controlled.
To correct this deﬁciiency, statistical methods are applied to the results to enable the
drawing of a conclusion.
For example, an experiment could be conducted to test the effectiveness of some
new drug on children with attention-deﬁcit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). Fifty chil-
dren with ADHD could be selected, with twenty-ﬁve being placed at random in the
experimental group and twenty-ﬁve in the control group. The children in the experi-
mental group would be given the drug, probably in a classroom situation, and the
children in the control group would be given a placebo (sugar pill). This could be
done on a ‘‘double blind’’ basis, so that neither the children nor the persons conduct-
ing the experiment would know in advance who was getting the drug. The objective
is to control the conditions as much as possible. Then the negative behavior of each
of the ﬁfty children would be recorded over a period, say, of an hour. Each time a
child was out of his/her seat, disturbed others, ﬁdgeted, failed to follow instructions,
etc., the incident would be noted.
The results of such an experiment would be expected to follow what is called a
normal probability distribution (bell-shaped curve). (Further discussion of normal
probability distribution is presented in Section 9.4.) One curve would represent the
experimental group, another curve the control group. Assuming the drug is effective,
the two curves would be displaced from one another; but they would probably over-
lap in part, as indicated in Figure 1. This means that certain children in the experimen-
tal group exhibited more negative behaviors than certain children in the controlgroup,
but most of the children in the experimental group exhibited fewer negative behaviors
than most of the children in the control group. Then statistical methods would be
applied to the two curves to determine the effectiveness of the drug. Such an experi-
ment is similar to Mill’s method of difference except that instead of the phenomenon

Causality and Mill’s Methods
519
S
N
L
(negative behavior) being wholly present in some occurrences, it is present in varying
degrees. In this sense, the experiment resembles the method of concomitant variation.
Number of children
Number of negative behaviors
Experimental
group
Control
group
Figure 1
In some kinds of scientiﬁc research on humans, it is nearly impossible to control
the circumstances to any signiﬁcant degree. Such research includes investigations that
cover a long period of time or investigations in which the health of the subjects is at
issue and legal or moral restrictions come into play. Example:
A nutritionist wanted to determine the effect of ﬁfteen vitamin and mineral sup-
plements on atherosclerosis (artery disease). Because the effect was expected to
require several years to develop, the nutritionist ran an ad in a health publica-
tion for individuals who had ingested these substances on a regular basis for
ﬁve years. Eighty people answered the ad and reported which substances they
had taken and how much of each. These people were then examined. Some
showed no evidence of the disease, while others manifested the disease in vary-
ing degrees. After analyzing the data, the nutritionist concluded that certain
vitamins and minerals offer protection against atherosclerosis.
The procedure followed by the nutritionist is very similar to Mill’s joint method of
agreement and difference. The objective is to identify a cause among a pre-selected
class of possible conditions, some of which are accompanied by the phenomenon
(atherosclerosis), and some of which are not. The major difference between the nutri-
tionist’s procedure and Mill’s joint method is that the nutritionist took account of
varying degrees in which the conditions and the phenomenon were present in the
eighty occurrences. In this sense, again, the nutritionist’s procedure was similar to
Mill’s method of concomitant variation. However, the nutritionist may also have taken
into account various combinations of conditions, a consideration that lies beyond the
power of the joint method by itself.

520
Chapter 9: Induction
The procedure illustrated in this example is not an experiment but a study. More
precisely, it is a retrospective study because it examines subjects who have already
fulﬁlled the requirements of the examination—as opposed to a prospective study,
where the subjects are expected to fulﬁll the requirements in the future. For a pro-
spective study, the nutritionist could select a group of subjects and follow their vitamin
and mineral intake for ﬁve years into the future. Such a study, however, would be
more costly, and if the nutritionist instructed the subjects to ingest certain vitamins and
minerals and avoid others, the study could involve legal or moral implications.
Another kind of study found widely in the social sciences uses what is called the
correlational method, which closely replicates Mill’s method of concomitant variation.
Example:
A psychology professor was interested in the relationship between IQ scores and
grade point average. The professor randomly selected one hundred graduating
seniors, obtained their GPAs from the registrar, and asked them to take an IQ
test. All of them complied. Then the professor compared the scores of each
student with his/her GPA. The professor found that in general higher IQ scores
corresponded with higher GPAs.
The results of this study indicate a positive correlation between IQ score and GPA.
If the study showed that students with higher IQs had, in general, lower GPAs, this
would indicate a negative correlation. Once a study of this sort is done, the next step
is to compute the correlation coefﬁcient, which is a number between 1.00 and 1.00
that expresses the degree of correlation. If it turned out that the student with the
highest IQ score also had the highest GPA, the student with the next highest IQ score
had proportionately the next highest GPA, and so on, so that the IQ-GPA graph was a
straight line, then the correlation coefﬁcient would be 1.00. This would reﬂect a
perfect positive correlation.
On the other hand, if it turned out that the student with the highest IQ score had
the lowest GPA, the student with the next highest IQ score had proportionately the
next lowest GPA, and so on, so that, once again, the IQ-GPA graph was a straight line,
then the correlation coefﬁcient would be 1.00. This would reﬂect a perfect negative
correlation. A correlation coefﬁcient of 0.00 would mean that no correlation exists,
which would be the case if the IQ scores corresponded randomly with the GPAs. A
correlation coefﬁcient of, say, 0.60 would mean that in general higher IQ scores
corresponded positively with higher GPAs.
The outcome of this study can also be indicated graphically, with IQ score repre-
senting one coordinate on a graph, and GPA the other coordinate. The result for each
student would then correspond to a point on the graph, such as the one in Figure 2.
The graph of all the points is called a scatter diagram. A line that ‘‘best ﬁts’’ the data
can then be drawn through the scatter diagram. This line is called the regression line,
and it can be used to produce a linear equation, y  bx  a, that describes the
approximate relation between IQ score (x) and GPA (y). This equation can then be

Causality and Mill’s Methods
521
S
N
L
used to predict future GPAs. For example, suppose that an entering freshman student
has an IQ of 116. This student’s future GPA could be predicted to be approximately
116b  a.
GPA
IQ score
Correlation
coefficient ≅ +0.60
y = bx + a
Regression line
x
y
Figure 2
Hundreds of studies such as this one have been conducted to detect correlations
between such factors as TV violence and aggression in children, self-esteem and
intelligence, motivation and learning time, exposure to classical music and retention
ability, and marijuana use and memory. However, such studies often fall short of
establishing a causal connection between the two factors. For example, given a posi-
tive correlation between exposure to TV violence and aggression in children, this does
not necessarily mean that exposure to TV violence causes aggression. It might be the
case that children who tend to be violent are naturally attracted to violent TV shows.
Or perhaps a third factor is the cause of both. But a positive correlation can at least
suggest a causal connection.
Once a correlation is established, a controlled experiment can often be designed
that will identify a causal connection. For example, in the case of TV violence, a group
of children could be randomly divided into an experimental group and a control
group. The experimental group could then be exposed to violent TV shows for a
certain period of time, and the control group would be exposed to nonviolent shows
for the same period. Later, the behavior of the children in both groups could be
observed, with every act of aggression noted. If the experimental group displayed
more acts of aggression than the control group, the conclusion might be drawn that
TV violence causes aggression.
Experimental procedures resembling Mill’s method of concomitant variation have
also been used in the physical sciences to identify causal connections. For example,
in the early part of the nineteenth century, Hans Christian Oerstead noticed that a wire
carrying a current of electricity could deﬂect a nearby compass needle. As the current
was increased, the amount of deﬂection increased, and as the current was decreased,
the amount of deﬂection decreased. Also, if the current were reversed, the deﬂection

522
Chapter 9: Induction
would be reversed. Oerstead concluded that a current of electricity ﬂowing through a
wire causes a magnetic ﬁeld to be produced around the wire.
Other applications of the method of concomitant variation have been used not so
much to detect the existence of a causal connection (which may have already been
known) as to determine the precise nature of a causal law. For example, in the latter
part of the sixteenth century Galileo performed experiments involving spheres rolling
down inclined planes. As the plane was incrementally lifted upward, the sphere cov-
ered greater and greater distances in a unit of time. Recognizing that the downward
force on the sphere is proportional to the pitch of the plane, Galileo derived the law
that the acceleration imparted to a body is directly proportional to the force acting on
it. Galileo also noticed that whatever the angle of the plane, the distance covered by
the ball increased exponentially with the time in which it was allowed to roll. For
example, if the time was doubled, the distance was quadrupled. From this correlation
he derived the law that the distance traveled by a falling body is proportional to the
square of the time that it falls.
In the seventeenth century, Robert Boyle conducted experiments involving the
pressure and volume of gases. Boyle constructed an apparatus that allowed him to
compute the volume of a gas as he varied the pressure. He noted that as the pressure
increased, the volume decreased, and as the pressure decreased, the volume in-
creased. From this correlation he derived the law that the volume of a gas is inversely
proportional to its pressure. A century later, Jacques Alexandre Charles observed a
correlation between the temperature of a gas and its volume. As the temperature
increased, the volume increased, and vice versa. This correlation provided the basis
for Charles’s law for gases.
Detecting correlations has also been important in astronomy. Early in the twentieth
century, Henrietta Swan Leavitt recognized a correlation between the average bright-
ness of certain variable stars, called Cepheids (pronounced sef´-ee-ids), and their
periods of variation. Cepheids ﬂuctuate in brightness over periods ranging from a day
to several months, and Leavitt discovered that longer periods correspond with greater
average brightness, and shorter periods with lesser average brightness. Once the dis-
tance of a few nearby Cepheids was determined, the distance of any Cepheid could
then be computed from its average brightness and its period of variation. This corre-
lation provided the ﬁrst method available to astronomers for measuring the distance
between our planet and galaxies other than our own.
EXERCISE 9.2
I. Identify the kind of causality intended by the following statements. Is the cause
a sufﬁcient condition, necessary condition, or both sufﬁcient and necessary
condition?
1.
#
Throwing a brick through a window will cause the window to break.

Causality and Mill’s Methods
523
S
N
L
2. Heating an iron rod causes it to expand.
3. Slashing an inﬂated automobile tire with a knife will cause it to go ﬂat.
4.
#
Releasing the shutter of a camera causes an image to appear on the ﬁlm.
5. Pulling the trigger of a gun causes it to ﬁre.
6. Wetting litmus paper with an acid causes it to turn red.
7.
#
Pouring water on a wood ﬁre will cause it to be extinguished.
8. Eating contaminated food will cause one to become ill.
9. Stretching a spring causes it to exert an opposing force.
10.
#
Flipping the wall switch to the ‘‘up’’ position causes the overhead lights to
go on.
II. The following problems pertain to Mill’s methods.
1.
#
To determine the effectiveness of an oil additive, a testing ﬁrm purchased two
cars of the same make, year, and model, and drove each a distance of 30,000
miles using the same kind of gasoline, the same kind of oil, the same driver,
under the same road conditions. The oil in one engine included the additive,
whereas the oil in the other engine did not. At the end of the test, the engines
of both cars were dismantled, and it was found that the engine that contained
the additive had less wear. The testing ﬁrm concluded that the oil additive
caused the reduced wear. Construct a table that supports this conclusion.
Which one of Mill’s methods did the testing ﬁrm use? What sense of causality
is involved in the conclusion?
2. An eighth-grade teacher had ﬁve pupils who read very well. These pupils
were distinguished by the following features. Tom came from a large family,
had professional parents who were not wealthy, had training in phonics, read
novels, lived close to a library, and watched educational TV. Andy came from
a family that was not large, had wealthy professional parents, watched edu-
cational TV, did not live close to a library, did not read novels, and had training
in phonics. Cindy did not read novels, lived close to a library, had training in
phonics, had wealthy professional parents, came from a large family, and did
not watch educational TV. April had training in phonics, read novels, lived
close to a library, watched educational TV, came from a large family, and had
wealthy parents who were not professionals. Joe read novels, did not live
close to a library, had professional parents who were not wealthy, had train-
ing in phonics, watched educational TV, and came from a large family. What
can the teacher conclude caused these children to be good readers? Construct
a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the
teacher use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
3. An administrator for the Internal Revenue Service noticed that tax revenues
for a certain year were down by 14 percent. Of this amount, the administrator

524
Chapter 9: Induction
attributed 6 percent to an economic slowdown that year, 3 percent to higher
interest rates that led to higher write-offs, and 2 percent to changes in the tax
code. Unable to attribute the remaining 3 percent to any lawful factor, the
administrator concluded that it resulted from increased cheating by the tax-
payers. Which one of Mill’s methods did the administrator use?
4.
#
The repair manager for a manufacturer of home computers noticed that a
large number of units were being returned for repairs. The manager selected
a sample of seven returned units and noticed that these units were distin-
guished by the following characteristics. Units 1 and 3 had type X circuitry
and were shipped to coastal regions. Units 2 and 7 were sold to business
customers, were manufactured in the Kansas City plant, and were shipped to
coastal regions. Units 4 and 5 were used to play computer games and were
manufactured in the Kansas City plant. Units 6 and 7 were shipped to large
cities and had Type X circuitry. Unit 4 was shipped to a large coastal city.
Units 2 and 3 were shipped to large cities. Unit 5 was shipped to a coastal
region and had type X circuitry. Unit 3 was sold to a business customer who
used it to play computer games. Unit 1 was used to play computer games and
was manufactured in the Kansas City plant. Finally, Unit 6 was sold to a
business customer in a coastal region. Among these six distinguishing char-
acteristics the manager concluded that salty air caused the computers to break
down. Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s
methods did the manufacturer use? What sense of causality is involved in the
conclusion?
5. A manufacturer of ﬁshing equipment conducted a test of its products by
giving them to eight ﬁshermen who used them with the following results. Ed
and Flo used a Hot Spot lure and caught no ﬁsh. Dan and Amy used a Trusty
rod with a Husky reel, and Amy caught ﬁsh but Dan did not. Jake used a Sure
Catch lure, a Best Bet rod, a Spiffy reel, and caught ﬁsh. Bill and Tim used a
Husky reel, but only Bill caught ﬁsh. Kat used a Best Bet rod with a Husky
reel and caught ﬁsh. Amy and Kat used a Sure Catch lure, but only Kat used
monoﬁlament line. Bill used a Trusty rod, monoﬁlament line, and a Sure Catch
lure. Flo and Tim used Best Bet rods, and both Tim and Dan used Dynamite
lures. Finally, Flo used a Husky reel, Jake and Dan used monoﬁlament line,
and Ed used a Spiffy reel on a Trusty rod. What conclusion can the manufac-
turer draw about the power of this equipment to catch ﬁsh? Construct a table
that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the manufac-
turer use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
6. Nancy was contemplating the purchase of a new oven for her kitchen, but
she could not decide between an electric or a gas unit. Thus, she decided to
conduct an experiment using the ovens, one gas, one electric, of two friends
who live in adjoining apartments. She mixed up two identical batches of

Causality and Mill’s Methods
525
S
N
L
brownies under identical conditions of relative humidity and identical alti-
tudes, put them into identical baking dishes, and cooked them at the same
temperature for exactly the same time. The brownies cooked in the electric
oven came out moist, while the brownies cooked in the gas oven came out
relatively dry. Nancy concluded that baking in the electric oven caused the
brownies to be moist. Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which
one of Mill’s methods did Nancy use? What sense of causality is involved in
the conclusion?
7.
#
Mrs. Wilkins sometimes has trouble sleeping. In order to determine the cause,
she decided to take note of her pre-bedtime behavior over the course of a
week. On Monday she drank camomile tea, had a late dinner, took a hot bath,
read from a book, took a walk, and she slept well. On Tuesday she had a late
dinner, read from a book, and slept poorly. On Wednesday she drank a glass
of wine, got a massage, took a walk, and slept poorly. On Thursday she had
a late dinner, drank a glass of wine, read from a book, took a hot bath, got a
massage, and slept well. On Friday she read from a book, drank camomile
tea, got a massage, had a late dinner, took a walk, and slept well. On Saturday
she drank a glass of wine, got a massage, took a walk, drank camomile tea,
took a hot bath, and slept well. On Sunday she read from a book, took a hot
bath, drank camomile tea, and slept poorly. What can Mrs. Wilkins conclude
is the cause of sleeping well? Construct a table that supports this conclusion.
Which one of Mill’s methods did Mrs. Wilkins use? What sense of causality is
involved in the conclusion?
8. From a comparison of statistics a criminologist detected what he thought was
a correlation between ﬂuctuations in the employment rate and crimes of theft.
For every 2 percent increase in the employment rate, the rate of theft de-
creased by 1 percent, and for every 2 percent decrease in the employment
rate, the theft rate increased by 1 percent. The criminologist concluded that
unemployment causes crimes of theft. Which one of Mill’s methods did the
criminologist use?
9. A man developed an allergic reaction to an unknown food. His doctor asked
him about a number of foods that often cause allergies, and the man replied
that he had eaten coconut, chocolate, nuts, milk products, shellﬁsh, peppers,
eggs, and wheat products prior to suffering the reaction. The doctor told him
to eliminate all of these foods from his diet, and when he had done so, the
reaction disappeared. The doctor then told him to introduce each of these
foods back into his diet, one at a time. The man did so, and the reaction
reappeared only when he ate milk products. The doctor concluded that milk
products caused the allergic reaction. Construct a table that supports this
conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the doctor use? What sense of
causality is involved in the conclusion?

526
Chapter 9: Induction
10.
#
A psychiatrist had six adult women patients who suffered blurred ego bound-
aries. These patients were distinguished by the following characteristics. Meg
and Sue had been subjected to corporal punishment as children and both had
siblings. Dot and Jane were adopted, had a male parent ﬁgure, and experi-
enced sexual abuse. Lynn and Flo had siblings and a male parent ﬁgure, but
only Flo had a domineering mother. Also, Lynn and Meg had experienced
sexual abuse and were adopted, but only Meg had a domineering mother.
Jane and Dot were uprooted often as children. Flo and Sue had experienced
sexual abuse, but only Sue was raised in day-care centers. Jane and Dot each
had a domineering mother, and each had been subjected to corporal punish-
ment. Flo was uprooted often as a child and had been subjected to corporal
punishment. Dot and Lynn were raised in day-care centers, Sue had a male
parent ﬁgure, and Jane had siblings. What can the psychiatrist conclude is the
cause of the blurred ego boundaries of these women? Construct a table that
supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the psychiatrist
use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
11. A metallurgist added eight substances in various combinations to seven sam-
ples of molten aluminum for the purpose of producing aluminum alloys. The
metallurgist was interested in producing an alloy that had a special resistance
to corrosion. The samples were distinguished by the followingcharacteristics.
Samples 1, 2, and 3 contained both tin and copper, but only samples 1 and 2
were resistant. Samples 6 and 7 contained both silver and iron, but only
Sample 7 was resistant. Samples 4 and 5 contained sodium, but only sample
5 was resistant. In addition, samples 1 and 7 contained zinc, silicon, and
nickel. Sample 2 contained sodium, iron, and silicon, and Sample 5 contained
silicon and copper. Finally, Sample 3 contained nickel, and Sample 4 con-
tained zinc. Assuming no interaction occurs among these eight additives,
what conclusion can the metallurgist draw about these additives? Construct a
table that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did the met-
allurgist use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
12. A doctor has ﬁve patients who suffer from an unusual form of cancer. The
patients are distinguished by the following living conditions. Davis, Jones, and
Ellis live in a smoggy area near high-tension power lines, and Smith and Frank
smoke cigarettes and live downwind from a company that produces chemical
defoliants for the military. Frank also lives near the nuclear power plant. Davis,
Smith, and Ellis eat red meat every day and live near the nuclear power plant.
Jones smokes cigarettes and lives downwind from the chemical defoliant com-
pany. Smith lives in a smoggy area, and Davis and Ellis live downwind from the
defoliant company. What can the doctor conclude is the cause of the cancer?
Construct a table that supports this conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods
did the doctor use? What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?

Causality and Mill’s Methods
527
S
N
L
13.
#
Two of Mr. Andrews’ rose bushes became infected with aphids. Mr. Andrews
proceeded to spray one of the bushes with malathion insecticide but left the
other bush untouched. The two bushes are both American Beauty, are ﬁve
years old, have virtually identical locations, receive the same amount of water
and sunlight, are planted in the same kind of soil, and receive the same
degree of cultivation and the same amount of Bandini rose food. Within three
days the aphids disappeared from the bush that was sprayed, but they contin-
ued to thrive on the other bush. Mr. Andrews concluded that the malathion
killed the aphids on the bush that was sprayed. Construct a table that supports
Mr. Andrews’ conclusion. Which one of Mill’s methods did Mr. Andrews use?
What sense of causality is involved in the conclusion?
14. A sociologist conducted a study to determine if a correlation exists between
grade point average at the time of graduation and income ten years after
graduation. The sociologist visited the alumni ofﬁce of a local university and
obtained the names and addresses of those who had graduated ten years
earlier. The sociologist then contacted these graduates and asked them to
disclose their income and give permission for the university to disclose their
graduating GPAs. Two hundred students replied to this inquiry. The sociolo-
gist then applied statistical methods to compute the correlation coefﬁcient,
which turned out to be 0.2. How does this study relate to Mill’s methods?
What does a correlation coefﬁcient of 0.2 say about the correlation between
GPA and income? Is such a study called a prospective study or a retrospective
study? How do the two differ?
15. A cosmetics manufacturer tested a new cleansing cream on forty rabbits. The
rabbits were virtually the same genetically and were the same age. Twenty of
the rabbits were randomly placed in the experimental group and the other
twenty were placed in the control group. A patch containing the cream was
applied to the skin of each rabbit in the experimental group, and an identi-
cal patch containing a harmless substance was applied to the skin of each
rabbit in the control group. Then, all forty rabbits were kept in the same room,
at the same temperature, under the same lighting conditions, and fed the
same food. After ﬁve days, two of the rabbits in the experimental group
developed a rash where the patch was applied, but none of the other rabbits
did. The manufacturer concluded that there is a 10 percent likelihood that
the cleansing cream will cause a rash on the skin of rabbits. How does this
experiment relate to Mill’s methods? What sense of causality is involved in
the conclusion?
III. Identify the cause suggested by the information presented in the following tables.
Is the cause a sufﬁcient condition, a necessary condition, or both a sufﬁcient and
necessary condition? What method is used?

528
Chapter 9: Induction
1.
#
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
-
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
-
*
3
*
-
*
*
*
*
4
*
*
-
*
*
*
5
-
*
*
*
-
*
2.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
-
*
*
*
-
3.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
Phenomenon
1
*
-
-
*
-
-
-
2
-
*
*
*
-
-
*
3
*
-
*
*
*
-
*
4
-
*
-
-
-
*
-
5
*
-
-
-
*
-
-
6
*
*
*
-
*
-
*
4.
#
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
*
*
*
*
-
*
2
-
-
*
-
*
*
3
*
-
-
-
*
-
4
-
*
-
*
*
*
5
*
*
-
-
-
-
6
-
*
*
-
-
-
5.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
Phenomenon
1
-
-
*
-
*
-
2
-
*
*
-
*
*
3
*
*
-
*
*
*
4
-
*
-
-
*
-
5
*
-
*
*
-
-
6
*
*
*
-
-
*

Probability
529
S
N
L
9.3
Probability
Probability is a topic that is central to the question of induction, but like causality, it
has different meanings. Consider the following statements:
The probability of picking a spade from a full deck of cards is one-fourth.
The probability that a twenty-year-old man will live to age seventy-ﬁve is .63.
There is a high probability that Margaret and Peter will get married.
In each statement the word ‘‘probability’’ is used in a different sense. This difference
stems from the fact that a different procedure is used in each case to determine or
estimate the probability. To determine the probability of picking a spade from a deck
of cards, a purely mathematical procedure is used. Given that there are ﬁfty-two cards
in a deck and thirteen are spades, thirteen is divided by ﬁfty-two to obtain one-fourth.
A different procedure is used to determine the probability that a twenty-year-old man
will live to age seventy-ﬁve. For this, one must sample a large number of twenty-year-
old men and count the number that live ﬁfty-ﬁve more years. Yet a different procedure
is used to determine the probability that Margaret and Peter will get married. This
probability can only be estimated roughly, and doing so requires that we become
acquainted with Margaret and Peter and with how they feel toward each other and
toward marriage. These three procedures give rise to three distinct theories about
probability: the classical theory, the relative frequency theory, and the subjectivist
theory.
The classical theory traces its origin to the work of the seventeenth-century math-
ematicians Blaise Pascal and Pierre de Fermat in determining the betting odds for a
game of chance. The theory is otherwise called the a priori theory of probability
because the computations are made independently of any sensory observation of
actual events. According to the classical theory, the probability of an event A is given
by the formula
P(A)  f
n
where f is the number of favorable outcomes and n is the number of possible out-
comes. For example, in computing the probability of drawing an ace from a poker
deck, the number of favorable outcomes is four (because there are four aces) and the
number of possible outcomes is ﬁfty-two (because there are ﬁfty-two cards in the
deck). Thus, the probability of that event is 4/52 or 1/13 (or .077).
Two assumptions are involved in computing probabilities according to the classical
theory: (1) that all possible outcomes are taken into account and (2) that all possible
outcomes are equally probable. In the card example the ﬁrst assumption entails that

530
Chapter 9: Induction
only the ﬁfty-two ordinary outcomes are possible. In other words, it is assumed that
the cards will not suddenly self-destruct or reproduce, that the printing will not sud-
denly vanish, and so on. The second assumption, which is otherwise called the prin-
ciple of indifference, entails that there is an equal likelihood of selecting any card.
In other words, it is assumed that the cards are stacked evenly, that no two are glued
together, and so on.
Whenever these two assumptions can be made about the occurrence of an event,
the classical theory can be used to compute its probability. Here are some additional
examples:
P(a fair coin turning up heads)  1/2
P(drawing a face card)  12/52  3/13
P(a single die coming up ‘‘3’’)  1/6
P(a single die coming up even)  3/6  1/2
Strictly speaking, of course, the two assumptions underlying the classical theory are
never perfectly reﬂected in any actual situation. Every coin is slightly off balance, as is
every pair of dice. As a result, the probabilities of the various outcomes are never
exactly equal. Similarly, the outcomes are never strictly conﬁned to the normal ones
entailed by the ﬁrst assumption. When tossing a coin, there is always the possibility
that the coin will land on edge, and in rolling dice there is the analogous possibility
that one of them might break in half. These outcomes may not be possible in the
practical sense, but they are logically possible in that they do not involve any contra-
diction. Because these outcomes are so unusual, however, it is reasonable to think
that for all practical purposes the two assumptions hold and that therefore the classical
theory is applicable.
There are many events, however, for which the two assumptions required by the
classical theory obviously do not hold. For example, in attempting to determine the
probability of a sixty-year-old woman dying of a heart attack within ten years, it would
be virtually impossible to take account of all the possible outcomes. She might die of
cancer, pneumonia, or an especially virulent case of the ﬂu. She might be incapacitated
by a car accident, or she might move to Florida and buy a house on the beach.
Furthermore, none of these outcomes is equally probable in comparison with the
others. To compute the probability of events such as these we need the relative fre-
quency theory of probability.
The relative frequency theory originated with the use of mortality tables by life
insurance companies in the eighteenth century. In contrast with the classical theory,
which rests upon a priori computations, the relative frequency theory depends on
actual observations of the frequency with which certain events happen. The probabil-
ity of an event A is given by the formula
P(A)  f0
n0

Probability
531
S
N
L
where fO is the number of observed favorable outcomes and nO is the total number of
observed outcomes. For example, to determine the probability that a ﬁfty-year-oldman
will live ﬁve more years, a sample of 1,000 ﬁfty-year-old men could be observed. If
968 were alive ﬁve years later, the probability that the man in question will live an
additional ﬁve years is 968/1000 or .968.
Similarly, if one wanted to determine the probability that a certain irregularly
shaped pyramid with different colored sides would, when rolled, come to rest with the
green side down, the pyramid could be rolled 1,000 times. If it came to rest with its
green side down 327 times, the probability of this event happening would be com-
puted to be .327.
The relative frequency method can also be used to compute the probability of the
kinds of events that conform to the requirements of the classical theory. For example,
the probability of a coin coming up heads could be determined by tossing the coin
100 times and counting the heads. If, after this many tosses, 46 heads have been
recorded, one might assign a probability of .46 to this event. This leads us to an
important point about the relative frequency theory: the results hold true only in the
long run. It might be necessary to toss the coin 1,000 or even 10,000 times to get a
close approximation. After 10,000 tosses one would expect to count close to 5,000
heads. If in fact only 4,623 heads have been recorded, one would probably be justiﬁed
in concluding that the coin is off balance or that something was irregular in the way it
had been tossed.
Strictly speaking, neither the classical method nor the relative frequency method
can assign a probability to individual events. From the standpoint of these approaches
only certain kinds or classes of events have probabilities. But many events in the actual
world are unique, one-of-a-kind happenings—for example, Margaret’s marrying Peter
or Native Prancer’s winning the fourth race at Churchill Downs. To interpret the prob-
ability of these events we turn to the subjectivist theory.
The subjectivist theory interprets the meaning of probability in terms of the be-
liefs of individual people. Although such beliefs are vague and nebulous, they may be
given quantitative interpretation through the odds that a person would accept on a
bet. For example, if a person believes that a certain horse will win a race and he or
she is willing to give 7 to 4 odds on that event happening, this means that he or she
has assigned a probability of 7/(74) or 7/11 to that event. This procedure is unprob-
lematic as long as the person is consistent in giving odds on the same event not
happening. If, for example, 7 to 4 odds are given that an event will happen and 5 to 4
odds that it will not happen, the individual who gives these odds will inevitably lose.
If 7 to 4 odds are given that an event will happen, no better than 4 to 7 odds can be
given that the same event will not happen.
One of the difﬁculties surrounding the subjectivist theory is that one and the same
event can be said to have different probabilities, depending on the willingness of
different people to give different odds. If probabilities are taken to be genuine attrib-
utes of events, this would seem to be a serious problem. The problem might be

532
Chapter 9: Induction
avoided, though, either by interpreting probabilities as attributes of beliefs or by taking
the average of the various individual probabilities as the probability of the event.
The three theories discussed thus far, the classical theory, the relative frequency
theory, and the subjectivist theory, provide separate procedures for assigning a prob-
ability to an event (or class of events). Sometimes one theory is more readily applica-
ble, sometimes another. But once individual events have been given a probability, the
groundwork has been laid for computing the probabilities of compoundarrangements
of events. This is done by means of what is called the probability calculus. In this
respect the probability calculus functions analogously to the set of truth functional
rules in propositional logic. Just as the truth functional rules allow us to compute the
truth values of molecular propositions from the individual truth values of the atomic
components, the rules of the probability calculus allow us to compute the probability
of compound events from the individual probabilities of the events.
To
determine
the
probability
of simple
events, use:
Classical theory
Relative
frequency theory
Subjectivist theory
Probability
calculus
Probability of
compound events
Two preliminary rules of the probability calculus are (1) the probability of an event
that must necessarily happen is taken to be 1, and (2) the probability of an event that
necessarily cannot happen is taken to be 0. For example, the event consisting of it
either raining or not raining (at the same time and place) has probability 1, and the
event consisting of it both raining and not raining (at the same time and place) has
probability of 0. These events correspond to statements that are tautological and self-
contradictory, respectively. Contingent events, on the other hand, have probabilities
greater than 0 but less than 1. For example, the probability that the Dow Jones Indus-
trial Averages will end a certain week at least ﬁve points higher than the previous
week would usually be around 1/2, the probability that the polar ice cap will melt
next year is very close to 0, and the probability that a trafﬁc accident will occur
somewhere tomorrow is very close to 1. Let us now consider six additional rules of
the probability calculus.

Probability
533
S
N
L
1. Restricted Conjunction Rule
The restricted conjunction rule is used to compute the probability of two events
occurring together when the events are independent of each other. Two events are
said to be independent when the occurrence of one has no effect on the probability
of the other one occurring. Examples include getting two heads from two tosses of a
coin, drawing two hearts from a deck when the ﬁrst is replaced before the second is
drawn, and playing two sequential games of poker or roulette. The probability of two
such events A and B occurring together is given by the formula
P(A and B)  P(A)  P(B)
For example, the probability of tossing two heads on a single throw of two coins is
P(H1 and H2)  1/2  1/2  1/4
This result may be checked very easily by listing all the possible outcomes and com-
paring that number with the number of favorable outcomes:
Coin 1
H
H
T
T
Coin 2
H
T
H
T
Only one of the four possible outcomes shows both coins turning up heads.
Similarly, we may compute the probability of rolling two sixes with a pair of dice:
P(S1 and S2)  1/6  1/6  1/36
Again, we may check the results by listing all the possible outcomes:
1-1
1-2
1-3
1-4
1-5
1-6
2-1
2-2
2-3
2-4
2-5
2-6
3-1
3-2
3-3
3-4
3-5
3-6
4-1
4-2
4-3
4-4
4-5
4-6
5-1
5-2
5-3
5-4
5-5
5-6
6-1
6-2
6-3
6-4
6-5
6-6
Since only one of the thirty-six possible outcomes shows two sixes together, the prob-
ability of this event is 1/36.
2. General Conjunction Rule
The general conjunction rule is used to compute the probability of two events
occurring together whether or not the events are independent. When the events are
independent, the general conjunction rule reduces to the restricted conjunction rule.

534
Chapter 9: Induction
Some examples of events that are not independent (that is, that are dependent) are
drawing two spades from a deck on two draws when the ﬁrst card drawn is not
replaced, and selecting two or more window seats on an airplane. After the ﬁrst card
is drawn, the number of cards available for the second draw is reduced, and after one
of the seats is taken on the plane, the number of seats remaining for subsequent
choices is reduced. In other words, in both cases the second event is dependent on
the ﬁrst. The formula for computing the probability of two such events occurring
together is
P(A and B)  P(A)  P(B given A)
The expression P(B given A) is the probability that B will occur on the assumption
that A has already occurred. Let us suppose, for example, that A and B designate the
events of drawing two kings from a deck when the ﬁrst card is not replaced before the
second is drawn. If event A occurs, then only three kings remain, and the deck is also
reduced to ﬁfty-one cards. Thus, P(B given A) is 3/51. Since the probability of event
A is 4/52, the probability of both events happening is the product of these two frac-
tions, or 12/2652 (  1/221).
For another illustration, consider an urn containing ﬁve red balls, six green balls,
and seven yellow balls. The probability of drawing two red balls (without replace-
ment) is computed as follows:
P(R1 and R2)  5/18  4/17  20/306  10/153
If a red ball is selected on the ﬁrst draw, this leaves four red balls from a total of
seventeen. Thus, the probability of drawing a second red ball if one has already been
drawn is 4/17.
For another example, consider the same urn with the same contents, but let us
compute the probability of drawing ﬁrst a green ball and then a yellow ball (without
replacement):
P(G and Y)  6/18  7/17  42/306  7/51
If a green ball is selected on the ﬁrst draw, this affects the selection of a yellow ball on
the second draw only to the extent of reducing the total number of balls to seventeen.
3. Restricted Disjunction Rule
The restricted disjunction rule is used to compute the probability of either of two
events occurring when the events are mutually exclusive—that is, when they cannot
both occur. Examples of such events include picking either an ace or a king from a
deck of cards on a single draw or rolling either a six or a one on a single roll of a die.
The probability is given by the formula

Probability
535
S
N
L
P(A or B)  P(A)  P(B)
For example, the probability of drawing either a king or a queen (of any suit) from a
deck of cards on a single draw is
P(K or Q)  4/52  4/52  8/52  2/13
For another example, consider an urn containing six black balls, four white balls, and
two red balls. The probability of selecting either a black or red ball on a single draw is
P(B or R)  6/12  2/12  8/12  2/3
When the event in question is one that must necessarily occur, the probability is, of
course, 1. Thus, the probability of obtaining either heads or tails on a single toss of a
coin is
P(H or T )  1/2  1/2  1
The restricted disjunction rule may be combined with the restricted conjunction
rule to compute the probability of getting either a ﬁve or a six on each of two consec-
utive rolls of a single die:
P[(F or S)1 and (F or S)2] 



P(F or S)1  P(F or S)2
(1/6  1/6)  (1/6  1/6)
1/3  1/3
1/9
Since getting a ﬁve and getting a six on a single die are mutually exclusive events,
P(F or S)1 is evaluated using the restricted disjunction rule. The same is true of
P(F or S)2. Then, since two rolls of a die are independent events, the conjunction of
the two disjunctive events is evaluated by the restricted conjunction rule.
4. General Disjunction Rule
The general disjunction rule is used to compute the probability of either of two
events whether or not they are mutually exclusive. The rule holds for any two events,
but since its application is simpliﬁed when the events are independent, we willconﬁne
our attention to events of this kind. Examples of independent events that are not
mutually exclusive include obtaining at least one head on two tosses of a coin, draw-
ing at least one king from a deck on two draws when the ﬁrst card is replaced before
the second card is drawn, and getting at least one six when rolling a pair of dice. The
formula for computing the probability of either of two such events is
P(A or B)  P(A)  P(B)  P(A and B)

536
Chapter 9: Induction
If the events are independent, P(A and B) is computed using the restricted conjunction
rule, and the general disjunction formula reduces to
P(A or B)  P(A)  P(B)  [P(A)  P(B)]
The general disjunction rule may be proved as follows. When A and B are nonex-
clusive, A occurs either with or without B, and B occurs either with or without A. Thus
P(A)  P(A and B)  P(A and not-B)
P(B)  P(B and A)  P(B and not-A)
But A or B occurs in exactly three possible ways: A and not-B, B and not-A, and A and
B. Thus
P(A or B)  P(A and not-B)  P(B and not-A)  P(A and B)
Thus, when P(A and B) is subtracted from P(A)  P(B), the difference is equal to
P(A or B). [Note: P(A and B)  P(B and A).]
For an example of the use of the general disjunction rule let us consider the prob-
ability of getting heads on either of two tosses of a coin. We have
P(H1 or H2)  1/2  1/2  (1/2  1/2)
 1  1/4
 3/4
For another example, consider the probability of getting at least one six when rolling
a pair of dice. The computation is
P(S1 or S2)  1/6  1/6  (1/6  1/6)
 2/6  1/36
 11/36
The general disjunction rule may be combined with the restricted disjunction rule
to compute the probability of getting either a three or a ﬁve when rolling a pair of
dice. This is the probability of getting either a three or a ﬁve on the ﬁrst die or either a
three or a ﬁve on the second:
P[(T or F)1 or (T or F)2]  P(T or F)1  P(T or F)2 [P(T or F)1  P(T or F)2]
 (1/6  1/6)  (1/6  1/6)  [(1/6  1/6)  (1/6  1/6)]
 2/6  2/6  4/36
 20/36
 5/9
Since getting a three or getting a ﬁve on a single throw are mutually exclusive events,
P(T or F)1 is equal to the sum of the separate probabilities. The same is true for
P(T or F)2.

Probability
537
S
N
L
The general disjunction rule may be combined with the general conjunction rule to
compute the probability of drawing ﬁrst a red ball and then a black ball on pairs of
draws from either of two urns (without replacement). Suppose that the ﬁrst urn con-
tains two red balls, two black balls, and one green ball, and that the second urn
contains three red balls, one black ball, and one white ball. The probability, giving
two draws per urn, is
P[(R and B)1 or (R and B)2]
 P(R and B)1  P(R and B)2  [P(R and B)1  P(R and B)2]
 (2/5  2/4)  (3/5  1/4)  [(2/5  2/4)  (3/5  1/4)]
 4/20  3/20  (4/20  3/20)
 7/20  12/400
 8/25
5. Negation Rule
The negation rule is useful for computing the probability of an event when the
probability of the event not happening is either known or easily computed. The for-
mula is as follows:
P(A)  1  P(not-A)
The formula can be proved very easily. By the restricted disjunction rule the probabil-
ity of A or not-A is
P(A or not-A)  P(A)  P(not-A)
But since A or not-A happens necessarily, P(A or not-A)  1. Thus
1  P(A)  P(not-A)
Rearranging the terms in this equation gives us the negation rule. For an example of
the use of this rule, consider the probability of getting heads at least once on two
tosses of a coin. The probability of the event not happening, which is the probability
of getting tails on both tosses, is immediately computed by the restricted conjunction
rule to be 1/4. Then, applying the negation rule
P(H1 or H2)  1  1/4
 3/4
The negation rule may also be used to compute the probabilities of disjunctive
events that are dependent. In presenting the general disjunction rule we conﬁned our
attention to independent events. Let us suppose we are given an urn containing two
black balls and three white balls. To compute the probability of getting at least one
black ball on two draws (without replacement), we ﬁrst compute the probability of

538
Chapter 9: Induction
the event not happening. This event consists in drawing two white balls, which, by
the general conjunction rule, has the probability
P(W1 and W2)  3/5  2/4  6/20
Now, applying the negation rule, the probability of getting at least one black ball
on two draws is
P(B1 or B2)  1  6/20
 14/20
 7/10
For an example that is only slightly more complex, consider an urn containing two
white, two black, and two red balls. To compute the probability of getting either a
white or black ball on two draws (without replacement) we ﬁrst compute the prob-
ability of the event not happening. This is the probability of getting red balls on both
draws, which is
P(R1 and R2)  2/6  1/5  2/30  1/15
Now, by the negation rule the probability of drawing either a white or black ball is
P(W or B)  1  1/15
 14/15
6. Bayes’s Theorem
Bayes’s Theorem, named after the eighteenth-century English clergyman Thomas
Bayes, is a useful rule for evaluating the conditional probability of two or more mutu-
ally exclusive and jointly exhaustive events. The conditional probability of an event is
the probability of that event happening given that another event has already hap-
pened, and it is expressed P(A given B). You may recall that an expression of this form
occurred in the formulation of the general conjunction rule. When the number of
mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive events is limited to two, which we will
designate A1 and A2, Bayes’s Theorem is expressed as follows:
P(A1 given B)  [P(A1)  P(B given A1)]  [P(A2)  P(B given A2)]
P(A1)  P(B given A1)
This limited formulation of Bayes’s theorem may be proved as follows. Applying
the general conjunction rule to the events A1 and B, we have
P(A1 and B)  P(A1)  P(B given A1)
Applying the same rule to the same events written in the reverse order, we have

Probability
539
S
N
L
P(B and A1)  P(B)  P(A1 given B)
Now, since P(A1 and B) is equal to P(B and A1), we may set the right-hand side of
these two equations equal to each other:
P(B)  P(A1 given B)  P(A1)  P(B given A1)
Dividing both sides of this equation by P(B), we have
(*)
P(A1 given B)  P(A1)  P(B given A1)
P(B)
Now, it can be easily proved using a truth table that B is logically equivalent to the
expression [(A1 and B) or (not-A1 and B)]. Furthermore, since A1 and A2 are mutually
exclusive and jointly exhaustive, one and only one of them will happen. Thus, A2 is
simply another way of writing not-A1. Accordingly, the former expression in brackets
can be written [(A1 and B) or (A2 and B)], and since this expression is logically equiv-
alent to B,
P(B)  P[(A1 and B) or (A2 and B)]
Now, applying the general conjunction rule and the restricted disjunction rule to the
right-hand side of this equation, we have
P(B)  [P(A1)  P(B given A1)]  [P(A2)  P(B given A2)]
Finally, substituting the right-hand side of this equation in place of P(B) in equation
(*) above, we have Bayes’s Theorem:
P(A1 given B) 
P(A1)  P(B given A1)
[P(A1)  P(B given A1)]  [P(A2)  P(B given A2)]
For an illustration of the use of Bayes’s Theorem, suppose we are given one beige
urn and four gray urns in a dimly lit room, so we cannot distinguish one color from the
other. The beige urn contains eight red and two white balls, and each of the gray urns
contains three red and seven white balls. Suppose that a red ball is drawn from one of
these ﬁve urns. What is the probability that the urn was beige? In other words, we
want to know the probability that the urn was beige given that a red ball was drawn.
The events A1 and A2 in Bayes’s Theorem correspond to drawing a ball from either a
beige urn or a gray urn. Substituting B and G for A1 and A2, respectively, we have
P(B given R) 
P(B)  P(R given B)
[P(B)  P(R given B)]  [P(G)  P(R given G)]
Now, since there are a total of ﬁve urns, the probability of randomly selecting the
beige urn is 1/5, and the probability of randomly selecting one of the gray urns is 4/5.

540
Chapter 9: Induction
Finally, since each urn contains ten balls, the probability of drawing a red ball from
the beige urn is 8/10, and the probability of drawing a red ball from the gray urn is
3/10. Thus, we have
P(B given R) 
(1/5  8/10)  (4/5  3/10)
1/5  8/10

8/50
8/50  12/50  8/50
20/50  8/20  .40
Bayes’s Theorem is highly useful in practical affairs because it allows us to changeour
probability estimates of ordinary events as new information is acquired. For an example
of how Bayes’s Theorem is used for this purpose, consider the following example:
Mr. Jones became seriously ill from ingesting defectively manufactured tablets of
the painkiller novaprine. He intends to ﬁle a lawsuit against the most probable
manufacturer of the tablets. After a brief investigation, he ﬁnds that 70 percent
of the novaprine sold in this country is manufactured by Alpha Pharmaceuticals,
and 30 percent is manufactured by Beta Pharmaceuticals.
From this information the probability that Alpha Pharmaceuticals manufactured the
tablets is .70, in comparison with .30 for Beta Pharmaceuticals. Thus, Mr. Jones tenta-
tively decides to ﬁle his lawsuit against Alpha. However, upon further investigation
Mr. Jones discovers the following:
Of the novaprine manufactured by Alpha, 10 percent is sold on the east coast and
90 percent on the west coast, while 80 percent of Beta’s novaprine is sold on
the east coast and 20 percent on the west coast. Furthermore, Mr. Jones recalls
that he purchased his novaprine on the east coast.
Clearly this new information affects Mr. Jones’s original probability estimate. We
use Bayes’s Theorem to recompute the probability that Alpha manufactured the defec-
tive tablets given that the tablets were purchased on the east coast as follows:
P(A given E)  [P(A)  P(E given A)]  [P(B)  P(E given B)]
P(A)  P(E given A)
For P(A) and P(B) we use the original probabilities of .70 and .30, respectively. The
probability that the tablets were purchased on the east coast given that they were
manufactured by Alpha is .10, and the probability that they were purchased on the
east coast given that they were manufactured by Beta is .80. Thus, we have
P(A given E) 
.70  .10
(.70  .10)  (.30  .80) 
.07
.07  .24  .07/.31  .23
The new information that Mr. Jones acquired has signiﬁcantly affected the prob-
ability that Alpha manufactured the defective tablets. The probability has dropped

Probability
541
S
N
L
from .70 to .23. With this new information, it is more likely that Beta manufactured the
tablets, so Mr. Jones should now ﬁle his lawsuit against Beta. The probability for Beta
is 1  .23, or .77.
The earlier probability for Alpha (.70) is called the prior probability, and the later
ﬁgure (.23) is called the posterior probability. If Mr. Jones should acquire even more
information, the posterior probability becomes a new prior, and it is used as the value
for P(A) in a subsequent application of Bayes’s Theorem.
Additional Applications
Most of the examples considered thus far have used the classical theory to determine
the probability of the component events. But as was mentioned earlier, the probability
calculus can also be used in conjunction with the relative frequency theory and the
subjectivist theory. If we apply the relative frequency theory to the mortality tables
used by insurance companies, we ﬁnd that the probability of a twenty-ﬁve-year-old
man living an additional forty years is .82, and the probability of a twenty-ﬁve-year-
old woman living the same number of years is .88. To compute the probability of such
a man and woman both living that long, we use the restricted conjunction rule and
obtain .82  .88  .72. For the probability that either of these people would live that
long, we use the general disjunction rule and obtain
.82  .88  (.82  .88)  .98
Let us suppose that these two people are married and both would give 9 to 1 odds
on their staying married for forty years. This translates into a probability of 9/(9  1)
or .90. Using the restricted conjunction rule, the probability of this event happen-
ing is the product of the latter ﬁgure and the probability of their both living that
long, or .65.
For an example involving the subjectivist theory, if the Dallas Cowboys are given
7 to 5 odds of winning the NFC championship, and the Pittsburgh Steelers are given
3 to 2 odds of winning the AFC championship, the probability that at least one of these
teams will win is computed using the general disjunction rule. The odds translate
respectively into probabilities of 7/12 and 3/5, and so the probability of the disjunction
is 7/12  3/5  (7/12  3/5)  5/6. The probability that the two teams will meet in
the Super Bowl (that both will win their conference championship) is, by the restricted
conjunction rule, 7/12  3/5  21/60, or 7/20. The probability that neither will play in
the Super Bowl is, by the negation rule, 1  5/6  1/6.
The probability calculus can also be used to evaluate the strength of inductive
arguments. Consider the following argument:
The Dallas Cowboys are given 7 to 5 odds of winning the NFC championship. The
Buffalo Bills are given 3 to 2 odds of winning the AFC championship. Therefore,
the Cowboys and the Bills will meet in the Super Bowl.

542
Chapter 9: Induction
On the assumption that the premises are true, that is, on the assumption that the odds
are reported correctly, the conclusion follows with a probability of 7/20 or .35. Thus,
the argument is not particularly strong. But if the odds given in the premises should
increase, the strength of the argument would increase proportionately. The premises
of the following argument give different odds:
The Dallas Cowboys are given 7 to 2 odds of winning the NFC championship. The
Buffalo Bills are given 8 to 3 odds of winning the AFC championship. Therefore,
the Cowboys and the Bills will meet in the Super Bowl.
In this argument, if the premises are assumed true, the conclusion follows with prob-
ability 7/9  8/11  56/99, or .57. Thus, the argument is at least moderately strong.
Lest this procedure be misinterpreted, however, it is important to recall a point
raised in Chapter 1. The strength of an inductive argument depends not merely upon
whether the conclusion is probably true but upon whether the conclusion follows
probably from the premises. As a result, to evaluate the strength of an inductive
argument it is not sufﬁcient merely to know the probability of the conclusion on the
assumption that the premises are true. One must also know whether the probability
of the conclusion rests upon the evidence given in the premises. If the probability of
the conclusion does not rest on this evidence, the argument is weak regardless of
whether the conclusion is probably true. The following argument is a case in point:
All dogs are animals. Therefore, probably a trafﬁc accident will occur somewhere
tomorrow.
The conclusion of this argument is probably true independently of the premises, so
the argument is weak.
In this connection the analogy between deductive and inductive arguments breaks
down. As we saw in Chapter 6, any argument having a conclusion that is necessarily
true is deductively valid regardless of the content of its premises. But any inductive
argument having a probably true conclusion is not strong unless the probability of the
conclusion rests upon the evidence given in the premises.
A ﬁnal comment is in order about the material covered in this section. Probability
is one of those subjects about which there is little agreement in philosophical circles.
There are philosophers who defend each of the theories we have discussed as provid-
ing the only acceptable approach, and there are numerous views regarding the ﬁne
points of each. In addition, some philosophers argue that there are certain uses of
‘‘probability’’ that none of these theories can interpret. The statement ‘‘There is high
probability that Einstein’s theory of relativity is correct’’ may be a case in point. In any
event, the various theories about the meaning of probability, as well as the details of
the probability calculus, are highly complex subjects, and the brief account given here
has done little more than scratch the surface.

Probability
543
S
N
L
EXERCISE 9.3
I. Compute probabilities for the following simple events:
1.
#
What is the probability of rolling a ﬁve on a single roll of a die?
2. From a sample of 9,750 Ajax trucks, 273 developed transmission problems
within the ﬁrst two years of operation. What is the probability that an Ajax
truck will develop transmission problems within the ﬁrst two years?
3. If the standard odds are 8 to 5 that the Chargers will beat the Lions, what is
the probability that this event will happen?
4.
#
From a sample of 7,335 seventy-ﬁve-year-old women, 6,260 lived an addi-
tional ﬁve years. What is the probability that a seventy-ﬁve-year-old woman
will live to age eighty?
5. What is the probability of picking a black jack from a poker deck (without
jokers) on a single draw?
6. If the standard odds are 6 to 11 that the Red Sox will beat the Tigers, what is
the probability that this event will happen?
7.
#
Given an urn containing three red balls, four green balls, and ﬁve yellow
balls, what is the probability of drawing a red ball on a single draw?
II. Compute probabilities for the following compound events:
1.
#
What is the probability of getting either a six or a one from a single roll of
a die?
2. What is the probability of getting heads on three successive tosses of a coin?
3. What is the probability of drawing either a king or a queen from a poker deck
(no jokers) on a single draw?
4.
#
What is the probability of drawing two aces from a poker deck in two draws:
a. If the ﬁrst card is replaced before the second is drawn?
b. If the ﬁrst card is not replaced before the second is drawn?
5. What is the probability of drawing at least one ace from a poker deck on two
draws if the ﬁrst card is replaced before the second is drawn?
6. What is the probability of getting at least one head on three tosses of a coin?
7.
#
What is the probability of getting at least one six on three rolls of a die?
8. If a pair of dice are rolled, what is the probability that the points add up to:
a. 5?
b. 6?
c. 7?

544
Chapter 9: Induction
9. Given two urns, one containing two red, three green, and four yellow balls,
the other containing four red, two green, and three yellow balls, if a single
ball is drawn from each urn, what is the probability that:
a. Both are red?
b. At least one is green?
c. One is red, the other yellow?
d. At least one is either red or yellow?
e. Both are the same color?
10.
#
Given an urn containing three red, four green, and ﬁve yellow balls, if two
balls are drawn from the urn (without replacement), what is the probabil-
ity that:
a. Both are red?
b. One is green, the other yellow?
c. One is either red or green?
d. At least one is green?
e. Both have the same color?
11. What is the probability of drawing either an ace or a king (or both) on three
draws (without replacement) from a poker deck? (Hint: Use the negation
rule.)
12. What is the probability of drawing an ace and a king on three draws (without
replacement) from a poker deck? (Hint: Use the negation rule.)
13.
#
The probability of a twenty-year-old man living to age seventy is .74, and the
probability of a twenty-year-old woman living to the same age is .82. If a
recently married couple, both age twenty, give 8 to 1 odds on their staying
married for ﬁfty years, what is the probability that:
a. At least one will live to age seventy?
b. They will celebrate their golden wedding anniversary?
14. Assign a numerical value to the strength of the following argument: The odds
are 5 to 3 that the Indians will win the American League pennant and 7 to 5
that the Cardinals will win the National League pennant. Therefore, the Indi-
ans and the Cardinals will meet in the World Series.
15. Assign a numerical value to the strength of the following argument: The Wil-
son family has four children. Therefore, at least two of the children were born
on the same day of the week.
16.
#
We are given three new urns each containing seven red, ﬁve green, and three
white balls, and two old urns each containing ﬁve red, three green, and seven
white balls. The urns are identical except for an old or new date stamped
beneath the base. If a single red ball is randomly drawn from one of these

Statistical Reasoning
545
S
N
L
urns, was it most probably drawn from an old urn or a new urn? (Hint: For
this exercise and the ones that follow, use Bayes’s Theorem.)
17. Knowing that your friend Angella studies for her tests only 40 percent of the
time, you place an even bet with a third party that Angella will not study for
her upcoming test. Later, you just happen to hear that Angella passed the test.
Should you retract your bet? Assume that Angella passes nine out of ten tests
when she studies, and three out of ten when she does not.
18. A physician has diagnosed a patient as having either hepatitis or liver cancer
(but not both). Statistics reveal that hepatitis occurs in the general population
twice as frequently as liver cancer. Thus, the physician tentatively concludes
that the patient probably has hepatitis. Later the physician conducts a test on
the patient that turns out positive. On this test, nine out of ten cases of liver
cancer trigger a positive outcome, and one out of six cases of hepatitis trigger a
positive outcome. What is the new probability that the patient has liver cancer?
19.
#
Ms. Jones, a bookstore owner, wishes to send out an advertisement to po-
tential customers. She estimates that 20 percent of the town’s residents are
recreational readers, and she knows that all of the residents are either recre-
ational readers or TV addicts (but not both). Also, a TV repair person has told
her that two of ten TV addicts are newspaper subscribers, and from a survey
of her own customers she has learned that seven of ten recreational readers
are newspaper subscribers. If Ms. Jones places an ad in the local newspaper,
how effective will the ad be? (That is, what is the probability that a newspaper
subscriber is a recreational reader?)
20. Mr. Andrews, a grape merchant, inquires about a certain wine that he tastes
at a party. The host tells him that from a total of ten bottles of that wine, six
came from the north vineyard and four came from the south vineyard. From
this information, the merchant concludes that he should visit the north vine-
yard for a sample of the grapes. Later, he discovers that the wine in question
came from a bottle labeled Classic Reserve, and 30 of 100 barrels of north
vineyard wine were bottled with that label, while 130 of 200 barrels of south
vineyard wine were bottled with that label. Now, with this new information,
what is the probability that the wine came from the north vineyard?
9.4
Statistical Reasoning
In our day-to-day experience all of us encounter arguments that rest on statistical
evidence. An especially proliﬁc source of such arguments is the advertising industry.
We are constantly told that we ought to smoke a certain brand of cigarettes because it

546
Chapter 9: Induction
has 20 percent less tar, buy a certain kind of car because it gets 5 percent better gas
mileage, and use a certain cold remedy because it is recommended by four out of ﬁve
physicians. But the advertising industry is not the only source. We often read in the
newspapers that some union is asking an increase in pay because its members earn
less than the average or that a certain region is threatened with ﬂoods because rainfall
has been more than the average.
To evaluate such arguments, we must be able to interpret the statistics upon which
they rest, but doing so is not always easy. Statements expressing averages and per-
centages are often ambiguous and can mean any number of things, depending on
how the average or percentage is computed. These difﬁculties are compounded by
the fact that statistics provide a highly convenient way for people to deceive one
another. Such deceptions can be effective even though they fall short of being outright
lies. Thus, to evaluate arguments based on statistics one must be familiar not only with
the ambiguities that occur in the language but with the devices that unscrupulous
individuals use to deceive others.
This section touches on ﬁve areas that are frequent sources of such ambiguity and
deception: problems in sampling, the meaning of ‘‘average,’’ the importance of dis-
persion in a sample, the use of graphs and pictograms, and the use of percentages for
the purpose of comparison. By becoming acquainted with these topics and with some
of the misuses that occur, we are better able to determine whether a conclusion
follows probably from a set of statistical premises.
Samples
Much of the statistical evidence presented in support of inductively drawn conclusions
is gathered from analyzing samples. When a sample is found to possess a certain
characteristic, it is argued that the group as a whole (the population) possesses that
characteristic. For example, if we wanted to know the opinion of the student body at
a certain university about whether to adopt an academic honor code, we could take a
poll of 10 percent of the students. If the results of the poll showed that 80 percent of
those sampled favored the code, we might draw the conclusion that 80 percent of the
entire student body favored it. Such an argument would be classiﬁed as an inductive
generalization.
The problem that arises with the use of samples has to do with whether the sample
is representative of the population. Samples that are not representative are said to be
biased. Depending on what the population consists of, whether machine parts or
human beings, different considerations enter into determining whether a sample is
biased. These considerations include (1) whether the sample is randomly selected,
(2) the size of the sample, and (3) psychological factors.
A sample is random if and only if every member of the population has an equal
chance of being selected. The requirement that a sample be randomly selected applies
to practically all samples, but sometimes it can be taken for granted. For example,

Statistical Reasoning
547
S
N
L
when a physician draws a blood sample to test for blood sugar, there is no need to
take a little bit from the ﬁnger, a little from the arm, and a little from the leg. Because
blood is a circulating ﬂuid, it can be assumed that it is homogenous in regard to
blood sugar.
The randomness requirement must be given more attention when the population
consists of discrete units. Suppose, for example, that a quality control engineer for a
manufacturing ﬁrm needed to determine whether the components on a certain con-
veyor belt were within speciﬁcations. To do so, let us suppose the engineer removed
every tenth component for measurement. The sample obtained by such a procedure
would not be random if the components were not randomly arranged on the conveyor
belt. As a result of some malfunction in the manufacturing process it is quite possible
that every tenth component turned out perfect and the rest imperfect. If the engineer
happened to select only the perfect ones, the sample would be biased. A selection
procedure that would be more likely to ensure a random sample would be to roll a
pair of dice and remove every component corresponding to a roll of ten. Since the
outcome of a roll of dice is a random event, the selection would also be random. Such
a procedure would be more likely to include defective components that turn up at
regular intervals.
The randomness requirement presents even greater problems when the population
consists of human beings. Suppose, for example, that a public opinion poll is to be
conducted on the question of excess corporate proﬁts. It would hardly do to ask such
a question randomly of the people encountered on Wall Street in New York City. Such
a sample would almost certainly be biased in favor of the corporations. A less biased
sample could be obtained by randomly selecting phone numbers from the telephone
directory, but even this procedure would not yield a completely random sample.
Among other things, the time of day in which a call is placed inﬂuences the kind of
responses obtained. Most people who are employed full time are not available during
the day, and even if calls are made at night, approximately 30 percent of the popula-
tion have unlisted numbers.
A poll conducted by mail based on the addresses listed in the city directory would
also yield a fairly random sample, but this method, too, has shortcomings. Many
apartment dwellers are not listed, and others move before the directory is printed.
Furthermore, none of those who live in rural areas are listed. In short, it is both difﬁcult
and expensive to conduct a large-scale public opinion poll that succeeds in obtaining
responses from anything approximating a random sample of individuals.
A classic case of a poll that turned out to be biased in spite of a good deal of effort
and expense was conducted by Literary Digest magazine to predict the outcome of
the 1936 presidential election. The sample consisted of a large number of the maga-
zine’s subscribers together with a number of others selected from the telephone direc-
tory. Because four similar polls had picked the winner in previous years, the results of
this poll were highly respected. As it turned out, however, the Republican candidate,
Alf Landon, got a signiﬁcant majority in the poll, but Franklin D. Roosevelt won the

548
Chapter 9: Induction
election by a landslide. The incorrect prediction is explained by the fact that the 1936
election occurred in the middle of the Depression, at a time when many people could
afford neither a telephone nor a subscription to the Digest. These were the people
who were overlooked in the poll, and they were also the ones who voted for
Roosevelt.
Size is also an important factor in determining whether a sample is representative.
Given that a sample is randomly selected, the larger the sample, the more closely it
replicates the population. In statistics, this degree of closeness is expressed in terms
of sampling error. The sampling error is the difference between the relative fre-
quency with which some characteristic occurs in the sample and the relative frequency
with which the same characteristic occurs in the population. If, for example, a poll
were taken of a labor union and 60 percent of the members sampled expressed their
intention to vote for Smith for president but in fact only 55 percent of the whole union
intended to vote for Smith, the sampling error would be 5 percent. If a larger sample
were taken, the error would be less.
Just how large a sample should be is a function of the size of the population and of
the degree of sampling error that can be tolerated. For a sampling error of, say, 5
percent, a population of 10,000 would require a larger sample than would a popula-
tion of 100. However, the ratio is not linear. The sample for the larger population need
not be 100 times as large as the one for the smaller population to obtain the same
precision. When the population is very large, the size of the sample needed to ensure
a certain precision levels off to a constant ﬁgure. Studies based on the Gallup poll
show that a random sample of 400 will yield results of plus or minus 6 percent whether
the population is 100,000 or 100 million. Additional ﬁgures for large populations are
given in Table 9.6:
Table 9.6 Sample Size and Sampling Error*
Numbers of interviews
Margin of error
(in percentage points)
4,000
1,500
1,000
750
600
400
200
100
2
3
4
4
5
6
8
11
As the table indicates, reducing the sampling error below 5 percent requires rather
substantial increases in the size of the sample. The cost of obtaining large samples may
*From Charles W. Roll Jr. and Albert H. Cantril, Polls: Their Use and Misuse in Politics (New York: Basic
Books, 1972), p. 72.

Statistical Reasoning
549
S
N
L
not justify an increase in precision. The table also points up the importance of random-
ness. The sample in the 1936 Literary Digest poll was based on 2 million responses,
yet the sampling error was huge because the sample was not randomly selected.
Statements of sampling error are often conspicuously absent from surveys used to
support advertising claims. Marketers of products such as patent medicines have been
known to take a number of rather small samples until they obtain one that gives the
‘‘right’’ result. For example, twenty polls of twenty-ﬁve people might be taken inquir-
ing about the preferred brand of aspirin. Even though the samples might be randomly
selected, one will eventually be found in which twenty of the twenty-ﬁve respondents
indicate their preference for Alpha brand aspirin. Having found such a sample, the
marketing ﬁrm proceeds to promote this brand as the one preferred by four out of ﬁve
of those sampled. The results of the other samples are, of course, discarded, and no
mention is made of sampling error.
Psychological factors can also have a bearing on whether the sample is represen-
tative. When the population consists of inanimate objects, such as cans of soup or
machine parts, psychological factors are usually irrelevant, but they can play a signiﬁ-
cant role when the population consists of human beings. If the people composing the
sample think that they will gain or lose something by the kind of answer they give, it
is to be expected that their involvement will affect the outcome. For example, if the
residents of a neighborhood were to be surveyed for annual income with the purpose
of determining whether the neighborhood should be ranked among the fashionable
areas in the city, it would be expected that the residents would exaggerate their an-
swers. But if the purpose of the study were to determine whether the neighborhood
could afford a special levy that would increase property taxes, one might expect the
incomes to be underestimated.
The kind of question asked can also have a psychological bearing. Questions such
as ‘‘How often do you brush your teeth?’’ and ‘‘How many books do you read in a year?’’
can be expected to generate responses that overestimate the truth, while ‘‘How many
times have you been intoxicated?’’ and ‘‘How many extramarital affairs have you had?’’
would probably receive answers that underestimate the truth. Similar exaggerations
can result from the way a question is phrased. For example, ‘‘Do you favor a reduction
in welfare beneﬁts as a response to rampant cheating?’’ would be expected to receive
more afﬁrmative answers than simply ‘‘Do you favor a reduction in welfare beneﬁts?’’
Another source of psychological inﬂuence is the personal interaction between the
surveyor and the respondent. Suppose, for example, that a door-to-door survey were
taken to determine how many people believe in God or attend church on Sunday. If
the survey were conducted by priests and ministers dressed in clerical garb, one might
expect a larger number of afﬁrmative answers than if the survey were taken by non-
clerics. The simple fact is that many people like to give answers that please the
questioner.
To prevent this kind of interaction from affecting the outcome, scientiﬁc studies are
often conducted under ‘‘double blind’’ conditions in which neither the surveyor nor

550
Chapter 9: Induction
the respondent knows what the ‘‘right’’ answer is. For example, in a double blind
study to determine the effectiveness of a drug, bottles containing the drug would be
mixed with other bottles containing a placebo (sugar tablet). The contents of each
bottle would be matched with a code number on the label, and neither the person
distributing the bottles nor the person recording the responses would know what the
code is. Under these conditions the persons conducting the study would not be able
to inﬂuence, by some smile or gesture, the response of the persons to whom the drugs
are given.
Most of the statistical evidence encountered in ordinary experience contains no
reference to such factors as randomness, sampling error, or the conditions under
which the sample was taken. In the absence of such information, the person faced
with evaluating the evidence must use his or her best judgment. If either the organi-
zation conducting the study or the persons composing the sample have something to
gain by the kind of answer that is given, the results of the survey should be regarded
as suspect. And if the questions that are asked concern topics that would naturally
elicit distorted answers, the results should probably be rejected. In either event, the
mere fact that a study appears scientiﬁc or is expressed in mathematical language
should never intimidate a person into accepting the results. Numbers and scientiﬁc
terminology are no substitute for an unbiased sample.
The Meaning of ‘‘Average’’
In statistics the word ‘‘average’’ is used in three different senses: mean, median, and
mode. In evaluating arguments and inferences that rest upon averages, it is often
important to know in precisely what sense the word is being used.
The mean value of a set of data is the arithmetical average. It is computed by
dividing the sum of the individual values by the number of data in the set. Suppose,
for example, that we are given Table 9.7 listing the ages of a group of people:
Table 9.7
Number of People
Age
1
16
4
17
1
18
2
19
3
23
To compute the mean age, we divide the sum of the individual ages by the number of
people:
mean age  (1  16)  (4  17)  (1  18)  (2  19)  (3  23)
11
 19

Statistical Reasoning
551
S
N
L
The median of a set of data is the middle point when the data are arranged in
ascending order. In other words, the median is the point at which there are an equal
number of data above and below. In Table 9.7 the median age is 18 because there are
ﬁve people above this age and ﬁve below.
The mode is the value that occurs with the greatest frequency. Here the mode is
17, because there are four people with that age and fewer people with any other age.
In this example, the mean, median, and mode, while different from one another,
are all fairly close together. The problem for induction occurs when there is a great
disparity between these values. This sometimes occurs in the case of salaries. Con-
sider, for example, Table 9.8, which reports the salaries of a hypothetical architec-
tural ﬁrm:
Table 9.8
Capacity
Number of
Personnel
Salary
president
1
$275,000
senior architect
2
150,000
junior architect
2
80,000
senior engineer
1
65,000 Rmean
junior engineer
4
55,000
senior draftsman
1
45,000 Rmedian
junior draftsman
10
30,000 Rmode
Since there are twenty-one employees and a total of $1,365,000 is paid in salaries, the
mean salary is $1,365,000/21, or $65,000. The median salary is $45,000 because ten
employees earn less than this and ten earn more, and the mode, which is the salary
that occurs most frequently, is $30,000. Each of these ﬁgures represents the ‘‘average’’
salary of the ﬁrm, but in different senses. Depending on the purpose for which the
average is used, different ﬁgures might be cited as the basis for an argument.
For example, if the senior engineer were to request a raise in salary, the president
could respond that his or her salary is already well above the average (in the sense of
median and mode) and that therefore that person does not deserve a raise. If the junior
draftsmen were to make the same request, the president could respond that they are
presently earning the ﬁrm’s average salary (in the sense of mode), and that for drafts-
men to be earning the average salary is excellent. Finally, if someone from outside the
ﬁrm were to make the allegation that the ﬁrm pays subsistence-level wages, the pres-
ident could respond that the average salary of the ﬁrm is a hefty $65,000. All of the
president’s responses would be true, but if the reader or listener is not sophisticated
enough to distinguish the various senses of ‘‘average,’’ he or she might be persuaded
by the arguments.
In some situations, the mode is the most useful average. Suppose, for example, that
you are in the market for a three-bedroom house. Suppose further that a real estate
agent assures you that the houses in a certain complex have an average of three

552
Chapter 9: Induction
bedrooms and that therefore you will certainly want to see them. If the salesman has
used ‘‘average’’ in the sense of mean, it is possible that half the houses in the complex
are four-bedroom, the other half are two-bedroom, and there are no three-bedroom
houses at all. A similar result is possible if the salesman has used average in the sense
of median. The only sense of average that would be useful for your purposes is mode:
If the modal average is three bedrooms, there are more three-bedroom houses than
any other kind.
On other occasions a mean average is the most useful. Suppose, for example, that
you have taken a job as a pilot on a plane that has nine passenger seats and a maxi-
mum carrying capacity of 1,350 pounds (in addition to yourself). Suppose further that
you have arranged to ﬂy a group of nine passengers over the Grand Canyon and that
you must determine whether their combined weight is within the required limit. If a
representative of the group tells you that the average weight of the passengers is 150
pounds, this by itself tells you nothing. If he means average in the sense of median, it
could be the case that the four heavier passengers weigh 200 pounds and the four
lighter ones weigh 145, for a combined weight of 1,530 pounds. Similarly, if the pas-
senger representative means average in the sense of mode, it could be that two pas-
sengers weigh 150 pounds and that the others have varying weights in excess of 200
pounds, for a combined weight of over 1,700 pounds. Only if the representativemeans
average in the sense of mean do you know that the combined weight of the passengers
is 9  150 or 1,350 pounds.
Finally, sometimes a median average is the most meaningful. Suppose, for ex-
ample, that you are a manufacturer of a product that appeals to an age group under
thirty-ﬁve. To increase sales you decide to run an ad in a national magazine, but
you want some assurance that the ad will be read by the right age group. If the
advertising director of a magazine tells you that the average age of the magazine’s
readers is 35, you know virtually nothing. If the director means average in the sense
of mean, it could be that 90 percent of the readership is over 35 and that the remain-
ing 10 percent bring the average down to 35. Similarly, if the director means average
in the sense of mode, it could be that 3 percent of the readership are exactly 35 and
that the remaining 97 percent have ages ranging from 35 to 85. Only if the director
means average in the sense of median do you know that half the readership is 35
or less.
Dispersion
Although averages often yield important information about a set of data, there are
many cases in which merely knowing the average, in any sense of the term, tells us
very little. The reason for this is that the average says nothing about how the data are
distributed. For this, we need to know something about dispersion, which refers to
how spread out the data are in regard to numerical value. Three important measures
of dispersion are range, variance, and standard deviation.

Statistical Reasoning
553
S
N
L
Let us ﬁrst consider the range of a set of data, which is the difference between the
largest and the smallest values. For an example of the importance of this parameter,
suppose that after living for many years in an intemperate climate, you decide to
relocate in an area that has a more ideal mean temperature. Upon discovering that the
annual mean temperature of Oklahoma City is 60F you decide to move there, only to
ﬁnd that you roast in the summer and freeze in the winter. Unfortunately, you had
ignored the fact that Oklahoma City has a temperature range of 130, extending from
a record low of 17 to a record high of 113. In contrast, San Nicholas Island, off the
coast of California, has a mean temperature of 61 but a range of only 40 degrees,
extending from 47 in the winter to 87 in the summer. The temperature ranges for
these two locations are approximated in Figure 1:
Temperature
100
60
20
–20
Oklahoma City
San Nicholas Island
J
D
F
S
M
A
J
Month
N
M
O
A
J
Figure 1*
Even granting the importance of the range of the data in this example, however,
range really tells us relatively little because it comprehends only two data points, the
maximum and minimum. It says nothing about how the other data points are distrib-
uted. For this we need to know the variance, or the standard deviation, which
measure how every data point varies or deviates from the mean.
For an example of the importance of these two parameters in describing a set of
data, suppose you have a four-year-old child and you are looking for a day-care center
that will provide plenty of possible playmates about the same age as your child. After
calling several centers on the phone, you narrow the search down to two: the Rumpus
Center and the Bumpus Center. Both report that they regularly care for nine children,
that the mean and median age of the children is four, and that the range in ages of the
children is six. Unable to decide between these two centers, you decide to pay them
a visit. Once having done so, it is obvious that the Rumpus Center will meet your
*This example is taken from Darrell Huff, How to Lie with Statistics (New York: W. W. Norton, 1954),
p. 52.

554
Chapter 9: Induction
needs better than the Bumpus Center. The reason is that the ages of the children in the
two centers are distributed differently.
The ages of the children in the two centers are as follows:
Rumpus Center:
1, 3, 3, 4, 4, 4, 5, 5, 7
Bumpus Center:
1, 1, 2, 2, 4, 6, 6, 7, 7
To illustrate the differences in distribution, these ages can be plotted on a certain kind
of bar graph, called a histogram, as shown in Figures 2a and 2b.
Frequency
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Age
5
6
7
Rumpus Center
mean
median
Frequency
4
3
2
1
1
2
3
4
Age
5
6
7
Bumpus Center
mean
median
Figure 2a
Figure 2b
Obviously the reason why the Rumpus Center comes closer to meeting your needs is
that it has seven children within one year of your own child, whereas the Bumpus
Center has only one such child. This difference in distribution is measured by the
variance and the standard deviation. Computing the value of these parameters for the
two centers is quite easy, but ﬁrst we must introduce some symbols. The standard
deviation is represented in statistics by the Greek letter  (sigma), and the variance,
which is the square of the standard deviation, is represented by 2. We compute the
variance ﬁrst, which is deﬁned as follows:
2  ∑(x  	)2
n
In this expression (which looks far more complicated than it is), ∑(upper case
sigma) means the sum of, x is a variable that ranges over the ages of the children, the
Greek letter 	 (mu) is the mean age, (4), and n is the number of children (9). Thus, to
compute the variance, we take each of the ages of the children, subtract the mean age
(4) from each, square the result of each, add up the squares, and then divide the sum
by the number of children (9). The ﬁrst three steps of this procedure for the Rumpus
Center are reported in Table 9.9:

Statistical Reasoning
555
S
N
L
Table 9.9
x
(x  	)
(x  	)2
1
3
9
3
1
1
3
1
1
4
0
0
4
0
0
4
0
0
5
1
1
5
1
1
7
3
9
Total  22
First, the column for x (the children’s ages) is entered, next the column for (x  	),
and last the column for (x  	)2. After adding up the ﬁgures in the ﬁnal column, we
obtain the variance by dividing the sum (22) by n (9):
Variance  2  22
9  2.44
Finally, to obtain the standard deviation, we take the square root of the variance:
Standard deviation    √2.44  1.56
Next, we can perform the same operation on the ages of the children in the Bumpus
Center. The ﬁgures are expressed in Table 9.10.
Table 9.10
x
(x  	)
(x  	)2
1
3
9
1
3
9
2
2
4
2
2
4
4
0
0
6
2
4
6
2
4
7
3
9
7
3
9
Total  52
Now, for the variance, we have
2  52
9  5.78
And for the standard deviation, we have
  √5.78  2.40

556
Chapter 9: Induction
These ﬁgures for the variance and standard deviation reﬂect the difference in dis-
tribution shown in the two histograms. In the histogram for the Rumpus Center, the
ages of most of the children are clumped around the mean age (4). In other words,
they vary or deviate relatively slightly from the mean, and this fact is reﬂected in
relatively small ﬁgures for the variance (2.44) and the standard deviation (1.56). On
the other hand, in the histogram for the Bumpus center, the ages of most of the
children vary or deviate relatively greatly from the mean, so the variance (5.78) and
the standard deviation (2.40) are larger.
One of the more important kinds of distribution used in statistics is called the
normal distribution, which expresses the distribution of random phenomena in a
population. Such phenomena include (approximately) the heights of adult men or
women in a city, the useful life of a certain kind of tire or light bulb, and the daily sales
ﬁgures of a certain grocery store. To illustrate this concept, suppose that a certain
college has 2000 female students. The heights of these students range from 57 inches
to 73 inches. If we divide these heights into one-inch intervals and express them in
terms of a histogram, the resulting graph would probably look like the one in Figure 3a.
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73
57 59 61 63 65 67 69 71 73
Figure 3a
Figure 3b
This histogram has the shape of a bell. When a continuous curve is superimposed on
top of this histogram, the result appears in Figure 3b. This curve is called a normal
curve, and it represents a normal distribution. The heights of all of the students ﬁt
under the curve, and each vertical slice under the curve represents a certain subset of
these heights. The number of heights trails off toward a zero at the extreme left and
right ends of the curve, and it reaches a maximum in the center. The peak of the curve
reﬂects the average height in the sense of mean, median, and mode.
The parameters of variance and standard deviation apply to normal distributions in
basically the same way as they do for the histograms relating to the day care centers.
Normal curves with a relatively small standard deviation tend to be relatively narrowand
pointy, with most of the population clustered close to the mean, while curves with a
relatively large standard deviation tend to be relatively ﬂattened and stretched out, with
most of the population distributed some distance from the mean. This idea is expressed
in Figure 4. As usual,  represents the standard deviation, and 	 represents the mean.

Statistical Reasoning
557
S
N
L
µ
σ = 1
2
µ
σ = 2
µ
σ = 1
Figure 4
For a ﬁnal example that illustrates the importance of dispersion, suppose that you
decide to put your life savings into a business that designs and manufactures women’s
dresses. As corporation president you decide to save money by restricting production
to dresses that ﬁt the average woman. Because the average size in the sense of mean,
median, and mode is 12, you decide to make only size 12 dresses. Unfortunately, you
later discover that while size 12 is indeed the average, 95 percent of women fall
outside this interval, as Figure 5 shows:
Number of women
4
8
12
16
Dress size
20
Women who can
wear size 12
Figure 5
The problem is that you failed to take into account the standard deviation. If the
standard deviation were relatively small, then most of the dress sizes would be clus-
tered about the mean (size 12). But in fact the standard deviation is relatively large, so
most of the dress sizes fall outside this interval.
Graphs and Pictograms
Graphs provide a highly convenient and informative way to represent statistical data,
but they are also susceptible to misuse and misinterpretation. Here we will conﬁne
our attention to some of the typical ways in which graphs are misused.

558
Chapter 9: Induction
First of all, if a graph is to represent an actual situation, it is essential that both the
vertical and horizontal axes be scaled. Suppose, for example, that the proﬁt level of a
corporation is represented by a graph such as Figure 6. Such a graph is practically
meaningless because it fails to show how much the proﬁts increased over what period
of time. If the curve represents a 10 percent increase over twenty years, then, of
course, the picture is not very bright. Although they convey practically no information,
graphs of this kind are used quite often in advertising. A manufacturer of vitamins, for
example, might print such a graph on the label of the bottle to suggest that a person’s
energy level is supposed to increase dramatically after taking the tablets. Such ads
frequently make an impression because they look scientiﬁc, and the viewer rarely
bothers to check whether the axes are scaled or precisely what the curve is supposed
to signify.
Profits
Time
Figure 6
A graph that more appropriately represents corporate proﬁts is given in Figure 7
(the corporation is ﬁctitious):
Profits (millions of dollars)
Quarter
Tangerine Computers, 1999
1
2
3
4
15
10
5
Figure 7

Statistical Reasoning
559
S
N
L
Inspection of the graph reveals that between January and December proﬁts rose from
$8 to $10 million, which represents a respectable 25 percent increase. This increase
can be made to appear even more impressive by chopping off the bottom of the graph
and altering the scale on the vertical axis while leaving the horizontal scale as is:
Profits (millions of dollars)
Quarter
Tangerine Computers, 1999
1
2
3
4
10
9
8
Figure 8
Again, strictly speaking, the graph accurately represents the facts, but if the viewer
fails to notice what has been done to the vertical scale, he or she is liable to derive the
impression that the proﬁts have increased by something like a hundred percent or
more.
The same strategy can be used with bar graphs. The graphs in Figure 9 compare
sales volume for two consecutive years, but the one on the right conveys the message
more dramatically:
Total sales (thousands of units)
Tangerine
Computers
1998
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1999
Total sales (thousands of units)
Tangerine
Computers
1998
8
7
6
1999
Figure 9
Of course, if the sales volume has decreased, the corporate directors would probably
want to minimize the difference, in which case the design on the left is preferable.

560
Chapter 9: Induction
An even greater illusion can be created with the use of pictograms. A pictogram is
a diagram that compares two situations through drawings that differ either in size or
in the number of entities depicted. Consider Figure 10, which illustrates the increase
in production of an oil company between 1990 and 1999.
1990
1 million
barrels
1999
2 million
barrels
Figure 10
This pictogram accurately represents the increase because it unequivocally shows that
the amount doubled between the years represented. But the effect is not especially
dramatic. The increase in production can be exaggerated by representing the 1999
level with an oil barrel twice as tall:
1990
1 million
barrels
1999
2 million
barrels
Figure 11
Even though the actual production is stated adjacent to each drawing, this pictogram
creates the illusion that production has much more than doubled. While the drawing
on the right is exactly twice as high as the one on the left, it is also twice as wide. Thus,

Statistical Reasoning
561
S
N
L
it occupies four times as much room on the page. Furthermore, when the viewer’s
three-dimensional judgment is called into play, the barrel on the right is perceived as
having eight times the volume of the one on the left. Thus, when the third dimension
is taken into account, the increase in consumption is exaggerated by 600 percent.
Percentages
The use of percentages to compare two or more situations or quantities is another
source of illusion in statistics. A favorite of advertisers is to make claims such as ‘‘Zesty
Cola has 20 percent fewer calories’’ or ‘‘The price of the new Computrick computer
has been reduced by 15 percent.’’ These claims are virtually meaningless. The ques-
tion is, 20 percent less than what, and 15 percent reduced from what? If the basis of
the comparison or reduction is not mentioned, the claim tells us nothing. Yet such
claims are often effective because they leave us with the impression that the product
is in some way superior or less expensive.
Another strategy sometimes used by governments and businesses involves playing
sleight-of-hand tricks with the base of the percentages. Suppose, for example, that
you are a university president involved with a funding drive to increase the university’s
endowment. Suppose further that the endowment currently stands at $15 million and
that the objective is to increase it to $20 million. To guarantee the success of the drive,
you engage the services of a professional fund-raising organization. At the end of the
allotted time the organization has increased the endowment to $16 million. They
justify their effort by stating that, since $16 million of the $20 million has been raised,
the drive was 80 percent successful (16/20  100%).
In fact, of course, the drive was nowhere near that successful. The objective was
not to raise $20 million but only $5 million, and of that amount only $1 million has
actually been raised. Thus, at best the drive was only 20 percent successful. Even this
ﬁgure is probably exaggerated, though, because $1 million might have been raised
without any special drive. The trick played by the fund-raising organization consisted
in switching the numbers by which the percentage was to be computed.
This same trick, incidentally, was allegedly used by Joseph Stalin to justify the
success of his ﬁrst ﬁve-year plan.* Among other things, the original plan called for an
increase in steel output from 4.2 million tons to 10.3 million. After ﬁve years the actual
output rose to 5.9 million, whereupon Stalin announced that the plan was 57 percent
successful (5.9/10.3  100%). The correct percentage, of course, is much less. The
plan called for an increase of 6.1 million tons and the actual increase was only 1.7
million. Thus, at best, the plan was only 28 percent successful.
Similar devices have been used by employers on their unsuspecting employees.
When business is bad, an employer may argue that salaries must be reduced by 20
*Stephen K. Campbell, Flaws and Fallacies in Statistical Thinking (Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-
Hall, 1974) p. 8. The original reference is to Eugene Lyons’s Workers’ Paradise Lost.

562
Chapter 9: Induction
percent. Later, when business improves, salaries will be raised by 20 percent, thus
restoring them to their original level. Such an argument, of course, is fallacious. If a
person earns $10 per hour and that person’s salary is reduced by 20 percent, the
adjusted salary is $8. If that ﬁgure is later increased by 20 percent, the ﬁnal salary is
$9.60. The problem, of course, stems from the fact that a different base is used for the
two percentages. The fallacy committed by such arguments is a variety of equivoca-
tion. Percentages are relative terms, and they mean different things in different
contexts.
A different kind of fallacy occurs when a person attempts to add percentages as if
they were cardinal numbers. Suppose, for example, that a baker increases the price of
a loaf of bread by 50 percent. To justify the increase the baker argues that it was
necessitated by rising costs: the price of ﬂour increased by 10 percent, the cost of labor
by 20 percent, utility rates went up 10 percent, and the cost of the lease on the building
increased 10 percent. This adds up to a 50 percent increase. Again, the argument is
fallacious. If everything had increased by 20 percent, this would justify only a 20
percent increase in the price of bread. As it is, the justiﬁed increase is less than that.
The fallacy committed by such arguments would probably be best classiﬁed as a case
of missing the point (ignoratio elenchi). The arguer has failed to grasp the signiﬁcance
of his own premises.
Statistical variations of the suppressed evidence fallacy are also quite common. One
variety consists in drawing a conclusion from a comparison of two different things or
situations. For example, persons running for political ofﬁce sometimes cite ﬁgures
indicating that crime in the community has increased by, let us say, 20 percent during
the past three or four years. What is needed, they conclude, is an all-out war on crime.
But they fail to mention the fact that the population in the community has also in-
creased by 20 percent during the same period. The number of crimes per capita,
therefore, has not changed. Another example of the same fallacy is provided by the
ridiculous argument that 90 percent more trafﬁc accidents occur in clear weather than
in foggy weather and that therefore it is 90 percent more dangerous to drive in clear
than in foggy weather. The arguer ignores the fact that the vast percentage of vehicle
miles are driven in clear weather, which accounts for the greater number of accidents.
A similar misuse of percentages is committed by businesses and corporations that,
for whatever reason, want to make it appear that they have earned less proﬁt than
they actually have. The technique consists of expressing proﬁt as a percentage of sales
volume instead of as a percentage of investment. For example, during a certain year a
corporation might have a total sales volume of $100 million, a total investment of $10
million, and a proﬁt of $5 million. If proﬁts are expressed as a percentage of invest-
ment, they amount to a hefty 50 percent; but as a percentage of sales they are only 5
percent. To appreciate the fallacy in this procedure, consider the case of the jewelry
merchant who buys one piece of jewelry each morning for $9 and sells it in the
evening for $10. At the end of the year the total sales volume is $3650, the total
investment $9, and the total proﬁt $365. Proﬁts as a percentage of sales amount to only
10 percent, but as a percentage of investment they exceed 4000 percent.

Statistical Reasoning
563
S
N
L
EXERCISE 9.4
I. Criticize the following arguments in light of the material presented in this section:
1.
#
To test the algae content in a lake, a biologist took a sample of the water at
one end. The algae in the sample registered 5 micrograms per liter. Therefore,
the algae in the lake at that time registered 5 micrograms per liter.
2. To estimate public support for a new municipality-funded convention center,
researchers surveyed 100 homeowners in one of the city’s fashionable neigh-
borhoods. They found that 89 percent of those sampled were enthusiastic
about the project. Therefore, we may conclude that 89 percent of the city’s
residents favor the convention center.
3. A quality-control inspector for a food-processing ﬁrm needed assurance that
the cans of fruit in a production run were ﬁlled to capacity. He opened every
tenth box in the warehouse and removed the can in the left front corner of
each box. He found that all of these cans were ﬁlled to capacity. Therefore, it
is probable that all of the cans in the production run were ﬁlled to capacity.
4.
#
When a random sample of 600 voters was taken on the eve of the presidential
election, it was found that 51 percent of those sampled intended to vote for
the Democrat and 49 percent for the Republican. Therefore, the Democrat
will probably win.
5. To determine the public’s attitude toward TV soap operas, 1,000 people were
contacted by telephone between 8 A.M. and 5 P.M. on week days. The num-
bers were selected randomly from the phone directories of cities across the
nation. The researchers reported that 43 percent of the respondents said that
they were avid viewers. From this we may conclude that 43 percent of the
public watches TV soap operas.
6. To predict the results of a U.S. Senate race in New York State, two polls were
taken. One was based on a random sample of 750 voters, the other on a
random sample of 1,500 voters. Since the second sample was twice as large
as the ﬁrst, the results of the second poll were twice as accurate as the ﬁrst.
7.
#
In a survey conducted by the manufacturers of Ultrasheen toothpaste, 65 per-
cent of the dentists randomly sampled preferred that brand over all others.
Clearly Ultrasheen is the brand preferred by most dentists.
8. To determine the percentage of adult Americans who have never read the
U.S. Constitution, surveyors put this question to a random sample of 1,500
adults. Only 13 percent gave negative answers. Therefore, since the sampling
error for such a sample is 3 percent, we may conclude that no more than 16
percent of American adults have not read the Constitution.
9. To determine the percentage of patients who follow the advice of their per-
sonal physician, researchers asked 200 randomly chosen physicians to put
the question to their patients. Of the 4,000 patients surveyed, 98 percent

564
Chapter 9: Induction
replied that they did indeed follow their doctor’s advice. We may therefore
conclude that at least 95 percent of the patients across the nation follow the
advice of their personal physician.
10.
#
Janet Ryan can afford to pay no more than $15 for a birthday gift for her eight-
year-old daughter. Since the average price of a toy at General Toy Company
is $15, Janet can expect to ﬁnd an excellent selection of toys
within her price range at that store.
11. Anthony Valardi, who owns a ﬁsh market, pays $2 per pound to ﬁshermen
for silver salmon. A certain ﬁsherman certiﬁes that the average size of the
salmon in his catch of the day is 10 pounds, and that the catch numbers 100
salmon. Mr. Valardi is therefore justiﬁed in paying the ﬁsherman $2,000 for
the whole catch.
12. Pamela intends to go shopping for a new pair of shoes. She wears size 8.
Since the average size of the shoes carried by the Bon Marche is size 8, Pamela
can expect to ﬁnd an excellent selection of shoes in her size at that store.
13.
#
Tim Cassidy, who works for a construction company, is told to load a pile of
rocks onto a truck. The rocks are randomly sized, and the average piece
weighs 50 pounds. Thus, Tim should have no trouble loading the rocks by
hand.
14. The average IQ (in the sense of mean, median, and mode) of the students in
Dr. Jacob’s symbolic logic class is 120. Thus, none of the students should have
any trouble mastering the subject matter.
15. An insecticide manufacturer prints the following graph on the side of its spray
cans:
Number of bugs killed
Time
After one application
Obviously, the insecticide is highly effective at killing bugs, and it keeps
working for a long time.
16.
#
A corporation’s sales for two consecutive years are represented in a bar graph.
Since the bar for the later year is twice as high as the one for the previous
year, it follows that sales for the later year were double those for the pre-
vious year.

Statistical Reasoning
565
S
N
L
17. Forced to make cutbacks, the president of a manufacturing ﬁrm reduced
certain costs as follows: advertising by 4 percent, transportation by 5 percent,
materials by 2 percent, and employee beneﬁts by 3 percent. The president
thus succeeded in reducing total costs by 14 percent.
18. During a certain year, a grocery store chain had total sales of $100 million and
proﬁts of $10 million. The proﬁts thus amounted to a modest 10 percent for
that year.
19.
#
There were 40 percent more trafﬁc accidents in 1990 than there were in 1960.
Therefore, it was 40 percent more dangerous to drive a car in 1990 than it was
in 1960.
20. An efﬁciency expert was hired to increase the productivity of a manufacturing
ﬁrm and was given three months to accomplish the task. At the end of the
period the productivity had increased from 1,500 units per week to 1,700.
Since the goal was 2,000 units per week, the effort of the efﬁciency expert
was 85 percent successful (1,700/2,000).
II. Compute the answers to the following questions.
1.
#
Given the following group of people together with their weights, what is the
average weight in the sense of mean, median, and mode?
Number of People
Weight
2
4
3
1
1
1
1
2
150
160
170
180
190
200
220
230
2. Given the following group of people together with their salaries, what is the
average salary in the sense of mean, median, and mode?
Number of People
Salary
1
2
1
3
1
2
5
$95,000
85,000
70,000
40,000
30,000
20,000
15,000
3. A small company has ﬁve employees who missed work during a certain
month. The number of days missed were: 1, 1, 2, 4, 7. What is the mean

566
Chapter 9: Induction
number of days missed? What is the variance and standard deviation of this
set of data?
4.
#
A day-care center cares for 10 children. Their ages are 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 4, 6,
6. Construct a histogram that represents the distribution of ages. What is the
mean age? What is the variance and standard deviation of these ages?
5. An instructor gave a ten-question multiple choice quiz to twelve students.
The scores were 10, 10, 9, 9, 8, 8, 8, 7, 7, 7, 7, 6. What is the mean score? What
is the variance and standard deviation of these scores?
III. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1.
#
If a sample is very large, it need not be randomly selected.
2. If a population is randomly arranged, a sample obtained by selecting every
tenth member would be a random sample.
3. If a sample is randomly selected, the larger the sample is, the more closely it
replicates the population.
4.
#
To ensure the same precision, a population of 1 million would require a much
larger random sample than would a population of 100,000.
5. In general, if sample A is twice as large as sample B, then the sampling error
for A is one-half that for B.
6. When a sample consists of human beings, the purpose for which the sample
is taken can affect the outcome.
7.
#
The personal interaction between a surveyor and a respondent can affect the
outcome of a survey.
8. The mean value of a set of data is the value that occurs with the greatest
frequency.
9. The median value of a set of data is the middle point when the data are
arranged in ascending order.
10.
#
The modal value of a set of data is the arithmetical average.
11. If one needed to know whether a sizable portion of a group were above or
below a certain level, the most useful sense of average would be mode.
12. Data reﬂecting the results of a random sample conform fairly closely to the
normal probability distribution.
13.
#
If a set of data conform to the normal probability distribution, then the mean,
median, and mode have the same value.
14. The range, variance, and standard deviation are measurements of dispersion.
15. Statements about averages often present an incomplete picture without infor-
mation about the dispersion.
16.
#
Data reﬂecting the size of full-grown horses would exhibit greater dispersion
than data reﬂecting the size of full-grown dogs.

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
567
S
N
L
17. The visual impression made by graphs can be exaggerated by changing one
of the scales while leaving the other unchanged.
18. Data reﬂecting a 100 percent increase in housing construction could be ac-
curately represented by a pictogram of two houses, one twice as high as the
other.
19.
#
If a certain quantity is increased by 10 percent and later decreased by 10
percent, the quantity is restored to what it was originally.
20. Expressing proﬁts as a percentage of sales volume presents an honest picture
of the earnings of a corporation.
9.5
Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
Hypothetical reasoning is most immediately applied to the production of explana-
tions. You will recall from Chapter 1 of this book that an explanation is a kind of
expression that purports to shed light on some event. Many explanations are grounded
in direct observation and memory. For example, suppose that you happen to be
wearing a cast on your arm. You know from direct observation that you broke your
arm while playing football a week earlier. Suppose somebody asks you about the cast,
and you reply, ‘‘I am wearing the cast because I broke my arm playing football.’’ This
is an explanation. Or suppose that your mathematics instructor asks you why you
failed the calculus test. You reply, ‘‘I failed the test because I didn’t study the night
before.’’ No hypothetical reasoning is used to produce explanations of this sort.
However, it often happens that the needed explanation cannot be produced from
direct observation. Suppose that you get into your car one morning, turn the key in
the ignition, and the engine cranks but fails to start. Why it fails to start is a complete
mystery. After all, it started perfectly well the day before. Because it is impossible for
you to peer into the inner workings of the engine to furnish the needed explanation,
you begin by producing conjectures about why the car will not start. Perhaps the spark
plugs are dirty, or the ignition coil is shorted, or the fuel pump is broken. Or perhaps
someone sabotaged the car overnight. These conjectures are hypotheses, and the
reasoning used to produce them is hypothetical reasoning. The hypotheses make
up for the lack of direct observation in producing the needed explanation.
As a follow-up, you decide to remove one of the spark plugs and inspect its condi-
tion. You do so and ﬁnd it covered with carbon deposits. Now you think you have the
answer: The car fails to start because the spark plugs are dirty. But of course this
explanation could be wrong. The correct explanation could be something else, but
this is the nature of all inductive reasoning. The outcome is only probable. However,
having produced this explanation, you can now convert it into an inductive argument.

568
Chapter 9: Induction
Suppose a friend comes up and says, ‘‘I see you ran out of gas.’’ You reply, ‘‘No, the
spark plugs are dirty, so if I replace them, the car should start.’’ Now you are trying to
prove something to your friend, and the kind of argument used is a causal inference.
Hypothetical reasoning is used by nearly all of us in our day-to-day experience.
The television repairman constructs hypotheses to determine why the picture appears
unclear after all the ordinary solutions have been tried without success, the motorist
on the freeway or turnpike reasons hypothetically to determine why the trafﬁc is
backed up bumper-to-bumper even though it is not yet rush hour, the physician
hypothesizes about the cause of a disease prior to prescribing medicine, the teacher
hypothesizes about the best way to present a complicated subject in the classroom,
and the prosecuting attorney suggests hypotheses to the jury in arguing about the
motive for a crime. In all of these cases the evidence is not sufﬁcient to indicate exactly
what is going on, what lies behind the scene, or what approach to take, so hypotheses
are constructed to make sense of the situation and to direct future action.
Hypothetical reasoning is used most explicitly in philosophical and scientiﬁc in-
quiry. Every scientiﬁc theory can be viewed as a hypothesis for unifying and rational-
izing events in nature. The Ptolemaic and Copernican theories about the sun and
planets, Dalton’s atomic theory, Darwin’s theory of evolution, and Einstein’s theory of
relativity are all hypotheses for making sense of the data of observation. The problem
for the scientist is that the underlying structure of nature is hidden from view, and the
data of observation by themselves are not sufﬁcient to reveal this structure. In re-
sponse, the scientist constructs hypotheses that provide ways of conceptualizing the
data and that suggest speciﬁc questions to be answered through the design of con-
trolled experiments.
Analogously, every philosophical system can be viewed as a grand hypothesis for
interpreting the content of experience. Plato’s theory of forms, Aristotle’s theory of
substance, Leibniz’s monads, and Kant’s theory about the mind are all hypotheses
aimed at illuminating various aspects of experience. Just as the structure of nature is
hidden from the scientist, the meaning of experience is hidden from the philosopher,
and ordinary common sense will not provide the answer. In response, the philosopher
constructs hypotheses that can be used to shed light on the content of experience and
to provide suggestions for further analysis.
Whether it is applied in philosophy, science, or ordinary life, the hypothetical
method involves four basic stages:
1. Occurrence of a problem
2. Formulating a hypothesis
3. Drawing implications from the hypothesis
4. Testing the implications
These four stages may be illustrated through the procedure used by a detective in
solving a crime. Suppose that a woman has been murdered in her apartment. Initially,

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
569
S
N
L
everything in the apartment is a potential clue: the empty wine glasses in the sink, the
small container of cocaine on the coffee table, the automobile key found on the carpet,
the strand of blonde hair removed from the couch, and so on. To introduce an element
of rationality into the situation, the detective formulates a hypothesis—let us say the
hypothesis that the key found on the carpet ﬁts the murderer’s car.
From this hypothesis a number of implications can be drawn. Suppose that the key
is the kind that ﬁts only late-model Cadillacs. It follows that the murderer drives a late-
model Cadillac. Furthermore, if the key is the only one the murderer owns, it follows
that the car may be parked nearby. A third implication is that the murderer’s name
may be on record at the local Cadillac dealership. To test these implications, the
detective conducts a search of the streets in the vicinity and contacts the local Cadillac
dealer for the names of recent buyers.
This example illustrates three additional points about hypotheses. The ﬁrst is that a
hypothesis is not derived from the evidence to which it pertains but rather is added to
the evidence by the investigator. A hypothesis is a free creation of the mind used to
structure the evidence and unveil the pattern that lies beneath the surface. It may be
that the detective’s hypothesis is completely false. Perhaps the key ﬁts a car that was
lent to the victim for the weekend. Any number of other possibilities are conceivable.
The second point is that a hypothesis directs the search for evidence. Without a
hypothesis for guidance, all facts are equally relevant. The mineral content of moon
rocks and the temperature in the Sahara would be as relevant as the cars parked on
the street outside the apartment. The hypothesis tells the investigator what to look for
and what to ignore.
The third point concerns the proof of hypotheses. Let us suppose that the detective
ﬁnds a late-model Cadillac parked outside the apartment building and that the key ﬁts
the ignition. Such a discovery might lend credibility to the hypothesis, but it would not
in any sense prove it. Concluding that a hypothesis is proven true by the discovery
that one of its implications is true amounts to committing the fallacy of afﬁrming the
consequent (see Section 6.6). Where H stands for a hypothesis and I for an implication,
such an argument has the invalid form
If H, then I
I
H
Let us suppose, on the other hand, that the murderer turns himself or herself in to the
police and that the only car the murderer owns or drives is a Ford. Such a fact would
prove the hypothesis false because it would falsify the implication that the murderer
drives a Cadillac. The argument form involved in such an inference is modus tollens:
If H, then I
not I
not H

570
Chapter 9: Induction
For the hypothesis to be proved true, the car that the key ﬁts would have to be found
and the owner would have to confess to the crime.
Some of the clearest illustrations of the hypothetical method of reasoning can be
found in scientiﬁc discoveries. Four examples are the discovery of radium by Pierre
and Marie Curie; the discovery of the planet Neptune by Adams, Leverrier, and Galle;
the discovery of atmospheric pressure by Torricelli; and Pasteur’s research concerning
the spontaneous generation of life. Following is a consideration of each of these
examples with special attention to the four stages of hypothetical inquiry.
Radium
In 1896 the French physicist Henri Becquerel discovered that crystals containing ura-
nium had the power to expose photographic plates. He found that when these crystals
were placed on top of an unexposed plate and left for a certain time, dark blotches
appeared in their place when the plate was developed. Becquerel concluded that the
crystals emitted certain rays that penetrated the opaque covering of the plates and
reacted with the photosensitive material underneath. Further investigation showed
that these rays were not as strong as x-rays, which could be used to photograph bone
structure, and so Becquerel’s interest in them lapsed.
A year later Marie Curie revived the question when she adopted it as the topic of
her doctoral research at the University of Paris. In place of Becquerel’s photographic
plates she substituted an electrometer, which was better suited to measuring the inten-
sity of the rays, and she proceeded to conduct various experiments with pure uranium
to determine the source of the rays that the metal emitted. When none of these exper-
iments proved fruitful, she shifted her attention to the question of whether othermetals
or minerals emitted the same kind of rays as uranium. She tested hundreds of metals,
compounds, and ores, but the only one that proved interesting was pitchblende, a
certain ore of uranium. Because pitchblende contained uranium, she anticipated that
it would emit rays; but because it also contained a number of impurities, she expected
the rays to be weaker than they were for pure uranium. Instead, they turned out to be
stronger. This problem caught Madame Curie’s attention and provided the focus for
her research in the months ahead.
In response to the problem, Madame Curie formulated the hypothesis that the
impurities in the pitchblende somehow triggered the uranium to increase the emission
of rays. One implication of this hypothesis was that mixing pure uranium with the
kinds of impurities found in pitchblende would cause an increase in the emission of
rays. To test this implication, Curie diluted pure uranium with various elements and
measured the strength of the rays. The results were always the same: the emissions
were always less than they were for pure uranium. Because of these results, she
abandoned the hypothesis.
Madame Curie then formulated a second hypothesis: The intensiﬁed emissions
were caused directly by some impurity in the pitchblende. The only other element

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
571
S
N
L
besides uranium that was known to emit rays, however, was thorium, and the pitch-
blende that had been tested contained no thorium. Thus, an immediate implication of
the hypothesis was that the increased rays were caused by an unknown element. A
second implication was that this element could be separated from the pitchblende
through a process of reﬁnement. At this point Marie Curie was joined by her husband,
Pierre, and they began a combined effort to isolate the unknown element.
Because the element was present in only the most minute quantities, separating a
measurable amount from the other impurities required a great deal of effort. The
Curies began by grinding up some pitchblende and dissolving it in acid. Finally, after
numerous stages of ﬁltration and the addition of other chemicals, they obtained a
pinch of white powder. By weight, this material was found to be 900 times more
radioactive than pure uranium, but since the primary component in the powder was
barium, the unknown element still had not been isolated.
Rather than continue with additional stages of reﬁnement, the Curies decided to
attempt a spectrographic analysis of the powder. Such analysis, they hoped, would
reveal the characteristic spectrum line of the unknown element. This proposal, which
amounted to a third implication of the hypothesis, was put to the test. When the
powder was burned in a spectrometer, a line appeared in the ultraviolet range that
was different from that for any other element. From the combined evidence of the
spectrum line and the intense radiation the Curies announced in 1898 the discovery of
a new element, which they called radium. After more processing and reﬁnement,
enough of the material was ﬁnally obtained to determine the atomic weight.
Neptune
In 1781 the planet Uranus was discovered by William Herschel, but the production
of a table giving the motion of the new planet had to wait until the gravitational
interaction between Uranus, Jupiter, and Saturn had been worked out mathemati-
cally. The latter task was accomplished by Pierre Laplace in his Mechanique Celeste,
and in 1820 Alexis Bouvard used this work to construct tables for all three planets.
These tables predicted the orbital motions of Jupiter and Saturn very accurately,
but within a few years Uranus was found to have deviated from its predicted path.
A problem thus emerged: Why did the tables work for Jupiter and Saturn but not
for Uranus?
In response to this problem a number of astronomers entertained the hypothesis
that an eighth planet existed beyond the orbit of Uranus and that the gravitational
interaction between these two planets caused Uranus to deviate from its predicted
position. It was not until 1843, however, that John Couch Adams, a recent graduate of
Cambridge, undertook the task of working out the mathematical implications of this
hypothesis. After two years’ work Adams produced a table of motions and orbital
elements that predicted the location of the hypothetical planet, and his computations
were so accurate that if anyone with a telescope had bothered to look, they would

572
Chapter 9: Induction
have found the new planet within two degrees of its predicted position. Unfortunately,
no one looked for it.
At about the same time that Adams completed his work on the problem, the French
astronomer U. J. J. Leverrier, working independently of Adams, reported a similar set
of motions and orbital elements to the French Academy of Science. The close agree-
ment between Adams’s and Leverrier’s predictions prompted a search for the planet;
but because a rather broad section of sky was swept, the planet was missed.
Finally, Leverrier sent a copy of his ﬁgures to Johann Galle at the Berlin Observa-
tory, where a set of star charts was being prepared. It was suggested that the region
corresponding to Leverrier’s computations be observed and the results matched
against the charts. This was done, and a small starlike object was found that was not
on the charts. The next night the same object was sighted, and it was found to have
moved. The new planet was thus identiﬁed. It was named Neptune after most astron-
omers outside France objected to the original suggestion that it be called Leverrier.
Atmospheric Pressure
The principle that nature abhors a vacuum, originated by Aristotle, was used for cen-
turies to explain the fact that in emptying a keg of wine an opening had to be made at
the top as well as at the bottom. Because nature would not allow a vacuum to be
created inside the keg, the wine would not drain from the bottom until air was let in
at the top. It was thought that this principle held universally for all applications involv-
ing a vacuum, but in the sixteenth century it was found that suction pumps used to
drain water from mine shafts would not work if the pump was situated over 30 feet
above the water level. This caused people to wonder whether nature’s abhorrence of
a vacuum, while holding true for kegs of wine, had certain limits for pumps.
In 1630 Giovanni Baliani of Genoa discovered a similar limitation in regard to
siphons. When he attempted to siphon water from a reservoir over a 60-foot hill, he
found that the siphon would not work. When the siphon was completely ﬁlled with
water and the stoppers were removed from both ends, a vacuum seemed to be created
in the uppermost parts of the pipe.
These ﬁndings were communicated to Gasparo Berti in Rome, who, around 1641,
attempted to determine more scientiﬁcally whether a vacuum could actually be cre-
ated. Berti designed an apparatus consisting of a spherical glass vessel attached to a
pipe about 40 feet long. The apparatus was afﬁxed upright to the side of a tower, and
after the valve at the lower end of the pipe was closed, water was poured through the
upper opening in the glass vessel. When both the pipe and the glass vessel were
completely ﬁlled, the opening in the vessel was sealed and the valve at the lower end
of the pipe was opened. Immediately water rushed from the bottom of the pipe,
creating a vacuum in the glass vessel. This experiment crystalized a problem that had
been developing for a number of years: If nature abhorred a vacuum, how did it
happen that it tolerated the creation of one in the glass vessel? Furthermore, why did

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
573
S
N
L
it happen, when the experiment was repeated, that the water always descended to the
same level in the pipe?
The results of Berti’s experiment were communicated to Evangelista Torricelli in
Florence, who was at that time Galileo’s assistant. Galileo himself thought that the
water was supported in the pipe by the power of the vacuum, but after Galileo’s death
in 1642, Torricelli formulated his own hypothesis: The water was supported in the
pipe by the pressure of the atmosphere. Torricelli reasoned that we live ‘‘at the bottom
of an ocean of air’’ and that the pressure of the air pushing against the bottom of the
pipe supported the water at a certain height in the pipe. A point of equilibrium was
reached, he thought, when the weight of the water remaining in the pipe equalled the
weight of the air pushing down from above.
From this hypothesis Torricelli derived several implications. One was that the pres-
sure of the atmosphere would support a column of mercury about 29 inches high in a
tube sealed at the top. This followed from the fact that the atmosphere supports a
column of water 33 feet high, that mercury is 13.6 times as dense as water, and that
33/13.6  12 inches  29 inches. A second implication was that such a tube ﬁlled with
mercury could be used to measure ﬂuctuations in atmospheric pressure. This second
implication won Torricelli the credit for formulating the theory of the barometer. Fi-
nally, Torricelli reasoned that if such a device were conveyed to a place where the air
was more rareﬁed, such as on a mountaintop, the column of mercury would descend.
The ﬁrst of these implications was tested by Torricelli’s associate, Vincenzo Viviani.
Viviani obtained a 4-foot section of glass tube sealed at one end, enough mercury to
completely ﬁll it, and a dish to hold more mercury. After pouring the mercury into the
tube Viviani placed his thumb over the open end, inverted the tube, and placed the
open end in the dish of mercury. After he released his thumb he watched the column
of mercury descend to about 29 inches above the level of mercury in the dish. Thus
was created the ﬁrst barometer. Its successful use in measuring atmospheric pressure
came later.
The test of Torricelli’s third implication was taken up in 1647 by the French philos-
opher Blaise Pascal. Having received word of Torricelli’s experiments with the barom-
eter, Pascal constructed one for himself. He readily became convinced of the
correctness of Torricelli’s hypothesis, and to demonstrate its correctness in opposition
to the vacuum principle, he requested that his brother-in-law, F. Perier, convey a
barometer to the top of the Puy de Doˆme, one of the highest mountains in Auvergne.
A year later Perier was able to fulﬁll this request. He began the experiment by setting
up two barometers in the monastery at the foot of the mountain. After noting that both
columns of mercury rose to an identical height, he disassembled one of the barometers
and instructed one of the friars to check the mercury level in the other throughout the
day. Then Perier, accompanied by a group of witnesses, set off up the mountain with
the other barometer. Upon reaching the summit, he assembled the second barometer
and discovered to the amazement of all that the mercury level was more than 3 inches
lower than it had been at the foot of the mountain. As a double check the barometer

574
Chapter 9: Induction
was taken apart and reassembled at ﬁve different spots on the summit. Each time the
results were the same.
At the midpoint of his descent Perier reassembled the barometer once again. He
found that the mercury level was about midway between where it was at the bottom
and at the top of the mountain. Finally, upon returning to the monastery, the friar who
had been watching the barometer there was questioned about what he had observed.
He reported that the mercury level had not changed since early that morning when
the group had departed. Pascal announced the results of this experiment to the edu-
cated world, and the announcement succeeded in abolishing the principle that nature
abhors a vacuum.
Spontaneous Generation
The theory of spontaneous generation holds that living beings arise spontaneously
from lifeless matter. The roots of the theory extend into ancient times. Aristotle held
that worms, the larvae of bees and wasps, ticks, ﬁreﬂies, and other insects developed
continually from the morning dew and from dry wood and hair. He also held that
crabs and various molluscs developed from moist soil and decaying slime. Extensions
of this theory prevailed throughout the Middle Ages and well into modern times. In
the seventeenth century it was widely held that frogs were produced from the slime
of marshes and eels from river water, and the physician Van Helmont thought that
mice were produced from the action of human sweat on kernels of wheat. All one
needed to do, according to Van Helmont, was toss a dirty shirt into a container of
wheat, and in 21 days the container would be teeming with mice. Even Descartes and
Newton accepted the theory of spontaneous generation. Descartes held that various
plants and insects originated in moist earth exposed to sunlight, and Newton thought
that plants were produced from emanations from the tails of comets.
The ﬁrst systematic effort to abolish the belief in spontaneous generation was made
by the Italian physician Francesco Redi. In response to the commonly held idea that
worms were spontaneously generated in rotting meat, Redi hypothesized that the
worms were caused by ﬂies. An immediate implication was that if ﬂies were kept
away from the meat, the worms would not develop. To test this hypothesis Redi cut
up a piece of meat and put part of it in sealed glass ﬂasks and the other part in ﬂasks
open to the air. Flies were attracted to the open ﬂasks, and in a short time worms
appeared; but no worms developed in the ﬂasks that were sealed.
When Redi published his ﬁndings in 1668, they had an immediate impact on the
theory of spontaneous generation. Within a few years, though, the microscope came
into common use, and it was discovered that even though meat sealed in glass con-
tainers produced no worms, it did produce countless microorganisms. The theory of
spontaneous generation was thus reawakened on the microbial level.
By the middle of the nineteenth century the theory had received considerable
reﬁnement. It was thought that spontaneous generation resulted from the direct action

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
575
S
N
L
of oxygen on lifeless organic nutrients. Oxygen was thought to be essential to the
process because the technique of canning fruits and vegetables had come into prac-
tice, and it was known that boiling fruits and vegetables and sealing them in the
absence of oxygen would cause them to be preserved. If they were left exposed to
the air, however, microbes would develop in a short time.
One of the defenders of spontaneous generation at that time was the Englishman
John Needham, an amateur biologist. Needham conducted an experiment in which
ﬂagons containing oxygen and a vegetable solution were buried in hot coals. The
coals would have been expected to kill any life in the solution, but several days later
the ﬂagons were opened and the contents were found to be alive with microbes.
Needham concluded that the oxygen acting alone on the nutrient solution caused the
generation of the microbes. In response to this experiment, Lazzaro Spallanzani, an
Italian physiologist, conducted a similar experiment. To ensure that the nutrient solu-
tion was lifeless he boiled it for an hour. Later no microbes could be found. To this
Needham objected that in boiling the solution for a full hour Spallanzani haddestroyed
its ‘‘vegetative force.’’ In addition, Needham argued, he had polluted the small amount
of oxygen in the containers by the fumes and heat. Thus, it was no wonder that
microbes were not spontaneously generated.
To settle the issue once and for all, the French Academy of Science offered a prize
for an experimental endeavor that would shed light on the question of spontaneous
generation. This challenge succeeded in drawing Louis Pasteur into the controversy.
Spontaneous generation presented a special problem for Pasteur because of his pre-
vious work with fermentation. He had discovered that fermentations, such as those
involved in the production of wine and beer, required yeast; and yeast, as he also
discovered, was a living organism. In view of these ﬁndings Pasteur adopted the
hypothesis that life comes only from life. An immediate implication was that for life
forms to develop in a sterile nutrient solution, they must ﬁrst be introduced into the
solution from the outside.
It was well known that life forms did indeed develop in sterile nutrient solutions
exposed to the air. To account for this Pasteur adopted the second hypothesis that life
forms are carried by dust particles in the air. To test this second hypothesis Pasteur
took a wad of cotton and drew air through it, trapping dust particles in the ﬁbers. Then
he washed the cotton in a mixture of alcohol and examined drops of the ﬂuid under a
microscope. He discovered microbes in the ﬂuid.
Returning to his ﬁrst hypothesis, Pasteur prepared a nutrient solution and boiled it
in a narrow-necked ﬂask. As the solution boiled, the air in the neck of the ﬂask was
forced out by water vapor, and as it cooled the water vapor was slowly replaced by
sterilized air drawn through a heated platinum tube. The neck of the ﬂask was then
closed off with a ﬂame and blowpipe. The contents of the ﬂask thus consisted of a ster-
ilized nutrient solution and unpolluted sterilized air—all that was supposedly needed
for the production of life. With the passage of time, however, no life developed in the
ﬂask. This experiment posed a serious threat to the theory of spontaneous generation.

576
Chapter 9: Induction
Pasteur now posed the hypothesis that sterile nutrient solutions exposed to the air
normally developed life forms precisely because these forms were deposited by dust
particles. To test this third hypothesis Pasteur reopened the ﬂask containing the nutri-
ent solution, and, using a special arrangement of tubes that ensured that only sterilized
air would contact the solution, he deposited a piece of cotton in which dust particles
had been trapped. The ﬂask was then resealed, and in due course microbes developed
in the solution. This experiment proved not only that dust particles were responsible
for the life but that the ‘‘vegetative force’’ of the nutrient solution had not been de-
stroyed by boiling, as Needham was prone to claim.
Pasteur anticipated one further objection from the proponents of spontaneous gen-
eration: Perhaps the capacity of oxygen to generate life was destroyed by drawing it
through a heated tube. To dispel any such notions Pasteur devised yet another exper-
iment. He boiled a nutrient solution in a ﬂask with a long, narrow gooseneck. As the
solution boiled, the air was forced out, and as it cooled, the air returned very slowly
through the long neck, trapping the dust particles on the moist inside surface. No
microbes developed in the solution. Then, after a prolonged wait, Pasteur sealed the
ﬂask and shook it vigorously, dislodging the particles that had settled in the neck. In a
short time the solution was alive with microbes.
When Pasteur reported these experiments to the Academy of Science in 1860, he
was awarded the prize that had been offered a year earlier. The experiments dealt a
mortal blow to the theory of spontaneous generation, and although the theory was
not abandoned immediately, by 1900 it had very little support.
The Proof of Hypotheses
The four instances of hypothetical reasoning in science that we have investigated
illustrate the use of two different kinds of hypotheses. The hypotheses involved in the
discovery of Neptune and radium are sometimes called empirical hypotheses, and
those relating to atmospheric pressure and spontaneous generation are sometimes
called theoretical hypotheses. Empirical hypotheses concern the production of
some thing or the occurrence of some event that can be observed. When radium had
ﬁnally been obtained as a pure metal it was something that could be seen directly, and
when Neptune was ﬁnally sighted through the telescope, it, too, had been observed.
Theoretical hypotheses, on the other hand, concern how something should be con-
ceptualized. When Galileo observed the water level rising in a suction pump, he
conceived it as being sucked up by the vacuum. When Torricelli observed it, however,
he conceived it as being pushed up by the atmosphere. Similarly, when Needham
observed life emerging in a sterile nutrient solution, he conceived it as being sponta-
neously generated by the action of oxygen. But when Pasteur observed it, he con-
ceived it as being implanted there by dust particles in the air.
The distinction between empirical and theoretical hypotheses has certain difﬁcul-
ties, which we will turn to shortly, but it sheds some light on the problem of the
veriﬁcation or conﬁrmation of hypotheses. Empirical hypotheses are for all practical

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
577
S
N
L
purposes proved when the thing or event hypothesized is observed. Today practically
all of us would agree that the hypotheses relating to radium and Neptune have been
established. Theoretical hypotheses, on the other hand, are never proved but are only
conﬁrmed to varying degrees. The greater the number of implications that are found
to be correct, the more certain we can be of the hypothesis. If an implication is found
to be incorrect, however, a theoretical hypothesis can be disproved. For example, if it
should happen some day that life is produced in a test tube from inorganic materials,
Pasteur’s hypothesis that life comes only from life might be considered to be disproved.
The problem with the distinction between empirical and theoretical hypotheses is
that observation is theory-dependent. Consider, for example, a man and a woman
watching a sunrise. The man happens to believe that the sun travels around the earth,
as Ptolemy held, and the woman that the earth travels around the sun, as Copernicus
and Galileo contended. As the sun rises, the man thinks that he sees the sun moving
upward, while the woman thinks she sees the earth turning. The point is that all of us
have a tendency to see what we think is out there to be seen. As a result, it is some-
times difﬁcult to say when something has or has not been observed.
In regard to the discovery of Neptune, the unknown planet was observed two times
in 1795 by J. J. Lalande, ﬁfty-one years before it was ‘‘discovered’’ by Adams, Leverrier,
and Galle. Lalande noted that his observations of the position of the small starlike
object were discordant, so he rejected one as erroneous. But he thought he was
observing a star, so he received no credit for discovering a planet. Analogous remarks
extend to Galle’s observations of the planet Neptune in 1846. If Leverrier’s computa-
tions had been erroneous, Galle might have seen what was really a comet. Thus, if we
can never be sure that we really see what we think we see, is it ever possible for a
hypothesis to be actually proved? Perhaps it is better to interpret the proof of empirical
hypotheses as a high degree of conﬁrmation.
Conversely, with theoretical hypotheses, would we want to say that Torricelli’s
hypothesis relating to atmospheric pressure has not been proved? Granted, we cannot
observe atmospheric pressure directly, but might we not say that we observe it instru-
mentally? If barometers can be regarded as extensions of our sense organs, Torricelli’s
hypothesis has been proved. Another example is provided by Copernicus’shypothesis
that the earth and planets move around the sun, instead of the sun and planets around
the earth, as Ptolemy hypothesized. Can we consider this theoretical hypothesis to be
proved? If a motion picture camera were sent outside the solar system and pictures
were taken supporting the Copernican hypothesis, would we say that these pictures
constituted proof? We probably would. Thus, while the distinction between theoretical
and empirical hypotheses is useful, it is more a distinction in degree than in kind.
The Tentative Acceptance of Hypotheses
A certain amount of time is required for a hypothesis to be proved or disproved. The
hypotheses relating to the discovery of radium and Neptune required more than a year
to prove. Theoretical hypotheses in science often take much longer, and theoretical

578
Chapter 9: Induction
hypotheses in philosophy may never be conﬁrmed to the satisfaction of the majority
of philosophers. During the period that intervenes between the proposal of a hypoth-
esis and its proof, conﬁrmation, or disproof, the question arises as to its tentative
acceptability. Four criteria that bear upon this question are (1) adequacy, (2) internal
coherence, (3) external consistency, and (4) fruitfulness.
A hypothesis is adequate to the extent that it ﬁts the facts it is intended to unify or
explain. A hypothesis is said to ‘‘ﬁt’’ the facts when each fact can be interpreted as an
instance of some idea or term in the hypothesis. For example, before the Neptune
hypothesis was conﬁrmed, every ﬂuctuation in the position of Uranus could be inter-
preted as an instance of gravitational interaction with an unknown planet. Similarly,
before Torricelli’s hypothesis was conﬁrmed, the fact that water would rise only 30
feet in suction pumps and siphons could be interpreted as an instance of equilibrium
between the pressure of the water and the pressure of the atmosphere.
A hypothesis is inadequate to the extent that facts exist that the hypothesis cannot
account for. The principle that nature abhors a vacuum was inadequate to explain the
fact that water would rise no more than 30 feet in suction pumps and siphons. Nothing
in the hypothesis could account for this fact. Similarly, Needham’s hypothesis that life
is generated by the direct action of oxygen on nutrient solutions was inadequate to
account for the fact that life would not develop in Pasteur’s ﬂask containing a sterilized
nutrient solution and sterilized oxygen.
In scientiﬁc hypotheses a second kind of adequacy is the accuracy with which a
hypothesis accounts for the data. If one hypothesis accounts for a set of data with
greater accuracy than another, then that hypothesis is more adequate than the other.
For example, Kepler’s hypothesis that the orbits of the planets were ellipses rather
than circles, as Copernicus had hypothesized, accounted for the position of the planets
with greater accuracy than the Copernican hypothesis. Similarly, Einstein’s theory of
relativity accounted for the precise time of certain eclipses with greater accuracy than
Newton’s theory. For these reasons Kepler’s and Einstein’s theories were more ade-
quate than the competing theories.
A hypothesis is internally coherent to the extent that its component ideas are
rationally interconnected. The purpose of a hypothesis is to unify and interconnect a
set of data and by so doing to explain the data. Obviously, if the hypothesis itself is
not internally connected, there is no way that it can interconnect the data. After the
mathematical details of the Neptune hypothesis had been worked out by Adams and
Leverrier, it exhibited a great deal of internal coherence. The hypothesis showed how
all the ﬂuctuations in the position of Uranus could be rationally linked in terms of the
gravitational interaction of an eighth planet. Similarly, Torricelli’s hypothesis showed
how the various ﬂuid levels could be rationally interconnected in terms of the equilib-
rium of pressures. Internal coherence is responsible for the features of elegance and
simplicity that often attract scientists to a hypothesis.
An example of incoherence in science is provided by the theoretical interpretation
of light, electricity, and magnetism that prevailed during the ﬁrst half of the nineteenth

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
579
S
N
L
century. During that period each of these phenomena was understood separately, but
the interconnections between them were unknown. Toward the end of the century
the English physicist James Clerk Maxwell showed how these three phenomena were
interconnected in terms of his theory of the electromagnetic ﬁeld. Maxwell’s theory
was thus more coherent than the ones that preceded it.
Similarly, in philosophy, Spinoza’s metaphysical theory is more internally coherent
than Descartes’s. Descartes postulated the existence of two kinds of substance to
account for the data of experience. He introduced extended, material substance to
explain the data of the visible world, and nonextended, immaterial substance to ex-
plain the phenomena of the invisible world, including the existence and activity of the
human soul. But Descartes failed to show how the two kinds of substance were
interconnected. In the wake of this disconnection there arose the famous mind-body
problem, according to which no account could be given of how the human body
acted on the mind through the process of sensation or how the mind acted on the
body through the exercise of free choice. Spinoza, on the other hand, postulated only
one substance to account for everything. Spinoza’s theory is thus more internally
coherent than Descartes’s.
A hypothesis is externally consistent when it does not disagree with other, well-
conﬁrmed hypotheses. Adams’s and Leverrier’s hypothesis of an eighth planet was
perfectly consistent with the nineteenth-century theory of the solar system, and it was
rendered even more attractive by the fact that the seventh planet, Uranus, had been
discovered only a few years earlier. Similarly, Marie Curie’s hypothesis of the existence
of a new element was consistent with Mendeleev’s periodic table and with the general
hypothesis that elements could emit penetrating rays. In 1890 Mendeleev’s table had
certain gaps that were expected to be ﬁlled in by the discovery of new elements, and
two ray-emitting elements, thorium and uranium, had already been discovered.
The fact that a hypothesis is inconsistent with other, well-conﬁrmed hypotheses does
not, however, immediately condemn it to obscurity. It often happens that a new hypoth-
esis arises in the face of another, well-conﬁrmed hypothesis and that the twohypotheses
compete for acceptance in the future. Which hypothesis will win is determined by an
appeal to the other three criteria. For example, Torricelli’s hypothesis was inconsistent
with the ancient hypothesis that nature abhors a vacuum, and Pasteur’s hypothesis
was inconsistent with the equally ancient hypothesis of spontaneous generation. In
the end, the newer hypotheses won out because they were more adequate, coherent,
or fruitful than their competitors. For the same reason the Copernican hypothesis
eventually triumphed over the Ptolemaic, the theory of oxidation won out over the
old phlogiston theory, and Einstein’s theory of relativity won out over Newton’s theory.
A hypothesis is fruitful to the extent that it suggests new ideas for future analysis
and conﬁrmation. Torricelli’s hypothesis suggested the design of an instrument for
measuring ﬂuctuations in the pressure of the atmosphere. Similarly, Pasteur’s hypoth-
esis suggested changes in the procedures used to maintain sterile conditions in hos-
pitals. After these changes were implemented, the death rate from surgical operations

580
Chapter 9: Induction
decreased dramatically. The procedure of pasteurization, used to preserve milk, was
another outgrowth of the hypothesis that life comes only from life.
Newton’s theory of universal gravitation is an example of a hypothesis that proved
especially fruitful. It was originated to solve the problem of falling bodies, but it also
explained such things as the ebb and ﬂow of the tides, the orbital motion of the moon
and planets, and the ﬂuctuations in planetary motion caused by a planet’s interaction
with other planets. Einstein’s theory of relativity is another example. It was originated
to account for certain features of Maxwell’s theory of electricity and magnetism, but it
succeeded, forty years later, in ushering in the atomic age.
The factors of coherence and fruitfulness together account for the overall rationality
and explanatory power of a hypothesis. Suppose, for example, that someone formu-
lated the hypothesis that the water level in suction devices is maintained by the action
of demons instead of by atmospheric pressure. Such a hypothesis would be neither
coherent nor fruitful. It would not be coherent because it would not explain why the
maximum water level in these devices is consistently about 30 feet, why the mercury
level in barometers is much less, and why the mercury level in a barometer decreases
when the instrument is carried to the top of a mountain. Do the demons decide to
maintain these levels by free choice or according to some plan? Because there is no
answer to this question, the hypothesis exhibits internal disconnectedness, which
leaves it open to the charge of being irrational. As for the fourth criterion, the demon
hypothesis is unfruitful because it suggests no new ideas that experimenters can put
to the test. The hypothesis that nature abhors a vacuum is hardly any more fruitful,
which accounts in part for why it was so suddenly abandoned in favor of Torricelli’s
hypothesis—it simply did not lead anywhere.
In summary, for any hypothesis to receive tentative acceptance it must cover the
facts it is intended to interpret and it must rationally interconnect these facts—in other
words, it must be adequate and coherent. After that, it helps if the hypothesis does not
conﬂict with other, well-conﬁrmed hypotheses. Finally, it is important that a hypothe-
sis capture the imagination of the community to which it is posed. This it does by
being fruitful—by suggesting interesting ideas and experiments to which members of
the community can direct their attention in the years ahead.
EXERCISE 9.5
I. For each of the following situations, invent at least three hypotheses aimed at
explaining what went wrong or at solving the problem. Then, for each hypothesis,
describe one or more experiments or inquiries that would conﬁrm or disconﬁrm
the hypothesis.
1. Someone you have been dating has a birthday coming up, so you call a ﬂorist
and order ﬂowers for the occasion. Two days later the person is cold and
distant.

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
581
S
N
L
2. After settling in a new location you buy some seeds for a ﬂower garden. When
the ﬂowers come up, they are stunted and of poor quality.
3. After mailing your paycheck to the bank, you write a check to pay your rent.
The rent check bounces.
4. On a windy day you pick up the phone to call a friend, but you ﬁnd that the
line is dead. You live in a house and share phone expenses with a housemate.
5. After driving for miles on a dusty road, you park your car near the bank of a
river and take a hike through the woods. Soon you become lost. In one
direction you see a small stream, and in the other, a trail.
6. A close friend calls you on the phone and conﬁdes a personal secret. That
night you write the secret in your diary. A few days later your friend is furious
with you because the friend overheard someone on campus talking about the
secret.
7. On a rainy evening you return to your ground-ﬂoor apartment and discover
that you have been burglarized. You can’t believe it, because you are certain
you locked the door when you went out. You share the apartment with a
roommate.
8. You are a philosophy professor at a university, and while reading a set of term
papers you discover that two of them are identical. Those two papers are also
extremely well written.
9. You are a manager of a department store, and, although business has been
brisk lately, your chief accountant informs you that the store is losing money.
10. A short time before ﬁnal exams you lose your class notes. You recall having
seen them four days ago. Use your own personal activities and movements
during the past four days as the basis for formulating your hypotheses as to
the whereabouts of the notes.
II. For the four scientiﬁc discoveries presented in this section identify the problem,
the hypotheses that were formulated, the implications that were drawn, and the
test procedure that was used.
III. The following article was written by a physician in the emergency room of a
hospital.* The article describes the difﬁculty that the author and other physicians
faced in diagnosing the nature of a patient’s illness. Identify the problem, the
hypotheses suggested, the implications drawn, and the tests conducted to conﬁrm
or disconﬁrm the hypotheses. You should be able to ﬁnd ﬁfteen hypotheses. Try
to distinguish the tests and observations made to narrow down the problem from
the tests and observations made to conﬁrm or disconﬁrm the hypotheses.
*Discover magazine, October 1994, pp. 28–31.  1994 The Walt Disney Co., reprinted with permission
of Discover magazine.

582
Chapter 9: Induction
An Unreasonable Sleep
by Elisabeth Rosenthal
The emergency room was unusually quiet early that Thursday morning, and
rounds promised to be brief. ‘‘You have only one patient,’’ said the doctor I was
relieving. ‘‘He’s a real winner, though. He’s basically unresponsive, but I can’t ﬁnd
anything wrong.’’ ‘‘Well, you know,’’ I said dryly, ‘‘when a patient’s in a coma,
there is usually a problem.’’ ‘‘Look, I know it sounds weird, but all the tests are
coming back normal. I’m beginning to think the guy’s faking. Well, not faking
exactly. But I’m beginning to think the problem’s psychiatric. Hey, if you ﬁnd some-
thing else, more power to you—you’re a better doc than I am.’’ And with that, he
was out the door.
When I stopped by Mr. Gerard’s room, I found a handsome blond man in his
early thirties lying motionless in bed. His eyes were closed and perfectly still; his
arms lay crooked at his sides. When I pulled down his sheet I was slightly surprised
to ﬁnd his feet crossed at the ankles. Maybe the nurse’s aide had left him that way
when she had put on his hospital gown.
He looked so perfectly peaceful, so perfectly asleep, that I suspected this coma
business was some kind of practical joke. I tapped his arm and whispered to try to
wake him up.
‘‘Mr. Gerard.’’
No stirring.
‘‘Mr. Gerard!’’—this time with a little nudge.
No reply.
‘‘MR. GERARD!!’’ I took both his shoulders and shook as hard as I could. But
again, no response. When I let go of his torso, he slumped back on the pillow. The
only movement I could detect was the perfectly rhythmic rise and fall of his chest
12 times a minute, the most normal of normal respiratory rates.
The chart at the foot of the bed recorded 14 hours of the most stable vital signs
an ER doctor could ever hope to see. And my brief neurological exam suggested
that every major brain pathway was intact: With his eyelids propped open, his
pupils reacted normally to light. When I tapped on his knees and tickled his feet,
his reﬂexes performed on cue. A man so profoundly unresponsive, with nothing
obviously wrong? I retreated to the nurses’ station to pore over his chart.
Mr. Gerard had been brought in the previous evening by an ambulance his
sister had summoned. He was a well-respected estate lawyer in a large city half-
way across the country, she said, and had just made partner two years before. He
had no real medical problems and, as far as she knew, had never seen a psychia-
trist or had any mental illness. She was fairly certain that he didn’t drink or take
drugs. But she confessed to the social worker that she and her brother had be-
come close only in the past year, during his tumultuous breakup with a longtime
girlfriend; before that they had done little more than exchange birthday cards.
Mr. Gerard had ﬁnished a major project the week before and had called her
Friday night saying he had no plans for the Fourth of July and might he join her
family for the week? He seemed ﬁne for the ﬁrst three days of his visit, even or-
ganizing a picnic in the park and a trip to a ballgame, she said. But on Wednesday
he seemed depressed, and he retired to his room early because he didn’t feel well.
On Thursday he hadn’t emerged by the time she left for work. When she got

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
583
S
N
L
home at 6 P.M. the door was still closed, so she went in and found him, as she put
it, ‘‘looking dead.’’ She called an ambulance and frantically searched her brother’s
suitcase for clues. All she found were books and clothes—no pill bottles, liquor, or
drug paraphernalia.
En route to the ER, Mr. Gerard had received the standard treatment for patients
who are unresponsive. First the paramedics gave him a shot of Narcan—which
reverses the effects of heroin and other narcotics by blocking opiate receptors in
the brain. Then they gave him a shot of dextrose, which brings around patients
who are comatose because of low blood sugar. But neither had helped. The ER
staff was faced with a man who appeared absolutely healthy yet profoundly
unresponsive.
There are only a handful of reasons for a coma in a young person: a drug
overdose or poisoning, a massive hemorrhage in the head because of trauma or a
premature stroke, a seizure, a metabolic abnormality, a brain tumor or abscess, or
a rare overwhelming infection. By the time I arrived, the night staff had methodi-
cally tested Mr. Gerard and found no trace of these conditions.
Although overdoses are the most common cause of comas in young people,
they almost always produce some other symptoms. With heroin, the pupils shrink.
With Valium, the respiratory rate dips slightly. With many antidepressants, the
heart races. But aside from Mr. Gerard’s absolute failure to respond to voices or
even pain, his exam showed nothing wrong.
Just to be sure, the night doctors had put a tube down his throat and pumped
out his stomach looking for pills. They had drawn blood to test for poisons and
drugs. They had sent Mr. Gerard up for an emergency CT scan of the brain to rule
out hemorrhage or a stroke. Still, they had come up empty-handed. At 5 A.M. they
called a neurologist to see if she had any ideas.
Dr. Green wasn’t too pleased about being dragged out of bed, and she was
immediately suspicious of this motionless body with an apparently normal neuro-
logical exam. She began a series of standard neurological tests designed to elicit
signs of consciousness.
She started by shaking his shoulders but quickly adopted more aggressive tac-
tics to see if she could get him to react. She pressed the handle of her reﬂex
hammer against his toenail with all her might. No response. She then pushed
down hard on his breastbone. This move, the so-called sternal rub, is so unplea-
sant that it evokes at least a grimace from patients in pretty deep comas. But there
was not a twitch from Mr. Gerard.
She even went so far as to squirt ice water into his ear, a technique neurologists
use to ﬁnd out if the brainstem—the primitive region of the brain that regulates
basic brain function—is working. If it is intact, the eyes jiggle reﬂexively. And if the
patient is conscious, he becomes dizzy and sick to his stomach. Dr. Green saw Mr.
Gerard’s eyes jiggle. And she thought she saw him begin to retch. Her hunch was
that he was awake.
She then tried to ﬁnd out whether Mr. Gerard was capable of voluntary move-
ment. Without giving any warning, she sprinkled ice water on his face. He seemed
to wince slightly and sink back into his trance. She resorted to a neurologist’s ploy
to distinguish the conscious from the comatose: she took his limp arm by the hand
and raised it a foot above his face, then let it drop. Patients in true comas have no

584
Chapter 9: Induction
choice but to smack themselves, hard, in the face or chest. Every time she tried
this, however, Mr. Gerard’s hand somehow veered right and glanced off his cheek.
Based on her observations and Mr. Gerard’s normal CT scan, Dr. Green pro-
nounced that there was nothing neurologically wrong with the patient. Her note
concluded: ‘‘Catatonia, of psychiatric origin. No evidence of neurological
dysfunction.’’
I agreed with her, but I had to admit the diagnosis made me nervous. True,
catatonia can befall patients with psychiatric illnesses, producing movements that
are frenzied, bizarre, or slowed to the point of complete stupor. And if left un-
treated, the stupor can be deadly because the patient cannot eat or drink. But
catatonia in someone with no previous psychiatric history was extremely rare—
yet what else could explain this condition?
I called the psychiatrist at the mental hospital to which we would refer Mr.
Gerard, described the case, and tentatively suggested that he be admitted. The
doctor, as I suspected, wouldn’t readily agree.
‘‘I don’t know if we can take him,’’ he began, and then he proceeded to echo
my own worst fears. ‘‘Are you sure he’s not an overdose? Maybe he’s taken some-
thing weird that’s not on our drug screen. Can you guarantee he’s not seizing?
You know not all seizures involve obvious twitching. Will you write on the record
that you’re positive he hasn’t had a stroke? They don’t always show up on the
scan right away.’’
‘‘Look, I can’t promise you anything right now—come see him and we’ll talk.
But it would be weird for a guy with an overdose or a stroke or a seizure to be so
rock stable for over 12 hours.’’
Within 20 minutes the psychiatrist was in the ER. He spent some time talking
with Mr. Gerard’s relatives—some at the hospital, and some at their homes—and
unearthed still more clues. What they had dismissed as eccentricity began to seem
more like serious mental illness.
When he called Mr. Gerard’s mother, who lived on the opposite coast, she told
him that her son’s behavior had been so erratic that she had been urging him to
see a therapist for several years. In the past six months, however, she had stopped
because her son had started accusing her of tapping his phone conversations and
monitoring his mail—and she worried about feeding his escalating paranoia. A
younger brother said he had been called to pick up Mr. Gerard at a hospital three
months before. He had been brought there by the police after a security guard had
found him in his ofﬁce at 5 A.M. dressed in swim trunks. Although the ER doctors
had thought he needed psychiatric help, Mr. Gerard had insisted on leaving with-
out any care.
‘‘I’m beginning to think he is a little nuts,’’ the psychiatrist said, as he relayed his
new ﬁndings. ‘‘But I’m still not sure. You can torture the guy and he doesn’t react.
How about a rush order on the drug tests that haven’t come back yet? And maybe
an EEG and a better CT scan.’’
Inside I groaned. That would be another six hours’ worth of tests and another
$2,000. I called to arrange for an EEG to monitor the electrical patterns deep in his
brain, which would guarantee 1,000 percent that he was not having a seizure.
I also asked for a CT scan enhanced with a dye that might reveal some odd tumor
or infection. And I left a message at the toxicology lab begging for the remaining
results as soon as possible.

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
585
S
N
L
After much coaxing and cajoling, Mr. Gerard got his EEG and second CT scan.
As I suspected, both tests were normal. But when the chief lab technician returned
my call, it was bad news. ‘‘No way for today,’’ he said. ‘‘We sent the screen out to
another state.’’
By now, though, the evidence was all pointing in one direction. When I looked
in on Mr. Gerard one last time, his feet were again crossed—and hadn’t they been
crossed the other way before?
I called the psychiatrist. ‘‘He’s yours,’’ I began, mentioning the latest results to
assuage his fears. ‘‘The tox screen won’t be back until tomorrow, but he’s been lying
here rock stable for almost 24 hours and there’s no overdose that can explain it.’’
My colleague started in with another round of questions. His temperature?
Normal. His chest x-ray? Totally clear. His blood counts? Perfect. Had they been
repeated? Yes, perfect again. His urine output?
I faltered. I tried to picture Mr. Gerard’s bed. I didn’t recall a urine bag hanging
by its side, and he certainly hadn’t gotten up to use the men’s room. ‘‘I’ll have to
check.’’
I rummaged through the nursing charts trying to calculate how much ﬂuid Mr.
Gerard had gotten through his IV line—and how much he’d put out. With renewed
trepidation I realized that there was no sign that he’d urinated at all. I looked
around his stretcher for a urine bag that had not been emptied. Nothing there.
Evidently Mr. Gerard had gone almost 24 hours without urinating. How could I
have missed this potentially critical clue? Were his kidneys failing? Was his bladder
paralyzed by an unusual overdose that had left him in a coma? Or was he holding
back voluntarily? I drew down his sheet to see if I could feel the outline of a bloated
bladder under his skin—indeed, I thought I could. But as I pressed, there it was
again: that slight grimace of a man who is awake and feeling pain.
Clearly, we needed one more test. I asked the nurse to accompany me, explain-
ing, ‘‘Let’s stick a catheter in his bladder to see what’s in there.’’
Working in an ER, you get in the habit of talking to unconscious patients be-
cause you never know what they may feel or understand. So as the nurse draped a
sterile sheet across his pelvis, she said exactly what she would say to any patient:
‘‘Mr. Gerard, you haven’t urinated in a while, so I’m going to put a tube in
through your penis and up into your bladder to see if there’s any backup there.’’
By now she had cleansed the area with disinfectant, put on sterile gloves, and
unwrapped the thin rubber catheter connected to a urine collection bag.
‘‘Okay, Mr. Gerard,’’ she said, picking up the catheter and taking aim. ‘‘It’s
going in.’’ As if those three small words had broken some deep trance, suddenly
the sheets began to stir and the carefully cleaned equipment tumbled to the ﬂoor.
The nurse and I were speechless as Mr. Gerard sat bolt upright and said, ‘‘Excuse
me, if you give me a urinal and close the curtains, I can handle this myself.’’
Stunned, not knowing what else to do or say, we granted his request and left.
What a way to clinch a diagnosis. We were ﬁnally certain that Mr. Gerard’s
problem was not caused by some undetected neurological injury. ‘‘I should have
known,’’ I said to the nurse, ‘‘that to a man, the threat of a catheter is the most
noxious stimulus of all.’’
When we returned to the room several minutes later, Mr. Gerard was once
again lying on his stretcher, limp and silent, unresponsive to commands. But now
we all agreed where he should spend the night.

586
Chapter 9: Induction
Over the next week, as Mr. Gerard went in and out of his stupor, doctors at the
psychiatric hospital garnered a bit more information from him. Mr. Gerard was
basically lucid, they said, but paranoid, and his thought patterns did not always
follow normal logic. They suspected that he had a mild form of schizophrenia and
started him on a low dose of an antipsychotic drug to treat that disease.
As the drug brought Mr. Gerard’s symptoms under control, however, a clearer
picture of his condition began to emerge. In retrospect, it was obvious that Mr.
Gerard had been suffering for months from mood swings, and his odd behavior
more closely matched the symptoms of bipolar disorder, or what used to be called
manic-depressive illness. Patients with this psychiatric disorder, which tends to run
in families, suffer alternating bouts of hyperactivity and depression.
It had taken a catatonic episode to force Mr. Gerard into treatment for his ill-
ness, but his prognosis was good. Fortunately, treatment with lithium can prevent
the destructive mood swings and permit the patient to lead a normal life. Not long
after he was admitted, Mr. Gerard was walking, talking—even gregarious, the
psychiatrists said. Just two weeks later he was able to return home and resume his
practice.
IV. Write a short paper (3–5 pages) on one of the following scientiﬁc events. Discuss
the problem, one or more hypotheses that were formulated, the implications that
were drawn, and the test procedures that were used. Then evaluate the hypothesis
in terms of adequacy, internal coherence, external consistency, and fruitfulness.
1. Isaac Newton: corpuscular theory of light
2. Christian Huygens: wave theory of light
3. Johannes Kepler: orbit of Mars
4. Nicolaus Copernicus: theory of the solar system
5. Count von Rumford: theory of heat
6. Charles Darwin: theory of natural selection
7. John Dalton: theory of atoms
8. William Harvey: circulation of the blood
9. Louis Pasteur: theory of vaccination
10. J. J. Thomson: discovery of the electron
11. Andre Marie Ampere: discovery of the electromagnet
12. Niels Bohr: structure of the atom
13. Alexander Fleming: discovery of penicillin
14. Henri Becquerel: radioactivity of uranium
15. Dmitri Mendeleev and Clemens Winkler: discovery of germanium
16. Amedeo Avogadro: Avogadro’s law
17. Johann Balmer: theory of the spectrograph
18. Alfred Wegener: theory of continental drift
19. James Watson and Francis Crick: structure of the DNA molecule

Hypothetical/Scientiﬁc Reasoning
587
S
N
L
20. John Bardeen: theory of superconductivity
21. Albert Einstein: theory of Brownian motion
22. Edwin Hubble: recession of the galaxies
23. Jean Baptiste Lamarck: inheritance of acquired characteristics
V. Write a short paper (2–3 pages) analyzing one or more of the hypotheses formu-
lated by Sherlock Holmes in one of the stories by Arthur Conan Doyle. Include a
discussion of the problem, the hypothesis, the implications that were drawn, and
the test procedures.
VI. Answer ‘‘true’’ or ‘‘false’’ to the following statements:
1.
#
Hypothetical reasoning is useful when the evidence by itself does not provide
the solution to the problem.
2. Hypotheses are derived directly from the evidence.
3. Hypotheses serve the purpose of directing the search for additional evidence.
4.
#
If the implications of a hypothesis are true, then we may conclude that the
hypothesis is true.
5. If an implication of a hypothesis is false, then we may conclude that the
hypothesis is false, at least in part.
6. In the episode pertaining to the discovery of radium, all of the hypotheses
turned out to be true.
7.
#
In the Neptune episode, Adams and Leverrier deserve the credit for working
out the implications of the hypothesis.
8. Torricelli’s hypothesis was consistent with the hypothesis that nature abhors
a vacuum.
9. In Pasteur’s day, the theory of spontaneous generation held that life was
produced by the direct action of oxygen on organic nutrients.
10.
#
The hypotheses relating to the discoveries of radium and Neptune may be
classiﬁed as empirical hypotheses.
11. Torricelli’s and Pasteur’s hypotheses may be classiﬁed as theoretical
hypotheses.
12. Theoretical hypotheses concern how something should be conceptualized.
13.
#
The problem with the distinction between empirical and theoretical hypoth-
eses is that observation is dependent on theory.
14. The adequacy of a hypothesis has to do with how well the ideas or terms in
the hypothesis are rationally interconnected.
15. The coherence of a hypothesis has to do with how well the hypothesis ﬁts
the facts.
16.
#
If a hypothesis is not externally consistent, then it must be discarded.

588
Chapter 9: Induction
17. A hypothesis is fruitful to the extent that it suggests new ideas for future
analysis and conﬁrmation.
18. If a theory is incoherent, it is deﬁcient in rationality.
19.
#
The theoretical interpretations of light, electricity, and magnetism during the
ﬁrst part of the nineteenth century illustrate a condition of inadequacy.
20. If a hypothesis gives rise to contradictory implications, it is incoherent.
9.6
Science and Superstition
The idea that the human mind is capable of operating on different levels in its effort
to comprehend reality is as old as philosophy itself. Twenty-four centuries ago Plato
drew a distinction between what he called opinion and knowledge. Opinion, he said,
is a kind of awareness that is uncertain, conﬁned to the particular, inexact, and subject
to change, whereas knowledge is certain, universal, exact, and eternally true. Every
human being starts out in life by operating on the level of opinion, and only through
great struggle and effort can he or she escape it and rise to the level of knowledge.
This struggle is called education, and it opens the eye of the mind to realities that
cannot even be imagined from the standpoint of opinion.
Today’s distinction between science and superstition is a modern equivalent of
Plato’s distinction between knowledge and opinion. Everyone recognizes that science
has revealed wonderful truths about the world of nature. It has put men on the moon,
wiped out life-threatening diseases, and ushered in the computer age. Also, almost
everyone recognizes that superstition is little better than foolishness. It leads people
to fear walking under ladders, breaking mirrors, and spilling salt. Practically everyone
agrees that if some claim is grounded in science, then it is probably worthy of belief,
while if it is grounded in superstition, then it is probably not worthy of belief. Where
people do not agree, however, is in what constitutes science and what constitutes
superstition. What one person calls science another calls superstitious nonsense.
Both science and superstition involve hypotheses, so the four criteria developed in
Section 9.5 for evaluating hypotheses are relevant to the distinction between science
and superstition. These criteria are adequacy, internal coherence, external consis-
tency, and fruitfulness. But the distinction between science and superstition also in-
volves psychological and volitional elements. It involves such factors as how the
observer’s subjective states inﬂuence how he sees the world, and how his needs and
desires play a role in the formation of his beliefs. Accordingly, to explore the distinc-
tion between science and superstition, we must introduce criteria that include these
psychological and volitional elements. The criteria we suggest are evidentiary support,
objectivity, and integrity. The following account of evidentiary support encompasses

Science and Superstition
589
S
N
L
adequacy and fruitfulness, and the account of integrity encompasses adequacy, inter-
nal coherence and external consistency.
Science and superstition are, in large measure, polar opposites. Where scientiﬁc
activity recognizes the importance of evidentiary support, objectivity, and integrity,
superstition ignores them. Accordingly, these criteria can be used as a kind of measur-
ing stick for sizing up the various beliefs people have about the world. To the extent
that those beliefs are supported by evidence, are objective, and arise from research that
reﬂects integrity, the closer they come to the ideal of science, and the more justiﬁed
they are. Conversely, to the extent that our beliefs do not share in these characteristics,
the closer they come to the ‘‘ideal’’ of superstition, and the less justiﬁed they are.
We note, however, that to say a belief is justiﬁed is not to say it is true in any
absolute sense. As we saw in Section 9.5, all beliefs that arise from science are tentative
at best. But such beliefs are the best ones we can have for now. Also, to say that a
belief is not justiﬁed is not to say it is absolutely false. It is quite possible that a belief
grounded in superstition today could tomorrow be grounded in science. But such a
belief is not worthy of assent today. An analogy can be found in rolling dice. No
sensible person would bet even money that a pair of dice will come up ‘‘snake eyes’’
on the next roll, even though he realizes that tomorrow it might be discovered that the
dice were loaded in favor of this outcome.
Evidentiary Support
In the preceding section of this chapter we saw that hypotheses in themselves are
mere conjectures, and before they are believed they should be supported by evidence.
This rule applies equally to the hypotheses that underlie science and to those that
underlie superstition. This rule is strictly obeyed in science, but it is often ignored in
the realm of superstition. For example, in the sixteenth century Copernicusformulated
the hypothesis that the sun is the center of our planetary system and that the earth
revolves around the sun—in opposition to the prevailing Ptolemaic hypothesis,which
put the earth at the center. In the years that followed, the telescope was invented, and
thousands of observations were made that conﬁrmed the Copernican hypothesis and
disconﬁrmed the Ptolemaic hypothesis. Without these observations, the Copernican
hypothesis would never have been adopted.
In contrast, consider the superstition that allowing a black cat to cross one’s path
will bring bad luck. No evidence has ever been collected in support of this hypothesis.
No tests have been conducted and no experiments performed. Possibly on one occa-
sion or other someone did allow a black cat to cross his or her path and later lost
money on the stock exchange or was injured in a car accident, but surely it would be
unreasonable to believe that allowing a black cat to cross one’s path caused the loss
or the accident. Such reasoning constitutes a classic case of the post hoc ergo propter
hoc (false cause) fallacy. But in spite of the lack of evidence, many people believe the
black cat hypothesis.

590
Chapter 9: Induction
Before inquiring further into the need for evidence, however, we must ﬁrst investi-
gate what counts as evidence. Does the testimony of authorities count as evidence?
What about ancient authorities? Does the Bible count as evidence? The answer is that
Does the
Bible count as
evidence?
scientiﬁc hypotheses are about the natural world, so only observations
of the natural world count as evidence. Every scientiﬁc experiment is
a question the experimenter asks of the world, and the result of that
experiment is nature’s reply. The problem with the testimony of au-
thority is that we have no certain knowledge that the authority is cor-
rect in his or her assessment. The same holds true of the Bible. We
have no way of knowing whether what the Bible says about the natural world is true.
If someone should reply that the Bible is divinely inspired, then the obvious reply is,
How do we know that? Do we have any observational evidence for it? Appeals to
authority ﬁgures and the Bible amount to passing the explanatory buck.
Another kind of evidence that is considered unreliable is anecdotal evidence. Sup-
pose that you have cancer and a friend advises you that eating garlic can cure it. You
decide to take this advice, and after eating a clove of garlic every day for a year, the
cancer goes into remission. Did the garlic cure the cancer? Evidence of this sort is
called anecdotal, and it is usually rejected by science. The trouble with anecdotal
evidence is that it is too isolated to establish any causal connection. Thus, the garlic
evidence ignores the thousands of people with cancer who have eaten garlic and have
not been cured, and it ignores the thousands of people who have experienced spon-
taneous remission of cancer and have not eaten any garlic. Also, there is no way to
turn the clock back and try the experiment again.
One of the key features of scientiﬁc evidence gathering is that an experiment
be replicable under controlled conditions. This means that the experiment must be
Scientiﬁc
experiments
must be
replicable.
repeatable by different scientists at different times and places. Rep-
licability helps ensure that the outcome of the experiment did not
result from anything peculiar to one certain experimenter operating
at a single place and time. Also, the controlled conditions are de-
signed to eliminate the inﬂuence of extraneous factors. Perhaps, in
reference to the garlic example, the cure was effected not by the
garlic but by something else that was eaten, or by any one of a
thousand other factors that occurred during this time, or by any combination of
these factors.
The evidence offered in support of superstitious hypotheses is rarely replicable,
and when it is, the outcome almost always fails to support the hypothesis. For exam-
ple, the belief in ghosts is usually supported by what one or more individuals claim to
have seen on some unique occasion. This occasion can never be repeated. And the
belief in psychic phenomena such as extrasensory perception is sometimes claimed
to be supported by experiments involving Zener cards: cards imprinted with crosses,
circles, wavy lines, stars, and squares whose image an observer might ‘‘transmit’’ to a

Science and Superstition
591
S
N
L
psychic receiver. But when these experiments have been repeated under carefully
controlled conditions, the outcome has never been other than what would have been
expected to occur through mere chance.
Another defect found in superstitious hypotheses is that they are often framed so
vaguely that it is virtually impossible to provide any kind of unequivocal conﬁrmation.
For example, in connection with the black cat hypothesis, what, exactly, is the mean-
ing of bad luck? What is interpreted as a stroke of bad luck today may turn out to be
incredibly good luck tomorrow. If a person loses $1000 in the stock market today, that
may lead him to be more cautious in the future, and that increased caution may save
$10,000 in the future.
In contrast, the hypotheses of science are often framed in the language of mathe-
matics, or they can at least be translated into some mathematical expression. This fact
Scientiﬁc
hypotheses
are phrased
precisely.
provides for extremely accurate conﬁrmations and is largely respon-
sible for the extraordinary success science has enjoyed during the past
500 years. For example, in 1802 the French chemist Joseph Louis Gay-
Lussac formulated the hypothesis that if the temperature is raised one
degree Celsius on a closed container of gas—any gas—the pressure
of the gas will increase by .3663 percent. The hypothesis has been
tested thousands of times by chemists and students in chemistry labs,
and it has been found to be correct.
Closely related to the problem of vagueness is the breadth with which a hypothe-
sis is framed. If a hypothesis is framed so broadly and comprehensively that even
contradictory evidence serves to conﬁrm it, then the hypothesis is not really con-
ﬁrmed by anything. Suppose, for example, that a health care practitioner should in-
vent a hypothesis involving diet. Practicing this diet is guaranteed to make you
feel great, but before it has this effect it may make you feel either rotten or the same
as usual. After following this diet for six months you report that you feel the same
as before. The practitioner replies that your experience conﬁrms the hypothesis, be-
cause this is what the diet is supposed to do. On the other hand, suppose that after
six months you feel great, or perhaps rotten. Again the practitioner will report that
your experience conﬁrms the hypothesis. Hypotheses of this sort are not genuinely
scientiﬁc.
In 1919 the philosopher Karl Popper discovered this very problem concerning
hypotheses. In response, he argued that any genuinely scientiﬁc hypothesis must be
framed narrowly enough so that it forbids certain things from happening. In other
words, the hypothesis must be falsiﬁable. In the years following its announcement,
many philosophers criticized Popper’s falsiﬁability criterion because, strictly speaking,
hypotheses are rarely susceptible of being disproved. But, as we saw in Section 9.5,
hypotheses can be disconﬁrmed (or rendered less plausible). Thus, we can retain
Popper’s basic insight by requiring that any genuinely scientiﬁc hypothesis be discon-
ﬁrmable. This means that the hypothesis must be framed narrowly enough so that it

592
Chapter 9: Induction
is possible for evidence to count against it. Newton’s gravitational hypothesis, for
example, satisﬁes this criterion because the discovery of two large bodies that failed
to attract one another would tend to disconﬁrm the hypothesis. But the dietary hy-
pothesis we just mentioned fails the disconﬁrmability criterion because no outcome
could ever count against it.
A problem closely associated with excessively broad hypotheses arises in con-
nection with what are called ad hoc modiﬁcations of hypotheses. For an example,
suppose that you are a sociologist conducting research into alcoholism. You formulate
Ad hoc
modiﬁcations
can ruin
hypotheses.
a hypothesis that alcoholism is caused by cultural factors that present
alcohol consumption in a favorable light. When you gather evidence
to support this hypothesis, however, you ﬁnd that relatively few peo-
ple who come from such cultures are alcoholics. Thus, you modify the
hypothesis to say that alcoholism is caused by cultural factors but only
when a genetic predisposition exists. But then you ﬁnd that many
alcoholics drink to ease the pain of depression and other psychologi-
cal problems. Thus, you modify the hypothesis once again to take this fact into ac-
count. Further research shows that parental drinking patterns play a role, so you add
another modiﬁcation. These changes are called ad hoc (‘‘to this’’) modiﬁcations be-
cause they are introduced purely to cover some problem or anomaly that was not
recognized when the hypothesis was ﬁrst framed.
The problem with ad hoc modiﬁcations is that their purpose is to shore up a failure
of evidentiary support in the original hypothesis. As more and more modiﬁcations are
added, the hypothesis becomes self-supporting; it becomes a mere description of the
phenomenon it is supposed to explain. For example, suppose that we introduce a
certain hypothesis h to explain the occurrence of a certain phenomenon x among a
group of entities A, B, C, D, E. As ad hoc modiﬁcations are added, we ﬁnd that A has
x because of some unique attribute a, B has x because of b, and so on. In the end our
hypothesis states that anyone who has attributes a, b, c, d, e exhibits x. But the set of
attributes a, b, c, d, e is simply a description of A, B, C, D, E. If we should ask why
entity A has x, the answer is that A has x because of a, where a is just a unique
something that A has. Applying this analysis to the alcoholism hypothesis, if we ask
why a certain person (let us call him Smith) is an alcoholic, the answer is that Smith is
an alcoholic because he has a certain attribute s that causes him to be an alcoholic.
The explanation is vacuous.
Another problem with ad hoc modiﬁcations is that they result in hypotheses that
are so complicated that it becomes difﬁcult to apply them. Science has always favored
simplicity over complexity. Given two hypotheses that explain the same phenome-
non, the simpler of the two is always the preferable one. In part this preference is
aesthetic. The simpler hypothesis is more ‘‘beautiful’’ than the more complex one. But
the preference for simplicity also results from the application of what has been called
‘‘Occam’s razor.’’ This is a principle, introduced by the fourteenth-centuryphilosopher

Science and Superstition
593
S
N
L
William of Occam, that holds that theoretical entities are not to be multiplied need-
lessly. Why settle for a complicated theory when a simpler one works equally well?
Besides, the simpler one is easier to apply.
Returning to the question of evidentiary support, one of the surest ways to know
that our hypotheses are supported by evidence is that they lead to predictions that
turn out to be true. Each true prediction represents a pillar of support for the hypoth-
esis. But some predictions are better than others, and the best ones are those that
reveal ways of viewing the world that would never have been dreamed of apart from
the hypothesis. If a hypothesis leads to predictions of this sort, and if those predictions
are conﬁrmed by evidence, then the hypothesis has earned a very special kind of
support. Such a hypothesis reveals hidden truths about nature that would never have
been recognized without it.
A classic example of a prediction of this kind resulted from the hypothesis under-
lying Einstein’s general theory of relativity. One of the consequences predicted by this
hypothesis is that light is affected by gravity. In particular, the hypothesis predicted
Science is
progressive,
superstition
is not.
that a light ray coming from a star and passing by the sun would be
bent in the direction of the sun. As a result, the position of the star with
respect to other stars would appear to be different from what it was
usually observed to be. Of course, testing such a prediction under
normal circumstances would be impossible, because the light of the
sun is so bright that it completely blocks out the light from stars. But it
could be tested during a solar eclipse. Such an opportunity arose on
May 29, 1919, and scientists took advantage of it. The prediction turned out to be true,
and as a result Einstein’s theory was quickly adopted. Within a few years the theory
led to the discovery of atomic energy.
Hypotheses that yield striking, novel predictions are largely responsible for prog-
ress in science. And it is precisely these kinds of predictions, argues philosopher Imre
Lakatos, that distinguish science from pseudoscience. Of course, not every scientiﬁc
hypothesis leads to such startling predictions as Einstein’s, but they may at least be
integrally connected to broader, umbrella hypotheses that have led to such predic-
tions. In contrast, the hypotheses underlying astrology have been around for twenty-
seven centuries, and they have produced not a single startling prediction that has been
veriﬁed and not a single new insight into the course of human events. They have
produced no master plan for future civilization and no hint about future discoveries in
physics or medicine. This lack of progress over centuries is one reason that philoso-
pher Paul Thagard concluded that astrology is a pseudoscience.
Objectivity
Our beliefs about the world are objective to the extent that they are unaffected
by conditions peculiar to the experiencing subject. Such conditions can be either

594
Chapter 9: Induction
motivational or observational. For example, a belief that is motivated by the emotions
of the experiencing subject and that exists for the primary purpose of satisfying those
emotions tends to lack objectivity. Also, a belief that is grounded in observations
peculiar to the experiencing subject, such as visual hallucinations, lacks objectivity.
Even though objectivity is an ideal that can never be completely attained, practically
everyone would agree that beliefs are more trustworthy if their content is not distorted
by the experiencing subject. The scientist constantly strives to avoid such distortions,
but the superstitious mind either revels in them or, in the more tragic cases, succumbs
to them.
All superstitions exist at least in part to satisfy the emotional needs of the experi-
encing subject. The chief emotions that give rise to superstitious beliefs are fear and
Superstitions
exist to satisfy
emotional
needs.
anxiety, and they are often reinforced by a disposition to fantasy and
mental laziness. Much of the fear and anxiety is generated by the fact
that everyone dies. Death can come suddenly, as in a freeway acci-
dent, a fall from a roof, or an avalanche, or it can come as a result of
cancer, heart failure, or stroke. Short of death, everyone is subject
to injury with its attendant pain, and most people at some time ex-
perience the mental suffering that accompanies rejection, loneliness,
and failure.
People have little control over these facts of life, and to relieve the anxiety they
produce, many resort to charms and amulets, the rosary beads dangling from the rear
view mirror or the scapular or medal worn around the neck. If nothing else will protect
us from the terrors of life, perhaps these objects will. After all, science has failed to
conquer disease and death, and it offers to the believer nothing but tentative truths
that may change tomorrow. To the person facing an uncertain future, dejection, or
loneliness, it may seem more reasonable to dial up the Psychic Friends Network and
buy a bit of immediate consolation.
A second element in the human condition that generates anxiety is freedom and
the responsibility freedom entails. The idea that you, and you only, are in charge of
your destiny can be an extremely frightening idea. Many people recoil from the
thought and seek refuge in a leader or guru. They turn all their power of critical
thinking over to this leader and blindly follow his or her instructions to the last detail.
When the leader orders them to believe any form of nonsense, no matter how silly,
they do so. The belief or practice ordered by the leader, they are told, is essential to
their protection. And when the leader orders them to send a check for ﬁfty dollars
to help restore the television tower or complete the mansion on the hill, they do so.
To refuse means they will have to face their own freedom. Sometimes, following such
orders can lead to tragedy, as it did in the Jonestown massacre in 1978 and the Heavens
Gate suicides in 1997.
A disposition to magical ways of thinking and mental laziness greatly facilitates the
ﬂight to superstition. Many people, if not most, are fascinated by the mysterious, the

Science and Superstition
595
S
N
L
arcane, and the occult, and some would rather believe an explanation clothed in magic
than they would a scientiﬁcally grounded one. Psychologists Barry F. Singer and
People are
fascinated
by the
mysterious.
Victor A. Benassi performed a series of experiments on their students
in which they had a magician pose as a ‘‘psychic’’ and perform dem-
onstrations of psychic feats. Before the demonstrations began, the
students were told repeatedly in the clearest language that the magi-
cian was only pretending to be a psychic, and that what they were
about to witness was really a series of conjurer’s tricks. Nevertheless,
in spite of these warnings, a majority of students concluded, in one
experiment after another, that the magician was really a psychic. Furthermore, many
concluded that the magician was an agent of Satan.
The disposition toward the magical and the fantastic is greatly reinforced by the media,
particularly television and motion pictures. The media are slavishly subservient to the en-
tertainment desires of their audience, so, given a widespread fascination with the magi-
cal, the media issue a constant stream of movies, miniseries, and ‘‘news’’ stories devoted
to that subject. These programs touch everything from vampires and disembodiedspirits
to irrational conspiracies and the intervention of angels. This persistent attention to the
fantastical increases the public’s acceptance of superstitious explanations whenever
realistic ones are not readily available, or even in the face of realistic explanations.
A disposition to mental laziness also assists in the formation of superstitious beliefs.
It is, in fact, extremely difﬁcult to ensure that one’s beliefs are supported by evidence
Superstitions
are supported
by sloppy
thinking.
and that they pass the test of internal coherence. Sloppy logic is so
easy it is no wonder people resort to it. Most of the informal fallacies
treated in Chapter 3 can arise from sloppy thinking. After old Mrs.
Chadwicke hobbled past the church, lightning struck the steeple and
burned the church to the ground. Obviously old Mrs. Chadwicke is a
witch (false cause). Furthermore, old Mrs. Chadwicke wears a black
cape and a black hood. It must be the case that all witches wear such
clothing (hasty generalization). And of course witches exist because everybody in the
village believes in them (appeal to the people).
Another kind of sloppy thinking involves an appeal to what might be called false
coherence. A farmer discovers that one of his cows has been slain. At the same time
the farmer happens to read a story in a local tabloid saying that a satanic cult is
operating in the vicinity. The cult practices its rites on the thirteenth day of each month.
The cow was slain on the thirteenth. Thus, the farmer concludes that the cow was
slain by Satan worshippers. This line of thinking involves many loose ends, but that
rarely deters people from drawing a conclusion. Becoming a clear, critical thinker is
one of the primary goals of education, but unfortunately becoming educated is no less
of a struggle for students today than it was for students in Plato’s day.
Thus far we have focused on emotions and dispositions in the experiencing subject
that lead to superstitious beliefs. We now turn to some of the many ways that our

596
Chapter 9: Induction
observation of the world can be distorted. Such distortions consitute avenues in which
conditions peculiar to the experiencing subject enter into the content of observation.
When such distorted observations are combined with the emotions and dispositions
mentioned earlier, superstitious beliefs are likely to arise. The distorted observations
can occur in the same person who has the emotions and dispositions or they can be
conveyed second hand. In either case, the combination leads to superstition.
One well-documented phenonemon that inﬂuences our observation of our own
bodily states is the so-called placebo effect. A placebo is any kind of ‘‘medicine’’ or
procedure that provides no medicinal or therapeutic beneﬁt by itself but that can effect
Placebos can
masquerade
as cures.
a cure when the patient is told that it has such beneﬁt. For example,
patients with knee pain have been told that an operation will cure
them, and after they undergo a minor incision that, by itself, has no
therapeutic effect, the pain often disappears. Also, patients who suffer
from nervous tension or depression have been told that a little colored
pill (which consists of nothing but sugar) will cure them, and after
they take the pill, the tension or depression disappears. Obviously in these cases it is
not the placebo alone that effects the cure but the placebo together with the sugges-
tion implanted in the patients’ minds by their doctors.
Another well-documented effect that inﬂuences our observation of the world
around us is called pareidolia. This is the effect by which we can look at clouds,
smoke, or the textured coatings on walls and ceilings and see animals, faces, trees,
and so on. We project the visual images we are familiar with onto vague, relatively
formless sensory stimuli and ‘‘see’’ that image as if it were really there. Pareidolia is
responsible for a good deal of religious superstition. For example, in February, 1999,
volunteers working in the Episcopalian Church of the Good Shepherd in Wareham,
Massachusetts, saw the image of Jesus in the wood grains of a door they were staining.
They concluded that the image was a miraculous appearance of Jesus. After all, one
of them observed, Jesus was a carpenter. Hundreds of incidents like this have been
reported in the media, but it never happens that someone who was raised a Buddhist
or Hindu sees an image of Jesus.
Closely related to pareidolia is the concept of the perceptual set, where ‘‘set’’ refers
to our tendency to perceive events and objects in a way that our prior experience has
We perceive
what we
expect to
perceive.
led us to expect. The idea of perceptual set is a product of Gestalt
psychology, according to which perceiving is a kind of problem solv-
ing. When we are confronted with a problem, such as ﬁnding the
solution to a riddle or puzzle, we enter into a state of mental incuba-
tion in which potential solutions are turned over in our minds. This
state is followed by a ﬂash of insight (assuming we are able to solve
the puzzle), after which the solution seems obvious. When we con-
sider the puzzle at a later time, the solution leaps into our minds. Such a solution is
called a Gestalt, which, in German, means form or conﬁguration. Analogously, every
act of perception involves solving the puzzle of organizing sensory stimuli into mean-

Science and Superstition
597
S
N
L
ingful patterns. Each such pattern is a perceptual Gestalt, or set, and once such a set is
formed, it serves to guide the processing of future perceptions. As a result, we perceive
what we expect to perceive.
Can you see the white triangle?
Is the white triangle really ‘‘there’’?
(Taken from Kanizsa, 1979, 74.)
In 1949 psychologists Jerome S. Bruner and Leo J. Postman performed a famous
experiment in which subjects were shown replicas of ordinary playing cards—but
some of the cards had been altered by reversing their color. For example, in some
groups of cards, the three of hearts was black and the six of spades was red. Of twenty-
eight subjects, twenty-seven initially saw the altered cards as normal ones. One subject
identiﬁed the black three of hearts as a three of spades on forty-four successive show-
ings. This experiment clearly shows that we perceive what we expect to perceive and,
indeed, this fact is familiar to everyone. For example, we expect to receive a phone
call, and while taking a shower we think we hear the phone ringing, only to be told
by someone in the other room that the phone did not ring. Or, while driving, we might
approach a red octagonal sign that reads ST P (our view of the sign being partly
blocked by a tree branch between the S and the P). However, we bring the car to a
stop, because we perceived the sign to read STOP. In fact, what our sense of vision re-
ceived was three consonants (S, T, P), meaningless until processed through perception.
Yet another factor that inﬂuences our sense of vision is the autokinetic effect. Ac-
cording to this effect a small, stationary light surrounded by darkness will often be
seen to move. One can prove the existence of this effect for oneself by looking at a
bright star on a dark night, or by observing a small stationary point of light in a dark
room. The lighted object will often appear to move. Psychologists speculate that the

598
Chapter 9: Induction
autokinetic effect results from small, involuntary motions of the eyeball of the ob-
server, and they have shown that the effect is enhanced by the reports of other observ-
ers. If someone standing nearby says that she just saw the object move, others will
often conﬁrm this report. The autokinetic effect is thought to be responsible for many
claims of UFO sightings.
Hallucinations of various sorts can also distort the content of perception. Two kinds
of hallucination that affect many people in the drowsy moments between sleep and
Hallucinations
distort
perception.
wakefulness are hypnagogic and hypnopompic hallucinations(Hines,
1988, 61–62). The former occur just before drifting off to sleep, when
the brain’s alpha waves are switching to theta waves, and the latter
occur just before awakening. During these moments the subject may
experience extremely vivid, emotionally charged images that seem to
be very real. These hallucinations are thought to be responsible for
the ghosts and other appearances that people sometimes see in bedrooms.
Collective hallucinations are another kind of perceptual distortion that can occur in
large crowds of people. Before such hallucinations can happen, the crowd must be
brought to a heightened emotional state, which may be brought on by the expectation
of seeing something important or miraculous. An occurrence of this sort may have
happened on October 13, 1917, when some 70,000 people gathered in the village of
Fatima in Portugal expecting to see a miraculous sign from heaven. At midday, one of
the children who was supposedly in contact with the Virgin Mary cried out to the
people to look at the sun. They did so, whereupon thousands saw the sun swirl amid
the clouds and plunge toward the earth. Of course, if the sun had actually moved, it
would have triggered seismograph readings all over the globe. Also, many of the
people there did not see anything unusual, but their reports were discounted. Never-
theless, even to this day many of the faithful take this observation of the swirling sun
as evidence of a miracle.
Finally, the operation of memory can distort the way we recall our observations.
Human memory is not like the process whereby a computer recalls information from
its hard drive with total accuracy. Rather, it is a creative process susceptible to many
Confabulation
produces false
recollections.
inﬂuences. When images are recalled from human memory, they are
retrieved in bits and pieces. The brain then ﬁlls in the gaps through a
process called confabulation. The brain naturally and unconsciously
tries to produce a coherent account of what happened, but precisely
how the gaps are ﬁlled in depends on such things as one’s feelings at
the time of recall, other people’s suggestions about the event recalled,
and one’s own successive reports of what happened. Given that memory recall is selec-
tive to begin with and that many details are inevitably left out, the ﬁnal picture recalled
may range anywhere from a fairly accurate representation to a total fabrication.
These effects represent only a few of the ways that human observation and mem-
ory can be inﬂuenced by the subjective state of the observer. To avoid such distor-
tions, scientiﬁc inquiry restricts human observation to circumstances in which known

Science and Superstition
599
S
N
L
aberrations of perception and recall are least likely to occur. In the natural sciences,
much if not most observation occurs through instruments, such as volt meters, Geiger
counters, and telescopes, the behavior of which is well known and highly predictable.
The results are then recorded on relatively permanent media such as photographic
paper, magnetic tape, or computer discs. In the social sciences, techniques such as
double-blind sampling and statistical analysis of data insulate the observer from the
outcome of the experiment. Such procedures provide considerable assurance that the
data are not distorted by the subjective state of the experimenter.
Integrity
Our efforts to understand the world in which we live have integrity to the extent that
they involve honesty in gathering and presenting evidence and honest, logical think-
ing in responding to theoretical problems that develop along the way. Most forms of
superstition involve elements of dishonesty in gathering evidence or a failure of logic
in responding to theoretical problems. Such failures of logic can be found in the lack
of response by the community of practitioners to problems involving the adequacy,
coherence, or external consistency of the hypotheses related to their practices.
The most severe lack of integrity arises when the evidence is faked. One of the
more striking examples of faked evidence is found in the case of the Israeli entertainer
Practitioners
of superstition
fake the
evidence.
Uri Geller. Beginning in the early 1970s, Geller presented himself in
numerous venues throughout the world as a psychic who could per-
form marvelous feats such as bending spoons, keys, nails, and other
metal objects through the sheer power of his mind. Such objects
would appear to bend when he merely stroked them with his ﬁnger,
or even without his touching them at all. Scientists were called in to
witness these feats, and many came away convinced of their authen-
ticity. But in fact Geller was just a clever trickster who duped his audiences into
thinking that he had psychic powers. Geller’s trickery was exposed in large measure
by the magician James Randi.
After watching videotapes of Geller’s performances, Randi discovered how Geller
performed his tricks, and in no time he was able to perform every one of them himself.
Sometimes Geller would prepare a spoon or key beforehand by bending it back and
forth several times to the point where it was nearly ready to break. Later, by merely
stroking it gently, he could cause it to double over. On other occasions Geller, or his
accomplices, would use sleight of hand maneuvers to substitute bent objects in the
place of straight ones. In yet another trick, Geller claimed to be able to deﬂect a
compass needle by merely concentrating his attention on it. As he would wave his
hands over the compass, the needle would spin—and his hands had been thoroughly
examined earlier for hidden magnets. But Geller had concealed a powerful magnet in
his mouth, and as he bent over the compass, the needle would spin in tune with his
head gyrations.

600
Chapter 9: Induction
Donald Singleton, reporter for the New York Daily News, was familiar with Uri
Geller’s alleged psychic ability to bend spoons and keys and identify hand-made
drawings that had been sealed inside two envelopes, one inside the other. He
suspected that the latter trick was performed by holding the envelopes up to a
strong light while the subject’s attention was diverted. Prior to writing a story on
Geller, Singleton performed the following test:
I went to a locksmith and got a duplicate of the strongest, thickest key
on my key ring. I tried with all my might and I couldn’t bend it, even by
pressing it against the corner of a steel desk. Then I made a simple drawing
(of an eye), wrapped it in aluminum foil and put it into two envelopes.
I went to see Geller the next afternoon.
He tried for more than an hour, with me keeping the envelope in my
sight every second, to get the drawing. And he failed.
Then he made an effort to bend the key, again with me keeping it in view
every second. Again, nothing happened. Uri said that he was terribly disap-
pointed, that this simply had been an all-around bad day for him (Quoted in
Randi, 1982, 29).
For another example of faked evidence, let us look at ﬁre-walking. Practitioners of
this art claim that their self-help seminars can alter a person’s body chemistry so as to
allow him or her to walk barefoot over a bed of glowing coals without being burned.
One of the leading gurus of this business is Tony Robbins of the Robbins Research
Institute. Robbins uses what he calls ‘‘neurolinguistic programming’’ to cure all sorts
of physical and psychological ailments, from irrational fears and impotence to drug
addiction and tumors. As proof of the efﬁcacy of this technique, he invites those who
have taken his seminar to engage in a ﬁre-walk. By merely believing they will avoid
burning their feet, he tells them, they will survive the ordeal unharmed.
The truth is that anyone, whether or not he has taken the seminar and regardless of
what he believes, can, under controlled conditions, walk across burning coals and
escape unharmed. Physicist Bernard J. Leikind proved this, at least to his own satis-
faction, when he showed up at a Robbins seminar in the fall of 1984 (Frazier, 1991,
182–193). Even though he had not attended the sessions and he declined to think cool
thoughts as per the instructions of the attendants, he found that he could perform the
ﬁre-walk without even getting singed. He explained his success by noting certain basic
laws of physics. In spite of their high temperature, wood coals contains a very low
quantity of heat, and they conduct heat very poorly. Also, the foot is in contact with
the coals for only a second at a time, thus allowing only a small quantity of heat energy
to ﬂow to the foot. As a result, the feet of ﬁre-walkers rarely sustain injury (or at least
serious injury).
For a third example of faked evidence we need look no further than the thousands
of fortune tellers, palm readers, and mentalists who use the art of ‘‘cold reading’’ to

Science and Superstition
601
S
N
L
divine all sorts of amazing truths about their clients’ lives. Most people who engage
the services of these ‘‘readers’’ do so because they have problems concerning love,
health, or ﬁnances. The reader knows this and often begins the reading with a ﬂatter-
Cold readers
deceive their
clients.
ing spiel that is tailored to ﬁt practically everybody. This recital is
intended to put the client at ease and condition him or her to open up
to the reader. All the while the reader is taking in every detail: the
client’s age, sex, weight, posture, speech patterns, grammar, eye con-
tact, build, hands, clothing (style, age, neatness, and cost), hair style,
jewelry, and whatever the client might be holding or carrying (books,
car keys, etc.). All of these provide clues to the personality, intelligence, line of work,
socioeconomic status, religion, education, and political afﬁlitation of the client.
The reader uses this information to formulate hypotheses that are then presented to
the client in the form of subtle questions. Depending on the client’s reactions—facial
expression, eye motion, pupil dilation, gestures—the reader can often tell if she is on
the right track. Once the reader hits on something close to home, the client will usually
react in amazement and begin revealing more details about himself. After appropriate
intervals, the reader will then rephrase this information in a different sequence and feed
it back to the client, to the client’s ever-increasing amazement. The client then provides
even more details, which the reader weaves together with everything else she has
learned. The use of a crystal ball, satin cape, or tarot cards combined with a polishedsense
of conﬁdence convey to the client that the reader can literally read the client’s mind.
Psychologist Ray Hyman, who, as a teenager, read palms to supplement his
income, has studied the art of cold reading in some depth. He relates a story
about a young lady who visited a mind reader during the 1930s:
She was wearing expensive jewelry, a wedding band, and a black dress of
cheap material. The observant reader noticed that she was wearing shoes
that were currently being advertised for people with foot trouble. He as-
sumed that this client came to see him, as did most of his female customers,
because of a love or ﬁnancial problem. The black dress and the wedding
band led him to reason that her husband had died recently. The expensive
jewelry suggested that she had been ﬁnancially comfortable during mar-
riage, but the cheap dress indicated that her husband’s death had left her
penniless. The therapeutic shoes signiﬁed that she was now standing on her
feet more than she used to, implying that she was working to support her-
self since her husband’s death.
The reader’s shrewdness led him to the following conclusion—which
turned out to be correct: The lady had met a man who had proposed to her.
She wanted to marry the man to end her economic hardship. But she felt
guilty about marrying so soon after her husband’s death. The reader told her
what she had come to hear—that it was all right to marry without further
delay (Frazier, 1981, 85–86).

602
Chapter 9: Induction
If the deceptive techniques of the magician who pretends to be a psychic, the
neurolinguistic programmer, and the cold reader are accepted at face value, they
appear to constitute evidence that really supports the hypotheses underlying these
activities. But faking the evidence is not the only way in which the practitioners of
superstition lack integrity. The other way concerns the reaction of the community of
practitioners to problems that arise in connection with the adequacy, coherence, and
external consistency of those hypotheses.
Such problems arise in connection with scientiﬁc hypotheses no less often than
they do with superstitious ones. When they arise in science, the community of scien-
Scientists are
puzzle-solvers.
tists shifts to what philosopher Thomas Kuhn calls a puzzle-solving
mode, and scientists work on them with great persistence until the
problems are solved. This puzzle-solving activity occupies the attention
of the vast majority of scientists for the greatest part of their careers,
and it constitutes what Kuhn calls ‘‘normal science.’’ Furthermore, it is
precisely this puzzle-solving character of normal science, Kuhn argues, that distin-
guishes science from pseudoscience.
For example, after the Copernican hypothesis was introduced, a problem turned
up in connection with what is called stellar parallax. If, as the hypothesis held, the
earth travels around the sun, then, in the course of its orbit, the farthest stars should
appear to shift in position with respect to the nearer ones. An analogous phenomenon
can be observed as you change your position in a room. The distant lamp, which
originally appeared to the left of the chair in the foreground, now appears to the right
of it. In the case of the stars, however, no parallax could be observed. The explanation
given at the time was that the stars were too far away for any parallax to be detectable.
Nevertheless, stellar parallax constituted an adequacy problem that the community of
astronomers regarded as a puzzle, and they worked on it for 300 years. Eventually
more powerful telescopes were produced that did indeed detect a change in position
of the stars as the earth orbited the sun.
In contrast, when an astrological prediction fails to materialize, the community of
astrologers never sets to work to ﬁgure out what went wrong. Astrologers never
recheck the location and birth time of the client or the exact position of the planets at
the time of his birth. They merely charge forward and issue more predictions.Similarly,
when the bumps on a person’s head fail to indicate essential features of that person’s
personality, or when the lines on his palm fail to reveal features of his life, the com-
munity of phrenologists and the community of palm readers never try to account for
the failures. They just ignore them and move on to the next batch of clients. Such a
response reveals a lack of integrity on the part of these practitioners toward their
respective hypotheses. Something is clearly wrong with the hypotheses or with the
measurements, but no one cares enough to do anything about it.
A similar response occurs in connection with coherence problems. Most supersti-
tions involve serious incoherencies, many of which arise from the lack of known
causal connections. For example, if astrology claims that the planets inﬂuence our

Science and Superstition
603
S
N
L
lives, then there must be some causal connection between the planets and individual
humans. But what could this connection be? Is it gravity? If so, then astrologers need
to show how inﬁnitesimally small gravitational ﬂuctuations can affect people’s lives.
On the other hand, if some other causal inﬂuence is at work, the astrologers need to
pin it down. What kind of laws govern it? Is it an inverse square law, like the law of
gravity, or some other kind of law? Analogously, if the lines on a person’s palms
indicate something about the person’s life, then what form of causality is at work here?
Do the lines inﬂuence the life, or is it the other way around? And what laws does this
form of causality obey?
Any absence of a causal connection is a defect in coherence, because it signals the
lack of a connection between ideas functioning in a hypothesis. However, such a lack
of coherence need not be fatal to a hypothesis. Physicians from the time of Hippocra-
tes knew that willow leaves, which contain the essential ingredient of aspirin, had the
power to relieve pain, but they failed to understand the causal connection until re-
cently. But what distinguishes the biomedical community from the community of
astrologers lies in their respective reactions to such problems. The members of the
biomedical community recognized the aspirin problem as a puzzle, and they worked
on it until they found the solution, but members of the astrological community are
unconcerned with identifying the causal mechanism by which the planets inﬂuence
human lives. Similarly, members of the community of palm readers and members of
the community of phrenologists care nothing about identifying the essential causal
connections implied by their respective hypotheses.
An even more serious problem is posed by hypotheses that are inconsistent with
established theories or laws. A case in point may be found in claims made by promot-
ers of the Transcendental Meditation movement. The practice of TM was popularized
Levitation is a
puzzle no one
wants to
solve.
in the 1960s by the Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, and since then it has
attracted thousands of adherents. It consists in the silent repetition of
a mantra, which induces a mental state similar to self-hypnosis. For
many who have tried it, the beneﬁts are mental and physical relaxation
leading to a sense of rejuvenation. But with further instruction in TM
(at considerable cost to the student), longer and deeper trances can
be induced that, the Maharishi claims, allow the meditator to levitate—
to hover in the air without any physical support. Thousands of disciples, he claims,
have learned how to do this, and he has released photographs that purport to verify
this claim. But of course if levitation actually occurs, it constitutes a violation of, or a
suspension of, the law of gravity.
The inconsistency of the Maharishi hypothesis with such a well-conﬁrmed theory
as the law of gravity is probably sufﬁcient reason to assign it to the category of super-
stition. But the reaction of the community of TM practitioners to this inconsistency
leaves little room for doubt. In 1971 the Maharishi bought the grounds and buildings
of what was formerly Parsons College in Fairﬁeld, Iowa, and he converted the site
into Maharishi International University. The University then became the home of the

604
Chapter 9: Induction
International Center for Scientiﬁc Research, which, one would think, would be the
perfect forum for investigating levitation. Given the availability of scores of alleged
levitators, the ‘‘scientists’’ in residence could conduct in-depth studies into this phe-
nomenon. Their ﬁndings could provide the basis for interplanetary space travel, to say
nothing of what they might do for safer airplanes. However, from its inception, the
International Center has conducted not a shred of research on levitation. No experi-
ments have been performed and no scholarly papers have been written. This response
is inconceivable for any bona ﬁde center of scientiﬁc research.
Summary
Distinguishing science from superstition is no idle preoccupation of armchair philos-
ophers, as some have suggested, but an issue vital to the future of civilization. In
Stalinist Russia responsible scientists were shipped off to the gulag for refusing to
knuckle under to the state’s ideas as to what was scientiﬁc. And in America, court
battles have been fought over what counts as science for curriculum reform in the
public schools. Also, the attempt to distinguish science from superstition has long-
standing roots in the history of philosophy. It can be taken as a modern equivalent of
the same question Plato asked long ago; numerous philosophers since then have
addressed the question from their own perspectives.
On the foregoing pages we have outlined some features that are characteristic of
scientiﬁc inquiry and some contrasting features that are characteristic of superstition.
The purpose of this exposition has not been to provide the sufﬁcient and necessary
conditions for an absolute demarcation line between science and superstition. Rather,
the purpose has been the more modest one of setting forth a group of family resem-
blances that a fair-minded inquirer may use in rendering a judgment that a set of beliefs
is more probably scientiﬁc or more probably superstitious.
Key terms introduced in this section.
Ad hoc modiﬁcations
Anecdotal evidence
Autokinetic effect
Collective hallucination
Confabulation
Disconﬁrmability
Hypnagogic hallucination
Hypnopompic hallucination
Occam’s razor
Pareidolia
Perceptual set
Placebo effect
Replicability
Scientiﬁc progress
Striking predictions
Vague hypotheses
To the extent that a set of beliefs rests on hypotheses that are coherent, precisely
tailored, narrowly formulated, supported by genuine evidence, and productive of new

Science and Superstition
605
S
N
L
insights, these beliefs can be considered scientiﬁcally grounded. This judgment is
reinforced by the conscientious response of the scientiﬁc community to problems that
develop concerning the adequacy, coherence, and external consistency of those hy-
potheses. But to the extent that a set of beliefs rests on hypotheses that are incoherent,
inconsistent with well-established theories, vague, overly broad, motivated by emo-
tional needs, supported by evidence that fails to be trustworthy, and that lead to no
new insights, then those beliefs tend to be superstitious. Such a judgment is reinforced
by a reaction of oblivious unconcern on the part of the community of practitioners to
problems that arise in connection with the adequacy, coherence, and external consis-
tency of those hypotheses.
Selected Readings
Best, John B. Cognitive Psychology. St. Paul: West Publishing Company, 1986.
Bruner, Jerome S., and Leo J. Postman. ‘‘On the Perception of Incongruity: A Para-
digm.’’ In Beyond the Information Given, by Jerome S. Bruner. New York: W. W.
Norton and Company, 1973.
Feyerabend, Paul. Against Method. London: New Left Books, 1975.
Frazier, Kendrick (ed.). Paranormal Borderlines of Science. Buffalo, New York: Pro-
metheus Books, 1981.
Frazier, Kendrick (ed.). The Hundredth Monkey, and Other Paradigms of the Para-
normal. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus Books, 1991.
Gardner, Martin. Fads and Fallacies in the Name of Science. New York: Dover
Publications, 1957.
Hines, Terence. Pseudoscience and the Paranormal. Amherst, New York: Prometheus
Books, 1988.
Kaniza, Gaetano. Organization in Vision. New York: Praeger Publishers, 1979.
Kitcher, Philip. Abusing Science: The Case against Creationism. Cambridge, Massa-
chusetts: The MIT Press, 1982.
Kuhn, Thomas S. ‘‘Logic of Discovery or Psychology of Research.’’ In Criticism and
the Growth of Knowledge, ed. by Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 1970, 4–10.
Kuhn, Thomas S. The Structure of Scientiﬁc Revolutions, 2nd ed. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1970.
Lakatos, Imre. Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1977.
Popper, Karl. Conjectures and Refutations. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963.
Radner, Daisie, and Michael Radner. Science and Unreason. Belmont, California:
Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1982.
Randi, James. Flim Flam. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus Books, 1982.
. The Truth About Uri Geller. Buffalo, New York: Prometheus Books, 1982.
Schick, Theodore, and Lewis Vaughn. How to Think About Weird Things. Mountain
View, California: Mayﬁeld, 1995.

606
Chapter 9: Induction
Singer, Bary, and Victor A. Benassi. ‘‘Fooling Some of the People All of the Time.’’ In
The Skeptical Inquirer, Winter, 1980–81, 17–24.
Thagard, Paul. ‘‘Why Astrology Is a Pseudoscience.’’ In Proceedings of the Philosophy
of Science Association, Vol. 1, pp. 223–234.
EXERCISE 9.6
I. Discussion exercises
1. Discuss the evidentiary problems raised by the following questions.
a. After drinking tea made from tarragon leaves every day for a year, your
grandfather reports that his bunions cleared up. Does this prove that tarra-
gon tea has the power to cure bunions?
b. You go to a psychotherapist who diagnoses your emotional condition as
resulting from suppressed Oedipal tendencies. When these tendencies rise
to the surface they can cause outbursts of emotion, but when they are held
in check your behavior may be either normal or overly placid. Is the psy-
chotherapist’s hypothesis a good one?
c. Every time the star running back of your school’s football team makes a
touchdown, he kneels for a quick prayer in the end zone. Is God blessing
this player’s performance on the ﬁeld?
d. On March 11, 1999, the Federal Trade Commission ﬁled a complaint against
Rose Creek Health Products of Kettle Falls, Washington. The complaint
alleges that the company took mere salt water, labeled it ‘‘Vitamin O,’’ and
sold it for $10 per ounce. A testimonial on the company’s Web site stated,
‘‘Three days after starting the Vitamin O, I threw my cane away. In Novem-
ber we went to Arizona and I bought myself a bicycle.’’ Another testimonial
by a man who had suffered severe headaches for twenty years stated, ‘‘The
day he began taking Vitamin O his headaches disappeared.’’ Do these
testimonials prove that the allegations of the FTC are false?
e. Shortly before drifting off to sleep, your roommate reports that she heard
someone call out her name in a loud, clear voice. Since no one else was in
the room at that time, does this mean that the voice came from a ghost?
f. In 1978 a New Mexico housewife, while cooking tortillas, noticed that the
burn marks on one of them looked like the face of Jesus with a crown of
thorns. The tortilla was encased in glass, and thousands of pilgrims came to
see it. Do these burn marks prove that Jesus is alive and dwelling among us?
2.
Discuss the meaning of the following selections.
a. ‘‘The universe is a macrocosm of creative energy and power, and every
man, woman, and child is the epitome of this totality of the cosmos. Within

Science and Superstition
607
S
N
L
your individualized energy ﬁeld, the microcosm called you, are twenty-two
Causal Powers, or angels, that control your conscious behavior and govern
the manifestation of all forms and experiences in your personal life.’’ (John
Randolph Price, The Angels Within Us)
b. ‘‘What is remarkable about the nervous system of the human species is that
it can command this inﬁnite organizing power through conscious intent.
Intent in the human species is not ﬁxed or locked into a rigid network of
energy and information. It has inﬁnite ﬂexibility. In other words, as long as
you do not violate the other laws of nature, through your intent you can
literally command the laws of nature to fulﬁll your dreams and desires.’’
(Deepak Chopra, The Seven Spiritual Laws of Success)
c. ‘‘Every plant has an aura, the invisible charge of energy that exists around
all things. It is the refracted and reﬂected light from electrical impulses,
heat, and vapor of the object. Or put another way, it is simply light dancing
around, inside, and off all things.’’ (Laurie Cabot, The Power of the Witch)
d. ‘‘The Pleiadians are back from the future to give us a broader perspective
on ‘the absurd times’ we live in. They explain how we are fragmented and
cut off from our connection to the whole of life. The crucial test for us will
be to shift from lineal thinking to a multidimensional perspective and ex-
pand our understanding of the frequency of love—the gateway to freeing
ourselves.’’ (Advertisement for Family of Light, by Barbara Marciniak)
e. ‘‘When advice from your angel is incorrect, it ain’t your angel. Messages
that prove misleading or untrue are due to desire or fear that was not
released before you began talking with your heavenly helper. You’re aware,
of course, that any situation has the likelihood of multiple outcomes.’’
(Alma Daniel, Timothy Wyllie, and Andrew Ramer, Ask Your Angels)
3. One of the early creationist theories advanced in opposition to Darwin’s the-
ory of natural selection was put forward by the nineteenth-century naturalist,
Philip Gosse. According to this theory God created the world in about 4000
B.C., and he did so in exactly six days, as per the account in Genesis. To
reconcile this story with indications that the world is much older, Gosse ar-
gued that God created the world with the appearance of a history. Adam was
created with a navel, trees were created with rings, and fossils were implanted
in geological formations and in sea beds. Is Gosse’s theory plausible? Does
his theory make God out to be a deceiver? Is a world with a fake history
intrinsically better than one with no history? If we were to update Gosse’s
theory, we would have to add that God created the world complete with light
rays that appear to have been emitted by distant galaxies more than 10 billion
years ago, and with fossils having ratios of carbon-12 to carbon-14 that indi-
cate (by carbon dating techniques) the fossils are millions of years old. Given

608
Chapter 9: Induction
these provisions, is there any way of disproving Gosse’s theory? In other
words, is the theory disconﬁrmable? If not, does this fact make the theory
unscientiﬁc?
4. The modern creationist theory, called ‘‘scientiﬁc creationism,’’ propounded
by Duane Gish and Henry Morris, accounts for geological formations and
fossils by appealing to the great ﬂood of Noah. This ﬂood allegedly killed
countless mammals, birds, ﬁsh, and insects, and their carcasses settled in
different strata amid the swirling waters, thus producing the fossils. But is it
plausible that all the animals that populate the earth today were saved on
Noah’s ark? These would include 25,000 species of birds, 15,000 species of
mammals, 2,500 species of amphibians, 6,000 species of reptiles, including
dinosaurs, and one million species of insects. How large must the ark have
been, in comparison, say, with the Titanic, to house these animals together
with sufﬁcient food for a 300-day voyage? Based on the number of human
hours it took to build the Titanic (do some research on this), how long do
you think it would have taken Noah, his wife, and three sons to build the ark?
Assuming the ark was made of wood, approximately how many board feet of
lumber would have been needed to build it (include enough wood for walls
and ﬂoors between the animals)? How long would it have taken Noah and
his family to collect and load the animals on the ark? How much time would
it have taken to provide one meal for the animals? Is scientiﬁc creationism a
plausible theory?
5. Suppose you are a fortune teller. You have a small shop in Milwaukee com-
plete with a crystal ball, beads hanging in the doorway, incense, and a shelf
of books devoted to the dark arts. At about 4 o’clock in the afternoon in early
March a couple in their mid-thirties come into your shop. They are apparently
healthy, and both are well dressed and wearing slightly worn gold wedding
bands. They are obviously affectionate, and as they take a seat on your couch,
the woman gives the man a quick kiss. You notice that their faces and arms
are well tanned, and the man is holding a key ring with two keys. One is
stamped with the word ‘‘Porsche.’’ When you glance through the front win-
dow, you notice a small, two-seat sports car of that make parked on the street.
You introduce yourself as a fortune teller famous throughout the world, and
as you gaze into your crystal ball, you say, ‘‘I see. . . .’’ (Do a cold reading of
this couple.)
At about 10 o’clock the next morning a woman in her mid-forties comes
through the front door. She looks tired, her make-up is slightly smeared, and
behind dark glasses you notice that her eyes look puffy. Her clothing is rum-
pled, and you detect a slight scent of alcohol on her breath. As she takes a
seat on your couch, you notice that she is agitated and nervous, and she
ﬁdgets with the wedding ring on her ﬁnger. In a subdued tone of voice she

Science and Superstition
609
S
N
L
says that she wants her fortune told. You reply that she has come to the right
place, and as you wave your hands over your crystal ball, you begin with the
words ‘‘I see. . . .’’ (Do a cold reading of this woman.)
6. Psychic phenomena include psychokinesis, telepathy, clairvoyance, and pre-
cognition. Psychokinesis is the ability to move objects through the direct
power of the mind; telepathy is the power to perceive the thoughts of others
without the use of the senses; clairvoyance is the ability to perceive distant
objects without the use of the senses; and precognition is the ability to see
the future without the use of the senses.
Psychologist Terence Hines [Hines, 1988, p. 83] argues that gambling casi-
nos and government-run lotteries provide a real-world test for the existence
of psychic phenomena. Every roll of a pair of dice, every spin of a roulette
wheel, every game of poker or blackjack, and every purchase of a lottery
ticket is an opportunity for the operation of psychokinesis, telepathy, clair-
voyance, or precognition. If these phenomena actually occurred, then one
would expect that the earnings of casinos and lotteries would be affected.
But in fact these earnings are exactly as the laws of chance predict. Does this
fact provide a fair test for the existence of psychic phenomena? Some defend-
ers of psychic phenomena argue that psychic powers cannot be used for
personal gain. Does this argument amount to an ad hoc modiﬁcation of the
hypothesis underlying psychic phenomena? Is the argument plausible?
7. In 1975 James Randi offered $10,000 to any person who could perform a
paranormal feat (including any demonstration of psychic power) in his pres-
ence under controlled conditions. (This offer was still open as of the printing
of this book.) Since that time, hundreds of people have tried to win the prize,
but not a single one has succeeded. Does the failure of such people to collect
the prize constitute a fair test of the existence of psychic phenomena?
During the past hundred years, thousands of experiments have been per-
formed to demonstrate unequivocally the existence of psychic phenomena,
but thus far none has succeeded. To account for the negative results of some
of these experiments Gertrude Schmeidler invented the ‘‘sheep-goat’’hypoth-
esis, according to which such experiments are inﬂuenced by the attitudes of
the experimenters. If the experimenters doubt the existence of psychic phe-
nomena, then the experiment is doomed to failure; but if the experimenters
are believers, then the experiment will succeed. Is this hypothesis believable?
Does it qualify as an ad hoc modiﬁcation? How might the attitude of the
experimenters affect the outcome of the experiment? Could James Randi’s
presence account for the inability of performers such as Uri Geller to dem-
onstrate their alleged psychic powers? [G. R. Schmeidler, ‘‘Separating the
Sheep from the Goats,’’ Journal of the American Society for Psychical Re-
search, 39, no. 1 (1945), 47–50.]

610
Chapter 9: Induction
8. In 1970, physicist David Simpson and his colleague Norman Foxwell per-
formed an experiment involving a group of UFO buffs in England. On a
Saturday evening about thirty of these individuals had gathered on a remote
hilltop where they thought there was a good chance of sighting a UFO. Simp-
son positioned himself on another hilltop, about three-quarters of a mile
away, and he pointed a purple spotlight, connected to a 12-volt battery, in the
direction of the group. At 11:00 P.M. he switched on the light for 5 seconds,
and after a ﬁve-second pause he switched it on again for 25 seconds. Mr.
Foxwell, Simpson’s accomplice, was stationed among the observers, and to
enhance the emotional effect, shortly after the purple light was sighted, Fox-
well switched on a buzzer that was attached to a bogus magnetic ﬁeld sensor.
According to UFO lore, UFOs are supposed to generate intense magnetic
ﬁelds, so the buzzer signaled to the crowd that a UFO was operating nearby.
To further enhance the effect, Foxwell had loaded a camera with a roll of ﬁlm,
two frames of which had been doctored with a fake latent image of a UFO.
Foxwell proceeded to take two additional snapshots in the general direction
of the purple light (which by then had been turned off), and he then gave
the ﬁlm to one of the members of the group for processing.
When the ﬁlm was developed, sure enough, a tiny image of what appeared
to be a UFO was visible on two frames. But those two frames (which were
taken a year earlier) also contained geographical features that were inconsis-
tent with the other two (genuine) frames. These inconsistencies were so glar-
ing that anyone who examined all four frames closely would detect that at
least two of them had been faked. However, when the photographs were
examined in the laboratory of the Flying Saucer Review, an international
publication devoted to UFO sightings, the experts announced that the nega-
tives were ‘‘genuine beyond all doubt.’’ Later, the director of research at the
Astrophysical Institute of the French National Centre for Scientiﬁc Research
published a ‘‘tentative interpretation’’ of the photographs, stating ‘‘In my opin-
ion there is no question of the object photographed being in any possible
way the result of faking.’’
Four months after the sighting, a report of the incident was published in
the Flying Saucer Review. As you read the following selection from the report,
remember that the purple light was turned on for a total of 30 seconds, that it
was absolutely stationary, and that it was located on the horizon, at zero
degrees elevation from the observers:
At 11:02 P.M. an object was seen at an elevation of approximately 20 degrees in the
eastern sky. The object appeared very suddenly as if it came through the clouds,
and appeared to the eye as a very bright ovoid light—purple in colour with a
periphery of white. Two members of my group who observed the object through
binoculars both remarked they could see a crimson light in the centre; this was also
attested to by witnesses with good vision.

Science and Superstition
611
S
N
L
The object remained stationary for approximately 30 seconds, during which time
Mr. Foxwell was able to take the ﬁrst of his photographs. The object then moved
slowly to the right—towards the town—and lost a little altitude in the process. At
one stage in the movement it dimmed considerably as though obscured by a low
cloud. The object continued moving for approximately 20 to 30 seconds, and then
stopped again. The light then increased considerably in intensity, though we could
not be sure if the object was moving directly toward the observation point, or if it
remained stationary. At this point the alarm of a detector sounded and a witness
ran to switch it off. After 10 to 20 seconds the light dimmed and went out as
though concealed by a cloud. However we were all certain that the object had not
moved once more. The sighting had lasted for approximately one to one and a half
minutes.
Why do you think the observers saw the purple light move? Was it because
they associated the light with the faked UFO images (the second of which
appeared slightly below and to the right of the ﬁrst)? Why did the observers
see the light as elevated 20 degrees off the horizon? (The faked UFO images
appeared approximately on the horizon.) Do you think that the expectations
of the observers affected what they reportedly saw? Do you think that confab-
ulation played a role in the report? How about the autokinetic effect? Or
perceptual sets? Why do you think the specialists who examined the photo-
graphs failed to detect the inconsistencies? Could emotions have played a role
in this oversight? [Taken from ‘‘A Controlled UFO Hoax: Some Lessons,’’ by
David I. Simpson, in Frazier, 1981.]
9. On the basis of a person’s natal chart (horoscope cast according to the per-
son’s date, time, and place of birth), astrologers claim to be able to analyze
that person’s character and personality and make predictions about his or her
life course. To test the claims of astrology about character analysis, UCLA
physicist Shawn Carlson conducted a study involving thirty American and
European astrologers considered by their peers to be among the best in the
ﬁeld. To complete the study Carlson selected 116 ‘‘clients,’’ who were then
given the California Personality Inventory (CPI), a widely used and scientiﬁ-
cally accepted test that measures personality traits. The results of the CPI were
then used to compile a personality proﬁle for each of the clients. The astrol-
ogers were informed about the nature of the CPI, and to prevent any anti-
astrology bias, many of their suggestions were incorporated into the study.
The astrologers were then given each client’s natal chart together with
three personality proﬁles. One of the proﬁles matched the client in question,
and the other two were chosen at random from a separate batch of personal-
ity proﬁles composed in the same way as the true one. No astrologer was able
to confront any client face-to-face, and the study was done on a double blind
basis so that neither the astrologer nor the experimenters knew which proﬁle
corresponded with which natal chart. The astrologers predicted that they

612
Chapter 9: Induction
would be able to match a chart with the correct proﬁle at least 50 percent of
the time. However, as it turned out, only one out of three matches was
correct—exactly what would be expected by chance. The results of Carlson’s
study were published in the widely respected scientiﬁc journal Nature.
Do you think that Carlson’s study tends to disprove the claim that astrol-
ogy can analyze personality features? Do you think that if the astrologers were
allowed to meet the clients face-to-face, the results would have been differ-
ent? Why? [From ‘‘Double-Blind Test of Astrology. . .’’ in Frazier, 1991]
Astrologers also claim the ability to make predictions. In 1978, R. N. Hunter
and J. S. Durr of the U.S. Geological Survey invited astrologers to submit
predictions about earthquakes. Hunter and Durr analyzed 240 predictions
made by 27 astrologers and found that their accuracy was worse than would
have been the case had they simply guessed. Also, in 1985, G. Chatillon
analyzed thirty predictions for North America made by Huguette Hirsig, one
of Montreal’s most famous astrologers. Only two were found to be correct.
Do studies of this sort tend to disprove the claims that astrologers are able to
make true predictions?
10. The ﬁrst step in providing an astrological reading is to cast the chart. This is
followed by an analysis of interacting chart factors, which in turn is followed
by the astrologer’s interpretation of these factors. In regard to the third step.
D. Hamblin, former chairman of the United Kingdom Astrological Associa-
tion, wrote:
If I ﬁnd a very meek and unaggressive person with ﬁve planets in Aries, this does
not cause me to doubt that Aries means aggression. I may be able to point to his
Pisces Ascendant, or to his Sun conjunct Saturn, or to his ruler in the twelfth house;
and if none of these alibis are available, I can simply say that he has not yet fulﬁlled
his Aries potential. Or I can argue (as I have heard argued) that, if a person has an
excess of planets in a particular sign, he will tend to suppress the characteristics of
that sign because he is scared that, if he reveals them, he will carry them to excess.
But if on the next day I meet a very aggressive person who also has ﬁve planets in
Aries, I will change my tune: I will say that he had to be like that because of his
planets in Aries.
Does this statement indicate that the step involving chart interpretation is not
subject to disconﬁrmation and is therefore unscientiﬁc? Is Hamblin saying
here that the interpretation is not of the chart but of the face-to-face encounter
with the client? [From ‘‘Does Astrology Need to be True?’’ by Geoffrey Dean,
in Frazier, 1991.]
11. In 1955, psychologist N. D. Sundburg gave the Minnesota Multiphasic Person-
ality Inventory, a commonly used personality test, to forty-four students, and
he then had two highly experienced psychologists draw up personality
sketches for each student based on the results of the test. He then presented
the individualized personality sketch to each student together with a universal

Science and Superstition
613
S
N
L
faked sketch. Fifty-nine percent of the students picked the faked sketch as
describing their true personality. What do these ﬁndings imply about self-
knowledge and the accuracy of personal validation? Are people prone to
accept descriptions of themselves that are ﬂattering? Do people tend to ﬁnd
some speciﬁc feature in their makeup that ﬁts any generalization?
Speciﬁcally, Sundburg found that the following sketch was acceptable as
describing the majority of college males:
You are a person who is very normal in his attitudes, behavior and relationships with
people. You get along well without effort. People naturally like you, and you are
not overly critical of them or yourself. You are neither overly conventional nor overly
individualistic. Your prevailing mood is one of optimism and constructive effort, and
you are not troubled by periods of depression, psychosomatic illness or nervous
symptoms.
The following sketch was found to be acceptable as describing the major-
ity of college females.
You appear to be a cheerful, well-balanced person. You may have some alteration
of happy and unhappy moods, but they are not extreme now. You have few or no
problems with your health. You are sociable and mix well with others. You are
adaptable to social situations. You tend to be adventurous. Your interests are wide.
You are fairly conﬁdent and usually think clearly.
Do you ﬁnd that either of these descriptions ﬁts you fairly well? If so, what
implications does this have for the astrologer, the Tarot card reader, or the
fortune teller?
12. On June 24 and 26, 1981, six children in the little village of Medjugorje in
Bosnia (former Yugoslavia) claimed to have had a vision of the Virgin Mary.
In the days and weeks that followed, more alleged visions occurred, and
reports began to attract visitors anxious for a vision of their own. From 1981
until mid-1998, approximately 26 million people, many from the United
States, visited Medjugorje, and many reported that their hopes were fulﬁlled.
By the time these visits began, claims of visions were popping up every-
where, to the obvious glee of the charismatic pastor of the local church.
However, not everyone accepted the authenticity of these visions. Among the
detractors was the local bishop, Pavao Zanic, who, on July 25, 1987, issued a
declaration that included the following:
The Madonna, they say, started to appear on the Podbrdo [a hamlet] of the Moun-
tain Crnica, but when the militia forbade going there, she came into homes, into
forests, ﬁelds, vineyards and tobacco ﬁelds; she appeared in the church, on the
altar, in the sacristy, in the choir loft, on the roof, on the church steeple, on the
roads, on the way to Cerno, in a car, on buses, in classrooms, in several places in
Mostar and Sarajevo, in monasteries in Zagreb, Verazdin, Switzerland, Italy, once
again in the Podbrdo, atop Krizevac, in the parish, in the rectory, etc. It is certain

614
Chapter 9: Induction
that not even half of the alleged places where the apparitions have taken place
have been mentioned. . . .
In 1991, after a lengthy inquiry, the Yugoslavian Bishops Conference is-
sued a statement that nothing miraculous had occurred at Medjugorje; never-
theless, thousands of pilgrims continue to stream into the village even to
this day. Also, the original six visionaries continue to claim apparitions of
the Virgin.
How do you think all these visions are best explained? Do you think they
are evidence of miracles? Or, could collective hallucination be responsible?
Do people see what they want to see? What is your estimate of the average
annual economic beneﬁt that 26 million visitors would bring to a small village
over a span of seventeen years? Do you think that this beneﬁt has anything to
do with the motives of the original six visionaries? Do you think that the
pilgrims to Medjugorje are prone to superstition?
Philosopher Paul Kurtz suggests that religion, with its emphasis onmiracles
and the supernatural, sensitizes people to belief in the superstitious and the
paranormal. Do you think that Kurtz is correct in this assessment? Is there any
essential difference between the miraculous and the superstitious? If so, is
there any evidence to support this difference? [Paul Kurtz, ‘‘Reﬂections on the
‘Transcendental Temptation,’’’ in Frazier, 1991, 13–16.]
II. Experiment exercises
1. Psychic phenomena include psychokinesis, telepathy, clairvoyance, and pre-
cognition (see Exercise I, 6). Design an experiment to test for the existence of
one or more forms of these phenomena. The experiment might use Zener
cards, dice, remote viewing tests, or Ganzﬁeld (sensory deprivation) condi-
tions. (For Ganzﬁeld studies see Frazier, 1991, pp. 143–148.) Be sure to build
sufﬁcient precautions into the experiment to prevent cheating.
2. Iridology is a diagnostic procedure that depends on the hypothesis that each
organ of the body is represented by a speciﬁc part of the iris. By examining
the eyes of a patient, the iridologist is supposed to be able to detect disease.
Design an experiment to test this hypothesis. Employ proper restrictions to
prevent cheating.
3. Dowsing involves the use of a forked tree branch (‘‘dowsing rod’’) to ﬁnd
underground water. Sometimes a pair of metal rods are used, and sometimes
oil, minerals, and metal objects are claimed to have been found. When the
dowser feels sudden jerks from the dowsing rod, he knows he is standing
over a source of water (or oil, etc.). The practice depends on the hypothesis
that water exerts some kind of magnetic inﬂuence over the rod, or engages
the psychic abilities of the dowser (or both). Design an experiment to test for
the existence of this phenomenon. (See the references to dowsing in Randi,
1982.)

Science and Superstition
615
S
N
L
4. Try your hand at cold reading. Have an assistant select some ‘‘clients’’ who
are willing to come in for a reading. They should be told in advance that you
have genuine abilities in this area. In preparation read Ray Hayman’s article
in Frazier, 1981, pp. 79–96.
5. Set up an experiment to test for the autokinetic effect. The experiment might
involve a small point of light in a large, dark room, or a ﬂashlight some
distance away on a dark night. Select a small group of observers for this
experiment, and include a test for the claim that one observer’s insistence that
the light is moving inﬂuences what the others see.
6. Design an experiment to test whether people are prone to believing fantasti-
cal explanations of things they do not understand (including conjurors’
tricks.) Consider repeating the experiment (described in the text) that was
performed by Singer and Benassi.
7. Design an experiment to test the claims of astrology. You might begin by
selecting ten ‘‘clients’’; obtain the exact time and location of their births and
have an astrologer do a reading for each. Then see if the clients can recognize
which reading (out of, say, a total of ﬁve) pertains to them. Or, alternately, for
each reading you might prepare a ‘‘reverse reading’’ in which the character
description is the exact reverse of the ‘‘true’’ reading. Then give each client a
copy of both readings (true and reverse) and see if he or she can distinguish
the true one. (See Geoffrey Dean’s two articles in Frazier, 1991, pp. 279–319.)
III. Essay exercises. After researching one of the following topics, write an essay of
eight to ten pages evaluating the plausibility of the underlying hypothesis.
1. The existence of UFOs.
2. Extraterrestrial abductions.
3. Scientiﬁc creationism.
4. Darwin’s theory of natural selection.
5. Biorhythms.
6. Phrenology.
7. Seances and channeling.
Summary
Inductive logic is not as developed as deductive logic, and at present it consists merely
of several independent topical areas. This chapter considers six of them: analogy and
its application to legal and moral reasoning, causality and Mill’s methods, probability
theory, statistical reasoning, hypothetical and scientiﬁc reasoning, and how science
differs from superstition.

616
Chapter 9: Induction
An argument from analogy is an inductive argument that rests on a similarity between
two things. Because one of these things (the primary analogate) has a certain attribute,
it is argued that the other (the secondary analogate) does also. Six factors that bear on
the strength of an argument from analogy are the relevance of the similarities shared
by the primary and secondary analogates, the number of similarities, the nature and de-
gree of disanalogy, the number of primary analogates, the diversity among the primary
analogates, and the speciﬁcity of the conclusion. Legal and moral reasoning provide a
natural vehicle for studying the function of analogical arguments in real-life situations.
The analogy between precedent cases and the case at hand may determine the outcome
of a trial, and analogies are effective in characterizing elusive moral situations.
Causes can be described in terms of sufﬁcient conditions, necessary conditions,
and sufﬁcient and necessary conditions. Mill’s methods, named after the philosopher
John Stuart Mill, are inductive techniques that allow us to identify causal connections.
The method of agreement identiﬁes necessary conditions, the method of difference
identiﬁes sufﬁcient conditions present in a speciﬁc occurrence, and the joint method
of agreement and difference identiﬁes sufﬁcient and necessary conditions. The
method of residues and the method of concomitant variation identify causal connec-
tions without regard to the kind of causality involved. The methods of agreement,
difference, and concomitant variation resemble certain methods used in the natural
sciences and the social sciences to identify causal connections.
Probability theory is a branch of mathematics that assigns a numerical ﬁgure to the
probability of certain occurrences. It comprises the classical theory, which rests on
a priori calculations; the relative frequency theory, which depends on empirical ex-
perimentation; and the subjectivist theory, which rests on the subjective beliefs of
individual people. Once these theories are used to assign a numerical ﬁgure to the
probability of a simple event, the rules of the probability calculus can be used to
calculate the probability of compound events. The conjunction rules compute the
probability of two events occurring together, the disjunction rules compute the prob-
ability of either of two events occurring, the negation rule computes the probability of
an event not happening, and Bayes’s Theorem computes the conditional probability
of two or more mutually exclusive and jointly exhaustive events.
Statistical reasoning includes any kind of argumentation based on statistical mea-
surement. Such arguments can be misleading because of ambiguities in language,
improper measuring techniques, hidden factors, and the skewed drawing of picto-
grams and graphs. Samples used to generate statistics must not be biased: They must
be randomly selected, of the proper size, and unaffected by psychological factors. The
word ‘‘average’’ can mean either the mean value of a set of data, the median value, or
the mode. Statistical claims must specify the meaning intended. The dispersion of the
data, expressed in terms of range, variance, and standard deviation, must also be
acknowledged. Graphs and pictograms must be drawn so they avoid illusions, and
percentages must state the base upon which the percentage is calculated and avoid
various numerical fallacies.

Science and Superstition
617
S
N
L
Hypothetical reasoning is used to solve a problem when the solution is not appar-
ent to undirected observation. The method consists of inventing a hypothesis that
illuminates the situation, drawing implications from the hypothesis, and testing the
implications. This method is not only applicable to many puzzling occurrences in
ordinary life, but is also essential to the progress of science. Four examples from the
history of science that clarify the hypothetical method are the discoveries of radium,
the planet Neptune, and atmospheric pressure, and the refutation of spontaneous
generation. Scientiﬁc hypotheses may be either theoretical or empirical. Empirical
hypotheses may be proved true or false, but theoretical hypotheses may only be
conﬁrmed in varying degrees. Criteria that bear on the tentative acceptance of hypoth-
eses are adequacy, internal coherence, external consistency, and fruitfulness.
The ﬁnal section introduces three general criteria for distinguishing science from
superstition. These are evidentiary support, objectivity, and integrity. These criteria
can be used as a kind of measuring stick for sizing up the beliefs people have about
the world. To the extent that those beliefs are supported by evidence, are objective,
and arise from research that reﬂects integrity, the closer those beliefs come to the ideal
of science and the more justiﬁed they are. But to the extent that the beliefs do not
share in these characteristics, the closer they come to the ‘‘ideal’’ of superstition, and
the less justiﬁed they are.


  
Answers to
Selected Exercises
Exercise 1.1
I.
1. P:
Titanium combines readily with oxygen, nitrogen, and hydrogen, all of which have an adverse
effect on its mechanical properties.
C:
Titanium must be processed in their absence.
4. P:
When individuals voluntarily abandon property, they forfeit any expectation of privacy in it
that they might have had.
C:
A warrantless search and seizure of abandoned property is not unreasonable under the Fourth
Amendment.
7. P1:
Following the birth of a defective infant, not only is the mother denied the normal tension
release from the stress of pregnancy, but both parents feel a crushing blow to their dignity,
self-esteem, and self-conﬁdence.
P2:
In a very short time, they feel grief for the loss of the normal expected child, anger at fate,
numbness, disgust, waves of helplessness, and disbelief.
C:
The psychological impact and crisis created by the birth of a defective infant is devastating.
10. P1:
Punishment, when speedy and speciﬁc, may suppress undesirable behavior.
P2:
Punishment cannot teach or encourage desirable alternatives.
C:
It is crucial to use positive techniques to model and reinforce appropriate behavior that the
person can use in place of the unacceptable response that has to be suppressed.
13. P1:
Private property helps people deﬁne themselves.
P2:
Private property frees people from mundane cares of daily subsistence.
P3:
Private property is ﬁnite.
C:
No individual should accumulate so much property that others are prevented from accumulat-
ing the necessities of life.
16. P1:
The nations of planet earth have acquired nuclear weapons with an explosive power equal to
more than a million Hiroshima bombs.
P2:
Studies suggest that explosion of only half these weapons would produce enough soot,
smoke, and dust to blanket the earth, block out the sun, and bring on a nuclear winter that
would threaten the survival of the human race.

Answers to Selected Exercises
619
S
N
L
C:
Radioactive fallout isn’t the only concern in the aftermath of nuclear explosions.
19. P1:
Antipoverty programs provide jobs for middle-class professionals in social work, penology,
and public health.
P2:
Such workers’ future advancement is tied to the continued growth of bureaucracies dependent
on the existence of poverty.
C:
Poverty offers numerous beneﬁts to the nonpoor.
22. P:
Take the nurse who alleges that physicians enrich themselves in her hospital through unneces-
sary surgery; the engineer who discloses safety defects in the braking systems of a ﬂeet of new
rapid-transit vehicles; the Defense Department ofﬁcial who alerts Congress to military graft and
overspending: all know that they pose a threat to those whom they denounce and that their
own careers may be at risk.
C:
The stakes in whistleblowing are high.
25. P1:
It is generally accepted that by constantly swimming with its mouth open, the shark is simply
avoiding suffocation.
P2:
This assures a continuous ﬂow of oxygen-laden water into the shark’s mouth, over its gills, and
out through the gill slits.
C:
Contrary to the tales of some scuba divers, the toothy, gaping grin on the mouth of an ap-
proaching shark is not necessarily anticipatory.
28. P1:
Anyone familiar with our prison system knows that there are some inmates who behave little
better than brute beasts.
P2:
If the death penalty had been truly effective as a deterrent, such prisoners would long ago
have vanished.
C:
The very fact that these prisoners exist is a telling argument against the efﬁcacy of capital
punishment as a deterrent.
II.
1. College sports are as much driven by money as professional sports.
4. Business majors are robbing themselves of the true purpose of collegiate academics, a sacriﬁce that
outweighs the future salary checks.
7. The religious intolerance of television preachers must not be tolerated.
10. Protecting the environment requires that we limit population growth.
Exercise 1.2
I.
1. Nonargument; explanation.
4. Nonargument; illustration.
7. Argument (conclusion: If the earth’s magnetic ﬁeld disappears, then intense cosmic rays will bom-
bard the earth).
10. Nonargument; report.
13. Nonargument; report.
16. Nonargument; piece of advice.
19. Argument (conclusion: For organisms at the sea surface, sinking into deep water usually means
death).
22. Argument (conclusion: Atoms can combine to form molecules, whose properties generally are very
different from those of the constituent atoms).
25. Nonargument; explanation.
28. Argument (conclusion: A person never becomes truly self-reliant).
31. Argument (conclusion: The plane mirror remains an important element in the modern arsenal of
sophisticated optical devices).
34. Nonargument; loosely associated statements.

620
Answers to Selected Exercises
II.
1. Nonargument.
4. Nonargument.
7. Argument (conclusion: The poor quality of parenting and the lack in continuity of adult care pro-
vided to many U.S. children contribute to a passivity and a sense of helplessness that hobbles
individuals for the remainder of their lives).
10. Nonargument.
VI.
1. Sufﬁcient: If something is a tiger, then it is an animal.
4. Necessary: If a person has no racquet, then he/she cannot play tennis. Or, If a person plays tennis,
then he/she has a racquet.
7. Sufﬁcient: If leaves burn, then smoke is produced.
10. Necessary: If a person does not open the door, then he/she cannot cross the threshold. Or, If a
person crosses the threshold, then he/she has opened the door.
Exercise 1.3
I.
1. Deductive (argument based on mathematics; also, conclusion follows necessarily from the premises).
4. Deductive (categorical syllogism; also, conclusion follows necessarily from the premises).
7. Inductive (causal inference; also, conclusion follows only probably from the premise).
10. Inductive (argument from analogy; also, conclusion follows only probably from the premise).
13. Inductive (argument from authority; also, conclusion follows only probably from the premise).
16. Deductive (conclusion follows necessarily from the premise).
19. Inductive (causal inference; also, conclusion follows only probably from the premises).
22. Deductive (conclusion follows necessarily from the premise; this example might also be interpreted
as an argument from deﬁnition—the deﬁnition of ‘‘refraction’’).
25. Inductive (causal inference: The dog’s familiarity with the visitor caused the dog to be silent).
28. Inductive (causal inference; also, the word ‘‘may’’ suggests a probabilistic inference).
Exercise 1.4
I.
1. Valid, unsound; false premises, false conclusion.
4. Valid, sound; true premises, true conclusion.
7. Invalid, unsound; true premise, true conclusion.
10. Valid, unsound; false premise, false conclusion.
13. Invalid, unsound; true premises, true conclusion.
II.
1. Strong, cogent; true premise, probably true conclusion.
4. Weak, uncogent; true premise, probably false conclusion.
7. Strong, uncogent; false premise, probably true conclusion.
10. Strong, cogent; true premise, probably true conclusion.
13. Weak, uncogent; true premises, probably false conclusion.
III.
1. Deductive, valid.
7. Inductive, weak.
13. Inductive, weak.
4. Deductive, valid.
10. Deductive, invalid.
16. Deductive, invalid.
19. Inductive, strong.
Exercise 1.5
I.
1. All G are S.
All cats are animals. (T)
All Q are S.
All dogs are animals. (T)
All G are Q.
All cats are dogs. (F)

Answers to Selected Exercises
621
S
N
L
4. No I are P.
No ﬁsh are mammals. (T)
Some I are not F.
Some ﬁsh are not cats. (T)
Some F are not P.
Some cats are not mammals. (F)
7. No P are H.
No dogs are ﬁsh. (T)
No C are H.
No mammals are ﬁsh. (T)
No P are C.
No dogs are mammals. (F)
10. Some S are not O.
Some dogs are not ﬁsh. (T)
Some G are not O.
Some animals are not ﬁsh. (T)
Some S are not G.
Some dogs are not animals. (F)
II.
1. If A then E.
If George Washington was assassinated, then
Not A.
George Washington is dead. (T)
George Washington was not assassinated. (T)
Not E.
George Washington is not dead. (F)
4. If E, then either D or C.
If D, then I.
If E, then I.
If Tom Cruise is a man, then he is either
a mouse or a human. (T)
If Tom Cruise is a mouse, then he has a tail. (T)
If Tom Cruise is a man, then he has a tail. (F)
7. All C with L are either
S or I.
All C are I.
All cats with fur are either mammals or dogs. (T)
All cats are dogs. (F)
10. All R that are F are either
L or H.
All R are H.
All F are L.
All cats that are mammals are either
dogs or animals. (T)
All cats are animals. (T)
All mammals are dogs. (F)
Exercise 1.6
I.
1.
4.
7.
10.

2

3

3

2

3

4

5

3

4










1

2

4

1

2




1

1
II.
1.
4.
7.

3

4

5

6

4

5

2

5

6








2

3

6

7

3

4

8







1

2

1

622
Answers to Selected Exercises
10.
13.

3

6

7

8

7

8







4

5

9

10

6

11

12





2




4

5

10

13






1

2
Exercise 2.1
II.
1. In dog sled races the dogs are tortured.
Torturing animals is morally wrong.
Therefore, dog sled races are morally wrong.
4. Free ownership of guns is as noble as belief in God and intestinal fortitude.
Belief in God and intestinal fortitude made our country great and free.
Continued belief in God and intestinal fortitude are necessary to keep our country the way it is.
Free ownership of guns is no less important than God and intestinal fortitude.
Therefore, gun control is wrong.
7. The celebration of cultural diversity causes social fragmentation.
The celebration of cultural diversity is symptomatic of a split personality.
The people who set this country up framed one nation, indivisible.
The celebration of cultural diversity works against the intention of these people.
The celebration of cultural diversity erodes national identity.
Therefore, the celebration of cultural diversity is wrong.
10. Liberalism has excessively enlarged the welfare system.
Liberalism has made welfare recipients indolent and irresponsible.
The liberals refuse to acknowledge or correct the defects in this system.
Liberalism has made the criminal justice system too sensitive to the criminal and too insensitive to
the victim of crime.
Liberalism has given more rights to the criminal than to the ordinary citizen.
Liberalism has promoted sex and violence in the school system.
Liberals have opposed prayer in the schools.
Therefore, liberalism is bad.
III.
1. Probably verbal; ambiguity. Does ‘‘sound’’ designate a subjective perception or an objective distur-
bance of the air (or some other medium)?
4. Probably verbal; ambiguity. By ‘‘violence’’ do we mean intentional hostility exerted by one
human against another, or the operation of blind physical forces? Possibly a combination of verbal
and factual. Is human violence caused by the operation of physical forces just as other physical
events are?
7. Factual. Did Paul go to Knoxville or Nashville?
10. Factual. When was the Battle of Trafalgar fought, and when did Nelson die?
13. Probably a combination of verbal (ambiguity) and factual. First, does ‘‘freedom’’ mean the absence
of external constraint only, or the absence of both internal and external constraint? Second, given
the former, is it appropriate to punish the perpetrator of evil acts even though those acts might be
internally compelled?

Answers to Selected Exercises
623
S
N
L
16. Verbal; vagueness. What is the meaning of ‘‘overpaid’’?
19. Verbal; vagueness. What is the meaning of ‘‘poverty’’?
Exercise 2.2
I.
4a. Plant, tree, conifer, spruce, Sitka spruce.
Exercise 2.3
I.
1. Precising deﬁnition.
10. Theoretical deﬁnition.
19. Lexical deﬁnition.
4. Lexical deﬁnition.
13. Stipulative deﬁnition.
22. Precising deﬁnition.
7. Persuasive deﬁnition.
16. Persuasive deﬁnition.
25. Stipulative deﬁnition.
Exercise 2.4
I.
1. Deﬁnition by subclass.
4. Enumerative deﬁnition.
7. Demonstrative deﬁnition.
10. Operational deﬁnition.
13. Deﬁnition by genus and difference.
16. Etymological deﬁnition.
19. Enumerative deﬁnition.
22. Synonymous deﬁnition.
25. Deﬁnition by subclass.
28. Deﬁnition by genus and difference.
II.
1a. ‘‘Skyscraper’’ means the Empire State Building, Chrysler Building, Sears Tower, and so on. Non-
synonymous term: building.
3a. ‘‘Animal’’ means a horse, bear, lion, and so on. Nonsynonymous term: mammal.
5a. ‘‘Intersection’’ means crossing.
6a. A person is a ‘‘genius’’ if and only if that person can earn a score of 140 on an IQ test.
7a. ‘‘Drake’’ means a male duck.
8a. ‘‘Morphology’’ is derived from the Greek words morphe, meaning ‘‘form,’’ and logos, meaning
reason, speech, or account. The morphology of something (such as an animal or a plant) gives
an account or explanation of the form or structure of that thing.
Exercise 2.5
1. Rule 3: too narrow; the deﬁniens excludes images made of bronze, wood, plaster, and so on.
4. Rule 6: ﬁgurative language.
7. Rule 5: negative.
10. Rule 7: affective terminology.
13. Rule 1: improper grammar.
16. Rule 4: circular.
19. Rule 6: vague.
22. Rule 1: improper grammar; Rule 6: vague; Rule 3: too broad (the deﬁniens also includes ketches,
sloops, and yawls).
25. Rule 3: too broad (the deﬁniens also describes violins, violas, and string basses).
28. Rule 2: fails to convey the essential meaning; the deﬁnition says nothing about the components of a
camera or how a camera works.
31. Rule 7: affective terminology.
34. Rule 3: both too narrow and too broad; the deﬁniens excludes instruments used for writing on
canvas, glass, metal, plastic, and so on, and it includes pencils, crayons, and so on.

624
Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 3.1
1. Formal fallacy.
7. Informal fallacy.
4. Informal fallacy.
10. Formal fallacy.
Exercise 3.2
I.
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
Appeal to pity.
Accident.
Appeal to force.
Tu quoque (you, too).
Red herring.
16. Ad hominem (argument against the person)
circumstantial.
19. Straw man.
22. Appeal to the people, indirect variety.
25. Missing the point.
Exercise 3.3
I.
1.
4.
Hasty generalization (converse
accident).
Slippery slope.
7. Appeal to ignorance.
10. Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority.
13. Weak analogy.
III.
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
Hasty generalization.
Ad hominen (argument against the person)
circumstantial.
No fallacy.
Straw man.
Red herring.
16. Missing the point.
19. Weak analogy.
22. No fallacy.
25. Appeal to ignorance.
28. False cause.
Exercise 3.4
I.
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
False dichotomy.
Amphiboly.
Begging the question.
Equivocation.
Composition.
16. Suppressed evidence.
19. Division.
22. Complex question.
25. Begging the question.
III.
1.
4.
7.
10.
13.
16.
19.
22.
Ad hominem (argument against the person)
circumstantial.
Equivocation.
Begging the question.
Division.
False cause.
Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority.
Composition.
Weak analogy.
25. Straw man.
28. Accident.
31. Red herring.
34. Amphiboly.
37. Suppressed evidence.
40. Begging the question.
43. Missing the point or suppressed evidence.
46. Hasty generalization.
49. Composition.
Exercise 3.5
I.
1. Missing the point or begging the question.
4. Composition.
7. No fallacy? Weak analogy?
10. Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority. The statement ‘‘Only a fool . . .’’ involves an ad hominem abusive.
13. False cause, suppressed evidence, begging the question. There is little or no evidence of any causal
connection between malpractice suits and the decision of some obstetricians to leave the ﬁeld. An
unmentioned factor is the inconvenience of being on call twenty-four hours per day waiting for
patients to deliver. There is also little or no evidence of any genuine ‘‘lawsuit crisis.’’

Answers to Selected Exercises
625
S
N
L
16. Begging the question?
19. Slippery slope.
(Strange argument!)
22. False cause? No fallacy?
25. False cause.
28. Suppressed evidence? Begging the question? No fallacy? The Commerce Clause of the U.S. Constitu-
tion and pertinent federal legislation prohibit unfair trade practices between states. No equivalent
regulations exist for international trade.
31. Appeal to the people (direct variety). Also appeal to pity?
34. Appeal to the people (direct variety)?
37. False dichotomy? No fallacy?
40. Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority, slippery slope.
43. Several cases of weak analogy. Also, a possible case of ad hominem abusive.
46. Begging the question; straw man.
49. Appeal to unqualiﬁed authority. The last paragraph suggests a hasty generalization.
52. Hasty generalization. Ad hominem abusive? Also, begging the question or red herring?
55. Weak analogy.
58. No fallacy or ad hominem circumstantial, depending on whether the arguer is attacking Gram’s
arguments or merely his unsupported statements.
Exercise 4.1
1. Quantiﬁer: some; subject term: college students; copula: are; predicate term: avid devotees of soap
operas.
4. Quantiﬁer: some; subject term: preachers who are intolerant of others’ beliefs;
copula: are not; predicate term: television evangelists.
7. Quantiﬁer: no; subject term: sex education courses that are taught competently;
copula: are; predicate term: programs that are currently eroding public morals.
Exercise 4.2
I.
1. E proposition, universal, negative, subject and predicate terms are distributed.
4. O proposition, particular, negative, subject term undistributed, predicate term distributed.
7. I proposition, particular, afﬁrmative, subject and predicate terms undistributed.
II.
1. No drunk drivers are threats to others on the highway.
4. Some CIA operatives are champions of human rights.
III.
1. Some owners of pit bull terriers are persons who can expect expensive lawsuits.
4. No residents of Manhattan are people who can afford to live there.
IV.
1. Some oil spills are not events catastrophic to the environment.
4. All corporate lawyers are persons with a social conscience.
Exercise 4.3
I.
1.
4.
7.
L
H
R
X
F
X
H
C
II.
1. Invalid
4. Invalid
7. Invalid
10. Valid

626
Answers to Selected Exercises
III.
1. No S are B.
S
B
7. False: Some S are not C.
S
C
All S are B.
(invalid)
S
B
False: Some S are C.
(invalid)
S
C
4. False: No J are N.
J
X
N
10. False: All W are L.
W
X
L
Some J are not N.
(invalid)
X
J
N
Some W are not L.
(valid)
X
W
L
Exercise 4.4
I.
1. No non-B are A. (true)
4. All non-B are A. (false)
7. Contraposition. (undetermined)
10. Obversion. (false)
II.
1a. All potential causes of lung cancer are homes contaminated by radon gas. (not logically equivalent)
2a. No radically egalitarian societies are societies that preserve individual liberties. (logically equivalent)
3a. All physicians eligible to practice are physicians whose licenses are intact. (logically equivalent)
III.
1. Invalid (illicit conversion).
4. Invalid (illicit contraposition).
7. Valid.
10. Valid.
13. Invalid (illicit conversion).
16. Invalid (illicit contraposition).
19. Valid.
Exercise 4.5
I.
1. (a) false, (b) true, (c) false.
4. (a) undetermined, (b) true, (c) undetermined.
7. (a) false, (b) undetermined, (c) undetermined.
II.
1. Valid.
4. Invalid (existential fallacy).
7. Invalid (illicit contrary).
10. Invalid (illicit subcontrary).
13. Invalid (existential fallacy).
III.
1. All non-B are A. (true)
4. Some non-A are B. (undetermined)
7. No non-A are B. (false)
10. Some non-A are not non-B. (true)
13. Obversion. (false)
16. Contradiction. (true)
19. Contrary. (undetermined)
IV.
1. Valid.
4. Invalid (illicit contraposition).
7. Valid.
10. Invalid (illicit contrary).
13. Invalid (illicit subcontrary).

Answers to Selected Exercises
627
S
N
L
V.
1. All I are C.
Some I are C. (subalternation)
Some C are I. (conversion)
4. All E are A.
False: No E are A. (contrary)
False: No A are E. (conversion)
False: All A are non-E. (obversion)
7. Some P are not non-S.
Some P are S. (obversion)
Some S are P. (conversion)
False: No S are P. (contradiction)
10. False: Some F are not A.
False: No F are A. (subalternation)
False: No A are F. (conversion)
False: All A are non-F. (obversion)
Exercise 4.6
I.
1. No S are B.
S
B
False: Some S are B.
(valid)
S
B
4. False: Some D are A.
D
X
A
Some D are not A.
(valid)
X
D
A
7. All P are F.
P
F
False: No P are F.
(invalid)
X
P
F
10. False: Some T are Q.
T
Q
All T are Q.
(invalid)
T
Q
13. False: Some P are T.
P
X
T
False: All P are T.
(valid)
X
P
T
Exercise 4.7
I.
1. All banks that make too many risky loans are banks that will fail.
4. All substances identical to bromine are substances extractable from seawater.
7. No halogens are chemically inert elements.
10. All ships that ﬂy the Jolly Roger are pirate ships.
13. Some organic silicones are things used as lubricants.
16. Some giant stars are things in the Tarantula Nebula.
19. All persons who believe Noah’s ark lies beneath the snows of Ararat are persons given to ﬂights
of fancy.
22. All cities identical to Berlin are cities that were the setting for the 1936 Olympic Games.
Or All events identical to the 1936 Olympic Games are events that took place in Berlin.

628
Answers to Selected Exercises
25. All places there is smoke are places there is ﬁre.
28. All ores identical to pitchblende are radioactive ores.
31. All novels written by James Michener are historical novels.
34. All times a rainbow occurs are times the sun is shining.
37. Some corporate raiders are persons known for their integrity, and some corporate raiders are not
persons known for their integrity.
40. All persons identical to me are persons who like strawberries. Or All things identical to strawberries
are things I like.
43. All places Cynthia wants to travel are places Cynthia travels.
46. No physicists are persons who understand the operation of semiconductors.
49. All measures that increase efﬁciency are measures that improve proﬁtability.
52. Some picnics are events entirely free of ants, and some picnics are not events entirely free
of ants.
55. All Net surfers are computer buffs.
II.
1. Some third-generation computers are machines that take dictation.
4. No downhill skiers who suffer from altitude sickness are effective competitors.
7. No matadors are performers who succumb easily to fear.
10. All hungry crocodiles are dangerous animals.
Exercise 5.1
I.
1. Major term: things that produce intense gravity.
Minor term: extremely dense objects.
Middle term: neutron stars.
Mood, ﬁgure: AAA-3; invalid.
4. Major term: good witnesses.
Minor term: hypnotized persons.
Middle term: persons who mix fact with fantasy.
Mood, ﬁgure: EIO-1; valid.
II.
1. All B are D.
4. No M are F.
No R are D.
All M are I.
No R are B.
Some I are not F.
AEE-2
EAO-3
valid
valid
7. All P are E.
10. Some O are not C.
All L are P.
All S are O.
Some L are E.
Some S are C.
AAI-1
OAI-1
invalid
invalid
III.
1. Some M are not P.
4. Some M are P.
All M are S.
All S are M.
No S are P.
No S are P.
7. All M are P.
10. Some P are not M.
All S are M.
No M are S.
All S are P.
All S are P.

Answers to Selected Exercises
629
S
N
L
IV.
1. No dogmatists are scholars who encourage free thinking.
Some theologians are scholars who encourage free thinking.
Some theologians are not dogmatists.
4. Some viruses are not things capable of replicating by themselves.
All viruses are structures that invade cells.
Some structures that invade cells are not things capable of replicating by themselves.
Exercise 5.2
I.
1. All C are U.
4. All H are D.
I
U
C
X
P
D
H
X
Some U are I.
Some D are not P.
Some I are C.
Some P are not H.
AII-4
AOO-4
invalid
invalid
7. No P are I.
10. No C are O.
F
I
P
D
O
C
X
All F are I.
Some D are not O.
No F are P.
Some D are not C.
EAE-2
EOO-2
valid
invalid
13. No P are W.
16. All C are G.
D
P
W
E
G
C
All D are P.
All G are E.
No D are W.
Some E are C.
EAE-1
AAI-4
valid
invalid
19. No S are I.
N
X
S
I
All S are N.
Some N are not I.
EAO-3
valid
II.
1.
4.
S
M
P
S
M
P
X
Conclusion: No S are P.
Conclusion: Some S are not P.

630
Answers to Selected Exercises
7.
S
M
P
S
M
P
10.
Conclusion: All S are P.
Conclusion: None.
Exercise 5.3
I.
1. All M are P.
S
M
P
All M are S.
All S are P.
invalid;
illicit minor
4. All P are M.
S
M
P
All S are M.
Some S are P.
invalid;
undistributed middle
7. No M are P.
S
M
P
All S are M.
All S are P.
invalid;
drawing afﬁrmative
conclusion from
negative premise
10. Some M are P.
S
M
P
X
All M are S.
Some S are not P.
invalid;
illicit major;
drawing negative
conclusion from
afﬁrmative premises
13. All P are M.
S
M
P
No M are S.
No S are P.
valid;
no rules broken
16. No M are P.
S
M
P
No S are M.
No S are P.
invalid;
exclusive premises
19. All P are M.
S
X
M
P
Some S are not M.
Some S are not P.
valid;
no rules broken
II.
1. Some N are C.
O
C
N
X
X
Some C are O.
Some O are N.
invalid;
undistributed middle
4. Some C are not M.
I
C
M
X
No C are I.
Some I are not M.
invalid;
exclusive premises

Answers to Selected Exercises
631
S
N
L
7. No S are V.
X
W
V
S
Some W are V.
Some W are not S.
valid;
no rules broken
10.
All S are M.
P
M
S
X
All M are P.
Some P are S.
valid, since S
exists
Exercise 5.4
1. Some non-T are M. (convert, obvert)
All non-I are non-M. (contrapose)
Some I are T.
Some M are not T.
All M are I.
Some I are T.
invalid; drawing afﬁrmative conclusion
from negative premise
4. Some I are C.
All C are non-P.
Some non-I are not P. (contrapose)
Some I are C.
All C are non-P.
Some non-P are not I.
invalid; illicit major
7. All non-M are non-E. (contrapose)
Some P are not M.
Some P are non-E. (obvert)
All E are M.
Some P are not M.
Some P are not E.
valid
10. Some S are non-D. (obvert)
No D are V.
Some non-V are S. (convert, obvert)
Some S are not D.
No D are V.
Some S are not V.
invalid; exclusive premises
Exercise 5.5
1. All scientists who theorize about the nature of time are physicists.
All persons identical to Stephen Hawking are scientists who theorize about the nature of time.
All persons identical to Stephen Hawking are physicists.
valid
4. All persons who wrote the Declaration of Independence are persons who had a big impact on
civilization.
All persons identical to Thomas Jefferson are persons who had a big impact on civilization.
All persons identical to Thomas Jefferson are persons who wrote the Declaration of Independence.
invalid, undistributed middle
7. Some songs Kathleen Battle sings are Puccini arias.
All songs Kathleen Battle wants to sing are songs Kathleen Battle sings.
Some songs Kathleen Battle wants to sing are Puccini arias.
invalid, undistributed middle
10. All TV viewers who receive scrambled signals are viewers with a decoder.
All persons who receive digital satellite signals are TV viewers who receive scrambled signals.
All persons who receive digital satellite signals are viewers with a decoder.
valid
13. All diseases carried by recessive genes are diseases that can be inherited by offspring of two
carriers.
All diseases identical to cystic ﬁbrosis are diseases carried by recessive genes.
All diseases identical to cystic ﬁbrosis are diseases that can be inherited by offspring of two carriers.
valid

632
Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 5.6
I.
1. Premise missing: Some police chiefs ﬁx parking tickets.
4. Conclusion missing: A few fraternities have no legitimate role in campus life.
7. Conclusion missing: Some expensive wines are not good wines.
10. Premise missing: Whenever the humpback whale is overhunted, the humpback whale population
decreases.
13. Premise missing: No one who thinks that everything is governed by deterministic laws believes in
free will.
II.
1. All persons who ﬁx parking tickets are persons who undermine the evenhanded enforcement of
the law.
Some police chiefs are persons who ﬁx parking tickets.
Some police chiefs are persons who undermine the evenhanded enforcement of the law.
valid
4. No groups that have dangerous initiation rites are groups that have a legitimate role in
campus life.
Some fraternities are groups that have dangerous initiation rites.
Some fraternities are not groups that have a legitimate role in campus life.
valid
7. Some chardonnays are not good wines.
All chardonnays are expensive wines.
Some expensive wines are not good wines.
valid
10. All times the humpback whale is overhunted are times the humpback whale population
decreases.
All recent years are times the humpback whale is overhunted.
All recent years are times the humpback whale population decreases.
valid
13. No persons who think that everything is governed by deterministic laws are persons who believe in
free will.
All mechanistic materialists are persons who think everything is governed by deterministic laws.
No mechanistic materialists are persons who believe in free will.
valid
III.
1. No organizations that make alcohol readily available and acceptable are organizations that are
serious about ﬁghting alcohol abuse.
All organizations identical to the Defense Department are organizations that make alcohol readily
available and acceptable.
No organizations identical to the Defense Department are organizations that are serious about ﬁght-
ing alcohol abuse.
4. All efforts to ban books are efforts that ensure those books will be read.
All efforts by the fundamentalist families in Church Hill, Tennessee, to remove
Macbeth, etc. from the libraries are efforts to ban books.
All efforts by the fundamentalist families in Church Hill, Tennessee, to remove
Macbeth, etc. from the libraries are efforts that ensure those books will be read.

Answers to Selected Exercises
633
S
N
L
7. All policies that promote more college graduates tomorrow are policies that result in higher tax
revenues tomorrow.
All policies that offer ﬁnancial aid to college students today are policies that promote more college
graduates tomorrow.
All policies that offer ﬁnancial aid to college students today are policies that result in higher tax
revenues tomorrow.
and
All policies that result in higher tax revenues tomorrow are good investments in the future.
All policies that offer ﬁnancial aid to college students today are policies that result in higher tax
revenues tomorrow.
All policies that offer ﬁnancial aid to college students today are good investments in the future.
10. All people who act in ways that decrease their chances of survival are people who will die out
through natural selection.
All smokers who continue smoking are people who act in ways that decrease their chances of
survival.
All smokers who continue smoking are people who will die out through natural selection.
and
All people who act in ways that increase their chances of survival are people who will survive
through natural selection.
All smokers who quit are people who act in ways that increase their chances of survival.
All smokers who quit are people who will survive through natural selection.
Exercise 5.7
I.
1. All A are B.
No C are A.
No B are C. }
}
Some D are C.
➤
Some D are not A.
valid
B
C
A
C
X
D
A
4. No K are N.
Some T are not N.}
Some T are K.}
Some C are not N.}
All T are C.
➤
Some C are Q.
➤
Some Q are not N.
invalid
K
X
T
N
T
X
C
N
C
Q
N
X
X

634
Answers to Selected Exercises
7. After contraposing the ﬁrst premise, obverting the second premise and the conclusion, and rear-
ranging the premises, we have:
No X are W.
No U are X.}
All U are W.}
No V are X.}
All V are U.
➤
All V are Y.
➤
No Y are X.
invalid
W
U
X
U
V
X
V
Y
X
10. After converting and obverting the second and fourth premises, obverting the third and ﬁfth prem-
ises and the conclusion, and rearranging the premises, we have:
All P are Q.
All P are R. }
All Q are R.}
All P are S. }
All R are S.
➤
No P are T. }
No T are S.
➤
All T are V.
➤
No V are P.
invalid
Q
P
R
R
P
S
S
P
T
T
V
P
II.
1. All things that produce oxygen are things that support human life.
All O are S.
All rain forests are things that produce oxygen.
All R are O.
No things that support human life are things that should be
destroyed.
No S are D.
No rain forests are things that should be destroyed.
No R are D.
After rearranging the premises, we have:
No S are D.}
No O are D.}
All O are S.
All R are O.
➤
No R are D.
S
O
D
O
R
D
4. No brittle things are ductile things.
No B are D.
All superconductors are ceramics.
All S are C.

Answers to Selected Exercises
635
S
N
L
All things that can be pulled into wires are ductile things.
All P are D.
All ceramics are brittle things.
All C are B.
No superconductors are things that can be pulled into wires.
No S are P.
After rearranging the premises, we have:
All P are D.
No B are D.}
No B are P.}
No C are P.}
All C are B.
➤
All S are C.
➤
No S are P.
D
B
P
B
C
P
C
S
P
7. All persons who give birth to crack babies are persons who in-
crease future crime rates.
All B are I.
Some pregnant women are pregnant crack users.
Some P are U.
All persons who increase future crime rates are criminals.
All I are C.
No pregnant crack users are persons who fail to give birth to
crack babies.
No U are non-B.
Some pregnant women are criminals.
Some P are C.
After obverting the fourth premise and rearranging the premises, we have:
All I are C.
All B are I.}
All B are C.}
All U are C.}
All U are B.
➤
Some P are U.
➤
Some P are C.
I
B
C
B
U
C
U
X
P
C
10. All things that promote skin cancer are things that cause
All S are C.
death.
All things that preserve the ozone layer are things that pre-
vent the release of CFCs.
All O are non-R.
No things that resist skin cancer are things that increase UV
No non-S are U.
radiation.
All things that do not preserve the ozone layer are things that
All non-O are U.
increase UV radiation.
Some packaging materials are things that release CFCs.
Some M are R.
No things that cause death are things that should be legal.
No C are L.
Some packaging materials are things that should not be legal.
Some M are non-L.

636
Answers to Selected Exercises
After contraposing the second premise, converting and obverting the third premise,
and obverting the conclusion, we have:
No C are L.
All S are C.}
No S are L.}
No U are L.}
No non-O are L.}
No R are L.}
All U are S.
➤
All non-O are U.
➤
All R are non-O.
➤
Some M are R.
➤
Some M are not L.
C
S
L
S
U
L
U
non-O
L
non-O
R
L
R
X
M
L
III.
1. No ducks are waltzers.
No D are W.
No ofﬁcers are non-waltzers.
No O are non-W.
All poultry of mine are ducks.
All P are D.
No poultry of mine are ofﬁcers.
No P are O.
After obverting the second premise and rearranging the premises, we have:
All O are W.
No D are W.} No D are O.}
All P are D.
➤
No P are O.
W
D
O
D
P
O
4. All hummingbirds are richly colored birds.
All H are R.
No large birds are birds that live on honey.
No L are O.
All birds that do not live on honey are birds that are dull in
color.
All non-O are non-R.
All hummingbirds are small birds.
All H are non-L.
After contraposing the third premise, obverting the conclusion, and rearranging the
premises, we have:
No L are O.}
No L are R.}
All R are O.
All H are R.
➤
No H are L.
O
L
R
R
H
L

Answers to Selected Exercises
637
S
N
L
7. All books in this library that I do not recommend are books
that are unhealthy in tone.
All non-R are non-H.
All the bound books are well-written books.
All B are W.
All the romances are books that are healthy in tone.
All O are H.
All the unbound books are books in this library that I do
not recommend.
All non-B are non-R.
All the romances are well-written books.
All O are W.
After contraposing the ﬁrst and fourth premises, we have:
All B are W.
All R are B. }
All R are W.}
All H are W.}
All H are R.
➤
All O are H.
➤
All O are W.
B
R
W
R
H
W
H
O
W
10. All animals that belong to me are animals I trust.
All A are T.
All dogs are animals that gnaw bones.
All D are G.
All animals I admit to my study are animals that beg when told to do
so.
All S are B.
All the animals in the yard are animals that belong to me.
All Y are A.
All animals I trust are animals I admit into my study.
All T are S.
All animals that are willing to beg when told to do so are dogs.
All B are D.
All the animals in the yard are animals that gnaw bones.
All Y are G.
After rearranging the premises, we have:
All D are G.
All B are D.}
All B are G.}
All S are G.}
All T are G.}
All A are G.}
All S are B.
➤
All T are S.
➤
All A are T.
➤
All Y are A.
➤
All Y are G.
D
B
G
B
S
G
S
T
G
T
A
G
A
Y
G
Exercise 6.1
I.
1. N
4. P • I
7. S ≡E
10. G ⊃I
13. H • (R v B)
16. P • I
19. S • N or (S v N )
22. (C ⊃U ) ⊃M

638
Answers to Selected Exercises
25. G v (H ⊃N)
28. (G • A) ⊃(S v P)
31. (G • F ) v (S • I )
34. J • [T ⊃(G v P)]
37. T ⊃[B ⊃(L • C)]
40. [(O v Q) • (K v I )]
43. C ≡T
46. [(M ⊃N ) • (G ⊃C)]
49. [(I • M) ≡A] ⊃ ( J v T)
II.
1. R v F
4. (H v S)
7. S ⊃G
10. A ⊃(N ⊃M)
13. (C • K) ≡P
16. [(T • L) ⊃H ] • (H ⊃I)
19. (B ⊃M) • [(M • I ) ⊃(C • P)]
Exercise 6.2
I.
1. Dot.
4. Triple bar.
7. Horseshoe.
10. Wedge.
II.
1.  H
F T
4. H
•
 N
T
F F T
7. W ⊃E
F
T F
10. H ⊃(C v E)
T
T
T T F
13. (E v C) ⊃(H • L )
T F F F
T
T T T
III.
1. A
•
X
T
F F
4.  C
v
Z
F T
F F
7.  X ⊃Z
T F
F F
10.  (A •  Z)
F
T T T F
13. (A • Y)
v
( Z • C)
T F F
T
T F T T
16. (C ≡ A)
v
(Y ≡Z)
T F F T
T
F T F
19.  [ (X ⊃C) ≡ (B ⊃Z)]
T
F
F T T
F T
T F F
22.  [(A ≡X) v (Z ≡Y)]
v
[( Y ⊃B) • (Z ⊃C)]
F
T F F
T
F T F
T
T F T T
F T T
25. (Z ⊃C) ⊃{[( X ⊃B) ⊃(C ⊃Y)] ≡[(Z ⊃X) ⊃( Y ⊃Z)]}
F T T
T
T F T T
F
T F F
T
F T F
F
T F F F
IV.
1. A
v
P
T
T ?
4. Q
•
A
?
? T
7. A ⊃P
T
? ?
10. (P ⊃A) ≡(Q ⊃B)
? T T
T
? T T
13.  (Q • Y) ≡ (Q v A)
T
? F F
F F
? T T

Answers to Selected Exercises
639
S
N
L
Exercise 6.3
I.
1. N ⊃(N ⊃N)
T T
T T T
F T
F T F
tautologous
4. [(E ⊃F) ⊃F] ⊃E
T T T
T T
T T
T F F
T F
T T
F T T
T T
F F
F T F
F F
T F
contingent
7. [(Z ⊃X) • (X v Z)] ⊃X
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
tautologous
10. [G ⊃(N ⊃ G)] • [(N ≡G) • (N v G)]
T
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
F
self-contradictory
13. [U • (T v S )] ≡[( T v  U) • ( S v  U)]
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
self-contradictory
II.
1.  D v B
 (D •  B)
4. R v  S
S •  R
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
logically equivalent
contradictory
7. (E ⊃C) ⊃L
E ⊃(C ⊃L )
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
consistent

640
Answers to Selected Exercises
10. W ≡(B • T)
W • (T ⊃ B)
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
inconsistent
13. H • (K v J )
( J • H) v (H • K)
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
F
F
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
logically equivalent
III.
1. Carlson’s prediction is false (self-contradictory).
4. It is possible that both astronomers are correct. If they are, a supernova will not occur within 10
light years of the earth.
7. It is possible that both stockbrokers are correct. If they are, then Datapro will cut back its work-
force. We can conclude nothing about Netmark and Compucel.
10. It is possible that Nicole’s philosophy makes sense. If it does, then the mind is not identical to the
brain, personal freedom exists, and humans are responsible for their actions.
Exercise 6.4
I.
1. N ⊃S / /  N ⊃ S
4. D ⊃W
/
D / / W
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
F
invalid
valid
7. Invalid (fails on ﬁrst line).
10. Valid.
II.
1.
4.
7.
10.
Valid.
Valid.
Invalid (fails
on fourth line).
Invalid (fails
on fourth and
sixth lines).
13.
16.
19.
Valid.
Invalid (fails
on third line).
Valid.

Answers to Selected Exercises
641
S
N
L
Exercise 6.5
Note: Truth values may vary depending on how the problem is done.
1. B ⊃C /  C / /  B
T T F
T F
F T
valid
4.  ( I ≡J ) / /  ( I ⊃J )
T
T
T
F
F
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
F
T
F
T
invalid
7. G ⊃H / H ⊃I
/  J ⊃G /  I
/ /
J
T T T
T T T
T F T T
T T
F
valid
10. (M v N) ⊃O / O ⊃(N v P) / M ⊃( Q ⊃N) / (Q ⊃M) ⊃ P / / N ≡O
T T
T F
T
T
T
T F F
T T
T T
F T T
F T
T F F
T F T
F F T
invalid
13. (A v B) ⊃(C • D) / (X v  Y) ⊃( C •  W) / (X v Z) ⊃(A • E) / /  X
T T
T
F F
T T
T
T F T T F
T T
T
T T T
F T
valid
II.
1. K ≡(R v M) / K •  R / M ⊃ K
T T
F T T
T T T F
T T F T
inconsistent
4. (N v C) ≡E / N ⊃ (C v H) / H ⊃E / C ⊃H
F T T
T T
F T F
T T T
T T T
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
consistent
7. S ⊃(R ≡A) / A ⊃(W •  R) / R ≡(W v T) / S • U / U ⊃T
T T
T T F
F T
F F T
T T
T T
T T T
T T T
inconsistent
10. A v Z / A ⊃(T • F) / Z ⊃( M • Q) / Q ⊃ F / T ⊃ M
/
M ⊃A
T
T
T
T
T
F
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
F
T
F
T
T
T
F
T
T
F
T
F
F
T
T
T
T
T
F
consistent
Exercise 6.6
I.
1. MT.
7. DD.
13. DS.
19. Invalid form.
4. CD.
10. DA.
16. AC.
II.
1. F ⊃T
13. (P ⊃T) • (A ⊃T)
T
T v T
F
MT
P v A
DD
4. W v M
16. M ⊃U
W
U
M
DS
M
AC
7. T
19. S ⊃C
T ⊃H
I ⊃S
H
MP
I ⊃C
HS
10. (L ⊃A) • (C ⊃F)
L • C
A • F
invalid

642
Answers to Selected Exercises
III.
1. (S ⊃M) • (S ⊃F)
S v S
M v F
CD
Since the second premise is a tautology, it is impossible to escape between the horns. The two
available strategies are therefore grasping by the horns and constructing a counterdilemma. Perhaps
Melinda could take her books to the party and study there. Such an event would falsify the left-
hand conjunct of the ﬁrst premise, thus falsifying the entire premise. Here is a counterdilemma:
If Melinda spends the night studying, she will pass the test tomorrow; and, if she doesn’t spend
the night studying, she will go to the party. She will either spend the night studying or not
studying. Therefore, she will either pass the test or go to the party.
4. (C ⊃S) • (E ⊃S)
S v S
C v E
DD
The second premise is a tautology, so it is impossible to escape between the horns. One could
grasp the dilemma by the horns by arguing that corporations could share the cost of neutralizing
toxic waste, thus preserving the competitive edge. Here is a constructive counterdilemma:
If corporations spend money to neutralize their toxic waste, then the environment will be
preserved; but if corporations do not spend money to neutralize their toxic waste, then they
will remain competitive. Corporations will do one or the other. Therefore, either the environ-
ment will be preserved or corporations will remain competitive.
7. (C ⊃L) • (J ⊃B)
L v B
C v J
DD
Here the second premise is not a tautology, so it is possible to escape between the horns. Perhaps
students could take a double major in liberal arts and business. One could also grasp the dilemma
by the horns by arguing that students could major in a liberal arts ﬁeld where a job would be
available upon graduation. Here is a constructive counterdilemma:
If students major in liberal arts, then they will take courses that are interesting and rewarding;
but if they major in business, then they will have a job when they graduate. Students will
either major in liberal arts or business. Therefore, either they will take courses that are inter-
esting and rewarding or they will have a job when they graduate.
10. (P ⊃Ri) • (Re ⊃E)
P v Re
Ri v E
CD
The second premise is not a tautology, so it is at least possible to escape between the horns. If we in-
structed counter-terrorist squads to execute terrorists on the spot, we would neither prosecute them
nor release them. Can you think of a way to grasp the dilemma by the horns? Here is a counterdilemma:
If we prosecute suspected terrorists, then we discourage terrorism; but if we release them, then
we avoid the risk of retaliation by other terrorists. We must either prosecute or release sus-
pected terrorists. Therefore, either we will discourage terrorism or we will avoid the risk of
retaliation by other terrorists.
IV.
1. If Oral Roberts actually receives messages from God, then he would not have sent the letter. Oral
Roberts did send the letter. Therefore, he does not actually receive messages from God. (MT)
4. If group problem solving is important, then we should not emphasize individual testing. Group
problem solving is important. Therefore, we should not emphasize individual testing. (MP)
If we should not emphasize individual testing, then the national math test is a mistake. We should
not emphasize individual testing. Therefore, the national math test is a mistake. (MP)

Answers to Selected Exercises
643
S
N
L
7. If we close the library at Central Juvenile Hall, then delinquents will be deprived of an opportunity
to read. If delinquents are deprived of an opportunity to read, then they will not have access to
ideas, dreams, and alternative ways of living. Therefore, if we close the library at Central Juvenile
Hall, then delinquents will not have access to ideas, dreams, and alternative ways of living. (HS)
If we close the library at Central Juvenile Hall, then delinquents will not have access to ideas,
dreams, and alternative ways of living. Delinquents must have access to ideas, dreams, and alterna-
tive ways of living. Therefore, we must not close the library at Central Juvenile Hall. (MT)
10. If viewing adult videocassettes led to violent sex crimes, then there would be over a million violent
sex crimes per week. It is not the case that there are over a million violent sex crimes per week.
Therefore, viewing adult videocassettes does not lead to violent sex crimes. (MT)
Exercise 7.1
I.
(1)
4. 2, 3, DS
5. 1, 4, MP
6. 3, 5, MT
(4)
4. 2, 3, MP
5. 1, 4, MP
6. 4, 5, DS
7. 4, 6, MT
8. 3, 7, DS
II.
(1)
1. (D • E) v (B ⊃P)
2.
3.
(D • E)
/ B ⊃P
B ⊃P
1, 2, DS
(4)
1. (R v W )
2. S ⊃(R v W)
/ S
3. S
1, 2, MT
(7)
1. (K • B) v (L ⊃E)
2. (K • B)
3. E
/ L
4. L ⊃E
1, 2, DS
5. L
3, 4, MT
(10)
1. S ⊃D
2. S v (D ⊃K)
3. D
/ K
4. S
1, 3, MT
5. D ⊃K
2, 4, DS
6. K
3, 5, MP
(13)
1. G ⊃[O ⊃(G ⊃D)]
2. O v G
3. O
/ D
4. G
2, 3, DS
5. O ⊃(G ⊃D)
1, 4, MP
6. G ⊃D
3, 5, MP
7. D
4, 6, MP
(16)
1. J ⊃[A ⊃(D ⊃A)]
2.
3.
J v A
J
/ D
4. A ⊃(D ⊃A)
1, 3, MP
5. A
2, 3, DS
6. D ⊃A
4, 5, MP
7. D
5, 6, MT
(19)
1. A ⊃[A v (T ⊃R)]
2. R ⊃[R v (A ⊃R)]
3. (T v D) ⊃R
4. T v D
/ D
5. R
3, 4, MP
6. R v (A ⊃R)
2, 5, MP
7. A ⊃R
5, 6, DS
8. A
5, 7, MT
9. A v (T ⊃R)
1, 8, MP
10. T ⊃R
8, 9, DS
11. T
5, 10, MT
12. D
4, 11, DS
III.
(1)
1. W ⊃(P v C)
2. P
3. W
/ C
4. P v C
1, 3, MP
5. C
2, 4, DS
(4)
1. (R ⊃L) ⊃(L ⊃F)
2. F v (R ⊃L)
3. F
/ R
4. R ⊃L
2, 3, DS
5. L ⊃F
1, 4, MP
6. L
3, 5, MT
7. R
4, 6, MT

644
Answers to Selected Exercises
(7)
1. H ⊃(D ≡A)
2. V v (R ⊃V)
3. R v H
4. V
/ D ≡A
5. R ⊃V
2, 4, DS
6. R
4, 5, MT
7. H
3, 6, DS
8. D ≡A
1, 7, MP
(10)
1. C ⊃[C v (J ⊃D)]
2. C ⊃(C • U)
3. (C • U)
4. D
/ J
5. C
2, 3, MT
6. C v (J ⊃D)
1, 5, MP
7. J ⊃D
5, 6, DS
8. J
4, 7, MT
Exercise 7.2
I.
(1)
4. 2, Simp
5. 3, Simp
6. 4, 5, Conj
7. 1, 6, MP
8. 4, Add
9. 7, 8, MP
10. 9, Simp
11. 5, 10, Conj
(4)
4. 2, 3, CD
5. 1, 4, CD
6. 2, Simp
7. 1, Simp
8. 6, 7, Conj
9. 5, 8, CD
II.
(1)
1. M ⊃Q
2. R ⊃T
3. M v R
/ Q v T
4. (M ⊃Q) • (R ⊃T)
1, 2, Conj
5. Q v T
3, 4, CD
(4)
1. (L v T) ⊃(B • G)
2. L • (K ≡R)
/ L • B
3. L
2, Simp
4. L v T
3, Add
5. B • G
1, 4, MP
6. B
5, Simp
7. L • B
3, 6, Conj
(7)
1. (U v W ) ⊃(T ⊃R)
2. U • H
3. R • J
/ U • T
4. U
2, Simp
5. U v W
4, Add
6. T ⊃R
1, 5, MP
7. R
3, Simp
8. T
6, 7, MT
9. U • T
4, 8, Conj
(10)
1. (P ⊃R) ⊃(M ⊃P)
2. (P v M) ⊃(P ⊃R)
3. P v M
/ R v P
4. P ⊃R
2, 3, MP
5. M ⊃P
1, 4, MP
6. (P ⊃R) • (M ⊃P)
4, 5, Conj
7. R v P
3, 6, CD
(13)
1. H ⊃(T ⊃R)
2. H v (E ⊃F)
3. T v E
4. H • D
/ R v F
5. H
4, Simp
6. T ⊃R
1, 5, MP
7. E ⊃F
2, 5, DS
8. (T ⊃R) • (E ⊃F)
6, 7, Conj
9. R v F
3, 8, CD
(16)
1. (F • M) ⊃(S v T)
2. (S v A) ⊃F
3. (S v B) ⊃M
4. S • G
/ T
5. S
4, Simp
6. S v A
5, Add
7. F
2, 6, MP
8. S v B
5, Add
9. M
3, 8, MP
10. F • M
7, 9, Conj
11. S v T
1, 10, MP
12. T
5, 11, DS
(19)
1. (J ⊃K ) • (O ⊃P)
2. (L ⊃J) • (M ⊃O)
3. K ⊃(L v M)
4. K • G
/ P
5. K
4, Simp
6. L v M
3, 5, MP
7. J v O
2, 6, CD
8. K v P
1, 7, CD
9. P
5, 8, DS

Answers to Selected Exercises
645
S
N
L
III.
(1)
1. T ⊃(Q • F)
2. T • C
/ Q v O
3. T
2, Simp
4. Q • F
1, 3, MP
5. Q
4, Simp
6. Q v O
5, Add
(4)
1. M v P
2. (P v S) ⊃(R • D)
3. M
/ R
4. P
1, 3, DS
5. P v S
4, Add
6. R • D
2, 5, MP
7. R
6, Simp
(7)
1. (C v M) ⊃(C ⊃T)
2. C v T
3. C
/ B
4. C v M
3, Add
5. C ⊃T
1, 4, MP
6. T
3, 5, MP
7. T v B
6, Add
8. T
2, 3, DS
9. B
7, 8, DS
(10)
1. (V • E) ⊃(P ⊃E)
2. V ⊃E
3. V • I
4. E ⊃(P v J)
/ J • E
5. V
3, Simp
6. E
2, 5, MP
7. V • E
5, 6, Conj
8. P ⊃E
1, 7, MP
9. P
6, 8, MT
10.
11.
12.
P v J
4, 6, MP
J
9, 10, DS
J • E
6, 11, Conj
Exercise 7.3
I.
(1)
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1, Com
4, Assoc
3, 5, DS
2, 6, MP
3, 7, Conj
8, DM
(4)
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1, Assoc
4, Simp
5, Simp
2, 6, MP
5, Com
8, Simp
3, 9, MP
7, 10, Conj
11, Dist
II.
(1)
1. (M ⊃P) • (N ⊃Q)
2. (M • N)
/ P v Q
3. M v N
2, DM
4. P v Q
1, 3, CD
(4)
1. (O v M) ⊃S
2. S
/ M
3. (O v M)
1, 2, MT
4. O • M
3, DM
5. M • O
4, Com
6. M
5, Simp
(7)
1. H • (C • T)
2. (F • T)
/ F
3. F v T
2, DM
4. F v T
3, DN
5. T v F
4, Com
6. (H • C ) • T
1, Assoc
7. T • (H • C )
6, Com
8. T
7, Simp
9. T
8, DN
10. F
5, 9, DS
(10)
1. (G • H) v (M • G)
2. G ⊃(T • A)
/ A
3. (G • H) v (G • M)
1, Com
4. G • (H v M)
3, Dist
5. G
4, Simp
6. T • A
2, 5, MP
7. A • T
6, Com
8. A
7, Simp

646
Answers to Selected Exercises
(13)
1. (F • A)
2. (L v A)
3. D ⊃(F v L)
/ D
4. L • A
2, DM
5. A • L
4, Com
6. A
5, Simp
7. F v A
1, DM
8. A v F
7, Com
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
F
6, 8, DS
L
4, Simp
F • L
9, 10, Conj
(F v L)
11, DM
D
3, 12, MT
(16)
1. (K v F)
2. F ⊃(K v C)
3. (G v C ) ⊃H
/ (K v H)
4. K • F
1, DM
5. F • K
4, Com
6. F
5, Simp
7. K v C
2, 6, MP
8. K
4, Simp
9. C
7, 8, DS
10. C v G
9, Add
11. G v C
10, Com
12. H
3, 11, MP
13. K • H
8, 12, Conj
14. (K v H)
13, DM
(19)
1. B v (S • N)
2. B ⊃S
3. S ⊃N
/ B v W
4. (B v S) • (B v N)
1, Dist
5. B v S
4, Simp
6. (B ⊃S) • (S ⊃N)
2, 3, Conj
7. S v N
5, 6, CD
8. (S • N)
7, DM
9. (S • N) v B
1, Com
10. B
8, 9, DS
11. B v W
10, Add
(22)
1. Q ⊃(C • B)
2. T ⊃(B • H)
3. (Q • T)
/ B
4. Q v T
3, DM
5. [Q ⊃(C • B)] •
1, 2, Conj
[T ⊃(B • H)]
6. (C • B) v (B • H)
4, 5, CD
7. (B • C) v (B • H)
6, Com
8. B • (C v H)
7, Dist
9. B
8, Simp
(25)
1. (T • K) v (C • E)
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
K ⊃E
E ⊃C
/ T • K
[(T • K ) v C] • [(T • K) v E]
1, Dist
[(T v C ) • (K v C )] • [(T v E) • (K v E)]
4, Com, Dist
K v E
5, Com, Assoc, Simp
(K ⊃E) • (E ⊃C )
2, 3, Conj
E v C
6, 7, CD
C v E
8, Com
(C • E)
9, DM
(C • E) v (T • K)
1, Com
T • K
10, 11, DS
III.
(1)
1. (S • D) v (S • H)
2. S ⊃(I • R)
/ S • R
3. S • (D v H)
1, Dist
4. S
3, Simp
5. I • R
2, 4, MP
6. R • I
5, Com
7. R
6, Simp
8. S • R
4, 7, Conj
(4)
1. G v (R • E)
2. (G v E) ⊃R
/ G v M
3. (G v R) • (G v E)
1, Dist
4. (G v E) • (G v R)
3, Com
5. G v E
4, Simp
6. R
2, 5, MP
7. G v R
3, Simp
8.
9.
10.
R v G
7, Com
G
6, 8, DS
G v M
9, Add

Answers to Selected Exercises
647
S
N
L
(7)
1. R ⊃(C v M)
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
(I v C)
(A v M)
/ R
I • C
2, DM
A • M
3, DM
C • I
4, Com
C
6, Simp
M • A
5, Com
M
8, Simp
C • M
7, 9, Conj
(C v M)
10, DM
R
1, 11, MT
(10)
1. E v (B • P)
2. E v (G • W)
3. P v W
/ E
4. (E v B) • (E v P)
1, Dist
5. (E v P) • (E v B)
4, Com
6. E v P
5, Simp
7. (E v G) • (E v W )
2, Dist
8. (E v W) • (E v G)
7, Com
9. E v W
8, Simp
10. (E v P) • (E v W)
6, 9, Conj
11. E v (P • W)
10, Dist
12. (P • W) v E
11, Com
13. (P • W)
3, DM
14. E
12, 13, DS
Exercise 7.4
I.
(1)
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
1, Equiv
2, Exp
3, 5, MT
4, 6, DS
7, Com
8, Simp
(4)
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
1, Com
4, Exp
3, 5, MP
6, Trans
2, DN
8, Impl
7, 9, HS
10, Impl
11, DN
II.
(1)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
(S • K ) ⊃R
K
/ S ⊃R
(K • S) ⊃R
1, Com
K ⊃(S ⊃R)
3, Exp
S ⊃R
2, 4, MP
(4)
1.
2.
3.
4.
(B ⊃M ) • (D ⊃M )
B v D
/ M
M v M
1, 2, CD
M
3, Taut
(7)
1. ( J • R) ⊃H
2. (R ⊃H) ⊃M
3. (P v J)
/ M • P
4. J ⊃(R ⊃H)
1, Exp
5. J ⊃M
2, 4, HS
6. P • J
3, DM, DN
7. P
6, Simp
8. J
6, Com, Simp
9. M
5, 8, MP
10. M • P
7, 9, Conj
(10)
1. (U • W) ⊃X
2. U ⊃U
/ (U v X)
3. U v U
2, Impl
4. U
3, Taut
5. U v W
4, Add
6. (U • W)
5, DM
7. X
1, 6, MP
8. U • X
4, 7, Conj
9. U • X
8, DN
10. (U v X)
9, DM
(13)
1. M ⊃(U ⊃H)
2. (H v U) ⊃F
/ M ⊃F
3. (U v H) ⊃F
2, Com
4.
5.
(U ⊃H) ⊃F
3, Impl
M ⊃F
1, 4, HS
(16)
1.
2.
3.
4.
J ⊃(G ⊃L)
/ G ⊃(J ⊃L)
( J • G) ⊃L
1, Exp
(G • J) ⊃L
2, Com
G ⊃(J ⊃L)
3, Exp

648
Answers to Selected Exercises
(19)
1. (I ⊃E) ⊃C
2. C ⊃C
/ I
3. C v C
2, Impl
4. C
3, Taut
5. (I ⊃E)
1, 4, MT
6. (I v E)
5, Impl
7. I • E
6, DM, DN
8. I
7, Simp
(22)
1. Q ⊃(W • D)
/ Q ⊃W
2. Q v (W • D)
1, Impl
3. (Q v W) •
2, Dist
(Q v D)
4. Q v W
3, Simp
5. Q ⊃W
4, Impl
(25)
1. I v (N • F)
2. I ⊃F
/ F
3. (I v N) • (I v F)
1, Dist
4. I v F
3, Com, Simp
5. I ⊃F
4, DN, Impl
6. F ⊃I
2, Trans
7. F ⊃F
5, 6, HS
8. F v F
7, Impl, DN
9. F
8, Taut
(28)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
(O ⊃R) ⊃S
(P ⊃R) ⊃S
/ R
S ⊃(P ⊃R)
2, Trans
(O ⊃R) ⊃(P ⊃R)
1, 3, HS
(O ⊃R) v (P ⊃R)
4, Impl
(O v R) v (P v R)
5, Impl
(O • R) v (P • R)
6, DM, DN
(O v P) • R
7, Com, Dist, Com
R
8, Com, Simp
(31)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
(S v T) ⊃(S ⊃T)
(S ⊃T) ⊃(T ⊃K )
S v T
/ S v K
S ⊃T
1, 3, MP
T ⊃K
2, 4, MP
S ⊃T
3, DN, Impl
S ⊃K
5, 6, HS
S v K
7, Impl, DN
(34)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
H ≡I
H ⊃(I ⊃F )
(H v I ) ⊃F
/ F
(H • I ) v (H • I )
1, Equiv
(H • I ) ⊃F
2, Exp
(H • I) ⊃F
3, DM
[(H • I) ⊃F] • [(H • I ) ⊃F]
5, 6, Conj
F v F
4, 7, CD
F
8, Taut

Answers to Selected Exercises
649
S
N
L
(35)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
P ⊃A
Q ⊃B
/ (P v Q) ⊃(A v B)
P v A
1, Impl
Q v B
2, Impl
(P v A) v B
3, Add
(Q v B) v A
4, Add
P v (A v B)
5, Assoc
Q v (A v B)
6, Assoc, Com
[P v (A v B)] • [Q v (A v B)]
7, 8, Conj
(P • Q) v (A v B)
9, Com, Dist
(P v Q) v (A v B)
10, DM
(P v Q) ⊃(A v B)
11, Impl
III.
(1)
1. D ⊃C
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
(C • S)
/ D ⊃S
C v S
2, DM
C ⊃S
3, Impl
C ⊃S
4, DN
D ⊃S
1, 5, HS
(4)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
D ⊃P
/ (I • D) ⊃P
D v P
1, Impl
(D v P) v I
2, Add
I v (D v P)
3, Com
(I v D) v P
4, Assoc
(I • D) v P
5, DM
(I • D) ⊃P
6, Impl
(7)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
G ⊃A
G ⊃L
/ G ⊃(A • L)
G v A
1, Impl
G v L
2, Impl
(G v A) • (G v L)
3, 4, Conj
G v (A • L)
5, Dist
G ⊃(A • L)
6, Impl
(10)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
(A • U) ≡R
(R v A)
/ U
[(A • U) ⊃R] • [R ⊃(A • U)]
1, Equiv
(A • U) ⊃R
3, Simp
R • A
2, DM
R
5, Simp
(A • U)
4, 6, MT
A v U
7, DM
A • R
5, Com
A
9, Simp
U
8, 10, DS

650
Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 7.5
I.
(1)
1. N ⊃O
2. N ⊃P
/ N ⊃(O • P)
3. N
ACP
4. O
1, 3, MP
5. P
2, 3, MP
6. O • P
4, 5, Conj
7. N ⊃(O • P)
3–6, CP
(4)
1. (G v H) ⊃(S • T)
2. (T v U) ⊃(C • D)
/ G ⊃C
3. G
ACP
4. G v H
3, Add
5. S • T
1, 4, MP
6. T
5, Com, Simp
7. T v U
6, Add
8. C • D
2, 7, MP
9. C
8, Simp
10. G ⊃C
3–9, CP
(7)
1. M v (N • O)
/ N ⊃M
2. M
ACP
3. N • O
1, 2, DS
4. N
3, Simp
5. M ⊃N
2, 4, CP
6. N ⊃M
5, Trans, DN
(10)
1. C ⊃(A • D)
2. B ⊃(A • E)
/ (C v B) ⊃A
3. C v B
ACP
4. [C ⊃(A • D)] • [B ⊃(A • E)]
1, 2, Conj
5. (A • D) v (A • E)
3, 4, CD
6. A • (D v E)
5, Dist
7. A
6, Simp
8. (C v B) ⊃A
3–7, CP
(13)
1. R ⊃B
2. R ⊃(B ⊃F)
3. B ⊃(F ⊃H)
/ R ⊃H
4. R
ACP
5. B
1, 4, MP
6. B ⊃F
2, 4, MP
7. F
5, 6, MP
8. F ⊃H
3, 5, MP
9. H
7, 8, MP
10. R ⊃H
4–9, CP
(16)
1. Q ⊃(R ⊃S)
2. Q ⊃(T ⊃U)
3. U ⊃(R v T)
/ Q ⊃(U ⊃S)
4. Q
ACP
5. U
ACP
6. R ⊃S
1, 4, MP
7. T ⊃U
2, 4, MP
8. T
5, 7, DN, MT
9. R v T
3, 5, MP
10. R
8, 9, Com, DS
11. S
6, 10, MP
12. U ⊃S
5–11, CP
13. Q ⊃(U ⊃S)
4–12, CP

Answers to Selected Exercises
651
S
N
L
(19)
1. P ⊃[(L v M) ⊃(N • O)]
2. (O v T) ⊃W
/ P ⊃(M ⊃W)
3. P
ACP
4. M
ACP
5. (L v M) ⊃(N • O)
1, 3, MP
6. M v L
4, Add
7. L v M
6, Com
8. N • O
5, 7, MP
9. O
8, Com, Simp
10. O v T
9, Add
11. W
2, 10, MP
12. M ⊃W
4–11, CP
13. P ⊃(M ⊃W)
3–12, CP
II.
(1)
1. H ⊃D
2. U ⊃S
/ (H • U) ⊃(S • D)
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
H • U
H
D
U
S
S • D
ACP
3, Simp
1, 4, MP
3, Com, Simp
2, 6, MP
5, 7, Conj
9. (H • U) ⊃(S • D)
3–8, CP
(4)
1.
2.
3.
J ⊃D
(J • D) ⊃C
(N • C ) ⊃I
/ J ⊃(N ⊃I )
4. J
ACP
5. N
6. D
7. J • D
8. C
9. N • C
10. I
ACP
1, 4, MP
4, 6, Conj
2, 7, MP
5, 8, Conj
3, 9, MP
11. N ⊃I
5–10, CP
12. J ⊃(N ⊃I)
4–11, CP
Exercise 7.6
I.
(1)
1. (S v T ) ⊃S
/ S
2. S
3. S v T
AIP
2, Add
4. S
5. S • S
1, 3, MP
2, 4, Conj
6. S
2–5, IP
(4)
1.
2.
H ⊃(L ⊃K )
L ⊃(K ⊃L)
/ H v L
3. H • L
AIP
4. H
3, Simp
5. L ⊃K
1, 4, MP
6. L
3, Com, Simp
7. K ⊃L
2, 6, MP
8. K
5, 6, MP
9. L
7, 8, MP
10. L • L
6, 9, Conj
11. (H • L)
3–10, IP
12. H v L
11, DM

652
Answers to Selected Exercises
(7)
1. (E v F) ⊃(C • D)
2. (D v G) ⊃H
3. E v G
/ H
4. H
5. (D v G)
AIP
2, 4, MT
6. D • G
5, DM
7. D
8. D v C
6, Simp
7, Add
9. C v D
8, Com
10. (C • D)
9, DM
11. (E v F )
1, 10, MT
12. E • F
11, DM
13. E
12, Simp
14. G
3, 13, DS
15. G
6, Com, Simp
16. G • G
14, 15, Conj
17. H
4–16, IP, DN
(10)
1. K
/ S ⊃(T ⊃S)
2. S
ACP
3. S v T
2, Add
4. T v S
3, Com
5. T ⊃S
4, Impl
6. S ⊃(T ⊃S)
2–5, CP
(13)
1. [C ⊃(D ⊃C )] ⊃E
/ E
2. C
ACP
3. C v D
2, Add
4. D v C
3, Com
5. D ⊃C
4, Impl
6. C ⊃(D ⊃C)
2–5, CP
7. E
1, 6, MP
(16)
1. (N v O) ⊃(C • D)
2. (D v K) ⊃(P v C )
3. (P v G) ⊃(N • D)
/ N
4. N
AIP
5. N v O
4, Add
6. C • D
1, 5, MP
7. D
6, Com, Simp
8. D v K
7, Add
9. P v C
2, 8, MP
10. C
6, Simp
11. P
9, 10, Com, DN, DS
12. P v G
11, Add
13. (N • D)
3, 12, MP
14. N v D
13, DM
15. D
4, 14, DN, DS
16. D • D
7, 15, Conj
17. N
4–16, IP

Answers to Selected Exercises
653
S
N
L
(19)
1. A ⊃[(N v N) ⊃(S v T)]
2. T ⊃(F v F )
/ A ⊃S
3. A • S
AIP
4. A
3, Simp
5. (N v N) ⊃(S v T)
1, 4, MP
6. N
ACP
7. N v N
6, Add
8. N
7, Taut
9. N ⊃N
6–8, CP
10. N v N
9, Impl
11. N v N
10, Com
12. S v T
5, 11, MP
13. S
3, Com, Simp
14. T
12, 13, DS
15. (F v F)
2, 14, MP
16. F • F
15, DM, DN
17. (A • S)
3–16, IP
18. A v S
17, DM, DN
19. A ⊃S
18, Impl
II.
(1)
1. (C • R) ⊃(I • D)
(4)
1. (Z ⊃C ) ⊃B
2. R ⊃D
/ C v R
2. (V ⊃Z) ⊃B
/ B
3. C • R
AIP
3. B
AIP
4. I • D
1, 3, MP
4. (Z ⊃C)
1, 3, MT
5. D • I
4, Com
5. (Z v C)
4, Impl
6. D
5, Simp
6. Z • C
5, DM
7. R • C
3, Com
7. Z
6, Simp
8. R
7, Simp
8. (V ⊃Z)
2, 3, MT
9. D
2, 8, MP
9. (V v Z)
8, Impl
10. D • D
6, 9, Conj
10. V • Z
9, DM
11. (C • R)
3–10, IP
11. Z • V
10, Com
12. C v R
11, DM
12. Z
11, Simp
13. Z • Z
7, 12, Conj
14. B
3–13, IP
15. B
14, DN
Exercise 7.7
(1)
/ P ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃Q]
1. P
ACP
2. P ⊃Q
ACP
3. Q
1, 2, MP
4. (P ⊃Q) ⊃Q
2–3, CP
5. P ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃Q]
1–4, CP

654
Answers to Selected Exercises
(4)
/ (P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P • R) ⊃(Q • R)]
1. P ⊃Q
ACP
2. P • R
ACP
3. P
2, Simp
4. Q
1, 3, MP
5. R
2, Com, Simp
6. Q • R
4, 5, Conj
7. (P • R) ⊃(Q • R)
2–6, CP
8. (P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P • R) ⊃(Q • R)]
1–7, CP
(7)
/ (P ⊃Q) v (Q ⊃P)]
1. [(P ⊃Q) v (Q ⊃P)]
AIP
2. (P ⊃Q) • (Q ⊃P)
1, DM
3. (P v Q) • (Q v P)
2, Impl, DN
4. (P • Q) • (Q • P)
3, DM, DN
5. P • Q
4, Simp
6. Q • P
4, Com, Simp
7. P
5, Simp
8. P
6, Com, Simp
9. P • P
7, 8, Conj
10. (P ⊃Q) v (Q ⊃P)
1–9, IP, DN
(10)
/ [(P • Q) • Q] ⊃P
1. (P • Q) • Q
ACP
2. (P • Q)
1, Simp
3. P v Q
2, DM, DN
4. Q
1, Com, Simp
5. P
3, 4, Com, DS
6. [(P • Q) • Q] ⊃P
1–5, CP
(13)
/ (P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃P]
1. P ⊃Q
ACP
2. P ⊃Q
ACP
3. Q ⊃P
2, Trans, DN
4. P ⊃P
1, 3, HS
5. P v P
4, Impl
6. P
5, Taut
7. (P ⊃Q) ⊃P
2–6, CP
8. (P ⊃Q) ⊃[(P ⊃Q) ⊃P]
1–7, CP
(16)
/ [(P ⊃P) • (P ⊃P)]
1. (P ⊃P) • (P ⊃P)
AIP
2. (P v P) • (P v P)
1, Impl, DN
3. P • P
2, Taut
4. [(P ⊃P) • (P ⊃P)]
1–3, IP

Answers to Selected Exercises
655
S
N
L
(19)
/ P ≡[P v (Q • Q)]
1. P
ACP
2. P v (Q • Q)
1, Add
3. P ⊃[P v (Q • Q)]
1–2, CP
4. P v (Q • Q)
ACP
5. P
AIP
6. Q • Q
4, 5, DS
7. P
5–6, IP, DN
8. [P v (Q • Q)] ⊃P
4–7, CP
9. {line 3} • {line 8}
3, 8, Conj
10. P ≡[P v (Q • Q]
9, Equiv
Exercise 8.1
1. Ce
28. (x)[(Gx • Vx) ⊃(Rx • Ex)]
4. (x)(Nx ⊃Bx)
31. (x)[(Rx • Vx) ⊃Ex]
7. Cg ⊃Gt
34. Gt ≡(x)(Wx ⊃Cx)
10. (∃x)(Ax • Px)
37. (∃x)(Mx • Ix) ⊃Ir
13. (∃x)(Tx • Rx)
40. (x)[(Bx • Mx) ⊃Sx] ⊃Sc
16. (x)Ix
43. (∃x)(Ex • Rx) ≡(∃x)(Mx • Ox)
19. (∃x)(Tx • Wx)
22. (∃x)(Gx • Ax)
25. (x)[(Mx • Px) ⊃Tx]
Exercise 8.2
I.
(1)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
3. Ax ⊃Bx
1, UI
4. Bx ⊃Cx
2, UI
5. Ax ⊃Cx
3, 4, HS
6. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
5, UG
(4)
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. Ag • Bg
/ Cg
3. Ag ⊃(Bg v Cg)
1, UI
4. Ag
2, Simp
5. Bg v Cg
3, 4, MP
6. Bg
2, Com, Simp
7. Cg
5, 6, DS
(7)
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx v Cx)]
2. (∃x)(Ax • Cx)
/ (∃x)Bx
3. Am • Cm
2, El
4. Am ⊃(Bm v Cm)
1, UI
5. Am
3, Simp
6. Bm v Cm
4, 5, MP
7. Cm
3, Com, Simp
8. Bm
6, 7, Com, DS
9. (∃x)Bx
8, EG
(10)
1. (x)(Bx v Ax)
2. (x)(Bx ⊃Ax)
/ (x)Ax
3. Bx v Ax
1, UI
4. Bx ⊃Ax
2, UI
5. Ax v Bx
3, Com
6. Ax ⊃Bx
5, DN, Impl
7. Ax ⊃Ax
4, 6, HS
8. Ax v Ax
7, Impl, DN
9. Ax
8, Taut
10. (x)Ax
9, UG
(13)
1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)Bx
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(∃x)Dx
3. An • Cn
/ (∃x)(Bx • Dx)
4. An
3, Simp
5. (∃x)Ax
4, EG
6. (x)Bx
1, 5, MP
7. Cn
3, Com, Simp
8. (∃x)Cx
7, EG
9. (∃x)Dx
2, 8, MP
10. Dm
9, EI
11. Bm
6, UI
12. Bm • Dm
10, 11, Conj
13. (∃x)(Bx • Dx)
12, EG

656
Answers to Selected Exercises
II.
(1)
1. (x)(Ox ⊃Sx)
2. (x)(Ox ⊃Fx)
/ (x)[Ox ⊃(Sx • Fx)]
3. Ox ⊃Sx
1, UI
4. Ox ⊃Fx
2, UI
5. Ox v Sx
3, Impl
6. Ox v Fx
4, Impl
7. (Ox v Sx) • (Ox v Fx)
5, 6, Conj
8. Ox v (Sx • Fx)
7, Dist
9. Ox ⊃(Sx • Fx)
8, Impl
10. (x)[Ox ⊃(Sx • Fx)]
9, UG
(4)
1. (x)(Cx ⊃Vx) • (x)(Px ⊃Fx)
2. (∃x)(Cx • Gx) • (∃x)(Px • Gx)
/ (∃x)(Vx • Gx) • (∃x)(Fx • Gx)
3. (∃x)(Cx • Gx)
2, Simp
4. Cm • Gm
3, EI
5. (∃x)(Px • Gx)
2, Com, Simp
6. Pn • Gn
5, EI
7. (x)(Cx ⊃Vx)
1, Simp
8. Cm ⊃Vm
7, UI
9. Cm
4, Simp
10. Vm
8, 9, MP
11. Gm
4, Com, Simp
12. Vm • Gm
10, 11, Conj
13. (∃x)(Vx • Gx)
12, EG
14. (x)(Px ⊃Fx)
1, Com, Simp
15. Pn ⊃Fn
14, UI
16. Pn
6, Simp
17. Fn
15, 16, MP
18. Gn
6, Com, Simp
19. Fn • Gn
17, 18, Conj
20. (∃x)(Fx • Gx)
19, EG
21. (∃x)(Vx • Gx) • (∃x)(Fx • Gx)
13, 20, Conj
(7)
1. (x)[Gx ⊃(Ix • )Px)]
2. (x)[(Ix • Px) ⊃Rx]
3. Ga • Gc
/ Ra • Rc
4. Gx ⊃(Ix • Px)
1, UI
5. (Ix • Px) ⊃Rx
2, UI
6. Gx ⊃Rx
4, 5, HS
7. (x)(Gx ⊃Rx)
6, UG
8. Ga ⊃Ra
7, UI
9. Ga
3, Simp
10. Ra
8, 9, MP
11. Gc ⊃Rc
7, UI
12. Gc
3, Com, Simp
13. Rc
11, 12, MP
14. Ra • Rc
10, 13, Conj

Answers to Selected Exercises
657
S
N
L
(10)
1. (x)[(Ax • Kx) ⊃Rx] ⊃(x)(Gx ⊃Sx)
2. (x)[(Ax • Kx) ⊃Fx] ⊃(x)(Gx ⊃Px)
3. (x)[(Ax • Kx) ⊃(Rx • Fx)]
/ (x)[Gx ⊃(Sx • Px)]
4. (Ax • Kx) ⊃(Rx • Fx)
3, UI
5. (Ax • Kx) v (Rx • Fx)
4, Impl
6. [(Ax • Kx) v Rx] • [(Ax • Kx) v Fx]
5, Dist
7. (Ax • Kx) v Rx
6, Simp
8. (Ax • Kx) v Fx
6, Com, Simp
9. (Ax • Kx) ⊃Rx
7, Impl
10. (Ax • Kx) ⊃Fx
8, Impl
11. (x)[(Ax • Kx) ⊃Rx]
9, UG
12. (x)[(Ax • Kx) ⊃Fx]
10, UG
13. (x)(Gx ⊃Sx)
1, 11, MP
14. (x)(Gx ⊃Px)
2, 12, MP
15. Gx ⊃Sx
13, UI
16. Gx ⊃Px
14, UI
17. Gx v Sx
15, Impl
18. Gx v Px
16, Impl
19. (Gx v Sx) • (Gx v Px)
17, 18, Conj
20. Gx v (Sx • Px)
19, Dist
21. Gx ⊃(Sx • Px)
20, Impl
22. (x)[Gx ⊃(Sx • Px)]
21, UG
Exercise 8.3
I.
(1)
1. (x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
2. (x)Bx
/ (∃x)Ax
3. (∃x)Bx
2, CQ
4. (x)Ax
1, 3, MT
5. (∃x)Ax
4, CQ
(4)
1. (∃x)Ax v (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
2. (∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)Ax
3. (x)Bx
2, CQ
4. Bx
3, UI
5. Bx v Cx
4, Add
6. (Bx • Cx)
5, DM
7. (x)(Bx • Cx)
6, UG
8. (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
7, CQ
9. (∃x)Ax
1, 8, Com, DS
(7)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)Cx v (x)Ax
3. (x)Bx
/ (∃x)Cx
4. (∃x)Bx
3, CQ
5. Bm
4, EI
6. Am ⊃Bm
1, UI
7. Am
5, 6, MT
8. (∃x)Ax
7, EG
9. (x)Ax
8, CQ
10. (x)Cx
2, 9, Com, DS
11. (∃x)Cx
10, CQ
(10)
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Bx • Cx)
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
3. (x)(Ax • Bx)
1, CQ
4. (x)(Bx • Cx)
2, CQ
5. (Ax • Bx)
3, UI
6. (Bx • Cx)
4, UI
7. Ax v Bx
5, DM, DN
8. Bx v Cx
6, DM, DN
9. Ax ⊃Bx
7, Impl
10. Bx ⊃Cx
8, Impl
11. Ax ⊃Cx
9, 10, HS
12. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
11, UG

658
Answers to Selected Exercises
(13)
1. (x)(Ax • Bx) ⊃(∃x)Cx
2. (∃x)(Cx v Bx)
/ (x)Ax
3. (x)(Cx v Bx)
2, CQ
4. (Cx v Bx)
3, UI
5. Cx • Bx
4, DM
6. Cx
5, Simp
7. (x)Cx
6, UG
8. (∃x)Cx
7, CQ
9. (x)(Ax • Bx)
1, 8, MT
10. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
9, CQ
11. (Am • Bm)
10, EI
12. Am v Bm
11, DM, DN
13. Bx
5, Com, Simp
14. (x)Bx
13, UG
15. Bm
14, UI
16. Am
12, 15, Com, DS
17. (∃x)Ax
16, EG
18. (x)Ax
17, CQ
II.
(1)
1. (x)[Px ⊃(Hx v Nx)] ⊃(∃x)Cx
2. Cf
/ (∃x)(Px • Nx)
3. (∃x)Cx
2, EG
4. (x)[Px ⊃(Hx v Nx)]
1, 3, DN, MT
5. (∃x)[Px ⊃(Hx v Nx)]
4, CQ
6. [Pm ⊃(Hm v Nm)]
5, EI
7. [Pm v (Hm v Nm)]
6, Impl
8. Pm • (Hm v Nm)
7, DM, DN
9. Pm • (Hm • Nm)
8, DM
10. Pm
9, Simp
11. Hm • Nm
9, Com, Simp
12. Nm
11, Com, Simp
13. Pm • Nm
10, 12, Conj
14. (∃x)(Px • Nx)
13, EG
(4)
1. (∃x)(Gx • Px) v (∃x)(Sx • Ex)
2. (∃x)Ex
/ (∃x)Px
3. (x)Ex
2, CQ
4. Ex
3, UI
5. Ex v Sx
4, Add
6. Sx v Ex
5, Com
7. (Sx • Ex)
6, DM
8. (x)(Sx • Ex)
7, UG
9. (∃x)(Sx • Ex)
8, CQ
10. (∃x)(Gx • Px)
1, Com, DS
11. Gm • Pm
10, EI
12. Pm
11, Com, Simp
13. (∃x)Px
12, EG

Answers to Selected Exercises
659
S
N
L
(7)
1. (x)(Px ⊃Sx) • (x)(Ix ⊃Gx)
2. (∃x)(Sx • Gx)
/ (∃x)(Px • Ix)
3. (x)(Sx • Gx)
2, CQ
4. (Sx • Gx)
3, UI
5. Sx v Gx
4, DM
6. (x)(Px ⊃Sx)
1, Simp
7. (x)(Ix ⊃Gx)
1, Com, Simp
8. Px ⊃Sx
6, UI
9. Ix ⊃Gx
7, UI
10. Sx ⊃Px
8, Trans
11. Gx ⊃Ix
9, Trans
12. (Sx ⊃Px) • (Gx ⊃Ix)
10, 11, Conj
13. Px v Ix
5, 12, CD
14. (Px • Ix)
13, DM
15. (x)(Px • Ix)
14, UG
16. (∃x)(Px • Ix)
15, CQ
(10)
1. (∃x)[Px • (Gx v Hx)]
2. (x)[Nx ⊃(Px • Hx)]
3. (∃x)(Px • Cx) v (∃x)(Px • Nx)
/ (∃x)(Cx • Gx)
4. (x)[Px • (Gx v Hx)]
1, CQ
5. [Px • (Gx v Hx)]
4, UI
6. Px v (Gx v Hx)
5, DM
7. Px v (Gx • Hx)
6, DM
8. (Px v Gx) • (Px v Hx)
7, Dist
9. Px v Gx
8, Simp
10. Px v Hx
8, Com, Simp
11. (Px • Hx)
10, DM
12. Nx ⊃(Px • Hx)
2, UI
13. Nx
11, 12, MT
14. Nx v Px
13, Add
15. Px v Nx
14, Com
16. (Px • Nx)
15, DM
17. (x)(Px • Nx)
16, UG
18. (∃x)(Px • Nx)
17, CQ
19. (∃x)(Px • Cx)
3, 18, Com, DS
20. Pm • Cm
19, EI
21. (x)(Px v Gx)
9, UG
22. Pm v Gm
21, UI
23. Pm
20, Simp
24. Gm
22, 23, DN, DS
25. Cm
20, Com, Simp
26. Cm • Gm
24, 25, Conj
27. (∃x)(Cx • Gx)
26, EG

660
Answers to Selected Exercises
Exercise 8.4
I.
(1)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)]
3. Ax
ACP
4. Ax ⊃Bx
1, UI
5. Ax ⊃Cx
2, UI
6. Bx
3, 4, MP
7. Cx
3, 5, MP
8. Bx • Cx
6, 7, Conj
9. Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)
3–8, CP
10. (x)[Ax ⊃(Bx • Cx)]
9, UG
(4)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Cx ⊃(∃x)(Bx • Dx)
/ (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
3. (∃x)Ax
ACP
4. Am
3, EI
5. Am ⊃Cm
1, UI
6. Cm
4, 5, MP
7. (∃x)Cx
6, EG
8. (∃x)(Bx • Dx)
2, 7, MP
9. Bn • Dn
8, EI
10. Bn
9, Simp
11. (∃x)Bx
10, EG
12. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃x)Bx
3–11, CP
(7)
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (x)[(Cx v Dx) ⊃Ex]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
3. Ax
ACP
4. (Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx
1, UI
5. (Cx v Dx) ⊃Ex
2, UI
6. Ax v Bx
3, Add
7. Cx
4, 6, MP
8. Cx v Dx
7, Add
9. Ex
5, 8, MP
10. Ax ⊃Ex
3–9, CP
11. (x)(Ax ⊃Ex)
10, UG
(10)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. Am v An
/ (∃x)Bx
3. (∃x)Bx
AIP
4. (x)Bx
3, CQ
5. Am ⊃Bm
1, UI
6. An ⊃Bn
1, UI
7. (Am ⊃Bm) • (An ⊃Bn)
5, 6, Conj
8. Bm v Bn
2, 7, CD
9. Bm
4, UI
10. Bn
8, 9, DS
11. Bn
4, UI
12. Bn • Bn
10, 11, Conj
13. (∃x)Bx
3–12, IP
14. (∃x)Bx
13, DN

Answers to Selected Exercises
661
S
N
L
(13)
1. (∃x)Ax ⊃(x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
2. (∃x)Dx ⊃(∃x)Bx
/ (∃x)(Ax • Dx) ⊃(∃x)Cx
3. (∃x)(Ax • Dx)
ACP
4. Am • Dm
3, EI
5. Am
4, Simp
6. (∃x)Ax
5, EG
7. (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
1, 6, MP
8. Dm
4, Com, Simp
9. (∃x)Dx
8, EG
10. (∃x)Bx
2, 9, MP
11. Bn
10, EI
12. Bn ⊃Cn
7, UI
13. Cn
11, 12, MP
14. (∃x)Cx
13, EG
15. (∃x)(Ax • Dx) ⊃(∃x)Cx
3–14, CP
(16)
1. (x)[(Ax v Bx) ⊃Cx]
2. (∃x)(Ax v Dx) ⊃(x)Ex
/ (x)Cx v (x)Ex
3. [(x)Cx v (x)Ex]
AIP
4. (x)Cx • (x)Ex
3, DM
5. (x)Cx
4, Simp
6. (∃x)Cx
5, CQ
7. Cm
6, EI
8. (Am v Bm) ⊃Cm
1, UI
9. (Am v Bm)
7, 8, MT
10. Am • Bm
9, DM
11. Am
10, Simp
12. Am v Dm
11, Add
13. (∃x)(Ax v Dx)
12, EG
14. (x)Ex
2, 13, MP
15. (x)Ex
4, Com, Simp
16. (x)Ex • (x)Ex
14, 15, Conj
17. (x)Cx v (x)Ex
3–16, IP, DN
(19)
1. (x)[Bx ⊃(Cx • Dx)]
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Bx) ⊃(x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
ACP
3. Ax
ACP
4. Ax ⊃Bx
2, UI
5. Bx
3, 4, MP
6. Bx ⊃(Cx • Dx)
1, UI
7. Cx • Dx
5, 6, MP
8. Dx
7, Com, Simp
9. Ax ⊃Dx
3–8, CP
10. (x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
9, UG
11. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx) ⊃(x)(Ax ⊃Dx)
2–10, CP

662
Answers to Selected Exercises
II.
(1)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Wx)
2. (x)(Rx ⊃Cx)
/ (x)[(Rx • Ax) ⊃(Cx • Wx)]
3. Rx • Ax
ACP
4. Rx
3, Simp
5. Ax
3, Com, Simp
6. Ax ⊃Wx
1, UI
7. Rx ⊃Cx
2, UI
8. Cx
4, 7, MP
9. Wx
5, 6, MP
10. Cx • Wx
8, 9, Conj
11. (Rx • Ax) ⊃(Cx • Wx)
3–10, CP
12. (x)[(Rx • Ax) ⊃(Cx • Wx)]
11, UG
(4)
1. (x)[(Sx v Ux) ⊃(Ix • Cx)]
2. (x)[(Cx v Vx) ⊃(Rx • Ax)]
/ (x)(Sx ⊃Ax)
3. Sx
ACP
4. Sx v Ux
3, Add
5. (Sx v Ux) ⊃(Ix • Cx)
1, UI
6. Ix • Cx
4, 5, MP
7. Cx
6, Com, Simp
8. Cx v Vx
7, Add
9. (Cx v Vx) ⊃(Rx • Ax)
2, UI
10. Rx • Ax
8, 9, MP
11. Ax
10, Com, Simp
12. Sx ⊃Ax
3–11, CP
13. (x)(Sx ⊃Ax)
12, UG
(7)
1. (∃x)Cx ⊃(x)[Ax ⊃(Sx • Dx)]
2. (x)(Cx ⊃Ax) ⊃(∃x)(Dx • Sx)
/ (∃x)(Dx • Sx)
3. (∃x)(Dx • Sx)
AIP
4. (x)(Cx ⊃Ax)
2, 3, MT
5. (∃x)(Cx ⊃Ax)
4, CQ
6. (Cm ⊃Am)
5, EI
7. (Cm v Am)
6, Impl
8. Cm • Am
7, DM, DN
9. Cm
8, Simp
10. (∃x)Cx
9, EG
11. (x)[Ax ⊃(Sx • Dx)]
1, 10, MP
12. Am ⊃(Sm • Dm)
11, UI
13. Am
8, Com, Simp
14. Sm • Dm
12, 13, MP
15. Dm • Sm
14, Com
16. (∃x)(Dx • Sx)
15, EG
17. (∃x)(Dx • Sx) • (∃x)(Dx • Sx)
3, 16, Conj
18. (∃x)(Dx • Sx)
3–17, IP, DN

Answers to Selected Exercises
663
S
N
L
(10)
1. (∃x)(Gx • Px) v (∃x)(Ax • Px)
2. (∃x)Px ⊃(∃x)[Ax • (Cx • Dx)]
/ (∃x)(Dx • Cx)
3. (∃x)Px
AIP
4. (x)Px
3, CQ
5. Px
4, UI
6. Px v Gx
5, Add
7. Gx v Px
6, Com
8. (Gx • Px)
7, DM
9. (x)(Gx • Px)
8, UG
10. (∃x)(Gx • Px)
9, CQ
11. (∃x)(Ax • Px)
1, 10, DS
12. Am • Pm
11, EI
13. Pm
12, Com, Simp
14. Pm
4, UI
15. Pm • Pm
13, 14, Conj
16. (∃x)Px
3–15, IP
17. (∃x)Px
16, DN
18. (∃x)[Ax • (Cx • Dx)]
2, 17, MP
19. An • (Cn • Dn)
18, EI
20. Cn • Dn
19, Com, Simp
21. Dn • Cn
20, Com
22. (∃x)(Dx • Cx)
21, EG
Exercise 8.5
I.
1. All cats are animals.
No cats are dogs.
No dogs are animals.
4. Some mammals are dogs.
Some mammals write books.
Some mammals are dogs that write books.
7. There are ﬂowers.
There are dogs.
No ﬂowers are animals.
Some dogs are not animals.
10. Some mammals are felines.
Some animals are not felines.
All mammals are animals.
Some feline animals are not mammals.
II.
(1)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
/ (x)(Bx ⊃Cx)
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
Aa ⊃Ba
/
Aa ⊃Ca
/ /
Ba ⊃Ca
F
T
T
F
T
F
T
F
F

664
Answers to Selected Exercises
(4)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (∃x)Ax
/ (x)Bx
For a universe consisting of two members, we have
(Aa ⊃Ba) • (Ab ⊃Bb)
/
Aa v Ab
/ / Ba • Bb
T
T
T
T
F
T
F
T T F
T F F
(7)
1. (x)(Ax ⊃Bx)
2. (∃x)Bx ⊃(∃x)Cx
/ (x)(Ax ⊃Cx)
For a universe consisting of two members, we have
(Aa ⊃Ba) • (Ab ⊃Bb) / (Ba v Bb) ⊃(Ca v Cb) / / (Aa ⊃Ca) • (Ab ⊃Cb)
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T T T
T
T T F
T
T
T
F
T
F
F
(10)
1. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
2. (∃x)(Ax • Bx)
/ (x)(Ax ≡Bx)
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
Aa • Ba /  Aa •  Ba / / Aa ≡Ba
T T
F
T T
F
For a universe consisting of two members, we have
(Aa • Ba) v (Ab • Bb) / ( Aa •  Ba)
v ( Ab •  Bb)
T T T
T
T F F
F
T F F
T
T
F
T F T
F
// (Aa ≡Ba) • (Ab ≡Bb)
T T T
F
T F
F
For a universe consisting of three members, we have
(Aa • Ba) v [(Ab • Bb) v (Ac • Bc)] /
T T T
T
T F F
T
F F F
( Aa •  Ba) v [( Ab •  Bb) v ( Ac •  Bc)]
F
T F F
T
T
F
T F T
F
T
T
F T T
F
// (Aa ≡Ba) • [(Ab ≡Bb) • (Ac ≡Bc)]
T T T
F
T F
F
F
F T F
III.
(1)
1. (x)[(Vx • Px) ⊃(Ax • Mx)]
2. (∃x)(Vx • Ox)
/ (∃x)(Mx • Ax)
For a universe consisting of one member, we have
(Va • Pa) ⊃(Aa • Ma)
/
Va • Oa / / Ma • Aa
T F F
T
F F
T
T T T
F
F F
(4)
1. (x)(Tx ⊃Hx)
2. (∃x)(Tx • Hx) ⊃(∃x)(Px • Ox)
/ (x)(Tx ⊃Ox)
For a universe consisting of two members, we have
(Ta ⊃Ha) • (Tb ⊃Hb) / [(Ta • Ha) v (Tb • Hb)] ⊃[(Pa • Oa) v (Pb • Ob)]
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
T T
T
T
T T T
T
F F
F
T
T T T
// (Ta ⊃Oa) • (Tb ⊃Ob)
T
F
F
F
T
T
T
Exercise 8.6
I.
1. Rcp
19. (x){Px ⊃(∃y)[Py • (Mxy ⊃Axy)]}
4. (∃x)Fxj ⊃Fmj
22. (∃x){Px • (y)[(Ty • Sxy) ⊃Axy]}
7. (x)[Px ⊃(∃y)Sxy]
25. (x){Lx ⊃(y)[(Wy • Cy) ⊃Rxy]}
10. (∃x)[Px • (y)Sxy]
28. (x){(Cx • Fx) ⊃(y)[(By • Ly) ⊃Rxy]}
13. (∃x)[(Cx • Lx) • Dpx]
16. (∃x)(Fxc • Icx)

Answers to Selected Exercises
665
S
N
L
II.
(1)
1. (x)[Ax ⊃(y)Bxy]
2. Am
/ (y)Bmy
3. Am ⊃(y)Bmy
1, UI
4. (y)Bmy
2, 3, MP
(4)
1. (x)(∃y)(Ax ⊃By)
/ (x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
2. (x)Ax
ACP
3. Ax
2, UI
4. (∃y)(Ax ⊃By)
1, UI
5. Ax ⊃Bm
4, EI
6. Bm
3, 5, MP
7. (∃y)By
6, EG
8. (x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
2–7, CP
(7)
1. (∃x)[Ax • (y)(Ay ⊃Bxy)]
/ (∃x)Bxx
2. Am • (y)(Ay ⊃Bmy)
1, EI
3. Am
2, Simp
4. (y)(Ay ⊃Bmy)
2, Com, Simp
5. Am ⊃Bmm
4, UI
6. Bmm
3, 5, MP
7. (∃x)Bxx
6, EG
(10)
1. (x)(∃y)Axy ⊃(x)(∃y)Bxy
2. (∃x)(y)Bxy
/ (∃x)(y)Axy
3. (∃x)(∃y)Bxy
2, CQ
4. (x)(∃y)Bxy
3, CQ
5. (x)(∃y)Axy
1, 4, MT
6. (∃x)(∃y)Axy
5, CQ
7. (∃x)(y)Axy
6, CQ
(13)
1. (∃x)Ax • (y)[(By v Cy) ⊃Dxy]
2. (∃x)Ax ⊃(∃y)By
/ (∃x)(∃y)Dxy
3. Am • (y)[(By v Cy) ⊃Dmy]
1, EI
4. Am
3, Simp
5. (∃x)Ax
4, EG
6. (∃y)By
2, 5, MP
7. Bn
6, EI
8. (y)[(By v Cy) ⊃Dmy]
3, Com, Simp
9. (Bn v Cn) ⊃Dmn
8, UI
10. Bn v Cn
7, Add
11. Dmn
9, 10, MP
12. (∃y)Dmy
11, EG
13. (∃x)(∃y)Dxy
12, EG
(16)
1. (x)(∃y)(Ax • By)
/ (∃y)(x)(Ax • By)
2. (∃y)(Ax • By)
1, UI
3. Ax • Ba
2, EI
4. Ax
3, Simp
5. (x)Ax
4, UG
6. Az
5, UI
7. Ba
3, Com, Simp
8. Az • Ba
6, 7, Conj
9. (x)(Ax • Ba)
8, UG
10. (∃y)(x)(Ax • By)
9, EG

666
Answers to Selected Exercises
(19)
1. (x)(∃y)Axy v (x)(y)Bxy
2. (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃Bxy)
/ (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃Axy)
3. Cx
ACP
4. (∃y)(Cx ⊃Bxy)
2, UI
5. Cx ⊃Bxm
4, EI
6. Bxm
3, 5, MP
7. (∃y)Bxy
6, EG
8. (∃x)(∃y)Bxy
7, EG
9. (∃x)(y)Bxy
8, CQ
10. (x)(y)Bxy
9, CQ
11. (x)(∃y)Axy
1, 10, Com, DS
12. (∃y)Axy
11, UI
13. Axn
12, EI
14. Cx ⊃Axn
3–13, CP
15. (∃y)(Cx ⊃Axy)
14, EG
16. (x)(∃y)(Cx ⊃Axy)
15, UG
III.
(1)
1. (x)[Px ⊃(y)(Ay ⊃Oxy)]
2. Pj • Ojm
/ Am
3. Pj ⊃(y)(Ay ⊃Ojy)
1, UI
4. Pj
2, Simp
5. (y)(Ay ⊃Ojy)
3, 4, MP
6. Am ⊃Ojm
5, UI
7. Ojm
2, Com, Simp
8. Am
6, 7, MT
(4)
1. Po
2. (x)[(Px • Cx) ⊃Sox]
3. (x)(Px ⊃Sxx)
/ Co
4. Co
AIP
5. (Po • Co) ⊃Soo
2, UI
6. Po • Co
1, 4, Conj
7. Soo
5, 6, MP
8. Po ⊃Soo
3, UI
9. Soo
1, 8, MP
10. Soo • Soo
7, 9, Conj
11. Co
4–10, IP
(7)
1. (∃x){Px • (y)[(Py • Kxy) ⊃Fxy]}
2. (x)[Px ⊃(∃y)(Py • Kxy)]
/ (∃x)(∃y)[(Px • Py) • Fxy]
3. Pm • (y)[(Py • Kmy) ⊃Fmy]
1, EI
4. Pm ⊃(∃y)(Py • Kmy)
2, UI
5. Pm
3, Simp
6. (∃y)(Py • Kmy)
4, 5, MP
7. Pn • Kmn
6, EI
8. (y)[(Py • Kmy) ⊃Fmy]
3, Com, Simp
9. (Pn • Kmn) ⊃Fmn
8, UI
10. Fmn
7, 9, MP
11. Pn
7, Simp
12. Pm • Pn
5, 11, Conj
13. (Pm • Pn) • Fmn
10, 12, Conj
14. (∃y)[(Pm • Py) • Fmy]
13, EG
15. (∃x)(∃y)[(Px • Py) • Fxy]
14, EG

Answers to Selected Exercises
667
S
N
L
(10)
1. (x){Ix ⊃[(∃y)(Cy • Ay) ⊃Ex]}
2. [(∃x)Tx v (∃x)Wx] ⊃[(∃x)Ix • (∃x)Cx]
3. (x)(Cx ⊃Ax)
/ (∃x)Tx ⊃(∃x)(Ix • Ex)
4. (∃x)Tx
ACP
5. (∃x)Tx v (∃x)Wx
4, Add
6. (∃x)Ix • (∃x)Cx
2, 5, MP
7. (∃x)Ix
6, Simp
8. Im
7, EI
9. Im ⊃[(∃y)(Cy • Ay) ⊃Em]
1, UI
10. (∃y)(Cy • Ay) ⊃Em
8, 9, MP
11. (∃x)Cx
6, Com, Simp
12. Cn
11, EI
13. Cn ⊃An
3, UI
14. An
12, 13, MP
15. Cn • An
12, 14, Conj
16. (∃y)(Cy • Ay)
15, EG
17. Em
10, 16, MP
18. Im • Em
8, 17, Conj
19. (∃x)(Ix • Ex)
18, EG
20. (∃x)Tx ⊃(∃x)(Ix • Ex)
4–19, CP
Exercise 8.7
I.
1. s  g
4. h / g
5. Wp • (x)(Wx ⊃x  p)
8. Nc • Mc • (x)[(Nx • Mx) ⊃x  c]
11. Sh • Ph • (x)[(Sx • Px) ⊃x  h]
12. Eh • (x)[(Ex • x / h) ⊃Lhx]
15. Rd • Nd • (x)[(Rx • Nx • x / d) ⊃Ldx]
16. Al • Sl • (x)[(Ax • x / l) ⊃Sx]
19. Pc • Wc • (x)[(Px • x / c) ⊃Wx]
20. (x)(y)[(Cx • Bx • Cy • By) ⊃x  y]
23. (x)(y)(z)[(Cx • Mx • Cy • My • Cz • Mz) ⊃(x  y v x  z v y  z)]
26. (∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Cx • Cy • Cz • x / y • x / z • y / z)
29. (∃x)(∃y){Sx • Bx • Gx • Sy • By • Gy • x /y • (z)[(Sz • Bz • Gz) ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}
30. (∃x)[Wxv • (y)(Wyv ⊃y  x) • Bx]
33. (∃x){Ax • Pxa • (y)[(Ay • Pya) ⊃y  x] • x  b}
35. Sr • (x)[(Sx • x / r) ⊃Srx]
38. Ar • Er • (x)[(Ax • Ex) ⊃x  r]
41. (x)(y)[(Sxh • Syh) ⊃x  y]
44. m / b
47. (∃x)(∃y){Tx • Cx • Ty • Cy • x / y • (z)[(Tz • Cz) ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}
50. (∃x)(∃y)(∃z)(Sx • Ox • Sy • Oy • Sz • Oz • x / y • x / z • y / z)

668
Answers to Selected Exercises
II.
(1)
1. (∃x)(Nx • Wjx • Ix)
2. Nc • Wjc • (x)[(Nx • Wjx) ⊃x  c]
/ Ic
3. Na • Wja • Ia
1, EI
4. (x)[(Nx • Wjx) ⊃x  c]
2, Com, Simp
5. (Na • Wja) ⊃a  c
4, UI
6. Na • Wja
3, Simp
7. a  c
5, 6, MP
8. Ia
3, Com, Simp
9. Ic
7, 8, Id
(4)
1. (∃x){Nx • Tx • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  x] • Wmx}
2. Ng • Wmg • (x)[(Nx • Wmx) ⊃x  g]
/ (∃x){Nx • Tx • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  x] • x  g}
3. Na • Ta • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  a] • Wma
1, EI
4. (x)[(Nx • Wmx) ⊃x  g]
2, Com, Simp
5. (Na • Wma) ⊃a  g
4, UI
6. Na
3, Simp
7. Wma
3, Com, Simp
8. Na • Wma
6, 7, Conj
9. a  g
5, 8, MP
10. Na • Ta • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  a]
3, Simp
11. Na • Ta • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  a] • a  g
9, 10, Conj
12. (∃x){Nx • Tx • (y)[(Ny • Ty) ⊃y  x] • x  g}
11, EG
(7)
1. Me • Se • (x)[(Mx • x / e) ⊃Sx]
2. Mn • Gn • (x)[(Mx • x / n) ⊃Gx]
3. e / n
/ Ge • Sn
4. (x)[(Mx • x / e) ⊃Sx]
1, Com, Simp
5. (Mn • n / e) ⊃Sn
4, UI
6. Mn
2, Simp
7. n / e
3, Id
8. Mn • n / e
6, 7, Conj
9. Sn
5, 8, MP
10. (x)[(Mx • x / n) ⊃Gx]
2, Com, Simp
11. (Me • e / n) ⊃Ge
10, UI
12. Me
1, Simp
13. Me • e / n
3, 12, Conj
14. Ge
11, 13, MP
15. Ge • Sn
9, 14, Conj
(10)
1. Bs • (x)[(Bx • x / s) ⊃Tsx]
2. (∃x){Bx • (y)[(By • y / x) ⊃Txy] • Cx}
3. (x)(y)(Txy ⊃Tyx)
/ Cs
4. Ba • (y)[(By • y / a) ⊃Tay] • Ca
2, EI
5. (x)[Bx • x / s) ⊃Tsx]
1, Com, Simp
6. (Ba • a / s) ⊃Tsa
5, UI
7. a / s
AIP
8. Ba
4, Simp
9. Ba • a / s
7, 8, Conj
10. Tsa
6, 9, MP
11. (y)[(By • y / a) ⊃Tay]
4, Com, Simp
12. (Bs • s / a) ⊃Tas
11, UI
13. Bs
1, Simp
14. s / a
7, Id
15. Bs • s / a
13, 14, Conj
16. Tas
12, 15, MP
17. (y)(Tay ⊃Tya)
3, UI
18. Tas ⊃Tsa
17, UI
19. Tsa
16, 18, MP
20. Tsa • Tsa
10, 19, Conj
21. a  s
7–20, IP, DN
22. Ca
4, Com, Simp
23. Cs
21, 22, Id

Answers to Selected Exercises
669
S
N
L
(13)
1. (∃x)(∃y)(Ax • Ox • Ay • Oy • x / y)
2. (x)(Ax ⊃Px)
3. (x)(y)(z)[(Px • Ox • Py • Oy • Pz • Oz) ⊃(x  y v x  z v y  z)]
/ (∃x)(∃y){Px • Ox • Py • Oy • x / y • (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  x v z  y]}
4. (∃y)(Aa • Oa • Ay • Oy • a / y)
1, EI
5. Aa • Oa • Ab • Ob • a / b
4, EI
6. Aa ⊃Pa
2, UI
7. Aa
5, Simp
8. Pa
6, 7, MP
9. Ab ⊃Pb
2, UI
10. Ab
5, Com, Simp
11. Pb
9, 10, MP
12. Oa
5, Com, Simp
13. Ob
5, Com, Simp
14. a / b
5, Com, Simp
15. Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob • a / b
8, 11–14, Conj
16. (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  a v z  b)]
AIP
17. (∃z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  a v z  b)]
16, CQ
18. [(Pc • Oc) ⊃(c  a v c  b)]
17, EI
19. [(Pc • Oc) v (c  a v c  b)]
18, Impl
20. Pc • Oc • (c  a v c  b)
19, DM, DN
21. (y)(z)[(Pa • Oa • Py • Oy • Pz • Oz) ⊃(a  y v a  z v y  z)]
3, UI
22. (z)[(Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob • Pz • Oz) ⊃(a  b v a  z v b  z)]
21, UI
23. (Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob • Pc • Oc) ⊃(a  b v a  c v b  c)
22, UI
24. Pc • Oc
20, Simp
25. Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob
15, Simp
26. Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob • Pc • Oc
24, 25, Conj
27. a  b v a  c v b  c
23, 26, MP
28. a  c v b  c
14, 27, DS
29. (c  a v c  b)
20, Com, Simp
30. (a  c v b  c)
29, Id
31. (a  c v b  c) • (a  c v b  c)
28, 30, Conj
32. (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  a v z  b)]
16–31, IP, DN
33. Pa • Oa • Pb • Ob • a / b • (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  a v z  b)]
15, 32, Conj
34. (∃y){Pa • Oa • Py • Oy • a / y • (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  a v z  y)]}
33, EG
35. (∃x)(∃y){Px • Ox • Py • Oy • x / y • (z)[(Pz • Oz) ⊃(z  x v z  y)]}
34, EG

670
Answers to Selected Exercises
(16)
1. Sc • Pc • Sn • Pn • (x)[(Sx • x / c • x / n) ⊃Px]
2. Sn • Dn • (x)[(Sx • Dx) ⊃x  n]
3. (x){Sx ⊃[Rx ≡(Dx • Px)]}
4. c / n
/ (∃x){Sx • Rx • (y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃y  x]}
5. Sc
1, Simp
6. Sc ⊃[Rc ≡(Dc • Pc)]
3, UI
7. Rc ≡(Dc • Pc)
5, 6, MP
8. [Rc ⊃(Dc • Pc)] • [(Dc • Pc) ⊃Rc]
7, Equiv
9. (Dc • Pc) ⊃Rc
8, Com, Simp
10. (x)[(Sx • Dx) ⊃x  n]
2, Com, Simp
11. (Sc • Dc) ⊃c  n
10, UI
12. (Sc • Dc)
4, 11, MT
13. Sc v Dc
12, DM
14. Dc
5, 13, DN, DS
15. Pc
1, Com, Simp
16. Dc • Pc
14, 15, Conj
17. Rc
9, 16, MP
18. Sc • Rc
5, 17, Conj
19. (y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃y  c]
AIP
20. (∃y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃y  c]
19, CQ
21. [(Sa • Ra) ⊃a  c]
20, EI
22. [(Sa • Ra) v a  c]
21, Impl
23. Sa • Ra • a / c
22, DM, DN
24. Sa ⊃[Ra ≡(Da • Pa)]
3, UI
25. Sa
23, Simp
26. Ra ≡(Da • Pa)
24, 25, MP
27. [Ra ⊃(Da • Pa)] • [(Da • Pa) ⊃Ra]
26, Equiv
28. Ra ⊃(Da • Pa)
27, Simp
29. Ra
23, Com, Simp
30. Da • Pa
28, 29, MP
31. (x)[(Sx • x / c • x / n) ⊃Px]
1, Com, Simp
32. (Sa • a / c • a / n) ⊃Pa
31, UI
33. (Sa • a / c) ⊃(a / n ⊃Pa)
32, Exp
34. a / c
23, Com, Simp
35. Sa • a / c
25, 34, Conj
36. a / n ⊃Pa
33, 35, MP
37. Pa
30, Com, Simp
38. a  n
36, 37, MT, DN
39. n  a
38, Id
40. Dn
2, Com, Simp
41. Da
39, 40, Id
42. Da
30, Simp
43. Da • Da
41, 42, Conj
44. y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃
y  c]
19–43, IP, DN
45. Sc • Rc • (y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃y  c]
18, 44, Conj
46. (∃x){Sx • Rx • (y)[(Sy • Ry) ⊃y  x]}
45, EG

Answers to Selected Exercises
671
S
N
L
Exercise 9.1
II.
1. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Has no effect.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
4. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Has no effect.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Has no effect.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
7. a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
Has no effect.
Strengthens.
Strengthens.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
Weakens.
Weakens.
Strengthens.
Strengthens.
Weakens.
10. Hint: For Maxie’s argument, concentrate on the similarities between a home and a car (a car is an
extended living space with heating, air conditioning, stereo, telephone, and so on), the dissimilari-
ties between a plane and a car (greater difﬁculty in controlling, ease of crossing international bor-
ders, greater danger in operating, and so on). Also, people outside U.S. borders are not accorded
the same constitutional protections as people inside, and a phone message normally suggests
greater privacy than a radio message. In addition, the teenagers parked in the lot were acting in
plain view, and a telescope only enhances ordinary sense perception (so there was no search).
Maxie, on the other hand, was talking while speeding down the freeway and was thus not acting in
plain view (in the same sense), and a radio receiver (used by the agents) does not enhance ordinary
sense perception.
For the agents’ argument, concentrate on the similarities between a car and a plane (both are
means of transportation, both can cross state lines, both are relatively hard to keep track of, and so
on) and the dissimilarities between a car or plane and a house (houses do not move, so it will stay
in place while a search warrant is obtained). Also, car phones use radio transmitters just like planes,
both the car phone message and the radio message from the plane were received inside U.S. bor-
ders, and the car phone message was received inadvertently, just as the radio message from the
plane and the image through the telescope were (thus making it impossible to plan ahead for a
search warrant). Also, in a sense, Maxie was acting in plain view: A lip reader traveling in an adja-
cent car might interpret his message. Lastly, controlling illicit drugs is a high priority for the
government.
13. Hint: Couch your arguments in terms of foreseeability.
For Liz’s argument note that there were several events that intervened between the car accident
and the amputation: Mary’s being taken to the hospital, Mary’s being treated by doctors for bumps
and bruises, Mary’s apparent mix-up with some other patient scheduled for leg amputation, the
doctors’ failure to check Mary’s proper identity before operating, etc. Liz did not directly control any
of these events, and therefore she could not have foreseen them. Liz could not have foreseen what
hospital Mary would be taken to, the fact that Mary would be mixed up with another patient, etc.
Because Liz should not be held liable for an event utterly unforeseen to her, she should not be
liable for Mary’s amputated leg. The facts are similar to those in Gomez v. Hunt, where Gomez
could not foresee the exact route that Hunt would take when walking home, the fact that a worker
would drop a brick, the fact that the brick would strike Hunt, etc. The facts are dissimilar to those in
Sacco v. Lane, where Lane was in direct control over the ﬂames in the barbecue, and it was those
very same ﬂames that spread to the houses.
For Mary’s argument note that Liz initiated a chain of events that ﬂowed naturally from the car
accident to the amputation. Once the car accident occurred, it was foreseeable that Mary would be
taken to the hospital; once Mary was in the hospital it was foreseeable that mix-ups would occur
(after all, mix-ups occur in hospitals every day); given the nature of these mix-ups, it was foresee-

672
Answers to Selected Exercises
able that Mary’s leg would be amputated. Granted, Liz might not have been able to foresee each
event in the chain, but once an event occurred, someone familiar with it could have foreseen the
next event. Therefore, given that each event was foreseeable by someone—at least some hypotheti-
cal person—Liz should be held liable. The events are similar to those in Sacco v. Lane. When the
ﬂames were leaping from the barbecue, it was foreseeable that they would ignite the trees; once the
trees were aﬂame, it was foreseeable that a house would be ignited, then another house, etc. Lane
would not have been able to foresee the whole chain of events at the time he was tending the
barbecue, but once one event occurred, the next was foreseeable. Also, even though the wind
constituted an intervening event, Lane was still held liable. Finally, the facts are dissimilar to those
in Gomez v. Hunt. When Hunt was walking home, he was in complete control over his own ac-
tions. He freely chose to walk past the building under construction, and he should have been on
the lookout for falling objects. The fact that he was struck by a falling brick was partly the result of
his own failure to observe. On the contrary, from the time of the accident until the amputation,
Mary was in the hands of others: the person who took her to the hospital, nurses in the hospital,
etc. In no sense was the amputation the result of Mary’s free choices.
Exercise 9.2
I.
1. Sufﬁcient condition. The window can also be broken by throwing a stone or baseball through
it.
4. Necessary condition. For an image to appear on the ﬁlm the camera must also be loaded and
focused and there must be sufﬁcient light.
7. Sufﬁcient condition. The ﬁre will also be extinguished if it is smothered.
10. Necessary condition. Electricity must also be supplied from the main lines.
II.
1. A  a certain make, B  a certain year, C  a certain model, D  driven 30,000 miles, E  a
certain gasoline, F  a certain oil, G  a certain driver, H  certain road conditions, I  the
additive.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Phenomenon
(Less wear)
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
-
Method of difference
Sufﬁcient condition
4. A  type X circuitry, B  shipped to a coastal region, C  sold to a business customer,
D  manufactured in the Kansas City plant, E  used to play computer games, F  shipped to
a large city.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
Phenomenon
(returned)
1
*
*
-
*
*
-
*
2
-
*
*
*
-
*
*
3
*
*
*
-
*
*
*
4
-
*
-
*
*
*
*
5
*
*
-
*
*
-
*
6
*
*
*
-
-
*
*
7
*
*
*
*
-
*
*
Coastal region (salty air) is the cause in the sense of a necessary condition.
Method of agreement.

Answers to Selected Exercises
673
S
N
L
7. A  camomile tea, B  late dinner, C  hot bath, D  read book, E  walk, F  wine,
G  massage.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Phenomenon
(slept well)
Mon
*
*
*
*
*
-
-
*
Tu
-
*
-
*
-
-
-
-
Wed
-
-
-
-
*
*
*
-
Th
-
*
*
*
-
*
*
*
Fri
*
*
-
*
*
-
*
*
Sat
*
-
*
-
*
*
*
*
Sun
*
-
*
*
-
-
-
-
None of the possible conditions is a cause of the phenomenon.
Joint method of agreement and difference.
10. A  corporal punishment, B  siblings, C  adopted, D  male parent ﬁgure, E  sexual
abuse, F  domineering mother, G  uprooted often, H  day-care center.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
Phenomenon
(blurred bound.)
Meg
*
*
*
-
*
*
-
-
*
Sue
*
*
-
*
*
-
-
*
*
Dot
*
-
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Jane
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
*
Lynn
-
*
*
*
*
-
-
*
*
Flo
*
*
-
*
*
*
*
-
*
Sexual abuse is the cause of the phenomenon in the sense of a necessary condition.
Method of agreement.
13. A  malathion, B  American Beauty, C  ﬁve years old, D  a certain location, E  a certain
amount of water, F  a certain amount of sun, G  a certain kind of soil, H  a certain amount
of cultivation, I  a certain amount of Bandini rose food.
Occurrence
Possible conditions
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
Phenomenon
(no aphids)
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
2
-
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
-
Method of difference, sufﬁcient condition.
III.
1. By the method of agreement, D is the cause in the sense of a necessary condition.
4. By the joint method of agreement and difference, D is the cause in the sense of a sufﬁcient
condition.
Exercise 9.3
I.
1. 1/6
4. .853
7. 1/4 or .25
II.
1. P(6 or 1)  P(6)  P(1)  1/6  1/6  2/6  1/3
4a. P(A1 and A2)
 P(A1)  P(A2)
 4/52  4/52
 1/169  .0059

674
Answers to Selected Exercises
4b. P(A1 and A2)
 P(A1)  P(A2 given A1)
 4/52  3/51
 1/221  .0045
7. First compute the probability of getting no sixes:
P(no sixes)  5/6  5/6  5/6
 125/216
Then use the negation rule:
P(at least one six)  1  P(no sixes)
 1  125/216
 91/216  .4213
10. a. P(R1 and R2)  P(R1)  P(R2 given R1)
 3/12  2/11
 6/132  .045
b. P(Y and G)  P(Y1 and G2)  P(G1 and Y2)
 (5/12  4/11)  (4/12  5/11)
 20/132  20/132
 10/33  .303
c. P(R or G)  1  P(Y1 and Y2)
 1  (5/12  4/11)
 1  20/132
 28/33  .848
d. P(G1 or G2)  1  P(not G)
 1  [P(R1 and R2)  P(R1 and Y2)  P(Y1 and R2)
 P(Y1 and Y2)]
 1  [(3/12 2/11)  (3/12  5/11)
 (5/12  3/11)  (5/12  4/11)]
 1  [6/132  15/132  15/132  20/132]
 1  56/132
 19/33  .57
e. P(same color)  P(R1 and R2)  P(G1 and G2)  P(Y1 and Y2)
 (3/12  2/11)  (4/12  3/11)  (5/12  4/11)
 6/132  12/132  20/132
 19/66  .288
13a. P(M or W)  P(M)  P(W)  P(M and W)
 .74  .82  (.74  .82)
 .95
13b. P(M and W and S)  P(M)  P(W)  P(S)
 .74  .82  8/9
 .54
16. P(N given R)  [P(N)  P(R given N)]  [P(O)  P(R given O)]
P(N)  P(R given N)
 [3/5  7/15]  [2/5  5/15]  21/75  10/75
3/5  7/15
21/75
 31/75  21/31  .68
21/75
Answer: new urn.

Answers to Selected Exercises
675
S
N
L
19. P(R given N)  [P(R)  P(N given R)]  [P(T)  P(N given T)]
P(R)  P(N given R)
 (.2  .7)  (.8  .2)
.2  .7
 .14  .16
.14
 .14/.30  .47
Exercise 9.4
I.
1. Since the water in the lake might not be circulating, the algae content of the water at one
end might not be representative of the whole lake. Thus, the sample might be biased.
4. According to Table 9.7, the margin of error for a random sample of 600 is  5 percent.
Since the sample taken indicates a difference of only 2 percent, the results of the sample
are inconclusive.
7. Since no mention is made of the size of the sample or of the expected sampling error, the
sample might be biased. The manufacturer might have taken 25 separate samples con-
sisting of ten dentists per sample and reported the results of only the most favorable one.
10. The problem concerns the meaning of ‘‘average.’’ If the average is a mean, most of the
toys could be over $15, and a few very cheap toys could bring the average down to $15.
If the average is a mode, there might be a few toys priced at $15, and all the other toys
might have varying prices exceeding $15. Only if the average is a median can one be
assured that half the toys are $15 or less.
13. Since no mention is made of the dispersion, the argument is weak. The rock pile might
consist of several pieces weighing 500 pounds and enough weighing only 4 or 5 pounds
to bring the average down to 50 pounds. If the range were only 10 pounds or so, the
conclusion would follow.
16. If the scale on the vertical axis does not begin at zero, the conclusion does not follow.
19. Since there were many more cars on the road in 1990 than there were in 1960, the
comparison is faulty.
II.
1. mean  180, median  170, mode  160
4.
3
2
1
1
2
3
Age
4
5
6
Frequency
Mean age  3, variance  3, standard deviation  1.73.
III.
1. False.
7. True.
13. True.
19. False.
4. False.
10. False.
16. False.
Exercise 9.5
VI.
1. True.
7. True.
13. True.
19. False.
4. False.
10. True.
16. False.

