


A 
DICTIONARY 
OF 
EGYPTIAN 
Ie 
MARTIN HINDS 
University of Cambridge 
ARABIC-ENGLISH 
Issued under the sponsorship of 
The American University in Cairo 
EL-SAID BADAWI 
The American University in Cairo 
LIBRAIRIE DU LIBAN 

Librairie du Uban 
Riad Solh Square, Beirut. 
Associated companies, branches and 
representatives throughout the world. 
© UBRAIRIE DU LIMN, 1986 
All rights reserved. No part o/this publication 
l1Uly be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system 
or transmitted in any Jorm or by any means, electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
without the prior, written permission oj the Publishers. 
This work was developed under a contract with 
the U.S. Office of Education Department of 
Health, Education and Welfare, and with support 
from the Ford Foundation. 
Printed in Lebanon by 
TvPOPRESS, Beirut 


Acknowledgements 
Introduction 
Arrangement of Entries 
The Dictionary 
Illustrations 
CONTENTS 
VII 
VIII 
XII 
1-966 
967-982 

VII 
Acknowledgements 
The compilers are indebted to a great many people for their advice and assistance. In the first place, the project 
would not have come into being at all without the support and encouragement of the late Chri~topher Thoron, who 
was President of the American University in Cairo from 1969 until his untimely death in 1974. Among other officers 
or former officers of the American University in Cairo who did much to facilitate work, particularly in times of 
difficulty, were Dr Richard Crabbs, Dr Hussein Fawzy, Dr Mohammed Allam, Dr Cecil Byrd, Dr Thomas Lamont, 
Mr Peter Nichols, Dr Richard Pedersen, Dr Moyer Hunsberger, Dr Marsden Jones, Mr Ahmed El-Lozy, Mr Carl 
Schieren and Miss Priscilla Blakemore. 
The project enjoyed the support of several institutions. A major part of the funding was provided by the U.S. 
Office of Education, among whose officers Mrs Julia Petrov, who was our understanding and longsuffering Program 
Officer, and Dr Richard Thompson deserve special thanks for their help. Substantial support was also provided by 
the Ford Foundation, in which connection acknowledgement is due to Mr William Irelan, Dr Ronald Wolfe, Mr 
Courtney Nelson, Mr Samuel Bunker, Dr Bjorn Jernu~d and Professor Richard Tucker. The moral support ofthe 
Arabic Language Academy in Cairo was indispensable, and for this we owe thanks in particular to Dr Ibrahim 
Madkour, formerly Secretary and now Chairman of the Academy, for his encouragement and advice (although the 
content of the' dictionary is of course the responsibility of the compilers alone), and to Mr Ibrahim El-Tarzi. 
The basic work of preparation of this dictionary took place between the years 1972-1977. Two experts whose help 
was indispensable during this period were Dr Raymond Bathurst, who handled the technical and computing side of 
the operation, and Dr Karl Stowasser, who iliitiated us into the elusive art of lexicography and readily shared with us 
the labour of drafting and redrafting some of the most complex entries. We were also fortunate enough to have the 
benefit of informed comments and criticisms from Professor T.F. Mitchell and Mr David Cowan. Work on the 
"production line" included labours of herculean proportions, particularly on the part of our principal assistants Dr 
Humphrey Davies and Mrs Carol Bebawi, while special mention needs to be made too of the contribution of Dr 
Elizabeth Sartain (notably her work in the area of etymologies), Dr Kristina Nelson, Mr Mohammed El-Saati, Mr 
Maged El-Kommo~ and Mr Jeffrey Bennett; the illustrations are the work of Mrs Elizabeth Rodenbeck. To these 
and to the very many others -
too numerous to name -
who gave of themselves unstintingly in this work, we extend 
our thanks. 

VIII 
Introduction 
This dictionary is intended to satisfy a longstanding need on the part of speakers of English for a dictionary with 
which to comprehend Egyptian Arabic. During the past twenty-five years progress has been made in the 
lexicography of Arabic dialects other than Egyptian, principally as a result of efforts based at Georgetown 
University; and the study of literary Arabic was transformed for speakers of English by the appearance in 1%1 of 
Hans Wehr's A dictionary of modern written Arabic. Such developments have highlighted the need for 
documentation of the dominant regional form of Arabic. For Egyptian Arabic is not only the native tongue of over 
forty-five million people who constitute just under one third of the Arabic-speaking world; it is also -
because of 
Egypt's important cultural and political role as an Arab state -
the most widely understood form of regional Arabic. 
The language described here is essentially spoken language and, as such, it may be contrasted with formal written 
language. In this connection, it may first be remarked that the prevalence of the view that literary Arabic (al-Iugha 
al-f~l)d) should replace its "corrupt" variant, the popular language (al-Iugha al-'iimmiyya), as the normal vehicle of 
spontaneous spoken communication cannot be allowed to obscure the fact that this is not the case in Egypt at present 
and there are no grounds for anticipating any major change in this respect. Moreover, the associated notion that only 
al-f~l)ii can be credited with a "real" existence as a "proper" system oflanguage (to the exclusion ofthe 'iimmiyya of 
the uneducated) fails to explain how educated and uneducated Egyptians alike -
all of whom communicate with 
each otherin the course oftheir daily round by means of 'iimmiyya of one sort or another -contrive to achieve some 
measure of mutual intelligibility. This dictionary is accordingly based on an alternative view of language variation in 
Egypt, a view which sees the 'iimmiyya of illiterate people as no less a system oflanguage than is the inherited classical 
f~1)d and -
in the absence of any clear picture of historical evolution -
envisages a synchronic language scheme in 
which these two systems are at extremes from one another, while between them lie three other distinguishable 
systems. Each of these five systems, or levels, contains elements which exist also in one or more of the other levels, 
but in varying proportions; although the divisions between the levels are of course blurred rather than clear-cut, each 
level can nonetheless be typified by its own specific combination of linguistic and allied social, educational and 
psychological characteristics. 
This schemel distinguishes two levels off~l)ii and three levels of 'iimmiyya. The older of the two levels of{u$l)d, 
which may be termed f~l)ii al-turiith, is specifically the linguistic vehicle of the legacy of Islamic high culture and 
religion, while contem~orary {u$1)d, which may be termed {u$1)d al-'a.m is the vehicle of modern culture and 
technology. In Egypt, f~l)ii al-turiith varies only minimally from the classical descriptions of f~l)ii. as might be 
expected in what is now in effect a liturgical language. F~1)d al-'tl.$r. on the other hand, as the vehicle of today's 
intellectual needs, exhibits features which contrast with the usual classical conventions -
notably a marked 
preference for nominal, rather than verbal, sentences; moreover, when employed orally in Egypt, f~l)ii al-'tl.$r 
displays other departures (phonological, morphological and syntactic) from the norms off~1)d al-turiith, and these 
departures for the most part occur in more pronounced forms in the various levels of 'iimmiyya. This dictionary is not 
concerned with lexical items which are restricted to one or both of these levels of f~l)d, on the ground that they are 
I Thl: scheme is set out in detail in al-Sa'id Mul;lammad Badawi, Mustawayat al-'arabiy.ya al-mu'lqira fi mi$r 
(Cairo, 1973). 

IX 
common to Egypt and other parts of the Arabic-writing world and are (or should be) documented elsewhere. 
Three levels of 'limmiyya can usefully be distinguished and it is with these that this dictionary is concerned. The 
mother tongue of any given Egyptian child is one of only two of these. the principal distinction here being whether 
the family background of the child is characterized by literacy or illiteracy. By the time a child reaches school age. he 
will have acquired a type of mother tongue which can be broadly classified as the 'limmiyya either of the 
"enlightened" (al-mutanawwirfn) or of the illiterate (al-ummiyyfn). the latter being predominant. If the child then 
goes to school. he is made to function not on his own linguistic level but on the level of fU$1)ti al-'O$r (in secular 
schools) or of /l1$1)1i al-Iurlilh (within the Azhar system). It is here. in respect of the individual- rather than in the 
broader frame of the totality of Egyptian language variation -
that the phenomenon termed diglossia can usefully be 
reco~nized and studied, for from this time the child advances (or fails to advance. as the case may be) simultaneously 
on two separate language levels., advance in one being linked with advance in the other. What may be regarded as a 
fruitful culmination of this process -
in the form of mastery of the third. acquired. level of 'limmiyya, namely that of 
the highly educated (al-muthaqqafin) -
is restricted to a small percentage of the population. This level of 'limmiyya 
is in effect the spoken counterpart of the writtenfU$1)1i al-'a$r and is used only in appropriate con~exts of interaction 
between muthaqqafin or would-be muthaqqafin; their language in more mundane contexts is ordinarily 'limmiyyat 
al-mutanawwirin, although some may also initially have been speakers of 'limmiyyat al-ummiyyin. 
A few examples of linguistic distinctions between these three broad levels of 'limmiyya may be useful here. 
'Ammiyyat al-muthaqqafin, being the 'limmiyya most strongly influenced by al-fU$I)Ii, is characterized 
phonologically by a measure of flexibility in respect of both consonants and vowels: although the .!.o , the ~ and 
the ~ are usually rendered ass, Z and ~ respectively, they are sometimes given the phonetic values offU$l)li, and the 
J frequently occurs as q; the fU$1)1i diphthongs aw and ay also occur, albeit less commonly than 00 and ee; andfU$1)ti 
long vowels are sometimes preserved in unstressed positions. In the phonology of 'limmiyyal al-mulanawwirin, 
however. the element associable withfU$1)1i is smaller: the.!.o. the ~ and the ~ are commonly rendered as t, d and 4, 
and less commonly as s, Z and ~, while the J only infrequently occurs as q; the diphthongs aw and ay normally 
disappear, as do fU$hli long vowels which fall outside the Egyptian system of word stress. In the phonology of 
'limmiyyal al-ummiyyin, the ':".the ~ and the ~ are rendered as I, d and 4 with very few exceptions, and the J as q is 
rare (e.g. muqri, qur'lin). 
As far as morphology and syntax are concerned. passive forms are fairly common in 'limmiyyat al-muthaqqafin, 
are much less common in 'limmiyyal al-mulanawwirin, and are afmost entirely absent in 'limmiyyat al-ummiyyin; the 
residual occurrences of the i'rlib of fU$1)1i and of fU$1)1i negation systems to be found in 'limmiyyat al-muthaqqafin are 
not to be found in the two other levels of 'limmiyya; the use of verbal nouns and the occurrence of verbal sentences 
are far more common in 'limmiyyat al-muthaqqafin than in the two other levels; with these two other levels comes 
greater use of constructions involving billi' and fi(h), as well as an additional system of enumeration in contexts of 
ordering and itemizing; finally. 'limmiyyat al-ummiyyin is characterized in particular by its partiality for formulaic 
expressions and cliches. 
The total scheme of language variation and interaction in Egypt can be represented in diagrammatical form thus: 
LEVELS 
fU~~li III-tUrlith 
·limmiYYllt III-muthllqqllfin 
·limmiYYllt III-mutllnawwirin 
·ammiYYlII al-ummiyyin 
c 
f 
d 
In thi~ diagram. the line a-b reprcsents what i~ theoretically the highest level of "correctness" in the literary 

x 
language, i.e. what is widely esteemed as the pure jiqIJa described by classical grammarians and lexicographers. The 
line cod, on the other hand, represents what is theoretically the least educated type of 'ammiyya, i.e. the form of 
language which exhibits the greatest number oflinguistic differences fromfl4lJa and enjoys little or no esteem within 
the community. Lines a-f and b-f represent the erosion of features attributed to the line a-b; in other words, they 
represent the proportional distribution of fl4IJa features within the various levels. Conversely, lines c-e and doe 
represent the erosion of features attributed to the line cod; in other words, they represent the proportional 
distribution of 'ammiyya features within the various levels. The area e-g-f-h accordingly represents the overlap of the 
literary and colloquial languages, while the areas a-g-e and e-h-b represent "pure" jiq/.lii features and the areas c-g-f 
and f-h-d represent "pure" 'iimmiyya features. The areas a-g-c and b-h-d represent the proportional distribution of 
foreign (dakhil) influence within the five levels. 
In connection with foreign borrowings it should first be stressed that what may be foreign to the Arabic component 
of Egyptian Arabic is not necessarily foreign to Egypt. Arabic was, after all, a language at one time foreign to 
Egyptians, and the labellin~of ancient but surviving Coptic and Greek elements as "foreign" is intended to signify 
their foreignness to Arabic rather than to Egypt. The identification of existing lexical items with ancient Coptic forms 
is, moreover, fraught with difficulty (more is said about this below) and there is often no way of knowing whether an 
identifiably Greek form first gained some currency in Egypt before the Arab conquest (effectively completed in 
641 AD) or after it. All that can usefully be said here in this regard is that there seems to have been a fusion from the 
seventh century onwards of one or more kinds of Arabic with certain pre-existing elements in Egypt, together with 
the super-addition of further foreign borrowings. The Arabic character of the language is pervasive, to the extent 
perhaps of having recast in an Arabic mould some of what was absorbed from the indigenous linguistic environment, 
for example in the vocabulary of riparian agrarian life, which was alien to the Arab cultural heritage. Such recasting is 
evident in the clustering of semantically related forms around verb roots which seem unlikely to have their origin in 
Arabic; on the other hand, there are also instances where such verb-root evolution has not taken place, and in this 
respect Egyptian Arabic can be contrasted with Syrian Arabic, which is more productive of verb roots in such 
circumstances. In general terms, then, Egyptian Arabic can be regarded as consisting of two main lexical categories, 
each of which can be subdivided: 1. Arabic: a) items which coinc1de nearly or completely with counterparts existing 
in literary Arabic, and b) items which have recognizable counterparts in literary Arabic, while yet differing from 
them in some significant and specifically Egyptian fashion. 2. Non-Arabic: a) items apparently specific to Egypt and 
without Arabic counterparts, and not identifiable as relatively modern foreign borrowings, and b) items identifiable 
as relatively modern borrowings. 
The levels which contain the smallest proportions of non-Arabic items are fl4IJa al-turath and 'ammiyyat 
al-ummiyyin, the former because of its static and frozen character and the latter because illiteracy has the effect of 
insulating its speakers from the direct influence of modern culture and the outside world. In 'ammiyyat al-ummiyyin, 
the majority of non-Arabic items are old or fairly old residents in the language (Coptic, Persian and Turkish, 
together with some Greek, Italian, French and English), mostly in such areas as agriculture, food, the household and 
administration; normally, o~ly major and dramatic events, such as war, can account for the admission of new 
borrowings at that level (e.g., nabalm). A greater number of non-Arabic items is to be found both injiqIJa al-'fL1r and 
in 'ammiyyat al-mutanawwirin, although of differing types. The items infl4IJa al-'fL1r. for the most part belong to the 
vocabulary of modern culture and technology and have either achieved recognition from the Arabic Language 
Academy or have simply acquired currency by the legitimizing force of written usage. Non-Arabic items in 
'ammiyyat al-mutanawwirin, on the other hand, relate for the most part to areas such as fashion, imported cosmetics, 
modern household appliances etc., which are beyond the financial reach and -
often -
the inherited tastes of 
speakers of 'ammiyyat al-ummiyyin; thus, while many of the non-Arabic items occurring in 'ammiyyat al-ummiyyin 
occur also in 'ammiyyat al-mutanawwirin, the converse does not hold true. Finally, it can be noted that it is 'ammiyyat 
al-muthaqqafin that contains the greatest number of non-Arabic items: this is because it makes use of items to be 
found in all the other levels, because its speakers are most directly in contact with influences from outside, and 
because they are not as restrained in speech as they are in writing. Indeed, nearly all newly borrowed items make 
their entrance into Egypt by way of this level and from this point may move also intofl4lJa al-'fL1r (e.g., siryaa/i) or 
into 'ammiyyat al-mutanawwirin (e.g., fil-faylaynar), although some items do not move further and may die out 
naturally (e.g., fin-noohaaw). 

XI 
It is the purpose of this dictionary to ~ocument stable lexical items occurring in anyone or more of the three levels 
of 'iimmiyya defined above. Lexical iteins or forms restricted to 'iimmiyyat al-ummiyyin are marked with an arrow 
pointing downwards and items or forms restricted to 'iimmiyyat al-muthaqqafin (other than items which are 
self-evidently restricted to that level) are marked with an arrow pointing upwards. Although the designation 
"Egyptian Arabic" has been employed, the focus is on Cairo and the phonological frame is that of Cairo and the 
Delta, to the exclusion of Upper Egypt where the phonology is markedly different; Alexandria, too, has been denied 
the closer attention that it clearly deserves. Rural items given here belong to the rural scene in the vicinity of Cairo 
and in the Delta, although the seemingly endless range of local variants there has by no means been covered 
exhaustively. Other items may be assumed to be current in Cairo unless otherwise indicated. 
The entries have been drafted with the primary purpose of fulfilling the needs of an English-speaking user who 
requires a general, overall-desc~iptive, synchronic, comprehension dictionary of Egyptian Arabic at all levels of 
society. As an overall-descriptive synchronic dictionary, it is intended to describe the language as it is now, rather 
than as it was, as it may be in the future, or as some would like it to be. Particular importance has been attached to the 
provision of numerous examples, both transparent in meaning and non-transparent. One departure from normal 
practice in bilingual synchronic lexicography of modern languages is, however, a modest attempt to provide some 
information of an etymological character; more is said about this below, but it may be stressed here that the 
compilers are well aware of the limitations of the present 2000-item etymological contribution. As for highly 
specialized terminology, and compound terms in particular, the question of what to include and what to leave out 
across the various subject areas has been noJess problematical here than in the compilation of any overall-descriptive 
dictionary. Special attention has been paid to termini technici in traditional areas of activity, which are fairly stable in 
the language but for the most part less well documented than the termini technici of modern science and technology; 
but it is clear that much subject-related work is needed to a greater depth than has been possible here if a lalge part of 
the highly specialized vocabulary of traditional Egyptian handicrafts is not to pass into oblivion. The main 
geographical names have been included, both inside and outside Egypt; personal names have been included only in 
special cases, notably where idiomatic expressions are involved. For a succinct description of the grammar of 
Egyptian Arabic, the user is referred to T.F. Mitchell, An introduction to Egyptian colloquial Arabic (London, 
Oxford University Press, 1956, repro 1978); mention may here be made also ofT.F. Mitchell, Colloguial Arabic: the 
living language of Egypt (London, English Universities Press, 1962) and Ernest T. Abdel-Massih, An introduction to 
Egyptian Arabic (Ann Arbor, The University of Michigan, 1975). 
Although there can be no doubt that this work suffers from shortcomings of a kind inevitable in a pioneering work, 
in this case exacerbated by a dearth of relevant linguistic studies, the status of pioneer in the field must in truth be 
accorded to Socrates Spiro, whose Egyptian Arabic-English dictionary first appeared in 1895 under the title An 
Arabic-English vocabulary of the colloquial Arabic of Egypt containing the vernacular items and expressions, slang 
phrases, vocables etc. used by native Egyptians, and in revised form in 1923 under the title An Arabic-English 
dictionary of the modern Arabic of Egypt. Spiro's work gives about 12,500 fairly detailed entries, attempts to identify 
bon:owings from other languages, and provides some contextual illustrations, but despite its merits it is now ofvalue 
only for its intrinsic historical interest and is, understandably enough, inadequate and misleading as a guide to 
Egyptian Arabic of the present day. Many terms given by Spiro (particularly those of Turkish origin) have since 
become obsolete, others have changed in sense or form, and numerous new lexical items and expressions have 
gained acceptance since his time, whether by borrowing from other languages or by internal derivation for purposes 
of new or substantially overhauled institutional, technological and ideological terminology. Accordingly, no reliance 
was placed on Spiro during the compilation of this dictionary, although a check at the final stage did yield some items 
which would otherwise have been missed. 
A fundamental feature ofthe present work is that it has been undertaken as a dictionary ofa "vacuum" type, based 
on field work and raw data without reference to any previous dictionary (apart from the final check of Spiro just 
mentioned). This is not to say that relevant published work was ignored, but attestations were not accepted merely 
on the authority of the printed word, and the overwhelming bulk of the data was oral and transcribed from 
tape-recordings. Several million words of material were edited down to a corpus of 400,000 words covering all 
aspects of Egyptian life, mostly in context strings, and were encoded with accompanying lexical analysis in 
machine-readable form so that they could be processed by computer in a way which yielded an ordered distillation of 

XII 
all encoded material and analysis. The drafting was based on this distillation and resulted in the present text of over 
22,500 headword entries. This figure may be compared with the 35,000 headword entries of Wehr (third edition) in a 
text of about the same length and with the 14,000 headword entries in a text of about half the length to be found in 
A dictionary of Iraqi Arabic: Arabic-English compiled by Woodhead and Beene (Georgetown 1967). The relatively 
greater length of the average headword entry in the present work can be attributed mainly to the quantity of 
illustrative examples included in many of the 30,000 sense divisions, among them over 6,500 idiomatic and 
non-transparent usages. 
Arrangement of Entries 
1. Roots 
The Arabic rooting system is employed, with modifications appropriate to the arrangement of Egyptian Arabic. 
Roots containing verbs are normally treated as they would be in the lexicography of literary Arabic, except that roots 
including radicals associated with the literary":" and ~ are given in their Egyptian forms, with cross-references from 
the literary form of the root; thus the headword ladc:a appears under the root t ~ J and there is a cross-reference to 
that root from the literary root t ~ J. The rooting of items containing the glottal stop associated with Arabic J 
preserves that J, however, since the uvular rendering of J coexists in the language with the glottal rendering, while 
the":" and ~ (with one exception of little importance) in effect represent phonemes which do not exist in Egyptian 
Arabic. 
In cases where two or more Egyptian variants of a literary Arabic root exist, these are sometimes brought together 
and sometimes kept separate -
always with cross-references -
according to semantic criteria. Thus J .!l ~ and J .!l j 
arc kept apart as separate roots, both cross-referenced from J .!l ~; on the other hand, there is every reason for 
keeping together all the items associated with a literary root such as":" J ..:.. and on such occasions the dominant 
Egyptian root has been used for grouping purposes, so that the root..;:.. J ..;:.. heads all relevant entries, both tilt, talat 
etc. and sulus, sulaasi etc.; there is a simple cross-reference to..;:.. J ..;:.. from the literary root..:.. J ..:.., and another 
cross-reference from the minor sibling Egyptian root V" J V" with a listing of the relevant headwords to be found 
under..;:.. J ..;:.., viz. sulus, sulaasi etc. 
Identical roots containing groups of lexical scatter semantically distinct from each other have been separated and 
numbered off. However, where two or more items with identical radicals exist ali:isolated forms, these have been 
given under a single root, such a root being within parentheses. The rooting of items which cannot readily be 
associated with verbs has been carried out by reference to the headword in its transcribed form, e.g., ~ ~ 1$ for yadd. 
Non-verbal Egyptian forms and foreign borrowings which cannot be regarded as having a place in fU$I:lli al-turiith 
take long vowels into account e.g., oj I ..; t for c:afaan and oj.J J ~ 
for $aloon; final short vowels are sometimes 
regarded as long for this purpose in any position up to the fourth radical, e.g., I ..; I y for baafa and I r oj V" for 
sinima. Where it appears from lexical scatter that some assimilation can be regarded as having taken place in a 
headword, this has been taken into account in the selection of the radicals, e.g., the root y .J Y oj • for the headword 
f'ambuuba In pI l'anabiibl. Where, however, an item has an exact counterpart long resident in classical Arabic, the 
literary root form has been accorded to it even when a verb form is lacking, e.g .. the root....iJ t for the headword 
xaruuf. Basically, the user who rders to literary root forms should have no difficulty in finding the right place, albeit 
by means of cross-references. Two final points may be mentioned here: where the root exceeds five radicals, the first 
four are given followed by a dash; and the ordering of roots takes gemination into account, instead of placing 
geminate roots at the head of a series, e.g. ~ ~ ..; follows t ~ ..; instead of preceding it. 
2. Headwords 
All headwords are given in two forms, viz. a form in Arabic script and a phonetic representation given in italic 
transcription. The forms given in Arabic script are intended to serve as a guide to the common written form, subject 
to the limitation that Egyptian Arabic is still essentially a spoken language without firm orthographic conventions. 
The following points may be noted in connection with headwords: 
i) 
The ordering of headwords within a root entry is according to the principle of first giving the simple verb and 
forms directly 'associated with it, followed by non-verbal forms grouped and ordered according to length, and 

finally derived verbs and forms associated with them. 
ii) The symbols used in conjunction with transcribed headwords are: 
a) t : restricted to 'iimmiyyal al-mulhaqqaftn 
b) J : restricted to 'iimmiyyal al-ummiyyin 
c) colon: current in (following phrases) 
d) small elevated numeral: one of two or more homophones. 
iii) Variant headwords of roughly equal currency are dealt with in the following ways: 
a) Many entries that are short are repeated. e.g.: 
~.J 'i laring Icoll nl Seville oranges. -
also naring. 
~.;l; naring lcoll nl Seville oranges. -
also laring. 
XIII 
b) In the case of the coexistence of assimilated and unassimilated forms taken to be of roughly equal currency. 
these are given as follows: ':";"';1 rilsabbilor rissabbil . .. The verbal information run-on (see below) of such 
an entry gives only unassimilated forms. but this should not be taken to mean that assim:lated forms are any 
less common. 
iv) Variant headwords of unequal currency 
Where phonetic variations are such that they lie within the frame ofthe Arabic-script headword. they are given in 
an order of priority which is intended to reflect notions of their relative currency. e.g .• jl~.; lurkuwaaz. 
lirkuwaaz, turukwaaz, lirikwaaz . .. Less current variants which do not lie within the frame ofthe Arabic-script 
headword are given in parentheses in the entry of the more current form and cross-referenced from their own 
root. e.g .• under the root,:, I.;. t. the entry reads,:,l...!.la/aan (alsolala/aan) . .. and there is across-reTerence 
to the latter form from the root entry ,:, 1 .;. J t. Parentheses are also used when a headword may be used in 
conjunction with another word with no change of meaning. e.g .• zabaadi (also laban zabaadi); in such cases no 
implication of relative currency.is intended. 
3. Verbal information and run-on entries 
Entries dealing with verbs normally terminate with a listing of the verbal noun(s) and verbal adjectives or 
participles associated with that verb in Egyptian Arabic; the forms given are sometimes incongruous from the 
standpoint of literary Arabic. These items of verbal information do not thereafter qualify for treatment as separate 
entries unless they occur in set phrases requiring definition away from the verb entry or have nominal or adjectival 
functions in addition to their verbal functions. In a spirit of compromise. the term "inactive verbal adjective" (iva) 
has been employed in order to avoid the need to describe the participles of intrinsically passive derived forms of the 
verb as either active or passive -
this being a moot point among exponents of Arabic grammar. 
Idiomatic and phrasal run-on entries start on a new line preceded by ~. Material is allocated to a run-on entry when 
it is in some way distinct from the main entry that it follows while yet being too closely linked with it in form to merit 
an independent entry. The most common examples of such material are verb-plus-preposition as a lexical unit. 
conjunctional phrases formed from preposition-plus-ma, and adverbial forms such as laadalan and lumuuman. 
4. Etymologies 
With regard to material of an etymological character in this dictionary, more could have been done if a very great 
deal more time had been available for the task. In practice. however. the priorities ofthe documentation of Egyptian 
Arabic dictated adherence to modest goals in this complex area. by concentrating in the first place on pulling 
together the fairly exiguous relevant work available and then by adding such further points as became apparent. 
Entanglement in the toils of Semitic philology has not seemed appropriate. so that loanwords which have for long 
been resident in Arabic generally have only rarely been accorded etymons in Hebrew. Syriac etc. The focus has been 
rather on items borrowed specifically by Egypt and on loanwords more general in the various regional forms of 
Arabic but of recent arrival, and the main languages involved are therefore Coptic, Greek, Turkish. Italian. French 
and English. Two general works consulted in this connection were Rufii'n Nakhla al-Yasii'i. Gharii'ib al-Iahja 
al-mi$riyya (Beirut. 1964) and AtJmad 'isii. al-Mu/:lkam ft U$1iI al-kalimiit al-'iimmiyya (Cairo, 1938).1 
IThe reader is also referred to Erich Prokosch, Osmanisches WOr/glll im Agyptisch-Arabisclll?ll (Berlin, 1983). which 
appeared too late to be taken into account in this dictionary. 

XIV 
The task of dealing with survivals from Coptic is accompanied by particular complications, not only because of the 
antiquity of that language and the shortage of published studies on its relation with Egyptian Arabic but also because 
Coptic terms varied in the different Coptic dialects and there are in any case difficulties in knowing how they were 
pronounced. For these reasons, and because too some of the likely etymons are recorded only in hieroglyphs, 
CopticJEgyptian etymons have not been given. The identification <Copb, it should be noted, includes those items 
attested only in hieroglyphs. In addition to Nakhla's book mentioned above, the following works have been 
consulted in this connection: Wilson B. Bishai, "The Coptic influence on Egyptian Arabic" (Johns Hopkins 
University Ph.D. dissertation, Baltimore, 1959); ibid. "Coptic lexical influence on Egyptian Arabic", Journal of 
Near Eastern Studies 23 (1964), pp.39-47; W.E. Crum, A Coptic dictionary (Oxford, 1939); George Sobhy, Common 
words in the spoken Arabic of Egypt, of Greek and Coptic origin (Cairo, 1950); and Wilyam N;q;ir, al-'Adat 
al-m~riyya bayna 'l-ams wa-'l-yawm (Cairo, 1967). 
As might be expected, there has in some cases been considerable difficulty in deciding whether a loanword was 
borrowed directly from its putative language of origin or came via another language. This is particularly so with items 
of Persian origin, some of which seem likely to have come via Turkish, others via Arabic and yet others directly. The 
same problem arises with a number of Greek and Italian terms, which may have arrived either directly or via Turkish. 
In general, an etymon is given in its form in the language of origin, unless some change in the pronunciation or 
meaning suggests a route via Turkish; in this latter case, the Turkish etymon is given, accompanied by a note "from 
P", "from It" etc. to indicate that the item is not Turkish by origin. In the case of items that can be traced to terms 
common to two or more European languages, attempts have been made on the basis of pronunciation and any other 
available clues to specify the probable source language. Items of general European origin have been left without 
etymological information. 
Etymological information is given between angle brackets and the following abbreviations are used: Copt(ic), 
Engl(ish), Fr(ench), Gr(eek), Heb(rew), It(alian), P(ersian), Sp(anish), Syr(iac), T(urkish). In cases of decided 
uncertainty, information is given with the qualifications "perh", "poss", or "prob". For reasons already indicated, 
Coptic, Syriac and Hebrew etymons are omitted, and this has also been done where the etymon is identical or almost 
identical with the definition. On rare occasions, the original sense of the etymon has been given when this has been 
thought to shed light on the entry. 
For Turkish, the following works have been consulted: New Redhouse Turkish-English dictionary (Istanbul, 
1968); J.W. Redhouse, A Turkish and English lexicon (new impression, Constantinople, 1921); H. Kahane et al., 
The lingua franca in the Levant: Turkish nautical terms of Italian and Greek origin (Urbana, 1958); and Julius 
Zenker, Turkisch-arabisch-persisches Handworterbuch (Leipzig; 1866). New Redhouse. spellings have been followed 
except in the case of the Constantinople h for kh, where b has been used to indicate the guttural which must have 
existed in the forms taken over by Egyptians. For Persian, reference has been made to Zenker and to F. Steingass, A 
comprehensive Persian-English dictionary (London, 1892), and Steingass' system of transliteration has been fol-
lowed with the exception of rendering as m his '11 which represents the Persian n when pronounced as m before b. For 
Greek, use has been made of Liddell and Scott and of Charis Patsis, Lexico elleno-angliko (Athens, 1967); the 
Random House dictionary system of transliteration of Greek has been followed except for eta, xi, upsilon, chi and 
omega, which have been rendered as e, ks, u, kh and 6 respectively. For Italian, the Reynolds' and Cassell's 
dictionaries have been used; for Spanish, Cassell's; and for French, Harrap's. 
5. Grammatical information 
Grammatical information, in the form of part-of-speech labels and certain other indications of grammatical 
properties, is given between obliques. The following abbreviations are used: 
absol 
absolute 
imper 
imperative 
pI n 
plural form 
imperatival 
noun 
adj 
adjective, 
adjectival 
imperf 
imperfect 
prep 
preposition, 
prepositional 
art 
article 
indef 
indefinite 
pron 
pronoun, 

XV 
adv 
adverb, 
inst n 
instance noun 
pronominal 
adverbial 
interrog 
interrogative 
prop 
proper 
ava 
active verbal 
adjective 
interj 
interjection 
pva 
passive verbal 
adjective 
coli 
collective 
invar 
invariable 
rei 
relative 
conj 
conjunction, 
iva 
inactive verbal 
conjunctional 
adjective 
sing 
singular 
constr 
construct 
masc 
masculine 
suff 
suffix 
correl 
correlative 
n 
noun 
unit n 
unit noun 
def 
definite 
neg 
negative, 
usu 
usually 
negation 
demonst 
demonstrative 
v 
verb 
num 
numeral 
el 
elative 
vi 
intransitive verb 
part 
particle 
emph 
emphatic 
vn 
verbal noun 
perf 
perfect 
esp 
especially 
vt 
transitive verb 
pers 
person, personal 
fem 
feminine 
w 
with 
pi 
plural 
foil 
following 
The following points may be noticed: 
i) Singular nouns ending in a or a in the transcription and in • in the Arabic script are to be treated as feminine unless 
the definition specifically indicates otherwise (e.g., xaliifa). Other feminine nouns are labelled as such. 
ii) Where no plural is given, none is thought to exist. An asterisk in the grammatical information indicates the plural 
ending -iin (-yyiin if the singular ends with i). Efforts have been made to rank plurals in order of frequency of 
occurrence; where different forms seem to be equally common, the *I-aat or -aatl-yya forms have been given first. 
iii) Verbs which retain the same sense whether or not there is a following preposition have been labelled Ivt and vii. 
iv) The bold dash is used within the body of an entry to introduce grammatical information applicable to what 
follows. 
6. Special language indicators 
Special language indicators, which are given in brackets, are used to point out restrictions peculiar to specific 
terms. Such restrictions may relate to subject areas and occupations, a particular connotation, a social group, or a 
limitation on currency. The following indicators are used: 
abus(ive) 
derog(atory) 
acad(eme) 
dipl(Qmacy) 
admin(istration) 
educ(ation) 
agric( ulture) 
elec(tricity) 
anat(omy) 
eng(ineering) 
arch(itecture) 
euphem(istic) 
art 
fig( urative) 
astrol( ogy) 
finan(ce) 
astron(omy) 
frozen contexts 
athl( etics) 
geog(raphy) 
auto( mobiles) 
geol(ogy) 
bank(ing) 
geom(etry) 
mus(ic) 
naut(ical) 
nav(al) 
non-Cairene 
needlew( ork) 
obsol( ete, obsolescent) 
path (ology) 
phot( ography) 
phys(ics) 
plumb(ing) 
poet(ical) 
pol(itics, political) 

XVI 
beggars 
gram(mar) 
police 
bio/(ogy) 
gym( nastics) 
pottery 
bot(any) 
hist( ory. historical) 
print(ing) 
broadc( asting) 
hort(iculture) 
prov(erb. proverbial) 
butcher(ing) 
iron(ic) 
psych( ology) 
cal/ig( raphy) 
Isl(am. Islamic) 
rur(al) 
carp( entry) 
Isl(amic) law 
sarc(astic) 
chem(istry) 
joc(ular) 
slang 
chess 
journ( alism) 
soccer 
children 
Jud(aism) 
sport 
Chr(istian. Christianity) 
leg( al practice) 
surg(ery) 
cin(ema) 
ling( uistics) 
trad(itional) soc(iety) 
coarse 
lit( erature) 
techn(ology) 
comm(erce) 
magic 
text(i1es) 
communic( ations) 
math( ematics) 
theat(re) 
constr( uction) 
mech(anics) 
theo/(ogy) 
cook(ery) 
med(ical practice) 
vendor's cry 
Copt(ic) 
metal(lurgy) 
vet( erinary science) 
dent(istry) 
mil(itary affairs) 
women 
deris(ive) 
min( eralogy) 
zoo/(ogy) 
7. Definitions and examples 
Definitions are given in British English. but the Random House dictionary has been referred to consistently in an 
attempt to avoid anglicisms unintelligible or misleading to those familiar only with American English. Most of the 
definitions are translational. with some additional "ostensive" definitions provided by the illustrations. However. 
analytical definitions have recommended themselves as less cumbersome for many instance nouns and for 
intrinsically passive derived forms of verbs themselves intransitive; in addition. analytical definition has been 
preferred in respect of most function words. on the ground that their complexities of usage can be summed up more 
readily in this way than through translational renderings which would fairly consistently fail to cover the semantic 
ranges involved. Senses and sub-senses are numbered off. Wherever possible. verbs have been defined in isolation 
from prepositions with which they may normally occur and the examples then show prepositional usages. 
Illustrative contextual examples are provided for all entries except those where the meaning is so restricted or 
specialized that such examples would merely smack of tedious pedantry. Such emphasis on examples is. of course, 
consistent with the usual lexicographical practice of citation and has the advantage of capturing some of the flavour of 
Egyptian life. -A& might be expected in formulaic areas of expression such as blessing. cursing. greeting and 
invitation. the gap between Egyptian Arabic and English is at its greatest. with resultant difficulties in finding 
renderings which convey adequately all the spontaneity and conviction of the original. The collection of idiomatic 
usages in general has been a priority and these are to be found listed among non-transparent items given after double 
bars in the entries. 
8. Transcription 
The system of phonetic transcription used here follows in most respects that adopted by T.F. Mitchell in An 
introduction to Egyptian colloquial Arabic (London. 1956. repro 1978). The main departures from that system 
concern certain vocalic renderings: a distinction is made here between a front a and a back a, and anaptyxis is shown 
wherever it occurs (rather than simply within composite morphological forms). Stress is not marked except where it 
constitutes an exception according to the rules elaborated by Mitchell; nor is stress shown in quasi-literary patterns 
such as gaamili. Thirty consonant symbols and six vowel symbols are used. the consonant symbol~ being listed here 
with their Arabic-script counterparts in the order of the Arabic alphabet. according to which the dictionary is 
arranged (subject to the modifications mentioned above in section 1). 

i) Consonants 
r 
• 
b 
":-' 
.;., ((II.m .!II 
0 
.!I 
eli 
( 
" 
C. 
of 
C. 
(I 
~ (also ~) 
r 
J 
ii) Vowels 
The six vowel symbols used are: 
a (Iallza muraqqaqa) 
low/open and front 
a (Ial/za mulakhkhama) low/open and back 
i (kasra khiili$a) 
high/close and front 
z 
s 
I 
~ 
tl 
; 
l 
'If 
e (kasra mumiila) 
middle/half-close and front 
u (gamma khiili$a) 
high/close and back 
o (gamma mumiila) 
middle/half-close and back 
XVII 
.i (1I1so 
~) 
f/I' 
...; 
.r (1Ilso .!I) 
qllj 
J 
. 
k 
.!l 
.r 
,Jf' 
J 
...J4 (1I1w ~I 
1/1 
r 
.k 
II 
~ 
~ (1IIw ...J41 
II 
• 
t 
w 
.J 
t 
)' 
IS 
These vowel symbols are doubled to indicate length, the Arabic-script counterparts of the pairs aa/aa, iilee and 
uu/oo being I, IS and.J respectively. 
Mastery of the exact phonetic value of each of the above symbols can of course be best achieved by practice with 
native speakers, but for descriptions of these values the user is referred to any of the grammars already mentioned. 
The following points, however, require special mention here: 
i) lj/q and r 
The J of literary Arabic is associated with two distinct sounds in Egyptian Arabic. The first of these (symbolized 
by lj) is of more widespread occurrence and is similar to the glottal stop (f). The second (symbolized by q) is similar to 
its counterpart in literary pronunciation and occurs commonly only in 'iimmiyyal al-mulhaqqafin. One good reason 
for distinguishing between f and lj is that the former may elide while the latter never elides. Compare, for example, 
rililli-sm-i (or li-fism-i) (he made a mistake in my name) with rililli-c;ism-i (he made a mistake in my share). 
ii) Doubled consonants 
Doubling of a consonant symbol in the transcription corresponds to the shadda of Arabic orthography. A doubled 
consonant is pronounced with twice the length of its single counterpart. 
iii) a-a/aa-aa 
The distinction made here is between the open vowel a made with the front of the tongue (rather like the English a 
in hal) and the open vowel a made with the back of the tongue (rather like the English vowel in t~e word calm) -cf. 
Egyptian Arabic barr (to pamper) with barr (to fulfil (a promise». The long vowels aa and aa may be regarded as 
having double the duration of a and a respectively, e.g., nabal (to sprout) and nabaal (plant), lab (all right then!) and 
(aab (to recover). 
iv) i-elii-ee 
These two vowels are produced with the front of the tongue. The closer of them, i, is similar to the vowel in the 
English pin (e.g., silim), ~hile for e the mouth is slightly more open and the vowel is roughly halfway between the 
vowels in English pin and pen; the vowel eoccurs usually as a contraction of ee in a closed syllable (e.g.,gel-na). The 
long vowels ii and ee may be regarded as having double the duration of i and e respectively, e.g., leel (bread) and 
eel-na (our bread), liifa (livelihood) and lifa (evening prayer). 
v) u-o/uu-oo 
These two vowels are produced with the back of the tongue and the relation ~etween them is analogous to the 
relation between i and e. The closer vowel, u, is similar to the vowel in English put, while for 0 the mouth is slightly 

XVIII 
more open; the vowel 0 occurs usually as a contracted form of 00 in a closed syllable (e.g., yom-na). The long vowels 
uu and 00 may be regarded as having double the duration of u and 0 respectively, e.g., door (round (in a game etc.» 
and dor-na (our round), duur (go around!) and durr (pearls). 
vi) Anaptyxis 
Unstressed anaptyctic vowels are represented in small elevated form, while stressed anaptyctic vowels are given in 
the normal fount. 
9. Hyphenation 
The system of hyphenation employed in the transcribed Arabic is intended to serve as an aid and does not 
constitute an attempt to lay down orthographic rules. Its purpose is to indicate the main features of the 
morphological structure oT composite forms and it is accordingly used with bound morphemes and monosyllabic 
particles, and in instances of elision, anaptyxis and linkage involving stress. Certain exceptions have been made, 
however, in order to prevent the amount of hyphenation from becoming excessive. 
i) Bound morphemes: e.g., darab-ni, wa/ad-i. Exceptions are: a) person markers used in the conjugation of the verb 
(e.g., katabt rather than katab-t, yiktib rather than yi-ktib), and b) suffixed pronominal morphemes when bound with 
prepositions or conjunctions (e.g., bikum, laleek, finnik, fikminnu). It may be noted that the third person singular 
masculine suffix after a vowel takes the form of incremental length with concomitant stress (e.g. ,fafuu they saw him, 
malaa with him). 
ii) Prefixed and suffIXed monosyllabic particles: the definite article (fit-beet), the time markers ya- and bi- (ya-yiktib) , 
the conjunctions wi- and fa- (wi-qarab-ni), the negative particles ma- and -f(ma-katab-f), and the prepositions li-, 
bi-, la- and mi- (li-beet-u). Exceptions: hyphenation is not used when a monosyllabic particle is followed by a definite 
article or by a pronominal suffix (hencefil-beet rather thanfi-I-beet, and bikum etc. as above); nor is hyphenation 
used before the conjunctive quasi-suffix (as in saacit ma, baldl mal, both because other form-classes may here be 
interpolated and because linkage here would imply erroneous stress. 
iii) Elision, anaptyxis and linkage involving stress: an example of hyphenation in elision involving stress occurs in the 
initial composite form of the phrase huwwa-na iii lamalt-u; where an anaptyctic vowel is stressed, it is preceded by a 
hyphen and followed by a hyphen, but hyphenation is not used to isolate unstressed anaptyctic vowels; the term 
linkage here relates to the enclitic use, affecting stress, of such potential free-form units as lak and di, as in fit-Ielaa-di 
(cf. fit-feela di) and katabu-ha-Ina (cf. katabuu-ha tina). 

1 ~ see 0 1 ~: faa 
y_1 ~ 
..,,1 faab Inl [Chr] Father (epithet of God). bi-sm il-
faab in the name of the Father. 
Iyl. 
~I faaba <gcrh Copt> In; always used vocativelyl 
[trad soc] father. finta waljaft-i-ni y-aaba I missed you, 
Daddy. !'aaba l-!'akl; !'ahu here's the food, Pop. 
~ 1 ~ 
~I !'aad, !'aad <poss related to Copt> In; always used 
vocativelyl boy. xud y-aad come here, boy. -also waad. 
r ~ 1 ~ 
i~1 !'aadam Iprop nl Adam. 
~ bani !'aadam Ifem bani fadma, pi bani fadmiinll/nl 
person, human bcing. laazim il-bani faadam yikuun 
eandu ~abr one must be patient. ya bani !'aadam [de-
rog] "" you brute, thickhead! 2/adjl considerate, 
polished, refined. di silt; bani fadma or silt; bani 
faadam this is a very nice lady. 
lS"~1 faadami ladj "I human. !'i{-{abiiea l-!'aadamiyya 
human nature. 
~~I faadamiyya Inl humanity, human feeling. 
I.S~I-
I.S~I faadi <Copt> Iw pron suff !'adii-I demonstrative 
drawing attention to a following pronoun or noun (cf Fr 
voici, voila). !'adii-ni geet here I am! !'aadi gneeh here's 
a pound. !'aadi n~~; saaea tanyafaatit there's another 
half hour gone! wi-!'aadi !'axrit-ha and now look how 
it's turned out. faadifurt-ak il-mihabbiba so much for 
your lousy advice, this is where your lousy advice has 
got me! 
I V" 1 ~ 
...,...~ !'aas J Icoll nl myrtle. 
4.-1 !'aasa lunit n, pi -aatl a myrtle bush . 
2V"1~ 
...,...1 faas 2 <Fr as> In pi -aatl ace (in cards). 
...; 1 ~ 
~I !'aafa In pi -aatl blight, disease (on a plant). 
-/adjectivallyl raagil faafa a pest of a man. I~aljn; 
kunaafa w-gambii faafa [prov] description of anything 
fine which is marred by an accompanying fault or 
blemish. 
I J 1 ~ 
JJI !'aala In pi -aatl I tool, instrument. fil-!'alaat id-
daqiiqa precision tools. fitqatal bi-!'aala Ijadda he was 
murdered with a sharp instrument. 2 machine. e~r 
il-faala the machine age. II !'aala katba typewriter. 
3 musical instrument. falaat niljasiyya brass instru-
ments. falaat iI-qare percussion instruments. !'alaat 
in-nafx iI-xafabiyya woodwinds. 4[euphem] penis. 
5 stopgap. !'ana gayb-u meaaya !'aala kida wis-salaam 
I've brought him with me just for the sake of 
appearances. 
JI faali ladj/I mechanical. finsaan faali robot. game; 
!'aali [print] machine setting. 2 automatic. n~~; !'aali 
semi-automatic. 3 [mus] instrumental. 
J"JI !'alaati lIn pi -yya/low-c1ass musician or singer. 
2/adj "I raffish. 
2 J 1 ~ 
JI faal J In always in constrllineage, line, stock. !'aal 
in-nabi (or faal ii-beet) the line of the Prophet. II !'aal 
faddaad hashish-smokers. 

J J 1 • 
Ji f'aal 2 <Copt> Inl I jacks, five-stones (children's 
game). 2/pl f'ilaanl a ~ingle jack-stone. five-stone. 
.J ~ r I. see .J r • : f'aamiin, f'amiin 
.J I. ~ee .J.J': f'aall 
~.J 1 • 
,ji f'aalli [lloll-Catrelle/ personal pronoun of the 1st 
. person singular. II f'aah y-aaJti = oh me. misery me! 
o 1 • 
.1 f'aah (also f'aa) <Copt> linterjl I yes. yes indeed. 
ah yes. f'aah .va beeh lla-lli kaall bt-yilJ~al that's right. 
Sir. that's what used to happen. f'is-sittaat ljiwwa f'aah 
ljiwlVa women are an effective force. yes indeed. an 
effective force. f'allh fihimt ah yes. now I understand. 
2 exclamation of pain. distress or regret. f'aah ya gamb-
i ouch. my side! II f'allh millllak = you snake in the grass! 
See further under 2 O.J • 
.J 0 1 • 
"...1 -f'aahu 
exclamation 
implying 
indifference. 
lagbaa-k iI-waziija g-giditda - f'aah~ '00 you like the 
new position?' ·So-so. 
(~I. ) 
~I f'aaya In pi -aatl I [lsi/ miracle performed by God. 
II raagil f'aaya (mill il-f'ayaat or mill f'ayaat rabb-i-lIa) a 
marvellous man. - (hiyya) I'aayajlg-gamaal (she is) the 
epitome of beauty. 2 verse of scripture.lIlakas il-I'aaya 
to do something in a way opposite to that usually fol-
lowed. reverse normal procedure. 
.... 1 I'aay linterjl exclamation of pain. - also I'ayy. 
..r'~I. 
...,.-!I I'aayis (also I'aayis kiriim) <Engl> Inl ice. ice 
cream. 
o 1 •• 
f, 
.111 l'al'l'aah [childrelll I Inl a spanking. a smacking. 
haaba I'tddaa-lli l'al'l'aah Papa gave me a ~panking. 
2 (also l'al'l'ah) exclamation discouraging a child from 
doing wrong = you'lI get a spanking! 
o •• ~ee 0 1 •• : ra rra!t 
t· . 
t! I'tl'al [chtfdrelll interjection expressing desire to 
visit the lavatory. 
2 
.1;.l y
• 
J>~ i rabaa;i: lads I rabaa;i lentils baked with chicken 
(a dish attrihuted to the Abaza family) . 
1 .J 1 y. see also y y • 
\;~i rabaalla (also I'abaalla llazi) Inl [Chr/ Our Father • 
paternoster. 
I Y y. see also I.J 1 y • 
";:'i I'abbln. in constr rabu. w pron suff rabuu- (1st sing 
l'abllu-ya)1 I Ipl rabbahaat. I'abaa I' f! father. progeni-
tor. I'abll/-waladthe boy's father. wayiid I'abull an only 
son. II f'illi yilraf I'abuu-ya Yljlll-lu (who knows my 
father may tell him) I'll do as I like and damn what 
anyone says! -maglis ii- I'abaa I' the Parent-Teacher 
Association. - I'abuu-k ma-hll rabllll-k wa-raxuu-k 
ma-hu I'axull-k (your father is not your father and your 
hrother is not your brother) = everyone for himself. 
2/pl I'abaal' onlyl 2a priest. father. I'abaal'ik-kiniisa 
(I) the clergy. (2) the Church Fathers. lIaadi I'abb' 
mil-kahana call one of the priests. II I'abb iltiraaf the 
priest to. whom one regularly makes confession. 
- ru-rabaal' il-biic[ the White Fathers. the Carmelites. 
2b Iwith 1st person pi suW [Chrl title of. and form of 
addre~s or reference to. a priest or monk. I'abull-na 
girgis Father Girgis. miin rabllU-lIa iii guwwa da who is 
that priest who is inside? 3 rabllll-ya informal mode of 
address to (I) an older man = Dad. (2) any man = 
mate. pal. - lalways in constr rahlll 4 stem. source. 
origin. bUrlIIljaan mistiwi lala rabllll oranges which 
ripened on the tree. gibt iI-xabar mill rabuu I got it 
from the horse's mouth. ril-l'lIs(IIWaalla di I'abllu-ha 
feell where is the master copy of this record? II wi- rabuu 
to an extreme degree. par excellence. as in daw/a w-
rabllll-ha one hell of a racket. 5 Iw masc n as referent. 
and w foil n (pi 1'1lInmaat. rllmmaat q.v. under I'lImm 
3)1 Sa the one with .... the one having .... rtf-walad 
I'abll Ilac[c[aara the hoy wearing glasses. I'ir-raagil rabll 
l"een Zl/rlj the man with the blue eyes. I'ik-kllrsi I'abll 
lalat riglem the three-legged chair. 5b the one costing 
. ... Illllt'll'a da d-dll/aab rahll nuit gllleeh is that the 
hundred-pound wardrobe? 
11 I'abll lin constrl (I) used with the name of a man's 
eldest son. or. if he has no sons. his eldest daughter. or. 
if he has no children. his father. as a respectful and 
slightly affectionate substitute for his own name. 
(2) used in some nicknames corresponding to certain 
given names. e.g .. rabu yaggaag for YIIIIsif. rabll yanafi 
for maynllllld. rabll .Ialiil for ribrahiim. rabll darwiij or 

darJfor m~(afa, fabu dawuud for silimaan, fabu r;ali 
for yasan. 
t;i fabban: fabban r;an gidd from generation to gen-
eration, from father to son. 
0!~i fabaween Idual nl (one's) parents. wayiid i1-
fabaween an only child. 
l.S~i fabawi ladj *1 paternal, fatherly. 
.~i fubuwwa Inl fatherhood. 
1 ......... 
.... ..: 
~I ,~I fubba, fabbah [children}. interjection accom-
panying actions of climbing and lifting "" hup! feela 
fubba see feela. -also hubba. 
";'i fubb: feela fubb see feela . 
. 
.... .... . 
.: . 
4r.1 fubbaha Inl sumptuousness, elegance (of appear-
ance). dool gamaar;a faaxir fubbaha those are ex-
tremely chic people. -/adjectivallyl waad fubba~a an 
elegant youth. villa fubbaha a sumptuous villa. 
~[.Y· 
~I fabgad: fabgad hawwaz Inl ABC (the first letters 
of the alphabet). da lissa f-fabgad hawwaz he is just a 
beginner. 
l.S~i fabgadi ladj *1 alphabetical.llraagil fabgadi a 
man who works by the book. 
~~i fabgadiyya In pi -aatl alphabet. 
).JtY· 
;.J~~i fabajuura, fabajoora <Fr abat-jour> In pi 
-aatl table lamp, standard lamp. 
~Y • 
~ i fabad: 1iI-fabad or fila 1-fabad ladvl forever. 
huwwa-yna ya-nr;iif liI-fabad are we to live forever? 
• fabadan 1 ladv always w neg! ever, at all. mif bi-tgii-Ii 
fabadan you never come and see me. ma-Y1ayy;1 kida 
fabadan this isn't at all the right thing to do. 
b-akallim-ak wala-!'ta saamir; fabadan I'm talking to 
you and you're not listening at all. 2 exclamation of 
emphatic denial"" never! certainly not! not at all! no-
thing at all! fikr-ik siktu r;alayya - fabadan ~o you 
imagine that they let me be? no way! c;al-Iaha tar;baana 
- c;alit-Iu fabadan he asked her, 'Tired?' She told him, 
'Not at al1!' maa-Iak ya fabu sayyid. - fabadan ya 
bamba ma-fii1'What's wrong, Abu Sayyid?' 'Nothing 
at all, Bamba,' 
l.S~i fabadi ladjl everlasting, eternal. fil-yayaah i1-
fabadiyya eternal life. 
3 
.-'e!h tafbiida In! life sentence, life imprisonment. 
faruuy fiikum ta fbiida I'll get you even if I go to prison 
for life for it! I'll kill you! 
~jA mufabbad ladjl for life (of a prison sentence ). 
fityakam r;alee bi-sign; mu fabbad he was sentenced to 
life imprisonment. -/ellipticallyl xad mufabbad or 
fityakam r;alee bil-mufabbad he was given a life 
sentence. 
-1oS~Y' 
.:,_,S'l!.~~! ,.}'~~-'>!.! fibudiyaakun 
(also 
fibuz-
iyaakun) <Gr hupodiakonos> In *1 [Chr] subdeacon. 
.:,';~~~! fibudiyaaqun t = fibudiyaakun. 
I )y. 
• A fibra In pi fibarl 1 needle. fibra r;ooga a curved 
needle. fibar tirikuuh knitting-needles. fibrit b~/a 
compass-needle. fibrit babuur needle for cleaning the 
jet of a primus stove. II fibrit i1-r;aguuz nettles. - fibrit 
faadam 
[bot] 
yucca. 
-beet 
i1-fibra 
compass. 
2 hypodermic 
needle, 
(and 
hence) 
injection. 
fid-duktuur katab-Ii talat fibar the doctor prescribed 
me three injections. IIbi-yiddi fibar (1) he gives injec-
tions. (2) he plays dirty tricks. 3 sting of a scorpion or a 
bee. 
ft:" meebar In pi mayaabirl large needle, sail-needle. 
1) y. 
I J.Ji fubra, fupira t <It> In pi -aatl 1 opera. 2 fil-
fubra site, in central Cairo, of the former Opera 
House. midaan it fubra Opera Square. 
.:;.,.:;.,) ..... 
~J.Ji rUbritt, fubreet <Fr operette> In pi -aatl 
1 operetta. 2 musical comedy (film). 
-.:;.,)y • 
..A; J. i fabratiif, fabritiif <Fr aperitif> Inl appetizer. 
-V"')Y· 
0!.JLi-J J. i fabrusfariin <cf Gr prospherein> In! [Chr] 
cloth with which the offertory is covered on an altar. 
- also burusfariin. 
1oS';')y· 
~ 
J. i fabrafiyya, 
fab'rufiyya, 
fibarJiyya 
<Gr 
eparkhia> In pi -aatl[Chr] diocese. 

.!lJY· 
~)4i fabarka <Gr aparkhe> Inl a sweet red wine 
(used particularly as communion wine). 
-.!lJY· 
..,.."..,s ;! ,,!I ril- fibraksiis <Gr prakseis> Inl {Chr] the 
book,of Acts of the Apostles. 
-
~J y. 
:( .. .,A;! ,,!I ril- fibrahimiyya Iprop nl Sufi order named 
after Sidi Ibrahim ed-Disuqi. 
.:.. ..; J Y' see .:...:.. J Y .: fubreet 
J..;;y' 
~) fabriiq In pI fabariiql metal or earthenware 
ewer with a spout (see PI.A, 2). fabriiq jaay teapot. 
J";JY' 
J..) fabriil, fibriil In! April. kidbit fabriil April fool. 
r";JY' 
(""!) fabriim Iprop n! Ibrim, a site in Nubia. 
~) fabriimi ladjl from Ibrim in Nubia. balay 
fabriimi a variety of high quality date, usually sold dry. 
r..;jy· 
(""!) fabziim In pI -aat, 
fabaziiml buckle. - also 
fabziin. 
oJ..;jy· 
,j!) fabziin In pI -aat, 
fabaziinl buckle. -also 
fabziim. 
- ..; j y. see -..; ~ y • : fibuziyaakun 
IJ'" y. see IJ"'''; Y • : fabiis 
e..;lJ"'y, 
~ 
i fabseeh <Fr abces> In pI -aatl {path] abscess. 
(-JIJ"'Y') 
~~! fib~aliyya, fab~aliyya, fib~aaliya <Gr psalia> 
In pI -aall {Chr] hymn based on a passage from 
scripture. 
~~~! fib~almudiyya, 
fab~almudiyya, 
fib~al­
muziyya <Gr psalmodia> In! {Chr] book of Coptic 
liturgical hymns. 
4 
J, y. 
~ I fibt In pI fabaatl It armpit. 2 {bot] base of a leaf 
on a plant. - also baat . 
.Jl, ..... 
... 
Ja;1 
fabba~ I/vtl to squeeze in the hand, fondle . 
fabba~i l-lagiin lajaan yitra squeeze the dough to 
make it soft. lammuala tfabba~ fi-xduud layyil-ha she 
is fondling her child's cheeks. 2 Ivil to masturbate. -vn 
tafbii~; ava/pva mifabba~. 
Ja;"hl 
fitfabba~ Ivil to be squeezed. -iva mitfabba~. 
~ t y. see 
~ t y : fabladiyya 
-Jty· 
~i 
faburalamsiis <Gr apokalypsis> In! {Chr] 
Book of Revelation, Apocalypse. leelit faburalamsiis 
the night of Holy Saturday, when the Book of Revela-
tion is read. 
-.:..I.!ly • 
.,;\5' >!i fabukaatu (also fabukaadu I) <It avvocato> In 
pI fabukatiyya, fabukadiyyal lawyer, advocate. -also 
favukaatu, favukaadu. 
1.)I.!ly. 
J~\5' >!i fabukaadu 2 <Sp> Icoll nl avocado tree(s), 
avocado pear(s). - also avukaadu. 
~lAJ~\5' >!i fabukaduhaaya lunit n, pI -aatl an avocado 
pear. -also favukaduhaaya. 
2 .) I .!l y. see .:.. I .!l y .: fabukaadu 1 
Jy. 
44 i fabla <T abla older sister> In pI -waat, fablaat, 
fablahaatl title of, and respectful form of address or 
reference to, an older woman, applied in particular by 
children to a schoolteacher"" Miss. 
-.;..Jy. 
u;~i fablatiin <Fr platine> Inll platinum. 2 Icoll nl 
(auto] contact breaker(s). 
~~i fablatiina In pI -aatl {auto] contact breaker. -
also bilatiina. 
IJ'" J y. see IJ"'''; J Y .: fibliis, fabliis 
-IJ'" Jyo 
~ 
~ i fablaseeh <Fr placier> In pI -aatl I sales repre-
sentative. 2 cinema usher. - also balaseeh. 

j~Jy. 
~ i fabliiz, fiblii; InJ alluvial deposit of the Nile. 
- ladjectivallyl {iin fabliiz soft mud. 
V"~Jy. 
~! fibliis, fabliis In pI fabalsal devil, demon, speci-
fically Satan. fibn il- fabalsa the sly devil. la/am ibliis 
fig-ganna {prov] (Satan's hope of Paradise) a total 
impossibility . 
.£I~Jy. 
~ 
i fabliik <Fr applique> In pI -aat, fabaliik/l wall-
lamp, bracket-light. 2 ornamental wall-relief. 
~i fabliika In pI -aatl = fabliik. 
I,:,y_ 
U!I fibn In pI fabnaaft (or more often fawlaad, q.v. 
under walad)1 1 son. fiddi fibn-ak ii-iii luu fawlaad 
{prov] (entrust your son to one who himself has chil-
dren) give responsibility to those with experience. 2 ya-
bn-i informal form of address to a boy or younger man 
"" son, my lad. 3 lalways in constrl one brought up in a 
specified place or social milieu. fibn ir-rii! a country-
man. fabnaaf il-qaahira Cairenes. fabnaaf ik-kiniisa 
regular church-goers. - for other phrases beginning 
with fibn (e.g., fibn i naas),look up the second compo-
nent of the phrase. See further under Z ~ ,:, y 
Z,:, .... _ 
... . 
U!I fabbin t Ivtl to eulogize (a deceased person).baflit 
ta fbiin memorial ceremony. -vn ta fbiin; ava mifabbin. 
';'hl fitfabbin t Ivil to be eulogized (at a commemora-
tive ceremony or the like). -iva mitfabbin. 
3,:,y. 
~i fubna Inl passive sodomy. landu (or fii) daaf il-
fubna he is a passive sodomite. 
,:,y,l. mafbuun In ·1 catamite, passive sodomite. lIya 
mara ya mafbuuna you slut! 
j .J ,:, y. see V".J':' Y • : fabanooz 
V".J':'y-
V"~i fabanoos (also fabanooz) <Or ebenos> InJ 
ebony.lI~alam fabanoos a fountain pen. 
.J Y - see I y Y • : 
fabu, 
fabaween, 
fabawi, 
fubuwwa 
I.J y. 
Iy,i fubwa <Fr hautbois> In pI -aatloboe. 
I ,:, .J y. see I y Y _: fabuu-na 
~y-
lJ.i faba (a) Ivtl to refuse. dayman yifba n-n~iiba he is 
always against being advised. -vn fibaa ft; ava faabi. 
~i fabiyyt Ipl fubaa/l/adjl of great integrity. 2/nl 
person of integrity. 
~hl fitfabba Ivil to play hard-to-get, be reluctant. 
say~a d-dalaal wi-b-titfabba lalee she coquettishly re-
fuses him. -vn tafabbiT; ava mitfabbi. 
y~y. 
'-:"eli fabiib <Copt> InJ Abib, the eleventh month of 
the Coptic year (early July to early August). fabiib 
{abbaax il-linab wiz-zibiib {prov] Abib cooks the 
grapes and raisins (this being the time of the grape 
harvest). min yaakul il-muluxiyya !-fabiib yigiib 
Ii-batn-u {abiib {prov] he who eats Jew's mallow in Abib 
will (have to) bring a doctor for his stomach. 
V"~y. 
L)":!! i fabiis Iprop nJ InJ the Egy~tian god Apis. laamil 
zayyi ligli fabiis (he looks Iik~ the Apis bull) "" he is 
very stocky. 
.~y. 
":!! i fabeeh, fabeeh <T agabey> In pI -aat, -aatl elder 
brother. 
~yl.:;,. 
lJ.\;i fataabi (also fataari) Iw pron suff fatabii-, fatarii-I 
demonstrative indicating the discovery of a reason or 
fact. fatabii-k ma-get1so that's why you didn't come! 
rubt a~ba4. wi- fataari l-filuus lissa ma-w~lit1 I went to 
draw my salary and it turned out that the money hadn't 
arrived yet. (Cf fagrann) 

IS ~ I .::... see IS y I .::.. .: ralaari 
y .::... see IS y I .::.. .: ralaabi 
..,..ISY'::"· 
...,-o!.iJi rutubiis <Fr aUlobus> In pI -aall bus. 
ri/- rutubiis in-nahri the (Nile) river bus. 
I ~ .::... see IS y I .::.. .: ralaari 
2 ~ .::... see 3 ~ ..,.. .: ralar 
3 ~ .::... see ~ IS .::.. • : riteer, ruteer 
Jy~.::... 
.}. A ritrabil In! {naut] keel. 
-y~'::" • 
.k.;i rutrubiil J <Fr automobile> In pI -aatl car. 
- also rutrumbiil, rutumbiil. 
-r~'::'" 
J.e,...;i rutrumbiilJ (also turumbiil) <Fr automobile> 
In pI -aatll car. 2 rutrumbiil (ljart) tractor, especially 
with plough attached. -also rutrubiil, rutumbiil. 
~~~.::.. . 
~;.i .~.;i rutrung Icoll nl {bot] Adam's apple(s) 
(Citrus medica var. cedrata). -also turung. 
- .::.. ..,.. .::.. . 
";'~.i) rutustubb <Fr autostop> Inl hitch-hiking. 
jl....;.::... 
)".i! rl1ufaar <Fr etouffoir> In pI -aatl 1 candle-
snuffer. 2 damper-felt (of a piano key). 
.J ....; .::.. • 
• ..,..! ritfuuh, ritfuww onomatopoeia for the sound of 
spitting, indIcating disgust. rl1fuuh (r;aleek) "" how dis-
gusting (you are)! -also tifuuh, tifuww. 
-jJ'::". 
JoI ... .iJi rutuqraa(i <perh Fr> 1 In "I autocrat. 
2/adj '1 autocratic. 
~1).iJi rutuqraa(/yyat Inl autocracy. 
.!l .::.. • 
o.!ti ralak <T etek> Inl tape along the lower edge of a 
long garment to save wear. 
6 
-J.!l.::.. • 
..j"j$ .iJi rutuklaaf <perh Fr> In pI -aall autoclave, 
strong vessel in which superheated steam under press-
ure is used for sterilizing or cooking . 
.::.. IS .!l .::.. • 
~I ritikeet <Fr> Inl 1 (style of) etiquette. da 
lil~g~;:aaz' r;andina ritikeet marriage with us hils a cer-
tain etiquette. 2 Ipl -aatl label, tag. 
J.::... 
J.i ratllcoll nl tamarisk tree(s). 
~i ratla lunit n, pI -aall a tamarisk tree. 
-ISJ.::..· 
"",*,i ralilyeeh, ralileeh <Fr atelier> In pI -aatl studio, 
workshop. 
- I r .::... see -.::.. r .::.. .: rutumaatik 
-Yr'::'" 
J,..ii rutumbiil or rutumubiil (also tumbiil) <Fr 
aUlomobile> In pI -aall 1 car. 2 rUlumbiil (ljarl) trac-
tor, especially with plough attached. -also rutrubiil, 
rUlrumbiil. 
-'::"r.'::'" 
o.!tl...ii rutumalik (also rUlumaalik) <Engl> ladj in-
varl automatic. 
~I...ii rutumatiik <Fr> ladj invarl automatic. 
~I...ii rUlumatiiki ladjl automatic. 
~lSr'::'" 
.r.'! rilamiin <Fr etamine> Inl soft evenly-woven 
material (especially that used as a base for cross-stitch 
embroidery) . 
- I ~ .::... see 2 IS ~ .::.. : rilnaajar 
4J IS 4J .::... see 2 IS ~ .::.. : rilneen 
-Jo.::... 
t.....li! 
rithalii~a <Copt> linterjl run aground! (in the 
jargon of Nile boatmen) . 
.J'::". 
oJI.;! ritaawa, ralaawa In pI -aall ransom money, pro-
tection money. 

I.S .:J ~ 
Ji rata T (i) Ivt/ to come to. r~rif ma fil-geeb yirtii-k 
ma fil-veeb {prov] = carpe diem, tomorrow will take 
care of itself. kulli raatin fiariib {prov] everything (des-
tined) to come is (relatively) imminent. -ava raati. 
J'il ru- raati r Inl the following. ruli y~al iI-raati what 
happened is this. ka-I- raati as follows. 
jhl rirratla Ivil to result. ma-yitrattaa-J eannu yaaga 
nothing will come of it. -ava mitratti. 
JI Saata Ivtl 1 to give, grant. rataa rabb-i-na bi-lii 
nifs-u fii God granted him all that he wished. 2 to 
afflict, curse. rallaah yiratii-ha b-mUJiiba taxud-ha may 
God afflict her with a fatal catastrophe! 3t = waata. 
-ava miraati. 
JIJ waata (also raataT) Ilvtl to be favourable, be 
propitious. rig-gaww i mwaati the weather is favour-
able. 2/vil to favour, make things easy for (s.o.). 
ril-ya;;i wataa-ni fortune smiled on me. yabibt-u 
mwatyaa his girlfriend is exactly on his wavelength. -vn 
miwatiyya, muwatiyya; ava miwaati. 
jLI ristiratla J Ivil to result. wi-reeh ya-yistiratla min 
eadam muwaffiit-u and what will come of his disapprov-
al? -ava mistiratli. 
J I.S .:J. see also J I.S ..,.. ~ 
,r-:i ',r-'i riteer, ruteer <Fr ether> In pi -aatl ether. 
~ ~ 
~ see 3..,....,.. ~ 
J ~. see 3 J ..,.. ~ and J I.S .:J. and J I.S ..,.. • 
J~~ see J.:J~ 
I.S I .[. • 
~~I rugaay <Copt> linterjl help! y-afieud rat[rab 
fiik Ii-yadd i ma tfiuul rugaay I'll keep beating you until 
you call for help! -also gaay. 
I ":-' [" 
~i ragbiyya <Copt> In pi ragaabil {Chr] book of 
the daily office, book of hours. 
1 ":-' [" 
see ":-' [..J: riigaab, rigaabi, rigabiyya 
J [. ~ 
,ft-i ragr, ragr In pi ruguurl wage, pay, recompense. 
ru-ragri mif fiadd iI-mafafifia the recompense isn't 
worth the hardship. II ru-ragr· eal-alla = God will re-
7 
ward (said in resignation to ingratitude). -wil-ragr· 
eal-alla set phrase used to boast of a reputation, as in 
da-na I-mieallim dabfa wi/-ragr· eal-alla = I'm Boss 
Dabsha, everyone knows me!- ragri w-eafya (may you 
enjoy) recompense and (further) well-being (said to 
one recovered from illness). -ea;;am allaahu ragr-ak 
may God make your recompense great (an expression 
of condolence). 
",ft-i rugra In pi ruguur. rugar/l wage, pay. 2 rent. 
rugrit iI-yoot[ dock dues. 3 fare. rugrit it-taksi the taxi 
fare. 4 (also earabiyya rugra) taxi. 
~,ft-i rugari In pi -yyal day labourer. 
,;4-t! rigaar In pi -aatl 1 lease. 2 rent. 
.,;4-t! rigaara In pi -aat, ragaayirl {rur] document in 
which the conditions governing a lease of land are 
written. 
~i ragiir In pi rugaral hireling, hired worker. ragiir 
bil-yomiyya day labourer. 
,;",t. marguur 
ladj 
-I 
1 hired, 
wage-earning. 
2 bribed. 3 rewarded (by God) for pious deeds. 
;'i raggar Ivtll to lease, rent, hire. y-araggar fafifia 
w-ratgawwiz fiiha I'm going to rent an apartment to 
start my married life in. raggart a caBala I hired a bicy-
cle. 2 to lease out, rent out. raay baani I-eimaara 
w-raggar-ha kull-a-ha he went and built the apartment 
building and rented it all out. -vn targiir; avalpva 
miraggar. 
;'hl rirraggar 1 Ivtl to hire,let, rent, lease. 2 Ivil to be 
hired, be rented, be leased. mitraggar Gala I-fiatl hired 
to kill. -ava/iva mitraggar. 
,ft-I raagir {rur] 1 Ivtl to share the reward of God's 
blessing with (o.a.). 2/vil to work as a casual farmhand 
for a daily rate. -vn miragra; ava miraagir. 
,ft-I,;. muraagir In -I lessee, tenant. 
,ft-\;I ritraagir Ivil to earn a reward (from God). yalla 
biina nitraagir fi-tarbiyyit iI-bint iI-yitiima di let us get a 
reward (from God) by bringing up this orphan girl. -vn 
miragra; ava milraagir. 
;'LI ristiraggarJ 
Ivtl 
1 to • employ, 
hire. 
ristiraggar-Iu kam raagil GalBan yigmaeuu-Iu I-may~uul 
he hired some men to gather the crop for him. 2 to rent. 
-ava mistiraggarJ • 
,ft-L muslargirT In ·1 lessee, tenant. 
oJ oJ J [. ~ 
;,ft-i ragrann. ragrann demonstrative indicating the 
discovery of a reason or fact. (ilie ma(ruud. - ragrann-u 
kaan zae/aan lammafufl-u 'He was thrown out.' 'Now 
I understand why he was angry when I saw him.' 
ristanneet-u fil-maktab wi-ragrann-u msaafir I waited 

for him at the office, but it became clear that he had 
gone away. ril-qa{r' ma-w~il-J' ragrann il-mal:Jatta 
facf.ya the train hasn't arrived, which is why the station is 
empty. (Cf rataabi, rataari) 
.) .J J [. ~ see .) J [.: ragruud, ragruudi 
OI.SJ[.~ 
<\uy'"i rajureeh <Fr ajoure> ladj invarl perforated. 
-also razureeh. 
I. 
I 
I 
• 
J~~ seeaso 
~J[. 
;~I ragza Icoll nI chemicals. 
~~i ragzagi In pI -yyal pharmacist. 
~l>I~i ragzaxaana In pI -aatll pharmacy, chemist's 
shop. 2 first-aid box, medicine chest. 
2 • 
I 
I· 
:. [. ~ see a so 
J .J [. 
~I raggiz Ivil to take a holiday, take leave. -vn ta rgiiz; 
ava miraggiz. 
~LI ristargizJ Ivi/to ask permission, take leave. -vn 
ristirgaaz; ava mistargiz. 
J [.-
~i ragl: I-agl, min ragllprepl for the sake of. I-agl' 
magd allaah {Chr] for the sake of God's glory. 
11 I-agl' ma Icon jl so that. 
~i ragal Inl I (destined time of) death. ragal-u 
qarrab the time when he must die drew near. riuaay 
maatit kida - ma-kanit-f' layyaana. - wi-maa-Iu -
ragal-ha kida 'How come she died just like that? She 
wasn't sick.' 'So what? Her time was up.' IIgaab ragal-
to finish off, polish off, as in ga qalad las-sufra gaab 
ragal-ha he went and sat down at the dinner table and 
polished off everything on it. 2t (appointed) time. 
rintaha raga I id-deen the period granted for repayment 
is over. II bil-ragal on credit. - rua ragal ¥eer musamma 
to an unspecified point in the future, sine die. 
~i raagil ladjl delayed, postponed. xalli I-milaad 
raagillet the appointment be postponed. -Iadverbiallyl 
laagil walla raagill:Ja-ysaddid diyuun-u sooner or later 
he will pay his debts. 
~i raggil Ivtl to postpone, delay. ma-traggil-ha 
I-yoom il-l:Jadd why don't you put it off till Sunday? 
-/the literary passive imperfect occursl kull il-iltizamaat 
di tu raggalli-muusim ~-~eed all these commitments are 
postponed until the hunting season. -vn targiil; ava 
miraggil; pva muraggil. 
~hl ritraggillvil to be postponed, be delayed. -iva 
mitraggil. 
8 
-V"J[.~ 
-..-~i raglaseeh <Fr glace> ladj invarl patent (of 
leather). 
oJ [. ~ 
4i ragana <perh Copt> In pI -aat, raganl cold 
chisel. 
.)oJ[.~ 
;~i rajinda 
<perh 
It 
agenda> 
In 
pI -aatl 
I notebook. rajindit il-lanawiin address book. 2 diary. 
3 {comm] list of promissory notes according to date 
due. 
V" oJ.[. ~ 
~I rajans <Fr agence> In pI -aatl car showroom, 
car-dealing agency. 
..1. oJ [. ~ 
~i raganta <It agguanta> linterjl {naut] avast! 
[..J [. ~ 
Cy'"i raguug: 
people. kaanu 
raguug 
wi-maguug 
troublesome 
zal:Jmiin if-faaril zayy' raguug wi-
maguug they were overcrowding the street and causing 
trouble. 
J.J[.~ 
.Iy'"i rajuur <Fr ajour> Inl {needlew] open-work. 
.J I.S [. ~ 
~i ragyu <It aggio> Inl premium, interest (on a 
loan). 
c. c.-
Ci ral:Jl:J exclamation expressing I reaction to extreme 
heat or cold == ouch! 2 {women] pleasure during sexual 
intercourse. 
t::.i ral:Jl:Ja 
{coarse] 
exclamation 
of 
extreme 
disapproval. ral:Jl:Ja ya lumar {women] == fuck that! 
...;i ral:Jl:Jeeh {women in trad soc] exclamation of sur-
prise == my! (often used sarcastically in badinage). 
ral:Jl:JeehJuufi I-beet kibiir rizzaay my! what a big house! 
fal:Jl:Jeeh l:Ja-txuJJi f-libb-i walla reeh == my, my! you 
think you can fool me? 
.) c. ~ see .also .) c..J 
..I> i ral:Jad r Inti one of. raI:Jad minna one of us. midd' 
ral:Jad id-diraleen stretch out one of your arms! 2 (also 

yoom fabad) a Sunday. (yoom) iI- fabad (this) Sunday. 
3 fil-fabad the One (epithet of God). 
~I.i fabaad Ipl n! 1 [math} ones, units. xaanit iI-
rabaad the units column. 2 jeweller's term for a one-
piastre coin. 
~ 
~i 'rl~ bidaafar I/num pl-aatl eleven. 
2 fil-bidaafar ladj invarl the eleventh. 
J IS J c - see J J c: fibliil 
rc' 
~I fibim onomatopoeic for the clearing of the throat. 
fiaal fibim wi-xaf/ fil-mawquul he said' Ahem' and got 
down to business. II min lfeer fibim wala dastuurwithout 
so much as a by-your-Ieave. 
I~C' 
1;..1 fibna Ipers pron! we. fibna gayyiin we're coming. 
-/used in emphasis of the pron suff -nal kallim-na fibna 
we are the ones you should speak to! Iidayman yit;uul 
ribna wi-bna he's always boasting. 
t- see tt· 
.:J t. 
~i fuxt In pi fixwaatll (full or half-) sister. 2 polite 
form of address or reference to any woman. fil-fuxt' 
layza baaga == does Madam want anything? ya fuxt-i a 
formal mode of address by a woman to a woman. 
lIYa-xt-i an informal mode of address by a woman to a 
woman. -ya-xt-i laleeha [women} how cute she is! 
3 sister (member of a Christian religious order). 
ril-fuxt i maryim Sister Mary. 4 male's female counter-
part thought to exist in the spirit world (also called 
fiariina). - Ino pi, w fem n as referent! Sa twin of. 
landi jakitta fuxt illi finta labis-ha I have a jacket just 
like the one you're wearing. IIma-I-haa:f fuxt she (or it) 
is peerless, as in ma-I-haa:f fuxt i {-gamal-ha she is of 
matchless beauty. 5b equivalent or companion piece in 
a succession. lfannit talat w~laat kull i wabda fabla min 
fuxt-a-ha she sang three songs, each one better than the 
one before. 
I' • 
cC' 
2 faxx, faxx I In, in constr faxu, w pron suff faxuu-
(1st sing faxuu-ya)/l Ipl fixwaatl (full or half-) brother. 
-lin commercial contexts pi fixwaanl firkit lali 
w-lumar labd ir-raazit; fixwaan the company of Ali 
and Omar (the sons of) Abd el-Raziq, Bros. 2/pl 
fixwal polite form of address or reference to any man. 
9 
fil-faxx i min teen (1) where are you from, friend? 
(2) where is the gentleman from? lIya fax-i or ya-x-i 
informal mode of address to a man == mate, my friend. 
- Ipl fixwaanl 3 member of a Sufi brotherhood. 
4 female's male counterpart thought to exist in the 
spirit world (also called t;ariin). - Ino pi, w masc n as 
referent! Sa twin of. fana landi t;ami~ faxu iii laleek 
I have a shirt just like the one you've got on. 
5b equivalent or companion piece in a succession. bana 
talat biyuut kull i beet fabsan min faxuu he built three 
houses, each better than the other. 
11 faxii-na an abrupt and slightly offensive form of 
address or reference to a man. faxii-na da iii t;aalid 
hinaak == that bloke sitting there. 
..:..1".1 fixwaat Ipl n, masc and fem! siblings.landi talat 
fixwaat wilaad wi-tneen banaat I have three brothers 
and two sisters.llya-xwaat-iJ [women} exclamation of 
surprise or exasperation. - fin kuntum 
fixwaat 
itbasbum [prov} == even if you are brothers and sisters, 
settle accounts (so as to remain on good terms). 
.,1".1 fixwaan Ipl nil brothers (as business partners). 
/irkit lali w-lumar labd ir-raazit; fixwaan the company 
of Ali and Omar (the sons of) Abd el-Raziq, Bros. 
2 brethren. II fil-fixwaan (il-muslimiin) the Muslim 
Brothers. 3 friends, buddies. fixwaan-ak fif:fulfl your 
workmates. Ilya-xwan-na (1) == 
hey, everybody! 
(2) exclamation of exasperation. 4 counterparts of hu-
man beings, thought to exist in the spirit world. 
~I".! fixwangi In pi -yyal [deris} Muslim Brother. 
lS".i faxawi ladj ·1 fraternal, friendly. di baaga 
faxawiyya this is a matter between friends. 
.~i fuxuwwa In! brotherhood, friendship. 
2' • 
cc-· 
t.i faxx 2 linterjl exclamation of exasperation. 
t! fixx linterjl exclamation of disgust or repulsion == 
ugh! -also fixxiih. 
olStt-
~I fixxiih linterjl exclamation of disgust == ugh! 
shame! leen-i {ii w- fat;uul fixxiih said of one who pub-
licly denigrates what he secretly desires. -also fixx. 
~ t· 
..i.;.i .. ~i • ..u. xad, faxad (yaaxud) Ivt!l to take. xad 
ik-kitaab bitaal-u wi-mifi he took his book and went 
off. llxad bi-yadd to assist, as in xad bi-yadd-i {-wat;t 
iz-zant;a he helped me when I was in a tight spot. 
-yaaxud wi-yiddi (fi-kalaam) there is give-and-take (in 

conversation) with him. - fit-faxd' wit-ea(a (1) give-
and-take. (2) trade, business. 2 to take along with one. 
ma-tinsaa-Jtaaxud if-Jan(a don't forget to take the bag. 
xud-ni maeaak take me with you. IIrabb-i-na yaxd-u 
may God take him off! may he die! - ma-Ijadd'-Jwaaxid 
minha Ijaaga {prov] you can't take any of it with you 
(when you die). 3 to convey, transport. fit-taks' xad-ni 
l-malja{(a (or lil-malja((a) the taxi took me to the sta-
tion. 4 to administer to oneself. xud id-dawa take the 
medicine.lj-aaxud duff I'll have a shower.llxad it-kaar 
he learned the trade. 5 to require. min hina 
li-skindiriyya b-yaaxud talat saeaat (the journey) from 
here to Alexandria takes three hours. fit-laljma 
Ija-taaxud siwa ktiir the meat will take a long time to 
cook. 6 to treat, deal with. ma-taxud-Jit-masfalagadd 
don't take the matter seriously! IIxud-ni eala qadd a 
eaql-i humour me! go along with me! 7 to choose and! 
or use (s.th. appropriate for a particular purpose). 
bi-naaxud qumaaf xafiif eafaan it-bi(aana we get light-
weight material for the lining. naaxud it-futubiis let's 
take the bus. 8 to undertake. miin Ija-yaaxud door it-
ba(al who will play the leading role? xadit it-imtiljaan 
she sat for the examination. laazim naaxud qaraar we 
must make a decision. 9 to receive, obtain, gain. 
fin-naggaar bi-yaaxud kaam ealaf-Juyl' da how much is 
the carpenter paid for this work? xadtaljukm a ealee 
I obtained judgement against him. fin fa-lla taaxud 
id-dukturaah I hope you get a doctorate. laazim taaxud 
fizn you must obtain permission. fit-mutoor xad sureit-
u the engine picked up speed. la huwwa xad bit-yimiin 
wala bif-Jimaal he gained nothing whatsoever. 10 to 
marry. faxuu-k xad miin whom did your brother mar-
ry? 11 to sustain, receive (s.th. imposed or inflicted), 
be affected by. xad Ijukm' taani he got a second sent-
ence. xadit bard she caught a cold. Ija-taaxud qarbit 
fams you'll get sunstroke. fit-kartoon xad bitumiin the 
cardboard was given a coat of bitumen. fis-saqf' xad 
ru(uuba the ceiling became damp. xad(-lu) qalameen he 
got slapped a couple of times. xadit (laha) kitmiteen 
'!i-eaqm-a-ha she was subjected to harsh words. II tieiiJ 
wi-taaxud yer-ha may you live to take another knock 
(expression of light-hearted consolation after a minor 
misfortune). 12 to subject (s.o. or s.th.) to (s.th.) in a 
precipitate manner. xad-ni kaffeen he upped and slap-
ped me a couple of times. xud il-Ijeeta wlff give the wall 
a quick coat of pall1t! Ija-taxud-ni muxalfa are you going 
to slap a ticket 011 me? - Ivll 13 to derive power, mo-
tion etc. fit-tambuur bi-yaaxud min il-mutoor the drum 
derives its motiol1 from the motor. - VI1 faxd, faxadaan; 
ava waaxid. 
10 
~ xud <cf Copt> Ifem xudi, pi xudul come here! -xud 
eandak Ifem xudi eandik, pi xudu eandukul (1) take 
that! (2) wait! hold it! (3) ... you'd be amazed at how 
much (or how many), as in wi-xud eandak fifisuwwaalj 
fingliiz wi- famrikaan wi- falmaan you should have seen 
how many tourists there were, English, Americans and 
Germans! wit-ma(ara qaalit xud eandak ... the rain 
came down in torrents. -xud wi-haat ladverbiallyl (soc-
cer] one-touch. -xadfi-nafs-(u) (1) to be conceited, as 
in waxda qalam fi-nafs-a-ha she is so conceited! (2) to 
be offended, as in xad fi-nafs-u minni I offended him. 
-xad fi-wiff-(u) to make a break for it, to take to one's 
heels. -xad wi-dda to exchal'lge words, as in mudir-na 
e~abi ma-b-tiqdar-!' taaxud wi-tiddi maeaa our direc-
tor is bad-tempered; you can't discuss things with him, 
xud wi-ddi maeaa eala baal it-buli~ ma yiigi keep him 
talking until the police come. -xad eala (1) to get used 
to, take to, as in filjna waxdiin eala kida we've got used 
to this state ofaffairs. (2) to act familiarly with, be fresh 
with, as in ma-txalli-huu-f yaaxud ealeek don't let him 
get fresh with you! (3) to aim at, as in xud ealaf-Jagara 
di bit-bunduqiyya aim the rifle· at the tree, fil-qayyaas 
bi-yaaxud eala Ijaaga sabta the surveyor takes a bearing 
on a fixed object. (4) to go by, follow, as in ma-taxud-J' 
eala kalaam faxuu-k don't go by what your brother 
says. -xad baeq-u see baeq. xad bi-xaa(ir, xad eala 
xa(r-(u) and xad il-xaa(ir see xaa(ir. -xad baal-(u) see 
baal. xad salaam see salaam. 
~i ';';'J ,;';'i faxxid 'or waxxid Ivtl to accustom, 
cause to get used to. finta iii waxxidt-u eala qillit it-
fadab you're the one who accustomed him to bad man-
ners. fibn-ik zayy' ma trabbii wi-gooz-ik zayy' ma 
twaxxidii {prov] you can raise your son, but you must 
train your husband. - vn tafxiid; ava mifaxxid, 
miwaxxid. 
;.;. yl ,;.;. hi fitfaxxid or fitwaxxid Ivil to be made 
accustomed. - iva mitfaxxid, mitwaxxid . 
.,io..i faaxiz Ivtl I/usu negl,to find fault with, blame. 
ma-tfaxiz-nii-J don't misunderstand me, don't get me 
wrong. ma-tfaxz-uu-J f~l-u mif min hina don't blame 
him - he's not from here. 2 to hold accountable. 
faxizt-u eala kull' yalta eamal-ha I held him account-
able for every mistake he made. -vn mufaxza; ava 
mifaaxiz. 
;.,io..I;. mufaxza In pi -aatl offence, fault. fii ealeek 
mu faxzaat ftf:(uyl there are faults you are accused of in 
your job. lila mufaxza please forgive me, no offence 
intended; -often used, especially by the less educated, 
when mentioning any mundane or lowly object, as in 
gibt-i-lak la mufaxza g-gazma ... I've brought you the 

sho~s, ir"you'll excuse my mentioning them. 
..i.>\;1 fittaaxid Ivil I passive of xad. 2a to be taken 
aback, be startled. fawwil majulti waraqit iI-imtibaan 
ittaxidt I got a shock when first I saw the exam paper. 
2b to be agitated, be upset. maa-Iak bi-tittaaxid kida 
why are you taking on so? -ava/iva mittaaxid. 
.JI fittaxaz f (yittixiz, yattaxiz) Ivt, literary passive 
forms also occurl I to effect. fil-figrafaat illi b-tuttaxaz 
the measures which are taken. 2 to take over, take on, 
acquire. fil-ma~aahir illi b-yattaxizuu-ha the appear-
ances which they acquire. 3 to treat, regard. fil-bikaaya 
di futtuxizat sabab Ii- fih'aa f iI- fabzaab this matter was 
used as a pretext for the dissolving of political parties. 
-vn fittixaaz; ava mittixiz; pva muttaxaz. 
~t· see ~t· 
) t· 
..,;-i faaxarf ladj, fern I'uxra, pi I'aaxariinl other. min 
finsaan Ii·faaxar from one person to another. min 
waqti I-faaxar from time to time. fil-bayaah iI-fuxra 
the life to come (in the hereafter). 
...,...i faxiir ladj *1 final. 
fil-fa~1 il-I'axiir min iI-
masrabiyya the final act of the play. fit-mayya ir-rabe;a 
wil-faxiira the fourth and final,watering. 
11 faxiiran ladvl finally. kaan rakib-ha sittiin e;afriit 
li-badd i rna I'axiiran wi~il she was on tenterhooks until 
he eventually arrived. 
..,;-i faaxir Inl la Iw foil indef nl the last. faaxir beet the 
last house. fi-faaxir lab;a at the last moment. 
Ib extreme, utmost. I'aaxir tae;ab an extreme of fati-
gue. yigri e;a/a faaxir sure;a he runs extremely fast. 
ramaa e;a/a faaxir diraae;-u he threw it as far (or: as 
hard) as he could. e;a/a 1- I'aaxir to the last degree, to the 
utmost. as in raagil manfuux e;a/a I-faaxir an extremely 
pompous man. 1iI-l'aaxir [naut] hard over! 2 fil-faaxir 
the Ultimate (epithet of God). 3/pl fawaaxirl end, 
latter part. fil-faaxir or fil-faaxir in the end, finally. 
min iI- fawwil 1iI- faaxir from first to last. faaxir in-
nahaar (at) the end of the day. bet-naf-I'aaxir iJ-jaarir; 
our house is at the end of the street. min faaxir id-dunya 
from the ends of the earth. e;a/a faaxir iz-zaman see 
zaman. fawaaxir i~-~eefthe latter parts of the summer. 
- I'awaaxir occurs adjectivally in such phrases as 
[il-cajart iyyaam iI- rawaaxir min ramaqaan in the last 
ten days of Ramadan. 
11 rila raxr-u et cetera. 
;.,.>i I'aaxira T see faxra 2. 
11 
0..,;-1 faxra Inl I lonly in constrl the end of, the out-
come of. faadi faxrit-ha this is the upshot! faxrit-u 
kaanit wibja he came to a sticky end. I'axrit-ak sooda == 
go to hell! II faxrit-ha to cut a long story short. 2 fil-
I'axra (also fit-faaxira) the hereafter, the life after 
death. 3 tabus] face. famma e;alee faxra what an ugly 
mug he has! 
";1..,;-1 I'axraani 
ladj 
*1 
final, 
last. 
liJ-juhuur 
i/- faxraniyya g-ganiin bi-yibqa tqiil in the last months 
the foetus grows heavy. 
i.S';>J waxri ladvl late, behind time. bi-t~ba waxri 
she's a late riser. fil-waqt i waxri it's late in the day. 
.;>1; raaxar Ifem ruxra, pi ruxriinl adjective used in 
apposition as an equivalent of the English 'too', 'also' 
etc. fana raaxar ma-nimti-j I didn't sleep either. 
fit-ba{aa{is e;ayza labma faktar wil-makaroona ruxra 
the potatoes need more meat and so does the pasta. 
I'in-naas kitrit wil- fase;aar ruxra rtalae;it the population 
has increased and prices have risen in turn. lIya-xii-na 
nta raaxar == come off it! 
.. 
.;>1 faxxar Ivtl I to make late. delay. I'axxart i safar-i 
I delayed my departure. I'axxar sae;t-ak saae;a wabda 
put your watch back one hour. 2a to cause to move 
back. faxxar iI-e;arabiyya I-wara move the car back . 
IImiJyit tiqaddim rigli wi-tfaxxar it-tanya she walked 
haltingly or hesitantly. 2b to cause to regress, cause to 
deteriorate. fit-barb i I'axxarit iI-ba/ad the war put the 
country back." mae;rift-u tl'axxar it is a disadvantage to 
know him. - Ivil 3 to lose time, become slow (of a 
watch). I'is-saae;a faxxarit xamas daqaayiq the watch 
has lost five minutes. 4 to move back. faxxar jiwayya 
go back a little. -vn tafxiir; ava mifaxxar. 
;.r-> i.; ta fxiira In pi -aatl delay. kull i ta fxiira w-fiiha 
xe.era [pro v] every delay contains (some) benefit. 
.;>;' mu I'axxar Inl that part of a payment due only 
after certain conditions have been met (notably that 
portion of a woman's marriage settlement that she may 
c1a!m under Muslim law if divorced or widowed). 
;.;>;' mufaxxiraT Inl back part, rear. 
;i.;1 fitfaxxar Ivil I to be late. fil-qa{r itfaxxar in-
nahar-da the train was late today. ma-titfaxxaruu-je;an 
iI-madrasa don't be late for school! fitfaxxar fid-dafe; 
he got into arrears. 2a to go back, retreat. fitfaxxar 
jiwayya e;an iJ-jibbaak move back from the window a 
little! 2b to regress, deteriorate. balt-u tl'axxarit his 
condition has deteriorated. -vn ta fxiir; ava mitfaxxar. 
;h.. mitfaxxar = mufaxxar. 
j t. see 
~ t .: faaxiz, mu faxza, fittaxaz T 

v" t-
~! rix,fl/interj/shame! rix,f 8 caleek shame on you! 
fie on you! 2 In!: buuz il-rix,f, wiffil-rix,f andfakl il-rix,f 
one who brings bad luck, iII-omened person. 
~! .~! rix,fiih, rix,fiyy linterjl shame (on you)! 
fie (on you)!. 
-y~t· 
J., ~I rux{Ubuut, raxtabuU{ In pI -aatloctopus. 
.J t· see t t ~: raxu, rixwaat, rixwaan, rixwangi, 
raxawi, ruxuwwa 
I r I ~. 
rbi radaam I In! [Chr] tune used at vespers and 
matins, Sunday to Tuesday. 
:z r I ~. see :z r I ~ r: radaam 2 
• ~. see I IS ~ .: radaar 
y 
~. 
..,.."i radab In! I good manners, politeness. ma-fli-f 
candak radab have you no manners? silt' ~al:Jbit radab 
wi-kamaal a lady of impeccable manners. fialiil il-radab 
ill-mannered. ril-radab fat/.tf.al-u cal-cilm [prov] good 
manners are to be preferred to learning. IImaI:Jall il-
radab or beet il-radab lavatory. 2/pl radaab/letters, 
literature. 
ril-radab 
il-carabi Arabic literature. 
II ril-radab il-makfuufliterary works which talk openly 
about sex. - ril-radab if-facbi folk literature. -
radaab 
Ipl n! 3 formal etiquette. radaab il-l:Jadiis the etiquette 
of conversation. 4 morals, morality. IIbulii,f i/-radaab 
the vice squad. 5 ril-radaab the arts, the humanities. 
kulliyyit il-radaab the Faculty of Arts. 
~"i radabi ladj ·1 I pertaining to literature. naqd' 
radabi literary criticism. 2 pertaining to the arts or 
humanities. ril-qism i/-radabi the Arts Department 
(e.g., of a secondary school). 
~~"i radabxaana In pI -aatl [obsol] lavatory. 
J~"i rudabaati In pI -yyal [obsol] professionalimpro-
viser of rhymes. IIcaamil zayy il-rudabaati clowning 
about. 
~"i radiibt In pI rudabaarl litterateur, man of 
letters. 
..,..;i raddib Ivtl to discipline, teach manners to. raddib 
rawlaad-ak teach your children some manners! -vn 
tardiib; ava miraddib; pva muraddab. 
~"h tardiib Ivn!lImaglis tardiib disciplinary board. 
12 
~"h tardiibi ladjl disciplinary.llraara tardibiyya re-
taliatory raid . 
..,..;;. muraddab/adj ·1 well-mannered, polite. rUficud 
muraddab ya walad sit quietly, boy, and behave 
yourself! 
..,..;hl ritraddib Ivill to be disciplined, be taught man-
ners. 2 to behave politely, sho~ manners. laazim 
titraddib fl-kalaam-ak you must speak politely. -ava/ 
iva mitraddib. 
- J ~ ~ • 
IS""",;! riddalcadiJ [women in trad soc] term of 
address or reference (used particularly in contexts of 
warding off evil). 
-[..J~. 
~JA ridrujiin <Fr> In! hydrogen. 
I r ~. 
r"j raadim Ivil to eat carefully in small mouthfuls . 
raadimfl-rakl-ak eat little by little. -vn miradma; ava 
miraadim. 
rb! ridaam In! I juices of cooked meat, gravy (con-
sumed by dipping with bread). 2 [rur] oil, fat. 
:z r ~. see r ~ I ~: raadam, raadami, raadamiyya 
3 r ~. see :z r I ~ r: radaam 2 
~ ~ ~ see I ~ j .: radaan I, madna, raddin 
r • ~. 
I"""i radham male given name. radham if-farfiaawi 
historical character celebrated in popular songs and 
literature for his resistance to Turkish tyranny. 
~.J ~ • 
"J"i radwad <Copt> In! effeminate man, catamite. 
lIS ~ • 
• bi radaah Ifem n, pI radawaatl instrument, piece of 
equipment. rig-geefmugarrad radaah fl- riid if-facb the 
army is merely a tool in the hands of the people. 
radawaat 
~il:Jl:Jiyya sanitary appliances. 
radawaat 
maktabiyya stationery. 
lS;i radda 
I/vtl 
Is to 
carry 
out, 
perform . 
ma-bi-y raddii-f wa;ift-u ma;buut it doesn't perform its 
function properly. Ib to give a performance of, give a 
rendition of. 2 lvil to lead, be conducive. ril-rasbaab illi 

bi-tfaddi l-inxifaarJ il-mabic;aat the reasons leading to a 
drop in sales. -vn fadaaf, tafdiyya, tafdiya; ava 
mifaddi, mufaddi . 
• bi fadaaf 
Ini 
performance, 
rendering. 
fil-mumassiliin faddu fadaaf mumtaaz the actors gave 
a fine performance. 
\S~;. mufaddi In ·1 performer. 
lIS ~_ 
\S~! fidda (yiddiJ <Copt> Ivtl I to give, provide 
(with). ma-dda-nii-ffur~a he didn't give me an oppor-
tunity. fidda l-c;agala l.eet he oiled the wheel. rabb-i-na 
yiddii-k ~-~il:Jl:Ja may our Lord give you health. II filii 
ddaa-k yiddii-na [prov] (He who gave to you will give to 
us too) ... don't imagine that you are the only recipient 
of God's favours, don't be too proud in your own good 
fortune. -yaaxud wi-yiddi see faxad. - fiddajabah Ii- ... 
to look like ... , resemble .... 2a to hand, pass. fiddii-ni 
k-kitaab da hand me that book! 2b [soccer] to pass (the 
ball). 3 to yield, emit, produce. fj{-yeec fidda mal:J~uul 
fakbar the field produced a larger yield. fic-cabla b-tiddi 
~ootl:Jilw the drum makes a nice sound. 4 to subject to 
action (usually vigorous) by means of (s.th.). fiddaa-ni 
dmaar he butted me with his head. fiddaa-ni kalaks he 
honked his horn at me. fidda l-koorafig-goon he slam-
med the ball into the goal. -vn middiyya; ava middi. 
3 IS ~. see IS ~ I .: faadi, fadii-
-JIS~' 
~ 
.,I Y..It! fidyulooji <perh Fr> lad jl ideological. 
4.,1 Y..It! fidyulojiyya In pI -aatl ideology. 
Ii. see 1.;-
~~I,;. 
...,...1)Ji furaanus <perh Fr> Iprop nI Uranus. 
''; . 
i~i farraf Ivil to mock, laugh (at). dayman yifarraf 
lala kull'l:Jaaga b-sabab wi-min yeer sabab he always 
ridicules everything, whether there is reason for it or 
not. -vn tafriif; ava mifarraf. 
"'I,; • 
~!J)i faruuba Ifem adjl possessed of a malevolent cun-
13 
Jt,J • 
ning (of a woman). ya faruuba ya c;aguuza you old 
witch! 
-yy,;-
4;Ji furubba Iprop nI Europe. 
~;Ji furubbi ladj ·1 European. 
~J4;Ji furubbaawO ladj ·1 [deris] aping European 
ways. 
.!.IV"y,;· 
~I) farabisk <perh Fr> I/coll nl arabesque(s). 
2 ladj invarl arabesque. 
t y';' see t y,;: farbac;, farbac;a, farbac;taajar, 
farbic;iin 
-~u,;. 
~~.;) furtuduksi, 
fartuduksi, 
fursuzuksi, 
farsuzuksi 
<Gr 
orthodoksos> 
Ipl 
furtuduks, 
fartuduks, fursu1.uks, farsu1.uksl[Chr] I ladjl pertain-
ing to the Orthodox churches. 2 Ini Orthodox 
Christian. 
~~.;) furtuduksiyya, 
fursu1.uksiyya 
Ini [Chr] 
Orthodoxy. 
-J-u,;. 
..,.:.;) fartifuuh <Fr artichaut> In pI -aatl small hair-
piece with either short or long hair. 
-.!.Iu,;. 
~;~) fartikarya <Engl> Ini [path] urticaria, a tem-
porary rash characterized by red patches and itching 
and caused by certain allergies. II bi-yic;mil-Ii fartikarya 
he gives me the creeps. 
(-.J u ,;,,) 
jlj";! firtiwaa1. <Fr ardoise> Ilni slate. 2/adj invarl 
made of slate. -also firdiwaaz. 
~jlj";! firtiwaazi <perh Fr Artois> ladjl artesian. 
fabaar firtiwaziyyat artesian wells.llmayya firtiwaazi 
well-water (i.e., not from the Nile or a canal). -also 
firdiwaa1.i. 
(~-
[.;1 furg <Fr orgue> Inl electric organ. 
-,; (,; " 
rl ~ 
J J-! firugraam <Fr a~rogramme> In pI -aatl air 
letter. 

j ~ [.J -
Ij~.J) furganza <Engl> In! organza. 
-
~ [.J -
JL:~.~"uJi furijinaal <Fr original> 1 In pI -aatl [print] 
matrix. 2/adj invarl classy, swank. 
j.J [.J - see j.J [.J J : faragooz 
tJ-
t~i farrax, farrax 1 Ivtl to put a date on. farrax 
ig-gawaab bi-tariix in-nahar-da he dated the letter with 
today's date. 2/vil to write a chronicle or history. 
bi-y farrax /iI-l;arb he's writing a history of the war. -vn 
tafriix; ava/pva mifarrax, mifarrax. 
~) 
.. tariix Inl 1 Ipl tawariixl date. 2 Ino pll history, 
chronicle. tariix mo,sr the history of Egypt. tariix I;ayaat-
u the story of his life. see further under tJ":" 
~.J\.; tariixi ladjl 1 pertaining to history, historical. 
2 chronological. 3 historic. 
., t;-
,:.,>.;1 furxun, farxun <Gr arkh6n> In pI faraxnal 
[Chr] leading layman in church affairs. 
.,I~J-
.JI~) furdaan <prop n Jordan> Inl [Chr] baptismal 
font. - also fiI-furdun. 
yy ~J-
.;.~) fardabb <Copt> In pI faraadib, faradibbl dry 
measure of 198 litres, ardeb. fil;e[ar fardabb-ak yiziid 
[prov] "" look to your own affairs and they will prosper. 
fardabb' ma-huu-Iak ma-til;e[ar keel-u tillaffar daqn-ak 
wi-titlab fi-Jeel-u [prov] don't attend the measuring of 
somebody else's ardeb for your beard will get dusty and 
the load will tire you"" mind your own business. 
J~J-
.J~.J) '.J~) furdar <Engl> In pI -aatl work-order. 
fiblat furdar /iI-warJa laJaan furfuf send an order to 
the workshop for shelves. 
"~J-
.J~}JI fit- furdun (also fil- furdunn f) 1 Iprop nl Jor-
dan. nahr it-furdun the river Jordan. 2 Inl [Chr] baptis-
mal font. - also furdaan. 
J~) furduni (also furdunnif) 1 ladj *1 Jordanian. 2 I 
n *1 a Jordanian. 
14 
(-.J~J-) 
jIJ~.J! firdiwaaz <Fr ardoise> 1 In! slate. 2 ladj invarl 
made of slate. -also firtiwaaz . 
..sjlJ~.J! firdiwaazi <perh Fr Artois> ladjl artesian. 
fabaar firdiwaziyya f artesian wells. II mayya firdiwaazi 
well-water (i.e., water not from the Nile or a canal). 
- also firtiwaazi. 
-..s~J. 
~~.JJi furdeevar <Fr> Inl hors d'oeuvre. 
JJ-
~! firr linterjl sound made to attract the attention of, or 
shoo away, sheep. 
'-'" J -
see '-'" J .J: firis, faras, firs, fariis, farras, 
fit farris, fitfaaris 
- j '-'" J - see -
~ ..:.. J -: fursuzuksi, 
farsuzuksi, 
fursuzuksiyya 
-r..PJ-
.. ::,,,u~) farjiminidriit <Gr 'arkhimandrites> In 
pI farjiminidritiyyal [Chr] archimandrite. 
..J..s..PJ-
...&"..:.) farJii!. farJiif <Fr archives> In pI -aat, faraJiif, 
faraJiifl 1 archive. 2 filing cabinet. 
..J&> J -
..J&» 
fare[ Ifem nl 1 earth, soil. fare[' ramliyya sandy 
soil. 2a ground, surface of the earth. fiI-lo,safiir 
bi-tl;u{[" lala 1- fare[ the birds alight on the ground. 
nifs-i 1- fare[' tinJaqq' w-tiblal-ni I wish the earth would 
open and swallow me up. II fiI-fare[' ti~bal; sama the 
world will be turned upside down. -law ma-Jalit-ak-J 
it-fare[' nJiiI-ak lala ras-na "" we'd do anything for you. 
- tal;t it- fare[ high and low, as i~ dawwar laleeha tal;t 
il-fare[look for her everywhere, look for her high and 
low. -min tal;t it- fare[ (1) sparing no effort, going to any 
lengths, as in hat-ha min tal;t ({aqa{ilq) il- fare[ bring her, 
regardless of effort. (2) with the greatest of difficulty, 
as in gibt il-filuus di min tal;t it- fare[ I brought this 
money after a great deal of trouble. -ma-yinzit-J it- fare[ 
it never fails, as in kilmit-u ma-tinzit-J ii-fare[ you may 
rely on his word, dalwit-u ma-tinzit-J it- fare[ his prayer 
is always answered. -I;-axsif biiku 1- fare[ I'll show you! 
- fit- fare[ i{-{ahra the holy places in the Hijaz. -gab 
manaxiir-u (or dimaay-u) I-fare[ he forced him to give 
in. - faadi s-sama w-faadi I-fare[ I have absolutely no-

thing. - fibn iI- farq native, especially with reference to 
the /allal:Jiin. 2b floor. farq; xajab a wooden floor. 
b-amsal:J biih iI-farq I'll wipe the floor with him! 
2e surface of a card table or gaming table. fil-waraii illi 
/il-farq the cards which are on the table. 3 fil-farq the 
Earth, the terrestrial sphere. farq allaah wasla [prov] 
.. there's plenty of opportunity elsewhere. bi-ytjuul ya 
farq; ithaddi ma-laleeki iiadd-i he says, 'be calm, 
Earth, there is none on you but II' (of a very conceited 
person). - Ipl faraaqi/4 land, landed property. landi 
bittit farq; gamb iskindiriyya I have a piece ofland near 
Alexandria. II/een faraqii where on earth is he now? 
what are his whereabouts? 
""') farqi ladjl 1 pertaining to the ground or floor. 
fid-door iI- farqi the ground floor. 2 terrestrial, earthly. 
fil-kura 1-farqiyya the terrestrial sphere. -In! 3 [elee] 
earth. 
~) farqiyya In pI -aatl 1 floor, flooring, prepared 
surface. farqiyya musallal:Ja reinforced floor. farqiyyit 
if1aaril the road surface. 2 background. warda 
fabmar lala farqiyya zariia red roses on a blue back-
ground. 3 storage charge, demurrage . 
.;0) faraq lcoll nl termite(s). 
4.<.) faraqa lunit n, pI -aatl a termite . 
.;oJ.Jl. mafruuq ladjl 1 underweight, thin and small 
(as a result of supposed demonic possession). 
2 possessed by an evil spirit from the nether world 
(believed to live underground) . 
.;oJI fitfaraq Ivtll to become thin and weak (as a 
result of supposed demonic influence). 2 to be posses-
sed by an evil spirit. - ava/iva mitfiriq. 
J., .J -
a. .JJi furta <T orta> In pI fura{, fur{aatl 1 [mil, 
obsol] battalion. 2 large group, bunch. mil:Jammad 
wi-zaki w-lali - fil-fur{a kull-a-ha xaragit Muhammad 
and Zaki and Ali - the whole bunch of them went out. 
landu fur{it liyaal he has a lot of children. 
J.,1t..J-
a.~ .;I furvaa{a <T "gat from Gr> In pI fara¥ii{1 
windlass, winch, capstan. 
.:, t.J-
~) furvun <Engl> In pI -aatl (church) organ. 
JJt.J-
J ~ ) far¥uul, furvuul r In pI fara¥iill musical instru-
ment of the muzmaar (q.v.) family, consisting of two 
15 
pipes, one a drone and the other a melody pipe (see 
PI.J, 16). 
-J..J.J-
)}.JJi furuvwaar <Fr> linterjl au revoir! bye-bye! 
J.J -
~) faraq r In! insomnia. 
(.d.J-) 
.!I) fark <perh Fr are> In pI -aatl arc lamp. 
.!II) faraak In! tooth-brush tree (Salvadora pesica). 
- IJ" .£I .J -
I; •... S) furkistira <Engl> In pI -aatl lorchestra. 
2 dance-band. 
-.dJ.J-
,:.,ISJ) farlikaan <Fr arlequin> In! type of hairstyle. 
( r.J - ) 
4.) furma In! [abus] lineage. lalant-i-Iu fabu furmit 
gidd-u I cursed all his bloody ancestors. 
4.) farma <It armare> In! [naut] rigging. lamal i/-
farma to ready a ship for sea, fit out a ship. 
IJ" r .J - see IJ" J r .J -: f armuus 
I J r .J - see 1 J r .J: farmila 
1 J r .J - see .:, r .J -: farmalli 
- r r .J - see .::...:, r .J -: farmamant 
~rr 
~) farmanni (also farmalli, farmanli) Ipl farman, 
farmal, 
farmanniyya, 
farmalliyya, 
farmanliyya, 
farmanniyyiin, farmalliyyiin, farmanliyyiinl 1 ladjl 
Armenian. 2 Inl an Armenian. 
'::"iJr.J-
.;:..:...) farmant Iprop n! Armant, a town twelve miles 
south-west of Luxor. IIkalb; farmant (also kalb; 
farmamant) breed of strong big dog, (loosely) any 
pedigree dog. 
IJ" J r. .J -
U""') farmuus <Gr armos> In pI faramiisl seam, 
join (e.g., between bricks, planks, parts of a sail). - also 
larnuus, larmuus. 

-"~.)" 
J...,jli) rarnaruu[i, 
rarnaroo[i I/adjl Albanian. 
llfilfil rarna ruu[i paprika. 2 In pI rarna ruut, rarna rootl 
an Albanian. 
":"~.) .. 
....,;) rarnab In pI raraanib, ranaaribJI I rabbit. 
bi-yiwlidu zayy il-raraanib they breed like rabbits. 
IIba~u zayy il-raraanib they were cowed. 2 [slang] a 
million Egyptian pounds. 
~) rarnaba In pI -aat/l doe rabbit. zayy il-rarnaba 
tiwlid kull i lahreen ma"a [prov} ... she breeds like a 
rabbit. 2 (loosely) = rarnab. 3 rarnabit il-manuiir the 
tip of the nose . 
..... .;) rarnuub InI[children} rabbit, bunny. 
....,;) rarnib I/vtl to cause to cower (like a rabbit). 
2 lvil to cower (like a rabbit). -vn rarnaba; ava/pva 
mirarnib. 
I,)" ~.) .. 
""".J'11 ril-rurnus InI[obsol} the supply corps of the 
British Army. 
JJ~~.) .. 
~.J.,i rurneek <T ornek> In pI raraniikl I printed 
form, blank form. II rurneek zanb [mil} punishment. 
2 (dress) pattern. 3 [print} matrix. 4 [eng} template. 
.J.)" 
.,) rarw (also ~arw) <Copt> Inl[bot} oak. 
J.J.)" 
~.,) rarawla InI chrysanthemum. 
I~.) .. 
~) rarya I <Engl> InI[soccer} goal area. xatt il-rarya 
the line demarcating the goal area. 
l~.) .. 
~) rarya 2 In pI raraayal[naut} yard of a lateen sail. 
~) rarya 3 <It aria> linterjl[naut} lower away! 
J~.) .. 
•. b! riryal (also riryil, raryal) <Engl> In pI -aat, 
raraayill aerial, antenna. 
.)~~.)" 
J.!!) raryeer <Fr arri~re>: marl aryeer [auto} reverse. 
16 
IJ .. 
I~! ,Ij! ri.l;a Iconj/l if. ri.l;a ribna ma-!tarenaa-!yer-na 
lIa-yiftiri if we don't buy, others will. 2 whether. 
risral-u ri.l;a kaan mlJEaasamak ask him whether he has 
(any) fish. 
-.) ":" J .. 
.r-il~ji razbaraleer <Fr aspirateur> In pI -aatl[auto} 
distributor, -also rasbirateer. 
-I,)"":,,J" 
LJ"~) razbistus <Engl> InI asbestos. -also 
rasbistus. 
JJ ":" J .. 
~j 
'11 ril-razbakiyya Iprop nI a public garden in cen-
tral Cairo, and the area surrounding it. suur il-
razbakiyya the wall of Ezbekiya garden on the Opera 
Square side, famous for its second-hand book stalls. 
~~J .. 
':'.,ji razutt <Fr> InI [obsol} azote, nitrogen. 
~.,ji razutiik <Fr azotique>: lIaamit:[ il-razutiik nit-
ric acid. 
.)J .. 
)j! ri.l;aart Inll/pl ruzur, ri.l;araatllongwrapper,loin 
cloth (used particularly during the pilgrimage to Mec-
ca). 2/pl -aatl any structural device which goes all 
round a room (e.g., skirting-board, decorative groove 
between wall surface and ceiling surface). 
j,~.)J" 
~)j'1l ril-razariita Iprop nI a district in Alexandria. 
'~.)J .. 
~.J.,ji razureeh <Fr ajou~~> ladj invarl perforated. 
-also rajureeh. 
~IJJ .. see also ~~JJ .. and ~~J 
~IS! ri.l;zaay ladvl I how, in what way. raslJEd-ak 
ri.l;zaay how can I help you? ~ult-i-lu yiEmil-u zzaay 
I told him how to do it. 2 how, to what degree.luufi 
ranala(tra rizzaay look how clever I am! 
.)~JJ" see also .)~~v'J 
.)!.Si razziir Inli soldering alloy. 2 tinning (for copper 
pots). 

ISIS.;.;- see also ~Ijj_ and ~~j 
ISS! fizzayy linterrog adv, always w pron suff or foil n! 
how is .. ? how are .. ? fizzayy-ak how are you? fizzayy 
i/-fawlaad how are the children? fizzayy il-lJaal how are 
things? fizzayy iskindiriyya lala lJiss-ak how do you 
(or: did you) find Alexandria? 
) t j - see 1.; t j : faZlar2, fitfaZlar 
-)t,.i-
~.r jl fazlariina In! fuss. laa~il fazlariina lal-faatfi 
he'is making a fuss about nothing. 
IoU-
Jjt. mafzaqt In pi mafaaziql tight corner, tough 
spot. 
Jj-
Jji fazal In! eternity. -common only in the phrases: da 
fazal that was very long ago. min (jadiim il- fazal since 
the beginning of time, from time immemorial. 
J) I'azali ladj/l eternal.llda mij (jillit baxti bass - da 
fa(jr i fazali kamaan it's not just bad luck - it's hopeless 
poverty. 2 extremely old, as old as Methuselah. 
I 
0 
C.;-
rjl fazam (i) Ivtl to put (s.o.) in'a fix. I'a(jsaa( it-tallaaga 
I'azamit-ni xaa/~ (paying off the) fridge instalments left 
me really short of money. -ava I'aazim; pva mafzuum . 
... ) 
I'azma I In pi -aatl I crisis. fazmit il-I'axlaa(j the 
crisis in morals. II fijtaddi ya I'azma titlJalli {prov] 
(worsen, crisis, that you may be relieved) = it's darkest 
before the dawn. 2 shortage. fazmit it-taksiyaat the 
acute shortage of taxis. 38 crisis period (of an illness). 
3b attack (of an illness). gaa-Iu I-fazma btalt-u he had 
one of his attacks. 
rjhl I'itl'azam Ivil to be put in a fix. -iva mitl'izim. 
rSi fazzim I/vtl to upset (s.o.). - Ivil 2 to become 
unavailable or in short supply (of goods etc.). 3 to 
become critical or complicated. ril-lJaala J-libnaan 
I'azzimit xaa/~ the situation in Lebanon became critic-
al. -vn tafziim; ava mil'azzim. 
rShl fitl'azzim Ivill to be upset, be annoyed. 2 to be-
come unavailable or in short supply (of goods). -avaliva 
mitl'azzim. 
2 
0 r.;-
... ) 
l'azma 2 <Engl> In! asthma. 
I)~rj-
r.j! fazmiirl Iprop n! Izmir (in Turkey). 
17 
Jr.) I'azmirli ladjl pertaining to Izmir. linab 
fazmirli Smyrna grapes. 
2.;~rj· 
r.) fazmiir 2 <Gr smile> In pi fazamiirl chisel. -also 
fazmiil. 
J ~ rj-
..h--;i fazmiil <Gr smile> In pi I'azamiill chisel. -also 
fazmiir. 
1 • 
• 
IJ.;· 
.:,~i fazan, fizin (a, i) Ivil to grant permission. lamma 
yil'zin rabb-i-na when God wills. -vn fizn; ava I'aazin; 
pva mal'zuun. 
.:,~! l'iznln!l/nopllpermission.lan (or bald i) I'izn-ak 
by your leave, excuse me. bi-zn iJlaah God willing. 2 Ipl 
I'uzuun, I'uzunaatl warrant, permit. !'izn i taftiij search 
warrant. fizn i t~diir export licence. II fizn i bariid post-
al order. - I'izn i m~raft bank deposit slip. 
':'J~t. ma I'zuun In pi ma faziinl official authorized to 
perform Muslim marriages. 
~J~t. mafzuniyya In! the office of a mal'zuun. 
.:,I~i • .:,bi fadaan I In pi -aatl {lsi] call to prayer.lly~lJa 
min il-fadaan = he is awake from the crack of dawn. 
-kulli wa(jti w-Iuu I'adaan {prov] = everything in its 
own time. 
~~t. .~...I.o madna In pi midanll minaret. 2 {lsi] bead 
forming the junction on a string of prayer beads . 
.:,~i . .:,;i I'addin, I'iddan (yiddan) Ivtl I {lsi] to call (a 
prayer). I'addin il-l~r he called the afternoon prayer. 
- Ivil 2 {lsi] to give the call to prayer. II bi-yiddan ft-
mal(a {prov] (he gives the call to prayer in Malta) = he's 
flogging a dead horse. 3 {lsi] to become due (of 
prayer). ril-l~r iddan it is time for the afternoon 
prayer to be called. 4 to crow (of a cock). -vn tal'diin; 
a~alpva mifaddin, middan. 
.:,~.;. mul'azzin In °1 muezzin . 
.:,~LI I'istal'zin Ivt and vii I to ask permission (of). 
fistafzint in-naa~ir (or min in-naa~ir) have you asked 
the headmaster's permission? 2 to take one's leave 
(of). fastal'zin-kum (or fastafzin) ba(ja I must be going 
then. -vn fistifzaan; ava mistafzin. 
2 ~ j _ see ~ ~ .J: I'uzn 
j.Jj-
tjJji fazuuza <.Gr gazoza> In! {non- Cairene] pop, 
carbonated soft drink. -also gazuuza, kazuuza. 

ISj ~ 
~~i raza I (i) Ivt/ to harm. II rallaah yirzii-k = may you 
suffer for the sufferings you've caused to others (used as 
a mild rebuke). -vn raza, raziyya; ava raazi; pva marzi. 
~~i razaz In! skin disease, specifically ringworm. 
bi-yitlaalig min i/-raza iii f-raas-u he is being treated for 
ringworm. 
~~i raziyya Ivn!1I wiJ/' raziyya one who brings harm to 
others (e.g., by tale-bearing, malicious gossip, or by 
being tyrannical or quick to punish). 
~~;. murzi ladj *1 harmful. 
~~hl ritraza Ivil to be harmed, be injured. - iva mitrizi. 
~~hl ritrazza Ivil to be upset, be worried. - iva 
mitrazzi. 
- I IS j - see IS IS j : razyaar 
V" -
..,..! ris <Copt> linterjl behold! 
I V" - see IS V" ~: rasa 
• .::.01 y V" ~ 
J~! risbaati <It spade> Icoll n! spade(s) (in cards). 
II raa!J fi-sabla risbaati he fell into a deep sleep. 
4J I y V" ~ see -
4J y V" _: risbaani 
-IyV"-
...,...~! risbaatis Iprop nl popular carbonated soft 
drink. 
-UYV"-
~! risbitalya <T ispitalya from It> In pI -aatl hos-
pital. riI-risbitalya Nadriyya the hospital for chest dis-
eases. - also ristibalya J . 
-:[.y~-
~~! risbagitti <It> In! spaghetti. -also risbakitti. 
~~! risbagittiini <It> Inl spaghettini. - also 
risbakittiini. 
l-,)y~-) 
[.I.I.,-! risbidaag <P safedaj> In! white lead, ceruse. 
- also sibidaag. 
.J~~~! risbadiquun <Gr despodikon>. Inl IChr] 
central square of the impression with which a eucharis-
tic loaf (fiurbaan) is stamped. 
18 
l-.JY~_ 
cJ-.r.-i rasbiriin, risbiriin <Eng» 
In! aspirin. 
~.r.-i rasbiriina, risbiriina lunit n, pI -aatl an aspirin 
tablet. 
~~.r.-i rasbirinaaya, risbirinaaya = rasbiriina. 
l(-.JY~_) 
.r-il.r.-i rasbirateeF <Fr aspirateur> In pI -aatllauto] 
distributor. - also razbarateer. 
~.r.-! risbireeh 
<Engl> 
In! 
spray 
(usually 
hair-spray). 
-~y~-
..,..,,:..--i rasbistus <Engl> In! asbestos. -also 
razbistus. 
-.!l ..... V"-
~~! risbakitti <It> In! spaghetti. - also risbagitti. 
~~! risbakittiini <It> In! spaghettini. -also 
risbagittini. 
Jy~-
.::..e')l,..! risbi/aayit <T ispalet> 1 Icoll n! epaulette(s). 
2 In pI -aatl epaulette . 
-4JYV"-
~~! risbanya or rasbanya Iprop nl Spain. 
J~! risbaani or rasbaani lladjl Spanish. - 1n!2/pl 
risbaniyyiin, rasbaniyyiin, risbaan, rasbaanl a Spa-
niard. 3 Ino pI/ the Spanish language. 
J".;~! risbanyooli Ipl risbanyooll l/adjl Spanish . 
!Jumma 
risbanyooli 
Spanish 
influenza. 
rafi~a 
risbanyooli Spanish dance, Flamenco dance. 2 In! 
lobsol] Spaniard. - Ino pI/ 3 the Spanish language. 
.J.J Y V" -
.)",...1 risboor <Fr sport> ladj invarl 1 casual (of 
clothes etc.). riJ1anta di sboor miJ tiwalitt that's a 
casual bag, not for dressy occasions. - ladverbiallyl 
laabis risboor dressed casually. 2 broad-minded. 
xallii-k risboor don't be so narrow-minded! 
u~_ 
..::-1 ristf In! behind, posterior, backside. 
,)Iu~_ 
~~! ristaad <Fr stade> In pI -aatl stadium. 
4Jlu~-
j,; ~ 
'il ri/-ristaana, ri/-rasitaana <T asitane> Iprop nl 
I obsol] Istanbul. 

( ":0"':'" o.J U'" ~ ) 
";'"...! ristubb <Engl stop>: nuur iI-ristubb (1) red 
traffic-light. (2) brake-light. saala stubb stop-watch. 
l'istubb [ein] cut! 
~"...! ristubba <It stoppa> Inl I/pl -aatl length of 
oakum used as a bung for a leaky joint. 2 Icoll n! rag. 
-also ris(Ubba. 
iJ"r'o.JU"'~ 
~! ristibn<Englstepney>l/npl-aatlsparewheel. 
2/adj invarl spare, held in reserve. tialam ristibn a 
spare pen. 
4-! ristibna In pi -aatl spare wheel. 
(-"r'o.JU"'.) 
~I.-! ristabeena <It sta bene> linterjl agreed! done! 
~! ristibalyaJ <T isbitalya from It> In pi -aatl hos-
pital. -also risbitalya. 
- [. o.J U'" • 
r.i='4:-! ristigmatizm <Engl> In! astigmatism. 
-~o.JU"'. 
.1!J..f-! ristudyu <perh It> In pi -haatl studio, espe-
cially of a photographer. kanaba studyu a studio couch. 
.)o.JU"'. 
ji.J rustur, r~{ur <perh It lustro> In! spirit polish 
used for furniture. 
eft,r.-i rusturgi In pi -iyya/ French polisher. 
"r'Jo.JU"'~ 
~!J,r.-! ristrubya <perh Fr estropie> I/advl by 
chance, by a fluke. nagafJ fil-imtiljaan ristrubya he suc-
ceeded in the exam by a fluke. 2 In pi -aatl fluke, 
chance. -/adjectivallyl nagaalj ristrubya false success. 
dafannaan ristrubya he's an impostor making himself 
out to be an artist. 
o.J.)o.JU"' • 
.:.,)\.;...! ristart <Engl> In! start (of a race). IIsiwiif iI-
ristart start-switch. 
1_.) o.J U"'. 
~I,r.-! ristiratiiji <Engl> ladj *1 strategic. 
~I,r.-! ristratijiyya In! strategy. 
Z-Jo.JU"'. 
lei I,r.-i rwturalya Iprop n! Australia. 
19 
JI,r.-i rusturaali I/adj *1 Australian.llbayl usturaali 
an oaf. 2/n °1 an Australian. 
3(-Jo.JU"',,) 
iJI,r.-! ristiraada <Fr estrade> In pi -aatl table, 
wooden platform in a classroom. 
.1!,r.-! ristiryu <Engl> In pi -haatl I stereo record-
player. 2 discotheque. 
t.iJ,r.-! ristirliini <Eng!> ladjl sterling. 
jo.JU"'. 
~\.;...i rustaaz In pi rasatza, rasatiizJ I I title of, and 
polite form of address or reference to, a teacher or to a 
man not otherwise qualified for a title (e.g., by profes-
sion or status). 2a [aead] professor. rustaaz musaar;id 
university teacher approximately equal to senior lectur-
er (Brit.) or associate professor (U.S.). rustaaz kursi 
(or bi-kursi) holder of a professorial chair. 2b school-
teacher. 3 man wearing the traditional dress of ajeex 
(i.e., a gown and turban). IIdaftar iI-rustaaz master 
ledger, master register. 
ij\.;...i rustaaza In pi -aatl I [aead] woman professor. 
2 woman school-teacher . 
~j\.;...i rustaziyya 
Inl {aead] 
I 
M.A. degree. 
2 professorship. kursi.l-rustaziyya professorial chair . 
.i.-iil ritrastiz Ivil tabus] to give pompous or officious 
advice, play the school-master. rinta Ija-titrastiz 
laleena are you trying to tell us what's what? -vn 
rastaza; ava mitrastiz. 
- t o.J U"'. see IS r t: ristuyummaaya 
-";o.JU"'. 
1S.l:A:;...! ristafandi <prop n Yusuf Efendi> lcoll n! 
tangerine(s). -also yusafandi, yustafandi, yuusif 
rafandi, yusfi, safandi. 
~~~! ristafandiyaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a tangerine. 
-also 
yusafandiyaaya, 
yustafandiyaaya, 
yuusif 
rafandiyaaya, safandiyaaya. 
.!l o.J U"'. see also .!lIS o.J U'" • 
.d....i rastik <Eng!> In! I elastic. gazma rastik a pair 
of elastic-sided boots. zimmit-u rastik his conscience is 
flexible. 2 Ipl rasaatik/ piece of elastic (usually covered 
with some kind of material). 3a Icoll n! rubber band(s). 
3b Ipl rasaatikl rubber band. 
~ IS::... i rastikaaya lunit n; pi -aatl a rubber band. 
~.!lo.J9". 
.!l"... • .!l"...! ristukk <Engl> In pi -aatl {eomm] 
stock. 

-.!luV"~ 
Ij.fo..i fastakooza, 
fistakooza <Gr astakos> InJ 
llcolll spiny lobster(s), langouste(s). 2/unit n, pi 
-aatl a spiny lobster, a langouste. 
~ Ij.fo.. i fastakozaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a spiny lobster, 
a langouste. 
-.:, Ju V"" 
~i fasitliin <Engl> InJ acetylene.liljaam fuksijiin 
asitliin oxy-acetylene welding. 
- r u V'" 
see 1.J r ~: fistimaara 
(~':'UV"') 
~! fistung <T ustunf> In pi -aatl draughtsman's 
case of drawing instruments. - also f~{Ung. 
~! fistinga <T istinga> Inl [naut] brail. 
l(_.:,UV"~) 
~! 
fistangaliina ladj invarl crazy. 
J.-.z;-! fistinsil <Engl> Inl stencil. matbalit fistinsil 
mimeograph machine. 
2 - .:, U V" ~ see 1..s.:, ~: fistanna 
':'.J u V'" 
.:,.,,:;..-i fasitoon <perh Fr> InJ acetone. 
(.!l..suV"~) 
..!.I,,:;.-i fusteek <T kostek> In pi -aat, 
fasatiik, 
fasaatikl watch strap, watch bracelet. 
is:.,,;.-i fastiika 1 
<Fr 
elastique> 
In 
pi fasatiikl 
1 eraser, rubber. 2 barber's rubber bowl (with a base 
for wiping lather off the razor). 
is:.,,;.-i fastiika 2 <It steeea> In pi -aatl 1 stick of 
carved bone (used in book-binding). 2 billiard cue. 
J..suV"~ 
J.,::-! fistiil <Fr style> Inl period furniture, especially 
of the French rococo style. 
~ V" ~ 
~i fasad In pi fusuud, fusUdal 1 lion. mudarrib 
fusuud lion tamer. daa f il- fasad [path] leontiasis. 2 riI-
fasad [astrol] Leo. 
~i fassid Ivil to become coarse (of skin). fiday-ya 
fassidit mil-qafafmy hands have become (rough from 
being) chapped. -vn tafsiid; pva mifassid. 
~hl fitfassid Ivil [path] to be affected by leontiasis. 
-iva mitfassid. 
20 
~LI fistafsid Ivil to show courage, pretend to be 
brave. - ava mistafsid. 
1 
.J V" • 
J"" i fasar 1 t (i) Ivtl to take captive. -vn fasr, fasr; ava 
faasir; pva mafsuur. 
.......i fasiir l In pi fasra, fusara, yusaral prisoner, cap-
tive. 
~ ya badawi gaab il-yusara 0 Badawi (who) brought 
back the captives! (chant sung in praise of Sayyid 
Ahmad el-Badawi). 
J"" \;1 fitfasar Ivil to be captured. -iva mitfisir. 
2 
.JV"~ 
• J""i fusra In pi fusarll family. fafraad il-fusrafamily 
members. 2 dynasty. 38 staff. fusrit il-magalla the staff 
of the magazine. fusrit ig-gamla the staff of the uni-
versity. 3b social or cultural club in, e.g., a university. 
3 .J V" ~ 
;i fasar 2 In pi fasaarl 1 effect. bi-rasar ragli with 
retroactive effect. riI-lilaqaat if-fax~iyya liiha fasar 
kibiir fit-talaamul mala I-lumala personal relations 
greatly influence one's dealings with clients. 28 trace, 
vestige. fasar rigl footprint. laazim fasar ifjaljm' 
yifYisil the trace of grease must be washed off. 
riI-futubiis mifbayin-Iu fasar there's no sign of the bus. 
2b relic. fis-saala di fasar lan gidd-i this watch came 
down to me from my grandfather. II fasar (or fatar) 
in-nabi a village on the Nile between Cairo and el-
Ma'adi. -
fasaar Ipl nJ 3 antiquities, historical re-
mains. m€¥laljit il-fasaar the Department of Anti-
quities. daar il- fasaar the Egyptian Museum. bi-ytaagir 
fil-fasaar he deals in (Egyptian) antiquities. 
;i . .;i fatar In pi -aatl a personal article, usually a 
piece of clothing, used as a token in magic or folk 
medicine (cf fasar 2 b) . 
..s;i fasari ladj *1 pertaining to antiquities or historic-
al remains. riI- famaakin il- fasariyya historical sites. 
tuljaf 
fasariyya 
historical 
treasures. 
larabiyya 
fasariyya (1) a veteran car. (2) [joe] an old jalopy . 
.);t. mafsuurt ladjl preserved from the past. Ijikam 
mafsuura treasured aphorisms from the past. 
ji fassar Ivil 1 to have an effect, exert influence. 
ma-tljawilj' tfassar [ala rafy in-naas don't try to influ-
ence people's opinions. tayayyuraat is-suuq bi-tfassar 
[ala I-iqt~aad fluctuations in the market affect the eco-
nomy. 2 to have emotional impact. fil-film' fassar 
[alayya qawi the film moved me deeply. -vn ta fsiir; ava 
mifassar, mufassir. 

,#h tafsiir In pi -aatl effect, impact. tafsiir il-Ijaqaara 
11art;iyya lala l-rarb the impact of Eastern culture on 
the West. 
~WI fit-tafsiriyya In! [art) impressionism. 
;;.. mufassirt In pi -aatl effect. mufassiraat 10tiyya 
sound effects. 
;1.1 fitfassar/vill to be influenced, be affected. kunt' 
lissa mitfassar bil-minawwim I was still under the effect 
of the sleeping pills. 2 to be affected emotionally. 
rufassart i lamma juft-a-ha bi-tlayyat I was moved 
when I saw her crying. -iva mitfassar. 
;LI fistafsart lvil 1 to take exclusive possession. 
fistafsar bil-filuus kull'-ha l-na/s-u he appropriated all 
the money for himself. 2 to exercise a monopoly. 
fif-Jirka stafsarit bi-tawziil; il-laban the company had a 
monopoly in milk distribution. -vn fistifsaar; ava 
mistafsar. 
--JIJ"-
~I J"'! fisra fiillprop n! Israel. 
j.;1J"'! fisrafiili lladj ·1 Israeli. 2/n ·1 an Israeli. 
-..JJIJ"-
~ 
I J"'! fisrafiillprop n! [lsi) Israfil, the angel who will 
sound the trumpet on the Day of Judgement. 
1 
IJ" IJ" -
~i fuss In! 1 [math) power, exponent of a power. 
fitneen fuss ' talaata two to the power of three, two 
cubed. 2 root, origin. fir-raagil da fuss i (il-)/asaad this 
man is the root of all corruption. 
~! fiss I In! motive, cause. filii ljf11al kaan bi-fiss I 
minha she was the cause of all that happened. 
1J"l... i fasaas I In pi -aatl basis, foundation. fasasaat 
il-mabna the foundations of the building. kiriim fasaas 
foundation cream. fil-luluum fasaas il-Ijayaah the sci-
ences are the basis of life. fixtiyaar Ijurrs lala fasaas 
il-musawaah been il-gamiil a free choice on the basis of 
complete equality. naas fasas-hum min ma-fii-fpeople 
who started from nothing. 
11 lala fasaas finn Iconjl on the understanding that. 
saab il-~ftaalj maca l-bawwaab lala fasaas finn i 
lamma ykuun raayib nit;dar nudxul he left the key with 
the janitor on the understanding that we can get in 
when he's away. - fasaasan ladvl basically, fun-
damentally. fil-Ijarb l fasaasan imtiljaan lif1acb war is 
basically a test of the people. 
21 
..,.:. i fassis I Ivtll to found, base. 2 to prepare (a wall 
or the like) for painting. -vn tafsiis; ava/pva mifassis. 
..,.:.;.. mufassist In ·1 founder. mufassisiin il-Ijizb il-
watani the founders of the National Party . 
......:;.. mufassasa In pi -aatl 1 public sector corpora-
tion. 2 organization, (cultural or educational) founda-
tion. 3 legal institution. dawlit il-mufassasaat rule 
according to established legal institutions. 
..,.:.hl fitfassis I Ivil to be founded, be established. 
- iva mitfassis. 
1 
IJ" IJ" -
~! fiss 2 <T es> In! [mus) rest. 
3 
IJ" IJ" -
.:..l:i fasaas 2 In! furniture. 
..:.: i fassis 2 Ivtl to furnish (a house). -vn ta fsiis; ava 
mufassis . 
..:.:1.1 fitfassis 2 Ivil to be furnished. -iva mitfassis. 
I J, IJ" -
Ja-i .Ja-.,i fusta <T usta> In pi fustawaatl title of, 
and form of address or reference to, one who has under-
gone training or apprenticeship in a craft or profession 
regarded as skilled, e.g., foreman of a small workshop, 
carpenter, qualified machine operative, driver, laun-
dry-man, belly-dancer, leader of a troupe of female 
dancers and musicians. 
..J I J, IJ"-
...iL! fistaa/ <Eng!> In! staff (in an organization, 
school etc.). 
rlJ,lJ"-
4.L! fistaama <perh It stame> In pi -aatl stile (of a 
door or window). 
"r' "r' J, IJ" -
~ ."l:.-! fis{Ubba <It stoppa> In! 1 Ipl -aatl length of 
oakum used as a bung for a leaky joint. 2 lcoll n! rag. 
- also fistubba. 
~&,la-! fis{Ubbaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of cotton 
waste. 
"r'r.blJ"-
~! fistamba<Itstampa>/npl-aat/l mould,mat-
rix. 2 piece of equipment, or tool, of a standard size. 
bubiina stamba a standard-size spool. 3 [carp) curve 
(instrument for describing curves). 

-':'~V"'. 
J".;.Ua-l fistambuul, fistanbuullprop oJ Istanbul. 
J.;Ua-! fistambulli, fistanbulli <T istanbullu> ladj *1 
pertaining to Istanbul. II ljarl I fistambulli variety of 
edible gourd (Curcubita maxima), similar to a pump-
kin. -kanaba fistambulli ottoman, divan. -gibna 
stambulli mature salty white cheese. -/urraaba 
s{ambulli pr§yer-bead tassle made of fine metal chain. 
.J.J ~ V'" • 
.;)...i fus{UuraT 
In pI rasatiirl 1 legend, myth. 
fik-kalaam da fasatiir that talk is (mere) tales. 2 source 
of amazement. 
~;)...i fustuuri ladjl legendary, mythical. 
J.J~V"'. 
J)'" i fus{Uul, fas{Uul In pI fasa{iil, fasa{iill fleet. 
-.J~V"'. 
~1)...1 fis{Uwaana 
In 
pI -aatl 
1 cylinder. 
2a gramophone record. 2b spiel, patter, rigmarole. 
JI)...! fistuwaani, fus{Uwaani ladjl cylindrical. 
~ V'" • 
...... i fasaf loJ sorrow, regret. maca (or li-) I-fasaf 
unfortunately . 
...... i faasif laval regretful, sorry. 
~bl fitfassif, fitfassaf Ivil to apologize, express re-
gret. fitfassifit-Iu ii-iii I:Jf1ial minhum she apologized to 
him for what they had done. -ava mitfassif, muta fassif. 
~h. mutafassif ladj *1 sorry, regretful. 
"""J.o mufsif ladjl distressing, saddening. bi-yifiarraf 
tf1iarrufaat mu·fsifa he behaves in an upsetting way. 
xabar mufsifsad news. 
U"" t ~ V'" • 
~1 
fisfuxi linterjl exclamation of disgust ... ugh! 
fisfuxia lala kida how disgusting! 
':"J~V"'. 
.. :: .• li.,J fasfalt <Fr> Inl asphalt. 
':'~~V"'. 
.:r-A-l fisfiin <Gr sph~n> In pI fasafiinl [carpI wedge. 
II qarab fisfiin benhum he drove a wedge between them. 
- fidda-Iha fisfiin he played a dirty trick on her. 
-.JJV"'. 
j, oJ! .;.... 1 fisqarbuut T <It scorbuto> Inl scurvy. 
22 
~JV"' • 
......u... i rusquf, fusljuf <Gr episkopos> In pI fasaaqifa, 
rasaqfa, rasatjfal bishop. 
~i fusqufi, fusljufi ladjl episcopal. 
.:;&.i.. i fusqufiyya, fusljufiyya In pI -aatl 1 bishopric, 
episcopate. 2 bishop's residence. 3 administrative cen-
tre of a bishopric. 
-1.dV"'. 
,.)""u~.J faskaaris, fiskaaris <Gr askaris>: duud 
faskaaris [path] ascarides, threadworms. 
~.:".dV"'. 
~! 
fiskitf <Eng» 
In pI -aatl 1 sketch. 2 sketch 
pad. 
-.:".dV"'. 
~! 
fiskiiting, fiskeeting <Engl> Inl skating. 
.:" .J .d V'" • 
~ ;:...! fiskirta or fiskarta (also sikirta or sikarta) <It 
scarto> loJ 1 cotton waste. 2 something shoddy or in 
bad condition, something fit only to be thrown away. 
larabiyya skirta a wreck of a car. 3 discard pile (in 
cards) . 
.i;:"'1 fiskirtu or fiskartu (also sikirtu or sikartu) 
= fiskirta. 
.J .J .d V'" • 
J;:"'1 fiskuruu <Engl screw> loJ spin (on a ball). 
fidda (or lilib) ik-koora skuruu he put a spin on the 
ball. II ljalam fiskuruu propelling pencil. 
J.dV". 
~ 
i faska/a <prob T iskele from Gr> In pI fasaakill 
quay, wharf, jetty. 
1_.:,.dV"'. 
~;..I:S:....! fiskindiriyya, 
fiskandariyya 
Iprop 
oJ 
Alexandria . 
JI;..I:S:....! fiskandaraani 
ladj 
*1 
1 Alexandrian. 
2 having dark-brown glaze (of pottery). - loJ 3/pl 
-yyal an Alexandrian. 4 Ino pI/ drum rhythm employed 
in the zaar. 
Z(-.:,.dV"'.) 
J...I:S:....! fiskandiil <T iskandil> loJ [nautl lead and 
line. 
JI..I:S:....1 fiskandaal <Fr scandale> loJ scene, scandal. 

.:.. J .!l V'" 
see j, J .!l ..; .: fiskuuta 
JJ.!lV". 
41~1 fiskuula, fiskoola <ltscuola> [obsol]: bituul 
fiskuula students (in general). -laamil bitaal fiskuula 
acting learned. 
I r. V'" 
see also I.S r V" 
1'"'""1 fism I Inl I/p~ fasma, fasaami, fasmaafl name. 
bi-nilraf-u bil-fism we know him by name. lala fism ... 
after the name of ... , as in sammuu lala fism abuu they 
named him after his father, kiniisa lala fism iI-ladra a 
church dedicated to the Virgin Mary. law kaanit 
iI-fasma tin/ara kaan iI-faqiir samma-bn-u xara [prov] 
(if names had to be bought with a price, the poor man 
would have to name his son Shit) = what's in a name? 
II fana xaayif lala fism-i I am fearful for my reputation. 
-fismB lala musamma a fitting name. -laafit il-fasaami J 
[women] an expression used when someone (espe-
cially a child) is mentioned by name = may the one 
mentioned live long! - ril-fasmaa f il-fJusna the epithets 
of God. - fism-alla (or fism-alla lala ... ) and, among 
Christians, fism iNaliib (or fism iNaliib lala ... ) an 
invocation of divine protection, as in fizzayy ibn-ik 
fism-alla (or fism-alla lalee) = how's your son, God 
protect him? ril-waad fism-alla lala maqaam-ak ball; 
ruufJ-u = the boy, begging your pardon, wet himself; 
-also used with affectionate derision, as in gaa-ni 
si-sm-alla mfJammad yinadii-ni = Mr - may God bless 
his little heart -Muhammad came to call me, fism-alla 
lala laql-ak = use your head! - (fitfa{/.tfal) bi-sm-illa = 
please help yourself! (an invitation to share food). 
- bi-sm illaahi r-rafJmaan ir-rafJiim [lsI] invocation of 
divine protection used at the beginning of any task, no 
matter how great or small. - fism in-nabi fJars-u w-~ayn­
u may the Prophet's name guard and protect him (used 
in conversation about a child). -da-sm-u kalaam is that 
any way to talk? -lazzeet-u lal-baab wi-sm-i faddeet 
waagib I only paid him my condolences at the door, but 
one may say I've done my duty. -bi-yruufJu l-madrasa 
ma-b-yilmiluu-/ fJaaga wil- fism i mudarrisiin they go to 
school and do nothing and for that they get called 
teachers. 2/pl fasmaaf onlyl[gram] noun. 
11 fism; finn Iconjl in view of the fact that. finta 
l-masfuul film innak rayyis-hum you are responsible 
since you are their boss. 
~I fismi ladj *1 nominal. sanad fismi a nominal 
share. 
23 
2 r V'" 
~1 fism 2 1n! sin. finna ball/. i;-;anni fism = to think 
even a little evil of someone is a sin (admonition not to 
think ill of others). 
-trV"-
~ 
l-. ,!I ril- fi.Ymaliliyya Iprop nl Ismailia, a city on 
the west bank of the Suez Canal. 
J.,&.l-. ,!I ril-fismaliili: fi[l-naadi l-fismac;iili the 
Ismailia Club (famous for its football team). 
1.S.,~l-.1 fismalallaawi I/adjl of, or pertaining to, 
Ismailia. - Inl 2 Ipl -yyal one from Ismailia. 3 Icolll 
honeydew melon(s). 
u ~ r. V"-
.::..:.-i fasmant <Engl> Inl cement. 
-JrV"-
r!?.,...1 fismooking 
<Fr 
smoking> 
I dinner-suit(s), (men's) evening-dress. 
woven synthetic fabric. 
I ~ V"-
In 
invarl 
2 smooth 
I..;..I fisna Iprop nl Esna, a town in Upper Egypt 
(known in particular for its fine lentils). 
->.,1..;..1 fisnaawi I/adj *1 pertaining to the town of 
Esna. 2 In pI -yyal native of Esna. 
-V"~V'" 
.r---il..i fasanseer, f~a~eer <Fr ascenseur> In pI -
aatll lift, elevator. 2 [phot] manoeuvring apparatus of 
a camera tripod. 
~IJV"-
,;!,J faswaan Iprop n! Aswan, a city and province in 
Upper Egypt. 
JI."...i faswaani, faswaaniladj *1 pertaining to Aswan. 
J;1."...i faswanli ladj *1 pertaining to Aswan. 
c:. J V" - see c:. J V" : fiswifJ 
J J V" - see 3 J J V": faswira, fisweera 
I.S V" • 
..r'i fasa f In! sorrow. 
~i fasiyya Inl maltreatment and the suffering it 
causes. fil- fumm i dayman fJammaalit fasiyya a mother 
always bears the brunt. 

II.S V" • 
I"....i ruyat Iprop oJ Asia. 
l.S~i ruyawit ladj *1 Asian. 
.J I.S V". see also .J I.S .:J -
,r-:i ruiir2: Eala ginaalJ il-ruiir by radio. 
.J, .J I.S V" -
.l. ~i rasyuut Iprop oJ Assiut, a city and province in 
Upper Egypt. 
~~i rasyuu[i ladj *1 pertaining to Assiut.lltat;m' 
rasyuu[i set of furniture consisting of a sofa and chairs, 
having wooden frames and arms and separate cushions 
for seats and backs. 
,.;. - see ,.;. I.S -: reef 
I t 1 ,.;.. see t t ,.;.: rufaaca 
2 t 1 ,.;.. see I t I.S ,.;.: rifaaEa, rafaaEa 
.J 1,,:-,";'-
.J~! rijbaar <Copt>: rijbaar Eala- expression of dis-
dain, as in rijbaar Ealeena min kalam-hum !iina what 
does it matter to us if they gossip about us! 
JJ .:J ,.;. _ 
.!.l;;.:. i raftik <perh T hB4tek> In pI rafaatikl underarm 
gusset. 
~i raftiik In pI rafatiikl = raftik. 
• 
I 
I 
• 
.J !{". see a so 
.J .J IJ" 
.r I raffar Ivil I to endorse officially, give a signed 
ruling (on an official or commercial document). raffar 
Ealee bil-l:Ji!; he gave it a 'no action' endorsement. 2 to 
gesture, usually with the hand. kaanit l:Ja-tinzil maEaaya 
loola raffar laha tt;uullar she would have come down 
with me had it not been for his motioning to her (secret-
ly) to refuse. -vn tarfiir; ava miraffar. 
i;":' h ta r.Jiira In pI -aatll signed endorsement (on an 
official or commercial document). 2 visa. tar.Jiirit 
duxuul entry visa. 
.,:.;. muraffir In pI -aatl pointer, indicator. muraffir 
is-surEa the speedometer needle. 
":'hl ritraffar lvil (impersonal) passive of raffar. 
ril-gawaab itraffar Ealee the letter was given a signed 
ruling. -iva mitraffar. 
":-'.J";'-
.... .Jl.:.t! rifarb <Fr ~charpe> In pI -aatl woman's scarf. 
24 
I.S [..J ,.;.. see 1.J.J";': rafargi, rifargi 
~~. 
..,:.! riffl linterjl exclamation offriendly admiration == 
wow! my! 2 ril-riff exclamation of wonder, used 
hypothetically == whatever would have happened? 
wil-riff' bat;a law w~lit w-ana naayim whatever would 
have happened, then, if she'd arrived while I was 
asleep? 
.J oJ ,.;. • 
pi raffar IvtI {slang} to relieve (s.o.) of (all) money. 
raffart iz-zibuun I took the customer to the cleaner's. 
-also t;affar. -vn raffara; ava/pva miraffar. 
phi rirtaffar lvil passive of raffar. -iva mitraffar. 
":-,,,:-,JJ,.;._ 
~i rufkubba <It scopa> loJ {naut} broom, mop. 
-also fukubba. 
- .J JJ ,.;. • 
40~! rifkarma <Gr skarmos> In pI -aatl {naut} 
tholepin. -also fikarma . 
.J, .J JJ ,.;. _ 
~ 
~i rafkuu{a (also riskuuta) <It scotta> In pI -aatl 
{naut} sheet (of a sail). 
J ,.;. • 
.:,')I.:.i raflaan ladj *1 bankrupt. 
~i raffill/vtl to leave (s.o.) penniless, clean out. 
ril-l:Jaraami raffil il-beet min kull-u the thief stripped 
the house bare. 2/vil to run out (of money, possessions 
etc.). ma xala~ raffil min kull' fluus-u he's completely 
cleaned out. -vn ta r.Jiil; ava/pva miraffil. 
~t.1 ritraffillvil to become destitute. ritraffilt'min 
ku1l 8 l:Jaaga I've got nothing left to my name. -ava 
mitraffil. 
JIJ";'. 
J')I.:.! riflaal <Copt> linterjl {Chr} let us pray! (said 
by the priest to the congregation). -also rifliil. 
J I.S J ,.;. • 
JJ.:.! rifliil <Copt> linterjl {Chr} let us pray! (said by 
the priest to the congregation). -also riflaal. 
- t r ,.;.. see ,.;. I.S .: rifmiEna 
I I.S ,.;. _ 
~! riJi particle used I in listing a series. Eandu 

mimma gamiil-u riJi gibna w- riJi zatuun wi- riJi sardiin 
ma-tliddi-j he has something of everything -cheese, 
olives, sardines, and what have you. 2 repeated, as a set 
phrase to introduce a riddle. riJi riJi xarab-ha w-miJi = 
guess who? guess who? he ruined it and left (i.e., guess 
who did that). 3 with the meaning 'something' in the 
rhyme: xuf/ b- riJi tibqa riJi - xuf/ ba/aaf tibqa wa/aa-j 
enter with something and you'll be something, enter 
with nothing and you'll be nothing. 
% ~..;. 
~.:) rufiyya <Gr eukh2> In pI rawaafil [Chr) prayer, 
intercession. rUfiyyit i1-marqa prayer for the sick. 
~ ~..; 0 
;~i rafiida In! cloth grip on a carding bow. 
~ i,.;# 0 
~i r~i~ In pI r~~1 flowerpot. 
I .l. ~ 
0 see I.l. IJ" • : rUS{a 
Jy.l.i,.;#O 
J,l:....<.! 
r~{ablln pI -aatl stable. 
r';'.l.i,.;#O 
~i r~{Ung <T ustun(> In pI -aatl draughtsman's 
case of drawing instruments. -also ristung. 
"';~O 
......... i r~af <Copt> In! caper bush, caper root. 
I J i,.;# 0 
J.....i 
r~lln pI r~uu/l 1 origin, source. da min r~/i 
yunaani it's of Greek origin. kaan r~/-u bal.Jl.Jaar he 
was a sailor originally. riI-l:Jikaaya di laha r~uul min 
rayyaam i1-ringiliiz this business goes back to the days 
of the British." kaddaab fi- r~/i wiJf-u a barefaced liar. 
2 lineage, breeding, stock, pedigree. landu r~1 he's a 
decent sort. lamal bi- r~/-u he acted according to the 
dictates of his breeding. r~/-ak fill-ak you are what 
you do. qa/-Ii lan r~/-u w-f~/-u he told me all about 
himself. IIma-luu-j r~1 he doesn't know how to behave. 
3a original ~opy. riktib-Ii r~/i w-~urteen type me an 
original and two copies. r~uul maktuuba bil-yadd 
hand written original(s). 3b [phot) negative. - /conjl 
4 the fact is that, because. ma-yilraf-/ yilmill.Jaaga 
r~/-u ¥abi he can't do anything because he's stupid. 
r~/-a-ha ¥eer i1-banaat dool the fact is that she's not like 
25 
those girls. r~/-u-hum lamliin gidlaan the fact is that 
they're 
just 
acting 
tough. 
-
r~uul Ipl 
n! 
Sa foundations, fundamentals. II riI-r~uul riI-rarbala 
the four foundations of Muslim jurisprudence. 
5b rules. r~uul i1-lilb the rules of the game. 5c code of 
social conduct, correct behaviour. kuU a l.Jaaga bil-
r~uul there's a proper way to do everything. kaan 
i1- r~uul i1-waal.Jid yix/~ min wal:Jda zayy i di bi{-{alaaq 
the proper thing would have been to get rid of such a 
woman by divorce. II ribn i1-r~uul one of good breed-
ing. 6 [finan) assets. r~uul wi-x~uum assets and liabi-
lities. 7 [hort) stock. 
lIla/a r~/-u or la/a r~uul-u as it really should be, as in 
kufari la/a r~/-u (or la/a r~uul-u) properly made 
kushari, kushari the way it ought to be done. - r~/an 
ladvl 
(1) originally, 
initially. 
(2) basically, 
fun-
damentally. -min r~/-u ladvl categorically (not), abso-
lutely (not). ma-juft-uu-j min r~/-u I have not seen 
him at all. -fil- r~lladvl originally. 
J...i r~1i ladj *1 1 original. fihaadit i1-milaad i1-
r~liyya the original birth certificate. 2 authentic, 
genuine. gild i r~1i genuine leather. ~aluun mudhab 
mil- r~1i a genuine gilt sitting-room suite. II r~1i ya gaaz 
[vendor's cry) paraffin free of impurities! 
J".....i r~uuli ladjl correct, proper. 'raagil r~uuli an 
upright man. 
~".....i r~ulgi In pI -yyal [derog slang) one who con-
forms with established patterns of social conduct. 
;JL.i r~aala Inl genuineness, authenticity. r~aalit 
i1-fannaan fi-ju¥l-u the artist's genuineness in his work. 
J.,....i 
r~ii1ladj pI r~alal 1 of good stock, well-bred, 
well-born. 
l.J~aan r~iil a pure-bred stallion. xud 
i1-r~ii1a wi-law kaanit la/-l.J~iira [prov) marry a well-
born woman no matter how poor she may be. 
2 genuine, authentic. 
~,;.. mir~~alladj "I = r~iil. 
~hl ritr~~al Ivil to take root. riI-fikra tr~~alit fi-
dmaa¥-i the idea became rooted in my mind. -ava 
mitr~~al, mutar~~iIf. 
J.....LI 
ristar~att I/vtl to remove completely, extir-
pate. laazim nistar~i1 i1-lana~ir i1-haddaama we must 
eliminate destructive elements. ristar~al i1-waram he 
removed the tumour. 2 to select for good origin. 
II ristar~al wi-tgawwiz find yourself someone from a 
good family and marry her. - Ivil3 to become chronic. 
ril-maraq ista r~al fii the disease became chronic in him. 
rik-kizb istar~al fii he became a chronic liar. -vn 
ristir~aal; ava 
mistar~i1, 
mistar~al, mustar~i1; pva 
mustar~al. 

2J~_ 
J..oi rtllallcoll nJ python(s). 
a..i rtllala lunit n, Pol -aatl a python. 
~~~-
..,...:L..i rtlla~ <Fr> In pi -aatl essence, concentrate. 
rtlla~' yasmiin jasmine essence. 
- ~ 
~ ~ 
- see - "'" ~ "'" _: rtlla~eer 
clu!"-
'->1..41 rat/aal.JaJ [women] exclamation of concern or 
mild disapproval. ya di l-rat/aal.Ja what a sorry state of 
affairs! 
~Jv"" 
lJ.;i rat/alya <Adalia (in Turkey» 
InJ common 
lemon (as distinct from the Egyptian lemon). 
~JI..J., .. see ~J..J., .. : ritaali 
.J..J., .. 
.)111 ritaart In pi -aatll tyre. ritaraat tiyublis tubeless 
tyres. 2a frame. ritaar mudhab gilt frame. 2b frame-
work, setting. ril-masrala laazim titfihim fi-ritar-ha i-
ial.Jiil.J the question must be viewed in its proper setting. 
ji raaar Ivtl[arch] to frame, make a border. raaaru 
1-l.Jetaan they framed the walls with a border. -vn ta rtiir; 
avalpva miraaar. 
ji;1 ritraaar Ivi/[arch] to be framed. - iva mitraaar. 
-'":-'.J..J., .. 
~)oi ratrabanJ In pi -aatl [coarse] large penis, 
chopper. 
~.J.J..J.,,, 
':'J)oi ratruun Inl natron. -also natruun. 
~J)oi ratruuna Ipl -aatl unit noun of ratruun. 
I"",J..J.,,, 
..,...u.i ratlas 1 In pi rataalisl atlas. 
~i ratiasi ladjl Atlantic. ril-mul.Jiit ril-ratlasi the 
Atlantic Ocean. ril-l.Jilf il-ratlasi N.A.T.O. 
2"",J..J.,,, 
..,...u.i ratlas2 InJ satin. 
26 
~J..J.,,, 
lj~1 ritalya Iprop nJ Italy·lIl.Jarb' ritalya percussion 
caps. 
J~1 ritaali l/adjl Italian. 2/n *1 an Italian. 
JI".ll. talyaani, talyaani Ipl talyaan, talyaan, talayna, 
talayna/l ladjl Italian. - InJ 2 an Italian. 3 Ino pI/ the 
Italian language. 
~ t" see ~.J t: ralid 
~~jt .. 
':'jI'-! rilzinn lconjl as if. xallii-na nit/i n-nuur 
rilzinnina mijmawgudiin let's switch off the light, as if 
we were not in. rijtayali kwayyis rilzinni mawguud 
work (as) well as if I were here. 
tJ.Jt" 
e.r i raluuqal onomatopoeia for the sound of an old 
car-horn.larabiyya mhakkala raluuqal yalnixurda a 
worn out 'honk-honk' car, that's to say a wreck . 
It-
1&.1 raYa, raya <T aga> In pi -waat, -waatl[obsol] title 
of palace eunuchs and other high ranking civil and 
military officials of the Ottoman empire. II rayyaam 
il-rayawaat (the days of the Turks and Mamelukes) '" 
the days of the tyranny. 
"'" It" see I t I ~ : iayaquul rayaasi 
"'" ..J., "'" t -
..,J....&.i rayus{US InJ August. 
-~rt .. 
..r,:....~! riyumeenus <Or hegoumenos> InJ [Chr] 
hegumen. -also hiyumeenus. 
-"",~~" 
~I 
rUYnus[is <Or anagn6stes> In "I [Chr] read-
er of lessons during a service. 
-.Jt J .. 
\.e.;-.)~! rifxaristiya <Or eukharistia> Inl [Chr] 
eucharist. 
-':".JJ .. 
i.r-i)i rufirtiira <perh Fr> In pi -aatl[musJ overture . 

J.J...i. 
~)! ra/riqya. ri/riqya Iprop nJ Africa. 
~)! ra/riiqi. ri/riiqi ladj *1 African. 
[~1...i. see also [~.J...i 
rf)1 • ra/rang Ipl nJ (western) foreigners. westerners. 
~)I ra/rangi 
ladjl 
European, 
western-type. 
magalia /rangiyya a western magazine. II rit-tariix il-
ra/rangi the Gregorian system of dating. -kabineeh 
ra/rangi pedestal lavatory . -leef ra/rangi white bread 
made in stick-loaves about 30 cm. long. -/urn a/rangi 
bakery where leef ra/rangi, cakes and biscuits are 
made and sold. -gallabiyya/rangi a men's galabiya with 
turn-down collar and button-up cuffs. -/adverbiallyl da 
laabis ra/rangi he is dressed in western clothes. 
(J~.J...i.) 
JJ)) ru/arool l <Engl> Inl overhaul (of a vehicle, 
piece of equipment etc.) 
JJ)Ji ru/arool1 <Engl> In pl-aatl overall. 
j..s.J...i. 
.i!)i ra/riiz In pi ra/ariizl <prob Fr> I frieze. 
2 decorated edging (on furniture). 
..;..V"...i • 
.;:....j) ru/sit <Engl> Inl {print} offset. 
.)..sV"...i. 
~ w) ru/saayid <Engl> ladj invarl {soccer} off-side. 
t ...i. see ..s t ...i: ra/la 
~t...i • 
,j\;...;wi rafranistaan. 
ra/ranistaan 
Iprop 
nJ 
Afghanistan. 
Jwi ra/raani. rafraani I ladjl Afghan. 2 In *1 an 
Afghan. 
...i...i • 
ji ruff linterjl I exclamation of exasperation. ru/t 
min di-I-liifa how awful life is! 2 {coarse} one of the 
sounds of pleasure made by a woman during sexual 
intercourse. 
jl riff linterj! exclamation of disgust (especially at a 
bad smell). riff" lar-riifJa di what a disgusting smell! 
~h ritra/fi/lvil to grumble, express anger, displea-
sure or disgust. - vn ta raffuJf; ava mitra/fifo 
27 
J...i • 
~ i ru/uq 1 In pi ra/aaqll horizon. ra/aaq biliida dis-
tant horizons. 2 range of vision. II raagil waasil il-ru/uq 
a tolerant (broad-minded) man. - raxuu ru/uq-u 
dayyatj his brother is narrow-minded. 
~i ru/uqi, ru/qiT ladjl horizontal. 
J~i raffaaq1 In *1 swindler. 
..;..1.!l...i • 
.,;-\5""; i ravukaatu (also ravukaadu I) <It avvocato> In 
pi ravukatiyya. ravukadiyyal lawyer, advocate. - also 
rabukaatu. rabukaadu. 
I.) l.!l ...i. 
J.)\5".,;i ravukaadu 1 <Sp avocado> Icoll nl avocado 
tree(s). avocado pear(s). - also rabukaadu. 
~ lA J.)\5" .,; i ravukaduhaaya In pi -aatl an avocado pear. 
- also rabukaduhaaya. 
1 .) I .!l ...i. see ..;.. 1 .!l ...i .: ravukaadu 1 
-..sr...i· 
h.,;i ravumiitar <Engl A. V.D. meter> multimeter. 
-.)~...i • 
..socii ra/andi <T e/endi> In pi -yya. ra/andiyyaatl 
I Egyptian man in western clothes. 2 title of. and form 
of address or reference to. an Egyptian man from the 
middle class. rafaad ra/andi ... Mr. Rashad. ya-/andi 
Sir! ya ra/andi or ya ra/andii-na a pompous and conde-
scending form of the preceding. ril- ra/andi btaar;-i my 
husband. II ra/andii-na title of the former Khedives of 
Egypt. 3 title of. and form of address or reference to, a 
school-teacher. 
rocii ra/andim <T e/endim> I/n/la form of address 
to a middle-class Egyptian of either sex. Ib {mil} form 
ofaddress to a superior officer. 2 interrogative interjec-
tion requesting the repetition of something not proper-
ly heard ... excuse me? I beg your pardon? 
V"oJ...i. 
..,.;lii ravans <Fr avance> Inl I {elec} overcharging. 
2 {sport} lead, head start (with which a weaker player is 
allowed to begin). Iik/i-kull i geem xamas nUtja( ravans 
you can begin each game with five points' lead. 
jlS...i· 
.r.t i rafiiz In pi ra/aayizl bonding clip. 

IJ" 41 ..; -
~",i rUfiist <Fr office> In pi -aatl pantry, servants' 
room. 
~4S";-
~i rafiif <Fr affiche> In pi -aatl poster. 
~4S";. 
oJ~i rafyuun In! opium. 
~~i rafyuuna In! I/pl -aatl unit noun of rafyuun. 
II ribn' rafyuuna an opium addict. - ril-rafyuuna (illit 
lalee he became very ratty. 2 addiction, susceptibility. 
ril-babr' rafyuuna landi the sea is an addiction of 
mine. 
~~i rafyungi In pl-yyal opium addict. 
~i rafyin Ivil I to take opium. 2 to fall under the 
influence of opium. -vn rafyana; ava mirafyin. 
'41";-
~! rifeeh <Fr elfet> In pi -aat/l[cin) effect. 2 side 
(in billiards). riddii-ha rifeehfimaal put left side on it. 
~ J - see ~ J~: muraqqat 
~c.J.· 
oj I""; I ruqbuwaant In pi -aatl daisy. 
rJJ-
~! riqliim t In pi raqaliiml region. 
~! riqliimit ladjl regional. 
~~I ritraqlimt Ivil to become acclimatized. -vn 
taraqlum; ava mitraqlim. 
r~ ~ J. 
r,,:.ii ruqnuum <Syr> In pi raqaniiml [Chr} anyone 
of the Persons of the Trinity. 
~~ J-
~."At! riquuna <Gr eik6n> In pi -aatl [Chr} I icon. 
2 religious medal. -also t;uuna. 
..; I ~.!l. 
...;\::S"i ruktaaf <Fr> In pi -aatl[mus} octave. 
- ~~.!l. 
J. .,,:!i ruktoobar In! October. 
~4S~.!l. 
~i ruktiin <Engl> Inl [chem} octane. 
28 
I ~ .!l .. 
;"lS"i rakaada In! astonishment, dismayed incredulity. 
ramma rakaada laleek what a most unreasonable per-
son you are! -/adverbiallyl ril-rakaada amazingly and 
infuriatingly, as in ril-rakaada rinnaha bi-tbaawil tiriJ-
ni the fantastic thing is that she's trying to make me 
angry, ril-rakaada rinnu rayyar rary-u fagra the in-
furiating thing is that he suddenly changed his mind. 
• bil-rakaada ladvl out of spite, contrarily. mif b-a/rab 
bil-rakaada fiik I am not going to drink just to spite 
you. See further unaer 
~,.;.!l 
2 ~.!l. 
..I$i rakiid I ladjl certain, established. da xabar rakiid 
this is certain knowledge. 2 ladvl for sure, undoubted-
ly. rakiid ba-yiksabu I-barb there's no doubt that they 
will win the war. 
ii rakkidl/vtltoverify. ranabaalitwaabidyirakkid 
lina l-xabar-da I've just sent off someone to have this 
piece of "news checked. 2 Ivil to be emphatic. 
rakkidt-i-Iu rinni b-at;uul il-bat;t; I assured him that 
I was telling the truth. rakkidt· lalee ybarrar il-
istimaraat I impressed on him that he should fill in the 
forms. -vn tarkiid; ava mirakkid; pva murakkad. 
i~1 ritrakkid Ivill to be verified. 2 to be certain, be 
in no doubt. rana mitrakkid min kida I am certain of 
that.laazim nitrakkid minnu (1) we must be sure about 
him. (2) we must make sure by asking him. -vn 
tarakkudt; ava mutarakkid; ava/iva mitrakkid. 
iLl ristirakkidJ Ivil to be quite sure. la81.im 
rastirakkid min innaha kwayyisa I must be certain it is 
O.K. -ava mistirakkid. 
r4S~.!l· 
~"lS"i rakadiimit <perh Fr> ladj ·1 academic. 
dirasaat 
rakadimiyya 
academic 
studies. 
raagil 
rakadiimi an academic, a scholar. 
.J .!l • 
; ji rukra In pi rukar, rukraatl knob or handle (parti-
cularly of a door or window). IIbi-ylammae rukar 
(1) he's an eavesdropper. (2) he's a toady. 
- "="'.J.!l • 
.:.~",ji rakrubaat <perh Fr acrobatie> In! acroba-
tics. laalib il-rakrubaat acrobat. 
J~",ji rakrubaati ladj ·1 acrobatic. 
(-~.J.!l.) 
.;.I"ji rakurdaa/ <Fr accordage> In! tuning (of a 
piano). 

.)!J,;I rakurdeer 
<Fr 
accordeur> 
In 
pI -aatl 
piano-tuner. 
,,~J,;i rakurdiyoon <Fr accord~on> In pI -aatl 
accordion. 
r~J.4J· 
\,tj'i rikziima, rakziima <Engl> In! eczema. 
-~J .4J. 
,,~jl5) rukazyoon 
<Fr occasion> 
In 
pI -aat, 
rukazyonahaatl sale (at reduced prices). 
(V".4J.) 
voSi rales <Fr axe> In pI -aatl axle. 
voS! riles <perh Eng» Ifem n, pI -aatll the letter X. 
2 (euphemJ menses. - Imasc n! 3 express (train). -
ladj invar/4 quick,fast.-/adverbiallyl rawwab lal-beet 
riles he went home fast. 
-":,,V".4J. 
~..-5'! rilesibrees <Eng» In pI -aatl express (train). 
-[V" • .4J. 
~I rulesijiin <Fr oxygene> In! oxygen.llmayyit 
rulesijiin aqueous solution of hydrogen peroxide. 
~V".4J. 
~i rulesiid <Fr> In pI rakasiidl oxide. 
~J-Si rulesideeh <Fr oxyd~> ladj invarl oxydized. 
J-Si ralesid IvtI to oxydize. IImuxx-i mralesid my 
brain's a bit rusty. -vn ralesada; ava/pva miralesid. 
J-Shl ritralesid lvil to become oxydized. -vn taralesud t; 
Iva mitralesid. 
.JV".4J. 
IrS! rilesiraJ <perh It extra> ladj invarl first-class. 
ba((iix rilesira excellent water-melons. 
-V"V".4J. 
;I.,.....si ralesiswaar, rilesiswaar <Fr accessoires> lcoll 
n, pI -aatll spare part(s). 2 prop(s) (in theatre etc.). 
3 accessory or accessories (in fashion). 
(-JV".4J.) 
ftOl-S'i ralesiliteer or rilesiliteer <Fr acc~l~rateur> In 
pI -aatl accelerator. 
",,&e!-S! rilesililoon <perh Fr> In pI -aatl xylophone. 
~V".4J. 
,.si rulesu, rilesu <Gr elesb> linterjl {jocJ out with 
you! run along! 
29 
~V".4J. 
v-S'i rulesi <perh Engl> ladjl oxy-acetylene. 
.J~V".4J • 
..-5'( rulesiir, riksiir In pI rakasiirl elixir. rulesiir il-
lJayaah the elixir of life. 
-~V".4J. 
.r~i ralesiyuus <Gr alesios worthy> {ChrJ 
I/interjl call repeated three times by Coptic congrega-
tions. 2 In! action of making such a threefold call. 
-
~~.4J. 
rl~! ri~idaam <poss Fr contre- accidents> In pI 
-aatl bumper, fender. 
.J ~.4J .4J • 
.Jji rakkoor <Fr accord> In pI -aatl {musJ harmony. 
J.4J-
JS'i .JS' kal, rakal (yaakul) Ivtl I to eat, consume. 
nils-i raakul jilaati ktiir I feel like eating a lot of ice 
cream. II ril-larabiyya di b-taakul banziin this car just 
eats up petrol. -kul leeldon't make trouble for your-
self! - rana kalt; mseaa leel wi-mallJ I have broken 
bread with him, a bond exists between us. -kal fi-roolJ-
u to simmer (with pent-up anger etc.). -kallalJm(-u) to 
exploit (s.o.). -kal muxx(-u) to take (s.o.) in, persuade 
(s.o.) against his better judgement. - rin-naas kalit wi/I-
u he was made to feel small. -kal bi-lat;l-i lJalaawa he 
sweet-talked me (into s.th.). -bi-yakul-ha walla he is 
unscrupulous. - ril-bint a landuku kuluu-ha you've got 
the girl; to hell with you and her! -kal il-bint {coarse 
slangJ he had the girl. -ba-yaakul bitta min ... it is very 
becoming to, as in ril-Iustaan lJa-yaakul bitta minnaha 
the dress suits her extremely well. 2 to eat away, wear 
down, corrode. ril-bagar bi-yaakul il-mayya btaseit il-
muus the whetstone wears down the edge of the razor. 
ril-makwa kalit il-kumm the iron scorched the sleeve. 
ril-t;ami~ kal-u l-larat; the shirt was rotted with sweat. 
ril-baruuma b-taakul ~-~aag rust is corroding the iron 
sheeting. 38 to appropriate. bi-yaakul ramwaal il-
yataama he takes the orphans' money.llbi-yaakul maal 
in-nabi == he'd sell his own grandmother. -kal il-gaww 
he stole the limelight. -kal lat;l-a-ha he stole her 
reason. 3b to take (a piece, in a game). kal-lilaras he 
took one of my knights. 4 to cause itching or irritation 
in. gism-i b-yakul-ni min mayyit il-babr my body is 
itching from the sea-water. II t;alb-(u) kal-(u) to be wor-

ried, as in tjalb-a-ha b-yakul-ha lala-bn-a-ha she's wor-
ried sick about her son. - riid-(u) kalit-(u) lala to itch to 
get one's hands on, as in !'id-ha b-takul-ha lalee she's 
itching to hit him, !'iid-u b-takl-u lal-filuus he's itching 
to get his hands on the money. 5 to be taken in by. 
ma-b-akul-f' min furl il-bulitiika btaeit-kum I won't 
swallow any of your cant. 6 to do (s.o.) down, put one 
over on (s.o.). kal-nifil-filuus he did me down over the 
money. 7 to sustain (a blow etc.). kallaltja he received 
a hiding. kal matjlab he had a dirty trick played on him. 
8 to subject (s.o.) to. kalit-u tjalameen she gave him a 
slapping. - Ivii 9 to take bribes. -vn !'akl. !'akalaan; 
ava waakil; pva ma!'kuul. 
11 kallala to swindle (s.o.) out of. kallalayya gneeh he 
swindled me out of a pound. 
JS'i !'akl loJ I/vnl II !'akla leef earning one's daily 
bread, livelihood. - bitaae !'aklone who accepts bribes. 
2 food. II !'akl' w-marla w-tjillit ~anla == a life of ease, 
the life of. Riley. 3 cards (in any card game) that can be 
picked up. 
J.lS'i !'akla In pi -aatl a meal. 
.:,'%i !'akalaan Icoll oJ bedbug(s). 
~'%i !'akalaana lunit n, pi -aatl a bedbug. 
..:..")'}'t. ma!,kulaat Ipl nl foodstuffs. 
#i !'akalti ladj pi -yyal unscrupulous. 
JS'..,i !'awkalleV morelmost delicious or palatable. 
J~i !'akkaal In pi !'akkaliin, !'akkaalal I gourmet. 
II taab wi-stawa w-talab il-!'akkaal it has ripened and 
calls for the eaters! (fruit vendor's cry). 2 one who takes 
bribes. 
Jii !'akkiil In pi !'akkiilal one who enjoys eating, 
gourmand. 
j.., .ji !'akkil 
or 
wakkil J 
Ivtl 
I to 
feed. 
b-a !'akkil-hum !'aysan yaaga I feed them the best there 
is. 2 to subject (s.o.) to. !'akkilt-u xazuutj I played a 
trick on him. 3 to bribe. !'akkilt-u lafaan yitallal il-
waraqa 1 bribed him to issue the document. 4 to take (a 
card) with a similar one (in card games). -vn ta!,kiil; ava 
mi!'akkil, miwakkil. 
jhl I'itl'akkil = I'itwakkil J. - iva mitl'akkil. 
j -"I I'itwakkil J 
Ivii 
passive 
of wakkil J. 
- iva 
mitwakkil. 
JS'I I'aakil/vtl to share food with. qalad yil'akil-ha 
wi-ykallim-ha li-raayit ma w~lu m~r he kept her com-
pany with food and conversation until they reached 
Cairo. -vn mil'akla; ava mil'aakil. 
JS'lol I'itl'aakil/vii I to corrode, wear away. 2 to be 
partnered in eating. II raagil ma-yitI'akil-fa man with no 
table 
manners. 
-vn 
ta I'aakulf ; 
iva 
mitl'aakil, 
muta I'aakilf . 
30 
. 
JS'\;I I'ittaakil/vii I to be eaten, be consumed. 2 to be 
eaten away, be worn down, be corroded. 3a to be 
appropriated. 3b to be taken (of a piece, in a game). 
4 to be fooled, be taken in. -iva mittaakil. 
- J J.£I. 
~,r-lS'! I'ikliriiki <Gr klerikos> I/adj ·1 [Chr} per-
taining to the priesthood, clerical. kulliyya !'iklirikiyya 
theological seminary. 2 In ·1 student in or graduate of a 
theological seminary. 
-~ J.£I. 
~i I'aklafeeh <perh Fr> In pi -aatl [print} cliche. 
-ISJ.£I· 
..,.,r-lS'! I'ikliirus <Gr kMros> lcoll nl [Chr} clergy. 
('.£1-
rS'i I'akam Ipartl exclamation of wonder == how much! 
how many! wi- I'akam min if-fitiima di how much ofthis 
sort of name-calling (I have to put up with)! 
.;,.;,('.£1. 
.:,..s! I'ikminn Iconjl because, since. bi-yriir minni 
I'ikminni ngiyt he's jealous of me because 1 passed (the 
exam). I'ana b-asl'allalee I'ikminnu ma-rgil-f il-beet 
1 am asking about him because he hasn't come home. 
.;,.;,.tl. 
.;,s-i I'akinn Iconjl as if, as though. !'akinnu mif hina as 
though he weren't here. 
.:;.;s-i I'akinnit- Iconj, with pron suffl as if, as though. 
lamal I'akinnitu ma-smil-fhe pretended that he didn't 
hear. 
J \., .tl. 
1S)},i I'akwaari: gild' I'akwaari buffalo hide. 
"r" \ IS.£I· 
..,..\$! I'ikyaab Inl reed mats. 
J-
JI ril-/def art; total assimilation of I to foil 'sun letters', 
as well as usu g and k; usu elision of hamza in contextl 
the. 

IJ. 
J! !'ila Iprep; w pron suff !'ilee- (1st sing !'ilayya)1 I to, 
towards. !'in-naas tun;ur !'ilee bi-ceen il-il:Jtiraam the 
people regard him with respect. ljalb-i mayyaal !'ileek 
my heart is attracted to you. II wi-maa !'ila zaalik and the 
like, as in !,ir-rafwa wil-fasaad wi-maa !'ila zaalik brib-
ery, corruption and the like. 2i to, until. !'ila I-c~r 
il-l:Jadiis until the modern period. naljl il-Ioon !'ila 1-
ljumaafthe transference of the colour to the cloth. min 
... !'ila ... from ... to ... , as in laxx~ mill ~afJJit tamanya 
!'ila cafara summarize pages eight to ten, min sitta !'ila 
xamastaafar fil-miyya from six to fifteen percent. 
II !,itwaffa !'ila ral:Jmit illaah he died (and went) to (rest 
in) God's mercy. - !'il-!,amri !'ileek ya rabb I submit to 
you, 0 God. 
11 !'ila !'axr-u et cetera. 
[IJ. 
~ "ii !'alaag <T alaca> Inl thick glossy striped material 
made of cotton and silk. 
~ "ii !'alaaga In pi -aatl I unit noun of !'alaag. 2 kaftan 
made of !'alaag. - Ino pll 3 elegance, chic.laabis !'aaxir 
!'alaaga very well dressed. gaww i !'aaxir !'alaaga a very 
chic atmosphere. 
.sIJ. 
..s"ii !'alaay <T alay> [mil] regiment. !'amiiralaay, 
miralaLlY see I Jr' 
y J. 
Ji !'allib Ivtl to incite. !'allib calayya n-naas he set 
people against me. -vn ta!,liib; ava mi!'allib. 
-..,..yJ. 
,;....~i !'alabastar Inl alabaster. 
";>i.JyJ. 
;4i .~i !'alabantja <perh T alabanda> Inl 
smooth talk, bravado. camal calee !'alabanqa he put 
one over on him. bitaac !'alabanqa a glib fellow. 
r" y J. 
p,Ji !'albuum <Engl> In pi -aatl album. !'albuum 
~uwar photograph album. 
..::.. J. 
.Ji !'allit Ivil to make fun, laugh (at s.o.). ballal ti!'allit 
calee stop making fun of him. -vn taWit; ava mi!'allit. 
See further under ..::.. J • r 
31 
.::.ihl !,it!'allit Ivil I = !'allit. 2 (impersonal) passive of 
!'allit. !'ana mifmin illi b-yit!'allit caleehum I am not the 
type to be laughed at. -avaliva mit !'allit. 
[ J. see [I J • : !'alaag, !'alaaga 
.s [J. 
4."1,,i !'awlugiyya, !'ulugiyya <Gr eulogia>: IUljmit 
il-!'ulugiyya [Chr] blessed bread. 
..,.. J • 
..,Ji !'allis Ivil to behave or speak disparagingly. 
yil:Jibb' y!'allis cala n-naas he likes to tell disparaging 
tales about people. -vn ta!,/iis; ava mi!'allis. see further 
under ..,.. J • r 
~hl !'it!'allis Ivil I = !'allis. 2 to be made fun of, be 
disparaged. -ava/iva mit!'allis . 
..,..l'G1 !,it!'aalis = !'it!'allis. -ava/iva mit!'aalis. 
j, ..,.. J • 
~i !'alista <perh T aleste> ladi invarl excellent, 
tip-top. fuyli !'alista fine work. raagil !'alista an excel-
lent man. !'il-!'akl istawa w-balja !'alista the food was 
cooked to perfection. 
I ..; J. see also I";.J J and I"; J.J 
....iIi !'ilif(a), !'alaf(a) Ivtl to get used to, be on intimate 
terms with. kull i waal:Jid bi-yi!'laf illi zayyu everyone 
likes his own kind. -vn !'ilf, !'ul!. !'ulfa; ava !'aalif; pva 
ma!'luuf. 
wi !'ulfa Inl intimacy. benhum !'ulfa they're intimate. 
"';."Ii !'aluuf ladi *1 intimate, sociable. 
..A"Ji !'aliif I ladil tame. 2 In pi !'ullaafl sweetheart, 
darling. 
..ii !'alliF Ivt/ I to form. !'allifil-wizaara tal:Jt' ryast-u 
he made up the cabinet under his leadership. 2a to 
write. huwwa bi-y!'alliffil-iqt~aad he writes on econo-
mics. !'il-waal:Jid laazim yi!'allif-Iu ktaab yitraljlja bii one 
has to write a book that will get one promoted. 2b to 
compose (lyrics, music etc.). 3 to concoct, make up. 
!'allif-Iu !'ayyi sabab make up any old reason for him! 
-v!l ta !'liif; ava mi !'allif. 
....iI;- mu!'allif In *1 I author. 2 composer. 
....iI,;. mu !'allafT In pi -aatl I literary work. 2 musical 
composition . 
..ihl !'it!'allif Ivil passive of !'allif. -iva mit!'allif. 
....iI'G1 !,it!'aalifT Ivil to become good friends, become 
intimate. fil-mucaskar if-fubbaan bi-yit!'alfu w-yicrafu 
bacq at camp the young people become friends and get 
to know one another. -vn ta!'aaluf; ava mit'laalif. 

2"'; J • 
...Ali ralf I Inum, pi ralaaJ! a thousand. ralt' w-
lullumiyya one thousand three hundred. xamasl alaaf 
five thousand. 2 In pi ralaat. ruluuf, pi of abundance 
ralafaall (unit of a) thousand. ralaaf(or ruluuf) in-naas 
thousands of people. rubr:umiyya mil- ralffour hundred 
in a thousand. II ralt' waraaha ruluuf"" money breeds 
money. 3 riI-ralf ladj invarl the thousandth . 
..;.Ii ralft ladj *1 millennia!. riI-r:iid iI-ralft the millen-
nial anniversary. 
~ 
i ralfiyya In pi -aall I poem of a thousand distiches. 
2 (also ralfawiyya) prayer string of ninety-nine beads . 
.sJwi ralfaawi ladjl millenia!. 
~;.Ji ralfawiyya I In pi -aall I (also ralfiyya) prayer-
string of ninety-nine beads. 2 thousandfold recitation 
of the falba (q.v.) 
...Al i ralif Ifem nl I first letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
riI- ralif bih the alphabet. II zayy iI- ralif orderly, like 
clockwork. - ri/- ralif ligllrr iI-bih one thing leads to 
another. -Ia yieraf il- ralif min iI-madna (or min kuuz 
id-dura) he's illiterate. 2 [chemJ symbol for oxygen . 
..Ji ra/liF Ivil to reach a thousand. bi-yilqaal 'linn 
is-sikooyafagara mir:ammara bi-Irallifit is said that the 
sequoia is a tree that lives a thousand years! - vn la rliif; 
av~ mi rallif. 
...a:.. mirallif ladj *1 extremely aged, as old as 
Methuselah. 
J"'; j. 
;wi ralfa <perh T kalfa> In pi -waall monitor (in a 
school class). 
~;.Ji ralfawiyya! Inl rank of monitor, monitorship. 
- J"'; J. 
~.;J i ralafrallka, ralafranka <prob It alia franca> 
I ladj invar! Western-like. r:amliin zayy in-naas iI-
ralafranka they behave like western people. 2 Inl West-
ern style (of behaviour, dress etc.). qulu-Iha Iba{{aljurl 
iI- ralafranka tell her to stop behaving like a westerner 
(or in the western styie). 
IJ".J"';J • 
..,..;;.Ji ralfuns <prop n Alphonse> Icoll nl Alphonse 
mango(es). - also funs. 
- .;I.!l J. 
~J?J I riliktiroon <Engl> In pi -aall electron . 
.)J?Jl riliklirooni lad)1 electronic. 
..:.t;;J?Jl riliklironiyyaal/pl nl electronics. 
32 
- j.!l J. 
0!.)~}J i ralikzandiriin Inl alexandrite . 
~ J. 
Jl rul <Engl L> ladj invarl L-shaped. 
I I J J. 
)01 rilla I I Iprepl except, but. ma-bi-yljibb '-frilla nafs-
u he loves nobody but himself. ma-fii-f balad bi-li~rif 
liI-muwagaf ik-kibiir r:arabiyya rilla riyna we're the 
only country that gives cars to top officials. 2 particle 
signalling 28 a rhetorical question that imputes ingen-
uousness to the previous speaker. rilla mif fahmaa-k 
what do you mean, she doesn't understand you (of 
course she does)? ma~/ayl-u reeh. - rilla reeh 'What is 
his interestT 'Surely you don't have to ask what (that 
is)!' rilla 'lana raayiy feen what do you mt:an, where am 
I going (you know very well)? 2b a sudden and unex-
pected development. rilla yiggawwiz of all things, he 
should go and get married! w-ana qaar:id fil-beel rilla 
wi-[abb' rabuu-ha w- raxuu-ha while I was sitting in the 
house, 10 and behold her father and brother suddenly 
appeared! 
11 rilla wi- Iconjl (1) except that, as in m-amfii-J rilla 
w-mar:aaya munfaax I never go off without a bicycle 
pump. (2) that (in contexts of oaths), as in yilif 
bi-yamiin i[-[alaaq rilla w-yib[ay nafuux iI-yakam he 
swore by an oath of divorce that he would smash the 
referee's head. - rilla riza Iconjl unless, as in mif 
mumkin lirawway rilla riza kaan iI-mudiir miwaaftq 
you can't go home unless the director agrees. -Ijakam 
rilla to insist, as in rumm-u yakamil rilla yruuy i/-
madrasa his mother insisted that he go to schoo!. 
)oi 'lalla linterjl now then, come on. 'lalla qui-Ii reeh 
ra ry-ak ftl-mawc[uur: come! tell me your opinion on this 
subject. 
2 I J J. see t J • : 'lalla. rilla l 
.J I J J. see t J .: rallaawi 
..;.:;.JJ. 
jl rillali feminine relative pronoun: bi-llali raysan 
(by the better way) "" or else! as in [allar: iI-ftluus bi-llali 
raysan hand over the money or else! 
..; ~ J J. see ..; j J J • 
..;~JJ • 
.s.ill rillazi masculine relative pronoun: wi-llazi minnu 

and so on, as in rifjaay wig-gurnaan wi-llazi minnu the 
tea and the paper and so on . 
.:r.11 rillaziina plural relative pronoun: ribn illaziina 
Ifem bint iIlaziina, pi wilaad illaziinal = son of a ... ! 
IS J J. 
JlI filii Irel pron/) who, which, that. 'lis-sill illi sakna 
can·n~ya the woman who lives on the corner. fik-kursJ 
/Ii waaqif calee il-cayyil the chair that the child is stand-
ing on. II fiza kaan ~abb-u rilli huwwa~abb·u mif caawiz 
yisac~'u if his own friend won't help him .... fiza kaan 
i/·mudarrisiin illi humma mudarrisiin ma-yiqdaruu-j 
yigawbu I-imtibaan if the teachers themselves can't 
answer the exam .... 2 whoever, whichever, whatever. 
rilli 'lana cawz-u raruubjayl-u whatever I want. I take. 
fis·sagaayir dool bituuc miin. - ii-iii yifrab 'Whose are 
those cigarettes?' 'They're for whoever wants to 
smoke: filii lu qahri ma-yinqiribji cala ba(n-u [prov] 
"" he who has a backer comes to no harm. IIya-1Ii hina = 
anyone at home? -/elipticallyl filii xad ig-gurnaan 
bitaac·i ygiib-u. - filii. 'Whoever took my paper, give it 
back.' 'Whoever (took it is not I): 3 Iw conj functionl 
seeing that, since. ril-baqlj· calayya filii (awict-ak it's 
my fault for obeying you. 'lana fujkar illi ljaddimt-ak lu 
I should be thanked, since I introduced you to him. 
Ilkamaan illi despite the fact that, as in ljaal bi-yiftim-ni 
kamaan illi xadt-u macaaya just imagine, he's insulting 
me, even though I took him with me! 
~ filii ma expression of incredulity at the non-
appearance or non-occurrence of something. filii ma 
jaayif sawwaalj incredible that there is no driver any-
where. filii ma baddi ga zar-na would you believe it 
. not a single person came to visit us! 
- loS J J. 
l;.,J~i falaliina <perh It anilina> Inl furniture-staining 
fluid. -also fanaliina. 
r J. 
~i falam In pi falaaml pain. II rusbuuc il- ralaam [Chr] 
Holy Week. 
r:;ll faliim ladjl painful. 
~I.;I fitfallim Ivil to experience pain. -ava mitrallim. 
~I faalim Ivtl to hurt, cause pain to. 
fil-garl:J i 
bi-yralim-ni ktiir the wound causes me great pain. 
yaama falim-ha b-kalaam-u l-gaarib how often he hurt 
her feelings with his sharp words. bi-zyaada miralma 
liina b-t~arrufaat-ik il-bayxa you've hurt us enough 
with your stupid behaviour. - vn miralma J; ava 
mifaalim. 
33 
rjA muf/im ladj *1 painful. 
J.;lrJ· 
.l;Ui falmaa; <P almas> Icoll nl diamond(s). 
rir-raagil da billit ralmaa:; that man is a gem of a fellow. 
IIkalaam-u zayy il-ralmaa; you can trust his word. 
4loui falmaa;a In pi -aatl ) lunit nl a diamond. 
2 glazier's glass cutter. - Ino pll 3 Iprop nl Almaza, an 
area of Cairo to the north-east of Heliopolis, the site of 
Cairo's first airport. 
~ui -ralma:;iyya Inl jelly-like sweet dish consisting of 
starch, sugar and flavouring. 
':"r J • 
l,,;Ui ralmanya Iprop nl Germany. 
Jui ralmaani, ralmaalli Ipl ralmaan, ralmaan/) ladjl 
German. fil-ba~ba I-ralmaani German measles. - Inl 
2 a German. 3 Ino pll the German language. 
'.S':"r J• 
~) I ralamunya <It alluminio> Inl aluminium, 
aluminum. silk iI- ralamunya wire for scouring pots and 
pans. 
.:.. J. see 3 J I .: rilaan 
oJ. 
.)I! .<Il! filaah In pi faalihal deity, god, specifically a 
pagan deity. raalihit il-faracna the gods of the Phar-
aohs. reeh it-tagabbur da -huwwa-nta rilaah what's the 
meaning of all this bluster? do you think you're a god? 
IIlaa rilaaha rilla lIaah there is no god but God (the first 
part of the Muslim profession of faith, used as a re-
sponse to, e.g., wabbid allaah or wabl:Jiduu or raminti 
bi-lIaah, qq.v.). - rilaah-i ynakkid caleek = a plague on 
you! 
11 rilaah-i a formulaic exclamation of appeal to God. ya 
rilaah-i oh my God! rilaah-i tirgac saalim Ii-cyaal-ak 
[beggars] please God may you return safe to your 
children! 
~)I! filaahi ladjl divine. ris-sirr il- rilliahi (1) the 
divine mystery. (2) breath of life, soul, as in ris-sirr 
iI;rilaahi (ilic = he gave up the ghost, he died. 
.J.II rallaah In; also rallaahu, rallaahi, illaah and 
rillaahi following the inflexion patterns of classical Ara-
bic, with the variants 'lalla and rilla 2 in some contextsl 
the one God, Allah. fallaahu rakbarGod is most great. 
ril-bamdu li-llaah praise be to God. II rallaah or rallaah 
cala an exclamation of delight, as in rallaah ca/il g-

gaww God, what lovely weather! rallaah rin-noom 
laziiz God, how nice it is to sleep! - w-allaahi (or w-alla) 
by God! a mild oath used (1) to lend emphasis to a 
request, statement or question, as in min fa4.1-ak w-
allaahi please! I beg of you! w-allaahi (or w-alla) mif 
caarifl really don't know, w-allaahi (or w-alla) ma-na 
raayib I most certainly will not go! w-allaahi (or w-alla) 
ma-badd'-f yislaahil kida certainly, no one deserves 
such treatment! I'ay w-alla (or w-allaahi) yes indeed! 
ba-ysaafir amriika, - w-allaahi 'He's going to America.' 
'Really?' (2) to introduce an inferential conclusion, as 
in w-allaahi (or w-alla) baCia da kull' waabid wi-zooC;-u 
well, then it's a matter of each to his own taste. -li-lIaah 
ya mubsiniin [beggars] (charity) for the sake of God, 
you charitable people! -li-lIaah fi-li-lIaah for no reason, 
for nothing, as in falam-ni li-lIaah fi-li-lIaah he called 
me names for no reason. -cal-alia formula used 
(1) when refusing alms to a beggar"" God will provide! 
(2) to imply misgiving about an outcome, as in 
bi-yc;uulu ba-yibnu-lna wibda~ibbiyya. - cal-alia 'They 
say they'll build us a medical centre.' 'Let's hope so.', 
cal-alia baCia yzaakir let's just hope he studies, cal-alia 
ma-liddiif lil-c;uradaali c;irf just you wait and see 
whafll bappen if you don't give the monkey-man a 
piastre! -ya-hl-alla ya-lli hina is anyone at home? - for 
other formulaic phrases (e.g., racuuzu bi-llaah), see 
under their other components. see also under I'alla. 
Ji I I'alla (also halla I) linterjl exclamation of surprise 
or dismay. I'alla gara I'eeh Heavens, what's happened!? 
I'alla I'alla ... what's all this! see also under I'allaah . 
..s,,)\.I1 I'allaawi I ladj *1 [deris] sanctimonious. 2 ladvl 
without paying, for nothing. 
;JII I'allahumma 0 God! I'allahumma I'igcal-u xeer "" 
pray God all turns out well! (said after laughing or 
dreaming or a bad premonition). I'allahumma {awwil-ik 
ya roob "" God give me patience! I'allahumma dim-ha 
nicma may God perpetuate His bounty (said, e.g., after 
eating). I'allahumma bfa:r,-na God keep us! (said in the 
presence of danger or in face of meanness). 
I'allahumma la-cliraaq a formula used to disclaim any 
blasphemous intent in criticising God's work, as in 
I'ir-raagil da mcarra~ I'allahumma la-cliraaq the man's 
a swine, but God knows best! 
1I1'allahumma rilla except for. I'ac;ul-lak I'innu cumr-u 
ma ciyi I'allahumma l'iIlafwayyil I'infilwanza I tell you 
he's never been ill, except for a slight attack of influen-
za. - I'allahumma I'inn as God is witness, as in 
I'allahumma I'inni ~aayim (no,) by God, 'I am fasting 
(said when tempted to do something in Ramadan con-
34 
trary to the observance of the fast, e.g., gossiping). 
O.J J -
"II I'alooh, raluuh, I'alu <Fr a1l6> linterjl hello! (in 
answering the telephone). 
IS J • 
~i I'alya, I'ilya In pi -aal, I'aly, I'ilyl [anal] buttock. 
buc;nafil-I'alya an injection in the buttock. II I'abu I'alya 
[a bus slang] (one with a) fat arse. 
;IISJ-
o:-'l.l'i' 1'iI-l'iIyaaza (also malbamil il-l'iIyaaza) Inl the 
Iliad. 
1 Y r-
4ii I'amba <Copt> In! title of Coptic patriarchs, 
bishops and metropolitans. 
ylyr-
~ t...! I'imbaaba Iprop n! Embaba, a northern suburb of 
Guiza on the bank of the Nile. 
<.J.t...! I'imbaabi Ipl -yyal 1 ladjl of or pertaining to 
Embaba. 2 Inl one from Embaba. 
..s,,~t...! rimbabaawi Ipl -yyal = I'imbaabi. 
';'IYr" 
...,.:.4i"i I'umbaafa, I'umbaafi <T onb8§l> In pi -yyal 
[mil, obsol] corporal (later cariif). wakiil I'umbaafa 
lance-corporal. 
-I y r-
Ut...! I'imbaarib 
1 ladvl 
yesterday. 
ma-rabilf 
imbaarib she didn't go yesterday. 2/nl yesterday. 
I'alraak I'imbaarib the Turks of yesterday. IIl'ibn 
imbaarib ingenuous man, naive man. - I'awlaad 
I'imbaarib the young. - I'awwill'imbaarib the day before 
yesterday. -I'awwil I'awwill'imbaarib three days ago. 
I_ Jyr " 
J).Ir.i rimbra{oor, 
I'ambra{oor 
imperalore> In pi I'aba{ra f I emperor. 
oJ).Ir.i I'imbra{oora, 
I'ambra{oora 
empress . 
<perh 
It 
In 
pi -aatl 
..sJ).Ir.i I'imbra{oori, I'ambrq{oori ladj *1 imperial. 
~J).'r.i I'imbra{oriyya, I'ambra{oriyya Inl empire. 
Z(-JYr') 
J~ r.! I'imbiryaal <Fr imperial>: goox imbiryaal best 
quality baize. 

IJ"I,i fambaraas <Fr embrasse> In pI -aatl decora-
tive tasselled cord used for looping back a curtain. 
JYr • 
*i fambaleeh <Fr emballer> In! [auto} revving. 
fiddii-ha fambaleeh rev her up! 
J.JYr-
~~i fambuula <Fr> In pI -aatl ampule. 
lJ.JYr" 
.J~i fambuun <Gr ambOn> /n! [Chr} pulpit (of 
wood or marble). 
'.J Yr' 
~i fumbuuh <Copt> [children} lint any drink, but 
especially water. 2 linterjl offer of, or request for, the 
same .. 
(.IISYr") 
r,i fambeer <Fr ampere> In pI -aatl I [elec} 
la ampere, 
Ib amperage. 
Ie: ammeter. 
2 gauge. 
fambeer iI-banziin fuel gauge. 
fambeer is-surea 
speedometer. 
r,i fambiir <Fr empire> ladj invarl Empire-style (of 
dress etc.). 
11oJr' 
~1 fimta I linterrog advl when? faagi fimta when 
shall I come? 1:J00ai fimta when did it happen? 2 Ipron! 
when. c;ul-Iu yiigi fimta tell him when to come. 
- IJ" IoJ r • 
.r--'".,..i famutseer <Fr amortisseur> In pI -aatl[auto} 
shock-absorber. 
~ r' 
..1.01 famd In!: daltar i1-famd; wir-rald [mil} register of 
incoming and depa~ting soldiers. 
I .Ir" 
J"i famar (u) I Ivtl to order, give orders to. rabb-i-na 
famar muusa bii Our Lord ordered Moses to do it. 2 Ivil 
to order, command. fil:Jna fil-xidma - fufmur (or 
tufmur) bass we're at your service - just say the word. 
lamma rabb-i-na yufmur when God wills. -vn famr; 
ava faamir; pva mafmuur. 
) 
famr l In pI fawaamirl command, order. famr-ak 
just as you wish! tal:Jt; famr-ak (I'm) at your disposal. 
35 
bi-famr iIIaah God willing. fawaamir fidariyya admi-
nistrative rulings. famr; dale and famr; ,farl payment 
order .lIl:Jaakim bi-famr-u absolute ruler. - fiza garaa-Ii 
famr allaah "" if I skould die. 
J""t. mafmuur I/pva/li fana eabd iI-mafmuur I just 
carry out orders. 2 In pI ma famiirl 2a police officer in 
charge of an c;ism or a markaz. 2b official in charge of a 
district branch of a governmental body. ma fmuur 
qaraayib local tax inspector. 3 manager (of an estate), 
bailiff. 
~J""t. mafmuriyya In pI -aatl la district branch of a 
governmental body. mafmuriyyit qaraayib gardin siti 
the Garden City Office of Inland Revenue. Ib position 
of being in charge ofsuch a branch. 2a office or position 
of an estate manager. 2b area under the supervision of 
an estate manager. 3 chore, errand, assignment. 
.) ... 1 fimaara In! I overbearing behaviour, bossiness. 
2/pl -aatl emirate. 
,i famiir Ipl fumara. famaaral lint prince. famiir 
iJ-fuhada Prince of the Martyrs (St. George). law fana 
famiir wi-nta famiir miin yisuuC; iI-l:Jimiir [prov} if I'm a 
prince and you're a prince who'll be left to drive the 
do~keys? II famiir biuaar highest rank in the Egyptian 
Navy. - famiir bal:Jr second-highest rank in the Egyp-
tian Navy. 2/adjl kind:hearted, pleasant, obliging. da 
gadae famiir he's a good-hearted chap. 
.,i famiira In pI -aatl princess . 
..s,i famiiri ladjl[obs..olj governmental. fil-madaaris 
j[-famiriyya the state schools. -also miiri. 
..s'ii ,i famiiralaay (also miralaay) In pI -aatl[obsol} 
ranks in the Egyptian Army and Navy approximately 
corresponding to lieutenant-general and captain 
respectively. 
;~I fitfammar Ivil to behave bossily. fil-muwa;;afiin 
bi-yitfammaru eag-gumhuur the officials push the pub-
lic around. -ava mitfammar. 
};.. muftamar In pI -aatl conference. 
.) .• :..1 fistimaara In pI -aatl official form. II fistimaarit 
c;umaaJ a form on presentation of which a government 
employee can buy goods (originally cloth) from a gov-
ernment store against his salary. 
2 
.I r • 
.ri famr 2 /n pI fumuurl affair, matter, case (especially 
one's personal case or the set of circumstances in which 
one finds oneself}.l:Jaaga maeruul famr-a-ha a matter 
of common knowledge. ma-Iii-f fi-fumuur masl:J 
ig-goox di I have nothing to do with this toadying busi-
ness. fana mil:Jtaar fi-famr-u I can't make him out. 

II ramr-i (or ramr-i-na) li-Ilaah ... I give up, let matters 
run their course (indicating resignation). - waliyy' ramr 
{leg] guardian. - ramaam il-ramr il-waaqi[ r faced with 
a fait accompli. -marluub [ala ramr-u having his hand 
forced, helpless. - ramr-ak variib you are a curious 
man! 
.) ... i ramaara In pi -aatl I evidence, indication. [ala 
wijf-u ramaraat it-taqwa his face bears the marks of 
piety. 2 (verbal) sign, token (as evidence of good faith). 
riddii-ni ramaara GalBan iflarraala tirqa tdaxxal-ni 
faqqit-ak tell me what to say to the maid so that she will 
(know I'm not an impostor and) let me into your nat. 
bi-ramaarit ma (or wi-bil-ramaara) kuntu [and' 
raxuu-ya mbaarilj as evidence (that I have really been 
to see him, I know from my brother that) you were with 
him yesterday. 
0 .. ,.1.;. muramra In pi -aatl plot, conspiracy. 
J'~I ritraamar Ivil to plot, conspire. -ava mitraamir. 
.!J.Jr~ 
~) I'amrilka, I'amirika Iprop nl America. 
~) ramriiki ladjl American. 
J~) ramrikaani Ipl ramrikaanl I ladjl American. 
IIgild' ramrikaani thick leather of good quality. -baar 
ramrikaani a built-in bar in a house. - qami~ 
ramrikaani a casual shirt. 2 Inl an American. 
.!l J'hl rul'amrak, I'itl'amrik Ivil {deris/ to adopt what 
are thought to be American manners. - vn I'amraka; ava 
mUl'amrik . 
.!l J'LI I'istil'amrik Ivil {deris/ to ape the Americans. 
-ava mi.wl'amrik. 
- J.J r' see I.J r ~: I'amiralaay 
.J1.SJ.r~ 
.....,.....i I'amfiir <Copt> Iprop nl Amshir, the sixth 
month of the Coptic year (early February to early 
March). II I'i/-I'ism' I-(uuba Wil-fi[I' 1-l'amfiir ... one 
thing said and another thing done. - I'amfiir daxal bi-
za[abiib-II Am~hir has arrived bringing its storms, re-
ferring (1) to the coming of stormy weather at the end 
of winter. (2) to the arrival of a temperamental or 
moody pcr~on. 
t. r ~ see I.S t. r: I'am[a, I'am[aal' 
Jc~ 
J...~ yil'malf Ivt, imperf onlyl to hope. I'ana b-al'mal 
I'innak tizur-ni I hope you'll visit me. maraq mij 
36 
mal'muul ij-Jifa minnu a disease from which there is no 
hope of recovery. -vn I'ama/; ava I'aamil; pva 
marmuul. 
J...i ramal In pi I'amaall hope, aspiration. [ala I'amal 
il-maksab in the hope of profit. I'~ljaab-ak xayyibu 
I'amal-ak your friends brought about your failure. 
IIxeebit I'amal a big failure, total good-for-nothing. 
-xeebit iI-l'amal rakba gamal {prov/ a failure mounted 
on a camel (mockingly of one who promises what is 
beyond his capacity). - ramal ribliis fig-ganna {prov] 
(Satan's hope of Paradise) ... a total impossibility. 
a.i rama/a Inll source of desire and wonder. tiqull' 
beet-ak I'ama/a what's so marvellous about your house? 
l'iI-/aljma [anduhum I'ama/a (meat for them is an ob-
ject of curiosity) ... they don't see meat from one year's 
end to the next. l'iI-qamar ir-ruusi kaan I'amalit in-naas 
kull-a-ha the Russian satellite was the big thing with 
everyone. II I'amma di ramala w-allaahi what an incredi-
ble way to behave! 2 aspiration, goal. luqbaal ramalt-
ak {women in trad soc] may you gain what you hope for 
too! (used on happy occasions and at celebrations). 
~hl ritrammillvi/la to wonder in disbelief. qa[adt' 
ratrammilfi- raljwaal id-dunya I sat there wondering at 
the ways of the world. ritrammilu ya naas ... would you 
ever believe it? can you credit it? Ib to make a close 
examination. fatalj is-saa[a w-qa[ad yitl'ammil fiiha he 
opened the watch and scrutinized the works. 2t to 
ponder, reflect, meditate. bald it-tal'ammu/ fi/-
mawquU[ after thinking the matter over. -vn ta rammul r ; 
ava mitrammil, mutal'ammil r. 
~h tarammuu In pi -aatl topic of meditation, de· 
votional theme. 
I r r ~ 
ri I'umm Ifem nl I Ipl rummahaat, rummahaatl 
la mother; -used with the name of a woman's eldest 
son, or, if she has no sons, her eldest daughter, or, ifshe 
has no children, her father, as a respectful and slightly 
affectionate substitute for her own name. ya I'umm-i a 
formal and respectful mode of address to an older 
woman. bald umm-i w-ruxt-i l'iI-kull' giraan-i {prov/ 
after my mother and sister, all (others) are (mere) 
neighbours. I'il/i [andu I'umm-u ma-yinljimill' hamm-
u {prov/ there's no need to worry about someone who 
has his mother (to support him). II I'ibn umm-u mother's 
boy, sissy. - I'umm iI-[agaayiz epithet of Sayyida 
Zaynab. - rumm iI-m~riyyiin (1) epithet of the wife of 
Sa'd Zaghloul. (2) hospital named after her in Guiza, 
and the surrounding area. - rumm iI-murminiin name 

accorded to each of the wives of the Prophet Muham-
mad. - rumm id-dinya epithet of Egypt. - rumm il-qura 
Mecca. - rumm U lali dessert of filo pastry, raisins and 
butter, baked in hot milk. - rumm ir-raas the top of the 
head. Ib {prinl] matrix. 2 Iw foil pron suff, no pll stem, 
source, origin (cf rabb 4). ril-fuul bi-yinfaflala rumm-
u the beans dry on the plant. II rumm iI-Cjee!J core of a 
boil or abscess. 3 Iw foil n, masc and fem pI rummaal, 
rummaall 3a the one with, the one having. ril-Cjahwa 
I-Iurki rumm i wifj Turkish coffee with a head. 
kubbayaal in-nibiil rumm i rigl the stemmed wine-
glasses. rir-riggaala rummaal il-Cju~aan il-biit[ the 
men with the white shirts. II rumm iI-xeer '(or rumm 
is-sald or rumm iI-hana) epithet applied to a girl or a 
woman regarded as the bearer of good fortune. 3b the 
one costing. riI-larabiyya rumm i xamasl alaaf gineeh 
the five-thousand pound car. - for other phrases begin-
ning with rumm (e .g., rumm i CjweeCj) look up the 
second component of the phrase. 
t.:i ramma In; always used in vocativel {Irad soc] 
mother. haali I-leej y-amma bring the bread, mal 
lIy-amma, y-amma-y {children] exclamation of fear. 
4..,.i rumuuma Inl maternity, motherhood. 
Z t r" 
4.1 rumma In pI rumaml I nation. maglis iI-rumma 
the National Assembly. ril-rumam il-mutta!Jida the 
United Nations. Ilya rummil in-nabi ... what bedlam! 
2 rumam Ipl n! crowds. naas rumam crowds of people. 
r-=i rammim Ivtl to nationalize. -vn larmiim; ava/pva 
mirammim. 
r-=hl ritrammim 
Ivil 
to 
be 
nationalized. 
-iva 
mi/rammim. 
3 UO 
~i rummi ladj ·1 illiterate. 
~i rummiyya Inl illiteracy. ma!Jw ummiyya eradica-
tion of illiteracy. 
4 UO 
~ ramm (i) Ivtl{lsl] to lead (the prayer), lead (s.o.) in 
the prayer. -vn ramamaan; ava raamim; pva 
marmuum. 
rl.! rimaam In pI rarimmal {lsi] I prayer leader, 
imam. II rimaam masgid chief religious leader in a mos-
que. 2 title of certain religious leaders. rimaam i/-
yaman {obsol] the Imam of the Yemen. II ril-rarimma 
I-rarbala the four eponymous founders of the schools 
of Islamic law. - ril-rimaam (1) = ril-rimaam if-jafli 
(founder of the school of law dominant in Egypt). 
37 
(2) the tomb of Imam Shafi'i in south-east Cairo and 
the district around it. - ril-rimaam il- rakbar the Sheikh 
of el-Azhar. 
rl.i ramaam r I Iprepl before, in front of. 2 In! front. 
xa/Wa Ii/-ramaam one step forward! 
IS"l.i ramaamiT ladj ·1 I fore, front. ril-rasnaan iI-
ramamiyya the front teeth. rir-rigl iI-ramamiyya the 
foreleg. 2 forward. laffa ramamiyya {gym] forward 
roll. 
5 rr" 
~ ramm <Copt> {children] I Inl food. 2 linterjl eat! 
-also mam, hamm. 
'.U" 
1,;,1 ramma I Iconjl 18 when. naadi lalayya ramma 
luxrug call me when you go out. Ib if. ramma lislanna 
bald is-saala Inaajar mif !Ja-llaaCji laks if you stay till 
after twelve, you won't find a taxi. Ic until. rUCjlud 
ramma yirgac stay until he comes back. -/often used in 
elliptic 
statementsl 
ramma 
rajuuf in-nobaa-di 
!Ja-lil!Jaggigu b-reeh (I'm just waiting) to see what ex-
cuses you'll make this time. 2/conjl as for. ramma 
I-mazziika I-varbiyya fa-Iaha iii yifhamuu-ha as for 
western music, there are those who appreciate it. 
3 interjection emphasizing extent or degree. ramma di 
!Jkaaya what an extraordinary business! that really is 
something! ramma da raagil n~~aab what a crook the 
man is! ramma mbaari!J sihirna !Jittil sahra what a great 
evening we had yesterday! 
t.:! rimma (also ya rimma and la-rimma, rimman and 
ya rimman and la-rimman, ya rimmalan and la-
rimmalan) Icorrel conjl rimma (or any variant) ... raw 
(or rimma or any variant) either ... or. laazim yikuun 
rimma xadam fig-geej raw illafa minnu he must have 
either served in the army or been exempted from it. 
J'rro 
Jt.:i rummaal particle used I to introduce a question, 
often rhetorical and sarcastic, that asks for further in-
formation on the implication of a preceding statement 
or act "" in that case ... , if that is so ... , ralla rinta iii 
b-lifla!J iI-baab - rummaal feen rumm U lali my! you 
open the door' yourself! but where's Umm Ali? 
rummaal ma-!Jaddi-j bi-yzur-ni leeh then why doesn't 
anyone visit me? rummaal zamb i miin so whose fault is 
it? 2 to introduce an emphatically affirmative answer to 
a question, or the confirmation of a statement ... but of 
course! most certainly! dafacl iIIi laleek. - rummaal 
'Have you paid what you owe?' 'Sure I have!' laazim 

tiruul:J ti-wal:Jd-ak. - fummaal yacni miin l:Ja-yruuh 
macaaya 'You'll have to go on your own.' 'Of course. 
Who is there to go with meT 3 to indicate impatience or 
exasperation. fistanna calayya fummaal give me a little 
time, will you! fismac bass' fummaal just listen, will 
you! 
iJ ..:.. r r - see I r r -: fimmatan 
iJrr- see I rr -: fimman 
iJr-
v-l fimin (a) Ivil 1 to feel secure. hiyya cayza tlaaqi 
r-raagil ilti tifman finn al:Jayat-ha macaa tkuun saciida 
she wants to find a man with whom she may feel sure 
that her life will be happy. ma-b-a fman-f' calee l-wal:Jd-
u I don't feel easy about him on his own. 2 to be trust-
ing. ma-b-afman-luu-fI don't trust him. -vn famn; ava 
faamin. 
v-i famn Inl safety, security. ril- famn il-qawmi 
national security. ril-famn ~-~inaar;i industrial safety. 
(quwwaat) fil-famn il-markazi the riot police, the 
home-guard. 
,;,I..i I'amaan Inl safety, security. w~il bi-famaan he 
arrived safely. l:Jizaam famaan safety-belt. ~anca 
fil-yadd' famaan min il-faqr possession of a craft is a 
safeguard against poverty. -ladjectivallyl b~~eetjimaal 
wi-ymiin laqeet is-sikka I'amaan I looked left and right 
and found it safe to cross. II fir-riggaala ma-lhum-f' 
I'amaan never trust a man! (said by a woman). -fatrit 
il-famaan the safe period (during which the likelihood 
of conception 
is 
minimal). 
-fi- famaan 
illaah 
(1) goodbye! (2) minding one's own business, doing no 
harm to anyone, as in fana kunt' saayiq fi-I'amaan 
illaah laqet-ha niztit quddaam il-carabiyya I was driving 
along just nicely, when suddenly she stepped out in 
front of the car. 
i,;l..i I'amaana Inl 1 honesty, trustworthiness. - Ipl 
-aatl 2a something held in safe-keeping, deposit. sibt 
ik-kitaab famaana candu I left the book with him for 
safe-ke<:ping. II maktab il- famanaat the left-luggage 
office, baggage deposit. 2b some object kept hidden, or 
the existence of· which is known only to a few. rul:Jt' 
m{allac il- famaana min geeb-i I pulled the you-know-
what out of my pocket. 3 secretariat. ril- famaana 1-
caamma secretariat general. 4 {euphem] faeces. 
l:Ja{{-i-lu 1- I'amaana cal-baab he left his visiting-card in 
front of the door. - linterjl 5 I implore! famaana 
(caleek) truul:J tinadii I beg you to go and call him. 
.r-oi famiin I 1 ladj pi I'umanal honest, trustworthy. 
38 
ril-mul:Jaami laazim yikuun famiin maca l-cumala a 
lawyer must be honest with his clients. 2 In 
pi fumanaafl official in a confidential or responsible 
position vis-a-vis a body or institution. II famiin lagna 
committee secretary. - famiin maxzan warehouse su-
pervisor. - famiin sanduuq treasurer. - famiin maktaba 
librarian. - famiin jur{a municipal green-uniformed 
policeman (necessarily a holder of the high school 
certificate) . 
.r-ol I'aamiin, 
famiin 2 linterjl amen. fadci r;ala 
walad-i w-fakrah min yiquul I'amiin {prov] I curse my 
son, and hate those wb.o say 'Amen'. 
';i fammin Ivtl 1 to trust. m-a fammin-uu-f cala bint-i 
I wouldn't trust him with my daughter. min fammin-ak 
la-txuun-u wa-law kunt' xaayin {prov] do not betray the 
trust of one who trusts you even if you are really not 
trustworthy"" live up to people's expectations, even if 
they are ill-founded. 2 to render (a firearm or the like) 
safe. ril-musaddas mifammin the revolver has the 
safety-catch on. - Ivil 3 to take out insurance. 
fit-ta fmiin cf.idd il-maracf. insurance against illness. 
fammin cala l:Jayaat-u b-falf' gneeh he insured his life 
for a thousand pounds. 4 to say 'Amen' (e.g., after a 
prayer). II fammint a cala kalaam-u I approved of what 
he said. -vn tafmiin; ava/pva mifammin; pva 
mufammanr. 
.r-oi.; tal'miin In pi -aatl insurance, surety. tafmiin 
jaamil 
comprehensive 
insurance. 
tal'minaat 
igtimaciyya social insurance, social security. tal'miin 
ibtidaa fi initial surety (paid by one submitting a tender 
or the like). l:Jikaayit ig-gawaaz kull-a-ha tafminaat -
I'if-fabka tafmiin ril-mahr' tal'miin 
I'il-mul'axxar 
ta fmiin marriage is entirely a matter of insurances; the 
engagement gift of jewelry is an insurance; the bride-
money is an insurance; the money set aside for a wife in 
case of divorce is an insurance. 
';y mufamman: mul'amman calee insured person or 
object. 
.;i.;1 fitfammin Ivil passive of fammin. - ava/iva 
mitfammin. 
v-I faamin Ivil 1 to have faith, believe. fif-facb' 
faamin bii the people believed in him. ya mfamna 
tir-rigaal ya mfamna liI-mayya fil-Yurbaal {prov] to 
have faith in men is to have faith in a sieve holding 
water. II famint' bi-llaah an exclamation of wonder at 
some manifestation of God's wisdom. -trfamnu bi-
llaah "" would you ever believe such a thing? °2 to have 
confidence, have trust. ya weel ilti yfaamin luku woe to 
him who trusts in you! ma-bi-yfamin-f' r;al-fuluus fil-

bank he does not trust the bank with his money. -vn 
mifamna; ava mifaamin . 
.:ro~1 fitfaamin Ivii to be trusted. da-nta titfaamin lad-
dahab you are to be trusted even with gold. - iva 
mitfaamin. 
.J~! fimaan, fiimaan Inl faith, belief. lala qadd i 
fimaan if-Jalb; b-yibqa fimaan ig-geefthe army's faith 
will be in proportion to that of the people . 
.:ro';' mufmin In *1 believer, member of the faithful. 
Ijalb il-mufmin daliil-u (the heart of the believer is his 
guide) the (true) believer can trust his heart. 
ril-mufmin dayman m~aab [prov] "" the righteous are 
(the MJrst) afflicted (as a test of their faith, an express-
ion used when offering comfort in disaster). 
.:,.::1 firtaman Ivtl to trust. ma-b-tiftimin-nii-J don't 
you trust me? faftimn-u lala fayy; &aaga I'd trust him 
with anything. - vn fiftimaan; ava miftimin; pva 
muftaman. 
J~I fiftimaani ladjl pertaining to credit. tashilaat 
iftimaniyya credit facilities . 
.:roLl fista fmin Ivtll to trust. 2 to select for trustwor-
thiness. - ava mistafmin. 
';LI fistifammin J Ivil to place trust. baqa qaalid 
mistifammin-Iu yquum yisraq-ni here I am, sitting off 
my guard trusting him and he robs me. - ava 
mistifammin. 
.:roLl fistifaamin J Ivil to feel safe, feel secure. siib-u 
lamma yistifaamin wi-ynaam wi-baldeen fimsik-u 
leave him until he feels safe and goes to sleep then catch 
him. - ava mistifaamin. 
-y,jr~ 
..,.. ~i fumnibuus or fumnubuus <Fr omnibus> In 
pI -aatl [obsol] bus. 
~,j r' 
~i famint <Fr amiante> In! asbestos. - also 
famyant. 
IS ,j r ~ 
~.,.i famunya <Engl> Inl ammonia. 
..:J lor ~ 
.::..~i famhaat: bala& famhaat a small sweet yellow 
variety of date. 
J IS) r ~ 
.k.,.i famwiillcoll nl [obsol] bamboo canes (for use in 
the manufacture of furniture). 
39 
';"',j..sr~ 
~i famyant <Fr amiante> asbestos. - also famint. 
,j~ 
..,! fin Iconjl if. fin quit; faah nibqa mwafqiin if you say 
'yes', then we're agreed. fin faaf allaah If God will. 
11 fin ... walla ... Icorrel conjl whether ... or .... fin kaan 
kuwayyis walla wi&if whether it be good or bad. 
l,j~ 
l;i fana Ipers pronll. fana galaan I'm hungry. da-na 
yalbaan but I'm (just) a poor man.llqaal fana w-fana to 
brag, boast, as in kuUi ma yifta& buqq-u yquul fana 
w-fana every time he opens his mouth it's to boast 
about himself. - fana w-huwwa wiz-zaman {awii/ "" I'll 
get even with him in the end. - fana w-faxuu-ya lala 
bn; lamm-i w-fana wi-bn i lamm-ilal-yariib [prov] my 
brother and I stand together (in a dispute) against my 
cousin, but my cousin and I stand together against any-
one outside the family. 
11 ya-ana (0· ··-aani) dear me! oh my! (used by one who 
is ill, tired I," exasperated). 
Jl;i fanaani I/adj *1 egoistic, selfish. 2 In *1 egoist. 
;;;l;i fananiyya Inl egoism, selfishness. 
'":-' ,j ~ 
"";i fannib Ivtl to scold. fabuu fannib-u la-iii lamal-u 
his father scolded him for what he had done. -vn 
tafniib; ava mifannib. 
..,..,;h tafniib 
Ivnl 
IItafniib 
iq-qamiir 
pangs 
of 
conscience. 
"";hl fitfannib Ivii to be scolded. - iva mitfannib. 
'":-') ,":-,,j ~ 
,-!~i fambuuba, 
fumbuuba 
In 
pI fanabiib, 
fambubaatll cylinder. fumbuubit butagaaz a cylinder 
of butane gas. 2 tube. fambuubit malguun sinaan a 
tube of tooth-paste. fambuubit ixtibaar test tube. 
II fambuubit qalam a biro refill, ball-point pen refill . 
3 inflatable ball. II fambuubit il-hawa squeeze-bulb (on 
a scent-spray, an atomizer etc.). 
I .;... ,j ~ 
~\;;; nitaaya Ipl nity, nuty, nitayaatl l/adjl la female 
(animal or plant). naxla ntaaya female palm tree. 
Ib voluptuous (oCa woman). 21n!2a person, animator 

plant of the female sex. kalbit-na wildit talat dukura 
wi-ntayteen our dog gave birth to three male and two 
female puppies. 2b female (plug, joint, mechanical 
part etc.). dakar wi-ntaaya (1) tenon and mortise. 
(2) hook and eye fastener. 
~,,;i runuusa Inl femininity. 
z ..:.. ., 0 
..::..;1 rinta Ipers pron sing mascl you. rinta kaddaab 
you're a liar! di btalt-ak rinta is this yours? da-nta 
jakl-ak baayin lalee z-zalal it's obvious from your 
appearance that you are upset. II rinta w-huwwa both of 
you! (usually in contexts of abuse) as in ya wlaad ik-kalb 
rinta w-huwwa you sons of bitches both of you! yalla 
rinta w-huwwa get the hell out, both of you! -ya waad 
rinta [abus] hey you boy! - rinta w-rinta [abus] you this 
and you that, as in ma-luu-f kalaam rilla nta w-rinta 
lamma zhiqt he has been doing nothing but criticize me 
and I've reached the end of my tether. 
..::..; 1 .~ 1 rinti Ipers pron sing fern! you. rinti !Jabibt-i 
you're my darling. 
~1 rintu Ipers pron pll you. rintu ra!Jsan naas you're 
the best of people. 
~ 1 rintum = rintu. 
(-.;":,,.,0) 
.~i rantireeh <Fr entree> In pi -aatl 1 informal sit-
ting room (in contrast with,valoon). 2 suite of furniture 
for such a room . 
...,..,;;:.;i rantartayb <Engl> In! intertype machine. 
Cl,),,;;;i ranturaaj <Fr entourage> Inl ring circled with 
gems. 
"";;:.;1 rintarfiyuuh <Engl> In pi -aatl interview. 
lamaluu-lu rintarfiyuuh they interviewed him. 
..:;.,.1 ;:.; i rantirikoot or rantarkoot or rintarkoot <Fr> 
Inl beef from the ribs, entrecote. 
.!I ..:.. ., 0 
~i rantiika <It antico> In pi -aatll antique. - ladj 
invarl 2 ancient, antique. 3 odd, droll, grotesque. 
wifj-ak rantiika your face is absurd.jakl-u rantiika he's 
a droll-looking type. 
~~i rantikxaana tnl museum; obsolete except in 
ril-rantikxaana the Egyptian Museum. 
<l.l;; hi ritrantik Ivil to dress in a quaint and elaborate 
fashion. -vn rantaka; ava mitrantik. 
.,.,,,:,,.,0 
~ i rantinna <Engl> In pi -aatl antenna. 
40 
..:.. J ..:.. ., 0 
..:;.,~i rantuut <prob Copt> In pi ranatiitl peg on the 
beam of a plough, or of a saqya, for the attachment of 
harness (see PI.D, 13). -also bantuut, lantuut. 
.!I.,o see 1":,,.,0 
~~~o 
~I rangajeeh <Fr engage> ladvl arm in arm . 
kaanu majyiin rangajeeh they were walking arm in arm. 
&i rangij Ivtl to link one's arm with (s.o.). -vn 
rangaja; ava mirangij. 
&hl ritrangij Ivil to link arms. -ava mitrangij. 
.;~., 0 
~ 
I rangar In pi ranaagirl large shallow copper 
serving-vessel. 
-J~'" 
1~1 ringiltira, ringiltira <It lnghilterra> Iprop nl 
England, (loosely also) Britain. 
loS ~ 
1 ringiliizi lad j pi ringiliizl 1 English, (loosely) 
British. II ra!Jmar ringiliizi pillar-box red. -muftaa!J 
ringiliizi monkey wrench. -kurraas ringiliizi exercise 
book for handwriting practice. -firaax ringiliizi large 
variety of chicken. -([arbit) mal!J ingiliizi Epsom salts. 
- buruud ringiliizi British reserve, the stiff upper lip. 
-,vam .. ingiliizi {chern] dextrin, British gum. - In/2 an 
Englishman, (loosely) a Briton.llxallii-na ngiliiz let's go 
Dutch! 3/no pll the English language. 
JIoS~"o 
~ 
1 ringii/ In! 1 Ipl ranagiill gospel. 2 ril- ringii/ Ino 
pl/ the New Testament. 
~1 ringiili {Chr] 1 In *1 la Evangelist, writer of 
one of the four gospels. Ib reader in church services. 
2 ladj *1 evangelical. ril- raqbaa( il- ringiliyyiin mem-
bers of the Coptic Evangelical Church. 
~ 
mangaliyya In pi -aatl (Chr] church lectern. 
oJ"J~.,o 
..,J~i randalus Iprop nl Andalusia. 
..,-l~i randalusi, randaluusi ladj *1 Andalusian. 
rloSj.,o 
~) ranziim <Fr> In pi -aatl enzyme. 
1 oJ" ., 0 see also oJ"" J 
, .... ..Ii runs 1 Inl friendly atmosphere, conviviality. 

qacdit funs a convivial gathering. 2 ladj invarl conge-
nial, convivial. sitti funs a convivial woman. maglis 
funs a convivial get-together.lelit-na l:Ja-tkuun funs our 
night will be fun . 
..,..;1 fins Icoll nl member(s) of the human race. finta 
fins i walla ginn are you a person or a spirit (said, e.g., 
when coming upon someone in the dark) "'" what have 
we here? fil- fins i wil-ginn i wil-l:Jayawaan win-nabaat 
mankind, spirits, animals and plants. 
~1 finsi I/adj *1 attributed to mankind (as disting-
uished from the world of spirits). 2 Inl a member of the 
human race. 
"L..;l finsaanln/l person, human being. 2 fil-finsaan 
28 frozen form equivalent to English 'one'. fil-finsaan 
laazim yiciif one has to live! 2b Man, mankind. 
fil-finsaan 
il-muca~ir contemporary Man. - ladjl 
3 humane, kindly. di silti finsaana b-~al:Jiil:J she is a 
woman full of human feeling. 
~L..;l finsaniyya 
Inl 
I humanity, 
humanness. 
2 human feeling, humaneness, kindliness . 
...,..,,;i faniis Inl companion, someone who keeps one 
company. 
'-..;1 faanisa In pi fawaanis, faanisaatl title of, and 
form of address or reference to, a young unmarried 
wo~an "'" miss. fil-faanisa fatma Miss Fatma. 
..,..;1 faanis Ivtl to entertain (with one's company). 
findah-lu yiigi yfanis-na hina call to him to come and 
keep us company here. fanistu and fanistuu-na cour-
teous formula expressed to guests"'" you're very good 
company (the reply being 'lalla yfans-ak). fintu 
l:Ja-tfansu fimta when will you be coming to visit us? - vn 
mifansa; ava mifaanis. 
..,..;\.;1 fitfaanis Ivil passive of faanis. -iva mitfaanis. 
..,..;LI fistafnis Ivi/l to be sociable, pass the time in a 
friendly manner. humma qacdiin bi-yistafnisu maca 
bacc[ they're sitting having a friendly chat together. 2 to 
seek advice, consult. 
fal:Jibb astafnis bi-rafy-ak 
fil-mawc[uuc da I should like to ask your opinion on this 
subject. 3t to become tame (of an animal). fin-nimri 
mif mumkin yistafnis tigers cannot be tamed. - Ivtl 
4t to tame (an animal). bi-yiftiru quruud wi-
yistafnisuu-ha they buy baboons and tame them. -vn 
fistifnaas'; ava mistafnis; pva musta fnas' . 
1 f.)" .;,. see I..:...;,.: funuusa 
';'.J f.)" .;,. see ';'.J f.)" .;, ..s: fansuun 
..:.. ..;. .;,. 
-.:...:.;i faniftah <T eni~te> Inl {obsol] form of address 
41 
or reference to a sister's husband (used by women). 
r.J";'';'· 
~".:.;i fanJuuga <It acciuga> Icoll nl anchovies. 
...; .;, . 
-..iii fanf' In pi funuuflnose.llra¥m i fanf-u in spite of 
him. 
~i fanfif ladjl nasal. 
-..iiI finf In pi funuufll {carp] moulding around the 
frame of a door. 2 {mus] bridge at the angle on the neck 
of an cuud (see PI.J, 9). 
-..iiI finif ladj *1 finicky. nifs-u finfa he has a finicky 
appetite. 
.... i fanafa Inl self-respect, decent pride. candu fanafa 
he has self-respect. 
...ihl fitfannif Ivil to look down one's nose, affect a 
supercilious air. - ava mitfannif. 
-..iiLI fistafnif Ivtl 
I {leg] 
to 
appeal against. 
fil-mul:Jaami stafnif il-l:Jukm the lawyer appealed 
against the sentence. 
2t to 
resume. 
fistirnaaf 
il-cilaqaat id-diblumasiyya the resumption of diploma-
tic relations. -/the literary passive form also occurs! mif 
man;uur i/-cilaqaat tustafnaf qabli sana it is unlikely 
that relations will be resumed before a year has passed. 
- vn ristirnaaf; ava mistarnif. 
-.;\.:.:.;...I ristirnaaf Inl {leg] appeal. mal:Jkamit il-
istirnaaf the Court of Appeal. mul:Jaami stifnaaf a 
lawyer with enough seniority to appear before the 
Court of Appeal. 
j\':':';"'1 ristifnaafi ladjl (leg] pertaining to appeal. 
- J"';.;, • 
IJ)..i.; I ranfilwanza, rinfilwinza <Engl> Inl influenza, 
severe attack of common cold. 
J.!.I.;, • 
~) ,~i fankil <Engl> (also runkil <Fr» Inl 
affectionate and respectful form of address and refer-
ence used by young people to uncles and also to men 
who are not close relatives"'" uncle. 
- J.!.I.;,. 
L.,,:;-)S:.;i fankilistooma <perh Fr> Inl (path] hook-
worm, ankylostomiasis. 
f.)" ..s .!.I .;,. see f.)".!.I.;,: finkiis 
~.;,. 
il;~1 fil-fanaam Inl mankind. xayr il-fanaam best of 
mankind (epithet of the Prophet Muhammad). 

4S r ~ ~ 
~i ranimya, rinimya <Engl> Inl {path} anaemia. 
1 ~,j ~ 
;i rann (i) Ivilto moan, groan. -vn raniin; ava raanin. 
~(~~~) 
.,1 rinn 1 Iconj introducing subordinate clausel that. 
wafifit 8 lala rinni l:J-aruul:J I agreed to go. fialuu-Ii rinn 
iI-maktab mafifuul they told me that the office was 
closed. I:J-ablat iltimaas rinnu yifibal-ni I'll send a re-
quest that he accept me. 2 particle used to emphasize a 
following statement. ramma rinnak l:Jumaar bi-~al:Jiil:J 
you really are a complete ass! 
11. m8[a rinn lconjl despite the fact that. 
~l rinna In pi -aatl defect, drawback. riI-bint' di 
laazim fiiha rinna lamma ygawwizuu-ha I-walad 
bif-jakl' da this girl must have something wrong with 
her for them to marry her off to a boy of this type. 
3 ~ ~" see I ~ ,,: ranaani, rananiyya 
IJ'" I ~~" 
IJ"'lilii rananaas <Fr ananas> Icoll nI pineapple(s). 
I t~~" 
III rinnama l/conj~however, but. ma-kunt'-jb-abUj~' 
1-l:Jagaat zayy' di rinnama hiyya kaanit iI-l:Jafiiifia 
lagbaa-ni I used not to pay attention to such things, but 
the fact is she appealed to me. huwwa lbaara lan 
lakuul rinnama masluub it's a type of hammer, but 
tapered. rik-kalaam sahl' rinnama I-fill' ~alb it's easy 
to talk but hard to act. 2 exclamatory particle == what a 
... , such a ... , really. riftareet larabiyya rinnama 
larabiyya I've bought a car -such a fantastic car! kalt' 
rakla rinnama min illi fialb-ak yil:Jibb-a-ha I ate a really 
delicious meal. 4,arabt-u lalfia rinnama laal I gave him 
a really good hiding. 
.. ~ " 
xi ranhu linterrog adj (appositively also ranhuu, 
ranhuun), fern 
ranhi (appositively also ranhii, 
ranhiin), pi ranhum (appositively also ranhumma)1 
which? ranhu door or rid-door ranhu (or fanhuu or 
ranhuun) which floor? ranhi bint or ril-bint' ranhi (or 
ranhii or ranhiin) which girl? 
1 4S ~" 
jii .jiil ritranna, tarannaf Ivil to act with delibera-
tion and caution. man taranna nasi ma tamanna [prov] 
42 
he who acts with deliberation achieves what he desires. 
bi-yiftaval bi-taranni he works carefully and slowly. 
llfit-taranni s-salaama (wi-fil-lagala n-nadaama) [prov} 
(there is safety in caution and regret in speed) ... more 
haste, less speed. -vn taranni; ava mitranni, 
mutarannif . 
. 
li=-I ristaf}na 
(yistanna) 
1 Ivtl 
to 
wait 
for . 
riI-larabiyya l:Ja-tistannaa-k the car will be waiting for 
you. rima mistanni reeh what are you waiting for? 2 lvil 
to wait. mif kunt' tistanna lamma rfJ1l:Ja couldn't you 
have waited till I woke up? ristanna lalee give him 
time. II ma-l:Jadd'-j l:Ja-yistanna == death comes to all. 
- ristanna l-awarrii-k just wait and I'll show you! -ava 
mistanni. 
JLI ristiranna J Ivil to work with care, act with deli-
beration. -ava mistiranni. 
2 4S ~" 
JI"i rawaanif Ipl nI vessels, containers 
"." 
~l rihir onomatopoeia for the sound of crying or 
giggling. 
J. " 
jIoi rahlln pi rahaalil 1 family, family group, rela-
tives. rilli ma-Iuu-j xeer fi- rahl-u ma-Iuu-j xeer fi-l:Jadd 
{prov} he who does no good to his family does no good 
to anyone. II rahl ii-beet the family of the Prophet 
Muhammad. -wi-nta ma-I-rahl-ak {abus} what business 
is it of yours? 2 people. rahl iI-balad (or rahaali l-balad) 
the people of the town. rahl iI-yimiin rightists. II rahl 
is-sunna Sunnite Muslims. - rahl i(-(ariifi Sufis. -ya-hl 
alia ya-lli hina == anyone at home? -
ril-rahaali Ipl nI 
3 the public. II tuggaar iI-rahaali private sector mer-
chants. 
11 rahlan (also rahlan wi-s'ahlan) interjection used (1) in 
greeting == hi! hello! (2) in welcome == (you're most) 
welcome! (3) in allowing and acCepting (often critical-
ly) the freedom of others to act, as in huwwa mif laayiz 
yiigi - rahlan wa-sahlan he doesn't want to come? he's 
free to do as he likes! laayiz tilabbar lan rary-ak -
rahlan wa-sahlan you have a perfect right to express 
your opinion. - rahlan bi ... welcome to ... ! rahlan bis-
sawra welcome to the revelution! - rahlan biik (biiki, 
biikum) response to rahlan (1) and (2). 
JAi rahli ladj/l privately owned, privately run, held 
as a concession from the government. madrasa rahliyya 
private school. maktab bariid rahli sub-post-office. 

2 natiorral. riI-bank iI- rahli 
I-m~ri the Egyptian 
National Bank. rin-naadi I-rahli the National (Foot-
ball) Club. 
~i rahliyya Inl 1 family, kin. 21 eligibility. 
JAi raahiIT ladjl populous, populated, inhabited. 
riI-raraat kaanit barc[u lal-manaa{iq iI-rahla bis-
sukkaan air-raids were also carried out over the popu-
lated areas. 
J..,..t. marhuul = raahil. 
~i rahhil 
Ivtl 
to 
qualify, 
make 
qualified. 
ris-sanawiyya I-laamma trahhil-ni I-duxuul ig-gamla 
the secondary certificate qualifies me to enter universi-
ty. marka1. tarhiil mihani Occupational Training Cen-
tre. -vn tarhiil; ava mirahhil; pva murahhal. 
~j.o murahhil, murahhalln pi -aatl 1 qualification. 
2 mu rahhilaat, mu rahhalaat Ipl n! qualified persons, 
people with diplomas, certificates etc. IIlaskari 
murahhilaat a soldier with a school certificate or 
diploma. 
~hl ritrahhal, 
ritrahhil Ivil 1 to get married. 
ritrahhilt i b-bint iI-balaal I got married to the right girl. 
2 to become qualified, obtain qualifications. -ava 
mitrahhil. 
JAI:o..I ristaahil Ivtl 1 to deserve, merit. walad 
ma-yistahil-/ rilla c[-c[arb a boy who deserves nothing 
but a beating. 2 to be worth. da yistaahil kaam fi-na;ar-
ak how much is this worth in your opinion? -ava 
mistaahil. 
J • • 
..,..i rahu Iw foil n or pron (rahu hiyya often rahiyya, 
rahu humma often rahumma)1 introductory particle 
anticipating a word or clause that expands or comments 
on a statement or situation ... there you are, now you 
see. rabiil fi-dukkaana w-rahu tasaali I'll open a small 
shop, and it'll be a way to keep busy. landu rinsaniyya 
yuqaf - ma-landuuJ rahu maaji if he has any human 
feeling, he stops; if he hasn't, he keeps going. mif 
rariiba - rahu huwwa w-hiyya l.ayy i balc[ it's no sur-
prise; he and she are just the same. mif qult-i-lik -
rahu-nti geeti riid-ik facf.ya didn't I tell you (that you'd 
come empty-handed), and here you are, empty-
handed. rahu kida I-boos walla balaajnow that's what 
I call kissing! 
~i rahu Ifem rah£, pi rahuml demonstrative drawing 
attention to a preceding or following noun. 
riI-muzakkira malaaya rah£ I have the memo with me 
right here. b-atkallim larabi raM I'm speaking Arabic 
right now. rahum iI-qu~aan here are the shirts. 
43 
• IS • • 
"*-i reheeh, rihiih exclamation indicating disbelieving 
astonishment ... come off it! 
JO 
) 
raw Iconjl or. mumkin tiruub min hina raw hina you 
can go either this way or that. 
I ~ I J. see ~ I J J: riwaan 
:z ~ I J. see :z IS ~ .: rawaani 
""r' J • 
....~! riyaab: zihaab wi-riyaab there and back. ta1.kara 
l.haab wi- ryaab return ticket, round-trip ticket. 
.:J J • 
UJi rawit <Engl> lladj invarl {sport] out, out of play 
(ofa ball). 2/adv/2a {sport] out of play. 2b astray, off 
the mark. 3 Inl {broadc] output. 
[~. 
[.JI. roog In! {mus] name given to the note B half flat. 
~JI rawiig In! {mus] mode in Arabic music having E 
natural and G flat. 
IS ..;. J. see :z IS ..;. • : rujiyya 
.j4IJ 0 
i.)Ji '~Ji rooc[a <T ada> In pi ruwac[, 
riwac[, 
roc[aat/l room. jaqqa b-talat ruwaq a three-room flat. 
II rooqit taftiifmanhole, inspection shaft. 2 suite offurn-
iture. rooc[a xajab l.aan a beechwood suite. rooc[it 
noom (1) bedroom. (2) bedroom suite. 
.J.,jJ • 
. hi roofar <Engl over> Ifem n, pi -aatl {soccer] over-
head kick. ba-yilmil roofar he is going to kick it over-
head. bi-yirfal-ha roofar tawiila he puts it up in a long 
overhead kick. 
IJ JO 
Ji raa/ J 
(u) Ivil 1 to revert. 
raalit iI-ramlaak 
Ii- r~bab-ha 1- r~liyyiin the property reverted to its 
original owners. 2 to be destined, be bound, be certain 
(to do s.th.). ril-limaara di rayla Iis-suquU{ this build-

ing is bound to collapse. - vn fayalaan; ava faayil. 
J;i fawwil l l/adj invar, in nominal position! first. 
fawwil marra the first time. fawwil talat marraat the 
first three times. II fawwil fimbaarilj the day before 
yesterday. - fawwil fawwil fimbaarilj the day before 
the day before yesterday. 2 In pi fawaa fill 2a first part, 
beginning. fawwil ifjahr the first day of the month. 
fawaaril ifjahr the early part of the month. min il-
fawwil (1) from the beginning. (2) in the first place. 
fimsik il-xee{ min fawwil-u hold the thread by the end. 
min fawwil-u 1- faxr-u from beginning to end of it. rilli 
lu fawwil (u faaxir [prov] what has a beginning must 
have an end. II fawwil bi- fawwil on the spot, as soon as 
(it) comes, as in xall~Ju¥l-ak fawwil bi- fawwil do your 
work as soon as it comes to you (don't wait for it to 
accumulate). 2b top scorer (in an examination etc.). 
fawaa ril il-fa~1 the top students in the class. 2c the half 
of the domino which is not matched with a domino on 
the board. gihaar wi-fawwil-u bis-sih a domino with a 
four matching a four on the board and a three unmatch-
ed. fawwil-ak ya dooh wi-nta bil-beeJhere is a two (to 
match a two on the board) paired with a five. 
11 f'il-fawwil ladvl at first, first of all. da kaan il-fawwil 
that's how things used to be. ma-baliitj' tfuut lala 
fumm-i zayy il- fawwil she stopped dropping in on my 
mother the way she used to. {ammin·ni 1- fawwil set my 
mind at rest first. fil- fawwil bi-tliff il-balad first of all 
you go round the village. - fawwil ma Iconjl as soon as. 
fawwil ma tljull' rigl-ak fil-beet laayiz tiliawwim fti 
xinaalia as soon as you enter the house, you want to 
start a quarrel. fawwil ma faakul il-Iulima tUliaf lala 
lialb-i the moment that I eat my meal, it sets off 
heartburn. 
;U;~I fil- fawwila Inl [frozen contexts] the first stage or 
part. fil- fawwila lasal wit-tanya ba~al [prov] the first 
part is honey (i.e. nice) and the second onions (i.e. 
horrible) (said especially of marriage). ril-bani faadam 
ya b- fawwilt-u ya b- faxrit-u [prov] man gains either this 
world or the next. ril- fawwila bi-sm-illa wit-tanya 
bi-sm-illa wit-talta bi-sm-illa the first is in the name of 
God, and the second is in the name of God, and the 
third is in the name of God (a magic formula to exorcise 
the evil eye, often accompanied by rubbing of the sick 
person with the leaves of a corn cob). ril-fawwila faah 
wi-tanya faah wit-taalita faah the first line of each sec-
tion of a certain tripartite form of a mawwaal.1I fawwilt 
imbaarilj the day before yesterday. - ril- fawwila call by 
rag-ball player at the first service of each round. 
~;i fawwilakJi ladvl 1 first of all. fawwilakJi gum 
44 
yizuruu-na w-baldeen ... first, they came and visited us, 
and then .... daxalt il-maktab wi-fawwilakJi w-fana 
b-aftalj id-durg' ~ubaal-i tlawwar I went into the office 
and straightaway hurt my finger as I was opening the 
drawer. 2 not before, only. fawwilakfi n-nahar-da ~­
~ublj only this morning and not before. 
J;i fawwalf 1 ladj, fern fuula, pi fawaaril, fuwal! 
first. fid-dars il- fawwal the first lesson. fi{-{alaba 1-
fawaaril the top students. f~-~afIJa I-fuula the front 
page (of a newspaper). mufattif fawwal chief inspector. 
II mulaazim fawwal [mil] lieutenant. -ft- fuula in the 
first year (at school). 2 Inl First of all (epithet of God). 
11 fawwalan ladvl firstly (in enumeration). 
J;i fawwali ladj *1 basic, primary. fislaaf fawwali or 
fislafaat fawwaliyya first aid. talliim fawwali [obsol] 
basic education (not leading systematically on to furth-
er stages). 
.:..Q;i fawwaliyyaat Ipl nl basics. 
lr~;i fawwalaani ladj *1 first, initial. 
ril-f~1 iI-
fawwalaani the first classroom. fit-talatt ufhur iI-
fawwalaniyyiin the first three months. fil-mla{aat il-
fawwalaniyya the initial mistakes. 
1 J.,. 
J;i fawwil 2 Ivtl to misinterpret deliberately, twist 
(facts etc.). finta bi-tfawwil kalaam-i bjakl' ¥ariib 
you're twisting my words in an amazing way! -vn 
tafwiil; avalpva mifawwil. 
Jl';t. mifawwilaati In pi -yyal twister, garbler (of 
facts etc.). 
J;hl fitfawwilf Ivil to be misinterpreted deliberately, 
be twisted (of facts). - iva mitfawwil. 
3J.J< 
;u"i fuula Inl hopscotch. 
[. J .J < see loS [. J <: fall'lugiyya 
r.J< 
r"i foom <Engl> Inl [elec] ohm. 
IJ.J< 
.) faan I Ivi/: faan il- fawaan the time has come, as in 
faan i/-fawaan nitgawwiz balia it's high time we got 
married, ma-fanjil-fawaan nimJi it's not yet the right 
time for us to leave. 
.) faan 2 f : min faan Ii- faaxar from time to time, now 
and then. 
11 ril-faan f ladvl now. Ijatta I-faan up to now. 
.:,IJi fawaan Inl 1 appointed time. kull' Jeef bi-

'i'awaan-u'[proy] there's a proper time for everything. 
baldi fawaat il-'i'awaan too late. ga min yeer 'i'awaan he 
came unexpectedly. 2 season. 'i'awaan il-manga the 
mango season. 
.J:, i.J J • 
~Ji 'i'awanta <T aYanta> Inl trickery, deceit. 
'i'is-sagaayir il-yomeen dool rawanta cigarettes these 
days are a fraud. II sinima rawanta haatu fius-na the 
chant from the cheap seats of the cinema when the 
projector breaks down. - ladverbiallyl bi-yirkabu 
'i'awanta they ride without paying. II raalj rawanta he 
lost everything to no purpose. 
~) 'i'awantagi In pi -yyal cheat, swindler. 
1 0 J • 
• Ji 'i'ooh exclamation of exasperation. 'lana qalb-i 
Ijaasis 'linn a 
Ija-yilj~al Ijaaga mif kiwayyisa. - rooh 
Ija-yilj~al 'i'eeh bass 'I have a foreboding that something 
bad is going to happen.' 'For Heaven's sake, what could 
possibly happen?' 
2 0 J' see also 
0 I • 
• ;hl 'i'it'i'awwah Ivil to moan with pain or distress. -vn 
ta rawwuh f; ava mit'i'awwah. 
IIoSJ' 
IoSJ\.. marwa In pi maraawil refuge. 
.I)!! 'i'iiwaarf Inl provision of shelter. murassasaat 
'i'iiwaa'i' organizations for housing the destitute. 
2 1oSJ • 
~) ruuya <T oya> Inl variety of handworked edging 
(on the head-kerchief traditionally worn by women). 
J IoSJ , 
IS) rawa J (i) <prob Copt> Ivt/: ga-k rawa yirwii-k 
labus, may misfortune befall you! 
ISJi rawa 2 Inl see rawa J. 
loS' 
lSi ray f Iconjl in other words. rit-tawaagud hina 
riltibaari ray 'linn il-muwa;;af YUltabar mawguud 'i'iza 
kaanit jakiltit-u mawguuda we consider presence here 
as purely a matter of form, i.e. the official is considered 
to be present if his jacket is. 
11 ray (or 'lay) nalam it is true ... (but) ... , as in 'lay 
nalam 'i'inni qarabt-u laakin huwwa yistaahil it's true 
45 
1 hit him but that's only what he deserves. - 'lay or ('lay) 
w-allaahi (1) honest to God! (2) yes indeed! how true 
that is! 
Y loS' see Y J .: 'i'iyaab 
~ loS' see also 
~ loS and 
~ ~ loS 
~! 'i'iid Ifem n, pi rideen, rayaadi, w pron suff ridee-
(lst sing 'i'iday-ya, 3rd pi also 'i'iden-hum)1 1 hand, 
(loosely also) wrist, arm. xaduu min 'i'iid-i they took it 
out of my hand. rigil wi- riid-u faqya he returned emp-
ty-handed. baqit zayy il-lagiina f- riid-u she became like 
putty in his hands. laabis saalaf-'i'iid-u wearing a watch 
on his wrist. ril-mawquul ft-riid-i the matter is in my 
hands, 1 have taken charge of the matter. lala 'i'iid-ak 
if1imaal on your left. silt" laguuza masnuuda lala 
'i'iid-u an old lady leaning on his arm. bi-yilmil-ha b-
riid-u (I) he makes them himself. (2) he makes them 
by hand. bi-yilmil-ha lala riid-u (1) he makes them by 
hand. (2) he has them made under his supervision. 'i'iid 
lala 'i'iid tisaalid [proy] many hands make light work. 
rilli riid-u fil-mayya mif zayy illi 'i'iid-u ftn-naar [proy} 
(he whose hand is in water is not like him whose hand is 
in fire) == you can't advise one in a situation different 
from your own.llmidd i 'i'iid-ak (1) help yourself! (as an 
invitation to eat). (2) lend a hand! join in! - 'i'iid-u 
xafiifa he's light-fingered - 'i'iid-u naffa he's tight-fisted. 
- fiid-u twiila he's a thief. - fiid-u waqfa he's a poor 
worker. - riid-u salka he's a skilled worker. - 'i'iid-u 
maxruuma or fiid-u sayba he's open-handed, he's ex-
travagant. - rilli f- riid-u mif lu he's very generous. -lala 
'i'iid(-) in (his) presence, in front of (his) eyes, as in 
xallii-k lala riid-u lamma yxall~ if1uyl stay close by 
him till he finishes the job, kul/-u kaan lala 'i'iid-ak it all 
happened in your presence. -lala 'i'iid-ak ya fusta stop 
here, driver! -Iamma tuqaf lala fiid-ak [proy] (when 
you stand on your hand) == when pigs fly. -lala 'i'ideen 
at the hands of, by way of, as in riI-Ija:g i gaa-Ii lala 
rideen waaljid yariib good luck came to me at the hands 
of a stranger. -talab 'i'id-ha he asked for her hand in 
marriage. - 'i'agwaz-hum fi-'i'idee-hum their husbands 
are under their thumbs. -fi-fiid-(u) 'linn ... it is in (his) 
power to ... , as in ft- riid-ik rinnik tinawwari Ijayaat-ik 
it's in your power to brighten your life. - riid-ak lala 
give, hand over! as in 'i'iid-ak lalafilin hand over five 
piastres! - fiid wara w-'i'iid quddaam empty-handed. 
- 'lana min riid-ak di 1- riid-ak di I'm completely at your 
disposal. - 'i'iid-i lala fiid-ak lead on! - riid-i f- 'i'iid-ak 
let's co-operate! -huwwa riid-i w-rigl-i 1 can't do with-
out him. -Ia min riid-u wala min rigl-u in no way con-

nected with him. - riid-ak wil-fartl. it's a hopeless case. 
fiid-ak minnu wil-farq he's a hopeless case, you can't 
depend on him for anything. 2 foreleg (of an animal). 
3 handle (cf yadd). fiid mi(jaffa broom handle. IIfiid 
hoon pestle . 
.0 fayyid Ivtl to support. -vn ta fyiid; ava mifayyid. 
~h\ fitfayyid Ivil to be supported. - iva mitfayyid. 
j loS ~ 
J-.! fiir f In pI fuyuurl penis. 
IoSjloS~ 
loS-id fiizi <Engl> l/adj invarl easy, relaxed. bint' 
fiizi an easy lay. 2 ladvl easily, relaxedly. xud il-I;ikaaya 
fiizi take the matter simply. 
1 
'-":.. loS ~ 
~\ faayis Ivil to act with desperate courage, take a 
great risk when faced with no alternative. tigii-jnifaayis 
- ya (jaatil ya ma(jtuu/let's do our damnedest - all we 
have to lose is our lives! -vn mifaysa; ava mifaayis. 
1 IJ" loS ~ see IJ" loS , ~ : faayis 
..; loS ~ 
~ 
i feef linterrog pronl what? (mainlyin proverbs and 
set phrases). feef [arraf-ak how did you find out? feef 
ti[mil il-malta fil-wijf il-[ikir [pro v] (what can the tire-
woman do with an ugly face?) "" you can't make a silk 
purse out of a sow's ear. feef gaab li-gaab "" there is no 
comparison, the one is not a patch on the other. feef 
I;aal law ... what would happen if ... , as in feef I;aal 
ba(ja law libist-i-Iku I-badla l-kul;li (if you think I look 
smart now) what would you say if I put on the navy-
blue suit for you! 
~! fijmi[na linterrog partl 1 why (this) and not 
another? fijmi[na fana why pick on me? 2 response 
formula in (jafya jokes (see (jafya). 
..J# loS ~ 
~i fayqan f ladvl also. 
'JIoS' 
,)\i feela <prob Copt>: feela fubb, feela fubba "" 
heave ho! - also heela. 
-1oS~1oS~ 
fi!')\\ faylaynar <Engl> Inl eyeliner. 
46 
rloS~ 
.... oi fuyma <T oyma> Inl 1 wood-carving, decora-
tive relief work in wood. 2 plastic mouldings for de-
corating wall panels, fitted cupboards, ceiling, etc. 
~.,i fuymagi In pI -yyal wood-carver, carpenter 
specializing in decorative relief work. 
1 .;, loS ~ 
oJy-i faYUUn <Engl> In pI ·aatl [e/ee] ion. 
;'i fayyin f Ivtl to ionize. - vn tafyiin; ava mifayyin. 
;'h\ fitfayyin Ivil to be ionized. -iva mitfayyin. 
1.;,1oS~ 
oJ y-i fuyun, fuyin <T oyun> In pI -aatll ordinary win 
in backgammon, where the loser has succeeded in re-
moving at least one of his men from the board (cfmars). 
2 [coarse slang] an instance of sexual intercourse, a lay. 
e loS ~ 
"-! i feeh 1 linterrog pronl what? bi-t(juul feeh what do 
you say? ni[mil feeh what can (or: shall) we do? feeh 
i/-balaawi di what's all this trouble? I;a-ti(jlibii-ha 
¥amm' walla feeh are you going to turn nasty about it, 
or what? feen il-filuus. - filuus feeh 'Where's the 
money?' 'What money?' ma[aak filuus (jadd' eeh how 
much money do you have with you? II fil;na f- feeh walla 
f-feeh what's that got to do with the matter in hand? 
-ya-bn il- feeh you son of a so-and-so! 2 Irel pronl 
xallii-na nfuuf fintu [amaltu feeh let's look at what 
you've done. 
e.JloS~ 
6y-i faywa <Copt> linterjl yes. 
1 loS loS ~ 
.si fayy l/adj invarl any. fi-fayy' wa(jt at any time. 
[ala fayy' I;aal in any case. fayy' waal;id anyone. 
[andak fayy' fikra [an il- fuwaq do you have any idea 
about the rooms? 2 linterrog adj invarl what? bi-fayy' 
I;a(j(j by what right? 
~i fayyuha las fayy 1, but emphaticl any ... at all. 
fayyuha I;aaga any old thing. fi- fayyuha ma[had in 
some institute or other. laa finta wala tafiida wala 
simsima wala fayyuha maxluu(jin kaan not you, nor 
Tafida, nor Simsima, nor any living soul. 
1 loS loS ~ 
.si fayy sound expressing pain. 

1,,;,,;-
~! fiyyaa- I iw 3rd pers suffl demonstrative particle 
signalling identity (often with a pejorative connota-
tion). fi/-bint iyyaa-ha that girl - you know who. wirk 
iI-wizza fiyyaa-ha the leg of that very same wretched 
goose (we've all been talking about). fig-gamaac:a 
fiyyaa-hum these people, you know whom' I mean. 
2 iw 2nd pers suffl introductory particle signalling pro-
hibition. fiyyaa-k tihawwib gamb il-baab don't you 
dare go near the door! fiyyaa-k hiyya tiigi hina taani 
she'd better not come here again! 3 iw 2nd pers sing 
suffl introductory particle signalling hopefulness. 
fiyyaa-k yikuwlII r-rukkaab kull-u-hum sulaam I hope 
all the passengers are safe! 
47 
bl,,;,,;_ 
.~i fayyaah iinterji /childrenJ I what a shame! 
2 you're going to be in trouble! 
1 b ,,; ,,; _ see 
I ~ ,,; _: fayyuha 
Y.J...s,,; -
,-:",;i fayyuub iprop nl Job.~abr' fayyuub the patience 
of Job. 
b.J ...s ,,; -
.;i fayyuuh <Copt> /non-CaireneJ interjection sig-
nalling 
I emphatic 
confirmation. 
bi-tifham 
fil-c:arabiyyaat. - fayyuuh filla b-afham fil-c:arabiyyaat 
'Do you know anything about cars?' 'You bet I know 
about cars!' 2 forceful intent. fayyuuh ya gidc:aan 
I:J-acf.rab-u l:Jittit c:alc;a just wait, lads, till you see the 
beating I give him! 

(y) 
..,.. bi- I Ibefore 1st person sing b-I verb prefix with 
imperfect indicating continuous or habitual action. 
bi-tilmil feeh what are you doing? b-aruulJ hinaak kull' 
yoom I go there every day. bi-yikkallim larabi kwayyis 
he speaks Arabic well. kaan bi-yidris barra he was 
studying abroad . 
..,.. bi-2/w 1st person sing pron suff biyya, w 3rd person 
sing masc bii; other pron suffs bi(i)-I preposition in-
dicating I instrument or means. m-alJibb '1 fasaafir bil-
lja(r I don't like to travel by train. mumkin yitlJassin 
bit-tamriin he may improve with training. bi-tif(ar bi-
feeh what do you have for breakfast~ :1 cause. mabsuu( 
bi-wuguud-ak happy you are here. mif ljaadir faljul-lak 
farlJit-i biik ljadd' feeh I can't tell you how happy you 
make me! nifs-i f-layyil fafralJ bii I am longing for a 
child to rejoice in. 3 manner or mode. gayy' b-surla 
coming quickly. kallim-ha b-lJinniyya he spoke to her 
kindly.lJa;;-u bil-maljluub he is unlucky. xadt ik-kitaab 
minnu b-dilJk I kidded him into giving me the book. 
(abaxit bi-nifs she cooked willingly. 4 accompaniment 
or concomitance. jaay bi-laban tea with milk. xud 
iflaljlja bil-laf! ilti fiiha take the flat together with the 
furniture in it. fii lJadd' hina bil- fism' 4a is there any-
body here with that name? lila biyya wala lalayya mind-
ing my own business. -biina or yalla biina ... let's go! 
- fahlan biik conventional response to fahlan wa-
sahlan. 5 span of time or occasion in time. y~uum 
bin-nahaar wi-yif(ar bil-leel he fasts by day and breaks 
his fast at night. 6 equivalence in sale or recompense. 
ri/-leen bil-leen an eye for an eye. fiftareet kiilu ljuuta 
b-xamsa saalf I bought a kilo of tomatoes for five pias-
tres. qufr-i b-raljabt-u (my fingernail is worth his neck) 
... he's not worth mY,little finger. fitneen fi-xamsa b-
rajara two fives are ten. 7 degree of separation, 
48 
J 
• 
amount of difference. biliid lannu b-farbalt imtaar 
four metres away from it. fakbar minnak bi-yoom 
yilraflannak bi-sana {prov] (he who is) older than you 
by one day knows more than you by a whole year. 
8 standard of measurement, 
criterion. 
bi-ybiil 
iI-ljumaaj bil-mitr he sells the cloth by the metre. 
fil-iltiqaad da xaa(if bil-mafhuum ig-gidiid this belief is 
wrong according to the new understanding. g01.-ha 
bi-Ylfiib bis-sana her husband stays away for a year at a 
time. fana b-ajtBlfal bil-yomiyya I work by the day (i.e. 
I am paid by the day). ljasuu bil-milli (1) they mea-
sured it by the millimetre. (2) they measured it accur-
ately. 9 sequence or succession. fiddii-ni taljriir yoom 
bi-yoom give: me a report day by day. fimji xa(Wa 
b-xa(Wa ... go very slowly. mallii-ni kilma b-kilma dic-
tate to me very slowly. xallii-na ni~arraf walJda b-
walJda ... let's act very cautiously. 
11 ... bi-ma fii- r ... including ... , as in fil-lulJuum 
mamnuula bi-ma fiiha s-samak flesh is forbidden, in-
cluding fish. - bi-ma finn Iconjl since, in view ofthe fact 
that, as in bi-ma finnak ma-gibt'l huduum-ak tiblja 
trawwalJ you go home since you haven't brought your 
clothes. -bi-duun see duun I: 
_Iy 
.~ baaf Ifem n, pi -aatl second letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also bih. beeh. 
yly see y.Jy:baab 
Ilyly 
~~ baaba <Gr pappas, cf also P and T baba> Inlllpi 
babawaatl {Chr] pope, pontiff, patriarch.:1 !no pI/ dad-
dy, father.llbaaba lfannuug dip made ofsesame paste, 
garlic and mashed roasted egg-plant. -la/a baaba ... 

whose leg do you think you're pulling?! 3/no pI! affec-
tionate form of address to the very young. 
I.S-"~ baabawi ladj *1 [Chr} papal, patriarchal. 
Z( I yly) 
~ ~ baaba I In pi -aatl[obsol} text of a shadow puppet 
play. 
4!~ baaba 2 <Copt> In! second month of the ·Coptic 
year (mid-October to mid-November). baaba xuj/ (or 
fudxul) wi-t;ftl il-bawwaaba Baaba, come in and close 
the door (against the cold). zarl; baaba yiy/ib in-
nahhaaba the crops planted in Baaba (are so great that 
they) overwhelm plunderers. 
1,;,ly 
\;~ baata: baata baata see baata. 
C. I y see c..J y : baaba 
Ioply 
I.S.)~ baadi Inonce word!: baadi baadi siidi mbammad 
il-baYdaadi (or il-buydaadi) jaal-u w-baa-u la/aa-di 
children's counting rhyme ... eenie-meenie-mynie-mo 
etc. 
(.)Iy) 
.)~ baar l <prob Engl> In pi -aatl I bar, bar room. 
2 drinks cupboard. 
.)~ baar2 <poss Fr barre> Inl [auto} axle . 
• .)~ baara <T para> In pi -aatl[obsolj one-fortieth of 
a piastre, one-fortieth of a piastre piece. 
1~ly 
l.:.~ baaja <T p8§a> In pi -waat/l Pasha, formerly a 
title of, and form of address and reference to, highest 
ranking officers and officials, now commonly used in 
respectful address to high officials (particularly police 
officials). 2 term of address used to both men and 
women to indicate familiarity.juufya baaja - fin kaanit 
fuxt-ak layza tsaaftr laazim tisaaftr mBGaaha look, old 
chap. ~f your sister wants to go on a journey, you must 
I!o with her.llya baaja flirtatious remark to a woman in 
the street ... how pretty! 3 supercilious person. faxuu-k 
da baaja that brother of yours doesn't give a damn 
about anything. 
1u""ly 
u""~ ba~ (also bas) <Fr basse> In pi ·aatl [mus} 
49 
la double-bass. Ib viola da gamba, cello. 2a bass line 
in music. 2b left hand music for piano. 2c left hand bass 
buttons on an accordion. -/adj invarl 3 bass. 
Z u"" I y 
see I.S u"" Y : ba~a 
1.1.ly 
.l.~ baael lcoll nl sycamore figs, not slit open when 
small, and therefore inedible when ripe. 
~~ baaea I Ipl -aatl unit noun of baael. 
Z(.1.ly) 
.l.~ baae2 In pi -aat/l armpit. II baae-u win-nigm he has 
nothing to his name, he's flat broke. - xad(-u) (or gaab 
(-u) tabt; baae-u to gain control over (s.o.), as ineablan 
baal-u maafi fiza kaan waaxid balta I-mudiir tabt; baae-
u of course he's doing all right since he's got even the 
director under his thumb. -xajj; fti baaeor nizil wayyaa 
baae he wrestled with him (using his arms). 2 [naut} 
chine. 
~~ baata2 <It palla>: tilil baata (1) to come out a 
draw, as in (illu baata they drew, fil-lajara (illit baata 
the round ended in a draw. (2) to be fruitless (of effort), 
be vain (of an attempt). 
\J"'.1.1 y 
..,.J.~ baa(is Inl strip of leather between the sole and 
insole of a shoe . 
tly see It.Jy:baBG 1 
tly 
t.1.r baBY <T baga> In! I tortoise-shell. 2 celluloid. 
~~ baaya In pi -aat/l piece of celluloid. baayit saala 
watch glass. 2 collar stay, collar stiffener. 
lolly 
J~ baat; <perh Copt>: far(tbaat; land into which the 
remains of a barsiim crop have been ploughed to fertil-
ize it. 
.!Ily 
.!I~ baak <Eng!> In pi -aatl I [soccer} back. baak 
raayit right back. sird i baak third back. 2 backhand in 
tennis, ping-pong, and other racket sports. 
r.!lly 
rS"~ baakim <perh Engl vacuum> Inl hydraulic sys-
tem. zeet baakim hydraulic fluid. 

-' .!ll ..... 
."s'~ baaku <It pacco> In pI bawaakl. bakuwaa/. 
bakaawi J I packet, pack. bawaakl duxxaan saayib pack-
ets of loose tobacco. baaku faay packet of tea. 
I J I ..... 
~~ baa/a I <It balla> In pI -aall bale. baalll qU{1l a bale 
of cotton. IIlissa {aalll mll-baala brand new 
1 J I..... see 1 1$ J ..... : baa I I 
..:.. J I ..... 
~~ baalil <perh Fr> In pI -aall (painter's) palette. 
.:, I ..... 
.J~ baan Inl [bol[ Egyptian willow (Salix aegyptica). 
ru~n iI-baan epithet for a woman with a slender and 
graceful figure. 
I.;, I ..... 
\;~ baana. fJaana w-baana this and that. sibna-haa-Iak 
beefl fJaana w-baana we've left the matter for you to 
decide between this (solution) and that. 
• I ..... 
o~ baah f <Copt> In pI -aall penis. 
1$1 ..... 
-s~ baay <prob Copt>: ya baay exclamation of incre-
dulou~ di~may. da b-yilmillamaaylf - ya baay or .va 
baay lala lamayl-u my! he does such outrageous 
things! 
..... 1$ I..... see ..... 1$ ..... : baa.\"Ib 
cycy 
~~ bafbaf Ivil to bleat. -vn bafbafa: ava I1l1bafbaf. 
j 
~ ..... see 
I j 1$ ..... : biir, bufra. bur" 
..,.,~ ..... 
..r~ bafs, baas: la baas or Iii barS" la/a ... a get-well 
wish"" I hope It'S nothmg senous. la ba rs' bi- f not 
inSignificant, not bad, as m kml/1l1yya la bafs' bilha a 
not mSlgnlflcant quantity, not a bad quantity. 
..ry. bufs Inl misery. -/ad\ectivallyllllfa bufs a miser-
able life. 
.;, -' ~ ..... 
4;y' bafuulla <Copt> Inl tenth month of the Coptic 
so 
year (June to July). ba fllllllil iI-fJagar stone-dry Ba 'una . 
(i-ba fllllfla la y/lutmb {lIl1b wa/a IIIliml/ muuna in 
Ba 'una mud brick~ ~hould not be set, nor should mortar 
be made. bafuIIIla b,-ma/f'f I/-mayya mlz-vir Ba'una 
dnes the water out of the mI'. 
.Jl, I .......... 
.J;.~ babaa~ Icoll nl papaya (Canca papaya). 
I 1$ I .......... 
~~ babaaya <Sp> Icoll nl papaya 
..... .......... 
~ babba linteql Iellllclrelll "" I am cross With you! 
~ bubba Imter)1 lehilclretll warning to a child m dan-
ger of fallmg 
)..:.. .......... 
of,-! blbura, plpura <Fr pupitre> In pI -aatl music 
~tand. 
-t ............... 
.J~ babba)'aall In pI -aatl parrot. -also barbaraan. 
• -' J .......... 
o.h bibilooh <Fr bibelot> In pI -aatl knick-knack. 
.;, 1$ J .......... 
~.,. bublilll <Engl or Fr> In pI -aatl poplin. 
r I.:, .......... 
C~.Yo bublllllClJ <Fr boblllage> Inllelee/l coil sIlk 
il-bublllllClJ (m~ulatc"') wire for COlI~. 2 cOIl system, 
armature. - abo bubtllla. 
j -' .......... 
).Yo~ babuur (also baguu,r i ) <perh It I'apore> In 
pI ball'abirr (balI'agirr), bawabl;r (ball'agirr)1 I (primus) 
~tovc. babllllr Slbtrlu Spirit Move. babuur gaaz pnmus 
~tovc. 2 ShiP, motor-driven vessel. 3 locomotive, train. 
babllur bulaala goods tram. babuur flhrbrees express 
tram. 4a engme or motor. babuur larab,yya car en-
gme. 4b any of a variety of machme~ dnven by a motor 
or engine. babllur If-yaruqa fire-engine. babuur {lfJlin 
grist mill. babuIII' (lalllg gmnmg factory. babuur zala{ 
steamroller. - al~o lI'ablllll'. 
r"-' .......... 
~.Yo ~ babllllllig. fllY 
babult/llg camomile. - also 
babllullI. 

~ :.J.J y y 
JYo~ hablllllli. fiil, ba/JlIlilli <P biibuna> camomile. 
- also babllllllig. 
.J~y y 
~ 
Yo bubiina <It bobina> In pi -aarl 1 bobbin, reel, 
spool. 2 Ie/eel coil - also bubinallj 
1 o~yy 
~ bibeeh <Fr bebe> In pi -aarl baby. 
J~ bibehaari ladjl pertaining to babies, babybh. 
20~y Y 
~ bibiih <Fr pipi> Inl Ichildren/ urine.lamal bibiih 
to urinate. 
.J.J~yy 
.; ~ babYlIlIna <Fr papillon> In pi -aarl bow tie. 
e;:1..:..y 
c\; -" buraaj <Fr porage> Inl soup. 
...... I..:.. y 
...... \; Yo buraas <Fr porasse> 1 potash. 2 lye. II buraas 
famrikaani a stain remover made from lye. - also 
bll{aas 
t. 1..:.. y 
t. ~ biraal lin constr; fern biraalir, pi bill/lIl1 nominal, 
in free and 
appo~itional constructions, indicating 
13 po~session. fil-musaddas biraal-i (I) my pistol. 
(2) the pistol is mine. fijfan{a bralit-ha (I) her bag. 
(2) the bag helong~ to her. fik-karaa.li brill-lid (1) our 
chair~. (2) the 
chair~ are ours 
Ib concomitance. 
filfaraamil bitaalit il-larahiyya the car hrakes. lal!' 
zayy' btaal foqt-ak furniture like that in your room. 
23 association. fir-raagil bitaal il-C;lIu{a the man with 
the tomatoes, the tomato vendor. bitaal ii-laban the 
milk man. bituul il-fann those who have to do with art, 
i.e. artists, art dealers etc. raagil bitaal rabb-i-na a 
pious man. finti ya btaalit ljasan you, Hasan's woman! 
2b Iw indef nl ascribability, tendency or inclination. da 
kalaam bitaal sittaat that's womanish talk. mij bitaal 
masfuliyya an irresponsible type. bitaal fafkaar 
shrewd. fana mij bitaal gawaaz I'm not the marrying 
type. fitiwwaat bitlllll xinaac; quarrelsome bully-boys. 
bitaal niswaan philanderer. II bitaal liyaal pederast, 
child molester. - bitaal feeh (I) why? what for? as in 
bitaal feeh taaxud gineeh why should you take a 
pound? (2) how come? as in bitaal feeh ma-C;lIlt i-Iuu-j 
51 
how come you didn't tell him') 3 genitive relationship. 
fis-sittaat hill/Ul fingiltira the women of England, En-
glish women. fil- fasaar hitaalit ma~r Egypt's historical 
monument~. bitaal zamaan of a long time ago, of the 
old days. 4 approximation. bitaal saala ahout an hour. 
gibr' braal kiilu I hrought ahout a kilo. -
Istanding 
independentlyl 5 (and) what nol. (and) so on. ruljna 
s-suuc, wi-btaal we went to the market and so on. 
yimkin nilaa(ji !Jiltit gild' (w-jhitaal we may find a hit of 
leather or what not. 6 fil-bitaal6a the thingumajig, the 
whats-its-name. the doings. 6b leuphem/ sexual organ. 
'..:....:..y 
~ batt I (i) Ivil to come to a decision. reach a decisive 
conclusion. laazim nibitt' fil-mawquul da we must 
make up our minds about the matter. lagnit ii-batt the 
decision-making committee. mamnuul manl' baatt 
strictly forbidden. -vn batt; ava baatt; pva mabtuur . 
~ batta I instance noun of batt. 
\;~ bataatan r 1 ladv, always w negl ever, at all, what-
soever. 
ma-fiif 
fayy' 
llaac;a 
bataatan 
been 
il- fijtirakiyya wid-diin there is no relationship what-
soever between socialism and religion. 2 linterjl cer-
tainly not! not at all! bi-tiddaayic; min wugulld-ifil-beet. 
- fabadan w-allaahi - bataatan 'Are you annoyed at my 
b.eing in the house?' 'Not at all! No no!' 
.......,;1 fitbatt 
Ivil 
(impersonal) 
passive 
of batt. 
fil-mawquul da rbatt' fii walla la has that matter been 
settled or not? - iva mirbatt. 
..:.,.;1 finbatt = firbatt. - iva minbatt. 
2 ..:.. ..:.. y 
see also ''':''.J Y 
~ bait 2 (i) Ivil: batta tbitt-ak 
(w-a~balj silr-ak) 
indignant response by one addre~sed as ya bitt (q.v. 
under 1 ..:.. .J y 
). 
~ batta 2: batta rbitt-ak see batt 2 . 
~ bitt I see bint. 
3( ..:....:..y) 
~ bitt 2: 
bitt 
il-widn 
[anat/ 
mastoid 
process. 
qarab-hum lala hitt' wdan-hum he boxed their ears. 
;; bittiyya In pi baraari. bittiyyaarl wooden tub. 
.J!..:....:.. y 
J~ bittaaw. battaaw <perh Copt> Icoll nl type of 
br~ad made of Indian millet (dura lweega). 
.J~ bittaawa. battaawa lunit n. pi -aatl a loaf of 
bittaaw. 
.sJ~ bittaawi. battaawi = bittaaw. 
~J~ bittawiyya, battawiyya = bittaawa. 

.!l.:..:.y 
~ 
batatak: Ijatatak batatak rapaciously, feverishly, 
frantically. nizil Gala I-Geef Ijatatak batatak he gobbled 
up the bread ravenously. nizlit Galee qarb B Ijatatak 
batatak she beat him frenziedly. 
.11[..:.y 
j~l;y' 
butagaaz <Fr Butagaz> InJ 1 trade name 
under which bottled butane gas is marketed for com-
mercial use. 2/pl -aatl cooking stove. butagaaz bik-
kahraba an electric cooker. 
.) .:. y 
p. batar, batarT (u) Ivtl (surg] to amputate. -vn batr, 
batr; ava baatir, baatir; pva mabtuur, mabtuur. 
.h;1 I'itbatar, !,itbatar Ivil to be amputated. - iva 
mitbitir. 
J.J.)':'y 
JJ? bitrool <Fr petrole> Inl oil, petroleum. 
JJfi bitrooli 
l/adjl pertaining to 
petroleum. 
mawadd' bitroliyya petroleum products. 2/adj invarl 
smoky-grey in colour. 
iJ.J.) .:. y 
I.JJ fi batmon <Fr patron> In pI -aat, -aatl paper pat-
tern (for a dress etc.). 
4;Jfi batroona <It padrona> = batroon. 
IS.) .:. Y 
~.;~ batari <Fr batterie> Inl set of drums. 
J. IS .) .:. y 
~? butriiJ <It pulitrice> Inl [eng] polishing 
machine, buffer. 
iJ IS .) .:. Y 
~~ batriina <It vetrina> In pI batariin, batrinaatl 
1 show-case. 2 shop-window. 3 glass-fronted set of 
shelves fixed to a wall by the road-side to displ{lY small 
items for sale. -also vatriina. 
- .J J. .:. y see J. y : bitfawiiJ 
I t .:. y 
t'~ baatiG ladj °11 powerful, effective (especially of a 
saint). sirr-u baatiG his power is overwhelming. II l'iI-
batGa epithet of Sayyida Zaynab. 2 having the power to 
read minds, tell the future etc, (of a sorcerer or 
magician). 
52 
1 t .:. y 
see t 1 .:. y : bitaaG 
1.).J"';,:,y 
.)~ bitifuur <Fr> Icoll nl petits fours. 
o.)~ bilifuura lunit n, pI -aatl a petit four. 
~I.)~ bitifuraaya lunit n, pI -aatl = bitifuura . 
1.).J"';,:, Y 
o.)fo. batafuura <perh It buttafuori> In pI -88tl davit. 
J':'y 
~ 
Yo butCja In pI bawaatiCjI crucible, melting-pot. -also 
budCja . 
J.:. y 
Ji'! batuul Imasc and fem adjl celibate, virgin. 11!'i/-
batuul the Virgin (Mary). 
~i'! batuliyya Inl [Chr] celibacy, virginity. 
~I I'itbattil Ivil 1 [lsi] to be devout in worship. 
2 {Chr] to devote oneself to a life of celibacy or virgin-
ity. -vn tabattul; ava mutabattil. 
.:..:.J.:.y 
~ batalitta <Fr patelette> In pI -aatl flap or fly on 
clothing. 
JJ.:.y 
A 
bitillu <It vitello> Inl veal. -ladjectivallyl 
I'if-Ialjm iI-bitillu faljlj iI- !'ayyaam di veal has become 
scarce these days. 
IS J.:. y 
\".I; Yo butifya <It bottiglia> linterjl bottles! (rag-and-
bone man's cry). 
r .:. y 
see iJ':' ~ : 
bitm, 
battaama, 
battim, 
I'itbattim 
iJ IS r .:. Y 
.:r--i'! bitumiin <Engl> InJ bitumen. 
iJ .:. y 
..:F! bitn (also bitm) <Copt> In pI butuunl [agric] ridge 
between furrows or patches of cultivation (see PI.E, 
20). 
~ bitniyya = bitn. 
4;~ battaana (also battaama) In pI -aat, batatiinl 
{agric] implement for making ridges in the earth to 
m,?rk off irrigation units (see PI.D, 5). 
..:F! battin (also battim) Ivtl to make ridges in (fields) to 

mark off the units of irrigation. -vn tabtiin; ava/pva 
mibattin. 
.:;;..;1 ritbattin (also ritbattim) Ivil passive of battin. -iva 
mitbattin. 
[,1 iJ":" Y 
[.I.:.;~ batinaaj, patinaaj <Fr patinage> Inll skating. 
2 Ipl -aatl skating-rink. 
, 
- [, iJ ..:.. y 
see - [, iJ ~ y: bitingaan, bitingaana, 
bitingaani 
- IJ'" iJ":" Y 
~.;;... batunsaleeh <Fr batons sales> Icoll nl long 
salted pastry stick(s). 
jlS":" Y 
~ bitiir <perh Fr patere> In pI bitaayirl [eleej block 
on which a ceiling-rose is mounted. 
.!lIS":" Y 
~ butiik <Fr> In pI -aat, bawatiikl boutique. 
J..!Iy see JIJ"'Y 
r I [, Y 
4.0~ bijaama, bigaama J <perh It pigiama> In 
pI -aatl pair of pyjamas. 
c:['y 
~. bigil:J ladj *1 impudent. 
~ 
1 rabgal:J lell morelmost impudent. 
4.~ bagaal:Ja Inl impudence. 
e=::~ baagil:J I ladj *1 impudent. 
~ 
baggal:J Ivil to behave impudently or insolently. 
ma-tbaggal:J1i fiyya do not be rude to me! -vn tabgiil:J; 
ava minaggal:J. 
&1 ritbaggal:J Ivil to behave impudently or insolent-
ly. -ava mitbaggal:J. 
~~ baagil:Jz Ivil to behave impudently or insolently. 
iiaGad yibaagil:J maGa rabuu he went on answering his 
father back. -vn mibagl:Ja; ava mibaagil:J. 
~l,;1 ritbaagil:J Ivil to behave impudently or insolent-
Iy. -ava mitbaagil:J. 
IS~[,Y 
~J~ bigudya <Fr bigoudi> Icoll nl hair-roller(s). 
t[,Y 
~ bagaG Icoll nl 1 swan(s). 2 [rurj pelican(s) . 
~ 
bagGa lunit n, pI -aat/l a swan. 2 [rurj a pelican. 
J~y 
~ baggi/t Ivtl to honour, venerate. -vn tabgiil; ava 
mibaggil; pva mubaggal. 
r [, "::' 
~ bagam In invarl oaf, dolt, blockhead. 
~ baggim Ivtll to dumbfound, make (s.o.) shut up. 
2L to put under anaesthetic. -vn tabgiim; ava/pva 
mibaggim. 
~I ritbaggim Ivill to be dumbfounded, be made to 
shut up. 2L to be put under anaesthetic. -iva 
mitbaggim. 
j .J <:: Y see j.J Y Y : baguur 
tlS[,Y 
~ 
Yo bujeeh <Fr bougie> In pI -aatll sparking-plug. 
2 candle (unit of light intensity). 
c:yc:y 
~ 
bal:Jbal:J I/vtl to loosen, make loose. bal:Jbal:J-li 
l-fustaan let the dress-out for me. 2 Ivi/2a to let oneself 
go, act without restraint. bal:Jbal:Jifwayya wi-dl:Jaki re-
lax and have fun! 2b to spend money freely. -vn 
bal:Jbal:Ja; ava/pva mibal:Jbal:J. 
~ 
mibal:Jbal:J ladj *1 la comfortably off, in easy 
circumstances. Ib out-going, easy-going, generous-
natured. 2a ample, loose. fustaan mibal:Jbal:J a loose-
fitting dress. 2b ample, generous. kiilu mbal:Jbal:J a 
good kilo. rig-gazzaar da wazn-u mbal:Jbal:J that butcher 
is always generous when he weighs (the meat). 
c.~ bal:Jbuul:J ladjl easy-going, amiable. 
~I ritbal:Jbal:J Ivill to be loosened. 2 to let oneself 
go, act without restraint. -ava/iva mitbal:Jbal:J. 
":"c:Y 
~ 
bal:Jtt ladjl pure, theoretical. riyaaqa bal:Jta pure 
mathematics. -/adverbiallyl da {abGan rigraar maali 
bal:Jt this of course is a purely financial procedure. 
..!Ic:Y see IJ"'C:Y 
1 c: c: Y 
; 
bal:Jl:J I Icoll nI ducks. 
~ bal:Jl:Ja I lunit n, pI -aatl a duck. 
~t; bal:Jl:Jaaya In pI -aatl a duck. 

2c.c.y 
b babb 2 (i) Ivtl to cause to become hoarse. fana 
babbeet ~oot-i caleek I lost my voice calling you. - vn 
babb. bababaan; ava baabib; pva mabbuub. 
~ babba 2 Inll hoarsenes~. 2 voice timbre. 
21 fitbabb Ivil to become or be made hoarse. - avaliva 
mitbabb· 
Jc.c. y 
b Dal,b I <Copt> linterjl [childrenj gone! finished! 
~ babba 1= babb. 
.Jc.y 
/'". babr In pi bubuur. bibaar. fubbur. buburaJ I 
I sea. fil-babr il-fabyaq (il-mutawassi[) the Mediterra-
nean Sea. mayyit babr salt water. flrmii fil-babr' yi[lac 
wi-f-bu(j(j-u samaka [provj throw him in the sea and 
he'll emerge with a fish in his mouth (said of one who is 
consistently lucky). yicmil il-bahr' [biina [provj (he 
makes out that the sea is [ibiina) "" he paints a rosy 
picture. kalb il-babr seal, sea-lion. fiil il-bahr elephant 
seal, walrus. II babr-u waasic it is endless or limitless, as 
in fil-cilm' babr-u waasic knowledge is infinite. 
- fil-babr' ybibb iz-ziyaada [provj (the sea wants more) 
"" those who have are never satisfied. -raagil babr a 
v~ry knowledgeable man. - fifrab mil-babr "" go to hell! 
- filii ~abbar-ni calajurb iI-babr ... "" after all I've been 
throl.gh (I can take whatever may come). -ma-badd'-J 
carif-lu barr' min babr "" you can't pin him down. 
-bubuur-u yawii[a he's a very deep person. 2 river, 
large canal. fil-babr or babr in-niil the River Nile. 
yiwaddii-k iI-babr' wi-ygiib-ak calfaan (he takes you to 
the river and brings you back thirsty) he's deceptive. 
3 span or period (of time). fi-babr' talat siniin within 
the space of three years. 48 span (of a girder or beam). 
4b swallow, space between the sheave and the shell in a 
pulloy-block. 5 Ipl bUQuur onlyl [poetj metre. 
.:r.,,,r,ll fil-babreen Iprop nl Bahrein. 
..s /'". babart," babri ladjl 18 pertaining to the sea. 
fac.faab babriyya seaweed. zublifa babriyya turtle. 
Ib nautical. cU(jda babariyya knot, one nautical mile 
per hour. 2 pertaining to a (large) river, especially 
the Nile. babri ya samak [vendor's cryj Nile fish! 
-/optionally invariablel 3 northern. balakoona babri (or 
babriyya) a north-facing balcony. II fil-wagh iI-babari 
Lower Egypt. -faatib beet-u cal-babri "" he keeps open 
house (of one who behaves extravagantly in order to 
impress). - Iprepl 4 to the north of, at the north of. 
fana saakin babari l-balad I live on the north side of 
54 
town. - ladvlS north(ward). fana msaafir babari I'm 
travelling north. 
~ 1 /'". babraaya In pi -aarl [rurl ground level section of 
a (jaaca containing step(s) giving access to the raised 
floor(s). 
..sJI/'". babraawi Ipl babarwa. babrawiyyiinl I/adjl 
pertaining to Lowe~ Egypt. pertaining to the Delta. 
2/nl a Lower Egyptian. zamaan kaanit 
bi-tib~al 
xina(jaat been i~-~acayda wil-babarwa in the past there 
used (often) to be quarrels between the Upper and 
Lower Egyptians. 
~ /'". babriyya Inl navy. fil-babriyya t-tuganyya the 
Merchant Navy . 
.~ bubeera In pi -aatllake. 
.~I fil-bibeera Iprop nl Beheira. a provlOce in the 
western Nile Delta. 
..s~ bibeeri ladj pi babayral pertaining to Beheira. 
.J~ babbaar In pi babbaara. babbariinl sailor. 
..sj~ babbaari ladj invarl [carpI rabbeted. wa~/a 
babbaari a rabbeted joint. 
~ babbar Ivil to travel northwards. -ava mibabbar. 
';"'1 fitbabbar Ivil to become erudite, study exten-
sively. - vn tababbur; ava mitbabbar. 
..,...c.y 
~ 
babas (a) Ilvtl to investigate, examine, study. 
ba-nibbas (f-)il-mawquuc da we shall investigate this 
matter. 2 Ivil to look, search. bi-yibbas can fafkaar 
gidiida he's looking for new ideas. -vn babs; ava baabis; 
pva mabbuus. 
~ 
babs In pi bubuus, fabbaasl I research, study. 
markaz iI-bubuus iz-ziraciyya the Agricultural Re-
search Centre. 2 report, study, paper. 
.;.... ~ baabis I In *1 researcher, research worker. baabis 
igtimaaci social worker. 
~ 
mabbasf In pi mabaabisl [acadj research topic, 
thesis. mabbas fil-man(iq a thesis in logic . 
.;....l,.. mabaabis Ipl nl police investigation depart-
ment. fil-mabaabis iI-camma Central Criminal Inves-
tigation Department. mabaabis famn id-dawla Bureau 
of Investigation for National Security. mabaabis it-
tamwiin enforcement arm of the Ministry of Supply. 
..;......,.;1 fitbabas Ivil to be investigated, be examined, be 
studied. -iva mitbibis. 
.;....~ baabis 2 1vtl to hold a discussion with (s.o.). -vn 
mubabsa; ava mibaabis, mubaabis r . 
.;....1.,;1 fitbaabis Ivil I to discuss together. 2 to be in-
volved in discussion. - avaliva mitbaabis. 

JJc":,, 
~ 
baylaq Ivil to starc, be goggle-eyed. waqfiin 
tibaylaqu leeh why are you standing staring? mij qaadir 
!'anaam wi-lellay-ya mbaylaqa 1 can't sleep and my 
eyes are wide open. II !'akl i w-bay/aqa ... looking a 
gift-horse in the mouth. - vn baylaqa; ava mibaYlaq. 
jl t ":" 
I)~ buxaara Iprop nl Bukhara. 
\S)~I !'iI-buxaari Iprop nl el-Bukhari, ninth-century 
compiler of a canonical assemblagc of Prophetic tradi-
tions. IIhuwwa-yna rli(na fil-buxaari ... was it such a 
heinous mistake we made? 
t":"t":" 
~ 
baxbax Ilvtl to sprinkle. 2/vil to develop air-
pockets (of cement or metals). - vn baxbaxa; ava 
mibaxbax. 
~I !,itbaxbax Ivil to be sprinkled. -iva mitbaxbax. 
..:Jt":,, 
~ 
baxtln pi !'abxaat. buxuut/l fortune,lot. yimkin 
iI-bint i di tkuun min baxt-i perhaps it will be my lot to 
marry this girl. !'i1-baxt U land allaah one's fortune de-
pends on God. !,inta w-baxt-ak it depends on your luck. 
!,iI-baxt i kaan !,iswid it was rotten luck. 2 good luck, 
good fortune. ya baxt-u how lucky he is! baxt-ak ya 
rabu bxiit (1) try your luck. (2) lucky dip. qaliil iI-baxt i 
ylaaqi I-laqm i fil-kirja (provJ an unlucky man will find 
bones (even) in tripe. qiraa( baxt i wala faddaan ja(aara 
(provJ ... an ounce of good luck is better than a pound of 
cleverness. 3 lalso pi buxutal surprise package. 
~ 
bixiit/prop nl male given name. II baxt-ak ya !'abu 
bxiit (1) try your luck! (2) lucky dip. 
~ 
mibxit ladj °1 possessed of a lucky touch. 
~ 
mibaxxat ladj °1 = mibxit. 
j..:Jt":,, 
jb..,;1 !,itbaxtar Ivil to strut, swagger. -also !,itmaxtar. 
-ava mitbaxtar. 
I' • 
• C C ":" 
t:, baxx (u) Ivtll to spray (s.th.) with a liquid. ya-ngiib 
yadd i ybuxx ij-faqqa lajaan nix/~ min ~-~ar~iir we'll 
get someone to spray the flat to get rid of the cock-
roaches. 2 to atomize, spray (a liquid). baxxit mayya 
lala I-qami~ qabl i ma yitkiwi she sprayed the shirt with 
water before it was ironed. II !,id-dinya baxxit baxxa 
wayda w-ba((alil there was just a quick shower and then 
ss 
the rain stopped. -vn baxx, baxaxaall; ava baaxix; pva 
mabxuux. 
~ b.axa Ipl -/Jatl instance noun of baxx. II baxxit 
lafa:iil a demon of a child. 
4>. ~ baxxaaxa In pi -aatl any dcvice whose purpose is 
to spray liquids (e.g., atomizer). 
~¥. buxxeexa In pi baxaxiixl = baxxaaxa. 
¢-'I !'ilbaxx Ivil to be sprayed. - iva milbaxx. 
&1 !'inbaxx 0: !'ilbaxx. -iva minbaxx. 
Z.tt ":" 
t:, bixx <Copt> interjection used to startle someone 
... boo! 
I 
• 
j C ":" 
)~ buxaar Inll steam, water vapour. mumkin li((ibix 
lal-buxaar it can be cooked over steam. II yallit buxaar 
pressure cooker. 2/pl !'abxiral vapour. 
razaal 
wi-!'abxira saamma poisonous gases and vapours. 
I.Sj~ bl,lXaari ladjl steam-driven. !'alaal buxariyya 
steam-driven equipment. 
)~ buxuur Inl incense. rafl i buxuur {ChrJ raising of 
incense, offering of incense. 
~i !'abxar ladj, fern baxra, pi buxrl exhaling mal-
odorous breath. !'iylarl i ya baxra !'abuus-ik mineen 
{provJ (I don't know where to kiss you because of the 
smell of your mouth) 1 am at a loss to know how to 
please you. 
• N 
mabxara In pi mabaaxirl I fumigator. 2 censer, 
thurible. 
• ~ 4 baxra, 
baaxira 
In 
pi bawaaxirl 
steamer, 
st~amship. 
~ baxxar Ivtl I to evaporate. 2 to fumigate. 3 to 
cense. - Ivil 4 to engage in flattery. !,it-Iabxiir Ii/-
mudiir flattering the director. 5 to respire (of plants). 
-vn labxiir; avalpva mibaxxar. 
• ~ 
labxiira Inl I Ipl -aall instance noun of tabxiir. 
2 Ino pI/ branch of folk medicine involving the use of 
incense. 
J1N mibaxxaraali In pi -yya/l one who censes or 
fu.migates shops and streets. 2 flatterer. 
';";1 !,ilbaxxar Ivil I to evaporate or be evaporated. 
2 to be fumigated. 3 to be censed. 4 to be or become 
diffused or dispersed. 
-vn 
labaxxur f; avaliva 
mitbaxxar. 
Z j t ":" see j It":" : buxaara. !'iI-buxaari 
I.l"'t":" 
~ 
baxas (i) Ivtl to cause a setback to. rabb-i-na 

baxas-u God upset his plans. -vn baxasaan. baxsa; ava 
baaxis; pva mabxuus. 
~ 
baxs ladj invarl very low (of prices). 
...,.......,.1 fitbaxas Ivil 1 to be caused a setback. 2 to be 
under-priced or under-valued. - iva mitbixis. 
..;..;ty 
~ 
mibaxFif 
ladjl 
perforated. 
bi-tit[imil 
in-namaazig di b-waraq marsuum wi-mbaxfiJthese de-
signs are made with paper, drawn upon and perforated 
(for transference to cloth used in tent making). 
~.J..;ty 
~ 
~ 
baxfawangi <T bahpvan> {obsol] In pi 
-yyal gardener. 
Jty 
~ 
bixil (a) Ivil to stint, become stingy or miserly. 
ma-tibxal-J' [aleena b-ziyart-ak "" visit us more often! 
-vn buxl. 
~ 
baxiil ladj pi buxalal miserly. 
~i fabxal lell more/most miserly. 
~I fistabxal 
Ivtl to consider miserly. 
-vn 
fistibxaal; ava/pva mistabxal. 
J~ty 
~ 
buxnuq In pi baxaaniql throat latch (of a bridle). 
~ J Y see I i.$ J Y : badaf. badf. bidaafi. mabdaf. 
fibtadaf. fibtidaafi. mubtadif 
c:. J Y see c:..J J y : baduuy 
I J J Y 
~ budd: La budd it is absolutely necessary, as in kaan la 
budd (min) inn' kull-u-hum yiruuyu all of them simply 
had to go.la budd' min taydiid il-masfuliyya it must be 
determined who is responsible (for what went wrong), 
rilli minnu la budd a [annu {prov] '"' what must be must 
be. miJwala budd not so good, only so-so, as in zooq-u 
miJ wala budd his taste is so-so. ma-fii-J [annu (or 
minnu) budd it is a must. 
~i fabadd ladj invarl callous, insensitive. 
~~ baddid Ivtl to waste, squander. fritter away. 
bi-ybaddid yayaat-u he's wasting his life. -vn tabdiid; 
ava/pva mibaddid. 
~-4' tabdiid Inl (leg] violation of trust. 
~~I fitbaddid Ivil to. be wasted, be squandered, be 
frittered away. - iva mitbaddid. 
56 
~I fistabadd Ivil to act tyrannically. bi-tistabidd' 
bin-naas kida leeh why do you treat people so arbitrari-
ly? -vn fistibdaad; ava mustabidd . 
\S~I..I.,.;.-I fistibdaadi ladj °1 dictatorial. 
2 J J Y see J J.J : bidd-
I.) J Y 
J~ badr In pi buduurl 1 full moon. Ilka-finnina ya 
badr'la ruyna wala giina "" as if we had done nothing, 
for all the effect our effort had. 2 Ipl also budural 
epithet for a good-looking youth or girl.llbadr' bduur 
"" a ravishing girl 
2 .) J Y 
J~ badar' (u) Ivil to come unexpectedly, come by 
surprise. huwwa - la samay allaah - badar minni kilma 
zaualit-u I inadvertently said something that upset 
him. 
\SJ~ badri ladvl early. lissa badri [ala gawaz-ha it's 
still too soon for her to get married.lizar[' badri (deris] 
well-built person. 
11 min badri ladvl (1) some time ago. xarag min badri he 
left a good while ago. (2) for a considerable time. fana 
mistannii-k min badri I've been waiting for you for quite 
a while. (3) a considerable time in advance. bi-yxa((a( 
lil-mafruu[ min badri he makes plans for the project 
well in advance. 
~J~ badriyya In pi badaaral 1 pullet. 2 Ipl also -aatl 
young ewe. - Ino pI! 3 early morning. ril-badriyya 
saa[a haniyya the small hours of the morning is a lovely 
time. 
\S)~ badaari: zar[ il-badaari the earliest planting of 
any crop. 
J~ i fabdar lell earlier/earliest. laazim tiigi fabdar min 
kida you must come earlier than that. 
J~ baddar' 1 Ivil to make an early start. xallii-na 
nbaddar fif-Jurllet's start early with the work. 2 Ivt/ to 
appoint an earlier time for (s.o.). huwwa [aayiz 
yibaddar-ni fil-ma[aad he wants to give me an earlier 
appointment. - vn tabdiir; ava/pva mibaddar. 
J~4 baadirf 1 Ivtl to be ahead of (s.o., in doings.th.). 
kunna za[laniin mala ba[4.' laakin lamma fuft-u 
huwwa·/li badir-ni b-tayiyya we were angry with one 
another. but when we met he was .the first to get in a 
greeting. 2 Ivil to hasten. baadir bi-tasliim i/-mablar he 
hastened to hand over the amount. -vn mubadra; ava 
mubaadir. 
oJ~1.,.. mubadra In pi -aatl {pol] initiative. 

;~I ristabdar Ivtl I to ask or cause to be earlier. 
ruuh istabdar-hum go and hurry them up! 2 to consider 
(too) early. -/vil 3 to make an early start. -vn 
ristibdaar; ava/pva mistabdar. 
3 J ~y 
)~ .• ;-'! badar 2 (u) Ivt! to scatter, broadcast, strew. 
bi-nubdur iI-kimaawi fil- rarq we spread the chemical 
fertilizer over the ground. bar;d i ball-a-ha b-nubdur 
it-taliaawi after it (i.e. the land) has been moistened we 
broadcast the seed. -vn badr, bidaar; ava baadir, 
baadir; pva mabduur, mabduur. 
;~ bizrlcoll n/seed(s), pip(s), stone(s). r;inabmin veer 
bizr seedless grapes. II vurzit iI-bizr {needlew} type of 
knot-stitch. 
• ;~ bizra In pI -aatli/unit! a seed, a pip, a stone. bizrit 
mifmif an apricot stone. bizrit xarruub a carob seed. 
2 Icolll seed(s), pip(s), stone(s).liutn i xaali min i/-bizra 
cotton with its seeds removed. 
~I;~ bizraaya = bizra. 
;J~ buzuurf Ipl nl seed(s) . 
..s.J!.-'! bideeri l ladj invarl mottled whitish-red colour 
(of pigeons) . 
• ;I~ •• ;I~ baddaara I In pI -aatl device used for 
sowing . 
..s;l~ baddaari, baddaari Inl method of planting rice 
by which the mature crop is cultivated directly from 
seed without an intervening stage of transplant. 
;..i.,;1 .;..I.,il ritbadar Ivil to be scattered, be broadcast. 
-iva mitbidir. 
4 J ~y 
.;~J! budra <Fr poudre> In pI -aatl powder. budrit 
talk talcum powder. budrit Iihaam welding flux. budrit 
hafiif powdered hashish. sukkar budra icing sugar. 
II budrit iI-r;alriit (1) itching powder. (2) tree of the 
genus Sterculia, the fruit of which contains hairs caus-
ing itching. 
• ;I~ baddaara 2 In pI -aatl powder dispenser. 
;~ baddar 2 Ivt! to powder, dust with powder. -vn 
tabdiir; ava mibaddar. 
;.l,;1 ritbaddar Ivil to be powdered, be dusted with 
powder. -iva mitbaddar. 
,jIJ~Y 
,:,I;-'! badraan: giziirit badraan area in north Cairo. 
r J ~ Y 
~;-,! badarga: fJadarga badarga the opening phra<;e of 
a chili:lren's counting game. 
57 
r.JJ~Y see ,j.JJ~y:badroom 
,j.JJ~Y 
':'J;-'! badroon (also badroom) <T bodrum> In 
pI -aatl basement, cellar. 
t~Y 
t-'! badar; (a) Ivt! to create, originate, invent. 
ril-hamaam huwwa-lii badar; iI-hubb it's pigeons that 
invented love. -vn badr;; ava baadir;. 
t-'! bidr; Inl {women} sauciness, brashness. 
~-'! bidr;a In pI bidar;/la innovation. Ib creation (in 
art, fashion etc.). 2a improp.riety, scandalous be-
haviour. 2b eccentricity, unconventional behaviour. 
3 heresy . 
fj-'! badiir; lladjl marvellous, wonderful. fikra 
badiir;a a brilliant idea. 2t In! (r;ilm) iI-badiir; literary 
ornamentation (one of the three branches of the study 
of Arabic rhetoric). 3 riI-badiir; Supreme Creator 
(epithet of God). 
~-'! badiir;a Iprop nl female given name. IIsamak 
badiir;a angel fish. -kubri badiir;a {obsol} bridge over 
the Nile at Cairo (later called kubri I-ga/aa r) joining the 
west bank and the southern end of Guezira Island, 
named after the dancer, Badi'a Masabni. 
t -'! i rabdar; I lel/ morelmost wonderful. 
t..l.,il ritbadar; Ivil to be created, be originated, ~ 
invented. ril-hubb itbadar; fi-balad-na love was 10-
vented in our cOUlltry. -iva mitbidir;. 
t~ baddar; Ivil to do wonders, perform marvel.s. 
riz-zamaalik baddar; bi-~ahiih in-nahar-da Zamahk 
(football team) was really great today. - ava mibaddar;. 
t-,!i rabdar;2 Ivil to excel, give a wonderful perform-
ance. rinta rabdar;t i Iii-mat/you played a great match. 
-vn ribdaar;; ava mubdir;. 
tl-'!! ribdaar; In! excellence. 
t -"! 1 ribtadar; Ivt! to invent. -vn ribtidaar;; ava 
mibtidir; . 
J~y 
j,i~J! budlia In pI bawaadilil crucible, melting-pot. 
- also butlia. 
J"sJJ~y 
.;$ -'! badikiir or bidikiir <Fr> In! pedicure. 
I J~y 
J-'! badal l (i) Ivt! to substitute. xallaa-ni mif ba~~ 
wi-badal iI-viweeja he distracted my attention and 

switched the hracelet. - vn badal; ava baadil; pva 
mabdllul. 
J~ badal l 
In 
pi -aall I substitute, replacement. 
laazim lislanna l-badalljabl' ma-Iljullm bil-fagaaza you 
must wait for the suhstltute (worker) before you go on 
holiday. badal faaljld replacement for something lost. 
2 exchange, swop. 
kllll' waabid bi-yifliri klaab 
wI-bald' fahr' yilmt/u badal each of them buys a hook 
and after a month they arrange a swop. 3 allowance. 
badallamsiil expense account. badal sahar extra pay-
ment for night work. badal {abiilil lamal hardship 
allowance. 
J~ badal 3 (also bidaal) Iprepl instead of. bi-Ylblal 
wakiil maklab-u badalu he sends his office agent in his 
place. 
~ badal ma, bidaal ma /conjl instead of. badal ma 
ymbisi{ balja middaayilj xaali~ instead of being pleased 
he became extremely irritated. 
4~ badaliyya In pi -aall [obsol] money paid for ex-
emption from military service, purchase money. 
JJ~ mabduul In *1 child believed to have been substi-
tuted by the jinn for another, changeling. II fil-wad-da 
zayy il-mabdulll that boy is very irritable. 
Jl~ bidaall Iconjl since, as long as. bidaal finla mfiil 
fis-slkka l-wibfa di yiblja mif ba-linfal since you've 
taken to living a bad life, you won't be good for any-
thing. 2/prepl = badal 3 . 
...k~ badiil Ipl badaayill I Inl substitute, alternative. 
2 ladjl substitute, alternative. 
;;Jl~ baddaala In pi -aall [agric] I Archimedes' screw 
(see PI. E, 15). 2 irrigation device consisting of a 
wooden box which is tipped back and forth. 
J~1 filbadallvil I to be substituted. 2a to be pos~es­
sed by a jinni. 2b to become annoyed or upset. saalil 
ma faaf il-faluura Ibadal wala baljaa-j ljadd' laartf 
yikallim-u as soon as he saw the bill ht: hecame very 
cross and nobody could speak to him. -a\ a/Iva mtlh/dtl 
J~1 finbadal = filbadal. - avaliva minbldil. 
J~ baddil l Ivtl to change, change around. layz-ak 
Ilbaddil il-lagala I want you to change the wheel. 
fll-waad bi-ybaddil (sinaan-u) the boy is losing his milk 
teeth. baddil id-dustuur he changed the constitution. 
-vn labdiil; avalpva mibaddil. 
J.i.,;1 fitbaddil Ivil I to change, become different. min 
yoom ma rigil wl-baal-u Ibaddil he's been different 
ever since he got back. 2 to be replaced (by a substi-
tute). fif-jan{a laazim ilbaddilil fil-lja{r the case must 
have been changed fo~ another in the train. fil-bukm' 
bil- fildaam ilbaddil bil-mu fabbad the death sentence 
58 
was commuted 
to 
life 
imprisonment. 
-avaliva 
milbaddil. 
J~~ baadil Ivtl to exchange with (s.o.). tibadil-ni do 
you want to swop with me? bi-litlimil btl-muqayqa faw 
bll-mubadla it is done hy means of bartering or ex-
change. -vn mibadla, mllbadla f; avalpva mibaadil. 
J~L,;1 filbaadil Ivtl to exchange with one another. bald 
il-lafa b-yilbadlu n-Ilukal il-la{iifa after supper they 
exchange amusing jokes. -vn labaadul; ava mitbaadil. 
J-4--~ 1 fislabdil Ivtl I to make a substitute for. 
b-aslabdil-lak baljlj-ak bi-hdiyya instead of paying you 
what lowe I'll give you a present. 2 to take out (a loan) 
with one's pension as security. fislabdtl xamsa gneeh 
min il-malaaf lala lafar sinim he got an advance 
against five pounds of his pension to be paid back over 
ten years. -vn flslibdC/al; avalpva mislabdil. 
Jl~ 1 fislibdaal In pi -aall loan made to an employee 
or pensioner with his pension as security. 
2 J ~ y 
Jl~ baddaal <Fr pedale> In pi -aall pedal. ma-Idus-j' 
lal-baddaal don't step on the pedal! marktb baddaal 
paddle-boat, paddle-ship. 
J~ baddil2 Ivil to pedal. b-abaddil bi-rigl' wabda 
I pedal with one leg. -vn tabdiil; ava mtbaddil. 
3 J ~ y 
;J~ .;;J~ badla In pi bidal, -aall I (man's) suit, 
(woman's) 
trouser-suIt. 
badlil 
¥U{S 
diving-suit. 
2 uniform. badla laskariyya military uniform. 3 belly-
dancer's costume. 
I.SJ~y 
.,.J~ bidalyu <It bardiglio> Inl type of grey marble 
oJ ~ Y 
.J~ badall In pi fahdaalll I hody, torso (of a human). 
~Ibbil il- fabdaan wala ~ibbll il-'fadyaan [prov] (health 
of bodies rather than health of religions) = a sound 
body produces a sound mind. -Ipl used for emphasisl 
haru fabdaan-i they gave me a thorough beating.lI~abb 
allaahu badan-ak conventional reply to~abb in-noom. -
baab il-badan anus. -risimmi badan-ha bil-kilmileen 
dool = you make her feel hurt by those words. 2 basic 
part onto which other parts are built, e.g., body of a 
wind instrument, tank of a primus stove, hull or prow of 
a boat, front and back sections of ~ galabiya or dress. 
3 uterus. 
J~ badani ladj *1 bodily, physical. riyaaqa badaniyya 
physical training. 

- [oJ J '":-' 
.:..~:,~ bidingaan (also bitingaan, biringaanJ) <P 
biidinjtin> Icoll nl eggplant(s), aubergine(s), II faadi 
zamaan il-bidingaan it's the silly season, it's the season 
for madness. 
;.;~:,~ bidingaana (also bitingaana) lunit n. pi -aatl an 
egg-plant, an aubergine. 
J~:'~ bidingaani (also bitingaani) ladi invarl dark 
purple. 
• J '":-' 
~~ badiiha Inl insight. perspicacity. badiht-u lJaqra, 
he is quick-witted. IIlala I-badiiha spontaneously. 
I.J J '":-' 
'>J~ badawi I In pi badwl bedouin, nomad. 2/adi *1 
pertaining to the bedouin. 
.>J..I,II fil-badawi Iprop nl Sidi Ahmad el-Badawi 
(popularly known as es-Sayyid el-Badawi). famous 
Muslim saint buried in Tanta, 
2 .J J '":-' see 215 J '":-' 
c:..J J '":-' 
U~ badulllJ [magic, obsolJ abecedarian compound 
word. sometimes represented by its value number 2468, 
and used a~ a lucky charm. 
I.> J '":-' 
i~ .I~ bada', hadaf' r (a) Ivil I to make a start, be-
gin. bi-tibda f bi-lJarf il- falif it begins with the letter 
falif. 2 Ipreverbl to begin to. fil-mumassiliin badu 
yizharu lal-masralJ the actors began to appear on the 
stage. -vn hadf. hidaaya: ava baadi, baadifr. 
i~ .I~ bada! (i), badaf! I (a) Ivtl to begin or start 
(s.th.).lJa-yibdi 1-lJafla b-fwmiyya he'lI begin the per-
formance with a song. fawwil ma nibdi I-qool ni~alli 
lala n-nabi when we begin the tale we bless the Prophet 
(opening phrase of popular stories). - vn badff, bady; 
ava baadi, baadifl: pva mabdi, mabduufl. 
• ~ badf Inl [athlJ start. badfd laali standing start. 
'".~ badya Ifem n. pi -aat, hidayl I casting-on point (in 
knitting etc.). law Jaddeet fatlit il-badya lJa-yitlJall i kull-
II if you pull the cast-on stitch undone. it will all unravel. 
2 frame. skeleton. foundation. 
~I~ bidaaya Inl beginning. start. min iI-bidaaya from 
the beginning. xa({ il-bidaaya [athlJ starting line. 
jl~ bidaafi, budaafi ladi *1 primitive. fann' bdaafi 
primitive art. xalla~u laleehum bi-(ariiqa budafiyya 
they finished them off in a savage manner. 
S9 
i~i fabda' lell having priority. taking precedence. 
huwwa fabda min gooz-ik he takes precedence over 
your husband. 
i...l,.oo mabdaf In pi mabaadifl I principle. conviction. 
min lJees il-mabdaf on principle. raagil ma-landuuj 
mabdaf an unprincipled man. 2 beginning. starting 
point. min mabdaf iI-famr right from the start, as in 
fana quit' min mabdaf il-famr' laazim nidfal illi 
laleena I said from the very beginning that we should 
pay what we owe. 
11 mabdafiyyan ladvl (I) in principle. (2) originally, in 
the first place . 
• 
i~l,.. mubadfa In pi -aatl initiative, initiatory action. 
L,;I .15...1.,.> 1 fitbada, fitbada f Ivil to be started, be 
begun. -iva mitbidi . 
.s~ badda Ivtl to give priority to. lumr-u ma-badda 
fa~lJaab-1I lala qarayb-u he never puts his friends be-
fore his relatives. - vn tabdiyya: ava/pva mibaddi . 
.s.:i.,;1 fitbadda Ivil to be given priority. - iva mitbaddi. 
I~I fibtada I Ivtl to begin. start, bi-nibtidi I-lamal 
bi(-(ariiqa di we begin the work this way. - Ivil 2 to 
make a start. begin. fiI-imtilJanaat ibtadit fimbaarilJ the 
examinations began yesterday. 3 Ipreverbl to begin to. 
fi/-Jams ihtadittisayyalJ il- fasfalt the sun began to melt 
the asphalt. - vn fihtidaa rr: ava mibtidi, mubtadil, 
mllbtadirT . 
';I~I fibtidaafi ladi *1 I initial. primary. madrasa 
btidafiyya a primary school. malJaakim ibtidafiyya 
courts of first instance. surla btidafiyya [autoJ low 
gear. 2 pertaining to primary school. fana f-fuula 
btidaa fi or fafla h-~aff il- fawwill-ibtidaa fi I am in the 
first grade of primary school. 
"';I~),I riI-fibtidafiyya Inl the primary school certifi-
cate. huwwa fil-ibtida fiyya he's working for his primary 
school certificate. 
.s~ . 
.s~ mubtadi, mubtadif In 
*1 I beginner. 
2 [ehrJ novice. 
.s..\i-I fistabda J Ivil to make a start. begin. fistabdi 
bil-qum~aafl wi-xalli Jjarabaat lil- faaxir start with the 
shirts and leave the socks till last. -ava mistabdi . 
215 J '":-' 
I~ bada 3 r (yabduJ Ivil I it seems. it appears. yabdu 
fiflllU maJYUIII it seems he's busy. 2 to appear. bada 
lalee fit-talab the tiredness showed on him. he looked 
tired. II filmil ma badaa-Iak do whatever you like . 
.s~ i fabda 2 r Ivtl to show. fabda fixlaa~-u he showed 
his sincerity. fabdeet rafy-i I expressed my opinion. 
bi-duulI fibdaa f iI- fasbaab without explaining the 
reasons. -vn fibdaaf; ava mibdi, mubdi. 

'\s~Y 
4!-'! bideeh <Fr> In pI -aatl bidet. 
• 
3 
J~Y see 
J~Y 
-[';'~Y see -[';'~Y 
~IJY 
"';IJ! biraafu, biraallut (also baraawu) <It> linterjl 
bravo. biraafu laleek well done! good for you! 
.J I J Y see ~ I J Y : baraawu 
I_ J Y 
I J! bara I (i) Ivtl to exonerate, grant immunity to. 
Cjal-Iaha brii-ni w-fana fa{allaCj-ik he said to her, 'If you 
absolve me (from the sinfulness of it) I'll give you a 
divorce'. Ilbareet zimmit-i min allaah I did what was 
right in the eyes of God. - pva mabri. 
IS J! bariJ ladj pI fabriya, fabriyyal innocent. ya baxt 
iI-ma~/uum wi-huwwa bari {proll] lucky the man who is 
wrongly accused (because he will be compensated for 
his sufferings in the next life) (said by one who claims he 
is falsely accused). 
•• IJ! baraafa InI{leg] innocence.l:Jakamit iI-mal:Jkama 
b-baraa fit iI-muttaham the court declared the defen-
dant not guilty. 
'ISJ! bariif ladj pI fabriyaafl innocent, acquitted. 
fil- faaxir {ilil barii f he turned out to be innocent after 
all. II fana bariif minnak I've washed my hands of you 
completely. - fakuun bariif lan diin iI-fislaam I would 
be outside Islam, i.e. no longer a Muslim, (if ... ). 
• IA fibraaf: sanat iI-fibraaf Sabbatical year (in 
Judaism). 
i:n barraf 
Ivtl 
to 
acquit, 
declare 
innocent. 
fil-mal:Jkama barrafit-u la/aan ma-fii-/ fadilla kfaaya 
the court acquitted him because of lack of sufficient 
evidence. -vn tabrifa t; ava/pva mibarra f. 
i:n-I fitbarraf Ivil to be found not gUilty. - iva 
mitbarraf. 
1S:n-1 fitbarra, fitbarra Ivil to disown responsibility. 
fabuu-ha tbarra minha her father washed his hands of 
her. -ava mitbarri. 
IS r.-I fistabra, 
fistabra: bareet-ak wi-stabreet-ak 
60 
(women] I absolve you completely. 
I~I fistibarra J Ivtl intensive of fitbarra. II fana 
stibarreet mil-liyaal di I've had as much as I can stand 
from these kids! -ava mistibarri. 
2_ Jy 
IS,)~ baari InI Creator (epithet of God). 
~,)I fil-bariyya InI Creation, the created universe. 
YJY 
~ J! birba <Copt> In pI baraabi, fibriball ancient or 
ruined temple. 2l tomb. 
tYJY 
t::, J! barbax, barbax In pI baraabix, baraabixl culvert, 
any of various types of large metal or earthenware pipes 
(used, e.g., for drains, sewers, irrigation). 
I JyJy 
ISJ!J! barbari In pI barabral I {deris, obsol] black 
African (not used in direct address). 2 hot-tempered 
person. II barabra ya rasuul allaah expression of apology 
to a third party for someone with a hot temper. - Ino 
pll 3 gibberish. bi-yitkallim' barbari he's talking 
double-Dutch. 
2 JYJY 
,).J! J! barbuur In pI barabiirl nasal mucus, snot. 
J! J! barbar Ivil I to have a running nose. 2 to snivel. 
-vn barbara; ava mibarbar. 
J! ft' mibarbar ladjl snotty-nosed, snot-covered. 
3 JYJY 
J! J! birbir <Copt> ladj invarl young (of a chicken). 
II finta lissa birbir ... you're still wet behind the ears. 
• J! J! birbira In pI baraabirl pullet. II diik iI-baraabir the 
only brother of a number of sisters . 
-JYJY 
j!. J! J! barabriiz <Fr pare-brise> In pI -aatl I wind-
screen, wind-shield (of a car etc.). 2 back window (of a 
car etc.). 
~YJY 
~ 
J! barbif Ivtll to blink ( the eyelids) constantly (as a 
nervous habit). 2 to narrow (the eyes). bi-ynaam 
wi-lenee mbarbifa he sleeps with his eyelids slightly 
open. -vn barba/a; ava mibarbif. 

JYJY 
J! J! barbae; I Ivtl to plaster (a wall), plaster over 
(holes in a wall). 2 Ivi/2a to stare, open the eyes wide. 
2b to gleam, twinkle (of the eyes). -vn barbae;a; aval 
pva mibarbae;. 
J!,.,.,.I rilbarbae; Ivil to be plastered, be plastered over. 
-iva milbarbae;. 
~~YJY 
~ 
1 J! baraband <poss P bdrbad> In pi -aall one who 
speaks very fast and fluently, chatter-box. huwwa 
barabandi fil-ringiliizi or bi-yilkallim ringiliizi zayy iI-
baraband he speaks English fluently. 
~~YJY 
JJ!J! barbooni Icoll nl red mullet (Mullus barbatus, 
and other similar varieties). 
~\; J! J! barbonaaya lunit n, pi -aall a red mulle"t. 
-.;;.J.;;.JJY 
0;";; J! barliluura <It parlilura> In pi -aall {mus] 
score. 
ISJ'::-JY 
..... ; J! burlreeh <Fr> In pi -aall portrait. 
"",.;;.JJY 
y...; J! burutuslu <It proleslO> In pi buruluslaall 
{comm, obsol] protest. 
..r" J! barlas Ivil {comm, obsol] to serve or execute a 
protest. - vn barlasa; ava mibarlas. 
-"",.;;.JJY 
~l::-;J J! burulislanti <Engl> ladj pi burulislantl 
JChr] Protestant. - also buruslanli. 
-t.;;.JJY 
JI;,; J! burluyaal Iprop nl Portugal. 
JI;,; J! burluyaali I ladj *1 Portuguese. 2 In *1 a Portu-
guese. 3 In, no pll the Portuguese language. 
-J.;;.JJY 
,:,lAi J! burIUe;aan, 
burlUe;aan 
Icoll 
nl 
oranges. 
burlue;aan rabu surra navel oranges. burlUe;aan baladi 
small sharp variety of orange. burlUe;aan sukkari sweet, 
bland variety of orange. burlUe; aan ~eefi variety of 
orange that is harvested (unlike other varieties) in 
the summer. burlue;aan bi-damm-u blood orange. 
IlburlUe;aan bamya carambola. 
61 
;;,;lA; J! burIUe;aana, burlUe;aana lunit n, pi -aal, -aatl an 
orange. 
JlA; J! bWlue;aani, burlUe;aani ladj invarl orange in 
colour. 
-.!I.;;.JJY 
J§YJJ! burutukuul <Fr> In pi -aatl I protocol. 
2 regulations, rules (of a school, club, place of 
business). 
')J.;;.JJY 
""Y J! biritoon <prob Fr peritoine> Inl {anat] peri-
toneum. 'liltihaab fil-biriloon peritonitis. 
,,;.;;.JJY 
~;~ barteeh <Fr partez> linterjl (ein] action! 
.;;.J,,;.;;.JJ Y 
4 J! bartiita <It partita> Inl I gambling party. 2 illicit 
gathering. 
<.J,,;.;;.JJ Y 
':"-;JJ! burutiin <Engl> In pi -aatl protein. 
-,,;.;;.JJY 
) jA.,; J! baratayfuud <prob Engl> Inl paratyphoid. 
I~JY 
CJ! burg In pi rabraag, buruug, biraagl I tower. burg i 
bamaam dove-cote, pigeon-house (see PI.C, 3). burg 
iI-qaahira Cairo Tower, on Guezira Island. burg iI-bafr 
oil rig. [aaYif fi-burg i [aagi living in an ivory tower. 
II burg i min [ae;l-u (aar he lost his head. - ba-t(ayyar 
burg i (or burgeen) min [ae;l-i you'll driv~ me out of my 
mind. 2 {astral] zodiacal sign. 
C::r. barrag Ivtl to pile up. bi-nbarrag-humfooe; ba[qi 
waabid waabid we stack them up on top of each other 
one by one. -vn tabriig; avalpva mibarrag. 
C:"'I ritbarrag Ivil to be piled up. - iva mitbarrag. 
2 
..... 
~J • 
~;~ baariga r In pi bawaarigl battleship. 
J ~ J Y see 2,,; J ~ Y ; buruugi 
- J~JY 
jl.r:-J J! burugraam <prob Fr> In pi -aatl programme, 
plan. reeh burugraam-ak in-nahar-da what are your 
arrangements for today? 

...,.. er j ..... 
.r~,J! birgaas <P bur}ds> Inl {obsolj equestrian sport 
or entertainment (e.g., horse-dancing, mounted stick-
fighting etc.). 
~,J! bargis Ivil I {obsolJ to engage in equestrian 
sports. II I'alma wi-ybargis fin-naxl {provj (blind yet he 
gallops about amid the palms) "" he seeks to do what is 
far beyond his capacity. 2 to run about in a clumsy or 
dangerous way, barge about. - vn bargasa; ava 
mibargis. 
I J er j 
..... 
~,J! bargil Ivtl to confuse, put into disarray. riglee 
mbargila his legs are tangled up with each other. fJaaga 
lbargli iI-muxx something which throws the brain into 
confusion. - vn bargala; avalpva mibargil. 
~...,.;I I'itbargil Ivil to be confused, be thrown into 
disarray. - iva mitbargil. 
l( Jer j 
..... ) 
~,J! bargal <T pergel from P> In pi baraagill {geomj 
compass, pair of compasses. blJrgal m(/c;~~ combined 
calipers. bargal ba((iixa external calipers. bargalfooka 
divider (in metalwork). 
~,J! birgula, birJula, pirgula, pir/ula <prob It 
pergola> In pi -aall summer-house. 
°..ser j 
..... 
~J,J! burujeeh <Fr projet> Inl draft. 
~af/Jaat 
buru/eeh page proofs. 
-Jer j 
..... 
<.!l;'~,J! blrgalaatak fJlrgalaatak birgalaatak fJalac;a 
dahab fl-wdanaat-ak chant used In the ceremonies for a 
newborn child on yoom is-subuUl. 
I Cj ..... 
C,J! barafJ (aJ Ivil to take one's ease, act in a free and 
easy fashion. barafJ fik-kalaam (1) he waxed eloquent. 
(2) he talked too much. ma-lIbrafJ-J' fiiha -xallii-k lala 
c;add-ak "" don't run away with yourself; keep within 
your limits. - vn baraafJ; ava baarifJ. 
CI,J! baraafJ I Inl spaciousness, vastness. I'Ii-waafJid 
bi-yfJiss' bil-baraafJ fi~-~afJra one gets a feeling of open-
ness in the desert.llxad baraafJ-u to behave freely, take 
one's ease, as in xadl' baraafJ-ifif-fuy/l settled down to 
the work contentedly and without interference, xad 
baraafJ-u fif-Jac;c;a he did just as he liked in the flat. 
2 lad] invarl spacious, roomy.fac;c;a baraafJ a spacious 
62 
flat. xalli I-fuslaan baraafJ min lafJl Ii-wis( make the 
dress full below the waist. 
Cr.-I l'istabrafJ Ivtl to select for spaciousness. humma 
baCia stabrafJufac;c;it-na lanfac;c;it-ku they felt our flat 
to be roomier than yours. -vn l'istibraafJ; aVII 
mistabrafJ· 
2 Cj ..... see - I ..... r ~: l'imbaarifJ 
I')j ..... 
:',J! birid (a, aJ Ivil I to become cold, cool off. fJU((-U 
fit-tal/aaga lafaan yibrad put it in the refrigerator to 
cool. II I'ibrad fiwayya (1) don't get so excited! 
(2) behave yourself! 2 'to feel chilly, become chilled. 
I'ana bridt - fJ-aruufJ I'albis bal(u I feel cold; I'll go and 
put on a coat. 3 to be soothed. fJu((iI-marhamlal-garfJ' 
yibrad put the ointment on the wound and it will be 
soothed. 4 to become a boor, behave insensitively or 
shamelessly. -vn buruud, baradaan, baraada; ava 
baarid, bardaan. 
:'J,J! buruud In/l frigidity, reserve.lamil-ni b-buruud 
he treated me coldly. landaha buruud she is frigid. 
buruud iI- I'ingiliiz English sa,!gfroid. 2 insensitivity. 
shamelessness. 
i:.l,J! baraada Inl shamelessness, insensitivity. 
:.)~ baa rid ladjl I cool, cold (of inanimate things). 
mayya barda cold water. II I'alwaan barda (ceramic) 
colours that do not need firing. - !'in-nuCj(a I-barda para-
lysis. -leen-i barda la/a ... {women in lrad soej may my 
eye not harm ... (prophylactic phrase used to ward off 
the evil that may be attracted inadvertently by admira-
tion), as in ya gamaal-u - leen-l barda lalee what a 
pretty (child) - may my eye not harm him! 2 mild (to the 
taste). (umbaak baarld mild tobacco. filfil baarid mif 
fJaami mild rather than hot pepper. 3a insensitive. 
II damm-u baa rid he's stolid. 3b unabashed, shameless. 
ya baa rid - ma-bi-tfJiss '-J xaali~ you boor! have you no 
feelings? 4a uninspiring, flat nukta barda a dull joke. 
kalaam baarid tedious talk. f~/' baarid a rotten trick. 
4b dull, blunt. sikkiina barda a blunt knife. 
,:,b,J! bardaan ladj "I cold (of persons). 
:',J! bard Inl I cold weather, coldness. fi- I'ayyaam 
ii-bard' bi-nya((ii-ha during the cold weather we cover 
it. bi-yilrtlif min ii-bard he's trembling frollJ the cold. 
-/adjectivallyl I'id-dunya bard it's cold. 2 cold, chill. 
xad bard he caught a cold. Ilssa xaarig min door bard 
I've just got over a bit of a cold. 
:.) I'abrad lell colderlcoldest, milderlmildest etc. 
II I'abrad min mayyit (uuba {provj (colder than the water 

in the month of Tuba) ... thoroughly unlikeable (a play 
on baarid I and 3). 
OlJ';' buruuda Inl 
I coldness (of temperature). 
1 frigidity. 
ll~ barraad I In pi -aat, barariidl I teapot. 2 kettle. 
l~ barrad Ivtl I to cool, make cold. 2 to soothe. 
Ilbaaga tbarrad iI-qalb something that (1) reassures, 
soothes the nerves, (2) quenches thirst. - v~ tabriid; ava 
mibarrad. 
~~ tabriid Ivnl Ilqami;.s it-tabriid (autoJ cylinder 
sleeve. -muhandis tabriid engineer specializing in cool-
ing systems. 
l".r. mubarrid In pi -aatl water cooler. 
l:"'1 fitbarrad Ivil to be cooled. - iva mitbarrad. 
l r,-I fistabrid, 
fistabrad Ivtl I to consider cold. 
lamma fastabrad ig-gaww aquum falbis bal{U when 
I find the weather cold I put on a coat. 2 to consider 
shameless. - Ivil 3 to behave shamelessly. ma-
tistabrad-J behave yourself! - vn 
fistibraad; ava 
mistabrad. 
Z~.J Y 
l,;. barad (u) Ivtl to file, file down. bi-nubrud-u [a/aan 
nifiil iz-ziyadaat we file it to remove the surplus. -vn 
bard, baradaan; ava baarid; pva mabruud. 
oll,;. biraada, buraada Icoll nl filings. 
II ~ barraad Z In "II filer. 2 fitter. barraad kah, abaa fi 
electrical fitter. 
lr.' mabrad lIn pi mabaaridl file, rasp. mabrad deel 
faar a rat-tail file. II/isaan-u mabrad he has a sharp 
tongue. 2/adj invarl having a twill weave (of material). 
l ~I fitbarad Ivil to be filed. - iva mitbirid. 
J~.J Y 
~,;. bariid Inl post, mail. saa[i bariid postqtan, mail-
man. sanduuq bariid (1) mail-box. (2) post-office box. 
hay fit iI-bariid the General Post Office. bariid gawwi 
airmail. bi-ruguu[ iI-bariid by return post. 
\S~,;. bariidi ladjl postal. 
4~.J Y 
ol,;. burda In pi -aatl {obsolJ type of cloak or mantle 
worn by women. 
5 ~ J y 
see 
~.J.J Y : baruud, baruuda 
6 ~.J Y see 
~ 1,$ .J Y : biriid 
~~.Jy 
c..l,;. biridj <Engl> Inll bridge (card game). 2 {nautJ 
bridge (of a ship). 
63 
.J.J ""I 
·.J~.JY 
oJJlJ J! burudruh or burudurooh <Fr bordereau> In 
pi -aatl {commJ account book. 
I,$.J~.JY 
l,$.JlJJ! burudri <Fr broderie> Inl embroidery. 
t~.J Y 
~l J! .~l J! barda[a In pi baraadi[1 donkey-saddle 
(made of stuffed sacking). yisiib iI-bumaar wi-yitja({ar 
[a/-barda[a {provJ (he lets the donkey off but takes it 
out on the saddle) he punishes the weak for the faults of 
the strong out of fear of what the strong may do. 
-"';~.JY 
~ll J! biradifeer (also biladifeer) <Fr bras de fer> Inl 
Indian wrestling. 
J~.J Y 
Jl J! bardaq: boo/ bardaq Iprop n/low-class district of 
Cairo. zayy; btuu[ boo/ bardaq uncouth. 
-J~.JY 
J-";lJ! bardaquuf, bardaqoo/ <P marza-gosh> Inl 
marjoram. 
.J~.JY 
JlJ.J! burdu <It bordo> Inl {nautJ I gunwale. loob 
iI-burdu gunwale strake. 2 railing round a ship's deck. 
.J.J~.Jy 
OJJlJ! burduura <perh It bordura> In pi -aatl 
kerb-stone. 
I,$~.JY 
I,$l J! bardi Icoll nl papyrus. 
t~JY see t~JY 
I JJy 
~ barr l Inl land (in contrast with sea). fil-wll,1uul 
Ii-barr iI-famaan a safe landfall. rilli [ai-barr a 
[awwaam {provJ (he who is on land is a (strong) swim-
mer) ... it's easy to talk big when one is not put to the 
test, it's easier to criticize than to act. fibna lissa [al-
barr (we're still on dry land) we haven't committed 
ourselves yet, there's still time to reconsider. ~oot-u 
ygiib ii-barr (his voice reaches the shore) his voice is 
extremely loud. rasa [ala barr (to come eventually to 

land) to reach a conclusion, find a solution, as in layziin 
nirsi lala barr we want to settle the matter. gab-ha 
I-barr (to bring it to land) lused figuratively, usually in 
negative contextsl (1) to bring about a satisfactory solu-
tion. (2) to behave in a reasonable fashion, as in mij 
raaqi ygib-ha I-barr he's not prepared to behave 
reasonably. 
v~ barri ladj */1 pertaining to land (as opposed to 
sea and air). rin-nac;1 il-barri overland transport. 2 wiJd 
(as opposed to domestic). bamaam barri wild pigeons. 
~~ barriyyq. f Inl open land, wasteland. 
I~ •• ~ barra Ilprepl outside. barra mf¥r outside 
Egypt. barra I-beet outside the house. 2/advl 
2a outside, out. xalli I-kalb' barra keep the dog outside. 
mil-bee(a I-barra from the wall outwards. rij-Jarr' barra 
w-biliid ... God forbid! (prophylactic phrase accom-
panying the mention of something unpleasant). II ri(lac; 
Ii-barra [naut] head for sea! -min barra (I-)barra 
(1) without calling in at home, as in haatmalaakjakitta 
lafaan niruub is-sinima min barra barra bring a jacket 
with you so that we can go straight on to the cinema. 
(2) on the sly, on the quiet, as in bi-yibc;a fid-dukkaan 
~-~ubb' w-bald iq-quhr' b-yijtalfal fi-warja min barra 
barra he's at the shop in the mornings and works on the 
sly at a worksbop in the afternoon. 2b abroad. lissa 
raagil min barra he's just returned from abroad. 
- Inominallyl bitaal barra from abroad, as in c;umaaf 
bitaal barra cloth from abroad. 
JI~ barraani ladj */1 outer. ril-baab il-barraani the 
outside door. 2 linvarl false. filuus barraani counterfeit 
money. 
~\..~ barr 'maa ri ladjl amphibious. 
1 JJ Y 
~ barr (i) Ivtl to look after (o.s., especially by eating 
well). birr' nafs-ak look after yourself (i.e. don't be so 
miserly with yourself). bi-ybirr' nafs-u he is self-
indulgent. - ava baarir. 
~ barr 2 (i) Ilvil to be faithful (to a promise). barreet 
bi-wald-i I kept my word. 2t Ivtl to honour, treat with 
deference and devotion. IIbagg' mabruur greeting to 
one returning from a pilgrimage to Mecca. - vn barr, 
birr; ava baarr; pva mabruur. 
~ birr In! charitableness, piety, devotion. 
~~ baarr ladj pi rabraar/l pious, righteous. 2 showing 
devotion (to parents, teachers etc.), charitable (to the 
poor etc.)_ - In! 3 Beneficent One (epithet of God). 
o~1 ril-mabarra (also mustaffa I-mabarra) In! fee-
paying hospital organization (with branches through-
out Egypt). 
64 
;.;! barrar Ivtl to justify. ril-lfaaya tbarrar il-wasiila the 
end justifies the means. -vn tabriir; ava mubarrirf . 
;:,.. mubarrir In pi -aatl reason, justification. reeh 
mubarriraat-ak what are your reasons? 
;::"'1 ritbarrar Ivil to be justified. - iva mitbarrar. 
3 JJY 
~ barr3 In pi buruurll door-jamb. 2 window-ledge. 
JJJ Y 
J ~ birru Inl Inaut] bolt, lug. 
°ISJJY 
~~ burreeh <perh T bire> [women] exclamation of 
exasperation'" that's the limit! burreeh minnak you're 
the limit! 
1-JJY 
j.;! baraz J (i, u) Ivill to protrude, project. ril-buruuf 
bi-tibriz min il-xalfthe letters protrude from the other 
side. 2 to become outstanding.fax~iyyaat barza prom-
inent personalities. 3 to amount to a surplus (of money 
etc.). balaat buruuz riraad instances of surplus takings. 
-vn buruuz; ava baariz. 
jJ.;! buruuz In pi -aatl I protrusion. 2 dowel. 
j;~ baariz J In pi bawaarizl I surplus. baariz riraad 
surplus receipts. 2 Ipl onlyl [bank] unaccountable sur-
plus of money after auditing. 
oj.;! .oj;~ barza, burza In pi buruuzl facial crest (of a 
horse). 
jl.;! buraaz Inl faeces, solid excrement. 
j:';1 ritbarraz Ivil to defecate. - ava mitbarraz. 
j;~ baariz 2 Ivtl to fight a duel with. -vn mubarza; ava 
mubaariz. 
:j).~. mubarza In pi -aatl duel. 
j), .. 1 ritbaariz Ivil I to duel. 2 to be fought with in a 
duel. -ava/iva mitbaariz. 
j) rabraz Ivtl I to emphasize. ri/-Ioon il-razrac; 
bi-yibriz gamaallenee-ki blue shows off the beauty of 
your eyes. 2 to bring out. laazim tibriz gawaaz is-safar 
you must show your passport. -vn ribraaz; ava mubriz. 
1 jJ Y 
j.;! baraz 2 (i, u) <perh P barth> Ivtl to join together 
(two ends of a broken thread, strand of wool etc.)' 
ribriz il-fatla di kiwayyis join this thread together firm-
ly! -vn buruuz; ava baariz. 
j~ barraz = baraz 2 • -vn tabriiz. 
Jlj:'" mubarrazaati In pi -yyal [text] warp-mender in 
a weaving shop. 

J j.J "r' see .i IJ .J "r' : bariiz, bariiza 
JIJ.i.J"r' 
J.iI."J 1 fil-baraziillprop nl Brazil. 
J.iI.;. baraziili 1 ladj ·1 Brazilian. 2 In ·1 a Brazilian. 
IJ".J "r' see I.J"IJ.J "r': bariis 
.:.0 IoJ" .J "r' 
.i-'..;! birislu <brand name Preslo>: ualla brislu 
pressure cooker. 
(-':"I.J".J"r') 
~\o-J.;! buruslaala, buruslaala InI {anal] prostate 
gland. 
J,,:-.;! birislul <Engl Brislol>: waralj birislul a type 
of medium-grade heavy white paper, used for drawing 
and calligraphy. 
Ji\o-J.;! buruslanti <Engl> ladj pi buruslanll {Chr] 
Protestant. -also burulislanli. 
-";I.J".J"r' 
V!.Jl&..J.;! birusfariin <cf Gr prospherein> Inl {Chr] 
cloth with which the offertory is covered on an altar. 
-also fibrusfariin. 
JIoJ".J"r' 
. J...;! bursulln pi baraasill {lexl] selvage. 
- J I.J".J "r' 
.r.4-.JJ! bursiliin <Engl> Inl porcelain. 
"'~.JJ! bursilaan <Fr porcelaine> Inl porcelain. 
r.JI.J".J"r' 
r.J-';! barsuum Iprop nl male given name. /lljiraa[ 
barsuum linear measure equal to 0.087 centimeters. 
-.JI.J".J"r' 
JI.J-.;! biriswaar (also biniswaar) <Fr perissoire> In 
pi -aatl paddle-board, surf-board. 
rlJl.J".J"r' 
~.;! barsiim <Copt> Icoll nl Egyptian clover (Trifo-
lium alexandrinum). /lloor allaah fi-barsiim-u see loor. 
~I.;! barasiim Ipl nl fields of clover. 
~.;! barsiimi ladj invarl bright green in colour. 
J..J"r' 
..;..;! baraf (u) <Copt> 1 Ivil to sit or squat (on the 
ground) without concern for decorum or the cleanness 
65 
of the place. 2 Ivtl to sit (s.o.) down (on the ground). 
-vn barja, barja; ava baarif, baarif; pva mabruuf, 
mabruuj. 
..;..;! burf <Copt> In pi fabraafl coars~ly-woven mat 
of palm leaves or palm fibre (used particularly in pris-
ons for sleeping on) . 
..;..;;1 filbaraf Ivil to sit or squat (on the ground) with ... 
out concern for decorum or the cleanness of the place. 
-ava milbirif . 
..;. ~ 
1 finbaraf = filbaraj. 
..;.~ mibarraf ladj ·1 sitting or squatting on the 
ground. 
c..:J 
.. 
\.oJ 
I.J".J . 
..:..:..;! birifl or burufl <P birishla> ladj invarl soft-
boiled (of eggs). 
,?~J..Jy 
..:.".:.I.J~ barafull <Fr> In pi -aall parachute. -also 
barafuul. 
r";'.J"r' 
,..:..;! barfim IWI to rivet, seal or fix tightly. 2 {slang] 
to make small written notes for use in cheating in (an 
examination). -vn barjama; ava/pva mibarfim. 
rL:...;! birjaam, burjaam <P parchin> Icoll nil pill(s). 
2 rivet(s). markib birjaam a riveted ship. 3 {slang] 
minutely written material for use in cheating in an . 
examination. 
;;,.\.:..;! birjaama, burjaama lunit n, pi -aalll a pill. 2 a 
rivet. 3 lalso pi barafiim, barafiiml {slang] crib, note 
for use in cheating in an examination. 
,..:. ftil filbarjim Ivi/l to be riveted, be tightly sealed or 
fixed. 2 {slang] 2a to be cheated in (of an examination, 
when cribs are used). 2b to be minutely written for use 
as a crib in an examination. 3 to fall silent, shut up. 
-ava/iva milbirfim. 
':".J";'.J"r' 
..:. ".:.IJ~ barafuul <Engl> In pi -aall parachute. -also 
barafull. 
P";'.J "r' 
r"':'.;! barjuum Iprop nl Barshum, a tow .. in Qalyubiya 
province. 
..,..,.:..;! barjuumi ladj ·1 pertaining to 6r from Bar-
shum. /lliin barjuumi figs (in contrast with liin fooki 
prickly pears). 
1~.J"r' 
u"'~ barr~ Ivll {naul] to splice. -vn labri~; ava/pva 
mibarr~. 

Z~.;y 
..r' J! 
bara~ Inl [path] vitiligo . 
..r') rabra~ ladj, fern bar~a, pi bur~1 afflicted with 
vitlhgo. 
..r').J'>'" miboora~ ladj °1 afflicted with vitiligo. 
l(~.;y) 
..r' J! 
bl/r~ In pi rabra~1 gecko. laamil zayy iI-bur~ 
small and shrivelled in appearance.ljabb-ak bllr~ maya 
gecko kiss you! (a curse based on the folk belief that the 
gecko is a carrier of skin disease, mainly used in curt 
response to rana b-aljibb-ik). 
~).Y. bur~a <It borsa> In pi -aatl I stock exchange, 
bourse. 2 large cafe. 
.!l ..J# .; y 
see .J..J#,; Y : barqak 
.J..J#,;y 
..:.. J! • .,.;. J! barqu (also barqak) <perh T bIT de> ladvl 
I also, too. Ija-tiigi malaana barqu are you going to 
come with us too? 2 nevertheless, even so, all the same. 
barqu miffaahim lj~d-ak reeh even so, I don't under-
stand what you mean. b-aqrab-ha kull' yoom wi-barqu 
ma-fii1 fayda I beat her every day but still it makes no 
difference. 3 intensifier"" really, surely. mif kida barqu 
isn't that so? don't you agree? huwwa da kalaam barqu 
is that any way to talk? IIkida barqu response of re-
proach "" really now! 
b.;y 
j, J! barat (u) Ivil [coarse] to defecate. -vn barta; ava 
baarit; pva mabruut. 
:il. J! barta In pi -aat, buratl [coarse] faeces, shit. 
j,,,.,;1 ritbarat Ivil [coarse] to ~it or squat (on the 
ground). 
.:,Ib.;y 
J~J! biritaam. baritaamJ I ladj 'I British, (loosely) 
English. 2 In °1 a Briton, (loosely) an Englishman. 
IJ" b .; y 
see IJ".J b .; y : bartuus 
I .;. b.; y 
...r"J. J! bartuu!' Icoll nl old out-of-shape shoes. 
'-"J. J! bartuu!a In pi baratiifl old out-of-shape pair of 
shoes. IIkalaam iI-baratlif (verbal) dangers. - raas-u 
w- ral/, bartuu!a (or -baratlif iI-balad) ma- he won't ... 
at any price, as in ras-ha w-ral/' bareuu!a ma-tsaafir 
malaahum wild horses won't make her travel with 
66 
them. -manljuul iI-bara{iif cheap liquor, rot-gut . 
...,.J. J! barta! Ivtl I to wear (shoes) until out of shape . 
IIIj-abarta!-ak I'll flatten you! - Ivi/2 to act dumsily or 
ineffectively. rIT-raagil da b,-ybarta! fi1uyl-u that man 
does a sloppy job. 3 to run, blotch (of colours, paints 
etc.). -vn barta!a; avalpva mlbarta! . 
...,.J.".,;I ritbarta!lvil to be worn out of shape (of shoes). 
- iva mllbarea! . 
Z .;. b .; y 
see ';'.J b .; y : bartuu!2 
bb.;y 
.1. J! burull ladj pi -aatl slothful and slovenly. 
~ 
J! burulla = burull· 
tb.;y 
~ 
J! bartal Ivil I to gallop about, run and prance ab-
out (of donkeys). 2 [joc] to gallivant about, gad about . 
r,l-waaljid Ylxalla~ lmtiljanaat wi-ybar{al balja lala 
keef-u one finishes exams and then one'~ free to gad 
about as it suits one. -vn bartala; ava mibartal. 
Jb.;y 
J.,l. J! bartitl In pi bareii/I bribe. 
Jl. J! bar{al Ivtl to bribe. - vn bareala; avalpva mibartal. 
Jl.".,;1 ritblilr{al Ivil to be bribed. -Iva mllbartal. 
Irb.;y 
r1 J! baream (also barean)/vil I to speak gibberish, talk 
incoherently. mibar{am zayy it-turk"" talking double-
Dutch. 2 to mutter cro~sly, grumble. -vn bar{ama; ava 
mibar{am. 
2 r b .; y 
see 
I r .J b .; y : bareullm 
- r b.; y 
,:,w, J! bareamaan <Martaban tin Burma» 
In pi -aatl 
glass or plastic jar with lid, jam jar. -also ba{ramaan. 
;,; W, J! bareamaana = bareamaan. - also ba{ramaana. 
.:, b .; y 
see r j, .; y : bar{an 
IJ".Jb.;y 
...r"J. J! barel/US <It pertuzo> In pi baratiisl [naut] sea-
men's quarters or storeroom (on a steamer). -also 
bartllu!. 
';'.Jb.;y 
...r"J. J! bartuu!2 <It perlllzo> In pi bara{iifl [naut] 

seamen's quarters or storeroom (on a steamer). - also 
bar{uus. 
rJj,;y 
r)..J'. barcuum <It bertone> In pI baraciim/l beam or 
block of wood. 2 pontoon, beam. 3 /naut} lighter. 
t; ..... 
t..J'. barae (a) Ivil to become skilled, excel. baraeti 
fil-koora I excelled in football. - vn baraaea; ava 
baarie· 
t.) rabrae lell morelmost skilled. 
t.':"'1 ritbarrae Ivil to make a donation. eawziin naas 
lilbarrae bi-damm they want people to donate blood. 
-vn laba"ue; ava mitbarrae. 
t.':" laba"ue In pI -aall donation. 
rt; ..... 
r>".J'. bureum r In pI baraaeiml bud. II riI-baraaeim the 
younger generation. 
':'t;y 
':"j..J'. .'::"j:-..J'. baryuut In pI barayiitl flea. kulli 
barruut eala qaddi damm-u /prov} ... from each accord-
ing to his ability. II barayiit is-silt sugar-coated caraway 
seeds. -ba/iijit il-barayiit fleawort (Plantago psyllium). 
.;,J. r. mibarYit, mibaryat ladj *1 flea-infested. 
Jot;y 
..;.s..J'. barya/lvtl to prick holes in (a paper pattern, in 
order to transfer a design). -vn barra/a; ava mibarYa/. 
1Jt;y 
~.J'. buryul l <prob T burgu> In pI baraayi/l any of a 
variety of tools for making and adjusting holes in metal. 
~.J'. baryallvtl to smooth off, edge off (holes bored in 
metal). -vn baryala; ava/pva mibarral. 
2Jt; y 
~.J'. buryul2 <T burgul> Inl boiled and crushed 
wheat, used in the preparation of certain dishes. 
.; ; y see .J J .J y : biroova 
~I';; Y 
.,lil)! barafaan, baravaan <Fr paravent> In pI -aatl 
screen, folding screen. - also barawaan. 
1oJ\J".J.J"r' 
WJ..J'. buru{lSIa <It provvista> Inl /naut} provisions. 
67 
JIS.J.J"r' 
J.,.tJ..J'. birufiil <Fr> Inl profile. -/adverbiallyl ruqaf 
birufiil stand sideways-on. 
~IS.J.JY 
.;,ei1J! barafiin <Engl> Inl paraffin. zeet barafiin 
mineral oil. 
J;"r' 
J..J'. barae; (u) Ivil 1 to shine, sparkle. bi-nnaqqaf-u 
wi-nlammal-u la/aan yubrue; we clean and polish it so 
it shines. 2 to flash (of lightning). - vn bare;; ava baarie;. 
J..J'. bare; Inl lightning. raldi w-bare; thunder and 
lightning. 
~..J'. bare;a In pI -aatll gold disc on a necklace. 2 metal 
sequin. 
~..J'. barqiyya In pI -aatl telegram. 
~..J'. bariie; Inl I glitter, lustre. 2 allure. baaga liiha 
bariie; xa~~ i lis-saayi!J something with a special appeal 
for the tourist. 
JI ~ barraae; ladjl radiant. ralwaan barraae;a radiant 
colours. 
Jr. mabrae; In pI mabaarie;1 telegraph transmitter. 
J~ barrae; Ilvtl to open (the eyes) wide. rinta 
bi-tbarraq lenee-k kida leeh why are you staring like 
that? 2/vil to stare, open wide (of the eyes). eenee 
barrae;it wi-yaab ean il-waeY his eyes were fixed and he 
lost consciousness. - vn tabriie;; ava mibarrae;. 
tJ.JY 
e..J'. bure;ue In pI baraae;iel I veil (usually of black 
crepe and gold) worn to cover the lower part of the face 
(see PI.F, 8)./ayla burque il-!Jaya she has taken off the 
veil of modesty (said of a woman who behaves in a 
shameless fashion). riI-ra!Jsan tilbis.burque (you'd bet-
ter wear a veil) ... you behave like a woman (an insult to 
a man). ta!Jt il-baraaqie simm; naae;ie /provl (under the 
veil is deadly poison) though modest in appearance, a 
person may be highly immoral. 2 valance, pelmet. 
3 wattle (on the head of a turkey etc.). 
e..J'. barqae Ivtl to veil with a bure;ue. - vn barqaea; ava 
mibare;ae· 
e.ro'l ritbare;al Ivil to veil o.S., put on a veil. eandina 
burqueeen bure;ue 
i~barqaenaa-bu w-bure;ue ma-
tbare;aena-buujwe have two veils, one we have worn 
and one we haven't (a tongue-twister). - avamitbare;ae. 
JJJ.J"r' 
J';'..J'. barquuq <Gr praikokion> Icoll nI plum(s). 

4J.,. J. barCjuuCja lunit n, pI -aall a plum. 
~ Ii'; J. barCjuCjaaya = barCjuuCja. 
I.!J.J Y 
is J. baraka In pI -aal, -aall blessing, grace, divine 
favour (manifested especially as good fortune, pleni-
tude) charismatic quality. II ril-barakafii(k) (1) thanks 
to (you), the credit should go to (you), as in kull'feer 
lamm' zayy' ma-nta laayiz - ril-baraka f-bint-i 'Every-
thing went just the way you wanted.' 'It's all thanks to 
my daughter.' (2) it all depends on (you), as in dawwar 
lala wa~iifa taakul minha leef - ril-baraka fiik 'Find 
yourself a job to keep body and soul together.' 'I'm 
depending on you (to find me one).' (3) expression of 
condolence "" it's for you to fill the place of the de-
ceased. -bil-baraka "" without undue concern, without 
bothering to be precise, as in bi-yaaxud filuus-u bil-
baraka he takes his money without counting it, bi-ybiil 
iI-ba((iix bil-baraka he sells water-melons without 
bothering to weigh them. - (w-allaahi) baraka thank 
heavens! - baraka ya gaamil (illi gat minnak wala gatf' 
minna) exclamation of relief at finding oneself released 
from an obligation. -Cjallil barakil-u it is (or was) no 
longer successful. -Cjillil baraka a source of misfortune. 
-Cjaliil iI-baraka scanty, insufficient, as in ril-bufteek da 
Cjaliil il-baraka - rilmili-Ina (abiix fried steak doesn't go 
very far; make us a stew! -Ij~alil il-baraka "" you have 
brought a blessing to our house (said to a guest). -ya 
barakil dUla I-waldeent may the blessing of my pa-
rents' prayers assist me (said before any undertaking). 
-lala barakil ilIaah invocation of God's blessing (said 
before any undertaking). - ril-xeer wil-baraka source of 
good fortune, as in da-nta (fiik) il-xeer wil-baraka we 
can always depend on you for anything. - riI-baraka 
fil-bukuur "" the early bird catches the worm. -luCjmil 
II-baraka {Chrj (a piece of) unconsecrated eucharistic 
bread. -Ijabbil il-baraka seed of fennel flower (Nigella 
sativa) used in the preparation of, e.g., chest ointment 
and some types of bread. 
.!l) rabrak lell morelmost useful. effective, etc. da 
I-f~~ il-waaljid min iI-burluCjaan !'abu~urra rabrak min 
lafara min is-sukkarl one segment of a navel orange is 
more nourishing than ten of a sukkari one. 
is) J. baruuka, baruuka I In pI -aall lucky piece, 
charm. ranafayil-ha baruuka I'm carrying it for luck. 
.!l)? mabruuk I/adj "I blessed with divine favour. 
raxuu-k da raagil mabruuk your brother has a saintly 
air about him. rabb-i-na yiglal-ha sana ;"abruuka 
laleek may God make it a prosperous year for you! 
68 
2 plentiful 
(beyond 
expectation). 
!'il-mahiyya 
mabruukaffahr-i-da the wages have gone a long way 
this month. !'akl' mabruuk food that proves to be suffi-
cient for more people than expected. 3 linvarl congra-
tulatory exclamation said to someone on a happy occa-
sion or on the acquisition of something new"" congra-
tulations! as in mabruuk lala I-jakitta congratulations 
on the new jacket! ral/, mabruuk many congratula-
tions! IImabruuk lal-rart/. congratulations on your new 
shoes! 
is)? mabruuka Inl measles. 
.!l;4 baarik Ivil 1 to give blessing. rabb-i-na mif 
Ija-ybarik-Iu f-liyaal-u God will not bless him with 
regard to his children. II rallaah yibaarik fiik (God 
bless you) (1) conventional response to mabruuk. 
(2) expression of thanks for a favour or service ren-
dered. 2 {Chrj 2a to pronounce a blessing, invoke a 
blessing. 2b to say grace (before a meal). 3 to give 
congratulations. bi-ybarku I-balt/. they congratulate 
each other. - Ivt/4 {Chrj to bless. -vn mibarka; ava 
mibaarik. 
.!l;~ mubaarak I/adj "I fortunate, blessed. ramat/.aan 
mubaarak blessed and happy Ramadan. IIxa(Wa 
mbarka "" what good fortune brought you here! (greet-
ing to a visitor). -ya mubaarak friendly form of address 
imputing naivety, as in kull in-naas masmuulj luhum 
is-safar bass' miin ya mubaarak illi landu fluus (of 
course) everyone is allowed to travel, but bless your 
heart, who do you think can really afford it! 
2 congratulatory exclamation said to someone on a 
happy occasion or on the acquisition of something new 
"" congratulations!, as in mubaarak lal-fuslaan congra-
tulations on the (new) dress! 
.!l ) ... , rilbaarik Ivil la to receive a blessing. kull' ma 
b-afuuf-u b-albaarik-bii it's always a blessing to see 
him. rin-naas liruulj it/.-t/.ariilj lalafaan lilbaarik bii 
people go to the tomb to receive a blessing. Ib {Chrj to 
be blessed (ritually). bald il-laruseen ma Ibarku after 
the bride and groom have been blessed. 2 to be 
converted into a blessing. lamma lilmil (ayyib 
bi-yilbarik-/ak fi-gary-ak when you do good it brings 
you a blessing in your daily life. -ava/iva milbaarik. 
.!l),. labaarak: labaarak allaah r, labaarak il-xallaaCj 
blessed be God! used as an exclamation of wondrous 
admiration, as in laleeha gamaallabaarak il-xallaaCj 
(fiima xa/aCj) "" she's such a beauty! blessed be God for 
creating her! 
.!l.r.-' rislabrak = rilbaarik la. -ava mislabrak. 
.!l;4:-' rislibaarik = ritbaarik la. - iva mislibaarik. 

2~; Y 
.!l./. barak, birik (i) Ivil I to kneel (particularly of a 
camel). 2 to throw one's whole weight (on(opofs.o. or 
s.th.). watjtjalt-u fil-fartf w-barakt i footj-u (or lalee) 
I threw him to the ground and flung myself upon him. 
IIbarak lal-filuus he appropriated all the mOlley. 3 to 
reach the end of one's endurance. tjaeadit tiftaval 
[il-maktab wil-beet wi-tihmil fi- fakl-a-ha I-vaayit-ma 
barakit she went on working in the office and the house, 
and neglecting her food till she was in a state of com-
plete collapse. -ava baarik . 
.!l~ barrik Ivt/l to make (a camel) kneel. 2 to make 
someone fall (on s.o. or s.th.). -vn tabriik; ava 
mibarrik. 
.!l:";1 fitbarrik Ivil passive of barrik. - iva mitbarrik. 
3~; Y 
;S./. birka In pI birakl pool, pond. II wifJiI-birka a l:Jayy 
in Central Cairo (formerly known in particular as a red 
light district). -birkit iI-fiil a l:Jayy in Cairo, between 
Sayyida Zaynab and the Citadel. 
4 ~ ; y see .!l.J; Y : baruuka 2 
! ~ ; y see .!l1.S; Y : bureek, bureeka 
.) l.!l; Y 
;lSJ./. burukaar <Fr broeart> Inl brocade. 
~I~;y 
.:,IS"./. burkaan In pI barakiinl volcano. 
~1S.!l;y 
'4./. barkiita <It barehetta> In! {nautl ship's log. 
lISA; y 
~./. barkeeh <Fr> In pI -aatl parquet flooring. 
..,..!l J; y 
.rSJ./. barlaks <perh Gr parallaksis> In pI ,aatl {Chrl 
antiphon. 
.J.,~J;y 
J..:J./. birlant <It brillante> Inl brilliant-cut diamond. 
xaatim birlan( diamond ring. 
Ir;y 
r./. baram (u) Ivtlla to twist, twirl. baram Janabaat-u 
he twirled his moustache. laazim tubr/Jm iI-l:Jabl you 
musttwistthe rope. Ib {text I to rove (threads or fibres). 
69 
2 to roll, roll up. kunaafa mabruuma kunaafa wrapped 
spirally round a filling (usually of nuts) to form rolls . 
II fibrum-ha ... you know where you can stuff that! - Ivil 
3 to be frittered away (of money). 4 to wander about, 
go around. baramna wi-tfassaI:Jna we wandered around 
and enjoyed ourselves. -vn barm; ava baarim; pva 
mabruum. 
~ baram lala to search for. fit/.i1t abrum lalee 1i-l:Jadd i 
ma xadt i fluus-i I kept on looking for him until I got my 
money. 
rJ.r." mabruum In! {textl worsted. 
4.J.r." mabruuma Inl I cylindrical variety of mango. 
2 okra. 3 home-made pasta rolled into very small 
pieces, steamed and served with sweetened milk . 
4...1- burma I: musmaar burma screw. masamiir burma 
screws. 
";'..1- burmagi In pI -yya/l one who is suave and com-
manding. 2 philanderer. see further under 1[('; Y 
r..l- buram ladj invarl I suave and commanding. 
2 dissolute. 
r..l- burum: Jurum burum (1) mess, chaos. fil-l:Jikaaya 
[illit Jurum burum the thing turned out a mess. 
(2) nonce phrase used in spells ... abracadabra. 
{""!..I- bariim = burmagi. 
rl~ barraam In °11 {text I rover, operator of a roving 
machine. 2 barraam (l:Jabl) 
{nautl rope-spinning 
swivel. 3 devious person, twister. 
~~ barriima In pI -aatl I thread (of a screw). 
musmaar barriima a screw. - Ipl barariim, barrimaatl 
2 corkscrew. 3 swirl (of hair, OJ! a horse). 4 rowlock . 
S (oil) drill. 
r.r.-'I fitbaram Ivi/la to be twisted, be twirled. Ib {text I 
to be roved. 2 to be rolled, be rolled up. -iva mitbirim. 
r~1 finbaram = fitbaram. -iva minbirim. 
r~ barram Ivt and vii I to twist, twirl (a number of 
things or a number of times). tjaalid yibarram (f-) 
Janabaat-u he keeps on twirling his moustache. 2 {text I 
to rove (a number of threads or fibres). -vn tabriim; 
ava/pva mibarram . 
r) fabram r Ivtl to conclude (e.g., a contract), ratify 
(e.g., a treaty). -vn fibraam. 
rl..l-! ribraam Ivn! IImal:Jkamit in-natj,f wil-ribraam 
{Iegl Court of Cassation. - fayy i l:Jukm i ytjuul-u 
ma-f-huu-jnatj,f raw fibraam no decision of his is ever 
challenged. 
2 ('; Y 
4...1- burma} In pI buraml (squat narrow-necked) 
earthenware vessel (see PI.A, 4). 

jl J. biraam 
In 
pi fibrima, 
birimal earthenware 
casserole. 
3 jj Y 
L.. J. birma Iprop nl small town near Tanta, renowned 
for egg production.llbisbit birma an insoluble problem, 
an inexplicable matter (i.e. which only the quick-witted 
egg merchants of Birma could work out). 
4 r j Y see r.J j Y : baruuma 
5 r j Y see r IS j Y .: fabriim, fabriimi 
YrjY 
;(,.oJ. burumba <Burumba (in Guiza province»: 
sab[' burumba [deris] swank, coxcomb. 
j'::" rj Y 
ji..J.)~ barumitr <Fr barometre> In pi -aatl baro-
meter. 
I [r j Y see also I r j Y 
~ 
J. barmaga J Inll suaveness, artful sophistication. 
2 dissoluteness. 
~ 
ft'l fitbarmag I Ivil I to affect an appearance of 
sophistication. ma-titbarmag-J' [aleena ya [amm -
da-bna naas ya/aaba don't be highfalutin with us, mate, 
we're only ordinary folk. 2 to behave in a dissolute 
fashion. -ava mitbarmag. 
1 [r j Y 
~l; J. birnaamig In 
pi baraamigl la programme. 
birnaamig musiiqi musical programme. birnaamig ~eefi 
summer 
programme. 
Ib (computer) 
program. 
2 curriculum, timetable, schedule. 
~ 
J. barmag T Ivtl to programme. -vn barmag T; aval 
pV!l mibarmag. 
~ftl fitbarmag 2 T Ivil to be programmed. -iva 
mitbarmag. 
J rj Y 
..;. J. barmaq <T parmak> In pi baraamiq/l banister. 
2 spoke (of a wheel). -also barnaq. 
-<JrjY 
.;.,~ J. birmanganaat 
<Fr> 
Inl 
potassium 
permanganate. 
-
0 rj Y 
.;.,~ J. baramhaat <Copt> Inl seventh month of the 
70 
Coptic year (10 March -8 April). baramhaat ruub il-yee( 
wi-haat in Baramhaat (it is time to) go to the field and 
bring (whatever you like, because the fields are full of 
crops). 
~.JrjY 
O~.J'" J. baramuuda <Copt> Inl eighth month of the 
Coptic year (9 April- 8 May). baramuuda duqq if-Ji[iir 
bil-[amuuda wala yibqa fil-yee( wala [uuda in Bara-
muuda pound the barley with the pestle, and let not a 
stalk remain in the field. 
<J.JrjY 
IJ.J'" J. baramoon <Gr paramone> Inl [Chr] I period 
of fasting before the feasts of Christmas and Epiphany 
(in the Coptic Church). 2 the day before a feast day. 
JlSrjY 
J..,.. J. barmiilln pi baramiil, baramJiIIl barrel. [uqdit 
t~biin barmiil barrel hitch. II barmiil yadd Archimedes' 
screw. 2 capstan. 
~IJ. baramilgi In pi -yyal cooper. 
<Jj Y 
~ J. birniyya, barniyya In pi baraanil earthenware pot 
or dish glazed on the inside. 
- I <J j Y see 1 [ r j Y : birnaamig 
[<Jj Y 
r::: J. burung <T bUruncuk> Inl [obsolJ georgette 
crepe, gauze. -also burunguk, burunguq, burungug. 
1S[<JjY 
~ 
J. biringi <T birinci> ladj invarl I first. 2 best. 
- [ <J j Y see - [<J ~ Y : biringaan 
~ <Jj Y 
...... J. baranda <prob Engl> In pi -aatl veranda. -also 
faranda . 
j <Jj Y 
)J J. burunz <perh Fr> Inll bronze. 2 metallic paint. 
burunz' dahabi gold metallic paint. 
')JJ. burunza: such phrases as ma-ma[ii-J wala 
brunza I haven't a penny. 
IS)JJ. burunzi 
ladjl 
I pertaining 
to 
bronze. 
2 bronze-coloured. 

(V".J.J":-') 
..,..; J. burn us In pi baraanisl I cape or cloak (usually 
with a hood). 2 {Chr] cope worn by priests and bishops 
during the liturgy. 3 bathrobe, beachrobe. 
..,..; J. birins <Engl> In pi -aall prince. 
4..."....; J. birinsiisa <Engl> In pi -aall princess. 
.fl.J.J ":-' 
.u; J. birink <It paranco> In pi -aall running stretcher 
(in a slaughterhouse) on which a carcass is hung. 
I J.J.J ":-' 
Ji J. barnaq I I Ivtl to cause (the eyes) to stare. kaan 
mibarnaq-Ii Genee he was staring at me. 2 Ivil to stare. 
-ava milbarnaq. 
Z J.J.J ":-' 
Ji J. barnaq 2 <T parmak> In pi baraaniq/l banister. 
2 spoke (of a wheel). -also barmaq. 
.11S.J.J":-' 
~J. burneeta In pi baraniit, burnetaal/l hat. 2 lamp 
shade. 
I • .J ":-' 
'J~I fil-burah Iprop nl male spirit sometimes invoked 
in the zaar. 
z • .J ":-' see • IS .J ":-' : bireeh, bureeh 
r • .J ":-' 
~I..".J 1 riI-burhamiyya Iprop nl Sufi Order named 
after Sidi Ibranim ed-Disuqi. 
.J • .J ":-' 
.:,1.. J. burhaan, burhaan T In pi barahiin/l proof, evi-
dence. feeh il-burhaan Gala wuguud iIIaah what is the 
proof of God's existence? 2 sign, token, augury. 
,jAJ. barhan Ivil to give proof, provide evidence. 
laazim libarhan Gak-kalaam da you have to back up this 
assertion with proof. -vn barhana; ava mibarhan. 
,jA;.'1 filbarhan Ivil (impersonal) passive of barhan. 
fik-kalaam da Ibarhan Galee that claim was proved. -iva 
milbarhan. 
I J.J ":-' 
iJ J. barwa I <perh P paro> In pi baraawil plasterer's 
trowel. 
Z J.J ":-' see I IS.J ":-' : barwa 2 
71 
.J I J.J ":-' 
.:,IJ J. barawaan <Fr para vent> In pi -aall screen, fold-
ing screen. -also barafaan, baravaan. 
IS [.J.J ":-' see IS.J J ":-' : buruugi 
~ J.J ":-' 
,)JJ~ baruud <perh P barud> Inl gunpowder. mal!J i 
baruud saltpetre. 
i,)JJ~ baruuda J In pi baruudl rifle. 
j J.J ":-' 
jJ J. birwaaz <T pervaz from P> In pi barawiizl any 
frame or edging (e.g., picture frame). 
~ 
j!JI J. barawizgi In pi -yyal (picture) framer. 
jJJ. barwiz Ivtl to frame, surround.II!J-abarwiz fism-
ak I'll hold you in great esteem. -vn barwaza; avalpva 
mibarwiz. 
jJ;.'1 filbarwiz Ivil to be framed, be surrounded. - iva 
milbarwiz . 
..}J.J":-' 
..rJ J. burooj <Fr broche> In pi -aall brooch. 
..JJ.J ":-' 
4iJJ. biroova <It prova> In pi -aall I: rehearsal. 
2 fitting. fil-Iarzi Gawiz-ni Ii-broova lanya the tailor 
wants me for another fitting. 3 {print] proof, proof 
sheet. 
J J.J ":-' 
,jJ J. barwaq I/vtl 18 to cause to shine. Ib to make 
resplendent (especially by decoration and ornamenta-
tion). kaanil mibarwaqa fooqit in-noom lamaam she 
had made the bedroom look splendid. 2 /vii to shine, 
gleam. -vn barwaqa; avalpva mibarwaq. 
,jJ;.'1 filbarwaq Ivi/l to shine, gleam. 2 to become or 
be made resplendent. -ava/iva milbarwaq. 
JJJ.J":-' 
~JJ~ baruuka 2 <perh It parrucca> In pI -aall wig. 
J J.J ":-' 
JJJ. barwill/vtl to crumble (between the fingers). 
2/vil to become crumbly. fil-fi(iir mibarwil xaa/~ the 
pastry is very crumbly. -also farwil. - vn barwala; ava 
mibarwil. 
JJ;.'I filbarwil Ivil I to be crumbled. 2 to become 
crumbly. -also rilfarwil. - avaliva milbarwil. 

(r.J';Y) 
4.J;~ baruuma I <Gr broma> Inl rust, corrosion. 
4.JJ. baruuma 2 <It paroma> Inl {naut} mooring 
rope, painter. 
.J.J.; Y 
I;J. baruwwa <It prua> In pi -aatl {naut} bow (of a 
ship). kawirtit l-baruwwa foredeck. fil-baruwwa right 
ahead! 
IIJ.;Y 
..; J. bara 2 or bara (i) Ivtl 1 to trim or sharpen to a 
point. fibrii-li t;alam sharpen me a pencil! 2 to wear 
down, wear away. fif-jwrl' bara l-fazmiil the work 
wore away the chisel. II fil-hamm' baraa-ni the worry 
wore me out. -vn bary; aVJl baari; pya mabri. 
~ J. barya In 
pi -aatl 1 linst nl a sharpening. 
2 sharpened end (e.g., of a pencil). 
IJ J. barwa 2 1 In pi -aat, baraawil worn-down piece (of 
soap). 2/adj invarl quick-witted. 
~I~ barraaya In pi -aatl (pencil) sharpener. 
..; .r.' I fitbara Ivil 1 to be trimmed or sharpened to a 
point. 2 to be worn down, be worn away. fi~-~abun-da 
b-yitbiri b-surla that kind of soap wears away quickly. 
II fitbara n~~ "lat;l-i (half my mind is worn away) I'm 
so worn out I can hardly think. -iva mitbiri. 
..;..,,; I finbara = fitbara. -minbiri. 
ZIJ.;Y 
";.)~ baara Ivtl to compete with. ma-badd'-j yibarii 
fig-gary no one can compete with him at running, no 
one can run as fast as he. -vn mubaraah; ava mibaari. 
II).,... mubaraah In pi mubaraat, mubarayaatl competi-
tion, contest, match. fii talat mubarayaat il-badd'-da 
there are three matches this Sunday . 
..;).,;-1 fitbaara Ivil to compete. -ava mitbaari. 
3 ..; .; Y see I • .; Y : bara, bari, fitbarra, fistabra, 
fistibarra 
4 ..; .; Y see Z • .; Y : baari. barlyya 
~IJ.;Y 
~J. biriid <Fr bride> Inl (needlew/ bar. lirwa briid 
button-hole consisting of a worked bar. 
UIJ.;Y) 
ju~ bariiz Iprop nl Paris. : also bariis. 
1j!J. bariiza I In pi baraaYlzl ten piastres, ten-piastre 
coin or note. 
72 
OJ-J. bariiza 2, biriiza <Fr prise> In pi baraayizl 
1 {elee} point, socket. 2 [plumb} water outlet. 
...,..IJ.;Y 
\J""!.)~ bariis Iprop nl Paris. -also bariiz . 
.£I..;.;y 
~.) J! bureek <T bOrek> Icoll nI small pastries with 
sweet or savoury filling. 
"'~')J! bureeka Ipl -aatl unit noun of bureek. 
.JrlJ.;Y 
~J. biriimu <ltprimo> ladj invar/l first-class. fakl' 
briimu top-notch food. sawwaat; biriimu a first-class 
driver. - In/2 first dish ofa meal (in a restaurant, etc.). 
3 ril-biriimu top prize-winning ticket! (cry of the 
lottery-ticket seller). 
(·IJ.;Y) 
~J. bireeh <Fr> In pi -aatl beret. 
~J. bureeh <poss Fr bureau> In pi -aatl tallboy . 
jyjy 
;'J!j! bazbuuz In pi bazabiizll small spout (e.g., on a 
water jug). 2 small protrusion. 
j!j! bazbiz Ivii 1 to exude or emerge in droplets. fii 
xurm' ~lfayyar il-mayya bi-tbazbiz minnu there is a 
small hole from which the water drips. fil-larat; bat;a 
ybazbiz min wiff-u drops of sweat began to ooze from 
his face. 2 to put out protuberances. gism-u bazbiz 
xaal~ his whole body has come out in pimples. farl 
if-fagara bi-ybazbiz the branch of the tree is putting out 
buds. -vn bazbaza; ava mibazbiz. 
.; j Y see 3 .; ~ Y : bizr, bizra, bizraaya 
.£I.;j Y 
.!I.)j! bazrak <P buzurg> Inl {mus} name given to E 
half flat (on the fourth space of the staff). 
- r.;jy 
Ja....)j! bazramii( ladj invarl 1 of mixed blood, mon-
grel. 2 chaotic, topsy-turvy. -also ba~ramii(. 
. ..... 
.;.; " 
1 bizz In pi bizaazl 1 any small protuberance or pro-
jection (e.g., nipple, stud, bud, knot (in wood». II bizz 
ir-rigl ankle bone. 2 breast, udder. IIlinab bizz (il-
lanza) variety of sweet elongated grape. -bizz il-kalb 
{bot} name given to varieties of Zygophyllum, Polygo 

num and Mesembryanthemum. -gaab iI-xabar min bilz 
umm-u ... he got the news straight from the horse's 
mouth. -huwwa lissa mif laarif tariilj bizz umm-u ... 
he's still wet behind the ears. -huwwafaarib min bizz 
umm-uJ ... he has great strength and courage. 
;~ bizza = bizz. 
;)~ bazzaaza!n pi -aatl I feeding bottle, nursing bot-
tle. 2 teat or nipple of a feeding bottle. 
I -
• 
~.Jy 
J). baZlj Icoll nl [agric] onion sprout(s).lIbazlj; baeli 
baby onions (sown from seed of ordinary onions and 
often pickled). 
~). baZlja lunit n, pi -aatl an onion sprout. 
W). baZljaaya = baZlja. 
Z\,;;y 
J). bazalj (u) Ivtl to spit. - vn bazlj; ava baazilj; pva 
mabzuulj. 
JI). buzaalj Inl spittle, saliva. 
~I~ bazzaalja In pi -aatl spittoon. 
J~ bazzalj Ivll to spit. -vn tabziilj; ava/pva mibazzalj. 
1 - • 
~.Jy 
J). buzulj <T bozuk> Inl [mus] bouzouki. 
IJjy 
J). bazl Inl [surg] tapping, paracentesis. !'aalit bazl 
trocar and cannula. bazl id-damm phlebotomy. 
Jr.- mabzal In pi mabaazill opening in a furnace for 
the removal of ash and cinders. 
Z Jj y 
J~ bazalT (i) Ivt/: bazal guhd (or guhuud) to exert 
effort, take pains. -vn bazl; ava baazil; pva mabzuul. 
Jjl.,.. mabaazillpl nl vices. 
JI~I !,ibtizaallnl indecency, vulgarity. 
J.i;.,.. mubtazalladj *1 indecent, vulgar. 
.,:,Jjy 
.;.1;4 bazalt <Fr> Inl basalt. 
JI;4 bazalti ladjl of or pertaining to OOzalt. 
r j y see r I.J j y .: !'abziim 
.J., .J j y see j,.J j I.J y : bizanti 
73 
~1V"y 
i)."'! bisaara <Copt> Inl dish of dried broad beans, 
cooked with spices and herbs, and mashed. - also 
b~aara. 
V"lyV"y 
i.-~ bisbaasa I (also bisbaasa hindi) Inl mace (spice). 
v~YV"Y 
'::";.r.-4 basaburt <Engl> In pi -aat, -aatl passport. 
- also basboor. 
V"YV"Y 
~ 
basbis Ivil I to call puss-puss-puss (to a cat). 2 to 
tell tales, gossip. kaan bi-ybasbis laleek ljuddaam~a!Jb­
ak he was telling tales about you in front of your friend. 
-vn basbasa; ava mibasbis. 
~ 
bisbis linterjl sound made in calling to a cat. 
i.-~ bisbaasa 2 In pi basabiisl woman given to spite-
ful gossip. 
~.JyV"y 
;.r.-4 basboor <Fr passeport> In pi -aatl passport. 
- also basaburt. 
V".J Y V" Y 
i.-~ 
basbuusa Icoll nl sweetmeat of baked semolina, 
soaked in syrup. 
JlvV"y 
J~ bustaal <Fr postale>: kart; bustaal Ipl kuruut 
bustaall postcard. ~uura kart; bustaal postcard-size 
photo. 
.:,lvV"y 
.:..~ bustaan <P bustdn> In pi basatiinl garden. 
.;,.'l....eJ I !'i/-basatiin Iprop nl village to the north of 
el-Ma·adi, famous for its cemetery. 
~vV"Y 
~ 
bastar <prop n Pasteur> Ivtl to pasteurize. -vn 
bastara; ava mibastar. 
~I !,itbastar Ivil to be pasteurized. - iva mitbastar. 
"';vV"Y 
~ 
bastif Ivtl to scold, give (s.o.) a piece of one's 
mind. -vn bastafa; avalpva mibastif. 
~I !,itbastif Ivil to be scolded. - iva mitbastif. 

~ J..:....rY 
~ 
bistil/a, bastilla <It mastel/a> In pi -aatl large 
metal container or kettle for holding liquid. 
loS J..:....r Y 
~ 
bastilya <ltpastiglta> I Icoll nl small sugar can-
dies. pastilles. 2 lunit n, pi -aatl a small sugar candy, a 
pastille. 
~~ bastilyaaya = baslllya 2. 
r":"..r Y 
~ 
bisllm <Engl> In pi basaallml piston. binz il-
bistim piston ring. - also bistin. 
';''':''..rY 
~ 
bistin <Engl> In pi basaatml piston. binz il-bistin 
piston ring. - also bistim. 
-';''':''..r Y 
J~ bastanikaar <P basta-nigiir> Inl [mus] mode in 
Arabic music beginning on B half flat and having E half 
flat and G flat. 
';'J":"..rY 
J~ bastooni, bastuuni <It bastoni> Inl clubs (in 
cards). 
.;. loS ..:.. ..r Y 
~y. bustiif <Fr postiche> In pi -aatl hair-piece. 
..!l1oS":"..rY 
~ 
bastiika <It pastecca> Inl [naut] block, snatch 
block. 
JIoS/Z...rY 
1oSJ.:":'-'. basajeeri <It passeggeri>: markib basajeeri 
passenger ship. 
(t..rY) 
~ 
basxa J <Copt> In pi -aatl foot of a plough, to 
which the ploughshare is attached (see PI.D, 21). - also 
ba~xa. 
~ 
basxa 2 <Syr> Inl [Chr] service held on each of 
the four days preceding Good Friday. -also ba~xa. 
I J..rY 
fi'. basr Icoll n, pi busuurl pimple(s), spot(s). 
or. basra lunit n, pi -aatl a1'imple, a spot. 
2 J..r Y 
,r.-Iy. bawasiir Ipl nl [path] haemorrhoids, piles. 
74 
3 J ..r Y see J I ..r Y : bisaara 
IoSJ..rY 
~J~ bisarya <perh Gr psan> Icoll nl I fry of certain 
Nile fishes, especially the libiis (Labeo sp.). 2 sand-
smelt. 
..r..rY 
~ bass J (i) Ivtl [cook] to rub (ingredients) together 
(in the making of cakes and pastries). -vn bass, 
basasaan; ava baasis; pya mabsuus. 
~ 
bisiisa, basiisa I Inl sweet pastry. based on 
maize flour. 2/adj invarl (accidentally) crumbled or 
squashed. 
2..r..rY 
~ bass 2 (i) Ivtl to instil (Into s.o.) Inspire (in s.o.). 
manaa;ir muxilfa tfassar ftl-farfaal wl-tbISS ' filhum ir-
ru[b frightful scenes which affect children and fill them 
with terror. -vn bass, basasaan; ava baasis; pya 
mabsuus. 
~I fitbass Ivil to be instilled (into s.o.), be inspired 
(in s.o.). - iva mitbass. 
3(..r..rY) 
~ bass.l <P bas> I linterjl enough! bass - wala kilma 
enough! not one word more! II wi-bass and no more, as 
in [ala qadd' maqdarit-ha w-bass according to her 
means and no more. -Iamma qaal ya bass to the max-
imum, as much as possible, as in qa[adt aqrab fii 
li-yaayit lamma qaal ya bass I beat him till he could take 
no more,firibna lamma quina ya bass we drank till we 
could drink no more. 2 ladvl only, just. [afaan xa{r-ak 
bass just for you. sibuu-ni faxuff' bass just let me in. 
kunt" [aayiz fa[raf bass I just wanted to know. law 
bass" badd' ysa[id-ni if onl~ someone would help me. 
3 Iconjl but, however. ruub -bass I fiifar{ go! but there's 
a condition. ma huwwa mabsuu{ kida - bassi fana laf 
well, he's happy like that, but I'm not! 
~ buss: ma-fii-f buss I wala huss '" there are no ifs and 
buts about it. 
~ biss J linterjl I sound made to a cat, usually in 
order to shoo it away. 2 sound made to attract the 
attention (e.g., of a waiter). 
~ biss 2: biss-ak biss-ak '" just you dare! 
4 ..r ..r Y see ..r J ..r Y : basuus 
1,1, 
.... 
..r . 
~ 
basal (i) Ivtli to give pleasure to, make happy. 

laazim il-waal:Jid yibsi{ nafs-u one has to enjoy oneself. 
ril-lelaa-di nawyiin nibsi{-ku tonight we intend to give 
you a good time. II fibsi{ ya lamm there you are, every-
thing is O.K. (said to one whose problem is solved). 
-basal faxlaaq-u it cooled his temper, it brightened his 
mood. 21 to unfold, spread out. IIbasa{ kaff-u (he 
opened his palm) he was charitable. -vn basta; ava 
bllasi{; pva mabsuu{ . 
.J...~ baasi{' Inl Giver of bounty (epithet of God). 
Ilquul ya baasi{ "" take it easy! don't fret! 
J.~ mabsuu{ ladj *1 I pleased, content. fintu 
mabsu{iin hina are you happy here? fana mabsuu{ 
minnak I'm pleased with you. 2 exhilarated, high (as a 
result of drink, drugs etc.). /irib lamma balja mabsuu{ 
he drank till he had a glow on. 3 well-off. rich. kaan 
fal/aal] bassi mabsuu{ he was a peasant, but 
comfortably-off. 
~ base' Inl numerator of a fraction. 
~ 
basta I In pi -aat/landing (on a staircase). 
J.~ busaa{ 
In 
pi fabsi{al 
I carpet. 
II fil-busaa{ 
fal:Jmadi "" thing~ are quite informal. -busaa{ ir-ral:Jma 
large cloth, usually of black velvet marked with a cross, 
spread out and carried from the corner~ by four bearers 
in front of the coffin in Christian funeral processions. 
2 noor of a (boxing or wrestling) ring. 
J.~ basaa{a Inl ease, ~implicity. bi-bdslla{a simply, to 
put it simply. 
~ 
basii{ ladj pi busa{a, bl15aa{1 I simple, easy. 
lja-Ililmiltagriba basii{a we'll make a simple experi-
ment. laawiz tigaddid fiqamt-ak - basii{ll you want to 
renew your residence permit? that's a simple matter. 
II ril-mu/tarak il-basii{ !math/lowest common denomi-
nator. 2 unpretentious, unassuming. hllwwa taagir 
basii{ he's a small-time trader. fil:Jlla Ilaas bllSll{a we're 
simple folk. 3 simple-minded, naive. 4 small (in quanti-
ty or extent). rII//-a-ha b-kimmiyya basii{a mill if-
jarbaat sprinkle it with a little syrup. bi-yl:Jibb i yitfalsif 
laakin lala basii{ he likes to go in for a little philosophiz-
ing.law giri tiblja garyit-ll basii{ll even if he does run, he 
can't run much. 5 slight, insignificant (in intensity). 
wagal basii{ a slight pain. - ladv/6 to a limited degree, 
to a small extent. ma-fiifl:Jadd' mul:Jtarif filla basii{ 
there are only a few professionals. bi-tiwgal basii{ it 
hurts a little 
J..,....JI riI-basii{ll r Inl the earth.lala cf.ahr il-basii{ll on 
earth. 
1...,;1 fitbllSll{ Ivil I to be or become pleased ~r con-
tent. filmil il-waagib kllwayyis la/aall il- fllbla titbisi{ 
mill/lak do your homework well so that Teacher will be 
7S 
plea~ed with you. 2 to become exhilarated (as from 
drink, drugs etc.). 3 to enjoy oneself. fitbasa{na qawi 
fi-skindiriyya s-sana IIi faatit we had a really good time 
in Alexandria last year. - avaliva mitbisi{. 
.k-,; 1 finbasa{ = fitbasa(. - vn finbisaa{; ava minbisi{. 
~ 
bassa{ Ivtl to simplify. - vn labsii{; avalpva 
mibassa{. 
J...:..;I fitbassa{ Ivil to be simplified. - iva mitbassa{. 
.l....~ baasi{.! Ivtl to humour (s.o.). qaladil tibas{-u 
1-l:Jaddi ma waafiq lal-beela she sweet-talked him till 
he agreed to the transaction. -vn mubas{a; ava 
mibaasi{. 
J....l,.. mubas{a Inl cordiality, agreeableness, con-
geniality. riI-mubas{a fil-kalaam the niceties of con-
versation. ma-1l:Jibbif il-mubas{a she doesn't like 
familiarities . 
.l....l,;1 filbaasi{ Ivil I to speak pleasantly. qaldiin 
yitbas{u mala balcf.q alabuu-ha gadd they were having a 
light-hearted conversation but then became argu-
mentative. 2 to be humoured. -ava/iva milbaasi{. 
.k.-,.;.-I fistabsa{ Ivtl I to consider simple or easy. 
ma-tistabsa{f il-masaaril bi{-{ariiqa di don't take mat-
ters that lightly! 2 to select for easiness or simplic;ity. 
fistabsa{-Iu masfala w-l:Jall-a-ha he picked out an easy 
(mathematical) problem and solved it. -vn fislibsaa{; 
ava mistabsa{. 
Z j,..,... y 
.J.-y. bus{a I <It posta> Inl I mail. maktab bus{a post 
office. waraqit bus{a or {aabil bus{a postage stamp. 
2 postal service. malldubiin min i1-bus{a representa-
tives from the Post Office. 
.r.J..-y. bus{agi In pi -yyal postman, mailman. 
J (j,..,... y) 
~ 
bas{.! Icoll nl reed(s).qalam bast reed pen (as used 
by calligraphers). 
~ 
bast I <perh Engl> Inl paste applied to a razor 
strop to aid sharpening. 
~ 
bas{a.! <It pasta> In pi -aatl an Egyptian sweet 
similar to a mille-feuille. 
~ 
bas{a.!; bas{it fahm charcoal ember for igniting 
the tobacco in a water-pipe. 
~ ~ 
bas{aaya = bas{a.l. 
I.SJ~ baS{llawi ladjl pertaining to Tell Basta, near 
Zagazig. lja/p bas{aawi type of stiff straw used in the 
manufacture of brooms. 
~ 
bus{a.! <P pista> Inl small piece of opium or 
hashish enough for one dose. 

r~J.,..rY 
4.. ~ 
bastirma <T pastlrma> Inl garlic-and-spice-
cured beef. 
J..rY 
..;....; I finbasaq r Ivil to stem, emanate. lagna nbasaqit 
min lagna tanya a committee that grew out of another 
committee. -vn finbisaaq; ava munbasiq. 
-J~..r"" 
~ 
biskilitta <It bicicletta> In pi -aatl bicycle. 
"::".J~..rY 
.;:.,.f-... baskuut <It biscotti> Icoll nl biscuit(s), 
cookie(s). - also baskawiit. 
j;;.f-... baskuuta lunit n, pi -aatl a biscuit, a cookie. 
- also baskawiita. 
J.J~..rY 
J.f-... baskuul (also mizaan baskuul) <Fr bascule> In 
pi -aatl weighbridge. 
-.J~..rY 
~.f-... baskawiit <Fr biscuit> Icoll nl biscuit(s), 
cookie(s). - also baskuut. 
~.f-... baskawiita lunit n, pi -aatl a biscuit, a cookie. 
- also baskuuta. 
~~.f-... baskawitaaya = baskawiita. 
J..r Y 
J-~ baasil ladj pi busalal I distasteful. IIdamm-u 
baasil he is disagreeable. 2 brave, courageous. 
~ J..ry 
~ 
bisilla <It pisello> Icoll nl pea(s). bisillit iz-
z~huur sweet pea(s). 
~J\.....e bisillaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a pea. 
1 r..r Y 
r-'"" mabsam, mabsim In pi mabaasiml I mouth-piece 
(of a water-pipe (see Pl.I, 6), wind instrument (see PU, 
17 and 19), cigarette-holder etc.). 2 part of rectal 
syringe which is inserted in the anus. 
~ 
tabsiima In pi -aatl smile. laleeha tabsiima 
tgannin she has a bewitching smile. 
~I fitbassim Ivil to smile. madd' fiid-u wi-tbassim 
he stretched out his hand and smiled. -ava mitbassim. 
~ 
tabassam: fin-nabi tabassam even the Prophet 
smiled! (to get a smile from a girl in the street). 
~I fibtasam Ivil to smile. fiuaay fabtisim w-ana 
76 
fayfaa-k kida how can I smile seeing you like this? -vn 
fibtisaam; ava mibtisim. 
4..~1 fibtisaama In pi -aatl a smile. 
2 r' ..r Y see r IS ..r Y : basiima 
Jr..r Y 
~ 
basmala Inl name given to the invocation bi-sm 
illaah ir-ral:Jmadn ir-ral:Jiim (in the name of God the 
<;ompassionate and the Merciful). 
~ 
bismilla linterjl invitation to a guest to begin 
eating when food is served "" please start! 
~ 
basmil Ivil to utter the invocation bi-sm illaah 
ir-ral:Jmaan ir-ral:Jiim (said before an undertaking). -vn 
basmala; ava mibasmil. 
J..-,;I fitbasmil = basmil. - ava mitbasmil. 
-~.J..rY 
.~~ basandiida <P pasandida> Inl {mus] mode in 
Arabic music. 
..r.J..rY 
..r ~ basuus Iprop nl a village i(l Qalyubiya province, 
known for the good quality of its fammaam melons. 
rlS..rY 
~ 
basiima Inl confection like hariisa, but harder 
and with coconut. 
~y 
..;~ baf- <T ba~> prefix, with occupational titles, 
indicating higher rank (frequently used by way of com-
plimentary hyperbole). bafmuhandis chief engineer. 
bafkaatib head clerk. bafrayyis (1) foreman. (2) {naut] 
boatswain. baffawiiJ (also bitfawii}) {obsol] sergeant-
major (in army or police). 
";Y";Y 
~ 
bafbiJ <perh Copt> I Ivtl to sprinkle with 
water. IIrabb-i-na ybafbiJ i(·(uuba lli tal:Jt' raas-u (may 
God soften the stone head-rest under his head) "" may 
God rest his soul. 2 Ivil to sprout (of plants). -vn 
bafbafa; avalpva mibafbiJ. 
~I fitbafbiJ Ivil to be sprinkled with water. - iva 
mitbafbiJ· 
.J.J Y"; Y 
ISJ~ bafbuuri <perh T 
ba~pare> Inl nozzle. 
Ilraffaa,l" bafbuuri [naut] kort nozzle. 

I..::,., 
I....., 
. ...,.. . 
~ 
baffit I Ivtl to make penniless. miraat-i baffitit-ni 
if-fahr-i-da my wife finished off all the money I had 
this month. 2 Ivil to become penniless. Yana mbaffit 
I h.aven't got a penny. -vn tabfiit; avalpva mibaffit. 
..::....:..;1 Yitbaffit Ivil to be made penniless. - iva mitbaffit. 
2(.;,..;.y) 
~ 
bift In pi bifuut. bifuta. bifuutal woollen overgar-
ment of various types, worn by men. 
~ 
buft <P pusht> In pi bufuutl [coarse. abus] '" 
sod. 
.!l .;, ..;. y 
~ 
baftik Ivtl to adorn with strips of (coloured) 
cloth. II miljaffa mbaftika straw broom bound with cloth 
strips (to prevent fraying). - vn baftaka; avalpva 
mibaftik. 
~I Yitbaftik Ivil passive of baftik. -iva mitbaftik. 
I 
• 
J...,..Y 
loS A 
bufra Inll good news. 2 money or present given 
to one who first delivers a piece of good news. 
;)~ bifaara In pi bafaayirll good omen. portent. au-
gury. 2 money or present given to one who first delivers 
a piece of good news. 3 [Chr] 3a gospel. bifaarit matta 
the Gospel according to St. Matthew. 3b riI-bifaara 
(1) the Annunciation. (2) (the preaching of) the 
Gospel. 
J-~ bafaayir Ipl nl I indications. bafaayir ir-rabiil 
the signs of spring. 2 earliest picked fruit of the season. 
-/adjectivallyl linab bafaayir earliest grapes. 
A 
bafiir Inl bringer of good tidings. riI-bafiir epithet 
o~ the Prophet Muhammad. 
A 
baffar Ivtl I to give good news to. baffar-ni b-
nagaab-i he announced to me the good news of my 
success. Yallaah yibaffar-ak bil-xeer may God brillg you 
good news (said to one who has performed a favour). 
2 [Chr] to evangelize. - Ivil 3 [Chr] to act as a 
preacher or missionary. 
baffar bil-Yingii/ been 
in-niyaam niyaam he preached the Gospel among the 
cannibals. 4 to give the first yield (of a crop). 
bi-yistimirr i f-numuww-u i-'lfaayit ma ybaffar it con-
tinues growing until it gives its first yield. -vn tabfiir; 
a~a/pva mibaffar. 
,r..... mubaffir In 'I [Chr] missionary. 
..,..:.1.,;1 ritbaafir l Ivil to look (upon s.th.) as a good 
omen, be cheered (by s.th.). Yitbafirt i biikinubb it did 
me good to see you in the morning. - ava mitbaafir. 
.,r.;.-I ristabfarr Ivil to look (upon s.th.) as a good 
77 
omen, be cheered (by s.th.). Yistabfarna bii (xeer) we 
took it as a good sign. -vn Yistibfaar; ava mistabfar. 
2.J~Y 
~ bafar l (u) Ivtl I to flake, shred, grate. ~abuun 
mabfuur soap flakes. -vn bafr. bafr; ava baafir; pva 
mabfuur. mabfuur. 
; A 
bafara In pi -aatl la skin. surface. Ib com-
plexion. 
bafara duhniyya 
an oily 
complexion. 
2 [text] finish. 
;~ mabfara In pi mabaafirl grater. 
3 
• 
J...,..Y 
~ bafar 2 Inl I human being. riI-waabid ban:f.u bafar 
after all, one is only human. 2 riI-bafar mankind. 
3 ~ [euphem] penis. 
1oS~ bafari ladjl human. qabiyya bafariyya human 
sacrifice. qufdal bafari frogman. Ilduktoor bafari 
physician. 
4 
• 
J...,.. Y 
r4 baafir Ivtl I to undertake, carry out. perform. 
bi-ybibb i ybaafir kull i ljaqiyya b-nafs-u he likes to 
handle each case himself. bi-ybaafir lamal-u fil-bank 
he carries out his job at the bank. mabruum min 
mubafrit i1-buljuulj is-siyasiyya deprived of exercising 
political rights. 2 to supervise. mif lawziin badd ybafir-
na we don't want anyone to supervise us. -vn mibafra. 
mubafra r; ava mibaafir. mubaafir r; pva mubaafar r . 
; r L,.. mubaafaratan r ladvl directly. 
rL,.. mubaafir lIn 'I supervisor. 2/adj 'I direct. 
Yitti~aal mubaafir direct communication. bi-tbaawil 
tilraf Yasraar-i b-{ariilja !'eer mubafra she tries to find 
out my secrets by indirect means. sabyaat mubafra 
[textJ direct colours. 
r 1.,;1 Yitbaafir 2 Ivil to be supervised. - iva mitbaafir. 
5 .) Iw~ Y see ').J"; Y : bajawra 
.;, J ..;. Y 
.;.. r Yo bufirt <poss Engl bush shirt> In pi -aatl [milJ 
fatigue shirt. 
"';J";'Y 
J A 
bafraf <P pish-rav> In pi bafaarifl [musJ in-
strumental form having a 4/4 signature (and character-
istically longer than the samaali) . 
JJ";'y 
JA bafralj Ivtl to give (s.o.) a treat (usually by 

spending money). kull' baaba ma yzur-na ybafrac;-na 
b-c;irfeen every time my father comes to visit us he 
spends money on us generously.llb4rac; lenee to feast 
one's eyes. gIve one's eyes a treat. - vn bafrac;a; ava/pva 
mlbafrac;. 
;';,r-! bafrac;a Inl luxury. rm wugid iI-leef yibc;a 
l-mall:J' bafrac;a {pravJ (if bread is available. then salt is 
a luxury) = fIrst things first. 
.; -""",,I 'litbafrac; Ivil to treat oneself. spend money 
freely on pleasure. -ava mithafraq. 
";,JJ";y 
...rJ,r-! bafaroof<Copt> lcoll nl flammgo(s).lIzayy' 
luud iI-bafaroof very tall and thin. 
~";y 
.....,-! baff (i) Ivil to ~mile. look happy. saalit mafaf-m 
baff' f-wiff-I as soon as he saw me. his face lit up. - vn 
bafaafa. bafafaan; ava baaflf. 
...r~ bafuuf ladjl smiling. genial. 
t";y 
~. bifil. bafil I ladj *1 hideous. abominable. 
~I 'labfal lell more/most hideous or abominable. 
~~ hafaala 
Inl 
hIdeousness. 
frightfulness. 
ta~arrufaat-u f-mllntaha I-bafaala his behaviour is abso-
I~tely appalling. 
~ baffal Ivil to commit outrages. 'lil-kalb' baffal 
fiihllm bi-nyaab-u the dog savaged them with his fangs. 
~ 
1 'listabfal Ivtl to consider hideous or abomin-
able. - vn 'listibfaal; ava mistabfal. 
.!l";y 
~ 
bafka Inl a type of card game. 
J.!l..; Y 
.J..-.... bafkar Ivtl to gut. clean out (a carcass). - vn 
hafkara; ava/pva mihafkar. 
)~ hifkaar In pi hafakurl one who cleans out 
carcasses. 
(J,J .!l";y) 
,).J.-... h4kllllr In pi bafakurl long metal rod wuh a 
hooked end (used. e.g .. by bakers for removing trays 
from the oven). 
.,).J.-... bafkllura Inl head of the penis (in animals). 
J ,.;.!l";y 
~ 
bafkur <P pesh-gir> Inl I terry cloth. terry 
towelling. 2 Ipl hafakurl bath towel. 
78 
J..; y 
~ 
bafla or btjla In pi bifal. biflaatl {lIon-CairelleJ any 
small sharp instrument usable as a weapon. 
-rJ";y 
~ 
baflamii[ Inl {joeJ penis. 
.!l,.;J";y 
~ 
bafliik <perh T ha~ltk> In pi baJaltikl neck 
edging of a galabiya (see PI.F. 4). 
r"; y 
r 
bafam (i) Ivtl to surfeit. r,d-diJm' b-yibfim 
wi-yxalli l-waal:Jid ma-yi(jdar-f' yaakul fat gives one a 
feeling of uncomfortable fullnes~ and makes one unable 
to eat (anything else). - vn bafam. bafamaan; ava 
baafim; pva mabfllum. 
.J~ bafmaall lad) *1 suffering from a feeling of being 
full (rich food) . 
~I 'litbafam Ivil to be surfeited. - iva mitbifim. 
2 
4 
r...r y 
~ 
tabfiim Inl riveting. 
3 r ..; y 
see r,.;"; y : b4ilma 
J r"; y 
~ 
bafmala Icoll nl loquat(s). 
~Jr";y 
~ 
bifamill. bafamill <Fr> Inl bechamel sauce. 
~ 
bifamilla. bafamilla = hifamill . 
...r1J";y 
~ 
bafalls <Copt> Inl the ninth month of the Cop-
tic year (9 May to 7 June). bafans' b-yiknis ii-beet (or 
il-rarq') kans Bashans sweeps the house (or ground) 
clean (because stores run out prior to the next harvest). 
JIJ";y 
~ 
bafnac; Ivt/ to wrap or veil (the head or neck). 
bafnac;it wiff-a-ha bl[-[arl:Ja she covered her face with 
the veil. - vn bajnac;a; ava/pva mibafllac;. 
~ 
bufneec;a In pi b4aniic;. bufnec;aat/ muffler. 
~carf. head-veil. 
..:;;..-,;1 ritbafllac; IVII to be wrapped or veiled (of the 
head or neck). - iva mubaflla{i. 
IJIJ";y 
~ 
baflliin <perh Copt> /coll n/ lotus(es). 

~ 
bafniina lunit n, pi -aatl a lotus. 
~ 
bafnin Ivil to expand or freshen up as a result of 
soaking in water. Iju{[i I-baljduunis [i-mayya [afaan 
yibafnin put the parslcy in water to freshen it up. faxad 
dUff' w-{iIi[ wi-wifJ-u mbafnin he took a shower and 
came out with his face glowing. -vn bafnana; ava 
mibafnin. 
~I fitbafnin = bafnin. -ava mitbafnin. 
.).J ..; Y 
'jY"'"! bafawra <T par;avra> In pi -aatl blackboard 
duster, chalk eraser. 
i";"; y 
~ 
bafiima J In pi bafaayiml after-birth (of anim-
als). - also mafiima. 
,)I,-""y 
'j~ bu~aara <Copt> Inl dish of dried broad beans, 
cooked with spiccs and herbs and mashed. -also 
bisaara. 
I,-""y,-""y 
~ 
ba~ba~ Ivil to ogle, make eyes, leer (often with 
accompanying suggestive remarks). w-ana b-aba~ba~ 
liz-zabaayin wi-feeh ya[ni so I make eyes at the cus-
tomers, what of it? -vn ba~ba~a; ava miba~ba~. 
'-""~ bi~baa~ ladj *1 flirtatious (usually of men) . 
...r' ~ 
ba~buu~ I In pi ba~abii~1 (male) flirt. 
..,~ miba~ba~aati In pi -yyal flirt. 
~I 
fitba~ba~ Ivil 
I (impersonal) passive of 
ba~ba~. fana mifmin illi b-yitba~ba~ luhum I'm not the 
type to put up with people making eyes at me. 2 to look 
around furtively. maafi b-titba~ba~ [ala feeh what are 
you sneaking around looking for? -avaliva mitba~ba~. 
2,-""y,-""y 
...r' ~ 
ba~bu~2 (also ba~buu~ willa) In pi ba~abii~1 
embcr. 
~ ~ 
ba~bu~a = ba~buu~. 
~L.. ~ 
ba~bu~aaya = ba~buu~. 
(t,-""y) 
~ 
ba~xa I <Copt> In pi -aatl foot of a plough, to 
which the ploughshare is attached (see PI.D, 21). -also 
basxa. 
~ 
ba~xa2 <Syr> Inl [Chr] service held on each of 
the four days preceding Good Friday. - also basxa. 
79 
I,) '-"" Y 
~ 
ba~ar Inl vision, sight. 
04~ ba~ariyyaatf Ipl n/optics. 
..r-"""-! 
ba~iir ladj *1 I cndowed with sight, sighted. 
ril-[een ba~iira wil,yadd i lja~iira [pray] "'" the spirit is 
willing but the flesh is weak. ril-yariib fa[ma wa-law 
kaan b~iir [pray] "'" a stranger is always to be excused 
his ignorance of foreign customs. 2 clear-sighted, dis-
cerning. - In/.3 Discerning One (epithet of God). 
'..r-"""-! 
ba~iira: fif-fakwa 1- rahl il-ba~iira [eeb [pray] 
complaint to the perspicacious is unseemly. 
~i fab~ar (also fa~bar) Ipartlwho knows?, one won-
ders. rab~ar raalju feen one wonders where they have 
gone. huwwa mif gayy I filla bukra. - wi- fab~ar (yiigi) 
'He's not coming before tomorrow.' 'Who knows 
(whether he'll come or not).' II wi-fab~ar feeh and what 
not, as infiribnafaay wi-ljahwa w- fab~ar feeh we drank 
tea, coffee and what not. - rab~ar wi-m-adrik so on and 
so forth, as in yiljuulu ta[aalu w- fab~ar wi-m-adrik they 
say 'come' and so on and so forth. 
j~! fib~aarf Inl sight.llzugaag fib~aar optical glass. 
"...L,;I 
fitbaa~ar Ivil to look around, search. fil-waaljid 
laazim yitba~ar-lu f-ljirfeen [afaan ma~ariif il-madrasa 
one has to get hold of some money for school expenses. 
- ava mitbaa~ir. 
2,),-""y 
• ~ 
ba~ra Inl I an Egyptian game (known also as' 
kaami and fil-waad yiljUff) played by two to four per-
sons; cards are dealt in fours, jack and seven of di-
amonds take all, and single cards can be taken by their 
equivalents in other suits. - Ipl ba~aari, b~arl2 taking 
of a card by its equivalent in another sui! in the game of 
b~ra, or the card~ so taken. 3 gain swiftly snatched. 
~ 
b~~ar Ivil I to take a card with its equivalent in 
another suit in the game of b~ra. 2 to land a profitable 
deal. -vn tab~iir; ava miba~~ar. 
3 ,) '-"" Y see ,) 1 '-"" y : b~aara 
I,-"",-""y 
~ 
b~~ (u) Ivil I to look. bu~~-i-li look at me! ba~~i 
f-sa[t-u he looked at his watch. ba~~eetfimaal wi-yimiin 
I looked left and right. rit- raaqa di bi-tb~~· [ala reeh 
what does this room look out on? b-ab~~·[aleek min 
il-balakaana I'll watch you from the balcony. 2 lalways 
followed by laaljal modal of (sudden) awareness. 
ba~~eet laljeet il-baab xabba{(suddenly) I heard a knock 
at the door. ba~~ i laalja f- riid-u ljirfeen (ayyibiin he 
realized that he had (accumulated) a good sum of 

money. kamaan sana raw sanateen fJa-tb~~' tlaat;i 
ribn-ak kibir wi-bat;a raagil after a year or'two you'll 
find your son has grown up and become a man. -vn 
b~~, b~~aan; ava ba~~. 
11 b~~' Ii- (1) to consider, give consideration to. b~~' 
liI-mustat;bal think about the future. b~~eet Ii-na/s-i 
min guwwa ~ilibt· la/a na/s-i I had a good think about 
the condition I was in and felt sorry for myself. (2) to 
envy, strive to be like (s.o.). dayman bi-yb~~' Ii-wlaad 
lamm-u he' always envious of his cousins. rilli yb~~' 
lin-naas yitlab {proY} emulating others (out of envy) 
wears you out. 
~ 
b~~a I linst n, pI -aatl a glance, a look. 
..,..~ b~~a~ In • and pI b~~a~al {obsol} spy, 
snooper. 
~I 
ritb~~~ Ivill to look around furtively. tilat;ii 
dayman maafi yitb~~~ you always find him going 
along looking stealthily about him. 1 to search. ruufJ 
itb~~~ laleehum go along and look for them! 
2 IJ'f' IJ'f' y 
~ 
b~~a2 In pI -aatl ember of charcoal (especially as 
fuel for a water-pipe). 
~~ b~~aaya In pI -aatl = b~~a2. 
r .J .k IJ'f' y 
r ~ 
b~cuum <It bastone> In! wooden ornamental 
moulding along edges of a ceiling, in corners, on 
columns etc. 
I J IJ'f' Y 
~ 
b~al Icoll nl I onion(s). b~al raxqar spring on-
ions. II zaral-u zarl' b~al (1) he caused him to fall. 
(2) he brought about his downfall. -bi-yim/i zarl' b~al 
= he's dead drunk.- yoom lasal wi-yoom b~al = some 
days are good, some bad. - b~al bi-xamsa wi-b-xamsa 
b~al = six of one and half-a-dozen of other. 1 (plant) 
bulb(s). 3 tuberose(s). 
~ 
b~ala lunit n, pI -aatl I an onion.llya daaxil been 
i1-b~ala w-t;ifrit-ha ma-y/ufJl' laleek rilla ~unanit-ha 
{proY} (you who push your nose be~ween the onion and 
its skin, all you'll get will be its nasty smell) = keep your 
nose out of other people's business. - b~alit i1-mufJibb ' 
xaruu/ {proy} = a posy from the beloved is a ruby. 
-ma-yiswaal b~ala he' worthless. -caaci I-b~ala put 
your head down! -y~uum wi-yi/car lala b~ala see 
~aam. - Ipl rab~aall 1 a plant bulb. 3 a tuberose. 
J...c b~ati ladj invarl pale golden-brown in colour. 
80 
~ 
b~eelat In pI -aatl {anat} bulb of the hair. 
2 J IJ'f' Y 
.ll,p..t! b~/a <It bussola> In pI -aat, b~al/ navigation-
al compass. 
r IJ'f' Y 
~ 
b~am (u) Ivtll to imprint, stamp. 1 to put one's 
finger-prints on (a document, in lieu of signing). huwwa 
min ilti b-yub~umu he's iIIiterate.llb~am bil-la/ara to 
be in complete agreement. -vn b~m; ava ba~im; pva 
mab~uum. 
~ 
b~ma <T basma> In pI -aatl I impression (of a 
stamp, seal etc.). 1 finger-print. 
~ 
b~magi In pI -yyaJ a yes-man. 
~I ritb~am Ivil I to be imprinted or stamped. 1 to 
be marked with a finger-print (in lieu of a signature, of a 
document). -iva mitb~im. 
~.J IJ'f' Y 
~~ b~oon <perh Fr> Inl bassoon. 
ISIJ'f'Y 
4.A ba~a I <Engl> In pl-aatl {soccer} pass. 
~~ ba~a2 Ivtl {soccer} to pass (a ball). IIfJ-aba~i 
z-zibuun da liik I'll pass this customer on to you. -vn 
mib~iyya; ava/pva miba~i. 
~l,;1 ritba~a Ivil {soccer} to be passed (of a ball). 
- iva mitba~i. 
It~Y 
~~ biqaala Icoll nl I goods, merchandise. t;acr' 
bqaala goods train, freight train. markib biqaala 
freighter. fJusn is-suut; wa/a fJusn iI-biqaala {proy} a 
good market is more profitable than having good mer-
chandise. biqaala win-naas gawaaca (supplies when 
the people are hungry) fulfilment of a .crying need. 
1 (mental) resources. biqalt-u t;layyila he has little in-
formation to offer (of a scholar). II biqalt-u xil~it he 
can't think of any more lying tales to tell. 
t!-~ baqaayil/pl nl merchandise. 
~ baqqal I/vtl to shop for. nazla lala S-SUUt; 
rabaqqal/iwayyit fJagaat I'm going down to the market 
to shop for a few things. - Ivil 1 to go shopping. 3 to 
prosper. -vn tabqiil; ava mibaqqal. 
2t~Y 
~ 
mibqal t In pI mabaaqill scalpel, dissecting 
knife. 

..,.Ij,y 
...... u. Yo butaas, bitaas <Fr potasse> Inll potash. 2 lye. 
II butaas famrikaani a stain remover made of lye. - also 
bUlaas. 
Ij,lj,y 
u.~ bataata <prob It batata> Icoll nl I sweet pota-
to(es). 2 lunit n, pi -aatl a sweet potato. 
~u.~ batataaya lunit n, pi -aatl a sweet potato. 
..,.j,lj,y 
..,.1~ bataatis <poss T patates from Gr or It> Icoll nl 
potato(es). 
j,.J,~ batatsa lunit n, pi -aatl a potato. 
~U~ batatsaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a potato. 
Jlj,y 
4i~ bitaaCja 
<prob Gr pittakion> In 
pi -aat, 
ba(aayiCj J I card. bitaaCja !ax~iyya personal identity 
card. bitaaCjit tamwiin ration book. bitaaCja ntixabiyya 
ballot paper. 
• .,I, y 
~ biti, bi(a J (i) Ivil to take (too) long. fit-Cjatri bi(i 
the train was long behind schedule. bityu fif-Juvl they 
were very late with the work. daxalit ii-beet bityit 
lalayya she went into the house and left me waiting 
ages. -vn batayaan; ava baati. 
• ~ butft Inl slowness, tardiness. bi-butf slowly. 
.~ baliif ladj * and pi butafa, butaafl slow. 
II fin-naCjI iI-ba(ii f un motorized transport. 
J.,. batta I Ivtl to cause to take too long or be too slow. 
mif laarif feeh illi battaa barra I don't know what kept 
him out so long. -ava mibattf. 
;"1 fitbatta Ivil to be delayed. -iva mitbatti. 
).,;-1 fistabta 
Ivtl 
to consider slow. 
fistabtu 
faxuu-hum xaragu ynaduu they thought they had 
waited too long for their brother so they went out to call 
him. -vn fistibta; ava mistabti. 
Ij,yj,y 
~ 
batbatl Ilvtl to flatten, squash. fil-Cjatri miji 
lal-musmaar batbat-u the train ran over the nail and 
squashed it flat. 2 Ivil to become fat and flabby. -vn 
ba(ba(a; avalpva mibatba(. 
~I fitbatbat Ivil I to become fat and flabby. 
fitbatbatit fil-lizz she has grown fat from living a life of 
ease. 2 to be flattened. - ava mitbatbat. 
lj,yj,y 
~ 
batbat2 Ivt. and viI to splash about (in shallow 
81 
water). batbat riglee fil-mayya he kicked about in the 
water. -also balba(. -vn batbata; ava/pva mibatbat. 
c. j, y 
~ batafJ (a) Ivtl to inflict a wound on (s.o., especially 
on the head or other bony part of the body). rukbit-i 
mabtuufJa my knee is grazed. batafJ nafuux iI-fJakam he 
gashed the referee's head. IIma-fJaddi batafJ-ni veer 
iz-zaman wi-lyaal-i "" I'd be a happy man but for the 
way life and my children treat me. -vn batfJ; ava baatifJ; 
pva mabtuufJ . 
~ 
batfJa In pi -aatll linst nl a wound, a graze (espe-
cially on the head or other bony part of the body). filii 
lala raas-u batfJa yfJassis laleeha {prov] (he who has a 
head wound keeps feeling it) "" a gUilty person will 
always give himself away. II batfJit if-Jams sunstroke. 
2 batfJit raas poil. 
~ 
batafJgi In pi -yyal bully, thug. 
~I fitbatafJ Ivil to be wounded or grazed (of, or on, 
the head or other bony part of the body). - iva mitbitifJ. 
~ 
1 finbatafJ = fitbatafJ. -iva minbitifJ . 
~ battafJ I Ivtl to attack viciously. 2 Ivil to get out of 
control. -vn tabtiifJ; ava mibattafJ. 
t -!' y 
~ 
battiix Icoll nl water-melon(s). yiqrab il-farqi 
ytallal battiix "" he can perform miracles. 
4. battiixa In pi -aatl I lunit nl a water-melon . 
II battiixa Cjarla a water-melon the flesh of which is white 
and tasteless. -zayy iI-battiixa l-maCjfuula a matter of 
luck. -fJutti f-batn-ak battiixa ~eefi {prov] (put a sum-
mer melon in your belly) "" relax, don't worry about a 
thing. -bargal battiixa external calipers. 2 pommel (of a 
saddle). 3 hub of a cart-wheel. 
I J .,I, Y 
.:,I~ batraan In *1 one who is arrogantly ungrateful. 
fit-batraan nadmaan {prov] one who has an arrogantly 
ungrateful attitude towards God's gifts will live to re-
gret it (because they will be withdrawn). 
~ batar Inl arrogant and wasteful attitude towards 
gifts or blessings. 
';;"'1 fitbattar Ivil to be ungrateful to the point of ridi-
culing gifts. - ava mitbattar. 
1 J .,I, Y 
J~ bitaar 
In 
pi bayatral 
I {obsol] 
farrier. 
2 veterinarian. 
.s~ bitari ladj *1 veterinary. tibb i bitari veterinary 
medicine. duktuur bitari veterinary surgeon. 

3 .; ..J., Y see IS.;..J.,..J., Y : ba{[ariyya 
4.; ..J., y 
see -.; Yr': faba{ra 
1 t.;..J., Y 
t.J~ ba{aarix Inl cured salted roe of the grey mullet, 
botargo. 
tJ~ ba{ruux In, pi ba{ariixl roe (of any type offish). 
t~ ba{rax Ivil to be swollen (with, or as if with. roe). 
bald' ma jta'lfal JIl-lIgaara mabfa~t-u ba{raxit after he 
worked in commerce, his wallet bulged. -vn ba{raxa: 
ava mibatrax. 
2 t.; ..J., Y see .!l.;..J., y : ba{raxaana 
...,.. .; ..J., Y 
...,.. ~ bu{rus male given name. butrus ir-rasuul the 
Apostle Peter 
-';:"').,J I ril-bu{rusiyya (also ftl-kiniisa l-bu{rUslyya) Inl 
Coptic Orthodox church in Abbasiya. 
-..;.;..J., y 
J.,-~ batarjiil <Gr epllrakhelios> Inl {Chrl stole (of 
a priest). 
.!l.;..J., y 
.!l ~ ba{rak <Gr patriarkhes> In pi ba{arkal {Chrl 
patriarch. 
~ 
~ ba{rakiyya 
Inl 
{Chrl 
patriarchate. 
-also 
ba{riyakiyya, ba{riyarklyya. 
.,;\.;.)., . .,;W' ~ ba(raxaana <prob T patrikljane> 
Inl {Chrl patriarchate. 
-r.;..J.,y 
.:"l.. ~ ba(ramaan <Martaban (in Burma» 
In pi -a at, 
-aatl glass or plastic jar with lid. jam jar. -also 
bar{amaan. 
~ l.. ~ ba{ramaana = ba{ramaan. - also ba{ramaana. 
.!l1S.;..J., Y 
~~ ba(riyakiyya Inl {Chrl patriarchate. -also 
ba{rakiyya, ba{riyakiyya. 
-IS.;..J., Y 
~ 
J-~ ba{riyarkiyya <Gr patriarkheio> Inl {Chrl 
patriarchate. - also ba{rakiyya, ba{riyaklyya. 
1 ...,.. ..J., y 
see ...,....J., I y . baa{is 
2 ...,.. ..J., y 
see ...,...J..J., Y : batuus 
82 
..:.....,....J.,y 
..:;...,,;~ ba{ista <It> Inl cambric. batiste. 
1";..J.,y 
~ 
ba{aj' (u) I Ivtl to strike, smash. fi{-{uuba ba(ajit 
manaxiir-u the stone struck his nose. 2 Ivil to collide. 
kaan maaji fiq-qalma qaam ba{aj Jil-bee(a he was walk-
ing in the dark when he collided with the wall. -vn 
ba{ajaan: ava baa{iJ: pva mab{uuj. 
.r"J.,.. mab(uuj ladjl squashed-looking. manaxiir 
mab{uuja broad flat nose. 
~I fitba(aj' Ivil I to crash, collide. wiljil itba{aj 
JiI- farq he fell crashing to the ground. 2 to be stuck, be 
smashed. - avaliva mitbi{iJ. 
A ba{[aj' Ivil to thras~ about, strike out wildly . 
fahu yinzil yiba{[ajJiI-mayya w-xalaa~ well, he goes into 
the water and just splashes about a bit. -vn tab{iiJ: ava 
miba{[aj. 
2";..J., Y 
A 
ba{aj2 (u) Ivt and viI to stain. ril-buuya ba{ajit 
(lala) hiduum-i the paint stained my clothes. -vn 
batajaan: ava baa{iJ: pva mab{uuj. 
~ 
butfa In pi bu{ajl stain. imprint. 
.;J..,;I fitba{aj2 Ivil to be stained. -iva mitbi{iJ. 
~ 
ba{[aj2 Ivil to become streaky (of coloured cloth) . 
- tab{iiJ: ava mitba{[aj. 
3 
• ..J., ..... 
'-':: 
. 
~ 
ba{[a!,' Ivil to lose shape, become flabby. 
fil-gizam bitaalit iI-fayyam-dljahr' waabid wi-tba{[aj 
shoes these days lose their shape after a month. -vn 
tab{iiJ; ava miba{[aj. 
4(..;..J., y) 
A 
batf Inl veal. 
cl 
~ butfa In pi bu{aJ! bar,rel. 
1..J.,..J.,y 
~ ba{[' (u) Ivtl I to flatten out. xudi I-lagiina di bu{[ii-
Ira take this piece of dough and flatten it. 2 to push 
(s.o.) into a sitting position. rubt' ba{[-u lal-kursi 
I shoved him down onto the chair. 3 to cause a setback 
to (s.o.). rabb-i-na ba{[-u "" he failed to get what he 
~anted. -vn ball, ba{a{aan: ava baa{i{: pva mab{uu{. 
Ja.,;1 f'itba{[ Ivil 1 to be or become flattened out. 2 to 
take a tumble. 3 to plump down into a sitting position. 
- avaliva mitba{[. 
1.,; I f'inba{[ = fitba{{. - avaliva minba{{. 
~ 
ba{{a{ Ivtl to flatten out (thoroughly, or with a 

number of movements, or a number of things). riI-qa{r; 
ba({a{-u the train squashed him flat.\lsagaayir miba({a{a 
oval cigarettes. -samak miba{(a{ flatfish. -vn tab{ii{; 
avalpva miba({a{. 
~ 
tab{ii{a Inl instance noun of tabliil. 
Jak.,1 fitba({a{ Ivil to be flattened, be flattened out. 
-iva mitba({a{. 
2 .l:. .l:. y 
~ ba({2 Icoll nl duck(s). \I rilli kalt-u wizz; wizz; 
ba-tJuxx-u ba({; ball {prov} "" what you enjoy (to ex-
cess) today you will suffer for, or pay for, tomorrow. 
~ ba{{a 2 In pI -aatl I lunit nl a duck. II fakl-ik mineen 
ya ba({a "" (it looks so good) I don't know where to 
start. 2 plump and pretty girl. 38 affectionate form of 
address"" dear. 3b.nickname for fa{11la. 
~~ ba({aaya lunit n, pI -aatl a duck. 
3.l:. .l:. y 
~ bUll <Engl> In pI -aatl small sailing boat. 
~.J.l:..l:.y 
~)~ ba{{ariyya <It batteria> In pI -aatl I {elee} bat-
tery. 2 torch, flashlight. 3 {mil} battery (of artillery). 
4 array, assemblage (of machinery). 
J .l:. y see J I .l:. y : bi{aaqa 
IJ.l:.y 
~ ba{al l r (a) Ivil to be annulled, become void or 
invalid. fitkallimfa-~alaat-u ba{alit {lsi} he spoke (while 
praying) and so his prayer became invalid. riI-beel 
baa{i/ the tran,action is not valid. -vn bu{laan; ava 
baa{i/. 
~ bili! (a) Ivil I to become exhausted. fid-dawa da 
mafluul-u bi{il this medicine has become ineffective. 
mif larfa leeh il-fayyam-di baqeet fab{al bi-surla 
I don't know why I get tired so quickly these days. 2 to 
go out of fashion, become obsolete. riI-mooc[a di billit 
min zamaan this fashion has been out of date for a long 
time. 3 to become void or invalid. -vn ba{al, ba{alaan; 
ava ballaan, baa{il. 
Jl.~ baalil Inl falsehood, deception, that which is not 
valid. fi!-baalil ma-Iuu-jrigleen {prov} falsehood has no 
leg(s) to stand on. ba-ydaflu lannu bil-baatil they will 
put up a false defence for him. fimsik il-baa{illala ma 
ygii-Iak iI-baqq {prov} fight for more than your right 
and you will end up by getting what is rightfully yours. 
IIbi-ynaahid fil-baa{il (or bil-baa{il) "" he is fighting a 
lost battle. -ma-lrift;-j faaxud macaaha baqq; wala 
83 
baalil I couldn't get anywhere with her no matter what 
method I tried. -laa{i/lala baa{il "" incessantly and to 
no purpose. - fil-laa{il fil-baa{il "" all and sundry, with-
out discrimination, as in ga I-buli~ xad-hum la{iI-hum 
fi-ba{iI-hum the police came and took them all in. 
-Olol,J I riI-ba(liyya J Iprop nl populous area in Cairo 
between the Citadel and el-Azhar, known for its trade 
in drugs and hashish. -also riI-ba{niyya. 
~~ bilaala Inl I idleness, inactivity, unemployment. 
faydit fayyaam iI-bi{aala n-noom {prov} (the benefit of 
days of idleness is sleep) the only relief when times are 
bad is sleep. 2 day off, day of leisure. 
J~ ba({aal ladj *1 18 idle. riI-fiid iI-ba({aala nigsa 
{prov} the idle hand is unclean. filmil bi-xamsa 
w-baasib iI-ba({aal {prov} (work for five (piastres) and 
ask the idle man how much he has earned) no matter 
how little you earn, it will still be more than the idle man 
earns. IIlammaal lala ba({aal incessantly and to no 
purpose, as in fikkallim lammaallala ba({aal he kept 
up a steady stream of pointless nonsense. Ib {agrie} 
fallow. fin-nabya I-ba({aala the unplanted side (of a 
field, furrow). 2 bad, wicked, depraved. raagil ba({aal a 
bad man. -ladverbiallyl mifi ba((aal he behaved badly. 
IIbabr; ba({aal a choppy sea. - fiblid-na lan kul/; 
ballaal keep us from all evil. 
11 mif ballaal not bad, tolerably good. riI-imtibaan 
ma-kan-j; ba({aal the exam wasn't bad. fizzayy; 
~ibbit-ak. - mif ballaala 'How's your health?' 'Not bad.' 
~ ba[{al Ivlll to put a stop to, render inactive: ba({al 
iI-mutoor switch off the engine! 2 to put an end to, give 
up. mif ba-tballali mnaqra won't you stop quarrelling? 
ba({alt it-tadxiin min sana I stopped smoking a year ago. 
\I ba({aluu-da wi-smaluu-da "" whatever next! the things 
that go on! - Ivil 3 to stop, become inactive. lalaan 
iI-larabiyya ma-tba({al-j; minni so that the car won't 
pack up on me. -vn tabtiil; ava/pva miba({al. 
11 ba((allala to supplant, supersede. b-aftab-Iu maball; 
yballallalee I'll open a shop that will put him out of 
business. 
2J.l:.y 
~ batal2 In pI fabtaalll hero. \I fil-ba{al ir-rumaani 
epithet of St. George· (maari girgis). 2 champion. 
3 principal character (in a story, film etc.). batal il-film 
the star of the film. -. ladjl 4 courageous, brave. 
~ balala In pI -aatl heroine. 
~~ bu(Uula In! I heroism. 
fil-bu(Uula fil-barb; 
b-tixtilif min finsaan Ii- faaxar heroism in war differs 
from one man to the next. - Ipl -aatl2 act of heroism. 
fil·muraasil iI-barbi mif bass I ysaggi/ il-bU(Ulaat the war 

correspondent does not only record heroic deeds. 
3 championship. bi-yaxdu fluus gawaayiz fil-bu{ulaat 
they get prize money in the championships. 4 leading 
role, starring part (in a play, film etc.). 
r j, y 
~ 
ba{ama In! {obsol] stage in shoe making entailing 
the stitching of a reinforcing strip of leather to the upper 
before it is sewn to the sole. 
.J j, y 
~ ba{n Ifem n, pi bi{uun, bu{Uunl I abdomen, abdo-
minal region or any specific part thereof. ba{n-i b-
tiwgae-ni I have stomach-ache. saaeit iI-bi{uun tituuh 
iI-euljuul {prov] when it's time to eat, minds wander. 
hamm-ak eala ba{n-ak you think only of your belly. 
bassit bi-l:Jarakit ig-ganiin fi-ba{n-a-ha she felt the baby 
moving inside her. naamu eala lal:Jm' ba{n-u-hum they 
went to bed hungry. IIba{n-i majya (1) my bowels are 
moving. (2) I have diarrhoea. -xallaa-ha ba{n' I:Jmaar 
he went to excess. -ba{n-i karkibit my heart sank. 
-ba{n-u wasea he's unscrupulous. 2a young brought 
forth at a (single) birth. dool mawludiin fi-ba{n' wal:Jda 
those are twins (or triplets etc.). baed' wlaadit I'awwil 
ba{n after the birth of the first child. 2b crop yield. 
bi-naaxud ba{neen min iI-barsiim wi-baedeen nizrae iI-
ljaml:J we get a double crop of clover before we plant the 
wheat. 3 inner or innermost part. Ji-ba{n iI-ljumaaj 
right inside the material. II ba{n iI- I'iid palm of the hand. 
-ba{n ir-rigl or ba{n iI-ljadam sole of the foot. - ba{n 
iI-waadi the bottom of the valley. - ba{n iI-bal:Jr low 
gradient of the river embankment. 
4 
ba{niyya Inl I inner face. 2 {arch] underside 
(e.g., of an arch). 
~ 
bi{ani ladj *1 gluttonous. 
i,; ~ bi{aana or bll{aana In pi -aat. ba{aayinl I lining 
(<!f a garment). 2 undercoat (of paint etc.). 3 [mus] 
(back-up) chorus. 4 {naut] shelf (for cargo). 
~ 
bi{eeni In pi bi{eniyyal glutton. 
.:;.;~ ba{{aniyya In pi ba{a{iin. ba{aniyyaatl blanket. 
yurzit iI-ba{(aniyya {needlew] blanket-stitch. 
J.~ baa{in Inl I Ipl bawaa{inl inside. inner part. eilm 
il-baa{in knowledge of the esoteric. ealii~ bi-bawaa{in 
iI- I'umuur informed about the intricacies of affairs. 
- ladjectivallyl I'il-ealjl iI-baa{in the subconscious. 2/no 
pI/ Undiscernable One (epithet of God). 
~ min iI-baa[in {comm]: miljawla min iI-baa{in sub-
contracting. taskiin mil-baa{in subletting. 
~~ baa{ini ladj *' I internal. {ibb' baa[ini internal 
medicine. duktoor baa{ini physician. 2 esoteric. 
84 
4\J1 I'il-ba{niyya Iprop nl populous area in Cairo 
between the Citadel and el-Azhar, known for its trade 
in drugs and hashish. - also l'iI-ba{liyya J• 
~ ba{{an Ivtl I to line, pad. ba{{anit iI-Justaan she 
lined the dress. 2 to give an undercoat of paint to. -vn 
tab{iin; avalpva miba{{an. 
~I I'itba{{an Ivil passive of ba{{an. -iva mitbaaan. 
V".J j, y 
~ 
ba{ansa or ba{unsa In pi ba{aanisl {naut] half-
deck (fore or aft) of a sailing boat. 
V".J j, Y 
...,.. ~ ba{uus Inl {naut] wide timber running round the 
top of the gunwale of a Nile sailing boat (on which the 
boatman can walk). 
..s j, y 
see • j, y : bi{i 
~y~y 
~ 
ba;ba; Ivii I to exude, issue, ooze out. mif 
I:J-addi-huu-Iak lamma eeen-ak tiba;ba; I won't give it 
to you even if your eye drops out. 2 to shake with fright. 
-vn ba;ba;a; ava miba;ba;. 
J~y 
~ ba;r In pi bu;uurl [anat] clitoris. 
-rJ~y 
1.,... ~ ba;ramii{ ladj invarl I of mixed blood, mon-
grel. 2 chaotic, topsy-turvy. - also bazramiil: 
~~y 
~ ba;; (u) Ivil I to ooze, squirt out. dust" e~-~ur~aar 
raal:Jit m~ariin-u ba;;a min guwwaa I stepped on the 
cockroach and out squirted its insides. 2 to bulge, start 
(of the eyes). eeen-i ba;;it lammajuJt-a-ha I went pop-
eyed when I saw her. -v~ ba;;. ba;a;aan; ava baa;i;. 
~~ ba;aa;a: bag' ba;aa;a to project very much, as 
in eeen-u bagit ba;aa;a his eyes popped out of his 
head. 
~ ba;;a; Ivt/l to cause to squirt out. 2 to cause (the 
eyes) to bulge or start. I'is-sukr' baga; eenay-ya drunk-
enness made my eyes bulge. -vn tab;ii;; ava/pva 
miba;;a;. 
JaJi.;1 I'itba;;a; Ivil passive of ba;;a;. -iva mitba;;a;. 
r.~y 
~ bagam Ivil to wear a mournful expression. ljaaeid 
mibagam wala iii daafin he's sitting looking as miser-

able as if he-'d just buried a close relation. -vn tab;iim; 
ava miba;;am. 
~ 
tab;iima linst n, pI -aatl a mournful expression. 
calee bittit diin tab;iima he really looks very gloomy. 
lJ"yty 
~ 
bacb~ /vt/'l to goose, poke between the but-
tocks with a finger. IIma-tu4'cud-/i tbacb~ fil-rakl 
{coarse] keep your fingers out of the food! 2 {coarse] to 
put one over on (5.0.), playa dirty trick on (s.o.). -vn 
bacb~a; ava/pva mibacb~. 
IJ" ~ 
bacbu~ In pI bacabi~1 I act of goosing. rilli 
yimfi wara I-ciyaal yistaahil iI-bacabi~ == he who takes 
the advice of children deserves to be treated like a child. 
2 {slang] protrusion,little bump. II da-nta bittit bacbu~ 
ma-tsawii-/ baaga,you're just a worthless little squirt. 
3 {coarse] dirty trick mif kifaaya I-bacbu~ i[[j-ddah-
lak isn't that rotten trick he played on you enough? 
4... ~ bacbu~a = ·bacbu~. 
~I 
ritbacb~ Ivil 
passive 
of 
bacb~. -iva 
mitbacb~. 
I tyty ; 
~ bacbac Ivil I to grunt or bellow discontentedly (of 
camels). 28 to give vent to one's feelings. 2b to com-
plain vociferously. -vn bacbaca; ava mibacbac. 
~ 
bacba.ca Inl 1 grunt of a camel. 2 loud protesta-
tion, angry bluster. 
Ztyty 
~ bu£buc <perh Copt> In pI bacabiic, bacaabicl 
bogeyman. ma-tuxrug-/i bil-Ieel labsan iI-bucbuc 
yi(lac-lak don't go out at night or the bogeyman will get 
you!/akl-a-ha zayy iI-bucbuc == she's as ugly as a witch. 
.:..ty 
~ 
.~ bacat (a) Ivtl 1 to send. lissa ma-bacatti-/ 
ig-gawaab I haven't sent the letter yet. ribcat-lina 
rumm-u send his mother to us. - Ivil 2 to send provi-
sion. riftaral barra w-bac;a mabsuu( wi-kaan dayman 
bi-yibcat Ii- rahl-u he got a job abroad and became quite 
wealthy and used always to remit to his family. 
rabb-i-na yibcat may God provide. 3 Ipreverbl to send 
word (to do s.th.) bacatuu-Ii c;aluu-Ii I-xabar they sent 
me the news. ribcat haat iI-biira send out for the beer! 
bacatu ygiibu t-tamargi they sent someone to bring the 
nurse. -vn bacataan; ava baacit; pya mabcuut. 
11 bacat Ii- to send for (s.o.). lamma lac;a/a4'c;a kbiira 
~acat Ii-mir(lat-u when he found a large f1l1t he sent for 
his wife. kaanit rumm-u cayyaana fa-bacatuu-Iu his 
85 
moth,er was ill so they sent for him. 
~~ baacit Inl Provider (epithet of God). 
.::..""'" mabcuus In *1 delegate, envoy. 
~ bacs Inl resurrection.llbizb iI-bacs {pol] Renaiss-
anc~ Party (in Syria, Iraq and Lebanon). 
~ bicsa In 
pI -aatl mission, delegation. bicsa 
diblumasiyya diplomatic mission. 
.;.....;1 .~I ritbacat Ivil to be sent. - iva mitbicit. 
..:....,;1 .~I rinbacat = ritbacat. - iva minbicit. 
.;...,;1 rinbacasr Ivil to arise, stem. daragit baraara 
calya munbacisa min it-tafaacul a high temperature 
arising from the reaction. -vn rinbicaas; ava munbacis. 
J.:..ty 
~ 
.~ bactar Ivtl to scatter (about). ma-tbactar-/ 
iI-filuus don't throw money around! II b-abactar karamt-
ak I'll strip you of your dignity, I'll humiliate you. -vn 
bactara; ava/pya mibactar. 
)...,;1 .';"';1 ritbactar Ivil to be scattered (about). - iva 
mitbactar. 
-J.:..ty 
.:,I~ bacatraan Inl {bot] name given to species of 
Artemisia and Achillea. 
.!Ity see .:..t y 
rrty 
~ bacag (i) Ivtll to make elliptical. 2 to make baggy. 
-vn bacagaan, bacg; ava baacig; pya mabcuug. 
&" munbacig r ladjl elliptical. 
~I ritbacag Ivil passive of bacag. - iva mitbicig . 
Jrrty 
J"':'A! bacgar J Ivil to become fat and shapeless. 
ril-wiliyya tixnit wi-bacgarit kida the woman grew fat 
and flabby. -vn bacgara; ava mibacgar. 
J"':'A! bacgar2 101 nickname used to tease or mock one 
who is plump or clumsy. 
~I ritbacgar Ivil to become fat and shapeless. 
balaa/iI-xiyaara I-mitbacgara di don't give me this bul-
bous cucumber. - ava mitbacgar. 
~ty 
~ bicidJ (a) Ivil to be or become distant. ril-filuus 
wi-~aabib il-filuus ma-yibcaduu-/ caleek neither the 
money nor the owner of the money is ever out of reach 
fOI. you (i.e. they are at your command). m~ri 

ma-tiblad-j' lala yabiib {provJ (Cairo is never inac-
cessible to those who love her) nothing is out of reach to 
those who desire it strongly enough. nUlja( il-ma(aafi 
b-tiblad masafaat (iwiila lan balq-a-ha the fire-stations 
are very remote from one another. - vn bUld. 
~ bilid2 (i) Ivil to stay away, remove oneself. fiblid 
lan in-naas dool keep away from those people! 
b-afaqqal fablid lan wagal id-dimaay I like to keep 
clear of bothersome matters. f,blid lan ifjarr' w-
yannii-lu {pravJ keep your distance from trouble and 
deal with it diplomatically. - vn bUld. 
~ balad (i) Ivtl 1 to take away, remove. fiblid 
il-laban lan in-naar take the milk off the stove! yaawil 
yiblid ik-koora lan ig-goon he tried to get the ball away 
from the goal. 2 to keep away. lawza tiblidii-ni lan 
il-yubb do you want to keep me from love? rabb-i-na 
yiblid lannak wilaad i/-yaraam may God keep evil 
people from you! (used prophylactically after reference 
to a misfortune). -vn baladaan; ava baalid; pva 
mabluud. 
~ bUld Inl I/vn/ !Ida bUld-(u) it is beyond (his) 
reach, it is impossible for (him), as in laawiz taaxud 
il-filuus - da bUld-ak you want to take the money? 
that'll be the day! -il-buld' gafa remoteness hardens 
one's feelings. -bUld' na:;ar farsightedness, foresight. 
2 Ino pll distance. lala bUld' talaata kiilu at a distance 
of three kilometres. - Ipl fablaadl 3 dimension, 
aspect. fi/-buld ir-raabil the fourth dimension. rasm' 
sulaasi l-fablaad isometric projection. kull' fablaad 
il-yukm all the aspects of the verdict. 4 {musJ interval. 
~~~i fabladiyya In pi -aatl {obsolJ large agricultural 
estate.llhiyyaf-firka tiblja fabladiyyit fabuu-k is the 
company yours by exclusive right? (i.e. you behave as if 
the company were your father's estate). 
~ bald Iprep. w foil pron suff also baldii-/ after. 
Ylktkuun fil-beet bald is-saala tamanya will you be at 
home after eight o'clock? nazzil-ni lan-n~ya di filii 
bald' maya{{it il-futubiis drop me at that corner after 
the bus stop. bald' kida t(al/alj-ha wi-ngawwiz-ak 
faysan minya after that you divorce her and we'll marry 
you to someone better. hiyya daxalit baldiikum (or 
bald' minkum) she went in after you. bald' bukra the 
day after tomorrow. bald' bald' bukra the third day 
from today. II ... min bald(-u) ... now that (he) has 
departed! (in expressIOns of mourning), as in nilmil 
feeh mm baldak whatever shall we do now you're 
gone! -la ljab/(-u) wala bald(-u) the like of it has never 
been seen before, nor ever will be again, as in saakin 
fi-beet la ljablu wala baldu he is living in a wonderful 
86 
house, m~iiba la ljablaha m~iiba wala baldaha 
m~iiba an unparalleled disaster. 
11 bald' ma Iconjl after. baljeet famnal-ha mil-xuruug 
bald' rna ggawwizna I began to forbid her going out 
after we were married. 
.:r..~ baldeen ladvl 1 afterwards, then. y-akkallim 
lanha baldeen I'll talk about it later. wi-baldeen 
lamalti feeh and then what did you do? II wi-baldeen 
(1) whatever is to be done? as in mif ya-yilyalj yiljra 
l-kitaab ljabl i/-imtiyaan. - (ab wi-baldeen 'He won't 
manage to read the book before the exam.' 'Well what's 
he going to do then?' (2) (also wi-baldeen mala-, 
wi-baldeen wayya-) whatever next, whatever will (he) 
get up to next, whatever is the matter with (him), as in 
wi-baldeen (malaak) ya walad - kifaaya labat balja 
that's quite enough from you, boy - no more fooling 
now! wi-baldeen (malaakum) -ma-gibtuujid-duktoor 
leeh whyever didn't you get the doctor! (3) (also 
wi-baldeen yalni) so ... ? as in, kaan kull' sana yi(lal 
il-fawwillala l-fa~l. - wi-baldeen. - wala ljableen bass' 
b-addii-k fikra 'He used to be top of the class every 
year?' 'So ... ?' 'Nothing at all; I'm just giving you an 
idea.' 2 too, as well. goz-ha wiyif wi-fawlad-ha 
mutlibiin wi-baldeen ~iyyit-ha talbaana her husband is 
a bad lot, her children are tiresome and on top of all that 
she's in poor health. 
~ bild: bild if-farr == God forbid, perish the thought 
(used prophylactically at mention or suggestion of mis-
fortune), as in fana xayfa ykuun - bild ifjarr (lalee) -
y~al-lu yaaga I'm afraid that something, G~d forbid, 
may have happened to him. 
~ biliid ladj pi bUlaad, bUladal 1 distant, far. fatay 
maktab fi-Yilla bliida he opened an office in a remote 
place. biliid lan i/-leen biliid lan i/-ljalb {provJ out of 
sight, out of mind. min zaman biliid long since. II raagil 
biliid in-na:;ar or raagil na:;ar-u bliid a far-sighted 
man. -ya bliid insulting 'form of address, in which 
mention of the name of the person addressed is deliber-
ately avoided. - fi/-biliid form of reference to one who 
is absent and is the object of censure, intended to show 
that no aspersions are cast on anyone present. -biliid 
lan- prophylactic phrase accompanying mention of 
something undesirable == may such a thing be far from 
you! as in yalit-na baljit zift - biliid lannak we have 
fallen on evil times, may the like of them never come 
upon you! -biliid lanfanab-ak == it's quite beyond you, 
you'll never manage (to have or do something). 
2 unlikely. biliid yikuun rawway badri it is unlikely 
that he would have gone home early. mif biliid tismal 

sirri gdiid it's not improbable that you'll hear a new 
secret. II fabah biliid a hardly-perceptible likeness. 
-/adv/3 far, far away. fufl-u min biliid I saw him from 
afar. fig-gawabaal bi-liigi bliid lan balq-a-ha the let-
ters come spaced far apart. II ba-nruub biliid leeh why 
should we go so far (in looking for examples and prece-
dents, when there ar~ plenty close at hand)? min biliid 
Ii-bliid (I) from a distance, remotely, as in beeni 
w-beenu qaraaba min biliid Ii-biliid he and I are dis-
tantly related. (2) discreetly, from a discreet distance, 
as in fisfallalee min biliid Ii-bciid make dlscreet en-
quiries about him. 
-'-!i fablad Ilelll morelmost distant or unlikely. 2 riI-
fablad form of reference to one who is absent and is the 
object of censure (or to one present but ignored) ... the 
unmentionable you-know-who. 
~ bauad I/vtl to remove. 2 Ivil to remove oneself, 
go far away. bauadu libqu lasal qarrabu tibqu b~al ... 
familiarity 
breeds contempt. 
-vn 
labliid; 
ava 
mibauad. 
-",\;I filbaalid Ivil to steer away, keep clear. kulli ma 
nqarrab-lu yilbaalid lanna w-lan mafakil-na when-
ever we make friendly approaches to him, he steers 
away from us and our problems. -vn labaalud t; ava 
milbaalid. 
-'-!i fabladz Ivtl to remove, exclude, eliminate. 
fabladuu lan iJ1irka they removed him from the com-
pany. -vn fiblaad; ava mublid; pva mublad. 
~I fislablad, fislablid Ivt; the literary passive 
fuslublid also occursl I to consider (too) far. 
bi-lislablid iI-miJwaar min hina Ii-skindiriyya do you 
think the journey from here to Alexandria is (too) far? 
2 to reject as unsuitable, unlikely or untenable. 
ri/-xubara bi-yislablidu n-lia~ariyya di the experts dis-
count this theory. fil-mawquul da slublid this topic has 
been rejected. 3 to select for remoteness. fistablad-Iak 
billa lan i(-(ariiq fibni fiiha find yourself a plot of land 
to build on well away from the road. - vn fisliblaad; ava 
mislablid; pva muslablad. 
.Jt"=" 
j'l balr Icoll nl dung (specifically of sheep, goats and 
camels). 
'j'l balra lunit n, pI -aall piece of dung (of a sheep, 
goat or camel). II balra wi-yqaawib il-tayyaar {prov] 
(he's only) a turd, and yet he goes against the current 
(said of a low person who sets himself up against his 
betters). 
;. bauar Ivil to dung, defecate (of sheep, goats and 
camels). -vn labliir; ava mibauar. 
87 
.J.Jt"=" 
)J.J"! balruur 
In 
pI balariirl 
I young 
camel. 
2 insignificant person. 
')J.J"! balruura In pI -aatl young female camel. 
Jjt"=" 
J~ balzaq 1 Ivtl to scatter. kidb i msaawi wala sudq i 
mbalzaq {prov] consistent lying is more credible than 
garbled truth. riI-lumr i miJbalzaqa (prov] life is not a 
squandering (matter). IIb-aba~zaq karamt-ak I'll strip 
you of your dignity, I'll humiliate you. -vn balzaqa; 
avalpva mibalzaq. 
J~ balzaq z Inl term of reference to a ridiculous 
person. 
..,.. t "=" see .;:.. t "=" : 
mabluus, 
bals, 
bilsa, 
finbalas 
I~t"=" 
~ 
balq/n, w pron suff often balqii-I 18 some, part 
of, a few, a number of. kaan landu balq i/- famal fif1ifa 
he had some hope of recovery. balq iI- fawqaal nibibb i 
ninzil naakul barra sometimes we like to go and eat out. 
balq in-naas ybibbu y~ayyifu fi-skindiriyya wil-balq 
it-Iaani ma-ybibbuu1yisiibu I-qaahira some people like 
to spend the summer in Alexandria but others do not 
like to leave Cairo. Ib lin constr with indef nl a little of, 
a touch of. similli balqi kalaam I heard a little gossip. 
2a one another, each other. qablu balqi fin-naadi they 
met one another in the club. bu(( iI-kulub lala 
balq(-a-ha) fir-rukn stack the books on top of one 
another in the corner. furbu( iI-bibaal fi-balq(-a-ha) tie 
the ropes together. ma-liskunuu1 mala balq(-ii-ku) 
leeh why don't you share accommodation? butt 
iJ1antileen guwwa balq put the two cases inside one 
another. riI-c;am~een zayy i balq the two shirts are like 
each other. xallii-hum biliid lan balq(-u-hum) keep 
them apart (away from each other). riI-larabiyyileen 
daxalu f-balq the two cars ran into each other. 
IIfi-(raqabit) balq together as an average, as in xud 
fiwayyit iI-manga dool fi-(raqabil) balq take this heap 
of mangoes as one lot (where the extra good quality of 
one would compensate for the lower quality of 
another). fana b-abil-/ak iI-beleen fi-(raqabil) balqi 
b-xamsiin fall gneeh iI-waabid I will sell you the two 
houses together in one deal at fifty thousand pounds 
each (as if the two houses were exactly alike. which they 
are not). - fin-naas Ii-balq(-a-ha) people are meant to 
help one another (said. e.g .• by someone who is being 
thanked for offering his help). 2b (him)self, (her)self, 

etc. f~-1afiil.Ja daxalit fi-balt/.-a-ha the tin was crushed 
or pressed together (lit: went into itself). wal.Jda 
laguuza w-karkuuba wi-mkalbara kidaf-balt/.-a-ha an 
old woman all stumpy and gnarled. IIzayy' balt/.-U 
O.K., it makes no difference; it's all the same to me, as 
in til.Jibb' timfi dilwae;ti. - zayy' b~lt/.-U 'Do you want to 
go now?' 'All right.' huwwa lissa ma-katab-fil-gawaab. 
-zayy' balt/.-U 'He still hasn't written the letter.' 'Never 
mind.' -zayy' balt/.(-U) [euphem} bad, awful, as in 
ril-waal.Jid bi-yizhae; mil-liija iii zayy' balt/.-a-ha di one 
gets fed up with this terrible life, ya nhaar zayy' balt/.-U 
how awful! good grief! - f~ad balt/.(-u) wi- to up and 
(do s.th.), make a move to (do s.th.), as inxud balt/.-ak 
wi-{Ial dawwar lal-waad shake a leg and go and look 
for the boy! 
, 
~ lala balt/.- ladvl (1) (of a divisible whole) together, 
unseparated, (as) one lot. fiddii-ni l.Jittit lal.Jma tneen 
kiilu lala balt/.-a-ha give'me two kilos of meat in one 
piece. l.Jittit ig-gibna di lala balt/.-a-ha tillal e;add' feeh 
what is the weight of this whole piece of cheese? 
fid-dunya kida lala balt/.-a-ha ma-tiswaa-ffardit gazma 
this life (as opposed to the life hereafter) altogether is 
not worth anything, (2) (of a person) in a composed 
position. fUiflUd lala balt/.-ak ya wala sit properly, 
boy! bae;eet e;aalid mij lala balt/.-i mil-e;alae; I was 
sitting restless with worry. (3) (of a place, of a crowd) 
tightly crowded, tightly packed together. ril-futubiis 
bae;a lala balt/.-U the bus has become crammed with 
people. fin-naas lala balt/.-a-ha fil-mal.Jatta people are 
jammed together in the station. 
l~ty 
..;.~ balUUt/.' Icoll nl gnat(s). 
..... ~ baluut/.a' lunit n, pI -aatl a gnat. 
1Su!~ty 
~ 
balt/.ifi In! 1 tiny amount. balt/.ifi mall.J a 
sprinkling of salt. 2 Tiny (given prophylactically as a 
boy's name by mothers whose children have died, in 
order to ward off the evil eye). 3 scornful form of 
address to a lOan. 
.!l.!lty 
~ 
balkik Ivt/ to confuse, muddle up, mess up. -vn 
backaka; ava/pva mibackik. 
-.s ~ 
balkuuka In pI balakiikl affectionate form of 
reference to any old contraption (especially a car, ship, 
bicycle etc.). ril-balJcuuka wie;fit minni the old jalopy 
conked out on me. 
88 
~I fitbalkik Ivil to be confused, be muddled up. 
- iva mitbackik. 
(Jty) 
.)"! ball In pI bUluul, bUluula/ husband, used espe-
cially in lamentation by a woman whose husband has 
died. 
J.t balli ladjl not irrigated during the later stages of 
growth (especially of fuul, garlic and onions). 
.)"! bill Inl [deris} pot belly of a heavy eater. fabu bill 
glutton. 
.J.J t y 
~ balaww In! fabulous beast characterized by fatness 
and ugliness, bogeyman, troll. 
.~ bacawwa In! troll-woman. 
j1ty 
-it&. Yo burBaZ <T bogaz> In pI bawariiz, burazaatl 
1 strait. markib buraaz lightship, 2 harbour mouth, 
(and hence also) breakwater. baab il-buraaz the har-
bour entrance. 
u!lty 
4.!.~ buraa/a <T pogafa> Icoll n! sweetmeat made of 
flaky pastry and cut into diamond shapes. 
~L:.~ bura/aaya lunit n, pI bura/aatl a piece of 
buraa/a. 
~ t y 
see IS t y : baraaf 
tyty 
,:,~ barbaraan In pI -aatl parrot. bi-yikkallim zayy 
il-barbaraan he talks non-stop. - also babbaraan . 
~ barbar Ivil to babble, talk unintelligibly or non-
sensically. -vn barbara; aya mibarbar. 
I..::.. ty 
~ barta In! surprise. lala barta by surprise, all of a 
sudden. -/adverbiallyl {ilillaleena barta he took us by 
surprise, 
~~ baarit Ivtl to take by surprise, come upon by 
surprise. nibaarit il-laduw we surprise the enemy. -vn 
mibarta; ava mibaarit. 
~l,.;1 fitbaarit Ivil to be surprised, be taken by sur-
prise. - iva mitbaarit. 
l..::..ty 
~ 
,~ biriita, bariita Icoll nl small seeds found as 
impurities in rice, grain etc. 

.:..;.- mibarrat ladjl full of bilriita. 
~I I'itbarrat Ivil to be adulterated, be mixed with 
impurities. - iva mitbarrat. 
~ ~t Y 
~I~ buYdaad, baydaad Iprop nl Baghdad. 
IS~I~ buYdaadi, baydaadi ladj °1 pertaining to Bagh-
dad. IIbinna buYdaadi type of fine-quality henna that 
yields a dark dye. -baadi baadi siidi mbammad il-
buYdaadi first part of a counting rhyme\Ised by children 
== eenie-meenie-mynie-mo. 
J~I~ buydadli Inl I wooden piece half an inch by one 
inch. 2 lath work. 
~~I I'itbaydid Ivil I to act aloofly or disdainfully. 
bi-titbaydid lan-naas kida leeh why do you look down 
on people so? 2 to enjoy life to the full, live opulently. 
naas bituul baYdada people who enjoy the good life. 
-vn baYdada; ava mitbaYdid. 
j t y 
see j I t y : buyaaz 
..; t y 
see ..; I t y : buYaaja, buyajaaya 
u#ty 
~ 
buyq Inl hatred. 
~ 
i I'abyaq: l'ab¥Qq il-balaal land allaah i(-{alaalj 
the most odious of what God permits is divorce. 
...;.~ mabyuuq ladj *1 hated. 
Jty 
~ bayl In pi biYaalll mule. badd; Yljuul il-baYI; fil-
I'abriilj == would anyone say anything so stupid? ljaalu 
lil-baYI; miin I'abuu-k ljaal xaal-i l-b~aan [prov] when 
they asked the mule who his father was he told them his 
uncle was the horse == everyone likes to show himself in 
the most favourable light. taxxan widn il-bayl; b-ljoolit 
jii flatter a mule by addressing him as if he were a horse 
== flatter gullible people by letting them think you have 
a high opinion of them. I'agsaam biyaal wi-lUljuul 
la,rafiir (those people are) all brawn and no brain. II bayl 
usturaali a stupid oaf. 2 pier (of II bridge). 
~ bayla In pi -aatl I she-mule. wallid i/-bayla == he 
did.the impossible. 2 pier (of a bridge). 
J~ barraali ladj 
invarl pertaining to 
mules. 
la!abiyyaat barraali mule-drawn carts. 
~ barral Ivil to become clumsy and stupid. -vn 
tabyiil; ava mibarril. 
89 
JA,:;-I I'istabyal I Ivtl to consider stupid. 2 Ivil to be-
come mulish, behave stubbornly. -vn I'istibyaal; aval 
pva mistabyal: 
"ty 
.i-! bayw ladj invarl [rur] unripe, not mature (of fruit, 
vegetables etc.). 
ISty 
.~ biYaal'i or bayaal'i Inl prostitution. 
..::..o"';y 
~ bafta <P bafta> Inl calico. IIsumla beeqa zayy 
il-bafta a spotless reputation. 
..::..o..::..o"';y 
~ bafitta, bavitta i <It bavetta> In pi -aatl (child's) 
bib or feeder. 
.!lIS..::..o"';y 
~ 
bufteek, bifteek <Fr bifteck> Inl beaten steak 
cooked by frying. 
J"'; y 
;;).! bafra <obsolete brand name> Icoll nl cigarette 
paper(s). 
I"';"';y 
~ baffa In pi -aat, bufafl pair (in dice). 
2"';"';y 
~ buff <Fr pout> In pi -aat, bufuufl pouffe, large 
leather cushion or hassock stuffed and used as a low 
seat. 
~ buffa = buff. 
..::..o,j"';y 
~y. bufant <Fr> ladj invarl puffed out, bouffant. 
tlS"';y 
""'y. bufeeh <Fr> In pi -aatl I canteen, snack bar. 
2 buffet-style meal. 3 buffet, sideboard. 
";yJy 
~ 
baljbif I Ivtl to cause to blister. 2 Ivil to blister. 
-vn baljbaja; avalpva mibaljbif. 
;; • _;: bUljbeeja In pi baljabiif, bUljbejaatl blister. 
JyJy 
~ 
baljbalj I Ivt/ to cause to blister. 2 Ivil to blister. 

jafayf-i ba(jba(jit min ij-fa((a my lips blistered from the 
red pepper. -vn ba(jba(ja; ava/pva miba(jba(j. 
~ 
bU(jbee(ja In pi ba(jabii(j, bU(jbe(jaatl blister. 
~I fitba(jba(j 
Ivil to become blistered. -ava 
mitba(jba(j . 
[.JY 
~ 
bU(jga <T bakfa> In pi bU(jag, bU(jgaatl 1 cloth 
bundle tied with a knot. 2 [carp} (any type of) hinge in 
which the two leaves are riveted together round a cen-
tral pivot. 3 [canstr} patch of plaster put on a wall to 
regulate the depth of stucco or other facing that is to be 
applied. 4a square section in tent applique design (see 
PI.H, 5). 4b motif in tent applique design (see PI.H, 
13). 
~ ba(j(jag Ivil [constr} to put patches of plaster on a 
wall to regulate the depth of stucco or other facing. -vn 
tab(jiig; ava miba(j(jag. 
-,J~Jy 
""';J~ ba(jduunis (also ma(jduunis) Inl parsley. 
.J J y 
,A ba(jar Icoll'nl cattle (other than buffalo) . 
• ,A ba(jara In pI -aatl cow. fin wi(j[it il-ba(jara tiktar 
sakakin-ha [pray} (if the cow falls, the knives abound) 
"" everyone is against the unfortunate. 
..s,A ba(jari ladj invarl pertaining to bovines other 
than buffalo. lal:Jma ba(jari beef other than buffalo 
meat. laban ba(jari cow's milk. 
.J,J.JJy 
.JJ,A ba(jruur <Copt> Inl frog. 
IJ"Jy 
~ 
ba(js Inl box tree, boxwood. 
-I" IJ"J y 
.1~ bU(jsumaa{ <Gr paksimadi> Icoll nl 1 bread 
slices hardened by rebaking, rusks, breadsticks. 
2 (dried) bread-crumbs. 
";";Jy 
~ 
bafi{iij <P bakhshfsh> Inl tip. feeh rafy-ak 
fil-wahba wil-bafi{iijwhat do you think about gratuities 
and tips? 
~ 
bafi{ij Ivil to disburse money in a condescending 
manner. -vn bafi{aja; ava mibafi{ij. 
..1 J y 
see ..1,J J y : ba(juu{i 
90 
ItJy 
~ bU(j[a In pi bU(ja[, bU(j[aatl la stain, spot. muziil 
lil-bu(ja[ spot remover. Ib spot (as a plant disease). 
2 (also buq[a) location, spot. 
fil-beet fi-bu(j[a 
mumtaaza the house is in an excellent spot. 
e.-. ba(j(ja[1 Ivtl to spot, stain, blotch. fiz-zeet ba(j(ja[ 
il-(jamii~ the oil stained the shirt. 2 IVII to stain or be 
stained, blotch or be blotched. 5'il-(jami~ ba(j(ja[ the 
shirt stained. -vn tab(jii[; ava/iva miba(j(ja[. 
~I fitba(j(ja[ Ivil to be or become stained or blotch-
ed. -vn taba(j(ju[ r; ava mitba(j(ja[. 
~ taba(j(ju[ I~I spot (as a plant disease). 
ltJy 
~ bU(ja[:ju(ja[ bu~a[ (ya rabb' yU(ja[) [children} "" 
hope he falls! (chanted when someone is attempting a 
difficult climb). 
"';Jy 
~ ba(jf <perh Copt> In pI bU(jufal lummox, oaf. 
-ladjectivalJyl famma raagil ba(j/' ~al:Jiil:J what a real oaf 
of a man! 
IJJy 
~ bU(j(j <cf Lat bucca> Inl la mouth.I:JU((-Uf-bu(j(j-
ak put it in your mouth. huwwa b-bu(j(j-u {alab il-filuus 
he asked for the money himself. fil-bu(j(j il-ma(jfuul 
ma-yxujf'-huu-jid-dibbaall [pray} (flies do not enter a 
closed mouth) keep your mouth shut and all will be 
well. bU(j(j-a-ha bi-yna(j(ja{ [asal she has a honeyed 
tongue. fil-marabba {il[it zayy is-sukkar tistaahil bU(j(j-
ak the jam turned out to be delicious - really worth 
eating. lIyislam bU(j(j-ak "" well said! -bU(j(j is-sab[ 
snapdragon, antirrhinum. Ib mouthful. I:J-akl-u [ala 
bU(j(j' waal:Jid I'll eat it up in one mouthful. fiddii-ni 
bU(j(j give me a mouthful. 2 opening, aperture. bU(j(j 
ij-f~lta the opening of the cushion . 
~ 
bU(j(jee(ji ladjl oral, verbal. -ladverbialJyl 
(jul-haa-lu bU(j(jee(ji kida just give him the message 
oralJy. 
lJJy 
~ bal;(j / (u) Ivtl to cause to split open or burst. daas 
[ak-koora ba(j(j-a-ha he trod on the balJ and burst it. 
-vn ba(j(j. ba(ja(jaan; ava baa(ji(j; pva mab(juu(j. 
~ ba(j(ja / Ipl -aatl instance noun of ba(j(j. 
.j.;1 fitba(j(j Ivil passive of ba(j(j J. - iva mitba(j(j . 
.j.; I finba(j(j = fitba(j(j. - iva minba(j(j . 

3JJy 
~ baq{/ Icoll nl I bedbug(s). IIdamm-u zayy il-baqq 
'" he's a drag. 2 any of a variety of plant pests. 
~ baqqa 2 lunit n, pi -aatl a bedbug. zayy il-baqqa 
tiwlid miyya w-tquul ya qillit il-xalaf [prov/ like the 
bedbug, which gives birth to a hundred and says, 'How 
few!' '" the unworthy breed too much. 
JJy 
iJ~ biqaala In pi -aatl I grocery trade. (maljall i) 
biqaala grocery shop. 2 groceries. 
J ~ buquul Ipl nl legumes. 
J-f! buquuli ladjl leguminous. 
J~ baqqaal In *1 grocer. 
~ baqqal Ivil to soften (after soaking in water) and be 
about to sprout (oflegumes). - vn tabqii/; ava mibaqqal. 
.JIJJy 
;J~ baqlaawa <T baklava> Inl confection made of 
filo pastry with syrup and nuts.llloolj baqlaawa or ~aaga 
baqlaawa cross-hatched steel plate, anti-slip plate. 
bJJy 
~ 
baqla{ Ivil to become plump or chubby. -vn 
baqla{a; ava mibaqla{. 
.l;JJy 
~ 
baqla:; J Ivil to become chubby. -vn baqla;a; ava 
mibaqla;. 
~ 
baqla;2 Inl [deris/ plump person. 
.J;, A baqluu; ladj pi baqalii;1 chubby. 
J JJy 
iJ A baqluula <perh Copt> In pi baqaliil, baqlulaatl 
bubble, blister. 
~ baqlil Ivil I to become bloated, puff up. eeen-u 
baqlilit his eye became puffy. 2 to gurgle (of a container 
of liquid). 3 to bubble, effervesce. -vn baqlala; ava 
mibaqlil. 
~ 
buqleela In pi baqaliil. buqlelaatl bubble, blister. 
b.JJy 
J. ~ baquu{i <Copt> Inl tin dish or small basket into 
which vegetables are placed as they are selected for 
purchase. 
.sJy 
..;-. baqa J (a) Ivil I to be. da yibqa gooz-ik is that your 
husband? ma-tibqaa-f magnuun don't be crazy! kaan 
91 
dayman bi-yibqa zallaan he was always annoyed. 
rik-kalam-da yibqa reeh what kind of talk is that? 
fis-sitt' di tibqaa-Iak reeh how is this woman related to 
you? kull i mayibqa I-qumaafrixii~ kulli ma tibqafital-u 
faqall the cheaper the cloth, the looser the weave. 2a to 
become.lja-yibqa duktoor rinfaaf allaah God willing 
he'll become a doctor. xud id-dawa w-Ija-tibqa kwayyis 
take the medicine and you'll get well. baqeet Gala 1-
Ijadiida I became penniless. 2b Iw negl to be (no lon-
ger). ma-baqit-!i ~lfayyara she is no longer young. 
ma-baqaa-f landu muxx he no longer has any sense. 
3 to arrive, attain (at or to a place, time or condition). 
mif Ij-atkallim Ii-Ijadd i ma nibqa f-ma~r I shan't speak 
till we reach Cairo. fis-saala baqit talaata or baqeena 
s-saala talaata it's three o'clock now. baqa fig-gamla 
he has joined the university. baqit fi-mufkila she got 
involved in a problem - limpersonallyl 4a there has 
elapsed. baqaa-Ii saala b-axabba{ lal-baab I've been 
pounding on the door for an hour. baqa-Iha mlaaya 
talat siniin she has been with me for three years. 
ma-baqa-Illu-f diqiqteen hina he's hardly been here two 
minutes. 4b there has accumulated or accrued. bi-kida 
yibqaa-Iak landi lafara gneeh that makes ten pounds 
lowe you. baqa landina f1uus kitiir we accumulated a 
lot of money. - Ipreverbl Sa to begin to. ba{n-i bafit 
tiwgal-ni my stomach started hurting. bald ig-gawaaz 
baqeet famnal-ha min i/-xuruug after we got married 
I did not allow her to go out. dilwaqti bass i baqit tiigi 
kull i yoom only now has she started coming every day. 
Sb Iw negl to be (no longer) engaged in or accustomed 
to (doing s. th.). ma-baqaa-!yizur-na xalaa~ he has stop-
ped visiting us. ma-baqet-faljibb-ak I don't like you any 
more! 6 to arrive at the point of (doing s.th.). lamma 
tibqi tlaaqi raagil (fibqi) fitgawwizii when you find a 
man, marry him! 7 modal of constant or repeated ac-
tion. lamma kunt i fi/-mustaffa baqit tiigi tzur-ni kulli 
yoom when I was in hospital she visited me every day. 
'baqeet fanaadi w-humma mif samlin-ni I called and 
called but they didn't hear me. 8 modal of decision or 
emphasis. Ij-abqa fax{af rigl-i w-fazuur-u I'll go and 
pay him a quick visit then. fibqi talaali (landina) 
fwayya do come around (to our house) for a while! 
nibqa ttafaqna we've agreed then! yibqa yir4,ii-k ik-
kalam-da then you're happy about what was said? baqa 
xalaa~ well then, that's that! -/impersonallyl yibqa 
ttafaqna we've agreed then! 
..j.? biqi (a) Ivil I to stay, remain. biqyu landina I-Ijadd 
i~-~ublj they stayed with us till morning. 2 limpersl 
there remained, there was left over. biqii-Iu fahreen 

fiffurl he had another two months of work to go. baafii 
caleekum talaata gneeh you still owe three pounds. - ava 
baafii. 
~~ baafii 1 laval II rahu da iii kaan baafii that's all 
I need! that's the limit! - bafiyaa-lak (it's waiting for 
you) I'll get you for that! -l:Jayaat-ak il-bafiya == may 
your life be long (response to ril-bafiiyyaf-l:Jayaat-ak). 
- In! 2 Ipl bafiyiin, .bawaafii; always deft the rest, the 
others, the remainder. bact/.-u-Iwm fiacad cal-rart/.' 
wil-bafiyiin wififu (or wil-baafii wifii/) some of them sat 
on the ground and the rest stood. xud kitaab waaI:Jid 
wi-siib il-bafiyiin (or il-baafii) take one book and leave 
the others. xud l:Jisaab-ak wi-haat il-baafii take what 
you're owed and give me the change. cUfibaal il-
bawaafii == may the rest of us (or you, or them) be as 
fortunate (a good wish on a happy occasion, or bitter 
remark on a unhappy one). 3 Ino pI! Everlasting One 
(epithet of God). 
• ~ .~ bafia2 Ipartll so, then, now. ruuI:Ju bafia go, 
then! very well, go! rana I:J-acallim-ak bafia I'll teach 
you then! rixtifi bafia that's enough now! 2 however, on 
the other hand. fana rafat/.t/.al il-qism il-radabi - wald-i 
bafia cayiz-ni raxuffi(-(ibb I prefer the arts side, but my 
father wants me to go into medicine. 
~ bafii: cumr iffafii bafii [prov] the life of the scamp 
lasts longest. 
~ i rabfia leI! morelmost lasting. II wil-l:Jayy' rabfia 
mil-mayyit == the living deserve more consideration 
than the dead. - raxuu-k rabfiaa-lak == your brother is 
your most constant friend (injunction to show greater 
consideration for one's brother than for any friend). 
• 1At baqaar In! survival. II ril-baqaar li-llaah only God 
is eternal (expression of condolence to one bereaved). 
4 bafiiyya In, constr bafiiit and bafiiyyit, pi bawaafiil 
rem~inder, rest. laazim bafiiit il-cidda titrisil the rest of 
the equipment must be washed. II bafiiit il- riid tip, infor-
mal commission. - ril-bafiiyyaf-l:Jayaat-ak expression of 
condolence == the deceased will continue to live 
through you! 
J...: bafifiaJ Ivtl to cause to remain. kalit wi-bafifiit 
jiwayyit rakl' l-axuu-ha she ate and left some food for 
her brother. -vn tabfiiyya; ava mibafifii. 
~I ritbafifia Ivil there remained. ritbafifia calayya 
talaata gneeh 
I still owed three pounds. - ava 
mutabaqqiT, mitbafifii. 
~ 
yibfii limperf vI to cause to remain, preserve (of 
God). rabb-i-na yibfii l:Jayaat-ak may our Lord preserve 
you! - ava mibfii. 
11 yibfii cala to spare, let be. II ma b-yibfiiif cala l:Jadd he 
spares no-one with his words. 
92 
~I ristabfia Ivt/ to cause to stay. yimkin 
yistabfiuu-ni/wayya baed' sinn il-macaafperhaps they 
will keep me on for a while after retirement age. -vn 
ristibfia; ava mistabfii. 
~I ristibafifiaJ Ivil there remained. dafact' gneeh 
wi-stibafifia calayya xamsiin fiirfl paid one pound and 
was left owing fifty piastres. - ava mistibBfifii. 
.!l y see ."s' Y : bakawiyya 
,; l.!l y 
.J~ bikaar <perh P pargar> In pi -aatl circle, or arc, 
or anything (e.g., a strip of metal) formed into a circle 
or arc. 
~I.!ly 
.;.~ bikaa/ <Fr picage> In! act of pricking piano 
hammers to soften their felt . 
iJ l.!l y 
oJ~ bikaan <prob Engl> Icoll nl pecan nut(s). 
-Iy.!ly 
~~ bikbaafi, bakbaaji <T binb~l> In pi -yyal 
[obsol] army rank equivalent to lieutenant-colonel (re-
placed by rank of muqaddam). -also bimbaaji. 
yy.!ly 
.,..~ bikabb I <Engl pick-up> In pi -aatl pick-up 
truck. 
.,..~ bikabb2 <Fr pick-up> In pi -aatl record-player . 
.:.,;y.!ly 
';:".J.I!~ bakaburt <It boccaporto> 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 manhole. 2 cesspit. 
.!ly.!ly 
~ 
bakbik Ivil to bubble, effervesce. -vn bakbaka; 
ava mibakbik. 
.:..!l .... 
d. bakkit Ivt/ to censure, reprove, reproach. -vn 
tabkiit; avalpva mibakkit . 
.:i,.1 ritbakkit Ivil to be censured, be reproved, be 
reproached. -iva mitbakkit. 
.:. .:. .!l .... 
~ 
bakitta I <It bacchetta> In pi -aatl 1 action lever 
on a piano. 2 [arch} moulding. 
~ bakitta 2 <prob Engl> In pi -aatl packet. 
. 
. 

UJ":;'.!Jy 
~~ baktirya <Engl> Inl bacteria. 
- J":;'.!Jy 
J~ bakatuuni In pI -haatl [e/ee] fixture for down-
ward slanting wall-lamp. 
-y~.fly 
I,J!Jl~ bakadubra <prob Engl> In pI -aatl [theat] 
backdrop. 
1J.fly 
; J... bakra In pI -aatl young she-camel. 
..sJ... bakri: manjiyyit i/-bakri area in north-east 
Cairo. 
~}:J I ril-bakriyya Iprop nI a Sufi order. 
• J... bukra ladv/l tomorrow .l:Ja-tiigi n-nahar-da walla 
bukra are you coming today or tomorrow? bald; bukra 
the day after tomorrow. bald; bald; bukra three days 
from now. bukra nismal wi-baldu njuuf"" we shall 
wait and see. lI'lin-nahar-da qabl; bukra as soon as 
possible, better sooner than later. 2 some time (soon) 
in the future. bukrajalr-ak yi(Wal taani your hair will 
grow again soon enough! 
J... bikr I In pI bakaaril first-born child. luqbaal i/-
bakaari "" we look forward to the birth at your children 
(said to a newly-married couple). 2/adjl2a Ipl bakaara 
or invarl virgin. banaat bikr or banaat bakaara virgins. 
'larlt bikr virgin soil. 2b linvarl unfertilized, unpollin-
ated.1I mayyit (urfi bikr pickling solution containing salt 
and vinegar, but no spices. 
..sJ... bikri ladj "I first-born. 
~ J... bikriyya In pI -aatll one giving birth for the first 
time. 2 virgin. 
;)~ bakaara Inl I virginity. 2 maidenhead. fa4.4.; 
bakarit-ha he deflowered her. 
J...i 'labkar lell morelmost early. 
)~ bukuur Inl earliness, being early. 'lil-baraka fil-
bukuur (God's blessing is in rising early) the early bird 
catches the worm. 
)~ bakuur Icoll nl [Chr] first-fruit(s). 
;)"s\ bakuura In pI -aatl first-fruit, first result. 
bakuurit 'lintaag i/-ml¥nae; kaanit mujarrifa the first 
products of the factory did it great credit. yoom i/-
bakuura {Jud] Shabuoth. 
J~ baakir I/advl tomorrow. l:Ja-niigi ~abaal:J baakir 
we'll come tomorrow morning. 2 (also buxuur baakir) 
Inl {Chr] matins. rafae; (buxuur) baakir to say the ser-
vice of matins (with its rituals, of a priest). 
93 
.t. bakkar Ivil I to be (ready) early in the morning.' 
laazim tibakkaru 'liza kuntu e;awziin tifuufu juruuq if-
jams you'll have to be ready early if you want to see the 
sunrise. 2 to produce one's first child. l:Ja-tbakkar 
bi-walad 'lin jaa 'I allaah her first child will be a boy, God 
willing. -/vt/3 to blow old smoke out of (a water-pipe). 
- vn tabkiir; ava mibakkar. 
hi 'litbakkar Ivil to be blown clear of old smoke (of a 
water-pipe). - iva mitbakkar. 
fo.l 'libtakar Ivtl to invent, create, originate, inno-
vate. -vn 'libtikaar; ava mibtikir; pva mubtakar . 
..::..I~ mubtakaraat Ipl 
nl fashions, 
creations. 
mubtakaraat i/-muusim the season's fashions. 
2.J.!J Y 
~ bakar Icoll nI spool(s), reeI(s), pulley(s), block(s). 
Ilxee{ bakar (sewing) thread . 
;~ bakara lunit n, pI -aatl a spool, a reel, a pulley, a 
block. 
)~ bakkaar = bakar. 
;.J~ bakkaara = bakara. 
J J .!J y 
see J I .fl y : bikaar 
-yJ.!Jy 
..::..I,;y.~ bikarbunaat <Fr> Inl bicarbonate. 
(£.J.!Jy 
C~ bakrag <T bakraf> In pI bakaarigl teapot. 
JJ.fly 
.J ~ bakrar Ivi/l to swell ( ofthe eyes). 2 to goggle ( of, 
or with, the eye). ma-tbakrar-lii-j bi-e;enee-k kida don't 
goggle at me like that! -vn bakrara; ava mibakrar. 
.flI.SJ.fly 
4.~ bikriik <Fr>: l:Jamq i/-bikriik picric acid. 
I V".fl y 
~ 
buks J <Engl> Inl I /pl -aat, 'labkaas, bikaasl 
box, blow, punch. 2/no pll (sport of) boxing. tae;aala 
ni/{ab buks let's do a little sparring. 
~ 
bakkis Ivil to throw punches. qae;ad yibakkis-Iu 
lamma wiqie; min {uul-u he·kept on punching him until 
he fell flat. -vn tabkiis; ava mibakkis. 
~ 
I 'litbakkis Ivil to be punched. - iva mitbakkis. 
.rS'~ baakis Ivtl I to box. 2 to have a fist fight with. 
-vn mibaksa; ava mibaakis. 
.rS'~ I 'litbaakis Ivil I to box each other. 2 to have a 
fist fight with each other. - ava mitbaakis. 

Z~.dy 
..,.s.1! ,~ buks 2 <Engl> Inl I (also buks' turd) 
police wagon for transporting prisoners, black Maria, 
paddy wagon. 2 (also larabiyya buks) covered wagon. 
3 (also fanca buks) vanity case or the like. 4 {elec] ter-
minal box. 
-~~.dy 
.J~~ bakistaan Iprop nl Pakistan. 
J~~ bakistaani 
lIn 
*1 
a Pakistani. 2/adjl 
Pakistani. 
I.;..dy 
~ 
bakaf Inl trickery, bluffing . 
..;.~ bakkaaf In *1 bluffer. 
~ 
bakkif Ivil to act fraudulently, fool, bluff. 
ma-tbakkifj'lala faxuu-k don't take in your brother! 
- vn tabkiif; ava mibakkif. 
J~ 
mibakkafaati In pI -yyal = bakkaaf. 
~I fitbakkif Ivil (impersonal) passive of bakkif. 
mumkin yitbakkif laleek you may be fooled. - iva 
mitbakkif· 
Z 
• .£1 .... 
~ . 
~ 
bukfa <T bokfa> In pI -aatl round water con-
tainer of a gooza (see PI.I, 10). 
1 .;. .£I y 
see .;. I .£I y : bikaaf 
.).;..dy 
i..)A bakfuriyya Inl con game. 
iJ ,,; .;. .£I y 
~~ bakafiin <It beccaccino> Icoll nl snipe. 
~~ bakafiina lunit n, pI -aatl a snipe. 
1 .£I .£I .... 
. 
. 
~ bakk (u) Ilvtl to ooze, exude. b-alJu{(' raaCj mifmif 
wi-raaCj sukkar w-asiib-u l-lJadd' ma ybukk' mayyil-u 
I put a layer of apricots and a layer of sugar and leave it 
till it produces juice. II wiff-u lJa-ybukk id-damm his face 
is flushed. 2 Ivil to flow. fid-dimla bakkit min leen-u 
tears streamed from his eyes. -vn bakk, bakakaan; ava 
baakik; pva mabkuuk. 
~ bakka linst n, pI -aatl a squirt, a drop. 
4.;1 fitbakk Ivil to flow, be exuded. -avaliva mitbakk. 
Z} .£I .£I y ) 
~ bukk <prob Engl pocket-book> In pI -aatl small 
money purse. 
94 
~ bikka <It becco> In pI -aat, bukuukl small nozzle, 
jet. 
J.d y 
~.1! bukla <prob Fr boucle> In pI -aat, bukal/I lock 
(of hair), ringlet. 2 buckle. 
.IJ.dy 
.~ bakalaah <It baccala> Inl dried and salted cod 
fish (eaten particularly during Lesser Bairam). 
-.)J.dy 
~.))~ bakalurya <Fr baccalaureat> (obsol] secon-
dary school diploma. 
...,-I.'))~ bakaluriyuus, bakaluryoos In pI -aatl bache-
lor's degree in science or commerce. 
.JJ.dy 
~ 
bikalooh <prob Fr> In pI -aall piccolo. 
~,,;J.dy 
...,...J ~ bukuliis <Fr piea a coulisse> In pI -aatl small-
size Vernier caliper. 
o,,;J.dy 
.."JS.1! bukleeh <Fr boucle> ladj invarl curly (of hair). 
1 r.d y 
~ bukm Inl dumbness. 
~ bakam Inl dumbness . 
~i fabkam ladj, fem bakma, pI bukml dumb. 
~ r .£I y 
see r.d I y : baakim 
iJ .£I y see iJ I .£I y : bikaan 
-YiJ.dy 
.)~ ~ 
bakinbawdar or bikinbawdar <Engl> Inl 
baking-powder. 
I,,;.dy 
~ baka (i) Ivil to weep, lament. bakit bi-daml il-leen 
she cried her eyes out. fifkii-li w- fana fabkii-lak let's 
commiserate together. kutr i/-lJuzn I Ylallim il-buka 
{prov] much sadness teaches weeping. -vn buka, bika; 
ava baaki. 
11 baka lala to care for, as in mif baaki lala lJaaga not 
giving a damn, b-abki lala-bn-i wi-bn-i b-yibki lala 
l-yariib {prov] I care for my son, but my son cares for 
the stranger (i. e. is ungrateful and fails to reciprocllte), 

filii yibki lad-dinya ydawwar laleeha {prov} he who 
cares about worldly things must look for them. 
IS~ bakkaay ladj *1 given to weeping, always 
snivelling. 
~ 
mabka: yaafi{ iI-'!Iabka the Wailing Wall (in 
Jerusalem). 
j., bakka Ivtl to cause to weep. -vn tabkiyya; ava 
mibakki. 
uS'~1 fitbaaka Ivil to pretend to weep or be sad· 
bi-yitbaaku lal-yurriyya lafaan yidyaku lan-naas they 
pretend to be sad about (lost) freedom in order to 
deceive the people. - ava mitbaaki. 
Z(IS.l.I"r') 
~4 bakya I In pi bawaakil la arch. Ib arcade. II riI-
bawaaki street in Ataba famed for its arcades. 2 strip of 
metal bent into a curve. 
~4 bakya 2 In pi -aatl casing for a drawstring or cord. 
1 1S.l.I "r' 
~ 
bikya shortened form of rubabikya (q.v.). 
I.:, ~.l.I "r' 
~ 
bikiin Inl Peking. 
~ 
bikiini I ladjl from or pertaining to Peking. 
riI-ba{{ iI-bikiini Peking duck. 
Z.:, ~.l.I "r' 
~ 
bikiini2 Inl bikini. 
( • ~.l.I "r' ) 
~ 
bikeeh <Fr piqu~> Inl I quilting. 2 ladj invarl 
quilted. 
~ 
J! bukeeh <Fr> In pi -aatl bouquet (usually large 
and arranged in a high basket stand). 
J"r' 
J. baIT Iconjl I rather. bi-yurfuq iI-inyirafaat di bal 
wi-yqawim-ha he rejects these deviations. or rather, 
resists them. 2 Iw preceding neg! but rather. fin-nut;{a 
ma b-tintifirfi bal bi-tkawwin the spot does not dis-
perse, but rather builds up. 
1 J"r' 
~ bala I I Iprepl without. bala t;afya no kidding. {ilil 
min iI-muulid bala yumm~ (he left the muulid without 
any chick-peas) he gained nothing from what should 
have been a profitable enterprise. 2 particle signalling 
prohibition or disapproval. bala kalaam faariY stop this 
nonsense! bala xeeba don't be stupid! -/repeated for 
95 
emphasisl bala fadab bala waksa damn literature - it's 
all a farce! 
[.1 J "r' 
~~ bilaaj <Fr plage> In pi -aatl beach. 
,,1 J"r' 
~'iJ! bulaadJ <P pallid> Inl steel. sady-u wala 1-
bulaad (his cheek surpasses steel (in hardness» "" he is 
very thick-skinned. 
~IJ"r' see ~J"r':balaaf 
~.J:.IJ"r' 
.)0.;.11 ..,..J.~ bilaa{us iI-bun{i Iprop nl Pontius Pilate. 
JI J"r' 
J'iJ! bulaat; Iprop nl Boulak, a populous quarter in 
Cairo bordered on the west by the Nile. IIdool wala 
btuul bulaat; they are worse than people from Boulak 
(i.e. they behave in an extremely rowdy manner). 
-bulaat; id-dakruur low-class area in the west of Grea-
ter Cairo. 
j'iJ! bulaat;i ladj '1 pertaining to Boulak. fit-tirla 
I-bulat;iyya the Boulak Canal (later filled in and made 
into a street, it ran from el-Qulali district north through 
Shubra). 
J 1 J "r' 
J~ balaal: yalaa/-i balaal-i my own property. 
.I"r' J "r' 
.~ bilibaah: fuyl iI-bilibaah deception, sleight of 
hand.lamalu lalayyafuYI i/-bilibaah they put one over 
on me. 
.J:."r'J"r' 
~ 
balba{ Ivt and viI to splash about (in shallow 
water). - also ba{ba{. - vn balba{a; ava mibalba{. 
~I fitbalba{ = balba{. -ava mitbalba{. 
t"r'J"r' 
~ balbal/vtl I to make into small round balls. 2 to 
nibble at (food). 3 to eat (opium or similar drugs). -vn 
balbala; ava/pva mibalbB[. 
t..t:-4 balbuulln pi balaabil. balabiil/l small pill-like 
ball. 2 tablet, pill (especially of drugs such as opium). 
~..t:-4 balbuula = balbuul· 
~I fitbalbal/vil passive of balbal. - iva mitbalbB[. 

J J y J y 
4~ bilatiina In pI -aat, bilatiinl {auto] contact break-
». balbil l Ivtl to throw into confusion. ma-tbalbil-!' 
er. -also rablatiina. 
rafkaar-i don't confuse me! lawziin yilmilu balbala 
fil-ba/ad they're trying to spread confusion in the coun-
J [ J y 
see [I J y : bilaaj 
try. -vn balba/a; ava/pva mibalbil. 
~I ritbalbil/vil to become muddled, be thrown into 
1 [ J y see [..s J y : buliiga 
confusion. -ava/iva mitbalbil. 
lJy Jy 
». balbil2 Ivil to emit mating cries (of a male goat). 
-vn balba/a; ava mibalbil. 
3(JyJy) 
». bulbul <P bulbul> In pI ba/aabill nightingale. 
~ bilbila <Copt> In pI ba/aabill almost any small 
rounded hanging object (e.g., bobble, plug cock of a 
tap, small knob, small round bell). 
(~.JyJy) 
~~ balbu~1 In pI balabi~/ {rur] ember. -also 
btllbu~. 
~ 
~ 
balbu~2 ladj pI balabii~1 stark naked. -/adver-
biallyl {allal-ha balbu~ (1) he brought her out stark 
naked. (2) he (made a deal with her that) left her 
empty-handed. 
"';..syJy 
...A.! ~ bulubiif <Engl bully beef> (nl corned beef or 
mutton. 
,?.:.oJy 
~ balitta <It> In pI -aatl artist's palette. 
-.!l.:.o Jy 
~~ baltakaana <It baldaccrino> In pI -aatl frame 
supporting a pelmet or canopy, 'baldaquin. -also 
baldakaana. 
t.J.:.o J y 
• .;~ ba/atooh <Fr plateau> In pI -aatl (film) set, 
studio. 
.!l..s.:.oJy 
.s...; ,; -'I bulutiika <perh T politika from Gr> Inl 
smooth talking, glib talking, cant. 
.;,..s.:.oJy 
.:n'~ bilatiin <Fr platine> Inl I platinum. 2 {dent] 
amalgam. 3 = bilatiina. 
.!l..s[Jy 
~ 
baljiika Iprop nl Belgium. 
~ 
baljiiki Iladj *1 Belgian. 2 In */ a Belgian. 
(Jy 
~ ba/alJ Icoll nl date(s).11 ba/alJ if-!aam finger-shaped 
pastries made of deep-fried leavened batter, soaked in 
syrup. -/a (aal ba/alJ if-faam wa/a linab i1-yaman "" he 
did not manage to get either of the things he wanted. 
-wikaalit il-ba/alJ scrap market located In Boulak. 
-laraCj ba/alJ alcoholic drink distilled from dates. 
-balalJ il-baIJr mussel(s). 
~ 
ba/aIJa lunit n, pI -aatll date. zayy il-ba/aIJa fiz-
zoor like a date in one's throat (of something intoler-
able). 2 date-shaped object. ba/aIJit goozit i{-{iib a nut-
meg. balalJteen il-milza goat's pendants. lamba balaIJa 
small elongated light bulb (used mostly for chandel-
iers). taxriiza ba/aIJa {naut] back-splice. 3 motif in tent 
applique designs (see PI.H, 10). 
~~ ba/aIJaaya = balaIJa. 
c:.~ ballaalJ Inl date-grower. sana liI-fallaalJ wi-sana 
liI-ballaalJ {prov] one year the date crop is good, the 
next the good luck goes to the farmer "" good luck 
moves from one to another. 
~ ballalJ Ivil to produce dates (of a palm tree). -vn 
tabliilJ; ava miballalJ. 
J"Jy 
~ ba/ad Ifem n, pI bi/aadl I Ising and pI used inter-
changeablyl country, n~tion. laazim nixalli wlad-na 
yIJibbu ba/ad-hum we must make our children love 
their country. Cju{n' blad-na raIJsan Cju{n' fil-laa/am the 
cotton produced by our country is the be~t in the world. 
bilaad if-!aam the Levant. bi/aad barra abroad. II ({ilil 
fi-wiff-u) bi/aad allaah li-xa/Cj allaah (he set off into) the 
big wide world (without any particular plan). -fi- raaxir 
bi/aad i/-muslimiin at the ends of the earth. 2 (home) 
village, town. rana raayiIJ i/-ba/ad I'm going to my 
village. kull' ba/ad fiiha nuur every town has electricity . 
ri/-balad illi twaddi raIJsan mi-lli tgiib "" we can well do 
without him! II ribn' ba/ad (1) native, not a foreigner. 
da mif xawaaga da-bn' ba/ad he's not a foreigner, he's a 

local. (2) one embodying the good qualities of the tra-
hard to handle (especially of animals). -vn fistiblaad; 
ditional classes, good sort, nice guy. -da-nta balieet ibn; 
ava mistablid. 
balad(l) you've become a man ofthe world. (2) you've 
become easy-going. 
3 ~ J y 
see 
~ I J y : bulaad 
u~ baladi ladj usu invarl 18 in traditional Egyptian 
style. (abbaax baladi local Egyptian-style cook. rali~; 
- J 
~ J y see - J 
~ J y : biladifeer 
baladi local Egyptian-style dancing. baladi ya niEnaBG 
[vendor's cry} wholesome mint! w~faat baladi (or 
baladiyya) folk remedies. bi-ysammuu bil-baladi ... the 
native Egyptian name for it is .... IIEeej ba/adi coarse 
whole-meal bread. -samaad baladi manure. -samn; 
baladi clarified butter. -diraaE baladi linear measure 
equalto 0.58 metres. Ib native to Egypt (as opposed to 
ruumi or fafrangi). IIgazar baladi dark red variety of 
carrot. 2 common or garden, ordinary. muftaa!J baladi 
an ordinary spanner. kalb; baladi a street dog. manga 
baladi a variety of small mango. 38 of the (conserva-
tive) lower class (as opposed to what is modern and 
affected by external influence). fil-!Jitta 1Ii-!Jna sakniin 
fiiha baladi jwayya the area in which we live is a bit 
low-class. 3b vulgar. sitt; baladi liawi a very vulgar 
woman. 
~~ baladiyya In pi -aatl municipality. 
.:..,~ baladiyyaat Inl person or persons coming from 
the same neighbourhood (as each other or as s.o. else). 
dool baladiyyaat -ma tidxul-/ benhum these people are 
from the same neighbourhood -don't interfere with 
them. fir-raagil baladiyyaat-ak mif !Ja-ygib-ha I-barr 
tta.al man from your village is not going to b~ reason-
able. baladiyyaat-ak w~alu the people from your home 
village have arrived. II fabu l-baladiyyaat [deris} an Up-
per Egyptian. 
u~ baladii- In, always w pron suffl = baladiyyaat. 
1 ~ Jy 
• J~ balaada Inl sluggishness, dullness, stupidity. 
balaada fil- fi!Jsaas insensitivity. 
~ baliid ladj pi buladal sluggish, dull, stupid. !Jiggit 
iI-baliid mas!J it-taxta [prov} the dull pupil busies him-
self cleaning the blackboard (so as to avoid answering 
questions) == the incompetent cover up their inability 
by an appearance of activity. 
~i fablad lell morelmost dull or stupid. 
~ ballid lvi/to become sluggish, apathetic or dull. -vn 
tabliid; ava miballid. 
..Il,;1 fitballid = ballid. taballud fil- fafkaar apathy. -vn 
taballud; ava mitballid. 
~I fistablid Ivtl I to consider sluggish or stupid. 
2 to select for stupidity. - Ivi/3 to be unresponsive, be 
-.!J ~ Jy 
~IS"~ baldakaana <It baldacchino> In pi -aatl frame 
supporting pelmet or canopy, baldaquin. -also 
baltakaana. 
.JjJ~ buldoozar <Engl> In pi -aatl bulldozer. 
..,...J ~ J Y 
""J~ balduus, baladoos In pI -aatl [mech} portable 
lamp. 
j J y 
see j.J J y: biluuza 
..,.. J y 
see I vlflloS J Y : buliis, buliisi 
iii..,.. J y 
,:,~ balasaan Inl [bot} elder. 
J.:...,..Jy 
J.-~ bilastar <Engl> Inl plaster, medical adhe~ive 
tape. 
-.:...,..Jy 
.ili.-~ .o.!le:-~ bilastik, balastik, balastiik <Engl> Inl 
I plastic. 2 plasticized paint or varnish. balastiik iI-
mayya plastic paint to be mixed with water. - ladj 
invar/3 plastic. kiis bilastik a plastic bag. fil- farqiyyaat 
iI-biiastik plasticized floor varnishes . 
r..,..Jy 
~ 
balsam In! balsam. 
Ii ..,.. J y see Ii 1 ..,.. J y : balasaan 
JIoS..,..Jy 
.r--~ bilasiir <Fr placeur> In pI -aatl cinema usher. 
(°IoS..,..Jy) 
~ 
~ bilaseeh <Fr placier> In pI -aatl I sales repre-
sentative. 2 cinema usher. - also fablaseeh. 
~ 
biliseeh <Fr plisse> ladj invarl I pleated. 
2 ribbed (of knitting). 

• J~ 
IJ' 
. 
';Jy 
..;.~ balaaf 1 Iw pron suff, balaaf min-I particle sig-
nalling la prohibition or the urging of discontinuance. 
balaaf fitiima no insults! balaaf hizaar stop fooling 
around! balaaf yiruul:Ju they had better not go. balaaf 
tixalli mraat-ak ti[lac min ii-beet you ought not to let 
your wife go out of the house. 'Iagib-Iak iI-kitaab walla 
balaaf shall I bring you the book or not'! balaaf minnu 
let's do without it! II walla balaaf par excellence, as in 
'Iahu kida I-mila walla balaaf now that's what I call 
singing! Ib retraction of something previously stipu-
lated. balaaf iI-c;alam - haat ik-kitaab bass never mind 
about the pencil - just bring the book. mif c;adra 'Iaakul 
ir-ruzz. - balaafbac;a 'I can't eat the rice.' 'O.K. don't.' 
II 'Ial:Jsan min balaaf better than nothing. 2 ladj invarl 
free. lit l:Jagaat il-balaaf ma-l:Jadd '-j bi-yil:Jtirim-ha 
no-one 
properly 
values 
things 
that 
are 
free. 
-
lellipticallyl lit-balaaj kallar minnu [prov] take amp-
ly from what is free. bi-balaaf(also bi-balaafi) for free, 
gratis. -
ladverbiallyl 'Iiddaa-ni k-kitaab balaafhe gave 
me the book free. 'Iilli yiigi balaaf yiruul:J balaaf'" easy 
come easy go.ll.va balaafhow cheap! (often used ironi-
cally). - raal:J balaaj to come to nothing, as in tacab-u 
raal:J balaaf his effort was in vain, lit-camlaa-di mif 
rayl:Jaa-lak balaafyou won't get away with what you've 
done . 
...r'~ balluufi [joe] ladvl free, for nothing. kalt' 
balluufi 1 ate gratis. 
....;.; J y 
~ 
bUlfufi <perh Engl> Ipl balaffal I Inl commun-
ist, bolshevik. 2 ladjl 2a communist. 2b ruthless. 
~ 
balfif Ivtl 1 to convert (s.o.) to communism. 2 to 
cause (s.o.) to be corrupt or immoral. 3 to brainwash. 
- vn balfafa; avalpva mibalfif. 
...A....l,.;! 'Iitbalfif Ivil 1 to become a communist. 2 to be 
corrupted. 3 to be bramwashed. - avaliva mitbalfif. 
I..,.,Jy 
...A bala~ 1 (u) Ivtl to bribe. I:J-ablu~-u rubc ' gneeh I'll 
bribe him with twenty-five piastres. - vn ba/~; ava 
baall~; pva mabllw~. 
~ 
ba/~a lunit n, pi -aatl a bribe. 
~! 'Illbala~ 1 Ivil to be bribed. - iva mitbili~. 
~! 'Iinbala~ = 'Illbala~ I. - iva mmbili~. 
2..,.,Jy 
...A bala~2 (a) Ivtl {dent] to form, shape (a crown). 
- vn ba/~; ava baali~; pva mabluu~. 
98 
...A ba/~ Inl [dent] crown-forming machine. 
~! 'Iitbala~2 Ivil [dent] to be formed, be shaped (of 
a crown). - iva mitbili~. 
3..,.,Jy 
d')~ balu~ Inl 1 marrow (of bones). 2 Ipl bawali~/ 
mouthpiece of a wind instrument (see PI.J, 17). 
4 ..,., J y see ..,., I J J y : ballaa~ 
5 ..,., J y 
see ..,., loS J Y : bulii~. bulii~i, bulii~a 
r..,pJy 
~ 
balqam Ivil I to scowl. maa-Iak mibalqam kida -
ma-tidl;ak macaana why are you scowling so -why not 
laugh along with us? 2 to stand up (to s.o. bigger than 
oneself). naadir 'linn iI-muwa;;af yibalqam maca 1-
mudiir only rarely does an employee stand up to the 
director. -vn balqama; ava mibalqam. 
Ij"Jy 
~ bili[ ladj *1 I blunt. 'Iazmiil naggaar bass' bili[ a 
carpenter's chisel, but blunt. 2 boorish, thick-skinned. 
.J.,~ balaa[ Inl I Icoll nl tile(s).lIlit-balaa[ il-malaki the 
royal court. -gazzaar iI-balaa[ head butcher (in a 
slaughterhouse). -sukkar balaa[ sugar formed into 
large slabs. - 'Ieeh yaaxud ir-riil:J min il-balaa[ {prov] 
(what can the wind take from the tiles?) there's nothing 
to be gained from it. -cal-balaa[ see balaa[a. 
2 unploughed land. 
;J,~ balaa[a In pi -aatl 1 lunit nl a tile. IIcala balaa[a 
bluntly, as in gibna-haa-Iu cala balaa[a we didn't mince 
our words with him. -cala I-balaa[a (also ca/-balaa[) 
(I) stripped bare. (2) flat broke. 2 slab (of concrete). 
3 surface in a mud oven upon which bread is baked (see 
Pl.c, 9) . 
Jai. balla[ 1 I Ivtl to tile, pave. Iissa ma-balla[uu-j ir-
ra;iifthey still haven't paved the sidewalk. 2 Ivil to be 
obstinate, refuse to budge. lit-carabiyya balla[it fis-
sikka the car came to a standstill on the way. balla[it 
fil-xa{{ she wouldn't co-operate. II da mballa[-Ii fil-xa{{ 
he's refusing to co-operate. - balla[ cal-f1uus he hung 
onto the money. - vn tablii[; avalpva miballa[. 
J..,l,; tablii[a linst n, pi taballi[1 prepared surface of 
wooden planks (used, e.g .. for a ramp or temporary 
bridge or roof) . 
.JaL. muballi[ In *1 tiler. 
kL-! 'Iitballa[ Ivil to be paved. be tiled. - iva mitballa[. 
~! 'I/Slabla[ Ivtl to conSider (s.o.) thick-skinned . 
- vn 'Iisllblaa[: ava mistabla[. 

l.k Jy 
~ bul{a <It volta> In pi bula(1 [naut] I tack, one of a 
series of tacking movements. 2 short voyage. IItfarab 
bul{a he took a stroll, he bummed around. 
~ balla(2 Ivil [naut] I to tack, beat about. 2a to beat 
up and down (outside a harbour). 2b to lie (off a har-
bour) with engines running waiting to dock. - vn lablii(; 
ava miballi{. 
J.k Jy 
.1)." balluu{ Icoll nl oakes). 
.J,)." balluu{a lunit n, pi -aatl an oak. 
4.k Jy 
~ bal{a <T balta> In pi bula{, bal(aatl billhook, axe, 
hatchet. warid-ha bil-bal(a he acts tough, he strong-
arms his way around. See further under ~ .k J y 
~ .k J y see also 4.k J y 
~ 
bal{agi <T baltaCl> In pi -yyal I thug, bully. 
laazim nil:Jarras minnu - da waad bal{agi we must watch 
out for him -that kid is a bully. 2 [mil, obsol] pioneer. 
~ 
bal{ag Ivil I to become recalcitrant, become de-
linquent. mibal(aga lal-fugra she's holding out on the 
rent. 2 to play truant (from school). - vn bal{aga; ava 
mibal(ag. 
.J.kJy 
"bJ ~ bal(u <Fr paletot> In pi balaa{iI overcoat. 
I$.kJy 
~ 
bul(i Inl I Icolll Nile perca (Tilapia sp.). 2/pl 
bala{wal [slang] person from P4t1 ::.aid. 
~ 
bul{iyya lunit n, pi -aal/ a bul{i fish. 
~~ bul(iyyaaya = bul(iyya. 
~ J y 
see ~.J J Y : baluu~a 
tJy 
&. balal (a) Ivtl to swallow. bi-yiblalu n-nafas lajaan 
yibayyinu finnuhum gidlaan they take in the smoke to 
show that they are tough guys. IIl:Jaaga miJ mabluula 
something unacceptable. - baalil radyu "" very 
talkative. -balal riilj-u (1) to (take a short break to) 
catch one's breath. (2) to be reassured. - vn ball, 
balalaan; ava baalil; pya mabluul. 
~;I ~ baluula In pi -aat, bawaliill drain. 
~ 
~ ballaala 
In 
pi balaliil, 
ballalaatl 1 drain. 
II ballaalit filuus (1) a squanderer of money. (2) a drain 
99 
on ~ne's financial resources. 2 plug-hole. 
~ f. balluula In pi -aatl sewer, drain. 
¥. bulleela In pi -aatl = balluula. 
~ mablal /n pi mabaalill tabus] mouth, gob. 
~I fitbalal Ivil to be swallowed. II raagil ma-yitbilil-/ 
min iz-zoor a man who is hard to take, an insufferable 
man. - iva milbilil. 
& I finbalal = fitbalal. - iva minbilil. 
&. ballal Ivtl I to cause to swallow. ballalt-u kalaam-u 
I made him take back his words. 2 to wash down (e.g., 
food). haat kubbaayit mayya faballal biiha I-Iuljma get 
me a glass of water to help me swallow the food. 3 to 
b!ibe. -vn tabliir;; ava/pva miballar;. 
~I fitballal Ivil I to be made to swallow. 2 to be 
washed down (of, e.g., food). 3 to be bribed. -iva 
mitballal· 
I rtJy 
~ ball am Ivil to blossom. -vn ballama; ava 
mibalcam. 
1 r t J y 
i A balluum In pi balaliiml gullet, oesophagus. 
It,Jy 
&. balalf (u) Ivtl I to reach (of news etc.). balalf-na 
xabar wafaat-u news of his death reached us. 2 to 
attain. fin ja-lla tublulf famal-ak [women] may you 
realize your hopes! Iissa ma-balalf-J' sill; sniin be's not 
yet six years old. - lvi, also imperf yiblalfl 3 to reach 
puberty. -vn buluUlf, mablalf, bilaalf J ; ava baalilf. 
t,~ buluUlf Inl puberty. 
t.~ bilaalf = buluUlf. 
t.~ balaalf In pi -aatl I [leg] official complaint to the 
police or a magistrate. 2 communique. 3 [obsol] roll of 
attendance (at el-Azhar University). 
~~ baalilf l I In *1 adult. 2/adj *1 extreme, extensive. 
garl:J; baalilf serious wound. 
~ 
~ balaalfa r Inl rhetoric. nal:Jw; w-balaalfa grammar 
and rhetoric. 
..):-~ balaalfi ladjl rhetorical. ~uwar balalfiyya rhetor-
ical images. 
~ baliilf ladj • and pi bulalfal eloquent. 
~I fablalf l Iell more/most eloquent. 
~ 
mablalf In pi mabaalilfll amount, sum (usually of 
money). fiddet-Iu jiik bi-mablalf lajara gneeh I gave 
him a cheque to the amount of ten pounds. 2 (large) 
amount, (great) extent. fil-masaafa kaanit mablalf it 
was a considerable distance. lajaan tilrafi mablalf 

l:Jubb-i liiki so that you should know how much I love 
y~u. 
~ ballar/vt/l to tell or communicate (s.th.) to (s.o.). 
l:Jadd' ballar-ak iI-xabar has anyone told you the news? 
2 to report (an offence etc.). ballart is-sirfia liI-buli~ 
I report.:d the theft to the police. 2b to report to (the 
police etc.). ballart iI-buli~ bis-sirtja I reported to the 
police about the theft. 3 to cause the attainment of. 
{Uulit iI-baal tiballar iI- famaal [prov] ... everything 
comes to him whC? waits. -vn tabliir; ava miballar, 
muballirt. 
~ muballir In ·1 informant. 
t'4 baalir2 /vil to exaggerate. finta kull a l:Jaaga tbaa/ir 
fiiha you exaggerate in everything. di farqaam 
mubaa/ar fiiha fwayya these figures are somewhat in-
flated. -vn miba/ra, muba/ra; ava mibaalir, mubaalir; 
pva mubaalart. 
~i fablar 2 t = ballar 1. -vn fiblaar. 
1tJy 
40.4 bulra, ba/ra In pi bular, bulraat, ba/raatl pair of 
men's leather backless slippers (see Pl.F, 6).11 mantjuUG 
iI-bular poor quality liquor, rot-gut. 
JtJy 
4.)~ bulrarya Iprop nl Bulgaria. 
IS)~ bulraari I/adj *1 Bulgarian. 2/n *1 a Bulgarian. 
3 In, no pll the Bulgarian language. 
rtJy 
~ ba/ram Inl mucus, phlegm, sputum. 
~ 
ba/rami: mazaag (or labl) ba/rami a phlegmatic 
temperament (one of the four cardinal humours). 
I"';Jy 
...A.4' balal (i) <poss Engl> Ivtl to bluff, take in. -vn 
ball, balalaan; ava baalil; pva mabluul. 
4i.4 balla linst n, pi -aatl a bluff, a deception. 
~ 
ballagi In pi -yyal bluffer, deceiver. 
J~ ballaal In *1 sweet-talker, deceiver, bluffer. 
...A.l.;1 fitbalal Ivil to be bluffed, be taken in. -iva 
mitbilil· 
1"'; Jy 
...A.4 ball <Engl> In pi buluuf, bullllaf valve. 
~IJ Jy 
.JLaJI ril-balqaan Iprop nl the Balkans. 
100 
.d J y 
~ • .d~ buluk (also buluke) <T bOlak> In 
pi bulukaat, bulukkaatl [police and mil, obsol] com-
pany. buluk famiin company quartermaster-sergeant. 
bulukaat in-ni;aam [obsol] riot police (subsequently 
styled ril-famn iI-markazi). 
JI.dJy 
)IS"~ balakaar 
<Fr 
placard> 
In 
pi -aatl 
wall-cupboard. 
1.< .d .d J y ) 
~ balakk, bilakk <prob Engl black> In! tar, pitch, 
bitumen. 
4 balakka <It placca> In pi -aat/l [elec] insulating 
disc. 2 [plumb] washer. 3 [naut] escutcheon. 
.d~ .~ bulukk 2 <Eng! block> In pi -aat/l block of 
buildings. 2 (also kUfk' bulukk) railway signal-box. 
laamil bulukk signalman. 3 bulukk' noot writing pad. 
1 .d .d J y see .d J y : bulukk I 
-J.dJy 
JSJ -'I bulkili Iprop n! residential quarter in Alexandria 
to the east of Stanley, and summer quarters of the 
government under the monarchy. 
<~.J.dJy) 
.JA balkoon, balakoon <perh Fr balcon> Inl bal-
cony or back stalls (in a cinema or theatre). 
~ A 
balkoona, balakoona <perh It balcone> In 
pi -aatl I balcony. 2 platform (e.g., of a high-wire 
performer). 
IS.dJy 
fl. balki <T belki from P> ladvl perhaps, maybe. 
1 JJy 
.1 ball (i) Ivtll to moisten, dampen, wet.laazim tibill 
ir-rutjaatj bi-farbaat you should moisten the rutjaatj 
with syrup. salaat iI-layyil yibill' nals-u sometimes the 
child wets himself. falr-i lissa mabluul my hair's still 
wet. II ball' riitj-(u) (1) to wet one's whistle. (2) to give 
(s.o.) respite. -ball if-farbaat he diluted the syrup to 
make a sweet drink. 2 to soak. tibill iI-Iuulli-raayit ma 
ynabbit you soak the broad beans until they sprout . 
IIbill-u wi-frab mayyit-u (soak it and then drink the 
water) ... it's not worth the paper it's written on (of a 
worthless document or written paper; reference to the 
folk cure of drinking water in which a written charm has 

been soaked). 3 to embarrass. finta ballet-ni t;uddaam 
xa[ibt-i you embarrassed me in front of my fiancee. -vn 
ball, balla, balal, balalaan; ava baalil; pva mabluul. 
4 balla 1 linst n, pi -aatl a moistening, a wetting. 
2 Ivn!11 zawwid it-[iin balla == he made things go from 
bad to worse. 3/n pi bilall bundle (of reeds, for making 
a mat). 
~ balalln! moisture. 
~ biliila Inl dish of stewed wheat eaten with milk and 
sugar. biliila Jarkasiyya a biliila made with unhusked 
g!een wheat. 
~ maballa: zawwid il-maballa tiin == he made things 
go from bad to worse. 
j;1 fitballivi/l to becoJ!le moist or damp. 2 to be or 
become soaked.llma-titball i1fi-but;t;-utuula (a broad 
bean can't be soakec! in his mouth) he can't keep his 
mouth shut. 3 to be or become embarrassed. -ava/iva 
mitball. 
. 
J.,;I finball = fitball. - ava/iva minball. 
j 
ballil lvil to moisten slightly. tiballil il-t;umaaJ 
wi-baedeen tikwii you dampen the cloth and then iron 
it. -vn tabliil; ava/pva miballil. 
2JJ'-' 
.1 buli <poss Engl mil slang bull> In! {mil] khaki 
webbing. 
. 
IJ".lJJ"r' 
..,..~ balla~ Inl 1 katr ril-balla~ Iprop n! a village 
near Qena in Upper Egypt, known in particular for its 
clay deposits. II min katr il-balla~ oafish. - Ipl balali~1 
2 (also balla~i) large two-handled earthenware pitcher 
(sec: Pl.A, 10). 3 clumsy and stupid person, oaf. 
o.r"~ balla~i = balla~ 2. 
.;,IJJ'-' 
. 
. 
~~ ballaana <Gr balaneus> In pi -aatl female bath-
attendant and masseuse. 
J.J J "r' 
).. ballu <perh Engl> Inl hullaballoo. laamil ballu 
he's making a big fuss. 
I.J J J J"r' 
-'J~ balluura I <Engl> In! {anat] pleura. 
2.J J J J "r' see .J J J "r' : 
balluur, 
balluura 2, 
balluuri 
~JJJ":/. see ~J"r':balluufi 
101 
';'J.JJ"r' 
.J~ balloon <It pallone> In pi -aat, balaliinl balloon. 
-also baloon. 
~ ~ balloona = balloon. - also baloona. 
.;,~JJ"r' 
, 
~ balliin <Lat> In pi balaliinl {Chr] pallium. 
r J "r' 
~ balam ladj invarl dim-witted. 
~ ballim Ivil to be or become aghast, stupefied or 
sullen. -vn tabliim; ava miballim. 
~ 
tabliima Ipl-aatl instance noun of tabliim. ramma 
kaan miballim bittit tabliima he was absolutely 
s~aggered. 
~I fitballim Ivil to be stupefied, become stupid. 
tUt;lud tilallim fil-mitballim y~bab naasi {prov] no 
matter how much you try to teach the dimwit he turns 
out not to have learned a thing. -ava mitballim. 
r40-1 fistiballim J Ivil to be or become stupefied or 
mystified. -ava mistiballim. 
.!.I r J "r' see ..,.. J r J "r' : balmoosi 
.J r J "r' 
A balmar <Engl> Ivtl {chem] to polymerize. -vn 
balmara; ava/pva mibalmar. 
~I fitbalmar Ivil {chem] to be polymerized. -iva 
mitbalmar. 
J..,.. r J "r' 
J~ 
bilimsul <Engl>: lalaama blimsul {naut] 
Plimsoll line. 
.;, r J "r' 
.J~ bulman <Engl pullman> In! overland express 
bus. 
..,..J r J "r' 
~ 
~ balmoosi <Eng!> In pi balamiisl {Chr] a mem-
ber of the Plymouth Brethren. 
j,JrJ"r' 
~.Y'~ balamoo[i: raalJ balamoo[i to be in vain, go for 
nothing. 
I.;, J"r' see .;,1 J J"r': ballaana 
2 .;, J "r' see .;, J J J "r' : balloon, balloona 

J iJ J y see iJ IS J J Y : balliin 
4 iJ J y see I iJ.J J y : baloon!, baloona 
5 iJ J y see 1 iJ.J J y : baloon2, baluun 
.:.. iJ J y 
~ 
bilinti, bilanti <Engl> In pi -yaat, -haatl {soccer} 
penalty, penalty kick. 
[,iJJy 
~ 
balanga In pi -aatl {agric} metal rod by which the 
depth of a ploughshare may be adjusted (see PI.D, 19). 
~ iJ J Y 
I~ Yo bulanda Iprop nl Poland. 
IS~Yo bulandi 1 ladj *1 Polish. 2 In *1 a Pole. 3 In, no 
pll the Polish language. 
..,. iJ J y see ~ 
iJ J y : bala~ 
(";'iJJy) 
...,...;~ balanf! or balanf! <Fr planche> In pi -aatl 
table top. 
..;.;~ balanF or balanf2 <Fr blanche> In pi -aatl 
{mus] minim, half note. 
4..:..;~ balanfa <perh Fr planche> In pi -aatl {theat} 
box in which coloured lights are fixed on the stage. 
-";'iJJy 
J..,...;~ balanfii{a 
<Fr planchelle> 
(surveyor's) 
plane-table. 
(~iJJy) 
A 
balan~! In pi -aat, balaani~1 (powered) fishing 
boat. 
A 
bala~2 <perh 
Fr 
balance> 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 somersault. t/,arab bala~ I fil-hawa he turned over in 
mid-air. 2 balance-wheel (in a watch or clock). 
.J.!liJJy 
fi;~ balanku <Itpalanco> Inl {naut] tackle. balanku 
kawirta deck tackle. balanku migwiz double whip. 
-riJJy 
;...,...,;~ balanimitr <Fr> In pi -aatl {geom} planimeter. 
• J y 
~ balah Inl idiocy. 
102 
~i fablah ladj, fern balha, pi bulh, bulahal idiotic, 
imbecilic. 
-.)oJy 
I.,.-.>~ bilharsiya, bilharisya (also bilharsa, harsa J ) 
<prop 
n 
Bilharz> 
Inl 
(path] 
bilharziasis, 
schistosomiasis. 
.J J y 
see I IS J Y : balwa 
.)~ J y 
.>~ balluur Inl cut glass, crystal. -also bannuur. 
;.>~ balluura 2 lunit n, pi -aatl piece of crystal. 
balluurit (arabeeza 
plate-glass table top. - also 
bannuura. 
IS.>~ balluuri ladjl crystalline. 
.>~ balwar Ivtl 1 to cause to crystallize. sukkar 
mibalwar granulated sugar. 2 to summarize, epitomize, 
bring into focus. -vn balwara; avalpva mibalwar . 
.>"L,; I fitbalwar Ivil to crystallize. - ava mitbalwar. 
j.J J y 
;j~ biluuza, bilooza <It blusa> In pi -aatl 1 blouse. 
2 (woman's) sweater . 
j;. .J J y 
;J;)~ baluu:;a <T palau from P> Inl 1 smooth pud-
ding based on cornstarch, sugar and water. 2 (abus] fat 
slob. 
.)"';.JJy 
) ~ buloofar, buloovar <Engl> In pi -aatl pullover, 
sweater. 
.!l .J J y see .!l J y and l.!l.!l J Y : 
bulukk !, 
buluke 
liJ.JJy 
.J~ baloon! <poss It pallone> In pi -aatl balloon. 
-also balloon. 
~ ~ baloona = baloon. - also balloona . 
liJ.JJy 
.J) ~ baloon 2, baluun <Fr ballon> Inl brandy snifter. 
lIS J Y 
~ bili (a) Ivil to wear out, become rotten. -vn bila; ava 
haali. 
~ bala 2 (i) Ivtl to afflict. yibli w-n:iin God (both) 

afflicts (us) and helps (us to withstand the ordeal). -Ithe 
literary passive occursl fiza buliitum fa-statiru [prov] 
when you have been afflicted (with being a sinner) 
don't advertise it. - vn bala; ava baali; pva mabli . 
• ~ .~ bala" Inll calamity, affliction. wUljuuc iI-bala 
Willa nti;aar-u [provj the occurrence of calamity is pre-
ferable to anticipation of it. 2 serious skin disease (e.g., 
mange). 
;~ balwa In pI balaawil calamity, misfortune, disas-
ter. feeh iI-balaawi di whafs all this mess? gat-ak balwa 
"" may misfortune befall you! min faaf ba/~it lfeer-u 
haanit calee balwit-u [provj one's own misfortunes can 
be insignificant in comparison with those of others. 
fil-balwa tcumm i wir-rabma tx~~ affliction is for all, 
while mercy is for individuals. II raagil balwa (1) a clever 
devil. (2) a thorough pest. 
~ baliyya Inl calamity, misfortune, disaster. -/adjec-
tivallyl raagil baliyya a wretched man. 
J,.; I fitbala Ivil to be afflicted. - iva mitbili. 
J,.;I finbala = fitbala. 
J,.;I fitballa Ivil [abusj to make an accusation, know-
ing it to be false. fitballa calayya bi- finn a calayya 
gneeh he falsely accused me of owing a pound. - ava 
mitballi. 
~ 
I fibtala 1 Ivtl to afflict. rabb-i-na yibtilii-k bi-
m~iiba may God afflict you with a disaster! 2 to be 
afflicted. iI-balaawi iii btaleena biiha the calamities we 
have suffered. - vn 
fibtila; ?'/a/pva mibtili; pva 
mubtaliJ. 
l.s J y 
J~ baal ' Inl mind. da kalaam ma-gaa-f cala baal-i 
such a thing never crossed my mind. raab can baal-i it 
slipped my mind. faddii-k (ariiba ma-kat cal-baal I'll 
give you a beating such as you never dreamed of. fin 
fa-Ila tnuul illi f-baal-ak I hope you attain what you 
have in mind.lllawwil baal-u he was patient. -baal-u 
waasic (1) he is tolerant. (2) he has no idea of time, he 
is hopelessly unpunctual. -~aabib baleen kaddaab 
(w-abu talaata mnaafilj) [prov] "" one who tries to do 
two things at once is fooling himself (and he who tries to 
do three fools himself even more). -xad (or xalla) baal-
u to be mindful, pay attention, take note, as in 
ma-xadti-j baa/-i mil-bikaaya di I didn't think of that, 
xud baal-ak lamma fakallim-ak pay attention when 
I speak to you! xud baal-ak wi-nta mcaddi f-jaaric 
watch out while you're crossing the street! fana waaxid 
baal-i (1) I'm on my guard. (2) I'm paying attention. 
(3) I'm quite well aware, xud baal-ak mif-jan(a cala ma 
103 
fagiib cilbit sagaayir keep an eye on the bag while I get 
a packet of cigarettes! xad (or ba((i) fi-baal-(u} lusu 
w negl to become perturbed, become concerned, as in 
fiftakart innaha baaga basii(a ljumti ma-xadti-jfi-baal-i 
I thought it a simple matt~r so I didn't get anxious. 
-ljaal fi-calj/i baa/-u he thought to himself. - filii 
baal-ak fi- the you-know-what, as in gibt iIIi baal-ak fii 
did you bring the you-know-what? -min illi baal-ak fii 
"" of the you-know-what sort, as in dool banaat mi-I/i 
baal-ak fiihum you know :what sort of girls they are! 
- baal-ak you know (what?), as in baal-ak - fana wljict i 
f-bubb-a-ha you know what? I've fallen in love with 
her! baal-ak balja law rubna w-Ialjeena I-lja(r i mifi you 
know what, if we go and find the train has left (we'll be 
in a fix). 
11 cala baal ma and ca-baal ma Iconjl (1) until. 
fistannaa-ni cala baal m-aagi wait for me until I come. 
(2) by the time that. cala baal ma geet kaan rawwab by 
the time I came, he had gone home. 
J~ baala 2r Ivil to care, pay heed. -vn mubalaa; ava 
mubaali. 
3.s J y 
~ bilya <It biglia> In pI bilay, bilyaatl 1 marble, 
small 
ball. 
bilya 
xafab 
small 
wooden 
knob. 
2 rolling-pin. 
~ bily Icoll n! marble(s). Ilrummaan bily ball-
bearings. - naftaliin bily moth-balls. 
-..::.o.sJy 
".:.;~ bilyatfu <It pagliaccio> In pI -aatl jester, 
clown. 
(.sJy 
~Yo buliiga <It puleggio> In pI -aatl [nautj sheave 
(of a block). 
-,;.sJy 
J~.J~ bilyardu <It> Inl billiards. 
11.I"'.s J y 
..,....J Yo 
bu/ii~ (also buliis) <prob Fr> In! police. caskari 
bu/ii~ a policeman. ru-buli~ id-dawli Interpol. buli~ 
barbi military police. 
u-olYo 
bulii~i (also buliisi) ladjl pertaining to police. 
riwaaya buli~iyya a detective story. 
11.l"'.sJy 
~ 
Yo 
buli~a <It polizza> In pI bawaa/~, bawali~, 

bu/~aatl bill. buli~it ta I'miin insurance policy docu-
ment. buli~it Jal:Jn bill of lading. 
° IS J y 
~4 baleeh <prob Fr> In! ballet. 
rY 
f'"! bim: qaal bim to utter a word (of protest), as in 
I'iwla tquul bim not a peep out of you! ma-qal-J' bim he 
didn't make the slightest protest. 
I yry 
~ bumba I <It bomba> lunit n, pI -aatl I percussion 
fire-cracker. 2l bomb. II I'iddaa-li bumba he played a 
dirty trick on me. 
~ bumb 
Icoll 
nl 
percussion 
fire-crackers. 
2l bombs. II zayy iI-bumb great, fantastic, as in ~il:Jl:Jtt-i 
zayy iI-bumb my health is fantastic! 
lYry 
~ bumba 2 <It pompa >-In pI -aatl pump. 
J(yry) 
~ bamba I <T pembe> ladj invarl pink, rose-
coloured. bamba msaxsax shocking pink. -also banba, 
banbi. 
~ bamba 2: I'iqaal bamba {mus] rhythmic mode in 4/4 
time consisting of two strong beats of one count each, 
followed by a rest and a weak beat of half a count each 
and a rest of one count. 
~ bamba 3 given name (usually female). II wilaad lali 
bamba street acrobats. 
..; I y r y 
see ..; I y .;, y : bimbaafi 
t I y r y 
see t I y .;, y : bumbaay 
.JYrY 
."...4 bambuu, bambu <perh Engl> Inl bamboo cane. 
karaasi bambu cane chairs. 
b.Jy.rY 
J. ~ bambuu(i <Engl bumboat> In pI -yyal port 
trader who effects sales from a small boat to passengers 
on board ship. 
1';'.JyrY 
.J ~ bum boon <prob Fr> In! I pompon, fringing with 
beads or tassles (used in the decoration of upholstery). 
2 {bot] pompon. 
104 
1 .;, .J y r y 
see ';'.J Y .;, Y : 
bumbooni, bumbu-
naaya, bumbuniira 
°ISYrY 
~y. bumbeeh <Fr bombe> ladj invarl convex, 
rounded. 
J.J r Y 
J~ bimool <Fr bemol> In pI -aatl {mus] flat. n~~; 
bimool half flat -also mull. 
ISrY 
~4 bamya Inl okra. II di I'umuur bamya this is all 
corruption. 
• .;, Y see 
I IS .;, Y :. binaa 1', binaa I'an, bannaa I' 
Y';'Y 
~ banba <T penbe> ladj invarl pink, rose-coloured. 
banba msaxsax shocking pink. -also bamba. 
~ banbi = banba. 
..;Iy.;,y 
..,.:.~ binbaa/i, bimbaafi <T binb~l> In pI -yyal 
{obsol] army rank equivalent to lieutenant-colonel (re-
placed by muqaddam). - also bikbaafi. 
tly.;,y 
t ~ bumbaay <T boyun bagl> In pI banabiiYI 
bow-tie. 
';'.J y.;, y 
J~ bumbooni or bunbooni <It bomboni> Icoll n! 
sweet(s), candies. 
:\; ~ bumbuuna or bunbuuna lunit n, pI -aatl a sweet, 
a candy. 
~l;~ bumbunaaya or bunbunaaya = bumbuuna . 
;.# ~ bumbuniira or bunbuniira <It bomboniera> In 
pI -aatl covered candy-dish. 
I..:;...;,y 
~ bint (also, less formally, bitt) In pI banaat/l girl. 
madrasit banaat a girls' school. I'ikfi g-garra lala 
fumm-a·-ha ti(lal iI-bint' I-I'umm-a-ha {prov] "" just as a 
jar will only turn out what it was filled with, so a girl will 
always take after her mother. II I'i/-bitt' mraat-i "" my 
little wife, the little old girl. 2 daughter. bint" lamm 
female paternal first cousin. lIya bint-i form of address 
to a woman ·younger than the speaker. 3 virgin. 

4 queen (in cards). - for other phrases beginning with 
bint (e.g., bint; naas) , look up the second component of 
the phrase. see further under 1.,:,.,:, Y 
J~ banaati ladj invar/l pertaining to girls, girlish (of 
clothes, games, manners etc.). 2 seedless (of fruit). 
3 l£oung (of beef) . 
.::..~ binuut: bint; bnuut a virgin. 
~.rt bannuuta ladj invarl sissyish. wa/ad bannuuta an 
effeminate boy. 
l.,:,.:,y see J".:,y: bunt 
[I.,:,.:,y 
[.\;; Yo buntaaj <perh Fr pointage> In! {print} final re-
touching of zinc plate. 
-V"":'':'y 
1,,;4~ bantisbanya <It pan di Spagna> In! sponge 
cake. 
J"';":'':'y 
Ji oF. bantufli <It pantofoli> In! I lcolll slippers. 
2/pl bantuflaatl pair of slippers. 
-.!.I.,:,.:,y 
~ 
bintikusti 
<Gk 
pent~kost~> In! 
{Chr} 
Pentecost. 
J":'':'y 
oF. bintu <It venti> In pI -haatl {obsol} twenty-franc 
piece, Napoleon. 
~J":'':'y 
.:.. oF. bantuut <prob Copt> In pI banatiitl peg on the 
beam of a plough, or of a saljya, for the attachment of 
harness (see PI.D, 13). -also fantuut, lantuut. 
.!l1S":'':'y 
~ 
bantiik In pI banatiikl strip of low-lying land 
alongside a dyke. -also bankiik. 
I[.:,y 
~ bing Inl anaesthetic. duktuur bing anaesthetist. 
bingi kulli general anaesthetic. b.ingi mawt/.ili local 
anaesthetic . 
. 
~ bannig Ivtl to anaesthetize. -vn tabniig; ava/pva 
mibannig. 
e.1 i'itbannig Ivil to be anaesthetized. H kal wi-tbannig 
he stuffed himself silly. -iva mitbannig. 
105 
1 [.:, Y 
~ bang <P panj> In pI -aatl five (on dice etc.). 
-Y[':'y 
ri Yo ~ bingibung <Eng» 
Inl ping-pong. 
.J[':'y 
~ 
bangar I <T pancar> Inl beetroot. bangar is-
sukkar sugar beet. 
~ 
bangar2 Ivil to become bloated, become full. kal 
wi-bangar he ate until he reached near bursting. -vn 
bangara; ava mibangar. 
J[':'y 
~ 
bunguz <Engl> Inl bongo drums. 
J[':'y 
~ 
bangafi In pI banaagifil peg-box (of a musical in-
strument, see PI.J, 8). 
.J.J[':'y 
.)"';Yo bunjuur <Fr bonjour> linterjl good day! 
1 ~.:,y 
~ band <T bend from P> In pI binuudl article, item, 
clause, paragraph (of a law, contract etc.). fil-band i 
ma-yismab-J (1) the (budget) item does not permit it. 
(2) the money won't stretch that far. b-abua-a-ha tabt; 
band i1-bada/aat I'll charge it to allowances. 
fil-masaafil di tudxul fi-bnuud i1-burriyya J-Ja;qiyya 
t~ese matters fall into the categories of personal liberty . 
~ bannid Ivtl to itemize, list, categorize. -vn tabniid; 
ava/pva mibannid. 
. 
~I fitbannid Ivil to be itemized, be categorized. - iva 
mitbannid. 
1 ( ~.:, y) 
i~ 4. banda <prob It banda> In pI -aatl decorative 
band on clothes. 
i~ binda In pI bindal {naut} bollard. 
[I ~.:, y 
[.I~ bindaaj (also bindaaf) <Fr> In pI -aatl bandage. 
I.J ~.:, Y 
.)~ bandar <P bandar> In pI banaadirl 1 (large) 
town. sittaat il-bandar the ladies of the town. 2 {obsol} 

police headquarters of a town (as distinct from a 
markaz, the police headquarters of the surrounding 
villages). b-awaddii-k iI-bandar I'll take you to the 
police (said in a town). 
'"";~ bandari ladj *1 [obsol] coming from or pertain-
ing to a bandar. 
2 J ~ .;, Y see J.J ~ .;, Y : 
banduur, 
banaduura, 
banduura 
J J ~ .;, Y see J '"" ~ .;, y : bandiir, bundeera 
J ~';'y 
J~ bunduq Icoll nl hazelnut(s). 
~~ bunduqa I lunit n, pi -aatl a hazelnut. 2 In 
pi banaadiql [rur] rifle, large gun . 
..)~ bunduqi Inl I Venetian sequin. - ladj invarl 
2 24-carat (of gold). 3 hazel, red-gold (in colour). 
;y~ bunduqiyya In pi banaadiql rifle, shotgun. 
bunduqiyyit raff shot-gun. bunduqiyyit hawa air-gun. 
;Y~I fil-bunduqiyya Iprop nl Venice. 
-.;, ~';'y 
...i,,::;~ bandantiif <Fr pendenti!> -aatl necklace with 
a medallion or pendant. - also ban(an(iif. 
(J.J~';'Y) 
;J~ banduur In pi banadiir, banduraatl hair-spring of 
a watch. 
• ;J~ banaduura, banduura <It pomodoro> Icoll nl 
[rur] tomato(es). 
J.J~';'y 
JJ...I.:e. banduul, bandool <Fr pendule> In pi banadiil, 
bandulaatl pendulum. 
(JI..P';'Y) 
J'..~ bandiir In pi banadiirl tambourine. 
.J'..~ bundeera <It bandiera> In pi banadiir/l flag, 
banner. 2 taxi-meter flag. 
J~y 
;".,. bannuur Icoll nl (thick) glass, cut glass, crystal.l!ya 
(abaq bannuur "'" you pretty thing! (flirtatious remark 
to ~ girl). 
'0;".,. bannuura lunit nl I Ipl -aatl any ·thick piece of 
glass. bannuurit (arabeeza a glass table top. 2 Ipl 
bananiirl2a glass water container of a water-pipe (see 
Pl.I, 5). 2b [slang] 'drunkard's bottle', a round bottle 
(of spirits) containing approximately a quarter of a pint. 
106 
~ bannar Ivtl to polish (e.g., leather) by rubbing with 
a cylindrical block of glass. I! wifl' mbannar a face glow-
in~ with health. -vn tabniir; avalpva mibannar. 
,r.,;1 fitbannar Ivil to be given a sheen (by being rub-
bed with a cylindrical block of glass). - iva mitbannar. 
j.;,y 
fi binz In pi bunuuz, bunuzal (piston) ring. 
r j .;, y 
see .;,.s j .;, y : banzitm 
I';'j';'y 
.;fi binzin (also maflal binzin) <prop n Bunsen> Inl 
bunsen burner. 
2 ........ 
I,) J I,) 
• 
see .;,.s;.;, y : banziin, banziina 
- oj';' Y 
.r-'" fi banzaheer <T panzehir from P> Icoll nl Egyp-
tian lemon(s). banzaheer ya lamuun cry of the lemon 
vendor. 
r .s j .;, y 
see .;,.s j .;, y : banziim 
';'.sj.;, y 
.:.r..fi banziin (also banziim) <perh It benzina> Inl 
I benzine, petrol, gasoline. maba((it banziin petrol sta-
tion. 2 [auto] accelerator pedal. daas banziin to 
accelerate, step on the gas. 
~fi banziina In pi -aatl I petrol station, gas station . 
2 small container for petrol. 
(\J"'';'y) 
..,..;~ bans <poss Engl pumps> Inl shoes (for men) 
without laces. slip-on shoes. 
~ 
binsa <perh Itpinza> In pi binas, binsaatlla pair 
of pliers. Ib [e/ec] hickies, conduit-bending pincers. 
Ie [print] type-setter's 'tweezers. 2 hairpin, hairclip. 
- J\J"'';'y 
~ 
binsiliin <Engl> Inl penicillin, (loosely also) 
any antibiotic. 
- .J \J'" .;, Y see -
\J'" .J J Y : biniswaar 
o.s \J"'';' y 
~ 
banseeh <Fr pensee> Icoll nl pansy, pansies. 
(-.s\J"',;,y) 
.;~ bansayoon <Fr pension> In pi -aatl boarding-
house, small private hotel. 

\;1.-; y. bunsiyaana Inl [bot] poinciana. 
J.<Jy 
~ 
binf <Engl> In pi -aatl bench. 
J~<JY 
~ 
bin~ar, ba~ar In pi bana~irl fourth finger, ring 
finger. 
j,<JY 
.la;y. ,~ bunt (also bunt) <It punto> In pi fabnaa{1 
I point (in scoring). IIfaraqit bunt to miss by a small 
margin, as in fir-r~a~a kaanit Ija-tiigi fiyya /aakin 
iI-ljamdu 1i-lIaalj faraqit bunt the bullet would have hit 
me but thank God it missed by a fraction. 2 ace (in 
cards). 3 [print] point (a unit of typefount). II bunt; 
fiswid bold type. 4 hand engraving. 
~ 
,~y. bun{a I <It punta> In pi buna{1 [metal] 
I bit (of a drill). bun{a wi-m/affbit and brace. 2 pointed 
cold chisel. 3 toecap. 
~ ,J.iy. bun{a 1 <It punto> In pi buna{1 spot (of 
welding). 
~ banna{ Ivtl I [print] to choose a type-fount for. 
2 to retouch (an engraving plate). 3 [meta/] 38 to do 
spot welding to. 3b to do projection welding to. -vn 
tabnii{; avalpva mibanna{. 
~I fitbanna{ Ivil passive of banna{. -iva mitbanna{. 
-Jj,<Jy 
.:,~ ban{a/oon 
(also 
man{a/oonJ) 
<perh 
Fr 
pallia/on> In pi -aat, mana{iiiJ I I pair of trousers. 
banta/oon furt or ban{a/oon q~ayyar a pair of shorts. 
2 [theat] pair of side strips of a curtain. 
-<Jj,<JY 
~ 
ban{an{iif <Fr pendenti!> In pi -aatl necklace 
with a medallion or pendant. - also bandantiif. 
(~j,<JY) 
~ 
bun{i I <It ponte> Inl[eonstr] wooden plank two 
inches by twelve (used in particular for scaffolding). 
~ 
bun{i 1; bilaa{us iI-bun{i Pontius Pilate. 
Jt<JY 
J~ bimraali ladj *1 Bengali.ll/iin bimraali banyan. 
[..,."';<Jy 
~ 
banafsig, banafsag <P banafsha> Icoll nl 
violet(s). 
107 
~ 
banafsigi ladj invarl violet (in colour). fafiu;a 
fooq iI-banafsigiT ultra-violet rays. 
J."'; <J y 
~ 
banal! <P bunafsh> Inl amethyst. 
(~<JY ) 
~ bank I <Fr bane> In pi bunuukl I work bench. 
2 shop counter. 
~ bank 1 <prob Engl> In pi bunuuk. bunukaJI 
bank. fil-bank iI-markazi the Central Bank (of Egypt) . 
J ~ <J y 
~ 
bankar <Engl>: xad bankar [naut] to bunker. 
-<J~<JY 
.::.. ~ 
bankinoot <Engl bank-note> Inl paper 
money. fawraq bankinoot bank notes. 
J~~<JY 
fo. bankiir <T banker from It> In pi banakiirl 
wealthy man. 
(~~.!l<Jy) 
~ 
bankiik Inl strip of low-lying land alongside a 
dyke. -also bantiik. 
~ 
bankeek <Engl> Inl pancake (make-up). 
~ J <J Y see ~ J <J ...; : banilya 
I<J<JY 
:r. bunn Icoll nl coffee bean(s). bunn; faxqar un-
roasted coffee beans. bunn; mljamm~ roasted coffee 
beans. bunn; Ija~a unground coffee beans. bunn; 
ma{ljuun fine-ground coffee beans (for Turkish coffee). 
bunn; magruuf (or faransaawi) coarse-ground coffee 
beans (for French-style coffee). bunn; niskafeeh instant 
coffee. II ga-k katmit i/-bunn may you be struck dumb! 
~ bunni ladj 
invarl 
I brown, coffee-coloured. 
IIIj-axalli nahaar-ak bunniI'll give you a bad time! 2 bay 
(of a horse). 
Z<J<JY 
:r. binll <Engl pen> In pi bunuun. bununal steel nib-
holder in a pen. 
J .J <J <J Y see J <J Y : bannuur. bannuura 
O~<J<JY 
• .f-! bannuuh. panlluuh <Fr panneau> In pi -aatl 
panel with moulded decorations. 

(.IS .J .J ..,.. ) 
.$! binni I <perh Copt> Inl lepidotus, a Nile fish 
(Barbus bynni). 
~ binni2 Inl domesticated pig~on. 
~ binniyya In pi banaani, binniyyaatl I pigeon coop 
made 
of mud. 
2 underwater 
fish-hole 
in 
an 
embankment. 
10.J ..,.. 
~ banha (also banha I-lasal) Iprop nl Benha, chief 
town of the Qalyubiya province and a main railway 
station. 
JI-,.J..,.. 
)~ binwaar, bunwaar <Fr peignoir> In pi banawiir, 
binwaraatl theatre box, seats at the front of a theatre 
balcony when partitioned into private sections. 
IIS.J..,.. 
.$! bana (i) Ivtl to build, construct. banu-Ina madrasa 
f1arq il-balad they bui1.t us a school in the eastern part 
ofthe town. balad mabniyya lala tallalaali a town built 
on a high hill. fil-baani {aalil wil-faabit naazil [prov] 
(the builder is going up and the digger is going down) 
the good flourish while the evil suffer. {ariiqit tafkiir-u 
kull-a-ha mabniyya lalaf-fakk his whole way of think-
ing is founded on doubt. -vn buna, binaaf; ava baani; 
pva mabni. 
~ buna Inl building. 
.~ binaaft Inl building, structure. 
11 binaa fan lala t Ipreplon the basis of, according to. 
binaafan lala kida on this basis. 
~ bunya, binya t In/l build, physique. saliim il-binya 
of sound constitution. 2 (binya t only) [ling] formal 
structure. binyit il-kilma the structure of the word. 
.J~ bunyaan Inl style or method or quality of building. 
~~ binaaya 
In 
pi -aatl 
building, 
construction. 
~inayaat gidiida new buildings. 
~ banna In pi -yiin/l bricklayer.llbanna wi-mnaawil 
or banna wi-faalil (both bricklayer and passer of 
bricks) one who does two jobs at the same time. 
2 mason. 
Illuud il-banna 
[bot] 
Lignum 
vitae, 
Guaiacum . 
• ~ bannaart ladjl constructive. naqd' bannaaf con-
structive criticism. 
~ mabna In pi mabaanil building. 
..r,;1 fitbana Ivil to be built, be constructed. - iva 
mitbini. 
~I finbana = fitbana. 
108 
llS.J..,.. see also I.J..,... 
.$! bani Ipl n, always constrl the children of, those 
associated with. bani fisra fiil the Children of Israel. 
banifakuuf [deris] carpenters. II bani faadam Ifem bani 
fadma, pi bani fadmiinl a human being. -bani sweef 
Bani Suef, town and province in Upper Egypt. 
~ binayy Inl [women] small boy, little lad. 
~ binayya, bunayya t In pi -aatl girlie, little girl. 
~I fitbanna Ivtl I to adopt as son or daughter. 2 to 
give patronage to (s.th. or s.o.). laazim il-fafkaar 
ig-gidiida tlaaqi badd' yitbannaa-ha new ideas should 
find someone to encourage them. -vn tabanni; ava 
mitbanni. 
~ tabanni Inl adoption. fibn' bit-tabanni an adopted 
son. 
JIS.J..,.. 
;;';;Yo buniyya <It pugno> In pi -aatl I blow, punch. 
2 (also buniyya badiid) brass knuckles, knuckle-duster. 
.JIS.J"", 
~ bineen Inl biscuit made of flour, clarified butter 
and salt, flavoured with sesame, fennel etc., and shaped 
into thin rectangles. -also mineen. 
(01S.J..,..) 
~ buneeh <Fr bonnet> In pi -aatl I bathing cap, 
shower cap. 2 (also buneeh bariimi) woman's brimless 
hat. 3 baby's bonnet or cap. 
~~ baneeh <Fr pane> ladj invarl [cook] covered with 
bread-crumbs. 
-'IS.J"", 
~ banyu <It bagnio> In pi -haat/l (fixed) bath tub. 
2 bath for electro-plating. niddii-Iu banyu blatiin we 
plate it with platinum . 
.J -' IS .J ..,.. 
.J~ binyoon <Fr pignon> In pi -aatl [mech] pinion. 
0..,.. 
• ~ bih Ifem n, pi -aatl second letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also baa f, beeh. 
0..,..0..,.. 
~ bah bah Ivil to speak incomprehensibly. - vn 
bahbaha; ava mibahbah . 
1":;"0..,.. 
~ bahat l or bihit (a) Ivill to turn pale, fade. wi/f-u 

bahat mil-xoofhis face turned pale with fear. fil-jakitta 
bahatitfif-fams the jacket faded in the sun. 2 to run (of 
colours). -vn bahataan; ava baahit. 
,:,\:r. bahataan Inl paleness, pallor. 
~ bahhat, bahhit Ivtl I to cause to fa.de. 2 to cause 
(colours) to run. -vn tabhiit; avalpva mibahhat, 
mibahhit. 
2~.~ 
~ bahat 2 (a) Ivtl to astonish, surprise. -pva 
mabhuut. 
,:,\:r. buhtaan Inl falsehood. 
..::+,i 1 finbahatlvll to be astonished, be surprised. -iva 
minbihit. 
~.~ 
~ 
bahga Inl delight. 
~ 
bahiig ladj "I delightful. 
ea4.- mabaahig Ipl nl delights. 
&1 fitbahag J = fibtahag. -ava mitbihig. 
&1 finbahag J = fibtahag. -vn finbihaag. 
~ 
1 fibtahag Ivil to be delighted. -vn fibtihaag; ava 
mibtihig, mubtahig r . 
J,) .~ 
J~ bahdillvtl to dishevel, play havoc with, throw into 
confusion. ma-tiqdar-fi txuf/ wi-nta f11bahdil kida you 
can't go in looking such a mess. bahdilti wiff-u I gave 
his face a battering. riI-liyaal bahdilu I-fooqa the kids 
messed up the room.fatam-u bahdil-u he heaped abuse 
upon him and left him floundering. fil-lJubb i bahdala 
{prov] to love is to be thrown into confusion. riI-lizz i 
bahdala {prov] wealth is dissipation. -vn bahdala; ava 
mibahdil. 
J~I fitbahdillvil to be or become dishevelled, be 
maltreated, deteriorate (through bad treatment). 
~ilJlJit-u tbahdilit his health was ruined. - avaliva 
mitbahdil. 
I.J. ~ 
Jf: bahar (a, i) Ivtl I to strike with awe, overwhelm. 
2 to dazzle (the eyes). -vn bahar; ava baahir; pva 
mabhuur. 
'Jf: bahra instance noun of bahar. fitbaha~ti ba~ra 
I was completely overwhelmed. 
Jf:i fabhar ladj, fem bahra, pi buhrl albino. -also 
faghar . 
.*-1 finbahar Ivil to be overwhelmed, overcome with 
awe. finbahar bi-gamal-ha he was bowled over by her 
beauty. -iva minbihir. 
.*-1 fitbahar = finbahar. - iva mitbihir. 
109 
Z.J • ~ 
.Jlr. buhaar In pI -aatl spice (most commonly used in 
the plural to denote mixed spice). 
~.J.~ 
,:,~ Jf: bahragaan Inl {obsol] decorative head-fringes 
of a bride. 
[.Jf: bahrag or bah rag Ivtl to doll up (usually with an 
implication of poor taste). - vn bahraga, bahraga; aval 
pva mibahrag, mibahrag. 
[.-*,,1 fitbahrag or fitbahrag Ivil to overdress, be over-
dressed, be tarted up. - avaliva mitbahrag, mitbahrag . 
j~.J.~ 
j!Jf: bahriiz <perh T pehriz from P> Inl {cook] con-
centrated stock. 
~.~ 
.ld~ baahi; ladj "I· excessive, exorbitant. 
IJ .~ 
-.;lr. buhaaq Inl {path] vitiligo alba. 
..;..,... miboohaq ladj "I afflicted with vitiligo alba. 
2J.~ 
-.;..,a~ bahuuq In pi bawahiiql wooden frame onto 
which loads are fastened on a camel's back. 
J.~ 
J.r: bahal (i) Ivtl to overwhelm. gamal-ha bahal-u her 
beauty stunned him. -vn bahalaan; ava baahil; pva 
mabhuul. 
J.t.;1 fitbahallvil to be overwhelmed, be awed. -iva 
mitbihil. 
J.r. bahli: lala I-bahli 18 unveiled (of a woman). Ib in 
an immodest fashion. 2 openly, publicly. 
~ 
I fibtahallvil to supplicate, implore. - vn fibtihaal; 
ava mibtihil. 
,:.N~I fibtihalaat Ipl nl {lsi] religious songs deli-
vered, sometimes with the support of a chorus, during 
special celebrations, traditionally beginning. with 
fGlvis-na fadrik-na ... (save us, come to our rescue (0 
God». 
JJ.~ 
llir. bahlala Inl astonishment. 
J)r. bahluullpl bahaliilll In! jester, clown, buffoon. 
2/adjl foolish (often with religious tendencies), 
dervish-like . 
..)4.;1 fitbahlil, fitbahlal Ivi/. to become astonished. 

rilbahlilna lala lamayil-ha iii mifmac;buula di we were 
amazed at that unacceptable behaviour of hers. - ava 
milbahlil. 
-.JJoy 
.:,1),; bahlawaan <P pahlawan> In pI -aalll acrobat. 
2 tricky person. 
1 roy 
(""!1": bihiim Ipl bahaayimll Inl domestic animal (larger 
than a sheep), usually male. 2/adjl 2a stupid. 
2b uncouth. - bahaayim Ipl nl 3 domestic livestock 
(larger than sheep). bahaayim il-baliib dairy animals. 
i....,r, bihiima Ipl bahaayimll Inl domestic animal (lar-
ger than sheep). 2/masc and fern adjl 2a stupid. 
2b uncouth. 
,*,",1 rinbaham Ivil to become obscure, become unin-
telligible. -vn rinbihaam; ava minbihim. 
~i rabham Ivtl to make obscure, make mysterious. 
rabham i1-bikaaya la/aan illi c;aldiin he made the mat-
ter unintelligible because of those present. -vn 
ribhaam; pva mubham. 
1 roy 
i~! ribhaam r In pI -aall thumb. 
.J 0 y 
see 0 I.S Y : bahawaal. bahawaali. bahawiyya 
J.J 0 Y 
Jx. bahwac; Ilvtl to make (too) large or wide. 2/vil 
to become unwieldy, become too big to manage. 
ril-lamaliyya bahwac;il the whole thing got out of hand. 
fuslaan mibahwac; a loose ill-fitting dress. -vn 
bahwac;a; ava mlbahwac;. 
J*I rilbahwac; Ivil to become (too) wide or large. 
- ava milbahwac;. 
0.J 0 y 
.~~ bahuuh <Fr bahul> In pI -aall buffet, sideboard. 
Il.Soy 
~ bahi ladjl radiant, pleasant, full of happiness . 
• ~ baha. bahaar Inl magnificence. 
~ bahiyy = bahi. bahiyy m-nuur Shining with light 
(epithet of the Prophet Muhammad). 
~i rabha tell morelmost magnificent. 
~~ baaha Ivil to boast. bi-ybaahi b-reeh what does he 
boast about! - vn mubahaah r ; ava mibaahi. 
~t.;1 rilbaaha Ivil to make a show, be boastful, be 
proud. ril-c;arla b-litb~aha bjalr' bml uxl-a-ha {prov] 
110 
the bald woman boasts of her niece's hair. - vn labaahi; 
ava milbaahi. 
11.S 0 y 
40'" y. buhya <T boya> Inl decorator's oil-based paint. 
-also buuya . 
~y. buhyagi In pI -yyal I shoe-shine boylman, 
shoe-black. 2 {obsol] housepainter, decorater. -also 
buyagi. 
J I.J Y 
Jly. buwaal <Fr> Inl voile. - also vuwaal. 
ly.Jy 
..,..~ baab In pI rabwaah, bibaanl I door, gate. baab 
in-naggaar mixallal {prov] (the carpenter's door hangs 
awry) == the cobbler's children are ill-shod. ril-baab 
i1-mac;fuul yiblld il-c;aqa l-mislalgil {prov] (a closed 
door keeps unexpected calamities distant) circumspec-
tion wards off danger. ril-baab illi ygii-lak minnu r-riib 
sidd-u wi-slirtib {prov] (close the door that lets the wind 
in and relax) == stay away from likely sources oftrouble. 
IIfatb' baab just a beginning. - rana laayiz beel min 
baab-u I want a self-contained house. - baab il-badan 
anus. -mil-baab li{-{aac; see {aac;. -lala baab allaah 
poor, living on God's mercy. -ya baab in-nabi invoca-
tion of el-Sayyid el-Badawi. 2 chapter, subdivision . 
11 min baab Iprepl by way of, out of. min baab il-
mugamla by way of courtesy. min baab iz-zooC; out of 
politeness. 
~Iy. biwaaba Inl 
I occupation of a bawwaab. 
2 monthly payment to a bawwaab . 
..,..1 ~ bawwaab In "I concierge, doorkeeper. II baab min 
reer bawwaab a chaotic state of affairs, a free-for-all. 
~I~ bawwaaba In pI -aall gate, main entrance. 
bawwaabil hawiis gate of a lock. kaalib bawwaaba clerk 
who records goods arriving and leaving (e.g., in a ware-
house). bawwaabit i1-mitwalli one of the old gates of 
Cairo located in the now populous area of rid-darb 
il-rabmar (q.v.) . 
..,..~ bawwlb Ivtl to classify, order. /urill-u ybawwib 
Il-mallumaal his job is to classify the information. -vn 
labwlib; avalpva mibawwib. 
..,.. ~I ritbawwib Ivil to be classified. - iva milbawwib. 
1 y.Jy 
'-! y. buuba <It poppa> Inl {naut] poop. 
U.Jy 
..:... y. buut (also gazma buut) <Engl> Inl pair of boots. 

J.:...JY see J':"y 
(~[..JY) 
~.Yo buugi I <Engl bogie> In pi bawaagil railway 
truck or carriage. 
~.Yo buugiZ <It poggia> Inl {naul} (a vessel's) bear-
ing away to leeward. 
C.J Y 
c.~ baal:J I (u) Ivil to make a disclosure or revelation. 
baal:J bis-sirr he gave the secret away. -vn bool:J. 
bawal:Jaan; ava baayil:J. 
c.~ baaI:J2 
(i) Ivtl to make permissible, allow. 
l'iI-l:Jagaal illi bi-lbil:J-ha I-nafs-ak the things you allow 
yourself. 
'->~ baal:Ja In pi -aall courtyard. 
c.~i l'abaal:Jf = baal:J z -/the literary passive imper-
fect form occurs! l'iI-misaafir yubal:J-lu I'innu yiflar the 
traveller is allowed to break the fast. - vn l'ibaal:Ja; ~va 
mubiil:J; pya mubaal:J. 
'->~! l'ibaal:Ja Inl {lsi law} permissibility. 
I.S'"'~! l'ibaal:Ji ladj ·1 promiscuous, pornographic. 
c.~ mubaal:J In pi -aall {lsi law} permissible action. 
c.1.,;..1 l'i.Ylabaal:J Ivtl to regard as permissible, consider 
fair game. -vn l'islibaal:Ja; ava mislibiil:J, muslabiil:J r ; 
pva muslabaal:J r . 
I t.J Y 
t~ baax (u, i) Ivil to become tedious, become un-
appealing. I'in-nukla bi-Ibuux lamma lilc;aal kiliir a joke 
loses its punch when it's repeated often. -vn bawaxaan; 
ava baayix. 
~~. baayix ladj ·1 tedious. silly. annoying. 
tJ!1 I'abwax lell morelmost tedious, silly or annoying. 
~I rabyax = I'abwax. 
~1.Yo bawaaxa Inl tediousness, silliness, boorishness. 
~l.! bayaaxa = bawaaxa. 
t~ bawwax II Ivtl to make tedious or boring. 2 Ivil to 
be or become tedious or boring. ma-Ibawwax-p baCia 
stop being such a bore! -vn labwiix; ava/pya mibawwax. 
r; bayyax = bawwax I. 
t ~ 
1 I'islabwax Ivt/l to consider tedious or silly. 2 to 
select for tediousness. I'islabwaxl i klaab wi-ddel-huu-Iu 
I selected a boring book and gave it to him. - Ivi/3 to 
behave in a silly or boorish manner. - vn I'islibwaax; 
ava/pya mislabwax. 
~I I'islabyax = I'islabwax. -vn I'islibyaax; ava/pva 
mislabyax. 
It.JY 
~.Yo buuxa. booxa In pi -aall vapour. bi-lirfal lfala 
111 
1-l:Jalla tfimm i buuxil il-labiix she lifts up the saucepan 
lid to smell the food cooking. 
tl.Yo buwaax Inl steam, vapour. 
t~ bawwax z Ivil to emit steam, give off vapour. 
111'iI- I'akla di bawwaxil fi-dmaav-i = the meal made me 
drowsy with a feeling of well-being. - ava mibawwax. 
~').J Y 
..s:>.Yo boodi <Engl> Inl bodywork (of a car). 
~.JY see lj.JY 
I .J.J Y 
.I~ baar I (u) Ivil to be or become undesirable or un-
marketable. I'il-bic[aa[a baaril the goods became un-
saleable. II l'iI-binti baaril the girl became unmarriage-
able. - I'il-bayra I-beel I'abuu-ha {prov} (an unmarriage-
able woman belongs in her father's home) a faulty 
article should stay with its maker. -vn bawaraan; ava 
baayir. 
.I.Yo buurl ladj invarl I undesirable, unmarketable. 
banaal buur unmarriageable girls. 2 infertile. I'arc[i 
buur waste-land, uncultivable land. 
J1.I.Yo buraani ladj invarl made of dried ingredients (as 
opposed to fresh ones). bamya braani dish of okra 
prepared from dried okra. 
.I~ bawwar Ivt/l to cause to become unusable or ur 
marketable. 2 to make (land) infertile. -vn labwiir; a 
mibawwar. 
.I~I I'ilbawwar Ivil to become unusable or unmarlr t-
able. - ava milbawwar. 
1 ( .J .J "'P ) 
.I.Yo buurz <Fr> Inl Port (in place names). buur saliid 
Port Said. 
0.l.Yo buura <It bora> Inl squall. 
~ 
.J .J Y see 1 ~ 
.J Y : miboor~ 
J .J .J Y see J.J ~ Y : bawaaric; 
I~.J.JY 
..s.l.Yo buuri l <Copt> Icoll nl grey mullet (Mugil 
cephalus). 
;';.I.Yo buriyya lunit n. pi -aall a grey mullet. 
~~.I.Yo buriyyaaya = buriyya. 
l~.J.JY 
..s.l.Yo buuriz <T boru> In pi bawaaril I bugle, pipe. 

2 fine blow-pipe for directing heat in delicate soldering 
jobs. 3 type of water-pipe resembling a gooza but free-
standing and having a flexible smoking-tube (see PU, 
11). 
~JJ. buruugi <T borueu> In pI -yyal bugler. 
I j.J Y 
j.J! buuz <P poz> In pI buwaaz/la muzzle, snout (of 
an animal). Ib {derog] mouth (of a human). riqfil 
buuz-ak shut your trap! IIbi-yie{rab buuz and huwwa 
maadid buuz-u fibreen he is pouting or sulking. -leel 
wi-nhaar fi-buuz bale{ "" they're cooped up together all 
the time. - lJa(t' buuz-u f-[ibb-u he hung his head in 
silent grief. -buuz il- rix~ wet-blanket, so.bersides. 
-lawya buz-ha she is scowling. -lfl¥bin [an buuz-(i) 
{joe] despite (my)self. 2 Ipl rabwaaz, buwaazl tapering 
tip or protuberance. buuz gazma toecap. buuz ribra 
point of a needle. buuz ik-karafatta the point of the tie. 
zaradiyya b-buuz malfuuf round-nosed pliers. 
j~ bawwiz Ivil to pout, sulk. miraal-i bi-Ibawwiz leel 
wi-nhaar my wife sulks all the time. -vn labwiiz; ava 
mibawwiz. 
oj.."'; labwiiza linst n, pI -aall a. sullen look. 
2 • J.J Y 
I~.J! buuza Iprop nl Buddha . 
..s~.J! buuzi lIn *1 a Buddhist. 2/adj "I Buddhist. 
~~."JI ril-buziyya Inl Buddhism. 
3(j.JY) 
j.J! booz (also boo;) <prob Fr> In pI -aall {phOI] 
pose. 
oj.J! booza <It posa> = booz. 
...,...JY 
...,...J! boos <P bos> Ivnlll boos il- rayaadi dilJk· [ad-
duquun {prov] the kissing of hands (i.e. the showing of 
excessive respect) is a mockery. - bi-boos il- rideen with 
great difficulty. with great effort, as in ma-qa(a[I'-j 
it-Iazkara rilla b-boos il- rideen only with the greatest 
effort did 1 manage to buy the ticket. 
...,..~ baas (u) Ivtl to kiss. IIhaal raas-ak (or riid-ak) 
rabus-ha "" let's make up. -busl' riid-i wif/' w-qahr 
(I kissed my palm and the back of my hand) "" 1 gave 
thanks to God, 1 felt a sense of gratitude. -lJ-abuus 
riid-ak or lJ-abuus rigl-ak "" 1 should be extremely 
grateful to you. -vn boos; ava baayis. 
;;"".J! boosa linst n, pI -aall a kiss. boosil il-lJayaah the 
kiss of life, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation. II wi-fooq(-u) 
boosa with expressions of gratitude too, as in liragga[ 
112 
ik-kilaab wi-fooq-u b.oosa kamaan you have not only to 
return the book but also to show how grateful you are 
too. 
...,..1.,;1 rilbaas Ivil I to be kissed. 2 limperf onlyl to be 
worthy of being kissed. riid lilbaas a hand to be kissed. 
- iva mitbaas. 
...,..\"'; 1 rinbaas = rilbaas. -iva minbaas . 
...,..~ bawwis Ivtl to allow or cause to kiss. 
ma-ybawwis-j',lJadd' riid-u he does not let anyone kiss 
his hand. - vn tabwiis; ava mibawwis. 
J IS ...,.. .J Y see 2 J ...,.. Y : bawasiir 
IJ..JY 
"';'.J! booj I Inl <T bo§, cf also Copt> Inl play or loose-
ness (of parts which could be more tightly adjusted).fii 
boojfil-faraamil the brakes are not tight. II (ili[ boojto 
turn out to be nothing, turn out to be a flop, as in kull illi 
[amal-u (ili[ booj everything that he did turned out to 
be a flop. 
...;. ~ bawwif' Ivill to cause a slackening or looseness. 
bawwifna [al-lJabl we slackened the rope. 2 to become 
slack. -vn labwiif; ava mibawwif. 
"';':-"'1 rilbawwif' Ivil passive of bawwif'. -iva 
milbawwif· 
2J..JY 
"';'.J! b~oj2 <Copt> In pI rabwaafl size, industrial 
starch . 
...;.~ baaj (u) Ivil to become soggy, dissolve. -vn 
bawajaan; ava baayif. 
..r ~ bawwif2 Ivtl I to soak (s. th., e.g., bread, aspir-
ins) so that it disintegrates. 2 to coat with size. -vn 
labwiif; avalpva mibawwif . 
"';':-"'1 rilbawwif2 Ivil passive of bawwif2. -iva 
milbawwif· 
3 
• 
...,...JY 
..r.J! buuj <Engl> In pI rabwaafl [meeh] bush. 
1,Ji'.JY 
...r'.J! bu~ Icolll reed(s) (particularly of the rigid, hol-
low type of Saccharum spontaneum). 
;v.J! bu~a I lunit n, pI -aall a reed, a piece of reed. 
bu~il gooza mouth-reed of a water-pipe (see PU, 8). 
labbis il-buu~a libqa [aruusa [prov] (dress up a reed 
and it Will become (as pretty as) a doll) "" clothes make 
the man. 

1(1J".J":") 
.... J! bu~a 1 <Fr pouce> In pI -aatl inch. 
.... J! bu~a j <Fr poussee> In pI biw~1 {naut} pushing 
of a ship in a particular direction (e.g., by a tug). bu~a 
I·wara heave astern! lIl'amal bu~a buxaar to raise 
steam. 
JIJ".J":" see 1J~":,, 
J,J,.J .... 
j, J! bu~a« <Fr boite> In pI -aatl {elec} connection 
box. 
I JI, .J ":" 
1~ baa; (u) Ivil I to become spoiled or useless. 
fil- fakl i baa; the food became spoiled. Tal',I"aab-i baa;it 
my nerves went to pieces. fil-l'uz;uuma baa;it l'alayya 
the party was spoiled for me. sal't-i bay;a my watch is 
out of order. 2 to be or become corrupted. bitti bay;a 
an immoral girl. -vn bawa;aan, boo;a; ava baayi;. 
1 J! i fabwa; lell morelmost useless. 
1~ bawwa; Ivtl to spoil, corrupt. z;awwidt il-mal17 i 
w-bawwa;t il- fakl I put in too much salt and spoiled the 
food. miin bawwa; il-bint i di (1) who corrupted this 
girl? (2) who (illegitimately) deflowered this girl? -vn 
tabwii;; ava/pva mibawwa;. 
1;;1 fitbawwa; Ivil to be spoiled, be corrupted. -iva 
mitbawwa;. 
1J1,.J":" 
~ 
J! buu;a <T boza> Inl I {obsol} barley beer. 
II dimaar-i baliit buu;a my mind has gone to pieces. -di 
}irka buu;a this is a corrupt company. 2/pl buwa;, 
bu;aatl establishment for the sale of barley beer. 
J JI, .J ":" see 3 j.J ":" : boo; 
I t,.J ":" 
t~ baac I In pI -aat, fabwaacl distance from tip to tip 
of the outstretched arms. II baac(-u) {iwiil (he is) adept, 
(he is) adroit, as in fin-naas dool bac-hum {iwiil {IS-
sirlia those types are dab hands at thievery. -bil-baac 
wid-diraal' by force. 
t}! bUUl: ma-yil'raf-p kuul'-U min buul'-u (he doesn't 
know his elbow from the bones of his wrist) he cannot 
discriminate. 
1 t,.J ":" 
t;;1 fitbawwal/vil to vomit. -ava mitbawwac. 
~JI.,. mibawl'a Inl vomiting. 
113 
t.-,~I fistibaawal'J Ivil to vomit violently. -ava 
mistibaawal' . 
J.J":" 
JJ! bUUli In pI fabwaalil I horn, bugle. lIl'iid il-
fabwaali Rosh Hashana, Jewish New Year. 2 horn-
shaped loudspeaker. 3 {mus} bell of a wind instrument 
(see PI.J. 20). 4 mouth-piece. S conch shell. 
J~ bawwali Ivil to shout challengingly, talk in a stri-
dent voice. -ava mibawwali. 
jJ.l.J":" 
.J J! bookar <Engl> In! poker (the card game). 
I J.J ":" 
J~ baall t (u) Ivil to urinate. - vn bawalaan; ava baayil. 
JJ! boolln! urine. 
JJ! bawli ladjl urinary. masaalik bawliyya urinary 
tracts. 
:u~ mabwala In pI mabaawill (public) urinal. 
l:.J J! bawliina In! {chem} urea. 
J~ bawwil/vil to urinate. -vn tabwiil. 
J ~I fitbawwil Ivil to urinate. -vn tabawwulf; ava 
mitbawwil. 
2 J.J ":" 
:u J! boola Inl round (in shooting). 
tJ" J.J ":" 
..,.J J! buulus Iprop n! male given name. II buxuur il-
buulus {Chr} incense offered during a reading from the 
Pauline epistles. 
I r.J ~ 
r 
J! buum Icoll nl owl(s). fitbac il-buum yiwaddii-k 
il-xaraab {prov} ... he who takes a raven for his guide 
will light on carrion. 
4. J! buuma I lunit n, pI -aatl an owl. II wi/I il-buuma 
(1) ugly face. (2) bringer of misfortune. 
2 r.J ":" 
4.J! buuma l <It boma> Inl {naut} boom. 
(,j.J":") 
<JJ! boon I <Fr bon> In pI -aatl voucher, chit. 2 order 
form. 
<JJ! boon 2 <perh Copt> ladj invarl deep, compli-
cated, devious (of a person). 
~,j.J":" 
...,.. J! boon~ <Engl> In pI bawaani,l"l bonus. 

D J ':-' see 
D I ':-' : baah 
J D J ':-' see 
I J D ':-' : mlbooha(j 
J J ':-' 
~ baww Inl I Ipl -aall stuffed effigy of a calf used to 
encourage a cow to let down her milk. 2 Ino pll {rur} 
2a large ball of rags bound with cord. 2b (also i'iI-
baww) kind of hockey played with this ball (also called 
rldd q.v.). 
";J':-' 
~y. buuya <T boya> In pI -aall decorator's oil-based 
paint. II blluyilllaar pottery glaze which requires firing. 
- dahall iI-hawa buuya (he painted the air) he did the 
impossible. - also buhya. 
~y. buyagl In pI -yyal I shoe-shine boylman, shoe-
black. 
2 {obsol} 
housepainter, 
decorater. 
- also 
buhyagi. 
· 
..; ':-' 
~ blii'a In pI -aall I physical environment. lalawwus 
il-biii'a f pollution of the environment. 2 social en-
vironment. mill b,ii'a wa[ya from a low-class environ-
ment IIxidmil lI-biii'a the Youth Commumty Service. 
~ bim lad]1 environmental. 
.;:.. I ..; ':-' 
J~ bllyaali Inl {mus} mode in Arabic music beginning 
on D and having E half flat and B flat. 
~ I ..; ':-' 
.~~ blyaada <P piyiida> Inl I Icolll{obsol} infantry. 
2 military drill, square-bashing. - ladvl 3 on foot. 
rawwalJ biyaada he walked home. 
J ,:, I ..; ':-' 
,,;~ biyaallu <prob It> In pI -haal, -waall piano. 
':-'..;':-' 
'":"'!~ bayib (also baaYlb) <Engl> In pI -aall smoker's 
pipe. 
~ biiba <It pipa> In pI -aall I smoker's pipe. 
duxxaall biiba pipe tobacco. 2 [plumb} gully trap. 
..;':-'..;':-' 
~ beebi <Engl> In pI -haall baby. 
I.;:.. ..; ':-' 
.::..~ baa I (a) Ivil 1 to spend the night, stay overnight. 
114 
baa III lala 1- i'art[ she spent the night sleeping on the 
floor. i'illi Ilbaal fii lll~balJ fll {prov} ,., (I) what we 
spend the night discussing, we find ourselves discussing 
in the morning. (2) we have to repeat the same things 
over and over again. II i'akl' baayil (1) food from the 
day before. (2) stale food. -libaalllaarli~balJ ramaad,., 
every crisis passes with time. -firib lak-kilaab mayya 
bayla ,., he refuses to give the book hack to its owner. 
2 to fit (into s. th.). laazim il-mu/laalJ yibaal fil-(jifld 
lala ralJl-u the key should fit smoothly into the lock. 
3 to repeat the year (in school or college). baal fi- i'uula 
lalal silliill he stayed three years in the fIrSt class. 4 to 
calm down (of the sea). - vn bayaal, biyaal, bayalaall; 
ava baayil. 
11 baallala to land on (s.o.), be at the expense of (s.o., 
of a trick, joke etc.). i'ahi baalil laleek you were 
tricked. 
'-'~ biyaal Ivnl II riI-biyaal if-filwl hibernation. 
~~ bayaala, biyaala linst nl spending of the night. 
'--"o-! beel In pI biyuut, buyuutl I house, home. (jaladl' 
fil-beel i'imbaarllJ I stayed at home yesterday. IIbeel-1 
beel-ak ,., consider my home as your own. -guwwa 
guwwa - beel-ak beel-ak cry made to drive poultry in-
doors. -beel allaah (1) the Kaaba at Mecca. (2) a place 
of worship. - i'll-beel iI-lJaraam the sacred precinct In 
Mecca. -beellalJm Bethlehem. - beel il-lankabuut spid-
er's web. -buyuul iI-i'azyaai' fashion houses. -beel iI-
i'adab or beel ir-raalJa J lavatory. - i'il-filuus fi-bel-ha 
the money is safe and sound. - i'idxulu I-buyuut mill 
i'abwab-ha ,., do things the proper way. -xarg/ beel 
second-hand household effects. 2a household. ma~r/ 
beel waalJid Egypt is one household. i'izzayy il-beel 
how's the family? yixrib beel-ak ,., God damn you! 
II i'ahl iI-beel the family of the Prophet Muhammad. 
2b wife. i'asraar been raagll wl-beel-u secrets between a 
man and his wife. IIlalayya [-[alaa(j mill beel-i strong 
oath or asseveration. 3 container, encasement. beel 
bu~/a binnacle. beel II-wild the uterus. beel iI-loolJ 
shoulder (of meat). xazuu(j fi-beel-u {arch} (bridge) pile 
cast in SIlU. 4a division on a game-board. 4b irrigation 
basin (in a field, see PI.E, 19). - Ipl i'abyaal/5 verse (of 
poetry). 
.$>I beeli ladj invarl 1 domesticated (of animals). 
lJamaam beeli domesticated pigeons. 2 home-made. 
marabba beeli home-made jam . 
.::..\; r-l biyutaal/pl nl {obsol} aristocratic families. min 
i'abllaai' iI-biyulaal coming from an aristocratic family. 
Jr-l biyuuti ladj invarl custom-made, tailor-made . 
lagliid biyuuti custom binding. 

.. ~ bayyaala Icoll nl {rurJ travellers and tradesman 
who are allowed to spend the night in the village 
guest -house. 
J~ bayyaali ladverbl overnight, for the night. fin 
kunl U [ayiz-ha bayyaali yib(ja lidfa[ mU(jaddam if you 
want it for the night then payment should be made in 
advance. 
.....".. mabiil, mubiil Inl overnight stop. la~riiy mubiil 
{milJ overnight leave-pass. 
~ bayyil/vtl la to cause to stay overnight.ya-nbayyil 
il-firaax fil-xunn we'll put the chickens in the coop for 
the night. bi-nbayyil-ha fil-mayya we leave them in the 
water overnight. Ib to give overnight accommodation 
to (s.o.).la[aala nbayyil-ak [andina come and we'll put 
you up at our house. 2 to cause to fit (into s.th.). masay 
i1-xafaba [afaan yibayyit-ha f-rigl i{-{arabeeza he planed 
the piece of wood to make it fit into the leg of the table. 
3 to fix (an intention, resolution etc.). fana mbayyit 
in-niyya [ala s-safar min fimbaariy I decided yesterday 
that I would travel. 4 to castle (the king, in chess). 
- Ivil 5 to spend the night, stay overnight. bayyitti 
fil-mustaffa I spend the night in the hospital. 6 to plot, 
conspire. humma mbayyitin-Iu [ala [al(ja they are plan-
ning to beat him up. -vn labyiit; ava/pva mibayyit. 
~ bayyit [ala (1) to pay a day's wages in advance to (a 
casual labourer to secure his labour the following day), 
as in mijma[(juul iI-mi(jaawil bi-galaalit (jadr-u ybayyit 
[ala l-[ummaal bi-nafs-u it is inconceivable that the 
contractor, being the grand person he is, should go 
personally to book the workers for the next day. (2) to 
make a check on (s.o. or s.th.) for the night, as in 
famm-aruuy fabayyil [ala l-firaax I'll be off to check on 
the chickens for the night. (3) to put one over on (s.o.), 
as in bayyil-ha [aleek he had the last laugh at your 
expense. 
~ 
tabyiita Inl I instance noun of tabyiit. 2 advance 
payment (to casual labourers). bi-yiddii-hum tabyiita 
[afaan yi{la[u f-fuvl i taani yoom he gives them a day's 
pay in advance to ensure that they will turn up for work 
the next day. 3 a game in which someone hides some-
thing in a heap of dirt or sand, divides the heap into two 
parts and then asks those present to guess in which part 
the object is hidden. 
'::';"1 fitbayyit Ivil passive of bayyit. - iva.mitbayyit. 
Z..:.o IJ ":-' 
4. biita <It bitta> In pi biyatl bitt, bollard. 
3 ..:.0 IJ ":-' set; ..:.0 IIJ ":-' : bayaati 
115 
,?';"IJ":-' 
4. bayilta <perh It paglielta> In pi -aatl small pearl 
sequin for ornamenting a costume, paillette. 
([.IJ":-') 
~ beej <prob Fr> ladj invarl beige (in colour). 
~ beega <prob Itpiega> In pi -aatl turn-up, cuff (of 
trousers) . 
t IJ ":-' see tJ ":-' : baayix, 
fabyax, 
bayaaxa, 
bayyax, fislabyax 
I ~ IJ ":-' 
~~ baad (iJ I Ivtl to exterminate, eradicate. 2 Ivil to 
become extinct. - ava baayid, baa fid f . 
~~ baafid ladj *1 extinct. II fil-[ahd il-baafid the pre-
Revolution era in Egypt. 
~~i fabaadf = baad. -vn fibaada; ava mubiid; pva 
mubaad. 
J.".:.o mubiid In pi -aatl insecticide, pesticide. 
2 ~ IJ ":-' see 
~ I IJ ":-' : biyaada 
J ~ IJ Y 
";.I:-! ''';~ beeda(j in pi bayaadi(jl pawn (in chess). 
I .) IJ Y 
oJ.Y. bufraf In pi bufarl focus, focal point. IIdool 
bufrlt fasaad they're a bunch of scoundrels. 
IJJ.Y. bufrif ladj *1 focal. fil-bu[d iI-burri focal 
distance. 
fi 'ft! biir In pi fabyaar, biyaarl I well. fayt iI-biir 
bi-fibra {provJ digging a well with a needle. II (ma-nta 
laari/) iI-biir wi-va{aa (well, you know) the ins and outs 
of it. -sirr-ak fi-biir = your secret is safe with me. 
2 shaft, manhole. biir sillim stair-well. biir sa(jya a 
brick-lined shaft in which a water-wheel is mounted. 
oJ'- bayyaara In pi -aatl I manhole. 2 drainage well 
(of a house). 
2 .) IJ Y 
0.r.! biira <It birra> Inl beer. 
I.)IJY 
1ft! biira <It vira> tinterjl {nautJ raise! heave! biira 
I-mux{aaf up anchor! 
J.)IJY 
";ft! beera(j <T bayrak> In pi bayaari(j, bawaari(jl 
banner, standard (especially of a Sufi order). 

U~.J~y 
UJft bayruut Iprop nl Beirut. 
JJ ft bayruuti I In pi -yyal a person from Beirut. 
2 ladjl coming from or pertaining to Beirut. 
I~.J~Y 
~.Jfi bayuriya <Engl> Inl pyorrhoea. 
·~.J~Y 
4!.Jfi biyureeh <Fr puree> ladj invarl pureed, 
mashed, creamed. 
j~y 
j.! biiz <T biz> In pi biyaazl awl, bodkin. 
j,":'j ~ y 
~j.! biizan(a Iprop nl Byzantium. 
J.;j.! biizan(i, bizan(i ladj *1 I Byzantine. 2 futile. 
fruitless. munaqfa biizan(iyya a futile discussion. 
~j~y 
J~ biizu <Fr biseau> Inl print] I bevelling. 2 drilling 
out the background of an engraving plate. 
IJ"YIJ"~y 
~ 
baysibs <Engl> Inl [anat] biceps. -also baay. 
I 
• 
lJ"~y 
~ 
bayyif Ivil to apply a treatment or coating of size. 
ba-nbayyif Galee we'll treat it with size. - also bawwif. 
-vn tabyiif; ava mibayyif. 
Z(.;.~y) 
~ 
beejl, biif <T be~> In pi -aatl five (on dice etc.). 
IlIeej beej half-blind. 
~ 
beej2 InI [text] a defect in cloth, occasioned by the 
shuttle running out of thread. 
~ 
beeja, biifa <T per;e> In pi biyaj, bifaatl veil of 
very thin material. 
..?'~y 
~ 
bee~: fi-bee~ bee~ at a complete loss. 
1..J#~y 
";'4 baaq (i) Ivil to lay an egg. II baqit-lu fil-c;af~ good 
fortune just fell into his lap. -lamma tbiiq «not) even if 
you laid an egg) "" no matter what you do, never. - baaq 
Gala to long for (s.th.), be dying for (s.th.). - 5'il-beeq 
baaq min tabt' raas-u (he was so lazy that) the eggs laid 
116 
eggs under his (recumbent) head. -vn beeq, bayaqaan; 
ava baayiq. 
~ 
beeq Icoll nil egg(s). IIbeeq Guyuun fried eggs. 
-beeqjamm in-nasiim hard-boiled eggs coloured for the 
Shamm in-Nasim festival. 2 testicle(s). IIbeeq iI-Gigl 
(1) large round yellow variety of mango. (2) hearts (in 
cards). 
~ 
beeqa Inl I lunit n, pi -aatl an egg. ril-beeqa 
ma-tiksar-j iI-bagar [proy] an egg can't break a stone. 
filii yisrac; it-beeqa yisrac; ig-gamal [proy] he who steals 
an egg will steal a camel. II c;aaGid Gala beeqa (sitting on 
an egg) on tenterhooks. -lissa ma-(liG-j' mit-beeqa (he 
still hasn't emerged from the egg) he's still wet behind 
the ears. - bi-yitGab bit-beeqa wit-bagar [proy] (he jug-
gles with the egg and stone) he's very adroit. -lac;et-ha 
beeqa mc;ajjara "" I found it ripe for the picking, or 
ready for the taking. -law kaanit it-beeqa liiha widneen 
yiflLuu-ha fitneen [proy] "" a problem, however small, 
is better shared. 2 Idual and pi buyuuq, biqaan, beeql 
testicle. 3/pl -aatl [mech] ball-joint. 
~J~ bayqaawi ladj invarl egg-shaped, oval. 
..., fi buyuuqaln pi -aatl I [anat] ovum. 2 [bot] ovule. 
...,~ bayyaaqa ladjl laying, producing eggs. firaax 
bayyaaqa laying hens. 
~ 
mabyaq In 
pi mabaayiql I ovary. 
2 [bot] 
stamen. 
..;.4;1 fitbaaq Ivil to be laid (of an egg). - iva mitbaaq. 
~ 
bayyaql Ivtl to keep (s.o.) on tenterhooks. -vn 
tabyiiq; ava/pva mibayyaq. 
""";"1 fitbayyaq I Ivil to be kept on tenterhooks. -iva 
mitbayyaq. 
Z..J#~y 
~i fabyaq ladj, fern beeqa, pi biiql I white. fabyaq 
zayy it-laban as white as milk. bafta beeqa bleached 
calico. IIbagar fabyaq limestone: -c;alb-u fabyaq he is 
good-hearted. - wabda La fabyaq wala fabmar one who 
doesn't powder or paint her face. -nahaar-ak fabyaq 
have a good day! -ya xabar fabyaq [euphem] what bad 
news! -mayya beeqa [path] glaucoma. -(abac;a beeqa 
[dent] enamel. - fid-daar it-beeqa Casablanca. - fit-babr 
it- fabyaq (it-mutawassi() the Mediterranean Sea. 
- fit-beet it-fabyaq the White House, in Washington. 
-labma beeqa (1) fat. (2) the flesh of poultry, game and 
white fish. -zeet fabyaqpoppy-seed oil. -sitaab fabyaq 
any blade used as a weapon. - dahab fabyaq (1) white 
gold. (2) gold alloyed with silver or platinum. -xajab 
fabyaq whitewood. -c;irj' fabyaq half-piastre coin. 
ma-Ganduu-j la fabyaq waLa fiswid he is penniless. 

fi/·C;irf it· fabyaq yinfal fil·yoom iI· fiswid [prov] ... 
even a little money helps when times are bad. 2 light 
grey (of a horse). 3 transparent (of glass etc.). - Inl 
. 4 blank (in dominoes). 
Jl.a.!i fabyaqaaniladj·1 fair·complexioned (of males 
only). 
.;.l.! bayaaqln/l whiteness. bayaaqlenee the whites 
of his eyes. II firmi bayaaq·ak cross my palm with silver! 
(said by fortune·tellers) .. fiddaa·lijiik lala bayaaq he 
gave me a blank cheque. 2 white (of an egg). 
3a whitewash. 3b plaster. 3c size. 3d bleach. 4 (as a 
euphemism for zift q. v.) tar. 5 tin plating. 6 mildew (as 
a plant disease). 7/coll nl edible Nile fish (Bagrus 
bayad). 
~l.! bayaaqa In pi ·aatl I unit noun of bayaaq 7. 
2a blank space (in 1I sheet of writing, printing etc.). 
2b double blank (in dominoes). 3 dust·cover (for furni· 
ture etc.). - bayaqaat Ipl n!4 (bed or table) linen. 
~I.,.,II fj/·bayaqiyya Inl mus~um of coaches and car· 
riages in the former royal stables in Zamalek. 
~ 
bayyaq2 Ivt/l to whifen.1I bayyaq wi//·u·hum he 
made them proud of him. 2 to bleach. 3 to whitewash. 
4 to plaster. 5 to tin, cover with a film of alloy. 6 to hull 
(rice). 7 to produce a fair copy from a rough draft .• vn 
tabyiiq; ava/pva mibayyat{. 
:i .... J tabyiiqa In pi ·aatl I instance noun of tabyiiq. 
Hair copy. 
. 
~ 
mibayyaq In ·1 I whitewasher. 2 plasterer. 
3 tinner. 
J~ mibayyaqaati In pi ·yyal = mibayyaq. 
~I fitbayya(f Ivil passive of bayya(f. • iva 
m.itbayyaq. 
~ 
1 fibyaqq/vil to become white .. ava mibyiqq. 
~ 
mibyaqqa In pi ·aatl fair copy. 
~ 
1 fistabyaq Ivtl to select for whiteness. • ava 
mistabyaq. 
j j" IJ ":" see 2 j j" ":" : bitaar, bitari 
I tlJ ":" 
t~ baac2 (i) Ivtll to sell. maballaat bi·tbiil bil·yaali 
high·priced stores. bi·ybiil iI·mayya· f·baarit is· 
sB(jc;ayiin [prov] (he sells water in the water·sellers' 
quarter) ... he carries coals to Newcastle. baac illi 
c;uddaam·u wi·11i waraa (he sold all he possessed) he 
was left without money or property. 2 to expose, bet· 
ray, turn (s.o.) over, let (s.o.) down. bac;a kida tbit;·ni 
wi·l·miin • lin·naas iI·kilaab dool is that how you give 
me away· and to such terrible people! - Ivil3 to find a 
117 
8 
good market. fil·fus{Uwaana baacit kitiir the record 
sold well. ·vn beel, biyaala; ava baayil. 
~ beela linst n, pi ·aat/l a (single) sale.lIlal·beela 
or fooc; iI·beela to be taken free (with purchased 
goods), as in wi·xud is·samaka I·bilwa di min landi fooc; 
iI·beela and take this nice fish from me into the bargain! 
2 lot (in an auction etc.) . 
~l.! biyaala Ivn/ilkaz/ak biyaaca [butcher] dressing 
knife. 
~~ baayil In ·1 I seller, salesman. 2 lalso pi 
bayyaacal street hawker, vendor. 
~ baYla In pi ·aatl[lsl] act of formal acknowledge· 
ment o( (a ruler's) authority. 
t'- bayyaac In ·1 seller, vendor, salesman. II fiddallac 
lal·bayyaal ... to play hard·to·get~ as in kull i ma 
fanadii yaakul ma·yirqaa-f tic;ul./ b·yiddallal lal· 
bayyaac whenever I call him to eat he refuses as if he's 
leading on a salesman. 
t;:t" mubiil J Inl selling, sale. fil·mubiil bin·nac;d i bass 
cash sales only. 
.:..~ mabilaat Ipl n!.1 sales. mud;;r i/·mabilaat the 
s~les manager. 2 
(qism) 
fil·mabilaat the sales 
department. 
tI,;"l fitbaac Ivil to be sold .. iva mitbaac. 
t. ~ 1 inbaal = fitbaac· • iva minbaac· 
f::!:! bayyal/vtl to cause to sell. bayyacuu·ni /Ii waraaya 
wi·1Ii c;uddaami they brought about my financial ruin. 
• aHa mibayyac. 
~~ baayal Ivtl [lsi] to make formal acknowledge· 
ment of the authority of (a ruler) .. vn mubaYla, 
mubaayala r ; avll mibaayil. 
~ 
l,.. mubaYla In pi ·aatl contract of sale, bill of sale. 
~I fistapyal Ivil to act recklessly. fistabyactl 
wi·stac;alt· lala {Uul I said damn the consequences, and 
resigned straight away .. vn fistibyaac; ava mistabyac. 
...JIJ":" 
'"' bayyif <Engl payoff> Ivtl to pay in full and dis· 
charge (a seaman or crew). ·vn tabyiif; ava/pva 
mibayyi{. 
I .!IIJ ":" 
~ beeka <Eng» 
In pl·aatl pique (fabric). 
(~.!IIJ":") 
..,h, biikun <Eng» 
In pi ·aatl beacon. 
.§..o. beekun <Engl> In! bacon. 

I J.s y 
~ beela: heela beela andfeela beela heave! heave-hoi 
~ J.s y 
...k biyill <Fr bielle> In pi -aatl piston connecting-rod. 
1J.s y 
.:,,~ baan (a) Ivil to appear. become manifest or visible. 
futubiis baan fi- faaxir if-faaril a bus came into sight at 
the end of the street. ril-l:Jac;c;' ybaan {prov] truth will 
out. da baayin /ina that's apparent to us. fiz-zalal 
baayin laleek you're clearly upset. waC;lit-ak bayna 
you're in for trouble.lIlala wiff-ak yibaan ya maddaar 
il-libaan {prov] = nothing you do can be kept secret for 
ever. -ava baayin. baa fin f . 
.:y. ~ baayin lava w adverbial functionl it is evident that 
.... apparently. baayin (laleeha) l:Ja-tmattar apparently 
it is going to rain. baayin finnak mif l:Ja-tnaffiz I-ittifaac; 
it looks as if you are not going to implement the agree-
ment. baayin faxuu-k mif l:Ja-ygib-ha I-barr it seems 
that your brother is not going to behave reasonably. 
J~ baafinf laval II fi(-(alaac; baafin {lsi law] the di-
vorce is irrevocable. 
.:.r.>! been I Iprepl 1 between. fil-l:Jaara been ii-bank' 
wil-Iukanda the alley is between the bank and the hotel. 
kaan fii ma been lafara w-xamastaafar kitaab lala 1-
maktab there were between ten and fifteen books on 
the desk. II beeni w-beenak frankly speaking. -kaanit 
farl:Jaana benha w-been nafs-a-ha she was rejoicing in-
wardly. - been iI-beneen between the two extremes. 
-been in-nahreen Mesopotamia. 2 among. in the midst 
of. fin-naas il/i-nta laayif benhum the people among 
whom you are living. 
11 been ... wi-(been) what with ... and .... as in tilibt' 
xaali~ been iI-c;araayib wil-liyaal I got completely worn 
ollt. what with the relatives and the children . 
.:.r.>! been 2 Inl ill omen. ruraab ii-been bird of ill omen. 
one who brings bad news or misfortune. 
~ 
beneen: been iI-beneen between the two ex-
tremes, taking a middle course. 
0l.:..! • .::..~ benaat. 
banaal Iprepl between. xalli 
1-l:Jikaaya benatna keep the matter strictly between us. 
II benaat il- falyaad the period (noted by trademen as a 
slack season) between the two feasts. liid iI-fi(r and 
liid-il- faql:Ja. 
4. bayyina Inl evidence. proof. ril-bayyina lala 1-
muddali the burden of proof is on the plaintiff. 
IIl:Jaraami bala bayyina (he is) a thief with no evidence 
against him, a lucky person. - ril-layyina bayyina a 
118 
sample shows the quality of the whole . 
.:.r.>!i fabyan lell morelmost clear. 
.:,,~ bayaan In pi -aatl 1 communique. account. 
bayaan laskart military communique. fiddii-ni bayaan 
lan xibrit-ak Is-sabc;a give me a report on your previous 
experience. 2 demonstration. bayaan lamali a practic-
al demonstration. 3 penultimatel:Jagar of a hashish-
smoking session. 4t rhetoric. - bayanaat Ipl nl 
5 particulars. details. fiktib-Iu bayanaat if-furl write 
the particulars of the job for him. 
11 bayaanan: layaanan bayaanan openly. frankly and 
publicly. as in bi-yisrac;u kida layaanan bayaanan they 
steal openly without any regard for anyone. 
J~ bayaani ladjl graphic. rasm' bayaani a graph. 
~ bayyin/vt/l to reveal. make clear. lafaan yibayyin 
iI-l:Jac;c; in order to reveal the truth. gihaaz yibayyin 
~-~uura I-man(ic;a mUlayyana an apparatus which 
shows the image of a given area.llnibayyin zeen street 
call of female shell-diviners. -ljumaaf bi-ybayyin sheer 
material. - fif-feex bayyin karaama the saint has given a 
sign. 2t to state. declare. -vn tabyiin; ava mibayyin. 
~I filbayyin Ivil to become clear. - ava mitbayyin. 
~I.,... mubayna f Inl difference. disharmony. 
.:y.~1 fitbaayin Ivil to make an impressive show . 
laawiz yitbaayin c;uddaam in-naas he wants to make a 
good impression on people. - ava mitbaayin. 
.:y.~ labaayun f In pi -aall difference. disharmony. fii 
tabaayun been m~alil:J-na we have conflicting interests. 
.:y.L,:;... mutabaayin f ladj *1 different. contradictory. 
.:,~i fabaan f 1 Ivt/ to cause to be clear. indicate. 2/vil 
to be obvious. clear or outstanding. n~r' mubiin an 
outstanding victory. -vn fibaana; ava mubiin. 
.:,l,;.-I fistabaan. fislibaan J Ivil to pan out. become 
clear. 
fahu 1-l:Jac;c; istabaan truth will out. - vn 
fistibaana f ; ava mistibiin. 
. .:,l.".,:;...1 fislibyaan In pi -aall questionnaire. 
I • .s y 
~ .~ beeh I <T bey> In pi bahawaatl Bey. formerly 
a title of. and form of address and reference to. second-
highest ranking officers and officials. now used looselv 
to indicate respect or to flatter. 
Jlx 
bahawaati ladj invar/luxuiious. grand. 
~x bahawiyya Inl rank of Bey. 
~~ bakawlyya Inl rank of Bey. 
Z • .s y 
~ beeh 2 Ifem n. pi -aatl second letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also baa f. bih. 

IS IS Y 
~ bayy <Engl> Inl /nautJ paybill. 
• IS IS Y 
~ biyeeh <Fr biais> Inl I bias (in fabric).Jirii{ biyeeh 
bias binding. 2 Ipl -aatl /needlewJ false tuck. 
119 
r.J!.S!.SY 
..r;' bayyuumi I ladj pI -yyal of or pertaining to the 
Bayyumi order. 2 In pI -yyal a Bayyumi. 
:..;.. ~ 
I fil-bayyumiyya Iprop nl Sufi order named after 
Sayyid Ali el-Bayyumi. 

.. 
4, J 
1.:.0 
I; taa Ifem n, pI -haatl third letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also taaf, tih, teeh. 
.1.:.0 
• 1; taaf Ifem n, pI -aatl third letter of the Arabic 
alphabet -also taa, tih, teeh. 
1.:.01.:.0 
1;1; taata linterjl exhortation to a child learning to walk, 
particularly in the phrase taata taata xa{(i I-[ataba come 
on, come on till you step over the threshold. 
~I.:.o see ~.J.:.o:taag 
I .J 1 .:.0 
0;1; taarat: taara ... taara ... /advl sometimes ... some-
times .... taara yimfi w,-taara yirkab he sometimes walks 
and sometimes rides. 
11 taaratan ladvl sometimes. 
1 .J I .:.0 
); .;1; taar Inl revenge. b-aaxud bi-taar-u or b-axall~ 
taar-u I shall avenge him. beeni w-beenu taar there's a 
feud between him and me. 
jl'::' see jlj,:taaza 
u:. 1.:.0 . 
4.:.1; taala <Fr tache> In! {cin] hot spot. 
1SI.:.o 
lSI; taay ladjl alloyed and brittle (of gold). 
• .:.0 • .:.0 
i;i; ta fta f Ivil to stutter over the pronunciation of the 
letter t. -vn ta fta fa; ava mita fta f. 
I,,:", ,,:",.:.0 
~ tabba <T tepe> In pI -aat, tibabll {mil] wall acting 
as backstop behind targets on a range. tabbit qarb in-
naar target area of a firing range. 2 hillock . 
1,,:", ":"' .:.0 
";"""1 fistatabb r Ivil to become stable, become firmly 
established. fin-ni;aam istatabb order was established. 
-vn fistitbaab; ava mistitibb, ",ustatibb. 
.:.0 ,,:",.:.0 see 1.:.0 ":"' IJ" : tibit, fatbat, tabaat, tabaata, 
tabiit, tabbit, fittabbit 
,,:",.:.0,,:",.:.0 
~ 
tabtaba I~ I intelligence, cleverness, wittiness. 
2 experience. 
~ 
mitabtib 
ladj 
"I 
I intelligent, 
clever. 
2 experienced. da raagil mitabtib t;awi f-luvl-u this man 
has really got experience in his ~ork. 
....,.:.0 
.J • 
,;; tibr In! gold ore. yixalli t-turaab tibr he (or it) turns 
dust into gold, he (or it) works miracles. 
tlS.J":"'.:.o 
~;.J!\; tabureeh <Fr tabouret> In pI -aatl stool, 
foot-stool. 
.J IS d- ,,:",.:.0 see .J u:. ":"' j, : 
tabaliir, 
tabajiira, 
taba/ir.aaya 
t":"'.:.o 
t-' taba[1 (a) Ivtl I to follow, go after, tail. fataari 
I-baraami taba[-ni mneen ma-rubt it turned out that the 

thief was following me wherever I went. ritbaG il-buum 
yiwaddii-k il-xaraab [prov] follow the owl (i.e. an evil 
person) and he will lead you to destruction. 2 limperf 
and ava onlyl to be subordinate to, be attached to, 
pertain to. bi-yitbaG-u Giddit Gummaal a number of 
w~rkers are under him. rH-murassasa lli b-titbac-ha 
l-mustaffayaat the organization to which the hospitals 
are attached. kull i da taabiG lil-raYziya wil-mafrubaat 
all this pertains to victuals and drinks. -vn tabaG, 
tabaciyya; ava taabiG; pya matbuuG. 
& tabaG 2 
preposition 
indicating 
1 ~ossession. 
rik-kursi da mijtabaG-na this chair doesn't belong to us. 
2 affiliation. ba'ieet tabaG il-G~aaba di I became a 
member of this gang. ril-mabkama lli l-wakiil tabac-ha 
the court to which the legal representative belongs. 
ribna tabaG il-qanuun raqam talattaafar we come under 
Law No. Thirteen. rana b-aftayal tabaG il-miGallim 
I work for the miGallim. 3 accordance. tabac tabliil-i 
liz-zubuun according to my analysis of the customer. 
11 tabaG ma Iconjl according to what. bi-yi~arraftabac 
ma ttafa'itu he acts as you agreed. 
~ 
tabaGiyya In! 1 citizenship. Gandu tabaGiyya 
ringiliizi he has British nationality. 2 Icolll subject(s). 
ril-mal[iyyiin k~anu tabaciyyit ringiltira the Maltese 
were British subjects. 
11 bit-tabaGiyya ladvl subsequently, consequently. 
t' \; taabiG I In pi ratbaaGI 1 follower, supporter. min 
ratbaac Gabd in-na~ir one of Nasser's followers. 
2 retainer, protege, yes-man. -/adjectivallyl raagil 
taabiG a submissive man. 
i; tubbaG: 'iib[i tubbaG Ipl ra'ibaa[ tubbaGI[Chr] Cop-
tic Catholic. 
t 4- tabbaaG In pi -iin, tabbaaGal all-purpose truck-
hand, driver's mate. 
r;;; tabbiiG In pi tabbiiGa, tababiiGI = tabbaac· 
t' \; taabiG 2 Ivtl 1 to follow, go in pursuit of. rana 
tabiGt-a-ha 
b-na;ar-i l-yaayit ma daxalit il-beet 
I followed her with my eyes until she entered the house. 
2a to follow up, pursue. fii mafruuq mitabGa mil-
mufattijthere is supposed to be follow-up by the inspec-
tor. 2b to keep up with. ril-mubaami laazim yitaabiG 
iI-qawaniin ig-gidiida a lawyer must keep up with the 
new laws. 3 to keep on doing, continue. rid-duktoor 
laazim yitaabiG id-diraasa a doctor must keep on study-
ing. -vn mitabGa, mutabGa; ava mitaabiG. 
t'~' rittaabiG Ivil to follow in ~uccession. sibaa'i 
tataabuG relay race. -vn tataabU[ t; ava mittaabiG. 
ef' rittabaGt 
Ivtl 1 to follow, 
pursue. 
tann-u 
mittibiG-ha l-yaayit ma w~lit il-maktab he trailed her 
121 
until she got to the office. 2 to adhere to, adopt (a 
method, policy.). ri(-(uru'i illi mumkin yittibiG-ha 1-
rinsaan the paths which a man can foliow. -/the literary 
passive imperf form occurs in elevated speech! ri(-{Uru'i 
illi tuttabaG the paths which are (to be) followed. -vn 
rittibaac; ava mittibiG; pya muttabaG. 
~, ristatbaG t Ivtl to entail, engender, have as a 
consequence. -vn ristitbaaG; ava mistatbiG. 
J y \oJ 
Jt'''' tawaabil Ipl nl hot seasonings and spices, 
condiments. 
j;; tabbil Ivtl to season, spice. -vn tatbiil; ava/pya 
mitabbil. 
~, rittabbil Ivil to be seasoned, be spiced. -iva 
mittabil. 
IJ.J J y \oJ see • .J J y \oJ : tabloon 
.JJy\oJ 
.~\; tablooh (also tabloon, (abloon) <Fr tableau> In 
pi -aat, tablowaatl 1 panel, board. tablooh Garabiyya 
dashboard. tablooh kahraba fuse-board, meter cup-
board. 2 wall picture, mural. 3 {text] drawframe. 
IJ y \oJ 
.:;-; tibn In! chopped straw. II tibn abmar straw of 
barsiim. - mayya min tabt i tibn snake-in-the-grass. 
.;,4- tabbaan In pi tabbaanal {obsol] straw-seller. 
:i,; 4- tabbaana In pi -aatl stora.ge place for tibn, barn. 
IIdarb (or sikkit) it-tabbaana the Milky Way. 
.r..o matban In pi mataabinl storage place for tibn, 
barn. 
~ 
matbana = matban. 
• Y \oJ see also • y IJ 
~ tabbih Ivtl to arouse the interest of (s.o., in s.th.). 
tabbih il-waad fil-liGba Gafaan yixallii-ni raftiri-haa-lu 
he put the toy under the boy's nose so as to make me 
buy it for him. tabbih-ufil-bikaaya di get him interested 
in this matter. -vn tatbiih; ava/pya mitabbah. 
~, rittabbih Ivil to have one's interest aroused. -iva 
mittabbih. 
\oJ ~ ~ \oJ 
.:.. ~ \; tabuut In p[ tawabiitl 1 metal scoop wheel used 
in irrigation (see PI.E, 22). 2 irrigation device similar to 
the sa'iya (see PI.E, 1), but which raises water by means 
of a metal scoop instead of a wooden water-wheel. 

IIcalee l:Jiss' wala t-tabuut he has a very ugly voice (espe-
shame, as in kaffa qahr-a-ha kida cala ceen-ak ya taagir 
cially in singing). 3 sarcophagus. 
she is exposing her back for all to see. 2 opportunist. 
~ 
matgar In pi mataagirl place of business, place of 
o..s y..:;.. 
..,;; tabeeh <Fr tapis> In pi -aatl canvas, mat (In wrest-
ling, boxing). 
(J":;"":;" ) 
..s? tatari In pi tatar, tataarl a Tartar. ritlammu calee 
zayy it-tatar they rushed upon him. 
~I rit-titr <Fr titre> Inl [einf the credits. 
-.!lJ":;" ..:;.. 
~;~I? titrakurd <Engl> Inl /musf tetrachord. 
.!l..:;....:;.. 
~ 
titik <T tetik> In pi -aatl trigger (of a gun). 
V"J~":;"":;" 
<.ryl::,.; titanoos <Engl> Inl tetanus. 
JJ":;" ..:;.. 
0;":;; tatuura Icoll nl [botf datura. -also datuura, 
dahtuura. {a[Uura. 
I ..s..:;.. ..:;.. 
l,,; y tutya Inl la type of collyrium with a zinc base 
(particularized as tutya beee[a). Ib copper sulphate 
(particularized as tutya zarqa). 2 Icolll squid(s). - ladj 
invar/3 [obsolf disastrous, calamitous. gawaaza tutya a 
disastrous marriage. 
o I [...:;.. see 0 [. J : tigaah. tugaah 
J[.":;" 
o)~ tigaara. tugaara Inl 1 trade, commerce. tigaarit 
ig-gumla the wholesale trade. dibloom tigaara diploma 
in commercial studies. II rit-tigaara fil-xusaara xusaara 
failure breeds failure. 2 Ipl -aatl business, commercial 
venture. canduhum tigaraat fi-kull' I:Jltta they have 
business dealings everywhere. 
..s;\:f. tigaari. tugaari ladj '1 1 commercial. ril-yurfa 
t-tugariyya the Chamber of Commerce. ril-bal:Jriyya 
t-tugariyya the Merchant Navy. IIbi-yiftayal tugaari he 
works fast and carelessly. 2 wholesale (of price). 
~l; taagir} In pi tuggaarll (male) trader, (male) mer-
chant or dealer. tuggaar iI-muxaddaraat narcotics deal-
ers. tuggaar tagzira retail merchants. IItuggaar if-fanta 
persons who traffic goods in suitcases between coun-
tries. -cala ceen-ak ya taagir ,., openly, without fear or 
commerce. 
~l; taagir2 Ivill to trade, conduct commercial busi-
ness. deal. bl-ntaagir fil-bie[aaca I-mistawrada we deal 
in imported merchandise. taagir bi-sm-i-na he traded 
using our name.l:Jisaab mltagra a trading account. 2 to 
take advantage, profit unscrupulously. bi-ytaagir bil-
wa{amyya he is exploiting nationalism. - vn mitagra; ava 
mitaagir. 
~~I rittaagir Ivil to deal, do business. kaanu 
b-yittagru fil-muxaddaraat they were pushing drugs. 
- vn rittlgaarT; ava mittaaglr . 
..i[.":;" 
o:;f. tagza Inl character. ma-Iuu-f tagza he's unpredict-
able, he's inconsistent. 
V" J [. ..:;.. 
<.r~ taguus Inl [nautf transverse plank bridging cen-
tre of Nile sailing boat. 
..:;..c...:;.. 
~ 
tal:Jt 1 Iprep, w pron suff also tal:Jtii-1 beneath, be-
low, under. min tal:Jt it-tarabeeza from under the table. 
cimaara tal:Jtiiha (or tal:Jtaha or tal:Jt' minha) garaaj a 
building with a garage under it. tal:Jt' riyast-u under his 
command. l:Jatteet is-sikklina tal:Jt if-faraab I put the 
knife inside my sock. tal:Jt iI-muraqba (1) under surveill-
ance. (2) on parole.lltal:Jt· ramr-ak (I am) at your dis-
posal! -tal:Jt ir-riil:J downwind, leeward. -tal:Jl' min im-
mediately following (in age, position, ranking etc.), as 
in huwwa raxuu rilli tal:Jt' minnu he's his next younge~t 
brother, mif ii-beet da - la r - rilli tal:Jt' minnu not this 
house but the one beyond it. - rafiua tal:Jt iI-l:Jamra 
infra-red ray~. - tal:Jt il-l:Jisaab on account. -tal:Jt it-tatab 
on demand. - tal:Jt iI- rare[ and min tal:Jt iI-rare[ see raul-
2 ladvl below. humma nizlu tal:Jt they have gone down, 
they have gone downstairs. min fooq li-tal:Jt from top to 
bottom. ritlac min tal:Jt come out from underneath . 
nazzil raas-u l-tal:Jt he hung down his head. II min tal:Jt' 
l-tal:Jt stealthily, covertly, as in bi-yb~~' min tal:Jt' l-tal:Jt 
he lo~ks stealthily, bi-yiftayat min tal:Jt' t-tal:Jt he oper-
ates behind people's backs. 
J~ tal:Jtaaniladj '1 lower . ril-fakk it-lal:Jtaani the low-
er jaw. 
c...:;.. c...:;.. 
~ 
tal:Jtal:J Ivtll to budge, to move. 2 to dislocate (a 

lim?). -also taltal. -vn tafJtafJa; avalpva mitafJtafJ. 
~I S'ittafJtafJ Ivil passive of tafJtafJ. - iva mittafJtafJ. 
"';c.::.. 
..j,ii. tafJaf (i) Ivtl to make a present to (s.o., of s.th. 
precious, often used ironically). tafJaf-ni b-hidiyya he 
gave me a valuable gift. -vn tafJafaan; ava taafJif; pva 
matfJuuf· 
~ tufJfa In pi tUfJaf/1 object of rare beauty or worth, 
objet d·art. tufJaf S'asariyya antiquities. 
riI-S'~naaf 
I-c;adiima tUltabar tufJafthe old types are considered to 
be collector's items. 2 delightfully odd or eccentric per-
son, card. S'inta tufJfa ya-bn-i S'aaya min S'ayaat allaah 
you're a real character, my boy, a gem! 
~ 
tufJfagi In pi -yyal dealer in objets d'art. 
~ 
matfJaf In pi mataafJif/ museum. II raagil matfJaf a 
real character. 
..j,ii.1 S'ittafJaflvil passive of tafJaf. S'ittafJafbi-mu~iiba he 
was hit by a disaster. - iva mittifJif. 
..j,ii.i S'atfJal' = tafJaf. 
I .,s C'::" see also l..s..s C 
..r: tafJfJa J Ivtl I to salute. 2 to offer hospitality to 
(s.o.). zallaan la/aan ma-fJadd i_/ tafJfJaa lamma zar-na 
he's annoyed because no one offered him hospitality 
w~en he visited us. - vn tafJiyya; ava mitafJfJi. 
..r:1 S'ittafJfJa Ivil passive of tafJfJa. - iva mittafJfJi. 
z ..s C'::" see Z..s C.J : S'ittafJa 
(.::..t.::..) 
.::..Ji. taxt <P takht> In pi tuxullll I platform, dais. 
2 group performing Arabic music. 3 (woman's) full 
posteriors. ya taxt flirtatious address to a woman with 
large posteriors. 
~ taxta <P takhta> In pi tuxat, tuxuta, taxtaatl 
I school desk and chair set. 2 blackboard . 
.::..Ji. tixit ladj '1 well-built, stout. 
-'":'.::..t.::.. 
..r ~ 
taxtaboo/ <P takhta-posh> In pi -aatl fobsol} 
covered recess of the courtyard of an old house, in 
which guests may be entertained without entering the 
private rooms. 
t.::..t.::.. 
~ 
taxtax Ivil to become plump. -vn taxtaxa; ava 
mitaxtax. 
~I S'ittaxtax = taxtax. -ava mittaxtax. 
123 
- .J'::" t.::.. 
.:,IJft taxtarawaan <P takhti-rawim> In pi -aatl 
fobsol} camel-borne litter in which a bride is conveyed 
during the zaffa . 
.) t.::.. see .) t ~: S'ittaaxid 
.Jt.::.. see also .Jt~ 
.-0> \; taaxir Ivtl to move aside. taaxir rigl-ak Jiwayya 
move your leg (out of the way) a little. -vn mitaxra; 
ava~pva mitaaxir. 
.-o>\;1 S'ittaaxir Ivil to move or be moved aside or out of 
the way. - avaliva mittaaxir. 
.-o>\;;"1 l"istaaxirJ = S'ittaaxir. -ava mistaaxir. 
r t.::.. 
~ taxam (i) Ivtl to cause (s.o.) to feel uncomfortably 
full of food, surfeit. taxamt i nafs-i bil- S'akl I stuffed 
myself with food. riI-S'akli taxam-ni the food made me 
feel over-full. -vn taxamaan, taxm; ava taaxim; pva 
matxuum. 
~ taxma linst nl a case of overeating. 
.J~ taxmaan ladj *1 bloated, uncomfortably full (of 
food). 
~ 
tuxma Inl indigestion resulting from over-eating. 
S'iftareena fil-S'akli lamma l-waafJid kaan fJa-ygii-lu 
tuxma we stuffed ourselves with food till we almost had 
in?igestion. 
~I S'ittaxam Ivil passive of taxam. -iva mittixim. 
~I S'intaxam = S'ittaxam. 
,;,t.::.. 
~ 
.~ tixin, tuxun (a) Ivil I to become thick. 2 to 
become fat. - vn tuxn, taxaana. 
11 tixin lala to consider oneself too grand for, or above 
(s.th.). fJa-nitxan la/furl illi b-naakul minnu lee/how 
can we despise the work by which we earn our living. 
~ • .:Ji. tuxn Inl thickness. laayiz 100fJ tuxn i kaam 
how thick a plank do you want? 
.,;~ .4;U' taxaana In pi -aatl thickness. (makanit) 
taxaana {carp} thicknessing-tool, thicknesser. taxanaat 
sitta milli w-xamsa milli thicknesses of 6mm. and Smm. 
~ 
.,J.ii. tixiin ladj pi tuxaanl I thick (of solids and 
liquids). 100fJ tixiin a thick plank. siluuk tixiina wi-sluuk 
rufayyala thick wires and thin wires./urba txiina thick 
soup, viscous soup, S'ic;(al it-taran/aat lala txiin cut the 
slices thick. IIlac;l-u txiin or muxx-u txiin he's stupid, 
he's a thickhead. 2 fat. binti txiina zayy iI-barmiil a girl 
as fat as a barrel. 3 deep (of a voice). -
In pi taxaayinl 
4 prominent person. fii ~anaYliyya w-fii taxaayin there 

are artisans and there are big-shots. 
~i .~i fatx,in elative of tixiin. 
~ 
mitxin ladj invarl beefy, solid. mara mitxin a 
buxom wench. 
~ 
.~ taxxan Ivtl I to thicken, (in volume or con-
sistency). 2 to make fat. fakl i1-lJa/awiyyaat bi-ytaxxan 
eating sweet foods makes you fat. II taxxan widn(-u) to 
flatter (s.o.), swell (s.o.) up with (undue) praise. 
3/carp) to reduce (wood) to a given thickness. - Ivil 
4 to become fat.llmuxx-u taxxan xaa/~ he's become a 
complete thickhead. -vn tatxiin; ava mutaxxin t; ava/ 
pv,!' mit~an. 
~ 
.~ mutaxxin In pi -aatl thickener (in indust-
rial dyeing etc.). 
';'>~I fittaaxin Ivil to act the bully, behave grossly, be 
brusque. finla lJa-tittaaxin [aleena walla feeh do you 
think you are going to push us around? - ava mittaaxin. 
~I fistatxan I/vtl to consider (s.o. or s.th.) fat or 
thick. 2/vil = fittaaxin. -vn fistitxaan; ava mistatxan. 
.:.0 IS J').:.o 
..::..l-,-" tiduliit <Fr theodolite> In pi -aatll theodolite. 
2 transit-compass. 
1 ~.:.o see IS ~ ~ : ya tara 
..,. 1 ~ .:.0 
...,..1.; tiraas <Fr terasse> In pi -aatl terrace. 
IS 1 ~.:.o 
~I.; tiraay <Engl> Inllanat} triceps. -also tiraysibs. 
..... 
.:.0 
. ~ 
"'!.; turba Inl I Ipl turab, turbaatl grave, tomb. 
bi-faraf-i w-turbit fabuu-ya by my honour and my 
father's grave! IIturba lamma tlimm-ak == drop dead! 
-turba ma-Ihaa-f ~aalJib (a grave without an owner) a 
place with no proper order, somewhere where anything 
IS allowed. 21 (also turba) Ino pll soil. 3 Ipl turabl turbit 
ljaJiif a block of hashish packaged, usually, in cloth. 
.... .; turab Ipl nl cemetery. 
<.J.'; turabi In pi -yyal I cemetery attendant and 
gravedigger. 2/adj *1 scavenging. 
.... 1.; turaab In pi fatriba t I I dust, dirt, earth. turaab 
ma[dani metal dust, metal filings. II nifs-u fit-turaab == 
he is very modest. - bi-turaab i1-filuus dirt cheap. 
-yaama t-turaab bi-yaakul {prov] == the grave gobbles 
all. - fait' min yitmanna turaab gazmit-u anybody would 
124 
be delighted with even the dust off his shoes == he is a 
most desirable connection. 2 (also turaab falJmar) ash. 
tibaat naar t~balJ turaab {prov] == here today, gone 
tomorrow. 
~ I.; turaaba Inll soil. 2 a speck of dust, a bit of dust. 
<.J.I.; turaabi ladjl I of or pertaining to earth, soil or 
dust. (Uruc; turabiyya earth roads. 2 dust-coloured. 
.....? mutrib, 
mitrib 
ladjl 
dusty, 
dust-bearing. 
fig-gaww' mutrib the weather's dusty . 
.... ; 
tarrab Ivtl to cover with dust or ash. fi/-xamasiin 
tarrabit id-dinya the xamasiin wind covered everything 
with dust. -vn tatriib; ava/pva mitarrab. 
....:;1 fittarrab Ivil passive of tarrab. -iva mittarrab. 
.....;;-1 fistatrab 
Ivtl 1 to select for dustiness. 
fil-lJumaar istatrab-Iu Ijitta wi "marray fil- farq the 
donkey chose a dusty place and rolled 01. the ground. 
2 to consider dusty. - ava/pva mistatrab. 
I ..,. I.,:," ~ .:.0 
...,..~.; tirbaas I <perh Fr trapeze> In pi tarabiisl {anat] 
trapezius muscle of the back . 
z ..,. I y ~.:.o see I..,. Y ~ .:.0 : tirbaas 2 
-,?y~.:.o 
\;~.; tarabattaata onomatopoeic for the sound of 
music == ta-ra-ra-boom di-ay. 
~.; tarabattati nonce word for interrupting an asi-
nine conversation . 
- ~y~.:.o 
.ft J.'; tiribirintir <Engl> In pi -aatl teleprinter, tele-
type machine. 
jy~.:.o see jlSy~.:.o:tarabiiz 
- jy~.:.o 
.:.r.,,j!'; tarabziin <perh P darbazin> In pi -aat, -aatl 
I banister, railing. 2 {naut} bulwark. - also darabziin. 
I..,.y~.:.o 
..r!'; tarbis Ivtl to bolt. baab mitarbis a bolted door. 
IImuxx-u mtarbis (1) he's a blockhead. (2) his head is 
feeling muzzy. (3) he's unreceptive to new ideas. -vn 
tarbasa; ava/pva mitarbis. 
...,..~.; tirbaas 2 <perh P dar-basta> In pi tarabiisl 
I bolt, latch. IIlJa{( i/-hamm r fit-tirbaas he vented his 
rage on an innocent person or object. 2 stupidly con-
serv~tive or narrow-minded person. 
..r!.;1 fittarbis Ivil to be locked. -iva mittarbis. 

125 
"'" J .:J 
Z,-", Y J V see 1 I,)" I Y J V : tirbaas' 
.ill:-.; turgumaan In pI -aat, taragmal dragoman, au-
~ Y J V see j I.S Y J .1 : tarabee~a 
I~YJV 
,;r.; tarbin Ivt! {surg] to trepan. -vn tarbana; ava/pva 
mitarbin. 
~ J. tarbana In pI -aatl (surg] trephine. 
,;r.;1 fittarbin Ivil passive of tarbin. -iva mittarbin. 
1 ~ Y J V see ~ I.S Y J V : turbiina, turbiin 
-~YJv 
~; tarabantiina <It terebentina> Inl turpentine .. 
jl.SYJv 
ftl; tarabiiz <Engl> In pI -aatl trapeze. 
~I.SYJv 
~; turbiina <It turbina> In pI -aatl turbine. markib 
turbiina turbine ship. 
,J.:!; turbiin <Fr> = turbiina. 
-I.SYJv 
,>;1.".,..; tiribiyanku <It tagtio bianco> Inl cut of meat 
consisting of a whole thigh muscle. - also tilibiyanku. 
UJU 
-;;;)j turta <It torta> In pI -aat, turatl large fancy 
creamy cake. - also turta. 
JUJU 
;; tirtir Icoll nl spangle(s)', sequin(s). 
0;; tirtira In'pl -aat, taraatirl 1 lunit" nl a spangle, a 
sequin.lIleen-u zayy it-tirtira his eyes are as (small as) 
sequins. -I:J-addii-lu fit-tirtira I'll give it to him where it 
hurts most! 2 jingle (on tambourine). 3 cutting-wheel 
(of a glass cutter). 
-JUJU 
;I j; tiritwaar, turutwaar <Fr trottoir> In pI -aatl 
pavement. sidewalk. - also tilitwaar, tallitwaar. 
r [.J v 
~; targim Ivtl to trapslate. interpret. targama 
fawriyya simultaneous translation. -vn targama; ava 
milargim. 
:u:-; targama Inl 1 Ipl -aatl translation. 2 Ipl taraagiml 
biography. 
~ r- mutargim In *1 translator. 
, thor}zed tourist guide. 
~.;I fittargim Ivil to be translated. - iva mittargim. 
tJ v see also tJ' 
t'.; tarrax Ivtl 1 to put a date on. fana /Ii tarraxt iI-
muzakkira I'm the one who dated the memo. 2 to spin 
(a yarn), tell a tale. qaalid yitarrax kalaam wi-yq_uul 
fibn-i lamal wi-bn-i sawwa sitting spinning yarns and 
saying 'My son did this, my son did that.' -vn tatriix; ava 
mitarrax. 
J J v 
'.; tirr, tirri linter;jl sound used to encourage cattle to 
come to drink. 
I.SjJV 
I.Sj'; tarzi <P darzf> In pI -yyal (men's) tailor, 
(ladies') goodTquality dressmaker. miql¥~ i tarzi tailor's 
scissors. 
1 I,)"J V 
...,.,.; tirs In pI tu"uus, tiruusl 1 cog-wheel, gear-wheel, 
(loosely al,so) any small wheel or wheel-like object.. tirs i 
wallaala striking-wheel of a lighter. tirs B lagala bicycle 
sprocket. sanduuq it-tiruus gear-box. 2t shield. 
4...; tirsa ': makaroona tirsa pasta in the shape of small 
cog-wheels . 
...,.,1'.; tarraas' In pI tarraasal {rur] maker of wooden 
gears for a saqya. , 
...,., '.; tarras Ivil to be thrown out of gear (of cog-
wheels). - also qarras. - vn tatriis; ava mitarras. 
11,)"JV 
...,.,; taras' (i) 1 Ivtl to insert by force, wedge, jam 
(s. tho into S. th.). tarast i fiid.ifil-xurm I forced my hand 
into the hole. 2 Ivil to jam, become jammed or wedged. 
fil-baab taras fi-~baar;-u the door closed on his finger. 
Ilmuxx-u taaris fi-bar;q-u he has an unreceptive mind, 
he is inflexible. - vn tarasaan, tars; ava taaris; pva 
matruus. 
...,.,1.;.0 mitraas <P matars> In pI matariisl 1 wooden 
wedge used to keep a door closed. 28 blockhead, dolt. 
2b s.trong, brawny man. - matariis Ipl nl 3 barricades. 
...,.,.;1 fittaras Ivil to be jammed, be inserted by force. 
fiid-u ttarasit fid-durg his hand got caught in the draw-
er. -iva mittiris. 

31J"')U 
..r; tars Inl stern (of a ship or boat). 
~~; tarsaxaana <T tersdfpine> In pi -aatl lobsolJ 
dockyard. 
4(IJ"')U) 
\...; tirsa 2 In pi -aatl sea-turtle. 
..r; taras 2 In pi -aatl {rurJ mature kid. 
..r; taras J <T teres> In pi -aatl labusJ pimp. 
~ j tarraslyya In pi -aat. taraasll ornate donkey-
saddle with stirrups and stuffed pommel. 
..rlj tarraas 2 In pi tarraasal driver of pack animals. 
5 IJ" .) usee IJ".) J : turaas 
oJllJ"')u 
~ \...; tirsaana. tarsaana <T tersane> In pi -aatl 
I dockyard. shipyard. 2 arsenal, cache of arms. II naadl 
t-lirsaana one of the top Egyptian football teams. 
J.!lIJ"')U 
jS:.-J; Itruslkl <Fr tricycle> In pi -aatl tricycle-
carrier, tricycle-cart. 
JIJ"')U 
.,...; lirsu <It lerzo> Inl third class. milr' lirsu maitre 
d'hotel, third class. IIgumhuur il-lirsu the front row 
audience (in a cinema), the people in the cheap seats. 
oJ I.S IJ" .) U 
4;,-1; larasiina <It lerrazzmo> In pi -aall lobsolJ 
I terrace. 2 balcony. 
t.)U 
~; Itrea In pi lirael medium-sized irrigation canal 
(larger than the qanaaya). lireil ~arf discharge canal. 
lireil firaad feeder canal, supply canal. 
IJ" ..;.) U 
..,.J; larfas (a) labusJ 1 Ivil to become stout or fat. 
2 Ivtl to cause to become stout or fat. fil-mawadd 
in-nijawiyya larfasil-ha the starchy substances made her 
fat. -,vn larfasa; avalpva mitarfas. 
..,.J;I fittarfas Ivil to be made stout or fat. - iva 
mittarfas. 
l.!l.) U 
.!l; larak (u) Ivtl 1 to leave. fUlruk-u lamma yinjaf 
leave it till it dries. vaaga matruuka I-taqdiir-i some 
thing left to my discretion. 2 to bequeath, leave by will. 
126 
fabuu larak-Iu fluus kiliir his father left him a lot of 
money. 3 to neglect, disregard (especially religious 
obligations). ga-/ak ii-moot ya laarik i~-~ala IprovJ 
(death has come to you, you who neglect the Prayers) .,. 
your sin~ have caught up with you (said of one suffering 
from hi~ own misdeeds). - Ivil 4 to withdraw, lose 
interest, become dispassionate. kaan b'-YVibb id-dinya 
w-baedeen larak wi-zlhid he used to love hfe but then he 
renounced everything and withdrew from society. -vn 
tark; ava taarik; pva matruuk. 
..:..1$' J r- malrukaallpl nl cast-off or used articles. eandi 
qamii~ bunni min malrukaal gidd-I I have a brown shirt 
left by my grandfather. 
-;s; lirka In pi larikaall legacy, bequest. qartibil 
larikaal death-duty, inheritance tax. IIhiyya Ilrkil 
fabuu-k do you imagine its yours by exclusive right? 
.!l) fittarak Ivil passive of larak. - iva mittlrik. 
.!l..,;;; I fintarak = ftllarak. -Iva mmttrik. 
l.!l.) U 
.!I; tark Icoll nl panels of highly coloured decorative 
applique work, used for the ~iwaan (see PI.H). 
3.!l.) U 
.}; lurki I/adj ·1 Turkish.llzeet lurki Turkey red oil 
(a sulphated castor oil used in leather manufacture). 
- In/2 Ipl falraak. larakwa. lurkl a Turk. 3 Ino pI/ the 
Turkish language. Ilbi-yilkallim turki he's talking 
double-Dutch. 
\$; lurkiyya. lurkiya Iprop nl Turkey. 
-J.!l.)U 
.lIp; lurkuwaaz. lirkuwaaz. lurukwaaz. lirikwaaz 
<Fr> Inl turquoise. 
OJ.!l.; U 
~; lirikooh <Fr Iricol> Inl knitting. jakkila trlkooh 
a knitted jacket. bi-IVibb' lijlaval lirikooh she enjoys 
knitting . 
~JJ.)U) 
~; lirill In pi -aall oaf, dolt. 
JJ; lurull (also lurulli) <Engl> In pi lurulliyaall 
I, trolley. 2 trolleybus . 
...J; lirilla 
<Engl>: 
earabiyya(al) 
Itrilla 
trailer 
truck(s). 
-JJ.)U 
jJ; tara/alli <T terelelli> ladj invarl cuckoo, dotty, 
screwy. 

rJ.;.:> 
r; laralam onomatopoeia for the sound of music = 
tra-Ia-Ia. -also (aralam. 
..;J.;.:> 
J;.i lurli <T IUr/U> Inl dish of mixed vegetables. 
-also lulli, (urli. 
-..;J.;.:> 
.;,.,.J; lirilyoon <Engl> Inl trillion, (loosely also) infi-
nite number. 
I r.; .:> 
r; laram (u) Ivtl I to knock out (teeth). 2 to knock out 
the teeth of (s.o.). - vn larm, laramaan; ava laarim; pva 
malruum. 
... ; 
larma Ifem adjl missing (of teeth). 
r;i !'alram ladj, fern larma, pl/urml having missing 
teeth. 
r;1 !'illaram Ivil I to be knocked out (of teeth). 2 to 
have one's teeth knocked out. - iva millirim. 
r';; 1 !'inlaram = !'illaram. - iva minlirim. 
rJ larram Ivtl I to knock out (teeth). 2 to dent the 
cutting edge of (a saw, file, rasp etc.). -ava/pva 
milarram. 
r;1 !'illarram Ivil I to be knocked out or badly decayed 
(of teeth). 2 to be badly dented in several places (of a 
cutting edge). -iva millarram. 
lr.;.:> 
r; lirm <Engl> Inl [acad} school or university term. 
ni;aam il-lirmeen system by which the academic year is 
divided into two terms, each with its own examinations. 
..; I r .;.:> see - r r .; .:> : lurmaay 
(yr.;':» 
.... ; 
turumba I 
<It Iromba> In pi -aall pump. 
Illurumba kawitf rubber drain-plunger. -Iurumbil baab 
hydraulic door-operating device. -also (urumba, 
{Ulumba. 
.... ; 
turumba 2 <It tromba> In pi -aatl trumpet. 
I_ yr .;.:> 
J....; turumbee(a <T trampete> In pi -aatl side 
drum. -also (urumbee(a. 
~; 
turumbe(gi In pi -yyal side drummer. -also 
(Urumbe(gi. 
l(-Yr.;':» 
(;J':"; taramboon <perh Fr> In pi -aatl trombone. 
127 
.;,.J."..; tarambuliin 
<prob 
Engl> 
In 
pi -aall 
trampoline. 
J - Y r .;.:> see - r .; ..:.0 • : turumbiil 
I 
_ 
..rr.;<..j 
........; lirmis Icoll nl Egyptian lupin (Lupinus termis), 
the seeds of which are commonly sold in the streets as a 
snack . 
4......; lirmisa In pi -aall I lunit nl a lupin seed. 
2 [plumb} plug cock. 3 key passage (of a lock). - Ino 
pll 4 gland which supposedly forms a small lump in a 
boy's chest when he reaches puberty. (illil-lu I-lirmisa 
he reached puberty. 
1 
_ 
..rr.;<..j 
........ ; 
lurmus <Engl trade name> In pi laraamisl 
vacuum flask. 
-..rr.;':> 
.:..~.,..; lirmuslaal <Engl> In pi -aall thermostat. 
(-u.;.:» 
.... t.:; lurummaay (also lurmaay, lurumwaay) <Engl> 
In pi -aall I tramway (system), streetcar (system). 
!,ifjaaril illi fii I-Iurummaay the street with the tram-
lines in it. 2 tram, streetcar. xaba(-u I-Iurummaay he 
was knocked over by a tram. 3 motor-powered barg~. 
4 metal bell on the end of the drone pipe of the !'arruul. 
;....,..; lirmumilr <Fr> In pi -aall thermometer. 
- -' r .;.:> see - r r .; .:> : lurumwaay 
JI~.;':> 
.;l;; lirnaalj <T Ilrnak> Inl [nautJ fluke (of an 
anchor). 
.:>~.;.:> 
.,;;; liranlu <It liranle> Inl [obsol} loop of leather on 
the heel of a shoe used to pull it on. 
[~.;.:> 
~; lurung Icoll nl [bol} Adam's apple(s) (Citrus 
medica var. cedrata). -also !'utrung. 
~; lurunga Inl I lunit n, pi -aall an Adam's apple. 
2 Ino pll frieze design used in tent applique work (see 
PI.H,27). 
~~; lurungaaya = lurunga. 

( -
~oJ.;'::") 
.:,~,; turungaan <P turungan> InJ lemon balm 
(Melissa officinalis). 
~,; turungeela InJ a game played with marbles, in 
which the target marbles are placed in the shape of a 
triangle. 
- j oJ.; .::.. 
.).;;-:;,; taranzistur <Engl> In pi -aatl transistor. 
II raagil taranzistur [derog] very small man, pip-squeak. 
..,.. oJ.; .::.. 
...,...;',; tarans <Engl> In pi -aatl [elec] transformer. 
1_ ..,.. oJ.; .::.. 
.:,\.;...;); tarnistaan <Engl turn astern> [naut] order 
given to boat's engineer to move astern. 
2 -
..,.. oJ.; .::.. 
~',; taransiit <prob Fr> Inl 1 transit. 2 transit 
area (in an airport). 
..;. oJ .; .::.. 
..,:.;',; taranl <Fr tranche> In pi -aat, -aatl slice. 
Iisikkiinit taranl carving knife. 
J oJ.;'::" see J 1 oJ.; .::..: tirnaaif 
.!loJ,;'::" 
<.!1;,; tarank or tarank <Engl> In pi -aatl 1 trunk tele-
phone system. 2 trunk telephone call, long distance 
call. 
-
t oJ.; .::.. 
..::...+.-i); tarnihiit <Engl turn ahead> [naut] order 
'given to boat's engineer to move ahead. 
..;. ..s oJ .; .::.. 
~,; tarneela In pi -aatl handle of a tap or faucet. 
t.; .::.. 
4. '.; turraha r In pi -aatl falsehood. 
..,.. .J .; .::.. 
..rJ'; tarwis Ivil to make a surrounding wall, fence 
etc., make a frame (around s. th.), for protection. tsrwis 
lalaJ-rimqa lalaan tibaan draw a line round the signa-
ture so tliat ifstands out. -vn tarwasa; ava/pva mitarwis. 
~J'; tarwiisa In pi tarawiis, tarwisaatl 1 surrounding 
wall, fence etc. 2 flourish or line drawn round a signa-
128 
ture to make it stand out . 
..rJ}I rittarwis Ivil (impersonal) passive of tarwis . 
mittarwis lalee well-guarded. -iva mittarwis. 
..,.. ..s.; .::.. 
...r'-'; tiriis <Gr treis> In pi -aatl three (in cards). 
...,..........,; tiraysibs <Engl> InJ [anat] triceps. ,- also 
tiraay . 
I 
IJ..s.;.::.. 
~,; taryaifa InJ mockery. 
J!.}I rittaryaif Ivil to make a mock, poke fun. rima 
b-tittaryaif lalayya are yoo making fun of me? -vn 
taryaifa; ava mittaryaif. 
2J..s.;'::" 
~~,; tiryaaq InI antidote, theriac. 
'::"oJ..s.;'::" 
fo,.'; taryantu InJ [Chr] triangle (musical instrument) 
used to accompany chants and hymns in the Coptic 
church. 
oJ Ij'::" 
J.; I:; tazaana InJ whitewood planking. -also latazaana, 
latazaana . 
~j.:.o 
~:; tazga <T tezgah from P> In pi tizagl work bench. 
mangala tazga vice . 
..s.!lj'::" 
~,.i; tazakiyya <Gr theotokia> In pi -aatl [Chr] 
hymn to the Virgin Mary . 
.!lJj'::" 
.ill:; tuzluk <T tozluk> In pi tazaalikll (leather) leg-
gings or gaiters. gazma b-tuzluk a pair of high boots. 
2 section of appliqueed sailcloth used as a partition in a 
1iwaan . 
( .::.. ..,.. .::.. ) 
.::-~ tust <Engl> Inll toast. 2 (leel) tust sandwich-
loaf, rectangular loaf of bread. 
..:;.....; tist In pi -aatl human pyramid (in acrobatics). 
t..,...::.. 
~ tusl In pi ritsaall one ninth, ninth part. 

~ 
tisla Inurn: in absol state, in apposition, or w foil 
n sing in context~ of ordering and itemizing; pI -aatl 
nine. fis-saala tisla nine o'clock. xumsumiyya w-tisla 
five hundred and nine. ril-liyaal tisla the children are 
nine (in number). liyal-ha t-tisla her nine children. 
tisla saar nine piastres. haat tisla biira bring nine beers! 
Ilyoom tisla min fahr; tisla the ninth of September. 
·kull-i-na wlaad tisla (we are all born after nine 
months' pregnancy) ... we are all equal. 
• tislaat (tislaat) ladvl in nines, nine at a time. 
t"' tisal Inurn: in constr w foil n pI; usu tisalt when 
followed by n pI ordinarily w initial hamzal nine. tisal 
banaat nine girls. tisalt ufhur nine months. tisalt alaa! 
nine thousand. 
~ J"'\; tasuula In! ninth day of the month of Muh-
arram. 
t"\; taasil ladjl ninth. lifit-taasil in the ninth (month 
of pregnancy). 
r ~ .r-I.:...-; tisaltaafar I/num pI -aatl nine-
teen. 2 fit-tisaltaafar ladj invarl the nineteenth. 
.:r.-' tisliin 1 Inurn pI -aatl ninety. 2 fit-tisliin ladj 
invarl the ninetieth. 
~l-..; tuslumiyya 1 In pI -aatl nine hundred. 2 fit-
tuslumiyya ladj invarl the nine-hundredth. 
~ tassac Ivil to reach the ninth day (after a birth, 
marriage or death). - ava mitassal. 
J:';~ 
;,.:.; tiffa <Copt> ladj invarl fat, corpulent, plump. 
~..;';~ 
.j...:.; tifiiki 1 ladjl Czech. 2 In "I a Czech. 3 In no pll 
the Czech language. 
Jlt~ 
Jl.; talaala I limper, fern talaali, pI talaalul come! 
come on! talaala bukra come tomorrow! talaala niskar 
let's get drunk! 
Iyt~ 
~ tilib (a) IvjJ 1 to become tired, become worn out. 
fana tilibti w-Iaazim fanaam I'm exhausted and must 
sleep. ri/-mawatiir bitaalit it-taksiyaat bi-titlab bi-surla 
taxi engines wear out quickly. 2 to put oneself to trou-
ble, put oneself to inconvenience. yaama tlibti 1-~all:J-u 
w-dilwaqti b-yinkir how often I've put myself out on his 
behalf and now he denies it! 3 to suffer discomfort. 
ma-tlibtif qawi fil-Yo4i.laada I didn't suffer much pain 
when I had the baby. -vn talab; ava talbaan. 
~ talab I (i) Ivtll to tire, wear out. fiffur/ i talab-ni 
129 
the work tired me out. 2 to put to trouble or inconveni-
ence. famal-i m-akunfi talabt-ak I hope I haven't 
been any trouble to you. 3 to cause discomfort or suf-
fering. fiffiifa b-titlib is-sidr the narghile causes chest 
pains. -vn talab, talabaan; ava taalib . 
........ talab2 In! inconvenience. ma-fiif talab it's no 
trouble at all.lltalab-ak raal:Ja (the inconvenience you 
cause is ease) ... it's a pleasure. 
..,.I..ui fatlaab Ipl nl fees. 
':'4-u talbaan ladj "I t tired, worn out. fana talbaan 
min sahrit fimbaaril:J I'll tired from last night's party. 
Il!ax~iyyit-u talbaana he has a weak personality. 2 sick, 
ill. talbaan fiwayya not very well. IImuxx-u talbaan 
he's a bit crazy. 3 poor, wretched, pitiable. muwaHa! 
talbaan wi-ralbaan zayyi l:Jalaat-i a poor, unfortunate 
civil servant like me. 4 of poor quality. xaaaat talbaan a 
bad calligrapher. farqi talbaana infertile land. film i 
talbaan qawi a lousy film . 
........ i fatlab I tell more/most tired. 
'-:-""-\;;.. mataalib Ipl nl troubles, burdens, worries, 
difficulties . 
........ i fatlab2t Ivtl to tire. - ava mutlib. 
...,...-.;... mutlib ladj "I tiring, tiresome. fis-sillim huwwa 
iii mutlib it's the stairs that are tiring. ya salaam da-nta 
walad mutlib giddan goodness! aren't you a tiresome 
boy! 
...,....:::.-1 fistatlab Ivtl to consider (s.th.) too tiring. - aval 
pya mistatlab. 
lyt..:J 
.:,l,..U • .:,4-u tilbaan In 
pI talabiinl 1 snake. zayy 
it-tilbaan yuqr~ wi-yi/bad like a snake, biting and lurk-
ing (said of a snake-in-the-grass). filii qar~-u t-tilbaan 
yixaa! mil-l:Jabl [prov} he whom the snake has bitten 
fears the rope. Htilbaan i/-ba(n [path} roundworm. 
-raas tilbaan motif in tent appliql1ework (see PI.H, 
12). 2 tilbaan iI-bal:Jr or samak tilbaan eel. 
t..:Jt..:J 
~ taltal Ivtl 1 to budge, move. 2 to dislocate (a 
limb). -also tal:Jtal:J. -vn taltala; avalpva mitaltac· 
f::A':' mitaltal ladjl unsteady on one's feet, tottery. 
~I fit/altal Ivil passive of taltal. -iva mit/actal. 
v-t..:J 
~ 
talas (i) Ivtl to make unhappy or miserable. filii 
talas-u zamaan-u yirkab futubiis it's an unfortunate 
man who has to go by (public) bus. -vn talaasa, 
talasaan; ava taalis; pya matluus. 
,-",,..::... matluus ladj pI mataliisl unlucky and wretch-

· 
ed, doomed to failure. II 'lil-matluus matluus wa-law 
.s>\.Q; tuffaalji, tiffaalji ladjl apple-like. xadd-a-ha 
lallac;u lala raas-u fanuus {prov] = an unlucky man 
'laljmar tuffaalji she has apple-red cheeks. IIzatuun 
stays unlucky no matter what chances he gets. - 'litlamm 
tuffaalji variety of large green olive for pickling. 
il-matluus lala xaayib ir-raga the wretched man comes 
together with the hopeless one (said to abuse an asso-
ciation between two persons). - 'i'il-laruusa lil-lariis 
wig-gary'lil-mataliis {prov] the bride is for the groom 
but those who have exhausted themselves (preparing 
the marriage) only have trouble (i.e. involving oneself 
in what is essentially other people's business only brings 
problems). 
~ 
taliis ladj pi tUlasal miserable . 
...,.....i 'latlas lell morelmost miserable or unhappy. min 
'latlas maxaliic; illaah one of the most wretched of 
creatures. 
~I 'lintalas Ivil to be made unhappy, wretched or 
miserable. - iva mintilis. 
yJt..:.o 
..,..w . ..,..w tallab In pi talaalibl fox. 
4,.W .:y..; tallaba Inl 1 foxiness, slyness, cunning. 
2 {path] Alopecia areata, fox-evil (a nervous disorder 
cau~ing small round patches of baldness). 
..,...L.;I 'littallab Ivil 1 to become foxy, cunning or sly. 
2 to behave foxily, cunningly or slyly. -ava mittallab. 
"';..:.0 
~ tifa In pl-waatl ichneumon. - also tifaawa, tiftwwa. 
.J I ...; ..:.0 
oJ\.Q; tifaawa In pi -aatl ichneumon. -also tifa, tiftwwa. 
..:.0"';..:.0 
~ tifta In! red powder used for colouring food. 
'laljmar tifta pale red. 
01..:.0 ...; ..:.0 
• \:;.i; taftaah <Fr taffetas> Inl taffeta. 
"';..:.0"';..:.0 
...£A; taftif Ivil to spit or splutter while talking. -vn 
taftafa; ava mitaftif. 
4i";;';; taftuufa In pi tafatiifl l.fslang] cigarette. 2 a 
small piece. taftuuftt laljma a small piece of meat. 
c~..:.o 
c.~ tuffaalj, tiffaalj Icoll nl apple(s). 
4.\.Q; tuffaalja, tiffaalja lunit n, pi -aatl an apple. 
tiffaaljit 'laadam the Adam's apple. IItiffaaljit ~aari 
{naut] wooden cap on the top of a mast. 
t."'; ..:.0 
t:! taffax 1 Ivtl to cause to swell. lenee kaanit 
mitaffaxa min kutr il-liyaa{ his eyes were swollen from 
much weeping. 2 Ivil to become swollen. -vn tatftix; 
a':.~pva mitaffax. 
t:!1 'littaffax Ivil to be made to swell. -iva mittifflX. 
"';'''';..:.0 
~ 
tufajgi <T tufek~i> In pi -yyal armourer (in the 
police and the army). -also tufakfi. 
"';"';..:.0 
.j; taff (i) Ivtl to spit. ft-blaad barra Ijatta t-taff' b-ftluus 
abroad it costs you money even to spit. II tiff' f-wifJ-i law 
you may spit in my face if (such-and-such an unlikely 
thing happens), as in 'libc;a tiff' f-wifJ-i law 'lana ¥al{aan 
= I'll eat my hat if I'm wrong! -tiff' min buc;c;-ak "" 
don't say such things (said to one who blasphemes or 
mentions something ill-omened). -taffiin fi-buC;C; , balti 
(it's as if) they have conspired together. - 'li/li ytiff' taffa 
ma-yilljas-haa-J {prov] (one does not lick what one has 
spat) what has been cast away should be left alone, 
what's done is done. -vn taff, tafafaan; ava taaftf; pva 
"!atfuuf. 
~ taffa In pi -aatl 1 instance noun of taff. 2 gob of 
spittle. 
J\.Q; tifaaf Inl spittle. 
~\.Q; tifaafa Inl spittle . 
:i.A;.. mitaffa In pi -aatl spittoon. 
.£l"'; ..:.0 
~ 
tufakfi <T tufek~i> In pi -yyal armourer (in the 
police and the army). -also tufajgi . 
~ ~.i tufakxaana <T tufekljiine> In pi -aatl {obsol] 
gun factory. 
J"'; ..:.0 
J..&; .JA: tif! Inl fibrous vegetable sediment, dregs. tif! 
if:faay!ea dregs. 
J..&; .JA: tafftl Ivil to become fibrous. 'lil-lift' jaax wi-
tafftl the turnips became old and woody. -ava mitaffil. 
0"'; ..:.0 
.,.\.Q; tafaaha In pi -aatl triviality. 
<Ii\; taafth ladjl trivial, insignificant. 
4i; i 'latfah lell morelmost trivial or insignificant. 

J ~ V see J.;.. and .J I J.;.. and .J.J J .;.. 
lifa, lifaawa, lifiwwa 
OJ"'; v 
.;; lifuuh, tifuww onomatopoeia for the sound of spit-
ting, indicating disgust. tifuuh (laleek) "" how disgust-
ing (you are)! leen-i fii wi-tfuww" lalee {provj I have 
my eye on it and how disgusting it is! (said in running 
down what one secretly desires). - also fitfuuh, 
fitfuww. 
JJ"'; v 
.:,.; lifiwwa In pi -aatl ichneumon. - also tifaawa, tifa. 
J I J v see 2..s J .;.. : taqaawi 
yJv 
.,..t; • .,..... taqab (i) Ivtl to drill or bore. -vn taqb, 
taqabaan; ava taaqib; pva matquub. 
-,..A; • .,..... tuqb, suqb f In pi tuquub, suquub r I hole. 
",li.:.. .... li:.. mitqaab In pi mataqiibl I any device for 
drilling or boring. 2 skirt chaser. 
"";1 fittaqab Ivil to be drilled or bored. - iva mittiqib. 
JJv 
JZ .j.i; tiqil (a) Ivil I to become heavy. bi-yjarrabu 
l-farxa mayya ktiir lajaan titqal fil-wazn they give the 
chicken a lot of water to drink so it will weigh more. 
II fi/-yarr i xalla dmaay-i titqal the heat made my head 
feel muzzy. quddaam i/-mudiir lisaan-i b-yitqal I get 
tongue-tied in front of the boss. 2 to become burden-
some, become difficult. ma-tsib-j iI-waagib yitqal 
caleek don't let the homework get on top of you. lJasseel 
finn i samal-i tiqil I felt hard of hearing. 3 to act re-
served, play it cool. balaaj luqli baqa enough of this 
coyness! da b-yitqallalayya he plays hard-to-get with 
me. fit-tuqli ~anla playing hard-to-get is an art. II fitqal 
car-ruzz (lamma yistiwi) "" have patience! take it easy! 
-vn tuql, taqalaan; ava taqlaan. 
JZ .j.i; tuqllnl I weight, heaviness. naxx i min it-tuql 
it gave way under the weight.lliissa l-tuql i wara the best 
is still to come. 2 weight, object used in weighing. 
3 {nautJ hand lead. 
JlA;i fasqaatr Ipl nl weights for weight-lifting. lJaml 
i/-fasqaal weight-lifting. 
JZ .j.i; taqal Inl weight, object used for weighing 
down. taqal Iilladuuf counterpoise for the shadoof. 
;.li; laqala = taqal. 
J,.i: .J.eA; tiqiil ladj pi tuqaal/ I heavy, weighty. 
macmuul min in-nalJaas il-liqiil made of heavy copper. 
131 
tiqiil 
wi-xafiif it-tiqiil 
heavyweight 
and 
light-
heavyweight (in boxing and wrestling). IIgeeb-u tqiil 
he's well-off. - tiqiil iI-lisaan slow and indistinct of 
speech. - fir-raagil da xebl-u lqiila that man is a total 
flop. - fiid-u tiqiila he is clumsy. 2 thick, heavy. jaay 
tiqiil strong tea. jarbaat tiqiila syrup which is (too) 
highly concentrated. misaqqala tqiila heavy (greasy) 
moussaka. Ilraxx it-tiqiila to defecate. 3 difficult, 
burdensome. fil-waagib da tqiillalayya that homework 
is difficult for me. tibqa tqiila minni law talabti minha 
I-xidma di it would be expecting too much if I were to 
ask her for such a favour.lltiqiil (id-damm) dour, boor-
ish, unpleasant. -tiqiil is-saml hard of hearing. 48 coy. 
4b phlegmatic, cool. 5 lalso pi taqaayill prominent, 
notable (of persons). I~u~ taqaayil big-time thieves. 
JA:i .j.<;i fatqal leI! morelmost heavy, morelmost 
burdensome. II fatqal mil-hamm" lal-qalb more than 
can be tolerated. 
Jt.i; .JIi- tuqqaal In pi -aatl counterpoise (notably a 
sliding counterpoise on a steelyard). 
~t.i; .~Ii- tuqqaala I~ pi -aatl weight, object used for 
weighing down. tuqqaa'lit waraq paperweight. tuqqaalit 
is-saala c1ockweight. 
J.l.i .~ tuqqeela In pi -aatl weight, object used for 
weighing down. tuqqee!a lil-waraq paperweight. 
JU!. .Jli:.. mitqaal In pi mataqiil/ unit of weight equal 
to. twe~ty-four carats or 72.223 English grains. 
JA: .j.<; taqqal, taqqil Ivtl I to make heavy, make 
burdensome. ma-ttaqqi/-j iI-lJiml" lal-larabiyya don't 
put too heavy a load on the car! II taqqil damm-u he 
behaved in a deliberately boorish and unpleasant way. 
-taqqal rigl-ak (I) don't walk so fast. (2) be patient. 
2 to size (e.g., textiles). - Ivil 3 to lean heavily. 
ma-ttaqqilli lal-qalam don't press (too) hard on the 
pencil! II fiwla fakuun taqqilt a laleek I hope I've not 
been too much trouble. 4 to go to excess (especially in 
drinking alcohol). taqqilt i fif-jurb I had too much (alco-
hol) to drink. taqqilt imbaarilJ I had a heavy night last 
night. taqqilt i fin-noom I slept too long. 5 to wear 
warm clothes. laazim titaqqil lamma tuxrug you must 
put on something warm when you go out. - vn tatqiil; 
ava/pva mitaqqal, mitaqqil. 
0-i... .0~ mitaqqalaai Ipl nl heavy goods. 
Jil; taaqil Ivt/ to set an equivalent in weight. law 
taqil-ni bid-dahab even if he pays me my weight in gold 
(I won't do what he wants). -vn mitaqla; ava/pva 
mitl}aqil. 
Jil;l fittaaqil Ivil I to be equalled in weight. II finta 
b-tittaaqil bi-lajar riggaala you're the equal of ten men. 
2 to play hard-to-get. - ava/iva mittaaqil. 

J.i;:.-I fistattial, fistatf.jill/vtJ to consider (too) heavy 
or weighty. II fana b-astattiil damm-u I consider him 
boorish. 2 Ivil to behave in a brusque or high-handed 
manner. -vn fistitf.jaal; ava/pva mistatf.jal, mistatf.jil. 
~ J ioJ 
.;;; taf.jan (i) IvtJ I to do (s.th.) well. laazim tiUiin-1i 
l-badla lal- faaxir you must matte the suit a perfect fit. 
2 limperf onlyl to be an expert in. bi-yitf.jin il-larabi he 
knows Arabic well. -vn taf.jn, taf.janaan; ava taaf.jin; pva 
matf.juun. 
.;;; tif.jin ladj ·1 meticulous (usually in manual work). 
fil-fallaab it-tif.jin illi faddaan-u ma-yirmii-f faf.jall' min 
lalar faraadib ¥alla the meticulous peasant is he whose 
land yields not less than ten ardebs of wheat per feddan. 
.;;;i fatf.jan, fatqan T = taf.jan. -vn fitqaan t; ava 
mutqin; pva mutqan. 
.J~! fitqaant Inl exactitude, precision, accuracy. 
';;;1 fittaf.jan Ivil to become or be made exact, precise, 
or perfect. -vn fittif.jaan; iva mittif.jin. 
I .J J ioJ see I loS J .,:, : taf.jwa 
1 .J J ioJ see 1 loS J ioJ : taf.jaawi 
I loS J ioJ see also I loS J .J 
~ taf.ji ladj pi fatf.jiya, fatf.jiyyal pious, God-fearing. 
IS;;; taf.jwa In! devoutness, piety. 
~i fatf.ja lell more/most pious or God-fearing. 
~I fittaf.ja IvtJ I to fear (God). fittif.ji llaahfi-1il:Jl:Jit-ak 
value your health (as a' gift of God)! 2 to be wary of. 
fittif.ju dalwit iI-ma;luum {prov} beware of (bringing 
upon yourself) the curse of the oppressed! fittif.ji larra 
man fal:Jsanta filee {prov} beware of the evil (i.e. ing-
ratitude) of those to whom you have done good! -ava 
mittif.ji. 
Z loS J ioJ 
ISJli; taf.jailwi Ilpl n! seeds (for sowing). 2 In! (deris 
diminutive version (ofs.th.). taf.jaawi raagil a pint-sized 
man. . 
~ taf.jf.ja IvtJ to sow (land). -vn tatf.jiyya; ava/pva 
m!!af.jf.ji. 
~I fittaf.jf.ja Ivil to. be sown (of land). -iva mittaf.jf.ji. 
ioJ I JlioJ 
.:.~ tikaat In! mounting of a scoop on a water-wheel. 
ioJJlioJ 
.::..$..; tikit <Engl tic' et> I tag, label. nisi yil:Jua it-tikit 
132 
lal-fan(a he forgot to put the label on the bag. 
2 collection slip, ticket. fit-tikit bitBaG it-tanturleeh the 
ticket for the dry-cleaning. 
I JlioJ JlioJ 
~ 
taktil~ I Ivil to tick, go tick-tock. f.jalb-i bi-ytaktik 
my heart is beating hard. IItaktik lat-tilifoon to jiggle 
the telephone to get a connection. -vn taktaka; ava 
mitaktik. 
~I fittaktik I Ivil to be made to tick or click. sinaan-i 
ttaktikit mil-bard my teeth are chattering with the cold . 
-iva mittaktik. 
Z JlioJ Jl ioJ 
~ 
taktiik <Fr tactique> Inll tactics. 2 Ipl-aatl tac-
tic, scheme, strategem. 
~ 
taktiiki ladj ·1 tactical. 
~ 
takti1C2 IvtJ to plan (s.th.) carefully. -vn taktaka; 
ava/pva mitaktik. 
~ 
mitaktik ladj ·1 sharp, on-the-ball. 
~I fittaktie Ivil to be planned carefully. -iva 
mittaktik. 
3 Jl ioJ Jl ioJ 
.d;~ takatiik Ipl n! consequences. gat.lu l:Jumma 
w-raal:J fi-takatik-ha he had fever and died of it. 
IJ"'JlioJ 
u-SI; taks or taksi <perh Engl> In pi taksaat, 
taksiyyaat, tukrlsal taxi. taksi bin-nafar a taxi which 
plies a fixed route, each passenger paying his own fare. 
I Jl JlioJ 
.!t takk I (i) Ivil to make a slight sound, creak, click. 
fil-balaa(a takkit tal:Jt' riglay-ya the tile made a slight 
sound under my feet. fil-maktab takk' tal:Jt it-tuf.jl the 
desk creaked under the weight. -vn takk, takakaan; ava 
taakik. 
~ takka I linst n, pi -aat/l a slight sound, a creak, a 
click. 2 a little bit. 3 twitch, tic. takka llJ1abiyya a ner-
vous tic. 
Z Jl JlioJ 
~; tikka I In pi -aat, tikakl draw-string. -also dikka. 
~ 
takkik Ivtl to put a drawstring in (e.g., a garment) . 
-vn tatkiik; ava/pva mitakkik. 
~I fittakkik lvil to have a draw-string inserted (of, 
e.g., a garment). -iva mittakkik. 

3 ( .!l .!l ..::. ) 
~ takk 2 <T tek> In! {mus] weak beat. 
i. takka 2; takkit yaraara a plate of heat-resistant 
material (asbestos) used on a goldsmith's soldering 
disc. 
~ tikk J In! {mus] used only in combination with the 
name of a note to fndicate a rise in pitch of a quarter 
tone, e.g., tikki zirkoola the note one quarter of a tone 
higher th!!n D flat (i.e. D half flat). 
~ tikk 2 <Engl> In! teak. 
i. tikka 2 <It taees> In pi -aatl {print] nick (on a piece 
of type). 
1 J .!l..::. see J.!l.: 5'ittaakil 
r .!.!..::. 
~ 
tukma In! binding strip round a section of appli-
que work. 
oj .!.! ..::. 
0; tikna <T tekne> I plasterer's mixing trough. 
2 hull (of a boat). 
- J oJ.!l..::. 
~ 
"J,p:'. tiknulujya <prob Engl> Inl technology. 
eft "J.,s.; tiknulooji I lad j ·1 technological. 1 In ·1 
technologIst. 
IS.!.!"::' 
~ tikiyya <efT tekye> In pi -aat, takaayal I {obsol] 
Sufi religious house. 1 [joe] free eating-place, a place 
where anything goes. II tikiyya min reer bawwaab {prov] 
'" a free-for-all. 
~~ takkaaya In pi -aatl arm-rest. takkaayit kanaba 
cushion used as an arm-rest on a sofa. 
~I 5'ittaka Ivil to lean, support oneself. haat linafllat 
nittiki r;aleeha bring cushions for us to recline on. 
ril-r;aguuz kaan maafl yittiki r;ala r;ukkaaz the old man 
walked supporting himself on a walking-stick. rize; 
is-saar;i lil-mittiki {prov] the labour of the hard-working 
enriches the idle. -ava mittiki. 
fil rittakka (yittakka) Ivill to press, exert pressure. 
tittakka r;al-xajab yizayyae; if you press on the wood, it 
will creak. ril-muda(ris r;allim-ni zzaay 5'attakka 
gaamid r;ad-dibriyaaj the instructor taught me how to 
press down hard on the clutch. 1 to place emphasis, 
give concentration. tinae;e;i f~/een tittakka r;aleehum 
133 
kuwayyis wi-txujj il-imtiyaan choose a couple of chap-
ters and study them thoroughly, then take the exam. 
-vn tatkiyya; ava mittakki. 
o~.!l..::. 
~\; takeeh <Fr taquet> In pi -aatl {auto] tappet. 
yJ..::. 
..,.L; tilb ladj ·1 {obsol] well-built, strong (of a person). 
gittit-u tilba he is solidly built. 
-~yJ..::. 
.,s:;~ tilibiyanku <It taglio bianco> In! cut of meat 
consisting of a whole thigh muscle. -also tiribiyanku. 
..::.J..::. 
~ 
,.;..1; tilt In pi 5'atlaatl lone third, a third part. tilti 
kiitu a third of a kilo. II ma-kanit-p tistagri te;uul tilt 
it-talaata kaam ... she didn't dare utter a word. 
- 5'iddaa-ni r;ale;a tilten-ha moot ... he gave me a beating 
which half killed me. 1 string of prayer beads of thirty-
three beads only (in contrast with one of ninety-nine 
beads). 
v-:%' ,0":Jw talat Inum: in constr w foil n pi; usu talatt 
when followed by n pi ordinarily w initial hamzal three. 
talat riggaala three men. talatt alaaf three thousand. 
kull i talat yigaara every three stones. fit-talatt iyyaam 
dool during those three days. II 5'it-talat warae;aat the 
three-card trick. -juri it-talat warae;aat trickery, dishon-
esty, monkey business. 
~ 
su/us In! a large decorative intertwined style of 
Arabic calligraphy. II bis-sulus definitely, as in 5'inta 
ya-trawway bis-sulus you will definitely go home. 
.~-:% ,0":Jw talaat (also yoom talaat) In! (any) Tuesday. 
5'it-talaat or yoom it-ta/aat Tuesday. 
~-:% ,~":Jw ta/aata Inum: in absol state, in apposition, or 
w foil n sing in contexts of ordering and itemizing; 
pi -aatl three. miyya w-talaata one hundred and three. 
ril-qanuun raqam talaata law number three. ril-r;iyaal 
talaata the children are three (in number). r;iyal-ha 
t-talaata her three children. ta/aata saar three piastres. 
haat ta/aata e;ahwa bring three coffees! kulli sanateen 
ta/aata every two or three years. lIyoom talaata (min) 
jahri ta/aata the third of March. - 5'it-ca/aae; bit-talaata 
{lsi] irrevocable divof.ce. -talaata bi-llaah il-r;a;iim or 
w-allaahi I-r;a;iim talaata three (oaths) 'By Almighty 
God!' (a very forceful oath). 
~ ta/ataat (ta/ataat) ladvl in threes, three at a time. 
d-:% sulaasi ladjl I triple. lIyue;na sulasiyya D.P.T. 
(di.phtheria, 
pertussis. and 
tetanus) 
injection. 

- fil-[aqala s-sulasiyya {anat! the triceps. 2 tripartite. 
3 {mus! three-quarter (time). waltz (tempo). - 4/nl 
trio. 
....... ,Il. saluus Inl triad, trio. ris-saluus iI-raqdas {Chr! 
th~ Holy Trinity. 
u'j,; tallaat In • and pI tallaatal I practitioner of the 
three-card trick. 2 con man. 
.;.J\., ,.;.JI.; taalit ladjl third. rit-talta tabta (prov! the 
third (time) is decisive. 
WI.. saalisan ladvl thirdly. 
..;:..};;.,. matluutJ = musallas 1. 
~ 
;;.,")\., • ..,..\.;).; talattaaJar Iinum pI -aatl thirteen. 
2 rit-talattaaJar ladj invarl the thirteenth . 
.;y.;")\., .';";'j,; talatiin I Inum pI -aatl thirty .11 waaIJid wi-
ta/allin a card game resembling blackjack. -qarab (or 
[amal) waaIJid wi-ta/atiin {coarse! to masturbate, 
wanko 2 rit-ta/atiin ladj invarl the thirtieth. 
~L..")\., tultumiyya I Inum pI -aatl three hundred. 2 rit-
tu~uml>:.ya ladj invarl the three-hundredth. 
....L • .;...\; tallit Ivtl to do (s.th.) for a third time. laazim 
ratallit is-sana I have to repeat the year a third time. 
IJabl' mtallit three-stranded rope. - vn tatliit; avalpva 
mllallll. 
.....".L.; tasliis Inl {Chr! doctrine of the Trinity. 
.:..".l;; tatllit Inl I practice of the three-card trick. 
2 ~onning . 
......L... musallas ladjl I (also mllallitJ) triangular. 
mabrad 
mitallit three-sided 
file. 
- In 
pI -aatl 
28 triangle. IJisaab iI-musallasaat trigonometry. IlIi[b' 
musallasaat {soccer! three part pass. -musallas iI-
massaaIJ surveyor's cross-staff. 2b {mus! triangle. 
2c.!hird highest pitched string of the [uud . 
..;..l;1 rittallit Ivill to be difficult, or choosy, play hard-
to-get. riz-zibuun bi-yittallit [aleena the customer is 
being difficult and hard to please. 2 passive of tallit. 
fil-lJabl' da law ittallit IJa-ykuun lixiin tiawi if three 
thIcknesses of this rope are used together it will be too 
·thic~. -avaliva mittallit. 
..;.J I.; 1 rittaalit == rmallit 1. - ava mittaalit. 
J..:..J..:.. 
J:;l; taltlll Ivtl to heap up, pile up. 2 Ivil to become a 
pile. ba/aawi mtaltila calamity upon calamity. -vn 
talt~/a; avalpva mitaltil. 
J:;l;1 rlllaltilivil to be heaped up, be piled up. rif1url 
ittaltil [ala dmaay-i I was up to my ears in work. - iva 
mittalli/. 
- J":" J..:.. 
;I j± tilitwaar <Fr trottoir> In pI -aatl pavement, side-
134 
walk. -also tiritwaar, turutwaar, tallitwaar. 
[.J..:.. 
rf .& talg Inll ice. -/adjectivallyl fil-mayya talg the 
water is ice-cold. 2 snow. 
. . 
~'j,; .~'j,; tallaaga In pI -aatl refrigerator. markib 
tallaaga refrigerator ship.llgibna tallaaga very creamy, 
fr~shly:made lightly-salted white cheese . 
rf .& tallig Ivtll to store (s.th.) on ice. 2 to freeze. 
- Ivil 3 to freeze. turn to ice. talligt' mil-bard I froze 
w~h cold. -vn tatliig; avalpva mitallig . 
&1 rittallig Ivii to become frozen or very cold, be 
made to freeze. -avaliva mittallig. 
c:. J..:.. see also c:. oJ ..:.. 
cf tiliIJ, tilIJ ladj '1 insensitive, thick-skinned, imper-
vious to hints. 
cfi ratlalJ lell morelmost insensitive, etc. 
.,.'j,; talaalJa Inl insensitivity, thick-skinnedness, im-
p~rviousness to hints . 
cf tallalJ Ivill to become blank, dazed or insensitive. 
2 to behave in an insensitive or brusque way. -vn tatliilJ; 
ava mitallalJ. 
~I ristatlalJ Ilvtl to consider insensitive or thick-
skinned. 2/vil to behave in an insensitive way. -vn 
ristitlaalJ; avalpva mistatlalJ. 
rc:. J ..:.. 
~ 
talIJam Ivil to be obstinate. refuse to give way. 
xadit if1an{a w-talIJamit [aleeha she took the bag and 
refused to let go of it. ma-ttaIIJam-!, kida -IJaawil tifham 
iIIi b-atiul-huu-Iak don't be so stubborn - try to under-
stal!d what I'm telling you! -vn talIJama; ava mitalIJam. 
~I rittalIJam = talIJam. 
-.!lIJ"J..:.. 
'":'~ tiliskoob <perh Fr> In pI -aatl telescope. 
-.)t.J..:.. 
JI P tilirraa! <perh Engl telegraph> In pI -aatl tele-
gram, cable. -also tillirraaf, tallilrraa!. 
"';J..:.. 
.....i.l; tili! (a) Ivil I to become damaged or destroyed. 
ra[~ab-ha tilfit her nerves were wrecked. II ris-sa/a! tala! 
== to lend is to lose. 2 to become corrupted or spoiled. 
ril-wad da tili!min yoom ma raaIJ ig-gam[a this boy has 
been corrupted since he joined the university. -vn tala!; 
ava tal!aan, taalif. 
.....i.l; tala! (i) Ivtll to damage, wreck. ril-IJariitia ta/a!it 

iI-mayall the fire wrecked the shop. 2 to corrupt. 
iayb-u talaf faxlaaq-u his friend corrupted his morals. 
-vn talaf, talafaan; ava taalif; pva matluuf. 
.;:,~ ta/afiyyaat Ipl nl breakages, damage. 
J')\;.. mitlaaf ladjl extravagant, wasteful, prodigal. 
..... .11 i tawaalif Ipl nl things too damaged to function 
properly . 
...A.l:; 1 fintalaf Ivill to be damaged, be wrecked. 2 to be 
corrupted, be spoiled. Yibn-ak ik-kibiir intalaf your 
eldest son has gone to the dogs. -vn Yintilaaf; iva 
mintilif. 
..A.I;i Yatlaf Ivtl to damage, harm. !'iI-xamra muilifa I~­
liyya alcohol is injurious to the health. -vn Yitlaaf; ava 
mutlif· 
- j"'; J..:.. 
.JJ!j.,Al; tilifizyoon <Fr> In pi -aatl television. 
JJ!j.,Al; tilifizyooni ladj °1 of or pertaining to tele-
vision. mlliawwir tilifizyooni television cameraman. 
Ilkoora tilifizyoniyya black and white football. - maska 
tiliJizyoniyya (unnecessarily) melodramatic goal save. 
.r.U J!j.,Al; tilifizyongi ladj pi -yyal {deris] pertaining to 
television. 
"","';J..:.. 
~ 
talfis Ivil to be flabby, drip with fat. -vn talfasa; 
ava mitalfis. 
.,-llil Yittalfis Ivil to become or be made fat or flabby. 
-avaliva mittalfis. 
.j"';J.;:.. 
.J# tilifoon <perh Fr> In pl-aatl I telephone. 
2 telephone call. fiddii-ni (or Yiqrab-li) tilifoon give me 
a call. ga-ni tilifoon I got a telephone call. 
J# tilifooni ladjl telephonic. taywiil tilifooni 
(money) transfer by telephone. 
.)l; talfin Ivt and viI to telephone, make a telephone 
call. -vn talfana; ava mitalfin. 
~I Yittalfin Ivil to be telephoned. - iva mittalfin. 
.!l J.;:.. 
.ill; talk: budrit talk talcum powder. yagar talk talc, 
hydrous magnesium silicate. 
I.J J.;:.. 
J; tall In pi tiluu/, tilaalll mound, man-made hill, tell. 
fiI-balad di mabniyya lala taU" laali this village is built 
on a high mound. IIxud min it-talli yixtall {prov] ,.. 
spending will consume any amount of money. - tall 
i/-c;amar (mount of the moon) heel of the hand (in 
135 
palmistry). -talli kawkab iz-zuhra (mount of Venus) 
ball of the thumb (in palmistry). 2 Ipl tiluul onlyl heap 
of dirt. 
Z.J J..:.. 
J; tull <Fr tulle> Inl tulle, gauze. 
j; tulli I I Inl tulle. 2 ladj invarl made of tulle. 
namusiyya tulli tulle mosquito net. 
4> tulliyya In pi talaali, tulliyyaatl {rur] head-shawl of 
tulle. malaana t-tarabiil wit-talaali cry of the vendor of 
haberdashery or notions . 
-..:.. J J.;:.. 
)"J. tallitwaar <Fr trottoir> In pi -aatl pavement, 
sidewalk. -also tilitwaar, tiritwaar, turutwaar. 
-t~J..:.. 
"';Ip tilliYraaf, 
tilliYraaf, 
talliyraaf <perh Engl 
teleg~aph> In pi -aat, -aatl telegram, cable. 
jlP tilliYraafi, tilliyraafi, talliYraafi ladj °1 tele-
graphic: linwaan tilliyraafi cable address . 
.r.-i 1 P 
tilliYrafgi, talliYrafgi In pi -yyal telegraphist. 
IS J J.;:.. 
jl,; tulli 2 <T turlU> Inl dish of mixed vegetables. 
-also turli, (urli. 
I.I"'~ J J..:.. 
..,...1; talliis <Copt> In pi talaliisl large sack. II qaalid 
zay~ it-talliis ,.. sitting like a lemon. 
~ 
talliisa In pi talaliis, tallisaatl = talliis . 
r J.;:.. 
~ tilim I (a) Ivil I to become blunt. Yis-sikkiina tilmit 
xaa/~ the knife has become very blunt. 2 to become 
insensitive or thick-skinned. -vn talma, ta/aama, 
talamaan; ava taalim . 
~ talam (i) Ivtl to blunt. YiNada ya-yitlim is-sikkiina 
rust will blunt the knife. -vn ta/ma, ta/amaan; ava 
taalim; pva matluum. 
;".')\; ta/aama Inl 1 bluntness. 2 thick-skinnedness, 
insensitivity . 
... );;.. matluuma Ifem adjl loose, profligate, aban-
doned (of a woman). 
.:,Wi talmaan ladjl blunt. 
~i Yat/am lell I morelmost blunt. 2 morelmost in-
sensitive or thick-skinned. 
~ tilim 2 1adj °1 1 blunt (of a blade). 2 thick-skinned, 
i~sensitive. tilim zayy iI-mizayyiniin as bold as a barber. 
~ tallim I Ivt/ to. cause to become blunt. - Ivil 2 to 

become blunt. 3 to be unresponsive. rig-gal.Jf' tallim 
fil-rarc[' xala~ the donkey foal absolutely refused to 
budge. -vn tatliim; ava/pva mitallim. 
~I rittallim lvi/ to become or be made blunt. -ava/iva 
mittallim. 
. 
rl.;1 rittaalim lvi/ to become insensitive or thick-
skinned. -ava mittaalim. 
rb-I ristatlim Ivtl I to consider blunt. 2 to consider 
insensitive or thick-skinned. - lvi/ 3 to become blunt. 
4 to become insensitive or thick-skinned. 
-vn 
ristitlaam; ava mistatlim. 
j r J.:.. 
..i...1" tilmiiz In pi talamiiz, talamzal I pupil, school-
child, student. tilmiiz l.JirafiT apprentice. 2 [Chr} 
disciple . 
• ~ 
talmaza In! apprenticeship. 
~I rittalmiz lvi/ to become or be made a student or 
disciple of (s.o. or s.th.). -vn talmaza; iva mittalmiz. 
lIS J.:.. 
')t" tala I (i, u T) Ivtl to recite. bi-yitlu l-qurraan (Uul 
il-leel fi-ramaqa.an they recite the Koran all night long 
durin.g Ramadan. -vn tilaawa; ava taali; pva matli. 
11SJ.:.. see also ISJ-, 
')t" tala 2 (i) Ivtl to follow. -vn tuluww; ava taali. 
Jl.; taali ladjl following. bit-taali consequently, as a 
consequence. 
.;, I IS J.:.. see .;, I IS J ..1. : talyaani 
-'ISJ.:.. 
.".1; tilyu <It tiglio> In! dried lime blossoms (used in 
the preparation of an infusion). 
,£)IYr.:.. 
.!l4i tumbaak, timbaak <perh Gk toumpeki> In! type 
of finely cut tobacco, wrapped in a broad leaf, for 
smoking in a fii/a. - also {umbaak. 
JIYr':" 
~4i timbaala <It timballo> In! kettledrum. 
-IYr':" 
J4i timbaani <perh It> In! timpani, orchestral 
kettledrums. 
I .!l Y r';:'" see .!l I Y r .:.. : tumbaak, timbaak 
136 
l'£)Yr.:.. see I,£)y.;,.:..: rittambak 
J Y r':" see J Y .;, .:.. : tambal, tambil, rittambil 
-'Yr':" 
.,;. timbu T <perh It> In! tempo. 
J-'Yr':" 
~ J'!""'; tumboola <It> In! tombola. 
IJlSyr':" 
~ 
tambiila In pi -aatl [carp} strip of wood fixed to 
bottom rail of windows and doors to lengthen them 
when they are too short. 
1 J IS Y r':" see - Y r .:.. .• : tumbiil 
r':"r':" 
r=:' tamtim Ivi/, to mumble. -vn tamtama; ava 
mitamtim. 
I .J r .:.. 
) 
tamr Icoll n! dried dates. IItamr' hindi ,tamarind. 
- tamr' l.Jinna henna plant, Egyptian privet. -tamr' 
l.Jinna rafrangi mignonette . 
• ) 
tamra In pi -aatl I lunit n! a dried date. 
II ma-yilraf-fit-tamra min ig-gamra [prov} (he can't tell 
a dried date from an ember) "" he doesn't know his arm 
from his elbow. 2 glans (of the penis). 
1 
_ 
.J r '-' 
.ft') tamargi <T tlmarel> In pi -yyal (male) nursing 
. assistant. 
4) tamargiyya In pi -aatl female nursing assistant. 
j. tammar 1 <T tlmar from P> I~tl to take care of, 
attend to (animals, especiatly horses). -vn tatmiir; ava/ 
pva mitammar. 
3 .J r':" see 4.J r '-'" : tamar, tammar 2 
(1,-", r .:.. 
c.W timsaal.J <Copt> In pi tamasiil.Jl crocodile. 
dimuul it-tamasiil.J crocodile tears. II kureek timsaal.J 
large ~and-operated type of car jack. -sarraalj timsaalj 
[carp} handsaw. 
~ J J r':" 
Ji ~amalli <T temelli> ladvl continually, always. 
tamalli yikdib he always lies. salit-ha tamalli b-tuljafher 
watch keeps on stopping. 

r r":;" 
~ tamm I (i) I/vt/ to accomplish, render complete. 
fif1ahr illi gayyi fla-ytimm i xamas siniin he'll be five 
years old next month. fit-toob tamm i talatiin mitr the 
bolt of cloth was a full thirty metres in length. 1 lvil 
2a to become complete, be completed, be accom-
. 
-
plished. sinan-ha tammit she got her full set of (adult) 
teeth. tamm il-itti/aafi benhum the agreement between 
them was concluded. lb to be effected, take place, 
occur. lamaliyyiteen yitimmu I-nals iI-wafit two opera-
tions that take place simultaneously. fil-imtiflaan 
ma-bi-ytimm illajwaafi the exam is not conducted in a 
haphazard fashion. -vn tamaam, tamamaan; ava tamm, 
taamim; pva matmuum. 
rli tamaam 1 In! completeness. faaxir tamaam or 
tamaam it-tamaam absolutely perfect.lllaia t-tamaam 
or bit-tamaam e'!tirely, completely, wholly. - fidda 
tamaam [mill to report all present and correct. -tabuur 
it-tamaam [mill roll call. 1 ladj invarl perfect. raagil 
tamaam a real man. kull-u tamaam everything is O.K. 
xabat xabta tanlaam fiawi he pulled off a really O.K. 
deal. 3 ladvl completely, perfectly. fuxt-i jabah-i 
tamaam my sister looks exactly like me. fig-gihaaz 
maafi tamaam the equipment is working perfectly. 
• tamaaman ladvl absolutely, completely. 
rli tamm 2, taammt ladj/l complete.landu filmaam 
laamm i bil-lamal he has a complete grasp of the work. 
2 perfect. fi-watJ.l i fuluqi laamm in a perfect(ly) hori-
z?ntal position. 
:ii lamma, timma In! completeness, fullness. faadi 
limmit il-fiy~a this is the end of the story. Illaia tammit 
(a1sq tammit) leen-(u) full to the brim. - fis-sabla w-
limmil-ha (or w-dimmil-ha) every conceivable evil. 
~i falamm I lell morelmost complete or perfect. 
huwwa xall~ iflurl a lala falamm i wagh he did the 
work in the most complete and satisfactory way. lala 
falamm islildaad in full readiness. 
4.J t&miima t In pI tamaayiml amulet, charm. 
~ milamma: faxrit iI-mitamma ... to add insult to 
i~jury, the last straw. 
,..c tammim Ivt/ to complete, put an end to, conclude. 
fif1awiif tammim iI-mafltJ.ar wi-fia/al-u the sergeant 
concluded the police report and closed it. II rabb-i-na 
ylammim bi-xeer may Our Lord grant a successful con-
clusion! (a compliment paid, e.g., to the couple and 
their parents at an engagement party). -vn tatmiim; 
avalpva mitammim . 
• tammim fala to check, to inspect (s.th.). fibfia 
tammim lala jlurl i fiabl i ma trawwafl please inspect 
the work before you go home. 
137 
~ tatimma t In! conclusion. feeh tatimmit l-fiy~a 
,,:~at is the end of the story? 
r'1 fittammim· Ivil 
passive 
of 
tammim. 
-iva 
mittammim. 
':'i fatamm 2 t = tamm / l. -vn fitmaam; avamutimm. 
,....-.-1 fistatmim IvtJ to complete, conclude. -vn 
fistitmaam; avalpva mistatmim. 
f:-' fistatamm I/vt/ to finalize. fistatamm i fumuur 
salar-u he finalized his travel arrangements. 1 Ivil to be 
or become completed. -vn fistitmaam; avalpva 
mistatimm. 
I .J r .;., 
.;,.; • .;j. taman I 
In 
pI fatmaanl price. 
fin-~ri 
fil-flarb i taman-u t-tatJ.fliyya the price of victory in war is 
sacrifice. II kullijeef bi-taman-u everything has its price. 
- fil-raali taman-u fii expensive things are worth every 
penny in quality. 
~ 
samiin ladjl valuable, precious . 
.;;.: .J tammin I Ivt/ to put a price on, appraise the 
value of. -vn tatmiin; avalpva mitammin. 
u.::.. . .;... mutammin In *1 professional appraiser, 
valuer . 
.. 
.;j.1 fittammin Ivil to be priced. -iva mittammin . 
Z.J r .;., 
,:,W .,:,li taman 2 Inum: in constr w foil n pI; usu 
tamant when followed by n pI ordinarily w initial ham-
zal eight. taman kutub eight books. tamant iyyaam eight 
days. tamant alaal eight thousand. 
~W .~li tamanya Inum: in absol state, in apposi-
tion, or w foil n sing in contexts of ordering and itemiz-
ing; pI -aatl eight. miyya w-tamanya one hundred and 
eight. ~afIJit tamanya page eight. fil-Iauiiba tamanya 
the players are eight (in number). tamanya saar eight 
piastres. haat tamanya biira bring eight beers! lIyoom 
tamanya (min) jahri tamanya the eighth of August. 
-tamanyaat the top inner corners ofthe goal (in soccer). 
11 tamanyaat (tamanyaat) ladvl in eights, eight at a time . 
.;,.; • .;j. tumn In pI fitmaanll one eighth, eighth part. 
1 [obsoll 2a district or precinct of a city. lb police sta-
tion of a district or precinct. 
4:..; .~ tumna In pI tumanl 1 [obsoll unit of weight 
equal to 2.5 wififia or 3.12 kilogrammes. 1 unit of dry 
measure equal to 0.258 Iitres. 
..:rol: • ..:ro\; taamin ladjl eighth. 
.rs- ~W • .,.:,\':;li tamantaajar Ilnum pI -aatl eight-
een. 1 fit-tamantaajar ladj invarl the eighteenth. 
.;,e'W • .;,e'li tamaniin Ilnum pI -aatl eighty. 1 fit-
tamaniin ladj invarl the eightieth. 

~I.H .• '; .~ tumnumiyya I Inurn pi -aatl eight hun-
dred. 
2 fit-tumnumiyya 
ladi 
invarl 
the 
eight-hundredth. 
~ .J tammin 2 Ivtl to make eight-sided or octagon-
al. -vn tatmiin; avalpva mitammin. 
.;... .~ mitammin I ladil octagonal, eight-sided. 
2 In pi -aatl octagon. 
loS i.J ~ ..:. 
..; j. timunya <It antimonio> Inl antimony. 
JJ ~..:. 
J""'; timuurJ <prop name Taymur>: manga timuur 
large, dark-green variety of mango. - also taymuur. 
I i.J":' 
I.:.; tana I Inl honour. ma-luu-f cartf.' wala tana he has 
neither honour nor dignity. 
l.!lyi.J":' 
~ 
tanbik Ivil to sit royally. -vn tanbaka; avalpva 
mitanbik. 
~I fittanbik. fit{ambak Ivil to sit at one's ease, loll. 
fittanbik fik-kursi caamil nafs-u fabu cali he lolled 
about in the chair putting on airs. - ava mittanbik. 
2 .!l y i.J":' see .!l I y 
~ ..:. : tumbaak. timbaak 
Jyi.J":' 
J.,.:; tambal <P tanbal> ladi pi tanablal extremely 
lazy. II tanablit is-sultaan three fairy-tale characters of 
legendary indolence employed to amuse the sultan. 
camliin zayy' tanablit is-sul(aan behaving in an ex-
tremely indolent fashion. 
J.,.:; tambil Ivil to be or become sluggardly, be idle. -vn 
tambala; ava mitambil. 
J.,.:;I fittambil Ivil to become sluggardly, idle or indo-
lent. - ava mittambil. 
":'i.J":' 
.:..;l; tant <Fr tante> Inl I aunt, auntie. 2 respectful 
form of address and reference to an older woman. -also 
(an(. 
- J":' i.J":' 
":,l r tanturleeh <Fr teinturerie> Inl dry-cleaning 
establishment. 
,J,,:,i.J~ 
....I;.;; tantif Ivtl to cut or tear into small pieces, dismem-
138 
ber. -vn tantafa; avalpva mitantif. 
;ij?" tantuufa In pi tanatiifl morsel, small piece. 
II ma-yelt-uu:f wala tantuufa == he hasn't a penny to his 
name. 
....1;.;;1 fittantif Ivil to be cut into small pieces, be dis-
membered. - iva mittantif. 
~":'i.J":' 
~ 
tantilla <Fr dentelle> Inl lace. - also dantilla. 
I i.J":' i.J":' 
.;r; tantin Ivil to strum, hum. b-atantin cal-cuud 
I strum on the lute - also dandin. -vn tantana; ava 
mitantin. 
2 i.J ~ i.J":' see J J ..:. i.J ~ : tantan. tantana 
J~i.J~ 
'.r.W tangara <T tencere> In pi tanaagirl [obsol] cas-
serole dish. - also (angara. 
C. i.J ~ see also C. J ..:. 
~ tiniY. tiny ladi °1 insensitive, thick-skinned, imper-
vious to hints. 
:i.>1.:.; tanaaya Inl insensitivity, thick-skinnedness, im-
perviousness to hints. 
~i fatnay lell morelmost insensitive, thick-skinned, 
i~pervious etc. 
~ tannay Ivil to become mulish, become stubborn 
and dense. fil-bihiim il-mitannay ma-ygii:f filla bitf.-
tf.arb the mulish beast will co-operate only when beaten. 
muxx-i tannay my mind seized up. muxx-u mtannay 
he:s dense. -vn tatniiy; ava mitannab. 
~I fittanay Ivil to become mulish, stubborn, dense, 
and thick -skinned. - ava mittanab. 
~I fistatnab I Ivtl to consider insensitive or thick-
skinned. 2 Ivil to become insensitive or thick-skinned. 
-vn fistitnaay; ava mistatnab. 
~i.J~ 
• ...\:,; tanda <It tenda> In pi tinad, tandaatl awning. 
J ~ i.J ~ 
J...\:,; tandar Inl [anat] flexor tendon. 
J i.J":' 
.fo tinar <Engl thinner> Inl I paint thinner. 2 spot 
remover. 
1V"i.J~ 
...,...;; tinis <Engl> Inl tennis. tinis i(-(awla table tennis. 

2 IJ" ~.;. see IJ" ~.J .;.: (uunis J, 
tuunus, 
tunsi, 
tuunis 2 
I .ll ~.;. 
d;,; tank <Engl> In pI -aat, tanaakiJ I storage tank. 
tank i banziin petrol tank. tank i ~abuura ballast tank, 
b~oy. 
d;,; tannik I Ivtl to bloat (of food). 2 Ivil to become 
bloated with food. -vn tatniik; ava/pva mitannik. 
d;,;1 fittannik Ivil to become full, become bloated with 
food. kat wi-ttannik he ate till he was fit to burst. -ava 
mittannik. 
2.ll~.;. 
~ 
tanaka <T teneke> In pI -aatl metal pot used for 
brewing Turkish coffee. -also kanaka. 
.) l.ll ~.;. 
)\5..;; tinkaar Inl tincal, borax. 
I~~.;. 
.:; tann (also tannit) <perh Copt> Iw suff; perf: 
tann-ultannit-u, 
tami-a-haltannit-ha, 
tann-u-huml 
tannit-hum, 
tann-akltannit-ak, 
tann-ikltannit-ik, 
tann-u-ku(m)ltannit-ku(m), tann-iltannit-ni, tann-i-nal 
tannit-na; imperf: yitann-ulyitamiit-u, 
titann-a-hal 
titannit-ha, 
yitann-u-humlyitannit-hum, 
yitann-akl 
yitannit-ak, 
titann-ikltitannit-ik, 
titann-u-ku(m)1 
titannit-ku(m), 
fatann-i/fatannit-ni, 
nitanni-nal 
nitannit-nal quasi-verb indicating 1 the continuousness 
or habitualness of an action or state. tann-i daaxi/ furth-
er and further in I went. titann-u-ku mafyiin keep on 
going. tann i/-waad yinaadi [aleeha l-lfaayit ma tnabalj 
the boy kept on calling out to her until he was hoarse. 
laazim yitann-u maafi he must keep on going. 
yitann-u-hum mafyiin they keep on going. fis-sitt i 
tannit-ha mittaxda the woman remained upset. ya reet 
titann-ik wayyaaya I wish you could stay with me. 2 the 
immediate succession of one action or state to another. 
Ijaddimt it-tazkara w-tann-i taati[ [ala foolj I presented 
the ticket and then went straight upstairs. faafu 
g-gurnaal wi-tann-u-hum tayriin [af-firka they saw the 
newspaper and rushed straight off to the company. 
2} ~ ~ .;. ) 
~ tinna: ma-luu-j (ma-lha-j) tinna he (she) has no 
pri."ciples. 
~ tinniin In pI -aat, tananiinl dragon. maari girgis 
wil-linniin St. George and the dragon. 
139 
o)S~~.;. 
"-i-J tinneeh In pI -aall {ChrJ alb. 
.J ~ .;. 
;.,:; tanwa Inl dregs (of Turkish coffee). 
I~~.;. 
..; 'cf lana 2 (i) Ivtl I to bend. fitnu riglee-ku w-
rukab-ku bend your legs and knees. tana raas-u l-taljt he 
bent his head down, he hung down his head. 2 to fold. 
taneet Ijarf-u I folded its edge. deel matni [ala makana a 
hem turned up by machine. 3 {nautJ to reef. - vn tany, 
taniyya; ava taani; pva matni. 
~ 
.~ tanya In pI -aatl I instance noun of tany. 
2 fold, bend. tanyit id-diraa[ the crook of the arm. 
3 hem. tanyit banta/oon trouser turn-up, trouser cuff. 
4 {nautJ reef (in a sail). 
~ taniyya In pI -aatl fold, bend . 
.d fasnaaf Iprepl during. llfil-fasnaaf di during this 
time. 
cf I fittana Ivil passive of tana. laazim yittini fin-n~~ it 
must be folded in half. - iva mittini . 
~I .~I fintana = fittana. -iva mintini. 
~ .~ tanna J Ivtl to bend or fold (a number ofthings, 
or one thing a number of times). -vn tatniyya; ava/pva 
mitanni. 
. .. 
~I 'cfl fittanna Ivi/l to be bent or folded (of a num-
ber of things or of one thing a number of times). 2 to 
sway (of a woman in walking). -ava/iva mittanni. 
..;i fasna Ivil to speak in praise, express admiration. 
kull it-talaba b-yisnu [alee all the students praise him. 
-vn sanaaf; ava musni. 
-r-I fistasna Ivtl to make an exception of. bi-ndaffa[ 
kull it-talaba m~ariif laakin bi-nistasni fawlaad i/-
fasatza we charge all the students expenses, but we 
except the children of professors. -vn fistisna, 
fistisnaa f t; ava mistasni; pva mustasna. 
.~I fistisnaaft In pI -aatl exception. bi-stisnaaf ... 
with the exception of .... 
~~I fistisnaaW 
ladjl 
exceptional. 
Ijaala 
stisnafiyya an exceptional situation. 
2~~.;. 
~ 
I .~I fitneen 
I Inurn, 
pI -aatl two. 
waaljid 
~ulfayyar wi-tneen kubaar one small and two large. 
humma l-itneen both of them. fahr itneen February. 
-/adverbiallyl rilti-nta [ayz-u taxd-u tneen whatever 
you want you can take twice over. 2 (also yoom itneen) 
Inl (any) Monday. yoom l-itneen Monday. 

~ fitnenaat ladvl in twos, by twos. 
~ 
1.::1 ,..,.:.l.;;1 fitnaafarI Inurn pi -aatl twelve. 2 riI-
fitnaafar ladj invarl the twelfth. 
140 
J~ ,J\'; taani ladj "II second. riI-!Jarb il-laalamiyya 
f 
t-tanya the Second World War. 2 other, another. bald' 
lifriin yoom tanyiin after another twenty days. ma-tgii-J 
la bukra wala fayy' yoom taani don't come tomorrow 
or any other day! fit-tanyiinfeen where are the others? 
landak taani have you any other? mif laawiz min da -
laawiz min it-taani I don't want (any) of that, I want 
(some) of the other. 3 next, following. rigilna taani 
yoom Wt; returned the following day. taani marra ma-
titfaxxar-fnext time don't be late. II kull' yoom wit-taani 
(too) often. -hiyya t-tanya gat she, in her turn, came. 
- ladv/4 again, more. mif !J-akallim-ak taani I'm not 
going to speak to you again. kul taani eat some more! fii 
feeh taani what else is there? 
~ min taani ladvl over again. 
JI?I fit-tawaani Ipl n in constrl of the second grade 
(of quality). qU{n it-tawaani second-grade cotton. 
le; ~ saaniyan ladvl secondly. 
~~ sanya In pi sawaani, sanyaatl second (time unit). 
IIsanya wa!Jda just a moment! 
..sy~ sanawi J ladj "II secondary. madrasasanawiyya 
.school for children in the 15-18 age group, high school. 
fahaada sanawiyya (lamma) high school certificate. 
2 pertaining to high school. hiyya r~-~aff il-fawwil is-
sanawi (or fi- fuula sana wi) she's in the first year of high 
school. 
~ y \:J 1 fis-sanawiyya In! I the last year of secondary 
school. 2 (also fis-sanawiyya I-lamma) the secondary 
school certificate. 
~I.:: sunaafi ladjl I dual. 2 bipartite. 3 [mus] two-
four (time). - Inl 4 [mus] duo, duet. 
~ tiniyya: fabu miyya yi!Jsid fabu tniyya [prov] (the 
man with a hundred (animals) envies the man with a 
(single) two-year-old animal) the rich are never 
satisfied. 
~ ,~ tanna Z Ivtl to do (s.th.) a second time. tanni do 
(it) ;lgain! -vn tatniyya; ava mitanni. 
3 loS ~ o:J 
~ tinya <prob Engl> [path] tinea, ringworm. 
I loS ~ o:J 
le;.,; tunya In pi -aatl [Chr] alb, tunic. 
.£l1oS~o:J 
.u,;.,; tuniik <Fr> Inl tunic. 
oo:J 
Ai tih Ifem n, pi -aatl third letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also taa, taaf, teeh. 
oo:Joo:J 
~ tahtih Ivil to stutter, stammer. -vn tahtaha; ava 
mitahtih. 
r 0 o:J 
~ taham (i) Ivtl to accuse (usually without evidence). 
tahamuu f-sirqit il-!Jumaar they accused him of stealing 
the donkey. huwwa kaan mathuum fil-bint he was ac-
cused concerning the girl (i.e. of having seduced her). 
-vn tuhma; ava taahim; pva mathuum. 
4..f: tuhma In pi tuhaml accusation. fit-tuhma di lizqit 
fii this accusation stuck to him. rit-tuhma btalt-i (jail the 
charge against me is murder. II wi//' it-tuham criminal 
type. 
~I fintaham Ivil to be accused. -iva mintihim. 
~I fittaham Ivtl to accuse. fittahamuu-ni bi-xtilaas 
falf' gneeh they accused me of embezzling a thousand 
pounds. -vn fittihaam; ava mittihim; pva muttahamT. 
~ 
muttaham In ,"I [leg] accused . 
r~.Jo:J 
ri.,; tawfam In! Ilpl tawaafiml sibling in a multiple 
birth. tawfameen twins. -also 100m. 2 fit-tawfam Ino 
pI! [astrol] Gemini. 
·Y.Jo:J 
y\,; taab (u) Ivil to repent and desist (from a vice). tubt' 
li-llaah lanfamm ik-kukayiin I swore to God to give up 
sniffing cocaine. huwwa-nta ma-bi-ttub-J' fabadan you 
never give up your evil ways. -vn tooba; ava taayib. 
~ taab lala to unburden, relieve (of God). rabb-i-na 
ytuub la/eehum mil-liyaa/ may God relieve them of the 
burden of their children! f~llaah yituub la/eena min 
rufyit is-safliin God relieve us of the sight of (such) 
awful people! rabb-i-na ytuub laleena mif-JuY/aana 
/-mihabbiba di God relieve us of this lousy work! 
~.,; tooba Ilnl repentance. 2 ladvl never again. tooba 
(min or fiza or fin etc.). I'll never do (such and such) 
again, as in tooba min di n-nooba I'll never do it again, 
tooba fin kunt astalqad fid-daggaliin never again will 
I put my trust in con men, tooba fin kunt' raa!J faskar 
taani never again will I get drunk. 
yl:; tawwaab In! Granter of forgiveness (epithet of 
God) . 
y:; tawwib Ivtl to induce renunciation in (s.o.). fana 

b-acraf fatawwib-ak can ik-kasal da I'll be able to make 
you give up this laziness! -vn tatwiib; ava/pya 
mitawwib . 
..,...';1 fitta.wwib Ivif passive of tawwib. -iva mittawwib. 
ZYJ":;" • 
..,....lz . ..,...J\;I fittaawib Ivif to yawn. bi-tittaawib kitiir 
leeh why are you yawning so much? -vn mitawba; ava 
mittaawib. 
3 yJ ..:;.. 
..,....; • ..,....; toob In pi fatwaabll bolt (of cloth). 2 dress 
(particularly a long type). toob iI-/arab wedding-dress. 
II min toob-u of his kind, as in fibna mif min tob-ha we're 
not her type. -Iaabis toob yeer toob-u he is trying to pass 
himself off as something he is not. 
I":;"J":;" 
.;:.,.; tuut / Icoll 011 mulberry, mulberries. 2 mulberry 
tree(s). 
~.; tuuta / lunit n, pI -aatl I a mulberry. 2 a mulberry 
tree. 
~ \;.; tutaaya = tuuta /. 
.;:.,;. tawwit I Ivif to turn black and blue (as though hurt 
or bruised). jafayf-i tawwitit mil-bard my lips turned 
blue with cold. 2 Ivtl to make black and blue. 
b-atawwit-Iu ceen-u I'll give him a black eye. -vn tatwiit; 
ava/pya mitawwit. 
.;:.,';1 fittawwit Ivil to become or be made black and 
blu.e (as though bruised). - ava/iva mittawwit. 
Z":;"J":;" 
.;:.,.; tuut 2 <Copt> Inl the first month of the Coptic 
year (mid-September to mid-October). 
~.; tutiyya: fis-sana t-tutiyya the starting date of the 
Coptic calendar, i.e. 283 A.D. 
J ( ..:;.. J ..:;.. ) 
.;:.,.; tuut 3 <Copt>: tuut baawi (tuut) call of an 
itinerant conjurer. 
~.; tuuta 2: wi-tuuta tuuta firYit iI-badduuta terminat-
ing phrase for a children's story "" and so 1he story is 
done. 
[J ..:;.. 
[.\; taag In pI tigaanll crown (of a king, priest etc.). 
Iisiid(-u) w-taag raas(-u) "" (his) lord and master, one 
greatly superior to (him), as in fima siid-i w-taag raas-i 
1 honour you greatly, da-na siid-ak wi-taag raas-ak 
141 
you're not worthy to touch the hem of my dress! 
2 capital (of a column). 
[.;. tawwag Ivtl to crown. -vn tatwiig; ava mitawwig; 
pya mutawwagf. 
[.';1 fittawwig Ivif to be crowned. - iva mittawwig. 
.) J ..:;.. 
J.J' 'J.J' toor 101 Ilpl tiraanl bull, ox. guba fawla 
b-Iabmi toor-u [proy] (Goha is more entitled to the 
flesh of his ox) "" a man has first claim on his own 
property. toor allaah fi-barsiim-u [proy] (God's ox in 
His clover) one who is'stupid but content. laa-Iu fit-toor 
wala fic-tibiin [proy] (he has nothing to do with either 
the ox or the milling) he has no hand in the matter. 
faqul-Iak toor tiqul-Ii fiblib-u [proy] (I tell you 'Ox' so 
you tell me 'Milk it') (1) you are not paying attention, 
you are being dumb'. (2) you insist on attempting the 
impossible. cumr ii-mara ma trabbi toor wi-yduur fis-
saqya [proy] (a woman can never raise an ox that would 
turn the water-wheel) "" a woman cannot properly raise 
a boy by herself. 2 fit-toor Ino pU [astrol] Taurus. 
3/fem toora/ oaf,. dolt. 
.:,1.# siiraan Ipl 01: m~arcit is-siiraan bull-fighting . 
ol.)J":;" 
olJ..fI1. fit-tawraah 101 the Torah. 
j J ..:;.. 
oj'; tooza In pI -aat/long double-ended drum (used at 
zaar-ceremonies) . 
.lJJ":;" 
-.s.; tooka <T toka> In pI -aat, tiwakl I buckle. 
2 decorative hairpin or slide. 
J J ..:;.. 
J.; tawal (i) Ivtl to daze, incapacitate mentally, bewil-
de~. -vn tawal, tawalaan; ava taawil; pya matwuul . 
J.;I fittawallvif to become or be made dazed, mental-
ly incapacitated or bewildered. - ava/iva mittiwil. 
J.r: 1 fintawal'; fittawal. - ava/iva mintiwil. 
,?JJ":;" 
.::."J I.; tuwalitt, tiwalitt, tawalitt' <Fr toilette> 101 
la grooming, smart appearance. ~abuun tuwalitt toilet 
soap. Ib (women's) evening-dress.labsa tuwalittwear-
ing evening-dress. Ie cosmetics, make-up. fis-sitt B 
/ja((it tuwalitt the woman put on make-up. 2 Ipl -aatl 
bathroom, lavatory. camal tuwalitt to go to the lava-

tory. - ladj invar/3 dressy (of women's clothes, etc.). 
rif-fan(a di sboor miftuwalitt that's a casual bag, not for 
dressy occasions. 
..:oJ.i tawlitlvtl to groom, make up (o.s.). -vn tawlata; 
avalpva mitawlit . 
..:oJ;, rittawlitlvil to become or make oneself groomed 
or made-up. -avaliva mittawlit. 
I r~':;" 
r'; 'r.i toom 1 In! garlic. 
~,; '~.i tomiyya Inl dish of meat in gravy flavoured 
with garlic. 
z r ~.:;., 
r.i toom 2 1n pltiwaaml twin(s). -also tawram. 
(':u':;" ) 
"'.i toon <prob Engl> In pi -aatl [mus} interval of a 
tone. rubG' toon quarter tone. n~I' toon semitone. 
";,;.i tuuna <prob Engl> Inl tuna fish, tunny. 
-
.:;.,~~.:;., 
u.F...i tiwintoot <Engl twin tote> In pi tiwintaatl 
double bet. 
IIJ"'~~ .:;., 
..,....i tuunis I, tuunus Iprop nl I Tunis. 2 Tunisia. 
..r'.i tunsi Ipl tawansal I ladjl Tunisian. 2 In! a 
Tunisian. 
z IJ'" ~~.:;., 
..,....i tuunis 2 (also (uunis) In pltawaniisl rope which 
fastens the water pots to the saliya (see PI.E, 12). 
.~ .:;., 
.1; taah (u) Ivi/l to go astray, get 10st.taayihGan ii-beet 
unable to find the house. di taahit r;an baal-i that slipped 
my mind. taayih fin-noom drowsy. II tuht , Gan iI-war;y 
I lost consciousness. 2 to be forgetful, have one's mind 
wander. huwwa-na tayha Gan is-sitt' di could I possibly 
forget this lady? -vn tawahaan; ava taayih. 
~I; taayih lavailisarrax (or lawwat) lamma gaab (or 
lamm a Galee) it-tayhiin he screamed till he brought 
(even) the lost, he bellowed his lungs out. -gasb it-
tayha he did the impossible, he did miracles. -gaab laha 
t-tayha he brought her to unimagined heights of (sex-
ual) ecstasy. 
.;. tawwah Ivtl I to cause to go astray. beet-u ma-
ytawwah-fhis house is not difficult to find. 2 to cause to 
142 
forget. m-aGraf-f' reeh illi tawwah-ha min baal-i I don't 
know what made me forget about it. -vn tatwiih; aval 
pva mitawwah. 
.~, rittawwah Ivil to be led astray. - iva mittawwah . 
~~.:;., 
;. taww particle indicating the immediate occurrence 
of an action. tawwu gayy (I) he has just arrived. 
(2) he'll soon be here. tawwina nazliin (1) we've just 
come down. (2) we are just going down. tawwaha 
wakla she's just eaten. 
11 tawwan and fit-taww ladvl immediately. y.-agii-k 
fit-taww' (wil-Iay;a) I will come to you immediately. 
-taww' ma Iconjl as sQon as, immediately after. taww' 
ma nzilna mil- rutubiis xadna taks right after we had got 
off the bus, we took a taxi. taww' ma nxallfJ1 if-fuyla 
ya-nfuut Galeek as soon as we finish work, we'll drop in 
on you. 
1oS~':;" 
~,,:... ,~.ii-" maMa In pi mataawil refuge, shelter. 
ma-Iuu-f matwa he's homeless. 
~JI; taawa Ivtl I to shelter, protect, give refuge to. 
laazim titaawi I-r;iyaal mil-bard you must protect the 
children from the cold. 2 to cause to disappear, hide 
away. riI-mudiir taawa n~1 iI-mizaniyya the director 
spirited half the budget away. -vn mitawiyya; avalpva 
mitaawi. 
~J~' rittaawa Ivill to take or be given refuge. 2 to be 
hidden away. -avaliva mittaawi. 
"'r'1oS':;" 
~ 
tiib <prob Fr type> Inl distinct (facial) type, dis-
tinct character (especially in the terminology of theatre 
and film-making). mif mafruuq rinnaha tkuun gamiila 
liadd' ma tkuun liiha tiib she's not supposed to be pretty 
so much as possessed of a distinct (facial) character. 
IJ'" IJ'" "'r' loS .:;., 
..,..l.!1; taybass <Fr taille basse> ladj invarl low-
waisted (dress etc.). 
IJ"'J"'r'IoS':;" 
~",; tiyublis <Engl> ladj invarl tubeless. ri(araat 
tiyublis tubeless tyres. 
':;"1oS':;" 
4 
teeta <perh Gr tethe> In! [children} title of, and 
polite form of address to, an elderly woman, especially 
a grandmother. 

;.::J IS.::J 
J jt.; liyalru <It lealro> In pI liyalraall {obsol] 
theatre. 
J.::J IS.::J 
J;.; teelalln pI layaalill I variety of wild goat. 2 Don 
Juan, skirt-chaser. 
[. IS.::J 
r:i liij (also liifor liifa) <Fr lige> In pI falyaaj,liyaajl 
I cable (of the type used in vehicles). liij faraamil 
brake-cable. liij dibriyaaj steel cable joining clutch ped-
al and disc. 2 pawl. 
C. IS.::J 
(\:;;1 fin/aalj Ivil to be allowed, permitted, or made 
possible. -iva minlaalj. 
(l;i ralaalj Ivtl to allow, permit, make possible (to or 
for s.o.). fana !aakir illi ralaljl-i-li fur~it ziyaaril il-
ml¥nal I am grateful for your giving me the chance to 
visit the factory. -Ithe literary passive also occursl 
fUli!J-li zyaart il-ml¥nal I was allowed to visit the fac-
tory. -vn filaalja; ava mutiilj; pva mutaalj. 
; IS.::J 
)~ layyaar In pI -aatl I current (of water, air etc.). 
xallii-k laayim mala I-Iayyaar keeping swimming with 
the current! 2 {elee} current. layyaar mitrayyar alter-
nating current. 3 trend, current of opinion. bi-Ilabbar 
lan layyaar it expresses a trend. 
0; IS .::J 
J.# IUruh <It liro> In pI -aall arena where the shoot-
ing of clays or pigeons is the object of betting. 
j IS.::J 
ifl" leeza <T leyze> Inl {obsol} title of, and polite form 
of address to, an elderly woman, especially a relative. 
IJ"IS.::J 
~ 
lees In plluyuusl I billy goat. 2 stolid fool, dolt. 
filuus mala Iyuus {prov] it's oafs who have the money . 
.,..;. layyis Ivil to become stupefied. fil-waaljid layyis 
bald iI- rakl one felt drugged after eating. -vn lalyUs; 
ava milayyis. 
.; IS.::J see [. IS .::J : liif, liifa 
~J";IS.::J 
J~ layfuud <prob Engl> Inl typhoid fever. 
143 
..rJ.JIS.::J 
..r";"; tayfuus <prob Engl> Inl typhus. 
.!lIS":" 
!II; laak (i) Ivil to wear out, become threadbare. -vn 
layakaan; ava laayik. 
J IS":" 
J,; liillnl la hemp. Ib strong cloth made from hemp 
(used in particular for mattresses). 2 fibre. liiI dibriyaaj 
{auto} clutch disc of fibre. IlliiI il-faraamil brake-pads. 
- Ipl falyaal13 linen. IlJirii{ liiI tape-measure. 
~ liila Inl I {lexl} staple. Cju{n i (awiil il-liila long-
staple cotton. - Iplliyall 2 layer of fibres (in a tyre). 
3a {naut] fore-lock. 3b {engJ split pin. 
11 bil-liila with great difficulty. 
..h; layyil Ivtl to secure (a bolt or the like) with a 
forelock or split pin. -vn lalyiil; ava/pva mitayyil. 
I 
IS":" 
J layyim Ivtl to enthral by love, infatuate. -vn lalyUm; 
ava milayyim; pva mutayyam. 
;1 fillayyim Ivil to be or become enthralled by love, 
be or become filled with infatuation. - avaliva 
millayyim. 
2 
IS":" 
r 
. 
r><' IUm <Engl> In pI ralyaaml I team (in football 
etc.). 2 round (in the shooting of pigeons or clays). 
;JrlS":" 
)YO-; laymuur <prop name Taymur>: manga laymuur 
large dark-green variety of mango. - also limuur. 
.., IS":" 
. ~ liin (also liin barjuumi) Icoll nl fig(s). II tUn !ooki 
prickly pear(s) (Opuntia ficus indica). -liin iI-fiil great 
cardamom, black amomum (Amomum granum para-
disi). -IUn binraali banyan. 
4:.; liina lunit n, pI -aall a fig. 
I ( 0 IS ..:.. ) 
..,; leeh I Ifem n, pI -aall third letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also laa, laar, lih . 
..,; leeh 1, IUh Inl pride, ttaughtiness, self-assertion . 
..,; leeh 3 <Engl> Inl {plumb] T-joint. 
2 0 IS":" see 0 J ..:.. : laayih 

-1J.Ju.:J 
~ 
~ tiyuuning <Engl> tuning. dayra tiyuuning 
feleel tuning cjrcuit. 
144 
~uuu.:J 
,;.; tayyeer <Fr tailleur> In pi -aatl woman's two 
piece suit (jacket and skirt). 

.I.!J see • ..,.. 
yJ.!I see yJ':" 
...iJ.!I see J...iJ..,.. 
J J.!I see J J .:.. 
\;\; Oaf Oaf Ivil to lisp. -vn 9arBafa; ava mi9af9af. 
.!I J.!I see .:.. J .:.. 
rJ.!I see rJ.:.. 
J;.!J see 1.J)..,.. 
oj r.!l see 
I oj r':" and 1 oj r .:.. 
~ oj.!l see 
I ~ oj':" and 1 ~ oj .:.. 
) .J.!I see ).J':" and I).J..,.. 
JJ.!J see J...i.:.. 
~.J.!I see ~.J':" 

I r see ..s r . ga 
Irlr 
~~ gaaga Iprop nl Jinn! of guidance (invoked in spells 
and charms). 
~ I r 
,~ ]aad <Fr> Inl jadc. 
.) I r ~ee .).J r: gaar, gaara:' 
(j I r) 
j~ gaaz I <perh T gaz from Fr> Inl paraffin, 
kerosene. lambll gaaz kerosene lamp. 
j~ jaaz <Engl> Inl jazz. fmiit jaaz a Jazz-band. 
.:" I r sce 2.:".:" r : gaall 
~ I r 
• ~ gaah Inl honour. prestige. status.la gaah wala maal 
yihimm-I-ni neither status nor wealth interests me. lIya 
gaah in-nabl exclamation of awe"" oh. wow! isn't that 
something!. as in,va gaah lIl-nabi ljlllll 'i'akla oh. wow! 
what a meal! - 'i'ana I-gaah in-nabl "" I beseech you! 
- 'i'ilaah-i w- f1l1ta gaah-i invocation to God for his aid in 
performing a task. as in filaah-i w-'i'ima gaah-i tkuun 
mill 1I1-llagljllll may God grant you success! 
.Jlr 
.J~ gaawa 
(people). 
Iprop nl Java .. 26011 nl Javanese 
..sJ~ gaawi I ladj *1 Javanese. buxuur gaawi benzoin. 
2 Inl [bot] styrax. IIsabYit iI-gaawi friar's balsam. 
..sIr 
..s~ gaay, gaay <Copt> linterjl help! IIgaay ya huuh 
help me! come to my aid! 
.)..s I r 
J'-~ gaayir <poss Fr cahier> Inl standard size of paper 
58 by 82 centimetres. 
.)." r 
.J~ ga'i''i'ar Ivtl to push. force. IIga'i''i'ar dimaa¥-u 
liI-muJkila I-mayit ma ljall-a-ha hc put his mmd to the 
problem until he solved it. - ava miga'i''i'ar . 
• 
.Jt;.:.1 'i'itga'i''i'aror 'i'lgga'i''i'arlvil to be pushed. beforced. 
- iva mllga 'i''i'ar. 
;~ gaa'i'lr Ivil to object. resist. protest. bl-yljibb' 
ygaa 'i'1r liI-Iaaql wil-malyaall he likes to argue whether 
he has a good reason or not. - vn lruga fra; ava lrugaa fir. 
;t;.:.1 'i'lIgaa'i'lr 
or 
'i'lggaa'i'lr 
Ivil 
I = gaa'i'lr . 
2 (impersonal) passive of gaa fir. batta tamall waraljll 
il-bl/s{a kamaall yllgaa'i'ir Iii IS there even to be an 
argument over the pnce of the stamp! - iva mitgaa fir . 
(yyr) 
~ 
gibb Inl dcep hole. pit. II !VIC/Ie li-glbb he got into a 
difficult problem. he got m a fix. 
~ glbba In pi -aat, glbabl buttonless long outer robe 
open down the front. worn by Muslim clergy and well-
to-do villagers. lIeads' b-glbba unhulled lentils. 
4 gabba I <prob Copt> Inl five-stones. jacks. - also 
kabba. 
~ y r 
~ gabad Ii) Ivtl to seize hold of. grasp (especially 
with the hand). gabad-ni mill {oolj-i he seized me by the 
collar. ljasseet bi-baaga gabadit-ni I-tabt il-mayya I felt 
something draggmg me down under the water. - vn 
gabd. gabadaan; ava gaabid; pva magbl/I/d. 

;~4- gabbaada In pi -aat/long-handled fruit-hook. 
~I ritgabad or riggabad Ivil to be seized, be grasped 
(especially with the hand). -iva mitgibid. 
-¥.JI ringabad = ritgabad. - iva mingibid. 
I;y[ 
r. gabarl 
(u) 
Ivtl 
I to set 
(broken bones). 
ril-migabbaraati gabar laqmit diraal-i the bone-setter 
set the bone of my arm. 2 to round up to a whole unit. 
lumr-u-hum ma gabaru ksuur iI-gineeh they never 
round a sum of money up to a pound (when they're 
going to give it to someone). 3 (also gabar xaa(ir and 
gabar bi-xaa(ir) 3a to soothe (s.o. 's feelings) with a kind 
word or deed, treat (s.o.) charitably, help out (s.o. in 
distress). da kaan raagillfalbaan w-ana gabart i xa(r-u 
that man was in a bad way and I helped him. 3b to 
bribe. mif raaqi ymajji I-waralj - yimkin yikuun layz-ak 
tugbur bi-xa(r-u he's not prepared to finish with the 
papers -perhaps he wants you to give him something. 
- Ivi/4 to sell out. lissa ma-gabarnaa-jwe still haven't 
run out. riI-burtuljaan gabar (I) the oranges are sold 
out. (2) the oranges are finished. II da kaan zamaan 
wi-gabar that was in the old days, that's past history. 
5 to recover, get over a crisis. -vn gabr, gubraan, 
gubraniyya; ava gaabir; pva magbuur. 
r. gabr I/vn/llgabr iI-babr see xaliig. 2/nl riI-gabr 
algebra. 
J.~ gaabirln/l male given name. 2 Healer (epithet of 
God). lIya gaabir cry of the vendor of cooked offal. 
;J~ gubaara, gibaara J In pi -aat, gabaayirl splint. 
; ~ 
gibiira. gahiira In pi gabaayirl splint. 
~I ritgabar 1 or riggabar 1 Ivil passive of gabar I. - iva 
mitgibir. 
~I ringabarl = ritgahar l. -iva millgihir. 
~ gabbar Ivtl to set (broken bones). -vn tagbiir; aval 
pya migabhar. 
~ migabbar In *1 bone-setter. 
JI~ migabbaraali In pi -yyal bonesetter. 
~I ritgabbar 1 or riggabbar 1 Ivil to be set ~orrectly 
(of broken bones). - iva milgabbar. 
2 ;Y[ 
r. gabar2 (i) Ivtl to force, compel. gabar-ni lal-majy 
he forced me to walk. -vn gabr; ava gaabir; pva 
magbuur. 
<.Sr. gabri ladjl compulsory. rit-Iasliira I-gabriyya 
the compulsory fixed-price. 
r. gubr Inl I cruelty. reeh ig-gubr i da tf.arb-ak lu 
ma-ykun-f bif-Jakl i da how cruel! you shouldn't beat 
him like that! 2 insolence. ya gubr-a-ha lamma Iljabbay 
147 
mala gran-ha what a nerve she has to call her neigh-
bours bad names! 
o J.r.>; gabaruut Inll omnipotence, might. 2 source of 
all authority (one of the five parts of the Sufi cosmos). 
J~ gabbaar ladjl I Ipl gahabral colossal, huge. 
limaara gabbaara an enormous building. riggaala 
gababra huge men. 2 Ipl -iinl ruthless, despotic. 
riggaala gabbariin ruthless men. kullu zii laahalin 
gabbaar [provJ every person with a physical defect has a 
cruel streak. -
Inl 3 Omnipotent One (epithet of 
God). 
.r..Y:- gabaayir Ipl nl high and mighty behaviour. (ya 
leen-ak) ya gabayr-ak what a nerve you've got! 
~I rilgabar2 or riggabar2 Ivil to be forced, be com-
pelled. - iva milgibir. 
~I ringabar2 = ritgabar. - iva mingibir. 
~I rilgabbar2 or riggabbar.? Ivil to behave ruthless-
Iy. -vn lagabbur r; ava milgabbar, mutagabbir r . 
.r.>;i ragbar r = gabar2. - vn rigbaar; ava mugbirr; pva 
mugbar. 
\.SJY:-l rigbaari ladjl compulsory. larmiin rigbaari 
compulsory insurance. 
-~.JY[ 
0!.~.r.>; gabardiin, gi~ardiin <Engl> Inl gabardine. 
J~;y[ 
'y-.r.>; gibriil (also gibriinJ) Iprop nl I male given 
name. 2 the archangel Gabriel (in Islamic belief, the 
angel mediating divine inspiration). 
.J ~ ; y [ see J ~ .J y [ : gibriill 
.~.Jy[ 
~.r.>; gabariih <Fr gabaril> In pi -aall model (in naval 
architecture ). 
..,..y~ 
~ 
gibis (a) Ivil to stiffen, thicken (of dough, paste 
etc.). -vn gabasaan; ava gaabis. 
~ 
gibs Inl 1 plaster. 2 gypsum, plaster of Paris . 
..... ~ gabbaasa In pi -aall gypsum works, limestone 
works. 
~ 
gabbis Ivt/l to put plaster on. gabbisuu-Iu rigl-u 
they put his leg in plaster. 2 to cause (e.g., dough) to 
thicken or stiffen. - Ivil 3 to stiffen, harden, set. tf.iil 
lil-malguulZ jiwayyil zeet raysan yigabbis add a little oil 
to the putty or it may get too hard to use. IImuxx-u 
gabbis == his mind seized up. -vn lagbiis; avalpva 
migabbis. 

~ 
I fitgabbis or figgabbis Ivil passive of gabbis. -iva 
mitgabbis. 
1 Jy[ 
~ 
gabal Inl I Ipl gibaall hill, mountain. gibaal 
Ik-kuI:JI' tifnii-ha I-maraawid {prov/ «even) mountains 
of kohl are worn away by kohl-probes) "" water wears 
away a stone. 2 Ino pll arid desert land (as opposed to 
cultivated land). 
~ ~ 
gabalaaya In pi -aatl (man-made) mound or hill-
ock, rockery. 
~ 
gabali ladjl I arid and hilly. 2 mountainous. 
II faraanib gabali hares. 
Z.J Y [ 
~ 
gibilla In pi -aatl tabus] natural disposition. raagil 
gibil/it-u watya a base-natured man. 
,:,1 Jy[ 
I..J ~ r. gublaan <Fr les Gobelins> Inl Gobelin tapes-
try, (also loosely) machine-woven tapestry used for 
upholstery 
I,:,y[ 
4 
gibna In pi gibanl cheese. 
~ 
gabbin I Ivtl to make into cheese. 2 Ivil to curdle 
(of milk). -vn tagbiin; avalpva migabbin. 
~I fitgabbin or figgabbin Ivil to be made into 
cheese. - iva mitgabbin. 
Z,:,y[ 
~ 
gabun, gubun, gibin (u, i) Ivil to become coward-
ly. -vn gubn. 
~ 
gubn Inl cowardice. 
~i fagban lell morelmost cowardly. fagban min il-
gubn more cowardly than cowardice itself. 
I..J~ ¥abaan In pi gubana, gabanaatJ I coward. 
~I fistagbin Ivtl I to consider cowardly. 2 to 
select for cowardliness. - Ivil 3 to act in a mean way. 
- vn fistigbaan; avalpva mistagbin. 
J( ':'Y[) 
~ 
gibiin In pi gibinal forehead, brow. min larac; 
gibiin-i with the sweat of my brow, by my own efforts. 
II filii maktuub lag-gibiin laazim tifuuf-u I-leen {prov] 
'" what is destined will be fulfilled. 
~ ~ gabbaana In pi -aatl cemetery. 
-I,$':'Y[ 
o ~ 
gabanyoot <Copt> Inl {Chr] I Pater Noster. 
148 
2 formal registration of betrothal, and the accompany-
ing ceremony. 
~Y[ 
~ gabah (a) Ivtl to confront (s.o.) in such a way as to 
embarrass. fana magbuuh minkum I am too embarras-
sed to face you. -ava gaabih; pva magbuuh. 
~ 
gabha Inl I Ipl -aatl front (in war). 2/pl gibaahl 
forehead, brow. 
~I fitgabah or figgabah Ivil to be caused embarrass-
ment (by confrontation with s.o. or s.th.). -iva 
mitgibih. 
~~ gaabih Ivtl to face, confront.laazim nigabh-u bil-
l:Jac;iic;a we must confront him with the truth. da gabaan 
ma-yic;dar-I' ygaabih fayy' mujkila he is too cowardly 
to face any problem. 
~~I fitgaabih or figgaabih Ivil to be confronted (with 
s.th.). - iva mitgaabih. 
II,$Y[ 
~ 
gabba Z Ivil to spend money (on s.o.) in order to 
gain influence. 
f~rif filuus-i zayy' ma-na laayiz -
huwwa bi-ygabbi lalayya I'll spend my money just as 
I choose -does he support me (and so have a right to 
interfere)? - ava migabbi. 
~ 
I fitgabba 
or 
figgabba 
Ivil 
I = gabba z. 
2 (impersonal) passive of gabba z. fil:Jna mif min il/i 
yitgabba laleehum we're not the type of people to live 
off others! - ava/iva mitgabbi. 
ZI,$Y[ 
4 
gubya'/n pI gubayl {rur] fish snare. 
.II..::.o[ 
J~ gitaar <prob Fr> In pI -aatl guitar. 
,?..::.o~ 
~ .4 gitta In pI gitatl (human) body. rama (or 
lac;c;al:J) gittit-(u) lala to be a nuisance to, impose one-
self upon, force one's attention upon, as in jal:Jl:Jaat 
raami gittit-u laleek a beggar imposing himself 
on you. II fallaah la yirmii-Iak gitta f- farq {beggars] 
may God not cast any of your family to earth! -da gitta 
{deris] '" he's very well built! -bi-yinhajuf-gittit-i they 
t~lk savagely about me behind my back. 
~ gussa In pI gusasl corpse. 
.1..::.0 [ 
ft.: gitir, gitr <prob Fr guetre> In pI gitarl {mil] pair of 
gaiters. 

OJ":;' [ 
.j~ gatooh <Fr gateau> Icoll nl pastries, small 
cake(s). 
,-!I..j~ gatohaaya lunit n, pi gatohaat, gatohayaatl a 
pastry, a small cake. 
IC[ 
Ii"": .~ guya Iprop n! Goha, a character in folk 
stories, renowned for his direct, simplistic and shrewd 
approach to life. IImusmaar guya pretext, excuse for 
keeping one's foot in the door. - beet guya maze, laby-
rinth. -huwwa guya fakbar walla-bn-u ... who are you 
trying to kid? I wasn't born yesterday. -guya fawla 
b·laYm i toor-u {prov] o~e has first claim on one's own 
possessions. - c;aalu ya guya liddi moog iI-baYr. - c;aal 
il-gayyaat faktar mir-rayyaat {prov] ... future opportu-
nities outnumber those in the past, there will always be 
a chance to get even. 
~C[ 
~ 
gayad (i, a) I Ivtl to receive with ingratitude. 
gayad nil mit rabb-u he was ungrateful for God's good-
ness. 2/vil to become callous, become insensitive. -vn 
gubd, gayd, guyuud; ava gaayid; pva magyuud. 
J~ gayuud ladj * I ungrateful. 
~I fitgayad or figgayad Ivil to be received with 
ingratitude. - iva mitgiYid. 
~I fingayad = fitgaYad. -iva mingiYid. 
JC[ 
~ 
gayar (u, a) Ivtl to bury (s.o.) in a hole. fallaah 
yigyar rooy-u matray ma raay ... may he roast in hell! 
-vn gayr; ava gaayir; pva magYuur. 
~ 
guyr In pi guyuur, giyaarl burrow, hole (of an 
animal). guyri fraan rat hole.lIguyri dUb yikaffi miyya 
w-miit yabiib {prov] there will always be room in one's 
home for a friend. 
~I fitgayar or figgayar Ivil passive of gayar. 
rahu-tgayar fi-sittiin dahya ... he went to the devil! 
thank God we got rid of him! -iva mitgiYir. 
,.-..;1 fingayar = fitgaYar. -iva mingiYir. 
~ 
gayyar Ivil 
to 
stare 
wide-eyed. 
maa-Iak 
bi-tgayyar-Ii kida b-lenee-k what are you staring at me 
like that for? -vn tagyiir; ava migaYYar. 
~C[ 
..;.:....:. gal:Jf In pi guyuuj, guyujal young donkey. II fin 
149 
kunti f-balad yU(;budu g-gal:Jfi yifP wi-ddii-Iu {prov] ... 
when in Rome do as the Romans do. - wala fiif gal:Jfl 
yuxrug minha b-bardalt-u ... it's a very tight spot 
indeed. 
~ 
gayyaj Ivil to behave brusquely. -vn tagyiif; ava 
migayyaj. 
..;-~ gaayif Ivil to behave defiantly. ya ymaar ya yabi 
banal tigaayif m8(;a /Ii fakbar minnak you stupid ass, 
stop defying your elders! -vn migal:Jfa; ava migaayif. 
rc[ 
~ 
gayam (i) I/vtl to send to hell. dahya tigyim-u 
maya disaster cast him into hell! 2 Ivil to stare (at s.o. or 
s.th.) in envy, put the evil eye (on s.o. or s.th.). min 
sa8(;it ma len-ha gayamit fil-waad rac;ad layyaan the 
moment she set her evil eye on the boy he fell ill. -vn 
gaym; ava gaayim; pva magyuum. 
~ 
gayma instance noun of gabm. gayma taxd-u to 
hell with him! 
~ 
gayiim In! hell, hellfire. fana laayiffi-gayiim I'm 
living in hell. 
~I fitgayam or figgayam Ivil to go to hell, die (of an 
enemy). -iva mitgiYim. 
~I fingayam = fitgaYam. -iva mingiYim. 
~ 
gayyam Ivil to s~are in fury, envy or hatred. 
bi-ygayyam-Ii b-lenee ka- finn i ya-yiftiris-ni he stares 
at me as if he were going to devour me. -vn tagyiim; ava 
migayyam. 
" 
j; c [ 
~ 
gaya; t (a) lvil to bulge, protrude (of the eyes). 
lenee-ha gaya;it lamma c;arrat iI-yabli yawaleerr 
rac;abit-ha her eyes bulged as the rope tightened round 
her neck. -vn guyuu;; ava gaaYi;. 
tt[ 
& gaxx (u, i) Ivill to spin a yarn, tell tall stories. 2 to 
sq~irt. -vn gaxx, gaxaxaan; ava gaaxix. 
t~ gaxxaax In * and pi gaxxaaxal fibber, hot-air 
merchant. 
i:fl fitgaxx or figgaxx Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
gaxx. fahu itgaxx a laleek t~ere you are -you've been 
I~d up the garden path! - iva mitgaxx. 
~I fingaxx = fitgaxx. -iva mingaxx. 
1 ,) ,) c::. 
~ gadd l (i) Ivil to occur newly. gaddit ;uruufthings 
came up unexpectedly. gaddit laleehum sarwa they 
suddel).\y came into money. ya-ygidd a laleek naas 

you'll come across new people. ma-gadd'-j Galeeha 
lJaaga she is still the same, she is not likely to change or 
improve. -vn gadadaan; ava gaadid. 
.l.(~ gidiid lad j pi gudaadl I new. xad qamii~ gldild he 
took a new shirt. -ladverbiallyl /issa mitGayyina gdlid 
she's just newly appointed. Ilgidiid lang brand-new. 
-gidiid fi-gidiid all new, as in labsiin gldiid fi-gidiid 
Gajaan iI-Giid wearing completely new clothes for the 
feast. -yoom tamanya ftl-gidiid the eighth of next 
month. 2 different. dawwar-Iak Gala wa~iifa gdiida find 
yourself a diff. cent job. -
Inl 3 {obsol] one fortieth of a 
piastre, coin one fortieth of a piastre in value. 
~ min gidiid lad vI anew, again. min fawwil wl-gdiid 
anew, all over again. 
~~i fagdad lell newer/newest. 
~i fagadd = fagdad. 
~~ gaddid Ivtl I to renew. laazim fagaddid rux~it is-
siwaaqa I must renew my driving licence. 2 to reno-
vate, restore. tagdiid il- fasaar iI- fislamiyya the renova-
tion of Islamic monuments. 3 to reconstitute. 4a to ex-
temporize (within the structure of a song). 4b to inno-
vate (in art). -vn tagdiid; ava/pva migaddid. 
..:..I.l.(~ tagdidaat Ipl nl innovations, renovations. 
~~I fitgaddld or figgaddid Ivil I to be renewed. 2 to 
be renovated, be restored. 3 to be reconstituted. - iva 
mitgaddid. 
~I fistagadd Ivil I to occur newly. /i-yaayit rna 
tistagadd d lJaaga tanya until something else crops up. 
2 to be newly arrived (in employment etc.). -vn 
fistigdaad; ava mustagldd, mustagadd. 
~~I fistagdld Ivtl I to select for newness. 2 to con-
sider new. -ava mistagdid. 
2 ~ ~ [. 
~ gadd 2 (i) Ivil to strive, try hard. min gadd' wagad 
{pr<:!v] he who strives will find his reward. ma-huu-J 
gaadd' f-Gamal-u he makes no real effort in his work. 
-vn gidd, gad,d; ava gaadd r, gadd. 
~ gadd 3 1 Inl earnestness, seriousness. bi-yitkallim 
kiltir wl-lamma yilgi g-gadd' (or /ig-gadd' or fig-gadd') 
ma-yiGmil-f' lJaaga he talks a lot but when it really 
comes to action he doesn't do a thing. 2/adj invarl 
earnest, serious. sitt' gadd a serious-minded woman. 
fijtayalu juyl' gadd 
they 
worked 
very 
hard. 
Ilqalabuu-ha gadd (after talking light-heartedly) they 
became argumentative. -ladverbiallyl b-akkallim gadd 
I mean what I say, I'm speaking in earnest. 
~ bl-gadd or mm gadd ladvl seriously, in earnest. finta 
b-titkallim bi-gadd do you really mean what you say? 
150 
I~ giddan lad,vl I very. gaayiz giddan it's very possi-
ble. da ¥arilb giddan this is very strange.lltaqdiir gayyid 
giddan {aead] ranking of Very Good (between Excel-
lent and Good). 2 very much. fid-dawa nafaG-ni glddan 
the medicine benefIted me very much . 
..s~ giddi ladjl serious. 
~~ giddiyya Inl seriousness, gravity. bi-(kull') 
giddiyya earnestly, seriously. mlj baayin Galee waaxid 
t1-mawquuG bl-giddiyya he does not seem to be ta~ing 
the matter seriously. 
J ~ ~ [. 
~ gidd Inl I Ipl guduudl grandfather. fabu gidd-I my 
great-grandfather. II fabban Gan gidd from generation 
to generation. 2/pl fagdaadl ancestor, forefather. 
;~ gid(ia In pi -aatl grandmother. 
4 ~ ~ [. 
;~ gadda Iprop nl Jeddah. 
I .) ~ [. 
;)~ gadaara Inl worth, worthiness. bi-gadaara de-
servedly. faaz Gan (or bi-) gadaara (1) he deserved his 
success. (2) he had a comfortable win. 
J-~ gadiir ladj *1 worthy, deserving. 
,;~i fagdar lell worthier/worthiest, more/most de-
serving, more/most appropriate. fana fagdar minnak 
big-gayza I deserve the prize more than you. 
fagdar-Iak tibiiG-u you'd do best to sell it. 
2 
.) ~ [. 
..s,;~ gudari Inl smallpox. IIgudari mayya or gudari 
kaadib chicken pox . 
..sJ-~ gudeeri Inl chicken pox. 
,;~ gaddar I Ivil to be afflicted with pox. - vn tagdiir; 
ava migaddar. 
;,;~ migaddara Inl dish of rice, lentils and onions 
(more often called kujari). 
J.)~[. 
)~ gidaar, gadaar In pi gudraan, gidaraatl wall. 
,;~ gaddar2 Ivtl to make a foundation for. biyuut 
i/-man{iqa kull-a-ha mgaddara bil-lJagar ig-giiri all the 
houses in the area are built on a limestone foundation. 
- vn tagdlir; ava/pva migaddar. 
,;~I fitgaddaror figgaddarlvil passive of gad dar. -iva 
mitgaddar. 
4.)~[. 
,;~ gazr, gizr I In pi guzuurl {mathJ root. gazr' tarbiiGi 

a square root. gazr i takliibi a cube root. 
J~ gidr. gizr2 r In pi guduur. guzuurl I root. gidr is-
sinna the root of the tooth. IImin gidr i (ayyib of good 
stock. -fjacal gidr(-u) he eliminated (him), he extir-
pated (him). -gabit-u lala gduur rafjabt-u (1) she threw 
him flat on the ground. (2) she made him fall hopelessly 
in love with her. 2 emerald matrix (sold as a semi-
precious stone). 3/coarse slangl penis, prick. - also 
gidl. 
J~ gizr I 
In 
pi guzuurl 
I basis, 
root, 
ongm. 
fil-masfala laha guzuur min zamaan the question has its 
roots in the past. 2/lingl (Arabic) root. 
~. 
I 
J~ 'J~ gadda,. Ivil to become firmly rooted (of a 
plant). -vn tagdiir; ava migaddar. 
t~~ 
t~ ·t~ gadal In pi gidlaanl I/occasionally fern 
gadalal one possessed of one or more of the following 
groups of characteristics: (I) nobility of character and 
integrity.{ilil gadal malaana w-fjaam bil-waagib kull-
u he turned out to be a gentleman in his dealings with us 
and did all he could. (2) intelligence and application. 
huwwa gadal fjawi f-fur/-u he's very good at his job. 
(3) manly toughness and courage. xallii-k gadal -
&a·txaaf min fiwayyit liyaal be a man! are you going to 
be scared by a few kids? 2 fellow, (young) man. ya 
gadal informal (and sometimes somewhat reproachful) 
form of address to a (usually younger) man'" my man! 
my lad! see further under ~ t ~ ~ 
~~ .~~ gadala In pi -aatl /rurl young she-goat. 
t~i fagdal/el/ I morelmost possessed of the qual-
ities of a gadal. 2~ better/best. fahu I-fjizaaza di 
fagdal min illi fjabl-a-ha this bottle is definitely better 
than the one before. 
t~ magdal J ladj invarl having the qualities of a 
gadal. dool fawlaad magdal bi-~al:Jiil:J there are real 
men. 
~~ magdala Inl quality of being a gadal. 
t~1 fistagdal Ivtl I to select for being a gadal. 
la/aan tixawwif-hum istagdal-Iak waal:Jid minhum wi-
4rab-u if you want to frighten them, get hold of one of 
their toughs and give him a beating. 2~ to select for high 
quality. fistagdal fjumaaf wi-f~~al-Ii minnu choose 
some good-quality cloth and make it up for me. - Ivil 
3 to behave like a gadal. fislagdal bafja w-haal illi 
laleek be a man and pay me what you owe! -vn 
fistigdaal; ava mislagdal. 
iJ t ~ ~ see also t ~ ~ 
"~ gadlana Inl quality of being a gadal. 
lSI 
~~I filgadlan or figgadlan Ivil I to behave in the;' 
manner of a gadal. 2 to get a move on. laazim 
yitgadlall jiwayya f-furl-u he must get a bit of a move 
on in his work. -vn gadlana; ava mitgadlan. 
...;~~ 
JI~ .JI~ migdaaf, mugdaaf In pi magadiiJl oar. 
IIkassar magadiil(-u) '" to discourage (s.o). take the 
wind out of (s.o. 's) sails. - also mUfjdaaf. 
J~ .J~ gaddif Ivil I to row. gihaaz lagdiif rowing-
exercise apparatus. 2 Ivil /Chrl to blaspheme. ya weel 
i1li ygaddifu lala rabb-i-na woe to those who abuse 
God!. -vn tagdiif; ava migaddif, mugaddif'. 
IJ~~ 
J~ gadal l (i) Ivtl to braid, plait, twist. -vn gadl, 
gadalaan; ava gaadil; pva magduul. 
~~ gadla In pi -aatl I instance noun of gadl. 2 plait 
(of rope). 
JJ~ magduul Icoll nl ashlar. 
~J~ magduula lunit n, pi magadiill an ashlar (usually 
standardized at one metre square). 
~~ gidiila In pi gadaayill braid, plait. gaabil baruuka 
b-gadaayil she got a wig with braids. 
J~I filgada/or figgadallvil to be braided. be plaited. 
-iva mitgidil. 
J~ gaddil Ivtl to braid, plait, twist (particularly rope). 
-vn lagdiil; avalpva migaddil. 
J~I filgaddil or figgaddil Ivil to be braided, be 
plaited. be twisted. - iva milgaddil. 
lJ.)~ 
J~ gadal 2 r Inl debate, controversy, argument, dis-
pute. lumr-u ma-yl:Jibb iI-gadal mala mraal-u he never 
likes to argue with his wife. 
11 gadalan ladvl for the sake of argument. nifriq gadalan 
finn iI-kalam-da ~al:Jiil:J let us suppose just for the sake 
of argument that what is said is true. 
J.)~ gaadil I Ivtl to argue with, dispute with. ma-
Igadil-nii-f don't argue with me! 2 Ivil to discuss, argue. 
fiqil yigaadil malaaya he went on arguing with me. 
II yigaadil fil-baa{iI to argue just for the sake of arguing. 
- vn migadla. mugadla, gidaal; ava migaadil. 
~.)~ mugadla In pi -aall debate, controversy, dispute. 
J.)~I filgaadil or figgaadil Ivil 1 to argue. 2 to be 
argued with. -ava/iva milgaadil. 
3J.)~ 
J~ gadal 3 (i) Ivtl to transplant. -vn gadl; ava gaadil; 
pva magduul. 

J~ gidl In pi guduull ro~t. li-lfaayit maffatl' yiqrab 
guduul until the seedling puts down roots. -also gizr, 
gidr. 
J~I ritgada/or riggadallvil I to be transplanted. 2 to 
get established, put down roots (of a plant). riffital 
bi-titgidil il-rawwil fil-maftal first the seedlings get 
established in a nursery. 3 (a bus] to settle down, estab-
lish oneself. ritgidil fi-matra!;-ak keep still, don't move! 
-ava/iva mitgidil. 
4 J .) [. see 
I J [. .) : gaddaal 
J.J')[. 
JJ~ gadwal In pi gadaawill I chart, list. gadwal 
rac:maal agenda. 2 schedule, timetable. 3 table (arith-
metical, logarithmic, statistical etc.). 4 {print] column. 
JJ~ gadwil Ivtl to schedule, list. laazim nigadwil 
taf~iil iffulfl we should make a list of the work details. 
c:ayziin nigadwil diyun-na we want to fix dates for (re-
paying) our debts. - vn gadwala; ava/pva migadwil. 
JJ~ migadwil Ipva/llc:uqda mgadwila (naut] carrick 
bend. 
JJ~I ritgadwil or riggadwil/vil to be scheduled, be 
listed. -vn tigadwiii; iva mitgadwil. 
~.J .) [. 
.JJ~~ gaduun,. gadoon <Fr guidon> In pi -aat, 
gawadiinl handlebar (of a bicycle). 
~.P[. 
..>~ gidy In pi gidyaanl young goat, kid. 
..>41 ril-gady Inl (astrol] Capricorn. madaar il-gady 
the Tropic of Capricorn. 
Y ~ [. see yj [. 
• 
4 
J .) [. see 
J') [. 
[. I J [. see 1..; J [. : garaaj 
..; I J [. see 1..; J [. : garaaf 
r I J [ 
j1r.- giraam <Fr> In pi -aatl gramme. 
152 
I. J [. 
_..> r.- gariir ladj * and pi guraral I audacious, 
courageous, daring. 2 impudent, cheeky. 
ir.-i ragrar lell morelmost audacious. 
i ~I ritgarrar or riggarrar Ivil to dare, have the cour-
age.!;a-titgarrar ti!;ua' rimqit-ak c:aleeha will you dare 
to sign it? -ava mitgarra r. 
i.ll.;'l ritgaarar or riggaarar Ivil to dare. ritgaarar 
wi-daxal yinadii he summoned up his courage and went 
in to call him. -ava mitgaara r. 
..> .r.-::-I ristagra Ivil to dare (usually negative or in 
contexts of challenging). ma-yistagraaf he wouldn't 
dare! tistagri tkallim-ni kida do you have the nerve to 
talk to me like that?! -ava mistagri. 
i .r.-::-I ristagra r Ivtl to select for courage. ristagra r-Iak 
waa!;id yiquum bil-c:amaliyya find a brave man to do 
the job. - vn ristigraa r; ava/pva mistagra r. 
1. J [. see I..> J [.: rigraar, rigraari 
IYJ[. 
..,.. ~ garrab J Ivtl la to tryout, test. garrab faraamil 
il-c:arabiyya he tried out the car brakes. Ib {Chr] to 
tempt, put to the test. rif-fitaan bi-ygarrab-na the devil 
tempts us. 2 to experience, go through. yaama I-waa!;id 
garrab one has been through a lot. II risral migarrab 
wala tisral tabiib {prov] (seek the advice ofthe one who 
has experienced (an illness) rather than that of the 
doctor) == experience counts for more than theories. 
-vn tagriib; ava/pva migarrab. 
IS':'-.If. tagriibi ladjl experimental. raara tagribiyya test 
raid, practice raid . 
~.If. tagriba or tagruba In pi -aat, tagaaribl la test, 
experiment. ta!;t it-tagriba (1) undergoing trials. (2) on 
a trial basis. II rit-tagriba xayru burhaan == the proof of 
the pudding is in the eating. Ib (Chr] trial, temptation. 
2 experience. 
..,.. ~ 
1 ritgarrab or riggarrab Ivil passive of garrab. -iva 
mitgarrab. 
lYJ[. 
..,.. r.- girib (a) Ivil I to become mangy. 2 to become 
shabby or mangy-looking. fakl-u garbaan his appear-
ance is disgusting. 3 to become faded or washed-out (of 
colour). -vn garab, garabaan; ava garbaan . 
..,.. r.- garab In! scabies, mange . 
.J4r.- garbaan ladj */1 {path] mangy. 2 shabby, dis-
gusting in appearance. 3 faded, drab (of colour). 
~ r.- garba In pi -aatl mange, itch. 
~r.- garaba ladj invarllike a sore, disgusting. rinta 

been fixwaan-ak garaba you are a disgrace to your 
friends! fib[id [an in-naas ig-garaba dool stay away 
from these revolting people! 
y~i fagrab ladj, fem garba, pI gurbl 1 mangy. 
2 faded, drab (of colour). 
y ~ 
. garrab 2 Ivil to become mangy. - ava migarrab. 
';'~I figrabb Ivil 1 to become mangy. 2 to become 
faded or washed-out (of colours). - ava migribb. 
J "r';[. 
yl~ giraab In pI giriba, girabaatl la sheath, scab-. 
bard.lb holster. 2 small bag or pouch (usually of leath-
er).IIYa((i raas-u fig-giraab he was rendered harmless 
(like a snake in a conjurer's bag). -yaamafig-giraab ya 
ljaawi {prov] (how much you have in your bag, conjur-
er!) '" the world is full of surprises. 3 flap of a.~iwaan 
(q.v.). 
4 "r' .I [. see Y.J .I [. : guruub 
't "r'; [. 
J.J~ gurubbi Iprop nl 1 Groppi's, a well-known 
coffee-house and restaurant company with two branches 
in downtown Cairo. 2/coll nl (Groppi) ice cream(s). 
-"r'''r'; [. 
uJ;""'~ giribbifruut, giribfiruut <Engl> Icoll n! 
grapefruit(s). -also giriffiruut. 
~~ giribb = giribbifruut. 
t"r';[. 
tJ!~ garbuu[. garbuu[ In pI garabii[. garabii[1 
I desert rat, jerboa. 2 {abus] low despicable vagabond. 
trashy good-for-nothing. 
~~ garba[a Inl loafing. vagabondage, bumming 
around. ballal garba[a fifjawaari[ stop roving about 
the streets! 
t~ migarba[. migarba[ ladj *1 {abus] low and 
despicable. 
til fitgarba[ or figgarba[ Ivil to become a vaga-
bond. fi/-waad ilgarba[ min yoom ma maal fabuu the 
lad became a complete good-for-nothing when his 
father died. -vn tigarbii[; iva mitgarba[. 
..,...!l"r';[. 
..,.5 J! r. girbuks. garabuks <Engl> In 
pI -aatl 
gear-box. 
).J"r'; [. 
~~~ garabandiyya <P char-bandi> In pI -aatl 
153 
1 knapsack. 2 game-bag. 
r.!.oJ[. see rlJAJ[. 
.:: .:.. [..1 [. 
~J~ jurjilt (also kiribb i jurjilt) <Fr> In! geor-
gette, a matt crepe of sheer silk or rayon. 
I .1[..1[. 
.r:-.r:- gargar Ivtl to drag, pull, draw. gargar-ni liI-qism 
he dragged me to the police station. bi-ygargar-na 
liI-fasfila ~-~a[ba he draws us on to the difficult ques-
tions. -vn gargara; ava/pva migargar. 
.r:-~ migargar In pI -aatl {obsol] long trailing over-
garment worn by women of the lower classes on dressy 
occasions. 
J~.r:- girgaar ladj *1 troublesome, provoking quarrels 
or schisms. 
.r:-~I fitgargar or figgargar Ivil to be dragged; be 
pulled. mitgargar fil-mayaakim dragged through the 
courts. - iva mitgargar. 
2.1 [..1 [. see J..s [..1 [.: gargiir 
IJ" [. J [. 
~.r:- girgis Iprop nl male given name. maari girgis 
St. George. 
~.J[.J[. 
.~~.r:- garguuda Inl variety of date. 
J..s[.J[. 
~.r:- gargiir Inl rocket (Eruca sativa). gargiir fartii 
winter cress (Barbarea praecox). 
~J [. 
c..r:- garay, garay (a) Ivtl 1 to wound, injure. garay 
fu[uur-i he hurt my feelings. garayti qalb-i you broke 
my heart. fafki I-miin wi-kull in-naas magariiy [prov] to 
whom can I complain when everyone is suffering? 
2/imperf onlyl to behave in such a way as to make incur-
sions on the privacy of (s.o.) [eeb -ma-iigrayjil-giraan 
shame on you! don't invade the neighbours' privacy! 
-vn gary; ava gaariy; pva magruuY. 
c..r:- gary. gary In pI guruuy. giraayl wound, injury . 
gary i yaayir a deep wound. yinya({a [aI-garb i YEiib or 
yiffi g-giraab "" (something or someone) with a sooth-
ing or pleasant effec~. 
c.J~ gaarib r ladjl carnivorous. 
'-J~ garba, gaariba r In pI gawaariyl 1 [zool] carni-

vore. fi~-~uquur wi-klaab i~-~eed min it-gawaaril:J hawks 
and hounds are carnivores. 2 Ipl onlyl members of the 
(human) body. b-al:Jibb-ak bi-kul/' gawarl:J-i I love you 
with my whole being. 
;;""I? giraal:Ja Inl surgery. falaat giraal:Ja surgical 
instruments. 
cs>1? giraal:Ji ladjl surgical. camaliyya giral:Jiyya a 
surgical operation. 
c.1~ garraal:J In *1 surgeon. 
c.~1 fitgaral:J or flggaral:J Ivil to be wounded, be in-
jured. -iva mitgiril:J. 
c..r.J 1 fingaral:J or fingaral:J = fitgaral:J. - iva mingiril:J. 
c.~ garral:J Ivtl I to scratch. fir-rami' bi-ygarral:J it-
qizaaz sand scratches glass. 2 to injure extensively. 
garral:J wiff-u he left his face badly cut about. 3 to 
abuse, slander, defame. giran-ha yaama garral:Ju 
sumcit-ha how her neighbours blackened her reputa-
tion! sitt' mgarral:Ja a notorious woman. -vn tagriil:J; 
ava/pva migarral:J. 
c.~1 fitgarral:J or figgarral:J Ivi/l to be scratched. 2 to 
sustain extensive injuries. 3 to be slandered, be de-
famed. - iva mitgarral:J. 
J.) ~ 
~? garad, garad (u) Ivtl I to scrape clean. kawaaric 
magruuda bit-kazlak trotters scraped clean with the 
boning knife. fugrudi s-siggaada sweep the carpet with 
a hard brush. 2 to take an inventory of. garad iI-maxzan 
he took an inventory of the store. -vn gard, gard; ava 
gaarid; pva magruud. 
~? gard Inl inventory, stocktaking. daftar gard inven-
tory record book. 
~?i fagrad ladj pi gurdl beardless. 
~I? garaad Icoll n/locust(s).lIgaraad it-bal:Jrcrayfish. 
;;~I? garaada lunit n, pi -aatl a locust. 
~Jj~ garuud Inl scraper, scraping tool. 
~? giriid Icoll nl palm stalk(s), commonly used, 
when stripped of leaves, for weaving crates for the 
storage of vegetables, etc. ca~iir gtrild juice extracted 
from young palm branches for use as a base for hubhub 
(q.v.). 
;;~? giriida, 
gariida 
In 
pi garaayid, 
garaayid, 
giridaatl I lunit nl a palm branch. 2 a newspaper. IIda 
kalaam garaayid "" that's just chatter. 3 either of the 
two bones in the forearm. 4 decorative seam-binding 
running the length of a sleeve (of a galabiya or 
cabaaya). 
~J?i fagruud ladj pi fagariidl beardless. 
, .. PJ?i fagruudi = f;;lgruud. 
~~I fitgarad or figgarad Ivi/l to be scraped. 2 to be 
154 
inventoried ... iva mitgirld. 
J.r.J1 fingarad = fitgarad . .. iva mmgirid. 
~~ garrad Ivtl I to scrape. kaanu bi-ygarradu {-{iin 
min if-faaric bi-ku/l' ~cuuba they were scraping the 
mud from the street with great difficulty. 2 to strip, 
divest, relieve. garradu ;-;aabi{ they stripped the offic-
er of his rank. garradu I-ljassils they defrocked the 
priest. ril-l:Jaramiyya garradu I-beet mm ku/l U l:Jaaga the 
thieves stripped the house bare. 
ril-bulii~ misku 
1-l:Jaramiyya w-garradduu-hum min sital:J-hum the 
police caught the thieves and disarmed them. garraduu 
min kull illi l:Jitt-u they robbed him of all his belongings. 
3 [mil] to dispatch (troops). -vn tagriid; ava/pva 
migarrad. 
...s~.Ji: tagriidir ladjl abstract (of art). 
;(~&I ril-tagridiyyar Inl abstractionism, abstract 
art. 
J~ mugarrad ladj *1 I bare, stripped. bit-ceen it-
mugarrada with the naked eye. bani faadam mugarrad 
min il-faxlaalj a man totally without manners. 
2 abstract.fakl' mugarrad abstract form. 3 [gram] sim-
ple. 
fit-fie I il-mugarrad the simple verb. -/advl 
4 merely. di mugarrad ta~awwuraat these are 110 more 
than mere fantasies. mugarrad finni fatkallim titnarviz 
I only have to speak and you lose your temper! 
~ bi-mugarrad Iprepl at the very moment of, as in 
bi-mugarrad badf it-tazhiir at the very start of blossom-
ing. - bi-mugarrad ma Iconjl as soon as. 
J~I fitgarrad or iggarrad Ivil to be stripped, be di-
vested. -vn tagarrud r, tagarrud r; iva mltgarrad. 
oJ I J.) ~ 
.;,b? gardaan In pi garadiinl standard-size barrel 
J J.) ~ 
J.? gardal <T gerdel> In pi garaadilll bucket, pail. 
II fawaljljac-u zayy 19-9ardal '" I'll take the sucker for all 
he's got! 2 dolt, sucker. 
oJ J.) ~ 
..r--
';'~j~ gardin siti Iprop nl Garden City, an upper-
class district of Cairo adjoining the Nile. 
I. 
.).)~ 
.).)~ 
~ garr} (u) Ivt/l to pull, drag. carabiyya ygurr-a-ha 
l:J~aan a cart pulled by a horse.llbi-ygurr' rigl-u (1) he 
limps. (2) he leads him on, he leads him up the garden 

path. - fik-kalaam bi-ygurr i batq-u one subject of con-
versation leads to another. - ril- falif tigurr il-bih "" one 
thing leads to another. -garr-ufil-kalaam he led him on. 
garr' mlaa kalaam he entered into conversation with 
him. -garrit diyka she gave a drawn out (provocative) 
laugh. -garr'Jakal provocation. picking a quarrel. as in 
c;a~d-ak hizaar walla garr' Jakal are you just joking or 
are you trying to provoke (me)? -garr' naalim mala 
see naalim. 2 to buy (goods. especially groceries) on 
credit. - vn garr, gararaan; ava gaarir; pva magruur. 
:r.. garr2 Ivnl lIyar/, garr {gramJ preposition. 
~ garra: wi-halumma garra and so forth. 
)J.r:- magruur In pI magariirl 1 lavatory unit. 2 [rurJ 
cesspit. 
.?, garra Inl 1 Ipl -aatl instance noun of garr. fiddii-ni 
garra min sigart-ak give me a drag of your cigarette. 
Ilgarrit ljalam a (mere) stroke of the pen. as in bi-garrit 
c;alam fawaddii-k is-sign I could send you to prison 
with a stroke of the pen. 2 Ipl giraar, gurarl earthen-
ware jar. pitcher (see PI.A. IO).lIkaanfi-garra w-xarag 
/i-barra {provJ (he was in a jar and came out) "" he has 
risen in the world. -mij kull' marra tislam ig-garra 
{prov/ "" don't rely on always being so lucky. 
.:r.. gurra In pI -aatl spoor. trail, track. IIma-yaddi-J 
carif-lu gurra or fid-dibbaan il-fazralj ma-yilraf-f' 
gurrit-u "" no one has seen hide or hair of him. 
:r.. girrlinterjl shoo! (to a dog). fimfi girri min hina get 
out! go away! 
;I:r.. garraar In pI -aatl la any of a range of engines and 
devices for dragging or pulling (such as a tractor, 
locomotive, tugboat. carriage-return mechanism of a 
typewriter, harness trace). Ib trailer. luuri b-garraar 
trailer-truck 
2a dumb waiter, service lift. 2b (also 
sufragi garraar) bus-boy. 3 (also baab garraar) sliding 
door. 4 pair of flat slippers. 
';I:r.. garraara In pI -aatl trailer. 
;!I~ garaayir Ipl nl wake. consequences, follow-up 
(of something bad). fiyna lissa f-garayir-ha we're still 
suffering from the consequences. kull illi ya~al da kaan 
mill garayr-ak all that happened was because of you. 
~I fitgarr or figgarr Ivil passive of garr.11 fitgarr' min 
IIilla buzz off! - fi~-~al//, da ma-yitgarrij kitiir this line 
of merchandise is not much in demand. - iva mitgarr. 
~I fingarr = fitgarr. - iva mil/garr. 
• ;1 r.-' 1 fingiraara In pi -aatl debt owed for goods ac-
quired on credit. mijmumkin taaxud gidiid filla lamma 
Ixalla~ ingiraarit ijjahr illi faat you cannot start new 
credit until you have paid off what you owe from last 
month. 
fo.-I fig/arr r Ivtl l{zoolJ to chew (the cud). ruminate 
ISS 
(food). 2 to ponder over (especially sorrows). maqqit 
il-leel sahraana tigtarr' hmum-ha she spent a sleepless 
night mulling over her troubles. - vn figtiraar; ava 
migtarr, muglarr. see further under J .).) ..;. 
~I fistigarr J Ivtl to draw (e.g .• money, goods) in 
stages or on credit. yaama ljult-i-lu ba{[al tistigarr i 
bljalt-ak minnu Jukuk how often I've told him not to 
keep taking his groceries on credit. - vn fistigraar; ava 
mistigarr . 
• ),&-I fistigraara J In pI -aall debt owed for goods 
acquired on credit. 
I, 
.).)~ 
j ~ 
.~ ~ girz In pI girzaanl large rat. 
2 ..i .) ~ see 2 V" .) ~ : garaz 
loJ"')~ 
"-~ gursa, girsa In pI guras, girasl public disgrace. 
scandal. 
..r ~ gurasi In pi -yyal scandalmonger. 
..r ~ garras Ivtl to shame publicly. bring scandal 
upon. garrast-i-na fil-yitla kull-a-ha bi-Zliilj-ak you've 
made us a scandal throughout the neighbourhood with 
your shouting! - vn lagriis; avalpva migarras. 
..r:"':1 fitgarras or figgarras Ivil to be shamed publicly. 
be made the subject of scandal. - iva mitgarras. 
2(oJ"')~) 
..r~ jirs <Engl> Inl jersey. sweater. -alsofirz. 
..r ~ garas (also garaz) In pI fagraas, garasaatl bell. 
IItitbaan fabu garas rattlesnake. 
ioJ"')~ 
4. y ~ gursuuma, garsuuma In pi garasiiml germ, mic-
robe. ba~~it-li min foolj li-tayt i tljul-/ gursuuma she 
looked me up and down as if I were a germ. 
-.;,oJ"')~ 
• P:;.J-~ garsunyeera <Fr garfonniere> In pI -aall 
accommodation acquired by a man for the purposes of 
clandestine affairs with women. 
';'.J..r.)~ 
~.J-~ garsoon <Fr garfon> Inl 1 Ipl -aatl waiter . 
2 (also tala garsoon) Ino pI! gamin hairstyle (for 
women). 
.s..r.)~ 
'-::-~ jirseeh <Fr> Inl 1 jersey (knitted fabric). 
2 pullover. 

I";'j~ 
..r.r: garaf (u) I/vtl to crush, grind coarsely (e.g., 
legumes). bi-yugruf iI-fuul lafaan yilmil talmiyya he 
crushes the broad beans to make talmiyya. bunn' 
magruufcoarse1y ground coffee. talg' magruufcrushed 
ice. 2 to grate, crunch. fir-rami' b-yugruf lala I-balaat 
the sand crunches on the tiles (when one walks on it). 
fasnaan-u b-tugruf wi-huwwa naayim he's grinding his 
teeth in his sleep. -vn gar/. garafaan; ava gaarij; pva 
magruuj. 
..r J!.I fitgaraf or riggaraf Ivil to be crushed, be ground 
coarsely. - iva mitgirij . 
..r ~ 
1 fingaraf = fitgaraj. -iva mingirij. 
l";'j~ 
z::.1.r: • ..rl.r: garaaf (also garaaj) <prob Fr> In pI -
aatl garage. 
..r ~ garraf I Ivtl to park (a vehicle, not necessarily in 
a garage). garraf iI-larabiyya gamb ir-r~iif park the car 
by the kerb. 2/vil to be parked (of a vehicle). fi/-Iuuri 
garraf fil-l:Joof iI-qurayyib the lorry parked in the yard 
nearby. - vn tagriij; ava/pva migarraj. 
..r:!.' 1 fitgarraf or figgarraf Ivil to be parked (of a 
vehicle). - iva mitgarraj. 
tj~ 
t.r: garal r (ai Ivtl to drink, pour (a drink, especially 
medicine) down the throat. garal id-dawa bil-lafya he 
could hardly gulp the medicine down. 
~.r: gurla In pI -aat, gurall mouthful, draught, gulp, 
dose (of, e.g., water, medicine). xud talat gurlaat min 
id-dawa yawmiyyan take three doses of medicine daily. 
t~ garral Ivtl to make (s.o.) swallow, force (s.o.) to 
drink. garraluu is-simm they forced poison down his 
throat. Ilyaama garral-ni z-zaman min kaas-u ... how 
much have I been forced to drink from the cup of 
suffering! - vn tagriil; ava/pva migarral. 
t:!.' 1 fiigarral or figgarral Ivtl to be made to swallow, 
force oneself or be forced to take (e.g., medicine, mal-
treatment). - vn tagarrul r; ava/iva mitgarral. 
...ij~ 
J.r: garaf (u) Ivt/l to carry along, carry away (of a 
current). 2 to shovel, scoop, sweep up. -vn gar/, 
garafaan; ava gaarif; pva magruuf. 
J ).~ gaari!' ladjl sweeping, irresistible (ofa current). 
IIl:Jubb' gaarif overwhelming love. 
J.r: garf In pI guruuf! I clod of earth. wiqil lalee 
gar!, min fooq iI-l:Jeeta a lump of dirt fell on his head 
from off the wall. 2 oaf, d~lt. 
156 
J-,)~ garuuf In pI gawariif! I small spade or shovel. 
2 dustpan. 3 wooden threshing shovel. 4 scoop (for 
sugar, rice etc.). 
;ij 1 ~ garraafa In pI -aatl mechanical shovel. 
;ij fi magrafa In pI magaarif! hoe-shaped iron for rak-
ing ash from an oven or hearth. 
J J!.I fitgaraf or figgaraf Ivil to be carried along by a 
current (of water, air, opinion etc.). -iva mitgirif. 
J ~ 
1 fingaraf = fitgaraf. -iva mingi;if. 
J~ garraf Ivtl to rake out (e.g., ash). -vn tagriif; 
ava/pva migarraf. 
J:!.'I fitgarraf or figgarraf Ivil to be raked out. -iva 
mitgarraf· 
,?.:J...ij~ 
QI.r: garafatta <It cravatta> In pI -aatl tie, cravat. 
- also karafatta . 
- ...i • ...i j ~ 
u-')..!.~ giriffiruur <Engl> In! grapefruit. - also 
giribb, giribbifruut, glribfiruut. 
.:J..s...ij~ 
~ 
~ garafiit, girafiit <Fr> In! graphite. 
Jlj~ 
.lS")~ girka <T rargdh from P> Inl {mus] I name 
given to the note F natural. 2 mode in Arabic music 
having F natural, 8 flat and E half flat. 
I rj ~ 
r ~ gurm In! criminal behaviour, criminality. 
i...t~ gariima In pI garaayiml crime. feeh ig-gariima 
/Ii lamalnaa-ha what crime did we commit? 
r~ garram Ivtl to make (s.th.) illegal. fil-l:Jukuuma 
garramit it-tadxiin flS-sinima the. government made 
smoking in the cinema illegal. -vn tagriim; ava 
migarram. 
r:!.'1 fitgarram or figgarram Ivil to be made illegal. 
-iva mitgarram. 
r.r:i fagram Ivil to behave ruthlessly. fagramt' f-
l:Jaqq-i you have trampled on my rights. -vn figraam; 
ava mugrim. 
U"'1.r:! figraamiT ladjl criminal. falmaal figramiyya 
criminal acts. 
r fi mugrim lIn • and pI magarmal criminal. 2 ladj *1 
2a ruthless. 2b naughty. (of a child). see further 
.under r j ~ r 
r,&-I fistagram I Ivtl to consider criminal. kull-i-na 
stagramnaaf-qarb-u lik-kalb we all thought him a bully 
for beating the dog. fin-naas istagramit lamlit-u s-

sooda people condemned his dreadful behaviour. 2 Ivii 
to behave, or enjoy behaving, in a criminal fashion. 
feeh furl i1-istigraam da what's this high-handed be-
haviour! -vn fistigraam; ava/pva mistagram. 
1 r,J [. 
4.~ gurma In! huge quantity, large number. [andu 
gurmit [iyaal he has a horde of children. 
r~ girim ladj *1 sturdy, robust, large of stature. 
~J~ gurumiyya Inl bulkiness (especially of a human 
body). fammaj~ i girim gurumiyya what a mountain 
of a man! 
4.1~ garaama = gurumiyya. 
r~1 figramm Ivii to become large in structure (of 
living things). rij-fagara grammit the tree grew thick 
and tall. -ava migrimm. 
Jr,J[. 
..;. ~ garmalj In! huge mob. [anduhum garmalj [iyaal 
they have a whole tribe of children. 
~,J [. 
iJ~ gurn In pI fagraan, giraanl la threshing floor, 
threshing area. Ib open space in a village (where peo-
ple sit, chat etc.). 2 wooden mortar. 3 {Chr] (baptis-
mal) font. 
iJft garran Ivtl to place (e.g., wheat) in a gurn. -vn 
tagriin; ava/pva migarran. 
iJ~1 fitgarran or figgarran Ivii to be placed in a gurn. 
-iva mitgarran. 
JI~,J[. 
iJ~ ~ ,J\; ~ gurnaal or gurnaal, (also gurnaan J , 
gurnaanJ) <Fr journal> In pI garaniil, garaniinl 
newspaper. 
oJ ~ .J ,J [. see ..::.0 I.S .J,J [. : garanitta 
IS .J,J [. 
l.iJ~ garunya <prob It geranio> In! variety of gera-
nium (Pelargonium zonale): 
( oJ I.S .J,J [. ) 
~ 
~ garaniit, giraniit <Fr> Inl granite. 
41 ~ garaniita (also garanitta) <It granita> In! semi-
frozen syrup, sorbet (usually lemon-flavoured). 
157 
~.J,J[. 
,":,J,.- guruub <Engl> In pI gurubaat, gurubbaatl 
group. 
J.J,J [. 
JJ,.- garwillvtl to brush with a broom or one's hand 
(large pieces of, e.g., broken sugar, stones) from the 
surface of a pile of s.th. smaller. -also galwil, galwin. 
-vn garwala; ava/pva migarwil. 
JJ.#I fitgarwil or figgarwil Ivil passive of garwil. 
- also fitgalwil, fitgalwin. - iva mitgarwil. 
• .J ,J [. 
tJ,r-": jiruuh <It giro> In pI -aatl armhole (in a 
garment). 
II.S,J[. 
I.S,.- giri (i) Ivii I to run. giryit [alee w-fJatfanit-u she 
ran to him and embraced him. 2 to speed (away). 
fis-samaka giryit the fish darted off. sa8[it ma nadahna 
Iit-taks I giri as soon as we called the taxi, it speeded 
away. 3 to flow. fi/-mayya b-tigri /iI-bafJr the water 
flows to the sea. fJubb-a-ha b-yigri f-damm-u ... he is 
deeply in love with her. fid-dumuu[ giryit fi-[nee 
lammajaf-ha the tears sprang to his eyes when he saw 
her. IIriilj-i giri my mouth watered. - fil-filuus bi-tigri 
f- fiid-u ... he's well-off. - fJisaab gaari (bank] current 
account. -vn gary, garayaan; ava gaari. 
11 giri [ala to labour for the sake of, work to provide for. 
bi-nigri [ala [ej-na we work for our living. di sitt l 
maskiina b-tigri [ala farba[[iyaal she's a poor woman 
struggling to keep four children. 
IS,.- gara (a) Ivil to happen, occur. tistahli lIiyigraa-lik 
you deserve what you get. fana xaayifyikuun gara-Iha 
fJaaga I'm afraid something may have happened to her. 
gara I-[alj/-ak feeh have you gone mad? miin [aarif 
kaan raafJ yigra feeh who knows what would have hap-
pened? fJ-aljabl-u wi-IIi yigra yigra I'll meet him come 
what may! ya reet i11i gara ma kaan would that it had 
never happened! IIma-yigraa-f fJaaga ... it's O.K! it 
doesn't matter! 
~,.- garya / linst n, pI -aatl run. garya musri[a a fast 
run. 
~.)~ garya 2 In pI gawaaril {obsol] female slave, con-
cubine. fu(buxi ya garya. - kallif ya siid-i {prov] ... he 
who calls the tune must pay the piper. sitt' w-garyiteen 
[ala ljaly; betfteen {prov] ... a sledge hammer to crack a 
nut. 
~ 1,.- giraaya In pI -aatl (also [eej giraaya) daily bread-

ration (used in prisons, the army, and (formerly) at 
el-Azhar). 
..s~ migra In pi -aatl groove. Iii migra kida I-lagala 
b-timJi fiiha there is a groove along which the wheel 
runs . 
..s ~ magra In pi magaaril I course. magra !Jayaat-i 
the course of my life. 2a groove, slot. 2b channel, con-
dut!. magra I-luyuun the fourteenth-century aqueduct 
situated in south-east Cairo. II riglit iI-mayya I-magarii-
ha = life returned to its normal course. -
ril-magaari 
Ipl nl 3 the sewers, the sewage system . 
..s~ garra Ivt/l to cause to run. laazim tigarrii kull' 
yoom you must exercise him every day. 2 to cause to 
flow. !Jaaga tgarri r-riiq something which makes the 
mouth water. 3 to clear of obstructions (in order to 
make a flow possible). garri I-masuura di clear this pipe. 
-vn tagriyya; avalpva migarri. 
..s.J~ gaara' Ivtl I to keep pace with, conform to, 
comply with. laazim iI-waa!Jid yigaari I-mooqa one 
should keep up with the fashions. fana mif qaadir 
fagarii-k li-kalaam-ak I cannot go along with what you 
say. 2 to humour, indulge. gaari I-mudiir Ii-!Jadd' ma 
taaxud iI-lilaawa humour the director till you get the 
rise. -vn migariyya; ava migaari . 
..s ~i fagra t, fagra t Ivtl to set in motion, effect, carry 
out. !Ja-nigri l-fi!J~afiyyaat iI-Iazma we'll make the 
necessary statistical runs. -vn figraa f; ava migri, 
mugri; pva mugra. 
• I~! figraaft In pi -aatl measure, procedure, step. da 
mugarrad flgraaf rasmi that is merely a formal mea-
sure. figrafaat qanuniyya legal proceedings. 
.}I~! . figraafi t ladj *1 procedural. nuqta figrafiyya a 
procedural point. 
1 loS J r see 
I ~ J r: fistagra 
rloS.lr 
~~ 
giriigi 
<Engl> 
I/adjl 
Greek. 
2/n 
pi gmgiyyiin, giriigl a Greek. 
I~..i r 
• ~ guzf In pi fagzaafl I part, piece. fagzaaf iI-
makana the machine parts. 2 any of the thirty 
sections into which the Koran is divided. see further 
under l..i r ~ 
.}~ guzm ladj *1 partial. filtiraal guzfi partial rec-
ognition. II ril-ma!Jkama I-guzfiyya court of summary 
justice. 
IS8 
• ..s~ guzeef, guzayft In pi -aatl molecule. 
~~ guzeefi ladjl molecular. 
i~ gazzaf Ivtl to section, split up. tagziif iz-zarra split-
ting the atom. -vn tagzifa, tagziif; ava/pva migazzaf . 
.;~ tagzifa Inl sectioning, subdividing. IItuggaar 
tagz/fa retail merchants. 
i~1 fitgazzaft or riggazzaft Ivil to be sectioned, be 
split up. -vn tagazzuf; iva mitgazzaf. 
1 ~ ..i r see I loS ..i r : gazaa f 
yjr 
..,..~ gazab (I) Ivt/l to attract. bi-Ylgzib iz-zabaayin it 
attracts customers. 21 to pull. gazabt-u min fiid-u 
I pulled him by the hand. -vn gazb; ava gaazib; pva 
magzuub. 
~~~ gaazibiyya t Inl attraction, attractiveness, pull. 
fil-gaazibiyya I-ginsiyya sexual attraction.llqanuun ig-
gaazibiyya the law of gravity. 
""'J~ magzuub ladj pi magaziibl possessed, insane 
(applied in particular to dervishes). 
..,..I~ gazzaab ladj *1 attractive, charming. 
..,..~I fitgazab or figgazab IVII I to be attracted. 2 to 
be pulled. 3 to act as if possessed (particularly in con-
texts of religious ecstasy). -ava/iva mitgizib . 
..,..~ 1 fingazab = fitgazab. 
- vn 
fingizaab; iva 
mingizib. 
I 
• 
.I J r 
.J~ gazar' Icoll nl carrot(s). 
'.J~ gazara lunit n, pi -aatl a carrot. IIgazarit !Jariiq 
fire-cock, fire-hydrant. -ma!Jbas gazara stop-cock . 
~I.J~ gazaraaya = gazara. 
1 
, 
JJ r 
o 
J..~ glZlira In pi gazaayir/l island. II fig-giziira Iprop 
nl Guezira, the larger of the two islands In the Nile at 
Cairo. 2 traffic island. 
)1.).1 ril-gazaayir Iprop nl I Algeria. 2 (madllnit) 11-
gazaayir Algiers. 
..sJ..I~ gazayrt I/adj invarl term applied to anything 
planted near the banks of a river, or on islands In a 
river. 2/adj *1 Algerian. 3/n '1 an Algerian . 
J 
, 
J.I r 
.J~ gazar Z (u) Ivtl to deal harshly with (in money 
matters). gazar-ni lis-sllr he charged me a murderous 
price. beela gazr a terrible deal. -vn gazr, gazr; ava 
gaazir; pva magzuur. 
o.Jl~ gizaara Inl I occupation or practice of butcher-

ing. 2 Ipl -aatl butcher's shop. 
}~ gazzaar In *1 butcher. 
'Jr. magzara In pi magaazirl massacre. 
J~I fitgazar or figgazar Ivil to be dealt with harshly 
(over money). -iva mitgizir. 
J~I fingazar = fitgazar. -iva mingizir. 
4 
_ 
.JJ[. 
Jj:I:o gazr Inl ebb. madd i w-gazr tide, flow and ebb. 
5 ~ .i [. see 4 ~ ~ [. : gazr, gizr I 
I •• 
.JJ[. 
~ gau I (i) Ivtl to shear, clip. gau i jalr-u he cut his 
hair very short. IIgau i raljabit-ha he cut off her head. 
-vn gau, gazazaan; ava gaaziz; pva magzuuz. 
.~ gaua In pi -aatl I linst nl a shearing, a clipping. 
2 shorn fleece . 
• ~ giua In pi -aat, gizazl shorn fleece. 
~I fitgau or figgau Ivil to be sheared, be clipped. 
-iva mitgazz. 
~I fingau = ritgau. -iva mingau. 
1 •• 
~ ~ [. 
~ gau 2 (i) Ivil to bite hard. gazz· lala ~baal-i he bit 
down on my finger. gau· lala snaan-u he clenched his 
teeth. -also kau. -vn gazz, gazazaan; ava gaaziz. 
J .i.i [. see j J j [. : gazuuza 
It.i[. 
tj:l:o gazal I (a) Ivtl to sprain. fiid-i magzuula my wrist 
is sprained. -vn gaZl, gazalaan; ava gaazil; pva 
magzuul· 
~ 
j:I:o gaZla In pi -aatl a sprain. 
t~1 fitgazal or figgazal Ivil to be sprained. -iva 
mitgizil' 
t~ 
I fingazal = fitgazal· - iva mingizil· 
Zt.i[. 
tj:l:o gazal 2 (a) Ilvt/: gazal in-nils to cause to feel 
sick, nauseate. fil-fakl i gazal nils-i the food made me 
feel sick. 2 Ivi/: fin-nils i gazalit to feel sick, be nause-
ated. nils-u gazalit lammajamm ir-riilja l-wil.Jfa he felt 
sick when he smelled the stench. - vn gazar;, gazalaan; 
ava gaazil; pva magzuul. 
4i~ j:I:o gaZlaana Ifem adjl nauseated. nils-i gaZlaana 
I feel sick. 
t~ gazzal I Ivtl to cause to feel sick, nauseate. calm i 
159 
ygazzar; in-nils a sickening taste. - vn tagziil; ava 
migazzar;. 
t~1 fitgazzar; I or figgazzal I Ivil to be made to feel 
sick, be nauseated. - iva mitgazzal. 
3 
• 
t~[. 
t~ gazzal] I/vtl to marble, give a (synthetic) grain-
ing or veining effect to. 2/vil to acquire a (synthetic) 
graining or veining effect. -vn tagziil; ava/pva 
migazzar;. 
t~1 fitgazzar;2 or figgazzar;2 Ivil to be marbled, ac-
quire a (synthetic) graining or veining effect. -ava/iva 
mitgazzar; . 
4 tj [. 
t~ gizl In pi guzuur;/l torso (of a human). 2 trunk 
(of a tree). 
"";.i[. 
Iil~ guzaalan ladvl haphazardly. bi-Yiirilluluus-u 
guzaalan he spends his money thoughtlessly. 
jl~ guzaafi ladjl haphazard, random. Jur/-u dayman 
guzaafi min reer tax(ii( his work is always haphazard, 
without a proper plan. taljdiir guzaafi arbitrary 
estimation. 
"';j~ gaazil Ivil to take risks. - VD migazla; ava 
migaazif. 
~j~ migazfa, mugazfa In pi -aatl risk. 
J j [. 
~~ gizla In pi gizal, gizlaatlthick slice, steak (of meat 
or fish). 
J~ gizilladj *1 thick.jalr-a-ha gizil she has thick hair. 
J~ gazzil I Ivtl to slice. xud is-samaka di gazzil-ha 
take this fish and cut it in slices. 2 Ivil to become firm 
and thick (of flesh). raljabit-ha mgazzila she has a neck 
like an ox. - vn tagziil; ava migazzil. 
J~I fitgazzzil or figgazil Ivil sliced. - iva mitgazzil. 
.:"IJj[. 
.., 'i ~ guzlaan J Ipl -aatl purse. 
':"~J.i[. 
.r.IJj~ gazuliin <prob Fr> In! petrol, gasoline. 
I 
-r ~ [. 
;.. ~ gazma <T fizme> In pi gizam, gazmaatll pair of 
shoes. gazma b-raljaba pair of boots. IImuxx-u gazma 
he's a dolt. -loften with an association of impurity and 

degradation! ribn' gazma "'" low bastard. da-bn' kalb' 
laawiz iq-qarb' b-siltiin gazma he is a son of a bitch and 
should be beaten with sixty shoes (i.e. should be given 
the most humiliating of punishments). wala yhimm-ak 
fi-gazmit-ak "'" you shouldn't give a tinker's cuss. 
2 footrest on a boot-black's stand or sewing machine. 
~j#: gazmagi In pi -yyal shoemaker, cobbler. 
Jl..j#: gizamaati In pi -yyal shoemaker, cobbler. 
1 
• 
r.J [. 
r j#: gazam I (i) Ivil to decide, be decisive. m-at;dar-/ 
agzim bi-ra ry' fil-Ijaala di I can't give a definite opinion 
in this case. -vn gazm; ava gaazim. 
rj#: gazm Inll {gram] jussive mood, apocopate form. 
2: kazlak gazm {butcher] boning knife. 
r.J~ magzuum11n! {gram] not followed by a vowel (of 
a consonant). fill' magzuum a verb in the apocopate 
(jussive) form. 
rj#: gazam 2: habb' gazam see habb 2• 
3 r j [. 
rl~ guzaam In! leprosy. 
r.J~ magzuum 2 /adj *1 leprous. 
~ j [. see 
~.J j [ : gazuun 
-.JJj[. 
.J-JJj~ gazwariin Icoll n! evergreen tree(s) ofthe pine 
family (Casuarina stricta). -also kazwariin. 
~')Jj~ gazwariina Ipl -aatl unit, noun of gazwariin. 
. also kazwariina. 
jJj [. 
.jJj~ gazuuza <Gr gazoza> Inl pop, carbonated soft 
drink. -also razuuza, kazuur.a. 
~Jj[. 
.JJj~ gazuun <Fr gazon> In! {bot] ray grass (Lolium 
perenne). 
I~j[. 
1Sj#: gaza Ivtl to reward. gazaa-k allaah kull' xeer or 
rabb-i-na yigzii-k may God reward you! :vn gazaa r; ava 
gaazi; pva magzi . 
• Ij#: .Ij#: giza, gazaart In pi -aatl punishment, penal-
ty. qarbit gazaar (soccer] penalty kick. 
.Ij#: gazaat or gizaat In, always in constrl recompense, 
requital. hiyya di gizaat-i is this (all) the reward I get? 
gazaat il-ril)6aan qarb il-rit;laam {prov] be charitable 
160 
and your only reward is a beating. gizaat-ak illi 
ma-smilt '-/ kalaam rabuu-k that's what you get for not 
heeding your father's advice. 
ISj~ gaaza Ivtl 1 to punish. ril-mudarris gazaa b-
lalt;a the teacher punished him with a beating. rallaah 
yigaazi /Ii kaan is-sabab may God punish the one who 
caused all this! II ralla ygaazif(aan-ak == you little devil! 
2 to requite (of God). - rallaah yigaazii-k xeer may God 
reward you! -vn migaziyya; ava migaazi. 
ISj~1 ritgaaza or riggaaza Ivil to be punished. -iva 
mitgaazi. 
1 
• 
~.J[ 
~j#: gazya In pi -aatl cross-beam supporting the 
framework of a sat;ya (see PI.E. 3). 
-r'::"V"[. 
.J~ gustumaan In pi -aatl (naut] bowsprit. 
.) V" [. 
~ 
gasad In pi ragsaadl human body. rit-tanaawul 
min gasad ir-rabb' w-damm-u {Chr] the partaking of 
the body and blood of the Lord. 
IS~ gasadi ladjl bodily, physical. riI-ramraaq ig-
gasadiyya bodily illnesses. Ijubb' gasadi carnal love. 
4 
gassid Ivtl to embody, incarnate, represent in 
concrete form. riI-film' gassid mUfkilit is-silt iI-
mitwa;;afa the film illustrated the problem ofthe work-
ing woman. bi-yt;uulu rinn if-/i(aan bi-ygassid nafs-u 
lalafakl' balq il-Ijayawanaat they say the devil man-
ifests himself in the form of certain animals. -vn tagsiid; 
ava migassid. 
~I ritgassid or riggassid Ivil to become corporeal, 
materialize, become incarnate. kull il-faqaayil itgassidit 
fii all virtues were incarnate in him. -vn tagassud; ava 
mitgassid. 
~I rit-tagassud Inl {Chr] the incarnation (of 
Christ) . 
I.JV"[. 
~ 
gisr In pi gusuurl embankment (on a waterway). 
lala gisr it-tirla on the canal bank. raas gisr {mil] 
bridgehead. 
~ 
gassar Ivil to make an embankment. gassar cal-
mayya make a bank to enclose the water. -vn tagsiir; 
ava migassar. 
~I ritgassar or riggassar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
gassar. laazim yitgassar lal-mayya an embankment 
should be made round the water. -iva mitgassar. 

2 hJ" [. 
i) .. ~ gasaara, 
gasaara 
Inl 
audacity, 
courage, 
boldness. 
J~ gasuur ladj °1 courageous, audacious, bold. 
J"'~I ritgaasir, ritgaasar or riggaasir, riggaasar Ivil to 
dare, venture, have the courage (to do s.th.). tic;dar 
lilgaasir tic;uul kida f-wiff-u do you dare say that to his 
face? -vn tagaasur; ava milgaasir. 
I V"V"[. 
~ 
gass (i) Ivtl to test, examine, sample. gass iI-layma 
ljaW ma tal/al-ha min ii-fum he tested the meat (to see 
that it was done) before taking it out of the oven. gass 
i1-xutfaar c;abl; ma yiftirii he examined the vegetables 
before he would buy them. rid-dukloor gass; nabtf-i the 
doctor took my pulse. gassu nabtf in-naas they sounded 
out the mood of the people. -vn gass; ava gaasis. 
~ 
gassa linst n, pi -aatl a test, a sounding. lamalu 
gassaat lafaan yifuufu nool iI- fasaas iI-munaasib they 
made tests (by drilling in the soil) to decide which was 
the right type of foundation. 
""'J"'~ gasuus In pi gawasiisl spy. 
~J"'~ gasusiyya Inl espionage. 
...,.4 gassaas In °11 {geol} an expert in taking sound-
ings (especially in search of oil or water). 2 {rur] 
gassaas bahaayim an expert in testing pregnant cattle to 
decide the age of the foetus. 
~ 
migass In pi -aatl 1 probe. 2 plumb-line. 
~I ritgass or riggass Ivil to be tested, be examined, 
be sampled. -iva mitgass. 
~I ringass = ritgass. -iva mingass. 
~I ritgassis or riggassis Ivil to spy. bi-yitgassisu 
laleena b-tayyaraat they spy on us with planes. - vn 
tagassus; ava mitgassis. 
~I ristagass Ivtl to spy out, pry into. ruuy istigass 
il-xabar go and make secret inquiries about the news. 
-ava mistigass. 
2 oJ' V" [. see .;...;.. [. : gussa 
r oJ' [. 
r--:- gism In pi fagsaaml body. ril-lac;1 is-saliim 
fil-gum is-saliim a sound mind resides in a sound body. 
gism il-larabiyya the body of the car. ragsaam rariiba t 
foreign bodies, foreign matter. II ritlib gism-ak wala 
lillib Ijalb-ak {prov] tire yourself physically (by doing 
the job yourself) rather than mentally (by trying to get 
others to do it). gism ig-gariima material evidence of 
the crime. 
II""'!" gismi ladjl bodily. 
161 
J~ gusmaani ladjl bodily, physical. 
4.~ gasaama 
In! 
enormity, 
greatness. 
kaanit 
iI-xasaayir fi-raayit iI-gasaama losses were absolutely 
immense. 
~ 
gasiim t ladjl great, tremendous. xatar gasiim 
great danger. mafaakil gasiima enormous problems. 
~i ragsam lell morelmost great or tremendous. 
~ 
gassim Ivtl 1 to embody, give form to. timsaal 
mugassam lar-rayma a statue representing mercy. 2 to 
give substance to, magnify .1I~oot mugassam stereopho-
nic sound. -~uura mugassama three-dimensional pic-
ture. -vn tagsiim; ava migassim; pva mugassam. 
~I ritgassim or riggassim Ivil 1 to take shape 0' 
form, materialize. ril-fikra tgassimit fi-zihn-i the idea 
formed in my mind. 2 to be given shape, be formed. - vn 
tagassum; ava/iva mitgassim. 
J.'..f[. 
~I ragafJf: ~oot fagaff a husky voice. 
t';'[. 
~ 
gafal Inl greed. 
~. gaJilt, gifilladj °1 greedy . 
~I ragfal/ell morelmost greedy. 
I r ';'[. 
~ 
gafJim t Ivtl to burden (s.o.). fif-fur/aana -di 
gafJimit-ni mataalib kitiira this business made me 
undergo many hardships. -vn tagfiim; ava migafJim. 
~I fitgafJim or riggafJim Ivll to undergo (a 
hardship). yaama tgaffimt; m~aalib lafaan xatr-ak 
how many difficulties I suffered for your sake! -vn 
tagaffum; ava mitgafJim. 
2r';'[. 
~ 
gafma Inl adjustment bolt (on a goldsmith's 
scale). 
• LoS .;. [. 
~ 
gifeeh <Fr guichet> In pi -aatl cashier's 
window. 
':'~u"'[. 
Ja..:. g~tanJ Ivil {obsol] to loll or recline in a grand 
fashion, sit or stretch out with a regal air. -vn g~tana; 
ava mig~tan. 
~I 
ritg~tan or 
rigg~tan = 
g~tan. -ava 
mitg~tan. 

"="~~ 
~ 
gaqb Inl {bot] bird's-foot trefoil. 
t~~ 
~ 
gaqal (a) I/vtl to stretch out,lay down. gaqalu 
l-magruuh lal-rarq they laid the wounded man on the 
ground. 2 Ivil to lie down. gaqallas-siriir he stretched 
out on the bed. -vn gaqalaan, gaql; ava gaaqil; pya 
magquul· 
~I ritgaqal or riggaqal Ivil I to recline at one's 
ease, loll. 2 to be laid down. -ava/iva mitgiqil. 
~ 
I ringaqal = ritgaqal. - ava/iva mingiqil. 
t~t~ 
~ 
galgal/vil to brag, be vocal, make empty boasts 
or threats. -vn galgala; ava migalgal' 
t~ galgaal, gilgaal Inl boaster, loudmouth, 
braggart. 
I ,)t~ 
~ 
gauad Ivtll to wrinkle, crinkle. 2 to curl (hair). 
jalr' mgBllad curly hair. -vn tagliid; ava/pya 
migBllad . 
• ~ 
tagliida In pi tagaliidl wrinkle. 
~ 
I ritgauad or riggauad Ivi/l to be wrinkled. 2 to 
be curled (of hair). -vn tagauud r; iva mitgauad. 
~ 
tagauudt In pi -aatl wrinkle. 
z ,)t~ 
IS~ gileedi ladj pi -yya, galaydal I pertaining to 
the Upper Egyptian tribe of the galayda. - In! 
2 {obsol] musician witt- drum or flute. 3 loafer, wastrel. 
IJt~ 
/"": galar (a) Ivil to make a loud unpleasant noise, 
bray, bellow (of a human tieing). faakir rinnak 
ha-tlahii-ni b-giliir-ak do you think you can distract me 
with your bellowing? -vn giliir, galr; ava gaalir. 
• .J~ galuura Inl I/no pll loud unpleasant sound, 
bray, bellow. 2 Ipl-aat, gawaliirl {slang] mouth (as an 
organ producing unpleasant sounds). rab'1 gal'uura a 
loudmouth. sidd ig-galuura shut your gob! 
.~ gUlleera = galuura. 
/"": gallar = galar. -vn tagliir; ava migallar. 
z Jt~ 
oJ1/",,: gUlraan In pi galariinl scarab. 
JJt~ 
P. gilirr In! I disgusting-looking person, eyesore. 
162 
2 good-for-nothing, a nobody. 
':lJt~ 
oJ/",,: galran I/vtl to cause to swell, inflate (a part of 
the body). riq-qarba galranit tjurt-u the blow made his 
forehead swell. 2 Ivil to be or become swollen, swell. 
raas-u galranit mil-xab(a his head swelled from the 
knock. -vn galrana; ava/pya migalran. 
oJ~ migalran ladjl raucous (of a voice). 
~t~ 
~ 
gal~a Inl pompous posture. tjalad lak-kanaba 
maglu~ hittil gaua he lounged on the sofa giving 
himself such airs! 
4..0~ galal¥a Inl self-importance, pomposity. 
~ 
giliil ladj pi gUll¥al self-important. pompous. 
~i ragll¥ lelll more/most self-important or pom-
pous. wala yhimm-i-ni ragll¥ gili~ fiikum the biggest 
bully among you doesn't scare me. 2 {slang] 
betterlbest. 
U'"'~ gaual¥i ladj invarl enormous, huge. lalee 
hittit gitta gaual¥i b1akl what a formidable body he 
has! 
,J' ~ 
maglu~ ladj "I sitting with an air of self-
importance. maglu~ fil-larabiyya w-bitt' zayy iI-tjif(a 
tjBlda gambu lounging in the car like a big-shot with a 
smashing girl next to him . 
...,-. 1 ritgall¥ or riggal~ Ivil to recline or sit with an 
air of self-importance. -ava milgil~. 
~I 
ringal~ = ritgal~. -ava mingili~. 
~1S~t~ 
~ 
gUlqeeq Inl {botl sow-thistle (Sonchus 
oleraceus). 
J..Jt~ 
IS,}-: galfari Inl left-over food (in the jargon of 
waiters) . 
Jt~ 
~ 
galal (a) Ivtl I to set aside, earmark. galalt'-Iu 
xamsiin tjirf in latjaa I promised him fifty piastres if he 
found it. 2 to cause to be (usually of God). rallahumma 
riglal-u xeer may God make it turn out well! ya rabb' 
riglal kalam-na xafiif lala tjalb-u-hum Lord, make our 
words acceptable to them! ril-mayya magluula lif1urb 
water is made for drinking. - Ivi/3 to pretend. galalit 
rinnaha iii dafalit she made out that it was she who 
paid. -ava gaalil; pya magluui. 
~I ritgalalor riggalallvil to be made. -iva mitgilil. 

~I fingalal = fitgalal. - iva mingilit. 
u# Jt[ 
~ 
galla~ Ivil to become fat, become podgy. 
r;ayyil-ha galla~ min kutr i1-fakl her child got (too) fat 
from over-eating. -vn galla~a; ava migal/~. 
~ 
gUllu~ Inl [abusJ fatty, fatso. 
0..1' ~ 
galluu~ ladj pi galalii~1 fat, plump, podgy. 
~I fitgalla~ or figgalla~ = galla~. 
rt[ 
~ galam (i) Ivtl I t? force, stuff (s.th. especially 
food into s.o. or s.th.). galam il-Iuljma j-buljlj-u 
w·bil-lafya ljidir yiblal-ha he stuffed such a big bite of 
food into his mouth that he could hardly swallow it. 2 to 
compress, squeeze. galamit bUljgit il-huduum tabt i ba{-
lIa she held the bundle of clothes tight under her arm. 
-vn galm; ava gaalim; pva magluum. 
~ 
galma Ipl -aatl instance noun of galm. 
~I fitgalam or figgalam Ivil I to be compressed, be 
squeezed. 2 to be stuffed or stuff oneself (with food). 
riggalamit mil- fakl she ate till she was fit to burst. 
. avaliva mitgilim. 
o..I'~t[ 
~ 
galma~ Ivil to sit with a pompous air. -vn 
gar;ma~a; ava migalma~. 
~I fitgalma~ or figgalma~ Ivil to behave haught-
ily, act with an air of self-importance. - ava mitgalm~. 
.s...;;t.[ 
;;"';I~ gwrrafya <It geografia> Inl geography. 
jl~ gu¥raafi ladjl geographical. 
tt[ 
~ girra Inonce wordl sound made in imitation of a 
baby either to play with a baby or to mock someone for 
behaving babyishly. 
.:,,"';[ 
~ 
gift <T fift> In pi gUfuutl I forceps, tweezers. 
2 clamp. gift i juryaani arterial clamp. - also jift. 
~ gifta In pi -aatl lip inset (in sewing). 
';"'; [ 
~ gafar Inl camel pox. 
~ gaffar Ivil to show signs of camel pox, be afflicted 
with camel pox. -vn tagfiir; ava migaffar. 
163 
l(;J[l 
~ 
gafr: lilm il-gafrT fortune-telling, through the 
study of the letters of a person's name in combination 
with astrology . 
• ~ 
gafra: bafra gafra barren and uninhabited area of 
land, desolate place, area of ruins. 
-:-..;..;J[ 
~) 
~ gufritt <Fr gaufrette> Icoll nl wafer biscuit(~). 
~!~ gufritta lunit n, pi -aatl a wafer biscuit. 
~~)~ gufrittaaya lunit n, pl-aatl =gufritta. 
JJ[ 
~ 
gaff' (i) Ivil to dry, become dry. -vn gafafaan. 
gafaaf; ava gaff. gaaff, gaafif. 
j~ gafF. gaaff ladjl dry. jalri gaff dry hair. 
ba{{ariyya gaffa dry-cell battery. booC[ gaff dry dock. 
IIljalam gaff ball-point pen. -radd i gaff curt answer. 
- kalaam gaff rude talk. 
~i fagfaf lell morelmost dry. 
~i fagaff = fagfaf. 
....;~ gafaaf Inl I dryness. 2 [obsolJ dry period in the 
winter when the Nile is low and irrigation activity 
ce~ses. 3t drought. 
~ 
gaffif Ivtl I tp dry. gaffif dimuul-ak dry your 
tears. 2 to desiccate. laban migaffif dried milk. -vn 
tagjiif; avalpva migaffif; pva migaffafT . 
~ 
I fitgaffif or figgaffif Ivil to be dried. - iva 
mitgaffif. 
.jJ[ 
~ 
gifn In pi gUfuun. fagfaanl eyelid. filtihaab il-gifn 
[pathJ conjunctivitis. IInaam malw i gufuun-u he slept 
his fill, he had a good sleep. 
"J[ 
~ gafa' (a) Ivtl to shun, avoid (s.o.). ma-fii-Jfamarri 
min babiib yigfaa-k nothing is more bitter than being 
rejected by one's sweetheart. II fin-noom gafaa-ni sleep 
eluded me. -vn gafa; ava gaafi; pva magfi . 
• ~ 
,~ gafa 2 
Inl hardening of the emotions . 
fit-buld i gafa [provJ remoteness hardens one's feel-
ings. gafaa-k wala xluww i daar-ak [provJ not being on 
speaking terms with you is better than having you leave 
home altogether. 
j~ gaafi ladj pi gafyiin, gufaahl rough, harsh, hard 
(of temperament). naas gufaat i{-{abl crude people. 
o~ gafwa Inl aversion, antipathy, estrangement. fii 
gafwa benhum they have a mutual aversion to one 
another. 

li~ gaafa Ivtl to turn away from, shun. fin-noom 
fi-br;aad-ak yigafii-ni sleep in your absence eludes me. 
ruli ygafii-k gafii [prov} (he who rejects you, reject 
him) give as good as you get. -vn migafiyya; ava 
migaafi· 
j~1 fitgaafa or figgaafa Ivil to shun one another. 
fil- fawwil itgaafu w-dilwaljti t~aafu ... at first they were 
brusque with each other but now they are good friends. 
-vn tagaafi; ava mitgaafi. 
.1 I J![. 
)lS"~ jakaar <prop n Jacquard> Inl I jacquard 
weave, a process by which intricate designs are woven 
into a fabric. 2 jacquard loom. 3 jacquard, fabric pro-
duced on a jacquard loom. 
.:;o..:..J!£ 
Q"~ '4~ jakilla (also zakilla J) <It giacchella> In 
pi -aatl jacket, cardigan . 
.1 J! [. see .1 I J! [. : jakaar 
I J[. 
~ gala I: gala gala I li,nterjl cry of conjurers when 
performing tri~ks ... hey presto! 2 Icoll n! conjurers, 
magicians. 
~..:..I J[. 
..J~ jliaati <It gelato> Inl ice cream. 
1,,:-, J[. 
~ 
galab I (i) Ivtl to attract, stimulate, bring about. 
ru-lJigaab da yiglib iI-malJabba this amulet wins love. 
yaama galabit Ima m~aayib how many catastrophes 
she's brought on us! -vn galb. galabaan; ava gaalib; pva 
magluub. 
~ 
_galba In pi -aatl uncouth person. feeh iI-galba 
s-sooda dl /Ii gibt-a-ha mr;aak what a dreadful lout 
you've brought with you! 
~ 
gilba In pi gilab. gilbaatll [mech} bush, bushing. 
2 ferrule. - ladj invar and pi gilabl3 glib (ofa person). 
~ 
galab 2 ladj invarl 1 unbroken (of a horse). 
2 uncouth, rough (of a person). 
~ 
galaba T Inl uproar, clamour. fii galaba fdiida 
fif-faarir; bi-sabab iI-muruur the traffic is causing a 
tremendous noise in the street. 
..,..~ gallaab I In *1 stimulator, bringer about. gallaab 
m~aayib causer of disaster. IIgallaab iI-yasiir the one 
who set free the captive and brought him home (epithet 
of el-Sayyid el-Badawi). 2/adj *1 attractive, winning. 
164 
~1 fitgalab or figgalab Ivil to be brought, be 
brought about. -iva mitgilib. 
..,...4..;1 fingalab = fitgalab. -vn fingilaab; ivamingilib. 
~1 fistaglib Ivtl to gain, win, procure, obtain. 
lJasab far;mal-ku lJa-tistaglibu malJabbit in-naas faw 
karahiyyit-hum you will earn people's love or their 
hatred according to your actions. -vn fistiglaab; ava 
mistaglib. 
l,,:-,J[. 
~~ gallabiyya (also galabiyya) In pi galaliibl gala-
biya, full-length loose gown (the traditional dress of 
Egyptian men and women). gallabiyya baladi man's 
gown with wide sleeves and a plain neck opening, worn 
over a sideeri (q.v.) (see PI.F, 5). gallabiyya frangi 
man's gown with cuffs, collar and a buttoned neck 
opening. gallabiyya b-wis(J woman's waisted dress . 
gallabiyya samra woman's black galabiya worn over 
indoor clothes when outside the house (see PI.F, 11). 
3,,:-,J[. see ,,:-,IJJ[.:gullaab 
.;,1,,:-, J[. 
.:,l,4. gulbaan Inl variety of vetch (Lathyrus satirus). 
-.;,,,:-, J[. 
~ 
gilibineez Inl string wrapping around pipes for 
guarding against chipping . 
-. ":-' J[. 
)~ gulbahaar <T giilbahar from P> In! a kind of 
backgammon. 
..:.. J [. see 
~..:.. I J [. : jilaati 
":-'.1..:..J[. 
..,..IA gilitrab <Engl gully-trap> In pi -aatl [plumb} 
trap in the gully or central drain of a building. 
I.;,~..:.. J[. 
.;;:; k 
gilUliin <Fr> Inl (paper-cutting) guillotine. 
l.;,~o::J J[. 
~ 
jilatiin <Engl> Inl gelatine. 
.;;:;~ galatiin Icoll nl gelatinous sweet(s) cut into 
cubes. 
4~ galatiina lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of galatiin. 
4~ jilatiina <It gelatina> Inl1 gelatine. 2 [theat} 
gelatine slide. 

~l:,,;~ galatinaaya lunit n. pI -aatl = galatiina. 
J[J[ 
~ 
galgillvil to resound. reverberate. ~ot-ha galgil 
fil-beet her voice rang through the house. fir-rald; 
galgil the thunder rumbled. -vn galgala; ava migalgil. 
~ 
gilgil (also gingil) In pI galaagill jingle bell. 
fit/.iiya b-galaagil a scandal with bells on. a sensational 
scandal. 
-iJ[J[ 
~~ 
gilignaayit <Engl> Ini gelignite. 
CJ[ 
~ 
galya Ifem adjl bald. raas-u galya he is 
bald-headed. 
...ic J[ 
~ 
migalyalladj ·/1 rough-skinned. 1 oafish. 
tJ[ 
~ 
gabe Inil (also yagar gabe) grindstone. whetstone. 
1 encrusted grease or dirt. - ladj invarl 3 uncouth. 
boorish. uncivil. 
~ 
galxa In pI -aatl grindstone. whetstone. 
~~ gallaaxa In pI -aatl grindstone. whetstone. 
~ gallax Ivtlla to grind. tagliix ladasaat lens grind-
ing. Ib to sharpen. whet. raay yigallax is-sikkiina he 
went to sharpen the knife. 1 to smear or encrust with 
dirt or grease. - Ivi/3 to become dull and stupid (espe-
cially of the brain). muxx-i gallax ... I can hardly think 
clearly. 4 to become dirty or greasy. kull; gittit-u 
wi-hduum-u gallaxu mil-larafi wil-wasaaxa all his body 
and clothes were covered with sweat and dirt. -vn 
tagliix; ava/pva migallax. 
&-1 fitgallax or figgallax Ivil to be sharpened. be 
whetted. -iva mitgallax. 
I ~ J[ 
~ galad I (i) Ivtl to whip. flog. y-aglid-ha fiuddaam 
in-naas kull-u-hum I'll flog her in front of everybody. 
-vn gald; ava gaalid; pva magluud. 
i~ galda lunit n, pI -aat. guladl stripe, lash. galaduu 
rublumiit galda they gave him four hundred lashes. 
~ gild In pI guluudl I skin. hide. leather: gild il-
xaruul sheepskin. gild-u xifin its skin is rough. YUfina 
tayt il-gild subcutaneous injection. gild"lala laqm skin 
and bone.lIgild; yurr genuine leather. _gild; lammiil 
patent leather. -gild; famrikaani cowhide. -maat ft-
gild-u he was scared stiff. -naIad (or xil~) bi-gild-u he 
165 
escaped with his life. -lidim il-gild wis-safiat ... he lost 
everything. -gild; nimr garden mimulus. 1 outer mem-
brane (of a plant). bark (of a tree). 3 brake-block (of a 
bicycle). gooz gild bil-yadiid a pair of brake-blocks in 
their shoes. 
i~ gilda Inil lunit n, pI -aatlla piece of skin. hide. 
leather or rubber.lllaia l-gilda on one's uppers, broke. 
Ib strop. l/pl -aat, giladl la binding (of a book). 
lb jacket, cover (of a book).lc (plumb] (tap) washer. 
- ladj invar/3 miserly. 
~~ gildi ladj ·1 I pertaining to the skin. famraaq 
gildiyya skin diseases. 1 made of leather. 
~I~ gildaaya In pI -aatl a piece of skin, hide, leather 
or rubber. 
. 
,)~ gallaad In ·/la flogger. Ib executioner. 1 dealer 
in hides. 3: warafi gallaad paper used for book-jackets. 
~I fitgalad or figgalad Ivil to be whipped, be flog-
ged. -iva mitgilid. 
~I fingalad = fitgalad. -iva mingilid. 
~ gallid I/vtl to put a cover on, bind (a book). fti 
talamza tyibb; tgallid kararis-ha warafi fay mar some 
school children like to cover their copybooks with red 
paper. farxOj-lak tiftiri ktaab fiadiim wi-tgallid-u it'd be 
cheaper for you to buy a second-hand book and have it 
bound. l/vil to beco!De leathery. ril-leel gallid the 
bread went as hard as leather. -vn tagliid; ava/pva 
m.igallid. 
~. migallid In ·1 book-binder. 
.JI~ migallidaati In pI -yya/ book-binder. 
~I fitgallid l or figgallid 1 Ivil to be covered. be 
bound (of books). -iva mitgallid. 
z,) J[ 
~ galad2 t Ini stamina, endurance. nils-u yiftaral 
bass; ma-landuu! galad he has the desire to work but 
not the stamina. 
~ gilid ladj pI gulaadllong-suffering, steadfast. 
i,)~ galaada Ini stamina, endurance. 
~I fitgallid 2 or figgallid 2 /vil to endure, suffer. bear 
(pain. hardship etc.). -vn tagalludt; ava mitgallid. 
.i.J [ 
~ galliz <Engl> Ivtl to·glaze (pottery). -vn taglik; 
ava/pva migalliz . 
.# 1 fitgalliz or figgallk./vil to be glazed (of pottery). 
-iva mitgallk. 
IJ" J [ 
~ 
galas t (i) lvil to sit down. galasu yitbaysu they sat 
down to have a discussion. II rud-u galsaJ he has a 

steady hand (e.g., in shooting). -vn guluus r, galasaan; 
ava gaalis. 
IJ' ~ guluus Ivnlll rooq.it guluus sitting room. - raqam 
guluus seat number (in an examination). -liid il-guluus 
(i/-malaki) anniversary of the coronation . 
.rl4- gaalis I lad jl thick, viscous (of fluids). 
~ 
galsa In pI -aat. gilaslla session, sitting. ril-ljaaqi 
raggil il-galsa the judge postponed the hearing. IIgalsit 
kahraba one session of electric shock treatment. 
-qumaaf gilas material used for the top covering of 
chairs, sofas etc. Ib seance. 2 window-sill. 3 {euphem] 
lavatory seat. 
~ 
galiis In pI gulasa. gullasl companion. galiis il-
muluuk [obsol] companion of kings "'" a man of 
consequence. 
~ 
maglis In pI magaalisl board, council. rariis il-
maglis chairman of the board. maglis qarawi village 
council. maglis il-wuzara the Cabinet. maglis laskari 
court martial. IIlamal maglis [euphem! to go to the 
lavatory . 
.rl4- gaalis 2 Ivtl to attend the councils of. ribn-i baqa 
kaatib kibiir wi-baqa ygaalis il- rakaabir my son has 
become a big writer and hob-nobs with the great. - vn 
migalsa; ava migaalis. 
...,.J~I ritgaalis or riggaalis Ivil 1 to keep company. 
have social intercourse (with s.o.). dayman yi!Jibb' 
yitgaalis mar;aana he always likes to be in our company. 
2 (impersonal) passive of gaalis. raagilla yitgaalis wala 
yitxaa{ib a man one wouldn't wish to keep company 
with or (even) speak to. -avaliva mitgaalis. 
-')IJ'J[ 
.J.-A gilisriin <prob Fr> Inl glycerine. 
..; J [ see ..; I J J [ : gullaaf 
~ J [ see IJ'#.J J [ : galu~ 
IbJ[ 
~ 
gala{ (u) Ivtl I to graze, scrape, abrade. gala{t' 
riid-i I scraped the skin off my hand. 2 to rub off, 
scrape off. ma-tuylu{-fil-buuya min lal-baab don't rub 
the paint offthe door! -vn gall; ava gaali{; pva magluu{. 
~ 
galla I In pI -aatll linst nl a scraping. 2 raw place, 
scrape. 
~ 
I ritga/a{ or riggala{ Ivil to be scraped raw. - iva 
mitgili{. 
Ja4.; I ringala{ = ritgala{. -iva mingili{. 
~ 
gal/a{ /vt/l to scrape, rub off (a surface layer of 
s.th.). gal/a{it il-lagiin min ridee-ha she scraped the 
166 
dough off her hands. 2 to smear (s.th. with s.th.). gal/a{ 
il-gar!J I bil-mar!Jam he smeared the wound with oint-
ment. - vn taglii{; avalpva migal/a{. see further 
u~der b I.S J [ 
~I ritgal/a{1 or riggalla{1 Ivil to be scraped or rub-
bed off extensively or repeatedly. - iva mitgal/a{. 
2b J[ 
~ 
gal{a2 In pI -aatl I (blood) clot. 2 thrombosis. 
galla fi/-qalb coronary thrombosis. 
~I ritgal/a{2 or riggal/a{2 Ivil [path! to clot, coagu-
late (of blood). -vn tagal/u{; ava mitgal/a{. 
I"';J[ 
~ 
galaF (i) Ivtl to draw. pull (into wire or fila-
ments). -vn galf; ava gaalif; pva magluuf. 
~ 
galf Inl machine for drawing wire. 
~I ritgalafl or riggalaF Ivil passive of galaf. -iva 
mitgilif. 
2"'; J [ 
~ 
galaF (i) Ivil to scrape, scrape (the top) off. galaf 
riid-u he grazed his hand. galaft il-qifra min lag-gar!J 
you rubbed the scab off the wound. -vn galafaan; ava 
gaalif; pva magluuf. 
~ gilf ladj pI rag/aaft crude, low-class, uncouth, 
vulgar (of people). 
~i raglaf lell morelmost crude. low-class etc. 
... ~ galaafa Inl vulgarity. crudeness (in behaviour or 
speech). ti!Jiss ' bil-ga/aafafi-ta~a"ufaat-u w-fi-ka/aam-
u you feel how uncouth his behaviour and speech are . 
~I ritgalaF or riggalaf2 Ivil to be scraped, be 
scraped off. -iva mitgilif . 
~I ristaglif I Ivtl to select for vulgarity or crude-
ness. raa!J istaglif-lu wa!Jda w-balat-ha tixdim rumm-u 
he picked a low-class woman and sent her to be his 
mother's servant. 2 Ivil to act in a vulgar or uncouth 
way. ba{{altisatgliffi-kalaam-ak stop talking like a lout! 
- vn ristiglaaf; ava mistaglif. 
.:,,"';J[ 
~ 
galfana <prop n Galvani> Inl galvanizing. 
~ 
galfin Ivtl to galvanize. -vn galfana; ava/pva 
migalfin. 
.Yl4.4- galfaanu Inl galvanometry. 
.Jl4.4- galfaani ladj °1 galvanic. 
~I ritgalfin or rigga/fin Ivil to be galvanized. -iva 
mitgalfin. 

167 
).J.£l J r 
jj ~ gulukooz <prob Fr> Inl glucose. 
I.J Jr 
~ gall (i) 1 Ivtl to respect, honour. fana fagill-u 
1!-lIaah fi-Ii-lIaah I respect him unfeignedly. - Ivil 2 I 
only in perfl to be or become great or sublime (usually 
of God). fallaah [azz' w-gall or fallaah gail' galaal-u 
God, Mighty and Glorious i~ He.lIgamaal gall iI-xaalitj 
beauty that makes one praise the Creator. -gall iI-mulk 
to a great extent, in great numbers, in great sizes, etc., 
as in bini' lJilwa gall iI-mulk an extremely pretty girl (as 
befitting God's creation), [aalam gall iI-mulk an enor-
mous crowd (such as is only possible in God's king-
dom). 3t to be too great, be too difficult (for s.th.). 
lJadsa Igill" [all iI-wa~f an incident that defies descrip-
tion. -vn galaal, galaala. 
J~ galaal Inl grandeur, sublimity, awesomeness. 
galaal iI-man;ar the grandeur of the scene. wi-lJatjtj i 
galaal iIIaah by God's sublimity! (a strong oath). 
jJ~ galaa/a Inl sublimity, loftiness. galall-ak your 
Majesty. ~alJbil ii-gala ala Her Majesty. galaalil iI-malik 
His Majesty the King. II bi-galall-u or bi-galaalil tjadr-u 
[ironJ == the high and mighty, the great, as in sii 
man~uur bi-galall-u the mighty Mr Mansur. 
~ 
galiil 11nl Glorious, Most Sublime (epithet of 
God). 
2 ladj 
pi fagillal 
honourable, venerable. 
riI-[uqw i1-galiil the honourable member. 
.k-i faga[[T Ivtl to respect, honour. -vn figlaal; ava 
mugill. 
2.J J r 
~ gilla Inl 1 dung (of animals). 2 dung mixed with 
straw, dried and used for fuel. 
jJ~ gallaala Inl 1 woman dung-gatherer. 2 Icoll nI 
chickens left to scavenge from dung heaps. 
h gal/ill Ivt and viI to defecate (of cattle). -vn lagliil; 
ava migallil. 
~I filgallill or figgallill Ivil to be defecated (by 
cattle). -iva milgallil. 
3 J J r 
J~ gilaalln pi -aall 1 camel-saddle blanket made of 
goat wool. 2 winter blanket made of sacking for an 
animal. 
h galli12 t (iJ Ivtl to cover, drape. gallilil ~uuril 
ibn-a-ha I-mayyil bis-sawaad she draped her dead son's 
picture with a dark cloth (as a sign of mourning). -vn 
lagliil; avalpva migallil. 
~I filgalli12 or figgalli12 to be covered or draped 
(especially with black cloth as a sign of mourning). - iva 
milgallil. 
4} J J r ) 
~ gulla In pi -aall [alhlJ shot. 
~ magalia In pi -aall magazine, journal, periodical. 
':-'.1 J Jr 
...,..~ gullaab <P gultib> Inl rose-flavoured syrup. 
IIsukkar gullaab sugar sedimented in molasses, often 
moulded into candies. 
~.' J J r 
..r~ gullaaj <P gultij> Inl 1 sheets of thin pastry. 
2 dish, either sweet or savoury, made of layers of this 
pastry. 
':-' r J r 
~ 
galambu: fabu galambu In invarl 1 crab, crabs. 
2/slangJ 28 ugly person, ugly people. 2b policeman, 
policemen. fuzz. 
~.,:, J r 
~ 
ga/and <Engl> In pi -aall/mechJ gland, lantern 
ring. 
..J.,:,Jr 
~ 
galan/. galamf In pi -aall oaf. boor, clod. 
~.J Jr 
....... )~ galu~ In pi gawali~/lump of mud. 
J.J J r 
J ~ galwillvtl to brush with a broom or one's hand 
(large pieces of, e.g., broken sugar. stones) from the 
surface of a pile of s.th. smaller. galwil i1-lJ~a da mir-
ruzz pick that grit out of the rice. - also garwil, galwin. 
-vn galwala; ava/pva migalwil. 
J#I filgalwil or figgalwillvil passive of galwil. -also 
fitgarwil, fitgalwin. -iva milgalwil. 
1":'.JJr 
~~ galwin Ivtl to brush with 11 broom or one's hand 
(large pieces of, e.g., broken sugar, stones) from the 
surface of a pile of s.th. smaller. -also garwil, galwil. 
-vn galwana; avalpva migalwin. 
~#I ritgalwin or figgalwin Ivil passive of galwin. 
-also fitgarwil, fitgalwil. -iva mitgalwin. 

Z(tJ.JJ~) 
.:,)~ galoon I <Fr galon> In/l/no pll galloon, braid. 
2 Ipl -aatl trimming of galloon . 
.:,)~ galoon 2 or galuun <Fr gallon> In pI -aatl 
I gallon. 2 one-gallon can. 
tJ~.JJ[. 
,J..J~ gala ween In! I thistle-like plant (Sonchus 
loeraceus). 2 dung (of cattle). 
I ~ J [. 
~ gala 2 (i) Ivt/l to polish, burnish (e.g., metal). 2 to 
exibit (a bride adorned in her finery before the bridal 
procession). leelit il-galwa wedding night. 3 to cause to 
be eloquent. fif-furb' b-yigli l-waal:Jid drinking makes 
one eloquent. -vn galy, gila, galwa; ava gaali; pva 
magli. 
~ gila In! polish. 
~ 
galya linst n, pI -aatl a polish, a polishing. 
:~ .~ galla I In pI gallayiinl one who polishes met-
al, marble, floor tiles etc. 
J..:.; I fingala Ivii I to be polished or burnished (of 
metal etc.). 2 to bc:come eloquent. fingaleet fil-l:Jadiis 
I sparkled in the conversation. 3t to be or become 
manifested or revealed, manifest or reveal oneself. 
ril-l:Jaqiiqa ngalit the truth came to light. 4t to result (in 
s. th.). fingalat il-malraka lan qatileen the battle ended 
with two people dead. -ava/iva mingili. 
¥I fitgala or figgala = fingala. -ava/iva mitgili. 
~ galla 2 /vtll to clarify, explain. 2 to polish. 3 plate 
with metal. -vn tagliyya; ava/pva migalli. 
~I fitgalla or figgalla Ivii la to be or become re-
vealed or manifest. rabb-i-na yitgalla laleena b-ral:Jmit-
u may God show us His mercy! ril-ladra tgallit lin-naas 
fiz-zatuun the Virgin Mary appeared to people in Zay-
toun. Ib {Chr] to be transfigured. 2 to be polished. 3 to 
b.e plated with metal. -vn tagalli; ava/iva mitgalli. 
~I fit-tagalli In! {Chr] the transfiguration (of 
C;hrist). 
~ 
mutagalli T In! One who manifests Himself 
(epithet of God). ya mutagalli lala labiid-ak ya rabb 0 
God who hast manifested Thyself to Thy servants. ya 
rabb I ya mutagalli fihlik il-lusmalli (cry of the masses 
in Cairo against the Ottoman rulers) Godl who art 
manifest in Thy deeds, destroy the Ottoman! 
~ 
I fistagla Ivtl to seek an explanation of, discover, 
clarify. laazim nistagli sirr il-mawqifwe should discover 
the essential element in the situation. -vn fistigla, 
fist'B~aafT; ava mistagli: 
168 
Z ~ J [. 
~ gala J (i) I/vtl to oust, dislodge. 2/vil to depart, 
evacuate. -vn gala, galaaf; ava g3ali; pva magli. 
.~ galaaf Inl evacuation. liid ig-galaaf Evacuation 
Day (in commemoration of the British evacuation from 
Egypt on 18th June 1954). kubri g-galaaf Evacuation 
Bridge (between the southwest tip of Guezira and 
Guiza). 
J.J~ galya In pI -aatl expatriate community. 
~ galla J Ivii to miss a target, miss a hit. -vn tagliyya; 
ava migalli. 
3(~J[.) 
~ jili <Engl> In! (fruit) jelly dessert. 
J~ gali <Engl> In! (ship's) galley. 
.).J~J[. 
.~J~ galyarda <prop n Gaillard> In! (bot] Gaillar-
dia, blanket-flower. 
j,~J[. 
~ 
galyat Ivtl I to make greasy, make messy with 
grease. fid-dihn' galya{ ~awabl-ak the fat mad~ your 
fingers greasy. - Ivii 2 to become greasy. 3 to behave 
rudely. leeh tigalya{ malaa bif-fakl-i-da why are you so 
impolite to him? -vn galya{a; ava/pva migalyat. 
J.~ gilyaat ladj pI galaytal vulgar, boorish. 
I 
~r[. 
.....-:- gamb I <prob Engl gum> In pI -aatl gum-shield. 
Z ~ r [. see ~ tJ [.: gamb 2, gamba, gambiyya 
jl~r[. 
.i~ gumbaaz <P jlJn-bdz> Inl gymnastics. gumbaaz 
il-xeel equestrian gymnastics. 
~.J~r[. 
1S.r.': gambari <It gamberi> lcoll n! shrimp(s), 
prawn(s). 
~~.r.': gambariyaaya lunit n, pI gambariyaatl a 
shrimp, a prawn. 
u!-~r[.· 
~ 
gumbuf <T cumbrq> Inl {mus] type of steel-
stringed instrument. 
I 
r~r~ 
~ 
gumguma In pI gamaagiml skull. 

1 r [. r [. 
Galee diyuun kitiira his debts accumulated. -vn 
~ 
gamgim Ivil to mutter. -vn gamgama; ava 
tagammudr; ava/iva mitgammid. 
migamgim. 
~ 
I fistagmid .lvtl to select for hardness. - ava 
mistagmid. 
cr[. 
~ gamalJ (a) Ivil to start forward, bound forward (of 
a horse).llrarabaat gamlJa r unbridled passions. -vn 
gumuulJ; ava gaamilJ. 
I ~ r [. 
~ gimid (a) Ivill to become stiff or hard, congeal. 
fil-mayya gimdit the water froze. 2 to become ~trong. 
figmad be strong! be resolute! Gaqalaat-i gimdit my 
muscles grew strong. 3 to become miserly. riid-u gimdit 
he became tight-fisted. -vn gumuud, gamadaan; ava 
gaamid . 
.M~ gaamid ladj *1 I stiff, hard, inflexible. kawit/ 
gaamidhard rubber. raba(t-u rab(agamda I tied it tight-
ly. 2 strong, robust, vigorous. ~ilJlJa gamda robust 
health. leela gamda a powerful family. -qalb-u gaamid 
he is courageous. -muxx-u gaamid (1) he's intelligent. 
(2) he's inflexible. 3 miserly, mean. naas gamdiin tight-
fisted people. 4 intense, extreme, existing in a high 
degree. lalqa gamda a sound beating. mar~ gaamid 
dreadful stomach-ache. lJumma gamda a high fever. 
qoof gaamid intense light. -/adverbiallyl tiqallibii-hum 
fi-balqi gaamid you stir them together hard. 
~i fagmad elative of gaamid. 
~U:- gamaad I Inl inanimate matter. finta ma-bl-tlJiss i-f 
- finta gamaad do you have no feelings, are you made of 
stone? IllJayawaan faw nabaat faw gamaad animal, 
vegetable or mineral. -da gamaad (fawwal) he's tight-
fisted (cf gamaad 2). 
~~~ gumudiyya Inll hardness, solidity. 2 meanness. 
~~-'"'=" gammuudi ladj invarl very miserly. 
~ gammid Ivtl I to make stiff or hard. 2 to streng-
then. gammid qalb-ak take courage! 3 to change (an 
amount of small change) into units of larger denomina-
tion. gammidti talaata gneeh I changed three pounds of 
coins (or low denomination notes) for pound notes. 
4a [finan] to freeze (bank loans or liquid assets). 4b to 
fix (rents, prices etc.) usually by government order. 
tagmiid iI- far~ida freezing of funds. - Ivil 5 to hold 
tightly. gammid lal-kursi hold tight to the chair! 6 to 
freeze, solidify. ril-Iaban gammid the milk froze solid. 
-vn tagmiid; ava/pva migammid. 
~I fitgammid or figgammid Ivil I to become or be 
made hard or stiff. 2 to be collected, be accumulated 
(of money). fitgammid /iyya qirfeen (ayyibiin fil-bank 
'" I've saved a lot of money in the bank. fitg~mmidit 
2 ~ r [. 
.s~U:- gamaad 2: gamaad (il-) fawwalfifth month of the 
Muslim year. gamaad (iI-)faaxar or gamaad it-taani 
sixth month of the Muslim year .11 gamaad fawwal very 
mean, miserly. 
oJ I ~ r [. 
:i;1~ gamadaana <It damigiana> In pi -aatl carboy. 
loJ r [. 
.r: gamar (u) Ivtl I to bury in live coals. 2 to cause 
much trouble or worry to (s.o.). da gamar-ni b-faqaylJ-
u he drove me to distraction with his scandalous be-
haviour. -vn gamaraan; ava gaamir; pva magmuur . 
.r: gamrl Icoll nl ember(s), live coal(s). 
o.r: gamra I lunit n, pi -aatl an ember, a live coal. da 
(ift i ~rayyar ma-yfarraq-fi been it-tamra wil-gamra (he's 
such a baby he can't tell the difference between a dried 
date and a burning coal) he is totally lacking in discern-
ment. II fig-gamra l-xabiisa anthrax. 
~I.r: gamraaya lunit n, pi -aatl a small piece of ember 
or live coal. 
o ~ 
magmara In pi -aat, magaamirl a hollow in the 
ground or a pot (made of clay or metal) to hold a live 
coal or the like. lJU{{ iI-buxuur fil-magmara put the 
incense in the censer. 
~I fitgamar or figgamar Ivil passive of gamar. - iva 
mitgimir. 
~I fingamar = fitgamar. -iva mingimir. 
.? gammar I Ivtll to set on fire. gammar il-falJm burn 
the coal till it blazes up. 2 to heat (bread). gammar 
iI-leef heat the bread over the fire. - Ivil 3 to blaze. 
ril-xafab il-malJruuq gammar the burning wood blazed 
up. -vn tagmiir; avalpva migammar. 
~I fitgammar10r figgammar l Ivil to be heated (of 
bread). - iva mitgammar. 
loJ r [. 
.r: gamr2 Icoll nl pebble(s). 
o.r: gamra 2 In pi -aatl I lunit nl a pebble. 2 [lsi] 28 I 
also pi gamaraatl one of the three pillars at Mina at 
which pilgrims throw pebbles in the course of Meccan 
pilgrimage rites. 2b lalso pi gimaarl a pebble used in 
the rite of stoning the pillars at Mina. 

~I f'itgammar 2 or f'iggammar 2 Ivil [lsIJ to purify 
oneself from any traces of urine or excrement (where 
clean water is unavailable) by cleaning oneself with 
three clean and dry pieces of stone. -vn tagammurt; 
ava mitgammar. 
~I f'istagmar = f'itgammar2. -vn f'istigmaar; ava 
mistagmar. 
J U[. 
)~ gummaar Icoll nl tender green shoot(s) at the top 
of !ugar cane or palm trees . 
• )~ gummaara Ipl -aatl unit noun of gummaar. 
/. gammar2} Ivtl to pollinate (especially palm trees). 
2 Ivil to produce tender green shoots (from the heart of 
the plant. of. e.g .• palm trees. sugar cane. lettuce). 
ril-qa~ab gammar fresh shoots appeared at the top of 
the sugar cane. -vn tagmiir; ava/pva migammar. 
~I f'itgammar 3 or f'iggammar 3 Ivil to be pollinated 
(of a palm tree). - iva mitgammar. 
.!.l.;r[. 
.!.l r. gumruk <T gumruk> In pi gamaarikl } customs 
duty. 2 custom.s-house. 
..J r. gumruki ladj 
*1 
pertaining to customs. 
f'it-talriifa g-gumrukiyya customs tariff. 
.!.Ir. gamrak (a) Ivt or vii to impose customs duty. 
gamraku (lala) I-larabiyya they have charged customs 
duty on the car. -vn gamraka; ava/pva migamrak. 
.!.I AI f'itgamrak or f'iggamrak Ivil passive of gamrak. 
- iva mitgamrak. 
j r [. 
~ 
gimmeez Icoll n/} sycamore(s). 2 sycamore fig(s). 
ij.,.l:' gimmeeza lunit n, pi -aat, gamamiizl } a syca-
mor~. 2 a sycamore fig. 
~lj.,.I:' gimmezaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a sycamore fig. 
.r.-~ gamamiiz: darb il-gamamiiz a populous district 
in east Cairo. 
. 
:r. gammiz Ivil to become pulpy (like sycamore fruit). 
- ava migammiz. 
' ..... r[. 
~ 
jims <prop n James [DeanJ> In pi -aatl [obsolJ 
modish young man. see further under .;., ..... r [. 
2 ..... r [. see ..... .J r [. : gamuus, gamuusa, gamuusi 
.;, ..... r [. see also 
~ ..... r [. 
~ 
jamsana Inl [obsolJ modish behaviour (of a 
170 
young man. after the manner of James Dean). 
~I f'itjamsin or f'ijjamsin Ivil [obsolJ to be modish 
(of a young man, after the manner of James Dean). 
- ava mitjamsin. 
":;"';r[. 
~ 
gamaft <P gamast> Inl amethyst. 
.. ,p r [. 
...,a.I: ga~ ladj invarl boorish, uncultured. 
t.r[. 
~ gamal (a) Ivtl } to bring together, gather, collect. 
gamalna iii yx~~-i-na we gathered together our own 
things. 
f',m 
yigmal-u rabb-i-na 
ma-yfarraq-uu-j 
f'insaan (or maxluucj) [provJ what God joins together 
no man can put asunder. gamalu f'a{raafil-mufkila they 
summed up the problem from all sides. 
f'in-n~iib 
gamal faml-u-hum marra tanya fate brought them 
together once more. lima gamal f'illa-mma waffaq 
[provJ == birds of a feather flock together. - f'i~-~alaatu 
gaamila [lsIJ call in the mosque for Muslims to gather 
together to perform the liid prayer or for meeting after 
prayer. 2 to gather, pick. gaml il-qu{n cotton picking 
3 to add (up). bi-nigmal il-murattab zaaf'id il-badalaat 
we add up the salary together with the allowances. 4 to 
berth (a ship). f'ir-rayyis gamal il-babuur lar-ra~iifthe 
captain berthed the ship at the quay. 5 [printJ to set, 
compose. ba-nigmal il-buruuf wi-nilmil laleeha 
birovaat we'll set the type and make proofs from it. 
6 [gramJ to make (a word) plural. - Ivi/7 to assemble. 
lamma n-naas tigmal when the people gather. f'igmal 
[milJ assemble! -vn gaml, gamalaan; ava gaamil; pya 
magmuul· 
~ gaml Inl } [mathJ addition. 2 Ipl gumuull [gramJ 
plural. 
11 gamlan or gamalan reply to the formulae baraman 
(q.v.) and min zamzam (q.v.) = (may we be there) 
together. 
~ 
gamla' linst n, pi -aatl one picking (of crop). 
qu{n I f'awwil gamla cotton from the first picking (a 
high grade of cotton). 
t'~ gaamil' In/} Ipl-iinl collector. gaamil {awaabil 
stamp'collector. 2 Ipl gawaamill mosque. 3 Ino pll All-
embracing One (epithet of God). Ilbaraka ya gaamil 
see baraka. 
:i....~ gamla2 In pi -aatl} university. 2 league. gamlit 
id-duwal il-larabiyya or f'ig-gamla I-larabiyya the 
League of Arab States, the Arab League. 

~~ gaamir;i ladjl pertaining to universities. tar;liim 
gaamir;i university education. 
t~ magmuur; In pI magamiir;/l sum. total amount. 
magmuur; il-filuus the sum of the money. 2 final score 
(in a competition). 3 total of marks (in an examina-
tion). fit-tilmiiz gaab magmuur; kuwayyis the pupil got 
a good result. 
~ ~ 
magmuur;a In pI -aat/l group, assemblage, col-
lection. magmuur;it suwwaab a group of tourists. 
magmuur;it 
fasatiin 
a 
collection 
of 
dresses. 
ri/.magmuur;a f-famsiyya the solar system. IIqarabt-u 
magmur;aat I gave him a succession of punches. 2 lalso 
pI magamiir;1 group of students given extra-curricular 
tuition to bring them up to the standard of their better 
colleagues. 
~ 
gamr;iyya 
In 
pI -aatl 
1 association, 
club. 
gamr;iyyil if-fubbaan il-muslimiin Muslim Youth Asso-
ciation. 
2 government-sponsored 
co-operative. 
gamr;iyya lar;awniyya government-owned food store. 
gamr;iyya 
zirar;iyya 
agricultural 
co-operative. 
3 informal savings club. 
~ gumr;a Inl 1 Ipl gumar;1 week. 2 (also yoom (ig-) 
gumr;a) Friday. ~alaat ig-gumr;a Friday midday com-
munal prayer. II fil-gumr;a I-yiliima {lsi] the last Friday 
of Ramadan. fil-gumr;a I-baziina (or I-r;a;iima, or k-
kibiira) {Chr] Good Friday. 
~lI:- gamaar;a In pI -aal/l formal or informal group of 
people. gamaar;il iI-mufminiin {Chr] congregation of 
believers. gamaar;a min il-mudarrisiin a group of 
teachers. mutjakkir qawi ya gamaar;a thanks very 
much, everyone. IIgamaar;il il-xidma I-r;amma the stu-
dent voluntary service society. - fig-gamaar;a indirect 
form of reference to one's wife, or to one's wife and 
family. 2 {mil] squad. 
.I'll:- gamaar;i ladj *1 collective. r;ilaag gamaar;i group 
therapy. 
~ gamiir; Inl 1 fig-gamiir; everybody. ril-gamiir; 
fakalu has everyone eaten? lllir;bil goon lil-gamiir; 
street ball-game in which all the players aim at the same 
goal. 2 all, all of. gamiir; il-biyuul all of the houses. 
Ilmimma gamiir;-u something of everything necessary, 
as in lilaaqi r;anduhum 
mimma gamiir;-u min 
i/-mur;allabaal wi-Iawaazim iI-beel you'll find they have 
all sorts of tinned goods and things for the house. 
~ gamiir;an ladvl everyone. ~abaab iI-xeer (r;aleeku) 
ga,;,iir;an good morning, one and all! 
t~ gammaar; In *1 {print] typesetter, compositor. 
~ gammiir; In *1 {print] typesetter, compositor. 
~ 
magmar; In pI magaamir;1 1 meeting, assembly. 
171 
2 council. magmar; il-Iu1fa I-r;arabiyya or fil-magmar; 
il-Iu1fawi the Arabic language Academy. 3 {Chr] 
synod. 4 {zool] cloaca. 5 {rur] a small wooden (or tin) 
box (for keeping sugar, coffee etc.). 
~I filgamar; or figgamar; Ivil passive of gamar;. - iva 
milgimir;. 
~ 
I fingamar; = filgamar;. - iva mingimir;. 
C;': gammar; Ivtl 1 to assemble, put together. r;afaan 
yigammar; i/- fagzaa f in order to put the parts together. 
r;aawiz yigammar; il-masuura di wil-masuura di he 
wants to join this pipe and this pipe. II fil-lilifoon 
ma-bi-ygammar;-f in-nimra the number doesn't con-
nect. - wibda mugammar;a (rural) community centre. 
- markaz lagmiir; collection or assembly centre. 
2 {print] to set, compose. bi-ygammar; il-buruuf 
wi-b-yir;mil r;aleeha birovaal he sets the type and makes 
proofs from it. -vn tagmiir;; ava migammar;; pva 
mugammar;. 
~ 
mugammar; In pI -aall 1 depot. mugammar; 
baqaayir; goods depot. II mugammar; il-badiid winulb 
the (Helwan) Steel Plant. 2f co-operative store. - Ino 
pll 3 fil-mugammar; concentration of government de-
partments in a building on Tahrir Square, Cairo. 
~I filgammar; or 
figgammar; 
Ivil passive of 
gammar;. - vn lagammur; f; ava milgammar;. 
~ 
tagammur; In pI lagammur;aall gathering, assem-
bly. fiklafafil (ayyaral-na lagammur;aallil-r;aduw our 
planes discovered enemy concentrations. 
C"~ gaamir; 2 f Ivtl to have sexual intercourse with. 
-vn mugamr;a, gimaar;; ava migaamir;. 
t ~ gimaar; Inl sexual intercourse. 
C"~I filgaamir; or figgaamir; Ivil to have sexual inter-
course. - ava milgaamir;. 
C;':i fagmar; Ivil to decide unanimously. fagmar;na (or 
fagmar;na rafy-i-na) r;ala I-mirwaab mar;aahum we 
made ajoint decision to go with them. - vn figmaar;; ava 
mugmir; f; pva mugmar; f . 
t~! figmaar; (also figmaar; ir-rafy) Inl unanimous 
agreement. 
wafqu 
bil- figmaar; 
they 
agreed 
unanimously. 
..r~! figmaar;if ladjl unanimous. kaanil muwafqa 
figmaar;iyya it was a unanimous agreement. 
~I figlamar; Ivil 1 to gather, meet together, assem-
ble. figtamar;u fil-barb they got together during the 
war. fis-sillaal iglamar;u wi-llafaqu finnuhum yiqa(r;u 
I-maballaat the women got together and agreed to 
boycott the stores. 2 {euphem] to have sexual inter-
course. figlamar; mar;a mraal-u he had intercourse with 
his wife. - vn figtimaar;; ava miglimir;. 
t41 figtimaar; Inl Ilpl -aall meeting, assembly. 

makaan l-igtimaac meeting place. camalna gtimaac we 
held a meeting. 2 (also c~lm il-igtimaac ) Ino pll 
sociology. 
~41 Yigtimaaciladj */1 social. Yax~~aaYigtimaaci 
(1) social worker, social counSellor. (2) student coun-
sellor. 
II ril-Ijaala 
l-igtimaciyya 
marital 
status. 
2 sociable, fond of society. raagil igtimaaci bi-yljibb 
il-Ijafalaat a sociable man who likes parties. 
~ 
mugtamac 
In 
pi -aatl 
society, 
milieu. 
ril-mugtamac il-xaarigi the outside world. 
~I Yistagmac Ivtl to concentrate, gather together. 
laazim nistagmac kull' qiwwit-na cajaan niwaagih il-
caduw we must gather all our forces to face the enemy. 
-vn Yistigmaac ; ava mistagmac . 
I Jn~. 
J~ gamaal Inl beauty. ya gamaal in-nabi (caleek) ex-
pression of admiration = aren't you a beauty! gamaal 
id-dinya bil-maal wil-Yaxra bil-Yacmaal [prov] the 
beauty of this world is (attained) by wealth, and that of 
the hereafter by (good) deeds. 
J~ gamaalif ladjl aesthetic. 
.::.)'~ gamalaat Ifem pi adjl beautiful, lovely. banaat 
gamalaat pretty girls. 
~41 Yil-gamaliyya Iprop nl quarter and administra-
tive district (qism) in eastern Cairo. 
j.,..I: gimiil In pi gamaayil/ favour, service, good turn. 
ma-b-yiljfa?,-j ig-gimiil he is ungrateful. Yilli yicmil 
gimiil yitimm-u [prov] he who does a good turn should 
do it in full. 
~ 
gimiila = gimiil. 
j.,..I: gamiil ladj pi gumaa/! 1 beautiful, aesthetically 
pleasing. ril-funuun il-gamiila the fine arts. 2 fine, ex-
cellent. zooq gamiil good taste. IIlu ra Yy' gamiil he has 
good ideas. 
~i Yagmal l /ell more/most beautiful, nicer/nicest. 
Yagmalljaagaf-Ijayaat-i hiyya l-qiraaya the nicest thing 
in my life is reading. 
..k- gammil! Ivtl to beautify. IIrabb-i-na ygammil-ha 
bis-satr may God bless our life with His protection! -vn 
tagmiil; ava migammil. 
H 
tagmiil Inl beautification, cosmetics. camaliyyit 
tagmiil plastic surgery. 
~I Yitgammil or Yiggammil Ivil Ia to be beautified. 
1 b to beautify oneself. ya hana lIi yitgammilu b~-~abr = 
blessed be those who adorn themselves with forbear-
ance. 2 to do a favour, offer a service. ma-yljibb'-j 
Ijadd' yitgammil calee he doesn't like anyone to do him 
a favour (thereby making him feel under an obligation). 
172 
-vn tagammul; ava/iva mitgammil: 
J..~ gaamil Ivtl 1 to treat with courtesy. 2 to flatter. 
- Ivil 3 to behave with courtesy. -vn migamla; ava 
migaamil. 
iJ.,~ mugamla /n pi -aatl 1 courteous expression (of 
greeting etc.). 2 act of courtesy. 
J..l;oEl Yitgaamil or Yiggaamil Ivil I to boast of doing a 
favour. la titgaamil calayya wala Yatgaamfl caleek let us 
stop pretending that we try to oblige each other. 2a to 
be treated with courtesy. 2b to be flattered. - ava/iva 
mitgaamil. 
~I Yistagmil Ivtl 1 to select for beauty. Yaljsan-lu 
yistagmil bint' yiggawwiz-ha he should choose a pretty 
girl to be his wife. 2 to consider beautiful. mistagmila 
rolj-ha she is vain about her looks. -vn Yistigmaal; ava 
mistagmil. 
1 Jn~. 
~ gamal! (i) Ivtl to combine, add together. 
gamal-hum bi-jatma he blanketed them under one in-
sult. II ril-Ijisaab yigmil (let the account accumulate) 
don't bother to pay me back now; I'm keeping a note of 
what you owe (in situations of frequent financial trans-
action). -vn gaml; ava gaamil; pva magmuul. 
~ gumla Inl Ia Ipl guma/! total, sum. gumlit 
il-baqaayic miit Ijitta the total of the goods is one hun-
dred items. Ij-adfac big-gumla I'll pay in a lump sum. 
IIgumlit naas a bunch of people. Ib Ino pll bulk. 
Yil-Yintaag big-gumla mass production. tigaarit ig-
gumla the wholesale trade. tuggaar n~~' gumla mer-
chants dealing in small quantities of wholesale goods. 
2 Ipl guma/! phrase, sentence. gumal musiqiyya musical 
phrases. 
ll.I: gimla: bi-gimlit (dool) and min gimlit (dool) ex-
pression dismissive of the importance of a loss sus-
tained, in view of a preceding, and much greater, loss. 
xalli g-gineeh da b-gimlit illi qaacu count that pound as 
one of all the rest that wcre lost. 
j...;'1 Yitgamal or Yiggamal Ivil to be combined, be 
added together. - iva mitgimil. 
~I Yingamal = Yitgamal. -iva mingimil. 
~i Yagmal Z r Ivtl I to combine, add together. 2 to 
sum up. Yigmil-li l-ma'Yquuc fi-talat kilmaat summarize 
the subject for me in three words. -vn Yigmaal; ava 
mugmil; pva mugmal. 
J~! Yigmaali 1 ladjl total, overall. ril-macna 1-
Yigmaali the overall meaning. 2/nl total (sum). 
Yigmaali taman il-beec the total sales price. 
~ 
mugmalT In pi -aat/ summary, outline. 

3 Jr[. 
.k gamal2 In pi gimaal, gimElal camel. IIleen gamal 
walnut. -ma-Jufti-J iI-gamal wala I-gammaal [prov] 
(I have seen neither the camel nor the cameleer) I have 
00 idea who was responsible. - riI-gamal bima lJamal 
(the camel with what it carried) the whole caboodle. 
-ma-gaa-J fi-gamal == he hasn't asked for too much! 
- fis-sikka tfawwit ig-gamal (the way permits the pas-
sage of the camel) no-one is forcing (you etc.) to stay! 
-ya gamal-i expression of mourning by a woman 
lamenting her dead husband. -gamal iI-balJr pelican. 
~ gamali ladj invarl I of or pertaining to camels. 
lalJma gamali camel meat. 2 requiring long cooking. 
IIr~ay gamali [joe] tea very late in coming. 
Jlr: gammaalln pi -iin, gammaalal camel driver. 
.k- gammilZ Ivil to work as a camel-driver. -vn 
lagmiil; ava migammil. 
.!l • .!l Jr[. 
~ 
gumalakka, gamalakka <It gommalaeea> In! 
lac, shellac. 
':uJr[. 
.,.,Jl.r; gamaloon <prob It eomignolo> In pi -aatl 
pitched roof. 
rr[. 
~I fistagammT Ivil to relax, take things easy. -vn 
fisligmaam; ava mistigimm, mustagimm. 
ilSrr[. see jr[.:gimmeez 
J. r [. 
;p' gamhara = gumhuur. 
)~ gumhuur, gamhuurJ Inl I Ipl gamahiirl crowd, 
mass or multitude of people. gumhuur in-naaxibiin the 
mass of electors. gamahiir if-falb the popular masses. 
1/00 pI! public. di liiha gumhuur there is a public for 
this. 
gumhuur 
ik-koora 
the 
football 
public. 
fi/-muwa;;df rakan ig-gumhuur the emp\oyee kept the 
public waiting. 
1S.r-'Lr: gamahiiri ladjl pertaining to the public, 
popular. 
IS)~ gumhuuri ladj ·1 republican. II ril-lJaras ig-
gumhuuri the Presidential Guard. -qaraar gumhuuri 
Presidential decree. 
~)~ gumhuriyya In pi -aatl republic. gumhuriyyit 
mtqr i/-larabiyya the Arab Republic o.f Egypt. 
~I fitgamhar or figgamhar Ivil to gather in crowds. 
fin-naas itgamharit fil-midaan crowds gathered in the 
173 
square. - ava mitgamliar. 
V".Jr[. 
..,..,.~ gamuus <P gamas> Icoll nlwater buffalo(es). 
IIgamuus rabyaq stupid oaf. 
4..,.~ gamuusa I In pi gawamiis, gamusaatl female 
water buffalo. 2/masc and fem adjl oafish. ramma 
raagil gamuusa ~alJiilJ what a great lout of a man! 
~,.~ gamuusi ladjl pertaining to water buffalo. 
lalJma gamuusi (1) buffalo meat. (2) very tough meat. 
• ~ [. see I IS ~ [. : ginaa ri 
y~[. 
~ 
ganab (i) I Ivtl to set aside. rignib it-tarabeeza 
fir-rukn move the table aside into the corner. 2/vil to 
move aside. e;ult-i-Iu yignib fiwayya I told him to move 
aside a little. -vn ganabaan; ava gaanib; pva magnuub . 
.,..;~ gaanibT In pi gawaanib/l aspect. min iI-gaanib 
iI-qanuuni from the legal aspect.ll/ayyin iI-gaanib gen-
tle. -laziiz iI-gaanib powerful. -marhuub iI-gaanib 
feared. -fasiilJ iI-gawaanib wide, spacious (of buildings, 
towns etc.). 2 side. II rilagaanib besides, in addition to. 
-lala gaanib to a degree, as in lala gaanib kibiir mil-
rahammiyya of great importance. - Iprepl 3 next to, 
beside. gaanib iI-baab next to the door. 
~ 
gamb Z lIn pi ginaab, ragnaab, gunuubl side. 
gamb it-tariie; the side of the road. siib-u lala gamb 
leave it aside. ginaab-i waglaa-ni my sides ache. 
ma-timfii-J min gamb-a-ha don't leave her side. Ilfiriit 
gamb [text] selvage. -zamb-u lala gamb-u [prov] he'll. 
get (or, has got) his just deserts. -kul/i waalJid yinaam 
lag-gamb illi yrayyalJ-u (since agreement is impossible) 
let everyone go his own way. -xad gambi min to 
boycott, keep aloof from, as in leeh waaxid gamb i 
minni why are you avoiding me? 2 (also gambi min) 
Iprep, w pron suff often gambii-I 28 next to, beside. 
gamb if-Jibbaak next to the window. faatit gambiina she 
passed by us. 2b along with, together with. haati 
fwayyit (Urfi gamb ii- rakl bring some pickles with the 
food. 
11 gamban: gamban silaalJ [mil] lower arms! 
4 
gamba In pi -aat, ginabl pannier (especially one of 
a pair carried by a donkey). rana Iii We;il,i min e;alr 
ig-gamba (it is I that fell from the bottom of the pan-
nier) I am hopelessly unlucky. 
(.~ gambiyya Inl sheath-knife (in the jargon of 
fitiwwaat). 
~ 
gunub ladjinvarl[lsl] ritually impure after sexual 
intercourse (of the human body). 

4 
gannabiyya In pi gananiibl I plot of land on 
either side of a secondary canal. 2 ditch alongside a 
road or railway track. 
~i 5'agnabi Ipl 5'agaanibl I ladjl foreign. 2 Inl 
foreigner . 
..,..~ ganaab Inl [obsol] honorific used as a respectful 
form ofreference and address. ganaab-ak Sir.llxallii-ha 
cala ganaab illaah leave it up to God. - 5'il-ganaab i/-
caali [obsol] title of. and form of reference to, the 
Sultan of Turkey. 
~~ ganaaba Inl [lsi] state of ritual impurity after 
sexual intercourse. 
..,...f-:>:-
ga~uub Inl south. 
J.~ ganuubi ladil southern. 
~ 
ginneebi ladv/l sideways. raakib ginneebi riding 
sidesaddle. 2 side by side. 
~I 5'itganab or 5'igganab Ivil I to be set or moved 
aside. 2 to move away, remove oneself. -ava/iva 
mitginib. 
~I 5'inganab = 5'itganab. -ava/iva minginib. 
~ 
gannib Ivtl I to turn sideways. gannib i/-maktab 
cal-!Jee{a turn the desk sideways on to the wall. 2 [leg] 
to demarcate (boundaries). -vn tagniib; avalpva 
migannib. 
~ 
tagniiba Ipl -aat, taganiibl instance noun of 
ta~niib. 
~I 5'itgannib 
or 
5'iggannib 
I Ivtl 
to 
avoid. 
5'itgannibna l-munac:Ja we avoided the argument. 2 Ivil 
[leg] 2a to fix a demarcation line. 2b to be demarcated. 
-vn tagannub; avaliva mitgannib. 
~i 5'agnab Ivil [lsi] to become ritually impure as a 
result of having sexual intercourse. - ava mugnib. 
~ 
I 5'igtanab Ivtl to keep away from, avoid, boycott. 
-vn 5'igtinaab; ava migtinib. 
.i y .J [. see .i I y r [. : gumbaaz 
J.;:...J[, 
~ 
jintit <Engl gentle(man» 
ladi invarl I well-
bred, refined. walad Jintil wi-mu5'addab qawi a well-
bred and very polite boy. 2 gentle. xallii-k jintit 
macaaha treat her gently. 
~ 
jantala Inl I good-breeding. 2 gentleness. 
[..J[. 
~~ ganga <Fr changeant> ladi invarl shot (of a 
fabric). 
J [. .J [. see J [. J [. : gingit 
174 
IC.J[. 
&- gana!J (i) l/vtl to strand, run (a ship) aground. 
ril-marakbi gana!J it-qaa"b car-rami' w-sa!Jab-u lil-
barr the boatman ran the boat aground on the sand and 
pulled it ashore. 2/vil to run aground. -vn gan!J, 
gana!Jaan; ava gaani!J; pva magnuu!J. 
c.~ ginaa!J, ganaa!J In pi 5'igni!Ja, 5'agni!Ja, gina!Jaatl 
I wing (of a bird, an aeroplane). IImaksuur ig-ginaa!J 
weak, in need of protection. - 5'llli txaaf cala ragi/-ha 
wi-triir tiq~qa~ ginaa!J-u la y{iir [prov] she who worries 
about her husband and gets jealous should clip his 
wings so that he does not flyaway. -cala gnaa!J is-surla 
(also cala ganaah ir-riib) very quickly. -cala gnaa!J 
it- 5'asiir by radio. - 5'ixfitf. ginaa!J-ak be modest and hum-
ble. -dayman faarid ginaa!J-u he is always overbearing. 
2 wing (of a building). 3 suite. !Jagazna-Ihum ginaa!J 
fil-Iukanda we reserved a suite in the hotel for them. 
4 [soccer] wing. 5'ig-ganaa!J it- 5'ayman the right wing. 
& gunayyi!J In pi -aatl aileron. 
&- gannalj I Ivtl to swing or stretch (the arms) expan-
sively. ganna!J diracaat-u he stretched out his arms. 
- Ivi/2 to swing the arms expansively, take up a lot of 
room (particularly when walking). 3 to tilt, stand at an 
angle (of a vehicle with a bent axle or wrecked suspen-
si~n). -vn tagnii!J; avalpva miganna!J. 
~ 
muganna!J T, miganna!J ladil winged. 
1 
• 
Cv [. 
~ 
gun!Ja In pi guna!J1 misdemeanour, civil offence. 
J.J [. 
~ gund Icoll n, pi 5'agnaadl body of troops. gund' 
murtazaqa mercenaries.lIgundu llaah [lsi] the faithful. 
-gund if-Jay{aan the followers of Satan. - 5'agnaad ir-
rabb [Chr] the hosts of the Lord. -rabb i/-5'agnaad 
[Chr] the Lord of hosts . 
.s~ gundi In pi gunuudl I [mil] ordinary soldier (in 
contrast with an officer). 2l soldier, fighting-man (of 
any rank). ril-gundi I-maghuul the Unknown Soldier. 
~~ gundiyya Inl military service. 
~ gindl In pi ganaadil [obsol] Turkish soldier, 
mameluke. !Jadd' yquul lig-gindi ra{{i {iiz-ak [prov] 
(who would dare to tell the mameluke 'Cover your 
arse'?) == who dares tell a powerful man how to behave? 
~ gannid Ivtl I [mil] to recruit, conscript. 2 to em-
ploy, call upon the services of (s.o.), enlist the help of 
(s.o.). gannidt' nafs-i I-xidmit-hum == I devoted myself 
to serving them. -vn tagntid; ava migannid; pva 
"!ugannad. 
~ mugannad In *1 recruit, conscript. 

~I fitgannid or figgannid Ivil I to be recruited, be 
- y j <J ( 
conscripted. 2 to have one's services enlisted. - iva 
..k~ ganzabiil In pll ginger. - also zangabiilf. 
mitgannid. 
.) ~ ~ [. 
)~ gandar <prob Fr calandre> Ivtl to mangle (laun-
dry), 
calender 
(paper). 
-vn gandara; 
avalpva 
migandar. 
)~I fitgandar or figgandar Ivil to be mangled (of 
laundry), be calendered (of paper). -iva mitgandar. 
-"';~<J( 
JiJ~ gandufli Icoll nl c1am(s). 
J J <J ( 
J~ gandal I In pi ganaadill boulder, especially ob-
structing the course of a river. 2 ganaadil Ipl nl rapids, 
cataract. 
J~ gandil f Ivtl to cause to fall down dead (like a 
stone). tf.arab-u bin-naar gandil-u he gunned him down. 
-vn gandala; ava/pva migandil. 
J~I fitgandil or figgandil Ivil to fall down dead, be 
made to fall down dead. -vn tigandiil; ava/iva 
mitgandil. 
.) ~ [. see j I <J <J ( : ginnaari. gunnaari 
I j ~ [. 
;j~ ganaaza In pi -aatl funeral, funeral procession. 
~alaat iI-ganaaza [lslJ ritual prayer said over the coffin. 
Ilganaaza !Jarra wil-mayyit kalb [provJ == a lot of fuss 
about nothing. -yic;til iI-c;atiil wi-yimji f-ganazt-u (he 
walks in the funeral procession of the man he mur-
dered) he is utterly brazen. - finja-I/a famjif-ganazt-u 
== I'd like to see him dead and buried! 
\S.i-~ ganayzi ladjl pertaining to funerals. 
~ala 
ganayziyya [ChrJ funeral service. 
j~ ginnaaz In pi gananiizl [ChrJ I funeral. 2 funeral 
service. bi-yic;ru I-ginnaaz lal-mutanayyi!Jiin they read 
the funeral service over the dead. 
~ ganniz Ivtl [ChrJ to perform a funeral service for. 
~alaat it-tagniiz funeral service. -vn tagniiz; ava 
miganniz. 
~I fitganniz or figganniz Ivil [ChrJ to be given a 
funeral.llyajeex ruu!J figganniz drop down dead, you! 
·iva mitganniz. 
1 •• 
)1.1[. 
~ jinz <Engl> In pi -aatl jeans. ban(alunaat jinz a 
pair of jeans. c;umaaj jinz denim. - also jins. 
l;j<J( 
)~ ginzaar <P zangar> Inl verdigris. 
i)~ ginzaara = ginzaar. 
IS)~ ginzaari ladj invarl bluish-green, turquoise (in 
colour). 
)~ ganzar' Ivil to become verdigrised. Ilmuxx-u 
mganzar == he's thick-headed. -ya mganzara [abusJ you 
filthy hag! -vn ganzara; ava miganzar. 
Ijj<J( 
J'-~ ganziir <P zanjir> In pi ganaziirl I heavy metal 
chain. ganziir mux(aaf anchor chain. ganziir lagala 
bicycle chain. 2 track (on, e.g., a bulldozer, tank). 
.)~ ganzar} Ivtl to chain. ganzar iI-bawwaaba he fas-
tened the gate with a chain. -vn ganzara; ava/iva 
miganzar. 
)~ miganzar ladjl tracked, possessing a track. 
larabiyya mganzara tracked vehicle. 
;,AI fitganzar or figganzar Ivil to be fastened with a 
chain, be chained together. -vn tiganziir; iva mitganzar. 
I..,.. <J ( 
~ 
gins In pi fagnaasl la type, kind, species . 
fig-gins iI-bajari the human race. riI-wi(waa( mif min 
gins it-leer a bat is not a bird. fin-naas fagnaas == it takes 
all kinds to make a world. gins i bazramii( mixed breed. 
II ya gins i kalb you dog! I b lalways w negl (not a) single. 
ma-fii-fgins i waa!Jid there's not a single person there. 
wala gins i kilma not a single word. 2 race, nation. 
bi-yikrah fahl i gins-u he hates his compatriots. 3 [musJ 
tetrachord. - Ino pll 4a sex. fig-gins iI-la(iif the fair 
sex. 4b ~exual activity. 
~ 
ginsi ladjl pertaining to sex. fif-fuzuuz ig-ginsi 
sexual perversion. kutub ginsiyya sex books. 
11 ginsiyyan f ladvl sexually. 
~ 
ginsiyya 
In 
pi -aatl 
nationality. 
fidaarit 
ig-gawazaat wig-ginsiyya passport and immigration 
office. 
~ 
gannis Ivtl I to sort or classify according to type. 
2 to harmonize, blend. gannisit iI-fustaan mala I-kulfa 
she made the dress and the trimmings harmonious. -vn 
tagniis; avalpva migannis . 
..:.-:. migannis ladj *1 cross-bred, of mixed descent, 
mongrel.llc;umaajmigannis [textJ blended cloth, cloth 
of two sorts one markedly inferior to the other. 
~I fitgannis or figgannis Ivil I to be sorted, be c1as-
sified.1I fitgannis bi-ginsiyya to acquire citizenship, as in 

fitgannist' big-ginsiyya I-famrikiyya I acquired Amer-
ican citizenship. 2 to be harmonized, be blended. - ava/ 
iva mitgannis. 
...,..; l.:- gaanis Ivtll to resemble, be of the same kin"d or 
nature as. fil-l:Jumaar il-mixa[(a{ bi-ygaanis il-l:Jumaar 
i/-laadi the zebra is akin to the donkey. 2 to match up. 
-vn migansa; ava migaanis. 
...,..;~I fitgaanis or figgaanis Ivill to become similar. 
2 to be matched up. - vn taga{lllus; ava/iva mitgaanis, 
mutagaanis f . 
...,..; ~ tagaanus f In/ similarity, harmony. 
1 
• 
IJ'" '" [. 
~ 
jins <Engl> In pI -aatl jeans. Cjumaaj jins de-
nim. - also jinz. 
v!o .:, [. 
~ 
ganf <It gancio> In pI -aatl hook-shaped end of 
a metal roo. 
~ 
ganja = ganj. 
~ 
gannij Ivtl to bend the end of a metal rod into a 
cr~ok or V-shape. - vn tagniij; ava migannij. 
~I fitgannij or figgannij Ivil to be bent into a crook 
or V-shape. -iva mitgannij. 
u'" .:, [. 
~ 
ga~ <Fr ganse> Inl piping, braid, 
.l..:,[. 
~ 
jane <Fr jante> In pI junu{al wheel-rim, felloe. 
IIlala j-jan{ penniless. 
-(J.!l.:,[.) 
~~ 
junkileer <Fr jongleur> In pI -aatl juggler. 
~l.:- ganakliis or janakliis <prop n Gianac/is> Inl 
I variety of grape, reddish-yellow and large-sized (used 
for wine). 2 brand name of win~. 
~J':'[. 
41.; ~ gunilla <It gonnella> In pI -aatl skirt. 
'.:,.:,[. 
~ gann (i) Ivtl to drive mad. di l:Jaaga tginn this (is so 
infuriating, or, so marvellous, that it) drives one crazy! 
da raagil yiginn illi ma-yitgann '{that man would drive 
the sanest person mad! nawya lala gnaan-i she's trying 
to drive me mad! - vn ginaan; aya gaanin; pva magnuun . 
.J~ ginaan In/l madness, insanity. 2 lused in apposi-
tionl something wonderful or fantastic. di bint' gnaan 
she's a marvellous girl! - linterjl 3 crazy! fantastic! 
176 
super! 
i.Jr. magnuun Ipl maganiinli/adj/la crazed, crazy. 
ma-tibCjaa{ magnuun don't be crazy! Ilya {amaa{im ya 
magnuuna [vendor's cry] crazy 'tomatoes (referring to 
the wild movement in price). Ib infatuated with. 
magnuun koora football crazy. magnuuna bir-raCj~ 
she's crazy about dancing. 2 In/-madman, lunatic. 
~ ganna I Inl a fit or attack of madness. min fawwil 
na;ra gat-Iu ganna sm-a-ha muna at first sight he went 
wild with love (or: hatred) for Mona. 
~i fagann lell morelmost insane, infatuated or in-
fatuating. fij{urba tgannin wil- fakl' fagann the soup is 
great and the food even bette~! 
i.J~ gunuun Inl madness, 
in~anity. II fil-gunuun 
funuun [prov] "" madness takes many forms (said upon 
witnessing or hearing of something strange or 
eccentric). 
J~ gunuuni 
ladjl 
crazy, 
insane. 
tl¥arrufaat 
gununiyya crazy behaviour. b-al:Jibb-a-ha b-jakl' 
gunuuni I love her to distraction. 
~ ~ gununiyya Inl craziness, foolish behaviour. 
balaaj gununiyya don't be silly! landu jwayyit 
gu'!uniyya he's a little crazy. 
~ ~ gannuuna In/ I quick temper. fir-raagil da b-
gannuuna this man is hot-tempered. {illit gannunit-ha 
she went into one of her fits of temper. 2 uncontrolled 
desire. gannunt-u I-Cjumaar he is addicted to gambling. 
~I fitgann or figgann Ivil to become mad, be driven 
m.ad. - ava/iva mitgann. 
~ 
gannin Ivtl I to drive insane, madden. l:Jubb-u 
l:Ja-ygannin-ni his love will drive me out of my mind! 
2 to infatuate. - Ivi/3 to cause madness. 4 to inspire 
delight. fil-Cjumaaj da yigannin this cloth is gorgeous! 
- ~va migannin. 
~I fitgannin or figgannin Ivil la to go mad or be-
come insane. Ib to get into a state, become excessively 
upset. lamma-nta tfaxxart itgannint' w-rul:Jt il-Cjism 
when you were late I got into a state and went to the 
police station. 2 to become infatuated. fitganninu lal-
larabiyya they went crazy over the car. - ava/iva 
mitgannin. 
~I fistigann Ivtl to consider mad. finta b-tistigann-
i-ni do you take me 'for a lunatic? -vn fisJignaan; ava 
mistiginn. 
1.:,.:,[. 
~ ginn Icoll nl jinn, demons. bi-yijtalfa!-zayy ig-ginn 
he works like a demon. II ginn ' ~awwar "" the devil 
personified (applied to a mischievous or clever person). 
- wala I-ginn il- fazraCj yilraf {ariiCj-u "" not a soul knows 

where he has gone. -ginn-u w-lafriit-u /li y~ayyii badri 
'" he will be furious with anybody who dares to wake 
hjm early. 
J:': ginni lunit n *1 a male jinni or demon. 
4 ginniyya lunit n pi -aatl a female jinni or demon. 
II fibn i ginniyya a clever devil. 
,:,~ gaan Icoll nl demons, jinn. 
3 •• 
• \J \J ~ 
4- ganna 2 Inl I fig-ganna Paradise. la/am ribliis fig-
ganna (Satan's hope of Paradise) a total impossibility. 
Illll,l'fuur ig-ganna Icoll nl (1) swallow(s). (2) bird-of-
Paradise flower( s). 2 Ipl -aatl 28 paradise. ganna min 
reernaas ma tindaas [proy] a paradise without people is 
not worth walking in. 2b any of the (seven) degrees of 
Paradise. 
4 
gineena In pi ganaayinl I garden. 2 park. gineenit 
il-bayawanaat the zoo. 3 orchard. 
J!4- ganayni I In pi -yyal gardener. lIyibiil il-wardi 
/ig-ganayniyya [proy] (he tries to sell flowers to the 
gardeners) "" he takes coals to Newcastle. 2/adj *1 
garden. linab ganayni garden grapes. 
4 •• 
\J\J~ 
~ 
ganiin In pi raginnal I foetus, embryo. 2 germ 
(of a seed). 
)I~,j[. 
-»4- ginnaari or gunnaari ladjl flame-red. 
11S,j~ 
~ gana I (i) Ivil I to commit a crime, sin. ganit (or 
ganat) fi-l:Jae;e;-i gnaaya wil:J/a xaali~ she committed a 
most terrible crime against me. 'liI-magni lalee the 
victim of a crime. 2 to bring suffering (upon s.o., usual-
ly unintentionally). ganeet lala-bn-i I wronged my son. 
·vn ginaaya; ava gaani; pva magni. 
~4- ginaaya In pi -aatl felony, crime, criminal act. 
mabkamit il-ginayaat criminal court. IIb-awaddii fi-
gnaaya "" I'll get the law onto him! 
J~ gaani In pi gunaah T I [leg] criminal. 
.;4- ginaa'liT ladj *1 criminal. 'liI-qaqaar nOleen -
madani wi-gnaari there are two kinds of jurisprudence, 
civil and criminal. 
~I ritgana lor riggana I Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
gana. kaanit bariira wi-tgana laleeha she was innocent 
b.ut suffered unjustly. - iva mitgini. 
~I ritganna or rigganna Ivil to behave injustly, bring 
a false accusation. ritga!lnu lalayya they wronged me. 
-vn taganni; ava mitganni. 
177 
2 
• 
IS"'~ 
~ gana 2 (i) Ivtl to gather, pick, harvest (especially 
cotton). II ri/li zaral gana [proy] he who sows will reap. 
-vn gany; ava gaani; pva magni. 
~ ganna 3 In pi -yiin, gannaayal picker, harvester. 
gannaayit il-e;utn a woman cotton-picker. 
~I ritgana 2 or riggana 2 Ivilto be gathered, picked or 
harvested. - iva mitgini. 
·1S,j~ 
~ 
gineeh <Engl guinea> In pi -aatl lone pound 
(currency). n~~i gneeh fifty piastres. rubli gneeh 
twenty-five piastres. 2 (golden) guinea. gineeli ringiliizi 
a British gold sovereign. IIsumlit-u zayy ig-gineeh id-
dahab his reputation is spotless. -kilmit-u zayy 
ig-gineeh id-dahab he keeps his promise, he tells the 
truth. -muxx-u zayy ig-gineeh id-dahab he has a bril-
liant mind. 
I • [. see • ~.J : giha 
2 • ~ see IS ~ : gih 
.; I • ~ 
J~ gihaar, guhaar <P ehahtir> In pi -aatl four (in 
dice etc.). 
.lS"J~ girka see .1.1.; ~ 
-.[..~ 
.:,~ gahgahoon ladvl haphazardly" in any old 
way. waaxid kull a yaaga gahgahoon taking everything 
as it comes. -/adjectivallyl raagil gahgahoon a simple 
fellow: 
~. ~ 
~ 
gahad (i) Ivtl to fatigue, exhaust, overwork. gahad 
nafs-u min kutr i/-Jurl he overworked himself. - ava 
gaahid. 
~ 
guhd Inl I effort, endeavour. ya-nistafiid min 
i~-~abri wil-larae; wig-guhd we will profit from pati-
ence, sweat and effort. bazalti kuW guhd-ifil-mirwaay 
badri I made every effort to go home early. 2 [elee] 
potential, voltage. 3 [phys] stress. 
~ 
gihd Inl capacity, competence. lamal raaxir ma 
f-gihd-u he did as much as he could.llkulli waayid lala 
e;addi gihd-u everyone according to his means. 
~~ guhuudT Ipl nl exertions. guhuud id-dawla 
f-magaal il-xadamaat the efforts of the state in the 
sphere of public utilities. 
~ 
gahiid: guhd i gahiid tremendous effort, great dif-

ficulty. wi-b-guhd' gahiid ljidirna nJuljlj' {arilj-na f-ljalb 
iz-zabma with a great deal of trouble we managed to 
elbow our way through the crowd. 
~~ maghuud 
In 
pi -aatl 
effort. 
exertion. 
fiI-maghuud iI-barbi the war effort. maghuud zihni 
mental effort. 
.a~ gaahid Ivtl I to struggle against. seek to suppress. 
II/aazim tigaahid nafs-ak you must try to suppress your 
desires. 2 to wage war or jihad (against). cf.ariibit gihaad 
war tax. - Ivi/3 to strive. do one's utmost. bi-ygaahid 
fi-sabiil mU{ir he is entirely devoted to serving Egypt. 
'lil-kiniisa I-migahda the Church militant. -vn migahda, 
gihaad; ava migaahid. 
~~ gihaad Inl war. fiI-gihaad fi-lIaah the Sufi concept 
of a conflict between spiritual and material desires. 
,.P~ gihaadi ladj *1 military. 
~~~ gihadiyya Inl [obsol] military service. 'lit-
gihadiyya former style of the Ministry of War. 
~i 'laghad t Ivtl to wear out. exhaust. 'lis-sabbaab 
balja mughad the swimmer became exhausted. 
mab~uul mughid 1iI- 'larcf. a crop which overworks the 
soil. -vn 'lighaad; ava mughid; pva mughad. 
~I 'ligtahad Ivil to strive. make an effort. do one's 
best. {aalib mugtahid a diligent student. -vn 'ligtihaad: 
ava mugtahid, migtihld. 
~~I 'ligtihaad Inl I effort. diligence. 2 judgement. 
interpretation, (personal) assessment. 
'lil-mas'lala 
b-tiltimid fin-nihaaya lala gtihaad-ak if-fax~i the mat-
ter depends in the final analysis on how you personally 
see things. 
\ .. p~1 'ligtihaadi ladjl based on personal judgement. 
'lahu wis-salaam - ball igtihaadi it is just a personal 
solution. 
I .J 0 [. 
~ 
gahar J t (aJ Ivil to make a proclamation (in a loud 
voice). talk openly and brazenly. gahar bi-ra'ly-u he 
declared his opinion openly. gahar bif-mauiya he 
flaunted his sin. Ilgahar binala [lsI] to recite the first 
two rakla of the ritual prayer in a loud voice. -vn gahr, 
gahaara: ava gaahir: pva maghuur. 
I ~ 
gahran ladvl openly. publicly. 
I.)~ gahaaran, gihaaran t ladvl openly. publicly. 
facf.ab-hum gahaaran he made a public scandal of them. 
IIgahaaran nahaaran in broad daylight. as in saralju 
J-faljlja gahaaran nahaaran they burgled the flat in 
broad daylight. 
..s.)~ gahwari, gahuuri ladjl loud (of voice). dayman 
yitkallim bi-~oot gahuuri he always speaks in a loud 
voice. 
178 
~ 
gahiirt ladjl loud (of sound). nadra lamma 
tismal i~-~oot if-gahiir fil-mazziika niini you rarely 
hear a loud sound in Chinese music. 
#. mighart In pi magaahirl microscope. 
,.,.~ gaahart or gaahir Ivtl to make an open declara-
tion to (s.o.). address (s.o.) frankly. b,-ygahir-ni b-
ladawt-u he openly expresses his hostility to me. 
d~yman tigaahir bi-ra ry-a-ha fin-naas she always lets 
you know exactly what she thinks of people! -vn 
mugahra, migahra: ava mugaahir, migaahir. 
1 .J 0 [. 
~ 
gahar 2 (a) Ivil to become dazzled. na;ar-u gahar 
his eyes were dazzled. -vn gahar, gaharaan: ava gaahir. 
~ 
gaha,.' (i) Ivtl to dazzle. 
'lif-ba~a~aan lij-fams' 
yighir in-na;ar looking at the sun dazzles the eyes. -vn 
gahar, gaharaan: ava gaahtr. 
~i 'laghar ladj. fern gahra. pi guhrl albino. 
J .J 0 [. see .J I 0 [. : gihaar, guhaar 
j 0 [. 
~ 
glhiz (a) Ivil to become ready. t1-fustaan ba-yighaz 
'limta when will the dress be ready? - vn gahazaan: ava 
gaahiz. 
j'>~ gaahiz I ladj *1 ready-made. huduum gahza 
ready-to-wear clothes. xarasaana gahza precast-
concrete. 2/advl already. mifawwin gaahiz ready-
coloured. 'lana laabis gaahiz wi-mistanni I'm already 
dressed and waiting. 
,;,~ gihaaz In pi 'laghizal I piece of equipment. ap-
pliance. apparatus. gihaaz tilivizyoon a television set. 
gihaaz cf.a¥{ pressure gauge. II 'laghiza talwicf.iyya artifi-
cial limbs. 2 system. 'lit-gihaaz if-lacf.ali the muscular 
system. 3 (official) body. organizational apparatus. 
'lit- 'laghiza I-bukumiyya I-muxta~~a the governmental 
bodies concerned. 4 [euphem] private parts. - Ipl-aatl 
5 trousseau (including household furniture). 
~ 
gahhiz Ivtl 1 to prepare. gahhizt if-'lakl I prepared 
the food. libsu maraayif wi-gahhizuJuna{-hum they put 
on smocks and got their satchels ready. 2 to furnish (a 
home for newly-weds), prepare a trousseau. 3 [text] to 
dress. finish (cloth). -vn taghiiz: avalpva migahhiz. 
.:..I~ taghizaat Ipl nl preparations. 'lit-taghizaat 
icf.-cf.aruriyya Iir-ribla the preparations necessary for the 
trip. 
~I 'litgahhiZ or 'liggahhiz Ivil I to get ready, prepare 
oneself. 2 passive of gahhiz. - avaliva mitgahhiz. 
~i 'laghaz t Ivil to put an end (to s.th.), do away 
(with s.o. or s.th.). 'licf.{arreena nighiz lal-bayawaan 

iI-magruu& we were forced to put down the wounded 
animal. minfaglit-u faghaz lal-fakla I-wa&d-u he was 
so gluttonous that he finished off the meal on his own. 
-vn fighaaz r; ava mughiz r . 
"",O[ 
.ki faghaq I/vtl to abort (a pregnant woman). 
faghaqil nafs-a-ha she caused herself to abort. -/the 
literary passive form occursl fughiqat fif1ahr iI- fawwal 
she had an abortion in the first month (of pregnancy). 
2/vil to miscarry, abort. -vn fighaaq. 
.;.~! fighaaq Inl abortion. 
J O[ 
.w.. gahal (a) Ivtl I to be ignorant of. II filii 
ma-yilraf-ak yighal-ak {prov] ,.. to know you is to 
appreciate you. 2 to behave according to the dictates of 
youth. gahal wi-taab ,.. he has sown his wild oats. -vn 
gahl, gihO ; ava gaahil; pya maghuul. 
.w.. gaht Inl I ignorance. 
fil-gahla ladiww ii-
madaniyya ignorance is the enemy of civilization. 
2 youthfulness. 
J.~ gaahillpl gahala, guhala, guhhaal, guhhalll Inl 
ignorant and foolish person. min n~alj gaahil ladaa 
{prov/ give advice to someone ignorant and you will 
only make an enemy of him. fig-gaahil ladiww i nafs-u 
{prov/ the ignorant is his own enemy. 2/adjl 
2a ignorant. 2b young, youthful. tjabil-ni gadal gaahil 
sinn-u ma-yzid-f lala lifriin sana a young lad met me 
who wasn't more than twenty years old. 
J.a~ gaahili ladjl pagan, pre-Islamic. 
ril-c~r il-
gaahili pre-Islamic period. 
~~I fil-gaahiliyya r Inl the pre-Islamic era. 
J~ maghuul I/adj 
*1 unknown, anonymous. 
riI-gundi I-maghuul the Unknown Soldier. 2 In 
pi magahiill {math] unknown, unknown quantity. 
~i faghal lell I morelmost ignorant, morelmost 
foolish. faghal min daabba ,.. dumber than an ox_ 
2 morelmost youthful. 
J~ gahuulladj ·1 ignominious. 
J.~ magaahil Ipl nl unknown regions. magaahil 
rifriqya darkest Africa. 
~ 
gahhil Ivtl to accuse (s.o.) of ignorance. -vn 
raghiil; ava migahhil. 
J.~I fitgaahil or figgaahillvtl to ignore. ril-mudiir 
bi-yilgaahil il-muwa:;;afiin bituul-U the boss ignores his 
employees. -ava mitgaahil. 
~I fistaghil/vtll to consider ignorant or stupid_ 
rinra b-tistaghil-ni w-fana facraf faktar minnak do you 
consider me ignorant when I know more than you do? 
179 
2 to select for 
ignorance. 
fistaghil-lak 
waa&id 
wi1anal-u mlaak choose a stupid fellow to work with 
you. -vn fistighaal; ava mistaghil. 
r 0 [. 
4..~ gahaama Inl grim look. ziilj iI-gahaama iii Gala 
wiff-ak take that scowl off your face! 
~ 
gahhim (i) Ivil to frown, scowl. dayman yigahhim 
fi-wiff in-naas he's always scowling at people. -vn 
taghiim~ ava migahhim. 
~ 
taghiima linst n, pi -aatl a seowl, a frown. calee 
Ijittit diin taghiima what a scowl he has! 
r." ,,,. [. 
~ 
gahannam, guhannam Ifem nl hell. fin-nahar-da 
gahannam today is very hot. gahannam gooz-i wala 
gannit fabuu-ya {prov] (better the hell of my husband 
than the paradise of my father) better suffer as a wife 
than be" a spinster in comfort. II &agar gahannam silver 
nitrate . 
. 
~ 
gahannami, guhannami ladjl devilish, diabolic-
al. fikra gahannamiyya one hell of a good idea. 
:( 7.-: gahannamiyya (alsogahannamiyyafokiyya) InI 
bougainvillea. 
I 
J~o[. 
.)~ gahwarllvtltodeepenandwiden,causetogrow 
deeper and wider. fil-midda gahwarit il-garlj pus 
deepened and widened the wound. 2 Ivil to grow deep-
er and wider. -vn gahwara; ava/pya migahwar. 
.)~I fitgahwar or figgahwar Ivil to be made deeper 
and wider. - iva mitgahwar. 
2 J ~ 0 [. see I J 0 [. : gahwari 
u:.1~[. 
..;.1,,-; guwaaf <Fr> InI gouache pigment. 
";I~[. 
4;1,,-; gawaafa Icoll n, pi -aatll guava tree(s)_ 2 guava 
fruit(s). 
~\il,,-; gawafaaya lunit nil a guava tree. 2 a guava 
fruit_ 
"I~[. 
,:,1,,-; juwaan <Fr joint> In pi -aatl seal, gasket. 
I 
"r'~[. 
..,..1,,-; gawaab In pi fagwiball answer, reply.llsufaal 
wiJgawaab (a question and an answer) ,.. briefly. - Ipl 

gawabaatl 2 letter. gawaab taw~iyya letter of recom-
mendation.llyitlirifig-gawaab min linwaan-u [proy] = 
you can tell a book from its cover. 3 [mus] 3a octave (to 
a given tone). 3b middle register of the luud. gawaab 
ig-gawaab the highest register of the luud. 
""'J~ gaawib Ivt and vii to answer, respond to. 
ma-tgaawib (lala) sufaal-i well, answer my question! 
-vn migawba; ava migaawib. 
""'J~I fitgaawib or figgaawib Ivill to be answered (of 
a question). 2 to be responsive. fitgaawib malaaya he 
went along with me. -ava/iva mitgaawib . 
..,..~i fagaab f Ilvil to answer, respond. 2 Ivtl to fulfil 
(a wish). fana fagabt' {alab-ak I did what you wanted. 
fif-Jeex da dalwit-u mugaaba this man's prayers are 
(always) answered. -vn figaaba; ava mugiib; pva 
mugaab. 
~~! figaaba In pi -aat, fagwibal answer. wara/iit 
figaaba answer sheet. 
..,..~I flStagwib 
Ivtl 
to 
cross-examine. 
-vn 
fistigwaab; ava mistagwib. 
..,..~I fistagaab f Ilvil to respond, react. fi{-{alaba 
ma-b-yistagibuu-fthe students don't respond. 2 Ivt and 
vii to answer a prayer (of God). rabb-i-na stagaab 
(/i- dalwit-i) Our Lord answered my prayer. -vn 
fistigaaba; ava mistigiib, mustagiib. 
,,-!~I fistigaaba linst n, pi -aatl a response, a 
reaction . 
..,..~ mustagaab ladjl fulfilled, answered. dalit-lu 
dalwa mustagaaba she prayed a prayer for him and it 
was answered. 
2 Y .J [. see Y [..J : figaabi, figabiyya 
C.J[. 
c.~1 figtaal:J Ivtl to cover completely, spread over. 
fil- fanfilwanza 
gtaal:Jit il-balad influenza spread 
thrqugh the town. -vn figtiyaal:J; ava migtaal:J; pva 
mugtaal:J. 
t.J[. 
t~ guux or goox <T t;uba from P> In pi fagwaaxl 
baize. IIguux fimbiryaal best quality guux. -masl:J il-
guux flattery, toadying, buttering-up. 
:i.> ~ guuxa or gooxa lunit n, pi -aatl pIece of baize. 
\I rabu guuxa w-fabu falla fil-/iabr' b-yiddalla [proy] 
both the rich man and the poor man are lowered (final-
'iy) mto the grave. 
ol..J [. 
~~ gaad (u) Ivil to behave generously or openhanded-
180 
Iy. bi-yguud lan-naas bi-kull illi l:Jilt-u he gives all he has 
to help people. IIgaadu b-farwal:J-hum they sacrificed 
themselves. - vn guud; ava gaayid. 
~~ guud Inl generosity. fil-guud min il-mawguud 
[proy] generosity is to give of what is available. 
.~~ guuda Inll charity, alms. naas fahl' guuda wi-
karam charitable and hospitable people. 2 (good) qual-
ity, excellence. yitwa/i/iaf laleeha guudit il-mal:J~uul the 
quality of the crop depends on it. II wig-guuda response 
to the mentioning by someone of his home town, as in 
l:Jaqrit-ak mineen. - min fasyuu{. - wig-guuda 'Where 
are you from?' 'From Assiut.' 'Exc' .lent people!' 
~ gayyid ladj */1 good, excellent.fi-~il:Jl:Jagayyida in 
good health. 2[acad] above average, good. xadt 
il-lisans' b-ta/idiir gayyid I got my B.A. with the rank-
ing Good (between Satisfactory and Very Good). 
~I~i fagwaad Ipl nl noble and generous people. muf 
kull-u-hum fagwaad zayy' ma-nta faakir not all of them 
are (as) noble and generous as you believe. 
~J~i fagaawid = fagwaad. 
~J~i fagawiid = fagwaad . 
~~i fagwad Ielil morelmost generous. 2 betterlbest. 
~I~ gawwaad Inl Most Beneficent One (epithet of 
God). 
~~ gawwid Ivt and viii to do (s.th.) well. ma-l:Jadd B 
laad bi-ygawwidf~-~anla zayy' zamaan no one (nowa-
days) makes things as well as they used to be made. 2 to 
recite the Koran according to traditional principles. - vn 
tagwiid; ava migawwid. 
~.,f. tagwiid Inl art of reciting the Koran (in accord-
ance with certain 
rules of pronunciation and 
intonation). 
~~I fitgawwid or figgawwid Ivil to be recited accord-
ing to traditional principles (of the Koran). muf kifaaya 
l:Jil; il-qurfaan laazim yitgawwid it isn't sufficient to 
learn the Koran by heart; it should be correctly recited 
according to traditional principles. - iva mitgawwid. 
~~i fagaadf Ivtl to be highly proficient in, excel in. 
bi-yugiid il- fingiliizi he knows English well. - vn 
figaada; ava mugiid. 
~ ~ 
I fistagwid Ivtl to select for superior quality. - vn 
fistigwaad; ava mistagwid. 
I,;.J[. 
,)~ gaar' (i) Ivtl to come to the rescue. lamma 
tgawwizt' rabb-i-na gar-ni min il-beet il-wil:Jif da when 
I got married God saved me from this terrible house. 
- vn giira; ava gaayir. 
.~ giira Inll being near to, living in the neighbour-

hood of. girit-hum wib!a living as their neighbours is not 
nice. 2 realm of responsibility. fana (wqieti) f-girt-ak 
I throw myself on your mercy! - Ipl 
fagwaarl 
3 locality, district. fi/-beet fi-giira mif battaala laakin 
qadiimjiwayya the house is in a reasonable neighbour-
hood but is a bit old. 
)~ gaar2 I In pI giraanl neighbour. fiftiri l-gaar qabl 
id-daar {prov] (buy the neighbour before the house) 
choose where you live for the neighbours, not the 
house. ~abaab il-xeer ya gaar-i - fintafi-daar-ak w-ana 
f-daar-i [prov] '" neighbourliness lies in courtesy, not 
intimacy. Ilsaabie gaar the remotest neighbour, as in 
. fin-nabi w~~a eala saabie gaar (prov] the Prophet 
(Muhammad) preached the love of (even) the remotest 
neighbour. 2 Iprepl .next to. gaar il-baab beside the 
door. qauad-u gaarak sit him down beside you'. 
')~ gaara 2 In pI -aatl woman neighbour. fik-kalaam 
liiki ya gaara (these) words are for you, neighbour (said 
of talk addressed to one person but intended to be 
overheard by another). 
;loP. giwaar, guwaart Ilprepl next to, in the vicinity 
of. 2 In/: busn il-guwaar good-neighbourliness. baqq 
il-giwaar rights and duties of neighbourliness (i.e. good 
neighbourliness, hospitality, protection etc.). 
';loP. guwaara J Inl nearness, closeness. fanafarbaan 
bi-guwart-ak I'm overjoyed at having you near me. 
)~ I fingaar Ivil to be given assistance out of a nasty 
situation" be rescued. - iva mingaar. 
)J~ gaawir Ivtl I to be a neighbour to, live next door 
to or in ihe vicinity of. gaawir eamm-i he lived next to 
my uncle. min gaawir il-baddaad yitbiriq bi-naar-u 
{pray] he who sits next to a blacksmith gets scorched by 
his fire. 2 to associate with. min gaawir il-qoom 
farbieiin yoom baqa minhum {prov] if you mix with 
people for forty days you become one of them. - Ivil 
3 to make one's abode in the vicinity of a holy place 
(notably el-Azhar mosque in Cairo, or Mecca or Medi-
na). -vn migawra; ava migaawir. 
)J~ migaawir In *1 I student or disciple residing in the 
vicinity of his !eex. 2 student boarding at el-Azhar. 
- fil-migawriin Iprop nI 3 quarter adjacent to 
el-Azhar. 
)~i fagaart Ivil to give aid. II fagaar-ak allaah God 
protect you from such things! may you never see the 
like! as in !akl-a-ha fagaar-ak allaah may you never 
have to see "anyone as ugly as she is! 
f~-~udaae 
fagaar-ak allaah ba-yiflaq raas-i I've got a splitting 
headache - may you never have one like it! -vn figaara; 
ava migiir. 
181 
~ mugiir Inl protector (especially as a name of God). 
lIya mugiir God save us! as in wid-dinya nattarit ya 
mugiir the rain was so heavy, Lord preserve us! 
)Jt;o:l fitgaawir or figgaawir Ivil to be neighbours, live 
next door to or in the vicinity of. - ava mitgaawir. 
)~I fistagaar Ivil to appeal for help. b-astagiir 
bi-llaah minnak God help me against you! -vn 
fistigaara; ava mistagiir, mustagiir. 
2').Jr 
)~ gaar3 (u) Ivil I to go too far, encroach. bi-yquul 
finni gurt" eala farq-u he says I annexed some of his 
land unlawfully. fis-sikkiina gaarit fid-dibiiba the knife 
cut too deeply into the animal. 2 to commit an outrage, 
do wrong. fil-gaar gaar wi-law gaar {prov] your neigh-
bour is your neighbour, even if he acts wrongly. fin gaar 
ealeek gaar-ak bawwil baab daar-ak {prov] if your 
neighbou'r wrongs you, move house. qawaniin gayra 
tyrannical laws. -vn goor; ava gaayir. 
')oP. goora In pI -aatl 1 instance noun of goor. 2/pl 
also gi~ar, guwarl ditch, hole, pit, indentation. 
)t.:.;1 ,fingaar Ivil (impersonal) passive of gaar. 
ma-y~abb i1 yingaar ealee kida it is not right that he 
should be wronged in this way. - iva mingaar. 
I j.J r 
j~ gaaz 2 
(u) Ivil 1 to be fitting, be correct. 
fik-kalam~da ma-yguz1i minnak you shouldn't say 
things like that! 2 limpersl it was permitted, it was 
allowed. fir-raagil yiguz-lu farbae sittaat a man is per-
mitted four wives. -vn gawaaz; ava gaayiz. 
11 gaaz eala to take (s.o.) in, deceive. gaazit ealeehum 
il-fawanta the trick worked on them. yaama gaaz ean-
naas a lot of tricks have been played on people before! 
j.J":'-! yaguuz IviJ modal signalling possibility. yaguuz 
finnaha mif ba-tiigi she may not come. min il-gaayiz it is 
possible. gaayiz ma-eagabituu-! maybe he didn't like 
her. ba-tiigi bukra. - gaayiz 'Will you come tomorrow?' 
'Perhaps.' - ava gaayiz. 
jl'p' gawaaz J In pI -aatl pass, permit. gawaaz safar 
passport. gawaaz muruur permit to pass. 
'J~ gayza In pI gawaayizl prize, award . 
• 
j~l fagaaza, figaazat In pI -aatl 1 holiday, leave. 
huwwa n-nahar-da mif ragazt-ak today isn't your day 
off. fagaaza maraqiyya sick leave. 21 certificate, de-
gree. xad figaazit id-dukturaah he obtained his docto-
rate. see further under 2 j r. 
jJ~ gaawiz Ivt/ to exceed. gawzit budud-ha she over-
stepped the mark, she went too far. -vn migawza; ava 
migaawiz. 

jJ~1 fitgaawiz or figgaawiz Ilvt and viI to disregard. 
riI-furuuc; i(-(afiifa di b-nitgawiz-ha these trifling differ-
ences we ignore. ratlajjim rinnak titgaawiz lan suur 
tiliarruf-u I hope you will overlook his misbehaviour. 
11 Ivtl to exceed, be in excess of. riI-biroyaat 
ma-titgawiz-/' rusbuul the tests do not take more than 
a week. -ava mitgaawiz. 
2 j.J [. see also [..J j 
j ~ gawaz (i) Ivtl to make double. rigwiz iI-Ijabl make 
the rope double! -vn gawazaan; ava gaawiz; pva 
magwuuz. 
j~ gooz I In pi ragwaaz. gizaanl I husband. - Ipl 
ragwaaz. giwaazl 1 pair. gooz Ijamaam a brace of pi-
geons. big-gooz in pairs.lilbit gooz wallafard the game 
of 'odd or even'. 3 front pair of teeth (of a ruminant). 
kasar gooz [rur] to lose two (front) teeth (of an animal). 
• ragwaazan: fagwaazan wi-rafraadan to an extreme 
degree, as in rakal iI-lalfia ragwaazan wi-rafraadan he 
got a terrible beating. 
.1j~1 ril-gawzaar In/[astrol] Gemini. 
.~ giiza Inl marrying. marriage. giizit iI-banaat 
mutliba getting one's daughters married is tiresome. 
j1~ gawaaz 2 In! marriage. c;asiimit gawaaz marriage 
certificate. gawaaz lala Ijubb a love-match. rig-gawaaz 
sutra [proy] marriage is protection (advice to girls). 
rig-gawaaz n~~ , id-diin to marry is (to assure oneself of 
fulfilling) half of one's religion . 
• j1~ gawaaza Ipl -aatl a marriage. di kaanit gawaazit 
reeh what kind of a marriage was this! IIgawaazit 
n~aara an unbreakable relationship. - fimji f-ganaaza 
wala timji f-gawaaza [prov] better escort a funeral than 
involve yourself in marriage negotiations (as the results 
of the latter may be more distressing than the former). 
ISj1 ~ gawwaazi ladj invar/[rur] drawn or worked by 
a pair of animals. sat;ya gawwaazi water-wheel turned 
by two animals (opposite each other). 
j~ migwiz ladj invarll double(d), paired. fii mifrid 
wi-fii migw;z there is single and there is double. [ut;dit 
watad migwiz double clove-hitch. silk' migwiz double 
wire. 1 even (of a number). 
j ~1 fitgawaz or figgawaz Ivil to be made double. -iva 
mitgiwiz. 
j~ gawwiz Ivtl to effect the marriage of (s.o.) (to). 
gawwi1.uu-ni Ijumaar they married me to an ass. 
IIgawwizu mifkaalj li-riima - ma lala I-itneen c;iima 
[prov] ... these nobodies deserve each other! -ava/pva 
migawwiz. 
j~1 ritgawwiz or riggawwiz I/vtl to marry, wed. 
ritgawwizit duktoor she married a doctor. llvil to get 
182 
married. mif laayiz yitgawwiz rabadan he doesn't ever 
want to get married. -ava mitgawwiz. 
• ritgawwiz lalee(ha) he married another wife in addi-
tion to (her). 
1 • 
.J .J [. 
j~ gooz2 Icoll nl walnut(s), walnut tree(s). Ilgooz 
i(-[iib nutmeg(s). -gooz hind coconut(s). 
.j~ gooza Inlllunit n, pi -aatl a walnut. IIgoozit ir-
rat;aba Adam's apple. llpl giwazl type of hand-held 
water-pipe with a water-holder made out of a coconut 
or substitute (e.g., a jam jar) and a cane stem (see PI.I, 
7). 3 perforated mug used in the making of kunaafa. 
~1j~ gozaaya lunit nl a walnut. 
~j ~ goziyya Inl confection of syrup and coconut. 
j, .J [. see j, IS .J [. : gawii( 
t.J[. 
t~ gaal (u) Ivil to become hungry. yixaaf yifuxx' 
la-yguul he's afraid to excrete lest he hunger (said of a 
miser). riI-firaan tudxul beet-u tguul rats (which) enter 
his house starve. -vn guul; ava gaeaan, gaayil. 
t ~ guullnl hunger. rig-guul kaafir [proy] ... hunger 
can drive one to do anything. 
~ ~ guula Ipl -aatl instance noun of guU[. II/abala 
baed' guula see jabala. 
.;,\&. ~ • .;,4 galaan ladj • and pi gawaala/ hungry. 
fig-galaan yiljlam bi-suut; iI-leej [prov] (the hungry 
man dreams of the bread market) one's aspirfltions are 
determined by one's needs. rig-galaan yit;art;ajiz-zala( 
(a hungry man will chew gravel) need forces one to 
accept what one would normally despise. fuut lala 
ladiww-ak galaan wala Iful-/' lalee liryaan [prov] 
(pass by your enemy hungry, since he will not detect 
your hardship, but not naked, since that would betray 
your need) shame and weakness lie not in poverty but in 
exposing oneself to accusations of indecency. 
t~i ragwal lell morelmost hungry. IIdool ragwae 
naas they are the meanest people you can imagine. 
~~ magaala In pi -aall famine. 
t~ gawwal Ivtl to make hungry. riiljit iI-rakl' 
gawwaeit-ni the smell of the .food made me hungry. da 
mgawwalliyaal-u he does not give his children enough 
to eat. -vn tagwiil; ava migawwal. 
t~' fitgawwalor riggawwallvil to be made hungry. 
- iva mitgawwae. 
t*""' fistagwal Ivtl to consider hungry. laazim 
istagwaeuu-k lamma-dduu-Iak iI-rakl they must have 

thought you were hungry since they gave you food. -vn 
Yisligwaal; ava mislagwal. 
1"';,,[, 
...; ~ goof Inl inside, interior. goof iI-qizaaza the inside 
of the bottle. goof iI-Yarq the interior of the Earth. fii 
yaraqaan fi-goof-i there's a burning in my stomach. 
j~ gawfi ladjl subterranean. miyaah gawfiyya sub-
terranean water. 
...;~i Yagwaf ladj, fern gawfaayr, pi guufl hollow, 
concave. IIdayman kalaam-u Yagwaf he always talks 
nonsense . 
...;~ gawwif Ivtl I to hollow out, make concave. 2 to 
gut. -vn lagwiif; avalpva migawwif. 
i.A....J'ii. lagwiifa In pl/agawiif, lagwifaall cavity, hollow. 
lagwiifil iI- rud the hollow of the hand. 
"';~I Yilgawwifor Yiggawwiflvi/l to be hollowed, be 
made concave. 2 to be gutted. - iva milgawwif. 
1 ...; ,,[, see ...; I " [, : gawaafa, gawafaaya 
\';" [, 
J~ gooq = gooqa. 
;.. ~ gooqa In pi -aall I musical band, musical troupe. 
gooqil zaar a troupe performing at the zaar. 2 theatrical 
group. 3 crowd, gathering, group. IIga wi-mlaa 
g-gooqa b,al'-u he came and brought his clique with 
him. 
IJ,,[, 
J~ gaal (u) Ivil to move around. go about. 
ril-bayyaala I-gayliin street hawkers. Yeeh illi yguul 
fi-xa{r-ak what's going on in your mind? lIyi,l'uul wi-
yguul he hangs around with people (especially women). 
-vn gawalaan; ava gaayil. 
iJ ~ gawla. goola In pi -aalll round (in boxing, wrest-
ling etc.). 2 tour. gawla nlixabiyya election tour. 
JI~ gawwaal In pi gawwaalal Senior Scout. Rover. 
J~ magaal In pi -aall I sphere of activity. fi-magaal 
il-Ialliim in the field of education. 2 scope (for activ-
ity), range. ma-fii-j magaallil-lilb there's no scope for 
mucking about. magaal mama{iisi magnetic field. 
J~I Yilgawwil or Yiggawwillvil to go around, move 
from place to place. ya;r il-Iagawwul curfew. bayyaal 
mUlagawwil street hawker. 
-vn tagawwul; ava 
mUlagawwil. 
1 J" [, 
J~ gootr <Engl> Inl [soccer' I goal (the physical 
structure). 2 goal (the scored point). 3 (also gool 
183 
JJt 
kiibar) goal-keeper. - also goon. 
I. oJ" [, 
~~ goon <Engl> In pi Yigwaan. giwaanl [soccer} 
I goal (the physical structure). 2 goal (the scored 
point). 3 goal-keeper. - also gootr. 
1 ~ ,,[, see also 1.J" [, 
~~ gawwin I Ivtl to cause to go deep or far (into 
s.th). gawwin iI-musmaar fi-qalb iI-yee{a he drove the 
nail deep into the wall. 2/vil to go deep or far (into 
s.th). ma-tgawwin1i bliid fil-mayya Yaysan hinaak 
rawii{ don't swim too far; it is deep out there. -vn 
tagwiin; ava migawwin. 
~~I Yitgawwin or Yiggawwin Ivil I to go deep or far 
(into s. th.). Yilgawwinu fi,l'-,I'aljra I-Ijadd i ma taahu they 
went so far out into the desert that they got lost. 2 to be 
made to go deep or far (into s.th.). - avaliva mitgawwin. 
J I.U [, see ~ I " [, : guwaan 
\S.::..~,,[, 
,ji ~ guwanti. gawanti <It guanti> In pi -aatl pair of 
gloves. fardit guwanti a (single) glove. maskiin goz-ha 
mlaaha zayy ig-guwanti - ma-lilbis-uu-jilla-mma Iljissi 
bil-bard ... poor husband! she only remembers him 
when she needs money. 
J 0" [, 
.J"~ gawharr Inl essence, crux. gawhar iI-mawquul 
the crux of the matter. 
..s.J"~ gawhariT ladjl essential. lUn,l'ur gawhari an 
essential factor. 
-'.J"~ gohara 
In 
pi gawaahirl 
I jewel, 
gem. 
II Yig-gohara l-mCl,l'uuna (the well-kept jewel) the wife. 
- gawaahir ya linab [vendor's cry} grapes like jewels! 
2 eye of an animal (food) . 
..ft' .J"I~ gawahirgi In pI -yyal jeweler. 
.J"~ mugoohar ladjl hard and shining. 
..:..I.J"~ migawharaat Ipl nl jewels, jewelry. 
JI.J"~ migawharaali In pI -yyal jeweler. 
1 " " [, 
~ gaww In/l air, atmosphere. layziin nirayyar gaww 
we want to get a change of air. II raalj fil-gaww it dis-
appeared entirely. 2 weather, climate. Yig-gaww i latii! 
in-nahar-da the weather is pleasant today. - Ipl 
YagwaaYI 3 atmosphere, mood. gaww i lilmi an 
academic atmosphere. gaww i jaaliri a poetic atmos-

JJt 
phere. lafaan yilmil gaww' mnaasib in order to create 
a suitable atmosphere.llhuwwa laamilli-nafs-u gaww 
he has created an aura for himself. -kal ig-gaww he 
stole the limelight. - ril-waal:Jid laazim yitmaffa mala 
I-gaww = one must bend with the wind. 4 girlfriend, 
boyfriend. hiyya di g-gaww' btaal-i that is my 
girlfriend. 
-S~ gawwi ladj ·1 pertaining to air, atmospheric. 
bariid gawwi airmail. ¥aara gawwiyya air raid. fiq-qa¥[ 
ig-gawwi atmospheric pressure. fis-silaal:J il-gawwi the 
Air Force 
z .J.J r 
I~ •• ~ guwwa I/prep, w pron suffguwwaa-/inside. 
guwwa I-beet inside the house. ril-xazna guwwaaha 1-
filuus the safe has the money inside it. 2 ladvl inside. 
[ililna min guwwa we emerged from inside. fimsal:J-u 
guwwa w-barra clean it inside and out. 
JI~ guwwaani ladj 
·1 inner, internal. kawitf' 
guwwaani inner tube. ril-m~uura g-guwwaniyya the 
inside pipe. see further under z.:, J r 
J.-SJr 
~~ gawii[ <T Clvata> In pi gawaa,yi{1 peg. 
-Sr 
~ .~ ga, gih (yiigi) Ivt and viii to come (to), arrive 
(at). lissa ma-gaajhe hasn't come yet. ma-tguuj filla 
biiha don't come without her! zaman-ha gayya she'll be 
here any minute now. fis-sana g-gayya next year. ga 
badri he came early. gat waxri she came late. gum 
fil-malaad they came at the appointed time. bi-ygii-Ii 
(or bi-ygii-ni) kull' yoom he comes to me every day. 
bi-yiigi lalafjakl' da it comes in this form. fawwil ma 
gaa-Ii (or gaa-ni) I-laya when I first got ill. gat-Iu (or 
gat-u) n-nooba he had a seizure. mirwaal:J wi-mgiyy 
going and coming. II zayy' ma tiigi tiigi come what may. 
- raal:Jit il- fayyaam wi-gat il- fayyaam time passed. 
- gat-ak (or ga-k) dahya maya calamity befall you! go to 
hell! -ya gat ya raal:Jit it's a matter ofluck. -Ia raal:J wala 
ga (1) to be without experience, as in da layyil 
~u¥Qyyar la raal:J wala ga he is just a little boy still wet 
behind the ears. (2) to be trivial or insignificant, as in 
dool itneen gineeh la raal:Ju wala gum it is only a matter 
of two pounds, nothing to speak about. -lissa gayy-i-Iak 
fil-kalaam I'm coming to that now. - fi[-[alqa ma-gatf' 
fiiha the shot missed it. - fagi-Iha fmaal - tigii-Ii ymiin 
she and I are always a~ loggerheads with one another. 
- fintagayy are you in (this round of the game)? are you 
playing? 2 to happen to t.>e, turn out to be. ril-faral:J ga 
184 
(f-)yoom il-xamiis the wedding fell on Thursday. 
ril-l:Jamdu Ii-ilaah - gat saliima thank.God! it turned out 
all right. '3 to be in accord (with), be comparable (with). 
fufna beet yiigi zayy' bet-na we saw a house comparable 
with our house. finta ma-tgiij l:Jittl! minni you aren't a 
patch on me! larabiyya xurda zayy' di tiigi feen gamb 
il-marseedis how could a rattletrap like this be com-
pared with a Mercedes! huwwa ma-ygiij fi-qufr-i he's 
not worth my finger nail! loon yiigi lala wiff-i a colour 
that suits my face. ril-fustaan ga laleeki (1) the dress 
suited you. (2) the dress fitted you. fig-gazma di 
ma-tgiij (lala) qadd-i these shoes won't fit me. II wi-di 
tiigi can that really be right? -yiigi ... approximately, as 
in yligi kiilu lal:Jma about a kilo of meat, qaladt' yiigi 
n~~' saala I sat for about half an hour. -hawa ... gayy· 
lala hawa ... = the two are perfectly compatible, as in di 
bint' la{iifa qawi - hawaa-ha gayy· lala hawaa-ya she's 
a very nice girl; we hit it off together perfectly. -
Ipre-verb/4 to up and (do s.th.), make a move to (do 
s.th.). ga yimsik is-samaka giryit he was about to grab 
the fish when it darted away. kull' ma faagi 
fastal:Jamma m-alaqii-f mayya every time I ~ome to 
take a bath I find there's no water. fawwil mafuft-u 
geet maasik fii as soon as I saw him, I went and grabbed 
him. ga xab[-u qalam he upped and slapped him. -vn 
migiyy; ava gayy, gaay. 
11 ga lala to go against (s.o.), especially for reasons of 
policy rather than conviction. lamma yil:J~al xinaaqa 
fil-leela dayman bi-yiigi lala mr.aat-u whenever there is 
a quarrel in the family he makes his wife give in (for the 
sake of peace). lafaan il-lifra I:J-aagi lala nafs-i 
w- f~all:J-u fana for the sake of our friendship I'll climb 
down and make things up with him. 
~.~ migiyya linst n, pi -aatl a coming. 
4 gayya linst n, pi -aatl a coming. gih gayyit xeer he 
came bringing good fortune with him. 
1 Y-Sr 
...,..~ gaab (i) Ivtl I to bring, fetch. bi-tgiib il- fawlaad 
min il-madrasa she fetches the children from school. 
gaabit raagil yirakkib laha n-nuur she brought in a man 
to install the electricity for her. mumkin fagiib 
il-larabiyya wara may I back up the car? II gaab-u 1- farq 
(1) he threw him to the ground. (2) he destroyed his 
future, career etc. -gaab xabar-u he put an end to him. 
- rabb-i-na ygiib talab-ak bi-fayda may the Lord reward 
your efforts! - feef gaab Ii-gaab how can there be any 
comparison (between these two things)? -malrift-u 
tgiib wara to know him is a disadvantage. -tiliifwi-tgib-
Ii [women] (expression of gratitude for a gift) == may 

you live long and continue to provide for me! -qadd 
is-simsima wi-tgiib ii-xed milaggima. - kilma (a riddle) 
== (what is) the size ofa sesame seed and can draw up an 
army? - a word. 2 to produce, yield, bring forth. 
ril-limaara bi-tigib-lu talatiin gineeh fif-Jahr the build-
ing brings him in thirty pounds a month (in rent). lissa 
ma-gabit-Ji lyaal she hasn't had any children yet. 
bi-ygiib damm i min manaxiir-u he has a nosebleed. 
miin gaab ig-goon who scored the goal? laawiz fagiib 
faktar min tisliin fil-miyya fil-imtiljaan I want to get 
more than ninety percent in the exam. law.ziin bass i 
ngiib Ijaqq-u (we don't care about profit,) we just want 
to realize its cost. IIgaab illi f-batn-u (1) he vomited. 
(2) he confessed all. -gaab lala nafs-u he ejaculated. 
-gab-ha lala balaala he spoke frankly, he laid his cards 
on the table. -gaab fi-sirt-ak he gossiped about you. 
- fima fakir-ni gibt a Ijaaga min landi do you think 
I made it all up? -ma-ygib-ha filla rigal-ha == only those 
with a special ability can do it (said of, or to, one who 
succeeds where others fail). 3 to cause, bring on, bring 
about. bi-tgiib iI-maraq it causes illness. gibt-u l-nafs-ak 
you brought it upon yourself. gibt i lit-tuggaar iI-kafya 
I brought disaster on the merchants. 4 to reach, arrive, 
get as far as. mafruuq nigiib ii-barr it-taani bald i n~~ i 
saala we should reach the other shore in half an hour. 
zalqit iI-marakbi gaabit ii-barr the boatman'~ cry 
reached the shore. -vn gayabaan; ava gaayib. 
~~ magaaba In pi magaayibl act of bringing. yaama 
gab laha magaayib ma-lhaa-f ladad he brought her 
innumerable gifts. 
...,..~I fitgaab or figgaab Ivil passive of gaab. -iva 
mitgaab . 
...,..~I fingaab = fitgaab. -iva mingaab. 
2(yloS~) 
~ 
geeb In pi giyuub, guyuubl I pocket. dafal min 
geeb-u he paid out of his own pocket. huwwa f-geeb-i 
I've got him in my pocket, he is at my beck and call. filii 
f-geeb-i f-geeb-ak all I have is yours. II fabu geeb 
maxruuq spendthrift. - f~ljaab ig-giyuub it-tiqiila the 
well-off. -guyuub fanfiyya {anat] sinuses. 2 sine. 
~ 
jiib <Engl>: larabiyya jiib Ipllarabiyyaat jiibl 
jeep. 
~ 
jiiba <Fr jupe> In pi -aatl skirt. 
r loS r see r.J r: figtiyaalj 
~ loS r see 
~.J r: gayyid 
185 
I .JloSr 
~ giir Inl I lime. IIgiir Ijayy. quick-lime. 2 chalk. 
-S ~ giiri ladji calcareous. Ijagar giiri limestone. 
madda giriyya [dent[ tartar . 
• J~ gayyaara In pi -aatl limekiln. 
~ gayyar I Ivtl to render lustreless, give a matt finish 
to. 2 Ivil to become lustreless. -vn tagyiir; ava/pva 
migayyar. 
;":1 fitgayyar or figgayyar Ivil to be (made) lustreless, 
be given a matt finish. - iva mitgayyar. 
I 
• .JloSr 
.~I fig-giiza Iprop nl Guiza, town and province on 
the west bank of the Nile, the town being considered 
part of greater Cairo. 
-S-,I~ gizaawi I ladj °1 Guizan. 2 In °1 a Guizan. 
..; loS r 
~ 
geef In pi giyuufl army. 
~ 
geefi ladj invarl army, perraining to an army or 
armies. gazma geefi a pair of army boots. 
<.S'".."..!.I fig-giyuufi I epithet of seef fibn zi yazan 
(q.v.). 2 gaamil ig-giyuufi the Giyushi Mosque, an old 
and conspicuous mosque on the Muqattam Hills, built 
at the instigation of famiir ig-giyuufBadr el-Jamali late 
in the eleventh century . 
..,.. loS r 
~ 
gii,J <Copt> In pi figya~, giya~1 (noisy) fart. 
IIgii,s fi-qafa~ inconsequential talk or activity. 
~ 
gayy~ Ivil to fart (with noise). -vn tagyii,s; ava 
migayy~. 
"';loSr 
~ 
giifa In pi giyafl rotting corpse or carcass. 
~ 
gayyif Ivil to become putrid, stink (of a dead 
body). - ava migayyif. 
JloSr 
~ 
giil In pi fagyaal/ generation. 
rJloSr 
~ 
.,J ~ jiyulujia <prob It> Inl geology. 
~.,J~ jiyulooji I ladjl geological. 2 In *1 geologist. 

(r~[.) 
~ giim Ifem n, pi -aafl fifth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet.lIsiin wi-giim questioning, cross-examination, 
as in xad-ni f-slin wi-giim he started questioning me. 
- 'i'i1-l:Jaala giim (I) {obsoll there is an emergency alert. 
(2) the (money) situation is very tight. 
186 
~ geem <Engl> In pi -aafl game (in tennis or 
ping-pong). 
~.J~~[. 
..,~ gayyuun <Fr guillaume> In pi -aafl {carpI 
plough plane, rabbet plane. 

c. c. ba- (also ha-) /b- or h- before 1st pers sing/ verb 
prefix with imperfect indicating future action. ba-tiigi 
fimta when will you come? fana [aarif ba-tCjuul feeh 
I know what you're going to say. kaan ba-yfuf-ha he 
was going to see her. 
( I c.) 
I.> baa I, baa 1 sound made to urge on a donkey"" 
gee-up! -also barr. 
I.> baa 2, baa 2 /fem n, pi bahaat/ sixth letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. - also baa f, bah. 
; 
.1 C. 
.1.> baaf /fem n, pi -aall sixth letter of the Arabic 
alphabct. -also baa, baa, bah. 
I,:-,Ic. seeal,so I..; ..... c. 
~I.> baaba: baaba baaba (ya rabb; (or ya-lIi) tgii-ni) 
1 encouragement to a child to crawl or toddle towards 
one. 2 [children] a chant. in ball-catching games. parti-
cularly aimed at distracting other catchers"" it's com-
ing, it's coming! 
1..:..1c. 
iiI.> baata: baala baala linvarl destitute, penniless. 
fana baala baala "" I haven't got a thing to my name. 
IS":" I C. 
~I.> baati In pi -yyal kebab-seller, kebab restaurateur. 
[. I C. see 1 [..J C. : lJaaga 
1 ..; ~ I C. 
ISJI.> lJaadi I: lJaadi baadi siid-i mbammad i1-balfdaadi 
(or iI-bulfdaadi) faal-u w-lJa{{-u [alaa-di children's 
counting rhyme "" eenie-meenie-mynie-mo etc. 
1 ..; ~ I C. see J"; I ~ C. 
J I C. see 1 J .J C. : baara 
...; I C. see ...;...; C. : lJaaf 
J I C. see J.J C. : baal, lJaala, lJaali 
1,;,1c. 
Ii \.... lJaana: baana w-baana or baana w-maana this and 
that, one thing and another, as in been lJaana w-maana 
qayya[na [afaa-na (what with this and that we've lost 
our supper) we've been involved with so many triviali-
ties that we've lost our chance of having what's impor-
tant. sabu-haa-Iak been lJaana w-baana they left you 
completely up in the air about it. 
I ..... C. see ..; ..... C. : lJaba 
I .......... C. 
~ babb 1 (i) 1 Ivtl to like, love. bi-tbibb iI-musiiqa do 
you like music? b-abibb iI-bint; di I love that girl. rilli 
ylJibb; nafs-u tikrah-u n-naas [prov] who loves himself 
is hated by others. II babb; wi-ndabb he fell madly in 
love. - fir-rigl; tdibb; matralJ ma tlJibb [prov] "" one is 
guided by one's affections. - fir-rizCj; ybibb iI-xiffiyya 
[prov] "" you have to look lively to make a living. 
2 /preverbl to like to. libibb; tisma[-ha would you like 
to hear it? - Ivt and vii 3 to kiss (as a sign of respect). 
IIlJibb" ([ala) raas-u kiss and make up with him! 
-lJabbit-ak iI-[afya may good health kiss you! (in re-
sponse to e.g., xallel-kum bi-[afya stay in good health. 

-l.Jabbit-ak ruxt-ak may your spirit-sister kiss you! (used 
as l.Jabbit-ak il-lafya). -l.Jabb-ak bur~ see bur~. -vn 
l.Jubb, mal.Jabba, l.Jababaan; ava l.Jaabib; pva mal.Jbuub. 
..;.... l.Jubb Inl love, passionate love. IIl.Jubb iz-zaat 
selfishness. 
~ mal.Jabba In! love. kull' rinsaan mil.Jtaag /il-
mal.Jabba every human being needs to be loved. 
y~ mal.Jbuub In 'I I beloved. 2/no pll 2a [obsol] 
gold pound. 2b {slang] a pound note. 
..;.... l.Jibb In pI ral.Jbaabl beloved. 
~ 
l.Jibbi ladjl friendly (of a game). matf' l.Jibbi a 
friendly match. 
..;.... i ral.Jabb' lell more/most loved. 
~ 
l.Jabiib Inl I Ipl l.Jabaayib, ral.Jbaabl dear one, 
friend. ya l.Jabiib-i my dear (a common form of 
address). ril-liyaal ral.Jbaab allaah children are the 
loved ones of God. [Uullumr il-baladeen l.Jabaayib the 
two countries have always been on good terms. rin 
kaan l.Jabiib-ak lasal ma-till.Jas-uu-J kull-u {prov] 
(should your friend be honey, don't lick him all away) "" 
don't abuse the kindness of a friend. qarb il-l.Jabiib 
zayy' rakl iz-zibiib {prov] being beaten by a friend is as 
(good as) eating raisins. II ril-l.Jabiib the Beloved 
(epithet of the Prophet Muhammad). 2/pl ral.Jibbal 
lover. ril-ral.Jibba tneen itneen lovers love to walk 
together (said to tease strolling couples etc.). 
~ 
l.Jabiiba In pI -aat, l.Jabaayib, ral.Jbaabl I dear 
woman, female friend. IIsitt il-l.Jabaayib mother. 
2 sweetheart, girlfriend. 
y~ l.Jabbuub ladj 'I likeable, amiable. 
~ 
l.Jabbiib In pll.Jabbiibal {deris] (inveterate) lover. 
rayyaam il-madrasa kunt "l.Jabbiib when I was at school 
I was always in love.llfawaaril il-l.Jabbiiba the dimly-lit 
streets favoured by lovers, lovers' lanes. 
~I ritl.Jabb Ivil to be loved, be liked. -iva mitl.Jabb. 
~I rinl.Jabb = ritl.Jabb. -iva minl.Jabb. 
~ 
l.Jabbib' Ivtl to cause to feel love or liking. rilli 
l.Jabbib-ni fii rinnu mux/~ what made me like him is his 
sincerity. -vn tal.Jbiib; ava mil.Jabbib; pva mul.JabbaM. 
~I ritl.Jabbib Ivi/l to ingratiate oneself, make up (to 
s.o.). 2 to be made to like or love. -ava/iva mitl.Jabbib. 
";""i raI.Jabb 2 t = l.Jabb'. -ava/pva mul.Jibb. 
.;:s mul.Jibb ladj *1 loving, kind, benevolent. raagil 
mul.Jibb' lin-naas a man well-disposed to his fellows. 
II b~alit il-mul.Jibb' xaruuf {p ro v] (an onion eaten with a 
loving friend is as good as a sheep) "" a cheerful look 
makes a dish a feast. 
~ 
yustal.Jabb Ivil to be desirable. riz-ziyaara 
ma-tustal.Jabb '-J saalit il-rada visiting is not desirable at 
lunch time. - iva mustal.Jabb. 
188 
2 ,":JI.,:," C. 
..;.... l.Jabb 2 Icoll n, pll.Jubuubl I seed(s), grain(s). 
wi-baldeen yigri fii ril-Iaban wi-yimla 1-l.Jabb then the 
sap rises and fills the seed. l.Jubuub il-liqaal.J pollen 
grains. 2 pill(s). l.Jubuub manl il-l.Jaml birth-control 
pills. 3 pimple(s), papule(s). IIl.Jabb if-Jabaab acne. 
4 bead(s). 
~ l.Jabba lunit n, pI -aatl I a seed, a grain. lIyilmil 
mil-l.Jabba ljubba {prov] "" he makes a mountain out of 
a molehill. -l.Jabbit il-leen pupil of the eye. -ya l.Jabbit 
leen-i "" my poor dear! (expression of affectionate 
sympathy). -li-l.Jabbit leen(-u) (full) to the brim. 2 a 
pill. 3 a pimple. 4 a bead. 5 a single specimen (of cer-
tain collective nouns).l.Jabbit ljuu(a a tomato. - Ino pll 
6 small quantity, smidgen. bi-nl.Jammar l.Jabbit ruzz' 
{IS-samna we brown a little rice in the samna. IIl.Jabba 
(b-)l.Jabba little by little. 7 short period of time. 
ristanna l.Jabba wait a bit. kaanit rumm-u twaddii-Iu 
rakl' kull" l.Jabba his mother used to bring him food 
every so often. b-albis ljab[' m-anzil bi-l.Jabba 
~rayyariin (or ~urayyara) I get dressed shortly before 
going out. 
1II.Jabbiteen ladvl somewhat, a bit. huwwa (aalil fiiha 
l.Jabbiteen he fancies himself somewhat. ljaladna 
l.Jabbiteen wayyaahum we stayed with them for a bit. 
~~ l.Jabbaaya = l.Jabba 1-4. 
~ 
l.Jubeeba In pI -aatl a grain, a seed. 
~ 
l.Jubaybi ladjl granular, grainy. IIxa!ab l.Jubaybi 
chipboard. -ramad l.Jubaybi trachoma. 
~ 
l.Jabbib 2 /vi/i to produce seed. bald' mayl.Jabbib 
ik-kuuz yitfattal.J wi-yistiwi after it has formed its seed 
the cob opens and ripens. 2 to come out in pimples. 
wasaaxit il-muus xallit raqabt-i tl.Jabbib the dirtiness of 
the razor blade made my neck come out in spots. -vn 
tal.Jbiib; ava mil.Jabbib. 
~ 
mil.Jabbib ladjl grainy, having a grain (of wood, 
leather, etc.). 
I ~ y y C. see I j y y c. 
Ijyyc. 
I~ l.Jabbaza t Iw folllaw clausel how nice it is to ... , 
how much better it would be if .... (ya) l.Jabbaza law 
kaan il-waal.Jid laarifism il-lamiil wi-yindah-Iu bi-sm-u 
how much better it is if one knows the customer's name 
and calls him by it! (ya) l.Jabbaza law gibt-i-Ina 
kubbaayit!aay how nice it would be if you brought us a 
cup of tea! 

-oyyc. 
.;,~ Ij~bbahaan Icoll n~ cardamom. 
yc.yc. 
~ 
lJabljab ladj invarl small, stunted in growth. 
ba((iix Ijabljab undersized water-melons. 
'.Iyc. 
; 
Ijibr In pI I'aljbaarl ink.llljibr· [ala waraCf = empty 
(written) words. - I'umm il-Ijibr or samak il-Ijibr sqqid. 
-Ieela zayy il-Ijibr a terrible night. 
o ~ maljbara f In pI maljaabirl inkwell, container for 
ink. 
~ Ijabbar Ivtl to ink over, apply ink to. bi-yljabbaru 
looljit ir-rasm they go over the diagram in ink. -vn 
taljbiir; ava/pva miljabbar. 
~I I'itljabbar 
Ivil 
to 
be 
inked. 
ril-kilifehaat 
bi-titljabbar bi-Ijibr i (baa[a the plates are covered with 
printer's ink. -iva mitljabbar. 
l./yc. 
; 
Ijabar Inl 1 black rough silk cloth. 2 Icolll women's 
outer wrap(s) made of this cloth. 
0; Ijabara lunit n, pI -aatl woman's outer wrap of 
black silk or velvet. 
3.1Yc. 
\S)~ Ijubaara In plljubarayaatl bustard. 
j y C. see 1 j y y C. : Ijabbaza 
lJ"'yc. 
...,-.> Ijabas (i) Ivtl 1 to confine, constrict. Ijabast i 
nafs-i barra I locked myself out.ljabas lannina I-mayya 
he cut off our water supply. Illjabas nafas-(u) to hold 
(one's) breath. -Ijabas damm-(u) to cause (s.o.) to feel 
constricted and ill at ease, put a damper on the spirits 
of. 2 to shut up, imprison. law ma-da/alt i-J il-raraama 
yiljbisuu-k if you don't pay the fine they'll put you in 
prison. - Ivi/3 to finish off a meal (with a cigarette, tea 
etc.). haat lina/aay niljbis bii (lal-I'akl) get us some tea 
to finish off the meal. -vn Ijabs, Ijabasaan; ava Ijaabis; 
pya ma"buus. 
...,-.> Ijabs Inl 1 imprisonment. IIljabs i CfuflaaCf {mil] 
confinement to barracks. 2 jail, prison. xaduu fil-Ijabs 
they took him to jail. 
4.. ~ maljbuusa Inl variety of backgammon. 
~ 
maljbas In pI maljaabisl 1 stopcock. 2 clasp, clip 
(of a necklace, bracelet etc.). ' 
..,..,..a 1 I'itljabas Ivil passive of Ijabas. - iva mitljibis. 
189 
~I I'inljabas = I'itljabas. -iva minljibis. 
~ 
Ijabbis 1 Ivtl to confine, lock up, imprison (a 
number of things or a number of times). Ijabbisit il-
firaax she shut up (all) the chickens. 2 Ivil = Ijabas 3. 
-vn taljbiis; ava/pva miljabbis. 
~ 
taljbiisa linst n, pI -aatl a cigarette, drink of tea 
etc., taken at the end of a meal. 
~ 
1 I'itljabbis Ivil passive of Ijabbis. -iva mitljabbis. 
...,..~I I'iljtibaas f In! impediment. I'iljtibaas fil-bool 
{path] retention of urine. 
'';yc. 
k 
Ijabbif Ivt and vii 1 to make an assortment of, 
gather a variety of (usually food). I'akla mljabbifa a 
meal including a variety of foods.llljabbif il-Ijikaaya he 
spiced up the story. 28 to pad, pad out. bi-nbabbif-ha 
(or bi-nbabbif laleeha) la-tingirilj we pad it over so that 
it doesn't get scratched. 2b to fill in, fill up. babbif 
il-xurm illi fil-bee(a bil-muuna fill the hole in the wall 
with mortar. -vn tabbiif; ava/pva mibabbif. 
~ 
tabbiifa linst n, pI taljabiif, taljbifaatl 1 an 
assortment of snacks. 2 seasoning (of a dish). 
~I I'itljabbif Ivil passive of babbif. -iva mitbabbif. 
l';yc. 
....i-:> Ijaba/lcoll nl Ethiopians. 
41 ril-Ijaba/a Iprop nl Ethiopia. 
~ 
baba/i ladj *1 1 Ethiopian, Ethiopic. - In! 
2 Amharic. 3 Ipl babaj, I'abbaa/, Ijaba/a, bibjJ I an 
Ethiopian . 
.!lyc. 
~ 
babak (u, i) Ivtl 1 to cause to fit exactly. 
ril-mum£lrriqa Ijabakit ir-rubaa( lag-garb the nurse 
tightened the bandage over the wound. I'iljbuki I-ra(a 
lal-balla kwayyis fit the lid properly on the pan. 2 to be 
(too) precise with (s.th.). ma-tuljbuk-haa-Jdon't be so 
finicky! 3 babak or babakit limpersl it was necessary, it 
had to be. Ijabak (or Ijabakit) I'innak tiigi tzauaCf-li 
Cfuddaam in-naas did you really have to come and give 
me a row in front of everyone? -vn Ijabk, Ijabakaan; 
ava baabik; pva maljbuuk. 
~ 
Ijabka In pI -aatl 1 instance noun of babk. 2 plot 
(of a story, play etc.). 3 foundation loop of a crochet 
pattern. 4 headband on the spine of a book. 
~I I'itbabak Ivil passive of Ijabak. - iva mitbibik. 
.!.l,...; 1 I'inbabak = fitljabak. -iva minljibik. 
~ 
babbik Ivtl 1 to cause to fit properly. 2 to make 
difficult, be finicky with (s.th.). bi-yljabbik il-I'umuur 
he complicates things. I'awwil ziyart-i I-lelit-ha kaanit 

mi!Jabbika fwayya the beginning of my visit to her 
family was a little tense. -vn ta!Jbiik; ava/pva mi!Jabbik. 
~ 
I fit!Jabbik Ivil passive of !Jabbik. -iva mit!Jabbik. 
I J Y C. 
~ 
!Jibil (a) Ivil 1 to become pregnant. !Jiblit minni 
she got pregnant by me.ll/amma ti!Jbal iI-barla "" when 
Hell freezes over. 2 to have one's fill, be sick (ofs.th.). 
ril-waa!Jid !Jibil wi-wilid mik-kalaam da I've had my fill 
of that nonsense! -vn !Jabal, !Jabalaan; ava !Jablaan. 
~ 
!Jabal Inl pregnancy. fustaan iI-!Jabal maternity 
dress. 
~ 
!Jibla Ifem adj, pI -im, !Jabaala T/ pregnant. 
~ 
!Jabbil Ivtl to make pregnant.llyi!Jabbilu I-barla "" 
they tell fantastic hes. -vn ta!Jbiil; avalpva mi!Jabbil. 
~I fit!Jabbii Ivil to be made pregnant. - iva 
mit!Jabbii. 
1 J Y C. 
~ 
!Jablln pI !Jibaal, fi!Jbaall rope, cord. nall iI-!Jabl 
skipping. !Jabl' rasiil clothes-line. !Jabl' nagaah life-
line. fil-!Jabl is-surri the umbilical cord.ll/aabis kull illi 
lal-!Jabl "" dressed to kill. -!Jibaal iI-mawadda ties of 
friendship. -!Jibaal-u {awiila he takes his own sweet 
time. 
Jl;... !Jabbaalln pI !Jabbaala/l rope maker. 2 {constrJ 
one of a team of workmen who tug the mixing-shovel 
through cement with a rope. 
.}.l. !Jaabll: ril-!Jaabillala n-naabll every Tom, Dick 
and Harry, as in f,-ramaqaan tilaaljl I-!Jaabil lala 
n-naabil faayil 1S-Slb!Ja during Ramadan you'll find 
everybody and his brother carrying prayer beads. 
l\Syc. 
~ 
!Jaba (i) Ivil to crawl on all fours. fl/-waad laazim 
yi!Jbi ljabl' ma Ylmfl a child must crawl before he can 
walk. -vn !Jaby; ava !Jaabi. see further under I ..... I c.. 
l\Syc. 
IJ.I. !Jaaba Ivtl to show partiality towards (s.o., at s.o. 
else's expense). -vn mu!Jabaah; avalpva mi!Jaabi. 
IJ.~I fit!Jaaba Ivil passive of !Jaaba. -iva mit!Jaabi. 
1.t::J t::J C. 
..::- !Jatt (i) Ivtl to break, cut or tear pieces off (s.th.), 
chip away at (s.th.). - vn !Jatataan; ava !Jaatit; pva 
"!a!Jtuut. 
~ !Jitta In pI !Jitatll (also pI !Jittaat) piece, bit, item. 
!Jittit !Jadiid a piece of iron. ma-ladJ' fiyya !Jitta lala 
190 
balq-a-ha there is not a bit of me left in one piece. 
fld-dasta fiiha tnaafar !Jitta there are twelve items in a 
dozen.ll!Jitta !Jitta bit by bit, little by little. -!Jitta bi- a 
coin or note worth ... , as in !Jitta b-xamsa a five-piastre 
piece (or note). -!Jitta wa!Jda (1) at one go, straight off, 
as 10 balja waziir !Jitta wa!Jda he became a minister 
straight off. (2) in one piece, as in fiddil-ni talaata kiilu 
la!Jma !Jitta wa!Jda give me three kilos of meat in one 
piece. - ril-!Jitta btalt-u his girlfriend. -!Jitat· iI-ma{bax 
the kitchen rags. -!Jall' !Jittafil-fingaan (or ta!Jt' dirs-u) 
he put a piece of opium in his cup (of coffee) (or in the 
corner of his mouth). -!Ja-yaakul min-... !Jitta to suit 
perfectly (of clothes), as in ril-mandiil !Ja-yaakul min 
ljurit-ha !Jitta the kerchief looks bewitching around her 
forehead. 2a place, locality. fii !Jitta warma f-fiid-i 
there is a swollen place on my hand. laffeet laleek 
fi-kull' !Juta I looked for you everywhere. 2b district, 
neighbourhood. fahl iI-!Jwa the people of the neigh-
bourhood. hiyya fa!Jla wa!Jda fll-!Jwa kull-a-ha she's 
the prettiest girl in the whole district. 2c {euphemJ red 
light district. - !Jittit Ino pl/3a a little of, a smidgen of. 
!Jittit layyil a mere scrap of a child. !Jittit fafandi 
ma-yiswaaJ nikla a little guy not worth a penny. 
ma-fiiJ wala !Jittit qill there's not a spot of shade. 
3b loften w additional intensifiers, esp diinl an incredible 
. .. , a real ... ! famma !Jittit !Jufra what an incredible 
hole! fallaah yurzulj-kum bi-!Jittit nll/a may God send 
you a real disaster! flmbaarl!J sih,rna !Jittit diin sahra 
yesterday we had such a wonderful evening! xa{abt' 
!JWit diin xu{ba bint' kalb I gave a bloody flOe speech! 
~ 
!Jiteeta Inl small piece, bit. la !Jitta wala !Jteeta not 
the littlest bit. 
~ 
!Jattu Ivtl to break, cut or tear into small pieces. 
-vn ta!Jtiit; avalpva ml!Jattit. 
~I fit!Jattit Ivil to be broken, cut or torn into small 
pieces. - iva mu!Jattit. 
1.t::J ~ C. 
~ !Jatta ladv/l even. di !Jatta mafhuurafil-leela she's 
even renowned within the family. bi-yruu!J fur/-u 
raakib futubiis walla biskilitta walla !Jatta maafi he goes 
to work on a bus, or a bicycle, or even walking. 
m-amfiiJ filla w-malaaya munfaax !Jatta wa-Iaw kunt' 
waxid-ha laffa I don't go without a pump even if I'm 
only going for a spin. - Iconjl2 until. fiftaral {uulil-Ieel 
!Jatta {ilil in-nahaar he worked through the night until 
daybreak. 3 so that, in order that. lamalit layyaana 
!Jatta yiigi yzur-ha she pretended to be ill so that he 
would visit her. 

.!l"::""::"c 
~ 
Ijatatak: Ijatatak batatak rapaciously, feverishly, 
frantically. nizil [ala I-[eej Ijatatak batatak he gobbled 
up the bread ravenously. nizlit [alee qarb a Ijatatak 
batatak she beat him frenziedly. 
"::"c"::"c 
~ 
Ijatljit Ivtl to break into small pieces, divide into 
bits.llljatljit fil-kalaam to split hairs. -vn Ijatljata; aval 
pva miljatljit. 
~I ritljatljit Ivil to be broken into small pieces. - iva 
mitljatljit. 
('..::.. C 
\;.> Ijatman ladvl decidedly, definitely. rinzili I-balad -
Ijatman Ija-tlaalji I-ljumaaj illi-nti [awzaa go into town 
and you're sure to find the material you want. 
~ 
Ijatmiyya f Inl inevitability. rigtimaa[ bi-nnaaljif 
fii riI-mac:raka w-mutatallabat-ha w-IjatmiyYit-ha a 
meeting at which we discuss the battle, its demands and 
inevitability. 
j#- maljtuum ladj *1 inevitable.lIljadar wi-maljtuum 
it~s fate and there's nothing one can do about it. 
~ Ijattim Ivtl I to demand, decree, make compul-
sory. wagb-i yljattim [alayya ~-~araalja my duty com-
pels me to be frank. 2 to insist on. Ijattimit [aleena 
nbaat she insisted that we stay the night. II Ijattim ra ry-
(u) to insist wilfully on, as in Ijattim rary-u rinnu ysaafir 
iI-balad fi-n~~ il-Ieel he would brook no objectio.n to his 
going to the village in the middle of the night. -vn 
taljtiim; ava miljattim; pva muljattam. 
~ 
taljtiima In pi -aat, taljatiiml necessity, demand, 
exigence.lI[alee taljatiim '" he sometimes gets a bee in 
his bonnet. 
~I ritljattim Ivil I to become inevitable. 2 to insist. 
3 passive of Ijattim. -ava/iva mitljattim. 
~ 
I ristiljattim J = ritljattim. -ava mistiljattim. 
.s"::"c 
,j> Ijata (i) Ivt and viI to smooth-talk. lja[ad yiljti 
[aleeha (or yiljtii-ha) lamma xad minha I-fuluus he 
worked on her till he got the money from her. -vn Ijaty; 
ava Ijaati. 
o .!J C see 2 IJ" IJ" C 
y~c 
~ 
Ijagab (i) Ivtl to conceal. rabb-i-na Ijagab [anni 
n-ni[ma God has hidden His grace from me. -vn Ijagb, 
191 
Ijagabaan; ava Ijaagib; pva maljguub. 
~~ Ijaagib In pi Ijawaagibl I eyebrow. II ril-[een 
ma-ti[laa-j [ala I-Ijaagib {prov{ (the eye will never be-
come higher than the eyebrow) (1) polite rejoinder to 
praise '" I wouldn't presume to accept any praise. 
(2) admonition to respect social class. 2 diaphragm 
(contraceptive device). - Ipl Ijuggaabl 3 doorkeeper, 
usher. Ijaagib maljkama court usher. 
..,..4- Ijigaab In pi riljgiba, Ijigibal la amulet (usually 
consisting of a written charm worn on the person). 
Ib triangular decoration used in gold jewelry making. 
2/no pll 2a woman's veil that covers the entire face. 
IImakjuuf [annu I-Ijigaab he's clairvoyant, he has 
second sight. - raf[ il-Ijigaab the emancipation of 
women, women's liberation. 2b (also riI-Ijigaab il-
Ijaagiz) {anat] diaphragm. 
~I ritljagab Ivil to be concealed (from sight). - iva 
mitljigib. 
~I rinljagab = ritljagab. -iva minljigib. 
~ 
Ijaggib Ivtl I to cause to wear an amulet. 2 to 
cover with a veil. -vn taljgiib; avalpva miljaggib; pva 
muljaggabf. 
~I ritljaggib Ivil I to wear an amulet, be protected 
by divine or magical influence. 2 to wear a veil. - ava 
mitljaggib. 
~I riljtagab Ivil to disappear from sight. riljtagabit 
[anna I-muddit rusbuu[ we haven't seen her for a 
week. -vn riljtigaab; ava miljtigib, mUljtagib. 
I~~C 
~ Ijagg J (i) Ivil to go on pilgrimage (especially to 
Mecca). muusim il-Ijigg the season of the yearly pil-
grimage to Mecca. -vn Ijigg, Ijagg; ava Ijaagig. 
~ 
Ijigga J linst n, pi -aatl a pilgrimage.llzu I-Ijigga Zu 
I-Higga, twelfth month of the Muslim year (during 
which the annual pilgrimage takes place). 
C~ ljagg 2 In pi Ijuggaagl la pilgrim, one who has per-
formed the Meccan pilgrimage. Ib title of, and form of 
address or reference to, a pilgrim. II raljmad zayy 
iI-Ijagg aljmad {prov] (Ahmad is as good as Pilgrim 
Ahmad) '" all people are equal whatever their titles. 
2 polite form of address to an older man. 
~~ Ijagga In pi Ijuggaagl la female pilgrim. Ib title 
of, and form of address or reference to, a female pil-
grim. 2 polite form of address to an older woman. 
2 
~~c 
. 
~ 
Ijigga 2 In pi Ijigagl pretext, excuse. ma-[ad-Iakj' 
Ijigga you've run out of excuses. 

~ 
l:Jugga In pll:Jugagl I title deed to property. 
2 proof, evidence. 
~I fill:Jaggig Ivil to offer pretexts, make excuses. 
kul/' ma lisfal-ni lan ladam noom-i fall:Jaggig bil-
baralfiil whenever she asks why I don't get any sleep, 
I give the fleas as an excuse. II bi-yill:Jaggig bi-jalr' raas-
u he'll make an excuse of anything. -ava mill:Jaggig. 
~I fil:Jlagg Ivil to complain, protest. fil-l:Jakam 
il:Jlagg B lala I-gumhuur the referee protested against 
the (behaviour of) the crowd. - vn fil:Jligaag; ava 
mul:Jlagg, mil:Jlagg. 
~I 
fislil:JaggigJ Ivil to offer pretexts, make false 
excuses. -ava mislil:Jaggig. 
I J ['C 
f:'> l:Jagar} Inl I/colll stone(s). fil-l:Jagar ig-giiri 
limestone. 2 Ipll:Jigaal'a, fal:Jgaarl a stone. l:Jagar rafiid 
the Rosetta stone. IIl:Jagar id-damm green stone hol-
lowed out to hold a few drops of blood, worn by women 
as a (folk) remedy for internal bleeding. - fil-l:Jagar 
iI- faswad sacred stone fixed in one of the corners of the 
Kaaba. -l:Jagar l:Jammaam or l:Jagar rigleen pumice 
stone. -l:Jagar zeel oilstone. - fal:Jgaar kariima precious 
stones. -makanil l:Jagar {print] lithograph machine. 
- raas-u zayy iI-l:Jagar ... he's pigheaded. -l:Jagar daayir 
wala sabl' naayim {prov] (a rolling stone is better than 
a sleeping lion) ... a little thing that ~oes something is 
better than a big thing that does nothing. - fil-l:Jagar 
id-daayir la budd B lan laa-u ... you can't get away with 
everything all the time. 3/pll:Jigaara, l:Jugaaral 3a dry 
battery. 3b spectacle lens. 3c l:Jagar wallaala flint of a 
lighter. 4 Ipl fil:Jgira, l:Jigiral pottery bowl of a water-
_pipe (see Pl.I, 2), (loosely also) a pipeful of tobacco. 
nifrab l:Jagar laani qabl' ma nimfi let's smoke another 
pipe of tobacco before we go .. 
Of:'> l:Jagara lunit n, pi -aall a stone. 
~If:'> l:Jagaraaya In pi -aall piece of stone. 
J~ l:Jaggaar In • and pi l:Jaggaaral I quarryman. 
2 stonemason. 
J':'4' mal:Jgar In pi mal:Jaagirl quarry. 
JIJ':'4' mal:Jgaraali In pi -yyal quarry-man. 
/:- l:Jaggar Ivtl I to chock (a wheel) with a stone. 
rakanl' f-l:Jilla 
mdal:Jdara 
w-l:Jaggarl 
iI-larabiyya 
I parked on a slope and put &. chock under the car 
wheel. - Ivil 2 to become hard (as stone), become 
petrified. 3 to behave stubbornly. -vn lal:Jgiir; ava/pva 
mil:Jaggar. 
~ 
mil:Jaggar Ipva/II wazn' ml:Jaggar {mus] four-four 
time. 
192 
~I fill:Jaggar Ivi/l to be chocked with a stone (of a 
wheel). 2 to become hard, become petrified. -ava/iva 
mill:Jaggar. 
1 J ['C 
f:'> l:Jagar2 (u): bagar lala I to confine in quarantine. 
l:Jagr' ~il:Jl:Ji quarantine (for humans). l:Jagr' zraali 
quarantine (for animals and plants). 2 {leg] to declare 
legally incompetent. - VB l:Jagr; ava l:Jaagir; pva 
mal:Jguur. 
of:'> l:Jugra r In pi l:Jugar, l:Jugraall room. l:Jugrillafliif 
inspection chamber. l:Jugril xaraayi( map room. l:Jugrit 
rasm (1) artist's studio. (2) art room (in a school). 
f:'> l:Jigr In pi l:Jigaarll I!lp. lala l:Jigr' fumm-u on his 
mother's lap. 2 (als? fiI-l:Jigreen) crotch. l:Jigr i/-
ban(aloon the crotch of the trousers. 
#1 fill:Jagar: fill:Jagar lala passive of l:Jagar lala. -iva 
mill:Jigir. 
~I finl:Jagar = fitl:Jagar. -iva minl:Jigir. 
j[,C 
:r:- l:Jagaz (i) I/vtl to reserve. laayiz al:Jgiz fooe[a 
I want to book a room. 2 to detain. l:Jagazuu-ni Iil-
lal:Jqiiq they detained me for questioning. 3 to bar, 
block. - Ivil 4 to make a barrier, put up a barrier. 
l:Jagazu been i/- fale[aa f wi-lfeer i/- fale[aaf they put up a 
barrier between the members and the non-members. 
II fil-l:Jigaab iI-l:Jaagiz {anal] diaphragm. -vn l:Jagz; ava 
l:Jaagiz; pva mal:Jguuz. 
1II:Jagaz lala {leg] to attach, issue a writ of attachment 
for. fil-mul:Je[ar l:Jagaz lala dukkaan-i the writ server 
attached my shop. 
~l> l:Jaagiz In pi l:Jawaagizl I barrier.lIl:Jaagiz inoot 
the sound barrier. -l:Jaagiz moog breakwater. 2 {athl] 
hurdle. 
o~l> l:Jagza In pi -aatl partition. 
;4- l:Jugaaz In! {mus] mode in Arabic music begin-
ning on D and having E flat, B flat, and F sharp. 
;~I fi/-l:Jigaaz Iprop nl the Hijaz. 
...;4- l:Jigaazi ladjl of or pertaining to the Hijaz. 
II barsiim l:Jigaazi common medick (Medica gestiva), a 
variety of barsiim, superior for its year-round growth 
and retention of value as fodder when dried. 
~I fill:Jagaz Ivil passive of l:Jagaz. -iva mitl:Jigiz. 
;- l:Jaggiz Ivil to act as a barrier. waal:Jid faayill:Jabb' 
yl:Jaggiz wi-yxallt¥-hum min bale[ someone who was 
passing wanted to interpose himself and break up the 
fight. -vn lal:Jgiiz; ava mil:Jaggiz. 

-.tlj[C 
;lS'j4- l.Jugazkaar <T hicazkar> Inl {mus] com-
pound mode beginning on C and having 0 flat and A 
flat. hugazkaar kurd compound mode beginning on C 
and having 0 flat, E flat, A flat, and B flat. 
J[C 
~ 
l.Jagal (i) Ivilto hop on one foot. fir-rigl illi til.Jgil 
caleeha fawwil iI-lilba laazim titann-ak til.Jgillaleeha 
I-faaxir iI-lilba the foot on which you hop at the begin-
ning of the game you must continue hopping on till the 
end.lll.Jagalt; fiiha (ya rraab ii-been) ""the situation has 
got very bad thanks to your interference (said to one 
considered to be a bearer of misfortune). -vn l.Jagl, 
l.7agalaan; ava l.Jaagii. 
~ 
l.Jagla linst n, pi -aatl a hop. lilbit iI-l.Jagla 
hopscotch. 
~~ l.Jaggaala Inl bedouin dance in which a woman 
symbolically chooses a husband from a circle of men. 
Ir~c 
r-:- l.Jagam (i) Ivtl to cup, scarify. -vn l.Jagm. 
l.7agamaan; ava l.Jaagim; pva mal.Jguum. 
~4- l.Jigaama In! cupping, scarification (especially of 
the head). 
r~ l.Jaggaam In *1 {obsol] cupper. 
~I fitl.Jagam Ivilto be cupped. -iva mitl.Jigim. 
r-:-i fal.JgamT Ivilto hesitate, flinch. fal.Jgam lan if-
flhaada he declined to give evidence. -vn fil.Jgaam; ava 
mul.Jgim. 
z 
r~c 
r-:- l.Jagm In pI fal.Jgaam. l.Jig[ma. l.Juguum JI size, 
volume. baaku l.Jagm; kbiir a large-sized packet. l.Jagm 
i1-fooqa the size of the room. l.Jagm iI-istismaraat the 
volume of investment. 
~~C 
~ 
l.Jagna Inl common reed (Phragmites communis). 
rltc 
r~~ l.Jaxaam <Heb> In pI -aatl chief rabbi. 
~"'~~ l.Jaxamxaana In pI -aatl chief rabbi's resi-
dence and administrative centre. 
I ~ C see I.S j C: l.Jada J• l.Jida I 
• ~ c: see Z I.S ~ C : l.Jiddaaya 
193 
J J. I ~ C see 
~ C. : l.JidaaJar 
':-'~c 
..,.,..boi ral.Jdab ladj, fern l.Jadba, pll.Judbl hunchbacked. 
..,.,.i. l.Jaddib Ivtlto make convex.ladasa mul.Jaddaba a 
convex lens. -vn tal.Jdiib; ava/pva mil.Jaddib; pva 
mul.Jaddab. 
~~ tal.Jdiiba Ipl -aat, tal.Jadiibl instance noun of 
tal.Jdiib . 
..,.,~I ritl.Jaddib Ivill to become convex. 2 to be made 
convex. - ava/iva mitl.Jaddib. 
.::.. ~ C see ..,.. ~ C : 
l.Jadiit, 
l.Jadduuta, 
l.Jaddit. 
ritl.Jaddit 
[ ~ C see [I.S ~ C: l.Judeeg 
i ~ ~ C 
.i. l.Jadd I (i) Ivtlto sharpen, heighten (the feelings). 
reeh illi l.Jadd-ak lal-bint; di kida what has so inflamed 
your love for that girl? -vn l.Jadd. l.Jadadaan; ava 
l.Jaadid; pva mal.Jduud. 
.i. l.Japd 2 In pI l.Juduudl I limit. l.Juduud iI-balad the 
borders of the country. lala l.Juduud iI-mal.Jatta on the 
perimeter of the station. rilzam l.Jadd-ak (or l.Juduud: 
ak) "" don't overstep the mark. di I.Jkaaya zaadit lan 
l.Jadd-a-ha this business has gone too far! kull; Jeer 
wi-Iuu l.Juduud there's a limit to everything.llfi-l.Juduud 
approximately, as in laayiz radIal fi-l.Juduud xamsa 
gneeh I want to pay about five pounds. -lala l.Jadd; 
talbiir-(u)T as (he) put it, as (he) expressed it. -lala 
l.Jaddin sawa it's six of one and half a dozen of the other, 
it makes no difference. 2 CUlling edge.l.Jadd is-sikkiina 
the blade of the knife. IIsilaal.J bi-l.Jaddeen {fig] a two-
edged weapon. 3 {lsi] punishment prescribed by Isla-
mic law .lll.Jadd alia beeni w-beenu "" I'll have nothing to 
do with him. 
1I1i-l.Jadd Ipreplto, till. balat if-farraala 1-l.Jadd; landi 
he sent the maid over to my place. subit iI-rasiil 
manfuur 1i-l.Jadd iI-mayribiyya she left the washing out 
till sunset. -1i-l.Jadd i ma Iconjl until. lialadit tilayyat 
1i-l.Jadd; ma thadd i l.Jel-ha she went on crying until she 
was exhausted. - rila l.Jaddin ma T to a certain extent. 
1S.i. l.Jaddi ladjl pertaining to limit. mantilia l.Jaddiyya 
upper limit of a tax bracket. ril-lilaawa zawwidit 
iI-man(ilia 1-l.Jaddiyya btalt-i the rise put me in a higher 
tax bracket. 

;l. l:Jadd 3, l:Jaadd ladjl I sharp, sharpened. sikkiina 
l:Jadda a sharp knife. 2 acute (of illness). 3 {geom} acute 
(of an angle). 
J,}J.II. mal:Jduud ladj ·1 limited, bounded. fil-waift' 
mal:Jduud time's limited. muxx-u mal:Jduud his outlook 
is narrow. /irka maIJduuda a limited company . 
.b.i fal:Jadd lell morelmost sharp. fiI-leen fal:Jadd' 
mif-Jarfara {prov} the (evil) eye is sharper than a sickle. 
i.b. l:Jidda Inl vehemence. kallim-ni b-l:Jidda he spoke 
to me vehemently. 
iJ.}~ l:Jududal = l:Juduuda. 
iJI~ l:Jidaada Inl metalwork, blacksmithery. 
iJ.}~ l:Juduuda l In pI -aatl border of a plot of land. 
IIzaayid lan iI-l:Juduuda gone too far. 
~~ l:Jadiid InI iron, (loosely also) any metal. sulufaat 
l:Jadiid ferro-sulphates. l:Jadiid zahr cast iron. l:Jadiid 
~ulb steel. fooka bi-snaan l:Jadiid a fork with metal 
prongs. IIxaduu fil-l:Jadiid (1) they put him in irons. 
(2) they arrested him. -laayiffil-l:Jadiid win-naar living 
under dreadful strain, living in hell. -baab iI-l:Jadiid 
Iprop nI Cairo's main railway station and the area 
around it. -xara l:Jadiidl iron filings. 
i~~ l:Jadiida Inlilinst n, pll:Jadaayidl a piece ofiron, 
a piece of metal. IIla/a 1-l:Jadiida down to one's last 
penny, as in ~araf iI-ifirfeen illi malaa wi-baifa lal-
l:Jadiida he spent all the money he had and went broke. 
2 Ipll:Jadaadil metal spike on top of a wall or railing. 
IS~~ l:Jadiidi lactjl I of iron, of metal. IIlaziima 
l:Jadidiyya a will of iron. -raagill:Jadiidi robot. 2 dark 
grey. 
JI.b. l:Jaddaad In ·1 blacksmith, metal worker.llbeeni 
w-beenu ma ~anal iI-l:Jaddaad ,., we are at daggers 
drawn. 
ISJI.b. l:Jaddaadi ladj invarl pertaining to metal and to 
metal working. munfaar l:Jaddaadi metal-cutting saw. 
musmaar l:Jaddaadi large thick crudely-handmade nail. 
~I fitl:Jadd Ivill to be sharpened. 2 to lose one's tem-
per. -ava/iva mitl:Jadd. 
J.b. l:Jaddid Ivtll to limit, restrict. fis-sawra l:Jaddidit 
iI-milkiyya the revolution limited property rights. 
II tal:Jdiid in-nasi birth control. 2 to determine, specify. 
l:Jaddidit iI-mal:Jkama yoom liI-beel the court fixed a day 
for the sale.layz-ak til:Jaddid bi;-;!lb(' mlin illi lI'al(aan 
I want you to determine exactly who is at fault. tiifdar 
til:Jaddid sinn ig-gamal bi-snaan-u you can tell the age of 
the camel by its teeth. -/the literary passive imperfect 
form occurs! fis-silr' b-yul:Jaddad l:Jasab fuhrit iI-mu(rib 
the price is fixed according to the fame of the singer. 
3 to delimit. nil:Jaddid ifi(lit iI-farq' big-giir we mark 
the boundaries of the plot of land with lime. -vn 
194 
tal:Jdiid; avalpva mil:Jaddid; pva mul:Jaddad. 
J~I fitl:Jaddid Ivil passive of l:Jaddid. -iva mitl:Jaddid. 
~I fil:Jtadd Ivil to become heated (in argument etc.). 
dayman yil:Jtadd' fil-munacJa he always gets worked up 
in discussion. -vn fil:Jtidaad; ava mil:Jtadd. 
~ 
mustal:Jadd 
In 
pI -aatl 
{butcher} 
knife-
sharpening steel. 
z,) ,) I:. 
.b. l:Jadd 4 Ipronl someone, anyone. l:Jadd' fiihum 
ballall' lanni one of them informed on me. l:Jadd' 
ywallal l:Jaaga w-yisha laleeha would anyone (be so 
stupid as to) light something and forget all about it? 
ma-l:Jadd'-J ladd-u-hum no-one has counted them . 
.b. l:Jadd 5 In pll:Juduudl SlInday. lalaala yoom l:Jadd 
come on a Sunday. talaa/a 1-l:Jadd (or yoom iI-l:Jadd) 
come (this) Sunday. 
3,),)1:. see also zlS,)1:. 
.b. l:Jidd sound used to chase kites away (e.g., from 
chickens). 
.I ,) I:. 
.)~ I finl:Jadar Ivill to fall down, slide down. finl:Jadar 
la/a qahr-u he fell down on his back. 2 to deteriorate. 
finl:Jidaar iI- faxlaaif moral decline. -vn finl:Jidaar; ava 
minl:Jidir. 
[,.1,)1:. 
~)~ l:Jadarga: l:Jadarga badarga the opening phrase 
of a children's counting game. 
vdl:. 
~~ l:Jadas I T (a) Ivil to happen.l:Jadas fillan it actual-
ly happened. -vn l:Jadas, l:Juduus; ava l:Jaadis. 
~~ l:JadasT 1 Inl Ilpl fal:Jdaasl event. happening. 
ziyart-u kaanitl:Jadas kibiir his visit was a great event. 
2/no pI! {lsi} ritual uncleanness, ritual impurity. 
~Jl. l:Jaadis T In pll:Jawaadisl event, happening. 
l:Jaadis saliid a happy event (Le. a birth). 
4:Jl. l:Jadsa In pll:Jawaadisl I incident. event. l:Jadsa 
;ariifa l:J~alit fil-igtimaal a nice thing occurred during 
the meeting. 2 accident. kaan fi-futubiis lamall:Jadsa 
he was in a bus that was involved in an accident. 
~~ .~~ l:Jadiit Inl talk, conversation. IIkitir 
iI-l:Jadiit wil-kalaam tongues started wagging. 
~~ l:Jadiis Inlilcolllthe Tradition(s) of the Prophet 
Muhammad. - Ipl fal:Jadiisl 2 a Tradition of the 
Prophet Muhammad. 3f formal talk or address (e.g., 
on the radio). - ladj ·1 4 modern. fif-Jilr iI-l:Jadiis 

modern poetry. 5 new, recent. katakiit yadiisit il-fac;s 
newly-hatched chicks. lIyadiis is-sinn young. 
uol>i I'aydas I lell more/most modern or recent. 
~J~ '~J~ yadduuta In pI yawadiit/l story for chil-
dren. 2 piece of gossip, rumour. 
0~ maydat In pI mayadiitl [derog] conversation, 
gossip session. 
ulol>i raydaas Inl I/colll juvonile(s). 2 (also malgal' 
raydaas) reform school. 
u~ . 
.::..~ yaddit, yaddis t I Ivtl to talk to. 2 Ivil to 
talk, speak. -vn taydiit, taydiis; avalpva miyaddit, 
miyaddis. 
J\;.A..e miyadditaati In pI -yyal [derog] one given to 
longwindedness. 
u~1 • .::..~I I'ityaddit, I'ityaddist Ivil to exchange 
talk, chat. xallii-na .nityaddit wi-nidyak Jiwayya let's 
chat and laugh a little. - ava mitYaddit. 
uol>i l'aydas 2 1/vll to produce, give rise to. kalaam-u 
raydas zuhuul his words caused amazement. 2 Ivil [lsi] 
to become ritually unclean, enter into a state of ritual 
impurity. -vn I'iydaas; ava muYdis. 
0~lol>! I'iydasiyyaat Ipl nl [math] co-ordinates. 
u~ muydis (also muydis ni[ma) In ·1 upstart, 
parvenu. 
~~c:. 
Jol> yadaf (i) Ivtl la to throw, toss. yadaf-Ii k-koora 
he threw me the ball. II beet mayduuf an out-of-the-way 
house. Ib to throw at, pelt. yadafuu bi(-(uub they 
pelted him with stones. 2 to discard. farrart il-mayfa~a 
mi-lli fiiha w-ruyt" yadif-ha I emptied the wallet of its 
contents and threw it away. - Ivil 3 to veer. 
rid-diriksiyoon bi-yiydi/yimiin the steering-wheel pulls 
to the right. -vn yadf, yadafaan; ava yaadif; pva 
mabduuf. 
• yadaf fik-kala.am to speak rashly, as in damm-ak 
{aayir w-b-tiydif fik-kalaam yimiin wi-Jmaal you're all 
excited and you don't know what you're saying. 
4iol> yadfa linst n, pI -aatl a throw. 
JI~ yaddaaf In 
pI -aatl 
I flywheel. 
2 shuttle. 
3 [naut] lifeline. 
4i1~ yaddaafa In pI -aatl I [text] pick. 2 balance-
wheel (in a watch or clock). 3 clapper (of a bell). 
4 counterweight on a locomotive wheel. 5 rocker arm 
on an oil-rig pump. 
J~I I'ityadaf Ivill to be thrown. II balwa wi-tbadafit 
Galee"" what a disaster it is that has befallen him! 2 to 
be discarded. -iva mitbidif. 
J..wl rinyadaf = rityadaf. -iva minYidif. 
J~ yaddif Ivtll to throw (a number of things, or a 
195 
number of times). 2 to pelt (with a number of missiles). 
I'illi beet-u min c;izaaz ma-yyaddi/-J in-naas bi(-(Uub 
[prov] people who live in glass houses shouldn't throw 
stones. -vn taydii/; ava/pva miyaddif. 
J~I rityaddif Ivil passive of Yaddif. -iva mityaddif. 
IJ~c:. 
"';..1> yuduC; (a) Ivil to become (too) salty. ril-mayya 
ku/l-a-ha tbaxxarit wil-I'akli yuduC; all the waterevapo-
rated so the food became too salty. -vn yuduc;iyya. 
~J..I> yuduc;iyya Inl sharpness, piquancy (of taste). 
...;~l> yaadic; ladjl I salty. gibna yadc;a salty (white) 
aged cheese. IImayya yadc;a solution made from che-
mical salts. 2 sour, tart, sharp. burtac;aana yadc;a a sour 
orange . 
...;~I~ yawaadic; Ipl nl salty foods. 
"';..1> yidiC; ladj ·1 clever, quick-witted. 
"';..I>i raydac; lell la morelmost salty. Ib morelmost 
sour. 2 morelmost clever or quick-witted. 
4;1..1> yadaac;a Inl sharp-wittedness. ril-mawquu[ 
waaqiy ma-biddi-huu-Jyadaac;a the matter is obvious, 
it doesn't need any special cleverness . 
...;.:i- yaddac; I Ivll la to taste in order to test for salti-
ness. Ib to add salt to (food). Ie to make too salty. 
2 Ivil to eat something salty or sharp in taste. -vn 
taydiic;; ava/pva miyaddac;. 
~ yaddac; [ala (1) to mock, poke fun at. (2) to try to 
attract, try to pick up, make passes at (a girl). 
J!~ taydiic; In! sharp-wittedness. bit-taeab wit-tazniic; 
wit-taydiic; itYfl1~alt" [ala talaata gneeh with a lot of 
effort and belt-tightening and scheming I got together 
three pounds. 
...;~I..' 1 I'ityaadic; Ivil to act smart, play the smart aleck. 
-.ava mityaadic;. 
"';..1> 1 I'iydac;c; Ivil I to become salty (of food). 2 to 
mature (of pickles). - ava miydac;c;. 
...;~I I'istaydac; Ivllia to select for saltiness. Ib to 
consider (too) salty. 2a to select for quick-wittedness. 
2b to consider (too) quick-witted. - Ivil3 to act clever, 
affect cleverness. -vn I'isiiydaac;; ava mistaYdac;. 
l(J~c:.) 
4;..1> yadac;a In pI -aatl pupil (of the eye). 
~..I> yadiic;a t, yadiiqa t In pI yadaayic;1 garden. 
II badaayic; il-c;ubba residential area in north-west 
Cairo. 
I .J ~ c:. 
1..1> yada I (i) Ivllto shoe (e.g., a horse). -vnyady; ava 
yaasi; pva maYdi. 

J.A> l:Jidw Icoll n/{rur] leather sandals with one thong 
over the instep and another encircling the big toe. 
iiJ.A> l:Jidwa In pi -aat,l:Jidawll horseshoe. 2 unit noun 
of l:Jidw. 
IS~I ritl:Jada Ivii to be shod (e.g., of a horse). -iva 
mitl:Jidi. 
z J ~ C 
IS.A> l:Jada 2 (i) Ivil to sing or chant (to a camel cara-
van). -vn l:Jida; ava l:Jaadi. 
1S.)l> l:Jaadi2/n pll:Judaahl one who sings or chants to a 
camel caravan. 
'IS~C 
IS~I ritl:Jadda Ivtl to challenge, defy. ratl:Jaddaa-k law 
/Iribt' xamsa biira wara balc[ I challenge you to drink 
five beers in a row. -ava mitl:Jaddi. 
IS~ tal:Jaddi In pi -yaatl challenge. tal:Jaddiyaat i/-l~r 
the challenges of contemporary society. 
ZIS~C 
~I.i- l:Jiddaaya In pll:Jadaadi, l:Jiddayaatl kite (bird). 
II ril-l:Jiddaaya ma-tirmii-J katakiit {prov] (a kite doesn't 
throwaway chicks) a man doesn't discard what he most 
values. -ya mara ya l:Jiddaaya = you old buzzard of a 
woman! see further under 3 ~ ~ C 
[IS~C 
~.A> l:Judeeg: rabu I:Jdeeg stork. 
• 1 ~C see ISjc 
...; ~ C see ...;~C 
J ~C see IJ~C 
J ~ C see I J ~ C and ISjc 
ly.JC 
..... ~ l:Jarab (i) Ivil to strive persistently (usually with 
evil intent). l:Jarab la/a I-itneen li-l:Jadd' ma farrar; 
benhum he kept scheming against the two (friends) till 
he split them up.l:Jarabu la/a ramwaal rabuu-hum they 
tried all means to get their hands on their father's 
money. IIbi-yil:Jrib fi-nafs-u he's fuming, he's boiling 
with anger. -vn l:Jarb, l:Jarabaan; ava l:Jaarib; pva 
196 
mal:Jruub . 
..... ~ l:Jarb Ifem n, pll:Juruub,l:JurubaatJ I war. ril-l:Jarb 
iI-la/amiyya t-tanya the Second World War.lll:Jarb abu 
zeed mala diyaab = a hel.1 of a fight. 
~ ~ l:Jarba In pi -aat, l:Jiraabl I spear, lance. II raas 
l:Jarba spearhead (literally and figuratively). 2 {athl] 
javelin. 
~~ l:Jarbi I/adj °1 pertaining to war, military. 
muraasill:Jarbi war correspondent. buli~ l:Jarbi military 
police. ku/liyya l:Jarbiyya military academy. 2/n 
pi l:Jarbiyyaatl that part of a water-pump which consists 
of a driving-shoe and filter. 
......)l> l:Jaarib Ivtl to make war against. ril-ratraak 
gayyiin yil:Jarbu mlaana 1-ringiliiz the Turks are coming 
to fight with us against the English. -vn mil:Jarba; ava 
mil:Jaarib . 
..... .)~ mul:Jaarib In °1 fighter. II ril-mul:Jaaribiin i/-
qudamaar war veterans . 
..... .)~I ritl:Jaarib Ivil I to fight each other. 2 to be 
fought against. -avaliva mitl:Jaarib. 
ZY.JC 
..... ~ l:Jarrab <cf Icelandic> Ivtl{naut] I to frap. 2 to 
haul on (a rope etc.), pull (a rope etc.) taut. -vn tal:Jriib; 
ava/pva mil:Jarrab. 
..... ~ 
1 ritl:Jarrab Ivil passive of l:Jarrab. - iva mitl:Jarrab. 
3(Y.JCl 
~ 
~ ~ l:Jirbaaya In pi -aatl chameleon. II raagill:Jirbaaya 
a-snake-in-the-grass. 
.....I,r' mil:Jraab In pi mal:Jariibl prayer niche iii a mos-
que, mihrab . 
U.JC 
..:.. ~ • ..:.. ~ l:Jarat (i, u) Ivtl I to plough. bi-nil:Jrit 
il-rarc[" l:Jart' rfayyal we plough the ground in close 
furrows. IIma-til:Jrit-J' malaa do not be rude to him. 
2 {constr] to mix (concrete). -vn l:Jart,l:Jarataan,l:Jiraat; 
ava l:Jaarit; pva mal:Jruut. 
JI ~ l:Jiraatiladj invarl pertaining to, or cultivated on, 
ploughed land. IIfuull:Jiraati green broad beans . 
..... I~ .01~ l:Jarraat In ° and pll:Jarraatal I {constr] 
workman who controls the shovel that is dragged 
through concrete to mix it. 2 ploughman. 
..:...I,r' • ..:..I,r' mil:Jraat Ipl mal:Jariitl I Inl plough (see 
PI.D, 8). 2 ladjl oafish, stupid, thick. 
..:... ~I • ..:.. ~I ritl:Jarat Ivi/l to be ploughed. 2 {constr] 
to be mixed (of concrete). - iva mitl:Jirit. 
..:... ....... 1 • ..:.. ....... 1 rinl:Jarat = ritl:Jarat. - iva minl:Jirit. 

[;C 
(~ !Jarag J J (i) Ivtl to embarrass, put in a fix. - ava 
mi!Jrig. 
(~ !Jarag 2 Inl embarrassment. rana !-yaayit iI-!Jarag 
I feel terribly embarrassed. 
("'-:1 rit!JaragJ Ivil to be embarrassed, be put in a fix. 
-iva mit!Jirig. 
(~ !Jarrag Ivtl to make forbidden. maama !Jarragit 
lalayya racial foO'1 is-su{Uu!J mother forbade me to go 
onto the roof. rid-duktuur mi!Jarrag lalayya l-mal!J the 
doctor has forbidden me salt. -vn ta!Jriig; ava mi!Jarrag. 
(~i ra!Jrag Ivtl to ~mbarrass, put in an embarrassing 
situation. kunta laayiz rattihm-u '1uddaamak la/aan 
ra!Jrig-u I wanted to accuse him in your presence in 
order to embarrass him. -/the literary passive also 
occurs! rana ru!Jragt; minnu I was embarrassed by him. 
-vn ri!Jraag; ava mu!Jrig; pya mu!Jrag. 
(~I rista!JragJ /vil to have scruples (particularly 
on religious grounds). bi-yista!Jrag !Jatta yaaxud !Ja'1'1-u 
he is even reluctant to take what is his right. -vn 
risti!Jraag; ava mista!Jrag. 
J~;c 
o.!l;~ ~ !Jirgalaatak: !Jirgalaatak birgalaatak !Jala'1a 
dahab fi-wdanaat-ak chant used in the ceremonies for a 
newborn child on yoom is-subuUl. 
r~; c 
I"'!'" ~ !Jargim Ivil to hover around, hang about (with 
intent to acquire s.th.). huwwa mi!Jargim lal-filuus he 
has his eye on the money. -vn !Jargama; ava mi!Jargim. 
I"'!'""'-:I rit!Jargim Ivil (impersonal) passive of !Jargim. 
bint; !Jilwa zayy; di laazim yikuun mit!Jargim laleeha a 
pretty girl like this must surely be the object of (a lot of 
people's) ambitions. - iva mit!Jargim. 
I"'!'" ~I risti!JargimJ = !Jargim. -ava misti~argim. 
l; C 
~ ~ !Jarad (i) Ivt/l to cut in a curve (in dressmaking). 
2 to train in manners, polish (s.o.). -vn!Jard, !Jaradaan; 
ava !Jaarid; pya ma!Jruud. 
i~ ~ !Jarda In pi -aatll linst n! a cut along a curve (in 
dressmaking). 2 woman's head-kerchief. 
~"'-:I rit!Jarad Ivil I to be cut in a curve. 2 to be or 
become polished (of s.o). - ava/iva mit!Jirid. 
~~I rin!Jarad = rit!Jarad. -iva min!Jirid. 
197 
JJc. 
1 ~~C 
;~ !Jarrar J Ivtl I to write up, put in written form. 
!Jarrar if-fiik bi-sm-i he made out the cheque to me. 2 to 
edit (a book, newspaper etc.). -vn ta!Jriir; ava/pya 
mitJarrar. 
11 !Jarrar lala to aim at. !Jarrar iI-bundu'1iyya la/-fagara 
w-cf.arab he aimed the rifle at the tree and fired. 
~ JI.""-: ta!Jriiri /adj invarl written, in written form. 
rimti!Janaat ta!Jriri written exams. 
..r: JI.""-: ta!Jrirgi 
/n 
pi -yyal 
[obsol] 
WJiter, 
letter-writer. 
;~ mu!Jarrir In '1 editor. 
;-""-:1 rit!Jarrar J Ivi/l to be written up, be put in written 
form. 2 to be edited (of a book, newspaper etc.). -iva 
mit!Jarrar. 
2 ~~ C 
~ !Jurr ladj/l Ipl ra!Jraar, !Jurriinl free, independent. 
di balad burra this is a free country. huwwa burr; yilmil 
illi yilgib-u he's free to do as he likes. rinta burr suit 
yourself (but bear the consequences)! lumla !Jurra hard 
currency. 2 [pol] liberal. 3 noble, proud, of integrity. 
nafs-u !Jurra or damm-u !Jurr he's a proud soul, he's a 
man ofintegrity.llleen iI-!Jurr; mzaan-u [prov] the eye 
of the man of int~grity is his (unfailing) judge. 
4 genuine, authentic. lU'1d; luuli !Jurr a genuine pearl 
necklace. 
~~ !Jurriyya In pi -aatl freedom. nU'1lud feen la/aan 
nitkallim bi-!Jurriyya where can we sit and talk freely? 
;~ !Jarrar 2 Ivtl to liberate. fii !Jadd; Yer-na y/}arrar 
bilad-na is there anyone but us to liberate our country? 
-vn ta!Jriir; ava mi!Jarrar; pya mu!Jarrar. 
JI.""-: ta!Jriir In/liberation·1I (midaan) it-ta!Jriir Libera-
tion Square, the main square in central Cairo. 
-mudiriyyit it-ta!Jriir land reclamation area in the north-
west Delta. 
;-""-:1 rit!Jarrar 2 Ivil to be liberated. - iva mit!Jarrar. 
;~ muta!Jarrir ladj '1 free-thinking. 
J ~~ C 
~ !Jarr J (i) Ivtll to make (s.o.) hot. riblidfiwayya 
!Jarret-ni move away a little, you've made me hot. 2 to 
make angry. rana ma!Jruur minnu I am angry with him. 
- vn !Jararaan; ava !Jaarir; pya ma!Jruur. 
~ !Jarr 2 /n! heat. fi-li~z iI-!Jarr at the peak of the heat. 
-/adjectivally/ rid-dunya !Jarr the weather is hot. 
» !Jarr 3, !Jaar ladjl I hot (in temperature). lI!Jaar 
wi-naar (wi-yacf.ab iI-gabbaar) curse on one who makes 
an unfair or dishonest profit"" may his wellbeing turn to 
hellfire! 2 hot (in taste). filfil !Jarr hot pepper(s).lIzeet 

))~ 
lJaar linseed oil. 3 fervent. warm. ardent. IIganaaza 
lJarra wil-mayyit kalb ... much ado about nothing. 
,:,I~ lJarraan ladj °1 hot (of animals and people). 
ft- farus(us iI-waalJid yibqa lJarraan (uul in-nahaar in 
August one is hot all day long. 
i) J'"" lJaraara Inl 1 heat. II waraq lJaraara asbestos. 
2 temperature. mizaan lJaraara thermometer. Gandu 
lJaraara he has a (high) temperature. 3 fervour, 
warmth. ardour. sallim Galayya b-lJaraara he greeted 
me warmly.llma-GanduujlJaraara he has no go, he's a 
wet blanket. 4 rash. ril-lJaraara /Ii f-wiff-u natarit Gala 
gism-u kull-u the rash on his face spread to his whole 
body. 5 electric current (only with respect to the tele-
phone system). ma-qdirt'j falli~iI biik - ma-kanj' fti 
lJaraara I couldn't phone you - the line was dead. 
IS) J'"" lJaraari, 
lJaraari ladjl thermal, thermo-. 
- fit-tasbiit iI-lJaraari thermo-setting. miG alga lJarariyya 
heat treatment. IIsuGr u lJaraari calorie. 
~I fitlJarr Ivi/l to be made hot (of people). 2 to be 
made angry. -iva mitlJarr. 
::"";1 finlJarr Ivi/l to lose one's temper. fana b-anlJarr' 
min iI-kalaam iI-faarir da I get angry with this non-
sense. 2 to be made to feel hot. - ava/iva minlJarr. 
Ji>1 filJtarr Ivil 1 to feel hot. 2 to get angry. ya farr 
ilJrarr anger took control. as in qaGadu yitGatbu w-ya 
farr ilJtarr' t/.arabu baGt/. they went on arguing until 
tempers were lost and they hit one another. -ava 
milJtarr. 
4 JJ C 
J- J'"" lJariir In pI lJaraayirl silk. (loosely also) any silky 
matenal. lJariir farf furnishing fabric with a silk-like 
finish. 
IS J- J'"" lJariiri ladjl silky. 
IS J-I J'"" lJarayri In pI -yya/l silk merchant. 2 silk mak-
er. - ladjl 3 silky, silken. qumaaf Gala lJarayri a silky 
type of cloth. 
)~ lJarrar J Ivtl{text] to give a silk-like finish to. -vn 
talJmr; ava/pva milJarrar. 
5 J J C 
~ lJarr sound made to urge a donkey'" gee-up! -also 
lJaa, lJaa. 
jJ C 
.J J'"" lJirz In pI falJraaz/l sealed depository for items of 
evidence in a cnminal case. 2 amulet. 
.J~ lJarraz Ivtl to put (an item of evidence) into a 
sealed depository. - vn talJriiz; avalpva milJarraz, 
.J '.):.1 fitlJarraz Ivil to be put into a sealed depository (of 
198 
criminal evidence). - iva mitlJarraz . 
.JJ'""i falJraz Ivtl to be in or come into possession of 
(especially s. tho illegal). filJraaz silaalJ {leg] illegal pos-
session of arms. -vn filJraaz; aVII mulJriz. 
IJ"'JC 
..r J'"" lJaras I, lJaras (u, i) Ivtl to guard, protect. 
fik-kalb' b-yulJrus iI-ftraax min il-Girsa the dog protects 
the chickens from weasels. rabb-i-na yulJrus-u {women] 
God bless him! II (fism) in-nabi lJars-u {women in trad 
soc] may the Prophet's name protect him! (used with or 
instead of a child's name to ward off the evil eye). -vn 
lJiraasa; ava lJaaris, lJaaris; pva malJruus. 
..r.Jl> lJaaris In pI lJurraasl guard, watchman. 
..rJ.r: malJruus ladj °1 guarded, protected (especially 
from evil). Garuusa lJilwa mil-Geen malJruusa a lovely 
bride safeguarded from the evil eye. malJruus (wi-
mu~aan) {women in trad soc] guarded and safe (from 
the evil eye)! (used with or instead of the name of a 
child). II fizzayy iI-malJruus how's your little son (may 
God protect him)? 
..rJ'"" lJaras 2 Inl escort, guard. lJaras faraf guard of 
honour. ril-lJaras iI-gumhuuri the Presidential Guard. 
..r~1 fitlJaras Ivil to be guarded or protected. -iva 
mitlJiris. 
..r~ lJarras l/vil to be on one's guard. laazim 
nilJarras minnu we must beware of him. 2/vtl to set 
(s.o.) as a guard. lJarrasuu Gala l-maxzan they made 
him a guard over the warehouse. -vn talJriis; ava/pva 
milJarras. 
..r '.):.1 fitlJarras Ivil to be set as a guard .. -ivalpva 
mitlJarras. 
11 fitlJarras Gala to keep under guard. ril-buli~ itlJarras 
Galee the police put him under guard. 
..r.;>1 filJtaras Ivil to be on one's guard. filJriris min 
it-taGabiin watch out for snakes! -vn filJtiraas; ava 
milJtiris. 
u!J C 
..r J'"" lJirf Icoll nl melon( s) which never reach ripeness 
on the plant. 
4.:. J'"" lJirfa Ipl -aarl unit noun of lJirf. 
~ L:. J'"" lJirfaaya = lJirfa . 
..r J'"" lJirif ladjl 1 rough, coarse. ramla lJirfa coarse 
sand. 2 savoury and appetizing (of food) . 
..r ~ lJarraf 1 Ivil to eat savoury food as an appetizer . 
2 Ivtl to make rough or coarse. -vn talJriif; ava 
milJarraf. 
..;. ~I firlJarraJT Ivil to act provocatively, pick a quar-
rel. -vn talJarruf; ava mitlJarraf. 

..; .;. .; ( 
...A.:. ~ fJar/aflvtl to cause to feel rough. fakl i/-xarfuuf 
bi-yfJar/if iI-buqq eating artichokes makes one's mouth 
feel rough. - avalpva mifJarfif. 
...A.;-I~ fJara/iif Ipl nl scales (of, e.g., a fish, a 
crocodile). 
v#.; ( 
~ 
~ fJarf¥ (i, u) Ivil to be on one's guard, take care. 
-vn fJir~; ava fJaari~. 
~~ fJir~r In/l care, solicitude. 2 meanm,ss. 
...P'-~ fJari~ ladj 
*1 careful, solicitous. laazim 
i1-waafJid yikuun fJarii~ r;ala siqat iI-r;amiil one must be 
careful to retain the client's trust. 
~ 
~i fafJrf¥ lell morelmost careful or solicitous. 
~? fJarra~ Ivil to take care, be careful. fJarra~ r;ala 
I-filuus lafJsan titni/il watch out for your money or it will 
be pinched. fJarra~ min ~afJb-ak wala txawwin-uu-! 
{prov} don't be too trusting with your friend or you will 
find yourself questioning his honesty. -vn tafJri~; avai 
pva mifJarra~. 
~:"':I fitfJarra~ = fJarrf¥. -ava mitfJarrf¥. 
~..,....:;-I 
fistafJra~ Ivil to be on one's guard, take care. 
fistafJrf¥ r;al-filuus look after the money. fistafJra~ mil-
kilaab beware of the dogs. - vn 
fistifJraf¥; ava 
mistafJrf¥. 
J#.; ( 
..;.? fJarraq Ivtl to provoke, incite. r;anaf¥ir min 
barra g-gamr;a fJarraqu {-{alaba r;al-mu:;ahraat ele-
ments from outside the university put the students up to 
the demonstrations. - vn tafJriiq; ava mifJarraq. 
";':"':1 fitfJarraq Ivil to be provoked, be incited. -iva 
mitfJarraq. 
1";.;( 
...; ~ fJarf' In pi fJuruuf. 
fufJruJl I letter (of the 
alphabet). min fJarfil-'laliffila fJarfil-yaa'l "" from A to 
Z. zawya fJarf' tih T-square. II wala fJarf don't say a 
word! 2 musical note. 'lil-maqaam da b-yibtidi b-fJarf' 
dooh this scale begins with doh. 
j~ fJarfi ladj *1 I literal. targama fJarfiyya literal 
translation. 2 literal-minded, pedantic, pernickety. 
~ fJarfiyyan ladv/literally. 
~ ~ fJarfiyya Inl literalness. fJarfiyyit i1-qanuun the 
letter of the law. 
2 
' 
o.J.;( 
...; ~ fJarF In pi fJuruuf, 'lufJrufl edge. fJarf i1-maktab 
the edge of the desk. 
199 
...; rJ 1 finfJaraf Ivil I to become corrupt, become de-
viant. 2 to become defective. mazaag-u munfJarifhe's 
out of sorts, he's not himself. -vn 'linfJiraaf; ava 
munfJarif. 
"';lrJ 1 'linfJiraaf In pi -aat! I deviation. 2 deflection . 
...;? fJarraf Ivtl 
I to change the meaning of. 
ma-tfJarraf-! iI-kalaam don't twist what has been said. 
2 to place on the edge (e.g., of a table). 'li/-fingaan 
mifJarrafthe cup is right at the edge (of the table). -vn 
tafJriif; avaipva mifJarraf . 
...;:,.,: 1 'litfJarraf Ivil I to be changed in meaning. 2 to be 
placed at the edge (of, e.g., a table). -iva mitfJarraf . 
J 
' '-'.;( 
;ij ~ fJirfa In pi fJirafJ trade, (skilled) craft. fibn i fJirfa 
a (good) craftsman. 
J~ fJirafi ladj * and pi -yyal skilled, expert (at a 
particular trade). 
~? fJarriif In pi fJarriifal expert, master. da fJarriif 
kutfiina he's an expert at cards. 
"';.r>1 fifJtaraf I Ivtl to practise (a profession). 
bi-YifJtirfu qiraayit i1-qur'laan they practise Koran-
reading as a profession. 2 Ivil to become a professional. 
kaan haawi w-bar;deen ifJtaraf he was an amateur and 
then turned professional. - vn fifJtiraaf; ava mufJtarif. 
"';..is mufJtarif In *1 professional. 
4 
' '-'.;( 
;ijl~ fJaraafa Inl pungency, piquancy (of taste). 
~? fJirriif ladjl spicy, piquant, pungent. 
.;,..;.;( 
~ 
~ fJarfana Inl skill, expertise. di s-siwaaqa fJarfana 
driving is a matter of skill. 
.:ri ~I 'litfJarfan Ivil to act the professional, act the 
expert. - ava mitfJarfan . 
J.;( 
,j~ fJaraq (a) Ivtl I to burn. bi-nigmar; i1-waraq 
wi-nifJraq-u f-goora barra we collect the leaves and 
burn them in a pit outside. IIbi-yifJraq id-damm it is 
infuriating, it makes one's blood boil. -ya rabb i 
ma-tifJraq-!i qalb-i r;alee {women} "" 0 Lord, don't 
make me suffer by his death (expressing concern for 
one in danger). -fJaraq-lu I-faxqareen {abus} he in-
sulted him vilely. 2 to fire (ceramics). b-yifJraq 
i{-{awaagin fi-furn i max~u~ he fires the casseroles in a 
special oven. 3 to cause a stinging sensation to (s.o.) or 
in (s.th.). 'liI-marham da b-yifJraq i1-r;eneen that oint-
ment makes the eyes sting. 4 to frustrate (e.g., a plan). 

l:Jaralj-li n-nukta he spoiled my joke (by giving away the 
punch line). l:Jaralj iz-zahr he had a good throw of the 
dice and wasted it (in backgammon). - Ivi/S to burn. 
IIljanaabill:Jarlja incendiary bombs. 6 to smart, sting, 
cause a burning sensation. leen-i b-til:Jraq my eye 
smarts. -vn l:Jarq, l:Jariiq, l:Jaraqaan; ava l:Jaariq; pva 
mal:Jruuq. 
.j.;> l:Jarq In pll:Juruuql {path] burn . 
.Y.,,;> l:Jariilj f 
In pll:Jaraayiql conflagration, fire. 
taffaayit l:Jariilj fire-extinguisher. wabuur l:Jariiq fire-
engine. l:Janafiyyit l:Jariiq fire-hydrant. 
~.;> l:Jariiqa In pi l:Jaraayiql conflagration, fire. 
wli.;> l:Jaraqaan Inl burning sensation. l:Jaraqaan iI-
qalb (1) heartburn. (2) misery.l:Jaraqaan iI-bool {path] 
burning sensation in the urinary tract. 
j.i.;> l:Jurlja Inl intense mental or emotional pain. 
bi-tlayyat bi-l:Jurlja she's crying bitterly . 
.jl~ l:Jarraaq ladjl hot, peppery, pungent (of food). 
filfil l:Jarraaq hot pepper(s). II ril-l:Jubb· l:Jarraaq love 
makes the heart suffer. -taman l:Jarraaq an exorbitant 
price. 
~~ l:Jurreeqa In pll:Jarariiql blister. 
.j~1 fitl:Jaraq Ivill to be burnt. kunt' sayba 1-lal:Jma 
fil-butagaaz lamma tl:Jaraqit wi-baqit fal:Jm I had left the 
meat in the oven till it burnt to charcoal. fik-kumm 
itl:Jaraq minni I burnt the sleeve by mistake. II fauaab-i 
tl:Jaraqit my nerves are frazzled. 2 to be fired (of cera-
mics). 3 to be frustrated, misfire (of, e.g., a plan). 
II ri/-xabar itl:Jaralj the news leaked out (before its offi-
cial release). -iva mitl:Jiriq. 
.j ~ 
1 finl:Jaraq = fitl:Jaraq. -iva minl:Jiriq. 
.Y.,,;~I fit-tal:Jariiq Inl (hot season of) the Nile's 
lowest water level. 
.j~ l:Jarraq Ilvtl to burn (s.th.) several times or in 
several places. 2 Ivil to burn with passion or lust, suffer 
intense emotional pain. -vn tal:Jriiq; ava/pva mil:Jarraq. 
.j:"':1 fitl:Jarraq Ivil I to be burnt several times or in 
several places. 2 to suffer intense emotional pain. -ava/ 
iva mitl:Jarralj. 
.!l';C, 
.!l.;> l:Jirik ladj *1 dynamic, on-the-ball, quick-witted. 
kaan nifs-i fabqa zayy-u milal:Jlal:J wi-mdardal:J wi-l:Jirik 
w-alallaq fayyuha wal:Jda I wanted to become like him, 
glib, outgoing, quick-witted and able to hook any girl. 
~.;> l:Jaraka In pi -aat, -aatl I movement, motion, 
activity. lamalit-li l:Jaraka b-len-ha w-fihimt'ql¥d-a-ha 
feeh she winked at ~e and I understood what she 
wanted to get across. waqt iI-muulid id-dakakiin tiblja 
200 
fiiha l:Jaraka during the muulid the shops are busy. 
l:Jarakaat 
farqiyya 
{gym] 
floor 
exercises. 
min 
iI-l:Jaraka {athl] from a running start. Ilqism iI-
l:Jaraka 
-( 1 ) 
transport section 
(of a company 
etc.). (2) {communic] operation control section. 
2 movement, fluctuation. l:Jarakit iI-beel the fluctua-
tion in sales.l:Jarakit iI-l:Jisaab (record of) fluctuation in 
a bank account. '3 movement (as a social, political or 
artistic phenomenon). 
fil-l:Jaraka l-wataniyya the 
nationalist movement. 4 trick, deception. lamal fiyya 
l:Jaraka xallaa-ni tra/adt he played a dirty trick on me 
and got me fired. S {mus] movement. 6 group or 
annual promotions, appointments etc. for the civil ser-
vice, diplomatic corps and other official bodies . 
.J.;> l:Jaraki ladj *1 pertaining to a l:Jaraka. II fism' 
l:Jaraki code-name, nom de guerre . 
.!l~ l:Jarrak Ivtl I to move. mif qaadir fal:Jarrak 
diraal-i I can't move my arm. qiwwit id-da/l illi 
bi-tl:Jarrak iI-bistim the driving force that moves the 
piston.lll:Jarrak iI-mumassiliin {theat] to block a play. 
2 to arouse, stimulate, move (emotionally). 3 to stir, 
agitate.l:Jarrak if-Jaay stir the tea! -vn tal:Jriik; ava/pva 
mil:Jarrak. 
~~ tal:Jriika linst n, pi -aatl a movement. 
.!l~ mul:Jarrik In pi -aatl I motor. mul:Jarrikaat id-
diizil diesel engines. 2 propeller. 
.!l:"':1 fitl:Jarrak Ivill to move. ma-titl:Jarrak-f' minhina 
l-lfaayit m-argal don't move from here till I get back! 
2 to be moved. ri/-kursi tl:Jarrak min makaan-u the 
chair has been moved from its place. -vn tal:Jarruk; 
ava/iva mitl:Jarrak . 
.!l:"': tal:Jarruk In pi -aatl {mil] (troop) movement . 
.!l~ mutal:Jarrikf ladjl moveable, mobile. sillim 
mutal:Jarrik escalator. IIkursi mutal:Jarrik wheelchair. 
.!l.;.!l';C, 
.!l.J.;> l:Jurukruk: lala 1-l:Jurukruk barely, only just, as 
in nigil:Jt' bass· lala 1-l:Jurukruk I passed, but only by 
the skin of my teeth. 
";.!l';C, 
.;.S.;> l:Jarkif Ivll to agitate, excite, thrill, stir. -vn 
l:Jarkafa; ava/pva mil:Jarkif. 
.;;s ~1. fitl:Jarkif/vil to be agitated, be excited, be thril-
led, be stirred. - iva mitl:Jarkif. 
r.; C, 
i.;> l:Jurum (a) Ivil to be forbidden. fin kaan ii-beet 
laayiz zeet yil:Jram lala g-gaamil {prov] '" charity be-

gins at home. burmit laleek lift-ak {abus] may you be 
deprived of your life! (abusive reply to baraam or 
baraam laleek). - ava barmaan. 
r? baram I 
(i) Ivtl I to deprive. ma-txalaq-j illi 
yibrim-ni minku the person who could take me away 
from you has yet to be born. 2 {Chr] to excommuni-
caie. - vn birmaan; ava baarim; pva mabruum. 
r? barm Inl {Chr] excommunication. 
4.? burma Inl I Ipl -aatl {trad soc, abus] woman. 
2 Ino pll sanctity, inviolability. ril-buyuut laha burma "" 
every man's home is his castle. 
r? baram 2 Inl I Ifem and mascl wife. Ijaram-i 1-
mu~aana (or I-ma~uun) "" my respected wife. 2 {lsi] 
sacred enclave (as at Mecca and Jerusalem). fit-baram 
if-fariif the sacred enclave at Mecca. 
11 baraman {lsi] a greeting to one who has just finished 
his prayers (i.e. may we pray some day in fit-baram 
if-farii!). - fit-barameen the cities of Mecca and 
Medina . 
.ill.? baramlik Inl {obsol] women's quarters in a tra-
ditional upper-class house. 
rl? baraam I/nl forbidden thing (especially in 
Islam). 
f~uum 
w-a~alli w-m-akul-f bit-baraam 
fabadan I fast and pray and never accept tainted 
money. huwwa baraam lamma fastarayyab fiwayya is it 
a crime if I take a little rest? II da baraam - fana kunti 
naayim it's too bad, I was asleep! - fibn· baraam bas-
tard. 2 ladj invarl illegal, illicit. ril-maal it-baraam iII-
gotten gains.llxitfa baraam "" little bastards. 3 modal of 
reproach. baraam (laleeku) tinsuu-ni bit-marra what a 
shame for you to forget me completely! II baraam laleek 
shame on you! have a heart! 
rl? biraam In pI birimal coarsely woven woollen 
blanket, rug or wrap. 
-rl? baraami In pI -yyal thief.lIlaska~ (or lasaakir) 
wi-baramiyya cops and robbers (children's game). 
-baraami I-balla large black ant. 
f"'!? bariim Inl I women's quarters (in a traditional 
house). 2 Icolll women. lumr-u ma-jaaf bariim (1) he 
has never had anything to do with women. (2) he is 
sexually frustrated. 
~? bariimi ladj invarl pertaining to women. 
manadiil bariimi ladies' kerchiefs. 
r 
~I fitbaram Ivil I to be deprived. fitaah-i m-atbirim 
minha 0 God, may I never lose her! 2 {Chr] to be 
excommunicated. - iva mitbirim. 
r.....,ul finbaram = fitbaram. -iva minbirim. 
r~ barram Ivtl la {lsi] to declare to be baraam (q.v.). 
bi-ybarramu n-nibiit they consider wine baraam. Ib to 
forbid, prohibit. baaba mbarram ik-kutfiina fil-beet 
201 
Daddy has forbidden card-playing in the house. 2 to 
dissuade (s.o. from doing s.th. shameful). laazim 
fabarram-u yisraq taani I must get him to stop stealing. 
- Ipreverb/3 to heed the (bad) results (of doing s. th.), 
be warned off (doing s.th.). finta ma-barramti-j 
tilaakis it-binti di haven't you learnt your lesson and 
stopped teasing that girl? lamalti kida la/aan tibarram 
tibuus il-xaddaama I did that so that you stay away from 
kissing the maid. II/issa ma-barramti-j haven't you 
wised up yet? haven't you learnt your lesson yet? -vn 
tabriim; ava/pva mibarram. 
r~ mubarram In! Muharram, first month of the Mus-
lim year. 
r~1 fitbarram Ivil I {lsi] to be declared baraam 
(q.v.). 2 to be forbidden, be prohibited. II filli f-fiid-u 
mitbarram lalee he's so miserly he can't enjoy his 
wealth. 3 to be dissuaded (from doing s.th. shameful). 
-iva mitbarram. 
r?i fabram Ivil {lsi] to put on the dress of a pilgrim to 
Mecca .• vn fibraam; ava mubrim. 
rl?! fibraam Inl {lsi] I state of ritual preparedness of 
a pilgrim in Mecca. 2 garments worn while on pilgrim-
age to Mecca. 
r,;> 1 fibtaram Ivt/ to respect. fibtirim nafs-ak have 
some self-respect (i.e. behave yourself)! -vn fibtiraam; 
ava mibtirim; pva mubtaram. 
rl,;>1 fibtiraam Inl respect. laazim tilaamil waldit-ak 
bi-btiraam you should treat your mother with respect. 
.:.\,,1,;>1 fibtiramaat Ipl nl respectful greetings. bald 
is-salamaat wit-ibtiramaat after giving greetings and 
paying respects. 
r r 
mubtaram ladj *1 I respectable. raagit mubtaram 
ma-yilmilp kida a respectable man would' not do such 
a thing.llya mubtaram {trad soc] polite form of address 
to a man (also used sarcastically and jokingly). 2 good, 
of good quality or quantity. haat itneen kiitu labma 
mubtarama go and buy two kilos offirst-rate mc;at. kalt i 
kimmiyya mubtarama I ate a good amount. 
r ~I fistabram Ivtl to consider forbidden or shame-
ful. -vn ristibraam; ava mistabram. 
( Jj".Jc.) 
J..? barmallnl African rue (Perganum harmal) (the 
seeds of which are used as incense). 
;u,.? barmala In pI -aatl loose wrap, shawl. 
.:J.; C. 
4J? baran, baran, burun, birin (i, a, u) Ivill to lose 
one's temper, become angry. bi-tibran lalayya kida 
leeh why are you getting annoyed with me? 2 to balk, be 

refractory. fil-IJlqaan ga land i1-mayya w-baran the 
horse got as far as the water and balked. xayfa lalajaan 
ibn-i b-yibran lala (or lan) I-bizz I'm worried because 
my child refuses the breast. -vn bama; ava baarin, 
bamaan. 
~J? baruun ladj invarl I morose, sulky, petulant. 
2 recalcitrant, restive (of a riding animal). 
u!o .!l iJ ..I c:. 
..;5.;? barankaj Icoll nl Cape gooseberries. 
i.S..Ic:. 
loS ~I fitbarra I/vtl to intend, aim at. yitbarra I-
famaana he strives to be honest. 2 Ivil to make an 
investigation. laazim nitbarra lan i1-mufkila e;ab/' ma 
nubkum fiiha we must investigate the problem before 
passing judgement. -vn tabarri; ava mitbarri. 
loS ~ tabarri In pi tabarriyyaatl investigation. bituul 
i/-mabaabis lamalu tabarriyyaat the detectives made 
investigations. -/adverbiallyl fil-bu/i~ xaduu tabarri 
the police took him in for investigation. 
y.ic:. 
'-:';;. bizb In pi fabzaabl I political party. ni;aam 
i/-bizb i1-waabid one-party system. 2 [lsi} 2a one of the 
sixty parts of the Koran. 2b group of prayers known to 
have been recited by a pious person, and whose subse-
quent recital is therefore praiseworthy. bizb iI-babr a 
group of such prayers particularly recited when travel-
ling by sea. 
~;;. bizbi ladjl of or pertaining to a political party. 
,-:,~I fitbazzib Ivil to take sides, become an adherent. 
-vn tabazzub; ava mitbazzib. 
'-:'~ mitbazzib ladj *1 partisan, biased. 
I 
• 
..I..1c:. 
o.JJ3> bazzuura In pi -aatl riddle, puzzle . 
..13> bazzar I Ivil to guess. bazzar fazzar make a guess! 
-ava mibazzar. 
1 
• 
..1..1 c:. 
.J..b. bizirT (a) Ivil to be vigilant, be on one's guard. 
fil-bazar ma-yimnal-J' qadar [prov} no amount ofvigi-
lance can forestall fate. -vn bazar; ava baazir; pva 
mabzuur . 
.J~ bazzar2 Ivtl to warn. - vn tabziir; ava mibazzar. 
.J~I fitbazzar Ivil to be warned. -iva mitbazzar. 
.J~~ baazirT Ivil to be vigilant, be on one's guard. 
baazir min ik-kalb' da watch out for that dog! -vn 
mibazra; ava mibaazir. 
202 
.i .i c:. 
3> bazz I (i) Ivtl I to score, make an incision in. bazz 
iI-l~aaya lajaan yiksar-ha he scored the stick so that 
he could break it. bazz' rae;abt-u he slit his throat. 2 to 
trim. -vn bazz, bazazaan; ava baaziz; pva mabzuuz. 
• bazz' f-nafs-(u) to hurt (s.o.), offend (s.o.). bazz' 
f-nafs-i finnu yiigi I-balad wi-ma-yfut-J' lalayya it hurt 
me that he came to town and didn't drop in to see me. 
-bazz alala ... fid-dibk a fit oflaughter gripped ... , as in 
lamma ftakart in-nukta iii qult'-haa-/i bazz· lalayya 
d-dibk when I remembered the joke you told me I was 
seized by a fit of laughter. 
3> bazz 2 In pi buzuuzl I incision, slit. 2 section of 
sugar cane. 
03> bazza In pi -aatl incision, slit. 
ojl;;. bazaaza In! ill-feeling, hostility. fii bazaaza 
benna there's bad blood between us. 
~I fitbazz Ivil to be incised. -iva mitbazz. 
j3> bazziz Ivtl to slit, score, make an incision in (s.th.) 
several times or in several places. -vn tabziiz; avalpva 
mibazziz. 
j~1 fitbazziz Ivil to be slit or scored several times or in 
several places. - iva mitbazziz. 
J.ic:. 
~;;. bazae;, bizie; (a) Ivtl I to corner, put in a tight 
spot, put pressure on. bazaqt-u xadt' minnu I-filuus 
I cornered him and got the money off him. 2 to take 
short. bazaq-ni d-dibk I couldn't control my laughter. 
fif-Jaxxa bazae;it-u he badly needed to go to the lava-
tory. 3 to tighten. bazaq ir-rubaa{ he tightened the lace. 
- Ivi/4 to bear down, contract the abdominal muscles 
(e.g., to defecate or give birth). -vn bazq, bazaqaan; 
ava baazie;; pva mabzuuq. 
~;;. baze;a Ipl -aatl instance noun of baze;. 
~.:,.'I fitbazae; Ivil passive of bazae;. -iva mitbazae; . 
~3> bazzae; Ivtl to tighten very much or in several 
stages. hiduum-u mbazzaqa his clothes are very tight. 
-vn tabziiq; avalpva milJazzaq. 
~~I fitlJazzae; Ivil to be tightened very much or in 
several stages. - iva mitlJaz~aq . 
I" .i c:. 
r;;' bazam (i) Ivtl to bundle, tie in a bundle. -vn bazm, 
lJazamaan; ava lJaazim; pva mabzuum. 
r;;' lJazm Inl firmness, strictness. 1'i/-lJazm' mif 
malnaa iI-qaswa strictness doesn't mean cruelty . 
4.;;. bizma In pi bizam, lJizmaatl bundle, bunch. 
rl;;. lJizaam In pi l'ilJzima, lJizimai I belt. IIlJizaam 
baladi silk cummerbund. 2 saddle girth. 3 centre band 

of a tennis net. 4 wooden frame of a wrestling floor. 
S decorative rib on the spine of a book. 
rl.;. lJuzaam Inl [mus] mode in Arabic music begin-
ning on E flat having A flat. 
r ~ lJazzim Ivtl I to tie successively in bundles. 2 to 
tighten (a belt). 3 to put a scarf or the like on (s.o. 
preparatory to his or her performing a belly-dance). 
4 to wrap a belt round, put a belt on (s.th. or s.o.). 
II[uC;dit talJziim barmiil barrel belt hitch. -vn talJziim; 
ava/pva milJazzim. 
~~ talJziima Ipl -aatl instance noun of talJziim. 
r j-'I fitlJazzim Ivil I to be tied successively into bun-
dles. 2 to be tightened (of a belt). 3 to tie a scarf around 
one's hips preparatory to performing a belly-dance. 
4 to put on a belt or have a belt put on. -ava/iva 
mitlJazzim. 
oJj C 
~.;. lJizin (a) Ivill to become sad. lJizint· [alee lamma 
fult· lJalt-u I grieved for him when I saw the state he 
was in. 2 to mourn, go into mourning. -vn lJuzn; ava 
lJaznaan. 
11 la ... wala yalJzanuun neither ... nor anything at all. la 
liC;Yu lJaraami wala yalJzanuun they didn't find a thief or 
anything of the sort. la lu maal wala yalJzanuun he has 
nothing to his name. 
~.;. lJuzn, lJizn In pi falJzaanl sorrow, grief. kutr 
il-lJuzn i y[allim il-buka [prav] much grief teaches one 
to weep. - Ino pll 2 mourning. muddit il-lJuzn the 
period of mourning. 
.:.r...;. lJaziin ladj pi lJazaanal I sad, sorrowful. c;alb-i 
lJaziin I'm unhappy. gat il-lJaziina tilralJ ma-Iac;itji laha 
matralJ [prav] = one who is born to suffer will find no 
opportunity to rejoice. II fig-gum[a l-lJaziina [Chr] 
Good Friday. 2 in mourning. 
«.¢I.;. lJazayni ladj invarl gloomy, doleful. narama 
lJazayni a sad tune. 
~:rt malJzana Inl I mourning, state of mourning. 
fi-balad-na l-malJzana lir-riggaala win-niswaan talatt 
iyyaam in our town mourning for both men and women 
lasts three days. 2 place of mourning. 
~~ lJazzin Ivtl to make sad, grieve. man;ar-hum 
yilJazzin the sight of them makes one grieve. -vn 
talJziin; ava/pva milJazzin. 
~j-'I fitlJazzin Ivil to be made sad, be grieved. -iva 
mitlJazzin. 
~jc 
.I.i. lJiza I Inl [mil] straight ranking. fuc;alfil-lJiza line 
up with the others! 2 ladvl [mil] in line, abreast. 
lOl 
fil-lasaakir wac;fiin lJiza the soldiers are standing in 
line. 
I.i. .I.,b. lJada J , lJida I Iw pron suff lJidaa- (lst pers 
sing lJadaaya)1 preposition indicating location (cf Latin 
apud, Fr chez, and land 1). fil-bitt illi c;acda lJdaak the 
girl sitting next to you. fitneen min lJadaana two of our 
people. tilac;ii-ha lJida I-xut[ariyya you'll find it at the 
greengrocer's. 
~jl. lJaaza [mil] I Ivt/la to make (soldiers) stand in 
line. lJaazi I-[asaakir di have these soldiers stand in 
straight lines. Ib to stand in line with. lJaazi I-laskari iii 
ganb-ak line up with the soldier beside you. 2 Ivil to 
dress ranks. -vn lJiza, milJaziyya; ava milJaazi. 
~j~1 fitlJaaza Ivil [mil] I to dress ranks. 2 to be stood 
in line with. -avaliva mitlJaazi. 
"':"lJ"'c 
___ lJasab I (i) Ivtl 1 to calculate, reckon. bi-yilJsib 
i;-talJmiil Gala I-limdaan he calculates the load on the 
pillars. lamma b-tiigi tilJsib-Iu t[-t[araayib ... when you 
come to reckon his taxes .... 2 to consider, regard. 
laazim tilJsib lJisaab lin-naas you must take (other) peo-
ple into consideration. ma-b-alJsib-kumji riggaala 
I don't regard you as men. 3 to think, believe, be under 
the impression that. lJasabt-u-kum xaragtu I thought 
you'd gone out. filli lJasabt-u lac;eet-u I found things to 
be just as I had expected. -vn lJisaab; ava lJaasib; pva 
malJsuub. 
..... l..- lJisaab In/l Ivnlll bi-lJsaab carefully, cautiously, 
~s in b-aakul bi-lJsaab lafaan m-atxanj I eat 
cautiously so that I won't get fat. - min reer lJisaab 
(1) incautiously. recklessly. (2) in great abundance. 
-lamal lJisaab to take into account, consider, as in 
filmil lJisaab illi waraak have some thought for those 
behind you! finta ma-b-tilmilji lJsaab li-lJadd you 
don't give a damn about anyone. raagi/ yitlimil-Iu 
lJsaab a man to be reckoned with. 2 Ipl -aatl account, 
bill. lJisaab gaari current account. fidaarit il-lJisabaat 
il-[amma accounts office. lala lJsaab-u at his expense. 
fiddeet-u lJsaab-u I paid him (what was due to him). 
lI,I'art talJt il-lJisaab payment on account. -kull-u bi-
lJsaab-u everything has it's price. -bi-yiftayalli-lJsaab-u 
he is self-employed. 3 Ino pll arithmetic. 
.Jl..- lJisaabi ladj/l of or pertaining to calculating or 
a~ithmetic. falaat lJisabiyya calculating machines. 
II lumla (or gineeh) lJisaabi foreign currency transferable 
only to Egypt and in Egyptian currency (e.g., the 
Sudanese pound). 2 resting on assumption, supposed, 
presumed. 

...-l> fJaasib 11 ladjl calculating, calculatory. makana 
fJasba calculator. mas[ara fJasba slide rule. 2 In pi -aatl 
calculator, calculating machine. IIfJaasib riliktirooni 
computer. 
,-:,,,.,s mafJsuub 
In 
pI mafJasiibl 
protege. 
rana 
mafJsuub-ak I'm yours to command. ril-mafJsuub 
mansuub wi-law kaan malyuub [prov j ... you are worth 
as much as your patronage.llmafJsuub-ak ... yours tru-
ly, as in da fat;iir xaa/~ zayy' mafJsuub-ak he's a very 
poor man just like me. 
~".,s mafJsubiyya 
In! 
1 favouritism. 
rif-Jirka 
kull-a-ha mafJsubiyya the company works entirely on 
favouritism. 2 Ipl-aatl instance of favouritism. rif-Jirka 
kull-a-ha mafJsubiyyaat everything in the company is 
done through influence. 
..r.- fJasbi ladjl of or pertaining to accounting. 
II ril-maglis il-fJasbi office of the judiciary which super-
vises the financial affairs of wards of the court. 
~ 
fJisba Inl calculation. II ril-mablalf fJisba basii[a 
the sum is paltry. -fJisbit birma complicated problem . 
.J~ fJisbaan Inl surmise, expectation. da ma-kan-f' 
f-fJisbaan-i that's something I hadn't expected at aU. 
.....- fJasab 2 1 (also la/a fJasab) Iprepl according to. 
kull' waafJid fJasab rutbit-u each one according to his 
rank. tartiib fabgadi fJasab il-murallifiin alphabetical 
order by author. 2/n/: ril-fJasab win-nasab social 
standing. 
~ fJasab ma, la/a fJasab ma Iconjl as, as in la/a fJasab ma 
tfJibb' hiyya as she herself wants, la/a fJasab ma 
z:zibuun laayiz as the customer wants. 
.JJI .....- fJasab alia Iprop nl male given name.llfirt;it 
fJasab alia [derisj brass band of old men and even older 
instruments such as is often hired to play at peasant 
weddings etc. -mazziikit fJasab alia the music played by 
such a band. 
......- fJasiib ladj *1 of noble birth. II ril-fJasiib in-nasiib 
epithet of anyone descended from the Prophet 
Muhammad. 
......:- fJassiib In pI fJassiiba/ one good at calculating. di 
lil-mawludiin mif lil-fJassiiba [provj (good fortune is) 
for those who have it provided by God, not for those 
who scheme and plan. 
~I ritfJasab Ivil 1 to be calculated. ril-ragaaza 
I-larc{a b-titfJisib min il- ragaaza s-sanawiyya compas-
sionate leave is counted a part of one's annual leave. 
IIsaala ma-titfJisib-f' mil-lumr (a time that is not reck-
oned as part of one's life span) a wonderful time. 2 to be 
considered. -iva mitfJisib. 
..--;1 rinfJasab = ritfJasab. -iva minfJisib. 
204 
.....- fJassib Ivt/ to entrust (s.o.) to the protection (of, 
e.g., God or a saint). fJassibt-u bin-nabi I have en-
trusted him to the protection of the Prophet Muham-
mad (said by a mother when putting her child to sleep). 
-avalpva mifJassib. 
~I ritfJassib Ivil to be entrusted to the protection 
(of, e.g., God or a saint). -iva mitfJassib. 
...-l> fJaasib 2 1 Ivt/ to settle an account with. laayir. 
rafJasb-ak la/a fJaagit il-beet I want to settle with you 
for the shopping. fi-yoom mil-rayyaam fJ-afJasb-ak 
laia-lli lmalt-u one of these days I'm going to settle up 
with you for what you did. 2 Ivil to take care, be careful. 
fJaasib watch it! be careful! fJaasib lalayya treat me 
gently! II fJaasib hina ya-s[a stop here, driver! -vn 
mifJasba; ava mifJaasib. 
4,-6e mufJasba Inl accounting, accountancy . 
...-6e mufJaasib In *1 accountant.llmufJaasib qanuuni 
chartered accountant. 
...-t.::1 ritfJaasib Ivil 1 to settle accounts with one 
another. 
ma-fafu-hum-f' 
w-humma 
b-yisrat;u 
fafuu-hum wi-humma b-yitfJasbu [provj (they didn't 
see them stealing but they saw them dividing up the 
swag) ... wrongdoers may not be caught in the act, but 
the consequences of their action will always betray 
them. 2 to have an account settled. -avaliva mitfJaasib. 
~ IJ"'C 
...I....> fJasad I (iJ Ivt/ 1 to envy. rafJsid-ak lalee I envy 
you it. 2 to put the evil eye on. ma-tb~~'-lii-f t;awi 
la-tifJsid-ni don't look at me so hard oryou'U put the evil 
eye on me. -vn fJasad, fJasadaan; ava fJaasid; pva 
mafJsuud. 
...I....> fJasad 2 /nl 1 envy. 2 the evil eye. 
~"..- fJasuud ladj pi fJussaadl.l envious. wa/ad xabiis 
fJasuud bi-yikrah-hu~ lafaan l'afJsan minnu a low, en-
vious boy who hates them because they are better than 
he. lumr il-fJasuud ma ysuud the envious never gain 
ascendancy. 2 having the evil eye. teen il-fJasuudfiiha 
luud may the evil-eyed be struck blind! (a formula 
against the evil eye). 
..s~"..- fJasuudi ladj *1 1 envious. 2 having the evil 
eye. 
~t.:- fJassaad In *1 one having the evil eye. fJ~waaya 
f-leen il-fJassaada ... may the evil-eyed woman be 
struck blind! (a formula against the evil eye). 
~I ritfJasad Ivil 1 to be envied. 2 to be made a victim 
of the evil eye. -iva mitQisid . 
~I rinfJasad = l'itfJasad. -iva minfJisid . 
• 

.JIJ"C 
~ 
l:Jasar (u) Ivtl to cause grief to (s.o., usually by 
loss). ga 1-l:Jaraami l:Jasar-ni lal-ljirfeen illi kaanu landi 
a thief came and broke my heart by taking (all) the 
money I had. -vn l:Jasaraan; ava l:Jaasir; pva mal:Jsuur. 
• ~ 
l:Jasra In! deep grief or regret.l:Ja-tmuut bi-l:Jasrit-
ha she will die of grief. lIya l:Jasra [women} a mild 
exclamation of regret ... oh dear! alas! -ya l:Jasra lala ... 
woe betide ... ! 
~I fitl:Jasar Ivil I passive of l:Jasar. 2 to feel great 
grief. -ava/iva mitl:Jisir. 
.ro-il finl:Jasar = fitl:Jasar. finja-lla ma-tinl:Jisrii-jlala 
l:Jadd i min l:Jabayb-ak [women in trad soc} may you 
never suffer the loss of any of your dear ones. - ava/iva 
minl:Jisir. 
;- l:Jassar Ivtl to make (s.o.) feel sorry or regretful. 
jaljljit-ha 1-l:Jilwa l:Jassarit-ni lala nafs-i her nice flat 
made me feel sorry for myself. -ava/pva mil:Jassar. 
;.s mil:Jassar ladj ·1 mean, miserly. 
;.-a I fitl:Jassar Ivil to feel sorrowful, feel regretful. 
maal baxt-a-ha wi-b-titl:Jassar lala nafs-a-ha dilwaljti 
her luck turned and now she feels sorry for herself. baBG 
larabiyyit-u b-rwg it-turaab wi-dilwaljti b-yitl:Jassar 
laleeha he sold his car dirt cheap and now he regrets it. 
-ava mitl:Jassar. 
I IJ" IJ" C 
..;- l:Jass I (i) Ivill to experience a physical sensation. 
l:Jasseet bi-sUljUliyyit iI-filuus I felt the cold touch of the 
coins. b-al:Jiss i b-ljalb-i bi-yduljlj i gaamid I feel my 
heart pounding. 2 to have an emotional feeling or 
psychological awareness. l:Jaasis bil-wil:Jda he's feeling 
lonely. leeh dayman b-al:Jiss inni faljall i min in-naas 
why do I always feel that I'm beneath other people? 
Illjalb-i l:Jaasis I have a premonition. -l:Jiss"lala damm-
ak (or lala lal:Jm-ak) ... you ought to be ashamed of 
yourself! 3 to become aware. lamma riglu bet-hum 
l:Jassu bil-l:Jaraami when they arrived back home they 
sensed the presence ofthe thief. raagil ma-bi-yl:Jiss i-jan 
insensitive man. -vn l:Jasasaan; ava lJaasis; pva 
mal:Jsuus. 
;":'\.. l:Jassa In pll:Jawaassl sense: riI-l:Jawaass iI-xamsa 
the five senses.landu l:Jaaga zayy iI-l:Jassa s-sadsa he has 
almost a sixth sense. II raal:Jit l:Jawass-i I lost all sensation 
(an expression of shock). - fana b-axdim-ak bi-kull i 
l:Jawass-i I serve you with everything I have. 
IJ"~ mal:Jsuus ladjl concrete, tangible. Ilkalaam 
mal:Jsuus double entendre. -kallimt-u bil-mal:Jsuus 
I gave him indirect hints. 
20S 
..r- l:Jiss In! I voice. ma-tlallii-jl:Jiss-ak don't raise 
your voice. 2 sound. l:Jiss iI-mutoor the noise of the 
engine. 3 effective presence (of s.o. or s.th.). (Uul ma 
l:Jiss-ak fid-dinya as long as you're alive. fana (ayyib 
bi-l:Jiss-ak lowe all my well-being to you.lIl:Jiss-ak ... 
watch out for ...• as in l:Jiss-ak iI-baab mind the door! 
-l:Jiss-ak leen-ak (or l:Jiss-ak biss-ak [joe}) ... just you 
dare! -Ia l:Jiss i wala xabar ... neither sight nor sound, as 
in feen-ak ya raagilla l:Jiss i wala xabar where have you 
been? there's been no sight or sound of you for ages. 
-lala l:Jiss ... on the strength of one's relationship with 
. .. , as in fana b-atlaamil {1S-SUUlj lala l:Jiss-ak I carry on 
my business by virtue of your good name, fiIYana lala 
l:Jiss iI-mal:Jall he became rich thanks to the shop. 
~ 
l:Jissi ladj ·1 sensuous. raagill:Jissi a man who lives 
to indulge the senses. 
:(.:- l:Jissiyya Inl sensibility, sensitivity, feeling. 
~L- l:Jasasiyya In pI -aatl I sensitivity, feeling. 
2 [path) allergy. 
~ 
l:Jasiis ladj ·1 sensitive (of people). 
..,..t.:- l:Jassaas ladjl I sensitive. mizaan l:Jassaas fine 
balance. bi-yitl:Jifir bi- fibra l:Jassaasa it is etched out 
with a sensitive needle. 2 [phot} sensitized (of plate or 
paper). 
~ 
l:Jassis Ivtl I to cause to feel. l:Jassisit-ni finnaha 
mif layza tfuf-ni she made me feel that she didn't want 
to see me. 2 to sensitize. jUlflit-u finnu yl:Jassis 
wi-ygaffif iz-zinka f-nafs iI-waljt its job is to sensitize 
and dry the plate simultaneously. -/vil 3 to give a light 
touch. maddeet fiid-i fal:Jassis lala buuz ig-gazma 
fajuuf-u aabbalj walla lissa I stretched out my hand to 
feel the toe of the shoe and see if it had creased yet. 4 to 
grope, feel one's way. kaan iI-ljamar lfaayib wi-l:Jassisna 
I-lfaayit ma w~ilna there was no moon so we felt our way 
along till we got there. -vn tal:Jsiis; ava/pva mil:Jassis. 
..,...:..a I fitl:Jassis Ivill to be made to feel. fitl:Jassist inni 
mif marlfuub fiyya I was made to feel that I was not 
wanted. 2 to be sensitized. 3 (impersonal) passive of 
l:Jassis 3. fig-gibna di mitl:Jassis laleeha this cheese has 
been handled. -iva mitl:Jassis. 
";-i fal:Jasst = l:Jass. -vn fil:Jsaas. 
..,..L-! fil:Jsaas In! I/pl -aatl feeling, sense. landu 
fil:Jsaas bit-lulfa he has a feeling for language. fii fil:Jsaas 
land iI-muwa;;afik-kibiir finn iI-larabiyya mUka/fa Iii 
top officials seem to think that cars are a reward for 
them personally. 2 Ipl fal:Jasiisl sensibility. ya but i min 
iggawwiz wal:Jda tifham fil:Jsaas-u how lucky is he who is 
married to a woman who understands his feelings! 
II ma-landuu-j fil:Jsaas or huwwa ladiim iI- fil:Jsaas he is 
insensitive. 

Z.o.)" 0.)" C 
.:- Ijass 1 (i) Ivtl to urge. t/.amiir-i Ijass-i-ni lala 1-
iltiraaf my conscience urged me to confess. - vn Ijass . 
.;.. Ijass 3 linterjl cry urging a dog to attack. Ijass or 
Ijassa lalee go get him! 
J r 0.)" C 
r-- Ijasam T (i) Ivtl to settle (s.th.) decisively. 
kilmiteen minnu yiljsimu I-mas!'ala a couple of words 
from him would settle the question once and for all. 
qqraar Ijaasim a decisive resolution. -vn Ijasm; ava 
Ijaasim; pva maljsuum. 
r-- Ijasm T Inl resoluteness, resolution. b-ymaaris 
mas!'uliyyaat-u b-surla w-bi-Ijasm he carries out his 
responsibilities quickly and resolutely. 
r-"' 1 I'itljasam Ivil to be settled decisively. -iva 
mitljisim. 
~I !'inljasam = I'itljasam. -ivn minljisim. 
Z ro.)"C 
r""- Ijusuum Inl first seven days of the Coptic month 
of Baramhat, popularly believed to be a bad time for 
planting. 
.;:.,\.,."..- Ijusumaat = Ijusuum. 
oJo.)"C 
.:r- Ijusn Inl excellence, (good) quality. Ijusn iI-
xidma the excellence of the service.llljusn is-suuC; wala 
Ijusn iI-bit/.aala {prov] ... a good market is more profit-
able than having good merchandise. -sitt iI-ljusn (wig-
gamaal) (I) fairy-tale princess or heroine. (2) {bot] 
bella-donna. - {aabll Il-Ijusn dImple ID the chin. 
.:r- Ijasan T ladjl good. Ijasan ~-~uura good-looking. 
Ijasan is-seer wis-suluuk of good conduct and be-
haviour. nawayaa Ijasana he has good intentions. 
;;.;,..- Ijasana In pi -aatl 1 good deed, charitable act, 
alms. dool mabsu{iin wi-Ijasanit bet-hum kitiir they're 
well-off and give a lot to charity. Ijasana c;aliila timnal 
balaawi ktiira (beggars) a little charity wards off many 
troubles! Ijasana w-!'ana sild-ak {prov] ... people ask 
you for charity and yet behave as though they were your 
master. 
2 good 
aspect, 
pleasant 
characteristic. 
!,iz-zawaag Ijasanaat-u !'aktar min sayyi!'aat-u the good 
aspects of marriage outnumber the bad. 3 mole, beauty 
spot. 
.:r-i I'aljsan I 1 lell betterlbest. ma-ntii-j !'aljsan 
minni you are no better than I. I'aljsan film' fil-balad 
the best film in town. limm' Isaan-ak !'aljsan-Iak you'd 
better curb your tongue! 2/conj, also laljsanl 
206 
2a because. haatu 1- I'utumbiil !'aljsan iI-beeh misaafir 
get the car, because the bey is going on a journey. 
2b lest. I'iskut !'aljsan yismal-ak be quiet or he'll hear 
you. 3/advl perhaps, maybe (usually indicating worry 
or fear). !'aljsan tikuun fi{sit taljt iI-larabiyya she may 
possibly have been run over by the car! 4 linterjl ... 
serves you (him, her etc.) right! 
11 I'aljsan ma Iconjl rather than. I'asib-hum xaa/~ !'aljsan 
m-aliij benhum bi-mazalla I would rather leave them 
altogether than live among them in humiliation. 
~"..- Ijusuniyya Inl (good) quality. 
~! riI-ljuseen 
1 el-Husayn, grandson of the 
Prophet Muhammad. gaamil (or ma/had) iI-ljuseen the 
Mosque of el-Husayn in Cairo, between el-Azhar and 
Khan el-Khalili. 2 riI-ljuSeen or Ijayy li-Ijuseen district 
immediately surrounding the mosque of el-Husayn. 
~ 
Ijuseeni Iml {mus] 1 mode in Arabic music be-
ginning on D and having C half flat and E half flat. 
Ijuseeni la/iraan mode in Arabic music beginning on A 
and having B half flat and E half flat. 2 second pair of 
strings on a luud (the A strings). 
~I riI-ljiseniyya Iprop nl the district immediately 
surrounding the mosque of el-Husayn in Cairo. 
.;;.- Ijassin Ivtl to improve, ameliorate. l'iI-m~nal da 
Ijassin !,intaag-u c;awi this factory has greatly improved 
its production. -vn taljsiin; avalpva miljassin. 
.;:.,~ tal.Jsinaat Ipl nl improvements. l'iI-mal.Jall' 
mac;fuul lit-taljsinaat 
the 
shop 
is 
closed 
for 
improvements. 
~I I'itljassin 
Ivil 
1 to 
improve. 
I'ig-gaww' 
ma-yitljassin-j' ktiir c;abl' fabraayirthe weather doesn't 
improve much before February. 2 to be improved. -vn 
taljassun; avaliva mitl.Jassin . 
~ 
tal.Jassun In pi -aatl improvement. 
.:r-i !'aljsan1lvil to do well. !'aljsantwelldone! l'ittiC;i 
/arra man !'al.Jsanta rilee {prov] beware the evil ofthose 
to whom you do good! -vn l'il.Jsaan; ava miljsin, 
muljsin. 
11 I'aljsan lala to give alms to. 
.;\......1 !'iljsaan Inl 1 charity. 2 {lsi] highest degree of 
faith and works that can be achieved by a Sufi. 
~ 
muljsin In °1 charitable person. beet iI-muljsin 
lamaar {prov] the charitable man's house prospers. II ... 
wi-kaan allaah yil.Jibb iI-mul.Jsiniin ...... and that was the 
end of that, ... and nothing could be done about it (a 
rueful comment at the end of a tale of mishaps and 
misfortunes) . 
.;,--:;-1 !,istal.Jsin Ivtl to select as better or best. 
Ij-astaljsin-Iak I'ayy' c;a{r' ywafc;-ak I'll pick out for you 
the train that suits you best. -vn !,istiljsaan; ava 

mislabsin; pva muslabsan r. 
~ 
yuslabsan limperf preverbl it would be prefer-
able to, it would be better to. yuslabsan I~ba badri it'd 
be better if you got up early. yuslabsan ma-Igii-J hina 
laani you'd better not come here again. min il-
muslabsan it is preferable, as in min il-muslabsan (finn) 
il-bagga lilbis fabyaq it is preferable for a woman pil-
grim to wear white. -vn fislibsaan; ava mislabsin; pva 
muslabsan r . 
.!l.JV"r 
.!l,,-- baswik Ivil to be pernickety, fuss. -vn baswaka; 
ava mibaswik. 
I 
• 
.JV"r 
.r- bajar (u, i) Ivtl to force, stuff. bajar fiid-u 
fil-xurm i ma-[rif-Ji ytalla[-ha he stuffed his hand into 
the hole and couldn't pull it out. daxal bajr it fitted in 
only with difficulty. II bi-yubjur (fil- fakl) he stuffs him-
self (with food). - feejbajar-ak ma[aana what gives you 
the right to interfere with us? -vn bajr; ava baajir; pva 
mabjuur. 
11 bajar nafs-u to interfere. bi-yubjur nafs-u f-kull d 
baaga he interferes in everything. 
1oS.;-> bifari ladj *1 interfering, nosey. ma-libqaa-J 
bifari w-liddaxxal fi-lli ma-Iik-Ji fii don't be nosey and 
interfere in what's none of your business. 
~I filbajar Ivill to interfere. filbajar fil-xinaaqa he 
interfered in the fight. baddi yilbifir-Ii will someone 
stand up for me? 2 to be wedged, be stuck, be forced 
(into s.th.). riI-muflaab ilbajar fil-qiflthe key got stuck 
in the lock. - avaliva milbifir. 
.r."" I finl.Jajar = fill.Jajar. -avaliva minl.Jifir. 
.r- bajjar Ivtl to pack, stuff with.l.Jajjaru z-zakaayib 
(bi)-qu[n they stuffed the sacks with cotton. -vn lal.Jjiir; 
a~a/pva mil.Jajjar. 
~I fill.Jajjar Ivil to be packed, be stuffed. - iva 
mill.Jajjar. 
. 
.;->i fal.Jjar J Ivtl [women] to cause to interfere. feeh 
illi fal.Jjar-ak benhum whatever made you interfere with 
them? 
l.J~r 
o ~ 
l.Jajara In pI -aalll insect. 2 insignificant person, 
nonentity. 
1oS.;-> bajari ladjl 
insectile, 
insecti-. 
mubidaal 
bajariyya insecticides. 
(.J~r 
[.';-> l.Jajrag Ivil I to become hoarse (of the voice). 
207 
fil-bard i xalla ~OOI-U bajrag his cold made his voice 
hoarse. 2 to gasp for breath (of one suffocating). 
II bajragir il-moor the death rattle. -vn bajraga; ava 
mibajrag. 
[.~I firl.Jajrag = bajrag. -ava mirl.Jajrag. 
~~r 
.;.... l.Jajj (i) Ilvtl to cut or mow (grass, clover etc.). 
filii yfiiq mil-bahaayim nibifj-u driis what's left after the 
animals have grazed we cut to make into dried fodder . 
fin kunr i f-balad yi[bidu g-gal.Jf l.Jiff wi-ddii-Iu ]prov] 
(when in a country where they worship the ass, cut 
some grass and feed him) ... when in Rome do as the 
Romans do.lIl.Jajj wis[-u bin-nabbuur he felled him with 
his club. - fil-bee[a di bajjir wis[-i (or qahr-i) this deal 
left me flat broke. 2 Ivil to eat large quantities. qa[ad 
yibiff I-yaayir ma xall~ i1-fakli kull-u he kept on guz-
zling until he finished all the food. -vn bajj; ava baaFif; 
pva mal.Jjuuf. 
~ 
bajiif Icoll nlllpl bajaayifl grass(es). 2 Ino pll 
hashish. II baxx a l.Jajiif devilish kids. 
~ 
l.Jajiifa Inl I = l.Jajiif. - lunit n, pI -aarl 2 a 
blade of grass. 3a a piece of hashish. 3b a variety of 
hashish . 
. 
.;.L:- l.Ja//aajln *11 habitual hashish-smoker. 2 [ioc] 
one who is ingenious, artful and humorous in the way of 
hash!sh-smokers. II kalaam l.Jajjajiin weird ideas. 
~l-. l.Jajjaafi ladj invarll of or pertaining to hash-. 
ish smokers. 2 extraordinarily ingenious and imagina-
tive. nukar bajjaaji amazing jokes. 
~ 
mibajja, mabajja In pI -aall medium-sized sickle 
(for cutting grass, clover etc.). 
~I firbajj Ivil to be cut (of grass etc.). - iva mirl.Jajf. 
. 
~I finbajj = filbajf. -iva minbajf. 
...,.:....- l.Jajjif/vi/l to take hashish. 2 to graze on grass. 
xud il-yanam ribajjif [ag-gisr take the sheep to graze 
along the bank. -vn ral.Jjiif; ava mil.Jajjif. 
J~r 
....A.... l.Jajaf Icoll nl encrustation of seaweed etc. on 
ships' bottoms, fouling. 
~ 
mil.Jajjif ladjl seaweed-encrusted, fouled. 
r~r 
~ 
bajam I (i) Ivtl to keep (s.o.) on a short leash, 
keep (s.o.) under control. fibjim banaar-ak make your 
daughters behave respectably! -vn l.Jajamaan; ava 
l.Jaajim. 
~ 
bifma Inl decency, modesty. ya banaar sib-ku 
mil-bifma - bukra ifiibu don't be so modest, girls -

tomorrow you'll be old and grey! fit-fa(jr' bifma 
wit-lizz' bahdala [prov] poverty (induces) reserve; 
wealth, flamboyance. -/adjectivallyl raagit bifma a de-
cent man. sitt' bifma a modest woman. 
~ 
bafam 2 lcoll nI entourage. xadam wi-bafam ser-
vants and followers-on. 
r:~ mabaafimJ Ipl nl genitals. 
~I fitbaffim 
Ivil 
to behave modestly. 
-ava 
mitbaffim. 
.J ..;. c. see I IS ..;. C. : bafw, bafwa 
I IS ..;. c. 
...r- bafa I (i) Ivtll to stuff. bafa I-martaba b-(ju{n he 
stuffed the mattress with cotton.llkurumb' ya-lli til:Jfi 
[vendor's cry] cabbage, you who (want to) make mal:Jfi! 
-ma;l-Iak mal:Jfi hduum (or baafi nafs-ak hiduum) kida 
leeh why ever are you bundled up in so many clothes? 
2 to fill (8 tooth). 3 to load (a rifle). -vn bafw; ava 
baafi; pva mal:Jfi. 
".:- bafw Inll stuffing, padding. jakittafitwi b-bafw a 
padded winter jacket. II rurzit iI-baj'w [needlew} satin-
stitch. -da fustaan bilw' (jawi. - fir-rakk a lal-bafw 
'That's a very pretty dress.' 'It's the person inside that 
makes the clothes!' 2 filling (for teeth). 3 panelling. 
bafw' bubaybi chipboard panelling. II bafw' baladi style 
of intricate panel work employing interlocking geomet-
ric designs traditionally fitted withou.t nails or glue, 
used for doors, mosque pulpits etc. (see PI.G, 9). 
i"':- bafwa lunit n, pi -aatll a filling (for a tooth). 2 a 
piece of panelling. 
..rs mal:Jfi Icoll nl stuffed vegetables. mabfi kurJlmb 
stuffed cabbage (leaves). 
~~ mal:Jfiyyaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a stuffed vegetable 
or vegetable leaf. 
1...:- bafa 2, bifa In, in constr bafaa- or bafaat-/I guts, 
belly. yim/irib fi-bafaat-u [women} may he be struck in 
his guts! 2 offspring.llya bafaa-ya [women} 0 my poor 
child! 
.1...:-i fal:Jfaaf Ipl nI internal organs of the body. 
~I fitbafa Ivil I to be stuffed. 2 to be filled (of a 
tooth). 3 to be loaded (of a rifle). - iva mitbifi. 
~I finbafa = fitbafa. -iva mi"Wi. 
...r- baffa Ivtl to stuff repeatedly or forcefully. (jalad 
yibaffi fig-garb' lamma d-damm' wi(jif he went on 
packing the wound till the blood stopped. -vn tal:Jfiyya; 
avalpva mibaffi. 
lIS ..;. c. 
~l. bafya In pi bawaafil marginal note, annotation. 
208 
l.z.l. baafa: baafa 1i-lIaah God forbid! 
~~I fitbaafa Ivtl to avoid, shun. kull-u-hum 
fil-m~/aba b-yitbafuu-ni everybody in the agency is 
avoiding me. -avalpva mitbaafi. 
I~c. see 1.J~c.:b~a 
.J1~c. 
ISJ\.-
b~aawi ladj/: 
bumaar 
b~aawi hinny. 
IImuxx-u b~aawi he's stupid and rash . 
Y~c. 
~ 
b~ba InI measles. b~ba falmaani German 
measles . 
~ 
b~iab Ivil to come down with measles. law 
ibn-ak b~iab labbis-u fabmar if your son gets measles 
dress him in red. -vn tabiiib; ava mib~iab. 
~I fitb~iab = b~iab. - ava mitb~iab. 
~~c. 
~. b~ad (u) Ivtl to harvest (wheat, barley, rice and 
mature clover). filii tizral bi- fiid-ak tubiud bi- fiid-ak 
[prov} "" as you sow, so shall you reap. -vn b~d, 
b~aad; ava ba~id; pva mabiuud. 
i~ 
b~iida Inl [agric] I cropped land before the 
stubble has been ploughed in. 2 harvest time (especial-
ly for wheat). 
i.)L.:-
b~iaada In pi -aatl (mechanical) harvester. 
~I fitb~ad Ivil to be harvested. -iva mitbiiid. 
...I..a.:oW1 
finb~ad = fitb~ad. -iva minbiiid. 
.)~c. 
~ 
b~ar (u) Ivtl I to narrow down, restrict, limit. 
riI-muxbir b~ar if-Jubha fil-xaddaama the detective 
narrowed suspicion down to the maid. fibna layziin 
nubiur iI-xinaa(ja we want to keep the quarrel within 
bounds. 2 to determin~ the extent or quantity of. 
fil-bukuuma layza t~biur ladad iI-fummiyyiin the 
government wants to determine the number of illiter-
ates. ma-I(uu)-J b~r beyond counting, innumerable. 
II b~r it-tirka [leg} taking inventory of a legacy for legal 
purposes. 3 to take short. riI-mayya b~arit-u he badly 
needed to relieve himself. fakk a b~rJ to urinate, have 
a pee. -vn b~r; ava ba~ir; pva mabiuur. 
1S.;4> bll1ari In pi -yyal reed mat maker . 
.;\.- bll1aar InI[mus} (the note) A flat. 
,r--
b~iir Icoll nl woven reed matting. 
i,r--
b~iira Inll/pi bll1r, b~aayirl reed mat.lIlala 
I-b~iira penniless, flat broke. - b~iirit gibna rush sieve 
for straining curds. -b~iirit ii-ieefwasla [prov} (sum-
mer's mat is broad) there's always room for guests in 

the summer (because one can put a mat down anywhere 
and sleep on it). -kureek l.J~iira hydraulic car-lift. 2 Ipl 
l.J~iirl[naut} bottom part of the hull of a sailing boat. 
~I ritl.J~ar Ivil passive of l.J~ar. -iva mitl.J~ir. 
r-il rinl.J~ar = ritl.J~ar. -iva minl.J~ir. 
;P~ l.Ja~ir Ivtl to surround, contain, besiege. 
!'il-buli~ l.Ja~ir il-muharribiin the police surrounded 
the smugglers. firfiit il-mataafi l.J~rit in-naar the fire-
men contained the fire. -vn l.J~aar, mul.J~ra; avalpva 
mil.Ja~ir; pva muI.Ja~ar t . 
)L-. l.J~aar In pi -aatl siege. 
' 
;p~1 ritl.Ja~ir Ivil to be surrounded, be contained, be 
besieged. -iva mitl.Ja~ir. 
r.J IJ'l' C 
r.r-
l.J~ram 1 Ivtl to prevent the ripening of (grapes 
or dates). rig-gaww8 l.J~ram il-linab the weather 
spoiled the grapes. 2 Ivil to become sour or otherwise 
unpleasant in taste. -ava mil.J~ram. 
r.r-
l.J~rum Icoll nI unripe grapes or dates. 
IJ'l' IJ'l' C 
~ 
1.J~~a In 
pll.J~~1 1 class period. landina 
n-nahar-da 1.J~~it riyaaqa we have a mathematics class 
today. 
2 share, 
allotment. 
1.J~~it 
il-muwa~~af 
fit-tarminaat l-igtimaliyya the employee's social insur-
ance contribution. 1.J~~it-ak kaam fir-ruz1. how much is 
your share of the rice? 
I JIJ'l'C 
J.-
l.J~al (a) lvil to happen, take place, occur. reeh 
illi b-yil.J~al hina what's going on here? l.J~alit l.Jariifia 
fil-limaara a fire occurred in the building. ril-l.Jadsa lli 
b~alit laha the accident that happened to her. 
ma-l.J~al-/ liyya/larafI haven't had the honour.l.J~al 
landi sahw I forgot. l.J~al minnu valat he made a mis-
take. l.J~al fii kasr it got broken. III.J~al xeer it turned 
out O.K., nothing serious happened. -1.J~uul il-bala 
wala nti~aar-u [prov} it's better to suffer a calamity than 
to live in expectation of it. -ma-yil.J~all (1) (also rin 
/a-lla ma-yil.J~a£) may it not happen! God forbid! (2) it'll 
never happen (as you say), your threats are empty. -vn 
l.J~uul; ava l.Ja~i1. 
• b~al lalat to obtain, get. l.J~alt8 lad-dukturaah 
I obtained a doctorate. 
J-..~ l.Ja~illnll state of affairs. da l-l.Ja~il that's the 
way things stand. 2 [rlfr} storehouse for grain: 3 [math} 
result. l.Ja~il iq-qarb product. 
J~ 
mal.J~uulln pi mal.J~iill crop, yield. mal.J~iil 
~efiyya summer crops. rir-rayy il-ma~buut bi-Y1.awwid 
209 
mal.J~uul il-rarq proper irrigation increases the yield of 
the land. 
~L-. l.J~aala Icoll nI[rur} grains and heavy straw left 
after winnowing. 
~ 
l.J~iila InI amount collected, takings. l.J~iilit 
bank id-damm i kaam Iitr in-nahar-da how many Iitres 
did the blood bank collect today? 
~t.:-
1.J~~aala In pi -aatl money-box. 
~ 
1.J~~allvtlla to catch up with. maddeet Ii-vaayit 
ma 1.J~~alt-u-hum I hurried till I caught up with them. 
kaanit l.Ja-tintil.Jir l.ayyi ma-ttafafina w-kunt8 l.J-al.J~~al­
ha she would have killed herself as we had agreed and 
I was going to follow her. Ib to manage to get, obtain 
with effort. rul.Jt ig-gamliyya 
w-I.J~~alt(-i-li) farxa 
I went to the co-operative and managed to get a chick-
en. IItal.J~iill.Ja~il (1) without due care, in a slapdash 
way, as in lamal ifluvli taI.J~iill.Ja~il he did the work 
sloppily. (2) something (so obvious as to be) hardly 
worth stating, as in yibfia tal.J~iil l.Ja~il lamma nfiuul 
rinnu laazim kaan fii razma been is-sawra wil-rixwaan 
needless to say, there had to be a crisis between the 
Revolution and the Muslim Brothers. 2a to reach. 
l.Ja-nl.J~~al riskindiriyya fiabl iq-qalma we'll reach Ale-
xandria before it's dark. ma-I.J~~alli la marl.Jala talta 
wala rabla he didn't get to the third or fourth stage. 
ril-manga 1.J~~alit sittiin fiir! ik-kiilu mangoes have 
reached sixty piastres a kilo. II hiyya 1.J~~alit bafia has it 
come to this then? have things come to such a pass? 
-kull-u ml.J~~al balq-u it all comes to the same thing. 
-la ml.J~~al wala mw~~al good-for-nothing. 2bt to 
grasp, comprehend. rit-talaba ma-I.J~~aluul id-dars 
the students didn't grasp the lesson. 3a to collect 
(dues). ~aal.Jib il-beet bi-yl.J~~al il-rigaar yoom il-xamiis 
the landlord collects the rent on Thursday. 3b to yield 
(in dues). ril-limaara bi-tl.J~~al tultumiit gineeh fiflahr 
the building brings in a revenue of three hundre.d 
pounds a month. -vn tal.J~iil; aValPva mil.J~~al. 
~ 
mul.J~~il In *1 collector of dues (e.g., fares, 
debts, taxes). 
~ 
muI.J~~ila In pi -aatl [math} resultant. 
~I ritl.J~~allvill to be collected (of dues). 2 to be 
comprehended, be grasped. -iva mitl.J~~al. 
• ritl.J~~al lala to obtain (with effort). ritl.J~~alt8 la/a 
talaata gneeh wi-xaatim dahab I managed to get hold of 
three pounds and a gold ring. 
~ 
mitl.J~~a[J InI income. magmuul il-mitl.J~~al 
mBGaaya /ahri ritnaa/ar gineeh my total monthly in-
come is twelve pounds. 
J.-.;-I ristal.J~a[J Ivil to gain possession (of s.th.) by 
exertion. yiftaval yoom bi-l.Jaal-u lala/aan yistaI.J~al-lu 

cala cifriin (jirf he works the whole day long to get 
twenty piastres. -ava mi .• tay~al. 
lJ~C 
~.J> y~ala, y~/a In pi -aat, yawa~i11 craw, crop of 
a bird.IlY~alt-u dayyi(ja he's hot-tempered. 
-yJ~c 
.:,l,.l...-
y~albaan Inl rosemary. 
1.:,~C 
.:.r-
y~n In pi y~uunl fortress. 
... L-. y~aana In pi -aatl immunity. riI-yu(jna di 
b-ticmil y~aana min id-diftirya this injection gives im-
munity from diphtheria. riI-y~aana d-diblumasiyya di-
plomatic immunity. 
.:r--
y~iin ladjl impregnable. yigaab j[-yi~n iI-y~iin 
{magic] the amulet of unfailing protection. 
.;:-
y~~an Ivtl I to fortify, protect. 2 to immunize 
(against disease). 3 to cast a spell as protection against 
the evil eye. miya~~an min if-jeen J (women] may you 
be protected from harm. -vn tay~iin; avalpva miy~~an. 
~ 
tay~iin In pi -aatl charm or spell to protect one 
from evil. 
~1 rity~~an Ivil passive of ya~~an. - iva mitY~~an. 
l.:,~C 
.:,L-. y~aan In pi y~inall stallion;(loosely) a horse 
of either sex. (jiwwit y~aan horsepower. y~aan j[-qafz 
{athl] vaulting horse. 2 knight (chess piece). 
1.J~C 
.,.a> y~w Icoll nl pebble(s), fragment(s) of stone, pot-
tery etc. 
~ 
y~a = y~w.lly~a Ibaan {bot] rosemary. 
o.,.a> y~wa lunit n, pi y~aa;"'iI a pebble, a fragm •• t 
of stone. y~wa fik-kila a stone in the kidneY.IIY~wit 
maly' f-ceen ilti ma-y~alli can-nabi a grain of salt in the 
eye of whoever refuses to bless the Prophet (a formula 
of protection against the evil eye). - waaci zayy iI-y~wa 
very thrifty. 
~1.,.a> y~waaya = y~wa. 
1 .J ~ C see .J I ~ C : y~aawi 
1..s~C 
~i ray~af Ivtl to count, enumerate. -vn riy~a. 
.L-.! riy~a Inl statistics. 
~L-.! riy~ariyya In pi -aatl statistic. 
210 
1 ..s ~ C see 1.J ~ C : y~a 
1.J~C 
~ 
yaqar (a) Ivtl I to attend, be present at. yaqart 
iI-muyaqra I attended the lecture. ma-yaqart'-j ii-film 
I didn't go to the film. fil-wa(jt j[-yaaqir at the present 
time. IIbadiht-u yaqra he is quick-witted. 2 to be a 
contemporary of, be around at the same time as. 
yaqart-u fig-geeJ I was in the army when he was. - lvil 
3f [lsi] to become due (of prayer). r~-~ala yaqarit it is 
time to pray. dayman~alaat-u yaqra or dayman bi-y~alli 
yaaqir he is always prompt in his prayers. - vn yuquur; 
ava yaaqir . 
;';- yuquur Inl presence. II yuquur wi-n~iraaf clock-
ing in and out. 
..,.;.l> yaaqir I linterjl at your service! O.K.! (indicat-
ing willingness to comply with an order or request) . 
o ~ 
yaqra Inll lusu in constr, pi yaqaraatl formal or 
respectful form of address to, and title of, a man or 
woman. yaqrit-ak mineen where are you from, Sir? 
yaqrit id-duktuura the (respected) lady doctor. 
II r~-~ala cala yaqrit in-nabi blessings be upon the 
Prophet! -ya yaqrit (1) sarcastic form of address. 
(2) form of address used to attract the attention of one 
whose name is unknown to the speaker. 2 Ipl -aat, 
yuqarl2a Sufi ceremony, dhikr. 2b tomb of any vener-
ated Muslim religious figure. 
0;1.4> yaqaara f In pi -aatl civilization . 
~ 
mayqar In pi mayaaqirl I formal record or 
memorandum of a case reported to the police. mayqar 
Jakwa qidd ig-giraan report of a complaint against the 
neighbours. lIya-tiftay-/, mayqar ... are you going to 
conduct an inquest? (why) are you going to start asking 
all these penetrating questions? 2 official record of pro-
ceedings, minutes. mayqar ig-galsa the minutes of the 
session. mayqar iI-gard inventory • list. 3 gathering, ses-
sion. mayqar xeer (1) informal meeting to settle a quar-
rel. (2) mediator in ~ quarrel. 4 presence. mayqar-u 
laliifhe is pleasant company. 5 Iprop nl a spirit invoked 
in the zaar. 
~ 
muyqar In *1 (leg] writ server . 
.;.... yaqqar Ivtll to prepare, get ready. yaqqar Janeit-
u he packed his bag.llyaqqar muxx-(u) to concentrate, 
keep one's wits about one. as in laazim tiyaqqar 
muxx-ak calaJaan tifham id-dars' kwayyis you have to 
concentrate to understand the lesson well. - yaqqar id-
damm to stimulate the blood, give energy, as in rakl 
ik-kibda bi-yyaqqar id-damm eating liver increases 
vitality. -yaqqar-Iak j[-xeer [women] may He (God) 
bring you good fortune! (a courteous response to yaaqir 

q.v.). 2 to call up (spirits). 3 to mark as present. fibr;a 
yatftfar-ni fik-ka/f put me down as present on the list. 
-vn taY4.iir; ava miYatftfar. 
~ 
taytfiir In pi -aatl preparation. 
I$~ taytfiiri ladjl [a cad, obsolJ preparatory, 
elementary. 
~ 
muyatftfir In ·1 laboratory assistant. 
#1 fityatftfar Ivil passive of yatftfar. -iva mityatftfar. 
.,;.l. yaatfir2 f 1 Ivtl to lecture to. 2 Ivil to lecture. 
present a lecture. -ava muyatfra; ava miYaatfir. 
i";'~ muyatfra In pi -aatllecture. 
.,;.~ muyaatfir In ·1 lecturer. 
~ 
1 fistaytfar = yatftfar. -vn fistiytfaar; ava/pva 
mustaytfar . 
.::..1 ~ 
mustaytfaraat Ipl nl preparations, pro-
ducts. mustaytfaraat tagmiil beauty preparations. 
~ 
1 fistayatftfarJ Ivil to prepare oneself. -ava 
mistaYatftfar. 
.J~c. 
.:r'- yatfan (u) Ivtl 1 to embrace. raayit maytfuuna 
fiyya she rushed into my arms. 2 to stick close to. 
lamma tirkin i1-carabiyya laazim tuytfun ir-rfliiif when 
you park the car you should hug the kerb. -vn yatfn; ava 
yaatfin; pva maYtfuun. 
.:r'- yutfn In pi faytfaanl 1 bosom (in contexts of 
embracing). xadu baetfi bil-yutfn they hugged each 
other. raayit waxdaa f-yutfn-a-ha she took him in her 
arms. II fitrabba J-yutfn i fahl-u he was raised in the 
bosom of his family. 2 armful, armload. xud-lak yutfn i 
barsiim cala/aan yumart-ak take an armful of clover for 
your donkey. 
~W- yatfaana Int 1 (also daar yatfaana) nursery 
school. duur yatfaana nursery schools. 2 custody (of 
children). 
~~ yatftfaana In pi -aatl incubator (for chicks). 
~I fityatfan Ivil to be embraced. -iva mitYitfin. 
.;,.:-;1 finyatfan = fitYatfan. -iva minYitfin . 
.)a. yatftfan 1 Ivtl to bring close. yatftfan ik-kutub 
fi-baetfa ca/aan tiddi makaan move the books together 
to make more room. - Ivi/2 to pull over.fardit kawiifi 
tfarabit wi-ma-Iyir;ti-/ fayaqqan yimiin a tyre blew and 
I didn't have time to pull over to the right. 3 to clinch 
(in boxing). -vn tayqiin; ava/pva miyaqqan. 
~I fityaqqan lvil to be brought close together. - iva 
mityaqqan. 
211 
~~c. 
:(u mayqiyyaJ 
In 
pi -aat, 
mayaatfil favourite 
woman. 
Ja..:-I fistaytfa Ivtl to treat (a woman) as a favourite 
(of a man). -ava/pva mistayqi. 
,,:-,bC. 
...-l- yatab Icoll nl dry stalks of harvested crops, and 
other vegetable refuse, used for fodder and kindling . 
.,...~ yattaab In ·1 [obsolJ collector and seller of 
firewood. 
~ 
yattab Nil to practise quarter-staff fencing. - vn 
taytiib; ava miYattab. 
~ 
taytiib Inl quarterstaff fencing. 
~bc. 
. 
J- yatt (u) Ivtlla to put, place, set. yutt' /elt-ak set 
down your load. yutti nafs-ak matray-i put yourself in 
my place: yatteet eala wif/iNiniyya kiilu layma I put a 
kilo of meat in the pan. yatcuu [IS-sign they put him in 
prison.IlYatti rigl-(u) fi- to set foot in, as in min fawwil 
ma yatteet rigl-i fil-balad since I first set foot in the 
town. -yatti fiid-(u) fi- to put (one's) hand ~o, get to 
work on, as in mif y-alaar;i war;t ayutti riid-i fii fin-
nahar-da I shan't fin_d time to get round to it today. 
-yatti fiid-(u) cala (I) to get (one's) hands on, acquire, 
as in faah law eirift ayutti fiid-i eala r;ir/een ah, if only 
I knew how to get my hands on some money! (2) to put 
(one's) finger on, determine, as in fana yaasis bi-diir; 
bass i mif r;aadir fayutti fiid-i cas-sabab I feel depress-
ed but I can't put my finger on the cause. -yatti 
ceen-(u) cala to set (one's) sights on, set one's heart on, 
as in hiyya yatta een-ha ealee min yoom ma/aftt-u she's 
been out to get him since the day she saw him. 
-yatt-a-ha waati (to bow one's head) to be meek, be 
humble. -yatt-(u) fil-fictibaar to take (s.th.) into con-
sideration. -yatt-(u-hum) r;uddaam baeq to set (peo-
ple) in confrontation with one another, as in finta 
dayman bi-tyutt-i-na r;uddaam baeqi kida leeh why are 
you always forcing us into confrontation like that? Ib to 
apply, administer. tiyutti fazliin lif-/aer do you want 
any brilliantine on your hair? yaWt-lu dawa cag-gary 
she put a medication on the wound for him. 2a to pay. 
yatteet fiiha miit gineeh I paid a hundred pounds for it. 
2b to bet, place (money~. yutti xamsa gneeh cala nimra 
sabca put five pounds on number seven! -/vil 3 to 
alight. fin-nayla yawt cal-warda the bee alighted on the 
flower. II fin/a-lla ygii-lak wi-yyutta caleek may disaster 
come and rest upon you! -ma-bi-yljuai-/ waa(i he is 
very ·proud. 4 to become exhausted, become weak, 

collapse. -vn I;aa, I;a(a(aan; ava I;aa[i(; pva mal;(Uu(. 
~ I;aa' min to detract from, undermine. bi-yl;ua' min 
Cjimit-ha he runs her down. 
~ 
I;aaa Ipl-aatl instance noun of l;a((.lll;aaa ya baaa 
beginning phrase of child's rhyme used to set the 
rhythm in games. 
~ 
I;i((a In! degradation, debasement. di I;iaa f-faraf-
ak that's an insult to your honour. huwwa I;i((af-lelt-u 
he is a disgrace to his family. 
.i-i fal;aa lell morelmost degenerate, morelmost de-
based. da-nta fal;a((' bani faadam lumr-i Cjabilt-u 
you're the basest man I've ever met! 
~ 
I;a[ii(a ladj invarl exhausted, whacked, done in. 
~ mal;aa Inl focal point, object, centre. mal;aa il-
fan;aar the object of attention. IIl;aa-i-lu mal;aa he 
intrigued against him. 
~ 
mal;aaa In pi -aatll alighting point, stop. mal;aait 
futubiis bus stop. mal;a«it Cja(r railway station. 
2 station, installation. mal;a«it banziin petrol station, 
filling station. mal;a«it fizaala or mal;a«it firsaal radio 
station. mal;a«it kahraba power plant. 
~I fitl;aa Ivilla to be put, be placed, be set.llruul; 
fitl;aa go sit down and get out of the way! - fitl;aa' 
fUCjlud sit down and shut up! Ib to be applied, be 
administered. 2 to be paid. 3 to be bet, be laid as a bet. 
- iva mitl;a((. 
1-;1 finl;aa/vill = fitl;a((.2t to degenerate, become 
debased. faxlaaCj-u nl;a«it his morals degenerated. ya 
munl;aa you degenerate! -vn finl;i(aa(t; ava minl;aa, 
munl;a(( . 
..l:.b I;a((a( Ivtlla to lift down, lower. I;a((a[it if-feela 
min lala raas-u she took down the load from off his 
head. Ib to unburden, (help to) unload.l;aaa( is-silt' di 
help that lady put down her load (from off her head). 
2 to cause to pay. I;aaa(-ni larbuun xamsa gneeh he 
made me pay a five pound deposit. 3 to cause to alight. 
I;aaa(l in-naI;l " laf-fagara I brought the bees down on 
the tree. -vn tal;[ii(; avalpva mil;aaa(. 
~I fitl;aaa( Ivil passive of I;aaa(. -iva mitl;aaa(. 
r ~ c.. 
r1- I;aaam t Ivtl to shatter, wreck. 
fal~aab-u 
ml;aaama his nerves are wrecked. -vn tal;[iim; avalpva 
mil;aaam, mul;aaam. 
~I fitl;aaam Ivil to be shattered, be wrecked. -iva 
mitl;aaam. 
.J J; c.. 
)... I;a;ar (u) IvtI I to forbid, prohibit, ban. I;a;arit 
laleehum il-lilb' fif-faaril she forbade them to play in 
212 
the street. II wiCjil fil-mal;;uur to take a false step. 
Ill;a;r' tagawwul curfew. 2 to catch (s.o.) in the act. -vn 
I;a;r; ava I;aa;ir; pva mal;;uur. 
~ 
'.r-4> I;aqiir In pll;iqraanl {rur] I hall or corri-
dor off which are situated a number of smaller rooms. 
2 small roof-top room usually for storing milk and dairy 
products. 
• ~ 
I;a;iira t In pi I;a;aayirl enclosure or pen for 
animals . 
#1 fitl;a;ar Ivil I to be forbidden, be prohibited. 
2 to be caught in the act. - iva mitl;i;ir. 
)a...; 1 finl;a;ar = fitl;a;ar. -iva minl;i;ir. 
J;J; 
• 
c.. 
~ l;aH J (i) Ivtl to give pleasure to, delight. fallaah 
yil;i;;-ak yafeex {joe] God grant you enjoyment! (said 
to s.o. in appreciation of his entertaining company). 
-vn I;a;;, I;a;a;aan; ava I;aa;i;; pva mal;;uu;. 
~ l;aH2 In pll;u;uu;/1 luck, fortune.l;aH-i maayil 
I'm out of luck.l;a;;-a-ha zayy il-bumb she has fantastic 
luck. fana w-I;a;;-i I'll take my chance. fid-dinya 
I;u;uu; life is a matter ofluck.lIl;a;;-akfi-[iiz-ak {abus] 
you have incredibly good (or bad) luck! 2 enjoyment, 
fun. fibn "I;a;; fun-lover, happy-go-lucky type. saalit 
il-I;a;;' ma-titlawwaq-f {prov] you can't make up for a 
lost moment of pleasure. xad I;a;;-u minha w-sab-ha he 
had his fill of pleasure from her and then left her. 
~~ mal;;uu; ladj '1 lucky. 
~I fitl;a;; Ivil to enjoy oneself, have a good time. 
fitl;a;;u Cjabl if-fabaab ma y(iir minkum enjoy 
yourselves before youth flies from you! - ava· mitl;a;;. 
IS J; c.. see IS";' c.. 
~ ....; c.. 
~ 
I;afiidt In pi fal;faadl grandson. 
.~ I;afiida t In pi fal;faadl granddaughter. 
.J"";c.. 
~ I;afar (u) Ivtl I to excavate, dig. I;afaru ma(ral; 
iI-lalaama they dug up the place where the marker was. 
Ill;afar il-biir bi- fibra {prov] (to dig a well with a needle) 
to persevere with patience and skill. 2 to make a groove 
or grooves, chisel, carve etc. -vn I;afr; ava I;aafir; pva 
mal;fuur . 
• ~ I;afra Ipl -aatl instance noun of I;afr .lll;aJra gafra 
• barren and uninhabited land, desolate area . 
)l. I;aafir In pll;awaafirl hoof. 
.~ I;ufra In pll;ufarl hole, pit. 
.J\.b. I;affaar In • and pi I;affaaral I digger, labourer 

engaged in digging. 2 engraver. 3 woodpecker . 
.#1 ritljafar Ivill to be excavated, be dug up. 2 to be 
marked· with a groove or grooves, be chiselled, be 
carved, be etched. -iva mitljifir. 
~I rinljafar = ritljafar. -iva minljifir. 
j~c 
:;:.. Ijafaz (i) Ivtl to encourage, stimulate, give incen-
tive to. -vn Ijafz, Ijafazaan; ava Ijaarll. 
ji I.. Ijaarll In pI Ijawaarlll incentive. ril-ragr i1-riqaafi 
yuetabar Ijaafiz liI-muwa;;af. the extra pay is consi-
dered an incentive for the employee. 
J# ~ C see j;. ~ C : 
Ijafaq, 
Ijaafit/., 
Ijufaaq, 
ma!Jfaqa, ritljafatf., rinljafaq, Ijaffaq, miljaffaq, ritljaffaq 
.J,~c 
~\.b. Ijuffaata In pI -aatl six-holed single-reed pipe 
shorter and fatter than the naay. -also luffaata. 
j;.~c 
~ 
Ijafa; (a) Ivtlla to keep, retain, store. bi-yiljfa;u 
fwayya min i1-Cjamlj· la/aan yibCja taCjaawi they save 
some of the wheat for seed. xud i1-fuluus di riljfa;-ha 
landak take this money and keep it with you. 
llma-b-yiljfa;ji gmiil he is ungrateful. Ib [adminJ to 
file, put on file for reference. Ic [legJ to suspend action 
on (a case). ma daam ~talaljtu yibCja I-buli~ yiljfa; 
it-taljCjiiCj since you have reached a settlement the police 
will drop the case. 2a to protect, preserve (from harm). 
ril-waraCj bi-yiljfa;-ha min it-turaab the paper protects 
it from dust. rallaah yiljfa;-ak God preserve you! (in 
response to praise and generous or kind words or ac-
tions). fi-Ijif; illaah (go) in God's safe-keeping! good-
bye! 2b to keep a watch on. riljfa; lisaan-ak watch your 
tongue! riljfa; markaz-ak (have a regard for your posi-
tion) == watch your step! 3 (also Ijifi;, Ijafaq or Ijifitf.) 
3a to memorize, learn by heart. ma-kanji macaaya 
Cjalam fa-Ijafa;t in-nimra I didn't have a pencil on me, 
so I memorized the number.ljafa;t i1-Cj~iida kull-a-ha 
f-talatt iyyaam I got the whole poem off by heart in 
three days. 3b to learn (a lesson). riza ma-Ijafa;tij 
id-dars i kwayyis Ij-addii-k sifr if you don't learn the 
lesson well, I'll give you a zero. II riljna Ijaf;iin 
ik-kalaam da we know all about that, that's not new to 
us. -vn Iji/;, Ijife[; ava Ijaafi;, Ijaafie[; pva maljfuu;, 
maljfuuq. 
11 Iji/;an lalat out of regard or concern for. mif 
Ij-aballay i/-buli~ Ijif;an lala markaz-ak I shall not in-
form the police so as not to jeopardize your position. 
213 
..Iitl.. ljaafi;J, Ijaafiq In plljuffaa;, Ijafa;al [lsIJ one 
who has committed the Koran to memory. 
4li.i I.. Ijaf;a In pI -aat, ljawaafi;1 record of mail sent 
either interdepartmentally or by the postal system . 
.J;. p 
maljfuu; ladjl I preserved, canned. laljma 
maljfuu;a canned meat. - maljfu;aat Ipl n!2 [adminJ 
archives. 3 [aeadJ passages set for memori2ation in 
schools. Cjitlit maljfu;aat a piece for memorization. 
.J;.~ Ijufaae[ In pI -aat, 
riljfit/.a, Ijifte[al sanitary 
napkin. 
4 
Ijafii; Inl Protector (epithet of God). ya Ijafii; == 
God protect us! (said on encountering something un-
pleasant or ugly). 
~ 
maljfa;a, maljfaqaJ In pI maljaafi;, maljaafiql 
wallet, billfold.llfanta maljfaza zip-up case for papers. 
Ju,al ritljafa;, ritljafaq Ivil passive of Ijafa;. -iva 
mitljifi;, mitljifit/.. 
.lw.il .rinljafaq = ritljafa;. - iva minljifi;. 
J&i... Ijaffa;, Ijaffaq Ivtl I to cause to commit to mem-
ory. Ijaffae[it-ni I-linwaan she made me memorize the 
address. rifjeex bi-yljaffa;-hum i1-qurraan the sheikh 
teaches them the Koran by rote. - Ijaffaq only 2 to 
bleS"S (usually a baby) with the formula miljaffaq (min 
ir-radi). - Ivil3 to put on a sanitary napkin. -vn taljfii;, 
taljfiiq; avalpva mtljaffa;, miljaffaq. 
~ 
miljaffae[ Ipval II miljaffae[ bi-suurit ir-raljmaan 
protected by the sura of the Merciful (i.e. Koran sura 
55; phrase used instead ofa child's name as a prophylac-
tic against the evil eye). ril-miljaffaq ibn-ikfeen where's 
your son, bless him? 
~I ritljaffa;, ritljaffaq Ivtl I to be made to learn 
(s.th.) by memory. ritljaffa;na I-qurraan biq-qarb we 
were beaten into learning the Koran by heart. - Ivil 
2 to be learned by heart, be memorized. 3 (ritljaffae[ 
only) to put on a sanitary napkin. -avaliva mitljaffa;. 
11 ritljaffa; lala to take custody of, take into custody. 
rin-niyaaba tljaffa;it lala gism ig-gariima the Prosecu-
tor's office took custody of the material evidence of the 
crime. ril-buli~ itljaffa; ealee fit-taxfiiba the police took 
him into custody (and put him) in the lock-up. 
~ 
taljaffu; t In! 1 aloofness, reserve. kallim-ni bit-
taljaffu; he spoke to me aloofly. bi-duun taljaffu; with-
out reservation. 2 taljaffu;aat Ipl n! reservations. rana 
/iyya taljaffu;aat lala n-nuCjta di I have some reserva-
tions on that point . 
..).1i. taljaffu;i: Ijabs i taljaffu;i detention pending 
trial. 
..Iitl.. ljaafi;2 Ivil 1 to give protection. bi-nruff-u 
b:butaas lafaan yil;aafi; lalee min ii-mann we spray it 

with potash to protect it from aphids. ma-yafi;t'1 
lak-kutub ill! sallift'haa-/ak you didn't take good care 
of the books I lent you. 2 to pay attention, give regard. 
bi-yyaafi; la/a mawaliid-u he is punctual. - vn miyaf;a, 
muyaf;a. yifaa;; ava miyaafi;, muYaafi;. 
Jaj~ muyaf;a In pi -aatl {adminl province, one of the 
twenty-five main administrative units into which Egypt 
is divided. II/aazim fawaddli-k il-muyaf;a I must take 
you to the police! 
.Ju~ muyaafi; In */1 governor of a province. 2 {poll 
conservative. yizb il-muyaafi;iin the (British) Con-
servative Party. - ladj */3 conservative, traditional in 
outlook . 
.Ju;..1 fiytafa; Ivil to retain possession. b-aytifi; bii 
ka- farfiif I keep it as a record. fiytafa;u bil-butuula 
they retained the championship. - vn fiytifaa;; ava 
miytifi;, muytafi;; pva muytafa;. 
~I fistayfa; Ilvtl to call upon (s.o.) to maintain 
and respect. 2l Ivil 2a to be careful, take great care. 
bi-yistayfa; la/a kull' qirf he treasures every penny. 
2b {Iegl to apprehend. -vn fistiyfaa;; ava mistaYfa;. 
"';"';c 
~ yaff (i) Ivtll to surround, make a border around. 
yaffeena ~-~uura b1iriit we put a ribbon round the edge 
of the picture. mayfuuf bi-maxaatirT surrounded by 
danger. 2 to trim, cut the edge off. xud il-xajaba 
Yiff-a-ha mig-g~mb' jwayya take the piece of wood and 
trim it from the side a little. 3 to depilate, remove 
unwanted hair from. - Ivi/4 to brush (against s.th.). 
maaji yyiff' fil-yee{a brushing up against the wall as he 
walks. -vn yaff, yafafaan; ava yaafif; pva maYfuuf. 
• yaf!" la/a (or fi-) to take too much of (e.g., food). 
yafr la/-fuul (or fil-fuul) lamma ma-f4.il1 ilia leej he 
ate the beans at such a rate that he found himself left 
witl\ just bread (and no beans to eat it with). 
Jl> yaaf ladvl by itself (either of bread without any 
accompaniment, which is a sign of want, or of food 
without bread, which is a sign of plenty). II ril-waayid 
yakul-ha yaaf faysan ma yisraq one would rather live 
on dry bread than steal. min istaktar lfumuus-u kal yaaf 
{provl == one who overestimates his resources will soon 
have a real crisis. - ladjectivally/leej yaafbread eaten 
alone. 
~ l> yaffa, yaaffa r In pi -aat, yawaafi, yawaffT! edge, 
border. rigl-u la/a yaffit il-qabr he has one foot in the 
grave. 
J ~ yUfuuf Inl I depilation, removal of unwanted 
hair from the body. 2 depilatory paste. 
214 
~ 
yafiif Inl rustle, rustling sound. 
~I fityaff Ivill to be surrounded. 2 to be trimmed. 
3 to be depilated. - iva mityaff. 
~ 
I finyaff = fityaff. - iva minyaff. 
....A.b. yaffif Ivtll to measure out (a quantity of goods) 
with niggardly exactitude, give (exact weight) and not a 
little more. 2 to depilate (a part of the body) with 
depilatory paste. - vn ta&flif; avalpva miyaffif . 
....u--:I fityaffif Ivil la to depilate oneself, pluck out 
unwanted hair. Ib to be depilated (of a part of the 
body). 2 to pay (excessive) attention to one's groom-
ing. mityaffifa la/-faaxir dolled up to the nines. 
3 passive of yaffif 1. - avaliva mityaffif. 
J"';c 
ill.... yafla In pi yafa/aatl la ceremony. yaflit la fbiin 
memorial ceremony. Ib party, celebration. yaflit liid 
milaad a birthday party. 2 performance. yaflil sinima a 
cinema performance. yaflit musiiqa ~ concert. 
J.Ue ma&fal In 
pi mayaafill I {rurl 
procession. 
2 (masonic) lodge. 
J.i;>1 fiytafal Ivil I to hold a celebration. fiYlafalu 
b-liid gawaz-hum they celebrated their wedding 
anniversary. 2 to give a warm welcome. fiytafalu 
bil-yuggaag fil-mataar they received the pilgrims at the 
airport with great rejoicing. - vn fiytifaa/; ava miYtifil. 
J~I fiytifaalln pi -aatl celebration. 
~J"';c 
J.alb. yafla{ Ivtl to overdo, be fussy in. bi-tyaflatfi-wifj-
a-ha she overdoes her make-up. finta bi-tyafla{ flafs-ak 
kida leeh why are you so fussy about your appearance? 
ka/aam-u myafla{ he talks in an exaggerated way (in 
order to impress). -vn yafla{a; avalpva miyafla(. 
J.,')I.A. yiflaa{ ladjl foppish, extravagant in dress and 
manner. 
J..;;- yafluut = Yiflaat· 
~I i'ityafla{ Ivill to preen oneself. 2 to be adorned 
or arranged in an extravagant manner. -avaliva 
milyafla{: 
':'''';c 
~ 
yafan (i) Ivtl to take in one's cupped hands. 
II bi-yiyfin wi-yiddii he gives to him without measure, he 
gives to him freely. -vn yafn; alia yaafin; pva maYfuun. 
~ 
yifna, yafna In pi -aat, yifanl handful. yifnit 
~abuun a handful of soap. 
,,\4. yifaan In pi i'iYfina, yifinal quantity held by both 
hands cupped to~ether.lllayya{t' min kull' leen yifaan 
== I cried buckets. 

.):il fitljafan Ivil to be taken in cupped hands. -iva 
mitljifin. 
~I finljafan = fitljafan. -iva minljifin. 
\S"';c 
.;- Ijifi (a) Ivil to wear out one's shoes completely. 
Ija-tistanna lamma I-fawlaad yiljfu la/a ma tiftiri-Ihum 
gizam are you going to wait till the children have gone 
right through their shoes (and are going barefoot) be-
fore you buy them new ones? II riglee Ijifyil to wear one's 
feet off, go far and wide (in search of s.t~.), as in 
dawwart· lala qital 'IIiyaar lamma riglay-ya Ijifyit 
I searched high and low for spare parts. -vn Ijafa, 
Ijafayaan; ava Ijaafi, Ijafyaan. 
1Iljifi wara (or lala) to pursue, toil after. tuullumr-i-na 
Ijafyaniin wara luqmit iI-leef we've spent all our lives 
chasing a living.ljifiina laleek fimbaarilj ma-Iaqena-k-j 
we wore ourselves out looking for you yesterday, but 
couldn't find you. 
jl> Ijaafi ladj *1 barefoot. daayis Ijaafi leeh why are 
you going barefoot? 
yJc 
~ 
Ijaqiibaf In plljaqaayibl satchel, bag. Ijaqiiba 
diblumasiyya diplomatic bag. 
~Jc 
..I.i.> Ijac;ad (i) Ivil to hold a grudge. dayman yiljC;id lala 
xa/c; il/aah he's always holding grudges against people. 
-vn Ijic;d, Ijiqd, Ijaqadaan; ava Ijaac;id; pva maljc;uud. 
..I.i.> Ijiqd, ljiC;d In pi faljqaadl hatred, rancour, spite. 
fii faljqaad c;adiima been iI-lelteen there are old feuds 
between the two families. 
jJC 
~ 
ljaqiirT ladj "I despicable. 
~i faljqar lell morelmost despicable. 
;... Ijaqqar Ivtl to disparage. -vn taljqiir. 
};>I filjlaqar Ivtl to despise. - vn filjtiqaar; ava 
mifJtiqir; pva mufJtaqar. 
;"";"1 fislafJqarJ Ivt/ to despise. -vn fistiljc;aar; ava 
mistafJc;ar. 
JJc 
.j... Ijaqq I (i, u) 1 Ivtl la to find to be in the wrong. 
fifJna smilna iii fJ~al minnu w-fJaqqenaa-lik we have 
heard what he did and consider that he is in the wrong 
rather than you (or: for what he did toyou).lb to admit 
(o.s.) to be in the wrong, blame (o.s.). fana gaay 
fafJuc;q i nafs-i liik I am coming to apologize to you (for 
21S 
what I have done). 2 Ivi; imperf onlyl to be appropriate 
or justifiable. ma-yljic;c; i_/ak-ji titkallim bit-tariiqa di 
you shouldn't b'e talking this way. II filii yfJiqq-i-/ak 
filmil-u do as you wish (since there's nothing to stop 
you). -yifJic;c;-i-lu yc;uul kida he's not to blame for 
talking that way (since no one seems to be able to shut 
him up, or: since everyone else is talking nonsense). 
- vn Ijac;c;, Ijac;ac;aan; ava Ijaaqiq; pva maljquuc;. 
lIfJac;q"la/a to kiss (e.g., the head) as a way of apolo-
gy.ljuqqd lala ras-ha kiss her head (in apology) . 
.:;p maljc;uuc; ladj "lin the wrong. hiyya mafJc;uuqa-
ma-kan-ji y~afJfJ i lilmil kida she's at fault; she 
shouldn't have done that. 
.j... fJac;c; 2 Inl la truth. c;ul-Ii I-Ijac;c; tell me the truth. 
fil-fJaqq i yilla wa/a yillaa-j lalee laali {prov} (the 
truth rises and no-one, no matter how high, may rise 
above it) "" the truth will always out. kilmil iI-fJac;q i 
tillil (or itqaalit) the truth is out! now we have it! kilmit 
il-Ijaqq i luc;af fiz-zoor {prov} "" people cannot accept 
the truth. II bi-fJac;q or bil-fJaqq or bi-Ijaqq i w-Ijac;iiq or 
bi-Ijac;c; i w-fJac;iic;i really and truly, as in tibc;a ~afJb-i 
b-fJaqc; then you are truly my friend, bil-fJac;c;· fJ~al 
kida honestly that's what happened, fik-ka/aam da 
b-fJaqq i w-Ijaqiic;i is that really so? is that on the level? 
-ma-Ijadd i-j laarifyaaxud minnak fJaqc; i wa/a baatil no 
one can get anywhere with you, trying to get something 
out of you is like trying to get blood out of a stone. -lirif 
finn allaah fJac;c; "" to mend one's ways, as in mif fJ-aftiri 
minnu lafaan yitlallim wi-yilraf finn allaah Ijac;c; i 
wi-ybiil bit-Iasliira I shan't buy from him so that he 
may learn a lesson and mend his ways and sell at the 
fixed price. Ib fil-fJaqq Truth (epithet of God). 2 lin 
constrl the appropriate thing for, what is fitting for. 
fJaqq-ak laakul you should eat. kaan fJac;c;-i taradl-u-
hum I should have thrown them out. kaan fJac;c; i 
gooz-ik yibuus riglee-ki your husband should have kis-
sed your feet. II bil-Ijac;c; (also filla bil-fJac;c; or min 
fJaqq) by the way, apropos of that, as in (filla) 
bil-Ijaqq· la/a zikr iz-zawaag ... by the way, talking of 
marriage .... 3 cost, what is payable (for an item bought 
or service rendered), worth. ril-qalam da fJac;c;-u kaam 
how much does this pencil cost? fJaqq if-jarraala lan 
fahr i tamanya the maid's wages for August. - Ipl 
fJuc;uuc;1 4 right, title, claim. b-ataalib bi-fJaqc;-i 
I demand my rights. fJuc;uuc; madaniyya w-qanuniyya 
civil and legal rights. fJuquuq il-fadaa f iI-lalani 
{broadc} royalties paid to artists for the broadcasting of 
their work. liyya l-fJaqqi f-fabuneeh I'm entitled to a 
season ticket. ~aafJib iI-fJac;c; "leen-u qawiyya {prov} he 
who has right oh his side acts boldly. bayyin fJaqq-ak 

wi-siib-u {prov] establish your rights and then drop the 
matter. II Yil-yaljlj' wil-mustayaljlj full details of entitle-
ment, as in y-aljawwim Yaysan muyaami lafaan 
yibayyin il-yaljlj' wil-mustahaljlj I'll hire the best lawyer 
to make clear what is owned by whom. -liik (or landak 
or malaak) yaljlj (1) you're right, what you say is right. 
(2) you have the right, as in law qarab-ak yiblja liik 
yaljlj' tiqrab-u if he hits you you have the right to hit 
him. -la/a yaljlj in the right, as in Yiz-zibuun dayman 
'la/a yaljlj the customer is always right. - fil-yaljlj" 
laleek you are in the wrong. - yaljlj-ak la/ayya 
(1) lowe you an apology. (2) rely on me to defend 
your rights (said to one angered or upset by the action 
of a third party). - yaljlj-i landak you owe me an apolo-
gy. -fi-Ijaljlj- with regard to, (s.o.) as in Yik-ka/aam da 
wiljif fi-Ijaljlj-a-ha such talk could damage her reputa-
tion, ljaalu ka/aam kuwayyis fi-Ijaljlj-ak they spoke well 
of you, Yit-tuhma sabta f-Ijaljlj-u the accusation has 
been proved against him. - wi-Ijaljlj ... (I swear to do 
s.th.) by my obligation to ... , as in wi-yaljlj' gaah 
in-nabi la-Yagib-/ak larabiyya lamma titgawwiz by (my 
obligation to) the mighty Prophet, I swear I'll get you a 
car when you get married, wi-Ijaljlj' min xallaa-k bani 
Yaadam Ij-axalli wiff-akfawaaril by what lowe to Him 
Who made even you a man, I'll cut roads all over your 
face! -xad Ijaljlj-(u) to get (its) due (of attention, time 
etc.), as in lammaf1Uld' ykuun waaxid yaljlj-u when 
the work is being done as it should be, fil-leef 
ma-xad1' yaljlj-u fit-taxmiir the bread wasn't left to rise 
long enough. -kal Ijaljlj-(u) to infringe the rights of 
(s.o.), as in lumr-i-na ma-kalna yaljlj" yadd we've 
never treated anyone unjustly. - fil-leef wil-maly' Iii 
Ijaljlj breaking bread (with another) establishes obliga-
tions. -
IjUljUUlj Ipl nI 5 law (as an academic disci-
pline). kulliyyit il-yuljuulj the faculty of law. xirriig 
IjUljUUlj a graduate in law. 
~ yaljlj' ma in return for, a compensation for. maffii-Ii 
f1uylaana di yaljlj' ma salidt-ak get this business seen 
t~ for me in return for my having helped you. 
~ Ijaljlja ladvl honestly, really, truly. m-aljdar1' 
Yaljul-lik yaljlja xadamtii-na ljadd' Yeeh honestly, 
I can't tell you how much help you've been to us! yaljlja 
I-wa/ad bi-yzaakir (UUI is-sana as God's my witness, the 
boy studies all year long! yaljlja nta xadt' fluus-ak I say, 
did you really get your money? 
. 
J\A. Ijaljljaani ladj °1 just, fair. raagil tayyib wi-
Ijaljljaani a decent aod fair man. 
~~ yaljljaniyya: wizaarit il-yaljljaniyya {obsol] the 
Ministry of Justice. 
216 
~ IjUljlj In pi Yiljljaalj, Ijiljaaljl I small container, 
box, pot. 2 pelvis.llfoolj YUljlj-u w-duljlj-u (1) == finish 
him o'ff immediately, don't hesitate to punish him. 
(2) choose the most efficient plan and carry it out with-
out hesitation. 3! clay body of a funnel-shaped hand 
drum, (loosely) any of a variety of clay or wood funnel-
s~aped drums (see PI.J, 6). 
~ YUljlja = IjUljlj. 
:;.i Yaljaljlj lell morelmost entitled, morelmost de-
serving. Yana Yayaljlj' minnak bii 1 have a better right 
to it than you. 
~ 
Ijaljiilj: bi-Ijaljlj' w-Ijaljiilj really and truly. 
~ 
Ijaljiilja In pi Ijaljaayiljl fact, truth. fii yaljiilja 
muhimma gamb il-Ijaljiilja di there is (another) impor-
tant fact (to consider) along with that one.fil-Ijaljiilja in 
fact. II fil-Ijaljiilja the fact is, to tell the truth, as in 
fil-Ijaljiilja Yiyna salidna Yahl-a-ha f-kull" Ijaaga the 
fact is we helped her family in everything. kaanit 
il-Ijaljiilja lagbaa-ni to tell the truth she had taken my 
fancy. 
..;;;- Ijaljiilji I ladjl 18 true, verifiable. di 
lj~~a 
Ijaljiljiyya this is a true story. Ib real, genuine. da mif. 
Ijall" yaljiilji that's not a real solution. 2 ladvt certainly, 
for sure. di wiljfa Ijaljiilji this is indeed bad. yaljiilji 
ma-kisbuu-f il-mafj' laakin lilbu kwayyis it's true they 
didn't win the match, but they played well. bi-Ijaljlj' 
w-Ijaljiilji really and truly. 
~I Yityaljlj Ivil I to be found to be in the wrong. 2 to 
admit one's fault. Yana Ij-atljaljlj' Iii I'll apologize to 
him. -ava/iva mitljaljlj . 
.j...; I Yinyaljlj = YitYaljlj. -ava/iva minYaljlj. 
J. Ijaqljalj I Ivtl to make (s.th.) come true, fulfil. 
rabb-i-na yljaljljalj-/ak muraad-ak may God make your 
wish come true. 2/vil to carry out an investigation, 
inquiry or interrogation. bi-yyaljljalj mala I-muttaham 
he's interrogating the' accused. -vn taljljiilj; ava 
miyaljljalj . 
~ yaljljalj fi- to scrutinize. yaljljaljt' fil-lafara gneeh 
lafaan Yalraf Yin kaanit muzayyafa walla laY 1 looked 
closely at the ten-pound note to see if it was counterfeit 
or not. 
~ 
taYljiilj In pi -aatl I interrogation. fii malaak 
taljljiilj bukra fil-ljism you will be interrogated tomor-
row at the police station. 2 investigation, inquiry. 
fil-buli~ farag lannu rahn it-taljljiilj the police let him 
go pending investigation, II taljljiilj ~uljafi reportage. 
. 
~ 
muljaqljilj, muljaqqiqt In °1 I interrogator. 
2 !nvestigator. 
~I Yityaljljalj Ivil I to be fulfilled, come true. 

2 (impersonal) passive of 1:Jaqqaq 2. fil-muttaham 
it1:Jaqqaq ma[aa the accused was interrogated. - ava/iva 
mit1:Jaqqaq. 
11 rit1:Jaqqiq min (or fi-) to scrutinize. 
j....:-I rista1:Jaqq 1 Ivtl to deserve, be entitled to, 
merit. yista1:Jaqq· rugra [ala kida is he really entitled to 
be paid for that? yista1:Jaqq· [alqa he deserves a beat-
ing. 2 Ivil to fall due. fil-mablar da yista1:Jaqq· [alee 
yoom xamastaafar maayu he must pay this sum by May 
the fifteenth. mif mista1:Jaqq ... not worth ... , as in 
fil-1:Jikaaya di mif mista1:Jaqqa d~dawfa di kl!ll-a-ha the 
matter is not worth all this fuss. -vn risti1:Jqaaq; ava/pva 
mista1:Jaqq. 
~ 
musta1:Jaqq ladjl (fallen) due, owing. fil-filuus 
il-musta1:Jaqqa [aleek the money you are due to pay. 
II ~il-1:Jaqq i wil-musta1:Jaqq see 1:Jaqq 4. 
~I risti1:JaqqaqJ Ivil to look carefully, peer. -ava 
misti1:Jaqqaq. 
JJe 
JA> 1:Jaq/T In pI 1:Juquul, 1:Juquul/ 1 field, plot of land. 
1:Juquul bitrool oil fields. 2 area of activity. 1:Jaql 
it-ta[liim ig-gaami[i the field of university of education. 
3 tabulation (on a typewriter). 
.;,Je 
.:.,.b 1:Jaqan (i) Ivt/ to inject. bi-yi1:Jqinu I-firaax 
[alafaan ma-tilyaaf they inject the chickens so that 
they do not contract diseases. -vn 1:Jaqn, 1:Jaqanaan; ava 
1:Jaa,qin; pva ma1:Jquun. 
4;.b. 1:Juqna In pl1:Juqanl 1 injection.lI1:Juqnafaragiyya 
enema. 2 hypodermic syringe. II raagil 1:Juqna a thor-
ough pest. 3 malicious story told as an incitement. 
fil-1:Juqan illi mudiir maktab-u b-yiddii-haa-Iu zaUilit-u 
minni the tales his administrative assistant tells him 
have set him against me. 4 psychological boost. natiigit 
l-imti1:Jaan kaanit 1:Juqna tamaam bin-nisbaa-Iu the exam 
result was a real shot in the arm for him. 
~I rit1:Jaqan Ivil to be injected. - iva mit1:Jiqin. 
~I rin1:Jaqan = rit1:Jaqan. -iva min1:Jiqin. 
..}:>I ri1:Jtaqan Ivil {path] 1 to become inflamed. 
~ubaa[-i 1:Jtaqan my finger became inflamed. 2 to be-
come congested. -vn ri1:Jtiqaan; ava mi1:Jtiqin. 
.£le.£le 
~ 
1:Jak1:Jak Ivt/ to rub clean or smooth with repe-
ated action. qa[adit ti1:Jak1:Jak riglee-ha b-1:Jagar il-
1:Jammaam she rubbed away at her feet with the pumice 
stone.llraagil mi1:Jak1:Jak a finicky man. -vn 1:Jak1:Jaka; 
ava/pva mi1:Jak1:Jak. 
217 
~I rit1:Jak1:Jak Ivil to be rubbed clean or smooth. 
-iva mit1:Jak1:Jak. 
,;.£le 
.f- 1:Jikr Inl land or property owned by the govern-
ment and leased to a private tenant. 
,?I ri1:Jtakar Ivt/ to monopolize. ma-y~a1:J1:J i-f 1:Jaddi 
yi1:Jtikir raqwaat iffa[b no one should monopolize 
foodstuffs on which the masses live. -vn ri1:Jtikaar; ava 
mi1:Jtikir. 
J~I ri1:Jtikaar In pI -aatl monopoly. 
~.£le 
~ 1:Jakk (u, i) 1 Ivt/ to rub. laazim ti1:Jukk il-marham 
[al-gar1:J i marriteen fil-yoom you should rub the oint-
ment into the wound twice daily. l11:Jagar 1:Jakk gem-
polishing stone. 2/vil to rub together, grate. lamma 
raduus [ad-dibriyaaj it-turuus bi-t1:Jukk when I step on 
the clutch the gears grind. IImaafi y1:Jukk he stumbles 
along .• vn 1:Jakk, 1:Jakakaan; ava 1:Jaakik; pva ma1:Jkuuk. 
i.... 1:Jakka I 1 linst n, pI -aatl a rubbing, a scraping, a 
grinding. 2 In! {path] scabies. 
~~ 1:Jakkaak: 1:Jagar 1:Jakkaak pumice stone. 
~I rit1:Jakk Ivil to be rubbed. - iva mit1:Jakk. 
~I rin1:Jakk = rit1:Jakk. -iva min1:Jakk. 
~I ri1:Jtakk Ivil 1 to clash, get into conflict (with 
s.o.). xallii-k fi-1:Jaal-ak ma-ti1:Jtakk i-j bi-1:Jadd mind 
your own business and don't interfere with anyone else. 
2 to be in contact, have dealings (with s.o.). -vn 
ri1:Jtikaak; ava mi1:Jtakk. 
.!.I~I ri1:Jtikaak In! 1 friction. 2 social intercourse. 
ril-i1:Jtikaak bin-naas bi-y[allim it-tift izzaay yitlaamil 
mala I-mugtama[ contact with people teaches the child 
how to deal with society. 
('.!.Ie 
r>- 1:Jakam I (u) Ivt/ la to rule over, govern. 1:Jukm 
iffalb i liffa[b the rule of the people by the people. 
l11:Jukm il-1:Jaakim fil-ma1:Jkuum tyranny, oppression, as 
in bi-y[amluu-na 1:Jukm il-1:Jaakim fil-ma1:Jkuum they 
treat us like slaves. Ib to arbitrate in. miin 1:Ja-yu1:Jkum 
il-mat! who will referee the match? Ie to declare (a 
verdict). ril-ma1:Jkama 1:Jakamit baraara the court de-
clared a verdict of not guilty. 2a to control, regulate. 
talla bitti may~a 'ma-1:Jadd i-j [aari! yu1:Jkum-ha she is 
turning into a spoilt girl - no one can control her. 
bi-yfidd il-xeet [afaan yu1:Jkum taxaanit il-muuna he 
pulls the string tight to regulate the thickness of the 
mortar. II rana ma1:Jkuum bi-waqt my time is limited. 
2b to hold tightly in position, grip. 
fil-wiffeen 

bi-Yliaffilu l-mutoor wi-b-yuljkumuu the two surfaces 
close up the motor and hold it together. 3 to coincide 
with. yUljkum yoom rarbac it falls on a Wednesday. 
- Ivi/4 to pass judgement, declare a verdict. Ijakamu 
liyya they passed judgement in my favour. Ijakamu 
calayya they condemned me. ril-liaaqi b-yuljkum 
bi-/arc il-muslimiin the judge rules according to Muslim 
law (i.e. with justice). rabb-i-na Ijakam calayya raciif 
fil-Ijaraam Our Lord condemned me to live in sin. 
II ri;-;uruuf Ijakamit bi-kida circumstances so ruled. 
- ma-yuljkum-/ [women in trad soc] "" God forbid! how 
could you ever think such a thing? (sarcastically, in 
badinage). -/impersonally/ljakamit kida this is the way 
it (has) happened (and there is nothing anyone can do 
about it). 5 to grip, hold tightly. r~-~amuula b-tuljkum 
cal- ramyant the nut grips onto the asbestos. - vn Ijukm; 
ava Ijaakim; pva maljkuum. 
1Iljakam cala lusually imperf and neg! to possess, as in 
ma-yuljkum-/ illa cala murattab-u he has nothing but 
his salary. -Ijakam rilla to insist, as in rumm-u Ijakamit 
rilla yruulj il-madrasa his mother insisted that he go to 
school. 
r>- ljakam 2 (i)./vtl to exercise firm control over. 
riljkim iid-ak tighten your grip. riljkim in-nifaan take 
firm aim. - vn Ijakamaan; ava Ijaakim; pva maljkuum. 
r>- Ijukm In pi raljkaamll judgement, verdict, sent-
ence.ljuwwa waaxid Ijukm' xamastaafar sana he's been 
sentenced to fifteen years. II riq-qaruura liiha raljkaam 
"" privation compels people to do things they would not 
normally consider. 2 stipulation, provision. raljkaam 
qanuun il- rigra raat ig-gina riyya the stipulations of the 
criminal procedures law. - ladvl 3 imperatively, 
necessarily. Ijukm' laazim nizuur-u we absolutely must 
visit him. 
rS"~ Ijaakim J 
Inl 
I Ipl 
Ijukkaaml 
ruler. 
2 Ipl 
Ijawaakiml any of a variety of control or adjust devices 
(e.g., valve, stabilizer). - Iconjl 3 because, for. 
ma-ruljt'-/ if-fwd in-nahar-da Ijaakim rana ma-nimt'-/ 
kiwayyis I didn't go to work today because I hadn't 
slept well. kallim-ni b-zOOli Ijaakim rana m-agii-/ bil-
cafya speak to me politely - brusqueness doesn't work 
on me. 
~ 
Ijikma In/l wisdom.llljikmit-ak ya rabb "" Lord, 
your wisdom is too deep for man to understand (said in 
the face of an incomprehensible event). - di Ijikmit 
rabb-i-na (such is our Lord's wisdom) it's beyond our 
comprehension, but this is the way things are. - ramma 
Ijikam how very strange! 2 Iplljikaml maxim, adage. 
r>- Ijakam J Inil Ipl Ijukkaaml referee, umpire, arbi-
ter, judge.llx~m' w-Ijakam [prov] opponentand judge 
218 
(at one and the same time). 2 Ino pll Righteous Judge 
(epithet of God). 
~ 
Ijakama In pi -aatl I thick pad placed under the 
yoke of a draught animal to prevent chafing. 2 bit (of a 
bridle). 
... ~ 
Ijukuuma 
In 
pi -aatl 
I government. II bil-
Ijukuuma by force, as in mif xaarig wala bil-Ijukuuma 
nothing will force me to go out. -raalj yiljaasib il-
Ijukuuma [slang] he went to the lavatory. 2 ril-
Ijukuuma [slang] the wife, the missus . 
..r~ Ijukuumi ladj *1 governmental. ril-gihaat il-
Ijukumiyya government bodies. 
~ 
Ijakiim Ipl Ijukamal I Inl physician, doctor. 
2 ladjl wise, sensible, prudent. xad il-callia iii mWl¥~i 
caleeha l-Ijakiim he got the beating a wise man would 
prescribe for the likes.of him (Le. the beating he de-
serves). - Ino pl/3 Inl the All-wise (epithet of God). 
i....$- Ijakiima In pi -aatl 1 woman doctor. 2 qualified 
nurse or midwife. 
~ 
maljkama I In pi maljaakiml court of law. 
2 linterjl [leg] court in session! (call by court usher to 
announce that the court is convened). 
~I ritljakam Ivil I to be ruled, be governed: 2 to be 
controlled, be regulated. 3 to be held tightly in posi-
tion, be gripped. 4 to be refereed. 5 to be passed (of a 
sentence). - iva mitljikim. 
~ 
Ijakkim I Ivtl to appoint as judge or arbitrator. 
law Ijakkimuu-ni cala s-sitt' di la-raglid-hafil-midaan if 
they put me in judgement over that lady I'd have her 
flogged in the square! hayrit taljkiim committee of arbi-
ters. kaan laazim raljakkim calil-i I should have used 
my head. Illjakkim rary-(u) he insisted. 2 to put in 
control. 
rabb-i-na ma-yljakkim-ak cala 
walaaya 
[women in trad soc] may God never put you in charge of 
a helpless woman! 3 to insist on.ljakkimt innaha tinzil 
mil-beet is-saaca talaata ~-~ublj I insisted on her leaving 
the house at three in the morning. - Ivi/4 to referee. 
miin Ija-yljakkim fil-mat! who will referee the match? 
S to fix tightly, seal well. Ijakkim cala l-Ijanafiyya turn 
the tap off tightly. -vn taljkiim; ava/pva miljakkim. 
pi ritljakkim Ivil 1 to be placed in judgement. 
ritljakkim calayya iii yiswa wi-iii ma-yiswaaf every 
Tom, Dick and Harry was allowed to do whatever he 
liked with me. 1 to become determined, insist. 
ritljakkim las-safar in-nahar-da he insisted on travel-
ling today. -vn taljakkum; ava/iva mitljakkim. 
11 ritljakkim fi- to keep under control. tilidar titljakkim 
fil-maxrata zayy I ma-nta laayiz you can control the 
lathe in any way you like. bi-titljakkim Jiyya kida leeh 
why are you trying to keep me under your thumb. 

rS'1.. lJaakim 1 Ivtl to try, take to court. lJa-nlJaakim 
il-muhandis illi rakkib il-kablaat rala( we're going to 
prosecute the engineer who installed the cables wrong-
ly. -vn milJakma; ava milJaakim. 
4.S6f mulJakma In pI -aatl trial. 
rS'~\ fitlJaakim Ivil to be tried, be taken to court. - iva 
mitlJaakim. 
r>s mulJkam ladjl sealed, tightly closed. 
~\ filJtakam Ivil to gain possession. faah law 
falJtikim lala fait gneeh ah, if only I could get hold of a 
thousand pounds! -ava milJtikirn. 
~\ fistalJkim Ivil H to gain possession. fistalJkim 
lala lmarteen he became the owner of two apartment 
buildings. 2T to take hold, become entrenched. 
fil-fikra stalJkimit fi-muxx-i the idea took hold of me. 
mafaakil 
mustalJkima 
chronic 
problems. 
- vn 
fistilJkaam; ava mistalJkim, mustalJkim. 
..::.~\ fistilJkamaat Ipl nl {mil] fortifications. 
~\ fistilJakkimJ Ivil to behave tyrannically. -ava 
mistilJakkim. 
-~r~c. 
)~ lJikimdaar <T hiikiimdar> In pi -iyyal one 
with executive authority (e.g., officer in charge of a 
police station, plane crew, tank crew etc., prefect in a 
school). 
~)~ lJikimdariyya In pi -aatl chief of police's 
office. 
~~c. 
..?- lJaka (i) I Ivtl to tell, relate. lJ-alJkii-lak fizzaay 
iggawwizt I'll tell you the story of how I got married. 
2 Ivil to tell stories. c;aladna nilJki lala /Ii fufnaa fil-
lJarb we sat around telling stories about what we saw in 
the war. -vn lJaky, lJikaaya; ava lJaaki; pva malJki. 
~~ lJikaaya Inll matter, affair. fiI-lJikaaya di zaadit 
lan lJadd-a-ha this business has gone too far. feeh 
lJikayt-u malaak what's his business with you? 
ma-xadti-j baal-i mil-lJikaaya di I didn't think of that. 
da-nta IJkayt-ak mihabbiba you're in a terrible fix. 
fis-sittaat bi-yilmilu 1-lJikaaya di women do this sort of 
thing. II feeh lJikayt-ak what's the matter with you? 2 Ipl 
-aat, lJakaawU I story, tale. fir-raagil da c;al-Ii IJkaaya 
rariiba that man told me a strange story. 
~\ fitlJaka Ivil to be told (of a story). lJikaaya 
rariiba tlJakit lannu a strange tale was told of him. - iva 
mitlJiki. 
~\ finlJaka = fitlJaka. -iva minlJiki. 
~ 
lJakka 1 1/vtl to tell (s.o.) stories, entertain (s.o.) 
with tales, the news etc. lJakkii-na fwayya come and 
219 
chat with us and tell us what's been going on. 2 Ivil to 
chat. c;aldiin nilJakki mala balt/. we're chatting to one 
another. -vn talJkiyya; ava milJakki. 
I Y Jc. 
..,...l. lJalab (i) Ilvtl to milk. nic;uul (oar yic;uulu 
filJlibuu {prov] (we say it's a bull, they say milk it) we're 
talking at cross purposes. II tifiUI-ji b-yilJlibuu you'd say 
they keep him to milk him (from the way they take such 
good care of him). -lJalb in-nuguum {magic] a cere-
mony performed to gain or regain love. 2 Ivil to give 
milk, produce milk. fiI-bac;ara b-tilJlib kitiir the cow 
gives a lot of milk. -vn lJalb,lJilaaba,lJaliib; ava lJaalib; 
pva malJluub. 
...,...L.. lJaliib Inl milk. -/adjectivallyllaban lJaliib (fresh) 
milk. 
~ 
lJaliiba: c;a(al i1-lJaliiba wir-rayba (to cut off the 
fresh milk and the curdled) to cut off all help, as in 
fil-lJukuuma c;a(alit 1-lJaliiba wir-rayba the government 
has left us completely in the lurch. 
~ 
malJlab Inl I {bot] mahaleb (Prunus mahaleb). 
2 a sort of crisp round bread or biscuit made with 
mahaleb. 
~ 
malJlaba In pi malJaalibl earthenware crock (see 
PI.A,3). 
~ 
malJlabiyya Inl oil of mahaleb (used in 
cosmetics). 
~\ fitlJalab Ivil to be milked. -iva mitlJilib . 
...,...t...:..\ fistalJlib Ivtl to suck (e.g .. pastilles). -vn 
fistilJlaab; ava mistalJlib; pva mustalJlab . 
~ 
mustalJlab In pi -aatl {chem] emulsion. 
2( yJ c. l 
4,1.. lJalba In pi lJalbaatl ring, arena. lJalbit mulakma 
boxing ring. lJalbit rafi~ dance floor. 
4,1.. lJilba Inll fenugreek. 2 an infusion of fenugreek. 
V" V"y J C. 
4 
lJalabissa (also furl il-lJalabissa) Inl rascally and 
devious behaviour, hanky-panky. 
eJc. 
& lJalag (i) Ivtl to gin (cotton). wabuur lJaliig ginning 
mill. -vn lJalg, lJilaaga, lJaliig; ava lJaalig; pva malJluug. 
~~ lJilaaga Inl cotton-ginner's trade. 
~ 
lJaliig Inl ginned cotton. 
~ 
malJlag In pi malJaaligl ginning mill. 
~\ fitlJalag Ivil to be ginned. - iva mitOilig. 
~\ finlJalag = fitlJalag. -iva minlJilig. 

Jc.Jc. 
J...l> l.Jall.JiI Ivti to budge. saeteen lala rna l.Jall.Jiluu 
min matral.J-u (it took) two hours for them to move it 
from its place. -vn l.Jall.Jala; ava/pva mil.Jall.Jal. 
J...6'1 fitl.Jall.Jillvil to be budged. - iva mitl.Jall.Jal. 
.jj J C. 
<J.J:).. l.Jalazoon In! spiral. 
~.J:).. l.Jalazoona In pi -aatl 18lobsol] horse-drawn 
tram or bus. IIbitaaeit iI-l.Jalazoona a whore. Ib lrur, 
obsol] bus. 2a Archimedes' screw (see PI.E, 15). 
2b metal scoop wheel (see PI.E, 22). 
J.J:).. l.Jalazooni ladjl spiral, helical. tirs' l.Jalazooni 
worm gear. sillim l.Jalazooni a spiral staircase. 
U'" J C. 
~ 
l.Jils In pi fil.Jlaas, l.Jilaasllrur] saddle blanket of a 
camel. 
I~Jc. 
....ib. l.Jilif, l.Jalaf (i) Ivil to swear an oath, gives one's 
pledge. l.Jilifna .nit/.rab-ak law futl' min hina we have 
sworn to beat you if you pass this way. l.Jilfit la-tfarraq 
leeJ lis-sayyida l.Jalaawit nagaat-u she made a vow to 
distribute bread (to the poor) for the sake of Sayyida 
Zaynab to celebrate his rescue. I.J-addii-Iak lalqa til.Jlif 
biiha {Uul lumr-ak I'll give you a beating to swear by for 
the rest of your life! II fin-naas bi-til.Jlif bi-l.Jayaat-u == 
people have nothing but good to say about him. -qaalu 
1iI-l.Jaraami fil.Jlif - qaal gaa-Iak iI-farag Iprov] == a 
thiers honour is of little worth. -vn l.Jilfaan; ava l.Jaalif. 
1II.Jiliflaia (1) to bind someone by an oath, be insistent 
(that s.o. do s.th.). l.Jilif lala mraat-u ma tuxrug he 
swore that his wife should not go out. l.Jilif lalayya 
l-al¥adda malaa he insisted I must have lunch with 
him. (2) to forswear. l.Jilif lala I-l.JaJiif he swore off 
hashish. 
<J~ l.Jilfaan In pi -aatloath. 
....ib. l.Jilf In pi fal.JlaafT I pact, alliance, treaty. riI-l.Jilf 
iI-fatlasi the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. 
4iI~ mul.Jalfa In pi -aatl pact, alliance, treaty . 
...J... l.Jallif Ivtl I to adjure, cause to take an oath. 
l.Jallifuu-ni b-finni m-atgawwiz-J' l-yaayit ma fatimm' 
talaata w-lifriin sana they made me swear I would not 
marry untii I was twenty-three. 2 t? finish off com-
pletely, use up utterly. kifaaya dalk' fil-l.Jalla - finti 
l.Ja-tl.Jallifii-ha that's enough scrubbing at the pan -are 
you trying to scour it all away! -vn tal.Jliif; ava mil.Jallif. 
~I fitl.Jalliflvi/l to be adjured. 2 to resolve to inflict 
suffering. -ava/iva mitl.Jallif. 
220 
....iI1.'1 fitl.Jaalif Ivil to make an alliance. fitl.Jalfu mala 
balt/.' t/.idd iI-laduw they made an alliance against the 
enemy. -vn taI.Jaaluf; ava mitl.Jaalif. 
....ib..;....1 fistal.Jlif I Ivil to resolve to inflict suffering (on 
s.o.) da mistal.Jlif-1i he's out to get me, he has it in for 
me. 21 Ivti to adjure fastal.Jlif-ak bi-bn-ak tisalid-ni by 
(the love you bear) your son, I plead with you to help 
me. -vn fistil.Jlaaf; ava mistal.Jlif. 
....u........1 fistaI.Jallif = fistal.Jlif. -ava mistal.Jallif. 
Z~Jc. 
ll.l. •• ~ 
l.Jalfa In! {bot] alfa esparto, haifa grass. 
Ilxud bi-l.Jaqq-ak l.Jalfa wi-l.Jraq-u Iprov] (ex~rcise your 
full rights, even if you're only entitled to l.Jalfa which 
you will then bum) don't give up anything you have a 
right to even if it is completely worthless. 
~~ l.Jalfaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a blade of haifa grass. 
3 ~ J C. see ~.J J J C. : l.Jalluuf, l.Jalluufa 
I J J C. 
~ 
l.Jalaq I (a) I/vti 18 to shave (beard, head), cut 
(hair). fil.Jlaq-1i daqn' w-Jalr give me a shave and hair-
cut. l.Jalaquu-1i raas-i they shaved my head. maeguun 
l.Jilaaqa shaving cream. makanit l.Jilaaqa razor. 
IImuluxiyya mal.Jluuqa coarse-chopped muluxiyya. 
Ib to strip (a screw thread). 2 Ivilla to have a shave or 
haircut.2b to strip, be stripped (of a screw thread). -vn 
l.Jalq, l.Jilaaqa; ava l.Jaaliq; pva maI.Jluuq. 
4i6. l.Jalqa linst n, pi -aatl a shave, a haircut. IIl.Jalqa 
ngiliizi a crewcut. 
~ 
l.Ja/iiq r ladjl shaven.l.Jaliiq id-daqn clean-shaven. 
raagill.Jaliiq id-daqn a clean-shaven man. 
,j~ l.Jallaaq In "I barber, men's hairdresser.l.Jallaaq 
~-~il.Jl.Ja Irur. obsol] barber-surgeon. 
~I fitl.Jalaq Ivill to be barbered, be shaved. 2 to be 
stripped (of a screw~hread). -iva mitl.Jiliq. 
Z J J C. 
~ 
l.Jalq In pll.Juluuq, l.Juluqa/l throat. 2 frame (ofa 
door, window etc.). 3 neck (of, e.g., a bottle). 
~ 
l.Jalaq 2 Inlllcolll ring(s), circle(s).l.Jalaq sataayir 
curtain rings. 2 Ipll.Jilqaan. l.Julqaanl pair of earrings. 
fardit l.Jalaq an earring. lIyiddi 1-l.Jalar; Ii-lli bala wdaan 
{prov] (He gives earrings to those who have no ears) == 
the best goes to those least equipped to appreciate it. 
4i6. l.Jalaqa In pi -aat, l.Jalqaat, l.Julqaanl I lunit 01 a 
ring, a circle. l.Jalaqit mafatiil.J key ring. r;aGlad-na 
l.Jalaqa lal-l.J~iira he sat us in a circle on the mat. 
IIl.Jalaqit mulakma boxing ring. -l.Jalaqit zikr a Sufi 

gathering for chanting the name of God. 2 section in a 
market devoted to selling a particular commodity. 
Ijalat:;it i/-xut/.aar market area where vegetables are 
sold. 3 episode (in, e.g., a television or radio serial). 
IIlala Ijalt:;aat (1) in instalments, bit by bit. (2) from 
time to time, as in bi-y~uumu lala Ijalt:;aat {jocJ they fast 
sporadically. 
~ 
Ijalat:;i ladjl ring-shaped, circular. 
:(;1.. Ijalat:;iyya 
In! 
surrounding 
circle. 
t/.arabu 
Ijalat;iyya Ijawalee they encircled him. 
~ 
Ijallat:; Ivii I to move about so as to block routes of 
escape.ljallat:; Ijuufcut him off and catch him! (cry after 
a thief or escaped animal).ljallat:;u lalayya w-t/.arabuu-
ni they cornered me and beat me. Ijallat:; lalayya fik-
kalaam he tried to stop me making my point. 21 to 
circle in the air. -vn taljliit:;; ava miljallat:;. 
~I fitljallat:; 
Ivil 
I to 
set 
in 
a 
ring-shape. 
2 impersonal passive of Ijallat:; 1. fitljallat:; lalayya 
I was cornered. - ava/iva mitljallat:;. 
rJJc 
r.,.a.. Ijalt:;uum In pi Ijalat:;iiml throat, gullet. 
I.J J C 
J.. Ijall l (i) Ivtll to undo, untie. bi-yljilliNamuula he 
unscrews the nut. Ijall iI-lut:;da he untied the knot. 
IIyi8i11i w-yurbu{ to exercise effective power, get things 
done (usually in negative contexts), as in la yljilli wala 
yurbu{ he's ineffective. -miji lala Ijall i falr-u to do as 
one likes with no regard for convention. -Ijill-i-ni 
lamma ...... it's bound to take a long time for ... , as in 
Ijill-i-ni lamma yirgal ... it will be ages before he comes 
back. 2 to solve. mUfkila ma-yljilli.haa1 rilla rabb-i-na 
a problem only our Lord can solve, a very tough prob-
lem. 3 to dissolve. Ijall i fwayyit lambar fil-t:;ahwa he 
dissolved a little ambergris in the coffee. 4 to disperse, 
break up. Ijallu g-gamliyya they dissolved the associa-
tion. 5 {ChrJ Sa to absolve of sin. Ijill-i-ni ya-buu-na 
give me absolution, Father. rabb-i-na yljill-ak God 
grant you remission of your sins. Sb to grant sanction to 
(s.o., of a priest). - Ivi/6 to dissolve. fis-sukkar Ijall i 
fil-mayya the sugar dissolved in the water. II ril-alwaan 
Ijallit the colour ran. 7 to become loose, come undone. 
riNawamiilljallit mala surlit iI-mutoor the bolts work-
ed loose with the speed of the motor. II ral~aab-i Ijallit 
my nerves are in shreds. -Ijilla lanni leave me alone! 
8 to come into or upon (s.o. or s.th.). Ijallit ir-roolj 
fi-gasad-u he revived. Ijuluul ir-roolj iI-qudus {ChrJ 
(1) the descent of the Holy Spirit. (2) epiclesis. 
ril-m~aayib illi Ijallit laleena the disasters that befell 
221 
us. -vn Ijalalaan, Ijuluul, Ijall; ava Ijaalil; pva maljluul . 
• ljalli maljall (or makaan-) to take the place of. miin 
Ija_yljilli makaan-ak lamma tkuun fi-fagaaza who'll 
take your place when you're on holiday? 
j.. ljall 2 /n pi -Ijuluull solution. mufkila ma-lhaa1ljall 
an insoluble problem. 
J.,Lo= maljluuli/n pi -aat, maljaliill {chemJ solution. 
2/adj *1 sexually impotent. 
~ Ijalla I In pi -aat I instance noun of Ijall. 2 = ljall2 • 
- Ipl Ijilall 3 metal cooking-pot. IIljallit fum or Ijallit 
keek cooking-pot constructed to produce results com-
parable with those of oven cookery. -Ijalla rumm a 
~uffaaraJ or Ijalla bristu or Ijallit buxaar pressure cook-
er. - fil-Ijikaaya di Ijalla w-huwwa marrafit-ha ... he 
knows everything about his matter. -Ijalla w-Iat:;eet 
ra{aa-ha I found just what I was looking for. -Ijallit 
I;ittifaat:; food eaten by a couple on their wedding-night. 
J.. Ijillln! {ChrJ I (declaration of) absolution. laazim 
taaxud Ijilli t:;abl it-tanaawul you must receive absolu-
tion 
before 
communion. 
2 sanction, 
privilege. 
riI-t:;assiis bi-yiddi Ijilli liI-layyaan lafaan ma-y~um-f 
the priest gives a sick man permission not to fast. xadti 
Ijillalafaan fadbalj I obtained (from a priest) permis-
sion to slaughter (animals for food). 
• fi-Ijill free to act, having a free hand. rana mif fi-Ijill 
inni rat:;ul-Iak I am not at liberty to tell you. 
~ Ijilla In! metal conduit leading from a water-wheel 
to a ditch. 
J')I... Ijalaal In! what is allowed by the precepts of 
Islam. II fibn (or binta) Ijalaal nice person, decent sort, 
as in wilaad iI-ljalaal filii faafu d-duxxaan ballaru 1-
mataafi the good folk who saw the smoke called the 
fire-brigade. - ribn (or bint) iI-ljalaal ... Mr (or Miss) 
Right, as in mif Ij-atgawwiz filla lamma falaat:;i bint 
iI-ljalaal I shan't marry till I find Miss Right. -filuus 
Ijalaal honestly-gotten gains (which are always ex-
pected to be fruitful), as in ril/i fluus-u Ijalaal yiftiri 
minni {vendor's cryJ ... you'll never go wrong if you buy 
from me! - Ijalaal-i balaal-i or Ijalaal-i zalaal-i it is 
my own to enjoy. - ladjectivallyl fil-filuus i!-Ijalaal 
ma-tt/.il1honestly-earned money will never be lost. 
;a..L.. ljileela J .. ya Ijleela {womenJ linterjl how nice! 
how wonderful! 
J')I... Ijallaal In *1 solver ( of problems), untier (of 
knots). Ijallaal mafaakil or Ijallaal lut:;ad a solver of 
problems, one who gets things put right. kulli lut:;da 
w-/iiha Ijallaal ... there's always someone who can sort 
things out (no matter how complicated a situation may 
~e). 
J.-t maljallln pi -aat/l shop, store, place of business. 

maljall alt' ~anf emporium. maljall' ngaara carpenter's 
shop. ril-maljallaat Cjafia g-gumla the shops are closed 
on Fridays. 1 place. rUCjlud maljall-ak sit where you 
are. bi-yustalmal maljall-u it is used in its place. 
IIkalaam-ak fi-maljall-u == how right you are! -fi-veer 
maljall-(u) inappropriately, unnecessarily, as in wala 
~araft' qirf' f-veer maljall-u I haven't wasted a single 
piastre. 3 (also maljall il-fadab) {euphem] lavatory, 
w.c. 
~ 
maljalli ladjllocal, locally-made. ril-istihlaak il-
~aljalli local consumption. 
~I fitljall Ivil I to be undone, be untied. 1 to be 
solved. 3 to be dissolved. 4 to become sexually impo-
t;nt. -ava/iva mitljall. 
~ 
I finljall = fitljall. - avaliva minljall. 
jb. Ijallil/vt/l to analyse. Ijallilu I-layyinafil-malmal 
they analysed the sample in the lab. 2 {lsi] la to declare 
to be Ijalaal (q.v.). 2b to slaughter (an animal at the 
point of death), so as to make the eating of its flesh 
ritually permissible. -vn taljliil; ava miljallil. 
~ 
taljliil/n/l Ipl -aat, taljaliill analysis. 2 Ipl taljaliil 
o~lyl {Chr] absolution. 
JLr' muljallil In *1 {lsi law. obsol] intermediate hus-
band employed to enable a man to remarry a woman he 
h~s divorced with the threefold repudiation. 
~I fitljallil Ivil passive of Ijallil. -vn taljallul; iva 
~itljallil. 
.F>I filjtall Ivtl to occupy (territory) by force. -vn 
filjtilaal; ava miljtall; pva muljtall. 
~')\:;...I filjtilaallnl military occupation (of an area). 
~ 
muljtaliln *1 occupier, invader. 
. 
J-:-I fistaljalllvtl to consider Ijalaal (q. v.), consider 
fair game. yistaljall' maal in-nabi he would swindle the 
Prophet himself. -ava mistlljill. 
1 J J C 
J.l. Ijalalln pi filjlaall penis. 
J.,.l>.! filjliil/n pi filjlaa/, faljaliill penis. 
";~JJc 
J». Ijalluuf In pi Ijalaliifll boar, pig. 2 (fig] fat, dir-
ty ~r base person. 
;U». Ijalluufa In pi -aat/l sow. 2 {rur] any of various 
types of metal scoop wheel used in irrigation (see PI.E, 
22). 
I r J c 
r.l- Ijilim I (a) Ivil to dream. {uullUmr-i b-aljlam bi-
kida all my life I've dreamed of that. -vn Ijilm; ava 
Ijaalim. Ijalmaan. 
222 
r.l- Ijilm I In pi faljlaaml dream. tafsiir il-faljlaam in-
terpretation of dreams. Ijilm ibliis fig-ganna {provJ 
(Satan's dream of Paradise) a total impossibility. Ijilm' 
w-itfassar a dream come true. 
~ 
I fistaljlim Ivil to have wet dreams. -vn 
fistiljlaam; ava mistaljlim. 
1 r J c 
r.l- ljilim 2 (a) Ivil to behave with patience and res-
traint. laazim tiljlam la/a wlaad-ak you should go easy 
with your children. -vn Ijilm; ava Ijaalim. Ijalmaan. 
r.l- Ijilm 2 Inl tolerance. riI-Ijilm' sayyid il- faxlaaq 
{prov] tolerance is the chief of virtues. Ijilm-ak la/ayya 
be patient with me! Ijil"!-ak/iwayya take it easy! don't 
get het up! 
~ 
Ijaliim I ladj pi Ijulamal tolerant, good-natured. 
2 Inl Patient One (i.e. with sinners) (epithet of God). 
J r J C 
W- Ijalama In pi -aatl nipple, teat.llljalamlt widn ear-
lobe. -Iamma tjuufljalamit widn-ak (when you see your 
earlobe) == when hell freezes over. 
r.;,Jc 
~ 
Ijalangi In pi -yyal swindler. 
r.J J C 
r». Ijaluum <Copt> Inl mild white cured cheese. 
sometimes braided. 
.JJc 
J> Ijili (a) Ivill to be or become attractive, pleasant 
or enjoyable, gain favour. bald' mafna xadt if-Jaqqa 
Ijilyit taam f-leen-u after I had taken the flat he started 
to feel it was attractive again. yiigi ~,~eef wil-qalda 
barra tiljla summer cpmes and sitting in the open be-
comes pleasant. 2 to become sweet. fif-Jaay Ijili zyaada 
lan il-Iuzuum the tea became over-sweet. -vn Ija/a. 
Ijalaawa. Ijiliww; ava Ijaali. 
J> Ijala I (I) Ivtl I to sweeten. ma-tiljlii-J if-/aay fil-
barraad don't sweeten the tea in the teapot. 2 to cheer, 
brighten up. ga Ijala I-qalda he came and cheered up 
the gathering. -vn Ijalayaan; ava Ijaali; pva maljli. 
')b Ijaia Z Inl sweetness. fis-sukkar iI-mikarrar Ija/aa 
faqall refined sugar is less sweet. 
oJ')b Ija/aawa Inl I pleasurableness, pleasantness, 
sweetness. ya Ija/aawa how nice! ya Ija/awit-ha how 
sweet she is! ma-fii-J Ija/aawa min veer naar and filii 
yaakul min Ijalawit-ha yitljammil mararit-ha {prov] == 

there's no pleasure without pain .!lljalawt-ak well done! 
-Ijalaawit (ir-)roolj (final) burst of energy born oCa zest 
for life, final fling, as in fil-xinaaija I-faxiira di bass· 
Ijalaawil roolj the last quarrel is just a final attempt to 
put up a fight, fil-ba{{a I-madbuulja b-tWal timfi 
wi-Ifaifa{ min Ijalaawit ir-roolj a duck that has its throat 
cut goes on walking and jumping about, so strong is the 
hold life has on it. 2 present or treat given in celebra-
tion. Ij-alaffii-k barra Ijalaawil nagaalj-i I'll take you 
out to dinner to celebrate passing my exams. 
ma-linsu-naa-f fil-Ijalaawa don't' overlook us when 
you're treating everyone. 3 any of a variety of sweet-
meats or candies. Ijalaawa (ljiniyya halwah. Ijalaawa 
fuliyya hard white candy encrusted with peanuts. 
Ija/aawa la/af sesame seeds pressed together with 
caramel. Illja/aawit is-sayyid sweetmeats and candies 
made in Tanta for the muulid of the saint el-Sayyid 
el-Badawi. -laruusa Ijalaawa sugar doll of the sort sold 
at the muulid of any saint. -kallaijl-(u) b-Ijalaawa to 
dupe (s.o.). -bi-yilbaal zayy iI-lja/aawa ... it sells like 
hot cakes. 4 depilatory paste made from sugar, water 
and lemon juice. 
j> Ijilw I lad j *1 la sweet (to taste). II zeet Ijilw com-
mon cooking oil. -mayya Ijilwa fresh water. Ib nice, 
good.ljilwa kida is that O.K.? ka/aam-u Ijilw he speaks 
well. wacf.cf.abl iI-ba{aa{is wil-makaroona w-xallet-hum 
mil-Ijilwiin I prepared the potatoes and pasta and made 
them really nice. wabbaxl-u b-kaam kilma Ijilwiin la/-
haamijI rebuked him with a few well-chosen words in 
passing. ladverbiallyl firsil-u Ijilw wash it well! II nifs-u 
Ijilwa he's easy to please. - fil-Ijilwi ma-yikmal-f /provj 
nothing can be perfect. - Ie good-looking. fakl-a-ha 
l:Jilw she looks pretty. II wijf(-u) l:Jilw· lala ...... (he) 
brings good luck to ... , as in wijf ii-binI inurayyara ga 
l:Jilw· lala fabuu-ha the newborn girl brought her 
father good luck. 2 Inl sweet course (of a meal). 
~ 
l:Jilya 
In 
pi -aall 
decoration, 
ornament, 
embellishment. 
,jl j> Ijilwaan I Inl I remuneration for services ren-
dered. 2 ransom, redemptive price. see further 
under ~.J J C 
~ I j> Ijilwaana: Ijilwaana f-silwaana see silwaana . 
.:;,~j> Ijalawiyyaat Ipl nl I confections, sweetmeats, 
fancy pastries. 2 neck sweetbreads. 
Jlj> l:Jalawaani In pi -yyal confectioner, maker and 
seller of sweetmeats and fancy pastries. 
J..i faljla lell morelmost sweet, lovely, pleasant etc. 
(ya) m-aljla how lovely, as in (ya) m-aljlaa-ha how 
lovely she is! ya m-aljla I-biira f-lizz iI-ljarr how lovely 
to drink beer when the weather's really hot! 
223 
rc. 
i~ Ijileewa ladj invarl goodlooking. waad Ijileewa a 
handsome lad. 
j.. Ijalla 2 Ivtlla to sweeten.ljalli z-zabaadi b-fiwayyit 
lasal sweeten the yoghurt with a little honey. fiddii-ni 
Ijittit baijlaawa faljalli biiha bUijij-i give me a piece of 
baklava to sweeten my mouth. IIljalli bUijij-ak bi-~alaQt 
in-nabi sweeten your mouth with the words 'Blessings 
on the Prophet!' Ib to make pleasant.ljalla l-ijBlda he 
brightened up the gathering. 2 to eat (s.th.) as a des-
sert. bald i ma nilradda layziin niljalli ba{{iix after 
we've eaten we would like water-melon for dessert. 3 to 
decorate, ornament.ljallit iI-fustaan bi-dantilla she de-
c,?rated the dress with lace. -vn taljliyya; ava miljalli. 
~I fill:Jalla Ivil passive of Ijalla. -iva milljalli. 
~I filjlaww Ivil I to be or become sweet (to the 
taste). {alm-u miljliww it tastes sweetish. 2 to become 
pretty. fil-Ijibla lamma tiljlaww i yibija iii !-ba{n-a-ha 
bint when a pregnant woman gets prettier it means she's 
carrying a girl. 3 to become enjoyable, become 
pleasant. fid-dinya Ijlawwit !i-leen-i I started to enjoy 
life. -ava miljliww. 
J..I filjlayy = filjlaww. -ava miljlayy. 
~I fislaljla Ivtl to consider pleasant, find enjoy-
able. fistaljleet ii-film I enjoyed the film. - ava mistaljli. 
~'.JJc 
,jlj> ljilwaan 2 Iprop nl He1wan, a residential and in-
dustrial town to the south of Cairo. 
Jlj> l:Jilwaani ladj *1 from Helwan. fig-giir iI-
Ijilwaalli Helwan limestone. 
~.J J C see also .J J C 
,jj> l:Jalwin I Ivtl to sweeten (the mouth, of food). 
Ijaaga Iljalwin iI-buijij something to sweeten your 
mouth. 2 Ivil to eat or taste something sweet. II fana 
mljalwin I fancy eating something sweet. -vn Ijalwana; 
avalpva mil:Jalwin. 
1Iljalwin la/a to pay for the return of, redeem, ransom. 
Ijalwin la/-baijara lamma riglil he paid for the return of 
the (stolen) cow. 
j, ~ JC 
~ 
Ijalya{ Ivil to toady, make up (to s.o.). -vn 
Ijalya(a. 
.l.~ Ijilyaa( In ·1 toady. 
rc 
~ Ijama I In, in constr Ijamaa-I father-in-law. 

.u- .~ I.Jama] In, in constr I.Jamaat-, pi I.Jamawaatl 
mother-in-law. riI-I.Jama lama [prov] a mother-in-law 
is (as hard to bear as) blindness. I.Jamaat-i mnaqra qaal 
(allaq bint-a-ha [prov] (he said) 'My mother-in-Iaw's a 
plague!' Someone told him, 'Divorce her daughter!' (of 
one who complains of a situation whose solution is in his 
own hands).III.Jamaat-ak bi-tI.Jibb-ak you've come at the 
right time (to one who arrives when food is being 
served). 
..b y r c:. see ..b y I.J c:. : I.Jambuu(, I.Jamba( 
Jc:.rc:. 
~ 
I.JamI.Jar Ivil to set one's sights (on s.th.). 
bi-yI.JamI.Jar lak-kitaab da he is out to get that book by 
any means. -vn I.JamI.Jara; ava miI.JamI.Jar. 
rc:.rc:. 
~ 
I.JamI.Jam Ivil 1 to flutter the wings (especially of a 
pigeon). 2a to puff itself up, prance, strut etc., prior to 
mating (of animals and birds). 2b to become sexually 
aroused. -vn I.JamI.Jama; ava miI.JamI.Jam. 
~ I.JamI.Jam lala to give protective care to (s.o.). 
I.JamI.Jam la/a I-liyaal wijaafma~aliI.J-hum he cared for 
the children and looked after their interests. 
~ r c:. 
.u- I.Jamad (i) Ivil to praise, give thanks to (God).la/a 
I-lumuum iI-waaI.Jid yiI.Jmid rabb-i-na "" anyway, one 
isn't too badly off. II fiI.Jmid rabb-i-na "" count your 
blessings! -vn I.Jamd; ava I.Jaamid; pva maI.Jmuud. 
.u- I.Jamd Inl praise. fiI-I.Jamdu 1i-lIaah praise be to 
God! (used (1) in reply to any enquiry after one's well-
being. (2) as a grace after eating. (3) as an expression 
of relief or satisfaction). I.Jamd ilia las-sa/aama praise 
be to God for (your) safety! (sajd (1) to one arriving at 
the end of a journey. (2) to one who has just recovered 
from an illness. (3) to a woman who has just given 
birth) . 
.u-i faI.Jmad Iprop nl male given name. II fabu faI.Jmad 
"" big shot. 
';:'I.u-i faI.Jmadaat: fabu faI.Jmadaat [obsol] green tar-
bush with a white tassel, formerly worn by the Alexan-
drian milallim, hence such expressions as laabis fabu 
faI.Jmadaat dressed like an Alexandrian, milallim 
lamil-Ii fabu faI.Jmadaat trying to lord it over me (in the 
manner attributed to Alexandrian milallimiin). 
~.u-i faI.Jmadi: fil-busaa( faI.Jmadi welcome! there's 
room for everyone and anyone. xa~1i I-busaa( faI.Jmadi 
let's keep things friendly! 
224 
.J.::.I"" I.Jamiid Inl Praiseworthy One (epithet of God). 
~.J.::.I"" I.Jamiidi ladjl [path] benign. waram I.Jamiidi a 
benign tumour. 
I J.r c:. 
r-I faI.Jmar J ladj, fern I.Jamra, pi I.Jumrl red, reddish-
brown. II faI.Jmar fingiliizi fire-engine red. - faI.Jmar 
fafaayif lipstick. -I.J~aan faI.Jmar a bay horse. -(uub 
faI.Jmar fired bricks. -/aI.Jma I.Jamra lean meat. - naI.Jaas 
faI.Jmar copper. - fabu kalb aI.Jmar a baby. - fig-ginn 
iI- faI.Jmar the most powerful of the jinn. - wa/a g-ginn 
iI- faI.Jmar yiqdar yigiib-u "" nothing on earth could 
make him come, it is impossible to make him come. 
- warra(a) I-leen iI-I.Jamra to be intimidatingly severe 
(toward s.o.), as in fis-sikirteera tlawwidit la/a qil/it 
iI- fadab bass iI-mudiir ig-gidiid warraa-ha I-leen iI-
I.Jamra the secretary had habitually been very rude, but 
the new director let her know what he thought of that! 
Jlr-i faI.Jmaraani ladjl reddish. 
• r- I.Jumra Inl 1 [path] erysipelas, St. Anthony's fire. 
2 Icolll broken bricks. 
.)u- I.Jamaar Inl redness, reddish-browness, ruddiness. 
lII.Jamaar wi-I.Ja/aawa ya ba((iix water-melon vendor's 
cry"" it looks good and tastes good! 
.)~ maI.Jmuur ladjl afflicted with laminitis (of a 
h?rse). 
r- I.Jammar Ivtl 1 [cook] to fry (particularly in samn) . 
ba(aa(is miI.Jammara potato chips, French .fries. 2 to 
make red. bi-yI.Jammar iI-leen it makes the eye in-
flamed. lII.Jammar-lu qafaa give him a slapping on the 
back of the neck! -I.Jammar-lu leen-ak be very strict 
with him, show him you won't put up with any non-
sense! -vn taI.Jmiir; avalpva miI.Jammar. 
~I fitI.Jammar Ivil [cookJ to be fried (particularly in 
samn). -iva mitI.Jammar. 
::"""1 fiI.Jmarr Ivil to burn red, turn reddish-brown. 
fiI-fustaan iI.Jmarr' mis-sabra the dress turned red from 
the dye. fiI-ba/aI.J iI.Jmarrthe dates (ripened and) turned 
red. wiJJ-i I.Jmarr I blushed. fiI.Jmarreet qawi fi-
skindiriyya you got very sunburned in Alexandria. -vn 
fiI.Jmiraar; ava miI.Jmirr. 
~I fistaI.Jmar J /vtl 1 to consider red. 2 to select for 
redness. -ava mistaI.Jmar. 
1 Jrc:. 
.)U- I.Jumaar In pi I.Jimiirl 1 male donkey, jackass. 
IIxallaa-ha ba(n' I.Jmaar [provJ "" he added insult to 
injury. - feef larraf iI-I.Jimiir bi- fakl ig-ganzabiil[provJ 
(what taught donkeys to eat ginger?) "" what's the point 

of throwing pearls before swine? -muul ya Ijmaar Gala 
ma ygii-lak il-lalii(j [prov} (you will be a dead donkey 
before the fodder comes) you have a long wait ahead of 
you. -sikitnaa-lu daxal bi-Ijmaar-u = we gave him an 
inch and he took a mile. -Ijumaar waljfi or Ijumaar 
mixatta( zebra. -Ijumaar fuyl grind, swot. - yulub (or 
yilib) Ijumaar-i I give up, I'm stumped. 2 fool, dolt. 
3 any of a variety of supporting devices (e.g., trestle, 
jack). 
0)',.. Ijumaaraln plljimiirlfemale donkey·llijumarl-ak 
il-larga wala sul'aal il-lal'iim [prov} better make do 
with your lame donkey than go to the wicked for help. 
ri I'aljmarz lell morelmost stupid. 
)L,.. Ijammaar I In ° and pI Ijammaaral [obsol} donkey 
driver. 2/adj °1 mannerless, vulgar. 
<.S)L,.. Ijammaari: rikib Ijammaari to ride astride. 
<.S? Ijimmiiri, Ijimmeeri, Ijummeeri: rikib Ijimmiiri 
(etc.) to ride astride. 
~I I'islaljmarz I Ivtl to consider stupid. 2/vil to 
behave stupidly. - ava/pva mislaljmar. 
J.Jrc 
Jr Ijamra(j Ivil to be difficult, be unco-operative, be 
evasive, stall. -vn Ijamra(ja; ava miljamra(j. 
J~I I'illjamra(j = Ijamra(j. -ava milljamra(j. 
J~I l'isliljamra(jJ = Ijamra(j. -ava misliljamra(j. 
..,. (' C 
...,..L.r- Ijamaas Inl enthusiasm, fervour, zeal. 
4.. L.r- Ijamaasa = Ijamaas. balaaf Ijamaasa don't be so 
rash! 
...,..... Ijammis Ivtl to inspire with enthusiasm. -vn 
laljmiis; ava miljammis. 
~I I'illjammis Ivil to become enthusiastic. -vn 
laljammus; ava milljammis, mUlaljammis. 
~rc 
..;..r- Ijamaf (i) Ivtl to scorch, burn. -vn Ijamf; ava 
ljaamiJ; pva maljmuuf. 
4.:..r- Ijamfa linst n, pI -aall a scorching. 
..;..r- ljimiJladj °1 I tough-minded, virile. goz-ha ljimiJ 
mimaffii-ha lal-lagiin ma-Ilaxba(-uu-fher husband is a 
real man; he really makes her behave herself. 2 crisply 
roasted. ljimiJ wi-laziiz ya ma(jli [vendor's cry] crisp 
roasted peanuts! 
~I I'illjamaf Ivil to be scorched, be burnt. - iva 
milljimiJ· 
...;...-; I I'inljamaf = I'illjamaf. - iva minljimiJ. 
225 
~.rc 
~ 
Ijumm~ Icoll nl chick-pea(s). sala{il Ijumm~ a 
dip of ground chick-pea, sesame seed, garlic and 
lemon. Ijumm~ iJ-faam hot, spicy drink made with 
whole chick-peas. lI(ilil mil-muulid bala Ijumm~ 
[prov} he left the fair without any chick-peas (of one 
who gets nothing out of an affair from which he might 
ex~ect to profit). 
~ 
Ijumm~a In pI -aatl I lunit nl a chick-pea. 
IIlamalljumm~a to apply a chick-pea to a boil or the 
like to draw out the pus. 2 cloaca (of a chicken). 3 [rur} 
pond in a field (for drainage). 
~ 
Ijumm~iyya (also Ijalaawa Ijumm~iyya) Inl 
hard. white candy studded with dried chick-peas. 
Jl......r-
Ijumm~aani: zaraayir Ijumm~aani buttons 
made of knotted thread. 
~ 
maljm~ In pI -aal, maljaami~1 oven for roasting 
coffee beans, peanuts and seeds. 
~ 
maljma~a = maljma~. 
~ 
Ijamm~ Ivtl I to parch (seeds or grain). 
bi-nljamma~ id-dura (jabl i ma nixzin-ha we parch the 
maize before storing it. bi-yljamm~ is-sudaani he 
roasts the peanuts.lIleefmiljamm~ crisp dried bread. 
2 [phys] to superheat. -vn laljmi~; aVa/pva miljamm~. 
~I I'illjamm~ Ivil I to be dried by heat (of food). 
2 to become crisp or brittle. I'ik-kawilf (jidim wi-
Iljamm~ the rubber got old and brittle. 3 [phys) to be 
superheated. - iva milljamm~ . 
~rc 
.p Ijimiq or Ijumuq (a) Ivil to go bad (of cooked food 
or fruit), go sour (of milk). -vn Ijamaqaan; ava Ijaamiq, 
Ijamqaan. 
.;z..6. Ijaamiq In pI I'aljmaaq, Ijawaamiql acid. 
.p Ijimq = Ijaamiq. 
~ 
y- Ijumuuqa Inl acidity (of the stomach). 
~ 
y- Ijumuqiyya Inl spoilage (of food), sourness (of 
mil~ that has gone off) . 
.;.~ Ijummaaq Inl [bol} sorrel. 
.p Ijammaq Ivtl I [phol} to develop (film). 2 to 
cause (milk) to go sour or (food) to go bad. IIma-
Iljammaq-uu-f [women in Irad soc} don't go too far! -vn 
laljmiiq; ava/pva miljammaq. 
~I I'illjammaq Ivil [phol} to be developed (of 
fi!m). - iva milljammaq. 
.p I I'iljmaqq = Ijimiq. - ava miljmiqq. 
Jrc 
~ 
Ijam(ja Inl (bad) temper, ill-humour, pique. 

.:,l.i.r- yamt;aan ladj *1 overwrought, in a state. 
~ yumqT Inl foolishness, folly. 
~ 
yimat;i ladj pI -yyal quick to take offence, peev-
ish, touchy. 
~i faymaqT ladj, fern yamqa, pI yumql foolish, 
silly. 
..:;~ maymuut; ladj *1 in a state, wrought up. fawwil 
ma simil iI-xabar raay maymuut; bil-liyaa( as soon as 
he heard the news he burst into tears. 
..:;...a I fityamat; Ivii to become worked up, get into a 
state. lamma lfili( ityamat; lalayya when he made a 
mistake, he lost his temper with me. -ava mitYimit;. 
..:;....; I finyamat; = fityamat;. - ava minYimit;. 
1Jrc. 
J.r- yamall (i) Ivtl I to carry (especially a person). 
yamalit ibn-a-ha w-mifyit she picked up her son and 
left. yamal hamm to be laden with care. yamalit hamm-i 
she bore my burdens, she concerned herself with my 
troubles. ma-tiymil-J' hamm don't worry! 2 to put up 
with, tolerate. ma-yiymil-J aktar min kida it can't take 
any more than that. - Ivi/3 to become pregnant. hiyya 
yamalit minnu she became pregnant by him. -vn 
yimlaan, yamalaan, yaml; ava yaamil; pva maymuul. 
~ yamallala to attack (particularly verbally). -yamal 
min to be offended by (s.o. or s.th.). 
J..I.. yaamil Ipl yawaamill I ladjl pregnant. 2t Inl 
stand, support. yaamil garaayid newspaper stand. 
4lr- yamla In pI -aatl I campaign. 2 load, burden, 
care. fiI-liyaal yamla children are a burden. rabb-i-na 
yxaffif yamlit-ak may God lighten your troubles! 
J.r- yimllnll/pl yumuul, faymaallload, burden. xalli 
tawakkul-ak la/-allah wi-rmi I-y/m/d la/-baat;i {prov} 
put your trust in God and cast your load on the Ever-
lasting (or, as a pun: on other~). fiI-yiml' btaal iI-
mutoor the (electric) load on the motor.IlYiml-u xafiif 
his family responsibilities are few. - fans mif yiml-ak 
you're too heavy (or: too much) for me. 2 Ipl yimlaanl 
coarse woollen blanket. 
j.P- yimali ladj/long-suffering, stoic. 
J"..,. yamuulladj "I long-suffering, stoic. 
41"..,. yumuula In/l load, burden (on a vehicle). 2 load 
limit, bearing capacity. yumuulit ik-kubri xamsa (inn 
th~ bridge has a load limit of five tons. 
JLr- yammaal: yammaal i1-fasiyya longsuffering, 
st,!ic, uncomplaining. 
41Lr- yammaa/a In pI -aatl la shoulder strap. fanilla 
b-yamma/aat a sleeveless vest. Ib braces, suspenders. 
2 strap with which to carry a load. 3 trivet, tripod. 
226 
~ 
maymal In pI mayaamill richly decorated camel 
litter; specifically, that formerly sent each year to 
Mecca with the Egyptian pilgrim caravan. 
~I fityamal Ivil to be borne, be carried. - iva 
mitYimil. 
~I finyamal = fitYama/. -iva minYimil. 
J.r- yammillvtl I to load. yammiluu la/a gmaal they 
loaded it on camels. b-ayammil-ak ii-mas fuliyya I hold 
you responsible. lIyammii i1-faraamil to slam on the 
brakes. 2 to support, hold up. fik-kureek bi-yyammil 
iI-larabiyya the jack holds the car up. -vn taymiil; 
avalpva miyammil. 
~ yammil la/a to lean on. yaasis b-dooxa fiddii-ni 
k-kursi fayammillalee I feel giddy, give me the chair 
to lean on. 
~ 
taymiilln pI -aatl {arch} load, weight. 
~ 
taymiila In pI -aatl {auto} block or chock at the 
end of a hydraulic lift ramp which prevents a car from 
rolling off. 
~I fityammillvt/l to endure, put up with. laazim 
nityammil mataalib i1-yayaah we must put up with the 
hardships of life. 2 to take upon oneself. miin 
ya-yityammil i1-masfuliyya who will assume the re-
sponsibility? -/vil 3 to be loaded, be carried. 4 to be 
held up, be supported. 5 to bear a grudge, bear malice. 
mityammil minni min yoom ma Jatamt-u he's had a 
grudge against me ever since the day I swore at him. 
-vn tayammul; avaliva mityammil. 
J..~I fityaamillvil to take sides (against s.o. or s.th.), 
make unreasonable demands (ofs.o.), be hard (on s.o. 
or s.th.). ma-tityamil-J' la/a ba/ad-ak kida don't be so 
hard on your country. ralfm' finni layyaan itYamilt· 
la/a nafs-i w-t;umt iftalfalt although I was ill I braced 
myself and set to work. -vn tayaamul; ava mityaamil. 
J...o..I fiytamal Ivtl to endure, suffer, put up with. 
maskiina - fiytamalit kitiir poor woman, she's had a lot 
to put up with in life. -vn fiytimaa/; ava miytimil; pva 
muytama/. 
~ yuytamal it is possible, there is a possibility. yuytamal 
finnak tit;abl-ufis-sikka you may just meet him on the 
way. 
J~I fiytimaal In pI -aatl possibility. da mugarrad 
iytimaal ya-tiigi bukra it is only a possibility that she 
may come tomorrow. 
~ 
muytamal modal of possibility. muytamal yiigi 
wi-muytamal ma-ygii-J maybe he'll come, maybe he 
won't. 
..J.-.;.-I fistaymil I/vtl to endure, put up with. 
fiz-zahr' b-yistaymil in-naar cast iron withstands fire. 
fistaymilt-ik lamma I-maryuum gooz-ik itwaffa laakin 

dilwa(jti ... I put up with you till your hushand died, but 
now .... 2/vil to last, have stamina. haatii-Iu gazma 
kwayyisa lafaan tistaymil buy him good-quality shoes 
so that they will last. ¥a~hin lan kull' mafakl-ak laazim 
tistaymil no matter what your problems are, you must 
carryon. - vn fistiymaa/: ava mistaYmil. 
2(Jre. l 
~ yamal 2 f In pi yimlaanl I lamb. fil-yamal [astrol] 
Aries. 2 [Chr] offertory, (uncon,secrated) Host. 
<.SJ'j,.,- yamalaawi ladj *1 from HamouI. a village in 
Minufiya. yamalaawi ya xa~~ lettuce vendor's call. 
IUe. 
.? yamma I Ivtl I ~o bath. 2 to water a crop heavily, 
flood a field (e.g .. of rice). - vn taymiyya: avalpva 
miyammi. 
.r yuma Inl bathing. yoom iI-yuma bath day. 
ma-bi-yyibb '-/ ii-yuma he doesn't like bathing. 
~ r- yumuum Inl bathing. yumuum iI-laruusa (or il-
lariis) the bride's (or groom's) traditional ceremonial 
bathing on the night preceding the consummation of a 
m.arriage. 
~I.I- yammaam In pi -aatl I bathroom, public bath-
house, (loosely also) w.c., lavatory. feen il-yammaam 
min facfl-ak where is the bathroom, please? II zayy i 
yammaam bala mayya (like a bathroom without water) 
utterly useless. -duxuul il-yammaam mif zayy i xruug-u 
[prov] it's easier to get yourself into a situation than it is 
to get out of it. 2 bath. fiddeet-u yammaam I gave him 
a bath. xad yammaam he took a hath. lIyammaam 
siba~ya swimming pool. -yammaamfams a sunbathe. 
~I.I- yammamgi In pi -yyal [obsol] proprietor of, or 
attendant at, a public bath. 
.;....:...\ fistayamma Ivil la to bathe, have a bath, wash 
oneself all over. Ib [euphem] to have sexual inter-
course (in reference to the bath that, according to Isla-
mic precepts, must follow the act). 2 to bathe, go for a 
swim. - vn fistiymaam f; ava mistaYammi. 
ere. see also 2..s r e. 
.r yumma In pi yummiyyaat, yummiyaatl fever. 
yumma mUldiyya an infectious fever. ril-yumma 1-
fisbanyooli Spanish influenza. yumma ~afra yellow fev-
er. mustaffa I-yummiyaat fever hospital, hospital for 
infectious disease. II raagil yumma a pest of a man. 
~ ~ 
maymuum ladj *1 I feverish, suffering from fev-
er. 2 excited. 
227 
J U e. 
~I.I- yamaam Icoll 
nl pigeon(s), dove(s). 
Ilraal 
iI-yamaam yall il-yamaam (the doves flew off, the 
doves flew down) a rhythmic chant used by children 
when pounding on the back of one of their number as 
part of a guessing game. -dura yamaam or yamaam ya 
dura corn as delicious as pigeon! (cry of the vendor of 
grilled corn-on-the-cob). 
~I.I- yamaama Inl I lunit n, pi -aatl a pigeon, a dove. 
yamaamit is-salaam the dove of peace. II fir-raagil zayy 
il-yamaama fiza rayyifit {aarit [prov] a man is like a 
pigeon - when it grows feathers it flies away (advice to a 
woman to spend her husband's money lest it tempt him 
to marry another). - (zayy il-)yamaama very fast, as in 
rawway lal-beet (zayy il-)yamaama he went flying 
home. 2 Ino pI! [children] penis. 
l.Jre. 
<.Sr- yamawi ladj *1 from Hama (in Syria). yamawi ya 
mifmif apricot vendor's cry. 
2 
..I r e. see 2..s r e. : yamw, yamwa 
l..sre. 
.r yama.l (i) Ivtl to_protect, defend. rabb-i-na yiymii-
k God keep you! fana sawwaa(j fa(jdar faymi nafs-i 
fi{-{arii(j I'm a driver who can take care of himself on the 
road. -vn yimaaya; ava yaami; pva maymi. 
~I.I- yimaaya Icoll nl [obsolJ European(s) in Egypt 
enjoying certain legal privileges. II finta ymaaya do you 
think you can get away with your (insolent) behaviour? 
.,..l> yaami l In *1 protector (often used in interces-
sions to saints). lIyamii-ha yaramii-ha [provJ its guar-
dian is its robber (e.g., in reference to a corrupt upper 
official in an organization). 
;;""l> yaamiya f In pi -aatl garrison . 
.r yima Inl I protection, patronage. fana f-yimaa-k 
I rely on your protection. 2 place of security, especially 
one's homeland. 
~\ fityama Ivil to be protected, be defended. - iva 
mitYimi. 
~\ finyama = fitYama. -iva minYimi. 
.,..l> yaama Ivil to stand in defence. dayman 
bi-yyaami lan abuu he always takes his father's side. 
-vn miyamiyya; ava miyaami. 
.,..I..e muyaami In * and pi -yyal lawyer. 
.,..~\ fityaama Ivi! to take refuge (behind s.o. or 
s.th.), place oneself under protection. ma-tityamaa-/ 
fiyya don't try to hide behind me! - ava mityaami. 
~\ fiytama Ivil to take refuge. - ava mibtimi. 

21Sr C,. 
..r !:Jimi (a) Ivill to become hot. rif-fams' !:Jimyit the 
sun grew hot. 2 to become sharp. ris-sikkiina !:Jimyit 
mis-sann the knife got sharp with whetting. 3 to be-
come pungent, strong or spicily hot in taste. 4 to be-
come intense. ril-matf' !:Jimi the game warmed up. -vn 
flumuww. flamayaan; ava flaami. flamyaan. 
..r flama 4 (i) Ivtl to heat (an oven or furnace). -vn 
flamy, flamiyya: ava flaami; pva maflmi. 
~ flamiyya Inl zeal, fervour, intensity. raagil 
ma-landuu-! flamiyya he's a spineless fellow. 
~~ flaami 2 ladj "I I hot. damm-u !:Jaami he's hot-
blooded. II bil-flaami w-bil-baarid by all possible means. 
-/a lala flaami wala lala baarid restive. 2 sharp. 
3a pungent, strong, spicy (to taste). 3b unpleasantly 
sweet (to taste). 4 energetic, lively, quick. 
~ flamw Inl I heat. reeh iI-flamw' da how hot it is! 
II flamw in-niil prickly heat. 2 rash. 
;~ flamwa In pI -aalli/inst nl a stoking.llfi-flamwit-
(u) = (strike) while the iron is hot, as in xu!!' 
fil-mawquul fi-flamwil-u get on with the business while 
it's a hot issue. 2 {mech] spot of excess metal removed 
from a metal sheet with a welding torch. 3 a pimple. 
;. flimmi: (umbaak flimml a strong type of tobacco. 
~ 
miflma or maflma In pI -aat. maflaamil fire-
chamber of a mud oven (see PI.C, 10). 
;. flamma 2 Ivtl I to make spicy. flammi I-kaari 
!wayya add more spice to the curry. 2 to vitalize, stimu-
late. intensify. rig-goon iIIi gaf-rawwil diljiilja !:Jamma 
I-matfthe goal which was scored in the first minute gave 
spirit to the match.lI!:Jamma (-(allj to induce labour, as 
in ril-b~al bi-y!:Jammi (-(allj onions induce labour. - vn 
ta!:Jmiyya; ava ml!:Jammi. 
~ 
I ristaflma Ivtll to find to be or consider hot or 
spicy. 2 to select for spiciness. rista!:Jmaa-1i ljam' filfil 
min hmaak find me a hot pepper from over there. - ava 
mirlaflmi. 
J IS r C,. see I r r C,.: !:Jamma I. !:Juma, rista!:Jamma 
Jy.JC,. 
~ 
!:Janball Ipl -yylln, !:Janballyya. flanablal I In! 
adherent of the school of Islamic law named after 
Ahmad Ibn Hanbal. - ladjl 2 Hanbalite. ril-mazhab 
iI-!:Janbalt the Hanbahte school of law. 3a rigid, strict, 
puntanical. 3b finicky, fastidious. 
I..:;...JC,. 
~ 
• .;..;.... flint: 
ribn' 
flint 
opportunist, 
sharp 
228 
operator . 
2..:;...JC,. 
J".:> .J";~ !:Januuti In pI -yyal one who prepares a 
corpse for burial, undertaker, mortician. 
oJ ":;".J C,. 
~ 
flantiflvt/l to trim tiny pieces off (s.th.).laazim 
ti!:Jantifil-luljma bi-snaan-ak do you have to nibble bits 
off the edge of the bread?! 2 to touch up, attend pain-
stakingly to the appearance of (s.o. or s.th.). (uul 
in-nahaar ljalda t!:Jantif fi-bint-a-ha she fusses over her 
daughter's appearance all day 10ng.!:Jantifit !:Jawagib-ha 
she plucked her eyebrows. -vn !:Jantafa; avalpva 
miflantif. 
'-i,F> !:Jantuufa In pI -aatl small piece, fragment. 
~I rit!:Jantif Ivi/l to have tiny pieces trimmed off. 
2 to be touched up. 3 to preen oneself. -ava/iva 
mit!:Jantif. 
.l.Y.JC,. 
.l..,.:- flambuu( In pI flanabii(1 [agric] flowering shoot 
(e.g .. of an onion, radish or carrot plant) grown for 
seed. 
~ 
!:Jamba( Ivill [agric] to produce flowering shoots 
(of, e.g., onions, radishes, carrots). 2 [slang] to be-
come erect (of the penis, clitoris, nipples). -vn 
!:Jamba(a; ava mi!:Jamba(. 
J[,.JC,. 
;.r:-:- flangara r In pI !:Janaagtr/larynx, throat. 
J[,.JC,. 
~ 
flangillvt/l to make (clothes) short or too short. 
rinta flangllt II-fustaan xaali~ you've made the dress 
extremely short. - Ivi/2 to hop on one foot. 3 to prac-
tise trickery and deception. kaan laayiz yiflangil 
fil-mawquul bass iflna faljsiin-u kwayyis he wanted to 
do some dirty work, but we are wise to him. -vn 
!:Janga/a; ava miflangil. 
~ 
flangal: bil-flangal wil-mangal (I) bringing bad 
luck. (2) using every possible means to achieve an end. 
~I rit!:Jangii Ivil I to hop on one foot. rawwil 
ir-ralj~ it-ti!:Jangiil [prov] (when one first dances, one 
hops) = everything is difficult at the beginning, practice 
makes perfect. 2 to practise trickery. 3 to be made too 
short (of clothes). -vn ti!:Jangiil: ava/iva mll!:Jangii. 

J ~~c 
J~ fJandaq Ivtl to make dainty and small. fik-kaam 
fJaaga /Ii lamaltii-ha fil- foO//a fJandaquu-ha what 
you've done to the room has made it much more charm-
ing and intimate. gineena mfJandaqa a pocket-
handkerchief of a garden. bint; mfJandaqa a petite girl. 
-vn fJandaqa; avalpva mifJandaq. 
J~I ritfJandaq Ivil to be made or become dainty and 
small. -iva mitfJandaq. 
<J".~ C 
~ 
fJannis Ivt/ to tantalize. stimulate a desire that 
ca~not be fulfilled. -vn tafJniis; ava/pva mifJannis. 
~I ritfJannis Ivil to be tantalized. -iva mitfJannis. 
~~c 
~ 
fJanaj In pi fafJnaaf, fJinijal snake. eel. 
.,;#~~c 
~ 
fJanj~a Inl affected airs. balaaj iI-fJanjflla 
k-kaddaaba di none of these ridiculous airs and graces! 
~ 
mifJanj~ ladj *1 ostentatious. putting on airs. 
~I 
fitfJanj~ Ivil to put on airs. affect a manner 
calculated to impress. -ava mitfJanj~. 
J~~c 
Jla.;> .~ fJam/allcoll nl colocynth·lIlijt-u fJam/al 
he has a wretched life. 
j,~c 
Ja.:. fJini( ladj °1 savoury (of food). 
~l.;... fJanaa(a Inl savouriness. tastiness (of food). 
j,.,;- fJunuu( Inl [Chr] embalming oils. 
.b fJanna( Ivtl to embalm. -vn tafJnii(; ava/pva 
mifJanna{ . 
.01 fitfJanna{ Ivil to be embalmed. -iva mitfJanna{. 
.J-,j,~c 
)).:.... fJan{uur <perh T hinto from Hungarian> In 
pi fJana{iirl horse-drawn cab. II fJan{uur iI-leen the 
orbital ridge of the eye. riddeet-u lala fJan{uur leen-u 
I gave him a real shiner. 
(.J~c) 
~ 
fJanafi I Iprop nl male given name. 2 In ° and 
pi -yya. fafJnaaf! adherent of the school of Islamic 
law named after Abu Hanifa. 3 ladj *1 Hanafite. 
229 
fil-mazhab iI-fJanafi the Hanafite school of law. 
~ 
fJanafiyya In pi -aatl tap, faucet. 
1.!l~C 
~ 
fJunka. fJinka r Inl experience, skill. 
~ 
fJannik Ivt/ to make (s.o.) experienced or worldly 
wise. fJannikit-u t-tagaarib experience has taught him a 
thing or two. -vn tafJniik; pva mufJannak. 
~I fitfJannik Ivil to become or be made worldly 
wise, gain experience. -ava/iva mitfJannik. 
Z.!l ~C 
<.!l.;. fJanak In/I animal's mouth. II fJanak is-sabl snap-
dragon, antirrhinum. 2~ (person's) mouth. fJadd; fiina 
yiqdar yiftafJ fJanak-u would anyone of us dare to open 
his mouth? da lsaan-u ma-yidxul-/ f-fJanak-u he talks 
too much .lIlazam-hum bi-n~~ a fJanak he invited them 
half-heartedly . 
~.!l~C 
~ 
fJankij Ivil to rummage around, potter about. 
ma-luu-! juyl; yeer iI-fJankaja he's got nothing to do but 
potter around. -vn fJankaja; ava mifJankiJ. 
J~ 
mifJankafaati ladj pI -yyal dithery, confused. 
I~~C 
~ fJann (i) Ivil I to show tenderness, tiehave kindly. 
bi-tsiib-u l-yaayit ma yitnibifJ wi-bac;deen tifJinn a lalee 
she leaves him till he's cried himself hoarse and then her 
heart goes out to him. II bi-yfJinn a lal-yalaaba he gives 
alms to the poor. -zayy iI-wizz - fJinniyya bala bizz 
[prov] like the goose who mothers her goslings without 
breast feeding (of one who does nothing to prove his 
convictions). 2 to yearn. da-na b-afJinn; l-fayyaam 
zamaan liow I miss the old days! 3 to become soft. 4 to 
relax and begin to yield milk (of a dairy animal). 
fil-baqara g-gidiida b-taaxud yalaba lala ma tfJinn the 
new cow takes a lot of coaxing before she gives milk . 
-vn fJinniyya. fJanaan. fJaniin; ava fJaanin. 
..,.,;- fJanuun ladj *1 kind-hearted, affectionate, ten-
der. qalb-u fJanuun he has a kind heart . 
.:r.!- fJuneen r, fJineen I IplOP nl male given name. 
II rigil bi-xuffay fJuneen he came back empty-handed. 
~ 
fJinayyin ladj °1 I kind, affectionate, tender. 
qalb-u fJnayyin he's ~indhearted. 2 soft, yielding. 
martaba fJnayyina a soft mattress. bi-titlimil warda 
r~a~ lajaan tibqa fJnayyina ll¥-~iini the washer is made 
of lead so it will be easy on the porcelain. 
~i fafJann lell morelmost kind, affectionate or 
tender. 

.:i- l.Jannin Ivtl I to cause to behave with kindness or 
tenderness. 
fana 
l'awz-u 
yitwassaC-1i 
l'andaha 
wi-yl.Jannin qalb-a-ha l'alayya I want him to put in a 
good word with her and soften her heart towards me. 
II fallaah yil.Jannin (l'aleek) may God make people be 
kindly to you (said to a beggar when refusing him alms). 
2 {rurl to calm and give confidence to (a dairy animal) 
as an encouragement before milking. -vn tal.Jnim; ava 
m!l.Jannin. 
~I fill.Jannin Ivil passive of l.Jannin. - iva mill.Jannin. 
Z iJ iJ ( see I ~ iJ ( : l.Jinna 
J iJ iJ ( see iJ ~ iJ (: l.Jineen 2 
l~iJ~ 
.~ .~ l.Jinna Inl henna. II/eelil iI-l.Jinna eve of con-
summation of a marriage when the bride and groom are 
traditionally decorated with henna. -Iamr' l.Jinna 
mignonette. 
~ 
l.Janna Ivtl to dye with henna. lIya ml.Janni deel 
iI-l'~fuur ... huwwa I-ma~uur 0 putter of henna on 
the bird's tail, he (name ofthe person referred to) is the 
victorious! (chant sung to oneself or another for en-
c!>uragement). -vn lal.Jniyya; ava mil.Janni. 
~I fill.Janna Ivil to be dyed with henna. - iva 
mill.Janni. 
Z~iJ( 
~ 
l.Jana (i) Ivtl to bend, twist. qahr-u mal.Jni his back 
is bent. -vn l.Jany, l.Janayaan; ava l.Jaani; pva mal.Jni. 
~ 
l.Janya In pI -aal/l bend, curve.lIl.Janyil ir-raqaba 
humiliation. 2 stoop. 
~ 
l.Janiyya In pI -aall low recess. 
~I fml.Jana Ivil I to bend or twist, be bent or 
twisted. 2a to bow, curtsey. 2b to stoop. -vn finl.Jina; 
ava/iva minl.Jini, munl.Jani. 
• ~I finI.Jinaaf1 In pI -aall bend, curve. 
~ 
munl.Jana 1 In pI munl.Janayaatl bend, curve. 
fis-sawwaaq laazim yudxul fil-munl.Jana bir-raal.Ja the 
driver should make the turn slowly. 
~I fill.Jana = finl.Jana. -ava/iva mitl.Jini. 
iJ~iJ( 
.:r-:- l.Jineen 21 " l.Jineen wi-mmeen a very long time, as 
in kull' I.Jneen wi-mneen once in a blue moon, bal'd' 
I.Jneen wl-mmeen after endless waiting and bother. 
'C 
0\> l.Jah Ifem n, pI -aall sixth letter of the Arabic 
230 
alphabet. - also l.Jaa, l.Jaa, l.Jaa f . 
~.JC 
.::..~ l.Juul In pll.Jilaanl I whale. llzeel kibdil 1/-l.Juut 
cod-liver oil. 2 fil-l.Juut {astroll Pisces. 
1c;:.JC 
[.~ l.Jawag (i) Ivtl to expose to need, cause to need. 
fallaal.J ma-yil.Jwig-na Iii may God never put us in a 
situation where we need him! filii likrah wiJf-u 
yil.Jwig-ak iz-zamaan Ii-qafaa {pro vI ... the person you 
hate the sight of now you may have to beg from later. 
II/amma l.Jawagil Ii-qarb when it came to blows. - vn 
l.Jawga, l.Jaaga; ava l.Jaawig; pva mal.Jwuug. 
~ 
~ l.Jawga Inl need, want, destitution. ma-yzill'-f 
ii-bani faadam filla 1-l.Jawga {provJ nothing degrades a 
man like need. II wala l.Jawga ... I don't need your help 
(any more). wala (I-)l.Jawga Ii-... there is no need forthe 
help of ... (with reference to one whose unwilling assist-
ance is dispensed with), as in fana l'amall iJ-faay 
bi-nafs-i wala 1-l.Jawgaa-lu I made the tea myself with-
out any help from the likes of him! 
~l> l.Jaaga In pI -aatl la thing. object. finta gaayib 
iI-l.Jagaal di mineen where did you get these things 
from? IIl.Jaagil iI-l.Jukuuma government property. 
-l.Jaagil iI-beel the household shopping, the groceries. 
Ib anything, something. ma-qull'-f l.Jaaga (I) I didn't 
say anything. (2) I haven't raised any objection. 
ma-falaml-uu-f wala l.Jaaga I didn't insult him or any-
thing of the sort! 2 matter, affair. fiftakarl-a-ha l.Jaaga 
basiica I thought it was a simple matter. - Ino pI/ 
3 need, want. fi-waql iI-l.Jaaga in time of need. ~aal.Jib 
iI-l.Jaaga farl'an {provl a man in need is a headstrong 
man. fi-l.Jaaga Ii- in need of, as in fana miJ fi-l.Jaaga 
I-fayy' musal'da minnu I don't need any help from 
him. II qaqa l.Jaaga to relieve oneself. -qaqa minha (or 
mal'aaha) l.Jaaga he had sexual intercourse with her. 
[.~i fal.Jwag lell morelmost needy . 
[.~I fill.Jawag Ivil to be exposed to need. fin fa-lla 
ma-lill.Jiwig-f {women and beggarsl may you never be in 
need! - iva mitl.Jiwig. 
[.~I finl.Jawag = fill.Jawag. -iva minl.Jiwig. 
[.::,... l.Jawwig 1,1 Ivtl to expose to need, cause to need. 
gaz-lia miJ mil.Jawwig-ha 1-l.Jaaga her husband lets her 
want for nothing. 2 Ivi except w follfiwayyill.Jagaall to 
shop, go shopping. - vn lal.Jwlig; ava mil.Jawwig. 
[.~I fill.Jawwlg I Ivil I to be exposed to need. 2 to 
shop, go shopping. - avaliva mill.Jawwig. 
[.~I fll.Jlaag Ilvtl to need. yil.Jlaag falla it needs a 
piece of string. 2 Ivil to be in need. bi-yil.Jlaag II-Iacb' 

kitiir it requires a lot of effort. huwwa iii milJtag-1i mif 
rana iii milJtag-lu it's he who needs me, not I who need 
him. -vn rilJtiyaag; ava milJtaag. 
l::.1,,;....\ rilJtiyaag In pi -aall necessity, need. 
..::..~~ milJlagaal: lJagaat wi-milJtagaat all sorts of 
things; this, that and the other. 
1 [.JC 
~\..".. lJawaayig Ipl nl I oddments. 2 giblets. 
l::.~ lJawwigZ Ivtl I to season with spices. 2 ,to add 
delicacies (such as raisins and 'nuts) to (food). -vn 
lalJwiig; avalpva milJawwig. 
~.,-: lalJwiiga linst n, pi -aal, talJawiigl a mixture of 
spices, seasonings or delicacies for adding to food. 
~ 
~ milJawwiga Inl a preparation of oil, sugar and 
other fattening substances taken to help one gain 
weight. 
l::.~\ rillJawwigZ Ivil passive of lJawwigz. -iva 
milfJawwig. 
.JC.JC 
.."....".. ljuufJu Inl last remains, all that's left. 
J.J C 
~..".. lJawad (i) I/vtl to turn, divert. ma-lilJwid-/ riid-
ak don't turn your hand aside. rilJwid wiffil-[arabiyya 
fwayya turn the front of the car a little. 2 Ivil to turn, 
veer, change direction. rilJwid yimiin ya-s(a turn to the 
right, driver! -vn lJawadaan, lJawda; ava fJaawid; pva 
malJwuud. 
.~..".. lJawda In pi -aall bend, turn. 
~IJ..".. lJawadaaya In pi -aatl bend, turn (in a street). 
~."il ritlJawad Ivil to be diverted, be turned aside. - iva 
mitfJiwid. 
~~ fJawwid = fJawad. -vn lafJwiid; ava milJawwid. 
11 lJawwid [ala to drop in at, stop off at. lJ-alJawwid 
[alee I'll call in at his place on the way. lJawwidl· 
[al-ba(j(jaal fa-traxxart i fwayya I stopped at the 
grocer's, so I was made a little late. 
~~\ rillJawwid = rilfJawad. -iva mitlJawwid. 
I .. I.J C 
• .)L.. lJaara In pi -aal, fJawaari/ I narrow lane, alley 
(traditionally constituting a small neighbourhood). 
laffifil-ni lJaara guwwa lJaara w-zu(jaa(j guwwa ZU(jaa(j 
she led me round about from lane to lane and alley to 
alley. riI-lJaara kul/-a-ha stafaa[il bil-mawquu[ the 
whole neighbourhood buzzed with the affair. 2 track or 
lane within a wider way (e.g .. that for a single contes-
tant in a running or swimming race, or a traffic lane). 
231 
)~ milJwar In pi malJaawirll axis. 2 axle. 
..s)~ milJwari ladjl central. IImusmaar mifJwaari 
pivot bolt. 
.)~ mafJaara, mufJaara In pi -aatl I lunit nl a sea-
shell. ra(jeel-ak min [een ig-gaara ralJadd i mil-malJaara 
I have censed you against your neighbour's evil eye, 
sharper than a sea-shell. 2 plasterer's trowel, float. see 
further under .J C r 
.)~ lJawwar Ivtl to change, modify, twist. yaaxud 
iI-fikra w-ylJawwar-ha he takes the idea and adapts it. 
rima bi-llJawwar kalaam-i you're twisting my words! 
-ava talJwiir; ava/pva milJawwar, 
)~\ ritlJawwar Ivil to be changed, be modified, be 
twisted. - iva mitlJawwar. 
.)JL.. lJaawir Ivtl I to dodge, feint. 2 to argue with, 
debate with. lJawir-ni ktiir fit-taman he debated the 
price with me for a long time. 3 to keep (s.o.) guessing, 
play verbal games with. lJawir-ni mudda w-ba[deen 
(jal-Ii l-fJa(jii(ja he kept me guessing for a while and then 
told me the truth. -vn fJiwaar, milJawra; ava milJaawir. 
)..".. lJiwaarf, lJuwaarf In pi -aatl dialogue . 
')Jt.i:\ ritlJaawir Ivil to debate, argue. -ava milfJaawir. 
z .J.JC 
.)..".. lJuur I f Icoll nl houris. 
~)..".. lJuriyya In pi -aal, lJawaaril houri, nymph. 
.)..".. lJawar Inl intense contrast between the white of 
the eye and the darkness ofthe iris (regarded as a sign of 
beauty). 
3(.J.JC) 
)..".. lJuurzf Inl kidskin. 
.)..".. lJuur 3 1coll nl poplar(s). 
j.J C 
jL.. fJaaz f (u) Ivtl to obtain, gain possession of. -vn 
lJayazaan; ava fJaayiz. 
oj..".. fJooza Inl posses~ion, property. 
ojt.> lJiyaaza Inl {leg] custody of land or property by 
right of ownership or tenancy. kul/ i fJyaZI-u xamas 
fadadiin wi-lJalla dool bil-rigaar he only has control 
over five feddans and even those he rents . 
j~ \ rinfJaaz Ivil to take sides, side (with s.o.). rinlJaaz 
Ii-mraal-u qidd axuu he sided with his wife against his 
brother. [adam iI-inlJiyaaz {pol] non-alignment. -vn 
rinlJiyaaz; ava minlJaaz. 
j6.:.. munlJaaz ladjl {pol] aligned. 
V" .J C 
..r""" lJawas (i) Ivtl to perplex, confuse, bewilder. reeh 

illi l:Jays-ak what is confusing you? -vn l:Jawasaan; ava 
l:Jaayis. 
4..~ l:Joosa Inl perplexity, bewilderment, embarrass-
ment·llya l:Joosa sooda or ya l:Jost-i [women] "" what am 
I to do?! 
...... ~I fil:Jtaas Ivil to become perplexed. fawwil ma 
nizil m~r il:Jtaas fi-kullal:Jaaga when first he came to 
Cairo, he was at a complete loss. II bi-yil:Jtaas fi-hduum-u 
(he gets entangled in his own clothes) he can't cope with 
anything. - ava mil:Jtaas. 
I 
• 
...... -' r 
..;.l.. l:Jaaf (u) Ivt! 1 to hold back, keep in, restrain. 
l:Juufi l-waad ya haanim keep the child back, Madam. 
sa[aat ma-tiljdar-J' tl:Juuf nafs-a-ha wi-truul:J mafguura 
fil-[iyaa( sometimes she can't restrain herself and 
bursts into tears. l:Juufu 1-l:Jaraami stop thief! 2 to with-
hold, reserve. l:Jaafit ik-kitaab [anni she withheld the 
book from me. -vn l:Jawafaan; ava l:Jaayi/ 
1II:Jaaf [an to protect. l:Juuf ya rabb Lord protect us! 
fana fa[raf al:Juuf [an nafs-i I know how to look after 
myself. 
..;.~ l:Joofln pl'fal:Jwaaf,l:Jiwaaf, l:Jifaanl 1 yard, cour-
tyard.l:Joof il-mal:Ja((a the forecourt of the station.l:Joof 
il-madrasa school playground. faraft-i-lhum l:J~iira fil-
l:JoofI put down a mat for them in the courtyard (of the 
house). 2 sectioned-off plot of land. bi-nizra[-u 
fi-l:Jwaaf [afaan yi(la[ fatl we sow it in separate plots to 
produce seedlings. 3 graveyard. 
..;.I~ l:Jawwaaf In *1 lone who intervenes in a quar-
rel, mediator. 2 Ino pll Protector (epithet of God) .l:Juuf 
ya l:Jawwaaf [women in trad soc] Lord protect us! (used 
sarcastically in quarrels). 
...... ~I fitl:Jaaf Ivil to be retained, be held back. fil-bool 
[andu tl:Jaaf he suffers from retention of the urine. 
fll-mraama tl:Jaafit [annu his fine was suspended. 
lIe5oo(-u tl:Jaaf he couldn't speak. - iva mitl:Jaaf. 
...... 1....; I finl:Jaaf = fitl:Jaaj. -iva minl:Jaaf. 
..r~ l:Jawwif Ivtl to put aside for later use. 
ma-l:Jawwift'-J wala malliin I haven't saved a penny. 
bi-nglib is-sibaax wi-nl:Jawwif-u 1-l:Jadd il-muusim we get 
the fertilizer and store it till the season. II fin fa-alia 
ma-l:Jadda l:Jawwif [joe] never mind the cost! -vn 
tal:Jwiif; ava mil:Jawwif. 
~~ tal:Jwiifa linst n, pI -aat, tal:Jawiifl savings, nest-
egg. tal:Jwiifit il-[umr life-savings. 
.;.~I fitl:Jawwif/vil to be set aside for later use. -iva 
mitl:Jawwif· 
232 
1 
• 
...... -' r 
..;.~ l:Jawaf Icoll nl rabble, scum, dregs of society. 
J ~ -' r see 1 J ~ r 
v"=' -' r 
~ 
~ l:Jool/. In pI fil:Jwaal/., l:Jiwaal/., fal:Jwaal/.l I basin, 
sink. l:Jool/. ma(bax kitchen sink. l:Jool/. l:Jammaam 
(1) bathroom sink. (2) bath tub. 1I1:J001/. rabaaba peg 
box of a rebaba. 28 [agrie] field plot sectioned off for 
irrigation. bi-nirwi l-ree( bil-l:Jool/. we irrigate the field 
plot by plot. 2b flower-bed or the like in a garden . 
3 pelvis. l:Jool/. il-kilya f [anat] renal pelvis. 4 dock. 
l:Jool/. gaaff dry dock. 5 rectangular piece in tent appli-
que work (see PI.H, 6). 
~ 
~ l:Jawwal/. Ivtl [agrie] to divide (a field) into irriga-
tion basins. -vn tal:Jwiil/.; avalpva mil:Jawwal/.. 
.l:.-'r 
1l.. l:Jaa( (i) Ivil to surround. l:Jaa(u bii min kull' l:Jitta 
they surrounded him on all sides. II fal:Jii(-ak [ilm 
I inform you, I notify you. -vn l:Jaya(aan; ava l:Jaayi( . 
.la.> l:Jee( = l:Jee(a . 
~ 
l:Jee(a In pll:Je(aanl wall. fil-l:Je(aan laha wdaan 
[prov] walls have ears. II [aljl-u l:Jee(a he's a blockhead. 
- fil-l:Jee(a l-wa(ya kull in-naas tinu((a [aleeha [prov] "" 
debase yourself and all men will abuse you. -mifi gamb 
il-l:Jee(a to behave in a self-effacing way, keep out of 
trouble. 
1 ~ l:Jawa( Inl cunning, slyness . 
~I~ l:Jawaa(a = l:Jawa(. 
~~ l:Jawii( ladj pll:Juwa(al crafty, sly. 
1~1 fitl:Jaa( Ivil (impersonal) passive of l:Jaa{- fitl:Jaa( 
biina we were surrounded. - iva mitl:Jaa( . 
1 ~ l:Jawwa( Ivtl to fence, enclose. l:Jawwa( ig-gineena 
he put a wall around the garden. -vn tal:Jwii(; avalpva 
mil:Jawwa(. 
~~ tal:Jwii(a In pI tal:Jawii(1 written charm carried in 
order to keep away evil spirits . 
1~1 fitl:Jawwa( Ivil I to be fenced in, be enclosed. 
2 to close in (on s.o. or s.th.). fitl:Jawwa(u biina they 
closed on us. 3 to wear a tal:Jwii(a. -avaliva mitl:Jawwa(. 
J..1~1 fitl:Jaawa( Ivil I to make an enclosure (around 
s.o. or s.th.). fitl:Jawa(na biihum we surrounded them. 
2 to behave cunningly or deceitfully.l:Ja-titl:Jaawa( [ala 
miin who do you think you're trying to deceive? -ava 
mitl:Jaawa( . 
1l..i fal:Jaa(f = l:Jaa(. -vn fil:Jaa(a; ava mul:Jii(. 
~l..l fil:Jaa(a In pI -aatl information, notification. 

~ 
muljii{ Iladj *1 surrounding. ril-man{itja 1-
muljii{a the surrounding area. - In pi -aatl 1 circle, 
coterie. fil-muljii{ bital-na in our circle, among our 
acquaintance. muljii{ il- fusra the family circle. 3 [math] 
circumfererence.4t ocean. -/adjectivallyl raagil muljii{ 
a man of boundless knowledge. 
1\:.,..1 filjtaa{ Ivil to be cautious, take precautions. 
filjtaa{ minnu - da Ija/angi watch out with him - he's a 
swindler! -vn filjtiyaa{; ava miljtaa{. 
1~1 filjtiyaa{ Ivn/ll;ubbaa{ I-iljtiyaa{ [mil] reservist 
officers. -min baab I-iljtiyaa{ as'a precaution. 
.;:,U.~I filjtiya{aat Ipl nl precautions. 
J.~I filjtiyaa{i ladj • and invarl precautionary, re-
serve, spare. Ijabs iljtiyaa{i detention pending investiga-
tion. laga/a Ijtiya{iyya (or filjtiyaa{i) spare tyre. 
-/adverbiallyl Ij-agiib malaayafluus ziyaada Ijtiyaa{i I'll 
bring some extra money with me for contingencies. 
1 ~I fistaljwa{ Ivil to take precautions. min baab 
il-istiljwaa{ by way of precaution. -vn fistiljwaa{; ava 
mistaljwa{. 
...i.JC 
...; ~ Ijoor' Ijoof zaaf see zaaf. 
J.JC 
Jb. Ijaatj (u) Ivil to be sufficient, be enough -vn 
Ijawatjaan; ava Ijaayitj. 
J~ Ijawwatj Ivil to suffice, be satisfying. mahma 
tiddii-hum barqu mij miljawwatj fiihum no matter how 
much you give them it's never enough. II fik-ka/aam 
ma-bi-yljawwatjji fii .,. he is very thick-skinned. -vn 
taljwiitj; ava miljawwatj. 
J.J C 
Jb. Ijaal l (u) Ivil to complete a full cycle (of time), go 
full circle. ma-Ijalji lalee I-Ijool filla w-huwwa 
mitgawwiz by the same time the next year he was 
already married. -vn Ijawa/aan; ava Ijaayil. 
11 Ijaal been ... wi-been f ... to prevent (s.o. or s.th.) 
from .... huwwa iii Ijaal beeni w-been finni fasiib iI-
ba/ad he is the one who prevented me from leaving the 
country. 
Jb. Ijaal l (i) Ivtl to transfer, pass over, refer. Ijiil 
ijjur/i da laleeha pass this job over to her! Ijaluu 
la/-malaaj they pensioned him off. -vn Ijeela. 
Ijaya/aan; ava Ijaayil. 
J~ Ijiwil (a) Ivil to develop strabismus, become 
squint-eyed. -vn Ijawa/. 
J~ Ijawal (i) Ivtll to make (the eyes) squint, make 
233 
(the eyes) look in different directions simultaneously. 
ma-tiljwilji lenee-k laljsan tiljwall don't squint your 
eyes like that or you'll end up with a real squint. 1 to 
change the direction of. filjwil fiid-ak fiwayya direct 
your hand a little the other way. -vn Ijawa/aan; ava 
Ijaawil. 
Jb. ljaa/J/masc and fem nIl Ipl faljwaall state, condi-
tion. fil-Ijaal itrayyar things have changed. ma-fii-j 
Ijaddi raaqi b-Ijaa/-u no-one's ever satisfied with his 
situation. laazim titjbaluu-na la/a Ija/-na you must 
accept us as we are. kull i yoom la/a di I-Ijaal every day 
it's the same. jahr" faw jahreen wi-kulli jeef yirgal 
Ii-Ijaa/-u a couple of months and everything will be back 
to normal. fil- faljwaal is-siyasiyya fil-ba/ad the political 
conditions in the country. Ijasab ma tismalj il-faljwaal 
as conditions allow. ril-faljwaal ig-gawwiyya weather 
conditions." fizzayy i Ijaa/-ak or fizzayy iI- faljwaal how 
are things? how are you doing? -la/a kull" Ijaal or la/a 
fayy i Ijaal in any case, at any rate. -fil-Ijaalf right 
away, immediately. -bi-Ijaa/- a whole ... , an entire ... , 
as in saala b-Ija/-ha a whole hour, kiilu lahma b-Ijaa/-u 
a whole kilo of meat, kursi nafareen bi-Ijaa/-u a whole 
double seat. -la/a tjadd" Ijaa/-(u) (1) commensurate 
with (s.o.'s) means as in ril-larabiyya mij tjawi bass" 
la/a tjadd" Ijaa/-i the car is not up to much but it's all 
I can afford. (2) poor, badly off, as in filjna naas la/a 
tjadd" Ija/-na bassi muljtaramiin we are poor people, 
but respectable. - ril-Ijaal min balq-u I'm as badly off as 
you are, as in law kaan malaaya kunt addii-k bass 
iI-Ijaal min balq-u if I had any I'd give you some, but 
I'm no better off than you. - ril-Ijaal wil-miljtaal every-
thing to do with it, the whole works, as in safalt-u lan 
famr-u gab-Ii I-Ijaal wil-miljtaal I asked how he was 
(and) he told me the whole story, bi-ytallal kirf-u 
w-ml¥ariin-u w-Ijaa/-u w-miljtaa/-u he takes out its 
tripes and its intestines and the whole kit and caboodle. 
-/a landu Ijaal wa/a miljtaal he's destitute. -daftar il-
faljwaal chronological register of events used particu-
larly in a police station, police blotter. - ril-faljwaal 
ijjax~iyya [leg] matters relating to personal status. 
llno pilla one's personal affairs, one's own business. 
Ija-nsiib-ak hina lamma njuuf Ija/-na w-nirgal naxd-ak 
baldeen we'll leave you here while we tend to our 
business and come back and pick you up later. mijyu 
kulli waaljid wara Ijaa/-u each one went about his own 
business.llfi-Ijaa/-(u) about his own business, as in ruulj 
fi-Ijaa/-ak mind your own business! fana f-Ijaa/-i wi-nta 
f-Ijaa/-ak you mind your business and I'll mind mine, 
{uul lumr-i maaji gamb il-Ijee{a wi-f-Ijaa/-i all my life 
I've kept out of trouble and minded my own business, 

siib-u f-Ijaal-u leave him be! - raalj li-Ijaal-(u) to go 
(one's) own way, as in (allaqt-a-ha w-raaljit li-•• I-ha 
I divorced her and she went her own way. - ril-Ijaal 
wiqif business stagnated. Ijaal-i wiqif I ceased to pros-
per. 2b belongings. bmm' lzal-na w-Iamlim Ijal-na get 
together our baggage and gather up our belongings. 
- I'aljwaallpl nl 3a (ways of) behaviour (usually with a 
pejorative implication). I'aljwaal-u ¥ariiba he's a queer 
fish, one can never tell what he'll do next. I'ana 
mistalgib lala I'aljwaal-u I find everything he does ex-
traordinary.3b I'll-I'aljwaal those supernatural powers 
(the ability to read the future, to be in more than one 
place at one time etc.) attributed to the most advanced 
Sufis. 
~ Ijaalan ladvl right away, immediately. hlyya gayya 
Ijaalan she's coming right away. 
~ I- baala In pi -aatl 1 particular state or condition, 
situation, case. baalit (awaaril' a state of emergency. 
il-baala I-igtlmaliyya marital status. fi-baalit ¥iyaab 
muwagafwhen an official IS away. fullit il-baala lala 
kida I'usbuleen it went on like that for two weeks. 
balit-na daYYlqafwayya I-yomeen dool our (financial) 
situation IS a bit .tight these days. II balt-ak baala you're 
in a really bad way! - bl-baalit tl-fabriika in factory 
condition, brand new. -zayy" balaat- like, waabid 
zayy" balaat-i someone like me. 2a case (of sickness). 
baalit tayfuud a case of typhoid. 2b fit, attack, bout (of 
sickness, depression etc.). landu Ijaala kida bi-tgii-Iu 
lamma ykuun zallaan he suffers from a condition which 
makes him subject to an attack when he gets upset. 
JI- baali ladjl 1 actual. I'tl-maqaas il-baali btaal il-
I'aks the actual size of the axle. 2 present, current. 
fil-waqt il-baali at the present time. 
~ baabyyan r ladvl presently, at the present time. 
J r 
bawllnl power, might. la Ijawla wala quwwa I'illa 
bi-llaah (or, more commonly) la bawl illaah there is no 
power or strength but with God! (an exclamation of 
helplessness and resignation), ya bawl illaah 0 might of 
God! (an exclamation of resignation or indignation). 
J» bool Inl year. 
J» bawli ladjl/botj annual. zuhuur Ijawliyya annual 
flowers. 
J»i I'abwal ladj, fern boola, pi buu/l squint-eyed, 
cross-eyed. 
JI» bawaali ladvl approximately, circa. bawaali 
s-saala IIsla about nme o'clock. bawaali xamsa mitr 
about five or six metres . 
.:r.:J1» bawaleen Iprep, w pron suff bawalee- (w 1st 
sing bawalayya)1 around, about. suur bawaleen ii-beet a 
wall around the house. huwwa mif daari bi-l/i bawalee 
234 
he's oblivious to what's about him. IIljawalee kalaam 
kitilr he has a bad reputation. 
;.)1» biwaala In pi -aatl money order. 
JI~ Ijawwaal In pi -aat, bawawitll /agriej ridge of 
earth made to control the flow of water to a field being 
irrigated. 
J~ mubaal Inl impossibility. 
Jr mabwalln pi mabaawil! = bawwaal. 
.).-r 
mibwalgi In pi -yyal railroad switchman. 
J~I I'itbaallvil to be transferred, be shifted. bald' 
xamsim sana fil-wizaara I'itbaal lal-malaaf after fifty 
years in the ministry he was put on a pension. -iva 
mitbaal. 
JL...; 1 I'inbaal = I'ubaal. - iva minbaal. 
J ~I I'itbawallvi/la to develop a squint, develop stra-
bismus (of the eyes). Ib to be made to squint (of the 
eyes). 2 to be dislocated (of a joint). -ava/iva muljiwtl. 
J.,..u 1 I'mbawal = I'itbawal. - avail va minbiwtl. 
J~ bawwillvt/l to hand over, transfer. ba-ybawwil 
il-qaqiyya lala I-mabaakim he'll hand the case over to 
the courts. bawwil if-fiik byya he made the the cheque 
over to me.llbawwtl/eommuniej over! 2 to transform 
into, convert into. xadu I-badroon wi-bawwilu.u maktab 
they took the basement and turned It into an office. - vn 
tabwiil; ava mibawwtl. 
~r tabwitla In pi -aatl 1 (telephone) extension. 
2 liability. 3 points (on a railway). 
J~ muljawwilln pi -aatl/elee! transformer. 
J~I I'itbawwtllvi/l to be handed over, be transfer-
red. 
2 to be transformed, be converted. - iva 
mitljawwil. 
JJI- baawillvil to try, attempt. Ijawilt' mala aha biz-
lOoq I tried being polite to her. bi-tbaawil tin;-ni she is 
trying to irritate me. - vn mibawla; ava mlbaawtl. 
.i,lJ~ mubawla In pi -aatl attempt. 
JI-i I'aljaa/f 
Ivtl to transfer. pass over, refer. 
I'il-mudlir I'abal-ni bNaljqliq the director referred me 
for investigation. qaaqll-I'iljaa/a magistrate whose job 
it is to evaluate sufficiency of evidence for trial. - vn 
~ibaala. 
J»I I'iljwall = Ijlwtl -ava mibwill. 
J\.:..;....I I'istabaal Ivil it was impossible. I'lstabaal 
lalayya I'afahhim-u it was impossible for me to make 
him understand. -/sometlmes used w neg part la for 
emphasisl kaan la yistabiil bald' kida I'abu({" baaga 
f-buqq-i it was quite impossible for me after that to put 
anything in my mouth. - vn I'lstlljaala; ava mustabiil. 
.i,I\.:..;....1 I'lSIibaala Inl/ChrJ transubstantiation. 
J.,....:;.-. mustaljiilln pi -aatl impossibility. II min raabil 
il-mustabitl (or II-mustaljilaat) absolutely impossible. 

r.J e. 
r~ l:Jaam (u) Ivil to hover (around s.th.). -vn l:Joom, 
l:Jawamaan; ava l:Jaayim. 
:i...,. l:Jooma Inl empty piece of land, vacant lot. 
401~ l:Jawwaama In pi -aatl hovercraft. 
~ .J e. see I IS IS e. : l:Jiwaan 
J J e. 
.I~ l:Jawwa l Iprop nl Eve. ya bint"l:Jawwa, ya-bn" 
l:Jawwa terms used in spells to designate a person whose 
mother's name is unknown to the magician. 
IISJe. 
..;..,. l:Jawa I (i) Ivtl to contain. -vn l:Jawy; ava l:Jaawi; 
pva mal:Jwi. 
~I..,. l:Jawaaya In pi -aat, l:Jiwyaanl coil of cloth or 
straw used as a pad under hard heavy loads carried on 
the head. 
~..,. l:Jawiyya 
In 
pi -aat, 
l:Jiwyl 
pad 
under a 
camel-saddle . 
..;~ l:Jawwa 2 Ivtl to coil (cloth or straw) for use as a 
l:Jawaaya. -vn tal:Jwiyya; ava/pva mil:Jawwi. 
..;~I fitl:Jawwa Ivil to be coiled for use as a l:Jawaaya. 
-iva mitl:Jawwi . 
..;~I fil:Jtawaf Ivil to contain. ri/-baaku b-yil:Jtiwi 
,ala ,ajar ,ilab the packet contains ten boxes. -vn 
fil:Jtiwaaf; ava mil:Jtiwi . 
..:..~~ mul:Jtawayaat Ipl nl contents. 
11$ J e. 
..;..,. l:Jawa 2 (i) Ivill to conjure, do magic tricks. 2 to 
behave cunningly. -vn l:Jawy, l:Jiwa; ava l:Jaawi; pva 
mal:Jwi. 
";J~ l:Jaawi In pll:Juwaahl snake-charmer, magician, 
conjurer. IIl:Ja-liflayall:Jaawi lalayya are you trying to 
deceive me? -yaama fig-giraab ya l:Jaawi see giraab. 
[1$ e. see I [.J e.: fil:Jliyaag 
~ 1$ e. 
. 
J~ l:Jaad (i) Ivil to deviate, stray. ma-ll:Jid-f' lan il-
aa/j/j don't stray from the truth! -vn l:Jayadaan, l:Jiyaad; 
ava l:Jaayid. 
J~ l:Jiyaad Inl neutrality. xal/ii-k lal-l:Jiyaad don't get 
involved. fil-l:Jiyaad il- figaabi active neutrality . 
..I(~ l:Jaayid Ivtl to handle cautiously, deal with diplo-
235 
matically. 
fana b-al:Jayid-hum lajaan ma-l:Jaddi-f 
yismal tina l:Jiss I am always careful when I deal with 
them so as not to cause scenes.llmil:Jaayid nafs-u mind-
ing his own business, -vn mil:Jayda; ava mil:Jaayid, 
-'I. ~ mul:Jaayid ladj "I neutral. bilaad mul:Jayda neutral 
countries, 
.lISe. 
o,r.> l:Jiira Inl perplexity, bewilderment. kaanil l:Jirl-u 
ma-balda-haa-f l:Jiira he was totally perplexed. Ilrahr 
il-l:Jiira {rur] the month of Baramhat when it is too cool 
to sit in the shade but too warm to sit in the sun, 
.:"I,r.> l:Jayraan ladj "I perplexed. II fil-kalb il-l:Jayraan 
pig-in-the-middle, game in which two or more players 
toss a ball to each other while one other player tries to 
get possession of it. 
; 
l:Jayyar Ivtl to confuse, bewilder. filli malaa fjir/ 
ml:Jayyar-u yigiib gooz l:Jamaam wi-ytayyar-u {prov] he 
who has some money and doesn't know what to do with 
it buys a pair of pigeons and flies them (a comment on 
the high cost of the hobby). -vn lal:Jyiir; ava mil:Jayyar. 
~ 
I fill:Jayyar Ivil to be (put) in a quandary. -ava/iva 
mitl:Jayyar . 
)~I fil:Jlaarlvi/l to be perplexed, be at a loss. fil:Jlarl i 
f-famr-i I didn't know what to do. 2 to try one's utmost 
and still fail. raagillaguuz yil:Jlaar yirqii-ki wi-ydallac-
ik an old man would never manage to please and pam-
per you. fana I:Jlarl i mala I-liyaal I can't cope with the 
children. -ava mil:Jlaar. 
j IS e. see j J e. : l:Jiyaaza 
1~1Se. 
~ 
l:Jees (also l:Jees finn-) Iconjl since, as. l:Jees kida 
ma-fii-f maanil that being the case, there's no objec-
tion. zayyi balq-u l:Jees finnak mi~ammim O.K., since 
you insist. 
~ min l:Jees Iprepl with regard to. min l:Jees il-mabda f in 
principle. min l:Jees if-fakl as far as the appearance is 
concerned. -bi-l:Jees finll- Iconjl in such a way that, so 
that. bi-nl:Ju((-i-lha gilda b-l:Jees finnaha ma-lnafjfjat-f 
we put a washer on it so that it won't drip. 
~ 
l:Jaysiyya In pi -aall I social position, standing. 
2I:Jaysiyyaal/pi nl {leg] whereases, legal reasons (for a 
jUdgement). 
1~1Se. 
~ 
l:Jeesi: lama l:Jeesi complete blindness. 

( ~~c.) 
~ 
l:Jee~ Inl perplexity. fi-l:Jee~ bee~ at a complete 
loss. 
4...>10> l:Jiyal¥a In pI -aatl girth, strap. 
~~c. 
.;.l> l:Jaaq (i) Ivil to menstruate. -vn l:Jeeq, l:Jayaqaan; 
ava l:Jaayiq. 
~ 
l:Jeeqlnl menstruation, monthly-period. 
~ 
l:Jeeqa Ipl -aatl instance noun of l:Jeeq. 
..J.. ~ C. see ..J...J c.: l:Jee{, 
l:Jee{a, 
mul:Jii{, 
fil:Jtaa{. 
fil:Jtiyaa{, fil:Jtiyaa{i 
";~c. 
~ 
l:Jayyif Ivtl to alloy (gold). -vn tal:Jyiif; ava 
mil:Jayyif. 
~I fitl:Jayyif Ivil to be alloyed (of gold). - iva 
mitl:Jayyif. 
J~c. 
.:Ie> l:Jayyaq Ivtl to flavour (food), especially by adding 
salt. -vn tal:Jyiiq; avalpva mil:Jayyiq. 
JIo> l:Jiyaaq In! flavour (especially saltiness). 
J~c. 
~ 
l:Jeellnl I strength. fithadd' l:Jel-ha she became 
exhausted. ma-lad-!' fii l:Jeel he has no strength left. 
m-aqdar-f ft¥lub l:Jeel-i I'm exhausted.l!l:Jeel-ak hold it! 
stop! -fidd' l:Jeel-ak (1) pull yourself together!, pull 
your socks up! (2) take courage, be brave! - fuqlud 
la/a l:Jeel-ak sit down! fuc;af la/a l:Jeel-ak stand up! 
2 side effect, after-effect. 
4L.> l:Jiila Inl 1 resource, means. kull illi l:Jilt-i all that 
I have. ma-kan-f' l:Jilt-u l:Jaaga or ma-l:Jilt-uu-fhe didn't 
have a thing. ma-xallit-f' l:Jilt-u l:Jiila she left him with 
nothing. I! fil-l:Jiila the only possession, as in da l:Jiilit 
fumm-u he is his mother's only child. fii landak wilaad 
reer iI-bint' di. -/af hiyya 1-l:Jiila 'Do you have any other 
children apart from this girl?' 'No, she is all I have.' 
2 Ipl l:Jiyall trick, ruse, stratagem. ma-bil-yadd' l:Jiila 
there is nothing to be done, one is helpless. 
~ 
l:Jiyali ladj * and pI -yyal artful. 
~I.> l:Jayla Ifem adjl in heat (of a mare). 
J..I.> l:Jaayil Ivtl to cajole. qalad yil:Jaayil miraat-u 
lafaan tuxrug malaa he kept trying to talk his wife into 
going out with him. - vn mil:Jayla; ava mil:Jaayil. 
J..~I fitl:Jaayillvil to beg, plead. fiqilt atl:Jaayillala 
f-fawiif lafaan yifukk ik-ka/abfaat min fiday-ya I kept 
236 
pleading with the police officer to take off my hand-
cuffs.1! bi-yitl:Jaayillan-noom he is trying desperately to 
get to sleep. -ava mitl:Jaayil. 
J~I ,fil:Jtaal Ivil 1 to con, practise chicanery. 
2 Ipreverbl to try hard. fil:Jtalt axallii yistannaa-k 
ma-fii-f fayda I tried in vain to make him wait for you . 
- vn fll:Jtiyaa/; ava mil:Jtaa/. 
J~ mil:Jtaal laval I! riI-l:Jaal wil-mil:Jtaal see l:Jaa/ J 
under J.J C. . 
J~ mul:Jtaalln *1 con man, swindler . 
l,j~c. 
,:,1.> l:Jaan (i) Ivil to approach, draw near (in time). 
l:Jaan is-safar the time for departure has come. lamma 
yl:Jiin iI-l:Jiin when the time comes. -ava l:Jaayin. 
.:r-> l:Jiin In pI fal:Jyaan, fal:Jayiinl time, occasion. 
fi-balq iI-fal:J),aan sometimes. been kullal:Jiin wi-miin 
... once in a blue moon. 
11 fal:Jyaanan ladvl sometimes. -1i-l:Jiin ma Iconjl until. 
fistanna 1-l:Jiin m-aagi wait until I come. 
~ 
l:Jayyin Ivtl to supply with money. lamma faqbaq 
l:J-al:Jayyin-ak when I get my wages I'll give you some 
money. -vn tal:Jyiin; avalpva mil:Jayyin. 
~ 
mil:Jayyin ladj *1 rich, well-off. 
~I fitl:Jayyin Ivil 1 to have ready money. 2 to have 
one's finances replenished. -avaliva mitl:Jayyin. 
11 fitl:Jayyin iI-fur~a to watch for or seize an opportunity. 
dayman bi-yitl:Jayyin iI-furl¥ lafaan yitxaaniq malaaya 
he's always on the look-out for chances to pick a fight 
with me. 
~ 
I fistal:Jayyin J Ivil to have ready money. -ava 
mistal:Jayyin. 
Z,j~c. 
J,", l:Jayyaani: ba/al:J l:Jayyaani a large reddish variety 
of date, eaten fresh. 
I ~~ C. 
" 
l:Jiyi (a) Ivil to live. yil:Jya (or yal:Jya) r-rayyis long 
live the president! -ava l:Jayy. 
" 
l:Jaya I (i) Ivtl 1 to give Ii'fe to, revive, vitalize. 
fil:Jyii-ni n-nahar-da w-mawwit-ni bukra {prov] ... sus-
tain me today and you can do what you like with me 
tomorrow. 2 to perform, stage, put on. riI-firqa l:Jayit 
sahriteen the group gave two evening performances. 
bi-yil:Jyu z-zaar bil- fugra they perform the zaar for a 
fee. -vn l:Jaya; ava l:Jaayi; pva mal:Jyi. 

~ bayy I linterj/: bayy· Gala ... hasten to ... , as in 
bayy· Gala ~-~alaah [lsi] come to prayer! 
~ bayyZ l/adj "I alive, living. ril-misiib iI-bayy the 
living Christ. zaxiira bayya live ammunition. 2 Inl Liv-
ing One (epithet of God). 
~ bayyJ In pI 'i'abyaa'i'l I quarter, district, neigh-
bourhood. bayy; raaCfi a high-class district. 2 one of the 
main administrative sectors within an Egyptian city. 
bayy il-'i'azbakiyya the Ezbekiya district (in Cairo) 
ra'i'iis iI-bayy administrative head of a sector. 
~ bayya I In pI -aatl snake, serpent. 'i'illi tUCfr~-u 
I-bayya min del-ha yxaaf [prov] and 'i'illi tUCfr~-u 
I-bayya yxaaf min garrit il-babl [prov] who has been 
bitten by a snake fears its tail (or: fears the pulling of a 
rope). 'lin babbit-ak bayya 'i'i((aWWaCf biiha [prov] ... 
cherish an offer of friendship no matter from whom. 
;\,,> baya Z Inl (state of) life. been il-moot wil-baya 
between life. and death.llbil-baya alive and well, alive 
and kicking, as in dafanuu bil-baya they buried him 
alive, ya rabb; xud-ni bil-baya 0 Lord, take me (now, 
although I am very much) alive. 
;\,,> bayaah In, in constr bayaatl life. ril-muhimm; 
'linn· bayat-ha maGaa tkuun saGiida the important 
thing is that her life with him should be happy. 'lana 
f-Ijayaat-i ma1uft;1 suu'i' Ija;;; bif1akl; da all my life 
I've never seen such bad luck.ljayaat-,:, fin-namiima he 
thrives on gossip.llya Ijayaat-i a tender form of address. 
- wi-Ijyaat an intensification of the oath particle wi-, as 
in wi-Ijyaat-ak, wi-Ijyaat rabb-i-na, wi-Ijyaat in-nabi, 
wi-Ijyaat raljmit 'i'abuu-k, wi-Ijyaat maCfaam il-Ijuseen 
etc., any of which may be used (1) in polite request, ... if 
you please, as in wi-Ijyaat-ak mumkin tiCful-1i s-saaGa 
kaam please, would you tell me the time? (2) in strong 
affirmation, as in wi-Ijyaat-ak mif Ija-taxd-u you cer-
tainly will not take it! (3) as a connection in narrative 
with little function other than to give a slight emphasis 
to the following words ... whereupon, so, as in 
fa-Cfult-i-Iu la mu'i'axza ya-bn-i ma-xadt;1 baal-i 
mil-Ijikaaya wi-Ijyaat-ik wi-xadt il-waad Gala Ijigr-i then 
I told him, 'Sorry, son, I didn't think of that', and 
I took the kid on my lap. -Ia bayaata Ii-man tunaadi r ... 
you're flogging a dead horse. 
237 
. i.$,y.:> Ijayawi ladjl vital. door Ijayawifil-masraljiyya a 
vital role in the play. IImuqadd B Ijayawi antibiotic. 
~,y.:> Ijayawiyya Inl vitality, vigour. 
,:,I,y.:> Ijayawaan Ipl -aatl I Inl animal. ril-Ijayawanaat 
il-manawiyya spermatozoa. gineenit il-Ijayawanaat the 
zoo. 2/adjl beastly, gross (of a person). 
JI,y.:> Ijayawaani ladjl pertaining to animals, of anim-
alorigin. 
,:,1". ljiwaan J In pI -aatl animal. 
~ maljya Inl Sufi dhikr. 
~ ljayya 2 /vtl to greet, salute. bayyi ril-Galam salute 
the 
colours! 
II w-ana 
daaxil 
ig-gamGa 
Ijayyeet 
il-bawwaab bi-sgaara as I was going into the Universi-
ty, I gave the doorman a cigarette in greeting. -vn 
taljiyya; avaliva mibayyi. See further under 1 i.$ c:. ..:;.. 
~ taljiyya In pI -aat, taljaayal I salute, greeting. 
maGa taljiyyit if1irka with the compliments of the com-
pany.1I 'i'it-taljiyyaat [lsi] that part of the Muslim ritual 
prayer which contains the creed and invocations of 
blessing on the prophets and saints. 2 food or drink 
offered in hospitality to a guest. 
~\.... baaya Ivtl [agric] to water (a crop) for the first 
time after the shoots appear. -vn miljayaah; ava 
miljaayi. 
~6'1 'i'itljaaya Ivil passive of Ijaaya. -iva mitljaayi. 
1 i.$ i.$ c:. 
.\,,> ljaya J Inl I diffidence, modesty, politeness. 
'i'iI-ljaya fir-riggaala ywarris iI-faCfr [prov] diffidence in 
men brings poverty. Cfaliil il-Ijaya indecent, shameless. 
2 [rur] vagina (of a quadruped). 
~ ljayy4 ladj "I diffident, modest and well-
mannered. walad Ijayy; wi-mrabbi kwayyis a polite, 
well brought-up boy. 
~ 
1 'i'istalja Ivil to behave with or feel diffidence or 
embarrassment. 'i'istaljeet akallim-ha fif1aariG I was 
too shy to talk to her in the street. 'lima ma-b-tistibii1 
aren't you ashamed of yourself? 'i'illi ma-yistilji yifGal 
ma yiftihi [prov] who feels no shame acts as he pleases. 
lI'i'is-sitt iI-mistiljiyya Cape gooseberry fruit(s). - ava 
mistibi. 
~I 'i'istabya = 'i'istaba. -vn 'i'istiljya; ava mistibyi. 

It 
l> xaa Ifem nl seventh letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
II riI-mawqul-da lala Ijarf il-xaa no one knows if this 
matter will turn out to be good or bad. - alsoxaaf. xah. 
.1 t 
.l> xaaf Ifem n, pi -aatl seventh letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also xaa. xah. 
.; I t 
.;.l> xaaj: yinlal xaaj-ak. yillan xaaf fabuu-k, etc. "" 
damn you! 
IJlt 
Jl> xaal J In pi faxwaal. xilaanl I maternal uncle. 
2~ familiar form of address to a youngish man. 
) l> xaalu Inl affectionate form of address to a mater-
nal uncle. xaalu ga uncle came. 
;;Jl> xaala In pi -aatl I maternal aunt. 2 (also xall-i) 
affectionate, familiar or respectful title of, and form of 
address or reference to 2a a maternal aunt. 2 b! an 
older woman. 2c an older woman who is one's social 
inferior.llxall-i landuku is my aunt here? (said in refer-
ence to one who dashes in to ask something and dashes 
out again as soon as he has the answer without bother-
ing to observe the niceties expected of a visitor). 
Z J I t 
Jl> xaal 2 Inl mole on the cheek, beauty spot. 
r"lt 
il> xaam <P khi'im> ladj invar/l raw, unprocessed. 
b,laslik xaam raw plastic. riI-ljadiid i1-xaam iron ore. 
2 inexperienced, naive. di binI' xaam Iissa gayya mil-
balad she's an inexperienced girl just come from the 
• 
village. 
4.l> xaama In pi -aatl I raw material. xamaal i{-
cibaala printing materials. fil-c;izaaz ma~nuul min 
xamaal kiliira glass is made from many materials. 
2 quality, kind, type. riI-xafab nafs-u laaZlm yikuun 
min xamaal kuwayyisa the wood itself must be of good 
quality. IIxaml-u kwayyisa he's made of good stuff. 
,:,It 
.:,l> xaan J <P khi'in> In pi -aatl{obsol! caravanserai, 
bazaar. IIxaan i1-xaliili district of Cairo famous for its 
tourist bazaars, near el-Azhar mosque. 
~l> xaana <P khi'ina> In pi -aatl I pigeon-hole (for 
papers etc.). fil xaana b-raqam i1-fooqa yaaxud 
iz-zibuun mmha I-muftaalj there is a pigeonhole with 
the room-number on 1\ from which thc client takes his 
key. 2 blank space or box in a form. fimqi fil-xaana di 
sign in this space. 3 {math! digit column. xaamt 11-
faljaad the units column. 4 point of a backgammon 
board. square on a chessboard or draught-board. 
II wiC;il fi-xaanit i1-yakk to be trapped totally, be trap-
ped without hope of escape or release. 5 {mus! that 
section of an instrumental piece followed by the refram. 
6 jack on a telephone switchboard. 
11 -xaana suffix indicating a house or buildmg, forming 
quasi-compounds with some nouns. fll- fantikxaana the 
Egyptian Museum. fil-kutubxaana {obsol! the Egyp-
tian National Library (later daar il-kutub). II riI-
muhandisxaana {obsol! the School of Engineering. 
- fadabxaana {obsol! lavatory. -fafaxaana (1) {mil! 
clinic. (2) {rur! animal hospital. 
· ~ t ~ee ,,; ~ t: maxbaf. maxaabif 

I.;yt 
~ xabar J Ivtl to experience. xabar iI-liija f- rurubba 
he experienced life in Europe. -vn xibra; ava xaabir. 
• ~ xibra In pI -aatl experience. landu xibra (awiila 
f-mas!J il-!'araae{i he has had a lot of experience in 
surveying. bi-nistawrid xibraat fi-magaal i~-~inaala we 
import expertise in the industrial field. 
~ xabar1 In pI !'axbaarl (item of) news. diriit bil-
xabar did you hear the news? xudu !'axbar-kum min 
~i¥Qr-kum [prov} get the gossip from the children. 
II !'axbaar-ak reeh '" how are you? ,how are things? -ya 
xabar (!,iswid or !'abyae{) exclamation of dismayed sur-
. prise'" good heavens! oh no! asinyaxabar-lamal kida 
b-~a!Jii!J oh no! did he really do that? ya xabar - lac;u 
~ar~iir fil-gatooh good grief! they found cockroaches in 
the cakes! -fi-xabar kaan over and done with, beyond 
recall. -!J-ac;(al xabar-ak or !J-agiib xabar-ak I'll kill 
you! 1"11 finish you! - !'aaxir xabarstop-press,late news. 
-Ia ygiib xabar wala ywaddi xabar useless, good-for-
nothing. - !'iI-xabar !'eeh what's the matter? -xabar(-ak) 
!'eeh (said with irritation) what's up with you? 
~ !,idda xabar to give forewarning, give notice. !'iddii-ni 
xabar c;abliiha bjiwayya let me know a little before-
hand. !'izzaay thiib min reer ma tiddi xabar how come 
you absent yourself without notice? 
.;~ xabariyya In pI -aatl piece of news. 
~ 
xabiir In pI xubaral I expert. gaabu xubara 
!'agaanib yijlaralu fis-sadd il-laali they brought foreign 
experts to work on the High Dam. da xabiir liz-zarra 
he's an atomic expert. 2 (also xabiir mutammin) 
auctioneer. 
~i !'axbar lell I betterlbest informed. 2 morelmost 
experienced. 
~ muxbir In *1 detective. 
~;4>1 rixbariyya In pI -aatl (piece of) information 
passed to, e.g., the press, the police, the relevant 
authorities. 
;.. xabbar Ivtl to tell, inform. xabbarl abuu-k bi-nnina 
!Ja-nitgawwiz have you told your father that we're get-
ting married? -vn laxbiir; ava mixabbar. 
jl~ mixabbaraati In pI -yyal tell-tale. 
,J! ~ xaabir Ivtl to pass on information to. -vn mixabra; 
ava mixaabir. 
o,J!\;£ muxabra (also muxabra tilifoniyya) In pI -aatl 
telephone call. 
.;:,I,J!~I !,il-muxabaraal/pl nl the Bureau of Intelli-
gence, the Secret Service. 
,J! li'l !,itxaabir Ivil to be in communication. ril-laskari 
da txaabir mala I-laduw waC;1 iI-!Jarb that soldier pas-
sed on information to the enemy during the war. - ava 
239 
milxaabir. 
..,,:;>1 !,ixtabar I/vtl to test, assess, tryout. !'il-xu(uuba 
la!aan iI-max(ubiin yixtibru bale{ the engagement 
period is for the couple to get to know each other. 2 Ivil 
to have a deep spiritual experience. -vn !,ixlibaar; ava 
mixlibir. 
;l.:>1 riXlibaar 
In 
pI -aatl 
I test, 
examination. 
!,ixtibaar siwaac;a driving test. bi-yilmiluxlibaar li-kull i 
{aalib they give each student a test. la!J1 il-ixlibaar on 
probation, under surveillance or observation, on trial. 
2 spiritual or mystical experience. 
~I rislaxbar Ivil to inquire, make inquiries. -vn 
riSlixbaar; ava mistaxbar. 
1 .; Y t see .;.J Y t : xabuur 
I· 
• 
.;yc 
:r.> xabaz (i) I Ivtl to bake (especially bread). II rana 
lagn-u w-xabz-u I know him inside out. 2 Ivil to bake 
bread. bi-nixbiz kull i !'usbuUl we bake bread every 
week. -vn xabiiz, xabz; ava xaabiz; pva maxbuuz. 
;,4->- xabbaaz In "I baker. II !'iddi I-lee! li-xabbaziin-u 
wa-/aw yaklu n~~-u [prov} (give the bread to those who 
know how to bake it, even iftheyeat halfofit) '" have it 
done by an expert even if it costs more. 
, 
maxbaz In pI maxaabizl bakery. 
~I !,ilxabaz Ivil to be baked (especially of bread). 
c;abl il-lee! ma yitxibiz bi-y!Ju{{u lalee simsim before', 
the bread is baked they put sesame on it. - iva milxibiz. 
~ 
1 rinxabaz = rilxabaz. - iva minxibiz. 
1 • 
• 
.;yc 
.~ xubbeeza I Icoll nl mallow(s). 2 Inl [obsol} 
brothel. 
IJ"'yt 
.......,> xubs Inl I deceitful cunning, deviousness, wili-
ness. 2 defilement. !'aluuzu bi-llaah mil-xubs i wil-
xabaayis Lord protect me from all defilements (uttered 
notably when entering the lavatory). 
.......,> xabas r Inl evil. ril-xamra xabas alcoholic drinks 
are a vice. 
.;...>i !'axbas lel/l morelmost cunning, devious or de-
ceitful. 2 morelmost wicked. 
~ 
xabiis ladj pI xubasa/l deceitful. cunning, wily . 
ya xabiis you snake-in-the-grass! 2 [palh} malignant. 
waram xabiis malignant tumour. 
~ 
xabiisa In pI xabaayis, xabaa!,isT! vice, sin. 
ril-xamra rumm il-xabaayis liquor is the root of all 
vices. 

...,..-! li'l fitxaabis Ivil to act cunningly, behave deceitful-
Iy. - ava mitxaabis. 
U#yt 
~ 
xab~ (u) Ivil I[deris] to tattle, inform. 
ba-yuxb~ laleek law geet mitfaxxar he'll tell on you if 
you come late. 2 to practise deceit or trickery. xab~ 
laleena he tricked us. 3 to intrigue. miraat-u dayman 
tixb~ been ig-giraan his wife is always setting the neigh-
bours at odds with one another. 4 to philander. -vn 
xab~; ava xaab~. 
~ 
xab~ Inl I deceit, fabrication. II riI-xab~' wil-Iab~ 
wiliness, deviousness, monkey-business, as in ba([al 
riI-xab~' wil-Iab~' wil-Iaf/' wid-dawaraan bitaal-ak da 
stop this deviousness and beating about the bush of 
yours, ma-fiif badd' zayyu fil-xab~' wil-Iab~ no one (an 
tell tall stories the way he can. 2 philandering. 
~ 
xab~a linst n, pi -aatl a lie, a deception, a slander-
ous tale. 
~ 
xabii~a Inl I concoction, mixture. 2 mess. 
..,..t;> xabbaa~ ladj °1 I lying. devious. 2 tell-tale. 
3 philanderer. 
~ 
xabba~ Ivtl to press, squeeze, squash together. 
xabba~it 
iI-lagiina 
she 
kneaded 
the 
dough. 
IIma-txabba~-jiz-zarl don't trample on the plants! -vn 
taxbii~; avalpva mixabba~. 
~I fitxabba~ Ivil to be pressed or squeezed, be 
squashed together. - iva mitxabba~. 
byt 
.Ja,;.. xaba( (a) Ivtl I to hit, strike. xaba( iI-waad bil-
larabiyya he hit the kid with the car. xaba(-u e;alam he 
gave him a slap.llxaba(bi-kalaam to address brusquely, 
as in ma-tixba(-nii-j bl-kalaam-ak don't use such hard 
words with me! -xaba( mifwaar to go on a (long, tire-
some) errand or journey. -xab(: laze; abruptly, without 
beating about the bush, as in e;aal xab( laze; innaha 
maatit he blurted out that she had died. xu/!' 
fil-mawquul xab[' laze; come right to the point! 2 to 
appropriate. xaba( xab(a kbiira he landed a good deal. 
he made a killing. xaba( i/-filuus he pocketed the 
money. he knocked off the money. - Ivil 3 to rattle. 
knock. bang. fil-baab xaba( (I) the door banged. 
(2) there was a knock at the door. -vn xab(; ava xaabi(; 
pva maxbuu( . 
.Ja,;.. xab(a linst n, pi -aatl I a knock. a blow. xab(iteen 
fir-raas tiwgal [prov] (two blows on the head hurt) "" 
one disaster can be endured. two are almost unbear-
able. 2 a coup. xab(a ~abafiyya a journalistic scoop. 
; .. "fa 
fa~iila a 
real 
coup. 
xab(it milallim a 
240 
master-stroke . 
~I fitxaba( Ivil I to be hit or hit oneself, be knocked 
or knock oneself. larabiyyit-i txaba(it min wara my car 
was run into from behind. riI-markib itxaba(itfir-r~iif 
the ship struck the quay. II fin /a-lla fatxibi( fi-na;ar-i 
law ... may I be struck blind if ... (as a disclaimer). -da 
fakiid itxaba(fi-dmaay-u la/aan yit~arrafbif-jak/' da he 
surely must be off his rocker to act like this. 2 to be 
appropriated. -avaliva mitxibi(. 
~ 
I finxaba( = fitxaba(. - avaliva minxibi(. 
~ 
xabba( Ivil I to give a series of knocks. xabba( 
lal-baab he knocked at the door. IIbi-yxabba(u mala 
balq' fil-kalaam they bandy words with each other. 
2 to emit a knocking sound. riI-mutoor bi-yxabba( the 
engine is knocking. fil-baab bi-yxabba( there's a knock 
at the door. 3 to behave confusedly. grope. siib-u 
yxabba( let him blunder around, leave him in his confu-
sion! - vn taxbii(; avalpva mixabba(. 
~I fitxabba( Ivil I to be hit. be knocked, be 
bumped. 2 to speak confusedly. lamma txabba( 
fi-kalaam-u e;abaq Galee I-bulii~ when he gave contra-
dictory statements the police arrested him. - avaliva 
mitxabba(. 
I Jyt 
J.> xabal ' (i) Ivtl to stupefy. yuuh - riI-fustaan da 
yixbil my! that's a stunning dress! ftf-bmt' xabalit-ni the 
girl made me flip. -vn xabal; ava xaabil; pva maxbuul. 
J.> xabal 2 In! lunacy. landu xabal he's crazy. 
~I fitxabal Ivil to be stupefied. - iva mitxibil . 
J,.>.;I finxabal = fitxabal. - iva minxibil. 
J.> xabbil Ivtl to make a mess of, spoil. fi(-(abbaax 
xabbil il- fakl the cook ruined the food. fimi xabbilti 
iI-waad you spoiled the boy. -vn taxbiil; avalpva 
mixabbil. 
2 Jy t 
J.> xabal 3 Icoll nl barnacles and seawc;ed etc. en-
crusted on the bottom of a boat. 
.n y t 
.Jy.~ xabuur In pi xawabiirl wedge. wooden peg or 
plug.llxabuur miyam (I) a nasty trick. (2) a tight spot, 
a nasty situation. 
l.Syt 
. 
..r.> xiba Inl I seclusion. hiding. e;aalid fil-xiba (he is) 
hiding himself away. riI-e;umaa/ i~farr' min kutr iI-xiba 
the fabric turned yellow from being stored away so 
long. 2 secluded quarters for bedouin women. 

~~ xabaaya Ipl nJ hidden things, secrets, intricacies. 
huwwa laarif kull; xabaaya I-fi~~a he knows all the ins 
and outs of the story. 
~l> xabya In pi -aat, xawaabi/large jar, vat. 
~ maxbaf In pi maxaabifl air-raid shelter. 
~ 
xabba Ivtl to conceal, hide. kaan mixabbi 
I-musaddas taht iI-maxadda he was hiding the gun under 
the pillow. bi-txabbi lanni kull a haaga she hides every-
thing from me. finta bi-txabbi lala mraat-ak are you 
hiding your affairs from your wife? -vn taxbiyya; ava/ 
pva mixabbi. 
~I fitxabba Ivil I to be hidden. 2 to hide oneself. 
-ava/iva mitxabbi. 
~ 
1 fistaxabba Ivil I to hide oneself. fistaxabbeet 
minni leeh why did you hide from me? IIsitt; 
mistaxabbiyya Cape gooseberry fruit(s). 2 to become 
hidden. misiir iI-mistaxabbi ybaan hidden truths come 
out. rabb-i-na yikfii-na farr iI-mistaxabbi {prov] may 
God protect us from the evil of the unknown. -ava/iva 
mistaxabbi. 
r";' t 
~ xatam (i) Ivt/la to stamp. f~-~arraaf bi-yixtim-Iu 
l-wll,l'l the cashier stamps the receipt for him. Ib to seal. 
2 to conclude, finish (a reading, recitation etc.). xatam 
iI-fi~~a he finished the story. w-axtim kalaam-i 
b~-~alaatu lan-nabi and I finish my tale by blessing the 
Prophet (closing formula used by narrators of popular 
epics).lIxatam ~-~ala to follow the Muslim ritu~1 prayer 
with certain prescribed devotional formulae. -xatam 
iI-qurfaan (1) to recite the entire Koran at a xatma 
(q.v.). (2) to complete one's memorization of the 
Koran. 3 to pin down (an opponent's shoulders, in 
wrestling). - Ivi/4 to be completed, be finished." fahi 
xatamit and that's the last straw! Sa to heal over, close 
(of a wound). fig-garh; xatam the wound healed over. 
5b to form a skin (of fluids such as milk). -vnxatamaan, 
xatm, xitaam- ava xaatim; pva maxtuum. 
~ xatm In pi xawaatiml {coarse] arsehole, anus. 
~ 
xatma I In pi -aatl evening ceremony held at the 
time of a death or of a happy event, or in fulfilment of a 
vow, the main feature of which is the recitation of the 
entire Koran. 
4..:.;1..1 iI-xatma, riI-xitmaJ Inl Koran. wil-xatma f-
fariifa by the Holy Koran! 
r~ xitaam Inl ending, conclusion. fahsan (or misk iI-) 
xitaam the best of endings, as in finfa-lIaf-Juyla titxitim 
fahsan xitaam let's hope the work reaches the most 
successful possible conclusion. II fil-xitaam ~-~uyayyar 
the memorization of the thirtieth, twenty-ninth, and 
241 
twenty-eighth parts of the Koran. - riI-xitaam ik-kibiir 
the memorization of the complete Koran. 
~~ xitaami iadjl final, concluding. riI-mafhad iI-
xitaami the final scene. 
r'l> xaatim In pi xawaatiml I finger ring more elabo-
rate than a plain band (cf dibla).lIxaatimsulaymaan the 
seal of Solomon. -falr; xawaatim curly hair. 
-makaroona xawaatim macaroni. -faqq iI-xaatim 
de-flowering 
(on 
the 
occasion 
of 
marriage-
consummation). 2 motif in tent applique designs (see 
PI.H, 18). 3 anus. 
r'l> xaatam: xaatam it- fanbiya the last ofthe prophets 
(epithet of the Prophet Muhammad). 
~l> xatma, xaatima r In pi xawaatiml end, conclusion. 
fil-fumuur bi-xawatim-ha all's well that ends well. 
~ xitm In pi faxtaam, xitaaml I stamp. xitm; tariix 
date stamp. 2 seal. xitm ig-gumhuriyya the Seal of the 
Republic. IIha({; xitm(-u) lala {abus] to set one's seal 
on, label as one's own (without right), as in manal-ak 
tifrab leeh - huwwa hacc; xitm-u lal-hanafiyya why 
won't he let you drink? - has he staked a claim on the 
tap? 
r~ xattaam In *1 employee whose function is related 
to stamping operations (e.g., policeman in charge of 
finger-printing suspects, employee who stamps grades 
on. carcasses in a slaughterhouse). 
.... ~ xattaama In pi -aatl ink pad. 
~I fitxatam Ivil I to be stamped. fitxatam bit-
mafibuul it has been stamped Approved. 2 to be sealed. 
3 to end, come to an end. -avaliva mitxitim. 
~I finxatam = fitxatam. -ava/iva minxitim. 
iJ..;,t 
.:;> xatan (i) Ivtl to circumcise. -vn xitaan r; 'ava 
xaatin; pva maxtuun. 
.:..~ xitaan r Inl circumcision. 
.:;> xattin Ivtl to inoculate, vaccinate. -vn taxtiin; ava/ 
pva mixattin. 
~I fitxattin Ivil to be inoculated, be vaccinated. - iva 
mitxattin. 
J[t 
~ 
xigil (a) Ivil to become shy or embarrassed. xigilt; 
lamma smilt in-nukta I was embarrassed when I heard 
the joke. -vn xagal; ava xaglaan. 
J~ xaguulladj *1 bashful, shy. 
~ 
xaggil Ivtl to embarrass, put to shame. -vn 
taxgiil; ava mixaggil. 
~i faxgal Ivtl to embarrass, put to shame. 
II faxgaltum tawaqul-na you've embarrassed me, 

you've made me feel unworthy of your praise. 
~ t see 
~ t ~ : xad, xud 
~ ~ t 
~ xadd In pi xuduudll cheek. lala xadd-ufaama on 
his cheek is a mole. IIlamalli-... xadd-u madaas (to 
make one's cheek a stepping place for ... ) to treat with 
the utmost deference. II I'aymar xuduud rouge. 2 {naut} 
one of the two supporting blocks (partners) at the foot 
of a mast. 
~.).I.O- xudadiyya or xududiyya In pi -aall small pillow, 
cushion. 
• ~ mixadda In pi -aall I pillow, cushion. 2 {elee} 
armature coil. 3/areh} pile-cap. 
[..J~~t 
~J~ xadduuga In pi xadadiigl pair of cross-thonged 
sandals. 
I 
• 
J ~ ~ 
.J~ xaddar Ivtll to drug. duktuur ii-bing' bi-yxaddar 
il-mariit{ qabl ig-giraaya the anaesthetist anaesthetizes 
the patient before surgery. \'iI-yafiif bi-yxaddar hashish 
has a drugging effect. 2 to lull into a false sense of 
security. 
-vn 
laxdiir; 
avalpva 
mixaddar; 
ava 
muxaddirr. 
.::..I.J~ muxaddaraat I Ipl nl drugs, narcotics. mukafIJit 
iI-muxaddaraal Narcotics 
Divi~ion (of a police 
department) . 
.J~I I'ilxaddar Ivil to be drugged. - iva mitxaddar. 
1 J ~ t 
..:...I.J~ muxaddaraal 2 
Ifem 
pi ad]/: 
I'is-sittaat i/-
muxaddaraatJ aristocratic women sheltered and pro-
tected from hardship. 
~ ~t 
...,..1.0- xadaf (I) 
Ivtl to scratch. 
!'il-luuri xadaf 
larabiyyit-i the truck scratched my car. Ill'ayy' kilma 
mumkin lixdif sumlil-ha anything can damage her 
reputation. -vn xadf: ava xaadif; pva maxduuf. 
"';'.1.0- xadf In pi xuduufl scratch. 
;":'.1.0- xadfa linst n, pi -aall a (single) scratch. 
.r~1 I'itxadaf Ivtl to be scratched. -iva milxidif. 
...;.~ I I'inxadaf = I'itxadaf. - iva minxidif . 
..;..~ xaddif Ivtl to scratch repeatedly. make scratches 
on. ma-txalliiJ il-qu((a txaddif il-mubilya don't let the 
cat scratch the furniture. I'il-bistim il-qadiim xaddif is-
silindar the old piston made. scratches on the cylinder. 
242 
-vn laxdlif; avalpva mixaddif. 
...,.~I I'itxaddif Ivil to be scratched repeatedly or ex-
tensively. - iva mitxaddif. 
ItJt 
t.l.O- xadal (a) Ivtl to trick. deceive. xadalna l-laduw 
bi-munawraal we took the enemy in with manoeuvres. 
IIl'il-yarb' xidla /provl "" all's fair In war. IIl'arbaab 
il-xidaal /obsolJ politicians. -vn xldaal, xldla: ava 
xaadil: pva maxduul. 
~.I.O- xidla In pi xldall deception. swindle. trick, 
bluff. II xidla sinima I'lyya gimmick. trick photography 
in cincma . 
~.I.O- xadlila In pi xadaayill deceIt, treachery. 
tl~ xaddaal lad] 'I deceitful, deceptive (of s.o. or 
s.th.). 
t ~ 
I I'lIlxadal Ivil to be tricked, be taken in. I'm-naas 
il-busa{a b-yinxidlu bil-Ylyal il-basii{a simple people 
are deceived by simple tricks. -iva minxidil. 
t~1 I'itxadal = I'inxadal· -iva milxidil· 
lt~t 
t ~ xaddal Ivtl/cookJ to cook (fried onions) in toma-
to puree. -vn laxdlil: avalpva mixaddal. 
~~ laxdllla Inl fned onions cooked with pureed 
tomatoes (a basic constituent of many Egyptian 
dishes) . 
t~1 I'ilxaddal lviI/cook} (of onions) to be fried and 
then cooked In tomato purec. - iva mllxaddal. 
Jt~t 
t~ maxdal' In pi maxaadill sleeping-place. II mara 
maxdal J voluptuous woman. 
J~t 
J.I.O- xidil (a) Ivil to become numb. rigl-i xidlit my leg 
went numb. llma:b-yixdaIJ (1) he is always nagging. 
(2) he is always going places. -zayy ir-rigl il-xadlaana 
{deris} useless (like a numb leg). -vn xadalaan: ava 
xadlaan. 
J~ xaddill Ivtl to numb. tuql ifJan(a xaddil klll-i the 
weight of the bag numbed my shoulder. 2 Ivil to be-
come numb. rtgl-, J.addilit min kutr il-fiulaad my leg 
became numb from so much Sitting. -vn iaxdiil: ava/pva 
mixaddil . 
r ~ t 
j.l.O- xadam' (i) Ivtlla to serve, wait on. I'is-sulaah illi 
b-yixdimu l-muwagafiin the messengers who serve the 
employees. I'axrit xidmit il-Yuu· lalfia {provJ the up-

shot of serving a Turk is a beating (said when one gets 
ingratitude in return for a service). Ib to do (s.o.) a 
favour, perform a service for. 
fana I:J-axdim-ak 
fi-tac.viin ibn-ak I will do what I can for you to get your 
son appointed. Ie to support, strengthen. bi-ynaqqi 
~-~uwar ilIi b-tixdim il-maqaal he picks the illustrations 
that best back up the article. 2 to work (s.th.) with due 
care and skill, manipulate (skilfully) by labour. xadamt 
il-xajab biz-zeet I gave the wood the oiling it needed. 
xidmit il-fartt working the land. fintaag ma~r' kwayyis 
bass illi yixdim-u laazim yikuun 'daqiiq the Egyptian 
(product) is all right, but the one who works with it has 
to be nifty. - Ivi/3 to serve, do service. xadamfig-geej 
he served in the army. malaffil-xidma the employment 
record. 4 to be of use. fif-JUld' da ma-yixdim-/ this 
work is useless! - vn xidma; ava xaadim; pva maxduum . 
.... .>.> xidma In pi xadamaatl I service. yilzam (fayy i) 
xidma is there anything I can do for you? xidma 
laskariyya military service. II fayyi xidma (\) is there 
anything more I can do for you? (2) at your service! 
2 [ChrJ (organized) meetingorservice in church. - Ino 
pl/3 [lslJ 3a distribution of free food and drink at the 
time of muulid (q. v.) celebrations. 3b food and drink so 
distributed. 
t~l> xaadim In pi xuddaaml I mosque custodian, mos-
que janitor. 2 [ChrJ lay worker, volunteer worker in a 
church. 3 [frozen contextsJ one who serves, servitor, 
servant. sayyid il-qoom xadim-hum [provJ the lord of 
the people is their servant. xaadim ir-rabb or xaadim 
il- fingii/ [ChrJ form of reference to a Protestant minis-
ter. xuddaam I-ism [magicJ spirits assigned to certain 
roles. 
tJ';;': maxduum r In *1 employer. master. 
t'>'> xadam 2 Icoll nl servant~, attendants. sillim i/-
xadam the servants' stairs. IIxadam wi-l:Ja/am servants 
and followers-on, entourage. 
tJ'>'> xaduum ladj *1 helpful. obliging (of a person). 
tl.:i.;. xaddaam In *1 male servant. xaddaam-ak ya beeh 
(I'm) your servant, Sir! 
;;"I.:i.;. xaddaama In pi -aatl female servant, maid. 
t"";'::l fitxadam Ivil passive of xadam. - iva mitxidim. 
t~1 finxadam = fitxadam. -iva minxidim. 
t.:i.;. xaddim Ivtl I to find employment for, put to work. 
huwwa bi-yxaddim if-Ja¥¥aliin fil-biyuut he finds jobs 
for servants in private houses. xaddimt-u land"lamm-i 
I got him work at my uncle's. maktab taxdiim domestic 
employment agency. 2 to bring into direct contact, 
make even or level. xaddim i/-maktab lala 1-l:Jee{a put 
the desk flush against the wall. 3 to cause to serve. {uul 
ma huwwa qaalid bi-yxaddim illi l:Jawalee all the while 
243 
he's sitting there he keeps people around him busy. 
-
Ivil 4 to come into direct contact, meet properly. 
fit-tirseen ma-bi-yxaddimuu-j mala balq the two cogs 
don't mesh. -vn taxdiim; ava mixaddim. 
11 xaddim lala to serve. xaddim laq-quyuuf il-fawwil 
serve the guests first. 
t~ mixaddim, muxaddim r In *1 = mixaddimaati. 
jL.~ mixaddimaati or mixaddamaati In pi -yyal em-
ployment agent for domestic help. 
t$1 fitxaddim Ivil passive of xaddim. - iva mitxaddim. 
t~ 
1 fistaxdim 11 Ivtl to make use of. fif-Jeex 
bi-yilrafyistaxdim ig-ginn the sheikh knows how to use 
the jinn (to serve him). -Ithe literary passive form 
occurs frequently in elevated speechl da n-nool illi 
b-yustaxdam fil-maktab that's the type used in the 
office. 2! Ivil to take up employment. balaaj tistaxdim 
fil-l:Jukuuma don't work for the government. -vn 
fistixdaam; avalpva mistaxdim; pva mustaxdam. 
..:r--'~ mustaxdimiin Ipl nl personnel. mudiir il-
mustaxdimiin personnel manager. 
1.S.JI·pt 
"sy,.'>'> xideewi <P khidev> I In *1 Khedive. 2/adj *1 
pertaining to a Khedive. 
J ~ t see Z J j t 
II ' 
.;c:. 
• ~ ,I ~ xara I (also xara sinnu) <perh Copt::>-I Inl 
children's ball game. 2 linterjl call marking first serve of 
the game where the ball is served backwards over the 
head or shoulder. 
Z I .; t see 
I I.S .; t : xara 2 
":,,.;t 
y ~ xirib, xurub (a) Ivil I to be destroyed, be ruined. 
bahayim-hunrmaatit wi-byUl-hum xirbit (their animals 
died and their houses fell to ruin) they were hit by total 
disaster. 2 to cease to function, go out of order. 
fi/-makana xirbit fag fa the machine suddenly conked 
out. fil- fasanseer xarbaan the lift is out of order. -vn 
xaraab; ava xarbaan. 
y~ xarab (i) Ivtl to destroy, ruin. fii l:Jadd i yixrib 
beet-u b- fiid-u would anyone deliberately bring ruin 
upon himself? II (fal/aah) yixrib beet-ak = (God) damn 
you! (used as a curse but also to denote surprise or 
wonder). - fal/aah la yixrib-Iak beet [beggars] may God 
not destroy your home! - (fal/aah) yixrib laql-ak ex-
clamation of affectionate amusement = you're a riot! 

what a devil you are! -xarab-ha w-c;ac:ad c:a/a tall-a-ha 
he ruined it and sat (in satisfaction) on the mound of 
ruins. - rasiib iI-maxruub ii-beet da I'Uleave this blasted 
house! -vnxarabaan. xaraab; avaxaarib; pvamaxruub . 
..,..1.;> xaraab Inl destruction, ruin. lIya xaraab-i (also, 
euphemistically, ya xaraaj-i) exclamation of dismay or 
despair == woe is me! IImoot wi-xaraab diyaar {prov] 
death and destruction, complete devastation. -xaraab 
malta total destruction, the end of the world. gayy' 
tc;ul-Ii bac:d' xaraab malta is it now that you tell me 
(after it's too late)! 
~ I.;> xaraaba In pi -aat, xaraayibl piece of waste 
ground. Il/uu fi-kull' xaraaba c:afriit [prov] (he has a 
demon in every piece of waste ground) (1) he has 
friends everywhere, he has lots of influence. (2) he is 
very suspicious, he is full of fears. 
~J';> xaruuba Inl space between rails on a railway 
track. 
..,.. ~I ritxarab Ivil to be destroyed, be ruined. 
II ritxarab geb-u to go broke. - iva mitxirib. 
..,..::.> xarrab Ivtl 1 to ruin, destroy. riI-c:iyaal xarrabu 
I-Iic:ab kull-a-ha the kids have ruined all their toys. 2 to 
sabotage. -vn taxriib; avalpva mixarrab. 
..,..J'I ritxarrab Ivil 1 to be ruined, be destroyed. 2 to 
be sabotaged. -iva mitxarrab. 
1y.)t 
..,..J::'> xarruub Icoll nl carob(s). rayyaam raswad min 
c;am iI-xarruub (prov] days blacker than a carob pod. 
~J::'> xarruuba In pi -aatl unit of volume equal to one 
sixteenth of an c;adab or 0.129 litres. 
J.y.)t 
..;....;> xarbif Ivtll to scratch. riI-c;ua' xarbif-ni the cat 
scratched me. 2 to scrawl, scribble. xarbif rimqit-u he 
scribbled his signature. - Ivi/3 to scratch, be scratchy. 
bi:ynauam iI-xajab c:ajaan ma-yrarbif-J he smooths 
the wood so that it won't scratch. -vn xarbaja; ava/pva 
mixarbif· 
..;... ~ mixarbif ladj °1 [slang] on-the-ball, aware and 
alert. 
";'.Yo';> xarbuuj = xarbuuja. 
4.:..Yo';> xarbuuja In pi xarabiifl 1 scratch mark, claw 
mark. 2 scribble, scrawl. 
..;... ~I ritxarbif Ivil to be or become scratched. -ava/ 
iva mitxarbif. 
J y.) t 
.Y.';> xarbac; Ivtl to ruin, wreck, destroy. riI-makana 
244 
mxarbac;a xaa/~ the machine is completely wrecked. 
-vn xarbac;a; ava/pva mixarbac;. 
.Y. ~I ritxarbac; Ivil to be ruined, be wrecked, be des-
troyed. - iva mitxarbac;. 
.::J1.S.::J.)t 
.::.-;.;> xartiit Inl 1 Icolll rhinoceros( es). 2 Ipl xaratiitl 
rhinoceros. 
(.)c, 
C.;> xarag I (u) Ivil 1 to go out, leave. fuxrug barra get 
out! riI-bitt' di ma-Ihaa-J xuruug mil-beet rabadan this 
girl isn't allowed to leave the house ever. II ril-bikaaya 
xaragit min riid-i the matter passed out of my control. 
-batn-u xaragit he defecated. -kalaam xaarig (c:an badd 
iI-radab) improper, impolite or ill-mannered language 
or talk. - rid-dax/a wil-xarga the ins and outs, the de-
tails, as in laazim tic:raf id-daxla wil-xarga do you have 
to know the ins and outs of it all? 2 to project, jut out. 
- vn xuruug; ava xaarig . 
11 xarag wara to follow (a bier) to the cemetery, walk in 
the funeral procession of. -xarag c:an to break with the 
authority of. ribn-i xarag c:an tooc:-i my son no longer 
obeys me. xaarig c:an iI-qanuun an outlaw. xarag c:an 
iI-xaa (1) to become derailed. (2) to deviate. 
C.;> xarag Z (i) Ivtl 1 to put outside. rixrig iI-karaasi 
fil-ba/akoona take the chairs out onto the balcony. 2 to 
extract (e.g., essences). -vnxarg, xaragaan; avamixrig; 
pva maxruug. 
CJ';> xuruug Ivnl exit. IIsifr iI-xuruug the }3ook of 
Exodus. 
~J';> xuruuga linst n, pi -aatl an outing. 
C.;> xarg Inl yield, essence, turnout, produce. IIxarg 
in-nagaf drop-shaped glass or crystal beads. - c:aff' 
xarg / beet second-hand furniture. -sitt' xarg' beet a 
second-rate woman. 
~.;> xarga 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 funeral 
procession. 
2 protrusion, projection. 
C)L>. xaarig 1 Iprepl la on the outer surface of. raakib 
xaarig iI-makana mounted on the outside of the 
machine. Ib in the space surrounding. waac;if xaarig 
iI-murabbac: standing outside the square. 2 riI-xaarig 
In! 2a the outer surface, the exterior. mitwassax min 
iI-xaarig soiled on the outside. 2b the outside world, 
abroad. rana msaafir iI-xaarig I'm going abroad. 
~)\.;I.I riI-xarga Iprop nl oasis in the Western Desert, 
situated between the Nile at Luxor and the Dakhla 
oasis. 
~)l> xaarigi ladj °1 1 outer, external. riI-ragnaab 

il-xaarigiyya the outer surfaces. fizaaea xaarigiyya out-
side broadcasting. xatti xaarigi outside (telephone) 
line. IImukalma xaarigiyya overseas call. 1 pertaining 
to what is foreign. fifjuruun il-xaarigiyya foreign 
affairs. eilaqaat xaarigiyya foreign relations. 
4;l;L1 riI-xaarigiyya (also wizaarit il-xaarigiyya) Inl 
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. waziir il-xaarigiyya the 
Minister of Foreign Affairs. 
~,;. xurg In pi faxraagl cloth saddlebag. rakkibt-ak 
waraaya sarac;t il-eeef mil-xurg {prov] == you bit the 
hand that fed you. IIraagil xurg'a useless, feckless or 
inept fellow. -&aaga tfawwit il-eattaar xurg-u == a thor-
oughly exasperating matter. 
~I ~ xurraag In pi xarariigl abscess. 
~~ xirriig, xarriig In 'I graduate. 
~}I' maxrag In pi maxaarigl I outlet, exit. maxrag il-
eaadim {meeh] exhaust outlet. l{ling] point of 
articulation. 
~~ xarrag Ivt/ I to take out, let out, send out. bint-i 
ma-txarrag-haaj mil-beet reer lamma tgiib fabka you 
won't be taking my daughter out of the house till you've 
brought an engagement present! xarraguu-ni mil-
mustaffa 
they 
discharged 
me 
from 
hospital. 
xarragt-a-ha min c;alb-i I drove her from my heart. rana 
&-axarrag-ik xuruuga &ilwa yoom il-xamiis I will take 
you for a nice outing on Thursday. 1 to (cause to) 
graduate. rig-gamea xarragit kaam duktuur how many 
doctors did the university graduate? -vn taxriig; aval 
pya mixarrag. 
~ji. taxriiga In pi -aatl solution, way out, contrived 
justification. 
~J'I fitxarrag Ivil passive of xarrag. -vn taxarrug; ava 
mitxarrag, mutaxarrig r . 
~J' taxarrug Inl graduation (from, e.g., a university). 
&aflit taxarrug graduation ceremony. 
~,;.i faxrag Ivtl to direct (a play, film etc.). miin 
raxrag il-masra&iyya who directed the play? -vn 
fixraag; ava muxrig. 
~}I' muxrig In 'I director (in cinema, the~tre, radio 
etc.). 
~';";-I ristaxrag, 
ristaxrig 
Ivt/ 
I to 
extract. 
bi-yistaxragu I-fusfaat min il-manaagim they extract 
phosphates from the mines. 1 to procure by applica-
tion. laazim tidfae damra eafaan tistaxrag if-fihaada 
you have to pay for a fiscal stamp before you can 
procure the certificate. -vn ristixraag; ava mistaxrag; 
pya mustaxrag. 
~,;..:.... mustaxrag In pi -aatl copy of a document. 
mustaxrag rasmi min fihaadit milaad an official copy of 
a birth certificate. 
245 
J c:. J c:. 
,;.,;. xarxar Ivil to leak continuously, trickle. 
riI-mayya xarxarit {uul is-sikka the water leaked all 
along the way. -vn xarxara; ava mixarxar. 
~tJt 
.F';' xarxif, xarxaf I/vt/ to make hoarse. fil-bard i 
xarxif ~oot-i the cold has made my voice hoarse. l/vil to 
wheeze, crackle, rattle. bi-txarxif w-hiyya nayma she 
wheezes when she's sleeping. rir-radyu bi-yxarxif the 
radio crackles. -vn xarxafa; ava mixarxif. 
~J t 
0.)';' xurda <P khurda> 1 lcoll nl scrap-metal. taagir 
xurda scrap-metal dealer. II raagil xurda a useless man. 
lIn! {obsol] one-fortieth of a piastre. Ilma-bilt-uuj 
xurda he's penniless. 
.:..IJ .),;. .xirdawaat, xurdawaat, xardawaat Ipl n! haber-
dashery, smallwares, notions. 
JIJ .),;. xirdawaati, xurdawaati, xardawaati In pi -yyal 
haberdasher, vendor of smallwares and notions. 
.)~ xarrad Ivt/ to gather (scrap). -vn taxriid; avalpva 
mixarrad. 
.)J'I fitxarrad Ivil to be gathered (of scrap). -iva 
mitxarrad. 
J ~J t 
~.),;. xurduc; Icoll nl pellets (e.g., for an air-gun). 
'-i.)';' xurduc;a lunit n, pi -aatl a pellet. 
~li.),;. xurduc;aaya = xurduc;a. 
J ~J t 
J.)';' xardalln! mustard. ladjectivallyllousy, rotten. 
eiifaxardal a rotten life. 
JJt 
~ xarr (u) 1 Ivil to leak. fil-gardal bi-yxurr the bucket 
leaks. Ilma-txurrij min riid-u I-mayya (1) he's tight-
fisted. (2) he's very precise. l/vtl to leak out, allow to 
flow out. fig-garb i bi-yxurri damm the wound is bleed-
ing.1I xarr illi f-bacn-u he spilled the beans, he confessed 
to everything. -vn xarr, xararaan, xariir; ava xaarir. 
J'-';' xariir In! purl, murmur, gurgle (of running 
water) . 
• ,;1:;" xarraara In pi -aatl cesspool, drain. II ruub ft-
xarraara to hell with you! 
I •• 
.) .) c:. 
j';' xaraz, xaraz 1 (i, u) IvtJ to pierce, bore. -vn xarz; 

ava xaariz; pva maxruuz. 
j~ xaraz 2 Icoll nl bead(s).lIxaraz if-baqar gall blad-
ders of cows. marabbit xaraz if-baqar a preparation 
supposed to have fattening properties. 
oj~ xaraza Inl Ilunit n, pi -aat, -aatl a bead. 2/pl 
xarazl squared-off back end of a faas (q.v.). 
jl jI! muxraaz In pi maxariizl awl. 
j).~ maxaariz Ipl nl secret ways, tricks, devious be-
haviour. ma-l:Jadd'jyilrafmaxarz-ak filla fana I'm the 
only one who knows all your ins and outs. 
j ~I fitxaraz Ivil to be pierced, be bored. - iva m.ilxiriz. 
j~1 finxaraz = fuxaraz. -iva minxiriz. 
j::'> xarraz / Ivtl to pierce in a number of places. -vn 
taxriiz; avalpva mixarraz. 
) ~ mixarraz In pi -aall bar made up of connected 
pieces of wood (in mafrafiyya work, see PI.G, 6). 
)~I filxarraz / Ivil to be pierced in a number of places. 
- iva milxarraz. 
2 j.; t 
)::.> xarraz 1 Ivtl [naut} to splice (rope). -vn taxriiz; 
avalpva mixarriz. 
oj.";' laxriiza In pi taxariizl [naut} splice. 
)~I filxarraz 2 Ivil to be spliced (of rope). -iva 
milxarraz. 
.;, Ij.; ( 
.:..I)~ xarazaan Icoll nl bamboo, cane.llkursixarazaan 
cane chair or straight-backed wooden chair after the 
pattern of a cane chair. - also xazaraan. 
.,; Ij ~ xarazaana lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of cane, a 
cane. cf.arab-ha b-xarazaana he beat her with a cane. 
- also xazaraana. 
..,.,.; C. 
...r ~ xiris, xurus (a) Ivill to shut up, fall silent. fixras 
shut up! 2 to become dumb. - vn xars, xaras; pva 
maxruus. 
...r ~ xaras (i) Ivtl to silence, shut (s.o.) up . 
...r~i faxras ladj, fern xarsa, pi xursl dumb. fumm 
i/-faxras lilraf lu¥at ibn-a-ha [prov} (the dumb man's 
mother knows her son's speech) familiarity teaches 
understanding. xadu gooz il-xarsa fitkallimit [prov} 
(they took the dumb woman's husband (and) she 
spoke) == a drowning man will learn to swim. II rarcf.' 
xarsa non-porous soil unfit for cultivation . 
...r ~I filxaras Ivil to become dumb, become silent. 
fir-radyu Ixaras leeh why has the radio gone dead? -ava 
milxiris. 
246 
..,., ~ 
1 finxaras = filxaras. -ava minxiris. 
..,.,::.> xarras Ivtl to shut (s.o. or s.th.) up, quieten, 
silence. xarras ir-radYli shut the radio off! -vn laxriis; 
ava/pva mixarras. 
...r~1 fitxarras Ivil to be silenced. -iva mitxarras. 
.;,1..,.,.;( 
:i;L. ~ xarasaana <T borasan> Inl concrete. 
JL.~ xarasaani ladj 'I made of concrete. 
..,.,\S..,.,.;t 
..r.:-~ xarsiis (also xarsiis marsiis) <T blrslz> ladjl 
good-for-nothing. 
..; .; ( see y.; ( : xaraaf 
"';";.;( 
..;.,-~ xarfuuf Icoll nl globe artichoke(s). 
-;,j.r~ xarfuufa lunit n, pi -aall an artichoke. 
~U.,-~ xarfufaaya = xarfuufa. 
i";'; ( 
~ 
~ xarfim Ivtl to give (s.o.) a severe beating (espe-
cially about the head and face). {ilil ginaan-u w-xarfim-
ha he went crazy and beat her face to pulp. -vn 
xarfama; ava/pva mixarfim . 
~ 
~I fitxarfim Ivil to be beaten severely (especially 
about the head and face). - iva milxarfim. 
';'\S~.;( 
~).> xar~iin Inl zinc. 
~ 
)..> xar~iini = xar~iln. 
1,1..;( 
.1 ~ xara{ (u) Ivtll to chop, cut up (vegetables, herbs) . 
2 to lathe, turn on a lathe.llxara{-u I-xarraa{ wi-nqalab 
maal (the turner turned it and fell down dead) it has no 
like, it cannot be reproduced. - Ivi/3 to allow colour-
ing, flavour, etc. to seep out. ma-li¥sil-uu-f fi-mayya 
suxna laysan yuxru{ don't wash it in hot water in case it 
runs. xallifjaay yuxru{ leave the tea to brew. 4 to tell 
lies, tell tales. {uullUmr-u yixru{fik-kalaam he's always 
telling lies. nazla tixru{ fi-siirili?iran-ha she's gossiping 
away about her neighbours. -vn xar{; ava xaari{; pva 
maxruu{. 
~ 
~ xar{a / In pi -aat, xura{l slice, chopped-off piece. 
J.,JjI! maxruu{ In pi maxarii{l [geomJ cone. 
~J jI! maxruu{a Inl [rur} type of home-made noodle 
(usually eaten with milk and sugar). 

.}J)' maxruu(i ladjl [geom/ conical. 
J.I.;. xiraa(a Inllathing, turning. 
bl:f. xarraa( In *1 I lathe operator, turner. II bukra 
xarraa( iI-banaal yixru(-ha one day God who shapes the 
girls will make her shapely and pretty. 2 one who chops 
dough into lengths (in a bakery). 3 liar, slanderer. 
J.)' maxra(a In pi maxaarit I I lathe. 2 mincing knife 
(see PI.B, I). 
b)' 1 filXara( Ivill to be chopped, be cut up (of veget-
abies, herbs). 2 to be lathed, be turned on a lathe. - iva 
miIXiri(. 
b';'; 1 finxara( = fitxara(. - iva minxiri(. 
b:f. xarra( Ivtl I to chop finely, mince (vegetables, 
herbs).lIxarra(uu Ii/-wizz (they've chopped him up for 
the geese) he's disappeared, he's not around these 
days. 2 to chop into lengths. 
~abbalil iI-lagiina 
w-Xarra(il-ha bis-sikkiina she formed the dough into 
fingers and chopped them into lengths with the knife. 
-vn laxrii(; avalpva mixarra(. 
b ~I filxarra( Ivill to be chopped finely, be minced. 
2 to be chopped into lengths. - iva milxarra(. 
lj,jt 
J..J\.;. xarta2 In pi xura(1 map, chart. 
~.;. xarii(a In pi xaraayi(1 map, chart. 
rj,jt 
r).';' xar(uum In pi xara(iiml I hose, flexible tube. 
IIxar(uum fiil elephant's trunk. 2 [coarse] penis, dick. 
rl-.;. xar(am Ivil to set one's heart, mind or eyes (on 
s.th.), have designs (on s.th.). falarii mxar(am lal-bint i 
wala l:Jadd i1laarif it turned out that he had set his 
heart on the girl without anyone realizing. -vn xar(ama; 
ava mixar(am. 
';'.Jj,jt 
..r).';' xar(uuj <perh Fr carlouche> Icoll nl 
cartridge( s). 
i...).';' xar(uuja I lunit n, pi -aal, xara(iifl a cartridge. 
2 In pi xara~;jl carton (of 200 cigarettes). 
Itjt 
t,;.o.1 fixlaral/vtl to invent. fixlaralillilba gdiida she 
invented a new game. -vn fixliraal; ava mixliril. 
tl,;.o.1 fixliraal/n pi -aatl invention. 
1 
• 
tjC 
t~ xaral (iJ Ivtll to trouble, annoy, upset, bother. 
fil-wad-da xaral-ni mil-liyaa( this boy has driven me 
247 
up the wall with his crying. 2 to frighten, shock. -vn 
xaralaan; ava xaaril; pva maxruul. 
~.;. xarla Inl t bother. 2 shock. 
t';' xiril/adj *1 spineless, wishy-washy. 
:"'1.;. xaraalu Inl spinelessness, wishy-washiness. 
tJ'1 filxaral Ivil I to be troubled, be bothered, be 
made tired. 2 to be frightened. - iva milxiril. 
t';'; 1 finxaral = filxaral· - iva minxiril· 
I~jt 
.:,li.;. xarfaan ladj *1 raving, incoherent (especially 
from hunger). hiyya xarfaana mig-guul she's so hungry 
she's raving. 
~ I.;. xuraafa 
or 
xuraafa 
In 
pi -aat, 
-aatl 
18 superstition. Ib legend, fable. 2 [slang] something 
fantastic, something fabulous. 
jl~ xuraafi ladjl I legendary. l:Jayawaan xuraafi a 
legendary beast. 2 incredible, fantastic, marvelous. 
film i xuraafi a fantastic film. 
J:f. xarraf Ivil to become feeble-minded. fii riggaala 
lamma yikbaru yxarrafu there are men who lose their 
wits when they grow old. bi-txarraf bi-Ic;uul feeh what 
are you raving about? II fis-saala bi-Ixarraf ... the watch 
is running on cart-wheels. -vn laxriif; ava mixarraf, 
muxarrifT . 
...;., J' taxriif In pi laxariif/ raving, nonsensical talk. 
IIlaxariif ramatf.aan the nonsense supposedly talked by 
those fasting in Ramadan. 
1 
• 
• 
.... jC 
...;.,.;. xariif Inl autumn, fall. xariif iI-lumr old age. 
~~ xariifa Inll fil-xariifa the cool northern breeze 
that blows intermittently during the summer. 2 cool 
weather (during the summer). fid-dinya bac;it xariifa a 
cool spell has come . 
..;...;. xariifi ladj *1 autumnal. 
J:f. xarrif Ivil to turn cool (of the weather in sum-
mer). fid-dinya b-tiigi l-bil-Ieel wi-txarrif night comes 
and it gets cooler. 
3~jt 
JJ~ xaruuf Inl Ilpl xirJaanl ram, (loosely) sheep. 
farwil xaruufsheep-skin. 2 man who has no say in the 
morals of his family. 
';'~jt 
..;J.;. xarfif Ivill to make a sound of scratching, rust-
ling or crackling. fiI-faar bi-yxarfif fid-durg the mouse 
is scrabbling in the drawer. fir-radyu bi-yxarfif the 
radio is crackling.lllac;l-u mxarfif he's crazy. 2 to be-

come rough, uneven or coarse. saeb ie-earabeeza rnxarfij 
the table top is rough. -vn xarfaja; ava mixarfif. 
4:.i';> xarfaja Ini roughness of finish. riI-xajab laazim 
yikuun niqiif wi-xaali min iI-xarfaja the wood must be 
clean and free of roughness. 
J;t 
~,;. xarac; (a) Ivt/l to pierce or bore (a hole) through. 
II geeb-u maxruuc; or S'iid-u maxruuc;a he's a spendthrift. 
2 to deflower (a virgin). -vn xarc;. xarac;aan; ava 
xaaric;; pva maxruuc;. 
~;l> xaariqT ladj ·1 extraordinary. 
~)". xawaariq T • xawaariq T Ipl nl miracles, marvels, 
wonders. 
i.iJ~ maxruuc;a Inl[butcher} rump. 
i.i';' xirc;a In pi xirac;1 I rag, scrap of cloth. 2 Sufi 
attire. 
~)'I !'itxarac; Ivi/l to be pierced. 2 to be deflowered 
(of a virgin). - iva mitxiric;. 
~ ~ 
1 !'inxarac; = !,itxarac;. -iva minxiric;. 
~ ~ xarrac; Ivtl to pierce repeatedly, make several 
holes in. fustaan mixarrac; mil-lilta a moth-eaten dress. 
-vn taxriic;; av~pva mixarrac;. 
~ ~ 
1 !,ixtarac; Ivt/l to penetrate. !'ie-eayyaara xtarac;it 
baagiz ~-~oot the aeroplane broke the sound barrier. 
2 to traverse, cross. II !,ixtiraaq iq-qabya cross-country 
racing. -vn !'ixtiraaq; ava mixtiric;. 
I r; t 
r.;> xaram (u) I Ivtl to make a hole in. !'ir-r~a~a 
xaramit iI-beee the bullet pierced the wall. xaram 
iI-beeea lajaan yib~~· lalayya he made a hole in the 
wall to peep at me. eablit widn-u maxruuma his eardrum 
is perforated.lIgeeb-u maxruum or S'iid-u maxruuma he 
is a spendthrift. 2 Ivil to wander off the point. -vnxarm; 
ava xaarim; pva maxruum. 
r';' xurm In pi xuruum, xiraaml hole, opening. xurm' 
!,ibra eye of a needle. 
4..';> xurma In pi -aatl a small hole. 
4..1~ xarraama In pi -aatl I paper punch. 2[naut} 
pricker for making holes in sailcloth. 
~I~ xarraami ladvl in a straight line, directly. 
r)'1 !,itxaram Ivil to be punctured, be pierced with a 
single hole. - iva mitxirim. 
r ~ 
1 !,inxaram =. !,itxaram. -iva minxirim. 
r~ xarram Ivtl I to make holes in, perforate. 
yixarram widaan il-banaat lajaan il-balac; he pierces 
the girls' ears for earrings. - Ivil 2 to take a short cut. 
mumkin tixarram min wara g-gamla you can take a 
short cut behind the university.llxarramfik-kalaam to 
248 
speak improperly. 3 to be overspent (of a budget). 
!'iI-mizaniyya xarramlt mar;aaya I have overspent my 
budget. -vn taxriim; avalpva mixarram. 
'-!)' taxriima In pi -aat, taxariiml I instance noun of 
taxriim. 2 short cut. 
r).el !,itxarram Ivil to be perforated. - iva mitxarram. 
1 
• 
r; c: 
,:,L..;> xarmaan ladj ·1 craving. longing. !'ana xarmaan 
lala sgaara I'm dying for a cigarette. 
It.J;t 
t J ';> xarwall Icoll nl castor oil plant(s). zeet xarwal 
castor oil. 
1 t.J; t see also ~ t; t 
t J ';> xarwal Z I Ivil to become feeble, become physi-
cally weak and helpless. !,ir-raagil xarwal min C;illit 
il-!'akl the man became weak from lack of food. 2 Ivtl to 
weaken, exhaust, enfeeble. !,is-sahar mixarwar;-ni 
staying up late has worn me out. -vn xarwala; avalpva 
mixarwar;. 
II,$;t 
..s.;> xiri (i) Ivt and viI [coarse} to defecate, shit. ;arrae 
il-!'imaam xiryu I-m~alliin [proy} (the imam farted so 
those praying shitted) ... the error of a leader is com-
pounded by his followers. -vn xara; ava xaari. 
..s.;> xara 2 Icoll nl [coarse} faeces, shit. II riI-xara 
bac;aa-Iu mara yiblif laleeha bie-ealaac; [proy} even the 
lowest of the low have acquired rights which they can 
abuse, look what the world has come to! -/adjectivallyl 
!'iI-!'ayyaam iI-xara faydit-ha nom-ha [proy} the only 
good thing you get from lousy times is the sleep you 
have during them. 
~.;> xarya lunit n. pi -aatl[coarse} a turd. 
..s~ xarra Ivtl[coarse} I to make (s.o.) defecate. !'illi 
yxarrii zayy illi yc;arrii (or yiwaqqii) [proy}'" he doesn't 
know chalk from cheese. 2 to give (s.o.) a hard time. 
-avalpva mixarri. 
..s).el !,itxarra Ivil passive of xarra. -iva mitxarri. 
ll,$;t 
~.;> ~ariyya In pi xaraayal fine small gold or gold-
plated disc (e.g., on necklaces and bracelets). 
~I,$;t 
~.;> xaryae Ivt/l to exhaust, drain of strength. kutr 
if-Juyl' xaryae-ni I'm worn out from so much work. 
- Ivil 2 to become exhausted. !'ana xarya(t I'm 

finished! 3 to do badly, fail hopelessly (e.g., in an 
exam). -vn xarya{a; ava/pya mixarya{. 
~;o::1 fitxarya{ Ivil to be or become exhausted. - ava/ 
iva mitxarya{. 
1".lj( 
rl;,> xuzaam I {bot] hyacinth. 
.j I.; j ( 
,});,> xazaraan Icoll nl bamboo, cane. II kursi xazaraan 
cane chair or straight-backed wooden chair r:nade after 
the pattern of a cane chair. -also xarazaan. 
;(; I;;,> xazaraana lunit n, pI -aatl a bamboo cane. - also 
xarazaana. 
J":-'tj( 
u~;'> xuzalbalaat Ipl nl superstitions. 
..Jj( 
...;;,> xazafT Inl pottery, ceramic work. 
J;,> xazafiT ladjl ceramic. 
"';I~ xazzaafT In *1 potter, ceramist. 
...;~ xazzifT Ivt and viI to pot, work in ceralI'ics. -vn 
taxziif; ava/pva mixazzif. 
Jj( 
J;,> xazatj (u) Ivtl to pierce, make a hole in. -vn xaztj; 
ava xaazitj; pya maxzuutj. 
JJ.il> xazuutj In pI xawaziitj/l impaling spike. 2 dirty 
trick, doublecross. 3 {carp] wooden peg or pin. 
4 {constr] 48 a pile. 4b pile-driver. see further 
under J j.J ( 
JJ'I fitxazatj Ivil to be pierced. - iva mitxizitj. 
J~ xazzatj Ivtl to impale, drive a peg or stake into. 
law ma-skittill:J-axazzatj lenee-k if you don't shut up 
I'll put your eyes out! -vn taxziitj; ava/pva mixazzatj. 
JJ'I fitxazzatj Ivil to be impaled or pierced. - iva 
mitxazzatj . 
1 Jj ( 
J.ro-I fixtazallvtl {chem] to reduce. -vn fixtizaal; ava 
muxtazil. 
J1.ro-I fixtizaallnl shorthand. 
J1.ro-I fixtizaali ladjl {chem] pertaining to reduction. 
mawaadd ixtizaliyya reduction agents. 
Z Jj ( 
J~ xazal (i) Ivtl to let down, disappoint. xazal-ni watjt 
iflidda he left me in the lurch in time of need. -vn 
249 
xizlaan; ava xaazil; pya maxzuul. 
J..i;.; 1 finxazallvil to be disappointed, be left in the 
lurch. - iva min"Xizil. 
J~I fitxazal = finxazal. -iva mitxizil. 
Il"j( 
r;,> xazam (i) Ivtl to pierce (the nose, particularly of an 
animal). -vn xazm; ava xaazim; pya maxzuum. 
rl;,> xuzaam 2, xizaam Inl I Ipl -aatl nose ring . 
IIxizaam-u liif he is kept on a tight leash. 2 Ipl xizimal 
seton. 
rJ'1 fitxazam Ivil to be pierced (of the nose, particu-
larly of an animal). - iva mitxizim. 
Z I" j ( see I" 1 j ( : xuzaam I 
.jj ( 
\J;'> xazan (i) Ivtl to store. bi-nixzin iI-tju{n i I-",aayit ma 
1-l:Jukuuma tiftirii we store the cotton till the govern-
ment buys it. lifti btaal iI-xaziin {vendor's cry] turnips 
for storage (fit to be kept - not too ripe). -vn xazn, 
xaziin; ava xaazin; pya maxzuun. 
cY-;'> xaziin Inl I Icoll nl household provisions . 
2 pantry, cupboard. 
~;,> xaziina In pI xazaayinl = xazna. 
;(;;,> xazna In pI xizanl 18 cash window,.cash desk, 
cashier's office. Ib safe, coffer. 2 {mech] seating. 
;(;1;,> xazaana In pI -aatll pantry, cupboard. 2 {obsol] 
treasury. II wizaarit iI-xazaana the Treasury. 
\JI~ xazzaan In pI -aatl I storage tank. 2 reservoir. 
3 dam, barrage. 
\Jr maxzan In pI maxaazinl warehouse, storehouse .. 
storage place, depot. maxzan ",alia wheat granary (see 
PI.C, 4). famiin maxzan stock clerk. maxzan butagaaz 
butane gas depot. 
..r:Wr maxzangi In pI -yyal store-keeper. 
\J~ xazzin I Ivtl 18 to store, store up. bi-nxazzin 
iI-rakl"lalajaan iI-liid we store up food for the feast. 
Ib to place in a store or depot. fana mxazzin i/- futubiis 
iI-fagr I took the bus back to the depot at dawn. 2 Ivil to 
harbour resentment. fig-gamal mixazzin-Iu the camel is 
bearing him a grudge. -vn taxziin; ava/pya mixazzin. 
\JJ'I fitxazzin Ivi/l to be stored up. 2 to be placed in a 
store or depot. - iva mitxazzin. 
\J.ro-I fixtazan Ivtl to store up. fin-naml i b-yixtizin 
is-sukkar the ants store away the sugar. - ava mixtizin. 
~j( 
~;,> xizi J (a) Ivil to become bashful, shy, embarrassed 
or ashamed. - ava xazyaan. 

..s~ xaza (I) Ivtll to spite (the Devil or the evil eye). 
ma-tiqrab-uu-J - fixzi /-Ji{aan don't hit him -spite the 
Devil (i.e., resist the temptation to hit him). 
fallahumma xZli-k (i.e. yixzli-k) ya /{aan "" get thee 
behind me, Satan! fana lJaH-1 kaan haayil in-nahar-da-
huss - fixZII-leen 'My luck was fantastic today.' 'Shush 
-don't tempt the evil eye!' 2 to put to shame. da 
xazaa-na b-tc¥arrufaat-u he embarrassed us with his 
behaviour. -vn xiza; ava xaazi; pva maxzi. 
~~ xazya linst n, pI -aatl a shame, a disgrace . 
..sjtt muxzif ladj "I shameful, disgraceful. 
.!l..;:....,..t 
~ 
xastik (i) <perh P khastagi> I Ivil to become 
weak, out of sorts, tired or exhausted. xasttkt' min kutr 
is-sahar I am worn out from staying up late so often. 
fil-makana xastiku the engine got tired. 2 Ivtl to 
weaken, exhaust. kutr if-Juyl' xastik-ni so much work 
has exhausted me. -vn xastaka; ava/pva mixastik. 
.J..,..t 
~ 
xisir, xusur (a) Ivtl I to forfeit, lose, let slip. 
lJa-nixsar if-Jar;r;a' wil-beet kull-u b-sabab fihmaal-ak 
we'll lose the flat and the house altogether because of 
your negligence. xisirt' ~lJubiyyit-u I lost his friendship. 
xisirt' fluus-u I lost his money (through unprofitable 
dealing). {ifilt' min if-Juyla xasraan I came out of the 
deal worse off than I was before. 2 to lose, fail to win. 
lJa-yixsaru I-mat! they're going to lose the match. lIya 
faa{ir ramaqaan ya xaasir dlin-ak (children's chant) you 
breaker of Ramadan's fast, you profaner of your reli-
gion. - Ivi/3 to spoil, become spoiled. fil-Iaban xisir 
the milk has gone bad. 4 to break down, cease to func-
tion. salt-i xasraana my watch is out of order. 5 to fall 
(morally), go to the dogs. ril-walad xisir the boy be-
came a bad lot. mara xasraana a fallen woman. -vn 
xusaara; ava xaasir, xasraan. 
0)1...> xusaara In 
pI xasaayirl loss, waste, pity. 
fik-kuaab da xusaara [ii this book is wasted on him. 
xusaara tirmll-ha it would be a pity to throw it away. 
xasaaytr fil-mabilaat losses on sales. xasaayir fil-
farwaalJ r fatalittes. Ilya xsaara what a pity! too bad! 
~ 
xassar Ivtll to cause to lose. ril-r;umaar xassar-u 
fluus-u gambling made him lose his money. 2 to spoil, 
wreck, ruin. fll-war;la xassarit iI-minabbih the fall 
ruined the alarm clock. xassar iI-bint (I) he ruined the 
girl's morals. (2) he had sexual intercourse with the 
girl. - vn taxsiir; ava mlxassar. 
?I fitxassar Ivil passive of xassar. - iva mitxassar. 
250 
~I fistaxsar Ivtll to consider too good to waste . 
bi-yistaxsaru zibl il-lJamaam la/aan yir;daru ybiluu 
they consider it a waste to throwaway the pigeon drop-
pings since they can sell them. IIb-astaxsar [ii /arbit 
II-mayya "" I don't think he's worth a brass farthing. 
2 Ipreverbl to consider it a waste (to do s.th.). fana 
mistaxsar armii-ha I can't bring myself to throw it away. 
b-astaxsar fakallim-u I wouldn't waste my breath on 
him. -vn f,sllxsaar; ava mistaxsar. 
-.J.).r t 
,)J ~ 
xasrawaan <perh P khusrawitm> fadvl 
sidesaddle. 
I 
• 
""''''''C 
.;.;. xass (i) Ivilla to shrink. ril-r;umaa/ xass' fil-yasiil 
the cloth shrank in the wash. fll-filuus xassit the money 
ran low. Ib to lose weight. lamalt' rjiim la/aan faxiss 
I went on a diet to lose weight. 2 to be missing, be 
lacking. feeh IIIi lJa-yxiss d laleehum law ilJtafalu min 
yeer mlkrufoon what are they going to lose, if they 
celebrate without a loudspeaker? -vn xasasaan, 
xissiyya; ava xaasls . 
• :';,. xissiyya Inl shrinkage, weight-loss. 
~ 
xassis Ivtll to cause to shrink. 2 to cause to lose 
weight. -vn taxsiis; ava mixassls. 
~I fitxassis Ivil I to be caused to shrink. 2 to be 
caused to lose weight. - iva mltxassis. 
~I fistaxass Ivtl I to find shrunk or diminished. 
fistaxassit is-sukkar r;aamit tahamit tJ-Jayyaala she 
found the sugar had diminished so she accused the 
servant. 2 to consider (too) httle. fistaxass il-fugra he 
considered the wage too little. -ava mlstixiss. 
1..,....,.. t 
...:.... xlssa Inl meanlless. baseness. xissit II-fC¥1 mean-
ness of character. 
';';'i faxass lell I morelmost mean or base. 2 morel 
most miserly. 
....1...> xasaasa Inl meanness, baseness. xasaasU I{-{abl 
meanne~s of character. 
.........-> xasiis ladj " and pI xusasa/l mean, vile, base. 
2 miserlr. 
t..,..t 
~ 
xassal Ivil I to run out, become used up. 
ril-xa/ab xassal malaaya I ran out of wood. 2 to be-
come debilitated, break down (usually from old age). 
larabiyyit-i bi-txassal malaaya ktiir my car breaks 

down on me a lot. - 3 Ivtl to weaken, debilitate. kUlr 
if-fwd i mxassal-ni too much work has worn me out. 
- vn laxsiil; avalpva mixassal. 
"";l.I"'t 
...A.-.-. xasaf (i) Ivtll to eclipse. 2 to consume utterly, 
annihilate. IIxasaf biyya 1-5'art[ he finished me ofr. -ya 
maxsuuf ir-raqaba you wretch! -vn xasf, xasafaan; ava 
xaasif; pva maxsuuf. 
J"...> xusuuf Inl eclipse. xusuuf kulli total eclipse. 
""""'::1 5'ilxasaf Ivil I to be eclipsed. 2 to be annihi-
lated. - iva milxisif. 
~ 
1 5'illxasaf = 5'ilxasaf. - iva minxisif. 
"';I~t 
Jl:.> .mfaaf, xafaaf <T ~o~af from P> Inl dish of 
dried or fresh fruits macerated or stewed in sugar syrup. 
":-'~t 
~ 
xafab Icoll n, pi 5'axfaabl wood, timber. 
~ 
xajaba lunit n, pi -aal/l a length of wood , a stick. 
bi-yzuqq it-tooq quddaamu b-xafaba he propels the 
hoop before him with a stick.faatfooq iI-xafaba he shot 
(the ball) over the top strut (of the goal). II xafabil 
il-masralj stage. - 5'il-lalal xafabaal /soccer] the goal. 
28 / lsi] wooden bier on which a corpse is carried to the 
grave. 2b /Chr] coffin. 
~ 
xafabi ladj *1 made of wood. II 5'alaal xafabiyya 
woodwind instruments. 
":'~ xajjaab In * and pi xaffaabal /conslr] scaffold-
ing erector . 
.;.~ xajjaabi ladj invarl I pertaining to wood. 
mabrad xajfaabi carpenter's file. qalam xafjaabi 
draughtsman's pencil, 
hard lead pencil. 
II sill " 
lat[m-a-ha xaffaabi a big woman. 2 woody in texture. 
kummilra xajfaabi a variety of hard pear. 
~ 
xajfib 1 Ivtl to timber, lay with timbers. 2/vil to 
stiffen, become rigid. gism-u xaffib lamma simil 
ik-kalaam da his body stiffened when he heard those 
words. -vn Iax/iib: avalpva mixaffib. 
~ 
laxfiiba In pi -aal, taxafiibl 1 police-station de-
tention cell. Ija-Ibaal fit-Iaxfiiba you'll spend the night 
in the lock-up. 2 shed, hut. 
o:.J~t 
..::..:..0. xifl <P khishl> In pi xufuutl lance, spear. 
1 
It· 
... 
I.I"'CI.I"'C 
~ 
xajxif Ivil to make a crackling or rattling 
251 
sound. da landu kuljlja w-sidr-u bi-yxafxif qawi he has 
a cough and his chest rattles badly. 5'ustuwaana fiiha 
xajxafa a crackly record. - vn xajxaja; ava mixajxif. 
1 
.... 
... 
I.I"'CI.I"'C 
..;.~ xujxaaj Icoll nl poppies. zeel iI-xujxaafpoppy-
seed oil. 
4-~ xujxaafa lunit n, pi -aall a poppy. 
r'J ~ t 
r ~ 
xafrim Ivtl to wreck, smash, bash, ruin. lamal 
Ijadsa w-xajrim nafs-u he was involved in an accident 
and got badly injured. - vn xaframa; avalpva mirafram. 
r..,....;'1 5'ilxafrim Ivil to be wrecked, smashed, or 
ruined. - iva mitxafrim. 
J.-~t 
..;.> xaff (u) Ivtl 1 to go or come into, enter. xaffeel 
iI-beel I entered the house. xajfig-geefhe went into the 
army. - Ivi/2 to go or come in, enter. xabbat lal-baab 
qabl i ma Ixufj knock on the door before you go in! 
ril-lee/ xaffnight came. ma-bi-yxujf-ffinanf da it is 
not of that type, it doesn't come under that heading. 
xaffeet laleehum I went in to them. xajf lak-koora he 
went in after the ball. xufF ya-sta lissa fii wasal move 
up, driver, there's still plenty of space! xajf fil-
mawt[uul to get into the subject. Ilxuff ymiin turn 
right! xaff f-muxx-u finn ... he got the idea that ... , as 
in xaff f-muxx-u finn ik-kalaam da lalee he got the 
impression that this talk was about him. -ma-xajf-f 
fi-muxx(-u) (1) to be unbelievable to (s.o.), as in da 
kalaam ma-yxuff-ffi-muxx i Ijadd no-one could believe 
such a thing. (2) to be unappealing to (s.o.), as in da 
laljn i ma-yxujf-ffil-muxx that tune has no appeal. 3 to 
consummate a marriage, begin married life. mif 
Ija-nxuff 'leer ma yikmal ig-gihaaz we shan't get mar-
ried before we have a completely furnished home. 
II bi-yxuff" lal-laruusa leelit id-duxla he has intercourse 
with the bride on the wedding night. - vn xafafaan; ava 
xaajif· 
11 xajf fi- (1) to collide with, crash in to, as in 
ril-larabiyya xaffit fi-fagara the car crashed into a tree. 
(2) to fit on, as in ril-xaalim bi-yxuff hubaal-u the 
ring goes onto his finger, ril-bantaloon ma-bi-yxuff-f 
fiyya the trousers are too tight for me. -xajf" lala to 
take in, deceive, as in law kunna m'(aflaliin kaan 
yixuff" laleena k-kalaam da if we were gullible we 
would have been taken in by that. 
~ 
yilxaff Ivi imperf onlyl to be fit to be entered. 
beet il-kariim yilxajj'" it is nice to visit a generous man. 

da makaan ma-yitxaff'-j min wasaxt-u it's such a dirty 
p!ace that it's not fit to be entered! - iva mitxafJ. 
..;..:u 1 finxaff = fitxafJ. - iva minxafJ. 
.;..:.> xaffij Ivtl to cause to enter. xaffij-hum ~-~aala 
lala {uul take them straight into the hall! - vn taxfiij; ava 
mixafj"if· 
11 xaffij lala to put over on. tiftikir finnak Ija-txaffij 
ik-kalam-da lalayya do you think you're going to take 
me.in by that? 
~I fitxaffij Ivil to be made to enter, be inserted. 
fil-m~maar itxaffij bi-{luUl ir-roolj the nail went in 
(only) with the utmost difficulty. - iva mitxaffiJ. 
11 fitxaffij lala to (be used to) deceive. yi~har finn 
ig-gadal il-labii{ da k-kalaam itxaffij lalee it appears 
that this foolish fellow has been taken in. 
t.?t 
~ 
xafal (a) Ivil to be submissive, be humble (parti-
cularly before God). -vn XUfUUl; ava xaafil. 
t.,.;..> xufuul Inl submissiveness (particularly before 
God), (holy) reverence. 
oJ .? t see oJ I .? t : xUfaaf 
r.?t 
~ 
xafam (i) Ivtl to keep under control, keep a tight 
hand on (s.o.). da-nti laazim tixfimi bint-ikfiwayya you 
should exercise firmer control over your daughter. - vn 
xafm, xafamaan; ava xaafim; pva maxfuum. 
~ 
1 fitxafam Ivil to be kept under control. - iva 
mitxijim. 
~I finxafam = fitxafam. -iva minxijim. 
.;,.?t 
,s.::..> xufni ladj *1 boorish. rough and rude . 
.:r> xijin ladj *1 I rough. coarse textured. gild' xijin 
rough skin. faay xijin coarse tea. lI~oot xijin a husky 
voice. 2 rough, tough. IIlaqma xijna bigwig. -/adver-
biallyl bi-yillabu xijin they play rough. 
u.->i faxfan lell morelmost rough, coarse, tough, etc. 
I,;l..:.>. xafaana Inl roughness of finish. 
1,;".:.> xufuuna Inl I roughness of finish. 2 roughness 
of behaviour. 
.:r> xaffin Ivll I to roughen. give a rough finish to. 
fil-gaww' bi-yxaffin il-falwaalj the weather roughens 
the planks. 2 to thicken. xaffin il-qalawooz milli 
thicken the thread one millimetre. 3 to toughen up. 
fig-geef xaffin-u army life has toughened him up. - Ivil 
4 to act tough. huwwa xaffin malaaya fik-kalaam he 
talked to me roughly. - vn taxfiin; ava mixaffin. 
252 
•. _:.;.: taxfiina In pi -aat, taxafiinl piece of cloth or pap-
er. used to tighten a joint. 
~I fitxaffin Ivil passive of xaffin. -iva mitxaffin . 
.).:.>1 fixfann Ivil to become rough. fil-xafab faqqaq 
wi-xfann' min ij-jams' wir-ru{uuba the wood has crack-
ed and become rough from (exposure to) the sun and 
humidity. - iva mixfinn. 
J".?t 
J.,.;..> xafwal Ivil to make a rattling sound. xafwala 
fil-mutoor a rattling sound in the motor. -vn xafwala; 
ava mixafwil. 
\S.?t 
~ 
xiji (a) I Ivtl to fear. fixfa llaah fear God! 
ma-b-yixfuu-j fawamr-i they don't respect my orders. 
2 Ivil to feelfear. fij-jaya{iin bi-yixfu min faayit ik-kursi 
the devils fear the Throne verse (of the Koran). - vn 
xafya. xija. xafayaan; ava xaafi; pva maxfi . 
..s-> xija Inl bashfulness, modesty, shame. 
.:,l.,..:.> xafyaan ladj *1 bashful, shy, timid. 
.:,l.,..:.> xafayaan 
Inl 
timidity, 
bashfulness, 
embarrassment. 
~I fixtafa Ivil to become embarrassed, have a 
sense of shame. ma-b-yixtijii-j min t~arrufaat-u di 
quddaam wilaad-u isn't he ashamed to act so in front of 
his children? II fixtiji (lala damm-ak) have some sense 
of shame! - fixtiji lalafalr-ak ij-jaayib shame on your 
grey hairs! - filii xtafu maa/u only the shameless are left! 
there's no modesty left in the world! - filii yix/iji min 
bint" lamm-u ma-yxallif-f' wlaad {prov] (he who feels 
embarrassed before his cousin when she becomes his 
wife, begets no children) '" he will achieve nothing who 
does not face the facts. - ava mix/iji. 
yW"'t 
..,.......> xa~b. xi~b r ladjl fertile, rich. farq' x~ba fertile 
land. xayaal xi~b a fertile immagination . 
..,.......>i 
fax~ab lell morelmost fertile. 
~"...> xu~uuba Inl fertility. 
~ 
xa~iib: il-hilaal il-xa~iib the Fertile Crescent. 
..,.,L.a>! 
rix~aab Inl impregnation (of animals). 
~ 
xa~~ab Ivll I to fertilize, enrich (land). 2 to im-
pregnate. - vn /ax~iib; ava/pva mixa~~ab. 
~I fllxa~~ab /vi/ I to be fertilized, become or be 
made fertile. 2 to be impregnated. -ava/iva mi/xa~~ab. 
~I 
fis/ax~ab /vt/ to consider fertile. 
~W"'t 
~ 
xa~r /n pi xu~uur/ waist. 

J""l> xa~ir Ivt/ to put the arm round the waist of 
(s.o.). -vn mix~ra; ava mixa~ir. 
~I fix/~ar Ivt/ 1 to summarize, condense. fix/~ar 
i1-maqaala he gave a summary of the article. 1 to short-
cut. fis-sawwaatf ix/~ar i(-(ariitf the driver took a short 
cut. - Ivii 3 to be brief, be concise. fix/~irfi-kalaam-ak 
be brief in what you have to say! fix/~ar ik-kalaam 
laakin iI-malna waalJid he cut down what he had to say, 
but the sense was the same. 4 to isolate oneself, hold 
oneself aloof. filJna mix/~riin lan ig-giraan we don't 
mix with the neighbours. humma layjiin mix/~riin fi-
lJillil-hum they live apart from the people of the neigh-
bourhood. -vn fix/~aar; ava mix/~ir; pva mux/~ar . 
.)~I fix/~aar In! brevity. bi-x/~aar in brief, to sum 
up. 
I vi' vi' t 
..;.,.. x~~ I (u) Ivt/ 1 to concern, pertain to. di ma-bi-
Ix~~"-haaj 
that's 
none 
of 
her 
business. 
bi-yx~~-u-hum rukn i fil-ma(aar they have a special 
corner in the airport. filii yX~,f-U min iI-wirs such of the 
legacy as belongs to him. 1 to pick out, select. x~~uu 
bil-Iartfiyya they singled him out for promotion. - Ivii 
3 to apply or refer specially or exclusively. fir-ralJma 
1X~~i wil-Ialna 'lumm {prov] salvation is for the few, 
damnation forthe many. -vn xi~~iyya, x~u~; ava x~~, 
xa~~ f; pva max~u~. 
,J' ~ 
x~u~: bi-x~u~ concerning, with regard to. 
lala (waghi) I-x~u~ especially, particularly. 
11 x~u~an ladvl especially, in particular. fana zallaan 
minnu giddan wi-x~u~an finnu ma-lazza-nii-/ I'm 
very upset with him, especially since he didn't pay me 
(his) condolences . 
..r' ~ 
x~u~i ladjl 1 private, personal. duruus 
x~~iyya private lessons. - ladvl 1 especially. f~~all 
iI-badla x~u~i la/aan iI-lJafla I had the suit made 
especially for the party. 3 particularly. bi-ylJibbu 
yilfassalJu w-x~u~i fiza kaan ig-gaww"lJilw they like 
to go out especially if the weather is good. 
';"l> X~~2, xa~~r ladjl lof a special type. 
riI-manaa(itf iI-bilroliyya laha (abiila 
xa~~a the 
petroleum-producing areas have a particular nature. 
fagaaza x~~a la/aan iI-lJagg a special leave of absence 
for the pilgrimage. 2 extra-special, noteworthy. 
lamaluu-Iu la/wa x~~a they made him a special din-
ner. 3 private, not public, personal. riI-qi(aal iI-xa~~ 
the private sector (of the economy). madaaris x~~a 
private schools. 
11 x~~ i bi- particular to, peculiar to. riI- fumuur iI-x~~a 
bil-muwagafiin matters relating to employees. markib 
253 
x~~a b-natfl iI-biqaala a ship specially for freight trans-
portation. fil-Iahga I-x~~a b~-~iliid the dialect pecul-
iar to Upper Egypt. kull i waalJid fi-makaan-u I-x~~ i bii 
everyone is in his proper place. 
";l> xa~1a f In! 1 Ipl xaw~~1 = x~1iyya. 1 Ipl 
x~aay~1 characteristic, trait (of a group). x~1a min 
x~aay~ il-maganiin one of the characteristics of the 
insane. 
11 x~~alan, xa~~alan t ladvl especially, expressly, in 
particular. 
Cl> x~~iyya In pi -aall property, characteristic 
(usually, of matter). min x~~iyyaal iI-lJadiid law1ii1 ik-
kahraba it is one of the properties of iron to conduct 
electricity. 
,J' ~ 
max1u~ ladj *11 specific, particular, certain. 
laf~ii1a max1u~a liI- fawlaad a particular cut (of 
clothes) for children. 2 extra, special. banziin max~u~ 
first-grade petrol or gas. - ladv/3 especially, express-
Iy, in particular. gayy i max~u~ la/aan yilkallim malaa 
he's coming expressly to talk with him. gaab ik-ki/aab 
max~u~ la/aani fana he brought the book especially 
for me. 
";""i fax~~ lell morelmost special, morelmost par-
ticular.lala 1- fax~~ or bil- fax~~ especially, particular-
ly. 
salaal iI-fizaala 
b-li(Wal 
wi-lala 
I_fax~~i 
fil-munasbaal iI-wa{aniyya sometimes the hours of 
broadcasting are lengthened, especially on national 
occasions . 
.;~ i fax~~aa fi In *1 specialist. fax~~aa fi glimaali a 
social worker. 
~ 
x~~~ Ivtl to assign, allot. laazim yix~~~ 
makaan muslaqillala/aan iI-lummaal he must assign a 
separate place for the workers. da mx~~~ Ii/-maklab 
this is earmarked for the office. -vn ta;qi~; ava/pva 
mix~~~; pva mux~~~. 
~I 
filx~~a~ Ivil 1 to specialize. lJ-alX~~~ fig-
giraalJa I'm going to specialize in surgery. mulJaqraal 
mUlax~~i~a specialized lectures. 2 to be assigned, be 
allotted. riI-muwaH,af da IX~~~ Ii-slilaam iI-bus(a that 
employee was assigned the task of taking in the mail. 
-vn laxa~~~; avaliva mUlax~~~ f. milxa~~~. 
~ 
tax~~u~ In pi -aall specialization. 
~I fixla~~ Ivil 1 to concern oneself. riI-muwaHaf 
iI-muxla~~ the responsible official, the official whose 
business it is. kuUi lagna b-lix/~~ i b-na/aa{ mUlayyan 
each committee concerns itself with a particular activ-
ity.2 to be characterized, be distinguished. kul/ i balad 
bi-lixla~~" lan il-Ianya b-mumayyizaal each country is 
distinguished from another by characteristic traits. -vn 
fixti~a~; ava mux/~~. 

..,..,\..a:;.>1 
fixti~aa~ In pi -aall concern, business. da mif 
ixti~aa~-ak that's not your concern. da waaxid IXIl~a~aat 
il-mufrif he's taken over the supervisor's functions. 
fixti~a~aat il-mal:Jaakim il-muxtalifa the jurisdictional 
competence of the various courts. 
2 ..,.., V'" t 
~ 
xa~~.l lcoll nl lettuce(s). 
~ 
x~~a lumt n, pi -aatl a lettuce. 
~~ xa~~aaya = xa~~a. 
J V'" V'" t 
~ 
xu~~ In pi flx~aa~1 [rur} hut, shack, shanty, hovel. 
JV"'t 
J.L.a.;. 
xu~la In pi -aat, xu~all tress, lock. 
J.L.a.;. 
xi~la In pi xa~aayil, xi~1aatl personal trait, habit. 
filii fii xi~la ma-yisla-haa-f [prov} "" a leopard doesn't 
change his spots. 
1('V"'t 
~ 
xa~am (I) Ivtl to deduct, subtract. 
xa~am-iI 
yomeen he docked me two days' pay. -vn xa~m; ava 
xaa~im; pva max~uum. 
~ 
x~m I In pi xu~umaat, xu~uuml discount, deduc-
tion. bi-yiftiri minhum bi-xa~m d lafara fil-miyya he 
buys from them at a ten percent discount. 
~ 
xa~miyya In pi -aatl discount, deduction. 
ril-xa~miyya lafaan il-falqaaf bass the discount is for 
members only. 
~ 
xi~m J, xa~m 2 In pi x~uum, fax~aaml opponent. 
xu~uum id-dalwa the opposing parties in the lawsuit. 
xi~m' w-l:Jakam "" judge and jury, as in laamil nafs-u 
xi~m' w-l:Jakam he's setting himself up as judge and 
jury. 
;..~ xu~uuma In pi -aatl dispute, quarrel. 
~I fitxa~am Ivil to be deducted, be subtracted. 
fil-baaqi txa~am li/-xidma the balance has been de-
ducted for service. - iva mitxi~im. 
~I fmxa~am = filxa~am. -iva mmxi~im. 
("""'l> xaa~im Ivt/ to break off relations with (s.o.) as a 
result of a dispute, cease to be on speaking terms with. 
- vn xi~aam; ava mlxaa~lm. 
(""'" ~ I 
fllxaa~lm Ivil to break off relations with each 
other as a result of a dispute. humma mllxa~miin min 
mudda kbllra they haven't been on speaking terms for a 
long time. - ava mitxaa~im. 
~I flXla~am 1 Ivtl to dispute with, quarrel with. 
ruul:J fana mixti~m-ak ll-yoom il-qiyaama "" I Will never 
254 
talk to you again! 2 Ivil to have a dispute, quarrel. 
fixta~amu quddaam ll-mal:Jkama they quarrelled in 
front of the court. -iva mixti~im. 
2('V"'t 
~ 
xi~m 2 In pi xi~aam. fax~aaml bolster-end cover. 
.sV"'t 
~ 
xa~a (i) Ivtl I to castrate, geld. 2 to gain control 
over. have (s.o.) by the balls. llraagit max~1 spineless 
man, drip. - vn xa~ayaan. xa~y; ava xaa~i; pva mavi . 
.i"....a>. xa~ya. xi~ya r Inl testicle (especially of a man). 
~ 
xa~(v ladjl castrated. gelded. 
..r"li' maxaa~i Ipl nl testicle~ (a~ food). 
~I fitxa~'a Ivil to be castrated, be gelded. - iva 
mitxi~i. 
~I fmxa~a = 
fitxa~a. -iva minxi~i. 
,;"';:'.t 
~I faxqar ladj, fern xaqra, pi xuqrl la green. 
IIlIifs-u xaqra he is gentle and unassuming. -{11lit-lu 
s-sillaan il-xuqr his teeth fell out (from old age). 
- fit-lalaba I-xaqra district of Cairo near the Opera 
Square. - ril-qubba I-xaqra (I) the dome above the 
Prophet Muhammad's tomb. (2) the Prophet's Mosque 
in Medina. Ib (loosely) greenish-blue. pale blue, 
greenish-grey, greyish-brown. (julla xaqra mxalla{a a 
tabby cat. nall' faxqar a (sandal) sole of camel leather 
(so-called because of Its greeni~h tinge). 2a unripe (of 
plants, fruit etc.). manga xaqra unripe mangoes. 2b not 
fully processed. gild' faxqar half-tanned leather. II {uub 
faxqar ~un-dried mud brick. 2c fresh, not salted or 
cured (of fish). 3 damp. moist. fd-hlduum ilssa xaqra 
the clothes are still damp. 4 blessed with good fortune, 
prosperous. sana xaqra a pro~perous year. fild-u xaqra 
he has a lucky touch, he bring~ profit to whatever he 
Involves himself in. (jadam-u faxqar laleena he bnngs 
u~ good luck . 
.:.r..~ ~I fil-faxqareen: sabb-I-lu (or lalan-Iu etc.) 1-
faxqareen he insulted (or cursed etc.) his whole 
lineage. 
• ~ 
xuqra Icoll nl I pot herb(s). 2 greens, green 
vegetables. 3 verdure. 
~ 
xlqr: sid-na I-xlqr a pious man said In the Koran 
to have had an encounter wIth Moses and to be en-
dowed with immortality and divine knowledge. 
.s ~ 
xuqari In pi -yyal greengrocer. 
.J\..4> xaqaar Inl verdure, greenness. 
.J~ xuqaar Icoll n, pi xuqrawaatl vegetable(s). 
~ 
xaqqar Ivtl I to make green. fis-sabya xaqqam 

iI-qumaaj the dye made the fabric green. ril-mayya 
bi-txac[c[ar iz-zar[ water makes plants grow green. 2 to 
, 
cause to prosper. Yll1rabbi xac[c[ar lina zar[it-na Lord, 
may we have a rich harvest. 3 [agricj to prepare and 
sow (land). - Ivi/4 to sprout, put forth plants (of land). 
-vn taxc[iir; avalpva mixac[c[ar. 
~ 
I I'ixc[arr Ivil to turn green. loon mixc[irr a greenish 
colour. -vn I'ixc[iraar r ; ava mixc[irr. 
r.;.J:>t 
r ~ 
muxac[ram ladj "I spanning' more than one gen-
eration, experienced in the old ways and the new. 
~.J:> t 
~ 
xac[c[ (u) Ivtll to churn (milk). 2 to startle, give a 
sudden fright to.lamma na((i min wara I-baab xac[c[-i-ni 
moot when he jumped out from behind the door he 
scared me to death. -vn xuc[c[, xac[ac[aan; ava xaac[ic[; 
pva maxc[uuc[ . 
....:.. xac[c[a linst n, pi -aatl start, sudden fright. II {aasit 
iI-xac[c[a shallow metal bowl used in folk medicine from 
which persons subjected to a fright drink specially 
t~eated water as a protection against sterility. 
~I I'itxac[c[ Ivil to be startled. be given a sudden 
fr1ght. -iva mitxac[c[. 
..,;.;.; I I'inxac[c[ = I'ltxac[c[. - iva minxac[c[. 
t.J:>t 
~ 
xac[a[' T (a) Ivil to be subordinate or subject. 
balad-na b-tixc[a[ Ii-muljaf;it I'asyuu{ our town comes 
under Assiut province. bi-yixc[a[ lit-taqaliid it is gov-
erned by tradition. -vn xuc[uu[; ava xaac[i[. 
~ 
xac[a[2T 
(i) 
Ivtl 
to 
subject, 
subjugate. 
subordinate. 
~i I'axc[ar: T Ivtl to subject. subjugate. subordinate. 
I'axc[a[ Ijamaat-u 1- I'iradt-u he made his mother-in-law 
submit to his will. -vn I'ixc[aa[; ava muxc[i[. 
• .1 t 
J.> xa{a J (i) Ivil to err. xa{eet fi-Ijaqq-u I did him 
wrong. -vn xa{ayaan; ava xaa{i. 
).l> xaa{il' ladj "I I irregular. against the rules. 
2 wrong, at fault. - In "I 3 [Chrj sinner. 
u.... xa{al' In pi l'ax{aal'T I mistake. fault. [alajaan 
n~allalj I'ax{al'-na so we can rectify our mistakes. 
~ 
.~ xa{iyya In pi xa{aayal sin. IIxa{iyyit ... 
poetic justice as retribution for wrong done to (s.o.). as 
in rigl-u kkasarit xa{iyyit is-silt iI-ralbaana iii c[arab-ha 
when he broke his leg it served him right for having hit 
that poor woman. 
2SS 
u....i .J.>i I'ax{al'r, I'ux{a Ivil I to err. make a mis-
take. I'ax{eet (or I'ux{al'ti) Jit-taqdiir I made a wrong 
estimate bi-yix{il' fi-Ijaqq in-naas he does people wrong. 
2 to sin, transgress. -ava muxtil', mux{i. 
y.1t 
~ 
xa{ab (u) Ilvtl 18 to propose marriage to (a 
girl). raalj yix{ub-haa-Iu ggawwiz-ha he went to propose 
marriage to her on his (friend's) behalf, (and) he mar-
ried her (himself). Ib to ask for (a girl) in marriage. 
xa{abt-a-ha min I'abuu-ha I asked her father for her 
hand. Ie to become engaged to (a girl). 2 Ivil to deliver 
a speech, give an oration. -vn xu{ba, xu{uuba; ava 
xaa{ib; pva mux{uuba. 
~ 
xu{ba Inl Ilpl xu{abl 
18 speech, oration. 
Ib sermon given in a mosque. 2 Ino pll engagement. 
~)a> xu{uuba In pi -aatl engagement. engagement 
ceremony. ril-xu{uuba {aalit Ii-sana the engagement 
lasted a year. I'ana [azmaa-k [ala xu{ubt-i I invite you 
to my engagement. 
:w.l> xa{ba 
In 
pi -aatl 
professional 
female 
matchmaker. 
..,..lb.> xi{aab T In pi -aatl I letter. gamU[ iI-xi{abaat 
iI-muta[alliqa bil-mawc[uu[ all of the correspondence 
relating to the subject. 2 speech, address. xi{aab 
ir-rayyis itzaa[ Jit-tilivizyoon the President's speech was 
broadcast on television. 
~ lb.> xi{aabi r : tillirraa! xi{aabi night letter. 
~ 
xu{iib Inl I Ipl xu{{aabl fiance. 2/pl xu{abal 
speaker. orator. 
~ 
xu{iiba In pi -aatl I fiancee. 2 female orator. 
~u;. xa((aaba = xa{ba. 
~I I'itxa{ab Ivil passive of xa{ab. -ava mitxi{ib . 
..,..Ja;.;1 I'inxatab = I'itxa{ab. 
~l> xaatib Ivtl to address, talk to. -vn muxatba; ava 
muxaatib; pva muxaatab. 
~Ii'l I'itxaatib Ivil I to converse, confer. talk 
together. 2 to be addressed. -ava/iva mitxaatib . 
.;.1t 
~ 
xatar' (u) Ivil to come to mind. Jikra ma-xatarit-f 
[ala baal-i I'abadan a thought which never crossed my 
mind. -vn xu{uur; ava xaa{ir. 
).l> xaa{ir' In 
pi xawaa{irl I inner self, inner 
thoughts and feelings. qalit-Iu kull illi bi-yduur fi-xa{ir-
ha she told him everything that was going on in her 
mind. xawaa{ir i1-mulaqqin laazim tikuun murakkiza 
[al-mumassil the prompter's whole attention must be 
focused on the actor. xa{ar-Ii xaa{ir an idea occurred to 
me. IIbi-xaatir- according to the inclination of, as in 

filmil bi-xa(r-ak do as you please! -gabar (bi-)xaa(ir or 
is-suxuniyya she's raving from the fever. -vn xatrafa; 
fiftara (or (ayyib) xaa(ir to soothe (s.o.'s feelings) with a 
ava mixa(raf. 
kind word or deed, treat (s.o.) with sympathetic consid-
eration, help out (s.o. in distress), as in kallar xeer-u 
finnu gabar bi-xaa(ir iI-yatiim he is much to be praised 
for showing kindness to the orphan, gabr iI-xawaa(ir 
lal-allaah "" your kindness to me will be rewarded by 
God's to you. -kasar bi-xaa(ir to hurt the feelings of, 
treat (s.o.) without consideration. -xad lala xa(r-u he 
felt offended, his feelings were hurt. -faafxaa(ir(-u) to 
see to (s.o. 's) needs, as infuuf xa(r-u give him a gratui-
ty, ril-bint' bi-tbibb-ak -fuuf xa(ir·ha the girl's in love 
with you -do something to make her feel good. 2' good 
will, kind feeling (held by one for another). lu xaa(ir 
kibiir land iI-mudarrisiin the teachers would do any-
thing for him. IIlafaan xaa(ir (1) for the sake of, as in 
talaali lafaan xa(r-i come for my sake! (2) so that, in 
order to, as in bi-yc;addim mafariillil-fac;saam lafaan 
xaa(ir tinaffiz-ha he sends on projects to the depart-
ments for them to carry out. 
lIlamal xaa(ir Ii- to do a good turn to. bi-yilmilu xaa(ir 
Ii-balt[ they do one another good turns. -xad (bi-)xaa(ir 
to pay condolences to. 
~ 
xu(r Inl wish, desire. mif bi-xu(r-i it does not de-
pend on my will. 
~ 
xa(ar2ln pi fax(aarl danger, risk.fii xa(ar laleeha 
min ii-moot she's in danger of dying. kull' mihna laha 
fax(ar-ha every profession has its riSKS. -/adjectivallyl 
ril-fiifa di xa(ar c;awi this socket is very dangerous. 
0;)..;. xu(uura Inll danger. fii xu(uura lala bayaat-ak 
you are in danger of your life. 2 consequence, signifi-
cance, seriousness. ma-tc;allil-!, min xu(uurit wabaaf 
ir-rafwa don't play down the gravity of the bribery 
epidemic . 
.r-1a> xa(iir ladjl I dangerous .. 2 serious, critical, cru-
cial. 3 tremendous, incredible. 
~i fax(arl lell I morelmost dangerous. 2 morel 
most serious, grave or significant. 
).~ maxaa(ir Ipl nl dangers. 
).1.>. xaa(ir2 Ivil to take risks, be reckless. mif laazim 
tixaa(ir bi-bayaat-ak you should not risk your life. -vn 
muxa(ra; ava mixaa(ir. 
o).~ muxa(ra In pi -aatl risk. 
~i fax(ar2 Ivtl to notify, inform. ba-yix(ir ii-bank 
he'll notify the bank. - vn fix(aar; ava mux(ir. 
)1.>! fix(aar In pi -aatl notification, advice note. 
fix(aar sabb debit withdrawal note. 
"';,;.bt 
J ~ 
xa(raf Ivil to be delirious, rave. bi-txa(raf min 
,1, .b . 
. 
C 
.la> xa(( I (u) Ivtl la to mark (paper) with lines. XU(( 
iI-warac;a di rule lines on this sheet of paper. Ib to draw 
(lines). XU((' talat XU(UU( draw three lines. 2 to furrow 
(land). nixu(( iI-fart[ iI-fawwil first we furrow the land. 
3 to pencil (the eyebrows). -vn xa((; ava xaa(i(; pva 
max(uu(. 
1> xa((2 In pi xu(uu(/la line. xa(( iI-bayaah the line of 
life (ofthe hand). xa(( iI-fufuq the horizon.llxa(( in-naar 
the line of fire, the battle front. -xa((' seer itinerary, 
route. -(ilil min il-xa(( he did something unusual, he 
changed his routine. -c;alad-Ii fil-xa(( he wouldn't 
budge. Ib route (e.g., of a bus). nizilt' r-faaxir il-xa(( 
I got off at the terminus. Ie telephone line, telephone 
connection. fiddii-ni xa([, xaarigi give me an outside 
line! IIhuwwa mif malaaya lala l-xa(( there's no com-
munication between us, he's not on my wavelength. 
2 [agrie] furrow. 3a handwriting. xa((' miin da whose 
handwriting is that? 3b script, calligraphic style. xa((' 
kuufi Kufic script. 3c type fount. 
.J.. ~ 
max(uu( I In pi -aatl (hand-written) manu-
script. 2 ladjl in manuscript form. 
;J. ~ 
max(uu(a In pi -aatl (hand-written) manuscript. 
4b. xi((a. xu((a In pi xi(a(, xu(a(1 plan, scheme. 
.J..t1,;. xa((aa( In ·1 calligrapher, sign-writer. 
Jak.. xa((a( Ivtl I to draw lines on, mark with lines, 
stripe. xa((a( il-ma/lab mark out the pitch! kiliim 
mixa((a( a striped carpet. II nixa((a( bil-wadal we (for-
tune tellers) tell the future using shells. 2 to furrow. 
lamma tinlam iI-fart[' kwayyis nixa((a(-ha bil-mibraat 
when the ground is nice and smooth we furrow it with 
the plough. 3 to pencil (eyes and eyebrows). 4 to plan, 
draw up plans for, design. fil-barb' tibtaag tax(ii( war 
needs planning. ba~nxa((a( i/-ba/ad min gidiid we shall 
re-design the town. wizaarit it-tax(ii( the Ministry of 
Planning. -vn tax(ii(; avalpva mixa((a( . 
.lli muxa((a( In pi -aatl scheme, plot, conspiracy. 
muxa((a( yasaari a leftist plot. 
~ 
I fitxa((a( Ivil passive of xa((a(. - iva mitxa((a(. 
...;,1,t 
...Ala> xa(af (a) Ivtl I to snatch, grab. xa(aft' fan(it-ha 
wi-griit I snatched her bag and ran off. II xa(af rig/-u to 
hop off, nip out, get oneself off, as in xa(aft' rig/-i 
wi-Jtareet-u I nipped out and bought it, /aazim fax(af 
rig/-i /-badd' firka minfarikaat it-tafmiin I'd better get 

myself down to one of the insurance companies. -xataf 
nafas-u (1) to gasp for breath. (2) to constrict the brea-
thing of, as in rir-rabw i b-yixtaf nafas-i the asthma 
makes it difficult for me to breathe. 23 to purloin, steal. 
riI-r;umda xataf zarr;it-i the mayor stole my crops. 2b to 
kidnap. xatafu ribn-u w-talabu fidya they kidnapped his 
son and demanded a ransom. 2c to hijack. xatafu t-
tayyaara they hijacked the plane. - vn xarf; ava xaa[if; 
pva maxtuuf. 
:i.4.Ia.;. xarfa linst n, pi -aatl a grab, a snatch. 
J~ max(uuf ladjl pallid, blanched (of the face). 
wiJf-a-ha max(uuf wi-baayin rinnu Ija-yulfma r;aleeha 
her face is pallid and it looks as if she's going to faint. 
-also maCj(uuf. 
Jtb. xa((aaf In • and pi xa((aafal I snatcher. xa((aaf 
funat a bag-snatcher. IIxa((aafit riggaala a woman who 
snatches men (from other women). -xa((aaf rigwaan 
[soccer] 
goal-snatcher, 
cunning 
goal-scorer. 
23 kidnapper. 2b hijacker. 
Jtb. xu((aaf I In pi xatatiifl large hook. 2 Icoll nl 
swallow(s). 
J~ muxtaaf In pi maxa(iifl anchor. 
~I ritxa(af Ivil passive of xa(af. -iva mitxi[if. 
-.Ab.; I rinxa(af = ritxataf. -iva minxi(if. 
...J,~I ritxaa(if Ivtl to snatch from one another. 
rahumma btadu yitxarfu k-koora they've started to grab 
the ball from one another. - ava mitxaatif. 
r~t 
~ 
maxtama In 
pi maxaa(iml muzzle. 
ridljak 
r;al-Cjird i b-maxtama gild [pro v] (humour the ape with a 
leather muzzle) "" little things please little minds. 
II.S~t 
;)..0. xa(Wa In pi -aat, xataawil I step, pace. miJi 
l-xa(Witeen li-bet-ha he walked the few steps to her 
house. Ilxatwa r;aziiza "" you honour us by your visit! 
(especially to one who visits after a protracted abs-
ence). - rahl il-xa(wa (in popular belief) people who 
have the power to transport themselves over vast dis-
tances by supernatural means or to appear simul-
taneously in more than one place. - been il-xa(Wa 
wil-xa(Wa yifr;al allaah ma yafaar [prov] (between one 
step and the next God may do as He wills) "" there's 
many a slip twixt the cup and the lip. -bi-yr;idd 
il-xataawi r;aleeha he spies on her. 2 manner of step-
ping.llxa(Wa tan;iim [mil] march on the spot! 3 a stage, 
a step in a procedure. 
~ 
xa((a Ilvtl to step over, cross. w-allaahi m-axa((i 
257 
r;atabit bet-hum bar;d' kida I swear I'll never cross their 
threshold after this! II rimfi sana wala txa((i Cjana [prov] 
(walk for a year rather than cross a ditch) "" slow but 
sure is best. 2 Ivil to take a step, step. law xa((eet hina 
Ij-amawwit-ak if you come this way, I'll kill you! -vn 
taxtiyya; ava/pva mixa((i. 
~I ritxa((a Ivtl I to surpass, exceed. ris-sawwaaCj 
itxa((a s-surr;a l-qanuniyya the driver exceeded the 
speed limit. 2 to pass (s.o.) over, disregard. ritxa((uu-ni 
fit-tarCjiyya they passed me over for promotion. - Ivil 
3 to be stepped over, be crossed. - ava/iva/pva mitxa((i. 
1 I.S ~ t see 
~ J:, t: xata, xatayaan, xaati, xa(iyya, 
xa(aaya, rax(a, mux(i 
.:..Jt 
.:...t~ xaafit ladjl quiet, faint. qoor xaafit subdued 
light. 
..,..Jt 
..,....b xafas (i) Ivtl I to thrust down. xafast i wiJf-i fil-
maxadda I buried my face in the pillow.lj-axflS buuz-u 
fil- rarq I'll push his face into the dust! II huwwa iii xaflS-
ni he's the one who's holding me back (in life, in my 
career etc.). -ya maxfuus insulting form of address "" 
you who should be trodden into the ground. - ri/-
maxfuus insulting form of reference to one who is ab- . 
sent. - vn xafs, xafasaan; ava xaafis; pva maxfuus. 
~I ritxafas Ivil to be thrust down. II ritxifis sit down! 
plonk yourself down! - iva mitxifis. 
~ 
I rinxafas = ritxafas. -iva minxifis. 
~~t 
..;.\.A.;. xuffaaf, xaffaaf In pi xafafiiJl /zool] bat. 
~Jt 
~ 
xafaq (i) Ivtl to lower. ril-rasbiriin mumkin 
yixfiq il-Ijaraara aspirin may bring the temperature 
down. -vn xaf4.; ava xaafiq;· pva maxfuuq. 
...... ~ xaafiq Inl Caster-down of the proud (epithet of 
God). 
~ 
I rinxafaq Ivil to become low, decline. rinxifaaq 
fil-mabir;aat a drop in sales. badr i minxifiq [athl] a 
crouching start. -vn rinxifaaq; ava minxifiq, munxafiq. 
~ 
munxafaq In pi -aatl depression, low-lying 
area. munxafaq il-qaaaara the Qattara depression. 
~ 
xaffaq Ivtl to lower, reduce. rasr;aar muxaffaqa 
reduced prices. -vn taxfiiq; avalpva mixaffaq; pva 
muxaffaq. 

~ 
taxfiicf. In pI -aatl discount, reduction. fiftara 
b-ta:fiicf. he bought at a discount. 
~ 
\ fitxaffacf./vil to be lowered, be reduced. fis-silr 
itxaffacf. the price was reduced. - iva mitxaffacf.. 
1~~t 
.:.-. xaff (i) Ivil 18 to become lighter. lamma timla 
balloona hawa txiff when you fill a balloon with air it 
gets lighter. Ib to lessen, diminish in intensity. kull' ma 
yikbar id-door yixiff' min lalee the older he gets the 
milder the fits become. fif-JUyl' xaffthe work has slack-
ened off.llxiff' jwayya take it ea,sy! Ie to become less 
dense. fiz-zeet bi-yxiff the oil thins out. 2 to recover 
(from an illness). xaffeet wil-l.Jamdu 1i-lIaah I'm better 
now, praise be to God! - Ivtl 38 to make lighter. xiff 
iI-l.Jim/lighten the burden. xiff' fiid-ak Jiwayya don't 
use such a heavy touch.llxiff-a-ha tluum [prov} (light-
en the ship and it will float) ... don't take things too 
seriously and you'll find they go better. 3b to make less 
dense, lighten in consistency. xiff iI-muuna don't put so 
much cement in the mortar! 3c to slacken, take the 
strain off. xiff iI-l.Jabl slacken the rope! 3d to thin out. 
xiff' jalr-i thin out my hair! lamma I-tju(n' yi(lal bi-
yxiffuu when the cotton comes up, they thin it out. -vn 
xaff, xafafaan; ava xaafif; pva maxfuuf. 
~ xiffa In! I lightness. xiffit l.Jaraka agility. II xiffit 
yadd (1) manual dexterity. (2) quality of being light-
fingered or larcenous. 2 vivacity: jolliness, light-
heartedness. 3 silliness, fatuousness. 
4 xiffiyya = xiffa·11 fir-riztj' yl.Jibb iI-xiffiyya [prov} 
... ?taking a living needs a quick mind. 
J.i\..b. xafaafa = xiffa. 
........ xafiif ladj pI xUfaafl I light (in weight). xafiif 
zayy ir-riifa light as a feather. tjumaajxafiiflight-weight 
material. lams' xafiif a light. touch. II fiid-u xafiifa 
(1) he's dexterous. (2) he's light-fingered, he's larce-
nous. - damm-u xafiifhe has a cheerful disposition, he's 
cute. -tjalb-u xafiif he's easily startled, he's timid. 
-latj/-u xafiif he's feather-brained. -rabb-i-na yiglal 
ik-kalaam xafiif lala tjalb-u-hum ... may ~he spirits not 
be offended by our words (a formula pronounced dur-
ing the zaar). - fil-mutoor xafiif.lauto} the engine is 
losing compression. 2 simple, not complex. riI-masfala 
di xafiifa this is a simple problem. musiiqa xafiifa light 
music. 3 small in quantity or extent, meagre. jalr-u 
xafiif his hair is sparse. fif-Juyl iI-yomeen dool xafiif 
there's not much work these days. fiddii-ni (abatj fuul 
zeet xafiif give me a plate of broad beans without much 
oil! ziyaara xafiifa a brief visit. 4 dilute, weak, thin or 
258 
light in consistency.jaay xafiifweak tea (i.e. tea made 
without many leaves). farcf.' xafiifa poor soil. 
~ 
xifayyif = xafiif. 
~i faxaff lelllighterllightest, etc. 
J\..b. xaffaaf In! pumice. fil-l.Jagar iI-xaffaaf pumice 
stone . . 
j\..b. xaffaafi ladj invar/ilightish. luzuuma feeh - di 
fakla xaffaafi bass what do you mean, a feast? this is 
just a light snack! 2 easy-going, pleasant. 
~\ fitxaff Ivil passive of xaff 3. -iva mitxaff. 
....ib. xaffif Ivtl 18 to make lighter. xaffif-ha • mif 
tjaadir faJiI-ha make it lighter; I can't carry it. Ilxaffif 
damm-ak ... don't be a drag! Ib to lighten the consisten-
cy of, dilute. xaffifil-buuya thin the paint! Ie to reduce 
in amount or extent. xaffif huduum-u he put on lighter 
clothing. xaffif iI-mall.J ' fil- fakl put less salt in the food. 
xaffifil-fignaab trim the edges. Id to slacken, take the 
strain off. xaffif-Iu S-surl' jwayya give him a looser 
rein! 2 to cure. fid-dawa xaffif-ni the medicine cured 
m~. -vn taxfiif; avafpva mixaffif, muxaffaf. 
..A.U2\ fitxaffif Ivil passive of xaffif. - iva mitxaffif. 
~\ fistaxaff Ivtl I to consider light or easy. 
II fistaxaffit latj/-u she considered him a fool. - fana 
ma-b-astaxaff'-j damm-u 
I don't 
consider 
him 
pleasant. 2 to select for hghtness or easiness. -vn 
fistixfaaf; ava mistix/ff. mistaxaff. 
11 fistaxaff' bi- to take lightly, treat With contempt. ma 
tistaxiff'-J bi-latj/-i don't take me for a fool! 
bi-Ylamil-ni b-muntaha I-istixfaaf he treats me most 
contemptuously . 
1 
• 
" 
""'''"'c 
.:.-. xUff In 
pI xifaaf, 
faxfaafl 
I slipper. II rigil 
bi-xuffay l.Juneen he returned empty-handed. 2 hoof (of 
a camel). filii tilmil-u n-namla f-sana yaxd-u g-gamal 
fi-xuff [p ro v} what an ant accumulates in a whole year a 
camel can destroy. in one kick ... people's capabilities 
differ. 
1 • 
" 
\J,,",C 
~ 
xafatj (u) I Ivtl to beat, whip (a liquid). xafatjit 
iI-beecf. lajaan it-turta she beat the eggs for the cake. 
2 Ivil to palpitate (of the heart). xafatjaanfil-tjalb heart 
palpitations. -vn xaftj. xafatjaan; ava xaafitj; pva 
maxfuutj. 
.;AO' \ fitxafatj Ivil to be beaten together. - iva mitxifitj. 
~ 
\ finxafatj = fitxafatj. - iva minxifitj. 
1 
• 
" 
!:'''"'C 
~ 
xaffatj Ivtl to plaster over (a wall). -vn taxfiitj; 

a':.a/pva mixaffat;. 
~I ritxaffat; Ivil to be plastered over (of a wall). - iva 
mitxaffat; . 
lS.Jt 
..» xifi (a) Ivil (derogl to disappear, vanish, buzz off. 
lamallamlit-u w-xifi he did his dirty work and beat it. 
-vn xafayaan . 
..» xafa I (i) Ivtl to hide, conceal. xafajfan(a he hid 
the bag. II rinta ya maxfi you wretch! -(at;iyyit il-rixfa 
magic cap supposed to render its'wearer invisible. -vn 
xafy, rixfa; ava xaafi; pva maxfi. 
~ 
xifya Ilnl (rurl agricultural land obtained when 
canals are filled in or roads dug up and unofficially 
annexed to neighbouring plots. 2 ladvl secretly, covert-
ly. saafir xifya he left unannounced. 
..» xifa, xafa 1 In! secrecy, hiddenness. fil-xifa in 
secret, as in ril-muxaddaraat bi-titbaal fil-xifa drugs are 
sold clandestinely . 
..» xafi ladjl hidden. ril-lilm il-xafi occult know-
ledge, esoteric knowledge. 
~ 
xafiyy Inl Hidden One (epithet of God). ya xafiyy 
il- ral(aaf 0 Thou of Hidden Graces! 
~I ritxafa Ivil to be hidden, be concealed. -iva 
mitxifi· 
~I rinxafa = ritxafa. -iva minxifi. 
~I rixtafa Ivil to disappear. ril-walad ixtafa mil-beet 
the kid disappeared from the house. -vn rixtifa; ava 
m!xtifi. 
~I ritxaffa Ivil to become disguised, disguise one-
self. -ava mitxaffi. 
~I ristaxfa Ivii to hide. ristaxfu min in-naas 
wi-nisyu rinn; rabb-i-na jayif-hum they hid from 
people, but forgot that God sees them. -ava mistaxfi. 
;"""1 ristixaffa J, ristaxaffaJ Ivil to hide. -ava 
mistaxaffi· 
[I Jt 
..,..":J,;.. xulaagi In pI -yyaatl {Chrl prayer book usually 
containing the three Coptic liturgies. 
lyJt 
~ 
xulba In pI xulab/l {rurl bundle, bunch. 2 {text I 
skein. 
Z'7 J t 
...,,';}.;. xallaab r ladj ·1 fascinating, captivating. gamaal 
xallaab captivating beauty. man;ar xallaab a fascinat-
ing scene. 
~ 
maxlab In pI maxaalibl paw. 
259 
~yJt 
~ 
xalb~ Ivill to tattle, tell tales, fib. 2 to fabri-
cate, make up stories. 3 to philander, be lecherous. 
- Ivtl 4 to mix up, make a mess of. -vn xalb~a; ava/ 
pva mixalb~. 
~ 
~ 
xalbu~ In xalabi~1 I tattler, one who tells 
tales behind others' backs. 2 philanderer, lecher. 
~I 
ritxalb~ Ivil passive of xalb~. -iva mitxalb~. 
byJt 
~ 
xa/bat Ivii I to cause trouble maliciously. matral:J 
ma yruul:J yixalba( been in-naas wherever he goes he sets 
people at odds with one another. - Ivt/2 to confuse. 
rima xalba(t-i-na bil-t;~~ bituul-ak you've confused us 
with your stories. - also laxba(. -vn xalba(a; ava/pva 
mixalba(. 
~I ritxalbat Ivil to be or become confused. - iva 
mitxalba( .. 
I[Jt 
~ 
xaliig In pI xilgaan, xulgaanl gulf, bay. xaliig is-
siwees the Gulf of Suez. ril-xaliig il-larabi the Arabian 
Gulf. II (tirlit) il-xaliig (il-m~ri) an ancient canal which, 
until filled in in the mjddle of the nineteenth century, 
ran north-east across Cairo from its starting point on 
the Nile opposite Roda Island. (faaril) il-xaliig a street, 
known also as Port Said Street, running along part of 
the filled canal. fumm il-xaliig a district opposite Roda 
Island, at the beginning of the ancient canal. 
1 [ J t see [I J t : xulaagi 
JtJt 
~ 
xalxil/vtll to loosen the several parts of, cause 
loss of cohesion in. sinna mxalxila a loose tooth. 2 to 
displace, cause turbulence in (air). -vn xalxala; ava/pva 
mixalxil . 
J~ xulxaalln pI xalaxiill anklet. 
~I ritxalxillvil passive of xalxil. -vn taxalxu/; iva 
mitxalxil. 
~ 
taxalxulln! turbulen.ce. 
~ Jt 
..I!l> xaalid ladj ·1 immortal, eternal. zikra xalda an 
u!ldying memory. 
..II.> xallid Ivtl to immortalize. -vn taxliid; ava/pva 
"!ixallid; pva muxallad r . 
.u;.:1 ritxallid Ivil to be immortalized. - iva mitxallid. 

V'" J t 
~I fixtalas Ivtl to embezzle. -vn fixtilaas; ava 
mixtilis; pva muxtalas f . 
V"'~I fixtilaas 
In 
pi -aatl 
misappropriation, 
embezzlement. 
..p muxtalis In "I embezzler. 
~Jt 
~ 
xil~ I or xu/~ (a) Ivil 1 to come to an end, be 
finished. fiz-zeet xil~ there's no oil left. fiI-ljajla xi~it 
the party came to an end. 2 to make an end. fixll¥ batfa 
have done! that's enough out of you! nilmil tfurla 
w-nixll¥ let's toss up and have done! ma-tiftalj1 
iI-mawquul laljsan ma-nix/~1 don't open the subject 
or we'll never hear the end of it. 3 to become ex-
hausted. xil~t' mis-sillim the stairs tired me out. 4 to 
save oneself. fix/~ bi-lumr-ak run for your life! 5 to 
obtain clearance. fil-biqaala xi~it min ig-gumruk the 
goods have been cleared through customs. -vn 
xall¥aan, xulu~; ava xaa/~, xa/~aan. 
oJI"» xulu~ Inl {mechJ clearance. fil-xulu~ been 
iI-bistim wis-silindar the clearance between the piston 
and the cylinder. 
v..!(.;. xaa/~ ladj "I 18 unmixed, pure. dahab xaa/~ 
pure gold. 1 bt pure, true, sincere. fid-diin iI-xaa/~ the 
true religion. dUlaa f xaa/~ r true prayer, prayer from 
the heart. 2 free, clear. fil-mux(aafxaa/~ the anchor's 
up. Ilgittit-ha mij xa/~a her body is possessed by a de-
mon. - fimi xa~a you are divorced! I divorce you! 
3 paid-for in full. fil-Ijisaab xaa/~ the bill is paid off. 
4 finished, completed, fij1ur/' xaa/~ the work is com-
pleted. - ladvl 5 very, extremely. wiljij xaa/~ very 
bad. 6 completely, thorQughly. xalll¥t' xaa/~ I've 
finished completely. fitfi n-naar lamma I-xuqaar yistiwi 
xaali~ turn off the heat when the vegetables are thor-
oughly done. 7 at all, ever. ma1uft'1ljaaga xaa/~ 
I didn't see anything at all. ma-tkallim-uu1 xaa/~ don't 
talk to him ever! 
~ 
Xil~2 ladj ·1 sincere, truthful. tiljiss' kida min 
kalaam-u fmnu mij xil~ you feel somehow from the 
way he talks that he is not straightforward. IIdamm-u 
mij xil~ he's crooked. 
~i faxll¥ I lell morelmost sincere. 
oJI"';i.;.. xalal¥ I 
Inl 1 deliverance, salvation. kaan 
xalal¥-u lala fiid-i his deliverance was at my hands. 
Ilfuuf (or filraf) xr a~-ak look to your own ends, look 
after yourself ... /pl -aatl placenta, afterbirth. 
oJI"';i.;.. xalal¥L 1 adverb indicating finality = once and 
for all. gittit-i nhaarit xala~ my body is in a state of 
260 
complete collapse. hiyya xalal¥ batfit kiwayyisa she's 
become a good girl now. fij1ams' nizlit xalal¥ the sun's 
gone down now. m-ana xalal¥ ijtareet waaljid I've 
already bought one. fana xalal¥ fakalt (thanks) but 
I've had enough to eat. 2 linterjl that's it! so much for 
that! xalal¥ - filii faat maat that's settled then, we'll let 
bygones be bygones. xalal¥ - fana mwaafitf OK, 
I agree. xalal¥ ya siid-i ma-tiZlal1 never mind, old 
chap, don't get upset. xalal¥ tfarrabna - batfeena f-
banha the journey's almost over now -we've got as far 
as Benha. yibtfaxalal¥ batfa that's it then, it's settled 
then. II wi-xalal¥ (1) that's just the way it is, there's no 
argument about it, as in fahu huwwa iii tlayyin wi-
xalal¥ he's the one who got the job and there's nothing 
to be done about it, fahu fana tfult' kida w-xalal¥ that's 
what I've decided and there are no two ways about it. 
(2) just to get it over with, rakkibii-Iu fayy' zuraar 
wi-xalal¥ just fix any old button on it. 
4..>';i.;.. xulal¥a Inl essence, most important part. 
xulal¥it iI-mawquul what the subject boils down to. 
...,.....l> xilee~: (ilil min darb' xlee~ = he escaped (death) 
by a miracle. 
~ 
xalll¥ Ivtl I to finish, bring to an end. xalll¥t' 
fur/-i badri I finished my work early. 2a to rid, free. di 
Ija-txalll¥ ii-beet min ~-~arl¥iir this will rid the house of 
cockroaches. rabb-i-na yxalll¥-na minkum may Our 
Lord rid us of your presence! Ilxalll¥ qamiir-u he 
cleared his conscience. 
-I:J-axall~-Iak taar-ak I will 
avenge you. 2b to free from the marriage bond, di-
vorce. 2c limpersl it is acceptable to, meets with the 
approval of. yixalll¥-ak (finn-ak) tihazzaf-ni ~uddaam 
m-naas di kull-a-ha do you think it's right of you to 
mock me in front of all these people? laf 
ma-yxalll¥-nii1 fana mutfassif no, I don't think it's 
right, I'm sorry. 3 to separate, disengage. fil-buli~ ga 
xall~-hum min balt{ the police came and broke up the 
fight. II ma-ynuub iI-mixalll¥ filla ta/f(iil hiduum-u 
(provJ the (would-be) peace-maker only gets his 
clothes torn. 4 to save, rescue. xalll¥-ni mil-war(a di get 
me out of this fix! 5 to expedite a matter or job for 
(s.o.). xalll¥-ni batfa laayiz famfi finish what you're 
doing for me - I want to leave! 6 to obtain clearance for. 
- Ivil 7 to be finished, be through. kallim-ni lamma 
txalll¥ give me a call when you're finished (with what 
you have in hand). -vn taxli~; ava/pva mixalll¥. 
11 xalll¥ lala (1) to exterminate, as in xalll¥u lala 1-
ll¥afiir they exterminated the birds, qaruuri nxalll¥ 
lalee tfabl' ma ykallim iI-bulii~ we must do him in 
before he talks to the police. (2) to finish off, as in xalll¥ 

lal-lee! min reer ma yistanna 1-lal:Jma he polished off 
the. bread without waiting for the meat. 
~ 
mixall~ ladi ·1 resourceful, capable. 
~ 
muxall~ Inl I = mixall~aati. 2 {Chr] Saviour 
(epit~et of Jesus Christ). 
J~ 
mixall~aati In pi -yyal one who, for remunera-
tion, facilitates the clearance of goods from customs, or 
of ~apers through the bureaucracy. 
~\ fitxall~ Ivil I to rid oneself. fii ladaat 
fi-balad-na laazim nitxall~ minha there are customs in 
our country of which we 'must rid ourselves. 
2 (impersonal) passive of xall~. fil-fakl itxall~ lalee 
the food was finished off. fil-biqaala txall~ laleeha 
min ig-gumruk the goods were cleared through the 
customs. -avaliva mitxall~. 
~i fax/~2 Ivil to be faithful, loyal, be sincere. 
I:J-ax/~-/ik (Uul il-lumr I'll be faithful to you all my life. 
muwaa{in mux/~ li-blaad-u a citizen loyal to his coun-
try. -vn fixla~; ava mux/~. 
~\ 
fistax/~ Ivtl I to deduce. 
fistax/~ti min 
kalam-ha finnaha mij layza I deduced from what she 
said that she wasn't interested. fistax/~ in-natiiga he 
drew the conclusion. 2t to extract. fistixla~ iz-zeet min 
bizr il-Iju{n the extraction of oil from cotton seed. -vn 
fistixla~; ava mistax/~. 
bJt 
.lal;.. xala{ (i) Ivtl to mix, blend. bi-nixli{-u lal-mayya 
we mix it with the water. l:Ja!iij maxluu{ adulterated 
hashish. II bi-yixli{ fik-kalaam he raves, he speaks non-
sense. -vn xal{; ava xaali{; pva maxluu{ . 
.lal;.. xal{ Inll (radio) interference, static. 2 nonsense. 
;J.l> xal{a In pi -aatl mixture. fil-xal{a btaalit iI-mal:J!i 
the mixture for the stuffed vegetables. II ruzz i bil-xal{a 
rice with raisins, pine-nuts and spices; oriental rice . 
.lal;.. xil{ Inl {rur] straw and vegetable debris. II {iin xil{ 
mixture of straw etc. and mud used for making bricks, 
daub etc. 
Ja..l> xalii{ Inl combination, mixture. fin-ni,;aam xalii{ 
min il-ijtirakiyya wir-rafsimaliyya the system is a com-
bination of socialism and capitalism. II lee! xalii{ bread 
of wheat and maize flour . 
.J.,)i... xallaa{ In pi -aatll mixing machine, blender (for 
food, cement). 2 mixer, tap that blends hot and cold 
water. 3 mixing head (of a welder's torch). 
~\ fitxala{ 
Ivil 
to 
be 
mixed, 
be 
blended. 
fil-xarasaana lbaara lan raml i w-fasmant i w-zala{ 
wi-mayya b-yitxil(U mala balq concrete consists of 
sand, cement, gravel and water mixed together. -iva 
mitxili{. 
261 
.la.L;..; \ finxala{ = fitxala{ . 
.Iai>. xalla{ Ivtl to mix thoroughly, blend thoroughly. 
xalla{-ha bit-turaab he mixed it thoroughly with the 
earth. -vn taxlii{; ava/pva mixalla{. 
~ 
mixalla{ ladi *1 cross-bred, hybrid. 
.l.I;.:\ fitxalla{ Ivil to be thoroughly mixed or blended. 
- iva mitxalla(. 
~\ fixtala{ 
Ivil 
I to 
mix, 
mingle, socialize. 
ma-bi-yl:Jibbuuj yixtil{u b-l:Jadd they don't like to mix 
with anyone. 2 to become confused, get in a mess. 
fixtala{ lalayya I- famr I was at a loss to understand the 
matter. -vn i'ixtilaa{; ava mixtili{. 
~ 
muxtala{ ladil mixed. madrasa muxtala{a a 
coeducational 
school. 
fil-mal:Jaakim 
il-muxtala{a 
{obsol] the mixed courts. 
-ybJt 
~ 
xal{abi~a In! huge mess, chaotic situation. 
~. 
xal{abii{a = xal{abi~a. 
tJt 
c:> xalal (a) Ivtll to pull out, extract. fixlal il-watad 
mil-farq pull the peg out of the ground! rul:Jt i faxlal 
sinaan-i I went to have my teeth pulled. II bi-xall id-dirs 
with the greatest effort, as in xadnaa-ha minnu b-xall 
id-dirs we got it from him only with the greatest 
difficulty. 2a to rip off, tear off, dislocate. xalalt 
il-Ijami~ min lalee I ripped the shirt off him. fil-baab 
maxluul the door is off its hinges. 2b to give (s.o.) aiolt 
of sudden anxiety, disquiet etc. xalalt-i-ni bil-xabar da 
you really shook me with that news. - Ivil 3 to get 
away, take oneself off. xalalt i minhum bil-lafya 
I managed to get free of them with great difficulty. 
. 
I 
ma-tixlal madaam ijjurl' xil¥ you get along now that 
the work is finished. -vn xall; ava xaalil; pva maxluul. 
~)\,;. xalaala r Inl indecency, immodesty. 
~ 
xaliil t ladi */1 indecent, immodest. bint i xaliila 
an immodest girl. fustaan xaliil an indecent dress. 
2/invarl {rur] second-hand. gazma xaliil second-hand 
pair of shoes. 
~\ fitxalal/vi/l to be pulled out, be extracted. 2 to 
be detached, be dislocated. kitf-i txalal my shoulder 
was disiocated.llljalb-i txalal mil-xoofl was unnerved 
by fear. - iva mitxilil .. 
~ 
\ finxalal = fitxalal. -iva minxilil. 
c:> xallal Ivtl I to unhinge, dislocate. xallal kulli 
fabwaab il-beet he took all the doors of the house off 
their hinges. 2 to pull, extract (teeth, fingernails etc.). 
- .IviJ 3 to become loose or rickety. fil-larabiyya 

xallar;it mil-ma{abbaat the car became rickety because 
of the bumps. baab in-naggaar mixallar; {prov] = the 
cobbler's children are ill-shod. - vn taxliir;; ava/pva 
m..ixallar;. 
d!' mixallar; ladj *1 exhausted. 
~I ritxallar; Ivi/l to be detached, be dislocated. 2 to 
be pulled out, be extracted. - iva mitxallar;. 
"';Jt 
...AI.> xalajI (i) Ivtl I to break, fail to keep. xalafit i1-
mataad she broke the appointment. xalaf kalaam-u he 
went back on his word. 2 to provide a compensation for 
(of God). rabb-i-na yixlif-u r;aleek bil-l:Jalaal may God 
compensate you well for it! (as a condolence to one who 
has suffered a loss). ril-mir;awwic[ mixlif = God will 
cempensate you (for yourloss). - Ivi/3 to act contrari-
Iy. ri;-;uruuf xalafit things went wrong. - vn xalafaan, 
xulf; ava xaalif, mixlif; pva maxluuf. 
...AI.> xalf Inl back, rear. huguum mil-xalf an attack 
from the rear. 
~ xalfan ladvl to the back, to the rear. xalfan dur about 
turn! 
~ 
xalfiT ladj */1 rear, hind, back. ril-baab i1-xalfi 
the back door. 2 to the rear, backward. mesa xalfiyya a 
backward dive. 
~ 
xalfiyya f In pi -aatl background. ril-xalfiyya s-
saqafiyya the cultural background. 
...AI.> xilf: xii!, xlaaf pointing in opposite directions, 
head to toe, back to back. ris-sardiin mitra~~' xilf' xlaaf 
the sardines are arranged head to tail. kull' dikkiteen 
xilf' xlaaf each pair of benches is back to back. 
...AI.> xilfa Icoll nil offspring, children.llxilfit r;afariit a 
naughty child. 28 second growth (of a crop). 2b new 
shoot (of a plant). 
...AI.> xalaF Icoll nl children, off-spring, descendants. 
ril-xalaf wis-salaf descendants and ancestors. xayru 
xalafJi-xayri salaf like (good) father, like (good) son. 
"';')\.0.. xilaaf lin pi -aatl 18 difference, disparity. 
Ib disagreement, difference of opinion. 2 (also bi-
xlaaf) Iprepl besides, over and above, in addition to. 
'lana dafar;t' r;iJriin gineeh naqd' (bi-)xlaaf iI-l:Jagaat illi 
jtaret-ha I paid twenty pounds cash quite apart from the 
things I bought. 
~ wi-xlaaf-u et cetera, and so on. 
;';')\.0.. xilaafa In/l Caliphate. 2 successorship in a Sufi 
order. 
~ 
xaliifa Imasc n pi xulafal 18 successor. Ib suc-
ce~sor of the founder of a Sufi order. 2 Caliph. 
...AI.> xallif Ivtl I to beget or bear (offspring). r;aawiz 
262 
yitgawwiz wi-yxallif rawlaad he wants to get married 
and have children. xallifit r;ayyil waal:Jid she had one 
child. 2 to leave behind, bequeath. ri/-l:Jubb' xallif-li 
l-r;azaab love left me with torment. -vn xi/fa, xalaf; 
avalpva mixallif. 
...A.,.I ~ taxaliif Ipl nl offspring. II rumm it-taxaliif cramp 
in t~e region of the womb occurring after childbirth . 
..:..~ muxallafaat Ipl 
nl 
I things left behind. 
muxallafaat ig-geej il-ringiliizi the (saleable) material 
left behind by the British army. 2 byproducts . 
m~xallafaat iI-1filaal cereal by-products. 
~I ritxallif Ivil I to fail, fall short. under-achieve. 
ritxallif r;an il-l:Juc[uur he failed to come. ritxallif r;an 
it-tagniid he failed to report for military service. midd' 
lal:Jsan nitxallif r;an mar;aad iI-qa{r hurry up or we'lI miss 
the train. 2 to fall behind. regress. ri/-bint itxallifit r;an 
iI-magmuur; wi-taahit the girl fell behind the group and 
got lost. ri/-balad itxallifit the country regressed. 3 to be 
born. ritxallif-lu walad mig-gawaaz il-rawwalaani he 
ha~ a child by the first marriage. - avaliva mitxallif. 
....A.l>..;... mutaxallif ladj *1 I underdeveloped. bi/aad 
mutaxallifa 
underdeveloped 
countries. 
r;ayyil 
mutaxallifa retarded child. 2 {aead] allowed to carry a 
maximum of two failed subjects over into next year (of 
a university student). 
....ill> xaalif Ivt/l to go against. act contrary to. xaalif 
il- ramr he disobeyed the order. 'lana b-axalf-ak 
fir-rary'da I oppose you in that opinion. xaaliftur;raf 
{prov] go against (convention) and you'll get known. 
IIjiriik mixaalif one who is always disagreeing. 2 (leg] to 
impose a fine or penalty on (s.o.) for a misdemeanour. 
-vn mixalfa: ava mixaalif. 
;W~ muxalfa In pi -aatl I transgression. violation. 
28 {leg] misdemeanour. 2b traffic violation. 38 fine or 
penalty (for a misdemeanour). 3b traffic ticket. 
....iI~1 ritxaalif Ivill to have a dispute. differ with one 
another. 28 to be disputed. 2b to be disobeyed. 3 [leg] 
to have a fine or penalty (for a misdemeanour) imposed 
upon one. - avalpva mitxaalif. 
...A.l:.>1 rixtalaf Ivil I to differ. be different, vary. 
{alabaat iz-zabaayin bi-tixtilif the customers' requests 
vary. bi-yixtilif r;adad-ha bi-xtilaafil-markib their num-
ber varies according to the type of ship. kull' suuq 
muxtalif r;an it-taani every market differs from the next. 
II r;ala rixtilaf-hum according to their various types, as in 
'li/-muhandisiin r;ala xti/af-hum all the various sorts of 
engineers. 2 to differ in opinion, disagree. madaam 
ixtalafna nir;mil tagriba since we disagree we'll make a 
test. -vn rixtilaaf; ava muxtalif, mixtilif. 
"';)\;.>I rixtilaaf In pi -aatl difference. 

,;,"';Jt 
.:,.il> xalfin Ivtl to confuse, muddle, entangle. ril-lju{(a 
xalfinit bakarit il-xeet the cat tangled up the spool of 
thread. l:Jl¥al xalfana fil-l:Jikaaya there was chaos and 
confusion in the matter. -also laxfin. -vn xalfana; aval 
pva mixalfin. 
~I fitxalfin Ivil to be confused, be muddled, be 
entangled. -iva mitxalfin. 
JJt 
~ 
xalalj (a) Ivtl to create. wi-iii xalalj il-xa/~ by the 
Creator of creation! (an oath indicating anger). di 
lamaliyya ~naliyya ma-fi-haaf xallj this is an industrial 
process with nothing creative about it. lIya mawlaay 
ka-ma xalaljt-i-ni (0 Lord, I am as you created me) ... 
I am reduced to penury, I have nothing left. - fil-xaalilj 
in-naatilj ... the spit and image, as in da I-xaalilj 
in-naatilj faxuu he's the spit and image of his brother. 
-vn xallj; ava xaalilj; pva maxluulj. 
.;L;LI fil-xallj Inll creation, the created universe.llsiib 
il-xallj; lil-xaalilj (leave creation to the Creator) ... what 
others do is none of our business. - wa-li-lIaahi (or luu) 
fi-xalq-i-hi!ufuun ... God makes them all types! people 
are odd! 2 Ifem and pll people. ril-xallj illi sakniin 
gambiina the people living next to us. fi4.lu yitljatlu 
mala balcf.; 1-l:Jadd; ma I-xallj; tlammit they went on 
fighting till people gathered around.llya xallj rhetorical 
appeal for help, witness etc., addressed to no one in 
particular (cf ya naas). - zayy il-xallj like everyone else, 
as in filmil zayy il-xallj - laazim tifizz behave normally 
-do you have to be different? -baab il-xallj a square in 
north-east Cairo . 
.;I~ xaalilj Inl I Creator, Maker (epithet of God). 
2 creator, designer, inventor. II fil-xaalilj in-naatilj see 
xalalj. 
,jp maxluulj In pI maxaliilj, maxluljaatl creature, 
created being. 
~ 
xUllj I In pI faxlaaljl disposition, temper. xullj-u 
dayyalj (or ~alb) or faxlaalj-u dayyalja (or ~alba) he's 
quick-tempered. IIhaddi faxlaalj-ak (or xullj-ak) calm 
down! -tallal faxlaalj-ufiyya he vented his rage on me. 
2 faxlaalj Ipl nl 2a character, nature. faxlaalj-ak 
kiwayyisa you're a decent sort. 2b morals, manners. 
gayy; tiddii-ni dars; fil-faxlaalj you're going to teach me 
manners? 
m> xillja I Inl I creation. fana xilljit rabb-i-na zayyi 
zayyak I am God's creation (too, so) I'm as good as you 
are! 2/pl xilaljl 28 face, physiognomy. 2b ugly mug. 
3/euphemJ penis. 
263 
j,iJ;.. xillja 2 ladvl already, as it is. lammaal bi-yiddii-ni 
ffuyl; w-fana ma!yuul xillja he keeps giving me more 
work when I'm aJready busy. 
j,iJ;.. xalalja In pi -att/l rag. 2 (the only) garment one 
owns. -xalaljaat Ipl nl 3/non-CaireneJ clothes. 
~ 
xilalji. xulalji ladj *1 quick-tempered. 
:u.".l> xaliilja Inl creation. min fawwil il-xaliilja 1-l:Jadd; 
dilwaljti from the beginning up to now. 
J!')I.> xalaayilj Ipl nl people. siib il-xalaayilj fi-l:Jal-ha 
leave people to their own affairs. 
,j~ xallaalj, xallaaq T Inll Creator (epithet of God). 
2 ladj *1 creative. fannaan xallaaq a creative artist. 
~I fitxalalj Ivil to be created. ril-bani faadam itxalalj 
min tiin Man was created from clay. II fitxalaljt; fit-turfi 
I was born in the pickle trade. - iva mitxililj. 
~ 
I finxalalj = fitxalalj. - iva minxililj. 
.j.. xallalj Ivtll to put together from bits and pieces, 
make up. xadit iI-biluzaat il-ljadiima w-xallaljit minha 
fustaan she took the old blouses and made up a dress 
out of them. 2/chemJ to synthesize. - vn taxliilj; aval 
pva mixallalj. 
~I fitxallalj Ivil I to be put together from bits and 
pieces, be made up. 2/chemJ to be synthesized. 3 to 
lose one's temper. tikallim-u duYri yitxallalj the mo-
ment you speak to him he flies into a rage. -avaliva 
mitxallalj . 
I J J. 
• 
C. 
J-. xalllnl vinegar. II xallaa-ha xall he went too far, he 
overstepped the mark . 
.:....~ xallaat Ipl nl acetate. xallaat ir-r~al¥ acetate of 
lead. 
j... xallill Ivtl to pickle, preserve in vinegar or brine. 
2 Ivil to become pickled. fiz-zatuun bi-yaaxud kaam 
yoom la!aan yixal/il how many days do the olives take 
to become pickled? Ilxal/ii fis-sanawiyya I-laamma he 
got stuck at the secondary certificate stage, he spent 
years getting the secondary certificate. -vn taxliil; aval 
pva mixallil. 
Jk mixallil Icoll n, 
pI -aatl pickle(s), pickled 
vegetable(s). 
J~ mixallilaati In pI -yyal maker andlor seller of 
pickles. 
~I fitxallillvil to be pickled, be preserved in vine-
gar, or brine. -iva mitxallil. 
lJJ. 
• 
c. 
~ xii/a Inl I plant (Ammi visnaga), the seeds of 
which have medicinal properties and the dried rays of 
the umbels of which are used as tooth-picks. 2 (also 

xillaftaani) Bishop's weed (Ammi majus), the seeds of 
which have medicinal properties. - Ipl xilall 3 tooth-
pick made from a dried ray of Ammi visnaga. 
J1.o. xalal Inl disorder, defect. fii xalal fil-makana the 
machine is out of order. lIl'andu xalal fil-muxx he's 
mentally deranged. 
J1.o. xulal Inl lunacy, craziness. -ladjectivallyl da raagil 
xulal he's a crazy man! 
j.,i faxaW lell morelmost crazy. 
J~ xilaaIT Iprepll (also min xilaal) through.faaf-ak 
min xilaal if-fibbaak he saw you through the window. 
wi'iil' min xilaal ~awabl'-i it fell through my fingers. 
2 (also fi-xilaal) during, within the period of. xilaal 
is-sana during the year. l'amalt' feeh fi-xlaal il-l:Jarb 
what did you do during the war? 
J p 
maxluul In pI maxaliilllunatic. 
~I fitxall Ivil to become unbalanced. fitxall'tawazn-
u he lost his equilibrium. II fitxall' f-muxx-u (or f-l'a'il-
u) he went potty. -ava mitxall. 
j....; I finxall = fitxall. - ava minxall. 
j.,i faxa1l 2r lvil 1 to fail to meet an obligation. 
fif-firka faxallit bit-tal'aaqud the company broke the 
contract. 2 to cpmmit a violation, transgress. muxill' 
bif-faraf dishonourable. muxill' bil- fadab immoral. 
- vn fixlaal; ava muxill. 
j:..1 fixtall Ivil to become unbalanced or upset.l'a'il-u 
xtall his mind became unbalanced. 
ril-markib 
tawazun-ha 
xtall' 
w-mayyilit the ship 
became 
unbalanced and listed. IIxud min it-tall' yixtall[prov] 
(take from the hill and it will topple) == wealth can be 
squandered gradually as well as quickly. -ava mixtall. 
3 J J' 
. 
c 
~ xiii In pI xillaanl close friend, intimate. 
j..l> xaliil Inl lover. 
~ 
xaliila Inl mistress, female lover. 
4 J J t 
Jfo xuluul: fumm il-xuluullcoll nl mussel(s).11 fakal 
bi-l'a'il-i fumm il-xuluul he fooled me. 
IJ"rJt 
~ 
xalmis Ivill to doze, doze off. 2 [coarse slang] 
to make love (to a woman), have it off (with a woman). 
-vn xalmasa; ava/pva mixalmis. 
[~Jt 
.J~ xilingaan, xulingaan In! briar root. 
264 
I.J J t 
o.,~ xilaawa <perh Copt> In pI -aatl rope, joined to 
a tow rope, that the tower of a boat wraps around his 
torso. 
Z .J J t see I IS J t; xiliww, xuluww, xilwa, xalwati 
lIS J t 
~ xili (a) Ivil to become empty, become c1ear.l'aayiz 
yi{affif-ni l'afaan ig-gaww' yixlaa-Iu he wants to get rid 
of me so that he can do as he pleases. II 'ia1b-u xaali he's 
not in love, he's fancy-free. -baal-u xaali he's carefree. 
-vn xiliww, xuluww; ava xaali. 
~ xili bi- to take (s.o.) aside, be alone with (s.o.). {Uul 
il-wa'it' w-huwwa l'aayiz yixla bit-bint all day long he's 
been wanting to be alone with the girl. 
~ xala J (i) Ivt/ I to empty, clear. xalu I-beet min 
is-sukkaan they cleared the house of tenants. IIxala 
nafs-u min it-masfuliyya he disclaimed the responsibil-
ity. -xala {-{araf [leg] to clear oneself of claims against 
one (e.g., a former employer). -xalasabiil-u he set him 
at liberty. 2 to bone, remove the bones from.l:Jamaam 
maxli boned pigeons. -vn xitiww, xuluww; ava xaali; 
pva maxli. 
~ xala bi- to let down.l:Ja-yixli biik waqt iz-zan'ia he will 
let you down at the time of need. 
fo xiliww, xuluww (also xiliww' rigl) In pI -aatl 
key-money. 
Jlp. xawaali: ril-fayyaam il-xawaali == the good old 
days, the days of carefree fun. 
ofo xilwa In pI -aat, xalaawil private room (e.g., in a 
mosque, for meditation, or in a bath-house). 
J fo xalwati In pI -yyal I Sufi practising reclusion and 
solitary meditation. 2 member of the Khalwati order of 
Sufis. 
~ xala 2 Inl openness, open ground. fil-xala in the 
open air. 
~ 
xaliyya In pI xalaayal 1 bees' nest, beehive. 
28 [bioi] cell. 2b [elec] cell. 2c cell (in a political 
organization or the like). 
~ xalla Ivt; imper w 2nd pers pI suff xallii-kul I to 
permit, allow. xallii-ni fadxul let me in! rabb-i-na 
ral:Jiim finnu xallaa-ki tista'ibili r-rabiil' bi-qalb' gdiid 
Our Lord is merciful, he has allowed you to meet the 
spring in a new frame of mind. IIxalli l'annak let me 
relieve you of that, let me take that from you. 28 to 
cause to be. xallaa fll,frar he made it smaller. xallaa-ni 
maskiin he made me miserable. xalli f-qalb-ak ral:Jma 
have some pity! farayyar ir-rUX!a w- faxallii-ha bi-sm-i 

I'll change the licence and have it put in my name. 
xallii-k nafiit snap to it! xallii-k zooq have some man-
ners! 2b to cause (s.o. to do s.th.). xalli kulli waalJid 
yifuuf nafs-u let each look to himself! xalli r-rayyis 
yigiib iI-biira have the waiter bring the beer! huwwa 
s~sinn illi bi-yxallii-ha tinsa it's age that makes her 
forget. ruulJ [and iI-lJakiim xallii yikfif [aleek go to the 
doctor and get him to give you an examination. 3 to 
keep, preserve. lJ-axallii-ha lJtiyaati I'll keep it as a 
spare. xallii-k ma[aaya hang on! stay with me (while 
I do something, say something further etc.)! xallii-k 
[af1imaal stay on the left! xallii-ni [al-baal keep me in 
mind! Ilxallii-k stay where you are! -xallii-k mala lIaah 
trust in God! -xallii-k fi-lJaal-ak mind your own busi-
ness! -xallii f-lJaal-u leave him alone! -xallii [ai-alia 
leave the solution to God! don't worry about it! - rabb-i-
na (or fallaah) yixallii-k God preserve you (in thanks 
for a service, or enquiry after one's health etc.). 
- rabb-i-na (or fallaah) yixalli(-hum-Iak) may God pre-
serve your children for you! 4 to leave, leave behind. 
xallit-u fil-beet she left it in the house. Ilfatam-u w-ma-
xalla-Iuu1 he covered him with insults. -Ia xalla wala 
baqqa he left nothing unsaid or undone. -xalla ... bi-
[afya [women] good-bye (said by the person leaving), 
as in xallenaa-kum bi-[afya we take our leave of you, 
g,?od-bye. - ava mixalli. 
~I fitxalla: fitxalla [an to abandon. titxalla [anni 
f-;uruuf zayyi di you'd abandon me in such straits? 
dilJik [aleeha w-ba[deen itxalla [anha he made a fool of 
her and then he jilted her. - ava mitxalli. 
J> i faxla r = xala J. - vn fixla, fixlaa f. 
J.:;>I fixtala Ivil to become alone, be left on one's own. 
saa[it ma tixtili tibki as soon as she's on her own she 
starts crying. [aawiz faxtili biik I want to see you alone. 
- ava mixtili. 
J.>..;-I fistaxla Ivtl 1 to consider empty. 2 to select for 
emptiness. - ava mistaxli. 
11 fistaxla bi- to take the opportunity to be alone ~ith 
(s.o.). 
l.s J t 
,')\.;o! mixla In pi maxaalill feed bag, nose-bag. 2 [mil] 
duffel bag. 
~ r t 
J..i- xamad (i) Ivtl 1 to cause to be quiet, cause to shut 
up. fixmidi l-[ayyil iI-maqruub da shut that blasted 
child up! 2 to extinguish, put out. xamadu s-sawra they 
suppressed the revolution. - vn xamadaan, xamd, 
xumuud; ava xaamid; pva maxmuud. 
265 
~ 
I finxamad Ivil 18 to become quiet, shut up. 
fil-waad inxamad wi-naam the kid shut up and went to 
sleep. finximid fuq[ud shut up and sit down! Ib to 
crash out, sleep from exhaustion. 2 to be extinguished, 
be put out. - ava/iva minximid. 
~I fitxamad = finxamad. - ava/iva mitximid. 
.J r t 
? 
ximir or xumur (a) Ivil to prove, rise (of dough). 
-vn xumraan, xamaraan; ava xaamir, xamraan. 
? 
xamr Icoll n, pi xumuurl alcoholic beverages (beer 
generally excepted). 
,? xamra = xamr. 
loS? xamri 
ladj 
pi -yyal 
tawny 
brown 
(of 
complexion) . 
..r:? xamurgi In pi -yyal alcoholic, alcohol addict. 
.r-i'- xamiir In! 1 liquorice water. 2 fermented sugar-
cane juice. 
'.r-i'- xamiira Inl any fermenting agent (e.g., yeast, 
yoghurt). xamiirit biira brewers' yeast. II wiff-u yiqta[ 
iI-xamiira mil-beet (his face drives the yeast from the 
house) he's a jinx, he brings bad luck. -xamiirit iI-[arab 
Colchicum richii (a plant, one of the ingredients of 
m~raat). 
,~U- xammaara In pi -aat, xamamiirl seedy bar, dive. 
? 
xammar Ivtl 1 to ferment, leaven. 2 to mix (earth 
and straw) with water and leave to work till the mixture 
reaches the right consistency for making bricks or daub. 
3 to temper (metal). 4 to blend, mix well. - Ivil 5 to 
ferment. 6 to improvise poetry. -vn taxmiir; ava/pva 
mixammar. 
~I fitxammar 
Ivil 
passive 
of xammar. 
-iva 
.' 
mltxammar. 
~I fixtamar Ivil to ripen, mature. ril-fikra xtamarit 
fi-muxx-i the idea ripened in my mind. - ava mixtimir. 
..r r t 
~ 
xaJnsa J Inurn: in absol state, in apposition, or 
w foll n sing in contexts of ordering and itemizing; 
pi -aatl five. miyya w-xaJnsa bass one hundred and five 
only. humma xaJnsa wi-lJna ta/aata they are five and we 
are three. xaJnsa saar five piastres. xaJnsa kiilu five 
kilos.firibti xamsa biira I drank five beers.fahri xaJnsa 
May. IIxaJnsa!-[een-ak five (fingers) against your (evil) 
eye! (accompanied by thrusting the palm of the hand 
with fingers outstretched towards the person addres-
sed). -xaJnsa wi-xmeesa (1) formula used to ward off 
the evil eye. (2) charm in the shape of a hand worn for 
protection against the evil eye. - fi[mil bi-xaJnsa 
w-lJaasib iI-battaal [prov] '" doing a little is better than 

doing nothing at all. 
11 xamsaal ladvl in fives. 
~ 
xamsa 2 In invarl little bit, trifle, smidgen. 
!'islanna xamsa hang on a tick! xamsa c;yaafa a touch of 
elegance. 
..sJL.i- xamsaawi ladjl of five units, fivefold . 
..,....;- xums In pI !'axmaasl one fifth, a fifth part. II cf.arab 
!'axmaas {i-!'asdaas "" to rack one's brains. 
..,....;- xamas Inurn: in constr w foil n pI; usu xamasl 
when followed by n pI ordinarily w initial hamzal five. 
xallifil xamas banaal she gave birth to five girls. xamasl 
alaaf five thousand. xamasl iyyaam five days. xamas 
!'awlaad five children. 
c.rLP- xumaasi In pI xumasiyyaall {mus] quintet. 
...,....;- xamils Inl I/pl !'ixmisal (also yoom xamlis) a 
Thursday. yoom iI-xamiis (this) Thursday. Ilxamiis iI-
lahd {Chr] 
Maundy Thursday. 2/pl ximsaanl 
2a Thursday visit to a grave by members of the de-
ceased's family, attended, especially in the case of the 
first two visits, by certain traditional practices. 
b-almil-Iu ximsaan bac;aa-Iu lafar siniin I've been visit-
ing his grave every Thursday for ten years. 2b memorial 
gathering usually at the home of the deceased on the 
two Thursdays following the death. II !'iI-xamiis ~­
~u'lfayyar visit to the deceased's grave on the first Thurs-
day after the death unless the first Thursday falls within 
the immediate (usually three-day) mourning period, in 
which case the visit is made on the next following Thurs-
day, attended by the distribution of money and food to 
the poor. !'iI-xamiis ik-kibiir visit to the deceased's 
grave on the Thursday following that of !'iI-xamiis ~­
~u'lfayyar attended by the same practices, plus a recep-
tion for the acceptance of condolences and the reading 
of the Koran. 2c {obsol] money traditionally paid every 
Thursday to a Koranic teacher by the father of a child. 
.xud xamiis-u !'infa-I/a ma-c;ara {prov] (take his xamiis 
even ifhe hasn't recited) == get as much as you can, even 
if you do not fulfil your obligations. 
~ 
xlmeesa In pI -aal/: xamsa w-ximeesa (1) formula 
used to ward off the evil eye. (2) charm in the shape of a 
hand worn for protection against the evil eye. 
...,.... t. xaamis lad jl fifth . 
.r&- ~ 
.r\:;...;- xamaslaafar I Inurn pI -aatl fif-
teen. 2 !'iI-xamaslaafar ladj invarl the fifteenth. 
.:r--i" xamsiin I Inurn pI -aall fifty. raagil fil-xamsinaal 
a man in his fifties. 2 !'iI-xamsiin ladj invarl the fiftieth. 
3 {Chr] Inl !'iI-xamsiin Pentecost. 
~ 
xamsiini ladj *1 Pentecostal. 
.:r--\.;1..1 !'iI-xamasiin 11")1 a hot, dust-laden southern 
wind that blows on occasion during the spring. 
266 
~LP- xamasiini ladjl characterized by the conditions 
prevalent during !'iI-xamasiin, hot, dusty and windy (of 
weather). 
J.:1.......i- xumsumiyya I Inurn pI -aatl five-hundred. 
2 !'iI-xumsumiyya ladj invarl the five-hundredth. 
~ 
xammis I/vtl to do for a fifth time. 2 Ivil to share 
a cigarette. bi-yljibbll yxammisll mala balcf. they like to 
pass the cigarette around. -vn taxmiis; avalpva 
mixammis. 
~ 
taxmiisa Ipl -aatl unit noun of taxmiis. 
tJl'r.t 
pi !'axm~f, 
!'axm~f: 
!'axm~ iI-c;adam Ipl 
!'axaam~ iI-!'ac;daaml instep of the foot. 
Jrt 
J ~ xumuutf Inl lethargy. 
I.r r t 
r-"- xamm (u) Ivtl I to gulp down, bolt (food). 
ma-Ixumm'-f iI-!'akl' kida - !'umdu'lf kuwayyis don't 
bolt your food like that -chew it well! 2 to dupe, de-
ceive. !,inta Ija-Ixumm ' mim who are you trying to fool! 
-vn xamm, xamamaan; ava xaamim; pva maxmuum. 
i;.. xamma linst n, pI -aall fraud, trick. 
~I !,ilxammlvi/l to be gulped down (offood).2 to be 
duped, be deceived. - iva mllxamm. 
;""1 !'inxamm = !'ilxamm. - iva minxamm. 
2 
• 
r r C 
~ 
xamiimi ladj invarl soft (of unripe dates picked 
from under the tree). 
~ xammim Ivil to become soft (of unripe dates picked 
from under the tree). -vn taxmiim; ava mixammim. 
l 
' 
r r C 
(.;. xumm In pi !'ax~aaml mud coop for chickens or 
poultry (see PI.C, 5).lIxumm' noom a person given to 
excessive sleep, an extremely lazy person. - also xunn. 
<J! t 
.;,i- xammin I/vtl to guess, surmise. xammin miin ga 
guess who came! kunt' mxammin iI-ljikaaya min 
zamaan I had worked out the whole thing long ago . 
2 Ivil to make a plot, lay a plan. xammint-i-Iu lala lalc;a 
I determined to give him a beating. -vn taxmiin; ava 
mixammin. 
~ 
laxmiina linst n, pI -aall I a guessing. 2 a plot. 
~I !,ilxammin Ivil to be guessed at, be surmised . 
-iva mitxammin. 

..::.. .:, t see 1..,...:, t: xinta, xunta 
.J[..:,t 
~ 
xangar In pI xanaagirl dagger. 
.:,t.:,t 
~ 
xanxin Ivil to speak with a nasal tone. -vn 
xanxana; ava mixanxin. 
~I !,itxanxin Ivil to become n'asal. - ava mitxanxin. 
J')':' t 
J~ xandat/ Ivil {mil] to dig in, entrench. -vn 
xanda/ia; ava mixanda/i. 
J~ xanda/il In pI xanaadi/il ditch, trench. 
.J~j.:,t 
.;I.:;> xanziir In pI xanaziirl pig. xanziir barri wild 
boar. IIraagil xanziir despicable man. 
i.;l.:;> xanziira In pI -aatll sow. 2 scrofula. 3 {constr] 
profile board. 
I 
.' 
..,.. '" C 
...r:..> xanas (i) Ivil to fall silent. wi-marra wal:Jda raal:J 
/iaa{il xans and all of a sudden he fell'silent. -vn xans; 
ava xaanis. 
..,..\.;>. xannaas: !'il-wiswaas il-xannaas epithet of the 
De~i1 as tempter. 
..,...;.;. xanniis ladjl sly. guileful. 
~I !,itxanas = xanas. -ava mitxinis. 
~ 
xannis Ivil to be elusive. ma-tl:Jawil-/ txannis 
malaaya don't try to avoid the issue with me. II !'in-nuur 
xannis the light dimmed. - vn laxniis; ava mixannis. 
1 
" 
""''''C 
..r> xinta, xunla I ladj invarl effeminate (of a man). 
2/nl hermaphrodite. 
... j-> xunuusa Inl effeminacy. 
~ 
muxannas ladj ·1 effeminate, weak (of a man). 
~I !,ilxannis Ivil to become effeminate or weak (oCa 
man). -ava milxannis. 
.Ji,;..:,t 
.,.:..;;. xanjar Ivil I to become rugged, tough and mas-
culine. kaan fakl-u gamiil wi-bald; mudda xanfar he 
used to be fine-featured, but after a while his looks 
became craggy. 2 to become coarse or crude. -vn 
xanfara; ava mixanfar. 
267 
.)~ xanfuur Ipl xanafiir/l/n/ia {slang] man, guy. 
/ialdil xanafiir a stag party. Ib tough-guy. 2/adjl 
2a tough, rugged (of people). 2b coarse, crude (of 
people). 
1.S.r--\.;>. xanafiiri ladjl pertaining to xanfuur . 
~I !,ilxanfar Ivi/l to break (of the voice). 2 to be 
thick and husky (of the voice). - ava milxanfar . 
.J ~.:,t 
~ 
xa~ar lIn pI xana~irll little finger. 2 {bulcher] 
small sharp knife used for skinning, boning etc. 3 (also 
(arf il-xan~ar) cut of meat from the ribs. 4 molar tooth 
(of an animal). 5 {arch] squinch. 
~ 
xa~ar2 Ivil I {bulcher] to wield a xan~ar. 2 to 
steal in small amounts, pilfer. !'il-xaddaam bi-yxan~ar 
min filuus il-xuqaar the servant is always pilfering from 
the vegetable money. - Ivtl 3 to take in (cloth etc.). 
xan~ar-Ii I-wis( fiwayya take the waist in a bit for me . 
-vn xa~ara; ava mixan~ar . 
~I !'ilxa~ar Ivil to be pilfered. - iva milxa~ar. 
.J.:,t 
....i,;> xanaf <Copt> Inl nasality of speech . 
....i,;>i !'axnaf ladj, fern xanfa, pI xunfl characterized by 
nasality of speech . 
~\.;>. xanaafa Inl nasality of speech. 
~I !,ilxanaf Ivil to become afflicted with nasal 
speech. - ava milxinif. 
~ 
I !'inxanaf = !,ilxanaf. - ava minxinif. 
....i,;> xannif I Ivil to speak with a nasal voice. 2 Ivtl to 
make nasal. xannif ~OOI-U he made his voice nasai. -vn 
la:niif; avalpva mixannif. 
~I !,ilxannif /vii to be made nasal (of a voice). -iva 
milxannif. 
...0;1.;.:1 !,ilxaanif Ivil I to speak through the nose. 2 to 
put on airs, behave snobbishly. - ava milxaanif. 
.J.J.:,t 
):.> xanfar Ivi/l to speak with a nasal tone. 2 to snort . 
!'iI-waad !'axad bard; w-{uul in-nahaar /iaalid yixanfar 
the boy has caught a cold and snuffles all day long. 
IIxanfar fin-noom he fell into a deep sleep. - Ivt/3 to 
make nasal. -vn xanfara; ava mixanfar. 
pi !,ilxanfar Ivil to be made nasal. - iva milxanfar . 
..,...J.:, t 
~ 
xunfis Inl I/colll beetle(s). 2 In pI xanaafisl 
hippie, long-haired male. -
!'iI-xanaafis Ipl nl 3 the 
Beatles. 
~ 
xunfisa lunit n, pI -aal, xanaafisl I a beetle. 

IllabbiS il-xunflSa tiblja sitt in-niSa {proy] dress up a 
beetle and she'll become a great lady. 2 feminine of 
xunflS 2. 
~ 
mixanflS ladj "I long-haired, modish etc. 
~I 'i'itxanfiS Ivil to grow one's hair long and/or 
dress colourfully, modishly etc. - ava mitxanfis. 
J,:,t 
~ 
xanalj (u) Ivtll to asphyxiate, suffocate. 'i'ir-riiba 
l-wib/a xanaljit-ha she choked on the bad smell. 2 to 
strangle. -vn xanaljaan, xanlj; ava xaanilj; pva 
maxnuulj. 
4i ~ maxnuulja In pi -aail motif used in tent applique 
designs (see PI.H, 22). 
~ 
xunlja, xinlja In pi -aat, xunaljl point between two 
body joints. xunljit il-'i'iid the point joining the hand and 
the arm. 
J~ xinaalj Inllower part ofthe throat or·that part ofa 
garment next to it. miSku fi-xnaalj balt/. they grabbed 
one another by the throat (or by the collar). II 'i'inta 
ba-timsik fi-xnaalj-i are you going to quarrel with me? 
4i~ xinaalja In pi -aatl quarrel, fight, row. 
J~ xannaalj In ·1 strangler. lI'i'il-ljutt' ma-ybibb'1 
'i'illa xannaalj-u {proy] (the cat likes only him who treats 
it ~ruelly) ... people respond only to harsh treatment. 
J~ xunnaalj Inl I strangles, equine distemper. 
2 diphtheria. 
~ 
maxnalj In pi maxaaniljl {carp, metal] jig. 
~I 'i'itxanalj Ivill to be asphyxiated, be suffocated. 
'i'itxanaljit mil-yaaz fil-ma{bax she suffocated from the 
gas in the kitchen. 2 to be strangled. - iva mitxinilj. 
..;:;..; 1 'i'inxanalj = 'i'itxanalj. - iva minxinilj. 
Jit> xaanilj Ivtl to quarrel with. -vn xinaalj; ava 
mixaanilj. 
Jiu.:1 'i'itxaanilj Ivil to quarrel, fight, brawl. 'i'itxanfiu 
l8§-~abuun they fought to get some soap. - ava 
mitxaanilj . 
~I 'i'ixtanalj Ivil to suffocate. -vn 'i'ixtinaalj; ava 
mixtinilj. 
,:,,:,t 
~ xunn <perh Copt> In pi 'i'axnaan/l mud coop for 
chickens or poultry (see PI.C, 5). - also xumm. 
28 square storage niche in a wall. 2b storage space for-
ward in a wooden boat. 3 locker. 4a small windowless 
room, den. 4b hide-out. 
ot 
.b. xah Ifem n, pi -aatl seventh letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also xaa, xaa'i'. 
268 
[.1.Jt 
~I.,> xawaaga <P khwaja> In pi -aatll European or 
western foreigner. 2 {obsol] Christian. 
~~I.,> xawagaaya In pi -aat, xawagaatl European or 
western woman foreigner. 
.:J.Jt 
.::...,> xawat (i) Ivtl to pester, bother. xawat-ni la/aan 
'i'axd-u malaaya he pestered me to take hiin with me. 
Ilbi-tixwit id-dimaay ... you're a pain in the neck! -vn 
xawta; ava xaawit; pva maxwuut. 
:ii".,> xawta In pi xiwatl commotion, row, scene. 'i'eeh 
il-xawta lIi-nta lamil-ha di why don't you shut up! ga 
'i'imbaarib lamal-lina xawta kbiira la/aan il-bikaaya he 
came yesterday and made a huge scene with us over the 
matter. 
.::...,0'1 'i'itxawat Ivil to be pestered. -iva mitxiwit. 
,::,,";";1 'i'inxawat = 'i'itxawat. - iva minxiwit. 
[..Jt 
~.,> xooga <T lJoca> In pi -aatl I {obsol] teacher. 
2 (naut] purser. 
I' 
• 
C.JC 
t.J> xoox Icoll nl peach(es). lI'i'illi ma-yirqa bil-xoox 
yirt/.a b1araab-u {proy] (he who doesn't accept the 
peach must accept its nectar) if one doesn't accept what 
one is first offered, one may have to be satisfied with 
something less later on. 
~.,> xooxa I lunit n, pi -aatl a peach. 
~t> ~ xoxaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a peach . 
Z t.J t 
~.,> xooxa 2 In pi xooxl opening in a wall or gate, 
wicket gate. 
t~ xawwax Ivil to rot away, perish or decay inside. 
'i'il-xa/ab mixawwax tile wood is rotten below the sur-
face. 'i'il-laya xallaa xawwax wi-balja gild" lala laqm 
illness drained his strength completely and left him no 
more than skin and bones. II muxx-u xawwax'" his mind 
has gone to seed. -vn taxwiix; ava mixawwix. 
I 
• 
J .J C 
,).,> xoor In pi 'i'axwaar, xiraan/land depression. 
2 J.J t 
,)~ xawwar l Ivil I to become weak and sterile . 
'i'il-'i'art/.' xawwarit min kutr il-'i'ihmaal the soil had 

cracks and holes from much neglect. 2 to be or become 
exhausted. -vn laxwiir, laxwiir; ava mixawwar. 
J.nt 
J~ xawwar2 Ivil I to make a noise. 2 to bellow (of a 
bull). -vn laxwiir, laxwiir; ava mixawwar. 
lJ".J.Jt 
IJ"J~ xoorus <Gr khoros> Inl [Chr] choir. 
j.Jt 
.~ ~ xuuza In pI xiwazl helmet. 
Jj.Jt see also Jjt 
.:;:;~ xoozaq or xawzaq Ivtl I [obsol] to impale. 
II fil-mixoozaq yijlim is-sul{aan (the impaled man will 
insult the sultan) in extremities a man can do anything. 
2 to corner, put in a tight spot, playa dirty trick on. 
-ava/pva mixoozaq, mixawzaq. 
.:;:;.;0:1 fi1xoozaq or filxawzaq Ivil I to be impaled. 
2 to be cornered, be put in a tight spot, be tricked. - iva 
milxoozaq, milxawzaq. 
.r.Jt 
.;.~ xawwij Ivtl [carp] to countersink (a hole, for a 
screw-head). -vn laxwiij; avalpva mixawwij. 
'4:.......;0: laxwiija In pI -aall [carp] countersink. 
.;.~I filxawwij Ivil [carp] to be countersunk (of a 
hole. for a screw-head). - iva milxawwij. 
'-"'.J t 
'-'" ~ xu~ Icoll nl palm leave(s), palm frond(s). 
Illjadd iI-xu~ [Chr] Palm Sunday. 
..... ~ xu~a lunit n, pI -aal, xiwl¥1 a (piece of) palm 
leaf, a (piece of) palm frond.llxu~il {arbuujthe (rice-
or other) straw lining of a tarbush. -xiwl¥ ljadiid rolled 
steel strips. steel billets. 
,-",~I filxawwl¥ Ivil to pad up with sacking material 
or with woven palm-leaves. -ava milxawwl¥. 
""'.J t 
..,.,1.> xaaq (u) Ivil I to wade in water or mud. 2 to tell 
tales, gossip. {uul in-nahaar bi-Ixuuq [i-siiril garil-ha all 
day long she gossips about her neighbour. IIbi-yxuuq 
fid-diin he blasphemes. - Ivt/3 to go through, under-
go. ma~ri xaaqil ljuruub mariira Egypt went through 
some bitter wars. -vn xawaqaan; ava xaayiq . 
..,.,l;.E1 filxaaq Ivil to be suffered. be gone through. -iva 
milxaaq. 
,,;.l;.; 1 finxaaq = filxaaq. - iva ~inxaaq. 
269 
. 
..,., ~ xawwaq = xaaq. -vn laxwiiq; ava mixawwaq. 
"';.Jt 
JI.> xaaf (a, a) Ivil I to be afraid. fil-gabaan yixaaf 
min xayaal-u the coward is afraid of his own shadow. 
2 to worry, be concerned. ma-Ixaf-f calayya don't 
worry about me. xayfa law ijlaYalit t~rif in-na;ar can 
ig-gawaaz she's afraid if she works she'll forget about 
marriage. min xaaf silim [prov] "" better safe than 
sorry. - Ivtl 31 to fear, revere, stand in awe of. 
bi-yxaaf rabb-i-na he fears God. -vn xoof; ava xaayif. 
J~ xoof Inl fear. 
U ~ xawfan: xawfan min r Iconjl for fear that, lest. 
ma-zurluu-j xawfan min illi b-yilqaal I didn't visit him 
for fear of what is being said. 
JI~ xawwaaf ladj *1 fearful. timid. 
~~ xawwiif = xawwaaf. 
~ 
muxiif ladjl frightening, awful. 
J~ xawwif Ivtl I to frighten. fima mij bi-Ixawwif-ni 
b-kalaam-ak your words don't scare me. 2 to worry, 
disturb. -vn laxwiif; ava mixawwif. 
J~I filxawwif Ivil I to be frightened. 2 to be 
worried. -iva milxawwif . 
I J.J t 
J~ xooli In pI xiwalal overseer of farm workers. 
J~ xawwilf Ivtl to grant (power, authority etc. to 
s.o.). xawwil-Iu s-sul{a he gave him the authority. -vn 
laxwiil; ava mixawwil. 
J ~ 
1 filxawwil Ivil to be granted (of power, authority 
etc.). - iva milxawwil. 
1 J.J t 
J~ xawal In pI -aall I [coarse] passive homosexual, 
catamite, nance. 2 [abus] bastard, stinker, swine. see 
further under <.J J.J t 
J J.J t see 
I J I t and 1 J It: 
xaal J, 
xaalu, 
xaala, xaal 2 
<.J J.J t see also 1 J.J t 
J.;o:I filxawlin Ivil I to be spineless or effeminate. 
2 to dither. ba{{al xawlana wi-jlayal baqa stop shilly-
shallying and get down to work! -vn xawlana; ava 
milxawlin. 
<.J.J t 
.:,1.> xaan 2 (u) Ivtl to betray, let down. nadab iI-lja;; illi 
xaan-u he bewailed the luck that failed him. law zakril-i 

mif xaynaa-ni if my memory does not deceive me. 
II/ixuun-ak 
iI-~ifra does our long friendship mean 
nothing to you? -yixuun-ak iI-[eef wil-mallj does 
friendship mean nothing to you? -ma-xad-j' xwaana he 
was not on his guard. -vn xiyaana, xuwaana; ava 
xaayin. 
.;r..1..;.. xaayin In pi xawanal betrayer, traitor. 
,:,I~ xawwaan ladjl untrustworthy, fickle (of affairs, 
the world etc.). 'i'id-dinya xawwaana it's a treacherous 
world. 
~~ maxaana In pi -aall secret. [irifl' maxaanil iI-
mas'i'ala I learned the secret behind the matter. 
,:,~I 'i'ilxaan Ivil to be betrayed. - iva milxaan. 
,:,~ xawwin Ivtl to suspect or accuse of treachery. 
Ijarras mm ~aljb-ak wala Ixawwin-u {provJ better to be 
on guard against your friend than have reason to sus-
pect him and accuse him afterwards. -vn laxwim; ava 
mixawwin. 
,:,~I 'i'uxawwin Ivil to be suspected or accused of 
treachery. - iva milxawwin. 
,:,"';"::"'1 'i'lstaxwin Ivtl to consider untrustworthy. 
IIbi-yislaxwin ~awab[-u (he suspects his own fingers) 
he's very suspicious of others. -vn 'i'islixwaan; ava 
mistaxwin. 
1 .s .J t see also 
1 t t • 
.sJI..;.. xaawa Ivtl to be intimate with. 'i'in kibir ibn-ak 
xawii {provJ if your son has grown up, treat him as a 
brother. II mixaawi g-ginn in league with demons. -vn 
mixawiyya; ava mixaawi. 
.sJ~1 'i'ilxaawa Ivil to have a close relationship with 
each other. hiyya wi-blils IIxaawu she and the devil are 
hand in glove. - ava mllxaawi. 
2.s.Jt 
.s.,> xiwi (a) Ivil to become empty. 'i'i!-waaljid ba{n-II 
xawyaana I am rather hungry. - vn xawa, xawayaan; 
ava xaawi, xawyaan. 
"':-'.st 
,-;-,1..;.. xaab (i) Ivil to fail to succeed, come to nothing. 
xaab 'i'amal-u his hopes came to nothing. xaab fl-fuyl-u 
he was unsuccessful in his work. min saa[il ma [irif 
rI-xammaara xaab xeeba 'iawiyya from the moment he 
began to frequent bars he became a complete good-for-
nothing. II marra t~lIb wi-marra lXIib '" win a few, lose a 
few. -vn xeeba, xayaaba; ava xaaYlb, xaybaan. 
~ 
xeeba Inl failure.llya xeeba you good-for-nothing! 
-ya xebl-ak what a dead loss you are! -xeebil 'i'amal 
270 
rakba gamal {provJ '" a failure for all to see. - 'i'ik-kidb' 
xeeba lying is a sign of failure. 
'-:-! I..;.. xaa.wb In pi xiyyaah, .\II\'yaab/ good-lor-nothing. 
...,...>i 'i'axyab lell morelmost unsuccessful or useless. 
~.:.> xaYYlluban: (\) xayyuuban [ala may shame cov-
er, as in xayyuuban [ala da'in-ak may you be greatly 
shamed! (2) xaYYllllban [ala-... 'i'in it would be proof of 
one's worthlessness if ... , as in xayyuuban [alayya 'i'in 
ma-kllnl il[alliml' swaa'iil[arabiyya f-gum[a I would 
be shown up as a fool if I couldn't learn to drive a car in 
a week! 
~ 
xayyib Ivtl I to cause to fail. ~aljb-u xayyib-u hiS 
friend made him fail. II 'i'allaah Ylxayyib-ak a mild or 
affectionate curse. 2 to disappoint, fail. bi-txayyibu 
leeh kull' 'i'amaal-i why do you frustrate all my hopes? 
-
Ivil 3 to fail, be disappointing. wa~fa ma-Ixayyib-j' 
'i'abadan a prescription that never fails. -vn laxyiib; ava 
mixayyib. 
~I 'i'ilxaYYlb Ivil I to be made to fail. 2 to be dis-
appointed. - iva mitxayyib. 
~I 'i'istaxyib Ivtl to consider a failure. -vn 
'i'istixyaab; ava mlslaxyib. 
t.st 
l;..,.> xiixa ladj invarl sissyish, spineless, weak and use-
less. raagi! xiixa a weakling. da Ijmaar xiixa ma-Ylswaa-f 
il-[alii'i rill bi-yakl-II that's a rotten donkey, not worth 
the fodder it eats. 
6-1..;.. xaaylx ladj *1 weak, effeminate. 
r;> xayyix Ivil to become ~issylsh, weak or useless. 
- ava mlxayylx . 
~I 'i'itxayyix = xayyix. - ava mitxayyix. 
I,;.st 
.r-> xeer Inl I bounty, blessing, good. xeer rabb-i-na 
ktiir God's bounty is great. Zlyaadit Il-xeer xereen '" you 
cannot have too much of a good thing. 'i'if-jagara 
l-murra xer-ha barra It's a poor tree that drops its frUit 
outside'" chanty begins at home.lllja~al xeer no harm 
has been done. -xeer ('i'm faa'i' allaah) all's well 
(I hope)? -bl-xeer (I) in good health, as in 'i'ana b-xeer 
wil-Ijamdu li-llaah I'm in good health, praise be to God! 
balad-na b-xeer our country is in good shape! (2) (also 
[ala xeer) safely, as in lI-ljadd' ma Imllrr rI-'i'azma [ala 
xeer until the criSIS IS safely over. -filk i!-xeer (thank 
you,) you're a good sort. -gayylln wI-gayy' xer-na 
ma[aana we're coming and our bounty (i.e. food etc.) 
is coming with us. -
'i'il-xeer 2 good luck, good fortune. 
bl-ygilb Il-xeer it brings good luck. wtfj-u fil 'i'il-xeer his 
presence bnngs good luck. ga l-xeer [ala 'iuduum-u he 

brought good luck with him. ~abaalj il-xeer good morn-
ing. masaaf iI-xeer good evening. IIkallar xeer-ak see 
kallar. 3 (also pi form xayraat) good deeds, charitable 
acts. bi-yilmil iI-xeer he does good. II dalaayil iI-xayraat 
see dalaayil. 
p> xayr In in constrl {frozen contextsj the best of. xayr 
il-fumuur iI-wasa[ {provj the middle road is the best. 
xayru I-kalaam ma qalla wa-dall{provj '" brevity is the 
soul of wit. xayr ii-birr" laag[/-u '" the sooner the 
better. xayr il- fanaam (the best of mankind) epithet of 
the Prophet Muhammad. 
0..> p> xayri ladil charitable. lamal xayri a charitable 
act. gamliyya xayriyya a charitable society. 
• p> xiira Inl I choice. ma-lii-J xiira fil-ljikaaya di 
I have no choice in this matter. II lala xiirit iIIaah '" God 
be with you (or us etc.) (in what you (or we etc.) are 
about to do)! God grant success! 2 goodness. fiI-xiira 
[-ma xtaar-u lIaah God's is the best solution (when a 
solution to a dilemma presents itself out of the blue). 
kull i tafxiira w-fiiha xiira {provj every delay brings its 
share of good. 
~ xayyir, xiyyir ladi *1 I virtuous, kind. 2 charitable, 
benevolent. 
p>i faxyar lell better/best, morel most likely to bring 
blessing or good fortune. fil-faxyar lak finnak ... the 
best thing for you would be to .... finta lik iI- faxyar the 
choice is your~. 
)l,> xiyaar I Inl I choice. lik il-xiyaar you have the 
choice. 2 lin constrl the best, the choice. huwwa min 
xiyaar in-naas he's one of the very best. 
~ xayyar Ivtl to cause to choose, offer a choice to. 
ma-txayyar-nii-J benkum don't make me choose be-
tween you! laawiz liljayyar-u xayyar-u {provj if you 
want to confuse him make him choose. - vn taxyiir; ava 
mixayyar. 
)..:1 fitxayyar Ivil I to choose, make a choice, decide. 
kunt d laawiz fab'ia muhandis bass i?,-?,uruufilxayyarit-
Ii I wanted to become an engineer, but circumstances 
decided for me. fitxayyart' been finni fa'ibalfuru[-hum 
faw fatrifid I had to make a choice between accepting 
their conditions or being sacked. 2 to be chosen. 
Ilma-yitxayyar-F lannak he's no better than you, 
you're every bit as good as he is. - ava/iva mitxayyar. 
)\.;,;.1 fixtaar Ivtl to choose, select. fixtar-/i fustaan ljilw 
choose me a nice dress. fari'i-na xtaar il- farq our team 
chose the ground. -vn fixtiyaar; ava mixtaar; pva 
muxtaar l . 
)1.,.:;.> 1 fixtiyaar In pi -aarl choice. fixtiyaar ljurr a free 
choice. 
0..»1.,.:;.>1 fixtiyaari ladi */ optional. fasfila xtiyariyya 
271 
optional questions. 
)WI fil-muxtaar Inl the Chosen One (epithet of the 
Prophet Muhammad). 
01).:;~ muxtaraal r Ipl nl selections, selected passages. 
muxtaraat 
min 
id-diwaan 
selections 
from 
the 
anthology. 
0)L;.;...1 fistixaara In pI -aarl sortilege or casting of lots 
using the beads of a siblja or the Koran. 
2 
' 
Jl.S c.. 
.;l,> xiyaar2 Icoll nl gherkin(s). IIxiyaar fambar see 
fanbar I. 
o.;l,> xiyaara lunit n, pI -aarl a gherkin. II fid-dinya 
zayy il-xiyaara - yoom f-iid-ak wi-yoom (or lafara) 
fi-[ii?,-ak {prov] the world is like a gherkin -one day in 
your hand, one day (or ten) up your arse. 
..;~t 
~ 
xeef Inl sacking, sackcloth, burlap. 
i..-,,> xeefa In pI -aatl piece of sackcloth or burlap 
(used, e.g., as a floor-cleaning cloth). 
~ 
xeefi ladil made of sackcloth or burlap. 
~ 
xayyif Ivtl to cover or wrap with sacking or bur-
lap. -vn taxyiif; ava/pva mixayyif. 
~ 
1 fitxayyif Ivil to be covered or wrapped in sacking 
or burlap. - iva mitxayyif. 
.1~t 
..6.,.;. xee[ Icoll n, pi xuyUU[, xe[aanl thread. IIxuyuu[ 
iI-fagr r the first rays of dawn. - bil-xee[ wil-mixyaa[ 
precisely, accurately, as in ljakaa-Ii I-'ii~~a bil-xee[ wil-
mixyaa[ he told me the story in detail. -'iaa[il xee[ 
iI-mizaan dead drunk. -xee[ iI-banna plumb-line. 
- zayy' xe[een fi- fibra (as inseparable) as two threads in 
a needle. 
J.l,> xiyaa[a Inl sewing, stitching. 
J.,t;.;. xayyaa[ In *1 tailor (especially of the less preten-
tious sort). 
J.t;.;. xayyaa[a In pI -aatl seamstress, dress-maker. 
J.,~ mixyaa[, muxyaa[ In maxayii[1 packing-needle. 
~ 
xayya[ Ivtl I to sew, stitch. xayya[-Iu badla he 
sewed him a suit of clothes. fid-duktuur xayya[ ig-garlj 
the doctor stitched up the wound. 2 {coarsej to copu-
late with, screw. -vn taxyii[; ava mixayya[. 
¥I filxayya[ Ivil I to be sewn, be stitched. 2 {coarsej 
to be screwed. - iva mitxayya[. 
...; ~ t see ...; ~ t: xaayif, muxiif 

I J~t 
JLo. xaal J (i) Ivil 1 to be well suited, go well. 
ril-karafatta di Ixiil lala l-badla this tie goes well with 
the suit. 'lil-libs' xaayil laleeha the clothes look good on 
her. huwwa xaayil qawi fil-badla he looks very smart in 
the suit. ri/li zayyak ma-yxil-j' fik-kidb one who is 
(sincere) like you makes a bad liar. 2 to be plausible (of 
a deception). yixiil laleek ik-kalaam da are you really 
taken in by that? -vn xayalaan; ava xaayil. 
~ 
xayal . (i) Ivtl to distract, disturb. 'lil-bint' 
xayalil-ak lan il-muzakra the girl has distracted you 
from your studies. -vn xayalaan. xayla; ava xaayil; pva 
maxyuul. 
~Lo. xayla In pi -aall disturbing interruption or dis-
traction. IIbala xayla don't bother yourself with that. 
-xayla kaddaaba a lot of fuss about nothing. 
J~ xayaal In pi -aatl 1 shadow. bi-Ixaaf min xayal-ha 
she's afraid of her own shadow. IIxayaal il-maqaala 
scarecrow. xayaal iq-4.ill shadow play. 2 fancy, im-
agination. xayaal-i saral:J my imagination wandered. 
xayaal-u x~b he has a fertile imagination. 
J~ xayaali ladj *11 imaginary, unreal. 2 fantastic, 
fabulous. 
J.,i'l rilxayallvil to be distracted. - iva milxiyil. 
J.;.:I rilxayyil. laxayya/f Ivtl to imagine, fancy. 
bi-yilxayyil 'linn in-naas kull-a-ha l:Jaramiyya he im-
agines that everyone is a thief. laxayyal baqa just im-
agine! can you credit it? -vn laxayyul; ava mitxayyil. 
J.;.: taxayyu/f In pi -aall illusion, imagining, fancy. 
J,.Lo. xaayil Ivtl to attract the attention of, distract. 
qaalid yixayil-ha bil-miraaya he is trying to attract her 
attention by (flashing) the mirror. - vn mixayla; ava 
272 
mixaayil. 
J,.~I rilxaayil Ivil to put on airs, act conceitedly. -ava 
milxaayil. 
11 ritxaayil lala to boast of being better than. ritxayill" 
lalee b-larabiyyil-i I boasted of having a better car 
than his. - ritxaayil bi- to imagine seeing. 'lana txayill' 
biiha I thought I saw her. 
1 J~t 
~ 
xeel/coll n, pi xuyuul. xiyuul! horse(s). Ilrakbar 
maa fi-xeel-ak rirkab-u (ride your highest horse) do 
your damnedest! you don't scare me! 
J~ xayyaal In pi xayyaalal horseman, cavalryman. 
r~t 
~ 
xeema In pi xiyam. xiyaaml tent. 
~ 
xiyami In pi -yyal tent maker. 
.,.~ xiyaami In pi -yyal = xiyami. 
~~ xiyamiyya Iprop nl district in rid-darb il- ral:Jmar 
where tent-making shops are located. 
i~ xayyaam In *1 tent maker. 
~ xayyim Ivil to prevail. ris-sukuut xayyim silence 
reigned. -vn laxyiim; ava mixayyim. 
iJ ~ t see iJ.J t: xaayin. xiyaana 
(~~t) 
~ xayy Ifem xayya/: ya xayy exclamation of bantering 
dismissal"" come off it! don't exaggerate! 
~ xayya In pi -aall noose, snare. IIgaab rigl-(u) fil-
xayya to trap (s.o. or s.th.). 

1 ~ 
• .) ,b da I (also dawwa, dawwat, dawwak, dawwan, 
dahu, dahuwwa, dahuwwat, dahuwwak, dahuwwan, 
dihawwa, dihawwat, dahawwak, dihawwan) Ifem di 
(also diyya, diyyat, diyyak, diyyan, dihayya, dihayyat, 
dihayyak, dihayyan, dahl, dahiyya, dahiyyat, dahiyyak, 
dahiyyan, dihiyya, dihiyyat, dihiyyak, dihiyyan); 
pI dool (also dooli, doola, doolat, doolak, doolan, 
dahum, 
dahumma, 
dahummat, 
dahummak, 
dahumman, 
duhamma, 
duhammat, 
duhammak, 
duhamman)/l/demonst pron! this, this one, that, that 
one. tjataluu lajaan da they killed him for that? da 
I-mudiir wi-di mraat-u that's the director and that's his 
wife. dool r~l.Jaab-ak are these your friends? rinta 
laayiz da walla da do you want this one or that one? II da 
w-da all and sundry, every Tom, Dick and Harry, as in 
rinta tja81id tidaxxal da w-da are you letting just any-
one come in? 2/demonst adj, in apposition! this, that. 
rir-raagil da miin who is this man? juuf iI-bint i di just 
look at that girl. b-al.Jibb in-naas dool 1 like those 
people. 
11 min da lalaa-da (as a response) middling, not all that 
good but not all that bad, as in ral.Jwaal-ak !'izzayyaha. 
- min da lalaa-da 'How are things with you?' 'I get by.' 
-... min dool ... of the average kind, ... of the typical 
kind, as in ris-sitt i min dool tUtjlud tidall81 fl-bn-a-ha 
I-raayit ma ybuu; the average woman goes on spoiling 
her son until he's ruined, marra min dooll.Ja-titkiJif one 
of these days you'll be found out, yoom min dooll.Ja-
yimfi one of these days he'll quit, raah min dool ... don't 
tell me! 1 well know what sort they are! -da ... da Ifem 
di ... di, pI dool ... doo/l exclamatory demonstrative 
conveying derision or admiration of the object indi-
cated. da reeh lIi-nta labs-u da what on earth is that 
you're wearing? da miin da IIi tjal-Iak who the hell told 
you so? dool riggaala dool those call themselves men? 
di larabiyya di you call that a car? da !'eeh ig-gamaal da 
kull-u how beautiful! 
• .) ,b da 2 lexclamatory particlel but, why, really. da 
I-mooqa 1-!'ayyam-di magnuuna really, fashions these 
days are crazy! da I-burtutjaan is-sanaa-di l.Jilw i tjawi 
my. the oranges are nice this year! da-l.Jna zabayn-ak 
but we're customers of yours! 
_I ~ 
_I.) daa!' In pI -aatll physical or mental ailment. daa!' 
ik-kalb rabies. daa!' iI-flii elephantiasis. dlla!' iI-la;ama 
megalomania.lldaa!' il-muluuk gout. 2 bad habit. !'illi. 
fli daar ma-yisla-huu-J [prov} he who has a bad habit 
cannot get away from it. II daa!'-u da!,-hum he's always 
picking on them. 
I ~ 1 ~ 
o.)b daada I <T dada from P> In pI -aat, dadawaatl 
nanny, children's nurse. 
z ~ 1 ~ see IS ~ ~: daada 2, !,itdaada 
IJ" 1 ~ 
..... b daasa In pI -aatl pulley, block. 
t 1 ~ 
tb daar: gaab daar(-u) to bring about (s.o.'s) down-
fall, finish (s.o.) off. 
.d 1 ~ 
.db daak 
(also 
dukha, 
dukhat, 
dukhawwa, 
dukhawwat, dukhawwan) Idemonst pron; fern diik I 

(also dikha. dikhat. dikhayya. dikhayyat. dikhayyan. 
dikhiyya. dikhiyyat. dikhiyyan); pi dukhum (also 
dukhumma. 
dukhummat. 
dukhumman. 
dukham. 
dukhamma. dukhammat. dukhamman)1 that (other), 
that (other) one. diik iI-leela that night, the other night. 
riI-fustaan da ra/jla min dukha this dress is prettier than 
that other one. (n.b. rin-nahaar and rli-yoom are qual-
ified irregularly by the feminine form, as in kunt" 
landu diik in-nahaar I was at his place just the other 
day). 
J I ~ 
Jb daal Ifem n. pi -aatl eighth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also dih. 
r I ~ 
rb daam 1 <Fr dame> In pi -aatl queen (in cards). 
oJ I ~ 
;;.; b daana <T dane from P> In pi -aatl (artillery) shell. 
J oJ I ~ 
..;;\~ daanie; <P dtinak> In pi dawaanie;l[obsol] I unit 
of land measure equal to 29.172 square metres. 2 type 
of copper coin. bl-y/jasib-m bid-daanie; wis-sa/jtuUl he 
makes me account for every last penny. 
~ I ~ 
~b daaya <P dtiya> In pi -aatl midwife without pro-
fessional training or qualifications. IIdi daaya w-mafta 
[deris] (she is both a midwife and a tirewoman) == she 
can turn her hand to anything. 
J ~ I ~ 
J.b daayal <Engl> In pi -aatl.(telephone) dial. 
y~ 
~ 
..,..i~ darb Inl habit, natural disposition. rana darb-l 
klda that's the way I am. mm darb-u k-kidb lying is a 
habit with him. 
..,..~ durbladj invarlsly. mara durb a cunning woman. 
""'Jj~ daruub ladj '1 industriOUs. 
C)ly~) 
.)~J~ dubaara 1 <perh T dubara> Inl string. pack 
thread. twine. fatlit dubaara piece of string. kurariyyit 
dubaara ball of string. I/Juyl id-dubaara [obsol] trick-
ery. - q~r id-dubaara small area in central Cairo be-
tween Tahrir Square and Garden City. 
274 
.)~J~ dubaara 2 <T dubara from P> In pi -aatl pair of 
twos (in dice). 
Iyy~ 
.;:.~ dabb (i) Ivtll to bang, thump, hit. e;aladit tidibb d 
lal-baab lamma ~/jiina she went on pounding at the 
door till we woke up. dabb-a-ha la/e;a he gave her a 
thumping. II fir-rigl' tdibb' matra/j ma l/jlbb [prov] 
(one's foot hits the place one likes) one's feet follow 
one's fancy. 2 to thrust, stuff. dabb iI-filuusft-geeb-u he 
stuffed the money into his pocket. dabb I /jiltit diin rakla 
qabl' ma naam he stuffed down one hell of a meal 
before he went to sleep. - Ivil 3 to make a banging. 
make a clattering reeh illi bi-ydibb I fooe; IS-SU{UU/j 
what's making the bangmg noise on the roof? tililt 
adlbb I nzilt adibb I lae;eet id-dibb I bi-ye;aze;az libb 
I went up banging, I came down banging, I found the 
bear cracking libb with his teeth (a children's rhythm 
chant). II kull' min habb I w-dabb every Tom, Dick and 
Harry. - vn dabb. dabiib. dababaan; ava daabib; pva 
madbuub. 
~ dabb I ft- to surge through, rise up within, as in dabbit 
fii rir-roo/j (1) he began to stir. (2) his spirits rose . 
~~ dabba 1 linst n. pi -aatl a bang. a thump. IIdabbil 
m-namla the slightest noise. the faintest sound, as in 
yismal dabbit in-namla he's very sharp-eared, kaanil 
id-dmya sakla lismal dabbil in-namla it was so quiet 
you could hear a pin drop. 
~b dabba 2 Inl dumb animal. raghal min dabba == 
dumber than an ox. 
":-O!~ dabiib 
Inl 
[non-CaITelle] 
I snake. 
2 Icolll 
snake(s). 
'-!~~ dabbaaba In pi -aall I tank. track-laying vehicle 
of war. tac,m I dabbaaba tank crew. wiliyya lamia zayy 
id-dabbaaba a woman looking like a tank (Le. a very 
large woman). IIgazma (kalb') dabbaaba a pair of 
wedge-heeled shoes. 2 [prim] platen. 
';:'...1.0 midabb. madabb Imasc and fem n. pi -aal/l one 
who commits gaffes or blunders. 2 sucker, dupe, fall 
guy. 
';:'.,1;"\ flldabb or r,ddabb Ivil to be thrust. be stuffed . 
IIleen IIIdabb ' ftiha rU~ClCl~a (an eye in which a bullet 
should be thrust) (I) a bold eye. as in di mara yildabb I 
f-lell-ha rll~aa~a this is a woman with a bold look. 
(2) the evil eye. as in dl mara laleeha leen lildabb I ftiha 
rtI~aa~a this woman has the evil eye. -iva mildabb. 
';:'.,1;"1 rindabb = rlldabb. -iva mmdabb. 
lyy ~ 
..;,~ dabbib Ivtl to make pomted. sharpen to a point. 

manaxiir-u mdabbiba his nose is pointed. -vn tadbiib; 
ava/pva midabbib. 
~""I 'i'itdabbib or 'i'iddabbib Ivil to be made pointed. 
- iva mildabbib. 
3,,:, ":' ~ 
y~ dibb, dubb f In pi dibab, dibaba f I bear. II 'i'id-dubb 
iI-qutbi the Pole Star. - 'i'id-dubb i/-'i'akbar Ursa Major. 
- 'i'id-dubb i iI-'i'a~rar Ursa Minor. -/aqeel id-dibb i 
yqazqaz libb I found the bear cracking libb with his 
teeth (part of a children's rhythm chant -see dabb). 
.;~ dibba, dubba f In pi -aall female bear. (loosely 
also) any bear. 
4,,:, ":' ~ 
.J~~ dibbaan Icoll nl flies. niff id-dibbaan shoo off the 
flies! ralli I-'i'akl i la-Ylifr lalee 'i'id-dibbaan cover the 
food lest the flies settle on it! II bi-ylxaaniq maca 
dibbaan 
wiff-u 
... he 
is very short-tempered. 
- 'i'id-dibbaan iI-'i'azraq ma-yilraf-Iuuj gurra (the flesh 
flies do not know his spoor) he's disappeared without 
trace. - (qaalid) bi-yniff id-dibbaan he has no custom-
ers (of a trader), business is slack. 
~~~ dibbaana In pi -aatl I/unit nl a fly. Iidibbaanit 
ik-kalb horse-fly. 2 (also sinn i (naml) id-dibbaana) 
bead (on a rifle). 
~~~ zubaaba f Inl fly. II 'i'iz-zubaaba t-tayra blind spot 
(in the eye). - wazn iz-zubaaba flyweight (in boxing 
etc.). 
.)J ":' ":' ~ 
);~ dabbuur 
In 
pi dababiir, 
dababiirl 
I wasp. 
dabbuur 'i'al:Jmar hornet. dabbuur 'i'azraq cuckoo wasp 
or ruby-tailed wasp. dabbuur 
'i'a~far paper wasp. 
dabbuur iI-xafab carpenter bee. dabbuur zann a la/a 
xaraab liff-u [provJ (a wasp buzzed till its nest was 
destroyed) ... he asked for it. dabbuur zann a lala l:Jagar 
misann [provJ (a wasp buzzed over a whetstone) ... you 
can't get blood out of a stone. 2 philanderer. huwwa 
'i'akbar dabbuur fil-balad he's the biggest skirt·chaser in 
town. 3 wooden spinning top operated with a string (as 
opposed to a whip -cf nabla). 
;);~ dabbuura In pi dababiir, dababiir, dabburaatl 
I star of rank (on a uniform). ;aabit bi-dabburteen a 
first-lieutenant. xad dabbuura he got an extra pip. 
2 scabbling hammer. 
[":'~ 
t~~ dibaagf <P dibd> In pi dayabiigl brocade, sil-
ken cloth. 
275 
~~~ dibaaga <P dibdja> In pi -aatl fulsome prelimin-
ary, prologue, preface (to remarks). gayyi lamil-/i 
dbaaga he came to me humming and hawing. balaaf 
id-dibaaga di stop beating about the bush! 
i~ dabbig I Ivtl to compose, formulate (in good 
style). dabbig-Iu xutba he composed an eloquent 
speech. 2 Ivil to engage in fulsome preliminaries. ba/aaf 
tadbiig ... come to the point! -vn tadbiig; ava/pva 
midabbig. 
I C. ":' ~ 
Cl~ 'Cl~ dabal:J I (a) Ivtll to cut the throat of (especial-
ly an animal, to slaughter it for food). 'i'id-dabb ifjarli 
slaughter of animals according to Islamic law. 
IIma-yiqdarji yidbal:J farxa ... he wouldn't harm a fly . 
-da-nta tistaahil id-dabb "la/a kida ... you deserve ev-
ery conceivable punishment for that! 2 to deal harshly 
with (in money matters). huwwa dabab-ni fil-beela di 
... he took me for every penny I was worth over the sale. 
-vn dabb, dibiib, dibbiyya; ava daabib; pva madbuub. 
Cl~ 'Cl~ dabl:J Inl [magic] sacrifice. laleek dabl:J you 
have to bring a sacrifice (Le. a chicken or the like to be 
sacrificed at a zaar). 
~~ ,~~ dabba I Ipl -aatl instance noun of dabb. 
~~ zabl:Ja: zabl:Ja ~izdriyya [path] angina pectoris. 
~~ ,~~ dibbiyya Inl [non- Cairene] point where a 
throat is cut in ritual slaughter. 
~; '~~ dibiil:J Icoll nl I carcass(es) of slaughtered 
animal(s). 2 meat of animals slaughtered for consump-
tion especially during liid ii-'i'atlba and liid iI-fitr . 
~; ,~~ dibiiba lunit n, pi dabaayibl a carcass of a 
slaughtered animal. 
~~ zabiil:Ja f In pi zabaa'i'il{ [Chr] sacrifice (of the 
Eucharist). 
' 
cS~ dabbaab I In *1 slaughterer. 2/adj *1 given to 
charging exorbitant prices. 
Cl.i.. 'Cl..\.o madbab Inl I slaughter-house. 2 point 
where a throat is cut in Islamic ritual slaughter. laazim 
yitballil min madbab-u it must have its throat cut at the 
proper place in order to be acceptable in religion as 
food. 
Cl.i.. mazbal:J In pi mazaabil:JI [Chr] altar. 
~.i.. ,~..\.o madbaba, mazbaba In pi madaabib. 
mazaabibl massacre. 
Cl.lil 'i'ildabab I or 'i'iddabab I Ivil to be slaughtered. 
-iva mitdibil:J. 
Cl"\;1 'Cl...lil 'i'indabab l = 'i'itdabahl. -iva mindibib· 
~; ,~~ dabbab Ivtl to cut the throat of (a number of 
things). dabbal:J-hum waal:Jid waabid he slaughtered 

them one after the other. -vn tadbiilj; ava/pva 
midabbalj. 
~~I ritdabbalj or riddabbalj Ivil to have the throat cut 
(of a number of things). - iva mitdabbalj. 
1 C Y ~ 
~ 
'e-~ dabalj2, qabalj (a, aJ Ivtl to lose (one's 
voice). dabaljt' ~oot-i caleek I shouted myself hoarse 
calling you. -vn dablja, qablja; ava daabilj, qaabilj; pva 
madbuulj, maqbuulj. 
~ 
,~~ dablja 2, qablja Inl case of hoarseness. 
~I 'e-~I ritdabalj2 or riddabalj2, ritqabalj or 
riqqabalj Ivil to be lost (of the voice). - iva mitdibilj, 
mitqibilj. 
~I 'e--"I rindabalj2, 
rinqabalj 
ritdabalj2, 
ritqabalj. -iva mindibilj, minqibilj. 
Iy~y~ 
..,..-,!~ dabdib / Ivil to make a repeated banging, thud-
ding or stamping (with the feet). miin illi naazil 
yidabdib cas-sillim who is that c10mping down the 
stairs? - vn dabdaba; ava midabdib. 
1 Y ~ Y 
~ 
..,..-,!~ dabdib 2 Ivtl to sharpen to a point. -vn dabdaba; 
avalpva midabdib. 
~..!-'!~ dabduuba / In 
pi dabadiibl I sharp point. 
dabduubit il-lisaan the tip of the tongue. II wiljic fi-
dabadib-ha he fell madly in love with her. 2 fragment, 
particle, small fraction. 
~u-'!~ dabdubiyya In pi -aatl sharp point (e.g., of a 
needle). 
3y~y~ 
""'J-'!~ dabduub Inl [children] bear, teddy bear. 
~J-'!~ dabduuba 2 = dabduub. rid-dibba d-dabduuba 
"=.Mr Bear (in children's stories). 
1 .) Y 
~ 
J. b daabir In pi dabaayirl trace. ritlja{ac dabir-hum 
mil-ba/ad they were entirely removed from the country. 
;~ dabbar Ivtl to think out a plan for, arrange. 
dabbaruu-Iu muramra they set up a conspiracy against 
him. laaZlm tidabbar rumur-ha dilwaljti she must put 
her affairs in order right now. lamma tfuut ca/ayya 
walit'taani rakuun dabbart' nafs-i w-mustacidd'l-kulla 
Ijaaga when you call another time, I'll have put myself 
'n order and be ready for anything. II rabb-i-na ydabbar 
may Our Lord provide a solution! -mudabbir il-Ijaal 
Settler of Affairs (epithet of God). - ril-cabd' fit-tafkiir 
276 
wir-rabb' fit-tadbiir man proposes, God disposes. 
- tadbiir manzili domestic science, home economics. 
- vn tadbiir; ava midabbar, mudabbir T ; pva midabbar, 
mudabbarT. 
.r-!~ tadbiir In pi tadabiir, tadbiraatl arrangement. 
II dabbar-ni ya waziir. - rit-tadbiir li-llaah ya malik 'Tell 
me what to do, 0 Vizier!' 'Guidance is for God to give, 
o King!' (a formula commonly met with in stories). 
;;.. mudabbir ladjl thrifty, provident. sitt' beet 
mudabbira a thrifty housewife. 
;~I ritdabbar or riddabbar Ivil to be arranged, be 
settled. wa/a yhimm-ak -titdabbar don't worry, it'll turn 
out O.K. -iva mitdabbar. 
1.) Y 
~ 
J.~ dubur In pi ridbaar, radbaarT I back, rear, but-
tocks, anus. wallu 1- radbaar they turned their backs and 
ran away . 
3 .) Y ~ see .) I y 
~ : dubaara 
4 .) Y 
~ see .).J y y 
~ : dabbuur, dabbuura 
-..;.)y~ 
(.~J.~ dibriyaaj <Fr debrayage> In pi -aatl [auto] 
clutch. rid-dibriyaaj bi-yfawwit the clutch is slipping. 
I..,..y ~ 
..r;~ dabbuus In pi dababiisl I pin. dabbuus ribra 
straight pin. dabbuus rasm drawing-pin, thu~b-tack. 
dabbuus mafbak or dabbuus ingliizi safety-pin. 
dabbuus faransaawi brad (for paper). dabbuus jacr 
hairpin. dabbuus dabbaasa staple. dabbuus saljya ver-
tical axle of a water wheel (see PI.E, 4).lIxad dabbuus 
he had a dirty trick played on him. 2 clip, brooch. 
dabbuus ralmaa~ di!!mond clip. dabbuus karafatta tie-
pin, tie clip. 3 drumstick (of a cooked bird). 
4-;~ dabbuusa Inl I point of a shoulder or hip. 
2 drumstick (of a cooked bird). 
4-4~ dabbaasa In pi -aatl stapler. 
...,.,;~ dabbis Ivtl I to pin. ljutt-i-1u I-fuu{a w-dabbis-ha 
put a towel on him and pin it on. IIdabbis-1i tuhma he 
pinned a charge on me. 2 to staple. 3 to draw (s.o.) into 
a liability. dabbis-ni f-cajara gneeh he wormed ten 
pounds out of me. -vn tadbiis; ava/pva midabbis. 
~~ tadbiisa Ipl -aatl instance noun of tadbiis. 
""";~I ritdabbis or riddabbis Ivil I to be pinned. 2 to 
be stapled. 3 to be landed with a liability. ritdabbist' 
Ijittit diin tadbiisa I was really put on the spot. 

ril-muwa;;afiin xaragu w-fana iii tdabbist i fif-Jurl the 
employees left and 1 was the one who got landed with 
the work. -iva mitdabbis. 
lU"'y~ 
..r.~ dibs <Engl dip stick> Inl rod for measuring pet-
roleum in a storage tank. 
I 
• u,) 
U"'. 
. 
~~ dabf <Copt> Inl rough-"ut limestone. dab/, 
mrawwim quarry stone cut to standard sizes. II kalaam 
zayy id-dabf crude and insensitive talk. 
~~ dabfa Inl I lunit n, pI -aatl a piece of rough-cut 
limestone. 2 Ino pll a type of mango. 
~~~ dabfaaya = dabfa 1. 
..r~~ dabbaaf In • and pI dabbaafal one who talks 
crudely and insensitively. 
.;:~ dabbif I Ivtl to cover with a layer of dabf (in road 
building etc.). bi-ydabbifu (-(ariilj wi-baldeen yisaflituu 
they put a layer of dabf, and then a layer of asphalt, on 
the road. 2 Ivil to indulge in crude and insensitive talk. 
dayman yidabbif fik-kalaam he's always rude and inso-
lent. -vn tadbiif; avalpva midabbif. 
1 
• ~ 
~ 
U'" • 
~~ dabaf <T dube§> In pI -aat, dibifa, dubufal pair 
of fives (in backgammon). 
.!.lv!-y~ 
~~ dibfik <T dipfik> In pI dabaafikl rifle butt. 
ty~ 
e:-~ dabar (u) Ivtl I to tan (leather). 2 to tan (the skin, 
of the sun). - Ivil 3 to eat gluttonously. bi-yudbur 
dabr i wi-yljuul ma-kalti-Jhe eats enormously and says 
'I haven't eaten'. -vn dabr, dibaar, dibaara, dabaraan; 
ava daabir; pva madbuur. 
t ~~ dibaar I Inl tanning solution. 2/coll ill tanned 
goods. 
~~ dabra In pI -aatl I tanning solution. 2 linst nI a 
tan. 
t ~~ dabbaar In °1 I tanner. 2 glutton. 
~.M madbara In pI madaabirl tannery. 
~I.M madabri In pI -yyal tanner. 
e:-.,I;I fitdabar or fiddabar Ivill to be tanned (ofleath-
er). 2 to be tanned (of the skin, by the sun). - iva 
mitdibir. 
e:-.,I;I findabar = fitdabar. -iva mindibir. 
277 
Jy~ 
~~ dabalj (u, a) Ivtl to trail, shadow, stick closely to. 
ril-laskari tann-u dabilj-ni l-raayit il-beet the policeman 
shadowed me all the way to the house. -vn dabaljaan; 
ava daabilj. 
11 dabalj fi- to lay hold of. dabalj fi-raljabt-i he seized me 
by the neck. 
~.,I;I fitdabalj or fiddabalj Ivtll to trail, shadow, stick 
closely to. 2 to pick on, single out for unfavourable 
treatment. finta dayman mitdibilj il-layyil kida leeh 
why are you always picking on the kid like that? -ava 
mitdibilj. 
~.,I; 1 findabalj = fitdabalj. - ava mindibilj. 
.;;~ dabbalj Ivtl to save up. !J-a!Jaawil fadabbalj-lak 
il-mablar I'll try and get together the money for you. 
II dabbalji ya xayba lil-rayba [prov] "" why bother, fool-
ish woman, to scrimp and save when your husband will 
take all the money to spend on some other woman? i.e . 
don't put'yourself to trouble when the benefit will go to 
a rival. -vn tadbiilj; avalpva midabbalj. 
~.,I; tadbiilja Inl savings. qayyal laleeha tadbiiljit il-
lumr he spent his life-savings on her. 
';;.,1;1 fitdabbalj or fiddabbaq Ivil I to be saved up (of 
money). 2 to get hold, gain possession (especially of 
money). fiddabbaq-lu lala qirfeen sulfa he managed to 
get together a bit of money by borrowing. - avalivalpva 
middabbaq. 
.!.ly~ 
~~ dabaka Inl fuss, commotion . 
I Jy ~ 
~~ dibla In pI dibal, diblaatl I ring or band of one 
width (in contrast with xaatim (q. v.) in the case of a ring 
for the finger). !Jalaq dibla plain earrings passing 
through the lobe of the ear. dibal lis-sataayir curtain 
rings. 2 loop (intra-uterine device). 3 lalso pI duball 
anus. II fabu d-dubal pederast. 
1 J y 
~ 
J.J~ dubl <Fr double> Jadj invarl I double, double-
size. qahwa dubl a double-size cup of coffee. 2 par 
excellence, to a high degree. fakla dubl a real meal. 
lalqa dubl a good hiding. raagil dubl a fine man. - In 
pi -aatl 3 [auto] pair of double wheels. fid-dubl it-
quddamaani the front pair of double wheels. 
3 J y 
~ 
J.~ ,J.~ dibit (a) Ivil to wilt. fin diblit il-warda ri!Jit-ha 
fiiha [prov] (even if the rose wilts, it has its scent) good 

breeding shows in any circumstances. - vn dubuul, 
dibuul, dabalaan; ava dablaan. 
278 
J.~ .J.J dabbil/vtl to cause to wilt or wither. ril-lata! 
dabbil iz-zarl drought caused the plants to wither. -vn 
tadbiil; ava/pva midabbll. 
~~I .~..I::.-I ristadbil Ivtl I to consider wilted or 
withered. ristadbilit il-f~ulya wi-ftarit badalha ba{aa{is 
she thought that the beans were too withered so she 
bought potatoes instead. 2 to select for wiltedness or 
witheredness. ril-fakahaani l-xabiis balfa yistadbil 
wi-ydiss' f-kiis il-mooz the deceitful fruit-seller went on 
choosing the withered bananas and slipping them into 
the bag. - ava mistadbil. 
J I J ..... ~ 
J~J diblaalf Icoll nl palm-fibre rope(s) (used in par-
ticular for securing scaffolding boards). 
.;, I J ..... ~ 
.J~J dabalaan Inl plain white calico. 
[.J ..... ~ 
[.~JJ dublaaj <Fr doublage> Inl fein] dubbing. 
~J dablij, dablig Ivtl fein] to dub. -vn dablaja, 
dablaga; ava/pva midablij, midablig. 
~~I ritdablij, ritdablig or riddablij, riddablig Ivil 
fein] to be dubbed. - iva mitdablij, mitdablig. 
.; J ..... ~ 
)...J dablar I Inl /acad] one who repeats a year (in 
school or college). 
~JJ dubleer <Fr doublure> Inl /ein] stand-in. 
)...J dablar] Ivi/l fein] to stand in. 2 facad] to repeat a 
year (in school or university). -vn dablara; ava 
midablar: 
J J ..... ~ see J I J ..... ~ : diblaalf 
- r J ..... ~ 
..,-l.~J diblumaasi ladj ·1 I diplomatic. ris-silk id-
diblumaasi the diplomatic corps. 
riI-lJaqiiba d-
diblumasiyya the diplomatic bag. 2 tactful. - In ·1 
3 diplomat. 
~l.~J diblumasiyya <prob Fr diplomatie> I_I 
diplomacy. 
fi-muntaha 
d-diblumasiyya extremely 
tactful(ly). 
.;,J ..... ~ see .;,IJ ..... ~:dabalaan 
r.JJ ..... ~ 
r).. J dibloom, dubloom, dabloom (also dabloon J ) 
<Fr diplOme> In pi -aatl diploma. dibloom laali 
graduate or postgraduate diploma. dlbloom mutawassi{ 
diploma below the standard of a university degree. 
l.~J diblooma = dibloom. 
';'.J J ..... ~ see r) J ..... ~ : dabloon J 
.; ..s J ..... ~ see .; J ..... ~ : dubleer 
..s ..... ~ 
":!!JJ .le!JJ dubya <It doppio>: /obsol] lJisaab id-
dubya double-entry bookkeeping. kaatib dubya a dou-
ble-entry bookkeeper. 
..,.. I ..s ..... ~ 
..,..le!JJ dubyaas <Fr deux pieces> ladj invarl two-
piece. fustaan dubyaas two-piece outfit. 
.; .J .:J ~ 
;.;yb datuura Icoll nl /bot] datura. -also dahtuura, 
tatuura, {a{uura. 
[.[.~ 
ri-J daggig r Ivtl to arm fully. daggig nafs-u bis-silaalJ 
he armed himself to the teeth. -vn tadgiig; ava/pya 
midaggig; pya mudaggag r . 
ri-..Iil ritdaggigor riddaggig Ivi/to be fully armed. - iva 
mitdaggig. 
[.~[.~ 
[.~J dagdig Ivil to bump, be bumpy (of roads, cars 
etc.). ril-larabiyya mifyit tldagdlg fi{-{ariilf the car 
bumped down the road. -vn dagdaga; ava midagdig. 
IJ[.~ 
~J dagallnl confidence trickery, charlatanism, de-
ception, hocus-pocus. 
Jt.;.J daggaal In ·1 confidence trickster. charlatan. 
II ril-masiix (or ril-masillJ) id-daggaal (or ig-gaddaal) the 
Anti-Christ. 
~J daggil Ivil to engage in swindling. ma-nafal-J' 
fil-bandar raa!J iI- raryaaf yidaggil lal-fallalJiin he 
couldn't make out in town so he went to the country to 
cheat the peasants. -vn tadgii/; ava midaggil. 
J~~ midaggalaati In pi -yyal = daggaal . 

2 J ~ ~ 
~, digla Iprop nl I area immediately to the east of 
e1-Ma'adi. 2 the River Tigris. 
.;, ~ ~ 
~b daagin ladjl tame, domesticated. bayawaan 
daagin a domesticated animal. 
~I), dawaagin Ipl nl poultry. ba;iirit dawaagin poul-
try run. 
.J ~ ~ 
..?' duga: duga I-Ieel the dark (of night). 
Ic.c.~ 
c., dabb J (i) I Ivil to toil. fanbab fi-~aot-i w- fadibb i 
w-farfab id-damm [ strain my voice, and slave, and 
sweat blood. lammaal yidibb' fil- fakl he is hard at it, 
wolfing down the food. 2 Ivtl to inflict (an action) with 
intensity on (s.o.). dabb-i-ni lalqa he gave me a terrific 
beating. nazla tdibb' jtiima f-garit-ha she goes on and 
on hurling insults at her neighbour. -vn dabb, 
dababaan; ava daabib. 
c.6:, dabbaab ladj • and pi dabbaabal slogging, toil-
ing, hard-working but unintelligent. 
2c.c.~ 
c., dabb 2 ladj invarl /children] good. II fis-sabb 
id-dabb (ya) xaruuf na{{aab child's chant for urging a 
ram to butt. 
;,;, dabba ladj invarl /children] good, nice. 
3c.c.~ 
c., dabb 3 Icoll nl /nan-Cairene] egg(s). filii laayiz 
id-dabb i ma-yqul-J' fabb /prav] he who wants (hot, 
boiled) eggs should not say 'Ouch!'. see further 
under .s C. ~ 
c.~c.~ 
c..\.>' dabdab Ivtl to budge, ease (s.o. or s.th.) away. 
-vn dabdaba; ava/pva midabdab. 
c..\.>,.\; 1 fitdabdab or fiddabdab Ivil I to go a little 
away, move oneself aside. ba-niddabdab biliid lan 
il-bitta w-nirkab min land in-na~ya we'll move along 
from here a bit, and get on (the bus) at the corner. 2 to 
be budged, be eased away. -vn dabdaba; ava/iva 
mitdabdab· 
J ~ C. ~ 
.).\.>, dab dar Ivtl I to cause to roll down. b-adabdar-ak 
279 
fagiib-ak i/- fart/. I'll knock you sprawling to the ground! 
2 to cause to decline. fil-xamra dabdarit ~ibbit-u drink 
sapped his health. -vn dabdara; ava/pva midabdar. 
o ./-.\.>, dubdeera, dubdeera In pi dabadiir, dubderaatl 
(downward) slope. min nuqra I-dubdeera /prav] (out of 
the cranny' on to the downward slope) '" out of the 
frying-pan into the fire. 
o.)).\.>, dabduura, dabduura = dubdeera . 
.).\.>,.\;I fitdabdar or fiddabdar Ivil 1 to roll down. 
raqabt-u ddabdarit min lal-mixadda his head slipped 
off the pillow. 2 to go into decline. 
fabwaal-u 
middabdara his circumstances have deteriorated. - ava 
mitdabdar. 
~Jc.~ 
C;>' dabrag 1 Ivtl to roll, cause to roll. dabragit il-
baramiil barrel rolling. dab rag filuus-ak roll your pen-
nies! 2 /naut] to parbuckle, raise or lower using a par-
buckle. -vn dabraga; ava/pva midabrag. 
C~,.\;I fitdabrag or fiddabrag Ivil to roll. - ava 
mitdabrag. 
~.sJc.~ 
~~' dubreeg Inl common vetch (the seeds of which 
frequently occur as an impurity in grain). yaxdu 
I-qamb i ynaqqu minnu (-(iin wid-dubreeg they take the 
wheat and pick thc dirt and vetch seeds out of it. 
~~, dubreega lunit n, pi -aatl a vetch seed. 
IJ" C. ~ see also IJ" c..J ~ 
.,r>' dabas (a) Ivtl to shove, thrust, press (s.th. into 
s.th.). dabast i fiid-i guwwa g-gubr" lajaan aqfif il-
famab [ pushed my hand into the hole to catch the 
rabbit. -vn dabs, dabasaan; ava daabis; pva madbuus . 
.,r>,.\;1 fitdabas or fiddabas Ivil to be shoved, thrust or 
pressed (into s.th.). - iva mitdibis. 
.,r>,.\; 1 findabas = fitdabas. - iva mindibis . 
.,r>b daabis Ivil to push one's way, exert oneself. 
dabist i w- fana (aatil il- futubiis ti-badd i ma laqeet 
ma(rab [ forced my way into the bus until I found a 
place. -vn midabsa; ava midaabis. 
.!.l C. ~ 
~ 
.~, dibik (a) Ivil 1 to laugh, smile. ba-njuuf 
miin fiina 1Ii ba-yidbak fil-faaxir we'll see which of us 
will laugh last! fidbak qabl id-dibk i rna yilrla laugh 
before laughing becomes too expensive, laugh while 
you can. filii yidbak in-nahar-da Ylayya( bukra /prav] 
he who laughs today will weep tomorrow. 28 to jest. 

da-yna b-nidyak ya-xt-i macaaki we're just teasing you, 
dearie! 
2b to 
mock, 
laugh. 
ma 
tiblia 
latiif 
wi-ma-tidyakl' calayya why don't you be nice and stop 
making fun of me?! -vn diyk; ava daayik; pya 
madyuuk. 
11 diyik cala to fool, cheat. diyik cala calil-u-hum bi-
kilmiteen he deceived them with a few words. fid-diyk B 
cad-duliuun making fools of people. 
Yid-diyk B 
cal-ciwala fayda {pray] fooling fools is legitimate (be-
cause they ask for it). kaan madyuuk caleena we were 
cheated. 
~ 
,~~ diyka linst n, pI -aati laugh, a smile. 
IIxallaa-ni diyka been in-naas he made me a 
laughing-stock. 
~ 
''is.'';~ quyyeeka, duyyeeka Inl object of laugh-
ter or ridicule. yaasib Yana mif id-duyyeeka btact-ak 
just watch it! I'm not here for you to make fun of. 
:0:.....;.... madyaka, maqyaka Inl 1 place of laughter. 
Yiyna f-maktab - ya-tililibuu madyaka we're in an 
office; are you going to turn it into a joke shop! 
28 comic 
situation, 
farce. 
ya-tililibu 
l-igtimaac 
madyaka do you want to turn the meeting into a com-
edy act? 2b object of laughter. xallat-ni madyakit-ha 
she made me the butt of all her jokes. 
~I 
,~..I>I Yitdayak or Yiddayak, 
fitqayak or 
Yiqqayak: fitdayak calee (caleeha etc.) he (she etc.) 
was fooled, was cheated. Yana mif min illi b-yiddiyik 
caleehum I'm not the type to be fooled. - iva mitdiYik. 
~I 
,~..I>I Yindayak = Yitdayak. -iva mindiYik. 
..u.:..... ,..u.:~ dayyak, qayyak Ivtl to make (s.o.) laugh. 
kalaam yidayyak laughable talk. II fallaah yidayyak-ak 
= you make me laugh! -vn tadyiik, taqyiik; ava/pya 
midayyak, miqaYYak. 
~I 
,..u.:..I>1 fitdayyak or fiddayyak, Yitqayyak or 
fiqqayyak Ivil 1 to be made to laugh. 2 to act coquet-
tishly. yaama Yiddayyakit maca da w-da w-hiyya 
~yayyara how many men she flirted with when she was 
young! - ava/iva mitdayyak, mitqayyak. 
11 Yitdayyak cala to poke fun at. liacadu yitdayyaku 
caleehaf-¥iyab-ha they poked fun at her in her abse~ce. 
J C. ~ 
J.>b daayil/vil to make an effort, strain one's wits. 
mUfkila tann-u ydaayil lamma yall-a-ha a problem 
which he kept struggling with until he solved it. -vn 
midayla; ava midaaYil. 
J.>I..I>I fitdaayil or ,fiddaayil = daaYil. 
~ J c. ~ 
..,..,t...~ daylib, daylab Ivtl to sneak, insinuate. daylib 
280 
fiid-u f-geeb-u he slipped his hand in his pocket. -vn 
daylaba; ava/pya midaYlib. 
..,..JI-~ diylaab 
ladj 
pI dayaliibl 
blandiloquent, 
smooth-tongued, unctuous, sly. 
..,..,t.....I>1 Yitdaylib or fiddaylib Ivil to sneak in. yiddaylib 
zayy it-taclab he moves in stealthily like a fox. Yin-naas 
iddaylibu liuddaami fi{-{abuur people slipped in before 
me in the queue. - ava mitdaYlib. 
11 fitdaylib ca/a to make up to (s.o.). liaacid yiddaylib 
caleeha lamma bacit-lu I-beet he kept on making up to 
her until she sold him the house. 
..s C. ~ see also J C. C. ~ 
..s>~ dayyi, dayy = dayy 3. 
~~ dayya lunit n, pI -aatl an egg. 
.;.~ dayya Ivil to lay eggs. candina farxa bi-tdayyi 
yamaati we have a hen that lays every day. -vn dayy; 
ava midaYYi. 
..s iJ t t ~ see I iJ t ~ : daxaxni 
J t ~ 
."'>~ zaxra = zaxiira. 
.r->~ dixiir Inl gunpowder. 
• 
.r->~ zaxiira In pI zaxaayirl 1 ammunition. zaxiira 
yayya live ammunition. 2i treasured thing. 
".>;1 Yiddaxar Ivtl to save, conserve. law tiddixir 
macaahum taaxud nisba Yacla if you save with them 
you'll get a higher rate. Yiddixir nafaa{-ak lil-mubaraah 
save your energy for the match! -vn Yiddixaar; ava 
middixir; pya muddaxar r . 
)~;I fiddixaar In pI -aatl 1 savings. daftar iddixaar 
savings book. 2 superannuation. 
-S)~;I Yiddixaari ladjl pertaining to saving. 
..:..1".>':;" muddaxaraat Ipl nl savings. 
~..;.t~ 
..,..~~ duxfaab In pI daxafiibl wooden implement 
used by a pickle maker to agitate the vegetables in the 
brine . 
..,.....:.>~ daxfib Ivtl to treat (vegetables) by using a 
duxfaab. -vn daxfaba; ava/pya midaxfib. 
..,.....:.>..1>1 Yitdaxfib or fiddaxfib Ivil to be treated with a 
duxfaab. - iva mitdaxfib. 
Jt~ 
J.>~ daxal (u) I/vt and vii to go in(to), enter. daxalit 
(fi-)mayall she went into a shop. fiyna daxalna 
(fi-)yarbeen liabl' kida we've entered two wars before 

this. daxalt a laleehum il-fooqa I went into the room 
where they were. fudxuli min latabit iI-baab come in 
from the doorway! fin-nuur bi-yudxul tayt iI-lfa{a the 
light comes in under the lid. mamnuul id-duxuul no 
entry. fif-fita daaxil winter is approaching. II daxal 
i"!tiyaan to sit for an exam. -daxal mazaag-u to take 
one's fancy, as in ril-bitt i daxalit mazaag-i w-mif 
y-aaxud lfer-ha the girl has taken my fancy and I'll 
marry no other. -ma-daxal-F dinya he's had no experi-
ence with a woman. - fid-daxla wil-xarga the ins 
and outs, the details. - yaaga mif daxla dmaalf-i (or 
muxx-i, or laql-i) (\) something I can't figure out. 
(2) something I can't accept. 2 IviJ to consummate a 
marriage, begin cohabitation. baldi mudda niktib 
ik-kitaab wi-ngahhiz wi-nudxul after a while we write 
the contract, buy the gihaaz (q. v., sense 5) and consum-
mate the marriage. -vn daxla, duxuul; ava daaxil. 
~ daxal fi- (1) to be a matter for, be the responsibility 
of, as in dafeef yudxul fi-firaadit illaah that is in God's 
hands. (2) to enter into, embark upon, as in daxal 
malaahum fi-siin wi-giim he set about questioning 
them. (3) to collide with, crash into, clash with, as in 
ril-larabiyya daxalit fil-yee{a the car crashed into the 
wall, w-ana b-akkallim fit-tilifoon waayid daxal fil-xaa 
while I was speaking on the phone someone else came 
on the line (as a result of crossed lines). (4) to attack, 
set about, fall upon, as in daxalfil- fakl i b-fidee w-riglee 
he gobbled up the food, daxal fiina fmaal he rode 
roughshod over us. -daxal lala to deceive, as in 
kalaam-u daxal lalayya I was taken in by his words. 
-daxal been to intervene between, as in ya daaxil been 
il-b~ala w-qifrit-ha ma-ynuub-ak filla ~annit-ha [prov] 
(you who push yourself in between the onion and its 
skin will only get the smell) if you interfere in other 
people's business you'll be sorry. 
~~ daxla Inl entrance. beet daxlit-ufarqiyya a house 
whose entrance faces east. 
~b daaxil l 1 Inl inside. fi-daxl-u inside it. ma{li min 
id-daaxil bi-loon fabyaq painted white on the inside. 
2 Iprepl inside. dawaayir daaxil balq-a-ha concentric 
circles. 
~I..ul fid-daxla Iprop n! the Oasis of Dakhla, the 
most populous of the oases of the Western Desert. 
~b daxli, daaxili ladjl internal. huduum daxliyya 
underclothes. siyaasa daxliyya internal policy. naziif 
daxli internal haemorrhage. fi({ilaal daxli reading (but 
not borrowing) rights (at a library). fiytiraaq daaxili 
internal combustion.liyaada daxliyya in-patient clinic. 
II madrasa daxliyya boarding school. 
281 
~b daxliyya, daaxiliyya r In! 1 internal affairs. 
wizaarit id-daxliyya the Ministry of the Interior. 2 fid-
daxliyya [joe] the wife . 
.:..~b daxliyyaat Ipl n! private affairs, confidential 
matters. xalla kuUi fasraar-u w-daxliyyaat-u malaaya 
he confided in me all his secrets and private affairs. 
~~ daxllnl 1 legitimate concern, involvement. daxl-u 
feeh fi-da what business of his is that? ma-lii-f daxl i 
b- fasaami names are no concern of mine. 2 Ipl duxuull 
income, revenue. qariibit id-daxl income tax. 
lli.~ duxla Inl consummation of marriage, beginning of 
cohabitation (of a married couple). leelit id-duxla 
wedding-night. 
j.>~ daxiill ladjl intrusive. fik-kamangaat di daxiila 
laleena these violins have come to us from outside. 
kilma daxiila loan word. II fil-lammi wid-daxiil collo-
quiallanguage and loan words. 2 In pI duxalal intruder, 
outsider. fid-duxala ma-yitkallimuu-J those who have 
nothing to do with us should keep silent! 
~~ daxiila In pI daxaayill intrinsic nature. 
~..I.o madxal In pi madaaxill 1 approach, entrance, 
entrance hall. 2 introduction. fik-kalaam luu madaaxil 
there are (proper) ways to broach a subject. 3 [elee] 
in~uction coil. 
~~ daxxal Ivtl to cause to enter. daxxal if-Jooka fi-
~baal-u he got the thorn stuck in his finger. bi-ydaxxal 
il-markib il-miina he takes the boat into harbour. 
fil-maybas bi-ydaxxal il-mayya lala s-sifoon the stop 
cock admits the water to the cistern. II feej"daxxal-ni 
w~at's it got to do with me? -vn tadxiil; ava midaxxal. 
~,.I;I fitdaxxal or fiddaxxal Ivil to interfere, inter-
vene. mif mafruuq yiddaxxalu f-kull a yaaga they are 
not supposed to interfere in everything. -vn tadaxxul; 
ava mitdaxxal. 
~ fitdaxxal been to mediate between. fitdaxxal benhum 
wi-nhi l-mawquul mediate between them and put an 
end to the matter! 
~b daaxil 2 ' Ivtl to interwine. -vn midaxla; ava 
midaaxil. 
~I,.I;I fitdaaxil or fiddaaxil Ivil 1 to interfere. filii 
yiddaaxil been in-naas yaama yindaas {prov] you get 
nothing but put-downs from interfering with people. 
2 to be or become intermixed, intermingled, or inter-
twined. falwaan mitdaxla mixed colours. IIxu{Uu{ 
mitdaxla crossed (telephone) lines. -vn tadaaxui1; aval 
iva mitdaaxil. 
~~i fadxai1 (i) = daxxal. -commonly used in unele-
vated speech in the phrases feef fadxal-ak fil-mawquul 
what has brought you into the matter? fadxal taysinaat 
(or taldilaat) to make improvements (or modifica-

tions), as in l:Ja-nidxil tal:Jsinaat la/-mal:Jall we're going 
to make improvements to the shop. -vn fidxaalT; ava 
mudxil. 
lJ"r't l 
~~ daxmis Ilvtl to dim. daxmis i/-Iamba turn the 
lamp down low! 2/vil to become dim. ril-Iamba 
daxmisit the lamp burnt low. ril-Ieel daxmis the night 
thickened.lldimaar-i daxmisit I felt at a low ebb. -vn 
daxmasa; ava midaxmis. 
11 daxmis Ii- {coarse] to copulate with, lay (a woman). 
- daxmis la/a to hoodwink. Ill:Ja-tdaxmis la/a baaba ... 
who are you trying to fool? 
~Jil fitdaxmis or fiddaxmis Ivil to be dimmed or 
become dim. -avaliva mitdaxmis. 
I ~t l 
~~ daxana Inl smoke, haze, fumes . 
. 
.J~~ duxxaan Inl 1 smoke, fumes. faafu d-duxxaan 
wi-ballaru I-ma(aafi they saw the smoke and notified 
the fire-brigade .11 ma-fii{ duxxaan min reer naar {prov] 
there's no smoke without fire. - fid-duxxaan i/-qurayyib 
yilmi {prov] ... ·you can't see the wood for for trees. 
2 Ipl fadxinal tobacco. duxxaan il-maqr chewing tobac-
co.lll:Jaqq id-duxxaan {euphem] tip, pourboire. 
.. ~~ duxxaana Inl smoke. lIya duxxaana ruul:Ji lag-
galaan {children] smoke go to the hungry one! (dog-
gerel said when smoke is seen). 
~~~ daxaxtti In pi -yyal tobacconist.llmixaa~im id-
daxaxni not on speaking terms with the tobacconist (i.e. 
always cadging cigarettes). 
~ 
..... madxana In pi madaaxinl 1 chimney, (smoke) 
fu?nel. 2 Ino pI! chainsmoker. 
,;,-.~ daxxan Ivtll to smoke (cigarettes etc.). 2 to fill 
with smoke, make smoky. finta daxxant il-fooqa 
you've made the whole room smoky! 3 to fumigate, 
smudge. - Ivil 4 to give off smoke. ril-Iamba bi-
tdaxxan the lamp is smoking. lI~abal:J mldaxxan he got 
up in the morning fuming. -manaxiir-u mdaxxana he's 
very angry, he's breathing fire. 5 to fill up with smoke, 
become smokY.lenay-ya daxxanit my eyes became full 
of smoke. ril-fooqa daxxanit the room filled with 
sll!0ke. -vn tadxiin; ava/pva midaxxan. 
,;,-...... midaxxan ladjl smoked, preserved by smoking 
(of cured meat, fish etc.).lIl:Jikayit-hum midaxxana ... 
their story is infamous. 
1 ~ t l 
,;,-.~ duxn Inl millet. 
282 
J.J~tl 
J~~ daxnuuq In pi daxaniiql corner niche, hole. 
IIdaaxii fi-daxaniiq-u he has wormed himself into his 
favour. 
J,i ~~ daxnuuqa Inl small niche. 
~ I Y II 
.J~-'!.~ dadabaan, didabaan <P didbdn> In pi -aatl 
sentry. 
..s l l 
..s~b daada 2 Ivtl to humour, soothe. fana lammaal 
fadaadi fii minubl:J' wala fii fayda I've been handling 
him with kid gloves for a long time, to no avail. -vn 
midadiyya; ava midaadi. 
..s~IJiI fitdaada or fiddaada Ivil 1 to be soothed, be 
humoured. 2 to saunter. ga yiddaada la/a faqall' min 
mihl-u wa/a ka finn· landu furl he came sauntering in 
at his ease, as if he had no work. -ava/iva mitdaadi . 
j 
l 
0;; .o;~ dura Icoll nl maize, corn. dura lweega curved 
sorghum, a name for varieties of Sorghum vulgare and 
Andropogon sorghum. dura faami Indian corn (Zea 
mays). dura mafwi (or maqli) roasted corn-on-the-cob . 
dura mfaffarpopcorn.1I ril-leefdura wik-ka/aam ruumi 
{prov] the bread is coarse, the talk highfalutin (of 
pretentiousness) . 
oJ)~ darawa Inl {rur] maize cut before maturity for use 
as green fodder. 
r' I j 
l 
I..I;~ diraama <prob Engl> Inl melodrama. 
U""I;~ diraami ladjl melodramatic. 
Yj l 
.... ;~ darb In pi duruubl 1 path, way, route. II darb ii-
farbiliin a route through the Western Desert from 
Sudan, passing through the Egyptian oases. 2 main 
lane (in a neighbourhood). II fid-darb ii- fal:Jmar one of 
the main thoroughfares of the area of Cairo built up 
during the medieval period, now also the designation of 
the qism including most of that area. 
~I~~ durraaba: baaba xUff' wi-qfil id-durraaba (now 
it's the month of) Baaba, come in and close the gate 
(against the cold) . 
.... ~~ darrab Ivtl to train, coach. darrabt-u-hum la/a 
qarb in-naar I trained them to shoot. tadriib laskari 
military training. tal:Jt it-tadriib in training. II mara 

mdarraba a hard-bitten bitch of a woman. -vn tadriib; 
avalpva midarrab. 
........ )x tadriib In pi -aatl training exercise, practice. 
fig-giraaba [ayza tadribaat ma-Ihaa-J badd surgery re-
quires endless practice. 
<ft)x tadriibi ladjl pertaining to training. fatra 
tadribiyya training period. 
,,",~.M mudarrib In *1 trainer, coach. mudarrib fusuud 
lion trainer. mudarrib koora football coach. 
,,",~xl fitdarrab or fiddarrab Ivil to be trained. - iva 
mitdarrab. 
- j '-:' J 
~ 
.:r..j.I)~ darabziin In pi -aat, -aatl I banister. 2 [naut] 
bulwark. - also tarabziin. 
.!l '-:' J ~ 
~)~ darbik I Ivtl to reduce to chaos. fil-liyaal 
darbiku I-beet fi-''Yaab-i the kids made a shambles of 
the house while I was away. b-adarbik id-dinya lala 
dmaa!'-ak I'll get you into real trouble! 2 Ivil to make a 
din or commotion. [amal darbaka [al-faaqi he made a 
big fuss about nothing. -vn darhaka; avalpva midarbik. 
~)~ darabukka In pi -aatl small earthenware hand 
drum. IIJu!'1 id-darabukka coquettishness. 
~)xl fitdarbik or fiddarbik Ivil to fall apart, collapse. 
fid-dinya ddarbikit Gala ba[q-a-ha the world's a sham-
bles, everything's in an uproar. fiddarbik [as-sillim he 
tumbled down the stairs. - ava mitdarbik. 
.r.!l '-:' J 
~ 
crS 'y-)~ darabuks, darabuks <prob Engl> In pi -aatl 
[auto} gear-box. 
• .,; '-:' J ~ 
~I)~ darapeeh <Fr drape> ladj invarl draped (style). 
I 
~J~ 
(.)~ darag J (u) Ivtl I to break in, train. ba[d' rna 
nudrug-u fif-Ju!'/' Jwayya yiblja yaaxud mahiyya after 
we have given him a little training in the work he will 
start drawing a salary. 2 [lsi] to wrap (a corpse in a 
shroud). -
Ivi/3 to make a start. min fawwil rna darag 
fil-waziifa from when he first started in the job. -vn 
darg, daragaan; ava daarig; pva madruug. 
11 darag lala to become habituated to. daragna lala 
kida min wi-bna ~l'Uyyariin we've been accustomed to 
such things since we were children. 
(.)~ daarig ladjl I popular, common (of speech, lan-
guage). [ibaara darga a popular expression. fil-Iu!'a 
283 
d-darga the colloquial language. 2 (fiqaal) daarig 
Emus] (a rhythmic mode) in three-quarter time consist-
ing of a strong beat, a rest, and a weak beat, or in 6/8 
time consisting of a strong beat, a rest, a weak beat, a 
strong beat, a rest, and a strong beat. 
~)~ darga In pi -aatl headband (of a book). 
(.)~ durg In pi fadraag, diraag, duruugl drawer. durg 
iI-maktab the desk drawer. IIdurg ' kabriit a box of 
matches (as distinct from a booklet). 
(.)~ darag 2 /nl I Icoll nl step(s), stair(s). 2 Ipl fadraagl 
layer of a burial shroud. 
~)~ daraga. daraga In pi -aat. -aatl la lunit nl a step. 
sillim bi-sabal daragaat a stairway with seven steps. 
daraga daraga step by step. Ib Emus} (whole) step . 
nu~~ I daraga half step. 2a grade. fiz-zeet daragaat wi-
fanwaa[ oil comes in various grades and types. tazkara 
daraga fuula a first -class ticket. 2b grade, rank . 
murattab-u marbuu{ basab id-daraga his salary is fixed 
according to his rank. daragit fustaaz professorship. 
daragaat ik-kahanoot [Chr} clerical orders. 2c grade, 
mark (in an examination). xad daraga lalya fil-
imtibaan he got a high mark in the examination. daraga 
[ilmiyya (or gaamiliyya r) academic degree. 3 degree, 
point (of measurement). zawya tis[iin daraga a ninety-
degree angle. daragit il-baraara the temperature. 
daragit in~ihaar melting point. li- faaxir daraga to the 
utmost degree, to the nth degree. li-daragit finn ... to 
the degree that ... , to the extent that .... 
(,)xl fitdarag or fiddarag Ivil I to be inserted, be 
included. 2 to be trained. - iva mitdirig. 
(,)xl findarag = fitdarag. -iva mindirig . 
(.~~ darrag Ivtl la to give a stepped form to. darragt I 
Ja[r-u bil-mif£, wil-malja~~ I tapered his hair with the 
comb and the scissors. Ib to grade, graduate. tadriig 
il-lju{n cotton grading. bi-ydarragu I-masaa{ir bis-santi 
wil-buu~a they mark off rulers in centimetres and in-
ches. fil-bukuuma bi-tdarrag iI-muwa:;;afiin the gov-
ernment classifies employees by grades. 2 to move 
along (in a group). darrag ik-kutub Jiwayya move the 
books along a bit! 3 to train (in). bi-ndarrag-hum 
[aJaan yiblju sufragiyya we train them to be waiters. 
-vn tadriig; avalpva midarrag. 
ll:.Jx tadriig Ivnl II bit-tadriig gradually. 
.... :~.ux tadriiga linst n. pi -aatl stepped or layered 
haircut. 
~)x tadriigi 12 ladjl gradual. lad vi gradually. by 
degrees. 
(,~.M mudarrag In pi -aatl I amphitheatre. auditor-
ium. lecture room. grandstand, stand (in a stadium). 
2 [mus] register. fil-mudarrag il-[aali upper register. 

ril-mudarrag il-wasat middle register. ril-mudarrag il-
waa{i low or bass register. 
c;:~.,.\;\ ritdarrag or riddarrag Ivil passive of darrag. -iva 
mitdarrag. 
C;:,»i radrag Ivil to insert, include. ridrig ism-i fik-kalf 
put my name on the list. -vn ridraag; ava mudrig; pva 
mudrag. 
C;:J.x...\ ristadrag or ristadrig Ivtl to draw (s.o.) out 
(with the purpose of eliciting information). ristadragt-u 
(fik-kalaam) li-raayit ma kafaf lan il-fJikaaya kull-a-ha 
I led him on until he revealed the whole affair. -vn 
ristidraag; ava mistadrag, mistadrig; pva mwtadragf. 
1 
~.1 ~ 
C;:\J') durraag Icoll n![zooIJ francolin. 
~G.) durraaga lunit n, pI -aatl a francolin. 
IS [.I ~ 
I.S":' JJ') durgi <T dort cihar> In pI durgiyyaatl pair of 
fours (in backgammon). 
":-' ~.1 ~ 
'-:'.)J.) dardib I/vtl to cause to dribble, cause to trickle. 
ma-tdardib-j il-l~iir min buqq-ak don't dribble the 
juice out of your mouth! 2/vil to dribble, trickle. 
ril-fJubuub dardibit mif-juwaal the grains trickled out of 
the sack. -vn dardaba; ava/pva midardib. 
'-:'')J.,.\;\ ritdardib or riddardib Ivil to dribble, trickle. 
II ris-sakraan iddardib las-sillim the drunk fell sprawl-
ing down the stairs. -ava mitdardib. 
[ 
~.1 ~ 
C;:.)J.) dardig Ivil to bump, be bumpy (of roads, old cars 
etc.). -also dagdig. - ava midardig. 
C~.1 ~ 
C}J.) dardafJ Ivtl to educate in the ways of the world, 
make sophisticated. kaanfallaafJ itgawwiz bint' bandar 
dardafJit-u he was a peasant (but) married a town girl 
who gave him some polish. -vn dardafJa; ava/pva 
midardafJ· 
C')J.,.\;\ ritdardafJ or riddardafJ Ivil to become or be 
made worldly-wise. -ava/iva mitdardafJ. 
I.I~.I~ 
J')J') dardar Ivtl to scatter, sprinkle. bi-ydardar 
il-masfJuuq lag-garfJ he sprinkles the powder over the 
wound. -vn dardara; ava/pva midardar. 
J')J.,.\;\ ritdardar or riddardar Ivil to be scattered, be 
sprinkled. -iva mitdardar. 
284 
l.l~.I~ 
'iJJ')J') darduura lIn pI daradiirl toothless gum. 
2 daradiir Ipl n! milk teeth beginning to emerge through 
gums. 
";~.I~ 
..r.)J.) dardif Ivil to chat. qaldiin yidardifu zayy' ma 
ykuun ma-warahum-j' furl they keep on chatting as if 
they have nothing to do. -vn dardafa; ava midardif. 
t ~.1 ~ 
t.)J.) dardal Ivtl to give (a drink to s.o.) ungraciously 
or with accompanying curses. huwwa laawiz id-dawa -
dardacuu-Iu bis-simm he wants the medicine, so let him 
bloody well have it! -vn dardaca; ava/pva midardac. 
t')J.,.\;\ ritdardal or riddardal Ivtl[abwJ to gulp down, 
wolf down. ridfal taman i1li ddardalt-u pay up for what 
you've wolfed! -ava/pYa mitdardal. 
.!l ~.1 ~ 
.!l.)J.) dardik = darbik. -vn dardaka; ava midardik. 
.!l.)~\ ritdardik or riddardik = 
ritdarbik. -ava 
mitdardik. 
r ~.1 ~ 
r.)'» dardim I Ivtl to fill up (especially with earth or the 
like). dardimu n-nuqra bil-fJigaara they filled in the 
hole with stones. 2/vt and viI to cover over, bury. 
rameena l-giifa fil-fJufra w-dardimna laleeha (or 
dardimnaa-ha) bit-turaab we threw the carcass into the 
hole and covered it over with earth. -vn dardama; ava 
midardim. 
r.)J.,.\;1 ritdardim or riddardim Ivil to be covered over 
(with earth, stone etc'.). - iva mitdardim. 
IS~.I~ 
IS.) J') dirdi <P durdf> Inl dregs. II fJ-axalli nhaar-u dirdi 
I'll give him hell! 
I.I.J~ 
~.) darr (i) I Ivtl to cause to flow plentifully. ril-biira 
bi-tdirr i1-bool beer acts as a diuretic. 2 to flow (of 
milk). -vn darr. dararaan. ridraar; ava daarir. mudirr. 
'i~.) darra In pI -aatl udder. 
)J.)! ridraar In! yield (of milk). 
~..\.o mudirr In pI -aatl diuretic. 

1 JJ ~ 
~~ durr Icoll nl pearl( s). 
;~~ durra J lunit n, pI durarl a pearl. kalaam-ak kull-u 
durar all your words are pearls (of wisdom). 
IS~~ durri 
ladjl 
lustrous, 
shining 
(like 
stars). 
rik-kawaakib id-durriyya the gleaming stars. 
J JJ ~ 
; ~~ durra 2 In pI -aat, durarl parrot. 
4 J J 
~ see 1 J J j : durriyya 
I jJ ~ 
)J~ daraz (i) Ivtl to cram, jam, pack tightly. daraz 
if-Janca kutub he stuffed the case full of books. sinaan-u 
madruuzaf-bac:tl his teeth are close together. -vn darz; 
ava daariz; pva madruuz. 
;)J~ darza linst nI a jammimg. kaanit 
~-~aala 
madruuza darza the hall was jam-packed. 
))..Iil rindaraz Ivil to be crammed, be packed tightly. 
- iva mindiriz. 
))..Iil ritdaraz or riddaraz = rindaraz. - iva mitdiriz. 
)~~ darriz Ivtl to dent, make indentations in (s.th.) by 
pressure, carving etc. -vn tadriiz; ava/pva midarriz. 
)~..Iil ritdarriz or riddarriz Ivil passive of darriz. - iva 
mitdarriz. 
1 jJ ~ 
IS))~ durzi Ipl duruuz/l/adj/la Druze, pertaining to 
the Druzes. Ib hard-hearted, tight-fisted. 2 Inl a 
Druze. 
IIJ"J~ 
..r)~ daras J (i) Ivtl to study. fi-sana ruula b-yidris 
magmuuc:it c:uluum muxtalifa in the First Year he stu-
dies a number of different subjects. I:J-adris i/-
muzakkira I'll study the memo. -vn diraasa, dars; ava 
daaris; pva madruus. 
4...1)~ diraasa In pI -aat/l study (of a subject). dirasaat 
Jarc;iyya Oriental Studies. 2 (artistic) study, r~-~uura 
di draasa l-fallaal:Ja m~riyya this picture is a study of an 
Egyptian peasant woman. 
\.$"" I)~ diraasi ladjl pertaining to study. rik-kutub 
id-dirasiyya I-muqarrara the books set for study. 
..r)~ dar:s In pI duruus/lesson. mif kifaaya d-dars illi 
tc:allimnaa fil-l:Jarbeen illi faatu isn't the lesson that we 
learned in the last two wars enough? 
4...)..1.0 madrasa In pI madaarisl I school. ril-madaaris 
I-ibtidariyya elementary schools, primary schools. ma 
285 
niftal:J madrasa fin-nafllet's open a school for picking 
pockets. 2 school of thought. madaaris radabiyya liter-
ary schools. 
\.$"")..1.0 madrasi ladjl pertaining to school or to school-
teaching, 
pedagogical. 
II tafkiir madrasi shallow 
thinking . 
..r )..Iil ritdaras J or riddaras J Ivii to be studied. -iva 
mitdiris. 
..r)..Ii 1 rindaras J = ritdaras J. - iva mindiris . 
..r~~ darris Ivtl to teach (a subject).I:J-adarris i{-{alaba 
tariix I'll teach the students history. -vn tadriis; ava 
midarris . 
..r~..I.o mudarris In·1 (school)teacher. mudarris rawwal 
senior teacher (in a subject). mudarris xa~~ private 
teacher. daragit mudarris {aead] university rank 
equivalent to assistant professor (U.S:) or lecturer 
(U.K.). mudarris lura university language-teacher 
(without the status of a lecturer). 
..r 
~..Iil ritdarris or riddarris Ivii to be taught. - iva 
mitdarris. 
..r;l..lil ritdaaris or riddaaris Ivil to give joint attention 
or consideration (to a subject). bac:d; ma ddarisna 
fil-mawtluuc: ittafac;na c:a/a JruuC mac;buula after we 
studied the subject together we came to agreeable 
terms. -ava mitdaaris. 
llJ"J~ 
..rJ~ daras 2 (i) Ivtl to thresh. -vn diraas; ava daaris; 
pva madruus. 
...,-!.)~ diriis Inl dried clover (used as animal feed). 
..r)..Ii 1 ritdaras 2 or riddaras 2 Ivil to be threshed. -iva 
mitdiris . 
..r)..Ii 1 rindaras 2 = ritdaras 2. - iva mindiris. 
J IJ" J ~ see IJ" J ~ 
: dirs 
4 IJ" J ~ see IJ" IS J ~ : diriisa 
-.JIJ"J~ 
;I.,..)~ diriswaar <Fr dressoir> In pI -aatl small 
sideboard. 
..;. J 
~ 
..r)~ darj (also rabu dar/) Iprop nl nickname for 
Mustafa. 
IJ IS ",;# J ~ 
~)b dar~iini <P diir-ehfnf> Inl cinnamon. 

It.)~ 
tJ~ dirlln pi duruulll shield. faaz bi-dirlll-quwwaat 
il-musaliaba he won the Armed Forces Shield (trophy). 
2 (piece of) armour. d"l' dabbaaba tank armour. 
3 handlebar grip (of a bicycle). 
","I~~ darraala In pi -aatl armoured cruiser. 
t~~ darral' Ivtl to armour, equip with armour. -vn 
tad"'l; ava/pva midarral. 
~~.\o mudarrala In pi -aatl armoured car. 
ri/-
mudarralaat the Tank Corps. 
t~-"I ritdarral' or riddarral' Ivil to be armoured. 
-iva mitdarral. 
It.)~ 
tlJ~ ,tIJ~ diraal In pi -aat, ridrila, dir{la, rudrull 
la arm, forearm. buc;na fid-diraal an injection in the 
arm. II rabu draal form of reference to a male with a 
deformed arm. -da raagil bi-draal-u that's a man who 
relies on his own efforts. - bid-diraal (1) by dint of 
great effort. (2) by force. Ib foreleg (of an animal). 
Ie shoulder (of meat). 2a arm, lever. diraal sanafoor 
arm 
on 
a 
(railway) 
signal, 
semaphore 
arm. 
2b connecting-rod. 3 unit of linear measurement. 
diraal baladi unit of linear measurement equal to 58 
centimetres. diraal milmaari unit of linear measure-
ment equal to 75 centimetres. 
~ 
IJ~ diraala = diraal 2. 
t~~ darral2 Ivtl I to elbow. darral-ni f-sidr-i he 
elbowed me in the chest. 2 to take the (diraal) 
measurement of. darral-II I- rooqa di measure this 
room for me! - Ivi/3 to make an obscene gesture with 
the forearm. 4 to swagger. Ylmfi ydarral fis-sikka 
tc;ul-f'famfuun he swaggers along the road as ifhe were 
Samson. - vn tad"il; avalpva mldarral. 
t~-"I ritdarral2 or r,ddarrall/vil to be measured out 
by the diraal. - iva mudarral. 
rt.)~ 
~ 
J~ darlami In • and pi daralmal graduate of the 
Dar el-Ulum (cf. daarJ 2). 
r t.) ~ 
~J~ dar'(am 
= 
darma¥. -vn dar¥ama; avalpva 
mldarYam. 
~ 
J-"I rUdanfam or r,ddar¥am = rudarmaY. - avaliva 
mudaryam. 
..;.) ~ 
";J~ darfa In pi -aat, dura{lleaf (of a door, window, 
286 
screen etc.).lIgaab duraf-ha he finished it off complete-
ly. - also qalfa. 
I J.";.) ~ 
J.t J~ darfil <T tirfil from It> I Ivtl to roll (steel into 
sheets). 2/vil to pitch, heave, roll. ri/-markib bl-tdarfil 
fil-babr II-laali the ship tosses in the rough sea. -vn 
darfala; avalpva mldarfil. 
iliJ~ darfala Ivn/ilioob darfala {nautl bilge keel. 
J.t J-"I ritdarfil or riddarfil Ivil 1 to be rolled. 2 to 
pitch, heave, roll. -vn darfala; avaliva mitdarfil. 
IJ";.)~ 
J,iJ~ darfiil <prob Lat delphinUS> In pi daraf,,/I 
la dolphin. Ib big beefy person. 2 roller. 3 mooring 
post in the seabed. 
-J";.)~ 
Jill)~ darfilfil <P darfilfil> Inllong pepper. 
IJ.)~ 
I..iJ~ darac; I Icoll nl shield(s). 
~J~ darac;a lunit n, pi -aatl a shield. 
l(J.)~) 
I..iJ~ darac;2 In pi -aatl {textl loom frame. 
';J~ darac;i, 
daraql ladll thyroid. 
r,l-yudda d-
darac;iyya the thyroid gland. 
tIJ.)~ 
~ 
\.i J~ durc;aala In pi -aatl{ obsol I noor space between 
two raised estrades. 
I~.)~ 
.!lJ~ dark' Inl bottom, depth. r,d-dark il-rasfal mm 
in-naar {Isil the depths of hell. 
.!lJ~ darak, darak In pi -aatl {obsoll area of watCh or 
patrol, beat. yafiir darak official watchman. 
.!l).\o madaarik Ipl nl mental faculties. madark-u 
wasla he is broad-minded. 
.!l)~ daarik Ivtl to put in order, set right. daa"k 
II-mawquul c;abl' ma yiw~al liI-bulil~ set the matter 
right before it reaches the police! -vn midarka; ava 
mldaarik. 
.!l)-" I rudaa"k or riddaa"k = daarik. - ava mudaa"k. 
.!l) radrak 1 Ivtll to realize, reach an understanding 
of. rana ma-radrakt'-j c;a~d-ak I didn't grasp your 
meaning. IIlIssa ma-Yld"k-j he's still immature. 2 to 
catch up with. II radrak-u I-moot he died. -vn r,draak; 
ava midrik, mudrik 1 . 

.!lJ.)! fidrak J Ivil to reach puberty. fit-bitt idrakit -
ma-tnam-f mala xwat-ha ~-~ubyaan the girl has 
reached puberty, she shouldn't sleep with her young 
brothers. - ava midrik. 
.!l1.J.l! fidraak Inl consciousness, awareness, under-
standing. da lissa layyit ma-landuu1 fidraak he's still 
too young to understand. kaanit ~-~adma fdiida 
ma-baliaa1 landu l-fidraak the shock was (so) great 
that he lost consciousness . 
.::..IS" J..\o mudrakaat r Ipl nl concepts. mudrakaat 
ba~ariyya visual concepts . 
.!lJ..I:.-1 fistadrak Ivtl to rectify or redress (s.th.) in 
good time. fit-ltalta stadraknaa-ha -fii feeh taani we put 
the mistake right (before any harm could be done) 
-what more could be wanted? -vn fistidraak; ava 
misladrak, misladrik; pva mistadrak. 
l.!l..JJ 
.!lJ') dirik <Engl> In pI -aall derrick. 
-iJ".!l..JJ 
~.,....sJ.) diriksiyoon (also diriksoon) <Fr direction> 
In pI -aatl (auto] steering-wheel. diriksiyoon lal-yimiin 
right-hand drive. 
r..J J see r I ..J J : diraama, diraami 
tr..J J 
C;J.) darmalt Ivtll to roll (s.o. or s.th.) on the ground. 
2 to cover with earth or mud. -vn darmalta; avalpva 
midarmalt. 
C; J-"I fitdarmalt or fiddarmalt Ivil I to roll or be rolled 
(on the ground). 2 to be covered with earth or mud. 
-avaliva mitdarmilt. 
iJ..J J 
~J.) daran Inl I tuberculosis. 2 Icolll (bOI] tuber(s). 
3 Ipl fadraanl dirt, filth. 
~J.) darana, darana lunit n, pI -aatl (bot] a tuber. 
~~.) darran Ivil I to become (very) dirty. huduum-u 
darranit his clothes got filthy. 2 to become tuberculous. 
fifaf it-bani faadam lidarran mis-sull human lungs may 
contract tuberculosis. - Ivt/3 to make dirty. 4 to cause 
tuberculosis in. S to cause to develop (small) swellings. 
-vn tadriin; ava/pva midarran. 
~~-"I fitdarran or fiddarran Ivil passive of darran. -vn 
ladarrun; iva mitdarran. 
r '..J J 
r"'J.) darhim In pI daraahim, daraahiml 1 (obsol] 
287 
dirhem, measure of weight equal to 3.12 grammes. 
2 dirhem, a silver coin. II fid-daraahim maraahim ... 
money is a remedy. 
I .J..J J see ..J J : darawa 
1 .J..J J see 1 IS..J J : dirwa 
J .J..J J see J IS..J J: diraawa, daraawa, midarraawi. 
midarrawaali 
t.J..J J 
t JJ.) darwax Ilvtl to cause to feel dizzy or giddy. 
fil-liliww i bi-ydarwax-ni heights make me giddy. 2 Ivil 
to feel dizzy or giddy. darwaxil wi-fultma laleeha she 
felt dizzy and fainted. -vn darwaxa; ava midarwax. 
tn-"I fitdarwax or fiddarwax Ivil to feel dizzy or 
giddy. - ava mitdarwax . 
";.J..J J 
";""'JJ.) darwiif <P darwesh> In pI darawiifll dervish, 
member of a Sufi order. 28 godly person. 2b person not 
quite right in the head. 
..rJJ.) darwif Ivtl I to make (s.o.) pious. 2 to make 
(s.o.) soft in the head. - vn darwafa; ava/pva midarwif. 
..rJJ-" 1 fitdarwifor fiddarwif/vi/l to become a mem-
ber of a Sufi order. 28 to adopt or affect the manners 0(, 
a godly person. 2b to go soft in the head. - ava 
mitdarwif· 
IIS..JJ 
IS).) diri (a, a) Ivil to become aware. min lteer ma yidra 
without his realizing. mif l:Ja-yidru biyya they won't 
realize I'm there. fima driit bi-lli l:J~al have you heard 
what happened? II ma-drit1 you must have heard (the 
news I'm about to tell you). - vn darayaan, diraaya; ava 
daryaan, daari. 
~IJ.) diraaya In pI -aatl know-how, skill. 
~~J.) daryaan ladj °1 aware, conscious. 
I.SJ.)i fadra J lell betterlbest informed. lala kulla Ijaal 
finta fadra ... anyhow, it is up to you since you know 
(about it) more than others do. 
I.S~.) darra J Ivtl to inform, notify. - ava midarri. 
I.SJ.)i fadra 2 = darra. feef fadraa-ni ... I have no idea 
(about that). II wi-min fadraa-k yimkin da~aljiilj'" who 
knows? it may be true. 
11S..JJ 
ISJ.) dira Inl sheltered or hidden place. fif1ams" 
Ijamya - ruulji fUlilUdi fid-dira the sun is strong; go and 

sit in the shade. II bi-yiftaral fid-dira he works on the sly. 
-/prepositionallyl xallii-k dira I-lJeet stay in the shelter 
of the wall. 
'..,.).) dirwa In pI -aatl 1 screen, protective wall. 
rik-kajf' wara dirwa examination behind a screen. 
2 'Shelter, sheltered place. lami/-Ii dirwa ranaam fiiha 
he's made me a refuge to sleep in. 
IS).) daara Ivtl 1 to hide, conceal. bi-tdaari k-kitaab 
minni (or lanni) leeh why are you hiding the book from 
me? - Ivil 28 to be secretive, keep one's affairs to 
oneself. rana mif min illi bi-ydaaru I am not the secre-
tive type. di ma-b-tilrafl' tdaari she does not know 
how to keep things to herself. lJibb' w-waari wi-krah 
wi-daari {prov] == show your love discreetly but hide 
your hate completely. 2b to put behind cover, make a 
screen. bi-ydaari lala leen-u miflams he is shielding 
his eyes from the sun. IIdaari lala jamlit-ak tifiiid 
{prov] (shield your candle and it will burn) don't broad-
cast your plans lest people's knowledge of them jeopar-
dize your success. -vn midariyya; ava midaari. 
11 daara lala to cover up for (s.o.). ranajuft-ak bi-tisrafi 
wi-dareet laleek I saw you stealing and covered up for 
you. 
IS)~I ritdaara or riddaara Ivil to be hidden, hide one-
self. riddaaraf-4.ill' ~ubaal-u (prov] == he wished that 
the earth would swallow him up. -ava/iva mitdaari. 
31S..J~ 
,..,I~ "..,1.).) daraawa, diraawa Inl winnowing. makanit 
diraawa winnowing machine. 
,I..,l. '1S.).i. 'lS.)oM midra In pI -aat, midar, madaaril 
1 winnowing fork. II haati ya midra waddi ya sidra 
{prov] (bring, winnowing fork; take, cooking pot) == 
whatever is earned is quickly used up. 2 punt-pole. 
IS~~ ,~~.) darra 2 Ivtl to 
wi~now. bi-nkawwim-u 
wi-ndarrii bi-makana we heap it up and winnow it with a 
machine. -vn tadriyya; avalpva midarri. 
1S..,I~oM midarraawi In pI -yyal one who winnows. 
JI..,~oM midarrawaati In pI -yyal one who winnows. 
IS~~I ritdarra or riddarra Ivil to be winnowed. -iva 
mitdarri. 
V"IS..J~ 
~.).) diriisa <poss It. terraziere> In! railway-track 
maintenance. laami/ (or laskari or rafiir) diriisa 
railway-track maintenance worker. 
~lSjj~ 
~j.) duzziina, dazziina <It dozzina> In pI -aat, 
288 
dazaziinl dozen. bid-duzziina by the dozen, in great 
quantities. - also (UZziina. 
(.;:..V"~) 
..::-.) dist <prob P dastf> In pI dusuutl 1 brass pot or 
cauldron. ri/li YUfilUd fil-wist' yikkabb· lalee rid-dist 
he who sits in the middle will have the dist emptied over 
him (a children's rhyme). 2 {metal] small smelting fur-
nace. 3 (slang] sucker. rinta fakir-ni dist do you take me 
for a sucker? 
~.) dasta <P dasta> In pI -aat, disatll dozen. n~~' 
dasta half a dozen. bid-dasta by the dozen. 2 pack (not 
necessarily containing a dozen). dastit kabriit a carton 
of ten boxes of matches. 
..J.J';:"V"~ 
.)..,;-.) dustuur, dastuurJ <P dastar> In pI dasatiirl 
1 {pol] constitution. rilJna mistanniyyiin id-dustuur id-
daarim we're waiting for the permanent constitution. 
- Idastuur onlyl 2 {constr] 28 course of rough-cut 
limestone (trimmed on one side). 2b set of blocks of 
wood (fixed into a wall) onto which a doorframe is 
fitted. 3/no pll {rur] leave, permission. min reer rilJim 
wala dastuur without so much as a by your leave. 
dastuur ya syaad-i by your leave, masters! (a form of 
address to spirits in zaar ceremonies). 
IS.)"';-.) dustuuri lladj ·1 constitutional. 2 In ·1 
constitutionalist . 
.;..)..,;-.) dusturiyya r Inl constitutionality. 
..J V" ~ 
'",-.) dusra Inl {metal] crimping (of metalsheet edges). 
V" V" ~ 
.;..) dass (i) 1 Ivtl to insert, insinuate. dassit i/-filuus 
fid-durg she put the money inside the drawer. ri/-buli~ 
dass· laleehum muxbir the police infiltrated them with 
a plain-clothes man. IJ-adiss-i-Iu simm' fiflaay I'll slip 
poison into his tea. 2 Ivil to insinuate oneself. huwwa iii 
dass' benna he's the one who came between us. -vn 
dass; ava daasis; pva madsuuS. 
4-0-.) dasiisa In pI dasaayisl plot, intrigue . 
...,..t.:..) dassaas In *1 intriguer. II ri/-lirfi' dassaas {prov] 
== inherited characteristics are ever-present. 
';'~I ritdass or riddass Ivil to be inserted, be insinu-
ated. - iva mitdass. 
';'..Ii 1 rindass = ritdass. - iva mindass. 
"""':'~I ritdassis or riddassis Ivil to infiltrate oneself. 
- ava mitdassis. 

J.J I.)" ~ 
J."..~ disuuq, dusuuq Iprop nl Disuq, a town in the 
north-west of the Delta, known in particular for the 
shrine of the Muslim saint Ibrahim ed-Disuqi. 
.}."..~ disuuqi, dusuuqi ladj *1 pertaining to the town 
of Disuq. 
~.".....I.II fid-disuqiyya, fid-dusuqiyya Iprop nl Sufi 
order founded by Ibrahim ed-Disuqi. 
( .!II.)" ~ ) 
.!L~ disk} 
<Engl> In 
pi -aatl 1 (news) desk. 
2 (control) desk (in a recording studio). 
.!L~ dise <prob Engl> In 
pi -aatl 1 cymbal. 
2 semaphore disc. 3 (path] (slipped) disc . 
.!L~ disk.l <Fr disque> In pi -aatl gramophone 
record. 
~ I.)" ~ 
r-~ dasam Inl fat (as an animal product). gibna kamlit 
id-dasam full-cream cheese. 
r-~ disim, dasim r ladjl rich, heavy (particularly of 
food). fiI-fakli da disim lala mildit-i this food is too 
rich for my stomach. da mawquul dasim yil:Jtaag li-
tafkiir that's a rich subject requiring thought. 
~\...,~ dasaama Inl fattiness, greasiness. 
r-...I;..I fistadsim Ivtl 1 to consider fatty or greasy. 2 to 
select for fattiness, greasiness or richness. - ava 
mistadsim. 
JY~I.)"~ 
r.-'-~ disimbir, disimbar Inl December. 
-";"~I.)"~ 
~Jl;.;..J~ dusintarya 
<It dissenteria> 
Inl 
{path] 
dysentery. 
DISI.)"~ 
4::-J~ duseeh <Fr dossier> In pi -aatl file, dossier, fol-
der.lIlu duseeh wisix landina he has a bad record with 
us. -ma-fii-/ daali l-fatl:J i dusehaat there's no need to 
bring things out into the open! 
..;.,..; ~ 
..;...:.~ dafat (i) Ivtl to disregard, ignore. dafat iJ-
muzakkira he paid no attention to the memorandum. 
-vn daft; ava daafit; pya madfuut. 
..;...:.~ daft (also waraq daft) Inl waste paper, scrap 
paper. 
..:--"1 fitdafat or fiddafat Ivil to be disregarded, be 
289 
ignored. - iva mitdifit. 
~-"I findafat = fitdafat. -iva mindifit. 
~~ daffit = dafat. -vn tadfiit; ava/pva midaffit. 
.::....:.-,,1 fitdaffit or fiddaffit = fitdafat. - iva mitdaffit . 
~ ..; ~ see 
~ IS ..; ~ : difiida, dafiida 
..;~..;~ 
";'J..:.~ dafdif Ivtl to reduce to fragments, smash, shat-
ter. f~-~udaal dafdif dimaar-i the headache split my 
skull. -vn dafdafa; ava/pya midafdif. 
..;...w.-"I fitdafdif or fiddafdif Ivil to be reduced to 
fragments, be smashed, be shattered. -iva mitdafdif. 
I .. ~~,) 
..;.~ daff (i) Ivtll to mash, pound. daffit id-dura lar-
ral:Jaaya she pounded the maize in the quern.llqaalid 
yidifP kalaam faarir he keeps on churning out nonsen-
sical talk. -yidifP f-furl-u he slogs away at his work. 
2 to smash, shatter. I:J-adiff i{-{abaq lala raas-ak I'll 
smash the plate on your head! - vn daff; ava daafif; pya 
madfuuf. 
..;....:.~ difiif Inl 1 something (specifically grain or 
beans) which has been mashed or pounded. 2 beads 
and stones woven onto a net placed around a corpse. 
~~ difiifa Inl something mashed, pounded, or 
broken to pieces . 
..;.G~ daffaaf In *1 lone who engages in mashing or 
pounding. 2a one who slogs at his work profitlessly, 
hack. 2b one who engages in prolonged and fruitless 
chatter, natterer. 
-f...... midaff Inl 1 any tool or instrument used for 
mashing or pounding. 2 one who chatters at length. 
-f.-"I fitdaff or fiddaff Ivil to be mashed, be pounded. 
- iva mitdaff. 
-f.-"I findaff = fitdaff. -iva mindaff . 
.;..:~ daffif Ivtl to mash or pound lightly. -vn tadfiif; 
ava/pya midaffif. 
~ 
..... midaffifa In pi -aatl bean-mashing machine. 
...,:...;.-,,1 fitdaffif or fiddaffif Ivil to be pounded or 
mashed lightly. - iva mitdaffif. 
2(";";~) 
-f.~ duff} <Fr douche> Inl 1 Ipl fadfaaj, difaaf, 
dufuufl la shower. xadt i dufF sariil I took a quick 
shower. Ib douche. 2 Ino pll scolding. fiddaa-ni duffi 
gaamid he gave me a sound scolding . 
-f.~ duff] <P dCt-shash> In pi fadfaafl double six (in 
backgammon) . 

-I.SJ~~ 
.J~.) diJilyoon In pI ·aall (joe] a vast number. 
r~~ 
4....J') dufma In pI dufaml (mil] bunker. dufmil madfal 
gun emplacement. 
i.J~~ 
.::...) daffin Ivtll to launch (a ship, an enterprise etc.). 
l:Jaftil ladfiin a launching party. 2 to consecrate (a 
church). - vn ,adfiin; avalpva midaffin. 
.:r-:-;; ladfiin In pI -aall I launching (of a ship, an en· 
terprise etc.). 2 consecration (of a church). 
';';;1 rildaffin or riddaffin Ivill to be launched (of a 
ship, enterprise etc.). 2 to be consecrated (ofa church). 
. iva mildaffin. 
~I.S~~ 
i..\e-.) difiida, daflida In pI dafaayidl peg on the yoke of 
plough (sec PI.D, 9). 
290 
j, j, ~ 
~J.) du{{a f <It dOle> In pI -aall (ehr] dowry. -also 
doo/a, doo{a. 
~t~ 
~ \&..) dUlaaba f In pI ·aall joke, amusing story. 
..,...1.) daalib Ivtllto tease, pull (s.o.'s) leg. 2 to fon· 
dIe, play with. bi-Idaalib ibn·a-ha ~-~urayyar she is 
playing with her little son .• vn midalba; ava midaalib. 
~I.A. mudalba, mudaalaba f In pI ·aall caress, affec· 
tionate conversation. 
..,...1;;1 rildaalib or riddaalib Ivilto exchange cares· 
ses, affectionate words etc .• ava mlldaalib. 
..,.~t~ 
~.) dalbislvi/ltogropearouIJd(insearchofs.th.). 
laazim lidalbis fi·kul/ d l:Jaaga you must dig into every· 
thing. 2 to become sad or depressed .. vn dalbasa; ava 
midalbis. 
~;;I ri/dalbis or riddalbis Ivil (impersonal) pas-
sive of dalbis. r,l·mal:Jfa;a mildalbls fiiha the wallet 
has been tampered with. - iva mildalbis. 
J~t~ 
.}.&-.) dalbillvtl I to cause to fade or wither. riI'laya 
dalbil-ha illness withered her body. riI-gafaaf dalbil 
iz-zarlthe drought withered the plants. riI·l:Jizn' dalbil 
wiff-a-ha sorrow turned her face wan. 2 to soften (e.g., 
dough). qalbili I'lagiina bijwayyil mayya soften the 
dough by adding a little water. - Ivi/3 to become iII-
looking. bald' ma l:Jiblil dalbilil t;awi after she became 
pregnant she looked very poorly. -vn dalbala; avalpva 
midalbil. 
.}.&-;;I rildalbll or riddalbillvil la to wither, fade. 
Ib to become iII·looking. 2 to become softer (e.g., of 
dough). 3 passive of dalbil. ·ava/iva Wldalbil. 
.Jt~ 
o,)\&..) dalaara, dilaara Inl prostitution. beel dalaara 
brothel. 
.rb daalir ladj 'I ruthless (of a man), sluttish (of a 
woman). 
..,. t ~ 
..rs-.) dalas (a) Ivill to force one's way. dalas bi-kill-u 
fiz-zal:Jma he shouldered his way into the crowd. 2 to 
step. stamp. r,dlas lala ~-~ur~aar da t;abl' ma yigri step 
on that cockroach before it gets away! - Ivt/3 to insert, 
cram. force (s.th. into s.th.). dalas diraal-ufif·fat;t; he 
forced his arm into the crack. 4/eoarse slang] to copu· 
late with, stuff. -vn dals; ava l/aalis; pva madluus. 
..rs-;;I rildalas or riddalas Ivil passive of dalas . • iva 
mildilis. 
Jt~ 
"y..) dalat; (a) Ivtl I to slam, bang. 2 to do in a hasty 
haphazard fashion. law ma-lIla-f laarif lilmil-ha 
ridlat;·ha w-xalaa~ if you don't know how to do it, just 
do it any old way and get it over with! -vn dalt;a; ava 
daalit;; pva mal/llllu;. 
Jr.A. madlllul; In pI madallit;1 damned thing, cursed 
thing. siib Il-madlulllj da leave that damned thing 
alone! 
.r;;1 rildalalj or riddalat; Ivil passive of dalat;. - iva 
mildlllt;. 
.r,A;1 rindalalj = rildalalj. -iva mil/dilit;. 
..!lt~ 
&.) dalak (a) Ivtl I to rub hard. scrub, scour. 
ma-lidlak-f' leen-ak kida w-riid-ak wisxa don't rub 
your eye hke that when your hand is dirty. r,dlak, 
I-huduum kuwayyis rub the clothes hard! 2 to give 
(s.o.) trouble, harass. rana dalakl-u dalka kwayyisa 
I gave him a really hard time. rabuu·ya madluuk fif· 
fuyl my father has a very hard time at work. -vn dalk; 
lIva daalik; pva madlullk. 
~.) dalka In pI ·aall I linst nl a rub, a rubbing. 
2 trouble. hardship. Il.vigi-lhum dalka one day they'll 

find life isn't so easy (said of those who are carefree). 
~..IOI fildalak or fiddalak Ivil I to be rubbed, be 
scrubbed. 2 to gain experience, become experienced. 
fiddalakfif-fuy/a di kwayyis he's become expert at this 
work. hiyya iii bi-llUU/ wi/aad-ha - fiddalakilfid-dunya 
kwayyis she's the one who supports her family -she 
really knows her way around. - avaliva mildilik. 
~..IOI findalak = fildalak. -avaliva mindilik. 
~J dauak = dalak. -vn ladliik: ava/pvamidauak. 
~..IO ladliika = dalka. 
J~..I.o midauakaali In pi -yyal mllsseur. 
~..IOI fildauak or fiddauak = fildalak. -ava/iva 
mildauak. 
';'.!l t J 
~J dalkif Ivil to rummage. balla/ lidalkif fil-
fadraag stop ransacking the drawers! -vn dalka/a; ava 
midaekif· 
rt~ 
~J dalm Inl support. fid-dalm is-SUluudi liI-bilaad 
i/-larabiyya Saudi support for the Arab countries. 
;.,.I&.J dilaama, dUlaama r In pi -aall support, prop, 
pillar. 
~J dallam r Ivtl to support, prop up. bi-ydallam 
kalaam-u b-fadilla he supports what he says with evi-
dence. sanduulj ladliim in-naljd currency reserve fund. 
-vn ladliim; avalpva midauam. 
~..IOI fildauam or fiddauam Ivil to be supported, be 
propped up. -iva mildauam. 
J t ~ see IS t ~ : dalwa 
.JJ t ~ 
.J;J dalwar Ivtl to send spinning, send reeling. 
xaba(-u dalwar-u fil- farc[ he hit him and sent him reel-
ing to the ground. -vn dOlwara; ava/pva midalwar. 
.J;..IOI fildalwaror fiddalwar/vil to reel back (from a 
blow). xad i/-buks' wi-ddalwar fil-farc[ he received the 
blow and fell reeling to the ground. - ava lizildalwar. 
IS t ~ 
I&.J dala I (i) Ivtl I to pray to, invoke. bi-yidli (1-) 
rabb-i-na he prays to God. 2 to invite. daluu-ni lal-
la/a they invited me to dinner. fi-farlj-u-hum 
mansiyyiin wi-f-hamm-u-hum madliyyiin (we're) for-
gotten at their feasts, but invited for their troubles. -vn 
dUla, dala, dalw: ava daali; pva madli. 
11 dar;a (rabb-i-na) Ii- to pray for, invoke blessings upon 
(s.o.), as in fumm-i b-lidlii-Ii la/Ban fangalj fil-
291 
imliljaan my mother is praying for me to pass my exam. 
-dala (rabb-i-na) lala to curse, invoke curses upon . 
..,r..1... yudla r Ivil to be called, be named. ~aljib-na 
Ijseen dayman yudla siljs our friend Hussein is always 
called siljs. 
I&.J •• I&.J dUla In pi fadliya t/ prayer, invocation (of 
God's blessing). 
I&.J dala2 Inl invocation (of God's wrath). 
..,rb daali Inlllpi dawaalil motive, incentive. feeh 
id-daali finnak lamall i kida what made you do that? 
bi-yifralj id-dawaali wil-fasbaab he explains the mo-
tives and reasons (behind s. th.). II ma-fiij daali there's 
no call, there's no need, as in ma-fiij daali lik-kalaam 
da there's no call to talk that way. 2/pl -yiinl inviter, 
host . 
..,r..l.o madli In pi madaalil invitee, guest. 
;..ul fi/-madlu Inl {leg] the one whose name is (a 
term used by process servers). safalna I-madlu laliwe 
questioned the one whose name is Ali. 
t;J daewa I 
In 
pi -aall 
18 prayer, 
invocation. 
II dalwil-U ma-tinzilj i/- farc[ he is a pious man. 
Ib imprecation, curse. 2 invitation. lazkaril dalwa in-
vitation card. 
i.SY-J dalwa2 In pi dalaawill lawsuit. rafal dalwa 
lalayya he brought a suit against me. IIma-Iuuj (ma-
Ihaaj etc.) dalwa "(bi-) he (she etc.) has no right to 
interfere (in), as in ma-Iakji dalwa biyya you have 
nothing to do with me, my affairs are none of your 
business. 2 proselytization. 
..,rJi fadla lell morelmost conducive. 
~I&.J dilaaya In pi -aall publicity, propaganda. kul/i 
{flalib bi-yilmil dilaaya I-nafs-u each student cam-
paigns for himself. 
..,r..101 fitdala or fiddala I Ivill to be invited. 2 to be 
invoked (of a blessing or curse). yaama ddalit-Iu 
dalawaal min waldee he received numerous blessings 
through the prayers of his parents. -/impersonallyl min 
falmaa/-u s-sayyifa ddala lalee kitiir everyone cursed 
him for his bad behaviour. - iva mildili. 
..,r..101 findala = fildala. - iva mindili. 
';'..1.0 midalli In *1 one who directs the prayers of 
pilgrims at Mecca. 
..,rI..lO ladaalif Inl correlation, association. fil-Iadaali 
I-Ijurr (or l-mu(laq) free association . 
..,rI..l:O'.o mUladaalif IlIdjl dilapidated, on the point of 
collapse . 
..,r;1 fiddala Ivtll to claim, assert. dayman bi-liddili 
k-karam she always claims to be generous. fiddala 
finnu dukruur he claimed to be a doctor. 2 to pray to 
God (for s.o.), invoke the blessings of God (upon s.o.). 

kull-i-na b-niddicii-Iu (rabb-i-na) yirgac bis-salaama 
we all pray for him to come back safe. - Ivi/3 to bring a 
lawsuit (against s.o.). I:J-addaci caf-flrka bil-l:Jaqq iI-
madani I'll sue the company for compensation. -vn 
fiddicaaf; ava muddaci, middici; pva muddaca. 
..r~ muddaciT In 'I [leg] plaintiff, prosecutor. 
riI-muddaci 
I-caamm 
the 
public 
prosecutor. 
II riI-muddaci I-caamm iI-iftiraaki government official 
with Cabinet rank charged with prosecuting crimes in-
volving exploitation of the people. 
..r~ muddaca: muddaca calee [leg] defendant. 
..rJ.:;,-1 fistadca 
(yistadci) 
Ivtl 
I to 
summon. 
riI-mal:Jkama b-tistadcif-Juhuud the court summons the 
witnesses. -/the literary passive form frequently occursl 
(ilic ridiif wi-yustadca f-l:Jaalit i(-(awaarif he's become a 
reservist and will be called up in case of emergency. 2 to 
require. demand. necessitate. da ma-yistadcii-f kull 
id-dawfa di that's not worth all this commotion. - vn 
fistidcaa f; ava mistadci. 
t~t~ 
t ~~ dayday, dayday Ivtll to batter .I:J-adayday-u min 
iq-qarb I'll beat the daylights out of him. 2 to crunch 
(with the teeth). mifkalit il-l:Jamaama bass - di daydayit 
i1-caqm' kamaan she not only ate the pigeon. she 
crunched up the bones as well. -vn daydaya; avalpva 
midayday. 
t~~1 fitdaydayor fiddayday Ivil I to be battered. 
2 to be crunched. - iva mitdayday. 
Jt~ 
,;.~ damr (u) llvtl to force. cram, thrust (s.th. into 
s. th.). damrit ~ubac-ha [-l:Janak iI-cayyil cafaan ti(allac 
iI-xaraza she forced her finger into the child's mouth to 
get out the bead. 2 Ivil to burst in (on s.o.). rush (upon 
s.o.). miraat-u damrtl calee huwwa w-cafiqt-u his wife 
burst in on him and his mistress. - ava daayir. 
ISJt~ 
IS';' J~ duYri <T dogru> ladvl I immediately, right 
away. {arad-ni duYri he threw me out right away. 
2 straight on. xallii-k maafi duYri l-yaayit ma tiw~al walk 
straight on till you get there. 3 in a straightforward 
fashion. fana {uul cumr-i maafi duYri all my life I've 
behaved properly. -/adj invar/4 straightforward, sin-
cere. raagil duYri a straightforward man, an undesign-
ing man. fana ~ariil:J macaak wi-duYri I'm being frank 
and open with you. 5 straight. misallaat duYri straight 
darning-needles. 
292 
~t~ 
4.:.S..~ daYfa r Inl dusk. [i-daYfit iI-misa at dusk. 
~~ dUITeefa 
Inl 
dusk. 
gum [i-duITeefit 
i1-
ma!ribiyya they came at dusk. 
...;.;:.~ daITafl Ivtl to blur, bedim. 2/vil to become dim 
or blurred. - also daYfif. - vn tadYiif; avalpva midaITaf. 
~~t~ 
~~ dayfif I Ivtl to blur. bedim. fin-nada dayfif iI-
barabriiz the dew blurred the windscreen. 2 Ivil to be-
come dim or blurred. na;ar-u mdayfif his sight has 
dimmed. - also daITaj. - vn daYfafa; ava/pva midayfif . 
~~ 
duyfeefa In pi -aat, dayafiifl dusk. gaa-ni 
[-duyfeefit iI-mayribiyya he came for me at dusk. 
~~I fitdayfif or fiddayfif Ivil to become dim or 
blurred. - ava mitdayfif. 
tt~ 
t~ daIT (u) Ivtl to break into fragments, smash, shat-
ter. daIT iI-qizaaz he smashed the windowpane. 
II dayy-u ca1qa he gave him a good beating. -vn daIT, 
~ayayaan; ava daayiy; pva madyuuy. 
t~1 fitdaIT or fiddaIT Ivil to be smashed. be shat-
tered. - iva mitdayy. 
";";t~ 
.J&.~ dUYUff In pi -aatl oaf. dolt. 
('t~ 
~~ dayam (i) Ivtl I to incorporate, combine. fidYim 
iI-mawquceen fi-maqaala wal:Jda combine both .topics in 
a single article. 2 [gram] to assimilate, contract (a 
sound). 3 to jumble, run together. bi-yidYim kalaam-u 
f-bacq he runs his words together. 
fafkaar-u 
madyuuma his thoughts ~re muddled. -vn daym; ava 
daaYim; pva madyuum. 
~~I fitdayam or fiddayam Ivill to be incorporated. 
2 [gram] to be assimilated. 3 to be jumbled. -iva 
mitdiyim. 
~.l.il findayam = fitdayam. -iva mindiyim. 
~~i fadyam r Ivtl [gram] to assimilate. -vn fidmam; 
pva madmm. 
..,.. (' t ~ 
~~ daymis Ivtl I to dim. 2 [coarse] to copulate 
with, lay. - Ivi/3 to grow dim. 4 to become glum, feel 
at a low ebb. 5 to get up to no good. -vn daymasa; ava 
midaymis. 
~~I fitdaymis or fiddaymis Ivil passive of daymis 
1. - iva mitdaymis. 

,jt~ 
.:j;.~ dayan (i) Ivtl {slang] to stuff (s.o., especially with 
food). -vn dayn; ava daayin; pva madyuun. 
~~ dayna In pi -aatl instance noun of dam. bittit 
dama a great feed. 
.:j;. ..... 1 findayan Ivil to stuffed (especially with food). 
-iva mindiyin. 
~.J t ~ 
..r,,;:,~ daYWif I Ivtl 18 to dim. daywif il-Iamba turn 
down the lamp. Ib to blur (the vision). fil-qatra 
daYWifit leen-i the eye-drops blurred my vision. 2 Ivil to 
grow dim. -vn daywaja; ava/pva midaYWif. 
i..:.";:'~ daywaJa Inl dimness, blurred-ness. 
~.,;:.~ duyweeJa Inl dusk. 
..r .,;:. ...... 1 fitdaywif or fiddaywif Ivil passive of daYWif· 
-iva mitdaywif. 
• ...; ~ see ,.;"'; ~ 
J":""'; ~ 
fl~ daftar In pi dafaatirl I ruled note-book, exercise 
book, ledger, register. daftar mabilaat sales ledger. 
daftar buc[uur signing-in book. daftar gard inventory 
record book. daftar murattabaat pay-roll. daftar Jikaat 
cheque book. daftar tilifoon telephone directory. 
Iidaftar il-fustaaz the master ledger. - daftar ~anfrecord 
book kept on the turnover of specific articles. -daftar 
yomiyya famrikaani daily account book with pages 
stamped and registered. -daftar bafra packet of 
cigarette papers. -laql-u daftar "" he has a sharp mem-
ory. 2 pamphlet, leaflet. daftar it-talliim instruction 
booklet. 
;b?~ diftirdaar Inl {obsol] former title ofthe Minister 
of Finance. 
~l>?~ daftarxaana In pi -aatl archive. 
,.; J":""'; ~ 
~.r.i~ diftirya <Engl> Inl diphtheria. 
J ,.; ..:.. ...; ~ see -..:..,.;"'; ~ : divateer 
...;~...;~ 
J...Ii~ dafdif Ivil I to flutter, flap, palpitate. 2 to be 
(over-)anxious, be (too) eager. -vn dafdafa; ava 
midafdif· 
J...Ii ...... 1 fitdafdif or fiddafdif = dafdif. - ava mitdafdif. 
(J ...; ~ ) 
)~ dafar In/ inflammation of the eyes (in cattle). 
293 
.)~ difra In pi -aat, difarl wire modelling-tool used for 
working clay or wax. 
-,jJ"';~ 
j....;)~ difransil <Fr> Inl {auto] differential gear . 
V" ...; ~ 
~~ dafas (i) Ivt/ I to stuff, cram. dafast i nafs-i 
f-zabmit il-futubiis I forced myself into the crowd on 
the bus. ril-huduum madfuusa fiJ-jan(a the clothes are 
crammed into the suitcase. II finta dayman bi-tid[1S 
manaxiir-ak (or buuz-ak) fi-kull B baaga you're always 
sticking your nose into everything. -b-ad[1S raas-ak fi(-
(iin "" I'll murder you! 2 to tuck away, put right inside. 
dafas mabfa;t-i f-geeb-u he tucked my wallet away in his 
pocket. dafas (nafs-u) tabt il-libaafhe burrowed under 
the quilt. II dafas i(-(abaq kull-u f-kirJ-u he knocked back 
the whol~ meal. -vn dafs, dafasaan; ava daa[lS; pva 
madfuus. 
If;';" madfuus Inl dish of pigeons baked with rice and 
milk. 
~ 
...... I fitdafas or fiddafas Ivil I to be forced, be cram-
med (into s.th.). 2 to force oneself (into, e.g., a crowd). 
fiddafast i fiz-zabma I forced myself into the crowd. 
-ava/iva mitdi[lS. 
.r! ..... 1 findafas = fitdafas. - ava/iva mindi[lS. 
.r!~ daf[1S = dafas. -vn tadfiis; ava/pva midaf[lS. 
~.;.. midaffis ladjl firm, compact. 
~ 
...... I fitdaffis or fiddaf[1S 
= 
fitdafas. - ava/iva 
mitdaf[lS. 
t"';~ 
e~ dafal (a) Ivtl I to pay (a sum) for (s.th.). dafalti 
fitneen gineeh banziin I paid two pounds for petrol. 
ba-yidfal il-lilaag he'll pay for the treatment. 
ma-dafaluu-Jil-fugra they didn't pay the fare. dafalti 
fiiha fait gneeh I paid a thousand pounds for it. 
2 (mech] to push, drive. ril-mayya b-tidfal sadlit 
il-balt fi-ttigaah waabid the water pushes the valve flap 
in one direction. quwwit !d-dafl momentum. 3 to re-
pel, drive away. ma-baddi-j yiqdar yidfal il-qac[a no 
one can avoid his fate. II fidfal bi-llati hiyya fabsan 
overcome evil with good. 
- Ivil 4 to protest. 
ril-mubaami dafal bi-oadam ixti!a~ il-mabkama the 
lawyer protested the court's lack of jurisdiction. -vn 
dafl; ava daafil; pva madfuul· 
e.) dafl In pi dufuUlI {leg] protest. 
;;...;~ dafla In/I Ino pI! forceful impetus, thrust, drive. 
IIralfgillandu dafla (1) a very energetic man. (2) a 

hot-tempered man. 2 Ipl -aall payment. 
el~ daafie ' In pi dawaafiel incentive, motive. 
~~ dufea Inl I I pi -aal, dUfael batch, part of a larger 
quantity. dufea mm iI-bic/.aaea one batch of the goods. 
rilxarragt' 
maeaa 
fi-dufeil 
lamanya 
w-siuiin 
I graduated with him in the class of '68. dufeil raffaaf 
burst of machine-gun fire. rid-damm' b-yinzil dufeaat 
wara baec/. the blood is flowing in spurts. II dufea waljda 
all at once, in one lot. 2/inst n, pi -aatl (single) pay-
ment. 3 Ipl dufael nickname for a private in the army. 
e.;.. madfae In pi madaafiel I cannon, gun. madfae 
raffaaf machine-gun. IIfi-wiff iI-madfae in the line of 
fire (for criticism etc.). -madfae is-suljuur Ramadan 
cannon awakening people for the nocturnal meal. 
- madfae iI- rimsaak Ramadan cannon signalling the 
time for ending the nocturnal meal. - madfae ir-rafe 
Ramadan cannon signalling the beginning of the fast. 
- madfae II-fi{aar Ramadan cannon signalling the end of 
the fa~t. - c/.arab madfae to fart, let rip. - ril-earabiyya 
b-I/emil madaafie the car backfires. 2 butane torch (for 
welding). 3 bolster-shaped cushIon (for a sofa etc.). 
4 folk preparation eaten by men to enhance sexual 
powers. laljas-Iu madfaeeen he took two doses of 
aphrodisiac. 
..;:..;.;.. madfaeiyya Inl artillery. madfaeiyya mc/.aadda 
b{-{ayyaraat anti-aircraft artillery. stfaalj tf-madfaeiyya 
the Artillery Corps. 
~.;.. madfaegi In pi -yyal gunner. 
e~1 radafae or rlddafae = rindafae I and 2. 
e...;1 rindafae Ivil I to be paid. 2 [mechJ to be pushed, 
be driven, have momentum. 3 to act impulsively. -vn 
rmdifaae: ava!Jva mindifle' mundafle r. 
t U"'; 1 rmdifaae r In pi -aatl I outburst, outbreak. 
2 rashness, impetuosity. 
4u...;1 rmdifaaea linst n. pi -aatl a sudden outburst. 
-.ru...;1 rmdlfaaeH ladj *1 Impulsive. 
e..l:.A mundafie ladj *1 rash, impetuous, Imprudent. 
el~ daafie l Ivil to put up a defence. laazim nidaafie 
can nafs-I-na we must defend ourselves. - vn midafea, 
dlfaac: ava midaafie . 
t I.t~ dlfaac In pi -aatl defence. ,difacaat ljawaleen iI-
mawqlc defence~ around the posItIOn. rid-difaae iI-
madam CIvil defence. 
-.ru~ dlfaacl ladjl defenSIve. rl{-{urUC; Id-dlfaeiyya 
defenSIve tactlc~ 
~I~I radaaflc or rlddaaflc IVII I (Impersonal) passive 
of daafle 2. rif-faraf laaZlm yitdaafle eannu one's hon-
our ~hould be defended. 2 to push one another. mzilna 
nadaaflc mll- rutubllS we pu~hed cach other out of the 
bu~. - vn tadaafuc 1 : ava!Jva madaafle. 
294 
I ...; ...; ~ 
j~ daff' (i) Ivtl to remove, throw aside. diff-u beiid 
take it right away! -vn daff, dafafaan; ava daafif; pva 
madfuuf. 
j~1 rildaff or riddaff Ivil to be removed, be thrown 
aside. - iva mitdaff. 
j...; I rindaff = rildaff. - iva mindaff. 
z ( ...; ...; ~ ) 
j~ daff2, duff In pi dufuuf! tambourine, larger than 
the ric;c;, with a small wooden edge around the head, so 
it can be twirled around the player's finger. 
j~ daft' Inl [ChrJ small cymbals used to accompany 
liturgical singing. 
;.j~ daffa' In pi -aat, difafl helm, rudder and tiller. 
eamuud daffa rudder stock. IIdawwar id-daffa to 
change the subject. - rinta c;alabt id-daffa calayya now 
you're turning against me! - min id-daffa lif-fabuura "" 
one and all. without exception. 
J"';~ 
...;t~ dafac; (u) I Ivtl to pour out. eala mahl-ak 
ma-tudfuc;-fll-mayya kida go easy, don't pour the water 
out that way! 2 Ivil to gush, spurt. rid-damm' dafac; min 
zoor-u the blood gushed out of his mouth. - vn dafc;, 
dafac;aan; ava daafic;: pva madfuuc;. 
.:;.t~1 ritdafac; or iddafac; Ivil to be poured out. -iva 
mitdiflc;. 
~...; I rindafac; = ritdafac;. - iva mindlflC;. 
..;t~ daffac; I Ivtl la to cause to gush or spurt. Ib to 
pour repeatedly. 2 Ivil to gush or spurt repeatedly. - vn 
ta~fiic;: avalpva midaffac;. 
.,t~1 ritdaffac; or riddaffac; Ivil to pour forth, gush 
forth. rtf-mayya b-I/ddaffac; mll-ljanafiyya water is 
pouring out of the tap. - ava nllldaffac;. 
.:"...;~ 
.)~ dafan (i) Ivtl to bury, entomb. dafannaa wi-xadna 
I-xaa{ir we buried him and paid our condolences. 
IIdafnim-u sawa "" (don't give me that,) we both know 
the real story. - maljbas dafn a tapl faucet all of whose 
adjOining pIpes are concealed in the wall. - vn dafn; ava 
daafm; pva madfuun . 
.,;j~ dafna linst n, pi -aatl a burial. ljac/.art Id-dafna 
rimbaarilj I attended the burial 
ye~terday. eilaag 
ir-rumatizm' bld-dafna fIr-rami treating rheumatism by 
bu.rYlng the patient up to his neck In sand. 
.Ju~ daffaan Inl horned viper. 
.).;.. madfan In pi madaafml I cemetery. 2 tomb. 

..)..Iil fitdafan or fiddafan Ivil to be buried. be en-
tombed. -iva mitdifin . 
..)..Iil findafan = fitdafan. II findafan bil-Ijaya his life 
tUIned out badly for him. - iva mindifin . 
..)~ daffin I Ivtl to bury, conceal (with.effort). 2 Ivil to 
~arbour resentment, store up ill will. qacad yidaffin-lu 
l-Ijadd i ma xad bi-taar-u he went on harbouring resent-
ment against him until he got his revenge. - vn tadfiin; 
avalpva midaffin. 
;1.J';~ 
).~~ difnaar Inl [Chrl book of the lives of saints written 
in verse and sung on saints' days in the morning service. 
~.J .; ~ 
• j~ difooh <Fr defaut> In pi -aatl defect. 
.s';~ 
j~ difi (a) Ivill to become warm, warm up. rigleedifyit 
his feet warmed up. 2 to acquire money, become 
wealthy. -vn dafa, dafayaan . 
• ....;~ dafa Inl warmth, cosiness. tacaala fUljcudfid-dafa 
come and sit in the warm! fid-dafa cafa wit-bard i 
laljljaas it-ljafa [provl "" how nice it is to be cosy when 
it's cold outside . 
.Jl".t~ dafyaan ladj */1 warm (of people and animals). 
2 well-off. loaded (with money). 
jb daafi ladjl warm. fin-nahar-da daafi its warm to-
day. IIgism-u daafi he has a (slight) temperature. 
~li~ daffaaya In pi -aatl heater, any device (such as a 
brazier, fireplace etc.) the purpose of which is the pro-
vision of heat. 
4~ diffiyya In pi dafaafi, diffiyyaatl [rurl woollen 
cloak. 
j~ daffa 2 Ivtl to warm, heat. ma-canduhumji 
huduum tidaffii-hum they don't have clothes to keep 
them warm.lldaffa geeb-u to acquire money, as in qabl i 
ma titgawwiz laazim tidaffi geeb-ak before you marry 
you should have some money. - vn tadfiyya; avalpva 
n;idaffi. 
j..lil fitdaffa or fiddaffa Ivil to become warm. fi(-(ij1 
iddaffa taljt it-liljaafthe child got warm under the quilt. 
-ava mitdaffi. 
li.x:-I .j.x:-I fistadfa 
Ivtl 
I to 
consider warm. 
bi-tistadfa I-ljacda hina can hinaak she feels warmer 
sitting here than there. 2a to select for warmth. 2b to 
select for wealth. fistadfit ~aaljib fa(yaan wi-ggawwizit-
u she chose a rich landowner and married him. - ava 
mistadfi. 
295 
-..:...s';~ 
,r...iJ divyateer (also divateer) <Fr deviateur> Inl 
[eleel double two-way switch circuit. 
IJ~J~ 
J.u~ daqdaq Ivtl I to crush, grind by pounding. 2 to 
nail. 3 to make (s.o.) worldly-wise (of life). xalli 
z-zaman yidaljdaq-ujwayya let life teach him a thing or 
two. - Ivil 4 to rap, bang. -vn daljdalja; ava/pva 
midaqdaq. 
J.u.Ai1 fitdaljdaq or fiddaljdaq Ivil passive of daljdaq. 
- iva mitdaqdaq. 
ZJ~J~ 
J.u~ duqduq In pi daljaadiql [trad soc, obsoll form of 
address or reference to a small child"" tiny one . 
; J ~ 
}~ daljar (u) I Ivtl to wedge, jam. fudqur i1-xajabafii 
wedge the piece of wood into it. 2 Ivil to become 
wedged or jammed. riI-mux{aaf daaljir the anchor is 
stuck. - vn daljr; ava daaljir, daaqir; pva madquur. 
11 daljar fi- (1) to persist stubbornly in. (2) to interfere 
in. 
}~ diqir ladj *1 I persistent, obstinate. 2 interfering, 
nosey. 
)i~ duqaar In pi -aatl peg, prop, stake (firmly fixed as 
a .support). 
}~ daqqar Ilvtl to lean, press, prop, wedge. daljqaru 
kutal xajab fis-suur il-maayil cajaan yisnidu they press-
ed blocks of wood against the sagging fence to prop it 
up. 2 Ivil to rub or press one's body (up against s.o.) for 
sexual 
satisfaction. 
huwwa 
bi-yljibb i 
yirkab 
fil-futubisaat iz-zaljma cajaan yidaljljar fis-sittaat (or 
lis-sittaat) he likes to ride in crowded buses so that he 
can rub up against the women. -vn tadljiir; ava 
midaqqar. 
11 d~qqar (raas-u) fi- to persist in. 
JI)...I.o midaljqaraatiln pi -yyal frotteur, one who rubs 
up against women in crowds for sexual satisfaction. 
}..Iil fitdaqqar or fiddaqljar Ivil to intervene, inter-
fere. II qul-lu yba((al yitdaqljar fi-lli ma-Iuu-j fii "" tell 
him to mind his own business! - ava mitdaqqar. 
}I~ daaljir Ivil to persist (unsuccessfully), be tena-
cious. leeh tidaaqir fi-lli ma-tiqdarf calee why persist 
in doing what you're incapable of? - vn midaljra; ava 
midaaqir. 
} 1.Ai1 fitdaaqir or fiddaaqir 
= 
fitdaqqar. 
- ava 
mitdaaljir. 

r"; J ~ 
r-.:.i~ dufifum In pi daqaafiml goldsmith's weight. 
r.J";J~ 
i ~~ dafifuum Icoll nl crushed limestone (used in ce-
ment mix), packing stone. 
4. ~~ dafifuuma In pi -aatl cudgel. 
JJ~ 
J~ daqq (u) Ivtl la to pound. quit' lig-gazzaar 
yiduqq-i-Ii I-Ial]ma I told the butcher to pound the meat 
for me. II daqq il-hamm' w-naxal-u "" he lived in con-
stant misery. -daqqeet-u lalqa suxna I gave him a good 
thrashing. Ib to hammer in, drive in. kull' lafart imtaar 
I]a-nduqq· lalaama fil- farti we'll drive a marker into 
the ground every ten metres.llmatral] rna tirsi duqq-i-
Iha {prov] (wherever your ship comes to rest, drop 
anchor) "" let fate carry you along. 2 to nail. 
fig-gazmagi daqq-i-Ii k-kalb' b-xamsa saa¥ the cobbler 
nailed the heel for me for five piastres. 3 to bang on, 
knock on, sound. filii laayiz yixuff' yduqq il-baab il-
fawwil anyone who wants to come in should knock on 
the door first. raal] daaqiq ig-garas qabl il-I]~~a rna 
tintihi he rang the bell before the class was over. 
II faxuu-ya daqq-i-Ii tilifoon fimbaaril] my brother cal-
led me by phone yesterday. -daqqit-Iu tilli¥raafshe sent 
him a cable. -lamalna-Ihum daqq' fils"" we picked 
them up by the arms and legs and banged their behinds 
together. -ya dahya duqqi oh no! now we're in for it! 
- daqq' daqqa to pull a fast one. -I]a-nduqq' daqqa 
farayl]i we'll strike up a happy tune. 4 to tattoo (a 
design). niduqq' wi-ntaahir wi-nfuuf il-baxt (gypsy 
street-call) we tattoo, do circumcisions and tell for-
tunes! IIdaqq ~-~aliib {Chr] tattooing of the cross (on 
the inner side of the wrist - a Coptic custom). -da 
daaqiq ~-~aliib {derog] (said by one Muslim of another) 
he's ruthless, he's without mercy. -bitaal id-daqq tat-
tooist. - huwwa-na daaqiq l~afiir "" do you think I'm 
simple? 5 to stipple (paint). - Ivil 6a to beat, pound, 
hammer. fig-giraan bi-yduqqu lal-I]eeta the neigh-
bours are banging on the wall. maj'yiln fif-!aarlt 
yiduqqu la/a d-dufuuf they're walking in the street 
beating on tambourines. 6b to beat, sound. ma-smitt'-J 
il-baab bi-yduqq didn't you hear a knock at the door? 
kaan qalb-i bi-yduqq' gaamid my heart was pounding. 
fit-tilifoon daqq the phone rang. fis-saala daqqit 
tamanya the clock struck eight. II duqqi ya mazziika 
(1) (said to a band) play up! (2) hurrah! -yaama daqqit 
lala r-raas (ubuul {prov] "" I've seen it all. 7 to take 
296 
hold, become established. nirwif-!atlaat lafaan tiduqq' 
fil- farti we water the seedlings so that they may take 
root in the ground. xinaaqa kbiira qawi daqqit a huge 
quarrel broke out.lldaqq' fiyya he came and started a 
quarrel with me. 8 to fuss or fret over details or trivial 
things. filii yduqq' yitlab {provJ worrying over little 
things just wears you out. ma-tduqq'-! don't make a 
fuss (over it). I]a-tduqq" lala kalaam in-naas are you 
going to fret over what people say? II daqqeet Galee 
ma-yinsaa-!milad-na I stressed to him that he must not 
forget our appointment. - vn daqq, daqqa, daqaqaan; 
ava daaqiq; pva madquuq. 
;ij~ daqqa Inl Ilinst n, pi -aatl a (single) beat, blow, 
knock. daqqaat il-qalb heartbeats. raq~it Gala daqqaat 
i(-(ubuul she danced to the beats of the drums.lldaqqa 
b-daqqa blow for blow, tit for tat. 2 specific rhythm 
(determined by the melody in question) to which a 
patient dances in the zaar.1I di daqqa w-di daqqa (that is 
one beat and this is another) this case is different from 
the previous one. -bi-timfi Gala daqqa w-n~~ she sways 
her hips when she walks. - di baqit daqqa qadiima that's 
old-fashioned. 3 condiment of hot red pepper, oil, 
v!negar, salt and water used to seas0-.!l fuul or kufari. 
;ij~ duqqa In! condiment consisting of salt and pounded 
spices (usually cumin, coriander and sesame). IIfaqiir 
duqqa very poor. 
;ij~ diqqa, diqqa r Inl precision, accuracy. bi-diqqa 
a~curately. Ildiqqit na;ar insight, perception. 
..}~ diqqi ladj *1 precise, accurate. kaan diqqif-!u¥l-u 
he was accurate in his work. II naggaar diqqi a joiner. 
;4i~ diqqiyya Inl I Ino pll exactness. 2 Ipl daqaaqil 
small cooking-pot. 
j~i fadaqq lell morelmost accurate, or precise. 
JI:i~ duqaaq Inl powder. duqaaq it-tirmis lupin flour. 
~~ daqiiq ladj */1 accurate, precise. falaat daqiiqa 
precision instrument~, precision tools. 2 delicate, fine. 
fis-salatiyya fu¥l-u-hum daqiiq watchmakers' work is 
delicate. II ril-ramlaar id-daqiiqa the small intestine. 
.;ei~ dlql/q Inl flour. diqiiq fiinu fine white flour (used 
for making western-type bread). diqiiq lalaama top 
quality flour. diqiiq sinn bran. II diqiiq is-simiit semoli-
na. -dlqiiq I(-(alt pollen (particularly pollen of the male 
palm flower). - fabu dqiiq butterfly, moth. - (yibqa) 
zet-na fi-dqiq-na we'll keep it all in the family, as in 
nigawwiz il-bint' li-bn· lamm-a-ha w-yibqa zet-na fi-
dqiq-na we'll marry our daughter to her cousin and 
keep it all within the family. 
~~ diqiiqa In pI daqaayiql minute. laqrab id-
daqaayiq minute hand (of a clock or watch). 

J~~ dac;c;aac; I In °1 Is one who grinds spices for sale. 
Ib one who grinds ingredients for taGmiyya. 2 In pi 
-aatl pile-driver . 
.]...1..0 midac;c;. madac;c; In pi -aatl I track, footpath. 
2 wooden pestle. 3 type of mallet used in ornamental 
wood-working. 4 rammer. 
~~ midac;c;a = midac;c; 2 and 3. 
.];';1 fitdac;c; or fiddac;c; Ivil passive of dac;c;. -iva 
mitdac;c; . 
.]..I.i 1 findac;c; = fitdac;c;. -iva mindac;c;. 
.;i~ dac;c;ac; Ivil I to go into· detail, be precise. 
bi-ydac;c;ac; fil-mawquuG he leaves no detail of the sub-
ject undiscussed. bi-ydac;c;ac; fijuyl-u he does his work 
accurately. 
2 to 
be 
meticulous, 
be 
particular. 
ma-tdac;c;ac;ji kida don't be so fussy. bi-ydac;c;ac; 
Gal-c;ir/ wil-malliim he's a penny-pincher. fil-mudiir 
dac;c;ac; maGaahum fil-mawaGiid the director was par-
ticular about their being on time. 3 to scrutinize, look 
carefully. dac;c;ac;i f-mayyit ik-kubbaaya !Ja-tlac;ii-ha 
mij niqiifa look closely at the water in the glass and 
you'll find it's not clean. -vn tadc;iic;; ava midac;c;ac;. 
.]...>.:;..1 fistadac;c; Ivtl to consider (e.g., workmanship) 
fine and delicate. - ava mistidac;c; . 
.].,.1;;...,0 mustadac;c; ladjl conical. 
I,$.J J ~ 
.}..u 1 fid-duC;C;i Iprop nl residential area in Guiza. 
~JJ~ 
~~ dac;/ig Ivtl to roll. dac;/ig iI-barmiil Gar-r~iif he 
rolled the barrel onto the wharf. - vn dac;/aga; ava/pva 
midac;/ig. 
~;.;I fitdac;/ig or fiddac;/ig Ivil to roll or be rolled. 
-avaliva mitdac;/ig. 
r J ~ 
W~ duc;ma (also dumc;a) <T tokmak> In pi -aatl 
I small wooden mallet. 2 cudgel. 
J 1 r J ~ 
JW~ duc;maac; <T tokmak> In pi dac;amiic;1 wooden 
mallet. 
~W~ duc;maac;a = duc;maac;. 
';'J~ 
.)~ • .)~ dac;n Ifem n, pi duc;uunl I chin. ~I wiC;iG /i-
dac;n-u "" he got up to his neck in trouble. 2 beard. 
huwwa mrabbi dac;n-u he has a beard. dac;n is-siisi dac;n 
iI-faar dac;n i m!Jammad in-naggaar (or in-najjaar or 
297 
iI-yaffaar) chant uttered by children in the course of 
such games as gabba (q.v.). IIxud-/i dac;n-i give me a 
shave. -sallim-ha dac;n-u he let himself be led by her. 
- fait dac;n i wala dac;n-i "" I'd rather see a thousand 
killed than get scratched myself. -di!Jk' Gad-duc;uun 
trickery, knavery. -min dac;n-u wi-ftil-Iu (if he wants a 
rope take hairs from his beard and make it for him) "" 
make him pay for all he gets. - fatif!" Gala dac;n-i law ... 
or fa!Jlac; dac;n-i law ... or faadi dac;n-i law ... "" I'll eat 
my hat if .... - waa!Jid jaayil dac;n-u wit-taani taGbaan 
leeh or waa!Jid jaayil dac;n-u wit-taani (or w-inta) 
zaG/aan leeh {prov] = why get upset about other peo-
ple's concerns? - dac;n iI-baaja variety of tree (Albizzia 
lebbek), so called because of the beard-like appearance 
of the long stamens of its greenish-white globose flow-
ers. 3 chin rest (of a violin). 
~~~ dac;c;aana In pi -aatl I curb chain (of a bridle). 
2 chin rest (of a violin). 
.J';'J~ 
4:i~ dac;nu Inl style of serving in the game called xara 
sinnu (q.v.). 
IJ".JJ~ 
U"'".b dac;uus In pi dawac;iisl I supporting strut within 
the sound-box of a stringed instrument. 2 {naut] trans-
verse timber supporting the half-deck in a Nile sailing 
boat. 
,; 1 .!l ~ 
)SJ~ dukaar In pi -aatl {obsol] two-wheeled horse-
drawn carriage, trap. 
~Iy.!l ~ 
C~~~ dikubaaj 
<Fr decoupage> 
Inl 
cinema 
shooting-script. 
,; .:.. .!l ~ 
.. ? ~ daktara Inl {mech] thread-cutting. 
I,; .:.. .!l ~ 
ol,;? ~ dukturaah <Fr doctorat> Inl doctorate. 
,; .J .:.. .!l ~ 
,;? 
~ duktuur, duktoor, daktuurJ <Fr docteur> In, 
fern duktuura, 
duktoora, daktuura J, pi dakatral 
I medical practitioner. duktuur nafsaani psychiatrist. 
duktuur bilari veterinarian. duktuur Gi~aam orthopaed-
ist. duktuur fasnaan dentist. duktuur fauaab neuro-

) ,)'~,) 
298 
logist. :2 one holding a doctorate. doctor. 3 form of 
.;. .tl l 
address or reference to any of the above or a 
..;.s J duklladj invarl huge and strong. 
pharmacist. 
-Jl.tll 
C\;J~J dikadraaj <Fr decadrage> Inl [ein] mis-
framing. 
.tll.fll 
.!l..lS'J dakdik Ivtl to tamp down. ram. beat or press 
down. level out (ground. earth. stone etc.). ril-xeel 
wi-hiyya b-tigri dakdikit il- rart{ the galloping horses 
flattened the ground. -vn dakdaka; ava/pva midakdik. 
.!l..lS' oIr\ ritdakdik or riddakdik Ivil to be beaten down. 
be flattened out. - iva mitdakdik. 
J.tl~ 
.J~ . .J J dakar Ipl dukura. dukuurll ladjl male (anim-
al or plant). naxl' dakar a male palm.llraagil dakar a 
real man. -mara dakarJ (\) a no-nonsense woman. 
(2) a lesbian assuming the male role. (3) a barren 
woman. -laamil dakar acting (\) the tough guy. (2) the 
ladies' man. -muzmaar dakar a muzmaar in the bari-
tone range. - wadala dakar large spiky sea-shell used in 
divination. - ril-fJa;; id-dakar bad luck. - ril-faqr id-
dakar extreme poverty. 2 In/2a person or animal of the 
male sex. dakar ba[{ a drake. kalbit-na wildit talat 
dukuur wi-ntayteen our dog gave birth to three male 
and two female pups. 2b male (plug. joint, mechanical 
part etc.). dakar wi-ntaaya (I) tenon and mortise. 
(2) hook and eye fastener. 2c [metal] thread-cutting 
tap. 
~~ za.karl In/l/pi zukuurl male. 2/pl zukural penis . 
.J~ . .JJ dakkar I/vtlto fertilize (ofa male palm tree). 
2 Ivil to cease bearing fruit owing to age (of a plant). 
- ~n tadki,,; ava/pva midakkar. 
.J~ muzakkar f Inl [gram] masculine. 
.:....J.,.\;\ rudakkarit or riddakkaritlvi/l to be fertilized 
(of a female palm tree). 2 to become a male (through 
surgery). - ava/iva mitdakkara . 
.J..I;;...\ ristadkar Ivt/l to fertilize artificially. pollinate 
(especially palm trees). 2 to consider male or mascu-
line. 3 to select for masculinity. - Ivi/4 to behave in a 
masculine fashion. bi-I/stadkar laleena "" she bosses us 
around. - ava mistadkar. 
":'I.SJ.tlJ 
~.JJ dikriitu <It decreto> Inl/obsol] firman. execu-
tive decree. 
I .tl .tl ~ 
~J dakk I (u) I Ivtl to tamp down, pbund firm. 
bi-ydukku l-xarasaana lalaan iI-meeda they tamp down 
the concrete for the foundation. 2 to stuff, cram. dakk 
il-mafJfa;a f-geeb-u he stuffed his wallet in his pocket. 
3 to flatten. raze. ril-infigaar dakk il-limaara the ex-
plosion flattened the apartment building. 4 to tighten 
the weave of (cloth). -vn dakk, dakakaan; ava daakik; 
pva madkuuk. 
i J dakka In pi -aatl [constr) I foundation layer of 
crushed stone. 2 block of pre-cast reinforced concrete . 
~..\.o midakk I In pi -aatl rammer. 
~oIr\ ritdakk or riddakk Ivil passive of dakk J. - iva 
mitdakk. 
2.tl .tl ~ 
i J dikka I In pi -aat. dikakl draw-string. - also tikka. 
~..\.o midakk 2 In pi -aatl rod for inserting a drawstring 
into a casing. 
i..\.o midakka = midake. 
.d J dakkik Ivtl to thread (cord. wire etc.) in the man-
ner of a drawstring. tadkiik is-silk' j-bakyit if-Iabaka 
passing the wire through the casing of the (tennis) net. 
-v,!! tadkiik; ava/pva midakkik. 
<J.lS" oIrl ritdakkik or fiddakkik Ivil to be threaded (of. 
e.g., a drawstring). - iva mitdakkik. 
J ( .tl .tl ~ ) 
i J dikka 2 In pi dlkakl bench. 
~J dakk 2 <Engl>: qumaal dakk duck (thick cotton 
cloth). 
-..:. J.tl J 
4 
J dikulteeh <Fr decol/ere> I ladj invarl decollete • 
low-necked (of a woman's garment). 2 In pi -aatl neck-
line of a garment 
r .tl ~ 
W J dukma Inl [naw] boom of a lateen sail. 
4..f J dakama In pi -aat, dakaml boom of a crane. 
~J dakkim Ivtl [constr! to support. underpin. ba{{u 
limdaan xalab lalaan yidakkimu jaddit il-xarasaana 
they put wooden posts to support the casing of the 
c~ncrete. -vn tadkiim; ava/pva midakkim. 
~ 
oIr\ fitdakkim or fiddakkim Ivil to be supported. be 
underpinned. - iva mitdakkin. 

.J~~ 
.:,IS"~ dukkaan In pi dakakiinl small shop. dukkaan 
l~iir a juice shop. 
i,;1S"~ dukkaana In pi dakakiinl small shop. dukkaanit 
sagaayir a cigarette shop. 
~IS" 
~ dakakiini ladvl illegally, illicitly. bac;eena 
nifta'(al dakakiini min '(eer rux~a we began to work 
ill~gally, without a licence. 
,:J ~ dakkin Ivt and viI I to conceal, be secretive (ab-
out). ma-tdakkin-J(lala) iI-mawcf.uul wi-bkii-Ii b-surla 
don't be so secretive about it - tell me quickly! 2 to 
hoard. ficf.lit tidakkin (lala) iI-filuus (uul lumr-a-ha 
w-maatit mil- raYniya she hoarded money all her life and 
died a rich woman. 3 to purloin, pilfer. wi-huwwa 
xaarig mil-ma{lam dakkin (lala) mallac;teen as he was 
leaving the restaurant he filched a couple of spoons. -vn 
tadkiin; avalpva midakkin. 
J;;I ritdakkin or riddakkin Ivil passive of dakkin. 
-iva mitdakkin. 
f .d ~ see .!l 1 ~ : 
dukha, 
dukhat, 
dukhawwa, 
dukhawwat, dukhawwan, dikha, dikhat, dikhayya, 
dikhayyal, dikhayyan, dikhiyya, dikhiyyat, dikhiyyan, 
dukhum, 
dukhumma, 
dukhummat, 
dukhumman, 
dukham, dukhamma, dukhammat, dukhamman 
').J.!l~ 
)~~ dikoor <Fr decor> In pi -aatll decor, interior 
decoration. laamil dikoor interior decorator. 2 [theat] 
stage-set. muhandis dikoor stage designer. 
y 1 J ~ 
,-:,'JJ~ dulaab <P dol-db> In pi dawaliibll cupboard, 
wardrobe, cabinet. dulaab bit; iI-malaffaat filing 
cabinet. II dawaliib mafruuba open shelves .• dulaab (if-
falriyya) implement for makingfalriyya. - dulaab in-
nixiil bolter in a flour mill. 2 any of various wheels 
(e.g., water-wheel, potter's wheel, watch orc1ock gear-
wheel). 3 short instrumental musical form in one key 
from four to twelve measures in length. 
I..:.. J ~ 
l:;b dilla Inl [geog] delta. II rid-dilta the Nile delta, Low-
er Egypt. 
J~J~ 
J",lb daldac; Ivtl to spill. waddi f-Jaay I-axuu-k bassi 
ma-Idaldac;-uu-ftake the tea to your brother but don't 
spill it. -vn daldac;a; avalpva midaldac;. 
299 
J",v;;1 ritdaldac; or riddaldac; Ivil to be spilt. - iva 
mitdaldac; . 
J ~ J ~ 
J...Il~ daldil Ivtl to dangle, hang down. c;alad fooc; 
iI-bee{a w-daldil riglee he sat on the wall and dangled his 
legs. IIdaldii widaan-u to look dispirited, as in lamma 
faafit in-natiiga {ililit wi-wdan-ha mdaldila when she 
saw the results she left in utter dejection. -vn dalda/a; 
ava midaldil. 
JJ...Il~ dalduul In pi daladiill minion, one who is sub-
missive or ineffective. rir-raagil da dalduul miraat-u 
that man is hen-pecked. baldi ma Igawwizt-u lac;eet 
rinnu dalduul rumm-u after I married him I found out 
he was tied to his mother's apron strings. 
J...Il;;1 ritdaldil or riddaldil Ivil I to dangle, hang limp-
ly. riI-furuul lamma tidbal bi-titdaldillal-rarcf. when 
the branches wither they droop to the ground. 2 to lag, 
fall behind. riI-mabsubiyya fif-Jirka xallit-ni raddaldil 
favouritism in the company led to my falling behind (in 
the promotion stakes). - ava mitdaldil. 
IJ"'.J~ 
..,-I~ dallis Ivil to act deceitfully or fraudulently, engage 
in misrepresentation. bi-ydallisu lan-naas fid-diin they 
misrepresent religion to the people. -vn tadliis; ava 
midallis. 
..,-1;;1 ritdallis or riddallis Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
dallis. yaama n-naas itdallis laleehum how often people 
have been deceived! - iva mitdallis. 
.; J ~ 
..,-I~ da/af (i) Ivil to plunge. riI-bac;ara dalafit fit-tirla 
the cow plunged into the canal. - vn dalf, dalafaan; ava 
daalif· 
ItJ~ 
t~ dalal' Inll pampering, coddling. da b-sabab da/al 
rahl-u fii that's because his family spoil him. II rism i 
dalal pet name. 2 diversion, pastime. b-afrab sagaayir 
dalal I smoke cigarettes just for something to do. 
huwwa waaxid fu,(l-u dalal he doesn't take his work 
seriously. 3 sauciness, coquettishness. II ya da/al flirta-
tious form of address to a pretty female. 
~ 
~~ da/aala = dalal'. 
t);, dalluulladjl spoiled, pampered. 
~)~ dalluula In pi da/aliil, dallulaatl spoiled child, 
darling. ra~/-u ya siid-i dalluulit iI-mudiir well, mate, 
he happens to be the director's pet. fufl iI-waad 

id-dalluue;a da did you see that spoiled boy? 
~J dallae;1 Ivtl 1 to pet, pamper, spoil. goz-ha 
bi-ydallae;-ha wi-ygib-/aha kull" lJaaga her husband 
pampers her and gets her everything. lIya mdallae; 
flirtatious form of address to a female ... you honey! 
2 to give (s.o.) the pet name of. fism-a-ha famallaakin 
bi-ydallae;uu-ha miimi her name is Amal but they call 
her Mimi as a pet name. -vn tadliie;; avalpva midallac;. 
~ 
Jor I fitdallae; or fiddallac; Ivil 1 to behave or be 
treated like a spoiled child. kibrit wi-lissa b-titdallae; 
she's grown up but she still behaves like a spoiled child. 
bi-titdallae; e;a/a xa[ib-ha e;uddaam in-naas she behaves 
in a spoiled way with her fiance in public. 2 to behave 
frivolously. e;ae;ad yitdallae; fif-fuvl' w-taraduu he 
didn't take his work seriously so they fired him. 3 to act 
coquettishly·. kull ir-riggaala bi-ylJibbuu-ha e;alafaan 
bit-titdallae; all the men like her because she's a flirt. 
- avaliva mitdallae;. 
lt J ,) 
~ 
J dilie; I (a) Ivil to become bland or insipid (of food). 
II fin-nifs' dile;it to be nauseated, as in nifs-i dile;it min 
kutr' furb i1-mayya I felt sick from drinking so much 
water, nifs-i dile;it min lJalyatt-u I felt disgusted at his 
flattery. -vn dalae;aan, dalaae;a, diluue;a. 
~J da/ac;2 (i) Ivtl to make (food) insipid. tabbax-hum 
ite;awwid yidlie; i1- fakl their cook used to produce in-
sipid food. Iida/ac; in-nifs to nauseate, as in tabix-ha 
dalae; nifs-i her cooking made me feel sick, tariie;it 
ka/aam-u da/ae;it nifs-i the way he was talking disgusted 
me. -vn da/ae;aan, da/aae;a. 
~J dilie;2/adj */ bland, lacking edge, insipid (of food 
or people). 
~J dallae;2/vt/l to nauseate (offood or drink). fakl' 
is-sudaani bi-ydallae; in-nifs eating peanuts makes you 
feelsick.2 to make (food) less salty. fir-ruzz' da lJaadie; 
e;awi -e;aayiz tadliie; this rice is very salty, it needs to be 
made less so. -vn tadliie; ava midallae;. 
~JI fidlau Ivil to become bland or insipid. - ava 
midliU· 
~..I:..I fistadlae; Ivtl 1 to consider (food) insipid. 2 to 
consider nauseating. - ava mistadlac;. 
IS ,) t J,) see - J ,) ,) .: fiddale;aadi 
,j1S"';J,) 
.;,.AIJ dulfiin <Engl> In pi -aatl dolphin. 
J J,) 
~J da/ae; (u) Ivtl to spill, pour out. xalli baal-ak lalJsan 
300 
tudlue; if-faay be careful not to spill the tea! fudlue;i 
l-mayyafil-lJooq pour the water into the sink. -vn dale;, 
da/ae;aan; ava daalie;; pva madluue;. 
11 da/ae; (nafs-u or roolJ-u) e;ala to tag after, latch onto. 
ma-bi-ylJibb "-haa-f wi-barqu dale;a nafs-a-ha e;alee he 
doesn't like her but still she hangs around him. 
c.,;)..w madluue; ladj/loose, flabby, hanging. 
~J da/e;a Inl tagging (along) after. battal dale;a e;aleeha 
don't be so gone on her! 
~J dile; In pi diluue;1 [obsol} woollen cloak. 
~Jorl fitda/ae; or fidda/ae; Ivil to be poured away, be 
spilled. -iva mitda/ae;. 
11 fitda/ae; e;a/a to tag after, latch onto. 
~..Ii I finda/ae; = fitda/lle;. -iva mindilie;. 
t.!l J,) 
..illJ da/ak (i) Ivtl to rub. da/ak rigl-u he rubbed his leg. 
- vn dalk; ava daalik; pva madluuk. 
~J dalka Ipl -aatl instance noun of dalk. e;alee dalka 
tiffi min fawwil marra he has a way of massaging that 
cures the first time. 
..illJ dallik Ivtl to massage, rub. - vn tadliik; ava 
midallik. 
Jts:.i..w midallikaati 
In 
pi -yyal 
1 masseur. 
2a homosexual. 
2b one 
who 
practises 
manual 
masturbation. 
.!1iJorI fitdallik or fiddallik Ivil to be massaged, be rub-
bed. - iva mitdallik. 
1 .!l J,) see .!l.J J J ,) : dallooka 
•. ;'\.!l J,) 
';:'~J dilikaat (also dilikaah) <Fr delicat> ladj invarl 
[deris} (over-) refined, genteel. 
o I .!l J,) see ..::.0 I .!l J ,) : dilikaah 
t J J,) 
jJ dall l (i) Ivtl to direct, guide. mumkin tidill-i-ni 
e;al-e;inwaan da would you direct me to this address? 
-vn dall, da/a/aan; ava daalil; pva madluul. 
jJ dall2 (u) Ivil to stand as proof. da ydull" e;a/a feeh 
what does this prove? - vn da/aa/a, dilaa/a; ava daalil; 
pva madluul. 
~~J da/aa/a, dilaa/a I In pi -aatl sign, indication, evi-
dence. dalaala e;a/a kida as evidence of this, as proof of 
this. fil-lJarb' laha da/a/aat e;abl' ma te;uum there are 
signs which precede the outbreak of war. 
~~J dilaala 2: suue; id-dilaa/a {obsol} slave-auction 

market. II fin/a-lla titbaal fi-suu(j id-dilaala == may you 
go to hell! 
J).M madluul In pi -aatl meaning. ya tara feeh 
madluul kalaam-u I wonder what he means. 
~.) daliilln pi fadilla, dalaayilll sign, indication, evi-
dence, proof. da daliil lala finn a la(jl-u faaqi that's 
proof that he is empty-headed. daliil (jaatil conclusive 
evidence. fadilla la(jliyya rational proofs. bi-daliil finn 
... and the proof is that .... II (jul-Ii ba(ja da-na btaar 
daliil-i I give up, tell me (the answer). -dalaayil iI-
xayraat [lsi} text recited during specified periods of 
supererogatory prayer. - Ipl dalaayil onlyl 2 guide, 
manual, directory. daliil tilifoon telephone directory. 
- Ino pll 3 [mus} (lalaamit) daliil key signature. 
j.)j fadalllell morelmost indicative. ma-fiij fadall i 
min kida lala kidb-u nothing could show more plainly 
that he is lying. 
J"-i.) dallaalln· and pi dallaalal broker, auctioneer. 
;;J"-i.) dallaala In pi -aatl woman who peddles ladies' 
goods (kerchiefs etc.) from house to house, and is 
thereby in a position to spread gossip and family 
secrets. 
j.) dallil l Ivill to hawk, shout the price of goods in a 
market place, call for bids in an auction. waa(jifyidallil 
lal-(juuta ma-baddij laayiz yiftiri there he stands 
hawking tomatoes but no one wants to ~uy .11 filli ydallil 
lala bqalt-u tibuur [prov} == he who is over-anxious 
about something will lose it. 2 to prove, offer proof. 
dallillala kull illi (jaal-u he offered proof for all that he 
said. -vn tadliil; ava midallil. 
j..l:-I fistadalllvill to obtain information. fistadalleet 
lala l-linwaan I found out the address. 2 to use as 
proof. finla b-tistadilli b-kida lala feeh what are you 
trying to prove with this? 3 to inquire, seek informa-
tion. 
fistadalleet laleehum wala badd i dall-i-ni 
I inquired after them but no one could guide me. -vn 
fistidlaal; ava mistidill. 
1 J J ~ 
J"i.) dalaalln! coyness, coquetry. bi-ysuu(j id-dalaal he 
plays hard to get.llma-ladji dalaal the good times are 
gone. -liik dalaal lalee do you have any influence 
(through friendship or affection) with him? 
j.) dallil 2 Ivtl to spoil, pamper. -vn tadliil; ava 
midallil. 
j..lil fitdallilor fiddallil, fitdallalor fiddallallvil to be 
coquettish, play hard to get, be evasive. tU(jlud titdallil 
lala fayyi raagil she flirts with just anyone. - vn 
tadallul t; ava mitdallil. 
301 
.d.JJJ~ 
AS).) dallooka, dalluuka: ra(j~ id-dallooka a Sudanese 
dance. da(j(jit id-dallooka type of music played for a 
Sudanese dance. 
r J ~ 
41.) dalama Inl [coarse} I Ipl -aatl tip of the clitoris. 
II fumm i dalama a nymphomaniac. 2 Ino pll orgasm. 
gaab laha d-dalama or gaab da/amit-ha he brought her 
to orgasm. 
":"iSrJ~ 
~)J.) dulumiit <Fr> Inl dolomite. 
.J J ~ see is J ~ : dalw, dilwt 
..:" J.J J ~ see ..:" J .J : dilwa(jti 
is J ~ 
).) dalw, dilwt Inl I bucket. 2 fid-dalw ,[astrol} 
Aquarius . 
..... "-i.) dallaaya In pi -aat/l hanging. 2 pendant. 
JIJ .) dawaali Ipl nl [path} varicose veins. Illandu 
dawaali he suffers from varicoceles. 
j.) daUa Ivtl I to hang up, suspend. nidalli n-nagafa 
f-wist il- fooqa let's hang the chandelier in the middle of 
the room. 2 to lower, let down. daUeena I-gardal fil-biir 
la/aan iI-mayya we let the bucket down into the well to 
get water. - Ivil 3 to have an erection (of male anim-
als). -vn tadliyya; ava midalli. 
j..lil fitdalla or fiddalla Ivil I to be hung, be sus-
pended, dangle. 2 to trail behind. tarbit-ha b-titdalla 
waraaha fil- farq her head-veil is trailing behind her on 
the ground. - ava/iva mitdalli. 
J.)j fadla t Ivil to speak out. fadla b- faqwaal-u to 
testify. II fadla b-~oot-u to cast one's vote. - vn fidlaaf; 
ava mudli. 
I is J ~ 
lelb dalya <Engl> Inl dahlia. 
r ~ 
r.) dum <T dam from P> In pi -aatl [mus} a strong 
beat. 
I r ~ see I r r ~ : dima 
~ I r ~ 
.:,l..J') dumaan (also qamaan I) <T damen from It> In 

pJ -aatl I Inaut} helm. mask id-dumaan steering. 
2 regulator lever in a watch. 
~l..J" dumangi (also qamangi) In pi -yya/helmsman. 
[r~ 
~.) damag (i) Ivtl I to amalgamate. damagu kull' 
farikaat id-duxxaan fi-Jirka gdiida they amalgamated all 
tile tobacco companies to form one new company. 2 to 
alloy. liI-laada b-yidmigu d-dahab bin-nalJaas usually 
they alloy gold with copper. -vn damg; ava daamig; pva 
madmuug. 
~...Iil rindamag Ivill to be or become amalgamated. 
1 to 
become 
engrossed. 
become 
absorbed. 
!'iI-mumassii indamag fid-door the actor was absorbed 
in his role. rindamagt'lii-liiraaya I was engrossed in 
reading. -vn rindimaag; ava/iva mindimig. 
e".)i radmag = damag. -vn ridmaag. 
r ~ r ~ 
rJ.o.) damdim I Ivtl to pat down. flatten. 2 Ivil to mut-
ter. lialad yidamdim las-siblJa he was mumbling over 
his worry beads. -vn damdama; ava/pva midamdim. 
I.) r ~ 
.)l...) damaar Inl ruin. 
;., dammar Ivtl to destroy. -vn tadmiir; ava/pva 
midammar . 
• ;J.o mudammira In pi -aatl Inaut} destroyer. 
;...Iil ritdammar or riddammar Ivil to be destroyed. 
- iva mitdammar. 
1 .) r ~ see .) J r r ~ : dammuur, dammuriyya 
3 .) r ~ see .)..s r ~ : dimiira, d,meera 
..,.. r ~ 
...,....) dims Inl remains of any threshed crop, used as 
bedding for cattle, then as fuel. 
'-~.) dammaasa In pi -aatll appliance for slow cook-
ing of beans, lentils etc., consisting of a paraffin stove or 
electric coil, and an aluminium or copper pot with 
stopper. 2 urn-shaped pot used for slow cooking. 
U""~., dammaasi: luul dammaasi broad beans which 
are intended for cooking as luul midammis . 
..,..;.) dammis Ivtl to cook (e.g., broad beans, lentils, 
tripe) in a stoppered container over a slow fire or buried 
in hot ashes. (ItAul) midammis dried broad beans 
cooked by tadmiis (a staple food of Egypt). -vn tadmiis; 
avalpva midammis. 
""';...Ii I ritdammis or riddammis Ivil passive of dammis. 
302 
-iva mitdammis. 
..,....s..,.. r ~ 
"--''' damsiisa Inl sea ambrosia. 
• ..s..,.. r ~ 
~l...) damaseeh <Fr damasse> Inl damask cloth. 
tr ~ 
eo.) damllcoll nl tear(s). 
~.) diml;sl, damlaT In pi dimuul, dumuull tear. 
rid-damm' wi/-larali wid-dumuul blood, sweat and 
tears. ma-yimsalJ-J' dimlit-ak rilla riid-ak IprovJ (only 
your own hand will wipe away your tear) == in times of 
trouble yOU can rely only on yourself. IIdimlit-ha 
sabliaa-ha she cries easily. -:zayy' dimlil i/-leen 
lukewarm. 
~.) dimla2 Inl sauce of tomatoes with stock. 
i-.) dammal Ivil to water (of the eyes), shed tears. 
lakkarit fii . wi-dammalil she thought about him and 
cried a little. II ris-sama (or rid-dinya) bi-Idammal it's 
drizzling. -vn ladmiil; ava midammal. 
Itr~ 
t:'.) damay (i) Ivtl to hallmark (metals) according to 
purity of content or weight. IIdamaYI-u la/a lia/aa 
I slapped him on the back of the neck. -vn damy; ava 
daamiY;' pva madmuuy. 
t,.J.o madmuuy I pva of damay. 2 ladjl stamped with 
a fiscal stamp. laa:zim yikuun i{-{alab madmuuy the 
application must have a fiscal stamp on it. 
~.) damya <T damga> In pi -aall I (waraliil or 
(aabil) damya fiscal stamp. larqaljaal damra govern-
ment petition form with fiscal stamp. qariibil id-damya 
or rasm id-damya stamp duty. 2 assay mark. m~/aljll 
id-damya wil-mawa:ziin government office responsible 
for assaying and hallmarking metals. 
t:'...Ii1 rildamayor riddamar Ivill to be stamped with a 
fiscal stamp. 2 to be hallmarked or impressed with a 
mark indicating weight or purity of content. -iva 
mildimiy. 
t:'...Ii1 rindamay = rildamay. - iva mindimir. 
1 tr ~ 
t l...) dimaay Imasc and fem n, pi dimiYa, ridmiya, 
dimayaatl 18 top of the head, skull. {uuba wililit la/a 
dmaar-i a brick fell on my head. wagal dimaay 
(1) headache. (2) bother, fuss, trouble. II gal (or 
(abbaliit) lala dmaay-u he really copped it. -dimaay 
b~al a large onion. - riddaa-li dmaay li-wi/f-i he butted 

me in the face. Ib mind, brain. (i1i[ ft-dmaar-i it occur-
red to me. ma-malit-f dmaar-u it didn't convince him. 
ril-ftkra di mij daxla dmaar-i I'm not convinced that 
this idea is right. IIdimaar-u naffa he is stubborn. 
-dimaar-u ~affal:Ja (1) he is obstinate. (2) he stays up 
late. 2 knob, knob-like protruberance. dimaar i1-
musmaar the head of the nail. 
J ~ ~ see ~ J ~ : dumt;a 
-.JJ~~ 
Jol j ~~ dimuqraa{i <prob Fr> I ladj *1 democratic. 
2 In *1 democrat. 
~I}~~ dimuqra{iyya Inl democracy. 
.!l ~ ~ 
do~ damak (i) Ivtl to press together. gism-a-ha 
madmuuk her flesh is firm. - vn damk; ava daamik; pva 
madmuuk. 
.!l\"..\.o midmaak, mudmaak In plmadamiikl [constr] 
course of bricks. 
do-"I rildamak or riddamak Ivil to be pressed 
together. - iva mitdimik. 
do..lil rindamak = ritdamak. -iva mindimik. 
I J ~ ~ 
J.~ damal (i) I Ivtl to heal. ril-marham damal iI-garl:J 
the ointment healed the wound. 2 Ivil to heal. ril-garl:J i 
damal the wound healed up. - vn daml, dama/aan; ava 
daamil. 
J...Ii1 rindamalf = dimil. -ava mindimil. 
ZJ,...... 
~~ dimmilln pi damaamill I boil. II waal:Jid zayy i id-
dimmil a touchy person, 2 cyst. 
;u.:~ dimmila In pi -aatl pustule, pimple. 
~~~ dimmilaaya 
In 
pi -aatl 
pustule, 
pimple. 
dimmilaaya ftl-[een sty. 
~~ dammillvil to develop boils, abscesses or pimples. 
wijf-u dammil his face came out in boils. -vn tadmiil; 
ava midammil. 
~J ~ ~ 
&~ damlig Ivtl to make round and well-formed. - vn 
damlaga; ava/pva midamlig. 
&-"1 ritdamlig or riddamlig Ivil to become or be 
made 
round 
and 
well-formed. 
ril-binti 
kibrit 
wi-gism-a-ha tdamlig the girl grew up and her figure 
filled out. - avaliva mitdamlig. 
303 
.!l J ~ ~ 
..u.L.~ damlik Ivtl to compress, squeeze into a solid 
mass. laazim tidamliki I-[agiina [afaan ma-tfarwil-fyou 
should squeeze the dough together so it doesn't crum-
ble. -vn damlaka; ava/pva midamlik. 
..u.L.-,,1 ritdamlik or riddamlik Ivil to be compressed, be 
squeezed into a mass. - iva mitdamlik. 
I ~ ~ ~ 
r~ damm I Inl 18 blood. lal:Jm i w-damm flesh and 
blood. t;ariib-i min damm-i my blood relation. min 
damm i mluuk of royal blood. nat;li damm blood trans-
fusion. fat;r i damm anaemia. fl¥iilit damm blood 
group. IIburtut;aan bi-damm-u blood oranges. -l:Jagar 
id-damm bloodstone. -damm i1-raxaween dragon's 
blood. 
-[aleeha 
d-damm 
she's 
menstruating. 
- (ral:Jmar) damm i1-razaal deep rose (red) colour. 
-[umr id-damm i ma-yibt;a mayya [prov] = blood is 
thicker than water. - rid-damm i yl:Jinn [prov] an uncan-
ny affinity exists between relatives. -eafal:J id-damm to 
work very hard. -dafa[ (or ~araf or kBl[ i) damm i 
t;alb-u to pay a very high price. -qarbit id-damm i ~iib­
ak maya pox take you! -1:J-asayyal:J damm-ak or I:J-afrab 
min damm-ak = I'll beat the living daylights out of you! 
-damm-i nifif or ma-bat;aa-! fiyya wa/a nut;{it damm or 
damm-i hirib or damm-i gimid I was frightened out of 
my wits. -fawwar damm-i or l:Jarat; damm-i he made my 
blood boil. -l:Jaagafid-damm something that runs in the 
blood, an intrinsic part of one's character. -ma-fti-f 
fi-wijf-u damm he has no shame. Ib blood feud. 
benhum damm they have a blood feud. 2 disposition, 
(finer) feeling. raagil[andu damm a considerate man. 
damm-u xafiif he has a cheerful disposition, he has a 
sense of humour. damm-u m[akkar he's in a bad mood. 
damm-u tt;iil he is stolid. damm-u baarid he is a boor. 
damm-u ziftr (I) he is unsympathetic or unresponsive. 
(2) he has venereal disease. damm-u yuleuf he has a 
boorish offensive disposition. II wid-damm response to 
mention of the name of a person one dislikes. -ya 
damm how boorish! -ya (salaam [ala) damm-ak how 
offensive you are! what a rotten type you are! 
• \..~ • \..~ dima, dimaa r T Ipl nl much blood. safk i dima 
bloodshed. IIm~~a~ dimaar extortioner. 
..s".~ damawi ladjl pertaining to blood, bloody. 
II mazaag (or (ab[i) damawi a sanguine temperament 
(one of the four cardinal humours). 
~".~ damawiyya Inl ruddiness (of complexion, as a 
sign of good health). 

rr.) 
304 
Zjr~ 
.J1.j~ 
... ,) dimma: ris-sabla w-dimmit-ha every conceivable 
IS;~,) dinaari <It danari> Inf diamonds (card suit). 
evil. - also timma. 
3 r r ~ see Z r r j: damm 2 
.J.Jrr~ 
;;',) dammuur Inf type of coarse cotton fabric (used 
extensively in upholstery). 
~;;',) dammuriyya Inflength of dammuur. 
l.jr~ 
.:,.0.)\ radman Ivtl to become addicted to. ridmaan 
is-sukr' t{arr' ~il:Jl:Jit-u addiction to drink damaged his 
health. -vn ridmaan; ava mudmin. 
oJ'..I.o mudmin In *1 addict. mudmin muxaddaraat drug 
addict. mudmin /firaaya bookworm. mudmin riyaat{a a 
sports enthusiast. 
Z .j r ~ see .j I r ~ : dumaan, dumangi 
-·.jr~ 
;.,r...') damanhuur Iprop nf Damanhour, a city in the 
Western Delta, the capital of the province of Beheira. 
1S;.,r...') damanhuuril ladjl pertaining to Damanhour. 
2/n *1 one from Damanhour. rail' nuuri wala 
damanhuuri [prov} a thousand Nuri gypsies are prefer-
able to a single Damanhouri (a comment on the alleged 
Damanhouri propensity for cunning). 
.J r ~ see r r ~ : dima, dimaa!', damawi, damawiyya 
J.,1~r~ 
.l.l"..') dumyaa{ Iprop nl Damietta, a town on the north-
ern coast of Egypt where the eastern branch of the Nile 
joins the sea. 
Jol"..,) dumyaa{i Ipl damay{a, dumya{iyya/l ladjl per-
taining to Damietta. 2 Inl native of Damietta . 
.la"...') damya{ [joe} Ivtl to do or make (s.th.) in the style 
typical of Damietta. bi-t/fuul di gibna dumyaa{i w-hiyya 
fallaal:Ji - ba/fa kida tdamya{-ha marra wal:Jda ya n~~aab 
you say this is cheese from Damietta, but it's just ordin-
ary cheese - and you've made it into Damietta cheese 
just like that, you cheat! -vn damya{a; ava/pva 
midamya{. 
.la"...-"i ritdamya{ or riddamya{ Ivil to adopt the ways of 
a dumyaa{i. - ava mitdamya{. 
.J ~ r ~ 
• .r-',) dimiira, dimeera <Copt> Inf time of (Nile) 
flood. 
..j ~ see ~.j ~: daniir, danaara 
y.j ~ 
..,.;j ''''';,) danab In pI radnaabl tail. danab i1-la/frab 
scorpion's tail. danab i1-l:Jayya serpent's tail. 
~j .~,) dineeba I: rabu dneeba tadpole. 
.~j .~,) dineeba 2 1nf barnyard grass (Panicum crus-
galli, Echinochloa crus-galli) grown as a forage crop, 
and appearing as a weed in rice fields . 
~J.;.,.j~ 
&,) dantilla, dantilla (also tantanJ, tantanaJ) <Fr 
dentelle> Inflace. - also tanlilla. 
~~,) dantillaaya, dantillaaya (also tantanaJ) lunit n, 
pI -aatl piece of lace. 
J~.;.,.j~ 
~b dantiil, danteel = dantilla. 
~,) dantiila, danteela = dantilla. 
[.j~ 
rfJ,) dung In pI -aatl portable powered water-pump. 
-also dunk. 
J [.j ~ 
~,) dungul <T dingil> lIn pI danaagil/ axle. 2/no 
pll nickname for a tough fast-operating swindler . 
~,) dangil I Ivil to hang on under a train (so as to 
travel without paying), stowaway on a train. 2 to play 
tricks. -vn dangala; ava midangil . 
r.J~.j~ 
"';J-",) .... ;-",) dandurma 
(also 
dardurma J) 
<T 
dondurma> Inf ice cream, fruit ice. 
";~.j~ 
..;.-",) dandif Ivtl I to (over-)ornament. IInahar-na 
mdandif ... it must be our lucky day! (said on seeing a 
pretty girl). 2 to reward (especially with money). 
la/aan i1-xidma /Ii-ddet-haa-/i !'ana I:J-adandif-ak I'll re-
ward you for the service you've done for me. -vn 
danda/a; ava midandif . 
..;.-"-'" 
ritdandif or riddandif Ivil to be (over-) 
ornamented. - iva mitdandif . 
.j~.j~ 
':'-",) dandin Ivil to hum. -vn dandana; ava midandin. 

,:,~~,:,~ 
"'J,J;~ danduun Inl drip of mucus running from the 
nose. II finta fakir-ni b-danduun do you think I'm just a 
kid! -also dannuun. 
1oS~':'~ 
1oS,J;~ dindi <It dindio> Inl turkey meat. 
I .1':' ~ 
)~~ dinaar In pI dananiirl dinar. 
I~,:,~ 
..;~ dannist Ivtl to foul, pollute. dannisu farq-i-na 
(-(ahra they fouled our pure land (with their presence). 
-v~ tadniis; avalpva midannis; pva mudannas. 
""';,J;\ fitdannis or fiddannis Ivil to be fouled, be pol-
luted. -iva mitdannis. 
~,:,~ 
4.:.;~ danfa, dinfa In pI -aatl pinch (of salt, snuff etc.). 
.;,:, ~ 
..Ai~ danaf ladj invar/oafish. 
J':'~ see J,:,I~:daanilf 
.!l,:,~ 
~J~ dunk In pI -aatl portable powered water-pump. 
-also dung. 
~(',:,~ 
~~ dinamu <Fr> In pI -haat, dinamuwaatl dynamo, 
generator. II dinamu I-fariilf the star player of the team, 
the dynamo of the team. 
';"loSr':'~ 
~~ dinamiit <Fr> Inl dynamite. 
.!l1oS (' ,:, ~ 
~~~ dinamiika <It dinamica> Inl [phys] dYl)amics. 
~~~ dinamiiki ladjl [phys] dynamic. 
~,:,,:, ~ ) 
..,~ dinn In pI danaani, dinaanl wooden cask, butt. 
305 
Il fitnayyil fi-danaani n-niila ... go to hell! 
..,~ dann- [non-Cairene] = tann-. 
,:,~,:,,:,~ 
"'.Y~ dannuun In! drip of mucus running from the nose. 
-also danduun. 
~ ,:, ~ see loS':' ~ : danaawa 
loS ,:, ~ 
J~ dini ladj pI dunaay/l gluttonous. 2 base, low. dini 
f-faxlaalf-u of low morals. 
J~i fadna lell I morelmost gluttonous. 2 lowerl 
lowest, baserlbasest. fil-l:Jadd i1-fadna the minimum . 
~~ dinya or dunya Ifem n! la world. fi-dinya reer id-
dinya in another world. II fana [amalt; feeh fi-dinyit-i 
what in the world have I done (to deserve this)? 
-ma-daxaI1; dinya he's had no experience with a 
woman. Ib great crowd. fil-buli~ ga wig-geefwi-dinya 
the police came, and the army, and a great crowd. 
-
fid-dinya or fid-dunya 2a the world (especially with 
a strong connotation of its vastness). fayy; ba/ad fid-
dinya any country in the whole world. fi- faaxir id-dinya 
at the ends of the earth. -/used in construct to indicate 
greatness or an extreme degreel firil:Jt; faral:J id-dinya 
I was overjoyed. lfadd id-dinya (1) very big, very im-
portant, as in muhandis lfadd id-dinya a big-shot en-
gineer. (2) very much, as in b-al:Jibb-ik lfadd id-dinya 
I love you with all my heart. II fumm id-dinya epithet of 
Cairo. -sanduulf id-dinya (1) portable puppet theatre . 
(2) peep-show. 2b this world (as opposed to the next). 
fir-ragil-da karrah-ha fid-dinya w-fig-gawaaz that man 
made her hate life and marriage. fid-dinya yoom [asal 
wi-yoom b~al [prov] (life is a day of honey and a day of 
onions) life has its ups and downs. IIbitaa[ id-dinya 
materialist. -hiyya d-dinya (aarit ... what's the rush? 
3 the prevailing environment. fid-dinya qalma it's 
dark. fid-dinya l:Jarr the weather is hot. fid-dinya 
turaab it's dusty. fid-dinya bi-tnaccar it's raining. 
fid-dinya ~iyaam it's a fasting season. 
1oS~~ dunyawi ladj *1 worldly, mundane. IIraagii 
dunyawi mercenary or materialistic person. 
ISJ~~ dinyaawi = dunyawi . 
•• l;~ danaa fa t Inl baseness, vileness . 
.Jl;~ danaawa Inl gluttony, self-indulgence, sensual-
ism. fid-danaawa (ab[ [prov] self-indulgence is a mat-
ter of nature . 
• J~ daniift ladj *1 base, vile, contemptible. 
~~ daniyya t In pI -aatl vile or base deed. nafs-u 
ma-tirqaa1 id-daniyya he couldn't bring himself to do a 

mean thing. 
j.) danna Ivtl to demean. tidanni nafs-ak lala rakla 
will you demean yourselffor a bite to eat? -vn tadniyya; 
avalpva midanni. 
..,.. loS ~ ~ 
~.) diniis Inl Chrysophrys aurata, a type ofsea bream 
found in the Mediterranean and the Red Sea. 
rloS~~ 
r-e'.) daniim <Engl> Inl denim. 
I 0 ~ 
I.) dih Ifem nl eighth letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
-also daa/. 
z 0 ~ see I ~ : dahri, dahi 
I Y 0 ~ 
~.) dihib (a) Ivil to become exhausted, become worn 
out. dihibt' mif-fuvl rm worn out from working. -ava 
dahbaan. 
...,.",..;... madhuub ladi °1 worn out. exhausted. II ribn 
iI-madhuuba tabus) son of a whore. 
Z Y 0 ~ 
~.) .~.) dahabln/l gold. riI-waCjt.mindahab == time 
is money. gineeh dahab gold sovereign. dahab rabmar 
red gold. dahab r~far yellow gold. dahab rabyaq 
(1) white gold. (2) cotton. rid-dahab iI-riswid black 
gold (petroleum). dahab Cjifra gold-leaf.lIlirCj' dahab 
ipecacuanha. -giziirit id-dahab a small island in the Nile 
at Old Cairo. -mayyit dahab or maar id-dahab gold 
lacquer. - zayy id-dahab exemplary, admirable (of char-
acter), as in Cjalb-u zayy Id-dahab == he has a heart of 
gold, rir-raagil da mUlamlit-u zayy Id-dahab that man is 
very honest in his dealings. -mlhna yaakul minha dahab 
an occupation from which he makes a very good living. 
- rit-turaab fi-riid-u dahab == he's lucky. - rixi~ id-dahab 
wi-viii n-nayaas == values have been turned completely 
upside down. 2 Icolll [euphem) bedbugs. 
~~ .~.), dahabi, zahabi ladi ~I golden. 
~\,A.) dahabaaya lunit n. pi -aal/l small piece of gold. 
2 [euphem) a bedbug. 
~.) dahabiyya In pi -aatl [obsol) houseboat. 
~.i. .~.;... mudhab ladi invarl gilded. 
~aloon 
mudhab gilt sitting-room suite . 
.,...:~ .• .,...:.) dahhab Ivtl to gild. dahhab ik-kursi da gild 
this chair. -vn ladhiib, tazhiib; avalpva midahhab. 
306 
Jt,;.i. .Jt,;.;... midahhabaali In pi -yyal gilder. 
.,...:~I . .,...:,l;1 ritdahhab or riddahhab Ivil to be gilded. 
-iva mitdahhab. 
l 'T' 0 ~ see I y 
0 j : madhab 
';.J.:Jo~ 
i j p.) dahtuura Icoll nl [bot) datura. - also datuura, 
tatuura, (a(uura. 
o ~ 0 ~ 
loa.) dihdah exclamation of surprise and consternation 
== what's this? 
.;0" 
./'.) dahr In pi duhuur/l (infinite) time, time from the 
beginning of the world to the end. kallaleeha d-dahr' 
w-firib == time has done its worst with it, it has suffered 
at the hands of time. 2 fortune. fate. dahr-ak ~afaa-/ak 
you've come upon good times. 
..,.. 0 " 
~.) dahas (a) Ivtl to trample on. crush, run over. -vn 
dahs; ava daahis; pva madhuus. 
~,l;1 ritdahas or riddahas Ivil to be trampled on. be 
crushed, be run over. - iva mltdihis. 
~~ 
I rindahas = ritdahas. - iva mindihis. 
..; 0" 
~.) dahaj (i) Ivtl to astonish. amaze. yaaga tidhif an 
amazing tl)ing. - vn dahja; ava daahif; pva madhuuJ. 
..,l..:.A..) dahjaan 
ladi 
°1 
bewildered, 
perplexed, 
astonished. 
~,l;1 ritdahaj or riddahaj = rindahaJ. -ava mitdihif. 
..;..~ I rindahaj Ivil to be astonished, be amazed. - vn 
rindihaaj; iva mindihif. 
~.)i radhajf = dahaj. -vn r,dhaaj; ava mudhif. 
.!l 0 " 
.!l..) dahak (a) Ivtl I to smear or plaster (with mud). 
2 to mash (beans, potatoes etc.). - vn dahk, dihaaka; 
ava daahik; pva madhuuk. 
.!l.,l;1 ritdahak or riddahak Ivil I to be smeared or 
plastered (with mud). 2 to be mashed. -iva mildihik. 
~.) dahhak Ivtl I to plaster (with mud). 2 to mash 
(food). - Ivil 3 to eat hashish. - vn ladhiik; ava/pva 
midahhik. 
..,.. .!l • ~ 
~.) duhuks In pi -aatl handle of a drover's whip. 

j J 0 ~ 
jA~ dahliz 
Ilvtl 
to 
postpone, 
delay. 
qacad 
yidahliz-lina (-(alab bitac-na 1-l:Jadd i ma qaac iI-waqt he 
went on holding up our application until it was too late. 
2/vil to make a discreet approach, prepare the way. da 
caayiz yidahliz-li cafaan fagawwiz-Iu bint-i he's trying 
to soften me up so I'll marry my daughter to him. 
qacadna ndahliz Ii/-masfa/a di kaam yoom we spent 
several days paving the way to this subject. -vn dahlaza; 
ava/pva midahliz. 
..,ljA..M midahlizaaii In pi -yyal person practised in 
dahlaza. 
j"j.;.~ dihlaaz 
ladj 
pi dihlaazal 
smarmy, 
smooth-talking . 
.r.Lo.~ dahliiz In pi dahaliizl / rur] vestibule, porch (of a 
house). 
jA.,I;l fitdahliz or fiddahliz Ivil to toady, smarm, de-
ceive by flattery. yiddahliz can-naas cafaan fall'raaq-u 
he wheedles his way round people for his own ends. 
-/impersonallyl muf ana iii yiddahliz calee I am not one 
to be deceived. -vn tidahliiz; avalpva mitdahliz. 
(.JJo~) 
jA~ duhuliladj invarl gullible, gormless. mara duhull a 
dumb broad. 
41A~ duhulla <P duhul> In pi -aatl bass drum. 
I r 0 ~ 
r-"'~ daham (i) Ivtl to take unawares. dahamit-ha 
carabiyya a car ran into her suddenly. daham-u 
cazrafiil'" he died unexpectedly. - ava daahim. 
r-"'b daahim f = daham. - ava midaahim. 
2 r 0 ~ see I ~ : dahUm. 
dahummak. 
dahumman. 
duhammak. duhamman 
~o~ 
dahumma. 
duhamma. 
dahummat. 
duhammat, 
.y.~ dahan (i) Ivtl I to coat, paint (with oil paint, 
varnish, grease etc.). IIkalaam madhuun glib talk, 
unctuous words. -kalaam iI-leel madhuun bi-zibda -
fiza (ilic in-nahaar calee saal:J [prov] '" promises made 
at night tend to be forgotten the next morning. 2 [Chr] 
to anoint. bi-y~allu calee wi-yidhinuu bi-zeet bi-sm 
ir-rabb they pray over him and anoint him with oil in the 
name of the Lord. - Ivil 3 to toady, curry favour. 
fidhin-Iu fwayya w-huwwa yiddii-k illi-nta cawz-u 
butter him up a bit and he'll give you what you want. 
4 to use aphrodisiac ointment. -vn dihaan, dahaan; 
ava daahin; pva madhuun. 
307 
.Ju.~ dihaan, dahaan In pi -aatl I paint. II dihaan cala 
wabar something superficial and therefore fragile, as in 
~ul:Jubiyyit-hum dihaan cala wabar their friendship 
can't last. 2 ointment. 
.y.~ dihn. duhn f In pi duhuunl fat, grease. lal:Jma b-
dihn fatty meat. duhuun nabatiyya vegetable fats. II dihn 
ii-ward attar of roses. - fid-dihn i fil-cataaqi [prov] (old 
chickens are the ones with fat on) the best wine comes 
in old bottles. 
4;.0.~ dihna = dihn. 
.j"'~ duhni ladjl fatty, greasy.facr i duhni greasy hair . 
fal:Jmaaq duhniyya [chem] fatty acids. IIkiis duhni 
[path] sebaceous sac. 
.:..~~ duhniyyaat Ipl nl fats, fatty foods. ma-b-akul-p 
duhniyyaat calafaan camla rijiim I don't eat fats be-
cause I'm on a diet. 
.y.~ dihin ladjl fatty . 
.y.~i fadhan leI! morelmost fatty. 
.y...M miahin I ladj 'I fatty. lal:Jma midhina fatty meat. 
2 ladj , or invarl obese. mara midhina a fat woman. 
.y..,I;1 fitdahan or fiddahan Ivil I to be coated (with 
paint, varnish, grease etc.). 2/Chr] to be anointed. 
- iva mitdihin. 
.;.~ dahhan. dahhin Ivtl to paint or smear in blotches. 
-vn tadhiin; ava/pva_midahhin. 
';'.,1;1 fitdahhin or fiddahhin Ivil 1 to oil or anoint 
oneself. 2 to be oiled or anointed. -vn tadahhun f; ava/ 
iva mitdahhin. 
.y.b daahin Ivil to deceive by flattery. -vn midahna; 
ava midaahin. 
.y..x;..1 fistadhin Ivtll to select for fattiness. 2 to con-
sider (too) fatty. - ava mistadhin. 
~ ~ 0 ~ 
,:?>~ dahninJ Ilvtl to make greasy.l:Jaasib la-tdahnin 
fidee-k take care! you may get grease on your hands. 
2/vil to become greasy. -vn dahnana; ava/pva 
midahnin . 
,:?>.,I;I fitdahnin J or fiddahnin J Ivil to become greasy. 
- ava mitdahnin. 
I .J 0 ~ see l..s 0 ~ : dahwa 
2 .J 0 ~ see I ~ : dahu 
.).JO~ 
,)",.~ dahwar Ivtl to cause to decline, cause to deterio-
rate. fis-sahar dahwar ~il:Jl:Jit-u staying up late had a bad 
effect on his health. -vn dahwara; ava/pva midahwar. 
,)",..,1;1 fitdahwarf or fiddahwart Ivil to deteriorate. 

tadahwur i1-lilaqaat been i1-baladeen the deterioration 
in relations between the two countries. -vn tidahwiirJ • 
tadahwur; ava mitdahwar . 
.. .JI..JI''''; tidahwiira linst n, pi -aatl a deterioration, a 
decline. 
oJ"J.~ 
.r.Jl'~ dahwis Ivtl to trample (on). !'iI-llyaal dahwisu 
z-zarl the children trampled on the plants. rana saamil 
dahwasa barra I can hear someone trampling about 
outside.lldahwis kalaam-i he rode roughshod over my 
arguments. -vn dahwasa; ava/pva midahwis. 
.r .JI'..,;I ritdahwis or riddahwis Ivil to be trampled on. 
- iva mitdahwis. 
JJ.~ 
J.JI'~ dahwillvtl to mess up, wreck, throw into confu-
sion. !'iI-liyaal dahwilu I-rooqa the kids made a mess of 
the room. ril-laya dahwil-u the illness affected him 
badly. IImidahwillala leen(-u) wretched, miserable. 
-midahwil fi-rooIH-u) or midahwil fi-nafs(-u) scruffy. 
-vn dahwala; avalpva midahwil. 
J.JI'..,;I ritdahwil or riddahwillvil to get messed up, be 
thrown into confusion. - iva mitdahwil. 
J J • ~ see I ~: dahuwwa. dahuwwat. dahuwwak, 
dahuwwan, dihawwa, dihawwat, dihawwak. dihawwan 
I IS • ~ 
..sA~ daha (i) Ivtl to overcome, overwhelm. lJaaga 
dahit-ni - ma-lrift'l rakkallim something came over 
me; I couldn't speak. - ava daahi; pva madhi. 
~b dahya In pi -aat, dawaahil calamity. gat-ak dahya 
= to hell with you! maya calamity befall you! Il'waddaa 
f-dahya = he caused him a lot of trouble, he gave him a 
hard time. - raalJ fi-dahya = (1) he came to a bad end. 
(i) he went, and good riddance to bl!d rubbish! -raagil 
dahya = a sly devil. ya dahyit id-dawaahi = you sly 
devil! -ga min ranhi dahya where the hell did he come 
from! -dahyit-u (lala) batn-u = he's interested only in 
filling his belly. -dahyit i1-batn· lJarra {prov] = gluttony 
leads people into a lot of trouble. -talJt is-sawaahi 
dawaahi {prov] = still waters run deep. -ya dahya 
due;e;i = oh no! now we're in for it! -ya dahya law ... 
what a disaster it would be if ... , as in ya dahya law 
lJadd' faf-na what trouble we would be in if anyone 
were to see us! 
".JI'~ dahwa Inl calamity. ya dahwit-i {women] 0 my 
calamity! (a conventional exclamation of dismay), as in 
308 
ya dahwit-i reeh i11i b-tilmil-u ya walah good God, what 
are you doing, boy? 
..sA~i radha lell morelmost calamitous. wil-radha min 
kida ... what's worse than that, as in wil-radha min kida 
rna-dafall i1-rigaar and what is more he hasn't paid the 
rent! 
.lA~ dahaart Inl cunning. 
ZIS.~ see I~:dahi 
IS IS • ~ see I ~: 
dihayya, 
dihayyat, 
dihayyak, 
dihayyan, dahiyya, dahiyyat, dahiyyak, dahiyyan, 
dihiyya, dihiyyat, dihiyyak, dihiyyan 
I J ~ 
J~ dO~ I <prob It do> Inl {mus] I the note C. 2 doh. 
IS I J ~ 
~IJ~ dawaaya I <Fr douille> In pi -aat, diwy, duwyl 
light-bulb socket. dawaaya musmaar bayonet light-
bulb socket. dawaaya e;alawoo; screw-in light-bulb 
socket. 
I YJ ~ 
..,..I~ • ..,..b daab (u) Ivil I to dissolve. ris-sukkar 
bi-yduub bi-surla fil-mayya s-suxna sugar dissolves 
quickly in hot water. madda e;abla Iid-dawabaan solu-
ble substance. II (ka- rinn-a-ha) f~~' mallJ ' w-daab (she) 
vanished. - hiyya daybafii she is madly in love with him. 
-e;alb-a-ha daayib lala-bn-a-ha she worries a lot about 
her son. 2 to wear out. riljarf' daab xala~ the furni-
ture has completely worn out. !'iI-yaae;a bae;it dayba the 
collar has worn out. II ribn id-dayba {abus] son of a 
whore. -lJ-aqrab-u bi~-dayba I will hit him with the old 
shoe! -vn doob. dawabaan; ava daayib. 
"",~.40 madyuub ladj ·1 {abus] wretched . 
..,..;~ • ..,..;~ dawwib Ivt/l to dissolve, cause to dissolve. 
2 to wear out. II tidawwibii-ha f-larae; i1-lafya {women] 
(may you wear it out with healthy perspiration) = wear 
it in good health! (said to someone who has just bought 
a new garment). -tidawwibi ladad xetan-ha {women] = 
may you live to wear out as many garments as this one 
has threads! (said to someone who has just bought a 
new garment). -vn tadwiib; ava/pva midawwib. 
~J"'; tadwiiba linst n, pi -aatl I a dissolving. layiz-lu 
tadwiibitfarba dubl' I-batn-u = he needs a strong laxa-
tive for his bowels. 1 a wearing out. 

..,..;..Iil fitdawwib or fiddawwib Ivil 1 to be dissolved. 
2 to be worn out. - iva mitdawwib. 
'-:-"'!..M muziib r In pI -aatl solvent. 
..,..I.i. muzaabf In pI -aatl solute. 
2 Y .J ~ see Y.J ~ IS : yadoob 
ISY.J~ 
IJ.J~ duubi <Engl> In pI dawaabil [text] dobby. 
.::.- .J ~ 
~ 
J~ doota <It dote> In pI -aatl dowry. - also du((a, 
doota. 
~'::'-.J ~ 
.;;....J~ duwittu <It duetto> Inl duet. 
J C.J ~ 
~ 
J~ doo!Jar Ivil to apply oneself determinedly and 
incessantly, keep at it. qaa[id yidoo!Jar fil-masfala leeh 
why does he keep on battling with the problem? -vn 
mudo!Jra; ava midoo!Jar. 
"'" C.J ~ see also "'" C ~ 
..r> J~ doo!Jas Ivil to become abscessed under the nail 
(of a finger or toe). -vn mido!Jsa; ava midoo!Jas. 
....,..~~ du!Jaas In pI dawa!Jiisl whitlow, abscess under 
the nail of a finger or toe. 
t.J~ 
tl~ daax (u) Ivil 1 to become dizzy. 2 to experience 
difficulty, be given the run-around. duxt is-sabar: 
doxaat [afaan falaaqi !Jaaga [idla I had an awful time 
finding something suitable. IIkunti feen ya mara ya 
dayxa [abus] where've you been gadding about, 
woman? -vn dooxa, dawaxaan; ava daayix. 
tJ~ dawax (i) Ivtl to make dizzy. fil-!Jarr i dawax-ni the 
heat made me dizzy. -vn dawaxaan; ava daawix; pva 
madwuux. 
~J~ dooxa In pI -aatl dizziness, nausea, dizzy spell. 
Ilya di-d-dooxa what an awful time! 
tJ..Ii1 fitdawax or fiddawax Ivil to be made giddy or 
dizzy. fiddawaxt i miq-qarba I was stunned by the 
blow. -iva mitdiwix. 
6~ dawwax Ivtl 1 to make dizzy. fil-qu[aad bi-
ydawwax-ni sitting up makes me dizzy. II dawwaxii-ni ya 
lamuuna a child's game in which the winner is the one 
who keeps spinning round longest without getting 
giddy. 2 to cause (s.o.) difficulty, give (s.o.) the run-
309 
.J J ,) 
around. -vn tadwiix; ava midawwax. 
t;..Ii1 fitdawwax or fiddawwax Ivil passive of dawwax. 
- iva mitdawwax . 
I ~.J ~ 
~J~ duud Icoll n, pI didaanl worm(s), maggot(s), cater-
pillar(s). IIduud ruumi leech(es). -zayy id-duud (a 
crowd milling and swarming) like worms. -maat 
wi-kal-u d-duud he died long ago. -kul id-duud qabl i 
ma yakl-ak [prov] (1) eat the worms (in your food) 
before they have a chance to eat you (when you die) . 
(2) it's either them or us. 
.~J~ duuda lunit n, pI -aatl a worm, a maggot, a cater-
pillar. duudit iI-!Jariir or duudit iI-qazz silkworm. duuda 
fari(iyya tapeworm. fid-duuda d-dawwaara or duudit 
iI- fiskaaris roundworm. duudit iI-qutn cotton-pest . 
II fabu duuda or waa!Jid [andu duuda catamite, passive 
homosexual. -fi-qalb-u duuda minni "'" he bears a 
grudge against me. 
~I;~ dawwaad In "I (in folk medicine) specialist in re-
moving parasitical worms from the eyes and nose of 
children or sheep. 
~;~ dawwid Ivil to become worm-eaten, become rid-
dled with worms. II raas-u dawwidit (1) his head became 
infested with lice. (2) his head was badly affected with 
ringworm. -ya mdawwid [abus] "'" you creep! - vn 
tadwiid; ava midawwid . 
2 ~.J ~ 
~J..i.. '~J.M madwid, midwid, midwad In pI madaawidl 
feeding-trough, manger. 
~J..i.. '~Jjo mizwad In! [Chr] manger (in a Christmas 
tableau). 
J ~.J ~ see 
~.J ~ • : fadwad 
J.J~ 
)~ daar 1 (u) Ivil 1 to circle, move in a circle, go 
around. qamar ~inaa[i bi-yduur !Jawaleen iI-farq a 
satellite which orbits the earth. !Ja-nduur [ala 
I-makaatib kull-a-ha we'il go round to all the offices. 
durt i fid-dunya I roamed the world. fid-diwaara wara 
I-banaat skirt-chasing. laft w-dawaraan (1) beating 
about the bush. (2) deviousness. II fi/-kaas id-daayir 
(the cup which circulates) death. -bint i dayra a loose 
girl. -[ala daayir malliim to the last penny. - feef [ala 
baal id-daayir mi-I/i bi-y[aayir [prov] one who is 
irresponsible can't understand one who takes things 
seriously. -daarit iI-fayyaam time went by. -daayir ma 

.JJ~ 
yduur or dayrin daayir all around, as in bi-nxayya{-ha 
daayir ma yduur we sewall round them. 2a to revolve, 
rotate. kull" lagala bi-tduur lala 1- faks' btal-ha each 
wheel revolves on its axle. surlit id-dawaraan speed of 
rotation. daar lala kalb-u he spun round on his heel. 
daarit lala nafs-a-ha she turned round. llraas-i daarit 
I became dizzy. -bi-yduur lala zabaan-u he's just bum-
ming around. -munfaar dawaraan [carp] pad-saw. 
- fd-yagar Id-daayir la budd' min la{{-u [prov] one who 
involves himself in many activities should expect a few 
mishaps. -fimaal duur [mil] left, turn! lil-xa//, duur 
[mil] about, turn! 2b to run, turn (of a motor etc.). {ililt 
agiib if-fan{a w-slbt il-mUloor daayir I got out to fetch 
the bag and left the engine running. xalli l-mUloor 
yiduur start the engine! IIdaarit benhum xinaalja they 
had a quarrel. 3 to reach maturity (of cheese or wine). 
bi-ysiibu I-miff' lafaan yiduur they leave the miff to 
ferment to maturity.lIgibna dayra a cheese made from 
skimmed milk and matured in milk and salt for at least a 
year. 4 to be stirred and mixed to the correct shade (of 
paint). -vn dawaraan, diwaara, duwaara; ava daayir. 
';J~ dawar (i) Ivtl to confuse, perplex. yaaga tidwir 
id-dlmaa¥ something that confuses the mind. -vn 
dawar; ava daawir; pva madwuur. 
,;1. daar 2 (i) Ivtl I to turn, change the position of. 
daarll qahr-a-ha liyya she turned her back on me. 2 to 
manage. administer. bi-tdlir fu fuun bet-ha she manages 
her household affairs. - ava daayir. 
,)';J~ dawaraan 
In 
pi -aatl 
I curve, 
curvature. 
2 circumference. 3 somersault (in diving). 
JI';J~ dawaraani ladjl rotational. yaraka dawaraniyya 
rotational motion. 
..r..1~ daayir In pi dawaayirl outer edge, surround. 
daayir il-maqrab the frame of the racquet. 
• ..r..1~ dayra In pi dawaayir, dayraatl I circle, ring. 
dayra kamla full circle. dayrit is-sin{ar [soccer] centre 
cirele, ten-yard circle. fid-dayra I-lju{biyyaf-Jamaliyya 
:he Arctic Circle. IIdayrit malaarif encyclopedia. 
! circuit. dayra kahraba fiyya electrical circuit. dayrit 
zeet oil circuit. 3 precinct, area defined for a particular 
purpose. 
dayra 
ntixabiyya 
constituency. 
dayrit 
maykamit labdiin the jurisdictional area of the 'Abdin 
Court. 4 [leg] division of a court of justice. 5 [obsol] 
large landholding, usually including several estates . 
..s ..r..1~ dayri ladjl I circular. xa{{' dayri circular bus-
route. IImalaf/' dayri circular memo. 2 cylindrical. 
,;I~ daar 3 Ifem n, pi duur. diyaarl I [rur] house. ~ayn 
id-daar courtyard. min xarag min daar-u fitljall' 
miljdaar-u [prov] he who leaves home loses respect. 
~abaay il-xeer ya gaar-i finta f-daar-ak w-ana [-daar-i = 
310 
good neighbours are polite to each other but do not 
interfere in one another's affairs. II moot wi-xaraab 
diyaar death and destruction, total ruin. -ya daar 
ma-daxal-ikfarr = it's all the same, no harm has been 
done (said, e.g., in approval of a proposed change in a 
plan). -min id-daar lin-naar = directly, immediately 
(into trouble). 2 establishment, house. daar nafr pub-
lishing house. daar iI-qaqaa f il-laali the Court of Crim-
inal Appeal. daar il-luluum college in Cairo specialis-
ing in Arabic and Islamic studies (part of Cairo Uni-
versity). daar yaqaana children's nursery. duur iI-
mUlallimiin teacher-training colleges. 3 abode, dwell-
ing place. II fid-diyaar il-m~riyya Egypt. -mufti d-
dtyaar the Grand Mufti of Egypt. - fid-daar iI- faaxira r 
or daar 11- faxra J or daar il-baqaa f the hereafter. -daar 
id-dunya or daar il-fanaafr this present world. -daar 
il-xuld paradise. 
,;p door In pi fadwaarl I turn (in a succession). bid-
door in turn, by turns. laleek id-door it's your go. 
laazim tistanna door-ak you must wait your turn. II door 
il-mayya [agric] (one's) turn to be supplied with irriga-
tion water. 2 stage. door in-nuqg stage of maturity. 
door i{-{ufuula stage of childhood. II raagil min door-i a 
man of my age. -huwwa bi-ynaazil fid-door iI- faxiir he 
is dying. 3 round. door kutfiina a round of cards. xad 
(or kisib) id-door he won the game. door sagaayir 
wi-door yaaga saljla first cigarettes and then a cold 
drink. daxalna mala balq' [-door ~uyubiyya we made 
friends with each other. 4 circuit. bi-yi{lalU s-sulaah 
bil- fadwaar the messengers go out on their rounds. 
5 bout, fit. fid-door bi-yziid wil-fazma b-tiigi.ktiir the 
bout grows worse and the crisis comes more frequently. 
waaxid door zukaam he has a cold. 6 role. feeh door 
il-muwa;;af fil-yarb what is the role of the civil servant 
in the war? 7 storey, tier. l andu beet ~u¥Qyyar talau 
idwaar he has a small three-storey house. IIxidmit 
fadwaar floor service (in a hotel). 8 [mus] responsorial 
musical form consisting of long vocal solo passages 
beginning in a fixed key and modulating to any number 
of keys, alternating with choral responses in the original 
key. 9 [obsol] stanza in a muwaffay. 
';J~ dawr: dawr kindi [mus] rhythmic mode in 7/8 time 
consisting of a strong beat and two weak beats each of 
one count followed by a strong beat and a weak beat, 
each of two counts. 
.';J~ doora In pi -aatl I cycle, system (e.g., of an en-
gine).11 doorit mayya water-closet, lavatory. 2 ride (on, 
e.g., horse or camel) . 
• ';J~ dawra r In pi -aatl 18 (cyclic) stage, (seasonal) 
session. dawra tadribiyya 
training cycle. dawra 

jahriyya menstrual period. dawra ziraliyya crop rota-
tion. dawril il-baraamig i~-~eliyya the summer period 
(radio and television) programmes. Ib tournament. 
Ic revolution. 2 circulation. !'id-dawra d-damawiyya 
blood circulation . 
..sJJ~ dawri I ladjl periodic. lilaawa dawriyya annual 
increment. bi-~ifa dawriyya periodically. 2 Inl sporting 
tournament (notably the football championship). 
~JJ~ dawriyya In pi -aall patrol, military patrol. 
lasaakir id-dawriyya police patrol. !,id-dawriyyaal is-
saabiliyya coast patrols, coastguard. 
';JJ~ diwariyya, dawariyya In pi -aall I circu·mference. 
!'izral-u f-dawariyyil is-suur plant it around the fence. 
2 (butcherl intestines and surrounding parts. 
);~ dawwaar I ladjl revolving. baab dawwaar a revolv-
ing door. riib dawwaar cyclone. makanil i(-(ibaala d-
dawwaara rotary press (newspaper). II !'id-duuda d-
dawwaara roundworm. -lumr id-dawwaara ma-Irabbi 
kalakiil {provl (a woman who is never at home can't 
raise chicks) ... a rolling stone gathers no moss. 
);~ dawwaar 1 or duwwaar In pi dawawiirl (rurl 
I common guest-house in a village, for the accom-
modation of strangers. dawwaar il-lumda place where 
the village mayor receives officials and visitors. 
2 cattle-pen. 
; );~ dawwaara (also dawwaaril ir-riib) In pi -aall 
weathercock. 
'J4~ dayyaara I In pi dayayiir, dayyaraall large grain 
sieve. 
)..\0 madaar In pi -aatl I track on which an animal 
moves around a water wheel. 2 orbit. IIlala madaar 
is-sana (or il-laam) all the year round, as in 
!'iI-burluc;aan bi-nlac;ii dilwaC;li lala madaar is-sana 
now we find oranges all through the year. -madaar 
il-gady Tropic of Capricorn. madaar is-sara(aan Tropic 
of Cancer. - !'iI-madaar lala ... the essential thing is ... , 
as in !'il-madaar lal-Iuluus Ii-kmaalil il-majruul money 
is essential to finish the project, !'iI-madaar lala 
mwafc;il-u all that matters is his approval. 
JJolOl !,ildawar or !,iddawar Ivil to be confused, be per-
plexed. - iva mildiwir. 
JJolOl !,indawar = !,ildawar. - iva mindiwir. 
)..Ii I !,indaar Ivil to turn. !,indaar lalayya he turned on 
me.llbil-mindaar back to front, as in !'id-dinya majya 
bil-mindaar the world is going backwards. -daayir 
mindaar all round. -ava mindaar. 
J;~ dawwar Ivtl 18 to cause to turn (round). dawwarna 
I-larabiyya wi-rgilna we turned the car about and went 
back. II dawwar maktab {mill command to report to the 
commanding officer (for wrongdoing). Ib to cause to 
311 
.JJ~ 
circulate. dawwar il-kaas laleena pass the glass around 
to us. II dawwar laha lac;l-a-ha he perverted her think-
ing. 2 to make round. dawwari bardil i/-kumm; jwayya 
cut the sleeve with more curve. 38 to cause to run, 
cause to be in operation. dawwar il-makan start the 
engines! 3b to cause to be under way or in progress. 
dawwar xinaac;a benhum he set a quarrel going between 
them. 4 to stir and mix (paints and the like) correctly. 
- Ivil 5 to turn around, turn back. !'i/-larabiyya 
la(laana w-ba-Idawwar lal-garaaj the bus has broken 
down and is going to go back to the garage. 6 to look 
(for s.th.). quest, search. !'iIIi ydawwar yi/aac;i'" seek 
and you shall find. bi-ydawwar-Ii lalajac;c;a he's look-
ing for a flat for me. laazim lidawwaru lalee wi-Igibuu 
min labl il-!'arq you must search for it and bring it, 
regardless of effort. !,ibn-u lala kitf-u w-bi-ydawwar 
lalee {provl'" it's right under his nose and he can't find 
it. dawwarl" lalee ~alc;a( fi-malc;a( I have looked high 
and low for it. - vn tadwiir. ladwiir; avalpva midawwar. 
J!JolO ladwiir In pi -aall twisting (of threads). 
; J!JolO ladwiira In pi -aall I instance noun of ladwiir. 
2 semicircular cut in cloth. 
J;..\o midawwar I ladj *1 round, rounded, curved. 
!'ibra mdawwara a curved needle. II !'iI-leen il-
midawwara {magicl the evil eye. 2 Inl [musl a rhythmic 
mode in 1214 time. 
;.~ dayyar Ivtl to turn (s. th.) around. dayyarl il-maklab 
I turned the desk around. !'it-Iarzi dayyar il-jakiua the 
tailor remade the jacket with the cloth reversed. laazim 
lidayyar il-marac;a you must stir the gravy. IIdayyar 
dimaay-i he got me to change my mind. - baaga Idayyar 
il-muxx something that puts one at a loss. - vn tadyiir; 
avalpva midayyar. 
J;olOl !,ildawwar or !,iddawwar Ivil I to turn round. 2 to 
be or become turned round. - ava/iva mildawwar. 
;'olOl !'ildayyar or !'iddayyar Ivil to move through a 
revolution. !'iI-wagal kaan {i-ba(n-i wi-Idayyar Ii-wara 
w-Iabl the pain was in my abdomen, then it moved 
round behind and further down. - ava mitdayyar. 
JJb daawir Ivt/ to equivocate with, be devious with 
(s.o.). YUC;lud yibawir-ni wi-ydawir-ni he never gives 
me a straight answer. -vn midawra; ava midaawir. 
;JJI..\o midawra. mudawrat In pi -aall deviousness. 
Jbi !'adaar Ivtl to manage, administer. suu!' il-!,idaara 
mismanagement. 
maglis il-!,idaara administrative 
board, board of directors. IImullaab il-!,idaara [aulol 
starter switch. -ba-lilmil !,idaara lala miin who you are 
bossing! -vn !'idaara, !'adaaraJ; ava mudiir. 
iJb! !,idaara In pi -aatl administrative department. 
!,idaarit it-tabc;ic;aat the Office of Investigation. !,idaarit 

J.JJ~ 
il-Iaraxi~ the licensing department. fidaaril iI-fafraad 
personnel office. 
\oS.)b! fidaari ladj 
·1 administrative, executive. 
musaalid fidaari administrative assistant. mudiir 
if-/u fuun iI- fidariyya director of administrative affairs. 
/ahaada fidariyya certificate authenticated by two gov-
ernmental officials and their immediate supervisor. 
kaadir fidaari administrative pay scale. rusuum 
fidariyya administrative fees.llyoom fidaari {mil} day 
set aside for washing clothes. 
~).)! fidargi In pi -yya/ good administrator. 
;...).,0 mudiir In *1 manager, director (of a company, 
government department etc.). mudiir laamm director 
general. mudiir muslaxdimiin personnel director. 
~;...).,o mudiriyya In pi -aalll {obsol} former designa-
tion of an Egyptian province (later termed muljaf;a, 
the sole exception being mudiriyyil il-Ialjriir). 
2 designation of the provincial apparatus of a ministry 
(headed by a mudiir laamm). mudiriyyil il-Iarbiya 
Wil-Ialliim fi-bani sweefthe Directorate of Education in 
Bani Suef. 
;..~ musladiir ladj ·1 rounded. 
J.;~~ 
~.)J.) dooraq In pi dawaariq/l pitcher or jug. 2 {chem} 
flask. 3 glass bowl of a water-pipe (see Pl.I, 5). 
~j~~ 
..,iJ.) doozan <T diizen> Ivtl to tune (an instrument). 
-vn duzaan, miduzna; ava midoozan. 
IIJ"~~ 
..,..1., daas (u) Ivtl I to step on, tread on, trample on. 
daas ii-ward he trod on the flowers. duus banziin step 
on the gas! fiwla l-larabiyya Iduus-ak be careful the 
car doesn't run you over! II filli yilmil qahr-u qan{ara 
yislaljmil id-doos {prov} he who accepts mistreatment 
in the beginning should not complain of its continua-
tion. - Ivi/2 to step, tread, trample. daas fil-waljla he 
stepped in the mud.llma-Ijadd'-/ das-Iu lala (arafno-
body gave him cause to be angry. - filli yduus laleek 
duus lalee show no consideration to those who show 
you none. -bi-yduus Ijaafi he goes barefoot. 3 to exert 
pressure. bacn-i b-liwgac-ni lamma faduus laleeha my 
stomach hurts when I press it. 4 to lay emphasis. laazim 
faduus lan-nuq{a di I must emphasize this point. -vn 
doos, dawasaan, diwaasa. duwaasa; ava daayis . 
..,..J.) doos: Ijoos doos utter confusion, as in xallu 
l-masfala Ijoos doos they turned the matter into a com-
312 
plete mess. 
4...J') doosa I I instance noun of doos.11 (ya Ijosl-i) ya 
dosl-i {women} ... what a calamity! 2 In! Sufi ceremony 
in which the sheikh walks upon the necks of his 
followers. 
4...G.) dawwaasa In pi -aall any of the range of things 
upon which a foot may be placed, or the pressure of a 
foot exerted (e.g., foot-rest, treadle, duck-board, 
pedal, bath-mat. car-mat etc.) . 
..,..i.).,o madaasJ In pi -aall pair ofany type offootwear. 
IIlamalli-... xadd-u madaas (to make one's cheek a 
stepping place for ... ), treat (s.o.) with the utmost 
respect. 
..,..I~I findaas IviJ 1 to be trodden on, be walked on. 
naas bi-lindaas wi-naas bi-linbaas {prov} (some people 
are trodden on and some are kissed) ... life is a matter of 
luck. 2 to be degraded. -iva mindaas. 
..,..1-"1 
fildaa.~ or fiddaas = findaas. -iva mildaas . 
..,..;.) dawwis = daas. -vn ladwiis; ava/pva midawwis. 
..,..;-"1 fildawwis or fiddawwis = findaas. -iva 
mildawwis. 
llJ"~~ 
4...J') doosa 2 <P dii-sih> In pi -aall pair of threes (in 
backgammon) . 
I..;~ ~ 
..rJ.) dawa/ (i) Ivtl to bother, irritate, trouble. 
dawa/il-na b-{alabal-ha k-kililra she bothered us with 
her numerous requests. fima dawa/I' dmaar-i you gave 
me a lot of trouble. ril-liyaar illi ma-y~ib-/' yidwif 
{prov} (the bullet which doesn't hit its mark is (never-
theless) a bother) one may have been saved the bite, 
but the barking was bad enQugh. -vn dawa/. daw/a; ava 
daawif; pva madwuuj. 
4..:.J') daw/a In pi diwafll loud noise, din, uproar. mif 
qaadir fa/laral fid-daw/a di I can't work in this din. 
2 fuss and bother, commotion. falmil-Iak daw/a do 
you want me to make a scene! II wid-daw/a di and what-
have-you, and so on, as in lamma lazzilu kaan laazim 
yaxdu l-laff' wil-hiduum wif-/una{ wid-dawja di kull-a-
ha when they moved, they had to take their furniture, 
clothes, bags and everything. 
~J.) dawjagi In pi -yyal noisy boisterous person. 
..rJ.)i fadwa/lell morelmost noisy . 
..rJ-,,1 fildawaj or fiddawaj Ivil to be irritated, be 
bothered, be troubled. -iva mildiwif . 
..r J~ 1 findawaj = fildawaj. - iva mindiwif· 

1 ';'.J ~ 
.. h~ doo! <T do§> Inl rib-cut (of meat). 
j,.J ~ 
~J~ doo{a <It dote> In pI -aatl (Chr) dowry. -also 
du{{a, doota. 
t.J~ 
tb daar <poss Copt>: gaab daar(-u) to knock the 
living daylights out of (s.o.). 
t;~ dawwar/vtl to wear out, exhaust, consume. C;aswit 
1-!'ayyaam dawwarit-ni hard times got me' down. -vn 
tadwiir; avalpva midawwar. 
t;.J.o midawwar ladj *1 sophisticated, hardened by ex-
perience. da raagil midawwar ma-yustahan-f bii he is a 
hard nut, not to be trilled with. 
t;-"I !,itdawwar or !,iddawwar Ivil to be worn out, be 
exhausted, be consumed. - iva mitdawwar. 
IJ.J~ see also lJ.Jj 
313 
JI~ 'Jb daac; I (u) Ivt/l to taste. duuC; c;abl; ma tiftiri 
taste before you buy. lI!'iIli ma-yduuc; il-murr; 
ma-yilral il-Ijilw ... only after experiencing hard times 
can one appreciate good fortune. -duc;t il-Ijilw; wil-
murr ... I've tried everything. - c;aalit yaama I-Ijalaawa 
Ijilwa. - c;aalu duc;tii-ha She said 'How sweet the confec-
tion is!' They said 'Have you tasted itT (applied to one 
who passes judgement on others without first-hand 
knowledge). -yaama tduuC; lala Isaan-ak ... you'll have 
to go through a lot! you'll have much to experience. 2 to 
appreciate. yiduuC; il- !'alwaan he has colour sense. -vn . 
dooC;, dawac;aan, diwaac;a, dawaac;a; ava daayic;. 
JI;~ 'JG~ dawwaac; In 
*1 taster. !,ir-rakP lad-
dawwaac; (vendor's cry) (it's up to the taster) ... taste 
them and see! 
JI..i.. 'JI.J.o madaac; Inl taste. !'iI-w01t mif kilaaya 
!,ir-rakk d lal-madaac; it's not enough to describe (the 
food to me); it's the taste that matters. 
JI..Ii 1 !,indaac; Ivil to be tasted. - iva mindaac;. 
JI-"I !,itdaac; or !,iddaac; = !'indaac;. - iva mitdaac;. 
J;~ 'J;~ dawwac; Ivtl to cause to taste. !'adawwac;-ak 
minnu Ijitta I'll give you a bit of it to taste.llfawwac;t-i-ni 
wala dawwac;t-i-ni (proY) you tantalize me with things 
that are not in your power to give. -vn tadwiic;; ava/pva 
midawwac;. 
lJ.J~ 
JJ~ dooq <Engl> In pI -aatl duke. 
~J~ dooqa In pI -aatl duchess. 
~J~ doc;iyya In pI -aatl duchy. 
.d.J~ 
A!J~ dooka I Inl uproar, din, tumult. miin laamil 
id-dooka di barra who is making that noise outside? 
xuduu-hum fi-dooka la-yirlibuu-ku ... overwhelm them 
with bluster lest they defeat you (said to one who 
monopolizes or shouts in a discussion). lamliin dooka 
w-dabaka lal-Iaac{i they are causing a hullabaloo for 
nothing. 
~;~ dawwik Ivil to make (loud) noise. !,ir-radyu 
dawwik lalayya the radio overwhelmed me with its 
blaring. -vn tadwiik; ava midawwik . 
.d;-"I !,itdawwik or !,iddawwik Ivil to be overwhelmed 
by noise, be shouted down. - iva mitdawwik. 
1.d.J~ 
.\S'J~ dooka 2 <P du-gah> Inl (mus) the note D. 
.J.d.J~ 
§J~ duuku <trade n Du (Pont) Co> Inl paint with 
which cars, refrigerators etc. are sprayed, body paint. 
maljaW duuku paint-spraying workshop. II warniif 
duuku car polish. 
IJ.J~ 
~J~ dawla In pI duwal, diwal, dawlaatl nation, state. 
mizaniyyit id-dawla the national budget. 1I'!,id-duwal 
il-kubra (or il-lu;ma) the major powers. -~aaljib id-
dawla (obsol) title of the Prime Minister. - !'irc;~ 
lil-c;ird; I-dawlit-u (proy) dance for the ape in his king-
dom. - !'il-!'ayyaam duwal (proy) life is full of ups and 
downs. 
JJ~ dawli, duwali ladj *1 international. 
J;~ dawwil Ivtl to internationalize. -vn tadwiil; aval 
pva midawwil. 
..kJ-" tadwiillnl internationalism. 
J;-"I !,itdawwil or !,iddawwillvil to be international-
ized. - iva mitdawwil. 
-.lJI.J.o mudawla In pI -aatl (leg) consultation (between 
judges before passing sentence). rurlit il-mudawla 
judges' retiring room. !'iI-Ijukm; bald il-mudawla 
judgement will 
be pronounced (directly) after 
consultation. 
JJI-"I !'itdaawil or !'iddaawil Ivil I (leg) to consult 
together (of judges, to reach a decision or a sentence). 
2 to be in circulation, be current. -vn tadaawul; ava 
mutadaawil. 
JJI.w mutadaawaiT ladjl current, in circulation, 
prevalent. 

2 J.J') see I,): dool, dooli, doola, doolal, doolak, 
standing orders. -sulfa musladiima {adminJ advance 
doolan 
cash (for operational expenditure). -zarl' misladiim 
perennial crops. -vn fislidaama; ava misladiim, 
I r.J ,) 
rb daam 2 (u) Ivil to last. endure. persist. zibuun 
daayim liI-mal:Ja((a a permanent customer of the sta-
tion. lIyiduum (long may it last) "" may you always be 
well. enough off to give to others (said to a host after 
eating or drinking. or on receipt of a gift or favour). 
-yiduum faq.l-ak may your bounty last (conventional 
reply to filfac[c[al). -daamil l:Jayaal-ak may you live 
forever (conventional reply to sufra dayma). -lala d-
dawaam for ever and always. -dawaam iI-l:Jaal min iI-
mul:Jaal {provJ "" nothing lasts for ever. - fid-dawaam 
1i-lIaah immortality is for God (alone) (said in consola-
tion at funerals). -sufra dayma "" may your table always 
be laden (said by a guest on finishmg a meal). 
- fid-daafimil iI-baluliyya {ChrJ Ever Virgin (epithet of 
the Virgin Mary). -vn doom, dawaam; ava daayim, 
daafimr. 
11 ma-daam loccurs both inflected and non-mflected. 
w conj functionl as long as. since. fana l:J-aflal:J-ha ma-
duml' (or ma-daam) flnla labxa klda I'll open it. since 
you're so clumsy. fiiha feeh ma-daamll (or ma-daam) 
hiyya lagbaa what's wrong with it. so long as he's 
pleased with her. see further under 2 r I ,) r 
('"!-'! yidiim Ivt, imperf and imper onlyl to perpetuate 
(of God). ya rabb' diim iI-mal:Jabba laleena 0 Lord, 
make our (brotherly) love last forever! 
('"!b daayim Inl Everlasting One (epithet of God). 
11 dayman I ladvl always. fis-sill' minnina dayman 
mil:Jlaaga I-raagil we women always need a man. 
dayman b-awzin iI-lal:Jma min reer warali I always 
weigh the meat unwrapped. 2 Imterjl "" may your 
bounty last (said to a host after eating or drinking). 
rJ .. i fadwam leI! morelmost lasting. 
4.G .. dawwaama In pi -aalll whiripool.llialieel nafs-i 
f-dawwaamil if1url I found myself up to my neck in 
work. 2 whirlwind. 
r;" dawwim Ilvtl to whirl, cause to turn, spin or rotate 
rapidly. fin-nawwa dawwimit i1-liaarib the high wind 
whirled the boat around. 2 Ivii to whirl, spin, rotate 
rapidly. -vn ladwiim; ava/pva midawwim. 
rJ1 .. daawim Ivii to continue, persevere. bi-ndaawim 
lala r-rayy' kull' fusbuleen we continue to irrigate 
every two weeks. -vn midawma; ava midaawim. 
rl..t.:-I fisladaam Ivil to continue, remain. fil-marac[ 
isladaam lala kida jahreen the illness continued like 
this for about two months. II fawaamir mustadiima (milJ 
musladiim. 
2 r .J ,) 
rJ" doom Icoll nl I doum-palm(s) (Hyphaene the-
baica). 2 fruit(s) of the doum-palm. 
4.J" dooma lunit n, pi -aalll a doum-palm. 2 a single 
doum fruit. 
I.:U
') 
"'J" duun ladj invarllow, wretched. fil-mahiyya duun 
the pay is miserable. raagil duun a scoundrel. da duun 
id-duun he's the lowest of the low. 
11 bi-duun without. bi-duun sabab for no reason. 
fagsaam bi-duun fil:Jsaas bodies without feeling. -min 
duun (1) (also duunan lan) in contradistinction to, as 
in flnli min duun in-naas kiwayyisa you alone are good, 
bi-yifrabu kunyaak min duun iz-zabaayin they out of all 
the customers are the only ones who drink cognac. 
(21 ) without, as in maeIiUulc[arabil-ak min duun sabab 
is it conceivable that she hit you for no reason? 
"'J..t.:-I fisladwin I Ivtl la to select for meanness or 
baseness. Ib to consider mean or base. fana sladwinl' 
nafs-i fil-lamla di I despised myself for this act. 2 Ivil to 
behave basely or despicably. -ava misladwin. 
2iJ.J') 
..,I~ .. diwaan In pI dawawiin/l (loosely) any govern-
ment office or department. diwaan laamm headquar-
ters (of a government department). 2 compartment (in 
a train). 3 anthology (of poems). 4 {musJ octave. 
fid-diwaan iI-fawwil the lowest octave on any instru-
ment. diwaan kibiir a major scale. diwaan ~urayyar a 
minor scale. 5 {magic, IslJ realm of spirits. fahl id-
diwaan (good) spirits. Ilraal:J fi-dawawiin-u (1) he 
fainted. (2) he became lost in thought. (3) he fell into a 
deep sleep. 
JI~ .. diwaani Inll ornate calligraphic style of Otto-
man origin. 2 {obsolJ government coin. 
..,; .. dawwin Ivtl 1 to record, enter (in a book etc.). 
dawwin faliwaal-u w-mac[tlaa laleeha he took down his 
testimony and made him sign it. 2 {musJ to notate. -vn 
ladwiin; ava/pva midawwin; pva mudawwanr. 
,:,;..Iil fildawwin or fiddawwin Ivii 1 to be recorded, be 
noted down. 2 {musJ to be notated. - iva mildawwin. 

• .J ~ 
J~ dooh (also doo 2 ) <P du> In pi -aatl two (in dice 
etc.). 
.J.J ~ see \ ~ : dawwa. dawwat. dawwak, dawwan 
I~.J~ 
• IJ~ .IJ~ dawa In 
pI radwiyal medicine, remedy. 
&-aktib lukum dawa ymawwil iI-mikroob I'm going to 
prescribe you a medicine to kill the germ. r~-~abr; 
ra&san dawa patience is the best cure. rid-daa 'I ie-lifts Iii 
rid-dawa n-nigis {prov} a nasty disease requires a foul 
medicine. 
II dawa 
~ara~iir substance for 
killing 
cockroaches. 
IoSJb daawa Ivtl to treat, cure. -vn midawiyya; ava 
midaawi. 
IoSJ 1-" 1 ritdaawa or riddaawa Ivil 1 to seek a cure. 2 to 
bc cured. be treated. - avaliva mitdaawi. 
1~.J~ 
IoSJ~ yidwi Ivi. imperf and imper onlyl to resound, 
make a ringing sound. widaan-i b-tidwi my ears are 
whistling. II/amma tidwi not even if you cry to the 
Heavens! -nizil yidwi he fell flat! - ridwi what a 
thrashing! (said, e.g., when the speaker is watching a 
fight). - rid-dayy; fil-widaan raklar mi$-si&r {prov] con-
stant repetition of an idea in someone's ears is more 
effective than magic. -vn dayy. dawy; ava daawi. 
1oS;~ dawwa r Ivil to make a ringing sound, reverber-
ate. lissa bi-Idawwi fi-wdaan-i it is still ringing in my 
ears. -ava midawwi. 
J~.J~ 
,,-!IJ~ .;IJ~ dawaaya 1 (also dawaayit &ibr) In pI -aat. 
diwy. duwyl inkwell, inkpot. 
4 ~ .J ~ see ~ \.J ~ : dawaaya 1 
.!J ~.J ~ 
.s:.....J~ diweeka' diik id-diweeka "" cock of the walk. 
,:,.!J \ ~ ~ 
.}~; • .}~~ diyaakun 
(also 
ziyaakun) 
<Gr 
diakonos> In pI -aall {Cllr} deacon, a grade in the 
hierarchy of the Coptic church. 
...;s~; .4~~ diyakuniyya Inl {Chr] organization of 
deacons working as preachers in country districts. 
315 
y~~ 
..,..:; .'-:"!.~ diib In pI diyaaba, diyaab. diyibal 1 dieb, 
jackal. IIlinab diib black nightshade (Solanum nig-
rum). -mif &a-tgiib id-diib min deel-u "" what you're 
doing is no big deal (said in disparagement of S.o. 's 
efforts). 2 wolf. 'lin lift; nalga takl-ak id-diyaaba 
{prov} (if you live the life ofa sheep, you'll be devoured 
by wolves) "" the weak must perish . 
..,..~~ diyaab: diyaab ibn; vaanim the enemy of the folk 
hero Abu Zayd. 
- jy~~ 
':"J.;A~ dayabzoon 
<Fr 
diapason> 
In 
pI -aatl 
pitch-pipe. 
- y 
~ ~ ~ see ,:, \ y 
~ ~ : didabaan 
I.) ~ ~ 
J,.~ deer In pI radyira. diyira. radyura. duyural monas-
tery, convent. 
;.I4~ dayyaara 2 Inl monastic community. 
1 .) ~ ~ see .).J ~: daayir. dayra. dayri, dayyaara I. 
dayyar. ritdayyar. mustadiir 
I (j ~ ~) 
j.~ diiz 1 Inl {bot} type of tall grass (Scirpus tuberosus). 
j.~ diiz 2 <T diz>: rirkal diiz kneel down. 
1 j ~ ~ see j ~ ~ ~ : diyeez 
Jj ~ ~ 
Jj.~ diizil <Engl> Inl I Ipl -aatl diesel engine. ralaat 
diizil diesel engines. 2 Ino pit diesel oil. 
oJ" ~ ~ 
..... ;~ dayyulls Inl wittol. 
-.)...;~~ 
il)~b diyafraam <Engl> In pI -aatl contraceptive 
diaphragm . 
J~~ 
..; w. daalj 2 ( i) Ivil to become narrow, close in. 'iii-villa 
blall-i daaljillalayya my villa became (too) cramped 

for me. daaqit biyya 1-l:Jaala I was in straitened cir-
cumstances. II daaqit id-dinya f-wiff-i I have exhausted 
all possibilities. -sidr-u daaq he lost patience. -ma 
daaqit filla ma ftaragit (or furgit) [prov] = things get 
worse before they get better. -vn diiq, dayaqaan; ava 
daayiq. 
~ 
diiqa In pi -aatl (financial) strait, (financial) cri-
sis. xud il-qirfeen dool fukk' diqt-ak biihum take this 
money and ease your indigence with it. 
.;;. dayyaq I ladj *1 narrow, tight. fawaaril dayyaqa 
narrow streets. II bi-riil:J dayyaq [naut] close-hauled. 
-muxx-a-ha dayyaq she is narrow-minded. -raagil 
xulq-u dayyaq an impatient man. -qurt-u dayyaqa he's 
dim-witted. - rizq-u dayyaq he has a hard time earning a 
living, he's unfortunate. -lad-dayyaq on a small scale, 
as in luzuuma lad-dayyaq a small party. 
..;..;.i fadyaq lell narrowerlnarrowest, tighterltightest. 
.;;. dayyaq2 Ivtl to make narrow(er) or tight(er). 
ril-limaara I-gidiida dayyaqit if-faaril the new building 
made the street narrow. Ildayyaq riil:J-ak [naut] haul 
close to the wind! - dayyaq il-xinaaq lala to harass. 
- dayyaqt' faxlaaq-i you've exhausted my patience! 
- finta l:Ja-tdayyaq id-dunya leeh why are you being so 
obstructive? -vn tadyiiq; ava/pva midayyaq. 
11 dayyaq lala (1) to put in a tight corner, put pressure 
on, as in fi;-;aabi{ qalad yidayyaq lalee li-yaayit ma 
ltarafthe (police) officer kept pressurizing him until he 
confessed. (2) to be mean, miserly or stingy with, as in 
goz-ha mdayyaq laleeha f-kull a l:Jaaga nifs-a-ha fiiha 
her husband is depriving her of everything she desires. 
~\ fitdayyaq or fiddayyaq Ivil be made narrower. 
- iva mitdayyaq. 
~ 
L.;. daayiq Ivtl to annoy, harass. lamma tirkab 
il- futubiis ma-tdayiq-/ir-rukkaab when you ride the bus 
don't 
irri~ate the passengers. -vn midayqa; ava 
midaayiq. 
~L;.;\ fitdaayiq or fiddaayiq Ivil to become annoyed, 
get fed up. ma-titdayiq-/' minni don't get annoyed with 
me. - ava mitdaayiq. 
~\ fistadyaq Ivtl 1 to select for narrowness or 
tightness. 2 to consider (too) narrow or tight. 
fistadyaqit fakmaam il-fustaan she thought that the 
sleeves of the dress were too tight. -vn fistidyaaq; ava 
mistadyaq. 
I,!) ~ ~ 
4.> diik 2 In pi diyuukl 1 cock, rooster. diik ruumi tur-
key cock. fin na{aq id-diik fukuk faddii-k only if the 
cock speaks will I sell to you on credit (no-credit 
notice). fid-diik il-fa~iil:J fil-beecf.a y~iil:J [prov] = talent 
316 
shows itself early. II diik il-baraabir the only son of a 
family with many daughters. -diik id-diweeka = cock of 
the walk. 2 bantam-weight (in boxing). 
~.> diiki: sUlaal diiki whooping cough. 
~.> dayyik Ivil to become pompous, become starchy. 
-vn tadyiik; ava midayyik. 
4...1::...\ fistadyik Ivtl la to consider virile. Ib to select 
for virility. 2 to consider pompous and bossy. - Ivil 
3 to behave in a pompous and overbearing manner. 
-ava mistadyik. 
2,!) ~ ~ 
4.> diik J Inl euphemism for diin in abusive remarks. 
yillan diik-ak go to heck! 
J ,!) ~ ~ see ,!) I ~ : diik I 
I J ~ ~ 
..h~ • ..h.> deelln pi diyuulll tail. II deell:J~aan pony tail 
(hairstyle). -mabrad deel il-faar rat-tail file. -deel 
il-kalb' ma yinlidil wi-law lallaqu fii qaalib [prov] (a 
dog's tail won't come straight even if they hang a brick 
on it) = a leopard cannot change his spots. -hiyya 
mqa{(ala s-samaka w-del-ha = her outrageous be-
haviour knows no bounds. -fid-dee! bringing up the 
rear. -nigma fumm' deel comet. 28 hem, bottom edge 
(of a garment). IIl:Ja{(' deel-u fi-snaan-u he took to his 
heels. - ri/-wad-da deel fumm-u that lad is tied to his 
mother's apron strings. 2b train (of a skirt). 
J..> dayyil Ivtl to move to or leave at the rear. fikminnu 
(awiil dayyiluu fi-faaxir il-f~1 they moved him to the 
back of the class because he was tall. -vn tadyiil; ava 
midayyil. 
J.",,' fitdayyil or fiddayyil Ivil to moved to the rear, to 
be left at the rear. - iva mitdayyil. 
2 J ~ ~ 
~.> diila: l:Jilt-i w-dilt-i the only property I have. 
':'ISJIS~ 
.:,J.J!..> diyuliin Inl type of synthetic fibre, made into a 
wash-and-wear fabric. 
r IS ~ see r ~ ~ : yidiim, daayim, dayman 
,) .;.. r IS'~ 
;"~.> diyamitr, dayamitr <Fr> In pi -aatl diameter. 
I,:, IS ~ 
,:,b daan I (i) Ivtl to have (s.o.) in one's debt (financial-

317 
Iy). fana dayn-u b-la!ara gneeh he owes me ten 
pounds. rilli dayin-ni b-malliim yiigi yaxd-u whoever 
lowe a millime to can come and get it. -vn deen; ava 
daayin; pya madyuun. 
.Ji.J dayan (i) = daan. -vn deen, dayanaan; ava daayin; 
pya madyuun . 
.Ji.J deen In pi diyuunl debt. fana ~aal:Jib deen laleek 
you are in debt to me.llbi-yiftiri bid-deen he buys on 
credit. -kull-u salafwi-deen {proy] ... nothing ever goes 
unrewarded or unpunished, justice is always done in 
the end . 
.Ji.IJ daayin I 1 In °1 creditor. 2 ladjl {bank] in credit 
(of an account). 
~~..I.o madyuniyya In pi -aatl debt, indebtedness. 
~~J dayyaana Ipl nl creditors. 
.Ji...I.o madiin 1 In °1 debtor. 2 ladjl {bank] overdrawn 
(of an account) . 
.:,I~I fitdaan or fiddaan Ivil to fall into debt. fiz-zaman 
xallaa-ni tdant-i-Iu circumstances caused me to fall into 
debt to him. -ava mitdaan. 
.:,I..Ii 1 findaan = fitdaan. - ava mindaan . 
.Ji.~1 fitdayan or fiddayan = fitdaan. - ava mitdiyin. 
.Ji...Ii1 findayan = fitdaan. -ava mindiyin. 
.Ji.b daayan, daayin2 Ivt! to borrow from (s.o.), buy 
from (s.o.) on credit. ma-xallaall:Jadd i ma-dayn-uul 
he borrowed from absolutely everyone. da-na mdaayin 
iI-bat;t;aal wig-gazzaar wi-btaal iI-firaax but lowe 
money to the grocer, the butcher and the chicken man. 
-vn midayna; ava midaayin. 
.Ji.1~1 firdaayan or fiddaayan, fitdaayin or fiddaayin 
Ivil to borrow money from each other. lamma n-naas 
titl:Jiwig liI-fuluus titdaayin min balq-a-ha when people 
are short of money they borrow from one another. 
II fana b-addaayan min fideen in-naas I have no money 
of my own. -ava mitdaayin. 
.:,1.1:..1 fistadaan, fistidaan Ivil to borrow, get into 
debt. lumr-i m-astidiin I never borrow money. -vn 
fistidaana; ava mistidiin. 
2.:,1.S~ 
.Ji.J diin 1 In pi fadyaanl religion. fid-diin iI- fislaami 
the Islamic religion. wi-diin-i by my faith! (a strong 
oath). lIya diin-i lala kida how very nice! -ya diin 
in-nabi wild exclamation of astonishment. -ya diin ik-
kalb ... you bloody bastard! -yillan diin-ak ... God 
damn you! -I:J-atallal diin-ak ... I'll beat hell out of you, 
I'll give you hell. - fin-naas lala diin muluk-hum (proy] 
... people follow the example of their leaders. 
- fig-gawaaz n~~ id-diin to marry is to fulfil half of one's 
religious obligations. naweet fakammil n~~ i diin-i 
I decided to get married. 2 lintensifying element! 
huwwa taalil diin faymaan fahl-ufifluvl he's working 
fit to bust a gut.l:Jittit diin cabat; dandurma an absolutely 
super dish of ice cream.llli-fabu diin(-u) to the furthest 
limit, to the extreme, to the full. 
Iil.J diini ladjl religious. lagnit iflu fuun id-diniyya the 
Committee for Religious Affairs. 
4;~J diyaana In pi -aatl religion, confession, sect. 
';~I fitdayyin or fiddayyin Ivil to become religious, 
become pious, make a show of being religious. -ava 
mitdayyin, mutadayyin. 
J.:,I.S~ 
.:,b daan 2 (i) Ivt! to convict. danlt-u riI-mal:Jkama the 
court convicted him. 
':'~J dayyaan Inl Judge (epithet of God) . 
4; ~J daynuuna Inl Judgement. yoom id-daynuuna the 
Day of Judgement. fid-daynuuna I-lu~ma the Last 
Judgement. 
.:,bi fadaan 2 = daan 2. -vn fidaana; ava mudiin; pya 
mudaan. 
J.JI.S~ 
.iAJ diyawlu <It diayolo>: wala diyawlu nothing 
(else) whatsoever, as in wala nigil:J wala diyawlu he 
didn't succeed or come anywhere near it. 
1 I.S I.S ~ 
~J diyya In pi -aatl ransom .11 ma-Iuul diyya (1) he is of 
no significance, he is worthless (2) he is an outlaw. - filii 
tilraf diyyit-u fit;til-u {proy] ... when you know the 
consequence of a deed, go ahead and act decisively. 
2 I.S I.S ~ see I ~ : diyya, diyyar, diyyak, diyyan 
J I.S I.S ~ see 2 I.S .J ~ : dayy 
jl.Sl.S~ 
j~J diyeez <Fr ditse> In pi -aatl {mus] sharp. 

• 
.::.ol~see.::.olj 
.J.!l~ see 2,,; .!l j 
J I ~ see J I j 
.!lJ~ see I· 
..I 
~. ~ see ~,,; ~ 
JJ~ see 3 J J j 
~ ~ ~ see 4 ~ ~ ~ 
..I r ~ see 2 ..Irj 
c. ~ ~ see 
I C. ~ ~ 
U~ see 2 uj 
~ ~ ~ ~ see ~ j ~ j 
~.;, ~ see 
~.;, ~ and 2 ~.;,j 
J ~ ~ see 3 J ~ ~ 
~ 0 ~ see 2 ~ 0 ~ and 
I 
. 
~ 0..1 
..I t ~ see ..It~ 
Jd see Joj 
..I ~ see ..I ~ 
.;, 0 ~ see .;, 0 j 
..1..1 ~ see 2 
..1..1..1 
.J ~ see .J j 
t..l~ see 2t..l~ 
.::.0 I .J ~ see .::.0 I j 
";..I~ see 3,,;..I~ 
~.J ~ see I ~.J ~ 
..It~ see 2 ..Itj 
~ .J ~ see 2 ~ .J ~ 
';'t~ see ';'t j 
J .J ~ see J.J ~ and 
2 
-
• 
'oJ.J ..I 
..I";~ see 
I ..I";j 
.;, J ~ see.;, J ~ 
..I .!l ~ see ..I.!l ~ and 1..I.!l j 
-
J ~ 
.!l ~ see -
J ~ 
.!l j 
J ,,; ~ see 
I J ,,; ~ 

I.) 
• 1.) .1.) raa Ifem nl tenth letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
-also raa!', rih. 
• I.) 
• 1.) .1.) raa!' Ifem n, pi -aall tenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also raa, rih. 
~ 
'':'.01.) 
...,-!I.) raabiJ <Engl rubbish> Icoll n/l/obsol] articles 
discarded by the British army and sold on the Egyptian 
market. bi-yiJlayal fir-raabiJ he works in the trade in 
army cast-offs. 2 any discarded articles. 
C. I.) see c..J.): raay. raaya 
.) t I.) see .) t . : raaxar 
~ I.) see ~ • .): raas 
.;,~I.) 
.;,-1.) raaJin <Engl> Inl/naul] ration. 
JI.) 
JI.) raaq I In pi raqaall layer. niru~~; f~-~aniyya raaq 
layma w-raaq ruqaaq we put a layer of meat and a layer 
of ruqaaq in the baking dish. IIxadil minnu raqaal it 
wore him out. 
~I.) raaqa = raaq. 
..:.. .!.II.) 
..:.SI.) raakil <Fr raqUf!IIf!> Inl paddle-ball. 
rl.) 
... 1.) raama: !,ibn' raama epithet of the Prophet 
Muhammad . 
l(iS l .) 
iSl.) raay I <Copt> Inl Alestes dentex, Alestes bate-
mose, a type of Nile fish. 
iSl.) raayl Inl/zool] ray, skate . 
Z is I.) see is'.): raaya 
~iSl.) 
~I.) raayiJ Inl I burr (on metal), ragged edge (to a 
piece of material). 2 metal filings or shavings (especial-
ly as impurities, e.g .. within the working parts of a 
mechanism). 
'') 
;;,;.) ri!'a In pi -aall lung. sara{aan ir-ri!'a lung cancer . 
...s;.) ri!'awi 
ladjl 
pUlmonary. 
!,illihaab 
ri !'a wi 
pneumonia . 
~ '') 
...,..i.) ra!'as' (a, u) Ivt/l to head, be head of. huwwa 
b-yir!'as il-farraJiin he is in charge of the office servants. 
2 to preside over. ra !'as l-iglimaal he chaired the meet-
ing. -vn riyaasa, ri!'aasa'; pva mar!'uus. 
4-\,;.) .4-~.) riyaasa, ri!'aasa r Inl leadership, chair-
manship, presidency. bi-yillammu I-fuqaha mala 
baltf.ii-hum bi-ryaasil Jf!x-hum the Koran reciters 
gather under the leadership of their sheikh. !,il-markib 
layl; ryasl-i the ship is under my command . 
...,...J';r mar!'uus In *1 subordinate . 
...,..1.) • ...,..i.) raas, ra!'s' Ifem n, pi ruus, ru!'uusf! I head 
(of a person or animal). masnad raas head rest. raas 
cfaani (1) a sheep's head (for eating). (2) stupid person, 
muttonhead. !'iYsii raas-ak wash your hair! raas 

baruuka wig-stand. II raas bi-raas on an equal footing, as 
in l:Ja-niftalfal raas bi-raas we shall work as equal part-
ners, bi-tilmil ras-ha b-raas-i she behaves as though 
she's my equal, she confronts and defies me. -raal:J raas 
fi-raas to faint. -raas-u w-ralf' seef(or bar{Uufa tabus] 
or wi-bara(iif iI-balad tabus]) "" wild horses could not 
make him (do something), as in raas-u w-ralf' seef 
ma-ybil-haa-! naat;~ lan kida he absolutely refuses to 
sell it any cheaper. -Iamma yut;all-faas fir-raas "" at 
the point of no return. -raas-u [IS-sama he is proud. 
-min is-saas Iir-raas from head to toe, from top to 
bottom. -xalla ras-na lalya I-fOOt; he made us proud of 
him. -xalla ras-na mita(iyya he made us ashamed of 
him. -foot; raas born (immediately) after, as in hiyya 
foot; raas-i lala tuul she is the next oldest in the family 
after me, bi-tgiib rawlaad foot; raas balr/. she has chil-
dren one after the other. -raas-i bi-tliffI am dizzy, I am 
in a spin. -bald' raas-i ma l:Jadd 8 laaf after me, the 
deluge. - raas iI-labd long-handled ceiling brush. -lala 
raas-u riifa {sare] he's a big-shot. -maafi lala raas-u he 
is living irresponsibly. -min tal:Jt' raas attributable to (of 
fault, blame etc.), as in kull illi l:J~al min tal:Jt' raas-ak 
all that happened is your fault. -min raas Ii-rigl totally, 
as in rima lfaltaan min raas-ak Ii-riglee-k you're com-
pletely wrong. -mif laarif raas-u min riglee "" he 
doesn't know whether he's coming or going. -lala 
leen-i w-raas-i or lala raas-i min foot; certainly, with 
pleasure. -matral:J ma tl:Jull' raas-ak l:J~tt' rigl-ak "" do 
your worst (you don't scare me)! -raas lfanam one of a 
herd of sheep and goats. - rabu raas one suffering from 
ringworm. - rabu r-ruus epithet for one with a large 
head. 2 top part or business end. raas kursi the top (of 
the back) of a chair. raas l:Jarba spearhead. raasfakuuf 
head of a hammer. raas musmaar head of a nail. raas 
siriir head of a bed. lala raas l:Jarit-na at the top of our 
alley. raas toom a head of garlit:. IIraas sukkar sugar 
loaf. -;-aas x~~ stem of a lettuce. -raas l:Jagar break-
water. 3 beginning, starting point. bi-Ylidd is-sibl:Ja min 
ras-ha he counts the prayer beads from the beginning. 
raas is-sana New Year's day. 4 top (of a hierarchy). 
ril-ridaara lala ras-ha I-lamiid the administration is 
headed by the dean. raas ma~ar {obsol] leader of a 
band of thieves. S heading, title. katabt' raas 
i1-mawtluullBi-~abbuura I wrote the title of the topic 
on the blackboard. 6 leading personality. hiyya rakbar 
raas fil-l:Jitta she's the most influential person in the 
neighbourhood. 7 cape, promontory. raas ii-barr Ras 
el-Barr, promontory and resort to the west of the east-
ern estuary of the Nile. raas it-tiin Ras et-Tin, promon-
tory at Alexandria, site of a former royal summer 
320 
palace. 8 {carp] rail. raas baab rail of a ddor. 
9 headband (of a bridle). 10 boom (of a crane). see 
further under I IJ" .J .) 
11 ra rsan T ladvl directly, immediately . 
..,.. iJ ra rsi T ladjl vertical. 
~JJ rusiyya In pI -aatl blow delivered with the fore-
head (against the forehead of another). qarab-u (or 
riddaa-Iu) rusiyya (or bir-rusiyya) he butted him with 
his head. 
~J rariisT In pI rurasa, rurasaarl chief person, 
head, leader. rariis fariit; team captain. rams qism 
department head. rariis maglis iI-ridaara the chairman 
of the board. rariis wuzara Prime Minister. rariis ig-
gumhuriyya the President of the Republic. 
~J rariisi ladj *1 principal, main. ril-bayanaat ir-
rarisiyya the most important items of information. 
maktab rariisi main office. tariit; rariisi main road. 
Illinwaan rariisi headline (in a newspaper). 
""";'J rayyis In pI ruyasal 1 man in charge of a group of 
workers, foreman, boss, chief. 2 captain of a boat. 
IIlut;dit ir-rayyis {naut] boatswain's hitch. 38 title of, 
and form of address or reference to, (1) any male not 
wearing military or religious dress or smart western 
clothes. (2) a waiter and any male who may be referred 
to as rusta (q.v.). 3b rir-rayyis informal title of, and 
form of address or reference to, the President of Egypt. 
~J rayyisa In pI -aatl woman in charge of a group of 
workers, forewoman. 
""";'.;1 ritrayyis Ivil to be in charge (of a group of work-
ers). -ava mitrayyis. 
J ~ IJ" ~.) see J r IJ" .) : 
ra rsimaal, 
ra rsimaali, 
rarsimaliyya 
.J i.) 
...;iJ raraf (a) Ivil to be compassionate, show mercy. 
-vn rarfa, rarafaan; ava raarif. 
~iJ rarfa Inl compassion, mercy. rir-rarfa bil-
l:Jayawanaat kindness to animals.ll/agnit ir-rarfa {aead] 
university committee that gives the final ruling on bor-
derline or just below borderline examination papers. 
"';J';J raruuf Inl Gracious One (epithet of God). 
.J ~.) see • .): rirawi 
IS ~.) see also 
I IS .) .J 
lSiJ rara (yara) Ivtl 1 to see in a dream or vision. rareet 

I'abuu-ya laabis l'abya4.f-abya4. I dreamt that I saw my 
father dressed all in white. 2 (frozen contexts] to see, 
behold.lajuft-u wala leen-i ral'it-u I didn't see hair .lOr 
hide of him. 3t to see (s.th.) as best, consider (s.th.) 
right. I'illi taraa I'ilmil-u do whatever you think best. 
-vn ral'y, rul'ya; pva marl'i. 
11 ya tara or ya hal tara I wonder. ma-gaa-j leeh ya tara 
I wonder why he didn't come. 
lSi.) ral'y In pI l'araal'l opinion, view. I'ir-ral'y iI-
laamm public opinion. ral'y; qanuuni legal opinion. 
I'ana ral'y-i nilmil qurla I think we should draw lots. 
bi-ymajji ral'y-u laleena he forces his opinion upon us 
Illaia ral'y according to the view of, according to the 
saying of, as in lala ral'y-ak illi yisraq malruuf I'~mr-u 
as you say, it's well known what happens to those who 
steal, lala ral'y iI-masal as the proverb says. - I'ana min 
ral'y-ak or ral'y-i min ral'y-ak I share your opinion. 
-I'eeh ral'y-ak I'inn ... (1) what do you say to the fact 
that ... ? as in I'eeh ra I'y-ak I'innak ma-tifham-j fJaaga 
(1) what would you say if I told you that you don't 
understand a thing? (2) can you credit that ... , just 
imagine that ... ? (sometimes used defiantly), as in I'eeh 
ral'y-ak I'inni ma-tlajjet-j; lissa can you imagine? 
I haven't had supper yet. -Iu ra I'y; gamiil he comes up 
with good ideas. 
~d.) rul'ya I Inl 1 seeing, sighting. I'iyna fi-nti;aar 
rul'yaa-k we're looking forward to seeing you. 2 {lsi] 
sighting of the new moon, which marks the first day of a 
month. sabatit ir-ru I'ya the sighting (of the new moon) 
was confirmed. 
~ J" marl'i t , marl'i ladjl visual. l'iI-funuun iI-marl'iyya 
the visual arts. 
~I.) raaya In pI -aatl pennant, small flag. 
~j.) rul'ya 2 Inl vision, dream. jaaf rul'ya wiyja (fil-
manaam) he had a bad dream. IIsifr ir-rul'ya {Chr] 
Book of Revelation, Apocalypse. 
~IJ" miraaya In pI -aatl 1 mirror. llfil-wif/ mraaya 
w-fil-qafa sillaaya {prov] (a mirror to the face and a 
thorn to the back of the neck) = he is pleasant with you 
to your face, but stabs you in the back. -miraayit 
iI-yubb B lamya {prov] = love is blind. -miraaya 
siyriyya kaleidoscope. 2 opening in the floor of a bak-
er's oven through which the heat enters from the fire-
chamber. 3 backboard (e.g., ofa boat or a cart). 4 area 
on the neck of an luud where the fingers stop the strings 
(see PU, 10). 
IS.I.;I I'itraal'a Ivil it occurred (to one's mind). I'ilmil 
ka-ma yitraal'a liik do as you think (best). -ava 
mitraal'i. 
321 
ISh) I'irta I'a Ivtl to consider right or suitable. -ava 
mirtil'i. 
I YYJ 
.:;..) rabb / Inl 1 Lord God. lIya rabb 0 Lord (protect 
us)! (expression of dismay, anxiety or resignation). 
-quul ya rabb = rely on God! -ya rabb; yingay = 
I hope to God he succeeds. -rabb; hina rabb; hnaak 
(the God of here is the God of there) all places are as 
good as each other. - raagil bitaal (or bi-yilraf) rabb-i-
na a pious man. - l'iI-fJikaaya di btaalit rabb-i-na the 
matter is in God's hands, there is nothing any man can 
do about it. - rabb-ak rabb; quluub the Lord looks on 
the heart. -liina rabb ism-u I-kariim we have a Lord 
whose name is the Generous One (expression of de-
spair or helplessness or, addressed to another, of con-
solation). 2 Ipl I'arbaabl master. rabb ii-beet (1) the 
Lord of the Kaaba, i.e. God. (2) the master of the 
house. I'arbaab i{-{ariiqa the leaders of the Order. 
IIl'arbaab iI-l'afJwaal Sufis with hidden spiritual powers. 
-ya 
I'arbaab 
kuW 
~iiba you 
trouble-makers! 
3 I'arbaab Ipl n in constr statel the ones with. I'arbaab 
is-sawaabiq those with previous convictions. I'arbaab 
iI-yiraf craftsmen, skilled workmen. 
I'arbaab iI-
malajaat pensioners. 
;,;.) rabba I t In pI -aatl mistress. rabbit beet housewife. 
rabbit ii-beet the mistress of the house. 
J~.) rabbaani 1 ladjl pertaining to the Lord God. 
I'~-~ala r-rabbaniyya (Chr] the Lord's Prayer. raagil 
rabbaani a pious man. 2/adj invarl God given, inscrut-
able. fJalaawa rabbaani natural beauty. -/adverbiallyl 
l'iI-yikaaya di y~alit rabbaani this affair came about for 
no apparent reason. 
Zy YJ 
.:;..) rabb 2 (u) Ivtl to beat (s.th.) of liquid consistency. 
-vn rabb, rababaan; ava raabib; pva marbuub. 
.:;..) rubb In pI rubuubl thickened fruit juice, fruit 
puree.llrubb; suus liquorice sweets or pastilles. 
;,; J" .~ J" marabba In pI -aatl jam. marabbit naring 
orange marmalade. 
':;'.;1 I'itrabb Ivil to be beaten. -iva mitrabb. 
':;';1 I'inrabb = I'itrabb. -iva minrabb. 
J y YJ 
~~.) rabaaba, ribaaba In pI -aatl musical instrument 
with one or two strings, with a small resonance box 

usually made of coconut, held vertically and played 
with a bow, rebab (see PI.J, I).jaalir ir-rabaaba singer 
who accompanies himself on the rabaaba. Ilmaaji b-
rabaaoa he is telling the news to all and sundry. 
y~,; rabaab, ribaab Inl collective of rabaaba. ribaaba. 
y~,; rabbaab, rabbaab In pi rabbaaba. rabbaaba. 
rabbabiinl player of the rabaaba. 
4y Y.J 
;.;,; ribba Inl [agric] I that part of the clover crop left to 
produce seed (and not cut for fodder). 2 Ipl ribabl crop 
or field of clover grown for seed. 
5:7 Y .J 
4,; rubbama (also rubbatan l ) ladvl perhaps, possibly. 
huwwa rubbama ykuun talbaan perhaps he's sick. 
rubbama nisyu maybe they forgot. 
-""'YY.J 
..r""';,; rubbisuus Icoll 
nl liquorice sweet(s) or 
pastille(s). 
-.!lYY.J 
~~_!,) rubabikya, rubabikya <It roba vecchia> Inl 
cast-off household articles, junk. bitaal rubabikya rag-
and-bone man, junk peddler. 
'::"..sYYJ 
t,;..;',; rubbeeta Inl [Chr] guest master in a monastery. 
c.Y.J 
Cl,; ribib'. rabab' (a) I Ivtl to make (a profit). ribibt' 
fluus kitiir I made a large profit. rabab II-biriimu he 
won the first prize. 2 Ivil to make a profit. fid-dllkkaan 
ribib qawi the shop did very well. fill!lah-i ma-tirbab 
{women} may you never prosper! -vn ribb: ava raabib, 
rabbaan. 
Cl'; ribb In pi farbaabl I profit. bi-y[allal filuus bir-
ribb l 
[lsI] he practises usury. 2 farbaab Ipl nl 
2a dividends paid on shares. 2b dividends paid to work-
ers in a public sector company from the profits of that 
company. 
~,; ribbiyya Inl profitability. 
Cl) farbab leI! morel most profitable. 
C~,; rabaab: fi~-~abaab rabaab "" let's sleep on it. 
tomorrow will be a better time (to consider the matter). 
Cl"" murblb' ladjl lucrative. highly profitable. 
e.,; rabbab I Ivtl to cause to make profit. farabbab-ak 
fil-beet faIt' gneeh I give you one thousand pounds' 
322 
profit for the house. 2 Ivilto lend money for profit. -ava 
mirabbab· 
Cl,;-I fistarbab Ivtl to try to gain. laazim tistarbab 
ritia fabuu-k you must try to gain your father's favour. 
-vn fistirbaab: ava mistarbab. 
Y.JY.J 
y J'.'; rabrab Ivil to become plump. fill out. -vn 
rabraba: ava mirabrab. 
'-:-!.J'.'; rubreeb Inl soft mud. mire. 
~J'.'; rubreeba Inl pool or puddle of mud. 
-'::".JY.J 
(,\;,; -"!) riburtaaj <Fr> In pi -aatl reportage. news 
coverage. 
..,.. Y.J. 
....... u ribs <Engl> Inl {text/ rep. 
I~YJ 
~) rabaj <Engl rubbish>: I/aas rabaj worthless 
people. rabble. riff-raff. 
2 ,,;, Y.J see ,,;, Y I .J : raabif 
~YJ 
~I,; raabi~ ladj *1 lying in wait. on the look-out. 
""":;1 
fitrabba~ Ivil to be in wait. watch out (for s.o.). 
bi-ytrabba~1I I- fayy' waabid gayy' min ir-riifthey are on 
the look-out for anyone commg from the countryside. 
gariimit it-tarabbll~ the criminal act of ambush. - vn 
tarabbu~: ava mitrabba~. 
ok Y.J 
~) rabat (II) Ivtl la to fasten, tie. rabat karafattit-u he 
tied his tie. raba[t' bzaam-i I fastened my belt.llyibt/I' 
w-yurbu[ to exercise power, act effectively and de-
cisively, as in la ybill' wala yurbll[ (he) is useless, (he) is 
ineffective, fana mif layz-u la ybill' wala yurbu[ fil-
lamaliyya I don't want him to have anything to do with 
the business. Ib to make fast, hitch, moor. filii 
ma-yurbu[ bihimt-II tinsiriq min/Ill [pro v] he who 
doesn't tie up his beast gets it stolen. fil-malayka 
wig-gmn' marbll[1lI1 biZ-Zlkr the angels and jinn are 
held powerless by the dhikr. IIlllqda rab[ [naut/ link-
tightening hitch. - Ian!' rubaa[ /I/aut/ boat that carries 
the mooring cable from a ship to the quay. Ic to bind, 
tie up. bundle. furbu[ I[-[ard tie up the parcel! Id to 
bandage. raba[it-Iu g-garb she bandaged his wound. 

2 to screw tight. 'i'urbu{ iI-faraamii tighten the brakes! 
3 to occupy. keep busy. ma-qdirt i-! 'i'agii-Iak lafaan 
i;-;uruuf raba{it-ni I couldn't come to you because 
things kept me. 4 to determine. fix. specify. raba{u 
f-!uruu{ they agreed on the conditions. IIrab{i kalaam 
(or lisaan or beela or 'i'ittifaaq) paying of an earnest or 
deposit to seal a deal. - 'i'iq-qab( wir-rab{ discipline. 
5 to cause impotence in (e.g., a bridegroom) by magic. 
- Ivi/6 to be fastenable. be attachable. 'i'iI-musmaar da 
b-yurbu{ fooq that screw goes on top. 7 to make a 
connection. see 
a 
relationship. 
bi-yurbu{ been 
il-mallumaat lafaan yifham il-mawqifhe relates all the 
information in order to understand the situation. 
'i'if-!alb 
iI-ma~ri b-yurbu{ been iI-fara!; wil-bayaaq 
Egyptians associate white with festivity. 8 to come to a 
dead halt. stop completely. 'i'urbu{ landak stop right 
where you are! yiftaral {uul in-nahaar wi-yiigi s-saala 
xamsa w-yurbu{ he works all day and then, when it gets 
to five o'clock, he downs tools. 9 to lie in ambush. 
raba{uu-Iu fil-qa~ab they lay in ambush for him in the 
sugar cane. -vn rab{, rubaa{, raba{aan; ava raabi{; pva 
marbuu{. 
~J rab{a J In pi -aatl I linst nl a tying, a binding, a 
fastening. - lalso pi ruba{1 2 bunch, bundle. niqlal 
if-fatl' wi-nrabba{-u rubat we pull up the seedlings and 
tie them in bundles. II bi-rab{it iI-milallim induding ev-
ery single one, as in xad-hum iI-bulii~ bi-rabtit iI-
milallim the police took them all in. 3 knot. raba{it 
rab{a fil-!;abl she tied a knot in the rope. II wisaam rab{it 
is-saaq the Order of the Garter. 
j,~J rubaa{ In pi -aat, 'i'arbi{a, ribital I tie, tie-string. 
gazma b-rubaa{ lace-up shoes. rubaa{ is-sitaara curtain 
sash, tie-back. 2 bandage. 3 brake. 4 {naut] strake. 
5 spell to induce impotence. 6 bond. rubaa{ muqaddas 
{Chr] a holy bond (i.e. marriage). 
~IJ rab{a 2 In pi rawaabi{1 I bond. wilad-na humma 
r-rab{a benatna our children are the bond between us. 
2a social or academic association. rab{it 'i'abnaa'i' qina 
Sons of Qena Association (a club for those fr-om Qena 
living in Cairo). 2b guild, union. 'i'ir-rawaabi{ iI-
lummaliyya the labour unions. 
j, Yo.J" marbuu{ In/: marbuu{ id-daraga {admin] salary 
bracket. 
~~J rubba{iyya Inl gang. lamalu rubba{iyya lalayya 
they ganged up on me. 
~.J" marba{ In pi maraabi{1 hitching place for lives-
tock, stable. II marba{ iI-faras the heart of the matter, as 
in 'i'ahu gibt i marba{ iI-faras you've hit the nail right on 
the head! 
323 
~;I 'i'itraba{ Ivil passive of rabat. - iva mitribit. 
~; 1 'i'inraba{ = 'i'itraba{. - iva minribit. 
.k;'J rabba{ Ivtl to tie. fasten, bind etc. (a number of 
things, or a number of times in succession). bi-nrabba{ 
it-liil !;izam we tie up the hemp in bundles. 'i'iI-muuna 
bi-trabba{ iI-madamiik the mortar binds the courses. 
tarbii{ larabiyya the checking and tightening of loose 
screws and bolts on a car. -vn tarbii{; avalpva mirabba{. 
.k;';1 'i'itrabba( Ivill to be tied. be fastened, be bound 
etc. (of a number of things. or a number of times in 
succession). 2 to lie in wait. -avaliva mitrabba{. 
~IJ raabi{ Ivil to station oneself. take up one's stand, 
settle oneself in position. rabi{t d lala baab ig-gaamil 
I stationed myself by the door of the mosque. 'i'ig-geef 
miraabi{fi-siina the army has taken up position in Sinai. 
!;a-tilmil 'i'eeh bukra. - 'i'araabi{ fil-beet 'What are you 
going to do tomorrowT 'Just hang about at home.' 
II 'i'ig-geefil-muraabit (obsol] "" the territorial army. -vn 
mirabta, . muraabata T; ava miraabit. 
~) 'i'irtaba{T Ivil I to be linked, be connected, be 
related. 'i'iI-mawquleen murtab{iin bi-balq the two 
matters are interlinked. 2 to enter an agreement, com-
mit oneself. -vn 'i'irtibaa{; ava murtabit. 
j,l,.;) 'i'irtibaa{ In pi -aatll link, tie, connection, rela-
tion. dimuul-i ma-Iuaa-! irtibaa{ big-gawaaz my tears 
have nothing to do with marriage. 2 commitment. 
rirtiba{aat maliyya financial commitments. 
ty.J 
t- J rabal (a, i) Ivill to gallop (of a donkey). 2 [joe] to 
get going full-swing, get properly under way. -vn rabl; 
ava raabil. 
t- J rabl In pi rurbull {obsolJ building divided into 
private apartments with a common courtyard for cook-
ing etc. IIzayy ir-rabl old and shabby (of a building). 
-ta!;t ir-rabl historic district running west along the 
outside of the line of the Cairo city walls from Bab 
Zuweila. 
~J rabla Inl manuscript copy of the Koran in thirty 
volumes, usually kept in a box, and on which oaths are 
traditionally sworn in cases of serious dispute. 
t- J rubl/n pi 'i'irbaal, 'i'irbal/l one fourth, quarter. 
rubl i saala a quarter of an hour. talatt irbaal kiilu 
la!;ma three quarters of a kilo of meat. 2 one quarter of 
a !;izb of the Koran. 3 {mus] quarter tone. 4 {Chr] 
four-line anti phonic verse from the liturgical hymns of 
the Coptic tasbi!;a (q.v.). Sa unit of volume equal to 
four qada!; or haifa kee/a (8.25Iitres). Sb vessel used to 
measure out one rubl of grain. 6 corner piece in tent 

applique work (see PI.H, 1). 
~J rubla In pi -aat, -aatl unit of volume equal to one 
quarter of an c;adal:J (0.516 Iitres). 
~J, ribil/adj "I stocky, stout. 
~.;I farball Inum: in constr w foil n pi; usu farbalt 
when followed by n pi ordinarily w initial hamzal four. 
fif-Jac;c;a farbal mataaril:J it's a four-roomed flat. 
farbalt alaa/four thousand. farbalt ic;lima four pens. 
IIbi-farbal leneen [joe] (with four eyes) wearing 
glasses . 
• ~) ,~) farbal2 (also yoom farbal) Inl a Wednes-
day. (yoom) il-farbal (this) Wednesday. II farbal 
fayyuub (Chr] the Wednesday of Holy Week on which 
the sufferings of Job are commemorated. 
~) farbala Inum: in absol state, in apposition, or 
w foil n sing in contexts of ordering and itemizing; 
pl-aatl four. farbala w- farbiliin sana forty-four years. 
ril-mazaahib il- farbala the four Islamic schools of law. 
fil-kutub di farbala these books are four (in number). 
fil- fic;lima 1- farbala the four pens. farbala kiilu four 
kilos. II fumm a farbala w-farbiliin (I) centipede. 
(2) a witch of a woman. 
• farbalaat ladvl in fours. 
~~J rubaali ladjl I fourfold, quadripartite. 2 for 
four people. c;awaarib rubaliyya four-man boats. -
In 
pi rubaliyyaatl 3 {mus] quartet. 4 quatrain. 
C!!J rabiilln/l spring, springtime. II rabiil (il-) fawwal 
the third month of the Muslim year. rabiil (it-)taani the 
fourth month of the Muslim year. 2 {rur] clover grown 
as a main crop. 
~J rablili ladjl spring-like (of weather). IIramad 
rabiili inflammation of the eyes caused by an allergy to 
pollen etc., and occurring in the spring. 
t ~J rabbaalln ·1 weight-lifter. 
~ J' ma~balln pi, maraabill pasture, meadow. 
.;-So ~) 'r~) farbaltaajar I/num pi -aatl four-
teen. lIc;amar farbaltaajar (1) a full moon (being the 
state of the moon on the fourteenth night of a lunar 
month). (2) a dazzling beauty. 2 ril-farbaltaajar ladj 
invarl the fourteenth. 
~) farbiliin I/num pi -aatl forty. -
ril-farbiliin 
2 ladj invarl the fortieth. 3/nl the fortieth day (1) after 
a death, when certain traditional ceremonies are per-
formed in commemoration of the deceased. (2) after 
childbirth, when the mother ceases to be ritually im-
pure. see further under 4J t Y J 
4:~) '~J rublumiyya I Inum pi -aatl four hun-
dred.2 fir-rublumiyya ladj invarl the four-hundredth. 
~IJ raabillladj·1 fourth. II min raabil il-musta/jiil (or 
324 
il-musta/jilaat) absolutely impossible. 
t.Y-J' marbuul ladj ·1 I stocky, stout. 2 folded in 
four. 
~J rabbal Ivtl I to form (s.th.) into a square, give 
(s.th.) the shape of a square. 2a to quadruple. salaam 
mirabbal (1) a fourfold flourish (e.g., from a band at a 
wedding after each toast). (2) a pompous and effusive 
greeting. 2b {math] to square (a numeral). fitneen 
tarbiil two squared. mitr' mrabbal a square metre. 3 to 
cross (the arms or legs) .1Ic;aalid wi-mrabbal riglee he's 
sitting comfortably. - Ivi/4 to eat clover. 5 to practise 
weight-lifting. -vn tarbiil; avalpva mirabbal. 
C!!'; tarbiil In pi tarabiill square. 
~.; tarbiila In pi tarabiill I square piece, e.g., in 
tent applique work (see PI.H, 4).2 triangular headker-
chief (see PI.F, 9). 
~.;JI fit-tarbiila Iprop nl market in Cairo, in the 
Ghouriyya district. 
~.; tarbiili ladj/{math] pertaining to squaring. gizr 
tarbiili square root. 
~ J' mirabbal, 
murabball 
In 
pi -aatl 
square. 
IImirabbal 
il-c;ifj 
{naut] 
cross-jack. 
-c;umaaj 
mirabbalaat (1) checkered cloth. (2) needle-point 
cloth. 
~ J' murabbal2 Inl I {mus] 4/4 time. 2 dance per-
formed by horses. 
~';I fitrabbal/vi/l to be formed into a square. 2a to 
be quadrupled. 2b {math] to be squared. 3 to sit cross-
legged. - ava/iva mitrabbal. 
~IJ raabil2 I/vtl to undertake a quarter share with 
(s.o., in business etc.)./j-arabil-kumfil-beela di I'll be 
your fourth partner in the deal. 2 Ivi/{rur] to work as a 
farm labourer (because labourers formerly shared a 
quarter of the crop). -vn mirabla; ava miraabil. 
~ 
1 J' mirabla ladvl by four people. yitjaal mirabla it 
is carried by four people. bi-yillabu koomi mrabla they 
play four-hand koomi. 
~IJ' miraabilln ·1 {rur] farm labourer. 
~.;-I fistirabbal Ivil to sit cross-legged. - ava 
mistirabbal· 
4JtYJ see also tYJ 
.JIIlJ rablan Ivil to reach the fortieth day (1) after 
childbirth (of a mother orchild).lamma rablant' sxint' 
c;awi forty days after giving birth, my temperature went 
up very high. (2) after death (of the deceased). -vn 
rablana; ava mirablan. 
.d Y J 
~J rabak (i, u) Ivtl I to entangle, muddle, compli-

cate. marbuuk fif-fUlfl up to one's neck in work. 2 to 
confuse, bewilder: embarrass. -vn rabka; ava raabik; 
pva marbuuk. 
~.; rabka In pi -aatl confusion, muddle. 
4.,... murbikt 
ladj 
*1 
confusing, 
complicated. 
ri/-mawCjif murbik wi-ralfm i kida fl-alaaCji flail it's a 
complicated situation, but even so I'll find a solution. 
4.;1 5'itrabak Ivil I to be or become muddled. 
5'if-fUlfl i fla-yitribik the work will get messed up. 2 to 
become confused and embarrassed. 5'awwil majaf-ha 
trabak as soon as he saw her he became flustered. 
-ava/iva mitribik. 
~) 5'irtabak = 5'itrabak. -vn rirtibaak; ava mirtibik. 
i.JY.; 
':'4.; rubbaan In pi rababnal captain, skipper. 
I.J Y.; 
.Yo'; rabwa In pi rubal hill, slight incline. 
~.; riba Inl usury. 
~~.; ribaaya Inl I upbringing, education. rana sitt i 
rbaayit madaaris I'm a woman with schooling. 2 good 
breeding, good manners. rin-naas dool canduhum 
ribaaya those are well-bred people. 
~.; rabba 2 1vtl 18 to make or let grow, rear. bi-nrabbi 
t-taCjaawi f-Cjl¥aari we grow the seeds in pots. bi-yrabbu 
g-gimaal cajaan if-feel they raise camels for carrying 
work. rabbajacr-u he let his hair grow. huwwa mrabbi 
daCjn-u he has a beard. II cuguul tarbiyya calves kept for 
meat. - rabbit il-xamiira she prepared the leaven so that 
it started to work. -rabbit-Ii cilia she made me sick and 
tired, she made me fed-up. Ib to keep (an animal, as a 
pet). ri/-ceela mrabbiyya kalb the family keeps a dog. 
2 to put on (extra weight or the like). rabbeet kirj 
you've grown a paunch. rin-naas bi-tzarrat-hum cajaan 
yirabbu laflm i ktiir people force-feed them to make 
them put on a lot of meat. 38 to bring up, raise (chil-
dren). da camm-i iii rabbaa-ni this is my uncle who 
brought me up. rabbaa-hum tarbiyya masifliyya he gave 
them a Christian upbringing. 3b to educate in moral 
and social conduct, bring up to be well-mannered. ri/Ii 
ma-trabbii ri/-rahaali trabbii ru-5'ayyaam {prov] he 
who is not disciplined by his parents will be disciplined 
by life. -vn tarbiyya, tarbiya f; ava/pv~ mirabbi. 
~.; tarbiyya, tarbiya Inl I education, upbringing. 
wizaarit it-tarbiya wit-tacliim the Ministry of Educa-
tion. tarbiya badaniyya physical education. cadiim it-
tarbiyya ill-bred. 2 {cook] thickening of flour and but-
t~r or yoghurt added to soups and stews. 
.;,.,... murabbi In *1 mentor, spiritual tutor. 
325 
.. 
~.,... murabbiyya, murabbiya In pi -aatl children's 
nurse, nanny, nursemaid. 
~Yo'; tarbawi ladjl pedagogical, educational. 
.;,.;1 ritrabba Ivil I to be raised, be reared. ril-firaax 
bi-titrabba fil-beet the chickens are raised in the house. 
2 to be well brought-up. rinta Cjaliil il- radab wi-ma-
trabbet-f you are rude and ill-bred. - iva mitrabbi. 
.;,1.; raaba Ivil to practise usury. -ava miraabi. 
.;, I.,... muraabi In *1 usurer. 
2.JY'; 
Yo'; rabw Inl asthma. 
.;.JY.; 
';Yo'; raboor <Fr rapport> Inl report. 
t.JY'; 
'Yo'; rabooh <Fr rabot> In pi -aatl {carp] I trying 
plane. 2.planing machine. 
I ..; Y.; see I.J Y .;: ribaaya, 
rabba, 
tarbiyya, 
tarbiya, 
murabbi, 
murabbiyya, 
ritrabba, 
raaba, 
muraabi 
2 ..; Y.; see 2 Y Y .; : marabba 
.;";Y.; 
ft',J'; rubeer <Fr repere> Inl {eng] bench-mark. 
y'::" .; 
~.; rutba In pi rutabl rank. rutab caskariyya military 
ranks. 
.......,;.; ratiib ladj *1 monotonous. 
~.,... martaba In pi maraatibl I mattress. 2 rank, 
status. II 5'allaah yicalli maratb-ak God advance you! 
(expressing gratitude). - maca martabit if-faraf {acad] 
with honours, as in 5'itxarragt i b-taCjdiir gayyid giddan 
maca martabit if-farafI graduated with the grade 'Very 
Good with honours' . 
...,...1.; raatib In pi rawaatibl I regular supply. raatib il-
biCjaala regular grocery order. laflmit ir-raatib the regu-
lar meat order. IlflallaaCj- ir-raatib barber who makes 
regular visits to customers. 2 salary, wage. - ladjl 
3 ~egular. ru-rimaam ir-raatib the regular imam . 
...,....; rattib Ivtl to P.ut in order, arrange. rattib 
hiduum-ak fid-durg arrange your clothes in the drawer. 
rattibt-i-Iak macaad I've arranged an appointment for 
you. rik-kutub mirattiba tartiib rabgadi the books are 
arranged alphabetically. II raagil murattab an orderly 
man. - vn tartiib; ava mirattib; pva mirattib, murattab . 

....,.,;.; tartiib In pi -aat/l organization. order. arrange-
ment. bu-tartiib in order. in succession. 2 plan. prepa-
ration. 
tartibaat 
tt-faray 
arrangements for 
the 
w<:dding-party. 
~J' murauab In pi -aatl salary. 
...,..;.;1 fitrauib Ivil to be put in order. be arranged. - iva 
mitrauib. mutarratib r . 
~ furauib lala r to follow upon. be consequential upon. 
...; loS .;., .;., .) 
...A.,;"\;J.) rutallif <Fr rotative> Inl [prmt! rotary press. 
~ .) .;., .) 
~fi; rttrid <Engl> Inl [auto! retread. 
IJ" ..::.J .) 
4; ,l...;; rttsa <It rizzo> Icoll nl sea-urchin(s). 
I ..;. ..::.J .) 
~; ratfln/l soil. earth. 2 rubble. broken stone. -also 
radJ. 
4.;.;; ratfa lunit n. pi -aatl piece of stone or broken 
brick. 
z ..;. ..::.J.) see ";'.J';".): rutuuj 
t..::.J.; 
t; ratal (a) IviliT to revel. indulge oneself. 2 to let 
up. calm down. (uul in-nahaar titxaanic; ma-tirtal1' 
lay;a she is quarrelling all day long and never shuts up 
for a moment. -vn ratalaan; ava raatil. 
I ~.;.,.) 
j;; rauillvt/l [lsI! to chant (e.g .• the Koran. accord-
109 to prescribed rules). 2 [Chr! to sing. chant (hymns, 
responses etc.). - vn tarwl; ava mirattil; pva murattal. 
~.; tartilia In pi tarawl! [Chr! hymn. 
~~ muraU/lIn *1 [Chr! cantor. 
j;.;1 furaU/llvll passive of rattil. - iva mitrauil. 
Z J ..::.J.) see .)..::.J J : ritl 
";'.J..::.J.) 
...r.y) rutuuj <Fr retouche> Inl [phot! retouching (ofa 
negative). 
1,j1oS';".) 
.:r.;J) rutiin <Engl> Inl I routine, humdrum round. 
rutim Il-yayaah Il-ladiyya the routine of ordinary life. 
2 bureaucratit routine. sanctified practice. fir-rutiin 
326 
ma-yismay-1ii1 faruuy maaji it would be contrary to 
regulations for me to go on foot. 
~J; rutiini ladj "I I routine. normal. figrafaat 
rutiniyya routine procedures. 2 attached to routine. 
ya-yifham finnak rutimi zayyu he'll think that you're as 
much a stickler for routine as he is. 
Z,jIoS';".) 
4; ritiina, ratiina <It retina> In pi rataayinl mantle 
(of a Tilley lamp) . 
[. ,j loS .;., .) 
&1; ,&; ratiinag In pi -aatl resin. 
~I) ,~; ratingi ladjl resinous. 
- [..) see .J [..) : ragaa f 
"=" [..; 
~; ragab Inl Ragab, the seventh month of the Mus-
lim year. lila yilgib-u l-lagab wala niyaam fi-ragab 
[prov! (he is pleased neither by wonders nor even by 
fasting in Ragab) ... he is the sort who will always find 
something to disapprove of. even in the most remark-
able things. 
~)I fir-ragabiyya Inl [lsI! I the 27th of Ragab. 
2 visit to Mecca made on that day. 
[. [..) 
c; ragg (u) Ivtl to shake. cause to tremble. tause to 
quake. -vn ragg. ragagaan; ava raagig; pva marguug. 
...;.) ragga linst n. pi -aatl a shaking. a trembling. a 
quake. 
C';I fitragg Ivil to shake or be shaken. tremble or be 
made to tremble, quake or be made to quake. - aVa/iva 
mitragg. 
[.40';1 firtigaag Inl [path! concussion. 
c:. [..) 
~I; raagiy r ladjl preponderant. fil-kaffa r-ragya the 
upper hand. IIlac;I' raagiy a sensible mind. a prudent 
mind. see further under c:. [..) r 
[..) [..) 
[.T."; ragrag Ivtl to cause to quiver. tremble or vibrate . 
-vn ragraga; ava/pva mlragrag. 
[.T.".;I fitragrag Ivil to quiver, tremble, vibrate. -ava 
mitragrag. 

t~.) 
r:::-; rigil (a) Ivil I to come or go back, return. 
ma-b-yirgalj; filla bald ii-la/a he doesn't come back 
till after supper. rigilna laani /iI- famsaal we've got back 
to saying proverbs again. fiI-fJasana fJa-lirgal-lak bil-
xeer the good you do will bring you good. IIrigil fi-
kalaam-u (1) he went back on his word. (2) he changed 
his mind. 2 to refer. ma-fiij kUlub yirgallaha {-{alaba 
there are no books for the students to consult. 
fir-ruguullifjalb consulting the people. 3 to go back, 
be attributable (to an origin). fii yimkin sittiin ra{sa 
laakin kull-a-ha b-lirgalli-Ialat fawt{aallig-gism there 
are maybe sixty ways of diving but they all go back to 
three physical positions. di ragla I-~uruufil- f~aaba this 
is attributable to the circumstances surrounding the 
injury. 4 Ipreverblto return (to doing s.th.). rigil yifjul-
Ii he started telling me again. dimaar-i riglilliwgal-ni 
my head started hurting again. -vn fUguul; ava raagil. 
~ rigillan to turn from. give up. firgallan lamayl-ak 
give up your (evil) ways! 
t~; ruguul/nl return. bi-ruguul iI-bariid by return 
of post. II ruguul ifjeex (fila ~ibaa) the old man'sreturn 
to youth (title of a widely-quoted book on sexual 
techniques) . 
t~ J" marguul In pi -aall unsold merchandise, sur-
plus stock. faxbaar iI-yoom lafjriiban ma-I-haaj 
marguul there are virtually no surplus copies left of 
(the weekly) Akhbar e1-Y oom.1I yirgal margul-na Ii-... 
let our subject revert to .... -nirgal Ii-margul-na let's 
get back to our (original) subject. 
~; ragla lunit nl a return. 
..s"":; ragli ladv '1 I retroactive. bi- fasar ragli with 
retroactive force. with retroactive effect. 2 revocable. 
{alaafj ragli {Iegl revocable divorce. 3 reactionary. 
~; ragliyya Inl {poll reactionism. 
tj':'; ragiil I ladj invarl second-rate, second-hand. 
2/coll nl rejects. II ragiil iI-koon rice hulls. 
r:::-J" margil r In pi maraagill reference work. ka//aaf 
milladdid i1-maraagil cross index. 
r::-; raggal. raggallvt/l to cause to return, move or 
bring back, give or take back. raggal'; klaab I returned 
one book. raggal dimaar-ak move your head back! 
maddeel fiid-i w-raggal,-a-ha laani I stretched out my 
hand and withdrew it again. raggal ifjirii{ he rewound 
the tape. fiI-fJagaal di liraggal-na l-m~r iI-firloniyya 
these things take us back (in time) to pharaonic Egypt. 
II zuraar il-Iargiil back spacer on a typewriter. 2 to bring 
up, vomit. raggal'; kull illi f-ba{n-i I brought up every-
thing that was in my stomach. 3 to attribute. i'ana 
327 
b-araggal fjaraf-u mid-dinya I-beel-u I attribute his 
general discontent to his home-life. -vn largiil; ava/pva 
miraggal· 
~.; largiila In pi -aall{musl refrain. 
~ 
J" miraggalln pi -aatl{musJ segno of a passage to 
be repeated. 
~.;I i'ilraggallvil passive of raggal. -iva milraggal. 
r:::-I; raagil 
Ivtl 
I to 
revise, 
check. 
review. 
i'iI-muhandis iI-i'in/aa i'i b-yiigi yraagil iI-mafjasaalthe 
construction engineer comes and checks the measure-
ments. raagil nafs-u he reconsidered. -qism iI-muragla 
comptrolling department. 2 to audit (an account). 
mizaan muragla {bankJ trial balance. -vn muragla; 
ava miraagil; pva muraagal r . 
,-:-1 J" muragla In pi -aall check, revision, audit. 
r:::-1J" muraagilln '/1 checker, reviewer. 2 auditor. 
r:::-I.;I i'ilraagillvi/lto be gone over, be checked, be 
revised. 2 to be audited. 3 to recede, retreat. -ava/iva 
milraagil' 
cf J" murtagal lladjl unsold (merchandise), surplus 
(stock). IIzeel murlagal used (car) oil (sold cheap for 
re-use). 2 In pi -aall unsold merchandise, surplus stock. 
r:::-) fargallvt/to attribute. -vn i'irgaal; ava murgil· 
r:::-.;-I i'islargal r Ivtl I to remind oneself of (s.th.), 
recall. riI-i'uslaaz bi-yislargil mufJat{raat-u the profes-
sor goes over his lectures (to refresh his memory). 2 to 
recall, ask the return of. -vn i'islirgaal; ava mislargil' 
...; ~.) 
~; ragaf (i) Ivil to tremble, shake, shiver. fjalb-i 
ragafmy heart trembled. -vn ragf, ragafaan; ava raagif. 
J~ 
J" marguuf ladj '1 shaky, trembling (especially 
from fear). fjalb-i marguuf mil-lamaliyya I am very 
frightened of the operation. 
~.;I i'itragaf Ivil to be shaken, shake. - ava/iva 
milrigif. 
~ 
;I firtagafT = ragaf. -vn i'irligaafT; ava mirligif. 
I J~.) 
~I; raagilln pi riggaala, rigaa/T Ila man, adult male. 
raagil kibiir an old man .11 raagil il-beelthe master of the 
house. Ib one distinguished by manly qualities and vir-
tues. xallii-k raagil be a man! lamal raagillalayya he 
tried to show me what a tough guy he was. -/adjectival-
Iy, occasionally fern ragla! da waad raagil he's a manly 
boy. di sitt; raagil she's a tough woman. xallii-ki bitt; 
ragla be a brave girl! Ie condescending or familiar form 
of address or reference to a man. i'inta ya raagil hey, 
you there! i'ir-raagil ig-ganayni iii kaan hina the garden-

er fellow who was here. 2 husband. ragl-ik feen where's 
your husband? qill' raagil wala qill' Ijee( {prov] (the 
shadow of a husband rather than that of a wall) "'" it's 
better to get married than to stay at home by yourself. 
3 underling, employee, follower. fir-raagil bitaal-i my 
man, my servant, my agent, etc. riggaalit il-milallim 
the boss's men, the boss's gang. 4 king in a pack of 
playing-cards. - riggaalit, rigaal Ipl n in const statel 
5 the men of (a particular profession). rigaal id-diin the 
men of religion. IIma-ygib-ha lla rigal-ha it takes an 
expert (compliment to one who accomplishes a difficult 
task). 
J~J rigaali ladj invarl 1 pertaining to men, for men. 
ban(alonaat rigaali men's trousers. 2 consisting of men. 
firqa rigaali a men's team. 
~~J ruguulaf In! manliness. 
~~J ruguliyya = ruguula. 
~.;-I fistargil 1 Ivtl to consider manly. fistargilt-u 
lamma qaam yidaafillankum I thought it very manly 
of him when he defended you. 2 Ivil to become man-
nish, affect manliness. sitt' mistargila a mannish 
woman. - vn fistirgaal; ava mistargil. see further 
under J~.J r . 
2 J~.J 
~J rigllfem n, pi rigleen, ruguull 1 foot, leg (of a 
person or animal). raalj lala riglee he went on foot. 
Ijuuji rigleen il-waad keep the kid's feet away! similt' 
rigl' majya las-sillim I heard a footstep on the stairs. 
IIxiliww' rigl key-money. - Ijagar rigleen pumice stone. 
-Ija«' riglalala rigl he crossed his legs. sallim lalayya 
w-huwwa Ijaa[i{ riglalala rigl he shook hands with me 
without even bothering to uncross his legs (a sign of 
disrespect). - rigl-u wil-qabr he has one foot in the 
grave. -gat rigl-u fiiha he got mixed up in it (Le., in the 
mess, in the disaster etc.). - wi-rigl-ak fooq raqabt-ak 
whether you like it or not! -ga-k kasr' rigl-ak {abus] "'" 
drop dead! - waaqif (or qaayim) lala rigl "'" hopping 
with excitement, as in ri/-balad waqfa lala rigl the town 
is hopping with excitement. - wiqif lala riglee to stand 
on one's own two feet, become self-reliant. -bi-riglee of 
one's own volition, as in giit bi-riglay-ya I came of my 
own free will, no one forced me to come, raalj lin-naar 
bi-riglee"'" he walked into it with his eyes wide open, he 
and no-one else is responsible for the trouble he's in. 
- b-agiib rigl-u fik-kalaam lam trying to trick him into 
telling the truth. - bi-tgurr' (or bi-tisljab) rigl-u she leads 
him on, she tempts hiU1. -hiyya fiid-i w-rigl-i it is indis-
pensable to me, - fabu rigl' masluuxa "'" the bogeyman. 
328 
- kull a Ijaaga taljt' riglee everything is at his disposal. 
- fil-kidb' ma-luu-J rigleen a lie will out. - rigl il-ruraab 
bird's-foot trefoil. 2 track, footsteps, wake, train. fi-
rigl- following after, in the train of, as in gayya f-riglee-
hum she is following them. rizq-u f-riglee good fortune 
follows him around, Ija;;-u f-riglee he always has the 
same good luck, ri/-xeer fi-riglee-k you bring good luck. 
II rigl-.. lala rigl-.. sticking close to the side of, as in 
mineen ma truulj rigl-i lala rigl-a-ha where ever she 
goes I am close behind, ma-na mittaltal min hina rala 
w-rigl-u lala rigl-i I'm not budging from here unless he 
comes with me. - fir-rigl' fiiha ktiir it is much fre-
quented. - qa(al rigl-u min il-beet he refused to set foot 
in the house again. 3 foot, leg (of an inanimate object). 
rigl' kursi a chair leg. rigleen babuur gaaz tripod for a 
primus stove. 4 leg of a garment. rigl' ban(aloon a 
trouser leg. 5 object resembling a foot. sanda rigl an 
L-shaped dolly block. 
3 J~.J 
J.!'.;I firtagalf Ivtl to improvise. fiza l-mumassil na«' 
sal" faw sal'een laazim yirtagil kilmiteen if the actor 
skips a couple of lines he has to improvise a few words. 
- vn firtigaal; ava mirtigil. 
J~.;I firtigaalif ladjl improvised. lazf irtigaali ex-
temporized playing. masfala rtigaliyya an improvised 
affair. Ilrurl irtigaali poorly-planned work. 
4 J~.J 
~J rigla Inl purslane. 
~ I J~.J see .;. J ~.J : riglaaj 
.;. J~.J 
';'~J riglaaj (also riglaaj) <Fr reglage> Inl {mechl 
regulating, adjusting. riglijaj larabiyya car-tuning. 
- also riklaaj, riklaaj. 
~ 
J ragliJ Ivtl {mech] to regulate, tune, adjust, set. 
-ava/pva miragliJ. 
~ 
j'1 fitragliJ Ivil {mech] to be regulated, be tuned, 
be adjusted, be set. -iva mitragliJ. 
1 r~.J 
~J ragam (u) Ivtll to stone. 2 to revile, curse (parti-
cularly' by saying faluUZU bi-llaahi min iJ-Ji(aan ir-
ragiim). -vn ragm; ava raagim; pva marguum. 
~ 
J ragiim ladjl 1 stoned. 2 reviled. II fir-ragiim 
accursed one (epithet of Satan). falUUZU bi-llaahi min 
iJ-Ji(aan ir-ragiim I take refuge in God from the 
accursed Satan (an invocation of protection). 

~.;I fitragam Ivill to be stoned. 2 to be reviled, be 
cursed. -iva mitrigim. 
~.;I finragam = fitragam. 
~ 
J raggim Ivtl 1 to stone, pelt with stones. 2 to hurl 
abuse at. -vn targiim, targiim; ava miraggim, miraggim. 
1 r ~J see r..s ~J : rijiim 
~ ~J see 
~..s ~J : ragiina 
.J ~J 
~ 
J raga (u) Ivtl If to hope (for). nargu finn; 
kalam-na ykuun mafhuum we hope our words are 
understood. 2 to beseech, implore. farguu-k please! 
I implore 
you! 
farguu-ki 
ma-tkallimi-nii-J lan 
ig-gawaaz taani I beseech you, don't talk to me again 
about marriage! -vn raga, ragaaf; ava raagi; pva 
margu . 
• ~ 
J raga, ragaa f r Inll hope. ragaa f-i fiik wal]d-ak ya 
rabb my hope lies in you alone, 0 Lord. ma-minnuu-J 
raga he's hopeless. xaayib ir-raga hopeless. fitlamm 
il-matluus lala xaayib ir-raga [prov] (the luckless 
joined up with the hopeless) "" one bad thing on top of 
another. 2 Ipl ragawaat, raga faatl request for a favour. 
fit-tarc;iyya bil-lamal mif bir-ragawaat promotion is by 
work not by favouritism. 
';".;1 fitragga Ivtl to entreat, solicit. fatraggaa-k 
tilmil-li xidma I entreat you to do me a favour. -ava 
mitraggi . 
.r.-.;-I fistarga J Ivtl to expect, hope for. fin bi{i 
mirsaal-ak fistargaa [prov] "" no news is good news. 
-ava mistirgi. 
';".;-1 fistaragga J Ivtl 1 to hope for. huwwa iii 
b-astaraggaa mid-dinya it is all I desire from this world. 
2 to beseech, implore. -ava mistaraggi. 
..s (J see .J (J 
r..s(J 
~ 
J rijiim <Fr regime> Inl diet. fana lamia (or majya 
lala) rjiim I'm on a diet. 
~ ..s (J 
4J ragiina <perh T refina> Inl rosin, colophony. 
~ CJ 
~ 
J ral]aba r In pi -aatl open space, square. 
..,......) farl]ab r leillargerilargest, morelmost generous 
(in size). 
329 
yl> J ril]aab: fi-rl]aab illaah may he be welcomed into 
God's presence! (in reference to one deceased). 
..,...... r marl]ab.= marl]aba. 
t.> r marl]aban linterjl welcome! 
l-r marl]aba Idual marl]abteen, pi maraal]ibl noun 
;quivalent in us~ge to the English interjection 'wel-
come!'. marl]aba (or less familiarly marl]abteen or 
maraal]ib) welcome! greetings! ya miit (or fal! etc.) 
marl]aba a hundred (or a thousand etc.) times wel-
come! marl]aba biik welcome to you! 
yl>.; tarl]aab r, tirl]aab Inl welcome. c;abil-ni bit-
tarl]aab he gave me a warm welcome. 
"";'J ral]l]ab Ivil to give a welcome. ral]l]abna biihum 
we welcomed them. ral]l]ab bil-fikra he welcomed the 
idea. -vn tarl]iib; ava miral]l]ab. 
CCJ 
CJ raI]l] (i) Ivtl to toss (bread dough) up and down on a 
ma{ral]a (q.v.) to make it flat and round. -vn ral]l], 
ral]al]aan; ava raal]il]; pva marl]uul]. 
C.;I fitral]l] Ivil to be flattened and widened by tossing 
(of bread dough). - iva mitral]l]. 
CJ CJ 
C~ 
J ral]ral] Ivil to sprawl, stretch oneself out. -vn 
ral]ral]a; ava miral]ral]. 
c...r> r miral]ral] ladjl full,loose, wide·llleejmiral]ral] 
flat, crisp, unleavened bread. 
..,., C J 
..,.,l> r marl]aa(/J, mirl]aaq,r (more commonly occur-
ring in the plural form maral]iic/.) In/lavatory. 
J CJ 
J,> J ral]iic; r Inl nectar . 
J CJ 
J....J ral]al (a) Ivil to set out on a journey, depart. 
II firl]ali ya leen [magic] away, you evil eye! -vn ral]iil; 
ava raal]il. 
J....IJ raal]il/adj *1 deceased, late. fiz-zaliim ir-raal]il 
the late leader. 
~ 
J ril]la In pi -aatl journey, trip. ril]lit ~eed a hunting 
trip. 
Jt.:. J ral]l]aali: leej ral]l]aali type of white ~read of 
wheat or maize flour. 
~ 
r marl]ala 
In 
pi maraal]ilI 
stage, 
phase . 
fil-lamaliyya fiiha farbal maraal]il the operation has 
four stages. ma-fii-J taxl¥~~ filla bald; marl]alit il-

lisans there is no specialization until after the B.A. 
stage. II fabsan bi-maraabil far and away better. 
J.,.> IJ' marabiil: gamal il-marabiil strongest camel in a 
caravan. 
~ 
J rabballvtl la to send off, despatch. rabbalt-u Gala 
m~r I sent him off to Cairo. rabbalit it-lard she de-
spatched the parcel. 
Ib to deport. rabbaluu-ni 
mll-balad bil-ljiwwa they deported me from the country 
by force. 2a to move on a stage, transfer. rabbal 
iI- figmaali [-daftar il- fustaaz he transferred the total to 
the master ledger. tarbiil deen debt conversion. 
ba-trabbal ifju¥l" Galayya w-tuljGud faaqi are you 
going to fob the work off on me and sit idly? 2b to finish 
work on, finish off. 3 to move out of true. ril-badsa 
rabbalil ljaqiib il-lja{r the accident forced the railway 
line out of true. -vn tarbiil, tarbiil; avalpva mirabbal. 
~.; tarbiila or tarbiila In pi tarabilll gang of casual or 
itinerant labourers. 
~.;I fitrabbal Ivil passive of rabbal. - iva mitrabbal. 
r c:. J 
r> J rabam (a) I Ivtl la to have mercy on. la tirbam 
wala txalli rabmit rabb-i-na tinzil you neither help (us) 
nor allow (us) to find relief elsewhere. II fallaah yirbam-
u God have mercy on his soul! (of the dead), as in 
fabuu-ya maat fallaah yirbam-u my father's dead, God 
have mercy on his soul! IIlaw balla¥u l-bulii~ yiblja 
l-Gayyil fallaah yirbam-u if they inform the police, God 
help the (poor) kid! - fallaah yirbam fayyaam zamaan 
"" 0 for the good old days! -yarbamu-kumu llaah bless 
you! (to one who sneezes). Ib to go easy on, spare. 
firbam nafs-ak go easy on yourself! fana rabm-u min 
if-Ju¥laana di I'm sparing him that task. 2 Ivil to be 
merciful, show compassion. fii naas ma-b-yirbamuu-J 
some people have no compassion. IIb~~' b-Geen-ak 
wl-rbam bl-ljalb-ak (look with the eye, feel pity in the 
heart) "" don't close your eyes to the sufferings of 
others. -vn rabma; ava raabim; pva marbuum. 
i...r-J rabma Inl I mercy, compassion. xalli [-ljalb-ak 
rabma show some compassion! raagil ir-rabma 
manzuuGa min ljalb-u a man with not a trace of compas-
sion in his heart. II wi-rabmit ... strong oath sworn by the 
dead, as in wi-rabmit fabuu-ya by my dead father's 
soul! wi-rabmit il-¥alya by the soul of my dead (mother, 
sister etc.). - fitwaffa l-rabmit illaah he clied (and went 
to rest) in God's mercy. - bisaa( ir-rabma baldaquin 
carried at Coptic funerals. -c;alee fait' rabma a 
thousand mercies on ,his soul. 2 food or money distri-
buted to the poor at cemeteries by relatives visiting 
330 
tombs of the dead, especially on the traditional mourn-
ing Thursdays (viz., 
fil-xamiis 
i~-~u¥ayyar and 
ril-xamiis ik.kibiir). fa(lal-lu b-rabma I go to visit his 
grave and distribute alms for his sake. 3 comfort, ease 
of living, relief from trouble. hina fii rabma bin-nisba 
l-landina life is easy here compared with where we 
come from. fifjaay Ganduku hina rabma the tea situa-
tion here where you are is easy. 
j r)1 fil-marbuum Inl polite form of reference to one 
dead. 
fil-marbuum gooz-ik your late husband. 
fil-marbuuma mraat-ak your late wife. 
.:.r J rabmaan Inl Merciful One (epithet of God). ya 
rabmaan ya rabiim what a terrible thing (God save us 
from such a terrible thing), as in raagil ya rabmaan ya 
rabiim what a terrible man! filli tikrah-u ljuulu Galee ya 
rabmaan ya rabiim "" God help the one she doesn't like! 
r> J rabim (also beet ir-rabim) Inl womb. 
r» 
farbam lell I morelmost merciful or compassion-
ate. 2 easierleasiest to bear. 
jl» 
farbaam f Ipl nl kin. waabid min il- farbaam a 
relative. 
~ 
J rabiim I ladj pi rubamal compassionate, merci-
ful. 2 Inl Compassionate One (epithet of God). 
~ 
J rabbam Ivtl I to distribute alms or pray in order to 
secure God's mercy on (the dead). 2 to bless (the 
dead). -vn tarbiim; avalpva mirabflam. 
~.; tarbiim In pi tarabiiml [ChrJ intercessory prayer 
for the dead (especially during the liturgy). 
~.;I fitrabbam Ivil to intercede (for the dead). - ava 
mitrabbam. 
r>.,;-I fistarbam Ivtl I to ask (s.o.) for mercy. 2 to 
consider merciful. 3 to select for mercifulness. -vn 
fistirbaam; ava mistarbam. 
loS c:. J 
~ l> J raljaaya In pi -aat! quem, hand-mill (see PI.B, 8). 
..:.. c:. J 
..::...> J raxt <P rakht> In pi ruxutal laVIshly decorated 
saddle of the Arab style worked with velvet and silver 
and hung with tassels etc. 
l.tt..J 
t J raxx (u) Ivil to pour down (of rain). ya na(ara rUXXl 
ruxxi Gala ljarGit bint uxt-i (rain, pour down pour down 
on my sister's daughter's bald pate) a children's chant 
said when it's raining"" it's raining, it's pouring, the old 
m.an's snoring. -vn raxx, raxaxaan, rixxiyya; ava raaxix. 
:i.> J raxxa linst n, pi -aatl a heavy shower. 

l' , 
. CC.I 
CJ ruxx <P rukh> I Inl {obsolJ rook (in chess). 2 Icoll 
nl legendary bird of gigantic size, roc. 
.I t.l see .I t ~ : raaxar, ruxra, ruxriin 
C.lC.I 
C"'> J raxrax Ivtl I to loosen, slacken. 2 to cause to be 
feeble or flabby. - Ivil 3 to become loose, become 
slack. 4 to become feeble, become enervated. - vn 
raxraxa; ava/pva miraxrax. 
C..,>;I fitraxrax Ivil I to become loose or flabby. 2 to 
be made loose or flabby. -avaliva mitraxrax. 
C..,>,;-I fistiraxrax Ivil to become loose or flabby. 
-ava mistiraxrax. 
I 
' 
~C.I 
~ 
J 
rixi~, ruxu~ (a) Ivilto go down in price. fil·bagaat 
iI-yalya rix~it the expensive items became cheaper. 
fil·yaali yirxa~·lak "" nothing is too good for you. -vn 
rux~. 
~ 
J 
rux~ Inl cheapness. llfir-rux~ when things were 
cheap. - bi-rux~ it-turaab dirt cheap. 
4.>1.> J 
raxa~a Inl cheapness. 
~ 
.,> J 
ruxu~iyya Inl cheapness. 
~ 
J 
rixi~ ladj pI ruxaa~1 I cheap, inexpensive. 
2 cheap, mean. 
~J 
rixayyi~ ladj °1 cheap, inexpensive. rixayy~ 
wi-kwayyis wi-bn i naas cheap, of good quality and pro-
duced by reliable people "" ideal. 
~) farxa~ lell I cheaperlcheapest. 2 meanerl 
meanest. 
~ 
J 
raxxa~ I 
Ivtl 
I to 
lower 
in 
price. 
mif 
ba-traxx~-ha can kida won't you reduce its price more 
than that! 2 to degrade, humiliate. raxx~tii-ni qawi ya 
bint ik-kalb you've made me look very cheap, you 
bitc~! -vn tarxii~; avalpva miraxx~. 
~;I fitraxxa~ I Ivtl to be made cheaper. - iva 
mitraxxa~. 
~,;-I fistarxa~ I Ivtl la to consider cheap. Ib to 
choose for cheapness. 2 Ivil to look for cheapness, 
economize. fii bi-yistarxa~u w-yiftiru n-nooc iI-faqall i 
maca finn iI-yaali taman-u Iii there are those who 
economize and buy the inferior sort, though it pays to 
buy the best. lIya mistarxa~ ya mistayli when you buy 
cheap goods you end up paying more. -vn fistirxaa~; 
ava mistarxa~. 
1 
' 
~C.I 
4..a> J 
rux~a In pI ruxa~1 licence, permit. rux~it siwaaqa 
331 
driving licence. rux~it silaab gun licence . 
~J raxx~2 Ivtl to license, permit, authorize. -vn 
tarxii~; ava/pva miraxx~. 
~; 
tarxi~ In pI taraxii~1 licence, permit . 
~;I fitraxxa~2 Ivil to be licensed. - iva mitraxx~. 
r t.l 
~J rixim ladj *1 unattractive, boorish, indolent. 
rl.> J ruxaam Inl marble. baarid zayy ir-ruxaam as cold 
(i.e. unfeeling, insensitive) as marble. naxl i ruxaam 
marble palms. 
... 1.> J ruxaama lunit n, pI -aatl I slab of marble, mar-
bl; table-top, marble counter. 2 a marble palm. 
~J raxxam Ivtl I to marble (paper). 2 to cover or 
decorate with marble. 3 to cause to sag, cause to lie 
heavy, cause to drag. - Ivi/4 to sag, drag, lie heavy. 
5 t~ become boorish. -vn tarxiim; ava/pva miraxxam. 
J~ r 
miraxxamaati In pI -yyal mason who works in 
marble. 
~;I fitraxxam/vi/l tobe marbled (of paper). 2 tobe 
covered or decorated with marble. - iva mitraxxam. 
.J t.l see ,J t.l : raxw, raxaawa, rixw 
,J t.l 
..s> J raxa (i) I Ivtl to slacken, loosen, relax. firxi 
J-JabakaJwayya lower the net a little! firxi I-babl slack-
en off the rope! II firxi·lhum il-babl give them more 
rope! be more lenient with them! 2 Ivil to become slack, 
become loose. -vn raxayaan, raxy; ava raaxi; pva 
marxi. 
..s> r marxi ladj *1 near-impotent, sexually feeble (ofa 
man). 
.,> J raxw, raxw I In pI raxaawil whiplash. 2 ladj invarl 
spineless, soft, feeble. 
.,> J rixw ladjl slack, loose. 
.1.> J .1.> J raxa, raxa, raxaaff Inl abundance, plenty. 
0,,1.> J raxaawa, raxaawa Inl slackness, looseness. 
IIcandu raxaawa he's effeminate. 
..s> I; taraaxi f Inl slackness, laziness, not pulling one's 
weight. 
..s>;1 fitraxa Ivil to be slackened, be loosened, be 
relaxed. - ava mitrixi. 
..s> J raxxa Ivtl I to slacken. raxxi J-Jabaka Jwayya 
slacken the net a little. 2 to weaken, enervate. -vn 
ta~xiyya; avalpva miraxxi. 
..s>;1 fitraxxa Ivil I to be slackened. 2 to be 
weakened, be enervated. - iva mitraxxa . 
..s» 
farxaf = raxa. 

..Ji..;I rirlaxa Ivill to become slack, become loose. 2 to 
lose vigour, become impotent. -vn rirlixa, rirlixaa r t ; 
ava mirlixi. 
..,....;-1 rislarxa Ivil to be relaxed. bi-ykuun ir-raas 
fooq il-mayya wir-rigleen mislarxiyyiin the head is 
above the water and the legs relaxed. -vn rislirxa, 
rislirxaart; ava mislarxi. 
..,....;-1 risliraxxa Ivil to become loose, slacken. -ava 
misliraxxi. 
III.) 
1.,; rida: (Uullumr-ak ya rida wi-nla kida {prov] (all 
your life, you garment, you've been the same) ... I am 
the same as I ever have been so the change must be in 
you. 
.) I II.) 
;1.,1; radaar <Fr> Inl radar. 
c II.) see IS II.) 
C II .) 
c.~; raday (a) Ivil to indulge in a vulgar slanging match 
(usually of women). -vn rady; ava raadiY. 
~I;; raddaaya ladj 
pi raddayiinl foul-mouthed, 
abusive (of women). 
til.) 
tl;; raddaax In pi -aall I (aulo] fuel-pump. 2 valve. 
makanil raddaax lavatory cistern inlet valve. -kawitfil 
raddaax rubber valve seal. 
II II.) 
;; radd l (u) Ivtl I to give back. mif raddenaa-Iu 1-
qalam didn't we give him back the pen? 2 to put back in 
position, restore. rudd il-baab close the door! 
ril-migabbaraali radd-i-Iu kilf-u the bone-setter reset 
his shoulder. riddaa qalam radd-i-Iu laql-u he gave him 
a slap that brought him to his senses. II radd' mraal-u he 
remarried his ex-wife. -yaaga Irudd' r-rooy something 
that refreshes the spirit, as in man;ar yirudd ir-rooy a 
sight for sore eyes. 3 to reciprocate. raddu s-salaam 
they returned the greeting. raddil laha z-ziyaara she 
paid a return visit to her. 4 to point out mistakes to, 
correct. riza kaan yaltaan laazim lirudd-ufil-yalatifhe's 
in error you must put him right. II qaalu ya firloon reef 
farlan-ak. - .t;aal ma-lqil1' yadd' yrudd-i-ni {prov] 
They said, 'Tyrant, what made you tyrannical?' He 
said, 'No one corrected me'. 5 to remove, rescind,lift. 
332 
rilaah-i laa ras ral-ak radd il-qatf.a bal il-Iud' fii 0 God, 
I do not ask You to rescind Your providence, rather 
that You deal kindly with me in it. 6 to reject, ward off, 
oppose. - Ivi/7 to reply. rimi ma-bi-lruddii1lalayya 
leeh why don't you answer me? rin-nimra rna-bi-
Irudd'1 the (telephone) number doesn't answer. 
S Ipreverbl to reply (and say). rarudd aqul-Iu reeh what 
shall I reply to him? 9 to return. ril-laya kaan bi-yuqaf 
wi-yrudd the sickness used to come and go.llfikra raddit 
fi-muxx-i an idea reoccurred to me. - raddil il-mayya 
f-zoor-ak may the water choke you! 10 to grow healthy. 
lamma blada yaakul radd' b-surla when he started 
eating, he quickly got his health back. wiff-u raadid his 
face is glowing with he~lth. - vn radd, radadaan; ava 
raadid; pva marduud. 
11 radd" lala to refer to, consult. kaan y~ayy' Irudd 8 
lalayya qabl' ma liftiri l-beel da you should have con-
sulted me before buying this house. 
;; radd 2 In pi ruduudl reply. IIradd' fill reaction. 
-radd' faraf restitution of honour. 
11 raddan: raddan lala t in reply to . 
• ;; radda I linst n! one act of returning, answering, etc. 
lllilbil ~-~adda radda (1) street ball game. (2) hand-
clapping game similar to that played to the rhyme 'Pat-
a-cake, pat-a-cake'. - riid-u fiiha r-radda he can cure 
(illnesses) by the touch of the hand. 
.;; radda 2 Inl bran. IIriyl-u radda it smells musty. 
~J~J" marduud ladjl ajar (of a door etc.). 
;; ridd In! {obsol] ball game resembling a simple form 
of hockey. 
.;; ridda Inl apostasy. 
; J" maradd, maradd In pi -aal, -aalll trace (by which a 
farm implement is attached to the draught animal). 
2 part of a garment that is. turned back on itself, revers. 
3a {mus] refrain. 3b {Chr] liturgical response. 
;;1 rilradd Ivil I to be given back. lIyilradd-i-lak fil-
rafraay ... may we have the chance to repay your gener-
osity on other happy occasions! (conventional compli-
ment to a host or giver of a gift). 2 to be put back in 
position. II ritradd illibaar-u (1) his good standing was 
restored. (2) {leg] the conviction was erased from his 
record. 3 to be reciprocated. 4 to be corrected in one's 
mistakes. - iva milradd. 
;;1 rinradd = rilradd. 
~;; raddid Ivtl to give the response (to), echo. 
ril-mutrib bi-yquul il-mazhab wi-baldeen il-kooras bi-
yraddid-u the singer sings the refrain and then the chor-
us repeats it. - vn lardiid; ava muraddid. 
~; J" muraddid In "I {Chr] cantor in the Coptic Church. 
~;;I ritraddid, rilraddid Ivill to go often. bi-lilraddid 

lal-baraat she frequents the bars. bi-yitraddid lalee he 
often goes to see him. 2 to hesitate. lamiil mitraddid 
xaayif sahli giddan finn ana fatinil-U given a hesitant 
timid customer, I can easily convince him. 31 to 
vibrate. -vn taraddud; ava mitraddid, mutaraddidf. 
J; j 
taraddud Inll hesitancy, irresolution. 2 In pi -aatl 
{communic} frequency. 
,;,) firtadd Ivill to return, revert. yirtaddi lu b~ar-u 
his sight will return. 2 to apostatize. 3 to be returned. 
-vn firtidaad; ava mirtadd, murtadd. 
11 firtadd 8 lala (impersonal) passive of radd a lala. filii 
zayyak ma-yirtaddi-j lalee someone like you is not 
worth consulting with. 
JI",,) firtidaad Inl apostasy. 
,;, r murtadd In "I apostate. 
; r-I fistaradd Ivtl to recall, ask for the return of, take 
back. -vn fistirdaad; ava mistiridd. 
J:lJ see J I:lJ: radaar 
.;. :l J 
..rJ; radf Inl I soil, earth. 2 rubble, broken stone. 
- also ratj. 
4..:.J; radfa lunit n, pi -aatl piece of rubble. 
t:lJ 
tJ; radalf (a) Ivtl to deter. taalib bi-fajaddi luquuba 
tirdal iI-mugrim he demanded the severest punishment 
to deter the criminal. -vn radl; ava raadil. 
.; :lJ 
,_iJ; ridfln pi fardaaf/I{naut} middle section (curved 
portiWl) of the rib of a boat. 2 hip. 
~J; ridiif Inl{mil} army reserve. 
J;; raddiflvtl{agric} to bank up (certain types of crop 
planted on one side only of a ridge) with earth from the 
unused side of an adjacent ridge. -vn tardiif; ava/pva 
miraddif. 
JJI; raadifT Ivtl to be synonymous with. -ava 
miraadif· 
JJlr muraadif In pi -aatl synonym. 
r :lJ 
rJ; radam (i) Ivt and viI to fill in, or cover, with a layer 
of earth. yl:Ju«ifwayyit bizra w-yirdim laleehum he puts 
in some seeds and covers them over. radam iz-ziriiba he 
put down a fresh layer of earth in the byre. radamu 
I-birak they filled in the ponds. -vn radm; ava raadim; 
pva marduum. 
11 firdim Ifem firdimi, pi firdimul to hell with it! forget 
it! 
333 
rJ; radm In! filling of earth, rubble or the like. 
rJjl fitradam Ivil to be filled in, or covered, with a 
layer of earth. -iva mitridim. 
rJ)1 finradam = fitradam. 
IJ:lJ 
';'J r mardin, mardan In pi maraadin/l {text} spindle. 
2 long poker used to arrange pieces in a furnace. 
-[.IJ:lJ 
.:. ~~; ridingoot <Fr redingote> In! tail-coat. 
.J :l J see i,S:l J : radaawa 
i,S :l J 
i,SJ; rada (i) Ivill to run and leave a stain. fil-falwaan 
ma-titrisil-ji sawa lal:Jsan tirdi lala balt/. (different) col-
ours should not be washed together lest they run and 
stain one another. 2 to leave an undesirable mark or 
taint. faxlaati-u radit lala f~l:Jaab-u his (evil) morals 
reflected on his friends. -vn radayaan; ava raadi, raadi; 
pva mardi . 
• "sJ; radi ladj pi rudaayl vile, base. II ril-leen ir-
radiyya the evil eye. -zayy iI-lamal ir-radi like (the 
consequences of) an evil deed (of something unwanted 
but inescapable), as in fir-raagil da zayy iI-lamal ir-radi 
the man's like a leech! - ril-f~1 ir-radi yirdi la/a~al:Jb-u 
{prov} = bad blood will show, what's in the blood 
cannot be removed. 
ii.b; radaafa Inll vileness, baseness, meaness. 2 low 
quality. radaafit ~-~ant txalli z-zubuun ma-yirgal-f 
taani the poor quality of the goods stops the customer 
from coming back. 
iiJb; radaawa J = radaafa. 
."sJ; radiiff ladjl = radio 
-":'i,S:lJ 
.r.-.,J; radyateer <Fr> In pi -aatl{auto} radiator. 
'i,S:lJ 
~JJ; rudeeh <Fr roder> Inl {mech} running-in, 
grinding-in. 
.Ji,S:lJ 
jl.JI; radyu, radyu <Fr> In pi radyuhaat, radyuhaat, 
radaawiJ I radio. similt-u fir-radyu I heard it on the 
radio. IIbaalil radyu = very talkative. 
~ ~J see Z jjJ 
J ~J see JjJ 

jlj.) 
;I); razaaz <Fr rosaee> In pi -aatl (e/ee] ceiling-rose. 
y j.) 
..,.,1)..1" mirzaab In pi maraziibl gouge. 
;';)..1" mirzabba In 
pi maraazibl sledge hammer. 
II wabuur mirzabba pile-driver. 
':"'.syj.) 
~)J; ruzbeet, ruzbiit <It rispetto> Inl I thing or 
things held in reserve, resource to fall back on. xalli 
l-qirJeen doollandak ruzbeet keep this money with you 
in case of need. 2 one who is a permanent fixture in a 
place. xallii-k finta ruzbeet fil-maktab you stay put in 
the office and hold the fort. - also rusbeet, rusbiit. 
"';.syj.) 
~); rUzbiif <Engl> Inl roast beef. 
,?':'" j.) 
'-)J; ruzitta <It morsetto> In pi -aatl {e/ee] terminal 
box, fuse-box (of an electric motor). 
.).).).) 
);)..1" mirazraz ladjl large, heavy and cumbersome. 
(uuba mrazraza a hulking great stone. 
I. , 
.).).) 
S; ruzz Icoll nl rice. ruzz' fabyaq (I) hulled rice. 
(2) plain cooked rice. waraq ruzz rice paper. IIzayy 
ir-ruzz in great quantities, as in kaan fii lasaakir zayy 
ir-ruzz there were policemen everywhere. - bi-yaakul 
ruzz' (b-laban) mala l-malayka (he's eating rice pud-
ding with the angels) '" he's sleeping soundly. 
.S; ruzza I lunit n, pi -aatl a grain of rice. II yurzit ir-
ruzza moss-stitch (in knitting). 
~IS; ruzzaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a grain of rice. 
1 (jj.) ) 
.S; razza, ruzza 2 In pi ruzazll hasp of a door. 2 [joe] 
resounding slap on the back of the neck. 
~I~; razaaz f Inl fine spray. fin-na{ar naazil razaaz it's 
raining lightly, it's dri~zling. 
J j j.) see j 1 j .) : razaaz 
-.:... ...,.,j.) 
.,..;l.:-); rizistans <Fr> In pi -aatl (e/ee] I resistance. 
2 resistor. 
334 
tj.) 
t); razal (a) Ivtll to slam, bang. razalit il-baab she 
slammed the door. razalt is-sammaala I slammed 
down the receiver. 2 to deal (a hard blow or the like) to. 
razal-u kaff he gave him a hard slap. razalt-u lalqa 
I gave him a hell of a beating. raal] razil-ni sabal taman 
fakaawi he went and clapped seven or eight complaints 
on me.llrazal mifwaarto tackle a (tiresome) errand, as 
in I]-arzal il-mifwaar lil-qalla I'm in for that damned 
trip to the Citadel!' 3 to keep (s.o.) hanging about. 
razal-ni lal-qahwa sal teen he kept me kicking my heels 
in the cafe two hours. fana marzuul lala l-mal]a{{a 
baqaa-li farbal salaat zaman I've been stuck at the 
station four whole hours! - vn raZl, razalaan; ava 
raazil; pva marzuul. 
t) ,; 1 fitrazal/vi/l to be slammed, be banged. 2 to be 
dealt a hard blow. 3 to be kept waiting. -iva mitrizil. 
t) ,; 1 finrazal = fitrazal· - iva minrizil· 
t S; razzal/vtl to slam, bang (a number of things, or 
one thinga numberoftimes). - vn tarziil; avamirazzal. 
tS,;1 fitrazzal/vil passive of razzal. - iva mitrazzal. 
Jj.) 
J); razaq (u) Ivtl to provide, provide for (of God). ya 
rabb' furzuq-ni 0 Lord, sustain me! rabb-i-na dayman 
bi-yurzuq-na bi-lli YGa{{al-na God always sends some-
thing to delay us. daleet allaah yurzuq-hum bi-niila 
I prayed God to bring disaster on them. II fana mif 
marzuuq biik I don't rely for my living on you (but on 
God), I can survive without you. - feefyilmil il-I]asuud 
fil-marzuuq {pro v] what can the envious do against one 
blessed by God with wealth? -Ithe literary passive form 
occurs in unelevated speechl turzaq you will be pro-
vided for (by God), somethmg will turn up. kull-u 
b-yurzaq all things are provided for by God. ruziqat 
bi-walad a son was born to her. - ava raaziq; pva 
marzuuq. 
J)I; raaziq Inl Provider (epithet of God). 
J); mq In pi farzaaql what God provides for man as 
his sustenance, livelihood, means of support. fana 
b-altimld lala r-rizq I depend on what God sends. 
ri/-maksab da mas fa lit rizq whether one makes a profit 
is up to God. fir-mq' ktiir tl-yomeen dool business is 
booming these days. ma-malii-f rizq' fatlaffa bil I've 
nothing to eat for supper. rizq-u waasll he IS prosper-
ous. fil-bal]r' rizq-u ktitr the fruits of the sea are many. 
IImalaak mq did you make a catch? (from one fisher-
man to another). - fahu rlzq it's a way of earning a 
living, it's something to keep body and soul together, as 
in b-alimm' sabaaris WI- fahu rizq I pick up cigarette 

ends - it's a living. - finta w-riUi-ak it's all up to your 
luck. -kull i waaljid wi-Iuu rize; or fir-rize; i (or 
riI- farzaae;) lal-alla God provides for all. - fir-rize; i 
yljibb iI-laljlalja (or iI-xiffiya) {prov/ God helps those 
who help themselves . 
.);) farzue;i, farzae;i In pi -yyal lone who lives from 
hand to mouth, one who does not know what his next 
day's job will be. 2 one always on the look-out for 
money, one who will do anything for a quick buck. 
fannaniin farzue;iyya artists who prostitute their art. 
.., I.L razzaae; Inl Provider (epithet of God). ya fattaalj 
ya laliim ya razzaae; ya kariim expression used upon 
beginning work in the morning. 
J:;.J" murtazaq f In pi murtazaqal mercenary. 
J; j-I fistarzae; Ivil to scrape together a precarious 
living. bi-tistarzae; min feeh iI-yomeen dool how are you 
keeping body and soul together these days? -vn 
fistirzaae;; ava mistarzae;. 
JjJ 
J~) .J;) firza/limper: fem firzali, pi firzalu/behave 
yourself! stop this impertinence! 
J~.) .J;.) rizil ladj *1 impertinent, insolent. 
J~) .J;) farzallell morelmost impertinent. 
~I~.) .~I;.) razaala 
Inl 
impertinence, 
insolence. 
II wa-Iaw fiiha razaala excuse my rudeness, but ... , as in 
mumkin tinawil-nif1an(a di wa-Iaw fiiha razaala excuse 
my rudeness, but could you hand me that suitcase, 
e;ul-Ii bae;a yalni wa-Iaw fiiha razaala falmil-bu feeh so 
tell me, if you excuse my asking, just what am 
I supposed to do with it? 
...h~.) . ...h;.) raziil ladj pi ruzalal = rizil. 
~~.) .~;.) raziila In pi razaayil, razaafilf! vice. 
J.L razzill Ivtl to reprimand. 2 Ivil to behave imper-
tinently. -vn tarziil; avalpva mirazzil. 
Jj;1 fitrazzil Ivil to be reprimanded. -iva mi/razzil. 
J;I;I fitraazil Ivil to behave offensively or insolently. 
bi-yitxaanie; mala z-zabaayin wi-yitraazil mala da 
w-mala da he gets into quarrels with customers and is 
~ffensive to everyone. -ava mitraazil. 
J;) firzall IviJ to become impertiment or insolent. 
-ava mirzill. 
J~ j-I .J; j-I fistarzil I Ivtl to consider cheeky or 
impertinent. 2 Ivil to behave in an impertinent manner. 
-vn fistirzaal; avalpva mis/arzil. 
rj.) 
~;.) ruzma In pi -aat, ruzaml I ream (of paper). 
2 skein. 
335 
~jJ 
",I;.) razaana Inl self-composure, steadiness, gravity of 
demeanour. 
,J..;.) raziin ladj • and pi ruzanal self-composed, 
steady, grave. 
rl~jJ 
... l;;.) ruznaama <P roz-ndma> Inl /obsolJ pensions 
department. 
IS j.) 
1$;.) raza (i) Ivtl I to afflict. rabb-i-na razaa-na 
bi-graan wiljfiin God has afflicted us with bad neigh-
bours. 2 to dump. firzi I-walad lak-kursi dump the boy 
on the chair. - vn razayaan; ava raazi; ava marzi. 
~;.) raziyya In pi razaayal calamity, disaster. lIya 
raziyya '" you devil! 
1$;;1 fitraza Ivi/l to be afflicted. 2/derisJ to stay put. 
-avaliva mitrizi. 
1$;1.) raaza Ivtl to nag, pester. xallii-k kuwayyis 
wi-balaaf tiraazi fumm-ak be good and don't pester 
your mother. -vn miraziyya; ava miraazi. 
1$;1;1 fitraaza Ivil to be pestered, be nagged. - iva 
mitraazi. 
1$:;) fir/aza Ivil/derisJ to stay put. firtizi fue;ludwhy 
on earth don't you sit down! - iva mirtizi. 
Y /oJ".) 
'-:-'.) rasab (i, u) Ivi/l to fail (in an examination). xad 
l-imtiljaan wi-rasab he took the exam and failed.lltaalib 
raasib /acadJ university student who has failed in more 
than two of a year's subjects and must therefore repeat 
a year. - fir-rusuub il-wa:r,iifi the overlooking of a group 
of civil servants in respect of salary increases. 21 to 
settle as a deposit, sink to the bottom. -vn rusuub; ava 
raasib. 
~"...) rusuubi ladjl sedimentary. 
,-:-,1.) raasib In pi rawaasibl residue, precipitate, sedi-
ment, deposit. 
.....:.) rassib Ivtl I to cause to settle as sediment, pre-
cipitate. riI-kubbaaya bi-trassib iI-wasaaxa llifil-mayya 
the anti-syphon trap allows the dirt in the water to 
settle. 2 to plate (metal). - Ivi/3 to settle as sediment, 
form deposits. -vn tarsiib; avalpva mirassib. 
...,.......; tarsiib In pi -aatl sediment, deposit. 
""':;1 fitrassib Ivil to be deposited as sediment. - aval 
iva mitrassib. 
-
/oJ" Y /oJ" J 
iJ~.) risibsiyoon f <Fr> In pi -aatl I reception 
desk. 2 room for guests, guests' parlour. 

"::"~,-:,..,...; 
"::"""-J) rusbeel, rusbiil <It rispellO> Inl I thing or 
things held in reserve, resource to fall back on. xalli 
/-(iirfeen doollandak rusbeel keep this money with you 
in case of need. 2 one who is a permanent fixture in a 
place. xallii-k fima rusbeel fil-maklab you stay put in 
the office and hold the fort. - also ruzbeel, ruzbiil. 
..::....,.. .; 
.:-1) rasl <P rasl> Inl {mus] (the note) middle C. 
2 mode in Arabic music beginning on middle C (and 
having E half flat and B half flat). 
J ..::....,...; 
.j;-) raslac; Ivtl to fix up, settle. raslaC;1 il-mawquul 
malaa I arranged everything with him, I settled the 
affair with him. raslaC;l-i-lu wa?,iifa I fixed him up with a 
job. -vn raslac;a; avalpva miraslac;. 
.j;-.; I filraslac; Ivil to be or become arranged, fixed 
up, settled or established. laawiz faljawwif-li c;irfeen 
kiwayyisiin lafaan falraslac; w-akammil n~~' diin-i 
I want to save a bit of money so that I can settle down 
and marry. - avaliva milraslac;. 
.J"::"..,.. .; 
.y-) ruslu <It arrOSlo> Inl (cook] I joint of meat for 
roasting. 2 roast meat. firaax rUSIU roast chicken. 
c ..,...; see C.;"",: marsalj 
t..,...; 
c:--) rasax (u) Ivil to become established, take root, 
become entrenched. -vn rasaxaan, rusuux; ava raasix. 
t:=-) rassax Ivtl to implant, establish, impress deeply. 
-vn larsiix; ava/pva mirassax. 
..,..1.;..,.. .; 
..,..1....-) rasraas Inl adhesive made of a yellow powder 
and used especially for leather. 
t..,...; 
C:-') rusy In pI farsaay, farsuyl wrist. 
J ..,...; 
411...) risaala 
In 
pI -aal, 
rasaa fil, 
rasaayill 
I consignment of merchandise. 2a message. laawiz 
fasib-lu rsaala I want to leave a message for him. 
2b {Chr] epistle. 3 (a cad] thesis, dissertation. 4 calling, 
vocation, mission. fif- fumuuma rsaala motherhood is a 
336 
vocation. faddeel risall-ak fil-Ijayaah you've fulfilled 
your mission in life. 
J.,..) rasuulln pI rusulll messenger. ma lala r-rasuul 
filla l-balaay a messenger's function is only to deliver a 
message. fir-rasuul {lsi] the Prophet Muhammad. 
2 apostle. liid ir-rusul {Chr] Feast of the Apostles, 
celebrated on 6th of Abib. ~oom ir-rusul (Chr] fast 
observed from Pentecost till the Feast of the Apostles. 
J.,..) rasuuli ladj *1 [Chr] apostolic . 
Jl....,. mirsaalln pI marasiill messenger (deliverer of a 
personal, rather than official, message). goz-ha balal 
laha mirsaal lic;abl-u lal-malja((a her husband sent 
someone to tell her to meet him at the station. 
fif-mirsaalla yitfilim wala yilhaan [prov] a messenger is 
not to be abused or molested . 
J-I) raasil l In *1 [commu~ic] sender (i.e. of a letter, 
telegram etc). 
~) rassilJ Ivtl to send, convey. rassil ig-gawaab lal-
beel send the letter to the house. -vn larsiil; ava/pva 
mirassil. 
~.;I filrassiiJ Ivil to be sent. - iva milrassil. 
J-I) raasil2 /vtl to exchange correspondence with. -vn 
murasla, mlrasla; ava miraasil. 
:iLl..,. murasla Imasc n pI -aall [mil] orderly, batman. 
:iLl..,. mirasla In pI -aall I correspondence, com-
munication. 2 carrier-pigeon . 
J-I..,. muraasilln *1 press correspondent. 
J-I.;I filraasil/vil to correspond with one another. 
-ava milraasil. 
J-) farsal (i) Ivt/l [communic] to send, transmit (a 
telegram, radio signal etc.). 2t to send. -vn firsaal; ava 
mursil; pva mursal. 
~l..)l firsaliyya In pI -aall I consignment, shipment. 
2 (communic] mail item. firsaliyyaal Ijukumiyya gov-
ernment mail. 3 [ChrJ mission. 
J-..,. mursal: 
fil-mursal 
fifee 
[communicJ 
the 
addressee . 
r"'" .; 
r-) rasam (i) Ivt/la to sketch, draw, paint. rasamt-i-lu 
fiskitfI drew a sketch for him.faatilj kababgi w-raasim 
Ijamaama bin-niyoon lal-maljall he sells kebab and has 
had a picture of a dove done in neon over the shop. 
Ib to form, shape. bi-ylju[[u Ijitat il-lagiin h-~aag 
wi-yirsimuu-hafureek they put the pieces of dough on 
the sheet and shape them like fureek. 2 to sketch out, 
draft out, plan. rasam i~·~aJlJa he drew up the page 
(dummy). kull' huguum kaan marsllum each attack was 
care~ully planned. 3 to dress up, make up. liC;lUd IITSlm 
fi-nafs-a-ha salteen she spends ages painting her face. 

waad marsuum an over-dressed lad. 4 {Chr} to ordain. 
-vn rasm; ava raasim; pya marsuum. 
11 rasam lala to have designs on. raxuu-k b-yirsim lala 
I-bint i di your brother has designs on that girl. tilat;ii 
bi-yirsim lal-filuus he's probably trying to think of ways 
to get the money. 
1""',) rasm InJ Ilpl rusumaat, rusuumfl 18 picture, 
sketch, drawing, painting. II dabbuus rasm drawing-pin. 
-rusuum mutaharrika animated cartoons. -rasm i t;alb 
cardiograph. - rasm i bayaani graph. Ib pattern, design. 
t;umaaj Iii rusumaat beeqa cloth with white patterns. 
Ic design, plan. 2 Ipl rusuum/la fee, due, charge. rasm 
iftiraak (or luqwiyya) membership fee. 2b formality, 
etiquette. 
4.-,) rasma I In pi -aatl I instance noun of rasm. 
2 pattern or model to be copied. 
,s-') rasmi ladj "I official. silri rasmi official ex-
change rate (for currency). mustaxrag rasmi official 
transcript. rigraraat rasmiyya official procedures. wat;t 
iI-lamal ir-rasmi official working hours. 
11 rasmiyyan ladvl officially. 
u~,) rasmiyyaat Ipl nJ formalities, etiquette, pro-
tocol, ceremonial. 
4.-1,) rasma 2 In pi -aat, rawaasiml tool-carrier (on a 
lathe). 
r"'" J" marsuum lIn pi marasiiml decree, edict. 
2 marasiim Ipl nl protocol, prescribed. procedure. 
4.l..,) risaama, rasaama InJ {Chr} ordination. 
rt.:,) rassaam In "II artist. 2 designer, draftsman. 
~,) rassiim ladj pi rassiimal I good at drawing. 
2 scheming. 
I""'J" marsamf In pi maraasiml (artist's) studio. 
I""'IJ" maraasim Ipl nJ protocol. 
1""';1 ritrasam Ivil passive of rasam. -iva mitrisim. 
JrlJ"') 
Jl.....i,) .JI.....I,) rismaal, 
rasmaal, 
rarsimaaif 
Inl 
I capital. 2 {rur} pigeon droppings (used as fruit tree 
manure). 
Jl.....i,) rarsimaalif I ladj ·1 capitalist, capitalistic. 
2/n ·1 a capitalist. 
~I.....i,) rarsimaliyya f Inl capitalism. 
J..-,) rasmil/vtl to finance. -ava/pya mirasmil. 
J..-;I ritrasmillvil I to be financed, amass capital. 
2 to settle down in a job, gain status. -ava/iva 
mitrasmil. 
I IJ IJ" .) 
..r') risi (a) Ivil 18 to rest, be settled. ril-larabiyya 
kull-a-ha b-tirsi lalaj-Jaseeh the whole car rests on the 
337 
chassis. Ib to come to rest, settle. risiina lala hall we 
settled on a solution. rit-taman illi risi lalee ril-mazaad 
the price at which (the article) was knocked down at the 
auction. risi lalee ril-lata the tender fell to him. 2 to 
dock, come to harbour. II risi lala barr to come to a firm 
decision. -vn rasayaan; ava raasi. 
I.S""I,) raasi ladj ·/1 sensible, steady, reliable. 2 in the 
know, au courant. 
I.S""J" marsa In pi maraasil anchorage, harbour. 
.l.. J" mirsa In pi maraasil {naut} grapnel. 
~,) rassa Ivtl I to award (a tender). rassu lalee ril-
lata they awarded him the tender. 2 to explain to, put 
in the picture. -vn tarsiyya; ava/pva mirassi. 
~;I ritrassa Ivil passive of rassa. -iva mitrassi. 
Z IJ IJ" .) 
,.j.) rasaf (i) Ivtl to lament, elegize (the dead). -vn 
risa; ava raasi; pya marsi. 
.l:,) risaar InJ elegy. 
IIJ IJ" .) 
l.-_u rusya Iprop nl Russia. see further under 
Z IJ" .J .) 
.;, ..;. .) 
~,) rifta <P rishta> Inl type of pasta. 
.::; .;, ..;. .) 
~J,) rujilta <It ricelta> In pi -aatl prescription (for 
medicine). 
'C. ..;. .) 
~,) rajah (a) Ivil to filter, filtrate. ril-mayya rajahit 
min is-sat;lthe water seeped through the roof. -vn rafl.J; 
ava raajih. 
~,) rafl.J Inl runniness of the nose. 
4-:. J" marjaha In pi maraajihl pack-saddle, working-
sa~dle (of donkey). 
~,) rajjah Ivtl I to filter. warat; tarjiih filter paper. 
2 to nominate, put forward as a candidate. kulli hizb i 
yrajjah nuwwaab each party nominates deputies. 
rat;alli min is-sinn i da ma-yit;dar-Ji yrajjah nals-u 
under that age he cannot put himself forward as a 
candidate. - Ivil 3 to drain, let out seepage. 4 to run 
(o! the nose). -vn tarjiih; ava/pya mirajjah. 
e:-J" murajjah In ·1 nominee, candidate. 
~;I ritrajjah Ivi/l to be filtered. 2 to be nominated, 
be put forward as a candidate. -iva mitrajjah. 
I ,) ..;. .) 
,J.;.,) rujd InJ maturity (of mind). sinn ir-rujd {leg} 

majority, coming of age. 
.Io-.J rajiid I Inl Discerner (epithet of God). 2 Iprop nl 
Rosetta, a town on the western branch of the Nile near 
the coast. !Jagar rajiid the Rosetta Stone. 
~.Io-.J rafiidi I/adjl of or pertaining to Rosetta. 2 In 
pI rafaydal a Rosettan. 
.l.:.) rarfad ' lell morelmost mature. rarjad rixwaat-u 
the eldest of his brothers and sisters . 
..\..) rarjad Z Ivtl If to guide. 2 [naut] to pilot. - vn 
rirjaad; ava murfid. 
.::..bl....J! rirjadaat Ipl nl instructions. 
~.)\..:..J! rirfaadi ladjl pertaining to guidance. 
.J.:..J" murfid In *1 I guide. 2 [naut] pilot. 
i..\...J" murjida In pI -aatl Girl Guide. 
..\..;;-1 rislarfid Ivill to ask for guidance. 2 to rely for 
guidance. rana b-aslarjid bi-/Ii Ilamal lfabl' kida 
I follow the precedents. -vn riSlirfaad; ava mislarjid. 
2 ~ .r .) 
')\..:..J rafaad Inl garden cress, tongue-grass (Lepidium 
sativum). 
.r.).r.) 
..r ;oM.J rafraf Ivtl to sprinkle all over or repeatedly. -vn 
rafrafa; ava/pva mlrafraJ. 
..r.r.;1 rilrafraf Ivil to be sprinkled all over or 
repeatedly. - iva mitrafraJ. 
.r .r .) 
":'.J raff' (u) Ivtll to sprinkle, strew, spray (s.th., i.e. 
on another). raffll lala na/s-a-ha kuuz mayya she 
sprinkled a mugful of water over herself. bi-nrufr lala 
wiff' kul/' ka!Jkaaya sukkar budra we sprinkle icing 
sugar over the top of each piece of ka!Jk.llliruffil-mal!J' 
ma-yinzil-f(if you scatter salt it won't fall) = there isn't 
room to swing a cat. -loo!J ir-taff [naul] washboard, 
splashboard.2 to sprinkle, strew, spray (s.th., i.e. with 
another). riI-baladiyya bl-lruff if-fawaaril the munici-
pality sprinkles the streets. ~awaani marfuufa b-radda 
trays sprinkled with bran. II rilli yruff-i-na bll-mayya 
bi-nruff-u bid-damm (one who sprinkles us with water 
we sprinkle with blood) our revenge is terrible. 3 to 
scatter 
as 
largesse, 
distribute 
open-handedly. 
riI-muliid bi-yrufr la{-(alaba mmar the instructor 
showers the students with (good) marks. raff' qahwa 
w-faay he bought a round of coffee and tea (for all). -vn 
raff; ava raafif; pva marjuuJ. 
~.J raffz Icoll nllead shot. bundulfiyya raff' shotgun. 
~.J raffa In pI -aatl I/inst nl a spray, a sprinkling, a 
scattering. 2 lunit nl a piece of lead shot, a pellet. 
338 
~ \..:.; raflaaya = raffa 2. 
..;.l....J raffaafln pI -aall spray nozzle (e.g., for a water-
ing-~an). mad/al raffaaf machine-gun. 
4.-l....J raffaafa In pI -aal/la spray, spray-gun, spraying 
machine. raffaafil ras/all asphalt-sprayer. Ib watering-
can. 2 machine-gun. 3 [naul] blade of an oar. 
":'';1 ritraff Ivil to be sprinkled, be strewn, be sprayed 
(on s.th. or with s.th.). -iva milrafJ. 
I 
-
• 
I.J IJ" .) 
"';':'.J rafalf (a) Ivtl to insert with force, thrust, ram . 
rafalf i1-ma(Wa fif-fagara he drove the knife into the 
tree. rafalft' snaan-i fiiha I sank my teeth into it. -vn 
raflf; ava raafllf; pva marfuulf. 
..;-.;1 ritrafalf Ivil to be inserted with force, be thrust, 
be rammed. - iva milrifilf. 
...;.:. .; 1 rinrafalf = rilrafalf. - iva mmrifiq. 
2 
-
• 
I.J IJ" .) 
4il....J rafaalfa T, rafaaqa T Inl I slimness, slenderness. 
2 gracefulness, elegance. 
";'-.J rafiilf T, rajiiq T ladjl I slim, slender. 2 graceful, 
elegant . 
..:.. ..:.. .!.I .r .) 
~.J rafkitta <It raschielto> In pI -aall de-burring 
tool. 
r .r.) 
r-.J rafam (i) [Chr] I/vil to make the sign of the cross. 
2 Ivt! to mark with the sign of the cross. -vn rafm; ava 
raafim; pva marjuum. 
r-.J rafm In pI rufuuml I [Chr] sign of the cross. 
2 (also rafm i1-mayya) [naut] water-line on a boat. 
4...-.J rafma linst n, pI -aall a making of the sign of the 
cross. 
r-.;I ritrafam I Ivi/[Chr] to be marked with the sign of 
the cross. - iva mllrifim. 
r-jl rillrafam = ritrafam. -iva mmrifim. 
2 
• 
rlJ".) 
4...-1.J rafma In pI -aall rust-scraper. 
r-I.J raafim Ivtl to remove (rust), clean (s.th.) of rust. 
-vn mirafma; ava miraaflm. 
r-I.;I rllraaflm Ivil to be cleaned of rust. -iva 
mllraafim. 
3 
• 
r IJ" .) 
r""'.J" marfuum ladj/laden, full, crowded, packed. 
f"":'.;1 rilrafam z Ivil to become laden. - iva mitriflm. 

r-') raJJim Ivtl to pack. load. cram. raJJim il-malJfa~a 
fluus he stuffed the wallet with money. -vn tarJiim; 
a~a/pva miraJJim. 
~.;I ritraJJim Ivil to be laden with. be crowded with. 
w-rutubiis mitraJJim naas the bus is packed with 
people. - iva mitraJJim. 
4 
• 
rlJ"J 
.4...-) raJma <T re§me> In pi -aat, ruJam, raJaayiml 
I halter. 2 bridle (of a draught animal). 
.J ..; J see .J"; I J : raaJin 
.J ..; J see ~..; J : raJwa, raJwa 
~ ";J 
\...:.) raja or raja W I Ivtl to bribe. fii muwa~~af 
yiwaqqaf it-waraq laJaan tirJii there are officials who 
delay the papers so that you will bribe them. 2 Ivil to 
promise to make a votive offering. rirJu tiJfu [pray] 
(carry out your) promise to make a votive offering 
(which will be distributed among the needy) and you'll 
be O.K. -vn raJw, raJw; ava raaJi, raaJi; pya marJi. 
ir ) raJwa or raJwa In pi raJaawi, raJaawil I bribe. 
2i votive offering (to a saint). ya lJuseen lik ir-raJwa 'lin 
nagalJt If I pass my exam I'll bring you an offering. 
Hussein. 
...r.;1 ritraJa Ivil to be bribed. - iva mitriJi. 
.,..:.;;1 rirtaJa f Ivil to take a bribe or bribes. 'lana 
laayiz waalJid murtaJi yiigi yiqnil-ni huwwa b-yirtiJi 
leeh I want a taker of bribes to come and give me a 
convincing reason why he takes them. -ava mirtiJi, 
murtaJi. 
"":';.r murtaJi In '1 one who habitually takes bribes. 
~..?'J 
~) ra~adl (u) Ivtll to make up (an account). keep 
account of, take stock of. lagnil r~d id-daragaal com-
mittee for the recording of (examination) grades. 2 to 
chart (on a map). bi-ngiib il-manasiib wi-b·nur~ud-ha 
lal-xarii{a we get the ground-levels and chart them on 
the map. 3 to watch for, lie in wait for. 4 to observe, 
keep watch on. -vn r~d; ava ra~id; pya mar~uud. 
~) r~d In pi rar~aadl observation. I'ar~aad gawwiyya 
meteorological observations. 
~) r~ad2 In pi I'ar~aadl talisman. 
~) r~iid In pi I'ar~idal money or goods in hand, 
stock, balance. Jiik min '(eer r~iid an uncovered 
cheque. 
~.r mar~ad In pi mara~idl observatory. 
339 
.)L..,.r mir~aad: bil-mir~aad on the lookout, as in kaan 
qalid-li bit-mir~aad he was lying in wait for me. 
~.;I ritr~ad Ivil I to be charted (on a map). 2 to be 
put under a spell. - iva mitr~id . 
.,W,) ra~~ad Ivtl to balance (an account). -vn lar~iid; 
ava/pya mir~~ad. 
"w'.;1 
ritr~~ad Ivil I to lie in wait. 2 to be balanced (of 
an account). -ava/iva mitr~~ad. 
~.;-I I'islar~ad Ivtl to waylay, lie in wait for. -ava 
mislar~ad . 
I..?'J..?'J 
IJ'" .r» 
r~ra~ I Ivil to become extremely cold. -vn 
ra~ra~a; ava mir~r~. 
~.r» r~ree~ Inl 
intense cold. 
-ladjectivallyl 
rid-dunya r~ree~ it's freezing cold. 
2..?'J..?'J 
1J"'.r» ·r~r~2 Ivtl to stack. -vn r~r~a; ava mir~r~. 
IJ'" ~.;I rilr~r~ Ivil to be stacked. - iva milr~r~. 
I..?' ..?' J 
.;.) r~~ (u) Ivtl I to place in an orderly arrangement, 
line up, stack, stow. 
r~~enaa-hum ft-~ufuuf we 
arranged them in rows. r~~ ik-kutub lal-I'urfufset out 
the books on the shelves! nir~~-u raaq lalJma w-raaq 
ruqaaq we stack it with a layer of meat followed by a 
layer of pastry. r~~eel it-malik wil-waziir wit-ftleen I set 
out the king, the queen and the two bishops (on the 
chess board). r~~ il-lJagar to stack the tobacco-holder 
of a water-pipe with a layer of tobacco and one of 
charcoal. 2 to list, enumerate, repeat. nizlil r~~ i Jtiima 
fti she set about him with a stream of insults. qalad 
yir~~ i fil-qawaniin he went on enumerating the laws. 
II r~~eel laleehum il-Iamaasi I said good evening to 
each of them in turn. -vn r~~; ava ra~~; pva mar~u~. 
~) r~~a In pi -aatl 1 stack, pile. 2 layer. 3 lay-out 
(e.g., of pieces on a games-board). 
';'.;1 
I'ilr~~ Ivil to be placed in an orderly arrange-
ment, be lined up, be stacked. -iva milr~~. 
~) r~~~ Ivtl to place (a number of things) in an 
orderly arrangement, line up (a number of things, in 
several rows), stack (a number of things, in several 
stacks). r~~~1 il-lasaakir I set out the pawns (on the 
chess-board). -vn lar~i~; ava/pya mir~~~. 
~.;I I'ilr~~~ Ivil to be arranged in several rows, 
stacks, etc. fil-risbilalya kunna 
milr~~~iin zayy 
il-'(anam il-madbuulJa in the hospital we were laid out 
in rows like slaughtered sheep. rid-daftarxaana di 
kull-a-ha milr~~~a f-nafuux-i I have the arrangement 

of the whole archive in my head. -iva mitr~~~ . 
.;.a;;I 
firt~~ Ivil to line up. firt~~u quddaam iI-baab 
line up in front of the door! -ava mirt~~. 
2"" "".J 
""L....J r~a~ I Inl lead. qa/am r~a~ a lead pencil. 
IIbi-yirsim iI-fiskitf' bir-r~a~ he draws the sketch in 
pencil. 2 Icoll nl bullet(s). feeh rafy-ak fi-ka/aam zayy 
ir-r~a~ - wi- feeh ra fy-ak fi-gitta zayy in-nilJaas 'What 
do you think of words as (hard as) bullets?' 'Then what 
do you think of a body as (hard as) copper?' (of one who 
is impervious to any rebuke). 
4..:.L....J r~a~a lunit n, pi -aatl I a piece of lead. 
Ilr~a~a sanda {naut] plummet. 2 a bullet. IIleen 
titdabb' fiiha r~a~a see fitdabb. 3 a pencil lead. 
LS"""L....J r~a~i ladj invarl grey. 
t"".J 
~.J r~~al Ivtl to set, stud, inlay. dahab mir~~al bi-
mgawharaat gold set with gems. -vn tar~iil; ava/pva 
mir~~al· 
~.r mir~~al ladjl I fancy, inlaid, embellished. 
2 {mus] embellished with accidentals (of a scale) as 
lagam mir~~al or siika mr~~al. 
~.;I fitr~~al Ivil to be set, be studded, be inlaid. - iva 
mitr~~al· 
...; "" .J 
...AJ.J r~af (u) Ivtl to pave, give a surface of gravel and 
asphalt to, macadamize. -vn r~f; ava ra~if; pva 
mar~uuf· 
.......... .J r~iif In pi ri#fa, fir~ifa, far~ifa r I I pavement, 
sidewalk. 2 quay, pier. 3 (railway) platform. 
~.J~.J 
~ 
~.J ratirati/vtl to shake, rock, jolt. -vn ratiratia; 
avl!'pva miratirati. 
..;. ~.;I fitratirati/vil to be shaken, be rocked, be 
jolted. - iva ",itratirati. 
vf' ~.J 
";'.J ratiti (u) Ivtl to bruise, crush. -vn ratiatiaan, ratiti; 
ava raatiiti; pva martiuuti. 
~.J ratiti r In pi rutiuutil bruise. 
..;..;1 fitratiti Ivil to be bruised, be crushed. - iva 
"'.itratiti. 
..;..;1 finratiti = fitratiti. -iva minratiti. 
t~.J 
~.J ratial, ritiil (a) Ivil to suckle, nurse (of a baby). 
340 
dool ratiliin la/a balti they were suckled at the same 
breast. II faxx' fir-ritiaala foster brother. -vn ritiaala, 
ratil; ava raatiil. 
~.J ratila linst n, pi -aatl a feed (for a baby). 
~) ratiiil ladjl suckling, unweaned (of an infant). 
~.r murtiila In pi -aat, maraatiil/l nursing mother. 
2 wet-nurse. 
~.J ratitial Ivtl I to suckle, feed with milk (naturally 
or artificially). waddeet-u I-fumm-u tratitial-u I gave 
him to his mother to suckle him. 2 to cause to suckle. 
ratitialit iI-ligl she took the calf (to its mother) to feed. 
-v.n tartiiil; ava miratitial. 
~.;I fitratitial Ivil to be suckled, be fed with milk. 
- iva mitratitial. 
.J ~.J see ~ ~ 
.J : ratiwa, ratiwaan 
~~.J 
~.J ritii, ritia I (a) Ivil I to be satisfied, be content. 
raatii b-qaliil-i I am content with the little I have, I'm 
easy to please. fayyuha walJda tirtia biyya any girl at all 
would be happy to have me. quit aggawwiz-ha laakin 
fumm-i ma-kanit-J' raqya biiha I wanted to marry her 
but my mother didn't approve of her. II filii yirtia 
b-qismit-u yirtaalJ {prov] he who accepts his lot is hap-
py. - filii ma-yirtia bil-xoox yirtia b-Jaraab-u {prov] (he 
who doesn't accept the peach must accept its nectar) if 
one doesn't accept what one is first offered, one may 
have to be satisfied with something less later on. - fana 
raatii w- fabuu-ha raatii w- finta maa lak ya qaatii {prov] 
rejoinder to a third party who interferes in lin agree-
ment. 2/preverbl to be willing (to do). ma-rtiit-j' 
tiggawwiz-u she would not marry him. ma-lJadd'-Jraatii 
yimtiii-lu I-waraq no one will sign the papers for him. 
sinaan-u mif raqya tuqal his teeth just will not fall out. 
riI-qarnabiica mif raqya txuJJ if-Janca the cauliflower 
won't go into the bag. -vn ritia; ava raatii; pva martii . 
11 ritii lan or lala to forgive, confer blessing. rabb-i-na 
yirtia laleek God bless you! goz-ha ritii lanha w-~alilJ­
ha her husband forgave her and made up with her. 
~.J ratia (i) Ivtl to satisfy. filmil illi yirtiii-k do as you 
see fit.llyihdii-k yirtiii-k expression inserted parentheti-
cally into a narration to indicate that the speaker by that 
point regarded himself as having gone to great lengths 
(using expressions such as fallaah yihdii-k and fallaah 
yirtiii-k) to persuade, accommodate etc. the party with 
whom the rc:ported interchange took place. 
~.J ritia 2 In! I contentment. lJalt-u ritia he lives a 
comfortable life. ritia lala kida one is well enough 
content with that. ritia Ii-man yartia (satisfaction comes 

to the one who is easily satisfied) "" things could be 
worse (in reply to an enquiry after one's well-being). 
2 male given name. II (uul r:umr-ak ya riqa w-finta kida 
"" you can never change your ways. 
..s~J raqwa In pi -aall [magic] ceremony performed 
to mollify the spirits possessing a person. 
.JI~J raqwaan Iprop nl I male given name. 2 [lsI] 
name of the angel who guards the gate to Paradise. 
ga~nil raqwaan Paradise itself. 
~J raqqa Ivtl to appease, seek to please. -vn 
larqiyya; ava/pva miraqqi. 
~; larqiya Inl [leg] "settlement. 
~;I filraqqa I/vtl to appease, seek to please. 2 Ivil 
to be appeased. -ava/iva mitraqqi. 
~IJ raaqa Ivtl to mollify, appease, soothe. raqii-ha 
b-kilma say something to stop her being angry. raqeel 
xa(ir-ha I squared things with her. -vn miraqiyya; ava 
miraaqi. 
~I;I fitraaqa Ivil to reach a settlement, consent 
mutually. filraaqu mar:a bar:q they reached a settle-
ment with one another. bil-Iaraaqi by mutual consent. 
-vn laraaqi; ava milraaqi. 
~) farqa r = raqa. - vn firqaa f. 
~) firlaqa Ivil to be satisfied, be content. -ava 
murlaqi, mirliqi. 
~.;-I fislarqa Ivtl to seek to appease, mollify. -ava 
mislarqi. 
':' ..1. J 
.,.J. J ri(ib ladjl I damp, moist. 2 cool. 
.,.J.J ru(ab Icoll nl soft black date(s). 
~).J ru(uuba Inl I dampness, moisture, humidity. 
2 chill in the bones, rheumatic pain. l:Jasseel bi-Jwayyil 
ru(Uuba 
f-gillil-i 
I felt 
somewhat 
rheumaticky. 
3 coolness . 
.,.1J ra((ab Ivtl I to cool. xud dujf w-ra((ab gism-ak 
take a shower and cool off. 2 to refresh, soothe. 
kalaam-u 1-l:Jilw j yra((ab i1-qalb his pleasant conversa-
tion soothes one's feelings. - Ivil 3 to bec,?me cool. 
fig-gaww j ra((ab the weather turned cool. 4 to turn soft 
and sticky (of dates). -vn lar(iib; ava mira((ab. 
~; lar(iib Inl [Iext] moisturizing process to which 
cotton is subjected before spinning .. 
..1.;..1.; 
..1.). J ra(ra( I Ivil to become overabundant, become 
too plentiful. 2 Ivtl to soil, dirty. -vn ra(ra(a; ava/pva 
mira(ra(. 
~).J rU(ree( In! filthy mud, mire. Ilxallaa rU(ree( he 
made a mess of it. 
341 
Jj,; 
J1J ra(lln pi far(aall unit of weight equal to 449.28 
grams (0. 99051b ).11 zayy ir-ra(1 dim-witted and gUllible. 
.:,..1.; 
J:. J ra(an (u) Ivil to speak in an incomprehensible 
language, talk double-Dutch. bi-yur(unu bit-fafrangi 
they're gabbling in some foreign language. -vn ra(n; 
ava raa(in. 
;.;l1J ru(aana Inl incomprehensible language, double-
Dutch (applied especially to Nubian). 
t; 
t J rar: Iprop nl the sun god of the ancient Egyptians. 
Y t; 
~J rar:ab, rar:ab (i) Ivtl to terrify. -vn rur:b; ava 
raar:ib; pva marr:uub, marr:uub. 
~ 
J rur:b Inl terror, fear. 
~ 
r murr:ib ladj *1 terrifying. 
~;I filrar:ab Ivil to be terrified. - iva milrir:ib. 
yyt; 
~ 
J rar:bib Ivtl to frighten, 
terrify. -ava/pva 
mirar:bib. 
~t; 
J.&. J rar:ad (i) Ivil to thunder. -vn rar:d. 
J.&. J rar:d In pi rur:uudl thunder . 
..sJ.&. J rar:di ladjl pertaining to thunder. sal:Jaab ratdi 
thunder clouds. 
~U;: J rauaad Icoll nl torpedo-fish, electric eel(s). 
It; t; 
tr 
J rar:rar: I Ivil to flourish, thrive. fiz-zarr:; rar:rar: 
the crops flourished. riI-r:iyaal mirar:rar:iin fil-madrasa 
the children are thriving at school. -vn rar:rar:a; ava 
mirar:rar:. 
tr;1 filrar:rar: = rar:rar:. - ava milrar:rar:. 
2 t; t; 
tr 
J rar:rar: 2: rar:rar: fayyuub Icoll nl variety of 
fleabane (Pulicaria arabica). 
v!. t; 
,J.&-J rar:aj(i) Ivt/l to cause to tremble or shiver. 2 to 
frighten. -vn raG/. rar:ajaan; ava raar:iJ; pva marr:uuj. 
~ 
J raGJa linst n, pi -aall a trembling, a shivering. 
raGJa f~-~ool a tremor in the voice. 
...r.r r marr:uuj ladj 'I timid, weak-kneed. 

.:,W-) radaan ladj *1 trembling, shaking. 
..r~) rauaaf I In! any of a variety of fish which give 
electric shocks. 2/adj/: fif-falal ir-rauaafParkmson's 
disease. 
.... ~) ra[[aafa Inl malaria. 
...!-&-.;I fitra[af Ivil I to shiver, tremble. yikkalfit 
btl-m{a [afaan gism-u b-yitri[if he wraps himself up in 
the bed-cover because he's shivering. 2 to be fright-
ened. - ava/iva mitri[if. 
...,:...;) firta[af = fitra[aj. - vn firti[aajf; ava mirticif. 
tt.J 
t l&.) ri[aa[ lcoll nl rabble. 
oJ t.J 
oJ-.I ra[an Inl rashness. 
oJ-) far[an ladj, fern ra[na, pi ru[nl hubristic, pushy 
and headstrong. 
~.r) ru[uuna Inl rashness. 
IS t.J 
-.r) ra[a (a) Ivtl I to care for the welfare of, look after, 
safeguard. fil-waal:Jid laazim yir[a fawlaad-u one has 
to look after the welfare of one's children. fis-sifaara 
b-tir[a ma~aalil:J il-balad the embassy looks after the 
country's interests. ma-b-yir[aa-J in-ni[ma iii huwwa 
fiiha he's careless of his good fortune. 2 to pasture 
(animals). - Ivi/3 to graze. - vn ri[aaya, racY, mar[a; 
ava raa[i; pya mar[i. 
~ l&.) ri[aaya Inl care. rl[aaya {ibbiyya medical care. 
markaz ri[aayit if-fabaab youth welfare centre. 
Ilfi-r[aayit illaah (go) in God's care! (to one setting out 
on a journey). 
-.r I) raa[H In pi ru[aahl I shepherd. fir-raa[i ~­
~aalil:J [Chr} the Good Shepherd (epithet of Jesus 
Christ). -kiis ir-raa[i [bat} shepherd's purse. 2 [Chr} 
pastor. 
~) ra[iyya In pi ra[aayal la flock, herd. Ib [Chr} 
congregatio.n, parish. 2 subject (of, e.g., a state). 
- Icoll n/3 subject(s). 
...r.r mar[a In pi maraa[iI grazing place, pasture. 
-.rl) raa[a Ivtl I to care for, look after (usually in-
directly or at one remove). laazim tiraa[i I-[arabiyya 
cafaan ticammar you must see that the car is well 
looked after so that it lasts. da mas fuul finnu yraa[i 
naqaafit il-mal:Ja{{a he's responsible for seeing that the 
~tation is kept clean. ma-b-yi[rafuu-f yiraa[u m~alil:J­
hum they are incapable of ensuring that their interests 
are ~afeguarded. IItjra[lI-ni (jraa{ faracii-k (jira{een 
[pray} any service you do me I will repay twice over. 
342 
2 to show consideration towards, take heed of. 
fil-waal:Jid laazim yiraa[i g-giraan one has to think of 
the neighbours. di kaanit mira[yaa-ni f-balad-ha (jawi 
she was very considerate to me in her country. fifaraat 
il-muruur ma-l:Jadd'-f mil:Jtirim-ha wala mra[ii-ha no 
one respects or takes any notice of the traffic-lights. law 
kunti b-taxdi baal-ik mil- fu~uul kunt' traa[i finn 
i/-[ayyil ma-ydayi(j-f ir-rukkaab if you'd any manners, 
you'd see to it thai the kid didn't annoy the passengers! 
IIraa[a rabb-i-na to fear God, behave rightly. -vn 
mura[aah; ava miraa[i. 
~I.r mira[Iyya Inl mindfulness. maca mra[iyyit-na 
lil-mufkila l:Ja-nnaa(jif il-marl:Jala t-tanya keeping the 
problem in mind we shall discuss the next stage. 
":-' t.J 
~) ramb f (a) Ivtl to desire. ril-mamnuu[ manmub 
[pray} what is forbidden is desired. -vn rarba; ava 
raarib, raarib; pya mar1fUub. 
i+) rarba f In pi rambaatl wish, desire. ma-Iuu-f 
rarba f-l:Jaaga he has no desire for anything. fiza kaan 
lak rarba if you wish. fistimaarit rambaat [acad} (col-
lege) preference form. 
~t.J 
,iJ;.) rarad Inl comfort, ease. ramd il-[eef comfort of 
life. 
t.Jt.J 
t~.1 rarrar Ivil to be wet with tears, water (of the 
eyes). 
ba~~eet la(jeet [enee m"arrara biq-dumuu[ 
I suddenly realized that his eyes were full of tears. -vn 
rarrara; ava mirarrar. 
..; t.J 
~) ririif In pi farrifa, ririfal loaf (of bread). 
II fir-ririif II-mi(jammar li~-~aal:Jib illi ydawwar [pray} 
(the hot loaf goes to the one who looks) == if you don't 
look, you don't find. 
r t.J 
~) raram (i) Ivtl to force, compel, coerce (s.o. into 
acceptance of s. th.). bi-yirrim-ni [as-safar leeh why 
does he force me to go away? -vn rarm, raramaan; ava 
raarim; pya marruum. 
~.1 rarm Iprepl in spite of. II rarm' fanf-u in spite of 
him, without reference to him, no matter what he 
thinks. -[ala (or bi-)r-rarm' min despite. 
11 rarm' finn Iconjl although, despite the fact that. 
b-al:Jibb is-sagaayir rarm inn' hiyya far/a min if-Jiifa 

343 
~JJ 
I like cigarettes although they are more expensive than 
..I.i.;1 r'itrafad (also r'itrafat) Ivil to be dismissed, be 
the water-pipe. 
sacked. - iva mitrifid. 
r&-.;I r'an-am = ramm. 
J t. j see ..; t. j : raywa, raywa, rayawi 
..; t.j 
..;.) raya (i) Ivil to chatter, chat. c;alad yirYi malaaya 
l-yaayit ma la((al-ni he sat chatting with me until he 
made me late. -vn rayy, rayayaan; ava raayi. 
oj:.) raywa, raywa In pi raYaawi, rayaawil f9am. froth, 
lather. 
..sl-) ra.mw;t ladjl lathery, foamy, frothy. 
• ~) ,..s~) ranaay In 
*1 one given to chatter, 
chatterbox . 
..;.) rana I Ivtl to lather, make foamy or frothy. rani 
I-liifa lather the loofah! 2 Ivil to produce lather, foam or 
froth. xalli I-laban yirani lafaan yilmil wiJflet the milk 
get frothy so that it forms a (creamy) skin. -vn tan-iyya; 
av.a/pva mirani . 
..;..;1 r'itrana Ivil to be lathered, be made frothy or 
foamy. - iva mitrani. 
J..; .. 
...i j 
J;li) rufar'iil, rafar'iil Iprop nl [Chr] the Angel 
Raphael. 
..:;, ...; j 
see J"'; j 
: rafat, rafta, r'itrafat 
c."';j 
~.; tarfiilja In pi tarafiiljl [non-Cuirene] I narrow 
woollen scarf worn by men (see PI.F, 2). 2 square of 
fine white cloth worn as a scarf by men. - also talfiilja, 
talfiir;a. 
J"';j 
..I.i) rafad (also rafat) (i) to dismiss, sack. wi-lanha 
w-raalj rafid-ni he fired me on the spot. law iI- rustaaz 
siml-ak kaan laazim yirfid-ak min ik-kulliyya if the 
professor had heard you, he would certainly have ex-
pelled you from the college. IIdaftar iI-r'amd i wir-rafd 
[mil] register of incoming and departing soldiers. -vn 
rafd, raft, rafadaan; ava raafid, raafit; pya marfuud, 
marfuut. 
• ..I.i) rafda (also rafta) linst n, pi -aatl a dismissal. rafda 
nhar'iyya final dismissal. 
';..I.i) rafdiyya dismissal. 
I"';j"';j 
"';.h rafraF Ivil to make. a fluttering or flapping mo-
tion. r'il-la~fuura rafrafit bi-ginaljat-ha the bird flut-
tered its wings. da c;alb-i bi-yrafrafminni I can't control 
the palpitation of my heart. -vn rafrafa; ava mirafraJ. 
...;).;1 r'itrafraf = rafraf. - ava mitrafraf. 
2"';j"';j 
...;)) rafraf2 In pi rafaari/. rafaarifl I mudguard, fen-
der. 2 cornice, eaves. 3 running-board . 
"';1)) rufraaf In pi rafariifl bandage or shield for the 
eye .lIlala lenee rufraaf", he is wearing blinkers, he has 
faulty judgement. 
...; J)) rafruuf In pi rafariifl bandage or shield for the 
eye. 
IJ" ...; j 
see ~...; j 
~"';j 
,.rU) raf~ (u) I Ivtl to kick, kick out at. IIbi-yurf~ 
in-nilma '" he spurns God's blessings. 2 Ivil to kick out. 
-vn raf~, raf~aan; ava raafi~; pya marfu~. 
u"'~) raffa~ In pi -aatl I (ship's) propeller. IIgooza 
b-raffaa~ water-pipe of the gooza type having a hole 
covered with a leather flap pierced through the wall of 
the water chamber above the level of the water to allow 
the expulsion of stale smoke between the smoking of 
one portion of tobacco and the next. 2 motor-powered 
boat. - ladj *13 given to kicking. 
~.;I r'itraf~ Ivil to be kicked. - iva mitrif~. 
,.rU) raff~ Ivtl I to propel, drive. 2 to kick repeated-
ly. - Ivil 3 to keep kicking out. f'il-waad bi-yraff~ 
wi-Ylayyat the kid is kicking and screaming. - vn tarfi~; 
ava. miraff~. 
,.rU.;1 
r'itraffa~ Ivil to be kicked repeatedly. - iva 
mitraff~· 
J; "';j 
~) rafaq (u) Ivtl I to refuse, reject, turn down. 
f'il-bank i rafaq iJ-Jiik the bank refused the cheque. 
rafaqu t-ta1ab they turned down the request. 2 Ipreverb/ 
to refuse (to do s.th.). rafaqu ygawwizu bint-u-hum 
/i-bn-i they refused to marry their daughter to my son . 
-vn raft/.; ava raafiq; pya marfuuq. 
~) rafaqi In *1 renegade, bigot, heretic. II r'ibn i (or 
bint i) rafaqi tabus] '" dishonest bastard (or bitch). 

.)ai.;1 ritrafaq Ivil to be refused, be rejected, be 
turned down. -iva mitrifiq. 
.J'~"";,) 
Jll.t.) riftaaw <Copt> In! measure of grain equal to 
one quarter of a keela (q.v.) 
It"";.) 
. 
~.) rafar: (a) Ivtll to raise, lift up. rirfar: raas-ak raise 
your head! raal:J raafir: riid-u b-r:a;ama he suddenly 
raised his hand with a grand gesture. rafar: koora r:alya 
he kicked a high shot. II rafar: r:een-u fii he talked back at 
him, he defied him. - rafr: il- rasqaal weight-lifting. 
-rafr:' buxuur {Chr] raising of incense. -r:iid rafr: ~­
~aliib {Chr] the feast of the exaltation of the cross. 1 to 
increase, raise the level of. r:ayziin nirfac mustawa 1-
mar:iifa we want to raise the living standard. 3 to re-
move, rescind, lift. riI-mudiir bi-ysaddaq r:ala g-giza 
raw yirfar:-u the director either approves the penalty or 
lifts it. ya rabb' rirfar: yaqab-ak r:anna 0 Lord, lift 
Your anger from us! xadt' l:Juqan laakin rafar:it 
id-damm' yomeen bass I had injections but they stop-
ped the bleeding"for a couple of days only. II rafar: riid-u 
he withdrew, he gave up. -madfar: ir-rafr: Ramadan 
cannon fired before first light to warn people that they 
should finish eating before the fast. 4 to submit (s.th., 
to a higher authority). rafar:t if-lakwa lil-ridaara 
I turned over the complaint to the administration. 
Ilrafar: dar:wa (or qaqiyya) {leg] to file a suit, as in 
rafar:t· r:alee dar:wit tard I sought an eviction order 
against him. Sa to record to scale. bi-yirfar:u mar:aalim 
il-rarq' w-yur~uduu-ha r:ala I-xariita they record the 
topographical features and chart them on the map. 
Sb to take an impression (of finger-prints etc.). rafar:u 
b~amaat-u min r:at-tarabeeza they lifted his finger-
prints from the table. - Ivil 6a to rise (of bread or 
dough). 6b to sprout from the earth (of shoots). -vn 
rafr:, rafar:aan; ava raafir:; pva marfuur:. 
~.) rafr:a I Ipl -aatl instance noun of rafr:. 
~ I.) raafir: I In! Raiser of the fortune of men (epithet of 
God). 
~ 
I.) rafr:a 2 In pi -aat, rawaafir:/1 lever. 1 elevator (of 
a plane). 
~.) rifr:ar In! I high rank, standing. min ragl' rifr:it 
il-watan for the sake of the good standing of the coun-
try. 1 {obsol] title of and form of reference to one 
holding the Grand Order of Muhammad Ali (formerly 
the highest award for-men). 
~) rarfar: I leV higherlhighest. 
344 
~~.) rifaar:i Iladj °1 Rifa'i, of or pertaining to the 
Sufi order founded by Ahmad Rifa'a el-Kabir (the 
order was celebrated formerly for the miraculous feats 
performed by its members, especially the discovering 
and charming of snakes from houses). lIn pi -yyal 
la member of the Rifa'i order. qayyid ya rfaar:i para-
lyse it, Rifa'i (a formula used on seeing a snake). 
lb snake-charmer. 
C!.) rafiir: I ladjl lofty, elevated, refined. zooq rafiir: 
refined taste.lI~aal:Jib il-maqaam ir-rafiir: {obsol] title of 
one holding the Grand Order of Muhammad Ali 
(f~rmerly the highest award for men). 
C!.) raffiir: In pi raffiir:al (soccer] one skilled at long 
high shots, good kicker. 
~.;I ritrafar: Ivil passive of rafar:. -iva mitrifir:. 
~I.) raafir: 2 Ivil to plead (on one's own or someone 
else's behalf). -vn murafr:a; ava miraafir:. 
~IJ" murafr:a In! {leg] defence. 
~ 1.;1 ritraafir: Ivil (leg] to plead, present a case. -ava 
mitraafir:· 
r!) rirtafar: Ivil I to become high, rise. ril-rasr:aar 
irtafacit prices went up. daragit il-l:Jaraara rtafar:it the 
temperature rose. jababiik murtafir:a high windows. 
1 to cease, let up. rid-damm irtafar: rimbaarilJ the 
bleeding stopped yesterday. -vn rirtifaar:; ava mirtifir:, 
murtafir:· 
t Ui) rirtifaar: In pi -aatl height, elevation, altitude. 
r! J" murtafar: 
In 
pi -aatl 
high 
place, 
height. 
murtafar:aat il-gulaan the Golan Heights. 
2 t ....;.) 
~.) rifir:, rufur: (a) Ivil to become thin, become slen-
der. -vn rufr:, rafar:aan, rUfur:iyya; ava rafr:aan. 
~.) rufr: 
In! 
thinness. 
rufr:' waraqit is-sigaara 
ma-y~al:Jl:J '-I yiziid r:an kida the thinness of cigarette 
paper should not exceed that (i.e. it should not be 
thinner than that). 
C!.) rafiir: 2 = rUfayyar:. 
e-~.) rafaayir: Ipl nl small objects (e.g., small fitments, 
small and therefore inferior fruits and vegetables). 
~.) rufayyar: ladj °11 thin, slim, slight, delicate. xee( 
rufayyar: a fine thread. b~al rUfayyar: small onions, 
baby onions. bu~a rfayyar:a a slender reed. 1 fine, not 
coarse. mabjara rUfayyaca a fine grater. -also rufantar:, 
rufannar:. 
~) rarfar:2 leV thinnerlthinnest, slimmerlslimmest, 
etc . . 
~.) raffar: Ivtll to make thin, make fine.l to thin, thin 
down (a liquid). -vn tarfiir:, tarfiir:; ava/pva miraffar:. 

. 
e.;1 ritraffalIvil I to be made thin, be made fine. 2 to 
be thinned. - iva mitraffal. 
C!;I rirfau Ivil to become thin. -ava mirfau. 
e.;;-I ristarfallvtl I to select for thinness. 2 to con-
sider (too) thin. -vn ristirfaal; ava mistarfal. 
IJJ.; 
j; rafF (i) Ivil I to twitch, flutter. lleeen-i bi-triff 
I have a premonition. 2 to wobble, move eccentrically 
(of a wheel or the like). 3 to come or take place unpre-
dictably andlor in abundance. rit-tillilrrafaat !inzil tiriffi 
min ig-gumhuur the cables keep flowing in from the 
public. ril-kutfiina bi-t{arqal wil-b~aari bi-triff the 
cards snap and the trumps come slapping down. -vn 
raff, rafafaan; ava raafif. 
~; raffa I linst n, pi -aatl I a twitch. 2 a wobble. 
IJJ.; 
j; rafF (i) Ivtl to mend (clothes or carpets) invisibly, 
darn, patch. -also rafa. -vn raff; ava raafif; pva 
marfuuf. 
~; raffa 2 /inst n, pi -aatl an invisible repair, a darn, a 
patch. -also rafya. 
~; raffa 3 Inl I profession of darning or patching 
clothes or carpets. 2 darner's establishment or work-
shop. 3 darner or patcher of clothes or carpets. 
j.;1 ritraff Ivil to be invisibly mended, be darned or 
patched. -iva mitraff. 
J{JJ.;) 
j; raff In pi rarfuf, rufuufl shelf.lIlala r-raffleft out 
of consideration, out of the running. 
j; riff <Engl> Inl {soccer] ref, referee.Jiilu r-rifftake 
off the ref! 
JJ.; 
..;i; rafaq I (a) Ivil to behave kindly (towards s.o.). -vn 
rifq; ava raafiq . 
..;i; rafaq2 (i) Ivtl to enclose and send (a paper, docu-
ment etc.). rirfiq il-muzakkira bil-istimaara enclose the 
memo with the form. -vn rafq; ava raafiq; pva marfuuq. 
..;i; rifq, rifq t Inl kindness, gentleness. ril-rifq i bil-
!Jayawaan kindness to animals. 
:W; rifqa In! companionship, company. 
..;i; rafaq 3 In/liove affair. rafaq-i malaaha kaan zift 
my affair with her was awful. 2 rir-rafaq one's lover. 
rir-rafaq bitaal-u his lover. rir-rafaq bital-ha her lover . 
..;i) rarfaq lell morelmost kind. 
Jei; rifiiq In pi rufaqa, 
rafaayiql I male lover. 
2 friend. 
345 
Jei; rafiiq, 
rafiiq t 
In pi rifaaq, 
rifaaq, 
rufaqal 
I colleague, companion. II rir-rafiiq il-ralla God. 
2 form of address and reference used among commun-
ists, Comrade. 3 male lover, boyfriend. 
~; rifiiqa In pi -aatl I female companion. 2 female 
lover, girlfriend. 
.:;i J" marfaq In pi maraafiql convenience, facility, 
anything conducive to ease or comfort. maraafiq 
(lamma) public utilities. marfaq i1-muw~laat the 
transportation system. marfaq is-sikka l-!Jadiid the rail-
way service . 
.:;i.;1 ritrafaq Ivil to be enclosed (of papers, docu-
ments etc.). laazim it-talab yitrifiq mala l-istimaara the 
application must be enclosed with the form. - iva 
m!trifiq. 
.:;i.;1 ritraffaq Ivil to behave kindly or gently. -ava 
mitraffaq. 
.:;i I; raafiq Ivtl la to be the lover of. rafiqt-a-ha 
l-muddit talat siniin I was her lover for three years. 
Ib to tie the companion of. 2t to be attached to, 
accompany. rid-duktuur il-muraafiq lil-fariiq the doc-
tor accompanying the team. siriir muraafiq companion-
bed (e.g., in hospital patient's room, for a relative). -vn 
murafqa t; ava miraafiq, muraafiq t . 
..;i1.;1 ritraafiq Ivil to accompany one another. -ava 
mitraafiq· 
..;i) rarfaqt = rafaq2. -vn rirfaaq; ava mirfiq, 
murfiq; pva murfaq. 
..;i.;;-I ristarfaq = ritraffaq. 
JJ.; 
ill; rafla In pi -aatl {mus] musical passage repeated at 
the end of each verse of a song, theme of a song. 
.;J JJ.; 
..,.oJ~; rifulfar <Engl> In pi -aatl revolver. -also 
firfir. 
t..:...:"J.; 
~; rufantal ladj *1 small, thin. -also rufayyal, 
rufannal· 
t.:".:"J.; 
~; rufannal/adj *1 thin, fine. razmiirrufannal a fine 
chisel. ¥uraz rufanna$'f/. fine stitches. -also rufantal, 
rufayyal· 
oJ.; 
";"li; rafahiyyat Inlluxury, comfort. 
~; raffah I/vtl to give (s.o.) a life of luxury. miraffah 

nafs-u he is taking good care of himself. 2 Ivii to provide 
relaxation or recreation. 
fasafir-li 
fiskindiriyya 
faraffah [an nafs-ifwayya I'm going to Alexandria to 
relax for a while. raayu g-gabha yraffahu [an ig-gunuud 
they went to the front to entertain the troops. -vn 
tarfiih; ava/pva miraffah. 
~.; tarfiihif ladjl pertaining to relaxation, re-
c!eational. [ilaag tarfiihi recreational therapy. 
~.;I fitraffah Ivil to live a life of ease, pleasure and 
comfort. - ava mitraffah. 
IIS"';.J 
li J rafa (i) to darn, patch. II makanit rafy ig-gizam shoe-
stitching machine. - also raff. -vn rafy, rafw; ava raafi; 
pva marfi. 
~J rafya I linst n, pi -aatl a darn, a patch. - also raffa. 
2 1S ...;.J 
~IJ rafya Z <Engl> Inl raffia. 
"':"' J.J 
.... J rac;aba In: w suff also ric;abit-; pi ric;aab, firc;aab, 
rac;abaatl I neck. rac;abit iI-[uud the neck of an [uud 
(see PI.J, 11). IIrac;abt-i I'm yours to command! -fl-
rac;abit on the responsibility of, as in da kull-u f-rac;abt-i 
all that's my responsibility, fana raagil ralbaan 
wi-f-rac;abt-i koom laym I'm a poor man with many 
dependents. -bi-rac;abit far superior to, as in yabl 
ik-kittaan bi-rac;abit yabl in-naylun linen rope is much 
better than nylon rope. -yac;c;-i b-rac;abt-i ... I give in, 
I'll do whatever you want (said under duress). - fiyna 
nirmi rac;abit-na w-nimfi waraaha we commit ourselves 
to something and carry it through. - wi-rac;abt-u tayt 
riglee (he acted) grudgingly, (he acted) under duress. 
- rilli yb~~' I-fooc; tiwga[-u rac;abt-u [provJ (he who 
looks up gets a pain in the neck) he who tries to keep up 
with the Joneses gets out of breath. -zamb-ak fi-rac;abt-
i I take your guilt on myself. -[awwil ir-rac;aba to make 
proud. -xalla rac;abt(-u) zayy is-simsima to cause (s.o.) 
to feel small, humiliate. 2 neckpiece (of a garment 
etc.). rac;aba bilastik cervical collar. gazma b-rac;aba 
boots. 
~ 
J rac;abiyya In pi -aatl collar (part of harness of 
draught animal). 
,:,l.iJ rac;abaan: fabu rac;abaan having no feathers on 
its neck (of a chicken). 
~l.iJ rac;abaana = rac;abaan. 
~ li J ric;aaba, riqaaba r In pi -aatl I censorship, sur-
veillance. 2 fir-riqaaba censor's department. 
346 
~.,iIJ .~.,iJ rac;uuba Inl egg(s) left in the coop as an 
inducement to chickens to lay. 
~J raqiib In pi ruqabal I censor. 2 [milJ sergeant. 
- Inopl/J Just Observer (epithet of God). 4 [lslJ angel 
reputed to accompany one through life, stationed on 
one's right-hand side, to record one's good deeds (cf 
[a!iid). 
....... .;1 fitrac;c;ib Ivtl to anticipate, expect, be on the 
look-out for. - ava mitrac;c;ib. 
....... IJ raafiib Ivt/la to keep under observation. ma-fiif 
yadd' mrac;b-ak reer rabb-i-na w-qamiir-ak there's no 
one watching over you but God and your conscience. 
Ib to supervise. b-addii-hum looy taf~iili w-b-araac;ib 
it-tanfiiz I give them a diagram and supervise its execu-
tion. 2a to check over, check through. raac;ib d!,lftar 
iI-bl¥amaat he checked through the finger-print file. 
2b to censor. -vn mirac;ba; ava miraac;ib, muraaqib r ; 
pva muraac;ab. 
.... I.J" murac;ba In! supervision, surveillance, control. 
tayt iI-murac;ba under surveillance . 
....... I.J" muraac;ib In */1 supervisor, overseer. 2 [acadJ 
2a invigilator, proctor. 2b highest non-academic 
administrative officer of a facuIty or college_ 3 [bankJ 
comptroller. 4 [milJ warrant-officer. 
....... 1.;1 fitraac;ib Ivii la to be kept under observation. 
Ib to be supervised. 2a to be checked. 2b to be cen-
sored. - iva mitraac;ib. 
~J.J 
..uJ rac;ad (u) Ivill to li~. riI-yigaara rac;da [ala c;alb 
ir-rt¥iif the stones are lying slap in the middle of the 
pavement. 2 to lie abed. rac;adt' fiiha yawaali fusbuu[ 
I was laid up with it for about a week. IIrac;ad [ala 
I-beeqto brood on its eggs (ofa bird). -rac;ad [ala flu us 
to stash away one's money, hoard one's money, as in 
fana raac;id [ala c;irfeen 1iI-fayyaam is-sooda I've got 
some money stashed away for bad times. -vn ruc;uud, 
ruc;aad, rac;adaan; ava raac;id. 
• ..u J rac;da In pi -aatl a sleep, a nap. 
..u.J" marc;ad In pi maraac;idl resting place. II marc;ad 
iI-kilwa [butcherJ loin. -marc;ad ii-laban [rurJ storage 
place for milk. 
~ 
J raC;fiad Ivtl I to cause to lie down, prostrate. 
2 [agricJ to layer (shoots). -vn tarc;iid; ava mirac;c;ad. 
'-Iei.; 'tarfiiida linst n, pi -aat, tarac;iidl [agricJ layer. 
~.;I fitrac;c;ad Ivii to be prostrated, be made to lie 
down. -iva mitrac;c;ad. 
J.JJ.J 
.j}J rafirac; Ivii I to weaken, soften up. 2 to well up 

(of tears). fid-dumuul miraliralia /-lenee tears are 
glistening in his eyes. -vn raliralia; ava miralirali. 
~J.J 
~.J rali~ (u) I Ivtl to perform (a dance). rali~it 
rali~a gdiida she danced a new dance. 2 Ivil to dance. 
II furli~ liI-liird i /-dawlit-u {prov] (dance for the ape 
where he reigns) == curry favour with authority no 
matter how misbegotten. -zayy iIIi rali~it las-sillim -/a 
jafuu-ha fahli taljt i wa/a fahli fOOIi {prov] like the 
woman who danced on the stairs - neither the people 
upstairs saw her, nor those downstairs (of one who is 
doing s.th. at the wrong time and place). -vn rali~; ava 
raali~· 
~; rali~ Inl dance, dancing. fir-rali~ ij-farlii belly-
dancing. - fir-rali~ i nali~ {prov] to dance is to lose digni-
ty. - fawwil ir-rali~i tiljangiil {prov] (when one first 
dances, one hops) == everything is difficult at the begin-
ning, practice makes perfect. 
4..a.t; 
rali~a linst n, pi -aatl a dance. 
"""~; ralilia~ I In °1 male dancer. 28 In pi -aatl ba-
lance mechanism (of a watch). 2b pendulum (of a 
clock). 
.... ~; ralilia~a In pi -aatl female dancer. timuut 
ir-ralilia~a w-wist-a-ha b-yillab {prov] (the dancer 
dies while her waist (still) undulates) == old habits are 
unbreakable. 
~;' fitrali~ Ivil to be danced. 
fir-rali~ iI-ba/adi 
mumkill yitrilii~ fi-fayyi Ijitta the stick dance may be 
performed anywhere. -iva mitrili~. 
~; ralilia~ Ivtl I to cause to dance. ralilia~uu-ha lala 
waljda w-n~~ they struck up the waljda w-n~~ rhythm 
for her to dance to. ralili~it Ijawagib-ha she moved her 
eyebrows rapidly up and down. 2 {soccer] to run rings 
round (an opposing player). -vn 
tarlii~; ava/pva 
miralilia~ . 
~;' fitrac;c;a~ Ivil I to move as if dancing, sway. 2 to 
be made to dance. -ava/iva mitrac;c;~. 
ItJ.J 
r!; ralial (a) I Ivtl to slam, bang. ma-tirc;al-f iI-baab 
don't slam the door! rac;alt-u c;alameen I gave him a 
couple of hard slaps. ya naas ma-fii-f tuuba farc;al-u 
biiha hey somebody, isn't there a stone I can clout him 
with? Ilrac;alit binoot she yelled out suddenly, she 
screamed out. -raCial mijwaar to tackle a (tiresome) 
errand. 2 Ivil to emit a banging sound, bang. fit-tabli 
b-yirc;al the drums are banging. -vn raC;la, rac;alaan; 
ava raac;il; pva marc;uul. 
347 
t'; r marliuul lad j '1 of easy virtue, of loose morals. 
e;' fitrac;al Ivil to be slammed, be banged. - iva 
mitric;il· 
~; rac;c;all Ivtl to hit (very hard or a number of 
times). rac;c;al-lu sdaalf-u give him a couple of slaps on 
the face. - vn tarliiil; ava/pva miralic;al. 
~;' fitralic;all Ivil to be hit (very hard or a number of 
times). -iva mitrac;c;al. 
Z tJ.J 
~; rUC;la In pi ruc;all I patch (for mending). 2 chess-
board. 3 {obsol] baking sheet. 
~; riqla or ruqla Inl cursive calligraphic style (that 
most commonly used in Arabic handwriting). 
~; raC;lial2 Ivtl to patch. rac;c;alt iI-hiduum wig-gizam 
I had my clothes and shoes patched. -vn tarc;iil; aVa/ 
pva miralic;al. 
~ r miraC;lial ladj °1 {deris] experienced in the ways 
of the world, worldly-wise. 
~;, fitraC;lial z Ivil to be patched. - iva mitraC;lial. 
JJ.J 
j; rac;c; (i) Ivil I to behave graciously or kindly, show 
favour. riliC; a laleena b-na;ara grace us with a glance! 
(to a pretty girl). ric;c; i laleena ya gamiila favour us, 
beautiful one! (to a pretty girl). 2 to become thin, deli-
cate or fine. - Ivt/3 to make thin, delicate or fine. -vn 
rac;c;, ric;c;a, raliac;aan; ava raac;ic;; pva marliuuc;. 
.;; ric;c;a Inl I delicacy, fineness (e.g., of work). 
2 sensitivity, gentleness. 
~; ric;c; In pI ruc;uuc;1 I kind of tambourine, with jing-
les, smaller than the duff or the mazhar. 2 valve flap. 
3 parchment. 4 slavery. 
~; ric;c;iyya = rilic;a. 
JU; ruc;aac; Icoll nl paper-thin round sheets of dough, 
usually dried, used in the preparation of various dishes. 
:U\i; rUliaac;a lunit n, pi -aatl a sheet of ruc;aac;. 
.:;.i; rac;iic; ladj pi ruc;aac;1 I delicate, fine. c;ijra ~adaf 
raliiilia a fine coveriqg of mother-of-pearl. gazma 
rac;iic;a a fine pair of shoes. 2 sensitive, gentle. fil-bint; 
di rac;iic;a w-rolj-ha Ijilwa she's a gentle and pleasant-
natured girl. 
J.:i; raqiiq Icoll nl slave(s). tigaarit ir-raqiiq iI-fabyat[ 
the white slave trade. 
~ \i; rac;aayic; Ipl nl thin or fine sheets or layers of 
metal. rac;aayic; falamunya thin sheets of aluminium. 
.;;; ruc;ayyali ladj 
°1 thin, fine. Ijittit 
la~aaya 
ruc;ayyac;a min iI-xarazaan a thin piece of bamboo stick. 
~) farac;c; lell thinnerlthinnest, finerlfinest. 

. 
~liJ raqqaaq In °1 player of the riqq. 
J.;I fitraqq Ivii to become or be made thin or fine. 
- ~va/iva mitraqq. 
JiJ raqqaq Ivt/ to make fine or thin. wi-nta bi-tbatta{ 
iI-lagiina raqqaq-ha while flattening the dough, thin it 
(too). -vn larqiiq; ava/pva miraqqaq. 
Ji.;1 fitraqqaq Ivil to be made thin or fine. -iva 
milraqqaq. 
1 
-
rIJ.J 
~J raqam' (u) Ivtl I to notice, spot. raqaml-u 
w-huwwa (aalil mil-beet I spotted him as he left the 
house. 2 to keep under surveillance, keep an eye on. 
raqim-ku fana I've got my eye on you! -vn raqamaan, 
raqm; ava raaqim; pva marquum. 
~ 
J raqam, raqm, raqm In pi farqaaml number, 
numeral, figure. ril-qanuun raqam lalaltajar law num-
ber thirteen. ril-farqaam bi-lquul kida the figures say 
so. 
~) farqam ladj, fem raqma, pi ruqml sharp-witted. 
~.;I filraqam Ivil I to be noticed. 2 to be kept under 
s~rveillance. - iva milriqim. 
~J raqqam Ivt/ to number, give a number to. larraxl 
il-muzakkira w-raqqaml-a-ha I dated and numbered 
the memo. Illalamaal il-larqiim punctuation marks. 
- yn larqiim; ava/pva muraqqam. 
r!.r miraqqam ladj °1 sharp-witted, crafty. 
~.;I filraqqam Ivil to be numbered, be given a num-
ber. -iva milraqqam. 
1 r J.J 
4..iJ raqma/unit n, pi -aall I tympanum (usually offish 
skin, of, e.g., a drum, a rebab, see PI.J, 3). 28 leather 
strip under the strings of a zither (qanuun) that serves to 
absorb vibrations. 2b ornamental guard-plate on the 
face of a luud, below the rosette, for protection against 
the plectrum (see PI.J, 13). 
~J raqam 2 collective noun of raqma. 
.J J.J see l..s J.J : raqw, raqwa 
l..sJ.J 
.}J raqa' (i) Ivtl to ward off the evil eye from (s.o.) by 
means of incantations and censing, perform a raqw for 
(s.o.). fin-nabi raqa naql-u min gamall-u the Prophet 
censed his she-camel against the evil eye of his compan-
ions (an incantation from the raqwa ceremony). -vn 
raqw; ava raaqi; pva marqi . 
• ';J raqwa linst n, pi -aall ceremony of incantations 
348 
and censing performed over something to protect it 
against the evil ey((. 
:YJ raqya = raqwa . 
.}.;I filraqa Ivil to have a raqwa performed for one. 
- iva milriqi . 
.}.r-I fislarqa Ivt/ to invoke protection (for s.o.) 
through the performance of a raqwa. rafeet-ak 
wi-starqeet-ak min leen illi ma y~alli lan-nabi form of 
incantation over a sick person. -vn fistirqa; ava 
mistarqi. 
l..sJ.J 
.}J riqi (a) Ivil to rise, advance, progress. riqif-wa;ift-
u he rose in his job. -vn raqyaan; ava raaqi. 
.}J raqa 2 
(a): 
raqa bi-
to help to advance. 
bi-nwaddii-hum iI-madaaris lalajaan yirqu b-m~r we 
send them to school so that they may help Egypt to 
progess. -vn ruqiyy f ; ava raaqi. 
.}IJ raaqi ladj °1 refined, high-class. zooq raaqi re-
fined taste. ril- fazyaa f ir-raqya high fashion garments, 
haute couture. 
.}) farqa 
leU 
more/most 
refined, 
more/most 
high-class. 
JJ raqqa Ivtl I to promote. IIraqqa laskari to queen a 
pawn (in chess). 2 to refine, polish up (manners). -vn 
tarqiyya, tarqiya f; ava/pva miraqqi. 
~.; tarqiyya, tarqiya f In pi -aatl promotion. 
.}.;I fitraqqa Ivil I to be promoted. 2 to be refined, 
be polished up (of manners). -iva mitraqqi. 
rl.!l.J 
"'lS"J rukaama <It ricamo> Inl broderie anglaise. 
y.!l.J 
...s J rikib (a) Ivtl I to mount, board, ride. kaanit rakba 
b~aan she was riding a horse. xallii-hum yirkabu 
turmaay 
let 
them 
take 
a 
tram! 
II fil-fart[' 
ma-yirkab-haaj in-niil fi-gamiil il-bilaad the Nile does 
not rise over the land throughout the country. -rikib 
raas-u he got to be stubborn. -rikib dimaay-u finn ... he 
got it into his head that .... 2 to dominate, have the 
upper hand over, boss around. y~abb' xaddaamyirkab 
faxuu-k is it proper for a servant to boss your brother 
around? miraal-u rakbaa (wi-mdaldila riglee-ha) his 
wife has him right under her thumb. II rakb-u lafriit 
(1) he is possessed by a demon. (2) he's in a bad 
humour, he's likely to blow up if provoked. - Ivi/3 to 
mount, board, ride. b-aw~~al-ak li-badd' ma tirkab I'll 
go along with you till you find transport. II bi-yirkab 
fooq dimay-na he bosses us around. 4 to be installed. 

'i'ik-kablaat rikbit ralat the cables were laid incorrectly. 
fii mikrufoon raakib there is a microphone set up. 
II muxx-u (or lac;l-u) raakib fimaal == he is pig-headed. 
-vn rukuub, rukuuba; ava raakib; pva markuub. 
;.., .J; rukuuba Inl I Ipl rakaayibl riding animal. 2 Ipl 
-aatl a ride, a lift . 
..,.51; raakib In pI rukkaabl passenger. 
..,...J.r markuub In pI marakiibl type of shoe or slipper 
with a turned-up toe.llya-bn iI-markuub == you son of 
an old boot! - 'i'abu markuub shoebill. 
4$; rakba In pI -aatl a ride. 
4$; rukba In pI rukabl I knee. lllir-rukab in great 
quantity, as in 'i'akl i lir-rukab masses of food. - rukab-i 
saabit == my knees turned to jelly (from fear). -man;ar 
yiyill (or yisayyib) ir-rukab a terrifying sight. 2 node 
(on the stem of a plant). 3 {mech} joint. 4 knee-pad, 
knee-guard. 
..... IS'; rikaab In pI -aatl pair of stirrups. 
~; rakkiib In pI rakkiibal skilled rider. 
..,.5.r markib Imasc and fem n, pI maraakibl boat, 
ship. II 'i'iI-markib illi fiiha rayyiseen tirrac; {prov} (a ship 
with two captains will sink) == too many cooks spoil the 
broth. 
4$.r markiba In pI -aatl small boat. 
~I.r marakbi In pI -yyal boatman. IIluzuumit 
marakbiyya an invitation not seriously intended (be-
cause one cannot take up an invitation from a boatman 
passing in midstream). 
..,.5 j'1 'i'itrakab Ivil to be mounted, be boarded, be 
ridden. - iva mitrikib . 
. 
..,.5; rakkib Ivtl I to cause to mount, cause to board. 
rakkibuu lala y~aan they mounted him on a horse. 
rakkibt-a-ha yantuur 1 put her in a carriage. rakkibt-ak 
waraaya sarac;t ii-lee! {prov} (I gave you a lift behind 
me (on my donkey) and you stole the bread) you took 
advantage of my kindness. 2 to put under the domina-
tion of. II 'i'iwla titma 'i'lis la-yrakkib-ak iJ-Jeex miit lafriit 
don't make fun or the Shaykh will send a hundred 
demons to possess you! 3 to mount, install, fix up. 'lana 
mrakkib gilda liI-yanafiyya I've put a washer on the tap. 
rakkibti tilifoon 1 installed a telephone. 'i'ig-gazmagi 
rakkib-Ii n~~i nall the cobbler put on a half-sole for 
me. 4 to combine, compound, synthesize. b-aaxud 
i1-mac;aatil ig-gayyida w-'i'arakkib-ha lala balt/. 1 take 
the outstanding verses and combine them. -vn tarkiib; 
ava/pva mirakkib. 
';.,$ j' tarkiiba linst n, pI -aat, tarakiibl I installation, 
fit~ent. 2 compound, mixture. 
..,.5.r murakkab ladjl I composite, compound. - In 
pI -aatl 2 {chem} compound. murakkabaat riza'i'iyya 
349 
nutriments. 3 component, ingredient. 4 {psych} com-
plex. murakkab nac;~ inferiority complex . 
....s j'1 'i'itrakkib Ivii passive of rl!kkib. - iva mitrakkib. 
~) 'i'irtakab Ivtl to commit (e.g., a mistake, a 
crime). -vn 'i'irtikaab; ava mirtikib, murtakib. 
~.!l; see ~.!ll;:raakit 
~~.!l; 
~ fi.t; . ~ fi.t; rikutta <It> In! ricotta (a soft unsalted 
type of white cheese). 
,).!l; 
JS; rakad (i) Ivii to lie stagnant (of water). lI'i'is-suuC; 
raakid the market is sluggish. - vn rukuud, rakadaan; 
ava raakid. 
;,); .!l; 
;:>;fi.t; rikurdar <Engl> In pI -aatl tape-recorder . 
j.!l; 
:J; rikiz, rakaz I (i) Ivii to come to rest, achieve stabil-
ity, settle on an even keel. 'i'iI-moog hidi wil-markib 
rik1.it the waves subsided and the boat stopped tossing. 
sibt is-sillim raaki1. lal-yeet 1 left the ladder leaning 
against the wall. ma-fii-J xaddaam yirki1. landi gumla 
1 can't get a servant to stay with me a week. -vn 
raka1.aan, rukuu1.; ava raaki1.. 
:J; raka1. 2 (i) Ivtl to set securely, position, rest. rakazti 
c;urt-i lala draal-i w-nimt 1 rested my forehead on my 
arm and slept. rakaz iI-latala tayt iI-larabiyya w-rafal-
ha he positioned the crowbar under the car and lifted it. 
-vn rakazaan, rak1.; ava raaki1.; pva markuu1.. 
:J) 'i'ar~z lelJ morelmost stable or steady. 
jlS'; rikaatlnl residue. 
j.J; rukuuz Inl {mus} keynote of a scale. 
-'.;$; rakii1.a In pI rakaayi1.11 brace, support. 2 {mus} 
short double length of pipe immediately following the 
mouthpiece of the 'i'arruul and muzmaar. (see PI.1 , 22). 
:J.r markaz In pI maraakizl I centre, central point. 
marka1. id-dayra the centre ofthe circle. II marka1. it-tuc;1 
centre of gravity. -markaz 
b~ari focal point. 
2 headquarters, centre of activity. lamalt iI-c;ahwa 
markaz-i 1 made the cafe my headquarters. marka1. 
buyuus research centre. maraaki1. tadriib training cen-
tres. 38 administrative area within a province, and 
under the government of a senior police officer 
(ma'i'muur). 3b town from which the area known as a 
markaz is administered. 3c building housing the main 
administrative offices, central police station etc., of the 

area known as a markaz. 4a placing, position. 
riI-lau;iiba luhum maraakiz zayy' lau;iibit ik-koora 
the players' positions are the same as those of soccer 
players. 4b standing, status. riljfa; markaz-ak remem-
ber your positIOn (and behave accordingly). raagil 
ma-luu1 markaz a nobody. see further under 
j.!J.)r' 
..s:J.J" markazi ladjl central, main. ril-bank iI-markazi 
the Central Bank. riI-maljkama I-markaziyya the cen-
tral court. 
:J.;I ritrakaz Ivil to be set securely, be positioned. -iva 
mitrikiz. 
j; rakkiz I Ivtl to concentrate, bring together. labiir 
murakkaz concentrated fragrance. 2 Ivil to concen-
trate, think concentratedly. b-azaakir Iil-imtiljaan 
wi-laayiz rarakkiz I'm studying for the exam and want 
to concentrate. -vn tarkiiz; ava mirakkiz; pva 
murakkaz. 
:J.;I ritrakkiz Ivil to be concentrated. - iva mitrakkiZ. 
fo;l rirtakaz Ivil to centre one's weight, balance. -vn 
rirtikaaz; ava mirtikiz. 
,Jt:t .!J .) 
...;.£; rakaq (u) Ivil to run, gallop. -vn rakq, rukuuq; 
ava raakiq. 
t.!J .) 
f; rakal (a) Ivi/l to kneel, get down on one's knees. 
2 [lsi] to bow from the waist in the performance of the 
ritual prayers. -vn rukuul; ava raakil. 
...s; rakla In pi -aatl prescribed part of the Islamic 
ritual prayer. farq ii-lila rarbal raklaat the prescribed 
n~mber of raklas for the last evening prayer is four. 
f.;1 ritrakkallvil [lsi] to pray supererogatory ritual 
prayers (independently of a group of worshippers). 
-ava murakkal. 
.).J"';.!J.) 
;}is; rukfoor, rikfuur <Fr Roquefort> Inl any blue 
cheese. 
I .!J .!J .) 
~; rakk' (u) Ivil to become broody (of a hen). -vn 
rakk, rakakaan; ava raakik. 
~; rakk z Inl reliance. rinta iii laleek Ir-rakk you are 
the one (we) depend on. rakk-ak lad-dawa taxd-u 
b-inti;aam wi-nta t{iib you make sure that you take the 
medicine regularly and you will recover. rir-rakk "lala 
it's up to, it depends on, as in rlljna raqyiin laakin 
ir-rakk· laleeku we're content but it's all up to you, 
350 
rir-rakk· lar-riggaa/a it all depends on the men. 
¥.; tarkiika In pi tarakiikl excuse, pretext. 
..!.IS".;I ritrakkik Ivil to u~c a pretext. rinta b-titrakkik 
lala ka/aam-u la/aan ma-tgli1 you are using what he 
said as an excuse not to go. kull' ma yiigi door-u 
yitrakkik lala Ijaaga la/aan ma-yidfal1 every time his 
turn comes he finds excuses for not paying. talaala 
ma-titrakkik1come along; don't try to wriggle out! -vn 
tarkiik; ava mitrakkik. 
2.!J .!J .) 
;O"IS; rakaaka Inl weakness, feeoleness (of language). 
4$; rakiik lad jl weak, poor, defective (of language). 
targama rakiika poor translation. luvat-u rakiika he 
uses language incorrectly. 
J • .!J .!J .) 
-;5; rukka: lilm (or(ibb) ir-rukka quack medicine. 
O.J .!J .!J .) 
. #; rukukuuh <perh Fr> Inl rococo. II vurzU 
rukukuuh [needlew] French knot. 
y!.IJ.!J.) 
..;:%; riklaa/ (also riklaaj) <Fr reglage> Inl [mech] 
regulating, adjusting. riklaa/ larabiyya car tuning. 
- also riglaaf, riglaaj. 
r'1 J .!J.) 
j'%; riklaam <Fr reciame> In pi -aatl advertisement. 
I r' .!J .) 
~I.;I ruraakim t Ivil to accumulate, mount, pile up. 
-vn taraakum; ava mitraakim, mutaraakim. 
2 r' .!J.) see r' I .!J .) : rukaama 
.:,.!J.) 
.:J; rakan (I) I Ivtl la to put aside.lj-arkin Il-filuus di 
liz-zaman I'll set this money aside for a rainy day. 
II rakan iI-larabiyya he parked the car. Ib to shelve, 
leave 
undealt 
with. 
riI-muwa;;afiin 
bl-yirkinu 
g-gumhuur bis-salaat the officials keep the public wait-
ing by the hour. 2 Ivil to halt, come to a stop. rlrkin hina 
ya rayyis stop here, driver! ris-saala b-tirkm the watch 
keeps stopping. riI-lj~aan bi-yirkin the horse balks. 
-vn rakanaan, rakn; ava raakin; pva markuun. 
Q; rakna In pI -aatl instance noun of rakn.llslib-ak ya 

waad min ir-rakna di stop this lazing around doing 
nothing, my boy! 
.:?.J rukn In pi farkaanl I corner. 2 essential, basic, 
corner-stone. farkaan id-diin the essentials of religion. 
farkaan iJ-fiik the essential information that must be 
put on a cheque by the signatory to make it valid (i.e., 
date, amount, signature etc.). II farkaan Ijarb {mill 
general staff. - rariis farkaan {mill chief-of-staff. 
-rukn; gaamid an influential man. 3 corner motif in 
tent applique work (see PI.H, 23). 
~.J rukni ladjl corner. qarba rukniyya {soccer I corner 
kick. 
.:?.;I fitrakan Ivil 18 to be put aside. II fana taawiz 
fatrikin tal-mataa!1 want to retire. Ib to be shelved, 
be left undealt with. 2 to lean. II filii yitrikin talee 
yitrikin tala Ijee[a mayla (who leans on him leans on a 
leaning wall) he's not to be relied on. -ava/iva mitrikin. 
J.J rakkin Ivtl {sport I to put (a ball) into a corner 
(e.g., ofa tennis court). -vn tarkiin; ava/pva mirakkin. 
.:.f.;) firtakan Ivil to rely, depend. -ava mirtikin. 
1~.!l.J 
"j1.J raaka Ivtl {nautl to dock (a ship), berth (a ship). 
-vn mirakiyya; avalpva miraaki. 
"j1.;1 fitraaka <It attraccare> Ivil {naut] to dock, 
berth (of a ship). munawrit taraaki berthing man-
oeuvre. -vn taraaki; ava mitraaki. 
Z~.!l.J 
~I.J rakya In pi aatl bonfire. rakyit naar open fire, 
camp-fire. 
,?.:..J.J 
~J.J rulitt <Fr roulette> In pi -aatl I dressmaker's 
tracing-wheel. 2 roulette. 
'.J J.J 
4IJ.J rulla <Engl> Inl decorator's roller. 
• J J.J 
• )J.J rulooh <Fr rouleau> In pi -aatl roller (for setting 
hair), hair-curler. 
• ~ J.J 
~.J rileeh <Engl> In pi -aatl (elecl relay switch. 
OJ'r.J see also' rJ.J 
J\..J.J rumaani ladj 
*1 
Roman. 
riI-m~arta r-
rumaniyya Roman-style wrestling. 
351 
rj':"r.J 
r.i'\..J.) rumatizm <prob Engl> In! rheumatism. -also 
maratizm J, mura[izm J, marmatizm J . 
c:.r.J 
c:".J ramalj (a) I/vtl to cause (a horse, donkey etc.) to 
gallop. ma-tirmalj-f iI-lj~aan wi-huwwa !aarib don't 
gallop the horse after it has been drinking. 2 Ivil to 
gallop, charge (especially of a horse, donkey etc.). {Uul 
in-nahaar bi-nirmalj wara l-fawraatj di all day we've 
been charging about after those papers. II zimma yirmalj 
fiiha wabuur a conscience broad enough for a train to 
charge about in, a somewhat elastic conscience. -vn 
ramlj, rimaalja; ava raamilj, raamilj. 
c:".J rumlj In pi rimaalj, rumuuljl I lance, javelin. 
IItala sinn; w-rumlj ... well-known, renowned, as in 
fana zakiyya bint iI-ljaggS tali l-fakahaani tala sinn; 
w-rumlj I'm Zakiyya, the daughter of Hagg Ali the 
fruit-seller, the biggest bigshot in the neighbourhood. 
2 upright handle of a plough (see PI.D, 18). 3 welding 
electrode, welding-rod. 
c.t.:.J rammaalj In *1 spearman, lancer. 
c.\...J" mirmaalj Inl {obsoll race course. II fooqa zayy 
iI-mirmaalj a very spacious room. -[ilit yigri bil-
mirmaalj he took to his heels. 
r::.J rammalj Ivtl to cause to gallop. -vn tarmiilj; ava 
mirammalj. 
c:. r .J 
~I.J raamix Icoll nl fermented unripe dates. 
l;,r.J 
.:,I..I.o.J ramdaan ladjl infected with ophthalmia (of the 
eyes), suffering from ophthalmia. 
..I.o.J ramad Inl ophthalmia, inflammation of the eyes. 
ramad ~adiidi purulent ophthalmia. ramad Ijubaybi 
trachoma. 
~..I.o.J ramadi ladjl pertaining to ophthalmia. 
~..I.o.J ramadiyyaJ Inl eye hospital. 
~.J rammad Ivil to develop ophthalmia, get sore eyes, 
get sore (of the eyes). -vn tarmiid; ava mirammad . 
Z;,r.J 
J\...J rumaad Inl I ash. rumaad sigaara cigarette ash. 
farbat ir-rumaad {Chrl Ash Wednesday. 2 earth, soil. 
~J\...J rumaadi ladjl grey. 
r.Jr.J 
r.J".J ramram Ivi/la to scavenge. fil-firaax bi-tramram 
fiz-zibaala the chickens scavenge off the rubbish. Ib to 

eat 
continual 
small 
snacks 
between 
meals. 
ma-b-yistafid-J' mil-faklB la/aan (Uul in-nahaar bi-
yramram the food's wasted on him because he spends 
the whole day stuffing himself with snacks. 2 to mix 
with those below one's station, go slumming. 
fig~gamla ramramit the university is taking in all and 
sundry. -vn ramrama; ava miramram. 
rlJ".J rumraam In pi ramariiml I leftover leaves and 
other debris of harvested crops. 2 good-for-nothing 
person, poor weak and pitiably useless person. 
rlJ".J rimraam Inllow scavenging person, one totally 
devoid of pride. 
rJJ".J ramruum = rumraam. 
jrJ 
jo J ramaz t (u, i) Ivil to be symbolic, stand as a symbol. 
fil-bint illi b-ti;har {'Nuura b-turmuz lik-kiniisa 1-
masiljiyya the girl who appears in the picture symbol-
izes the Christian church. -vn ramz; ava raamiz; pva 
marmuuz. 
jo.J ramz In pi rumuuzl symbol, sign. IIbir-ramz in 
code. 
4Sjo.J ramzi ladjl symbolic. fit-talaba b-yaxdu mabla ... 
ramzi bass the students are paid only a token sum. 
~jo.J ramziyya In! symbolism. 
':'~jo.J ramziyyaat Ipl n! symbols, cipher, code. 
;'.J rammiz Ivtl to assign a symbol or code to. -vn 
tarmiiz; ava mirammiz. 
J. rJ 
"';"'.J ramal (i) Ivil to blink (as a nervous habit), wink. 
II mif fiaadir yirmif(he can't bat an eyelid) he's petrified 
with fright. -vn ram/. rama/aan; ava raamif. 
4.:....J ram/a linst n, pi -aatl a wink, a blink. 
"';"'.J rim/In pi rumuufl eyelash. IIqarab (or rafial or 
razal etc.) rirh/to give a look through narrowed eyes 
(implying either coquetry or '!lalicious envy), as in 
Ij-arfial-ha kaam rim/ agib-ha 1-farql'll shoot her a few 
piercing glances and knock her flat, qarabit-u rim/, liyi 
min salit-ha she shot him an evil look and he fell sick 
then and there. -rimf iI-leen light cheap fabric with a 
narrow woven stripe. 
4.:....J rim/a lunit n! an eyelash. 
Jt.:..: J" mirammifaati In pi -yyal one who constantly 
winks or blinks. 
,jI:I r J 
.,I.A..J ramaqaan In! Ramadan, ninth month of the 
352 
Muslim year, during which Muslims fast daily from 
dawn to sunset. ramaqaan kariim traditional greeting 
used during this month (to guests == sorry not to offer 
you any food because of the fast). 
JrJ 
";'.J ramafi In! spark oflife. ma-lad-!' fiyya ramafi I am 
on my last legs. liljifi iI-fiatrB lala faaxir ramafi he just 
caught the train when he was on the point of collapsing. 
IIlufima tsidd' ramafi-ha a bite of food to keep her 
going. 
1JrJ 
J...J rami In pi rimaaltt sand.llljagar rami sandstone. 
-qarb ir-raml divination by sand. 
J..) 1 fir-ramllprop n! the ·beach at Alexandria from 
Victoria to Mahattet el-Raml and the district behind it. 
~.J ramla Inl Ilcoll nl = rami. 2/unit n, pi -aatl a 
specific lot or kind of sand. fir-ramla di ma-tinfae-!' 
lil-buna this sort of sand is no good for building. 
J...J ramli ladjl sandy, pertaining to or consisting of 
sand. faTti' ramliyya sandy soil. mallab ramli dirt 
pitch.llljagarramii sandstone. - balalj ramli black, elon-
gated variety of date of the rutab type. 
~.J rammal I Ivtl to polish with fine sand. 2 Ivil to 
become grainy in texture. lasal mirammil honey which 
has begun to crystallize. -vn tarmiil; ava/pva mirammil. 
~,;I fitrammal l , fitrammil l Ivil to be polished with 
fine sand. - iva mitrammal, mitrammil. 
2 J r J 
~) farmila, farmala In pi faraamill widow. II fibn' 
farmala one whose bad upbringing has led him to be 
corrupt. 
~,;I fitrammal 2, fitrammil 2 Ivil to become a widow-
er or widow. II fitrammilit lal-liyaal she devoted herself 
to her children, refusing to remarry after the death of 
her husband. -ava mitrammal, mitrammil. 
I UJ 
r.J ramm (u) Ivtll to repair, renovate. 2 to strengthen, 
revitalize (the body). fakla trumm iI-laqm (a meal that 
strengthens the bones) a wholesome meal. -vn ramm; 
ava raamim; pva marmuum . 
...: J" miramma In pi -aatl repair job. 
r,;1 fitramm Ivill to be repaired, be renovated. 2 to 
be strengthened, be revitalized. -iva mitramm. 
~.J rammim I Ivtl to restore, renovate. rammimu balq 
iI- fasaar they restored some of the historic monuments. 
-vn tarmiim; ava/pva mirammim. 

r--; tanniim In pI -aatl restoration, renovation. 
~;I fitrammim Ivil to be restored, be renovated. -iva 
mitrammim. 
z 
!r~ 
;;..,; rumma Inl all the appurtenances (ofs.th.).llxad-u 
b-rummit-u .... he took it lock, stock and barrel. 
~,; rimma In pI rimam/l piece of carrion, something 
putrid. fiz-zibaa1a xallit il-beet rimma the rubbish has 
made the house putrid. 2 [abus] foul person. ya rimam 
you filthy bastards! 
~,; rammim 2 Ivil to become putrid. -ava mirammim. 
oJlrr~ 
,;,UJ ,; .,;,t:,; rummaan I <Engl trade name Rollman>: 
rummaan bily ball-bearings. 
4it:,; rummaana l lunit n, pI -aatll a ball-bearing. 2 a 
spherical castor. 
I. 
"'r~ 
,;,t:,; rummaan 2 Icoll nl pomegranate(s). 
4it:,; rummaana 2 lunit n, pI -aatl I a pomegranate. 
2 movable counterpoise of a steelyard. 3 fetlock. 
Jt:,; rummaani ladj invarl dark red in colour. 
Z oJ r ~ see oJ I r ~ : rumaan, rumaani 
..s r~ 
IS"'; rama (i) Ivtl la to throw, fling. ramit nafs-a-ha 
mik-kubri she threw herself from the bridge. 'b~~eet 
laqeet jal:Jl:Jaat raami gittit-u calayya suddenly a beggar 
rushed upon me. raal:J marmi fil-farq he collapsed on 
the ground. II firmi bayaaq-ak cross my palm with sil-
ver! (said by fortune-tellers). -ramaa-Ii salaam he ex-
tended a greeting to me. -rama caleeha yamiin he 
uttered an oath of divorce against her. -rama gawaab to 
post a letter. Ib to shoot, shoot at. Ie to play, lay (a 
card).llrama caleehafluus to stake money on it. Id to 
throw out, throwaway. firmi z-zibaala throw out the 
garbage! Ie to desert, leave neglected. sibt-i-ni mbaaril:J 
marmi hina yesterday you left me here high and dry. 
2 to produce, yield. bi-yirmi warda f~far it produces 
yellow flowers. fil-faddaan bi-yirmi cajar farasdib 
ralla each feddan yields ten ardebs of wheat. 3 [constr] 
to lay or cast (concrete). ramu l-xarasaana they laid the 
concrete. ramu (xarasaanit) il- fasaas they laid (the con-
crete for) the foundations. ramu s-saqf they laid the 
(concrete) roof. ramu l-cimdaan they cast the (con-
crete) pillars. - Ivil 4 [rur] to give a feeding (to an 
animal). firmi lil-baqara feed the cow. 5 [coarse] to 
353 
ejaculate, shoot one's lot. -vn ramy; ava raami; pva 
marmi. 
11 rama cala (1) to lead to. fiflaaric bi-yirmi cala 
xaraaba the street leads to a patch of waste ground. 
(2) to aim at, take sights on. bi-yirmi cala l-ca1aama he 
aims at the marker. hiyya ramya cenee-ha cala l:Jadd i 
taani she has her eye on someone else. 
~,; ramya linst n, pI -aatl I a throw. kull-u-hum 
bi-yilrimu nafs ir-ramya they all come to the same bad 
end. 2 a shot. 3 [agric] a quantity (of, e:g., wheat) 
threshed at one time. 
~,; rimiyya Inl one worthy only of neglect, one not 
worth bothering about. 
4r1..,; rimaaya Inl shooting (as a sport). 
..r J' marma In pI maraamil I [sport] goal (i.e. at 
which one aims). 2 range. marma 1-bunduqiyya the 
range of the rifle. 
IS";I fitrama Ivil passive of rama. -iva mitrimi. 
;,; ramma Ivtll to throw (a number of objects, or a 
number of times). 2 to discard in quantity. -ava/pva 
mirammi. 
;J' mirammi ladj *1 lying around in abundance, 
found in abundance and therefore neglected. 
;;1 fitramma Ivil to be thrown (of a number of ob-
jects, or a number of times). -iva mitrammi. 
IJ" ..s r ~ 
'-""""",; ramiis <Fr remise>: carabiyya (or taks i) ramiis 
[obso1] provincial taxi or hire car without a meter. 
.J..sr~ 
.J/!'"J,; rumyu <prop name> In! Romeo, big-time lover. 
[. oJ ~ 
~,; ringa <Gr renga> Icoll nl smoked herring(s), 
kipper(s). 
4r4-i,; ringaaya lunit n, pI -asll a smoked herring, a 
kipper. 
toJ~ 
e,; rannax I Ivtl to soak, steep (until rotten or fer-
mented). 2/vil to lie idle, do nothing. 
f~l:Jaab-ak 
qarrabu yi(lacu cal-macasj wi-nta lissa mrannax {IS-
sana wi your friends are almost ready to go on a pension 
and you're still stuck in secondary school! -vn tarniix; 
ava/pva mirannax. 
(:'4,U) 
,J;,; rand Inl[bot] bay. 

,J.;.J.) rund <Fr ronde> In pi -aatl {mus] semibreve. 
whole note. 
~I ~~.) 
.,I,J.;.J.) rundaad <Fr rondade> In pi -aatl{gym] take 
off, spring. 
.J";~~.) 
• ;,J.;.) randi/uuh <Fr> In pi -aatl rendezvous (particu-
larly of lovers). 
(.d~.) 
.!o\;.) rank In pi runuukl circular piece in tent applique 
work (see PI.H. 19). 
.!o\;.) rank: hank' w-rank see hank. 
r.~.) 
'"'.) rannim or rannim Ivil {Chr] to chant (hymns. re-
sponses etc .• in unison). -vn tarniim, tarniim; ava 
mirannim, mirannim. 
4..,,;.; tarniima In pi -aat, taraniiml {Chr] hymn. 
~~.) 
..,.) rann (i) Ivtll to ring. rinn ig-garaz Gafaan yqlju ring 
the bell so they'lI wake up! 2 to hit hard. xud iI-wad-da 
rinn-u take this boy and give him a beating! Ij-arinn-ak 
lialam yi[ayyar Geen-ak I'll give you a slap on the face 
that'll knock out your eye! - Ivil 3 to emit a bell-like 
sound. fit-tili/oon bi-yrinn the telephone is ringing. 
~ot-ha balia yrinn' fil- fooqa her voice was ringing 
through the room. riI-lialam balia yrinn a Gala lia/aa the 
blows resounded on the back of his neck. 4 to go hang, 
go to the dogs. miraat-u sabit-u yrinn his wife let him go 
to the dogs. xallii yirinn let him go to hell! -vn ralln, 
r~niin; ava raanin; pva marnuun. 
j,;.) ranna linst n. pi -aatl a ringing sound. fanna w-
ranna see/anna . 
..,~.) rannaan ladj *1 ringing. jingling reverberating. 
~esounding. II/ooka rannaana {mus] tuning-fork . 
..,.;1 fitrann Ivil passive of rann. -iva mitrann. 
';'.)1 firtann = fitrann. -ava mirtann. 
( 0.) ) 
.1.) rih I Ifem n. pi -aatl tenth letter 01 the Arabic 
alphabet. -also raa, raaf. 
'.) rih2 <It re> Inl king (in cards). 
"-I..) rih3 <perh It re> Inl{mus] Ire. 2 the note D. 
yo.) 
~.) rahab I (a) Ivtl to find terrifying. rahabt iI-man;ar 
354 
I was terrified by the sight. -vn rahba; ava raahib; pva 
marhuub. 
~.) rahab2 (i) Ivtl to terrify. riI-man;ar rahab-ni the 
sight terrified me. -ava raahib; pva marhuub . 
~I.) raahib Inl I Ipl ruhbaanl {Chr] monk. 2 Ipl 
rawaahibl pointer (shaped like a praying monk) on the 
scale of a weighing-machine (which. when exactly 
opposite its fellow. indicates that the scales are level) . 
see further under ~ yo.) 
~I.) rahba In pi -aatl (Chr] nun . 
...,...,..) rahiib ladjl terrible. awful. terrific. mataalib 
rahiiba terrible inconveniences. kimmiyyaat rahiiba 
terrific quantities. 
.,..1A.)! firhaab Inl intimidation. terrorism . 
~1A.)! firhaabi In *1 terrorist. 
~yo.) see also yo.) 
4.) rahbana Inl{Chr] monasticism. 
.;r.A.;1 fitrahban Ivi/l{Chr] to become a monk or nun. 
2 to remain unmarried. -ava mitrabhin. 
J H.) 
J...u..) rahdil. rahdil I Ivtl to pull out of shape. law 
if1araab maliaas-u ma-kanit-f' rigl-u rahdilit-u kida had 
the socks been his size. his foot would not have made 
them so out of shape. 2 Ivil to become flabby. become 
out of shape. gism-u rahdil mil-laya his body became 
flabby because of illness. II hiduum-u mrahdila his 
clothes are untidy. -maa-Iu kida mrahdil /i-hduum-u 
why is he so unkempt! -vn rahda/a; avalpva mirahdil. 
J...u..;1 fitrahdillvil passive of rahdil. -iva mitrahdl/. 
.J:..)t.) 
j,~.) rahra[ I/vtl to loosen. make baggy or flabby. 
2/vil to become loose. become baggy. become flabby. 
~~.) ruhree[ <Copt> Inl wet mud. 
j, ~.;I fitrahra[/vi/l to become flabby. become soft. 
2 to be made flabby. -ava/iva mitrahra[. 
..; 0.) 
....y.) rahii/= ruhayyi/ . 
...;..) ruhayyi/ ladj 
*1 delicate. sensitive. layyil 
ruhayyi/a delicate child.lllia1b-u ruhayyi/he has a soft 
heart. 
~) rarha/lell morelmost delicate. 
~J" murha/ladjl delicate. sensitive. (of feeling or 
senses) . 
...AA.) rahha/lvtl to make soft. make delicate. lift-u 
n-nawalmi di rahhafit-u this easy life of his has softened 
him. -vn tarhii/; avalpva mirahhaf. 

"";';1 fitrahhaf Ivil to be made delicate, be made soft. 
- iva mitrahhaf. 
IJO.) 
..;a1J" muraahiq In ·1 teenager, adolescent, immature 
person. 
~IJ" murahqaT Inl adolescence, immaturity. 
1 J 0.) 
..;a) farhaq T Ivtl to exhaust, wear out. ma-tirhiq-haal 
bi-talabaat-ak don't overwhelm her with your demands. 
-vn firhaaq; ava murhiq; pva murhaq. 
r°.) 
r-" J" marham In pi maraahiml ointment, salve. II fiid-u 
marham his very tO\lch is soothing. -kalaam-u marham 
his words are soothing. 
<J O.) 
,jA.) rahan (i) Ivtl I to pawn. hiyya rahna sivit-ha she 
has pawned her jewelry. 2 to mortgage. 3 to keep (s.o.) 
waiting for a long time. finta lJa-tirhin-ni landak leeh 
why are you keeping me hanging about like this? -vn 
rahn; ava raahin; pva marhuun. 
,jA.) rahn In pi ruhunaat, ruhuunl I pawn, deposit. 
fil-/fazaayiz laleeha rahn there's a deposit on the bot-
tles. II rahn it-talJ/fii/f {leg} under investigation. -kaan 
ralJn iJart-i he was at my beck and call. 2{bank} 
mortgage. 
4; rahiina In pi rahaayinl I hostage. 2 pledge, 
something given as a pledge, surety. 
,jA;1 fitrahan Ivi/l to be pawned. 2 to be mortgaged. 
3 to be kept waiting. - iva mitrihin. 
.;,tol; raahin Ivtl to bet with. -vn rahaan, murahna; ava 
miraahin. 
,:,lA; rahaan In pi -aatl sum of money wagered (be 
tween two parties). min veer rahaan without any bet, 
(just) for fun. 
..:.I.:AIJ" murahnaat Ipl nl bets (laid, e.g., <.>n a race). 
cf.ariibit murahnaat taxes paid on wagers and bets. 
.;,to 1;1 fitraahin Ivil I to make a bet. 2 passive of 
raahin. -ava/iva mitraahin. 
<J I.,..) 
,:,I~; rahawaan <T rahvan from P> Int·young and 
powerful horse. zayy ir-rahawaan very fast. 
<JI.J.) 
4i1J; rawaana <T revanifrom P> tnt {rur} type of hard 
cake (made with a mixture of corn and wheat flour, 
355 
C,JJ 
eggs, sugar, clarified butter and a raising agent). 
ly.J.) 
..,..1; raab (u) Ivil to curdle (of milk). -vn rawabaan; ava 
raayib. 
~I; raayib ladjl curdled (of milk). laban raayib cur-
dled milk. II/fatal i1-lJaliiba wir-rayba (he cut off the 
fresh milk and the curdled) he cut off all his help, as in 
fabuu /fatal lannu l-lJaliiba wir-rayba his father cut 
him off without a penny . 
..,..J; roob J Inl thin paste, mixture (of, e.g., cement, 
mud) with a high proportion of water. 
~J; rooba In pi -aatl unit noun of roob . 
..,..;; rawwiblvtll to curdle (milk). II rawwib zabaadi to 
prepare yoghurt (from milk). 2 to add water to (s.th. 
dry) to make a paste or mix. -vn tarwiib; ava/pva 
mirawwib . 
..,..;;1 
~itrawwib Ivil I to be curdled (of milk). 2 to 
have water added so as to make a paste. - iva 
mitrawwib. 
ly.J.) 
..,..J; roob 2 <Fr robe> In pi farwaabl I dressing 
gown, house-coat, bathrobe. 2 {acad} gown. 
.) .:J .J .) 
;J; rootar <prop n Reuter> Int newsmonger. 
I ~.J.) 
[.1; raag (u) Ivil to flourish, be or become current or in 
demand. ~inaala rayga a booming industry. di rayga 
flS-suu/f this is selling briskly. - vn rawaag, rawaag, 
rawagaan; ava raayig, raayig . 
[.;; rawwag or rawwig tvtl to help to thrive, promote. 
tarwiig i1-fifalaat the spreading of rumours. -vn 
tarwiig; ava mirawwig. 
c::.;;1 fitrawwag or fitrawwig Ivil to be promoted, be 
backed. -iva mitrawwag, mitrawwig . 
1~.J') 
[.J; ruuj <Fr> Int rouge. lI~ubaal ruuj a lipstick. 
(.J.) 
c.1,) raalJ J Ivi/l to go . .bi-truulJ ifluvl imta when do you 
go to work? ruulJ min hina go away! II min hina w-raayilJ 
from this point on. -raayilJ gayy there and back, as in 
bi-yikkallif xamsiin /firp raayilJ gayy the return trip 
costs fifty piastres. -miJ laarif (la) yiruulJ wala yiigi he 
is stuck, he is stranded, as in mif larfa (la) faruulJ wala 

~JJ 
faagi mil-liyaal dool I am stuck because of these kids. 
-Ia raa!J wala ga insignificant, as in humma tneen gineeh 
la raahu wala gum they are merely two pounds. 
-!Ja-yru!J-laha iI-... a whole ... will go, as in lala 
ma-yirgal !Ja-tkuun raa!Jit laha I-gumla by the time he 
returns, a whole week will have gone by, lala ma nidfal 
iI-xiliww' wi-nbayyaq if1afifia wi-ngaddid iI-laff· 
!Ja-tru!J-/aha I-xamast alaaf gineeh by the time we have 
paid the key-money, redecorated the flat, and renewed 
the furniture, it (the expenses) will have cost as much as 
five thousand pounds. 2a to go (for good). fil-ma!Jfa;a 
raa!Jit minni flS-SUUfi I lost the wallet in the market. filii 
raa!J raa!J what's gone is gone. !Jadsa kaan mumkin 
yiruu!J fiiha an accident in which he could have been a 
goner. II fir-raagil !Ja-yruu!J minni the man (my hus-
band) is dying on me. - fana ru!Jt' xala~ I'm done for. 
-ya raa!Jit ya gat win or lose, as in fidxul fil-belaa-di ya 
raa!Jit ya gat join in this deal and take the risk. 2b to 
disappear, fade away. bUfilit if1aay ma-tru!J1' bil-
mayya a tea stain does not come out with water./akl-u 
raa!J lan baa/-i I cannot remember what he looks like. 
3/preverbl to up and (do s.th.), go and (do s.th.). 
b-ab~~-i-Iu fiaam raa!J qarib-ni I was just looking at 
him, and he went and hit me. fig-gineeh wifiil 
fi-balkonit-ha raa!Jit mixabbiyyaa the pound note fell 
on her balcony and straight away she rushed and hid it. 
-vn mirwaa!J, rawa!Jaan; ava raayi!J. 
11 raa!J lala (1) to go unperceived by, happen without 
the comprehension of (s.o.). kalaam-u bi-yruu!J 
laleehum the things he says are beyond them. 
ma-tru!J1' lalee !Jaaga he doesn't miss a thing. raa!Jit 
lalee nooma he overslept. (2) to slip from the grasp of, 
be lost to. fahu maat wil-filuus illi sta/af-ha minni raa!Jit 
lalayya now he's dead and I'll never get back the 
money he borrowed from me. raa!Jit lalee I-fur~a he 
missed the opportunity. 
(. ~ raa!J 2 Iw foil imperfl particle indicating future ac-
tion. fana mif raa!J fakallim-ak taani I'm not going to 
speak to you again. raa!J yiigu fimta when are they 
going to come? 
(.J) roo!J Ifem n, pi farwaa!J1 I soul, spirit. fiI-gism' 
wir-roo!J the flesh and the spirit. xasaayir fil- farwaa!J 
fatalities, loss of life. filii fiih roo!J who( ever) is still 
alive. lilm iI-farwaa!J occult science, black magic. 
ta!Jqiir iI- farwaa!J calling up spirits. II bi-sabalt irwaa!J 
with a charmed life, with nine lives. -roo!J-u (illit(l) he 
died. (2) he was exasperated. -bi-y(allal fir-roo!J he is 
dying. - roo!J-i bafiit fi-manaxiir-i I reached the end of 
my tether. -ro!J-ha !Jilwa she is good-natured. -yurudd 
ir-roo!J (returns the departing soul to the body) pleas-
356 
ing, as in kalam-ha yrudd ir-roo!J she is very nice to talk 
to. -ya roo!J-u filli ... how great is his patience that he 
. .. , as in ya ro!J-hum illi fiadriin yiliifu mala n-naas di 
how patient they are to be able to live with these 
people! - ma-land(-)/roo!J Ii- to have no patience with, 
as in ma-landii1roo!J lil-liyaal I have no patience with 
children. -ya roo!J-i term of endearment ... dear, darl-
ing. -roo!J-i !Ja-truu!J (1) I'm going to faint. (2) I'm 
absolutely exhausted. - fir-roo!J bir-roo!J very dear to 
one another, as in f~!Jaab ir-roo!J bir-roo!J very close 
friends. -ya roo!J ma-bald-ik roo!J one has but a single 
life (in folk stories), as in lamma ramuu fil-mayya fialad 
yilaafir wi-ya roo!J ma-bald-ik roo!J when they threw 
him in the water he went on fighting for his life. 2 self. 
fiult' l-roo!J-i I said to myself. faakir roo!J-ak feeh what 
do you think you are? leeh titlibu ro!J-ku kida you 
shouldn't have taken so much trouble. fiatal roo!J-u he 
killed himself. wafifiSCit iI-fakl· lala ro!J-ha she spilt 
the food on herself. fiI-layyil ~~ayyar la/a roo!J-u the 
baby wet himself. IIkabb· la/a roo!J-u (1) he spilt 
(s.th.) on himself. (2) he ejaculated spontaneously. 
-naayim la/a roo!J-u (he is) unaware of what goes on. 
-fayfa ro!J-ha she pampers herself. -minnu l-roo!J-u by 
oneself, as in fitlallimit i(-(abx' minha l-ro!J-ha she 
learned to cook all by herself. -!Ja-tmawwit ro!J-ha lala 
... (1) she is dying to get ... , she is longing for .. .. 
(2) she is passionately fond of ... , she is devoted to .. .. 
3 spirit, mood. roo!J iI-haziima defeatism. 4 essence. 
roo!J iI-yasmiin essence of jasmine. roo!J iI-xall concen-
trated vinegar. roo!J in-na/aadir spirit of ammonia. 
5 barrel (of a gun). bundufiiyya b-ro!Jeen !{ double-
barrelled shotgun. 6 pipe (of a wind instrument). 
(.J)I fir-roo!J Imascl: fir-roo!J il-qudus {Chr} the 
Holy Spirit. fir-roo!J il-famiin {lsi} the Archangel 
Gabriel. 
..s>J) roo!JiT ladj "I ~piritual. fabb' roo!Ji spiritual 
father, spiritual mentor. 
Jl>J) ro!Jaaniladj "II spiritual. 2 spiritually-minded. 
'l>J) ro!Janiyya In! spirituality. 
.:.¢l>J) ro!Janiyyaat Ipl nl spiritual teachings, spir-
itual insights. 
(.IJ) farwaa!J Icoll nl cheap scented and coloured 
boiled sweets. 
~IJ) farwaa!Ja lunit n, pi -aatl a scented and col-
oured boiled sweet. 
~l>IJ) farwa!Jaaya = farwaa!Ja. 
~I) raa!Ja I Inl I rest, ease, relaxation, leisure. fana 
b-a!Jibb' fiillit ir-raa!Ja I like to keep active. II !Jasab 
raa!Jit iI-fiumaa/without stretching the cloth (or: mak-

ing allowance for the design of the cloth). bi-ral:Jt-ak at 
your convenience. -beet raal:Ja {rur] lavatory. -bir-
raal:Ja slowly and carefully, as in ri{lal is-sillim bir-
raal:Ja take it easy up the stairs! - I'ir-rayy i bir-raal:Ja 
{agric] gravitational irrigation. -fayl-u lala kfuuf ir-
raal:Ja treating him luxuriously, feather-bedding him. 
-xad ral:Jt-u to take one's ease, make o.s. comfortable, 
as in I'uqlud wi-xud ral:Jt-ak sit down and take your 
ease, ril-mutoor xad ral:Jt-u the motor settled to a steady 
beat. -talab-ak raal:Ja == it's a pleasure to serve you! 
-raal:Jit il-l'arwaal:J mode in Arabic music beginning on 
B flat and having E flat and F sharp. 2 Ipl -aatl rest 
period, break. qatalti ral:Jt-i I interrupted my leave. 
~IJ raaI:Ja 2 In! palm (of the hand). 
C!J riil:J I Inll/pl riyaal:Jl wind.llzayy ir-riil:J (as fast) as 
the wind. -fooq ir-r.iil:J {naut] to the windward. -lala 
I'aaxir ir-riil:J {naut] full and by. - I'eef yaaxud ir-riil:J 
mil-balaat {prov] (what does the wind take from the 
tiles?) == how can you get water out of a stone? - rilli 
yizral ir-riil:J yul:J~ud il-lawa~if {prov] who sows the 
wind reaps the whirlwind. - I'illi tgiib-u r-riyaal:J taxd-u 
z-zawaabil {prov] (what the winds bring the storms 
take) == easy come, easy go. 2 Ipl l'aryaal:Jl flatulence. 
tallal riil:J he broke wind. 
C!J riil:J 2 {rur] I In pI l'aryaal:Jl side, end. I'il-beet 
maftuul:J min talatt iryaal:J the house is open on three 
sides. 2 (also fi-riil:J) Iprepl next to, beside. kaanit 
qalda (f-)riil:J-i she was sitting next to me. 
~J riil:Ja In pI rawaayil:Jl I smell, odour. fammeet 
riil:Jit ir-ril:Jaan I smelled the smell of basil. II ma-l:Jadd i:! 
yiqbal-lu riil:Ja nobody can stand him. 2 fumes. 
gamadaanit nitriik ikkasarit wir-riil:Ja btalit-ha kalit kull 
il-rasiil a carboy of nitric acid got broken and the fumes 
ate away the laundry. 3 perfume. qizaazit riil:Ja a bottle 
of perfume. 4 essence or concentrate used for flavour-
ing. lafaan yiqayyalu k-karla bi-yzawwidu lalee riil:Ja 
they add extra flavouring to it to get rid of the taint. 
S whiff, trace. ma-landuu:! riil:Ja miz-zooq he hasn't 
the least consideration (for others). . I'id-dinya 
ma-fi-haa-fwala riil:Jit ir-ral:Jma the world contains not a 
trace of mercy. Ilqahwa lala r-riil:Ja (Turkish) coffee 
with very little sugar. 
.J~J ril:Jaan Inl sweet basil. 
C!) l'aryal:J lell morelmost comfortable, morelmost 
convenient. 
(. ~J rayyaal:J In pI -aat/large irrigation canal. 
~J.J" marwal:Ja In pI maraawil:Jl I fan. Iinaas lala 
qulub-hum maraawil:J people who are not easily upset. 
2 {agric] helical blade of an Archimedes' screw. 
357 
C-JJ 
3 {auto] front quarter vent. -
l'il-maraawil:JJ Ipl nI 
4 the lungs. 
.s>J.J" marwal:Ji ladjl fan-shaped. 
(..Y-.J" maryuul:J ladj '1 I demon-possessed. 2 {deris] 
upset. 
r::,..J" muriil:J ladj '1 easy, comfortable. kursi muriil:J a 
comfortable chair. raagil muriil:J an easy man to deal 
with. I'aqsaat muriil:Ja easy installments. mihna muriil:Ja 
a profitable and genteel profession.llfakl-u mifmuriil:J 
he has a disagreeable appearance. 
(.;J rawwal:J I/vtl to take or send home. 2 Ivil to go 
home. laayiz rarawwal:J Ii-I'ahl-i I want to go home to 
my folks! -vn tarwiil:J; mirwaal:J; ava/pva mirawwal:J. 
11 rawwal:J lan in-nafs to relax, rest. ruqlud-lak yomeen 
fi-skindiriyya rawwal:J lan nafs-ak take a couple of days 
in Alexandria and have a rest. 
r::,.JI.;l1 rit-tarawiil:J Ipl nl {lsi] supererogatory prayer 
(of eight, twelve or twenty raklas) performed after the 
evening prayer in Ramadan. 
~J rayyal:J Ivtl I to give comfort or relief to, ease. 
ful-Ii rayya l:Jaaga trayyal:J-ni find me anything that will 
give me relief. ril-l:Jukuuma fuyl-a-ha rinnaha tsahhil 
l:Jayaat in-naas wi-trayyal:J-hum it's the government's 
job to make people's lives easier and more comfort-
able. quul I'inta laayiz I'eeh bi;-;abt - rayyal:J-ni tell me 
what it is exactly that you want -don't keep me on 
tenterhooks! ma-tithawwa wi-trayyal:J-na go and take an 
airing and give us a break! xud in-nool illi bi-yrayyal:J-
ku take the sort that suits you best. rayyal:J baal-ak (or 
qalb-ak) set your mind at rest! l:Jabbeet rarayyal:J-ak min 
il-mifwaar I wanted to spare you the journey. tihaddi 
baal-ak wi-trayyal:J sirr-ak she'll calm your mind and 
give you inner peace (praise of a bride). 2 (also rayyal:J 
min il-liifa) {slang] to relieve (of life), kill. 3 to give the 
correct set to. nisarral:J rawwil tasriil:Ja lafaan nirayyal:J 
falr-u we give a first comb-through to get the set of his 
hair. rin-naggaar rayyal:J il-baab the carpenter fixed the 
door so that it would open and close easily. 4 {soccer] to 
receive (a ball) on the foot and control and position it. 
S to perfume. - Ivil 6 to take a rest, take a break. 
lamma I'alraq raquum rarayyal:J when I start sweating 
I stop and take a rest. bi-yiftayalu wardiyyiteen 
mitw~liin wi-baldeen yirayyal:Ju yoom they work two 
consecutive shifts and .then take a day off. 7 to move 
under force as though seeking something against which 
to rest. I'il-larabiyya rayyal:Jit lalayya the car rolled 
back into me. ril-l:Jeeta rayyal:Jit the wall settled. 
ril-lagala rayyal:Jit minni the tyre went flat on me. 8 to 
give off a bad smell. fii ~eefi ma-Ylif-f - yiswaddi 

wi-ynattin wi-yrayyab there's a summer variety that 
doesn't last -it turns black and putrid and gives off a bad 
smell. -vn laryiib. larwiib; ava/pva mirayyab. 
c:.r mirayyab ladj "I I in easy circumstances. well-
off. 2 calm, deliberate, unflustered. 
c:.,;1 filrayyab Ivil passive of rayyab. -iva milrayyab. 
(.JI,;I filraawab 
Ivil to range, vary. 
fil- fugra 
b-titraawab ma been gineeh wi-tneen the wages vary 
between one and two pounds. -ava milraawab. 
(.\;";1 !'irlaab Ivil la to rest, relax, take one's ease. 
firlaab lis-siriir take a rest in bed! laazim lirlaabi baed 
il-wilaada you must take it easy after the birth. bi-nsiib 
i1-!'artf mirlaaba jahr we give the land a rest for a 
month. Ib to feel comfortable, feel at ease. bi-/irlab-li 
she feels at home with me. fana mif mirlaab 
lig-gamaar;a di I'm suspicious of those people. 
II qamiir-u rlaab his conscience was satisfied. -'ialb-u 
rlaab he felt relieved. 2 to find relief. tarajl irlabl 
I vomited and felt better. !'iddaa-ni birJaam wi-rlabt' 
jwayya he gave me some pills and I felt a little better. 
-vn !,irtiyaab; ava mirlaab. 
(.1.;;1 firliyaab Inl satisfaction, contentment, pleasure. 
bi-rliyaab willingly, gladly. 
(.\;" J" mirlaab ladj "I in easy circumstances, well-off. 
c:..;-I fislarayyab. fislirayyab Ivil I to rest, relax, 
take one's ease. !'u'ir;ud wi-slarayyab sit down and 
make yourself comfortable! 
!,issanadl· r;al-beeta 
jwayy~ !'aslirayyab I leant against the wall a while to 
rest. - the imperative form fistariib occurs in the 
proverb: !'i1-baab illi yiigi minnu r-riib sidd-u wi-slariib 
(shut the door that lets in the wind, and you will have 
peace) stop up the source of trouble and relax. 2 to feel 
comfortable, feel at ease. bi-tistarayyab-Ii she feels at 
ease with me. !'ana mif mislarayyab liI-bikaaya di 
I don't feel easy about the affair. 38 to find relief. ba{1l-i 
tkalbif wi-m-aslarayyab-J' reer lamma !'anaam lis-siriir 
my stomach gets tied up in knots and I only feel better if 
I have a lie-down. 3b {euphem} to die. 
-ava 
mislarayyab. mislirayyab. 
4>1.;-1 fistiraaba In pI -aatl la rest-room. Ib rest-
house. 2 interval, intermission. half-way break. 
~;;-..- mislarayyab. mislirayyab ladj "II in easy cir-
cumstances, well-off. 2 well-fitting, capable of moving 
easily (of, e.g., a lock, a door). 
oj CJ.) 
.j>J) rawban Ivtl to cause (s.o.) to waver, sway (s.o.) 
In his opimon. -vn rawbana; ava/pva mirawban. 
mirawban. 
358 
.j>Jr mirawban. mirawban ladj "I easily swayed in 
one's opinions . 
.j> J,;I filrawban Ivil to become or be made uncertain 
or indecisive. -avaliva mitrawban. 
I~JJ 
~I) raa!,id In pI ruwwaadl I guide. leader. IIraa!'id 
jabaab youth leader, youth organizer. 2 pioneer. 
IIraafid laqaaf astronaut. 3 (mill major. raafid babri 
lieutenant-commander. 
raafid tayyaar squadron-
leader. 
I..I!.J) ruwaydan r ladvl slowly, gently. 
i.)1 J" muraada In pI -aatl (rurl beaten path down to the 
water's edge where women wash clothes, etc. 
Z~JJ 
.)Jr marwid In pI maraawidl blunt-edged probe for 
applying kubl and the like to the eyes. 
I IJ" J J see also IJ". J 
..,..;) rawwis Ivtll to give a heading to. 2 to tie up (an 
animal), moor (a ship). -vn larwiis; ava/pva mirawwis. 
4......J'; tarwiisa In pI -aal. larawiis/l heading (of, e.g., 
a newspaper article). 2 stake for tethering an animal. 
..,..;,;1 !'ilrawwis Ivill to be given a heading. 2 to be 
tied up (of an animal), be moored (of a ship). -iva 
milrawwis. 
Z IJ" J J see also I ~ IJ" .) 
"rJ) ruusi I/adj "I Russian. 2/012& the Russian lan-
guage. 2b Ipl ruusl a Russian. 
";J.) 
,.h) rawaj (i) <perh Copt> Ivtl to distract, disturb. 
baaal mafy' fil- fooqa - rawajt-i-ni stop walking up and 
down the room -you~re unnerving me! -vn rawaj. 
rawajaan; ava raawif; pva marwuuj. 
i..:;,J) rawja Inl distractedness, mental confusion. 
r;amaluu-Ii rawja I-dimaar-i they got me into a tizzy. da 
faaxir rawja he's extremely scatter-brained. 
..rJJ" marwuuj ladj "I scatter-brained, always in a 
flap. 
..rJ) !'arwaj ladj, fem rooja, pI ruujl scatter-brained, 
always in a flap. 
oj ";J.) 
,:rJ) roojan <P raushan> In pI rawaajinl {obsol} air 
vent, skylight. 

1.,jI.Jj 
~J; roocf.: roocf. il-farag Iprop nl district of Cairo, on 
the east bank of the Nile to the north of Boulak, the site 
of Cairo's main wholesale fruit and vegetable market. 
4;. J; roocf.a I In pI -aat, riyaacf.1 kindergarten. 
4;. J ) 1 fir-roocf.a Iprop n! Roda, an island in the Nile at 
Cairo. 
4;.~; riyaacf.a 
Inl 
I sports, 
physical 
exercise. 
2 mathematics. 
~~; riyaacf.i ladj °1 I pertaining to sport. naadi 
riyaacf.i sports club. tarbiya riyacf.iyya phys!cal educa-
tion. fir-roolJ ir-riyacf.iyya the sporting spirit, sports-
manship. 2 pertaining to mathematics, mathematical. 
~;; rawwacf.t Ivtl to tame. -vn tarwiicf.; ava 
mirawwacf.. 
JL.;,.;.r mirawwacf.aati In pI -yyal animal trainer. 
.;:.;.; rayyacf. Ivtl to exercise. - avalpva mirayyacf.. 
~;.;I fitrawwacf./vil to be lamed. -iva mitrawwacf.. 
';:';'.;1 fitrayyacf. Ivil to take exercise. - ava mitrayyacf.. 
l.,j1.Jj 
4;.J) roocf.a2 <It roda> In! [naut] bight (of a rope). 
t..Jj 
I.&.J) rawla Inl marvellousness, splendour, magnifi-
cence. fil- faraani I-c;adiimafi-muntaha r-rawla the old 
songs are really great. 
t.J)i farwal lell morelmost marvellous, splendid, 
magnificent etc. 
el; raafilladj °1 marvellous, splendid, magnificent. 
~I; raafila In pI rawaafill amazing, impressive or· 
awesome thing. rawaafil il-musiiqa I-larabiyya the 
masterpieces of Arabic music. 
~.r muriilladjl terrifying, awe-inspiring. 
t.;; rawwal/vtl to frighten, awe. - ava/pva mirawwal· 
J.Jj 
JI; raac;2 (u) Ivi/l to become serene, peaceful, clear 
or uncluttered. fig-gaww i raac; the weather cleared. 
ril-balJri raac; the sea became calm. fil-mayya raac;it 
the water became clear. fif-Jawaaril raac;it the streets 
cleared. xud I-utubiis min fawwil il-xatti ykuun raayic; if 
you take the bus from the beginning of the line, there'll 
be plenty of room. fil-muruur maaJi b-rawaac;a the 
traffic is flowing easily. II rig-gaww i rac;-Iak your path is 
clear. - baal-u raayic; (1) his mind is clear of distrac-
tions. (2) he's in a good mood. 2 to recover (from sick-
ness), come round.lamalt il-m~raan wi-ruc;t I had my 
appendix out and recovered. - vn rawaac;a, rawac;aani 
ava raayic;. 
359 
~IJ; rawaac;a In! calmness, clarity, peacefulness, 
serenity.lJ-almil if-Jurli badri lala rawaac;a I'll do the 
work early while I'm fresh and there are no distractions. 
bi-yfakkar bi-rawaac;a he thinks well. riC;raa lala 
rawaac;a read it when you. have some peace and quiet. 
~I; raayic; ladjl clear, pure. mayya rayc;a clear water, 
translucent water. falwaan rayc;a clear light colours. 
JIJ) ruwaac;, riwaac; In pI -aat, farwic;al section of 
living-quarters, dormitories and workrooms of the stu-
dents at the old Azhar. 
J;; rawwac; Ivtl I to clear, calm. fif-Jaay rawwac; 
muxx-i the tea cleared my head. fil-buli~ rawwac; if-
Jaaril the police cleared the street.llrawwac; (damm-
ak) calm down! come to your senses! 2 to cause to 
recover, cause to feel better. fin Ja-lla z-ziyaara 
trawwac;-ak Jiwayya I hope the visit makes you feel 
better. 3 to tidy up, set straight. rawwac;it il-foocf.a she 
tidied up the room. rawwac;i s-siriir tidy up the bed! -vn 
tarwiic;; ava mirawwac;. 
~J'; tarwiic;a linst n, pI -aat, tarawiic;1 a tidying-up, a 
freshening-up. 
J; .;1 fitrawwac; 
Ivil 
passive of rawwac;. 
-iva 
mitrawwac; . 
.!.l.Jj 
.!.lJ; rook: maal ir-rook [obsol] public property. 
IJ.Jj 
J1J ; riwaal In pi firwilal [agric] ridge dividing one 
irrigation basin from the next (see PI.E, 20). 
J;; rawwil/vtl [agric] to prepare the irrigation basins 
for (a piece of land), by digging out the irrigation ditch-
es and piling up the ridges separating each basin. -vn 
tarwiil; avalpva mirawwil. 
J;.;I fitrawwil/vil [agric] to have irrigation basins 
prepared (of land). - iva mitrawwil. 
l(J.Jj) 
JJ) rool l <Engl> In pI -aatl [leg] agenda. 
JJ; rool2 <perh Engl> In pi -aatl roll, spool, coil. 
I r.Jj 
rl; raam: lala ma yuraam t as one would desire, as in 
fin-nahar-da ~ilJlJit-i mif lala ma yuraam my health 
today isn't as good as I would have wished. kulli Jeer 
kaan lala ma yuraam everything was as it should be. 
r1.r maraam Inl wish, desire. feeh maraam-ak mil-
lJikaaya what do you hope for out of the affair? IIgat 
lal-maraam it was just what was wanted, it turned out 
fine. 

1 !.JJ 
r)J rawwim Ivt/ to dress (stone). -vn tarwiim; ava/pva 
mirawwim. 
r;.;1 !,itrawwim Ivil to be dressed (of stone). -iva 
mitrawwim. 
J r.J J 
~)J ruumi Ipl ruum, !'arwaaml I a~ ladjl Greek. 
baqqaal ruumi a Greek grocer. I b~ In! a Greek. 
- linvarl 2 ladjl of the less common sort, not of the 
standard local Egyptian sort (in opposition to baladi 
q.v.). kalb' ruumi any dog of an identifiable breed, a 
dog not of a common-or-garden street type. quaa ruumi 
any cat of an identifiable breed, a cat not of a common-
or-garden street type. !'il-leej dura wil-kalaam ruumi 
{prov] the bread is coarse, the talk highfalutin (of pre-
tentiousness). IIdiik ruumi turkey cock. -farxa ruumi 
turkey hen. -filfil ruumi sweet peppers, bell peppers. 
- bidingaan ruumi large round egg-plants. -gibna ruumi 
type of hard yellow cheese. 3 Icoll nl turkeys. 
r)J ruum Icoll n! members of a Greek-speaking 
church. ruum urtuduks Greek Orthodox. ruum katuliik 
Greek Catholic(s). huwwa ruum katuliik (or ruum 
katuliiki) he is a Greek Catholic. 
Ir.JJ 
L.)J rooma <It Roma> Iprop nl Rome. see further 
under iJ I r J 
iJ .J J see iJ I .J J : rawaana 
~iJ.JJ 
-,,)IJ rawind ICOII n! rhubarb. 
J iJ.JJ 
J')J rawnaq Inl brightness, glitter, glamour. 
IIS.JJ 
IS)J rawa J (i) Ivtl I to irrigate. {Urumbit rayy irrigation 
pump. 2 to quench (thirst), satisfy the desires of (s.o.). 
lIyirwi I-qalb it refreshes the heart, as in kalaam-u 
jarbaat yirwi I-qalb he talks beautifully, it's refreshing 
to hear him, !'illi yirwi I-qalb {vendor's cry] (cool syrup) 
that refreshes the heart! -vn rayy, riwiyya; ava raawi; 
pva marwi. 
~J rayya I linst n, pi -aatl a (single) irrigation. 2 Iprop 
nl female given name. rayya wi-skiina two notorious 
murderesses 
active 
in 
Alexandria 
in 
the 
nineteen-thirties. 
.J4J rayyaan ladjl well-watered, fresh and green, not 
360 
withered. rayyaan ya figl {vendor's cry] fresh juicy 
radishes! 
~).rI1 !,it-tarwiya: yoom it-tarwiya {lsi] the day before 
yoom larafaat on which pilgrims prepare themselves by 
filling their water-pots, washing, donning the fi!Jraam. 
if they are not wearing it, etc. 
IS).;I !,itrawa J Ivil I to be irrigated. 2 to be qu.:nched 
(of thirst), be satisfied (of desire). -iva milrlwl. 
IS j'.;I !,irtawa r = fitrawa. 
llS.JJ 
IS)J rawa 2 (i) Ivtl to relate, narrate (a story, account). 
-vn riwaaya; ava raawi; pva marwi. 
~I)J riwaaya In pi -aatl la novel. Ib (also riwaaya 
tamsiliyya) stage play. 2 story, account. 
1oS)IJ raawi In * and pi ruwaahl transmitter, relater, 
narrator. 
.)I)J riwaa!,i I In *1 novelist. 2/adj *1 fictional. film' 
rwaa!'i fiction film. 
loS)'; 1 !,itrawa 2 Ivil to be related, be narrated (of a 
story, account). - iva mitriwi. 
loS;'; 1 !,itrawwa Ivil to reflect, consider, think careful-
ly. fitrawwa qabl' ma tilmil fayy' !Jaaga think well 
before you do anything. -vn tarawwi; ava mitrawwi. 
J lIS J 
J~J riyaal <Sp real> In pi -aat, firyila. riyi/a J I twenty 
piastres, twenty-piastre piece. 
I Y ISJ 
~J riiba Inl doubt, suspicion. 
":-i.r muriib ladj °1 suspicious, disquieting. 
..,..l;) firtaab Ivil to become suspicious. ma !Jadd'{ 
bi-yirtaab fi-kalaam-ak nobody suspects your word. -vn 
!,irtiyaab; ava mirtaab. 
1 Y IS J see 
I Y .J J : raayib 
..::.. IS J 
~J reet: ya reet lalso w pron suffl would that ... ! 
I wish that ... ! ya reet b-a{ul-hum I wish I could get my 
hands on them! ya ret-ni kunt' muhandis I wish I were 
an engineer! ya reet illi gara ma-kaan I wish what has 
happened had never taken place! kilmit ya reet 
lumr-a-ha ma tlammar {prov] "" building castles in the 
air gets you nowhere. 
[ISJ 
~J riiga <It riga> In pi -aatl line, groove. 

C ..; J see C.J J : riifJ, riifJa, rifJaan, faryafJ, rayyaafJ, 
maryuufJ, 
muriifJ, 
rayyafJ, 
mirayyafJ, 
fitrayyafJ, 
firtiyaafJ, fistarayyafJ, mistarayyafJ 
~";J 
~I.J raad (i) Ivtl to want, will. filii yriid-u lIaah huwwa iii 
y·kuun what God wills is. filii yriid-ak riid-u wi-IIi lalab 
bucaad-ak ziid-u (prov] seek those who seek you and 
those who seek to avoid you avoid with yet greater 
fervour. - vn rayadaan; ava raayid. 
~I) faraadf 
= raad. -vn firaada, faraada J; ava 
muriid; pva muraad. 
;~IA firaada, faraada J Inl will, willpower. ma-Iuu{ 
firaada he has no willpower. firaadit ilIaah the will of 
God. bi- firaadit iI-mariiq at the patient's request. 
..;~I.Jl firaadi ladjl pertaining to the will. maghuud 
firaadi an effort of will. camallaa firaadi involuntary 
action. 
.N...J" muriid In °1 Sufi novice. 
~I.J" muraad Inl wish, desire. feeh muraad-ak what do 
you want? muraad-i fazuur iI-fJabiib it's my wish to visit 
(the tomb of) the Prophet. 
<..J'" ..; J see <..J"" 
J : rayyis, rayyisa, riyaasa, fitrayyis 
I";";J 
";"'.J riiflcoll nl feather(s).llfurfa riifa feather duster. 
filii yiigi fir-riif baeJiif {pro v J (that which comes against 
the feathers is a tip) it is a blessing when damage is 
sustained only by what is non-essential and not by what 
is essential. -riif fabu l-fJ~een wild barley. -humma 
natfiin rif-na they are the cause of our poverty. 
~.J riifa Inl I lunit n, pi -aatl a feather. IIca/a raas-u 
riifa {sarc] superior person, big shot, as in taaxud 
iI-fawwilleeh huwwa-nta ca/a raas-ak riifa who do you 
think you are that you should be the first to take! - Ipl 
riyafl2 feather duster. 3 quill pen, dip pen. 4 blade (of 
a fan or propeller). 5 chop, cutlet. 6 plectrum. 7 lancet. 
S reed of a wind instrument. 9 {agric] side of a furrow 
(see PI.E, 21). 
';';'.J rayyif Ivil I to put out feathers, grow feathers. 
2 to acquire money or material possessions. - Ivt/3 to 
dust (s. th.) with a feather duster. - vn taryiif; ava/pva 
mirayyif· 
';';';1 fitrayyif Ivil to become wealthy, be endowed 
with money or material possessions. - ava mitrayyif. 
2 ..; ..; J see ..;..; I J : raayif 
..,., ..; J see I..,.,.J J: riyaaqa, 
riyaaqi, 
rayyaq, 
fitrayyaq 
361 
t";J 
~.J reec Inl {finan] yield, revenue, interest. 
oJ..; J 
~)I fir-riif lused inten;hangeably w pi form fiI-
faryaaJ! country (as opposed to town), countryside. 
min faryaaf damanhuur from the countryside round 
Damanhour. fiI-fJikaaya di ktiirafir-riifthis happens a 
lot in the countryside. 
..)-..J riifi ladjl rural. 
I J";J 
J!.J riit; Inl saliva. riit;-u giri calee his mouth watered 
for it.llca/a r-riit; (or, less commonly, ca/a riit;) or ca/a 
riit; in-noom on an empty stomach, before breakfast-
ing, as in taalit yoom taaxudfarba ca/a r-riit; on the third 
day you should take a purgative on an empty stomach, 
bi-ydaxxin ca/a riit; in-noom he smokes before break-
fast. - myyar ir-riit; to eat the first meal of the day . 
-fakk i riit;-(u) to have something to eat (after spending 
a considerable time without food). -riit;-(u) nifif «his) 
spittle dried) (1) (he) felt thirsty. (2) (he) went to great 
trouble, (he) worked very hard. (3) (he) became ex-
asperated. -ball ir-riit; (1) to take the edge off one's 
thirst. (2) to be helpful or kind to, offer help to, as in 
cumr-u ma ball; riit; fJaddhe is never helpful to anyone. 
-ba/ac ir-riit; to breathe a sigh of relief. -riit; fJilw gentle 
talk, as in cumr-u gooz-i ma-warraa-ni f-yoom riit; fJilw 
my husband has never spoken to me kindly in his life. 
-dawwat;(-u) r-riit; iI-murr to give (s.o.) a hard time. 
2 J ..; J see J.J J : raayit; 
I J..; J 
;;J~.J riyaala Inl dribble. II {uul cumr-ak bi-ryaala you've 
been an idiot all your life. 
~.J" maryala In pi maraayilll bib. 2 apron. 3 smock. 
maryalit iI-madrasa school uniform smock. 4 pinafore. 
J..J rayyil Ivil to dribble, drool. -vn taryiil; ava 
mirayyil. 
11 rayyil cala {abus] "" set one's eye on. mirayyil caf-
fat;t;a he's dead set on the flat. 
2 J ..; J see J I ..; J : riyaal 
I r ..; J 
('"!.J riim Inl scum, foam. II riim iI-bafJr aquatic plants. 
r:..J rayyim Ivil I to foam, form scum. 2 to practise 
deceit. rayyim calayya he swindled me, he bluffed me . 
-vn taryiim; ava mirayyim. 

2 r ..; J 
~) riima invented given name used in proverbs (in 
combination with the equivalent male given name 
mifkaalj) to signify a good-for-nothing woman. 
gawwizu mifkaalj /i-riima - (jaal ma Gala l-itneen (jiima 
{prov] they married Mishkah to Rima; it was said, 
'Both are useless' (of the association of two good-for-
nothings). rigGit riima l-Gadit-ha l-(jadiima (Rima re-
362 
turned to her old ways) "" old habits die hard. 
(.:/J ..; J ) 
'-'J!) riyoon I <Fr rayon> In pi -aatl department (of 
shop). 
'-'J!) riyoon 2 <perh Fr rayonne> In pi -aatl rayon. 
..; ..; J see I..;.J J : rayy, rayya, rayyaan 

Ij 
<!llj zaalik Idem pronl that.- mala zaalik despite that. 
Ii-zaalik or bi-zaalik therefore. ka-zaalik thus, similar-
ly ,likewise. wa-hwa ka-zaalik so be it. wa-ka-zaalik and 
so on.llmifmin fahl i zaalik. -Iaa da zaalik nafs-u {joe} 
'He's not that type.' 'On the contrary; he's the epitome 
of that type!' 
.;:.. 1 j see also .J j 
..:;,Ij ,..:;,I..i zaat Ifem nl I self, person. identity. 
ma-yyibbi-j filla zaat-u he does not love (anyone) but 
himself. fiz-zaat iI-malakiyya the royal person. fiz-zaat 
iI-filahiyya the Divine Being. yubb iz-zaat self-love, 
selfishness.llfi-yoom min zaat iI-fayyaam one day, on 
one of those days, once upon a time. llw suff or in 
cOl1strl itself, (him-, her-etc.) self. fil-mudiir zaat-u the 
director himself. min zaat (nafs) if-Jirka from the com-
pany itself. fabuu-k zaat nafs-u huwwa iii c;al-ha it is 
your father himself who said it. -bi-zaat-(u) (him)self, 
(her)self etc., in person, as in huwwa b-zaat-u ga he 
came in person. fana b-zaat-i y-ac;ul-Iu I shall tell him 
myself. 
11 biz-zaat especially, in particular. riI-Hx{aar da biz-
zaat this notification in particular. 
Jlj ,JI..i zaati ladjl 18 personal. relatil.g to the per-
son. taftiifzaati body search. Ib individual. relating to 
the individual. maghudaat zatiyya individual efforts. 
1 innate. inherent. self-. riI-iktifaaf iz-zaati self-
sufficiency. riI-yukm iz-zaati self-rule. autonomy. 
11 zaatiyyan ladvl personally. falraf-u zaatiyyan I know 
him personally. 
..:;,IJj zawaat Ipl nl aristocracy. upper classes. 
JIJj zawaati ladj invarl aristocratic. yayy i zawaati an 
aristocratic quarter. faxlac;-ha zawaati she has very re-
fined ways. 
• 
[.Ij 
[.I..i zaag <P zag> Inl vitriol. 
Jlj 
)..i zaar I In pi -aatl ritual of sacrifices, incantations, 
drumming and dancing performed for the purpose of 
appeasing anyone of a number of spirits by which a 
person may be believed to be possessed . 
Jlj 
Jlj zaallfem n, pi -aatl eleventh letter of the Ara~ic 
alphabet. 
.!.I J 1 j see 1 j : zaalik 
,:,Ij 
oJl..i zaan I Inll beech. 2 beechwood. 
.. I; zaana In pi -aatl I long pole. lilb iz-zaana or 
riI-wasb i biz-zaana [athl) pole-vaulting. 2 fixed iron 
frame for hanging suits and dresses. 3 piece of pitch-
pine between the beam of a shadoof and the pail. 
4 wooden pick used by an upholsterer. 
~ Ij 
lSI; zaay Ifem n, pi -aatl eleventh letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also zeh. zeen. 
J.j 
); zafar (a) Ivil to roar (of, e.g., a lion). -vn zafiir; ava 
zaafir . 
r-j 
rlj; zufaam f: riI-moot iz-zufaam violent death. 

iJ~j 
.il.;) zuraan loJ (bot] darnel. 
J:,lyj 
4I:.~) zubaata <perh Copt> In pI -aat, zabaayi{1 clus-
ter, bunch (of dates or bananas). -also subaata. 
lyyj 
":"O!) zibiib Inl I/colll raisin(s). IIqarb il-lJabiib zayy' 
rakl iz-zibiib {proy] (a beating from one's beloved is 
like eating raisins) anything received from one's be-
loved is sweet. 2 spirit distilled from raisins. 
~) zibiiba In pI -aatl I lunit oJ a raisin. rilli yaakul 
(jadd iz-zibiiba la ygii-Iu laya wala ~iiba {proy] (who 
eats as little as a raisin gets neither sickness nor catas-
trophe) eat little, live long. sooda zayy iz-zibiiba as 
black as a raisin (of a dark-skinned woman). 2 dark 
mark produced on the forehead as a result of repeatedly 
touching the ground in (Muslim ritual) prayer. 
Zyyj 
.;) zibb In pI razbaab, zibaab, zubuubl (coarse] penis, 
cock.llzibb il-rarq(l) {bot] conicum. (2) (deris] a short 
man. 
J Y Y j see 4 y Y ~ : zubaaba 
c y j see ley ~ : 
zablJa, 
zabiilJa, 
mazbafJ, 
mazbalJa 
~ \0.1 • 
• J 
o-'!) zibda Inl I butter. IIbint' zibda a smashing girl. 
- wara(j zibda greaseproof paper. - zibdit kakaaw lip 
salve·llgat-Iu zibda lalaf[iira "" he had it made, things 
went entirely his way. 2 variety of mango. 
~-'!) zibdiyya In/l/pl -aall crock (for butter, yoghurt 
etc. 2 Ino pll variety of m,ango. 
-'!) zubad Ipl oJ gist, most important part. (jal-Ii lala 
zubad il-bikaaya he gave me the gist of the story. 
o-,!j zabada loJ civet. 
.)~) zabaad Inl civet. (jutt' zabaad civet cat. 
1S.)~j zabaadi (also laban zabaadi) Inl yoghurt. 
~-'!) zibdiik Inllactic acid. 
~j zabbid I/vtl to churn (milk), cause (milk) to form 
butter. ril-xaqq' zabbid il-Iaban churning made the 
milk produce butter. 2/vil to yield butter, be changed 
into butter. ril-laban yizabbid bil-xaqq iI-mustamirr 
milk yields butter after continuous shaking. -vn tazbiid; 
avalpva mizabbid. 
364 
~J'I ritzabbid or rizzabbid Ivil to be turned into 
butter. - iva mitzabbid. 
Jyj 
J!) zubr In pI razbaar, zibaarl (coarse] penis, cock. 
~~Jyj 
~ 
J!) zabargad 
Inl 
2 aquamarine. 3 topaz. 
JJyj 
I chrysolite, 
peridot. 
~J!) zabra(j Ivtl {slang] to adorn, ornament. zabra(ju 
l-laruusa la/aan yoom farafJ-ha they've. dressed the 
bride up for her wedding-day. -vn zabra(ja; avalpva 
mizabra(j. 
~J!J'I ritzabra(j or rizzabra(j Ivil {slang] to adorn one-
self, dress oneself up, be adorned, be dressed up. -vn 
tizabrii(j; avaliva mitzabra(j. 
yjyj 
~~:, zabzaba In pI -aat/l (elec] oscillation, vibration. 
2 (radio) frequency. zabzaba lalya high frequency. 
.,..~.i. muzabzab ladj ·1 I wavering, vacillating, un-
decided. 2 hypocritical. 
.,..~..i;1 ritzabzib or rizzabzib Ivil to oscillate, vibrate. 
- vn tazabzub; ava mitzabzib. 
lJ:, \0.1 • 
• J 
~j zabatl Inl mud, mire. 
J.;j zabbat I I Ivtl to cover with mud or dirt. - Ivil2 to 
be covered with mud or dirt. 3 to become constricted, 
become entangled, become clogged. 
ril-xinaa(ja 
zabbatit the quarrel became hopelessly involved. batn-u 
zabba{it his stomach became bloated. -vn tazbii{; aval 
pva mizabbat. 
J.; J' I ritzabba{ I or rizzabba{ I Ivil to be covered with 
mud or dirt. - iva mitzabba{. 
Z J:, y j see J:, y ~ : zabat2, zabt, zaabi(, mazbuut, 
ritzabat, zabbat2, ritzabbat2 
J J:, Y j see J:, I y j : zubaata 
tyj 
~"') zawbala t I In pI zawaabil/large whirlwind, tor-
nado. Ilzawbala f-fingaan {proy] a storm in a teacup. 
-rilli tgiib-u r-riyaafJ tud-u z-zawaabil {proy] == easy 

come, easy go. 2/prop nl {aslrol} demon associated 
with Friday. 
J,":"j 
J!j zabatj (i) Ivil to dart (in or out), slip (away), flee. 
-also zaratj. -ava zaabitj. 
J,":"j 
J.j zabal (i) Ivtl {slang} to avoid like dirt, treat with 
contemptuous indifference. - vn zabl, zabla; ava zaabil; 
pya mazbuul. 
J.j zibllcoll nl dropping(s) (of birds, goats, sheep, 
rabbits, mice etc.). 
~j zibla lunit n, pI -aall dropping, piece of dung. 
IIzibla wi-ytjaawio i/-Iayyaar'" he's a nobody and he's 
out to change the world. 
~~j zibaa/a Inl garbage, rubbish, trash. ~afiioit zibaa/a 
rubbish bin. zibaalit iI-tju{n cotton waste. 
J~j zabbaal In 
°1 garbage collector. IIzabbaal 
wi-f- fiid-u warda {prov} a garbage man with a flower in 
his hand (applied to an incongruous combination). 
~jo mazbala In pI mazaabill rubbish dump, trash 
dump. 
J.J"I fitzabal or fizzabal Ivil to be neglected, be 
avoided like dirt. min suluuk-u tzabal minnina kulli-na 
because of his (bad) behaviour, he's been treated with 
contempt by us all. -iva mitzibil, mitzaba/. 
J.j zabbill/vtl to treat (e.g., leather) ~ith droppings. 
2/vil to drop excrement, excrete droppings (of birds, 
sheep, goats, rabbits etc.). -vn tazbiil; ava mizabbil. 
cJ,":"j 
~j zablaoa Inl [joe slang} ill-manners, insolence, 
rudeness. 
~jo muzablao ladj "I [joe slang} ill-mannered, inso-
lent, rude. 
~J"I fitzablao or fizzablao Ivil[joe slang} to be inso-
lent, abusive or rude. dayman yitzablafJ [ala graan-u he 
always abuses his neighbours. -ava mitzablaO. 
~:;.. mutazablifJ ladj "I {joe slang} insolent, rude, 
impudent. 
I ,j '":" j 
.:,~j zabaan Inl sting (of a bee, scorpion etc.). 
II fid-dinya watjfa [ala zaban-ha ... everyone is hopping 
with excited anticipation. -bi-yduur [ala zabaan-u he's 
just bumming around. 
~~j zabaana In pI -aatl sprout (ofa germinating seed). 
';'j zabbin Ivil to germinate, start growth. fil-oilba 
zabbinit the fenugreek seeds have germinated. -vn 
tazbiin; ava/pva mizabbin. 
365 
z • 
• 
oJ'":"J 
~ 
~j zabanya, zabaaniya f Ipl nI I {lsi} zabanyit 
gahannam 
Angels of Hell. 
J. henchmen. gaab 
zabanyit-u mEaa he brought his henchmen with him. 
3 ,j '":" j see ,j.J '":" j : zibuun, zubuun, zabuun 
,j.J,":"j 
':'Yoj zibuun, zubuun, zabuun J <P zubQn> In 
pI zabaayinl I (male) customer, client. 2 {slang} con-
temptuous form of reference to a third party. 
fiz-zibuun mif [agb-u k-kalaam da the creep doesn't go 
along with that! 
,j .J ~ j see ~ IS j: zaluun, fiz-zaluun, zaluuna, 
zaluunaaya, zaluuni 
I 
• 
[, [,J 
[.~j zugaagf Inil glass. II falyaaf zugaag fibreglass. 
2 glaze. 
~~j zugaagif ladjl of or pertaining to glass. 
~j zaggigf I Ivtl to glaze. -vn lazgiig; ava/pya 
milaggig. 
.::.~ J" lazgigaallpl nl glazes. 
~ 
J"I fitzaggig f I or fizzaggig f I Ivil to be glazed. - iva 
milzaggig. 
z 
• 
~ [,J 
~ 
j zaggig2 Ivtl to pencil (the eyebrows). -vn lazgiig; 
ava/pya mizaggig. 
~J"I fitzaggig Z or fizzaggig2 Ivil to be pencilled (of 
eyebrows). -iva milzaggig. 
J [,j 
J":"j zagarf (u) Ivtl to shout at, rebuke loudly. -vn 
zagr; ava zaagir; pya mazguur. 
J":" J"I filzagar or fizzagar Ivil to be restrained, be held 
back. -iva milzigir. 
J":"jOl finzagar = filzagar. -iva minzigir. 
[, I j [,j 
d,.. j zigzaag <prob Fr> I ladj invarl zigzag . 
fis-sikka zigzaag the way is zigzag. -/adverbiallyl maafi 
zigzaag going zigzag. 2 Ini ricrac braid. 
[,j [,j 
[.fto j zagzig Ivil to gain weight, fatten up (especially of 
animals). fil-mawaafl bi-Izagzig [al-[alafil-gayyid cat-
tle gain weight (iffed) on good fodder. -vn zagzaga; ava 
mizagzig. 

I J[) 
~ 
j zagal In pi razgaall light or popular poem in 
strophic form (often satirical). 
~j zagali ladjl pertaining to the zagal. rUll'niyya 
zagaliyya popular strophic poem set to music. 
Jt.;.j zaggaalln *1 writer of zagal. 
J,P.'jo mazguulladjl produced in zagal form. 
Z J[) 
~Ij zaagil: fJamaam zaagil carrier-pigeons. 
C)C) 
c:...i>j zafJzafJ Ivtl to move, shift (s.th. heavy). -vn 
zafJzafJa; ava/pva mizafJzafJ. 
c:...i>.:,;1 ritzalJzalJ or riu.alJzalJ Ivil to move or be 
moved (of s.th. heavy). -ava/iva mitzafJzafJ. 
I.J C) 
....A> j zalJafl (a) (also salJa/) Ivil 1 to crawl, creep. 
2 {text} to run, spread (of colours). 3 {mil} to advance, 
march forward. -vn zalJf; ava zaafJiJ. 
....A>IJj zawaafJif Ipl n! reptiles. 
~~j zalJfJaafa In pi -aall 1 {agric} leveller, drag. 
2 {slangJ pair of rubber slippers. 
.....;. j zalJlJaf Ivtll to cause to creep or crawl. 2 {lexl} to 
cause (colours) to run. 3 {agric} to smooth,level (with a 
drag). -vn lazfJiif; ava mizafJfJaJ. 
.....;. .:,; 1 rilzafJlJaf or rizzafJfJaf Ivil passive of zalJlJaJ. 
- iva milzafJfJaJ. 
Z· 
• 
uCJ 
....A> j zalJaF Inl palm leaves. -also zalaf, s8Gaf. 
JC) 
J>j zufJallprop n! Saturn. IIfJaH-u zufJal his luck is 
bad. -nahaar-u zulJal he's having an unlucky day. 
.J J C) 
ill:.. j zifJlifa, zulJlifa In pi -aal, zalJaalifl tortoise. -also 
zillJifa, zullJifa, silJlifa, sillJifa, sulJlifa, sullJifa. 
J JC) 
.:;b. j zalJlae; Ivtll to cause to slip or skid. rif-!awaaril 
iI-mabluula bi-tzalJlae; iI-larabiyyaal wet roads make 
cars skid. 2 {slang} to ease aside. rinla laayiz 
lizalJlae;-ni zayy' lawayd-ak do you want to ease me 
away as you usually do? mizalJlae; i{-{ae;iyya raaxir 
fiyaaka he is wearing his cap at a very jaunty angle. -vn 
zalJlae;a; avalpva mizafJlae;. 
366 
.:;b.jo mizalJlae; ladj *1 slippery. 
~ 
j zufJleee;a In pi -aal, zafJaliie;1 1 slide, chute. 
2 mire. 
.:;b..:,; 1 rilzafJlae; or rizzalJlae; Ivil 1 to slip, skid. 
rilzalJlae;I' fil-banyu NublJ I slipped in the bath tub this 
morning. 2 to ski. -ava milzalJlae;. 
.:;b..:,; lazalJluq Inl skiing. 
r C) 
~ 
j zafJam (i) Ivtl 1 to crowd, pack, fill up. 
ma-lizlJimuu-! iI-rool/a min fal/I-u-kum don't crowd the 
room, please.llleeh lizfJim nafs-ak bif-!akl-i-da why do 
you get yourself so busy like that? - riz-zafJma land 
in-nabi' {joc} crowding (should only occur) at the 
(tomb of the) Prophet"" don't push and shove! 2 to 
cause to rush, hustle. maa lak mazlJuum kida leeh why 
are you in such a hurry? II ba{n-u zalJmaa he has di-
arrhoea. -vn zalJamaan, zalJma; ava zaalJim; pva 
mazlJuum. 
4.P-j zafJma In! crowd. laayiz falfJae; if-!ull'/' e;abl' 
zafJmil iI-muw~/aal I want to get to work before the 
rush-hour crowds. -/adjectivallyl fil-bank' zalJma e;awi 
the bank is very crowded. 
~) razfJam lell morelmost crowded. 
rl.. j zifJaam = zafJma . 
~.:,;I rilzalJam or fizzalJam Ivil to become crowded. 
ril-rool/a IzafJamil the room grew crowded. -ava 
milzilJim. 
~ 
ji 1 rinzalJam = fitzafJam. -ava min1.ifJim. 
~ 
Ij zaalJim Ivil to jostle, elbow one's way. rin-naas illi 
bi-lzaafJim fig-gamliyya the people who jostle in the 
co-op. -vn mizalJma; ava mizaalJim . 
~Ijo muzaalJimT In *1 rival. 
~I.:,;I rilzaafJim or rizzaalJim Ivil 1 to jostle one 
another, elbow one another.lI,azaafJum iI-rafkaar the 
crowding of thoughts (in the mind). 2 = zaalJim. -vn 
lazaalJum T; ava milzaafJim. 
~,)jI rizdafJam = ritzalJam. -\'n fizdifJaam; ava 
muzdalJim. 
~.r-I fislazlJam Ivtl 1 to consider crowded. 2 to 
select for being crowded. -ava mistazlJam. 
J.J C) 
J~j zafJwillvtl to ease off, deflect, dodge. rahamm" 
lJaaga land iI-muwaHaf rinnu yzafJwil-ak min lalee the 
most important thing in the civil servant's mind is to get 
rid of you. -vn zalJwala; avalpva mizalJwil. 
J ~.:,;I fitzafJwil or fiuafJwillvil to be given the brush-
off. - iva mitzafJwil. 

ttj 
t j zaxx (u) Ivi/l to rain heavily, pour. fid-dinya bi-
tzuxx it is raining hard. -also saxx. 2 to urinate. -also 
fa;x. -vn zaxx, zaxaxaan; ava zaaxix. 
~j zaxxa linst n, pi -aatl I a shower of rain. 2 a 
urinating. 
J t j see J t ~ : zaxra, zaxiira 
";J tj 
...;.;. j zaxraf Ivtl to decorate, adorn. -vn zaxrafa; aval 
pva mizaxraf. 
~.;. j zaxrafa 
In 
pi -aat, 
zaxaariJl 
decoration. 
II zaxaarif id-dunya pleasures and vanities of the world. 
zaxaarif if-fi(aan temptations of the devil. 
...; .;. j zuxrufT In pi zaxaariJl luxury, indulgence, 
wordly pleasure. zuxruf iI-l:Jayaah the material plea-
sures of life. 
j';'j zaxrafi, zuxrufiT ladjl ornamental. fafkaal 
zaxrafiyya ornamental patterns. 
...;.;. ~I fitzaxraf or fizzaxraf Ivi/l to be decorated, be 
adorned. 2 to adorn oneself. -vn tizaxriif; ava/pva 
mitzaxraf. 
• rtj 
~ 
j zaxam (u) Ivtl I to lash, whip. riI-larbagi zaxam 
iI-l:Jumaar gaamid the cart-driver lashed the donkey 
hard. 2 {mus] to pluck (lute strings) with a plectrum. 
-vn zaxm; ava zaaxim; pva mazxuum. 
4i-j zuxma In pi zuxaml I leather strap for hishil\g, 
tawse. 2 stirrup leather. 
~ 
~I fitzaxam or fizzaxam Ivil I to be lashed, be 
whipped. 2 [musJ to be plucked with a plectrum. - iva 
mitzixim. 
2 
• 
• 
r CJ 
~j zixim ladj "II rancid or putrid in smell, stinking. 
fid-dihn iI-mixazzin min mudda ril:Jt-u b-tibqa zixma fat 
stored for a long time gives off a rancid smell. 
2 unbearable (of people). qaddi feeh ir-raagil da zixim 
how repellent that man is! 
4i-j zaxama Inl stench, stink. riI-lal:Jma di fiiha zaxama 
this meat stinks. II fir-raagil da lalee zaxama = this man 
is unbearable. -also zahama. 
4.~j zaxaama = zaxama. -also zahaama. 
·YJj 
~.)j zarbiyya In pi -aat, zaraabil hedge, fence, en-
closure .. 
4.!.)j ziriiba In pi zaraayibll pen, byre (for livestock). 
367 
xud min iz-zaraayib wala taxudJi min iI-qaraayib 
[prov] better to marry from the animal pen than from 
among your relatives. -
fiz-zaraayib Ipl nl 2 locality 
inhabited by garbage collectors and their families, so 
called after the sties of the pigs which they raise. 
,-:,.)j zarrab Ivil to make a hedge or fence, build a stick 
or bamboo enclosure. -vn tazriib; ava mizarrab. 
'-:' ~~ I firzarrab or fizzarrab Ivil to be erected or built 
(of an enclosure). - iva mitzarrab. 
2 yJj 
,-:,I.)jo muzraab, mizraab T In pi mazariibl spout for 
draining water from roofs and balconies. 
~YJj 
..:r..)j zarbin I/vtl to get (s.o.) into a temper. 2/vil to 
get into a temper. -vn zarbana; avalpva mizarbin. 
iJ,y..)j zarbuun ladj pi zarabiinl I excitable, easily in-
furiated. 2 epithet for a slave. 
:ii ,y..)j zarbuuna In pi zarabiinl fury. (aUal zarabiin-u 
lalayya he really let fly at me . 
..:r..)~1 firzarbin or fizzarbin Ivil to become furious. -vn 
rizarbiin; ava mitzarbin. 
CISYJj 
C"!.)j zurbeel:J Inl [bot] wormseed, Mexican tea 
(Ambrosinia ambrosioides). 
~J j see ~ IS J J j : zurreega 
~~Jj 
,j":".)j zargin 
Ivil 
I to 
become 
stuck, 
jam. 
fid-diriksiyoon bi-yzargin lamma fJal:Jm i yixl~ the 
steering-wheel jams when the lubricant runs out. 2 to 
become grumpy. -vn zargana, rizargiin; ava mizargin. 
4.)j zargiina In pi zaragiinl I hand-vice. 2 vice-like 
implement used for holding hot metal. 
.~Jj 
:>.)j zarad (i, u) Ivt/l to yield (juice, essel)ce etc., as by 
infusion). fik-karkadeeh zarad loon-u l-fal:Jmar the 
hibiscus flowers gave out their red colour (when infused 
in water). fiz-zabaadi zarad firf-u the yoghurt turned 
partly to whey. II wiff-i zarad laraq my face oozed 
sweat. 2 to cause (the face) to flush. wiff-a-ha mazruud 
min iI-l:Jarr her face is flushed from the heat. wiff-u 
mazruud min iz-zalal his face is purple with anger. 
- Ivi/3 to infuse till strong. xaUifJaay yizrid let the tea 
boil (or brew) till it gets strong. -vn zard, zaradaan; ava 
zaarid; pva mazruud. 

,).)j 1.aradl (u) Ivt/ to swallow (with difficulty), gulp. 
min kubr it-IUlima kaan bi-yi1.rud-ha ull-lafya he was 
eating such big pieces of food that he could hardly gulp 
them down. -vn 1.aradaan, 1.ard; ava 1.aarid; pva 
mazruud. 
,).)j 1.ard In! juice or essence (extracted as by infusion). 
1.ard it-/al.Jma the thickened juices and grease of meat. 
'').)j 1.arda In! I Ipl-aatl instance noun of 1.ard. 2 Ino pll 
2a strong dark tea. 2b hottest time (of day). fi-1.ardit 
it/-t/uhr at the peak of the noon heat. 
~,).)j 1.arradiyya, 1.aradiyya In pi -aat, 1.araadil (pair of) 
pliers. 
,).)jil fit1.arad, fitzarad lor fiz1.arad, fi1.1.arad I Ivill to 
be extracted (of juice or essence). 2 to become suffused 
with blood as through choking (of the face). -ava/iva 
mit1.irid. 
,).)jil fit1.arad 2 or fi1.1.arad 2 Ivil to be swallowed with 
difficulty. - iva mit1.irid. 
,).))1 finzarad, 
rin1.arad l 
min1.irid. 
rit1.arad. 
-avaliva 
,).))1 fin1.arad 2 = rit1.arad 2 • -iva min1.irid. 
,)~j 1.arrad, 1.arrad Ivtl to choke. -vn ta1.riid, tazriid; 
ava/pva mi1.arrad, mizarrad. 
;.)jl rizradd, rizradd Ivil to become suffused with 
blood as through choking (of the face). -ava mi1.radd, 
mizradd. 
2 1l.J j 
. 
,).)j 1.arad2 Icoll nllinks (of a fine chain). 
'').)j 1.arada lunit n, pi -aatl a link (of a fine chain). 
I 
• 
.J.J.J 
~j 1.arr (u) Ivt/ to close up (s. th.) tightly (especially with 
a drawstring). 1.arrit Tenee-ha she: narrowed her eyes. 
-vn 1.arr, 1.araraan: ava 1.aarir: Dva mazruur. 
~j 1.irr In pl1.uruurll tassel on a tarbush. 2 bud. II 1.irr , 
ward Icolll dried rosl"buds. 3 single specimen (of certain 
elongated fruits and vegetables). 1.irr' fiurunfil one 
clove. 1.irr' bataata one sweet potato. 1.irr' xyaar one 
cucumber. 
.;i.)j 1.uraar 
In 
pl1.araayir, 
ra1.raarl 
I button. 
2 push-button. 
~jil rit1.arr or fiz1.arr lvil passive of 1.arr. -iva mll1.arr. 
~)I finzarr = rit1.arr. -iva min1.arr. 
.)~j 1.arrar Ivt/ I to button, button up. ma-t1.arrar 
ij-jakitta bafia do button up your jacket! 2 (hort] to graft 
(a shoot). -vn tazriir, tazriir; ava/pva mi1.arrar. 
.)~jil rit1.arrar or fi1.1.arrar Ivil I to be buttoned. 
2 (hort] to be grafted (of a shoot). - iva mit1.arrar. 
368 
z 
• 
JJJ 
.~~ 1.arra In pi -aatl I particle. 2 atom. 
~~~ '1.arri, 1.urriJ ladjl atomic. fiumbita 1.arriyya atomic 
bomb. rubaar 1.arri atomic fall-out. 
~~~ 1.urriyya, durriyya J In pi -aat, 1.araaril progeny, 
offspring. 'lil-xun{lSa txallif miyya wi-tfiuul ya-fiillit id-
durriyya (prov] a beetle gives birth to a hundred and 
complains of scarcity of children .... the unworthy breed 
too much.lI1.u"iyyit lafariit a naughty child. 
[~J.Jj 
~~j 1.urreega In! (bot] bird's-foot trefoil (Lotus 
arabicus). 
l.Jj.Jj' 
.)j.)j 1.ar1.ar I/vt/ to fill to the brim. riz-1.ikiiba 
mzal'1.ara la/- faaxir l.Ja-ttarfafi the sack is stuffed to the 
utmost -it'll burst. 2 Ivil to become brim-full, become 
completely filled. lenee-ha 1.al'1.arit bid-dimuul her 
eyes filled with tears. -vn zar1.ara; ava/pva mizarzar . 
• .).,j.)j 1.arzuura l In! quickness of temper. wa/ad bi-
1.al'1.uura a boy with a bad temper. 
.)j.)jil ril1.al'1.ar or fizzal'1.ar Ivil I to be filled to the 
limit. 2 to lose one's temper. -vn tizar1.iir; ava/iva 
mit1.al'1.ar. 
2 
• 
• 
.J.J.JJ 
.).,j.)j 1.ar1.uur In pi zaraziirl starling. 
..).,j.)j 1.ar1.uura 2 = 1.ar1.uur. 
t.Jj 
t.)j 1.arB[ (a) Ivt/ la to plant, sow. rilli tizrB[-u 
tul.Jlud-u (prov] what you sow, you reap.1.arl' fa/raam 
mine-laying.lI1.arB[-u 1.arl' btllal he knocked him into 
the ground head first, he flattened him. -1.J-azrB[ nafs-i 
hina 'I'll 5tick around here.' -ya 1.arl i/-badaari (joe] 
what a fine specimen! what a fine figure of a man! Ib to 
cultivate. 2 (eonstr] to erect (scaffolding). 3 (text, 
print] to apply or fIX (powder) through spraying or 
dusting. 4 to restore the design of (a carpet, by mending 
it). -vn zarl, 1.iraala, ziraQ[a; ava 1.aaril; pva 
mazruU[ . 
t.)j ~arl Icoll 
n! crop(s), plant(s), greenery. 
1.arl-u-hum maat their crops died. ril.Jna bi-nl.Jibb 
i1.-1.arl' fil-beet we like to have plants around the house . 
~.)j 1.arla In pi -aatll linst n! a planting. 2 lunit n! a 
crop. 

~.Jj l.arli ladjl pertaining to plants or crops. raxt/ar 
l.arli bright green. 
~1.Jj l.irUGa, l.iraala InI I Ino pI/ agriculture. waziir 
i1.-1.iraala the Minister for Agriculture. 2 Ipl-aatl (area 
of) cultivation. beet-u gaar iz-1.iraBGa his house adjoins 
the cultivated area. 
~1.Jj l.iraali ladj ·1 agricultural. ma/:J~iil1.iraliyya 
agricultural products. muhandis l.iraali agronomist. 
IItarii~ l.iraali road passing through an agricultural 
area. - riI- r~/aa/:J i1.-1.iraali agrarian reform. 
t)j l.aarill In pl1.urraal r I farmer, cultivator. 
';'~J.Jjo mazrulaatr Ipl nI crops, plants. 
~~j l.arriil 
Icoll 
nI 
I seedling(s). 
2 shoot(s), 
sprout(s). 3 young fish. 
~~j l.arriila = l.arriil.1I dool1.arriilit rabalsa they are 
mischievous little monsters. 
~~j l.urreela lunit n, pi -aat, l.arariill I a seedling. 
2 a sprout, a shoot. 3 a young fish. 
~.Jjo mazrBGa, ma1.rala r In pi mazaarill place where 
a specific crop is cultivated. ma1.ralit naxiil a palm 
plantation.llma1.ralit firaax a chicken farm. 
11 lamal mazrala {path} to make a culture. riblat 
ii-bah-am lafaan yitlimil-Iu ma1.rala send the sputum 
to have a culture made. 
t.Jjil fitzarBG or fi1.1.arallvil passive of l.arBG. -iva 
mit1.iril_ 
t.Jji I fin1.arBG = fit1.arBG· - iva min1.iril· 
6j l.arral I/vil to sprout, germinate (usually of 
plants). l11.arral badri he grew early, he's tall ~or his 
age. 2/vtl = l.aral4. -vn tazriil; ava/pva mizarral. 
t)j l.aaril2 Ivtl to enter into a sharecropping arrange-
ment with (s.o.). -vn mi1.arla; ava mi1.aaril' 
t)jo muzaarilln ·1 farmer, cultivator. 
"';..}j 
-i1.Jj l.araa/lcoll nl giraffe(s). 
~1.Jj l.araa/a lunit n, pi -aatl a giraffe. 
IJ..}j 
J.Jj l.ara~ (u) Ivi/l to slip, pass. riI-/:Jaraami l.ara~ min 
iI-buli~ fi1.-1.a/:Jma in the crowd the thief slipped away 
from the police. riI-musmaar l.ara~ fil-xafab the nail 
went easily into the wood. IInaab-u l.aari~ (1) he's vi-
cious and cruel. (2) he's wily and untrickable. 2 to give 
a piercing sidelong glance. l.ara~ bi-leen-u liyya he 
threw a quick sharp look at me. -vn l.ar~, l.ara~aan; ava 
l.aari~. 
J)Jj zawaari~ Ipl nl innermost windings, labyrinthine 
core. tuht i /-1.awaari~ il-ba(niyya I got lost deep in the 
winding alleys of el-Batniya. 
369 
JJ)j l.aruu~ In pl1.awarii~/1 small irrigation channel 
supplying a paddy. 2 small snake. 
J!.)Jj l.awarii~ = l.awaar~. IIdaxal fi-1.awarii~ il-
mudiir he wormed his way into the director's 
confidence. 
JI.Jjo mU1.r~ In pi mazarii~1 javelin. 
J~j l.arra~ J Ivtll to slip, pass covertly. l.arra~-1i gneeh 
he slipped me a pound. 2 intensive of l.ara~ 2. -vn 
tazrii~; ava mizarra~. 
J~jil ritzarra~ J or riz1.arra~ I Ivil passive of l.arra~ J 1. 
- iva mitr.arra~. 
z -
• 
IJ..}..} 
J.J) razra~ ladj, fem l.ar~a, pl1.Urlil I blue. razra~ 
liini china blue. razra~ l.ayy in-niila as- blue as indigo. 
II mayya l.ar~a cataract (ofthe eye). -lat/ma l.ar~a abu-
sive epithet for a Copt. -naab-u razra~ he is cunning. 
-/:J-acallal iI-ba/a 1- fazra~ la/a gittit-u .... I'll destroy 
him! - NI-la/ariit iz-1.ur~ j b-titnaaat fi-lnee he is fu-
rious. - rinta /:Ja-tiftara/-/i fil- razr~ .... are you trying to 
play dirty with me? 2a grey (of a horse). 2b dove-grey 
(of a pigeon). 
.:,1i.Jj l.ara~aan InI blueness. 
JI.)j l.araa~ = l.ar~aan. 
~J.)j l.uru~iyya = l.ara~aan. 
J~j l.arra~2 IvtI to cause to become blue, make blue. 
l11.arra~-/i leen-i he gave me a black eye. -vn tazrii~; ava 
mizarra~. 
J~jil fitzarr~2 or fir.1.arra~2 /vii to be made blue. 
-}va mitzarr~. 
J.Jjl N1.ra~~ Ivil to become blue. wiff-u l.ra~~ i 
w-rurma lalee his face turned blue and he fainted. 
IIleen-u mizrifi~a he has a black eye. -ava mizri~fi. 
J.J;:-I ristazra~ Ivtl to consider blue. -ava mistazra~. 
~.!l..}j 
.?.Jj l.arkifr <P zar-kash> Ivtl to embroider, deco-
rate. -vn l.arkafa; ava/pva mizarkif. 
.?.)jil fitzarkifor riz1.arkiflvilto be embroidered, be 
brocaded, be decorated. -iva mitzarkif. 
J.J.!l..}j 
jJ~.)j l.irkoola: tikki l.irkoola see tikkl. 
t4S':uj 
ri.Jj l.arniix <P zirnfkh, cf also Syr> In! arsenic. 
J, .J..}j 
J..uj l.arwat{slang}l/vtltosoil,makeamessof.21vi1 
to become plentiful. fil-ba{{iix l.arwat melons have be-

come plentiful. -vn zarwa(a; avalpva mizarwa(. 
J.J),;I fitzarwa( or fizzarwa( Ivil to be soiled, be 
messed up. - iva mitzarwa(. 
yyt j 
~",.. j Zalbuuba In pI zalabiibl dust devil, whirlwind. 
~j Zalbib Ivil to become dusty and windy (of the 
weather). -vn zalbaba; ava mizalbib. 
~ 
jo m1zalbib ladj 'I excited and irritable. 
Jytj 
J,&. j zalbal: fabu zalbal Iprop nl town in the 
Qalyubiya province known for Its prison. 
.1..J y t j 
J.",.. j Zalbuu( In pI zalabii(/long woollen robe often 
with a hood (worn by peasants). 
J';" tj 
fl j zaltar, zaltar Inl thyme. - also saltar. 
~tj 
r;::-j zalag (i) 
=4'aZlag. - ava zaalig; pva maZluug. 
r;::-JI finzalag Ivil to be annoyed, be disturbed. -vn 
finzilaag; iva munzalig ! minzilig. 
r;::-) faZlag flvtl to annoy, disturb. fin jaaf allaah 
ma-nkun-J' faZlagnaa-k I hope we haven't disturbed 
you. -vn fiZlaag; ava mUZlig. 
I J t j 
f j zalar I (a) Ivtl to cut off short, dock (clothes or 
animals' tails).leeh zalarti I-fustaan kida why have you 
made the dress so short? -vn zalr; ava zaalir; pva 
maZluur. 
.r) faZlar l ladj, fern zalra, pI ZUlri docktailed. 
kalb· faZlar a dog with a docked tail. karabiig ZUlr 
short whips without lashes. II karabiig-u ZUlr he is very 
cruel. - (kull-u) q~r' dee! (ya faZlar) [pray] '" sour 
grapes! 
.r,;1 fitzalar or fizzalar Ivil to be cut off short, be 
docked. - iva mitzilir. 
f) faZlar 2 Ivtl to shorten too much. faZlartijalr-ik 
leeh kida why have you clipped off too much of your 
hair like this? -vn faZlara; avalpva mifaZlar. 
f jhl fitfaZlar Ivil to be shortened too much. - iva 
mitfaZlar. 
2 J tj 
f~ zalar 2 (i) Ivtl to fnghten, terrify, alarm. - vn 
ZUlr f; ava zaalir; pva maZluur. 
370 
.r~ ZUlr f Inl panic, terror. gat-Iu baalit ZUlr he 
panicked. 
f.iil finzalar Ivil to be frightened, be alarmed, be 
panic-stricken. -vn finzilaar; ava minzilir. 
tjt j 
t.r j zalzal Ivtl to shake, undermine (confidence 
etc.). zalzalit slqat-i f-nafs-i it shook my self-
confidence. -vn zalzala; avalpva mlzalzal. 
t.r jo mizalzal/adj 'I long and thin, tall and skinny. 
tJ.r j Zalzuul ladjl long and thin, tall and skinny. 
4 J.r j Zalzuula In pI zalaziill top part or spike of a 
sugar cane. IIzayy iz-Zalzuula long and thin, tall and 
skinny . 
t.r,;1 fitzalzal or fizzalzal Ivil to be shaken or 
undermined (of confidence etc.). -vn tizalZiil; iva 
mitzalzal· 
1.1. tj 
k j zala{ (a) Ivtl to pluck out (hair). zala(it 
bawaglb-ha bil-mulqaa( she plucked her eyebrows with 
the tweezers. - vn zall; ava zaali{; pva maZlUU(. 
k,;1 fitzala( or fizzala( Ivil to be plucked out. - iva 
mitzili(. 
k J I finzala( =4'itzala(. - iva minzill(. 
2 .1. t j see .1. I.S t j : zilee( 
ttj 
tj Zall (i) Ivtl I to treat cruelly, treat harshly. rubt 
altizir-Iu zau-i-ni I tried to apologize but he rejected 
me roughly. 2 to unsettle, upset (s.o.). -vn Zall. 
zalalaan; ava zaalil; pva maZluul. 
t;1 fllZall or flzzau/vi/l to be treated harshly. 2 to 
be unsettled. be upset. - iva mitzau. 
....it j 
"""' j zalaf Icoll nl palm frond(s). badd iz-zalaf [ChrJ 
Palm Sunday. - also zabaf. salaf. 
.u ~ j zauaafa In pI -aatl long-handled ceiling duster 
(with a head of palm or other fibre). 
~ 
j zauaf Ivil to dust a ceiling with a zauaafa. -vn 
taZliif; ava mizauaf. 
~,;I fllzauaf or fizzauaf Ivil to be dusted (with a 
zauaafa). - iva mitzauaf. 
(J....i tj) 
,)&. j zalfar. zalfar Inl sapphire. 
.:"I,)&. j zalfaraan. zalfaraan Inl saffron. 

Jt.i 
., 
j zalat; (a) IVIII to call out, shout.lamma b-tismal 
bayyaal bi-ynaadi b-tiZlat; lalee when she hears a 
street vendor cry, she calls out to him. marraat lamma 
bi-ygii-ni d-door I'abt;a l'aZlat; lalafwayyit hawa some-
times when I have an attack (of asthma) I clamour for a 
little air. 2 {slang] to stink to high heaven. -vn Ziliit;, 
zalat;aan; ava zaalit;. 
~ 
j ziliit; Inl clamour, shouting. kaanit ~-~aala 
kull-a-ha zliit; fi-zliiq the hall was all clamour and 
shouting. 
.,Ij zaaliq ladj/l garish (of colour). 2 tart, sour (in 
taste). 3 {slang] putrid. 
~j zalqa linst n, pl-aatl a shout, a cry. 
';j zauaq Ivil I to shout, bellow, yell. huwwa 
bi-yzauaq fiyya ki!ia leeh why does he sound off at me 
like that? 2 to scold, reprimand. zauaqt-i-Iha lamma 
gat waxri I gave her a dressing-down when she came 
late. -vn taZliiq; ava mizauaq . 
.; jil I'itzauaq or I'izzauaq Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of zauat;. mifana iii yitzallaq-Iu I am not (the sort) to 
be shouted at like that. - iva mitzallaq. 
Jt.i 
j&.j Zilil (a) Ivill to become cross, become irritated. 
I'ana zallaan minnu lala I-maqlab illi lamal-ufiyya I'm 
angry with him because of the trick he played on me. 
2 to become distressed. I'umm-a-ha zaelaana lalafraq-
ha her mother is upset at being separated from her. -vn 
zalal; ava zallaan. 
j&.j zalal In! I anger, annoyance. ma-f-naa1 miz-
zalal it is inconceivable that we should get angry with 
each other. l'if1ukuk mamnuul wiz-zaeal marfuul ... 
no credit sales. 2 distress, sadness. fJa-tmuut min iz-
zal al she will die of grief . 
..,':k.j zallaan '/adj "I I annoyed, cross, angry. I'ana 
zallaan minnak I am cross with you. 2 distressed, sad. 
hiyya zallaana lalee she is sorry for him. 
J r j zaluulladj invarl {rur] recalcitrant, unruly (ofan 
animal and, jocularly, of a woman). 
&j zalla Inll a fit of anger.lIlamal-ha b-zaela wala 
lad1i bi-ykallim-ni he used the incident as a pretext for 
not speaking to me any more. 2 a distress, a sadness. 
Zilil zalla maat fiiha he died of his grief .. 
~j zaUallvtll to upset, annoy, anger. ma-y~afJfJi1 
I'innu yzaelal I'ahl-u he should not upset his family. 
2 to distress, grieve. -vn tazliil; avalpva mizaelal. 
.!l J t.i see .!l J t ~: zaeluuk 
371 
rt.i 
~ 
j zalam (u) Ivtl to claim, allege. zaeamit I'inn ii-beet 
milk-a-ha she claimed that the house was hers. -vn 
zalm; ava zaalim; pva maZluum. 
~ 
j zalm r Inl allegation, claim. da ~afJiifJ lala zaem-
u-hum this is true according to their allegation. IIlala 
zalm inn ... on the assumption that, as in I'ana (abaxt 
i1-l'akli da kull-u lala zalm inn i1-leelagayya I cooked 
all this food thinking that the family was coming. 
~ 
I,.;. mazaalim r Ipl nl assumptions, . allegations. 
mazaalim ba(la false beliefs. 
4.~ j zalaama r In pI -aat/leadership . 
.::.l..~ j zalamaat Ipl n/leaders. 
~j zaliim In pI ZUlama/leader. 
~ 
jil I'itzauam or I'izzauam Ivtl to become the lead-
er of. I'itzallam is-sawra he became leader of the re-
volution. 
- vn 
tazallum r; 
ava 
mutazallim r, 
mitzallim, mitzallam. 
~t.i 
..r-j zaean r (i) Ivil to submit, give in, yield. 
..r-ji l'aZlan r = zalan. -vn l'iZlaan; ava mUZlin. 
..,~j! l'iZlaan r Inl submissiveness. 
J~t.i 
~j zilnifa In pI zaeaanif/l fin. 2 (rubber) flipper. 
~.J ~ t.i 
:i;~j zalnuuna In pI zaeaniin/llarge decorated pot 
in which a flower pot is placed, cachepot. 2 goatee 
beard. 
j,~t.i 
¥ j zilee(: zilee( wi-mlee( wi-naaaa( iI-fJee( every 
Tom, Dick and Harry. 
":-'tj 
~ 
j zalfab In! down, fuzz. 
~j zalfabi ladjl downy, fuzzy. 
. 
~ 
j zalflfab Ivil to become downy, become fuzzy. -vn 
tazlfiib; ava mizalflfab. 
~":-'tj 
;1.,&. j ZUlfbaar Inl dust produced in the processing of 
cotton etc. 
~t.i 
.JJ:.j zalfad (u) Ivtl to poke, prod, elbow. II I'is-kut ya 
mazlfUud quiet, you devil! -vn zalfd; ava zaalfid; pva 
mSZlfuud. 

.~ j zalfda linst n, pi -aatl a poke, a prod, a dig. 
~ 
j ZUlfd In pi riZlfaad, raZlfaadl poke, prod, dig with 
the elbow or leg. 
~ 
jil ritzalfad or rizzalfad Ivil to be poked, be prod-
ded. - iva mitzilfid. 
~ 
ji I rinzuad = ritzalfad. II rin fa-I/a tinzilfid Ji-tialb-
a~ == may a calamity befall you! 
~ 
j zalflfad Ivtl to prod or poke repeatedly. -vn tazlfiid; 
ava mizalflfad. 
1 JtJ 
~ 
j zalfar (u) Ivil to glare, glower. zalfarit-li zalfra 
xallit-ni !-n~~' hduum-i she gave me a glare which 
shrivelled me up. -vn zalfr; ava zaalfir. 
• ~ 
j zarra linst n, pi -aatl a glare, a glowering stare. 
Z J t J see J t IJ'f' : ZUlfayyar 
':"JtJ 
.:.. ~ 
j zalfrat Ivil to produce the trilling sound known as 
zarruuta. -vn zarrata; ava mizalfrat. 
~" ~ 
j zarruuta In pi zalfariit, zalfrutaatl a high trilling 
cry, commonly uttered by women on joyous occasions. 
tJtJ 
t~ 
j zalfZU IvtI to tickle. bi-tzalfZalf il-layyilli-Ijadd' 
ma ykarkac mid-diljk she tickles the baby until he 
bursts out laughing. -vn zalfzalfa; ava mizalfzalf. 
t~ jil ritzalfZu or rizzalfZalf Ivil to be tickled. -vn 
tizuziilf; iva mitzalfZalf. 
.l. t J 
~j zalfa{ (u) Ivtl to gulp down. -vn zall'(; ava zaalfi{; 
pva mazlfUU{. 
~ 
j ZUlfU{{a Inil Ino pI/ hiccups, hiccuping. 2 Ipl-aatl 
(one) hiccup. 
~ 
jil ritzalfa{ or rizzalfa{ Ivil to be gulped down. -iva 
",itzilfi{. 
.1i j zalflfa{ Ivtl to feed with repeated small quantities. 
bi-tzalflfatil-ba{(' lalafaan yisman she force-feeds the 
ducks so that they will fatten up. zalflfatnaa-Iu l-lilm we 
spoon-fed him knowledge. -vn tazlfii{; ava/pva 
mizalflfa{ . 
.1i jil ritzalflfa{ or rizzalflfa{ Ivil passive of zalflfa{. - iva 
mitzalflfa{ . 
1 .l. .l. tJ 
~ 
j zalf{a{ Ivil to become overjoyed. - also zati{a{. 
-vn zall'(a{a; ava mizall'(a{. 
1 .l. .l. t J see J t IJ'f' : ZUlfa{{a{, ZUlfa{{UU{ 
372 
JtJ 
~ 
j zalfal l (i) I Ivtl to cheat, deceive. zualit-ni 
b-ma;har-ha l-xaddaac she took me in with her decep-
tive appearance. 2 to poison (food). 3 to dazzle, blur 
(the vision). - Ivil4 to become dazzled or blurred in 
vision (of the eye). lenay-ya zalfalit ma-Iljitit'1 ratiraa-
ha my eyesight became blurred and I didn't manage to 
read it. -vn zalfl, zalfalaan; ava zaalfil; pva mazlfUul. 
~ 
j zual2 Ini deceit, deception. 
~ 
jot maZlfalln pi mazaalfil/loophole, embrasure. 
~ 
jil ritzalfal or rizzalfal Ivil passive of zalfal l • - iva 
mitzilfil, mitzalfal. 
~ 
jil rinzalfal = ritzalfal. - iva minzilfil. 
1 J JtJ 
~j zalflilllvtl to blur, render dim, dazzle (the eye). 
rin-nuur zalflil lenee-na the light dazzled our eyes. 
2 Ivil to become dim or blurred, be dazzled. lenee 
zalflilit min kutr in-nimar his vision became blurred 
from looking at so many numbers. - vn zalflala; ava/pva 
mizalflil. 
1 J JtJ 
J)i. j zuluul l In pi zualiill I young bird, squab. 
2 -young or immature person. rif1ulflaana di layza 
raagil gaamid wi-da lissa zalfluul this job needs a strong 
man, but this fellow is still wet behind the ears. 
-
zalfaliil/pl nl 3lslangJ lovely young girls, smashing 
birds. 
J.J J tJ 
J)i.j zalfluul 2; balalj zalfluul type of long'red date. 
.l. .l. ~ t J see J t IJ'f' : ZUlfan{a{, ZUlfan{UU{ 
~ ~ ~ tJ see J t IJ'f' : ZUlfannan, ZUlfannuun 
J.J tJ 
.;j;.j zalfwar Ivil to make noises, rumble (of the sto-
mach). ba{n-i b-titni{1X wi-bi-tzalfwar lamma b-aakul 
lads my stomach swells and rumbles whe~ I eat lentils. 
-vn zalfwara, tizalfWiir; ava mizalfwar. 
~.J tJ 
<.J j;. j zalfWin Ivil to make noises, rumble (of the sto-
mach). -vn zalfwana, tizalfwiin; ava mizalfwin. 
J 4S 4S t J see J t IJ'f' : ZUlfayyar 
I.:,. oJJ 
.;.ij zift Inl pitch, tar.llzayy iz-zi!t awful, lousy. - raagil 

zift ie-iiin a bloody bastard. -nawil-ni zift; musmaar 
hand me a blasted nail. -/adjectivallyl l:Jadd; yilidar 
yizaakir fil-gaww iz-zift; da can anyone study in this 
awful weather? 
~) fazfat lell morel most awful. 
.:.ij zaffit Ivtl I to tar, apply tar to. 2 to spoil, ruin, 
make a mess of.zaffitit lift-i she made a mess of my life. 
zaffit sumlit-i he blackened my reputation. - Ivil 3 to 
be covered with pitch, become as dirty as pitch. liami~-i 
zaffit fig-gaww i1-mirabbar my shirt has become filthy 
because of the dusty weather. 4 to become spoilt, be-
come bad or worse. yoom mizaffit a lousy day. -vn 
tapit; ava/pya mizaffit. 
.:.i,;1 fitzaffit or fizzaffit lvil passive of zaffit. -iva 
mitzaffit. 
z ..:.0 ...; j see .;.. J ...; j : zifeeta 
1..:.0 "';j 
4jij zifta Iprop n! Zifta, a markaz on the left bank of 
the Damietta branch of the Nile in Gharbiya province. 
\SJlaj ziftaawi ladj pI -yyal of or pertaining to Zifta. 
I.J ...; j 
. 
)j zifir ladj " I greasy, filthy. damm-u zifir (1) his· 
blood is dirty (a popular explanation of illness). (2) he's 
a bore, he's a drag. lisaan-u zifir he's foul-mouthed, 
he's given to insult. lIyomiyya zifra single-entry day 
book. -l:Jibr; zifir finger-printing ink, printing ink. 
-karbuun zifir double-sided cl!rbon paper. 2 rank or 
unpleasant (of smell or taste).lIyasmiin zifir common 
jasmine. 
)j zafar Icoll n! meat or poultry. 
o)ij zafaara Inl I greasy dirt. IIzafaara fid-damm 
syphilis (in folk medicine). 2 unpleasantly pungent 
taste or smell (exuded by fish or poultry). 
}j zalfar Ivt/l to soil, dirty.zalfarit fid-ha b-damm-u 
she soiled her hand with its blood. 2 [Chr} to eat (meat 
or poultry, thus breaking a fast). - Ivil3 to eat meat, 
fish or poultry. fil:Jna mzalfariin in-nahar-da-we're hav-
ing meat (or fish or poultry) today. -vn taz/iir; ava/pya 
mizalfar. 
},;I fitzalfar or fizzalfar Ivil passive of zalfar. - iva 
mitzalfar. 
).;.-1 fistazfar Ivt! to consider rank or .unpleasant-
smelling. -ava mistazfar. 
z .J ...; j 
o)j zafra In pi -aatl sigh, moan. 
,r-ij zafiir Inl exhalation, expiration. 
373 
l .J ...; j see .J"s"; j : zifeer, zufeer 
...; "';j 
j j zalf (i) Ivt! to parade, conduct a ceremonial proces-
sion (notably in weddings). fig-giraan kull-a-ha zaffit 
i1-laruusa all the neighbours led the bride in a proces-
sion. misku l-l:Jaraami w-zalfuu lil-liism they caught the 
thief and cotlducted him to the police station. -vn 
zafafaan; ava zaafif; pya mazfuuf. 
~ 
j zaffa In plzifaf, zaffaatl ceremonial procession 
(notably in weddings) .lIzaffit famjiir the last day ofthe 
Coptic month of Tuba. -huwwa b-yimji fiz-zaffa he 
goes along with the crowd. -yiqrab fi-zaffa wi-Ylaalil:J 
fi-larla [prov} he quarrels in public and makes up in 
secret . 
.Jlij zifaaf, zafaaf In! wedding. 
j,;1 fitzaff or fi1.1.aff Ivil to be paraded, be escorted in 
procession. - iva mitzaff. 
j,; 1 f£nzaff = fitzaff. - iva minzaff. 
J.,J"';j 
J.li j zafla{ IvtI I to cause to slip. 2 to make slippery. 
fin-na{ara zaflatit if-Jawaarit the rain made the streets 
slippery. -vii zaflata; ava/pya mizaflat. 
J.lijo mizafla{ ladj"1 slippery, smooth (in character). 
.1. )j j zafluu{ 1 ladj ·1 slippery, smooth (in character). 
2 In plzafaliitl [ror} catfish. 
J.li,;1 fitzafla{ or fi1.1.aflat Ivil to slide, slip. ga yimsik 
samaka fitzafla{it min fiid-u he tried to catch a fish but it 
slipped through his fingers. -vn tizaflii{; ava mitzaflat. 
.;.. "s ...; j 
~j zifeeta In! [bot} yellow oleander (Theretia 
hereifolia) . 
.J"s"';j 
,r-ij zifeer, ZUfeer <Fr z~phire> kind of cheap thick 
cotton cloth from which galabiyas, pyjamas etc. are 
made. 
.)Jj 
~j zaliliad Ivt! to force-feed (a child). - vn tazliiid; 
ava/pya mkaliliad. 
~ 
,;1 fitzalitiad or fkzatitiad lvil to be force-fed: -iva 
mitzatitiad. 
.J J j 
)j zatiar (u) Ivt! to put or push into a comer.zatiar-u 
f-r:lfkn il-l:Jalatia w-xallil1lalee he pushed him into the 

corner of the ring and finished him off. -vn zafir; ava 
zaafiir; pva maZfiuur. 
)j ZUfir Inl corner (of a room). 
);;1 ritzafiar or rizzafiar Ivil I to be put, pressed or 
pushed into a corner. 2 to get into trouble, be trapped. 
- avaliva mitzifiir. 
).:,;1 I'inzafiar = I'itzafiar. -avaliva minzifiir. 
')J Jj 
~ ) j ZUfirud J epithet used to impute worthlessness and 
smallness to one so called. ya ZUfirud you good-for-
nothing pip-squeak! ritlamm' ZUfirud lala ;ariifa 
{prov J Zuqrud joined up with Zarifa (of the association 
of two good-for-nothings). - also zafizuufi. 
~) jA mizafiradJ 
ladj 
*1 
bright and 1.I1ergetic, 
on-the-ball. 
JjJj 
~.;,ij zafizafi 
Ivil to chirp, 
twitter. 
ril-l~afiir 
bi-tzafizafi min ~abalJiyyit rabb-i-na birds twitter from 
the early morning. II l~afiir ba(n-i zafizafiit I was 
ravenous. - rana lafil-i zafizafi-li ... a sudden idea came 
to my mind. -vn zafizafia, tizafiZiifi; ava mizafizafi. 
~j jA mizafizafi ladj *1 out of sorts, off-key. mazaag-i 
mzafizafi I'm out of humour. 
~Jjj Zafizuufi lIn pI zafiaziifil type of small Nile fish 
that makes a twittering sound when pulled out of water. 
2 Ino pl/: Zafizuufi wi-;ariifa an association of two 
equally worthless characters. - also ZUfirud. 
"iiJjj zafizuufia In pI zafiaziifil shred of an exploded 
balloon, blown and popped. 
J!.j\i) 1 riz-zafiaziifi Iprop nl Zagazig, the capital of 
Sharqiya province. 
Ijd.Jj 
.J.J..i j zafi(a( Ivil to become elated, thrilled or over-
j?yed. - also zar(a(. - vn zafi(a(a; ava mizafi(a{. 
1 j, j, J j. see J t oJI' : ZUfia{(a(, ZUfia{(uu( 
oJ Jj 
....uj zafiaf (u) Ivtl I to throw (a stone, a ball etc.). 
riZfiUfik-koora w-rana ralfiuf-ha throw the ball at me 
and I'll catch it. 2 to pelt. zafiafuu-ni b-(uub they threw 
stones at me. - also Jafiaf. -vn zafif. zafiafaan; ava 
zaafiif; pva maZfiuuf. 
I 
-
-
• 
• ~ ~J 
~j zafifi (u) Ivtl I to push. ZUfifi il-baab lin-nalJya t-
tanya push the door the other way. IIma-tzufifi'-/don't 
374 
be so snappish! -ZUfifi a lagal-ak push off! 2 to incite. 
zafifiuu-ha lalayya la/aan yiqayyaluu-ni they incited 
her against me to ruin my life. - Ivi/3 {slang] to push 
off, get going.lJ-azufifi' bafia I'll be going then. nizufifi a 
las-suufi let's push off to the market. -vn zafifi, 
z~fiafiaan; ava zaafiifi; pva maZfiuufi. 
"iij zafifia linst n, pI -aatl I a push. ril-larabiyya kaanit 
layza zafifia la/aan il-mutoor yiftaral the car needed a 
push to get the engine going. 2 an incitement. kaanit 
zafifia murriqa sabbibit kull illi lJ~al it was a biased 
i!lcitement that caused all that happened. 
~;;I ritzafifi or rizzafifi Ivil passive of zafifi. -iva 
'!'itzafi fi . 
~.:,; 1 rinzafifi = ritzafifi. - iva minzafifi. 
~ 
j zafifiafi Ivtl I to involve (s.o. or o.s.) by force or 
without invitation. balaa/ tizafifiafi nafs-ak fi-lli yx~~' 
reer-ak don't interfere in other people's business! 2 to 
fOIce-feed (pigeons). -vn taZfiiifi; ava mizafifiafi. 
~;;I ritzafifiafi or rizzafifiafi I Ivij to intrude, interfere 
without invitation. dayman yizzafifiafi fi-x~~iyyaat in-
naas he always intrudes upon people's private affairs. 
2 to be force-fed (of pigeons). - avaliva mitzafifiafi. 
1 
-
-
• 
~~J 
~li j ZUfiaafi In pI -aatl dead-end alley or lane, 
cul-de-sac. 
JJj 
Jij zafial (u) Ivtl to throw (away), cast, hurl, fling. 
zafial il-lJagar biliid he hurled the stone away. - vn zafil; 
ava zaafiil; pva maZfiuul. 
ill j ZUfila In pI -aat, ZUfia11 cudgel. 
Ji;;1 ritzafialor rizzafial Ivil to be thrown, be hurled, 
be flung. -iva mitzifiil . 
Ji.:,; 1 rinzafial = ritzafial. - iva minzifiil. 
Jij zafifial Ivtl to throw or fling several times. "da 
bi-yzafifial he is mad, lie is out of his mind. - vn taZfiiil; 
a~alpva mizafifial. 
Ji;;1 I'itzafifialor rizzafifiallvil to be thrown or flung 
several times. - iva mitzafifial. 
j, J Jj 
.J..li j zafila( I Ivtl 18 to form (s. th.) into a lump or 
bundle. Ib to cause to become healthy and chubby. 
2 Ivil 28 to become lumpy. 2b to become healthy and 
chubby. - vn zafila(a; avalpva mizafila(. 
~.,Iij zafiluu(a In pI zafialii{/lump. 
Ja".li j ZUfilee(a = zafiluu{a. 
.J..li;;1 ritzafila{ or rizzafila{ Ivil I to be formed into a 

375 
r~j 
lump or bundle. 2 to be made healthy and chubby. - vn 
.;~ zakkiir In pi zakkiiral {lsi} one who practises the 
lizac;liit; iva milzac;lat. 
dhikr . 
r.Jj 
",j zac;c;am Ivtl to force-feed (especially ducks or 
.geese) in order to fatten up. - vn tazc;iim; ava/pva 
m.izac;c;am. 
",;1 fitzac;c;am or fizzac;c;am Ivil to be force-fed (of a 
duck or goose). -iva milzac;c;am. 
..lo ..lo <J J j see .) t o.;P : zuc;an{at. zuc;antuup 
I .!l j see l..s.!l j : zika, zakaah 
• .!l j see z..s.!l j : zakaa f 
y .!l j see y..s.!l j : zikiiba 
.:.. .:.. .!l j see .:...:...!l [. : zakilla 
l.).!l j 
.J~ zakar 2 (u) Ivtl If to mention. zakar fasamii-hum 
liI-galsa he mentioned their names in the session. di 
ma-lhaa1 zikr this isn't worth mentioning. -Ithe literary 
passive imperfect also occursl Ijaaga la luzkar some-
thing negligible. lac;addum yuzkar noteworthy prog-
ress. 2 to remember, keep in mind, think of (s.o. or 
s.th.) again and again. fil-eaaC;i1laazim yuzkur iI-mool 
dayman a wise man should always remember that one 
day he will face death. fana m-azkur1 iI-ljikaaya d~ 
I don't remember that matter. - Ivi/3 to participate in 
a dhikr. -vn zikr; ava zaakir; pva mazkuur. 
.J~ zikr In pi fazkaarl I remembrance, mention, re-
collection.lleala zikr ... speaking of ... , as in eala zikr 
i1- fagaaza Ija-Isaafir fimta while on the subject of the 
vacation, when are you going away? -xaalid (or eaatir 
or tayyib) iz-zikr == of blessed memory (reference to 
one deceased). 2 {lsi} dhikr, Sufi ritual based on the 
repeated mention of the name and epithets of God. 
3 fiz-zikr (also fiz-zikr iI-ljakiim) {lsi} the Koran. 
-. .JI~ zakra, zaakira f Inl memory, power of memory. 
eandu C;iwwil zakra he has a good memory. 
;~i.. mazkuur In 
°1 {leg} one mentioned. 
fil-
mazkuriin 
fae/aa 
the above-mentioned (ones). 
II fil-mazkuur derisive reference to one not present 
== you-know-who. 
..s.J~ zikra In pi zikrayaall memory, reminiscence. 
zikra sanawiyya an annual remembrance. 
..:..It.J~ zikrayaal Ipl nI memoirs. 
.J..i;1 filzaka,. or fizzakar Ivil I to be mentioned. 2 to 
be remembered, be kept in mind. - iva mitzikir. 
.J..i; I finzakar = fitzakar. - iva minzikir. 
j~ zakkar Ivt/ to remi~d. zakkar-u laljsan yinsa re-
mind him lest he forget. riI-walad zakkar-ha bi-bn-a-ha 
the boy reminded her of her son. -vn tazk!;r; ava/pva 
mizakkar. 
-. .J..i; tazkara (also taskara) In pi tazaakirl I ticket. 
bi-yic;tae it-tazaakir eala I-baab he buys the tickets at 
the door. daxalna eand i fibbaak it-Iazaakir we went in 
by the box office. IInu,y,ri tazkara half-fare ticket. 
2 prescription . 
..r: .J..i; tazkargi In pi -yyal ticket-seller. 
;\s"..i; tizkaar, 
tazkaar 
In 
pi -aatl 
I souvenir. 
2 memorial. 
..s;\S"..i; lizkaari, 
lazkaari ladjl I souvenir. ,ruura 
lazkariyya a souvenir photograph. 2 commemorative, 
memorial. 
-. j i.. muzakkira, muzakkara, mizakkara In pi -aall 
la mell\orandum. Ib formal registration of a loss etc . 
(made at a police station). 2 set of lecture notes handed 
out by a lecturer to students. 
~I j i.. muzakkaraal Ipl nl memoirs. 
.J..i;1 fitzakkar or fizzakkar Ivt/ to remember. 
fitzakkaril ibn-a-ha she remembered her son. -vn 
lazakkurf; ava milzakkar. 
.JI~ zaakir Ivtl to study (lessons). bi-Izaakir fingliizi 
leeh why are you revising English? ma-b-yic;dar1i 
yzaakir filla bi/-Ieel he can study only at night. -vn 
muzakra, mizakra; ava mizaakir. 
.J1..i;1 filzaakir or fizzaakir Ivil to be studied. - iva 
milzaakir. 
Z .) .!l j see .).!l .) : zakar I, muzakkar 
-Jo.;P.!lj 
~ 
),.a5 J~ zuk,rulugiyya <Gr doksologia> In pi -aatl 
{Chr} doxology. 
.!l.!lj 
~j zakk, zakk (u) Ivil to limp. bi-yzukk i bif-Jimaal he 
limps with the left leg. -vn zakakaan, zakk; ava zaakik. 
.!l' 
r .) 
~ 
j zakam (i, u) Ivtl to cause to suffer from nasal 
congestion, give a stuffy nose to. ma-lic;fil if-Jibbaak -
Ija-lizkim-ni close the window! you'll give me a cold! 

-vn zakamaan; ava zaakim; pva mazkuum. 
4.S" j zakma, zakma In pI -aatl a case of nasal 
congestion. 
rlS"j zukaam InJ nasal congestion. 
rS".;1 fitzakam or fizzakam Ivil to be given or get a 
stuffy nose. - ava/iva mitzikim. 
~.;I finzakam = fitzakam. - ava/iva minzikim. 
rS" j zakkim I Ivil to get or be given a stuffy nose. 2 Ivtl 
=.zakam. -vn tazkiim; ava/pva mizakkim. 
rS".;1 fitzakkim or fizzakkim = fitzakam. - ava/iva 
mitzakkim. 
I~.!lj 
IS"j zika InJ [lsI) alms tax (calculated according to fixed 
rules). 
;lS"j zakaahf = zika. zakaat it-fi[r alms for the poor 
paid by households at the end of Ramadan. 
~j zakilladj·1 good, pleasant (especially of odours). 
nafs' zakiyya a virtuous person. II fir-rawaayib iz-
zakiyya [iron) the smell of the sewers. 
~) fazka I lell morelmost pleasant. IIlaleeh faft/al 
~-~alaah wi-fazka s-salaam [lsI) a formula of praise 
(the best blessing and most everlasting p,::ace be upon 
him) used when the name of the Prophet Muhammad is 
mentioned. 
. 
~j zakka I/vil[lsl) to give obligatory alms or dona- • 
tions according to Islamic precepts. II zakki lan gamaal-
ik ... give us a taste of the wealth of beauty God has 
given you (a flirtatious remark). -ya mzakki baal-ak 
yibakki [proy) (alms-giver, your state causes weeping) 
not all who give alms are good. 2 Ivtl to recommend. 
fana zakkeet-ak land ir-raWs bitaal-ak I put in a good 
word for you to your boss. huwwa l:Ja-yzakkii-ha 
liI-wa;iifa g-gidiida he will recommend her for the new 
post. -vn tazkiyya, tazkiya t; ava mizakki. 
4$.; tazkiyya, tazkiya t In pI -aatl recommendation. 
gaab Jihaadit tazkiyya mit-ittibaad I-iftiraaki I-larabi he 
got a recommendation letter from the Arab Socialist 
Union. Ilfaaz bit-tazkiya to win (in an election) as an 
unopposed candidate. 
J.;I fitzakka or fizzakka Ivil to be recommended. 
- iva mitzakki. 
2~.!lj 
• IS"~ zakaa f Inl intelligence. 
~~ zaki 2 ladj pI fazkiyal intelligent. 
~~i fazka 2 lell morelmost intelligent. 
y~.!lj 
-;..$ j zikiiba In pI zakaayibl large gunny sack (par-
376 
ticularlyone with a capacity of one ardeb). 
yJj 
~ 
'.lj ialabya Icoll nJ doughnut-like sweetmeat(s) fried 
and soaked in syrup. IImif kull it-waC;laat zalabya 
[proy) ... you cannot count on getting away with it every 
time. 
J\Jj zalabaani In *1 [obsol) maker of zalabya. lila 
tc;uul kaani wala maani wala dukkaan iz-zalabaani ... 
don't utter a word of protest! 
j"j" .... Jj 
~j ;alabaaa In pI -aatl totally bald pate. IIliryaan 
zalabaaa stark naked. 
";cJj 
~ 
j zitl:Jifa, zulbifa In pI -aat, zalaabip tortoise. -also 
zul:Jlifa, zil:Jlifa, sublifa, sulbifa, siblifa, sitbifa. 
I Jj Jj 
Jjj zalzit/vtl to shake (of, or as though of, an earth-. 
quake). ~uwat-ha zalzil it-betaan her screams shook the 
walls. -vn zalzala; ava/pva mizalzit. 
Jljj zitzaalln pI zalaazill earthquake. 
J j .; I fitzalzit or fizzalzit Ivil to be shaken (by, or as 
though by, an earthquake). -iva mitzalzit. 
2 Jj Jj 
Jjj zilizli Icoll nJ porcelain-like wall-tile(s). 
j" J j 
.l.Jj zalat l (u) Ivtll to swallow (food) without chew-
ing, gulp down (food). 2 to sinp clean, shave clean. 
zalat raas-u he shaved his head clean. II zalt' malt stark 
naked. -vn zalt; ava zaalit; pva mazluut. 
.kJj zalat2 Inl I Icolll gravel, pebble(s). fiz-zalat~­
~awwaan flint. fiz-zalat it- fiswid basalt. mildit-u tiht/im 
iz-zalat he'll eat anything. fig-galaan yic;arc;aJ iz-zalat 
[proy) (a hungry man will chew gravel) a desperate man 
will 
try 
anything. 
l:Jabiib-ak 
yiblal-Iak iz-zalat 
wi-ladiww-ak yitmannaa-Iak it-valat [proy) ... your 
friend will accept anything you do, but your enemy is 
always trying to find fault. wabuur iz-zalat steam-roller. 
2 aborted foetus (of an animal) . 
~j zalata lunit n, pI -aatl a pebble. Ilraas-u zalala 
(1) he's bald. (2) he has a shaven head. (3) he is obstin-
ate. -muxx-u zayy iz-zalata ... he's a blockhead . 
.l.J) fazlat ladj, fern zalta, pI zultl bald. raas zalta a 
bald head. 

J.,):) zalluutJ: leef zalluut brown bread made in large 
thick round loaves . 
.J.Ij> I fitzalat or fizzalat Ivil I to be swallowed without 
chewing. 2a to strip oneself, undress oneself. fitzala(ti 
min huduum-i I took off my clothes. 2b to be stripped, 
~e made bare. raas-i tzala{it (bil-muus) my head was 
completely shaven. - ava/iva mitzilit . 
.J.I J I finzalat = fitzalat. -iva minzilit· 
.J.I..i zallat Ilvt/la to lay gravel or pebbles on (a road). 
Ib {rur} to plaster (a wall or floor) with mud or clay. 
2 Ivil to become smooth 'and hard. riI-ar{t zalla{it the 
ground dried hard. raas-u zalla{it he became bald. - vn 
tazliit; ava/pva mizallat. 
J.i j> I fitzallat or fizzallat Ivil passive of zallat 1. -iva 
mitzallat· 
tJj 
j"Jj zalla In pI Zilall large storage jar with handles 
(~sually for water) (see PI.A, 10). 
c! j zallac Ivtl I to accept with difficulty, force upon 
oneself. riI-waabid miJ r;aadir yizallac iI-lur;mafil-barr-
i-da one is unable to force down any food in this heat. 
2}0 store in a zalla. -vn tazliil; ava/pva mizallal. 
c! j>1 fitzallal or fizzallal Ivil I to be accepted with 
difficulty. 2 to be stored in a zalla. -iva mitzallac. 
.!l • .!l tJj 
4S:..Jj zalalukka In pI -aatl a small zalla.1I fil-bitti bilwa 
w-beeqa bass i fayla s-samna fiz-zalalukka {rur} a 
village wedding-song complimenting the bride on her 
beauty even though she is an unsophisticated country· 
girl. 
...; Jj 
...Al..i zalaf (i) Ivil to slip, trip. kilma za/afit min lisaan-i 
ma-kunti1 r;a~id far;ul-ha a word slipped out which 
I ~ad never intended to utter. -vn zalafaan; ava zaalif. 
...Alj>1 fitzallif or fizzallif Ivil to fawn (on s.o.), make up 
(to s.o.). balaaf titzallif liI-mudiir don't fawn on the 
d~rector. -ava mitzallif. 
J Jj 
~j zalar; I (u) Ivil to slip, slide, glide. riglay-ya zalar;it 
fit-tiin my feet slipped in the mud. -vn zalar;, zalr;, 
zalar;aan; ava zaalit;. 
~..i zalar;21n1 (street) mud. -/adjectivallyl kull is-sikak 
zalar; all the roads are slippery. 
~..i zalar;a = zalar;2. 
~~..i zallaar;a In pI -aat/l slide, chute. 2 sleigh, sled. 
..;Jj zulleer;a In pI -aatl slippery road or path. 
377 
.:,lil jo mazlar;aan 
In 
pI -aatl 
I railway crossing. 
2 {naut} slip. 
~ 
j>1 finzalar;./vii to slip, slide, glide. minzilir; fooq 
satb iI-mayya gliding along the surface of the water. 
II finzi/aar; vuqruufi {path} slipped disc, prolapsed disc. 
-vn finzilaar;; ava minzilir;. 
.:i..i zallar; I '/vtl to make slippery or muddy. 2/vil to 
become slippery or muddy. -vn tazliir;; ava/pva 
m!zallaq. 
~ 
j> I fitzallar; or fizzallar; Ivil to become or be made 
slippery. - ava/iva mitzallar;. 
r.JJJj 
4.."AI..i Zlil'iuuma Inl protrusion. 
~I.JJJj 
.:,,,AI..i za/ar;oon <perh T siiliigen> Inl red lead. -also 
salar;oon. 
.!lJj.see Ij:zaalik 
I J Jj 
j..i zall l (i) Ivil to slip. rigl-i zallit my foot slipped. 
IIlen-ha zalla she has a roving eye, she is a loose 
,,"::oman. -vn za/a/aan, zall; ava zaalil. 
~..i zalla lunit n, pI -aatl a slip, a mistake, an error, a 
sin. ya-rabb ivfir-Ii zallaat-i 0 God, forgive my sins . 
zallit lisaan a slip of the tongue.llzallit r;adam (a slip of 
the foot) ... a sin. 
JI..i zalal = zalla. 
1 J Jj 
J~..i zalaalladj invarl pure (ofwater).lIbalaal-i zalaal-i 
it's my own to enjoy . 
J~..i zulaalln/l albumen. 2 oedema . 
J~..i zulaali ladj ·1 of or pertaining to zulaa/. 
:J Jj 
J~ zall2 (i) llvtl to humiliate, debase. ma-fii1 baaga 
bi-tzill ii-bani faadam zayy iI-bawga nothing humiliates 
a man like want. II b-azill-ak I'll show you! I'll bring you 
low! 21 Ivil to become lowly, be debased. w-adii-ni 
fahu bald iI-lizz i zalleet after enjoying greatness here 
I am reduced to nothing.lazz i man r;anal wi-zalli man 
tamal {prov} ... he who is content is strong, but he who 
is greedy is brought low. -vn zull; ava zaalil; pva 
mazluul . 
. 
J~ zulllnl humiliation, abasement. firib min kaas iz-
z~1I he has drunk from the cup of shame . 
~~ zilla, zulla In pI -aatl shameful mistake. finta 

l:Ja-limsik-ha lalayya zilla are you going to use it against 
- J Y r j see - J y oj j 
me forever? zayy' ma ykuun waqil-li lala zulla = (he 
orders me around) as if he knows a gUilty secret (whose 
.!l J y r j see .!l J y oj j 
exposure I would do anything to avoid). 
j..J~ zalii//adj pi fazillal despicable, contemptible. 
j~i fazalllell morelmost debased. 
J:),~I fizlaallnl humiliation, debasement. 
~.i.. mazalla Inl humiliation. fif1akwa I-yeer allaah 
mazalla [prov] to complain to other than God is a 
humiliation. 
j..i;1 fitzall or fizzalllvil to be humiliated, be debased. 
- iva mitzall. 
J~I finzall = fitzall. - iva minzall. 
Jl~ zalli/ Ivtl to overcome, surmount. laazim nizallil 
kull ~-~ulubaat marra wal:Jda must we overcome all the 
difficulties at once? -vn tazliil; ava/pva mizallil. 
Jl..i;1 fitzallil or fizzallillvi/l to be overcome, be sur-
mounted. 2 to humble oneself, lower oneself (before 
s.o.). fitzallilt-i-Iu min Yeer !ayda in vain did I humble 
~yself before him. -vn tazallulf; ava/iva mitzallil. 
J..i.:;..1 fistazalllvtl to subjugate, bring into submission 
or thrall. fima l:Ja-tistizill-a-ha bil-filuus illi xadit-ha 
minnak are YOll going to enslave her for the money she 
took from you? - ava mistizill. 
rJ.J Jj 
.... ,1.) zalluuma In pi -aat, zalaliiml trunk of an 
elephant. 
.!l • .!l r J j 
~j zalamukka In pi -aatl parson's nose (of a fowl). 
- also zamuuka, zamukka. 
c..l.ojJj 
~j 
zalantal:Ji Ipl -yyal 1 ladjl penniless, destitute. 
2 In! vagabond, tramp. 
.!l J I r'; 
..ill L.) I fiz-zamaalik Iprop nl upper class district of 
Cairo, situated on the Guezira. 
I.SJ\S:.l.j zamalkaawi In pi -yyal one who supports or 
plays for the Zamalek Sports Club (especially the foot-
ball team). 
Yrj see yojj 
..:.. r j see also I..:.. oj j 
"::"j zamat (i) Ivii to become sultry or stifling (ofweath-
er). -vn zamataan; ava zaamit. 
~j zamla Inl sultriness, stuffiness. -/adjectivallyl 
fid-dinya zamta the weather's stifling. 
';';j zammit Ivtl to stifle, suffocate. sidr-i mzammit my 
chest is constricted. -vn tazmiita; avalpva mizammit. 
';';.;1 fitzammit r or fizz am mit r Ivil to become strict 
or puritanical. 
-vn 
tazammut; ava mitzammit, 
mUlazammit. 
.; [. r j 
jl:j zamgar Ivii to roar (of a lion). -vn zamgara; ava 
mizamgar. 
I 
• 
.;r.; 
J"j zumur l see zamr. 
J"j zamr Inl piping, plpmg sound. tabl' w-zamr 
(1) drumming and piping. (2) fanfare, great deal of 
noise. tubultabl-u w-zumur zamr-u he became widely 
known, he became prominent. li-lIaah ya zamr-i = all 
my effort has been was!ed . 
;t.:j zammaar In pi -iin, zammaaral piper. yimuut 
iz-zammaar wi-~baal-u yillab [prov] the piper dies and 
his finger (still) plays . 
• ;t.:j zummaara In pi -aat, zamamiirl 1 pipe or flute-
like instrument made of cane or wood, penny whistle. 
III:J-atallal zummaarit raqabt-ak I'll tear out your wind-
pipe! -tigmal-hum zummaara wi-t!arraq-hum l~aaya 
[prov] a pipe gathers them, a stick scatters them (ofthe 
mob). 2 sound made on the horn of a vehicle. fiqrab-Iu 
zummaara sound your horn at him! give him a hoot! 
'';j z;ummeera = zummaara. 
;L.jo muzmaar In pi mazamiirl wind instrument made 
of cane or wood. muzmaar baladi double-reed wooden 
pipe with a flared bell (see PU, 18). muzmaar nitaaya 
pipe of the baladi type in the treble range. muzmaar 
dakar pipe of the baladi type in the baritone range. 
muzmaar lurki double or treble bamboo pipe (see PU, 
21). 
;,-jo mazmuur In pi mazamiirl psalm. 
;j zammar Ivi~ 1 to pipe, play on a musical wind in-

strument. 'Iilli yzammar ma-pla((ii-/ daljn-u [prov] (the 
piper cannot cover his chin) "" you cannot hide your 
actions. 2 to hoot (on a vehicle's horn). -vn lazmiir; ava 
mizammar. 
;.:,;1 I'ilzammar I or I'izzammar I Ivil to be played on a 
muzmaar. - iva milzammar. 
2 
• 
Jr J 
.;"j zimir, zumurzJ (a) Ivil to grumble, complain, be 
discontented. -vn zamar; ava zamraan. 
.:..I.;"j zamraan J ladj *1 grumbling, discontented. 
;.i;1 I'ilzammar z or I'izzammar z Ivil to grumble in 
resentment, complain, grouse. -vn lazammur; ava 
milzammar. 
J J r j see J..s r r j : zummeer 
~ J r j 
~::"'j zumurrud Icoll nl emerald(s). IIzumurrud I'l¥far 
topaz. 
;~::"'j zumurruda lunit n, pi -aall an emerald . 
.s~::"'j zumurrudi ladjl of or pertaining to emeralds. 
t) rj 
tjAj zamzalf Ivil 1 to cheat (in money matters, games 
or gambling). 2a to break a promise. 2b to give a false 
promise. -vn zamzalfa; ava mizamzalf. 
Jjrj 
JjAj zamzalj Ivil I to grumble, complain. ljalad 
yizamzalj lamma {alabna I'innu ysalid-na he grumbled 
when we asked him to help. 2 to behave crookedly 
(over money). zamzalj fid-deen he was devious con-
cerning (payment of) the debt. - vn zamzalja; ava 
mizamzalj. 
r j r j 
rjAj zamzam Iprop nl name of a well at Mecca. IImin 
mayyil zamzam {lsI] invocatory formula addressed to 
one performing ritual ablutions (the response being 
gamlan). 
~jAj zamzamiyya In pi -aall water-canteen (made of 
metal or canvas). 
rjAj zamzim 1 Ivtl to wash (s.th.) in water from the 
well zamzam. 2 Ivil to wash oneself in water from the 
well zamzam. -vn zamzama; avalpva mizamzim. 
rjA.:,;1 I'ilzamzim or I'izzamzim Ivil to be washed in 
water from the well zamzam. -iva milzamzim. 
J., r j 
.la..j zama{ (u) 1 Ivtl to make tight, make a tight fit. 
379 
I'il-Iarzi zama{ il-badla zyaada lan il-Iuzuum the tailor 
made the suit too tight. 2 Ivil to become tight. 
I'ig-gazma g-gidiida zam{a lala riglay-ya the new shoes 
are a tight fit. ba{n-i zama{il lalayya my stomach be-
came distended. -vn zam{a; ava zaami£. 
..Ja.:j zamma{ = zama{. - vn lazmii{; avalpva mizamma{. 
~.:,; lazmii{a Ipl -aall instance noun of lazmii{. 
..Ja.:.:,;1 I'ilzamma{ or I'izzamma{ Ivil 1 to dress in tight 
clothes. 2 to become distended (of the stomach). - aval 
iva milzamma{ . 
J rj 
.;.oj zimic;, zumulj (a) Ivil to feel bored, fed up or 
weary. -vn zamalj, zamaljaan; ava zamljaan . 
.:..lA..j zamljaan ladj *1 bored, fed up, weary. 
.!l.r j 
~j zamukka In pi -aall I root, dock (of a horse's 
tail). 2 parson's nose (of a fowl). - also zalamukka. 
-.s".j zamuuka = zamukka. 
Jr j 
j.l.j zumla ladvl in a group.l:Ja-nl:Jiggi zumla we'll goon 
the pilgrimage as a group. 
~L.j zamaala Inl comradeship. 
J,..j zimiil, zamiil In pi zumala, zamaayilll colleague, 
team-mate. kaan zimiil-i fil-madrasa he was my school-
mate. zamayl-u !i/fUlfl his workmates. 2 companion. 
I.l,..j zimiila, zamiila In pi -aat, zumalaall 1 female col-
league. 2 female companion. 
J..lj zaamil Ivtl 1 to take or have as a colleague or 
companion. 2 [rur] to co-operate with, exchange ser-
vices with. landu l:Jumaara wal:Jda bi-yzaamil laleeha 
gaar-u he owns one donkey, which he pairs up with that 
of his neighbour (on a turn and turn about basis). -vn 
muzamla, mizamla, zimaala; ava mizaamil. 
J..I.:,;I I'itzaamil or I'izzaamil Ivil passive of zaamil. - ava 
mitzaamil. 
, 
.!l J r j see .!l J I r j : I'iz-zamaalik, zamalkaawi 
uj 
rj zamm I (i) Ivtl to press, press together. zamm i 
/afayf-u he pressed his lips together. -vn zamm, 
zamamaan; ava zaamim; pva mazmuum. 
jL.j zimaam I Inl 1 Ipl -aatl [leg] area of jurisdiction. 
zimaam il-balad tax-paying lands of a village. I'araaqi 
daaxil iz-zimaam tax-paying lands. I'arqi xaarig iz-
zimaam an area of land which pays no taxes. misaal:Jit 
fakk iz-zimaam survey concerned with establishing 

areas ofland ownership. 2/pl 'lazimmart halter. rein. 
bridle. II zimaam il-'lumuur control of affairs. - 'litwalla 
zmaam iI-l:Jukm "" to seize the reins of power. 
- 'liz-zimaam filit minnu he lost control. 
r-=..i zammim Ivtl to squeeze the breath out of (s.o.). 
- vn tazmiim; ava/pva mizammim. 
r-=.:,;I 'litzammim or 'lizzammim Ivil to have the breath 
squeezed out of one. - iva mitzammim. 
lUJ 
r~ zamm 2• damm 2 J(i) Ivtl to speak ill of. Cjabl' ma 
tzimmi walla timdal:Ji I:JU(P nafs-ikfi-ma(ral:J-i {prov] put 
yourself in my place before you judge me. -vn zamm; 
avo zaamim; pva mazmuum. 
~~ zimma In pI zimam/l integrity. sense of decency. 
ma-baCjaaf fii zimma wala 'limaan there is no longer 
any integrity orfaith. IIma-landuufzimma he's dishon-
est. -zimmit-u wasla or zimmit-u 'lastik he's a man of 
flexible integrity. -xall~t' zimmit-i my conscience is 
clear. I've done all I can. - biz-zimma and bi- (QT fi-) 
zimmit-ak honestly? is that really so? as in bi-zimmit-ak 
miJ juYI-u ma;buu( honestly now. isn't his work good? 
- bi-zimmit-i really. truly. as in bi-zimmit-i .'linti gamiila 
really. you're beautiful! 2 custody. care. landu 
f-zimmit-u mablay kibiir he has a large sum in his cus-
tody. llfi-zimmit-(u) Ii- (he) owes ...• as in fi-zimmit-i 
1-~aal:Jib ii-beet 'lugrit talatt ufhur lowe the landlord 
three months' rent. -fi- (or lala) zimmit (1) for the 
purpose of. as in l:Jagz' lala zimmit it-tal:JCjiiCj detention 
pending investigation. (2) dependent upon. as in lu 
talat liyaal fi-zimmit-u he has three children dependent 
upon him. (3) married to (said only of women). as in 
ma-baCjitf' f-zimmit-i she's no longer my wife. 
'lit-itneen lala zimmit-u the two of them are his wives. 
il...~ zimaam 2 In pI -aatl {bank] claim (in the form of a 
debit or credit). 
r.i.;1 'litzamm Ivil to be ill-spoken of. - iva mitzamm. 
r.i.;1 'linzamm = 'litzamm. - iva minzamm. 
j!.SuJ 
~..i zummeer Inl wild oats (Arena fatua). IInaas zayy 
iz-zummeer people who crop up everywhere they aren't 
wanted. 
<JrJ 
.:r..i zaman 
In 
pI 'lazmaanl 
I period. age. era. 
'lit-zaman da wil:JiJthese are bad times. da min zaman 
biliid that was ages ago. fi-zaman iI-malik fu 'laad in the 
era of King Fuad. IIl:Ja-naaxud zaman-na w-zaman Yer-
na (shall we take our time and that of others too?) we've 
380 
had our time. one can't expect to live twice over. - Ino 
pll 2 (absolute) time. baCja-lha waCjfa lal-mal:Jaaa 
sac teen zaman she's been waiting at the bus stop for two 
whole hours. Cjadiim Cjidam iz-zaman as old as time. 
balwa min balaawi z-zaman an all time disaster. IIlala 
'laaxir iz-zaman "" things have come to a pretty pass 
when ...• as in lala 'laaxir iz-zaman bi-tkallim-ni 
bi(-(ariiCja di it's come to a pretty pass when you speak 
to me like that. 'lit-'lawlaad itxan{lSu lala 'laaxir iz-
zaman bad times are really here now that boys have 
become hippies. - 'lana w-huwwa wiz-zaman (awiil '" 
I'll get even with him in the end! 3 fortune. life. hiyya 
b-tiJtikii-1i miz-zaman she's complaining to me about 
life. 'laah minnak ya zaml!n oh life. how hard you are! 
'lirkin-ha liz-zaman '" put it aside for a rainy day! 
~..i zamani ladjl time-. pertaining to time. temporal. 
Cjunbila zamaniyya time-bomb. 
,:,I.....i zamaan Inl I time. period. era. zamaan il-
mamaliik the days of the Mamelukes. doon juwaan 
zamaan-u the Don Juan of his time. da sul(aan zamaan-
u "" he's got it made. he's in clover. 2 long period of 
time, age. w-alla zamaan it's been ages! (since I saw 
you). baCjaa-1i zamaan ma-kalt'f ruzz' b-laban it's an 
age since I ate rice pudding. da min zamaan that was 
ages ago. ma-juft-a-haajmin zamaan I haven't seen her 
for ages. 3 times past. the old days. zayy' zamaan as it 
used to be. feen Cjahwit zamaan where's the coffee we 
used to drink in the (good) old days? kaanu 
b-yistalmiluu-ha zamaan they used to use it in the old 
days. 4 proper or expected moment. zaman-ha gayya 
she ought to be along at any moment. zamaan-ak gUlt 
you must be hungry by now. kaan zamaan kullal:Jaaga 
xil~it law kunti salidtii-ni everything would have been 
completed by now if you'd helped me. 
.:rjA muzmin ladjl chronic (of an illness). 
j'rJ 
.t- ....... ..i zamhariir f Inl bitterly cold weather. -/adjecti-
vally! 'lid-dinya zamhariir it's bitterly cold. 
I y <JJ 
~..i zumba <T zlmba> In pI zunabl I punch, centre 
punch. 2 stab in the back. dirty and malicious trick. 
c[arab-ni (or 'liddaa-li) zumba he played a dirty trick on 
me . 
~..i zumbagi In pI -yyal back-stabber, player of dirty 
and malicious tricks. 
2 y <JJ 
..,...;~ zamb In pI zunuubl fault, offence, sin. 'liz-zamb' 

381 
t~j 
mif[aleena it's not our fault! ma-luuJzamb it's no fault 
~ y .;, j 
of his. rabb-i-na yiyfir-lu znuub-u may God forgive him 
l.!.Y j zanubya <trade name> In! kind of cheap cigar. 
his sins. tabuur zamb punishment drill. II fana zamb-i 
feeh (1) what fault is it of mine? (2) what's it got to do 
J ~ y .;, j 
with me? (3) what did I do to deserve this? -(ya-tara) 
..,b;j zambij[ <P zanbil> In pi zanabiil/ large basket 
zamb i miin phrase suggesting that the victim of an 
made of green palm leaves. 
apparently chance circumstance has committed in the 
past a wrong which has caught up with him. -zamb-u 
[ala gamb-u he'll get (or: he has got) his just deserts . 
..,...~ zannib Ivtl to punish. law ma [amalt i-/ iI-waagib 
ya-yzannibuu-ni fil-madrasa if I don't do my home-
work they'll punish me at school. zannib-ni saa[a 
fif-/ams i w- fana fi-nti;aar-u he left me standing in the -
sun for an hour, waiting for him. -vn tazniib; ava/pva 
mizannib. 
~..i; tazniiba linst n, pi -aatl penalty, punishment, un- . 
just desert. huwwa-na [amalt i feeh [a/aan fazzannib 
it-tazniiba di what have I done that I should be sub-
jected to this punishment? 
"";..i;1 fitzannib or fizzannib Ivil to be punished. - iva 
mitzannib. 
..,...~i faznab Ivil to do wrong, commit a sin, make a 
mistake. huwwa-na faznabt i f-yaljlj-ak == have I (ever) 
wronged you? -ava muznib. 
..,....i. muznib ladj °1 guilty. 
.J y.;,j 
.)";'j zambuur In pLzanabiirl If hornet. 2 [coarse] 
clitoris. 
Jy';'j 
J.,'j zambalj J ICOll n, pi zanaabiljl [bot] I iris. 2 lily. 
IIzambalj iI-bayr starfish. 
~j zambalja lunit n, pi -aat, zanaabiljl I an iris. 2 a 
lily. Ilzanbaljit babr a starfish. 
J.,' j zambalj 2 Ivil to blossom (especially of an iris 01 
lily). -vn zambalja; ava mizambalj. 
- Jy';'j 
;U.,.l.,.;j zambaliita Ivil noise, commotion, stir. zeeta w-
zambalii{a brouhaha. feeh iz-zambaliita di kull-a-ha 
what's all this clamour about? 
.!.l Jy';'j 
.ill,.;j zambalik <T zemberek> In pi -aatl (metal) 
spring. [arabiyya b-zambalik a clockwork car. 
t.J y.;,j 
t";'j zambuux Inl seed case. 
I':"';'j see also ':"rj 
j;.;; zanta In! closeness (of the weather). 
..;.; j zannit Ivil to become close or stifling (of the 
weather). -vn tazniit; ava mizannit. 
-;;.,;:; tazniita = zanta. 
2.:.. ';'j 
J\;jl fiz-zanaati: fiz-zanaati xaliifa a warrior hero of 
popular epic. 
j,;j zantar Ivil to become bloated. kal wi-batn-u 
zantarit he ate and his stomach became bloated. -vn 
zantara; ava mizantar. 
j,; :; I fitzantar or fizzantar = zantar. - ava mitzantar . 
-.J':"';'j 
~.)";;j zanatuuri <It isolatore> In pi zanatiirl [e/ec] 
insulator (made of glass or porcelain) . 
I~';'j 
~j zingi In pi zunuugl negro. 
2 ~ .;, j see .!.l.;, j : zing, zinga, mizannig 
Jyc';'j 
~ 
j zangabiil Inl ginger. -also ganzabiil, zanzabiil. 
.J ~.;, j 
~j zangar Ivil to become obstinate, behave obsti-
nately. -vn zangara; ava mizhngar. 
-.Jc';'j 
.J1~j zingaraan Inl [mus] mode in Arabic music be-
ginning on C and having 0 flat and B flat. 
t';'j 
~j zinix ladjl rancid.llmuxx-u zinix he's stupid, he's 
slow on the uptake. 
~) faznax lell morelmost rancid. 
,,":\;j zanaaxa Inl rancidness. 
~j zannax, zannix Ivil to turn rancid. -vn tazniix; ava 
mizannax. 

e.r-I ristaznax Ivtl 
to consider rancid. 
-ava 
mistaznax. 
~iJj 
~ j zind In pi zunuud, zinlda, zunuda, zinaadl 
I shoulder and upper foreleg (of animal). 2 forearm (of 
a human). 
.)~j zinaad In pi zinidal trigger. 
~ j zannid Ivtl I to straighten and stiffen (e.g., the 
neck orthe back). maa lak waaCjif mizannid-/i raCjabt-ak 
- IJa-titxaaniCj malaaya what are you doing bridling at 
me like that? you want to pick a fight with me? zannid 
qahr-u w-naxal i1-larabiyya he straightened his back 
and heaved the car forward. 2 Ivil to be stubborn, balk, 
refuse, reject. kull-u-hum wafCju rilla huwwa zannid 
they all agreed but he refused stubbornly. -vn tazniid; 
ava mizannid. 
.~.;; tazniida linst nl I a tensing, a stiffening. 2 an 
opposition, a refusal, a balking. 
~.;;I ritzannid or rizzannid Ivil to be straightened and 
stiffened or straighten and stiffen (ofthe neck or back). 
- ava/iva mitzannid. 
J ~ iJj 
J~j zandaCj Ivil to oppose, challenge, contradict. 
IJa-tzandaCj fi-wiff-i you dare to set yourself against me? 
-Vrl zandaCja; ava mizandaCj. 
;ij~j zandaCja Inl atheism, gross heresy. 
J!~ j zindiiCj In pi zanadCja, zanadiiCjI atheist, gross 
heretic. 
J~.;;I ritzandaCj or rizzandaCj Ivil to become or behave 
as a heretic or atheist. zayy iffi(aan rtzandaCj fi-raaxir 
IJayaat-u like the devil, he ended his life an infidel. - ava 
mitzandaCj . 
J9 j 
J\.;j zmnaar In pi zananiir/l {Chr] girdle (of a priest). 
2 {naut] gunwale strake, topmost horizontal timber in a 
boat's hull. 
iJljiJj 
~I]j zinzaana <prob P zinddn> In pi -aat, zanaziinl 
prison cell. 
JyjiJj 
..6]j zanzabiillnl ginger. - also ganzabiil, zangabiil. 
iJjiJj 
w] j zanzin Ivil to buzz, make a low vibrating humming 
sound. ri(-(abla bi-tzanzin the drum is buzzing (i.e. not 
382 
sounding true). -vn zanzana; ava mizanzin. 
wl]j zinzaan Inl I obnoxious pestering. 2 headache 
caused by irritation. rabbaa-Ii zinzaan fi-dmaalf-i he 
pestered me till he gave me a headache. 
J iJj 
~j zanaCj (u) Ivtl to squeeze into a confined space, 
wedge in, corner. ma-tuznuCjf' xa((-ak kida don't 
cramp up your writing like that! zanaCjt' ~baal-ifil-baab 
I got my finger caught in the door. zanaCjna (uuba taIJt 
i1-kawitf we jammed a stone under the wheel. 
zanaCjuu-ni fil-munafifa they got me into a corner in the 
discussion. zanaCj-1i I-wazilr he penned in my queen (in 
chess). IImaznuuCj fil-filuus in a tight spot for money. 
-kaan maznuuCj wi-ma-/aCjaa-f kabineeh he was caught 
short and didn't find a lavatory. -vn zanCj; ava zaaniCj; 
pva maznuuCj. 
:u.;j zanCja In pi -aatl I crush, lack of space. kaan fii 
zanCja gamda fig-gamliyya there was an awful crush in 
the co-op. 2 tight spot, difficult position or situation. 
kaanit fi-zanCja wiIJfa w-rana salidt-a-ha she was in an 
embarrassing situation and I helped her out. 3 narrow 
lane, alley. -/adjectivallyl riI-IJaara di zanCja this lane is 
narrow. 4 (carp] cramping wedge. 
~) raznaCj lell morelmost narrow or tight. 
J\.;j zinaaCj Inl throat latch, throat band (of a horse, 
donkey etc.). 
;ij\.;j zinaaCja, zannaaCja In pi -aatl any of a range of 
devices for holding something tightly in place or con-
fined (as a tightening nut, a wedge, a mud barrier to 
check the flow of water in a channel, a halterfor holding 
an animal). 
~.;;I ritzanaCj or rizzanaCj Ivil I to be squeezed or 
squeeze oneself (into a confined place etc.). bi-yIJibb' 
yizziniCj fis-sittatt fil- rutubiis he likes to press himself up 
against women in the bus. 2 to be put in or get into a 
tight spot. riI-mumassiliin lamma yizzinCju bl-yb~~u 
liI-mulaCjCjin lafaan yilIJaCj-hum when the actors get 
stuck, they look to the prompter to help them. -ava/iva 
mitziniCj. 
~? I rinzanaCj = ritzanaCj. -avaliva minziniCj. 
~j zannaCj = zanaCj. -vn tazniiCj; avalpva mizannaCj. 
~ zannaCj la/a to crowd in on. sawwaaCj i1-rutubiis 
zannaCj lalayya the bus-driver hemmed me in.fiwayyit 
fubbaan mafyiin fiffaaril bi-yzannaCju la/-banaat a 
group of youths walking in the street crowding the girls. 
IIhumma mzannaCjiin la/ayya fil-filuus they keep me 
hard-up for money. 

~; lazniifia In pllazaniifil = zanfia 1, 2 . 
.;;1 filzannafi or fizzannafi Ivil 1 to be made tight. 
1 to squeeze oneself (e.g., into a confined place). -ava/ 
iva mitzannafi. 
nJojj 
j;';j zanfiuur, zanfiuur In pi zanafiiir, zanafiiirl cor-
ner, niche. 
OJ;';:' zanfiuura, zanfiuura = zanfiuur. 
.!lojj 
..d;j zink (also zing) <Engl> In! zinc. 
~j zinka (also zinga) In pi -aalll zinc plate. 1 vessel 
of zinc (especially a zinc flower-vase) . 
.i..,. mizannik (also mizannig) ladj °1 zinc-plated. 
-t.!lojj 
..... 1 j:. ~ 
j zinkurraaf <Engl> Inl zincography. 
ojojj 
;j zann (i) Ivil 1 to buzz, hum. 1 to whine, nag, pester. 
riI-wad bi-yzinn i m~-~ublj ... the baby's been fretting 
for ages. dabbuur zann a lala xraab liff-u {prov} (a 
wasp that brought about the destruction of its own nest 
through its buzzing) ... he asked for it! fiz-zann a 
lal-widaan fafiwa mis-siljr {prov} nagging in the ears is 
worse (and more effective in achieving its aim) than 
witchcraft. - Ivt/3 to give a beating to. zann-u lalfia he 
gave him a hard beating. -vn zann; ava zaanin. 
ij zanna In pi -aall hum, buzzing sound. II fabu zanna 
on.e afflicted by ringworm of the scalp. 
~l;j zannaan ladj °1 constantly nagging and pestering. 
.:,;1 filzann or fizzann Ivil to be given a beating. - iva 
milzann. 
y-! oj ojj 
~';j zannuuba lIn pi zananiibl rubber sandals con-
sisting of a flat sole fastened to the foot by thongs 
between the toes. 1 Iprop nl nickname for Zaynab. 
j I 0 ojj 
j!.rj zinhaar <P zinhiir> 1 ladvl erectly, vertically. 
waafiif zinhaar standing upright. 1 linterjl {mil, obsol} 
attention! beware! 
joojj 
Ji-j zanhar Ivil to become flushed, becume b!ood-red. 
wiff-a-ha mzanhar min kUlr ig-gary her face is flushed 
from so much running. -vn zanhara, lizanhiir; ava 
mizanhar. 
383 
r 0 oj j see I oj IS j : zen-hum 
IS oj j 
Jj zana (iJ Ivil to commit fornication or adultery. 
IIzana Jiiha (1) he committed fornication with her. 
(2) she is his illegitimate daughter. -vn zina; ava zaani. 
Jj zina Inl fornication, adultery. fibn i zina bastard. 
Jlj zaani In *1 fornicator, adulterer. fiz-zaani yxaaf 
lala mraal-u {prov} the adulterer worries over (the 
fidelity of) his wife . 
~Ij zanya In pi zawaanil fornicatress, adultress, 
profligate woman. ya-bn iz-zanya you son of a whore! 
J;I filzana or fizzana Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
zana. filzanaJiiha someone committed fornication with 
her. - iva milzini. 
oj 
oj zeh Ifem n, pi -aall eleventh letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also zaay, zeen. 
I Y oj 
..,...~ zahab (aJ Ivil to go, go away. !,iza Ijaqaril 
il-malayka zahabil if-faya(iin {prov} when angels are 
present, devils depart. saalil mafaf-ha lafil-u zahab as 
soon as he saw her he took leave of his senses. II/azkaril 
zihaab wi-fiyaab round-trip ticket. -vn zihaab; ava 
zaahib. 
"""Y'~ '''''''Y':' zahuub Inl {slang} pound (money). 
..,....i. mazhab In pi mazaahibl 1 method or procedure 
followed. 1 {lsi} orthodox Islamic school of jurispru-
dence. 3 refrain (of a song). 4 creed, religion. 
..,...~ madhab In pi madaahibl creed, religion (in con-
texts of abuse only). yiljrafi madhab-ak ... damn you! 
II mif laarif madhab ik-kalb i da gaa-na mneen heaven 
knows where that bastard came from! -(allal madahib-
ha ... he gave her a rough time. 
Z Y 0 j see Z y 
0 ~ : zahabi, lazhiib 
Hj 
.a j zihid, zahad (aJ Ivtl to lose interest in, be indiffe-
rent to. !'iIli limlik-u /- rud lizhad-u n-nafs {prov} ... what 
the hand obtains the heart disdains. -vn zuhd, 
zahadaan; ava zaahid. 
.aj zuhd Inl renunciation (of the world), abstemious-
ness, asceticism. !'iz-zuhd i yiqman liI-labd i(-(ariifi 
lis-salaada 1- !'abadiyya renunciation (of worldly temp-
tations) guarantees man the way to eternal happiness . 
.alj zaahid In ° and pi zuhhaadl abstemious person, 
ascetic. fid-dinyaf-na;ar iz-zaahid ma-lislahil-/ig-gary i 

waraaha in the opinion of the ascetic worldly comfort is 
not worth bothering about . 
...IoAj zahiid ladjl little, small, low (of price), 
insignificant . 
.a) fazhad lel/l morelmost abstemious. 2 morelmost 
insignificant. 
~j zahhid Ivtl to cause to lose interest. nukran-ha 
liI-gimiil zahhid-ni fiiha her ingratitude made me go off 
her. -vn tazhiid; ava/pva mizahhid . 
.a; I fitzahhid or fizzahhid Ivii to be made to lose 
interest. - iva mitzahhid. 
.a.;-I fistazhid Ivt/l to consider small, little or insig-
nificant.2 to feel indifferent. 3 to live a life ofrenuncia-
tion of worldly comfort. -ava mistazhid. 
1Jo j 
j>j zahr l Inl I/colll blossom(s), flower(s). 2 (also 
mayyit zahr) orange-flower water. 
i j> j zahra I In, pI zaharaat, zuhuur, fazhaar/l lunit nl 
a blossom, a flower. zuhuur bawliyya {hort] annuals. 
II zahrit sigaara the glowing end of a cigarette. -zaharaat 
ik-kajjaafa Brownies, junior Girl Guides. -maat 
fi-zahrit jabaab-u he died in the flower of his youth. 
2 motif in tent applique work (see PI.H, 8). 
~Ij>j zahraaya lunit n! a blossom, a flower. 
• Ij>j .Ij>j zahraaf: lalways defl fatma z-zahraaf 
epithet of Fatima, the daughter of the Prophet Muh-
ammad. 
~j>j zuhriyya In pI -aatl flower-pot, vase. 
i j>:) 1 fiz-zuhara, fiz-zuhra Iprop n! the planet Venus. 
IS j> j zuhari, zuhri In! syphilis. 
j>j'Jl ril-fazhar Iprop n! el-Azhar. gaamil wi-gamlit 
iI-fazhar el-Azhar Mosque and University. 
1Sj» 
fazhari 
I 
ladjl pertaining to el-Azhar. 
2/n *1 graduate of or student at el-Azhar, Azharite. 
j> jA mazhar In pI mazaahirl broad shallow tam-
bourine (without jingles). 
if:" j>ljA mazahirgi In pI -yyal player of the mazhar. 
j>jl.. mazahr Inl flower water. 
j.j zahhar Ivii to put forth blossom.landina mawaalib 
bi-tibtidi tzahhar we have citrus trees which are begin-
ning to blossom. -vn tazhiir; ava mizahhar. 
j>,)jl fizdahart Ivii to prosper, flourish. fit-tigaara 
zdaharit trade flourished. -vn fizdihaar; ava mizdihir, 
muzdahirt . 
lJoj 
j>j zahr 2 ICOII nl blueing (for laundry). 
ij>j zahra 2 lunit n, pI -aatl blueing (for laundry). 
lSj>j zahri ladj/light blue. 
j.j zahhar 2 Ivtl to blue. bi-tif(Uf iI-lfasiil wi-baldeen 
bi-tzahhar-u she rinses the laundry and then blues it. 
-vn tazhiir; ava/pva mizahhar. 
3 
• 
JOJ 
j>j zahr 3 Inl pig iron, cast iron. 
4 
• 
JOJ 
j>j zahr 4 <prob Tzar> In! I/coll nl dice. 2 pair of 
dice (in backgammon).llmalalehj' ya zahr ... you can't 
always be lucky! win a few lose a few! 
ij>j zahra 3 /unit n, pI -aatl a die . 
ojoj 
.:.,. j zahzah, zahzih Ivii to ~hine brightly. ril-ljamar 
kaan mizahzah (IS-sama the moon was shining brightly 
in the sky. II fid-dinya zahzahit-lu life became rosy for 
him. -vn zahzaha, tizahziih; ava mizahzah, mizahzih. 
J oj 
JAj zihilj, zuhulj (a) Ivii to become fed up. zihiljt' min 
ig-gawaaz wi-ljaraf ig-gawaaz I've had enough of the 
whole disgusting business of marriage. -vn zahalj, 
zahaljaan. 
.:,w.j z;ahljaan ladj *1 fed up, bored, exasperated, 
annoyed . 
JA) fazhalj lell morelmost bored, exasperated, etc. 
~j zahhalj Ivtl to cause to be fed up, exasperate. 
bi-tfa~illi-lfaayit ma tzahhalj iI-bayyaal she haggles to 
the point of exasperating the vendor. -vn tazhiilj; ava/ 
pva mizahhalj. 
.. . 
JA;I fitzahhalj or fizzahhalj Ivil to be made exasper-
ated. - iva mitzahhalj. 
Joj 
jA~ zahal (i) Ivtl to shock, astonish, bewilder, 
astound. man;ar yizh,iI iI-luljuul an amazing sight. 
- Ithe literary passive perfect frequently occursl fana 
zuhilt' mil-man;ar I was stunned by the sight. -vn 
zuhuul; ava zaahil; pva mazhuul. 
jA.i;1 finzahallvil to be distracted, be bewildered, be 
amazed. -iva minzihil. 
jA.i;1 fitzahalor fizzahal = finzahal. - iva mitzihil. 
roj 
~j zahama Inl 1 stink, stench. 2 frightening atmos-
phere. fil-gabbaana bil-leel kaan laleeha zahama the 
cemetery in the dark of the night had a horrifying 
atmosphere about it. -also zaxama. 
...lAj zahaama = zahama. -also zaxaama. 

~Ij 
.;,A~ zihn In pI razhaanl mind, brain. laayiz yina//a{ 
zihn i{-{aalib he wants to stimulate the student's mind. 
~~ zihni, zuhni ladjl mental. maghuud zihni mental 
effort. 
.J1j 
.~..i zahwa T Inl 1 brightness (of colour). 2 zenith, 
height. rumm; kalsuum maatit wi-hiyya f-zahwit /uhrit-
ha Umm Kulthul1l died at the height of her fame. 
~I..i zaahi ladjl vivid, bright. ralwaan zahya bright 
colours. 
~) razha lell brighter/brightest. 
.Jj 
J~ zu Inominal, fern (and also masc in unelevated 
speech) zaat, pI zawi, zawaatT; always in constrl pos-
sessor of. raagi/ zu rahammiyya an important man. 
mas rala mif zaat rahammiyya an unimportant matter. 
zawi 1-ramlaak property owners. bayawanaat zawaat 
i/-rarbal quadrupeds. rinta my zaat rahammiyya 
landiJ you're of no importance to me. IIzu I-qilda 
eleventh month of the Muslim year. -zu I-bigga twelfth 
month of the Muslim year. see further under..:;.. I j 
~~ zii: kullu zii laahatin gabbaar [provj every person 
with a physical defect has a cruel streak. 
..:;.. I .J j see ..:;.. I j : zawaat, zawaati 
":" .J j see I ":".J ~ : muziib, muzaab 
t":" .J j see t":" j : zawbaca 
~ ..:;.. .J j see also ..:;.. I.S j 
.:jJ..i zootan Ivil to turn rancid. - ava mizootan. 
[.Jj see also Z j.J [ 
[.J..i zoogT In pI razwaagl husband. 
~J..i zooga In pI zawgaatl wife.lltaladdud iz-zawgaat 
polygamy. 
~J..i zawgi ladj/la even (of numbers). Ib pertaining 
to doubles (in games). (ril-)xa{{ iz-zawgi doubles line 
(e.g., of a tennis cour!). 2 marital. xi/afaat zawgiyya 
marital disputes. 
~J..i zawgiyya Inl the state of marriage, matrimony. 
beet iz-zawgiyya marital home. 
~..i ziiga Inl marrying, marriage. sirr iz-ziiga [Chrj 
the sacrament of marriage. 
[.IJ..i zawaag Inl marriage. 
[.IJjo mizwaag ladj invarl frequently marrying. 
385 
JJj 
[.J..i zawwag Ivtl to effect the marriage of (s.o.) (to). 
- avaliva mizawwig. 
[.;jil ritzawwig or rizzawwig I/vtl to marry, wed. 
2 Ivil to get married. - ava mitzawwig. 
[.J,)jo muzdawagT ladjl 1 double(d). 2 duplicate. 
r~aal muzdawag duplicate receipt . 
C.J j see C I.S j : zooba 
1~.Jj 
,)I..i zaad 1 In! food, provisions. (ja{alit iz-zaad she gave 
up eating. II riz-zaad wiz-ziwwaad (or zuwwaad) all pro-
visions, as in xall~ laz-zaad wiz-zuwwaad he finished 
off everything . 
,)I;..i ziwwaad, zuwwaad: riz-zaad wiz-ziwwaad see 
zaad l • 
o,)G..i zuwwaada, ziwwaada Inl provisions taken on 
long trips (by, e.g., pilgrims to Mecca). 
,);..i zawwid l Ivtl to supply, furnish, provide. -vn 
tazwiid; avalpva mizawwid, mizawwad. 
,);jil ritzawwid or rizzawwid Ivil 1 to provision one-
self. 2 to be provided, be supplied (with s.th.). -avaliva 
mitzawwid. 
Z ~.J j see 
~ I.S j : ziwaada, zawwid 2 
I 
• 
.).J.) 
;I..i zaar2 (u) 1 Ivtl to visit. ya baxt; min zaar wi-xaffif 
[provj blessed is he who keeps his visits short! 2 Ivil to 
visit the tomb of the Prophet (at Medina). -vn ziyaara; 
ava zaayir . 
• .J~..i ziyaara In pI -aatl 1 visit. 2 food brought by visi-
tors for their host. 
,J!.1..i zaayir In • and pI zuwwaarl visitor. 
),jil rinzaar l Ivil to be visited. -iva minzaar . 
;ljil ritzaar or rizzaar = rinzaar I. -iva mitzaar . 
.J;..i zawwar1lvtl to show (visitors) round. -vn tazwiir; 
ava mizawwar . 
.J;jil ritzawwar 1 or rizzawwar 1 Ivil to be shown round 
(of visitors). - iva mitzawwar. 
.JJ lji 1 ritzaawar or rizzaawar Ivil to exchange visits. 
ba{{alu yitzawru maca balt/. they stopped visiting each 
other. -vn tazaawur; ava mitzaawir. 
Z 
• 
.).J.) 
.JJ..i ziwir'(a) Ivil 1 to choke (on something caught in 
the throat). ri/Ii yaakulli-wabd-u yizwar [provj who 
eats alone chokes. 2 to backfire (of a welder's torch). 
-vn zawaraan. 
.JJ..i zawar (i) Ivtl to cause to choke (on s.th. caught in 

JJj 
the throat). IUCima kbiira mil-leef zawarit-u a big piece 
of bread has choked him. -vn zawar, zawaraan; ava 
zaawir; pva mazwuur. 
.).1j zoor In pi zuwaar, fizwaarl 18 throat. lIyaaga 
masy' zoor a mere nothing, a little bite, just a trifle to 
keep your appetite at bay (offood). -lalee zoor yiblal 
it-toor he is a glutton. -ma-b-yinzil{' min zoor-i (or, 
more emphatically, ma-b-yinzil-tii{ min zoor) I can't 
stand him, I can't stomach him. -ma-landuu-f reer 
layyil bi-zoor-u he only has one child (to feed). 
Ib [butcher] windpipe and lungs. 2 any of a range of 
throat-shaped parts (as a piston-casing, narrow part of a 
tubular drum, connecting-pipe etc.). 
.:,1.).1j zawraan ladj "I choking (on s.th. caught in the 
throat). IIgeeb-u zawraan he's very rich. 
,).1.;,;1 fitzawar or !,iuawar Ivil to be made to choke. 
- iva mitziwir. 
3 
' 
J.JJ 
.).1j zuur Inl falsehood. fihaada zuur false testimony, 
perjury. 
11 biz-zuur (1) by force, as in wakkiluu-ni biz-zuur they 
forced me to eat. (2) with difficulty, as in yagaz 
ti-nafs-u tazkara biz-zuur he could hardly book himself 
a ticket. 
.);j zawwar 2 Ivtl to counterfeit (paper money, docu-
ments 
etc.). 
-vn 
tazwiir; 
avalpva 
mizawwar. 
muzawwar. 
.);.:,. muzawwir In °1 forger, counterfeiter. 
JI.);.:,. mizawwaraati, 
muzawwaraati 
In 
pi -yyal 
forger . 
.);.;,;1 fitzawwar 2 or fizzawwar 2 Ivil to be counter-
feited fil- fimqa tzawwarit bi- fiid waayid yarriif the 
signature has been forged by the hand of an expert. - iva 
mitzawwar. 
JJ.Jj 
.j.).1j zooraCi r In pi zawaariCiI small boat. zooraCi 
turbiid torpedo boat. zooraCi sibaaCi ~acing boat (as, 
e.g., an eight, a scull). 
t.Jj 
~ 
Jj zoola, zuula ladj invarl weak, submissive. ~ayiiy 
tuul wi-larq' laakin raagil zoola true he's a gigantic 
man but it's easy to push him around. 
t.Jj 
t1j zaar (u) Ivil to slip away, escape unnoticed. yawilt 
azuur minhum I tried to give them the slip. Illeen-u 
zayra he has a roving eye. -vn zawaraan; ava zaayir. 
386 
t;j zawwar/vil to absent oneself without permission, 
play truant. huwwa !'ayyaanan bi-yzawwar mif{url 
sometimes 
he 
plays 
hookey 
from 
work. 
II ma-tzawwar{' min il-mawquul don't try to evade the 
subject. - vn tazwiir; ava mizawwar. 
Jli.;.:,. mizawwaraati In pi -yyal truant. 
I oJ.J j 
";Ij zaaf (u) Ivtl to push away, remove. zafit-u bliid 
she pushed him away. zaaf-u guwwa he pushed him 
inside. II biz-zoof plentiful, in great quantity. - yoof zoof 
hastily, without delay, as in xad-ni yoof zoof min reer 
ma yisfa/-ni he hustled me off without even asking me. 
-vn zoof, zawafaan; ava zaayif. 
~Jj zoofa lunit n, pi -aatl. (a single) push. 
11 biz-zoofa plentiful, in great quantity. fin-naas kaanit 
biz-zoofa people were (present) in great numbers. 
";1.;,;1 !'itzaaf or fizzaaf Ivil to be pushed away, be 
removed. - iva mitzaaf. 
";1.:,;1 finzaaf = fitzaaf. - iva minzaaf. 
Z(oJ.Jj} 
";Jj zooF Inl[rur] roots and stalks of wheat collected 
for fuel after harvesting. II zoof it-ba/ad the scum of the 
town . 
";Jj zooF Inl [bot] hyssop. 
I 
-
, 
I.J .J .) 
.jIJj ziwaaCi Inl 1 making up, putting on cosmetics. 
2 make-up, cosmetics . 
.j;j zawwaCi Ivtl 1 to decorate, ornament. 2 to make 
up with cosmetics. - vn tazwiiCi; avalpva mizawwaCi . 
.j;.;,;1 fitzawwaCi or fizzawwaCi Ivil I to be decorated, 
be ornamented. maraakib mitzawwaCia b-fallaam 
boats decorated with flags. 2 to wear make-up. !'it-bint' 
kaanit mizzawwaCia la/a singit lafara the girl was made-
up to kill. -ava/iva mltzawwaCi . 
Z J .J j see also I J .J ~ 
.jJ~ ZOOCi In pi fazwaaCil1 taste, discrimination. zooCi 
gamiil good taste. ZOOCi-u baladi he has uncultivated 
down-to-earth taste. bint"lala zooCi-i a girl to my taste. 
fin-naas !'azwaaCi everyone to his own taste. II !'umm 
iz-ZOOCi epithet of Cairo. i tact, manners. yawitt' 
faxud-ha biz-zOOCi I tried to take it politely. IIxalli 
landak zooCi have some consideration! - kull-ak ZOOCi 
(1) "" you're too kind (said on receiving a compliment). 
(2) [sarc] what beautiful manners! (said to one using 
abusive language). - kull-ak zooCi wi-yinniyya "" thank 
you (said on receiving a favour). 

~J~ zawc;iyya 
In 
pi -aall 
= zooC;. 
min 
baab 
iz-zawc;iyya kaan iaazim nizuur-u for the sake of decen-
cy we should have visited him. 
t;iJ~ zawc;iyyan ladvl as a matter of consideration or 
decency. 
JJ~i I'azwac; lell 1 morelmost elegant or tasteful. 
2 morelmost polite. 
J;..i; lazawwuq r Inl (artistic) appreciation. 
JJ..i::..1 I'islazwac; 
Ivii 
to behave politely. -vn 
I'islizwaac;; ava mislazwac;. 
.!l.J; 
,!}Jj zuuk Inl stifle (of a horse). 
IJ.J; 
Jlj zaal l (u) Ivi/t~ cease. I'in-nilma zaalil min wiff-u 
God's grace has left him.llzawaal ya dunya ... ashes to 
ashes. -vn zawaal, zawa/aan; ava zaayil. 
Jlj zaal 2 (i) Ivtlto remove. -vn zayalaan; ava zaayil. 
JIJj zawaal Inl 1 noon. bald iz-zawaal afternoon. 
IIxatt iz-zawaal meridian. 2 shadow (of a person). I'ana 
faayif zawaal bi-yilljarrak ficf.-cf.alma I see something 
moving the dark. 
iJJjo mazwala In pi mazaawill sundial. 
JJlj zaawillvt/to practise (a profession), pursue (an 
interest). bil-muzawla by practice. larxi~ muzawlil iI-
mihna licence to practise the profession. -vn muzawla, 
mizawla; ava mizaawil. 
JI) I'azaal = zaal 2 • -vn I'izaala; ava muziil. 
.}.jo muziil/n pi -aall remover. muziil (/~-1ada) rust 
remover. 
lJ.J; 
~Jj zuweela: baab zuweela Iprop n! Bab Zuweila, an 
old city gate in Cairo. 
p; 
i1j zaam(u)lvi/ltogrowI.2toutteramatingcall(ofa 
male pigeon). -vn zawamaan, zoom; ava zaayim. 
LJ .J; see LJ I .J .J ; : zawwaana 
LJ1.J.J; 
~Gj zawwaana <poss T zlvana from P> In pi -aall 
compass saw. 
IIS.J; 
ISJj zawa (i) Ivtll to shape into the form of an angle. 
IIzawa Ijawagb-u he frowned. - l'iI-liyaal zawyiin-u the 
children are harassing him. 2 to put out of sight, hide 
387 
away. 3 [texl} to double. -vn zawy, zawayaan; ava 
zaawi; pva mazwi. 
~ij zawya In pi -aal, 
zawaaya, ziwy, ziwayJ I 
~a angle. zawya Ijadda acute angle. zawya iiayma right 
angle. zawya munfariga obtuse angle. I bf aspect. 
zawaaya I-baljs aspects of the study. 2 a small mosque 
(without a minaret). - Ipl ziwy only/3[carp, eng} try 
square. zawyil kuslilla mitre square. 
ISJjil I'itzawa or I'izzawa Ivii I to be formed into an 
angle. 2 to be put out of sight, be hidden away. 3 [text} 
to be doubled. -iva mitziwi . 
ISJjil I'inzawa = I'itzawa. - iva minziwi. 
2 IS .J; see .J;: zawi 
IS; see .J;: zii 
LJ .!l lIS; see LJ.!l1 IS ~ : ziyaakun 
":-' IS; see I,,:-,.J ~ : muziib, muzaab 
J ":-' IS; 
';':j .~j zeebaii In! mercury, quicksilver. 
~IS; 
~j zeet In pI zuyuut, ziyuutl oil. zeet faer hair-oil. 
ziyuut tafl:Jiim lubricating oils. zeet bizra cotton-seed oil. 
l'iI-iiassiis bi-yimsalj iI-mariicf. biz-zeet iI-muiiaddas the 
priest anoints the sick man with consecrated oil.llljajiif 
zeet pure hashiish. -zeet baar linseed oil. -zeet tayyib 
olive oil. - I'i/-baljri zayy iz-zeet the sea is totally calm. 
-zet-hum fi-diiic;hum in the family, as in gawwiznaa-ha 
/i-bn· [amm-a-ha w-bac;a zet-na f-diiiiii-na we gave her 
in marriage to her cousin and it all stayed in the family. 
~j zeeti ladj *1 oil-coloured, dark green. 
~jl I'iz-zetiyya Iprop n! an industrial region near 
Suez famous for its oil refineries. 
":'~j zayyaat In *'[obsol} food-oil merchant. 
~jo mazyata In pi mazaayitl oil-can, oiler. 
oJ.*j zatuun Icoll n! I olive tree(s). 2 olive(s). see 
further under LJ ~ .J ; 
oJ.*j I I'iz-zatuun Iprop n! district in north-eastern 
Cairo. 
~.*j zatuuna lunit n, pi -aatl I an olive tree. 2 an 
olive. 
~l;'*j zatuunaaya = zatuuna. 
J.*j zatuuni ladj invarl olive-green in colour. 
':';j zayyit I Ivtl to oil, apply oil to, render oily. 2 IviJ 
to become oily, become covered with oil. -vn tazyiit; 
ava/pya mizayyit. 

':';.:,;1 ritzayyit or rizzayyit Ivil to be oiled, be covered 
with oil. - iva mitzayyit. 
c.~j 
C.'.i zaa/J (i) Ivtll to shift, displace. zii/J ik-kursifwayya 
move the chair away a bit! zaa/J ramm-u it dispelled his 
gloom. zi/Jt· laleehum iJ1uri I shifted the work on to 
them. 2 [slang] to gobble up, polish off. yiziil.J kull-u he 
wolfs down everything (you give him). -vn zeel.J. 
zayal.Jaan; ava zaayil.J. 
~j zeel.Ja linst nl a displacement.lIgat-ak zeel.Ja go to 
hell! 
~Jj zool.Ja = zee/Ja. 
c.1.:,;1 ritzaal.J or rizzaal.J Ivtl I to be shifted, be dis-
placed. rahi balwa wi-tzaal.Jit ... that's a weight off my 
shoulders! 2 [slang] to be gobbled up, be polished off. 
- iva mitzaal.J. 
c.1ji 1 rinzaal.J = ritzaal.J. - iva minzaal.J. 
c.1) razaal.J T = zaal.J. -vn rizaal.Ja. 
~~j 
~Ij zaad 2 (i) Ivill to increase, grow. zidt' sabla kiilu 
I put on seven kilos in weight. ladad is-sukkaan 
bi-yziid kull' sana the population increases every year. 
takaliif iI-l.Jayaah zaadit tjawi the cost of living increased 
greatly. /Jubb-u Iiiha bi-yziid mala I-rayyaam his love 
for her grows as time passes.llzaad or (faaq) wi-ralta 
(1) to suffice amply, as in riI-akl' zaad wi-ratta the food 
was more than enough. (2) to increase out of all 
bounds, as in rilli zaad wi-ralta I-yomeen dool ~anlit 
ig-glzam iI-l.Jariimi what has really expanded and taken 
over recently is the women's shoe trade. 2 to go 
beyond. m~ruuf-u ma-kan1' yziid lan gineeh fif1ahr 
his_ pocket-money allowance never exceeded one 
pound a month. ris-sigaara ma-tzid1' lan waratja 
titl.Jiritj a cigllrette is nothing more than a piece of paper 
that burns. riI-leela hiyya g-gawaaz wi-iii yziid lalee 
min xilfa a family equals marriage plus whatever chil-
dren may come. II riI-l.Jikaaya zayda lan l.Jadd-a-ha this 
thing is going too far. rilli yziid lan l.Jadd-u yintjilib 
Ii-qidd-u [proy] ... whatever goes to extremes becomes 
counterproductive. - Ivtl 3 to add to. rabb-i-na 
yziid-ak min naliim-u may Our Lord add unto you of 
His blessings! ziid in-nabi ~ala bless the Prophet once 
more! say (the phrase) laleeh ~-~alaatu was-salaam 
again! min zaad-ak ziid-u w-xalli wlaad-ak labiid-u 
]proy] whoever has been a benefactor for you, be a 
388 
benefactor to him, and make your children his slaves. 
-vn ziyaada; ava zaayid. 
.~4j ziyaada In pi -aatl Is increase. nilmil tal.Jliil 
Iiz-ziyaada fil- rintaag we analyse the increase in pro-
duction. la zyaada wala nutj~aan no more, no less. 
Ib rise, increment. kull-u-hum mistanniyyiin ziyaada 
f-murattabat-hum they are all expecting a rise in their 
salaries. 2 excess, surplus. niJiil iz-ziyadaat illi (illit we 
remove the superfluities which have emerged. fii 
malliim ziyaada there's an extra millime. biJ-Jakl' da 
bi-Ylawwaq daxl-u wi-zyaada kamaan in this way, he 
does more than make up for his income. IItjahwa 
(sukkar) ziyaada extra-sweet coffee. -ziyaada lan in 
excess of, as in tudin ziyaada lan iI-luzuum too thick. 
~ bi-zyaada enough. bi-zyaada kida that's enough! 
bi-zyaada kalaam (that's) enough talking! bi-zyaada 
laleeha tjillit iI-/Jaya btalit-ha di she's shameless 
enough as it is. 
~Ij zaayid I ladj ·1 excessive, beyond what is desirable 
or right. miJ tjaadir ralabbi kull' talabaat-ik iz-zayda di 
I cannot satisfy all these excessive demands of yours. 
riz-zaayid raxu n-naatj~ [proy] ... too much is as bad as 
too little. 
~Ij zaarid Iprepl plus, in addition to. riI-murattab 
zaarid iI-badalaat the salary plus allowances. 
~ zaa rid rinn Iconjl in addition to the fact that. 
.~Ij zayda In pi zawaayidl (unwanted) protuberance, 
outgrowth, unevenness. II riz-zayda (d-dudiyya) [anat] 
the (vermiform) appendix. 
~) razyad lell more/most. riI-wagal bi-yibtja razyad 
fil- rawwil the pain is greater at first. 
ran~ lumr-i 
ma-bilt' b-!'azyad mit-tasliira I have never sold any-
thing for more than the fixed price. 
~j zeed Iprop nl male given name. II zeed wi-lbeed this 
and that, as in kunt' miJ laarif !'anaam wi-b-afakkar 
fi-zeed wi-libeed I could not get to sleep and I kept 
thinking of this and that. 
~ !'abu zeed iI-hilaali a warrior hero of folk epic. 
ka-!'innak ya-bu zeed ma-razeet [proy] (as though, 0 
Abu Zayd, you had not campaigned) ... we might as 
well not have bothered, our efforts came to nothing. 
sikkit !'abu zeed kull-a-ha masaalik [proy] (Abu Zayd's 
way is all clear paths) ... you can't keep a good man 
down . 
• ~IJj ziwaada In pi -aatl I increment, rise (in salary). 
batjaa-Ii sanateen min reer ziwaada I've been two years 
without a rise. 2 excess, what is over and above the 
required amount. tab da /Jatjtj-i mazbuut feen batja 
z-ziwaada ... this is my rightful share, but what about 
that extra (you used to offer me)? 

,)Ijo mazaad In pi -aatl auction. baalit kull" lafl-a-ha 
bil-mazaad she sold off all her furniture by auction. 
,);j zawwid2 Ivtl I to augment, increase. nizawwid 
i1-far{t mayya we give the land more water. IIraayil1 
fazawwid i1-lagala I'm going to get the tyre (more) 
inflated. - fi;-;aahir finni zawwidt-a-ha l1abbiteen it 
seems that I overdid things a bit. 2 to add. bi-ti{bux 
i1-firaax wi-bi-tzawwid laleehum mall1 she cooks the 
chickens and (then) adds salt to them. -vn tazwiid; ava 
mizawwid. 
-,!Ij zaayid 2 Ivil to bid (in an auction). fil-mizayda 
las-samak bidding for fish. -vn mizayda; ava mizaayid. 
t-,!Ijo mizayda, muzaydaT In pi -aatl auction. 
-,!Ijo muzaayidT In ·1 bidder, outbidder. 
-'! I.; 1 fitzaayid or fizzaayid Ivil to take part in an auc-
tion. -ava mitzaayi~. 
,)bjl fizdaad Ivil to increase. fil-xu{Uura .zdaadit the 
danger increased. fil- falraaq bi-tizdaad the symptoms 
are becoming more pronounced. -vn fizdiyaad; ava 
mizdaad. 
,)I.-r-I fistazaad (yistaziid, yistazaadJ) Ivtl to ask for 
more of, look for more of. nil1ibb i nistaziid mallumaat 
we like to get more information. -vn fistizaada; ava 
mustaziid T . 
I J ISJ 
)~j zayyaar Inl {naut] rope attaching the rear end of 
the tiller to the rudder. 
;'j zayyar Ivtl to fasten, attach. -vn tazyiir; ava 
mizayyar. 
t.r-!'; tazyiira In pi -aat, tazayiirl {obsol] a black robe 
formerly worn by middle-class women. 
t;'jo mizayyara Iprop oJ evil spirit believed to appear 
in the form of a woman clad in white garb. 
;'.;1 fitzayyar or fizzayyar Ivil to put on a tazyiira. 
-ava mitzayyara. 
1 J ISJ 
.J'..j ziir I 
In· pi fazyaar,. ziyaarl large handle-less 
earthenware jar used for storing and filtering water. 
(see PI.A, 7). II faadi z-ziir wi-faadi ya{aa (here is the 
ziir and here is its cover (part of a children's rhyme» ... 
here is what clinches it! (in presenting proof). -dawwar 
iz-ziir lala ya{aa lamma ltat;aa ... he met his match. 
-kasar ziir waraa ... he said good riddance· to him. 
t.J'..jo mazyara In pi mazaayirl cupboard-like stand on 
which a ziir is placed. 
3 J IS J 
.J'..j ziir2: fiz-ziir saalim Iprop n! a hero of popular epic. 
389 
4 J IS J see I J .J J : ziyaara 
[JISJ 
~ 
.J'..lj zayirga <poss P ztiycha> Inl table of random 
letters used in divination. -also yazirga. 
.J:, IS J 
J.lj zaa{ (i) Ivil I to become uproarious. ril-mu;ahra 
zaapt the demonstration broke into pandemonium. 
II fil-l1ikaaya zaapt the affair got out of hand. 2 to be-
come joyful. -vn zee{a; ava zaayi{. 
~j zee{a In! clamour, uproar. zee{a w-zambalii{a 
brouhaha. bi-yir;mil zee{a lal-lJagaat il-hayfa he makes 
a fuss about trivial things. 
J.;j zayya{ Ivil to indulge in noisy merriment, make a 
joyous commotion. -vn tazyii{; ava mizayya{. 
tlSJ 
t'~ zaac (i) I Ivtl·o to broadcast, send out, spread 
abroad (especially by radio or television). ma-tzil-J 
il-xabar don't spread the news. 2 Ivil to become known, 
be spread abroad. ~ii{-u zaal its fame spread. -vn 
zaYlaan; ava zaayil. 
t,j;1 fitzaac or fizzaac/vil to be broadcast (by radio). 
-iva mitzaal. 
t'j,; 1 finzaac = fitzaac· -iva minzaac· 
t'~i fazaal Ivtl to broadcast (by radio). malJawt 
fiz881a broadcasting station. -vn fizaala; ava muziir;i 
pya muzaac. 
~,~! fizaaca In pi -aatl radio broadcast. llfil-fizaaca 
on the radio. 
Ci)... muziil In ·1 announcer, broadcaster. 
JISJ 
~j zeef Inl affectation. 
~j zayyif Ivtl to counterfeit, forge (particularly 
money). -vn tazyiif; ava mizayyif; pya muzayyaf. 
~jo muzayyif In ·1 forger . 
~.;I fitzayyif or fizzayyif Ivil to be counterfeited, be 
forged (of money in particular). -iva mitzayyif. 
I J ISJ 
';'j zayyat; I Ivil to creak. baab mizayyat; a creaking 
door. sidr-u bi-yzayyat; his chest wheezes. -vn tazyiit;; 
ava mizayyat;. 
1 J ISJ 
~j ziit; In pi -aatl I edge, border. 2 strip. 
';'j zayyat; 2 Ivtl to make an edge or border around 
(s..th.). -vn tazyiit;; ava/pya mizaryat;. 

J", j 
390 
~,;I rilzayya/f or rizzaya/f Ivil to be given an edging or 
alphabet. -also zaay, zeh. 
border. -iva milzayya/f. 
J~j see J.Jj:muziil 
I~~j 
.:,Ij zaan 2 (i) Ivt! to adorn (with one's presence). rinta 
zinl iI-beel your presence has adorned the house, your 
visit is an honour. II hiyya 'ziin-u w-huwwa yzin-ha they 
are each as bad as the other, they're a good match. -vn 
zayanaan; ava zaayin . 
.J!.j zeen I ladj/l good. kalaam zeen sound words. ya 
zeen iz-zeen you best of men! riz-zeen wif-feen the good 
and the bad. - ladverbiallyl nibayyin zeen we read the 
future well (a gypsy catchword). lI"alli caz-zeen bless 
the Prophet! 1 pretty, handsome. 
~...J zen-hum Iprop nI poor district in southern Cairo 
on the northern edge of Fustat. 
~j ziina In pI -sal, ziyanl decoration, ornamentation. 
ril-ca/f/' ziina wisdom is an adornment. lumaq ziina 
fairy lights. 
~~j ziyaana Inl barbering, the barber's trade. 
ri/callim iz-ziyaana /-ruus iI-yalaama [prov] (he learnt 
to barber on the heads of orphans) "" the defenceless 
make the best guinea-pigs. 
';'j zayyin Ivt! I to adorn, decorate. bi-yzayyinu 
I-midan bi-Iumaq ca/aan iI-muulid they decorate the 
minarets with lights for the muulid. 1 [rur] to cut the 
hair of (s.o.). -vn lazyiin; ava/pya mizayyin . 
.;.;,. mizayyin lIn ·1 barber, hairdresser for men. 
rabrad min iI-mizayyiniin [prov] bolder than a barber, 
cheekier than a barber. zayy iI-mizayyin yidfJak 
cal-rfl,flac bi-(a/f(a/fil iI-ma/fB,f" [prov] like the barber, 
he fools the bald with the clicking of the scissors (i.e. he 
deceives him by pretending to go along with him). 
l/adj ·1 cheeky, bold. 
.1,;1 rilzayyin or rizzayyin Ivil I to be adorned, be 
decorated. 1 to be cut (of hair). -iva mitzayyin. 
l~~j 
.J!.j zeen 2 Ifem n, pI -aall eleventh letter of Arabic 
~~~j 
~j zeenab Iprop nI female given name. ris-sayyida 
zeenab mosque and quarter in the southern part of 
central Cairo, named after the grand-daughter of the 
Prophet Muhammad. 
..s~j see also ~Ijj- and ..s~jj-
~j zayy Iprep/l as, like. (acm-a-ha zayy in-nicnaac it 
tastes like mint. zayy ayyaam zamaan as in the old days. 
zayy' cawayd-ak as you usually do, as is your habit. sill' 
zayy' di such a woman.llzayy(-u) zayy ... (it is)just like, 
(it is) equal to, as in zayyu zayy i/-/fizaaz it's just like 
glass, zayyak zayy' reer-ak fair shares for all! 1 such as. 
rascaar iI-xuqaar zayy iI-bamya wi/-bisilla wil-koosa 
rla/acil /fawi the prices of vegetables such as okra, 
green peas and zucchini have gone up a lot. fii duwal 
/fablil-ha I-mufki/a di /fabliina zayy i,f-"iin wil-hind some 
countries, such as China and India, have encountered 
this problem before us. 3 about, something like, appro-
ximately. zawwidi calee zayy' sill' beqaal add about six 
eggs to it. rir-rusuum zayy' xamsa w-sabciin /firJ the 
dues are something like seventy-five piastres. 
1ft zayy' ma lconj/I as, just as, in the same way as. 
win-nabi zayy' ma b-a/fuul kida I swear it's exactly as 
I say. fJ-acmil zayy' ma-na caayiz I'll do as I please. 
ni/fdar nibiic-u zayy' ma-flarenaa we can sell it for the 
same price we bought it for.llbi-Y/fuum biiha zayy' ma 
ykuun he takes it on as circumstances permit. -liJrab 
reeh - zayy' ma ykuun 'What 'II you drink?' 'Just what-
ever's around.' 1 as if. rid-dukloor bi-ycaalig iI-marqa 
zayy' ma ykuunu wlaad-u the doctor treats the patients 
as if they were his own children. da zayy' ma ykuun fii 
laar benna it is as though there were a feud between us. 
~j ziyy In pI razyaarl uniform. 
.~ji razyaar Ipl nI women's dresses, women's 
fashions. carq' razyaar fashion show. 
~,;I rilzayya or rizzayya Ivil to dress oneself or be 
dressed. rilzayya b-ziyy-u I-caskari he put on his milit-
ary uniform. -ava/iva milzayyi. 

• I ..,.. 
• \.. saa f' Ifem n, pI -aatl fourth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also sih. 
cl ..,.. 
d- saag: xajab saag teak wood. 
c. 1..,.. 
:.-L... saal:Ja In pI -aatl playground, recreation space, 
parade 
ground. 
IIsaal:Ja 
jaGbiyya 
government-
sponsored youth club for military and sports training. 
I ~ I ..,.. 
• ~L... saada <P siida> ladj invarl plain, simple. c;umaaj 
saada un patterned cloth. jaay saada tea without milk. 
c;ahwasaada (Turkish) coffee without sugar. II fis-saada 
lis-saada [joe] unsweetened coffee for gentlemen. 
I.S J I V" 
I.S;L... saari' <Hindi> Inl sari. 
..,..1..,.. 
..,..L... saas: min is-saas lir-raas from head to toe, from 
top to bottom. 
Itl..,.. 
~L... saaGa I In pI -aatl la hour. b-ajtaral bis-saaGa 
I work by the hour. Ib hour of the day. fis-saaGa kaam 
what time is it? fis-saaGa tnaajar it is twelve o'clock. 
2 time, period of time. miin gayy is-saGaa-di who's 
coming at this hour? fi-nafs is-saaGa at the same time. 
mamnuuG it-tadxiin saaGit if-jurl no smoking during 
working time. saaGa I-c;alb-ak wi-saaGa /-rabb-ak 
[prov] (a time for yourself and a time for your Lord) ... 
(there is) a time for pleasure and a time for prayer. 
IIS3Gt-U c;arrabit his hour is near, he is about to die . 
-saaGit il-fJa;;i ma-titGawwaq-j [prov] you can never 
make up for lost pleasures. - kuUi saaGa wit-tanya very 
often, as in hiyya kul/i saar;a wit-tanya tkallim-ni bit-
tilifoo" she's always ringing me up! - fibn i saGt-u man of 
whims. -sar;it-ha at the same time, as infaakir lamma 
kunti bi-tdawwar Galayya - saGit-ha baCia kunti fil-
maktab remember the time you were looking for me? 
well, I was at the office then. -fi-saGit-ha then and 
there, at once, as in lamma fJ~a/it i1-l:Jadsa f-saGit-ha gih 
i1-bulii~ when the accident occurred the police came at 
once. J timepiece, watch, clock. IIsaaGa tawc;itiyya 
stop-watch . 
11 saar;it ma lconjl (I) when( ever), as in saaGit ma 
y~affar laha tiigi when he whistles, she comes. (2) as 
soon as, the moment, as in saaGit ma yiw~al fibGat-u 
I-beet as soon as he arrives send him home. huwwa kida 
min saaGit ma twalad he's been like that since the mo-
ment he was born. min saar;it is-sawra ma c;aamit from 
the time the revolution took place . 
..:...I&.L... salaat ladvl sometimes. IlsaGaat kitiira quite 
often. 
J I&. L... salaati In pI -yyal watchmaker, watch-repairer . 
~I.,... sawaali ladvl sometimes. 
2 t I..,.. see t I.S ..,.. : saaGa 2 
t. 1..,.. 
t L.. saari <Tsag> l/adj invarl {obsol] sound, unim-
paired; current only in the expressions saar (or saar) 
saliim (I) A-I (of health), (2) safe and sound, c;ir/ saar 
one piastre, c;irfeen saar two piastres. 2 In pi saraatl 
piastre, piastre coin. fiddii-ni saar give me a piastre! 
lajara saar ten piastres. 

JI~ 
JIIJ'" 
JI... saaCj I In pI siCjaan, siqaanl I stem, stalk (of a 
plant). 2 (human) leg, calf. 
1S.!l':"-1J'" 
*'; safutukiyya <Gr theotokia> In pI -aatl {Chr] 
hymn to the Virgin Mary. 
J -IJ'" 
JL safal (a) I/vtl to question, ask. ruufJ fisfal-u go 
and ask him. kunt' bidd-i fasfal-ak fJaaga I wanted to 
ask you something. 2 Ivil to make inquiries. waafJid 
kaan bi-yisfallaleek (or lannak) someone was asking 
about you. -vn sufaal, suf/aan; ava saafil; pya 
masfuul. 
• sa fal ft- lusu in neg contexts! to be concerned about. 
ma-b-yisfal-J' ftyya he doesn't give a damn about me. 
fihmil-u wala tisfal Iii ignore him and don't bother 
about him at all. 
JI;.. sufaal lIn! begging. IIfJumart-ak il-larga wala 
sufaal il-Iafiim {prov] = better to depend on your 
limited resources than to ask for the help of a mean 
man. 2/n pI fasfila, sufalaatJI question, query. 
II fil-gawaab lala Cjadd is-sufaal the answer should 
match the question (Le. be brief, don't be longwinded). 
J.;... safiil ladj pI sufala! I importunate. 2 cheeky. 
3 thick-skinned. 
J:1... saafil l t In ·1 beggar. 
J.lj-o masfuul ladj ·1 I responsible, accountable. 
fana mas fuul can il-fJikaaya di I am responsible for this 
matter. fil-lana~ir il-masfuula lan nagafJ-ha the fac-
tors responsible for its success. 2 responsible, in 
charge. miin if-J~ il-masfuul hina who's the person in 
charge here? ril-masfuliin mif malruucf. yiddaxxalu 
I-kull' ~yayyara wi-kbiira the authorities shouldn't have 
to deal with all the petty details. 
~.Ij-o masfuliyya In pI -aatl responsibility. 
J;.. surtt Inl wish. fafJmid-ak ya rabb' nawwilt-i-ni 
suf/-i 0 Lord! praise be to Thee for fulfilling my wish. 
41L masfala In pI masaafill I issue, question, mat-
ter. fin-n~r' mas falit waCjt victory is a question oftime. 
laazim ninaaCjifil-masfala di b-huduufwe must discuss 
this matter quietly. 2 {math] problem. 
JLI fitsafalor fissafail/vil to be asked (of a ques-
tion). da s-su faal illi malruucf. yitsiril that is the question 
that should be asked. 2 Ivtl to be asked (a question). 
ftl-igtimaal fitsafal sufaal mufJrig in the meeting he 
was asked an embarrassing question. - iva mitsifil. 
JLI finsafal = fitsafal. - iva minsifil. 
J.1... saaril 2 /vtl to question.la tsaril-ni wala fasaf/-ak 
392 
we shouldn't question each other. -vn misaf/a, 
musaf/a. 
J.wl fitsaaril or fissaafillvil to wonder, ask oneself. 
fana b-iltsaafil feeli illi lamalt-u ftik I am at a loss to 
know what I have done against you. -ava mitsaafil. 
r' IJ'" 
r!- sifim (a) Ivil to become weary, bored, or tired. 
fana sfimt' min tuul inti;aar-u I am fed up with waiting 
for him for so long. -vn safam, safaama· 
rL safam (i) Ivtl to bore, weary, make fed up. -ava 
saafim. 
4.L safaama In! tediousness. 
.:,I..L safmaan ladj */-"fed up, weary, tired, bored, 
exasperated . 
rLI fitsafam or l'issafam Ivil I to be bored, be 
wearied, be made fed up. 2 (impersonal) passive of 
sifim. ma-yitsifim-J' minnu no one could be bored by 
him. - iva mitsifim. 
J.,I YIJ'" 
~l,.... subaata <prob Copt> In pI -aat, sabaayitl clus-
ter, bunch (of dates or bananas). -also zubaata. 
t~lylJ'" 
el,.... sabaanix <P sipanakh> Inl spinach. 
·yYIJ'" 
~ 
sabab In pI fasbaabl cause, reason. fid-difJk min 
veer sabab Cjillit fadab to laugh without good reason is 
impolite. bi-sabab on account of, owing to. 
~4- sabbaaba In pI -aatl index finger. 
~ ~ sabbuuba In! {slang] business of a peddler, goods 
carried by a peddler. 
~ 
sabbiib In pI sabiibal. {slang] peddler. 
....;:... sabbib Ivtl to cause. fis-surla bi-tsabbib mUl;am 
il-fJawaadis speed causes most accidents. rabb-i-na 
bi-ysabbib il-fasbaab {prov] God creates causes (so 
that man can see an order in things, though God is not 
bound by cause and effect). -vn tasbiib; ava misabbib . 
..:..t;.... musabbibaat 
Ipl 
nl 
underlying 
factors. 
ril-mawcf.uul luu fasbaab wi-msabbibaat kitiira the 
matter is very complex . 
.,..:;.....1· fitsabbib or fissabbib Ivil I to be the reason, be 
the cause. feeh illi tsabbib lil-laya what was the cause of 
the illness? 2 to be caused. fi/-laya tsabbib lan i/-fakl 
il-wisix the illness was caused by dirty food. 3 to earn 
one's living (especially by hawking goods in the street). 
daayir tuul in-nahaar yissabbib-Iu ft-Jwayyit xucf.aar he 

goes around all day hawking vegetables to make a 
living. -ava/iva mitsabbib. 
..,.;:...:.. mitsabbib or missabbib In ·1 one who trades on a 
very small scale, peddler. 
lyy~ 
.;:.. sabb I (i) I Ivtl to revile, abuse. raal) sabib-Ii d-diin 
he went and insulted my religion. n masbuubafii (she is) 
accused of committing adultery with him. 1 Ivil to be 
abusive, be insulting. huwwa-nta bi-tsibb i f-baaba 
kamaan you dare to insult Father as well? IIl'in fuft-u 
bi-ysibb ilraf I'innu bi-yl)ibb [prov] = he must be in 
love to act so touchily. -vn sabb; ava saabib; pva 
masbuub. 
~ 
sabb 2 In! defamation. IIl'is-sabb iI-la/ani [leg] 
slander, defamation of character. -qanuun is-sabb libel 
law. 
~ subba Inl object of shame, disgrace or dishonour. 
xallit-u subba Cjuddaam in-naas she disgraced him in 
public. -/adjectivallyl da raagil subba the man's a 
disgrace! 
~ 
masabba = sabb 2. 
';""'1 I'itsabb or I'issabb Ivil to be abused, be reviled, 
be insulted. -iva mitsabb. 
";:""'1 I'insabb = I'itsabb. -iva minsabb. 
o::.J.Jyy~ 
~ ~ sapbuuta <perh Sp sapote> Inll avocado tree. 
1 avocado fruit. 
lo::.Jy~ 
.::.-,; sibit (a) Ivilla to become immobile, stay in place. 
I'isbat fi-makaan-ak stay where you are! Ib to remain 
steadfast. sibit fi-ka/aam-u he kept to what he said, he 
stood by his words. Ill'amlaak wi-I'amwaal sabta [leg] 
real estate, immovable property. -fi-muntaha s-sabaat 
as calm(ly) as can be. 1 to become set or fixed. 
!'iI-buCjla sibtit the stain has set. I'alwaan sabta fast 
colours. ma-Iuu-f ral'y i saabit he has no fixed opinion. 
3 to be proved. !'iI-Cjaqiyya sibtit lalee the case was 
proved against him. -vn subuut, sabaat, sabataan; ava 
saabit. 
.::.-,; sabat' (i) Ivtl I to prove. I'ana mustalidd asbit 
ka/aam-i I'm ready to prove what I say. 1 to record, 
make a note of. bi-yiddii-k w~1 i w-yisbit-u fid-daftar he 
gives you a receipt and records it in the notebook. - Ivil 
3 to be established, be verified. sabat-tina I'inn 
iI-l)amaas Ii-wal)d-u miJ kifaaya it was proved to us that 
enthusiasm alone is not enough.lIsubuut ir-rul'ya COll-
firmation of the sighting of the new moon marking the 
393 
beginning of a lunar month, particularly Ramadan. -vn 
subuut; ava saabit; pva masbuut. 
..:.\.; sabaat In/.[athl] standing position. rama I-Cjur1i 
min is-sabaat he threw the discus from a standing 
position. 
..::.r ~ saabit linterjl [mil, athl] as you are! 
.::...,; tibit ladj • and pI tubatal tenacious, cheeky, inso-
lent, obstinate . 
..:..;i I'asbat I lell morelmost reliable, firm, steady etc. 
. . . 
.::...,;i I'atbat lell morelmost cheeky, insolent etc. 
..:.1.; tabaat: laaju f-tabaat wi-nabaat = they lived 
happily ever after. 
~I.; tabaata In! obstinacy, insolence, intransigence. 
~ 
tabiit ladj pI tubata/ = tibit. 
.;;.; sabbit Ivtl I to fi~, fasten. sabbit iI-l'illaan lala 
I-I)ee{a he fastened tlte poster to the wall. 2a to stabil-
ize, make firm. bi-nsabbit iJ-/alri b-binas we clip the 
hair in place. gihaaz bi-ysabbit ik-kahraba an apparatus 
which stabilizes the electricity. sabbit I'iid-ak steady 
your hand! IIsirr it-tasbiit [Chr] sacrament of confirma-
tion. lb [admin] to hire on a permanent basis (after a 
probationary period). bald i sana I-mudiir sabbit-ni fif-
furl after a year the director made my appointment 
permanen.t. - Ivil 3 to provide evidence, establish 
validity. tiCjdar tisabbit lak-ka/am-da can you establish 
the truthfulness of what has been said? - vn tasbiit; 
ava/pva misabbit. 
.:.;:. tabbit I Ivtl to fix tightly, tighten. tab bit I'iid-ak 
lal-tigaam tighten your grip on the reins. 1 Ivil 2a to 
behave assiduously or tenaciously. tabbit la/ayya 
lafaan I'azuur-u he insisted on my visiting him. tabbitu 
lad-duruus Cjabl iI-imtil)aan they studied hard before 
the exam. 2b to ensure firmness or secure fastening. 
tabbitit la/-xiyaa{a she reinforced the stitching. II tabbit 
fiyya hold on to me tightly! -vn tatbiit; ava/pva mitabbit. 
4 
misabbit, musabbit In pI -aatl fixing fluid. 
'::';::';1 I'itsabbit or I'issabbit Ivil I to be fastened. 
l'iI-l'adawaat bi-tissabbit bi-masamiir the fixtures are 
fastened on with nails. 2a to stabilize, firm up, be stabil-
ized, be firmed up. !'iI-l)araara ssabbitit lala daraga 
mUlayyana the temperature was stabilized at a specific 
level. I'is-samaar yissabbit fi-balq-u the rushes are 
drawn up tightly together. 2b to be hired on a perma-
nent basis (after a probationary period). 3 to ascertain 
the truth. I'ana tsabbitti min ik-kalaam ilti tCjaal 
I verified what was said. ruul) issabbit minnu go and 
find out the truth from him. -ava/iva mitsabbit. 
'::';;1 I'ittabbit Ivil passive of tabbit. - iva mittabbit. 
.::.-,;i l'asbat 2 Ivtl to prove. I'ana I'asbatt-i-Iak bid-datiil 
iI-qaa(il I'inn i huwwa iii Cjaal I proved to you incon-

trovertibly that he's the one who said (that). -vn 
fisbaat . 
.:..1.,;1 fisbaat In pI -aatl proof. II muzakkirit fisbaat 
baala official complaint lodged with police. -jaahid 
Yisbaat witness for the prosecution. 
1.:.. y V"' 
..::.,... sabt (also yoom sabt) In pI subUta, sibita, subuutal 
a Saturday. Yis-sabt or yoom is-sabt Saturday. II Yis-sabt' 
sabbuut ... Saturday is grim (part of a children's rhyme 
about the days of the week -Saturday, as the first day of 
the working week, has the same significance in Egypt as 
blue Monday does in the West). II min fiaddim is-sabt' 
lafia I-badd' fiuddaamu {provj ... he who does good on 
Saturday will find his reward on Sunday. -sabt in-nuur 
{Chrj Holy Saturday. 
.:..;"" sabbuUl: Yis-sabt' sabbuut see sabt. 
3(.:..yV"') 
..::.,... sabat} <P sapad> In pI fisbita. siMal basket 
woven of split cane, (loosely) any stiff straight-sided 
basket. II sabat mayya basket containing a vessel of 
water for f1owe.rs. 
:(-. ' I Yis-sabtiyya Iprop nl quarter in Northern Cairo. 
IIfaar is-sabtiyya a large mouse or rat which, it is humor-
ously claimed, is responsible for frequent cuts in the 
Cairo electricity supply. 
4 .:.. y V"' see ':".J Y Y V" : sabbuuta 
-r':"yV"' 
~ 
sibtimbir. sibtimbar <Engl> Inl September. 
IcyV"' 
~ 
sibba In pI sibabl I prayer beads. rosary. worry 
beads. IIlas-sibba numerously. as in yillan fabuu-k 
las-sibba damn your father several times over! 2 {naUlj 
lifeline . 
.J~ subbaan or subbaan: subbaan allaah (1) praise 
be to God (formula used in prayer). (2) (also 
subbaan-ak ya rabb) God be praised! (exclamation of 
wonder). IIsubbaan allaah laleek (or fi-{abl-ak) ... 
Good Lord! is that any way to behave? -subbaan-u 
wa-talaala may He be praised. (formula used after the 
mentioning of God's name as a sign of absolute submis-
sion), as in Yallaah subbaan-u wa-talaa/a Yamar bir-
rabma God, may He be praised, commanded the show-
mg of mercy. 
c.;"" subbuub Inl Most Glorious One (epithet of 
God). 
394 
~ 
masbaba In pI masaabibl = sibba. 
e.- sabbab I Ivtlto praise God. 2 Ivilto say or repeat 
subbaan allaah. bi-ysabbab las-sibba he says subbaan 
allaah while passing the prayer beads through his fin-
gers.1I bi-ysabbab bi-bamd iI-mudiir {derisj he is always 
singing the praise of the director. -vn tasbiib; ava 
misabbab· 
c:--' tasbiib In pI tasabiibl glorification of God by ex-
claiming subbaan allaah. 
~ 
tasbiiba Ipl -aatl instance noun of tasblib. 
~ 
tasbiba In pI tasabiibl {Chrj collection of litur-
gical hymns of praise. 
~I Yitsabbab or fissabab Ivilto be praised, be glor-
ified (of God). -iva mitsabbab. 
1CYV"' 
~ 
sabab (a) Ivi/l to seep. riI-mayya sababu min tabt 
iI-baab the water seeped in under the door. 2 to crawl 
(of insects). riI-bafifi' saabib lal-bee{a bedbugs are 
crawling on the wall. 3t to swim. IIdayman yisbab fi-
Yafkaar-u he is always lost in thought. -saabib 
fi-larafi-u mil-barr he is dripping with sweat because of 
the heat. -b-afi{al sabb-u I'll ruin him. • vn sabb. 
sibaaba; ava saabib. 
~~ sibaaba Inl swimming. bammaam sibaaba swim-
ming pool. 
c.4- sabbaab In *1 swimmer. 
3cy V"' 
~ 
sibab linterjl ... get him! (said to incite a dog 
against someone). 
t y V"' 
t:: sabax Inl salt and other chemicals that prevent 
agricultural land from growing plants. farq' sabax agri-
cultural land that has been damaged by chemicals. 
t~ sibaax Inl fertilizer. sibaax baladi manure, dung 
used as fertilizer. sibaax kimaawi chemical fertilizer. 
r:;- sabbax I Ivtlto fertilize, enrich. nisabbax i/- farq' 
bi-sbaax baladi we fertilize the soil with manure. II fana 
b-asabbax-u lala iii lamal-u fiik I will give him a talk-
ing to for what he's done to you. 2 Ivilto become sterile 
owing to the presence of chemicals or salts (of land). 
Yil-rarq' sabbaxit wi-layza llaag the soil has become 
unproductive and needs treatment. -vn tasbiix; ava/pva 
misabbax. 
~ 
tasbiixa In pI -aatl instance noun of tasbiix. 
c;-.I Yitsabbax or fissabbax Ivil to be fertilized, be 
enriched. - iva mitsabbax. 

rl~y~ 
[.'..10.- sibidaag <P safediij> Inl white lead. -also 
I'isbidaag. 
~y~ 
;.;~ sabbuura, 
sabbuura 
In 
pI -aat, 
sababiirl 
blackboard. 
.Jt.::J~y~ 
.i.ftM' sibirtu, sibartu <It spirito> In! alcohol, (methy-
lated) spirit. sibirtu I'abyae{ surgical spirit, rubbing alco-
hol. sibirtu I'abmar methylated spirits. 
~ l;.ftM' sibirtaaya In pI -aatl I can with a long spout 
used to feed methylated spirits to primus stoves. 
2 alcohol burner. 
~~y~ 
~.;l.- sabaaris Icoll nl cigarette butts gathered from 
the street etc. for re-use. 
~l....ftM' sibirsaaya lunit n, pI -aatl a cigarette butt. 
.r.-.;l.- sabarsagi In pI -yyal gatherer of discarded 
cigarette butts. 
.r.ftM' sabras Ivil [joe] to smoke cigarette butts. -vn 
sabrasa; ava misabras. 
Iy~y~ 
~ 
sabsib I Ivtlto take great pains with (one's hair). 
-vn sabsaba; avalpva misabsib. 
~, I'itsabsib or I'issabsib Ivil to be overdone, be 
elaborately coiffed (of hair). -vn tisabsiib, ava 
mitsabsib. 
ly~y~ 
~ 
sabsib 2 Ivil to flow, stream. lenee sabsibit bid-
dumuul or I'id-dumuul sabsibit min lenee ... he shed 
tears. -vn sabsaba; ava misabsib. 
J(y~y~) 
~ 
sibsib In pI sabaasibl small bamboo flute, pitch-
ed higher than the naay. 
...-l.- sabaasib: I'is-sabaasib il-kubra {magic] collec-
tion of incantations pronounced against evil spirits. 
l.l ...... . ~ 
.l..,... sib{ In pI l'asbaa{1 grandchild. II I'asbaa{ in-nabi the 
Prophet's descendants. - I'il- I'asbaa{ the twelve tribes of 
Israel. 
1 J., Y ~ see J., I y ~ : subaa{a 
395 
Ity~ 
~ 
sabla Inurn: in absol state, in apposition, or w foil 
n sing in contexts of ordering and itemizing; pI -aatl 
seven. sabla w-liJriin twenty-seven. sabla saar seven 
piastres. sablajaay seven teas. II I'ibn i (or bint i) sabla 
(I) a baby born two months prematurely. (2) a person 
of highly-strung nervous temperament (characteristics 
said to be typical of those born prematurely). 
- I'is-sabla w-dimmit-ha (or w-timmit-ha) every con-
ceivable evil, as in {al/alu fii I'is-sabla w-dimmit-ha 
they dragged up every bad thing they could say about 
him, lamal is-sabla w-dimmit-ha he left no sin uncom-
mitted. - I'is-sabla the seven different ways of reading 
the Koran. bi-yiljra (I-qurl'aan) bis-sabla he recites the 
Koran in 
the seven ways 
(a sign of great 
accomplishment) . 
c::- sabal/num; in const w foil n pI; usu sabalt when 
followed by n ordinarily w initial hamzal seven. sabal 
daljaayilj seven minutes. sabalt iyyaam seven days. 
IIbuloofar bi-yaalja sabla V-necked sweater. -sabal 
~anaayil f- I'idee wil-bamm· baa{i{ lalee {prov] he has 
everything going for him but luck. - I'is-sabal banaat 
the Sisters of Charity . 
.rl.- subaali ladjl consisting of seven parts. 
t."... subuUl Inl ceremony marking the seventh day 
after the birth of a child. 
.::..\&. .,...J' I'is-subulaat Inl Jewish Pentecost, Feast of 
Weeks. 
t."...i I'usbuul, 
I'asbuul 
In 
pI I'asabiill 
week. 
I'usbuul il-I'alaam {Chr] Holy Week. 
.r."...i I'usbuuli, 
I'asbuuli ladjl weekly. lamra 
I'usbuliyya a weekly overhaul. 
~ 
~ 
'r\;..,- sabaltaajar I Inurn pI -aatl seven-
teen. 2 I'il-sabaltaajar ladj invarl the seventeenth. 
~ 
sabliin I Inurn pI -aatl seventy. II I'ibn i sittiin fi-
sabliin see siniin. 2 I'is-sabliin ladj invarl the seventieth. 
~~ .~ sublumiyya I Inuml seven hundred. 
2 I'is-sabliin ladj invarl the seven-hundredth. 
t-l... saabil ladjl seventh. IImin saabil sama I-saabil 
I'are{ from very high up to very low down. -saabil 
nooma a very deep sleep. - I'in-nabi wa~~a lala saabil 
gaar [prov] ... the Prophet said we should care for even 
our most distant neighbours. 
i:- sabbal/vil I to make seven. 2 to complete seven 
days. I'il-mawluud sabbal the baby is seven days old . 
- vn tasbiil; ava rilisabbal. 
lty~ 
c::- sabl In pI subula, subuUl, sibaall lion. IIraagil 
sabl a real man! -ya sabl-i J epithet a woman gives her 

husband when mourning him. -geeb is-sabl' ma-yixlaa-
f [proyJ (a lion always has plenty) "" a gallant person 
can always find means to assist others. -sabl' walla 
qabl (is it a lion or a hyena) "" success or failure? -l:Jagar 
daayir wa/a sabl' naayim [proyJ (better a rolling stone 
than a sleeping lion) "" a working nobody is better than 
idle nobility. -zahra kaff is-sabl motif used in tent 
applique work (see PI.H, 26). 
It,":-'V" 
~ sabay (also ~abay) (u) Ivtl 1 to dye. 2 to have 
dyed. -vn sibaaya, saby; ava saabiy; pva masbuuy. 
~ 
sabya (also ~abya) In pI -aatl dye, dye-stuff. 
Ilfuu[it is-sabya nylon napkin used by hairdressers to 
protect customers' clothes from dye. 
~ 
masbaya (also m~baya) In pI masaabiYI 1 dye-
works, dye factory. 2 dry-cleaning establishment. 
~I ritsabay or rissabay (also rir.sabay) Ivil to be 
dyed. II ritsibiy fin-niila J [womenJ go to hell! -di 
tsabayit miz-zalal wi-xassit 
in-n~~ she's become 
gloomy and wasted away with grief. -iva mitsibiy. 
~I rinsabay = ritsabay. -iva minsibiy. 
z t, ":-' 'V" 
~I... saabiyr ladj pI sawaabiyl full, complete, abun-
dant (notably of God's grace). rif-fukr' 1i-lIaah la/a 
nilam-u s-saabiya thanks and praise be to God for His 
ample grace. 
&-i rasbayr Ivtll to bestow grace and favour upon, 
be bountiful towards (s.o., especially of God). 2 {lslJ to 
perform (the ritual ablution) correctly. -vn risbaay; ava 
musbiy. 
J,,:-,V" 
...;.,- sabaCj J 
(a) Ivtl 1 to precede, go before. 
ril-xutuuba b-tisbaCj laCjd i/- rikliil the betrothal pre-
cedes the church wedding. kaan sabiCj-ni fil-madrasa 
b-sana he was a year ahead of me in school. II ril-kaff 
is-saabiCj saabiCj [proyJ "" the first blow has the advan-
tage. -sabCj il-r~raar [legJ premeditation. Cjatl"lamd' 
mala sabCj i1-r~raar [legJ premeditated murder, first 
degree murder. -xeer-ak saabiCj "" your good deed 
came first, so you are the one who should be thanked (a 
modest reply to an expression of thanks). 2 overtake, 
outstrip. Illallimnaa f-fil:Jaata sabaCj-na la/-rabwaab 
[proyJ (we taught him to beg, and he beat us to the 
doors) "" he bites the hand that fed him. -qarab-ni 
w-baka w-sabaCj-ni wi-ftaka [proyJ "" he wronged me 
and claimed he was wronged. - rilli sabaCj kal in-nabaCj 
[proyJ "" the early bird catches the worm. -saabiCj fiih 
396 
if-fitaan the devil got there (i.e. to the mother) first, he 
is a very son of the devil. - linvarl 3 modal indicating 
precedence in time. sabaCj Cjult-i-/ak ma-tgii-f hina I've 
told you before not to come here. -vn sabCj, sabaCjaan; 
ava saabiCj; pva masbuuCj. 
J!I... saabiCj J ladj *1 former, previous. rir-rariis is-
saabiCj the ex-president. 
~ saabiqan r, saabiCjan ladvl formerly, previously. 
~I... sabCja In pI sawaabiCjI 1 precedent. ril-mawquul 
da Iii sabCja landina fif-firka this matter has a precedent 
in our firm. 2 [legJ previous criminal conviction. 
rarbaab is-sawaabiCj previous offenders. mara (or 
raagil) rarbaab sawaabiCj a woman (or man) of the 
criminal sort . 
...;.,- sabaCj2 Inl 1 competition, contest. 2 race.-I:J~aan 
sabaCj <l'acehorse. ris-sabaCj the races . 
...;.,-i rasbaCj lell earlierlearliest, formerlfirst. 
'~., i rasbaCjiyya In pI -aatl priority, seniority. rif-fira 
l:Jasab rasbaCjiyyit i1-l:Jagz purchasing orders are fulfilled 
in the order in which they are placed. 
.i- sabbaCj Ivil to act before, ahead or in advance. -vn 
tasbiiCj; ava misabbaCj. 
u.;..... musabbaCjan ladvl in advance. 
J! I... saabiCj 2 Ivtl to race against, compete with. miin 
yisabiCj-ni fil-loom who wants to race me at swi~ming? 
- vn sibaaCj, musabCja, misabCja; ava misaabiCj. 
J\"- sibaaCj In pI -aatl 1 competition, contest. 2 race. 
~\..... musabCja In pI -aatl 1 competition, contest. 
rimtil:Jaan musabCja a competitive examination. 2 race. 
J! L...;I ritsaabiCj or rissaabiCj Ivil to compete (with 
o.a.). -ava mitsaabiCj. 
,j!L.;,. mutasaabiCjr In *1 competitor, contestant. 
.£l ":-' V" 
4- sabak (u) Ivtl 1 [metalJ to cast, found. 2 to plan 
meticulously. kidba masbuuka a well thought-out lie. 
-vn sabk, sibaaka, sabakaan; ava saabik; pva masbuuk. 
~ 
sabiika In pI sabaayikl 1 ingot (of gold or silver). 
2 alloy. 
.£l4.- sabbaak In *1 1 plumber (particularized as 
sabbaak 
~il:Jl:Ji). 2 metal founder (particularized as 
sabbaak malaadin). 
~ 
masbak In pI masaabikl foundry. 
~I ritsabak or rissabak Ivil 1 [metalJ to be cast, be 
founded. 2 to be well-planned. - iva mitsibik. 
~I rinsabak = ritsabak. -iva minsibik. 
4 
sabbik /vtl I to do (s.th.) well. sabbik i/-
lamaliyya he organized the job well. 2 [cookJ to re-
duce, cook in concentrated stock, juice or sauce. 

II ri/-misabbik wil-mibabbik elaborately cooked food. 
-vn tasbiik; ava/pya misabbik. 
~ 
tasbiika loJ a dish cooked in concentrated stock, 
juice or sauce. 
~I fitsabbik or fissabik Ivil passive of sabbik. -iva 
mitsabbik. 
IJylJ" 
..b- sabiilloJ If Ipl subull way, path. -common in 
unelevated speech in the phrases: Gaabir sabiil a passer-
by. raab Ii-baal sabiil-u he went his own way. fasxam 
wi- fat/all i sabiil a far worse path to follow, a far worse 
course, as in fil-rina wibifwil-fac;ri fasxam wi-fat/alii 
sabiil wealth is bad but poverty is far worse. Gala sabiil 
as, by way of, as in Gala sabiil iI-misaal by way of 
example, fif-firka bi-twl/1.zaG in-nataayig Gala sabiil 
hadaaya the company distributes the calendars as gifts. 
fi-sabiil for the sake of, as in kull-u yhuun fi-sabiil 
ig-gumhuur no effort is too great for the sake of the 
public, fi-sabiil iIIaah for the sake of God, out of char-
ity. 2 Ino pI! 28 water distributed out of charity to the 
thirsty. 2b [obsolJ the cry of one distributing water to 
the thirsty. 3 Ipl siMal public drinking-fountain. 
..b- sibiil = sabiil 3. 
J.. sabbii I Ivtl to dedicate, set apart for -charity, set 
apart to serve people. -vn tasbiil; ava/pya misabbil. 
~I fitsabbil l or fissabbil l Ivil to be dedicated, be 
set apart for charity. - iva mitsabbil. 
lJylJ" 
...- sabal l Icoll nl heads or ears of cereals. II mif{i sabal 
braided stalks of green wheat which are hung in homes 
at the time of ripening for good luck, a kind of corn 
dolly. 
~ 
sabala lunit n, pI -aatl a head or ear (of a cereal 
plant). 
~~ sabalaaya = sabala. 
J.. sabbil2 /vil to put out ears (of cereals). -vn tasbiil; 
ava misabbil. 
3JylJ" 
J.,.- sabal 2 (i) Ivt/l to drape, cause to hang loosely. 
sabalit {arba Gala ras-ha she covered her head with a 
veil. Ilya saabil is-satr· Gala Gabiid-ak ya-rabb == you 
cover your creature's sins with the veil of Your mercy, 
o Lord! 2 to shed (tears). -vn sabl; ava saabil; pya 
masbuul. 
J.. sabbil J Ivtl 1 to half close (the eyes). sabbilit 
Genee-ha min ik-kusuuf she cast down her eyes out of 
397 
bashfulness. 2 to close (the eyes of one deceased). -vn 
tasbiil; ava/pya misabbil. 
J....; I fitsabbil 2 or fissabbil 2 Ivil to be closed (of eyes). 
- iva mitsabbil. 
4JylJ" 
J.,.- saba/ J (i) Ivtl to spread (manure), fertilize (with 
manure). -vn sabl; ava saabil; pya masbuul. 
~ 
sabia Inl manure, dung (used for fertilizer) . 
J.,....il fitsabal or fissabal Ivil to be manured. - iva 
mitsibil. 
IJ" J Y IJ" 
~ 
sablis Ivil to throw one's opponent using the 
overhead hold (wrestling). -vn sablasa; ava misablis. 
-ISJylJ" 
~ ~ 
sabalyoona <perh It spagnola> In pI -aatl ver-
tical locking-rod on a double door or window, espag-
nolette bolt. - also sabanyoola. 
~ Y IJ" 
.,~ . .,4- sibaan Icoll nl eggs of hair-lice, nits. naas 
zayy is-sibaan people who can't be shaken off . 
~~ 
.~4- sibaana lunit n, pI -aatl an egg of a hair-
louse, a nit. 
,;..,. sabbin /vii to become full of nits (of hair). -ava 
~.~. 
. 
IJ" ~ Y IJ" 
4.....:,.... sibinsa <It dispensa> In pI -aatl caboose, 
guard's van (on a train). 
-1S~YIJ" 
~ ~ 
sabanyoola <perh It spagnola> In pI -aatl ver-
tical locking-rod on a double door or window, espag-
nolette bolt. - also sabalyoona. 
JJ.ylJ" 
~ 
sabahlala ladvl haphazardly, any old how. 
IIhuwwa waaxid iI-bikaaya sabahlala he's taking the 
matter too lightly. 
~ 
sabahlali ladj invarl aimless, careless, vague. 
Giifa sabahlali an aimless life. 
.J .J Y IJ" see .J.J Y IJ" - : suboor 
I IS Y IJ" 
4ft"'"' saba (i) Ivtll to take prisoner (especially in war). 

2 to charm, captivate. gamal-ha sabaa her beauty en-
chanted him. -vn saby; ava saabi; pva masbi. 
.."....1 fitsaba or fissaba Ivil • to be taken captive. 2 to 
be enchanted, be charmed. - iva mitsibi. 
2(ISYIJ"') 
~,- subya <T subye> Inl cold drink of slightly fer-
mented rice, sugar and water . 
.io.- sibya I <P sih-p/iy> In pi sibayl • trestle, tripod. 
2 steelyard. - also seeba. 
IISY IJ'" 
I.,.,- sibya 2 <perh It seppia> Icoll nl cuttlefish. 
.;, I.:..IJ'" 
.:,~ sataan <Fr> Inl satin. kastuur sataan flannel-
backed satin. 
I.':" .:.. IJ'" 
.::- sitt I Inum: in constr w fall n pll six. sitt' sniin six 
y~ars. 
~ sitta Inum; in absol state, in apposition, or w fall n 
sing in contexts of ordering and itemizing; pi -aatl six. 
fibna sitta there are six of us. (alabna sitta sala(a we 
ordered six salads. 
. 
. 
~ 
~ 
'r~ sittaafar. Inumpl-aatlsixteen.2 fis-
sittaafar ladj invarl the sixteenth. 
vi- sittiin Inuml • Ipl -aatl sixty. IIqaal waabid wi-
sittiin he took to his heels. 2 Ina pll intensifier used in 
curses and insults. fibn' sittiin kalb = son of a bitch sixty 
times over. ruub fi-sittiin dahya = go to blackest hell! 
fibn' sittiin fl-sabliin = son of (a bitch) sixty times 
multiplied by seventy times over. -
fis-sittiin ladj in-
varl 3 the sixtieth. 
~~ .:( .. : 
suttumiyya. Inum pi -aatl six hundred. 
2 fis-suttumiyya ladj invarl the six-hundredth. 
..:;..;l.. saatit ladjl sixth. 
2.:.. .:.. 
• 
IJ'" 
.::- sitt 2 In pi -aatl • lady, woman. fis-sittaat fl-
fingiltira the women in England. II fis-sitt' btalt-u his 
wife. -sitt il-bum (wig-gamaal) (I) fairy-tale princess or 
heroine. (2) {bot} belladonna. 2 mistress. sitt il-beetthe 
mistress of the house. sitt-ik mawguuda is your mistress 
at home? - Ina pll 3 respectful form of address or 
reference to a grandmother. fumm-u w-sitt-u malaa his 
mother and his grand~other are with him. 4 title of and 
form of address or reference to, a woman. fis-sitt' 
galiila Mrs. Galila. la mufaxza ya sitt-i excuse me 
ma'am. IIsitt' haanim madam. - fis-sitt (1) respectful 
398 
epithet of Sayyida Zaynab. (2) respectful epithet of the 
late singer Umm Kalthum. -sitt il-babaayib the mother . 
5 lin constr, w fem referent! the best of, the finest. 
ril-Iura I-larabiyya sitt il-Iuraat Arabic is the best lan-
gu~ge. sitt i/-kull or sitt is-sittaat the best of all. 
J~ sittaati ladj invarl coquettish, exaggeratedly 
feminine. hiyya t~arrufat-ha sittaati zyaada lan il-
lu~uum she affects too many girlish airs and graces. 
~ 
sattit Ivtl to give (a woman her) due as a feminine 
creature meam for adornment (usually with the im-
plication of relieving a woman of the necessity of doing 
menial tasks by providing servants or appliances). -vn 
tas.tiit; ava/pva misattit . 
.;.;...;1 fitsattit or fissattit Ivil • passive of sattit. 2 to 
affect mannerisms of a iady of leisure, play the lady . 
fana mif waxda lala qillil iI-baraka wala finn! fatsattit 
I'm not used to inactivity nor to lolhng about the house 
Iik.e an odalisque. - ava mltsattit. 
.:..:;....;.. mitsaltit ladj *1 coquettish, mincing, artificial. 
.J .:.. IJ'" 
.fo- satar (u) Ivtl • to protect (of God). loola salr' 
rabb-i-na kaan maat but for God's protection he would 
have died. fustur ya rabb or rabb-i-na yustur Lord 
preserve us! rilli yustur-u I-mawla ma-yifctab-uu-! iI-
labd {prov} no man can disgrace him whom God pro-
tects.1I fallaah yistur-akJ please, as in fallaah yustur-ak 
tiddii-ni qiifplease give me a piastre. 2 to hide, shield 
so as to maintain decency and decorum. fusturi riglee-kl 
cover your legs for the sake of decency. fustur nafs-ak 
don't expose yourself to scandal. layfiin masturiin 
(1) they live quiet, respectable lives, (2) they enjoy a 
rich life. II fustur bint-ak get your daughter married! 
-xallii-ha mastuura = let sleeping dogs lie. 3 to cover, 
protect. ril-xeema salraa the tent gives him cover. - Ivil 
4 to afford protection or cover (from scandal). 
figgawwizt-a-ha lafaan fastur laleeha I married her to 
protect her reputation. laazim tusturi lala gooz-ik you 
must shield your husband's good name. 5 to render 
good service, fulfil a need. ril-larabiyya di satarit 
malaaya lafar siniin this car has served me well for ten 
years. ril-malaziim kaanu kutaar laakin il-bamdu 
I-il/aah iI- fakl' satar there were many guests, but, thank 
God, the food was adequate. -vn satr; ava saatir; pva 
mastuur. 
J.- satr Inl 1 divine protection. IIlandu s-satr he has 
the decent minimum (euphemism = he has nothing). 
-landi s-satr I have enough, I'm doing all right (in-
direct response to inquiry into one's financial state). 
-landak is-satr {women in trad soc} may you have 

God's protection from disgrace (response to fitfaqqali 
landina). - hiyya satr; w-rata "" she's the sort to keep 
your name clean (of a potential wife). 2 {Chr] altar 
covering. 
;L... saatir Inl 1 Ino pll Protector (epithet of God).llya 
saatir said upon entering others' homes, giving the 
occupants a chance to prepare themselves. -ya saatir 
(ya rabb) expression of dismay"" good God! God pre-
serve us! 2 Ipl sawaatirl {mil] (protective) cover. 
fiq-qarb; min xalt saatir firing from behind cover. 
.).,:;..-. mastuur ladj °1 1 wealthy. '2 having one's basic 
needs provided for. fana mastuur il-l:Jamdu li-llaah 
I make a living, I get along all right, praise be to God! 
0.r- sutra Inl 1 Ipl -aat, sutarl top part of a uniform, 
jacket of a uniform. 2/no pll protection, safeguard. 
gawaaz il-banaat sutra "" it's a safeguard for girls to get 
married. 
J- sitr In pI sutllur, fastaarl curtain, drape. 
.)\;.... sitaar Inl curtain, screen. IIsitaar naar {mil] artil-
lery barrage. - fis-sitaar il-l:Jadiidi the Iron Curtain. 
-min wara s-sitaar behind the scenes, back-stage, 
secretly. 
O.)\;.... sitaara 
In 
pI sataayirl 
curtain. 
IIsataayir 
m!ldaniyya venetian blinds. 
.)\;.... sattaar Inl Protector (epithet of God). II fis-sattaar 
mawguudJ "" God will never let us down. -ya sattaar 
laleeku "" how exasperating you are! 
~I fitsatar or fissatar Ivil 1 to be shielded so as to 
maintain decency and decorum. ma-tic;lal-p c;uddaam 
in-naas - xufP guwwa titsitir don't undress in front of 
everyone! go inside where no one can see! 2 to appear 
presentable. ma-landii1 wala badla fatsitir biiha 
I don't have a single suit I can decently wear. 3 to 
maintain a decent standard of living. laazim falac;ii-li 
furla fatsitir biiha I must find a job that'oJI provide for 
",!e adequately. - iva mitsitir. 
~ sattar = satar. -avalpva misattar. 
J-; I fitsattar or fissattar Ivil to hide oneself, disguise 
oneself. -ava mitsattar. 
11 fitsattar lala to cover up (a crime etc.). 
fi-..o mustatir1 ladj °1 hidden, disguised. 
...; . .:.. ..,. 
..£- sattif Ivtl I to arrange, stack up, order neatly. 
tastiif ik-kutub shelving the books. xud ik-karaasi di 
sattif-ha guwwa take these chairs and stack them up 
inside. 2 to pack (with). I:J-asaafir bukra w-liss. 
ma-sattift; 1 funat-i I'm travelling tomorrow and have't 
packed my bags yet. finta ~attift il-larabiyya naas kida 
399 
leeh why have you packed the car with people like this? 
3 JO rebuke harshly. -vn tastiif; avalpva misattif. 
...A;;....; 1 fitsattifor fissattiflvil 1 to be arranged, be put in 
order, be stacked. fik-kutub mitsattifa lal- furfuf l:Jasab 
il-mawqulaat the books are arranged o~ the shelves by 
subject. 2 to be packed (with). 3 to be rebuked harshly. 
- iva mitsattif. 
o I.S IJ .:.. ..,. 
..... \;.... sataneeh <Fr satine> Inl cotton satin, satinet. 
IJ II.S .:.. ..,. 
.:,l.;,,- sutyaan <Fr soutien> In pI -aatl brassiere. 
- also sintiyaan, suntiyaan. 
~ [.1,)" 
~ 
sagad (u) Ivil to prostrate oneself in (or as if in) 
prayer. -vn suguud; ava saagid. 
o~ sagda In pI -aatl 1 a prostration (in prayer) . 
lI,I"alaat is-sagda {Chr] liturgical prayers used in Holy 
Week. 2 {lsi] one prostration (as a part of ritual 
prayer). 
.)~ siggaad Icoll nl carpet(s), carpeting. IImudiir is-
siggaad official responsible for the carpets in all mos-
ques under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Religious 
Endowments. 
o.)~ siggaada lunit n, pI -aal, sagagiidl mat, carpet. 
siggaadit ,l"ala prayer rug. Ilfeex is-siggaada head of a 
Sufi order. 
~ 
masgid In pI masaagidl mosque. 
~ 
saggid Ivtl {usu children] to cause to submit, out-
do. saggidt-ak - mif l:Ja-tl:Jaawil titnaac;if malaaya taani 
I've bested you -don't try to argue with me again! 
I:J-asaggid-ha b-kalaam-i 1-l:Jilw I'll make her mine with 
sweet-talk. -vn tasgiid; ava misaggid. 
~ 
1 fitsaggid or fissaggid Ivil passive of saggid. -iva 
mitsaggid. 
I .J [. ..,. 
;..... saggarl Ivtl to encourage, embolden, egg on. 
finta iii saggart il-wad-da laleek you are the one who 
encouraged that boy to be too familiar with you. -vn 
tasgiir; avalpva misaggar . 
';""1 fitsaggar or fissaggar Ivil 1 to take courage, 
dare (to do). 2 to be encouraged, be emboldened. - aval 
iva mitsaggar. 
l .J [.1,)" 
.)4-,,- sigaar Inl cigar. 
0.)4-,,- sigaara, sugaaraJ In pIsagaayirl cigarette. 

Iisigaarit xeet spool of thread (the spool being a small 
tube of cardboard). 
.J:.- saggar2 Ivii [joe} I to smoke cigarettes. 2 to hand 
out cigarettes. fiJ-Jayyaal kaan mizargin li-yaayit ma 
saggart-i-lu the porter was unhelpful until I gave him a 
smoke. -vn tasgiir; ava misaggar. 
t[. ...... 
~ 
sagal r (a) Ivtl to speak or write (prose) in a 
rhymed and rhythmical fashion. -vn sagl; ava saagil; 
pya masguul. 
~ 
sagl/nl rhyme and rhythm in prose. 
~ 
sagla linst n, pi ,aatl a rhyming word in prose. 
...;[. ...... 
J~ sigaaf In pi -aatl trimming ribbon, facing. 
JJ[. ...... 
~ 
sugUljlj <T sueuk> Icoll nl sausage(s). 
~ 
suguljlja In pi -aatl a sausage. 
~~ suguljljaaya = suguljlja. 
~ [. ...... 
.}..- sigill In pi -aatl register, record. II fis-sigill il-
madani the Civil Registry (of births and deaths). 
~ 
saggillvt! I to record, register. saggilu l-bayanaat 
fi-daftar they recorded the details in a ledger. gawaab 
musaggal registered letter. 2 to record (magnetically). 
jaraayi{ tasgiil (magnetic) recording-tapes. - Ivii 3 to 
register (by pressing the numbered button) the desired 
floor (in an automatic lift). - vn tasgiil; ava misaggil; pya 
musaggal. 
~ 
tasgiillnl I (also gihaaz tasgiil) tape-recorder. 
2 Ipl -aatl tape-recording. 
~ 
musaggil Inl I Ipl -iinl registrar. 2 Ipl -aatl 
tape-recorder. 
J,:;....;I fitsaggil or fissaggillvil passive of saggil. -iva 
mitsaggil. 
i" [. ...... 
;-.- sagam (i) Ivtl to put in a state of ecstasy. ril-ljalda 
sagamit il-waa&id the company and the surroundings 
put one in the best of moods. - ava saagim. 
~ 
I finsagam Ivil I to reach a state of euphoria or 
high satisfaction. &afla faaxir insigaam a really swing-
ing party. fiddit-ni &all' lil-mujkila finsagamt' minnu 
she gave me a solution to the problem that really 
pleased me. 2 to be harmonious. falwaan munsagima 
harmonious colours. faxlalj-ha ma-b-tinsigim-J' mala 
faxlalj-hum her ways are not in tune with theirs. -vn 
400 
finsigaam; ava minsigim, munsagim r . 
~I fitsagam or fissagam = finsagam. -ava 
mitsigim. 
oJ [. ...... 
.:r.- sagan (i) Ivtl to imprison. saganuu-ni f-{Ura they 
imprisoned me at Turah. -vn sagn, sign; ava saagin; pya 
masguun. 
.:r.- sign Inll imprisonment, jail sentence. fidduu-lu 
sana sign they gave him a year's imprisonment. 
II fis-sign I lig-gidlaan prison is for the tough and manly 
(boast of jailbirds and criminals). 2/pl suguunl prison, 
jail. II wiJ/' sguun jailbird. 
"'.J':"-' masguun In "I prisoner. masguun siyaasi a poli-
tical prisoner. 
~ 
sagiin In pi suganal = masguun . 
..,L;- saggaan In " and pi saggaanal jailer, prison 
warder. 
~I fitsagan or fissagan Ivil to be imprisoned. -iva 
mitsigin. 
~I finsagan = fitsagan. -iva minsigin. 
yc. ...... 
..,..-.. sa&ab (a) Ivt! I to pull along, draw, drag. 
sa&abt-u min fiid-u I drew him along by the hand. 
lamma trawwa& tis&ab laha g-gamuusa f-fid-ha when 
she goes home she has the buffalo in tow behind her. 
IIdayman mas&uub min lisaan-u he is always insolent, 
voluble, and offensive. -sa&ab naalim Ii- see naalim. 
2 to take away, withdraw. ril-balad sa&abit safir-ha the 
country recalled its ambassador. sa&ab nafs-u min il-
mawquul he withdrew from the matter. ru&t ana 
mmayyil wi-saa&ib is-sikkiina I went and bent down 
and pulled out the knife. sa&abt a lajara gneeh mil-bank 
I drew ten pounds from the bank. sa&abt'jiik lala bank 
iskindiriyya I drew a cheque on the bank of Alexan-
dria. fis&ab kart draw a card! IIsa&ab lisaan-u lalayya 
he insulted me. 3 to draw out, flatten out. bi-nis&ab 
il-lagiina we flatten out the dough. sa&ab id-da&ab he 
hammered out the gold. 4 to spread (paste, gummy 
substance). bi-nis&ab il-malguun bi-sikkiina we spread 
the paste with a painting spatula: 5 {text] to draw (cot-
ton into threads). 6 {naut] to fly (a flag). - Ivil 7 to 
exert hauling force. mutoor il-larabiyya dilwaljti 
b-yis&ab fa&san mil-fawwil the motor of the car pulls 
better now than before. -vn sa&b, sa&abaan; ava 
saa&ib; pya mas&uub. 
'":'.,-.... mas&uub ladj ·1 tapered, tapered to a point. 
0~.,-.... mas&ubaat Ipl nl {finan] withdrawals. 

..,..1....... safJaab Icoll nl cloud(s). 
~ I....... safJaaba In pI -aatll lunit nl a cloud. 2 cataract 
(of the eye) . 
..,..~ safJfJaab ladjl having a strong pull. mooga 
safJfJaaba a wave with a strong pull. 
...,..-.;1 !,itsafJab or !,issafJab Ivil 1 passive of safJab. 
II roofJ-i b-titsifJib minni I feel faint, I'm about to faint 
away. 2 {mil] to withdraw, retreat. -ava/iva mitsifJib . 
...,..-.;1 !,insafJab 
=!,itsafJab. Ilfaaz bil-!,insifJaab he 
won by default. -vn !,insifJaab; ava/iva minsifJib. 
~I !,itsafJfJab or !,issafJfJab Ivil to move stealthily, 
creep. !'iI-wilaad itsafJfJabu min yeer ~oot lala tara[iif 
~awabil-hum the boys crept soundlessly on tiptoe. -ava 
mitsafJfJab. 
':"coJ" 
..:..-. sUfJt Inl ill-gotten gains, illegal possessions. 
maal-u sufJt his capital has been acquired illegally. 
lifit-hum sufJt; f-sufJt they make their living by totally 
illicit means. 
.:.. -' .:.. C oJ" 
.;;.,~ safJtuut (also samtuut) Ipl safJatiitl Ini {obsol] 
1 unit of land measure equal to 0.304 square metres. 
2 one-twentieth of a piastre coin. -current in the 
phrases: wala safJtuut "" not a single penny. raagil 
safJtuut a tight-fisted miser. 
ICC oJ" 
i::-- safJfJ I (i) Ivt and vii to flow, stream. lenee nazla 
tSifJfJ; (bid-) dumuul his eyes shed tears. !,in-natara 
kaanit bi-JsifJfJ; (uul il-Ieel it was raining cats and dogs all 
night long. -vn safJfJ, safJafJaan; ava saafJifJ· 
~~ safJfJaafJa In pI -aatl burette. 
1 CCoJ" 
i::-- safJfJ 2 exclamation urging a ram to fight, notably in 
the children's chant !,is-safJfJ id-dafJfJ (ya) xaruuf 
na((aafJ· 
I J C oJ" 
.r- safJar (i) Ivtll to charm, enchant (of beauty etc.). 
ya salaam lamma leneen bint; tisfJir-ak how wonderful 
it is when a girl's eyes ensnare you! 2 to transform, 
change (by magic). !,il-laguuza safJarit-u !'amab the old 
woman turned him into a rabbit. - Ivi/3 to cast a spell. 
!'il-bitt; safJarit lil-waad la!aan yifJibb-a-ha the girl put a 
spell on the boy to make him love her. -vn sifJr; ava 
saafJir; pva masfJuur, masfJuur. 
.r- sifJr Inll magic, sorcery. 2 charm, allure. 
401 
..sT'- sifJri ladjl magic(al). !'allaab sifJriyya magic 
tricks. II miraaya sifJriyya distorting mirror. -geeb sifJri 
pocket sewn to the inside (of, e.g., trousers) as protec-
tion from pickpockets. -leen sifJriyya glass peephole 
(in a door). 
~l... saafJir In • and pI safJaral sorcerer, magician . 
J""""" masfJuur ladjl hidden, concealed, secret. geeb 
masfJuur = geeb sifJri (q.v.). xiyaa{a masfJuura (1) slip-
stitching. (2) invisible mending. 
.J"........ masfJuura In pI masafJiirl concealed cupboard 
or storeroom, such as a cupboard under the staircase or 
a loft. 
J~ safJfJaar In • and pI safJara/ magician, sorcerer. 
'J~ safJfJaara In pI safJafJiir, safJfJaraat/ la storage 
box, chest or crate. Ib storage room (usually a loft). 
2 {agrie] inspection shaft in a covered drainage canal. 
.J""o-' 1 !,itsafJar or !,issafJar /vi/ passive of safJar. - iva 
mitsifJir. 
1 
J C oJ" 
J.J"'- sufJuur Inllast meal taken before daybreak dur-
ing Ramadan . 
;...., safJfJar Ivtl 1 to serve the sufJuur to, provide the 
sufJuur for. 2 to wake (Muslims) for the sufJuur during 
Ramadan, usually by means of drumming. -vn tasfJiir; 
ava misafJfJar. 
.]1';"'" misafJfJaraati In pI -yyal one who cries and 
beats a drum to wake Muslims for the sufJuur. 
';""'1 !,itsafJfJar or !,issafJfJar Ivil to eat the sufJuur. 
-ava mitsafJfJar. 
oJ"CoJ" 
..,-- sifJs Inl {joe] nickname for Hussein. 
CoJ"CoJ" 
c-""-' safJsafJ Ivil 1 to leak (of a liquid). !'iI-mayya 
safJsafJit lal- !'arq the water leaked onto the ground. 
2 {slang] to feel sexually excited. -vn safJsafJa; ava 
misafJsafJ· 
...; C oJ" see ...; C j : safJaf 
I 
-
~ C oJ" 
..;-. safJaq (a) Ivtl 1 to powder, pulverize. sukkar 
masfJuuq powdered sugar.llsafJq il-malguun sanding a 
prepared surface prior to painting it. 2 to get rid of 
(s.o.), throw (s.o.) out, finish (s.o.) off. !'isfJaq-u bliid 
!'allaah la-yirgil-u to hell with him! - vn safJq; ava 
saafJiq; pva masfJuuq . 

4A....- saljqa In pi -aal/l instance noun of saljq. 2 mitre 
saw. 
J",....... masljuuq 1 In pi -aal, masaljiiql powder. 
II masljuuq il-qlzaaz glazing powder. 2 masaljiiq Ipl nl 
make-up (powder. rouge etc.). 
~ 
saljiiq ladjl very far or deep. very distant. 
~I rilsaljaq or rlssaljaq Ivil passive of saljaq. -ava 
~ milsiljiq. 
~I rinsaljaq = rilsaljaq. - iva minslljiq. 
2 J CIJ'" 
..;> L- saaljiq Ivil to engage in lesbianism. - vn siljaaq, 
misaljqa; ava misaaljiq. 
JL-.. slljaaq Inl lesbianism. 
~L.. misaljqa = siljaaq. 
I JCIJ'" 
;Q.- siljliyya In pi saljaalil 1 lizard. IImara zayy is-
siljliyya a cunning devious female. 2 {prinl! quoin. 
2 J CIJ'" 
J....- saljal (a) Ivtl 1 to torture by dragging over the 
ground with a rope tied to the legs. 2 to make thin,lean 
or withered. riI-laya saljal-u illness shrivelled him up. 
- vn saljl; ava saaljll; pva masljuul. 
J.:o.-.;I rilsaljal or rissaljal Ivil passive of saljal. - iva 
milsiljti. 
J.:o.-.;I rinsaljal = rilsaljal. - iva mirrsiljil. 
J J CIJ'" 
J>L- saaljil/n pi sawaaljill coast, shore. 
J>WI ris-saaljil/prop nl district in north Cairo. 
J>L- saaljili ladjl pertaining to the coast, coastal. 
rid-dawriyyaal is-saaljiliyya coast patrols, coastguard. 
J>I".. sawaljli l/adjl pertaining to the coast. coastal. 
2 In pi -yyal a coastal inhabitant. 
lyJCIJ'" 
.,...L- saljlib Ivtl to move (s.th.) stealthily. rin-naffaal 
saljlib riid-u f-mabfa;il-ha w-saraq il-qlrfeen the pick-
pocket slipped his hand into her wallet and got the 
money. - vn saljlaba; ava mlsaljlib. 
~I rilsaljlib or rissaljltb Ivil to move stealthily, 
creep. rissaljlibna waraa we crept after him. - vn 
lisaljliib; ava milsaljlib. 
2y JCIJ'" 
.,...L- saljlab Inl salep (dried tuber of various species 
of Orchis); thick, sweet drink made from salep. 
402 
....; JCIJ'" 
..u...... siljlifa, suljlifa In pi -aal. saljaalifl tortoise. - also 
silljifa, sulljifa, ziljlifa, zUljlifa, zilljifa. zulljifa. 
.,;.,~ JCIJ'" 
.::."b.- saljluul ladjl gay. flighty, frolicsome, light-
hearted. raalj iggawwiz binI' saljluUla [-sinn' wlaad-u 
he went and married a flighty girl young enough to be 
his daughter. 
J~ J CIJ'" 
J"b.- saljluul: rumm' saljluul {abus! appellation for 
a vulgar or ugly woman. 
.Jc..r 
i.:.-. siljna In pi -aal, siljanl physiognomy, face. 
qalab-Ii siljnil-u min 'l'eer sabab he scowled at me for no 
reaso~. reeh is-siljna I-¥alat di what an unpleasant-
looki~g man! 
CCIJ'" 
t:-- saxx (u) <perh Copt> 1 Ivtl to strike. hit, beat. 
saxx-u lalqa mlJifa he gave him a good hiding. 2 Ivil to 
pour with rain. rid-dunya kaanil bi-Isuxx it was raining 
very hard. -vn saxaxaan, saxx; ava saaxix; pva 
masxuux. 
~I rusaxx or rissaxx Ivil to be struck, be hit, be 
beaten. - iva milsaxx. 
~I rinsaxx = rilsaxx. - iva minsaxx. 
I 
• 
JCIJ'" 
/0- saxar (a) Ivil to jeer, scoff. sneer, laugh (at s.o.). 
ma-y~aljlj '-J nisxar min-naas it is not right for us to 
make fun of people\ - vn suxriyya; ava saaxlr. 
';/0- suxnyyaf In) I ridicule, sarcasm. 2 laughing-
stock . 
• ,;...... masxara In pi masaaxirf I preposterous be-
haviour. farce. bala qillil Ijaya w-masxara stop this 
shameless and outrageous behaviour. see further under 
J tlJ'" i 
.;.....;1 ritsaxar or rissaxar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
saxar. ril-fuqara ma-yilsixir-J' minhum the poor are not 
to be sneered at. - iva mUSlXlr. 
2 
• 
JCIJ'" 
"..,f-- suxra Inl forced labour, corvee. 
/0- saxxar Ivtl to enslave, subjugate. bi-ysaxxaru 
I-ginn' lafaan Y1lrafu rasraar in-naas they enslave the 
jinn in order to know people's secrets. II rima Ija-

tsaxxar-ni do you imagine I'm your-slave (to order me 
about so)? -vn' tasxiir; ava/pva misaxxar; pva 
musaxxarf . 
.f.-'I !,itsaxxar or !,issaxxar Ivil to be subjugated, be 
enslaved. - iva mitsaxxar. 
t..,.t..,. 
~ 
$axsax I Ivil to faint, swoon. sa.uaxit mit-ta[ab 
she fainted from weariness. Iisaxsaxit ([ala nafs-a-ha) 
min id-di!:Jk she almost died laughing. - vn saxsaxa; ava 
misaxsax. 
~ 
misaxsax ladjl pale, wan, faint. bamba 
msaxsax shocking pink. 
~ 
saxsax 2 ladj invarl fancy (of clothes); Jeex 
il-[ayqiin illi laabis ig-gibba s-saxsax the big dandy in 
the knock-out robe. 
'.1 ' c...,. 
k.. saxa[1 (a) Ivtl to metamorphose. Jakl-u masxuu{ 
zayy il-qird he looks as if he's been changed into a 
baboon. IIqaalu ya qird i raa!:J yisxa{uu-k - qaal raa!:J 
yi[miluu-ni yazaal{prov] "" those who have nothing to 
lose cannot be hurt. -vn saxe, saxa{aan; ava saaxi{; pva 
masxuu{. 
~ 
sax{a: ya sax{a you weak thing! you baby! (insult 
addressed to an adult who is behaving childishly). 
J..,>.-- masxuu{a In pi masaxii{1 {non- Cairene] idol, 
small statue used as a charm. 
.la.;.....;1 !'itsaxa{ or !'issaxa{ Ivil to be metamorphosed. 
- iva mitsixi{. 
k...;1 !'insaxa{ = !,itsaxa{. - iva minsixi{. 
l.1t..,. 
k.. saxa{2 (a) Ivil to become annoyed or angry. 
saxa{it [al-[iifa wi-iii [ayJin-ha she was fed up with 
everything. -vn SUX{; ava saaxi{. 
...;t..,. 
-.A.>...... suxf = saxaafa. 
~~ saxaafa In pi -aatl I fatuous stupid or asinine 
behaviour. 2 nasty or disagreeable behaviour. 
-.A.>......i !'asxaf lell I morelmost stupid. 2 morelmost 
disagreeable. 
...0,,;...- saxiifln pi suxafall fatuous, stupid, asinine (of 
people and behaviour). 2 disagreeable, nasty . 
...i.- saxxaf I Ivt and viI to mock, scorn, denigrate. 
ba{{al tisaxxaf fiyya wi-tsaxxaf ra !'y-i quddaam in-naas 
stop pouring scorn on me and my opinions in front of 
people. 2 Ivil to behave fatuously. -vn tasxiif; ava/pva 
misaxxaf. 
403 
~I !,itsaxxaf or !'issaxxaf Ivi/l to behave fatuous-
ly.2 to be mocked, be scorned, be denigrated. -ava/iva 
mitsaxxaf· 
~I 
fistasxaf I/vtl la to consider fatuous or 
stupid. Ib to consider disagreeable or nasty. 2/vi/2a to 
behave fatuously or stupidly. 2b to behave disagree-
ably. - avalpva mistasxaf. 
r t..,. 
i~ suxaam or suxaam Inl I filth, dirt. lI[iifit is-
suxaam a stinking life. 2 {women, coarse slang] (male) 
sexual organ. - ladj invarl 3 (also suxaam i{-[iin) 
rotten, awful. fabuu-ha suxaam i{-{iin qaal kida her 
rotten father said so. !'in-naas is-suxaam dool those 
lousy people. 
.\..~ suxaama 
Inl 
disgusting 
thing. 
nawlii-ni 
s-suxaama iii [a{-{arabeeza hand me over that damned 
what's-its-name on the table! 
r->--i !'ilsxam lell worse, worst. !'il-[uzubiyya suxaam 
wig-gawaaz !'asxam the unmarried state is misery but 
marriage is worse. ma-sxam min sitt-i !'illa siid-i {prov] 
(my mistress and my master are worse than each other) 
"" six of one and half a dozen of the other. 
~ 
saxxam Ivt/l to soil, dirty. II !,inta bi-tsaxxam !'eeh 
what are you muckjng about at? 2~ {coarse] to fuck. 
-vn tasxiim; ava misaxxam. 
~I !,itsaxxam or !'issaxxam Ivil I to be soiled, be 
dirtied. 2~ {coarse] to be fucked. - iva mitsaxxam . 
.1 r t..,. 
..I...;..... saxma{ Ivtl I to soil, smear, blotch. saxma[ 
il-waraqa !:Jibr he splotched the paper with ink. wifJ-u 
msaxma{Jukulaata his face is smeared with chocolate. 
2 {coarse] to fuck. -vn saxma[a; ava/pva misaxma(. 
j..L..;.... suxmaa{ Inl {coarse] form of reference to a 
worthless person or object. 
Ja....;....;1 !'itsaxma{or !,issaxma{lvi/l to become soiled, 
become smeared. 2 {coarse] to be fucked. -vn tisaxmii(; 
ava/pva mitsaxma(. 
oj t..,. 
v>-- sixin, suxun (a) Ivil I to become hot, become 
warm. !'il-mayya b-tisxim [al-butagaaz the water is 
heating on the gas. II I'il-xinaaqa sixnit qawi the dispute 
became extremely heated. 2 to become feverish. sixint i 
naar wi-qaalu di malarya I became very feverish and 
they said it was malaria. -vn suxuuna, suxuniyya; ava 
saaxin. 
.. ~ 
suxuuna, sixuuna Inl I heat. 2 fever. 
~:,>.- suxuniyya Inli heat. 2 fever. 

.,:,>l... saaxin ladj *1 hot, warm. 
,:,\.;;..... saxnaan ladj *1 feverish. 
.;;.... suxn ladj */1 warm, hot. (fil-leen) is-suxna a hot 
spring about 50 km south of Suez on the west coast of 
the Red Sea. II faddii-Iu lalqa suxna I'll give him a good 
hiding. -mifwaar suxn burdensome errand. 2 feverish. 
.;;....i fasxan Iell warmerlwarmest, hotterlhottest. 
~~ saxaana In pI -aatl = suxuniyya. 
,:,\.;.... saxxaan In pI -aatl 1 water-heater. 2 heating 
element. 
~ 
saxxan I/vtl to heat, warm. saxxani-Ina I-fakl 
heat up the food for us! II fil-mutoor laawiz tasxiin the 
engine needs warming up. -saxxan-Iu qafaa give him a 
burning slap on the neck. -ma-ysaxxan-f' qalb-ik 
{women in trad soc] may you never grieve! 2/vil to 
warm up. nimra talaata barra l-mallab bi-ysaxxan play-
er number three is warming up on the sidelines. -vn 
tasxiin; ava/pva misaxxan. 
~ 
tasxiina linst n, pI -aatl a (single) heating. 
~I fitsaxxan or fissaxxan Ivil to be heated, be 
warmed. -iva mitsaxxan. 
~I fistasxan Ivtll to select for heat or warmth. 
2 to consider hot or warm. - ava mistasxan. 
.J t IJ" see ..s t IJ" : saxaawa 
..s t IJ" 
.;..- saxi ladj pI fasxiya/liberal, generous. saxi lala 
l-fuqara he is generous to the poor. fid-ha saxiyya .,. she 
is open-handed. 
.\.;.... saxaaff Inl generosity. 
• ~\.;.... saxaawa In! generosity. 
yl~1J" 
~ 1.1.... sidaaba In pI sadaayibl 1 decorative moulding 
(of wood, plaster and the like). 2 thin strip of wood 
(espl::cially that used in decorative moulding). 
C. I ~ IJ" 
c.1.I.... sadaal:J: sadaal:J madaal:J a state of utter 
confusion. 
.., I ~ IJ" see Z ~.J IJ" : fis-sudaan, sudaani, sudaniyya 
ly~1J" 
..,.I.i... sadaab Icoll nl rue, herb of grace (used in folk 
medicine). - also sazaab. 
..,..i... sadab = sadaab. - also sazab. 
Z Y ~ IJ" see y I ~ IJ" : sidaaba 
404 
~ ~ IJ" 
i. sadd I (i) Ivtll to block, dam, fill. fi{-{abba bi-tsidd 
iI-banyu the plug stops up the bath. kaan fii zal:Jma 
sadda s-sikka there was a crowd blocking the way. 
fil-lummaal saddu 1-l:Jufra iii fif-faaril the workers fil-
led the hole in the road. fil-baab ilti yiigi minnu r-riil:J 
sidd-u wi-stiriil:J {proll] .,. stop up the source of trouble 
and relax. IIma-tsidd-haa-f don't be pessimistic, don't 
give up hope. -bi-ysidd-a-haf-wiff-i-na he's driving us 
up the wall. -sadd in-nifs to take away the appetite, 
dampen one's enthusiasm, as in l:Jaaga tsidd in-nifs 
something that really puts you off, nifs-i masduuda lan 
iI-fakl I have no appetite for food, buxl-u sadd' nifs-i 
lan id-dinya his stinginess has made me sick of life. 
-sadd' xaana to act as a (mere) stopgap, fill in for one 
more competent or better qualified, as in gibnaa ysidd' 
xaana mwaqqat lala ma nlaaqi waal:Jid lidil we brought 
him in just as a temporary stopgap till we could find 
someone decent. -l:Jaara sadd blind alley, cul-de-sac. 
-sadd iI-l:Janak pudding of flour, sugar and butter. 2 to 
pay (a debt, a bill). sidd illi laleek tiyya pay what you 
owe me. - Ivt and vii 3 to suffice ,(for), be enough 
(for). fil-mahiyya ma-bi-tsidd'-f l:Jaaga the salary isn't 
enough for anything. tamwiin if-fahr' ma-bi-ysidd'-f 
(fusbuul) the monthly ration isn't enough (to cover a 
week). - Ivi/4 to be dependable, be reliable. bi-ysiddu 
f-waqt iz-zanqa they may be relied upon in a tight fix . 
raagil ii-beet laazim yimla markaz-u - laazim yisidd the 
man of the house must live up to his position; he must 
be dependable. -vn sadd, sadadaan; ava saadid; pva 
• masduud . 
11 sadd' matral:J to fill in for, substitute for. fil-lasal 
yisidd' ma{ral:J is-sukkar honey is a substitute for sugar. 
i. sadd 2 In pI suduudl 1 block, obstruction. 2 dam. 
fis-sadd iI-laati the High Dam (at Aswan). 
i. sadd 3: sadd' sadd hush now! stop crying! (to a 
child). 
.i. sadda I linst n, pI -aatl an obstruction, an obstacle, 
a barricade.llsaddit if-firyaan or fis-saddaf-Jiryaniyya 
{path] embolism . 
• i. sidda In pI sidadl 1 mat of dried reeds used for 
roofing and as walls. 2 partition . 
~.I.... sadad In pI suduudl = sadd. 
i.i fasadd lell morelmost pertinent, relevant, or 
correct. 
~I.I.... sadaad: sadaad ir-rafy level-headedness, judi-
ciousness, correctness . 
~I.I.... sudaad In! obstruction. bi-yqaasi min sudaad fi-
manaxiir-u he suffers from an obstruction in his nose. 
.~I.I.... sidaada In pI -aatl cork, stopper. 

..I(~ sadiid ladil pertinent, right, relevant, correct. 
rafyi sadiid correct bpinion. 
JI~ saddaad 1 In * and pI saddaadal filler-in, stand-
in, stopgap. 2/adi *1 standing-in (for s.o. or s.th.). 
II raqabt-i saddaada I'll do it for you no matter what the 
cost. 
;JI~ saddaada In pI -aatl plug, stopper . 
.J...... masadd: saddi masadd to fill in for, stand in for. 
bi-ysidd i masadd axuu he stands in for his brother. 
.:i-;I fitsadd or fissadd Ivil 1 to be blocked, be stopped 
up. mawasiir i/-magaari tsaddit min iz-zibaa/a the drains 
became blocked with rubbish. II kull a yaaga tsaddit fi-
wiff-i I was at a loss as to what to do, I was blocked at 
every turn. 2 to be paid (of a debt or bill). fil-filuus 
ma-tsadditJi lissa the money hasn't been paid yet. 3 to 
stop talking, shut up. fitsadd belt up! - ava/iva mitsadd . 
.:i-;I finsadd 
= 
fitsadd. 
-vn 
finsidaad; ava/iva 
minsadd. 
J~ saddid Ivtl 1 to block off completely. saddidu kull 
is-sikak cafaan il-mawkib yifuut they blocked off all the 
roads so that the procession could pass. II saddid 
(il-fabwaab) fi-wiff-(u) to slam the door in someone's 
face, refuse to co-operate, as in kuntalaawiz faqul-/ak 
&aaga laakin saddidt il- fabwaab fi-wiff-i I wanted to tell 
you something, but you would have nothing to do with 
me. 2 to pay (what is due). ma-maluuJfiluus yisaddid 
biiha I-gumruk he doesn't have money to pay the cus-
toms duty. 3 to fill in (a form, a register etc.). saddid 
id-dafaatir qabli faaxir ifJahr make up the books be-
fore the end of the month. -vn tasdiid; ava/pva 
misaddid. 
J.:i-;I fitsaddid or fissaddid Ivil passive of saddid. - iva 
mitsaddid. 
I .J ~ IJ'" 
)~ sidr J Icoll n! [bot] 1 variety of Christ's thorn 
(Zizyphus spina Christi). 28 lotus tree. 2b lotus 
blossom. 
;)~ sidra J Ipl sidar, -aatl unit noun of sidr J. II si~it 
il-muntaha [lsi] the (lotus) tree in the seventh heaven. 
w~all-sidrit il-muntaha he attained the highest goal, he 
achieved supreme results. 
1 .J ~ IJ'" 
i)~ sidra 2: haati ya sidra waddi ya midra [prov] = 
what one hand does, the other undoes. 
~)~ sidriyya In pI -aatl large metal washing-up bowl. 
3 .J ~ IJ'" see .J ~ ~ 
: sidr 2, sidri, sidriyya, sideeri 
405 
IJ"'~IJ'" 
...,.,~ suds In pI fasdaasl one sixth, a sixth part. II faalit 
is-suds sextant. - (qarab) faxmaas fi-fasdaas (to be in) a 
state of bewilderment. 
..rl~ sudaasif In pI -yyaatl sextet . 
...,.,JL saadis ladil sixth. 
...,.,~ saddis Ivtl 1 to mutiply by six, make sixfold. 2 to 
make hexagonal. -vn tasdiis; ava/pva misaddis . 
...,.,i... musaddas In pI -aatl 1 hexagon. 2 hand gun, 
pistol (or gun-like device). musaddas raff spray-gun. 
musaddas mayya water-pistol. musaddas ~oot starting 
pistol. - ladil 3 (also misaddis) hexagonal. 
t ~ IJ'" see t ~ ~ : sidlf, sadlf, sidilf, fasdalf, saddalf, 
fistasdalf 
J ~ V" see J ~ ~: sadalj, sadlj, saadilj, sadalja, 
fasdaq, sadaalja, misdaalj, saddalj, fitsaddalj 
IJ~V" 
J~ sadal (i) Ivtl to let hang or fall. bi-tisdilqafayir-ha 
la/a ktaf-ha she wears her braids hanging down on her 
shoulders. -vn sadl; ava saadil; pva masduul. 
:iJ~ sadla/npl-aat/l instance noun of sad I. 2 curtain, 
veil. 
J..I.-.OI fitsadal or fissadal Ivil 1 to hang down, fall 
down. 2 passive of sada/. - ava/iva mitsidil. 
J..I.-.O I finsadal = fitsada/. - ava/iva minsidil. 
2 J ~ V" see J..s ~ V" : sidiil 
..s ~ V" 
.,s~ sada (i) Ivtl [text] to thread (a warp). -vn sady, 
sida; ava saadi; pva masdi. 
.,s~ .I~ sida In! [text] warp. 
;-'~ sidwa In! [text, obsol] a warp thread. 
~..I.....o masdiyya In pI masaadi, masdiyyaatl [text] a 
warp thread. 
.,s..l.-.OI fitsada or fissada Ivil passive of sada. - iva 
mitsidi. 
.,s~ sadda 2 = sada. -vn tasdiyya; ava/pva misaddi. 
.,si... misaddi In *1 [text] operator of a warping 
machine. 
.,s:i-.I fitsadda or fissaqda Ivil passive of sadda. - iva 
mitsaddi. 
J..s~V" 
.h~ sidiil <perh It sedile> In pI -aat, sidflal lavatory 
seat. .. 

Y ~ '-'" see 
I Y ~ '-'" and y j '-'" 
J ~ '..1'-'" 
J~I..r" suraadiq or suraadiq r In pi -aatl temporary 
pavilion of appliqueed or patterned cloth set up in a 
public place for funeral receptions or other large 
gatherings. 
loS , ..I '-'" 
~I..r" saraaya <P sardy> In pi -aatl Is palace. lileej 
is-saraaya sweet consisting of a kind of sponge cake 
soaked in syrup. Ib large house, manor house. 2 fis-
saraaya (also fis-saraaya~-~afra) madhouse, nuthouse. 
laazim yiwadduu s-saraaya~-~afra he ought to be locked 
up, he belongs in a nuthouse. 
Y..I'-'" 
""'..r" sirb In pi fasraabl I flock (of birds). 2 squadron 
(of aircraft). 
J~..r" surabaati In pi -yyal one who cleans drains and 
cesspools. 
..,.,I..r" saraab Inl mirage. 
""'.r-" masrab In pi masaaribl course, path (of a 
stream). 
..,.,I.r-" musraab In pi masariibl rain dram, sewer. - also 
muzraab . 
..,.,:,.. sarrab Ivtl I to cause or allow to leak out. 
fik-kuuz bi-ysarrab mayya the tin mug leaks water. 
406 
II fil-muwa:;:;af sarrab il-xabar the employee leaked the, 
news. 2 to convey secretly, smuggle. sarrab ik-kalb' 
min ii-beet he smuggled the dog out of the house. 
- Ivil 3 to be leaky. fil-!Jigaara bi-tsarrab the batteries 
leak. -vn tasriib, tasriib; ava misarrab. 
~~ tasriiba linst n, pi -aatl I a way of slipping out. 
jufnaa-Iu tasriiba lajaan nitxalla~ minnu we found a 
way to get him off our backs. 2 a (skilful) dribbling or 
weaving manoeuvre (in soccer). 
..,.,:"";1 fitsarrab or fissarrab Ivil I to leak, seep, be 
leaked. fiI-mayya tsarrabit fir-ramla the water seeped 
into the sand. 2 to convey oneself or be conveyed 
secretly, be smuggled. fil-mugrim itsarrab minhum the 
criminal gave them the slip. fiI-biqaala tsarrabit min 
il-markib the goods were smuggled off the ship. - ava/ 
iva mitsarrab. 
t.Y..I'-'" 
C:..r" sarbal Ivtl to fluster, rush and agitate. fiI-mudiir 
misarbal-ni lal-waralia di the director has got me into a 
flap over this paper. -vn sarbala; ava misarbal. 
c: ~I fitsarbal or fissarbac: Ivil I to be flustered. 2 to 
throw a tantrum. -vn tisarbiil; avaliva mitsarbac:. 
-i.Jy..l'-'" 
~..r" sarabintiina <It serpentina> In pi -aatl coil 
(of, e.g., a refrigerator or water-heater). 
';;"..1'-'" 
'::"..r" sart Icoll 
nl small 
immature fruit(s) 
or 
vegetable(s). 
~\.;..r" sartaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a small immature fruit 
or vegetable. 
i.J';;"..I'-'" 
,:j..r" sartin <Engl thirty-one> Ivil [coarseJ to mastur-
bate, jerk off. - vn sartana; ava misartin. 
i.J loS ';;"..1 '-'" 
4..r" sartiina <It semina> Inl bilge, bilge water. 
bumba sartiina bilge pump. -also santiina. 
I 
C..I '-'" 
I:..r" sarag (i) Ivtl to saddle. fisrig-Ii I-!J~aan saddle 
the stallion for me. -vn sarg; ava saarig; pva masruug. 
I:..r" sarg In pi suruugl saddle. 
<.S":"..r" sargi: fit-{ariilia s-sargiyya [athlJ the straddling 
style (in the high jump). 
<.S":".J..r" suruugi In pi -yyal saddler. II suruugi sayyaraat 
car upholsterer. 
I:~I fitsarag or fissarag Ivil to be saddled. -iva 
mitsirig. 
1::'" sarrig = sarag. -vn tasriig; avalpva misarrig. 
1::"";1 fitsarrig or fissarrig Ivil passive of sarrig. -iva 
mitsarrig. 
2 C..I'-'" 
~I..r" siraaga I Inl I Ivnl basting, tacking. 2 Ipl -aatl 
manner of basting . 
1::'" sarrag, sarrag Ivtl [needlewJ to baste, tack. -vn 
tasriig, tasriig; avalpva misarrag, misarrag. 
1::"";1 fitsarrag, fitsarrag or fissarrag, fissarrag Ivil 
passive of sarrag. -ava/iva mitsarrag, mitsarrag. 
J 
C..I '-'" 
I:..r" sarag (i) Ivil to strike (of lightning). Ilqarab-ni 
lia1am xalla leen-i saragit he gave me a slap that made 
me see stars. -vn saragaan; ava saarig. 
1:1..r" siraag In pi fasriga, sirigal oil lamp. 
~.r-" misriga In pi masaarigl = siraag. 

4 ( [J ...,., ) 
~ 
r 
sarga: I'abu sarga St. Sergius. kiniisit I'abu sarga 
the Church of St. Sergius in Old Cairo, believed to be 
built on the site of the Holy Family's refuge in Egypt. 
~Ir siraaga 2 Inl [vet] equine lymphangitis. 
5 [J...,., see [J I.S ...,.,: sirga 
C. J ...,., 
cr saral:J (a) Ivil 1 to go about in search of one's 
livelihood (of, e.g., an itinerant,Peddler, day labourer, 
beggar). bi-yisral:J bi-tirmis wi-b-yisqi n-nailS mayya he 
goes about peddling lupin and offering people water to 
drink. II l'isral:J go away! (to a beggar). -nal:Jli saaril:J 
worker bees. 2 to go to pasture, graze (of animals). 
3a to wander, stray (0f the mind). laql-u saaril:J lala 
ladt-u he's daydreaming as usual. xayaal-u saral:J his 
imagination wandered. IIma-tisral:Jf biyya don't try 
and fool me! 3b to ruminate, reflect. qareet iI-xabar da 
w-saral:Jt i fii fwayya I read that news and turned it over 
in my mind a bit. 4a to go further than intended as a 
result of inattention. kunt i raayil:J liI-baqqaal laakin 
saral:Jti baldi minnu ktiir I was going to the grocer but 
wandered far beyond without realizing. I'iwla I-azmiil 
yisral:J minnak mind the chisel (that you are wielding) 
doesn't slip! I'is-sikkiina saral:Jit min I'iid-i qa(alit wiff 
iI-lal:Jma the knife slipped in my hand and cut the top of 
the meat. 4b to continue further (than originally plan-
ned). kunt i I'arkab li-l:Jadd it-tal:Jriir wi-myyarti muxx-i 
w-saral:Jti kamaanfiwayya I was going to ride as far as 
Tahrir Square, but changed my mind and went on a bit. 
IIda saral:J wi-baral:J '" he's come up in the world. 
-saral:Jit wi-maral:Jit she went her happy way, she lived it 
up. -vn saral:Jaan; ava saaril:J. 
.;,1.> r 
sarl:Jaan ladj *1 distracted, absent-minded. 
Cr 
siril:J ladj *1 tall and straight. 
Cl:"" sarraal:J In *1 I yarn-spinner. 2 daydreamer. - I 
adj *13 loose, free-living.llbitt i sarraal:Ja an easy girl, a 
flirt. mara sarraal:Ja [coarse, abus] an easy lay, a whore. 
C!:"" sarriil:J 
In 
pi sarriil:Jal 
1 itinerant peddler. 
2 braggart. 
C.r- masral:J (also marsal:J J [obsolj) In pi masaaril:JI 
1 theatre. 2 stage. 3 theatre, theatrical art. l'il-masral:J 
wis-sinima stage and film. 
..s>.r- masral:Ji ladjl pertaining to the theatre or stage, 
theatrical. 
~.r- masral:Jiyya In pi -aatl stage play. 
C:,... sarral:J Ivtl 1 to send out to pasture. l'i~-~ubl:J i 
laazim tisarral:J iI-gamuusa in the morning she has to put 
the buffalo out to pasture. 2 to send (peddlers, beggars 
407 
etc.) out to work. l'iI-milallim bi-ysarral:J liyaal 
sabarsagiyya the boss sends kids out to work as 
cigarette-butt collectors. I'ir-raagil sarral:J miraat-u 
b-figli w-kurraat the man sent his wife out to hawk 
radishes and leeks. II misarral:J miraat-u having his wife 
working as a prostitute. 3 to tidy and arrange (the hair). 
xallii-ha tsarral:Jfalr-ik (or raas-ik) let her do your hair. 
-vn tasriil:J; avalpva rrzisarral:J. 
~.r' tasriil:Ja In pi -aatl la instance noun of tasriil:J. 
Ib hair-do. 2 dressing table. 
C::"";I l'itsarral:J or l'issarral:J Ivil I passive of sarral:J. 
2 to have one's hair done. - iva mitsarral:J. 
c. J ...,., 
Crt' sarax, ~arax (u) Ivil to scream, cry out, shout. 
faa/it ig-gussa w-saraxit she saw the corpse and 
screamed. l:Jamdi sarax lalee Hamdi shouted to him. 
sarax ir-raagil fi-wiff-u-hum the man yelled at them. 
-vn sarx, ~arx, siriix, suraax, ~uraax; ava saarix, ~aarix. 
Crt' sarx, ~arx Inl screaming. IIraas-i fiiha sarx my 
head is ringing. -rigl-i fiiha sarx my leg hurts terribly. 
~ rt' sarxa, ~arxa linst n, pi -aat, -aatl a scream, a cry, 
a shout. 
CJ';L... 'CJ';l... saruux or ~aruux In pi sawariixl rocket. 
IIlamba saruux crude kerosene lamp of metal with no 
chimney (see PI.B, 2). 
t!-~ sarriix In/: sarriix ibn i yomeen lin negcontextl '" 
a living soul, as in ba~~eet yimiin wi-fmaal ma-Iaqet-/ 
sarriix ibn i yomeen I looked right and left but found not 
a living soul. 
C~ sarrax or ~arrax Ivil to scream. - ava misarrax, 
mi~arrax. 
I ~ J ...,., 
~ r 
sarad (u, i) Ivtl to relate, narrate. balaaf tisrid 
iI-l:Jikaaya mil-I'awwil don't tell the story from the be-
ginning. - vn sard, saradaan; ava saarid; pva masruud. 
~.r'1 I'itsarad or I'issarad Ivil to be related, be 
narrated. -iva mitsirid. 
~ .r' 1 I'insarad = I'itsarad. -iva minsirid. 
2 ~ J...,., see .!l I y : sird i baak 
y I ~ J...,., 
..,.,br 
sirdaab <P sard-ab> In pi saradiibl subterra-
nean vault, cellar, basement. 
JI~J""" 
.;br 
sirdaar <P sar-dar> Inl [obsol] supreme com-
mander, commanding general. 

J ,) J loY' see J,) I J loY' : suraadiq, suraadiq 
JJ,)JIoY' 
~~ r 
sardilla <prob It sardella> Icoll nI Mediterra-
nean fish (Sardinella aurita, Sardinella eba). 
..... ~~r sardillaaya lunit n, pI -aatl a fish ofthesardilla 
species. 
·~IoS,)JIoY' 
.:.r..~ r 
sardiin Icoll nl I sardine(s). 2 Nile fish resemb-
ling sardines. 
~~ r 
sardiina Ipl -aatl unit noun of sardiin. 
..... ~~r sardinaaya = sardiina. 
l~IoS,)JIoY' 
~~..Ir surdiina <It sordina> In pI -aatl {mus] mute, 
sordino (for violin, cornet etc.). 
• J J loY' 
:,.. sarr l (u) Ivtl to please, make happy. lI17aaga 
ma-tsurr'j la eaduw wa/a 17abiib = it shouldn't happen 
to a dog. -vn suruur; ava saarir, saarir; pva masruur, 
masruur. 
..IJr suruur Inl pleasure, joy. bi-kull' suruur with the 
greatest pleasure, as in 17-aemil-haa-/ak bi-kull' suruur 
I'll be delighted to do it for you. 
.1:'" sarraart Inl happiness, prosperity. [IS-sarraar 
wiq-qarraa r = for better or for worse. 
• :,..... masarra In pI -aatl joy, delight, pleasure, happi-
ness. nigii-/ak dayman fil-masarraat may we always visit 
you on happy occasions. II... wa-fin-naas il-masarra 
{Chr] ... good will towards men. 
::"";1 rinsarr Ivil to feel happy, glad or delighted. rana 
b-ansarr' lamma b-ajuuf-ak I feel happy whenever 
I see you. -iva minsarr. 
1 
J J loY' 
:,.. sarr2 (i) Ivtl I to entrust (a secret). sarrit kilma 
f-widn-u she told him something secret in his ear. 2 to 
withhold (a secret). sarreet il-xabar fi-nafs-i I kept the 
secret to myself. - ava saarir. 
:,.. sirr In pI rasraarlla secret. II ril-biyuut rasraar ev-
ery house has its secrets. -eaalim il-rasraar Ommiscient 
(epithet of God). - kaatim rasraar {mil] secretary. 
- kilmit is-sirr {mil] password. -sirr-ak fi-biir ... (be sure) 
your secret will be well kept. - qa/-Iu I-qill' w-taeab 
is-sirr to hell with him and what he said. Ib spirit, inner 
being. quIt' f-sirr-i I said to myself. kilmaf-sirr-ak just a 
word in your ear. rallaqh yihaddi s-sirr may God calm 
the (troubled) mind. wi-fin-nihaaya (ilie (or xarag) 
408 
is-sirr il-rilaahi ... at last, he died. Ic spiritual power. 
sirr-u baatie his spiritual power is effective. fii sirr he's 
psychic. 2a (divine) mystery. Ilyiwqae sirr-u f-racleaf 
xalq-u (God) may reveal Himself in the weakest of His 
creatures. 2b {Chr] sacrament. sirr il-ietiraafthe sacra-
ment of confession. 
11 sirran ladvl privately, inaudibly. ra17yaanan bi-~a/li 
/i-llaah sirran we sometimes pray to God inaudibly (or 
privately) . 
loS:'" sirri ladjl I secret, confidential. taqariir sirriyya 
confidential reports. sirri lil-maya top secret. II17ibr' 
sirri invisible ink. -beet sirri brothel. - ramraaq sirriyya 
venereal diseases. - ril-eaada s-sirriya {euphem] mas-
turbation. 2 {Chr] 2a mystical. lahoot sirri mystical 
theology. 2b sacramental. 
.Jl.r sariira In pI saraayirl mind, heart, conscience. 
rabb-i-na rae lam bis-saraayir God knows the heart of 
everyone . 
:"'i rasarr= sarr2. -vn risraar. 
3 
J J loY' 
.:,.. surra (also ~urra) In pI surarl I navel. burtuqaan 
rabu surra (or bi-surra) navel oranges. 17izaarrr surra 
umbilical truss. 2 centre. bet-hum fi-surrit il-ba/ad their 
house is located in the centre of the viJlage. Iisurrit 
ir-raffa~ {naut] propeller post. 
.s:'" surri ladj '1 umbilical. ril-17abl is-surri umbilical 
cord . 
4 
J J loY' 
Jl.r siriir In pI saraayirl bed. Iisiriir markib stern 
bench of a boat. 
JIJJIoY' 
.;1:'" sirraaq, sarraaq <perh It saracco> In pI sarariiql 
(carp] saw. sirraaq timsaa17 panel saw. 
J loS J J loY' 
J!.:'" surreeq Icoll nl chrysalis( es). 
~:,.. surreeqa lunit n, pI -aatl a chrysalis. 
.IoY'JIoY' 
1oY':'" sarras Ivil to become wormy, become weeVily. 
rig-gibna sarrasit the cheese has become wormy. -vn 
tasriis; aVa misarras. 
1 
IoY'JIoY' 
..r r 
sirs Icoll nI rice awn(s). 
4... r 
sirsa lunit n, pI -aatl a rice awn. 
..... L.. r 
sirsaaya = sirsa. 

J \J" J \J" see \J" t.S J \J" : siriis 
tJ""i fasra[2/vil to speed up, accelerate. -vn fisraa[; 
ava musri[. 
Y\J"J\J" 
...-r 
sarsib I Ivt/ to cause to trickle, leak. fiz-zikiiba 
fiiha xurm i bi-ysarsib il-t;am!J the sack has a hole which 
lets .the wheat trickle out. 2 Ivil to dribble, trickle. 
riI-!Janafiyya bi-tsarsib the tap is dripping. fit/.-t/.uyuuf 
gum sarsaba the guests trickled in. -vnsarsaba; ava/pya 
misarsib. 
..,.."... r 
sarsuub In! I colostrum. 2 Ipl sarasiibl trickle. 
fil-mayya nazla sarasiib the water trickles down. 
...-,roil filsarsib or fissarsib Ivi/l to be made to trick-
le, be leaked. 2 to trickle, leak. riI-mayya t;a[adil 
litsarsib (Uul il-Ieel the water kept dripping all night. -vn 
lisarsiib; ava/iva milsarsib. 
t\J"J\J" 
t::" r 
sarsa[ Ivil to sound shrill. wi-hiyya b-lilkallim 
bi-tsarsa[ she speaks in a shrill voice. -vn sarsaca; ava 
misarsa[. 
t.J \J" J \J" 
t"... r 
sarsuu[ Icoll nl sissoo tree(s). 
-t.S\J"J\J" 
i.Jr."'r sirisyoon Inl a type of glue used to repair 
rubber and leather. 
,jbJ\J" 
i.Ju, r 
sarataan Inl Ilcolll crab(s}. 2 fis-sarataan 
{aslrol] Cancer. 3 {palh] cancer.lIsarataan il-t;izaaz de-
terioration of glass caused by heat or stress and leading 
to spontaneous shattering. 
tJ\J" 
tr sure In pi fasraacl (set of) reins. 
4&. r 
sur[a In pi -aall I speed. riI- fustawanaal liiha 
lalal SUr[aal records have three speeds. bi-sur[a quick-
ly. [addaad is-sur[a speedometer. 2 {aulo] gear.llnat;1 
is-SUr[aal il-fulumalik automatic transmission. 
~r sarii[ I/adj pi suraa[1 swift, fast, quick. sarii[ 
il-kasr quick to break. layyaar sarii[ il-Iaraddud {elec] 
high frequency current. 2 fis-sarii[ Inl express train 
or bus. 
tri fasra[ I lell faster/fastest. 
t::""'1 fitsarra[ or fissarra[ Ivil to be too hasty, rush. 
fana kulli t;~d-i finnak ma-kunli-f litsarra[ I only 
meant that you shouldn't have been hasty. -vn 
lasarrU[; ava mitsarrac. 
t:"""" mUlasarri[t ladj *1 rash, hasty, precipitate. 
loJJ\J" 
Jri fasraf Ivil to go too far, be extravagant. finla 
fasrafl i f-[ilaab-u you went too far in reprimanding 
him. -vn fisraaf; ava musrif. 
1 
• 
"-'J\J" 
JJ"" sirf <Engl> In pl-aall serve, service (e.g., in 
tennis) . 
JoJJ\J" 
~ 
r 
• .y.; r 
sarfileeh <Fr sur filer> 
In! hem-
stitching. II mat;~~ i sarfileeh pinking shears. 
j; r 
sarfil Ivt/ to hem-stitch. -vn sarfala; ava/pya 
misarfil. 
j;,roil fitsarfilor fissarfillvil to be hem-stitched. -vn 
lisarfiil;.iva misarfil. 
1\J"t.SoJJ\J" see also \J".JJ\J" 
~ 
r 
sarviis or siryiis <Fr service> In! la (also 
tat;m i sarviis) set of china. Ib (also ~a!Jn i sarviis) serv-
ing platter. Ie dining implements, table setting (china, 
silver, napkins etc.). fa!Jutl i sirviis /i-kaam how many 
shall I lay the table for? II tarabeezil sarviis dumb waiter, 
auxiliary serving table. 2 locker. 
rt.SoJJ\J" 
~I.r-- sirafiim <Heb> Ipl n! (Chr] seraphim. 
-
t.S oJ J \J" see J oJ J \J" : sarfileeh 
1 JJ \J" 
J r 
sarat; (a) Ivtl I to steal. sarat;u ghaaz lasgiil 
wi-fwayyil hiduum they stole a tape-recorder and a few 
clothes. bi-yisrat; il-ku!Jl i min iI-[een he could steal the 
kohl from your eyes! filii [aawiz yisrat; gamal 
yi!Jat/.t/.ar-lu kimaama {proy] (he who wants to steal a 
camel should have a muzzle ready for it) == good plan-
ning ensures success. fin sarat;t israt; gamal {proy] (if 
you steal, steal a camel) == if you must steal take some-
thing worthwhile. II wiff-a-ha yisrat; iI-[een her face 
captivates the eye. -sart;aa s-sikkiin == he's lost touch 
with reality, he lives in a world of false hopes. -door 
masruut; mezzanine, entresol. -ru!Jli masruut; min 
wij{iihum rawwa!Jl· [al-beel == I slipped away from 
their company and went home. 2 to rob. sarat;u bank i 
w-hirbu they robbed a bank and got away. sarat;t-u 
f-t;irp saar I robbed him of a piastre. II bi-yisrat; fil-litb 

he cheats at the game. -vn sirc;a; ava saaric;.; pva 
masruuc;. 
;;,; r 
sirc;a 1 In pi saric;aatl theft, robbery. sirc;a bil-
rikraah armed robbery. 2 ladvl stealthily. rawwa!J sirc;a 
he went home without anyone noticing. bi-yaakul sirc;a 
he eats on the sly . 
.:...liJ,r-A masruc;aat Ipl nl stolen goods. 
~r siriic;a In pi -aatl = sirc;a. 
";.r-'I ritsarac; or rissarac; Ivil 1 to be stolen. 
[arabiyyit-i tsarac;it mif-jaari[ my car was stolen off the 
street. 2 to be robbed. beet-i tsarac; my house has been 
burgled. 3 to steal away. II ritsarac;it mil-beet min reer 
ma !Jadd'jaf-ha she sneaked out of the house unseen by 
anybody. - avaliva mitsiric;. 
..; .r-' 1 rinsarac; = ritsarac;. -avaliva minsiric;. 
2 J.)...,.. see J \.).) ...,.. : sirraac;, sarraac; 
3 J .)...,.. see J",s.).)...,..: surreec;, surreec;a 
I .!l .) ...,.. 
.!l.r.- sirk, sark <Fr cirque> Inl circus. 
2 .!l .) ...,.. 
..} r 
sarki <T sergi> In pi saraakil register book 
for 
messenger-delivered 
dispatches. 
sallim-hum 
ig-gawabaat [as-sarki have them sign for their letters in 
the mail-delivery book. 
.!l:"" sarrak Ivtl to register (mail, dispatches or official 
letters) in the register book. -vn tasriik; avalpva 
misarrak. 
.!l:""'1 ritsarrak or rissarrak Ivil passive of sarrak. -iva 
mitsarrak. 
c.r.)""" 
~ 
r 
sarma!Ja Ivnl loitering, loafing. 
c.\.. r 
sirmaa!J In '1 loiterer, loafer. 
C".r-'I ritsarma!J or rissarma!J Ivil to loaf around, loi-
ter about. ratsarma!J fif-jawaari[ w-ahallis jiwayyiteen 
I'm going to hang around the streets and chase some 
crumpet. - ava mitsarma!J. 
.;,.)...,.. see ';'",s.)...,..: sariina 
~.;,.) ...,.. 
~ 
r 
siringa <It siringa> In pi -aatl syringe. 
I .J .) ...,.. 
J r 
sarw Icoll n! evergreen cypress. xajab sarw cypress 
wood. 
410 
OJ r 
sarwa I In pi -aatl 1 lunit nl a cypress. 2 a panel 
shaped like a diamond with one elongated point, used 
in !Jajw' baladi (see PI.G, 10). 
2 .J .) ...,.. 
OJ,} sarwa 2 In! 1 wealth, abundance. ma-yhimm-i-
nii-j il-maal 
wis-sarwa 
I 
don't 
care 
about 
money and riches. yaklu /is-sana sarwa min iI-c;am!J 
they consume an enormous quantity of wheat in a year. 
2 Ipl -aatl treasure. sarwaat tarix!yya historical 
treasures. 
...,.. .J .)...,.. see also ...,..",s"';.)...,.. 
...r'-Jr sarwiis <Fr service> In pi sarawiisl la (also 
(ac;m sarwiis) set of china. Ib (also ~a!Jn I sarwiis) serv-
ing platter. 2 government telegram, official telegram 
sent at the expense of a government department. 
...,..J r 
sarwis Ivtl to serve. [ayz-ak tisarwis iI-!Jilw' 
dilwac;ti I want you to serve the dessert now. -vn 
sarwasa; avalpva misarwis. 
...,..J.r-'I ritsarwis or rissarwis Ivil passive of sarwis . 
ril-[aja tsarwis dinner has been served. - iva mitsarwis. 
J.J.) ...,.. 
JIJr sirwaal (also jirwaa/) In pi sarawiill 1 loose 
breeches or trousers gathered at the waist and very full 
in the seat (worn by men of the Mediterranean coast). 
2 loose pantaloon-type trousers worn by the more tra-
ditional women of the Egyptian countryside. 
JJ,r-A misarwil: !Jamaam misarwil variety of pigeon 
which has feathers on its legs . 
I ",s.) ...,.. 
",s r 
sara (i) Ivil I to apply, be applicable. ril-qanuun 
da ma-yisrii-j [alee this law doesn't apply to him. 2 to 
spread. ril- ralam bi-yisri f-kull ' gism-i the pain spreads 
all over my body. !Jubb-a-ha b-yisri f-damm-u love for 
her runs in his blood. r~-~oot bi-yisri /iI-lee! wid-dinya 
sakta "" the sound carries at night when all is silent. 
IIma{ra!J mayisriyimri "" may it do you good! (to a guest 
after eating). -vn sarayaan, sarayaan; ava saari. 
",s) ... saari2 ladjl 1 operational, operative. IIsaari 1-
maf[uul valid, in force. 2 rampant (of, e.g., a conta-
gious disease). 
-:'r sariyya In pi saraaya, sariyyaatl {mil] company of 
soldiers. 
.1 rl risraarf, risra: risraar in-nabi, ral- risraar (wal-
mi[raag) {lsi] the Prophet Muhammad's night journey 
to Jerusalem (and the seven heavens). 

1 ..; .J IJ" 
IS:'" sarra Ivtl to dispel, drive away (sorrow, worries). 
nukat-u sarrit lan e;alb-i I-humuum his jokes dispelled 
the worries from my heart. -vn tasriyya; ava misarri. 
IS:""'I ritsarra or rissarra Ivil passive of sarra. raalj 
sinima wi-humuum-u tsarrit lannu he went to the cine-
ma and her troubles were dispelled. - iva mitsarri. 
J(..;.JIJ") 
~;l .. sarya In pI sawaaril flagpole. 
~.r- sirya <It serie> In pI -aa(1 {elee] series. 
~.rI1 ris-surayya Iprop nl {astron] the Pleiades. 
4 ..; .J IJ" see 4.J.J IJ" : surya 
5 ..; .J IJ" see ";.J I IJ" : saari I 
6 ..; .J IJ" see ..; I .J IJ" : saraaya 
J I ";.J IJ" 
J~.r- siryaaiiT <Fr surreal> ladjl surrealist. 
IJ" ..; .J IJ" 
"'-!.r- siriis Icoll nl chicory. 
i.J ..; .J IJ" 
~.r- sariina <It sirena> In pI sarayinl siren. 
JljlJ" 
Jlj.,- sizaal <Fr> Inl sisal (hemp). - also sayzal. 
yjlJ" 
.,..I..i.. sazaab Icoll nl rue, herb of grace (used in folk 
medicine). -also sadaab. 
.,....i.. sazab = sazaab. -also sadab. 
~j IJ" 
~I..i.. sazaaga Inl innocence, naivete. 
E~L. saazig, saazag ladj * and pI suzzaagl innocent, 
naive. 
J j IJ" see J I j IJ" : sizaal 
~li.JjlJ" 
.!ll.;j- suznaak <P soznilk> Inl (mus] mode in Arabic 
music beginning on C and having E half flat and A flat. 
i.J I y IJ" IJ" 
.;,1.,....,.. sasabaan. sisibaan. saysabaan r <P sisabiln> 
Icoll nI sesban. Danchi plant. 
411 
~l,...... sasabaana. sisibaana lunit n, pI -aatl a sesban 
plant. 
'::"IJ"IJ" 
~.,.. susta <It susta> In pI susatl 1 spring. susat iI-
larabiyya (car) suspension.lIsusat kubbaaya telescopic 
suspension (motorcycle). - walad susta nimble, agile 
boy. -mitri susta self-winding tape-measure. 2 zip 
fastener. 
IJ"";IJ"IJ" 
~.,.. susiis <Fr saucisse> Icoll nl sausage(s). 
4...."...,.. susiisa lunit nl a sausage. 
~L..,....,.. susisaaya = susiisa . 
.J I .J .;. IJ" 
;1"..- sifwaar <Fr sechoir> In pI -aatl (hair) dryer. 
y j, IJ" see y j, ~ r : m~{aba 
c. j, IJ" 
do- sa{alj (a) Ivtl to flatten. spread out flat. qarab-u 
w-sa{alj-u he knocked him flat. -vn sa{lj; ava saa{ilj; pva 
mas{uulj. 
do- sa{lj. SU{1j In pI SU{uulj. ras{ulj. rus{ulj/l surface. 
sa{1j iI-mayya (1) the surface of the water. (2) sea level. 
2 deck (of a ship). 3/pl SU{uulj used interchangeably 
with singl flat rooftop. fooe; is-su{uulj on the roof. 
riI-yasiil manfuur laS-Sa{1j the washing is hung on the 
roof. 4/pl ras{ulj onlyl {geom] plane. 
~ 
sa{lji ladjl 1 pertaining to the surface. riyaalj 
sa{ljiyya surface winds. 2 superficial, shallow. guruulj 
sa{ljiyya superficial injuries. lamlja sa{ljiyya a superfi-
cial glance. 
~ 
sa{ljiyyar Inl superficiality . 
e"J...... mas{uulj ladj *1 flat, shallow. {abae; mas{uulj 
dinner plate. 
~ 
si{iilj. sa{iilj ladvl prostrate. wie;illal-rarqi s{iilj 
he fell sprawling.llraae;id si[iilj he's lying ill, he's lying 
helpless. 
~ 
si[iilja = si{iilj. naayim si[iilja sleeping like a log. 
eu........ mis{aalj. mus(aalj Inlland between the river's 
edge and the corniche. 
~I ritsa[alj or rissa[alj Ivil to be flattened. - iva 
mitsi[ilj. 
~I rinsa[alj = ritsa(alj. -iva minsi{ilj. 
do- sa[[alj Ivtl la to flatten, level. rawwil Ijaaga 
bi-nsa[[alj iI-mallab first we level the pitch. Ib to 
spread out flat. layout flat. sa[[alj-Ii I-layyillay the 
baby flat on his back for me. 2 to measure the surface 

area of. saaal:J if1aqqa he measured the floor area of the 
flat. - Ivii 3 to ride on the roof of a train (to avoid 
paying the fare). 4 to lie down (for a rest). ruul:J 
sattal:J-Iak Jiwayya go and lie down for a while. -vn 
tas[iil:J; ava/pva misaaal:J. 
~ 
musaaal:J ladj *1 I flat. qadam musaaal:Ja flat 
foot. - In pI -aatl 2 flat surface. musattal:J bi-lagal 
laJaan yinaam lalee laamil tal:Jt il-larabiyya a platform 
with wheels for a worker to lie on under the vehicle. 
3 {geom] plane. 4 {constr] surface area. 
~I ritsattal:J or rissattal:J Ivii I to lie prone. 
l:J-atsaaal:J jiwayya I'm going to stretch out for a while. 
2 passive of saaal:J 1 and 2. -ava/iva mitsaaal:J. 
I J j,..,... 
).... sa[r In pI su{uur, ras{Urt I I row. 
nir~~-a-ha 
su{Uur su{Uur we arrange them in rows. 2 line. II kurraas 
sa{r' w-sa{r exercise book with widely spaced lines . 
• )a..... mastara In pI masaatir/l ruler. 2 {text] wooden 
track for a pick (on a loom). 3 facing for the neck 
opening of a garment. 4 metal strip which stabilizes the 
tuning of the strings of an qanuun (see PU, 24). 
• .;)a..i rUS{uura, ras{Uura In pI rasa{iirl myth, fable, 
legend. 
j.. sattar Ivt/l to compose and write down. saaar-lu 
gawaab he wrote him a letter. II wald' wi-msaaar lal-
gibiin man's fate is written on his face. 2 to rule, draw 
lines on. bi-nsattar il-waraq we rule lines on the paper. 
-vn tas{iir; ava/pva misattar. 
~I ritsattar or rissattar Ivil passive of saaar. -iva· 
mitsaaar. 
1 J j,..,... 
.;).L satuur Inpl sawa{iirl meat cleaver. - alsoJa{uur. 
3 J j,..,... see - J j, ..,... r : mastareen, mas{ariin 
j,j,..,... 
1.... satt (u) Ivt and viI to hit, strike hard. ri{-{uuba 
sattit-ni [-qurt-i stone hit me on my forehead. 
ril-larabiyya sattit [il-pee{a the car smashed into the 
wall. -vn salt; ava saa{i{; pva mas{uu{. 
i... satta finst n, pI -aatl a hit, a crash, a collision. 
LI ritsa{{ or rissa{{ Ivil passive of satt. -iva mitsatt. 
LI rinsatt = ritsa{{. -iva minsa{{. 
t j,..,... 
cb- sa{al (a) Ivil to shine brightly. -vn sutuul; ava 
saa{il· 
~L saatilladjl bright, radiant. 
412 
I J j,..,... 
Jla.. sa{al (i) Ivt/l to intoxicate. 2 to drug, dope. - vn 
satl, sa{alaan; ava saa{il; pva mas{uul. 
~ 
sa{la linst n, pI -aat, su{al/ a trip, a 'high'. 
J)a..... mastuul ladj * and pI masa{iill intoxicated, 
drugged, doped. 
Jla.. sutal I/nl any intoxicating agent. 2 ladj invarl 
28 doped, stoned, high. 2b intoxicated, drunk. 
Jl.-;I ritsa{al or rissa{allvil to be or become intoxi-
cated. - ava/iva mitsi{il. 
J.la-;I rinsa{al = ritsatal. -ava/iva minsi{il. 
Jh- sattall/vtl to dope with su{al. 2 Ivii to take, or be 
under the effect of, su{al. -vn tas{iil; ava/pva misa{{al. , 
1 J j,..,... 
Jla.. sa{1 In pI ris{aal, su[Ula, su{uul/ I bucket. 2 tin 
mug. 
.J j, ..,... 
Uo.- sa{a (i) Ivil to break and enter, commit burglary. 
rit-ta rmiin cfidd is-sa(W insurance against burglary. - vn 
sa(W, sa{ayaan; ava saati . 
.)a.. sa(Wa Inl influence, authority, power. 
J..-;I ritsa{a or rissa{a Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
sa{a. ril-xazna tsata laleeha the safe was burgled. -iva 
mitsi{i. 
t..,... see t..,....J: sila t 
J..:..t..,... 
J.- sal tar Inl thyme. - also zaltar. 
I ~t..,... 
.AA.. silid (a) Ivil I to. become happy. silidt' b-
muqablit-ak it has been a pleasure to meet you. 2 to be 
I 
fortunate in material gain. min gaawir is-saliid yislad 
{prov] or I:JU{{' rigl-ak ma{ral:J rigl is-saliid tislad {prov] 
stick close to a rich man and you too will have luck. -vn 
sald . 
.AA.. salad (i) Ivtl I to make happy. rig-gawaaza 
saladit-ni qawi the marriage made me very happy. 
II yislid ~abaal:J-ak '" good morning to you (in response 
to ~abaal:J il-xeer etc.). 2 to make fortunate. rin 
salad-ni zamaan-i l:Ja-tirsi lalayya I-munaq~a if things 
go well I should get the tender. -vn sald; ava saalid; 
pva masluud. 
.AA.. sald J Inl I happiness. 2 good fortune. kaan 
qadam sald" laleehum he brought them good luck. 
min sald-i-na nnak geet luckily for us, you've come! 
~.No..J I ris-saldiyya Iprop nl Sufi order. 

~ l.. saaeid J T In pI sawaalidl forearm. 
..... i faslad J lell morelmost happy, fortunate etc. 
iJI- salaada Inl I happiness. 2 lin construct with 
pron suff or titlel respectful title, or form of address, or 
reference. saladt-ak laayiz feeh ... what do you want, 
sir? salaadit iI-beeh ... his Excellency the Bey (also used 
jokingly and cynically). 
JY'- sUluud Ipl nI good fortune, prosperity. sald is-
sueuud ... utmost happiness. 
-'e-- saliid ladj pI sUladal I happy. hiyya lJa-tkuun 
s8[iida maeaa she will be happy with him. 2 fortunate, 
lucky (especially in material gain). fis-saliid kull 
in-naas tixdim-u [proy} everyone wants to do a rich man 
a service. 
i-'e-- saliida linterjl a salutation given either on join-
ing or leaving someone's company'" hello, good-bye. 
-,-,I fitsalad or fissalad Ivil to be blessed with good 
fortune. - iva mitsilid. 
Ja...j 1 finsalad = fitsalad. - iva minsilid. 
~l.. saaeid2 I/vtl to help, assist. miraat-i nizlit 
ruald-u /-lira l-lJaaga my wife went to help him buy 
things. saeidnaa lala salJb iI-yariili we helped him pull 
the drowning man out. II fustaaz musaalid [acad] 
associate professor. -mawadd; musalda [chem} 
catalysts. 2 Ivil to give help, give assistance. -vn 
mus8[da; ava musaalid. 
i~l..... musaeda In pI -aatl help, assistance. fayy; 
mus8[da do you need any help? 
~l..... musaaeid In "II assistant, aide. 2 [auto] shock 
absorber. 
~l..;1 fitsaalid or fissaalid Ivil to be helped, be 
assisted. -iva mitsaalid . 
..... i faslad 2T = salad. -vn fislaad; ava muslid. 
"""-' musladJ, mislidJ ladj "I born lucky. 
l~tV" 
..... saldz, sild, sUld Icoll nl plant(s) of the sedge 
family, particularly Cyperus longus, Cyperus rotundus. 
i ..... silda Ipl -aatl unit noun of saldz. 
~I ..... sildaaya = silda. 
J ~ t V" see 
~.J tV": SUluudi, saluudi, siluudi, 
fis-suludiyya, fis-saludiyya, fis-siludiyya, sal wid, 
fits8[wid 
I 
.J tV" 
j'- silr In pI faslaarl price. faslaar iI-/akha wil-
xuqaar the prices of fruit and vegetables. mif lJa-ybiil 
bis-silr iI-malliuul he won't sell at a reasonable price. 
Iisilr i/-/ayda rate of interest. 
413 
J"- sallar Ivtl I to price, set a price for. sallar-li 
I-kimmiyya di min /aql-ak give me a price for this 
quantity, please. 2 to attach worth or value to. ma-
ysallar-ak-l he has no respect for you. -vn tasliir; 
ava/pva misallar. 
i ~ 
tasliira Inl officially fixed price (of a given com-
modity). bi-ybiil-u bit-tasliira he sells it at its fixed 
price. 
;...... misallar, musallar ladjl officially priced. 
;""1 fitsallar or fissallar Ivii passive of sallar. -iva 
mitsallar. 
1 
.J tV" 
J"- silir, sUlur (a) Ivilto become rabid (of an animal). 
-vn salar; ava salraan. 
J"- salar J (i) Ivtl to infect (an animal) with rabies. 
II masluur /iI- fakl eating ravenously. -vn salaraan; ava 
saalir; pva masluur. 
J"- salar2 Inl rabies. 
.JIJ"- salraan ladjl rabid (of animals). see further 
under "'.J t V" 
-",",,",I fitsalar or fissalar Ivil I to become rabid. 2 to 
get in a frenzy. -ava mitsilir. 
J.JtV" 
J"- sUlr In pI aatl calorie. 
.., .J t V" see also 1.J t V" 
.JJ"- salran Ilvtl to infect (an animal) with rabies. 
2/vil to become rabid (of an animal). -vn salrana; 
avalpva misalran. 
.J-",",,",I fitsalran or fissalran Ivil to become rabid (of 
an animal). -ava mitsalran. 
I"'; tV" 
.......... sdlaF (i) Ivtl I to render an urgently needed 
service to, rush to assist. ril-muhimm; dilwaliti 
tisli/uu-ni b-~uuril iI-muzakkira the important thing 
now is for you to rush. me the copy of the memo. 
fisli/ii-ni b-Iulima - fana mistalgil give me a quick bite 
- I'm in a hurry. 2 lin neg contexts! to be sufficient for. 
ril-walit; btaal iI-birnaamig mif lJa-yisli/-na I-kull-i-da 
programme time won't allow us to do all that. -vn 
sala/aan; ava saali/; pva masluuf. 
.......... i fasla/T = sala/. - vn fislaa/; ava misli/. 
JI-l fislaa/lnl I/pl -aatl urgently-n~eded assist-
ance. lamma fakuun laayiz fallJali liatr; yiblia t-taks; 
fislaa/ liyya when I want to' be in time for a train a taxi 
is what I really need. II (larabiyyit) fislaa/ ambulance. 
- fUla/aat (fawwaliyya) first aid. 2 fil-fislaa/lno pl/ 

2a the First Aid Organization, the Red Crescent. 
2b specifically, the First Aid Centre on Ramses Street. 
1"'; t..,.. 
-..i-- salaF Icoll nl palm frond(s).badd Is-salaf {Chr} 
Palm Sunday. -also zabaf, zalaf. 
Jt..,.. 
J.... salal (i) Ivil to cough. -vn sUlaal; ava saalil. 
Jl.- sUlaal Inl cough. sUlaal diiki whooping cough. 
:a..- salla linst n, pi -aall a cough. 
:a..- silla J Inl a cough. 
~.J t..,.. 
..s:.~ SUluudi, saluudi, Slluudi I/adj *1 Saudi. 
2 In *1 a Saudi. 
~:..,-II 'lis-suludiyya, 'lls-saludiyya, 'lis-siludiyya 
Iprop nl Saudi Arabia. 
:.~ salwid Ivtl to Saudi-ize. -vn salwada; avalpva 
misalwld. 
:..,-.;1 'litsalwid or 'lissalwid Ivil to be or become 
Saudi-ized. - ava/iva milsalwid. 
I~t..,.. 
...,.... sala (a) Ivil I to make an effort. b-aslaa-/ak fi-
juYla I'll endeavour to find you a job. 'lisla ya labd' 
w-rana rasla malaak {prov} "" God helps those who 
help themselves. II/akar allaahu saly-a-kum may God 
repay your effort (in reply to funeral condolences). 
2 {lsi} to perform the salY. -vn salY; ava saali. 
11 'lisla Ifem r'Sli, pi 'llslul please speed up, please 
walk a little faster! (to someone holding up one's prog-
ress in a crowd). 
~I 'lis-salY Inl {lsi} the ceremony of running be-
tween Safa and Marwa seven ·tlmes (as part of the 
pilgrimage ritual). 
.rL. saali In pi sUlaahl office boy, office messenger. 
IIsaali bus(a (or bariid) postman. 
~ 
masla In pi masaal,l effort. masaali bamiida 
commendable efforts. rallaah yinaggab maslaa-k God 
grant you su~cess in your undertaking. 
1 ~ t..,.. see t ~ ..,.. : saala 2 , rilSaala 
.) t..,.. 
.;.. sayr f In pi suyuurl seaport. 
0';" sayra In pi -aall gap, breach, loophole. 
I C. ...; ..,.. 
eA- safab (a) Ivll I to shed, spill (blood). w-allaahi 
414 
I-asfab damm-ak "" by God, I'm going to kill you! 2 to 
snatch, swipe, grab. safabil i1-c;irjeen illi bill-i she 
swiped everything I had. safab i1-'lakl he wolfed down 
th: food. 3 = safax. -vn saflJ; avasaafib; pva masfuub. 
c.lA- saffaab In *1 I killer, murderer. 2 person without 
scruples, swindler. -also saffaak. 
~I ritsafab or rlSSafab Ivil passive of safab. -iva 
milsifib· 
z C. ...; V" 
eA- saflJ In pi sufuubl foot (of a hill or mountain). 
t...;..,.. 
t:}- safax (a) Ivtl to st.rike, deal a blow to. safax-fia 
lalc;a nt{iifa he gave her a sound thrashing. safax-u 
c;alam suxn he slapped him hard in the face. - alsosafab, 
safal. -vn safx; ava saafix; pva masfuux. 
ti-'I 'litsafax or r,ssafax Ivil passive of safax. - iva 
mltsifix. 
..,..t...;..,.. 
~.,A- sufuxs linterjl pooh! sufuxs' laleek pooh to 
you! 
I .) ...; ..,.. 
)- safar Inl travel (ling) . 'lis-safar bli-c;a(r' bilw it's 
pleasant to travel by train. 'lis-safar min hina liI-ruC;~ur 
yaaxud c;add' reeh how long does the journey take from 
here to Luxor? safar-u (aal sana he was ~way travelling 
for a year. IImiina s-safar port of embarkation. 
;;.)- safariyya In pi -aatl trip, Journey. kaaml 
safa"yya bliwa it was a lovely trip. maktab safa"yyaat 
travel office. 
o;lA- sifaara In pi -aatl embassy. 
;.f- safiir In pi sufaral ambassador . 
)- saffar Ivtl 1 to sepd off on a journey, dispatch. 
b-asaffar-ak barra liftiri bagaal I shall send you abroad 
to buy things. 2 {naul} to clear (a ship). -vn tasfiir; 
a~a/pva misaffar. 
;"';1 ritsaffar or 'lissaffar Ivil passive of saffar. -iva 
milsaffar. 
)L. saafir Ivil to travel, go on a journey. waabid 
minhum bi-ysaafir liI-xaa"g one of them travels 
abroad. safirt' ma~r I went to Egypt. fu'laad saafir 
i1-lizba n-nahar-da Fuad went to the farm today. -vn 
misafra; ava misaafir. 
)L... misaafir, musaafir In 
*1 traveller. IIroot{it 
misafriin front parlour, sitting room. -musa31id 
musaaftr {joe} railway porter. 

1,) ~ ~ 
i';'" sufra J In pI sufarl dining table, dining suite. 
II rooqit sufra dining room. -sufra dayma ... may your 
table always be laden (expression of thanks for a meal). 
~.;... sUfragi In pI -yyal waiter, a servant who waits 
at table. 
3(,)~~} 
i';'" sufra 2 In pI sufar/l piston driving a balance ham-
mer (in a watch). 2 yoke (of a garment). 3 {coarse 
slang] anus, arsehole. 
.;... sifrlT In pI rasfaarl book (of the Bible). 
i ~ 
sufeera or sifeera: ris-sufeera caziiza I name of a 
beautiful well-born lady of legend; now used ironically, 
as in fakra nafs-a-ha miin - ris-sufeera caziiza ... who 
does she think she is, the Queen of Sheba? 2 a kind of 
diorama showing scenes from traditional stories for 
children. 
4 ,) ~ ~ see 3,) ~ ~ 
: sifr2 
J.[.,) ~ ~ 
~.;... safargallcoll nl quince(s). 
~.;... safargala lunit n, pI -aatl a quince. 
o:.J.J,)~~ 
.::.. J';'" safruut In pI safariitl little rascal. 
~~~~ 
....i....i.- safsif Ivil to talk nonsense. - vn safsafa; ava 
misafsif· 
~ 
safsafa In pI safaasifl silly talk, nonsense. 
J:,~~ 
.ki- safa{ (u) Ivt/l to emaciate, make lean or gaunt. 
ril-humuum safa{it wijj-u worries have made his face 
gaunt. 2 to dry up, shrivel. rij-jams i safa{it iI-lamuun 
the sun has dried up the lemons. 3 to suck in, contract, 
flatten. safa{it bacn-a-ha cajaan tiwarri rinnaha muj 
l:Jaamil she drew in her stomach to show she was not 
pregnant. - Ivi/4 to become drawn or gaunt (of face, 
cheeks etc.). 5 to dry up, shrivel, diminish in size. 
Ilbacn-i safacit mig-guuc I feel famished. -vn safe, 
safacaan; ava saafic; pva masfuuc . 
.J.,;...... masfuu{ ladj *1 drawn, gaunt, haggard. 
.:"Uu.. safcaan 
ladjl 
I drawn, 
gaunt, 
haggard. 
2 shrivelled, dried up . 
.1u...;1 ritsafac or rissafa{ Ivil I to become drawn or 
gaunt. 2 to shrivel, diminish in size. - ava mitsifi{. 
415 
.lu....;1· rinsafa{ = ritsafac. -ava minsific. 
.lai... saffac = safa{. - vn tasfii{; avalpva misaffa{. 
J...i....1 ritsaffac or rissaffa{ = ritsafac. - iva mitsaffa{. 
t~~ 
e- safac (a) Ivtl to strike, hit. safact-u tjalam 
I slapped him in the face. -also safal:J 3, safax. -vnsafc; 
ava saafic; pva masfuuc. 
e-'I ritsafac or rissafac Ivil to be struck, be hit. - iva 
mitsific· 
~~~ 
..L saff (i) Ivtl I to eat rapidly, gobble. saff iI-lfadwa 
w-miji he wolfed down his lunch and left. II candi gazma 
b-tirtir bi-tsift traab I have a pair of shoes with sequins 
that pick up the dust like anything. -saffeet turaab fig-
geej I had a tough time in the army. - ril-l:J~aan saff 
iI-ligaam the horse bolted. 2 to consume in extravagant 
quantities. ril-carabiyya bi-tsift banziin the car just 
laps up petrol. ril-camaliyya bi-tsift fluus kitiir the 
process is enormously expensive. 3 to purloin (money). 
safr l:Jatjtj ig-gamciyya w-saafir he stole the savings-
club kitty and went abroad. -vn saff, safafaan; ava 
saafif; pva masfuuf. 
J ~ 
sUfuuf Inl medicinal powder taken orally. 
~ 
sUfayyif ladj *1 I tiny, minute. 2 shrimpy, 
scr~wny. 
JtA- saffaaf In *1 grafter . 
..1-;1 ritsaff or rissaff Ivil passive of saff. - iva mitsaff. 
~ 
1 rinsaff = ritsaff. - iva minsaff. 
.....u.- saffif Ivtl I to cause to consume in extravagant 
quantities. saffifuu-na rakl i l-lfaayit ma {afal:Jna they 
stuffed us with food until we were ready to burst. 
IIsaffif-ni t-turaab he gave me a hell of a time. 2a to 
make (s.o.) eat or swallow. IIsaffift-u kaam lal:Jluul:J 
I slipped him a few pounds as a bribe. 2b to administer 
a ~osage of sufuuf to. - vn tasfiif; ava/pva misaffif. 
","-,I ritsaffif or rissaffif Ivil passive of saffif. - iva 
mitsaffif. 
J~~ 
~ 
safatj (a) Ivtl to slam shut. balaaj tisfatj il-baab 
kida don't slam the door like that! IIxad fuluus-i w-tjaal 
rinna safatjnaa-kum ... he swiped my money and that 
was the last I saw of it. -vn saftj; ava saafitj; pva 
masfuutj. 
J-i-'I ritsafatj or rissafatj Ivil to be slammed shut. - iva 
mitsifitj· 
~ 
1 rinsafatj = ritsafatj. - iva minsifitj. 
~ 
saffatj Ivil to blow strongly (of wind). -vn tasfiitj; 
ava misaffatj. 

.!l";~ 
~ 
safak (i, u) Ivtl to shed, spill (blood). - alsosafalj. 
- vn safk; ava saafik; p~a masfuuk . 
.!.IlL saffaak 1 ladj *1 bloodthirsty. qaatil saffaak a 
bloodthirsty killer. 2 In *1 killer, murderer. - also 
saffaalj. 
<!U....;I ritsafak or rissafak Ivil passive of safak. yaama 
tsafakit dima b-sabab it-taar how much blood has been 
shed in vendettas! - iva mitsifik. 
<!U....;I rinsafak = ritsafak. - iva minsifik. 
J";~ 
JA- sifl In pI rasfaall 1 bottom edge. sifl il-baab the 
bottom 
edge 
of 
the 
·.doo~: 
2 curb(stone). 
3 skirting-board. 
JA- sufli ladj *1 lower, subjacent. rid-door is-sufli the 
lower floor. riI-[aalam is-sufli (magic] the nethe' 
world. world of demons and evil spirits. 
JA-i rasfatr lell lowerllowest. Ii-rasfal downward. 
nazziluu fi- rasfal saafiliin he was demoted to the lowest 
rank. 
jJlA- safaala Inl baseness, loathsomeness, meanness. 
JiL saafil 1 ladj * and pI safalal loathsome, base, 
vile. 2 In pI safala, sufala, rasaafill scoundrel, cad, 
heel. 
J,L saffillvil to behave in a despicabl~, caddish man-
ner. rinta Ija-tsaffil ma[aaya are you going to play dirty 
with me? - ava misaffil. 
Jil...;l ritsaafil or rissaafil Ivil to speak rudely. 
bi-yitsaafil [ala zumalaat-u he abuses his colleagues. 
- ava mitsaafil. 
u J ..; ~ see also u J ..; ~ • 
..::..l.i... saflit Ivtl to cover with asphalt. -vn saflata; aval 
pva misaflit. 
.::..U....;I ritsaflit or rissaflit Ivi/' to be covered with 
asphalt. -vn tisafliit; iva mitsaflit. 
J J";~ 
.;lA- saflaq Ivtl to do (s.th.) carelessly or in a slipshod 
manner, -vn saflaqa; avalpva misaflaq. 
m.t... saflaqa 
Inl 
1 sloppiness, 
carelessness. 
2 sponging, living off others. bi-yaakul saflaqa he 
sponges his meals off <»hers. 
~)I.A.. siflaaq In pI siflaaqal sponger, freeloader. 
.;lA.-; I ritsaflaq or rissaflaq Ivil passive of saflaq. - iva 
mitsaflaq. 
iJ"; ~ 
~ 
safiina In pI sufun, safaayinl ship, boat. safiinit 
416 
nuulj Noah's ark. safiinit rinzaa/landing craft. safiinit 
faqaa r space-ship. 
riJ";~ 
&- safing, sifillg Icoll nl sponge(s). falta sfing 
sponge-rubber cushion. 
~ 
safinga, sifinga 1 lunit n, pI -aatl a sponge. 2/nl 
liquor sponged from a counter and resold, 'liquor 
squeezings'. 
~~ 
sifingaaya. safingaaya = safinga. 
~~iJ";~ 
,;x.A... safandar Icoll nl {bot] horse-tongue tree (Ruscus 
hippo-glossum L.). - also lisaan il-faras. 
I.P iJ"; ~ 
.sx.A.... safandi <prop n Yusuf Efendi> Icol}-nl tanger-
ine(s). - also yusafandi. yuusifrafandi. YUsfi, ristafandi, 
yustafandi. 
~~x.A... safandiyyaaya lunit n, pI safandiyyaatl a 
tangerine. 
0"; ~ 
;.i.. safah Inl 1 insolence. 2 {lsI law] legal incom-
petence. 
;.i.. i rasfah lell morelmost insolent. 
~lA- safaaha In pI -aatl insolence. 
~ 
safiih ladj pI sufahal 1 insolent. 2 (lsI law] 
i~competent. 
;.i.. saffah, saffih Ivtl to denigrate, deprecate. leeh 
dayman bi-tsaffih kalam-ha why do you keep putting 
h:r down? -vn tasfiih; avalpva misaffah . 
.u...;-I ritsaffah or rissaffah Ivil passive of saffah. - iva 
mitsaffah . 
iJ.J";~ 
~.;..- sifoon <Fr siphon> In pI -aatl I cistern, lava-
tory tank.fadd is-sifoon he flushed the lavatory. 2 trap 
of a pipe or a drain. 3 soda siphon. 
.s";~ 
..)- safa I (i) 1 Ivtl to raise, swirl up (dust, sand). 2 Ivil 
to rise (of dust or sand). -vn safy; ava saafi; pva masfi. 
..)- safy Inl fine dust. safy I rmaal sand drift. 
lA- safa 2 Icoll nl I thorns. 2 thin thorn-like fishbones. 
~lA- safaaya lunit n, pI -aatl 1 a thorn. 2 a thorn-like 
fishbone. 
u.s";~ 
~.,.... suvyitti. 
suvyiiti 
ladj 
pI suvyittl Soviet. 
riI-rittiljaad is-suvyitti the Soviet Union. 

J V" see J V" .J : siqa 
... every Jack has his Jill. -liaaeid las-sali(a wil-Iali(a 
JIJV" 
41U- siliaa/a I <Gr skala> In pI -aat, saliaayill (naut) 
1 gangplank. 2 port-side. siliaa/a labanda hard a-port! 
41U- siliaa/a2 or saliliaa/a <Gr skala> In pI silia/aat, 
salilia/aat, saliaayill 1 scaffold, scaffolding. 2 pier, 
jetty. 
y J V" see Y J \oJ: SUlibf 
I 
-
.) IJ V" 
.;- saliar, saqar Ifem nl (lsi) hell. 
Z .) J V" see .) I J J V" : saliliaara 
JV"JV" 
J-i- salisali 1 Ivtl to moisten (by sprinkling). salisali 
ii-lee! bilwayyit mayya yiblia (ari sprinkle some water 
on the bread and it will become soft. 2 Ivil to chirp. 
-also zalizali. -vn salisalia; avalpva misalisali. 
~I ritsalisali or rissalisali Ivil to be moistened. 
-iva mitsalisali. 
..l.JV" 
Ju.... Salia(I, SUliU(, silii( (a, u) Ivil I to fall, drop. 
ril-mandiil salia( min riid-i the handkerchief fell from 
my hand. II fialb-i silii( I felt faint. -SUfiU( min na.;ar-i (or 
min leen-i) I've lost all respect for him. 2a to have a 
miscarriage, abort. sili(it baed il-badsa she miscarried 
after the accident. 2b (path) to prolapse: SUliUU( beet 
ii-wild prolapse of the uterus. 3 to fail (in an examina-
tion). silii(tl fil-larabi 1 failed in Arabic. 4a to drop out, 
disappear. rism-u salia( mil-kaff his name dropped 
from the list. 4b to lapse, cease (of a right). 5 (meeh) to 
be seated (in or on s.th.). rik-kabbaas bi-yisfia( fil-
masu~ra the piston is seated in the pipe. 6 (naut) to drift 
(with the wind, tide etc.). -vn SUfiUU(, safia(aan; ava 
Saalii(. 
11 yasqU( ... down with ... ! 
Ju.... salia(2 (i) Ivtl I to drop. saaeit ma I-mayya tiyli 
rislii(i I-xut[aar as soon as the water boils drop in the 
vegetables. 2 to plot, trace (on a map or chart). -vn 
safi(, salia(aan; ava Saalii(; pva masliuu( . 
.lo,;;.... SUliUU( Ini (naut) sag. 
.Jail... saaqi( In *1 unprincipled pe~n. 
Ju.... sali( Ini I abortion, miscarriage. 2 miscarried 
foetus. 
a.&... safi(a I linst n, pI -aatl a drop, a fall. 
~l... Sali(a2/fem avallikull i sali(a w-/aha lali(a (prov) 
{prov)'" on the ~Iert for every opportunity (especially 
the opportunity to act against one's enemies). 
,,\lo.i... sali(aan: lialb-(i) sali(aan (min ig-guUl) (I am) 
fainting from hunger. 
Ju.... Salia(31n11 offal.lIlidim i/-gild i wis-Salia( he lost 
everything. 2/colll windfall(s) (especially of oranges 
and lemons). 
.loU- sUfiaa( Inil offal. 2 that which falls from some-
thing. sUliaa( iI-vurbaal siftings, what falls from the 
sieve. 
~U- sUliaa(a = sUliaa(. 
.loll- saliliaa( In * and pI Saliliaa(al seller of offal. 
~Il- sUliliaa(a or saliliaa(a In pI -aatl 1 door latch. 
2 (short for sUliliaa(it iI-ramaan) safety-cati:h (of a 
gun). 3 (meeh) pawl, ratchet (e.g., of a water-wheel). 
4 (naut) 4a centre-board. 4b anchor, any weight serv-
ing as an anchor (in Nile boats). 
..lu....;1 ritsalia( or rissalia( Ivill passive of salia(2. 2 to 
drop down, jump down. -iva mitsilii(. 
.J..i...; I rinsalia( = ritsalia(. -iva minsilii(. 
J.L salilia( Ivtl I to cause to fall, let fall. salilia(t i/-
mandiil 1 dropped the handkerchief. salilia(it iI-filuus 
fil-b~1aala she dropped the money in the savings box . 
2 to lower. bUll iI-filuus /is-sabat wi-Salilia(-huu-Ii put 
the money in the basket and lower it to me. 3 to dip, 
drop. nisalilia(-ha[lS-sukkarwe dip it in the sugar. 4 to 
(cause to) fail in an examination). ril-mudarris da 
huwwa iii Salilia(-ni it was that teacher who failed me. 
5 to seat (one thing in or on another). bi-nsafifia(-ha 
fil-magaari we seat them in the grooves. 6 to plot (on a 
map or chart). 7 to abort, perform an abortion for. 
salilia(it nafs-a-ha (1) she aborted herself. (2) she got 
an abortion. - IvilS to have a miscarriage. -vn tasfiii(; 
avalpva misalilia(. 
J.i...1 ritsalilia( or rissalilia( Ivil passive of salilia(. 
Illi8IJGid yitsalilia(-li kull i yalta he keeps picking on me. 
-iva mitsalilia(. 
ItJV" 
r:!- SUliUl, siliil (a) lvill to become chilled (of drinks 
etc.). 2 to feel chilly or shivery. -vn sUfiuliyya; ava 
saaliil· 
~;;- sUliUliyya 
Ini 
coldness. 
rana 
basseet 
bi-suliuliyyit il-filuus 1 felt the cold touch of the money . 
~l... saafiilladjl cold, chilly. Ii/rab baaga salila would 
you care for a cold drink? II damm-u saa4iE he is insensi-
tive and unpleasant, he is a creep. 
~ 
salila Ini chill, coldness. yasalt-u-hum bi-mayya 
fatra yaeni (ayra salilit-ha 1 washed them in tepid 

water, that's to say, (water) with the chill taken off. 
.:,w.... satjlaan ladj *1 (feeling) chilly, shivery. 
~.J rastjal lell morelmost cold, chilly etc. 
c!- satjtj31 /vtl to cool, chill. satjtjallina l-biira chill 
t~e beer for us. -vn tastjiil; ava misatjtjal. 
~I ritsatjtjal or rissatjtjal Ivil to be cooled. - iva 
mitsatjtjal· 
~I ristastjal/vtl I to consider cold or chilly. rana 
mistastjal ig-gaww - xallii-na naaxud jakittaat I find the 
air quite chilly; let's take jackets along. II bi-nistastjal 
damm-u we find him a boor. 2 to select for coldness. 
ristastjallina tjzazteen pick us a couple of cold bottles. 
- ava/pva mistastjal. 
ltJ ...,.. 
c!- sutjl ladj invarl choice, first-rate, top-notch. 
zubuun sUtjl a prize customer. riddaa-lu kilmiteen sutjl 
... he gave him a good talking to. riggawwizit gawwaaza 
sutjl she married extremely well. rart/.' sutjl a choice 
piece of land. 
;, t J...,.. see t J J ...,.. r : misatjtjala 
I~J...,.. 
...AA... satjaf (u) Ivtl to roof, put a roof over. -vn 
satjafaan; ava saatjif; pva mastjuuf. 
...AA... satjf In pi sutjuuf, sutjufa, rastjufl ceiling. 
':;..&. satjfiyya In pi -aatl = satjf. 
~ 
satjiifa, sitjiifa In pi satjaayifl arbeur. 
.......... 1 ritsatjaf or rissatjaf Ivil to be roofed. -iva 
mitsitjif. 
~I rinsatjaf = ritsatjaf. -iva minsitjif. 
....oi- satjtjaF Ivtl to roof, provide with a roof. -vn 
tastjiif; avalpva misatjtjaf. 
.i...;1 ritsatjtjaF or rissatjtjafl Ivil to be roofed. - iva 
mitsatjtjaf. 
l~J...,.. 
ll.i- satjfa In pi -aatl a clap . 
....oi- satjtjaF Ivill to clap, applaud. II riid wal:Jda ma-
tsatjtjaf-J [provl (a single hand can't clap) ... it takes two 
to tango. 2 [mechl to pink, ping, rattle (of a car en-
gine). fii tastjiif fil-larabiyya there's a knocking in the" 
car ~ -vn tastjiif; ava misatjtjaf. 
..::...L&- satjtjafit Inl style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). 
~ 
tastjiifa linst n, pi -aatl I a clap. 2 a round of 
applause. 
.i...;1 ritsatjtjaF or rissatjtjaF Ivil (impersonal) pas-
sive of satjtjaF. ritsatjtjaf-Iu he was applauded. -iva 
mitsatjtjaf. 
418 
;'~J...,.. 
:it U; saqaafa T Inl culture. wizaarit is-saqaafa Ministry 
of Culture. II ris-saqaafa [obsoll pre-high school leaving 
certificate. - ris-saqaafa l-gamahiriyya youth culture 
centres. 
j~ saqaafiT ladjl cultural. 
...u.; saqqaf Ivtl to impart culture to, make cultured. 
ril-raflaam iI-kuwayyisa bi-tsaqqaf in-naas good films 
educate people. - vn tasqiif; pva musaqqaf. 
..;;;:; tasqiifi ladjl designed to impart culture. raflaam 
tasqifiyya educational films. 
~ 
musaqqafT I ladj *1 cultured, sophisticated. 2 In! 
intellectual. razmit iI-musaqqafiin the estrangement of 
the intellectuals. 
.......... 1 ritsaqqaf or rissaqqaf Ivil passive of saqqaf. -iva 
mitsaqqaf. 
4 ~ J...,.. see ~ J ...,.. • : rusquf 
~ '.J J...,.. 
oollA- satjtjaara Iprop nl (the village and pyramid site 
of) Sakkara. 
I J J...,.. see J J .::.. : rasqaal 
1 J J...,.. see J' J ...,..: sitjaala I, sitjaala z, satjtjaala 
r J...,.. 
rA- suqm T In pi rasqaaml malady, ill. rasqaam 
igtimaliyya social evils. 
ISJ...,.. 
..;- satja (i) Ivtll to give to drink. ristjii-ni kubbaayit 
mayya give me a glass of water to drink. satjeet iI-ligl 
I watered the calf. II rastjii l-murr 1"11 give him a hard 
time. -satjeet-u 
~anlit-i I taught him (everything 
I know in) my trade. 2 to water (plants). nistji f-fltal 
bald" lafart iyyaam ~e water the seedlings after ten 
days. 3 to irrigate. fi-balt/. in-nawaal:Ji laazim yistju 
l-rart/. B lala madaar is-sana in some areas they must 
irrigate the land all year round. II nistji l-kunaafa 
s-sukkar maltjuud we pour the syrup over the kunaafa. 
4 to silver (mirrors). 5 [metal I to plate (metal) byelec-
trolysis. 6 to temper (metal). -vn satjy, sitjaaya, 
sitjiyya; ava saatji; pva mastji. 
~lA- sitjaaya Inl silvering mixture for mirrors. 
4eil- satjya In pi sawaatjil water-wheel. (see PI.E, 1). 
.lA- .u.. satjtja 1 In pi satjtjayiinl [obsoll water-seller, 
water-carrier. bi-ybiil mayya f-l:Jaarit is-satjtjayiin 
[provl (he sells water in the water-carriers' alley) ... he's 

carrying coals to Newcastle. fabuu-k is-salilia maat 
(your father, the water-carrier, has died) ... polly wants 
a cracker (phrase taught to parrots). 
..;...... mislia, maslia In pI masaaliil I drinking trough 
or similar device (for watering animals). 2 irrigation 
ditch or irrigation canal (see PI.E, 17). 
ISJI.&-. misliaawi ladj invarl requiring regular heavy 
watering. fuul misliaawi type of broad bean which re-
quires heavy irrigation. II fare[ i misliaawi land bearing a 
regularly irrigated crop. 
~I fitsalia or fissalia Ivil passive of salia. - iva 
mitsilii. 
~I finsalia = fitsalia. -iva minsilii. 
J- salilia 2 Ivtl to pour (broth or some other liquid) 
over bread to make tasliiyya. II filJna lJa-nsalilii f-Ion-ha 
- iI-muhimm iI-mutoor (are we going to make tasliiyya 
in its colour) whitt's the colour got to do with it? the 
important thing is the engine! -vn tasliiyya; ava 
misalilii. 
';"-i tasliiyya In pI tasaaliil dish consisting of hot broth 
or the like poured over crumbled bread. tasliiyya b-
laban bread soaked in milk. 
~I fitsalilia or fissalilia Ivil to be prepared (of 
tasliiyya). -iva mitsalilii. 
.~ 
I fistisqaa ff, fistislia or (marae[) ii- fistislia Inl 
(path] ascites. 
..,.. IS Y .!!..,.. see - y .!! .J ..,.. : sukubees 
I.:...!!..,.. 
.::..S- sikit, sakat (u) Ivil to be or become silent, stop 
speaking, maintain silence. fuskuti lalJsan yismal-ik be 
quiet or he'll hear you! fayyaam iI-imtilJanaat ti/aalii 
I-balad sakta during exam times you'll find the town 
quiet. II min sukaat (l) quietly, silently. (2) without 
further ado. -vn sukuut, sukaat; ava saakit. 
11 sikit lala !o do nothing about, leave be, as in 
ma-siktuuj lalayya they would not leave me be, 
ma-skitna ktiir lala z-zull we've suffered humiliation 
long enough in silence. -sikit Ii- to overlook, let pass, as 
in fabuu-ya ma-kan-/ yuskut-Ii lamma yialiii-ni b-
atxaanili my father wouldn't overlook it when he found 
me fighting, fana mif lJ-askut-luhum fabadan I will not 
let them get away with it, sikitnaa-Iu daxal bi-lJmaar-u 
{prov] (we let it pass (when he brought in the bridle), so 
he came in with the whole donkey) ... we gave him an 
inch and he took a mile. 
u~ sukuut, sikuut Inl silence. 
0:... sakta In pI -aatll {mus] pause, rest. saktit balan! 
minim rest, half rest. 2 (also sakta lialbiyya) heart 
failure. 
419 
~ 
sukkeeti ladvl silently, quietly. 
.:..S:...;I fitsakat or fissakat Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
sikit. rala(aat-u ssakat laleeha a blind eye was turned to 
his mistakes. - iva mitsikit . 
..::..S:....;I finsakat = fitsakat. - iva minsikit. 
d- sakkit Ivtl to silence, quiet. 
fawwil ma 
I-minabbih e[arab madd i fiid-u w-sakkit-u as soon as the 
alarm rang he put his hand out and shut it off. -vn 
taskiit; avalpva misakkit . 
.::.LI fitsakkit or fissakkit Ivil be silenced, be 
quieted. -iva mitsakkit. 
2.:.. • .!! ..,.. 
J~ sakkuuti In! a variety of dried dates. 
I.J .!! ..,.. 
~ 
sikir (a) Ivil to become intoxicated, get drunk. 
bi-yiskar kull i yoom xamiis he gets drunk every Thurs-
day. !'ana skirt i (iina I got dead drunk. -vn sukr. 
~ 
sakar (i) Ivtl to make drunk, intoxicate. IIsakar-ni 
gamaa/runaa-ha her sweet singing enchanted me. -vn 
sukr; ava saakir. 
o ~ 
sakra Inl drunkenness. II raalJit is-sakra w-gat ii-
fikra {prov] ... the days of revelry have given way to 
sober reality. 
~I~ sakraan ladj • and pI sakaaral intoxicated, 
drunk . 
IS ~ 
sukari In pI -yyal drunkard. 
~If..- .~I~ sakaraan Inl (bot] Egyptian henbane. 
.r.f.- sikkiir, 
sakkiir 
In 
pI sikkiiral 
drunkard, 
alcoholic. 
~i faskarf Ivtl to make drunk, intoxicate. -vn 
riskaar; ava muskir. 
ul~ muskiraatT 
Ipl 
nl alcoholic beverages. 
gamliyyit manl iI-muskiraat The Society for the Pro-
hibition of Alcoholic Beverages. 
2 .J .!! ..,.. 
J.- sukkar Inll sugar. IIsukkar malliuud thick syrup 
of sugar, water and lemon juice. -sukkar nabaat crystal-
lized sugar, rock candy. 2 (marae[) is-sukkar diabetes. 
oJ.- sukkara Inll piece of sugar. 2 poppet, sweetie. 
fir-raagil da sukkara lie's a charming man. 
ISJ.- sukkari Iladj ·1 sugar(y). malJaliil sukkariyya 
sugar solutions. II r;t-bool is-sukkari {path] diabetes. 
2/nl (also burtuliaan sukkari) sweet, bland type of 
orange. 
-':'J.- sukkariyya In pI -aatl sugar bowl. 
ul..J.- sukkariyyaat Ipl nl sugars, saccharides. 
J- sakkar I Ivtl to sugar, candy. 2 Ivil 2a to become 

sweet. linab misakkar sweet grapes. 2b to crystallize, 
tum into sugar crystals. ril-lasal il-riswid lamma 
yitxazzin mudda (Wiila yisakkar molasses crystallizes 
when it is stored for a long time. - vn taskiir; ava/pva 
misakkar. 
ulJ.-. misakkaraat Ipl n! sweets, candy. 
l j .d IJ" see I j .d j : taskara 
I .:J j .d IJ" 
• \;~ sukurta <It sicurtii> In! (naut] safety. fJabl' 
sukurta lifeline .Il/irka sukurta maritime insurance com-
pany. - (raagil) sukurta ship insurance assessor. 
2 .:J j .!.I IJ" see .:J j .d IJ" • : sikirta, sikarta, sikirtu, 
sikartu 
- .:J j .d IJ" 
;; ~ 
sikirteer, sikirtiir, sikriteer <Fr secretaire> In 
pI sikirteriyyiinl (male) secretary. 
ris-sikirteer il-
laamm the secretary general. sikirteer laamm if-flrka 
general manager of the company (responsible for inter-
nal administration). 
i;; ~ 
sikirteera, sikiritiira In pI -aatl (woman) 
secretary. 
~.)\; ~ 
sikirtarya <Fr secretariat> In! I secretarial 
staff. 2 secretariat. 
.:J .J j .d IJ" 
i;;J'~ sakaroota In! {obsol] trade name of a fine 
cotton-and-silk fabric used to make shirts and 
galabiyas. 
~ loS j .d IJ" 
,j!.~ sakariin Inl saccharin. 
( U" .d IJ" ) 
..rS- saks I <Engl> In pI -aatl saxophone. 
..,.51... saks,z In! {bot] saxifrage. 
2 IJ" .d IJ" see 1J".J.d IJ" : sakuus 
I Ji IJ" .d IJ" 
~ 
saksik Ivi/l to chirp (of newly hatched chicks). 
2 to click, chatter (of a car engine, owing to excessive 
valve clearance). -also sac;sac;. -vn saksaka, tisaksiik. 
2 .d IJ" .d IJ" 
-.s ~ 
saksuuka In pI -aat, sakasiik/ goatee. 
420 
~1J".d1J" 
lei ~ 
saksunya <T Saksunya> Inl I {obsol] good 
quality chinaware.lIlac;l-u saksunya he's cuckoo. 2 cry 
of one who sells (and exchanges for anything old or 
used) various hardware etc. 
~~.d1J" 
,:rS- s(kfan <Engl> In pI sakaafinl {acad] discussion 
section, group of students of a large class who meet with 
a teaching assistant to go through the material already 
delivered in lectures . 
I t.d IJ" 
r!- sakal (a) Ivtl to strike, hit. sakaet-u c;alam I dealt 
him a smack. sakaet-u I gave him a kick. IIsakal il-
rakla he wolfed down the meal. -sakal-ni mac;lab he 
bluffed me. -sakaeit-u rim/she gave him a flirtatious 
look. -vn sakl; ava saakil; pva maskuU[. 
t"s:- maskuul ladj ·1 screwed-up, messed-up. lIya 
mara ya maskuula you whore! 
e--I ritsakae or rissakal Ivil passive of sakal. -iva 
mitsikil· 
~ 
I rinsakae = ritsakal. -iva minsikil. 
e--I ritsakkae or rissakkal Ivil to loaf, loiter. maafi 
yitsakkae fif1awaaril he's loafing around in the streets. 
-vn tasakkul; ava mitsakkae. 
J.d1J" 
j~! riskaafi In pI -yyal {obsolJ cobbler, shoemaker . 
1 .d .d IJ" 
~ sakk I (u) Ivtll to shut, close, lock. sUkk il-baab 
waraak shut the door behind you. rasukk-u bil-muftaafJ 
yalni should I lock it, you mean? Ilmuxx-u maskuuk 
he's dense. 28 to shut off, cut off (a flow). 
ril-lawwaama bi-tsukk il-mayya lan is-sifoon the float 
shuts off the water fro~ the tank. 2b to switch off, tum 
off (radio, tap, light, television, engine etc.). sukk in-
nuur tum off the light. 3 to snatch, grab. sakk if1anta 
w-miJi he grabbed the bag and left. 4 to hit, punch. 
sakkeet-u lalc;a I beat him up. Sf (also ~akk) to mint 
(money). - Ivil6 to close down. ril-matlam da sakk' 
min zamaan that restaurant closed down ages ago. 
7 {mechJ to click, chatter (of a car engine). -vn sakk, 
sakakaan; ava saakik; pva maskuuk. 
i- sikka In 
pI sikak, 
sikkaatl I road. saayic; 
wi-leen-u las-sikka driving and keeping his eyes on the 
road. waaxid is-sikka c;yaasa he travels back and forth 
along the road. II ris-sikka l-fJadiid the railway, the rail-
road. -c;uddaamak sikka there's a journey in your fu-

ture (fortune telling). -sikkit is-salaama safe journey! 
28 route. reeh rashal sikka li/-balad what's the easiest 
way to town? qui-ii sikkit-u feen tell me how to get to 
him.llfis-sikka (1) on the way, en route, as in qabilt-u 
fis-sikka I met him on the way, r:andaha ta/at r:iyaal 
wir-raabir: {IS-sikka she has three kids and the fourth is 
on the way, bet-hum fi-sikkit-i w-rana raayil.J if-furl 
I pass (near) their house on my way to work. (2) in the 
way, as in rintaf-sikkit-i you're in my way. -sikkit rabu 
zeed kull-a-ha masaalik {pray] "" where there's a will 
there's a way. 2b course of action. ma-fii-J quddaamak 
rilla sikka wal.Jda there is only one course open to you. 
3 (telephone) line.llqafal is-sikka to put down the re-
ceiver. -ma-tiqfil-J is-sikka keep the line open. 
~I ritsakk lor rissakk 1 (also rit~akk or ri§~akk) Ivil 
passive of sakk. -iva mitsakk . 
.d...; I rinsakk 1 
(aiso 
ri~akk) 
= ritsakk I. 
- iva 
minsakk. 
z .!l .!l V" 
d.. sakk 2 (u) Ivtl to adulterate, vitiate. rir-raagil da 
mar:ruuf r:annu rinnu bi-ysukk it-tar:miira iii bi-ybir:-ha 
that man is known for adulterating the hashish he sells. 
-vn sakk, sakakaan; ava saakik; pva maskuuk. 
i:- sakka Ilnl {slang] wash-out, loser. rir-raagil da 
xamma w-sakka that man is a born loser. 2/adj invarl 
28 junky, worthless. minabbih sakka a cheap alarm-
clock. 2b adulterated, vitiated. da wiski sakka this is 
watered down whisky. 
~I ritsakk 2 or rissake Ivil to be adulterated, be 
vitiated. -iva mitsakk . 
.d...; I rinsake = ritsakk 2. - iva minsakk. 
J • .!l .!l V" 
d.. sikk linterjl sound made to drive a goat away. 
V".;,J.!lV" 
..,..:K.. sakalans <prob It mescalanza> Inl mixture, 
hodgepodge. 
1.;, .!l V" 
,§.- sikin 1 (u) Ivil to become occupied, become 
tenanted. ril-r:imaara di kull-a-ha sakna that block is 
fully occupied. -vn sakan; ava saakin. 
,§.- sikin 2 or sakan 1 (u) Ivt and vii to inhabit, dwell. 
rif-Jaqqa 1Ii-l.Jna saknin-ha (or sakniin fiiha) the flat in 
which we're living. Ilbeet maskuun a haunted house. 
-vn sakan, sukna; ava saakin; pva maskuun. 
,§.- sakan 2 Inllodging, accommodation. 
421 
~ 
sakani ladjl residential. manaa{iq sakaniyya re-
sidential areas . 
.)'L... saakin In pi sukkaanl I tenant. hiyya b-tinqil 
il-r:aff lis-saakin ig-gidiid she's moving the furniture 
for the new tenant. 2 inhabitant. huwwa min sukkaan 
il-man{iqa he is an inhabitant of the area. sukkaan 
il-r:aalam the world population. 
Ji... sukkaani ladjl population, pertaining to the 
population. rik-kasaafa s-sukkaniyya the population 
density. 
ril-infigaar 
is-sukkaani the 
population 
explosion. 
J~ 
maskuuni ladjl {Chr] ecumenical. maglis 
maskuuni ecumenical council. ril-l.Jaraka I-maskuniyya 
the Ecumenical Movement. 
.:.f-.-. maskan In pi masaakinl hotJse, residence. 
masaakin Jar:biyya 
(government-subsidized) low-
income housing developments. 
~I ritsakan or rissakan Ivil passive of sikin 2 or 
sakan I. 0 iva mitsikin. 
~I rinsakan = ritsakan. -iva minsikin. 
.J.- sakkin 1 Ivtl 18 to house, provide accommoda-
tion for. Ib to settle (people). 28 to let, rent out, lease 
out, sublet. rinta bi-tsakkin il-badraan you're renting 
out the basement? 2b to settle (people, land etc.). 
rir:aadit taskiin is-suwees the resettlement of Suez. -vn 
taskiin; ava/pva misakkin. 
~I ritsakkin lor rissakkin 1 Ivil passive of sakkin I. 
-iva mitsakkin. 
.:.,~! riskaan Ivnl housing, settlement. wizaarit 
il-riskaan (wit-tar:miir) Ministry of Housing (and 
Reconstruction) . 
z .;, .!l V" 
,§.- sikin 3 Ivil to abate, become dormant. ril-wagar: 
sikin bar:d' ma xadt id-dawa the pain abated after 
I took the medicine. -vn sukuun; ava saakin. 
.:.,~ sukuun, sikuun Inl I calm, tranquillity, peace . 
2 {gram] 28 vowellessness (of a consonant). 2b (also 
r:alaamit sukuun) diacritical mark over a vowelless 
consonant. 
'4- sikiina Iprop n/: rayya wi-skiina two notorious 
murderesses in Alexandria in the nineteen-thirties . 
.J.- sakkin 2 Ivtl I to cause to abate or become dor-
mant. rid-dawa sakki,!-li I-wagar: the medicine caused 
my pain to abate. 2 to tranquillize, sedate. rid-dawa 
sakkin-ni the medicine sedated me. 3 to calm, calm 
down. -vn taskiin; ava/pva misakkin. 
J-. musakkin In pi -aatl I sedative, tranquillizer. 
2 pain killer. 

.}....;I filsakkin z or fissakkin z Ivil passive of sakkin z. 
- iva milsakkin. 
J.;, .!l ..,.. 
~ 
sikklin f Ifem nl = sikkiina. - common in unele-
va ted speech in the phrase sarqaa s-sikkiin "" he's lost 
touch with reality, he's living in a world of false hopes. 
~ 
sikkiina In pi sakakiinl I knife, blade (used, 
loosely, of any cutting instrument). sikkiinafaransaawi 
(farrier's) long-bladed sole knife. sikkiinil iI-maq~~ 
blade of the scissors. sikkiinillaranf(butcher's) slicing-
wheel. sikkiinil qa{(;iyya (plumber's) pipe cutter. II eas-
sikkiina subject to scrutiny, as in ba[{iix eas-sikkiina "" 
water-melon, guaranteed red and juicy (cut open to 
prove it). 2 any of various devices having a blade-like 
shape or a blade-like part (e.g., saddle clip to which the 
stirrup attaches, knife switch, centre-board of a sailing 
boat).lIfa~al (or falay) is-sikkiina {elec} to shut off the 
power. - mufa~~ala sikkiina {carp} a hinge whose flange 
is countersunk into the door. 3a plasterer's trowel. 
3b painter's spatula. - ladj invar/4 of the best quality. 
qu{n' sikkiina first grade raw ginned cotton. 
4.;, .!l ..,.. 
u~ sakanaallpl nl barracks. 
~.;,.!l ..,.. 
~ 
sikund <perh Engl> Inl {naul} second officer. 
J ~.;,.!l..,.. 
J~ sikundu <It secondo> ladj invarl I second 
class. lazkara skundu second class ticket. 2 second. 
fll-labaq is-sikundu the second course (in catering). 
IImilr' skundu assistant mailre d'h6Iel. -
In pi -haall 
3 {naut} second officer. 
'..,..) .!l..,.. 
...r~ sakuus Inl {Chr} alb worn by an Orthodox 
bishop. 
..s) .!l ..,.. 
.... ~ 
slkooya Icoll nl sequoia tree(s). 
..)1 J..,.. 
) 'l..)-' sulaar (also sular) Inl diesel fuel. 
1",:-, J..,.. 
..,..L salab J Icoll nl thick ropers), hawser(s). 
...,L salaba/unit n, pi -aall a thick rope, a hawser. rabat 
is-salaba fin-naaf he tied the rope to the yoke. 
422 
..,..L sallib Ivil to tie a thick rope or hawser (around 
s.th.). sallibl B eal-baramiil I roped up the barrels with a 
st~ut rope. - vn lasliib; avalpva misallib. 
..,...L..; I filsallib or fissallib Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
sallib. filsallib eala f-feela the load was roped up. -iva 
milsallib. 
2",:-, J..,.. 
..,..L salab Z (i) Ivt/l to take away by force. salab minni 
kull illi kaan maeaaya he took everything I carried on 
me. 2 to carry away, take away. fik-kuyya salabit 
nafas-i the cough left me breathless. IIgamal-ha yislib 
iI-euquul her beauty drives men crazy. 3 to snatch, 
steal. salab ma&fa;t-i he stole my wallet. II salab faraf-ha 
he deflowered her. 4 to rob. salab-ni min reer m-adri he 
robbed me and I wasn't even aware of it. S to pillage, 
sack, plunder. salabu l-balad wi-nahabuu-ha they sack-
ed and pillaged the country. 6 to taper. fislib-li 
l-kumm' min eand iI- I'aswira min facfl-ak please taper 
the sleeve at the cuff. - vn salb; avasaalib; pva masluub. 
4,L salba Ipl -aall instance noun of salb. 
..r.1- salbi ladj *1 I negative, passive (of a person or 
attitude). 2 {e/ec} negative. 
~ 
salbiyya Inl negativism. 
..,.JL.. saalib I/adjl negative. qUlb' saalib negative 
pole. 2 Inl {e/ec} cathode. 
"="')..... masluub ladj *1 I deprived. masluub yaqq-u 
deprived of his rights. masluub iI- firaada robbed of 
will. 2 wedge-shaped, tapered. l'iI-qaduum eibaara can 
fakuuf I'innama masluub min in-nayyileen the adze is 
like a hammer, but tapered at both en·ds. kumm' 
masluub tapered sleeve. 
..,...L..;I I'itsalab or I'issalab Ivil passive of salab. -iva 
milsilib. 
...,..L;I finsalab = I'itsalab. - iva minsilib. 
J",:-, J..,.. 
,,=",)J fusluub In pi fasaliibl method, manner, style. 
I'usluub ii-carnal fif-Jirka the work routine in the 
company . 
4 "':-' J..,.. see "':-' "':-' J ..,.. : saliib 
",:-,,,,:-,J..,.. 
~ 
silibb (also saliib) <Fr slip> In pi -aatl Y-fronts, 
jockey briefs. 
..,.. "':-' J..,.. 
..,..,l- silibs In pi -aatl 1 (pair of) rubber-soled shoes. 
2 lavatory seat. 

j,yJIJ'" 
~ 
salba(a Ivnl importunity. 
j,l,l.. silbaa( In pi silbaa(al an importunate pest. 
~I filSalba( or fissalba( Ivil to importune, beg or 
plead persistently. tjaladil titsalba( lalee lamma 
ddaa-ha I-lafara gneeh she kept begging him until he 
gave her the ten pounds. - vn tisalbii(; ava mitsalba(. 
..:;.,JIJ'" 
..:;..l.. salat (i) I Ivtl to pull out, slip out. salaui iI-xee( 
mil-fibra I pulled the thread out of the needle. min 
fa4.1-ak fislil iI-lirtj i min iI-la!Jma please" pull the ten-
dons out ofthe meat.lIsalat iI- riid min to drop (s.th. one 
is doing), as in salau i fiid-i min if-fugl i w-tjumti ru!Jt 
ii-bank I dropped everything and went off to the bank. 
Z Ivil to slip out. sigaara salatit mil-lilba a cigarette 
slipped out of the pack. law fayl-u kida I-fawraatj 
mumkin tislit if you carry it like that the papers may slip 
out. -vn salataan, salt; ava saalit; pva masluut. 
..:;..l.. salt ladj invarl flat. sidr-a-ha salt she is flat-
chested. IIfustaan salt an ill-fitting, shapeless dress. 
.:..L...;I fitsalat or fissalat Ivil passive of salat 1. - iva 
mitsilil. 
..:;..l....;1 finsalat = fitsalat. -iva minsilit. 
..:.L sallil Ivt/ to pull out one by one. -vn tasliit; aval 
pva misallil. 
..:.i...;1 fitsallil or fissallit Ivil I passive of sallit. Z to 
steal away, slip away. - avaliva mitsallit. 
1J"'.£l..:;.,JIJ'" 
~)- siluliks Inl compressed cardboard (used, e.g., 
for car interiors). 
y~..:;.,JIJ'" 
~)- silaliib <Engl> Inl sellotape, scotch tape. 
.J~":;" JIJ'" 
.,,;.J~ suliteer <Fr> In pi -aatl solitaire, diamond 
ring. 
CJIJ'" 
c..':J- silaa!J In pi fasli!Jal 18 weapon. silaa!J naari 
firearm. !Jaasib is-silaa!J yi(Wa/watch it, the gun may go 
off! Ilsuutj is-silaa!J name of a section of central Cairo. 
- waa!Jid min la!J1 is-silaa!J (1) one who has risen from 
the ranks. (2) an upstart. Ib IcolU arms, armaments. 
bi-ygiibu sla!J-hum min ~-~iin they get their arms from 
China. II fis-silaa!J iI- fabyaq knives, bayonets and any 
other blades used as weapons. Z {mill service (of the 
Armed Forces). IIsilaa!J i(-(ayaraan the Air Force. 
423 
3 blade. silaa!J mi!Jraat ploughshare (see PI.D, 20). 
silaa!J muus blade of a straight razor. 4 fis-silaa!J (cater-
er's) coffee-making equipment (pots, cup etc.). 
~)I.... sila!Jliik Inl I gun rack. Z small-arms storage 
room (e.g., in a police /itation). 
d- salla!J Ivtll to arm. riI-quwwaat iI-musalla!Ja the 
armed forces. Z {conslr] to reinforce. xarasaana 
msalla!Ja reinforced concrete. II waratj zeet misalla!J 
wired oil-seal paper. -vn tasliil:J; ava misallal:J; pva 
musalla!J. 
d--I fitsalla!J or fissalla!J Ivill to be armed, arm one-
self. da milsalla!J bi-sikkiina that man is armed with a 
knife. 2 to be reinforced. -avaliva mitsalla!J. 
";cJIJ'" 
~ 
sil!Jifa, sul!Jifa In pi -aat, salaa!Jif/ tortoise. - also 
si!Jlifa, su!Jlife, zi!Jlifa, zil!Jifa, zu!Jlifa, zul!Jifa. 
- J C J IJ'" see C J IJ'" : sila!Jliik 
tJIJ'" 
t:!- salax (u) Ivtl I to flay, skin~ salaxit iI- faraanib she 
skinned the rabbits. II fabu rig/' masluuxa the bogey-
man (a creature described as half man and half donkey 
and having flayed legs). Z to skin, abrade. witjilli 
w-salaxt i rukbit-i I fell and skinned my knee. 3 to burn 
(of the sun). fif-fams i salaxil-ni xaa/~ I got badly sun-
burned. 4 to punish harshly. -vn salx, siliix; ava saalix; 
pva masluux. 
t:!- salx Ivn/ skinning. IIbudril salx spot remover. 
~ 
salxa In pi -aat, silaxl I strip. Z {print] galley. 
~ 
siliixa linst nl a skinning. kazlak siliixa skinning 
knife. 
~t;J... salaxaana In pi -aatl slaughterhouse. 
tl-' 1 fitsalax or fissalax Ivil passive of salax. -iva 
mitsilix . 
&1 finsalax = fitsalax. -iva minsilix . 
t:!- sallax I Ivtl to make an incision in. 2 Ivil 28 to 
become chapped or raw (of skin). 2a to become sun-
burned (of skin). -vn lasliix; avalpva misallax. 
~I fitsallax or fissallax Ivill to become chapped or 
raw (of skin). 2 to become sunburned (of skin). 3 to be 
incised. - avaliva mitsallax. 
.J J IJ'" see .J I J IJ'" : sular, sulaar 
IIJ'" JIJ'" 
..,...l- salas Inl {path] incontinence. salas bool {palh] 
enuresis.lllandu salas fil-kalaam he's a chatterbox, he 
suffers from logorrhoea. 

..,..l- salis t ladjl fluent, articulate. kalaam-u salis he's 
a good conversationalist. 
..... )L. salaasa Inl I docility, tractability. 2 fluency (of 
style). 
2 IJ" J IJ" see ..:.. J ..:.. : 
sulus, 
sulaasi, 
saluus, 
saalisan, musaUas, tasliis 
-.J IJ" J IJ" 
..hA-I- salsafiilln/: yillan salsafiil-ak {abus] "" curse 
your whole family tree! -also sansafiil. 
JIJ"JIJ" 
J.-l- salsillvt/l to arrange in order, assign to a series. 
bi-ylimm it-talabaat wi-ysalsil-ha he collects the applica-
tions and assigns serial numbers to them. 2 to serialize. 
3 to chain up, put in chains. IIqird' msalsil a pest, a 
nuisance. -vn salsala; ava/pva misalsil, musalsal. 
J....L musalsalln pI -aatl series, serial (on radio, tele-
vision etc.). 
ll...L... musalsala In pI -aatl = musalsal. 
~ 
silsila In pI salaasilll chain. silsilit mafatiib key 
chain or key-ring. II ¥urzit silsila chain-stitch. -silsilit 
itf.-tf.ahr spinal column. 2 range, chain. silsilit gibaal 
mountain range. 3 sequence, chain. silsilit rabdaas a 
sequence of events. 4 series (of a publication etc.). 
J.,-.l- salasiilln! spinal column. 
J-.L.;I ritsalsil or rissalsil Ivil passive of salsil. -vn 
tasalsul; ava/iva mitsalsil. 
J-.L.; tasalsulf In! sequence. 
I j, J IJ" 
;U..L sulta / In pI -aatl power, authority. ris-sulta 1-
laskariyya military authority. ris-sulta t-tajriliyya leg-
islative power. ris-sulta t-tanfiziyya executive power. 
ris-sulta l-qatf.ariyya judicial power. lu sultaat il-mujrif 
il-laamm he has the powers of General Overseer . 
.:,I.I.L sultaan In! I effective majestic power. 2/pl 
salatiinl sultan. kUU' rinsaan fi-nafs-u sultaan {proy] 
every man is a sultan in his own eyes. ril-mixoozaq 
yiftim is-sultaan {proy] (the impaled man will curse the 
sultan) in extremities a man will do anything. 
ril-ralwar been il-lumyaan sultaan {proy] among the 
blind a one-eyed man is king. bi-fluus-ak bint is-sultaan 
laruus-ak {proy] if you are rich the sultan's daughter 
will marry you. II rana sultaan zamaan-i I'm the master 
of my own time. I can do as I please. See further 
under ~ j, oJ IJ" 
JI.I.L sultaani ladj invarl splendid, regal, brst-c1ass. 
qalda sultaani a princely party. nahaar sultaani a fine 
424 
day. IIbibr' sultaani ink made by boiling the singed 
ingredients in water. 
~ I.I.L sultaniyya 
In 
pI -aat, 
salatiinl 
I bowl. 
2 {plumb] bowl of a pedestal lavatory . 
.J.L saUat Ivtl r to incite, stir up (against s.o.). badd' 
msaUat-kum lala baltf. is someone setting you against 
each other? 2 to point, aim. saUat laleehum xar{Uum 
il-mayya lajaan yifarraq-hum he directed the water 
hose at them to disperse them. -vn tasliit; ava/pva 
mtsaUat· 
JJ....I ritsaUat or rissaUat Ivil passive of saUat. -iva 
mitsaUat· 
2 (j, J IJ") 
;U..L salta / <It saito> In pI -aatl {gym] somersault, 
flip. 
;U..L sUlta2, salta 2 Inl regulation khaki tunic (during 
British occupation). 
;U..L salata <Gk salata> I In pI -aatl side-dish, e.g., a 
dip, cold vegetables or salad, eaten with or before the 
main meal. salapt tibiina side-dish of sesame-seed 
paste. salata xatf.ra green salad. 2 Ino pll mess, muddle. 
xaUa l-bikaaya salata he made a mess of the whole 
thing. 
c. j, J IJ" see C. j, J .." : saltab 
~j,JIJ" see also Ij,JIJ" 
.).L saltan Ivi/l to settle back and relax, take one's 
ease (being in an expansive mood and feeling oneself to 
be in one's element). juuf-u qaalid mitsaltan see how 
blissfully he's sitting there! 2 to reach a point of inspired 
virtuosity (usually of a singer). - Ivt/3 to make com-
fortable. ritnabnab wi-saltan nafs-u w-bada y¥anni he 
cleared his throat, settled himself, and began to sing. 
IIsaltan il-maqaam to play \ntroductory music (in the 
same mode as that which will follow) in order to set the 
mood. -vn saltana; ava/pva misaltan. 
Q..l... saltana I Ivnl expansive luxurious relaxation. 
kaan qaalid raaxir saltana b-yifrab jiifa he was totally 
relaxed smoking his narghile. 2 In pI -aatl sultanate. 
.).1...;1 ritsaltan or rissaltan = saltan 1 and 2. -ava 
mitsaltan. 
t J ..,.. 
J.J.- silla t In pI silall commodity. 
.J.J t J IJ" see also t.J J IJ" 
.;,.L. salalawwa Inl ugly skinny person. lamia zayy 
is-salalawwa she looks like a skinny witch. 

I'; J IJ'" 
i.ll... sUlfa r In pI -aat, sulafl (usually official) loan of 
money. rul:Jt ii-bank; w-lamalt; sUlfa I went to the bank 
and took out a loan. 
...A1... sa/aF Inl borrowing, loan. xadt ik-kitaab da sa/af 
I took the book on loan. riddii-ni xamsa gneeh sa/af 
lend me five pounds! II ris-sa/af ta/af [prov) "" lend and 
lose; so play fools. kull-u sa/af wi-deen [prov) "" what 
you sow you reap. 
~ 
sa/afiyya In pI -aatl official loan, (of money) 
imprest . 
...L sallif, sallaf Ivtl to lend, loan. sallifit-ni fustaan she 
lent me a dress. bi-ysallif filuus bil-faayi; he makes 
loans at usurious rates. II bank it-tasliif (iz-ziraali) agri-
cultural loan bank (for seeds, fertilizer etc.). -vn tasliif; 
ava/pya misallif. 
...lli-I ristalaf Ivtl to borrow. ristalaft; min miraat-i 
gneeh I borrowed a pound from my wife. -vn ristilaaf; 
ava mistilif. 
z'; J IJ'" 
...A1... silf In pI salaayifl husband's brother. 
i.ll... silfa In pI sa/aayifl husband's brother's wife. 
...A1... salaF Icoll nl ancestors. ris-sa/af iNaali1:J the 
venerable forefathers.llxayru xalaf Ii-xayri salaf"" like 
good father like good son. 
J~i raslaaf Ipl nl predecessors. 
...All... saalifladjl preceding, prior, previous. II saalif iz-
zikr aforementioned. -min qadiim iz-zamaan wi-saalif 
iI-l~r wil-rawaan "" once upon a time. 
...All.,... sawaalif Ipl nl sideburns, sideboards. 
\.; J IJ'" 
l.U.. salfa, salfa <Engl> In! sulphonamide. 
,,:.'\ .; J IJ'" 
.:..l.U.. salafaat, sulfaat <Fr> Inl sulphate. sulfaat in-
nal:Jaas copper sulphate. 
oj \.; J IJ'" 
"Ii)- sulufaan, silufaan <perh Fr> In! cellophane. 
IJJIJ'" see also J.JJIJ'" 
~ 
sa/aq (u) Ivtl to boil (solids, especially food). 
rusluq iI-makaroona w-bacdeen §affii-ha boil the pasta 
and then drain it.llsalq; beeq a hasty slapdash job. -vn 
salq, siliiq; ava saaliq; pya masluuq. 
~ 
siliiq In! boiled food. siliiq fi-siliiq boiled bland 
food, hospital fare. 
~I ritsa/aq or rissalaq Ivil to be boiled (of solids, 
425 
especially food). - iva mitsiliq. 
Jl-; I rinsalaq = ritsalaq. - iva minsiliq. 
ZJ J IJ'" 
~ 
salq Icoll n! chard (used as a vegetable) . 
~ 
salqa lunit n, pI -aatl a chard plant. 
~w.... salqaaya = salqa. 
3(JJIJ"') 
~)- siluuqi In! saluki. 
.j...; tasalluq r .In! climb, ascent. 
.l. 15 J IJ'" see .l. 15 J ~ : salqat 
oj.J 15 J IJ'" 
".,ll- sa/aqoon <perh T siUugen> In! red lead. 
- also za/aqoon . 
.£l JIJ'" 
o.!l.l... salae (u) Ivtl to follow, adhere to. l:Ja-nusluk 
tariiqa mUlayyana we will follow a particular course. 
-vn suluuk; ava saalik; pya masluuk . 
o.!l.l... silik, salak 2 
(a) 
Ivil I to pass (through). 
ma-b-yislak-/ fil-l:Jaara di rilla I-larabiyya n-nannuusa 
only a . tiny car can pass through this alley. 
ma-b-yislak1; fil-ribra rumm; xurm; dayyaq it won't 
pass through a narrow-eyed needle. ril-milt; b-yislak 
fi1alr-i b-suhuula the comb passes easily through my 
hair. 2 to manage, cope. mil l:Ja-tiqdar tislak 
fif1uylaana di you won't be able to cope with this job, 
you aren't up to handling this job. sib-ni raslak malaa 
let me handle him. 3 to become disentangled (of hair). 
-vn salakaan; ava saalik. 
.!I)- suluuk In! behaviour. bi-niw§if waal:Jid suluuk-u 
mil kuwayyis we're describing someone whose be-
haviour is not nice. fihaadit l:Jusn; seer wi-sluuk certifi-
cate of good conduct, testimonial. 
.!lIl... saalik Iladj "I 18 clear, unblocked. IIqamiir-u 
saalik his conscience is clear. - riid-u salka he has a 
skilled hand. Ib untangled.jalr; saalik untangled hair. 
2 In "I [lsi) one who follows the Sufi way. 
o.!l.l... silk Ipl raslaak, suluukl 18 wire(s). l:Jibaal silk 
wire ropes. silk it-tilifoon telephone wire( s).11 silk Il:Jilal, 
silk; matbax or silk; ralamunya steel wool, scouring 
steel. Ib wire mesh. Ie: flex. silk ir-radyu radio cord. 
Id bicycle spoke. 2 gold necklace with light-weight 
pendants. 3 corps (in civil service). silk; qaqaa ri judi-
cial corps. silk; diblumaasi diplomatic corps. 
~ 
silka lunit n, pI -aat, silakl a piece of wire. 
~~ silkaaya lunit n! a thin short wire. 

o.!1.l-i raslak lell morelmost clear, unblocked or 
u~tangled. 
~~ sallaaka In pi -aatl any instrument used for 
cleaning or unblocking pipes, tubes etc., such as a pipe-
cleaner, rubber plunger for clearing drains, bottle 
brush. 
.ill..... maslakT In pi masaalikl path, course. masaalik 
bawliyya urinary tracts. IIsikkit rabu zeed kull-a-ha 
masaalik [prov} where there's a will there's a way . 
.!.lL sallik Ivt/l to clear, unblock, (pipes etc.). sallik 
zoor-ak 
clear 
your 
throat! 
sallikt 
i1-ballaaca 
I unblocked the drain. 2 to pick (teeth) clean. sinaan 
it-tirs B lawza tasliik the teeth of the cog need cleaning. 
bi-nsallik is-sinaan bil-xilla we clean our teeth with a 
xii/a. -vn tasliik; avalpva misallik. 
~ 
tasliika linst n, pi -aatl a clearing, an unblock-
ing. m8[aana (urumba kawitf' lit-taslikaat we have a 
rubber plunger for clearing operations. 
.!1L...I ritsallik or rissallik Ivil passive of sallik. -iva 
mitsallik. 
"",.!l J"", 
~ 
siliks .<perh Fr silex> Inl silica. 
1 J J 
· 
"'" 
..!- silllcoll nl thorn(s). 
a.. silla lunit n, pi -aatl a thorn. 
~~ sillaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a thorn.llfil-wiff' mraaya 
w-fil-c;afa siUaaya [prov} a mirror for the face and a 
thorn for the nape (said of a back-stabber). 
Z J J 
· 
"'" 
J- sail I (i) Ivtll to infect with tuberculosis. bi-yc;uulu 
rinn i{-{abajiir bi-ysil/ i1-mudarris people say that 
teachers contract tuberculosis from chalk. 2 to waste, 
emaciate. riI-hamm' sal/-a-ha sorrow made her waste 
~way. -vn sull; ava saalil; pva masluul. 
J- sull Inl tuberculosis. 
J).... masluul ladj • and pi masaliill I affected by 
tuberculosis, tuberculous. 2 emaciated, wasted. 
J-;I ritsall or rissall Ivil I to contract tuberculosis. 
~ to waste away. - ava mitsall. 
J.-; I rinsall = ritsall. -avaliva minsall. 
3 J J 
· 
"'" 
J- sall l (i) I/vtl to draw, unsheath (a sword, a dagger 
etc.). 2/vil to become erect (of the penis of a quad-
ruped). -vn sail, sa/alaan; ava saalil; pva masluul. 
;;J~ sulaala In pi -aatl strain, stock. rafJsan sulaala 
420 
fil-xeel i1-xeel i1-larabi the best breed of horse is the 
Arabian. 
L 
misslla In pi -aatll heavy needle for sewing sack-
ing, baskets or upholstery, packing-needle. 2 (also 
m;ualla) obelisk. 
J.l-ol ritsallil or rissallil Ivil I to trespass, infiltrate. 
2 [soccer} to penetrate as far as the goal before one's 
team shoots for it, make an offside move (of a forward). 
-vn tasalluIT; ava mitsallil. 
4.J J "'" 
~ salla I f In pi silall basket. koorit salla basketball. 
J~ sallaalln pi -aat, salaali! basket woven from split 
cane. 
r~ J J "'" 
r)..J I salluum Iprop nl Salum, a Mediterranean port in 
north-west Egypt and border post with Libya . 
1 r J "'" 
r1- silim (a) Ivil to stay safe. rilaah-i tirgal saalim 
Ii-lyaal-ak [beggars} = may God return you safely to 
your children! II min xaaf silim [prov} (he 'who fears is 
safe) = prudence makes for safety. -tislam thank you! 
-yislam buc;c;-ak well said! - ril-ramr' ma-yislam-! = 
well, nobody's perfect. -mif kull' marra tislam iI-garra 
[prov} = don't push your luck! -tislam riid(-ak) (may 
(your) hand stay safe) expression of thanks or congra-
tulation to one who has done or made something with 
his hands. -vn salaama; ava saalim . 
... ~ salaama Inli safety, wellbeing. rana mihtamm' 
b-salamt-u I'm interested in his welfare. layza fJaaga 
min iI-balad. - la layza salamt-ak 'Do you want any-
thing from town?' 'No (thank you), just your safe re-
turn.' laazim titrakkid min salaamit iI-larabiyya c;abl' 
ma tsaafir biiha you must make certain the car is in 
sound condition before you travel with it. Ilmala s-
salaama good-bye (said to one departing). -salaamit-
invocation of good health, as in salamt-ak I hope you 
get better soon, hiyya fa(ma layyaana - salamit-ha is 
Fatma sick? I hope she feels better soon. -bi-salaamit-
parenthetical formula of concern, as in rizzayy ibn-ik 
bi-salamt-u how is your son, may God keep him safe; 
- alsb used derisively, as in riI-fJaraami b-salamt-u xad 
kull illi landi the thief -bless his black heart - robbed 
me blind. - fJamd-illa las-salaama (praise God for (His) 
safekeeping) expression of felicitation said (1) to a 
traveller arriving at the end of a journey or to one 
returning after an absence, (2) to one recovered from 

an illness, (3) to a woman after giving birth. 2 integrity, 
intactness. salaamit iI-wafJda I-wa(aniyya the integrity 
of national unity. 
r'- saalim lava "I safe, sound, intact. saalim lfaanim 
(1) safe and sound. (2) scot-free. 
rl-i faslam I lelJ morelmost safe, sound or intact. 
faslam luhum yaxdu I-c;a(r it's safer for them to take the 
train. 
r~ salaam Inl I peace. fJamaamit salaam dove of 
peace. fis-salaamu laleekum (peace be upon you) the 
traditional greeting among Muslims, eliciting the re-
sponse wi-laleekum is-salaam.llya salaam exclamation 
of amazement ... my goodness! oh my! as in ya salaam 
lal-bint iI-fJilwa di oh what a pretty girl! ya salaam la/a 
C;illit fadab in-naas my God, how rude people are! 
- wis-salaam and wis-salaamu laleeku and that's that! 
and that's all there is to it. 2a salute, greeting. fi;-;aabi( 
laazim iI-laskari yit/.rab-Iu (or yaxud-Iu) salaam a pri-
vate has to salute an officer. IIkutr is-salaam yiC;ill iI-
malrifa [prov} excessive formality hinders friendship. 
-Ioola salaam-ak sabac; kalaam-ak la-kall i lafJm-ak 
c;abli It/.aam-ak ... had you not greeted me nicely 
I would have gobbled you up (traditional response 
which a monster makes to a greeting in children's stor-
ies). 2b musical salutation, fanfare. salaam malaki (or 
gumhuuri) musical rendering of the national anthem. 
..!l.l.~ sa/amlik <T seliimllk> Inll ground-floor area 
reserved for the reception of male guests (especially in a 
large house). 2 (loosely) ground floor. 
r-el- saliim ladj pI sulaaml sound, healthy, intact. 
mantic; saliim sound logic. saliim in-niyya well-
intentioned. ril-ligli saliim the calf is healthy. 
ril-fJamdu li-llaah gat saliima thank God, it turned out 
all right.llraagil saliim an upright man. 
;;- sallim Ivtl I to hand over. sallimna fawrac;-na li/-
mudarrisa we handed our papers in to the teacher. 
sallim nafs-u (I) he gave himself up. (2) he presented 
himself to the authorities (for, e.g., national service). 
sallim famr-u li-llaah ... he resigned himself. 2 to keep 
(s.o.) safe (of God). fallaahyisallim-ak (may God keep 
you safe) response to formulae containing the words 
sallim or sa/aama (e.g., sallim-li lalee, mala s-sa/aama) 
or to any polite enquiry after one's own or another's 
health or well-being.llya salaam sallim exclamation of 
amazement ... oh wow! well I never! - Ivil 3 to greet, 
give a greeting. sallimii-/i la/a waldit-ik say hello to 
your mother for me. lumuuman in-naas bi-ysallimu 
bil- riid usually people greet each other by shaking 
hands.lIsallim shake hands! -vn tasliim; ava misallim. 
~ 
tasliim In pI -aatl [mus} refrain, recurring pas-
427 
sage in an instrumental piece. 
~ 
tasliima = tasliim. 
~I fitsallim or fissallim Ivil passive of sallim. -iva 
mitsallim. 
~ 
tasallum Ivnl receipt. 
rL... misaalim ladjl peaceful, calm. 
rl-i faslam 2, fislam Ivil to become a Muslim. -vn 
fislaam; ava muslim. 
r~ 
~I fil-fislaam Iprop nI Islam. 
IS"~! fislaami ladj "I Islamic. 
r1- muslim In "I a Muslim. see further under 
rJlJ"r 
rh-I fislalam Ivtl to receive, accept. baldi ma slalaml 
ij-fahaada kunti b-axud-ha li/-maktab after I got the 
certificate I used to- take it to the office. fir-rayyis 
bi-yislilim (alabaal iz-zabaayin the waiter takes the 
orders of the customers. II fislalamjulfl(-u) he started 
work. -vn fislilaam; ava mislilim. 
,J-;-I fistaslim Ivil to give in, surrender. fistaslimt i 
I-ntlliib-i I surrendered to my fate. -vn fistislaam; ava 
mistaslim. 
lrJIJ" 
rl- sillim In pI salaaliml 1 staircase, stairs. (ililna 
is-sillim illi ywaddi lal-balakoona we climbed the stairs 
leading to the balcony. 2 ladder.lIsillim iI-c;afz diving-
board. - fis-sillim wit-tilbaan snakes and ladders (chil-
dren's game). 31 [mus} scale. 
~ 
sillima In pI -aal, salaa/iml step (of a stairway). 
~w... sillimaaya = sillima. 
lrJIJ" 
.:j, sallamiyya In pI -aatl [mus} smallest member of 
the naay family with a high-pitched tone. -see also 
fJuffaa[a and luffaa(a. 
4 r J IJ" see r.J J J IJ" : salluum 
JI. JI r J IJ" 
~ 
sa/amikka Icoll nI senna, senna pod(s), senna 
leaflet(s). - also sanamikka. 
JI J r J IJ" see I r J IJ" : salamlik 
.J r J IJ" 
.,.,.1- sa/amun <prob Engl salmon> Inl name used 
loosely for several kinds oftinned fish (e.g. mackerel). 
.J J .J J IJ" 
)...\:1.. silindar(alsojilindar) <Engl> In pI -aatl[mech} 
cylinder. 

I.JJIJ'" 
~~.JJIJ'" 
')I.... sala I (a) Ivti to get over (the memory of), forget. 
~~ siluweet <Fr> loJ silhouette, image cut out 
put out of one's mind. Juufi fJadd' yxallii-ki tisli l-fJuzn' 
from dark material and mounted on a light background. 
da find someone who will help you forget this sorrow. 
-vn silwaan. suluww; ava saali; pva masli. 
.:,1).. silwaan IvoJ consolation, comfort. 
4i I).. silwaana: fJilwaana f-silwaana by stealthy de-
grees. lamaluu-ha fJilwaana f-silwaana w-xall~u 1- fakl 
by stealthy degrees they managed to polish off all the 
food. t;at;adu ykallimuu-ni w-fJilwaana f-silwaana 
lat;et-hum mikattifin-ni they went on talking to me till 
I found they'd tied me up without my realizing it. ga 
t;alad mat;aana marra w-bat;deen lamal-ha fJilwaana 
f-silwaan wala lad-l' bi-ysib-na he sat with us once and 
then, somehow or other, he ended up never leaving us. 
0).. .~).. salwa loJ consolation, comfort. salwit-i 
f-samal i1-mazziika I-xafiifa I relax by listening to light 
music. 
J.. salla 2 /vti 1 to divert the mind from, take one's 
mind off. salli yulb-ak (or hamm-ak) keep your mind 
off things. salli ~yaam-ak take your mind off the fast (it 
will be easier to endure).lIsalli wat;t-ak keep· busy, fill 
your time. 2 to amuse, divert. fJafla musalliyya an en-
tertaining party. -vn tasliyya; ava musalli; avalpva 
misalli. 
~ 
tasliyya In pI tasaalil amusement, pastime. 
JI.....; tasaali Ipl oJ snacks . 
.::.IJ- musalliyaat Ipl oJ 1 amusements, diversions. 
2 assorted nuts, chick-peas, melon and sunflower seeds 
e!c., consumed to kill time. 
J-il fitsalla or fissalla Ivil to find amusement or diver-
sion, fill up time. bi-ygib-Iu salalaat yissalla fiiha 
wi-titfitifJ Jahiyyit-u he brings him salads to busy himself 
with and to whet his appetite. bi-yissalla laleena he 
amuses himself at our expense. mizawway min Juyl-u 
w-gaay yissalla fil-c:iyaada he's staying away from work 
and comes to fritter away his time in the clinic. 
bi-yitsalla bil- fakl he kills time by eating. -iva mitsalli. 
Z.J J IJ'" 
).. silw loJ custom, habit, tradition. 
t.J J IJ'" see also .J.J t J IJ'" 
t)..... misalwat; ladj °1 skinny, scraggy. 
J.JJIJ'" see also lJJIJ'" 
J)" salwat; Ivti to do or perform in a hasty, slipshod 
manner. -vn salwat;a; avalpva misalwat;. 
J)...;I fitsalwat; or fissalwat; Ivil passive of salwat;. 
- vn tisalwiit;; iva mitsalwat;. 
I ~ J IJ'" 
J... sa/a 2 (i) Ivti to melt (butter), render down (fat) . 
-vn saly; ava saali; pva masli. 
J- masliT loJ clarified butter. 
J-il fitsa/a or fissa/a lvil 1 passive of sa/a 2 • 2 to lose 
weight. -avaliva mitsili. 
J-il finsa/a = fitsa/a. -avaliva minsili. 
Z ~ J IJ'" see 1.J J IJ'" : tasliyya, tasaali, misalliyyaat 
- r~ JIJ'" 
JL..J- sulaymaani <perh T sa/amen> loJ mercuric 
chloride. 
.J 1 r IJ'" 
.Jl- samaar l lcoll oJ rush(es). 
O.Jl- samaara lunit n, pI -aatl a reed, a rush. 
~.J~rlJ'" 
~~ simitriyya <It simmetria> loJ symmetry, even-
ness. xallii-ha kull-a-ha simitriyya wafJda make it all 
even. 
~ .J ~ r IJ'" see ~.J ~ C. IJ'" : samtuut 
err IJ'" 
c;::- simig ladj • and pI sumagal boorish, churlish, 
loutish. 
c;::-i fasinag leJl more/most boorish, etc. 
~l- samaaga loJ boorishness, loathsomeness. 
C. r IJ'" 
e- samafJ (a) Ivil to give permission. samafJt-i-lu bil-
kalaam I allowed him to speak. m-asmafJ-J' l-fJadd' 
(b-finnu) yudxul beet-i I don't allow anyone to enter 
my house. fismafJ-1i fat;ul-lak permit me to inform you 
. ... ladad ir-rukkaab i1-masmuufJ (bii) the permitted 
number of passengers.lltismafJ would you mind, as in 

tismalJ tiliul-Ii I-mudiir feen could you tell me where the 
director is? - rismalJ-1i excuse me. -law samaIJt (if you) 
please. -Ia samalJ allaah God fdrbid! -vn samaalJ; ava 
saamilJ; pva masmuulJ. 
c.1..- samaalJ InJ permission, leave. IIsamaaIJ il-
marraa-di pardon this time, as in samaalJ il-marraa-di 
bass i ma-tir;mil-haa-J taani I'll let you off this time, but 
don't do it again, samaalJ il-marraa-di min fat/.I-ak 
please let me off the hook this time. - rahl is-samaalJ 
il-milaalJ nice people. 
4.1..- samaalJa InJ I generosity, kindness. 2 title 
accorded to a non-Egyptian mufti. 
..:..~"...... masmulJaat Ipl nJ articles allowed through 
customs without payment of duty. 
c:- similJ ladj ·1 kind, forgiving. lialb-u kull-u ralJma 
w-nifs-u simlJa he's a very merciful and forgiving man. 
II will similJ cheerful, kindly face. 
e"l... saamilJ Ivtl to pardon, forgive. rallaah yisamlJ-ak 
God forgive you! (to one who has wronged another). 
ril-misaamilJ kariim {prov] "" to forgive is generous. 
-vn misamlJa, musamlJa; ava misaamilJ. 
~L.... musamlJa I Ivnl forgiveness, pardon. 2 In pi -
aatl (obsol] vacation, holiday(s). 
e"wl ritsaamilJ or rissaamilJ Ivill to be tolerant, big-
hearted or indulgent. 2 to be forgiven. -vn tasaamulJ; 
avaliva mitsaamilJ. 
c-"-I ristasmalJ Ivt/l to ask (s.o.) for forgiveness. 
rUli~uri f-Jarr i wi-stasmalJii put an end to the un-
pleasantness and ask him for forgiveness. 2 to ask per-
mission of. ristasmalJt i maama fil-mirwaalJ lis-siima 
I asked mother if I could go to the cinema. rastasmalJ-
ak "" would you permit me, please .... -vn ristismaalJ; 
avalpva mistasmalJ. 
~ r IJ" 
JI..- samaad, simaad In pi rasmidal fertilizer. simaad 
baladi organic fertilizer, manure. simaad kimaawi che-
mical fertilizer. 
~ 
sammid Ivtl to fertilize, manure. -vn tasmiid; aval 
pva misammid. 
I 
~I ritsammid or rissammid Ivil to be fertilized, be 
manured. -iva mitsammid. 
I 
J r IJ" 
..,.- samar i: liar;dit samar an evening party. lJaflit 
samar an evening party or gathering in the open air 
(usually around a camp-fire). 
ft4- samiir In pi summaarl a participant in a 
musamra. 
rl... saamirilnJ informal evening performance oftra-
429 
ditional entertainments (i.e. skits, singing). IlmasralJ 
is-saamir government-sponsored theatre which prom-
otes traditional entertainments. 
rl... saamir2 Ivtl to spend the evening with (s.o.) in 
pleasant conversation. -vn musamra, misamra; ava 
misaamir. 
orL.... musamra, misamra In pi -aatl evening spent in 
conversation with friends. 
rL.... misaamir In ·1 a participant in a musamra. 
rwl ritsaamir or rissaamir Ivil to spend a pleasant 
evening chatting (with one's intimates). radii-na 
b-nitsaamir nitlJadditJiwayya w-nidlJakJiwayya here we 
are, passing the night with a few stories and a few 
laughs. - ava mitsaamir. 
1 
J r IJ" 
.JL........ musmaar In pi masamiir, masamiir/l nail, screw 
or nail-like device (e.g., fracture-pin, pointed cold 
chisel). IImusmaar raas tack, drawing-pin. -musmaar 
r;een fine-toothed rasp. -musmaar gadoon steering-rod 
(of a bicycle). - ril-rakl i da musmaar ba{n "" this food 
sticks to your ribs. -musmaar-u r~-~ady "" he's a drag 
and always around. -musmaar gulJa pretext, excuse to 
keep one's foot in the door, as in bi-Yliuul rinn i risrariil 
musmaar gulJa 1-ramriika he says that Israel is Amer-
ica's excuse for keeping her foot in the door. 2 corn (on 
the foot). 3 metal strap or clamp. 4 (a single) quilt-
stitch. S (also laban musmaar) colostrum. see further 
under J r IJ" r 
~ 
sammar Ivtll to nail. sammaru 1-lolJeen r;ala bact/. 
they nailed the two planks together. 2 to quilt-stitch. 
- vn tasmiir, tasmiir; avalpva misammar. 
;""1 ritsammar or rissammar Ivi/l to be nailed. 2 to 
be quilt-stitched. - iva mitsammar. 
3 
J r IJ" 
~..,.- sumuriyya InJ brownness, darkness (of skin). 
..,.-i rasmar ladj, fem samra, pi sumrl I dark-
skinned. II rin kunta r;aayiz; titmasxar liuum labbis 
il-rasmar ralJmar {prov] "" if you want to mock a man 
put him in an unsuitable situation. 2 {euphem] black. 
JI..,.-i rasmaraani ladjl dark-skinned, of dark 
complexion. 
.JI..- samaar2 InJ brownness, darkness (of skin). 
~I rismarr Ivil to brown, turn brown, tan. -ava 
mismirr. 
..,....:-1 ristasmarilvtll to consider (excessively) dark 
or brown. 2 to select for brownness or darkness. - ava 
mistasmar. 

4 
.J r IJ" 
;W tamar (a. u) Ivil to bear fruit (in the form of grati-
tude). ril-malruuf ma-yitmar1' fii he shows no grati-
tude for favours done him. lal-alla yitmar fiik I hope 
you appreciate it! -vn tamaraan; ava taamir. 
JW samar2 Icoll nl I (rare or exotic) fruit(s). 
2 product, yield. II samar ir-rool:J {Chr] the fruit of the 
Spirit. 
i r: samara In pI -aatll lunit nl a fruit. jagarit il-fiifta 
bi-tgiib l:Jawaali lajar samaraat {IS-sana the custard-
apple tree yields about ten custard-apples a year. 
2 yield, fruit. reeh samarit it-talab da kull-u what is 
there to show for all that effort? 
;; tammar2 Ivil {rur] to produce seeds or fruit (of 
plants and trees). -vn tatmiir; ava mitammar. 
.;-:-1 ristasmar2/vtl to invest (especially money). -vn 
ristismaar; ava mustasmir; pva mustasmar. 
JI..:..:..I fistismaar In pI -aatl investment. Ilfihaadit 
istismaar savings certificate. 
~ 
mustasmir In °1 investor. 
5 
.J r IJ" 
J:- sammuur /n pI samamiirl {zool] sable (Martes 
zibellina). gild' sammuur sable skin. farw' sammuur 
sable fur. 
6 .J r IJ" see .J r IJ'f' : samar 3 
IJ" r IJ" see IJ" r ..; : sams 
.JlJ"rlJ" 
JL- simsaar In pI samasra. samasral agent. simsaar 
bur~a stockbroker. simsaar larabiyyaat car dealer. 
.r-- samsar I Ivil to act as a broker or middleman. 
2 Ivtl to net or gain as a middleman. samsar miit gineeh 
fil-lamaliyya he made a hundred pounds on the deal. 
-vn samsara; ava misamsar. 
rlJ"rlJ" 
~ 
samsim Ivtl to make delicate, give a delicate 
shape or form to. - vn samsama; avalpva misamsim. 
r---' misamsim ladj °1 delicate-featured (of a face). 
~ 
simsim <cf Copt> Icoll nl sesame (seeds). leej 
fabu simsim bread covered with sesame seeds. 
II musmaar simsim small nails. - fiftal.J ya simsim open 
Sesame! 
........... simsima lunit n, pI -aatl a sesame seed. IIxalia 
rafiabt-i zayy is-simsima he made me feel small. - fiadd 
is-simsima wi-tgiib il-xeel milaggima - kilma (riddle:) 
the size of a sesame seed and (yet) it can bring the 
430 
horses all bridled; (answer:) a word . 
~ 
simsimiyya In pI -aatll sweets or pastries with 
sesame seeds. 2 stringed musical instrument, particular 
to the Suez Canal region (see PI.J, 4). 
r---'I fitsamsim or fissamsim Ivil to be made deli-
cate, be delicately formed. - iva mitsamsim. 
I .lo r IJ" 
.la- samac (u) Ivtll to scald (e.g., poultry to remove 
feathers, or tripe, tongue etc. to remove skin). 2 {rur] 
to heat to a high temperature (in order to sterilize). 
bi-yusmu(U I-mataaridfil-furn' fiab/' may~ubbu I-laban 
fiiha they sterilize the crocks in the oven before pouring 
the milk into them. -vn sa11ll. sama(aan; avasaami(; pva 
masmuu( . 
.J-.... masma( In pI masaami(1 shop or restaurant spe-
cializing in brain, tongue, trotters and other variety 
meats or offal. 
.l.a......;1 fitsama( or fissama( Ivil passive of samac. -iva 
mitsimi( . 
.l...:- samma( = samac. -vo tasmii(; ava misamma(. 
.la.:....1 fitsamma( or fissamma( = 
fitsama(. -iva 
mitsamma(. 
2 .lo r IJ" see .lo ~ r IJ" : simii(. simii(a 
t r IJ" 
r:- simil (a) Ivil I to hear, be able to hear. fa(raj 
ma-b-yismal1 he's deaf - he can't hear. 2 to receive 
information, 
receive 
news. 
ma-similt'-j lannu 
fabadan I've never heard of him. ma-smiltuu-j lan 
tal.J~iin il-bahaayim haven't you heard of immunizing 
cattle? 3 to listen. be attentive. lamma fakallim-ak 
tismal when I talk to you, you Iisten.llyismal minnak 
rabb-i-na may God answer your prayer! - fismal min 
hina w-fawwit min hina let it in one ear and out the 
other. - Ivt/4 to hear. similt ig-garas bi-yiqrab I heard 
the bell ring. II wi-min simil same here, as in fana 
galaan moot - wi-min simil(-ak) 'I'm starving!' 'Me 
too!' - fismal similt ir-rald' f-widaan-ak tabus] damn 
it! pay attention, will you! 5 to listen to. b-al.Jibb asmal 
ir-radyu I like to listen to the radio. Iisimil kalaam-u 
(1) he paid attention to what he said. (2) he obeyed 
him. he heeded his words. - kilmit-u masmuula his 
word carries weight. -vn samal. samaal. samacaan; 
ava saamil; pva masmuul. 
t.,...- masmuulladjl audible. 
r:- saml. samallnl hearing. sense of hearing. saml-i 
tfiiiil Jiwayya I'm a bit hard of hearing. IIlal.Jt' saml' 

w-b~ar iI-bulii~ under the very noses of the police. 
- fis-saml i wi(-(aala or samlan wa-(aala I hear and 
obey! at your service! samal huss hush! 
~ 
sumla Inl I reputation. sabaq-u suuf sumlit-u 
his bad reputation went before him. 2 nickname for the 
given name Ismail. 
-rl-. samaali I/adjl aural. -/adverbiallyl bi-tilzif 
samaali do you play by ear? 2 In! [mus] 2a vocal or 
instrumental piece consisting of three sections, each 
followed by a refrain, and a final section in a different 
rhythm, followed by the same refrain. 2b (samaali tqiil 
and samaali (aayir) specific rhythmic beats. 
c:-- samiil/nl All-hearing One (epithet of God). 
~t.:.. sammaala 
In 
pi -aatl 
I loudspeaker. 
2 telephone receiver. 3 earphone. 4 stethoscope. 
~ 
sammiil/n pi sammiilal connoisseur (of music). 
c.--" masmal/n pi masaamilll range of hearing, ear-
shot.lala masamil-hum or lala masmal minhum with-
in earshot of them. 2 [mus] passage. 
~I fitsamal or fissamallvil passive of simil. -iva 
mitsimil· 
c:-' I finsamal = fitsamal· - iva minsimil· 
~ 
sammal Ivtl I to cause to hear. b-asammal-u 1-
!Jaqiiqa I make him listen to the truth. bi-tzauaq kida 
leeh da-nta bi-tsammal faaxir if-faaril why are you 
shouting like that -they can hear you at the other end of 
the street! 2a to recite (e.g., a lesson). sammallala 
f-feex recite to the sheikh (so he can correct your mis-
takes). 2b to listen to the recitation of (e.g., a lesson). 
sammalt-i-lu d-dars I listened to him reciting the les-
son. 
- Ivil 
3a to 
echo, 
reverberate. 
fi~-~oot 
bi-ysammal fil-!Jammaam sound echoes in the bath-
room. 3b to radiate, be felt (of pain). fil-wagal ilfi 
f-ba(n-i bada ysammal fi-qahr-i the pain in my stomach 
began to be felt in my back. wagal misammal referred 
pain, synalgia. wik-ku!J!Ja lamma faku!J!J i tasammal 
fi-m~ariin-i when I cough I feel it in my guts. - vn 
tasmiil; avalpva misammal. 
~I fitsammal or fissammallvil passive of sammal. 
-iva mitsammal. 
~I fistamal 
Ivil 
to 
listen. 
fis-saala 
talaata 
!Ja-nistimilli-x(aab ir-ra fiis we shall listen to the Presi-
dent's speech at three o'clock. fiza kaan illi b-yitkallim 
magnuun yikuun iI-mistimillaaqil/provj even with a 
f\>ol speaking one should listen wisely. -vn fistimaal; 
ava mistimil. mustamil r . 
t. ~ 
I fistimaal/nl auditioning. lagnit istimaal audi-
tion board (for radio and television). 
~ 
mustamilln '1 listener. !Jaqaraat iI-mustamiliin 
iI-kiraam dear listeners! 
431 
t. ~ IJ" 
~ 
samy or ~amy In/la gum, resin.llnidwiyyit samy 
type of gummy blight. Ib gum arabic. 2a mucilage. 
2b glue. 
~ 
samyi or ~a111yi ladjl gummiferous. 
~ 
sammay or ~ammay Ivtll to stick with gum, glue. 
laazim yisammaYu (-(uruud wi-yixtimuu-ha qabl it-
tasliim they must gum and seal the packages before 
delivery. 2 to size (cloth, paper etc.) with gum arabic. 
yisammay-u l-!Jariir bald it-taghiiz they size the silk 
after the dressing. 3 to cause gumming in. fii nool min 
iI-famraaq bi-ysammay iI-qu(n there's a kind of disease 
which gums up the cotton (bolls). - Ivi/4 to contract 
gummy blight (of a plant). fil-qu(n i sammay the cotton 
has become infected with gummy blight. -vn tasmiiy; 
ava/pva misammay. 
~ 
tasmiiYa Inl type of gummy blight. 
~I fitsammay, fit~ammay or fissamay, f~~ammay 
Ivil passive of 5ammay. - iva mitsammay. 
~ 
tasammuy, t~ammuy Inl type of gummy blight. 
J ~ IJ" 
-.;t.:.. simmaaq Inl [bot] sumac (Rhus coriaria). 
l.!lrlJ" 
d.... samak Icoll n, pi fasmaakl fish. IIsamak laban 
tamr i hindi incongruous mixture. -samak fi-mayya (as 
slippery as) a fish in water, as in fil-mawquul da samak 
fi-mayya that matter is hard to grasp. -zayy is-samak 
(yaakul balq-U) "" bloodthirsty (especially of rela-
tives). -qaalu s-samak bi-y(allal naar - qaal kaanit 
i/-mayya tidii [prov] (They said 'The fish spouts fire'. 
He said 'The water would extinguish it'.) "" question 
the logic of everything you hear. 
~ 
samaka lunit n, pi -aatl I a fish. IIqa((al 
is-samaka w-del-ha (he's cut the fish and its tail) "" he is 
worldly and experienced. 2 gusset. 
'-!~ samakaaya = samaka. 
.!It.:.. sammaak In • and pi sammaakal fishmonger. 
2.!lrlJ" 
d.... sumk Inl thickness. 
..!.l,...- samiik ladjl thick. 
d....i fasmak lell morelmost thick. 
.).!l~1J" 
.f.;- .;:...- samkar (alsosankar) Ivtl to do metalwork 
on. fil-larabiyya layza samkara the car needs body-
work. -vn samkara; avalpva misamkar. 
...s.f.;- . ...s;:...- samkari (also sankari) <P sim-gar> 

In pi -yyal metal-worker, panel beater. IIsamkari 
mawasiir pipe maker. 
~JrlJ" 
4l..- similla <Fr semelle> 
In 
pi -aatl [constr} 
groundsill. 
I UIJ" 
;.... samm l (i) Ivtl to poison. -vn samm, samamaan; 
ava saamim; pva masmuum. 
rl- saammT ladj *1 1 poisonous. lfazaat saamma 
poison gasses. 1 venomous. 
r""""" masmuum ladj *1 poisoned, containing poison. 
IIkul - finta masmuum eat up; are you sickening for 
something? 
~ 
summiyya Inl poisonousness. 
.::.~ summiyyaat Ipl nl poisonous substances. 
;.... simm, summ, samm 2 In pi simuum, sumuuml 
1 poison. IIsimm' faar [bot} ratsbane. 
~{abbaax 
is-sirnm' laa budd' yduut;-u [prov} (the cook of poison 
will taste it) ... one is bound to have a share of what one 
produces. -damm-u zayy is-simm ... he's a bore. 
l[women and children} something or someone un-
pleasant. -da simm that (or he) is horrid! lIya simm 
(lala) ... how horrid (of), how beastly (of), as in ya 
simm a laleeku -Iaazim tilmilu kida you beasts, do you 
have to do that? 
ISJt:- simmaawi In * and pi -yya/l poisoner. 1 stray-
dog catcher. 
r"'- samuum Inl simoom. 
;""1 fitsamm or fissamm Ivil to be poisoned. - iva 
mitsamm. 
;""1 finsamm 
= 
fitsamm. IIlumr-u ma-nsamm' 
f-badan-u w-ijtalfal bi-zimma [iron} (the poison of hon-
est work has never entered his body) ... he hasn't done 
an honest day's work in his life .. -iva minsamm. 
~ 
sammim Ivtl to poison. bi-tl:Ju{{ii-1i reeh fi{-{abiix -
tisammimii-ni what are you putting in the food? you're 
poisoning me! -vn tasmiim; avalpva misammim. 
~I fitsammim or fissammim Ivil to be poisoned. 
II fiddii-Iu yitsammim tabus} ... Iet him choke on it! - iva 
mitsammim. 
~ 
tasammum Inl poisoning. 
;;-. musimm ladj *1 1 poisonous. 2 venomous. 
1 UIJ" 
rl.... masaamm r Icoll n, pi -aatl pores. 
~I.... masammiyya f Inl porosity. 
3 r r IJ" 
~ summa f Iconj/l then. fi- fawwil i{-{abuur iI- fadaal 
432 
summa 1- fummahaat first in the line are the children 
then the mothers. 1 furthermore, moreover. summ~ 
finnak laazim tiigi li-wal:Jd-ak what's more, you must 
come alone. 
I. 
IJ r IJ" 
.;y- simin (a) Ivil to grow fat, put on weight. -vn 
simna, samaana; ava samnaan. 
.;y- samn (also samn' baladi) Inl clarified butter 
ghee.1I samn ' !naali or samn ' hulandi cooking fat mad; 
of a mixture of vegetable or animal and vegetable fats. 
-samn ' nabaati preparation of vegetable fats for cook-
ing. - fis-samn· lala I-lasal (as complementary as) but-
ter and honey, as in fi!{alal:Ju w-riglu zayy is-samn a 
lal-lasal they made up an~ were once again like two 
lovebirds . 
..r- samni ladj invarl cream coloured. 
~ 
samna = samn. 
Jl.... samaani: balal:J samaani variety of large round 
orange-coloured date. 
.r.- simiin ladj/l fat, fatty.llmuxx-u smiin he's stu-
pid. l/pl sumaanl (also simiin malyaan) fat, over-
weight, obese. IIraagii simiin (1) a fat man. (2) a rich 
man. (3) a good catch (for marriage). - In! 3 fat. 
bi-naakul iI-lal:Jma 1-l:Jamra bass - ma-b-naakul-f is-
simiin we eat only the lean meat, not the fat. 
.;y-i fasman lell morelmost fat, obese etc. 
~L:- sammaana I In/: sammaanit ir-rigl the calf of the 
leg. sammaanit d-diraal the biceps. 
.;... sammin 1 Ivtl to fatten. mal:Ja((it tasmiin calf-
fattening station. l/vil to become fatty or greasy (of 
food). -vn tasmiin; ava misammin. 
';""'1 fitsammin or fissammin Ivil to be fattened. - iva 
mitsammin. 
.;,--0-1 fistasmin Ivtl 1 to consider (excessively) fat. 
1 to select as (sufficiently) fat. -vn fistismaan; ava 
mistasmin. 
1 • 
IJ r IJ" 
.:,L:- simmaan, sammaan Icoll nl quail. 
~L:- simmaana, sammaana 2 <cf Copt> lunit n, pl-
aatl a quail. 
3 i.J r IJ" see I i.J r \oJ : samiin 
.J r IJ" 
.\.- .\.- sama In pi samawaatl sky, heaven. Ill:Jaati{ 
manaxiir-u fis-sama he has his nose in the air, he is 
stuck-up. -li-rabb is-sama spectacular, as in t;awwimu 
xnaat;a I-rabb is-sama they started a fight to end all 

fights! - raadi s-sama w- raadi 1- rar4. (here is the sky and 
here is the earth) == I have nothing. 
->JI..... samaawi ladjl I sky-blue. 2 open to the sky. 
manwar samaawi open-sky light well. 
3 {Chr] 
heavenly. 
~ 
sumuww r , simuww, simiww Inlloftiness, exalted-
ness. simmuww il- raxlaali nobility of character.lI,vaa17ib 
is-simuww il-malaki His Royal Highness. 
IS"L. saami ladjl high, exalted, lofty, sublime. 
raxlaac;-ha samya she has a noble character. II ramr; 
saami royal decree. - ril-manduub is-saami the High 
Commissioner . 
..,....i rasma r lell morelmost high, exalted etc. 
~r"'" see also r""'o 
:r- samiyy r Inl namesake. 
~ 
samma I/vtl to name, call (s.o. or s.th.) by a 
name. fil-balad bi-ysammuu-ni 17asan at home in the 
village they call me Hasan. di bi-ysammuu-ha ragaazit 
wa4.l they call this 'maternity leave'. 2 Ivil to pro-
nounce the formula bi-sm illaah ir-ra17maan ir-ra17iim. 
II ma-fii-J 17add; samma laleek no one gave you a help-
ing hand. -vn tasmiyya, tasmiya r; ava!pva misammi; 
pva musamma . 
.;.... musamma Ipva! named. II risms lala musamma 
an apt name which fits its bearer. - rila ragal musamma 
for a certain period. - rila ragal yeer musamma until 
further notice, sine die. 
~I ritsamma or rissamma Ivil to be called, be 
named. II rilli ma-yitsammaa-J insulting form of refer-
ence, in which mention of the name of the person 
referred to is deliberately avoided == who had better 
remain nameless. - rilli ma-yitsammuu-J {women in trad 
soc] superstitious form of reference to spirits == those 
who are not to be named. - iva mitsammi. 
j, ~ r"'" 
~ 
simii{ <cf Copt> I Icoll nl sticks or rings of 
bread, often sprinkled with sesame seeds, eaten either 
fresh or dried. 2 Inl (also diC;iiC; is-simii{) semolina. 
~ 
simii{a lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of simii{. 
iJ..,.. see also 2 <J iJ..,.. and 1 ~ <J ..,.. 
4;.. sana In pi siniin, sanawaatl year. bald; rarbal 
siniin after four years. landu kaam sana how old is he? 
landu sanateen he is two years old. sanat ralt 
w-tuslumiyya tisla w-sabliin (in) the year 1979. ruxt-i 
s-sanaa-di lazmaa-ni landaha my sister has invited me 
to her place this year. II C;U{lit il- rutubisaat wi-sniin il-
rutubisaat == damn all buses! -ya sana sooda {women] 
433 
== oh woe! -kull; sana wi-nta {ayyib conventional greet-
ing at celebration of annually occurring feasts == many 
happy returns! happy Christmas! etc. -luc;baal miit 
sana conventional birthday greeting == may you live to 
be a hundred! -c;abl il-hana b-sana too early. 
~L... misaniyya In pi -aatl yearly payment in kind 
made to village tradesmen for services rendered. 
10,;,..,.. see 
I~.;,..::.o: 
ristisnaa ri 
rasnaar, 
2 0 ,;,..,.. see 2 ~ <J u : sunaari 
.!I..,..y';'..,.. 
ristisnaa r, 
~.,,;- sambuska (also sambuksa) <P sanbasak> Inl 
I triangular shape. fuu{it sufra m{abbac;a sambuska a 
napkin folded to form a triangle. 2 type of sweet pastry 
formed in triangles. - Ipl -aatl3 anything of triangular 
or rhomboid shape. 
.!Iy.;,..,.. 
~ 
,4:- sumbuk In pi sanaabikl {mech] round 
punch, (farrier's) pritchel, drift-pin. 
..,.. .!I y .;,..,.. see .!I..,.. y .;, ..,.. : sambuksa 
1 Jy.;,V" 
~ 
sambil Ivtl to put forth ears (of wheat, barley 
etc.). -vn sambala; ava misambil. 
J,.- .~ simbillcoll nIl heads, ears (of wheat or 
barley). 2 male inflorescences (of maize). 
-.I.,..- ,;a..:... simbila lunit n, pi -aat, sanaa bill a head, 
an ear (of wheat or barley), a male inflorescence (of 
maize). II/amba b-simbila a small open-flame tin oil-
lamp used in rural areas (see PI.B, 2). 
~I ris-sumbula, ris-simbila Inl {astrol] Virgo. 
~ 
simbi/iyya = simbila. 
2Jy.;,V" 
;a..:... sumbula Inl {mus] name given to the note E flat 
(on the third space of the staff). 
.; u .;, V" see I.; j, .;, V" : santar, sintar 
(-.;u';'V") 
JI?- sintiraal <Fr centrale> In pi -aatl telephone 
exchange. 
..;..;?- santarafiif 
<Fr 
centrifuge>: 
sukkar 
santarafiif granulated sugar. 

r~.:J~ 
434 
- t ..:J oJ IJ" 
back-supporter. lamma yUlja[ yilaalji iii yisnid-u when 
J.....i;;- santimilr <Fr> In pi -aatl centimetre. - also 
he's in trouble he'll find people to support him. 
santi. 
IImasnuud [ala l:Jee{a mayla (leaning on a leaning wall) 
J .J ..:J oJ IJ" see oJ.J..:J oJ IJ" : sana'ool 
<.J?- sanitoon (also sanatool) Inl matt paint (for 
walls). 
I.i- santi <Fr 
centimetre> Inl centimetre. - also 
santimilr. 
.r-:..... sinteer, santiir (also ramy is-sinteer) <Fr 
ceinture> Inl body hold and throw (in wrestling). 
4:- sanliina <It sentina> Inl bilge, bilge water. - also 
sarliina. 
-..s..:JoJlJ" 
J~ sintiyaal, suntiyaal = sintiyaan. 
<.J~ sintiyaan, sunliyaan <Fr soutien> In pi -aatl 
brassiere. - also sUlyaan. 
( [. oJ IJ" ) 
~ 
singa I <T sungu> Inl bayonet, II[a,maya fiiha 
singa sword-cane, sword-stick. 
~ 
singa 2 In pi sinagl I weight (of a balance scale). 
lI[ala singit [afara (dressed) to the nines. 2 contact 
pole, ~rm (of a trolley-bus or the like). 
y I [. oJ IJ" 
'-'~ singaab <P sinjiib> In pi sanagiibl squirrel. 
<.J,~ singaabi ladjl ash-colou~ed. 
J[.oJlJ" 
~ 
sangalj <T sancak>: sangalj labanda /naut} 
hard a-starboard! 
c:. oJ IJ" 
c!- sanal:J (a) Ivil to offer itself, pr~sent itself (of, e.g., 
a thought, an opportunity). -vn sunuul:J, sinuul:J, 
sa.nal:Jaan; ava saanil:J. 
c!- sannal:J Ivil to pretend not to hear, feign inatten-
tion. -vn tasniil:J; ava misannal:J. 
I ~ oJ IJ" 
,l.;... sanad I (i) Ivtl to support. l:Jizaam saanid liq-qahr 
'" depending on shaky support. -kull:Jaaga lisnid-ak eat 
something to keep you going. -vn sand, sanadaan; ava 
saanid; pva masnuud. 
,l.;... sand Inl support. IIkutla sand [naut} cross-pawl, 
timber support attached to the upper parts of the 
wooden frame of a boat (to keep the ribs properly 
spaced until the deck beams are in place). 
o,l.;... sanda In pi -aa/, sanaayidl I brace, support. 
2 dolly block. sanda rigl L-shaped dolly block. sanda 
fufeer flat dolly block. 
,l.;... sanad 2 Inl I Ipl 'i'asaniidl/leg} la item of evidence. 
Ib basis of a legal argume~t. Ie legal document. 2/pl 
-aatl government savings bond (of fixed value and with 
regular dividends). 3 Ino pI! support, help.llya sanad-i 
epithet a woman gives her husband when mourning 
him. 
o.)l;- sinaada In pi -aatl support, supporting strut. 
o.)\.;... sannaada = sanda . 
.>.,.:- sanniid In pi sanniidal accompanist (to a dancer 
or a singer). 
..1:.-0 masnad In pi masaanidl any of various objects 
functioning as a support. masnad saabit larch} fixed 
bearing. masnad raas head rest. masnad kursi chair 
back. masaanid kanaba back cushions of a traditional 
sofa. masnad sarg cantle of a saddle. 
,.1.;....;1 'i'itsallad or 
'llssanad 
Ivil to lean. 
duxt' 
wi-ssanadt" [ala 1-l:Jee{a I got dizzy and leaned against 
the wall. ta[aalt ssindi [ala kitf-i come, lean on my 
shoulder. - ava mitsimd. 
~I 'linsanad = 'lusanad. -ava mmsinid. 
,l.;... sannid Ivtl to support, give support to. -vn tasniid; 
ava misannid. 
,.1.;....;1 'litsannid or 'l,ssannid Ivil to support oneself, 
lean. maafl yitsannid [al·l:Jetaan he is walking along 
holding onto the walls. - ava mitsannid. 
~ 
mustanad In pi -aatl I document. 2 documented 
proof. 
.s~ mustanadi ladjl pertaining to records. daftar 
mustanadi record book of documents. 
2 ~ oJ IJ" 
..I,;....) 1 'lls-smd Iprop nl Sind (province in modern Pakis-
tan). II/affeet is-sind' wil-hind '" I went and looked 
everywhere. 
3 ~ oJ IJ" see oJ I ~ oJ IJ" : smdaan 

435 
r.:J "'" 
JI".j1J" 
j,.j1J" 
JI~ sindaalln pI sanadiill anvil. -also sindaan. 
.la:.... san[lcoll nIl santtree (Acacia nilotica).l ribs (of 
a boat's hull) . 
.j I " .j IJ" 
~ 
santa <Copt> lunit n, pi -aall 1 a sant tree. 1 a 
.JI~ sindaan In pI sanadiinl anvil. -also sindaa/. 
rib (of a boat's hull). 3 wart. 
.J " .j IJ" 
o.JoA:.- sandara In pi sanaadirl storage loft. 
IJ" " .j IJ" 
..,...oA:.- sundus Inl silk brocade. 
J".j1J" 
JJ..I.J sanduuc;, sunduuc; In pi sanadiic;1 I box, con-
tainer. sanduuc; bus[a mail-box.lIsanduuc; gaml {printl 
composing frame. ~sanduuc; id-dunya a type of peep-
show. 1 {gyml vaulting box, box horse. 3 fund, kitty. 
J " .j IJ" see J I " .j IJ" : sindaal 
.j " .j IJ" see .j I " .j IJ" : sindaan 
-"".j1J" 
"pJoA:.- sandawitf <Engl> In pi -aall sandwich. 
.!J I.S " .j IJ" 
~oA:.- sandiik <Fr syndic> In pi sanaadikl creditor's 
representative appointed by the court (in bankruptcy 
cases). 
- I.S " .j IJ" 
':"~oA:.- sindiyaan <P sindiyiin> Icoll nl holm oak(s). 
4;~oA:.- sindiyaana lunit n, pi -aall a holm oak. 
- I.S .J .j IJ" 
~).:..... sinatisl <Fr> In pI -aall scenarist. 
1J".j1J" 
...r- sins <prob It senza> ladvl [joel· 1 without 
paying. daxal is-siima sins he entered the cinema with-
out paying. 1 gratis. 
- .J IJ" .j IJ" 
..bA-:- sansafiilln!: yillan sansafiil-ak {abusl "'" curse 
your whole family tree! -also salsafiil. 
.j1J".j1J" 
.;,-:- sinsin Inl 1 minute liquorice beads (used as a 
breath freshener). 1 nickname for Hasan and Muhsin. 
~u.:.... san[aaya lunit n, pI -aalll a sant tree. 1 wart . 
I .J j, .j IJ" 
)..:... san[ar I (also sanlar,lan[ar) <Engl> Ivtl [soccerl 
to centre (the ball) for kick-off. -vn san[ara; ava 
misan[ar . 
)..:... sin[ar (also sinlar, lin[ar) In! {soccer 1 1 centre, 
centre spot. l/pl sanaalirl centre half. 
)..:....; 1 filSan[ar I or fissan[ar I Ivil passive of santar I • 
-iva miISan[ar. 
z .J j, .j IJ" 
)..:... san[ar2 Ivil to collapse heavily. saka[l-u buks l 
wiC;il misantar I punched him and he went down like a 
sack of cement. -vn santara; ava misantar. 
)..:....;1 fitsantar2 or fissantar2 
= santar2. -ava 
mitsan[ar. 
.J ., ..; .j IJ" 
.J.,it...- sana/oor :::Engl> In pI -aall 1 semaphore, 
(railway) signal. 1 epithet for a tall person . 
C. .!J .j IJ" 
~ 
sankalj Ivil to loaf about, drift about. -vn 
sankalja; ava misankalj. 
c.fi.;.- sankuulj ladj pI sanakiiljl good-for-nothing. 
mara sankuulja tramp, trollop. 
~I fitsankalj or fissankalj 
= sankalj. -ava 
mitsankalj . 
IJ.!J.j1J" 
.J.;- sankar IvtI to lock. -vn sankara; ava/pya 
misankar. 
~I fitsankar or rissankar lvil to be locked. -iva 
mitsankar. 
2 J .!J .j IJ" see .J.!J r IJ" : sankar, sankari 
- IJ" .!J iJ IJ" 
.J\..S.;.... siniksaar <Or> In! [Chrl synaxarion . 
I.S .!J iJ IJ" 
..J.;,... sunki <T sUnga> In pI -yaal, sanaakil bayonet . 
r iJ IJ" 
F sanam In pI -oat, sunuma, sinima/ camel hump. 

;;..,;,.. sanama = sanam. 
~l..:.... sanamaaya = sanama. 
rl:.- sanaam = sanam. 
I r oj V" 
I.:.- sinima, sinama <Fr> In pi -yaat, -haat/l cinema, 
movie-house. 2 ris-sinima the cinema, the movies, the 
film-making industry. - also siima. 
.;t..:- sinimaari 
ladjl 
pertaining 
to 
cinema, 
cinematographical. 
.!I • .!II" oj V" 
~ 
sanamikka Icoll nl senna, senna pod(s), senna 
leaflet(s). - also salamikka. 
I •• 
u u V" 
~ sann I (i) Ivtl to hone, sharpen. mumkin tisinn 
is-sikkiina would you sharpen the knife? IIsann' snaan-
(u) to get ready for action. -masnuun lal-raaxir ... 
on-the-ball. -vn sann, sananaan; ava saanin; pva 
masnuun. 
~ sanna linst n, pi -aatl a sharpening. 
~ sinn I In pi sinaan, rasnaan, sinuunl I tooth, 
tooth-like projection. furfit sinaan tooth-brush. sinaan 
ii-laban milk teeth. duktoor rasnaan dentist. sinaan 
iI-munfaar the teeth of the saw. ril-leen bil-leen 
wis-sinn bis-sinn {proy} an eye for an eye and a tooth for 
a tooth. IIsinn iI-fiil elephant tusk. -xad deel-u 
fi-snaan-u w-taar he took to his heels. 2 (sharp) point, 
tip, nib. sinn' 'ialam point of a pencil, nib of a pen. sinn' 
gazma toe of a shoe. II sinn ' naml id-dibbaana bead of 
the rifle sight. -lala sinn' w-rumIJ ... known to one and 
ali, as in rana zakiyya bint iI-IJagg 8 lali I-fakahaani lala 
sinn' w-rumIJ I'm Zakiyya, the daughter of Hagg Ali, 
the fruit-seller, known to one and all. 3 sharp edge. sinn 
is-sikkiina cutting edge of the blade. II sinn iI-'ialawoo; 
scrc:w-thread. 4 {butcher} front rib chop. 5 a point in 
tent applique designs (see PI.H, 3). 
~ sinna In pi -aat/l tooth. II rabu sinna nickname for 
a man with a gold tooth. 2 a little bit. sinna min gooz 
it-tiib a pinch of nutmeg. rimji sinna I-'iuddaam move 
forward just a bit. sinna sinna bit by bit.llsinnit rafyuun 
bit of opium for sucking. 
,:,G:- sannaan In pi sannaana, sannaniinl one who shar-
pens blades, knife-grinder. 
:;,..... misann Inl whetstone, grindstone, sharpening 
iron. II ralIJas misann-i w-rabaat mihanni {proY} ... I'll 
be poor but happy. 
':""'1 ritsann I or rissann 2 Ivil to be honed, be shar-
pened. -iva mitsann. 
436 
.:;- sannin I I Ivil to teethe. 2 Ivtl to make teeth or 
serrations in, indent. -vn tasniin; ava misannin. 
;....,. misannin ladjl toothed, serrated. 
;""1 ritsannin I or rissannin I Ivil passive of sannin 2. 
- iva mitsannin. 
z oj oj V" see also oj V" 
~ sinn 2 In pi rasnaanl age. sinn ir-rufd legal age. 
sinn-u kaam how old is he? rana ya doob sinn-i sitta 
w-lifriin sana I'm barely twenty-six years old. kibiir 
{IS-sinn elderly. taalin{lS-sinn advanced in years. sinn-u 
~ugayyar he's a young man. 
~ 
i rasann lell morelmost advanced in years. 
. . 
.:;- sannin 2 Ivtl to estimate the age of. -vn tasnlln; 
avalpva misannin. 
;""1 ritsannin 2 or rissannin 2 Ivil passive of sannin 2 • 
- iva mitsannin. 
:;,..... musinn ladj "I old, aged, advanced in years. 
3 oj oj V" 
~ sann 2 (i) Ivtl to launch, initiate (practices, laws 
etc.). rinta IIi sanneet sunna mhabbiba {if-firka you're 
the one who started an outrageous practice in the com-
pany. -vn sann; ava saanin; pva masnuun. 
~ sunna In pi sunanl I custom or usage sanctioned 
by tradition.lIlala sunnit iIIaah (wi-rasuul-u) {lsi} legal-
Iy, as in riggawwizna lala sunnit iIIaah we were legally 
married. 2 ris-sunna {lsi} the Sunna of the Prophet 
Muhammad. rahl is-sunna Sunni Muslims. 
~ sunni ladj "II Sunni, pertaining to the Sunna of 
the Prophet. 2 bearded. raagil sunni a man with a 
beard. - In .. and pi -yya/3 a Sunni, Sunnite.lllaamii 
sunni he pretends to be a pious man. 
':""'1 ritsann 2 or rissann 2 Ivil to be launched, be initi-
ated. - iva mitsann. 
';:';"'1 ristann Ivtl to launch, initiate. - ava mistann. 
4 •• 
u u V" 
~ sinn J Inl bran. leef is-sinn bran bread (prescribed 
for diabetics). 
.J I oj oj V" see .J I oj oj ~ 
: sinnaara 
.JojojV" 
.:- sinnu <Copt> Inl style of serving in the game of 
xara (q.v.). 
I .J oj V" see also oj V" 
..s~ sanawi 2 ladj "I annual. ta'iariir sanawiyya 
annual reports. 

~,,:- sanawiyya In pi -aatl anniversary. 
z .J ~ oJ" see Z IS ~ .:J : sana wi /, ris-sanawiyya 
I IS ~ oJ" see 
I IS ~ .:J: rasnaa r, rasna, ristasna, 
rislisnaa r, ristisnaa ri 
Z IS ~ oJ" see Z IS ~ .:J : saaniyan, sanya, sunaari 
J IS ~ oJ" see ~ oJ" : misaniyya 
J.JIS~oJ" 
OJ"":'" sanyuura: binti (zayy is-) sanyuura [rurJ pretty 
young girl. 
( • oJ" ) 
• \; sih / Ifem n, pi -aatl fourth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also saa r. 
~ sih2 <P sih> In pi -aatl three (in dice etc). 
~.:J.oJ" 
~ 
sahtana Ivnl shiftiness, slipperiness. 
.rt-- misahlin ladj "I shifty, slippery. 
.:r+-'I ritsahtin or rissahtin Ivil to pretend to be meek. 
-ava mitsahtin. 
~ • oJ" 
..If- suhd Inl sleeplessness, insomnia (usually of the 
lovelorn). 
J~ suhaad = suhd. 
J 0 oJ" 
.A- sihir (a) Ivil to stay up late. sihirna nismac l:Jaflit 
is-sitt we stayed up late to hear Umm Kalthum's con-
cert. dimaav-i l:Ja-litfilie; min kutr is-sahar my head is 
splitting from too much staying up late. -vn sahar; ava 
sahraan, saahir. 
o.A- sahra In pi -aatll evening, soir~e.libs is-sahra or 
badlit is-sahra formal evening-dress. l:Jittit diin sahra a 
great evening. 2 (late) evening event. landi sahra 
fil-beet I-Ielaa-di I'm having a few guests over tonight. 
,)'1- saahir I laVa "I wakeful, awake, staying up (at 
night). 2/adjl taking place in the evening.l:Jafli saahir 
or l:JaflasaahiraT (1) evening show, soir~e. (2) evening 
party. 
ISJlf- sahhaari ladvl through the night, late into the 
night. bi-yiJtavalu sahhaari they work through the 
night. -/adjectivallyllamba sahhaari (1) small oil-lamp. 
(2) night-light. 
~Jlf- sahhariyya In pi -aatll small oil-lamp left burn-
437 
J 0 "'" 
ing in order to save matches. 2 night-light. 
.r-f.- sahhiir In pi sahhiira/l a night-owl, night-hawk. 
IIsahhiir il-Iayaa/i one who is love-stricken. 2 Koranic 
reader employed throughout the month of Ramadan to 
recite the Koran at night in a private house. 
.A- sahhar Ivt/l to keep (s.o.) up late. 2 to employ (a 
Koranic reader) to recite the Koran throughout Rama-
dan in one's house. -vn lashiir; ava/pva misahhar. 
.A.-; I ritsahharor rissahhar Ivil to be kept up late. - iva 
mitsahhar. 
[J' oJ" 
~.A- sahrag Ivil to blaze (of fire). -vn sahraga, 
tisahriig; ava misahrag. 
I J. oJ" 
J+- sihil (a) Ivil to become easy. -vn sihuula, suhuula . 
J+- sahal (i) Ivil to contract diarrhoea. 
~.Jf- su.huula Inl ease, facility. bi-suhuula easily. 
J+- sahl I ladj "I easy, convenient. sahli zayyi /urb 
il-mayya ... as easy as pie. 2/n pi suhuullla plain, flat 
tract of land. 2b field, meadow. 
~ sahlan: rahlan wa-sahlan see rahlan . 
J+-i rashallell easier/easiest . 
J~! rishaallnl diarrhoea. II ril-rishaal il- rabyat[ coc-
cipiosis (fowl disease). 
~I- saahiiJ ladjl easy, convenient. 
J+-;I ritsahal or rissahal Ivil to be afflicted with 
diarrhoea. - iva mitsihil. 
J+...;I rinsahal = ritsahal. -iva minsihil. 
J+... sahhil Ivtl to make easy, facilitate. l:J-al:Jaawil 
rasahhil muhimmil-ak I will try to facilitate your task. 
IIrabb-i-na ysahhil may our Lord make (things) easy! 
(said when faced with a problem). - (raliaah) yisahhil-
lak may God make (things) easy for you! -vn tashiil; 
ava/pva misahhil. 
J.f-i tashiil (n pi -aat, tasahiill facility, facilitation. fii 
tashilaat irtimaniyya bin-nisba lit-tuggaar there are cre-
dit facilities for merchants.lIl:Jasab it-tasahiil depending 
on circumstances, as in I:J-ama/fi l:Jaal-i macaa bi-sgaara 
bi-fingaal e;ahwa l:Jasab it-Iasahiil yalni I'll soften him 
up with a cigarette or a cup of coffee, as appropriate. 
Jf-. musahhillnl I Facilitator (epithet of God). ya 
musahhil ya rabb ... make things easy, Lord (said when 
faced with a problem). 2 Ipl -utI laxative. 
J,;-;I ritsahhil or ri6sahhil Ivil passive of sahhil. 
II ritsahhilli-l:Jaal sabiil-ak ... push off! - iva mitsahhil. 
~l...;1 ritsaahil or rissaahillvil I to behave with leni-
ence, indulgence or tolerance. 2 to behave with negli-
gence or carelessness. - vn tasaahul; ava mitsaahil, 
mutasaahiiT . 

J·O fJ'" 
438 
J+.-;-I rislashill/vt/ to consider easy, find easy. xad 
........... 1 ritsahmidor rissahmidlvi/l to be levelled. 2 to 
iJ-fuvla iii b-yislashil-ha w-saab is-1a[ba he took the 
be settled. - vn lisahmiid; iva milsahmid. 
work he finds easy and left what was difficult. 2 to select 
for easiness. rislashil su raal mil-ilneen wi-gaawib [alee 
pick the easier of the two questions and answer it. -vn 
rislishaal; ava/pva mislashil. 
1 J t V" 
J.+-li ris-suheellprop nl[aslronJ Canopus.1I warra(a) 
s-suheel yitla[ mineen to give (s.o.) a hard time. 
- ~ J tV" 
~ 
sihliyya Icoll nl small salted grey mullet (Mugil 
seheli). -also siheeli. 
~o.- sihliyyaaya Ipl -aall unit noun of sihliyya. 
I r t V" 
rf- sahm I Inl 1 Ipl sihaaml arrow. - Ipl rishum, 
rushum, rashum, suhuma J I 2 share, stock certificate. 
3 land measure equal to 7.293 square metres. 4 drive 
shaft of a water-wheel (see PI.E, 10). 
rAt.. saahim Ivil to share, participate (with one's re-
sources). Ija-Isaahim bi-kaam fil-mafruu[ i1-xayri da 
how much will you contribute to this charity project? 
Ilfirka msahma joint-stock company. -vn musahma; 
ava misaahim. 
rAL... musaahim In ·1 shareholder, stockholder. 
rAL.;1 ritsaahim or rissaahim Ivil 1 (impersonal) pas-
sive of saahim. di mafarii[ljukumiyya ma-b-yitsahim-f' 
fiiha these are government projects one can't partici-
pate in. 2 to share or participate (mutually). -ava/iva 
mitsaahim. 
1 r tV" 
rf- sahhim Ivil to look concerned or preoccupied. -vn 
lashiim; ava misahhim. 
~ 
lashiima linst n, pI -aall concerned or preoccu-
pied expression. 
3 r tV" 
rf- sahm 2 InI[mu.,' name given to the note G on the 
first space above the stan. 
~ r t ,.,.. 
..I.o.f- sahmid Ivt/ 1 to level. even. rimbaarlfJ ibladu 
ysah,,,,du f-faarl[ tjuaaaam bel-lla yesterday they be-
gan to level the street in front 01 our house. 2 to settle, 
clear up. xallii-hu.m yisahmidu l-maw4uu[ da tjabl' rna 
yiltjilib li-xnaafia Ijamya have them settle this matter 
before it changes into a serious dispute. -vn sahmada; 
ava/pva misahmid. 
.J t V" see ~ tV": sahw, sahwa 
~ tV" 
<.If- sihi (a) Ivil to become heedless or inattentive. 
ris-sawwaatj sihi fwayya w-fJfJ1al fJadsa the driver was 
distracted briefly and there was an accident. gooz-i sihi 
[ala I-rakl' w-faat my husband forgot about the food 
and it burned. sihiil[an 1alaal i1-1ubfJ I forgot to per-
form the early morning prayer. sihyu fl1-1ala they over-
looked part of the prayer ritual. IIraalj [alayya sahw 
I had a lapse of memory. -vn sahayaan, sahw; ava 
sahyaan, saahi; pva mashi. 
11 suhi [ala to slip the mind of, as in kunt' mafmula watjl 
i1-ma[aad suhi [alayya w-ma-ruljl'-fI was busy at the 
time of the appointment, it slipped my mind, and so 
I didn't go. 
""..... sahwa linst nI a lapse of memory. raaljil[alayya 
sahwa I had a lapse of memory: II [ala sahwa by sur-
prise, as in xad-ni (or gaa-li) [ala sahwa he took me by 
surprise, he caught me unawares. 
.;,t..- sahyaan 
ladj 
·1 
forgetful, 
inattentive, 
absent-minded. 
~t.. saahi lladj ·1"" sahyaan. 2/adj pI sawaahil de-
ceptively innocent-looking, deep (of persons). laljl 
is-sawaahi dawaahi [provJ "" still waters run deep. 
<.If-i rasha lelll morelmost forgetful, absent-minded 
etc. 2 morelmost innocent-looking. 
~ 
sahha Ivtl 1 to distract, make inattentive. tj81ad 
yisahhii-ni I-Ijadd' ma l-tjatr' faal he kept me distracted 
until I missed the train. 2 to take advantage of the 
inattention of. sahhaa-ni w-Ijatt' f-geeb-i l-mafJfa;a he 
took advantage of my being distracted to put the wallet 
in my pocket. -vn lashiyya; ava misahhi. 
~I ritsahha or rissahha Ivil passive of sahha. -iva 
milsahhi. 
~I rislasha "" sahha 2. -ava mislashi. 
J~tV" 
J.e+... siheeli Icoll nI small salted grey mullet (Mugil 
seheli). -also sihliyya . 
~..I\.J V" 
~),... sawaari <P suwdrf> Ipl nI Imill cavalry. 
lI[amuud is-sawaari Pompey's Pillar (in Alexanoria). 
V" ..I \.J V" 
V")I,... sawaaris InI[obsolJ horse-drawn bus. 

'.J ...,. 
.L.. saaf2 (U) Ivil to deteriorate, go bad. fal:Jwaal-i 
saafit my situation worsened. -vn sawafaan. suuf. 
saww . 
• L.. saafJ (i) I Ivtl to wrong. act wrongly with respect 
\0. sifnaa-kum fi-feeh how have we wronged you? 
II fallaah la ysif-kum may God not harm you! (said to a 
beggar when refusing alms). 2 Ivil to be harmful. da 
bi-ysiif Ii-hay fit i/-bariid it is deleterious to the Post 
Office. 
'''- suuf Inl badness, bad state.·lIsuuf i/-l:Ja;~ bad luck. 
-suuf tafaahum misunderstanding. - ¥aali w-suuf keel 
expensive and underweight. 
~ saww Inl badness.llyasaww i baJct-i oh, the bad luck 
I have! -naas saww bad people. - f~bur lala gaar 
is-saww -la-yirl:Jalla-tgii-lu dahya [provJ bide your time 
with an evil neighbour -either he will move away or 
misfortune will befall him. 
.~ siwwa In pi -aat. siwawl pudendum. 
. :s- sayyif 
ladj 
°1 
bad. 
sayyif 
iI-faxlaaq 
bad-mannered. 
;.:;.. sayyifa In pi -aatl sin, misdeed. II raal:J fakaffar 
sayyifaat-u I'll give him a hard time. 
i,,-i faswa f lell worselworst. da feeh da ya faswa f ma 
xalaq rabb-i-na what does this mean, you worst of all 
God's creation! 
I.SJL.. masaawi. 
masaawif Ipl 
nl I evil deeds. 
2 shortcomings. 
• l...;1 fitsaaf or fissaaf Ivil passive of saaf2. fitsaaf or 
fitsaaf filee he was wronged. -iva mitsaaf. 
• L..;I finsaaf = fitsaaf. -iva minsaaf. 
i~ sawwaf Ivtl to impair, harm. dool sawwafu 
sumlit-na f-kull" l:Jitta they've hurt our good name 
everywhere. -vn taswii f; avalpva misawwa f. 
i~1 fitsawwaf or fissawwaf Ivil to be impaired. be 
harmed. - iva mitsawwa f. 
.L..i fasaaff Ivil to do wrong.lumr-i ma kunt i musiif 
/i-l:Jaqq-ak I've never done you any wrong. fana 
fasa ft-ak fi-l:Jaaga have I offended you in any way? - vn 
fisaafa T• fasaafa; ava musiifT. 
~.J...,. 
..,..1; sawaab Inl merit, reward accruing from pious 
deeds. bi-yiqru l-xatma wi-yiwhibuu-lu sawaab-ha they 
read the Koran through and donate the merit of it to 
him. II fiksab /iyya sawaab do me a good turn (and it will 
earn you a reward in heaven). 
~l:.. masaaba: bi-masaabit on a par with, tantamount 
to. fit-taharrub miq-qariiba b-masaabit sirqa tax eva-
sion is just like stealing. 
439 
.;~.J...,. 
.J'."- soobar. suubar <Engl> ladj invarl super. 
sagaayir suubar king-size cigarettes. banziin suubar 
high-grade petrol. 
.;'::".J...,. 
;,,- sootar Iprop nl name of a quarter in Alexandria. 
..; '::".J ...,. 
~,,- siwitf 
<Engl> 
In 
pi -aatl 
I switch. 
2 switchboard. 3 switchboard operator. 
[,.J ...,. 
~,,- sooga Inl hashish. 
.; [,.J ...,. 
.r:-,,- soogar <perh It assicurare> Ivtl I to register 
(mail). (ard i msoogar registered parcel. 2 to guarantee. 
fu¥li msoogar guaranteed work. 3 to lock up well. qiJli 
msoogar (1) a type of strong lock. (2) blockhead • 
numskull. -vn misogra; avalpva misoogar. musoogar. 
.r:-"...; 1 fitsoogar or fissoogar Ivil passive of soogar. 
- iva mitsoogar. 
I c..J...,. see also C. I.S ...,. 
CL.. saal:J I (u) Ivil to tour, travel. -vn siyaal:Ja; ava 
saayil:J. 
:i.>L,.. siyaal:Ja Inl tourism. waziir is-siyaal:Ja Minister 
for Tourism . 
..s>L,.. siyaal:Ji ladjl tourist(ic). 
(:!L.. saayil:J In pI suwwaal:J. suyyaal:JI tourist . 
Cl~ sawwaal:J In °1 itinerant, wanderer. 
C~ sawwal:J Ivtl la to cast, hurl, fling (over a long 
distance). sawwal:Jt i(-(uuba min if-fibbaak I flung the 
stone out of the window. sawwal:J iI-fikra di min dimaa¥-
ak throw this idea out of your head. Ib (alsosayyal:J) to 
spill out (over a large area). bi-nubdur iI-¥alla 
w-nsawwal:J laleeha I-mayya we sow the grain and then 
flood 
it 
with water. 
2 to put off, postpone. 
ma-tsawwal:J-J iI-mawquul don't go on delaying the 
matter. 3 to ruin, make a mess of. sawwal:J id-dinya he 
caused a lot of trouble. l:J-asawwal:J-ak I'll destroy you! 
-
Ivi/4 to wander aimlessly, drift. markib misawwal:Ja 
a drifting boat. -vn taswiil:J; avalpva misawwal:J. 
C ~I fitsawwal:J or fissawwal:J Ivil passive of sawwal:J. 
- iva mitsawwal:J. 
1 c..J ...,. 
c,,-1 fiswil:J ladj. fern sool:Jal black (euphemistic for 
fiswid 2a). - also fiswix. 

I' 
C.J V" 
tl... saax (u) Ivi/l to sink. rigl-i saaxitfir-ramlmy foot 
sank into the sand. 2 to faint. qumt' min lak-kursi 
w-fana daayix wi-rool:J-i sayxa I got up from the chair 
dizzy and feeling fai~t. -vn sawaxaan; ava saayix. 
1 • 
C.J V" 
t.,..! fiswix /adj, fem sooxal black (euphemistic for 
fiswid 2a). - also fiswil:J. 
I:J.JV" 
.)l... saad (u) Ivil to rule, become dominant. (lumr) 
iI-l:Jasuud ma ysuud [prov] the envious never rule. -vn 
siyaada; ava saayid. 
i.)l".. siyaada Inl I power, authority. da ~aal:Jib sulta 
w-siyaada he's the all-powerful boss. 2 sovereignty. 
3 siyaadit polite or formal title of, and form of address 
or reference to, a man or woman'" sir, madam. siyaadit 
id-duktoor the Doctor. mif ism' siyadt-ik magda isn't 
your name Magda, ma'am? 
..Ie- siid Inl I master. siid ii-beet the master of the 
house. siid-ak wi-taag raas-ak ... I'm your lord and 
master, I'm better than you from every point of view. 
fin kaan lak lana iI-kalb 8I:Jaaga qul-Iu yasiid-i [prov] if 
you need something from a dog call him master. 
2 respectful form of address or reference to a grand-
father. 3 siid-i familiar form of address to any man. xud 
ya siid-i take this, my friend. 4 siid-i and sid-na title 
accorded to any venerated Muslim religious figure. 
S lin constr, w masc referent! the best of, the finest. fana 
siid min yit{rab iI-luud I'm the best lute-player around. 
siid iI-mafkulaat the finest food. - Ipl fasyaadl 
6 demon, spirit. 
~ sayyid In pi saadal I title of, and polite form of 
address and reference to, a mal1. fana ~addart if-Jiik 
raqam kaza lis-sayyid [ulaan I issued cheque number 
such-and-such 
to 
Mister 
So-and-so. 
ya 
saada 
nahar-kum saliid gentlemen, good morning! 2 lord. 
sayyid-na title accorded to a venerated religious figure 
(e.g., a sheikh, a prophet or (among Christians) a 
bishop, a patriarch). fis-sayyid (iI-masiil:J) the Lord 
Christ. - (also fis-sayyid) Iprop n/3 male given name. 
IIsayyid qifta hippopotamus. 
i~ sayyida In pi -aatll title of, and form of address 
or reference to, a married woman. 2 title of a Muslim 
female 
saint. 
II fis-sayyida 
(1) Sayyida 
Zaynab. 
(2) name of the quarter in which the mosque of Sayyida 
Zaynab is located. - fis-sayyidaat the women saints 
(specifically, the descendants of the Prophet's daughter 
Fatima) buried in Cairo. 
440 
. 
1S..Ie- sayyidi ladjl pertaining to Christ. 
1:J.JV" 
.).,..i fiswid ladj, fem sooda, pi suudl I black. qutta 
sooda a black cat. fid-dinya baqit sooda zayy i/-Ieel it 
became as black as night. fis-suud the black races, 
negroes. II fabu I-fiswid [slang] opium. -qalb-u fiswid 
he bears grudges and is unkind. 2a (also euphemistical-
Iy, fiswix, fiswil:J) awful, catastrophic. baxt-i fiswid my 
luck is awful. ya nhaar fiswid what a black day! ya sana 
sooda good God! oh dear! IImisik [id-duxxaan maska 
sooda he got a hell of an addiction to tobacco. 
2b shameful. lamlit-ak is-sooda your shameful deed. 
3 (daaf) is-sooda melancholia. 
.).,.. i faswad lell blackerlblackest. 
ISJb.,.. sawdaawi ladj 
·1 
melancholic. 
mazaag 
sawdaawi a melancholic temperament (one of the four 
cardinal humours). 
.)1.,.. sawaad Inl blackness. ya wei-hum ya sawaad lel-
hum 0 blackest woe for them! IItilmii kida lafaan 
sawaad luyuun-i ... (don't expect me to believe) you're 
doing that just for my sake! 
,:,b.,...Jl fis-sudaan Iprop nI Sudan. See· further 
under .J :J.J V" 
" 
Jb.,.. suda~ni I/adj ·1 Sudanese. 1I([uul) sudaani 
peanuts. 2 In • and pI -yyal a Sudanese. 
.)~ sawwid Ivtl I to blacken. II sawwidt , wiff-i-na 
• you've disgraced us. 2 to make a rough copy of, draft. 
- Ivi/3 to turn black. -vn taswiid; ava misawwid. 
i~.,.... taswiida In pI -aatl draft, rough copy. 
.)~1 fitsawwid or fissawwid Ivil passive of sawwid. 
-iva mitsawwid. 
;.,..1 fiswadd Ivil to become black. II fis-samak iswadd 
the fish has rotted. -vn fiswidaadT; ava miswidd. 
i.)J-" muswadda, miswidda In pI -aatl draft, rough 
copy. 
.J :J.J V" see also 1:J.J V" 
,:,.).,.. sawdin Ivtl to Sudanize. -vn sawdana; avalpva 
misawdin. 
,:,.).,....1 fitsawdin or fissawdin Ivil passive of sawdin. 
-iva mitsawdin. 
I .J .J V" 
J~ Saari (u) Ivil I to become agitated. fil-bal:Jr' saar 
the sea became rough. 2 to blow up in anger. 3 to erupt 
(of a volcano). 4 to rebel, rise up. riI-waad da 
mutamarrid saayir lala kull 8 I:Jaaga that kid is unsub-
ordinate, rebelling against everything. -vn s~wra, 
sawaraan; ava saafirT, saayir. 

;t: saar2 (i) Ivtl to excite, stimulate. bi-yilzif bi-tariitja 
tsiir il- 'lal~aab he plays in a nerve-racking way. fJaaga 
bi-tsiir ihtimaam-i something which excites my interest. 
-vn 'lisaara; ava musiir; pya musaar. 
0.); sawra I In pI -aat, -aatl revolution, rebellion, 
inJiurrection. 
..F:'.); sawragi In pI -yya/l rebel, trouble-maker, agi-
tator. 2 hot-tempered person, firebrand. 
}l: saa'lir In 
pI suwwaarl revolutionary, rebel, 
insurgent. 
.)~ masaar l 1 Inl stimulus, sput. 
.)l:i 'lasaar Ivtll to excite, stimulate. riwaaya musiira a 
thrilling story. 2 to raise, pose, bring up. 'lasart 
il-mawquul min siniin I brought the matter up years 
ago. -/the literary passive occurs! min kaam sana 
I-mufkila di 'lusiirat how many years ago was this prob-
lem raised? -vn 'lisaara; ava musiir; pya musaar. 
.)\,:,;,,1 'listasaar1 
Ivtl to excite, stimulate. -vn 
'listisaara; ava mustasiir; pya mustasaar. 
1 .) .J ..,.. 
.).,... sa war, sawar (i) Ivtl to numb the hearing of, 
deafen. 'liI-mazziika I-lalya sawarit-ni the loud music 
deafened me. -vn sawaraan; ava saawir; ava maswuur. 
0.).,... sawra2 linst n, pI -aatl a deafening of the ears. 
.),....1 'litsawar, 'litsawar or 'lissawar, 'lissawar Ivil pas-
sive of sawar. - iva mitsiwir. 
.).,...;1 'linsawar = 'litsawar. - iva minsiwir. 
3 .) .J ..,.. 
.).,... suur In pI 'laswaarl surrounding wall, fence. 
0.).,... suura In pI suwarl sura, chapter of the Koran. 
o.).,...i 'laswira 
In 
pI 'lasaawirl I bracelet. 2 arm 
bracelet, armlet. 3 cuff. 
o;..,...! 'lisweera In pI -aatl = 'laswira . 
.)~ sawwar Ivtl to surround with a fence. -vn taswiir; 
ava/pya misawwar . 
.)~I 'litsawwar or 'lissawwar Ivil to be fenced around. 
-iva mitsawwar. 
4 .) .J ..,.. 
l,.).,... surya Iprop nl Syria. 
loS.).,... suuri Iladj "I Syrian. 2 In "I a Syrian. 
5 .).J..,.. see IJ.) I .J ..,.. : sawaari 
J.).J ..,.. 
In- sooratj Ivil to faint. tjaladna nnakkit Ii-yaayit ma 
kunna fJa-nsooratj mid-difJk we sat around telling jokes 
441 
until we were about to faint with laughter. - vn misortja; 
ava misooratj. 
I ..,...J..,.. 
IJ'.J"" suus I Icoll nI weevil(s), borer(s). 
..... .J"" suusa/unit n pI -aatl a weevil, a borer.llda raagil 
suusa he's a scheming creep . 
~I-.,... susaaya = suusa. 
..,..::,.. sawwis I/vtl 18 to cause to decay. 'lis-sukkar 
bi-ysawwis is-sinaan sugar rots the teeth. Ib to make 
worm-eaten or weevily. 2 Ivil 28 to decay, become de-
cayed. 2b to be or become worm-eaten or weevily. -vn 
taswiis; ava/pya misawwis. 
..r-"'" taswiis Inli dry rot. 2 {dent] caries. 
IJ'~I 'litsawwis or 'lissawwis Ivi/l to decay, become 
decayed. 2 to become worm-eaten or weevily. -ava 
mitsawwis. 
IJ'~ tasawwus1 Inll dry rot. 2 (dent] caries . 
1 ..,...J..,.. 
IJ'.J"" suus2: rubb i suus liquorice, sweets, liquorice 
pastilles. lirtj i suus liquorice root, liquorice . 
I .) ..,.. .J ..,.. 
IJ""!..J"" suwisra or siwisra <It Svizzera> Iprop nl 
Switzerland . 
..sJ""!."'" suwisri or siwisri Iladj "I Swiss. 2/n "I a 
Swiss . 
4J..,...J..,.. 
':"-.J"" sawsan Icoll nl lily of the valley . 
~.J"" sawsana lunit n, pI -aatl a lily of the valley . 
J".J..,.. 
j,.,... soot' In pI siyaat/lash, whip. 
~.,... sooti: tatliim sooti {hort] splice-grafting. 
t.J..,.. see I t I..,..: sawaali 
t.J..,.. 
t~ sawway Ivtl to justify. ma-fii-f fJaaga tsawway iIIi 
fJ~al minnak nothing can justify what you've done. -vn 
taswiiy; ava misawway, musawwiy. 
t~ musawwiy 
In 
pI -aatl 
justification. 
IImusawwiyaat it-talyiin papers necessary for appoint-
ment to a job, job credentials. 
t \....:;...1. 'listasaay1 Ivtl to find palatable. -vn 'listisaaya; 
ava mustasiiy; pya mustasaay. 
.J.J..,.. 
~I..... masaafa 
In 
pI -aatl 
I distance. 
sibaafJit 

iI-masafaat i[-[iwiila long distance swimming. 2 period 
of time. bafiaa-Ii masaafa (awiila mafuft-uufit's been a 
long time since 1 saw him. fi-masaafit rubG' saaGa with-
in a quarter of an hour .III:J-ariib masaafit is-sikka I'll be 
straight back. 3 [mus] 3a interval. lal:Jn' mitkarrar Gala 
masafaat muxtalifa a melody repeated at varying inter-
vals. 3b interval, distance between the frets of a Guud. 
11 masaafit ma Iconjl while. masaafit ma tgiib iI-Geej 
yikuun iI-Gaja gihiz by the time you've got the bread, 
dinner will be ready . 
...;~ sawwif Ivt and viI to delay, hold up. min l:Jafifi 
iI-muwagaf finnu ysawwif (f)iI-fawraafi the civil ser-
vant has the right to delay papers. -vn taswiif; ava/pva 
misawwif· 
...; ~I fitsawwif or fissawwif Ivil to be delayed, be 
held up. - iva mitsawwif. 
I 
-4.J .J t.J" 
Jl.. saafi2 (u) Ivtll to drive, herd. bi-tsuufi iI-bihiima 
btaaGit i[-[ambuuja she drives the beast that turns the 
water-wheel. 2 to drive, steer. tiGraf tisuufi Garabiyya 
do you know how to drive a car? 3 to get (s.o.) to act as 
intermediary or intercessor. sUfit B Gala faxuu-ya 
fumm-i [prov] (I had my mother straighten out things 
between my brother and me) == in a dispute call for help 
from someone who cares about the welfare of both 
parties. IIsaayifi Galeek in-nabi please, 1 beg you. 4 to 
adopt an attitude of, affect. finta leeh saayifi iI-Gind why 
are you being so stubborn? saafi iI-habal Galajfaytana 
he played stupid to cover up his mischief. - Ivil 5 to 
drive. suufi Gala mihl-ak drive slowly! rux1it siwaafia 
driving licence. 6 to persist, carryon beyond what is 
called for. ma-tsufif' fiiha really, it's enough now! cut it 
out! II saafi (fid-)dalaal to play hard-to-get. -vn siwaafia, 
siyaafia; ava saayifi. 
JI.- siyaafi Inl I sequence, course. siyaafi ik-kalaam 
the thread of the conversation. 2 level. fig-ganayni 
YfilJ1filJ1 in-nabataat Gajaan tibfia syaafi waal:Jid the 
gardener trims the plants to make them even. - Ipl 
-aatl 3 intermediary, go-between. 
JI~ .rawwaafi In ·1 driver. sawwaafi taks taxi-driver. 
J\....;I fitsaafi or fissaafi Ivil passive of saafi2. -iva 
mitsaafi· 
1 J.J t.J" 
J.,... suufi In pI faswaafi, siwaafil I bazaar, market, 
market-place. suufi is-samak the fish market. taryiir 
iI-Gumla f-mlJ1r' kaan lu sUUfi zayy il-bi4.aaGa the 
changing of money in Egypt had its own market just like 
any commodity. II fibn' suufi a born businessman. 
442 
2 market (for a commodity), demand. sac:aat bi-yibc;a 
b-fiirf' saar wi-saGaat bi-c;irfeen - huwwa w-suuC;-u 
sometimes it costs one piastre. sometimes two -it all 
depends on the market. 
..;.,... SUUfii ladj invarl of poor quality. saaGa suuC;i 
cheap-quality watch. jurI' suuC;i shoddy work. 
..;.,... siwafii ladj • and pI -yyal vulgar, plebeian, 
common. 
~.,... suweefia In pI -aatl small informal market. 
J~ sawwafi Ivtl to market, put on the market. -vn 
taswiifi; avalpva misawwat;. 
.j!""'; taswiifi Inl marketing. bi-yidris taswiiC; he's 
studying marketing. 
J~I fitsawwafi or fissawwafi Ivil I passive of 
sawwafi. 2 to go shopping. go buying. - avaliva 
mitsawwat; . 
I .!l .J t.J" 
.!ll.,... siwaak In pI -aat, fiswikal a small stick with a 
softened tip used, especially in the villages, as a kind of 
tooth-brush. 
.!ll"..... miswaak In pI masawiikl = siwaak. 
.!l~ sawwik Ivtl to clean (the teeth) with as;waak. -vn 
taswiik; avalpva misawwik. 
.!l~1 fitsawwik or fissawwik Ivil I to be brushed 
clean with a siwaak (of the teeth). 2 to clean one's teeth 
with a siwaak. -avalpva mitsawwik. 
1 .!l.J t.J" 
AS.,... sooka In pI siwak,.sokaatl sharp edge. naGGamt' 
sookit lool:J iI-fiizaaz I rounded off the sharp edge of the 
pane of glass. 
- y.!l.J t.J" 
~.,... sawikbees (also sukubees) Inl fine fabric used 
for making handkerchiefs. 
r.J t.J" 
rJl.. saawim Ivtl to bargain or haggle with. ma-fiif 
fayda min misawmit it-tuggaar fi-siGr' mul:Jaddad 
there's no point in bargaining with merchants over a 
fixed price. -vn misawma; ava misaawim. 
rJ\....;1 fitsaawim or fissaawim Ivil to bargain with one 
another. - ava mitsaawim. 
.J .J t.J" see 
~.J' t.J" : saww, siwwa 
I ~.J t.J" 
~~ yiswa Ivt, imperf onlyl to have (the) worth (of). 
da ma-yiswaafthis isn't worth (the price). ma-tiswaa-j 

ba~~a liiha it's not worth a glance. ma-yiswaa-j (jirjeen 
it's not worth two piastres. II rilli yiswa wi-iii ma-yiswaa-
j every Tom, Dick and Harry, as in xalla iii yiswa wi-iii 
ma-yiswaa-j yibahdil-ni he let every Tom, Dick and 
Harry disgrace me . 
..s.,.., siwa Inl I levelness, evenness. hiyya wil-l.Jeeta 
siwa waa!Jid it is flush with the wall. 2 cooking. 
ma-b-taxud-ji siwa ktiir it doesn't take much cooking. 
n~~ i siwa half-cooked. bee4. n~~ i siwa soft-boiled 
eggs. - Iprepl 3f Iw suff siwaa other than, except. 
ma-lhaa-j siwaa-k ya rabb sh~ has no-one but you, 
Lord. 
I.,.., sawa J I ladvl together. ritcajju sawa they had 
dinner together. !Ja-yigra reeh law mifiit bil-!Jalteen 
sawa what will happen if I do both things together? 
2 ladj invarl alike, equal. huwwa wil-!Jumaar sawa he 
and the donkey are just the same, he cannot be disting-
uished from a donkey. IIcala !Jaddin sawa (it's) six of 
one and half a dozen of the other, it makes no 
difference. 
.1.,.., .1.,.., sawa 2 , sawaarr, suwaar Icorrelative conj/: 
sawa ... sawa (or raw or ya) whether ... or. tib(ja 
!Ja-titgawwiz-u sawa jta'ifalit sawa ma-jta'ifalit-j she'll 
marry him whether she gets a job or not. 
.:.t:- siyyaan ladj invarl equal. kull-u-kum candi 
siyyaan in my opinion you are all equal. 
..s:-'" sawwa Ivtl I to give a straight profile to. sawwu 
~ufuf-kum even up your lines! ril-!Jaddaad bi-ysawwi 
kaff il-faas the blacksmith is straightening the edge of 
the hoe. sawwajanab-u he trimmed his moustache. 2 to 
settle, arrange. 
baCdi xamsiin sana sawweena 
l-masaa ril il-caskariyya after fifty years we have settled 
the military issues. !Ja-ysawwi kulli dyuun-ak he'll set-
tle all your debts.lIsawwa I-hawaayil he's done terrific 
things. 3 to cook. (jabl i ma tit!Jan il-bunn i laazim 
tisawwi I-fitiir before she grinds the coffee she must 
bake the fitiir. II rasawwii-k min i4.-4.arb I'll give you 
what for! I'll fix you! - vn taswiyya; ava/pva misawwi. 
11 camal wi-sawwa intensive form of camal, as in ribn-i 
camal wi-bn-i sawwa my son did great things, racmil 
reeh rasawwi reeh what on earth am I to do? camalit 
wi-sawwit fiyya she caused me all manner of harm. 
~.,....; taswiya, 
taswiyya 
In 
pi -aatl 
settlement, 
agreement. 
..s ~I ritsawwa or rissawwa Ivil passive of sawwa. - iva 
mitsawwi. 
..sJl.. saawa Ivtl I to render level or even. ril-infigaar 
saawa I-cimaara bil- rar4. the explosion levelled the 
building. bi-nsaawi l-rar4. i (jab/' ma ni!Jrit-ha we level 
the land before ploughing it. jacr' msaawi neatly trim-
443 
med hair. saawi s-siriir tidy the bed! ril-loon bitaac-u 
msaawi kull-u maca bac4.-u its colour is even through-
out. II kidb i msaawi wala sud(j i mbacza(j [prov] consis-
tent lying is more credible than garbled truth. 2 to have 
the worth of. ril-¥iweeja l-maksuura di bi-tsaawi talaata 
gneeh this broken bracelet is worth three pounds. 
xamsa w-talaata ysaawu tamanya five and three make 
eight. -vn misawiyya; ava/pva misaawi. 
olJl..... musawaah r Inl equality. ril-m usa waah fil-fura~ 
equality of opportunity. 
..sJl...;1 ritsaawa or rissaawa Ivil I passive of saawa. 
2 to be equal. ragzaa r mutasawya equal parts. ril-fa(jiir 
bi-yissaawa maca l-¥ani baed il-moot poor and rich are 
equal after death. -vn tasaawi; ava mitsaawi, mutsaawi. 
..s.f-I ristawa Ivi/la to become cooked, finish cook-
ing. ril- rakl i mistiwi the food is ready to eat. Ib to 
ripen, mature. (juuta mistiwiyya (over) ripe tomatoes. 
xajab mistiwi seasoned timber. 2 to be fed up, be at the 
end of one's tether. ristawa min il-mafy he's sick and 
tired of walking. 'lana staweet I've had enough! 3 to 
become even. IIxatt il-istiwa the Equator. -vn ristiwa; 
ava mistiwi. 
..s.Y--' mustawa In pi mustawayaatl I standard, level. 
mudarrisiin cala mustawa l-gamca teachers at the uni-
versity level. fi-mustawa sat!J il-mayya on a level with 
the surface of the water. foo(j mustawa in-na;ar above 
eye level. 2 class, status. 'lana mifmin mustawaa-ha I'm 
not of her class. 
Z ..; .J..r see ~.J..r: masaawi 
~";.J..r 
-,!.,..JI ris-siweed Iprop nl Sweden. 
..s-'!.,.., siwiidi I/adj *1 Swedish. 2/n * and pi siwiidl a 
Swede. 3/n, no pll (Swedish) physical exercises. 
..r ";.J ..r 
IJ"!..,..JI I'is-suwees Iprop nl Suez. qanaat is-suwees the 
Suez Canal. 
...; ..; .J..r see z..;.;, y : bani sweef 
";..r 
...r' si Iw foil name/l informal term of address or refer-
ence to a man (among the lower classes or between 
intimates). 2 respectful form of address (when used by 
an uneducated man addressing his superior). 
I ~ ";..r see 
~ I ..r : saa r I 

:z _ I.S V" see -.J V": saaf/, saaf], sayyif, sayyifa, 
musiif 
I ~ I.S V" 
.,..\.. saab (i) Ivt/ I to allow, permit. Ija-tsib-ha tiftayal 
are you going to let her work? ma-tsib-nii-J faylat don't 
let me make a mistake.la to leave alone, leave be. siib 
i1-b!Jab maftuulj leave the door open. siib ir-raagilli-
hmuum-u leave the man to his worries. sib-ni f-Ijaal-i let 
me be! leeh bi-tsiib iI-walad yi[ayyat kida why does she 
leave the boy crying like that? IIsaayib dat;n-u he's 
letting his beard grow. lb to leave behind. fana saayib 
miraat-i fil-ba/ad I've left my wife in the village. saabit 
/antit-ha fil-beet she left her bag at home. II mif Ija-nsiib 
Ijat;t;-i-na ma[aa we won't let him get away with it! 
lc to pass over, leave out. fiktib [ala satr' w-siib sa(r 
write on a line and skip a line. bi-tnat;t;i I-t;uuta nona/fa 
wi-tsiib iI-mistiwiyya she picks out the firm tomatoes 
and leaves the soft ones. 3a to leave, bequeath. gidd-u 
sab-Iu I-[imaara his grandfather left him the building. 
3b to leave, deposit. Ij-asib-Iak ik-kitaab maca 1-
bawwaab I'll leave the book with the doorman for you. 
3c to leave as an after-effect. fig-garlj' saab [alaama 
the wound left a scar. 4 to depart from, quit. sibt 
ingiltira min sanateen I left England two years ago. fiza 
lat;eet nafs-i ta[baan Ij-asiib if-Juyl' da if I find I'm 
getting tired I'll pack up this job. Sa to let go of, release. 
siib iI-ljabllet go ofthe rope! IIsiib fiid-ak (1) open your 
hand! (2) let go! Sb to let free, release. siib iI-mayya 
min iI-ljooqlet the water out of the sink. sib-ni [alee let 
me at him! - Ivil 6 to go loose, go uncontrolled. 
riI-ljabl' saab the rope went slack. maf~/-i saabit my 
joints went loose, I went limp. riI-bihiima saybafil-yeet 
the beast is loose in the field. fil-Ijanafiyyasayba the tap 
has been left on. Ilrukab-i saabit my knees turned to 
water. -batn-i saabit my bowels went loose. - riid-u 
sayba he's extravagant. -manaxiir-u sayba his nose is 
runny. - wis(-a-ha saayib she has a swaying walk. 
-[ut;da sayba granny knot. - fil-Ijikaaya saabit xaa/~ 
the whole affair fell apart. -saab [ala roolj-u he soiled 
himself. -roolj-u saabit he fainted. - fil-waad saab the 
boy ran wild, the boy strayed from the straight and 
narrow. - fil-maal is-saayib yi[allim is-sirt;a {prov] ,., 
unwatched property encourages theft. -vn sayabaan; 
ava saayib. 
11 saab [ala to mount (a female animal, of a male 
animal), as in riI-ljumaar saab [a/-Ijumaara the male 
ass mounted the female. - siib-ak min Ifem siib-ik min, 
pI sib-ku minI have done with! as in siib-ak mik-ka/aam 
i1-faariy da enough of this nonsense! siib-ik minnu 
444 
w-nirga[ liiki forget about him, now let's come back to 
you. 
'-:'!.\.. saayib ladjl for sale unpackaged. sukkar saayib 
sugar sold loose. laban saayib unbottled milk . 
.,..1....;1 fitsaab or fissaab Ivil passive of saab. -iva 
mitsaab. 
.,..1....;1 flnsaab = itsaab. -vn finsiyaab; iva minsaab. 
.,..~1 finsiyaabt Inli fluidity. 1 streamlining. 
..,..;... sayyib Ivt/ I to cause to leave. sayyibuu-ni I-balad 
they made me leave the country. 1 to cause to relin-
quish. sayyibt-u I-musaddas I made him drop the gun. 
3 to release. sayyib iI-mayyafiz-zar[ let the water onto 
the crops. fisma[ min hina w-sayyib min hina ,., let it in 
one ear and out the other. sayyib-Iu s-sur[ • [a/aan yigri 
loosen the reins so he'll ~un. II fif-Jarba sayyibit batn-i 
the laxative loosened my bowels. -vn tasyiib; ava 
misayyib. 
""';""1 fitsayyib or fissayyib Ivil passive of sayyib. -iva 
mitsayyib. 
..,..;.... tasayyub Inllaxity, laisser-faire. 
:z ~ I.S V" 
4",... seeba <perh T slpa from P> In pI -aatl trestle, 
tripod. - also sibya. 
[.I.S V" 
~ 
siiga Inl game resembling noughts and crosses. 
IIlja-nil[ab siiga [ala ba[q are we going to beat around 
the bush with each other? 
C. I.S V" see also I c..J V" 
c:. \.. saalj] (i) Ivil I to flow all over. riI-mayya saaljit 
[a/- farq the water flooded the floor .llIacr' saayilj loose 
flowing hair. 1 to tour, travel. nisiilj fi-blaad allaah we 
tour around everywhere. 3 to melt, become melted. 
xalli z-zibda tsiilj let the butter melt. r~a~ saayilj mol-
ten lead. IIkaanu saylj~in maca ba[q' fid-diljk win-
nukat they were in stitches with laughter and jokes. 
( 
-bint' saylja a playful flirtatious girl. - kull' ma 
b-a/uf-ha kull' RIa b-asiilj fi-gama/-ha the more I see 
her the more I'm knocked over by her beauty. -vn 
sayaljaan; ava saayilj. 
~ 
sayyalj Ivtl la (also sawwalj) to spill out (over a 
large area). sayyaljt i1-mayya [ala I-balaa( I sloshed the 
water over the tiles. IIIj-asayyalj damm-ak I'll beat you 
bloody! - balwa msayyalja a real calamity. Ib to fill to 
overflowing. sayyalj iI-ljooq fill the sink to the brim! 
la to melt (down). sayyaljit diljn' liyyit iI-xaruuf she 
rendered the fat of the sheep's tail. bi-ysayyalju s-samn 
they clarify the butter. II fil-bint' di bi-tsayyalj-ni xaa/~ 

this girl really makes me melt with desire. - fil-mazziika 
msayyalJaa-ni the music has me really turned on. 2b to 
defrost (a refrigerator). 3 to heat (stale bread in order 
to soften it). - Ivi/4 to liquify. ril-ma[guun sayyalJ the 
paste became runny. - vn tasyiilJ; ava misayyalJ. 
~I fitsayyalJ or fissayyalJ Ivil passive of sayyalJ. -iva 
mitsayyalJ· 
t loS ..,.. 
t:: siix In pi fasyaax, siyaaxl 1 skewer. ril-kabaab 
bi-yinlJa((i fil-fasyaax [ala l-falJ'!' the kebab is put on 
skewers over the charcoal. 2 rod, bar. IIsiyaax IilJaam 
welding electrodes. 
~ loS..,.. see 
I ~.J ..,..: siid, sayyid, sayyida, sayyidi, 
siyaada 
I .) loS ..,.. 
445 
;l- saar 3 (i) Ivil to proceed. fig-ganaaza saarit fizzaay 
what route did the funeral follow? xa((i seer route. II seer 
yimiin right turn (traffic). - vn seer; ava saayir. 
.r.- seer Inl 1 conduct, comportment. lJusn is-seer wis-
suluuk good conduct. lliahaadit seer wi-suluuk charac-
ter reference, testimonial. - In pi suyuurl2 (machine) 
belt, conveyor or drive belt. 3 strap. 
'.r.- siira In pi siyarl 1 topic, subject. futftf-i-na min 
is-siira di let's drop the subject. II wi-siirit-... and the like 
of ... , as ~n qutU[ il-lJafiif wil- fafyuun wi-sirit-hum 
damn hashish, opium and all that! -kunna [-sirt-ak we 
were talking about you. -gaab (fi-)siirit (1) to mention, 
speak of, as in ma-bi-tgib-Ji sirt-u fig-gawaab she 
doesn't mention him in the letter, gibna siirit iI_qU((i ga 
ynu(( '" speak of the devil! (2) to speak badly of, as in 
gaybiin fi-siirit miin who are you running down? 
2 reputation. sirt-ak wisxa you have a bad reputation. 
3 folk epic, collection of narrative prose and verse ab-
out a folk hero. 4 biography, vita. fis-siira (n-
nabawiyya) the biography of the Prophet Muhammad . 
• )t;... sayyaaraf In pi -aatl car, automobile. qita[ 
riyaar sayyara(lt car spares. 
)L.. masaar2 Inll course. masaar iI-markib the ship's 
course. 2 gait (of a horse). 
;... sayyar Ivtl 1 to move, keep in motion.fuufwaalJid 
yisayyar if-furli fi-ryaab-i find someone to look after 
things in my absence. 2 to help (e.g., a child) relieve 
himself. xudi l-[ayyil sayyarii take the baby to the pot-
ty. 3 to streak, cause streaking in. fis-sabra l-wilJfa 
tsayyar i1-qumaaf bad quality dye streaks the cloth. 
- Ivi/4 to become streaky. wiff-u sayyar mi/-[araq his 
face was streaked with sweat. - vn tasyiir, tasyiir; aval 
pva misayyar. 
• ~ 
tasyiira In pi -aat, tasayiirl 1 instance noun of 
tasyiir. 2 body elimination. II tasyiirit mayya urination. 
;""1 fitsayyar or fissayyar Ivil 1 passive of sayyar 2 
and 3. 2 to relieve oneself. fil-[ayyil itsayyar [ala roolJ-
u the baby wet himself. - avaliva mitsayyar. 
J.-l... saayir Ivtl to humour, go along with. sayr-u 
l-lJadd i ma ti[raf faxrit-u feeh play along with him until 
you know what he's getting at. II misaayir fumuur-u he's 
getting along, he's managing nicely. -vn misayra; ava 
misaayir. 
2 .) loS..,.. see I.J loS vii> : misiir 
C.J loS ..,.. 
C.r.- siirig Inl sesame oil. 
~.r.- sirga In pi -aatl mill for pressing vegetable oil. 
zeet sirga vegetable (cooking) oil. 
J..i loS ..,.. 
J.r.- sayzal <Engl> Inl sisal (hemp). - also sizaal . 
..,..1oS..,.. 
..... 1..- siyaasa 
Inl 
la policy. 
Ib politics. 
2 tact. 
bi-Ylaamil in-naas bis-siyaasa he deals with people tact-
fully. lliidd id-durg i bis-siyaasa pull the drawer out 
gently. 
-rl..- siyaasi ladj *11 political. 2 diplomatic. fis-silk 
is-siyaasi the diplomatic corps. 
11 siyasiyyan ladvl politically. 
...,..-! l... saayis I In pi suyyaas, siyyaasl 1 stable groom. 
2 garage attendant. 
...,..-! l... saayis2 Ivtl to handle with adroit care, nurse 
along. saayis fumuur-ak handle your affairs with tact. 
riI-lJ~aan [aawiz misaysa the horse. needs a gentle 
hand. -vn misaysa; ava misaayis. 
...,..-! l...;1 fitsaayis or fissayis Ivil passive of saayis 2. - iva 
mitsaayis. 
- y ..,.. loS..,.. see ~ I y ..,.. ..,.. : saysabaan 
1oS..,..1oS..,.. 
...r- siisi 1 Icoll nl ponies. 2 lunit n, pi sayaasi/ a 
pony. 
j,1oS..,.. 
Jol... saat (i) Ivilto become weak and watery (of food or 
drink). ma-txallii-J iI-muluxiyya tsiit don't let the 
muluxiyya get watery. qahwa sayta weak coffee. -ava 
saayit· 

.IbIS..,.. 
)...- saYlar Ivil to dominate, become master. fikra 
msaYlara dominant idea. bi-tbibb' tsaYlar r:ala goz-ha 
she likes to lord it over her husband. -vn saYlara; ava 
misay{ar. 
).....;1 Yitsay{ar or Yissay{ar = say{ar. -ava mitsay{ar. 
I tIS..,.. see also t..,...J 
t L- saar: (a) Ivtl to hold, accommodate. gubr' diib 
yisaar: miit babiib [provJ == there is always room for 
friends. IIqalb-u ma-ysar:-f' l:Jadd he cares for no one. 
- Yid-dinya ma-hiyyaa-J sayeaa-na the world cannot 
contain us (in our joy). -vn sayar:aan; ava saayir: . 
..rL- saar:az = saar:. -ava misaar:i. 
..rL..;1 Yitsaar:a or Yissaar:a Ivil to be accommodated. 
Yil-filuus miJmitsar:iyyafil-mal:Jfa;a the money won't fit 
into the wallet. -iva mitsaar:i. 
2 tIS..,.. see I t I ..,.. : saar:a I 
tIS..,.. see also tIS"" 
tL.. .tL- saay2 (i) Ivtl to work (fine metals). -vn 
siyaaya; ava saayiY. 
~L.. saayiY In pi saaya, suyyaaYI goldsmith. 
~L.. saaya Inl 
goldsmiths' market, goldsmiths' 
quarter. 
..:.l&."...a.o masuYaatt, m~uyaat r Ipl nl (metal, especial-
ly gold) jewelry. 
~ 
siiYa In! (metal, especially gold) jewelry. 
t L.a.. masaay, m~aay Inl (metal, especially gold) 
jewelry. 
~ 
sayyay Ivtl to acquire jewelry (especially gold) for. 
-vn tasyiiy; avalpva misayyay. 
~I Yitsayyay or Yissayyay Ivil I passive of sayyay. 
2 to acquire (gold) jewelry. - avaliva mitsayyay. 
"";IS..,.. 
.......... seef In pi suyuufl I sword. IIseef i/-qiyaasa ring 
gauge. -seefi/-Yiid side of the hand. -raas-u w-Yall' seef 
he is very stubborn, he is adamant, as in Yir-raagil 
raas-u w-Yall' seef ma-ybir:-haa-J the man won't sell it 
come hell or high water. -seef ibn' zi yazan proto-
Muslim South Arabian hero of Egyptian folk literature, 
famous for his struggles and exploits against pagan 
negroes and Abyssinians. 2 scythe. 3 type of card game 
of chance . 
...4- sayyif Ivtl to mow with a scythe. -vn tasyiif; ava 
misayyif. 
~I Yitsayyif or Yissayyif Ivtl to be mowed with a 
scythe. - iva mitsayyif. 
446 
I J IS ..,.. 
.i- sayyaq ,1vtl to scrub (a floor). -vn tasyiiq; ava 
misayyaq. 
';;""'1 Yitsayyaq or Yissayyaq Ivil to be scrubbed (of a 
floor). - iva mitsayyaq. 
2 J IS..,.. see 
I J.J ..,.. : saayiq, slyaaq. 
~ IS ..,.. 
4 
siika <P sih-gith> Inl [musJ I the name given to 
the note E half flat. 2 mode in Arabic music beginning 
on E half flat and having B half flat. 3 a naay tuned to E 
half flat. 
.;,I.I~IS"'" see J.I~ . ..,.. 
J IS ..,.. 
JL- saal (i) Ivil to flow, stream. Yid-dumuur: saalit min 
r:enee-ha the tears flowed from her eyes. -vn seel, 
sayalaan; ava saayil. 
J,- seel Inl flood, flow. 
iJ'J..,.- sayalaan Inl [path] gonorrhea. 
J..L- saayi/ I/adjl liquid, runny. llfiluus sayla liquid 
money. 2 In pi sawaayillliquid, fluid. 
;;J".... siyuula Inlliquid state, fluidity. 
Jt;.. sayyaallnl blaze (mark on a horse's face). 
;;J t;.. sayyaala In pi -aat, sayaylill pocket set into the 
side seam(s) of a galabiya. 
J- sayyi/ I Ivtl to cause to flow or stream. 2 Ivil to 
flow, stream. fi/-r:araq misayyi/ min wiJJ-u sweat IS 
pouring off his face. -vn tasyii/; avalpva misayyil. 
.1-;1 fitsayyi/ or fissayyi//vil to be made to flow. -Iva 
mitsayyil. 
~ IS ..,.. 
r- siim <perh P sim> Inl code, secret language. 
bitaar: it-talat waraqaat raaxar luu siim the three-card 
trick practitioner also' has his own secret Jargon . 
;".,.. siima I assonant intensifier, occurring with ql/ma. 
r:aamil fi-nafs-u qiima w-siima he gives himself airs. 
laa-lu la qiima wala siima he doesn't have even the look 
of worth. 
I ~ IS ..,.. 
I.,,- siima 2 In/l cinema, movie-house. 2 Yis-siima the 
cinema, the movies. 3/pl siyam J I a small box with 
eye-piece for viewing transparencies. - also sinima. 
J.;,IS..,.. 
.:r.- siin Ifem n, pi -aatll twelfth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. 2 In, no pI! abbreviation of su faal ( = ques-

tion). siin Gala di a question concerning this. siin wi-
0 I.S IJ" see 0 IJ" 
giim (abbreviation of sul'aal wi-gawaab) (1) question 
and answer. (2) cross-examination. 
I.J I.S IJ" 
2 <J I.S IJ" see I.S.J IJ" : siyyaan 
I"...... siiwa /prop n/ Siwa Oasis and town. 
I <J I.S IJ" 
loS"...... siiwi /adj */ from or pertaining to Siwa Oasis . 
• l.;.,... siina Iprop nl Sinai. 
balal:J siiwi Siwan dates, type of sweet black date. 

..; 
..;. -j suffix signalling I negative state, when used in 
conjunction with the prefix ma- (q.v. sense 3). 2 a 
rhetorical negative. [andak-J' sgaara you don't happen 
to have a cigarette, do you? tigii-j tit[ajja [andina 1-
lee/aa-di won't you come and dine at our place this 
evening? for Yer-J, see yeer; for ti(jul-J, see (jaal; for 
lolaa-J and lomaa-J, see loola and looma respectively. 
yl"; 
..,..~ jaab I: bariir jaab raw silk. 
.)~I..; 
. 
)~~ jaadir <P childar> In pi jawaadirl I tent. 2 large 
covered wholesale market, central warehouse (e.g., for 
fruit or fish). 
1..;1..; 
..;.L:. jaaj Inl gauze, muslin. 
4.:. ~ jaaja I In pi -aatl I lunit nl a piece of gauze. 
2 (film, television, radar) screen: 3 television tube. 
Z ..; I..; see ..;..;..;: jaaja 2 
( J I..;) 
J~ jaai l <P shill> In pi jilaanl I shawl. 2 length of 
muslin wound into a turban (see PI.F, 14). 
J~ jaal 2 <Copt> Icoll nl Synadontis schall, a Nile 
fish. - also ji/aan. 
1 r I..; 
jL.:J I rif-Jaam Iprop nl the Levant. e~pecially Syria and 
Lebanon. 
\S""~ jaami I ladjl pertaining to the Levant, especially 
Syria and Lebanon. II dura jaami maize (Zea mays). 
-[eej jaami Arab-style bread made with white flour . 
-jurb 'jaami way of smoking hashish in a gooza without 
water. 2 In pljawaaml a Syrian, a Lebanese. II ritlamm 
if-Jaami [a/-maYrabi the Syrian got together with the 
Moroccan (of a combination of two extremes). 
Z(rl..;) 
...~ jaama 
In 
pi -aatl 
I mole, 
beauty 
spot. 
2 birthmark. 
~~ jamiyya In pljawaamil rope made of fibre . 
IIgam[ if-Jawaami [nautJ hauling the ship as close to the 
quay as possible . 
61..; 
.~ jaah <P shah> Inl Shah (of Iran). 
";61..; 
~L:. jaahi <P shilhf> Inl striped material of cotton 
and silk, particularly used for kaftans. II [itr'jaahi sweet 
pea. 
( ..; I"; ) 
..;L:. jaay Inl tea, drink of tea. jaay kujari drink of tea 
made by pouring boiling water over tea leaves in a glass. 
~ l... jaaya In pi -aatl baby's under-shirt. 
( . ..; . ..;) 
i..:.i..:. ja'!ja'! <Copt> Ivil to begin to appear (of dawn 
or blossoms). -vnjarja'!a; ava mifarjar. 
.L.:..; jir.raa r Inl small amount (usually of liquid). 
bi-jir.raar mayya with a very little water. 
r • ..; see 1 r.J ..;: jurm, maj'!uum, 
ritjaa'!im, 
tajaarum, mutajaarim 

4J - ..; 
.,L. jafn In pljufuunl affair, matter. ju fuun i(-{Ul/aab 
(department of) student affairs.lllujafn he is a man of 
standing. -~aal;ib if-Ja fn the party concerned. - finta 
jafn-ak feeh what business is it of yours? 
J I y"; 
J\,..; jabaar Icoll nl type of Nile perch (Tilapia ZiIIii). 
oJ\,..; jabaara lunit n, pI -aatl a Nile perch. 
Iyy~ 
..;:..:. jabb I (i) Ivii I to grow up, grow to maturity. 
fiz-zarlajabbit the crop has matured. minjabb"lala 
jeef jaab lalee {prall] = as the twig is. bent so will the 
tree grow. 28 to rise on tiptoes. jabb· lajaan yi(ul-ha 
he stood on tiptoes to reach it. 2b to rear (of an animal). 
fi/-I;~aan jabb· lala I-Jaros the stallion mounted the 
mare. -vnjabb, jababaan; avajaabib . 
..;:..:. jabb 2 In jububal {rur] ox. Ilfabb iI-Ieel {bot] 
marvel-of-Peru, four-o'clock (Mirabilis jalapa). 
';:'L.:. jabb 3, jaabb In pI jubbaanl youth, young man. 
~L.:. jabba I In pI -aatl young woman, young lady. 
J4.:. jubbaani ladjl pertaining to youth. 
..,.,\,..; jabaab In/I youth, youthfulness. maat fi-Jabaab-
u he died in his youth. -/adjectivallyl finta lissajabaab 
you're still young. 2/coll nl youth(s), young people. 
~."..; jububiyya or jibubiyya Inl youth. 
~ 
jabiiba Icoll nl youth(s). 
l(yy";) 
~ jabba 2 <P shab> Inl alum.lIl;araqjabba {magic] 
to burn a piece of alum for the purpose of divining 
(from the shape into which it cools) the identity of one 
with the evil eye . 
.;:..,.:.. jubb <Fr chope> In pI -aatl tall glass for cold 
drinks. 
~y"'; 
..;...,..:. • ..;...,..:. jabat Inl dill. II fabujabat type of poisonous 
spider. 
.!J y"; see <.:I y"; and ...,.. y ..; 
Icy"; 
~ 
jabbiil; In pljabbiil;al hooligan, thug. 
2- jabbal; I Ivil to be militantly aggressive, make an 
assault. -vn tafbiil;; ava mifabbal;. 
lCY"; 
2- jabbal; 2 Ivt/ to streak, vein (e.g., colours). fiswid 
449 
mifabbal; bi- fabyat[ black with white veins. - vn tafbiil;; 
ava/pva mifabbal;. 
~I fitfabbal; or fifjabal; Ivil to be streaked, be 
veined (e.g., of colours). -iva mitfabbal;. 
3cy "; 
~ 
jabal; In pI fajbaal;l ghost, spectre. 
I 
..... 
• 
J • ...,.. 
oJ;:' jabbuura <Copt> Inl fog, mist, haze. 
;::. jabbar I Ivil to become misty. eenee-hajabbarit her 
eyes became misty. -vn tafbiir; ava/pva mifabbar. 
1 J y"; 
r.- jabar (u) Ivtl to jinx, put a jinx on. - ava jaabir. 
r.- jibr In pI fafbaarl span of the hand, measurement 
equal to the span of the hand. IIsigaara fibr an extra-
long cigarette. 
or.- jibra: qatla w-Jibra a type of children's marble 
game. 
;::. jabbar2 Ivt/ to jinx, put a jinx on. - vn tafbiir; 
ava/pva mifabbar. 
3 J y"; see J I y ..; : jabaar, jabaara 
4 J y"; see J.J Y ..; : jabuura 
I J y"; 
1 r.- jubra Iprop nl Shubra, a residential district in the 
north of Cairo. 
JJY"; 
Jr.- jabraq Ivtl to give a treat to. I;-ajabraq-u b-
gineeh I'll give him a pound as a treat.jabraqt· (lala) 
rool;-i I gave myself a treat. -vn jabraqa; ava/pva 
mifabraq. 
J,r;1 fitfabraq or fifjabraq Ivii to give oneself a treat 
or be given a treat. - iva mitfabraq . 
...,..y"; 
.' ~ • ;1 fitfabbis r or fifjabbis r Ivil to cling, hold on . 
fi/-bint i mitfabbisa b-ra fy-a-ha the girl is clinging to her 
opinion. -vn tajabbus; ava mitfabbis, mutajabbis. 
y";y"; 
~ 
jibjib <T ~/P~/P> In pI jabaafibl pair of backless 
slippers, (loosely) pair of backless light shoes. 
~ 
jabjib Ivil {magic] to cast a spell, specifically by 
beating the genitals with a slipper while pronouncing a 
magicformula (to jinx, e.g., an inattentive husband or a 

female rival). -vnjabjaba; ava mijabJib. 
~ 
jabjaba Inl/maglc/ ntual in which a woman casts 
a spell by beating her genitals with a slipper while 
pronouncing a magic formula. 
~ 
mijabjib ladJ '1 clever. skilful. 
~\ rlljabJib or rijjabjib Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of jabjib. yaama tjabjib-Iu oh! he's been subjected to 
sorcery many a time! -vn lijabjilb; iva mitjabJib. 
by~ 
~ 
jaba{ or jibi{ (a) Ivil to cling. take hold. Jabal 
fi-rumm-u he clung to his mother. rin-naar jib(ilfii the 
fire got a hold on him.jaba{ fil-bint' jab(a sooda he fell 
for the girl in a big way. -vnjaba(aan,jab(; avajaabi(. 
Ja,.... jab(a Ipl -aatl instance noun of jab(. 
,:"Ila,.... jab(aan ladJ *1 clinging. 
~ 
jubbee{ Inl name for various kinds of bristly or 
prickly wild plant. for instance burweed and alkanet. 
IInaas zayy ij-Jubbee{ quarrelsome people. 
.k,..:.;\ ritjaba{ or rijjaba( Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
jaba{. ritjaba( fii /jabl a rope was fixed to it. - iva 
mitjibi(. 
J..;.. jabba( Ivt/l to cause to cling or take hold.jabba{1 
il-walad fiyya I made the boy hold onto me. jabba( 
in-llaar fid-duxxaan let the fire get a hold on the tobac-
co. Ilfabba( I~-~amuula f-makan-ha screw the nut on in 
its place. 2 to fix temporarily.jabba( iI-makana I-raayil 
ma nlaac;i mikanitki get the machine to hang together 
until we can find a mechanic. - vn iajbii{; avalpva 
mijabba{ . 
• ~\ rltjabba{ or rijjabba{ Ivil passive ofjabba{. - iva 
lIIitjabbcl{. 
ty~ 
t>- jibil (a) Ivil 10 become satiated. have one's fill. 
yaklu lamma yifbalu they eat until they're full.jibill' 
fii c[arb I got my fill of beating him.llda maal wi-jibil 
moot he's been dead a long time. -vnjabal.jabalaan. 
t>- jabal (i) Ivtl to satiate. give (s.o.) a fill of. -vn 
jabl; avajaabil· 
~ 
jabla linst n. pI -aall a repletion. one's fill.jabla 
kwaYYlsa a satisfying meal. Ilfabla bald' guula see 
jabala. 
:....,... jabala Ipl-aall instance noun of jabal. jabal a (or 
jabla) bald' guula /provl a state of satiety after a state 
of hunger (applied. e.g .. to a parvenu). 
,:,,~ jablaall ladj '1 I satiated. full (with food). 
II ri/-rakl' fij-Jablaall xusaara /provl = there's no point 
in gilding the lily. 2 deep (of water). riI-ba/jr' jablaan 
hina the Nile is deep here. 3 full (of pleats). 4 wealthy. 
450 
C:- jabbal Ivtl I to satiate. satisfy. da rakl' ma-
yjabbal-Jthat food is not filling. ka/aam-akjabbar;-ni 
bil-rimaan your words have filled me with faith. 
II kalaam-ak jabbal-ni (I) your words are more satis-
fying than food. (2) your talk turns me off eating. takes 
away my appetite. 2 to saturate. fill. 3 to make (e.g .• a 
pleat) full. jabball k-kusar make the pleats deep. -vn 
lajbiil; avalpva mijabbal. 
~\ ritjabbal or rijjabbal Ivil I to be satiated. be 
satisfied. 2 to be saturated. ri/-rarci itjabbalil bil-
mayya the soil has become saturated with water. 3 to 
become thoroughly acquainted. acquire a thorough 
familiarity. 'lana daaris iI-fikra w-mitjabbal biiha I've 
examined the idea and am thoroughly acquainted with 
it. -ava/iva mitjabbal. 
t>-i rajbal = jabal· -vn rifbaal; ava mifbil. mujbll· 
IJly~ 
d,.. jabak I (u) Ivt/l to fasten. attach. rujbuk iI-baab 
lajaan iI-hawa ma-yic;fil-uu-Jhook the door so the wind 
won't close it. jabak iI-warat; he fastened the paper 
(with a clip or staple). Ilfabak ridee he clasped his 
hands. 2 to involve. engage. ri;-;uruuf jabakil-ni 
circumstances have involved me. 3 to arrange an en-
gagement with./ja-nujbuk-Iu I-bint' di walla lana shall 
we get him engaged to this girl or not? 4 to reserve (an 
article. with a down payment).jabakl iI-kursi b-xamsa 
gneeh I reserved the chair with a five-pound payment. 
- Ivil 5 to become fastened. become attached. 
ris-samaka jabakil fl~-~innaara the fish got caught on 
the hook. 6 to become involved. become engaged. 
jabakl' fil-xinaac;a I got involved in the fight. - vn 
jabakaall. jabk; avajaabik; pva majbuuk. 
;5..,.... jabka In pI -aall I instance noun of jabk. 
2 engagement present of Jewelry. 
d,.. jabae Inl Ilcoll nl net(s). netting. 2/plflbaakl 
grid. grill. 
. 
~ 
jabaka In pI -aal/l lunit nl a net. kooril tf-Jabaka 
netball. 2a any of a range of reticular objects (e.g .. 
hairnet. 
string 
bag. 
grid. 
grill. 
lattice). 
2b (communications) network. grid.jabakll {urut; net-
work of roads.jabakillilifoon the telephone network. 
3/alllol grill. 4 nasty affair. complicated business. 
~ 
jabaki ladjl reticular. 
~ 
jabakiyya In pI -aall retina. 
Jl~ Jibbaak 
In 
pljababiikl I window. Jibbaak 
lazaakir box office. ticket window. jirii{ jibbaak sash 
cord. 2 bed-end with metal bars. 
..u..:- majbak In pi majaabikl I any of a range of 
fastening devices such as a clasp. clip or pin. majbak 

warat; paper cliP: mafbak rasiil clothes peg, clothes pin. 
dabbuus mafbak safety-pin. 2 brooch. 
J.l.,....;1 ritfabak or riffabak Ivil to become involved. 
ritfabak bil-bint d lala (uul he got involved with the girl 
straight away. -ava mitfibik. 
..u.,.....; 1 rinfabak 
= 
ritfabak. - vn 
rinfibaak; ava 
minfibik. 
4- fabbik Ivtll to fasten, attach (a number of things. 
or a number of times). t;aladna [uul iI-leel nifabbik 
iI-warat; we stay"d up all night pinning the papers 
together. 2 to entangle. - vn lafbiik; ava/pva mifabbik. 
~ 
mifabbik Inl large lacy pastry, deep-fried and 
soaked in syrup. 
~I ritfabbik or riffabbik Ivill to be fastened. 2 to 
be entangled. - iva mitfabbik. 
<.!l,;-I riflabak Ivii to become engaged, become en-
tangled. riflabaknafi-xnaat;a kbiira we got caught up in 
a big fight. rig-geef iflabak mala I-laduw the army 
engaged in battle with the enemy. -vn riflibaak; iva 
miflibik. 
.!.ll,;-I riflibaak In pi -aall[mil] engagement. 
Z.!ly~ 
d.- fubuk <T fubuk> In pi -aall[obsol] long pipe for 
smoking, chibouk. 
u->-,- fubukfi In pi -yyal one who repairs and cleans 
chibouks. 
Jy~ 
J,..:. fibl In pi rafbaall I lion cub. -
rafbaal Ipl nl 
2a epithet given to junior players in a sports club 
(usually soccer). rafbaal iI-rahli the Ahli juniors. 
2b Cub Scouts, Wolf Cubs. 
,:uJy~ 
.:,),.... fabloon <perh It sciablona> In pi -aall [lexl] 
silkscreen. 
.J y ~ see .J ~ y ~ :fibiin 
j~.Jy~ 
:r.; y.l... fabuneez <Fr japonaise> ladj invarl sleeveless. 
lasaliin fabuneez sleeveless dresses. 
.y~ 
-..- fabah I (i) Ivtl to bring suspicion on. wut;uuf 
iI-buks i t;uddaam iI-beel fabah-na the stopping of the 
police-wagon in front of the house cast suspicion on us. 
mafy-a-ha huwwa da iii fabih-ha it's her behaviour that 
makes people think the worst of her. -vnfabahaan; ava 
faa";!.' pva mafbuuh. 
451 
~ 
yifbih. yifbah Ivt and vi; imperf and vn onlyl to 
resemble, bear a resemblance (to). r~-~uura ma-lifbih-
nii-f(or ma-li/bih-lii-J) the photo doesn't resemble me. 
kulli fin-Iu yifbih-in-Iu [prov] (everything has some-
thing resembling it) = like to like, every jack must have 
his Jill. -vnfabah. 
40- fabahlln pi rafbaahllikeness. resemblance.fabah 
biliid a remote resemblance. huwwa t;ariib-i wa-Iaakin 
mif fabah-i he's my kinsman but has no resemblance to 
me. ra[raaq-u fabah ralraaq iI-rishaal its symptoms 
resemble those of diarrhoea. lIyixlat; min if-fabah 
rarbi[iin [prov] (may He create forty of the same like-
ness!) exclamation on mistaking one person for 
another . 
• .".:... mafbuuh ladj "I suspect. fishy, open to suspi-
cion. binti mafbuuha a girl with a bad reputation. 
~ 
fubha In pi -aall suspicion. II raagil fubha a man 
who would bring suspicion on anyone who might 
associate with him. 
40- fibh In, in constrl semi-, quasi, as in fibh i laqab 
zayyi rUSlaaz a semi-title like Mister. fibh i gziira 
peninsula. 
~ 
fabiih ladjl similar (to), resembling, like. 
~i rafbah lell morelmost like or resembling. 
~I i'itfabah ot i'Yfabah Ivil to fall under suspicion, be 
suspected. -ava/iva mitfibih. 
....... 1 i'infabah = i'itfabah. - avaliva minfibih. 
~ fabbih Ivtl to liken, compare. bi-tfabbih-ni 
bin-naas iI-baramiyya dool do you liken me to those 
thieving people? -vn lafbiih; ava mifabbih. 
~ fabbih lala to try to place. kunt i b-afabbih laleek 
wi-Iamma kkalliml i lrilt-ak lala [uul I was trying to 
place you and when you spoke I knew you right away. 
~ 
tafbiih Inll resemblance, likeness. llfiifwi-tafbiih 
see liif. 2 Ipl -aall simile . 
~I i'itfabbih or riffabbih Ivill to be likened, be com-
pared. 2 to affect an appearance. ril-bint i ma-y~abf/-f 
titfabbih bil-walad a girl should not try to make herself 
look like a boy! -avaliva mitfabbih. 
4!l... faabih Ivtl to resemble. -vn mufabha; ava 
mufaabih. 
4! 1.:.;1 ritfaabih f or riffaabih Ivil to bear a resembl-
ance. -ava mitfaabih. 
~I i'iftabah Ivil to have suspicions. suspect. ril-buli~ 
iflabah fii w-gaab 18§J'iib bil-Iafliif the police suspected 
him and obtained a search warrant. riggaala muftabah 
liihum suspected men. -vn i'iflibaah; ava miflibih; pva 
muflabah. 
.ny~ 
ojy.L. fabuura Inl prow. min id-daffa lif-fabuura 

[proy] from first to last, from head to toe, all included. 
..sy";' 
IJ.I..:. !aaba Ivil to reach up, try to reach (for s.th.). 
ril-waad bi-y!aabi lala I-burtuliaan the kid is reaching 
up for the orange. -vn mifabiyya; ava mifaabi. 
~..sy";' 
.;,e...:. !ibiin <Syr> In pi ra!abiinl [Chr] I attendant on 
a bride or groom. 2 sponsor, godparent. 
"fibiin iI-koom Iprop nl Shibin el-Kom, the chief town 
of the province of Minufiya. 
I 0,;,";' see ..s 0,;, ..;. : fita 
~\J~ 
.::...; !att (i) Ivil I to clear out, leave in extreme 
annoyance. zahaliit min goz-ha w-!attit min ii-beet she 
got fed up with her husband and left in a huff. 2 to 
wander, be distracted (of mind, thoughts etc.). lalil-i 
bi-yfitt my mind wanders. - Ivtl 3 [rur] to pick up 
windfalls from (a tree). rul:Jt' lalieet in-naxla ma!tuuta 
I went and found that all the dates scattered around the 
base of the palm had been picked up. -vn!att,!atataan; 
ava!aatit; pva ma!tuut. 
£:. latta I In pi -aatl I instance noun of !att. 2 lcolll 
windfall(s). II liutn , latta [rur] scraps of cotton over-
looked by the pickers and gathered later. 
~ 
!atta 2 T ladj in~arl various, diverse. 
.:,1:..:. !attaan: tarli' !attaan a huge difference. !attaan 
been(u) w-been (raxuu) there's a world of difference 
be. tween (him) and (his brother). 
.;:.:;..:. !attit Ivt/l to scatter, spread out.!attit i1-mu;ahra 
he broke up the demonstration. II rinta !attitt' muxx-i 
you've bewildered me. 2 to drive (s.o.) from his home. 
lamma tfattit iI-ralbaan da l:Ja-ylaalii sakan rizzaay if 
you transfer this poor man (to another city) how is he 
going to find a home? Ilfattit ik-koora he kicked the ball 
o~t of play. -vn ta!tiit; avalpva mifattit. 
.;:..;.:.;1 ritfattit or rif!attit Ivil passive of !attit. - iva 
mitfattit. 
J 0,;, ..;. 
J;..:. !atal (i) Ivtl to plant seedlings in (the soil). ruzz' 
ma!tuul transplanted rice.l:Ja-niftii iI-rarc[' b-ruzz we'll 
transplant rice seedlings. -vn !atl; ava !aatil; pva 
ma!tuul. 
J:.;. !atllcoll n! seedlings, cuttings. 
~ 
!atla Inl I = !atl. 2 lunit n, pi fitall a seedling. 
~~ !atlaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a seedling. 
452 
J.o..!.. ma!tal Inl 
I Ipl 
ma!aatill plant nursery, 
arboretum. 2 transplant method of planting rice. 
J:.:.;I ritfatal or riffatal Ivil to be transplanted. -iva 
m!tfitil. 
J:.;. !attillvtl to plant seedlings in the (soil). rir-ruzz' 
lissa m!attil rimbaaril:J the rice was transplanted only 
y~sterday. -vn ta!tiil; ava/pva mifattil. 
J:.:.;I ritfattil or rif!attil Ivil to be planted (of seedl-
ings). -iva mitfatti/. 
r 0,;, ..;. 
~ 
!atam (i) Ivtl to abuse, revile, insult. ma-!atam-ak 
rilla iii mballar-ak [proy] it is he who passes on 
another's abuse of you who really abuses you! -vn!atm; 
ava!aatim; pva ma!tuum. 
:i .. :: !itiima In pl!ataayiml insult, verbal abuse . 
~I ritfatam or rif!atam Ivil to be abused, be reviled, 
be insulted. -iva mitfitim. 
r" rinfatam = ritfatam. -iva minfitim. 
..so,;,..;. 
.;:.:;..:. !atit (i) Ivil it rained. rid-dunya lissa!atya it's just 
rained. -vnfita; ava!atya. 
.1:..:. .1:..:. fita In! I winter season. gahhizna lif-fita we 
prepared for the winter. II zayy' layaali!-fita ( as tedious) 
as winter nights. 2 rain. 
..s.fo!. fitwi ladj *1 winter, wintery. riz-zarl if-!itwi win-
ter crops. Iibs' !itwi heavy clothing. 
~.fo!. !itwiyya In pi -aatl winter season, winter period . 
..r--- malta In pi ma!aatil winter resort. 
~ 
latta) Ivil I to spend the winter, ~ibernate. 
l:Ja-n!atti fi-smaliliyya we'll winter in Ismailia. 2 to 
dress in warm clothes.fatteena badri s-sanaa-di this year 
we started wearing our winter clothes early. 3!attit = 
!atit. - vn ta!tiyya; ava mifatti. 
.) [..;. 
.r.- !agar Icoll n, pi ra!gaarl tree(s), shrub(s). ra!gaar 
ziina ornamental trees and shrubs. ra!gaar iI-liutn cot-
ton plants . 
• ~ 
!agara lunit n, pi -aatl a tree. !agarit nasab (or 
leela) genealogical tree. 
~I~ !agaraaya In pi -aatl shrub, bush. 
;.;.:.. mifaggar ladjl figured with flowers or plants. 
liumaa! mifaggar flower- or foliage-patterned cloth. 
t[";' 
t~ !ugaae ladj pl!uglaanl brave, courageous. 
~~ 
!agaaea Inl bravery, courage. ri/-kasra tir/ib 
if-!agaaea [proy] numbers overcome courage. 

~ 
jagiir;, 
jigiir;J 
I/adj 
pljugr;aanl 
brave, 
courageous. 2 Inl hero of a Western (film or story). 
~ 
jaggar; Ivtl I to encourage. jaggar;naa r;ala kida 
we encouraged him in this. 2 to cheer for, cheer on. 
jaggar;na l-fariic; we cheered the team on. -vn tajgiir;; 
ava miJaggar;. 
~ 
tajgiir;i ladj *1 encouraging. sir;ri tajgiir;i 
[bank] a (high) rate of exchange for foreign currency 
set in order to encourage, e.g., tourism. 
~ 
mujaggir; In 
*1 fan, enthusiast. 
fana min 
mujaggir;iin ik-koora I'm a soccer fail. 
~\ fitjaggar; or fiJjaggar; Ivil I passive of jaggar;. 
2 to take courage, pluck up courage. -ava/iva 
mitjaggar;. 
.;,r.} 
~ 
jagan In pljuguun, fajgaanl sorrow. 
yc.} 
.... ."....:. juljuub Inl paleness (of the skin). 
....,.-L.:. jaaljib ladjl pale, white (of the skin). 
.Jyc.} 
~ 
jaljbar Ivtl [slang] to smudge, mess, dirty, black-
en. -also jaljwar. - vn jaljbara; ava/pva miJaljbar. 
~\ fitjaljbar or fiJjaljbar Ivil [slang] to be 
smudged, 
messed, 
dirtied 
or blackened. 
-iva 
mitjaljbar. 
':"c.} 
453 
..;:.......;, jaljat (a) Ivtll to beg for. fiJIJat-lak riYiiftitr;ajja 
bii beg yourself a loaf of bread to eat for your supper. 
2 to cadge, borrow.jaljatt i badla r;ajaan faruulj il-Ijafla 
I scrounged a suit so I could go to the party. - Ivi/3 to 
go begging. r;allimnaa-hum iJ-Jaljaata sabac;uu-na r;al- . 
fabwaab (we taught them how to beg and they beat us 
to the doors) ,., they bite the hand that fed them. - vn 
filjaata, jaljt; avajaaljit; pva maJlJuut . 
.:.t.:..:, jaljljaat In 
*1 beggar, mendicant. r;amliin 
nafs-u-hum jaljljatiin r;ajaan mtJ-yidfar;uu-j il-fugra 
they're pretending to be destitute so they won't have to 
pay the rent. Ilfaljljaat wi-r;aayiz riYiif [prov] he is a 
beggar but (still he) insists on getting a (whole) loaf, ,., 
beggars can't be choosers. - fiJ-Jaljljaat lu n~~ id-dinya 
[prov] the beggar owns half the world (because he gets 
a share of everyone's possessions). -zayyi jaljljatiin 
is-sayyida [prov] (1) (as swarming and insistent) as the 
beggars at Sayyida Zaynab. (2) (as sorry-looking a 
bunch) as the beggars at Sayyida Zaynab. 
..:.......:.; \ fitjaljat or fiJjaljat Ivil I to be begged (for). 
2 to be borrowed, be cadged. -iva mitjiljit. 
~ 
jaljljat Ivtl to give, lend (with no thought of 
return). jaljljatuu-na jwayyit mallj' r;ala ma niJtiri 
(could you) give us some salt until we buy some? 
jaljljatti kull il-huduum il-c;adiima I gave away all the 
old clothes. jaljljatuu-na c;irp li/-mawluud [beggars] 
donate a piastre for the baby. -vn taJlJiit; ava/pva 
miJaljljat. 
~I fitjaljljat or fiJjaljljat Ivil passive of jaljljat. 
fij-jakitta di jjaljljatit /i-xamsiin naJar this jacket has 
been lent to numerous people. -iva mitjaljljat. 
cc .} 
2- jaljlj (i) Ivill to become scarce, dwindle. kulli ma 
n-naas bi-tiktar fil-masaakin bi-tjiljlj as people increase 
in number, housing becomes scarce. fik-kabriit bi-yfiljlj 
il-yomeen dool matches are getting scarce these days. 
II fin-niiljaljlj the Nile fell. 2 to behave in a miserly way. 
-vnjalj~ljaan, jaljlj, jiljljiyya; avajaaljilj . 
2- juljlj IlnI meanness. 2/adj invarl miserly . 
r- jiljiilj ladjl I scarce, sparse, scant. 2 mean, 
miserly . 
.J C"; 
)6...:. jaljaar Inl diphtherial infection (in animals). 
;...:. jaljljar Ivil to wheeze, croak (because of obstruc-
tions in the throat). -vn taJlJiir; ava miJaljljar. 
.k c "; 
.b...; jalja( (a) Ivtl I to drag, pull tautly (of a rope) . 
28 to tie up tightly. fiJIJa(-ha kwayyis bil-Ijabl tie it 
firmly with the rope. 2b to fit firmly in place. jalja( 
il-watad bi-Jakuujhe fixed the peg firmly in place with a 
hammer. jalj( b-tasxiin [metal] shrink-fitting. - Ivil 
38 to stick, become stuck. fid-durg i jalja( the drawer 
stuck. 3b [naut] to run aground, take the ground. -vn 
jalja(aan, jalj(; avajaalji(; pva maJlJuu(. 
.b...; jalj( In pljuljuu(, juljll(al [deris] very tall and big 
(of people). 
~,;..;. jaljljuu(a Inl double-ended broad chisel with 
fine teeth . 
.b...:.;\ fitjalja( or fiJjalja( Ivii passive of jalja(. -iva 
mitjilji(. 
.J-..:.; \ finjalja( = fitf.alja(. - iva minjilji(. 
~ 
jaljlja( Ivil 18 to run out (e.g., of fuel). 
fil-r;arabiyya jaljlja(it the c~r has run out of petrol. 
IIgeeb-ijaljlja( I've run out of money. -zoor-ijaljlja( my 
throat has become dry. Ib to become used up, run out. 
fig:gaazjaljlja( min il-babuur the primus stove is out of 

paraffin. II riI-balalj bi-yfaljlja( fil-buC;C; dates make 
one's mouth dry. 2 {naut] to run aground, take the 
ground. - Ivt/ 3 {metal] to shrink. faljlja( gilba he 
shrank a bush. 4 to drag, pull tightly. -vn tafljii(; aval 
pva mifaljlja(. 
~I ritfaljlja(orriffaljlja(lvi/l to be shrunk. 2 to be 
pulled tightly. - iva mitfaljlja(. 
.l..l.c"; 
.JJ.......; falj{a{ Ivtl to drag, lug or send around from 
place to place. falj(a(-ni min maktab Ii-maktab he sent 
me around from office to office (on a wild goose chase). 
-vn falj(ata; avalpva mifalj(a(. 
JJ.-;I ritfaljtat or riffaljtat Ivil to be dragged or lug-
ged around from place to place. - iva mitfaljtat. 
J.!lc"; 
JS:- faljkil Ivtl to trip. -vnfaljkala; iva mifaljkil. 
~I ritfaljkil or riffaljkil Ivil to trip, stumble. 
(c;aliil il-baxt') yiffaljkil fi-bqaan-u {prov] (one destined 
to be unlucky) trips over his own balls. - vn tifaljkiil; ava 
mitfaljkil. 
r C"; 
~ 
faljm In plfuljuum, juljumaatl 1 grease, lubri-
cant, axle-grease. lamma f-faljm' btaal il-larabiyya 
Ylxl~ ma-tiftayal-f' ma;buu( when the car runs out of 
lubricant it doesn't run well. 2a fat. faljm' w-Ialjm 
rubber-blubber, fat and flab. 2b tallow. 
"'-- faljma In pi -aatl a bit of grease.lllaljmit il-widn 
ear-lobe. 
~~ 
faljmaaya = faljma. 
~ 
faljmi ladjl pertaining to grease. 
i~ faljljaam In *1 greaser. 
~ 
mafljama 
In 
pi majaaljiml 
1 grease-gun. 
2 lubrication point. 
~ 
faljljam I Ivtl{mech] to grease,lubricate.faljljam 
il-larabiyya w-yayyar iz-zeet grease the car and change 
the oil. 2·tvil to put on fat, become fatty. jaljljam wi-
laljljam it put on fat and flesh. -vn tafljiim; avalpva 
mifaljljam. 
~ 
mifaljljam ladjl greasy, covered with (lubricat-
ing) grease. huduum-i mjaljljama my clothes are all 
greasy. 
~I r,tfaljljam or riffaljljam Ivil to be greased, be 
lubricated. - iva mitfaljljam. 
I,,:,C"; 
.:r- faljan (a) 1 Ivtl la to load, load up, charge, 
freight. salaat il-biqaala b-titsiric; fif-faljn sometimes 
454 
the goods are stolen in loading. II rir-ragil-da mafljuun 
minnak that man is full of malice for you. Ib {elec] to 
charge. 2/vil 28 to be loaded up, be charged, be 
freighted (with cargo, fuel etc.). ril-larabiyyafaljanit 
the car has been fully loaded. 2b (elec] to be charged. 
-vnfaljn; avafaaljin; pva mafljuun. 
~ 
fuljna, faljna, filjna In pi -aatl I cargo, load. 
2 (electric) charge . 
.;r-'I ritfaljan or riffaljan = faljan 2. -iva mitfiljin . 
2 _ 
• 
.., C I.J" 
.:".:--1.:. faaljin r Ivtl to quarrel with, dispute with. -vn 
mifaljna; ava mifaaljin. 
.:".:--\,,:,;1 ritfaaljin r or riffaaljin r Ivil to quarrel (with 
o.a.). - ava mitfaaljin. 
.J.Jc"; 
.;"-;' faljwar Ivtl {slang] to smudge, mess, dirty, 
blacken. - alsofaljbar. -vnfaljwtlJ'a; avalpva mifaljwar. 
.;~I ritfaljwar or riffaljwar Ivil {slang] to be 
smudged, messed, dirtied or blackened. -vn ttfaljwiir; 
iva mitfaljwar. 
yt..; 
...,..;...:. faxab (u) Ivil to gush (with a gurgling sound). 
II damm-u baCia yifxub his blood was spurting out. -vn 
faxb, faxabaan; avafaaxib. 
.l.yt..; 
~ 
faxbat Ivil to scrawl, scribble. -vnfaxbata; aval 
pva mifaxba(. 
~~ 
faxbuuta In plfaxabiitl scribble, scrawl. 
~ 
faxbatiita {children] = faxbuuta. 
~I ritfaxbat or riffaxbat Ivil to be scrawled, be 
scribbled. - iva mitfaxbat. 
tt..; 
~ faxx (u) Ivtl {coarse] to excrete. faxx it-tic;iila (or 
xara or wasaaxa) to shit.faxx' mayya (or il-xafiifa) to 
pc;e. -vnfaxx, faxaxaan; avafaaxix; pva mafxuux. 
40....:. faxxa In pi -aatl 1 linst nl a (single) urination or 
defecation. II raalj faxxa f-Ijammaam {coarse] he died in 
total obscurity. 2 stool or (specific amount of) urine. 
IlIaxxit i1-laguuza {coarse! dry muluxiyya cooked and 
eaten cold. - rabu (or rumm')faxxa {deris] (I) a bed-
wetter. (2) a child who wets or soils himself. (3) a 
nobody. 
t~ fuxaax Inl urine or faeces . 
t~ faxxaax In *1 tabus] one who frequently wets or 
soils himself. 

C:-'I fitfaxx or fiffaxx Ivil to be excreted. - iva mitfaxx. 
~I finfaxx = fitfaxx. -iva minfaxx. 
4SS 
~ 
faxxax Ivtl to cause to excrete. faxxaxit i/-waad 
she put the kid on the potty. Ilraxxaxt-u min il-xoof 
[c~arse] I scared him shitless. -vn tafxiix; ava mifaxxax . 
. ~I fitfaxxax or fiffaxxax Ivil to be made to excrete. 
- iva mitfaxxax. 
.; t.;. 
/<- faxar (u) Ivil [coarse] to snort, grunt. faxart-i-Iu 
I snorted at him (I made what is considered a vulgar 
sound, to show my annoyance with him). -vnfaxr; ava 
faaxir. 
; /<- faxra In pi -aatl I linst nl a snort. 2 a snore. 
~ 
fixiir Inl (sound of) snoring. zahaliti minfixiir-u 
I-laali I'm fed up with his loud snoring. 
';"':";1 fitfaxar or fiffaxar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
faxar. lamma liult-i-Ihum lala rafy-i fitfaxar-Ii when 
I told them my opinion I was pooh-poohed. - iva 
m!tfixir. 
/<- faxxar Ivil to snore. -vn tafxiir; ava mifaxxar. 
r.;t.;. 
i;"':' faxram Ivtl [slang] to wreck, derange, mess up, 
confuse. -vnfaxrama; ava/pva mifaxram. 
i ~I fitfaxram or fiffaxram Ivil to be wrecked, de-
ranged, messed up or confused. - iva mitfaxram. 
t.;.t.;. 
~ 
faxfax I Ivtl to cause to rustle, rattle or jingle. 
faxfax il-filuus fi-geeb-u he jingled the money in hiS' 
pocket.lllialad yifaxfax il-waad lala riglee he sat dand-
ling the boy on his knee. 2 Ivil to rustle, rattle, jingle. 
faxfaxit ~-~agaat the jangling of finger cymbals. -vn 
faxfaxa; avalpva mifaxfax. 
~ 
fuxfeexa In pi faxafiix/l rattle (toy). 28 small 
cupola (of carved wood and with small windows) over a 
durliaala. 2b gazebo. 
~I fitfaxfax or fiffaxfax Ivil to rustle or be made 
to rustle, rattle or be made to rattle, jingle or be made 
to jingle. - avaliva mitfaxfax. 
~J.;.t.;. 
~ 
faxfulli Icoll nl variety of tumbler pigeon dis-
tinguished by a white neck. 
v"'t.;. 
.P-
fax~ In pi fafxaa~1 person, individual. 
~ 
fax~i ladj *1 personal, private. bikaayafax~iyya 
a personal matter. bi{aalia fax~iyya identity card. 
~ fax~iyyan ladvl personally. 
~ 
fax~iyya In pi -aatl I personality. lima-iii:! 
fax~iyya mal'aakum you don't respect me. 2 character 
(in a play etc.). 
~L..:. faaxi~ In plfawaaxi~/l pole, rod (for sighting, 
me~suring etc.). 2 target (in shooting). 
~ 
faxx~ Ivtl to diagnose. -vn tafxi~; avalpva 
mifaxxa~ . 
~ 
tafxii~ Inl acting. 
~ 
mifaxxa~iyya Inl [obsol] drama, acting. 
J~ 
mifaxxa~aati In pi -yyal I [obsol] actor. 
2 disparaging form of reference to an actor. 
~I 
fitfaxxa~ or fiffaxxa~ Ivil to be diagnosed. -iva 
mitfaxxa~. 
.1.t.;. 
.1.;... faxa{ (u) Ivil to shout angrily, bawl. faxa{ fil-
muwagaf he bawled out the employee. fax{i w-na{r 
roaring and bellowing. - vn fax{; ava faaxi[. 
~. fax{a linst n, pi -aatl an angry shout. 
J...;....:.;I fitfaxa{ or fiffaxa{ Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
faxa{. fitfaxa[ fiina we were shouted at. - iva mitfixi[. 
tJt.;. 
~ 
faxlallvtl I to cause to move sensuously, cause 
to sway. fi[-{abl i bi-yfaxlal ir-raliliaa~a the drumming 
makes the dancer move sensuously. 2 to give a hard 
time to. -vn faxlala; avalpva mifaxlal. 
~ 
mifaxlalladjl alluring. binti mifaxlala a dishy 
girl. fustaan mifaxlal an immodestly fetching and fancy 
dress. 
;,..i;,..... mifaxlala In pi -aatl [rur] a broad and heavily 
ornamented gold necklace. 
~I fitfaxlal or fiffaxlallvil to move sensuously. 
bi-titfaxlal zayy il-yaziyya she shakes herself like a bel-
Iy-dancer. - ava mitfaxlal. 
JJt.;. 
J.1>- faxlil I Ivtl to cause to jingle or rattle. 2 Ivil to 
rattle, jingle. sidr-u bi-yfaxlil his chest rattles. -vn 
faxlala; avalpva mifaxlil . 
.iJ ~ 
faxluula In pi faxaliill metal jingle (especially 
of a tambourine). 
~ 
fuxleela = faxluula. 
~I fitfaxlil or fiffaxlillvil to jingle or be made to 
jingle, rattle or be made to rattle. - avaliva mitfaxlil. 
t ~.;. 
t..J- fadax (a) Ivtl to crack. kida fadaxt i/-kubbaaya 

now you've cracked the glass! -vnJadx, Jadaxaan; ava 
Jaadix; pva maJduux. 
tJ..:. Jadx In pI Juduuxl crack. 
t..l.:.il fitfadax or fifJadax Ivil to be cracked. -iva 
mitfidix. 
t..L.:.;1 finJadax = fitfadax. -iva minjidix. 
~ ~ ..;. 
i; Jadd (i) Ivt/l to pull. Jaddu I-r;arabiyya they towed 
the car. Jadd is-sifoon he flushed the lavatory. Jadd' 
nafaseen min is-sigaara he took two drags on the 
cigarette. II fil-Ijikaaya di bi-tfidd intibaah in-naas this 
affair draws people's attention. 2a to pull taut, tighten. 
Jadd it-tabla he tightened the drumhead.ljaaga bi-tfldd 
il-far;~aab something which tenses the nerves. Il/idd' 
Ijeel-ak ... take courage (phrase of encouragement to 
one in difficult circumstances, the response being 
fif-Jadd 8 r;al-alla). - Jadd" r;alayya s-salx ... he made 
cruelfunofme.2b to tune (a stringed instrument). 3 to 
saddle, harness (an animal). - Ivil 4 to pull, tighten. 
lamma yin/af bi-yJidd when it dries, it pulls together. 
batn-i bi-tfidd 8 r;alayya my stomach is cramping me. 
5 to become firm or severe. fil-mudarris Jadd 8 r;ala 
t-talamza the teacher clamped down on the pupils. -vn 
Jadd, Jadadaan; avaJaadid; pva maJduud. 
.Jidd IfemJiddi, pI Jiddul [ioc] move! speed up! 
.i; Jadda In pI -aatll instance noun ofJadd. maJduud 
Jadda waljda evenly stretched. 2 skeleton, frame (e.g., 
for a reinforced concrete floor or ceiling, for a boat). 
fif-Jadda btaar;it ik-kiliim the structure of warp and 
weft threads in a carpet. II/aazim nir;mil-Iu Jadda we 
must put a splint (or splints) on him. 3 [mil] pack, kit. 
4 [gram] diacritical mark placed over a consonant to 
denote doubled value . 
• .:i... Jidda Inl I strength, intensity. Jiddit if-Jams the 
strength of the sun. rafati bi-Jidda he refused vehement-
ly. furma r;alee minJiddit il-tarlja he fainted from sheer 
joy. 2 hardship, distress. 
~.:i... Jiddiyya Inl I strength. 2 hardship, distress. 
-'!-'- Jidiid ladj plJudaad, Jidaadl I strong, robust. 
raagil Jidiid lif-Jurl a strong man for the work. farti' 
Jdiida rich land, fertile land. 2 intense, severe, ex-
treme. tioofJidiid intense light.Jidiid iz-zaxrafa heavily 
ornamented. Ijiraasa Jdiida close guard, heavy guard. 
maratiJidiid severe illness. kalaamJidiid or lahgaJdiida 
extreme language. 
.:i...i faJadd lell morelmost strong, intense etc. 
fil-xinaat;a dayra r;ala faJadd-a-ha the quarrelling has 
reached fever pitch .. 
.)Ii; Jaddaad In pI -aatl any of a number of devices the 
456 
purpose of which is to provide tension or traction (e.g., 
a splint, chain-adjustor). II fibn' Jaddaad (1) heavy 
smoker of hashish (usually in a gooza). (2) see r;antar. -
faal Jaddaad hashish-smokers. 
.l.:... mifadd In pI -aatl corset, girdle. 
.J..:.;I fitfadd or fifJadd Ivil passive of Jadd. -iva 
mitfadd. 
.i..:.; 1 finJadd = fitfadd. - iva min/add. 
.)i; Jaddid I/vtl to intensify. 
ril-buli~ Jaddid 
ir-riqaaba Gala I-beet the police intensified surveillance 
of the house. 2/vil to act firmly, act severely. Jaddid 
Gala I-walad Jiwayya be a bit (more) severe with the 
boy! -vn taJdiid; ava mifaddid. 
.).J..:.;I fitfaddid or fifJaddid Ivil to be intensified. 
fir-riqaaba tfaddidit surveillance was intensified. - iva 
mitfaddid. 
.).1..:.... mutaJaddidr ladj ·1 bigoted. 
.x:.:. 1 fiftadd Ivil to become intense, become stronger. 
fik-kuljljaJtaddit the cough became more severe.llya 
farti iftaddi ma Galeeki t;add-i (Earth, pull yourself 
together! no one as great as me walks your surface) ... 
I'm the best there is! (comment on arrogance). -vn 
fiftidaad; ava miftidd, muJtaddr. 
J 
~..;. see J ~ I ..;. : Jaadir 
J ~..;. 
13-'- Jidt; In Jidaat;, Jiduut;1 side of the mouth. II fabu 
Jdaat; wide-mouthed, fleshy-faced. 
J.J..:.;I fitfaddat; or fifJaddat; Ivil I [deris] to chew. {Uul 
in-nahaar titfaddat; bil-libaan all day long she chews 
away at gum. 2t to repeat erudite words senselessly. 
-also fitmaJdat;. - vn taJadduq r; ava mitfaddat;. 
. 
~ ..;. 
.J..:. Jadah (a)r Ivtl to surprise. -vnJadh; avaJaadih; 
pva maJduuh. 
...I.:.il fitfadah or fifJadah Ivil to be surprised, be per-
plexed. - iva mitfldih. 
.~I finJadah = fitfadah. -iva mln/idih. 
"';.J~";' 
J J.)t.:. Jaduuf In pI Jawadiifl counterpoised implement 
for raising irrigation water, shadoof (see PI.E, 14). 
~ ~..;. 
~.)t.:. Jaadit Inl (male) singer. 
~.)l.:. Jadya r In pI -aatl female singer. 
~ ~..;. see jj";' 

.J~~ see .Jj~ 
"r' I.) ~ 
.,..1 r furaab, faraab 1 <T forap> In pi -aatl pair of 
s~cks, pair of stockings. koorafaraab cloth ball used in 
street games. 
J I.) ~ 
JI r firaat; In! pitchpine. 
"r' -.) ~ 
.,..i r farrab Ivtl to stretch, crane (one's neck or head). 
bi-yfarrib raas-u w-yirakkiz leen-u he cranes his neck 
and stares fixedly. -vnfarraba; ava/pva mifarrib. 
·YJ"; 
.,.. r Jirib (a) Ivtll to drink. firibt il-murr I've drunk 
(from the cup of) bitterness. w-ana b-aluum b-afrab 
mayya ktiir when I swim I swallow a lot of water. nifrab 
fi-!iljljit-u let's drink his health.llJaarib min bin umm-u 
(he has drunk from his mother's breast) said of some-
one possessing great strength and courage. - rifrab mil-
baljr ... to hell with you! -huwwa b-yifrab he drinks 
(alcoholic drinks). 2 to absorb, drink in. lamma r-ruzz i 
yifrab il-mayya when the rice absorbs the water. Jirib 
il-kaar w-huwwa !¥ayyar he learned the trade while he 
was young. 3 to smoke (cigarettes). rinta mif laazim 
tifrab sagaayir kitiir you must not smoke a lot. -vnfurb; 
avafaarib; pva mafruub, mafruub . 
.,..J.r-- mafruub In pi -aat, mafariibl drink, beverage. 
riftaraa-Ii mafruub he bought me a drink. 
~ r farba In/i/inst n, pi -aatl a (single) drink.llraalj 
fi1arbit mayya (1) he died a sudden or pointless death. 
(2) he (or it) was a complete flop. 2/plfurabl purga-
tive. farbit mallj ingiliizi dose of Epsom salts. 
II riI-laruusa (illit farba the bride turned out to be a 
disappointment. see further under .:J 1 y .) ~ 
.J~ r farbaan ladj */1 having had a drink of water or 
beverage. ril-rarqi farbaana the land has been given 
water. rana farbaan ta/aata l~iir I've just had three 
(glasses) of juice. 2 having absorbed or thoroughly 
learned (e.g., a skill).farbaan i!-!anla min rahl-a-ha he 
has learnt the craft from its masters. 
~)".:. furba lIn! soup, broth. 2/adj invarl useless. 
goon furba a useless goalkeeper. 
.,.. r firb Inl [rur) dried mud. 
~r Jirba In! breeze, fresh air. -/adjectivallyl rooqa 
flrba an airy room. 
457 
~I~ • 
• .J IJ" 
.,..1..,.:. faraab 2 In! beverage with a fruit base. 
'":"!::,.:. farriib In plfarriiba/ heavy drinker (of spirits). 
~.r-- mafrab;yya In/l II'I -aatl[obsol} small external 
platform projecting from the mafrafiyya (used for the 
purpose of cooling jars of water). 2/no pU 28 (loosely) 
the technique and product of turned wood-work (cf 
mafrafiyya). 2b eye (of a needle) . 
...,.,.r;1 ritfarab or riffarab Ivil I to be drunk. rif1aay 
iffarab the tea was drunk. 2 to be absorbed. 3 to be 
smoked. - iva mitfirib. 
...,., .r; 1 rinfarab = ritfarab. -iva minfirib . 
...,.,::,.:. farrab 1 Ivtll to give to drink. farrab il-firaax he 
watered the chickens. farrabt-a-ha Ijaaga sat;la I gave 
her a cold drink.llJarrab-ha min kilan-ha he gave her a 
hard time. 2 to cause to absorb. mifarraba b-Ioon 
raljmar tinted with red. 3 to make to smoke. 4 to air 
(e.g., a room). - IvilS to make way for a current of air 
to enter. -vn tafriib; ava/pva mifarrab . 
...,., ~I ritfarrab 1 or riffarrab 1 Ivtl I to be caused to 
absorb. or soak up. 2 (also ritfarrab nafas-u) to catch 
one's breath, take a breather. rUt;lud iffarrab 
(nafas-ak) mis-sillim sit down and catch your breath 
after (climbing) the stairs. -vn tafarrub; iva mitfarrab. 
lYJ"; 
...,.,1..,.:. furraab Icoll nl tassel(s). 
~ I::":' furraaba lunit n, pi farariib, furrabaatl a tassel. 
Ilrurraabit xurg (1) saddle tassel. (2) person of no con-
sequence, nonentity. 
...,.,:-,.:.. mifarrab ladjl decorated with tassels. 
3y.)~ 
...,.,::,.:. farrab 2 Ivtl[carp} to plane (wood).lIfaarit tafriib 
smoothing plane. -vn tafriib; ava/pva mifarrab. 
...,.,~I ritfarrab 2 or riffa~rab2/vil[carpl to be planed. 
-iva mitfarrab. 
4 U 
• 
• .) IJ" 
...,.,;I .. ~ faarib In plfawaaribl moustache. 
5 y.) ~ see y I.) ~ : furaab I, faraab 1 
.:Jly.)~ see also Iy.)~ 
u~..,.:. farbaat Ifem nIl fruit or rose-flavoured syrup, 
drink made of diluted syrup. IIdamm-u farbaat he is 
sweet-natured. - riI-binti difarbaat this girl is a honey! 
-t;ahwa (or faay) farbaat over-sweet coffee (or tea). 
2 sugar syrup used in the preparation of various 
sweetmeats. 
J;~..,.:. farbatli In 1'1 -yyal vendor of sweet drinks. 

..::...l.;~ r 
farbataat ladi invarl {women, joel sweet, cute 
(especially of children). 
..; y ,;"; see ..;" y ,; ..; : farbuuf 
.!Jy,;"; 
~,r farbik {slang/l Ivtl to entangle, foul up, mix up. 
2 Ivil to become entangled, fouled or mixed up. 
'lif-XU[UU[ mifarbika f-bale[-a-ha the lines are entangled 
with one another. - vn farbaka; ava/pva mifarbik. 
4 ro'l fitfarbik or fiffarbik Ivil {slangl to be or be-
come entangled, fouled up or mixed up. - avaliva 
mitfarbik. 
";"y,;"; 
...r Yo r farbuuf <P sar-posh> In pi farabiifl hood for 
protecting the lit tobacco in a water-pipe. 
"'"y,;"; 
0Yo';l.. farboon <Fr charbon> Inl I carbon. 2 {auto] 
coke deposits (in an engine). 3 {e/ec] carbon-points (in 
a generator). 
':;",;"; 
..::...,;".:.. furt <Engl> I In pi -aat, -aatl shorts, short 
trousers. 2/adi invarl short (of clothes). ljami~ furt 
short-sleeved shirt. ban[aloon furt shorts. - also furl. 
[,,; ..; 
Cr farag' Inl anus. 
~ r faragi ladil anal. l:Juljnafaragiyya enema. 
I C,; ..; 
Cr faral:J I (a) Ivtl to explain, elucidate.faral:J id-dars 
he explained the lesson. II famr' y[uulfarl:J-u a compli-
cated matter. - vn farl:J; ava faaril:J; pva mafruul:J. 
C,r farl:J I Iprep, always w pron suffl the same as. 
lja~~ar il-fustan-da xamsa santi wil-fustaan it-taanifarl:Ju 
shorten this dress five centimetres and the other one the 
same. 2 In plfuruul:Jl explanation. 
~ 
r 
fariil:Ja' In pi faraayil:Jl I division, section. 
fariil:Ja e[aribiyya income or tax bracket. 2a microscope 
slide. 2b photographic slide. 3 slice (of meat etc.). 
:b..,.:.... majral:Ja In pi mafaaril:Jl I mortuary, morgue. 
2 autopsy room. 
er.;1 fitfaral:J I or fiffaral:J I Ivil to be explained, be 
elucidated. - iva mitfiril:J. 
C.,.:.; 1 finfaral:J I 
= 
fitfaral:J I. 
- vn finfiraal:J; iva 
minfiril:J. 
C::,.. farral:J Ivtl I to cut into slices, shreds or strips. 
458 
2 {surg] to dissect. - vn tafriil:J; avalpva mifarral:J. 
C:";';I fitfarral:J or fiffarral:J Ivi/l to be cut into slices, 
shreds or strips. 2 {surgl to be dissected. - iva mitfarral:J . 
2 C,; ..; 
Cr 
faral:J 2 (i): faral:J il-ljalb (or is-sidr or ir-rool:J) to 
give pleasure, afford delight. ¥una s-sitt' fumm' 
kulsuum bi-yifril:J il-ljalb Umm Kalthum's singing is a 
delight. - vn faral:Jaan; ava faaril:J; pva mafruul:J. 
C,r firil:J ladi */1 open, breezy, comfortable, relaxing 
(of places). 2 friendly, pleasant (of people). 
C,r i fafral:J lel/l morelmost open, breezy (of places). 
2 morelmost pleasant (of people). 
Cr-' mufril:J ladi */: mufril:J il-ljalb (or is-sidr or ir-
rool:J) pleasure-giving, delightful. 
C~I finfaraI:J2 Nil passive offaral:J2. -vn finfiraal:J; 
iva minjiril:J. 
C",.:..;I fitfaral:J 2 
or fiffaral:J 2 = finfaral:J 2. 
- iva 
mitfiril:J. 
t,; ..; 
tr farax, farax (u) Ivtl to crack, make a crack in. 
ljizaaza mafruuxa a cracked bottle. - vnfarJf' farx; ava 
faarix; pva mafruux, mafruux. 
tr farx, farx In plfuruuxl crack, fissure . 
t,r.;1 fitfarax or fiffarax Ivil to crack, be cracked. 
fik-kubbaaya wiljilit wi-ffaraxit the glass fell and crack-
ed. - iva mitfirix. 
t~1 finfarax = fitfarax. -iva mmfirix. 
t'r farrax,farrax I/vtl to crack (a number of things 
or a number of times). fif-fams' farraxit il-buuya the 
sun cracked the paint. 2 Ivil to crack, become cracked. 
'lif- fare[' niffit wi-farraxit the earth became dry and 
cracked. - vn tafriix; avalpva mifarrax. 
t::""'1 fitfarrax or fiffarrax Ivil to crack, be or become 
cracked. - avaliva mitfarrax. 
I~,;"; 
~r farad (u, i) Ivil I to make an escape, slip away. 
farad minni fiz-zal:Jma he managed to escape me in the 
crowd. fin-noomfarad min liyuun-i sleep fled from my 
eyes. 2 to become absent-minded, go wool-gathering. 
- vn furuud, faradaan; avafaarid. 
~::,.. farrad Ivtl to disperse, displace, render homeless. 
ril-l:Jarb' farradit naas kitiir the war made many people 
homeless. - vn tafriid; avalpva mifarrad. 
~::""'I fitfarrad or ftffarrad Ivil to be rendered home-
less, become a vagrant. - vn tafarrud; avaliva mitfarrad, 
mutafarrid. 
~~ mutafarrid ladi *1 loutish and uncouth, yobbish. 

l~J';' 
0~r faradit (i) Ivii it was hot and oppressive (of 
weather). fid-dinya faradit qawi fimbaariy it was 
awfully hot and stuffy yesterday. -vnfard; avafaarid. 
~.r fard Inl hot and oppressive breeze, stifling heat. 
.~ r farda = fard. lizz if1arda the peak of the midday 
heat. 
(~J';' 
C~ r 
farday Ivtl to abuse in a vulgar or common 
fashion. -vnfardaya; ava mifardaY. 
CJ~.r farduuy ladj 
pI faradiiyl low-class, foul-
mouthed (usually of a woman). -alsofarfuuy. 
C~.,.:.;-I fitfarday or fiffarday Ivil to break into vulgar 
and foul-mouthed abuse. - ava mitfardaY. 
r~J';' 
r~.r fardim Ivtl {slang] to treat roughly. -vnfardama; 
ava/pva mifardim. 
r~.r;1 fitfardim or fiffardim Ivil (slang] to be roughly 
treated. - iva mitfardim. 
I 
• 
JJ ..,.. 
:,.. farr' (u) Ivil to drip, dribble. ri/-yanafiyya bi-tfurr 
the tap leaks. fanafaarir laraq I'm dripping with pers-
piration. -vn farr. fararaan; ava faarir. faarir. 
1 
• 
JJ ..,.. 
:,.. farr1 Inl 1 Ipl furuurl evil. wickedness. kat-alia f-
farr may God ward off evil! yikfii-nafarr i/-... may God 
protect us from .... min reer farr in safety. without 
mishap. as in fin fa-lia kida min reer farr ' lSaafir 
wi-tirgallina qawaam God willing you will go away and 
come back safely. kaafi xeer-u farr-u he is humble. 
unassuming or living modestly. la minn(ak) wala 
kfaayit farr-(ak) if (you're) useless (you) needn't be 
positively harmful as well! fif1arr ' barra wi-bliid '" 
may evil be remote! (fal!,) bild if1arr u laleek (or 
lannak) '" may you be protected from evil (a thousand 
times over)! xad if-farr' w-raay '" never mind. it's no-
thing (said to one responsible for a minor accident. such 
as breakage. spillage etc.). 2 lin constrl worst. c[arab-ni 
farr ' qarba he hit me with the worst of blows. 
JI:'" farraani ladj ·1 vicious. spiteful. wicked. evil. 
leen farraniyya evil eye. 
J..:'" firriir 1 lad j * and pI fafraarl evil. villainous. 
farwaay firriira evil spirits. 2/nl villain (e.g .. in a 
story). 
J 
• 
I 
.JJ..,.. seeaso JJ[. 
ji..1 fiftarr Ivil to ruminate. chew the cud. II fima 
459 
bi-tquul yafarr iflarr are you trying to pick a fight? -iva 
miflarr. 
•. /;._1 fifliraara Inl chewing the cud. 
4 
• 
JJ ..,.. 
;lr faraar Icoll nl spark(s).leen-u bi-l{uqq 'faraar his 
eyes gleam (with anger). Ilfaraar falmaa; diamond 
chips. 
.;lr faraara lunit n, pI -aall a spark. 
UJ';'> 
jr farz <Fr> Inl {elee] charge. 
fi/-baccariyya 
ma-f-haa1 farz the battery is dead. 
j r firz <Engl> Inl jersey, sweater. - also jirs. 
jr firiz ladj *1 vicious. -alsofaris. 
..,..J';' 
...rr farisT ladj *1 vicious, ferocious. mugrim faris 
vicious criminal. - also firiz. 
4...lr 
faraasa Inl viciousness, ferocity. 
I. 
• 
..,..J..,.. 
.;. r 
faraf (i) 1 Ivtl to pour brine over (vegetables for 
pickling). 2/vil to produce whey (of milk). - avafaarif; 
pva mafruuf. 
.;. r 
firf' Inll whey. 2 pickling-brine. 
4...1:'" farraafa In pI -aatl dish for whey. 
...r r.;1 fitfarafor fiffaraflvil to be covered with brine. 
- iva mitfirif. 
1. 
• 
..,..J..,.. 
...r r firf1 In pI furuuf. firaaf, furufal bundle, bunch 
(e.g .. of carrots. turnips or onions). 
.;.:,.. farraf Ivtl to make (e.g .. carrots, turnips or on-
ions) into bundles. -vn tafriif; ava/pva mifarraf. 
oJ'::":"1 fitfarraf or fiffarraf Ivil to be made into bun-
dles (of. e.g .. carrots. turnips or onions). - iva mitfarraf. 
J .;. J';' see ~.;. J .;. : firfi. firfaaya 
'-:J .;. J .;. 
'":-r 
farfib I Ivtl to fringe, put a fringe on. faal 
mifarfib fringed shawl. 2 Ivil to drip. trickle. fid-damm I 
kaan bi-yfarfib mig-gary blood was dripping from the 
wound. - vn farfaba: avalpva mifarfib. 
~ J-r 
farfuuba In pI farafiibl strand of a fringe. 
II ri/-mayya nazla farafiib farafiib the water is falling in 
an irregular trickle. 
,":-.,.:.;-1 fitfarfib or fiffarfib Ivil to be fringed. -iva 
mitfarfib. 

c ..; J"; see C.J"; J ..; : jarjuulj 
t";J"; 
t!-.r jarjax Ivil to grate, make a grating sound. -vn 
jarjaxa; ava mifarjax. 
I 
• 
• 
JV"JV" 
.r.r jarjar 1 Ivtl to serrate. II mac;a.s.s' mfarjar 
(1) pinking shears. (2) thinning scissors. -vn jarjara; 
ava/pva mifarjar. 
;.r.r jarjara In pi -aat, jaraajirl serrated sickle. 
.r;:.;1 ritfarjar or rifjarjar Ivil to be serrated. -iva 
mitfarjar. 
2 
• 
• 
JV"JV" 
.r.r jarjar2 Ivil to drip, trickle. ril-mayyajarjarit min 
iI-Ijanafiyya the water dripped from the tap. -vn 
jarjara; ava mifarjar. 
3 
• 
• 
JV"JV" 
.r.r jarjar 3 Iprop nl name of a character in an 
elementary reading book. II {ariic;it jarjar method of 
teaching reading word by 
word, 
rather than 
alphabetically. 
C.J ..; J ..; 
C",;,.r jarjuulj ladj 
pljarajiiljl low-class, 
foul-
mouthed (usually of a woman). - also jarduulj. 
~";J"; 
..r-.r jirji Icoll nl pieces of plastic used in inlay work. 
~w..r jirjaaya/unit n, pi -aatl a piece of plastic used in 
inlay work. 
Ij,J"; 
.1.r jara{1 (u) Ivtl to make an incision in, slit (open). 
jara( ba(n is-samaka he slit open the belly of the fish. 
-vnjar{; avajaari{; pva majruu(. 
.1.r jar( 1 In pi juruu{1 incision, slit, slash. geeb-ak fii 
jar{ there is a slit in your pocket. 
~.r jar{a Inl I linst n, pi -aatl a slashing, a slitting. 
- Ipl -aat, jura{1 2 incision, slash. 3a slash, oblique, 
shilling-stroke. rutubiis bi-!ar{a bus with a diagonal 
stroke through the route number (indicating a variation 
in the route). 3b hyphen. 
~.r jirii{ Inl Ilpl rajri{a, jaraayi{, jir{aanl tape, 
band, strip, ribbon. jirii( tasgiil recording-tape. jirii{ 
[amba lamp wick. jirii( tangiid ruffle tape (for curtains). 
jirii{ (manr; iI-Ijam/) intra-uterine device. jirii{ liljaam 
{e/ee] insulating tape. 2 Ipl jaraayi{1 stripe of rank (in 
460 
the police or armed forces). 3/pl jaraayi{, jir{aanl 
3a track (of a railway or tramway). 3b (conveyor) belt. 
~.r jirii{a In pljaraayi{, jari{aatl 1 piece of ribbon. 
2 stripe of rank (in the police or armed forces). xad 
jirii{a he got promoted (in the non-commissioned 
ranks). 
~.r jirii{i: duudjirii{i tape-worm(s) . 
.11~ jarraa( In °1 cut-purse, pickpocket. 
.1.r-- majra( In pi majaari{1 scalpel, lancet. 
.1;:.;1 ritfara{1 or rifjara{' Ivil to be slit (open). -iva 
mitfiri{ . 
.1;:.;1 rinfara{ = ritfara{ I. - iva minjiri{. 
.1~ jarra{1 Ivtl to cut, slit (a number of times or in a 
nU!'1ber of places), scarify. [IS-sudaan bi-yjarra{u wi/j-
u-hum in the Sudan they slash their faces (for tribal 
marking). -vn tajrii{; ava/pva mifarra{. 
.1:;":"1 ritfarra(' or rifjarra{' Ivil to be cut or slit (a 
number of times or in a number of places). -iva 
mitfarra{. 
2j,J"; 
.1.r jara{2 (u) Ivtl to stipulate, demand, require. 
jara{t'r;alee rinnu yirgar; badri I made it a condition 
that he come back early. -vn jar{; ava jaari{; pva 
majruu(. 
.1.r jar{2 In pljuruu(1 condition, stipulation.r;ala(or 
Ii- or bi-)jar{' rinn ... on condition that ..... IImifjar{not 
necessarily. -juruu{ .siljljiyya health standards. - rilli 
rawwil-ujar(, raxr-u nuur (or salaam) {p~ov] "" a prior 
stipulation leads to a happy outcome. -jar(' gazaari 
penalty clause (in a contract) . 
~ 
.1;:.;1 ritfara{2 or rifjara{2 Ivil to be stipulated, be 
imposed (of a condition) .. - iva mitfiri{ . 
.1 ~ jarra{2 = jara[2. - ava mifarra{. 
.1:;":"1' ritfarra{2 or rifjarra{2 Ivilto make (demanding) 
conditions. - iva mitfarra(. 
.1 rl riftara{ !vtl t~ stipulate, demand, require. 
riftara{U r;alayya rinni rasiib ri{alya they made it a 
condition that I leave Italy. -vn riftiraac; ava miftiri{. 
11 yujtara{ it is a necessary condition. ma-yujlara(-!not 
necessarily. 
.1lr
l rifliraa{ In pi -aall stipulation. 
3(j,J";) 
.1.J"':' jur{ <Engl> I In pi -aall shorts, short trousers. 
2 lad j invarl short (of clothes). c;amii.s jur{ short-sleeved 
shirt. ban(aloon jur{ shorts. - also furl. 
~.r jur{a Inl police. rif-!ur{a I-r;askariyya the Milit: 
ary Police. 

tJ~ 
tr faral T (a) Ivil to set out, begin, undertake (to do 
s.th.). furuul fi-qatl intent to kill. -vn furuul; ava 
faaril; pva mafruul. 
t.)w, faaril In pI fawaarill street.llxalla ... fawaaril to 
make a mess of, as in faxalli wiff-ak fawaaril I'll cut 
roads in your face! lJa-nxalii dfBG-humfawaaril we'll 
make a mess of their defence! 
"r)"';' fawarli In pI -yyal street urchin. 
tJ.r- mafruul In pI mafarUlI project, plan. 
tr farl Inl [lsi} canon law .lIfi1arl' mUn == in whose 
book? says who? 
"r r 
farli ladjl 1 legal (particularly in terms of Isla-
mic law). sinn i farli (legal) majority. warasafarliyyiin 
legitimate heirs. 2 pertaining to Islamic law. 
t1r jiraal, furaal In pI fifrila, firilal sail. 
"rlr firaali, furaali ladjl 1 pertaining to sails. 
II tayyaara firaliyya glider. 2 pertaining to gliding. 
~r farUla Inl [lsi} canon law. 
~ 
1 ~ jirraala or furraala Inl 1 window in or over a 
door. 2 automatic platen press. 
t~ farral Ivtl to legislate. -vn tafrUl; ava mifarril; 
pva mufarral. 
,j"..,r; tafrUli ladjl legislative, pertaining to taw. 
finulta t-tafriliyya the legislative body. 
t~ mufarril In *1 legislator. 
"';J~ 
...; r faraf Inl honour. lJaras faraf guard of honour. 
bi1araf-ak really? on your honour? wi1araf-i 1-
amawwit-u by my honour, I'll kill him! 
i.ir farafa In pl-aatl 1 ornamental cornice (e.g., 
round the roof of a mosque). 2 frieze design in tent 
applique work used on screens at the entrance to a 
marquee (see PI.H, 25). 
~r farUf 1 (also firUf) ladj plfurafa, fafraaf! hon-
ourable, noble, virtuous, honest. II fil-xatma f1arUfa 
the Holy Koran. 2 In pI fafraaf onlyl descendant ofthe 
Prophet Muhammad. 
...; ri fafrafl lell morelmost honourable etc. 
~.r-- mafrafiyya Inl I projecting balcony enclosed by 
lattice-like wooden screens. 2 [carp] technique involv-
ing the turning of wood in certain traditional patterns 
resulting in a complex lattice-work effect (originally 
applied only to the screens of the projecting balcony 
-see PI.G). 
...;~ farraf I Ivt/ to honour (in particular with one's 
presence). ma-tfarraf bet-na won't you please give us 
the honour of a visit!farraftuu-na you've honoured us 
(formula of leave-taking uttered by the host to his 
461 
guests, who respond with the formula fallaah yifarraf 
miqdaar-ak). 2 Ivil to bestow honour with one's pre-
sence. farraftu fimta when did you arrive? -also used 
sarcastically, as infarraf yifrab faay malaana his High-
and-Mightiness deigned to drink tea with us. -vn tafrUf; 
ava mifarraf. 
~,r; tafrUfa In pI -aatl 1 [obsol} ceremonial dress, 
court-dress, full-dress (uniform). 2 guard of honour. 
J~,r; tafrifaati In pI -yyal [admin} official responsi-
ble for receiving important visitors, master of cere-
monies, chamberlain . 
...;:":"1 fitfarraf or fiffarraf Ivil to be honoured. -iva 
mitfarraf. 
...;:,.:.. tafarraf: tafarrafna response to an introduction 
== very honoured to meet you . 
...; ri fafraF Ivil to have supervision, be in charge. 
lJa-yibqa mufrif lala I-lummaal he will be in charge of 
the workers. -vn fifraaf; ava mufrif. 
"';Ir! fifraaf Inl supervision. 
Jlr ! fifraafi ladjl supervisory. 
",;.r- mufrif In *1 superintendent. mUfrif figtimaali 
social counsellor in a school. 
I 
-
• 
Io.JJ ...,.. 
~r jiriq, faraq I (a) Ivil 1 to choke. landu falal 
fil-balluum wi-law firib yifraq he has paralysis in the 
oesophagus and if he drinks he chokes. 2 to flood, be 
choked (ofan engine). -vnfaraq,faraqaan; avafaariq . 
~~ farraq I 1 Ivtl to cause to choke. 2 Ivil to be 
flooded, be choked (of an engine. -vn tafrUq; ava 
mifarraq. 
~:":"I fitfarraq I or fiffarraq I Ivil to be choked, be 
flooded (of an engine). -iva mitfarraq. 
1 
-
• 
Io.JJ ...,.. 
,:,li r farqaan ladjl parched. 
ui1r faraaqi <Copt> ladjl unirrigated, parched (of 
land). 
~:-,- farraq2 Ivil to become parched.or dry. fil-farqi 
farraqit the land dried up. -vn tafrUq; ava mifarraq. 
~:":"I fitfarraq2 or fiffarraq2 Ivil to become parched 
or dry. -iva mitfarraq. 
3 
-
• 
Io.JJ ...,.. 
~r faraq2 (u, i) Ivil to rise (of the sun). -vnfuruuq; 
avafaariq. 
~r farq Inl east. II faqul-Iak if1arq i tquul il-lfarb 
[prov} == you and I are always at loggerheads with one 
another. 
ui r farqi ladj *1 eastern. dirasaat farqiyya oriental 

studies. II rat;~ I fart;i belly-dancing. -l:Jut;na fart;iyya J 
enema (corruption offaragiyya). 
~.rJ I fif-fart;iyya Iprop nl Sharqiya, province in the 
north-east of the Delta. 
~Jli r 
fart;aawi Iplfarat;wal 1 ladjl of, or pertaining 
to, the province of Sharqiya. 2 In! one from Sharqiya. 
Jr-- mafrit; In pi mafaarit;1 east. riI-mafaarit; wil-
maraarib the corners of the earth. 
J:":' farrat; J Ivil to go eastward. II tifarrat; tirarrab 
wherever you go, as in tifarrat; tirarrab laazim tidfaE 
whatever you do or say you will have to pay. - vn tafriit;; 
ava mifarrat;. 
J,r:;...... mustafriq, mustafrit; In ·1 orientalist. 
5 J .;"; see J.J';";: faruut;a 
I.!J.; ..; 
.!lr farae (i) Ivtl to involve.l:Ja-yifrikuu-kfit-tuhma 
they will drag you into the charge (as an accomplice). 
-vnfarakaan; avafaarik; pva mafruuk. 
.!lr firk Inl 1 partnership. raar if-firk ... partnership 
spells trouble. 2 [isil polytheism, attribution of part-
ners to God. - ladj invarl 3 jointly owned. Eimaara 
flrk a jointly owned apartment building. 
;S r 
/irka lIn pi -aat, farikaat T, firak J I business, 
company, firm. 2/adj invarl shared, jointly owned. 
.!lr farak 1 In plfiraakl trap. 
.s r 
farika Inll = firka. 2 community, communion. 
l:Jayaat if-farika communal living. 
4r firlik In plfurakal 1 partner, associate·llraagil 
zayy if-firilk iI-mixaalif an argumentative man. 
- rif-firiik iI-mixaalif rixsar wi-xassar-u [provl cause a 
contrary partner to lose, even if you yourself thereby 
lose. 2 accomplice. 
~ 
r 
jlriika In pi -aatl female partner. firiikitl:Jayaat-i 
my wife. 
.!l"..,1 riifarak or riffarak Ivil passive of farak. - iva 
miiflrik. 
.!l.r-: I rinfarak = riifarak. - iva minfirik. 
.!l.J\..;. faarik 1 Ivtl to participate with. rafark-ak fil-
mafruuE I'll join you in the project. IIEayza ifarik-ni 
f-l:Jayaat-i she wants to ipterfere in my life. 2 Ivil to take 
part. laazim nifaarik fil-maghuud da we must partici-
pate in this effort. -vn mifarka, mufarka; ava mifaarik . 
.!l.J~1 ritfaarik or riffaarik Ivil 1 to take a share. 
Eaawiz yitfaarik fil-rataawa he wants a share of the 
protection money. 2 to go into partnership (in busi-
462 
ness). 3 to be joined into partnership. -ava/iva 
mitfaarik . 
.!lri rafrakT I/vtl to involve. 2/vil[Isll to attribute 
• partners to God. -vn rifraak; ava mufrik. 
.!ll.r-! rifraak Inl[Isll polytheism, attribution of part-
ners to God . 
.!l.r.:.1 riftarak Ivil 18 to participate. Ib to become a 
member. 'lana miftirik fi-naadi g-giziira I'm a member 
of the Guezira Club. 2 to become a subscriber. 3 to 
hold in common. fii l:Jagaat kitiir bi-yiftirku fiiha they 
have a lot in common. -vn riftiraak; ava miftirik; pva 
muftarak. 
.!l1.r.:.1 fiftiraak In pi -aatl 1 participation. bi-ftiraak 
maca 
in 
combination 
with. 
2 membership. 
3 subscription. riftiraak iI-t;atr season ticket for the 
train. 
~1.r.:.1 fiftiraaki 
lladj 
·1 socialist, socialistic. 
riI-illil:Jaad I-iftiraaki the Socialist Union. 2 In ·1 person 
holding socialist beliefs, socialist. 
~1.r..:.'lI1 riI-fiftirakiyya In! socialism . 
.!l.;.:... muftarak I/adjl common, shared. IIt;aasim 
muftarak [mathl lowest 
common denominator. 
-Eaamil muftarak [mathl common factor. 2/n pi -aatl 
2a [plumbl joint. 2b [eleel multi-plug socket, adaptor. 
2c [autol dual exhaust-pipe. 
Z.!J.; ..; 
.!l r furuk <T ,uruk> ladj invarl unfit, unsound (par-
ticularly with respect to military service). Earabiyya 
furuk an unsound car.llfiluusfuruk counterfeit money . 
.!l:":' farrak Ivtl 1 to render unsound or useless. 2 to 
reject as medically unfit for military service. -vn tafriik; 
ava/pva mifarrak. 
.!l?1 ritfarrak or riffarrak Ivil passive offarrak. -iva 
mitfarrak. 
3 .!J .;"; see .!J I.S .; d- : fureek, fureeka 
oJ'.!l.; ..; 
..,..s r farkasi 1 ladjl Circassian.llfarxafarkasi varie-
ty of chicken characterized by a bald neck. 2 In 
pi faraksa, farkasl a Circassian . 
~ 
r farkasiyya Inl dish of poultry cooked in a sauce 
containing nuts, and served with rice. 
- oJ'.!J.;"; 
.:;$-S r farkiskiin <Engl> Inl shark-skin cloth. 
I 
• 
r.; oJ' 
r.r- faram 
(u) 
Ivtl to tear, split, slit. faram 

ig-ga/labiyya fiz-zal:Jma he tore his galabiya in the 
crowd. -vnfarm; avafaarim; pva mafruum. 
jr farm In plfuruuml inlet, bay. 
j.,.:.i rafram ladj, femfarma, plfurml harelipped. 
j.r'1 ritfaram or riffaram Ivil to tear or be torn, split 
or be split. barwiz i~-~uura lafaan ma-tiffaram-fframe 
the picture so it won't get torn. - ava/iva mitjirim. 
j.ro 1 rinfaram = ritfaram. - ava/iva minjirim. 
z 
• 
(' J ..,. 
j r 
furum: furum burum (I) mess, chaos, as in 
rid-dunyafurum burum life is a sorry mess. (2) nonce 
phrase used in spells == abracadabra. 
..I:o('J ~ 
.k. r farma( Ivtl to shred, tear to shreds. - vnfarma(a; 
ava/pva mifarma{. 
463 
J... r 
farma{a Inl impertinence, rudeness. balaaf 
farma{a don't be so bloody rude. 
.1,..r" farmuu{ ladj pi faramii{1 impertinent, rude, 
foul-mouthed. 
J,,. r 
farmuu(a In pi faramii{11 cloth, rag. 2 harlot, 
whore. ya-bn if-farmuu{a son of a whore! farmuu{a 
middariyya wala l:Jurra mbahraga {prov] better a mod-
est prostitute than a tarted-up lady. 
.k.;:.il ritfarma{ or riffarma{ Ivil I to be torn to 
shreds. 2 to be or become impertinent, rude or sharp-
tongued. -ava/iva mitfarma{. 
JiJJ ~ 
..;; r 
farnalj Ivil to produce a cocoon (of silkworms). 
-vnfarnalja; ava mifarnalj. 
~ r 
farnalja In pi faraaniljl cocoon. 
OJ ~ 
'r farih ladj *1 gluttonous, greedy. 
~Ir faraaha Inl gluttony, greed. ramma-nta farih 
faraaha what a glutton you are! 
J J ~ see loS J ~ 
: farwa, farwa, muftarawaat 
J I J J ~ see J J J ..,. : firwaal 
JJJ ~ see also JJJ ~ 
~Jr faruulja Inl hot air flue between fire and baking 
chamber of a mud oven (see PI.C, 11). 
IIoSJ~ 
'Jr farwa. farwa In pi -aat. -aat, firawl buy, purch-
ase, deal. 
.... 
JJ.r 
.Ir 
.1 r fira Ivnl buying, purchasing. rit-beel wif-
fira buying and selling. Ilfira I-labd; wala tarbiit-u 
{prov] (the cost of) buying a (trained) slave is prefer-
able to (the trouble of) training him ... sometimes it's 
more economical to buy the finished article. 
~Ir firaaya Ivnl buying. purchasing. 
loS) ... faari I active verbal adjective of riftara.farii-ha 
b-filuus-u huwwa he has bought it with his own money. 
Ilhiyya mraat-ifaryaa-ni do you think my wife owns me! 
- ranafarii-k mahma l:J~al no matter what happens, I'll 
stand by you. - rilli farii-k yixdim-ak kiwayyis he will 
serve you well who values you (i.e. enough to buy you). 
2 In *1 buyer, purchaser. 
IoS.r'1 rinfara Ivil to be bought. - iva minfiri. 
IoS.r'1 ritfara or riffara = rinfara. -iva mitfiri . 
IoS,;-1 riftara or riftara Ivtl I to buy. riftareet-u 
b-sabla gneeh I bought it for seven pounds. II riftiri 
ma-tbil-f {prov] ... learn from other's confidences, but 
don't give away your own. -xa/la iii ma-yiftiri yitfarrag 
to make a public spectacle (of oneself), make a scene . 
2 to value dearly. rana ma-b-ansaa-J iIIi miftirii-ni 
I don't forget those who care for me. II riftareet rislaam-
i ... I behaved in a gentlemanly fashion. - ava miftiri. 
faari. 
..s,;..:... muftari In *1 buyer, customer. 
loS ,;.:.11 rit-muftari Iprop nl {astron] Jupiter . 
.:..IJ';":'" muftarawaat Ipl nl purchases. 
..... ~I,;-. muftarayaat Ipl nl purchases. qism it-
muftarayaat 
(or 
rit-muftarawaat) 
purchasing 
department. 
Z..sJ ~ 
':'~r furyaan f or firyaan f In plfarayiinl artery. 
J~r furyaaniT or firyaanif ladjl arterial. 
IIoSJ~ 
~r furya <Copt> In pi -aatl{Chr] censer, thurible. 
~IoSJ~ 
~r fureek <T r;6rek> Icoll nl type of bun. 
~ 
r 
fureeka Ipl -aatl unit noun of fureek. 
~.i ~ 
.i.;. fazz (i) Ivil to deviate, be an exception. rifmilna 
rinta tfizz alan ku/l in-naas why should it be you who 
are different from everybody? - vn fuzuuz; ava faaziz. 
faazz f . 
~J.i.. fuzuuz Inl perversion. deviation.fuzuuz ginsi sex-
~al perversion (specifically homosexuality). 
~I ~ fawaazz Ipl nl perverts. 

Jj ..; 
~;L:J I S'ifiazliyya Iprop nl Sufi order founded by Abu 
I-Hasan el-Shadhili. 
[.;, Jj"; 
r::: .} r. Jizlung 
or Jazlung 
<Fr> 
In 
pi -aatl 
chaise-longue. 
.J j"; 
I~ Jaza Inl smell,oilroma, fragrance. 
tV""; 
t-l.:. jaasil ladjl huge, vast (usually of distance).farq' 
Jaasil a tremendous difference. 
o 1$ V" ..; 
~l.:. Jaseeh <Fr chassis> In pi -aatl I chassis, frame. 
bi-nisbab iI-mutoor min ifiaseeh we strip the motor 
from the frame. 2 [phot] wooden film-cassette (for a 
studio cam.era). 
.;,t..;..; 
~ 
Jajxan <P shash-khiina> Ivtl to rifle (a gun 
barrel). - vn JaJxana; avalpva mifaJxan. 
~I 
S'itjlljxan or S'ifJaJxan Ivil passive of JaJxan. 
- iva mitjaJxan. 
1$ ...; ..;..; see 1$"';";: muJtaJfa, miftaJfa 
(('..;..;> 
r 
Jifm <P chashm> Inl Indian liquorice (Abrus 
precatorius), a shrub bearing seeds which are powdered 
and were formerly used as a medicine for inflamed 
eyes. IIbu((' f-leen-ak Jiwayyit Jifm have some 
consideration. 
~ 
jifma <T r4me> Inl [rur] outhouse, outside 
lavatory. 
.;,..; ..; 
.r- jifni <T re~ni> Inl random checking, sampling. 
lama I Jifni lala Juyl-i-na he spot-checked our work. 
~ 
Jifingi In pi -yyal [obsol] appraiser, assayer. 
1$";"; 
_. ; 
.r:-L. JaaJa 2 Ivil to flutter, wave in the wind. IIq~16-'i 
bi-yJaaJi lalee I have a longing for it. - vn mifaJiyya; 
ava mifaaJi. 
yy..,,; 
~ 
jaqqab Ivtl to lacerate, slash.Jaqqabuu-lu wifJ-u 
464 
they cut his face about. -vn taJqiib; ava/pva mifaqqab. 
~I S'itjaqqab or S'ifJaqqab Ivil to be lacerated, be 
slashed. -iva mitjaqqab. 
J~"; 
J..4.:. Juqali In pi -yyal quarrelsome or fractious per-
son, bully. 
1$ ~..; see also 1$ j; ..; 
~ 
Jatfya (also Jatya) In pi -aat, Juqayl splinter, 
sliver. 
yb"; 
..,..t...:. Ja(ab (u) Ivtl to cross off, strike out, cancel. 
S'uJ(Ub ism-i min iI-qayma cross my name off the list. 
-vn ja(b; ava Jaa(ib; pva m"aJ(Uub. 
..,..t...:. Ja(b Inl [comm] control of payment. qism ifia(b 
or qalam ifia(b Control of Settlement section. 
~I S'itja(ab or S'ifJa(ab Ivil to be crossed off, be 
struck out, be cancelled. - iva mitji(ib. 
~I S'inja(ab = S'itja(ab. -iva minJi(ib . 
.,..l...;. Ja((ab Ivtl I to finish off, finish work on. Ja((abi 
l-ma(bax qabl' rna timJi tidy up the kitchen before you 
go! faaqil taJ(iib iI-mawaliin bass all that remains is to 
clear away the pots and pans. 2 [constr] to fit out, put 
the finishing touches to (a building). mistaniyyiin 
lal-qifaani wil-S'adawaat bitaalit il-bammaam lajaan 
nifa((ab ii-beet we're waiting for the tiles and the bath-
room fixtures so we can put the finishing touches to the 
house. 3 to cross off repeatedly. Ja((ab iI-maqaala ku[[-
a-ha he blue-pencilled the article down to practically 
nothing. II qarabt-u Ja((abt-i-lu wifJ-u I beat his face to 
pulp. - Ivi/4 to finish work, knock off, shut up shop. 
Ja((abtu walla mumkin S'a(lub l~iir lamuun are you 
closing or may I order a lemonade? -vn taj(iib; avalpva 
mifa((ab. 
lIja((ab lala to dispos~ ofthoroughly . Ja((ab lal-SOakl he 
polished off the food. Ja((ab lal-filuus he spent the 
money to the last penny. Ilfa((abu lal-qahwa they 
wrecked the cafe (causing it to close) . 
~ 
taJ(iib In pi -aat, taJa(iibl [constr] finish, 
finishing touch. 
~I S'itja((ab or S'ifJallab Ivil passive ofJallab. -iva 
mitjallab. 
j~ 
... :, y b"; 
..,.1L:J1 S'ifia(bi Iprop nl beach and district in the east-
ern part of Alexandria. 
(b"; 
~ 
Ja(ab (a) Ivil to veer, go off course. xayaal-iJa(ab 

my thoughts strayed. II fik-kamangaati raal:J jaa{i1:J the 
violinist went screeching out of tune. - rawwil ma Yiftal:J 
yintal:J ,.. as soon as he takes a course (of action) he goes 
(too) far. -vnjatl:J, jatal:Jaan; avajaati'll. 
I ~j, ~ 
)..:. Jatar (a) Ivtl to cut in half; bisect. -vn jacr; ava 
jaa{ir; pva majfUur. 
)..:. jacr In pljutuur, fajfUrll half part. 2 hemistich. 
0)..:. jacra = jatr. 
o.;\b.; jataara 
Inl 
cleverness, 
skill. 
smartness. 
II fig-gary i n~~ if-jataara [prov} ,.. valour would fight, 
but discretion would run away. 
).L:. jaa{ir I ladj * and pI juttaarl clever. smart, skilful. 
fif-jacra tirzil bi-rigli I:Jmaar [prov} a clever woman can 
spin (even) withadonkey'sleg.llma-ytubb i fi/laj-jaa{ir 
,.. it happens to the best of us (phrase said to give 
consolation in misfortune). -yajaa[ir form ofaddress to 
a child. 
)..:.i fajtar lell morelmost clever, more/most skilful. 
IIkaan reer-ak fajtar ,.. what makes you think you can 
do it (when others cleverer than you have failed)? 
o.;~ ja{(Uura Inl smart kid. 
)..:.;1 fitfatar or fifjatar Ivil I to be cut in two, be 
bisected. 2 to split, divide. -ava/iva mitfitir. 
)...:.; 1 finjatar 
= 
fitfatar. 
-vn 
finfitaar; iva/ava 
minfitir . 
..,k.:.;1 fitfattar or fifjattar Ivill to try to outwit, try to 
take advantage. ma-titfattar cala iii qadd-ak pick on 
somebody your own size! 2a to try to be clever. 
fiyyaa-k baqa tifjattar fi-drast-ak I hope, then, you'll 
try to do better in 
your studies. 
II fik-kalb i 
ma-yifjattar-ji filla cala baab daar-u [prov} ,.. every 
dog is a lion at home. 2b to become clever. -ava 
mitfattar. 
).L:. jaalir2 Ivtl to share with. nifatir-kum il- fal:Jzaan 
we share your grief (phrase of condolence used in tele-
grams). -vn mujatra. 
2 J j, ~ 
.;).L:. jatuur In pI jawatiirl meat cleaver. - also satuur. 
[.';'Jj,~ 
~)..:. jatrang, jatarang Inl chess. 
Ij,j, • 
• 
I.J" 
.k.:. jattl (u) I/vtl to strike (a match). jatteet cuud 
kibriit I struck a match. 2 Ivil to strike off course, veer 
away. caql-u bi-yjutt his mind wanders. II finta bi-tfutti 
fil-kalaam (1) you're indiscreet in what you say. 
465 
(2) you're getting off the subject. -vn jatataan; ava 
jaa{it; pva majtuut. 
~11.:. jattaata In pI -aatl striking surface for matches. 
jattaa{it mifl striking surface of a book of matches. 
bl fitfattor fifjattlvi/to be struck (of matches). - iva 
mitfatt· 
2j,j,~ 
~ 
jatta Inl chili pepper (Capsicum conicum). 
~ 
jiteeta Inl I hot peppery sauce. 2 bird pepper 
(Capsicum frutescens). 
:(j,j,~) 
.la.:. jatt2 In pljutuutl bank, shore.lIlissa calaj-jatt,.. 
still untried, not yet exposed to any stress. 
1..:. jatt3; jatt" carabaan [mus} mode in Arabic music 
beginning on G and having A flat, E flat, and F sharp. 
I"';j,~ 
...Al...:. jataF (u) Ivtl to rinse, rinse off.jatafit ii-Yasiil she 
rinsed the laundry. -vnjau, jatafaan; avajaa{if; pva 
majV-tuf. 
;ij 11.:. jattaafa In pI -aatl bidet attachment in a lavatory 
bowl. 
~I fitfataF or fifjataF Ivil to be rinsed. - iva 
mitfi{if· 
~ 
1 fin/ataf = fitfataf. - iva minfitif. 
....ah.:. jattaf Ivtl to rinse off, rinse (a number of things, 
or a number of times). -vn tajliif; ava/pva mifattaf. 
kl fitfattaf or fifjattaf Ivil to rinse oneself off or be 
rinsed. - ava/iva mitfattaf. 
2"'; j, ~ 
...Al...:. jataF (u) Ivtl I [carp, metal} to bevel, make a 
chamfer on. II taw~iil bi-jatf scarfing. 2 to chip. -vnjau, 
jatafaan; avajaatif; pva majtuuf. 
...Al...:. jatf In pI -aatl I [carp, metal} chamfer, bevel, 
bevelled edge. 2 chip. 
~ 
jatfa In pI jutafl chip. 
~ 
jatfiyya = jatfa. 
~I fitfataF or fifjataF Ivil I [carp, metal} to be 
bevelled. 2 to be chipped. - iva mitfitif. 
.;, j, ~ see .;, j, IS ~ : fitaan, jitaani 
IS j, ~ see IS J# ~ :jatya 
1Sj;~ see also ISJ#~ 
~ 
ja;ya In plja;aayal piece of shrapnel. 
~ 
ja;iyya = ja;ya. 

I yt.r 
..,........ jacb In pi jucuubl I people, populace. lif1acb 
il-ma~ri the Egyptian people. 2 [Chr] congregation. 
~ 
jacbi l ladi 
*1 
I folk, traditional. 
la¥aani 
jacbiyya folk songs. 2 popular, of the mass of people. 
masaakin jacbiyya 
(government-subsidized) low-
income housing developments. lu nufuuzjacbi he has 
grass-roots' support. qumaaj jacbi cheap cloth for 
popular consumption. 
~ 
jacbi": nazlajacb1yya [path] bronchitis. 
( •.. jacbiyya Inl popularity. 
;;"....::. jUcba In pi jucabl I division (e.g .. in the police). 
2 [a cad] 2a unit within which university departments 
are grouped (e.g., College of Science, Division of 
Arts). 2b section, division of a large class. 3 [anat} 
bronchiole. 
4,......:. jicba In pljicabl I [rur} forked stick (used, e.g., 
as a shepherd's crook, or as a prop for the axis of an 
Archimedes' screw, or, fixed in an upright position, as a 
peg on which clothes, food, etc. may be hung; see, e.g., 
PI.D, 3). 2 (coral) reef. 
.,..;... jauab Ivtl to split, divide. -vn tajciib; ava/pva 
mifauab. 
~I litjauab or lifjauab Ivil I to be split, be di-
vided. 2 to branch off or out. li{·{ariiq bi-yitjauab 
hinaak the road divides there. - ava/iva mitjauab. 
2 yt .r 
.:,~ jacbaan Inl Shaban, the eighth month of the 
Muslim year. 
byt.r 
.l..,...- jacba{ Ivtl to cause to cling. da-nta Iii jacba{t 
il-waad fiyya you're the one who made the boy cling to 
my coat tails! -vn jacba{a; ava/pva mifacba{. 
.l.."...... jucbee{ Icoll nl a variety 'of nettle. 
.k,....:.;1 litjaca[ or lifjacba{ Ivil to cling, hang on. 
litjacba{ fi- lumm-u he clung to his mother. mltjacba{ 
fil-lutubiis hanging on to the bus. Ilmltjacba{ cala 
l-bibaal id-dayba [prov} clinging to frayed ropes. - ava 
mitjacba(. 
loJ t.r 
~ 
jacar (u) Ivil I to have a feeling, experience a 
sensation. caayiz yujc iT flnnu muhlmm he wants to 
feel that he's important. mitlamm' cala bac4.-u tqul1' 
jaacir bi-bard he's all curled up, you'd think he feels 
cold. 2 [abus} to spread malicious rumours. -vn 
jucuur; avajaacir. 
;"".::. jucuurl Inl feeling, sensation. ma-canduu-j 
466 
jucuur he has no feeling, he's thick-skinned. IlJucuur 
murhaf sensitivity. 
11 lli-Iaajucuur Inl the subconscious mind. 
..s;",..... jucuuri ladi *1 pertaining to feeling, sensate, 
sensational. 
1I/aajucuuri ladi *1 involuntary, unconscious, subcon-
scious. baraka lajucuriyya an involuntary or uncon-
scious movement. 
rl.. jaacir In pljucaral poet. IlJaacir ir-rabaaba a 
folk entertainer, usually in coffee-houses. - bi-yibki 
zayy if1aaclr he keeps repeating himself like a gra-
mophone record. 
..srI.. jaaciri ladi *1 poetic. 
./'- ficr In pi la!Gaarl poetry, poetic composition. 
..s./'- jicri ladi *1 poetic. 
./'-i lajcarl lell more/most poetic. 
;t.... jicaar In pi -aatl Ia slogan. Ib emblem. 2 (trade-) 
mark. 
rL. majaacir Ipl nl feelings, sensations. baaga 
massit majacr-u something which touched his feelings. 
;yo.:.... ma!Guur ladi *1 touched, crazy. 
;.. jaccar I Ivtl to cause to have a sensation or feeling, 
make aware.jaccar-ni bi-htimaam-u he made me sense 
his concern. -vn tajciir; ava/pva mifauar. 
;':';1 litjauar2 or lifjauar2 Ivil passive ofjauar'. 
- iva mitjaccar. 
./'-i fa!Gar 2 Ivtl I to cause to feel. lajcart-u linn' 
lana mabsuu[ I made him feel that I was happy. 2 to 
notify, inform. -vn lifcaar; ava mujcir . 
;t....l lifcaar In pi -aatl notification, notice (e.g., bank 
statement). 
~ 
1 listajcar Ivtl to experience the sensation of. 
listajcart id-diiq I felt depressed. II quruun isttjcaar (in-
sects') feelers, antennae. -vn listifcaar; ava mistajcar. 
2 oJ t.r 
./'- jacrlcoll n, pljucuurl I hair(s).lImajyacalabal/' 
jacr-a-ha she's a loose woman. - lumm if1ucuur (I) an 
evil female demon. (2) weeping willow (Salix babyloni-
ca). 2 hair-like substance. II silk ' jacr multi-core wire. 
-jacr' qalfa[a oakum. -qu[n' jacr raw unprocessed 
cotton. 
• ~ 
jacra In pi -aatl I lunit nl a hair. IIcandu jacra 
he's cuckoo. -{ilic minha zayy tj1acra min li-cagiin he 
emerged from it with not a hair out of place, he wriggled 
out of it cleverly. -jacra min daqn il-xanziir maksab 
[prov] "" (even) one hair from a miser is profit. 2 any of 
a range of hair-like objects (e.g., a filament, a slub, a 
lubber Ime). 3 a bit, a pinch.jacrit malb a pinch of salt. 
4 [path] trichiasis. 

~I~ falraaya In pi -aatl a hair. 
~~I rif1alriyya: baab if1alriyya area of central 
Cairo near the old wall. 
• ~ 
filra Icoll nl pubic hair. 
~~ filriyya Inl vermicelli. 
~ 
filiir Icoll nIl barley. filir-na wa/a e;aml:J i gar-na 
{prov] better our own barley than another's wheat. 
Ill:Jabbit filiir linear measure equal to 0.521 cen-
timetres. -ruu i fliir unhulled rice. 2 barley water. 
• .r-"-' filiira Ilunit n, pI -aatl a kernel of barley. 2 In 
plfalaayirl diamond-shaped piece of mother-of-pearl 
used in inlay work. 
.~ fUlayrat In pI -aat/l filament. 2 capillary. 
~ 
miflir ladj *1 hairy, hirsute. 
JI~ miflaraaniJ ladj *1 hairy, hirsute. 
;:. fauar2 Ivtl I to separate into strands or fila-
ments. 2 to remove the hair from (in tanning). -vn 
tafliir; avalpva mifauar. 
;':"1 ritfauar2 or riffauar2 Ivil passive offauar2. 
-iva mitfauar. 
t~t~ 
c::-- far:.fall Ivtl to brighten, cause to glow. ril-wiski 
far:.fal nafuux-i the whisky set my head glowing. 2 Ivil 
2a to become bright, glow. 2b to reach one's best level, 
shine (of a performer). -vnfar:.fala; avalpva mifar:.fal· 
~I ritfar:.fal or riffar:.fal Ivil I to become bright, 
glow. 2 to be made bright, be made to glow. -avaliva 
mitfar:.fal· 
j,t~ 
.la... fala{ (a) Ivtl to burn, sting (of pepper). ri/-filfil 
fala{ Iisaan-i the pepper burned my tongue. - vn 
fala[aan, fall; avafaali{; pva maflUU{ . 
.J-:.;I ritfala{' or riffala[ Ivil passive of fala(. - iva 
mitfili[. 
.J.a..:.; 1 rinfala[ = ritfala(. - iva minfili[. 
tt~ 
2- fau (i) I Ivtl to beam, radiate. ril-binti kaanit 
bi-tfiU i salaada the girl radiated happiness. 2 Ivil to 
beam, radiate, be radiated, be diffused. ris-salaada 
kaanit bi-tfill i min lenee happiness was radiating from 
his eyes. -vnfau, falalaan, riflaal; avafaalil. 
tl...:. fUlaallnl I/pl rafiual ray, beam. fUlaac if-
fams sunbeam. 2 Iplfulacaatl fanlight.fulaal iI-baab a 
small vent located over a door. 
~i rafiua In pI -aatl x-ray, x-ray photograph. 
467 
~w.i rUfaalaJ = rafiua. 
t 1....:.\ riflaal In pI -aatl radiation, radioactivity. 
riflaal zarri atomic radiation. 
2-- mufiu/adjl I radiating, emitting. 2 radioactive . 
na;aarir mufilla radioactive isotopes. 
"';t~ 
...A..- falaf (i) Ivtl I to inflame with passion. ril-binti 
falafit-u the girl set his heart on fire. 2 to hurry, rush. 
ma-tiflif-nii1 kida don't rush me! -vnfalafaan, facf; 
avafaalif; pva mafluuf. 
...A..:.; 1 ritfalaf or riffalaf Ivil passive of falaf. - iva 
mitfilif· 
....,i..!.; 1 rinfalaf = ritfalaf. - iva minfilif. 
Jt~ 
J..... falal (i) Ivtl to light, kindle. Ilfacalnaa-ha naar 
la/a I- ringiliiz we made things hot for the British. -ava 
faalil. 
4l..- fUlla,filla In pI -aat,julalll flame. II wa/adfilla 
a very bright boy. 2 (flaming) torch. 
J..:.i raflal i ladj', fern facia plfulil 1 (of people) 
blondish, fair. 2 (of animals) light grey. 
J..:.i raflal2t = fala/. -vn riflaa/; ava muflil. 
JI...:.\ riflaaiT In/-kindling, igniting, ignition. 
~I riftalalf Ivil to catch fire, ignite. e;aabil Iii-
iftilaal flammable. sariil I-iftilaal highly flammable. 
-vn riftilaa/; ava muftalil. 
JJt~ 
~ 
fallae; Ivtl 1 to string up, hang up. rig-gazzaar 
fac/ae; iI-xaruuf the butcher strung up the sheep. 2 to 
ensnare. huwwa mif laawiz yitgawwiz bassi rana iii 
I:J-afallae;-u he doesn't want to get married but I'm the 
one who will hook him. -vnfallae;a; avalpva mifallae;. 
JL...:.;I ritfallae; or riffallae; Ivil I to cling, hang on. 
kunta I:J-ae;allas-sillim fa-tfallae;ti fid-darabziin I was 
about to fall down the stairs so I clung to the banister . 
2 to be hung up, be strung up. II ritfac/ae; min deel(-u) to 
try to keep up with the Joneses. 3 to get hooked, be-
come strongly attached. riffac/ae; fit-tadxiin he got 
hooked on smoking. riffallae;ti fiiha I fell for her, 
hook, line and sinker. -avaliva mitfac/ae;. 
JJt~ 
Jl...:. fallil/vtl to kindle, cause to flare up. ril-furaae; 
bi-yfallil iI-l:Jubb absence makes the heart grow fonder. 
ril-mtl1aalil:J illi bi-tfallil l:Juruub the interests which 
spark off wars. II ralwaan mifallila bright colours. -vn 
faela/a; avalpva mifallil. 

;a"L..:. jUlleela In pljalaliil/ • fire, blaze. II walad 
jUlleela a fire-brand of a boy. 2 tense or troubled 
situation. 
J.l...:.;1 fitfalli/ or fifjalli/ Ivil • to be kindled. 2 to 
flare up, blaze. - ava/iva mitfalli/. 
.J.J .J tv!-
j,;.,:....;- jalnuuna In pi jalaniinl • spitfire, woman 
given to flaring up at the slightest provocation. 
2 epithet for the second henna crop. 
.J~.Jtv!-
~~ jalaniin: liid (or Ijadd) if-jalaniin {Chr] Palm 
Sunday. 
.).1 tv!-
.).,.,:. jUluur2 Icoll nl Letherinus nebulasis, a Red Sea 
fish. 
j.J tv!-
~~ jalwiz Ii Ivil to practise magic or witchcraft. 
2/vtl to bamboozle. - vn jalwaza; ava mujalwiz; pva 
mujalwaz. 
~..,...:... mujalwiz In °1 Ii sorcerer. 2 bamboozler. 
j, .J tv!-
1.,.,:. jalWa( Ivtl to scorch, burn. II fil-Ijubb' jalwa( 
qalb-i love has afflicted my heart. -vnjalwa(a; ava/pva 
mifalwa(. 
1 ~I fitfalwa( or fifjalWa( Ivil to be scorched, be 
burned. -iva mitfalwa(. 
ytv!-
...,..;..:. jayab In! disturbance, trouble, disorder . 
...,..&.1..:. jaaYib • Ivtl to make trouble with, be trouble-
some with. bi-tfaYib-ha leeh why are you stirring up 
trouble with her? 2 Ivil to create a disturb~nce, cause an 
uproar. -vn mifayba; ava mifaaYib. 
...,..&.L:.... mujaaYib In °1 trouble-maker, agitator. 
..:..tv!-
...:;..A.:. jayat Icoll n! white muscle-sheathing gristle. 
~ 
jayata lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of gristle. 
~~ jayataaya = jayata. 
~ 
mifarrat ladjl having inedible tough parts, grist-
ly (of meat). 
~ 
mifyit = mifarrat. qaalu leeh liljmit-ak mifYita -
qaal ig-gazzaar milrifa {pray] 
== 
business and 
friendship don't go together. 
468 
~ tv!-· 
....AA.:. jayaf InJ zeal, eagerness, passion. landu jayaf 
bil-qiraaya he is an avid reader. II bi-jayaf out of real 
love, as in lamal if-Juy/' da bi-jayafhe did this work out 
of real love for it . 
...;~ jaYuu!' ladj -I dedicated (to one's work) . 
...; ~ 
majyuu/ladj -I passionate, engrossed. huwwa 
majyuuf bis-siyaasa he's completely taken up with 
politics. 
J tv!-
J;..:. jayal i (a) Ivtl to occupy (a position etc.). bi-yifyal 
wa~iifit il-mudiir he holds the position of director. -vn 
jaYI; avajaayi/; pva majyuul. 
J;..:. jayal 2 (i) I'vtJ • to engage, occupy, keep busy. 
jayalt' nafs-i bi/-gineena I kept myself busy with the 
garden. ma-tifri/-J' baal-ak bil-Ijikaaya di don't give 
any thought to this matter. II hiyyajayla qalb-i == she has 
captured my heart. - baal-i majlfuullaleek I'm worried 
about you. 2 to fill, occupy. kull il-fuwac[ majyuula all 
the rooms are occupied. fin-nimra majyuula the num-
ber's engaged. 3 to work (fabric, metal etc.). majyuul 
bil-q~ab worked with gold thread. -vnjayalaan,jaYI; 
avajaayil; pva majlfuul. 
..:.. "i ~ 
majlfulaat Ipl n! artifacts. 
~ ~ 
majlfuliyya In pi -aat/l maJter requiring atten-
tion. 2 preoccupation. 
J;..:. juyl In pi fajlfaall • work. Ij-axall~ if-juyl' da 
bukra I'll finish this work tomorrow. laqeetjulf/aland 
il-gazzaar I found work at the butcher's. II da mif juyl-ak 
that's not your business. -juuf juyl-ak mind your own 
business! - fajyaal jaaqqa {leg] hard labour: 2 work, 
handicraft. juyl' fibra needlework. juyl' yadd hand-
made product. juyl' xajab bi-dahab wood with gold 
inlay. juyl' makana machine-manufactured product . 
fajyaal maljalliyya local handicrafts. 
- Ino 
pI/ 
3 (devious) business, (underhand) doings. baaal 
if-juyl' btaal-ak da stop being so devious.IVuyl it-talat 
waraqaat or juyl in-n~b fraud, swindle. 
ili..; jUlfla In pi -aatl • job, ta.sk, function. juylit-u 
finnu y(abbil cuul in-nahaar his job is to beat the drum 
all day long. ma-tdawwar lala juyla look for a job! 
2 problem, hassle. 
j,;~ juylaana = juyla. 
J\A.:. jarraa/. In pi -iin, jarraalal manservant, work-
er. 2/adj °1 2a working, functioning. huwwa jarraal 
gizamaati he works as a shoemaker. fil-makana 
jarraala the machine is working. 2b active, hard-
working. raagil gadd' w-jarraal a serious and hard-
working man. 2c in working order. 

;ij~ jarraala In pi -aatl female servant, maid. 
~ 
jarriilln ptjarriilal worker, labourer. 
~ 
majyallo! workshop (for handicrafts). 
~ 
majyala: juYla w-majyala fuss and bother. la 
juyla wala majyala nothing to do. 
J&. L:... majaaYil Ipl nl I matters requiring attention, 
things to attend to. 2 preoccupations, distractions. 
jA.:.;'1 ritfayal or rifjayallvil I to keep busy, occupy 
oneself. II ritfayal bi-duruus-u he was busy with his stu-
dies. ril-fuc;ara b-yitfiylu bil-gary i wara luc;mit-hum the 
poor are preoccupied with making' a living. 2 to be 
worked (of fabric, metal etc.). 3 to be worried, be 
concerned, feel uneasy. - ava/iva mitfiyil. 
~I rinjayal = ritfayal. -vn rinjiyaal; ava minjiyil. 
jA.:. jarral Ivtl I to employ. bi-tfarral in-niswaan li-
ysab-ha she employs the women to work for her. kaan 
bi-yjarral il-earabiyyaf-majawiir x~~iyya he used the 
car for private errands. 2 to operate, work. bi-yjarral 
il-makana he operates the machine.jarralt i ris{uwaana 
I put on a record. -vn tajYiil; ava/pya mifarral. 
~I ritfarralor rifjarrallvill to be employed. i to 
be operated, be put into operation. -iva mitfarral. 
J&.l.:. jaaril/vtl to try to attract the attention of (s.o., 
e.g., in a flirtatious manner). -vn mifayla; ava mifaaYil. 
J&.L.:.;I ritfaaril or rifjaayil/vil passive ofjaayil. -iva 
mitfaaYiI. 
J;.;..:.I riftayal (yiftayal) Ivil I to function, operate, 
work. bi-yiftayal sawwaac; he works as a driver. huwwa 
miftiYil fil-muxaddaraat he deals in drugs. C;aead 
yiftayal eal-euud he sat playing the lute. ny-ajtayal 
ealee - yimkin yiyayyar rary-u I'll work on him - maybe 
he'll change his mind. -ya-tiftayal Gala miin who are 
you trying to deceive! who do you think you're kidding? 
2 to act, take hold, take effect. rif-Jarba jtayalit the 
laxative started working. ril-mu;ahraat iftayalit taani 
the demonstrations have started up again. - Ivtl 3 to 
work (fabric, metal etc. with a pattern, embroidery, 
inlay etc.). riftayal il-xajab bi-dahab he worked the 
wood with gold, he made a gold inlay in tQe wood. -vn 
riftiyaal, juyl; ava miftiYil. 
IS t.~ 
..;.;. jaya (i) Ivil to teem with. bi-yifYi namlit is teeming 
with ants. ril- rutubiis kaan bi-yifyi easaakir the bus was 
swarming with soldiers. -vnjayayaan; avafaaYi. 
~ ~ see t ~ ~ 
: jafateen 
..:;,~~ 
..::.A..:. fift <T fift> In pi jifuutl (pair of) tweezers. - also 
gift. 
469 
J":;'~~ 
p.;. jaftar Ivil to become thick (of lips). - vnjaftara; 
ava mifaftar. 
OJ';;';'':' jaftuura In pljafatiirl (thick, fat) lip. 
IS~":;'~~ 
~ 
jiftifi ladj invarl immodest, tawdry (in flashi-
ness and transparency, usually of clothes). 
i.J I t ~ ~ see IS ~ ~ :jafaxaana 
1.)";~ 
,;.;. jafr Inllabium (of pudenda). 
0';';' jafra I In pi -aatl Is edge of a blade. Ib razor 
blade. 2 lip (of a quadruped). 
1 
' 
• 
.) '-' V" 
0';';' jafra 2 <Fr chiffre> In pi -aatl code, cipher. fakk 
if-Jafra he deciphered the code. 
. 
~~~~ 
....A...:.A..;: jaffif Ivil to long, yearn, be eager. tibc;a tifaffif 
eala kubbaayit mayya ma-tlac;i-haa-J you could be 
dying for a glass of water and not find it! -vnjaffafa; ava 
mifaffif. 
~I ritfaffif or rifjaffif = jaffif. - ava mitfaffif. 
J~~~ 
~ 
jaffac; In pljafaafic;1 pitcher, jug. 
J.,~~ 
.laA..:. jafa{ (u) Ivtll to sip, suck in, absorb. ril-makana 
b-tujfu{ it-turaab the machine sucks in the dust. 2 to 
drain away, siphon off. huwwajafa{filuus-i kull-a-ha he 
siphoned offall my money. -vnjafa{aan,ft;lf{; avajaafi(; 
pya majfuu{. 
~ 
jaf{a linst n, pi -aatl a sip, a suck, a gulp. 
.1~ jaffaa{ In pi -aatl siphon, suction pump, (loosely) 
any apparatus which works by siphoning or sucking 
(e.g., pipette). II/affaa{ yabb grain elevator. 
~~ jaffaa{a In pi -aatl I drinking straw. 2 intake 
component of a vacu';1m cleaner. 3 ventilator fan . 
4 (short for jaffaa[it ballaaea) drain plunger. 
.la.i..:.;1 ritfafa{ or rifjafa{ Ivi/l to be sipped, be sucked 
in, be absorbed. 2 to be drained away, be siphoned off. 
-iva mitfifi{ . 
.IaA..:.; I rinjafa{ = ritfafa{. - iva minjifi£. 
..la.W. jaffa{ Ivtl I to cause to suck, cause to sip. 2 to 
siphon. jaffac il-banziin min il-earabiyya he siphoned 

the petrol from the car. -vn taJfil{; ava/pva mifaffa[. 
~I fitJaffa[ or fifJaffa[ Ivil passive of Jaffa[. - iva 
mitJaffa[. 
t""; .;. 
e- Jafar; (a) Ivil to intercede. -vnJafaar;a, Jafar;aan; 
avaJaafir;. 
el.... Jaafir; 1 laval lila Jaafir; wala naafir; there's no 
good in him, he's of no use to anyone. 2 In *1 mediator, 
intercessor. 
""';L.JI fif-JafGi Iprop nl the Imam el-Shafi'i (d. 820 
AD), eponym of the Shafi'i school of Islamic law 
(fll-mazhab if-JafGi) as well as of a mosque and a large 
graveyard in Cairo. 
4..A... Jufr;a Inl [leg] right of pre-emption. 
&- Jafiir; In pi Jufar;al mediator, intercessor. 
~I fitJaffar; or fifJaffar; Ivil to intercede. -ava 
mitJaffar;. 
I"';"'; ..; 
:..... Jaff (i) Ivtl to trace, copy by tracing. faff ir-rasma 
he traced the pattern.llfustaan bi-yfiff' wi-yriffa classy 
dress. - vn Jaff, Jafafaan; ava faafif; pya maffuuf. 
~I.A... Jafafiyya Inl translucence, lIr;andaha fafafiyya 
she. has psychic powers. 
.j1.A... Jaffaaf ladjl translucent, semi-transparent. 
warm, faffaaf tracing paper. 
..,'L;I fitJaff or fiffaff Ivil to be traced, be copied by 
tracing. - iva mitJaff. 
2 ....; ....;.;. see 0"";';': flffa 
J"";';' 
..;A..:. Jafae; (a) Ivil to show charity or compassion. -vn 
fafae;aan, fafae;a, fafae;; avafaafle;. 
;i;.... Jafae;a Inl charity, compassion. 
':'W- Jafq'}an ladj *1 compassionate, sympathetic, dis-
posed to mercy. 
J"A- fafuue; ladj *1 kind-hearted. 
..;.0....;1 fitJafae; or fifJafae; Ivil passive ofJafae;. fitJafae; 
r;alee min kutr icl.-qarb he received much sympathy for 
being beaten so hard. - iva mitJifie; . 
.:;i-i faffae; = fafae;. -vn fiffaae;, ava miffie;. 
j..;iJ"";';' 
o,r.:.- Jufuneera orfufuniira,fifaniira orfifanyiira <Fr 
chIffonier> In pi -aatl piece of (bedroom) furniture 
consisting of drawers and cupboard, chiffonier. 
470 
° ....; .;. 
~ 
fafateen Idual nl (one's) lips. titni[ie; bl-qamm 
tJ-fafateen it is pronounced with the hps rounded. 
"-"- fiffa Inl 1 Ipl fafaaYlf, fifafi lip. 2 Ipl fifafl 
2a border, edge.fiffit i[-[arabeeza the edge of the table. 
2b [mech] jaw (of a vice etc.). 
.s+"- Jafahl ladjl oral, spoken. 
..s"A- fafawi ladjl oral, spoken. fimtibaanfafawl oral 
examination. 
uAl.A... fifaahl r = fafaht. 
.....L.. mUfafha ladvl orally. 
J.J 0 "";';' 
J.,...... fifhool <Fr chef de hall> In pi fifaat hool! bar-
room supervisor in a hotel. 
.J ....;.;. see 0"";';': fafawi 
iJ.J"";';' 
':'"A- Jifoon <Fr> Inl chiffon. 
I..;"";';' 
..;... Jifi (a) Ivil to recover, improve in health. II flrJu 
tiffu [prov] see rafa under ..;';' j 
- vn fifa, fifaaf r . 
..;... fafa (i) Ivtl to cure, heal. ~alawaat il-fimaan tiffi 
I-marilq {ChrJ the prayers of faith heal the sick. 
Ilrafaa-kum allaah wl-r;afaa-kum [rur] (God give you 
health and strength) response tofufiitum (q.v. below). 
-vnfifa; avaJaafi; pya maffi. 
~fufiitum {rur] (may you have been relieved!) formula 
said to one leaving a lavatory . 
• I.A... .I.A... fifa Inl healing.llbil-hana wif-Jifa ("" may it 
be of benefit to you) response to (1) an invitation to 
share food. (2) an appreciative comment on, or thanks 
given for, a meal. - bif-fifa (commonly said when giving 
out medication) "" may it bring good health. 
Jl.... faafi Inl Healer (epithet of God). 
j,;~ fafaxaana In pi -aatl 1 [rur] animal hospital. 
2 [obsol] mobile military hospital. 
~ 
fafiyya: yaJaafi kull'Jafiyya you who bring about 
every cure (phrase addressed to God in rae;w). 
~I fitJaffa / or fiffaffa / Ivil to indulge in malicious 
pleasure. fitJaffafiyya lammafallist he gloated over my 
going bankrupt. -vn taJaffi; ava mitJaffl. 
.;.:.... muffi In *1 healer. 
~ 
mustaffa, mistaffa (also muftaffa, miftaffa) In, 
usu fern, in constr also mustaffit, pi mustaffayaat, 
mistaffayaat, mistaffiyaat, miftaffiyyaatl hospital. 

1~..J.J. 
.)- faffa Ivtl to bone. labma mfaffiyya boned meat. 
-v.n taffiyya; avalpva mifaffi. 
";":';1 ritfaffa 2 or riffaffa 2 /vil to be boned (of meat). 
-iva mitfaffi. 
..i..J~J.J. 
IjU- fuqrafza <P shauq-afza> Inl Emus] mode in 
Arabic music beginning on B flat and having E flat and 
G flat. 
,,:-,J.J. 
4- mafqabiyya In pi -aatl mortise, or any slot or 
hole made in a piece of metal to receive and secure a 
corresponding piece, e.g., the fork end of a bicycle. 
I 
-
• 
.; \J oJ" 
;.:.. faqqar Ivil to make a check (with a personal visit). 
(iI[it tifaqqar [ala I-waad she went out to look in on the 
kid. ma-tiigi tfaqqar [aleena do come and see how we 
a~e. -vn tafqiir; ava mifaqqar. 
';':';1 ritfaqqaror riffaqqar/vil (impersonal) passive of 
faqqar. ba-yitfaqqar [aleehum they will be checked on. 
- iva mitfaqqar. 
1 
-
• 
.J \J oJ" 
;....i rafqar ladj, femfaqra, plfuqrll blond. 2 sorrel 
(of a horse). 
JI;....i rafqaraani ladj '1 blondish. 
J 
-
• 
.J \J oJ" 
o;lA.. faqaara: riI-filuus bi-truub faqaara nqaara the 
money's going down the drain. 
..J.J J .J. 
J;"" fuqruf In pi faqaarif! a medium-sized sickle. 
J';";' faqraf Ivtl to mow or reap with a fuqruf. - vn 
faqrafa; avalpva mifaqraf. 
J';':';I ritfaqraf or riffaqraf Ivil passive offaqraf. - iva 
mitfaqraf· 
j,J.J. 
.lM.:. faqa( (a) Ivtl to catch (a flying or falling object). 
Jaqa(t iI-beeqa qabl; ma tuqa[ I caught the egg before it 
fell. -vnfaq(,faqa(aan; avafaaqi(; pva mafquu(. 
~ 
faq(a linst n, pi -aatl a catch. 
.J.A.:..;I ritfaqa( or riffaqa( Ivil passive of faqa(. - iva 
mitfiqi(. 
471 
tJ .J. 
~ 
fuqa[: fuqa[ buqa[ (ya rabbi yuqa[) (children's 
chant when one of them tries a difficult climb) ... hope 
he falls off! 
I..JJ.J. 
...u.... faqaf (u) Ivtl to hurl at, shoot at.faqaf-ni b-(uuba 
he cast a stone at me. II min faaqif Ii-Iaaqif Ii-qabbaaq 
iI-rarwaab {prov] (from thrower to catcher to the angel 
of death) this way, that way, and then to perdition 
(usually with reference to money consumed, or to indi-
vidual suffering). -vnfaqf; avafaaqif; pva mafquuf. 
....u... faqf Icoll nl potsherd(s). 
:w.:. faqfa lunit n, pi -aat, fuqafl a (pot)sherd. 
~w- faqfaaya = faqfa. 
~IA..!. fuqaafa Icoll nl potsherd(s). 
J.,il.:. faquuf In plfawaqiif! tool used for breaking 
rock. 
....u..:..1 ritfaqaf or riffaqaf Ivil to be pelted, be shot at. 
- iva mitfiqif. 
....u..:.; 1 rinfaqaf = ritfaqaf. - iva minfiqif. 
l..JJ.J. 
J~ mafquufladj '1 longing, anxious. mafquuf[al-
mayya dying for a drink of water. mafquufa [ala-bn-a-
ha anxious about her son . 
J J.J. 
j.:. faqq I (u) Ivtl I to split. ba{{iixa mafquuqa a split 
water-melon.llfaqq; hduum-u he reached the end of his 
tether. 2 to cut, dig (a road or canal). Ilfaqq; (ariiq-u 
I-wabd-u he made it on his own. -vnfaqq, faqaqaan, 
jiqqiyya; avafaaqiq; pva mafquuq. 
~ faqq2 In plfuquuql I slit, crack, split. sadd; 
gamii[ if1uquuq he filled in all the cracks. Uba{{; 
~ubaa[-u fif1aqq {prov] he gave up, he threw in the 
towel. -yi(la[ min if-fuquuq yixall~ iI-buquuq {prov] ... 
help sometimes comes from the most unexpected quar-
ters. 2 a half. faqq i fuul a half-loaf fuul midammis 
s~ndwich. faqq iI-qamar half-moon shape. 
~ 
faqqa Inll Ipl-aatlla lunit nl a split, a cut. Ib half 
(of s.th. (split) in two parts, e.g., a half-round of Arab 
bread, a buttock, a side of beef). 2 Ipl fuqaq, fiqaql 
~partment, flat . 
ul..:. faaqq ladjl arduous, troublesome. tadriib-ufaaqq 
training him is a tedious matter. rafvaal faaqqa {leg] 
hard labour. 
u.,&..:. jiqiiq In pi fuqaqa, faqaayiq, rafiqqal I full 
brother. 2/with masc n referentl exact replica, twin. 
fustaan fiqiiq bitaa[-ik a dress exactly like yours. 

4&.;.: filiiilia In pljulialia, jaliaayilil I full sister. 
fuxteen jaliaayili two full sisters. Ilfiliiiliit nUlmaan 
[bot] red anemone. 2 Iwith fem n referent! exact repli-
ca, twin. gallabiyya jliiiliit bitalt-ak a galabiya exactly 
like yours. 
~ 
majalilia Inl hardship. riI-fagr8 Gala liadd il-
majalilia the recompense is commensurate with the 
effort . 
.j.:.;1 fitfalili or fifjalili Ivill to split. b-atmanna 1- fartf' 
tifjalili' w-tiblal-ni I wish the earth would open up and 
swallow me! (said in cases of extreme grief, embarrass-
ment or annoyance). 2 passive of jalilil. -ava/iva 
mitfalili· 
:;':"1 finjalili 
= 
fitjalili. 
-vn 
finjiliaat;; ava/iva 
m!njalili. 
~ 
jaliliali I Ivtl to split, crack open. 2 Ivil to crack, 
split, become cracked or split. fartf' najfa wi-mjalilialia 
dry, cracked earth. - vn tajliiili; ava/pva mifaliliali. 
.;a.:.; 1 fitjaliliali or fifjaliliali Ivil I passive of jaliliali. 
2 to crack, split. -vn tajaliliuli; ava/iva mitjaliliali. 
J J J. 
~ 
jalial (u) Ivt! 'to throw, fling. fifliUI-li I-koora 
throw me the ball. -vnjalialaan,jalil; avajaaliil; pva 
majliuul. 
lli..!. jalila linst n, pI -aatl a throw .lI/aazim landujalilit 
filuus he must have a bundle! he must have oodles of 
money! 
jA.:.;1 Citjalial or fifjaliallvil to be thrown, be flung. 
-iva mitfiliil. 
y JJJ. 
~ 
jalilib Ivt! to overturn, flip over. feeh illijalilib 
l.Jal-kum whatever happened to change your circumst-
ances? l.Jubb-u jalilib lalil-i his love flipped my mind! 
-vnjalilaba; ava/pva mifalilib. 
~ 
jalilaba In pI -aatl flip. 
',Ji' jUlileeba In pljalialiibl whirl. 
.;.u..:... mifalilib Ipva/ II bil-mifalilib (1) upside down. 
(2) inside out. 
~I fitjalilib or fifjalilib Ivil to overturn or be over-
turned, flip over or be flipped over. 
fifjalilib 
li-cuddaam fil-hawa he made a forward flip in the air. 
- avaliva mitfalilib. 
-yJJJ. 
j;~ jalilabaa; 
<prob 
T 
~aklaban> 
In! 
I somersault. 2 tumbler (pigeon). 
- ladj invarl 
3 shifty, slippery. 
472 
.J J J. see ..s J J. : jaliaawa 
..sJJ. 
~ 
filii (a) Ivil to toil, work hard. bi-yiflia lajaan 
yiwakkil-na he slaves to feed us. -vn jalia, jaliayaan; 
avajaliyaan. 
~ 
jalii ladj pI fajliiya, jUliaayl I naughty, mis-
chievous.1I lumr if-Jalii balii [proy! the life ofthe scamp 
lasts longest. 2 miserable, wretched. llfii l.Jadd' ykuun 
fi-fiid-u I-lia/am wi-yiktib nafs-u jalii [proy] (is there 
anyone who if he held the pen would write himself 
unfortunate) = no one is willingly wretched. 
~i fajlia lel/. morelmost naughty or mischievous. 
2 morelmost miserable. 
o,,\.i.:. jaliaawa In! naughtiness, mischief. 
~L.:.;I fitjaalia or fifjaalia Ivil to be naughty, behave 
mischievously. -ava mitjaalii. 
l.fl J. 
~ 
• ~ 
jaka I In! style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). -alsojakumba. 
.J I .fl J. 
o)~ jikaara or jukaara In pI -aat, jakaayirl gunny 
sack, small- or medium-sized sack. jikaarit fasmant 
sack of cement. 
yy.flJ. 
~ 
jukubba <It scopa> Inl [naut] broom, mop. 
- also fujkubba. 
c.fl J. 
~ 
jakal.J (i) Ivtl to send into raptures. min saalit ma 
simil l.Jiss' fumm' kalsuum liaalid majkuul.J since he 
first heard Umm Kalthum's voice he's been enrap-
tured. -vnjakl.J; avajaak!l.J; pva mafkuul.J. 
~I finfakal.J Ivil to be filled with pleasure, be en-
raptured. lammajuft il-bint' di njakal.Jt when I saw this 
girl I was enraptured. -vn finfikaal.J; iva minkiJil.J . 
~I fitjakal.J or fifjakal.J = finjakal.J. -iva mitfikil.J. 
1.J .fl J. 
~ 
jakar (u) • Ivtl to thank, give thanks to, express 
gratitude, acknowledgement or appreciation to.laazim 
fajkur-u lalee I mu~t thank him for it. Ilfakar allaahu 
salya-kum response to phrases of condolence = may 
God reward your efforts. 2 Ivil to speak highly, give 
praise. ma yi.fkur fi-nafs-u filla fibliis [proy] (only 
Satan praises himself) nothing is more foul than self-
praise. -vn jukr, jukraan; ava jaakir; pva majkuur. 

11 tufkar thank you! many thanks! 
.f..;. fukr In! thanks. II rail jukr a thousa[ld thanks! 
- rif1ukri /i-llaah ... don't mention it (response to ex-
pressions of thanks). 
473 
11 fukran thank you! thanks! 
~ I.f..;. fukraniyya Ivnl praising, praise. II rana b-ae;uul 
lCida mif fukraniyya f-nafs-i I say this with all due 
modesty. 
.J';":" fakuur In! He to whom we owe thanks (epithet of 
God). 
.J..:.;I ritfakar or riffakar Ivil 1 to be thanked. 
2 (impersonal) passive of fakar 2. ritfakar"fli he was 
praised. - iva niitfikir. 
~I rinfakar = ritfakar. 
j..:.;1 ritfakkaror riffakkar Ivil to express thanks, give 
. thanks. -aya mitfakkar. 
j...;.;.. mutafakkir, mutfakkir ladj ·1 thankful. (rana) 
mutafakkir thanks! (I) thank you! 
1 J JJ J. see J I JJ J. : fikaara 
rJJJJ. 
4...J~ fikarma <Gr skarmos> In pI -aatl tholepin. 
-also rifkarma. 
I~JJJJ. 
~.Jfi...;. fikurya <It cicoria> Inl chicory. 
~JJJ. 
..,..5"1.:. faakis Ivtl to provoke, pick a fight with. e;alad 
yifakis-ni I-lfaayit ma c{arabt-u he went on provoking me 
until I hit him. -vn mifaksa; ava mifaakis, mufaakis. 
~ ... S"l.!.. mufaksa, mifaksa In pI -aatl quarrel, fight, 
argument. 
..,..5"L:.;1 ritfaakis or riffaakis ,vil to quarrel, be quarrel-
some.l:J-atfaakis malaahum I'll pick a fight with them. 
-ava mitfaakis. 
JJJ.JJJ. 
~ 
fakfik Ivtl 1 to prick, cause to feel prickly. 
r~-~uufil-xifin bi-yfakfik-ni rough wool makes me feel 
prickly. - Ivi/2 to feel prickled, feel prickly. 3 to bub-
ble (of a liquid, from heat). -vn fakfaka; ava/pva 
mifakfik. 
~I ritfakfik or riffakfik Ivil 1 to be prickled, be 
prickled. 2 to feel prickled, feel prickly. -ava/iva 
mitfakfik. 
JJ.J J. JJ..; 
-;S".:.S..:. fakfuuka Inl 1 any of various dishes, consist-
ing usually of a base of tomatoes and onions in which 
fish or, more commonly, eggs are cooked, sometimes 
with the addition of rice or fuul. 2 type of fish. 
IJJJJ • 
. 
~ 
.!.I.:. fake (i, u) 1 Ivtl to prick. fakk il-lire; i w-nizil 
damm he pricked the vein and blood came out. 
Ilfakk(-u) mae;lab (or dabbuus) to playa dirty trick on 
(s.o.). 2 Ivil to have doubts or suspicions. bi-tfukk j fl-lli 
rana b-ae;uul-u do you doubt what I say? rafxa~ 
mafkuuk flihum suspects. -vn fakk; ava faakik; pva 
mafkuuk. 
.J.:. fakk2 In plfukuukl doubt. lafakk or bilafakk or 
ma-fli1 fakk no doubt. 
i..:. fakka In pI -aat/l lunit n! a pFick. bi-Ylayya( min 
fakkit dabbuus he cries from a pin-prick (i.e. for the 
s!ightest reason). 2 small stitch . 
.!ol.!.;1 ritfakk or riffakk Ivill to be pricked. yiffakk i 
f-lisaan-u [women] may his (evil) tongue be pricked! 
2 (impersonal) passive of fakk I 2. ritfakk i fli he is 
s!'spected. - iva mitfakk. 
<.!l..!..;1 rinfakk = ritfakk. -iva minfakk. 
~ 
fakkik I Ivtl 1 to prick repeatedly. 2 to cause 
(s.o.) to have doubts or misgivings. fakkik-ni fif1url i 
kull-u he gave me misgivings about the whole affair. 
l:Jagaat tifakkik fll-l:Jukuuma things which raise doubts 
about the government. -vn tafkiik; ava mifakkiJc. 
~I ritfakkik l or riffakkikllvilpassiveoffakkikl. 
- iva mitfakkik . 
lJJJJJ. 
~ 
fukuk Inl credit.lift i bif1ukuk I lived on credit. 
rif1,!kuk mamnuul wiz-zaca1 marfuul ... credit is not 
given and annoyance is (thereby) removed (sign in 
cheap shops, bars etc.). -/adverbiallyl on credit . 
riftareet-u fukuk I bought it on credit. 
~ 
fakkie Ivtl to buy or sell on credit. fakkik il-
bic{aala he sold the merchandise on credit. rana ma-b-
afakkik1 I don't accept credit. -ava tafkiik; ava 
mifakkik. 
~I ritfakkik 2 ar riffakkik 2 Ivil passive offakkik2. 
-iva mitfakkik. 
3JJJJ • 
. 
~ 
.!.I.:. fakk (u) Ivill to take, catch (of fire, and the like). 
2 to harden, set (of concrete or plaster). xarasaana 
sariilit if1akk quick-setting concrete. - Ivtl3 to strike 
(a match). -vnfakka,jakakaan; avafaakik. 
-;s~ fakkaaka In pI -aatl striking surface (of a 
match-box). 

I J.!l .;. 
~ 
Jakl In pI raJkaall la shape, form. kawitJ" lala 
Jakl' dayra rubber in a circular shape. Ib figure, dia-
gram. 2 (alsoJikl) appearance. Jakl-a-ha Ijilw she has a 
nice appearance. Jakl-u mirtiJi he looks like someone 
who'll take a bribe. 3 way, manner. laazim ra[lal 
bi- rayy' Jakl I must get out by any means. bi-Jakl" 
lamali in a practical way. 4 kind, sort, specimen. fii 
Jakl' xaJabi there is a wooden kind. II ranwaal wi-
raJkaalor raJkaal wi-ralwaan a wide variety. - Imasc 
and fem sing adil 5 (also Jikl) different. kull' yoom 
bi-yruulj li-duktuur Jakl every day he goes to a different 
doctor. 
~ bi-Jakl ladvl very, extremely. hiyya la{iifa b-Jakl she's 
very charming. 
~ 
Jaklif ladil formal. rigraar Jakli a formal 
measure . 
..:..~ Jakliyyaat f Ipl nl formalities. 
~ 
Jikl see Jakl 2 and 5. 
j5:...i raJkal lell morelmost strange or odd. ril-raJkal 
rinn il-bint' mabsuu[a malaa the strangest thing is that 
the girl is happy with him. 
Ji- Jakkil Iv.!1 I to give shape or form to. bi-yJakkil 
in-naljaas zayy' ma-nta laayiz he shapes the copper as 
you want. 2 to make up, constitute. lja-nJakkil lagna 
we'll form a committee. ril-Ijikaaya di bi-tJakkil 
xu[uura kbiira the affair constitutes a great danger. 3 to 
make an assortment of. Jakkil-li bumbuuni make an 
assortment of candies for me! 4 to mark (Arabic words) 
with short vowel signs. -vn taJkiil; avalpva miJakkil. 
~ 
taJkiil In pI -aat, taJakiill formation. taJkiil 
huguum attack formation. 
~ 
taJklila In pI -aatl I assortment. taJkiilit sala[aat 
an assortment of salads. 2 [text} defect in weave result-
ing from the warp dropping the woof. 
~ 
taJkiili ladil plastic, formative. ril-funuun it-
taJkiliyya the plastic arts. 
~ 
miJakkil ladjl mixed, assorted. gilaas mtJakkil 
mixed-flavour ice cream. Ilgazma mJakkila two-tone 
shoes. 
~I ritJakkil or riJJakkil Ivil I passive ofJakkil. 2 to 
take shape or form. -avaliva mitJakkil. 
IJ.!l.;. 
~ 
Jakal Inl quarrelling. wiJf' da walla garr' Jakal 
[joe, abus} (is that a face or an attempt- to pick a quar-
rel?) what sort of face is that you're pulling? (to one 
with a stern countenance). 
~ 
Jakla In pI -aat, Jukall quarrel. 
J5:...:. JukaiJ ladj invarl quarrelsome, cantankerous. 
474 
~ 
Jukali ladj *1 quarrelsome, cantankerous. 
JS'L.:. Jaakil Ivtl be quarrelsome with, provoke. - vn 
miJakla; ava miJaakil. 
JS'L:..;f ritJaakil or riJJaakil Ivil to pick fights, get into 
fights. - ava mitJaakil. 
J~! riJkaal In pI -aatl problem, difficulty. 
j5:..... muJkil In pI majaakill problem, difficulty. 
~ 
muJkila In pI maJaakil, muJkilaatl problem, dif-
ficulty. layziin niljill il-muJkila we want to solve the 
problem. 
~I ristaJkil Ivil [leg} to find legal grounds for 
contesting a case. - vn ristiJkaal; ava mistaJkil. 
-IJ.!l.;. 
1;'1 ~ 
Jukulaata, Jukalaata, Jakalaata J, jikulaata 
<It cioccolata> Icoll nl chocolate(s). 
~ 1;'1 ~ 
Jukulataaya, 
Jukalataaya, 
Jakalataaya J, 
Jikulataaya 
lunit 
n, 
pI Jukulataat, 
Jukalataat, 
JakalataatJ , Jikulataatl a chocolate, a bar or piece of 
chocolate. 
rJJ.!l';' 
;...k.;. Jakallama <prob T §ekerleme> Inl type of pas-
try ~ith coconut. 
~ us;.:. Jakallamaaya In pI Jakallamaatl unit noun of 
Jakallama. 
I r .!l .;. 
r>- Jakam (u, iJ Ivtl to curb, restrain. ma-yilraf-f' 
yuJkum ibn-u he doesn't know how to control his son. 
- vn Jakamaan, Jakm; ava Jaakim; pva maJkuum. 
~I ritJakam or riJJakam Ivil to be curbed, be res-
trained. - iva mitJikim. 
~I rinJakam = ritJakam. -iva millJikim. 
lr.!l';' 
~ 
Jakma <T f,lkma> In pI -aatl (enclosed) 
balcony. 
oj I r.!l .;. 
.J~ Jakmaan, Jakamaan <prob Fr echappement> 
In pI -aatl [auto} exhaust system. 
IYr.!l';' 
~ 
Jakumba Inl style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). - also Jllka. 
loS [. r .!l .;. 
~ 
Jakmagiyya <T fekmece> In pI -aatl [obsol} 
casket, dressing-case. 

475 
'CrJ;' 
.J JJ"; see ~ JJ ..; : jakwa 
cellent and in good shape. bint'ja/abiyya good-looking 
";.JJJ..; 
..r~L;, jakuuj <T fekif> In pljawakiifl 1 hammer. 
qarbijakuujhammer blow (in boxing). 2 [auto] rotor 
(of a car distributor). 3 Ino pll inspector (of railway 
track). 
~.!l..; 
~ 
jaka Z (i) Ivtl to complain about.jaka (min) I]aa/-
u he bewailed his state. jakit go'z-ha I-rumm-a-ha she 
complained about her husband to her mother.jakaa-ni 
liI-bulii~ he went and reported me to the police. 
II fif-!akwa Ii-reer iIIaah mazalla [prov] to complain to 
other than God is a humiliation. - rif-jakwa Ii-rahl 
iI-b~iira leeb [prov] to complain to the perspicacious is 
improper (because they can see (what's wrong) for 
themselves). -vn jikaaya, jakw. jakwa. jakiyya; ava 
jaaki; pva majki. 
~ fi- jakwa In pi jakaawil complaint. 
..JL. jaaki In pljukaahl accuser. 
~~ jakkaay ladj *1 given to complaining. jakkaay 
bakkaay perpetually whining and complaining. 
~I fitfaka or rifjaka Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
jaka. I]aaga ma-yitfikii-J minha a matter one doesn't 
complain about. - iva mitfiki. 
~I finjaka = ritfaka. -iva minjiki. 
~I ritfakka or rifjakka Ivil I to complain. 2 to 
appeal (against a judgement). -vn tajakki; ava 
mitfakki. 
~I riftaka Ivt and viI to complain. bi-tiftiki min 
if-!Ul·/d la/a {uul you complain about work without 
let-up. - ava miftiki. 
.;, I J..; 
~"J..- jilaan Icoll nl Synadontis schall. a Nile fish. - also 
jaa/. 
I Y J..; 
..,.J.- ja/ab (i) Ivtl to swipe, pinch (in the jargon of the 
underworld). -vn jalb. ja/abaan; ava jaalib: pva 
mafluub. 
1y J..; 
4,L jilba <Copt> Icoll nl type of Nile fish (Silurus 
mystus). 
~l.l- jilbaaya In pi -aall unit noun ofjilba. 
J y J..; 
..,.L ja/abi <T felebi> ladj *1 [obsolJ I generally ex-
girl. raagil ja/abi generous and cheerful man. riI-beeq 
ja/abi n-nahar-da the eggs are good and fresh today. 
IIfi{iir ja/abi a many-layered pastry folded over a centre 
of raisins, nuts and sweet syrup. 2 temperamental (of a 
man). 
4y J..; 
~ 
yiflib lvi, imperf onlyl to spurt out, gush out 
(e.g., of blood). -vnjalb. ja/abaan; avajaalib. 
.;,~yJ"; 
.:m1- jilbeen Inl infection (in animals) manifesting 
itself in thorny projections upon the tongue. 
I.:;.. J • 
.I.Y' 
.:....)- jalluul <Copt> In plja/aliitl a kick. qarab-u 
bif.-!alluut he kicked him. 
..:..L. jallit Ivil to kick (again and again). jallit-Iu 
kamaan give him a few more kicks. -vn tafliit; ava 
mi.fallit. 
..:.1....;1 ritfallil or rifjallil Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
jallit. ritfallit luhum kitiir they were kicked about (a 
lot). - iva mitfallit. 
1.:;.. J..; 
d... jalta <T ~ilte> In pljilat. jaltaatl cushion (for a 
couch or chair). 
J .:;.. J..; see .:;.. ~ J ..; : jiliita 
.:;...:;..J"; 
.:.-;':J.- ja/atiit: rumm if-!a/atiit [zool] omasum, many-
plies. - also rumm it-ta/aftif. rumm iI-/afaliif . 
..;..::.L. mifaltil (also ft{iir mifaltit) Icoll nl large pastry 
consisting of many layers of dough and clarified butter 
or cream baked and eaten with cream, honey or cheese. 
a... mifaltita (also fi{iira mifaltita) Ipl -aatl unit noun 
of mifaltil . 
c J ..; 
c!- jalal] (i. a) Ivtl I to take off, remove (a garment). 
2 to fire, dismiss. 3 [ChrJ to defrock (a member of the 
clergy). - Ivi/4 to become short (usually of the skirt of 
a garment). -vnjall] ,falal]aan; avajaalil]; pva mafluul]. 
d- jallal] I 
Inl card game resembling snap or 
beggar-your-neighbour. 
c!-i rajlal] ladj, pljull]l balding. 
&--,1 fitfalal] or rifjalal] Ivil passive of lalal] 1, 2, 3 . 
- iva mitfilil]. 

~ 
1 finfalal:J = fitfalal:J. -iva minfilil:J. 
~ 
fallaI:J2 Ivt/ 18 to raise (the skirt of a garment). 
fallal:Jil deel fuslan-ha she lifted the hem of her dress. 
Ib to uncover (by raising the skirt of a garment). 
fil-hawafallal:J riglee-ha the wind (lifted her skirt and) 
revealed her legs. II fil-balad illi ma-yilrafu-k{' fiiha 
fallal:J wi-gri fiiha [provl (you can) expose yourself and 
run about in the town where they don't know you. 2 to 
snap (a card in the gamefallal:J). - Ivil3 to flash, ex-
pose the genitals. 4 to become penniless. -vn tafliil:J; 
ava/pva mijallal:J. 
~I fitfallal:J or fijfallal:J Ivil passive offallaI:J2 1,2. 
-iva mitfallal:J. 
..:..tJ~ 
~ 
filixla In pi -aall <poss Yiddish> [obsoll large 
ugly woman. 
~~ 
filixlaaya In plfilixlaall = filixla. 
- .;, IJ" J ~ 
.:..fo-l.:. filisloon 
<Engl Charleslon>: 
ban{aloon 
filisloon flared trousers. 
J~J~ 
j.:.1.:. falfil <prob Copt> Ivil to pull a kerchief to and 
fro across the back and front of the neck as a gesture of 
mourning (of a woman). -vnfalfala; ava mijalfil. 
J.:.l.:.il fitjalfil or fijfalfillvil (impersonal) passive of 
falfil. II fin fa-lla yitfalfillaleeha I hope she kicks the 
bucket! - iva mitfalfil. 
ru#J~ 
4o"';:"w' falt/.uuma In pi falat/.iiml thick lip. 
~ 
mijalt/.am ladjl thick-lipped. 
...; J ~ see "';.J J J ~ : falluufa 
.1"';J~ 
Ju1.:. falfat Ivt/ to smudge, smear. falfat il-falwaan 
bi-mayya he blurred the colours with water. wijf-u 
mfalfat mit/.-t/.arb his face is a mess from the beating. -vn 
falfata; ava/pva mijalfat. 
~I fitfalfat or fijfalfat Ivil to be smeared, be 
smudged. - iva mitfalfat. 
IJJ~ 
..;1.:. fa/at; ladj invarl ill-bred, insolent, abusive. 
fi~-niswaan ij{a/at; dool those foul-mouthed broads. 
~ 
fallat; Ivil to behave in an insolent and abusive 
fashion. fana mij faahim fallat;-li kida leeh I don't 
476 
understand why he acted so abusively toward me. -vn 
la.l}iit;; ava mijallat;. 
..;1.:.;1 fitfallat; or fijfallat; Ivil 1 to be foul-mouthed. 
fitfallat; lalayya min reer sabab he showered me with 
obscenities for no reason at all. 2 (impersonal) passive 
offallat;. fana mijmin illi b-yitfallat; luhum I'm not one 
to be spoken to with abusive language! -ava/iva 
mitfallat; . 
lJ J~ 
..;1.:. filt; <perh Copt> In pl filuut;,filft;a/ [rurl string, 
thin rope. 
I J J • 
• 
IJ" 
J.:. fall (i) Ivt/ to paralyse. fil-xoof fall-u fear paralysed 
him. - vn fa/a/aan, falal; ava faalil; pva mafluul. 
Jl.:. falal In! paralysis. falal i/- facfaal infantile para-
lysis, polio. 
J.:.;I fitfall or fijfalilvil to become paralyzed. fijfall' 
f;diraal-u his arm became paralyzed. -iva mil/all . 
J.:.;I finfall = fitfall. -iva minfall. 
lJ J~ 
~")l.:. filaala In! basting, tacking. laaw;z filaa/a t;abl' 
ma Imakkin-ha it has to be basted before you sew it on 
the machine. 
~ 
fallillvt/to baste, tack. -vn lafliil; ava/pvamijallil. 
J.l.:.il fitfallil or fijfallil Ivil to be basted, be tacked. 
- iva mitfallil. 
3(JJ .) 
• 
IJ" 
4L:. falla In pi -aa/, filall hank, skein. 
i:. filla In pi fila/, fulall group, clique. rul:Jna filla 
kbiira we went in a big group. difillil-ak is this the gang 
you hang out with? 
J"-:J...;. fallaalln pi -aall 1 (Nile) cataract. 2 waterfall . 
4 J J ~ see I. I.S ~ : mafalla 
• .' J J ~ 
.")l.:. fillaah, fallaah: fillaah ya ... , fallaah ya ... linterjl 
1 invocation of the aid of a Muslim saint. fillaah ya 
sayyid may Sayyid (Badawi) help me! lissa la/a muulid 
iI-l:Juseen la/al fasabiil -fillaah ya l:Juseen it's still three 
weeks till the birthday celebration of Hussein; may 
Hussein enable me to take part! 2 expression of disbe-
lief. lamma fat;bat/. il-mukaffa I:J-addii-k n~~-a-ha -
fillaah ya mUka/fa 'When I cash the bonus, I'll give you 
half.' 'A bonus! that'll be the day!' I:J-adfal-/ak kull' 
malliim lalayya - fillaah ya I:J-adfal-/ak 'I'll pay you 

every penny lowe you.' 'You'll pay me! What a laugh!' 
.J J J ~ 
~ 
.)..,:. Jillu <It> In pi -haatlfmusJ cello. 
~;:,JJ~ 
~).:. falluufa In plfalaliiflfnon- CaireneJ a protrud-
ing, camel-like lip. 
l,j J ~ 
ul.!. Jilin <Engl shilling> In pi ~aatl five piastres, five-
piastre coin. 
l,jJ~ see ,jIJ~:Jilaan 
~ ~ ,j J ~ see ~ ~ ,j J V" : Jilindar 
IS J ~ 
~ 
falya In pi -aat, fawaalil 1 earthenware vessel 
similar in shape to, but smaller than, a maguur (see 
PI.A, 8), especially one used in milking cattle. 
.:.oISJ~ 
4.:. -filiita In pi falaayitlfrurJ donkey-pannier similar 
to, but larger than, a lfabiit (see PI.D, 4). 
,jISJ~ 
.r.L:. Jilyan <Engl Chilean>: battiix Jilyan type of 
round sweet water-melon, with dark green skin. 
DIS J ~ 
4,J\..:. faleeh <Fr> In pi -aatl chalet. 
j,,j·r~ 
.J.;i...:.1 rifmarnat Ivil to feel distaste, become dis-
gusted. -vn rifmirnaat; ava mifmarna(. 
(-,j ..... r~) 
ISjil,...:. famban1.i <Engl> In pi -aatl chimpanzee. 
);l,...:. fambanwaar <Fr chambre noire> InlfphotJ 
darkroom. 
~~ fambanya <Fr> Inl champagne. 
.:.or~ 
.;.....:. Jimit (a) Ivil to indulge in malicious joy, gloat. 
Jimit fiyya lamma flilt he took malicious pleasure at my 
expense when I failed. -vn famaata, famataan; ava 
faamit, famtaan. 
477 
.::.....:.;1 ritfamat or riffamat Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
fimit. -iva mitfimit . 
..:;....:.;1 rinfamat = ritfamat. -iva minfimit . 
..:..:.:. fammU Ivtl to arouse schadenfreude in (s.o.). 
rabb-i-na ma-yfammit fiik fJadd may God never cause 
anyone to gloat at your expense. -vn tafmiit; ava 
mifammit. 
':":':"1 ritfammit = Jimit. - ava mitfammit. 
j,cr~ 
J--!. famafJ[i In pi -yyal tough, bully. 
~ 
famafJ(agi = famafJ(i. 
tr~ 
~ 
famxa In! spicy aroma (of food). 
~ 
fumuxiyya = famxa. 
1S~~r~ 
4.JJ..I.o\..:. famdurya In! ornamental palm (Chamaedoria 
elegans). 
I 
• 
~ r V" 
~ 
famar! (u) Ivtll to hitch up, raise (the skirt ofa 
garment). 2 to uncover (by rolling up one's sleeves). 
rufmur diraal-ak bare your arm! - Ivil3 to ride up (of 
a skirt etc.). ril-fustaan famar lamma tfacadit when she 
sat down, the (skirt of her) dress rode up. -vn 
famaraan, famr; avafaamir; pva mafmuur. 
;.:. fammar! Ivtl 1 to hitch up, raise, roll up (one's 
garments).fammar kimaam-u he rolled up his sleeves. 
fammar iI-gallabiyya w-naa he hitched up his gown and 
jumped. 2 to uncover (by hitching or raising a gar-
ment).fammar riid-u (ordiralt-u) he bared his arm (by 
rolling up his sleeve). - Ivil 3 to prepare to fight. -vn 
tafmiir; ava mifammar. 
~I ritfammar or riffammar Ivil passive offammar 1 
and 2. -iva mitfammar. 
1 
• 
~ r V" 
~ 
famarz Inl fennel. rif1amar iI-fJilw Florence 
fennel. 
;.:. fammarz = famarz. 
J 
• 
~ r V" 
;..:... mifammar 
nonce 
word 
in 
the 
phrase 
riI-mifJammar wil-mifammar a specially-prepared fan-
cy meal. 
.:.0 ~ r ~ see 
~ ~ r ~ : famurt 

t.; r J. 
tr- Jamrax. Jamrax Ivil to attain full growth, be-
come vigorously sturdy. -vnJamraxa,jamraxa; ava/pva 
miJamrax. miJamrax. 
t J r- Jamruux I ladjl fully developed, strap~ing. 
- In pI Jamariixl 2 quarterstaff, long cudgel. 3 smgle 
stalk ( of dates). 4 male inflorescence (of a palm). 5 tear-
drop pendant (in jewelry). 6 [coarse slang] penis, dick. 
:i.;rJ. 
~.).,... Jamurd (also Jamurt) /adj invarl young, half-
grown (of chickens). 
oJ"rJ. 
..r- Jams (also samsJ) Ifem n, pI Jumuusl I sun. 
lammaJ1ams' ti(lae mil-¥arb when the sun rises in the 
west (i.e., never). Ilrams' w-qamar sparkler(s). 
-eadiww iJ1ams albino. -kull' waalJid eaarif Jams' 
daar-u ti(lae mineen [prov] each man knows best about 
his own affairs. 2 sunlight, sunshine. 
'-- Jamsa Inll place exposed to the sun, sunny spot. 
qaaeid fiJ1amsa sitting in the sun. 2 Ipl-aatl [theat] light 
projector. 
~l..-..:. Jamsaaya Inl = Jamsa 1. 
~ 
Jamsi ladjl pertaining to the sun, solar. 
fil-magmuuea J1amsiyya t the solar system. IIofuura 
Jamsiyya t photograph. -eeeJ Jamsi thick, spongy bread 
which is left to rise in the sun (peculiar to Upper Egypt). 
~ 
Jamsiyya In plJamaasi. Jamsiyyaatl I parasol, 
sunshade, umbrella. "eamal iJ1iiJJamsiyya he fastened 
the shutters half-closed. -kumm' Jamsiyya galablya 
sleeve 55 centimetres in width. 2 round glass window or 
skylight (in a dome). 3 [mus] rosette, rose, ornamental 
device found on various stringed instruments (see PU. 
12,26). 
;.,...:..- Jammuusa: ya Jams' ya Jammuusa xudi sinnit 
iI-lJumaar wi-haati sinn it iI-earuusa children's jingle 
uttered on the occasion of losing a tooth. 
...,..:. Jammls Ivtl to expose to the sun. taJmiis 
iI-maraatib Ylmawwit iI-bara¥iit putting the mattresses 
out in the sun kills the fleas. - vn taJmiis; ava/pva 
miJammis. 
~I fitfammis or fiJJammis Ivil 1 to get some sun, 
lie in the sun. baed' ma nilJrit tl-fart[' nSlb-ha tiJJammis 
after we plough the earth we leave it to get some sun. 
2 to be exposed to the sun. -ava/iva mitfammis. 
1 oJ" r J. see oJ" I r r J. : Jammaas 
478 
.;J.rJ. 
...r:-.r--I..... JamaJi~gi <T famawcl> In pI -yyallobsol] 
valet. 
rJ.rJ. 
~ 
Jamfim Ivil to sniff around. Jamfim fil- fakl' w-
saab-u. he sniffed the food and left it (uneaten). -vn 
JamJama; ava miJamfim. 
11 JamJim eala to go after, as in raalJ yiJamfim eala 
Jwayyit faxbaar he went sniffing about for some news, 
Jamfim eala banaat to run after girls. 
~.JJ.rJ. 
IJ~ JamJuun Iprop ~I Samson. 
lj,rJ. 
..Ia..... Jama( (u) Ivtl 1 to strike, hit. Jama(t-u ealqa 
I gave him a beating. 2 to charge (s.o.) an exorbitant 
price. fil-bayyaae min illi hina b-yuJmu( iz-zabaayin 
ofalJiilJ the average vendor here really stings people. -vn 
Jama(aan. Jam(; avaJaami(; pva maJmuu(. 
.J,,~ Jammaa( In ·1 one who charges exorbitant prices. 
.1..-;1 fitfama( or ftfJama( Ivil passive of Jama(. - iva 
mitfimi(. 
1 j, r J. see j,.J r r J. : Jammuu(i 
I tr J. 
~ 
Jame In pI Jumuuel 1 wax. Jame ' xitm sealing 
wax. Ilrame iskandaraani beeswax. 2 white powder 
coating a sugar-cane stalk around the node. - Icoll nl 
3 candle( s). 4 sparking plug( s). 
~ 
Jamea lunit n, pI -aatl 1 a candle. IIda Jamea 
mnawwara he's a beacon to all. -Jayil-Iuhum iJ1amea 
anxious to please them. -daari ealaJameit-ak [prov] ... 
don't wear your heart pn your sleeve. 2 a sparking plug. 
3lelec] candle (unit of light measurement). 4 motif in 
tent applique work (see PI.H, II). - In plJimael 
5 [naut] bitt, bollard, capstan . 
~t-..:.. Jameaaya = Jamea 1. 
..s-- Jamei ladjl waxen, waxy. 
~ W Jammaaea In pI -aatl any of various devices on 
or by which clothes or cloths are hung (such as a coat-
hanger, clothes cupboard, clothes horse, (towel) rack, 
clothes hook etc.). 
i- Jammae I Ivtl 18 to wax, put a wax coating on. 
Ilrammae iI-fatla ... he made off like greased lightning. 
Ib to seal (with wax). miJammae bi-Jame alJmarsealed 
with red wax. 2 to deal a hard blow to. Jammae 

ik-koora fig-goon he slammed the ball into the goal. - vn 
taJmiil; ava/pva mijammal. 
~ 
mijammal I ladjl waterproof, water-repellent. 
kulutt i mJammal (babies') plastic pants. 2 Icoll n/oil-
cloth(s), (loosely) any waterproofed material (e.g., tar-
paulin, waterproof sticking plaster, etc.). 3 Ipl-aatl unit 
noun of 2. 
~I 'litfammall or 'lijJammall Ivil passive of 
Jammall. - iva mitfammal. 
2tr 'p 
~ 
Jammal2 Ivil to become almost dry (of freshly-
baked bread, and washing). - vn 
taJmiil; ava 
mijammal· 
~I 'litfammal2 or 'lijJammal2 = Jammal2. - ava 
mitfammal· 
-~tr.P 
.:,I..u..- Jamlidaan In pi -aatl candlestick, candelabra. 
1Jr.P 
J....:. Jimil (a), Jamal (i) Ivtl to include, comprise. 
'lil-fatuura b-tijmal kull il-mabilaat the invoice includes 
all the sales. Illamal baddi b-lenee (or b-karam-u, or 
b-lacf-u) to treat some~me well, look after someone's 
interest. - vn Jumuul, Jaml, Jamalaan; ava Jaamil; pva 
maJmuul. 
J..- Jamllnl union, unity. gamal Jaml-i-na he united 
us, made us as one. farraljna Jaml-u-hum we sowed 
discord among them, we made them disunited. 
:i..l..... Jamla In pi -aatl scarf, shawl. 
J..L Jaamil ladjl complete, comprehensive. 
J..-i 'laJmal fell more/most comprehensive. 
J..;.:..I 'lijtamal Ivt and vii to include, comprise. 
mijtimil (lala) xamas 'lagzaa 'l comprising five parts. 
-iva mijtimil, muJtamil f . 
.::..~ muJtamalaatf Ipl nl content(s). 
2Jr.P 
JL...:. Jimaall Inl left (-hand side). xallii-k lalaJmaal 
ijjaaril keep to the left-hand side of the street. ~ifr· 
lalaJjimaal (zero written on the lefthand side) com-
petely worthless. 2 ladj invarl left, left-hand. 'lin-nabya 
Jjimaal min ijjaaril the left-hand side of the street. 
3 ladvl to the left.liff'Jimaal turn left!Jimaal duur [mil] 
left face! IIxad-ha Jmaal to go about things the wrong 
way. -muxx-u mitrakkib Jimaal he's crazy. -daxal ft-... 
Jimaal to attack (s.o.) with abuse, sarcasm, or biting 
criticism. 
479 
.. 
r r"'" 
J\......., Jamaallnl north. babr ijjamaal the North Sea. 
J\......., Jamaali ladj °1 northern. 
JJr.P 
ill...:. Jamlala Ivnl (display of) know-all manners, 
cocksureness. 
J)....;. Jamluul Ipl Jamaliill I ladjl la lively, quick. 
ril-binti di lahluubaJamluula this girl is clever, quick-
witted. Ib capably and vigorously pursuing many acti-
vities. 2 Inl know-it-all, clever dick, smart aleck. 
jl...;;1 'litfamlil or 'lijJamlil Ivil to behave and act in a 
know-all manner, be smart-alecky. -ava mitfamli/. 
u.P 
(:.;. Jamm I (i) Ivtl I to smell, sniff.Jammeet riibit baaga 
b-titbiriCj I smelled the odour of something burning. 
Jamm ik-kukayiin xallaa-ni miskiin cocaine-sniffing has 
made me wretched. IlIamm il-hawa to go for a stroll, 
take a breath of fresh air. -Jamm· lala qahri 'liid-u 
[sare] to use E.S.P. -Jamm i nafas-u (1) to recover, 
catch one's breath, relax. (2) to start showing some 
spirit (of one who has been oppressed). -Jamm il-
baraara it got a whiff of heat (i.e. it got barely hot). 
- rin-naas bi-tfimm-i-ni people like me, people enjoy 
my company. -Jamm (il-xabar) to get wind of some-
thing, as in kull i ma yJimm i (xabar) mufattij bi-yiCjftl 
whenever he gets wind of an inspector he closes down. 
- Ivi/2 to go off, spoil (of food; it is believed by some 
that such food has been sniffed at by a snake, thus 
becoming tainted with poison). 3/slang] to cadge, 
sponge. baljaa-Iu sniin bi-yJimm· laleena he's been 
sponging off us for years. -vn Jamamaan, Jamm; ava 
Jaamim; pva maJmuum. 
(:.;. Jamm 2 Ivnl smelling. IlIamm in-nisiim Egyptian 
spring festival and popular holiday on the Monday after 
Coptic Easter. 
~ 
Jamma linst n, pi -aatl a sniff, a whiff. 
r~ maJmuum/adj/spoiled. raklimaJmuumspoiled 
food, food which has gone off. maat min rakl i 
maJmuum he died from (eating) bad food (for some, 
the explanation of such an occurrence is that a snake 
has sniffed the food thus tainting it with poison). 
r~ Jammaam I In °1 I narcotics sniffer. 2 cadger, 
sponger. 
"'~I rijjammaama Iprop nl bogey-woman reputed 
to sniff at children with unclean faces and mouths, with 
the result that their faces come out in pustules (the 
possibility of a visit by her is accordingly used to coerce 
a child into keeping face and mouth clean). 

~ 
miJamm: xad(-u) lala miJamm(-u) to hustle (s.o., 
'nto action) without warning. 
~I 'litfamm or 'liJfamm Ivil passive of famm J. - iva 
mitfamm. 
;':';1 'linfamm = 'litfamm. -iva min/ammo 
~ 
fammim Ivtl J to cause to smell. 'lid-duktuur 
fammim-ha l-¥aaz the doctor had her smell the gas. 
Ilrammimii-ha n-naar give it a whiff of the fire (i.e. heat 
it briefly over the fire). -fammim-u hawa (I) to take 
(s.o.) out for a breath of air. (2) {slang] to kill (s.o.), get 
rid of (s.o.). 2 to render unconscious (with evil intent, 
by administering chloroform). -vn tafmiim; ava 
miJammim. 
~I 'litfammim or 'liJfammim Ivil passive offammim. 
-iva mitfammim. 
1 
• 
Uo,)" 
rW fammaam 2 Icoll nl (variety of) honeydew 
melon(s) (Cucumis dudaim). 
-..W fammaama lunit n, pi -aatl a melon (of the 
honeydew variety). 
o,)"lrr~ 
,-",W fammaas <Syr> In plfamamsal {Chr] deacon. 
j".J U ~ 
~;:.; fammuu{i: burtue;aan fammuu(i a thick-
skinned type of orange which appears on the market 
toward the end of the season. 
-
~i.Jr ~ 
.JJ~ famanduura <T ~amand"a from Gr> In pi -
aatl buoy. 
-.Jtr~ 
"';'J~ famhuuriJ Iprop n/ Shamhurish, the king of 
all demons. 
tl.Jr~ 
01.,...:. famwaah <Fr chamois> In! suede. 
l..s r ~ 
i.,...,..:. fimya In pi -aatl eddy, whirlpool. -also fiima. 
1 ..s r ~ see 1 r I ~ : famiyya 
j..sr~ 
~ 
fimiiz <Fr chemise> In pi famaayizl {auto] cylin-
der liner. 
480 
i.J~ 
.:r- fin <contraction of fay 'lin>: ku//' fin-lu yijbih-in-
lu {prov] (everything has something resembling it) like 
to like, every Jack must have his Jill. see further 
under 1 • ..s ~ 
yi.J~ 
~ 
fanab /n pi -aatl I moustache. fanab-ak 'late;al 
min !Jawagb-ak (I) you've a fine moustache. (2) you're 
a grown man. II fanab-u yue;aflalee ~-~ae;r (or ~ae;reen) 
(a falcon (or two falcons) could perch on his mous-
tache) "" he has a thick and luxuriant moustache (re-
garded as a sign of virility). -da biliid lanfanab-ak "" 
that's beyond you. - ('lin lamalt' kida) 'la!Jlae; fanab-i 
(if you manage that) I'll cut off my moustache - I'll eat 
my hat! -mara bJanab a spineless man. 2 {naut] 
fender. 
(JYi.J~) 
r 
fambar J <Fr chambre> In pi fanaabirl inner 
tube. 
r 
fambar 2 <P chanbar> In plfanaabirl any of a 
variety of metal frames or surrounds (e.g., frame of a 
lens, watch bezel, steel ribbon (used in bulk packag-
ing), piston ring). 
r 
fambar 3: xiyaar fambar Indian laburnum (Cassia 
fistula) the ~ods of which are used to make .a laxative. 
-la!Jm' fambar {non-Cairene] = kanduuz. -'lil-filuus 
raa!Jitfambar wi-lambar the money went in a flash and 
for God-knows-what! 
...;.:;..i.J~ 
..A;;;...:. fantif Ivtl to primp, preen. miJantifa !Jawagib-ha 
zayy' btuul is-siima primping her eyebrows like a film 
star. -vn fantafa; avalpva miJantif. 
i.i~ fantuufa In pi -aat, fanatiifl a tiny bit, a 
modicum. 
~I 'litfantif or 'liJfantif Ivil I passive offantif. 2 to 
preen oneself, primp. -ava/iva mitfantif. 
..s.:;..i.J~ 
-fL:. fantii <Chantilly (in France»: kireem fantii 
whipped cream. 
-..s':;"i.J~ 
.:..1..,:;;..:. fintiyaan <T fintiyan> In pi -aatl {obsol] baggy 
trousers (worn by women as an undergarment). 
[.i.J~ 
~ 
fannig Ivtl to cause to have convulsions, cause 

cramps or spasms in. riI-imtifJaan huwwa iii jannig-u 
the exam was the thing that made him all uptight. 
rat;abt-i mijanniga I have a stiff neck. l~ab mijannig 
t~itching nerves. -vn tajniig; ava/pya mijannig. 
~I ritfannig or rijjannig Ivii to have convulsions, 
have cramps or spasms.llma-tijjannig-liii don't get in 
such a state with me! -vn tajannug; ava mitfannig. 
~ 
tajannug In pi -aatl spasm, convulsion. II tajannug 
l~abi epilepsy. 
.II ~.;, v!-
)~ fingaar <Engl> In pi janagiirl shinguard. 
..s~';'v!-
~ 
fing! <T ufuncu> In! third one in a series. 
~ .;, v!-
-I.:...:. find In pi rijnaad,funuudl {naut] first and princip-
al transverse timber supporting the half-deck of a Nile 
sailing boat. 
J~.;,v!-
J-I.:...:. jandil Ivtl to get (s.o.) into a muddle. -vn 
jandala; ava/pya mijandil. 
J~I ritfandil or rijjandillvii to get into a muddle. 
-ava mitfandil. 
v!- .;, v!- see v!-..s.;, v!- : finiija 
';'v!-';'v!-
~ 
janfin Ivii 1 to produce a sound which reveals a 
defect in the constituent material (e.g., buzzing of a 
cracked lute, sound of badly-cast metal when tapped). 
2 to jingle, rattle. -vnjanjana; ava mijanfin. 
~ 
mijanjin ladjl falling apart, dilapidated. 
larabiyya mjanfina rattle-trap car. 
I j,.;, v!-
.la:..:. janat (u) Ivtl to tie firmly. janat riday-ya bil-fJabl 
he bound my wrists together with the rope. -vn jant; 
ava jaanit; pya majnuut. 
~ 
fineeta In/loop. rabat ij-Jiriita lUt;da w-Jineeta he 
tied the ribbon in a bow. 
J.a:..:.; I ritfanat or rijjanat Ivil to be tied firmly. - iva 
mitfinit· 
.!a:..:.; I rinjanat = ritfanat. - iva minfinit. 
2j,.;,v!-
:u..:..:. janta <T fanta> In pljunatll satchel, briefcase, 
handbag. 2 suitcase. II tuggaar ijianta persons who traf-
481 
fie goods in suitcases between countries. 3 trunk or 
boot (of a car). 
3 j, .;, v!- see j,..s.;, v!- : finiit 
t';' v!-
~\.;.:. janaala In! hideousness. tagriba f-muntaha j-
janaala an absolutely horrible experience. 
~ 
janiil ladj pljunaall terrible, frightful. fJadsa 
janiila terrible accident. wijf janiil hideo1Js face . 
da-nta janiil you're terrible! 
e:::-i 'rajnal/elf morelmost terrible. 
c:.:. jannallvii to speak slanderously .jannalu laleeha 
lamma {illit malaa they slandered her when she went 
0!lt with him. -vn tajniil; ava mijannal. 
pi ritfannal or rijjannal Ivii (impersonal) passive 
ofjannal. ritfannallalee ktiir he was much maligned. 
- iva mitfannal. 
1.J.;,v!-
J\.;.:. finaaf lunit and coil nl nose ring (attached to the 
outer side of a nostril). 
....::. jannif Ivtl to embellish (the nose) with ajinaaf. 
-vn tajniif; ava/pya mijannif. 
~I ritfannif or rijjannif Ivil passive of janni/. -iva 
mitfanni/. 
2.J.;,v!-
..A;...:. janaf (i) <perh Copt> Ivii to sniff, sniffle. -vn 
janf; ava jaani/. 
3.J.;,v!-
..A;...:. finf <Copt> In pi rijnaaf, jinaaf, jinuuf, finufal 
1 flexible basket, hemp sack (generally used for car-
rying straw by donkey or camel). 2 {rur] dummy, oaf. 
J';' v!-
...;;..; janat; (u) Ivtl to execute by hanging. -vnjant;; ava 
jaanit;; pya majnuut;. 
.;;...:.;1 ritfanat; or rijjanat; Ivil to be hanged. - iva 
m!tfinit;. 
...;;..; jannat; Ivtl to hang (a number of people). -vn 
ta.[niit;; ava mijannat;. 
.;;...:.;1 ritfannat; or rijjannat; Ivil to be hanged (of a 
number of people). - iva mitfannat; . 
C. .!l.;, v!-
~ 
jankafJ lvii to become sloppy or unkempt. bint i 
mjankafJa f-libs-a-ha a sloppily dressed girl. -vn 
jankafJa; ava mijankafJ. 

~I fitfanka!J 
or 
fiJJanka!J 
mitfanka!J. 
.; .!J <.J ..; 
Janka!J. 
- ava 
.f.:- Jankar Ivtl [metal] to scribe, mark out. -vn 
Jankara; ava/pva miJankar. 
.;K:...:. Jinkaar Inl [metal] I trace, mark made in scrib-
ing. 2 (qa/am) Jinkaar scribing-tool, scriber. 
FI fitfankaror fiJJankar Ivil passive ofJankar. -iva 
mitfankar. 
J.!J.;, ..; 
~ 
Jankal <T fengel from P> In pi Janaakill 
I hook.Jankal iJJibbaak window hook. II bi-ylauab-ha 
la/aJJanaakil he gives her a hard time. 2 technique in 
boxing or fighting, consisting of tripping the opponent 
(by using one's leg to hook the opponent's ankle). xad 
Jankal he was tripped. 
~ 
Jankil Ivtl I to trip, trip up. 2 to hook open (e.g., 
a door or window). -vnJankala; ava miJankil. 
~I fitfankil or fiJJankillvil I to trip, be tripped. 
2 to be hooked open. -ava/iva mitfankil. 
I ..... 
Y'-'..r 
;;,;.. Janna: Janna w-ranna hullabaloo and clamour. 
lamaluu-Iu Janna w-ranna they made a big fuss over 
him, they made a lot of noise abQut him. raagil luh 
Janna w-ranna a man who creates a stir wherever he 
goes, i.e. a famous and glamorous man. 
2 .;, .;,..; see .;,.;,..; ~ : miJanna 
... h.;,..; 
--'r- Janhif/vil to sniffle (in,crying). -vnJanhafa; ava 
miJanhif. 
~I fitfanhif or fiJJanhif = Janhif. - vn tiJa,!hiif; ava 
mitfanhif· 
<.J I ... .;, ..; 
,),,:..:. Jinwaan <perh Fr chinn;~> Inl Chinese-style 
carpet. 
01 ... .;,..; 
.1.;- Jinwaah <Fr chinois> ladj invarl in the Chinese 
style. 
~<.J"; 
,.r... miJanni: la mhanni wala mJanni see hanna. 
482 
.;\.S';'''; 
.;.".:...:.. Janyuur <prob Fr chignole> In pi Janayiirl 
[mech] drill . 
.r.- Janyar Ivtl [slang] to devastate, wipe out. 
fil-imti!Jaan da Janyar-ni that exam wiped me out . 
Janyart-ufil-munalifa I destroyed him in the discussion. 
-vn Janyara; avalpva miJanyar . 
~I fitfanyar or fiJJanyar Ivil [slang] to be devas-
tated, be wiped out. fiz-zamaalik itfanyar fil-matf' 
btaal fimbaari!J the Zamalek team was annihilated in 
yesterday's match. - iva mitfanyar. 
..; \.S .;, ..; 
~ 
JiniiJa In pi JanaayiJI I hole made in a wall dur-
ing construction or installation (e .g., for fastening scaf-
folding to a wall). 2 niche. 
b\.S,;,,,; 
.J...;..; Jinii(: Jinii{ iI-lafariit the other end of the world, 
as in fhuwwa !Ja-ywaddii-k fi-Jniit iI-lafariit he'll take 
you to God knows where! 
0\.S';'''; 
~ 
Jineeh <Fr chine> ladj invarl tinted (of paper). 
0",\.S<.J"; 
• .,,;..,,- Jinyooh <Fr> In pi -aatl chignon. 
yo"; 
..,.,If- Jihaab r In pi Juhubl shooting star, meteor. 
-.;,yo"; 
.;~ Jahbandar <P shiih-bandar>: Jahbandar it-
tuggaar [obsol] chief merchant. 
I ~ 0"; 
.A+- Jlhid (a) Ivil to give evidence. attest. Jihdu lalee 
they bore witness against him. miin !Ja-yiJhad malaaya 
who will testify in my favour? II miin yiJhad liI-laruusa 
(reer fumm-a-ha) [prov] (who will testify to the (beau-
ty of the) bride other than her mother) "" testimony 
from an interested party is likely to be be biased. -vn 
Jihaada, Jahaada; avaJaahid; pva majhuud . 
• ~lf- Jihaada, Jahaada Inl I testimony. IlJihaadit 
fisbaat testimony for the prosecution. -Jihaada ZUlU 
perjury. - fiJJihaada 1i-lIaah (witnessing belongs to 
God) said to strengthen a positive statement, as in 
fiJJihaada 1i-lIaah iI-fakl' da !Jilw "" by God, that's 
good food! 2 fiJJihaada (also fiJ-Jihadteen) the Muslim 
creed, i.e. laa rilaaha filla lIaah mubammadun rasuulu 

llaah there is no god but God (and) Muhammad is 
his Messenger. 3/pl -aat, jahaayidJ I 33 diploma. 
3b certificate. jihaadit milaad birth certificate. 
.al... jaahid l 
In pljuhuud, juhhaadJI I witness. 
jaahid in-nafy witness for the defence. rabb-u-najaahid 
God is my witness, as God is my witness ... ! -
Ipl 
jawaahidl2 indication, sign. 3 [lit] citation, quotation. 
4 [lsi] gnlVestone, headstone. - Sino pll thirty-third 
or sixty-sixth bead on a sibl:Ja. 6 peg on the yoke of a 
plough (see PI.D, 12). 
11 fif-Jaahid to cut it short ... , as in fif-jaahid rul:Jt iftareet 
r;arabiyya in short, I went and bought a car. 
~ 
jahiid, jihiid In pljuhada, juhadaafl I martyr. 
sanit if-juhada thc year of the Martyrs (283 A.D. - the 
starting point of the Coptic calendar). 2 casualty.- Ino 
pl/3 Bearer of witness (epithet of God). 
~ 
majhad In pi majaahidl I scene. W-majhad il-
xitaami the final scene. 2 funeral procession. 3 shrine. 
~ 
jahhid Ivt/l to call as a witness, call to testify. 2 to 
cause to witness. jahhidt d r;aleek faxuu-k I called your 
brother's attention to (what) you (have been doing). 
- vn tajhiid; ava mifahhid. 
~I fitfahhid or fifjahhid Ivil passive ofjahhid. - iva 
mitfahhid. 
.al... jaahid l Ivtl to observe, see, witness. miinjaahid 
il-l:Jadsa who saw the accident? -vn mujahda, mifahda; 
ava mifaahid. 
.aL.;.. mujaahid In *1 eyewitness, spectator, onlooker. 
.aL;I fitfaahid or fifjaahid Ivil I to be seen, be 
observed. 23 to bear witness to God and Muhammad, 
utter the jihaada. fitfaahid r;ala to pronounce the 
jihaada over a dying person. II fifjaahid r;ala nafs-ak == 
say your prayers! (i.e. I'm going to kill you). 2b to utter 
the jihaada as an expression of relief. fifjahidna lamma 
d-duktuur wa~al we were quite relieved when the doc-
tor arrived. -avaliva mitfaahid. 
~I fistajhid Ivi/l to seek a witness. fistajhidt i bii 
I called him as a witness. 2 to be martyred, die a mar-
tyr. - vn fistifhaad; ava mistafhid. 
lJtJ-
...... jahd Inll honey. kalaam-u zayy if-Jahd == butter 
wouldn't melt in his mouth. 2/colll honeydew 
melon(s). 
0""" jahda lunit n, pi -aatl a honey-dew mt;lon. 
'-!.I ...... jahdaaya = jahda. 
I 
• 
~ t '-'" 
.,.....:. jahr I In pi fujhur, juhuur, juhural month. talatt 
ufhur three months. fif-jahr illi faat last month.llfahr" 
483 
r;asal honeymoon. -jahr" r;asal wi-Jahr i b~al ups and 
downs. 
...s.A- jahri ladj *1 monthly. murattab jahri monthly 
salary. 
11 jahriyyan ladvl monthly. 
';.A- jahriyya In pi -aatl monthly pay, monthly 
wages. 
o.;'>L. mujahra ladvl monthly. 
1 
• 
~ t '-'" 
.A- jahar (i) Ivtl 1 to make famous. fik-kitaab da 
jahar-u that book made him famous. 2t to make a 
declaration of. jahar fiflaas-u he declared himself 
bankrupt. 3 to put a spell of barrenness on (a woman, 
by entering into her presence during the daytime of the 
forty-day period after her giving birth, carrying, e.g., 
jewels, fresh meat or the first-fruits of the season). - vn 
jahr, jaharaan; avajaahir; pva majhuur. 
~ 
jahr.2 verbal noun ofjahar 2. II fif-Jahr il-r;aqaari 
the notary office, at which civil marriages and own-
ership of property are registered. 
o ~ 
jahra In pi -aatll instance noun ofjahr2. 2 rash, 
skin eruption (thought to be caused by the evil eye). 
..)..tf-" mafhuur ladj *1 famous, well known. 
..A- juhra Inl fame, repute. W-furn i waaxid juhra 
kwayyisa the bakery"has a good name. II fism i juhra 
professional name, or name other than a given name, 
by which one is known . 
.r-f--' jahiirl ladj *1 famous. II fif-jahiir bi- (widely) 
known as ... , as in fumm i kalsuum if-Jahiira bis-sitt 
Umm Kalthum, known as fis-sitt. 
.A-i faJhar I lell morelmost famous. 
.,...:..;1 fitfahar or fifjahar Ivil I passive of jahar. 2 to 
become well known, become famous. - avaliva mitfihir. 
~I finjahar = fitfahar. - avaliva minjihir. 
.;'>l... jaahir Ivtl = jahar 3. - vn mifahra, mujahra; ava 
mifaahir. 
.;'>\...;1 fitfaahir or fifjaahir Ivil passive of jaahir. - iva 
mitfaahir . 
.A-i fajhar2 Ivtl 1 to profess, confess one's faith in. 
II fajharit fislam-ha she became a Muslim. 2t to exhibit 
(s.th.) for sale. -vn fiJhaar; ava miJhir, mujhir. 
.*-1 fiftahar Ivil to become famous. 
f~-~ir;iid 
bi-yiftihir bi-rac;a~aat il-r;a~aaya Upper Egypt is famous 
for stick dances. - vn fiftihaar; ava miftihir. 
I 
-
• 
tJ t '-'" 
.jf- jahac;, jihiC; (a) Ivi/l to catch one's breath, gasp 
(particularly when surprised or shocked). jahac;it 
lamma {aafit ig-garl:J she gasped when she saw the 

wound. 2 to exert influence by means of the evil eye. 
finti b-tifhaqi lal-waad kida leeh why are you putting 
the evil eye on the boy (by, e.g., gasping in admiration 
at him)? -vn fahaqaan, fahq, fahiiq; ava faahiq. 
~ 
fahqa In pi -aatl 1 instance noun offahq. 2 rash, 
skin eruption (thought to be caused by the evil eye). 
~ 
fahiiq r In! inhalation. bi-yaaxudfahiiq he takes a 
breath. 
2(J t v!-l 
&ol.:. faahiq ladjl tall, towering, lofty. 
&ol.:. faahiq ladjl intense, bright (of colours). fabyaq 
faahiq an intense white, a dazzling white. 
J t v!-
J+.:. fihil (a) Ivil to become lively, come alive. fifhal 
jiwdyya get a move on! -vnfahalaan; avafaahil. 
J+.; fahhill Ivtl to speed up, hurry up.fahhili I-fakl' 
fwayya hurry up the food a bit.llfahhil-ni fana I-fawwil 
attend to my business first. 2 Ivil to hurry. fahhil 
liffwrl" lafaan yix/~ badri he worked fast in order to 
finish early. -vn tajhiil; ava/pva mifahhil. 
J+-:.;I fitfahhil or fiffahhil Ivil 1 to be hurried. 2 to 
hurry, be in a hurry. -ava/iva mitfahhil. 
r t v!-
r+- fahm ladj invarl gallant, decent, gentlemanly. 
:i..~ fahaama Inl gallantry, decency. 
jl':'tv!-
.J~ fahnaaz <P shah-naz> Inl {mus] (name of the 
note) C sharp. 
.J t v!- see 
I IS tv!-: fahwa, fahwaani 
'IStv!-
'''''':' fahwa In plfahawaatU desire, lust. 
Jr.J+- fahwaani ladjl lustful, carnal. 
.sf- fahi ladjl delicious, appetizing. 
~ 
fahiyya Inl 1 appetite. ma-Iuuf fahiyya 1iI- fakl he 
has no appetite for food. laatil] if-fahiyya appetizer. 
2! orgasm. 
~i fajha lell more/most appetizing, delicious etc . 
.sf- fahha Ivtl to awaken desire or appetite in (s.o.). 
- vn tajhiyya; ava mifahhi . 
.:,~ mufahhiyyaat Ipl nl hors d'oeuvres. 
~I fitfahha or fiffahha Ivil passive of fahha. -iva 
mitfahhi. 
~ 
I fiftaha Ivtl to desire, have an appetite for, crave. 
la(-(arabeeza fii kull' ma tiftihii n-nals there is every-
484 
thing on the table your soul could desire. -vn fiftiha; 
ava miftihi. 
2 IS t v!- see IS t I v!- : faahi 
J1.Jv!-
JI.,.:. fuwaa/,jiwaal <P juwill> In pi -aat,jiw{/a,jiwlal 
1 large sack. jiwaal dura sack of corn. II raagil zayy 
iffuwaal a man wjthout a will of his own. 2 plain loose 
dress (e.g., maternity pinafore). 
ly.Jv!-
:i.,.:l.:. .~l.:. fayba In plfawaayibl blemish, impurity. 
fawaayib fil-mayya impurities in the water. 
2 Y .J v!- see 2 y Y v!- : fubb 
v!- y.J v!-
~.,.:. foobafl linterjl call for nuq(a uttered by perfor-
mers during celebrations (such as. weddings). 
~.,.:. foobaf1 IviJ to call foobaj. qalad yifoobaf 
ma-I]add'f saral fii he kept sayingfoobaf but nobody 
paid any attention to him. -vn mifobfa; ava mifoobaf. 
..:.. .J v!- see I j, .J v!- : faat, foota, fawwit 
I 
• 
c..J '-'" 
c.~ fawwal] I Ilvtl to cast, hurl, fling (over a large 
distance or area). lIJawwal]-ha min wara qahr-ak don't 
worry about it! 2 Ivil to wave, gesticulate. miin iIIi 
b-yifawwal] hinaak da who's that waving over there? 
lliawwal] li-wiff-i he treated me without respect. -vn 
tafwiil]; ava/pva mifawwal] . 
C. ~I fitfawwalj I or fiffawwal] I Ivil to be cast, hurled 
or flung (over a large distance or area). - iva mitfawwal]. 
2 
• 
c..J '-'" 
c.~ fawwal]2 <perh' Copt> Ivtl to sear (e.g., meat), 
saute (e.g., vegetables, rice). -vn tafwiil]; ava/pva 
mifawwal]. 
c.~1 fitfawwal] 2 or fiffawwal] 2 Ivil to be seared, be 
sauteed. -iva mitfawwal]. 
I J .J v!- see also J v!- • 
Jl.:. faar I (u) Ivtl to seek advice of. laazim fafuur 
mul]aami fil-I]ikaaya di I must seek the advice of a 
lawyer on this matter. -vnfoora; avafaayir. 
Jl.:. faar2 (u, i) Ivil to give advice. fil-mul]aami faar 
lalayya faruul] liI-mal]kama the lawyer advised me to 
go to court. -vnfoora; avafaayir. 

O.J~ /oora Inl a piece of advice. miin /aar caleek 
bifloora l-mihabbiba-di whoever gave you this rotten 
advice! 
o}.~ /aara In pI -aatll badge, emblem. 2/araat Ipl nl 
insignia. 
I.S.J ~ /uura t Inl consultation. maglis ifluura advisory 
council. 
0.J"':'" ma/uura Inl consultation. 
.J~ /awwar J Ivilto make a sign with the hand./awwar 
cala l-bahaayim tim/i he waved the livestock on. - vn 
ta/wiir; ava mifawwar. 
.JJ~ /aawir I Ivtl to consult, take counsel with. kaan 
laazim tifawir-na c;abl i ma titgawwiz you should have 
consulted us before getting married. I:J-a/aawir caC;l-i 
I'll think matters over. 2/vil to gesture, make a sign 
with the hand./awir-lu calayya mif-flbbaak he pointed 
me out to him from the window. /awir-li cala buC;C;-u 
yacni kaan raayil:J yitradda he pointed to his mouth 
meaning he was going to lunch. huwwa mifaawir liiki is 
he waving to you? -vn mifawra; ava mifaawir . 
.JJL:.;I fitfaawiror fif/aawir Ivil to consult one another. 
-vn ta/aawurt; ava mitfaawir . 
.J~ i fa/aar t Ivil I to allude, refer. filii fa/arna filee 
saabiqan that to which we alluded previously. 2 to give 
indication. bi-tfiir lil-wac;t it indicates the time. 3 to give 
advice, make a recommendation. fa/aaru b-feeh what 
did they advise? - vn fifaara; ava mu/iir; pva mu/aar. 
o.J~! fifaara Inil Ivnl II silaal:J il- fifaara [mil] the signal 
corps. - rahn ifart(-u) at (s.o's) beck and call. 2 Ipl-aatl 
indicator, signal. fifaarit qabaab foghorn. fifaarit 
(carabiyya) signal indicator (of a car). fifaarit (muruur) 
traffic-light. fifaraat yadawiyya hand signals. fifaara 
tillirrafiyya telegram. 3/pl fa/aayirl 3a sign. fil-l:Jubb i 
bi-ykun-lu fa/aayir (love has its signs) "" you can tell 
when someone is in love. 3b mark, blemish (in magic). 
fil- fasyaad (albiin farxa min reer fifaara the spirits 
demand a hen without blemish (i.e., all of one colour, 
unmarked in any way). 
~.J~i fa/argi, fifargi In pI -yyal signalman. fa/argi 
flS-sikka 1-l:Jadiid railway signalman. fa/argJ muruur 
traffic policeman. 
.r.-- mu/iir In *1 I field marshal (Sr.), general of the 
Army (U.S.). 2 mu/iir bal:Jri admiral of the fleet. 
.J~I fista/aarlvtl to seek advice of, consult. II fallaah 
yilcan illi /aar wi-sta/aar God damn everyone who 
brought this business about (said, e.g., of an unhappy 
marriage). -vn fistifaara; ava mistifiir, musta/iir; pva 
musta/aar. 
o.J~1 fistifaara In pI -aatl return visit to a doctor to 
check on the course of treatment prescribed as the 
485 
.. 
.. 
JIJ"JIJ" 
result of a previous examination (usually without the 
payment of additional fees). 
.Jl.:.;..... musta/aar In *1 I adviser, counsellor, consul-
tant. 2a [leg] judge of the Court of Appeal. 2b [dipl] 
counsellor. 2c [pol] chancellor. 
1 
• 
J.J tJ" 
.;I ~ /iwaar In pI -aatl trousseau (including furniture, 
furnishings and household equipment). 
.J~ /awwar 2 Ivtl to provide (a bride) with theflwaar. 
- vn ta/wiir; ava/pva mifawwar . 
.J~I fitfawwar or fif/awwar Ivil to get together the 
flwaar (of a girl about to be married). -ava mitfawwar. 
3 J.J"; see J.J"; r : mifwaar, ma/war 
JJ.J"; see also J.JJ"; 
.j.J~ /awrac; Ivil to stoke a fire until the flames enter 
the/aruuc;a. -vn/awrac;a; ava/pva mifawrac;. 
rJ.J"; 
... .JJw /awirma <T fevirme> Ini sliced lamb grilled on 
a vertical spit. 
IoSJ.J ..; 
I.S.J~ /uuri <T §urUrom P> Ini [mus] mode in Arabic 
music beginning on D and having E half flat and A flat. 
-see also qargaraar. 
I. 
• 
tJ".JtJ" 
..r~ /uu/ I/coll nl corn tassel(s). 2/n1 corn silk. 
4.:. ~ /uu/a <Copt> In pI -aat, /uwaj, /awaa/il I lunit 
nl a corn tassel. 2a forelock. II waac;ic lilu/t-u "" he's in 
up to his ears, he's in deep. 2b crest (of a bird). 2c top 
(of a tree). 
1. 
• 
tJ".JtJ" 
.;.~ /awwif Ivtl I to blur, cause to be vague. fikra 
m/awwifa a confused idea. - Ivil 2 to cause interfer-
ence (in radio waves etc.). 3 to spread slanderous 
rumours. - vn ta/wiif; ava/pva mifawwif . 
..;:....~ ta/wiifJ Inl syphilis. 
..r~ mifawwif ladj *1 syphilitic . 
..r ~I fitfawwif or fif/awwif Ivil passive of /awwif. 
- iva mitfawwif. 
3 ..; .J"; see ..; loS .J ..; : flwee/, /uwee/, /awiif 
J";.J"; 
.r ~ /aw/ar Ivil I to create interference. 
f~-~oot 

.» iJ. 
486 
kiwayyis bass' /iifawfara fl,l'-,Yuura the sound is fine but 
would you believe it? as in fuuf ya rax-i b-tidris iI-
there's interference in the picture. raxuu-k bi-Y1.aakir 
ma-tfawfar-f' lalee your brother is studying, don't dis-
turb him. 2 to spread slanderous rumours. -vnfawfara; 
avalpva mifawfar. 
.r..,.:.;1 ritfawfar or riffawfar Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of fawfar. mitfawfar laleehum they are the victims of 
vicious slander. - iva mitfawfar. 
1j".J~ 
.1.L..:. faat I (also faat) (u) <Engl shoot> Ivtl to kick, 
shoot, serve (a ball).faat ik-koorafig-goon he shot the 
ball into the goal. -vnfawa[aan, foot; avafaayi[. 
~.,... foo[a I (alsofoota) linst n, pI -aatl a kick, a shot, a 
serve. 
~ 
~ fawwiit In pI fawwiital good kicker, good server 
(of a ball player) . 
. .1.l..;1 ritfaa[ or riffaa[ Ivil to be kicked, shot, or served 
(of a ball). -iva mitfaa[ . 
.1.\....;1 rinfaa[ = ritfaa[. - iva minfaat. 
J.,~ fawwi[ (alsofawwit) Ivil to kick, shoot, or serve 
repeatedly. ril-huguum ik-kuwayyis laazim yifawwit 
fig-goon a good centre-forward must keep shooting at 
the goal. - vn tafwiit; ava mifawwi[ . 
.1. ~I ritfawwi[ or riffaWwi[ Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of fawwi[. mitfawwit laleeh kuwar kltiir a lot of balls 
were shot at him (i.e. the goalie). -iva mitfawwi[. 
1(.1.J~) 
J.,.,... foot In pI rafWaa[1 la half (in football match, 
hockey match etc.). Ib set (in squash, tennis etc.). 
Ie single race (in horse-racing). Id round (in a game). 
2 (single) circumambulation. 
~.,... foota2 <prob Copt> Inl Newcastle disease 
(affectmg fowls).lIgat-akfoo[a "" a plague upon you! 
J.I~ fawwaati: lamba fawwaa[1 simple oil-lamp 
without a chimney. (see PI.B, 2). 
"';.J~ 
...jL. faa/(u) Ivtl I to see, perceive.fuft' bet-na g-gidiid 
have you seen our new house? rintafayif-ni b-abaltar-
hum do I look to you as if I can afford to throw money 
around? lala madad (or madd) if-foofas far as the eye 
can see. II mfuuf wiff-ak bi-xeer '1m faa 'I allaah (phrase 
,aid to one or by one departmg on a Journey) "" God 
willing. we'll see you soon. -fuft' bliqa leeh 'lana 
ma-kunt'-f layz-ak tiruul:J do you see now why I didn't 
want you to go? -fuuf (ba4'a) see here, now, as infuuf 
baqa rik-kalaam da ma-y,Yal:Jl:J '-f see here, now, that 
~ort of talk won't do! -fuufya (rax-i etc.) just imagine, 
yabaani just imagine - she's studying Japanese! 2 to see, 
view. ma-fuft'-fil-film' da I didn't see that film.fayfa 
b-yilmil reeh can you see what he's doing? lila minfaaf 
wala min diri "" very discreetly. 38 to see, meet with. 
ma-bi-nfufuu-f kitiir we don't see him very often . 
nifuf-kum baldeen we'll see you later. 3b to meet with, 
experience. lumr-i ma-fuft iI-maral/. I've never been 
sick. II rilaah-i ma-tfuuf "" may you never have to ex-
perience ... , God spare you .... 4 to deem right. rilli 
bi-tfuuf-u rinta whatever you think is best. 5 to give 
attention to. fuuf l:Jaal-ak look after yourself. bi-yfuuf 
furl-u kwayyis he does his job well. fuuf furl-ak mind 
your own business! laazim tifuuf m(J,Ylal:Jit iI-liyaal you 
must look to the interest ofthe children. II kunt' b-afuuf 
mazaag-i kwayyis I used to indulge myself (in every-
thing). -faaf(-u) bi-l:Jaaga to give (s.o.) a gratuity or 
bribe, as in l:Ja-nfuf-hum bi-l:Jaaga lafaan yiktibu taqriir 
kiwayyis we'll give them a little sOPlething so they'll 
write a good report. -faayif nafs-u (or rool:J-u) he is 
conceited. 6 to find, ascertain. raagil fur/-; w-fuuf 
iI-rala[aat illi lamalt-a-ha go over my work and find out 
what mistakes I've made. fuuf mawaliid is-sikka 1-
l:Jadiid look up the train schedules.lltalaala rafuf-Iak 
iI-baxt let me tell your fortune. 7 to find, secure.juf-lak 
faqqa w-ragib-lak laruusa find yourself an apartment 
and I'll get you a bride. nifuuf lina l:Jall' malaaha let's 
try to work out something with her. huwwa iii faf-Ii 
wasta gamda he's the one who got me some effective 
pull.llIuf-lakfoofa do something about it, find yourself 
a way out. - Ivil 8 to (be able to) see. ma-bi-njuf-j' 
fitf.-tf.alma we can't see in the dark. -vnfawafaan,joof; 
avafaayif· 
:U".:. foofa In pI -aatl solution, way out. 
...jl..;1 ritfaaf or riffaaf Ivil passive offaaf. - iva mitfaaf. 
...;L:.; 1 rinfaaf = ritfaaf. - iva minfaaf. 
...; ~ fawwif Ivil I to c'ause to see or view. 2 to cause to 
perceive or understand. 3 to cause to meet with or 
experience. -vn tafwiif; avalpva mifawwif . 
"';~I ritfawwif or riffawwif Ivil passive of fawwif. 
- iva mitfawwif. 
J.J ~ 
~.,... fooq In pI rafwaaql yearning, longing, desire. 
~~ fawwaq Ivtl I to excite curiosity in.fawwaqt-i-ni 
liiha you've roused my curiosity about her. 2 to arouse 
desire or longing in. II ril-buld' bl-yfawwaq {prov! "" 
absence makes the heart grow fonder. -vn tafwiiq; ava 
mifawwaq. 

J-.."';'; tajwiiq Inl suspense. 
.).!.,.:..; tajwiiqi ladjl thrilling. 
487 
J~I fiifawwaq or fijjawwaq Ivil I to yearn, long. 
2 passive of jawwaq. - ava/iva miifawwaq. 
J\.;..I fijtaaq Ivil to yearn, long. fijtaaqit Ii- fumm-a-ha 
she longed for her mother. -vn fijtiyaaq; ava mijtaaq. 
~.J ..r 
.!l.,.. jook Icoll nl I thorn(s), prick(s), spike(s), 
spine(s). Ilbi-jook-u brand-new. 2 thistle(s). 3 fish 
bone(s). 
";! ~ jooka In pI -aatl I lunit nl a thorn, a splinter, a 
spine, a fish bone. 2 any of various objects having a 
thorn-like shape or a thorn-like part (e.g., awl, adjust-
ing-pin on the blade of a plane, cut-out mechanism on 
the loom which operates when a thread breaks). 
kurbaag bijooka spiked whip. lamba jooka bayonet-
mount light-bulb. winp b-jooka fork-lift. - Ipljiwak, 
juwakl3 (table) fork . 
.}.,.. jooki ladjl thorny.lltiinjooki cactus fruit, prick-
ly pear(s), Barbary fig(s) (Opuntia tuna) . 
.}.,.:- jawki ladjl pertaining to the spine. fin-nuxaal 
ijjawki spinal fluid. fil-l:Jumma j-jawkiyya [pathJ 
meningitis. 
4L. jaayik fadjl barbed. silk; jaayik barbed wire. 
.!l~ jawwik Ivtl to prick, prickle. 
fil-ba({aniyya 
jawwikit-u the blanket prickled him. - vn tajwiik; aval 
pva mijawwik. 
.!l~1 fiifawwik or fijjawwik Ivil to be pricked or 
prickled. -iva miifawwik. 
IJ.J..r 
J~ jawwil Ivil to dry up (of milk, fruit). fil-Iaban 
jawwil fi-sidr-a-ha her milk dried up. -vn tajwiil; ava 
mijawwil. 
J~I fiifawwilor fijjawwillvil to dry up (of fruit, 
milk). fijjatla layza tf.ill' w-ru{uuba lajaan ma-
tiifawwil-j the seedling needs shade and moisture so 
that it won't wither. -ava miifawwil. 
2J.J..r 
J.,.. jawalln/left-handedness. 
J.,.:-i fajwal ladj, femjoola, pljuullleft-handed. 
3J.J..r 
JI~ jawwaallprop nl Shawwal. the tenth month of 
the Muslim year. 
4 J.J..r see J I .J ..r : juwaal, jiwaal 
r.J ..r 
iJ- 'i":" joom '.juum' Inl shameful disgrace. yaleeb 
ij-joom [women in trad soeJ (1) shame! for shame! 
(2) 0 what a pity! how awful! riggaalit ijjuum men 
unworthy of the name. 
i.r jufm Inl evil omen. naas wijP jufm people of 
ill-omen. 
iJ~ majfuum ladj *1 iII-omened, ill-fated. yoom 
majfuum an evil day. naas majfumiin unlucky people . 
~~I fiifaafim or fijjaafim Ivil to feel bad pre-
monitions. b-aifaa fim lamma fajuuf-u I get bad pre-
monitions when I see him. - ava miifaafim. 
ij~ tajaafumt Inl pessimism. 
~L:;.. mutajaafim In *1 pessimist. 
2 
• 
r .J .,.. 
i"" juum21/nl a kind of hard wood. 2 Icoll nl quarter-
staff(s), cudgel(s), (specifically, those used in Upper 
Egypt). 
:i...,.. juuma In pI -aat, jiwaml quarterstaff, cudgel. 
,n ..r 
4;.,.. joona <Copt> In pI jiwan, juwanl storage place 
(especially for grain). Ilga naqb-u lala joona (fatf.ya) 
{provJ (the hole he made led to an empty storeroom) "" 
his effort was in vain. 
w~ jawwin Ivtl to store, store up. -vn tajwiin; ava/pva 
mijawwin. 
w~1 fiifawwin or fijjawwin Ivil to be stored. - iva 
miifawwin. 
'.J ..r 
,~ jawwih, jawwah I Ivtl to disfigure, deform. 
mayyit in-naar jawwihit wijj-u the nitric acid disfigured 
his face. 2 Ivil to be defaced, be disfigured, be de-
formed. - vn tajwiih; avalpva mijawwih, mijawwah. 
"+!"...; tajwiiha In pI -aatl a disfiguration, a deformity. 
,~I fiifawwih or fijjawwih, fiifawwah, fijjawwah 
Ivil to be defaced, be disfigured, be deformed. - iva 
miifawwih, miifawwah. 
'.>-' tajawwuh t In pi -aatl disfigurement, deformity. 
11,$.J..r 
1,$.,.. jawa (i) Ivtl to cook on coals or on a grill over 
coals or a fire. -vnjawy, jayy; avajaawi; pva majwi. 
,-,4"...- majwiyyaat Ipl nl grilled foods. 
~I~ jawwaaya In pi -aatl grill, gridiron. 
1,$".:.;1 fiifawa or fijjawa Ivil passive of jawa. - iva 
miifiwi. 

I loS .J ..} 
~.,.:. fiwayya, fuwayya In pi -aatl 1 an indefinite (but 
not large) number or quantity. riddaa-li fjiwayya iii 
kaanit candu he gave me the amount he had. lJaat 
fiwayyit karaasi kutaar hina bring a good number of 
chairs over here! candufwayyit ~uufhe has some wool. 
kull' fwayyit rayyaam every few days. candi fwayyit 
bard I have a slight cold. fiwayya (bi-)fwayya little by 
little, gradually. (candu) feer wijwayyaat (he has) 
quite a bit. -/adjectivallyl caql-ufwayya he's not very 
bright. baxt-u fwayya he's not very lucky. 2 (short) 
period of time. bacd'fwayya after a while, after a little 
while. kull'fwayya (1) from time to time, every once in 
a while, as in b-aruulJ hinaak kull' fwayya I go there 
every now and then. (2) very frequently, as in 
l1IIa-tixba{-niij bi-kalaam-ak kull' fwayya don't keep 
snapping at me! IllJa-yYiibfiwayya he'll be away for a bit 
(i.e. quite a while). - ladvl 3 somewhat, a bit. 
bi-{ariiqa ralJsan fiwayya in a somewhat better way. 
zaclaanafwayya she's a bit upset. lJagar kibiir fiwayya a 
largish rock. 
11 fiwayyiteen Inever used in constrl = fiwayya. 
1oS.".:.;-1 ristafwa Ivt/ to consider small. ristafwa 1-
mahiyya he thought the salary low. -vn ristifwa; ava 
mistafwi. 
(..}IoS.J..}) 
...;.....,.:. fiweej, fuweef: bijweef 1 slowly. ritkallim bi-
fweefspeak slowly. 2 gently. qarab-ni bijweefhe tap-
ped me. 3 quietly. ridlJak bi-fweeflaugh (more) softly. 
...;.....,1..:. fawiif <T ~av~> In plfawifiyyal 1 sergeant. 
2 form of address or reference to a policeman or soldier 
with a rank not higher than sergeant. baffawiif see 
...... 
IJ" • 
loS..} 
..r' fii linterjl cart-driver's call urging a horse to move 
"" giddup! Iltaxxan widn iI-bayl' b-qaalitfii [pray] (flat-
ter a mule by addressing him as if he were a horse) "" 
flatter gullible people by letting them think you have a 
high opinion of them. 
1·1oS..} 
.1..:. faar (i) Ivtl to will. rabb-i-na ma-far-f'lina r-raalJa 
God didn't wish us to be comfortable. -vn mafii ra; ava 
faayir. 
11 rin faar allaah or rin faar allaah God willing. 
lJa-tsaafir rimta - raaxir ifjahr' rin faa r allaah 'When 
are you travelling?' 'E.nd of the month, if all goes well.' 
lJ-azur-ku bukra rin faa r allaah I will visit you tomor-
488 
row. - rin fa-lla (1) optative interjection. rin fa-lla 
tzur-na qurayyib I hope you'll visit us soon. (2) even if. 
riftirii-ha rin fa-lla titkallif miit gineeh buy it even if it 
costs a hundred pounds! yalla naakul kabaab - rinfa-lla 
ma-lJadd' lJawwifcome on let's eat shish kebab -never 
mind the cost! -ma faar allaah or ma faar allaah 
prophylactic exclamation to ward off the evil eye (said 
upon seeing or hearing of something which excites 
one's admiration). 
~ 
mafiira In! will, wish. kull-u b-mafiirit illaah or 
kull-u b-mafiira everything is subject to God's will. 
i.:.. mafalla In pi -aatl gold pendant with a Koranic 
inscription. 
I. loS..} 
• .,r. feer In pi rafyaarl thing. kull' feer everything. 
feer ralJsan min la feer [pray] a little is better than 
none. II bifjeer il-filaani at great cost. -raagil fii feer 
li-lIaah (1) a charitable man. (2) a psychic man. sitt' 
fiihafeer li-lIaah (1) a charitable woman. (2) a psychic 
woman. (3) a loose promiscuous woman. -candufeer 
wijwayyaat he's quite well-off, he has quite a bit. 
l"..:.i rafya: ril-rafya (or rafyit-(u)) macdan t!lings are 
fine, things are in good shape, as in rafyit-hum macdan 
they are doing well. 
J • loS..} see 
I loS ..} .: rifi 
l yloS ..} 
..,..1..:. faab 2 (i) Ivil 1 to turn grey or white (of hair) . 
II riq-qarb' xalla facr-i faab the beating scared the day-
lights out of me. 2 to grow old, become grey-haired or 
white-haired.llbacd' mafaab wadduu l-kuttaab [pray] 
after he had become an old man, they sent him to 
elementary school (said in respect of an action taken 
after its proper time). -,vnfayabaan, feeb; avajaayib . 
'-:-! I..:. faayib I ladjl verbal adjective of faab. Ilfaayib 
wi-caayib (epithet of) a dirty old man. - In/2 king (in 
cards). 3 card game equivalent to 'old maid'. 
~ 
feeba Inl white hair, grey hair. II raagil calee feeba 
w-heeba a wise and respected old man . 
.,..;:... fayyib Ivtl I to cause (hair) to turn white or grey. 
2 to cause (s.o.) to turn (prematurely) grey or white (of 
a frightening experience, troubles, worries, and the 
like). 3 to give (s.o.) a hard time. -vn tafyiib; ava 
mifayyib. 
"";':"1 ritfayyib or riffayyib Ivil passive offayyib. -iva 
mitfayyib. 
~I ristafyib Ivtl 1 to regard as (too) old, reject 

because of old age. 2 to select (s.o.) for (his) old age. 
-ava mislajyib. 
Z ":" IS";' see ":" J ..;. : jayba 
3 ":" IS";' see ":" I ..;. : jaab I 
UIS";' 
.::..,..;. fiil <P chil> In pi -aall chintz, flower-printed 
calico. 
CIS";' 
~ 
jiil:J Inl variety of wormwood. 
tIS";' 
tl..:. jaax(i)lvill togrowold,age.2 to become too old 
and hence inedible (of vegetables and fruits). -vn 
jayxaan,jayxuuxa; avajaaya. 
~ ~ 
jayxuuxa In! old age. 
r:::::- jeex In pi juyuux, majaayal 1 title of, and form of 
address or reference to, a man who is of the Islamic 
professions (e.g., reciter of the Koran, head of a Sufi 
order), and to whom some religious status is attributed. 
jeex iI-fazhar the Grand Sheikh of el-Azhar. jeex 
majaaya it-turufi ~-~ufiyya the supreme head of all the 
Sufi orders in Egypt. IIkull i jeex wi-Iu tariifia {prov] 
(every sheikh has his own order) ... everyone has his 
own way of doing things. - fif-feex iI-biliid mafi{Uul 
nadr-u {prov] ... out of sight, out of mind. - fis-sill i di 
jeex (or jeexa) this woman is a simple soul. 2 title of 
respect to an older man. 38 leader of a group. jeex 
iI-va/ar chief watchman.jeex mall,l'ar (1) {obsol] leader 
of a criminal gang. (2) epithet for a clever cunning 
person, clever devil. jeex iI-balad appointed govern-
ment official in charge of a section of a village (former-
ly) the elected deputy-to the lumda). jeex l:Jaara a 
semi-official acting as a liaison officer between a police 
station and the inhabitants of a small section of a district 
(responsible for infant inoculations, draftees etc.). 
3b acknowledged mentor or master. huwwa jeex iI-
mumassiliin he's the Nestor of all actors. 4 tutelary or 
possession spirit. wi-l:Jayaaljeex di ... J {women] by the 
spirit who inhabits this (e.g., drink of coffee) .... 
1//a ya jeex and ya jeex exclamation, addressed to a 
man, signalling (1) incredulous surpise. (2) amused or 
scoffing disbelief. 
~ 
jeexa In! 1 Ipl -aall professional female Koran 
reciter. 2/pl majaaya/leader of a zaar troupe. 
1//a ya jeexa and ya jeexa exclamation, addressed to a 
489 
woman, signalling (1) incredulous surpise. (2) amused 
or scoffing disbelief. 
r;.:. jayyax Ivt/ 1 to address as jeex, treat with the 
deference due to an old person. 2 to cause (vegetables, 
fruit) to become hard and inedible. - vn tajyia; ava/pva 
mifayyax. 
c;.:..' fitfayyax or fifjayyax Ivil 1 passive of jayyax. 
2 {usu deris] to follow a life of abstinence. -iva 
mitfayyax. 
~, fistajyax I/vtl to consider (s.o.) a simpleton. 
2 Ivil {usu deris] to follow a life of abstinence. -vn 
fislifyaax; ava mislajya. 
~ IS ..;. 
~ 
jayyid Ivtl to construct, erect, build. - vn tajyiid; 
ava/pva mifayyid. 
~, fitfayyid or fifjayyid Ivil to be constructed, be 
erected, be built. -iva mitfayyid. 
I ..} IS i.J. 
:0..:."..: fiifa I <T ~i§e> In pi -aat, jiyafl water-pipe (see 
PI.I, 1). 
~ 
jayyif Ivil to smoke a jiifa. - vn lajyiif; ava 
mifayyif· 
Z<..}IS..}l 
...r.,.;. jeej <P shash> In! 1 six (in dice etc.). IVeej beej 
half-blind. 2 sixth point on a backgammon board. 
...r.,.;. fiifl <T ~i§> In! 1 foil. 2 fencing (as a sport). 
...r.,.;. fiif2 Icoll nl shutters. IViif famrikaani Venetian 
blinds.' 
:0..:."..: jiifa 2: musmaar jiifa short headless type of nail. 
blS";' 
.l.l.:. jaat2 (i) Ivil to be scorched, be singed, burn. 
nisiina r-ruzz' lan-naar jaat we forgot the rice on the 
fire so it burned. -vnjayataan, jiyaat; avajaayit. 
~ 
jayyat Ivtl to scorch, singe, burn.jayyat iI-fiami~ 
bil-makwa he scorched the shirt with the iron. -vn 
lajyiit; ava mifayyi(. 
iJ b IS ..} 
.:,1.1.".:. jitaan 1 In pi jaya{iinl devil. II fallaah yigaazi 
jtaan-ak that was very naughty of you! 2 fif-fitaan 
Satan, the Devil. fif-jitaan lilib bi-lafil-i the Devil 
tempted me. fif-fitaan jaatir {prov] the Devil is very 
crafty ... temptation is difficult to resist. 
JI.1.".:. fitaani ladjl wild, not cultivated (of plants). 
fil-baaiaa di ma-zaralna-haa-f - di talla fitaani we 
didn't plant this water-melon, it just came up wild.' 

J:.,.- jay(an Ivtl to cause to behave naughtily. - vn 
jay(ana; avalpva mijay(an. 
J..,....;I fitjaytan or ftjjaytan Ivil to behave naughtily. 
- ava mitjay(an. 
t. loS ..; 
t L. jaar; (i) Ivtl I to spread. cause to become wide-
spread. fa~baab-u jaar;u xabar nagaab-u his friends 
spread the news of his success. - Ivil 2 to spread, be-
come widespread. xabar nagaab-u jaar; news of his 
success got around. 3 to go wild, become uncontroll-
able. di jaar;it wala badd'-j r;aarif yurudd-a-ha she's 
running around as she pleases and no one can check 
her. -vnjayar;aan, juyuur;: avajaayir;. 
..r ~ jiyuur;i or juyuur;i I ladj *1 Communist. 2 In *1 
a Communist. 
~.",..:JI fij-juyur;iyya Inl Communism. 
t L. majaar; Inl joint or collective ownership. fare/.' 
(r;al-)majaar; jointly-held land. 
t:- jayyar; Ivtl I to send out, dispatch. jayyar;uu-ni 
b-gawaab they sent me with a letter. 2 to see off. 
jayyar;uu-ni lil-maballa they saw me off to the station. 
IlJayyar; ganaaza r to participate in a funeral proces-
sion. - vn tajYlir;;. avalpva mijayyar;. 
~I fitjayyar; or fijjayyar; Ivil passive ofjayyar;. - iva 
mitjayyar;. 
"'" L.t fijaar;a In pi -aatl rumour. 
.... L.i fujaar;a J see t.t."; 
t L:;..I fistajaar; Ivil to become filled with rumours or 
gossip. fil-baara kull-a-ha stajaar;it bil-mawquur; bitar;-
na the whole neighbourhood became full of gossip ab-
out this business of ours. - ava mistijaar;. 
I .!l1oS ..; 
4- jiik I <Fr chic> ladj invarl chic, elegant. 
4-i fajyak lell morelmost chic or elegant. 
:.5l"... jiyaaka Inl chic, elegance. 
4 
jayyik Ivtl to make chic, make elegant. jayyikit 
il- fooqa she made the room look elegant. - vn tajyiik; 
avalpva mijayyik. 
~I fitjayyik or ftjjaYYlk Ivil to become or be made 
chic, make oneself smart. - avaliva mltjaYYlk. 
2 .!l loS ..; 
4- jiie, jeek <Fr cheque> In pi -aatl (bank) 
cheque. 
3 .!l1oS"; see .!l.J";: jaayik 
I J loS ..; 
JL:. jaal 3 (i) (vt) I to carry, bear. huwwa tc;iil r;ajaan 
490 
tijiil-u he's too heavy for you to carry.jaal masfuliyyit 
fixwaat-u he bore the responsibility for his brothers. 
jaayil id-dinya r;ala d/J1aay-u == he is carrying the bur-
dens of the world on his shoulders. bi-yjiil iI-r;eela kull-
a-ha he supports the whole family. II r;ala c;afa min yijiil 
abundant, plentiful, as in fayyaam zamaan kaan 
ir-ruzz" r;ala c;afa min yijiil in the old days rice was 
plentiful. -jaal WI-ball' f-nafs-u he was offended, he 
took it to heart. -jaaYII r;abd il-c;aadlr see c;aadir. 2 to 
remove.jiil il-bagaat mill r;a(-(arabeeza clear the things 
off the table.jaal il-kulfa he dispensed with formality. 
jill iI-mabiay da min il-blsaab deduct that amount from 
the account. 3 to lift, pick up. r;aYZlin win!, yjill IS-
sanduuc; we need a winch to lift the crate. IIglbaal 
jalit-hum wi-gbaal ballit-hum (mountams picked them 
up and others put the~ down) == (in story-telling) they 
had a long and arduous journey. -jaalit il-beet she 
cleaned the house from top to bottom. 4 to accommo-
date. r;awziin ~aala tjiiltullUmiit nafar they want a hall 
which can accommodate three hundred people. 5 to 
hold in custody, put in safe-keeping. f~-~arraaf bi-yjiil 
il-filuus the cashier keeps the money. b-atfaxxar -bass' 
jil-Ii na~iib-i I'll be late, but keep my share for me. fana 
jayl-u liz-zaman == I'm saving it for a rainy day. : vnjeel, 
jayalaan; avajaayil. 
lljaal min (or li-) to bear a grudge. tikuun ltssajaayil 
minni do you perhaps still bear me a grudge? 
.u.,... jeela Inl 1 Ipl-aatl instance noun ofjeel.jeela bee/CJ 
heave-hoi 2a Ipl -aat, jiyall (physical) load, burden. 
2b Ipljiyall (mental) load, burden. 
J~ jayyaal In *1 I porte~. 2 loader. 
;U~ jayyaala In pi -aatl I [llon-Cairene] spoon, 
scoop. 2 [print] small press elevators. 
J~ jayyaali ladj invarl portable. 
J\;;..I fijtaal [non·Cairene] = jaal. -ava mijtaal. 
JL. majaal In pi -aatl carrying charge, freightage. 
JL.;I fltjaal or ftjjaal Ivil passive of jaal 3 • II fitjaal 
wi-thabad see fllhabad. - iva mitjaal. 
JL.; I finjaal = fitjaal. - Iva lIIilljaal. 
..k- jayyll Ivtl to cause or help to carry or bear. bumaar 
rukuuba ma-bi-njayyil-uu-j we don't make a riding 
donkey carry loads. Iljayyil-m w-fajayyll-ak [prov] == 
you scratch my back and I'll scratch yours. - vn tajyiil; 
ava/pva. mijayyil. 
~I fitjayyil or fijjayyil Ivil passive of jayyil. -Iva 
mitjayyil. 
2 J loS"; see J I ..; : jaal l , jaal 2 
.:, I J loS"; see .:, I J ..; 

(rl.S~) 
4...,- fiima Inl I Ipl -aatl eddy, whirlpool. -also jimya. 
2 Ipljiyaml habit. 
~ 
majiima In pI majaayiml afterbirth (of animals). 
-also bajiima. 
I<JI.S~ 
.:,1- jaan (iJ Ivtl to discredit. ma-fii-f baaga tfiin-u no-
491 
thing can be said against it, it is immaculate. -vn 
jayanaan; ava jaayin, jaa fin r . 
.:.r.- jeen J ladj *1 {non-Cairenej I ugly. 2 cruel. 
l(<JI.S~) 
.:,....:. jiin Ifem n, pI -aatl thirteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. 
tft- jiini <Fr Chine>: bibr; jiini Indian ink . 

'tJ" 
L... 1aa Ifem nl fourteenth letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
-also 1aad, 1ah. 
c::. ' tJ" 
~L... 1aag <T sac> Inll sheet metal, sheet steel.lilba 
1aag tin can. baab 1aag roll-down metal shutter. 2/pl 
-aat, 1igaanl baking sheet. 
~L... 1aaga In pi -aatll steel sheet. 28 finger cymbal. 
2b jingle of a tambourine. 
,) , tJ" 
.,L... 1aad 1 Ifem n, pi -aatl fourteenth letter of the Ara-
b~c alphabet. -also 1aa, 1ah. 
It'tJ'' 
t L... 1aalf (also 1alfaquul falfaasi) <T sag kol agasl> In 
pi -aatl {mil, obsol} rank between captain and major 
(replaced by rank of raafid). 
(J'tJ"> 
JL... 1aal <T sal> In pi -aatl {naut} floating pontoon. 
~L... 1aala <It sa/a> In pi -aatl hall of a house or flat, 
often furnished as a living room. fif1afifia foqteen wi-
1aala the flat has two rooms and a hall. 2 large room, 
public room, hall. 1aalit ma1.aad auction room. 1aalit 
gumruk customs hal1.1aalit larq (1) showroom, exhibi-
tion hall. (2) projection room. 3 stalls, orchestra seats 
(in a cinema). 4 {obsol} cabaret.1aalit rafi1 dance hall. 
II da beet mif 1aala ... this is a respectable house. 
"r' ~ tJ" see ~ "r' V" : sibaan 
"r' , "r' tJ" 
..,..4--0 1ubaab <Fr soupape> In pi -aatl {auto} valve. 
1ubaab /akmaan exhaust valve. 
1 "r' "r' tJ" 
..;.... 1abb 1 (u) Ivtl I to pour, pour out. 1abbit if1aay 
she poured out the tea.llmarkib 1abb bulk carrier. 2 to 
cast. bi-JI1ubb id-dirs I min id-dahab we cast the tooth in 
gold. - Ivil 3 to pour forth, stream. bafia d-damm I 
Y1ubb I min fiurt-u blood was gushing fro~ his forehead. 
-vn 1abb, 1ababaan; ava 1aabib; pva mQ1buub . 
..;.... 1abb 2 ladj invar/l solid, pure, unmixed. dahab 
1abb solid gold. fil-baab xa/ab 1abb the door is solid 
wood. lafJma 1abb lean, boneless meat. riI-lee/ fiamfJ I 
1abb the bread is one. hundred percent wheat. 
IIdimaalf-u 1abb he is stubborn. -lee/1abb {rur} all-
maize bread. 2 cast. fJadiid 1abb cast iron. timsaal1abb 
a cast statue. 
, 
~ 
1abba 1 linst n, pi -aat/l single casting or pouring 
operation. fil- fasmant illi landina fJa-ykaffi ta/at 
1abbaat we have enough cement for three pourings. 
2 cast, casting. fi1-1abba (illit mibaxbaxa the casting 
came out with air bubbles in it. 
~ 
1abiib = 1abb 2. 
~ 
mQ1abb, mi1abb In pi -aatl estuary. 
4 
mi1abba In pi -aatl outlet. 
';:""'1 fif1abb or fi11abb I to be poured. 2 to be cast. 
fir-rUjaQ1 Yi11abb a lala/1akl illi-fJna laY1.iin-u the lead 
is cast in the shape that we want. -iva mif1abb. 
";:""'1 fiTl1abb = fif1abb. -iva miTl1abb. 
"";""1 fif1abbib or fi11abbib Ivtl to pour forth, drip 

with (especially sweat). kaan wiff-u b-yi~abbib larae; 
bi-sabab iI-ljarr his face was dripping with sweat be-
cause of the heat. -ava mi~abbib. 
l'"r''"r'~ 
~t,... ~abaaba ladvl passionately (in love). muyram 
~abaaba head over heels in love. 
3 '"r' '"r' ~ see '"r' I '"r' ~ 
: ~ubaab 
C'"r'~ 
~ 
~ibilj or ~abalj (a) Ivilla to begin a new day, enter 
upon morning. ~abaljti ~addal I began the day with a 
headache. IIti,fbalj la/a xeer == good night. -~abaljna 
w-~abalj iI-mulki 1i-lIaah pious exclamation upon wak-
ing up in the morning == a new day, by the grace of God! 
Ib preverb 
signalling 
action 
in 
the 
morning. 
nibayyit-hum fil-mayya w-ni,fbalj nifil-hum we leave 
them in water overnight and the next morning we take 
them out. 2a to become. rif-faayil bi-muruur iI-wae;ti 
b-yi,fbalj qalda a fashion in time becomes the rule. kaan 
fi-Ijaal wi-~abalj fi-Ijaal == his fortunes were dramatical-
ly reversed. 2b preverb signalling inchoative action. 
kaan ralma w-~abalj yifuufhe used to be blind but now 
he can see. - ava ~aabilj. 
C!t... ~aabilj ladj °1 fresh. ril-fuul ~a~bilj the beans 
have just been cooked.ll~aabib bi-~aabib in continuous 
fresh supply, as in dayman nixbiz ~aabib bi-~aabib we 
always bake (bread) as we need it (we don't store any 
bread). ri,f-~aabib raabib ya fuul[vendor's cryJ == it is 
the freshly cut broad beans that win the day! 
~ 
~ubb Inll morning. ri,f-~ubb (1) in the morning. 
(2) this morning. lima te;uulu ya~ubb (do say'O morn-
ing') it's too early in the day for this sort of trouble. 
-laNubh first thing in the morning. -min i,f-~ubb 
(1) since the morning, as in min iNUbb i I-badd i bit-Ieel 
from morning till night. (2) for a long time, as in ribna 
wae;fiin mistanniin-ak min i,f-~ubb we've been standing 
waiting for you for ages. 2 [IsIJ early morning prayer. 
W 
~ubbiyya In pI -aatl morning, the first half of the 
day. 
~i rtJibab I lell I morelmost genial or cheerful. 
2 morelmost fresh. 
et,... ~abaab Inl morning. II~abaab iI-xeer or ~abaab 
ii-full or ~abaab iI-e;ifta etc. good morning. -~abaab 
in-nuur reply to ~abaab it-xeer etc. - ri,f-~abaab rabaab 
== let's sleep on it. 
11 ~abaaban ladvl in the morning. 
493 
~t,... ~abaaba: min ~abaabit rabb-i-na from the very 
early morning. 
~t,... ~abaabi ladjl morning, pertaining to the morn-
ing. bafta ~ababiyya matinee, morning performance. 
~ 
t,... ~ababiyya In pI -aat/l lin constrl the day after, 
the following morning. nuzur-kum ~abaljiyyit iI-liid 
we'll visit you the day after the feast. ~ababiyyit i/-
lamaliyya the day after the operation. 2 first morning 
after the wedding night. ~ababiyya mbarka ya laruusa 
wi-nta ya lariis a blessed morning to you, bride, and 
you, bridegroom! (traditional greeting on this occa-
sion). 3 present, usually of food or money, given to a 
couple on the morning after their wedding-night. 
11 min ~ababiyyit rabb-i-na from the very early morning. 
min ~ababiyyit rabb-i-na I-badd iI-mayribiyya wi-bna 
nazliin fuyl we've been working (hard) from early 
morning till sun-set. 
e~ 
~abuub ladjl fresh and pleasant (of comple-
xions). wif/ ~abuub a genial face. 
~~ 
~abbaabi ladvl (through the night) until morn-
ing. zakirti ~abbaabi I studied until morning. Iilibna 
bookar ~abbaabi we played poker until morning. 
e~ mi,fbaalj t In pI mtJiabiib/lamp. mi,fbaab kaafif 
searchlight. 
~ 
~abbab Ivtl I to start the day for (s.o.). ~alla 
y~abbab-ak bil-xeer may God give you a good mormng! 
ba-~abbab-ni bil-xinaae; will you bring me a quarrel 
first thing in the morning? 2 to approach (s.o.) first 
thing in the morning. ma-baddi-f ~abbab-na lissa we 
haven't had any customers so far this morning (said by 
shopkeepers etc.). la ~abbab-u wala tmassii == keep 
well away from him! - Ivil 3 to say good morning. 
daxalit min veer ma ~abbab (laleena) she came in with-
out saying good morning (to us). -vn ttJibiib; ava 
mi,fabbalj. 
~I ri~abbab or ri,f~abbab Ivil I to start the ~orn­
ing. lissa ma-~~abbabnaa-fwe haven't had any busmess 
yet this morning (said by shopkeepers etc.). ri~abbabit 
bi-xnaae;a mala g-giraan she had a quarrel with the 
neighbours first thing in the morning. ya reet i~abbabti 
b-fingaan e;ahwa I wish I had started the day (properly) 
with a cup of coffee. II ri~abbab bil-xeer good morning 
to you. 2 (impersonal) passive of ~abbab 3. da wif/ 
yi~abbalj laleeh is that the kind of face one would wish 
good morning to! - avaliva mi~abbab. 
~i rtJibab2T = ~ibib 2. 
~I ri,ftabab Ivil to start off the morning, encounter 
something first thing in the morning (such an encounter 
being regarded as an omen for the dar). ri,f~ababti 
b-wif/ bi/w in-nahar-da it made my day to see a pretty 
face this morning. ri,ftababna b-beela kwayyisa we be-
gan the day with a good sale. II ri,ftibib == let's not have 

this unpleasantness in the morning. - r~tibaab-ak laban 
(1) = I'm delighted to have you as my first customer of 
the day (polite remark made by shopkeepers etc.). 
(2) may you have a good day. - vn 
f~[ibaab; ava 
mi~tibib· 
:b.~1 f~(ibaaba linst n, pI -aatl a first encounter 
(with s.th. ors.o.) in the morning (regarded as an omen 
for the day). 
~I 
fist~bab Ivtl 1 to select for freshness. 2 to 
select (s.o.) for (his) pleasant features. - Ivi/3 to start 
off the morning. - vn fisti~baab; ava/pva mist~bab. 
c.l,......;...1 
fisti~baab Ivnl II yaaz 
il-ist~baab [obsolJ 
street-lighting gas. 
I -I Y 1.1'" 
.r." ~ibir, ~abar, ~ubur (u) Ivil to act with patience, act 
with fortitude or endurance. f~bur kamaanjiwayya be 
patient a little longer! m-aqdarj a~bur laleek faktar 
min kida I can't be patient with you any longer than 
that. ba-t~bur lala l-m~iiba di-zzaay how will she be 
able to bear this calamity? ~ibirt I w-nult '" for being 
patient I was rewarded with achieving what I wanted. 
filii yiftihi I-lasal y~bur r;ala qar~ in-nabl [provJ he 
who wants honey puts up with being stung by the bees. 
lI~ibir lala nafs-(u) to wait patiently, force oneself to be 
patient, as in law ~ibirna r;ala nafs-i-na gumr;iteen 
ba-yit/.tarr' ybiir; bit-tasliira if we hold out for two 
weeks he'll be forced to sell at the officially fixed price. 
- vn ~abr; ava ~aabir. 
.r." ~abrJ Inl patience (in adversity), fortitude. 
fi~-~abru baraq id-dukkaan [provJ patience let the shop 
burn down. da~abr' fayyuub that is the patience of Job! 
fl~-~abr' tariiq is-salaama [provJ patience is the way to 
well-being. fi~-~abr' muftaab il-farag [provJ patience is 
the key to relief (after distress). f~-~abr' (ayyib bass illi 
yirqaa-bu [provJ patience is fine, but who can put up 
with it? lI~abr-ak r;alayya be patient with me! - fi~-~abr' 
gamiil = don't be so impatient! -~abr-u-kum bi-llaah '" 
have patience! 
.)~ ~abuur ladj *1 patient (in adversity). 
;.. ~abbar I Ivtl to give patience, help (s.o.) to be 
patient. fallaah y~abbar-ak lala balwit-ak may God 
give you patience to bear your misfortune! -vn ta~biir; 
avalpva mi~abbar . 
• ~ 
ta~biira In pI -aatl snack. 
~I fit~abbarJ or fi~~abbarJ Ivil 1 =~ibir. 2 to be 
made patient. - avaliva mit~abbar. 
2 -I Y 1.1'" 
.r." ~abr 2 Inl aloe. 
494 
.)~ ~abbaar Icoll nl [botJ I succulent(s). 2 (loosely) 
cacti . 
• .)~ ~abbaara lunit n; pI -aat/l any of various succu-
lent plants, such as aloe or agave. 2 (loosely) cactus. 
.;.... ~ubbeer Inl 
[botJ 
Indian 
fig 
(Opuntia 
ficus-indica). 
;.. ~abbar2 Ivtl to embalm. kaanu I-faralna y~abbaru 
I-mayyitiin b,- fagza kimawiyya minha ~-~abr the Phar-
aohs used to preserve the bodies of the dead by treating 
them with chemicals including aloes. II waqfa ~abbara 
she is standing motionless. - vn 
ta~biir; avalpva 
m~abbar. 
~I fit~abbar2 or fi~~abbar2 Ivil I to be embalmed. 
2 to become motionless. fit~abbar fi-waqfit-u he stood 
motionless. - iva mit~abbar . 
J -I Y 1.1'" see -I.J Y 1.1'" : ~abuura 
4 -I Y 1.1'" see I -I 1.1'" Y : f~bar 
1.1'" -I Y 1.1'" 
1.I"'.r." ~abr~ Ivtl [nautJ to whip (the end of a rope). 
- vn ~abra~a; avalpva mi~abr~. 
tYI.I'" 
t L,.... ~ubaar; In 
pI ~awaabir;1 I finger. II maftuub 
~ubaal (open by the width of a finger) just ajar. -hiyya 
~awabl-ak zayy I bar;q-a-ha (are all your fingers alike?) 
everybody is different. - fakla taakul ~awabl-ak 
waraaha (a meal after which you will eat your fingers) a 
delicious meal. -~awaabir; zeenab type of confection 
sticky with honey. - ba(( I ~baar;-u (or ~awabl-u) fifjaqq 
(he put his finger in the crack) he gave up. he threw his 
hand in. - ba((' ~awabl-u (g-gooz) fi-lnee he defied 
(him), he told (him) where to get off. 2 (also ~ubaar; 
ir-rigl) toe. laqeet baaga zayy il-faqfuuqa tabt I ~baar;-i 
I-kibiir I discovered a sort of blister under my big toe. 
3a roughly finger-shaped object. ~ubaar; mooz a bana-
na. ~awaabil biyaanu piano keys. ~ubaar; dinamiit stick 
of dynamite. ~ubaar; ruuj a lipstick. ~ubaar; (abajiirstick 
of chalk. 3b pen (in the jargon of pickpockets). 4 linear 
measurement equal to 3.125 centimetres. 
t-L. ~aabil = ~ubaal· 
~ 
~abbar; Ivtl to shape (dough, kufta etc.) into fin-
gers. - vn ta~biil; avalpva mi~abbar;. 
~ 
mi~abbar; ladjl [carpJ straight-grained (of wood). 
~I fit~abbar; or f~~abbal Ivil to be shaped into 
fingers (of dough, kufta etc.). -iva mit~abbal. 

t Y..r' see t Y ..,..: 
~abalf, 
~ablfQ, 
m~balfQ, 
'i'it~abalf 
I.;, Y..r' 
.:"y,L.. ~abuun <cf It sapone> In pI ~awabiinl soap. 
~abuun wif/ or ~abuun !Jammaam or ~abuun tawalitt 
toilet soap. 
~abuun lfasiil laundry soap. 
~abuun 
mawaliin kitchen soap. lI~abuun iI-lafriit variety of 
fleabane (Gnaphalium luteo-album). -~abuun iI-lfeel 
plant (Auagallis arvensis) of the primrose family, com-
monly found in fields and gardens. - kull-u land 
iI-larab ~abuun [prov] (it's all soap to the bedouins) "" 
it's all the same thing to those who know nothing. 
~ y, L.. ~abuuna In pI -aatl bar of soap. lI~abuunit ir-
rukba kneecap. -sanda ~abuuna convex dolly block. 
Jy,L.. ~abuuni ladj *1 pure white (of a horse). 
~(.... ~abbaana In pI -aatl I shaving mug. 2 soapdish. 
;.;,....a.. m~bana In pI ma~aabinl I soapdish. 2 [obsol] 
soapworks. 
~ 
~abbin J Ivtl to soap, apply soap to. fur/it it-ta~biin 
shaving brush. -vn ta~biin: ava/pva mi~abbin. 
.;...a; I 'i'it~abbin J or 'i'i~~abbin J Ivil to be soaped, be 
rubbed with soap. - iva mit~abbin. 
2.;,y..r' 
J("" ~abbaani (also !Jabl i ~abbaani) Inl stout hemp 
rope used as a sling in the handling of heavy cargoes. 
~ 
~abbin2 Ivtl to handle (cargo etc.) in a sling. -vn 
ta~biin; avalpva mi~abbin . 
.;...a; I . 'i'it~abbin 2 or 'i'i~~abbin 2 Ivil to be handled in a 
sling. -iva mit~abbin. 
.J Y..r' see I.S Y ..r' : ~abwa 
.).J Y ..r' 
o.Jy,L.. ~abuura <Gr saboura> Inl ballast. 
I I.S Y ..r' 
~ 
~iba Inl I youth, childhood. kunt i hibaa-ya 
b-a/talfal na//aal I used to work as a pickpocket in my 
youth. 2 youth, youthfulness. lissa baayin laleeha ~­
~iba she still has the appearance of youth. 
~ 
~aba Inl I [mus] mode in Arabic music beginning 
on D and having E half flat, G flat and B flat. 2 (nasiim 
or nisiim) i~-~aba mild easterly breeze, in poetry sugges-
tive of one's love. 
0.".., ~abwa ladj pI -aatl having spine or backbone, 
stout, solid. da ~abwa wala kull i~-~abwaat this is the 
toughest of all the guys. 
..".." ~abi In pI ~ubyaanl I boy. xallifittalat ~ubyaan she 
495 
gave birth to three boys. II 'i'umm i~-~ubyaan demoness 
believed to snatch or injure chiJ"dren. 2 boy employed 
in a small business, assistant, apprentice. kunt i 
b-a/talfal ~abi baqqaal I used to work as a grocer's assis-
tant. - ladj pI ~ub'yaanl 3 youthful, young-looking. 
hiyya ~a!Jiil:J qarrabit lal-xamsiin laakin lissa ~abiyya 
true 
she's 
approaching 
fifty 
but 
she's 
very 
young-looking. 
~ 
~abiyya In pI ~abaayal young girl. 
..".."i 
ra~ba lell morelmost youthful. 
;,..:, ~abba2 Ivtl to render youthful again. xadit 
li-nafs-a-ha/abb i ~lfQyyar laakin fa!Jla la/aan yi~abbii­
ha she took a strong young lover to help her regain her 
youth. -vn ta~biyya; ava mi~abbi. 
~I rit~abba or ri~~abba Ivil to regain one's youth. 
bi-ymiilli-mutal if-fabaab - nifs-u yit~abba he inclines 
to youthful pleasures as he wishes to regain his youth. 
- iva mit~abbi. 
.;.L...;I 
rit~aaba or 'i'i~~aaba Ivil to behave like a young 
person (of an older man or woman). - ava mit~aabi, 
mut~aabir . 
~I 
rista~ba Ivtl I to select for youth or youthful-
ness. 2 to consider young. - Ivil 3 to behave like a 
young person. - ava mist~bi. 
2 I.S Y ..r' 
;,..:, ~abba3 Ivil 
to doze. leeb tuqlud 
t~abbi 
wiq-quyuuf qaldiin it is impolite to keep nodding off 
while the guests are present. - vn ta~biyya; ava m~abbi. 
YC..r' 
~ 
t~l:Jab: ti~l:Jab-ak is-salaama may peace be with 
you . 
~ 
~ul:Jba I Ivnl 
accompa~ing. w~al bi-~ul:Jbit 
'i'axuu he arrived accompanied by his brother. 2/nl 
company, companion(s). ril-wa/ad da (or ril-binti di) 
~ul:Jba sayyi'i'a this boy (or girl) is a bad companion. 3 In 
pI ~u!Jabl bouquet, posy, bunch (of flowers). 
..,-L.. ~aa!Jib J 
In 
pI ra~l:Jaab, 
~ul:Jaab. 
~il:Jaab. 
~al:Jaaba. ~ul:JabaatJ I I (male) friend. 2 lin constr w foil 
nl owner of, holder of, one with, one concerned with, 
one responsible for. 
~aal:Jib milk property owner. 
~aa!Jib tawkiil agency holder. 
'i'a~l:Jaab iI-Ieela those 
giving the party. ~aa!Jib lamal employer. ~aal:Jib maraq 
(or laya) sickly person. ra~l:Jaab mihan professional 
people. ~aa!Jib keefbon vivant. ~aa!Jib mazaag connois-
seur. ~aa!Jib iI-galaala (I-malik) His Majesty (the king). 
~aa!Jib is-simuww (il-malaki) His (Royal) Highness. 
~aal:Jib iI-faxaama (or is-salaada) His Excellency. 
~aal:Jib iI-faqiila [lsi] His Eminence. ~aa!Jib il-qadaasa 

[Chr} His Holiness. ~aa!Jib in-niyaafa [Chr} His Grace. 
~aa!Jib baleen kaddaab wi-~aa!Jib talaata mnaafifi [prov} 
"" one who tries to do two things at once is fooling 
himself, and he who tries to do three fools himself even 
more. -
f~-~a!Jaaba Ipl nI 3 the Companions of the 
Prophet Muhammad. 
~L.:. ~a!Jba In pI -aatl I (female) friend. 1 (female) 
owner, holder, the one With. ~a!Jbit ii-beet the landlady. 
~a!Jbit fadab wi-kamaal a polite, refined lady. ~a!Jbit 
iI-ga/aa/a Her Majesty. see further under ~aa!Jib I. 
..... ~ 
m~!Juubt ladjl accompanied. fii tafaaculaat 
m~!Juuba b-daragaat lalya min iI-!Jaraara some reac-
tions are accompanied by high temperatures. m~!Juub 
bis-sa/aama may peace be with you"" goodbye. 
..,-L... ~aa!Jib2 Ivtl I to befriend, make friends with. 
miraat-i ~a!Jbit naas faxlafi-hum wil:JJa my wife got into 
bad company. 1 to accompany. fis-sitt' bi-lYanni 
wi-!Jna bi-Tlia!Jib-ha bil-lazft~e lady sings and we play 
the accompaniment. fa/a)lt m~a!Jba accompanying in-
struments. -vn m~a!Jba, ~u!Jubiyya; ava m~aa!Jib. 
~.,-:> ~u!Jubiyya Inl friendship. 
..,-L...-'. fit~aa!Jib or f~~aa!Jib Ivill to make friendly 
overtures, strike up a friendship. fana xaayif finnaha 
mi~a!Jba la/ayya la/afaan manfalit-ha I'm afraid she's 
being friendly towards me out of self-interest. 
fi~a!Jibna la/a (or mala) balti' wi-!Jna fig-geef we 
became friends when we were in the army. 
1 (impersonal) passive of ~aa!Jib2. dool naas yi~aa!Jib 
laleehum are these the people to get friendly with! 
-ava/iva mi~aa!Jib. 
c. c. "" 
~ 
~a!J!J 1 (a) Ivill to flourish, develop well. fli-firaax 
~a!J!Ju w-ma-matl' minhum l\Ia/a waa!Jid the chickens 
did fine and not one of them died. tigart-u ~a!J!Jit 
wi-batjit laal his business grew and flourished. lto 
recover (one's health). riI-layyaniin~a!J!Ju w-batju laal 
the sick regained health and became quite well. 3~ to 
become attainable, come within reach. kull iIIi y~a!J!J' 
lak filmil-u do all that comes within the range of your 
ability. fin ~a!J!J' liyya tjlrfeen fabtj8 faftirii-Ii tjami~ if 
I come by some money I will buy myself a shirt. fin 
~a!J!J iI-leef yibfia I-baatji fabrafia [prov} (if the bread 
turns up, the rest (of the food) is (dispensable) luxury) 
"" keeping body and soul together does not require 
much. -
yi~a!J!J (also y~a!J!J inn) Ipreverb/4 to be fit-
ting, be appropriate. huwwa beeh kibiir wi-y~a!J!J' 
ykuun landu larabiyya he's a very important man and 
it's quite reasonable that he should have a car. 
ma-y~a!J!J'l tikallim-u kida you shouldn't talk to him 
496 
this way. 5 to be possible. y~a!J!J' tiigi dilwafiti it is 
possible that she may come now. y~a!J!J innu ma-
yurfutilit is possible that he won't refuse. - vn~i!J!Jiyya, 
~a!Ja!Jaan; ava 1aa!Ji!J. 
~ 
~a!J!J2 ladj 
invarl 
right, 
correct, 
proper. 
fil-muw~afaat ~-1a!J!J the correct specifications. 
fit-t~arruf ~-~a!J!J the right thing to do. fil-mudiir 
~-1a!J!J' b-yilmil kida a real director acts in this way. 
~ 
~i!J!Ja Inll health, good health. ~i!J!Jit-ak laal you 
are in excellent health. ~i!J!Jit-i tacbaana fwayya n-
nahar-da I'm not well today. II fizzayy ~-~i!J!Ja "" how 
are you? -fi-~i!J!Jit-ak your health! cheers! - bi-~i!J!Ja 
w-lafya "" may it bring health and strength (said to one 
eating or drinking). - rabb-i-na yiddii-k ~-1i!J!Ja (may 
God give you health) kindly wish expressed to a person 
suffering from the effects of illness or age. - wi-nta 
b~-~i!J!Ja (wis-sa/aama) and may you too be in good 
health (polite reply to the festival greeting kull' sana 
wi-nta tayyib "" may you be well at every recurrence of 
this annual celebration!). - (maktab) ~-~i!J!Ja the local 
government health centre. 1 truth, integrity. sabatit 
~i!J!Jit kalaam-u the truthfulness of his statement was 
established. 3 correct version. riI-!Jikaaya di ~i!J!Jit-ha 
finn' huwwa iii katab ig-gawaab mif hiyya the correct 
version of the story is that it is he, not she, who wrote 
the letter. 
..;w. ~i!J!Ji ladj ·1 sanitary, health-. fahaada ~i!J!Jiyya 
health certificate. II fadawaat 1i!J!Jiyya bathroom fix-
tures. -sabbaak ~i!J!Ji domestic plumber. 
11 ~i!J!Jiyyan ladvl healthwise. laayitj ~i!J!Jiyyan physical-
ly fit. 
e::-
~a!Jii!J ladj pi ~u!Jaa!J1 I correct, true, proper. 
kida 
~a!Jii!J is that (really) true? !JuCC iI-karaasi 
f-watil-a-ha na!Jii!J put the chairs in their proper 
place. bi-~a!Jii!J really, truly, as in !Ja-traggal-u b-~a!Jii!J 
will you really return it? 2 whole. riI- fasmaak bi-tiigi 
~!Jii!Ja the fish come ,whole. - ladv/3 really, truly. da 
~a!Jii!J kaddaab he certainly is a liar, it's true that he's a 
liar. 
~i f~a!J!J f lelll morelmost correct, true or proper. 
lala 1- f~a!J!J or bil-malna 1- f~a!J!J more correctly, to 
be more precise. 1 morelmost healthy. 
c.l-..i 'c.l-..1 f~!Jaa!J, fll,l'!Jaa!J In pI -aatl chapter (of 
the Scriptures). 
~ 
m~a!J!Ja In pI -aatl centre for convalescence and 
the treatment of mild illnesses. 
~ 
~a!J!Ja!J Ivtll to check, correct, amend. fawraatj 
iI-imti!Janaat titsallim 1iI- fustaaz iIIi !Ja-y~a!J!Ja!J-ha the 
exam papers are handed over to the teacher who will 
correct them. fil-birovaat tiruu!J iI- fawwal Iit-tll,l'!Jii!J 

the proofs first go to be proof-read. 2 to change 
(money) into higher denominations. naas tibibb; tfukk I 
fluus wi-naas t~abbab-ha some people like to change 
money into lower denominations, others into higher 
ones. -vn t~biib; ava/pva m~abbab. 
~ 
t~biiba linst n, pI -aatl a (single) marking or 
correcting. 
~ 
m~abbib In °1 1 person who corrects examina-
tion papers. 2 proofreader. 
~I ri~abbab or r~1abbab Ivil 1 to be checked, 
corrected or amended. ril-karariis iI-m~1abbaba lala 
maktab-i the corrected exercise books are on my desk. 
2 to be changed into higher denominations (of money). 
-iva mi~abbab. 
.J C. u" 
.IJ""-" .IJ"'o"" 1abra In pI ~abaari, 1abaaral desert. 
r~-1abra I-kubra the Sahara Desert.1abaara siti night-
club in the desert near the Pyramids of Guiza. 
ISJIJ"'o"" 1abraawi ladj °1 desert-, of the desert. (ariifi 
1abraawi desert road. 
c.u"c.u" 
r:::-w' 1ab1ab 1 Ivt/ to stir (s.o.) to alertness or activ-
itY.1ab1ab (nafs-ak) look smart! wake up a bit! gaww l 
"'1ab1ab invigorating weather. 2 Ivil to become alert. 
1ab1ab luhum kuwayyis la-yriffuu-k be on your guard 
against them lest they deceive you. - vn 1ab~aba; ava/ 
pva m~ab~ab. 
~I 
ri~ab1ab or r~1ab1ab Ivil to stir orieself into 
activity, be stirred into activity. - ava/iva mi~ab1ab. 
..; C. u" 
~ 
1abafi 1 ladj °1 journalistic. maqaal1abafi news-
paper article. mu rtamar 1abafi press conference. 2 In °1 
journalist. 
4il-.. ~abaafa/nl 1 journalism. 2 newspaper industry. 
burriyyit ~-~abaafa freedom of the press. 
~ 
~abiifat Inl 1 Ipl1abaayif/ paper, document. 
111abiifit sawaabifi police record, criminal record. 
-1abiifit dalwa {leg] (written) pleading. 2 Ipl 1ubuf/ 
newspaper. 
~ 
m~baf In pI m~aabif/ copy of the Koran. 
I tJ C. u" 
~ 
1aban (a) Ivt/ to grind. bilba m~buuna ground 
fenugreek. -vn1abn, 1ibiin; ava1aabin; pva m~buun. 
~ 
1abna linst n, pI -aatl a grinding. 
~t.:..... 1abbaana In pI -aarl grinder (for coffee, grain 
etc.). 
497 
~ 
m~bana In pI m~aabinl grinder. ~banit 
bunn coffee-grinder. 
~I 
ri~aban or r~1aban !vii to be ground. -iva 
mi~ibin. 
~I ri"1aban = ri~aban. -iva mi"1ibin. 
1 tJ C. u" 
.:r-' 1abn In pl1ubuun, ~ubunal 1 plafe, dish. lI~abn 
ir-rigl the sole of the foot. 2 (also ~abn; daar) cour-
tyard. 3 narthex (of a church). 
.J C. u" see IS C. u" : ~abw, ~abwa 
IS C. u" 
..r-
~ibi(a)lvill to wake up, waken. ril-beehwis-sitt; 
haanim ~ibyu walla lissa have the master and mistress 
woken yet or not? y~ba mil-fagr; kull; yoom he is 
awake from dawn every day. IInoobit 1aljayaan {mil] 
reveille. 2 to become alert. rana ~aabi lu I am on my 
guard for any of his tricks. -vn ~abayaan; ava ~aabi. 
~L... ~aabi ladj °1 awake, alert, alive. 
~ 
~abw ladj invarl fair, clear, fine (of weather, sky). 
.~ 
~abwa In! awakening. ~abwit ii-moot final rally 
before death. 
.J~ ~abyaan ladj °1 alert. ~abyaan Ii-roob-u looking 
out for himself, taking care of number one. 
..r-i r~ba leV more/most alert, alive or awake. 
~ 
~abba Ivt/ to awaken, rouse. gih 
i/-buli~ 
~abbaa-ni /-wis( i/-Ieel the police came and woke me up 
in the middle of the night. -vn t~biyya; ava/pva 
m~abbi. 
';:""'1 ri~abba or r~~abba Ivt/ to be awakened, be 
roused. - iva mi~abbi. 
.J t u" 
~ 
~axr/n pl1uxuur/rock. 
IS~ ~axri ladjl rocky, stony. 
.~u" see 11S~u" 
I~~u" 
~ 
~add (u) Ivt/l to deflect, parry, block. law waahid 
faa( i/-koora fig-goon yifidar y~udd-a-ha if someone 
shoots the ball at the goal he can deflect it. 111add; 
(w-)radd to and fro, as in ril-makkuuk maaJi~add; radd 
the shuttle runs to and fro. -~addi nifs(-u) lan to put 
(s.o.) off (his food, his work). 2 to rebuff. ri/-binti kulli 
m-akallim-ha ~udd-i-ni every time I speak to the girl 
she rebuffs me. -vn ~add, ~adadaan; ava ~aadid; pva 
m~duud. 

.i.. ~adda linst n. pi -aatl/sport} a block. a deflection. 
a return. 
lI~adda (w-)radda (I) to and fro. (2) a street ball game. 
olJolL.. ~aduud In pi ~awadiidl support for the cross 
beam of a saliya (see PI.E, 2). yimuut it-toor wi-nifs-u 
f-!Jakka r~-~aduud /prov} (an ox dies wishing for a rub 
against the ~aduud) = old habits die hard . 
.:;...,. m~add In pi -aatl obstruction. barrier. 
.:i...z.1 
fit~add or fi~~add IVII I to be deflected. be par-
ried. be blocked. IInifs(-u) n~addit lan to be put off 
(one's food. one's work). 2 to be rebuffed. - iva 
mit~add. 
~I fin~add = fit~add. -iva min~add. 
2 .) .) "'"' 
~~ ~adiid Inl pus. 
~~~ ~adiidi ladj *1 exuding pus. ramad ~adiidi /path} 
ophthalmia. 
.J .) "'"' 
.J~ ~adar (u) Ivil I to appear. emerge, originate. 
huwwa-na ~adar min"i lJaaga tzaUIlI-llk have I done 
anything to anger you? 2 to be promulgated, be issued. 
magallit ~abaalJ it-xeer bi-tu~dur kull' fusbuul the 
magazine 
~abaalJ /I-xeer 
appears every week. 
riI-qanuun it-gidiid ~adar min fusbuUl the new law 
came out a week ago. ~adarit fashum min ladad min 
if-farikaat shares have been issued by a number of 
companies. -vn ~uduur: ava ~aadir. 
.lolL.. ~aadir I I/adj *1 departing, outgoing. gadwal 
it-liu(ura ~-~adra table of train departures. baqaayil 
~adra goods for delivery. 2/nl outgoing mail, outgoing 
messages. daftar i~-~aadir register of outgoing mail. 
maktab i~-~aad" telegraph transmitting office. 
..::..IJolL.. ~aadiraat Ipl nl exports. 
.J~ sidr". ~adr In pi ~uduur. fi~daarl I chest. breast. 
bosom. qarabt-u f-sidr-u I struck him on the chest. 
xad-hll lala sidr-u he clasped her to his bosom. bald 
il-witaada s-sidr' b-yikbar after childbirth the bosom 
becomes larger. mustal/a ~-~adr chest hospital. maliaas 
is-sidr chest measurement, bust measurement. IIsidr 
II-xa{{ the side of the furrow. -sldr-u waasll he's toler-
ant and understanding. -fatalJ-1i sl~r-u he became pa-
tient and understanding. 2 cutting edge (of a blade). 
~.J~ sidri. 
~adrir lad]1 pertaining to the chest. 
fit-mustal/a nadriyya the chest hospital. II riI-liaf~ i~­
~adri the rib cage. 
~.J~ sidriyya In pi -aatl /Chr} alb. 
.)~ ~adaara r Inl pnority, precedence. liaqiyyit 
it-bitrool liiha ~-~adaara fit-mufawqaat the question of 
498 
oil has pnonty In the negotiations. riI-kamangaat 
fi-makaan i~-~adaara the viohns are in the most promin-
ent position. 
~.J!.~ sideerr In pi sadaarr/l type of vest or waistcoat 
worn under the galabiya (see PI.F. 3). 2 waistcoat. 
.J...I.4.o ma~dar In pi ma~aadirl I source. ma~dar rrZli 
source of sustinence. ma~dar i~-~oot the source of the 
sound. 2 jacket pocket (in pickpockets' jargon) . 
3/gramJ verbal noun. 
.JJ...I.4.o ma~duur ladj *1 suffering from tuberculosis. 
Ji.. ~addar Ivtl 
I to 
dispatch. 
tariix 
t~diir 
it-muzakkara feen where is the date of dispatch of the 
memorandum? 2 to export. 3 to put in the front. kull' 
m-akallim-u y~addar-Ii faxuu every time I question him 
he confronts me with his .brother. -vn t~diir; ava 
mi~addar. 
J':;"'" mu~add" In *1 exporter. 
.J.:i...z.1 
fit~addar or fi~~addar Ivil I passive of ~addar. 
2 to push oneself forward. geet faxuff' f-fooqit 
it-ma fmuur fit~addar-Ii laskarr txiin just as I was going 
into the police chief's office a fat cop confronted me. 
bi-yiigi lala I-hayfa w-yit~addar (he comes up against 
what is trifling and asserts himself) "" he tilts at wind-
mills. - avaliva mit~addar. 
.lolL.. ~aadir2 Ivtl to confiscate. -vn mu~adra; avalpva 
mi~aadir. 
.JolLa; 1 fit~aadir or fi~~aadir Ivil to be confiscated. -iva 
mit~aadir. 
.J~i fa~dar Ivtl I to issue. promulgate. 
f~darit 
it-lJukuuma tallimaat gidiida liI-muwa;;afiin the gov-
ernment has issued new instructions to civil servants. 
2 to publish. put out. lJa-ni~dir ladad xaa~~' I-mudillaat 
ir-rabiil we shall put out a special issue for the spring 
fashions. 3: fiwrik-ni wi-~dir nafs-ak /prov/ (give me 
the leg and take the breast yourself) no-one is expected 
to promote others above his own head. -vn fi~daar; ava 
mi~dir. 
.J..-...:;..I 
fista~dar Ivtl to obtain, have issued. fista~daru 
famr' min it-malJkama bit-fix/a they obtained a court 
order for the eviction. -vn fisti~daar: ava mista~dar. 
t .) "'"' 
tl~ ~udaal Inl headache. falla gaa-lli ~udaal I've got 
a headache. 
ti.. ~addal I/vtl to afflict with a headache.~addalt-i­
III you have given me a headache! 2/vil to get a 
headache. raas-u ~addalit min liillit in-noom "" he de-
veloped a headache from lack of sleep. -vn t~diil; 
avalpva ml~addal. 
t~1 fit~addal or fi~~addal Ivil I to be given a 

headache. 2t to collapse, crumble. beel-u I-qadiim 
i~~addal his old house has fallen into disrepair. -vn 
I~addul; avaliva mi/~addal. 
t J u" 
t...I.<> sidy or ~idy, sady or ~ady In pi sidaay, ~idaay, 
~udural I cheek. xabba(-Iu lala sdaay-u laJaan yifuuq 
slap his cheeks so he will come round. huwwa c:aamil 
zayyi musmaar r~-~idy ... he's a pain in the neck. 
2 cheek piece (of a bridle). 3/adj invarl cheeky. 
t...I.<>. ~idiy, sidiy ladj *1 cheeky.' 
t...I.<>1 
'i'~day. 'i'asday lell morelmost cheeky. 
t.~ sadday, ~adday Ivil I to become fat and thick. 
2 to behave in a cheeky manner. mahma Ikallim-u 
biz-zooq y~adday-Iak however gently you talk to him, 
he's always rude to you. -vn I~diiy, tasdiiy; ava 
m~adday, misadday. 
t....I..:z;...1 'i'istasday, 'i'ista~day I Ivtl to select for cheeki-
ness. 2 to consider cheeky. - Ivi/3 to behave cheekily. 
-vn 'i'istisdaaY, 'i'isti~daay; ava mistasday, mist~day. 
I"'; J u" 
"';..1.<> ~adat (a) Ivil to happen by chance. 'i'il-c:iid~adaf 
wi-ga g-gumc:a the feast happened to fall on a Friday. 
-/impersonallyl 
y~daf yikuun landina win-nuur 
maq(uul it may happen that he's at our place when 
there's a power cut. -ava ~aadif. 
~..I.<> ~udfa I In pi ~udafl chance, chance circumst-
ance, coincidence. qabilt-u bi~-~udfa I met him by 
chance. I~-~udaf is-saliida owing to happy circumst-
ance. 2 ladvl by chance . 
...;~~ ~aadif I Ivtl to come across, chance upon. ~adift 
axuu Ii/faaril I happened upon his brother in the 
street. 2 Ivil it happened (that). yi~aadil 'i'innu fis-
sinima it (so) happens that he's at the cinema. -vn 
m~adfa; ava mi~aadif. 
~~L.... m~adfa In pi -aatl chance. bil-m~adfa by 
chance. 
"';~L...;I 
'i'i~aadif or 'i'~~aadif Ivill to be come across, 
be chanced upon. 2 it happened (that): -ava/iva 
mi/~aadif. 
Z"';Ju" 
"';..1.<> ~adaF In/i/colll shell(s). 2 mother-of-pearl. 
i.i..l.<> ~adafa lunit n, pi -aall a shell. 
~..I.<> ~adafiyya In! {palh] psoriasis. 
..r:J..I.<> ~adafgi In pi -yyal worker in mother-of-pearl 
inlay. 
J J u" 
";..1.<> sadaq, ~adaq (u) Ivil to tell the truth, speak truth-
499 
fully. sadaq illi qaal il-l:Jubb i bahdala he spoke truly 
who said that love turns you upside down. (uul c:umr-u 
b-yusduq fi-kalaam-u he always speaks the truth. II 'lana 
b-al:Jibb asduq fi-mawaliid-i I like to keep my appoint-
ments faithfully. -Iaa wi-nla s-saadiq polite prefatory 
remark made when about to contradict someone ... 
forgive me for contradicting you, but .... - vn~idq, sudq, 
~idqt; ava saadiq, ~aadiq. 
";..1.<> ~idq or sudq Inl truth. kidb i msaawi wala ~idqi 
mbac:zaq {prov] consistent lying is more credible than 
garbled truth. 
i.i..l.<> ~adaqa, sadaqa, 
~adaqa In 
pi -aal, 
-aall 
I charitable deed or gift. 'i'ik-kilma (-tayyiba sadaqa a 
kind word is a good deed. 2 {lsi] specific act of charity 
prescribed by religion. 
";..I.<>i 
'i'~daq, 'i'asdaq lell morelmost truthful. 
..;1..1.<> ~adaaq Inl marriage settlement. 
i.il..l.<> ~adaaqa. sadaaqa I, ~adaaqa Inl friendship. 'i'illi 
beeni w-beenak 'i'aqwa min ~-~adaaqa what's between 
you and me is stronger than friendship. 
i.il..l.<> sadaaqa 2 Inl truthfulness. c:andu sadaaqa he is 
truthful. 
.j!..I.<> ~adiiq. ~adiiq t In pi 'i'~diqaa'i'l friend. 'i'~-~adiiq 
bi-yJaarik ~adiiq-u f-kull" l:Jaaga friends share every-
thing together . 
.j!~ ~addiiq. ~iddiiq Inl {lsi] true believer (epithet of 
the first Caliph, Abu Bakr). 
..;I..\.a.o misdaaq 
(also 
misdaaqan): 
misdaaq 
li-kalaam-ak ... confirming your (truthful) words .... 
..;~ saddaq. ~addaq Ilvtl to deem truthful, believe. ya 
rel-ni ma-saddaql-u fil- 'i'awwil I wish I hadn't believed 
him at the start. da mil misaddaq na;ar-u he can't 
believe his eyes. lil:Jlif-1i 'i'asaddaq-ak 'i'aJuuf'i'umuur-ak 
'i'aslalgib {prov] ... your behaviour contradicts what 
you say (though you try to convince me you're truth-
ful)! lisaddaq would you believe? can you credit? 
II/isaddaq bi-llaah honestly! as God is my witness! -vn 
lasdiiq; ava misaddaq; pva m~addaq t . 
11 ma-saddaq to be incredulous and overjoyed that, as in 
ma-saddaql atlal mil-qism I could hardly believe I was 
out of the police station, laqeet xalt-i layyaana 
w-ma-saddaqit Jafit-ni I found my aunt sick, and she 
was overjoyed to see o{e, ma-saddaqti smilti kilma 
c:aJaan tilmil min il-l:Jabba qubba you just loved to seize 
upon a single word to make a mountain out of a mole-
hill. -ma-saddaq ... wi- ... hardly had he ... when, as in 
ma-saddac;na nirtaal:J jiwayya w-gum gabu-Ina furl; 
taani we had hardly had chance to rest a bit when they 
came and brought us some more work. ma-saddac; 
'i'inriuhum sa'i'aluu wi-nfatal:J no sooner had they asked 

him than he poured out his story. 
J:i... Jaddatj2 Ivil to give authorization, give endorse-
ment or confirmation. b-almil talab bi-lJaddatj Galee 
fil- fidaara I make out a request which the administra-
tion authorizes. fit-tawtjiil laazim it-taJdiitj Galee min 
gihit iI-waziir the signature has to be endorsed by the 
minister. -vn taJdiitj; ava myaddatj. 
..:..li~ mU§addatjaat Ipl nl endorsed documents. 
J.l...\ fitsaddatj or fissaddatj Ivil to be believed. -iva 
mitsaddatj . 
J.l...\ filJaddaq or fYJaddatj Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of Jaddatj 2. fir-riIJla lJaddatj laleeha 1-faaxir laIJ;a the 
trip was approved at the last minute. -iva milJaddatj. 
J.)L.. Jaaditj I Ivt/ to befriend, become friendly with. 
bint-i Jadtjit walad baaaal my daughter has made 
friends with some good-for-nothing. 2 Ivil to give con-
firmation or endorsement. -vn myadtja; ava myaaditj. 
J.)L..a;\ filJaaditj or fYJaaditj lvil I (impersonal) pas-
sive ofJaaditj 2. fit-taJariiIJ ilJaaditj laleeha the permits 
were endorsed. 2 to become friendly. filJadtju maca 
(or wayya) baliJ. they became friends. -vn taJaadutj r ; 
ava/iva milJaaditj. 
r ~ I.J" 
rJ...:> Jadam (u, i) Ivt/ I to bump, knock. Jadamit-u 
larabiyya w-maat a car hit him and he died. 2 to shock. 
Jadam-ni l-xabar tjawi the news was a great shock to 
me. - Ivil 3 to bump, knock. Jadam fiyya waad 
Juvayyar a small boy bumped into me. - vn Jadm, 
Jadamaan; ava Jaadim; pva maJduum. 
4oJ...:> Jadma In' pi -aail I bump, jolt, shock, impact. 
2 shock, disappointment. Jadmit-ifiik kaanit kibiira my 
disappointment in you was_great. 
r..wi\ filJadam or fYJadam Ivil I to collide. 2a to be 
shocked. 2b to be disappointed. - ava/iva milJidim. 
r~\ fifIJadam = filJadam. -vn fifIJidaam; ava/iva 
mifIJidim. 
r.)L.. Jaadim Ivt/ to collide with, crash into. - vnJidaam, 
mU§adma; ava.myaadim. 
4o.)L.a.. mU§adma In pi -aatl collision. 
r.)L..a;\ filJaadim or fYJaadim Ivil to be in collision. 
fYJadmu maca baliJ.' fir-rafy their opinions .clashed. 
-vn taJaadum; ava milJaadim. 
r.)L..a; taJaadum In pi -aatl collision. 
r..u,....\ fYtadam Ivil to collide, impact. fil-mooga 
I-IJamla tiJtidim bil-firyal bitaal gihaaz iI-istitjbaal the 
carrier wave strikes the wireless receiver's aerial. 
fit-tayyaara Jtadamit bit-burg the plane! crashed into the 
tower. -vn fytidaam; ava mytidim. 
r\..u,....\ fytidaam In pi -aatl collision, crash. 
500 
I I.S ~ I.J" 
iJ...:> 'I.SJ...:> Jada I In/I rust, oxide (on metals). 2lbotJ 
plant rust. 
i:i... '1S:i... Jadda I Ivt/ to cause to rust. macruul finn 
ir-ru(Uuba bi-lJaddi I-IJadiid it is well known that mois-
ture causes iron to rust. 1-Ivil to rust, oxidize. bi-nidhin 
iI-IJadiid la/aan ma-YJaddii1 we paint the iron so it 
doesn't rust. IJadiid myaddi rusty iron. II muxx-u nl,l"addi 
he's dull-witted. -vn taJdiyya; ava/pva myaddi. 
z I.S ~ I.J" 
ISJ...:> Jada2 In pi faJdaafr I echo. II feeh Jada l-xabar 
da fin-naas how do people react to this news? 
r .J I.S ~ I.J" 
r.J'-J...:> Judyuum <prob Fr> Inl sodium. 
C.J I.J" 
:b.\J"'" JaraaIJa In/ frankness, candour. fismal ya 
lamm' ma-fii1 faIJsan mY-JaraaIJa listen here, my 
man, the best thing is to be frank! II bi-JaraaIJa frankly, 
as in kunt' b-JaraaIJa mitvaa; tjawi frankly, I was ex-
tremely annoyed. 
eJ-J"'" JariiIJ ladj pi JuraIJal frank, candid. ma-na 
dayman JariiIJ malaak but I'm always frank with you! 
bi-JariiIJ iI-libaara without mincing any words. 
CJ""'i faJraIJ lell morelmost candid or frank. 
C:;"" JarraIJ Ivill to give official permission or author-
ization. JarraIJuu-li b-duxuul iI-mantitja l-laskariyya 
they au'thorized me to enter the military zone. 2t to 
make an official statement or announcement. ,arraIJ 
masfuul bi-ntihaaf iI-fazma an official spokesman 
announced the end of the crisis. -vn taJriiIJ; ava/pva 
myarraIJ· 
eJ-~ taJriiIJ In/I Ipl taJariiIJI permit, permission, au-
thorization. taJriiIJ duxuul entry permit. 2 Ipl-aatl (offi-
cial) statement, announcement. 
C.:,..a.\ rilJarraIJ or rYJarraIJ /vii (impersonal) passive 
of JarraIJ. filJarraIJ-lu b-fusbuUl fagaaza he was 
allowed one week's leave. -iva milJarraIJ. 
C;L.. JaariIJ Ivt/ to be frank with. JarIJit-ni bi-lii I-tjalb-
a-ha she made a clean breast to me of what was on her 
mind. -vn mu§arIJa, myarIJa; ava myaariIJ. 
C;L..a;\ filJaariIJ or fYJaariIJ Ivil to speak frankly to one 
another. filJarIJu wayya baliJ.' b-kull illi I-nals-u-hum 
they were frank with one another about everything on-
their minds. -ava milJaariIJ. 

I ~~ IJ'f' 
:,.... ~arr 1 (u) Ivt/l to tie up, lace up (the opening of a 
bag etc.). rana laayiz raJuuf il-fiaml/ fiabl' ma ~urr 
iz-zikiiba I want to look at the wheat before you tie up 
the sack. 2 to pack, bundle up (in a cloth, the corners of 
which are knotted or laced together). miraat-u ~arrit 
il-yada btaal-u f-mandiil wi-fayyac;it-u l-yeet his wife 
tied up his lunch in a cloth and sent it to the field. -vn 
~arr, ~araraan; ava ~aarir; pva m~ruur . 
• :,.... ~urra2 In pI ~urarl bundle (made in a cloth, the 
corners of which are knotted ot laced together), small 
bag, purse. 
:"""1 
fi~arr or r~~arr Ivil passive of ~arr I. - iva mi~arr. 
:,....i f~arr Ivil to insist, persist. waal.Jid min it-tarafeen 
bi-y~irra lala mawfiif-u one of the parties is insisting on 
his position. -vn r~raar; ava mUjirr. 
}.r"'! r~raar Ivn/iisabfi il-r~raar lleg] premeditation, 
as in fiatl mac;a sabfi il- r~raar (wat-tar~~ud) premedi-
tated murder. 
2 ~~ IJ'f' 
:,.... .j ~arr2 (u) I/vtl to cause to leak or dribble. 
rif-fiwaal ~arr ir-ruzz' kull-u the sack let all the rice 
trickle out. 2 Ivil to leak out, dribble out. fir-ruzz' 
bi-y~urr' min ik-kiis the rice is running out of the bag. 
fil-mayya nazla ~araraan mil-fiirba water is leaking 
(steadily) out of the water-skin. -vn ~araraan, ~arr; ava 
~aarir. 
3 ~~ IJ'f' 
:,.... ~arr3r (u) Ivil to make a screeching or grating 
sound. ~arra lala snaan-u he ground his teeth. - ava 
~aarir. 
JIJ'f'~1J'f' 
.r"'.r'" ~ar~ar Ivil to make a screeching or grating 
sound. -vn ~ar~ara; ava m~ar~ar. 
;I .... .r'" ~ur~aar In pI ~ar~iirl cockroach. 
.J~..r'" ~ar~uur In pI ~ar~iir/l cockroach.lI~ar~uur il-
reet cricket. 2 (also ~ar~uur il-widn) cavity behind the 
lobe of the ear, (loosely) lobe of the ear. 
j, J IJ'f' 
.l.1~1 r~-~iraat In! the Path of Righteousness. maafi 
l~-~iraat behaving righteously, following the straight 
and narrow. 
tJIJ'f' 
t..r'" ~arall (a) Ivtl I to startle, alarm. daaxil 
501 
yitsal.Jl.Jab fiq-qalma ~arac;-ni coming in stealthily in the 
dark he gave me a fright. 2 to fluster, agitate. -vn 
~aralaan; ava ~aaril; pva m~ruul. 
t..r'" ~aral2 Inl epilepsy. 
t.,a'i rit~aral or f~~aral Ivil I to be startled, be 
alarmed. 2 to be flustered, be agitated. -iva mi~iril· 
t.,......1 
ri~aral = ri~aral· -iva mi~iril. 
t.JL... ~aaril Ivtl to wrestle with, struggle with. 
mUjarlit ii-moot wrestling with death. -vn mUjarla, 
~iraal T ; ava m~aaril. 
~.J\.... mUjarla, m~arla Inl wrestling. mUjarlit is-
siiraan bull-fighting. 
t.J\.... mUjaarilln *1 wrestler. 
t.JL...;1 
ri~aaril or r~~aarillvil to wrestle (with o.a.). 
-ava mi~aaril. 
I ..; ~ IJ'f' 
"';..r'" ~araF (i) Ivtl I to spend (money). rana b-~rif 
laleeha lifriin gineeh fusbuUli I spend twenty pounds 
a week on her. f~rif ma fil-geeb yirtii-k ma fil-yeeb 
lprov] (spend what is in your pocket and more will 
come providentially) ... carpe diem. 2 to disburse, 
issue, dispense. rid-duktuur ~araf-li Jahaada ~il.Jl.Jiyya 
the doctor issued me a health certificate. rig-gamliyya 
b-*rif it-tamwiin bil-bitafiaat the co-operative distri-
butes rationed goods on (presentation of) ration cards. 
rul.Jt il-muruur ~arafuu-li r/ala gdiida I went to the 
traffic department and they issued me with a new li-
cence. 3 to exchange (paper for money or goods). mif 
mumkin t~rifif-fiik da rillafil-xaarig you can only cash 
this 
cheque 
abroad. 
xud 
ir-ruJitta 
btalt-ak 
lil-ragzaxaana laJaan y~rifu-haa-Iak take your pre-
scription to the pharmacy and they'll dispense it for 
you. 4 to drain, draw off. fiabl' ma nizral il-rarq' n~rif 
minha l-mayya z-ziyaada iii fiiha before we sow the land 
we drain offthe excess water in it. 5 to exorcize. rif-feex 
yilraf y~rif il-lafariit lan il-malbusiin the sheikh can 
exorcize spirits from the possessed. -vn~arf; ava~aarif; 
pva m~ruuf. 
11 
~araf (in-)na;ar (1) to divert attention, as in 
ril-mu;ahraat ~arafit in-na;ar lan ziyaarit ir-ra riis the 
demonstration diverted attention from the president's 
visit. (2) to pay no attelltion, be distracted. n~rif 
in-na;ar lan iI-mawquU[ da we'll ignore that question . 
bint-i xayfa law iftaralit t~rif in-na;ar lan ig-gawaaz my 
daughter is afraid that if she works she will lose interest 
in marriage. 
"';..r'" ~arf Ilvn! IIgihat ~-~arf authority disbursing 
funds. - ramr' ~arf or rizn' ~arf (1) banker's order. 
(2) altthorization to issue supplies etc. - bi-~arf in-na;ar 

lan disregarding, not including. - In/2 funds allocated 
for current expenditures. miraat-i maska ~arf ii-beet my 
wife is in charge of the house-keeping money. 
3 drainage water. 4 {lingj morphology. 
~ ~ 
~arfiyya In pI -aatl payment. 
~J"""" mf¥ruuF Inl 
Ilpl -aatl la expenditure. 
Ib allowance. mf¥ruuf geeb pocket money. 2/pl 
mf¥ariif/ cost, expense. mf¥ariif diraasa tuition costs. 
II nafar mf¥ariif {leg] one who discharges a fine by work. 
..:, ~ 
~irf ladj invarl pure, unmixed, sheer. larabi~irf 
pure Arab. di mayya ~irf that's pure water. tjumaaf 
tju{n' ~"f pure cotton cloth. 
i.i ~ 
~irfa In pI ~iraf/ expedient, way out.fuuflak~irfa 
fil-mawquul da see if you can find a way out of this 
business. 
~I~ ~iraafa Inl I money changing. 2 handling of 
cash. 
":'1::"" ~arraaf In *1 I cashier. II raab yibaasib iNarraaf 
to go and spend a penny. 2 lalso pI ~ayaarif, ~ayarfal 
money changer. 3 lalso pI ~ayaarif, ~arraafal{rur] land-
tax collector. 
~::,... ~arriifJ In pI ~arriifal{rurjland-tax collector. 
..:,..,..... mf¥raf In pI mf¥aarif/ I land drainage canal. 
Ilma~raf mii" {obsolj drainage canal constructed and 
controlled by the government. 2t bank. 
j..,..... mf¥rafir ladjl pertaining to a bank.fiik mf¥rafi 
{finanj bank draft. 
..:, ~I 'i'i~araf or 'i'i~~araf Ivil passive of ~araf. - iva 
mit~irif. 
..:, .,.,,; 1 'i'in~araf Ivill to go away, turn away. II 'i'i~iraaf 
{milj dIsmiss! -daftar iI-buquur wil-in~iraaf1edger for 
signing in and out. 2 = 'i'i~araf. - vn 'i'i~iraaf; avaliva 
min~trif· 
..:,::,... ~arraf Ivtl la to discharge, deal with. ~arraft' 
'i'umuur-i I dealt with my affairs.lI~arraf-ni 'i'almil 'i'eeh 
tell me what to do, suggest a solution to me. Ib to 
cO(llmission (s.o.) to deal (with s.th.). ~arraft-u f-
'i'umuur-i I charged him to handle my affairs. 2a to 
drain. ~arrafu I-mayya mil-'i'arq they drained the water 
from the land. ~arrafu I-'i'arq' mil-mayya they drained 
the land of the water. 2b to dIspose of, distribute (mer-
chandise). taagir iI-gumla bi-y~arraf iI-biqaala lan 
{ariitj tuggaar lI-tja{{aali the wholesale merchant dis-
poses of the goods via the retail merchants. 3 to cause 
to depart. ~arraf iq-qlyuuf get rid of the guests! - vn 
tf¥rilf; avalpva mi~arraf. 
~~ tf¥rilfa Inlll pI tf¥ariif/ = ~irfa. 2 Ipl-aatl inst-
ance noun of tf¥rilf. 
":':""'1 
'i'i~arraf or 
'i'~~arraf Ivil I to act, behave. 
tismay /i-bn-ak y~~arraf kida do you allow your son to 
S02 
behave in this way? 2a to take steps, take appropriate 
action, act as one sees fit. 'i'iza Yf¥alit dawfa 'i'iI-'i'idaara 
ya-ti~arraf if there's any disturbance, the administra-
tion will take appropriate steps. 'i'iI-bukuuma b-tit~arraf 
fi-mafaa~iI if1alb the government is taking action to 
deal with the people's problems. 'i'axuu-ya b-Y/~arraf 
fi-'i'amwaal iI-leela my brother looks after the family's 
property. lI'i'iI-maxzangi bi-ytjuulu 'i'i~arraf fil-luhda 
the steward, they say, has disposed (illegitimately) of 
what is in his custody. 2b to cope, manage. m-alraf1 
a~arraf 'i'izzaay law gooz-i maat I don't know how I'd 
cope if my husband died. lIyi~~arraf 'i'ayy' kalaam he 
does any old thing to get by. - 'i'almil 'i'eeh fil-mufkila di. 
- 'i'~~arraf 'What shall I do about this problemT 'Find 
your way out of it.' -vn tf¥arruf; ava mit~arraf. 
..:,:,.... tf¥arrufln/l/vn/il tabt' tf¥arruf ... atthe dispos-
al of .... -sariil it-ta~arruf quick-witted, enterprising. 
-ladiim it-tf¥arruf witless, helpless. 2 Ipl -aat, -aatl 
(piece of) behaviour, (course of). action. 'i'it-tf¥arruf 
~-~aby , fil-yaala di reer kida that is not the right thing 
to do in this situation. tf¥arrufaat-ak batjit fiqiiba your 
behaviour has become a scandal! 
1 ..J .J IJ'" 
..:,~ ~araF (u) Ivil to use trimmings (on a galabiya, 
gibba or other item of men's clothing). -vn ~arf; ava 
~aarif; pva mf¥ruuf. 
":'J"""" mf¥ruuf2 Icoll nl trimmings, accessories (for 
men's garments) . 
~.)I-. mf¥ariif = mf¥ruuF. 
I r .J IJ'" 
~ ~ 
~arma <prob P charm> In pI ~uraml pair of (old) 
shoes. II 'i'iqrab id-dinya ~arma (hit the world with old 
shoes) take it easy, don't worry (said to person worried 
by a problem). -qarabit nafs-a-ha sittiin ~arma ... she 
was filled with regret,' she kicked herself. -qarabit 
wiff-a-ha sittiin ~arma (she hit her face with sixty pairs of 
old shoes) ... she plastered her face with make-up. 
- wiff-u maqruub miit ~arma he looks very sullen. 
-ya-bn 
~-~arma == son of a clapped-out whore! 
-If¥-~arma I-tjadiima == (take it) and good riddance to 
you! as in bukra taaxud filuus-ak If¥-~arma I-tjadlima 
you'll get your bloody money soon enough and good 
riddance to you! 
JI.. ~ 
~uramaati In pI -yyal {deris] cobbler, shoe-
mender. 
l(r.JlJ"') 
r ~ 
~urm Inl {coarse] arsehole. lI~urm-u {ilil fii ... he 

bust his arse to get it. -kull il-m~aayib fiik ya ~urm 
id-diik [prov] all catastrophes are (contained) in you, 
you cock's arse! (to a vile person). -kull il-m~aayib 
~aabit farag lamma farag ~urm-u xarag [prov] "" Farag 
was hit by so many disasters that he could take no more 
(of one beset by misfortunes). 
~.r4 ~irma In pI -aat, ~iraml chuck (of a drill used for 
precision work). 
loS.) ..?' 
1oS.;L... ~aari In pI ~awaaril I mast (of a boat). lI~aari 
~alCja lightning conductor. 2 flagpole. 
loS ..?' ..?' 
..,.,L... ~a~a Ivil to cheep. fil-katakiit bi-t~a~i guwwa 
I-Cjaf~ the chicks chirp in the cage. -vn mi~~iyya; ava 
mi~a~i. 
y j,..?' see Y j, ..?' r : m~taba 
Y t..?' 
~ 
~Ulub, ~ilib (a) Ivil to become (more) difficult. 
fij-juyli b-yi~lab laleena kulli fwayya work gets gra-
dually more difficult for us. -vn ~uluuba, ~ulubiyya; 
ava ~albaan. 
11 ~ilib lala to evoke pity in (s.o.). falJwaal-u b-t~lab 
lalayya I feel sorry for him in such circumstances. 
~albaan laleeha l-masakiin dool she feels sorry for 
those poor people. 
'-l J'W' ~uluuba In pI -aat, -aat, 
~ilaabl difficulty. 
bi-yijtiki min ~uluubit il- fimtilJaan he complains of the 
difficulty of the exam. 
~ J'W' ~ulubiyya = ~uluuba. 
~ 
~alb ladjl hard, difficult, trying. fimtilJaan ~alb a 
difficult exam. riI-fuCjara bi-Yliiju f-;uruuf ~alba the 
poor live under trying conditions. kitWfeef ft- fawwil-u 
~alb [prov] everything is difficult at first.lIlumla~alba 
hard currency. 
~i f~lab lell morelmost difficult etc. 
...,..t-. m~aalib Ipl nl difficulties. 
~ 
~auab Ivtl to make difficult, complicate. fil-lJall i 
da y~auab il-masfala this solution would only compli-
cate the matter. -vn t~liib avalpva m~allab. 
~I fit~auab or f~~auab Ivil I to smack the lips as 
an expression of dismay or regret. 2 to be made diffi-
cult. riI-imtilJanaat bi-ti~auab kulli sana lan illi 
Cjabliiha every year the exams are made more difficult 
than the year before. - avaliva mit~auab. 
~I 
fist~lab 
Ivtl 
I to 
consider 
difficult. 
fist~labu l-imtilJaan they found the exam difficult. 
503 
2 to select for difficulty. 
fist~lab fayyi sufaal 
wi-s fal-ni fii choose me any difficult question and try it 
on me. -vn fisfi~laab; ava mist~lab. 
.)t..?' 
-'-> ~aladr (a, y~lud) lvil to rise, ascend. fil-giil 
inaalid the rising generation. illiid inUlUud [Chr] 
Feast of the Ascension. - vn ~Uluud; ava ~aalid. 
~ 
finiliid Iprop nl Upper Egypt. 
1oS~ ~iliidi Ipl ~alaydal I ladjl from or of Upper 
Egypt. 2/nl an Upper Egyptian. kull illi yiigi min 
inalaydafayda [prov] an Upper Egyptian is only good 
for what you can get out of him. ma-fti-j lJawaleen 
i~-~alayda fayda [prov] there is no benefit in anything 
to do with the Upper Egyptians . 
~ 
~auad Ivtl I [mil] to escalate (e.g., an attack). 
2 [admin] to pass (s.th.) up a chain of command. 
3 [pol] to vote (s.o.) onto a higher committee. -vn 
l~liid; ava mi~auad. 
~I ~it~auad or f~~auad Ivil passive of ~auad. 
- iva mil~auad. 
~L.a;1 fil~aalid r or fi~~aalid r Ivil to be given off, rise 
(of vapours etc.). fii fabxira saamma 
b-tit~aalid 
wi-titlal fasnaa f it-tafaalul there are toxic vapours 
which are given off and rise up during the reaction. - vn 
t~aalud; ava mUl~aalid. 
1oS~L.a; l~aalUd;r ladjl ascending. tartiib t~aaludi 
ascending order. 
Jt..?' 
..;-
~alaCj (a) Ivtlto give (s.o.) a shock. -vn~alaCjaan, 
~alCj; ava ~aaliCj; pva m~luuCj. 
~ 
L... ~alCja, ~alqa r I In pi ~awaaliCjI thunderbolt, 
bolt of lightning. ~aari ~alCja lightning conductor. 2 f~­
~alqa the Commandos (in the Egyptian army). 
~I fit~alaCj or f~~alaCj Ivil to be thunderstruck. 
- iva mi~iliCj. 
~I fi~alaCj = fi~alaCj. -iva mi~iliCj. 
.!lJt..?' 
~ 
~allaka Inl destitution, being down-and-out. 
.!l).wo ~alluuk, ~Ulluuk (also Zalluuk) In pI ~alaliikl 
pauper, down-and-out, bum. lI~alluuk mitCjammij a 
well-dressed nobody. -tiruulJ feen ya Zalluuk been il-
muluuk (what are you doing amongst kings, you bum?) 
"" keep out of your superiors' company. 
..ill.....a;1 
fit~allak or f~~allak Ivil to become or behave 
like a tramp or down-and-out. fi~allak min mafy-u 
malafillit il-xanaafis he's turned into a vagabond be-
cause of his keeping company with this group of hip-
pies. - ava mit~allak. 

j t IJ'" 
jw> 1irir, 1urur (a) /vii 1 to become small or smaller. 
mifiina n1J11' saaca bass' w-ka- rinn il-masaafa ma-
1ilfrit-jwe walked for half an hour but it seemed that the 
distance didn't get any less. ril-bantaloon 1irir lalayya 
my trousers have become too small for me. 2 to become 
young or younger. ril-ragaaza xallit-u zayy' ma ykuun 
1urur lajar siniin having a holiday has made him look 
and feel ten years younger. -vn 1ilfar, 1urr. 
jw> 1urr loJ 1 smallness. 1urr iI-\'ibra xallaa-ni ma-
juft· -haa-j the needle was so small I didn't see it. 
2 childhood, youth. ribtada min 1ulfr-u Ylaakis 
iI-banaat [if-jawaaril from an early age he began to 
pester girls in the streets. 
jw> 1ilfart loJ 1 smallness. da yirgal 1i-1iYar lJagm-u 
this is owing to its smallness of size. 2 childhood, youth. 
rit-tacliim /i1-1ilfar ka-n-nafir la/-lJagar {prov] what is 
taught in childhood is never forgotten. 
;:iw> 1alfiir loJ small cog-wheel (of a water-wheel) (see 
PI.E,8). 
i;:iw> 1alfiira In pl1alfaayirl minor sin. ril-kizb' min 
i1-1alfaayir rinnama I-t;at/' min iI-kabaayir lying is a 
minor sin while killing is a major sin. 
~ 
1ulfayyar (aiso ZUlfayyar) ladj • and pl1ulfaarl 
1 small. rit;tal-u lala 1lfayyar cut it small. 1ulfaar iz-
zurraal small(-scale) farmers. 2 (also1ulfayyar[lS-sinn) 
young. ri1-1ulfaar ralJibbaar allaah {prov] the young 
(or: children) are the beloved of God. yilmiluu-ha 
1-1ulfaar w-YUt;alU fiiha I-kubaar {prov] (the children 
start it, the adults fall into it) when children start a 
dispute, their parents become involved in it. 
J';- 1ulfayyuur (also 1ulfantat, 1ulfan(Uut, 1ulfannan, 
1ulfannuun, 1ut;antat, 1ut;an(Uu(, 1Ulfaaa(, 1ulfatcuut, 
1ut;aaa(, 1ut;at(Uut, ZUlfan(a(, ZUlfan(UU(, ZUlfannan, 
ZUlfannuun, zut;antat, zut;an(Uut, ZUlfaaat, ZUlfaauut, 
zUt;aaat, zUt;aauu() ladj ·1 small and cutl:, tiny, wee. 
jw>i ra,nar lell 1 smallerlsmallest. 2 youngerl 
youngest. 
jw> 1arrar Ivtll to make smaller, reduce, scale down. 
rit-tarzi 1arrar iI-huduum the tailor took in the clothes. 
ni1arrar iI-xaraayit Ii-mit;yaas munaasib we reduce the 
maps to a suitable scale. 2 to cause to appear youn-
g(er). rit-tasriilJa g-gidiida1arrarit-ha the new hairstyle 
made her look younger. - vn tQ1lfiir; ava/pva mi1arrar. 
;""1 ril1arrar or ri11arrar Ivii 1 to be made smaller, 
be reduced or scaled down. 2 to be made to appear 
younger. - iva mil1arrar. 
,.,........, ristQ1lfar Ivtl la to consider (too) small. 
ril-gaahil bi-yistQ1lfar if.Jams a lajaan biliida one who 
does not know better thinks the sun is small because it is 
504 
far away. rinta mistQ1lfar nayb-ak fil-Iabma you think 
you have less than your fair share of meat? Ib to consid-
er (too) young. ristQ1lfarUu-ni (or ristQ1lfarU sinn-i) 
rafaquu-n.ithey decided I was too young and turned me 
down. 2 to belittle, underestimate. fii naas bi-tistQ1'(ar 
jarn iI-mawquul da some people underestimate the 
importance of this matter. rif-jabaab iI-rayyam-di 
b-yistQ1,(aru f-lenee-hum ik-kubaar [IS-sinn young peo-
ple these days don't respect their elders. 3a to select for 
smallness. ristQ1lfar lQ1aaya w-hat-ha find a small stick 
and bring it! 3b to select for youthfulness. -vn 
risti1lfaar; ava mistQ1'(ar. 
J ~ J t IJ'" see I t I.IJ'" : 1a'(aquul ralfaasi 
j, j, OJ t IJ'" see j t IJ'" : 1ulfanta(, 1u'(an(Uu( 
OJ OJ OJ t IJ'" see j t IJ'" : 1u'(annan, 1u'(annuun 
..; IJ'" see ..; IJ'" ~ : 1ifa 
I C. .J IJ'" 
~ 
1af/Ja In pi -aat, 1ufalJJI page. IIkurraas 1af/Ja 
w-1af/Ja exercise book with 'alternate blank and ruled 
pages. 
~ 
1afiilJ loJ 1 thin sheet steel. 2 tin plate. lilba 
1afiilJ tin can. II/amba 1afiilJ a small open-flame tin 
oil-lamp used in rural areas (see PI.B, 2). 
~ 
1afiilJa In pl1afaayilJI I piece of tin plate. 
2 large metal can (commonly used as a rubbish bin). 
3 blade (of a saw). 4 measure equivalent to twenty 
Iitres. . 
~ 
1af!alJ 1 Ivtl to cover with metal sheeting.1af!alJu 
s-sanadiit; iI-xajab biz-zink t~ey plated the wooden 
boxes with zinc. 2/vii to be over-stimulated (of the 
mind). dimaalf-i 1affalJit leelit rimbaarilJ mif-jaay ... 
I couldn't sleep ~ast night because I'd been drinking 
te~. - vn tQ1fiilJ; ava/pva mi1affalJ. 
~ 
mi1af!alJ, mlJ1af!alJ ladj ·1 armoured. t;izaaz 
mlJ1af!alJ 
armoured 
glass. 
larabiyya 
TT/1af!alJa 
armoured vehicle.llraas-u TT/1af!alJa (1) he's obstinate. 
(2) he's a night-owl, he stays up late. 
~I ril1af!alJ or ri11af!al:J I/vtl to leaf through (a 
book). 2/vii to be plated. -ava/iva mil1af!alJ. 
z C. ..; IJ'" 
~ 
1afalJ (a) Ivii to grant forgiveness. 1afaI:J lanni 
/i-rinnaha kaanit raWWillfal(a minni he forgave me, 

since jt was my first mistake. -vn ~afl.J, ~afal]aan; ava 
~aafil]. 
~ 
~afl.J InJ forgiveness. law k~an laqib-ni kaan yibqa 
!'ahwan min ~afl.J-u (lanni) = had he punished me, it 
would have been less painful than his forgiveness. 
~I !'i~afal] or !'~~afal] Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
~afal]. mif kull iI-ralalaal y~~ifil] lanha not all mistakes 
can be forgiven. -iva mi~ifil]. 
eiL.. ~aafil] Ivt/ to shake hands with. -vn m~afl.Ja, 
m~afl.Ja; ava m~aafil]. 
e;i L...; I • !'il~aafil] or !'~~aafil] Ivil to shake han~s (with 
o.a.). bald iI-licb i~afl.Ju·mala balt[ after the game, 
they shook hands. - ava mil~aafil]. 
~I !,isll¥fal] Ivt/ to ask (s.o.) for forgiveness. rul]1 
asll¥fal]-u lan raltil-i lakinnu rafat[ I went to ask him to 
forgive my mistake but he refused. -ava misll¥fal]. 
1 .) ~ U'" 
~ 
~afar (u) Ivil to whistle. !'ir-riil] bi-y~fur fif-
fibbaak the wind whistles at the window. II !'ir-riil] ~afar 
fi-wdaan iI-I]~aan ma-I]addi-J qidir yiwaqqaf-u the 
horse went wild and nobody could stop him. -vn ~afr; 
ava ~aafir. 
.,r.U ~afiir r InJ whistle, whistling sound . 
• )i ... ~uffaara In pI -aal, ~afafiir, safafiirl 1 whistle 
(sound). 2 whistle (instrument). I]alla b-~uffaara press-
ure cooker. 3 six-holed single-reed flute. 4 siren. 
~uffaaril '!,inzaar warning siren. 
';"';1 
!'i~afar or !'~~afar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
~afar. IIzayyi ma ykuun i~afar fi-wdaan-u as if it has 
gone wild (of an animal). -iva mi~ifir. 
;... ~affar 1 Ivil 1 to whistle. II widaan-i bi-~affar my 
ears are ringing. 2 to blow a whistle. -vn Il¥fiir, lasfiir; 
ava m~affar. 
)..,a; I !'i~affarl or !'~~affarl Ivil (impersonal) passive 
('If $affar I. mif !'ana iii yi~affar-lu mif-jibbaak I am not 
one to be whistled at from the window. -iva mil~affar. 
1 .) ~ U'" 
~i !'I¥far ladj, fern ~afra, pI ~ufrl 1 yellow. balal] 
!'I¥far yellow dates. II lads i !'I¥far husked lentils. - !'art[ i 
~afra soil of clay mixed with sand. - !,is-saraaya ~-~afra 
{derisJ mental hospital, as in I]aqq-ak liruul] is-saraaya 
~-~afra you ought to be locked up. 2 pale, wan. 3 sorrel 
(of a horse). 
.I~ .I~ ~afra Inl bile . 
• )...aI1 
!'~-~afra Inl jaundice. 
ISJI ~ 
~afraawiladj °1 rancorous. II mazaag ~afraawi a 
choleric temperament (one of the four cardinal 
humours). 
505 
.Jli.... ~afaar InJ yellowness, yellow. lI~afaar Jams just 
before sunset. -~afaar (beet[) egg·y.0~' 
1S.Jli.... ~afaari: 
~afaari Jams just before sunset. 
bi-yruul]u ret-hum ~afaari.Jams they go to their fields in 
the late afternoon just befor~ sunset. 
;... ~affar2 Ivt/ to make yellow. !,is-sagaayir bi-~affar 
is-sinaan cigarettes yellow the teeth. -vn Il¥fiir; ava 
m~affar. 
)...;1 !'i~affar2 or !'~~affar2 Ivil to be made yellow. 
- iva mil~affar. 
:"""1 
!'~farr Ivil 1 to yellow, turn yellow. waraq 
ik-kilaab ~farr i min if-Jams the pages of the book have 
yellowed from the sun. 2 to become pale or wan. -vn 
!'~firaar; ava misfirr, m~firr. 
,;...a:-I !,isll¥far Ivt/ 1 to select for yellowness. 2 to 
reject for yellowness. - ava misll¥far. 
J(.)~U"') 
~ 
~ifr (also sifr2) In pI !'I¥faar, ~ifaarl zero. lI~ifr8 
caJ-Jimaai (zero written on the left-hand side) some-
thing completely worthless. 
~ 
~afar InJ Safar, second month of the Muslim year. 
1 ~ U'" ~ U'" 
..jL.a.;.... ~af~aaf, ~uf~aaf Icoll nl willow(s). ~af~aaf 
baladi Egyptian willow (Salix safsaf). ~af~aaf !'umm 
if-Juluur weeping willow (Salix babylonica). 
~L.a.;.... ~uf~aafa lunit n, pI -aall a willow. 
1 ~ U'" ~ U'" 
~ 
~af~aF, ~af~if Ivil to become depleted or whit-
tled away. !'il-balad ~af~afil laleena we're the only ones 
left in the village. !'il-I]ikaaya ~af~afit lala ma-fii-J the 
matter came to nothing. -vn ~af~afa; ava m~af~a/. 
J ~ U'" ~ U'" 
~ 
~af~aF Iprop nJ nickname for Mustafa or 
Safiya. 
t ~ U'" 
~ 
~afal r (a) Ivt/ to slap. -vn ~afl; ava ~aafil; pva 
ml¥fuul· 
~ 
~afla In pI -aall s,lap. 
~I !'i~afal or !'~~afal Ivil to be slapped. -iva 
mi~ifil· 
~ ~ U'" 
.:..... ~affl (u) Ivtf.l to put in a row.lI~affi I]uruuftype-

setting. 2 to arrange. xallii-na ~uff ik-karaasi let's 
arrange the chairs. -vn ~afafaan, ~aff; ava ~aafif; pya 
ma~fuuf· 
J..., ~afF In pi ra~fuf, ~ufuuf, ~ufufaJI I row, line, 
rank. nazzil ~aff' snaan-i he knocked my teeth out. 
II rayyis ~aff head chef. -~aff' ~aabi{ non-commissioned 
officer. -huwwaf-~aff-i he's on my side. 2 grade, form 
(~n school). 
~ 
~uffa In pi ~ufaf/ [rurJ alcove raised above floor 
level. 
J\A..:. ~affaaf' ~affaaf buruuf typesetter. 
J...... ma~aff In pi -aatl rack, holder (as, e.g., that 
which a peddler of cold drinks wears attached to his 
wr}st and in which he puts his glasses). 
........... ~affaf Ivtl to arrange. miin illi ba-yiqdar yi~affaf 
ik-karaasi di kull-a-ha who will be able to arrange all 
these chairs? ru-bint' ~affifa falr-a-ha the girl has 
done her hair. - vn ta~fiif; ava/pva mi~affaf. 
.Jh....,1 
r~{affr Ivil to line up. ri~{affig-gamiil fi-{abuur 
everyone formed up into a line. -vn riNifaaf; ava 
mi~{aff. 
J ~ u'" 
~ 
~afqa In pi -aatl deal, bargain. 
~ 
~affaq r Ivil to applaud, clap the hands. -vn 
ta~fiiq; ava m~affaq. 
..;o...a; 1 rit~affaq or ri~~affaq Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
~affaq. rahu da I-ba{al ilti yistaahil rinnu yit~affaq-Iu 
this is the champion who deserves to be applauded. - iva 
mit~affaq . 
J ~ u'" see ..s ~ u'" : ~afwa 
..s ~ u'" 
~ 
~ifi (a) Ivil to become clear. ru-mayya I-likra ti~fa 
b-Jabba turbid water becomes clear with (the use of) 
alum. II ru-gaww' ~fii-Iu he had a clear field (in which to 
act). -vn ~afa, ~afw; ava ~aafi. 
11 ~ifi lala to come down to, be reduced to. bald 
id-dihn' kiilu I-Iabma ~ifi lala raqall' min in-n~~ after 
(removing) the fat, the kilo of meat came down to less 
than half (a kilo). 
\.i... ~afa limperl [milJ at ease! 
jL.:. ~aafi ladi *1 I pure, unsullied, unblemished. 
sumla ~afya an unsullied reputation. razraq ~iini ~aafi 
clear Chinese blue. lI~aafi ya laban (pure milk!) all's 
well now! we've settled our dispute! 2 net. ru-wazn 
i~-~aafi the net weight. 
.;..,.. ~afwa r Inl elite, best (of people). ~afwit i/-
malbuud the chosen of God. 
506 
.;t".;.... ~afyaan ladil emaciated, sickly. 
~i ra~fa lell more/most unsullied or unblemished. 
~\A..:. ~ifaaya, ~ifaaya In pi -aat, -aatl I remnant, re-
mains. yinaqqu I-rawwil wi-baldeen yidduu-na ~­
~ifaaya they make their selection first and then give us 
what is left. 2 [rurJ water still in an irrigation canal after 
it has been blocked at the mouth (the amount of water 
be~ng calculated in order to avoid flooding the crops). 
~\A..:. ~affaaya, ~affaaya In pi -aat, -aatl strainer. 
~affaayitfaay tea strainer. ~affaayit (ibaaq dish-draining 
rack. 
.;..a.. m~fa In pi m~aafil I filter, strainer, colander. 
2 ?rainage channel of a field. 
~ 
~affa Ivtl la to strain. nusluq il-makargona 
w-baldeen ni~affii-ha we boil the pasta and then strain 
it. Ib to drain. bald itnaafar saala min il-bidaar n~affi 
1- rarq' min il-mayya twelve hours after sowing we drain 
the land of water. IIqarab-u buks' ~affaa-Iu leen-u he 
punched him and put out his eye. 2 to settle, straighten 
out. laazim il-mudiir yi~affi bsaab-u yomiyyan the 
director must settle his account daily. ~affu I-xilaafthey 
settled (their) differences. 3 to liquidate. 
~affu 
ramlak-hum wi-safru they sold up their property and 
left. II ta~fiyit il-muusim stocktaking sale. -mubarayaat 
ti¥fiyya elimination matches (in a contest or cham-
pionship).4 [nautJ to coil (a rope). -vn t~fiyya, ta~fiya; 
ava/pva mi~affi. 
jL..; t~aafi Ipl nl final remains (of, e.g., a stock of 
merchandise). mayyit it-ta~aafi [rurJ water remaining in 
the main irrigation canals at the end of the irrigation 
cycle. -ladverbiallyl ri/-mayya nazla ta~aafi the water is 
trickling slowly down. 
J.-a.. m~affi ladi *1 pure. II ribn' balaal mi~affi a thor-
o~ghly good fellow. 
';"";1 
rit~affa or ri~~affa Ivil passive of ~affa. -iva 
mit~affi. 
jL.:. ~aafa Ivtl to be faithful or true to.lldahr-i~afaa-ni 
life is being good to me. -vn m~afiyya; ava m~aafi. 
jL..;1 
rit~aafa or ri~~aafa Ivil passive of ~aafa. -ava 
mit~aafi. 
.;Ja...1 
ri~{afa I Ivtl to choose, select. rabb-i-na ~(afaa 
min been in-naas God has singled him out (for his 
favours). 2 Ivil to settle differences, effect a reconcilia-
tion. r~{afu mala balq they became reconciled. r~{ifi 
malaa you deal with him! (I can't bear to). -ava m~(ifi. 
..;k-ll ru-m~(afa Inl the Chosen One (epithet of the 
Prophet Muhammed). 
J J u'" 
~ 
~aqr In pi ~uquur, ~uqural falcon.llfanab-u yuqaf 

Galee f~-~afir (a falcon could perch on his moustache) 
"" he has a thick and luxuriant moustache (regarded as a 
sign of virility). 
J., J., J., J ~ see .) t ~ : ~ufia{{a(, ~ufia{{uu( 
IJJ~ 
JA...> ~afial (i) Ivt/l to burnish (metal). 2 to finish (con-
crete). -vn ~afil; ava ~aafiil; pya mOJfiuul. 
ao..... mOJfiala In pi mOJaafiil/ burnishing block or 
steel. 
j4.a;1 
fit~afial or fi~~afial Ivil I to be burnished (of 
metal). 2 to be finished (of concrete). - iva mit~ifiil. 
J., J., iJ J ~ see .) t ~ : ~ufian(a(, ~ufian(uu( 
I • .!l.!l ~ 
.u... ~akk In pi ~ukuukl [legJ proof of contract, receipt. 
fil-mustanadaat di b-tuGtabar ~akk· Gala I-IJukuuma 
these documents are considered binding on the 
government. 
J ~ see J ~ 
.J : ~ila 
lyJ~ 
...,.J.... ~alab I (u) I/vtl to stiffen into an upright posi-
tion, make upright.ll~alab(uul-u (or yeel-u) he stood up 
straight. -~alab-ni Gal-baab IIU~~i saaGa he kept me 
waiting at the door for half an hour. - Ivi/2 to be stiff, 
be in an upright position. markib ~aalib a ship in (prop-
er) upright position (i.e. not listing). 3 to last (well), be 
of continuing use. fil-kursi da ya-yu~/ub maGaak that 
chair will last you well. -vn ~alb, ~alabaan; ava ~aalib; 
pya mOJluub . 
...,.J.... ~ulb Inll steel. 2 core, central part. ~ulb ii-bays 
the core of the research. II huwwa-bn-u min ~ulb-u he's 
his father's son. - ladj invarl 3 solid, stiff, hard. da 
xafab ~ulb that is very hard wood. 4 dependable. walad 
~ulb a reliable boy. 
...,.J.... ~i1ib. ~alib f ladj */1 stiff. inflexible.llhuwwa~i1ib 
ir-rafy or dimaay-u ~ilib he's obstinate, he's pig-
headed. 2 tough. hard. mawaaddi ~aliba solids . 
...,.J....i 
fa~/ab lell harder/hardest. 
~ ')l., ~alaaba Inl 1 hardness, toughness. 2 stamina, 
endurance. 
~ ')l., ~ilaaba In pi -aat, -aatl prop, support. 
507 
~I fit~alab I or f~~alab I Ivil to become or be made 
upright. - ava/iva mit~ilib . 
..).... ~allib I I Ivtl to fix firmly in position. lafieet-u 
~allib raas-u fil-baab wi-bi-YZUfifi I found him wedg-
ing his head against the door and pushing.ll/eeh ti~allib 
ra fy-ak kida why are you so obstinate? 2 Ivil to become 
stiff. rafiabt-i ~allibit mir-rumatizm my neck got stiff 
because of rheumatism. - vn tOJliib; ava/pva mi~allib. 
~ 
tOJliiba In pi ta~aliibl prop, support . 
.,l..a.1 
fit~allib I or f~~allib I Ivil I to become hard or 
stiff. ta~allub if-farayiin arteriosclerosis. 2 to be fixed 
firmly. -vn tOJallub f; ava/iva mit~allib. 
lyJ~ 
..,.J.... ~alab2 (u) Ivtl to crucify. - vn~alb; ava~aalib; pya 
ma~/uub . 
...,...l...o ~aliib In pi ~ulbaanl cross. finaliib iI- faymar 
the Red Cross. yurzit ~-~aliib [needlewJ cross-stitch. 
IIGiid inaliib [ChrJ Finding of Holy Cross Day 
(September 27). 
-~aliib faa4,i and ~aliib malyaan 
wooden lattice-work patterns (see PI.G, 2, 3). 
~ 
~aliiba, 
~aliiba In pi ~alaayibl cross piece. 
muftaay ~aliiba [autoJ wheel spanner. fi~-~aliiba [anatJ 
part of a ruminant's stomach having a honeycomb-like 
appearance, honeycomb tripe. 
~ 
~aliibi ladj *1 pertaining to crusades or crusad-
ers. fil-yuruub i~-~alibiyya the Crusades. 
~I fit~alab2 or f~~alab2 Ivil to be crucified. -iva 
mit~i1ib . 
..J.., ~allib2 Ivi/l [ChrJ to make the sign of the cross. 
fil-fiBSSiis ~allib Gal-mayyitiin the priest made the sign 
of the cross over the dead. 2 [aeadJ to make a cross 
beside or through incorrect work. -vn ta~liib; ava 
mi~allib. 
.,l..a.1 
fit~allib 2 or fi~~allib z Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of ~allib2. fil-mazbaIJ it~allib Galee the sign of the cross 
was made over the altar. - iva mi~allib. 
lyJ~ 
..).... ~allib 3, ~allab Ivtl to fasten flimsily together. 
~allab-Ii g-gazma I-yaayit ma faw~al ii-beet just fix me 
the shoes so that they'll hang together till I get home. 
-vn ta~liib; ava/pva mi~allab . 
~ 
mi~allab ladj */1 flimsily hanging together. 2 on 
the point of tears. 
~I fit~allab or fi~~allab Ivi/l to be flimsily fastened 
together. 2 to (be ready to) seize upon a pretext. 
fit~allib-Iu Gala kilma w-raay qarab-u he picked on one 
word he said and went and hit hil11 for it. - avaliva 
mit~allab. 

..,l..:.. mi~allab or m~lallab = m~allab. 
.l.yJI.I'" see .l.yJIJ'" 
CJI.I'" 
c:!-
~alal] 1 (u, a) Ivil to be ~lJitllble. be fit. laalib 
liI-isticmaal fit for use. huwwa sakraan ma-YlJllul]-f' 
liI-camal he's drunk, he's not fit to work. II rin 
ma-kan-f' y~/al] tabla y~/al] taar [prov] if it won't serve 
one purpose it will serve another (said of something 
apparently useless). -vn lalal]aan, lalal]iyya; ava 
laalil]. 
c:!- lalal] 2 (i) Ivtll to reform, set right. II rallaah y~lil] 
I]aal-ak (may God set your affairs aright) a polite way of 
seeking to silence someone. 2 to make peace between. 
-vn lull]; ava laalil]; pva mfllluul]. 
c:!- lull] In! reconciliation. mucahdit lull] peace 
treaty. 
~ 
lull]a In! I reconciliation. 2 [magic] charm car-
ried by a possessed person in order to make peace with 
the possessing spirit(s). 
dL.. laalil] 1 I/adj "I worthy, upright. riI-racmaa/~­
lall]a good deeds. 2 In! benefit, interest. Ii-Iaalil] i/-
gamiic for the good of everybody. r~-laalil:J iI-caamm 
the common good.llma-Iii-flaalil:J I'll have nothing to 
do with it! 
~L...JI r~-Iall]iyya Iprop n! es-Salihiya, a town in 
Sharqiya known in particular for its sweet melons. 
~J\..L.L... lall:Jaawi I/adjl of or pertaining to es-
Salihiya. 2 In! variety of large very sweet water-melon 
from the area around es-Salihiya. 
~ 
lallal:J 1 In! game in which one player stands with 
his back to the others, one hand showing under his 
armpit; another player then slaps his hand and the first 
player has to guess who it was. 
c:!-i rflllal:J 1 lell I morelmost suitable or fitting. 
2 morelmost correct. 
C~ lalaal] 
Inl 
up 
rightness, 
righteousness. 
!,it-tarbiyya min iI-!'abaa!' w~-Ialaal] min allaah [prov] 
upbringing is from parents but righteousness is from 
God. 
~~ 
lalal]iyya, lalal:Jiya f Inl suitability. fihaadit~­
lalal:Jiya certificate of proficiency (an in-service training 
certificate awarded to teachers without appropriate 
qualifications) . 
w..... mflllal:Ja In pi mfllaalil:Jl I interest, welfare. 
riI-mflllal]a I-camma the common good. /iyya mflllal:Ja 
fil-I]ikaaya I'm an interested party in the affair. min 
mflllal:Jt-ak !'innak tibiic-u it's in your interest to sell it. 
2 affair, matter. !'aruul:J iI-wizaara !'at;qi mflllal:Ja I'm 
508 
going to the Ministry to see to some business. rana 
t;flId-ak fi-mflllal:Ja I've come to see you about some-
thing. 3 gover.nment agency or department. mQllal:Jil 
iI-misaal:Ja the Survey Department. 
~ 
mflllal]i ladj "I pertaining to government de-
partments, official. 
~ 
mflllal]gi 
ladj 
pi -yyal 
opportunist, 
self-seeking. 
~I !'i~alal:J or r~lalal:J Ivill to be reformed, be set 
right. 2 to be or become reconciled. -ava/iva mi~iliI.J. 
&' I !,i7llalal] = !'i~alal:J. -iva mi7llilil]. 
c:!- lallaI:J 2 /vtll to mend, repair. !'in-naggaarlallal:J 
it-tabuuI the carpenter fixed the water-wheel. !'umm-i 
l:Ja-~allal:J iI-babuur cand is-samkari my mother will 
have the primus stove mended at the welder's. 2 to 
i.mprove, correct. 
riI-waaI:Jid mumkin 
y~allal:J-lu 
,ul/umii, kurraasa fil- rusbuuc one may (have to) cor-
rect (up to) three hundred exercise books in one week. 
3a-to adjust. bi-Ylallal] ik-koora cal-!'ar4 he positions 
the ball on the ground. 3b to tune (a musical instru-
ment).4 to even out, level. bacd it-tat;ri~ lallal]i I-wifl 
after you've made the dough into discs, even out the 
tops.lllallal:J-lu t;a/aa give him a slap on the back of the 
neck. -vn tfllliil:J; ava/pva m~allal:J. 
~ 
IflIliil:J In pi -aatl repair. 
~I !'i~allal] or r~lallal:J Ivil passive of lallal] 2. - ava/ 
iva mi~allal]. 
dL.. laali1:J2 Ivtl I to reconcile. ma-l:Jadd'-f yit;dar 
y~a/il:J-hum maca bac4 no one can get them together 
again. !'in-naas lall]uu-hum cala bac4 people recon-
ciled them. 2 to make up with. !'in !'abuu-ya zaual-ni 
!'umm-i ~alil:J-ni if my father upsets me, my mother 
makes it up with me. -vn m~all:Ja; ava m~aalil]. 
jJ.l...a,. mlJlall:Ja In pi -aatl reconciliation. 
d \..a; I !'i~aalil] or !'~Iaalil] Ivill to be reconciled. 2 to 
be comforted. - vn tQlaalul] r; iva mi~aa/il:J. 
d \..a; tQlaalul] Inl [leg] settlement out of court. 
c:!-i !'Qllal:J 2 r = lalal:J 2. !'id-dawa da mlJllil:J liI-micda 
this medicine is good for the ~tomach. -vn !'~/aal:J; ava 
mlJllil:J. 
~~! !'~/al:Jiyya (also !'~/al]iyyit !'al]daas) In pi -aatl 
(boys') reformatory, remand home. 
~I 
!'~talal:J Ivill to make up, become reconciled. 
!'~talal]l' macaaha laani I became reconciled with her 
again. 2 to agree, decide (upon s.th.). laazim n~tilil:J 
cala ramz' mucayyan we must agree on a certain sign. 
-vn !'~tilaal:J; ava m~tilil]. 
C~I !'~tilaal] In pi -aatl expression, (technical) 
term. 
~ 
mlJltalal] In pi -aatl (technical) term. 

~ 
1 fist~/alj Ivtl 1 to consider correct. 2 to render 
fit (for use). fist~/aal.J iI-faraaqi land reclamation. 3 to 
select for correctness. -vn fist~/aal.J; ava mist~/al.J; pva 
must~/al.J. 
.) J..,... 
..I!"... !uld <Fr solde> Inl 1 all ready cash (on one's 
person). 2 collection of money or chips with which one 
is playing (in gambling). 
~.P J U'" 
IS~ !uldi <It soldi> In pi !alaadil {obsol] small coin 
worth one-fifth of a piastre. 
vV"J..,... 
..::......J"... !ulist <Fr soliste> In! vocal or instrumental 
soloist. 
..,...J..,... 
4...a.l... !a1!a <It salsa> In pi -aatl tomato puree. II di 
fumuur !a1!a this is a farce! - fiI-ljikaaya batjit !a1!a it 
turned out a mess. 
1 J..,... J..,... 
J...al...o !a1!allvil to ring. !al!alit ig-garas the ringing of 
the bell. -vn !a1!ala; avalpva m~a1!al. 
2 J..,... J..,... 
Jl-L... !al!aal, !i1!aal Inl plasticine. 
c j, J..,... 
~ 
!altal.J (also saltal.J) Ivtl 1 to flatten. wabuur 
iz-zalat bi-y!altal.J if-Jaaril the steam-roller flattens the 
road (surface). tjafaa m~altalj the back of his head is 
flat. 2 to lay flat. !altaljt i gism-i lak-kanaba w-nimt 
I stretched myself out on the sofa and fell asleep. 
!altal.Ju l-layyaan lala tarabeezit iI-lamaliyyaat they 
laid the patient on the operating table. - Ivil 3 to lie 
down. fil-lummaal !a1tal.Ju taljt i fagara the labourers 
lay down to rest under a tree. -vn !a1tal.Ja; ava/pva 
m~altal.J. 
doL... m~altal.J ladj *1 flat. II!aljn i ~altal.J plate. 
~I fit!a1tal.J or f~!altalj Ivil 1 to lie down. 2 to be 
flattened. 3 to be laid down. -ava/iva mit!a1tal.J. 
tJ..,... 
~ 
!alal Inl baldness. 
.:,w.... !alalaan Inl baldness. 
~i f~lal ladj, fern !a1la, pi !ulll bald. 
2-1 fi!lau Ivil to become bald. -ava m~lau. 
509 
..; J..,... 
...Al..o !alaf In! arrogance. 
~')I.... !alaafa In! arrogance. 
...AlI....;I fit!aalif or f~!aalif Ivil to behave arrogantly. 
- ava mit!aalif . 
j, J J..,... 
.lu.l.... !altjat (also saltja(): (fi-)!altjat (fi-)maltjat in 
every single possible or conceivable place, as in 
dawwart· laleeha !altjat fi-maltjat ma-Iaqet-haa-J 
I looked high and low for her but I couldn't find her. 
J J..,... see .J J ..,... : m~alla, mUlalliin 
.J J ..,... 
i')l.... !ala, !alaah tIn, constr !alaat, pi !alawaatf! 
1 {lsi] ritual prayer. !alaat iI-fagr dawn prayer. 2 {Chr] 
prayer. f~-!ala r-rabbaniyya the Lord's Prayer.lI!alaat 
iI-tjandiil see qandiil. 3 f~-!ala the set of five ritual 
prayers in Islam. 4 blessing (of God on the Prophet). ya 
!alaat in-nabi 0 blessing of the Prophet! (exclamation 
used in, e.g., warding offthe evil eye, expressing depre-
cation, dismissing a request). laleehi !-!alaatu was-
salaam may blessing and peace be upon him (i.e. the 
Prophet Muhammad, in response to !allilan-nabi, q.v. 
below under !alla). 
j.... !alla 1 Ivtl to pray (fixed prayers). !alleet iI-fagr 
{lsi] I prayed the dawn prayer. pi-TI!alli I-quddaas 
marriteen kulli yoom l.Jadd we celebrate the liturgy 
twice every Sunday. Ilmayya ~alliyya {Chr] conse-
crated water. 2 Ivil to pray. fiqilt i f~alli lamma Ij~al-Ii 
w-Iamma Ij~al-li baaaiti 
f~alli {prov] I went on 
praying till I got what I wanted, and when I got what 
I wanted I stopped praying. !allaa-li w-fana layyaan 
{Chr] he prayed for me when I was sick. - ava/pva 
m~alli. 
11 !alla lala 1 {lsi] to invoke a blessing on. !alli lan-nabi 
{lsi] (bless the Prophet!) (1) exclamation of wonder or 
delight, as in faadi I-laruusa !alli lan-nabi faaxir 
gamaal there's the bride! my! isn't she beautiful. 
(2) calm yourself! !alli lala iii yiffal fiik {lsi] (bless him 
(Muhammad) who has compassion on you) formula 
used (1) at the beginning of an explanation or piece of 
advice. (2) as a conciliatory interjection. 2 {Chr] to 
pray 
over. 
fiI-qassiis 
bi-y!alli 
lala 
I-mariiq 
wi-b-yirfim-u biz,zeet the priest prays over the sick man 
and anoints him with oil. - !alla bi- {lsi] to lead in 
prayer. fiI- fimaam !alla bin-naas the imam led the 
people in prayer. 
j-. m~alla = m~alliyya. 

~ 
mi~alliyya, ml¥alliyya In pi -aatl 1 prayer mat. 
2 ~Iace for prayer (not having a pUlpit). 
~ 
mu~alliin, m~alliyyiin Ipl nl congregation. 
J...a;1 
fit~alla or fi~~alla Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
~alla. fil-layyil it~alla lalee prayers were said over the 
child. - iva mit~alli. 
( ':u J IJ'" l 
.;,)L... ~aloon I, 
~aluun 1 <Fr salon> In pi -aatl 
18 drawing room, sitting room. Ib sitting-room suite. 
2 hairdresser's establishment. ~aloon tagmiil beauty 
parlour. ~aluun l:Jilaalja barber's shop. 3 saloon car (in a 
train). 
.;,)L... ~aloon2, ~aluun2 <Engl> Inl saloon car. 
1(.sJlJ"'l 
~)L. ~alaaya 1 In pi -aatl [rur] wooden mortar and 
pestle. 
~)L. ~alaaya2 Inl colostrum, beestings. 
2 .s J IJ'" see .J J IJ"': ~alla, mi~alliyya, m~alliin, 
m~alliyyiin, fit~alla 
J I (' IJ'" 
JL.~I finumaallprop nl Somalia. 
JL.-,"", ~umaali I/adj *1 pertaining to Somalia. lal:Jm' 
~umaali meat imported from Somalia. 2 In *1 national 
of Somalia. 
.::.J (' IJ'" 
...:;........:. ~amat r (u) Ivil to become silent. film' ~aamit a 
silent film. - vn ~amt; ava ~aamit. 
...:;........:. ~amt Inl silence. 
fi~-~amt' zeen wis-sukuut 
salaama [prov] silence is best and safest. 
..::.-..a.. mu~mat ladj *1 solid, not hollow. 
~ (' IJ'" 
..l..o...o> ~amadl (u) Ivil to hold out, put up resistance. 
niljdar nu~mud liq-qQlr{ il-iqti~aadi we can stand up to 
economic pressure. -vn ~umuud; ava ~aamid. 
..l..o...o> ~amad2 Inl Everlasting One (epithet of God). 
~~ 
I fi~-~amadiyya Inl popular name for the Kora-
nic suurit il- fixlaa~. 
.J (' IJ'" 
~ 
~amar, samar 3 <Gr samari> Inl saddle felt. 
t (' IJ'" 
;,... -'"'" ~umdla In pi ~awaamill 1 dome-shaped coop 
made of mud (see PI.C, 5). 2 grain store made of mud 
(see PI.C, 4). 
510 
t (' IJ'" see t (' IJ" : 
~aml(, 
~aml(i, 
~ammal(, 
fit~ammal(, ta~ammul( 
I J (' IJ'" 
J-
~amal (ut Ivil to endure. 
fi~-~adaalja benhum 
ma-~amalit-J' sana their friendship didn't last a year. 
II ril-fuul bi-y~mul ma-yxallii-J il-waal:Jid yiguul bi-
surla beans stick to your ribs, you don't get hungry 
again quickly. -vn ~aml, ~amalaan; ava ~aamil. 
.;,~ ~amlaan ladj *1 enduring. 
~ 
~ammallvtl [rur] to reheat, re-bake (bread). -vn 
ta~miil; avalpva m~ammil. 
~I fit~ammil or fi~~ammil/vil [rur] to be reheated, 
,~ re-baked (of bread). -vn mit~ammil. 
2 J (' IJ'" see J.J (' IJ'" : ~amuula 
3 J (' IJ'" see J I (' IJ'" : finumaal, ~umaali 
('('IJ'" 
;:., ~amm (u) Ivtl 1 to close up, narrow up. ~umm' 
fafayf-ak purse your lips. lI~ammeet widaan-ak lan il-
l:Jaljlj you turned a deaf ear to the truth. 2 to learn by 
heart, memorize. fawwil ma yaaxud dars' y~umm-u 
fil-l:Jaal as soon as he gets a lesson he learns it by heart. 
- Ivil 3 to close up, become non-porous. ril-farq' di 
~ammit laazim nul:Ju{{-i-lha rami this earth has become 
very hard; we should add sand to it. -vn ~amm, 
~amamaan; ava ~aamim; pva ma~muum. 
;:"i fa~amm ladj, fern ~ammaaf, pi ~umml deaf. dool 
gamaala ~umm' bukm (they are deaf and dumb) 
(1) "" they are (as stupid as) dumb beasts. (2) "" they are 
wise and trustworthy (because they keep their mouths 
shut). 
il....:> ~imaam In pi -aatl valve, tube (of a radio and the 
like). IImizaan inimaam straw float (in angling). 
<lAl....:> ~imaama In pi -aat/l stopper, bung. 2 valve. 
~ 
~amiim 1 Inl heart, core, innermost part. 
bi-tljibb-u min ~amiim ljalb-a-ha she loves him from the 
bottom of her heart. qarba fi~-~amiim a shattering 
blow. fitbal:Jisna f-~amlim il-mufkila we discussed-the 
case thoroughly. 2/adjl genuine, true. ma~ri~amiim an 
Egyptian through and through. 
it.:.. ~ammaam In */1 one who learns by rote. 2 swot, 
grind. 
~I fit~amm or fiNamm Ivil passive of ~amm. -iva 
mit~amm. 
~I rin~amm = rit~amm. -iva min~amm. 
~ 
~ammim 1 Ivtl to desi gn. muhandis kibiir ~ammim 
luhum il-limaara an eminent architect designed the 

building for them. 2 Ivi/la to resolve, determine. min 
fawwil !Jayaat-i w-fana ~ammim (lala) finni fablia 
kaatib I've been determined to be a writer all my life. 
2b to insist. ~ammimt (lala) innu yiigi malaana 
I insisted that he come with us. -vn t~miim; ava 
m~ammim. 
~ 
t~miim In pI -aatl design. t~miim !Jasab talab 
~aa!Jib i1-limaara a design according to the wish of the 
owner of the building. 
~ 
m~ammim In *1 designer. m~ammim fazyaaf 
fashion designer. 
~I fit~ammim or 
f~~ammim Ivil passive of 
~ammim. -iva mit~ammim. 
J.J r "'"' 
41.,.L... ~amuula <poss T somun> In pI ~awamiill nut 
(of a bolt).II~awamiil muxx-u mafkuuka he has a screw 
loose. 
.) ""I iJ "'"' 
.;.,.:.-
~anbuurt In pI ~anabiirl tap, faucet. 
u 9 "'"' 
~ 
~anniit In pI ~anniital eavesdropper. 
~I fi~annat or fit~~annat Ivil to listen to, eaves-
drop. laamil is-siwitt b-yit~annat laleena the switch-
board operator is eavesdropping on us. -vn t~annut; 
ava mit~anna{. 
[. iJ "'"' 
~ 
~anag Inl deafness. 
~i f~nag ladj, fern ~anga, pI ~ungl deaf. 
2-01 f~nagg Ivil to become deaf. finta ~naggeet have 
you become deaf! -ava m~nigg. 
(J~iJ",",) 
J..I:J ~andal J <Engl> In pI ~anaadill (pair of) sandals. 
J..I:J ~andal2 <cf Gr, P, T, It> In pI ~anaadill 
I lighter, unpowered barge. 2 pontoon. 
J..I:J ~anda,.J Inl sandalwood. 
.) iJ "'"' see .) I iJ iJ "'"' : ~unnaara, ~innaara 
.) ..J, iJ "'"' see I.)..J, iJ ..,.. : ~an{ar, ~intar 
511 
t iJ "'"' 
t-
~anal (a) Ivt/l to manufacture, make. riI-libad di 
m~nuula min iI-goox these caps are made of felt. -/the 
literary passive imperfect occurs! kull i1-!Jagaat di 
t~nal Iii-hind all of these things are made in India. 
II beeni w-beenu ma ~anal i1-!Jaddaad = he and I are at 
daggers drawn. 21 to carry out, perform. f~nal fiyya 
malruul do me a favour. - vn ~unl, ~inaala; ava ~aanil; 
pva m~nuul. 
~ 
~anla In pI ~unal, ~anaayill I trade, craft, 
occupation. ~anla !Jilwa a good trade (to be in).lIsabac 
~anaayil wil-baxti qaayil {provJ = all one's skills will 
not compensate for bad luck. 2 art, (acquired) skill, 
craftsmanship. II fit-tUIi,i ~anla {provJ = coquettish dal-
liance is an art. - bi-~anlit la{aala with persuasive 
charm. 
~ l.:.... ~inaala In pI -aat, ~anaayil tt I craft, skill. 
madrasit i1-lunuun w~-~anaayil the School of Arts and 
Crafts. 2 industry. 3 manufactured product. 
..rl.:.... ~inaali ladj */1 industrial. fintaag ~inaali in-
dustrial production. 2 processed. laban ~inaali pow-
dered milk (for babies). 3 artificial. !Jariir ~inaali 
synthetic silk. sinaan ~inaliyya false teeth. 
11 ~inaliyyan ladvl synthetically, artificially. mawaddi 
mxallalia ~inaliyyan materials made up synthetically. 
eL... ~aanil In pI ~unnaall artisan, craftsman. 
.;..\&. ~ 
m~nulaat Ipl nl manufactured goods, me!"-
chandise. m~nulaat gildiyya leather goods. 
u"!-l.:.... ~anaYli In pI -yyal skilled worker, craftsman, 
artisan. 
c:a.o m~nal In pI m~aanill factory. 
~ 
m~naliyya In 
pI -aatl I cost of labour. 
fid-dibla bi-tkallil farbala gneeh dahab wi-gneeh 
m~naliyya the ring costs four pounds for the gold and 
a pound for the labour. 2 workmanship, craftsmanship. 
~I fi~anal or f~~anal Ivil passive of ~anal. -iva 
"!i~inil. 
t-
~annal Ivtl I to fashion, shape. nibtidi ~annal 
in-na!Jaas biJ-fakl illi-!Jna layziin-u we begin to make 
the brass into the shape we want. 2 to manufacture. 
3}0 industrialize. -vn t~niil; ava m~annal. 
~I fi~annal or f~~annal I/vil passive of ~an~al. 
2 Ivtl to simulate, feign. bi-yi~annal in-noom he pre-
tends to be asleep. -vn t~annul; avaliva mi~annal. 
e:l-I f~{anal Ivtl to simulate, feign. 
f~{analit i1-
kusuul she feigned shyness. -vn f~[inaal; ava m~[inil; 
pva m~{anal . 
..rt:J....,1 fy{inaali ladj 
*1 
simulated, put on. 
t~arrulat-ha fy{inaliyya liawi her behaviour is very 
unnatural. 

...;~~ 
...A.;... ~anf In! Ilpl r~naafl type, sort. fii ~anfeen 
baljiiki w-(alyaani there are two kinds, Belgian and 
Italian. IIwa/a ~anf ... not a single ... , as in ril-bitta 
ma-fhaa-f wa/a ~anf' bani raadam there's no one there 
at .all. 2 riNanf hashish. 
...A.;... ~annaf, ~annif Ivtll to classify. 2 to put together, 
compile. ~annif-Ii fwayyit buharaat wi-byaat-ak please 
give me an assortment of spices. ~annifit-Ii r;~~a (Wiila 
tidbak biiha ca/ayya she concocted a long story to puU 
the wool over my eyes. -vn t~niif; avalpva m~annif, 
m~annaf. 
....i.;..a.. m~annaf In pI -aatl item or piece of music in a 
variety show. riqaabit iI-m~annafaat department in 
broadcasting for variety show items. 
:ii;.' a" t~niifa In pI -aat, t~aniifl assortment, variety . 
.......... 1 ri~annaf or r~~annaf Ivill to be classified, be 
sorted. ril-kuruut di b-ti~annaf (Ii-)magmulaat ~hese 
cards are sorted into groups. 2 to be put together, be 
compiled. -iva mi~annaf. 
.J"';~~ 
512 
? 
~anfar Ivtll to sandpaper, sand. 2 to make (s.o.) 
refined, polish the manners of (s.o.). -vn~anfara; aval 
pva m~anfar. 
i? ~anfara I/vn/ll rir-raagil da laayiz ~anfara that 
man's manners need polishing. 2 (also warar; ~anfara) 
Inl sandpaper. warar;it ~anfara a piece of sandpaper. 
,;;-. m~anfar ladj *1 frosted (of glass). 
~I ri~anfar or r~~anfar Ivil I to be sanded, be 
finished with sandpaper. 2 to be refined, be polished 
(of, e.g., manners). -vn t~anfiir; iva mi~anfar. 
i ~ 
t~anfiira instance noun of t~anfiir. dual 
i/-farab wi-huwwa mit~anfar t~anfiira w-ka-rinnu 1-
lariis he came to the wedding dressed immaculately 
enough to be the bridegroom. 
r~~ 
~ 
~anam In pI r~naaml idol.llya bagam ya~anam'" 
y~lU dumb ox! 
~ 
~annim Ivil to behave stolidly, duUy or mutely. 
waar;if m~annim zayy abu I-hoof standing mute like the 
Sphinx. -vn t~niim; ava m~annim. 
I~~~ 
~ 
~ann J (i, u) Ivil[rur} to pause, wait. ~annitfiwayya 
w-r;alit-Ii larra she paused a moment and then said 
'No'. ~inn' rusbuUl wi-.talafaa-Ii wait for a week and 
come back to me. -vn~ann; ava~aanin. 
l~~~ 
~ 
~ann 2 (i) Ivil to give off a pungent smell. - vn~ann, 
~~nanaan; ava ~aanin. 
~ 
~anna Inl strong odour, reek (particularly of urine 
or onions). 
oJ\.;... ~unaan = ~anna. 
..,\.;... ~unaana = ~anna . 
;.... ~annin, ~annan = ~ann 2. ri/-hiduum bi-~annin 
mil-lara1 the clothes smeU of sweat. -vn t~niin; ava 
m~annan. 
.J I.~ ~ ~ 
i..l\.;... ~unnaara, ~innaara <T sinare> In pI ~ananiirl 
I fish-hook, (and by extension) fishing tackle. -/adjec-
tivallyl manga~unnaara type of mango with a hook-like 
end. 2 [carp} finishing nail. 
.JY.J~~ 
J..fo-
~inoobar IcoU nIl pine(s). 2 pine-nut(s). -also 
~ineebar. 
I.S ~ ~ 
:i~ ... ~aniyya, ~Imyya In pI ~awaanil I tray, salver. 
2 oven pan, shaUow pan.lI~aniyyit ba(aa(is dish of pota-
toes (usuaUy with tomatoes and onions) baked in a 
shaUow dish. 3 [Chr} paten. 4 any circular object used 
as a disc for a revolving piece of machinery. 5 traffic 
circle, roundabout. 6 circular platform. 7 [print} 
galley. 
.JYI.S~~ 
~ 
~ineebar IcoU nl pine-nut(s). -also ~inoobar. 
i ~ 
~inebra lunit n, pI -aa(l pine-nut. bafar; ~inebra 
an earring in the shape of a pine-nut. 
~I~ ~inebraaya = ~inebra. 
.~ 
..... ~ah Ifem n! fourteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also ~aa, ~aad. 
~.~ 
oIfJ ~ahad (a) Ivil to be scorched. ma-rar;dar-f ar;lud 
fif-fams' - wiff-i y~had min ii-barr I can't sit in the sun; 
the heat will scorch my face. -vn ~ahd; ava ~aahid. 
oIfJ ~ahd Inl blast of heat. 
iolfJ ~ahda = ~ahd. 
I.J' ~ 
-*'" ~ahar (a) Ivtl to melt down, smelt. badiid m~huur 
molten iron. -vn ~ahr; ava ~aahir; pva m~huur. 

~r 'li~ahart /vii I to melt. daragit il-'li~ihaar 
melting point. 2 to be melted. -vn 'li~ihaar; ava/iva 
mi~ihir. 
~I ri~ahar or 
r~~ahar = 
'li~ahar. - ava/iva 
mi~ihir. 
Z.) t I.J" 
A-"' ~ihr In! father- or brother-in-law. 
..:.IA-"' ~ihraat: min kitrit banaat-u ~aarit ik-kilaab 
~ihraat-u [pray] he who has many daughters will take 
even dogs for sons-in-law. 
;1 ....... )11 ri/-rC¥haar Ipl n! (all one's) in-laws male and 
female. 
~t.... ~aahir Ivtl to become related through marriage to 
(s.o.). -vn m~ahra; ava m~aahir. 
~ La; 1 ri~aahir or r~~aahir Ivii passive of ~aahir. -iva 
mi~aahir. 
1 
~.) t I.J" 
~A-"' ~ahrig, ~ahrag I Ivtl to cause (fire) to blaze up. 
rir-riiy ~ahrigit il-willa the wind made the fire blaze up. 
2 Ivii to blaze up (of fire). 'lin-naar ~ahragit the fire 
blazed up. -vn ~ahraga; ava m~ahrig, m~ahrag. 
Z 
~.) t I.J" 
~A-"' ~ahriig, ~ihriig In pi ~ahariigl cistern,large stor-
age tank (particularly for water). 
...r."!A-"' ~ahriigi In! type of mafrafiyya design (see 
PI.G, 1,7). 
J t I.J" 
J+.... ~ahal (a) Ivii to neigh (of a horse). -vn~ahiil; ava 
~aahil. 
J J t I.J" 
.J.l+.... ~ahlill Ivtl to liven up with merriment and noise. 
~ahlilu I-Ieela they brought the party to life. 2 Ivii to 
indulge in noisy merriment. ya-~ahlil il-Ielaa-di we're 
going to have a hell of a time tonight. -vn ~ahlala; 
ava/pva m~ahlil. 
~ 
~uhleela In pi ~ahalii/l blaze. 
J.l.f-;I 
'li~ahlil or r~~ahlil Ivil to be livened up with 
merriment and noise. -vn t~ahliil; 'ava mi~ahlil. 
~~ tl.J" 
..r-+"" ~ahyin Ivii to be unconcerned, pay no attention. 
~ahyin tifallC¥ [pray] don't worry and you'll grow fat 
(i.e. be healthy). riz-zibuun il-mutlib lamma yidfal 
il-yisaab y~ahyin lal-bafifiif a tiresome customer 
forgets the tip when he pays the bill. -vn ~ahyana, 
~ahyana; ava m~ahyin. 
513 
~,,~ t ~ 
"",*", ~ahyuun Iprop n! Zion. 
J",*", ~ahyuuni I/adjl Zionist. IIraagil ~ahyuuni a 
ruthless man. 2 In pi ~ahayna, ~ahaynal a Zionist. 
~~I 'linahyuniyya In! Zionism. 
~ \" ~ 
~I."... ~awaana In! (star) marking on a horse's 
forehead . 
ly,,~ 
..,..t.... ~aab (i) Ivt/ to hit, strike (a target or the like). 
'lin-nafangi ~aab il-hadaf the marksman struck the 
target. leen wi-~abit-ni someone gave me the evil eye. 
IImarra ~iib wi-marra txiib [pray] win a few,lose a few. 
-kalaam-u ~aayib what he says is right. -vn ~ayabaan; 
ava ~aayib. 
'-:"! t.... ~aayib In! disaster, calamity. ~aab il-balad ~aayib 
disaster befell the town. 
..,..1."... ~awaab In! rightness, correctness. mif mumkin 
il-waayid yikuun lala ~awaab lala {Uul you can't be 
right all the time. 
..,..."...i 'lC¥wab l 
lell morelmost right or correct. 
ri/-'lC¥wab inn afjabil-hum it would be better it'I met 
them. 
..,..La;1 
'li~aab or 'l~~aab Ivii to be afflicted, be struck. 
ri/aah-i yi~aab fi-nacf.ar-u may he be struck blind! 
'li~aab fil-yadsa talatt infaar three people were injured 
in the accident. -iva ·mi~aab . 
..,..L.a;1 
'li~aab = 'li~aab. -iva mi~aab. 
..,.. ~ 
~awwib t Ivtl to aim. ~awwabit-Iu na~ra she eyed 
him intently. -vn tC¥wiib; ava m~awwib. 
..,..~I ri~awwib or r~~awwib Ivii to be aimed. -iva 
mi~awwib. 
..,..t....i rC¥aab t = ~aab. ri/-mu'lmin m~aab the right-
eous always suffer. - vn 
r~aaba; ava m~iib; pva 
m~aab. 
..,..."...i 'lC¥wab 2 Ivi perf onlyl to be right. 'linta 'lC¥wabt 
illi ma-lazamti-hum-ji lal-faray you were right not to 
have invited them to the wedding. 
~t....! 
'l~aaba In pi -aatl injury. 
~ 
m~iiba (also n~iibaJ) In pi mC¥aayib, nC¥aayibl 
disaster, calamity. ya ~ibt-i woe is me! 'leeh il-m~iiba 
lIi-yna fiiha what kind of trouble have we got into? 
mC¥aayib fi-zakaayib [pray] "" it never rains but it 
pours. mC¥aayib naas land i naas fawaayid [pray] 
(some) people's misfortunes are benefits for (other) 
people. 
II ri/-m~iiba 'linn unfortunately, as in 
'lil-m~iiba 'linnaha miffahma yaaga unfortunately she 
understands nothing. -hiyya di l-m~iiba that's the sad 

part of it. -gat-ak m~iiba = go to hell! 
yL..&.. m~aab In *1 casualty, victim (of an accident). 
y..,...ao-I 
fist~wab, fist~wib Ivtl to consider right or 
correct. -vn fist~waab; ava mist~wab. 
2,,:-,.J ~ 
~.".-
~ooba <T soba> In pI -aatl shed in which young 
plants are cultivated. ~ooba r;zaaz greenhouse. 
";".J~ 
U.".-
~oot In pI f~waatl I voice. lalli ~oot-ak speak 
up! 2 noise, sound. riI- fawlaad yitsayyabu min reer 
~oot lala (ara(iif ~awabil-hum the children sneak out on 
tiptoe without a sound. 3 scream, cry. 4 vote. 
J.".-
~awti ladjl I vocal. riI-faybaal iNawtiyya the 
vocal 
chords. 
2 pertaining 
to 
sound, 
audio-. 
mu fassiraat ~awtiyya sound effects. 
~ 
~iit Inl fame, renown. II fiNiit wala I-rina {pro v] 
having a reputation (for being rich) has more advantage 
than (actually) being rich. 
ul.".-
~uwaat Inl screaming (in pain, fright, sorrow 
etc.). ~uwat-hum lili I-rabb is-sama their anguished 
cries reached the skies. 
~.".-
~uwiit Inl screaming (in pain, fright, sorrow 
etc.). fis-sitt' lirfit rarQ(/.-u w-haat ya ~uwiit the woman 
understood his intentions and started yelling. 
.::.;.. ~ayyiit In pI ~ayyiital Koran chanter, singer of 
religious songs. 
u~ ~awwat Ivii I to vote. bald' ma y~awwatu lagnit 
iI-intixaab bi-tifriz iI- f~waat after they vote, the elec-
tion eommittee sorts the votes. 2 to scream or cry (in 
pain, fright or sorrow). wara g-ganaaza niswaan bi-
t,sawwat following the funeral were women screaming in 
anguish. -vn t~wiit; ava mi~awwat. 
.:.;... ~ayyit I Ivtl to sing the praises of, spread the 
(good) reputation of. mif larfa ~ayyitiin {abix-ha lala 
feeh I don't know why they are singing the praises of 
her cooking. 2 Ivil to chant the Koran or religious 
songs. -vn t~yiit; ava m~ayyit . 
..::.;....:.. m~~ayyat ladj *1 famous, renowned. bar;a 
malr;uul finnak ma-smilt'-f lan (fulaan) iI-m~~ayyat 
illi-sm-u lala kull' Isaan it is i~credible that you've 
never heard about the famous ... whose name is on 
everybody's lips. 
~.J ~ 
b.".- .1.).".-
~ooda <Engl> Inl I soda. 
fi~-~ooda 1-
kawya caustic soda. 2 karbunaat i~-~ooda sodium bicar-
bonate, baking-powder. 3 soda-water. 
514 
I.).J~ 
I.J""-
~uura In pI ~uwar/l picture, photograph. ~uwar 
zeet oil paintings. II f'Nuura walla I-kitaaba heads or 
tails? (when tossing a coin). 2 face card, court card. 
3 copy, duplicate. 4 manner, mode. mtj layzaa·ki 
tihmiliJur/-ik b~-~uura di I don't want you to neglect 
your work like this. 
1oS.J""-
~uuri ladjl pertaining to outward form, formal. 
figrafaat ~uriyya measures taken only for the sake of 
appearances. 
.J~ ~awwar Ivtl I to portray, represent, make man-
ifest. riI-masrayiyya bi-t~awwar iI-far;r' fil-raryaafthe 
play portrays poverty in the countryside. II huwwa ginn , 
~awwar he's a real demon, he's the Devil personified. 
- y-~awwar r;aliil in-nahar-da I'm going to kill someone 
today! 
2 to 
photograph, 
film. 
rit-tilivizyoon 
ya-y~awwar lamaliyyit iI-rinqaaz television will film 
the rescue operation. III~wiir iI-muslanadaal photo· 
copying. 3 {mus] to transpose. ~awwar in-narama di 
lala yar/, taani transpose this tune into another key. 
-vn I~wiir; avalpva mi~awwar. 
I.)!.""; la~wiira In 
pll~awirrl I{magic] effigy. 
2! =~uura. 
loS.)!.""; I~wiiri ladj *1 illustrative. musiiqa I~wiriyya 
music accompanying the action in a film or play, back-
ground music. 
.J~ m~awwirr In */1 photographer. 2 cameraman 
(in motion pictures, television). 
JI.J~ mi~awwaraali. 
m~awwaraali In 
pI -yya/ 
photographer. 
.J~I ril~awwar or 
r,~~awwar Ivil 1 to imagine. 
fil~awwar (or I~awwar) bar;a just imagine! b-aYibb-ik 
foor; ma lit,sawwari I love you more than you imagine. 
2 to be photographed. IIfilm' mil~awwar exposed film. 
- vn la~awwur; ava/iva mit~awwar . 
.J~ t~awwurr In pI -aatl fantasy, flight of fancy. 
rana larfa di mugarrad I~awwuraal rinnama xufl' 
barqu I know they were mere fantasies but I was still 
afraid. 
2.).J~ 
.J.,....JI 
r~-~uur Inl {lsi] the trumpet on which it is be-
lieved two blasts will be blown at the end of the world 
- the first to destroy all living creatures, the second to 
resurrect them for judgement. 
.J~.J~ 
.".-.".-
~aw~aw Ivil to cheep (of chicks). riwla t,saw.saw 
not a peep out of you! II (la~afiir) ba(n-i bi-I~aw~aw I'm 
very hungry. -vn ~aw~awa; ava m~aw~aw. 

t J ..,., 
t L.. ~aal (u, i) lviit'o become a bum, become a down-
and-out. fif-Jabaab ~aYliinfif-fawaaril wi-biYlaksu in-
naas the young men loaf about in the streets and pester 
people. -vn ~ayalaan. ~iyaala; ava ~aayil. 
SIS 
t-L.. ~aayil ladj * and pi ~uyyal. ~uyyaal. ~iyyal. 
~iyyaall good-for-nothing. da walad ~aayil he's a good-
for-nothing kid. 
t~ ~awwal Ivtl to sour, embitter or ruin the life of 
(s.o.). fil-ma~aayib i1-mitkarrara ~awwalit lift-i con-
stant misfortune has ruined my life. yaama ~awwal-ni 
z-zaman what a hard life I've had! -vn ta~wiil; ava/pva 
m~awwal· see further under t J ..,., r 
tJ..,., see bs..,.. and t.s..,., 
JJ..,., 
..;,.".., ~uuf In pi f/¥waaf! wool. lI~uuf laskari thick 
plain polished cotton for women's clothes. -yil:Jraq 
~uuf-ak damn you! 
i.i.".., ~uufa In pi -aatl I piece of woollen cloth. 2 a 
wool, a type of wool. 3 device used by women for 
artificial insemination. 
j.".., ~uufi ladj *1 Sufi, pertaining to Sufism. fit-turuq 
i~-~ufiyya the Sufi orders . 
..;,~ ~awwif Ivil to become mouldy (particularly of 
bread). -vn ta~wiif; ava mi~awwif. 
..;,;...z;1 
fit~awwif or fi~~awwif Ivil to become a Sufi. - vn 
t/¥awwuf; ava mit~awwif. 
..;,;...z; ta~awwuf Inl Sufism. 
..;,~ mit~awwif or mi~~·awwif In *1 Sufi. 
I JJ...r' 
J.".., ~0011 Icoll nl dung of a donkey, mule or horse. 
iJ.".., ~oola lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of dung (of a donk-
ey, mule or horse). 
~')l.. ~ulaaya = ~~ola. 
J~ ~awwil Ivil to defecate (of a donkey, mule or 
horse). -vn ta~wiil; ava mi~awwil. 
2(JJ...r'l 
J.".., ~0012 <T sol> In pi -aatl {obsolj master-
sergeant, sergeant-major. 
iJ.".., ~uula <It sagola> {nautj Inl signal halyard. 
r J...r' 
iL.. ~aam (u) I Ivil to observe a ritual fast; abstain from 
food, drink, smoking and sexual relations from first 
light to sunset (for Muslims); abstain from all foods 
derived from animals, with the occasional exception of 
fish (for Copts).llyi~uum (yi~uum) wi-yiftar lala b~ala 
{provj he fasts (for ages) and then breaks his fast on an 
onion (a comment on illogical behaviour, or an express.-
ion of sympathy at a disappointing outcome). -samak 
~aayim fish which has not eaten for some time before 
being caught and whose intestines are therefore clean. 
-lafara ~ayma game of cards or backgammon in which 
the losing player does not win a single point. 2 Ivtl to 
fast during (a certain period). ma-qdir-Ji y~uum 
ramaqaan kull-u he could not fast the whole month of 
Ramadan. -vn ~oom, ~iyaam; ava ~aayim. 
i""" ~oom Inl fast, abstention. min hina I-faaxir 
if-Jahri filmill:Jisaab-ak la/a ~-~oom from now on till 
the end of the month, tighten your belt. II fi~-~oom 
ik-kibiir {Chrj Lent . 
...,..".., ~oomi ladjl {Chrj without meat or the flesh of 
fish or poultry (of food). 
it".... ~iyaam. ~iyaam Inl fasting, abstention . 
...,.t".... ~iyaami. ~iyaami ladjl {Chrj not containing 
animal products, with the occasional exception of fish 
(of food prepared for consumption in a time of fast). 
iLa;1 
fit~aam or f~~aam Ivil passive of ~aam. -iva 
mit~aam. 
r ~ 
~awwim Ivtl to make (s.o.) fast. 
fil-l:Jim i 
~awwim-ha lan iz-zaad.sorrow made her lose the desire 
for food. -vn ta~wiim; ava mi$awwim. 
i;...z;1 
fit~awwim or fi~~awwim Ivil to be made to fast. 
- iva mit~awwim. 
t p..,., see t r ..,., 
I <.J .J ...r' 
.=,L.. ~aan (u) Ivtl to look after, preserve, protect. 
yi~uun larq i1-leela he protects the honour of the fami-
ly. filuus-ak fil-l:Jif;i wi~-~oon your money is in safe 
keeping. fiddi sirr-ak ii-iii y~uun-u {provj tell your sec-
ret (only) to him who will keep it. II riI-larq iI-m~uun 
or fif-Jaraf i1-ma~uun or fil-l:Jaram iI-m~uun {obsolj a 
formal term of reference to one's wife (now used 
jokingly). -vn ~iyaana. ~iyaana. ~oon; ava ~aayin, pva 
m~uun. 
;;.;t".... ~iyaana. ~iyaana Inl maintenance (of equipment 
etc.). 
,).".., ~·iwaan. ~uwaan In pi ~iwina. ~awawiinl tempor-
ary pavilion of appliqueed or patterned cloth set up for 
funeral receptions and other large gatherings . 
.=, La; I 
fit~aan or fi~~aan Ivil to be protected. - iva 
mit~aan . 
.:..La; I . ri~aan = fit~aan. - iva min~aan. 

2 ~ .J IJ'I' 
.:,I~ iawwaan (also lJagar iawwaan) lcoll oJ flint. 
~ 1 ~ iawwaana lunit oJ a flint, a piece of flint. 
JI~ iawwaani ladjl pertaining to flint. lJagar 
iawwaani flint. 
lIS .J IJ'I' 
It.,..J 1 rii-iooya (also fuul ii-iooya) <prob Engl> lcoll 
oJ soya beans. 
CIS IJ'I' 
c.L... iaalJ (i) Ivil to cry out, yell. rid-diik it-fQiiilJ 
fil-bee4.a YiiilJ [proy} (the eloquent cock crows while 
still in the egg) == talent shows itself early. kitiir 
ii-iiyaalJ fialiil ii-iuuf [proy} == empty vessels make the 
most sound. -vn iiyaalJ; ava iaayilJ. 
~ 
iayyalJ = iaalJ. -vn tQiyiilJ; ava miiayyalJ. 
~ IS IJ'I' 
.)L... iaad 2 (i) Ivtll to catch (a prey). tiigi fiiid-u Yiiid-
ak [proy} == biter bit. 2a to hunt. 2b to fish for (fish). 
- vn ieed; ava iaayid. 
~ 
ieed loJ 1 hunting. ieed ii-iafir falconry, hawking. 
2 fishing. markib ieed trawler. rii-ieed bii-iinnaara 
angling. fabaktt ieed fishing net. II rii-ieed fil-mayya 
I-likra fishing in troubled waters. 
o~ ieeda lIn pi -aatl prey. 2/adj invarl worth hav-
ing, desirable. zibuun ieeda a prize customer. bint' 
ieeda a girl who's a good catch, a good lay. 
.)t;... iayyaad, iayyaad In */1 hunter. 2 fisherman. 
~.)'r- iayyadiyya, iayadiyya loJ dish of fish baked with 
tomatoes and spices. 
o~ mQiyapa, 
mQiyada 
In 
pi mQiaayidl trap. 
mQiyadit firaan mousetrap. 
.)L..a;1 rifiaad or riiiaad Ivil to be caught (of a prey). 
II rinfa-Ua tifiaadfi-fialb-ak (may you) drop dead! -iva 
mifiaad. 
.)L...;\ rir/iaad = rifiaad. -iva mir/iaad. 
~I rifiayyid or riiiayyid Ivtl to be on the look-out 
for. bi-YUfilUd la/-fiahwa wi-yifiayyid it-raxbaar he sits 
in the cafe and picks up what news he can. -ava 
mifiayyid. 
.)Ua...1 riicaad = iaad 2• rit-taragma bi-Yiicaadu z-
zabaayin the tourist guides hunt down the customers. 
516 
mamnuul ii-iayyadiin Yiicaadu is-samak fil-man{ifia di 
fishermen are not allowed to fish in this area . 
IIbi-yiicaad fil-mayya I-likra he's fishing in troubled 
waters. -ava miitaad. 
J ~ IS IJ'I' 
~~ iaydala loJ pharmacy. kulliyyit ii-iayda!a the 
College of Pharmacy. 
J~ iaydali In pi iayadlal pharmacist. 
~~ iaydaliyyat In pi -aatl pharmacy, chemist's 
shop. 
I .) IS IJ'I' 
.JL... iaar (i) Ivili/preverbl to start to, begin to. iaaril 
in-naas tibUiii-lu bi-lJtiraam people began to regard him 
with respect. 2 to become. bald' ma tabbeetiirt"laliil 
after I fell down I became ill. iaar landi keefl became 
addicted. 
.r--o mQiiir In pi mQiaayirl end, lot, outcome. mt/iiir·u 
malruuf his fate is well known. 
r--" • .r--o misiir loJ eventual outcome. misiir-ak 
tikuun rani yoom min it-rayyaam you're bound to be 
rich one of these days. misir·ha titladdit it'll tum out aU 
right in the end. 
~ 
iayyar Ivtl to change (s.o. or s.th.) into. {Uuba 
fiayyar i-iabiyya karkuuba (the month of) Tuba (is so 
cold that it) turns a young girl into a hag. -ava miiayyar. 
;""1 rifiayyar or riiiayyar Ivil to be changed into. 
- iva mifiayyar. 
2 .) IS IJ'I' 
" 
iiir <Copt> 1 ladj invarl heavily salted. 2 Icoll nI 
small fish. 
0" iiira lunit n, pi -aatl a small fish.lIleen ii-iiira a 
mineral spring near the mosque of the Imam Shafi'i said 
to posses curative powers. 
IJ'I'ISIJ'I' 
~ 
iiii ladj invarl unripe, green (especially of 
dates) . 
.J. IS IJ'I' 
.l.L... iaat (i) Ivil to become watery (of food). dimea 
iayca thin gravy. -vn iayataan; ava iaayit . 
t IS IJ'I' see also t IS IJ" 
tL... i aar (i) Ivtl to draft (a document etc.). -vo 
iiyaara; ava iaayir. 

~ 
~iiyat In pI ~iyayl style, form. ~iiyit it-taeaaqud 
wording of the contract. 
t. L.;I fi~aay or f~~aay Ivil to be drafted (of a docu-
ment etc.). -iva mi~aay. 
.J<.$<JP 
JL., ~aaf (i) Ivil to become too ripe for use (of a crop). 
fiz-zarea ~aafit wi-hiyya eala fabuu-ha the crop got too 
ripe while it was standing. - ava ~aayif. 
....A.,...:> ~eef Inl summer. 
~ 
~eefi lad j *1 of the summer: malji¥iil ~efiyya sum-
mer crops . 
• :...... ~efiyya In pI -aatl a summer. 
~ 
m~yaf In pI m~aayifl summer resort. 
'"'"" ~ayyif Ivil to summer, aestivate. -vn t~yiif; ava 
m~ayyif· 
~ 
m~ayyif In *1 aestivator. 
517 
r <.$ <JP see r.J <JP : 
~iyaam, 
~iyaam, 
~iyaami, 
~iyaami 
I I.J <.$ <JP 
.:,.....all 
f~-~iin Iprop nl China. II f~-~iin if1aebiyya jocu-
lar form of reference to the populous Guiza quarter of 
bulaaq id-dakruur. 
~ 
~iiniJ I ladj *1 Chinese. - In/2 Ipl *1 a Chinese. 
3 Ino pll the Chinese language. 
~ 
~iini2 I ladj invarl made of bone china or porce-
lain. 2 In! bone china, porcelain. fantfaf min ~-~iini 
baed i yasiil-u {provJ (cleaner than china after washing) 
completely cleaned out (of money). 
1 I.J <.$ v4 see <.$':' <JP : ~aniyya, ~iniyya 
3 .:, <.$ <JP see I.:,.J <JP : ~iyaana 

~ I '"'"' 
~I.-. qaad Ifem n, pI -aatl fifteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. IIlurat iq-qaad the Arabic language. -also 
qah. 
I" I '"'"' 
... 1.-. qaama <It dama> I Inl 18 draughts, checkers. 
Ib Ipl -aatl square (in a checkered design). qumaaf 
qamaat checkered cloth. 2/adj invarl check, check-
ered, plaid. ril-qumaaf iq-qaama checkered cloth. 
oJ I '"'"' 
JI.-. qaam (also laym' qaani) Inl mutton, lamb. 
J ~ '"'"' 
J.:,!.;> qafiilf ladj pI qUfaa/l meagre. kimmiyyaat 
qafiila meagre quantities. 
-.JG. qafaala t Inl meagreness. 
j:\..a;1 fitqaaril or fiqqaaril/vil to grow smaller, dwin-
dle. -vn taqaaful; ava mitqaaftl. 
J~I fistaqfal Ivtl to consider mf'agre. -ava 
mistaqfal. 
I '":' '":' '"'"' 
~ 
qabb J (u/lvil to take a firm hold (of s.th.). qabb' 
fi-xnaaq(-u) to grab (s.o.) by the neck. -vn qababaan, 
qabb; ava qaabib; pva maqbuub. 
~ 
qabb 2 In pI qubuubl pair of buck teeth. 
..;.... qabba In pI qubabl 18 jaw. {aqm iq-qabba t-
taytamyya a set of lower dentures. II muftaay bi-qabba 
adjustable wrench. -qabba fil- farq' w-qabba f,s-sama 
(one Jaw resting on the ground and the other raised as 
high up as the sky) "" very greedily, as in gaay faatiy 
buqq-u qabba fI1-farq' w-qabba fis-sama he's coming 
expecting too much. Ib den~ure. 2 wooden door lock 
• 
(see PI.C, 1). IIqabba w-muftaay three-cornered tear 
(in cloth). 
";""'1 fitqabb or fiqqabb Ivil to be taken hold offirmly. 
- iva mitqabb. 
~I finqabb = fitqabb. -iva min4fJbb . 
..;.. qabbab J Ivtl to test (a water-melon) for ripeness 
by cutting out a rectangular segment. II w-allaahi 
l-aqabbab kirf-ak by God I'll cut you open! -vn taqbiib; 
avalpva miqabbab. 
';""1 fitqabbab or fiqqabbab Ivil to be tested for 
ripeness by having a rectangular segment cut out (of a 
water-melon). - iva mitqabbab. 
2 '":' '":' '"'"' 
..,..l..4 qabaab Inl fog, mist. 
"'! l..4 qabaaba lunit n, pI -aatl a patch of fog . 
..;.. qabbab 2 Ivil to become foggy, become ·misty. 
IImuxx-i qabbab my head became muzzy. -vn taqbiib; 
ava miqabbab. 
.).J '":' '":' '"'"' see .).J '":' '":' ~ 
..;. IS '":' '":' '"'"' 
~ 
qubbeef In pI qubbeefal one who spoils for a 
fight. 
C. '":' '"'"' see 2 C. '":' ~: qabay, 
qabya, 
fitqabay, 
finqabay 
I ..;. '":' '"'"' 
...,..,.... qabaf Inl weak-sightedness . 
...,..,....i faqbaf ladj, fern qabfa, pI qubfl {deris] 
weak-sighted. 
..;.,..;a; 1 fitqabaf or fiqqabaf Ivil to become weak-
sighted. -ava mllqlbij. 

~ 
1 fim/abaj = fitqabaj. - ava minqibif . 
.;.;..., qabbaj Ivil I to become weak-sighted. 2 to grope 
around blindly. - vn taqbiif; ava miqabbaf. 
2 ..; y ~ see ..; IS y Y ~ 
: qubbeej 
.1 Y ~ see .1 y ..1; : 
qab{, 
qaabi{, 
finqaba{, 
finqibaa{ 
ty~ 
c7" qabac (u) = qabbac· - vn, qabc , qabacaan; ava 
qaabic · 
c7" qabc In pI qubuca, qibaac, qubuucal hyena. 
II sabc i walla qabc (lion or hyena) was it a success or a 
failure? 
.....,.., qabca In pI -aatl jig fixture. 
~ 
qabbac Ivil to go to voracious excess. finta 
qabbact' fi/- fakl i kida leeh why have you finished off so 
much of the food? tuggaar is-SUUli is-sooda qabbacu 
fin-naas the black market dealers had the public at their 
mercy. - vn taqbiic; ava miqabbac. 
~I fitqabbac or fiqqabbac 
= 
qabbac . - ava 
mitqabbac· 
,jty~ 
~ 
qabcan Ivil to go to voracious excess. - vn 
qabcana; ava miqabcan. 
~I fitqabcan or fiqqabcan 
= qabcan. - ava 
mitqabcan. 
~~~ 
~ qagg (i) Ivil to raise a hue and cry. fif1aaric kull-u 
qagg' min camayl-u all the neighbourhood is up in arms 
over his behaviour. - vn qagagaan; ava qaagig. 
~ 
qagga Inl uproar, tumult. 
~ 
qagiig = qagga. 
J~~ 
;;""'1 fitqaggar or fiqqaggar Ivil to grumble, com-
plain. - ava mitqaggar. 
t~~ 
.;,~ qagcaan ladj *1 reclining, recumbent. qagcaan 
cala l-kanaba reclining on the sofa. 
~I fiq{agac r or fiqqagac r Ivil to lie down, re-
cline. - ava miq{igic. 
c.~c.~ 
~ 
qaljqalj Ivtl to break the bones of, beat up. 
qumt' min in-noom miqaljqalj I woke up (feeling) 
Sl9 
rt~ 
smashed. -vn qaljqalja; ava/pva miqaljqalj. 
~I 
fitqaljqalj or fiqqaljqalj Ivil to be beaten up. 
- iva mitqaljqalj. 
.J c.~ 
~ 
qulja, qalja In/ forenooll. 
~L;., qaljya In pI qawaalji/ suburb. 
';yoW:> qaljwiyya, qaljawiyya In pI -aat, qaljaawil 
I forenoon, time around ten o'clock in the morning. 
2 [rur] meal held on the morning of a feast day. 
~ 
qaljlja J Ivt/ [rur] to delay till the late morning. 
- vn taqljiyya; ava miqaljlji. 
~I fitqaljlja J or fiqqaljlja J Ivil [rur] to delay till 
late morning. finta tqaljljeet xaali; cala ma ~ljiit it was 
nearly noon by the time you woke up. - ava mitqaljlji. 
IISC.~ 
~ 
qalj,iyya In pI qaljaayal I sacrifice, sacrificial 
offering. ciid iq-qaljiyya [lsi] the Feast of the Sacrifice, 
Greater Bairam. 2 victim. 
~i faqlja: ciid i/- faqlja [lsi] the Feast of the Sacri-
fice, Greater Bairam. 
~ 
qaljlja 2 Ivil to make a sacrifice. fana mustacidd' 
faqaljlji b-Ijayaat-i calajanha I'm ready to lay down my 
life for her. - vn taqljiyya, taqljiya; ava miqaljlji. 
~ 
taqbiyya, 
taqljiya r In 
pI -aatl 
sacrifice. 
taqljiyyaat iqti~adiyya economic sacrifices. 
~I fitqaljlja 2 or fiqqaljlja 2 Ivil to be sacrificed. 
- iva mitqaljlji. 
2 IS C. ~ see .J C. ~ : qulja, qalja, qaljya, qaljlja J, 
fitqaljlja J 
tt~ 
. 
t?> qaxx r (u) Ivtl to pump. fi{-{urumba ma-bi-tquxx'1 
mayya kfaaya the pump doesn't pump enough water. 
- vn qaxx; ava qaaxix; pya maqxuux. 
~ 
miqaxxa r In pI -aatl pump. miqaxxit Ijariiq 
fire-extinguisher. 
~I fitqaxx or fiqqaxx Ivi/ to be pumped. - iva 
mitqaxx . 
~ 
1 finqaxx = fitqaxx. - iva minqaxx. 
('t~ 
~ 
qaxm ladj pI quxaam, qixaaml enormous, huge. 
cadad qaxm a huge number. 
~i faqxam lell morelmost enormous, huger/hugest. 
~ 
qaxxam 
Ivtl 
to 
cause 
to 
become 
huge. 

ma-tqaxxam-J il-masfala bif-Jak/' da don't exaggerate 
the matter like that! -vn tar[xiim; ava/pva mir[axxam. 
~I fitr[axxam or fir[qaxxam Ivil to become huge. 
-vn tar[axxum; ava mitr[axxam. 
~ 
taqaxxum T 10/ I [finan] inflation. 2 [path] 
disteasion. 
~I fistaqxam Ivtll to consider (too) huge. 2 to 
select 
for 
hugeness. 
-vn 
fistir[xaam; 
ava/pva 
mistar[xam. 
J J~ 
:w. r[idd I Iprepl against. fit-tafmiin r[idd i/-marar[ in-
surance against illness. qidd il-Ijariifi fire-proof. fana 
mif r[idd' (ard-u I've got nothing against firing him. 2 10/ 
opposite. filii yziid Ean Ijadd-u yinriilib li-qidd-u [prov] 
everything that goes to excess has the reverse of the 
desired effect. 
.:..~:w. r[iddiyyaat Ipl 0/ feud. 
;L.;. qadd Ivtl to oppose, be hostile to. -vn miqadiyya; 
ava mir[add, mur[aaddT. 
;\.4.. mur[aaddT 
ladjl 
anti-, 
counter-. 
huguum 
mur[aadd counter-attack. madfBEiyya mur[aadda li(-
(ayyaraat anti-aircraft artillery. muqaddaat Ijayawiyya 
anti-biotics. 
;w..1 fitr[add or fir[r[add lvil to be opposed. -iva 
mitr[add. 
YJ~ 
,-:,.;4 r[arab (a) Ivtll to hit, strike, beat. r[arabt-a-ha 
Ealfia I gave her a hiding. qarab ik-koora b-rigl-u he 
kicked the ball. fir[rab-u bil-ma(Wa knife him! Ilqarab 
il-gamuusa Eeen he put the evil eye on the buffalo. 
-r[arab-ni mafilab he played a dirty trick on me. -qarab 
id-dinya iarma he let the world go hang. - r[arab i/-
wadBE (or ir-raml) to divine by shells (or by sand). 
-r[arab fiuJaa( to take a piece (in a game). -r[arab bul(a 
to take a stroll. -qarab (Uub to make bricks. -qarab 
Eumla to mint coin. -yiqrab wi-ylaafii he's good at 
thrust and parry. -r[arab iuljubiyya to strike up a 
friendship. -r[arab ... wifJ to give ... a coat of paint. 
-r[arab(-u) Eala Eeen(-u) to knock (s.o. or s.th.) out of 
the running, beat (s.o. or s.th.) hollow. -r[arab masal to 
give an example. 2 to let loose, let off, fire off. r[arab 
talfia he fired a shot. r[arabu naar fil-hawa they fired 
into the air. r[arab id-dinya (abanga he let the world go 
hang. r[arab ;ar(a he let off a fart. r[arab,[j tilifoon he 
phoned me. r[arab ik-kllaks he sounded the hom. r[arab 
noobit ii-ialjayaan he sounded reveille. r[arab in-nuur 
ik-kibiir he flashed his headlights. r[arab-li salaam he 
saluted me. r[arabu Ijalafiiyya Ijawaleen il-beet they 
520 
threw a cordon around the house. r[arabt· Eeen-iJmaal 
wi-ymiin I cast glances to left' and right. II r[arab tafliisa 
to go bankrupt. -r[arab EaJara (or waaljid wi-talatiin) 
[coarse] to masturbate, toss off. 3 to produce, give off. 
gism-u qarab faljmar his body flushed. fif-Jatla qarabit 
gudur-ha the seedling took root. 4 to play (a musical 
instrument). bi-yir[rab il-kamanga he plays the violin. 
S to push in, insert. r[arab is-silk' fil-masuura he in-
serted the wire into the pipe. qarab il-filuus fi-geeb-u he 
pocketed the money. 6 to multiply. fir[rab fitneen fi-
tneen multiply two by two. 7 to stake (money, at cards). 
Ij-ar[rab xamsa saar I'll stake five piastres. 8 to chum, 
beat, mix. laban r[arb buttermilk. fir[rab ii-beer[ fi-
baEr[-u beat the eggs together! II fi/-wiski mar[ruub the 
whisky is adulterated. 9 to hull (rice). - IvillO to beat, 
make a beating. fialb,i b-yir[rab my heart is beating. 
fid-diik bi-yiqrab b-ginaaIJ-u the rooster beats his 
wings. lIr[arabt' fid-durg I rummaged in the drawer. 
- fid-dinya b-tiqrab wi-tifilib everything's topsy-turvy. 
11 to go off, fire. fil-madfaE r[arab the cannon went off. 
fig-garas r[arab the bell rang. fardit kawitf' r[arabit one 
tyre burst. damm-u r[arab (1) he had a (brain) haemor-
rhage. (2) he burst a blood vessel (with ange.r). 12 to 
take effect, have pronounced effect. fil-fazma r[arabit 
the crisis struck. Ija;;-u r[arab his luck came up. fakiid 
il- fis(Uwaana Ija-tir[rab the record will definitely be a 
hit. 13 to go bad, spoil (of food). fil-mangaaya qarabit 
fif-Jams the mango went bad in the sun. 14 to copulate 
(of a male). fit-toor Eaagiz Ean ir[-r[arb the bull is incap-
able of mating. -vn r[arb.; ava r[aarib, r[arbaan; pva 
mar[ruub. 
~.;4 r[arba In pI -aat, r[arabaatl I linst 0/ a stroke, a 
blow. r[arabaat il-fialb heartbeats. qarbit Jams sun-
stroke. r[arbit marma goal kick. lIr[arbit miEallim 
master-stroke. -r[arba f-fialb-ak ... drop dead! 2 [mus] 
beat. 3 [naut] grommet. 
'-:'.J~ maqruub ladj' * and pI maqariibl wretched, 
rotten. yifi(aE-ak ya mar[ruub blast you, you scoundrel! 
~.;4 r[ariiba In pI r[araayibl I tax. IrIllilaljit ir[-
r[araayib Internal Revenue Agency. 2 quantity of seven 
ardebs (used in measuring rice only). 
1.ft'...;4 r[ariibiT ladj */ pertaining to taxation. 
,-:,1::"" r[arraab In pI r[arariibl large marble used for 
shooting at smaller ones in the game of turungeela 
(q.v.). 
~ I::"" r[arraaba loll Ipl -aat/la instrument (usually a 
rolled handkerchief) used in administering the pre-
scribed strokes in children's games (e.g., the game of 
(aab (q.v.». Ib the person holding the r[arraaba in 
children's games. 2 (also r[arraabit il-wadBE) Ipl 

4,Ilrrabiinl woman who divines by shells. 
~,:;"" qarrabiyya In pI -aat/light quilted coverlet. 
"r'!:;"" qarriib In pI qarriibal skilful person (in, e.g., 
sports). 
..,... ~ 
maqrab In pI maqaaribl 18 bat. Ib racquet. 
Ie egg-whisk. Id fly-swatter. 2 rice-hulling. plant. 
..,... :,.:..;, finqarab 1'(iJ passive of qarab.1I ya rabb anqirib 
fi-Isaan-i (fin kunti b-akdib) Lord, may my tongue be 
clJt off if I am lying. -iva minqirib . 
..,...~, fitqarab or fiqqarab = finqarab. -iva mitqirib. 
..,...:;.... qarrab Ivtl I to mix together, blend. nibua 
i/-fasmanti fOOli ir-ramli wi-nqarrab-hum tan-naaflf 
we put the cement on top of the sand and blend them 
together while dry. 2 to tease (cotton). 3 to quilt. 4a to 
calculate. xud iI-bisba di qarrab-haa-li do this sum for 
me. 4b to consider, weigh (a problem). qarrabt 
iI-bikaaya f-muxx-i lalieet-u huwwa IIi ba-yixsar 
I thought over the matter carefully and found that he 
would be the one to lose. -vn taqriib; ava/pva miqarrab. 
"",,~, fitqarrab or fiqqarrab Ivil pasive of qarrab. 
-iva mitqarrab. 
..,...;w, qaarib I/vtl to compete with. fit-tacmagi 
bi-yqaarib iI-curjagi the vendor of tacmiyya vies with 
the pickle-seller. 2/vil to speculate. qaarib fil-burla 
qayyac filuus-u he lost his money speculating in the 
stock exchange. -vn miqarba; ava miqaarib. 
..,...;Woi" 
fitqaarib or fiqqaarib Ivill passive of qaarib. 
2 to beat one another. fil-ciyaal bi-titqaarib (maca 
bacc{) the kids are beating one another. -ava/iva 
mitqaarib. 
..,...;<oi faqrab Ivil to go on strike. -vn fiqraab; ava 
miqrib, muqrib . 
..,...';<o! fiqraab In pI -aat/l strike. camalna fiqraab we 
held a strike. 2 key lever of a piano. 
..,...)a.#' fiqtarab f or fiaarab I Ivil to become confused, 
become agitated, become turbulent. micdit-i qtarabit 
my stomach became upset. -vn fitq{iraab; ava miq{irib, 
muqtarib. 
C.J v" 
~;<o qariifJ 
In 
pI faqrifJal 
tomb, 
sepulchral 
monument. 
I .J .J v" 
:;.... qarr (u) Ivtl to damage, harm, injure. fin-nuur 
il-fafJmar ma-bi-yqurrifil-film red light does not dam-
age the film.llma-yqurr ifthat's fine! -vn qarar; ava 
qaarir; pva maqruur. 
;;<0 qarar In pI faqraarl harm, damage. 
~w, qaarr ladj ·1 harmful. 
521 
. 
;;<0 qurra In pI qaraayirl co-wife in a polygamous 
marriage. 
:;""i faqarr 1 leV morelmost harmful. 
;.;<0 qariir ladjl blind. 
:,...;, fitqarr or fiqqarr lvil to be damaged, be harmed, 
be injured. -iva mitqarr. 
:,..;, finqarr = fitqarr. -iva minqarr . 
;~, fitqarrar or fiqqarrar Ivil to complain of harm 
done to one. leeh ma tiqqarrarfi min qaraar if-Jirka 
why don't you complain about the company's decision . 
-vn taqarrur; ava mitqarrar, mutaqarrir f . 
:;""i faqarr2 = qarr. -vn fiqraar; ava muqirr. 
::,..... muqirr ladj ·1 harmful. 
2 .J.J v" 
;;J;<O qaruura f In pI -aatl need, necessity. biq-
qaruura of necessity. fiq-qaruura laha fabkaam {prov] 
necessity has its own laws. lIyiliqi qaruura to go to the 
lavatory. 
~;J;<O qaruuri ladj ·1 necessary. -/adverbiallyl 
qaruuri ba-ywaafili ca/a I-ka/aam da he'll definitely 
agree to this. 
J..;..' fiqtarr or fiaarr lvil to be compe!led. fiqtarrit 
il-maballaat di finnaha txaffaq fascar-ha these stores 
were forced to lower their prices. - vn fiq{iraar; ava 
miqtarr, muqtarr. 
~;I)a.#' fiq{iraari or fi{{iraari ladjl compulsory, 
forced. 
hubuut iq{iraari forced landing. ba/aat 
iq{irariyya emergency cases, emergencies. 
3 .J.J v" 
;:;.... qarra In pI -aatl udder. 
1J".Jv" 
..r;<O qiTS (also dirs) In pI quruus, faqraas/l molar . 
qirs il-calil wisdom tooth. II bi-xa/c (or bi-lia/c) iq-qirs 
with very great difficulty. - filii yaakul ea/a qirs-u yinfac 
.nafs-u {prov] self-reliance brings benefit (used as a 
familiar exhortation to eat). -min taUt iq-qiTS grudging-
Iy. -huwwa waxid-ha tafJt i qirs-u ... he has her under his 
thumb. 2 piece of cooking salt. II fil-malfJ i btaae 
il-fakl 8 eaali qirs the foodisa bit on the salty side. 3 cog 
(of a water-wheel, see PI.E, 9) . 
..r:;"" qarras I/vtl to set (s.o.'s) teeth on edge. - lvil 
2a to be set on edge (of the teeth). 2b to have one's 
teeth set on edge. 3 (also tarras) to be thrown out of 
gear (of cog-wheels). -vn taqriis; ava miqarras. 
IJ"!,;Woi' taqariis 
Ipl 
nI 
{geog] 
I topography. 
2 undulation. taqariis il-farq the undulations of the 
land. 

.J:, J '-"" 
~ 
~ t/arta In pI -aat, t/uratl a fart. - also ;arta. 
j,':"'" t/arrat Ivil to fart. tit/arrat fi-bal:Jri yismaluu-k 
fi-qibli (when you fart in Lower Egypt they hear you in 
Upper Egypt) = why don't you just shut up (in dismis-
sing a worthless remark). - also ;arrat. - ava mit/arrat. 
j, ~\ ritt/arrat or rit/t/arrat Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of t/arrat. baqa rana min illi yit/t/arrat liihum [coarse} = 
am I the type to be farted about with? -also rit;arrat. 
-vn tat/riit; iva mitt/arrat. 
ItJ'-"" 
t~ t/arl In pI t/uruull teat (of an udder). 
2tJ '-"" 
t.JL.;.. t/aaral Ivtl to be similar to, resemble. -vn 
mut/arla; ava mut/aaril. 
t.Jl..4. mut/aaril In! [gram} imperfect tense. 
t.J\.4;\ ritt/aaral or rit/t/aaral Ivil passive of t/aaral. 
- iva mitt/aaril. 
t'-""t'-"" 
F 
t/alt/al Ivtl to weaken. ri/-marat/ t/alt/al-u ill-
ness weakened him. - vn t/alt/ala; ava/pva mit/alt/al. 
~\ ritt/alt/al or rit/t/alt/al Ivil to be or become 
weakened. ritt/alt/alt' min ig-guul I became weak 
from hunger. - ava/iva mitt/alt/al. 
IJt'-"" 
.......... t/illf, t/uluf (a) Ivil to become weak, become 
feeble. -vn t/alf, t/UlfJ; ava t/alfaan. 
.......... t/alaf (i) Ivtl to weaken. xilfit iI-liyaal t/alafit-ni 
giving birth to children wore me out. -vn t/alafaan; ava 
t/ualif; pva mat/luuf. 
.......... t/alf Inl weakness. 
~l.i....;,. t/alfaan ladj *1 ailing, sickly. 
............. t/aliif ladj pI t/ulaaf, t/ulafal weak, feeble. 
t/aliif glddan Very Poor (university grade). Yligl 
lat/-t/aliif lamma yistalgib iI-qawi {prov] He punishes 
the weak that the strong may pay heed. ris-silaal:J 
fi-yadd it/-t/allif reer is-silaal:J fi-yadd iI-qawi {prov} a 
weapon in the hands of a weak man is not the same as it 
would be in the hands of a strong man. 
.......... i rat/laF lell morelmost weak or feeble. II rat/laf 
iI-rimaan the least required or expected, as in rat/laf 
ii-rimaan rinnak tikalli'r'-u fit-tilifoon the least you can 
do is phone him. 
522 
.......... i rat/laF Ivtl to weaken. -vn rit/laaf; ava mit/lif, 
mut/lif· 
~\ 
ristat/laf Ivtl 1 to consider (too) weak. 1 to 
select for weakness. - vn ristit/laaf; ava mistat/laf; pva 
mustat/laf· 
2Jt'-"" 
.......... t/ilf In pI rat/laafll double, twice as much. t/ilf 
it-takaliif double the cost. 1 rat/laaf Ipl n! ... times as 
much. talat rat/laaf three times as much. 
~L.;.. t/aalif Ivtll to double. 2 to multiply, increase. 
-vn tat/aaluf; ava mut/aalif. 
~l..4. mut/aalaf ladjl compound. kasr' mut/aalaf 
compound 
fracture. 
fayda 
mut/alfa compound 
interest. 
.:...lA&.l..4. mut/alfaat Ip~ nl repercussions, side-effects. 
qaraar luu mut/alfaat a decision having repercussions. 
mut/alfaat id-dawa the side-effects of the medicine. 
~ 
\.4;\ ritt/aalif or r/t/4aal~f Ivil I to double or be 
doubled. 2 to multiply or be multiplied, increase or be 
increased. ladad is-sukkaan it/t/aalif kitiir the popula-
tion has multiplied many times over. - ava/iva 
mitt/aalif· 
.J:,t'-"" 
.lu.# qarat (a) I Ivtl to press, compress. ri/-raaz 
lamma b-niqrat-u bi-yibrad gas cools when we com-
press it.l/vil to exert pressure. bi-yit/rat bi-ribhaam-u 
he presses with his thumb. t/aratna Galee Gala/Ban 
yidxul iI-imtil:Jaan we put pressure on him to take the 
exam. IIrubaat qaarit tourniquet. -vn qart, t/arataan; 
ava qaarit; pya mart/uut . 
.lu.# qart In pI t/uruutl pressure. qart iI-hawa air 
pressure. qart id-damm blood pressure. quruut 
siyasiyya political pressures. Ilqatr it/-t/art relief train. 
-tamrinaat qart press-ups. -lilndu q-qart he has high 
blood pressure. - riq-qart" lalee he is under pressure, 
as in riq-qartd lalee rinnu yiigi he is under pressure to 
come . 
~ 
qarta linst n, pI -aatl (a single) exertion of 
pressure. 
~\ ritt/arator riqt/aratlvi/l to be pressed, be com-
pressed. 1 (impersonal) passive of t/urat 2. rig-garl:J' 
mif laazim yitqirit lalee pressure should not be put on 
the wound. - iva mitqirit. 
~ 
\ rinqarat = ritqarat. - iva minqirit . 
oj t '-"" 
,:JW> t/aran r (a) Ivil to harbour ill feelings. -vn t/irn; 
ava qaarin. 

~ 
c{aYiina r In pI c{ayaayin, c{ayaafinl hatred, 
rancoul. 
t~"';~ 
t-IU c{ufdallcoll nI frog(s). 
~ c{ufdal bajari Ipl c{afaadil bajariyyal frogman. 
;"-IU c{ufdala In pI c{afaadill I lunit nl a frog. 
1 wooden block on which the lac;raba of a plough rests 
(see PI.D, 16). 
I.)"'; ~ 
.;:.. c{afar (u) Ivtl to braid, plait.jalri matifuurplaited 
hair. -vn c{afr, c{afaraan; ava c{aafir; pva matifuur. 
o~ c{ifiira In pI c{afaayirl I braid or plait of hair. 
1 collection of wires or leads (such as those leading 
from a car's distributor), wiring arrangement. 
;W c{a/farllvtll to braid, intertwine·llkabki mc{affar 
a kind of braided cake. 1 to splice. - vn tac{fiir; avalpva 
mic{affar. 
~I fitc{affar1or fic{c{affarl Ivi/l to be braided, be 
intertwined. 1 to be spliced. - iva mitc{affar. 
1.)"';~ 
P . .;:.. c{ufr, c{ifr In pI c{awaafirl I finger-nail, toe-
nail. fis-sagaayir 
bi-t~affar is-sinaan wic{-c{awaafir 
cigarettes yellow the teeth and the ·nails. II c{ufr-u b-
rac;abit-ha ... he's worth ten of her. - da yitmanna C{ufri 
min c{awafir-ha (1) he obeys her slightest whim. (2) he 
would very much like to marry her. - fiC{-C{ufri 
ma-yitlal-/ min iI-/abm {prov! (the nail does not part 
from the flesh) one always sticks to one's own. 1 c1aw-
shaped motif in tent appliqee work (see PI.H, 7). 
o,tJ; .~ c{afra In pI -aatl gouge. 
p . .;:.. c{affarz Ivtl to mark (a pack of cards). -vn 
tac{fiir; avalpva mic{affar. 
~I fitc{affarz or fic{c{affarz Ivil to be marked (of a 
pack of cards). - iva mitc{affar. 
(...;...; ~) 
~ 
c{affa l In pI c{ifaafl bank (of a river etc.). 
~ 
c{affa Z In pI -aat. c{ufafl group (usually as part of a 
procession). faatu laleena c{affa wara c{affa they passed 
by us group after group. -also taffa. 
~ 
c{affa J Inl double number (e.g., in dice or domi-
noes). -also taffa. 
tJ~ 
~ 
c{alal (i) Ivtl to undermine (particularly financial-
ly). baCia gneeh yic{lil-ak do you want us to believe that 
523 
one pound can ruin you? -vn c{alalaan; ava c{aalil; pva 
mac{luul· 
~ 
c{illln pI c{uluUl. fac{laal. c{ulula/l rib.ll/u c{illi 
fil-mawc{uul he's involved in the matter. fiksar 
liI-layyil c{ill i yitlal-Iu tneen {prov! (break a child's rib 
and two will appear) ... spare the rod and spoil the child. 
1 small sickle. 3 side (of a triangle, polygon etc.). 
~ 
c{aliil ladjl expert, well-informed. c{aliil fil-
iqt~aad an expert in economics. 
~I fitc{alal or fic{c{alal/vil to be undermined. -iva 
mitc{i1il· 
~ 
I finc{alal = fitc{alal. -iva minc{ilil. 
~ 
c{allal Ivtl to corrugate. lIc;atiifa mc{allala 
corduroy. -vn tac{liil; avalpva mic{allal. 
~I fitc{allal or fic{c{allal Ivil I to be or become 
corrugated. 1 to gain great knowledge, become well-
informed. -avaliva mitc{allal. 
"';J~ 
m..;. c{alfa In pI -aat, c{ulafl leaf (of a door, window 
etc.). -also darfa. 
IJJ~ 
j... c{all (i) I/vtl to lose (one's way). c{alleet tariic;-i 
fic{-c{alma I lost my way in the dark. llvil to sin, err. 
- vn c{alaal; ava c{aalil, c{aall. 
J)I..;. c{alaallnl misguidedness. 
J)I..;. c{alaali In pI -yyal cheat. 
j...i fac{all lell morelmost erroneous, falser/falsest. 
fasxam wi-fac{alli sabiil (prov! far worse, as in huwwa 
kaddaab wi- faxuu fasxam wi- fac{all i sabiil he is a liar 
and his brother is even worse. 
jL. c{allill Ivtl to mislead, lead (s.o.) astray. bac;aa-lik 
ta/at siniin bi-tc{allilii-ni you've been leading me up the 
garden path for three years now! -vn tac{liil; avalpva 
mic{allil. 
j.;a.1 fitc{allill or fic{c{allill Ivil to be misled, be led 
astray. - iva mitc{allil. 
1 J J . 
• 
.oJ#' 
Jl; .J.<. c{ilIlnl shade, shadow. ma-fii-f wala bittit c{ilI i 
yeer c{i1/ illi majyiin there's not a speck of shade except 
for the shadows of the passers-by. II yurzit iC{-4.ilI {need-
lew! shadow-stitch. -xayaal ic{-c{i1/ shadow play. -c{i1/ i 
raagil wa/a c{ilI ii-beet {prov! ... better to marry than to 
live alone. 
jl; ;illIn pI ;ilaalll {geom! tangent.lt (also c{ill) sha-
do~.lIxafiif i;-;ilI he has a cheerful disposition. 
~ 
c{ulleela In pI -aatl awning. 

'ill... mi~alla, ma~alla In pI -aatl I any device (such 
as a canopy) providing cover or shadow. ma~alla 
gawwiyyat air cover (operation). 1 parachute. 
JiJ; .j... qal1il2 lvil to provide shade. layziin 
famsiyya tqallil laleena we want a parasol to give us 
shade. -vn taqliil; ava miqallil. 
~ 
mu~allal: ril-mu~allal bil-l'amaama the One 
Shaded by the Cloud (epithet of the Prophet 
Muhammad). 
j.a;1 ritqallil2 or riqqallil2 Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of qallil2. ril-iiabr' ma-yguz-/' yitqallil lalee shade 
should not be cast over tombs. -iva mitqallil. 
~I rista~allf Ivil to seek shade. -ava misti~ill. 
1 r J """ 
~ .w... qalma In! darkness. iiaBEid ftq-qalma sit-
ting in the dark. -/adjectivallyl rid-dil'lya qalma it's 
dark. 
~ 
qilim ladjl I dark, dimly-lit. makaan qilim a 
gloomy place. II wi/f-u qilim he has an unpleasant face 
(or expression). 1 dull, stupid. muxx-u qilim he's 
dimwitted. 
~i raqlam lelll morelmost dark. 1 morelmost stu-
pid or dull. 
r~ 'r"j,j qalaam In! darkness. 
~ 
qallim, qallam I Ivtl to darken, make dark. 
qallimnaa-ha lalee we darkened his world for him. 
1 Ivil to become dark. rid-dinya qallimit it became 
dark. II rid-dinya qallimit fi-wi/f-i my world turned to 
a~hes. -vn taqliim; ava/pva miqallim, miqallam. 
~I ritqallim or riqqallim Ivil to be made dark. -iva 
mitqallim. 
2 r J """ 
w... qulma <T dolma> In! stuffed vegetables, specifi-
cally without meat. 
~ , r """ see ~'r ~ : qamaan I, qamangi 
~ r """ 
o.)l....;. qumaada, qamaada In pI -aat, -aatl bandage, 
dressing. 
~ 
qammad Ivtl to dress, bandage (wounds). -vn 
taqmiid; ava/pva miqammad. 
~I ritqammad or riqqammad Ivil to be dressed, be 
bandaged (of wounds). -iva mitqammad. 
1.) r """ 
~ 
qamarl or qumur (u) Ivil to shrivel. ril-bihiima 
qamarit the animal became emaciated. II ril-mara 
524 
qamarit the woman became too old for sex. -vn qamr, 
qumuur; ava qaamir, qamraan. 
~ 
qammar Ivtl to cause to dry up. -vn taqmiir; ava/ 
pva miqammar. 
;""'1 ritqammar or riqqammar Ivil passive of 
qammar. -iva mitqammar. 
2.) r """ 
~ 
qamar2 (u) Ivtl to harbour or intend (evil). 
bi-yuqmur-lak i/-/arr he harbours evil intentions to-
wards you. II waf wi/ id-dakar w-uqmur whisper to the 
large shell and ponder (instruction given in shell divina-
tion). -vn qamr; ava qaamir; pva maqmuur. 
~ 
qamiir In pI qamaayirl I conscience. 1 [gramj 
pronoun. 
~I ritqamar or riqqamar Ivil passive of qamar2. 
-iva mitqimir. 
~i raqmar = qamar2. -vn riqmaar; ava miqmir, 
muqmir; pva muqmar. 
3 
• 
.) r IJ'I 
,;I ........ miqmaart 
In 
pI maqamiirl race 
course. 
IIma-fladd'-/ yil'lib-u f-rayy miqmaar nobody can de-
feat him in any field. 
r r """ 
;..:.. qamm (u) Ivtl I to join, unite. qummi riglee-ki 
f-balq keep your legs together. qammit ibn-a-ha l-sidr-
a-ha she embraced her son. 1 to comprise, contain. 
rid-daftar bi-yqumm ' kull' rasmaa r il-muwa~~aftin the 
ledger contains all the employees' names. 3 to harvest. 
bBEd' ma yin/af il-barsiim niqumm-u bil-manaagil after 
the clover dries out, we harvest it with sickles. -vn 
qamm, qamamaan; ava qaamim; pva maqmuum. 
~ 
qamma In pI -aatr I instance noun of qamm. 
1 [gramj vowel sign for short u (in Arabic writing). 
;"':1 rinqamm Ivill to join, join oneself. rinqammeet 
lin-niqaaba I joined the union. 1 to be joined, be un-
ited. 3 to be comprised, be contained. 4 to be har-
vested. -vn rinqimaam; ava/iva minqamm. 
;"':1 ritqamm or riqqamm = rinqamm. -ava/iva 
mitqamm. 
1 ~ r """ 
~ 
qaman (a) Ivtll to guarantee, ensure. lalafaan 
niqman mafl~iil wafra so that we may ensure abundant 
crops. 1 to act as guarantor for. 
r~flaab-i fla-
yiqmanuu-ni my friends will act as my guarantors. 
mil'assil wi-qaamin ganna (undertaker and guarantor of 
heaven) one who can do the impossible. -vn qamaan; 
ava qaamin; pva maqmuun. 

.:,1....;. c{amaan z In pI -aatl guarantee, surety. c{amaan 
11,)..):1 see ..; I,) ..):I : c{ana 
fax~i personal guarantee. c{amaan i/-lfeer second-person 
guarantee. 
11 c{amaanan Ii- as a guarantee of. 
~I....;. c{amaana In pI -aatl I surety. lala c{amant-i on 
my guarantee, I guarantee it. 2 guarantee. l'is-saala 
gaaya wi-mlaaha c{-c{amaana the watch came from the 
factory with a guarantee (certificate) . 
.:ro w, c{aamin In "I guarantor, warrantor. c{aamin 
mitc{aamin [leg] co-signatory. 
~i !'ac{man lell saferlsafest, surerlsurest. 
~I l'itc{aman or l'ic{c{aman Ivil to be guaranteed. 
-iva mitc{imin . 
.:rot..... 1 !'itc{aamin or !'ic{c{aamin Ivill to unite, form a 
group, stand together for a common purpose. 2 to 
accept joint liability. c{aamin mitc{aamin [leg] co-
signatory. -iva mitc{aamin. 
.:rot..... tac{aaman t = !'itc{aamin. - vn tac{aamun; ava 
mutac{aamin. 
.:rot..... tac{aamun t Inll [comm] joint liability. 2 [pol] 
solidarity. !,it-tac{aamun i/- !'ifriiqi 1- !'asyawi Afro-Asian 
solidarity. 
21,) r ..):I 
~ 
c{imn or, more commonly, min c{imn Iprepl 
among, included in, along with. fii min c{imn i/-lidda 
btalit-humfakuufincluded in their equipment is a ham-
mer. laazim yikuun miljaddim c{imn i/-l'awraalj bitalt-u 
fihaadit i/-milaad he must present a birth certificate 
among his papers. 
~ 
c{imnif ladjl implicit. 
.:,"";'" mac{muun t Inll content. 2 purport, meaning. 
~ 
c{amman t Ivtl to include in. c{amman taljriir-u 
kull iqtirayaat-u he put all his suggestions into his re-
port. -vn tac{miin; ava/pva mic{amman. 
';"";1 !'itc{amman or l'ic{c{amman I Ivil to contain. 2 to 
be made to include. 3 to be included. -ava/iva 
mitc{amman. 
3 I,) r ..):I 
.,:....J~ c{umana, c{uminu <perh It> Inl Ilcolll domi-
no(es). 2 set of dominoes. 3 game of dominoes. 
~ 
c{ammin Ivil to play the winning piece in a game of 
dominoes. -vn tac{miin; ava mic{ammin. 
';"";1 !'itc{ammin or l'ic{c{ammin Ivil to be won (of a 
game of dominoes). ma-yitc{ammin-f w-landi kull 
iI-lji(al di the game can't possibly be over while I still 
have all these pieces! -iva mitc{ammin. 
4 I,) r..):l see I,) I r l : c{amaan J, c{amangi 
.!II,) ..):I 
~ 
c{ank InI poverty, hardship. 
I,) I,) ..):I 
~ 
c{ann (i) Ivil to be stingy. !,in-niil c{ann a laleehum 
the Nile withheld its bounty from them. -vn c{ann; ava 
c{aanin; pva mac{nuun. 
~ 
c{aniin ladjl small, scanty. -/adverbiallyl c{aniin 
(lamma) nifuuf-u we seldom see him. 
';""1 l'itc{ann or !'ic{c{ann Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
c{ann. !'id-dawa ma-yitc{ann i-J bii medicine is not to be 
denied to anyone. -iva mitc{ann. 
';""'1 !'inc{ann = l'itc{ann. -iva minc{ann. 
..; I,) ..):I 
~ 
c{ana J (i) /vtl to wear out, exhaust (particularly of 
love or passion). - vn c{ana; ava c{aani; pva mac{ni. 
~ 
c{ana Z Inll tormenting love. 2 offspring. l'ic{-c{ana 
lfaali people's children are precious to them. ya c{anaa-
ya [women] = my dear! ya c{anaa-ya lalafabaab-ak you 
poor child to die so young! 
~ 
1 l'inc{ana Ivil to be or become worn out, be or 
become exhausted. -ava/iva minc{ini. 
~i !'ac{na t = c{ana J. - ava muc{ni. 
~ 
muc{nif ladjl exhausting. lamal muc{ni exhaust-
ing work. 
...):1 
..... c{ah Ifem n, pI -aat/ fifteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also c{aad. 
l • ..):I 
~I l'ic{(ahadt or !'i{(ahad Ivtl to victimize, perse-
cute. -/the literary passive occursl humma b-yuc{(ahadu 
kida leeh why are they persecuted so? -vn l'ic{(ihaad; 
ava mic{{ahid; pva muc{(ahad. 
J • ..):I 
~ 
........ c{ahr In pI c{uhuur, c{uh_ura/ la back (of a 
human or animal). sibaayit ic{-c{ahr backstroke (in 
swimming). fac{ayuu-ni min wara c{ahr-i they spoke ill 
of me behind my back. II !'i{-(ift i nizi/ bi-c{ahr-u the child 
was born in a breech position. -Iu c{ahr he has backing, 
he has support. !'illi lu c{ahri ma-yinc{irib-Ji la/a ba{n-u 
[prov] one who is strongly backed will not be struck in 
the belly. -min c{ahr descended from, as in l'ibn-i min 
c{ahr-i my own son, the son of my loins, raagi! min c{ahr i 
raagi/ a real man. Ib back, reverse. c{ahr iI-kaff the 

back of the hand. eala tfahr iI-baab on the back of the 
door. fl-tfahr iI-mabna at the back of the building. 
IIb-ajimm d eala tfahr' riid-i balja (shall I smell (it) on 
the back of my hand, then?) "" do you expect the birds 
to tell me? - Ino pll 2 surface. eala tfahr iI-mayya on 
the surface of the water. eala tfahr iI-markib on board 
ship. II da-lli {Ilet' bii min tfahr id-dinya "" is this all 
I have to show from the world? 3 menses. ealeeha 
tfahr-a-ha she is menstruating. 
-*" ~ahr: ean ~ahr' qalb r (memorized) by heart. 
~-*" ,~-*", tfahriyya Inl I back part, back piece. 
2 working edge (of a grindstone). 
-*" ,-*"' tfuhr Inl I period extending from approx-
imately midday until the middle of the afternoon. 
I'arbaea baed itf-tfuhr four o'clock in the afternoon. 
warret-lu nuguum itf-tfuhr I made him see stars, I gave 
him a hard time. -/adverbiallyl rin-nahar-da tf-tfuhr 
today at noon. I'ls-saaea tneen itf-tfuhr two o'clock in 
the afternoon. 2 [lsi] midday prayer. 
~ -*" ,~-*"' tfuhriyya Inl period around midday. 
taeaala fitf-tfuhriyya come about noon. -/adverbiallyl 
xaragit itf-tfuhriyya w-lissa ma-rigell-j she went out 
around noon and hasn't come back yet. 
o,;'-fl; ,o,;~ tfihaara In/l top coat (of paint). 2 back 
part, back piece. 
.".,.J; ~ahiir Inl [soccer] back. 
.# ,~ tfahhar Ivtl to paint with a fmishing coat. 
rin-naljljaaj tfahhar be{aan ii-beet the painter applied a 
finishing coat to the walls of the house. -vn tatfhiir; 
avalpva mitfahhar. 
';""1 I'ittfahhar or I'itftfahhar Ivil to be painted with a 
finishing coat. - iva mlltfahhar. 
.# ~ahhar I Ivtl to endorse (a cheque by sigmng on the 
back). -vn ta~hiir; avalpva ml~ahhar. 
.AJo;1 
I'it~ahharl or I'l~~ahharllvi/tobeendorsed(ofa 
cheque, by being signed on the back). - iva mit~ahhar. 
I.S • ..;P 
~\j tfaaha Ivtl I to check (signatures, finger-prints 
etc.) for verifIcation. 2 to match, correspond with. 
fiI-loneen yitfaahu baetf the two colours match. - vn 
mitfahiyya, mutfahaah; avalpva mitfaahi. 
~ 
L;,.; 1 rittfaaha or I'itftfaaha Ivil I to be checked for 
verification. 2 to be matched. - iva mittfaahi. 
-.J..;P see I.S.J..;P: tfool', 'tfawl'i, ratfaal' 
..;P.J..;P 
• \j ~ tfawtfaal' Inl din, noise, clatter. 
526 
I.S .J ..;P 
..s~ c[awa (I) Ivil to gleam, shine, give off light. -vn 
c[aww, c[ayy; ava c[aawl. 
~ tfayy Inl hght. ya c[ayy' eeen-i affectionate form of 
address, particularly by a mother to her son. 
• ~ c[oo I' r In pI rac[waa 1'1 hght. c[oo I' {abiiel natural 
light. fi- rawwrl c[oor at first light. eala tfoo I' kalaam-ak 
in the light of what you say. l'ac[waal'iI-madima the city 
lights. II I'i,~-~oot wic[-c[ool' Son et Lumiere. 
.;~ c[awl'i ladjl pertaining to light. sana c[awl'iyya 
light year . 
• \jj I'ac[aarr Ivtl to light, illuminate. quyuud iI-
ric[aara lighting restrictions. -vn I'ic[aara; ava mUc[lil'; 
pva muc[aal'. 
t I.S ..;P 
t \j c[aae (i) Ivil to get lost, become lost. bumaar-I 
c[aayie my donkey is lost. I'ana baasis bitf-c[ayaae I feel 
lost. fiI-fl,lr~a c[aaeit ealayya the opportunity was lost to 
me. II ba-yc[iie da f-da one thing cancels the other out. 
-~aayie wi-tfaayie ne'er-do-well. -sabae 
~anaayie 
wil-baxt' tfaayie [prov] plenty of skill, but no luck! -vn 
c[ayaae r, c[ayaeaan; ava c[aayie. 
~\j tfaYea Inl name given to an object (such as a fruit 
stone) used in a variety of the children's game called 
{urra . 
~ 
c[ayyae Ivtl I to lose, cause to be lost. c[ayyae-II 
fluus kitiir he lost me a lot of money. 2 to dissipate, 
squander. c[ayyaet' I'amwaal-ak eala l-kukayiin you 
have squandered your money on cocaine. I'~baab-u 
c[ayyaeuu his friends made him go to waste. - vn tac[yiie; 
avalpva mic[ayyae . 
~I ritc[ayyae or I'ic[c[ayyae Ivil I to be lost. 2 to be 
squandered, be wasted. -iva muc[ayyae . 
I .J I.S ..;P 
J\j c[aaf (i) Ivtl to add. fiI-waabid yic[iif ljirf' kida 
ljirj' kida one adds a piastre here, and a piastre there. 
-/the literary passive imperfect form occurs in elevated 
speechl fiI-mawaadd illi b-tuc[aaf ealee the substances 
which are added to it. -vn c[ayafaan; ava c[aayif. 
JL;,.;I I'itc[aaf or ric[c[aaf Ivil to be added. -iva mitc[aaf. 
Jl.A; 1 I'intfaaf = ritc[aaf. -iva mintfaaf. 
J\jj rac[aafr 
= c[aaf. - vn I'ic[aafa; ava mic[iif, 
muc[iitr; pva muc[aaf. 
~ \j! ric[aafa 1 Ivnl II bil- I'ic[aafa fila zaaliH in addi-
tion to that. - In pI -aatl 2 addition. ril-x~uum wil-
ric[afaat deductions and additions. 3 additive. 4 [gram] 
genitive construction . 

jW:.! riqaafi ladj *1 additional, extra. mulJaqraat 
riqafiyya 
[acad] 
(1) extra-curricular 
lectures. 
(2) lectures over and above a faculty member's 
workload. 
l";..s~ 
~ 
qeef In pi qiyuuf, quyuuf/ guest. rooqil qiyuuf 
guest parlour. riq-qeef i1-magnuun yaakul wi-yquum 
[prov] the crazy (Le. ill-mannered) guest eats and 
leaves (straight away) . 
... ~ qiyaafa, qiyaafa Inl hospitality. baatu f-qiyaafit 
ibn-i they spent the night as guests of my son. 
;.&,...;... maqyafa, maqyafa In pi maqaayif/ I guest-
house. 2 [rur] large halI used by an extended family for 
gatherings and entertaining. 
........... muqiif In ·1 steward. 
.......... muqiifa, muqiifa In pi -aatl stewardess, hostess. 
muqiifa gawwiyya air hostess. 
....;.., qayyif Ivtl to entertain (s.o.) as a guest. -vn 
taqyiif; ava miqayyif. 
527 
""';""1 ritqayyif or riqqayyif Ivil to be entertained as a 
guest. - iva mitqayyif. 
~w:. qaayif Ivtl to entertain (s.o.) as a guest. -vn 
miqayfa; ava miqaayif. 
~ 
l.;a; 1 ritqaayif or ritf.tf.aayif Ivil to be entertained as a 
guest. - iva mittf.aayif. 
JL4:;...1 ristaqaaf Ivtl to have as a guest. rig-gamea 
mumkin tistiqiif-ak {uul i1-mudda the university may 
have you as a guest for the whole period. -vn ristitf.aafa; 
ava mistiqiif. 
I r..s~ 
jw:' tf.aam (iJ to treat unfairly. rinja-Ila z-zaman ma-
yqiim-ak [beggars, women in trad soc] may you never 
suffer any misfortune! - vn tf.ayamaan; ava tf.aayim. 
j\.;a;1 rinqaam Ivil to be treated unfairly. -iva 
mintf.aam . 
1 r ..s ~ see r I ~ : qaama 

Ij, 
11. taa Ifem nl sixteenth letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
- also taa 1', tah. 
- 1 j, 
• 11. taal'r Ifem n, pI -aatl sixteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also tlla, tah. 
ylj, 
..,.,11. taab I Inl game for two players with stone counters 
and four strips of palm branch, each strip having one 
green and one white side; the strips are thrown against a 
vertical surface and the various combinations of green 
and white govern the movement of the stones on a grid 
drawn in the dust. 
~ 11. taaba In pI -aatl I splint. 28 one of the strips of 
palm used in the game of taab (q. v.). 2b winning throw 
in the game of taab. ya taaba ya l'itneen luur {prov} 
(either a winning throw or one that affects the outcome 
neither way) = you may win and you can't lose. -tiigi 
mala I-lumy' tabaat {prov} (the! blind may make win-
ning throws) = lucky flukes may occur. 
t'.j, see also ttj, 
til. taax onomatopoeia for the sound ofa hit, blow, or 
shot = bang! whack! wham! IInizil fl(i) (aax to beat the 
daylights out of (s.o.). 
.J 1 j, 
.)11. taar I In pI -aatllarge tambourine without jingles. 
lila yin/al tabla wala taar = of no use whatsoever. 
-magnuuna w-massikuu-ha {aar {prov} (she's mad and 
they put a tambourine in her hand) = they made a bad' 
situation worse. 
i.)u. taara 
In 
pI -aatl 
I hoop, 
wheel. 
rit-taara 
bi-tdawwar is-sikkiina the' flywheel turns the blade. 
IItaara laruusi large tambourine without cymbals,"zaar 
word denoting the daft. 2 ring-shaped support for a pot 
(used on the burner of a cooking stove). 3 outer edge, 
rim . 
j 1 j, 
...iu. taaza <P tliza> ladj invarl fresh. samak {aaza 
fresh fish. l'axbaar {aaza fresh news. - also taaza . 
~Ij, 
4.. 11. {aasa (also (atl,l"a) In pI -aat/l shallow metal bowl. 
II taasit it-tarba or taasit iI-xac[c[a shallow metal bowl 
used in folk medicine; persons subjected to a fright 
drink specially treated water from it for seven days as a 
protection against sterility. 2 frying-pan. 3 hub-cap. 
4 top ofthe skull, poll.lIlammar it-taasa to get high, get 
loaded. 5 helmet. 6 saucer-shaped projection on the 
stem of a water-pipe (see PI.I, 3). 
viii 1 j, see ~ 1 j, : tatl,l"a 
j, 1 j, see ..s j, j, ! taata 
J 1 j, see I J.J j, and Z J.J ok : 
taac;, 
taac;a, 
taaqa, tac;iyya 
1.1 j, 
J. taaha Iprop nI male name, sometimes used in refer-
ence to the Prophet Muhammad . 
r..slj, 
f"!u. taayim (also haftaayim) <Engl time> Inl {sport} 
half (in a match). l'it-taayim iI- rawwalaa,ri the first half. 

I ":-' j,. see also I ":-' ..s j,. 
.,.J. cab linterj; contraction of {ayyib (q. v.)1 all right 
(then), very well (then), o.k. (then). miJba-tiggawwizii 
- cab ya sitt-i ba-nfuf-lik lfeer-u you won't marry him? 
very well, young lady, we'll find you someone else. {ab-
nilmil reeh dilwafjti O.K. -what do we do now? 
1 ":-' j,. see [. ":-' j,. : (Ubgi 
JI,,:-,j,. 
J~). {Ubaar In! kind of grey mullet (Mugil capito). 
.;, I ":-' j,. 
.:,l,l. {abaan <T taban> Inl collective noun of {abaana 
(q.v.). 
~l,l. {abaana lunit n, pi -aatl 1 any of a number of 
devices serving the purpose of containment (e.g., re-
taining cap for watch jewels, kerbstone, top of a wall, 
rear end of a rifle butt). 2 sheet of rolled-out dough. 
I ":-' ":-' j,. 
..;:J. (ibb In! medicine, medical science. rit-(ibb il-bitari 
veterinary medicine. kulliyyit it-(ibb the Faculty. of 
Medicine, the School of Medicine.lI(ibb ir-rukka quack 
medicine. 
~ 
(ibbi ladj *1 medical.jihaada (ibbiya medical cer-
tificate. fantit lawaazim (ibbiyya first aid kit. Ilfjucn i 
(ibbi cotton wool, absorbent cotton. - bafiiJ tibbi high-
grade hashish. 
~ (ibbiyyan ladvl medically . 
..,..,.,J. tabiib In pi ra{ibbal doctor, physician. tabiib 
rasnaan dentist. 
.;;J. {abbib I Ivt/ to nurse (a sick person). -vn ta{biib; 
ava/pva mitabbib. 
~I rittabbib I or rittabbib I Ivil to be nursed (of a 
sick person). -iva mit(abbib. 
1 ":-' ":-' j,. 
..;:J. tabb I (u) Ivil 1 to fall down, drop. saalit is-satb i 
ma tabb a laleehum when the roof fell in on them. 
ril-m~iiba tabbit lala dmaalf-U disaster befell him. 
fjalb-i tabb my heart sank.lltabbeet fi-riid-u I fell into 
his clutches. -tabb i fik-kalaam to commit oneself un-
wittingly. 2 to arrive unexpectedly, pay a surprise visit. 
tabb a laleena zuwwaar wi-bna xargiin visitors arrived 
suddenly when we were on the point of going out. 
ril-mufattiJ misiir-u ytubb a landukum one day the in-
spector will come to your place by surprise. tabba 
lalayya min lfeer malaad he dropped in unexpectedly 
without an appointment. II (wi-)hubb i tubb see hubb. 
529 
3 to tumble, fall over. tabbeet fil-imtibaan I flunked in 
the exam. IIlfirifj li-wdaan-u f-bubb-a-ha w-tabb he fell 
head over heels in love with her and was completely 
hooked. -ma-y{Ubb i rillaf-faa(ir = it happens only to 
the best (said to give consolation in misfortune). 4 to tip 
freely (of scales). xalli l-mizaan yi{Ubb let the scales tip 
freely, i.e. give a fair weight! II tabb i zayy ir-ratl he fell 
for·it like a fool. 5 to rise, become very strong (of wind 
on the Nile). ril-hawa taabib the wind is blowing hard. 
- Ivt/6 to allow (scales) to tip freely. {Ubb il-mizaan let 
the scales tip freely, i.e. give a fair weight! -vn {abb, 
tababaan; ava taabib; pva matbuub. 
~ 
tabb2 In! strong wind, gale (in the jargon of the 
Nile boatmen). 
~ 
{Ubb: (wi-)hubb i {Ubb see hubb. 
..;J.... matabb In pi -aatl 1 hole caused by deterioration 
of the road surface, pothole. IImatabbi hawaari air-
pocket. 2 pitfall, catch. ris-suraal da matabbi gaamid 
that's a very tricky question. 
~I rit(abb or rittabb Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
tabb I 1.IIma-yittabbi-flalayya biila I don't fall for any 
tricks - iva mittabb. 
~I rintabb = rit(abb. -iva mintabb. 
.;;J. [abbib 2 Ivt/ 1 = [abb I 4. 2 to cause to fall. 3 to 
cause to arrive unexpectedly. reeh illi tabbib-u laleena 
[IS-salaa-di what brought him to our place at this hour? 
-vn tatbiib; ava/pva mitabbib. 
~I rit[abbib 2 or rittabbib2 Ivil passive of tabbib. 
- iva mittabbib. 
3 ":-' ":-' j,. 
~ tabba <prob Ittappo> In pi -aat/l (sink) stopper, 
(drain) plug. tabbit markib boat bung. 2 screw-cap (on 
the side or underside of a pipe or tank). 
[. ":-' j,. 
~). {Ubgi 
<T 
tOPfu> 
In 
pi -yyal 
{obsol] 
artilleryman. 
t,,:-,j,. 
~ 
tabax (u) Ivtl 1 to cook (food). ba-tutbuxu reeh 
in-nahar-da what are you going to cook today? rilli 
ylaafji iii yutbux-lu leeh yibrafj ~awabl-u {prov] (why 
should one who finds someone to cook for him burn his 
fingers?) don't do your own dirty work if you can find 
someone to do it for you. 2 to prepare (a mixture, a 
substance) by heating. bi-nu[bux in-niJa we cook up the 
starch. 3 to cook up, hatch (a plot and the like). tabaxu 
l-mawc[uul wi-naffizit-u liihum they hatched up the 

pIal! and she carried it out for them. miin {abax i{-{abxa 
who engineered the plot? - Ivi/4 to prepare {abiix. -vn 
{abx, {abiix; ava {aabix; pva ma{buux. 
t.l> {abx I Inl any of a variety of plastic pastes used by 
artists and in industry. 2/adj invarl solid, compact. 
li'uweeja {abx a solid bracelet. 
4 
{abxa linst n, pI -aatl a (single) cooking. lI{abax 
{abxa he cooked up a plot. -xassar i{-{abxa lajaan 
bi-malliin filfil lprovl (he spoiled the cooking for (want 
of) a millime's worth of pepper) = he spoiled the ship 
for a ha 'porth of tar. 
~ 
{abiix Inl I cooking, cuisine. II rij-Jirka di 
jUli'/-a-ha {abiix this company is thoroughly corrupt. 
28 dish cooked with stock or sauce (as opposed to fried 
dishes or salads). 2b [rurl vegetables intended for 
cooking in stock or sauce. 
to. {abbaax In ·1 (male) cook, chef. lI{abbaax 
is-simm' bi-yduulj-u lprovl (one who cooks poison 
tastes it) everybody shares in the benefit of his actions. 
~ 
ma{bax In pI ma{aabixl kitchen. 
~I rit{abax or ri{{abax Ivil passive of {abax. -iva 
mit{ibix. 
~I rin{abax = rit{abax. -iva min{iblx. 
~ 
{abbax Ivt/l to prepare (a mixture, paste or the 
like) by cooking. 2 to cook up (a plot, trick etc.). -vn 
ta{biix; avalpva mi{abbax. 
~ 
ta{biixa In pI -aatl I mixture of different herbs 
or medicines prepared by cooking (in folk medicine). 
2 confusion, mess. 
~I ru{abbax or rl{{abbax Ivil passive of {abbax. - iva 
mit{abbax. 
1 J ":-' b see J I ":-' b : {ubaar 
1 J ":-' b see J.J ":-' b : {abuur . 
U"''':-'b 
W 
{ubsiyya In pI -aat, {abaasil [rurl large deep met-
al bowl. 
~,,:-,b 
..,..,J:. {abaj1 (u) I/vil to collide, .bump. riI-markib 
{abajit fir-r~iifthe ship collided with the pier. 2 Ivtl to 
hit, bump into. riI-larab,yya kaanit l:Ja-tu{buj-ak the car 
nearly hit you. -vn {abajaan, {abj; ava {aabij; pva 
ma{buuj. 
.;..J:. {abaj2/n pI {uhUjal labusl ugly mug. 
..,..,J:.i ra{baj ladj, 
fern 
{abja, 
pI {ubf! 
[derisl 
dim-sighted. 
530 
.;..10;1 rit{abajor ri{{abaj Ivil to be hit, be bumped into. 
- iva mit{ibij. 
..,:.,l.; 1 rin{abaj = rit{abaj. -iva min{ibij. 
~ 
{abbij Ivi/l to move about blindly. rin-nuur il{afa 
wil-waal:Jid balja maaji y{abbij the light went out and 
I groped about blindly. 2 to splash about in water. 
ritlallimt' ii-loom ta{biij I learnt swimming by 
splashing about in the water, I learnt to swim all by 
myself. -vn ta{biij; ava mi{abbif. 
.;J.;I rit{abbij or ri{{abbij Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
{abbij. di mayya yit{abbij fiiha is this the sort of water 
for splashing around in! - iva mit{abbij. 
J~,,:-,b 
.r--Wo {abajiir (also labajitr) Inl (blackboard) chalk. 
i.r--Wo {abajiira (also taba/iira) Inl stick or piece of 
chalk. 
~I.r--Wo {abajiraaya (also labajiraaya) = {abajiira. 
":-'b":-'b 
~ 
{ab{ab Ivil to give repeated pats (particularly of 
affection or consolation). {ab{abit lal-l:J~aan wi-ddil-Iu 
sukkar she patted the horse and gave it some sugar. 
ma-t{ab{abii-J lal-lagiina l:Ja-twassaxii-ha stop patting 
the piece of dough, you will make it all dirty. -vn 
{ab{aba; ava mi{ab{ab. 
..,..U:..J. {ub{aab: ga lala {-{ub{aab it came just as (and 
when) wanted, as in rij-Juli'la gat-Iu lala {-{Ub{aab the 
job just fell into his lap. 
~I rit{ab{ab Ivil (impersonal) passive of {ab{ab. 
rana mij laayiz yit{ab{ab lalayya {uul il-waljt I don't 
want to be patted (on the shoulder) all the time. -iva 
mit{ab{ab. 
t":-' b 
~ cabal (a) Ivtl I to print. {abl il-film printing the 
film. 2 to mark, impr~ss. riI-llija {abalit-u b-{abla 
wil:Jja life has stamped him with an ugly nature. - Ivil 
3 to leave an impression, leave a mark. riI-xitm' da mif 
mumkin yi{bal laj-Jaml this stamp will not make an 
impression on wax. -vn {abl, {abalaan; ava{aabil; pva 
ma{buul· 
~ {abl In pI ra{baal, {ibaall nature, character. {abl' 
damawi sanguine temperament. ri{-{abl' fii rallaab his 
nature gets the better of him. baliid i{-{abl lazy and 
indolent by nature. da {abl id-dinya that's the way 
things are. subl:Jaan allaah fi-labl-ak I can't make you 
out. II bi{-{abl of course, naturally . 
11 {ablan ladvl of course, naturally. ma-huwwa {ablan 
but of course. 

¥ 
(abla In pi -aatl I instance noun of tabl. 
2 printing, impression. 
fi(-tabla t-tanya fJa-ti(lal 
Cjurayyib the second impression (of the book) will be 
out soon. 3 stamp of character. fil-biifa (abalit-hum 
bi-(abla zifra the environment left an unpleasant mark 
on them. 
t-u, (aabil. (aabal Inl It Ipl (ibaall characteristic, fea-
ture, cast. fumiyya laha {aabal xafiif a song of light 
mood. wiff-a-ha luh {aabil mUlayyan her face has a 
particular look about it. 2 Ipl {awaabill 2a postage 
stamp. 2b impression, stamp. II {aabil iI-fJusn dimple in 
the chin. 
.:..I&.".la.. ma{bUlaat 
Ipl 
nl 
printed 
materials, 
publications. 
~ L,1 {ibaala Inl (art or trade of) printing. makanit 
{ibaala printing pr!'!ss. 
~ 
{abiila Inll fi{-{abiila nature, the natural world. 
gamaal i{-{abiila the beauty of nature. 2 natural state, 
normal condition. fi{-{a~/aCja baCjit i{-{abiila f-Jur/-i-na 
walla feeh has shoddiness become our norm of work, or 
what? II bi-{abiilit iI-fJaal normally, as a matter of 
course. -la/a {-{abiila in situ, as in muhandis il-misaafJa 
b-yi{lal yiftaral la{-{abiila the surveying engineer goes 
to work on the site, nirgal nifuuf il-fJikaaya la/a {abilit-
ha let's go back and examine the matter in context. 
3 physics. {abiila nawawiyya nuclear physics. - Ipl 
{abaayill 4 nature, character. fi{-{abiila 1- finsaniyya 
or {abiilit il- finsaan human nature. {abiilit if-Jurl the 
nature of the work. IIhuwwa {abilt-u ynaam badri it's 
his custom to go to bed early. 
~ 
{abiili I ladj */la natural, pertaining to nature. 
fJariir (abiili (pure) silk. fi/-luluum i{-{abiliyya the 
natural 
sciences. 
II {arfJa 
{abiili 
silk 
headveil. 
Ib physical. {ibb i {abiili physical medicine. lilaag 
{abiili physiotherapy. Ie natural, normal. ba(n-a-ha 
riglit lif-Jakl i{-rabiili her abdomen has returned to its 
normal size. wilaada {abiliyya normal childbirth. 
2 ladvl 2a of course, naturally. 2b by nature. 
ril-mawasiir il-fuxxaar {abiili lazla /il-kahraba pipes of 
faience are, by nature, non-conductors of electricity. 
to. {abbaal In *1 printer. 
~ 
{abbiil In pi {abbiilal printer. 
4o.,k. ma{bala In 
pi ma{aabill I printing press. 
ma{balit fistinsil mimeograph machine; 2 printing 
house, press. 
~ 
ma{balgi In pi -yyal printer. 
~I fit{abal or fi{(abal Ivil passive of {abal. -iva 
mit{ibil· 
~ 
I fin{abal = fit{abal. - vn fin{ibaal; iva min{ibil. 
531 
t Wa;1 fin{ibaal f Inl impression, notion, conception. 
~Wa;1 fin{ibaalaf lunit n, pi -aatl an impression, a 
notion, a conception. 
.,rWa;1 fin(ibaali ladjl impressionistic, intuitive, 
subjective. 
il. {abbal Ivtl I to cause to adapt or conform (to 
s.th.). {abbalti mraat-i Gala {abl-i I moulded my wife 
to my own nature. ta{biil i{-{abl synchronization of the 
drum rhythm (to the dance). 2 [tech] to temper, check 
and grind (the cutting parts of a lathe). -vn ta{biil; 
ava/pva mi{abbal. 
~I fit{abbal or fi{{abbal Ivil to be or become 
adapted. fi{{abbalti bil-beet xala~ I've finally got used 
to the house. fi{-{abl i yirlib it-ta{abbul [prov] nature is 
stronger than nurture. -vn ta{abbul; avaliva mit{abbal. 
-Jty.b 
l.i I,}-",J.. {Uburrafya <It> Inl topography. 
j I,}-",b {uburraafi lad jl topographical. 
Jy.b 
.:;,1. {abaCj J (u. aJ' llvtl to fold in two. {abaCj ir-ririif 
lag-gibna w-Cjalad yaakul fii he folded the loaf around 
the cheese and started eating it. - Ivil 2 to pierce the 
ears (for earrings)._ Cjulayyil illi b-yu{buCju I-banat-hum 
il- fayyam-di not many people nowadays have their 
daughters' ears pierced. 3 to take a constricting hold. 
{abaCjt i f-zoor-u I grabbed his throat. II nafas-i {aabiCj 
la/ayya I feel suffocated. - fil-buli~ {abaCj la/a I-beet 
the police closed in on the house. -vn {abCj, {abaCjaan; 
ava (aabiCj. 
~ 
{abCja In pi -aatl bunch, handful. {abCjit baCjduunis 
a bunch of parsley. 
J!u, {aabiCj I In pi (awaabiCj/I storey, floor. 2 [plumb] 
screw-cap on the bent sealing-pipe of a sink, bath or 
wash-basin.llxalli {-{aabiCj mastuur "" leave well alone, 
don't make a scandal. 3 chip used in games, such as 
backgammon or draughts. 4 round in games such as 
backgammon and dominoes. 
.:;,1. {ibCj: {ibCj iI- f~1 identical replica, exact copy. 
11 {ibqan Ii- f Iprepl according to. {ibqan Ii- fafJkaam 
il-qanuun according to the provisions of the law. 
.:;,1. {abaCj2/n pi {Ubaai:;, fa{baaCj/1 plate, dish. II {abaCj 
xu~ shallow basket of palm fronds. -tabaCj (aayir flying 
saucer. -{abaCj il-b~1a compass bowl. -{abaCj il-yoom 
today's special, dish of the day. -{abaCj ba/adi circular 
motif in tent applique work (see PI.H, 17). 2 clay 
pigeon. 
~ 
tabaCja In pi -aatl la layer. tafJtaha (abaCjit rami 
under it is a layer of sand. Ib coating. (abaCjit kuruum 

chrome plating. laleeha tabafia fusfuriyya la/aan 
tinawwar fil-Ieel it has a phosphorescent coating so it 
will glow at night. 1 class, level. fit-tabafia l-kadl:Ja the 
working class. 3 tone, register (in music or speech). 
~oot-u ylaali fit-tabafia l-lalya his voice rings in the high 
register. fil-mumassil yil:Jawwil it-tabafia I-ladiyya 
l-tabafia nfilaliyya the actor changes from normal pitch 
to a melodramatic pitch. 
;;)'b_ matbafiiyya/npl-aat/l plate rack. 1 type of flat 
basket. 3 any large kind of bowl. 
.;#1 fittabafi or fittabafi Ivill to apply, be relevant. 
fin-n~u~ iI-qanuniyya iii mumkin tiaibifi Galee the 
legal texts which can be applied to him. 1 to be con-
gruent. 3 passive of tabafi 1. - avaliva mit{ibifi. 
.;# 1 fintabafi = fittabafi. - avaliva min(ibifi. 
~ 
tabbafi Ivtlla to fold, fold up. tabbafiit iI-yasiil she 
folded up the laundry. tabbafi riid-u lal-fiirfhe closed 
his hand on the piastre. II (fi(iir) mitabbafi I rur} = (fi(iir) 
mifaltit (q.v.). Ib to crush, bend, dent, crumple. 
fil- futubiis tabbafi iI-larabiyya the bus crushed the car. 
la to fit together, synchronize, make congruent. 
muhandis ~-~oot tabbafi ~-~oot lala ~-~uura the sound 
engineer dubbed the sound-track onto the film. lb to 
apply, implement. tatbiifi lamali lit-tariifia di a practical 
application of this method. 3~ to compare. 4 {mus} to 
syncopate. 5 to work (two consecutive) shifts. tabbafi 
(iI-Ieel lan-nahaar) wi-xad iI-yoom kull-u noom he 
worked a double shift (night and day) and (then) took a 
whole day for sleeping. 6 to extend (a drawn game) by 
doubling the score at which the players aim in order to 
determine the winner. -vn tatbiifi; ava mitabbafi. 
.;,.,la; tatbiifi In pi -aatl repetition drill for reinforce-
ment (in education). 
;;i_.k tatbiifia, tatbiifia Ipl -aat, -aatl unit noun of 
tatbiifi· 
~ 
tatbiifii ladjl applied. fil-funuun it-tatbifiiyya the 
applied arts. 
~I fittabbafi or fittabbafi Ivil passive of tabbafi. - iva 
mittabbafi . 
~u. taabifi2 Ivtl I to match, compare. tabifit' fiiimit 
if-/iik bil-fatuura I checked the value of the cheque 
against the invoice. 1 to match with. fil-farditeen tabfiU 
balel the two (shoes) matched. fil-b~amaat mutabfia 
the finger-prints match (one another). -vn mitabfia, 
mU(abfia; ava mitaabifi' mutaabifi. 
~u.. mutabfia In pi -aatl I correspondence, con-
gruity. 1 comparison. 
~ \l.;1 fittaabifi or fittaabifi lvil to be matched, be com-
pared. -vn tataabUt;; iva mittaabifi. 
532 
J y.J. 
JJ. tabal (u) Ivtl to drum. tabal tabla w-zamar zamra 
(1) he got a lot of fuss and attention. (2) he had a single 
shot at it. -vn tabl. 
JJ. tabllnll (sound of) drumming·lltabl' w-muzmaar 
noisy celebration. - fism-u zayy it-tabl' flS-SUUfi he's 
very well-known. l/pl (Ubuul! (large) drum. zayy it-tabl 
- ~oot laali w-goof xaali {prov} (like a large drum, with 
much noise and an empty inside) ... empty vessels make 
the most sound. tabl' baladi (1) bass drum. (2) small 
traditional band basically consisting of one or more bass 
drum players and one or more muzmaar (q. v.) players; 
such bands play traditional tunes and perform on a 
variety of occasions such as circumcisions, pilgrims' 
return from Mecca, weddings etc. II bit-tabl il-baladi 
with the greatest difficulty, by means of the most ex-
treme measures, as in fitxall~na minnu bit-tabl il-
baladi we got rid of him only with the greatest difficulty, 
ma-b-y~l:Jaa-/ min in-noom filla bit-tabl il-baladi he 
wakes only with the greatest difficulty, ril-bUfiBG 
ma-b-titlal-/' wala bit-tabl iI-baladi the stains are im-
possible to remove. 
~ 
tabla In pi -aat, (Ubal! I clay or wooden funnel-
shaped drum with a head of goatskin or fishskin (see 
PI.J, 5), (also loosely) any kind of drum. tablit iI-widn 
eardrum. lila yinfBG tabla wala taar ... of no use what-
soever. 1 way of drumming, drum rhythm. tablit-u mif 
kiwayyisa his drumming isn't good. 3 padlock. 4 wattle 
(of a turkey). 
~ 
tabliyya In pi tabaalil 1 low round table made of 
rough wood (see PI.C, 2) used particularly in the ccun-
tryside and by the poor as a dining table. 1 any of a 
range of wooden platforms used for various purposes 
(e.g., platform on a crane, crow's-nest on a ship, board 
on which mortar is mixed). 3 trapdoor of a gallows. 
- Ino pI! 4 group con.struction workers who mix and 
carry mortar. 
~ 
tablagi In pl-yyal drummer. 
Jo. tabbaalln ·1 drummer. 
J.I.. tabbillvill to beat a drum, drum. fuylit-u finnu 
ytabbil (Uul in-nahaar his job is to beat the drum all day 
long. II tabbil fil-mittabbil== to break down open doors. 
1 to make propaganda. fii naas kida tabilit-hum 
yitabbilu lil-l:Jukkaam there are people who are inclined 
to drum up support for the rulers. -tabbil-li w-fana 
fazammar-lak {prov} (drum for me and I'll pipe for 
you) you scratch my back and I'll scratch yours. 3 to 
become infertile (of agricultural land, by reason of soil 
salination or the like). II fid-dinya tabbilit the whole 

thing came to nothing. -vn ta(biil; ava/pva mi(abbil. 
J')Q:... mi(abbilaati In pi -yya/l drummer. 2 flatterer. 
~I fit(abbil or fi((abbil/vil (impersonal) passive of 
(abbil. riI-lasaakir laazim yit(abbil laha la/aan tilraf 
timJi b-xa(Wa wabda there must be drumming for sol-
diers to be able to march in step. - iva mit(abbil. 
iJ.J J y.b see .J J y ..:;.. : (abloon 
liJy.b 
4;~U. (abuuna In pi -aat, (awabiinl {obsol] bakery. 
1 iJ y.b see iJ I y .b : (abaan, (abaana 
(iJY.b 
~ 
(abanga <T tabanca> In pi -aatl pistol, revolver. 
IItlaarib id-dinya (abanga he doesn't give a damn about 
anything. 
.J.J y.b 
.J~u. (abuur <T tabur> In pi (awabiir/l row, queue. 
bi-nr~~ il-lee/ (abuur we arrange the bread in a row. 
wiqift i fi(-(abuur sal teen I stood in the queue for two 
hours. yim/u (abuur wara baltl they walk in single file. 
ii(abuur iNUbb morning line-up of school-children. 
- fi(-(abuur il-xaamis the fifth column. 2 [mil] 28 drill. 
fartli (abuur parade ground. 2b column. 
lSy.b 
~ U. (abya <T tabya> In pi -aat, (awaabil 1 fortress, 
castle. 2 rook, castle (in chess). 3 {rur] heap of straw. 
iJ(.b 
~u. (aagin In pi (awaaginl 1 earthenware oven cas-
serole.ilraayil (aagin sitt-ak lala dmaay-ak leeh why are 
you so upset? 2 any of various oven-cooked dishes such 
as (aagin makaroona dish of baked pasta and meat, 
(aagin b~al dish of onions baked with meat and tomato 
sauce. 
11 (aagin il-qafa the cleft of the nape of the neck. 
fiddet-Iu lala (aagin qafaa I smacked him bang centre 
on the neck. 
.,}J... ma(guun ladj "I muffled (of sound).-
.;J. (aggin Ivil to speak harshly, lash out with one's 
tongue. -vn ta(giin; ava mi(aggin. 
~I fit(aggin or fi((aggin Ivi/(impersonal) passive of 
(aggin. fana mijmin ilti yit(aggin malaahum I'm not the 
type to be ordered about. -iva mit(aggin. 
533 
J(~ 
J\..J:, rubaal In pi -aatl {anat] spleen. 
yJ(~ 
~ 
rublub In pi (abaatibl moss, lichen. 
iJ(.b 
.:,..J. (aIJan (a) Ivtl to grind, mill. baldi ma nna//if 
id-dura ni(ban-ha dqiiq after we've dried the maize we 
grind it into flour. -vn (abn, (ibiin; ava (aabin; pva 
macbuun. 
~ 
(ibiin InJ grist. makanit (ot wabuur) £ibiin grist 
mill.llma-lJaddi1yilrafyiqtib waraa (l:Jiin {rur] no one 
can outwit him. 
4;.,...U. (afJuuna In pi -aat, (awal:Jiinl 1 grist mill. 
2 grinder. (abuunit bunn coffee g~inder. 3 windmill. 
~ 
£il:Jii"a InJ thin paste of crushed sesame seeds. 
sala(it £ibiina sauce or dip of sesame paste (with, e.g., 
garlic, le,!,on juice, parsley etc.).lIlamal il-bal:Jri (l:Jiina 
he painted a (misleadingly) rosy picture. 
~ 
£iIJiini ladjl 1 pertaining to sesame paste . 
IIl:Jalaawa £il:Jiniyya halva. 2 beige in colour. 
., t.::.1 (al:JIJaan In *1 miller. 
4it.::.1 (aIJl:Jaana In pi -aatl grinder. (aljbaanit filfil pep-
per mill. 
.rJ.... ma(l:Jan In pi ma(aabinl grist mill (especially for 
flour). 
~ 
ma(bana In pi ma(aal:Jinl hand-mill, grinder. 
ma(l:Janit bunn coffee grinder .lI/isaan-u zayy il-ma(l:Jana 
he never stops talking. 
~I fit(al:Jan or fi((al:Jan Ivil to be ground. - iva 
mit(il:Jin. 
.rJ..;1 fin(al:Jan = fit(al:Jan. -iva min£il:Jin. 
0>u. (aal:Jin Ivtl to struggle with. riI-markib fil-babr i 
bi-t(aabin il-moog the boat is at sea battling with the 
waves. -vn mi(abna; ava mi(aabin. 
0>\1.;1 fit(aal:Jin Ivil to struggle (with o.a.). fitcal:Jnu 
sawa they struggled against one another, they fought 
each other. -ava mit(aabin. 
t t.b see also t I .b 
~ (axx (u) Ivtl to strike or hit loudly. (axxeet-u qalam 
I gave him a resounding lilap. II (axx i (alqiteen he fired 
off two shots. _(axx i mijwaar to cover a long distance 
unwillingly (usually on {oot), as in riI- futubiis ma-gaa-/ 
fa-(axxeet il-mijwaar iii-beet the bus didn't corne so 
I had to walk all the way horne. -vn (axx, (axaxaan; ava 
(aaxix; pva ma{Xuux; 
;.iJ. (axxa linst n, pi -aatl a blow, a shot.ii(axxit/ams 
sunstroke. 

J:JI, 
534 
&1 fil(axx or fi[{axx Ivil passive of {axx. fit{axx' 
j ~.;.k see j I.S ~ J .k: {arabeeza, (arabiiza 
Gyareen fi-nafuux-u he got shot twice in the head. -iva 
mit{axx. 
&1 fin{axx = fit{axx. -iva min{axx. 
I.; .k 
0). {ura Iprop nl Tura, area a little to the south of 
el-Ma'adi known for its quarries and prison. 
2 J.k see C£.J.k: (urgi 
• J .k 
i). lara f (a) Ivil to occur unexpectedly. {ara f Gala 
baal-u (or Gala xa{r-u) it occurred to him, it crossed his 
mind. fikra {arfa a passing notion. faxxarit-u l:Jaala 
{arfa an unexpected situation has held him up. -vn 
{arafaan; ava {aarif. 
';)1 {aarif lIn pi {awaarifl emergency. ;arf' (aarif 
force majeure. 2 {awaarif Ipl nl state of emergency. 
tamwiin i{-{awaarif emergency rations. l:Jaalit (awaarif 
state of emergency. 
I~.;.k 
..,...). {arab J (i) Ivtl to affect pleasurably with song. 
IIsayyidit i{-{arab epithet of the singer Umm Kalthum. 
-vn {arab; ava (aarib. 
..,...). (arab Z Inll delight or pleasure derived from sing-
ing. 2 vocal entertainment. fahl i{-{arab skilled and 
popular professional singers. 
..,... ).; 1 fit{arab J or fi[{arab Z Ivil passive of {arab J. - iva 
mit{irib . 
..,...).i fa{rab r = (arab J. - vn fi{raab; ava mu(rib . 
..,...).. mu{rib In *1 professional singer. 
2~J.k 
..,...). {arab 3 (i) Ivtl to frighten. leeh kida {arabt il-Gayyil 
what did you frighten the child like that for? -vn 
{arabaan; ava (aarib; pva ma{ruub. 
~). {arba'/inst n, pi -aatl a fright. {aasit i(-{arba kind of 
bowl used in folk medicine cures (see (aasa). 
..,...).;1 fil(arab Z or fi[{arab 3 Ivil passive of (arab 3. - iva 
mll(irib . 
..,... ).; I fin{arab = fit{arab. - iva min(irib. 
3~J.k 
..,...). {arb (also kufta bi{-{arb) Inl minced meat patties 
wrapped in fat from the belly of an animal and grilled on 
skewers. 
~ ~ J.k see 
~ I.S ~ J .k : (urbiid 
I..;~.;.k 
~). (urubf Imasc and fern n, pi -aatl simpleton, 
dullard. 
2";~J.k 
.r Yo). {arbuuf <T tarbUJ from P> In pi {arabiifl 
1 tarbush (PI.F, 13). II {arbuuf il-malik {bot] glory tree 
(Cleradendron splendens). 2 any of a variety of devices 
used as caps or cappings, e.g., flame guide ring on a 
primus stove, dental crown or cap, restraining cap on 
the spindle of a spinning machine. 
~I). (arabiifi lIn pi -yyal maker and seller of tar-
bushes. 2 ladjl of the (red) colour of a tarbush. 
...rl ).; 1 fil(arbif or fi[{arbif Ivil {obsol] to become a 
tarbush wearer, become a white-collar worker. - iva 
mit{arbif· 
~ ~ .;.k see j I.S ~ J .k : {arabee;a 
J ~J.k 
-.;.r.1 {arbaCj Ivtl to smash, demolish. -vn {arbaCja; aval 
pva mi{arbaCj. 
~).;I fit{arbaCj or fi[{arbaCj Ivill to collapse.l:Ja-tfiili 
da yi[{arbaCj da if you take this away that will collapse . 
lamma ti[{arbaCj is-sama Gal-farl/. when the sky falls to 
the ground (i.e., never). 2 to be demolished. -avaliva 
mil(arbaCj . 
2 .:, ~ .;.k see .:, I.S ~ J .k : (urbiin 
-':'~J.k 
~). (arban{iyya In pi -aatl caterer's portable set of 
tea- and coffee-making 'equipment. 
~1.S~.;.k 
.J.o.!). {urbiid <Engl> In pi -aatl 1 torpedo. Ian!' 
(urbiid torpedo boat. 2 fire-cracker. 
jl.S~J.k 
oj.,! I). {arabeeza, {arabiiza (also (arabee;a, tarabee;a) 
<Gr trapezi> In pi -aatl table. {arabeezit it-tawalitt 
dressing table. (arabeezit is-sufra dining table. 
':'1.S~J.k 
~). {urbiin <Fr> In pi -aatl turbine. 

EJ~ 
.. 
~). (urgi In pI -yyal middle level officiant at zaar 
ceremonies. 
CJ~ 
t). (arab (a) Ivtl I to bear, yield (fruit, of a tree). 
rif-Jagara (arab it talat lamunaat the tree bore three 
lemons.fagarit law ma-ti(rab-J [prov] the 'if' tree bears 
no fruit. - Ivil 2i to pose, present. ril-rasrila 1-
ma(ruuba the questions posed. 3 to cast (a net). 
4 [math] to subtract. -vn(arb, (arabaan; ava(aarib; pva 
ma(ruub· 
). (arb Inl I Ivnl II (rarcf. i) (arb il-babr alluvial land. 
flnl pollen (of a male palm). 3 ri(-(arb [Iud] the 
Midrash. 
~). (arb a Inl I linst n, pI -aatl a (single) yield (of a. 
tree, net cast etc.). 2 Ipl (urabl covering or veil for a 
woman's head, usually a black rectangular piece of 
cloth (see PI.F, 10). II w-allaahi b-alabbis-ak (arba (by 
God, I'll make you wear a veil) "" I'll beat you into 
submission (insult or threat to a man). 
~). (arbiyya In pI -aatl lone season's yield (of a 
tree). 2 [math] subtraction sum. 
~). (ariiba In pI (araayibl I (manual) work, assign-
ment, task. fuyli bi(-(ariiba piece-work. 2 [slang] a 
thrashing, a hiding. 
~I) (arraaba In pI -aatl cast net (for fishing). 
c.)... ma(rab In pI ma(aaribl I place. ma(rab il-qu(n i 
nizra{ bubuub il-fuul we sow broad beans where the 
cotton was. bu((i nafs-ik ma(rab-i put Y2urself in my. 
place. kull" baaga ma(rab-ha everything is in order. 
bUlli rigl-ak ma(rab rigl is-sa{iid tis{ad [pro v] follow in 
the footsteps of the lucky man and you will be lucky. 
Ilma-tifrab/' ma(rab badd don't drink after someone 
else (from the same glass). 2 place, space. basab 
il-ma(aarib il-facf.ya fis·siima according to the (number 
of) empty places in the cinema. gat il-baziina tifrab 
ma-Iaqit-Ji laha ma(rab [prov] "" one who is born to 
suffer will find no opportunity to rejoice. 3~ room. 
faqqa b-rarba{ ma(aarib a four-room flat. 
11 ma(rab ma Iconjl wherever. ma(rab ma truub rana 
waraak wherever you go I will follow. 
~)... ma(raba In pI ma(aaribl bat-shaped implement 
used in the preparation of flat bread (see PI.B, 4). 
c.).; 1 rin(arab t Ivil passive of (arab. - vn rin(iraab; ava 
min(irib· 
c.) (arrab Ivtl I to use a ma(raba on (a piece of 
dough, to flatten it). 2 to fertilize (a female palm). -vn 
ta(riib; avalpva mi(arrab. 
S3S 
~)..; ta{riiba In pI -aatl covering or veil for a 
woman's head = (arba (q.v.). 
c.); 1 rit{arrdb or ri((arrab Ivil passive of (arrab. - iva 
mit(arrab· 
~J ~ 
~). {arad (u) Ivtl I to chase away, drive away. tu{rud 
il-biddaaya {an il-katakiit she drives the kite away from 
the chicks. 28 to evict, expel. rawwil ma tkawwimit 
il- rugra {aleehum {aradt-u-hum as soon as their rent 
(arrears) accumulated, I evicted them. ritfacf.cf.al min 
yeer ma{ruud please get out before you are thrown out! 
2b to dismiss, fire. taw~iyya b-{ard-u a recommendation 
for his dismissal. - Ivil 3a to recede, fall in level (of 
water).3b to flow quickly (ofa river or sea). 4 to swarm 
(of bees). - vn lard, {aradaan; ava (aarid; pva ma{ruud. 
~). lard In pI (uruudl package, parcel. 
~I) {arraad In pI -aatl I ]naut] cruiser. 2 [agric] 
attachment (usually of wood) which can be mounted 
above ·a ploughshare in order to widen the furrow. 
~ )..; 1 rit(arad or ri((arad Ivil passive of {arad. -iva 
mit(irid. 
~ )..; 1 rin(arad = rit(arad. - iva min(irid. 
~)J:, (aarid Ivtl to chase, pursue. -vn mu{arda f; ava 
mi(aarid, mu(aaridf; pva mu(aaradf. 
~)Ua;1 rit{aarid or ri((aarid Ivil to be chased, be pur-
sued. - iva mit{aarid. 
I JJ~ 
0) (urra / Inl I knotted handkerchief. 2 children's 
game for two to four players in which the rules of the 
players are determined by lot (toss-up, counting-out 
etc.); the winner sentences the loser to a specific num-
ber of lashes with a rolled and knotted handkerchief, 
and designates a player to execute the sentence. 
3 bundle (of hides, in the jargon of tanners). 
)) (arrar Ivtl to roll (hides) into a bundle. -ava/pva 
mi{arrar. 
));1 rit{arrar or ri((arrar Ivil to be rolled into a bundle 
(of hides). - iva mit(arrar. 
z JJ ~ 
0) (urra 2 <T tura> In pI (urarl I monogram of the 
Ottoman Sultan. 2 calligraphically intricate monogram 
in the style of that of the Ottoman Sultans. - also (UYra. 
jJ~ 
jI). {iraaz In pI {uruuzl I type, kind, class. min 

it-(iraaz il-rawwal first class. 2 style. (iraaz marrabi 
North African style. 
j). tarraz /vt/ to embroider. -vn tatriiz; ava/pva 
mitarraz. 
j);1 rittarraz or riaarraz Ivil to be embroidered. -iva 
mittarraz. 
1J..;j, 
..;.> tarajl (u) Ivt/I to vomit.lltaarifid-damm giving 
one's utmost, as in Ijarim-ni mil-mukafra maca rinn' 
rana /Ii taarifid-damm' fij-Jurl he's refusing me a bonus 
even though I've been working myself to death. 
2 {abusJ to eat. quum rutruj cajaan nirsil it-{Ubaaq 
come on, gobble away so we can wash the dishes! - vn 
tarf, tarajaan, (iraaj, {Uraaj; ava taarif; pva matruuJ. 
..;. > tarj ladvl without ado, immediately. ga min 
barra daxal cal-rak/' tarfhe came inside and before you 
could say Jack Robinson he was at his food. 
..;.1> (Uraap, (iraajl Inl vomit. 
..;. )a; 1 rintarap /vil passive of taraj I. - iva min(irif. 
..;.)a;1 rittarajl = rintarajl. - iva mit(irif· 
..;.). tarraj Ivt/ to cause to vomit. II tarrajuu-ni d-damm 
they gave me a helI of a time! -vn tatriif; ava mitarraJ. 
..;.);1 rit(arraj or riaarraj Ivil passive of tarraJ. - iva 
mittarraJ. 
1J..;j, 
..;. > (irif or {Uruj (a) Ivil to become deaf. rana Ijaasis 
bi-tarajaan fi-widn-i I feel my ear going deaf. -vn 
tarajaan; ava taarif . 
..;. > taraj2 (i) Ivt/ to deafen. tarajt-i-ni bi-gciir-ak 
you've deafened me with your belIowing. -ava taarif. 
..;. > taraj3 In! deafness. 
..;. >i ratrajladj, femtarfa, pI {Urfl deaf. zayy il-ratraj 
fiz-zafJa (like a deaf man at a wedding celebration) 
completely unaware of what is going on. II rigl-u tqiila 
w-tarja he has a deadly kick (ofa man). - riid-utarja he 
packs a punch . 
..;.1> (iraaj2, {Uraaj2 In! deafness. ma-fii-j Ijaaga 
b-balaaj rilla I-cama wit-(Uraaj {prov] nothing is free 
except blindness and deafness. 
..;.)a;1 rittaraj2 or riaaraj2 Ivil to be deafened. -iva 
mit(irif· 
..;. )a; 1 rintaraj2 = (irif· -ava min(irif· 
j. >1 rijrajj = (iTif. - ava mittrajJ. 
3J..;j, 
..;.> taraj4 (u) Ivt/ to knock down. tarafit-ni cal-rarq 
she knocked me to the ground. -vn taraf, tarajaan; ava 
taarif; pva matruuJ. 
536 
..;.)a;1 rit(araj3 or riaaraj3 Ivil to be knocked down. 
- iva mit(irif. 
..;. )a; 1 rintaraj3 = rittaraj3. -iva min(irif· 
4J..;j, 
..r-> (UrJi <P turshi> IcolI n! pickle(s). mayyit {Urfi 
pickle liquid (drunk by some as an appetizer). 
~ 
> {Urjagi In pI -yyal pickle maker and vendor . 
5J..;..1. 
..;. > {Urf <Eng1> In! torch, flashlight. 
6 J. .;.1 see J....s.; .,1, : tireeja, {Ureeja 
J J..; .,1, 
..;.:. > tarjaq I Ivt/ to explode, burst. tarjaqit-Iu 1-
bal/oona she burst his balIoon. 2 Ivil to explode, burst. 
II ril-waaljid Ija-y(arjaq one could go crazy (with frustra-
tion), it's enough to drive one crazy. -vn (arjaqa; ava/ 
pva mi(arjaq . 
..;.:.)a;1 rit(arfaq or rittarjaq Ivil to be exploded, be 
burst. -vn ti(arjiiq; iva mit(arfaq. 
.,1,.;.,1, 
4l.,;.,k '';;;,;.i (ur(a <It tona> In pI -aat, turatl large 
fancy cake. - also turta . 
1.;.,1,.;.,1, 
» (ar(arl Ivtl I to raise (e.g., ears, head, finger). 
saacit majaafil-rak/' tartar widaan-u as soon as he saw 
the food he pricked up his ears. 2 to put to the trouble 
of coming from a distance. reeh ilti tar(ar-ak is-saaca di 
what made you take the trouble of coming at this hour? 
3 to cut the blossom top off (maize stalks after pollina-
tion). -also (ar(af. -vn (ar(ara; ava/pva mitar(ar. 
,;.,k> (ar{Uur I In pI (ara(iirl conical cap such as is 
worn by a clown. IIhuwwa faahim rinni Ij-axaaf min 
tar{Uur-u == does he imagine I will be awed by his pom-
posity? - (zayy) it-(ar(uur having no say in one's own 
affairs. 2/adj invarl good-for-nothing, useless. da 
raagi! (ar{Uur ma-tqayyac-J' waqt-ak macaa the man's a 
dead loss; don't waste your time on him! 
.,;.,k> (ar(Uura In pI tara(iirl blossom end (of a maize 
stalk). - also (ar{Uufa. 
1.;.,1,.;.,1, 
> > (ar(ar2 Ivil {slang] to urinate from a standing 
position (of a man). -vn (ar(ara; ava mitartar. 
>)a;1 rittartar or (iaartar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 

537 
J.J'» 
(ar(ar2. baqa da makaan yit(ar(ar fii is this a place to piss 
min (araf-ak does the young lady have your recom-
in?! -iva mit(ar(ar. 
mendation? - rixlaa r (or xuluww i) (araf official written 
..;. .k J .k 
.;J.). (ar(aj Ivtl I to splash, spatter. 2 {constrJ to 
roughcast (a wall). -vn (ar(aja; ava/pva mi(ar(aj. 
4.:.1). (ar(aja In pl. (ara(iifl a splash. II (ara[iif kalaam 
rumours, bits of (incomplete and uncertain) informa-
tion. fii (ara[iif kalaam rinnak &a-titraqqa there are 
rumours that you will be promoted . 
.;J.)";I rit(ar(ajor ri{(ar(aj Ivil to be splashed, be spat-
teredo -iva mit(ar(aj. 
"';.kJ.k 
....a.). (ar(af Ivtl to cut the blossom end off (maize 
stalks after pollination). - also (ar(ar. -vn (ar(afa; ava/ 
pva mi(ar(af. 
~).). (ar(Uufa In pI (ara[iifl I end, tip. lala (ara[iif 
iNawaabil on tiptoe. II b~~-i-li min (ara[iif manaxiir-u 
he looked down his nose at me. 2 (also tantuufa) small 
(redundant) projection. 3 (also (ar(Uura) blossom end 
(of a maize stalk). 
....a.)..; 1 rit(ar(af or ri{(ar(af Ivill to project, hang out. 
ril-mandiil mit(ar(af min geeb-ak the handkerchief is 
sticking out of your pocket. 2 to stand or be at the 
extreme end. tilaaqi bet-hum mit(ar(af barra l-balad you 
find their house there at the outskirts of the village. 
3 passive of (ar(af. - ava/iva mit(ar(af. 
J.kJ.k 
Jl.). (ar(aq Ivt! to prick up (one's ears).. widaan-u 
m(ar(aqa he's all ears. -vn (ar(aqa; ava/pva mi(ar(aq. 
Jl.)";1 rit(ar(aq or ri{(ar(aq Ivil to be pricked up (of 
ears). - iva mit(ar(aq. 
I"';J.k 
J). (arf, (araF In pI (uruuf, ra(raafl tip, end, extrem-
ity (particularly of the body). (arf iI-manaxiir tip of the 
nose. rik-kilma kaanit lala (art lsaan-i the word was on 
the tip of my tongue.llzalal-u lala (art manax!ir-u he's 
extremely short-tempered. -&add i das-lak lala (arfhas 
anyone done something to upset you? 
JU)' (arfaani ladj "I extreme, furthermost. cayziin 
niqlud ta&t if-jamsiyya (-(arfaniyya we want to sit under 
the sunshade that is at the very end. 
J). (araf2 In pI ra(raaf! party (to a dispute, contract 
etc.). &ubb i min (arafwaa&id one-sided love. II min (araf 
(1) on the part of, as in riblat &add i min taraf-i yjuuf 
il-caruusa send someone on my part to see the bride. 
(2) with the recommendation of, as in hiyya l-raanisa 
statement of clearance of an employee's responsibility 
to a former employer, certificate of discharge. 
JJ.; 1 rit(arraf or ri((arraf Ivill to be situated at the far 
end or extreme edge (of s:th.). 2 to go to extremes. 
riwla tit(arraftiigi hina don't you ever dare come here! 
-vn ta(arruft; ava mit(arraf, muta(arriJf . 
JJ.; ta(arruJf In! extremism. 
J)w muta(arriJf lIn "I extremist. 2 ladj "I extreme. 
yasaari muta(arrif an extreme leftist. 
2"';J.k 
~). (ariif ladj pI (Uraaf, (Urafal delightful, uncom-
monly pleasant. 
J).i ra(raf lell morelmost delightful. 
3"';J.k 
J). (araf3 (i, u) I Ivil to blink. rit-tilbaan ma-yi(rif-ji 
b-leen-u lajaan ma-landuu-j gufuun a snake cannot 
blink its ~yes because it has no eyelids.llxallaa-ni baqeet 
qaalid mif qaadir ratrif he kept me (so attentive that 
I stared) without batting an eye. 2 Ivtl to touch or brush 
(the eye) in a painful way. &aasib -(arafti leen-i careful! 
you hurt my eye. -vn (arafaan, (arfa; ava (aarif; pva 
ma(ruuf· 
J)..;I rit(araf or ri{(araf Ivil passive of (araf3. - iva 
mit[irif. 
J)..; 1 rin(araf = rit(araf. -iva min(irif. 
JJ.k 
J)' (araqt (u) Ivtl to knock, strike, pound, hammer. 
miin bi-yu(ruq il-baab is-salaa-di who is knocking at the 
door at this hour? -vn (arq; ava (aariq; pva ma(ruuq. 
~). (arqa linst n, pI -aatl a knock. 
~). (Urqa In pI turaq, (Urqaatl corridor, passage. 
l!.arra (-(Urqa (nautJ off course. 
J!.)' tariiq Imasc and fem n, pI (Uruq, (Uruqaatl 
I road. (ariiq lumuumi a main road. (ariiq m~r 
iskindiriyya the Cairo-Alexandria road. 2 route, way. 
rayyar (ariiq-u he altered his course. larraf-u tariiq 
kinz i fil- rart[ he told him the way to a buried treasure. 
geena lan (ariiq is-suuq we came via the market. 
ril-ladwa b-tiigi lan (ariiq il- rakl the infection is carried 
through food. b.i(-(ariiq ir-rasmi through official chan-
nels. II raaxir tariiq-ak feen what are you driving at? 
~). (ariiqa, tariiqa In pI (Uruql 't way, procedure, 
method. ri(-(Uruq id-difaliyya defence tactics. bi-rayyi 
(ariiqa (1) by any means. (2) by what means? di mif 
(ariiqa di that's 1)0 way to do things! 2 Sufi Order, Sufi 

brotherhood. kull'feex wi-lu [ariiqa [prov] "" everyone 
has his own way of doing things. 
j,i).... ma[raqa In pi ma[aariql anyone-handed ham-
mer with a blunt head (such as a sledge hammer or a 
farrier's rounding hammer). 
J)';I rit[araq or ri[{araq Ivil to be knocked, struck, 
pounded or hammered. - iva mit[iriq. 
J) [arraq Ivtl 1 to forge (metal). ril-Ijaddaad 
bi-ytarraq il-faas the blacksmith forges the mattock. 
2 to show (s.o.) the way out. -vn ta[riiq; avalpva 
mi[arraq. 
J J.; I rit[arraq or ri[{arraq Ivil 1 to be forged (of met-
a). 2 to be shown the way out. 3 to push off, shove off. 
ri{{arraq get lost! -ava/iva mit{arraq. 
tJ.;..1. 
r:!). [arqal 1 Ivtl to cause to make a cracking sound. 
[arqal ~awabl-u he cracked his knuckles. [arqal il-
kurbaag he cracked the whip. - Ivi/2 to crack, make a 
cracking, clicking or banging sound. 3 to burst (of a tyre 
etc.). IIbaqeet Ij-a[arqal min il-1(ee~ I was about to ex-
plode with anger. -vn [arqala; avalpva mi[arqal. 
:i...,i). [urqeel.a In pi -aatl child's toy clicker, (loosely 
also) any plaything that cracks. 
r:!).;1 rit[arqal or ri[{arqal Ivil to be cracked. - iva 
mit[arqal· 
I" J.; ..1. 
r). [aralam onomatopoeia for the sound of music "" 
tra-Ia-Ia. -also taralam. 
IoSJ.;..1. 
J.;.,1 [urli <T tiirLU> Inl mixed vegetables stewed in 
sauce. -also turli, tulli. 
1 1"'; ..1. 
j). [irim (a) Ivil to lose one's (front) teeth. 
j). [aram(u)lvtl 1 to cause (s.o.) the loss of his (front) 
teeth. 2 to thrust, jab. [aramit ~ubal-ha f-leen-i she 
poked her finger in my eye. -vn [arm, taramaan; ava 
[aarim; pva ma[ruum. 
j).i ra[ram ladj, fem carma, pi [urml having no front 
teeth. 
j).;1 rit[aram or ri[{aram Ivil passive of [aram. -iva 
mit{irim. 
j).;1 rin[aram = rit[aram. -iva min[il'im. 
j) [arram Ivtl to knock out (teeth). -vn tatriim; aval 
pva mi[arram. 
jJ.;1 rittarram or f.i[{arram Ivil to be knocked out (of 
teeth). -iva mit[arram. 
538 
11"';..1. 
4..;ll. carma In pi -aatl [naut] quarters for crew aft in a 
Nile sailing boat. 
Y 1"'; ..1. 
4:--). turumba <It tromba> In 
pi -aatl pump. 
II [urumbit baab hydraulic door-operating device. 
-[urumba kawitf rubber drain plunger. -[urumba 
mariina [naut] voice-pipe. - also turumba, tulumba. 
I_YI"';..1. 
~). [urumbeeta <T trampete> In pi -aatl [mil] side 
drum. -also turumbee[a. 
~). [urumbe[gi In pi -yyal [mil] side drummer. 
-also turumbe[gi. 
1 - Y I" .; ..1. see - I" .; ..::.0 • : [urumbiil 
tl"';..1. 
e-). tarmax Ivtl to do in a slapdash manner. -vn 
[armaxa; ava/pva mi[armax. 
e-).;1 rit[armax or ri[{armax Ivil to be done in a slap-
dash manner. - iva mit{armax. 
..1. I <.J,; ..1. 
~t;). [urnaa[a, 
[urunaa[a 
(also 
[urnee[a) 
<It 
tonnellata> 
In 
pi taraniitl (metric) ton, tonne. 
II ril-fuluus bi[-[urnaa[a money is plentiful. 
u!><.J.;..1. 
.;.;1). [aran! <Fr tranche> In pi -aat/l slice. 2 [elec] 
channel made in a wall for the installation of wiring. 
..1. <.J .; ..1. see ..1. I <.J,; ..1. : 
[urnee[a 
[urnaa[a, 
..1. loS <.J,; ..1. see ..1. I <.J .; ..1. : [urneeta 
~ .; ..1. see 1 loS .; ..1. : [araawa 
1 loS .; ..1. 
[urunaa[a, 
..s). [iri, [uri (a) Ivil 1 to become soft or pliant. 2 to 
become cool or refreshing (of weather). 3 to lose sharp-
ness (of a blade). -vn [araawa. 
0,,1). [araawa.1 Ivn/ IIljagar [araawa (1) whetstone. 
(2) grindstone (for marble, alabaster etc.). - In! 
2 coolness, cool weather. IIxad [araawa he caught a 
chill. -ma-mlaajit-[araawa [non-Cairene] he's penni-
less. -xallii-k fir-[araawa forget about it! 3 softness. 

fiid-u fiiha (araawa he has fleshy hands . 
.sJ. (ari ladj pi (uraay, (iraayl 1 soft, flexible. kawitf 
(ari flexible rubber. mubilyaat (ariyya soft-upholstered 
furniture. IIlaqm-u (ari he's a softie, he's still wet be-
hind the ears. 28 fresh and tender.leef(arifresh bread. 
garl:J; (ari fresh wound. 2b fresh and succulent. figl; (ari 
fresh and juicy radishes. 2c unripe, green. xafab (ari 
unseasoned wood. 3 cool, refreshing. nisma (ariyya a 
refreshing breeze. 4 moist, damp. fi/-yasiillissa (ari the 
laundry is still damp. buuya (ariyya wet paint. 
.s J.i fa(ra lell 1 morelmost soft. 2 morelmost fresh or 
tender. 3 morelmost cool or refreshing. 4 morelmost 
moist or damp . 
.s) (arra Ivtl 1 to soften, make pliant. 2 to dampen, 
moisten. ni(arrifwayyit rami we moisten a little sand. 
(arra riiq-u b-faay he wet his whistle with tea. 3 to cool, 
make fresh. ma-tl:Ju(( il-ba((iixa fit-tallaaga t(arrii-ha put 
the water-melon in the refrigerator to chill it. II (arra 
(lala) I-qalb to soothe, refresh (s.o.), as in ni(arri lala 
qalb-i-na b-l:Jaaga saqla let's cool off with a cold drink. 
- Ivil 4 to become cool or fresh (of weather). -vn 
ta(riyya; avalpva mi(arri. 
.s:}.;1 fit{arra or fi((arra Ivil passive of (arra. - iva 
mit{arri. 
.s)..;...1 fista(ra Ivtl I to select for tenderness, coolness 
or softness. 2 to consider (too) tender, cool or soft. 
- ava mista(ri. 
2.s.;..b 
~.J). (urya <Copt> In pi (awaaril kind of mattock, 
medium-sized faas (see PI.D, 6). 
.;. .s.; ..b 
~J. (ireefa, (ureefa Inl horned viper. 
jj ..b 
). (UZZ (also (U~~) linterjl so what! so who gives a 
damn! II(uzz; tiff the hell with it! -(UZZ; fi- ... to hell 
with ... , as in (UZZ; fiik to hell with you! - wala tilraf(uzz; 
min subl:Jaan allaah "" she can't tell chalk from cheese. 
.J.sjj..b 
~). (uzziina, (azziina <It dozzina> In pi -aat, 
(azaziinl dozen. bi(-(uzziina by the dozen, in great 
quantity. -also dllzziina. 
V"V"..b 
..;..I. (ass (also (aN) (u) Ivtl to smite, strike. (ass-i-ni 
muxalfa he slapped a fine on me. fil-hawa y(uss-a-ha 
539 
the wind buffets it. fin fa-lla y(uss-ak turmaay I hope 
you get run down by a tram! -vn (ass, (asasaan; ava 
(aasis; pva ma(suus. 
W (assa In pi -aatl instance noun of (ass. 
~ 
1 fit(ass or fi((ass (also fit(l¥~ or fi((a~~) Ivil 1 to 
crash, smash. l:Ja-yi((ass; fil-l:Jee(a he'll smash into the 
wall! 2 to be smitten, be struck. yit{ass; f-na~ar-u may 
he be struck blind! fi{{asseet fi-na~ar-ak have you been 
blinded, have you lost all sense of discrimination? - aval 
iva mit(ass . 
..;J.;I fin(ass (also fin(a~~) = fit(ass. -ava/ivamin(ass. 
V"..bV"..b 
..,.J.....1 (as(as Ivil to play music badly. qalad yi(as(as 
wi-ynaffiz he went on playing lousy music. -vn (as(asa; 
ava mi(as(is. 
.:...;...b 
.::-:.1 (ift (also (if 0 <P tasht> 1 In pi (Ufuut, (ifaat, 
fitfaa(, (ufutallarge shallow metal or plastic basin used 
for laundry and bathing (see PI.A, 9). fie-lift; qaal 
lil-mayrafa ya buu~a ya mla~la~a {prov] "" the pot 
called the kettle black. 2 oaf, dolt . 
~ 
(iftiyya (also (if{iyya) In pi -aat, (afaatil {rur] 
small deep metal basin . 
.;..;...b 
j.l. (aff (u, i) Ivtl I to cause (hot fat) to sizzle by the 
addition of liquid. nuruul:J l:Ja((iin fiwayyit diqiiq 
bis-samna wi-n(uff-a-ha bil-Iaban we put in a little flour 
with clarified butter and (after heating them together 
we add) milk so that it sizzles. 2 {metal] to temper by 
quenching. 3 {rur] to irrigate (land) prior to planting . 
4 to 
rupture 
(the 
amniotic sac before birth). 
fig-gamuusa (affit il-qarn "" the buffalo is about to 
deliver its calf. - IvilS to rupture (of the amniotic sac 
at birth). - vn (aff, (afafaan; ava (aafif; pva matfuuf. 
.;.l..:.l. (afaaf I Inl dimness, blurredness. mif faayif 
quddaami yeer (afaaf all I can see in front of me is a 
blur. II (afaaf kalaam unfounded information, rumours. 
- fi(-(afaafwala I-lama {prov] better weak-sighted than 
blind. 2 ladvl dimly, sparsely. bi-yfuuf(afaafhe can see 
only dimly. II b-alraf fingiliizi (afaafI have a smattering 
of English. 
.;..t..1 fit{aff or fi{{aff Ivil passive of (aff. -iva mit(aff. 
..b .;...b see .:...;...b: (if( 
.;...b.;...b 
~ 
(af(af Ivil to sizzle, splash (of hot oil, at the 

addition of liquids). -vn ta/ta/a; ava mita/ta/. 
J JuPJ., 
~ 
t~/afi <T taslak> Ivtl to carry out (work) in a 
hasty slapdash manner. -also taliafi. -vn t~/afia; ava/ 
pva mit~/afi. 
.,;l....aI.;1 
fitt~/afi or fia~/afi Ivil to be done in a hasty 
slapdash manner. -iva mitt~/afi. 
~.J J., J., 
0;).1. ta{Uura Icoll nI [bot] datura. -also datuura, 
dahtuura, tatuura. 
ISJ.,J., 
u,u, taata (also taftar) I Ivtl to bow or lower (one's 
head). 2 Ivil to bow to circumstances. ta(i-Iha ifuut 
[prov] acquiesce in (evil) circumstances and they will 
pass. -vn mita(iyya; ava/pva mi{aa{i. 
rtJ., 
,..J. tacam (i) Ivtll to make tasty or flavoursome.lJuai 
I-kammuun cal-xuqaar ca/aan yitcim-u put some cumin 
in the vegetables to give them taste. 2 [frozen contexts] 
to feed. fi{cim il-fumm' tistilJi I-ceen [prov] give and 
you'll get results. fitcim matcuum wala titcim1' 
malJruum [prov] help the one who once saw better days 
(because he feels deprivation more) rather than one 
who has always been poor. 3 [hort] to graft. - vn tacm, 
tacamaan; ava taacim; pva matcuum. 
,..J. tacm InI I taste, flavour. IIkalaam ma-Iu1 cacm 
uninspiring talk. 2 [hort] graft. 
~ 
tacmiyya Icoll nI common dish consisting of 
dried broad beans soaked and pounded together with 
herbs and spices, shaped into balls and deep fried in oil. 
tacmiyya mafruuda disc-shaped {acmiyya. {acmiyya 
fiammaati finger-shaped {acmiyya. {acmiyya malJliyya 
a sort of tacmiyya stuffed with onion and parsley. 
~ 
tacmagi In pi -yyal maker of tacmiyya. 
,..J. (Ucm Icoll nil bait. 2 [hort] graft(s). ma{Wit {Ucm 
grafting knife. 3 vaccine. 
W 
{Ucma lunit n, pi -aatl I piece of bait. 2 [hort] a 
graft. 
~W tucmaaya = {ucma. 
,..J. {icim ladj °1 I tasty, flavour-some. 2 cute, sweet. 
,..J.i fa{cam I lell I morelmost tasty or flavoursome. 
2 morelmost cute or sweet. 
540 
rw' tacaam In pi fatcima/ food. /irkit il-fatcima 1-
malJfuu;a the canned-foods company. 
~ 
matcam 
In 
pi ma{aaciml 
I restaurant. 
2 refectory. 
~ 
matcamgiJ In pi -yyal restaurant owner. 
~ 
taccam Ivtl I to inoculate, vaccinate. 2 to inlay. 
IItatciim il-kalaam studding one's speech (with attrac-
tive verbal devices). 3 [hort] to graft. tatciim ceen 
shield-budding. -vn tatciim; aVa/pva mi{auam. 
~I fit{auam or fiaauam Ivill to be inoculated, be 
vaccinated. 2 to be inlaid. 3 to be grafted. -iva 
mittaccam. 
,..J.i fatcam2t Ivtl to feed, give to eat. fitcaam 
il-fufiara f-ramaqaan lJalpal it's good to feed the poor in 
Ramadan. -vn fitcaam; ava mi{cim, mutcim. 
~I fistatcam Ivtl I to find tasty, savour (food). 
2 to detect the taste of. fana mistatcam mallJ' fil-fakl 
I can taste salt in the food. -vn fistitcaam; ava 
mistatcam. 
~tJ., 
uJ. tacan (a) Ivtlla to stab. Ib to defame, cast asper-
sions on. tacanit-ni f1araf-i she has wounded my hon-
our. 2 [leg] to contest (a sentence). -vn tacn; ava 
taacin; pva matcuun. 
uJ. {acn In pi {UGuunl {leg] appeal. 
4:.J. tacna linst n, pi -aatl I a stab, a thrust with a knife. 
2 an act of defamation. 
.:,.ru, tacuun Inl plague, pestilence. 
vJ.;1 fittacan or fiaacan Ivil passive of tacan. -iva 
mit{icin. 
~t.J" 
;;,;10 tUlfra In pi -aatl I monogram of the Ottoman Sul-
tan. 2 calligraphically intricate monogram in the style 
of that of the Ottoman Sultans. -also {Urra. 
.1,;10 {Ulfaraaft = {u~ra. 
1St.'!' 
~ 
talfa (a, i) Ivil I to have dominance, predominate. 
ril-mantifia di bi-yi{lfa caleeha {-taabic il-yunaani this 
area has a predominantly Greek stamp. 2 to behave 
domineeringly, play the despot. hiyya b-ti{lfa cala 
faxuu-ha ~-~ulfayyar she dominates her little brother. 
-vn {alfayaan; ava {aalfi. 
¥u, tarya In pi {ulfaahl despot, tyrant. 
.:,1.eAlO turyaan Inl despotism, tyranny. 
~I fittalfa or fictalfa Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
{alfa. fana miJmin illi b-yit{ilfi caleehum I'm not the sort 
to be bossed around. -iva mittilfi. 

.~J, see ~~J, 
~J,~J, 
c~J, 
~ 
tafalj (a) Ivi/l to overflow, spill over. 'i'aljyaanan 
il-magaari tidalj sometimes the sewers overflow. 
IIgild-u tafalj his skin erupted (in a rash). - Ivtl 2 to 
vomit, bring up. Iitafalj ik-kuuta (or 'i'id-damm) he 
worked himself to exhaustion. 3 [abus] to eat. 'i'idalj 
eat! (and I hope you choke). -vn taf/J, tafaljaan; ava 
taafilj, taf/Jaan; pya maduulj. 
~ 
taf/J In! [path] rash. 
~ 
taffalj Ivtl I to cause to overflow. 2 to cause to 
vomit. IIIj-ataffalj-ak ik-kuuta I'll make you sweat 
blood! 3 to force to eat. II lj-ataffafJ-ak is-simm ... I'll 
make life hell for you! -vn tatfiilj; ava/pya mitaffalj. 
~I 'i'ittaffalj or 'i'ittaffalj Ivii passive of taffalj. -iva 
mittaffal.J. 
1 J ~ J, 
.;10 tafar' (u) Ivil to jump, rise suddenly. ril-'i'aslaar 
tafarit bijakl i lI'ariib prices jumped up amazingly. -vn 
tafaraan; ava taafir. 
0.;10 tafra In pi -aatl a leap, a jump. 
z J ~ J, 
.;10 tafar 2 In pi 'i'adaarl crupper, rump (of a horse). 
~~J, 
..,..llo [if 
IS ladj "I I greedy, gluttonous. 2 unpleasant, 
horrible. ril-l~ya t-tifis Iii 'i'id-dawa n-nigis [prov] a 
nasty disease requires a foul medicine . 
..,..lloi radas lell I morelmost greedy or gluttonous. 
2 morelmost unpleasant. 
j.,.,l.il. tafaasa 
Inl 
I greediness, 
gluttony. 
2 un-
pleasantness. 
~Ua;1 rittaaflS or rittaafis Ivil to behave in a nasty 
way, act unpleasantly. -ava mittaafis. 
u:.~J, 
..;.;J. tifif, tafaf (a) Ivil to run away, flee. tifflt min 
goz-ha she ran away from her husband. da-na lawza 
radafmin xilac;-kum I'd like to get away from your ugly 
mugs! -vn tafafaan; ava taafif. taffaan. 
4.:.w, taffaafa In pi -aatl picklock, tool for forcing a 
lock . 
.;iJ. taffif Ivtl I to cause to flee, drive away. fakl i 
ytaffif a repellent face. 2 to force open (a lock). -vn 
tatfiif; ava mitaffif. 
~I rittaffif or rittaffif Ivil I to be caused to flee. 
2 to be picked (of a lock). -iva mittaffif. 
...Al.Al. taftaf In pi tafaa[ifl open-sided bus, often horse-
drawn, used in resorts. 
l~~J, 
~ 
taff (u) Ivii to gush out. 'i'il-mayya taffit mil-
magaari water burst out from the drains. -vn taff, 
tafafaan; ava taafif. 
ili. taffa' In.pl -aat, (Ufafl instance noun of taff. 
Z(~~J,) 
ili. taffa 2 In pi -aatl group (usually as part of a proces-
sion). faatu laleena taffa wara taffa they passed by us 
group after group. -also qaffa. 
ili. taffaJ In! double number (e.g., in dice or domi-
noes). -also qaffa. 
~ 
tafiifT ladjl trivial, inconsiderable, trifling. 
1 J~J, 
JAl. [iflln pi radaall baby (boy), infant, child. radaal 
il-madaaris school-children. ril-radaal 'i'al:Jbaab allaah 
[prov] (children are the beloved of God) ... children are 
innocent. 
llil. [ifla In pi radaall baby girl, little girl. 
~ p (Ufuula In! infancy, childhood. 
z J ~ J, 
~ 
(Ufeeli In pi -yya/ sponger . 
~ 
(UfayliT ladjl parasitical. 
u~ 
(Ufayliyyaat Ipl nl parasites. 
jil.;1 rittaffalor rittaffallvil to sponge, impose one-
self. -vn tatafful; ava mittaffal, mutataffil. 
3 J ~ J, 
JAl. taflln! clay, especially potter's clay. 
llil. tafla = tafl. 
jil. taffillvil to harden (ofland with a surface of silt). 
-vn tatfiil; ava mitaffil. 
-,~J, 
l.il. tafa' r (u) Ivil to float, be buoyant. -vn tafw; ava 
taafi. 
~~J, 
~ 
tafa 2 (i) Ivt/l to extinguish, put out, turn off (fire, 
light, radio etc.). ritfi n-nuur turn off the light. 2 to 
render dull, lustreless or muted, give a matt finish to. 
loon matfi muted colour. 3a to irrigate, water (parched 
ground). 3b to hydrate. giir matfi slaked lime. 3c to 
quench (hot metal). - Ivi/4 to go out, become dead (of 

a fire, light, engine etc.). -vn (afy, (afayaan; ava (aafi; 
pva matfi. 
~ 
(afya J Ipl -aatl I instance noun of (afy. 2 (also 
(afyit sigaara) cigarette ash. 
~w. (affaaya In pi -aat/l fire-extinguisher. 2 ashtray. 
jU:... ma(aafi Ipl nl fire department, fire-brigade. 
laskari 
ma(aafi 
fireman. 
larabiyyaat 
ma(aafi 
fire-engines. 
.;1;1 fit(afa or fi((afa Ivil passive of (afa 2 • - iva mit(ifi. 
.;la;1 fin(afa = fit(afa. -iva min(ifi. 
J1 (affa 4 = (afa 2 • -vn tatfiyya; avalpva mi(afft. 
J.l.;1 fit(affa or fi((affa = fit(afa. - iva mit(affi. 
.w.! fitfaafr Inl fire-fighting. fidaarit iI-fitfaaf or 
Cjism iI- fitfaaf fire department, fire-brigade. larabiyyit 
iI- fitfaa f fire-engine. 
IIoSJ..k 
l,.tu, (afya 2 Inl mixed dregs of alcohol, particularly 
methylated spirits (drunk by down-and-outs etc.). 
• ..,..J..k 
~ 
(aCjs, (aqsr <Gr taksis> In/l weather, climate. 
2/pl (uCjuus, (uquusl rite, ritual. IInafs 1(-(aCjs' huwwa 
huwwa it's the same thing all over again. 
~ 
(aCjsi, (aqsa ladjl ritual, liturgical. 
~ 
(aCjCjas J Ivtl {Chr] to ordain according to pre-
scribed ritual. (aCjCjasu l-ba(rak they enthroned the pat-
riarch according to the ritual. -vn ta(Cjiis; avalpva 
mi(aCjCjas. 
~I fit(aCjCjas or fi((aCjCjas Ivil passive of (aCjCjas J. 
-iva mit(aCjCjas. 
2..,..J..k 
~ 
(aCjCjas 2 Ivil to make a thorough search, search 
everywhere. (aCjCjas fif-jaCjCja lala naqqart-u he sear-
ched the whole flat for his glasses. -vn ta(Cjiis; avalpva 
mi(aCjCjas. 
3 ..,.. J..k see ..,.. loS J J ..k : (uCjCjeesi 
~J..k 
.;..J. (aCjaj (uJ Ivtl to hit (s.th. against s. tho else). (aCjaj 
rus-hum fi-balq he cracked their heads together. -vn 
(ac;.f, (aCjajaan; ava (aaCjif; pva ma(Cjuuj. 
..;.lii1 (iCjaaf Inl quarterstaff fencing. 
.;.AJa;1 fit(aCjaj or fi((aCjaj Ivil passive of (aCjaj. - iva 
mit(iCjif· 
..;i1 (aCjCjaj Ivtl I = (aCjaj. 2 to break, smash (e.g., 
eggs, melons). [aCjCjajii-1i beqteen fiz-zibda fry me a 
542 
couple of eggs in butter. IIleen-u m(aCjCjaja his eye is 
puffy and red. -vn la(Cjiif; avalpva mi(aCjCjaj. 
~I fit(aCjCjaj or fi((aCjCjaj Ivil passive of (aCjCjaj. - iva 
mit(aCjCjaj. 
J..kJ..k 
..:;kA1 (aCj(aCj J Ivtl la to cause to make a clicking or 
cracking sound. (aCj(aCj ~awabl-u he cracked his knuck-
les.1I Cjaalid yi(aCj(aCj ~awaabil riglee he's sitting around 
twiddling his thumbs. Ib to cause to crack. fil-barr' 
bi-y(aCj(aCj it- farq the heat cracks the earth. 2 {slang] to 
make aware and alert, give polish to. fil-waad da 
laawiz jiwayyit (aCj(aCja that kid needs smartening up. 
II(aCj(aCj widaan-u he pri~ked up his ears. - Ivil 3 to 
make a cracking sound. fit-buks' (aCj(aCj fi-wifj-u the 
punch exploded in his face. II Cjalb-i bi-y(aCj(aCj my heart 
is palpitating. -vn (aCj(aCja; avalpva mi(aCj(aCj. 
J..A.l... mi(aCj(aCj Ipva/libabl' m(aCj(aCj a rope, some of 
the strands of which have snapped . 
..:;kA1 (aCj(aCj 2: 
min 
(aCj(aCj 
/i-salaamu 
laleekum 
(I know) the whole story, 
4i)..A.1 (aCj(uuCja In pi (aCja(iiCj/I ashtray. 2 small occa-
sional table. 3 form of popular song consisting of cou-
plets sung by a soloist alternating with a choral refrain. 
4 a fart. 
-:;,1lii1 (aCja(iiCj Ipl n/: min (tabt 'J (aCja(iiCj iI- farq from 
the depths of the earth. 
~ 
(uCj(eeCja In pi -aat, (aCja(iiCjI I child's toy click-
er. 2 {nan-Cairene] motor-cycle. 
~I fit(aCj(aCj or fi((aCj(aCj Ivil passive of (aCj(aCj. - iva 
mit(aCj(aCj . 
• J J..k 
j1 (aCjCj (u, aJ Ivil 1 to burst, crack (open). niqiif 
lal-fasmant' raml"lajaan ma-ytaCjCj 'jwe add sand to 
the cement so that it ,won't crack. IInafuux-ak (aCjCj 
you're cracked, your mind has cracked. -miskuu 
w-lamaluu-Iu (aCjCj ii-fils they grabbed him and gave 
him a beating on the arse. 2 to crack, make a cracking 
noise. fi(-(abanga (aCjCjit the revolver went off with a 
crack. II (aCjCjit mil-yee; she exploded with anger. -min 
barra (aCjCj' (aCjCj' w-min guwwa faaj wi-baCjCj {pray] 
(outside rustling (of fine clothes), inside mites and 
bugs) '" all that glisters is not gold. -vn (aCjCj, (aCjaqaan; 
ava (aaCjiCj. 
J1 (aCjCjaCj Ivtl to cause to burst. II (aCjqaCjit-ni she 
drove me insane. -vn ta(CjiiCj; avalpva mi(aCjqaCj. 
jh;1 fit(aCjCjaCj or fi((aCjCjaCj Ivil passive of (aCjqaq. - iva 
mit(aCjCjaCj . 

Z J J j, 
4iI. tatitia In pI -aatl meal. fi-kull i tatitia fifJmidu rabb-
i-na at every meal praise God. 
IJ"\.fJJj, 
~ 
(Utitieesi Inl [rur] small window in a mud 
dwelling. 
r J j, 
~ tatiam (u) Ivt and viI to take hold (particularly with 
the teeth). fik-kalb i tatiam (fi-)rigl-i the dog sank his 
teeth into my leg. -vn tatiam, tatiamaan; ava taatiim; 
pva mattiuum. 
~ tatim In pI fattium, futtium, (Utiuma J I 1 set of 
complementary things. tatim i sufra dinner service. 
tatim i faay tea set. tatim i snaan set of teeth. tatim i 
fJmaar donkey tack. 2 complementary group of people, 
team, troupe. tatimi iI-markib ship's crew. 3 litter (of 
young animals). 
~I fintatiam ivil (impersonal) passive of tatiam. 
fintatiam fi-rigl-u he got his leg bitten. -iva min[itiim. 
r..il. tatitiam Ivtl 1 to fit out with a complete set of 
clothes. 2 [naut] to make up a crew. markib mitatitiama 
ship with crew. 3 to enable to take hold of, put into the 
clutches of. tatitiam-ni I-mablar bass just let me get my 
hands on the money. -vn tattiiim; ava/pva mitatitiam. 
~I fittatitiam or fittatitiam Ivil passive of tatitiam. 
-iva mittatitiam. 
IS J j, see I J .J j, : tatiiyya 
"r'Jj, 
..,..u. talab 1 (u) Ivtl 1 to request, order. talabtu faay 
walla tiahwa did you order tea or coffee? da I-matluub 
that's just the ticket! II fana fJ-atlub-huu-/ak I'll get him 
(on the phone) for you. 2 to demand. fit-talab 
[aleehumfidiid they are much in demand. 3 to request 
the hand of (s.o.) in marriage. Iitalabuu-ha tlazzizit 
fatuu-ha tnaddimit [prov] she coyly refused offers of 
marriage only to regret when marriage passed her by. 
4 to require. law iI-fJaraara zaadit [an iI-matluub if the 
temperature exceeds the required level. bi-yutlubu 
fhaada they require a certificate. 5 [mil] to call up, 
draft. -vn talab; ava taalib; pva matluub . 
..,..u. talab2 In pI -aatl 18 request, order. taflt it-talab 
(available) on demand. fJasab it-talab (made) to order. 
Iitalabaat-ak ... at your service. Ib application. talab 
gawaaz (safar) 
passport application. 2 demand. 
qanuun iI-larft wit-talab the law of supply and de-
mand. 3 requirement. talabaat ii-beet household neces-
543 
sities.llraafJ fi-talab he went on an errand. 
..,.Jll. taalib 1 In pI (Ullaab, talabal (male) student. beet 
it-talaba students' hostel. 
~ll. taiba I, taaliba t 1 In pI -aatl female student. 
2/fem adjl in heat. farasa taiba a mare in heat. 
~ 
talba2 In pI talabaatl[Chr] supplication, litany. 
.:.~"u.. matlubaatt Ipl of requirements. 
~ 
tulba lof[mil] fatigue duty. 
~ 
talabiyya In pI -aat, -aatl order, requisition, com-
mission. xad talabiyyaat farf he took orders for 
furniture . 
...,..u..1 fittalab or fiaalab Ivil passive of talab. -iva 
mit[ilib. 
.....u..: 1 fintalab = fittalab. -iva min[ilib. 
~I fittallab or fittallab Ivtl to require, necessitate. 
-vn tatallub; ava mutatallib t ; pva mutatallab t . 
.:.ljl.... mutatallabaatt, 
mutatallabaatt 
Ipl 
nl 
requirements . 
..,.Jll. taalib2 Ivtl to make a demand of (s.o.), make a 
claim on (s.o.). fil-lummaal bi-ytalbuf-Jirka b-fJutiuti-
hum the workers are demanding their rights from the 
company. fin-niyaaba bi-ttaalib bi-fafadd" [uquuba 
the prosecution is calling for the heaviest penalty. -vn 
mitalba, mutalba; ava mitaalib; pva mutaalab. 
..,.J\.I.;I fittaalib or fiaaalib Ivil passive of taalib2. -iva 
mittaalib. 
cJj, 
cU- talfJ Inl acacia. 
I IJ" J j, 
...,...u. talas (u, i) Ivil to close over or stop up (an aper-
ture) with mud or the like. talasit la/a butiti iI-balla~ 
wi-sabit-u lamma I-miff daar she stopped up the mouth 
of the pot (with mud) and left it till the miffhad aged. 
-vn tals; ava taalis; ava matluus. 
..,..LIa;1 fittalas or fittalas Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
talas. yit[ilis lalee b-fJittit [iina it is covered over with a 
lump of mud. -iva mit[ilis. 
Z IJ" J j, see IJ" J IS j, : taylasaan 
IrIJ"Jj, 
r-ll. taisim 1 Ivtl to jam, make unworkable. 2 Ivil to 
jam fast. fil-baab taisim the door jammed. muxx-i 
mtalsim my mind has seized up (usually from exhaus-
tion). -vn talsama; avalpva mitalsim. 
~I fittaisim or fittaisim Ivil to be or become jam-
med or unworkable. -ava/iva mittalsim. 

ZrlJ"'J.l:o 
r-11- (alsam 
I In 
pI (alaasiml 
talisman, 
charm. 
1 (alaasim Ipl nl cryptic symbols. 
J~J.l:o 
~ 
(a1iafi Ivtl to carry out (work) in a hasty slapdash 
manner. -also (ililafi. -vn (a1iafia; avalpva mi(a1iafi. 
~I rit(a1iafi or riaa1iafi Ivil to be done in a hasty 
slapdash manner. - iva mit(a1iafi. 
IJ"'lSr.l:oJ.l:o 
~ 
(al(amiis Inl {magic} formulaic word uttered in 
calling up spirits. 
t J..l:o 
ell. (ilie, (alae (a) Ivi/l to proceed, come or go forth. 
(i1iena rilJla we went off on a trip. yalla ni(lae (eala) 
i1-haram let's go to the Pyramids! riI-lJaramiyya [ileu 
ealayya the thieves came at me. jaarie (aalie min i1-
midaan a street leading off the square. (ilie yigri he set 
off at a run. 1 to come out, go out, get out. lJa-yi[lae 
mis-sign' baed' sana he'll get out of prison in a year's 
time. [ilie min is-sabafi he dropped out ofthe race.II[ilie 
min hiduum-u == he blew up (in, e.g., anger or ex-
asperation). -diin-u [ilie or eeen-u (i1eit (1) he became 
thoroughly fed up. (2) he had a very hard time of it. 
-roolJ-u (i1eit (1) he died. (2) he became exasperated. 
3 to appear, emerge. ril-ward' (ilie t~e flowers began to 
bloom. ril-ba([iix (ilie water-melon has come into sea-
son. riJ-jams' (i1eit (1) the sun rose. (2) the sun came 
out. rimta n-natiiga lJa-ti(lae when will the result come 
out? rir-rux~a (i1eit the licence was issued. [ilie bi-lJigga 
gdiida he's come up with a new excuse. II (aalie fik-kaar 
he's new to the trade. - ri(lae biiha out with it! 4 to come 
out, come off, come away. ril-rukra (i1eit fi-riid-i the 
handle came away in my hand: ril-fiifra b-ti(lae min kutr 
ir-ru(uuba the veneer comes off because of excess 
damp. ril-bufiae lJa-ti(lae bi-mayya suxna the stains will 
come out with hot water. 5 to ascend, go up. 
ri(-(ayyaara [ileit (1) the plane took off. (2) the plane 
gained altitude. ri(lae loofi is-su(uulJ go up to the roof! 
lJa-ni(lae bi-doreen kamaan we'll add two more storeys. 
lila [ilie wala nizil == he doesn't amount to anything, he's 
a nobody. -ti(lae is-sama tinzil i1-rarq ... ... whatever 
you do ... , as in ti(lae is-sama tinzil i1-rare{' mif mumkin 
lJa-taxud-ha whatever you do you'll never get it. -(aalie 
waakil naazil waakil (zayy i1-munjaar) == he doesn't 
miss a single opportunity. - ril-fikra (i1eit fi-dmaav-i the 
idea appealed to me. 6a to grow up (to be), become. 
[iliet' min ~urr-i meafifiad I grew up with a complex. 
544 
lJa-ti(lae reeh lamma tikbar what will you be when you 
grow up? 6b to turn out (to be), prove (to be). [ilie 
kazzaab he proved to be a liar. (ilie boojit turned out a 
flop. [ilie bi-kaam how much did it cost in the end? rilli 
maeaaya ma-yi(lae-J' eajara gneeh what I have with me 
doesn't amount to ten pounds.llyi(lae approximately, 
as in maeaaya yi(lae eajara gneeh I have about ten 
pounds. - Ivtl 78 to climb, ascend. [ilie is-sillim he 
climbed the stairs. 7b to board, mount. [iliet i1-rutubiis 
I boarded the bus. -vn (uluue; ava (aalie, (aleaan; pva 
ma(luue· 
11 [ilie Ii- to take after, as in ribn-u (lie-Iu his son took 
after him. - [ilie eala to suit, as in ril-Iustaan da 
ma-b-yi(lae-J' ealeeha that dress doesn't suit her. -[ilie 
fi- to take up, acquire as a habit, as in [ileit fi-lJkaaya 
gdiida she is up to something new, she took up a new 
(bad) habit, (aalie fiiha he is putting on airs, [ilie 
fi-ma(luue taani now he's up to something different. 
e'u, (aalie I I laval II wi-{aalie and upwards, and on-
wards, as in min hina w-(aalie from now on, eajar siniin 
wi-(aalie ten years and up. 2 In pI (awaaliel horoscope. 
t"u... ma(luue In pI ma(aliiel craze, fad. luhum 
ma{aliie variiba they come up with crazy new ideas. 
ell. {ale Inl I {text} lapping of cotton hanks before 
weaving. 2a pollen. lb inflorescence (of a palm tree). 
~ 
{alea Inl I appearance, emergence. (aleit if-Jams 
sunrise. {aleit in-nahaar daybreak. 2 sortie, expedition, 
outing. 
IIbadlit 
ic-(aiea 
{mil} 
dress 
uniform. 
3 countenance. geet bi-caleit-ak i1-bahiyya {deris} .. 
there you are in all your beauty. 4 funeral procession. 
~ 
(aliiea r In pI (alaayiel vanguard. 
~ 
(aliiei ladj ·1 avant-garde. II rit-tan;iim i(-(aliiei 
{obsol} secret organisation in the time of President 
Nasser charged with ascertaining and shaping opinions 
among the population. 
eU--- maclae II! pI macaalie/l upward slope. 1 first line 
of a poem or song. 3 overture. 
t')U... mi(laae In pI macaliiel climbing strap with which 
a climber circles the palm tree and his waist. 
t:!J.. (allae Ivt/l to send out. (allaeuu-hum min i/-balad 
get them out of the country! 1 to take out, get out. 
(allae riid-ak min geeb-ak take your hand out of your 
pocket! (allaet-i-Iu sgaara I proffered him a cigarette. 
IIlJ-a(allae eeen-u (or diin-u, or roolJ-u) I'll give him a 
very hard time. 3 to issue, release. bi-ytallaeu I-magalia 
kull' rusbuue they publish the magazine every week. 
lI(allae vaqab-u fiiha he took out his anger on her. 
-{allae (kalaam) eala to invent and spread (defama-
tory) rumours about (s.o.), as in (allae ealeena finn 
ilJna gubana he spread it around that we were cowards. 

4 to produce. fil-beeq (aUae katakiit the eggs produced 
chicks. fal1san ward i y(aUae riil1a huwwa I-ward iI-
baladi the flowers that produce the best scent are roses. 
5 to detach, remove. laazim ti(aUae kuU ~_~amyi min 
fiid-ak you have to get all the glue off your hands. 6 to 
acquire, obtain. (allae rux~a he got a licence. bi-t(allae 
kaam gineeh fif-fahr how much money do you make in a 
month? 7 to take, bring or send up. (allaeit iI-yasiil eala 
s-su{Uul1 she took the washing up to the roof. bi-n(allae 
mayya min iI-biir we get water up from the well. 8 to 
turn (s.o. or s.th.) into. siib-u bassi maeaana 
w-l1a-n(allae -huu-lak walad ma~buu( just leave him 
with us and we'll make a fine boy out of him. 9 to make 
(s.o. or s.th.) out (to be). (allaeuu-ni kaddaab they 
made me out a liar. -vn ta(liie ; ava/pva mi(allae . 
~I fit(allae or fiaallae Ivii 1 passive of (allae . 2 to 
look. bi-tiaallae li-feeh what are you looking at? 3 to 
aspire. fana mif mit(allae lit-tarqiyya I don't aspire to 
promotion. - ava/iva mit(allae . 
~u. (aalie2 Ivtl to peruse, study. kutub mu(alea 
(school) books (of selections from Arabic prose wri-
ters) for study. -vn mu(alea; ava mi(aalie. 
e11 fiaalae Ivii 1 to be (well) informed, be know-
ledgeable. fil-mul1aami laazim yiailie kitiir wi-ytaabie 
iI-qanuun a lawyer must be well-read and keep up (to 
date) with the law. 2 to refer (to written material). 
fil-muwa;~af bi-yiailie eala l-mustanadaat the em-
ployee consults the documents. -vn fiailaae ; ava 
miailie· 
e'- muaalie ladj ·1 well-informed, knowledgeable. 
~I fista(lae Ivtl It to look into, scrutinize. 
l1a-nista(lae iI-mawquue we'll look into the matter. 
lIl1ubb iI-isti(laae curiosity. 2 {mil] to make a recon-
naissance of. fista(laeu 1- fahdaafthey reconnoitred the 
targets. -vn fisti(laae; ava mista(lae. 
JJ.l. 
Jll. (alaq (i, u) Ivtl 18 to release, set loose. fi(liq 
iI-kalb" ealee set the dog loose on him! (alaqna 
l-bahaayim taakul iI-l1afiifwe let the cattle out to eat the 
grass. fi(liq iI-mayya fig-gineena let the water flow into 
t~e garden. Ib to discharge, fire (a projectile). 2 to 
mate with (of a male animal). -/vii 3 to have uterine 
contractions, have labour pains. -vn (alq, (alaqaan; ava 
(aaliq; pva ma(luuq. 
Jll. (alq 1 (also (alq) ladj/: fil-hawa (-(alq the open air. 
2 Icoll nllabour pains, uterine contractions. 
mJ. (alqa I Ipl -aatl 1 linst nI 18 a uterine contraction 
(in childbirth). Ib a shot. qarab (alqa he fired a shot. 
lc single declaration of divorce. 2 bullet, shell, 
545 
projectile. 
..;Ill. (aaliq Ifem adj ·1 divorced. 
:wu. (alqa 2 = taaliq. 
J')U. talaaq InI divorce. fit-(alaalf bit-talaata {lsi] irre-
vocable divorce. ' 
4i"u. taluuqa In pi -aatl stud animal. 
~ 
taliiq lIn pi {Ulaqal ex-husband. 2 ladj ·1 free. 
l1 urr i taliiq as free as the wind. 
~ 
taliiqa In w foil pron, pi -aatl divorcee. taliqt-u his 
ex-wife. 
..;Uo;1 fin(alaq Ivi/l to set off. fintalaqti waraa I went 
in pursuit of him. 28 to release, be released. 2b to be 
fired, be discharged (of a projectile). 2c to be set loose 
for mating purposes (of a stud animal). -vn fin[ilaaq; 
ava/iva min[iliq. 
4i~1 fin[ilaaqa In pi -aatl 1 instance noun of 
fin[ilaaq. 2 {mech] length of throw setting in machine-
tools. 3 {mech] period of time in which a machine 
works on a particular setting. 
Jll.; I fittalaq or fiaalaq = fintalaq. - ava/iva mit[iliq . 
..;U. taUaq Ivtl to divorce. -vn tatliiq; ava/pva mitallaq. 
~ 
mutallaqat In pi -aatl divorcee. 
~I fit(allaq or fiaaUaq Ivii to be divorced. - iva 
mittallaq. 
Jll.i fatlaq, fa(laq Ivtl 18 to release, set loose. Ib to 
discharge, fire (a projectile). waqt fitlaaq in-naar 
cease-fire. 2 to give (a name). fa(laqu ealee fism i gdiid 
they called him by a new name. -vn fitlaaq, ritlaaq; ava 
mi(liq, mu(liq; pva mu(laq, mU(laq. 
J')U.! fitlaaq Ivnlileala l-fi(laaq absolutely, at all (in 
negative contexts). ma-fuft-uu-feala l-fi(laaq I haven't 
seen him at all. 
11 fi(laaqan t ladvl absolutely (not), (not) at all. 
ma-b-nil1tag-uu-f fi(laaqan we don't need it at all. 
ma-baeat-fi gawabaat - fitlaaqan 'Hasn't he sent any 
letters?' 'None at all.' 
~ 
mutlaq t ladjl absolute. fil-l1ukm iI-mu(laq abso-
lute rule. faylabiyya mu(laqa an absolute majority. 
lIl1abs i mutlaq {leg] detention for a period of unspeci-
fied length. 
11 mutlaqan t (1) ladv always w neg! (not) at all, abso-
lutely (not). (2) linterjl certainly not! absolutely not! 
JJ.l. 
jJ. tall (u) Ivii 1 to project, protrude. mal1fa~t-u lalla 
min geeb-u his wallet is sticking out of his pocket. 28 to 
look (from an elevated position). tallit min if-fibbaak 
she looked out of the window. 2b to command a view. 
fo~qit in-noom bi-t{UU" eala l-gineena the bedroom 
overlooks the garden. -vn (aU, talalaan; ava taalil. 

11 {alia [ala to visit, drop in on (e.g., a sick person). 
qabl' ma truulj il-yee{ ti{ulla [ala fumm-a-ha before 
going to the field she drops in on her mother. 
ill. {alia 1 linst n, pi -aatl a look, a glance. 
j.l..;1 fit{all or fi({all Ivil (impersonal) passive of {all. 
bi-yit{alla [alee kull' saa[a someone looks in on him 
every hour. - iva mit{all. 
Yr J .1. 
~ 
{Ulumba <It tromba cf also T tulumba> In pi 
-aatl pump. -also turumba, {Urumba. 
~ 
{ulumbagi <T tulumbacl> In pi -yyal pump 
operator. 
IJ" r J .1. 
..,....u. {almas Ivil I to turn dark. fid-dinya {almasit 
(1) the sky darkened. (2) everything turned black (to 
my eyes). 2/vtl to ruin, wreck. -vn {almasa; ava/pva 
mi{almis . 
..,....u..1 fit{almas or fillalmas Ivil to be ruined, be 
wrecked. - iva mit{almas. 
.} -' J .1. 
..;.) u. {aluuf In pi (awatiifl plasterer's hawk. 
.:,." J .1. 
.:,) U. {aluun: [ala qalb-a-ha ti-{aluun seeing it through 
to the bitter end. 
I.SJ.1. 
J1. (ala 1.0) Ivtll to plate, overlay (metal). fin-naljaas 
ma{ti b-dahab the brass is gold-plated. 2i to paint. -vn 
{aly, lila, {alayaan; ava {aati; pva ma{ti. 
.')IJ., ,')IJ., lila, {ala 2 Inl metallic plating. lI[alee fi{-{ala 
(usually derisive) it stands out (in,a group). ya[ni-nta iii 
[aleek i{-{ala = the kettle calls the pot black . 
• )0. ,)0. {alla 2 In pi {allayiinl one who plates or over-
lays metal. 
J1;1 fin{ala Ivil to be plated, be overlaid (of metal). 
-iva min{ili. 
11 fin{ala [ala to take in, fool. ma-[adit-!' tin{ili [ala 
Ijadd it doesn't fool anyone any longer. 
Jla;1 fit{ala or fi({ala = fin{ala. - iva mit{ili. 
.;,II.SJ.1. 
.:,I.,..U. ralyaan (also talyaan) <It> Icoll n/ltalians. 
JI.,..U. {alyaani, {ulyaani (also talyaani) Ipl {alayna, 
talaynal I ladjl Italian. 2 Inl an Italian. -
In, no pll 
3 the Italian language. 
546 
r.1. I r.1. 
~lJ. (amaa{im Icoll nl tomato(es). 
4J:.lJ. {ama{ma lunit n, pi -aatl a tomato. 
~lJ.lJ. {amatmaaya = {amatma. 
~ .. r.1. see also .;, r .1. 
.:,lJ.1 fitmafann r Ivil to gain peace of mind. -vn 
fitmifnaan; ava mutmafinn. 
.!lIYr.1. 
.!l W {umbaak <perh Gr toumpeki> Inl type of finely 
cut tobacco, wrapped in a broad leaf, for smoking in a 
fiifa. - also tumbaak, timbaak. 
c.r.1. 
c.".J. {umuulj r Inl ambition. 
.J r .1. 
.;lJ. {umaar <P timar> In pi -aatl curry-comb . 
;J. {ammar Ivtl to take care of, attend to (animals, 
especially horses). -vn ta{miir; avalpva mi{ammar. 
,;1.;1 fil(ammar or fillammar Ivil to be taken care of, 
be attended to (of animals, especially horses). - iva 
mit{ammar. 
IJ"r.1. 
..,....1 lamas (u) Ivtl to efface, blot out. (ams il-Ijaqiiqa 
the obliteration of the truth. -vn {ams, (amasaan; ava 
{aamis; pva ma{muus. 
..,...J.;I fit(amas or fi({amas Ivil to be effaced or blotted 
out. - iva mit{imis. 
..,...J.; 1 fin{amas = fil(amas. -vn 
fin{imaas; iva 
min{imis. 
.}r.1. 
..;..1 {amaflnl labus] countenance. dahyaf-{amaf-u to 
hell with his ugly mug! 
r .1. r.1. see r.1. I r .1. : 
{amatmaaya 
tr.1. 
{amaa{im, 
{ama{ma, 
c..l. {imi[, {umu[ (a) Ivil to become covetous or 
greedy. fin {imi[ niddii-lu xamsa gneeh taani if he gets 
greedy we'll give him five pounds more. fana {am[aan 

fi-larabiyya zayy i larabiyt-u I covet a car like his. -vn 
tamal; ava taamii, tamlaan. 
e.k tamal Inl greed. II fit-tamal yi(jil/i ma gamal 
{prov] ... covetousness profiteth little. 
W 
tamla Inl greediness. 
t w.i fatmaal f Ipl nl ambitions. 
.r.o'1...J. tamlangi In pI -yyal covetous or greedy man. 
tamlangi banaa-Iu beet lalasangi sikin-Iu Iii {prov] (a 
greedy man built a house and a bankrupt man lived in it 
for him) the rewards of greed are minimal. 
tt.:J. tammaal/adj °1 covetous~ greedy. 
eJ. tammal Ivtl I to cause to become covetous or 
greedy. miraat-u tammalit-u I-Ja(j(ja kbiira his wife 
made him covet a big apartment. 2 to encourage to take 
advantage. finta iii tammalt-u liik it is you who caused 
him to try to make. use of you. -vn tatmiil; ava/pva 
mitammal· 
~I fil(ammal or fittammal Ivil passive of tammal. 
-iva mil(ammal. 
r'r~ 
~ tamm (u) Ivil to be overwhelming (of a disaster). 
-vn tamm; ava taamim. 
":\1. tamma I In pI -aatl (overwhelming) calamity. 
~ 
[amma z: la/a tammit leen-u (full) to the brim. 
-also tamma. 
~I fittamm or fittamm = tamm. - ava mittamm . 
.;, r ~ see also .;, - r ~ 
~ 
tammin Ivtl to reassure, set (someone's) mind at 
rest. ya rabb i tammin-ni lalee Lord, set my mind at rest 
about him! -vn tatmiin; avalpva mitammin. 
.;J.;I fittammin or fi[[ammin Ivil to be reassured, 
have one's mind set at rest. fittamminu laJ-Ja(j(ja set 
your minds at rest about the flat. fana mittammin-Iu 
I feel comfortable about him, I have no qualms about 
him. - iva mittammin. 
.;,J....I fis[imann J Ivil to feel 
reassured. -ava 
mis[iminn. 
i.Sr~ 
~ 
[amy <Copt> Inl silt, alluvium. 
~ 
[amya Inl I = [amy. 2 variety or type of tamy. 
II maxluu(j min [amyit il-fabarii(j (created from pitcher 
clay) stupid. 
i.Su!.I.;,~ 
~W:. [anaaJi <Gr> Iprop nl {deris] (nickname for) 
Athanasios, traditional name for a (Greek) cotton 
merchant. 
547 
y';'~ 
..,..:J. tanabJ (u, i) Ivil to appeal. da raagil kariim -
tanabna Galee (jaqa-Ina m~lal:Jit-na he's a generous 
man -we appealed to him and he saw to the business for 
us. -vn {anab, {anabaan; ava {aanib. 
..,...a.; 1 fit{anab or fittanab Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
{anab. fit{anab lalee his assistance was sought. - iva 
mit{inib . 
..,..:J.i fa{nabf Ivil to be long-winded. -vn fitnaab; ava 
mu{nib. 
I.J y.;, ~ 
.r.J. (ambar Ivtl to fill as full as possible. malaJ-Jiwaal 
wi-tambar-u he filled the sack till it would hold no more. 
- vn [ambara; ava/pva mi{ambar . 
.r.kol fit{ambar or fittambar Ivil to be filled to the 
maximum. -iva mit{ambar. 
Z.Jy';'·~ 
)~ {ambuur In pI tanabiirll Archimedes' screw (see 
PI.E, 15). 2 {mech/ flywheel, pulley-wheel. 3 drum, 
cylinder. 4 metal scoop wheel (used in irrigation, see 
PI.E.22). 
.)~ {ambuura In pI -aatl I {mech] 18 pulley-wheel. 
Ib drum, cylinder. -28 tambourine. 2b type of drum 
used in black (Sudanese) zaar. 
u!."y';'~ 
4.:. ~ 
[ambuuJa <It tambuccio> In pI -aat, {anabiiJl 
I metal scoop wheel used in irrigation (see PI.E, 22) . 
2 {naut] booby-hatch. 
.J[.';'~ 
• .r.-:J. tangara <T tencere> In pI {anaagirl {obsol] cas-
serole dish. -also tangara . 
IJ" .;, ~ see Z IJ" .;, " ~ : {uunis 
Iu!.';'~ 
..;.W:. [anaaJ Inl indifference. 
~ 
tanniJ Ivtl to act with indifference towards. 
{anniJuu-ni they behaved as though I weren't there. 
tanniJ forget it! skip it! -vn tatniiJ; ava mi{anniJ. 
~ tanniJ la/a to fail to return (s. th.). {anniJ lala I-filuus 
he didn't repay the money . 
..;.1;1 fittanniJ or fi{{an~J Ivil to be disregarded, be 
forgotten about. - iva mittanniJ. 

2 ..;. lJ,l. see ~..;. I lJ ,l. : {anaaji 
,l.lJ,l. 
Ja:l, {ant <Fr tante> loJ title of, and form of address to, 
an older woman within one's circle of family and ac-
quaintances "'" aunt. 
I ,l. lJ ,l. 
\l..:l. {an{a Iprop oJ Tanta, a town in the centre of the 
Delta, capital of Gharbiya province. 
~J\l..:l. {an{aawi I/adj °1 relating to Tanta. 2 In ·1 
(male) native of Tanta. 
lJ,l.lJ,l. 
.).;1. {an{an Ivil to make a big fuss over, sing the 
praises of. lamlin-lu lantana fil-intixabaat they're mak-
ing a big hullabaloo for him in the elections. -vn 
lantana; ava/pva mi{an{an. 
~I fit{an{an or fiaan{an Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of {an(an. di bt/.aaca yit{an{an liiha is that the kind of 
merchandise to write home about? -iva mit{an(an. 
llJlJ,l. 
.J. {ann (i) Ivil to ring, resound. widn-i bi-t{inn my ears 
are ringing. -vn {aniin; ava {l1anin. 
2lJlJ,l. 
.J. {inn, {Unn, (ann <perh Fr tonne> In pi fa{naanl 
(metric) ton, tonne. 
• ,l. 
J. {ah Ifem n, pi -aatl sixteenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also {aa, {aaf. 
j' ,l. 
R {Uhuror {ihir (a) Ivil {lsi} to become (ritually) pure 
after the menses, childbirth or sexual intercourse. 
bald' ma b-ti{har min il-laada after she is purified from 
the menses. -Y!l {Uhr, {ahaara; ava {aahir. 
R lahar (i) Ivtl {lsi} to purify (something defiled). 
- ava {aahir; pva ma{huur. 
0;t,J. {ahaara loJ I purity. {ahaarit il-fabdaan wala 
{ahaarit il-fadyaan {prov} (a clean body is preferable to 
good ritual) "'" cleanliness is next to godliness. 
2 circumcision. 
.;Au. {aahirlladj ·1 pure (in spirit). II (fis-sitt) i{-{ahra 
epithet of Sayyida Zaynab. 
Ri fa{har lell morelmost ritually clean. 
;.,.J.. {uhuur loJ circumcision. 
. .AJ. {ahhar Ivtll to purify, cleanse. bi-~uum la/aan 
548 
ni{ahhar nafs-i-na we fast in order to purify ourselves. 
IIlaazim ni{ahhar il-balad min il-gawasiis we must 
cleanse the country of spies. 2 to sterilize, disinfect. 
fid-duktuur {ahhar ig-gari:J the doctor cleaned the 
wound. 3 to dredge, clear (a waterway). -YO ta{hiir; 
ava/pva mi{ahhar. 
.AJa. mu{ahhir In pi -aatl disinfectant, antiseptic. 
.Alo;1 fit{ahhar or fiaahhar lvil passive of {ahhar. -iva 
mit{ahhar. 
J"u. {aahir2 Ivtl to circumcise. -vn mi{ahra; ava/p\'a 
mi(aahir. 
J"Ua.. mi{aahir In ·1 circumciser. 
J" lla.-I fit{aahir or fiaaahir Ivil to be circumcised. -iva 
mit{aahir . 
.,.J..;-I fista{har Ivtl to select for ritual purity. -vo 
fisti{haar; ava mista{har. 
lJ I j .,l. 
"IR {ahraanloJl/propoJTeheran.2 kind of Persian 
carpet. 
J.,l. 
~ 
{ihifi or [Uhufi or {ahafi (a) Ivil to become thor-
oughly fed up. {ihifit' minnu I'm fed up to the back teeth 
with him. -vn {Uhfi' {ahafiaan; ava {ahfiaan. 
~ 
{ahhafi Ivtl to drive to distraction. {ahhac;t' 
mraat-ak wi-lyaal-ak you've driven your wife and kids 
up the wall. -vn ta{hiifi; ava/pva mi{ahhafi. 
~I fit{ahhafi or fiaahhafi Ivil to be driven to distrac-
tion, become thoroughly fed up. -ava/iva mit{ahhac; . 
r .,l. 
~ 
{aham (i) Ivtl {deris} to fluster, preoccupy, keep 
busy. feeh illi (ahm-ak kida what has got you in such a 
flap? -vn {ahamaan; ava {aahim; pya ma{huum. 
~I fit{aham or fiaaham Ivil passive of {aham. -iva 
mit{ihim. 
~I fin{aham = fit{aham. -iva min{ihim. 
~.,l. 
~ 
{aha (i) r Ivtl to cook. lI{aha I-maayil to set the 
world to rights. -vn {ahy; ava {aahi; pya ma{hi. 
~ 
{ahy Inl cooking. II fialiil i{-{ahy tactless. c;illit {ahy 
tactlessness. 
~u. {aahi In pi {Uhaahl cook. 
. 
~I fit{aha or fiaaha Ivil to be cooked. -iva mit{ihi . 
ly.J,l. 
~ ~ {Uuba I <Copt> lunit n, pi -aatl I a brick. 2 a 
stone. II rama (Ubt-(u) "'" to give up on (s.o.), to give up 

one's hopes of (s.o.). -gaat i(-{Uubafil-mal{Uuba (the 
stone came against that which was (already) damaged) 
there was a coincidence of unfortunate circumstances. 
-zayy it-(uuba as (heavy as) a rock. -sabae {Ubaat chil-
dren's ball game in which the two teams try to score by 
getting possession of the ball and bowling it at a pile of 
seven stones. 3 a piece of broken brick, tile, cement 
etc. 4 a piece of dry mud. -
linterj~ 5 word said in order 
to jinx the opposing team (in ball games). 
..,..). (Uub Icoll nJ I brick(s). (uub fafJmar red brick. 
{Uub nayy unbaked mud brick. (Uub kasr broken brick, 
rubble. 1 stone(s). {Uub fabyaq limestone. lI{Uub iI-
farq everybody, bar none, as in bi-yiftiki minni I-{Uub 
iI- farq he's complaining about me to everyone in sight, 
bi-yitxaanit; mala (Uub iI- farq he'll pick a fight with 
anyone, he's very quarrelsome. 
1).). {Uubi (also fafJmar (Uubi) ladj invarl brick-red . 
..,..1). (awwaab In * and pI (awwaabal brickmaker. 
2":o'.J.l. 
4!). {Uuba 2 <Copt> Inl fifth month of the Coptic 
year, extending from early January to early February. 
{Uuba ~ayyar iNabiyya karkuuba Tuba (is so cold that 
it) turns a young girl into a hag. ruufJi ya {Uuba ya-lli 
ma-balletii1fil- farq' wala lart;uuba go away Tuba, you 
who haven't moistened (even) a single crack in the 
earth (comment on the dryness of the month). 
l":o'.J.l. 
-\SJ~). {Ubaawit ladj *1 {Chr] blessed (specifically 
with reference to Coptic bishops and patriarchs). 
fabuu-na (-{Ubaawi I-mukarram our Father, the hon-
oured and blessed (Patriarch). 
..,..). (awwabt Ivtl {Chr] to praise (bishops and pat-
riarchs) in the liturgy. -vn ta(Wiib; ava/pva mi(awwib; 
pva mu(awwab. 
..,..~I fit(awwab or fi((awwab Ivil passive of (awwab. 
-iva mit(awwab. 
c..J.l. 
c.u. (aafJ (i) Ivi/l to hurtle, career. fil-waad (aafJ min 
Gala kit/-i the boy suddenly toppled off my shoulder. 
II (aafJ fil-lalaali to exceed the bounds of moderation, as 
in fil- faslaar (aafJit fil-lalaali prices went sky-high. 
-(aayifJ ibn i raayifJ "" here today, gone tomorro.w, easy 
come, easy go (of money, possessions). 1 to lash out 
(verbally or physically). (aafJ fiyya he blew up at me. 
(aafJ fiyya bil-l~aaya he gave me a furious beating with 
the stick. -vn (eefJ, (ayafJaan; ava (aayifJ. 
c.). (awwafJ Ivtl to throw far, fling far. feeh illi 
549 
(awwafJ-ak fi- faaxir id-dinya kida what made you live 
so far away? -vn ta(WiifJ; ava mi(awwafJ. 
c.~1 fit{awwafJ or fiaawwafJ Ivil I to be flung or 
thrown far.l to sway, swing. sakraan bi-yit(awwafJ he's 
drunk and staggering along. 3 to get far, be far re-
moved. bi-yaaxud ik-koora w-yiaawwafJ biiha he takes 
the ball and gets well clear. beet mit{awwafJ a remote 
house. - ava/iva mit(awwafJ. 
t.J.l. 
t). (uux Iprop nl Tukh, a town and markaz in 
Qalyubiya province. lI{Uux fi-miliig a mix-up, confu-
sion. - fJ-awaddii-k fi-{Uux iI-lafariit "" I'll send you to 
the ends of the earth. 
"' .J .l. 
.,\1..:.. min{aad In pI mana[iidl blimp, airship, dirigible. 
I .J.J .l. 
.)). (oor Ih pI fa(Waarl I stage, phase. (oor min 
id-dawra (-(abiliyya a stage in the life-cycle. 1 mood, 
state, disposition (of s.o.). xarag lan (oor-u he lost his 
temper. raagil rariib iI- fa(Waar a man with an eccentric 
manner. 
.)J)a,. ma(Wuur ladj *1 rash, hasty, scatter-brained. 
.). (awwart Ivtl to develop, further, evolve. -vn 
ta(Wiir; ava mu(awwir, mi{awwar; pva mu{awwar. 
.) ~I fit(awwar or fiaawwar Ivill to be developed, be 
evolved. 1 to burst one's tether, become furious. 
fit(awwart· laleehum I got furious with them. -vn 
ta(awwur; ava/iva mit(awwar. 
.)~ ta(awwur In pI -aatl I development. ta(awwur 
Y-linaala f-~r the development of industry in Egypt. 
1 evolution (of the human species) . 
2 .J.J .l. 
i.)). (oora In pI -aat, [iwarl {rur] I foursome, group of 
four (used in counting certain items of food). (OOril 
kafJk four biscuits. (Orleen wi-gooz ten.l some, a little. 
fiddii-ni (OOril fuul give me a little bit of (cooked) fuul. 
1~.J.l. 
~). {awwis Ivtl to tarnish. -vn la(Wiis; ava/pva 
mi(awwis. 
~ 
~I fil(awwis I or fiaawwis I Ivil to be or become 
tarnished. - ava/iva mil(awwis. 
2~.J.l. 
~JJu. (awuus In pI {awawiisl peacock. 
~~I fil(awwis 2 or fiaawwis2 Ivil to swagger, strut. 
- ava mil(awwis. 

I";J..b 
.,..:.1). {awaa/i In pi {awa/iyyal {obsol] eunuch. 
..;.:-,1. {awwif Ivtl I to lop off. 2 to castrate. - vn ta{Wiif; 
ava/pva mi{awwif . 
..r~1 fit{awwif or fi{{awwif Ivil I to be lopped off. 
2 to be castrated. - iva mit{awwif. 
2 ..; J..b see ..; loS ..b : {awaf, fit{awaf, fin{awa/ 
tJ..b 
t 11 {aal (i) Ivtl to obey. ma-lad-/, b-ytiil fabuu he no 
longer obeys his father. kull-i-na tool famr-ak we're all 
obedient to your command. IIxarag lan tOOl(-u) to 
disobey (s.o.). - fana tool fiid-ak I'm yours to com-
mand. -vn tool; ava {aayil; pva mutaal. 
~ 11 {aala Inl obedience. II beet it-taala {lsi law] a hus-
band's house to which a deserting wife is legally obliged 
to return. -Ijukm it-{aala legal decision obliging a de-
serting wife to return to her husband's house. 
t:-,1. {awwal Ivtl to render obedient, bring to com-
pliance. -vn ta{wiil; ava mi{awwal. 
t~1 fit{awwal or fi{{awwal Ivil I to volunteer. 
fi{{awwal fig-gee/he volunteered for the army. 2 to be 
rendered 
obedient. 
-vn 
ta{awwul r ; 
avaliva 
mit{awwal· 
t~ mit{awwal. muta{awwil r In *1 volunteer. 
tJI1 {aawil Ivtl to acquiesce with. Ij-a{awil-ha la/a 
laCj/-a-ha I'll go along with her whims, I'll humour her. 
-vn mi{awla; ava mi{aawil. 
t J \1;1 fil(aawil or fi{{aawil Ivil to be obeyed. -iva 
mit{aawil· 
t l1i fa{aal f Ivtl to obey. -vn fi{aala; ava mu{iil; ava 
mu{aal· 
t \1;;..1 fista{aal f Ivil to be able. -vn fisti{aala; ava 
musta{iil· 
.,j'J ..b 
JI1 {aaf (u) I Ivtl to circle, circumambulate. 2 Ivil to 
circulate, tour (around). -vn {awaaf. {oof, ma{aaf; ava 
(aaytf. 
JI). {awaaf Inl (lsi] the ritual of going around the 
Kaaba in Mecca, particularly during the pilgrimage. 
J). {oof In pi fa{waaf. (iwaafl I low surrounding wall 
of brick plastered with mud. 2 raft. 
;,j). {oofa In pi -aatl temporary mental disorder. 
s8l8at tigit-lu {oofa kida yibCja yzauaCj mif laarif 
bi-YCjuul feeh sometimes he gets a fit of madness that 
makes him shout and scream without knowing what he 
is saying. 
550 
Ju... ma{aaf Inl effort, labour. faadi faxrit iI-ma{aaf "" 
I've been flogging a dead horse . 
;i,A;11 .~11 {ayfa In pi {awaayif, {awaafif/ I group, 
class, party, sect. {ayftt ii-mil maar construction labour-
ers. 2 Sufi order . 
..;:11 (aafiftr ladj *1 factional, sectarian. 
.:,U). {ufaan Inl flood. 
JI:-,1. {awwaaf In pi {awwaafal rural postman. 
J\1;1 fit{aaf or fi{(aaf Ivil (impersonal) passive of {aaf. 
ril-huduum di ma-yit{af-f' fiiha these clothes are not fit 
to go around the Kaaba in. - iva mit{aaf. 
J\1; 1 fin{aaf = fit{aaf. -iva min{aaf. 
J:-,1. {awwif Ivtl I to build a low wall (of mud-plastered 
brick) around (s.th.). 2 {lsi] to conduct (pilgrims) 
through the Meccan pilgrimage rites. 3 to cause to cir-
cle or circumambulate. -vn ta{wiif; ava mi{awwif. 
J;.t... mu{awwif In *1 guide for pilgrims at Mecca. 
J ~ 
1 fil(awwif or fi{(awwif Ivil passive of (awwif. -iva 
mit{awwif. 
1 lob ..b 
J)' {OOCj In pi fa{WaaCjI I ring. hoop. II {ooCj in-nagaah 
life-belt, life-saver. 2 neckband. 3 {print] chase. 
IIhuwwa naazil min {ooCj-u (1) he's the very image of 
him. (2) he can hardly bear (to do or to face) it. 
JI1 (aaCj I Icoll nl aperture(s), opening(s) (especially in 
the wall of a mud-brick house). II min iI-baab li{-{aaCj "" 
just like that, for no apparent reason. as in la8wiz 
titxaaniCj kida mil-baab li{-{aaCj do you want to quarrel 
like that, for no reason at all? 
JI1 {aaCj 2 In pi -aatl measure (in expressing ~he multi-
plication of a quantity).Ij-addii-lu {-{aaCj {aCjeen 1'\1 pay 
him back double. fifta'/(al i{-{aaCj {aCjeell to work with 
redoubled energy. ril-bil/aala '/{ilyit i{-{aaq la/ara the 
goods became ten times more expensive. 
:u11 {aaCja I In pi -aat. {iCjaanl I aperture, opening 
(especially one built into the wall of a mud-brick 
house). {aaCjit iz-ziriiba ventilation hole of an animal 
pen. {aaCjit ii-fum opening of a baladi oven or baker's 
oven. {aaCjit il-manaxiir nostril opening.llcaaCjit il-c;adr 
{lsi] the celestial light said to appear on leelit il-Cjadr; it 
is believed that those fortunate enough to see it may 
have their wishes granted. 2 niche (especially one built 
into the wall of a mud-brick house). II rilli Ija((eet-u 
fi{-{aaCja tilCjaa fi{-{aaCja {prov] "" save for a rainy day. 
3 hank, skein, coil (of thread). 4 bolt (of cloth). caac;il 
iI-huduum bi-ykuun fiiha talatiin mitr a bolt of cloth 
contains thirty metres. 
~11 {aCjiyya In pi {awaaCjil I skull-cap (see PI.F, I). 
II {aCjiyyit zift folk remedy for baldness, involving a cap 

of pitch. -(a(jiyyit il- rixfa a mythical (a(jiyya said to have 
the power of making its wearer invisible. da ramri 
mustal:JiiI tanfiiz-u -da-nta laayiz (a(jiyyit il-rixfa la/aan 
tilraf tilmil il-l:Jikayaa-di that's an impossible venture 
-you'd need to make yourself invisible for that! - ri(j/al 
('!(jiyt-ak wi-fallii-ha take off your skullcap and go 
through it for nits! (to an over-finicky person). 2 head 
or cap (of a nail or the like). 
J::,l. (awwa(j Ivtl I to surround, encircle. (awwa(jti 
ra(jabt-u bi-gmiila I got a hold on him by doing him a 
favour. 2 to fine (particularly a stowaway on a train). 
3 to put to (great) expense. l:Ja-n(awwa(j-ak fi-radwa 
we'll get you to cough up the money for a lunch. 4 to 
buff, shine (with a dry cloth). - vn ta(Wii(j; ava/pva 
mi(awwa(j. 
J!)'; ta(wii(j Inl rubbing glove (for grooming a horse). 
J~I rit(awwa(j or ri((awwa(j Ivil passive of (awwa(j. 
rin l:Jabbit-ak il-l:Jayya ri((awwa(j biiha [prov/ (if a ser-
pent loves you, wrap it around your neck) one should 
treasure friendship. - ava/iva mit(awwa(j. 
lJ".,l, 
Ju, (aa(j3 (i) Ivtl to endure, bear. rana mif (aayi(j 
ir-raagil da I can't stand that man. -/the literary passive 
imperfect occurs! ril-liifa ba(jit laa tu(aaq life became 
impossible to bear .11 tisaxxani I-mayya t(i(jii-ha b-riid-ik 
you heat the water till it's hand-hot. -vn (aya(jaan; ava 
(aayi(j. 
~u, (aa(ja 2, (aaqa In pi -aatl power, capability. rilmil 
guhdi (a(jt-ak do your very best! (aa(jit iI-makana 
mal:Jduuda the machine has a limited clJpacity. dafoo(j 
(a(jt-i that's more than I can manage. riI-rawwa~a di 
b-tiftaral bi(-(aaqa n-nawawiyya this is a nuclear-
powered submarine. 
J\l.;1 rit(aa(j or ri((aa(j Ivil to be endured, be borne. 
riI-(julaad fil-ba/ad di ma-yit{a(j-/ staying in this coun-
try is unbearable. - iva mit(aa(j. 
.)JJ".,l, 
~"k {ookar Iprop nl Tokar (a place to the south-east 
of Port Sudan at which a small Egyptian force was 
defeated by the Mahdists in 1884).lIraal:J fi-{ookar to 
come to a bad end (usually by tangling with the law). 
IJ".,l, 
J"k {iwil (a) Ivil la to become long, be prolonged. 
riI-leel bi-yi(Wal fif-Jita the nights become longer in 
winter. Ib [soccerJ to overshoot (of the ball). 2 to grow 
long(er) or tall(er). bukra/alr-ak yi(Wal taani your hair 
551 
will grow again soon. rif-Jagara di {iwlit fi-Ieela this tree 
has grown overnight. II ri(WaiJ get up! stand up! 
-ra(jabt-u (iwlil he felt proud. -lisaan-u (iwil he became 
insolent. - riwla s-silaal:J yi(Wal fl- riid-ak be careful 
with that knife in your han.d! - riid-u (iwlit la/a I-fuluus 
he stole the money. -vn {Uul, (awalaan; ava (aayil. 
Ju, (aal (u) I Ivil = (iwil 1. II (aal iI-ma(aal it's been a 
long wait, it's been a long time. 2a Ivtl to reach, attain. 
law (ult-ak l:J-a4,rab-ak if I catch you I'll hit you! l'iid-u 
ma-(alit-J iI-burtu(jaana his hand couldn't reach the 
orange. (aal-u l:Jabbit bard he had a touch of cold. 
rif-Jaay da (aal-u gaaz this tea has a slight taste of 
kerosene. Ilia (aayi/ ii-moot wa/a 1-l:Jaya half-way be-
tween life and death. -l:Jabb i w-/a-(al-Jhe had an unre-
quited love affair. - rilli t(uul-u ral:Jsan min leen(-u) get 
whatever you can out of (him). 2b Ipreverbl to get to. 
law ra{Uul rakallim-u ... if (only) I could get to speak to 
him .... -vn (uul, (awalaan; ava (aayil. 
J"k (Uull./vn/ll(uul (or (uulit) iI-riid thievery, larce-
nous inclination. -{Uul (or (Uulit) iI-baal influence, pull. 
-{Uul (or (uulit) ir-rool:J slowwittedness. -{Uul (or (Uulit) 
i/-lisaan rudeness, insolence. -(uul (or (Uulit) il-lumr 
(1) life span. (2) long life, longevity. -(uul (or (uulit) 
iI-baal patience. 2 In pi ra(Waa/l 2a length. (uul i/-
roo4,a the length of the room. ril-ra(Waal di landak do 
you have these lengths? bi{-(uu/lengthwise.llla/a {uul 
(1) straight ahead, straight on. (2) right away, im-
mediately. (3) continuously, incessantly. -(uul bi-lar4, 
every inch a ... (and yet revealing a shortcoming), as in 
musta/fa (uul bi-lar4,i wi-ma-fihaa-J ribra a fantastic 
hospital like this, and no hypodermics in it! - rana 
f-lar4,-ak rana f-(uul-ak == I implore you! 2b [geogJ 
longitude. xa((i (uulline of longitude. 2c height, size. 
ri/-wa/ad da (uul-u kaam how tall is that boy? II wi(jil 
min {Uul-u he fell full-length. - raagi/ bi-{Uul-u a man 
unaided, a man alone. -ga b-(uul-u to bring nothing, 
come empty-handed. -ya (uul-ak ya rax-i be your age, 
pal! -hizz i (uul-ak get a move on! - maa/i yhizz i {Uul-u 
swaggering. 3/prepl (also (uulit) throughout, all ... 
long. {Uul il-Ieel all night long. (uullUmr-i all my life. 
11 (uul rna (also (uulit rna) Iconjl as long as, while. rana 
mabsuu{ (uul ma-nta malaaya I'm happy as long as 
you're with me. 
~"k (uula see {Uul. 
J"k {Uuli ladj/l longitudinal. 2 oblong. 
Uu, (aalamaT Iconjl as long as. 
~ l"k (iwaa/a In pi -aat, (awaayi/, (awawiill I feeding 
trough (built against a wall at floor level for feeding 
livestock). 2 [constrJ wooden ramp for climbing 
scaffolding. 

.,h). [awiil, [iwiil ladj pi (Uwaal/ la physically long. 
nal:Jyit il-l:Jizaam i[-[awiila the long end of the strap. 
lI[iwiillariiq a great big (person). - riid-u [awiila he's 
light-fingered, he's sticky-fingered. -l:Jibaal-u [awiila he 
takes his own sweet time. -lisaan-u [awiil he is insolent. 
Ib long in duration. mudda [awiila a long time. faifSaa[ 
[awiilit il- fagal long-term instalments. 2 tall. raagil 
[awiil zayy il-madna a very tall man. [awiil wi- fahbal tall 
and simple, oafish. kullu [awiilin habiil (wa-kullu 
q~iirin makiir) [prov] every tall man is stupid (and 
every short man is sly). II (xarag minha) [awiil [awiil (he 
got out of it) scotfree. 
~). [awiila: fabu [awiila 1 tall man. 2 dolt, oaf. 
J).i fa(Wal leU morelmost long or tall. lisaan-u fa(Wal 
minnu he's extremely rude. 
jJl~ [awwaala In pi -aatl bench. 
JI~ [awwaali I/adj invarl direct. xa[[' [awwaali a 
direct (railway) line. ifu[uraat [awwaali trains operating 
on direct lines. 2 ladvl (1) straight ahead, straight on. 
(2) right 
away, 
immediately. 
(3) continuously, 
incessantly. 
Jll.... ma[aal: [aal il-ma[aal it's been a long wait, it's 
been a long time .. 
J.,.,Ja... mi[eewal, mi[eewil ladjl elongated. 
J\1;1 fin[aallvil to be reached, be reachable. yin[aal 
min tal:Jt if-Jibbaak it can be reached from beneath the 
window. -iva min[aal. 
J\l.;1 fit[aal or fi[[aal = fin[aal. -iva mit[aal. 
J~ [awwil Ivtl 1 to lengthen, make longer. [awwil-li 
l-kumm 'fwayya make the sleeve a little longer! II [awwil 
baal-ak be patient! - fallahumma [awwil-ik ya rool:J 
God, give me patience! 2 to make tall(er). ril-fustaan 
da y[awwil-ik that dress makes you (appear) taller. 
lI[awwil raifabt-i he made me feel proud. 3 to bring 
within reach. bass' [awwilu-huu-li just let me get my 
hands on him! rabb-i [awwil-ni iii f-baal-i Lord, grant 
my wish! - Ivil 4 to become (excessively) prolonged. 
ril-ifalda [awwilit the get-together dragged on and on. 
IIma-t[awwil-f (1) don't keep going on! shut up! 
(2) don't be away for long. -la t(awwil wala tif~~ar 
tabus] just shut up! -vn ta(Wiil; ava/pva mi[awwil. 
J~I fit[awwil or fi[[awwil Ivil passive of [awwil. -iva 
mit[awwil. 
JJ\l.;1 fit[aawil or fi[[aawil Ivil 'to behave' presump-
tuously or insolently. ma-ti[[awil-J' lala iii fakbar 
minnak don't be rude to your elders. -vn ta[aawu/t; iva 
mit[aawil. 
J).;...,I fista(Wil, fista{l-yallvtll to consider (too) long. 
fista(Wilna l-masaafa rgilna we found the distance too 
552 
long, so we turned back. 2 to consider (too) tall. 
fista(W!1 in-naxla ifaam ma-rqii-J yi[lal-ha he thought 
the palm tree was too high, so he refused to climb it. 
II baayin laleehum ista(Waluu-k apparently they took 
you for a big dolt. 3 to select for length or tallness. 
fista(Wil-1i l~aaya w-hat-ha find me a long stick and 
bring it. -ava mista(Wil. 
JJ.;..... musta[iil 1 ladjl oblong, rectangular. 2 In pi -
aatl oblong, rectangle. 
2J"j, 
jJJu. [awla <It tavola> In pi -aatl la backgammon. 
Ib backgammon board. 2 baker's straight-sided rec-
tangular tray (on which baked goods are prepared for 
baking and delivery). 3t table. tinis i[-[awla table 
tennis. 
,,,.bU. [awilgi In pi -yyal baker's delivery boy. 
" " j, 
.~ [awwa <T tava from P> In pi -aatl metal or 
earthenware pot. 
1oS"j, 
loS). [awa (i) Ivtl 1 to fold, fold up. II [aweet-u tal:Jt' 
baa[-i I made him my man. 2 to put out of mind, forget. 
fal:Jsan l:Jaaga ti(Wi 1-l:Juzn' da wi-tirgal li- fahl-ak the 
best thing would be for you to bury this sorrow and 
return to your family. -vn [ayy, [awy; ava [aawi; pva 
ma(Wi. 
.) [ayy Ivnl II~oom i[-[ayy [Chr] fast of total absti-
nence from food. -[ayy· tala layy on an empty sto-
mach, as in baat [ayy· lala layy he went to bed 
supperless. 
;J, [ayya In pi -aatl a fold. 
.1)'" .• )... ma(Wa In pi ma[aawil 1 jack-knife, pocket-
knife. ma(Wit calm [hart] gr~fting knife. 2 tall story, 
fish story. bi-yiqrab m,a[aawi he's telling tall stories. 
3 [text] warp cylinder. 
loS # 1 fin[awa Ivil 1 to be folded, be folded up. 
II fin[awa bald' ma maatit he cut himself off from socie-
ty after she died. -min[iwi lala nafs-u introverted. 2 to 
be put out of mind, be forgotten. fin[awa mala z-
zaman it was forgotten with time. -vn fin[iwa, 
fin[iwaaf; ava/iva min[iwi. 
.1#1 fin[iwaafr Inl introversion . 
.... )..;.. mun[awif ladj *1 introverted. 
.... )a;1 fit[awa or fi[[awa = fin[awa. -ava/iva mit[iwi. 
·YIoSj, 
..,.,u. [aab 2 (i) Ivil la to be or become virtuous, be or 

become good. kallim-u - yimkin t;alb-u y(iib talk to him 
- maybe he'll soften. Ib to become pleasing, become 
agreeable. fil-liija taabit luhum life became agreeable 
for them. IImimma lazza wa-taabt ... the choicest of 
food. 2a to become cooked. fistanna lamma I-bataa{is 
ti(iib wait till the potatoes are done.ll/alJm-i taayib I'm 
worn out. 2b to become ripe. 3 to heal, recover (from 
illness). (ibt have you recovered? II fijrab lamuun 
t;alb-ak yi(iib drink some lemon -it will refresh you. 
4 to turn cool (of weather). -vn tayabaan, (iyaab; ava 
taayib. 
..,..lelo (iyaab Ipl n! (cool) north wind. 
~ lelo (iyaaba = (iyaab. 
~ 
(iibt In! perfume, scent. IIgooz it-(iib or goozit 
it-(iib nutmeg. -lan (iib xaa(ir willingly. 
~ 
(iiba 1 In! kindness, good-heartedness. 
....;l. tayyib 1 ladj ·/1 good-hearted, kind. raagil tayyib 
a good man. fit-tayyib marriteen labiit [prov) he who is 
excessively kind is a fool. ma-Iak-p fit-tayyib n~iib you 
don't have what it takes to mix with the good (people). 
2 naive. 3 [frozen contexts} good, excellent. kull i sana 
wi-nta tayyib ... may the reoccurrence of this day, or 
occasion, find you well (a greeting on all annually cele-
brated occasions). t;irfeen tayyibiin a good sum of 
money. jiwayya tayyiba or jiwayya tayyibiin (1) a good 
while. (2) a good quantity. Ilzeet tayyib olive oil. 
- fil-la/ara t-tayyiba (points-winning) ten of diamonds 
in koomi (q.v.). - In, no pI/ 4 good turn(s), good 
deed(s). filmil it-tayyib wi-rmii l-balJr [prov} ... do 
good deeds for their own sake. - ladvlS well. lamalt i 
tayyib you've done well. - linterj/6 all right! O.K.! see 
further under I .... ,.1, 
~i fatyab lell ·1 morelmost good-hearted. 2 morel 
most pleasant. 
'":"!.Ua.. mataayib Ipl nl best parts, choicest items. 
mataayib id-dibiilJa the best cuts of meat. 
", 
• 2 
...,.... taYYlb Ivtll to perfume, scent. 2a to make ripe, 
ripen. 2b to cook (food) till ready to eat. 3 to heal. 
ril-marham lJa-ytayyib ig-garlJ the ointment will heal 
the wound.lltayyib xatr-u he consoled him, made him 
feel better. 4 [rur} to do well, make a good job of. -vn 
tatyiib; ava/pva mitayyib. 
Jt,;l... mi{ayyibaati In pi -yyal I member of an audi-
ence or claque who voices his appreciation during a 
performance. 2 flatterer, sycophant . 
..,..;J.;I fittayyib or fittayyib Ivil passive of tayyib 2. - ava/ 
iva mittayyib . 
.,...1.:;-1 fistatyab, fistatyib Ivtlla to consider kind, or 
good-hearted. Ib to consider naive. 2a to select for 
kindness or goodness. 2b to select for naivet~. 3 to act 
like a good-hearted person, give an appearence of kind-
ness. -vn fistityaab; ava/iva mistatyab, mistatyib. 
2 y ",j, 
~ 
(iiba 2 Iprop nI (Egyptian) Thebes. 
3 
• 
y ..s ,.1, see y I ,.1, : taab I, taaba 
c:. '" ,.1, see c:..J ,.1, : taalJ 
.J",j, 
.Ju, taar2 (i) Ivil to fly. fil-lJamaama mij t;adra t(iir the 
pigeon can't fly. II taarit lil-mustaffa she rushed off to the 
hospital. -kaan {aayir min il-faralJ he was walking on 
air. - fin-noom taar min lenee sleep left him. -lat;l-i (or 
muxx-i) taar I lost my mind. - fil-macaad taar min 
muxx-i the appointment went right out of my mind. 
-hiyya d-dinya taarit or fid-dinya ma-{arit1why are you 
in such a hurry? - fil-malJfa;a taarit the wallet has been 
pinched. -la{-taayir quickly, briefly, instantly, as in 
bi-yifham-ha la{-taayir he catches on very quickly. 
- bi-yifham-ha w-hiyya {ayra he's very quick-witted. 
- fana taayir xaa/~ I'm stoned, I'm far gone. -koora 
{ayra volleyball. -vn tayaraan; ava taayir, taafir, 
(ayraan. 
.):. tayar (i) Ivtl I to rush, hustle (s.o.). 2 to make 
irrational, make (s.o.) lose his head. bitaac il-mazamiir 
tayar il-liyaal the whistle-seller got the children in a 
frenzy (to buy). -vn tayaraan; ava taayir; pYa matyuur. 
,:,1'):' tayaraan In! aviation./irkit tayaraan airline com-
pany. silaalJ it-{ayaraan the Air Force. 
.):. teer Icoll nIl pOUltry and pigeon( s), domesticfowl. 
1It;~t;~ {eer-ak la yluuf bi-lfeer-ak [prov} ... clip your 
fowl's wings and they won't fly off to anyone else. 
2 birds. fic-ceer ig-gaarilJ birds of prey. mij kull ie-leer ilti 
yittaakillalJm-u [prov} (not all birds have edible flesh) 
... not everyone will allow himself to be exploited. -law 
kaan fii xeer ma-kan1i ramaa {-teer [prov} if there were 
any good in it, the birds would not have discarded it 
(Le. it is totally useless). 3~ flies. yilaawid i{-teer 
wi-YUt;al fil-lasal [prov} (the flies are sure to come 
back and fall into the honey) there is always a second 
chance to catch a wrongdoer. 
i.):. teera lunit n, pi -aatll a chicken, pigeon etc. 2 a 
bird. 3! a fly. 
.J ~ fUyuur T Ipl n! birds. fat-fUyuuru la/a fafkaal-i-ha 
taqac [prov} birds of a feather flock together . 
.JQ. tayyaar In ·1 I aeroplane pilot. II-/adjectivallyl 
naqiib tayyaar Air Force captain (and similarly for 
other ranks in the Air Force). 2 ladjl volatile (of subst-
ances). fiz-zuyuu~ i{-tayyaara volatile oils. 

.);1. tayyaara In pi -aatll aeroplane.lltayyaara waraq 
kite. 2 (rur] temporary animal pen in a field. 
~)o. ta)'yaari 1 ladil rash, hasty. r;aql-u tayyaari he is 
rash. 2 ladvl hastily. 
)u... mataar In pi -aatl airport. 
). tayyar Ivtl to cause to fly. fil-hawa tayyar il-r;imma 
the wind sent the turban flying. Ilba-t{ayyar filus-ha 
kull-a-ha she's going to blow all her money. -tayyar 
diraar;-u !-badsa he lost his arm in an accident. 
-ba-t{ayyar r;aql-i (or muxx-i) you'll drive me mad! 
-gaab gooz bamaam wi-tayyar-u he brought a pair of 
pigeons and kept them till they could fly (i.e. for breed-
ing). -vn ta(Yiir; ava/pva mi[ayyar. 
JI..J... mi(ayyaraati ladi pi -yyal light-fingered. 
).;1 fit(ayyar or fi({ayyar Ivil passive of [ayyar. -iva 
mit[ayyar. 
j loS j" 
..r.J. [iiz <T tiz> {coarse] Ifem n, pi (iyaaz, fa(Yaazl 
1 buttocks, rump, arse. r;iryaan i(-(iiz yibibb it-taqmiiz 
{prov] (it is) the bare-arsed (who) likes to wiggle ... it is 
the poor who like to keep up with the Joneses.1I roob-u 
f-[iiz-u he's quick-tempered. -muxx-u !-(iiz-u he's 
brainless. -ma-luu-![iiz he can't sit still. -humma [izeen 
fi-Ibaas they're inseparable. - qird abu (iiz bamra ba-
boon. -[iiz-ak bamra "" you're talking nonsense! 2 rear 
end of any object. [iiz il-r;arabiyya back end of the car. 
II ... fi-(iiz ... right after the other, as in sigaara f-(iiz 
sigaara one cigarette after another. -ladi invarl 
3 clumsy, oafish, thick. 
..r.J.i fa(Yaz fell more/most clumsy, oafish or thick. 
). (ayyiz Ivil to behave stubbornly, r~fuse to move, be 
stupid and oafish. -vn ta(Yiiz; ava mi(ayyiz. 
..;~j" 
..;u, (aaf (i) Ivil to stray, go off course. r~aa~a (ayfa 
~abit-ha a stray bullet hit her. fil-walad [aaf the boy 
went off the rails. -vn (eej, (iij, [ayaafa, [ayafaan; ava 
(aayij. 
,-",.,,1 (awaf (i) Ivtl to make heedless or negligent. maa 
lak ma(Wuuf kida why are you so reckless? -ava (aawij; 
pva ma(wuuj. 
~ 
(eef, (iij Inl recklessness, rashness. (eef ij-fabaab 
the heedlessness of youth. 
:i...:.1.,1 [ayaafa = [eej. 
~ 
[iija Inl {deris] someone held in reserve and used 
only as a stopgap, someone to fall back on when there is 
no-one better around. 
..rtu, [aayij/adi °1 rash, hasty. 
.;).;"1 fit(awaf or fi{{awaf Ivil passive of (awaj. -iva 
mit{iwij. 
SS4 
..;."h; I fin[awaf = fit(awaj. -iva min[iwij. 
( j" loS j" ) 
.laJ. [iit: faaxir iz-zamr' tiit {provJ at the end of the 
piping is a squeak (of fruitless effort). 
J..,1 [iita: nooma w-tamtiita fabsan min farab tiita 
{prov] sleep and stretching out (at home) are better 
than (pointless) party-going. 
t ~ j" see t.J j" : (aar; 
~ ~ j" see also ~.J j" 
...0.1 teef In pi fa(Yaafll spectre, apparition. 2 image, 
shadow. II fit-teef iq-qawfi {physJ the spectrum. 
J ~ j" see J.J j" : taaq 
-,-",J~j" 
.:,U,J. taylasaan Inl {ChrJ mitre . 
r loS j" see r ~ I j" : taayim 
.;,~j" 
u.,J. tiin Inl la mud, alluvium. Ilma~taba ti(n a mud 
bench. bi-tiin-u wa/a rasiil i/-birak unwashed (food) is 
better than (food) washed in (dirty) pools (vegetable 
vendor's cry). lIr;aamii widn' min tiin wi-widn' min 
r;agiin {prov] turning a deaf ear. -zift it-tiin da that 
unmentionable so-and-so! -bag-i tiin my luck is lousy. 
-zawwid it-tiin balla he made things go from bad to 
worse. 
Ib clay. 2/pl .fa(Yaanl land, agricultural 
property. 
4:.,l. tiina lunit n, pi -aatl 1 a clod (of mud or earth). 
IIsakraan tiina dead drunk. 2 a type of clay. 
II kull-u-hum tiina wabda they're all of a kind. - fit-tiina 
min it-tiina wi/-latta min il-r;agiina {provJ like father like 
son. 
~ 
tiini ladjl 1 muddy. 2 made of clay. 
;1 tayyin Ivtl 1 to daub with mud or clay. 2 {slangJ to 
botch, bungle. (ayyint i/-imtibaan I made a mess of the 
exam. lI[ayyint-a-ha I got dead drunk. -tayyint-a-ha 
r;ala dmaar-ak you've made it worse for yourself. - Ivil 
3 to become bad, become a mess (of, e.g., a situation). 
fi/-qaqiyya (ayyinit the case took a turn for the worse. 
-vn ta(Yiin; ava/pva mitayyin . 
.:J... ~i(ayyin ladj °1 lousy, awful. yoom mitayyin a 
lousy day. 
.)a; 1 fit{ayyin or fi({ayyin Ivil passive of tayyin. -ava/ 
iva mittayyin . 
~ ~ j" see 1oS.J j" : (ayy, tayya 

I~ 
\10 ;aa Ifem nl seventeenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also ;aar, ;ah. 
.I~ 
.\10 ;aart Ifem n, pI -aatl seventeenth letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. -also ;aa, ;ah. 
j,,,:-,~ 
.J....p • .J...lo ;aba( (also zaba(2) (u) Ivtl 1 to adjust, reg-
ularize, order. ;aba( iI-Ijisaab he put the account in 
order. ;aba(na n-ni;aam fi/-madrasa we re-established 
order in the school. bi-yu;bu( iI-minabbih la/Ban y~lja 
badri he sets the alarm clock in order to wake up early. 
II ril-laskari b-yu;bu( (iI-xa(Wa) mala zmiil-u the 
policeman keeps in step with his comrade. 2 to tune (an 
engine, a musical instrument etc.). II ru;bu( iI-maljalla 
tune into the (radio) station (properly)! 3 to catch, 
apprehend. 'Jil-buli~ ;aba( iI-Ijagaat iI-masruuc;a the 
police seized the stolen goods. miraat-u ;aba[it-u 
fis-siriir mala la/ic;t-u his wife caught him in bed with 
his mistress. -vn ;aba(aan, ;ab(, zab(, qab( t ; ava ;aabi(; 
pva ma;buu( . 
.J....p • .J...lo ;ab(, qab( (also zab() Ivnl IIqab( in-nafs self-
control. -/aay ;ab(excellent tea. - bi;-;ab(exactly, as in 
ris-Saala Inaa/ar bi;-;ab( twelve o'clock on the dot. 
~L;. .~\Io ~aabi(, qaabi( (also zaabi() In pI ;ubbaa(, 
qubbaa( T! I officer (in the police or the armed ser-
vices). ~aabitiljtiyaa(ireserve officer. II {mil] ~afP ;aabit 
non-commissioned officer. -;aabi( la;iim high-ranking 
officer (above the rank of major). 2 games master, 
sports master (in a school, also responsible for disci-
pline). 3 ;aabi( 'Jiiqaal {mus] drummer. 
.1. ~ 
• .1.",Jo.. ma;buu( (also mazbuu() ladjl 1 exact, 
in order. mawaliid-u ma;buuta he is punctual. riid-u 
ma;buuta his hand is sure. la/c;a ma;buu(a a sound 
hiding. -/adverbiallyl bi-yilmil/uv/-u ma;buu( he does 
his work properly. 2 linvarl medium-sweet (of Turkish 
coffee). 
~I .J:...,Io;I l'it;abat or ri;;aba( (also l'itzabat or 
rizzaba() Ivil 1 passive of ;aba(. 2 to become adjusted, 
become regular. -ava/iva mit;ibi(. 
~I • .la,.lo.;1 rin;abat, l'inqabatt 
= 
l'it;abat. -vn 
l'in;ibaat; ava/iva min;ibi{ . 
.1.~I • .1.I.,.I.i;I rinqibaat Inl (military) discipline . 
.J.a;..;. .J..) ;abbat (also zabba(2) 1 Ivtl intensive of 
;abat. 2 to become surfeited (of the stomach). -vn 
ta;bii{; ava/pva mi;abbat. 
J..;.;..;I .~I rit;abbat or ri;;abbat (also l'itzabbat2 or 
l'izzabba(2) Ivil passive of ;abbat 1. - iva mit;abba{. 
~y~ 
.."l; ;aby In pI ;ibyaan, ;ibaa'JI gazelle. IIrabu ;aby 
Abu Dhabi. 
y.)~ 
..,..); ;arab (u) Ivtl {coarse] to excrete (dung, faeces), 
crap.llbi-yu;rubu lyaa/'" they breed like rabbits! -vn 
;arb; ava ;aarib; pva ma;ruub. 
j,.)~ 
.1. ~ • .1.); ;ar(lt (a) Ivil to fart, break wind. II;uraa{ 
fi-c;afa~ {prov] ... much ado about nothing. -vn ;ar(, 
;uraat, ;arataan; ava ;aarit. 
~ 
~ 
.~); ;ar{a In pI -aatl a fart, a breaking of wind. 
II wi;-;ar(a (fiik) ... I don't give a fig (about you) (in 
answer to, e.g., a threat). - rinta ya si ;ar{a you rotter! 
-also qar{a . 
.1.1); ;arraat ladj • and pI ;arraa(al {coarse] voluble 
but undependable, full of flatulent talk. 

.1);i fa;rat 
lell 
worselworst, 
lousierl 
lousiest. 
fil-fitneen fa;rat min balc/. they are as bad as each 
other. 
.1:"'" . .1}o ;arrat Ivil i to break wind, fart.1I ;arrat-Iu 
he didn't give a damn about him. 2 [slang] to worsen, 
deteriorate (of circumstances). - also c/.arrat. -vn ta;riit; 
ava mi;arrat . 
.1);1 fit;arrat or fi;;arrat Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
;arrat. I;aqq-ak yit;arrat-/ak [coarse] you should be 
given short shrift. - also fitc/.arrat. -iva mit;arrat. 
lJ.)~ 
J); ;arf In pI fa;ruf, ;uruuf, ~urufa/l envelope.l;ua 
il-fawraaq fi-;arf put the papers in an envelope. 
2 casing (such as a watch case, ball-bearing casing, 
chuck of a drill, cartridge case, eggcup etc.). - Ipl 
;uruuf onlyl 3 (compelling or unavoidable) circumst-
ance. gaa-Ii ;arf' mufaagif something unexpected 
turned up (and delayed me). ;uruufmuxaffifa mitigat-
ing circumstances.llda b-;uruuf-u that depends on the 
circumstances. -xallii-ha b-;uruf-ha (let's) see how 
things turn out. - Ino pll 4 duration, period. fi-;arf' 
fusbuleen in the space of two weeks. 
J J)a.. ma;ruuf In pI ma;ariifl envelope (particularly 
in contexts of tendering). fatl; il-ma;ariifthe opening of 
sealed tenders (for comparative study by the appointed 
committee). 
J}o ;arraF Ivtl I to put in an envelope. maktab 
il-wuruud bi-y;arraf it-tillilfrafaat the reception office 
puts the telegrams in envelopes. 2 to slip (s.o.) a bribe. 
-vn ta;riif; ava/pva mi;arraf. 
J);I fit;arraF or fi;;arraF Ivil I to be put in an 
envelope. 2 to be slipped a bribe. -iva mit;arraf. 
ZJ.)~ 
J); ;urf In! sweetness, agreeableness, cuteness. 
4i I); ;araafa In! agreeableness. fi!-bint' di faaxir 
lataafa w.-;araafa this girl is extremely pleasant and 
agreeable. 
~); ;ariifladj pI ;urafa, ;urafal pleasant, agreeable, 
delightful. fakalu fakla ;ariifa they ate a nice meal. 
kaanit qalda ;ariifa it was a pleasant gathering. man;ar 
;ariif a pleasant sight. 
J);i fa;raf lell morelmost pleasant, agreeable etc. 
J}o ;arraF Ivtl to smarten up, make attractive. 
Juf-/ak qami~ kida y;arraf-ak wi-yxallii-k I;ilw find 
yourself a shirt that will make you look smart and 
attractive. - vn ta;riif; ava/pva mi;arraf. 
J);I fit;arraF or fiHarraF Ivill to make oneself 
556 
socially agreeable. 2 to be made to look attractive and 
agreeable. - ava/iva mit;arraf. 
J )10;1 fit;aarif or fi;;aarif Ivil to behave ingratiating-
ly, make a show of pleasantness. -ava mit;aarif. 
J )a;... 1 fista;raf I Ivil to behave ingratiatingly, make 
a show of pleasantness. fil-wa/ad da tamalli b-yista;raf 
la/-banaat that boy is always playing up to the girls. 
2 Ivtl to select for attractiveness or pleasantness. -vn 
fisti;raaf; ava/pva mista;raf. 
1 r J~ 
~ ;alam (i) Ivtl to wrong, deny justice to. fana iii 
gibt-u I-nafs-i ma-I;add '-/ ;alam-ni I brought it on my-
self, no-one wronged me. finti b-ti;limi I-wiliyya 
bik-ka/a~m da you're maligning the woman by saying 
that. ;alamuu-ni ;ulm il-I;useen they dealt with me as 
unjustly as Hussein was dealt with (reference is here to 
the killing of Hussein, the Prophet's grandson, at Kar-
bala in Iraq in 680 AD). -vn ;ulm; ava ;aalim; pya 
ma;luum. 
~ ;ulm Inl injustice. fil-musawaah fi;-;ulm a ladl 
[prov] for everyone to be equally unfairly treated is (a 
kind of) justice. 
rllo ;aalim In • and pI ;alamal wrongdoer, oppressor. 
fi;-;aalim wil-ma;luum the wrong-doer and the 
wronged. kull' ;aalim lu yoom or liik yoom ya ;aalim 
[prov] the unjust will get their deserts one day. 
r)la.. ma;luum I/pva/ Ilya baxt' min baat ma;luum 
wi-ma-bat-/' ;aalim [p'rov] "'" better to be oppressed 
than be an oppressor. 2/n pI ma;aliiml victim of 
oppression. yaama fil-I;abs' ma;aliim [prov] "'" how 
many are those who are wrongly punished! 
~i fa;lam lell morelmost unfair to others. fil-baadi 
fa;lam the first to do wrong ddes the greater wrong. 
4.)lo ;aluumaJ In pI -aatl gross injustice. 
rUo.. ma;aalim Ipl n! wrongs, injustices. 
~I fit;alam or fiHalam Ivil to be wronged, be de-
nied justice. - iva mit;ilim. 
,.110;1 fin;alam = fit;alam. - iva min;ilim. 
~I fit;allim or fiHallim Ivil to make a complaint. 
fit;allimu min il-qaraar da they lodged a complaint 
against this decision. - ava mit;allim. 
~ 
ta;allum In pI -aatl petition, complaint. 

~~~ 
.) ;ann 1 (u, i) Ivtl to think, believe, suspect. 
ra;unn-ak fahim-ni I think you understand me. lala 
ma ra;unn as far as I can tell, I think so. ;anneet lJaaga 
zayyi di I suspected something like that. -vn ;ann; ava 
;aanin; pva ma;nuun . 
.) ;ann2 I/vn/llkaan land; lJusn; ;ann-i (fii) he did 
not disappoint me. -balq i;-;ann; rism [prov] to think 
even a little badly of others is a sin. lin pi ;unuunl 
surmise, suspicion. lat;eet ;unuun-i f-malJall-a-ha 
I found my suspicions to be well-founded. 
~ ;anni ladjl pertaining to guessing, speculatory. 
~~ ;annaan,;annaanladj*,pl;annaana,;annaana/ 
given to thinking the worst of others. 
Ji;1 rit;ann or riHann Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
;ann I. ma-yit;ann;1 fii xeer he is not the type to be 
thought well of. -iva mit;ann. 
.~ 
J; ;ah Ifem n, pi -aatl seventeenth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also ;aa, ;aar. 
I.J • ~ 
~ ;ahar (a) Ivill to emerge, appear, become visible. 
ril-lJagaat illi b-ti;har [INUUt; the thi.ngs that appear on 
the market.lllJubb i;-;uhuur love of display, ostenta-
tion. 1 yi;har it seems, it is evident. yi;har in-naqqaara 
lagabit-u evidently the glasses pleased him. - Ivtl3 to 
reveal, cause to appear. rabb-i-na ;ahar il-lJat;t; our 
Lord has revealed the truth (said in the context of a 
vindication). -vn ;uhuur; ava ;aahir. 
~u. ;aahir laval II ril-laalim bi;-;aahir wil-xafi (God) 
the Knower of what is visible and invisible. - ri;-;aahir 
(rinn) apparently, it seems (that) ... , as in· ri;-;aahir 
557 
xadt; qarbit Jams it seems I've got sunstroke. - lJasab 
i;-;aahir judging by appearances. 
;; ~u. ;ahra T , ;aahira T In pi ;awaahirl manifestation, 
phenomenon. 
..:.I.)..,.J; ;uhuraat ladj invarl casual, temporary, sea-
sonal (of workers) .lummaal ;uhuraat casual or season-
allabourers. -/adverbiallyl riftaval ;uhuraat to work as 
a casual or seasonal labourer. 
~ 
ma;har In pi ma;aahirl appearance, external 
manifestation. ma;har min ma;aahir iI-lJubb one of the 
manifestations of love. bitaBl ma~aahir one who cares 
only about keeping up appearances. 
~~ ma;hariyya In pi -aatl ostentation. bi-ylJibbu 
l-ma;hariyya they like to keep up appearances. 
1ft' ~ 
ma;hargi ladj * and pi -yya/ concerned with 
outward appearances . 
.AJo ;ahhar2 Ivtl to cause to appear, make visible. 
ril-malJluul da bi-y;ahhar iI-lJibr is-sirri this solution 
makes the invisible ink appear. -vn ta;hiir; ava/pva 
mi;ahhar. 
~I rit;ahhar2 or ri;;ahhar2 Ivil to be made to 
appear, be made visible. -iva mit;ahhar. 
;; ~\li... mu;ahra In/pl -aatl demonstration. mu;ahra 
siyasiyya a political demonstration. 
~IJ;,;I rit;aahirT or ri;;aahirT lvil I to make a pre-
tence. bi-yit;aahir bil-rina he puts on a show of being 
rich. 1 to engage in a demonstration. rit-talaba t;ahru 
quddaam il-wizaara the students demonstrated in front 
of the ministry. - iva mit;aahir . 
...,.l>i ra;harT 
Ivtl I to reveal, disclose. 
ra;har 
li-larust-u l-iftiyaat; he revealed his longing to his bride. 
1 [phot] to develop (film). -vn ri;haar; ava mi;hir. 
~ 
mu;hir Inl [phot] developer, developing fluid. 
1 .J • j;, see .J • .jIII: ;ahr, ;ahiir, ;ahhar I, rit;ahhar 1 

t t la- contracted form of la/a (q.v.). 
~It 
~I&. laag Inl ivory. 
~I&. laagi ladjl made of ivory, ivory-like, ivory 
coloured. 
~ I t see 
~.J t: laada, laadi 
J I t see I J ..s t and J J ..s t: laar l, laar 2 
J I t see J.J t: laatja 
1Jlt 
JI&. laallladj invarl fine, splendid, excellent. YinfaaY 
a/laah ba-txif!, w-tibtja laal God willing, you'll get bet-
ter and be fine. Yid-dukkaana tlarafit wi-batja-Iha 
zabaayinlaa/the shop became known and gained a fine 
clientele. naas bilwiin mil-laal people of the very best 
sort. w-a/laahi laal win-nabi what a fine mess! Illaal 
il-laal first class, AI. -/adverbiallyl bi-yiktib laal he 
writes superbly. see further under ..s J t 
1 J I t see J.J t : laa/a 
(,It see I('('t and 1(,.Jt:laaml,laam3 
.:, I t see ':'.J t : laana 
( 0 It) 
~I&. laaha In pI -aatl physical ilandicap, disability. 
kullu zii laahatin gabbaar [prov] every person with a 
physical defect has a cruel streak. 
• 1&. laah linterjl sound made to urge on cows. 
J I y t see l..s J y : la-baal 
I_ yt see also .Jyt 
• .....&- libY Inl burden, load. 
~ labbaf Ivtl[mill to mobilize. II labba f guhuud-ak 
mobilize all your efforts, do your utmost. -vn talbifa; 
ava/pva milabbif; pva mUlabbafr. 
~ 
talbiYa Inl mobilization. Yit-talbiYa I-lamma 
general mobilization. 
l;..;1 fitlabbaf Ivil to be mobilized:-iva mitlabbaY. 
1 _ y t see ..s y t 
yyt 
~ labb (i) Ivtl to gulp down (a liquid, usually from a 
bowl or the like). -vn lababaan; ava laabib. 
~ libb Inl space between garment and chest.llfatab 
luhum libb-u he encouraged them (to do mischief). 
-waaxid kull" baaga f-libb-u he has everything in the 
bag, under his control. - ril-faar lilib fi-libb-i I got 
worried. -tiff' f-libb-ak count yourself lucky! - Yabu 
libb [non-CaireneJ a greedy man. 2 {non-Cairenel 
area. ril-libb if-jartji nizral-u tjamb in the e~stern sec-
tor we'll plant wheat. 
..:.. y t see 1 iJ" Y t 
~yt 
-'+ labad (u, i) Ivtl to worship, adore. -vn libaada; 
ava laabid; pva malbuud. 
O~~ libaada In pI -aatl act of worship or devotion. 
.:r..~ I&. labdiin Iprop nl district of east central Cairo 
known particularly for the palace of the same name. 
~."...ll ril-malbuud Inl the Deity . 
-'+ labd Inl 1 Ipl labiidl la slave. ma-yitjbal-f 

il-hawaan '6eer il-labiid only slaves accept degradation. 
II ril-labd i/-Yalbaan poor me. - fil-labd i li-l/aah un-
worthy me. Ib In in constrl (literally: the slave of ... ) 
form used with divine epithets etc. in given names for 
men, as labd il-laziiz, labd if-Jahiid etc. (also con-
tracted to lab- as lab-waduud for labd il-waduud). 
IIlabd-u (literally) His slave, used (1) as a given name. 
(2) as a shortened form of any of the names of the labd 
type. -faayillabd il-qaadir "" carrying the cares of the 
world on his shoulders, in a gloomy mood. 2 negro. 
llraas il-labd long-handled brush used for dusting ceil-
ings. - Ipllibaadl 3 mortal man. fil-labd'ma-yilraf-f 
il-Iuef mortal man knows nothing of mercy. 
o¥ labda In pi -aall I female slave. 2 negro woman 
or girl. 
~Jr."- lubudiyya Inl slavery. 
¥.- libeed Iprop n/: zeed wi-lbeed "" Tom, Dick and 
Harry. huwwa-na I:J-asmal kalaam zeed wi-lbeed am 
I to listen to what just anybody says? 
JL;.. labbaad In *1 worshipper. IIlabbaad if-Jams 
sunflower. 
...,... mal bad In pi malaabidl temple. mal bad yahuudi 
synagogue. 
¥I filr;abbid Ivil to behave piously or devoutly. -vn 
lar;abbud; ava milr;abbid. 
~I fislar;bid Ivtl to enslave, treat as a slave. -vn 
fislir;baad; ava mislar;bid. 
J~ 
1 fislir;baad Inl enslavement. 
- ~ ~yt 
..s/'-J¥ labdillaawi Inl orange melon (Cucumis 
chate). 
',;yt 
r, labar (u) Ivtl to cross. fig-geef labar il-qanaal the 
army crossed the Canal. -vn lubuur; ava laabir. 
;r."- lubuur Inl crossing. lubuur mufaah pedestrian 
crossing. mar;rakil il-lubuur the battle of the crossing 
of the Suez Canal (in October 1973). 
or, libra In pllibarl I lesson, example. di r;ibra 
yibc;al-ha-Ina rabb-i-na c;afaan nic;libir biiha this is a 
lesson sent by our Lord for us to learn from. l:JikaYI-u 
c;ibra 1-'6eer-u c;ala (uul il- fayyaam his story is an exam-
ple to others for all time.lIl:Jall-u c;ibarhe'sin a bad way, 
he is in a pathetic state. -dool c;ibar iz-zamaan those are 
the sort of riff-raff one gets nowadays. 2 criterion. 
fil-c;ibra l:Ja-lkuun bi-c;adad fafraad il- fusra the crite-
rion will be the size of the family. - Ino pll 3 underlying 
purpose, aim. feeh il-c;ibra min c;amayl-ak di what's 
behind these (disagreeable) actions of yours? 
559 
o;~ c;ibaara Inl I Ipl-aall expression, phrase. c;ibaara 
mafhuura a well-known expression. c;ibaraal musiqiyya 
musical phrases. 2 ril-c;ibaara the matter, the issue. 
feeh il-c;ibaara what's the matter? what's up? di mif 
il-c;ibaara that's not the point at issue. fif-r;ibaara mif 
bil-filuus laakin bil- faxlaaq it is not money but manners 
that are at issue. ya sana sooda hiyya I-r;ibaara wi~lil 
li/-xinaaq heavens! have things got to the point of fight-
ing? 
~ c;ibaara c;an tantamount to, something approaching. 
bi-yibqa c;baara c;an c;asal it becomes like honey. da 
c;baara c;an daflar fism-u 1- fuslaaz it is a sort of register 
called the master ledger. fif-fillar c;ibaara c;an waraqa 
the filter is (just) a piece of paper. 
.r.- c;abiir Inl aroma, scent. 
.;L;.. c;abbaara In pi -aal. c;ababiirl I footbridge, gang-
plank. 2 = c;abbuura (see PI.E, 17). 
0;;'" c;abbuura, c;abbuura In pi c;ababiirl secondary 
irrigation ditch (see PI.E, 17). 
~ c;abbar Ivtl I to show consideration or respect for, 
heed. fana feeh yac;ni c;alafaan ma-lrudd'-f c;alayya 
wala Ic;abbar-ni what do you take me for that you don't 
answer me or pay me any attention? b-ac;abbar-u big-
gazma I think he's as worthless as a shoe! 2 to measure;:. 
c;abbar il-qaml:J i wil-qumaaf he measured the wheat 
and the cloth. -vn lac;biir; ava mic;abbar. 
~ c;abbar c;an to express, be expressive of. malaabis 
bi-Ic;abbar c;an il-r;~r clothes which are expressive of 
. the times. 
~ 
lar;biir In pi -aal, lac;abiirl expression, phrase. 
..s ~ 
lac;biiri r ladjl pertaining to expression or style . 
fax{aa f i{-{aalib min in-nal:Jya I-Iac;biriyya the student's 
stylistic mistakes. 
~~I fil-Iac;biriyya Inl farl! Expressionism. 
;.ul filc;abbar Ivil passive of c;abbar. - iva milc;abbar. 
?-I fiC;labar I/vtl to think of, consider. fana 
b-aC;libr-ak zayyi faxuu-ya I think of you as my 
brother. l:J-aC;libir c;adam migiyy-ak mar;aana finnak 
fic;lan ma-ll:Jibb i-nii-f I'll take your not coming with us 
as a sign that you really don't love me. -Ithe literary 
passive form occurs even in unelevated speechl hiyya 
fa~naaf qadiima w-luc;labar lul:Jafthey're old sorts and 
regarded as antiques. 2 Ivil to learn a lesson, take heed. 
ma-b-yiC;libruu-J bi-lli b-yil:J~al they don't learn from 
what happens. -vn fiC;libaar; ava miC;libir; pva 
mUC;labar. 
;~I fillibaar In pi -aall I regard, consideration. 
c;afaan I-illibaraal di because of these considerations. 
IImac;a (or c;ala) r;libaar taking into consideration, as in 
mac;a llibaar muddil il-l:Jabs with consideration being 

given to the period of detention, cala ctibaar f'innu mif 
l:Ja-yiigi since he will not be coming. - bi-ctibaar in the 
capacity of, as in bi-ctibaar-i mudiir in my capacity as 
director, wi-bi-ctibaar f'inn' da 1- f'asaas ... and that 
being the basis .... 2 standing, good standing. ma-luu-f 
ictibaar he is of no consequence. f'itradd ictibaar-u 
(1) his good standing was restored. (2) [leg] the convic-
tion was erased from his record. 
~Jl,:;&.1 f'ictibaari ladj *1 pro-forma, for the sake of 
appearances. 
~ 
muctabar ladj *1 I respected, highly regarded. 
2 of good quality. ~uuf mUctabar good quality wool. 
~I f'istacbarJ Ivil to learn a lesson. laazim f'abuu 
yitlrab-u cafaan yistacbar his father should give him a 
beating to teach him a lesson. -ava mistacbar. 
2 Jyt 
~fr c ibri l/adj *1 Hebrew. 2/nl the Hebrew 
language. 
IV-yt 
..r+ cabsi In pi cabaysal tumbler pigeon of a type 
distinguished by its black body and white tail. 
...r+ cabasl; f'il:Jna b-nic;ra f-suurit cabas (or f-f'abu 
cabas) "" how many times do we have to go over the 
matter before you get it into your head? 
..r~ cabuus ladjl grim, stern, austere. 
..r~ c ubuus Inl grimness of countenance. 
u-~ cabbaasi ladj *1 Abbasid. 
~~I ril-cabbasiyya Iprop nl district of north-east 
Cairo known in particular for its army barracks and 
lunatic asylum. 
~~ cabbasiyya ladj invarl cuckoo, crazy. f'ir-raagil 
da cabbasiyya that man is cuckoo. 
..,..:.. cabbis Ivil to frown, scowl, glower. - ava 
micabbis. 
2V-yt 
4- cabas2 Inl triviality, jest, joke. 
11 cabasan ladvl in vain, to no avail. 
Ij,yt 
.k,&. caba(1 
Inl 
simple-mindedness, 
silliness, 
foolishness. 
.k,&.i f'acba( Iell morelmost foolish, silly etc. 
~\.,&- cabaa(a 
Inl 
simple-mindedness, 
silliness. 
bi-ysuuC; il-cabaa(a (cal-habaala) he plays the fool. 
¥. cabii( ladj pi cuba(al simple-minded, silly. 
bi-yicmil cabii( he acts stupid. (awiil wi-cabii( tall and 
silly. ril-cabii( f'aM [children] here comes the fool! (a 
teasing chant). 
560 
~ 
cubbee(i ladvl without forethought, without 
proper consideration. 
~ 
cabba(1 Ivtl to fool, dupe, take in. - avamicabba(. 
¥I f'itcabba(1 Ivil to be fooled, be duped, be taken 
in. - iva mitcabba(. 
~\.ul f'itcaabi( Ivil to act the fool, play dumb. - ava 
mitcabbi(. 
J.l,:;&.1 f'ictibaa(if ladvl haphazard. 
Ja.,..;;-I f'istacba( 
I Ivtl 
to 
consider 
stupid. 
bi-tistacba(-ni walla f'eeh do you take me for a fool or 
what? 2 Ivil to act stupid, play the fool. f'istacba( 
wi-camal nafs-u ma-faf-haa-fhe acted stupid and made 
out he hadn't seen her. f'inta cabii( walla b-tistacba( are 
you (really) stupid or (just) acting stupid? -vn 
f'isticbaa(; ava mistacba( .. 
2..10 y t 
.k,&. caba(2 (u) Ivtl to hold (s.o.) with one's arms, hug. 
-vn cab(; ava caabi(; pva macbuu( . 
.k,&. cub( Inl embrace, hug. xad-ni bil-cub( he hugged 
me . 
.la.,.;1 f'itcaba( Ivil to be held with arms, be hugged. -iva 
mitcibi( . 
.la.,..; I f'incaba( = f'itcaba(. - iva mincibi(. 
~ 
cabba(2 Ivil to hug vigorously. cabba( fiyya he 
gave me a big hug. - ava/pva micabba( . 
¥I f'itcabba(2 Ivil (impersonal) passive of cabba(2 . 
f'id-diriksiyoon ma-yitcabba(-f' fii kida the steering-
wheel is not to be hugged like that! - iva mitcabba(. 
ytyt 
...,....... cabcab I Ivtl to cram, stuff. 2 Ivil to become 
stuffed full, bulge. -vn cabcaba; avalpva micabcib. 
11 cabcab min to be fed up with, to be sick and tired of. 
~ 
micabcib ladjl baggy, stretched out of shape. 
~I f'itcabcab Ivil to be crammed, be stuffed. -iva 
mitcabcib. 
, 
11 f'itcabcab min = cab~ab min. 
Jyt 
~ cabac; (u) Ivil I to be pervaded (with a smell, 
smoke, fumes etc.). 2 to accumulate in a confined space 
(of smoke, fumes etc.). -vn cabC;. cabac;aan; ava 
caabic;. 
~ 
cabc;a Ipl -aatl instance noun of cabC;. 
~ cabbac; I/vtl to pervade (of smoke, fumes etc.). 
ril-beet micabbac; min riil:Jit il- f'akl the whole house 
smells of food. f'id-duxxaan cabbac; il- f'utubiis the 
smoke filled the bus. - Ivi/2 to become full of smoke, 
fumes etc. 3 to accumulate in a confined space (of 

smoke, fumes etc.). -vn tB(;biifi; ava/pva milabbafi. 
~ 
tB(;biifia = labfia. 
~I ritlabbafi Ivil to be pervaded (with smoke, fumes 
etc.). -iva mitlabbafi. 
JI.h"t 
loS;¥- labqari I· and pllabaqral I/adjl ingenious. 
2 In! genius. zaman iI-labaqra the age of geniuses. 
~;¥- labqariyya In! genius, ingenuity. 
.!lyt 
~ 
labak In! heavy, close-textured kind of cotton 
cloth used as a lining in upholstery and for poor-quality 
clothes. 
IJyt 
J.&. laballn/l filth, grime. waahid bi-labal-u a crude 
unrefined person. 2/colll black poplar(s). 
~ labala lunit n, pI -aatl a black poplar. 
ZJyt 
~ labia Iprop nl Abla, heroine of folk-epic and be-
loved of lantar (q.v.). 
.Jyt see also I. yt 
.~ lubuwwa In pI -aat/l pack, package, (full) con-
tainer. 
milabbis mahtuut fi-lubuwwaat 
raflcaal 
muxtalifa sugared almonds packed in various kinds of 
containers. 2 capacity (of a container). 
~ labba Ivtll to pack, load or pour (into a contain-
er). nigmal iI-fiutni bil-yaddi wi-nlabbii fi-kyaas we 
gather the cotton by hand and pack it in sacks. 2 to fill, 
pack (a container with s.th.).labbi l-banaadifi load the 
rifles! IIlabbaa-ha bil-kalaam lanhum he filled her ears 
with talk against them (and so made her angry with 
them too). -vn tB(;biyya; ava/pva milabbi. 
~I ritlabba Ivil I to be packed, loaded or poured 
(into a container). 2 to be filled, be packed (of a con-
tainer). - iva mitlabbi. 
~yt 
•• l,&. ,~l,&. labaaya In pI -aat, libyl sleeveless woollen 
robe (usually black) worn by men over a galabiya (see 
PI.F, 18). 
Iy..::.o t 
....,.;.s. litib (a), latab I (i) Ivil to remonstrate gently, 
offer mild criticism. rumm-u latabit lalee lamma 
lafiit-u ma-bi-yzakir1his mother reproached him when 
561 
she discovered that he did not study. -vn latab; ava 
laatib. 
.:,l,:;&. latbaan ladj ·1 reproachful, mildly reproving, 
gently critical. 
....,.;.s. latab 2 /nl cause ofreproach. ril-latab lala ... it's 
... that's to blame, as in ril-latab las-sinn it's age that's 
to blame, ril-latab lan-na;ar it's (poor) sight (or lack 
of insight) that's to blame. 
..,.;l&. laatib Ivtl to rebuke gently, reproach. laatib 
~ahb-u lala IIi ~adar minnu he reproached his friend for 
what he'd done. -vn litaab, milatba; ava milaatib . 
y\:&. litaab Inl reprehension, reproach, rebuke, 
reprimand. 
..,.;l.;1 ritlaatib Ivil I to reproach one another. 
ritfiablu wi-tlatbu wi-~alhu they met, discussed what 
they had against each other and made up. 2 to be re-
proached. ris-sakraan la yitlaatib wala yitlaam there is 
no point in remonstrating with or reproaching a drunk 
(for what he does). - ava/pva mitlaatib. 
Zy..::.ot 
....,.;.s. latab 3 lcoll nl upper or lower support beams of 
door- or window-cases, lintels, thresholds, sills. 
~ lataba lunit n, pI -aat, raltaabl an upper or lower 
support beam of a door-or window-case, a lintel, a 
threshold, a sill. II ril-beet bi-yitlirifmin latabt-u {prov} 
(a house is known by its threshold) = the first impres~­
ion tells all. - rafidaam wi-raltaab see fiadam. 
4,.;..11 ril-lataba (also ril-lataba l-xat[ra) Iprop n! Ata-
ba, a large square and the surrounding area in north-
east Cairo. 
....,.;.s. lattib Ivtl to cross the threshold of, enter (a 
house). -vn taltiib; ava/pva milattib. 
,:,..::.o~ 
.:.... ,.:.... latt (i) Ivi/l to become damaged by moths. 
2 to deteriorate (of cloth) through long storage. -vn 
latataan; ava laatit. 
~ ,~ litta Icoll n, pllitatl c1othes-moth(s). 
.).:..t 
J.o:.S- latiid Iprop n! {lsi} angel reputed to accomp~ny 
one through life, stationed on one's left-hand side, to 
record one's evil deeds (cf raqiib). 
I J .:.. t 
)s. ,j.s. litir (a) Ivi/l to trip.litir fig-gibba he tripped 
on his robe. 2 to happen (across s.th.), light (upon 
s. th.). fiallib fil-warafi li-J;add i ma litir fit-talab bitaB(;-i 
he riffled through the papers till he came across my 

application. fi4.ill adawwar Ii-Ijadd' ma llirl' !-binl iI-
Ija/aal I went on looking till I found Miss Right. lilirl B 
la/a bafjfjaal kuwayyis I found a good grocer. -vn 
la/araan; ava laatir. 
o;So •• r 
latra In pI -aal, lataraall a false step, a trip, 
a stumbling. rabb-i-na Ylkfil-kujarr d latraat iz-zamaan 
[beggars} may God protect you from falling on bad 
times. 
fo • .flo lallar Ivtll to cause to stumble. 2 to cause to 
happen (across s.th.). I'axuu-ya lallar-m fiiha my 
brother told me where to find her. - avalpva milallar. 
1 J..:J t 
or lilra J ladj mvarl I gallant, chivalrous and 
courageous. 2 strong. 
J J ..:J t see J j, t: litr 
IJ"J..:Jt 
If r 
latras Ivil to resist, balk. I'il-baab milatras the 
door is stuck. -vn latrasa; ava milatras. 
..r.r latrils ladj *1 obdurate. 
IJ..:Jt 
.:,;.s- latae; (a) Ivtl I to leave be, leave in peace. 
I'lltae;-ni y-aaba stop pestering me, Dad (to, e.g., a 
beggar). IIda ma-Yll/ae;-j' wa/a waljda he leaves no 
woman intact. 2 to release, set free, e.mancipate (e.g., a 
slave). - vn latae;aall, lite;; ava laatie;; pva maltuue;. 
~ 
late;a hnst n, pI -aatl a release, an emancipation. 
.;it&. laa/ie; r Inl shoulder. IIla/a laatie; within the re-
sponsibility of. 
~ 
lutae;i I In pI -yya/l reciter of the l"aae;a, a fie;i 
of the lowest sort. 2 base scavenging type, one always 
on the look-out for a free meal. 
~\;;&. li/aafja In pI -aall recitation of prayers and Kora-
nic verses by afie;i, intended to obtain forgiveness of sin 
for the deceased. 
..;:;.;1 I'illa/afj Ivil I to be left alone, be left in peace. 
2 to be released, be set free, be emancipated. - iva 
millllie;. 
.:,;.s-i I'allae; r Ivtl to release, set free, emancipate. - ava 
mIllie;. 
lJ..:J t 
~ 
lilfji ladjl old, mature. 
~ 
lutae;il In pI -yyal [deris} repairer of old worn-
out footwear. 
~ 
la/iifj ladjl ancient (of inanimate thmgs).lIma,l'r 
iI-la/iifja Old Cairo. 
562 
~ 
la/iie;a In plla/aae;iI old hen, laying hen over two 
years old. II I'id-dihn' fll-la/aae;i [prov} (it's the old hens 
that have the fat) "" the best wine comes out of old 
bottles. - I'ibn iI-la/iie;a tabus} "" son of a bitch. 
,is. lallae; I I/vtl to leave (e.g., wine) to age and 
mature. 2/vil to age and mature (of wine, people etc.). 
-vn lalliie;; avalpva milallae;. 
~I I'illallae; I Ivil to be left to age and mature. -iva 
millallae;. 
J~..:Jt 
.:,;.s- lallae; 1 Ivtl to load (e.g., a cart) and secure the 
load with ropes. -vn lalliie;; avalpva milallafj. 
~I I'IIlallafj2 Ivil to be loaded (of a cart). -iva 
millallae;. 
J..:Jt 
j:;&. la/al ' (i) I/vtl to carry, bear. ma-lIllll-j' hamm 
don't worry. 2/vil to groan from exhaustion. -vn 
la/a/aall, lall; ava laalll; pva malluul. 
~ 
lalla In pI -aall I instance noun of lall. 2 load, 
burden . 
j:;&. la/a/1 Icoll n/lever(s), crowbar(s). 
~ 
la/a/a lunit n, pI -aa/,la/aayill a lever, a crowbar. 
~~ li/aa/a Inl burden, load to be carried . 
J\;;&. lallaalln· and lallaa/al one who loads and un-
loads trucks, porter, carrier. 
J.:...;I I'illa/allvil to be carried, be borne (especially of 
worry). da wa/ad kuwaYYIs ma-yillilil-Iuu-jhamm he's 
a good boy, one doesn't need to worry about him. -iva 
m!llllil . 
j:;&. lallillvtl to carry (a number of things, or a number 
o~ times). -vn lalliil; avalpva mllallll. 
J.:...;I I'illalllllvil passive of lallil. -Iva mitl~IIi1. 
r..:Jt 
~ 
lalma, la/ama Inl darkness. 
~ lilim ladjl dark. 
~ lallim I Ivtl to darken. 2/vil to grow dark . 
I'id-dillya mlallima It ha~ become dark. -vn lalliim; 
a~a/pva milallim. 
~I I'illallim Ivil to be darkened. - iva millallim . 
...:J t 
.;so latah Inl idiocy. 
• .,..... malluuh In • and pI mala/iihl simpleton, idiot, 
madman. 
~I I'illlalah Ivil to become mad, lose one's mind. 
J.J..:J t 
J.. P- lalwiilladj plla/awlal veteran, expert, very ex-

perienced. II (firqit) il-lata:Vla the National Club foot-
ball team. 
r':" t see r"'" t 
~~t 
~ 
lagab I 
(i) Ivtl to please, be pleasing to. 
rin-naqqaara lagabit-u he liked the glasses. talaala 
[-'i'ayy' waqt' yilgib-ak come any time you please. 
fasaxit xu(ubit-ha lafaan i/-lariis mif lagib-ha she 
broke off her engagement because the suitor didn't 
appeal to her. ruli ma-yilgib-uu-jyiwzin barra "" if you 
are not satisfied go somewhere else! IIma-yilgib-uu-j 
il-lagab (wala ~-~iyaam fi-ragab) [provJ (he is pleased 
neither by wonders nor even by fasting in Ragab) "" he 
is the sort who will always find something to disapprove 
of, even in the most remarkable things. - vn lagab; ava 
laagib. 
~ 
lagab 1 Inl I wonder, amazement.llya lil-lagab 
good gracious! 2 Icolll amazing things, prodigious 
things. 'lana fuft il-lagab I saw incredible things. 
~ 
lagaba Inl a wonder, a curiosity, an astonishing 
thing. 
~ 
lugbf Inl pride, conceit, vanity. 
~i 'i'acgab I lell more/most astonishing, strange 
etc. 
~ 
lagiib ladjl wondrous, amazing, strange. naas 
muta~awwifa labsiin 'i'alwaan lagiiba Sufis wearing odd 
colours. mall~ar lagiib an amazing sight. 
~ 
lagiiba I In pllagaayibl marvel, strange hap-
pening. IIlagaayib laleeki ya dUllya what a strange 
world! 2 linterjl strange! odd! lagiiba - di lissa kaanit 
waqfa gambi min sanya walJda funny! she was standing 
next to me just a second ago. 
~.&-i 'i'ulguuba In pI 'i'alagiibl wonder. 'i'ulguubit 
i/-lagaayib illi fuft-a-ha the strangest thing I ever saw. 
""";""1 'i'itlaggib Ivil to wonder, be amazed. miraat-i 
kaanit titlaggib minni my wife used to wonder at me. 
-vn talaggub; ava mitlaggib . 
..,..,;.... talaggub 
Inl 
astonishment. 
IIlalaamit it-
talaggub exclamation mark. 
~l..;1 'i'itlaagib 
Ivil 
to 
behave 
conceitedly. 
bi-titlaagib bi-gamal-ha she makes a parade of her 
beauty. - ava mitlaagib. 
~i 'i'algab1f Ivtl to please, arouse the admiration 
of. 'lana mUlgab bi-juyl-ak I am pleased with (or: 
563 
I admire) your work. -/the literary passive occursl 
'i'ulgib bi-nafs-u he became conceited. -vn 'i'ilgaab; ava 
mUlgib; pva mUlgab. 
~ 
mucgab In *1 admirer.landaha mUlgabiin kitiir 
she has many admirers. mUlgabiin koora soccer fans. 
J~ milgibaaniJ In pI -yyal wondrous person. 
mabruuk laleek ya milgibaani ya yaali congratulations 
you (bridegroom) with your head in the air! (from a 
wedding song). 
~I 'i'istalgib Ivil to be astonished. 'lana kunt i 
b-astalgib min razalit-ha I used to be amazed at her 
insolence. - ava mistalgib. 
I~~t 
2- lagg (i) Ivtl to hit (especially on the back). IIlagg 
id-dunya [-balq-a-ha he set everyone against everyone 
else. -vn lagagaan, lagg; ava laagig; pva malguug. 
~ 
lagga Ipl -aatl instance noun of lagg. 
~I 'i'itlagg Ivil to be hit, be given a blow. - iva 
mitlagg. 
2~~t 
~ 
ligga In pi -aat, ligagl firm sort of omelette, thick-
ened with flour, usually about an inch thick and with a 
filling of vegetables or meat. 
I.) ~t 
~ 
lagr ladj invarl [rurJ unripe (of fruit or 
vegetables). 
~i 'i'algar ladj, fern lagra, pI lugar, lugrl crude, 
uncouth. 
2 .) ~ t see .).J ~ ~ t : lagguur 
J .) ~ t see .)..s ~ t : lagiir 
.).J ~~t 
J~ lagguur (alsofammaam lagguur) Icoll nl hairy 
cucumber melon(s) (Cucumis melo var. chate) . 
• J~ lagguura Ipl -aatl unit noun of lagguur. 
~IJ~ lagguraaya = lagguura. 
....;.)~t 
;ij ~ 
lagrafa Inl arrogance. 
J.J"":'- milagraf ladj *~ arrogant. 
J.r.--il 'i'itlagraf Ivil I to become arrogant. 2 to be-
have arrogantly. -ava mitlagraf. 
j~t 
~ 
.ligiz (a) Ivil to fail, become incapable.ligiz 'i'innu 

yiwlal-Iu he was unable to reach it. rana laagiz lan 
if1ukr I can't thank you enough. II rin /a-lla yilgaz 
fi-leen-u w-lafiit-u {women} may he become blind and 
sick! -vn lagz; ava laagiz. 
~ 
lagz In pI luguzaatl 1 shortage, deficiency, de-
ficit. 2 disability, inability, incapacity. lagz' kulli total 
disability. 
~~ laagiz In pI lagazal disabled person, incapaci-
tated person (whether deaf, blind, crippled or other-
wise afflicted). laagiz na;ar blind. 
~I-""I ril-lawaagiz Ipl 01: rumm iI-lawaagiz the 
mother of those who cannot look after themselves (Le. 
the poor, the old, the incapacitated) (epithet of Sayyida 
Zaynab). 
~ 
lagazlnl old age, infirmity. 
j~ laguur. ladj pI lawagiiz, lagaayizl old, elderly, 
aged. malgar lagaayiz old people's home. II ribrit iI-
laguur. nettle(s). -bard iI-laguur. (or iI-laguur.a) the 
first eight days of the month of Amshir, noted for their 
bitter cold. -zayy' lagaayiz iI-faray - rakl' w-na~wara 
{prov} like old biddies at a wedding -eating and 
criticizing. 
.j~1 ril-laguur.a Iprop 01 district of Guiza on the 
bank of the Nile. 
.~ mUlgiza In pI -aatl miracle. 
~ 
laggiz Ivtl 1 to incapacitate, cripple. riddaa-/i 
su raal laggiz-ni he posed me a question that nonplus-
sed me. - Ivil 2 to grow old. rana laggizt' xala41 I'm 
past it. 3 to fall short. ril-mizaniyya laggizit the budget 
showed a deficit. ril-filuus laggizit maeaaya/1ahr-i-da 
I have run ,out of money this month. ril-~umaa/ laggiz 
the cloth wasn't enough. -vn talgiiz; ava/pva milaggiz. 
';"'1 ritlaggiz lvil to be incapacitated, be crippled. 
-iva mitlaggiz. 
I J[t 
W lagal l 101 haste. bil-lagal or (less commonly) 
lala lagal quickly. 
~ 
lagala I Inl haste, hUrry. raagil landu lagala a 
hasty man. IIfil-lagala n-nadaama {prov} == haste 
makes waste. - ril-lagala min if-fi{aan {prov} haste 
comes from the Devil. 
J~ laguulladj *1 hasty. 
~~ laagilladj *1 urgent, fast.llxayru I-birri laag£l-u 
{prov} == he gives twice who gives quickly. 
~ 
laggill Ivtl to hasten, hurry (s.th. or s.o.) up, 
expedite. 2/vil to be in haste, hUrry. -vn taegii/; aVa/ 
pva milaggil. 
~I ritlaggill/vtl to hasten, hurry (s.th. or s.o.) up. 
- Ivil 2 to hurry, make haste. 3 to be hurried up, be 
564 
expedited. -ava/iva mitlaggil. 
~I ristalgill/vtl to speed up, hurry. ril-garsuun 
istaegil i{-{alabaat the waiter speeded up the orders. 
2 Ivil to make haste, be in a hurry. rifmilna l:Ja-nistaegii 
lala raaxir iz-zaman why should we hurry now after all 
this time? riz-zabaayin dayman mistaegiliin the cus-
tomers are always in a hurry. -vn ristilgaal; ava/pva 
mistalgil. 
~ 
mistalgilladj */1 urgent./uyla mistalgila an 
urgent job. 2 express (of post etc.). 
Z J[t 
W lagal2 Icoll nl 1 wheel(s). 2 cycle(s), (loosely 
also) certain small wheeled transporters (e.g., push 
chair, shopping trolley, invalid carriage). 
~ 
lagala 2 lunit n, pI -aatl 1 a wheel. fii lagal 
bi-talat lagalaat there are cycles with three wheels. 2 a 
cycle, (loosely) a small wheeled transporter (e.g., push 
chair, shopping trolley, invalid carriage). II lagala sabIa 
{gym} exercycle. -za~~a lagal(-u) fo leave, push off. 
3 pessary. 
J~ lagalaati In pI -yyal repairer of cycles, hirer of 
cycles. 
3 J[t 
W liglln pI luguul, liggaal, lugula/l calf. II beet[ 
iI-ligl (1) hearts (in cards). (2) variety of mango. -zayy 
iI-ligl all brawn and no brain. -ligl' rabiis Apis bull. 
2 dolt, blockhead. 
J~ laggaa/i ladjl of or pertaining to calves. 
ril-gazzaar da bi-ysammi g-gamuus ik-kibiir laggaa/i 
that butcher calls old buffalo meat young beef. II muxx-u 
laggaa/i he's stupid. 
r[t 
~ 
lagam 101 {mus}: lagam laflraan mode in Arabic 
music beginning on B. flat and having E flat. lagam 
mir411al mode in Arabic music beginning on B flat and 
having E half flat. 
~ 
lagami ladj invarl Persian. siggaad lagami Per-
sian rugs.IViifa lagami a/iifa prepared with a cone of 
tobacco wrapped in the leaf. - ril-l:Jigaaz il-lagami 
{mus} mode in Arabic music beginning on D and having 
F sharp and B half flat. 
~I ril-lagami Iprop 01 el-Agami, a coastal resort 
to the west of Alexandria. 
W 
lagamiyya 101 filling of clarified butter, honey 
and sesame used in pastries etc. 
~i raegam ladj, fern lagmal incapable of speech, 
dumb (of animals). 

~l&.i fa[aagim Ipl oJ [obsol} foreigners, aliens (parti-
cularly Persians and Tartars). 
~ 
mu[gamr In pi macaagiml dictionary, lexicon. 
.j[t 
~ 
lagan (i) Ivtl to knead.ll/au; w-[agan to chatt6r. 
- fana [agn-u w-xabz-u "" I know him inside out. 
-ma[guun bi-mayyil iI-[afariil"" .the Devil personified. 
-vn [agn, [agiin; ava [aagin; pva macguun. 
~ 
[agna linst n, pi -aall a kneading. 
~ 
[agiin loJ dough. lI[amall-i-lu widn; min tiin 
wi-widn; min [agiin I turned a deaf ear to him. 
~ 
[agiina Inl I/unit nl one lot of dough. 2/pl 
[agaayinl paste, batter. [agiinil {Uub mud-mix for 
bricks. IIba~il zayy iI-[agiina f-fidee she became as 
putty in his hands. -huwwa lissa [agiina he is still young 
and impressionable. 3 nature, temperament. [aginl-u 
tayyiba he is good-natured. 
<J.J#:'IW macguun In pi macagiinl I paste, cream. 
macguun &ilaa~a shaving cream. ma[guun sinaan 
tooth-paste. 2 stopping, putty. 3 electuary. see further 
under .j[tr 
~.J#:'IW ma[gungi In pi -yyal [obsol} pharmacist, 
chemist, dealer in pharmaceuticals and toiletries. 
~l... macagingi = ma[gungi. 
<J~ [aggaan In • and pi [aggaanal I construction 
worker who mixes mortar. 2 one who kneads dough. 
.r.uw macgan In pi macaaginl kneading trough. 
4- ma[gana In pi macaaginl pit in which mud bricks 
are made. 
~I fil[agan Ivil to be kneaded. -iva mil[igin. 
~I fin[agan = fil[agan. -iva min[igin . 
.:J:.s. [aggin Ivtl I to knead thoroughly. 2 to cause to 
have a doughy or pasty consistency. [eej mi[aggin 
doughy bread, badly-baked bread. - Ivil 3 to become 
doughy or pasty in consistency. -vn la[giin; avalpva 
mi[aggin. 
';""1 fit[aggin Ivill to be thoroughly kneaded. 2 to 
be made or become doughy or pasty in consistency. 
fir-ruzz il[aggin the rice stuck together in' doughy 
lumps. -vn lacaggun r; avaliva mil[aggin. 
.J[t 
• .&- [agwa Icoll nl pressed date(s). 
j.J [t see j.J [[ t : [agguur 
jlS[t 
~ 
[agiir loJ variety of sedge (Cyperus difformis). 
565 
I ,) t see I r : maa [ada 
(y,)t) 
~.i&. [adaba In pi -aall turban end hanging on the 
shoulder. 
'":'~\&. .'":'.)\&. [aadib ladjl insufficiently salted, insipid, 
tasteless. -also [aadim. 
,),)t 
:i&. [add l (i) Ivtll to count, enumerate.llma-l[idd;1 
and what have you, as in ruzz; w-tamaa{im wi-b~al 
ma-l[idd;1rice, tomatoes, onions and what have you. 
-raa& wi-~aal[idduu-Ii he went off and nobody heard 
from him again. 2 to consider. fana b-a[idd-ak raagil 
I think of you as a man. [idd-i-ni ~ull; kida (even) 
supposing that I said so. -vn [add, [adadaan; ava 
[aadid; pva ma[duud. 
• 
2J 
j&. [add 
In pi [uduudl group usually of five (used in 
counting certain items offood). fana xadl; [ifriin [add; 
lamuun lib~a fluus-ak kaam I took twenty lots of five 
lemons, so how much do lowe you? 
.:i&. [adda linst n, pi 7aall a counting.llkull; ra~~a liiha 
[adda muxlalifa each dance has a different rhythm. 
.:i&. [idda loJ I number, total. [iddi/-hum kaam how 
many are they? fif-Jikaal bi-lixqa[ Ii-[iddil figrafaal 
the cheques go through a number of procedures. 2 [lsi 
law} prescribed period after which a woman whose 
marriage has been terminated may remarry. - Ipl 
[idadl3 set oftools or implements, kit. [iddiljulflwork 
kit. [iddil &ilaa~a shaving kit. ~aani[[idda toolmaker. 
II walliduu-ha bil-[idda they gave her a forceps delivery. 
- [idad Ipl oJ 4 tools. bi-nislacmil[idad muxlalifa we 
use a variety of tools. 
~:i&. [iddiyya In pi -aall number. ma-l(uu)1[iddiyya 
without number, very many . II [iddiyyil yasiin sevenfold 
recitation of the yasiin sura of the Koran, performed 
either for the soul of a dead person or for wordly ends, 
such as the downfall of an enemy or success in a court 
case . 
.)j&. [adad In pi fa[daadll number, aggregate. [adad 
il-1ac[iiba farba[a the number of players is four.lIsifr 
iI-[adad th~ Book of Numbers. 2 numeral. xud-lak 
[adad choose a number .. fil-fa[daad iI-fardiyya wiz-
zawgiyya odd and even numbers. 3 issue. fawwil[adad 
min gariidil iI-fahraam the first number of el-Ahram 
newspaper. 
1S.)j&. [adadi ladjl numerical, arithmetical. 
~j&. [adiid ladjl I numerous. 21 lin constrl multi-, 
poly- (in compounds). [adiid iI-isli[malaal multi-
puTP.QSe. - loJ 3 lamentation for the dead. 

~I~ laddaad In pi -aatl meter. laddaad kahraba elec-
tricity meter. laddaad taks taximeter. 
~I.,..; taldaad Inl computation. taldaad is-sukkaan 
census. 
':;";1 fitladd Ivil to be counted. - iva mitladd. 
~~ laddid I Ivtl to enumerate. mif laazim tiladdid-Ii 
mazayaa-ha you need not enumerate its advantages to 
me. 2/vil to wail or lament (over the death of s.o.) 
enumerating the virtues of the deceased. - vn taldiid; 
ava m1laddid . 
• ~.:;,... miladdida In pi -aatl hired female mourner. 
~':;";I fitladdid Ivil I to become numerous, multiply, 
proliferate. 2 to be enumerated. 3 (impersonal) pas-
sive of laddid 2. riI-lagaayiz ma-yitladdid-f laleehum 
old people are not to be lamented (when they die). - vn 
taladdud; avaliva mitladdid, mutaladdid. 
~.:i..::... mutaladdidf ladj *1 I various, varied. lala 
mustawayaat 
mutaladdida 
at 
various 
levels. 
2 numerous. mutaladdid i~-~uwar in multiple copies. 
mutaladdid id-daragaat multi-grade. 
~i faladd Ivtl to prepare. yilidd' mul:JQ(traat-u he 
prepares his lectures. -vn fildaad; ava mUlidd; pva 
mUladd. 
-S~I~! fildaadi ladjl I preparatory. fil-mafruul Iissa 
fil-marl:Jala 1- fildadiyya the project is still in the prepa-
ratory stage.llmadrasa fildadiyya school for children 
of the 12-15 age group, junior high school. 2 pertaining 
to junior high school. fihaada fildadiyya junior high 
school certificate. huwwa fi~-~aff i1- fawwil il- fildaadi 
(or fi- fuula fildaadi) he's in the first year of junior high 
school. 
';~I~ 'il riI- fildadiyya Inl the junior high school cer-
tifIcate. huwwa fil-fildadlyya he\ in the last year of 
junior high school. 
..... 1.:;,... mUliddaat Ipl nl equipment. 
~I fistaladd Ivil to prepare oneself. get ready. 
dabbar nafs-u wi-staladd' I-kull" l:Jaaga he settled his 
affairs and prepared for everything. fiza kunt" lawiz-ni 
faagl malaak fana mustalidd if you want me to come 
with you I'm ready and willing. II fistalidd [athlJ get set! 
as In xud makaan-ak - fistalidd -gary on your mark, get 
~et. go! - vn fislildaad; ava muslalidd, mistilldd J • 
~I.....:;...I fistildaad 
Inl 
I readiness, 
preparedness. 
2 capability, potential, .propensity. 3 susceptibility, 
predisposition. -
fistildadaat Ipl n/4 preparations. 
) ~ t see J j t: riI-ladra 
...... ~ t 
~~~ lads Icoll nl lentil(s). IIlads abu gibba unhulled 
566 
lentils. - riI-lads illi qarab il-l:Jamaam lala leen-u [ven-
dor's cryJ "" lentils far tastier than pigeon! - filii 
ma-yilraf-f' yquul lads he who doesn't know says it's 
lentils (of people who judge only by appearance). 
~\...~ ladsaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a lentil. 
4-~ ladasa In pi -aatl lens. 
J~t 
J~ ladal l (i) Ivtl I to set straight, put properly in 
place. fildil i1-l:Jaaga makan-ha put the things properly 
in place! ladalit in-naqqaara she set her glasses straight. 
2 to set to rights, reform. l:Ja-tildil i1-malakoot do you 
think you can set the world to rights? yaama nifs-i 
faxd-u gooz faqlaam -qalam yildil-u w-qalam yilwig-u 
how often I've itched to give him a couple of slaps - one 
to bring him to his senses and one to knock him silly! 
IIga-lha I-lariis illi l:Ja-yildil l:Jal-ha a suitor has come 
along who is just right for her. 3 Ivil to be just. filii 
yul:Jkum laazim yildil he who stands in judgement 
should himself be just. - vn ladl, ladalaan; ava laadit; 
pva malduul. 
~ ladal lan to reconsider. fildil lan rafy-ak reconsider 
your opinion. - vn luduul lan. 
J~ ladllnl I justice. II nihayt-u faq/' w-ladl "" every-
thing's fair and square. 2 ladj invar and pi luduull [lsI 
lawJ meeting all requirements (of a witness). tigiib 
raagil ladl yifhad lal-laqd find an honourable man to 
witness the contract. 
;J~ ladla linst n, pi -aatl an adjustment. 
J~ ladal 2 Inl someone or something exactly suitable 
or fitting. laqa ladal-u fil-wa;;iifa di he found just what 
suited him in that job. -ladjectivallyl riI-ga';'aaza 1-
ladal an ideal marriage. 
J~ lidilladj *1 I straight. xafabalidla a straight piece 
of wood. 2 lalso pi ladaalal proper, decent (sometimes 
with a sarcastic implication). huwwa laawiz sukkaan 
lldliin fil-limaara he wa~ts (to have) nice people living 
in the building.' duxt is-sabal doxaat lafaan falaac;i 
l:Jaaga lidla I went to endless trouble to find something 
even half-way decent. huwwa-nta IIi lidil you talk as if 
you are beyond criticism! II fiftikir l:Jaaga lidla change 
the subject to something nicer. -/adverbiallyl fuqcud 
lidil sit properly! fimfi lldil yil:Jtaar ladiww-ak fiik 
[provJ keep to the straight and narrow and your enemy 
will be baffled as to how to harm you. 
J~i faldal lell I morelmost straight, correct etc. 
2 morelmost JUst. 
;JI~ ladaala Inl justice . 
..k~ ladiil In pi ladaayill husband of a wife's sister. 
J.,..;I fitladallvil I to correct one's position, straight-

en oneself. fitladal fi-C;aldit-u he seated himself more 
comfortably. 2 to mend one's ways, behave better. 
ma-titlidil baCia it's high time you behaved yourself! 
3 to be straightened, be set right. -avaliva mitlidil. 
J-IoUI finladal = fitlada/. -ava/iva minlidil. 
J~ laddil Ivtl I to put right, set straight. laddil 
hiduum-u he straightened his clothes. II rabb-i-na 
Yladdil-haa-/ak may our Lord put things right for you! 
2 to 
amend, 
modify. 
riI-qawaniin 
iIIi 
laddilit 
iI-qawaniin is-sabc;a the laws that amended the previous 
laws. - Ivil 3 to point out and correc.t faults. 
ma-&addijyic;dar yiladdillalee no one can find fault 
with him, he is beyond reproach.laddilna lat-tarkibaat 
illi kaan fakl-a-ha wi&iJ we went over and made im-
provements on the badly finished fixtures. - vn taldiil; 
ava miladdil; pva mUladda/. 
..k-loU taldiil In pi -aatl amendment, modification. 
taldiil wizaari cabinet reshuffle. 
;U~ miladdila ladj *1 {freq deris] clever and indust-
rious. riI-kuusa ya mladdila {vendor's cry] ... zucchini 
for the little home-maker! 
J~ mUladdal In pi -aatl average, average rate. 
mUladda/aat 
iI-fintaag 
the 
production 
rates. 
mUladda/aat iI-&araara f-ma~r the average tempera-
tures (at given times or places) in Egypt. 
J.l..1 fitladdillvil to become or be made straight or 
correct. -avaliva mitladdil. 
J~\&. laadil Ivtl I to be equivalent to. fis-sanawiyya 
I-lamma faw ma Yladil-ha the secondary school certifi-
cate or its equivalent. 2 to neutralize, counterbalance, 
compensate for. - vn miladla; ava miladdil. 
;U~l.... mUladla In pi -aatl {math] equation. 
J~I..;I fitlaadil, talaadalf Ivil I to come out even, 
draw. riI-matj intaha b-talaadul the match ended in a 
draw. 2 to break even. -vn talaadul; ava mitlaadil. 
J~ I filtadallvi/l to become straight or upright. 2 to 
become moderate. -vn 
filtidaa/; 
ava miltidil, 
mUltadii. 
J...I:Ao mUltadal linterj/: mUltadal marf common mis-
hearing of the command mUltaadan marf ready, 
march! 
J~I fistaldil I/vtl to straighten out. fis-samkari 
staldil iJ-faseeh the panel beater straightened the chas-
sis. -a passive form identical with the active form occurs 
in the proverb riI-malwuug yistaldillas-sindaal (the 
crooked may be straightened on the anvil) ... nothing is 
so bad it cannot be set right. 2 Ivil {rur, euphem] to 
wash the pubic region. -vn fistildaa/; ava/pva 
mistaldil. 
567 
r ~ t 
r~ lidim (a) Ilvtl to be deprived of. lidim iIIi &ilt-u 
or lidim ilti waraa wi-iii c;uddaamu he lost everything. 
II (min) yaddi ma-nildam-ha {women in trad soc] for-
mula of thanks for food or drink handed one. - finfa-I/a 
tildamii-ni la-... {women in trad soc] adjuration urging 
acceptance, as in fin fa-I/a tildamii-ni la-tiJrabii ... 
I pray that I may die if you do not drink it! -lidim 
iI-leen ... to suffer, go through hell, as in fin fa-I/a 
yildam leen-u {women in trad soc] may he suffer! 
fir-raagil iI-ladmaan iI-leen da (I) {women in trad soc] 
... that bastard of a man! (2) that poor, suffering man! 
fana ldimti leen-i w-lafyit-i laleeku ... I've worked 
myself to the bone for you. 2 Ivil to become rickety or 
decrepit, become worn out and useless. fig-gazma 
lidmit the shoes are worn out. riI-makana lidmit the 
machine is on its last legs. - vn ladam; ava laadim . 
r~ ladam I (i) Ivtl I to deprive of. ladamuu-ha 1-
lafya they drained her of her health. 2 to wear out, 
exhaust, incapacitate. cf.arabuu-ni lamma ladamuu-ni 
they beat me almost to death. -vn ladamaan; ava 
laadim; pva malduum. 
r~ ladam z Inl lack, non-existence. xa/ac;-u mil-
ladam he created it from nothing. fi-ladam wuguud 
iI-mudiir in the absence of the director. ladam iI-
fahliyya ineligibility. ladam iI-fimkaniyya impossibil-
ity. lI&alt-u ladam he's in a bad way. -ladam iI-
mufaxza excuse me. -da huwwa ladam-u {women in 
trad soc] == he hasn't a hope in hell! 
j~\&. laadim I In pllawaadiml waste, waste material. 
riI-c;u{n i{-{ibbi b-yitlimil min laadim iI-c;u{n cotton 
wool is made from cotton waste. yilimmu lawaadim 
it-tigaara they gather commercial waste. Ilmasuurit 
laadim exhaustpipe. 2/adjl insufficiently salted, in-
sipid, tasteless. -also laadib. 
j.JJA. malduum ladj "I lacking in. malduum iJ-
fax~iyya lacking in personality. 
.:,L.~ ladmaan ladjl worn out, exhausted. 
('"!~ ladiim ladjl lacking. ladiim iJjabah peerless. 
ladiim it-ttl,l"arrufincapable of conducting oneself prop-
erly, gauche. ladiim it-tarbiyya iII-mannered.llladiim 
iI- ftl,l"l unprincipled. 
j-loUl fitladam Ivil I to be deprived. 
fin fa-I/a 
m-atlidimji minku {women in trad soc] may I not be 
deprived of you! (expressing gratitude). 2 to be worn 
out, be exhausted, be incapacitated. - iva mitlidim. 
j-loUl finladam = 
fitladam. -vn finlidaam; iva 
minlidim. 
r~i faldam Ivtl 18 to execute, put to death (e.g., a 

prisoner). Ib to destroy (animals). 2 to destroy com-
pletely. racdam iI-wasiiqa he destroyed the document. 
-vn rildaam; ava mUldim; pva mUldam. 
rl~! rildaam 
Inl 
1 destruction, 
annihilation. 
2 execution, capital punishment. 
r.>.a.o mUldim ladj *1 destitute, poverty-stricken. 
I';'.)t 
,:,.>.a.o mal dan In pi malaadinl 1 metal. 
rasnaan 
maldan metal teeth. II ril-rafya maldan everything's 
perfect! - rin-naas malaadin people come in all sorts. 
2 (obsolj half a piastre, a half-piastre coin. 
J.>.a.o macdani 
ladjl 
1 metal, 
metallic. 
siluuk 
macdaniyya 
metal 
wires. 
2 mineral. 
mayya 
maldaniyya mineral water. 
,:,~ laddin Ivil to mine. -vn taldiin; ava mi;:addin. 
l';'.)t 
,:,~ ladan Iprop n! Aden.lIgannit ladan paradise. 
.J .) t 
t.S~ lada 1 (i) Ivtl to infect, affect by contagion. 
ril-raxlaaif iI-wil:J!a tildi bad manners are contagious. 
-vn ladwa; ava laadi; pva maldi. 
t.SJ~ ladwa Ifem n! infection, contagion. xad ladwa 
he caught a disease. 
,:,I..t~ lidwaan, ludwaan In! hostility, enmity, aggres-
siveness. ril-lidwaan is-sulaasi the tripartite aggression 
(against Egypt in 1956). 
~IJ~ ludwaniyya = lidwaan. 
I~ lada 2: maa lada see maa. 
t.SJ..IAI1 ril-ladawi Iprop n/: Sidi el-Adawi, a Muslim 
saint commonly invoked by those searching for lost 
property. ya salaam ya ladawi wi-iii ylaifii lu I-!Jalaawa 
o Adawi! a reward for the one who finds it. 
;~ ladiww In* and pi ralaadi, lida, racdal enemy. 
IIladiww-ak or ril-ladiwwiin (wi-iii yikrah-ak) ... may it 
happen to your enemy! or may it happen to your ene-
mies (and those who hate you)! (invocation against evil, 
used when something unpleasant is mentioned), as in 
yafeexa riftikri !Jaaga lidla - rinfa-lla I-ladiwwiin wi-iii 
yikrahuu-ki don't talk of such awful things, woman 
- may they befall only your enemies and those that hate 
you! -ma-ysurr'-f la laduw wala !Jabiib (it gives joy to 
neither foe nor friend) ... it's horrible, it's awful, as in 
baifa !Jal-ha ma-ysurr'-f la laduw wala !Jabiib she got 
into an appalling state, mif kifaaya rinnu mal(Uul 
il-Ialla I-mihabbiba d!-1Ii ma-lSurr'-f la laduw wala 
!Jabiib isn't it enough that he should be so cruelly aban-
568 
doned? -ladiww if-fams albino. 
iJI~ ladaawa Inl enmity, hatred, hostility. 
t.SJl&. ladii-: ladii-k Ifem ladii-ki, plladii-ku(m)1 ... 
may it happen to your enemy! (invocation against evil, 
used when something unpleasant is mentioned). 
t.S-""1 ritlada 
Ivil 
to 
be 
infected. 
xalli-bn-ak 
ma-yixtili(-f' b-rawlaad-i la-yitlidu minnu don't let 
your son mix with my children, lest they be infected by 
him. -iva mitlidi. 
t.SJ,aj I rinlada = ritlada. - iva minlidi. 
t.S~ ladda Ivtl 1 to cross. tiqdar tiladdi n-niilloom 
can you swim across the Nile? !Ja-nladdi f-faaril 
bi-taks' leeh why should we take a taxi just to cross the 
street? 2 to cause to pass through. laddi I-rastik min 
il-bakya pass the elastic through the runner! - Ivi/3 to 
pass, go past. ril-Ieela laddit the night passed. 
rir-r~at¥a laddit min il-xafab the bullet penetrated the 
wood. laddeet mil-larabiyya I overtook the car. 
laddeet lal-baififaal I passed the grocer's. laddeet 
lal-baififaal raaxud minnufwayyit !Jagaat I passed by at 
the grocer's to get a few things from him.lIladdit lalee 
the point was lost on him. -vn taldiyya; ava/pva 
miladdi. 
~.l.... miladdiyya In pi -aat, malaadil 1 small foot-
bridge. 2 ferry. 
t.SJW1 ril-malaadi Iprop nl el-Ma'adi, a garden suburb 
about seven miles to the south of the centre of Cairo. 
t.SJI.l.... miladdaawi In pi -yyal ferryman. 
t.S.i....1 ritladda Ivtl 1 to exceed, surpass, go beyond. 
mihnit-u ma-titladdaa-f iI- raati his job consists of no-
thing but the following. - Ivil 2 to be crossed, be pas-
sed. 3 to commit a transgression or offence, trespass. 
ritladdu lala yaifif-i they trespassed on my rights. 
II ril-mitladdi nadmaan {provj the aggressor will come 
to regret his aggression. -vn taladdi; ava/iva/pva 
mitladdi. 
t.SJl&. laada 1 Ivtl 1 to treat with hostility, treat as an 
enemy. niif~ir if-farr' la tladii-ni wala raladii-k let's 
spite the Devil, and not be enemies. y-a~ur-ak lala iii 
Yladii-k I'll stand with you against your enemies. 2 to 
make an enemy of (s.o.). min nt¥ay ig-gaahilladaa 
{provj give advice to someone ignorant and you will 
only make an enemy of him. -vn mUladaah, 
miladiyya; ava milaadi. 
t.SJl.;1 I'itlaada Ivil 18 to be treated with animosity. 
Ib to be made an enemy. 2 to become enemies. -ava/ 
iva mitlaadi. 
t.S~i ralda Ivtl to infect. -ava mUldi. 
t.S.>.a.o mUldi ladjl infectious, contagious. 
t.SJ;s..1 riltada Ivil 1 to make an attack. riltadu lalee 

569 
bill-qarb they attacked him with blows. 2 to assault 
sexually. I'iltada la/-bint he ravished the girl. -vn 
I'iltida, I'iltidaal'f; ava miltidi, mUltadif. 
.1-= 1 I'iltidaa I' In pI -aatl attack. II I'il-iltidaa I' is-
sulaasi the tripartite aggression (against Egypt in 1956). 
Y ~ t see Y ~ t and 3 Y j t and 4 y j t 
J ~ t see J j t 
IYJt 
..,..",J 1 I'il-larab Icoll nl the Arabs. 
IJ.r larabi 1 ladj pI larabl la Arab, Arabian, Ara-
bic.11 I'it-tariix il-larabi dating according to the Islamic 
calendar, Hijra dating. Ib bedouin. - 1n!2a Ipl larabl 
male Arab. II I'ibn· larab (1) an Arab. (2) stalwart fel-
low, fine man. 2 Ipl lurbaan, larabl a bedouin. 3/no 
pU Arabic, the Arabic language. I'il-larabi l-/~iilj liter-
ary Arabic. IIbil-larabi in plain language. 
~ r larabiyya I In! 1 Ipl -aatl la female Arab. 
Ib bedouin woman. 
2 I'il-larabiyya 
the Arabic 
language. 
j,ur luruuba Inl Arabism, Arab identity. 
..,..I~ larraab In *1 godfather. 
IJ.lri I'alraabi Ipl I'alraabl 1 ladjl bedouin. 2 In! a 
bedouin. 
~Iri I'alrabiyya In pI -aatl a bedouin woman. 
..,..~ larrab Ivtl 1 to translate into Arabic. 2 to Arabi-
cize. -vn talriib; ava mUlarrib; pva mUlarrab. 
..,..::""1 I'itlarrab Ivil 1 to be translated into Arabic. 2 to 
be Arabicized. 3 to affect the manners of an Arab. - iva 
mitlarrab. 
lYJt 
~ r larabiyya 2 <cf T araba> In pI -aat, -aatl 
wheeled vehicle (of any description). larabiyya I'ugra a 
taxi. larabiyya karru animal-drawn cart. larabiyyaat 
ija[r railway coaches. 
~ r larbagi <T arabacl> In pI -yya/l driver of any 
animal-drawn vehicle. 2 uncouth or foul-mouthed per-
son. II I'axlaaq larbagiyya uncouth manners. 
J~r larabaati In pI -yyal [obsol] repairer of carts. 
j,j ~ r larbaxaana In pI -aatl [obsol] shed for housing 
carts. 
3 YJt 
~r larba In pI lurabl [mus] 1 quarter tone. 2 device 
for adjusting the tone of the strings of the qanuun (see 
PU, 25). 
~YJt 
-'! r larbid Ivil to behave in a rowdy or riotous way, 
become rowdy, run wild. -Yn larbada; ava milarbid. 
~r larbiid ladj *1 rowdy. 
-'! J""I I'itlarbid Ivil (impersonal) passive of larbid. 
yaama I-beet da tlarbid fii this house has seen a lot of 
hooliganism. -iva mitlarbid. 
';'YJt 
l..J.Jlr larbuun In pI larabiinl down payment, de-
posit. b-aaxud larbuun xamsiin fil-miyya I take fifty 
percent deposit. 
.J! r carbin Ivil to pay a deposit, make a down pay-
ment. -vn larbana; ava milarbin. 
.J! J""I I'itlarbin Ivil (impersonal) p.assive of larbin. 
I'ik-kursi da mitcarbin lalee a deposit has been paid on 
that chair. - iva mitlarbin. 
[Jt 
Cr larag (u) Ivil to limp, hobble. -vn larag; ava 
laarig. 
~ r GaTKa In! 1 a limp. 2 zigzag design. 
Cri I'alrag ladj, fern larga, pI lurgl lame . 
~r cariiga Inl zigzag design. 
CI,..J.1 !'il-milraag In! [lsi] Muhammad's ascension to 
the seven heavens. 
C~ larrag Ivt/ to make (s.th.) wavy, undulating or 
uneven. larragit il-q~~a she cut (it) unevenly. I'arq' 
mlarraga undulating land. -vn talriig; ava/pva 
milarrag. 
C::""I I'itlarrag Ivil to be made wavy, undulating or 
uneven. -iva mitlarrag. 
C::,... talarrugf 
In 
pI -aatl 
zigzag, 
undulation, 
unevenness. 
';'[Jt 
I..J.J"':' r larguun In pI laragiinl date stalk. II I'anjalmil-
larguun drier than a date stalk. 
I JJ t 
~ larrl (i) Ivtl to disgrace, shame, dishonour. da-nta 
tlirr j balad you are the type that brings shame on every 
one around you. -vn lararaan; ava laarir; pva 
malruur . 
• ::r lirra In! slight, insult, disgrace. ya lirrit in-nisa 
you disgrace to womanhood! -ladjectivallyl Ijaaga ciTra 
a disgraceful thiJlg. 

~I fillarr Ivil 1 to be disgraced, be shamed, be dis-
honoured. 2 to feel ashamed, feel disgraced. - ava/iva 
millarr. 
::,.; 1 finlarr = fillarr. - ava/iva minlarr. 
:"'::-1 fislalarr Ivil to be ashamed. kaan mislalarr' min 
huduum-u he was ashamed of his clothes. - ava 
mislalarr. 
Z JJ t 
~ larrz (u) Ivil {a bus] to go about, wander about. 
kunl b,-tlurri feen ya mara m~-~ubb where the hell 
have you been tramping about all this time, woman? 
-vn lararaan, larr; ava laarir. 
IIJ"Jt 
IJ"J r laruus r = laruusa. II bitingaan iI-laruus varie-
ty oflong egg-plant. -laruus iI-babr iI- fabyaq the Bride 
of the Mediterranean (epithet of Alexandria). 
4-Jr laruusa In pI laraayisl la bride, bride-to-be. 
IIlaruusit in-niil'the bride of the Nile'; a maiden said to 
have been cast into the Nile in ancient times as a sacri-
fice at the height of the flood; later, a life-sized doll or 
column of earth whose casting into the Nile was one of 
the traditional ceremonies attending the cutting of the 
dam that separated the Nile from the Cairo Canal (see 
xaliig). -laruusit iI-babr (1) mermaid. (2) cowfish. 
-zayy' fumm iI-laruusa -faqya w-majbuuka {proy] like 
the bride's mother - idle and busy doing nothing. 
-laruusit iz-zaar woman possessed by a demon for 
whom a zaar ritual is performed. -laruusit iI-burCiul 
decorated part of a woman's veil. Ib marriageable 
woman. 2 affectionate form of address or reference to a 
young girl. 3a doll.lIlaraayis iI-muulid sugar dolls clad 
in bright paper dresses sold during the celebrations for 
the birthday of the Prophet Muhammad. 3b puppet, 
marionette. 4 whipping post. 5 {auto] upright projec-
tion on a bumperlfender, overrider. 6 vertical axle of 
the main cog of a saCiya (see PI.E, 4).7 gold crescent on 
iI necklace . 
..rJ r laruusi ladj invar/: tabla laruusi a style of 
drumming used in zaar ceremonies. taara laruusi large 
tambourine without cymbals. zaar word denoting the 
daft· 
'-'""-r lariis In pI lirsaanl 1 bridegroom, future hus-
band. 2 suitor. 3 eligible young man. 
Z 
IJ" J t 
.... r lirsa In pI lirasl 1 weasel. II filii yxaaf mil-lirsa 
ma-bi-yrabbii-f katakii! {proy] he who fears the weasel 
doesn't raise chicks. 2 malignant and vicious person. 
570 
3 IJ" J t 
see IJ".J J t : laruus 
~Jt 
..;. r larf In pI lUr"uJ! throne. 
..;. r larf In pI luruu/. lirfaanl {rur} ceiling. 
IJ" r lirf In pI falraaf, luruuJ! 1 leafy tops of root 
vegetables. 2 cluster of overhanging foliage. 
..r-..r lariif Inl 1 Ipl luruuJ! horizontal trellis. 2 Ipl 
lirfaanl 2a shaft and attached harness (of a cart). 
2b coupling unit (of a truck). 
,-,",,-~I fU-lariif Iprop nl e1-Arish, a town on the 
Mediterranean coast of Sinai. 
~r lariifa In pI laraayifl I animal pen in.a field. 
2 trellis supporting a climbing plant. 
..;. ~ larraf Ivtl 1 to trim, guillotine (uneven edges of 
paper, books). 2 to trl!in (a plant) to grow up a trellis. 
3 to enclose or roof over with trellises supporting climb-
ing plants. -vn talriif; ava/pva milarraj. 
~ 
jU talriifa In pI talariifl trellis supporting climbing 
plants, bower, arbour. 
";'/w milarraf ladj *1 fine-looking, well-dressed. 
fimfi milarraf wala timfi mikarraf {proY} ... it's more 
important to dress well than to eat well. 
..;. ~I fitlarraf Ivil passive of larraj. -iva mitlarraf. 
II.I"'Jt 
'-"" r 
lar~ In pI -aatl I pimp. 2 tabus} stinker, swine. 
'-"" ~ larr~ Ivil I to pimp, procure. larra~ IiI-Ciabba 
he pimped for the prostitute. 2 to ignore improprieties 
wilfully, turn a blind eye. bi-Ylarr~ lala iii bi-yriibu he 
turns a blind eye when people are absent. -ava 
milarr~. 
'-""/W milarr~ In *1 18 pimp, procurer. Ib lecher. 
2 unscrupulous person. 
\J L.. /w milarr~aati = milarra~. 
Z 1.1'" J t 
~ r 
lar~a In pI -aat, lur~1 I thick disc of pottery 
forming the floor of the baking chamber of a mud oven. 
(loosely) the floor of a mud oven (see PI.C. 9). 2 baking 
chamber of a mud oven (see PI.C, 8). 
~Jt 
...;. r laraq' (i) Ivtl 1 to offer. present, show. laraqu 
lalayya' wa~iifa they offered me a job. laraqu 
I-muttahamiin laf1aahid they presented those accused 
to the witness. 
fis-sinima 
di b-tilriq faflaam 
fagnabiyya that cinema shows foreign films. 2labus] to 
afflict (of illness). feeh Uli laraq-ak whatever (dreadful 
illness) has attacked you?! - Ivi/3 to crop up, occur. 

lara4.it-lu masfala la((alit-u something cropped up and 
delayed him. II fagaaza lania contingency leave. - vn 
larq; ava laariq; pva macruuq. 
11 laraqlan to turn away from. have nothing to do with. 
bi-yilriq lan if-JUld he deliberately avoids work. 
""".r larq' In/l Iplluruuql show. presentation, dis-
play. larqi fazyaaf fashion show. 2a Ipl falraaql 
width, breadth. bil-larq (I) widthwise. crosswise. 
(2) abreast. Illjumaaj larq· larqeen double-width 
cloth (i.e. cloth woven 140 cm wide or more). -fi-larq 
iI-bal:Jr on the open sea. - warNi-ni larq i ljafaa-k (or 
ktaaf-ak) let me see the back of you! -l:Ja-yxalli l:Jirt-ak 
larq i w-(uul it will perplex you to the utmost. 2b [geog] 
latitude. xa(( larq line of latitude. 
""".r larq2, lirq In pi falraaql honour. reputation. 
II fana f-larq-ak I beseech you! 
~.r larqi ladjl I widthwise. transverse. 2 [geog] 
latitudinal. 
...,.,)1&. laariq' In pi lawaariq/l illness. ga-k laariq "" 
a pox upon you! lallja tgib-Iu I-laariq a beating that will 
really knock the stuffing out of him. 2 In *1 demonstra-
tor, exhibitor. laariq faflaam film projectionist. 
4,;,)1&. larqa In pi -a at, lawaariql crossbar, crossbeam. 
larqit goon crossbar of a goal. larqit nool breast beam 
of a loom. larqit ~aari [naut] gaff. 
4,;,)1&. laariqa 
In 
pi -aatl 
female' 
demonstrator. 
laariqit fazyaaf fashion model, mannequin. 
,-,L;..J~ malruqaat Ipl nl exhibits. 
4,;,.r lurqa: lurqa Ii- exposed to. liable to. susceptible 
to. miljauadiin-u fil-maktab lurqa lil-majaakil they 
are stationing him in the office to cope with the prob-
lems (that arise). fig-guduur bi-tiblja lurqa liq-qalfthe 
roots are liable to grow weak. 
""".r laraq 2 /n pi falraaq/l chance happening, acci-
dent. 2 symptom. ;aharit laleeha falraaq iI-l:Jumma 
the symptoms of fever appeared on her. 
...,., .r i falraq' lell broader/broadest. widerlwidest. 
...,., J.r l aruuq Inl prosody. 
~.r lariiq ladj plliraaq, luraaql broad. wide. 
kurraat lariiq broad-leaved leeks. (umbaak lariiq 
coarse tobacco. Il(iwiil lariiq a great big (person). 
-ljafaa lariiq he's dim-witted. 
~.r lariiqa In pllaraayiql petition. application. 
Illariiqit dalwa [leg] application for legal proceedings. 
...,., ~ malraq In pi malaariql I display. exhibition. 
2" walk-round store. 
...,., ...... 1 fitlaraq Ivil I to be offered. be presented, be 
shown. 2 to be stricken (by illness). -iva mitliriq. 
...,.,:", larraq/vt/l to expose. make vulnerable .larraq 
571 
nafs-u lil-xa(ar he exposed himself to danger. makaan 
mUlarraq lis-sirlja a place exposed to (the possibility 
of) theft. -It he literary passive form occurs in elevated 
speechl ma-yularraq-F lif-Jams it should not be ex-
posed to the sun. 2 to broaden. nilarraq il-xajab we 
increase the breadth of the timber. -vn talriiq; ava 
milarraq; pva mUlarraq'. 
11 larraq bi-
to make insinuations against. finti 
bi-tlarraqi biyya are you making insinuations against 
me? 
...,.,:"';1 fitlarraq Ivil I to be exposed. be made vulner-
able. ril-majaakil illi b-atlarraq laha the problems 
I face. bi-yitlarraq finnu yilya faw yisaafir he is ex-
posed to the possibility that he may fall ill, or have to 
leave for somewhere else. 2 to be broadened. 3 to ob-
ject. protest, stand in opposition. -vn talarruq; ava/iva 
mitlarraq. 
...,.,)1&. laariq2 Ivil to object. protest, stand in opposi-
tion. l:Jadd i minnina yiljdar yiftal:J l:Janak-u walla 
Ylaariq does anyone of us dare to open his mouth or 
protest? -vn mUlarqa; ava milaariq. 
...,.,;1 .. .;1 fitlaariq Ivil to stand in contradiction, conflict. 
- vn talaaruq; ava mitlaariq. 
...,.,.ri falraq 2: falraq lan to turn away from, have 
nothing to do with. -vn filraaq; ava mUlriq. 
...,.,?I filtaraq I/vtl to stand in opposition to. 
ma-l:Jaddi-Jiltaraq-na no one stood in our way. 2 /vil to 
object, protest. stand in opposition. bi-Yltiriq lala 
ka/aam-ak he objects to what you say. -vn filtiraaq; 
ava miltiriq, mUltariq'. 
...,.,I? 1 filtiraaq In pi -aatl opposition, objection, 
veto. II fallahumma la-ltiraaq a formula used to dis-
claim any blasphemous intent in criticizing God's work, 
as in fir-raagil da mlarra~ fallahumma la-ltiraaq the 
~an's a swine. but God knows best! 
""".rl filraqq Ivil to become wide. - ava micriqq. 
...,.,..,-.;-1 fistalraq Ivtl I to show off with, make a dis-
play of. ma-tistalraq-F laqalaat-ak laleena don't try to 
use strongarm tactics with us. 21 to review, go over and 
examine. fir-rafiis istalraql:Jaras if-jarafthe president 
reviewed the guard of honour .l:Ja-nistalraq il- faraa f di 
kull-a-ha we shall review all these opinions. 3a to con-
sider wide or thick. 3b to select for width or thickness. 
-vn fistilraaq; ava mistalriq. 
~I..,-.;-I fistilraaqi ladjl of the light variety type (of 
entertainment). firlja stilraqiyya a song and dance 
troupe. film istilraaqi a musical-comedy film . 
-c.uPJt 
Jl....;..r larqal:Jaal <cf T and P arzlhal from Arabic> 

In pi -aatl I application or petition to a government 
department. 2 (also larqal:Jaal daml"a) paper printed 
with a fiscal stamp, upon which an official application 
or petition is submitted. 
~I.-;. r 
larqal:Jalgi In pi -yyal professional self-
employed writer of applications and petitions. 
j,Jt 
.J. r larac (u) Ivtl[non-Cairene} to chew, gnaw or bite 
pieces off (s.th.). larat kuuz id-dura he chewed the 
kernels off the corn cob. -vn larc; ava laariC; pva 
malruuc· 
.J.;o'l fitlarac Ivil[non-Cairene} to be chewed, gnawed 
or bitten off. -iva mitliriC. 
I~Jt 
J r lirif (a) Ivtll to know. miin laarif iI-mustaqbal 
who knows the future? ma-yilraf-f' (l:Jaaga) fic-cibb he 
knows nothing about medicine. filii tilraf-u fal:Jsan 
mi-lii ma-tilraf-uu-f [prov} better the devil you know 
than the devil you don't know. riI- fugra I-malruufa the 
known fare, the recognized fare. II filii ma-yilraf-ak 
yigha/-ak [prov} = to know you is to appreciate you. 
-qoolit m-alraf-f' ral:Jt-ik ya nafs-i [prov} saying 'I don't 
know' is the easiest way out. - (min iI-)malruuf finn ... 
it is well known that ... , as in malruuf finnaha 
magnuuna everyone knows she is crazy. 2 to discover, 
find out. fiqilt' raayil:J gayy' min l"eer fayda 1-l:Jadd' ma 
lrift innu laayiz filuus 1 went on coming and going to 
no avail till 1 realized that he wanted some money. ruul:J 
ilraf mawaciid is-sinima go and find out the cinema 
times. 3a to recognize, distinguish. ma-lrift'-kii-f 
wi-nti labsa naqqaara I didn't recognize you in your 
glasses. 3b to show consideration for. riI-laa/am hina 
ma-yilrafuu-f balq people here show no consideration 
for one another. IIma-yilraf-f' fabuu (1) he is com-
pletely impartial. (2) he would ride roughshod over 
(anyone, even) his father. 4 to experience, suffer.lirift 
iI-qaswa wil-lJiqd I knew suffering and the malice of 
others. - Ipreverbl Sa to have the ability to. tilraf 
tiluum can you swim? Sb to manage to. ma-kanit-f' 
larfa tnaam she couldn't get to sleep.lltilrafcould you 
(do)? would you mind (doing)? tilraf tigib-Ii lilbit 
sagaayir could you get me a packet of cigarettes? -vn 
malrifa; ava laarif; pva malruuf. 
• lirif Ii- to be conversant with, understand the work-
ings of. siib iI-lJanafiyya - fana falraf laha leave the tap 
-1 know how to make it work. II fana mif laarif [uku 
baqa I'm sick of trying to make you out, I'm fed up with 
your ways. 
572 
"'.;A" malrifa, milrifa In pi malaarif/ I knowledge, 
understanding. II bi-malrift-ak at your discretion, as 
you think best. - waziir iI-macaarif [obsol} Minister of 
Education. 
-dayrit 
macaarif 
encyclopaedia. 
2 friendship. kutr is-salaam yiqil/ iI-mierifa [prov} = 
excessive formality stunts the growth of friendship. 
3 acquaintance(s), friend(s). fil:Jna maczumiin land' 
naas malrifit-na we're invited out to some acquaint-
ances of ours. luu l:Jadd' macrifa fil-mal:Jkama he knows 
someone at the court. 
J.,.;A" malruuf Ilnl kind 
treatment, 
favour. 
ma-yinsaa-f iI-malruuf l"eer iI-xasiis [prov} only a base 
man forgets kindness shown him. fil-malruuf sayyid 
it-ral:Jkaam [prov} kindness is the best guide in judging 
(others). II filmil malruuf please! tilmil malruuf 
tigib-Ii gurnaal would you be so kind as to get me a 
paper? -xallii-ha bil-malruuflet's keep things friendly! 
let's not quarrel! -Ia bil-malruufwa/a bil-matluufnever 
(will 1 do what you say)! -rabb-i-na ydiim iI-macruuf 
may Our Lord preserve this kindly feeling (that's be-
tween us), Lord preserve our friendship. 2/prop nl 
district in central Cairo between Champollion and 
Ramses Streets. 
J r lurf Inll custom, practice.l:Jasab iI-lurf accord-
ing to custom. - Iplluruuf, liraaf/2 branch (ofa tree). 
3a mane (of a horse). 3b crest, comb (of a rooster). 
IIlurf id-diik [bot} love-lies-bleeding (Amaranthus 
candatus). 
Jr lurfi ladjl according to custom: fil-gawaaz iI-
lurfi common-law marriage (the offspring of which are 
nevertheless regarded as legitimate). maglis lurfi 
(1) [leg, obsol} court of common law. (2) gathering of 
arbiters and interested parties to resolve a dispute. 
II fal:Jkaam lurfiyya martial law. 
~ r larafa Iprop nl Arafa, a hill near Mecca·llyoom 
larafa [lsi} the ninth day of the pilgrimage month and 
the eve of the Greater Feast (ril-liid ik-kibiir), passed 
by the pilgrims on the hill of Arafa. 
.;:,\i r 
larafaat = larafa. 
~ r lariif In pi lurafa/l assistant to the master of a 
kuttaab. 2 [mil} corporal. 3 Ipl also lurfaanl[Chr} can-
tor (elevated synonym for milallim in the Coptic 
church). 
JI::r larraaf In *1 one who consults jinn or the stars 
about the future . 
~::r larriif: fabu I-larriif [deris} know-all. laamil 
fabu I-larriif he's making out he knows everything. 
~.;A" malrafa In pi -aatl mane (of, e.g., a horse). 
J;o'l fitlaraF Ivil to be or become known, be recog-

nized. fid-dukkaan illarafil the shop became known. 
fi(-(aalib iz-zaki b-yillirif lala (uul a bright student gets 
noticed straight away. II fig-gawaab yillirif min 
linwaan-u [prav[ (a letter is known by its address) "" 
you can tell a book by its cover. - iva millirif. 
J~I finlarafl = fillaraF. -iva minlirif. 
J~ larraf Ivt/l to inform (s.o.) of (s.th.). ril-garas 
bi-Ylarraf il-mutafarrigiin finn il-f~l il-laani Ija-yibda 
the bell informs the audience that the next act will 
begin.larraf-ni (ariifj kanz i fil-farq he told me the way 
to a buried treasure. II fee! larraf ... however should ... 
know? as in fee! larraf-ni ga walla laf how do you 
expect me to know whether he has arrived or not. 
fuskut - fee! larraf-ak fil-mawquul da shut up! you 
don't know anything about the subject! 2 to introduce, 
acquaint.larraf-ni biihum (or laleehum) he introduced 
me to them. laazim falarraf-ku bi-blad-na I must ac-
quaint you with our country. 3 to define. -vn lalriif; 
ava/pva milarraf. 
~JU lalriif In pI -aal, lalariif/ definition. 
~ 
JU lalriifa In! I Ipl -aall classified list of charges, 
tariff. lalriifa gumrukiyya customs tariff. fUlubiis 
lalriifa muwal:Jl:Jada a flat-rate fare bus. 2 half a piastre, 
a half-piastre piece. lalaala lalriifa one and a half pias-
tres. xamsa lalriifa two and a half piastres. ma-landiif 
wala lalriifa I'm penniless. 
J::"'I fillarraf Ivil I to be introduced, become ac-
quainted, get to know. fillarrafli b-gadal (or lala 
gadal) sawwaafj fil-lurmaay I became acquainted with 
a fellow who was a driver on the trams. 2 to make an 
identification. fis-saayil:J illarraf lala!an(il-U the tour-
ist identified his suitcase. 3 to be defined. - vn 
lalarruf'; ava/iva millarraf 
J) .. ;I fillaarif Ivil to become mutually acquainted. 
- ava millaarif 
J? 1 fillaraf Ivil 18 to confess, admit. fillarafl i bil-
gariima I confessed to the crime. bi-yillirif bi-fjillil il-
fadab he admits to (his) rudeness. Ib [Chr] to confess 
one's sins, go to confession. 2 to give recognition, show 
acknowledgement. fillarafu bil-l:Jukuuma g-gidiida 
they recognized the new government. laazim lillirif 
bil-gimiil you must acknowledge a favour shown. 
mUllaraf bi- recognized as valid, as in fiJ-!ihaada di 
mUllaraf biiha f-ma~r this certificate is recognized as 
valid in Egypt. -vn filliraaf; ava mUllarit. millirif; pva 
mUllaraf 
JI?I filliraaf In pI -aall confession, admission. 
II fabb illiraaf-i [Chr] the priest to whom I make 
confession. 
J....,:;-I fislalra[J 
Ivil 
I to 
identify, 
recognize. 
573 
ma-Ijadd if islalraf lal-ism-i-da no one recognized this 
name. 2 to get acquainted. fislalrafl" lala gadal 
(ayyib xad-ni mlaa I got to know a good fellow who 
took me with him. -ava mislalraf. 
2~.;t 
J.r laraf (u) Ivtl to give (s.o.) a nose-bleed. qarab-u 
w-laraf-u he struck him and mad~ his nose bleed. -vn 
larfa; ava laarif; pva malruuf 
J JU 1 fillaraF Ivil to be given a nose-bleed. -iva 
mitlirif. 
JJUI finlaraF = fitlaraF. -iva minlirif. 
J.;t 
.j.r lirifj (a) Ivil to sweat, perspire. kunli f-lizz iJfita 
falrafj zayy i lamma fakuun mistaljammi I used to 
sweat in the depths of winter just as I do when I've had 
a bath. - vn larafj; ava larfjaan. 
.j.r larafj Inl I sweat, perspiration. bid-damm i 
wil-larafj wid-dumuul with blood, sweat and tears. 
banaa b-larafj-u (or bi-larafj gibiin-u) he built it with 
the sweat of his brow. larafj il-lafya "" may your pers-
piration be the sign of returning health (said to a sick 
person who is perspiring)! bafja larafj-u marafj-u he 
became very embarrassed. 2~ payment for labour or 
share given to one involved in a small transaction. 
fig-gammaala b-yaxdu larafj-hum yalla w-dura the 
camel drivers get their cut in wheat and maize. 3 (also 
larafj balalj) arrack, colourless spirit made from dates, 
(loosely also) ouzo, raki. 
.; r larafji Inl arrack, colourless spirit made from 
dates, (loosely also) ouzo, raki. 
~ r larafjiyya In pI -aatl [absal] cotton skullcap, 
usually worn under turbans and other headgear. 
.j.r lirfj In pllUruufjl I vein. xadli l:Jufjna fil-lirfj 
I had an intravenous injection. Illirfj in-nisa sciatica. 
-lirfj i gamb i widn-u-hum ma-yl:Jibb if miraal ibn-u-
hum [pray] (a vein next to their ears doesn't like their 
daughter-in-law) "" mothers can never bring them-
selves to like their daughter-in-law. 2 tendon, sinew. 
38 stalk, stem.lIlirfji dahab ipecacuanha. -lirfji suus 
liquorice root, liquorice. 3b vein (of a leaf). 48 seam, 
vein (in rock). 4b streak, vein-like mark. 5 beam (of 
wood). - Ino pl/6 breeding, stock, descent. II fil-lirfj i 
dassaas or fil-lirfj i ymidd i l-saabil gidd "" like father 
like son. 7 body, texture, (stiff) consistency, viscosity. 
IIraagillirfj a strong man. 
.jlr luraafj Inl [mus] mode in Arabic music begin-
ning on B half flat and having E half flat. 
.jl ~ 
1 ril-liraafj Iprop nl Iraq. 

';Ir r;lraaqi I/adj *1 Iraqi. II wizz' r;raaqi swans. 
2 In *1 an Iraqi. 
~I~ r;arraaqa In pi -aatl saddle blanket. 
~I ~ r;arraqiyya In pi -aatl = r;araqiyya . 
..,~ r;arraq Ivtl 1 to cause to sweat. ma-tgarrii-j 
il-yu~aan faysan tir;arraq-u don't make the horse run or 
you'll make him sweat. 2~ to give (s.o.) a cut (on a 
transaction). 3 to make streaks in. - vn tar;riiq; avalpva 
mir;arraq . 
..,:"'1 fitr;arraq Ivil passive of r;arraq. - iva mitr;arraq. 
YJJt 
,-:,.,t r r;arquub In pi r;araqiibl 1 Achilles' tendon (in 
man), hamstring (in quadrupeds). IIku/l' waayid 
mir;allaq min r;arquub-u "" everyone must take the 
blame for his own mistakes. - fumm· r;araqiib [deris] a 
skinny woman. 2 [constr] corner angle between two 
walls. 
~.,t r r;arquuba In pi r;araqiibl 1 = r;arquub. 2 [rur] 
crack in the earth. 
..,...; r r;arqab Ivtl 1 to hamstring (an animal). 2 to put 
a stop to, make an end of. - vn r;arqaba; avalpva 
mir;arqab. 
..,...; ~I fitr;arqab 
Ivil 
passive 
of r;arqab. 
- iva 
mitr;arqab. 
..r'JJt 
~ 
r 
r;arqa~ Ivtl to entangle, confuse, tie in knots. 
Jar;r' 
mr;arqa~ tangled hair. 
lI~awaabir; mir;arqa~a 
gnarled fingers. -vn r;arqa~a; avalpva mir;arqa~. 
~ 
~I fitr;arqa~ Ivil to be entangled, be confused, be 
tied in knots. - iva mitr;arqa~. 
JJJt 
J.i r r;arqallvtl to hinder, complicate, make difficult. 
- vn r;arqala; avalpva mir;arqal. 
J. ~\ fitr;arqal Ivil to be hmdered, be complicated, be 
made difficult. - iva mltr;arqal. 
.!.lJt 
~ r r;arka In pi -aatl fight between two groups, gang 
fight, brawl. 
~ j'A mar;raka In pi mar;aarikl battle, struggle. 
.!l)l&. r;aarik Ivtl to fight with, struggle with. - vn 
mir;arka; avalpva mir;aarik. 
.!l)...;-\ fitr;aarik Ivil to fight, join battle. ma-titr;arkuu-j 
r;al-fakl don't fight over the food! - ava mitr;aarik. 
r J t 
I...r r;urma In pi r;uraml [agric] pile, heap (especially 
of a harvested crop). 
574 
j r r;arram Ivtl [agric] to form (a harvested crop) into 
piles. - vn tar;riim; avalpva mir;arram. 
j:"'1 fitr;arram Ivil passive of r;arram. -iva mitr;arram. 
~.JrJt 
1f.J'" r r;armuus <Gr armos> In pi r;aramilSl seam, 
join (e.g., between bricks, planks, parts of a sail). - also 
farmuus, r;arnuus. 
~':'Jt 
<.r"\; r r;irnaasi Inl pattern used in maJrafiyya work. 
~.J':'Jt 
IfYr r;arnuus <Gr,armos> In pi r;araniisl seam, 
join (e.g., between bricks, planks, parts of a sail). - also 
farmuus, r;armuus. 
.J J t 
oJ.r r;"wa In pi -aat, r;araawi, r;"awl la buttonhole. 
Ib belt loop, belt carrier. 2 [naut] bight. lIr;irwa yltta 
wayda endless bowline hitch. -r;irwa bay" running 
bowline hitch. 3 [agric] planting season. ril-r;irwa~­
~efiyya the summer planting season. 4 [coarse] woman, 
female . 
~.JJ t 
IfJ.r r;aruus Inl Marone labrax, a type of bass found 
in the Nile and in the Mediterranean. - also qaruu~. 
ISJt 
IS r r;iry Inl 1 nakedness. 2 [rurJloose overshirt. 
';'~r r;iryaan ladj * and pi r;araayal naked. laazim 
tisiib raas-ak r;"yaana you must leave your head unco-
vered. r;iryaniin zayy' ma wildit-hum fumm-u-hum 
naked as the day they were born. r;"yaan mall stark 
naked. 
...s~ r;arra Ivtl to lay bare, strip, expose. r;am [Iiz-ak 
lid-dababtir wi-quul ya rabb inta qadiir [provJ (expose 
your backside to the wasps and then ask for God's help) 
"" don't complain at the results of your own stupidity. 
- vn tar;riyya, tar;riya T ; avalpva mir;arri. 
~~ tar;riya T Inl erosion. ril-bayr' min r;awaamil it-
tar;riya the sea is one of the causes of erosion . 
...s:"'\ fitr;arra Ivil to be laid bare, be stripped, be ex-
posed. - iva mitr;arri . 
·Y..it 
,-:,.ri far;zab J T = r;aazib. 
,-:,jl&. r;aazib In pi r;uzzaabl bachelor, celibate.llr;aazib 
dahr' wala farmalJahr [provJ it is easier to be a bache-

lor for a lifetime than a widower for a (single) month. 
4!ji&. lazba In pI luzzaabl spinster. 
~r lazaba In pI -aatl = lazba. 
:4ur luzuuba I Inl bachelorhood. celibacy. 
~Jr luzubiyya = luzuuba. 
2~jt 
~r lizba In pI lizabll country estate consisting of a 
manor house and labourers' dwelIings surrounded by 
farmland. 2 hamlet which was formerly such an estate, 
and which is under the jurisdiction of the lumda of a 
village. Ulizbit in-naxl Ezbet en-Nakhl, an area in 
north-east Cairo. 
J~jt 
..,..I}&- lazaab In pI -aatl torture. torment. 
..,..~ lazzib Ivtl I to torture, torment. rabb-i-na l:Ja-
YlBZzib-ak God will torment you (in hell-fire). 2 to 
cause to suffer. give a hard time to, give hell to. misk-u 
I-bulii~ wi-lazzib-u /wayya the police took him and 
knocked him about a bit. riI-larabiyya lazzibit-ni ~­
~ubl:J the car gave me a lot of trouble this morning. 
fiddaa-ni/-Juyli da la/aan yilazzib-ni he gave me this 
jo~ to make me suffer. -vn talziib; ava/pva milBZZib. 
..,...i.;1 fitlazzib Ivil I to be tortured, be tormented. 
2 to be made to suffer, be given a hard time. -iva 
mitlazzib. 
4~jt 
..,..~ lazb ladjl sweet, pleasant. IImayya lazba.fresh 
water. 
..,..~i falzab2 lell morelmost sweet or pleasant. 
4!J~ luzuuba 2 Inl sweetness, pleasantness. 
.;jt 
J~ lazar (u) Ivtl I to excuse and sympathize with, 
make allowances for. fana lazr-ak mala I-liyaal di 
kull-a-ha I sympathize with you, with all these children 
around. 2 to place in straits, cause to be hard up. 
m~ariifil-madrasa lazarit-ni/-Jahr-i-da the school fees 
have put me in a tight spot thi~ month. fana malzuur 
(fil-filuus) I'm hard up (for money). -vn luzr; ava 
laazir; pva malzuur. 
J~ luzr In pI falzaarl excuse. fana yaltaan - ti'ibal 
luzr-i I am wrong; accept my apology. II fin-naas 
falzaar everyone has his problems. 
JJ.1... malzuur ladj *1 mentally deficient, touched. 
.IJ~ lazraafr I/adj pI lazaaral virgin. 2/nl fil-
lazraaf 2a {astrol] Virgo. 2b (also riI-ladra) the Vir-
gin Mary. 
575 
J.i.;1 fitlazar Ivil I to be in straits, be hard pressed. 
fitlazarti/wayyaf-fawwil if-Jahr I was a bit hard up at 
the beginning of the month. 2 to become mentally de-
ranged. -ava mitlizir. 
J.i.; I finlazar = fitlazar. - vn finlizaar; ava minlizir. 
J~i falzar Ivil: laq~d falzara man fanzar {prov] he 
who allows you time to mend your ways by giving you a 
warning has every justification to act against you if you 
do not act accordingly. 
J..i;&.1 filtazar Ivil to apologize, excuse oneself. 
l:Ja-yiltizir lan ilIi l:J~al he will apologize for what hap-
pened. bar;at-Ii wara'ia bi-yiltizir fiiha lan iI-migiyy he 
sent me a note in which he excuses himself from com-
ing. -vn filtizaar; ava miltizir. 
--.;jt 
J,e:IJ,r lazrafiillprop nI Azrael, the Angel of Death, 
the Angel who removes the soul from the body. ga-k 
lBZrafiil ii-moot ... I hope you die! 
~j.J j t 
"'J,r lazrana Inl 
I rage, fury. 
2 stubbornness, 
recalcitrance. 
~Jjtw milazran ladjl I enraged, furious. 2 stubborn, 
recalcitrant . 
~JjoUl fitlazran Ivi/l to become enraged. 2 to become 
stubborn, behave stubbornly. -ava mitlBZran. 
jj t 
~ lazz (i) Ivt/l to hold dear, cherish, prize. b-ar;izz-u 
zayy axuu-ya I love him like a brother. bi-Ylizz i nafs-u 
he holds himself in high esteem. II (rabb-i-na) yilizz i 
mi'idaar-ak ... may your position be enhanced! (the 
conventional reply to xa{Wa lBZiiza). - Ivil 2 to be-
come great, become powerful.lazza man qanal {prov] 
... contentment is the source of strength. fallaahu lazza 
wa-gall God, Almighty and Glorious is He. 3 to be-
come rare. riI-fuluus lBZZit iI-fayyam-di money has 
become hard to find these days. -vn lizz; ava laaziz. 
11 lazZ" lala to be hard on, be difficult to bear. yilizz" 
laleena finnak l:Ja-tsib-na the thought ofyoilr leaving us 
is hard to bear. -lBZZ"lan to withold from, as in ma 
kunt"-J falizz-u lannak I would not withhold it from. 
you (were it in my power to provide it) (a polite formula 
used in refusing a request). 
~ lizz Inl I wealth, riches. II fibn i lizz ... one born 
with a silver spoon in his mouth. -yiduum iI-lizz ... may 
you always have plenty (said to a host). - fayyaam 
iI-lizz ... the good old days. 2 lin constrl the peak of 
intensity of. l~ZZ if-Joo'i the height of desire. lizz iI-leel 

the depths of night. Gill il-quhr the peak of the noon-
time heat. [izz if-fita the depths of winter. [izz il-[umr 
the prime oflife.lI[izz il-babaayib the truest of friends . 
• ~ [izza Inl 1 power, might, honour. wi-[izzit iIlaah 
by the glory of God! 2 (also [izzit nafs) self-esteem, 
self-respect, pride. xadit-u /-[izza w-(arad-ni barra he 
became outraged and threw me out. 
~~ [izziyya Inl endearing quality. lI[izziyyit nafs 
self-esteem. 
~i fa[azz lell 1 more/most dear or precious. 2 morel 
most scarce. 
j!/- [aziiz ladj pi [uzaazl 1 dear, precious. miraat-i 
[aziiza [alayya my wife is dear to me.llbabb il-[aziiz 
[bot] chufa, earth almond (Cyperus esculentus). 
2 scarce. 
<.Sj!/- [aziiZI: xafab [aziiZI pitch pine. [inab [aziizi 
type of grape resembling the fayyuumi but larger . 
• j.... mi[azza Inl affection, esteem. 
j.;1 fit[azz Ivil to be prized, be cherished.llma-kan-f 
it[azz it would not be withheld (were it in my power to 
provide it) (a polite formula used in refusing a request). 
-iva mit[azz. 
).;1 fin[azz = fit[azz. -iva min[azz. 
j~ [azziz Ivtl to provide backing for, back up, sup-
port. riI-mudiir [azziz markaz-i (or mawqif-i) the direc-
tor backed me up. ma-tiqdar-f' taaxud sulfa mil-bank' 
min yeer badd' ma y[azziz-ak you can't get a loan from 
the bank unless someone provides backing for you. -vn 
ta[ziiz; ava/pva mi[azziz; pva mu[azzaz r . 
jj.;1 fit[azziz Ivil 1 to be backed up, be supported. 
2 to refuse out of pride what one really desires, stand on 
one's dignity. (alabuu-ha t[azzizit fatuu-ha tnaddimit 
[prov] (they asked for her hand and she was coy, but 
when they passed her over she was sorry) he who plays 
hard-to-get may find himself ,passed over. - ava/iva 
mit[azziz. 
)i&.1 fi[tazz !vii to pride oneself, boast. finta mu[tazz' 
b-nafs-ak xaa/~ you are very proud. -vn fi[tizaaz; ava 
mu[tazz. 
j..:;...1 fista[azz Ivt/ to pride oneself, boast. misti[izziin 
bi-fawlad-hum they feel very proud of their children. 
- ava misti[izz. 
~jt 
...;.r [azaf (i) 1 Ivtl to play (music or a musical instru-
ment). bi-ti[Zif il-biyaanu she plays the piano. b-a[zif 
samaa[i I play by ear. 2/vil to play, emit music. 
bi-yi[zif nafaaz it plays out of tune. -vn [azf; ava 
[aazif; pva ma[zuuf. 
"';j~ [aazif In °1 player, instrumentalist. 
576 
"';~I fit[azaf Ivil to be played (of music or a musical 
instrument). -Iva mit[izif. 
Jjt 
J/- [azaq (a) Ivtl 1 to dig over, till, hoe (soil) prepara-
tory to planting. bi-ni[zaq il- farq' bil-faas we break up 
the soil with the hoe. 2 to beat, hit. b-a[zaq-ku bin-
nabbuut 1"11 beat you with a stick! -vn [azq, [aziiq; ava 
[aaziq; pva ma[zuuq. 
~/- [azqa linst n, pi -aatl a tilling, a hoeing (of the 
soil). 
J~I fit[azaq Ivil 1 to be dug over, be tilled, be hoed 
(of soil). 2 to be beaten, be hit. -iva mit[iziq. 
IJjt 
J/- [azal (i) Ivtl 1 to separate, segregate, isolate. 
[azalu I-mabmumiinfil-mustaffa they isolated the fever 
patients in the hospital. II [azal il-kahraba to disconnect 
the electricity. 2 to insulate. fik-kawitf' b-yi[zil-u min 
il-badiid the rubber insulates it from the metal. 3 to 
alienate. [azal siyasiyyan to deprive of political rights. 
4 to depose, dismiss. baed is-sawra [azaluu [all iI-
wizaara after the revolution they sacked him from the 
ministry. -vn [az/; ava [aazil; pva ma[zuul. 
J/- [azl Inl quarantine area, isolation area. 
Jj~ [aazil In pi [awaazill insulator. 
J/-i fa[zal ladj, fem [az/a, pi [udl unarmed, de-
fenceless. riI-qitaal il- fa[zal unarmed combat. 
JI/- [izaal Inl 1 furnishings, household effects. 
2 I coarse] sexual organs (of a male). 
~J/- [izwee/a In pi [azawiill 1 giblet. 2 piece of 
furniture. 
J.:,.... ma[zal In pi ma[aazill quarantine area, isolation 
area. 
J~I fit[azal Ivil passive of [azal. -iva mit[izil. 
J~I fin[azal = fit[azal. -vn fin[izaal; iva min[izil. 
J~ [azzil Ivil to move house. filii kaanu sakniin 
fif1aqqa di [azzilu the people who were living in this 
apartment moved. -vn ta[ziil; ava mi[azzil. 
Jrl fi[tazaH Ivtl to abandon, give up. fi[tazalu s-
siyaasa they have given up politics. -vn fi[tizaal; ava 
mi[tizil. 
2 Jj t 
JJ~ [azuul In pi [uzzaal, [awaazilll jealous pt:(~on 
who attempts to interfere between intimates or lovers. 
leeh il-[awaazil I;asdin-ni - dool baqq-u-hum yibku 
[alayya why do the jealous envy me? they should weep 
for me! (from a song) - [awaazil Ipl nl 2 personal 
critics. censorious people. fizzaay tisma[ kalaam iI-

lawaazil how can you pay attention to what (my) ene-
mies say? 
rj t 
(r lazam (i) Ivtl I to invite. laazim tilzim I'umm-ak 
tiigi you must invite your mother to come. lazamnaa 
la/-yada we invited him to lunch. ruyna I-yafla 
w-/aqenaa-hum lazmiin naas kitiir qawi we went to the 
party and found they had invited lots of people. - Ivil 
2 to proffer an invitation (out of politeness). lazamit 
lag-giraan bil-leef is-suxn she offered freshly-baked 
bread to the neighbours. I'ana yariib la/afaan tilzimu 
la/ayya kida am I a stranger that you should feel com-
pelled to keep pressing me (e.g., to eat) like this? 3 to 
decide, resolve, determine. I'iza lazamta fa-tawakkal 
la/a lIaah once you've made up your mind trust in God 
(to help you carry out your resolve). I'ana lazamt i 
xala~ lag-gawaaz I've made up my mind to get mar-
ried. -vn lazm, luzuuma; ava laazim; pva malzuum. 
(r lazm Inl I resolve, intention, resolution·la/afeen 
iI-lazm where do you intend to go? 2 (also lizm) pow-
er, strength, energy. lazm iI-mUloor the power of the 
engine. lazm-u qall his strength declined. - Ipl 
luzuuml 3 [mech] moment. 
4.Jr luzuuma 
In 
pllazaayiml 
I invitation. 
IIluzuumit marakbiyya an invitation not seriously in-
tended. 2 (lavish) meal for invited guests. luzuumit 
yada a luncheon party. lamalnaa-Iu luzuuma f-liid 
milaad-u we had a feast for him on his birthday. 
jJ/t-' malzuum In pi malaziiml guest. 
~r laziima Inl I firmness of purpose, determina-
tion, resolution. tiqdar tiba{(al is-sagaayir law landak 
laziima you can give up cigarettes if you're really deter-
mined. 2/pl lazaayiml formula or passage (e.g., of 
scripture) recited as a charm or to bring about healing. 
j.:,.;1 I'itlazam Ivil to be invited. - iva mitlizim. 
j.:,.;1 I'inlazam = I'itlazam. -iva minlizim. 
j ~ lazzim Ivil to make spells, perform magic. -vn 
talziim; ava milazzim. 
~.:,.; talziima 
In 
pi talaziim, 
talzimaatl spell, 
incantation. 
j j..;1 I'itlazzim Ivil (impersonal) passive of lazzim. 
I'il-beet[ da mitlazzim lalee those eggs have been be-
witched. -iva mitlazzim. 
jjl.;1 I'itlaazim Ivil I to invite one another. fit[lu lafar 
daqaayiq yitlazmu miin yidxul iI- I'awwil they spent ten 
minutes inviting each other to go in first. 2 to gather 
one's strength. I'itlazimti wi-ddeet-u qa/am I slapped 
his face with all the strength I could muster. -ava 
mitlaazim. 
577 
.J j t 
'OJr lizwa Inl support, backing. 
J.J j t see 
I J j t: lizweela 
IoSjt 
Ir laza Inl I paying of condolences. 2 gathering for 
the paying of condolences to a bereaved family. 
l'iI- I'ayraab illi gum liI-laza the strangers who came to 
pay their condolences. kaan fii naas bi-yilmilu I-laza 
I'arbiliin leela there used to be people who sat to re-
ceive condolences for forty days. lIyigii-ni lazaa-k 
[women] may I hear news of your death! 
1oS/t-' malza In pi malaazil place where condolences 
are offered at a funeral. 
1oS~ lazza Ivtl to console, pay condolences to, com-
fort. ga Ylazzii-na he came to pay his condolences. 
ka/aam-u lazzaa-ni b-tariiqa mij malquula his words 
comforted me in an amazing way. -vn talziyya, talziya; 
ava/pva milazzi. 
~.:,.; talziyya, talziya In pi talaazil condolence, 
solace, consolation. 
1oSj..;1 I'itlazza Ivil to be consoled, receive condo-
lences, be comforted. -iva mitlazzi. 
,)I,)"t 
~ 
lusr In/I difficulty .lusri hat[m indigestion.lusr i 
tanaffus difficulty in breathing. IIlusr iI-mayya reten-
tion of urine. 2 hard times, difficult circumstances. 
bald iI-lusri yusr [prov] =- after the clouds the 
sunshine. 
~ 
lisir ladjl difficult. wilaada lisra a difficult birth. 
• ~ 
lisra Inl sultry weather. lisrit misra tlaffin iI-
kisra [prov] the sultry weather of August makes the 
bread go mouldy. 
IoSJI~ lisraawi ladj *1 left-handed. 
~i I'alsar' f ladj, fern lasra, pllusrl = lisraawi. 
~i l'alsar2 lell morelmost difficult or trying. 
,r--S- lasiirf ladj °1 difficult, trying. 
;.s. lassar Ivtl to make difficult, make trying. I'amfiir 
yiquulliz-zarl i siir ba/a talsiir xalli ~-~uyayyar yiy~~al 
ik-kibiir (the month of) Amshir (brings vitality and) 
tells the crops to flourish without any setbacks till the 
small plants catch up with the big ones. -vn tacsiir; 
ava/pva milassar. 
;"';1 I'itlassar Ivil to be made or become difficult or 
trying. wilaada mitlass~ra a difficult birth. -ava/iva 
mitlassar. 

..,...,.t 
..:;. lass (I) IVII to grope. feel one\ way (10 the dark). 
lasseet lala fllkrit iI-baab lala/aall fa.lrllg I felt around 
for the door handle to let my~elf out. - vn lass. 
lasasaan: ava laasls. 
..,.t..,.t 
~ 
laslas Ivil to grope. feel one's way (in the 
dark). - vn laslasa: ava mila~las. 
J..,.t 
~ 
lasf Inl tyranny. 
~I fitlassaf Ivil to adopt or impose arbitary views 
or decisions. - vn talassuf: ava mll/alassif. 
.;.:..a. talassu/i ladvl haphazardly. arbitrarily. at 
random. 
.J.!.I..,. t 
.f-s. laskar Ivil to encamp. set up camp. laskarna 
gamb I{-{ariie; we camped beside the road. II mllaskar 
/is-sirrir he stays in bed all the time. - ava milaskar. 
..s.f-s. laskari ladj *1 I military. martial. maglis 
laskari military tribunal. lJukm" laskari marllal law. 
mal:Jkama laskariyya court martial. raagillaskari (I) a 
military man (of any rank). (2) a military type.llxile;it-u 
laskariyya he hasa stern face. -
In pllasaakir.laskarl 
2 soldier of the lowest rank. private. IIlaskari bulii~ 
policeman. -laskari muruur traffic policeman. -laskar 
wi-l:Jaramiyya the children's game of 'cops and rob-
bers'. -laskari ma{aa/i fireman. 3 pawn (in chess). 
4 bed-knob. 
.f-.... mUlaskar In pi -aatl camp. encampment. 
mUlaskiIr lamal work camp. 
~I fitlaskar Ivil (impersonal) passive of laskar. 
fif- farq' di ma-yitlaskarj' fiilza camping is not allowed 
on that land. - iva mitlaskar. 
J..,.t 
~ 
lasallnl I (also lasal fabyaq.lasal nal:J/) honey. 
ya lasal fabyaq ya tiin {vendor's cry] figs sweet as 
honey! Ilrahr iI-lasal honeymoon. -samn "lala lasal a 
harmonious combination. a perfect match. -lasal 
itlaxba{ lala laban == a mess. a hodgepodge. - (lfare;aan) 
fil-lasal (drowning in honey) totally unaware of what's 
going on (as a result of. e.g .. being in love). -yoom 
lasal wi-yoom ba~al == some days are good and some 
bad. -nahaar-ak zayy iI-lasal have a good day! -kuuz 
lasal honeydew melon. -e;arl d lasal pumpkin (Curcu-
bita pepo). - filii laayiz iI-lasal yu~bur lala e;ar~ in-nal:Jl 
{pro!'] (he who wants honey puts up with being stung by 
578 
the bees) be prepared to pay the cost for what you want. 
2 (also lasal 'lis wid. lasal fasmar. lasal e;a~ab) molas-
ses. treacle. IIlasal wi-{lJiina a harmonious combina-
tion. a perfect match. 
~ 
lasala Inl type or quality of honey. fif-lasala di 
Iiliza rii!Ja l:Jilwa this type of honey has a pleasant smell. 
~ 
lasali ladj, often invarl I honey-like. sweet or 
sticky as honey. c;arl" lasali pumpkin (Curcubita 
pepo).2 light brown.lenee-ha lasali (or lasaliyya) she 
has hazel eyes. 
~ 
lasaliyya Icoll nl hard stick-shaped confection 
made from molasses and flour. 
oI!~ lasallyyaaya Ipl -aatl unit noun of lasaliyya. 
J.,.-.. malsllUl lad)1 mellifluous. ka/aam malsuul 
honeyed words. 
~ 
lassil Ivt/l to mix with or soak in honey or molas-
ses. lassil id-dllxxaan bac;a it's high time you steeped 
the tobacco in molasses. - Ivil 2 to become sweet in 
taste. yaah iI-ba{aaCls lassll" my. the potatoes have 
become sweet (because of bad storage)! 3 to take a nap. 
'lana xalaa~ laaZlm falassil fiwayya I'm tired out -
I must take a nap. IIlellee lassilit he dozed off. -vn 
talSIlI: avalpva nlllas~iI. 
-.1.,.-..; talsllla linst n. pi -aatl a nap. 
~ 
IIl1lassii Inl preparation of coarse-cut tobacco 
~tceped 10 molasse~ and fermcnted. used for smoking in 
the goo:.a. 
~I fitlassil Ivii to be mixed with or soaked in honey 
or mola~ses. - iva nlltlassil. 
r..,.t 
j~ l"smaam lad) *1 Ottoman. Turkish (of the 
Ottoman period). 
j;~ lllsmanlt, lllsmalli = l"smaalll. 
..s..,.t 
..s-s- lasa ladvi perhap~. IIlasa-lIa let's hope to God 
(that). a~ in lasa-lla ma-Imsaajlet's hope you won't 
forget. 
oj I .;. t 
.:..1....&. lafaan (also lala/aall) Iprepl I for. lor the sake 
of. lajaall feelz what for'! why? la/aall.m{r-ak for your 
sake. '111- fOOqll eli la/aan II-mlsa/rrm thiS room is for 
travellers. 'lana mustalldd llcfa!J!J1 b-l:Jayaat-1 lalafan-
ha I'm ready to sacrifice my life lor her. 2 because of. 
owing to. lafaan kula lor that rea~on. lamaluu-Ii 
mal:Jqar lafaan 11- fllzmaal they ~Iapped a police report 
on me for my negligence. - Icon II 3 so that. 10 order to. 
I:J-al\'aeldl ~-~al\'aall/ I-fll"'" lajaall yl~l/I\'11 I'll take the 

baking-trays to .the bakery to cook. falti~i/ bii fizzaay 
lafaan yilraf illi l:Ja~al how can I contact him so that 
hc'lI know what happened? fin-naxla b-Iaaxud waljl" 
lajaan tikbar it takes time for a palm tree to grow. 
4 because. 'lana zallaan minnak lafaan mif bi-lgii-Ii 
fabadan I'm annoyed with you because you never come 
to see me. bi-ninil-ha lafaan bi-Ikuun waxda fatriba 
we wash it because it gets dusty. 
y.rt 
~ 
lufb Icoll n. pi fadaabl herbage. plant(s).lujbi 
[ibbi medicinal plants. fadaab bal:Jriyya seaweed. 
~ 
lajba. lifba Inl sarsaparilla. 
I.;.r t 
.rs- lafr In pi fadaarl [/slj certain portion of the 
Koran recited in one silting. 
<.S? lafri ladjl decimal. kusuur lafriyya decimal 
fractions. 
~ 
lufr' Inl Ilpl fadaar! one tenth. 2/pllufuurl 
tithe. 
<.S;~i fadaari ladjl decimal. 
? 
lafar Inurn; in constr w foil n pi; usu lafart when 
followed by n pi ordinarily w initial hamzal ten. lafar 
banaal ten girls. lafart alaaf ten thousand. lafarl 
iyyaam ten days. 
.? lafara Ipl -oatIl Inurn; in absol state, in apposi-
tion, or w foil n sing in contexts of ordering and itemiz-
ing/ten. miyya w-lafara bass one hundred and ten only. 
~awabl-u I-lafara his ten fingers. lafara gneeh ten 
pounds. lafara kiilu ten kilos haat lafara Ijahwa bring 
ten coffees! lafaraat min in-naas '" dozens of people. 
Ilba,sam bit-lafara to be in complete agreement, give 
one's full approval. -kal bi/-lafara to wolf down one's 
food. -lamal (or cf.arab) lafara to masturbate. 
- fil-lafara [-[ayyiba (points-winning) ten of diamonds 
in the card game kaami (q.v.). - fumm" lafara ten-
piastre piece or note. 2 Inl round (of a board game), 
ha.nd (of cards).lafarit [awla a round of backgammon. 
;~ laffaar In 'I [Chrj publican. da zayy iI-laffariin 
he's a rapacious sort. 
.:.r..? lifriin I Inurn pi -aatl twenty. lifriin yaam 
twenty days. binti fil-lifrinaat a girl in her twenties. min 
zamaan fil-lifrinaat way back in the 'twenties. 2 'i'iI-
lifriin ladj invarl the twentieth. 
• I;.,.;\&. .I;.,.;\&. lafuuraln/l tenthdayofMuharram, 
celebrated by Muslims (a traditional meal of duck, milk 
and rice, the pudding called lafuura etc. being a feature 
of this occasion). 2 sweet pudding (based on whole 
wheat) eaten on the tenth of Muharram. 
579 
r\&. laafir' ladjl tenth. 
~ 
laffar' Ivtl I to multiply by ten. make or do ten-
fold. 2 to tithe. -vn tadiir; avalpva milaffar. 
;"';1 fillaffar' Ivil passive of laffar '. - iva mitlaffar. 
2.;.rt 
r- lufr 2 I Inl pregnancy (of animals). 2/adj invarl 
pregnant (of animals). 
or- lifra 
Inl 
association. 
cohabitation. 
close 
friendship. 
r- lufar ladj invarl [rurj pregnant. 
<.sr lifari ladj 'I sociable. fond of company. 
;w, lifaar Ifem adjl pregnant (of animals). 
o~ lafiira In pllafaayirl kindred. kin. 
.J'""""" madar. fabu madar Iprop nl a renowned ninth-
century astrologer. 'i'iI-baraka f-l:Jacf.rit-u fabu madar 
ig-gidiid [joej the credit is all his, the new Abu Ma'shar. 
~ 
laffar2 I Ivtl to mate with and make pregnant 
(especially of animals). 2 Ivil to become pregnant (of 
animals). -vn ladiir; avalpva milaffar. 
;"'1 fitlaffar2 Ivil to be impregnated (of animals). 
- iva millaffar. 
r~ laafir 2 /vtl to live with, associate intimately with. 
lafirt-u muddit ma kunna fig-f(eef I was an intimate of 
his in the army. bi-ytafir-ha fill:Jaraam he's having an 
illicit affair with her. min laaftr iI-ljaam farbiliin yaam 
~aar minhum [pravj if you live with people for forty 
days you become like them. laafir laafir misiir-ak 
lifaarilj [pravj enjoy the company of those you live with 
while you can, for one day you will be separated (by 
death). 
rL.;1 fillaafir Ivil I to be lived with, be associated 
closely with. raagil ma-yillafirf a man impossible to 
live with. 2 to associate closely. - avaliva mitlaafir. 
.:,I.;.rt 
.JI~ lafiraan Inl [musj name given to the note A 
below middle C. Ill:Juseeni lafiraan mode in Arabic 
music beginning on A and having B half flat and E half 
flat. 
.,f.rt 
..;.s. liffln pllifuuf, lifaajl nest.llliffil-lfUraab Icoll nl 
mushroom(s), toadstool(s). -liffin-naml(l) [needlewj 
smocking. (2) name given to palm fronds woven de-
c~ratively to form a small pyramid . 
~ 
liffa In pllifajlla hut, shack, hovel. Ib seaside 
chaJet. 2 coop for chickens, ducks or geese. 
~ 
laffif Ivill to nest. II fil- fumm i tlaffif wil- fabb i 
ytaffif [pravj '" a mother gathers her children around 

her; a father drives them away. 2 to become full of the 
nests of birds or vermin. fif-/agara la//ifit the tree 
became full of nests. II raas-u la/f"ifit his head is lice-
ridden. 3 {constr} to become full of cohering lumps of 
pebbles (of concrete, as a result of bad mixing). -vn 
talfiif; ava mila/Fifo 
~I fitla/ji/ Ivii (impersonal) passive of la//if. 
fif-/agara di tla/f"if fiiha s-sana IIi faatit this tree had 
nests in it last year. -iva mitla/jif. 
J";'t 
~ 
lifie; (a) Ivtl to love passionately. fin sarae;t israe; 
gamal wi-fin lifie;t ilfae; e;amar {prov} (if you steal, 
steal a camel, and if you fall in love, fall in love with a 
beautiful girl) ... you might as well be hanged for a 
sheep as a lamb. -vn life;; ava laajie;; pva malfuue;. 
~ 
life; In! passion, love. 
~\&. laajie; In * and pllu//aae;1 lover. II fit-laajie; 
y~alli lala gamaal in-nabi let the lover (i.e. of the 
Prophet) bless the beauty of the Prophet! (said to solicit 
blessings as a protection against the evil eye). -laajie; 
wi-malfuue; {carp} mortise and tenon joint. 
~.,.:.... malfuue; In ·1 beloved.lIlaajie; wi·malfuue; see 
laafie;· 
~ 
la/iie; In pllu//aae;1 (male) lover, sweetheart. 
~ 
lajiie;a In pi -aatl mistress, sweetheart. 
~I fitla/ae; lvii to be loved passionately. -iva 
mitlifie;· 
~I finla/ae; = fitla/ae;. -iva minlifie;. 
~ 
la//ae; Ivtll to hitch up, attach.la//ae; it-mux{aaf 
lal-win/ hitch the anchor to the winch! 2 to put into 
gear. ma-e;dirt'-/ fazue;e; it-larabiyya la/aan mila//ae;a 
I couldn't push the car because it was in gear. -vn 
talfiie;; ava/pva mila//ae;. 
:ii_ •• j talfiie;a linst n, pi -aatl I a hitching up, an 
at~aching. 2 a gear change. 
~I fitla//ae; Ivil passive of la//ae;. -iva mitla//ae;. 
Ir";'t 
~ 
la/am Inl hope, expectation. la/am-i w-ragaaf-i 
fiik wayd-ak ya rabb my hopes are in you alone, Lord! 
e;a{al la/am-hum he dashed their hopes. ma-kan-/ 
it-la/am fiik I had expected better of you. da b-la/am-i 
fiik or da min la/am-i fiik I had expected nothing less 
from you (as a friend). IIla/am-ak la/am fibliis fig-
ganna {prov} (your hope is like that of Satan for Para-
dise) ... you haven't a hope in hell. 
,:,1.-:.&. la/maan ladj *1 hopeful, expectant. la/maan 
fii!,a having high hopes of us. 
~ 
la/jim Ivtl to make hopeful, encourage. 
580 
la//imt-i-ni bit-yalae; xarramt ana wdaan-i {prov} (when 
you promised me earrings, I went and pierced my ears) 
... I counted my chickens before they were hatched. -vn 
tapiim; ava/pva mila/jim. 
~I fitla//im Ivil I to be hopeful or expectant. 2 to 
be made hopeful or expectant. -ava/iva mitla/jim. 
2r";'t 
ISJl....:..&. la/maawi In pi -yyal hangman, executioner. 
.J ..;. t see IS";' t: la/wa. lifwiyya. la/waafi 
~";'t 
~ 
lifi (a) Ivil to become night-blind. -ava laaji. 
~ 
yilfi Ivi imperf onlyl to be dim-sighted. bi-yilfi 
bi-lnee his eyesight is weak. 
.~ .l.:.&. la/a I Inl evening meal, supper. riI-la/a 
feeh it-lelaa-di what's for supper tonight? II riI-la/a r-
rabbaani {Chr} the Lord's Supper. 
~ 
la/a 2 Inl night-blindness. 
i,.,.:.&- la/wa In pi -aatl an evening meal. kaanit la/wa 
tistaahit bue;e;-ak it was a delicious dinner. 
.I..:..JI .I..:..JI riI-lifa Ifem n! I the Muslim evening 
prayer (performed approximately one hour after sun-
set). 2 the time of the evening prayer. 
~,.,.:.&- lifwiyya Inl time of the lifa (q.v.). 
~ 
la/iyya In! I evening twilight. 2 {Chr} vespers. 
dl,.,.:.&- la/waafi 
lladvl 
haphazardly. 
da 
ma-bi-ytimm'-/ la/waafi it doesn't happen by chance. 
2 ~adjl haphazard. 
~ 
la//a Ivtl I to give or serve an evening meal to. 
ya-tla//ii-na feeh what are you going to give us for 
supper? 2L to give the daily bread (of the Lord). 
rabb-i-na la//aa-na God has provided. -ava/pva 
m~la//i. 
~I fitla//a Ivii to take an evening meal. fitla//eena 
makaroona we had macaroni for supper. fitradda bii 
e;abl' ma yitla//a biik (eat him for lunch before he eats 
you for supper) get him before he gets you. -ava 
mitla/ji. 
I IJ'I' t see 2 ~ IJ'I' t : l~a 
YIJ'I't 
~ 
l~ab I (u) Ivtl to bind. niruuy laffiin if-/eela 
w-l~biin laleeha lBlb' gaamid then we wrap up the 
load and bind it tightly. -vn t~b. l~abaan; ava la~ib; 
pva mauuub. 
~ 
l~ba In pi -aat, l~abl {rur} type of head-
kerchief worn by women. 

~ 
c~ba In pi c~abl league, band. c~bit iI- I'umam 
the League of Natfons. 
...,...-. ca~ab2 In pi I'auaabl I nerve. duktoor I'auaab 
neurologist. 
IIhaddi 
I'auaab-ak 
calm 
down! 
-xassaruu-lu I'auaab-u they made him irritable, they 
put him on edge. - I'auab-ha bac;it majduuda she be-
came tense. - rauab-ha tilfit her nerves were wrecked. 
- I'auaab-u f-tal/aaga "" he's as cool as a cucumber. 
2 sinew. Ilcandu c~ab it is sturdy (of an animal). 
3 kinship on the father's side. di c;aribit-na min iI-c~ab 
she is a relative on our father's side. 
~ 
ca~abi ladj °1 la pertaining to the nerves, ner-
vous. 
rinhixaar 
c~abi 
nervous 
breakdown. 
Ib neurotic. 2 highly-strung, touchy. 
~ 
ca~abiyya Inl I kinship ties. 2 irritability. 
~w ci~aaba In pl.-aatl I gang (e.g., of criminals). 
yarb iI-ci~abaat gang warfare. 2 head-kerchief. 
~ 
c~iib ladjl hard, difficult. I'awc;aat c~iiba hard 
times, times of stress. mawc;if c~iib a difficult 
situation . 
...,...-;1 
ritc~ab Ivil to be bound. - iva mitci~ib. 
~ 
ca~~ab Ivtl to bind with a kerchief. cenee 
mc~~aba he is blindfolded. -vn taUiib; ava/pva 
micaNab. 
~I I'itc~~ab Ivil I to become fanatical, become a 
bigot. 2 to be bound with a kerchief. -vn tac~~ub; 
ava/iva mitc~~ab. 
~ 
taca~~ub Inl partisanship, fanaticism, bigotry. 
~ 
1 I'ict~ab Ivil to form a league, form a union. -vn 
I'ict~aab; ava mict~ib. 
~u"'t 
CL.:..:. ca~~aag ladj invarl cooked with onion (and 
sometimes tomato sauce, parsley etc.) until the juices 
are absorbed (of minced meat to be used as a compo-
nent in stuffed vegetables etc.). 
~ 
c~~ag Ivtl to cook (minced meat) with onion 
(and sometimes tomato sauce, parsley etc.) until the 
juice~ are absorbed. -vn tac~iig; ava/pya mic~~ag. 
~I I'itc~~ag Ivil passive of c~~ag. - iva mitc~~ag. 
~ u'" t 
;~ 
c~iida Inl thick gruel made with flour and 
butter. 
I.J u'" t 
~ 
c~ar (u) Ivt/ to wring, press, squeeze. bi-tuuur 
iI-rasiil she wrings the washing. c~aru minnu z-zeet 
they pressed the oil out of it. II c~aruu fil-imtiyaan they 
gave him a real grilling in the exam. -vn c~r, c~iir; ava 
S8I 
ca~ir; pya mauuur. 
; ~ 
c~ra linst n, pi -aatl a wring, a press, a squeeze . 
.r.= c~iir Inl (extracted) juice. c~iir burtuc;aan 
orange juice. 
;.)w c~aara In pi aatl juice, sap. 
;.)L.:..:. c~~aara In pi -aatl I juice-squeezer. 2 mangle, 
wringer. 
;..,.-.. mauara In pi maca~irl oil press, sugar-cane 
press. 
<.$JI..,.-.. mauaraawiladj °/relating to the large lime-
stone quarry of Ma'sara, near Helwan. I'i{-(Uub 
iI-mauaraawi b-titbini minnu gawaamic mosques are 
built of Ma'sarawi stone . 
.)w! I'iuaar In pi I'ac~iirl hurricane, tornado, 
cyclone . 
..,-.;1 
I'itc~ar Ivil to be wrung, be pressed, be 
squeezed. -iva mitc~ir. 
~ 
1 I'inc~ar = I'itc~ar. -iva minc~ir. 
1 .J u'" t 
.ra-JI 
!'il-c~r Inl I the afternoon. c;ahwit iI-c~r after-
noon coffee.lIsuuc; iI-c~r junk and old clothes market, 
flea market. 2 the Muslim afternoon prayer, performed 
any time from the moment half-way between noon and 
sunset and sunset itself. 3 Ipl c~uurl age, period, 
epoch. haruun ir-rajiid c~r-u the Harun ai-Rashid of 
his age. raagil maaji maca l-c~r a man who keeps up 
with the times. 
~.ra-JI !'il-c~riyya In! the late afternoon. 
<.$.)La.J I !'il-c~aari In! the time about half an hour 
before sunset (usually 
asso~iated with romantic 
feelings). 
J""l&. ca~ir Ivt/ to be contemporary with. c~irt it-
malik I was alive in the time of the king. -vn muc~ra; 
ava mica~ir. 
J""l.... muca~irt ladj °1 contemporary. l'iI-l'insaan it-
muca~ir modern man. 
IJ"'tlJ"'t 
u" ~ 
c~cu~ In pi c~aci~1 I drumstick. I'ibn· 
camm-u zayy i c~aci~ in-nuc;c;ariyya his cousin is as 
thin as a drumstick. 2 (anat] coccyx. 
..r' ~ 
c~cu~i ladjl coccygeal. 
...,-.-.. mic~c~ ladi.*1 skinny, thin. 
.JlJ"'t 
...;.-. c~af(i) Ivil to blow violently (of the wind). -vn 
c~f; ava ca~if; pya mac~uuf. 
~ 
c~fa linst n, pi -aatl a gust of wind. 

~I&. la~ifa In pI lawa~if/ gale, hurricane. 
IJ';..,.,t 
.;.-. l~fur Inl carthamus, safflower. 
.;.-. l~far Ivtl {cook] to add safflower to. - ava/pva 
mil~far. 
';"-;1 
'i'itla~far Ivil to have saf-flower added. -iva 
mitl~far. 
2 J .;..,.,t 
;.;..-. l~fuur In pI l~afiirl 1 = l~fuura. II/isaan il-
l~fuur grain-shaped pasta, graniamo. - la~fuur 
fil-yadd' wa/a lafara laf-Jagara {prov] = a bird in the 
hand is worth two in the bush. 2 ornamental bird, cage-
bird. ma!Jall" l~afiir bird shop. 
0;';"-' l~fuura In pI la~afiirl 1 sparrow, (loosely 
also) any small bird. IIdaaqiq la~afiir (tattooed with 
sparrows on each temple, after the manner of many 
Egyptian peasants; thus used to mean) naive, stupid, as 
in 'lana m-anii-J daaqiq la~afUr = I'm no country bump-
kin, I'm no fool. 'i'il-l~afiir illi la/a sdaay-i {aaru I'm 
not as daft as I used to be. - l~afUr ba{n-i bi-tzaqzaq = 
I'm ravenously hungry. 28 small stick, peg, dowel, as 
for instance on yoke of plough (see PI.D, 10, 12). 
2b wooden latch. 
[J..,.,t 
~ 
l~/ag 1 Ivil 18 to jib, balk, resist, be stubborn. 
'i'il-bihiima l~/agit the beast balked. zaqqeet beel 
il-wild' w-baqa I-waad yifarfar ta!Jt' 'i'Ud-i wi-Yl~/ag 
I pressed on the womb and the child started to squirm 
and resist. 'i'il-mas'i'a/a ml~/aga malaaya I can't get 
anywhere with the problem. Ib to jam, stick. 'i'il-baab 
mil~/ag the door is stuck. 2 Ivtl to obstruct and jam. 
law ma-ddet-Iuu-J filuus kaan !Ja-Yl~/ag-1i l-mawt:{uul 
jfI hadn't given him money, he would have put a span-
ner in the works. -vn la~/aga; ava/pva mil~/ag. 
FI £itl~/ag Ivil to be jammed, be wedged. -iva 
mitl~lag. 
r..,.,t 
~ 
l~am (i) Ivtl to protect, preserve. -vn l~m; ava 
la~im; pva mauuum. 
...... 1&. l~ma, la~imar In pI lawa~iml capital city. 
'-= l~ma Inl I matrimonial authority. la/a (or fi-) 
l~mit raagil under the authority and protection of a 
man, married. 2 power of divorce. 'i'il-l~ma fi-'i'id-ha 
she has the right to (unilateral) divorce (by virtue of a 
stipulation in the marriage contract). ~aa!Jibal il-l~ma 
{obsol] honorific title awarded to women. 
582 
~t..-. li~aami ladj 
°1 self-made, distinguished, 
successful. 
~ 
miuam In pI malaa~iml wrist. 
r--'I 
'i'itl~am Ivil to be protected, be preserved. -iva 
mitli~im . 
~I 'i'ill~am Ivil to take refuge. -vn 'i'ilt~aam; ava 
mUll~im. 
I I.S ..,., t 
~ 
li~i (a) I/vtl to disobey. mazaag-u yiUa 1-
'i'awaamir he's fond of disobeying orders. 2 Ivil to be 
obstinately disobedient, rebel. -vn l~ayaan, li~yaan; 
ava la~i; pva maui. 
.:,~ l~yaan 
ladjl 
rebellious, 
recalcitrant, 
disobedient. 
~ 
mauiya In pI malaa~il sin. 
..,-:;-1 'i'istaua Ivil to prove to be too resistant. 'i'azma 
slauit la/a I-!Jall a crisis that defied all attempts at a 
solution. -vn 'i'isliUa; ava mistaui, mustaui. 
~ 
muslaui ladjl incurable (of a disease). 
2 I.S ..,., t 
t..-. l~a Ifem n, pI l~yl stick, stave.lllilb il-l~a (or 
il-l~Y) quarterstaff fighting. - 'i'illi tjuuf-u raakib Gala 
l~a qul-Iu mubaarak il-!J~aan {prov] (he whom you 
see mounted on a stick, tell him 'congratulations on 
your horse!') = treat people as they wish to be treated. 
~t..-. l~aaya In pI -aal, l~y, l~yaan, l~yaanl 
stick, rod, staff. bi-yimfi b-l~aaya he walks with r 
stick. 
la~aayit daffa tiller. 
la~aaya f!iha singa 
sword-stick. 
3 I.S ..,., t 
..,..WI 
'i'il-la~i Iprop nl the (river) Orontes (in Syria). 
~~t 
~ 
lat:{ud Inl upper arm. 
~ 
lat:{t:{id Ivtl to help, assist, support. bi-Ylat:{t:{id 
il-wafd he supports the Wafd party. - vn talt:{iid; ava 
m!lat:{t:{id. 
~ 
mUlat:{t:{id In °1 supporter. 
...w...;1 'i'itlat:{t:{id Ivil to be helped, be assisted, be sup-
ported. -iva mitlat:{t:{id . 
~~t 
..;=. lat:{t:{ (u) I Ivtl to bite. 'i'ik-kalb· lat:{t:{-i-ni the dog 
bit me. 2 Ivil to perform the action of biting. lat:{t:{" Gala 
lisaan-u he bit on his tongue. -vn lat:{at:{aan, lat:{t:{; ava 
laat:{it:{; pva malt:{uut:{. 

~ 
laqqa linst n, pi -aatll a bite. 2 {dent} block for 
taki'!g a mould. 
~~ laqqaaq ladj ·1 given to biting. 
~I ritlaqq Ivil to be bitten. - iva mitlaqq . 
.;..;1 rinlaqq = ritlaqq. 
~t~t 
~ 
laqlaq Ivtl to gnaw, nibble. bi-Ylaqlaq 
qawafr-u he bites his nails. 
rif-mac;a~~· laqlaq if-
warac;a the scissors chewed up the paper. lirj; 
mlaqlaq a badly-dented piastre coin. -vn laqlaqa; 
ava/pva milaqlaq. 
~I ritlaqlaq Ivil to be gnawed, be nibbled. - iva 
mitlaqlaq. 
J~t 
~ 
laqal Icoll nl muscle(s). lJuc;na fif-laqal intra-
muscular injection. -/adjectivallyl raagiflaqal a mus-
cle-man, a brawny man. 
~ 
laqala lunit n, pi -aatl a muscle. Ilbi-Ylaamif 
in-naas bi-laqalaat-u he treats people roughly, he 
pushes people around. 
j..;a&. laqali ladjl pertaining to the muscles, muscular. 
tawaafuc; laqali muscular co-ordination. 
r~t 
~ 
.~ laqm 
Icoll 
n, 
plliqaam, 
li~aaml 
I bone(s). c;aliil if-baxt; bi-ylaac;i I-laqm; fik-kirja 
{prov} the unlucky man finds bones in tripe.llkalaam 
fil-laqm wounding words. -laqm-u (ari he is a weak 
and immature character. -duktoor li~aam orthopaed-
ist. 2 frame, skeleton. laqm ik-kursi the frame of the 
chair. 
~ 
.~ laqma lunit n, pl-aatl a bone. Illaqma 
xifna an influential person, a bigwig. -c;aal-u b-laqmit 
lisaan-u he himself said it. -laqma zarc;a pejorative 
epithet for Copts. 
~l...a&. laqmaaya tinst n, pi -aatl a (small) bone. 
~ 
la~mi ladjt of or pertaining to bone(s). haykal 
la.~mi skeleton. 
~ 
laqqam Ivi/l to become (as) hard (as bone). 2 to 
become bony. kibir sinn-u w-laqqam he grew old and 
lean. -ava milaqqam. 
~I ristalqam Ivtl I to select for boniness. 2 to 
consider (too) bony. ristalqam iI-xaruufhe thought the 
lamb to be too bony (and wouldn't take it). -vn 
ristilqaam; ava/pva mistalqam. 
.J~t 
~ 
luqw In pi ralqaar/l member. ralqaar i1-1agna 
583 
the members of the committee. 2 organ (of the body). 
...s~ luqwi ladjl organic. riI-kimya l-luqwiyya orga-
nic chemistry. reer luqwi inorganic. 
~~ luqwiyya tnl membership. karta luqwiyya 
membership card. 
J,).k t 
~.J~ lU(aarid Iprop nl {astron} Mercury. 
y.kt 
..,..b. la(ab Inl damage .l:Ja~ar iI-la(ab he estimated the 
damage . 
..,...).... mal(uub ladjl damaged. gaat i(-(uuba fil-
malluuba (the stone came against that which was 
(already) damaged) there was a coincidence of unfor-
tunate circumstances. 
~ 
la((ab Ivil to rot, perish (especially of fruit and 
vegetables). -vn tal(iib; ava mila((ab. 
,).kt 
)a&. li(r (also litrJ) In pllu(uLlrl I perfume. li(r iI-
ward attar of roses. 2 geranium, stork's-bill.llli(r;jaahi 
sweet pea . 
...s)a&. li(ri ladjl pertaining to perfume, odoriferous, 
fragrant, aromatic. ziyuut li(riyya essential oils (for 
perfume). ~abuun li(ri scented soap. 
.)~ li(aara Inl I spices and herbs. 2 spice and herb 
trade. 
)~ la((aar In ·1 herbalist and seller of spice.lIl:Jaaga 
tfawwit iI-la((aar xurg-u "" a thoroughly exasperating 
matter. 
~ 
la((ar Ivtl to perfume. - vn tal(iir; ava/pva 
mila((ar. 
lIla((ar Ii-J to purchase the gihaaz for (a bride-to-be). 
l:Ja-nla((ar-laha min ma~r we'll buy everything for her 
gihaaz in Cairo. 
J 1 j... mila((araati In pi -yyal perfume-seller. 
;""1 ritla((ar Ivi/l to be perfumed. 2 to perfume one-
self. -ava/iva mitla((ar. 
V".k t 
..,...t.&. litis (a) Ivil to sneeze. - vn lacs, li(aas, lu(aa r , 
la(asaan; ava laa(is. 
V"~ li(aas, lu(aas Inl sneezing. 
rid-dawa da 
bi-ysabbib iI-lU(aas this medicine induces sneezing. 
4-l.&. laesa linst n, pi -aatl a sneeze. 
~ 
la((as I/vtl to cause to sneeze. 2 Ivil to sneeze 
(repeatedly or violently). -vn tal(iis; ava/pva mila((as. 

1.;..1,t 
..,..J.&. li{if (a) Ivil I to become thirsty. lamma yil{aj 
jiwayya yballil riic;-u b-!Jaaga when he gets thirsty he 
wets his whistle with something. 2 to become parched 
(of land). -vn la{al 
~ 
la{aj Inl thirst. 
,:,I .. :..b latlaan ladj *1 I thirsty. yiwaddii I ba!Jr' 
wi-ygiib-u latlaan [proyl (he takes him to the river and 
brings him back thirsty) he can twist him round his little 
finger. 2 parched. fil-farq,d latlaana the land needs 
watering. 
1.;. .1, t 
~ 
la{ajgi <T ate~fi> In pl-yyal stoker, fireman 
(on a locomotive). 
-!-.1,t 
k 
la(( (a) Ivil to live an unsettled life. -vn la{a{aan, 
la((; ava laa{i{ . 
..I.~ la((aa{ In * and plla((aa{al vagabond. 
1";.1, t 
.....ib. la{af(i) lvil to show sympathy or concern (either 
verbally or through practical aid).la{afit lalee she sym-
pathized with him. bi-yil{if lala xalc; illaah he helps 
(poor) people. -vn laif; ava laa{if. 
.....ib. larf Inl sympathy, affection. !Jaramuu mil-larf 
they deprived him of affection. 
4i.l.~ laa{ifa In pllaWaa{ifl feeling. emotion, senti-
ment, passion. fil-!Jubb' fal;am laa{ifa fil-wuguud 
love is the greatest emotion in existence. fil-kukayiin 
b,-yic;til lawaif-ak cocaine deadens your feelings. 
.P~ laa{ifi ladj */1 emotional. muc;abla laa{ifiyya 
an emotional meeting. 2 sentimental. rinwa laa{ifiyya 
a sentimental song. 
lIlaa{ifiyyan ladjl emotionally. 
4ip lu{uufa: ~aa!Jib il-lU{uufa [obsoll form of 
address and reference to a high-ranking pasha = 
Excellency. 
P P lU{Ufitlu Inl [obsoll form of address and refer-
ence to a high-ranking pasha = Excellency . 
...a.,.; I fitla{af Ivil (impersonal) passive of la{af. 
fil-yataama laazim yitli{if laleehum orphans should be 
treated compassionately. -iva mitli(if. 
~I fitla((af Ivil to show kindness. - ava mitla((af. 
...Al.l.;1 fitlaa{if Ivil to be mutually affectionate or sym-
pathetic. -vn talaa{uf; ava mitlaa{if. 
....u...:..1 fistal{af IvtL to beg for kindness. -vn 
fistil{aaf; avalpva mistal{af. 
584 
1"; .1, t 
~ 
larfa In pi -aatl alley, (originally) small lane lead-
ing off a darb within an enclosed quarter. 
J.1,t 
Jb li{il (a) Ivill to break down. fil-makana li{lit the 
machine has broken down. 2 to become idle, stop 
working. - vn lU{I; ava laa{il. 
Jb lU{lln pi fal{aal! breakdown. fal{aal i/-kahraba 
breakdowns in the supply of electricity. 
~ 
lU{la Inl holiday. bukra lU{la tomorrow's a holi-
day. lU{lit il-fusbuUl weekly day off. IIsanit il-lU{la 
[JudI Sabbatical Year. 
Jl.~ laa{il/adj *1 jobless.lIlaa{illala baa{il = inces-
santly and to no purpose. - fli-laa{i/ fil-baa{i/ = all and 
sundry, without discrimination, as in ga 
l-buli~ 
xad-hum la{il-hum fi-ba{i/-hum the police came and 
took them all in. 
Jl.lr 
lawa{li In pi -yya/loafer, shirker. 
,:,~ la{laan ladj *1 lout of order, broken down. 
2 idle, out of action, unemployed. 
~ 
la{ala Inll delay. 2 holiday. 
~ 
la((allvt/l to hold up, delay. fiyyaa-k m-akunl' 
la((alt-ak lanjur/-ak I hope I haven't kept you from 
your work. rabb-i-na dayman bi-yur;zuc;-na bi-lli bi-
Yla((al-na = someone always comes along to delay us. 
C;81ad yirri malaaya l-raayit ma la((al-ni he sat chatter-
ing with me till he made me late. 28 to cause to break 
down, cause to stop working. fil-!Jaraara la((alit il-
makan the heat made the machines break down. 2b to 
invalidate, overrule. fii qawaniin bi-tinsax qawaniin 
wi-tla((al fa!Jkam-ha there are laws that abrogate laws 
and invalidate their stipulations. -vn tal {iii; avalpva 
mila((al. 
Jh,ul fitla((al Ivil I to be delayed, be held up. 
fitla((alt' fis-sikka I wa~ delayed on the way. 2 to break 
down. fil-makana tiftaral jlwayya w-titla((al jiwayya 
the machine works for a while and then breaks down for 
a while. 3 to be invalidated, be overruled. - ava/iva 
mitla((al. 
~ 
mitla((alladj *1 unemployed. 
,:,.1,t 
~ 
lo{an (u) Ivtll to soak, steep, macerate, ret (e.g., 
flax). 2 to cause to become rotten or decayed (through 
soaking). -vn lain, la{iin; ava laa{in; pva mal(Uun. 
Ja..... mal {an In pi malaa{inl tub for soaking flax . 
J.,ul fitla{an Ivil I to be soaked, be macerated, be 
retted (of. e.g., flax). 2 to become or be made rotten or 

decayed (through soaking). -ava/iva mitli[in . 
.;,k. la{{an I = la{an. 2 Ivil to rot, become rotten. -vn 
tal{iin; ava/pva mila{{an. 
~I !'itla{{an = !'itla{an. - avaliva mitla{{an. 
1S . .1 ( 
j.&. la{a I (i) Ivtll to give. rabb-i-na yiG{ii-k il-lafya 
God give you strength. !'allaah yillii-k may God give to 
you (said in dismissing a beggar). ~yil{i jabah (or 
malaamilJ) li- he looks like, as in yiG{ijabah li- !'abuu he 
looks like his father. -la{a xabar (li-) t.o notify. 
- !'il-!'axd i wil-la{a (1) give and take. (2) exchange (of 
conversation). (3) trade, commerce. -jar{ il-!'axd il-
la{a [prov] receiving is conditional upon giving. 2 to 
transmit (a telegram). bi-yiG{i t-tillirraaf bit-tiribirintir 
he transmits the telegram by teleprinter. -vn la{a; ava 
laa{i; pva maG{i. 
• 1.1.&. .1.1.&. la{a 2 In pI la{a!'aatl tender. !,ifJirka !,iddit 
la{a the company submitted a tender. rasa lalee I-la{a 
he was awarded the tender. 
Jot&. laa{i Inl Giver (epithet of God). 
~ 
la{iyya In pI -aatl gift. 
Jol..;1 !'itlaa{a Ivtl to administer to oneself, take 
(addictive drugs, alcohol, etc.). ba{{al il-bitaal illi 
b-titla{aa da give up that miserable addiction of yours! 
-ava/pva mitlaa{i. 
j.&.i !'aG{a Ivtl to give. -vn !'il{a, !'il{aa!'; ava mUlti. 
J..... mUlti Inl Giver (epithet of God). 
J...:-I !'istaG{a J = !'itlaa{a. 
Ir.l;( 
~ 
la:;aman: qasaman la:;aman "" by my (greatest) 
oath! (said when swearing to do something against the 
will of others). 
~ 
la:;ama Inl splendour, grandeur, majesty. 
la:;amit il-lJaqaara I-m~riyya the splendour of Egyp-
tian culture. lelit-na lJa-tkuun !'in jaa!' allaah !'aaxir 
la;ama we're going to have a really splendid night, 
God willing. II !'eeh il-la:;ama di "" what a splendid 
thing! - !'il-la:;ama li-llaah (walJd-u) "" don't put on 
airs! -/adjectivallyl lJaaga la:;ama a splendid thing. 
~ 
lu:;ma Ifem ell greatest. II !'iI-lJarb il-lu:;ma the 
First World War. - !,id-daynuuna I-lu:;ma the Last 
Judgement. - !'il-qiima I-lu:;ma [math] maximum 
value. 
~i !'al:;am lell greaterlgreatest etc. 
!'il-lJubb i 
l'al:;am [aa{ifa fil-wuguud love is the greatest emotion 
in existence. 
S8S 
~ 
la:;iim ladj pI lu:;ama, li:;aam, lu:;aaml great, 
mighty, magnificent. (da) la:;iim (that's) great! (that's) 
marvellous! w-«llaahi I-la:;iim (by) Almighty God! 
IIsalaam la:;iim [mil] salute to a senior officer. 
f"! llo&. la:;aayim Ipl nl disasters, catastrophes. yaama 
stalJmilna la:;aayim il- l'umuur how many disasters we 
have borne! 
~ 
la:;:;am I Ivtl to make great, attribute greatness 
to, be deferential to. da Cjaalid yila:;:;am-ni mi~-~ublJ 
the guy has been bowing and scraping to me all morn-
ing.1I la;;am allaahu l'agr-u-kum God make great your 
recompense! (a formula of condolence to the be-
reaved). jahri ramaqaan il-mula:;;am the glorious 
month of Ramadan (conventional form of reference to 
the fasting month). 2/vt and viI to salute. laazim 
tila:;:;am (l)i:;-:;aabi( you must salute officers. -vn 
tal:;iim; ava/pva milagam, mUlagam. 
~ 
tal:;iim In pI -aatl salute . 
~ 
milagam or mUla:;:;am ladjl magnifying. 
naqqaara mla:;:;ama (1) binoculars. (2) telescope. 
(3) magnifying glass. 
~I !'itla:;:;am 
Ivil 
passive 
of la:;:;am. 
-iva 
mitlagam. 
~ 
mUl:;am In, in constr statel most of, the majority 
of. mUl:;am malJa{{aat il-!'utubiis fil-hawa {-{alq most 
bus stops are in the open. 
~I l'istal:;am Ilvtl to consider (too) great. 
mistal:;am il-lamaliyya he thinks the operation too big. 
2 Ivil to behave proudly. !'inta mistac;am lala !'eeh why 
are you behaving in this stand-offish way? -vn 
!,istil:;aam; ava/pva mistal:;am. 
r J I ...; ( 
~ JlA&. lafaarim <T aferim from P> linterjl well done! 
bravo! lafaarim laleek good for you! 
J"';( 
p 
lafr Inl dust. zoor-i mitlJaaj min lafr is-sikka my 
throat is clogged with the dust of the road. 
o P lafara Inl cloud of dust. 
JlA&. lufaar Inl dust. 
oJlA&. lufaara Inl dust. 
~ 
lafiir Inl sowing by scattering over dry ground. 
P laffar Ivtll to make dusty. 2 to spray with (insec-
ticidal) powder. laffaru I-beet lajaan i~-~ar~iir they 
sprayed the house against the cockroaches. - Ivil 3 to 
raise dust. !'il-hawa y~affar wi-Ylaffar the wind whistles 

and raises the dust. fik-kannaas laffar laleena the 
sweeper got dust over us. 4 {slangJ to smoke. bi-Ylaffar 
(uul in-nahaar he smokes all day long. -vn talfiir; aval 
pva .milaffar. 
.; I';"'" milaffaraati In pi -yyal one who sprays insecti-
ci.dal powder. 
........ 1 fitlaffar Ivil I to be made or become dusty. 2 to 
be sprayed with (insecticidal) powder. -avaliva 
mitlaffar. 
)~ laafir Ivil to struggle, strive. baqaa-li saala 
b-alaafir mala n-noom I've been struggling to get to 
sleep for an hour.llraagil milaafir (I) an industrious 
man, an eager beaver. (2) a finicky man. -vn milafra; 
ava milaafir. 
)l..;1 fi1lsafir Ivil (impersonal) passive of laafir. da 
fahbal - ma-yitlafirj' malaa he's stupid - it's no good 
trying (to argue) with him. - iva mitlaafir. 
..:.0.1 ...; t 
":"",,p. lafriit In pi lafariitl demon or ghost (of either 
sex). II walad lafriit (I) a naughty child. (2) a cunning 
lad. - rakb-u (or lalee) lafriit (I) he's possessed by a 
demon. (2) hc:'s in a bad humour, he's likely to blow up 
if provoked. -lafriit in-niswaan child's toy whistle or 
the like which extends when blown. -lafriit iI-lilba 
jack-in-the-box. -lafariit iI-leel {obsolJ street-lamp 
lighters. -{aUalU l-lafarill fi-leen-i they gave me a real-
ly hard time. - filii yxaaf min iI-lafriit yi{lal-lu {provJ 
(he who fears a demon, will have a demon appear to 
him) == too much fear of something may cause it to 
occur. -lala kaf!" lafriit == in a precarious situation. 
-budrit iI-lafriit itching powder. -lafriit yi{aUal lafriit 
== it takes a thief to catch a thief. -lafriit nafriit a very 
crafty person. -raal] wi-rigir. zayy iI-lafriit he went 
there and back in no time. - ril-filuus fiiha lafriit {provJ 
== money slips through one's fingers. 
~p. lafriita In pi lafariit, lafritaatl I demon or 
ghost (of either sex). 2 workman's overalls, boiler suit. 
3 (car) jack. 4 negative (of a film). 5 wooden cone-like 
device for measuring and adjusting the size of bracelets 
and rings. 6 quCn iI-lafriita cotton waste. 
1.¢;lA&. lafarliti ladjl devilish. 
.;:.. P. lafrat Ivtl I to cause to behave wilfully and mis-
chievously, turn (e.g., a child) into a little demon. 
fawlaad ig-giraan lafratuu xaal~ the neighbours' chil-
dren have turned him into a real little demon. 2 to drive 
crazy (with anger, worry, frustration etc.). feeh ilti 
lafrat-ak kida what:s made you so angry? ginn' lamma 
Ylafrat-ak {abusJ may demons possess you! -vn 
lafrata; avalpva mieafrat. 
. 
586 
............ 1 fitlafrat Ivil pa~sive of lafrat. - iva mitlafrat. 
r .I ...; t see r.l I ...; t : lafaartm 
J."'; t 
...,..A&- laff Icoll nl 18 furnishings, household chattels. 
jaliqa bil-laff a furnished flat (for sale, rather than for 
rent). Ib luggage, baggage. slbt" lafj-i fil-famanaat 
I left my luggage at the left-luggage office. 2 weeds, 
debris and stubble from harvested crops. IIlaff' naff 
useless or worthless things. 3 offal. 
....:..u. laffa I Icoll nl 18 small bits of weed and debris 
from harvested crops, chaff, ChiPS, motes. xud tr-ruzz' 
da naliqi minnu l-laffa take this nce and clean the chaff 
from it. Ib offal. 2 In pi -aatl small bit of weed or crop 
debris, speck of chaff, chip, mote. fil laffa daxatit fi-
leen-i there's a speck in my eye. 3/no pI! {euphemJ 
bathroom, lavatory.jllliqa b-laffit-ha a flat with a bath-
room. laffit mayya lavatory. 4 {autoJ steering gear 
components including track rod, drop arm, control 
arm, and swivel bearing. firfal il-larabiyya w-rabba{ 
iI-laffa hoist the car and tighten the steering linkages. 
~l....A&. laffaaya = laffa 2. 
..;..A&- lifif ladj "I untidy, messy. 
4.:..A&. lafaja 101 untidiness, messiness. 
i-lA&. lafaaja Inl weeds, debris and stubble from har-
vested crops. IIlafaaja min in-naas good-for-nothing 
pe~ple. 
..;..A&- laffif Ivil I to collect useless things. 2 to scatter 
things about. -vn talfiif; ava mllaffif. 
IJ'" ...; t 
~ 
laf~ Inl {botJ Arbor vitae, gall-nut (from which 
ink.is made). 
~ 
laff~ Ivtl to dirty, soil. -vn talfi~; avalpva 
milaff~· 
~I fitlaff~ Ivil to become or be made dirty. - aval 
iva mitlaff~. 
.lo-:Jt 
~lA&. luffaaca Inl {non-CaireneJ six-holed single-reed 
pipe shorter and thicker than the naay. - also I]uffaa{a. 
.lu&. laffac Ivil {non-CaireneJ to play the luffaa{a. -vn 
talfii{; ava milaffa{. 
.ki...i fillaffac Ivil (impersonal) passive of laffac. 
fit-talabiin bi-yillaffac laha snakes have pipe music 
played to them. -iva mitlaffa{. 
I"';"';t 
..:k lafF (i) Iyil to abstain, refrain (from s.th. wrong 

or indecent). bi-Ylifr lan is-sirqa he would never 
s~eal. -ava laafif. 
i.i&. liffa Inl chastity, modesty, decency . 
...i p. lafuuf = lafiif. 
...A"A&. lafiif ladjl chaste, decent.landaha nafs "lafiifa 
she's a decent, self-respecting person. 
~i ralaff lell morelmost chaste or decent. 
~ 
laffif Ivtl to make chaste, make (s.o.) live a de-
cent life. rana iii raqdar ralaffif-ha I'm the one who 
can make a respectable woman of her. -ava/pva 
mi§affif. 
""",,,I ritlaffif Ivil I to be made chaste. be made re-
spectable. 2 = laft. - avaliva mi1laffif. 
~I rislalaff = laft. -ava misliliff. 
2"';"'; t 
...:k. lafF (i) Ivil to gather (of flies etc.). rid-dibbaan 
laff"lala l-rakl the flies settled on the food. -vn laff. 
lafafaan: ava laafif. 
J"';t 
~ 
lafat; (a) Ivtl to grab hold of.lafat;l-u min rat;abl-
u I grabbed him by the neck. -vn laft;. lafat;aan: ava 
laafit;: pva malfuut;. 
~ 
laft;a linst n. pi -aall a grab. 
~I rillafat; Ivil to be grabbed. - iva millifit;. 
~ 
laffat; Ivtl to grab (a number ofthings or a number 
of times). ril-bulii~ laffat;-hum kull-u-hum the police 
caught them all. -vn lalfiit;: avalpva milaffat;. 
+ lalfiit;a linst n, pi -aall a grab. 
~I rillaffat; Ivil passive of laffat;. -iva millaffat;. 
\J"'J"';t 
..,..w. lafl~ Ivil to struggle. -vn lafl~a: ava milafla~. 
~I 
ritlafl~ = lafl~. -ava millafl~· 
';'''';t 
~ 
lafan Inl I decay. rottenness. 2 rot, mould. 
~ 
lifin ladjl decayed, rotten, putrid, septic. 
"w. lafaan Inl mould. mildew. 
:iiw. lafaana Inl rottenness. fii riiI:Ji1lafaana fil- roO(ia 
there is a smell of decay in the room. 
:iip. lufuuna Inl rottenness, putridity. IIlandu 
lufuuna f-bacn-u he has an upset stomach producing 
foul gases. 
~ 
laffin I/vtl to rot. cause to decay or go mouldy. 
ril-l:Jarr" laffin iI-leej the heat made the bread go 
mOUldy. 2/vi/2a to rot. go putrid. 2b to become septic. 
-vn lalfiin: ava milaffin. 
587 
';";1 ritlaffin Ivil to become or be made rotten or 
putrid. -vn lalaffun; ava/iva millaffin. 
.J ...; t 
see i..$"'; t : lafw. lafwan 
.;, .J ...; t see also i..$"'; t 
~p. lafwana In! strength, force, violence. 
""...1 rillafwin Ivi/l to grow strong, become vigor-
ous. 2 to act the tough guy. -ava millafwin. 
i..$"';t 
~ 
lafa I (i) I Ivtl to exempt, spare. rilfii-ni ya beeh 
let me off, sir! allow me not to do what you want. 2 Ivil 
to grant exemption or forgiveness. lawfiit; saamil:J 
luraabi w-lafa lannu Tawfiq forgave Urabi and spared 
him. rabb-i-na yilfi lannak may God grant you forgive-
ness. -vn lafw; ava laafi; pva malfi. 
p. lafw Inl pardon. ya rabb "lafw-ak 0 Lord forgive 
me.lafw"laamm amnesty. II ril-lafw (or lafwan) dis-
clamatory exclamation to one who thanks one, compli-
ments one, or makes an insinuation against one, as in 
jukran. - ril-lafw 'Thank you.' 'Not at all, you're wel-
come.', zar-na n-nabi n-nahar-da. - ril-lafw 'We're 
most honoured by your visit.' 'You're too kind.' rinti 
fakra nafs-ik ral:Jsan minni walla reeh. - ril-lafw i yasiu i 
haanim - ril-leen ma-lillaaf lan i1-l:Jaagib 'You think 
yourself better than me. or what?' 'No, no, Ma'am, I'd 
never forget my place!' 
• lafwan = ril-lafw. see further under ';'.J"'; t 
jl&. laafi I~ ladj"1 strong, vigorous, healthy. 2/n/: ya 
jaafi .va laafi 0 Healer and Giver of strength (addres-
sed to God). 
~l&. lafya Inl good health, vigour. ma-fhuuflafya he 
has no strength left. II bi-~il:Jl:Ja w-lafya '" may it give you 
health and strength (said to one eating or drinking). 
-kaan bi-lafya he was unwell. -xallii-ku b-lafya or 
rUt;ludu bi(/)-lafya /women in trad soc] '" take care 
(said in farewell). 
• bil-lafya ladvl (1) by force. gawwizuu-ha bil-lafya 
they forced her to marry. (2) only just, barely. 
ril-larabiyya majya bil-lafya the car can barely go. 
ril-l:Jarr i bi-yxalli l-waal:Jid yijlaral bil-lafya the heat 
leaves one barely able to work. rana laayij bil-lafya 
I can only just get by. 
...il y. lawaaf or lawaafi or ril-lawaafi a greeting used 
by and to women in traditional society. IInoom i1-
lawaafi sleep soundly! -cf.arab laleeha lawaafi he took 
it and never mentioned it again. 
w. lafa 2 Inl health. strength, vigour. rid-dafa lafa 

[prov] = keeping warm keeps you well. 
~ 
cafi, cafiy ladj *1 strong, vigorous, robust, heal-
thy. di!Jka cafiyya a hearty laugh. 
~ 
i racfa I lell morelmost strong, vigorous etc. 
';";1 ritcafa Ivil 1 to be exempted. ritcafa mil-xidma 
fig-geeJ he was exempted from military service. 
2 (impersonal) 
passive 
of cafa I 
2. 
ril-raxtaar 
i~-~ul{Qyyara laazim yitcifi canha the small mistakes 
should be forgiven. - avaliva mitcifi. 
j l&. caafa Ivtl 1 to give strength or well-being to (of 
God). rallaah yicaafi badan-ak = may God give you 
strength! rallaah yicafii-k response to cawaaf (q.v.). 
cafaa-kum allaah response to bi-~i!J!Ja w-cafya (q.v.). 
2 to exempt, spare. !Ja-ycafuu-k mig-geeJ caJaan i1-
walda they will exempt you from military service on 
account of your mother. -vn micafiyya, mucafaah; aval 
pva micaafi; pva mucaafa . 
• li\"" mucafaah Inl exemption, dispensation. 
jl..;l ritcaafa Ivil 1 to grow strong, vigorous, healthy 
or powerful. 2 to be exempted. - avaliva mitcaafi. 
~i racfa 2f = cafa. -vn ricfa, ricfaar; ava micfi, 
mUcfi; pva mucfa. 
• I..i&.! ricfa, 
ricfaarr In pi ricfaraatl exemption. 
ricfaar t[ariibi tax exemption. 
~I ristacfaJ Ivil to resign. qaddimt' (alab isticfa 
I submitted my resignation. -vn risticfa; ava mistacfi. 
yJt 
..,....... caqb In pi cuquba, cuqbaan/: caqb iI-baab the 
bottom of the door. 
..,....... cuqb 1 Iprepl after. tacaala cuqb iz-ziyaara come 
after visiting hours. 2 In pi ciqaab, racqaabl end, tail-
end. cuqb' sgaara cigarette butt. 
~ p 
cuquuba In pi -aatl punishment. cuquubit 
iI-qatl' hiyya 1- ricdaam the penalty for murder is death. 
qanuun i1-cuqubaat the penal code. 
;Yl&. caaqiba f , caqba In pi cawaaqib, cawaaqlbl out-
come. rabb-i-na ygiib i1-cawaaqib saliima may God 
m~ke things turn out right! 
..,....... caqqab Ivtl to pick through the seeds of, sift (clov-
er). -vn tacqiib; avalpva micaqqab. 
11 caqqab (or caqqab f) cala to comment upon. 
..,..,l&. caaqib f, caaqib f Ivtl to punish. yagib mucaqbit 
iI-masruul the one responsible must be punished. -vn 
mucaqba, 
mucaaqaba, 
ciqaab; 
ava 
micaaqib, 
mucaaqib. 
yl<&. ciqaab Inl penalty, punishment. 
JlyJt 
Jl# cuqbaal linterjl may it be the same (for) ... ! 
588 
(used in formulae of (usually) good wishes or response 
to congratulations on happy occasions). cuqbaal-ak 
may you be similarly fortunate (or unfortunate)! 
cuqbaal candukum gamiican may you all be so fortun-
ate! cuqbaal wilaad-ak may your children be as lucky! 
cuqbaal yoom-ak may you have such a (happy) day (to 
celebrate)! cuqbaal ramalt-ak may you gain what you 
hope for too! cuqbaal-ak lamma tisqa( rinta kamaan 
just wait till you fail too! IIcuqbaalfarbaat iI-fara!J may 
we drink sherbet at your wedding party! (to one's host, 
when drinking sherbet). -cuqbaal miit sana (may it be 
the same for a hundred years) = many happy returns! 
11 cuqbaal ma Iconjl (1) until. ristanna cuqbaal m-agiib 
i1-fiuus wait till I get the money. (2) by the time that. 
cuqbaal ma yiw~al ig-gawaab !Ja-ykuun saaftr by the 
time the letter arrives he will have already left. (cf. 
ca-baal ma under 1 ~ J Y ). 
~Jt 
..w. caqad (i, u) Ivtl 1 to knot, tie a knot in. 2 to form, 
produce. bacd' Jwayya nawwaar i1-qu(n' yicqid looz 
raxt[ar after a while, cotton blossoms form green bolls . 
3 [cook] to thicken by boiling. sukkar macquud sugar 
boiled down with lemon juice and water to produce 
(1) a syrup used in cooking. (2) a depilatory of a waxy 
consistency.4t (also caqad) to convene (e.g., a meet-
ing). -Ithe literary passive form occursl maglis ij-Jacb' 
b-yucqad li-munaqfit qararaat i1-!Jukuuma the People's 
Assembly is convened to discuss the decisions of the 
government. - Ivil 5 to thicken through being boiled . 
xalliJ-Jurba ticqidJiwayya let the soup thicken a little. 
-vn caqd, caqadaan; ava caaqid; pva macquud. 
11 caqad qaraan f (yicqid qaraan) to sign the marriage 
contract (of the groom). -caqad cala (yicqid cala) to 
sign a contract of marriage with (a woman). 
..w. caqd In pi cuquud, cuqudaJ 11 contract. 2 [arch] 
arch. 
• ..w. caqda In pi -aat, cuqadl 1 sheaf, bundle. caqdit 
!Ja(ab qu(n a bundle of cotton stalks. 2 [arch] arch . 
..w. cuqd In pi cuquud, ciqaadl necklace. 
...w. cuqda In pi -aatl 1 knot (tied in s.th.). IIkuUB 
cuqda w-liiha !Jallaal [prov] every problem has some-
one who can solve it. 2 problem, difficulty. IIraagii 
cuqda a man who can solve any problem. 3 knot (in 
wood). II ril-cuqda thlib in-naggaar [prov] (the carpen-
ter can't deal with a knot in the wood) there are some 
problems which no one can solve. -!Ja(( il-cuqda fil-
minJaar [prov] to object out of contrariness. 4 [naut] 
knot, nautical mile. surcaat i1-markib bi-titqaas bil-

r;uc;da the boat's speeds are measured in knots. 
I used to believe in magic. -also fistac;r;ad. - ava 
5 knuckle. 6 complex, hang-up. 
mistar;c;ad. 
oW. r;ic;d Inl {cook} amount of liquid (usually water 
with salt) appropriate to a particular dish. fil-r;ic;d i 
btaar; iI-firaax kubbayteen mayya I-kulli larxa the 
amount of liquid to be added in the cooking of chickens 
is two cups of water per chicken. -also c;ir;d. 
~ 
r;aqiid, r;ac;iid In pi r;uqadaafl {mil} colonel. 
r;aqiid (ayyaar group-captain. 
o~ r;aqiida T In pi r;aqaa fidl 1 belief, conviction. 
r;an r;aqiida by conviction, Qn principle. 2 creed, 
dogma. 
~~ r;ac;c;aad In *1 maker and seller of trimmings for 
clothes, maker and seller of piping; braid etc. 
~~ r;uc;c;aad Inl knotted thread worn to ward off ill-
ness. II fiddii-ni r;uc;c;aad naafir; give me a practical 
solution . 
...Ii...; 1 fitr;ac;ad Ivii passive of r;ac;ad. - iva mitr;ic;id. 
...Ii...; 1 finr;ac;ad 
= 
fitr;ac;ad. -vn 
finr;ic;aad; iva 
minr;ic;id. 
~ r;ac;c;ad Ivtl 1 to tie in knots, tangle. 2 to make 
difficult, complicate. fit/.iI yir;ac;c;ad fi-!Jayat-na I-!Jadd i 
ma kull i waa!Jid marart-u (ac;c;it he went on making our 
life difficult till everyone was at the end of his tether. 
mawt/.uur; mir;ac;c;ad a complex subject. 3 to give a 
complex to. -vn tar;c;iid; avalpva mir;ac;c;ad. 
~I fitr;ac;c;ad Ivil I to be or become tied in knots or 
tangled. 2 to be made or become difficult or compli-
cated. 3 to be given a complex, develop a complex. 
fana kunt i mitr;ac;c;ada min iI-c;~r r;ajaan iI-r;ayyil nizil 
mayyit I had a complex about Kasr el-Aini (hospital) 
because the child was born dead. -ava/iva mitr;ac;c;ad. 
..Ii I..; 1 ritr;aac;Jd Ivil to make a contract (with o.a.). 
titr;aac;id iI-wikalaat mar;a t-tilivizyoon the agencies en-
ter into a contract with the television (corporation). -vn 
tar;aac;ud; ava mitr;aac;id. 
..IiI..; tar;aac;ud, tar;aaqud T In pi -aatl contract. Iii 
tar;aac;ud been if-firka wir-raakib a contract exists be-
tween the company and the passenger. 
~I rir;tac;ad Ivil 1 to believe, have faith (e.g., in 
God). ma-b-ar;tic;id-fi I-rabb-i-na I don't believe in 
God. 2 to believe (in the truth of a statement). 
ma-b-ar;tic;id-fi fil-!Jikaaya di I don't believe that story. 
3 yar;taqidT limperf onlyl to believe, think, consider. 
m-ar;taqid-j I don't think so. bi-nar;taqid 'linn i fii !Jail 
we believe there is a solution. -vn rir;tic;aad, fir;tiqaad; 
ava mir;tic;id. 
~\A;s.1 rir;tic;aad, rir;tiqaad In pi -aat, -aatl belief. 
~ 
1 rislar;c;ad J Ivil to believe. kunt astar;c;ad flS-si!Jr 
I.Hi t 
.Jw. r;iqaar or r;aqaar In pi -aatl real estate, landed 
property. 
. 
IS.JW. r;iqaari or r;aqaari ladjl pertaining to real estate 
or landed property. II 'Iii-bank iI-r;iqaari a bank that 
provides loans to those building houses. - fif-fahr iI-
r;aqaari seejahr. 
2.H jt 
P 
r;ac;ar (u) Ivtl to bite (of a dog). -vn r;ac;r; ava 
r;aac;ir; pva mar;c;uur. 
op r;ac;ra linst n, pi -aatl a (dog's) bite. 
.,.,..1 ritr;ac;ar Ivil to be bitten. - iva mitr;ic;ir. 
.,.,..1 finr;ac;ar = fitr;ac;ar. - iva minr;ic;ir. 
1 
- t 
;IJ 
P 
r;aC;C;ar 
Ivtl to foul, 
entangle. 
riI-mux(aal 
mir;ac;c;ar the anchor is fouled. -ava/pva mir;ac;c;ar. 
)..;1 ritr;ac;c;ar Ivil to be fouled, be entangled. -iva 
mitr;ac;c;ar. 
4(JJt) 
p. r;uc;r 1 Icoll nl {rur} root(s). 2/adj invarl experi-
enced in the ways of the world, hardened and capable . 
.Jw. r;aqqaar In pi 
r;aqaqiirl drugs, medicines. 
lIr;aqqaar iI-halwasa L.S.D. 
":"JJt 
..,.. p 
r;ac;rab J Ivtl to make difficult, make complex, 
make baffling. -vn r;ac;raba; ava/pva mir;ac;rab. 
..,..;A- mir;ac;rab or mir;ac;rab ladj *1 not straightfor-
ward, difficult to understand, complex and baffling. 
raagil mir;ac;rab a complex man, a deep type. rimti!Jaan 
mir;ac;rab a difficult exam. rik-koora gat-Iu mr;ac;raba 
the ball came to him at a difficult angle. 
..,.. p 
r;ac;rab Z or r;ac;rab Inl 1 Ipl r;ac;aaribl = 
r;ac;raba. lI!Jagar iI-r;ac;rab an aphrodisiac, supposedly 
made from an opium base. 2 hand (of a watch). 3 riI-
r;ac;rab {astrol} Scorpio. 4 bolt inserted through the 
balanga of a plough to hold the ploughshare at the 
required angle (see PI.D, IS). 
~ p 
r;ac;raba or r;ac;raba In pi r;ac;aaribl 1 scorpion. 
zayy iI-r;ac;raba c;ar~it-ha wil-c;abr as fatal as a scorpion 
with its deadly sting. 2 spiteful backbiting person . 
..,...,.,..1 ritr;ac;rab Ivil passive of r;ac;rab J. 
- iva 
mitr;ac;rab. 

JJt 
~ 
eaC;iiC; Inl carnelian. 
I JJt 
J.A&. eac;al (i) Ivll 1 to tether. II fiec;il-ha wa-tawakkal 
{prov] (tie up your beast and trust in God) '" God helps 
those who help themselves. 2 to believe, credit, find 
credible. II flnta ma-b-tieC;i/-J are you daft? - vn eaC;I, 
eac;alaan; ava eaac;i/; pva maeC;uul. 
J.A&. eiC;il (a) Ivil to become sensible or reasonable, 
learn some sense. lamma tikbar tiec;al wi-Iamma 
tiggawwiz tieC;al faktar when she grows up, she'll learn 
some sense, and when she gets married she'll learn 
more. - vn eaC;l; ava eaaC;il. 
J.A&. eaC;1 In pI euC;uull mind, reasoning power, sense. 
ya-bu eaC;I' txiin you dolt! gara f-eaC;l-u feeh what's 
come over him? kalaam-ak eeen il-eaC;1 what you say is 
the epitome of good sense. fa~ljaab il-euC;uul f,-raalja 
{provJ the intelligent have no problems. ril-eabii{ (or 
fil-magnuun) 
ma-yiegib-uu-/ lfeer 
eaC;l-u 
w-Iaw 
Ija({uu-Iu miit eaC;l" eala eaC;l-u {provJ the simpleton 
(or the madman) prefers his foolishness to the wisdom 
of a hundred others.llya eaC;l-i '" my only care! (a term 
of endearment). -eaC;I' riliktirooni a computer. -b,-
eaC;1 sensibly. In an intelligent way. as in bi-yaakul 
bl-eac;1 he eats sensibly. - Ijaaga bi/-eac;1 something sus-
ceptible to logical explanation. as in taeaalafahhlm-na-
ma hiyya Ijaaga bil-eac;1 come and explain to me - after 
all. there must be some logic behind it. -xad-(u) 
((aawle-(u). etc.) eala (c;add") eaC;I-(u) to humour. go 
along with. bear with, as In quit' m-azaual-haa-J 
w-axud-ha eala eaC;l-a-ha I thought. rather than upset 
her. I'll let her do it her way. -eaC;I-(u) qal-/(u) to say to 
oneself. think. as in eaC;I-1 c;al-li c;uum ya waad 
flftalj-Iak Ijlttit dukkaan ~u¥ayyar I said to myself. get a 
move on. lad. and open yourself a small shop, eaC;I-1 
c;al-il fltgawwlZ ea/aan yibc;aa-Iak beet I thought, why 
don't I get married and set up house? - c;aal f-eaql' 
baal-(u) to say to oneself privately. think to oneself 
secretly. as 
In c;ult' !-eaC;I' baal-I mif Ij-argae 
ild-duktuur da taani I said to myself. I'm not going back 
to that doctor! - (i/ie f'-eaC;I-(u) finn to be seized by the 
idea that. be taken all of a sudden by the idea that, as in 
fabuu (aaile fl-eaC;l-u flnnu yltgawwlZ blnt' ~¥ayyara 
baed' ma baqa fawlaad-u riggaala hiS father all of a 
sudden has become taken with the Idea that he should 
marry a young girl. now that h;s sons are men. -eamal 
eaC;I-(u) min (or b'-)eaql- to lower oneself to the level 
of, as in laakln tic;uuil feeh baqa Ilr-raagti iIli eaamil 
590 
eaC;l-u min eaC;1 il-waad wi-Jaaxi( fii but what can one 
say to the man who lowers himself to the same level as 
the kid and bawls at him? -eaC;I-(u) (aar to lose one's 
head. -min eaC;I-(u) on one's own initiative, off one's 
own bat, as in ma-tiemil-J' Ijaaga min eaC;l-ak don't do 
anything on your own initiative! -huwwa eaC;l-i daftar 
'" how am I supposed to remember everything! - fakal 
eaC;l-i he had me completely fooled. - ril-eaql is-saliim 
flg-gism is-saliim {prov] a sound mind (is found only) in 
a sound body. -eaql-u f-raas-u he IS level-headed. 
-eaC;l-ak fir-raas-ak tieraf xalal¥-ak {prov] '" do as you 
please, but bear the consequences. - fiddii-ni eaC;l-ak == 
just imagine! picture it for yourself! -eaC;l-u gazma he's 
a thickhead. - ril-eaC;1 il-baa(in the subconscious. 
-mayyil eaC;I(-u) to affect the judgement of (s.o.). 
Ji.&. eaC;li. eaqil ladjl mental, rational, intellectual. 
famraacf. eaqliyya mental illnesses. fis-sinn il-eaC;/i 
mental age. 
11 eaqliyyan ladvl mentally, rationally, intellectually. 
mutaxallif eagliyyan mentally retarded. 
~ 
eaC;ilyya, eaqliyya In pi -aatl mentality. 
Jil&. eaac;il, eaaqil ladj ,. and pi euc;ala, euqalaafl 
sensible, reasonable, sane. fis-sltt tl-eaC;la hiyya III 
Itc;dar Itdiir /ufuun bet-ha it takes a woman with sense 
to run a household. xud tI-magnuuna bint tl-eaC;la wala 
taaxud il-eac;la bint il-magnuuna {prov] better marry 
the crazy daughter of a sane woman than the sane 
daughter of a crazy woman. eaduwwun eaaqil xayrun 
min ~aditc;in gaahtl {prov] a sensible enemy is prefer-
able to an ignorant friend. 
J"....... maeC;uul lad] *1 reasonable, logical, compre-
hensible. kalaam-ak maeC;uul what you say makes 
~ense. mif maeC;uul incredible! it can't be! it doesn't 
make sense! 
~"..... maeC;uliyya Inl plausibility. 
..w. euc;la In pI euc;all 1 knuckle. 2 knob, node (e.g., 
of a reed). IIhuwwa zayy il-euc;la fiz-zoor (he's like a 
lump that sticks in your throat) he's extremely un-
pleasant. 3a vertebra. 3b segment of finger between 
two knuckles, knuckle-bone. II C;lI§ayyar zayy il-euc;la 
short as a knuckle-bone. 4a segment (of reed or the 
like) between two nodes. II lie bit il-euc;la tipcat. 
4b short flute made of one section of a reed. 5 [hort] 
cutting. euC;lit ward' baladi a rose cutting. 6 [gym} 
6a trapeze. 6b horizontal bar. 
J.A&. i faec;al lell morelmost reasonable. 
J\.A&. elc;aal, euc;aal In pI -aatl 1 stiff cord ring worn to 
hold the kufiyya In place on the head. 2 foot-rope, 
hobble. 

j.ii&. r;aqqa/l Ivtl to teach sense to, make reasonable. 
2 :vil to become knotty. - vn tar;qii/; ava/pva mir;aqqal. 
~ 
mir;aqqal ladjl gnarled, knotty. 
j.A..;1 fitr;aqqal Ivil I to be taught sense, be made 
reasonable. 2 to behave with reason. 3 to become knot-
ty or gnarled. - ava/iva mit[aqqal. 
~I fir;taqal, fi[taqal Ivtl to arrest and detain for a 
political offence and without due process of law. - vn 
fir;tiqaal; ava mir;tiqi/; pva muqtaqal. 
J.wu mur;taqal, mu[taqal In pi -aatl prison camp 
(especially for political prisoners), concentration camp. 
2 J J t 
J.# .J";~ r;aquul Inl [bot} camel thorn. 
r J t 
~ r;uqm Inl barrenness, sterility. 
r-"" r;aqqam r Ivil to sterilize. - vn ta[qiim; pva 
m,.ur;aqqam. 
~I fitr;aqqam r Ivil to be sterilized. - iva mitr;aqqam. 
.;.!It 
~ 
r;ikir ladj *1 turbid, muddy. mayya r;ikra turbid 
water. II wiff-u r;ikir he has an unpleasant face. 
'J~ r;ukaara, r;akaara, r;ikaara Inl dregs, sediment, 
lees. 
~ 
r;akkar or r;akkar Ivtl I to roil, render turbid. 
gaww l mr;akkar overcast weather. 2 to disturb, trou-
ble. r;akkar mazaag-i (or damm-i) he put me in a bad 
moo.d. - vn tar;kiir; ava/pva mi[akkar, mir;akkar. 
.... I,..s;.... mir;akkaraati In pi -yyal one who habitually 
spoils people's happiness, spoilsport, wet blanket. 
jv.;1 fitr;akkar or fit[akkar Ivil I to be made turbid. 
fi/-bayr' ma-yitr;akkar-f' min tirr;a [prov} (the sea is 
not stirred up by (water from) a canal) a drop in the 
ocean has no effect. 2 to be disturbed, be agitated. - iva 
mitr;akkar. 
~I fistar;kar Ivtl I to consider (too) turbid. 2 to 
select for turbidity. - vn fistir;kaar; ava mista[kar. 
';''.;.!It 
'-' ~ 
r;akrat Ivil to rummage, go ransacking. finta 
bi-tr;akrat r;ala feeh r;andak what are you rummaging in 
there for? - vn r;akrata; ava mi[akrat. 
'-'J~ r;akrllUl In pi r;akariit, r;akartal scoundrel, 
heel. 
j~t 
j~ r;lIkkaaz In pi r;akakiizl I crutch. 2 bishop's staff, 
crosier. 
591 
~I fitr;akkiz Ivil to lean, support oneself. -ava 
mitr;akkiz. 
iJ" .!l t 
~ 
[akas I (i) Ivtl I to reverse, invert. lI[akas i/-
faaya to do the opposite of what should be done. 2 to 
renect, produce a renection of. -vn r;akasaan, r;aks; 
ava r;aakis; pva ma[klllls. 
~ 
r;aks Inl I opposite, reverse. fis-sammaar;a [aks 
il-mikrllfoon the receiver is the opposite of the mic-
rophone. IIbil-r;aks on the contrary. -maafi fid-dinya 
bil-[aks "'" nouting convention. - fil-[aks I bil-[aks vice 
versa. 2 Ipl r;lIkllsaatl adversity, reverse in fortune 
thought to be occasioned by malevolent spirits or 
magic. fal/aah yimnar; r;annu I-r;ah God keep adversi-
ty from him! fllft' {ariiq-u fil-fingaan kaan kul/-u r;aks 
I saw his future in the cup, and it was nothing but 
adversity. 
~ 
r;aksi ladj *1 I opposite, contrary. fil-ittigaah 
i/-r;aksi the opposite direction. lir;ba r:,aksiyya a play 
against the direction of the game, a side or back pass . 
2 inverse. tanaasllb r;aksi inverse proportion. 
~ 
r;akas 2 Inl = r;aks 2. 
~I fitr;akas Ivil I to be renected. 2 to be reversed. 
- iva mitr;ikis. 
...,..s::...;1 finr;akas 
= 
fitr;akas. -vn 
fin[ikaas; iva 
min[ikis. 
-.rS"~ [aakis Ivtl I to bother, hassle, pester, annoy. 
r;eeb finnak ti[aakis il-banaatfif-Jaari[ it's shameful of 
you to bother girls in the street. 2 to thwart, oppose . 
qllrrit-ha dayman mi[aksaa-ha her co-wife is always 
standing in her way. -
Ivi/3 to act contrarily, play up. 
fil-fasanseer [ammaal bi-y[aakis the lift keeps playing 
up. fiz-zaman mir;aakis everything goes wrong these 
days! -vn mi[aksa, mu[aksa; ava mir;aakis. 
-.rS"L..;1 fit[aakis Ivil I to be bothered, be hassled, be 
pestered, be annoyed. 2 to be thwarted, be opposed. 
- iva mitr;aakis. 
';'.!l t 
~ 
[akaf (II) Ivtl to grab, take hold of. [akaft-u min 
fiid-u I grabbed him by the hand. - vn r;akafaan, r;akf; 
ava [aakif; pva ma[kuuj. 
~ 
[ukf I Icoll nl joints (of an animal), knobs or 
nodes (of a plant). 2/adj invarl stunted, undersized. 
ba{(iixa [ukf a stunted water-melon. 
.....s..s. [ukfa lunit n, pi -aatl a joint (of an animal), 
knob or node (of a plant). 
~I fit[akaf Ivil to be grabbed. - iva mitr;ikif. 

...,..s:...; 1 finlakaj = fillakaj. - iva minlikij. 
~ 
lakkaj Ivtl to grab (a number of things or a 
number of times). ru-buli~ lakkaj-hum kull-u-hum the 
police nabbed them all. -vn IPlkiij; avalpva milakkaj. 
~ 
1 fillakkaj Ivil passive of lakkaj. - iva millakkaj. 
"';.!.It 
..;6.&. lakaf (i) Ivil to devote one's attention. lakafl a 
lal-liaqiyya darasl-a-ha I concentrated on the case (un-
til) I had studied it thoroughly. -vn lakafaan; ava 
taakif· 
$.;.&.1 fillakaf Ivil to retire, seclude oneself, go into 
seclusion. -vn fillikaaf; ava millikif. 
I • .!.I.!.I t 
..!k lakk (u) Ivtl I to smear. lukk' fiid-ak bi1wayyil 
sabril yuud put a little tincture of iodine on your hand. 
fiwla Ilukk' hduum-ak buuya mind you don't get paint 
all over y~ur clothes. 2 to mess up, botch up. lakkil 
iI-fakl she made a mess of the food. feeh iI-lakk' da 
what's all this mess! 3 to embroil in a mess, set at odds. 
lakk in-naas fi-balq-a-ha he set the people against one 
another. -vn lakakaan. lakk; ava laakik; pva 
malkuuk. 
is. lakka Ipl -aall instance noun of lakk. 
.!l~ lakkaak In '/1 botcher, one who makes a mess 
of what he does. 2 malicious trouble-maker. 
~I fillakk Ivil I to be smeared. ~ to be messed up, 
be botched. 3 to be embroiled in a mess, be set at odds. 
- iva millakk. 
~I finlakk = fillakk. -iva minlakk. 
1 • .!.I.!.I t 
IS:.:. •• IS:.:. lakka Iprop nl Acre, a town on the 
Mediterranean coast north of Haifa. IIlamal :zayy' ma 
ykuun falab lakka (he behaved as though he'd con-
quered Acre) he behaved as though he'd achieved the 
impossible. 
r .!.It 
~ 
lakam (u) Ivtl to grab and hold tight, grasp, 
fis-sill' waldil-i raal:Jil lakmaa-ni w-baysaa-ni my 
mother suddenly hugged and kissed me. -vn lakm. 
lakamaan; ava laakim; pva malkuum. 
~I fillakam Ivil to be grabbed and held tight, be 
grasped. - iva millikim. 
~ 
lakkim Ivtl to cause or enable to grab. -vn 
lalkiim; avalpva milakkam. 
~I fillakkim 
Ivil 
passive 
of lakkim. 
-iva 
millakkim. 
592 
.;,.;,.!.It 
~ 
laknin Ivtl to annoy, upset, aggravate, exasper-
ate. famma di laknana how exasperating! lakninu 
ma:zaag-i they ruined my good humour. -vn laknana; 
avalpva milaknin. 
J~ 
milakninaali In pi -yyal one who habitually 
annoys people, pest. 
~I fillaknin Ivil to be or become annoyed, upset, 
aggravated or exasperated. -avaliva millaknin. 
".!.It 
i fo likwa In pi -aall cut of meat from the base ofthe 
tail. 
yJt 
~ lilba./n pllilabl container, box, pack, tin. lilbil 
sagaayir pack of cigarettes.lilbil sardiin tin of sardines. 
lilbil ga:zma shoe-box.lIlilbil saliya {agric] hollow in-
ner compartment of a water-wheel. -lilbil id-
diriksiyoon {aulo] steering column. 
~ 
lallib Ivtl to pack in a container. -vn lalliib; aval 
pva milallib. 
, ..:..t,f... mUlallabaalT Ipl nl canned foods. 
J~ milallabaali In pi -yyal packer. 
..,..L.;I fillallib Ivil to be packed in a container. - iva 
millallib. 
(Jt 
dl&. laalig Ivtl I to treat medically. rul:Jl iI-liyaada 
laani w-lalguu-ni hnaak I went back to the clinic and 
they treated me there. fi(-(abiib iI-mulaalig the doctor 
in charge ofthe case. 2 to tackle, deal with. treat. laalig 
iI-mawquul bi-l:Jikma go about the matter wisely. 3 to 
process. bi-Ylalgu I-liumaaj bi-mawaadd' kimawiyya 
they process the cloth with chemicals. -vn lilaag. 
mUlalga; ava milaalig. mUlaaligT. 
r;,.;J.&. lilaag In pi -aall'prescribed treatment. fiddaa-ni 
lilaag raali liawi he prescribed me very expensive 
medicine. Illilaag gamaali group therapy. -lilaag 
(abiili physiotherapy. -ma-luu1lilaag (1) it is incur-
able. (2) it is irremediable. 
..r:;J.&. lilaagi ladjl therapeutic. II mu fassasa lilagiyya 
hospital run by a trade union or professional association 
for the benefit of its members. 
~I.. mUlalga In pi -aall = lilaag. 
d \.;'1 fillaalig Ivill to be treated medically. b-allaalig 
bi-fibar wi-birjaam I'm being treated with injections 
and pills. 2 to be tackled, be dealt with, be treated. 3 to 
be processed. - iva millaalig. 

oJ I ..; J t. see oJ I ..; t. : lala/aan 
..JJt. 
....ok lalaf, lilif (i) Ivtl to feed (an animal). nifiil tibn 
iI-ralla la/aan nillif minnu l-bahaayim we take the 
wheat stalks to feed to the livestock. -vn lalf, lalafaan; 
ava laalif; pva malluuf. 
ill&. lalfa In pi -aatl I instance noun of lalf. 2 (kind 
of) fodder. 
...;).... malluuf ladj *1 fattened for market (e.g., of a 
calf). 
. 
....ok lalaf In pi f'allaaf/ fodder. II yalaawa lalaf sweet-
meat made of sesame seeds and sugar. 
i.t ')I.&. lalaafa Inl food grains. 
...;~ lallaaf In * and pllallaafal I seller of fodder, 
cereals, pulses etc. 2 one skilled at feeding livestock. 
...AL.;I f'itlalaf Ivil to be fed (of animals). - iva mitlilif. 
...AL.; I f'inlalaf = f'itlalaf. - iva minlilif. 
JJt. 
*" lililj (aJ Ivil to stick, adhere. f'if-jalr iI-malj~u~ 
lililj fi-hduum-i the shorn hair stuck to my clothes. -vn 
lalaljaan; ava laalilj. 
ill&. lallja 
In 
pi -aat, 
lulaljl 
beating, 
hiding. 
qarabt-a-ha lallja gamda I gave her a good thrashing. 
*" lillj In plliluuljl [coarse] passive homosexual, 
faggot. f'in laljeet iI-lillj i ma-tilljaa-/ iI-xaraaba w- f'in 
laljeet il-xaraaba ma-tilljaa-jil-lillj [pro v] if you find the 
faggot, you can't find the wasteground (to screw him 
in), and if you find the wasteground, you can't find the 
faggot. see further under oJ J J t. 
;w... lillja In plliluuljl [coarseJ girl of loose conduct, 
tart. 
*" lalalj Icoll nl leech(es). 
;w... lalalja lunit n, pi -aatl a leech. IIzayy iI-lalalja 
(like a leech) parasitical, clinging. 
~')I.&. lilaalja, lilaaqa In pi -aatl relation, relationship. 
lilaljaat /ax~iyya personal relations. lilaljaat lamma 
public relations. fii lilaalja been ta f'xiir i/- f'islaaf 
wiz-zibaa/a /Ii marmiyyafi/-jaaril there's a connection 
between the ambulance being delayed and the rubbish 
thrown down in the street. 
~)so li/uljiyya, lululjiyya Inl debauchery. sec further 
under J J.J t. 
J.,k laliilj Icoll nl fodder, animal feed. muut ya ymaar 
lala ma ygii-lak il-laliilj [provJ you'll die (of starva-
tion), you ass, if you wait expecting someone to bring 
you food (to one whose problem has little hope of 
solution). 
593 
~ 
laliilja lunit n, pi -aat, lalaayiljl a portion of 
fodder. 
~~ lallaalja In pi -aatl I clothes rail (in a wardrobe) . 
2 peg or hook on which to hang things up. 3 sling (for 
the arm). 
~ 
lulleelj Icoll nl any of various climbing or creep-
ing plants or brambles. l-ag/ iI-ward i yinsilji il-lulleelj 
[provJ for the sake of the roses the weeds get watered. 
~ 
lulleelja In pi -aatl I hanging strap (e.g., in a 
bus). 2 peg or rack on which to hang things. 3 sling (for 
the arm). 4 any hanging decoration (e.g., pendant on a 
necklace, mascot in a car). - lunit nl 5 a climbing or 
creeping plant or bramble. II ril-lulleelja or lulleeljit 
muusa the Burning Bush. 
~ 
mallalja In pi malaaliljl I spoon. 2 spoonful. 
.j.&. lallalj Ivtl la to hang, suspend. yiljlal huduum-u 
wi-Ylallalj-ha la/-jammaala he takes off his clothes 
and hangs them on the hanger. ya-nlallalj in-natiiga 
bukra we'll put up the result tomorrow.llkubri mlallalj 
suspension bridge. Ib to stand up, leave to wait in vain. 
farljalit il-malaad wi-lallaljit-ni sal teen she broke the 
appointment and left me waiting two hours. Ie [chemJ 
to suspend (a substance) in a fluid. 2 to harness, hitch. 
ril-faras lamma tikbar bi-Ylallalj-hafi/-larabiyya when 
a mare grows old she is put to pulling a cart. f'in kaan 
landu bhimteen yilallalj-hum fil-miyraat if he has two 
beasts he harnesses them to the plough. 3 to pick up (a 
girl). nifs-i f'ablja zayyu w-f'alallalj f'ayyuha wayiia 
I wish I were like him and could pick up any girl. 4 to 
get hold of illicitly, nick, swipe. lallalju f'asri/it i/-
imtiyaan they got hold of the exam questions (ahead of 
time). ri/-xaddaam lallalj ir-radyu w-mifi the servant 
swiped the radio and left. - Ivil 5 to comment, make 
comments. 
6a to 
jam, 
become 
stuck. 
f'aduus 
lad-dibriyaaj la/aan it-tiruus ma-tyukk i-j fi-balq-a-ha 
wi-tlallalj I press on the clutch so that the gears don't 
catch on one another and get stuck. f'i/- f'ibra mlallalja 
the (record-player) needle is stuck. II f'in-nimra 
mlallalja the number doesn't connect (when dialled). 
-lallaljt U lala l-fikra w-mif ljaadir f'ansaa-ha I'm com-
pletely hooked on the idea and can't forget it. 6b to 
catch on, become popular. bi-yziilu .1- f'uYniya lamma 
tlallalj they broadcast the song till it catches on. -vn 
talliilj; ava/pva milallalj. 
11 lallalj lala to put (s.th.) on to cook. lallalj lala 
l-layma put the meat to cook. -lallalj Ii- to feed 
(livestock) . 
.:;.l.o; talliilj 
In 
pi -aat, 
talaliiljl 
I comment. 
2 commentary. fit-talliilj lal-mat/the commentary on 
the match. 

i.A.).; talilir.;a In pI -aatll hanging strap. 2 hanging flap 
(e.g., of a tent or awning). 3a badge worn as an 
emblem. 3b pendant. 3c amulet worn on the person. 
4 sling (for the arm). 5 hook or rack used to hang things 
on. 
.;Lw mUlallir.;, mUlalliq In *1 commentator. 
j..... mUlallaq In pI -aatl {chemJ suspension, fluid in 
which a substance is suspended . 
..;l.ul ritlallar.; Ivi/la to be hung, be suspended. Ib to 
be stood up, be left waiting in vain. Ie {chemJ to be 
suspended in a fluid. 2 to be harnessed, be hitched up. 
3 to be picked up (of a girl). 4 to be got hold of illicitly, 
be nicked, be swiped. 5 to be connected. rin-nafaa[ illi 
b-Ylllallar.; bif-fabaab activities pertaining to youth. 
6 to become emotionally attached (to s.o.), become 
emotionally dependent (on s.o.). mif laar.;i luruusa 
tirqa bii lalafaan mitlallar.; xaali~ bi-rumm-u he can't 
find a girl prepared to marry him because he's so 
attached to his mother. IImitlallar.; min dee/-u "" he's 
trying to keep up with the Joneses. 7 (impersonal) pas-
sive of lallar.; 5. ril-l.Jagaat i~-~ulfayyara di mif laazim 
yitlallaCj laleeha it's not necessary to pick on these 
trivi.al matters. '" ava/iva mitlallar.;. 
.;..l.a.:;.. mutalallar.;aat, mutalallaqaat Ipl nl belong-
ings, possessions. 
rJJt 
~ 
lalr.;am Inl colocynth, bitter-apple. murr' zayy 
il-lalr.;am as bitter as colocynth. 
594 
,:, J J t see also J J t 
.:,Ll.;1 ritl_alr.;an Ivil to behave effeminately. -vn 
lalr.;ana; ava mitlalr.;an. 
.!lJt 
o..!lli. lalak (i) Ivil to chatter, prattle, babble on. - vn 
lalk; ava laailk. 
I.J Jt 
j&. lall (i) Ivtl I to make sick and weary. rll-tadriis 
fUlflaana tllll teaching IS a soul-destroying job. 2 to 
water for a second time (plants which do not flourish 
after the first watering). -vn lalalaan; ava laalil; pva 
"!alluul. 
& 
lilla In pI lilall I sickness, weariness. ril-l.Jikaaya 
di rabbit-Ii lilla I'm sick and tired of this business. 
2 reason, excuse. reeh il-lilla f-safar-ak bil-Ieel what is 
the reason for your travelling at night? kalaam-u da 
mugarrad lilla kida what he said is just an excuse. 
.J~ lilaala Inll comfort, consolation. 2 remainder, 
remnant, 
rest. 
3 excuse, 
pretext. 
4 occupation, 
diversion. 
~ 
lallilladj pllulalal extremely sick. 
J.;I ritlalllvil to become sick and tired. /lqllt aftaral 
fit-turmaay taman simin 1i-l.Jadd' ma tlalleet I went on 
working on the trams for eight years, till I was worn 
~~t. - ava mitlall. 
~ 
I rmlall = rlllall. -ava mmlall. 
Jk lallil Ivtl to account for, give a reason for. 
ril-baal.Jis laazim yilalld wighll na;ar-u the researcher 
m.!lst justify his opinion. -vn talliil; avalpva milallil. 
J.l.;1 rlllallillvil to make excuses. ra;unn' ma-lad1' 
III dilwar.;ti l.Jaaga titlallil biiha now I think there IS 
nothmg more for you to use as a pretext. -ava mlllallil. 
1.J J t 
j&. lalla (also lalalla) ladvl perhap~. nir.;ul-Iu - lalla 
wa-lasa y,smal kalam-na we'lI tell him. perhaps he'll 
listen to us. 
l J J t see ...s J t: lalaali 
':'.' J J t 
<.J~ lillaan Inl assonant complement tofilaan (q.v.). 
mgilb fi-siirit lilaan w-nir.;a[{al II-farwit lillaan we gos-
sip about so-and-so and slander so-and-so. 
;.,;~ llllaana Inl femimne of lillaan. 
rJt 
~ lilim (a) Ivtl I to know (of God). yillam allaah 
rinm b-al.Jibb-ak God knows I love you. Ilyillam bii 
(biiha. etc.) rabb-i-na bad to a degree that only God can 
comprehend, awful, disastrous. as in y-aadi I-yoom iIIi 
yillam bll rabb-I-na what an awful day! r,g-gawaaza 
[illit mu~iiba yillam biiha rabb-i-na the marriage 
turned out to be an utter disaster. 2 to know. 
m-allam-!' l.Jaaga lan d-mawquul I know nothing ab-
out the matter. II da l.Jilm' walla lilm is that mere wishful 
thinking or hard fact? -vn lilm; ava laalim; pva 
malluum. 
~ lilm Inll knowledge, information. ril-lilm' nuur 
knowledge is light (a common c1iche).lIlilm-i lilm-ak 
I know as little as you, I've no idea. - ril-lilm a land 
allaah God alone knows. I've no idea. -mala I-lilm' 
rmn ... despite the fact that .... -lil-lilm or min baab 
il-lilm for information. as in balatu ~uurit il-muzakkira 
liI-qism M-lllm they sent a copy of the memo to the 
department for information. -yikuun li-lllm-ak please 
be informed. take note. bear m mind. as in yikuun 

fi-lilm-ak fiza ma-get-Ji Ija-titrifid take note that if you 
don't come. you'i1 be fired. - Ipl luluuml 2 natural or 
physical science. luluum wi-fadaab sciences and arts. 
lilm in-nafs psychology. 3 academic discipline. sub-
ject. [IS-sana I-fuula b-yidrisu magmuulit luluum 
muxtalifa in the first year they study a number of diffe-
rent subjects. lilm iI-luyawiyyaat the science of linguis-
tics. - Ino pll4 note. memorlindum.lIgawaab bi-lilm 
iI-w~uul a recorded delivery letter. 
~ 
lilmi ladj */1 scientific.fii qism i lilmi wi-qism i 
fadabi there is a science department and an arts depart-
ment. 2 academic. scholarly. 
lIlilmiyyan ladvl (I) scientifically. lilmiyyan kull illi 
bi-ybiluu I-la{(ariin kalaam faariY scientifically speak-
ing. everything the herbalists sell is a lot of nonsense. 
(2) academically. lilmiyyan fana faljsan min faxuu-ya 
I'm better academically than my brother. 
JlJ&. lilmaani I/adj ·1 secular. 2 In *1 {Chr] layman. 
~I&. laalim Inl I Knower (epithet of God). - Ipl 
lulamal 2 one trained in Islamic law and theology. 
yixlaq min qahr iI-laalimfaasid {provJ '" God may give 
a good man a bad son. 3 scholar. 4 scientist. 
411&. lalma In pllawaaliml woman leader of a troupe 
of women musicians and dancers.llljaH iI-lawaalim '" 
the luck of the devil. 
r)w. malluum 
Inl 
I knowledge, 
known 
fact. 
II malluum finn ... it is common knowledge that ... , it is 
known that .... as in malluum finn i ma-Ijaddi-Jyilaaqi 
faqqa b-suhuula we all know that no one can find a flat 
easily. -yikuun fi-malluum-ak please be informed, 
take note. bear in mind. 2 riI-malluum the sum custo-
marily given (e.g., to a beggar or as the monthly tip for a 
dustman or the like). - linterj/3 of course! obviously! 
~)w. malluuma I In pi -aatl item of information. 
2 mallumaat/pl nl information. IImallumaatlamma 
general knowledge. 
~)... mallumiyya In/l skill. practical ability. ~aaljib 
mallumiyya a skilled person. 2 sum customarily given 
as a fee. 
~lJ&. lalmaan ladj *1 aware. informed, cognizant. 
~ lalam In pi fallaaml flag. 
r')l&.i fallaam Ipl nl notables, people of high social 
standing. 
~')I&. lalaama In pi -aatl I mark. affixed sign or in-
scription.lalaamit iI-xitm the mark made by the stamp. 
lalamaat 
it-tarqiim 
punctuation 
marks. 
II diqiiq 
lalaama highest quality flour. 2 marker. signpost. 
lalamaat muruur traffic signals. IIma-Jaf-J iI-lalamaat 
he failed the eye test. 3 indication. sign. symptom. 
S9S 
lalaamit iI-wilaada b-tibqa nzuul damm i faw mayya the 
sign that birth is near is the discharge of blood or fluid. 
~ 
laliim Inl Omniscient One (epithet of God). 
rk i fallam I 
lell 
morelmost 
knowledgeable. 
II fallaahu fallam (I) God knows best. (2) only God 
knows. I've no idea. as in da n~aam fallaahu fallam 
m~dar-u feeh God alone knows how the system 
started! 
r~ laUaam Inl Omniscient One (epithet of God). 
lallaam iI-Yiyuub Knower of the unknown (epithet of 
God). 
~ 
lulleema Inl something newly heard or learnt 
(especially when of only transient value). fad. craze. 
hiyya di lulleema gdiida (do you think) this is the latest 
thing out? fitlallimt-i-Iak luUeema you've got a new 
hobby-horse.lirift-i-Iak lulleema I've heard something 
new that may help you. 
r'- malaalim Ipl nl features. malaalim iI-wifjthe fea-
tures of the face. malaalim iI-balad ityayyarit xaa/~ the 
town has changed completely in appearance. 
r't&.. laalam Inl I Ipl lawaaliml world. bu(uulit iI-
laalam world championship. laalam iI-fann the world 
of art. 2 Ifem n. no pll people in general. fil-laalam di 
kull-a-ha all these people. kaan fii laalam kitiir there 
were masses of people. fismalu ya laalam listen every-
body! 
lIlaalamiin: rabb iI-laalamiin the Lord of the universe_ 
.}'t&.. laalami 
ladj 
·1 
I world-wide. 
majaakil 
laalamiyya world problems. fil-Ijarb iI-laalamiyya t-
tanya the Second World War. 2 of international stand-
ing. known world-wide. muhandis laalami an engineer 
of international standing. 
~ lallim Ivtll to teach. train.lallim-nijurb iI-xamra 
he taught me to drink wine. IIlallimnaa fif-Jiljaata 
sabaq-na lal- fabwaab {prov] (we taught him to beg and 
he beat us to the doors) '" he bites the hand that fed 
him. 2 to mark. bi-nlallim iI-xajab lajaan in-naqr we 
mark the wood for the mortising. fik-karabiig lallimit 
fi-gism-i the whips left marks all over my body. -vn 
talliim, lalaam; ava/pva milallim. 
~ 
talliim In! education. wizaarit it-tarbiya wit-
talliim the Ministry of'Education . 
.::..1...,,1u tallimaat Ipl n! instructions, directives. 
~ 
I..; talaliim f Ipl n/. teachings, doctrines. talaliim iI-
masiilj the teachings of Christ. 
~ 
talliimi 
ladjl 
educational. 
fis(uwaana 
tallimiyya an educational gramophone record. 
~ 
tallimgi In pi -yyal {mil] drill instructor. 
~~ 
tallimxaana In pi -aatl {obsolJ riding school. 

rLw milallim In *1 I title of, and form of address or 
reference to, a man in traditional society who owns a 
small business, directs the labour of others, or holds a 
similar position of authority (e.g., a foreman, shop-
keeper, or gang leader) "" boss. fana !arraal tabal 
il-milallim I work under the boss. Ilxabtit milallim a 
master-stroke. 2 polite form of address to a lower-class 
man. 
rLw mUlallim 
In 
*1 
I (male) 
teacher. 
yimuut 
il:mulallim wi-huwwa yitlallim [prov] even a teacher 
still has things to learn after living a whole lifetime. daar 
mUlallimiin 
teacher 
training 
college. 
ba!!awiiJ 
mUlallim drill sergeant-major. 2 [Chr] leader of con-
gregational prayer responses and hymns, cantor (in the 
C~ptic church). 
4..L... m1lallima In pI -aatl I female equivalent of 
milallim I. 2 manly woman, woman of forceful 
character. 
~ 
mUlallima In pI -aatl (female) teacher. 
~I fitlallim Ivtl I to be taught, learn. 2 to be 
"!arked. - avaliva mitlallim. 
~ 
mutalallim, mitlallimJ ladj *1 (well-)educated. 
~i fallam2 Ivtl to inform. fallamuu-na (bi-)I-
mawquul they informed us of the matter. - vn fillaam; 
ava mUllim; pva mUllam. 
i')\&.! fillaam Inl publicity. wasaaril fillaam mass 
media. fillaam!arli [leg] a court statement of the legal 
heirs to a person's estate. 
U""'')\&.! fillaami ladj *1 pertaining to pUblicity. mulljaq 
fillaami publicity officer. 
~I fistallam Ivil to inquire. -vn fistillaam; iva 
mistallim. 
ul,.~1 flsllliamaat Ipl nl inquiries. (maktab) il-
istillamaat information desk. 
I.:, Jt 
..)&. zalan J = fallan. 
\.:.l&. lalanan ladvl publicly, openly. 
~ 
lalani I/adj, often invarl public, open, overt. 
fildaam lalani public execution. di sirqa lalani this is 
daylight robbery! lala I-lalani publicly, openly. 2 ladvl 
openly, overtly. bi-Y'lfiff" lalani he cheats openly. 
..)&. i fallan Ivtl I to announce, declare. ril-mufti 
b-yillin ir-rufya the mufti announces the sighting (of 
the new moon). ril-Ijukuuma fallanit utiljaad gidiid the 
government announced a new union. fallanu I-Ijarb 
they declared war. 2 to inform. fil-Ijaaqir yillin il-
yaayib he who is present should inform the absentee. 
3 to display. fallan zalal-u he showed his annoyance. 
-vn fillaan; ava mUllm; pva mUllan. 
596 
11 fallan lan (I) to give formal notice of. fallanu lan 
ig-galsa g-gayya they gave notice of the forthcoming 
session. (2) to advertise. bi-yillinu fig-garaayid lan 
ff¥naaf sagaayir ma-Ihaa-!wuguud fis-suuq they adver-
tise in the papers types of cigarettes that are not to be 
found in the market. 
.;,')\&.! fillaan In 
pI -aatl I advertisement. 2 [leg. 
eomm] notification. 
.).... mUllin In *1 advertiser. 
2 .:, J t see .:, I J J t : lillaan. lillaana 
.J J t see ..s J t: luluww. liliww. lulwi. lilw. 
lilwi. lilaawa. lalaawa. lilleewi 
IJ.JJt 
'l.p- lalawla 
ladvl 
completely, 
altogether. 
xalla~uu-ha lalawla they finished it off completely. 
2 continually. ril-walad bi-yitbawwallalawla the child 
keeps vomiting. 
':'.J J t see ':'.J':' t : lilwaan 
..sJt see also 
1 J1t 
~ lili (a) Ivil la to become high(er), increase in 
height. kull' yoom il-limaara lammaala tilla every day 
the building keeps getting higher. fi/-babuur bi-yilla 
the stove(-flame) burns higher. Ib to become high(er) 
off the ground. fi{-{ayyaara lilyit the plane flew higher. 
II rilli lili lili [pro v] "" one who has gone to the top is out 
of reach (of his friends). -lili walla wi{i whate,-:er his 
standing, whatever people say about him. 2 to improve 
in quality. mustawa l-maliiJa laazim yilla the standard 
of living has to rise. II beet in-nattaa! ma-yillaa-! [prov] 
"" thieves never prosper. 3 to increase statistically or 
quantitatively. ladad is-sukkaan bi-yilla the popula-
tion increases. murattab-i lili my salary went up. 4 to 
increase in volume, become loud(er). ~oot-u lili 
w-huwwa b-yitxaaniq his voice rose while he was quar-
relling. 5 to become rough (of the sea). fil-moog lili 
the waves got rougher. -vn lilw. liliww. luluww; ava 
laali . 
11 filla Ifem filii, pI fillul [joe slang] hand over! give! 
filla b-sigaara give me a cigarette! 
~ liliww. luluww Inl height, elevation. liliww-a-ha 
faktar min miyya w-sabliin santimitr it is more than 170 
cm. high. bald' ma ytuul zarl it-tiilliliww' mitreen 
after the flax plants reach two metres in height. zawya 
luluww angle of elevation. II bi-lliww"ljiss-i at the top 
of my voice. 

Jl&. caali ladj *1 I~ tall, high. cimaara calya a tall 
building. 
(aalic 
fil-caali 
(1) being 
pretentious. 
(2) going upstream (in the jargon of Nile boatmen). 
II fil-muus fii caali w-waa{i the razor blade is dented. 
-gaab calii-ha wa{ii-ha he turned everything upside-
down, he upset things completely. Ib high off the 
ground. sal:Jaab caali high cloud. 2 high-quality, super-
ior. faxlaaq-u calya he has high moral standards, he is 
an upright man. fit-tacliim il-caali higher education. 
daar il-qatlaaf il-caali supreme court building. 
3 statistically high. nisba calya a high proportion. 
fascaar calya high prices. II kunyaak caali high-proof 
cognac. 4 loud. fir-radyu caali qawi the radio is very 
loud. Sa rough (of the sea). 5b shallow (of a river, in 
the jargon of Nile boat-men). 6 high (in pitch). 
Jl&. caal J see 
I J I t 
# cilw Inl I height. bi-cilw i raas-ak as high as your 
head. 2 {rurl heap. cilwi barsiim a large amount of 
clover. 
<.S# culwi or cilwi ladj *1 I upper, above. fid-door 
il-culwi the upper floor. 2 elevated, raised. kubri culwi 
an elevated footbridge. 
j&. i facia lell higher/highest, louder/loudest, etc. 
maglis facia supreme council. fil-qaafid il-facla the 
supreme commander. 
j&. cala loften shortened before def art to ca-; w pron 
597 
suff calee- (Ist sing calayya)1 preposition indicating 
I location upon,la literally. ca{-{arabeeza on the table. 
cala raas ig-gabal on the top of the mountain. 
Ib figuratively. fis-salaamu caleekum peace be upon 
you. 2 location above, 2a literally. {ayra cala JawaaJi 
J-fagar flying above the treetops.Jibbaak bi-nulla cag-
gineena a window that looks out over the garden. 
2b figuratively. ra riis cala kull il-cummaal supervis?r 
over all the workers. ma-tcallii-J ~oot-ik cala ~oot 
fabuu-ki don't raise your voice above your father's! 
ril-qassiis bi-y~alli cala I-mariiq the priest prays over 
the sick man. 3 location at. saakin cala na~yit if-faaric 
living on the corner of the street. quum uqc.ud cal-
maktab go and sit at the desk. biina nuqcud cal-qahwa 
let's go and sit in the coffee house. 4 motion to a posi-
ti!?n upon, 4a literally. ril-ma{ar baqa naazil cala rus-na 
zayy il-l:Janafiyya the rain started pouring down on our 
heads like water from a tap. 4b figuratively. farraqit 
ceeJ cal-yalaaba she gave out bread to the poor. 
5 motion towards. cala feen where to? hiyya gayya 
caleena is she coming towards us? Jaawir calee point to 
him! misaafir cala skindiriyya travelling to Alexandria. 
6 temporal relationship, 6a of a precise nature. ga cal-
macaad he came at the appointed time. c£¥-~ubl:J first 
thing in the morning. 6b of an approximative nature. 
tacaalu cas-saaca sitta come around six o'clock. cala 
faaxir is-sana nkuun cirifnaJwayyit l:Jisaab by the end of 
the year we will have learned some arithmetic. 6c of an 
extended nature.l:Ja-nicmil if-fugla cala tamant iyyaam 
we'll do the job over eight days. cala marr is-siniin with 
the passing of the years. 7 antagonistic or adversative 
relationship. finta macallna walla caleena are you with 
us or against us? ma-fufti-f calee l:Jaaga I've seen no-
thing to his discredit. wa{{i n-naar cal-l:JallaJwayya re-
duce the fire a little under the pot.llcalee sick 'em! at 
him! (to a dog). 8 governance by a condition. ril-farxa 
caleeha I-beeqa the hen is about to lay. ril-binta caleeha 
I-caada the girl is having her period. calee cafriit he's 
possessed. 9 incumbency or duty. caleek kaam how 
much do you owe? rid-door cala miin whose turn is it? 
caleek i~-mafatiil:J the keys are your responsibility. 
IIma-calek-f minnu don't bother about him. -caleek 
min da b- feeh why should you have to do that? -cal-alia 
(it's up to God) "" let's hope ... , as in cal-alia yiigi bukra 
let's hope he comes tomorrow,l:Ja-yingal:J is-sanaa-di-
cal-alia 'He'll pass (the exam) this year.' 'Let's hope 
so!' 10 object of reference or concern. Jukran caJ-faay 
thanks for the tea. fil:Jkii-1i calee tell me about it. sa fal 
caleek he asked after you. ca{afit calayya she showed 
tenderness toward me. fis-safar sahl" calayya travel is 
easy for me. bi-yquulu calee cayyaan they say he's sick. 
niwazzac filuus cala rool:J il-mayyitwe distribute money 
for the sake of the deceased's soul. II relationship 
characterized by disproportion. rid-dinya l:Jarr i calayya 
it's too hot for me. fil-fustaan kibiir caleeha the dress is 
too large for her. di lissa~YQyyara cag-gawaaz she's still 
too young for marriage. lissa badri cal-yada it's still too 
early for lunch. 12 ground or basis. cala feeh what for? 
cumuula caz-ziyadaat a commission on the extra sales. 
raJtirii-ha cal-mucayna I'll buy it on condition that 
I give it a personal inspection. calaa-di 1-l:Jaal in this 
state. 13 manner or form. cala maraal:Jil in stages. cala 
faJkaal in (various) shapes or sorts. 14 accordance. 
fugrit il- ficlaan titqaddar cala cadad ik-kalimaat the 
charge for an advertisement is estimated according to 
the number of words. bi-yit~arraf cala qaddi sinn-u he 
behaves in accordance with his age. raq£¥it ca{-{abla she 
danced to the drum. IIcala keel-ak as you wish. -cala 
mihl-ak easy does it! -cala kida (1) in this way, as in 
fil:Jna cala kida mif l:Ja-nixl£¥ we'll never get through if 
we go on like this. (2) that being the case, as in huwwa 
cala kida mif l:Ja-yiigi if that's the situation, he won't be 
coming. (3) at that, with that, as in xall£¥ kalaam-u cala 
kida with that he stopped speaking. 15a state. 

bi-ytfarrabu l-budra [an-naa!if they mix the powder 
dry. mitgawwiza [ala !Jubb she married while in love. 
she made a love-mlitch. xallifit rawlad-ha [ala kibar she 
had her children when she was old. ISb tendency. 
rij-jaari[ (aali[ [ala xafiif the street slopes gently up-
ward. sinaan-u zayy' snaan iI-mij£, bass a [ala rfayya[ 
it~ teeth are like those of a comb but on the thin side. 
[aayiz in-nacJa di bass a [ala lfaamilj I want this pattern 
but in a darker shade. 16 addition. riddii-ni xamsa kiilu 
burtuljaan [ala kiilu yusafandi give me five kilos of 
oranges and one of tangerines. 
11 [ala ma Iconjl (1) by the time that. [ala ma wi~/u kaan 
rawwa!J by the time they arrived he had gone home. 
[ala ma yiigl !J-akuun gaahlZ by the time he comes 
I shall be ready. (2) until. xallii-ha [andi [ala ma yiigl 
leave it with me until he comes. xallaa-I!a [andma [ala 
ma gum he left it with us till they came. -[ala rinn Iconjl 
(I) as if. bi-y[amluu-ni [ala rinm bn-u-hum they treat 
me as if I were their son. (2) on the assumption that. 
kalllmlt-ni [ala rinni rana [ali she spoke to me thinking 
that I was Ali. -[ala baal ma = [ala mao -[ala!aan 
see oj I ..; t. -ma[alijf, ma[alee! see"; ..; J t. r 
~ [ali Iprop nl male given name. II rabu [ali 
(1) nickname for !Jasan. (2) epithet for a generous and 
noble man. [amal rabu [ali to act the big-shot. spend 
lavishly and recklessly in an attempt to impress. - wilaad 
[ali bamba street acrobats. - rumm d [ali confection 
made of layers of thin pastry and often with a stuffing of 
nuts and raisins. baked in sweetened mIlk and samna. 
-[ali [awatf epithet for a cart-driver. 
oJ'h- [lIaawa or [alaawa In pi -aatl rise in pay. incre-
ment. 
11 [lIaawa [ala Iprepl in addition to. [alaawa [ala kida 
moreover. 
~ 
,laliyy Inl Most High One (epithet of God). 
..s~ [illeewi ladj mvarl /slang} higher. upper. 
frc-{abalja 1-[lIleewl the upper class. 
J\".. ma[aal,. ~aa!Jlb II-ma[aali /obsol} "" His Excel-
lency (a form of reference to a cabinet mmister). 
J~i fa[aali Ipl nl heights. highest regions. ra[aali 
n-nlll the the upper reaches of the Nile. fil-magd' 
ll-lIaah ft/- falaali glory to God in the highest. II ra[aali 
l-bl!Jaar the high seas. 
J'h- lalaall. fil-[alaali very high up. riI-bint iIIi 
manaxlr-ha fll-lalaali the girl with her nose in the air. 
riI-a~laar (aa!Jit ft/-[alaali prices shot sky-high. 
-!.l.; talaala I see J' t. .:.. 
~ lalla Ivt/la to make high(er). make tall(er).[allu 
lmaara they put up a building. Ib to raise (off the 
ground). r.alleet-u !Ja{{eet-u [ala r-raffll-foljaani I put it 
598 
up on the top shelf. 2 to make superior. improve. 
bl-y[allu guudlt 11- rilltaag they are improving the quali-
ty of production. 3 to raise statistically or quantitively. 
[awzlin m[alli nisblt iI- falyaaf I~-~ina[iyya we want to 
increase the proportion of synthetic fibres. 4 to make 
loud(er). ma-t[allli-j !Jlss-ak don't raise your voice! 
[alleet ir-radyu I turned up the radio. - Ivi! S to gain 
height. fi{-{ayyaara [alllt the plane mounted into the 
sky. fir-m!a [alllt the feather wafted up high. lI[al/l 
s~oo! (to a kite (bird». 
Ja;1 rlt[alla IVII passive of [alia. -Iva mit[alli. 
Jl.;1 flt[aala IVII to act high and mighty. fll-mudlir 
bi-yit[aali [ala l-muwagafim the manager lords it over 
the employees. -vn ta[aali; ava mit[aali. 
Jl.; ta[aala 2: fallaal! sub!Jaan-u wa-ta[aala God. 
praised and exalted IS He. 
J...;-I flSta[la Ivtl I to consider (too) high. tall. loud 
etc. 2 to select for height. tallness. loudness etc. - Ivil 
3 /naut/ to heave short. 4 to act high and mighty. -vn 
fisti[la; ava mista[li. 
j ~ r t. see j ~ oj t. 
I ~ r t. 
.JwJ. [amd I Inl intent. deliberateness. riI-mawtfuu[ 
!J~al kida mm yeer [amd the affair happened just like 
that without any intention. 2 ladj invarl deliberate. 
fil-ljatl,l-[amd fust degree murder. 3 ladvl deliberate-
ly. kasarit-u [amd' klda she broke It mtentionally. 
11 [amdan ladvl deliberately. ma['iuul finn; faksar-u 
[amdan kida is it conceivable that I should break it on 
purpose just hke that? 
o.JwJ. [umda I In pi [umadl headman of a village and 
its dependencies. mayor. 2/adj mvarl placid. carefree. 
raxuu-k da raagil[umda that brother of yours lives in a 
world of his own! 
~.JwJ. [umudiyya Inl area of JUrisdiction of an [umda. 
fintlxabaat Il-[umudlyya mayoral elections. 
~w. [Imaad I Inl I male given name. 2 (faarl[) 
[Imaad id-dlln Emad cd-Din Street. a major thorough-
fare running through north-central Cairo from Twenty-
sixth of July Street to Bab el-Hadid Square. 
.~w. [imaada Inl deanship. position of a dean. 
~.,..~ .~y>S- [amuud 
In 
pi [awamiid. 
[imdaan, 
ra[mldal I post. pillar. column. shaft. [amuud iI-
ma{aaft fireman's pole. [amuud Id-dmkslyoon /auto} 
steering column. [amuud iI-kirdaan /auto} transmis-
sion shaft. [amuud Id-daffa /naut} rudder stock. 
lI[amuud nuur lamp-post. - fll-[amuud iI-faqrl the 

spinal column. -kabriit iI-lamuud raw sulphur. 
2 column of print. 3 winding stem (of a watch or clock). 
.~".~ •• ~~ lamuuda In/[rurl Ilail. 
IS~"'~ 'IS~~ lamuudiladj/perpendicular, vertical. 
~ 
lamiid In pllumadal I [aeadl dean. lamiid il-
(alaba dean of students. IIlamiid is-silk id-diblumaasi 
the doyen of the Diplomatic Corps. 2 [mill brigadier-
general. lamiid baljri commodore. lamiid {ayyaar 
air-commodore. 
..I.o~ laamid' bil-laamid ladvl I in order to spite or 
upset. mif Ij-aruulj bil-laamid fiik I am not,going to go 
to spite you. 2 contrarily. dayman yilmil bil-laamid he 
always acts contrarily. 
~I f'itlammidi Ivtl to do (s.th.) intentionally. 
bi-yitlammidu taf'xiir gawabaat-i they deliberately de-
lay my letters. -ava mitlammid. 
..I.o\..; talaamud f Inl verticality, perpendicularity. 
..I.ol..:;.. mitlaamidf ladj '1 perpendicular, at right 
angles. 
..I.,';S.I f'iltamadf Ivt/l to endorse, approve, accept as 
valid. f'il-mudiir iltamad iI- f'i~alaat the director en-
dorsed the receipts. tawqiil mUltamad an approved 
signature. 
f'i~-~llUra di ma-tultamad-j' fil-maljkama 
this copy is not admissible in court. 2 to allocate (a sum 
of money). f'iltamadu talatt alaaf gineeh Iicf.-cf.aljaaya 
they allocated three thousand pounds for the victims. 
3 to patent. II bu~/a mliltamada a standard compass. 
-Ithe literary passive form is found in all senses/. -vn 
f'illimaad; ava mUltamid; pva mUltamad. 
~ f'iltamad lala to rely on. depend on. Ij-altimid lala 
kilmit Ijacf.rit-ak I shall rely on your word. Sir. 
riI-musiiqa t-ta~wiriyya fiI-baraamig bi-tiltimid lala 
I-mawcf.uulllafs-li the background music for the prog-
rammes depends on the subject itself. f'iltamadna lala 
lIaalr we have put our trust in God. II rilli yiltimid 
laleeku yiltimid lala lIaah he who depends on you 
(might as well) depend on God"" you are completely 
unreliahle. 
~~ I f'iltimaad In pi -aatl I endorsement. II f'awraalf 
iltimaad letters of credence (e.g .. of a diplomat). 
2 allocation. 3 patent. 
z ~ i" t 
~w. limaad2 Inl baptism. 
.:,I..I...ow malmidaan: yuljanna I-malmidaall John the 
Baptist. 
JI..I...ow malmidaani I ladj °1 [Chrl Baptist. riI-kiniisa 
I-ma;;midaniyya the Baptist Church. 2 In *1 a Baptist. 
~~"..... malmudiyya 
Inl 
[Chrl 
baptism. 
gum; 
malmudiyya font. 
599 
. 
~ lammid Ivtl [Chrl to baptize. -vn talmiid; ava 
milammid; pva mUlammad. 
~I f'itlammid2 Ivil [Chrl to be baptized. - iva 
mitlammid. 
Nt 
~ limir (a) Ivil I to prosper, thrive. biyut-hum 
limrit bald iI-ljarb they did well after the war .11 dayman 
laamir"" may your house always be prosperous (said to 
a host after eating or drinking). 2 to become inhahited, 
be built up. klill-a-ha sana wi-tneen wi-man{ilfit 
iI-haram tilmar wi-tiblfa zayy; ma~r in no more than a 
couple of years the Pyramids area will be built up and 
will have become just like Cairo. 3 to be held (of a 
muulid). muulid is-sayyida Ija-yilmar min yoom 
f'arbaltaajar the muulid of the Sayyida (Zaynab) will 
he held from the fourteenth. f'eeh iI-mawaalid iIIi 
lamraana dilwalfti what mawaalid are being celebrated 
at the moment? -vn lamaraan, lamaar; ava laamir, 
lamraall. 
;1..&. lamaar Inl I prosperity. II rabb-i-na yigcal-u 
lamaar may Our Lord make it (i.e. your house) 
prosperous (said on refusing an offer offood or to one's 
host after eating). -ma-fii-j beeni w-beenu lamaar we 
are not on good terms. 28 development, civilization. 
2b built-up area, inhabited area. riI-ljitta di lamaarthis 
part is full of buildings. 
.:,I~ lamraan ladj '1 I prosperous. 28 developed, 
civilized. 2b populated, inhabited. 38 filled, charged, 
loaded. 3b drunk, stoned. high. 4 in good condition. 
.~ lamra In pi -aatl overhaul, major repair job. 
IS ~ lamri: balalj lamri dates of an elongated yellow 
type, tough in consistency. 
~ lumr In pi f'almaar/life span, age. {uullUmr-i all 
my life long. lumr-ak kaam how old are you? ma-fii-j 
f'agmal minnu I-kull in-naas wi-I-kull iI- f'almaar there's 
nothing better for all people of all ages. tiblfa mistami 
lan lumr-ak law xaragt your life won't be worth living if 
you go out! II bald; lumr; {awiil (I) after a long life! 
(conventional exclamation to one who mentions his 
own death). (2) after a very long time. - riI-lumr; 
waaljid wir-rabb; waaljid ... one's destiny is decreed by 
God (said to abate fear of death). - f'iddii-ni lumr; 
wi-rmii-ni I-baljr [provl (grant me a long life and you 
can throw me in the sea) ... you can do as you like if you 
can control the outcome. 
~ lumr- ma- modal of absolute negation. lumr-i m-
. adaxxin I never smoke. lumr-i-na ma-bilna b-f'azyad 
min it-tasliira we have never sold at higher than the 

fixed price. fik-kalaam da lumr-u ma-yitCjaal such a 
thing should never be said. fik-kasallumr-u ma-ygiib 
filuus being lazy never makes money. 
• rs- lumra Inl {lsI] abbreviated form of the pilgrim-
age ceremonies which may be performed at any time of 
the year. 
.:.,Irs- lumraan Inl upkeep, maintenance. 
rs- lumar Iprop nl male given name. lIya lumar 
{women in trad soc] exclamation of contempt, as in 
mustawaa-ha da feeh ya lumar "" pooh! where does she 
come from?! 
.)W- limaara In pi -aat, lamaayirl 1 apartment build-
ing, block of flats. 2 construction, building and 
architecture. 
qism 
i/-limaara 
the 
Architecture 
Department. 
loS)\-. milmaari ladj *1 relating to building and 
architecture. muhandis m1lmaan architect. IIdiraal 
milmaari linear measure equal to 0.75 metres. 
~ lam mar Ivtl 18 to cause to prosper. rabb-i-na 
Ylammar beet-ak bi-barakit in-nabi may Our Lord 
make your house prosper with the Prophet's blessing! 
(expression of gratitude). Ib to build up, develop for 
habitation. laazim yilammaru man[iCjit iI-qanaal bald 
iI-l:Jarb they have to build up the Canal area after the 
war. 2 to repair. naadir dilwaCjti iii Y1lraf yilammar 
lS-sawaaCji rare nowadays is someone who knows how 
to repair water-wheels. kawaliin nilammar {vendor's 
cry] we repair locks! 3 to charge, load, fill (s.th.) with 
(fuel). bl-tlammar t1-babuur gaaz she fills the stove 
with paraffin. bunduCjlyya mlammara a loaded rifle. 
IIlammar i[-[aasa to get loaded, get stoned. -giyuub-u 
mlammara he's loaded with money. -ruzz' mlammar 
baked rice pudding with nuts and raisins. - Ivil 4 to 
last, stay in good condition. laazim tiraali I-larablyya 
la!aan tilammar you must see that the car is looked 
after so that it lasts. 5 {agric] to plant (a crop). 
l:Ja-tlammar feeh is-sanaa-di what are you going to 
plant this year? -vn talmiir; ava/pva milammar. 
• ~ 
talmiira linst n, pi -aatl 1 a fill, sufficient fuel to 
fill a stove or the like once. 2 sufficient tobacco or 
hashish for one smoke. 
.r"-' milammar 
ladj 
*1 
1 long-lived. 
2 {hort] 
perennial. 
;"'1 fitlammar Ivil 1 passive of lammar. 2 to get 
high, get stoned (on, e.g., alcohol or drugs). -iva 
mitlammar. 
~I fistalmar Ivtl to occupy, colonize. -vn 
fistilmaar; 
ava 
mtlStalmir, 
mistalmar; 
pva 
mustalmar, mistalmar. 
600 
)L...::....I fistilmaar Inl colonialism. 
1oS)L...::....1 fistilmaari ladjl colonial. 
~ 
mustalmir In "'I colonialist. 
.~ 
mustalmara 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 {pol] 
colony . 
2 housing and social development (e.g., for the em-
ployees of a company). 
.; r t. 
~ 
lama! Inl blear-eyedness. 
~i falma! ladj, fern lamia, pllumfl purblind, 
dim-sighted.lIlala ma titkal:Jl:Jal il-lam!a ykuun is-suuCj 
xirib {prov] by the time a dim-sighted woman has 
painted her eyes the market is over (of one who is too 
slow to snap up an opportunity). 
V'" i t. 
u"'w-
luma~ Inl 1 sandman's dust, sleepy dust. 
2 purulent discharge from the eyes. 
~ 
lamma~ Ivil to produce a discharge (of the 
eyes). IIwaad milamma~ an oaf. -vn talmi~; ava 
milamma~. 
Jit. 
~ 
lumCj, lumq r In pi falmaaq 1/ depth. 
~ 
lamiiq r ladjl deep. !uluur lamiiq profound 
feeling. 
~i falmaq lell deeper/deepest. 
';"'1 fitlammaq Ivil to go deeply, become deeply in-
volved. filii ¥aawi dars' b-yitlammaq fil-mawquul the 
one who is keen to study goes deeply into the subject. 
-vn talammuq; ava mttlammaq, mutalammiq. 
Jrt. 
~ 
lamal i (i) Ivtl 1 to do. l:Ja-tilmil feeh bil-filuus di 
what will you do with this money? lamalna fiik feeh 
what have we done to you? IIlamal iIIi ma-yitlimil to do 
the impossible. -lamfll wl-sawwa to perform great ex-
ploits, do wonders, as in wi-Cjalad yiCjuul lamalt' 
w-sawweet wi-mif laarif feeh and he went on saying 
how he'd done this, that and I don't know what else . 
28 to make, manufacture, prepare. fit-tarzi lamal-Ii 
I-badla f-yomeen the tailor made me the suit in two 
days. fif- faCjfaa~ malmuula mig-giriid the crates are 
made of palm-stalk. fi/-l:Jaraami lamal fatl:Ja fil-l:Jee[a 
daxal minha the thief made a hole in the wall through 
which he entered. filmil-Ii kubbaayit lamuun make me 
a glass of lemonade. 2b to have made, have manufac-
tured, have prepared.lamalt' fustaan land if-xayyaa[a 
iii gambiina I had a dress made by the dressmaker near 
us. lamalt' karaasi gdiida Ii~-~aloon I had new chairs 

made for the sitting room. 3 to create, devise. miin 
lamal iI-qi[la I-musiqiyya di who wrote this piece of 
music? rismay-Ii bass illi lamal iI-qanuun da ymaar 
excuse me (for saying so), but the person who drew up 
this law is an ass. 4 to form. ril-c;utn; lamallooz the 
cott~m formed bolls. rig-gary; lamal midda the wound 
turned septic. Sa to fix, see to. wi-yayaat-ik rilmili 
zuraar iI-c;amii~ please, would you fix the shirt button? 
xalli s-sabbaak yiigi yilmil is-sifoon get the plumber to 
come and see to the cistern. Sb to have fixed or seen to. 
dayman b-almil larabiyyit-i fil-rajans I always have 
my car fixed at the dealer's. 6 to cause. ril-ciyaal 
lamliin dawfa the children are making a racket. 
rumbuubit iI-butagaaz lamalit yariic;a the butane gas 
cylinder caused a fire. lamalu mafaakil fi-kull; yitta 
rayuu-ha they made problems wherever they went. 7 to 
mount. put on. kuUi rusbuUl tilmil yafla every week 
she throws a party. rimta ya-tilmilu masrayiyyit raaxir 
is-sana when are you going to put on the end-of-year 
play? 8a to make into, turn into. xudi t-tiin da lmilii 
marabba take these figs and make them into jam. 8b to 
cause to be. lamal-ni mudiir lala kull if1irka he made 
me director of the whole company. 8c to make (o.s.) 
out to be. lamalit (nafs-a-ha) labii{a she played the 
fool.lamalt; (nafs-i) naayim I pretended to be asleep. 
9 to commit. lamalt; znuub kitiir I committed mlny 
sins. lamal is-sabla w-dimmit-ha he left no sin uncom-
mitted. 10 to yield. ril-rashum lamalit sitta fil-miyya 
the shares realized six percent. riI-faddaan lamal 
xamas c;ana[iir c;u[n the feddan yielded five c;in[aar of 
cotton. II to effect. lamalt; sUlfa mil-bank I arranged 
a loan from the bank. ri~-~aabi{ lamal-Ii mayqar the 
officer made out a charge against me. 12 to assign, 
designate. b-almil-Iaha lafara saar fil-rusbuUl I put 
ten piastres aside for her a week. riI-mudarris laamil 
lina saala liI-muragla the teacher is giving us an hour 
for revision.lllamal yisaab see Yisaab. 13a to perform, 
carry out. mumkin ticmil-Ii xidma could you do me a 
service? rid-duktoor da b-yilmil iI-m~raan iI-racwar 
bass 
that 
doctor 
only 
does 
appendectomies. 
II ril-larabiyya b-tilmil xamsiin kiilu fig-galoon the car 
does fifty kilometres to the gallon. 13b to have per-
formed, have carried out. lamalta lamaliyya I had an 
operation. - Ivil 14 to behave, act. bi-yilmil zayy 
in-naas ig-gahala tamaam he acts just like an ignor-
amus. y-almil bi-kalaam-ak I'll do as you say. rilli 
b-yilmil bi-yilmil bi-r~/-u {prov] people act in all 
things according to their background.llyilmil zayy in-
naas {euphem] to go to the lavatory. IS to work. camal 
601 
bi-rakl-u he worked for his food. 16 to become.lamal 
rariis gumhuriyya he became President of the Repub-
lic. lamal-Iaha rdbb; w-zoog wi-raxx; kamaan he be-
came to her a father, husband and brother as well. -vn 
camal, limaala, camalaan; ava caamil; pva malmuul. 
lIlamal zayy to become like. riI-laya xallaa-ha camalit 
zayy iI-c~aaya illness made her as thin as a stick. 
manaxiir-u camla zayy; munc;aar iI-ruraab his nose 
looks like a crow's beak. 
j..&. camal] 
In! 
I black 
magic, 
sorcery. 
macmul-Iuhum camal a spell has been cast against 
them. - Ipl racmaall 2 act, action. gadwal racmaai 
agenda. rahamm; racmaal iI-yigg i/-riyraam the most 
important of the acts of pilgrimage is the putting on of 
the pilgrim dress. II wil-cama/or wi-reeh iI-camal what's 
to be done? -sifr iI-racmaal {Chr] the Acts of the 
Apostles. 3 work, job of work. laazim ninanam iI-
camal we have to organize the work. camal-u reeh 
what's his job? ralmaal ridariyya administrative jobs. 
racmaalfafawiyya w-tayririyya oral and written work. 
racmaal is-sana {aead] (marks given for) the year's 
classwork. 4 operation, 'manoeuvre. racmaal yarbiyya 
military operations. 5 feat, exploit. camal xaaric; a 
breakthrough. -
racmaal Ipl nl 6 business. raagil 
ralmaal a businessman. candi ralmaal kitiir fi-m~r 
I've a lot of business to do in Egypt. 
J..&. camali ladj! practical. tatbiic; camali practical 
application. 
Jot&. caamili Inl I Ipl cummaall labourer, worker. 
2 f Ipl caamiliinl employee. Ilfuruun iI-caamiliin per-
sonnel 
department. 
3 Ipl 
cawaamill 
3a factor. 
rahamm a caamil bin-nisbaa-Ii z-zaman the most im-
portant factor as far as I'm concerned is the time. 
3b agent. cawaamil muraksida oxidizing agents. 
-/adj ·/4 f active, diligent. riI-racqaar iI-caamiliin the 
active members. 
Jt.:&. cummaali ladj *1 pertaining to labour. c;aqaaya 
cummaliyya labour issues. 
i.I..&. camla In pllamaayill deed, act (usually bad). 
camalta camla ma-hiyyaa1Ia[iiflt I did something that 
was not nice. leeh iI-camaayil di why this (bad) be-
haviour? miskuu f-camlit-u they caught him in the act, 
they caught him redhanded. 
i.I..&. cumla In pi -aatl currency, money. riI-cumla~­
~acba hard currency. 
~ 
camaliyya In pi -aatl I process, operation. 
camaliyya ~naciyya an industrial process. lamaliyyaat 
[ibaaca printing processes. II ril-camaliyya g-ginsiyya 
the sexual act. 2 surgical operation. candaha qurya 

layza lamaliyya she has an ulcer that needs operating 
on. lamalt' talat lamaltyyaat I had three operations. 
3 matter, business. di lamaliyya basii[a this is a simple 
matter. lamaliyyit it-tadriis di mUljrlfa this teaching 
business is foul. 4 work done. kull' maktab bi-yiblat 
il-lamaliyya I-qism II-muragla each office sends the 
completed work to the checking department. 
..Jw. limaala Inl employment. llmaala kamla full 
employment. 
~ ~ lumuula I In pi -aatl commissIOn, percentage. 
fi/-muntigiin bi-Ylddu lumuula lil-bayyaliin the pro-
ducers give a commission to the salesmen. fi/-bank' 
b-yaaxud lumuula lala kull' sulfa the bank takes a 
commission on every loan. 2 ladi invarl well-made by a 
fine craftsman (particularly of furniture). karaasi 
lumuula chairs fashioned by a master carpenter. 
~ 
lam ill In pllumalal 1 client, customer. 2 agent. 
J~ lammaa/l Ifem lammaala, pllammaliinl mod-
al of continuation. ljalb-i lammaal yllaktik my heart 
keeps on ticking. fil-balaawi lammaala titbaddif 
laleena disasters keep on befalling us. lammalim 
yijtayalu they keep on working. lammaal-ak tub~ud 
lidaan il-ljamb you contmue to harvest the wheat 
stalks. naazillal-balla lammaal yaakul he's busy stuf-
fing himself from the pot. 2 ladv/: lammaallala ba[[aal 
incessantly and to no purpose, as in bi-yaakullammaal 
lala ba[[aal he eats all the time, whether hungry or not. 
J...... malmal In pi malaamt!1 I laboratory. II mal mal 
tafriix incubator for chicks. 2 factory, workshop. 
J-.;I flllamal Ivil passIve of lamal. - iva mlllimil. 
J-.;I fmlamal = fitlamal. -iva minllmil. 
~ 
lammt! Ivil to suppurate, produce pus. fldhin-ha 
marham lamma tlammil put ointment on it until it 
comes to a head. - vn lalmit!; ava milammil. 
J.~ laamil 2 Ivtl I to treat, deal with. ma-yilraf-f' 
yilaamil m-llaas he doesn't know how to treat people. 
II bi-YGaamll rabb-i-na he has principles. ft!lt bl-Ylaamll 
bi-Ylaamil rabb-i-na "" do unto others as you would do 
unto God .. 2 to transact business with. b-alaamil 
tuggaar 19-9umla I deal with the wholesale merchants. 
mUlamlll-u zayy id-dahab he is scrupulously honest, he 
pays on the nail. -vn mUlamla; ava milaamil. 
-.1..L... mUlamla Inl 1 treatment. mUlamlaxaNa special 
treatment. 
2 hard 
cash, 
currency. 
- Ipl 
-aatl 
3 transaction. flf-firka liiha mUlamlaat fil-xaarig the 
company has dealings abroad. 
J.I...;I fitlaamil Ivil 1 to manage, conduct oneself (in 
relation to another). balja mij larfa titlamli mala 1-
xaddaama you mean you can't cope with the maid? 
602 
. 
fil-muwagaf laazim yilraf yitlaamil mala g-gumhuur 
the official has to know how to deal with the public. 2 to 
transact business. kaanit in-naas bi-titlaamil bi/-
mubadla people used to do business by barter. 
bi-yitlaamil mala n-naas bij-farafhis word is his bond. 
- vn lalaamul; ava mitlaamt!. 
J-;-I flstalmil Ivtl to use, employ. bi-nistalmil 
fanwaal kitiir min il-waralj we use many kinds of pap-
er. -Ithe literary passive form occurs in unelevated 
speechl fil-yazaat istulmilat fil-barb gases were used in 
the war. - vn fistilmaal; ava mustalmil; avalpva 
mistalmil; pva mustalmal. 
J~I fistilmaal In pi -aatl I use. kull" baaga Iiiha 
stilmaal mUlayyan everything has a particular use. 
2 linguistic usage. 
~ 
mustalmal' 
ladil 
used, 
second-hand. 
larabiyyaat muslalmala used cars. 
J Jrt 
,j~ limlaaq r In pllamaaliqal gIant. 
lut 
~ lamm 1 (i, u) 1 Ivtl to pervade, prevail ~)Ver. 2/vil 
to become general or prevalent or common, spread, 
prevail. fi/-balwa bi-tlimm' wir-rabma bi-txu~~ [prav] 
calamities overtake (everyone) but acts of mercy are 
only enjoyed by the few. - vn lamamaall, c;umuum; ava 
laamim. 
i ~ lumuum 
In! 
generality. 
fil-lidda 
iii 
b-yistalmiluu-ha lumuum t!-kahrabafiyya the equip-
ment which the general run of electricians use. IIlal-
lumuum or lala I-lumuum anyway, in any case, as in 
lal-lumuum ma-fit-f daali lil-munalifa dilwaljti any-
way, there is no point in arguing now. 
11 
lumuuman 
lad vI 
(I) generally, 
in 
gencral. 
ba-nitkallim lumuuman wi-bit-tafa~iil we will speak 
generally and in detail. (2) generally, usually. fl(-[alaba 
lumuuman bi-ygitbu k-kutub min il-madrasa nafs-a-ha 
the students generally get the books from the school 
itself. 
..s"~ lumuumi I/adi *1 general, usual, main. 
maxzan lumuumi general warehouse. fi/-baab il-
lumuumi the public entrance. faaril lumuumi main 
road .. 2 ladvl generally, in the usual way. fis-siluuk iii 
gayya lumuumi lil-mutoor the wires that come in the 
normal way to the motor. 
;~ laam I, lamm 2, laamm ladi *1 I general, overall. 
fil-qiyaada I-lamma general headquarters. ril-qaafid 
i/-laamm the Commander-in-Chief. fil-yaalib il-laam 
in most cases. 2 public. ril-ma~/aba il-lamma the public 

interest. mubaqra c:amma public lecture. fil-qi(aac: il-
c:aamm the public sector (of the economy). 
":1&. c:amma I, c:aamma Inl generality. c:ammit if-fac:b 
the general public. xalla t-tac:liim 1iI-c:amma bac:di ma 
kaan liI-x~~a he made education available to everyone 
after it had been only for the privileged. 
;1&. c:ammi ladj * and pi c:awaamml illiterate. 
I'ir-raagil il-c:ammi wil-mutac:allim the illiterate man 
and the educated. II (l'iI-lura) I-c:ammiyya the vernacu-
lar language. 
rl.,J1 l'iI-c:awaamm Ipl nl the common people. 
~ i I'ac:amm lell I more/mo~t general. 2 morelmost 
widespread. 
~ c:ammim 1 Ivtl to propagate, make widespread. 
-vn tac:miim; avalpva mic:ammim. 
~I I'itc:ammim 1 Ivil I to be or become propagated, 
become or be made widespread. l'iI-fikra tc:ammimit 
the idea gained currency. 2 to be or become general-
ized. -iva mitc:ammim. 
Z ri" t 
~ c:amm .Ilnlla Ipl I'ac:maaml paternal uncle. Ib title 
of, and form of address and reference to, a man treated 
as an uncle. ma-tljulii-Jlu ya c:amm-i - I'inti ba-tkabbarii 
ljabl iI-l'awaan don't call him 'Uncle'; you'll make him 
old before his time! 2a respectful title o.f, and form of 
address and reference to, a man (usually) older than the 
speaker and of the lower social classes. fil-ljuu(a 
b-kaam ya c:amm how much are your tomatoes, Uncle? 
fUft" c:ammi makki I-bawwaab have you seen Uncle 
Makki the doorman about? 2b informal term of 
address to a male"" mate, buddy. c:ala feen ya c:amm 
where to, mate? da kalaam ya c:amm is that any way to 
behave, buddy? 
~ c:amma Z In pi -aatl paternal aunt. 
3 ri" t 
~ c:imma In pi c:imaml I headgear consisting of a 
skullcap or tarbush wound around with a length of fine 
white cotton cloth to form a turban (see PI.F, 12). 
Iitikabbar c:immit-lla you make us proud. 2 moulded 
black felt hat worn by Coptic clergy. IIba-yilbis iI-
c:imma he is going to be ordained. 
4.-1...&. c:imaama In pi c:amaayiml turban. 
~ c:ammiml Ivlll to make (a c:imma) by winding a 
white cloth around a skullcap or tarbush. 2 to dress 
(s.o.) in a c:imma. -vn tac:miim; avalpva mic:ammim. 
~I I'itc:ammim] Ivil to put on a turban. - ava 
mitc:ammim. 
603 
-.J.Jrt 
J~I&. c:amnawwilladv/last year. I'awwil c:amnawwil 
the year before last. 
~rt 
~ 
c:imi (i) Ivil to become blind. II sikirlamma c:imi he 
got blind drunk. - vn c:ama; ava c:amyaan. 
~ 
c:ama 1 (i) Ivtl to blind. rabb-i-na yihdii-k wi-yic:mi 
c:een-ak c:an iI-baraam God guide you and close your 
eyes to evil. I'id-duxxaan iI-ljurayyib yic:mi {prov] "" 
smoke gets in your eyes (objectivity is impossible when 
one's emotions are involved). - vn c:amayaan; ava 
c:aami; pva mac:mi. 
~ 
c:ama] Inl blindness. II l'iI-c:ama ya ~adr {prov] 
blindness, 0 moon! (said of one who is blind to the 
radiantly obvious). -ma-yic:raf-J is-sama mil-c:ama 
{prov] "" he can't tell black from white. -ba-taxud-ni 
c:ala c:amaa-ya are you going to take advantage of my 
ignorance? -bilt-u I-c:ama I-I'azralj he's stony broke. 
.J~ c:amyaan ladj *1 I blind. 2 ignorant, unaware. 
- ladv/3 dazed. daxal ii-beet c:amyaan he went into the 
house not knowing where he was. 
J~ c:imyaani ladvl blindly, without looking, with-
out knowing. 
~i I'ac:ma ladj, fern c:amya, c:amyaal'r, pi c:umy, 
c:imyaanl blind. (aac:a c:amyaal' blind obedience. II I'eef 
raraq iI-l'ac:ma ljaalljuffit c:iyuun {prov] what could a 
blind man want more than a basketful of eyes? (said 
when something longed for is offered). -xamsa saar 
c:umy a measly five piastres. talaata gneeh c:umy a meas-
ly three pounds. 
..,...,1 I'itc:ama Ivil passive of c:ama. -iva mitc:imi. 
~I..;I I'itc:aama Ivill to pretend to be blind. 2 to pre-
tend not to notice, turn a blind eye. -ava mitc:aami. 
..,-;-1 I'istac:ma Ivtll to select for blindness. 2 to con-
sider (too) weak sighted. - Ivi/3 to feign blindness, act 
like a blind man. - ava mistac:mi. 
.J~rt 
.,.,.s- c:amyu Inl style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). 
.Jt 
.:r c:an Iw pron suff: c:anni, c:annak, c:annik, 
lannu, c:anhalc:annaha, c:annalc:annina, c:anku(m)1 
c:snnuku(m), c:anhuml c:annuhuml preposition indicat-
ing I object of concern. kitaab c:an faransa a book 
about France. c:andak I'ayyi fikra c:an iI-l'iwaq do you 
have any idea about the rooms? kalam-kum c:an 
miraat-i laazim yintihi your gossip about my wife must 

stop. 2 distance or separation. f'inta ljaalid biliid lanni 
leeh why are you sitting apart from me? kaanit tayha 
lan baal-i it had slipped my mind. f'ahu nzaay lanni 
well. he's off my back! f'ana m-axrugj' lan (OOl-ak 
f'abadan I'll never disobey you. IIxud lannu Jjan(a 
relieve him of the bag! take the bag off him! - (xalli or 
haat) lannak let me take that for you. let me do that for 
you. 3 comparative relationship. f'iI-lilba di kbiira lan 
di this box is larger than that. mif ya-traxxa~-ha lan 
kidaJwayya won't you make it a bit cheaper than that? 
riI-waram bi-yxiff' yoom lan yoom the swelling gets 
better every day. 4 basis. source. authority. lan miin 
ik-kalaam da on whose authority is that said? maktuub 
lan yadd' waayid muyaami written under the hand of a 
lawyer. f'ana wafiljt· lan f'iqtinaal I agreed out of con-
viction. ma-b-yikkallimuuj lan lilm they don't speak 
from actual knowledge. IIlan f'izn-ak by your leave. 
-lan (ariilj by way of. via. 5 location in relation to a 
fixed point. lan Jimaal-u waayid wi-lan yimiin-u 
waayid taani on his left there's one and on his right 
there's another. 
~ wi-lanha wi- thereupon. right then. as in Jatam-ni 
ljumt' raadid lalee fa-zilil balja w-lanha w-raay rafid-
ni he insulted me so I answered him back; then he got 
offended and fired me then and there. -lan(nu) ma-.. 
who the hell cares if (he) does not .... as in lannak 
ma-ruyt who the hell cares if you don't go? 
y.Jt 
~ 
linab I/coll nl la grape(s). linab id-diib (or it-
tallab) gooseberries. Ib grape vine. waraq linab vine 
leaves. 2 ladj invar/luscious. 
~ linaba lunit n. pi -aatll a grape. 2 a vine . 
.... ~ linnaab Icoll nl jujube(s). 
~~ linnaaba lunit n. pi -aatl a jujube. 
.;.~ linnaabi ladj invarl reddish-brown. 
I,;Y.Jt 
.r.s- lanbar J, lam bar J Inl ambergris (used in particu-
lar as an aphrodisiac). 
..s.r.s- lanbari In pllanabral pigeon of a reddish-
brown breed. 
2(,;Y.Jt) 
.r.s- lanbar 2 , lambar 2 <T am bar> In pllanaabirl 
I large hall or shed (as in a factory or works). 2 hospital 
ward. 3 hold (of a ship). IIlambar ir-rukkaab [nautJ 
steerage. 4 block (as in a barracks or prison). 
.r.s- lam bar 3: Jambar wi-lambar see Jambar 4 • 
604 
u • .J t 
.;..:...;1 f'itlannit Ivil to be stubborn. be difficult. -ava 
mitlannit. 
~ 
talannut Inl pig-headedness. stubbornness. 
Y u.J t 
~ 
lantabli Iprop nl [obsolJ I brand name for a type 
of water-pipe tobacco. 2 (any type of) milassil. 
,;u.Jt 
j.;s. lantar Iprop nl Antar (in full. lantar ibn' 
Jaddaad). a hero of folk epic. y-almil lamaayil 
ma-lama/-haaJ lantar I shall do deeds such as even 
Antar never did! I Shilll amaze you all! 
..s? lantari Inl [rur, obsolJ vest similar to a sideeri 
(q. v.) with long tight sleeves. 
JU.Jt 
? 
lantallvtl to complicate. ma-tlanta/-haaj don't 
complicate matters! -vn lantala; ava/pva milantal. 
~ 
lantiilln pllanatlal veteran. 
,;[..Jt 
~ 
langar Ivtl to set (a hat) at an angle on the side of 
one's head. -vn langara; ava/pva milangar. 
,r,WU1 f'itlangar Ivil passive of langar. - iva mitlangar. 
o[..Jt 
~ 
langaha Inl conceit. self-importance. 
~ 
langahiyya = langaha. 
~I f'itlangah Ivil to act in a conceited manner, play 
the big-shot. - ava mitlangah. 
I ~.J t 
~ land preposition indicating 1 vicinity. ya-ninzil 
land iI-maba{(a we'll /1et out at the station. daxalna 
land 'Jibbaak it-tazaakir we went in by the ticket office. 
II f'istanna landak stay where you are! -landak stop 
what you're'doing! hold it! 2 place of residence. work 
or business. ya-yit¥adda landina bukra he is going to 
have lunch at our house tomorrow. lissa gayy' min land 
id-duktoor (I've) just come from the doctor·s. ya-tlaaqi 
zabaadi land' f'ayy' baljljaal you can get yoghurt at any 
grocer·s. 3 (approximate) time. land iI-fagr around 
dawn. land iI-Iuzuum when necessary. land iI-
f'azamaat in times of crisis. 4 accidentality. landu rigl' 
f'a{Wal mit-tanya he has one leg longer than the other. 
landaha I-qalb she has a bad heart. landi ~daal I have 
a headache.landak kaam sana how old are you? landu 

fahreen he is two months old.landiftkra yilwa I've got 
a good idea. landuhum fagaaza they have a holiday. 
S ownership. landu lmarteen he owns two apartment 
buildings. 6 present possession. ma-landii-J fakka 
I don't have any change. landuku leef do you have any 
bread? kull-u land allaah ... God knows all about it and 
will reward me (said, e.g., in response to ingratitude). 
fiyna liina landu gneeh he owes us a pound. ma-Iak-Ji 
landi yaaga I don't owe you anything, I'm under no 
obligation to you. 7 opinion. huwwa landi zayy axuu-
ya I regard him as a brother. fana landi ma-ygii-Jxaa/~ 
faysan in my opinion it would be better for him not to 
come at all. fablfac{ iI-yalaalland allaah i(-(alaaq the 
most odious of the things God permits is divorce. 
ma-gab-fi yaaga min landu he added nothing of his 
own, he said nothing new. finla baqa ma-tgib-Ji min 
landak (now that things have calmed down) don't you 
start making trouble! 8 association, community. ftkra 
mif maqbuula land if-Jabaab an idea unacceptable to 
young people. dafn iI-mawta land it-raqbaa( Iii (ariiqa 
x~~a among the Copts there are particular burial cus-
toms.landinafil-balad ma-yadd i-Jbi-yilmil kida in the 
village I come from no one does that. 9 conformity. 
fana landi wald-i I abide by my promise. 
1 ~ iJ t 
xs. lanad, linid (i) Ivil to behave stubbornly. -vn 
lind; ava laanid. 
xs. lind Inl stubbornness, obstinacy. II bil-lindi ft-... 
out of spite towards, as in wi-baldeen bil-lind i ftyya 
bi-yyibb iI-binti di and whafs more, just to spite me, 
he's fallen in love with that girl. -laamil bil-lind he is 
acting perversely. 
..sxs. linadi ladj *1 obstinate, stubborn. 
.J.iS- laniid ladj ·1 stubborn. 
~~ laanid Ilvtl to oppose stubbornly. fiz-zaman 
milanid-ni nothing goes my way. 2 Ivil to act stubborn-
ly. (Uullumr-ak finla mlaanid kida you've always been 
stubborn. -vn linaad, milanda; ava milaanid. 
~I..;I fitlaanid Ivil I to be opposed stubbornly. 2 to 
oppose one another. -avaliva mitlaanid. 
yJ~iJt 
..,...Jxs. landaliib In pllanaadill nightingale. lI~abaay 
iI-landaliib ... the top of the morning to you! 
UiJt) 
Or lanza In pI -aatl she-goat. II bizz iI-lanza variety of 
white elongated grape. 
r 
lanaz (also fabu lanaz) Icoll nl stork(s). 
60S 
V' iJ t 
..,..;~ laanis In pllawaanisl spinster. 
Ih)"'iJt 
~ 
lu~ur In 
pllana~irl element, 
factor. 
ril-lana~ir iI-masfuula lan nagay-ha the factors re-
sponsible for her success. 
..s ~ 
lu~uri ladjl racial. na~ariyya lu~uriyya a 
racial theory. 
1 .J v'" iJ t 
i,rWl1 
fil-la~ara <Heb> Inl {Chr, Jud] Pentecost. 
jj,iJt 
o)w. lan(aza Inl arrogance, haughtiness. 
j)..;&. lan(uuz ladj pllana(iizl arrogant. 
jw;1 fitlan(az Ivil to behave in an arrogant or haughty 
fashion. -ava mitlantaz. 
iJtiJt 
~ 
lanlana Inl chain of transmission (of hadith or 
other moral traditions). 
..JiJt 
~ 
lunf Inl violence, force. 
+- laniif ladj *1 violent, severe. 
~ 
lannif Ivtl to rebuke severely. -vn talniif; ava/pva 
m~lannif. 
....i.:.U1 fitlannif Ivil to be severely rebuked. -iva 
mitlannif· 
JiJt 
~ linq Inl neck. c{arab-u f-linq-u b-sikkiina he stab-
bed him in the neck with a knife. gat-ak wagallinq-ak 
tabus] may your neck hurt! Illalee linq i raqaba ... he 
has a neck like an ox. -linq i linab a bunch of grapes . 
-linq iz-zirr small protruding piece of felt to which the 
tassel is sewn on a fez. 
~ lunuqr In pI ralnaaql neck. Illunuq ir-rayim 
{anat] the cervix. 
..;;~ laaniq Ivtl to embrace, clasp. -avalpva milaaniq. 
..;;1..;1 fitlaaniq Ivill to embrace one another. 2 to be 
embraced. -ava/iva mitlaaniq. 
..JIJiJt 
~~ linqaafa In pI -aatl I neck. lafaq-u min 
linqaaftt hiduum-u he grabbed hold of him by the collar 
of his clothes. 2 neck-pad (of a yoke). 
~.JJiJt 
..po lanquud In pllanaqiid/bunch, c1uster.lanaqiid 

[inab bunches of grapes. II faaxir zl-[anquud the last 
child born to a couple. faaxir il-[anquud sukkar 
ma[quud /prov] (the youngest child is like concen-
trated sugar) "" the youngest child is the darling of his 
parents. 
(y .!l.Jt) 
~ 
[ankab (also [ankab fldd' wi-rkab) Inl a game in 
which a child mounted on another's shoulders tries (by 
kicking) to topple others similarly mounted. 
.::.. ~ 
[ankabuut In pi -aatl spider. beet zl-[ankabuut 
spider's web. 
IJ.Jt 
oy [inwa Inl force, violence, constraint. 
11 [inwatan ladvl by force. 
2 J .J t 
see "'s.J t : ma[nawi 
.JJ.Jt 
,)y [inwaan 
(also 
[ilwaanJ) 
In 
pi [anawlinl 
1 address. fil-gawaab yin[irifmin [inwaan-u /prov] "" 
you can tell a book by its cover. 2a title (of a book). 
2b caption (under a picture). 2c headline. 
OJY [anWIn Ivtl 1 to address. mif ija-t[anwln ig-
gawaab aren't you going to address the letter? 2 to 
entitle. [an win Ik-karikateer bl-duun ta[liiq he cap-
tioned the cartoon 'No comment'. - vn [anwana; aval 
pva ml[anwin. 
OJ.,:...;I fll[anwin IVII 1 to be addressed. 2 to be enti-
tled. - iva mit[anwln. 
",S.Jt 
..r [ana r (i) Ivtl to mean. ya[ni feeh what does it 
mean? ma-fa[nii-Jijadd' biz-zaat I don't mean to refer 
to anyone in particular. - ava [aani; pva ma[ni. 
~ ya[ni particle signalling 1 the giving or requesting 
of clarification"" that's to say, that is, does that mean 
then (in a question). faawir [ala buqq-u ya[ni raayiij 
yityadda he gestured to his mouth, meaning (that he 
was) going to lunch. bl-flzn Illaah ya[ni God permit-
ting, that is. ya[ni ija-taaxud il-futubiis you'll take the 
bus, then? II wi- feeh ya[ni so what! as mfatamt zl-mudiir 
- wi- feeh ya[ni so I insulted the manager - so what! 
2 attempted clarification, when the speaker is groping 
for words "" y'know. bass' ya[ni kuma [aawiz 
fasfal-ak sufaal but, y'know, I wanted to ask you a 
question. 3 a noncommIttal response with implied re-
servation "" so-so, sort of. finta mabsuu{ hina - ya[ni 
'Are you content here?' 'So-so.' 
606 
:i.;l:&. [lnaaya 
Inl 
care, 
compassionate concern. 
fll-[inaaya bi{-{if/ baby care. bi-faq.l' [nayt-ak thanks to 
your care. ba~~-i-li b-[een il-[inaaya he looked at me 
compassionately. 
"jAA ma[na (also ma[nitJ m constr) In pi ma[aanil 
meaning, signifIcance. ma[naa-ha (or ma[nit-ha) feeh 
di what does this mean? fld-dimuu[ di ma[naa-ha (or 
ma[nit-ha) finntk xayfa these tears mean that you're 
afraid. II bl-ma[na finn r which is to say that, as in 
bi-ma[na finn' flza ma-get-J is-saa[a sab[a tiqdar 
tirawwaij in other words, if I don't come at seven, you 
can go home. -bi-ma[na faaxar in other words. 
- bi-ma[na k-kzlma in the full meaningofthe word, as in 
da raagil bi-ma[na k-kilma he's a real man. - bi-ma[na 
fa~aijij more correctly. 
11 ril-laa-ma[na meaninglessness. 
"jAA ma[ni ladj *1 involved, concerned, relevant. 
fig-glhaat Il-ma[niyya the authorities concerned . 
..s ~ 
ma[nawi lad]1 ideational, abstract. II rooij 
ma[nawiyya morale, spirit. -fax~' ma[nawi /leg] artifi-
cial or juristic person. 
.y..; ta[ntyya, ta[niya Inl /path] tenesmus. 
~I fit[anna Ivil to suffer from tenesmus. -vn 
ta[niyya, ta[ntya; ava mit[anni. 
J~ [aana Ivil to suffer, feel distress. fil-mugtama[ 
bi-Ylaant min takaddus fafraad-u society is suffering 
because of the rise in population. - vn mu[anaah; ava 
ml[aant. 
~I fl[tana Ivil to take care, pay attention. laazim 
ninaqqii-ha w-ni[tini bi-xttyar-ha we have to pick them 
out one by one and be very careful which we choose. 
fi[tini bil-qahwa be sure you make the coffee properly! 
-vn fi[tina; ava mi[ttnt . 
~I fista[na (yista[na) Ivil to care, show interest or 
concern. fii duktoor tilaaqii ma-yist[naa-J you some-
times meet doctors who don't give a damn. 
ma-yista[naa-J yibu~~1 f-xilqit-ha he wouldn't conde-
scend to look at the likes of her. II qi/lit isti[na a devil-
may-care attitude. -vn flsti[n~: ava mista[ni. 
~ 0 t 
¥ 
[ahd In pi [uhuudl I era, age.fi-[ahd' faadam in 
the days of Adam. IImin [ahd' qurayyib recently. 
2 covenant, pact. II fzl-[ahd zl-qadilm the Old Testa-
ment. - ril-[ahd ig-gidlld the New Testament. -xamiis 
il-[ahd /Chr] Maundy Thursday. - waaxid [ahd" [ala 
nafs-u he has committed himself. - waaxid [ahd he has 
vowed allegiance to a leader of a Sufi order. 
o¥ [uhda Inl 1 custody, charge, responsibility. 
bi-yiju{{ il-[arabiyya f-[uhdit-i he puts the car in my 

charge. 2 Iplluhadl (item of) property in the charge of 
an official for which he must account on relinquishing 
his position. 
-I+"- malhad In pi malaahidl institute. 'lil-malhad 
il-laali Iil-Iarbiya r-riyaqiyya the Higher Institute for 
Athletic Training. 
~I 'lillahhid Ivtl to undertake, contract. 'lillahhidli 
('linni) 
'laraggal-Iu 
I-larabiyya 
s-saala 
lalaata 
I undertook to return the car to him at three. -vn 
lalahhud; ava millahhid. 
~ 
talahhud In pi -aatl formal undertaking, pledge. 
naaxud lalee lalahhud we get a formal undertaking 
from him. 
~ 
mutalahhid In *1 one contracted to supply speci-
fic items. 
• .al.... mUlahda In pi -aall treaty, convention. 
.al..;I 'lillaahid Ivil to come to an agreement, make a 
pact. 'lillahdu ma-yxunuu-j balq they agreed not to 
betray one another. -ava millaahid. 
..; I .J t. see !.$"; t. : lawaaf, lawaafi, 'lil-lawaafi 
t.Jt. 
c..y. lawag (i) Ivtl I to make crooked, twist, bend. 
luql ik-kutub lawag rigl i{-{arabeeza the weight of the 
books bent the table leg. 'lil-'laks i malwuug the axle is 
bent. II 'lil-malwuug yislaldil las-sindaal [provJ (the 
crooked may be straightened on the anvil) '" nothing is 
so bad it cannot be set right. 2 to set crookedly, tip, tilt. 
laawig {arbuuf-u wearing his fez at a jaunty angle. -vn 
lawag, lawga, lawagaan; ava laawig; pva malwuug. 
[.1"'" malwuug ladj *1 I crooked, bent, twisted. 'linti 
labsa I-burnee{a malwuuga you're wearing the hat 
crooked. II 'linta malwuug la/a 'leeh why are you so 
conceited. 2 loose, immoral. bint' malwuuga a loose 
girl. 
[.y.i 'lalwag ladj, fern looga, plluugl I crooked, 
twisted, bent. II 'lil-binl" I]a/-ha 'lalwag (I) she's a loose 
girl. (2) the girl has bad luck. 2 immoral. la~arrufaal 
looga crooked behaviour. -ladverbiallyl miji 'lalwag 
to behave immorally. 
~y. liweega: dura lweega sorghum, Indian millet 
(Andropogon sorghum). 
[."..;1 'lillawag Ivil I to be made crooked, twisted or 
bent. 2 to be set crookedly, be tilted. 3 to be offended. 
'linta milliwig minni leeh why do you have this stand-
offish attitude towards me. -ava/iva milliwig. 
[."";1 'linlawag = 'lillawag. - iva minliwig. 
[.~ milawwig ladjl crooked or twisted or bent in 
several places. 
607 
c..y.;1 'lillawwig Ivil to be made crooked, be bent, be 
twisted (in several places, or several times). 'liI-qaqiib 
illawwig the bar buckled. IIma-lha mafya b-lillawwig 
kida what makes her walk so provocatively? why does 
she wiggle herself about like that? - bi-lillawwig fi-
kalam-ha she talks in a coquettish and provocative way. 
~ iva millawwig. 
~ .J t. 
~l&. caad I (u) Ivtl I to cause (times, conditions) to be 
repeated (of God). rabb-i-na Ylud-ha laleekum bi-xeer 
may Our Lord bring back (these happy days) to you 
with bounty! (response to bi-looda). - Ivi/28 to recur 
(of times, conditions). II bi-looda or bi-loodil il-
'layyaam may it (or the days) be repeated! many happy 
returns! (a felicitation given on any happy occasion) . 
2 b 1 to return (of people) .I]a-nluud fi-nu~~ iI-leel we'll 
return at midnight. 3/w neg! to continue, remain. 
'lin-naas ma-lad-ji fiihum xeer there's no longer any 
good in people. ma-lad-Iak-F I]igga you have no argu-
ment left. ma-ludli-j faaqi I no longer have any free 
time. 4/preverbl 48 Iw negl to continue to. 'lil-beet 
ma-lad-j' ysal-na the house is no longer large enough 
for us. mij I]a-Yluud yi~/al] lij-jW.fl it won't be fit for 
work any more. 4b to start (again) to. kull i rna yifrigu 
lannu Yluud yisraq laani every time they release him 
he goes back to stealing. kull' rna yxiff' Yluud yilya 
laani whenever he gets well he falls sick again. law ludt 
allaamil bij-jikaal laani if I ever dealt with cheques 
again .... lIma-ludli-j 'laqul-ha (also ma-lunti-j 'laqul-
hal I won't say it again! - 'lin ludl i tluud I]U({' fiiha 
luud", (let me off this time but) if I ever do it again you 
can punish me any way you like. -vn lawda. looda. 
lawadaan; ava laayid. 
1Ilaad lala to bring returns, reflect upon. !'iI-xusaara 
I]a-Iluud laleena kull-i-na the loss will touch us all. 
I]a-Yluud laleena bil-fayda it 
will 
benefit us. 
!'iI-l]ikaaya di mij I]a-Iluud laleena reer bil-Ialab this 
affair will bring us nothing but trouble. 
~l&. caad2 (i) Ivtl to redo, do again. 'lil-muhandis yiliid 
il-Iasgiil the engineer does the recording again. xalleel-u 
Yliid kull il-Iamariin I made him do all the exercises 
again. laazim 'laliid is-sana I'll have to repeat the year 
(at school or university). -vn liyaada; ava laayid. 
11 laad lala to go over again. liid la/-xiyaa{a bil-
rna kana go over the stitching by machine. 
'~y. lawda Inl return. lazkara zihaab wi-lawda return 
ticket, round-trip ticket.lIlawdil ir-rool] reincarnation. 
-nuq{il iI-la-lawda the point of no return . 
• ~y. looda Inl return. IIbi-looda or bi-loodil iI-

rayyaam may it (or the days) be repeated! (a felicitation 
given on any happy occasion). 
~\&, laarid, laayid Inl (financial) return, take. laarid 
iI-mu rallif the author's royalties. lawaa rid in-nafc oil 
revenues. 
~1.r .~I.r lawaayid Ipl nl rates, taxes assessed on 
property for local purposes. 
O.)\&, laada 2 Inl I Ipl -aal. lawaayidl 18 habit, usual 
practice. kasal-ha balfa laada her laziness became a 
habit. di mif lawayd-u that's not his usual behaviour. 
zayy iI-laada as usual. llfil-laada usually. - riI-laada 
s-sirriyya {euphem] masturbation. Ib custom, tradi-
tion. ladaal m~riyya Egyptian customs. 2 ril-laada 
the monthly period, the menses. laleeha I-laada she's 
having her period. 3 ~iI-laada the simplest form of 
Egyptian backgammon. - ladj invar/4 standard, made 
to standard specifications. zeel laada standard oil. 
muflaalj laada a standard switch. laawiz birwaaz 
midahhab walla laada do you want a gilt or a standard 
frame? 
~ laadalan ladvl usually, ordinarily. laadalan bi-yilbis 
bantaloon he usually wears trousers. 
loS.)\&' laadi ladj *1 ordinary, normal. waraq laadi 
ordinary paper. -/adverbiallyl ruljl if-Juyla laadi I went 
to work as usual. ris-sillaal bi-yilbisu laadi the women 
wear ordinary clothes. 
.).r luud In pi lidaan. ralwaadl I rod, stick, pole, 
beam. luud kabriil match-stick. lU~d miqaffa broom-
handle. luud faduuf rocker beam of a shadoof. lidaan 
markib ribs of a boat. 2 stalk, stem. bi-niqtal ik-kizaan 
mil-luud we cut the ears from the stalk. luud Ifutn a 
(single) cotton plant. II rixc[arr' lud-ha ,., she blos-
somed. -luud fi-Ijizma ,., a drop in the ocean. -luud 
~-~aliib {Chr] the cross (of Christ). 3 musical instru-
ment related to the lute, oud (see PI.J, 7). - Ino pI! 
4 aloes wood. 
-¥- liid In pI ralyaadl feast, festival. liid milaad 
birthday. II riI-liid inuyayyar (1) {lsI] Lesser Bairam, 
three-day festival marking the end ofthe Ramadan fast, 
starting on the first day of Shawwal. (2) {Chr] Christ-
mas. - riI-liid ik-kibiir (I) {lsI] Greater Bairam, four-
day festival starting on the tenth day of Zu I-Higga 
marking the completion of the essential rites of pilgrim-
age to Mecca. (2) {Chr] Easter. -liid iI-rumm 
Mother's Day. 
~-¥- lidiyya In pi -aall present (of money) given at an 
annually celebrated feast or festival. 
O.)\.,&. liyaada. liyyaada In pi -aall outpatient clinic, 
doctor's surgery. 
.)1~ lawwaad In ·1 oud player. 
608 
.)\.;1 rillaad Ivil to be done again, be done another 
time, be repeated. riI-imliljaan Ija-yillaad min laani the 
exam will ~ done over again. xitta mublakra la Ilaadil 
wala nkafafil an original plan that has never been done 
before or thought of. rilli Ij~alla yilqaal wala yillaad 
what happened (is so improper that it) is not to be 
mentioned or repeated. - iva millaad. 
.)\..;1 rinlaad = rillaad. - iva minlaad . 
.)~ lawwid I/vtl to accustom. laazim lilawwid it-fift" 
lala rinnu yillab Ii-waljd-u you have to get the child 
used to playing on his own. lawwidnaa lalaf-Juyl we 
got him accustomed to the job. 2 Ivil to return, go back. 
Ija-Ylawwid min feen by which route will he return? -vn 
lalwiid; avalpva milawwid. 
~ layyid Ivil I to celebrate a liid. leeh layyidl' 
I-waljd-ak why did you spend the festival by yourself? 
2 to give a festive greeting. rin-naas layyidil lala balc[ 
(1) the people gave one another festive greetings. 
(2) the people visited each other on the occasion of the 
feast. -vn lalyiid; ava milayyid. 
.):-"'1 rillawwid Ivt and viI to become accustomed (to). 
rana Ilawwidl· (lala) I-wiljda I've got used to being 
alone. -vn lalawwudf; ava millawwid. 
¥1 rillayyid Ivil (impersonal) passive of layyid. dool 
naas yillayyid malaahum is this the sort of people one 
spends a feast with? - iva millayyid . 
')J\&, laawid I/vil to recur (of an illness). laawid 
lalayya I-may~ I had a recurrence of the colic. 2 Ivtl to 
start (doing s.th.) again. baldeen yilaawid ir-raami 
Ijafw iI-bunduqiyya then the marksman reloads the 
rifle. - vn milawda; ava milaawid. 
o~l.w mUlayda In pi -aall festival greetings. karl' 
mlayda greetings card. 
.)\&,j ralaadf Ivt/l to cause (times, conditions) to be 
repeated (of God). 2 to re-do, do again. -vn rilaadal 
ava mUliid. 
..I&oj ralid linterjl encore! 
o.)\&,! rilaada Inl repetition. II rilaadil ... re- (in com-
pounds), as in rilaadil na;ar reconsideration. rilaadil 
xart relathing. 
~ 
mUliid In 
*1 {aead] demonstrator, teaching 
assistant. 
.)~1 rillaad Ivil to become accustomed. rillaad 
yizur-na yawmiyyan he grew accustomed to visiting us 
daily. -vn rilliyaad; ava millaad. 
1oS.)~1 rilliyaadi ladjl normal, customary. 
.)\;.,. mUllaad adj *1 accustomed to, in the habit of 
(doing s.th.). hiyya mUllaada lilmil Ijafta lala raas 
is-sana she's in the habit of giving a New Year's party. 

609 
~ Jt 
11 mUllaadan linterj/: mUllaadan marf [mil] ready, 
laayiz yikallim-ak the director wants to speak with you. 
march! 
2 modal of necessity. riI-larabiyya layza lil~allab the 
car needs to be repaired. 
. 
1 . 
~ .J t see 
j .J t 
I j.J t 
.)y. liwir (a) Ivil to lose an eye, lose the sight of one 
eye. -vn lawar. 
.)y. lawar (i) Ivtl to cause to lose an eye. qarab-u 
lawar-u or (lawar leen-u) he hit him and put out his 
eye. -vn lawaraan; ava laawir; pya malwuur . 
.)y.i falwar ladj, fern loora, plluurl one-eyed. 
yiC;uullil-falwar falwar fi-leen-u [prov] = to tell the 
plain truth, call a spade a spade. IIm~raan falwar 
(vermiform) appendix (of the caecum). - fitneen luur 
(1) throw in the game of (aab (q. v.) that neither wins 
nor loses. (2) a neutral action, an action without effect 
on an outcome . 
.)~ lawwar Ivtl to injure, damage. - vn lalwiir; aval 
pya milawwar. 
oJ!.J'" lalwiira linst n, pi -aall a wound, an injury. 
.);"'1 fi1lawwar Ivil to be injured, be damaged. - iva 
mi1lawwar. 
~y.1 filwarr Ivil to lose an eye, lose the sight of one 
eye. -ava milwirr. 
1 j .J t see also I j ...s t 
'.)y. lawra In pi -aatl I [lsi] part of the body which 
must be covered during prayer. 2 genitals, pudenda. 
3 shameful thing. 
I j.J t 
j\&. laaz (u) Ivtl 18 to want, desire. laaz xamsa saar 
fiddel-haa-Iu he wanted five piastres, (so) 1 gave it to 
him. fis-sill" la.wzaa-ki f-kilmileen the lady would like a 
word with you. Ib Ipreverbl to want to. lamma faluUZ 
fablac; dac;n-i faruub lil-ballaac; when 1 want to get a 
shave, 1 go to the barber. 28 to require, need. 
fis-sibaaba bi-lluUZ fiddil il-gism swimming requires 
bodily strength. fil-kawitf" laayiz libaam the tyre 
needs mending. II fil-laayiz fahbal = necessity knows 
no law. 2b Ipreverbl to need to. fil-larabiyya IluUZ 
lilmawwin the car needs filling up. -vn looza, laaza; 
ava laawiz, laayiz. 
ojy. looza Inl want, need. wac;t il-looza in time of 
need, when necessary. 
oj\&. laaza Inl want, need. ma-luu-f laaza it is not 
needed. 
jJ\&. .)..\&. laayiz or laawiz Ifem layza, lawza, 
pllayziin, lawziinl I modal of desire. fil-mudiir 
1 j.J t 
~y.i faluuzu: faluUZU bi-lIaah (I seek refuge with 
God!) = God protect us! Heaven help us! bamaat-i 
gayya tzur-na. - falUUZU bi-lIaah 'My mother-in-law is 
coming to see us.' 'Heaven help us!' 
;L,.J 1 fil-liyaazu: fil-liyaazu bi-lIaah (refuge is with 
God!) = God protect us! Heaven help us! fit-tadxiin 
bi-ygiib - wil-liyaazu bi-lIaah - sara(aan smoking, God 
protect us, causes cancer. 
~~I fistalaaz Ivil to seek refuge (in God). fistalaaz 
bi-lIaah to say falUUZU bi-lIaah. -vn fistilaaza; ava 
mistiliiz. 
I U'" .J t 
U"'\&. la~ (u) Ivtl to smear. la~uu-li fiday-ya bibr i 
w-xalamuu-hum lala warac;a they smeared m} hands 
with ink and took their impression on a piece of paper . 
-vn lOo~; ava laayi~. 
U"'L..;I 
fitla~ Ivil to be smeared. - iva mitla~. 
U'" L..; 1 finla~ = fitla~. - iva minla~. 
1 U'" .J t 
~y. lawi~ ladj *1 difficult. mUfkila lawii~a a diffi-
cult problem. 
........J t 
....... y. lawaq 
Inl 
I substitute, 
compensation. 
fi/-lawaq lala I-mawla or laleeh il-lawaq wi-minnu 
l-lawaq or laleek il-lawaq ya rabb = God will provide 
(said upon suffering loss). IIlaleena I-lawaq = we're 
done for! 2l offspring, children. 
....... 1 y. luwaaq Iprepl instead of, in place of, as a sub-
stitute for. luwaaqak in your place. xud da luwaaq da 
take this instead of that. 
lIluwaaq ma Iconjl instead of (doing s.th.). 
....... ~ lawwaq 
Ivtl 
I to 
compensate 
(s.o.). 
fil-bukuuma lawwaqil-hum lal- farq illi xadil-ha the 
government compensated them for the land it took. 
2 to compensate for (s.th.), make up for (s.th.).laazim 
lilawwaq illi faat you have to make up for the past. fima 
b-ligri leeh -laawiz tilawwaq iJ-Jiwayya iii wc;ifl-u-hum 
why are you going so fast? do you want to make up for 
the little while when you stopped? II fallaah yilawwaq 
(laleek) may God make (it) up (to you)! (to one who 
has lost money or the like). -b-alawwaq-haa-Iak bukra 

I'll get my own back on you later! -vn lalwiui; ava 
milawwaq. 
.../41.."u lalwiiq In pI -aall compensation, indemnity. 
~."u lalwiiqi ladjl substitute. II raghiza lalwiqiyya 
artificial limbs. 
,,;,~, rillawwaq/vil to be compensated for, be made 
up for. saalil iI-Ija:;:;' ma-/illawwaqj a moment of 
pleasure (lost) cannot be replaced. - iva millawwaq. 
..;.~, rislalwaq Ivtl to obtain a substitute for 
(s.th.). b-ae;dar raslalwaq-u mil-maxzan I can replace 
it from the store. II rislalwaq-u land allaah he wrote it 
off as a dead loss. -vn rislilwaaq; ava mistalwaq. 
1"';.Jt 
J ~ loof Iprop n/: rabu loof nickname for labd 
ir-raljmaan. 
2 ...; .J t see ..s"'; t: lawaaf, lawaafi 
I ~l.J t 
131&. laae; (u) Ivtl to hamper, impede. 
";:1&. laariqf In pllawaariql obstacle, hindrance. 
4i1&. laae;a In pI -aatl impediment (especially one pre-
venting childbirth). rabb-i-na yfukk J lae;it-ha may God 
grant her a child! 
13~ lawwae; Ilvtl to delay, hold up. 2/vil to dawdle, 
delay, be late. ma-tlawwae;j' fit-tariie; don't dawdle on 
the way! -vn talwiie;; avalpva milawwae;. 
..:..li ~ mUlawwiqaat f Ipl nl hindrances, impedi-
ments. 
13~' ritlawwae; Ivil to be made late, be held up. 
laazim itlawwae;il fit-tariie; something must have de-
layed her on the way. riI-wllaada tlawwae;il the birth 
was delayed. IImiraat-i mitlawwae;a my wife is late in 
giving birth. - iva mitlawwae;. 
13~' ristalwae; Ivtl I to consider (too) late. 
ristalwae;l-ak rawwaljt when I felt I'd waited for you 
long enough I went home. 2 to make (s.o. who is late) 
Wurry up. ruulj istalwae;-U go and call him (he's been 
too long). - vn ristilwaae;; avalpva mistalwae;. 
2J.Jt 
~,~ lawwaae;a In pI -aat, lawawiie;1 small mattock. 
J.J t 
JI&. laal] (u) Ivtl to support, provide for (one's fami-
ly). - ava laaril. 
iJl&. laala Inl sponger, parasite. 
4l:1&. .~I&. leela, laarila f In pI -aatl family. 
J:I&. laarili ladjl pertaining to the family, familial, 
610 
domestic. bitaae;a laa riliyya family identity card. Iilba 
laa riliyya a game suitable for the home. landu lUZr" 
laarili he's tied up at home . 
~ layyilln plliyaal/ child. II bllaalliyaal pederast. 
-/adjectivallyl raagillayyil a childish man. 
JI.,&. liyaali ladjl childish. 
iJ'~ liwaala ladvl parasitically. rintu layfiin liwaala 
lala miin who are you sponging on? 
..k~ lawiil I ladj pll,walal lazy and incompetent. 
2/nl Inaut] rope by which a lateen sail is furled against 
the mast. 
J~' ristalw,llvtl to consider lazy or incompetent. 
rislalwiluu-k wi-xadu I-filuus minnak they took advan-
tage of your simplicity and appropriated the money. 
-vn ristilwaal; ava mlSlall¥iI. 
J J.J t see also J J t 
.;I."u' ri1loolaCj Ivtl I to behave promiscuously, be of 
easy virtue. 2 to behave saucily or provocatively. -ava 
milloolae; . 
I r.J t 
jl&. laam 1 (u) Ivil la to swim. lilraf tiluum do you 
know how to swim? IIlaam lala loom ... to string along 
with (s.o. usually in suspect behaviour), as in bi-tluum 
lala loom-u she supports him indiscriminately, 
ma-tlum-!' lala lom-hum go your own way, don't 
follow in their footsteps. Ib to float. laayim mala 1-
mayya drifting with the current. 2 to overflow. rit-lirla 
laamit lfarrae;it ,d-dinya the canal overflowed and 
flooded everything. ri~-~af'ilja layma zeet the can is 
brimful of oil. -vn loom, lawaamaan; ava laayim. 
j ~ loom Inl I swimming. 2 loom iI-babr Inaut] 
water-line. 
~I&. laayim ladj "I extra, surplus, hanging loose. 
j' ~ lawwaam ladj "I expert at swimming. II ribn 
iI-wizz "lawwaam [pro,v] (the son of geese swims well) 
"" like father, like son. 
4.,~ lawwaama In pI -aatl I float. ril-lawwaama 
blaalit is-sifoon the lavatory cistern float. 2 inflatable 
ring or otller buoyant swimming aid. 3 buoy. 
4 houseboat. 
~~ lalVwiim ladj pllawwiimal expert at swimming. 
j~ lawwim Ivtll to float, cause to float. b'-Ylawwim 
markib-ufil-banyu he sails his boat in the bath tub. 2 to 
flood, drench. lamma raagi ramsalj b-alawwim 
ifjae;e;a mayya when I wash the floor I have the flat 
swimming with water. 3 [naut] to hoist (a sail). 
4 [finan] to float (a currency). -vn talwiim; avalpva 
milawwim. 

i~1 fitcawwim 
Ivil 
passive 
of cawwim. 
mitcawwim. 
2 r -' t 
-iva 
it£. caam I In pi facwaaml year. kull d caam wi-nta (or 
wi-ntu) b-xeer may you be well every year! (convention-
al greeting on the occasion of any annual happy event). 
kull d caam wi-nta (or wi-ntu) hina may you be here 
every. year (to enjoy this happy occasion)! 
I<J-'t 
.:,t£. caan 1 (i) Ivtl to come to the help of, side with. 
gibt-ak ya cabd il-muciin ticin-ni - latjeet-ak ya cabd 
il-muciin titcaan {prov] I brought you, Abd al-Mu'in, 
to help me; I found, Abd al-Mu'in, that it was you that 
had to be helped, -vn coon; ava caayin. 
':'r coon 1 Inl help, assistance. II fallaah yikuun fi-
coon-ak may God help you! (expression of sympathy). 
.:,Iri facwaan Ipl nl assistants, helpers. II facwaan 
suf1iyya {magic] spirits involved in magic. 
;.;t£. caana In pi cuunl pubic hair . 
.; ~ macuuna Inl aid, relief. macuuna min famriika 
aid from America . 
.:,L.;I fitcaan 1 Ivil to be helped, be assisted. - iva 
mitcaan . 
.:, L..; 1 finc aan 1 = fitc aan I. - iva minc aan. 
':'Jt£. caawin Ivtl to help, assist. fii naas mumkin 
ticawn-u there are people who can help him. -vn 
micawna. mucawna; ava/pva micaawin. 
':'Jt.... micaawin In *1 assistant (in an official capacity). 
micaawin in-niyaaba assistant prosecutor. micaawin 
il-kulliyya university administrator responsible for 
custodial and classroom services. micaawin i/-masra!J 
stage-hand. micaawin ma!Ja{{a railway station traffic 
controller. micaawin 
i~-~i!J!Ja area assistant health 
officer. 
':'JL.;I fitcaawin Ivil to co-operate. -vn tacaawun; ava 
mitcaawin . 
. i L.; tacaawuni ladjl pertaining to co-operation. 
...,J 
. 
gamciyya tacawniyya government-owned foodstore. 
.:,t£.i facaan = caanl. -vn ficaana; ava muciin; pva 
mucaan. 
.;t£.! ficaana In pi -aatl subsidy. 
~ 
mUciin Inl Helper (epithet of God). cabd i/-
mUciin see caan I. 
.:,\":,,,1 fistacaan (yisticiin, yastaciin, yistacaanJ) Ivil 
I to seek assistance. fistacaanit big-giraan she asked 
the neighbours to help. nistacaan caf-fatja bi-llaah we 
pray to God for his assistance in dealing with the hard 
toil ahead of us (used, often jocularly, when beginning 
611 
work). 2 to make use (ofs.th.). fit-falaat illi b-yisticiin 
biiha ~-~anani the tools the craftsman employs. -vn 
fisticaana: ava misticiin. 
2(<J-'t) 
.:, r 
coon Z Inl giant. 
..;..;s. cunt: 
ma-cunt'-f. 
ma-cuntii-/. 
ma-cuntuu-f 
I (you) would never ... again. cf. caad 1 4b. 
J <J -' t see <J t r : macuun 
-'-'t 
. 
. 
;; ~ 
1 fil-cawwa for nawwit il-cawwa and nawwll baatjl 
l-cawwa see nawwa. 
IS-'t 
..sr cawa (i) Ivil to bark (of a dog), howl (of a wolf). 
-vn ciwa; ava caawi . 
..s r 
cawwa Ivil intensive form of cawa. - ava 
micawwi. 
.r1S-'t 
~ r caweefa Iprop nl name of a demon, said to be of 
Moroccan origin, invoked in zaar rituals. 
YlSt 
...... t£. caab (i) I Ivtl to attach blame or inadequacy to. 
ra;unn I bacd' kida ma-!Jadd'-fyitjdar yicib-nif-!Jaaga 
I think that after this nobody should be able to attach 
any blame to me. 2/vil to err in personal matters. 
fit- fa~iil ma-nib-fthe well-bred (person) never misbe-
haves. caab fi- to insult, use bad language to, as in 
fibn-i mufaddab wi-ma-nib-/, f-!Jadd my son is well-
mannered and never uses bad language to anyone. 
fit-ceeb fiz-zaat il-malakiyya {leg, obsol] insulting the 
King's name. caab cala to criticize or attack (s.o.) for, 
as in caab calayya sakan-i fi/-!Jayy I da he criticized me 
for living in that quarter. - vn ceeb, cayabaan; ava 
caayib; pva macyuub . 
........s- ceeb Inl I shameful behaviour. fin-namiima mif 
;e~b bassi w-!Jaraam laakin daliil cala catjl' faa"i 
scandal-mongering is nQt just shameful and forbidden 
by religion, but is also evidence of a fatuous mind . 
IIceeb (1) that's naughty! (to a child). (2) (also ya ceeb) 
shame! for shame! -ya ceeb if-foom (1) shame, for 
shame! (2) oh what a pity! how awful! -ceeb lala shame 
on, as in ceeb caleek ticmil kida shame on you for doing 
such a thing! 2 Iplliyuub, cuyuubl defect, fault, flaw. 
fii ciyuub fil-tjumaaf there are faults in the cloth. 
ci;'~b-na fiina we all have our faults, none of us is 
perfect. 

~ leeba Inl I a shameful act. kida landina fakbar 
leeba we consider this the most disgraceful thing. 2 bad 
word. bad language. lisaan-u ma-y{allal-J iI-leeba he 
never uses bad language. 
~~ laayib 1 I/adj *1 indecent, improper (in be-
haviour). faayib wi-laayib (old but still misbehaving) 
(epithet 00 a dirty old man. 2 In *1 gUilty party in a 
dispute. miin fiikum laayib who among you is at fault? 
..,..".... malyuub ladjl defective. qu{n' m3Gyuub defec-
tive cotton. mara malyuuba an immoral woman . 
.,.+ layyib Ivt/l to find fault with, point out the faults 
of. riI-muhandis layyib kull if-Jurl illi lamalt-u the 
engineer picked holes in everything I'd done. fin kunt' 
ral{aan layyibuu-ni if I'm at fault, tell me! 2 to spoil, 
render faulty. -vn talyiib; avalpva milayyib. 
lIlayyib lala to hold up to scorn, hold in contempt. 
ma-takul-J' b- fiid-ak faflsan yilayyibu laleek don't eat 
with your hand or they'll be scornful. bi-Ylayyibu lala 
IIifalr-u-hum {awiil they hold in contempt people who 
wear their hair long. 
~ 
~ laayib 2 Ivil to denounce as shameful. -vn 
milayba; ava milaayib. 
~ ..s t see 
~.J t: laad, liid, lidiyya, liyaada, 
layyid, fitlayyid, mUlayda, mUliid, filtiyaadl 
1.J..st 
;~ laar 1 Inl dishonour, disgrace. 
See further 
under 1 .J.J t 
o.r-" liira ladj invarl false. sinaan liira false teeth. 
falr' liira J wig. 
~ layyarl Ivtl to taunt (s.o.) by mentioning (his) 
faults or failures. layyaruu bi-finnu fibn H labd iswid 
they taunted him for being a black slave's son. -vn 
talyiir; ava/pva milayyar. 
;"1 fitlayyar 1 Ivil passive of layyar. - iva mitlayyar. 
J-~ .laayirl Ivtl to shame (s.o.) by bringing up things 
to his discredit. lila tlayir-ni wala falayr-ak - riI-hamm' 
{ayil-ni w-{ayl-ak [provJ "" don't bring things up against 
me and I won't against you -we both have our bad 
points. -vn mllayra; avalpva milaayir. 
J-l.;"1 fitlaayir 1 Ivil passive of laay" I. - iva mitlaayir. 
l.JlSt 
;\,,&. l,yaar In pi -aat, falyiral I fixed measure, por-
tion. fil-budra di b-nilgin-ha bi-lyaraat we mix this 
powder according to (fixed) measures. dahab liyaar 
tamantaafar eighteen carat gold. IIzawwid i1-liyaar 
flabbiteen he overdid it a bit. 2 gauge, calibre.llliyaar 
naart (1) calibre (of a gun). (2) (rifle) shot. riI-liyaar 
612 
illi ma-y~ib-J' yidwif [provJ the shot that doesn't find its 
target will at least give a fright. 
IS;\"&' liyaari ladjl standard (in size, quality etc.). 
;1.,..... milyaar In pi malayiirl standard, norm. 
~ layyar2 Ivtl to mark in graduations. kizaan 
milayyara graduated beakers. -vn talyiir; ava/pva 
milayyar. 
;"1 fitlayyar2 Ivil to be marked in graduations. - iva 
mitlayyar . 
J- ~ laayir21vtl to measure out, gauge.layirt iI-mayya 
bil-kubbaaya I measured the water out by the glass. -vn 
milayra; avalpva milaayir. 
J-l.;"1 fitlaayir2 Ivil to be measured out, be gauged. 
- iva mitlaayir. 
J.J..st 
;~ laar2 J (i) = falaar. 
;~i falaarT Ivtl to second, send on secondment. 
ralaruu-ni liI-xaarig they sent me on secondment 
abroad. -/the literary passive occursl riI-mudarris 
YUlaar Iit-tadriis fid-duwal iI-larabiyya a teacher may 
be seconded to teach in the Arab states. -vn filaara; 
ava mUliir; pva mUlaar. 
;l... mUlaarT ladjl out on loan. rutlt afattif lal-kitaab 
fil-maktaba laqeet-u mUlaar I went to look for the book 
in the library and found that it was out. 
;l..:-I ristalaar T Ivtl to borrow. fistalart ik-kitaab min 
iI-maktaba I borrowed the book from the library. -vn 
fistilaara; ava mustaliir; pva mustalaar. 
o;l..:-I ristilaara In pi -aatl [gramJ metaphor. 
4.J..st 
.r-" liir T Inl caravan. lila (Iuh) fil-liir wala fin-nafiir he 
has nothing to do with it. 
I JISt see I j .J t : laayiz 
1 j ..s t see 1 j.J t: rtl-llyaazu 
1V"..st 
~ 
liisa Iprop nl I Jesus. 2 [lslJ male given name. 
u! IS t 
.;.~ laaf(i) Ivi/l to Iive.laaffaqiir he lived in pover-
ty. fana lift' {uullUmr-1 fi-skindiriyya I've lived all my 
life in Alexandria. di t-tigaara iii bi-Yliif minha this is 
the trade by which he lives. rana b-aliif lala d-dawa da 
I live on that medicine. laaf lala I-hawa he led a very 
meagre existence. riI-liifa hina~alba life is tough here. 
IItiliifmay you live long! (in reply to an expression of 

thanks or a compliment). -tilii! rinta may you live long! 
(in reply to an enquiry after s.o. who, unknown to the 
enquirer, has died). -tiliif wi-taaxud ver-ha may you 
live to suffer again! (light-hearted consolation after a 
minor misfortune). -tiliifwi-tgiib may you live long to 
support us! (to the breadwinner of a family or anyone 
bringing a gift). -tiliif wi-tiftikir may you live long and 
remember! (expression of condolence to the bereaved 
on the occasion of an anniversary). -laajminjaaf-ak ... 
it's good to see you! (to s.o. one has not seen for a long 
time). -yaliiflong live ... ! as in yaliifil-malik long live 
the king! - rilli Yliif yaama yjuuf {provl ... the longer 
you live the more you see, the world is full of wonders. 
2 to spend all one's time. ril-liyaal fl- ragaaza w-layjiin 
flj-jaaril the kids are on holiday and spend all their time 
in the street. 3 to las~, keep, stay fresh. riI-qurunfll 
bi-Yliiflan ii-ward iI-baladi (cut) carnations last longer 
than (cut) roses.lalajaan yiliiflaazim tigiib-u~aabi!J if 
you want it to keep you have to buy it fresh. - Ivti 4 to 
live through, experience. basseet bil-wi!Jda /Ii rana 
layif-ha I became aware of the lonely life I'm living. 
-vn liifa; ava laayif. 
4 
liifa Inl a way of life, living. qirifti min lift-i 
I came to hate my way of life. di liifa tkaffar this life is 
enough to make one renounce one's religion. 
~\&. leeja (also layja) Iprop nl female given name. 
IIbint a leeja type of small, sweet date. -leeja f-suuq 
i/-Yazl «a woman named) leeja in the (crowded) yarn 
market) ... a needle in a haystack. 
J-+ leej Inl bread. kulleej babiib-ak tisurr-u wi-kul 
leejladiww-ak tiqurr-u (provl'" if you eat the food of a 
friend it makes him glad, if you eat the food of an enemy 
he resents it. II rakl i leej earning one's daily bread, 
making one's living. raakul leej rizzaay how shall 
I earn a living? -qa{alleej( -u) to cut off the source of 
(s.o.'s) livelihood, lose (s.o.) his job. - kalna sawa leej 
wi-malb we've been through thick and thin together, 
we're close friends. lalajaan xaa{ir iI-leej wil-malb illi 
benna for the sake of all we mean to each other. 
;;..:...... maliija Inllife, living (especially from the mate-
rial point of view). riI-maliifa valya life is expensive. 
mustawa I-maliifa the standard of living. mistirayyab 
li-malift-(u) in comfortable circumstances. rooqit 
maliifa living room. 
~ 
maliifit ladjl pertaining to everyday life. 
riI-rumuur iI-malifiyya everyday affairs. 
.;.l... malaaj In pI -aatl pension.lltilillal-malaajto 
retire . 
.;+ layyif Ivtl 1 to provide subsistence for. xal-ha 
mlayyif-ha her uncle supports her. 2 to keep alive, 
613 
sustain. - vn talyiif; ava milayyif. 
';':"'1 ritlayyif IviJ 1 to earn a living. 2 passive of 
layyif. -avaliva mitlayyif· 
4.:o\&.1 rilaaja 
Inl 
provision 
(for), 
support. 
riI-bukuuma b-tilmil tartibat-ha lajaan 
rilaajit 
is-sukkaan min gidiid fl-man{iqit iI-qanaal the govern-
ment is making arrangements in order to provide for 
the inhabitants of the Canal area again. 
'-'" ~ t 
~ 
leeqa, liiqa Inl a mess, a bad condition. 
!Jalit-hum baqit leeqa their life turned to misery. 
.J:,~t 
J.l.&- luyaa{ or liyaat Inl crying, weeping. yalla ninflti!J 
fil-liyaa{ come on then, let's all have a good cry! 
J.~ layyaa{ In ·1 one who cries a lot, cry-baby. 
~ 
layya{ 1 Ivil to cry, weep. layyat lamma nfalaq he 
cried his eyes out. 2 Ivti to make (s.o.) weep. reeh illi 
mlayya{-ak kida ya-bn-i what are you crying like that 
for, son? -avaliva milayya{. 
";~t 
J\&. laaf (i) Ivtl to disdain. nifs-i laaflt ii-rakl I went 
off eating. -vn layafaan; ava laayif. 
JI.;I ritlaaf Ivil to be disdained. - iva mitlaaf. 
J~t 
~l.&- layaaqa, liyaaqa In! dandyism, foppishness. 
~\&. laayiq lladj * and plluyyaaql dandified, fop-
pish. 2/coll n! (botl delphinium(s). 
~\&. layqa In pI -aatl {obsoll madam of a brothel. 
~ 
I.; 1 ritlaayiq IviJ to show off, behave ostentatiously. 
bi-yitlaayiq bi-larabiyt-u he goes around showing off 
his car. -ava mitlaayiq. 
J ~ t see J.J t: leela, laarila, layyil, liyaal, 
liyaali 
I';'~t 
.:r-&- leen Ifem n, plliyuun, luyuunl 1 Ipl also leneenl 
eye. lenee qaliifa his eyes are weak. jayf-u quddaam 
lenay-ya I see him befote my very eyes. duktoor 
leneen oculist. b-a!Jibb-ak qadd i lnay-ya I love you 
dearly. ma-qdirti-j ra!JU{{i leen-i f-leen-u I couldn't 
look him in the eye. rin-naas tun;ur rilee b-leen 1-
i!Jtiraam people regard him with respect. IIleneen ... 
yes, dear (in response to a call), as in maama -leneen 
maama 'Mummy!' 'Yes, dear!'. -(min or fl-) lenay-ya 
(I-itneen) or lala leen-i w-raas-i or min leen-i di 

w-c;een-I di at your service! with pleasure! (response to 
a request). -C;een-(u) ft- (he) wants (s.th.) very badly, as 
in fiftiri-ha-Iha madaam r;en-ha fiiha buy it for her since 
she wants it so badly. -r;een-(u) r;ala ... he has his eye on 
.... he's out to get ...• as in r;een-u r;al-bill' di he has his 
eye on that girl. -ya r;een-i (1) how marvellous! 
(2) poor thing! what a pity! - (ya) r;een-i r;ala ... (1) how 
marvellous IS ••• ! as in ya r;een-i r;al-gamaal da how 
beautiful this is! (2) [womenj how I pity ... ! as in ya 
r;een-i r;aleek you poor dear! - (da) bi-r;een-(u) not even 
if (he) gives (his) eye. as in finta r;aawiz r;afara gneeh 
r;al-ljikaaya di - da b-r;een-ak you want ten pounds for 
this? no way! -r;een-i r;een-ak openly. frankly. as 10 
bi-yisralju r;een-i r;een-ak they steal brazenly. -r;ala 
r;een-ak ya taagir openly. not trying to hide anything. as 
in bi-thazzar mar;a r-riggaala kida r;ala r;een-ak ya taagir 
she jokes around quite openly with the men. - wiljir; (or 
nizil) min r;een(-u) to fall out of favour with (s.o.). 
-daxal fi-r;een(-u) to gain favour with (s.o.). -ljlss-ak 
r;een-ak "" just you dare! -kamaan fiik r;een ... do you 
still have the cheek ...• as in kama an fiik r;een tiljawllj-ni 
do you still have the gall to bicker with me? -r;een-ak 
ma-tjlluf fllla n-nuur (may your eye see only light) "" 
you can't imagine ... ! as in fil-mufkila kibrit wi-kibrit 
r;een-ak ma-tjuuf filla n-nllUr r;a-lli lja~al the problem 
grew larger and larger - you can't imagine what hap-
pened! fUfna VIlla r;een-ak ma-tjuuf ftlla n-Iluur 
mubtlya feeh wl-ruxaam feeh such a villa as we saw! you 
could never imagine -such furniture. such marble ... ! 
- fil-r;een ba~itra wll-yadd' lja~iira [provj (the eye sees 
but the arm is short) "" the desire (or willingness) is 
there but not the means. -ljaaga r;aleeha I-r;een some-
thmg desirable. -r;een-i r;aleek barda may I not be en-
viou~ of you (said to emphasize admiration) - fil-r;een 
tikrah lilt faljsan minha [provj "" people tend to hate 
th\!lr betters. -r;een II-r;aljl the epitome of reasonable-
ness. - fabu r;een fan'a one who is never satisfied. 
-(allar; c:een(-uJ to give (s.o.) a hard time. as 10 
lj-addii-Iufllyla qallar; r;een-u I'll give him a job that will 
really make him slog hard. -ya ljabbll r;een-I "" my poor 
dear! (expression of affectionate sympathy). - warra 
I-c:een tI-ljamra to show one's anger. show one's disple-
a~ure. -mala r;een(-uJ see mala". -r;een flg-ganna 
w-r;een flll-naar "" not being able to make up one's 
mmd. - ftllt ybu~~-i-It b-r;een fabu~~-I-Iu bll-Ilneen "" if 
someone treab me well. I'll treat him even better. -lja{{ 
.. f'-r;een(-uJ to take good care of. as in law ga r;andl 
lj-aljll{{-II f-[eell-I if he comes to stay with me I'll look 
after him very well. -r;een fig-Jgamal walnut(s). 2 any 
614 
of various objects bearing a resemblance to the eye 
(e.g .• burner of a stove. bud of a plant). beeclliyuun 
fried eggs sunny-side up. 3 /usu pl/ hole, opening. 
space. r;uyuun il-mif( spaces between the teeth of a 
comb. r;uyuun II-ma~fa holes in a sieve. 4 spring (of 
water). lIr;een fams a north-eastern suburb of Cairo. 
- /no pl/ 5 fil-r;een the evil eye. the capacity for harm· 
ing people by regarding them enviously. ~abit-ni I-c;een 
I was afflicted by the evil eye. 6 /always in constrl epl' 
tome, essence. da r;een iI-ljaljiilja "" this is God's truth. 
r;een far;yaan i~-~ir;iid the most notable of the notables 
of Upper Egypt. 7 [Iegj property. ~aaljib tI-r;een the 
property owner. - Ipl -aatl 8 eighteenth letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. 
11 bi-c;een(-u) I the very selfsame. mif hiyya di s-saala 
- la ffa di hiyya b-r;en-ha 'That's not the watch: 'Oh 
yes, it's the selfsame watch!' 2 certainly not. no way. 
fiddii-ni ljirf - bi-r;een-ak 'Give me a piastre: 'Nothing 
doing.' 
.:,~i far;yaan /pl n/ notables. 
..r-- r;eeni, r;aynif ladjl [Iegj corporeal, material. 
ljaljlj' r;eeni material right. II lja~r iI-r;eeni Kasr e\-Aini. a 
large government teaching hospital. 
~ 
r;eniyya In pI -aatl eye-piece (of. e.g., micro-
scope. telescope). 
4 
r;ayyina In pI -aatl specimen. sample. r;ayyinit 
ljumaaf a cloth sample. xadna r;ayyinaat mil-rare{ we 
took samples of the soil. talat rarbar; fabaab mil-
r;ayyinaa-dl three or four youths of that type. 
II ril-c;ayyllla bayyma [provj the part reveals the whole. 
l;~ r;ayaanan 
ladvl 
openly. 
xad-ha 
r;ayaanan 
bayaanan he took it openly before everyone. 
J~ r;ayaani ladjl material. visible. ljalaat r;ayaniyya 
concrete examples. 
~ 
mir;yin or mur;yan lad) mvarl pertaining to a 
spring. mayya mlr;yin or "!ayya mur;yan spring water. 
water drawn from underground (as distinct from. e.g .. 
Nile water) . 
.;.. c;ayyin Ivtl I to determine. specify. fik-kllluub 
bllaar;it if-fikaat bl-tr;ayyin-Iak ra~iid-ak kaam the stubs 
of the cheques specify for you the balance remaining. 
2 to appoint. name to an office. r;ayyinuu fahbandar 
it-lUggaar they appointed him chief of the merchants. 
3 to carry out an on-the-spot inspection of. - vn taly"n; 
avalpva mir;ayyin; pva mur;ayyan. 
~ 
tar;yiin In pI -aatl I appointment. position. job . 
2 /milj (one man's) rations . 
.;.... mur;ayyan I lad) "I particular. specific. makaan 
mur;ayyan a particular place. fatrit ~oom mur;ayyana a 

set period of fasting. 2 In pi -aatl rhomboid. 
';"'1 ritlayyin Ivil I to be specified, be determined. 
makaan ig-gariima tlayyin bi~-~abt the site of the crime 
has been fixed precisely. 2 to be appointed. nifs-i 
I'atlayyin fi-Jirka I'd like to get a job in a company. -vn 
ta;:ayyun; ava mitlayyin. 
.:r.~ laayin Ivtl to carry out an on-the-spot inspection 
of. bi-tiigi lagna min wizaarit ~-~il:Jl:Ja tlaayin il-makaan 
a committee from the Ministry of Health comes to 
inspect the place. -vn mUlayna; avalpva milaayin. 
~l.... mUlayna In pi -aatl on-the-spot inspe~tion. lal-
mUlayna on inspection, as in ma-niftirii-J I'illa lal-
malayna we don't buy unless we inspect (the goods) 
first. 
Z';'~t 
.;,~ laan 2 (i) Ivtlla to remove, take awaY.lin-ha min 
hina take it away from here! Ib to lift, carry. liin 
if-Janta lalayya lift the bag onto my back! 2 to keep in a 
safe place. bi-niin filuus-u tal:Jt il-balaata he keeps his 
money hidden away under a tile. - vn leen, layanaan, 
liyaana; ava laayin; pva malyuun . 
.:,l..;1 l'itlaan2 Ivil la to be removed, be taken away. 
61S 
Ib to be lifted, be carried. I'ana laawiz if-Janta titlaan 
lalayya I want to have the bag lifted onto my back. 2 to 
be kept in a saf~ place. I'il-filuus laazim titlaanfil-bank 
the money must be put away in the bank. l'il-muftaal:J 
l:Ja-yitlaan tal:Jt id-dawwaasa the key will be kept hidden 
under the door-mat. - iva mitlaan . 
.:,l..;1 I'inlaan! = l'itlaan2. -iva minlaan. 
~~t 
.r.- liyi (a) Ivil to fall sick. I'awwil ma lyiit rigl-i wirmit 
when first I fell sick my foot swelled. -vn laya; ava 
layyaan. 
I,,&. laya I (i) Ivtl to cause to be ill. I'id-dawa da 
layaa-ni I'aktar this medicine made me iller than be-
fore. IIman~ar yilyi a sickening sight. -vn laya; ava 
laayi . 
I,,&. laya!/nl illness. hiyya Lissa Ijayma min laya she's 
just getting over an illness. I'id-duktuur muxt~~i 
fil-laya da the doctor specializes in that illness. 
.;,~ layyaan In *1 patient. 
L,..;I I'itlaya Ivil to be made ill. - iva mitliyi. 
.I,,&.! l'ilyaal'/nl weariness, fatigue. I'ana f-raayit il-
l'ilyaal'I am exhausted. 

• t 
ylt 
..,..l&. raab I Icoll n/ reed(s), cane(s). raab tarsi Persian 
cane.llraab ratrangi bamboo. -raawijurb il-raab fond 
of smoking a gooza. 
~ l&. raaba In pi -aat) I lunit n! a (piece of) reed, a 
(piece of) cane. raabit gooza the mouth-reed of a gooza 
(see Pl.I, 8). 2 forest, jungle. 
I.) I t 
.)l&. raar I In! [bot] bay (Laurus nobilis). 
2 .) I t see .).J t: raar 4 , raara 
jlt 
jl&. raaz <perh Fr> In pi -aatl gas. razaat saamma 
poisonous gases. 
~jl&. raazi I ladjl gaseous. 
IJ'" I t 
~l&. ra~a <It gassa> In pi -aatl [naut] grommet. 
tIt 
~l&. raara Inl noise, uproar, tumult. 
~It 
~l&. raaya, raaya In pi -aatl I extreme, furthest ex-
tent. raayit is-salaada extreme happiness. rana 
mabsuu{ lil-raaya I am extremely pleased. IIrayt-u in 
short, to cut a long story short, as in rayt-u b~~eet laqeet 
gasad-i mxaddll kull-u to cut a long story short, 
I suddenly discovered that my whole body had gone 
numb. 2 aim, goal. rayit-na I-rixlaa~ fil-lamal our aim 
is devotion to work. II ril-raaya tbarrar il-wasiila [prov] 
the en~ justifies the means. 
lIli-raayit Iprepl until, till, up to. It-raayit dilwaqti ma-
riglit1 she hasn't come back so far. w~~al-ni I-raayit 
il-beet he saw me home: -li-raayit ma or li-raayit lamma 
Iconjl till, until. mij Ija-nijtiri minnu I-raayit ma ybiil 
bit-tasliira we won't buy from him until he sells at the 
government fixed price. min saalit ma twa/ad li-raayit 
lamma baqa sul{aan from the moment he was born till 
he became sultan. 
.)yt 
'.r.&- rabara Inl fine dust . 
.r.&-i rarbar lad], fern rabra, pi rubrl I dusty, covered 
with dust. 2 miserable, rotten, lousy. zaman rarbar 
miserable times. II wijj-(u) rarbar (he) brings bad luck. 
.)~ rubaar Inl fine dust. IIrubaar zarriT atomic 
fall-out. 
'.)~ rubaara Inl I Ipl -aatl speck of dust. 2 Ino pll fine 
quality hashish. rubaarit il-rubaara superfine hashish. 
;,&. rabbar I Ivtl to make dusty, cover with dust. 2 Ivil 
to become dusty. -vn tarbiir; ava/pva mitrabbar. 
.#1 ritrabbar Ivil to become dusty, get covered with 
dust. rik-karaasi trabbaril wl-baqa Ija/-ha zayy 11-
hibaab the chairs got covered with dust and are in a 
filthy state. -ava/iva mitrabbar. 
~yt 
J+i rarbaj ladj, fern rabja, plrubjl I dark grey in 
colour. 2 faded, muted (of colours). 
..;:,s. rabbij I Ivtl to cloud, make murky. rir-ru{uuba 
rabbijit 'qizaaz ij1ababiik moisture clouded the win-
dows. qizaaz mirabbij (1) cloudy, murky glass. 
(2) frosted or semi-opaque glass. 2 Ivil to cloud over, 
become murky or difficult to see through. rid-dinya 
kaanit mirabbija saalit il-tagriyya it was misty around 
dawn. -vn tarbiij; ava/pva mirabbij. 

"":';"1 ritrabbij Ivil to become murky, cloudy or foggy. 
-ava mitrabbij. 
j,":'t 
¥. rabiit In pi ribtaan, ribta, rib£ta, rirbital sack 
split sideways and slung over a donkey's back to carry 
manure or dirt (see PI.D, 4). - ladjectivallyl raagil 
rabiit bi-~aljiilj a real oaf of a man. 
oj":'t 
.:r.i'- raban t (i) Ivtl to do (s.o.) ~n injustice (particular-
ly in business). kull i waaljid mit-tarafeen bi-yquul rinnu 
marbuun fil-beela each of the two sides claims he's 
been had in the deal. -vn rabn; ava raabin; pva 
marbuun. 
.:r.i'- rabn t Inl injustice (particularly in business). 
~I ritraban r Ivil to be done an injustice. - iva 
mitribin. 
.J,,:,t 
~ rabi ladj pi rarbiya, rarbiyya, rabiyyiinl foolish, 
stupid. 
~i rarba lell morelmost stupid. 
oJI.,&. rabaawa Inl foolishness, stupidity. rabawt-u 
gamda qawi he is very stupid. 
.1.,&. rabaarr = rabaawa. 
~t.;1 ritraaba Ivil to play the fool, act stupid. 
Ija-titraaba lalayya are you going to act the fool with 
me! -vn taraabi; ava mitraabi. 
..,.;.::-1 ristarba Ivt/l to consider stupid or foolish. 2 to 
select for stupidity. - Ivi/3 to pretend to be stupid or 
foolish. -ava mistarbi. 
I~":'t 
.;s. rabba Ivtl to hide, conceal. leeh mirabbi 
I-mawquullalayya why are you hiding the matter from 
me? -vn tarbiyya; avalpva mirabbi. 
;"'1 ritrabba Ivil to be hidden, be concealed. - iva 
mitrabbi. 
2 ~ ":' t see .J ":' t: rabi, ritraaba, ristarba 
.;...;..t 
.:;.;;.S;. ritit ladj °1 insupportable (of a person). 
.::.-;.s:. ratiit lad jl unpleasant (of a person). 
up. ratuut ladjl unpleasant (of a person). 
~If rataata Inl unpleasant ness. 
.:;.;;.S;. rattit Ivil to cause unpleasantness. riI-liyaal 
kaanu b-yillabu w-mabsu{iin daxal rattit laleehum the 
kids were happily playing when in he came and spoilt 
everything for them. -vn tartiit; avalpva mirattit. 
617 
~I ritrattit Ivil (impersonal) passive of rattit. kull i 
leela ynaamu mitrattit laleehum every night they go to 
bed upset. - iva ",itrattit. 
.)~t 
.;:oS:- ragar Icoll nl I gypsies. 2 disreputable rowdy 
people. 
loS .;:oS:- ragari In pi ragarl I gypsy. 2 rowdy and foul-
mouthed man. 
;';.;:oS:- ragariyya In pi -aatl I gypsy woman. 2 rowdy 
and foul-mouthed woman . 
.;:oS:-i rargar leU morelmost abusive or foul-mouthed. 
;.s:. raggar Ivil to hurl abuse. bi-traggarii-Ii leeh ya 
wliyya -huwwa-na gooz-ik what are you screaming 
abuse at me for, woman - am I your husband? -vn 
targiir; ava miraggar. 
;"'1 ritraggar Ivil (impersonal) passive of raggar . 
rana mij illi yiIYaggar Iiihum I am not someone to be 
abused. - iva mitraggar. 
~I ristargar Ivtl to select for abusiveness. -ava 
mistargar. 
oj I ~t 
.:,1-1&. radaan Inlspice similar to a clove but larger, used 
in the preparation of muraat. 
~ ~ t 
o.:l&. rudda In pi rudad, ruduudl gland. 
.) ~t 
J-I&. radar (u) Ivil to act treacherously, break faith. 
~aljibt-u w-bald i1-lijra t-tawiila radar biyya I be-
friended him, and after a long friendship he turned 
against me. -vn radr; ava raadir; pva marduur. 
J-I&. radr Inl perfidy, treachery, betrayal.lIleen iI-radr 
perfidy incarnate, as in fi-wijf-i sinn-a-ha yidljak-Ii 
wi-f-qahr-i tb~~-i-Ii b-leen iI-radr she smiles to my face 
but plots treachery behind my back. 
oJ-I&. radra linst n. pi -aat, radaraatl an act of 
perfidy. 
radraat iz-zaman life's betrayals, life's 
disappointments. 
).:l&. raddaar ladj °1 perfidious, faithless. raddaar zayy 
i1-baljr [prov] as treacherous as the sea. 
J~I ritradar Ivil (impersonal) passive of radar . 
ritradar biiha she was betrayed. - iva mitridir. 
J~l&. raadirt Ivtl to depart from, leave (a place). mij 
mumkin tiraadir iI-bilaad you cannot leave the country. 
-vn muradra r; ava miraadir; pva muraadar. 

.J~t 
";JJ;. lfud[a In pi lfudaf/ tIght-fitting head-dress re-
sembling a wimple with a long attached cowl that falls to 
cover the upper part of the body (worn by Muslim 
women, especially when praying or making the 
pilgrimage). 
oj ~ t see oj I ~ t : lfadaan 
.J ~ t see ..; ~ t : lfadwa 
..;~t 
IJJ;. I'ada Inl midday meal, luncheon. kull' yoom tiruulj 
iI-lfeel lIwaddi I-lfada she carries lunch to the field every 
day. 
6JJJ;. lfadwa In pi -aat, lfldawJ I a lunch. fll-lfadwa 
kaamt kiwayyisa the lunch was good. II yadwa 
wi-tljasabit laleek here's a lunch and it's been put to 
your account (i.e. the lunch has been prepared specially 
for you, so eat: said by the host to encourage his guests 
to eat well). -lamliin lfadwa having a joint lunch (i.e. 
each contributing some food). 
LS~ lfadda Ivt/.to provide lunch for. fayyaam zamaan 
kaamt il-bamza tlfaddi leela in the old days ten piastres 
would buy lunch for a whole family. -ava mi'(addi. 
LS':;;"I fitlfadda Ivi and vtl to eat (for) lunch. fana Iissa 
ma-tlfaddet-jI haven't eaten lunch yet. flllfaddeena (b-) 
kabaab we had kebab for lunch. II fitlfadda bli c;abl' rna 
Yllla//a biik {prav/ (have him for lunch before he has 
you for supper) "" get your blow in first. - ava mitlfadd,. 
..; l t see ..; ~ t and J..; j t 
IY.Jt 
'-:' j:. lfirib onarab (u) Ivi/l to set (of the sun). lfuruub 
if-jams or riI-lfuruub sunset. fif-jams' lfarabll the sun 
has set. 21 {abus/ to go away, get lost, disappear. rna 
tUlfrub min wif/-i get out of my sight! - vn lfuruub, 
lfarabaan; ava '(aarib. 
'-:'.I1A11 riI-lfaarlb: sab-I(u) I-Ijabl d lal-lfaarlb' to give 
(s.o.) free rein, to let (s.o.) do what he wants. 
'-:' j:. lfarb Inl west. nizralld-dura gihit Iharb we plant 
the maize on the west side. II rif-/arc;' wil-lfarb all over 
the place, as in fiftara Ijagaat mif-jarc;' w-Ijagaat mil-
lfarb he bought some things from here and some from 
there. 
~j:. lfarbi, lfarbi' ladj */1 western. fll-baab i1-lfarbi 
the west door. 2 western, pertaining to Europe or 
America. riI-musiiqa I-lfarblyya western music. 
618 
'-,;JI riI-lfarb,yya Iprop nl Gharbiya, a province in 
the centre of the Delta, administered from Tanta. 
LSJ~ j:. lfUrbaawi, lfarbaawi Ipl -yya/l ladjl of or per-
taining to Gharbiya, from Gharbiya. 2 Inl a man from 
Gharbiya. 
-;.., j;. lfurba Inl state of being a stranger or foreigner, 
separation from one's home town and people. f,l-'(urba 
tlallim {prov/ being a stranger teaches self-reliance. 
"-! 1 j;. lfaraaba Inl strangeness. feeh lfUraabit ti-Ijlkaaya 
di what is so strange about this story? 
~j;. lfariib I/adj *1 la strange, surprising. '(anib 
finni ma-ju[t-uu-j it's strange that I didn't see him. 
Ib Ipl falfraab, lfurb, lfurabal from the outside, alien, 
foreign. waaljid lfariib lan II-leela one not related to 
the family. glsm' lfarlib [iz-zoor a foreign body In the 
throat. 2 In pi falfraab, lfurb, lfurabal stranger, outsid-
er. II riI-lfariib falma wa-Iaw kaan b~iir {prov/ (the 
stranger is blind no matter how good his sight) an 
outsider, no matter how wise, can never understand 
your problems. 
~,;JI riI-lfariib Iprop n/: siid-II-lfariib a Muslim saint 
who~e tomb is in Suez. 
....... j:. lfariiba Inl I any of a number of eye ,ailments. 
2 Icolll impurities in grain. - linterjl 3 how strange! 
'-:' j:. i falfrab lell strangerlstrangest. 
,-:,';'" malfrib In pi malfaariblla period around sunset, 
late afternoon. Ij-agib-hum-Iak in-nahar-da I-ma'(rib 
I will bring them to you at sunset. Ib riI-malfrib or 
~alaat ti-malfrlb {lsi/ the sunset prayer. 2a west, place 
where the sun sets. riI-ma/aaric; wll-ma'(aarib (the easts 
and the wests) everywhere, as In rabb II-ma/aaric; wil-
malfaarib Lord of the whole world. 2b riI-malfrib 
(1) North Africa to the west of Libya. (2) Morocco. 
LJ.';'" malfrabi Ipl malfarba/i/adj/la of or pertaining 
to North Africa west of Libya. II mooz malfrabi variety 
of high quality banana with a spotted skin. Ib Moroc-
can. 2 In! a Moroccan. ' 
~,;... mamblyya In pi -aatl period around sunset, late 
afternoon. 
'-:'~ '(arrab Ivt/l to cause to leave one's home, cause 
to go abroad. fakl iI-lee/lfarrab-ni I left home in search 
of a livelihood. 2 to estrange. riI-buld' lfarrab-na long 
separation has made us strangers. - Ivil 3 to turn or 
move t? the west. tilfarrab tifarrac; mif Ija-taaxud lfeer 
n~iib-ak go west, go east, you will get only what has 
been predestined for you. -ava milfarrab. 
,-:,).;1 fitlfarrab Ivi/l to leave one's home for a differ-
ent city or country. fitlfarabt' w- fana [-sinn itnaa/ar 
I left home at twelve. 2 to be made to leave one's home 
for another city. - avaliva mitlfarrab. 

,-:,.;J:-I I'irtagrab Ivil to settle abroad. - vn I'irtiraab; ava 
mirtirib. 
'-:'.;;.. murtarib In "II [aead! foreign student. 2 Arab 
emigrant living in a non-Arab country. 
,-:,.;::-1 I'istarrab I Ivtl to consider strange or amazing. 
I'istarrabt illi Ij~al I thought what had happened was 
astonishing. 2 Ivil to be astonished, be amazed, be sur-
prised. I'ana b-astarrab I'innak bi-tirfii-ni I am asto-
nished that you should bribe me. ba~~uu-Ii bi-stiyraab 
they looked at me in amazement. - vn I'istiyraab; ava 
mislllrrab. 
lYJt. 
,-:,I~ yuraab In pi Yirbaan, Yirba, yiribal I crow. 
II ruraab nuulji raven. -lifF ruraab fungi (specifically 
mushrooms). - rurzit rigli yuraab herring-bone stitch. 
- ruraab ii-been bird of ill-omen, one who brings bad 
news or misfortune. -laamil zayy iI-yuraab crabbed 
and ugly. - I'eef (or yaama) gaab iI-yuraab I-umm-u 
[prov! what (or how often) did the crow bring to its 
mother? (of one who brings a worthless gift or dis-
appoints in the fulfilment of his obligations). -nizil 
b-iid-u rigli YUraab [ilil biiha xufP gamal he stuck in his 
hand thin (i.e. empty) as a crow's foot and pulled it out 
thick (i e. full) as a camel's hoof (of a greedy eater). 
-zayy i gamliY),it iI-yirbaan I'awwil-ha kaak wi- I'axir-ha 
kaak [prov! like a meeting of crows, nothing but caw-
ing. 28 [carp, metal! dead centre (of a lathe). 2b [text] 
tip (of a shuttle). 
J Y J t. see Y IS IS J t. : yurayyiba 
JYJt. 
J~ ~ yurbaal In pi yarabiill large coarse-meshed 
sieve, riddle. IIfaal iI-mayya bil-rurbaal [prov] (he car-
ried the water in the sieve) ... he managed the impossi-
ble. - l'iI-rurbaal ig-gidiid lufadda [prov] (the new sieve 
is taut) ... a new broom sweeps clean. - I'illi ma yfuuf 
min iI-yurbaal yibc;a I'alma [prov! he who can't see 
through a sieve must be blind (of one who is blind to the 
obvious). - I'abu yarabiil dragon-fly. 
J. ~ yarbil I Ivtl to sieve or sift with a yurbaal. 
bi-yyarbil iI-ralla he sifts the wheat. IIfi-yoom is-subuUl 
bi-yrarbilu I-layyil fi-yurbaal they shake the baby 
around in a sieve on the seventh day after his birth. 
2/vil [eng, meeh, auto! to shake, vibrate, spin off 
balance, spin off centre. lagal iI-larabiyya laayiz 
yitwizin lafaan ma-yrarbilJ the car's wheels need 
balancing so that they won't vibrate. -vn yarbala; aval 
pva miyarbil. 
619 
J. ..... I I'ityarbil Ivil to be sieved or sifted with a 
yurbaal. - iva mityarbil. 
I J J t. 
~ rarr (u) Ivtl to deceive, take in. I'ik-kalaam da 
yarr-i-ni the business took me in. kaanit mayruurafiik 
she overrated you. -vn ~'arr, yararaan; ava yaarir; pva 
marruur. 
)J';'" mayruur (also mayruur fin-nafs) ladj "I con-
ceited, vain. 
)J ~ yuruur Inl vanity, conceit. I'il-yuruur waxd-u he is 
utterly conceited. 
)J j;. yaruur ladj invar, sometimes fem yaruural 
treacherous (of time, life etc.). I'id-dinya l-yaruura the 
deceptive world, life the deceiver. 
).;1 I'ityarr Ivi/l to be deceived, be taken in. I'ityarreet 
fi-gamal-ha I was taken in by her beauty. 2 to become 
conceited or vain. - avaliva mityarr. 
11 I'ityarr i f-nafs(-u} to become vain. 
).;1 I'inyarr = I'itrarr. - avaliva minyarr. 
2(JJt.l 
~ yurr Icoll nl coot(s). 
o~ yurra In pi -aat, rurarl I blaze (on a horse's fore-
head). 2 first day of a lunar month. 
o;lj;. raraara In pI raraayirllarge bag of stout coarse-
ly-woven material for grain (capacity approximately 
120 kg.). 
j J t. 
j j;. yaraz, yaraz (i) (also yaras) I Ivtl to plant, insert 
(especially in the ground). yarazt: 'l~ayt-i fil-I'art/." 
lafaan I'alallim iI-makaan I planted my stick in the 
ground to mark the place. yarazt i ~baal-i f-leen-u 
I poked my finger in his eye. 2 Ivil to become stuck. 
rigl-i yarazit fi[-(iin my foot got stuck in the mud. 
1'i1-larabiyya Yarazit fir-rami the car got stuck in the 
sand. -vn yarz, yarazaan; ava Yaariz; pva mayruuz. 
oj ~ yurza In pi -aat, '(uraz! I stitch. 2 place such as 
small teashop, in which hashish is smoked. 
oj!. ~ yariiza In pI yaraayizl instinct. rariizit ig-gins the 
sexual instinct. I'is-sirc;a yariizafiihum they are a thiev-
ing lot. 
1.Sj!.j;. YariiziT ladj *1 instinctive, impulsive, natural. 
da raagilljissi w-yariizi he is a sensuous man who obeys 
only his natural instincts. 
j';'" mayraz In pi maYaarizl [slang] trick, trap, intri-
gue (against s.o.). 
j ..... 1 I'ityaraz (also I'ityaras) Ivil I to be planted, be 
inserted. l'ifJatla laazim tityiriz gaamid fil- I'art/. the 

seedling should be firmly fixed in the ground. 2 to 
become stuck. rigl-i tyarazit fi{-{iin my foot got stuck in 
the mud. 3 to fall victim (to an intrigue). !,ityarazt' 
fil-mae;lab illi lamalu-huu-Ii I fell in the trap they laid 
for me. - avaliva mityiriz. 
.;;.;1 !'inyaraz = !'ityaraz. -ava/iva minyiriz. 
..,.. J t. see j J t.: Yaras. !'itYaras 
u'" J t. 
...,.,.J- yarm[ In pi !'aYraaql I desired end, objective, 
goal. !'eeh i1-yaraq min kida what's the purpose of that? 
!'ana yaraq-i !'ae;ul-Iak xalli baal-ak what I'm trying to 
tell you is, take care! Il/uu yaraq fiiha he wants her 
(usually with the sense: he wants to marry her). -fii 
Yaraq fi-nafs-u he's up to something. - !'i1-yaraq in 
short, to cut a long story short, as in !'i/-Yaraqya babibt-i 
nizilt' w-xadt i1-!'utubiis in short, my dear, I went out 
and took the bus. - !'eef Yaraq i1-!'alma - e;aal e;utfit 
liyuun {pray] what could a blind man want more than a 
basket full of eyes? (said when s.th. longed for is 
offered). 2 bias, prejudice. !,if-firka kull-a-ha !'ayraaq 
the company runs on favouritism. !'iI-yaraq maraq 
{pray] prejudice is a sickness. - !'ayraaq Ipl nl 
3 movable belongings, personal effects. 
...,.,,;... muYriq/adj 'I biased. !,i1-bakam {ilil muyriq the 
referee turned out to be biased. 
J I t.J t. 
.)\&..J- yirYaar: xafab yiryaar {carp] cheap poor quality 
wood such as is used as a base for inlay work. 
Jt.Jt. 
.J-.J- Yaryar Ivil to gargle. -vn Yarmra; ava mimrmr. 
".J-.J- yaryara Inl gargle, liquid used for gargling. 
.J-;.;I !'itmryar Ivill = Yaryar. 2 (impersonal) passive 
of yaryar. !'id-dawa da yityarmr bii this medicine is to 
be used as a gargle. -avaliva mitYarmr. 
-Jt.Jt. 
~.J-.J- mrYariina <prob It gangrena> Inl gangrene. 
I"';Jt. 
";'.J- yaraF. Yarafl (i) Ivtl to serve or distribute (food) 
with a ladle or large spoon. mrf if-jurba fi/-!'a{baae; 
ladling soup into bowls. yalla las-sufra maama yarafit 
i1-!'akl up at the table! mother's dished out the food! 
II law rubt i1-kuweet tie;dar tiyrif filuus zayy' ma-nta 
laayiz if you went to Kuwait you'ld be able to rake in as 
620 
much money as you wanted. - vn yarf, yariif; ava yaarif; 
pva magruuf. 
";'.J- mraF. yaraF (u) Ivil to eat in large mouthfuls. 
!,inta b-tuyruf leeh huwwa-nta f-sabae; why are you gob-
bling down your food? do you think you're in a race? 
II !'uYruf fil-mayya {naut] hold water! -vn mrf; ava 
yaarif. 
~,;... mayrafa In pi mayaarifl I ladle, scoop. IIballa 
w-huwwa mayrafit-ha {pray] (a cooking pot and he's its 
ladle) == he knows the matter through and through. 
2 ladleful. kifaaya min iz-ziir mayrafa {pray] (one 
ladleful from the pitcher is enough) satisfy your needs 
modestly . 
..;,;.;1 !'ityaraf, !,itmraf Ivil passive of yaraF and 
mraf2. - avaliva mityirif. 
2"';Jt. 
~.J- yurfa1 In pi mraflroom. yurfitlamaliyyaatoper-
ating theatre. !'iI-yurfa t-tugariyya the Chamber of 
Commerce. 
JJt. 
.j.J- yirie; (a) Ivill to sink in water, drown. !'i1-markib 
yire;it the ship sank. !'iI-walad Yirie; fit-tirla the boy 
drowned in the canal. lIyiYrae; fi-jibr' mayya {pray] 
(he'd drown in a hand-span of water) == he couldn't 
fight his way out of a paper bag. - Yirie; fi-mafaakil to 
become bogged down in problems. - yare;aan fin-naam 
fast asleep. - yare;aan li-juft-u fil-bubb hopelessly in 
love. - yirie; fil-kitaab to become totally absorbed in the 
book. 2 to become soaked, became drenched. e;ami~-i 
yare;aan damm'my shirt is soaked in blood. -vn yarae;; 
ava yare;aan . 
..:;....J- yariie; lIn 'I drowned man. 2 In, no pll deep 
water. !'iI-wue;uuf fil-yariie; treading water . 
.j~ yarrae; Ivtl I to submerge, drown. 2 to soak. 
drench, flood. !'in-na{ara yarrae;it-hum the rain soaked 
them. !'iI-babr' zaad wi-yarrae; i1-bilaad the Nile rose 
and flooded the country. 3 to entangle, bog down. -vn 
tayriie;; avalpva miyarrae; . 
.j)';1 !'ityarrae; Ivil I to be submerged, be drowned. 
2 to be soaked, be drenched, be flooded. bi-yistanna 
fil-yee{ Ii-badd' ma I-mayya tiigi wi-yityarrae; it stays in 
the field until the water comes and it is flooded. -aval 
iva mityarrae; . 
.j~1 !'istayrae; Ilvtl to take up, consume (time). 
!'i1-bikaaya stayrae;it wae;t' {awiil the matter took a long 
time. 2 (also !'istayraq 1) Ivil to be absorbed, be im-
mersed (in s.th.). lae;eet-u mistayrae; fil-kitaab I found 

him absorbed in (reading) the book. - ava mistalI'ralj. 
. JJJt. 
~;.,so. mrilla <perh Engl> In pi -aatl gorilla. 
I r J t. 
r):- l(irim or mrum (a) Ivtl to pay as an unwarranted 
expense. rul:Jt itlaffeet fi-mallam l(irimt i xamsa gneeh 
I went and had dinner in a restaurant and had to fork 
out five pounds. fie[-e[aamin l(aarim [prov] (it's the 
guarantor who pays up) don't stand as a guarantor; 
you'll pay for it. -vn mraama; ava l(aarim, l(armaan. 
... 1):- mraama In pi -aatll fine. filii yxaalifil-muruur 
yidfalmraama those who violate the traffic laws have 
to pay a fine. 2 unwarranted expense.l:Ja-naaxud taks i 
mala finnaha tiblja mraama gamda we'll take a cab 
even though it'll cost a bomb. 
rot):- l(ariim In pi mramal 1 adversary, oppononent, 
antagonist. 2 [obsol] debtor or creditor. 
r);. mrram Ivtl 1 to fine. 2 to put to unwarranted ex-
pense, sting for a large sum. bi-yillabu fil-laddaad 
bi-yxalluu yigri zyaada lafaan yimrramuu-na they fid-
dle with the meter and make it go faster than it should 
so that they can make us pay through the nose. -vn 
tal(riim; avalpva mimrram. 
r ~I fitmrram Ivil passive of l(arram. - iva mitl(arram. 
2 r J t. 
rl):- mraam Inl passionate love. II fibn i l(araam a 
fun-lover. 
..,.-1):- l(araami ladjl pertaining to love. riwaaya 
l(aramiyya romantic novel. 
.::..t:.I):- l(aramiyyaat Ipl nl romances, love affairs. 
r';" mUl(ram ladj *1 fond (of), having a liking (for). 
fil-fuljaha mUl(ramiin fatta Koran-readers are partial to 
fatta. IImul(ram ~abaaba madly in love. 
IISJt. 
.1):- .1):- l(ira Inll glue. 2 fixative. 
ISJ):- l(arawif 
ladjl 1 gluey, glutinous, viscous. 
2 [chem] colloidal. 
'::"~J):- mrawiyyaat Ipl nl [chem] colloids. 
~ I);. l(arraaya In pi -aatl vessel for melting or dispens-
ing glue, glue-pot. 
IS);. l(arra Ivtl to glue. waal:Jid bi-ygammal il-fagzaaf 
fi-bale[i wit-taani bi-Yl(arrii-hum one assembles the 
parts and the other glues them. IIxabuur mil(arri (1) a 
nasty trick. (2) a tight ~pot, an awkward situation. -vn 
tal(riyya; avalpva mil(arri. 
621 
IS ~I fitl(arra Ivil to be glued. fil-l:Jittiteen itl(arru f-
bale[ the two pieces were glued together. - iva mitl(arri . 
21S J t. 
lSj:-i fal(ra Ivtl to allure, tempt, seduce. fil-fuguur 
ik-kibiira b-tirrii-hum yijtal(alu fil-xaarig the high pay 
lures them to work abroad. -vn fil(raaf; ava mUl(ri. 
.I):-! fil(raaf Inl temptation. malikit il-fil(raaf sex 
siren. 
.::..~.;.. mUl(riyaatf Ipl nl attractions, allurements. 
~ISISJt. 
"';'j:- mrayyiba Icoll n, pi -aatl rich buttery biscuit(s) 
somewhat similar to shortbread. 
J I j t. 
}J- mzaar Icoll nl pigeon(s) of a breed distinguished 
by a very short beak. 
I J j t. 
o}J- l(azaara Inl abundance. l(azaarafil-fintaag a high 
rate of production. laazim titriwi b-l(azaara it has to be 
heavily irrigated . 
.J'..:J- l(aziir ladjl abundant, thick, luxuriant. fagar 
l(aziir dense bushy trees. daljn i l(aziira a luxuriant 
beard. malar l(aziir a downpour. 
;:J-i fal(zar r lell morelmost abundant. 
2 J j t. see J I j t. : mzaar 
I j j t. 
) 
l(azz (u) Ivtl 1 to poke, prod (with s.th.). l(azz 
il-l:Jumaar fi-raljabt-u bil-l~aaya he prodded the donk-
ey in the neck with the stick. 2 to poke, insert (into 
s. th.). ~ubaal-i raal:J mal(zuuzfil-lagiina my finger sank 
into the dough. -vn l(azz. l(azazaan; ava l(aaziz; pva 
mal(ZUuz . 
• ) 
l(azza J linst n, pi -aatll a prod, a poke. 2 sudden 
sharp pain, stitch. ga-k l(azza may you perish! 
).;1 fitl(azz Ivil to be poked, be prodded. - iva mitl(azz. 
).;1 finl(azz = fitl(azz. - iva minl(azz. 
2 j j t. 
0) l(azza 2 Iprop nl Gaza. 
ISJI) l(azzaawi 1 ladj *1 of or pertaining to Gaza. 
2 In *1 one from Gaza. 
J j j t. 
JAIl fil-l(uZZ <T oguz> Icoll nl [obsol] the Ottoman 
ruling caste. II faaxir xidmit il-l(uZZ "lallja [p ro vI all the 

thanks you get for serving a Turk is a beating. 
jtjt 
j:-j:- ¥an-az. ¥an-iz Ivtl to poke or prod repeatedly. 
fiqil yhaz¥az iI-l:Jumaar lamma ljamma~ wi-waljljal-U 
he kept prodding the donkey till it bucked and threw 
him. -vn ¥az¥aza; avalpva mi¥az¥az. mi¥az¥iz. 
j:-.;,o;1 5'it¥az¥az. 5'it¥az¥iz Ivil to be poked repeatedly. 
- iva mit¥an-az. mit¥aZHZ. 
IJjt 
Jj:- ¥azal l (i) Ivtl to spin. bl-ti¥zil ~uufbil-ma¥zal she's 
spinning wool on the spindle. - vn ¥azl; ava ¥aazil; pva 
ma¥zuul. 
Jj:- ¥azllnl spun thread, yarn. II ¥azl il-banaat candy 
floss, cotton candy. - 5'itlaxba{ ¥azl-u he became con-
fused, he found himself at a loss. -leefa f-sUUlj iI-¥azl 
/prov] «a woman named) leefa in the (crowded) yarn 
market) ,., a needle in a haystack. 
JI) ¥azzaalln pi ¥azzaalal spinner. 
..JI) ¥azzaala In pi -aatl female spinner. II 5'i/-¥azzaala 
b-ti¥zil bi-rigl' I:Jmaar [prov] a (good) spinster can spin 
(even) with a donkey's leg. 
JjAo ma¥zalln pi ma¥aazil! 1 spindle. II 5'abu ma¥aazil 
stork. 2 spinning-mill. 
JjAo ma¥zali ladjl spindle-shaped. 
J.;,o;I 5'it¥azallvil to be spun. - iva mit¥izil. 
J;..; I 5'tn¥azal = 5'it¥azal. -Iva min¥izil. 
1 Jj t 
Jj:- ¥azal 2 (I) IVII to squmt, look sideways. - vn ¥azl. 
¥azalaan; ava ¥aaZII. 
J) ¥aZZII IVII to lose consciousness, faint. IIlenee 
¥azztlit the whites of his eyes showed and he fainted. 
- vn ta¥Zltl. ¥azalaan; avalpva ml¥azzil. 
3 Jj t 
Jj:- ¥azal' Inl 1 addressing of endearments to girls, 
flirting with girls. 2 love poetry. 
J)i. ¥aaZlllvtl to address with endearments, flirt with. 
ljaam b,-salamt-u yyaaztl Ig-gaww' btaal-i the smart-
aleck had the cheek to flirt with my girl. 5'i/-l:Jamaam 
bi-y~aw~aw w,-b,-pfaaztl balq-II the pigeons bill and 
coo to one another. - vn ml¥azla; ava miyaazil. 
J) .• .;I 5'it¥aazillvil passive of ¥aaztl. - iva mit¥aazil. 
4 Jj t 
Jlj:- ¥azaal In pi ¥IIzlaan. ¥izlaanl gazelle, (loosely 
also) deer. Ib'a ¥azaal form of address to a pretty girl. 
- 5'al:Jmar damm i1-yazaal scarlet. 
622 
J'lj:- mzlaani. ¥izlaani l/adjl gazelle-like (of the 
eyes). 2/callig] script based on the hamayooni and 
diwaani styles (named after its originator. Ghuzlan 
Bey) . 
..J Ij:- ¥azaala In pi -aat. ¥izlaan. mzlaanl female gazel-
le.1I bl-¥azaala temperamental, capricious. -[illit lalee 
(or gat-Iu) I-¥azaala w-saafir he got one of his whims 
and went abroad. 
oJ Jj t 
J j:- ¥azlin Ivil to 
lo~e consciousness, faint. - vn 
¥azlana; ava mi¥azlin. 
.J j t see l.s j t: ¥azwa 
l.sjt 
.sj:- ¥aza (i) Ivtl to invade. 5'isra5'iil ¥azit siina Israel 
invaded Smal. -vn ¥azw; ava ¥aazi. 
oJj:- ¥azwa linst n, pi -aatl campaign of conquest 
(especially one of the early Islamic campaigns). 
... .:,\&. ¥aazi 2 In pi ¥uzaahf I invader . 
~.:,\&. ¥aziyya In pi ¥awaazil female dancer and singer 
(especially in rural areas). II 5'id-dinya zayy iI-¥aziyya -
tirlju~ li-kull' waal:Jid fiwayya /prov] fortune is like a 
dancing-girl, it dances a little ~o_r everyone. 
....;,0;1 5'it¥aza Ivil to be invaded. -iva mit¥izi. 
1 
.' 
.sJt 
...jAo ma¥za Inl meaning, import, significance, im-
plication. ya lara 5'eeh ma¥za zyaaril ir-ra5'iis iI-mufag5'a 
I-rusya I wonder what is the significance of the Presi-
dent's sudden visit to Russia. kalam-ha ykayyif wi-Iuu 
ma¥zaa what she says is good to listen to and makes 
sense. 
3.sjt 
.Ii&. ¥iza Inl nourish~ent, nutrition. 5'il-laban Ylza 
kwayyis lil- 5'alfaal milk is very nourishing for children . 
.)Ii&. Hzaa 5'1 r lad]1 nutritional. laha ljlima ¥iza 5'iyya 
fafar iI-lal:Jma it has nutritional value that beats meat 
hollow. 
,,-!i&. i 5'a¥ziya r Ipl nl foodstuffs. victuals. mu 5'assassil 
~inaalil iI-5'a¥ziya the General Organization for 
Foodstuffs. 
...1. ¥azza' Ivtll to nourish, feed. SUIl5' il-Ia¥ziya mal-
nutrition. 2 to feed. supply. 5'ls-silk' da bi-y¥azzi 1-
mul:Jarrik this cable supplies the engine. - vn la¥ziya. 
ta~ziyya; avalpva mmlZZI. 
... ~ mu¥azzi ladjl nourishing. 
... ..i.;.;1 5'il¥azza Ivi/ passive of ¥azza '. -iva mtl¥azzi. 

JI.,,.,f:. 
J..-&. l'asal (i) Ivtl I to wash. bi-til'sil iI-l'asiil wi-tinfur-u 
kul/' yaam she does the washing and hangs it out every 
day. laazim ti1rsil sinaan-ak ljabl' ma tnaam you should 
brush your teeth before you go to bed. II l'asal-ha wi-
nafar-ha he made a public spectacle of her. 2/textj to 
scour. fil-l'asiil wit-taghiiz scouring and finishing. - vn 
l'asiil, ~'asl; ava/pva mal'sulli. 
J.,.-&. l'asiil Inl I Ivnl wash, washing. kul/-ll yi{lar; [il-
l'asiil /prov} it will all come out in the wash. II l'asiil 
iI-farq fagric} flooding the land to remove salinity. 
-r;amaluu-Iu l'asiil muxx they brainwashed him. 
-r;amalllll-ill l'asiil mir;da they cleared his stomach us-
ing a stomach-pump. 2 wa~h, laundry. b-alimm il-l'asiil 
(jabl iI-mal'rib I will take the laundry off the line before 
sunset. babl i l'asiil clothes line. 
:iL..<. l'asla linst n, pi -aatl a washing. nil'sil-ha l'asla 
kwayyisa we give it a good wash(ing). bi-tibsib-u 
l'asliteen wi-b-taaxud minni tisr;iin ljirfshe counts it as a 
double load of washing and charges me ninety piastres. 
J..-&. 'l{lIsl Inl {lslJ ritual bathing. 'l{usl iI-mayyit washing 
of the dead in preparation for burial. 
.Jw. 'l{assaala In pi -aatl I washer-woman. 2 washing 
machine. 
.J.....;.. ma'l{sala In pi ma'l{aasill table on which corpses 
are washed. 
...).....0;1 fitl'asal Ivil I to be washed. 2 [text} to be 
scoured. - iva mit'l{isil. 
J-..o; 1 fin'l{asal = fit'l{asal. - iva min'l{isil. 
~ 
'l{assil Ivtl to wash (a corpse). 'l{assilna I-marbuum 
wi-ka[[innaa we washed the deceased and wrapped him 
in a shroud. lI'I{assil-u wi-r;mil-Iu r;imma - ljaal fana 
m'l{assil wi-qaamin ganna {pravj ('Wash him and put a 
turban on his head!' He said, 'Am I a corpse-washer, 
and a guarantor of Paradise?') "" you can only do so 
much to help people; they have to do some things 
themselves. -vn tal'siil; ava/pva mil'assil . 
.;..:..u mi¥assil In *1 corpse-washer. 
.... ~ 
mi'l{assalaati In pi -yyal = mi'l{assil. 
~ 
1 fit'l{assil Ivil to be washed (of a corpse) - iva 
mit'l{assil. 
~I fi'l{tasal Ivil [Islj to perform the major ritual 
ablution (i.e. to wash the entire body). - vn fi'l{tisaal; 
ava mU'l{tasii. 
..r J.t 
~ 
'l{aff (i) Ivt/ I to cheat, deceive. fil-gazzaar 'l{aff 
iz-zibllun [il-mizaan the butcher swindled the customer 
by giving him short weight. II bidaal ma-t'l{ijf-u ljul-Iu 
f-wijf-u {pravj (rather than deceive him, tell him to his 
623 
face) "" it's better to tell a painful truth than to mislead. 
2 to adulterate. [ii naas bi-t¥ijf id-duxxaan some people 
adulterate tobacco. fil-Iaban i1-yameen daol ma¥fuuf 
xaali~ milk is very much watered down these days. 3 to 
counterfeit (money). fil-[iluus il-ma'l{fuufa ktiira [is-
suulj there's a lot of counterfeit money going around. 
-
Ivi/4 to cheat. bi-t'l{ijF f-Iir;b il-kutfiina she cheats at 
cards. 5 to fall sick from eating the wrong, or dirty, food 
(of cattle and sheep). - vn 'l{ijj, 'l{ajajaan; ava ¥aafij; pva 
ma'l{fuuf· 
~ 
'l{ijafi In *1 cheat, one who cheats. 
~w, 'l{affaaf In *1 cheat, one who cheats. 
~I fit¥aff Ivil passive of ¥aff. - iva mit¥aff. 
~I fin¥aff = fit¥aff. -iva min'l{aff. 
~ 
'l{affij Ivtl to help to cheat, co-operate with in 
cheating. filii bi-y¥ijF wi-iii y¥affij-u I-itneen ba-yit{irdu 
mil-imtibaan both he who cheats and he who helps him 
will be disqualified from the exam. - vn ta¥fiij; ava/pva 
mi~affij. 
....,......0;1 fit¥affij Ivil passive of ¥ilffij. - iva mit¥affij. 
rJ.t 
~ 
mfumiyya Inl naivete, inexperience . 
~i fa¥fam lell I more/most naive of inexperienced. 
2 more/most crude, raw etc . 
~ 
¥afiim ladj pi mfml I naive, inexperienced, 
ma-tljulji r;alayya 'l{afiim da-na b-astar;ba{ bass don't 
think I'm naive, I'm only acting silly. 2 crude, raw, 
unworked. badiid ¥afiim crude iron. bu~aan 'l{afiim an 
untrained horse. xafab ¥afiim [carp} unworked timber. 
~\<:. 'l{aafim1 ladjl brutal, oppressive, tyrannical, 
unjust. 
~I;.;I fit¥aafim Ivil to act stupidly or oafishly. - ava 
mit'l{aafim. 
~I fista¥fam or fista¥fim 1 Ivtl to consider unex-
perienced or oafish. Ivil 2 to act stupidly or oafishly. 
- ava/iva mista'l{fim. 
-sJ.t 
~ 
'l{iji: ¥iji r;alee (r;aleeha, r;aleehum etc.) he (she, 
they etc.) fainted or became unconscious. -vn 
'l{afayaan; pva ma'l{fi. 
",W ¥afyaan ladjl unconscious, fainting. 
.w, ¥ijaaf Inl 1 cover. 2 membrane. 
'Jw, 'l{ijaawa Inl cover, covering, veil. II fil-gahli 
'l{faawa "" ignorance is blind. 
""'I.1"'t 
~ 
¥a~ab (i) Ivtl to force, compel. mij mar;ljuul 
fa¥~ib bint-i tiggawwiz it's inconceivable that I should 

force my daughter to marry. -vn lI~b; ava lIa~ib; pva 
mall~uub. 
~ 
lI~b InJ force. IlbiI-lI~b by force. faxaduu-ha 
minni bil-lI~b they took it from me by force. 
~ lI~bin lan or lI~b· lan in spite of, despite. lI~bin 
lan leen ... against the will of ...• as in lamal il-waagib 
bitaal-u lI~bin lan leen-u he did his homework under 
protest. 
..,...u;1 
fitll~ab Ivil to be forced, be compelled. -iva 
mitll~ib. 
.,-;.;1 finll~ab = fitll~ab. -iva minll~ib. 
~I 
fillt~abf Ivtll to force, force open. fillt~ab 
il-liifl he forced the lock. II fillt~ab diljka he forced a 
laugh. 2 to rape. -vn 
fillt~aab; ava millt~ib; pva 
mUllt~ab. 
~ 
mUllt~ibr In *1 raper, rapist. 
~~t 
w lI~~a T In pI lI~~1 a choking. II wuguud-i zayy 
il-lI~~a I-fialb-u my presence is unbearable to him. 
~I fitll~~ Ivillabus] to be choked. win-nabi titll~~ 
by the Prophet, may you be choked! may you never say 
another word! -ava mitll~~. 
';'~t 
~ 
lI~n T In pI fall~aan, y~uunl branch (of a tree). 
IIlI~n il-baan epithet for a woman with a slender and 
graceful figure. 
y~t 
~ 
lIiqib or lIuqub (a) Ivi/l to become angry. lIiqibt' 
giddan lamma smilt inn il-walad sifii( I got furious 
when I heard that the boy had failed (his exam). wi/f-u 
baayin lalee l-lIaqab he looks angry. 2 to become 
estranged from and leave one's husband. hiyya 
bafia-Iha talat fasabiil lIaqbaana land axuu-ha she's 
been three weeks estranged from her husband is and 
staying at her brother's. -vn lIaqab; ava lIaqbaan; pva 
mallquub. 
~ lIiqib lala to turn down, refuse because of being 
offended. lIiqbit lal-lariis illi gabuu liha she turned 
down the suitor they brought for her. saalit ma 
yitxaanifi yillqab lal- fakl whenever he quarrels he re-
fuses to eat. IIl'inta Ija-tillqab lal-bayyaal "" I am not a 
salesman for you to act so choosy with me! (said, e.g., 
to one refusing an offer of help). 
~ 
lIaqba linst n, pI -aatl fit of anger. 
~ .,:..s. lIuquuba Inl state of estrangement (between a 
hu~band and wife). 
~ 
lIaqqab Ivtl to cause (one's wife) to leave the 
624 
ho~se. -vn tallqiib; ava millaqqab. 
..,.......1 fitl/aqqab Ivil to be caused to leave the house 
(of a wife by her husband). -iva mitllaqqab. 
~i fallqabIvtl to anger, offend. huwwa-nalamalt·-
Ijaaga tillqib rabb-i-na did I offend God in any way? 
.J.J~t 
..JJ ~ 
lIaqruu{ In pI lIaqariif/ gristle, cartilage. 
jJ~ lIaqruufi, lIuqruufiT ladjl gristly, cartilagi-
nous. II finzilaafi lIaqruufi slipped disc, intervertebral 
disc protrusion . 
~~t 
..Jai:- lIaqqT (u): lIaqq i,,-na;ar lan to disregard, 
ignore, forget about. huwwa laazim yilluqq in-na;ar 
lan ir-riljla di he should forget about this trip. qarrart 
inni falluqq in-na;ar lan il-lariis da I decided to refuse 
this suitor. -vn lIaqq; ava lIaaqiq; ava mallquuq. 
~ bi-lIaqq in-na;ar lan regardless of, not to mention. 
""'.J.1.t 
4-P 
lIa(rasa Inl arrogance. 
..,..).;.. milla(ras ladj *1 arrogant. 
..,.. Ja-;I fitl/a(ras Ivil to act in a lordly way, swagger, 
strut. fil-lamiil il-mitlla(ras luu mUlamla x~~a the 
snobbish customer is given special treatment. -vn 
talla(rus; ava mitlla(ras. 
"",.lot 
..,..los. lIi[is or lIU[US (a) Ivil I to submerge, dive. fiqilt' 
lIaa(is xamas dafiaayifi I stayed submerged five mi-
nutes. bi-yill[asu min lafara mitr they dive from (a 
height of) ten metres. 2 to disappear, vanish. finta 
lIaa[is leen il-mudda di kull-a-ha where have you been 
hiding yourself all this time? lIi[is ma-fiabb'{ he dis-
appeared without trace. -vn lIa[s; ava lIaa[is, lIa(saan. 
~ 
lIa(sa linst n, pI -aatl a dive. 
..,.J.l&. lIaa(is Inllnaut} draught (of a ship). 
..,..los. lIU(S Inl a quick swim, dip. yalla niqrab lIU(S let's 
go in for a dip! 
..,..u...J1 l'il-lIu(aas, ru-lIi(aas InllChr] Epiphany. 
...,...Ja&. lIa(iis: fiswid lIa(iis pitch black. 
..,..~ lIu((aas In *1 I diver. II fil-mayya tkaddib il-
lIa((aas Iprov} (water gives the lie to the diver) "" the 
proof of the pudding is in the eating. 2 fil-baljr il-
lIa({aas the bottomless sea, in the magic formula: 
Ij-armii-k {i1-baljr il-lIa({aas wi-ma-ykun-Iak{' la manga 
wala xala~ "" I'll throw thee (i.e. the evil eye) in the 
deep deep sea and not a soul can rescue thee (used in 
rafiw to ward off the evil eye). 

625 
..,.J.M maytas In pI mayaatisll bathing tank (in a pub-
lic bath). 1 {Chr] baptistry. 
~ 
yattas Ilvtl to submerge, immerse. fit-ta~iir 
iI-fiassiis bi-yyattas iI-cayyil fil-mayya I-muqaddasa dur-
ing the baptism ceremony the priest immerses the baby 
in the consecrated water. Ilvil to stay away for a while, 
disappear for some time. fana mif caarif faxuu-ya 
myaaas feen bafiaa-Iu sana I wonder where my brother 
has been hiding himself for the past year. -vn taytiis; 
ava/pva miyattas. 
~I fityattas Ivil to be submerged, be immersed. 
- iva mitYa{(as. 
J:,J:, . 
. 
t 
~ yatt (u) 1 Ivtl to plunge, immerse. yatti fiid-u fil-
fakl he plunged his hand into the food. Ilvil to fall fast 
asleep. -vn Yatt, yatataan; ava yaatit; pva may(Uut. 
1...1 fitya{( Ivil to be plunged, be' immersed. - iva 
mityatt· 
kl finya{( = fitya{(. -iva minYa{(. 
~J:,t 
• ~ 
.~ yata In pI yutyaanll lid, cover. yata ljizaaza 
a bottle-top. yata ganziir a chain-guard. yata sriir a 
bed-cover. IIfaifi w-yata everything, as in fil-bubb i 
liyya I-far/ wil-yata love is what I live for. - ril-biir 
wi-yataa (the well and its cover) all the details (of a 
secret), as in fana caarifil-biir wi-yataa I know all there 
is to know about it. 1 {mus] mawwaal composed to cap 
a preceding mawwaal. 
.~ Yitaaft Inl cover, protection. yitaaf gawwi air-
cover. yitaaf in-naqd currency backing. 
~ 
ya{(a Ivtll to cover. yatti nafs-ak kiwayyis lalJsan 
taaxud bard cover yoursc:lf well or you'll catch cold. 
li-yaayit il-mayya ma tyattii tamaam until the water 
completely covers it. II taytiyyit it-turba {hort] mul-
chings. -kalaam miyatti guarded speech. 1 to give cover 
to, give protection to. fit-tayaraan miyatti g-geejthe air 
force is providing cover for the army. 3 {journ] to pro-
vide press coverage for. miin illi ba-yyatti faxbaar il-
badsa who will cover the news of the accident? 4 to 
provide financial backing for. -vn tay(iyya; ava/pva 
miYa{(i. 
~I fityatta Ivil 1 passive of ya{(a. fil-tarabeeza 
mitya{(iyya b-turaab the table is covered with dust. 2 to 
cover oneself. fitya{(eet bil-battaniyya I covered myself 
with the blanket. -ava/iva mitYa{(i. 
~I fistayatta Ivil to cover oneself. fistayatta mil-
bard wrap yourself against the cold! faadi d-dinya - filii 
yistayatta biiha ciryaan that's the world! whoever relies 
on it for shelter might as well be naked. -ava mistayaai. 
I 
•• 
.)'-'t 
P 
yafarl (u, i) Ivtl to grant forgiveness for (s.th.) 
caamil kida cajaan rabb-i-na yuyfur-Iu zunuub-u he 
does that so that God may forgive his sins. II yafar allaah 
liina w-Iukum or yafar allaah zamb-u-kum or 
zamb-u-kum mavfuur replies to yirbam-ak allaah (said 
to one who sneezes). -vn yufraan; ava yaafir; pva 
mayfuur. 
,;.0;1 fityafar I Ivil passive of yafar I. - iva mityifir. 
,;..0;.-1 fistayfar Ivtl to ask (God) for forgiveness. 
fastayfar allaah God forgive me! (for doing such a 
thing, or if I ever did such a thing as you claim). - vn 
fistiyfaar; ava mistayfar. 
z 
•• 
.)'-'t 
P 
yafar2 (u) Ivtl to guard, watch over. fil-casaakir 
bi-tuyfur il-maballaat bil-Ieel the police keep a watch on 
the shops at night. fil-cumda xtaar waabid gitta YUYfur-
u the mayor chose a well-built man to be his bodyguard. 
-vn yafra; ava yaafir; pva mayfuur . 
,r.U:- yafiir In pI Yafar, yufaral night watchman, guard. 
yafar is-sawaabil the coast guards. jeex il-yafar head 
watchman, chief guard. IIbanaat yafar ugly girls. -sitti 
jeex yafar = a battle-axe, an ogress. 
,;.0;1 fityafar 2lvi/ to be guarded, be watched over. - iva 
mitYifir. 
...;...;t 
.:.&. yaff (i, u) Ivtl to trick, take in. finta faakir finnak 
ba-lYiff-i-ni b-kalaam-ak do you think you're going to 
take me in with this talk of yours? -vn yaf/' yafafaan; 
ava Yaafif; pva mavfuuf. 
.j;.;1 fityaff Ivil to be tricked, be taken in. fana tyaffeet 
fil-beeca di I was tricked in this deal. -iva mityaff. 
..1.;1 finyaff = fityaff. -iva minyaff. 
~ 
I fistavaff = yaff. - ava mistayaff. 
J . ...;t 
.;A&- yaffalj Ivtl {constr] to spread (cement) over bricks 
preparatory to plastering. - vn 
tayfiilj; ava/pva 
m!yaffalj. 
~I filYaffalj Ivil passive of yaffalj. -iva mityaffalj. 
J...;t 
J.i&. Yifil (a) Ivil 1 to cease to be aware. xud baa/-ak 
mil-baraami - law Yifilt a cannu dljiilja ba-yul(Uj 
mabfa;t-ak watch out for the thief - if you forget him for 
a minute, he'll swipe your wallet. 1 to nod off, drowse. 

leell-i riflil lafar dac;aayic; I nodded off for ten mi-
nutes. leen-I kaall/llissa l:Ja-lIrfallamma g-garas qarab 
I was just about to nod off when the bell rang. -vn 
rafalaan. yafla; ava raflaan. 
~ rafla Inl I oblivIousness. unawareness. IIlala 
rafla all of a sudden, without warning. as in daxal lala 
rafla he suddenly came in. fiI-larab,yya wlC;fil lala 
rafla the car stopped suddenly. -larils II-rafla {derisj "" 
the sort of brIdegroom who could only have been 
chosen because there was no one else left. 2 Ipl -aall 
short sleep. xadt' rafla I took a nap. 
..,~ raflaan ladj *1 dull, oblivious. 
J.A&. raffil I Ivtl to fool. rima l:Ja-trafft! mlln who are 
you trying to fool? 2 Ivil 2a to close in drowsiness (of 
the eye). 2b to drowse, nod off. rafflill wl-hiyya 
bi-lilfarrag lal-liliVll.yoon she nodded off while watch-
ing the television. - vn {arfit!; ava/pva mu·afft!. 
~ 
larfiillnl dullne~s of wit, stupidity. 
JAA.. muraffal ladj *1 dull, dim-witted. ya muyaffal 
(lala lenee-k) you dimwit! law kUllna mU)'affaliin kaall 
yixuff" laleena k-kalam-da if we were dumb we'd be-
lieve that. 
j.i.o;l rilyaffillvil to be fooled. -iva min·affil. 
JAA::-I rislarfillvtl 1 to select for dimwittednes~. 2 to 
consider dimwmed. - Ivil 3 to act the dimwit. -vn 
rlSlirfaal; ava mislarfil. 
J.Je.. 
.).i:- \'Ift (a) Ivil to nod off, snooze. yadoob rlfiil 
il-Illifoon qarab I'd hardly nodded off when the tele-
phone rang. -vn yafw; ava raaft. 
ip rafwa r In pi -1.11.111 nap, short sleep. I:J-axlld-It 
rafwa I'm going to take a nap. 
yJe.. 
~ 
rilib or rulub (a) Ivil to sUffer inconvenience or 
hardship. mif l:Ja-lI/r/ab II's no trouble. )'ilibt' min 
kuwafeer Ii-kwafeer I went through a lot trying to find a 
decent hairdresser. rllbll min II-lllaag land iI-l:Jukama 
w-raal:Jil il-muslaffa she ~uffered so much beIng treated 
by doctors that she (gave up and) went to the hospital. 
II rilib l:Jumaar-i I give up, I'm stumped. -vn rulb; ava 
ralbaan. 
~ 
ralab (i) Ivtl I to overcome, gain domInation 
over. rin-noom )alab-m sleep overcame me. r,(-(abl' 
yil'lib il-Ia(abbul {prol'j nature is stronger than nur-
ture. rll-bayyaal kaan laawiz ytffaccar lalayya laakin 
~'alabt-u the salesman tried to outsmart me but I got the 
better of him. 2 to WIn. milll lalab iI-matf' da who won 
the match? II filii lirltb-bu fillab-bu {provj (what you 
626 
WIn with, play with) "" (I) gamble only wllh your win-
nings. (2) choose the method most likely to achieve 
your ends. - marluub lala ramr-u resigned, helpless. 
- IVII 3 to preponderate. Ylrltb lala ;ann-I rllln' 
raxuu-k huwwa III xad-u I am almost sure it IS your 
brother who took It. - vn ralabaan; ava raalib; pva 
marluub. 
~ 
rulb Inl Inconvenience, hardship, suffering. 
rabb-i-na yaxd-u lafaan nirtaa!J mmnu w-min rulb-u 
may Our Lord reheve u~ of him so that we may be free 
of him and all the bother he causes! ya rulb-i y-aani 0 
Lord, I suffer! oh ml~ery me! ru!J1 is-sllI/ma rasalll 
rulb-i fwayya I went to the cinema to forget my trou-
bles for a while. 
..,l,ll. ralbaan I ladj * and pi "alaaba/la poor, needy. 
rana yalbaan mif laaC;1 luc;mil t!-leef I'm a poor man 
who can hardly find a bile to eat. Ib wretched, miser-
able. ell bill' l'albaana w-maksuuril iI-glllaal:J she's a 
poor, defenceless gIrl 2 In • and pi ralaabal 2a poor 
man, pauper.l1Iswaan iI-)'alaaba bl-yiflaralufil-ree(the 
womenfolk of the poor work In the fields. 2b poor soul, 
unfortunate wretch. 
r,r-raag,l kaan wiff' sguun 
wi-ma-yiffa((ar-f' r,lla c:ala I-ralaaba the man was a 
jail-bird and used to take advantage only of the poor 
wretche~ who couldn't defend themselves. 
..,.J l&. raalib I Inl preponderance. II fiI-raalib rllln ... it 
i~ probable that ... ftl-yaalib (1) usually, for the most 
part, as in fiI-biyulIIlg-gldiida fil-raalib IIblja dayyac;a 
modern houses arc usually small. (2) probable. 
ftl-l'aalib l:Ja-ysaaftr bukra he'll probably leave tomor-
row. 2 In *1 winner rir-rlyaaqa )'aalib wi-marluub 
there's a winner and loser In every game. 
11 raallban ladvl = fll-yaalib . 
..,u. ralaba In/l inconvenience, bother, trouble. rana 
mUlarasslf lala I-yalaba di I'm sorry for (causing) this 
inconvenience. di b-Iaaxud yalaba kbiira it puts one to a 
lot of trouble. 2 idle chatter, prattle. balaafyalaba l~­
~ubl:J cut out all this prattle first thing in the morning! 
3 fussy Interfering, overbearing noseyness.1I ril-yalaba 
Illha ral:Jkaam {provj "" there I~ no real defence against 
nosey people. 
"'Jl,ll. - yaiabaawl ladj *1 I talkative. dl ralabawiyya 
b-Jakl she's such a chatterbox! 2 fUSSily interfering, 
overbearingly nosey. 
~ 
i rar/ab leI. in constrl most of, the greater portion 
of, the majority of. raylab ik-klllllb lIalj~a most of the 
books are lacking. raYlab sukkan-ha mil-lummaal 
most of lis inhabitant~ are labourers. fi- raylab 11-
ral:Jyaan more often than not. f,- rar/ab iI-l:Jalaal In most 
cases. 

11 fi/- rar/ab ladvl (I) in most cases, usually. bi-yi!J~al 
fil- rarlab 'linn il-!J~gga b-tilbis hiduum beeqa it is usual 
for a woman pilgrim to dress in white garments. 
(2) probably. fil- rarlab mif !J-ac;dar raagi badri I shall 
probably not be able to come early. 
~i rarlabiyya 
Inl 
majority, 
greater 
portion. 
rar/abiyyit il- ra[{aa/ min silk ik-kahraba most of the 
breakdowns are owing to the electric wire. rintuxib 
bi-rar/abiyya he was elected by a majority. llfil-
rarlabiyya (1) in most cases, usually. fil-rarlabiyya 
l-ma~riyyiin bi-yfac{qalu l-xilfa 
~ubyaan Egyptians 
usually prefer to have male children. (2) probably. 
fil- rarlabiyya d-dinya !Ja-tma{{ar in-nahar-da it will 
probably rain today. 
... /:J.&. rallaab 
ladjl 
all-powerful, 
overwhelming. 
ri{-{ab[ i rallaab nature dominates nurture. 'IiI-hawa 
rallaab love conquers all. 
..,...Lo; I ritralab Ivil passive of ralab. - iva mitrilib. 
....1;.;1 rinralab = ritralab. - iva minrilib . 
. . 
-,..lJ. rallib Ivtl I to inconvenience, give trouble to. 
[aawiz tisaafir bil-[arabiyya xud-ha laakin !Ja-trallib-ak 
jiwayya if you want to go in the car, take it, but it will 
give you some trouble. [ayaa rallib-na his illness has 
put us to a lot of trouble. 2t to give greater weight to, 
consider preponderant. rallibna l-i!Jtimaal da [ala 
l-i!Jtimaal da we gave greater weight to this probability 
than to that. -vn tarliib; ava/pva mirallib. 
..,...Lo;1 ritrallib Ivil I to gain mastery, triumph. lamma 
yitrallib [alee {ab[-u ya !Jafii; when his (baser) nature 
gets the better of him, Lord protect us! ritrallibit [alee 
jahwit-u fa-ma-ljdirli y!Juuj nafs-u his lust overcame 
him and he couldn't control himself. 2 to be put to 
inconvenience, be put to trouble. yaama trallibt i f-
!Jayaat-i how much trouble I've had to put up with in my 
life! -vn tarallub r; avalpva mitrallib. 
..,..J INI ritraalib 7vi/l to talk at great length but to little 
point. 2 to be fussy and nosey and pretend to know a 
great deal. lja[ad yitraalib [aleeha w-/amma ga door-u 
ma-[rifli yi[mil !Jaaga he kept on giving her lldvice but 
when his turn came he couldn't do a thing. -iva 
mitraalib. 
~I ristarlib Ilvtl to select for helplessness. 2/vil 
to act the weakling. -vn ristir/aab; ava mistarlib. 
.::.Jt 
~ 
,..::.U. ra/at Icoll nil weeds. 2 impurities (in, e.g., 
grain). 
~ 
,~ ra/ata lunit n, pi -aatl I a weed. 2 an 
impurity. 
627 
~~ ralataaya = ralata. 
~ 
rallit Ivtl I to make weedy. 2 to weed (e.g., a 
field). baed ir-ruzz ma yzarra[ laazim tirallit-u after the 
rice has sprouted you should weed it. - Ivil 3 to be-
come full of weeds. rir-ruzz i maa-/u rallit kida why has 
the rice become so full of weeds? -vn tarliit; ava/pva 
mirallit. 
...:.J.,;;I ritrallit Ivil passive of rallit. - iva mitrallit. 
..!.oJtsee.::.Jt 
IJ" J t 
~ 
ri/is ladj */1 obnoxious, irritating. 2 insensitive, 
crass. 
'-~ ralaasa Inl I obnoxiousness. 2 insensitivity, 
crassness. 
~ 
rallis Ivill to behave obnoxiously or irritatingly. 
2 to behave insensitively or crassly. -vn tarliis; ava 
mirallis . 
..,..IN I ritrallis Ivil (impersonal) passive of rallis. 
ritrallis [alayya people were obnoxious to me. - iva 
mitrallis. 
~I ristarlis Ivtl I to consider obnoxious. 2 to 
select for obnoxiousness. - Ivil to behave obnoxiously. 
- ava mistar/is. 
~Jt see .l;Jt 
J..Jt 
J..U. rili{ or rulu{ (a) Ivil to err, make a mistake. !Jaasib 
tirla{ fil-[add take care not to make a mistake in count-
ting! 'lana rli{ti fis-sikka I took the wrong way. miin 
il-ral{aan who's at fault? who's the culprit? -vn ralat; 
ava ra/taan. 
11 ri/it fi- or rulu{ fi- (1) to wrong, offend against. riltu 
f-!Jaljlj-i they wronged me. (2) to insult, be rude to. 
[eeb - da raxuu-k ik-kibiir ma-tir/atli fii shame! he's 
your older brother and you shouldn't be rude to him. 
J..U. ra/at I Ivnl II 'IiI-ra/at marduud ,.. no offence 
meant! 2 In pi -aatl error, mistake. law waa!Jid !J~al 
minnu rayy ira/at !Ja-yitrifid if anyone does anything 
wrong, he'll be sacked. 3 ladj invarl incorrect, wrong, 
mistaken. da t~arruf ralat this is the wrong way to 
behave, nimra ralat·a wrong (telephone) number . 
4/advl incorrectly. bi-tiemil iflurl i ralat you are doing 
the work wrongly. 
~ 
ra/ta linst n, pi ralataatl mistake, error. Wlljl[ 
fi-ralta he slipped up. rahi ralta w-mif !Ja-tikkarrar it 
was indeed a mistake but it won't be repeated. 

j,~ vallaac ladj ·1 foul-mouthed, rude. lllilbit iI-
vallaaca card game in which the player tries to take as 
few cards as possible and discard as many as possible . 
..Iak vallac IvtI 1 to attribute error to, accuse of being in 
the wrong. livallac-ni rana leeh riza kaan huwwa Ili 
valcaan why do you say I'm in the wrong when it's him? 
2 to cause to make a mistake, confuse. vallac-ni min 
kutr' kalaam-u w-rana b-aftaval he made me make a 
mistake by talking so much while I was working. - vn 
tavliiC; ava/pva mivalla(. 
.lokI ril'l'allac Ivil 1 to be accused of being in the 
wrong. 2 to be caused to make a mistake, be confused. 
- iva mitvallac. 
JaJ~ vaaliC Ivtl to cheat, deceive (s.o., over a bill orthe 
like). rig-gazzaar valic-ni f-sabliin liirf the butcher 
swindled me out of seventy piastres. ma-tvalic1' fik-
kalaam don't twist the conversation! -vn mivalca; ava 
mivaali( . 
.laJ t.;1 ritvaalic Ivil to be cheated, be swindled. -·iva 
mitvaali(. 
~I ristavla( Ivtl to consider in the wrong. kull-i-na 
stavla(naa-k fik-kalaam illi liult-u we all thought you 
were wrong in what you said. -vn ristivlaa(; ava/pva 
mlSlavla(. 
.l;Jt 
Jali, 
vtli~ or vulu; (a) (also vtliqJ or vuluqJ) Ivil I to 
become deep, break (of a voice). 2 to become thick, 
bulky or heavy. 3 to become coarse or crass. raxuu 
(abl-U vulu; his brother has become coarse-natured. 
-vn valaa~a; ava val;aan. 
~')IJ. valaa;a (also valaaqaJ) Inl I deepness (of 
sound). 2 thickness. 3 coarseness, crassness. 
~ 
valii; (also valiiqJ) ladj pI vula;al I thick and 
heavy.fuuma valii;a a stout cudgel.lllialb-u valii; he's 
hard-hearted. - ril-m~raan iI-valii; {anat} the large in-
te5tine. 2 deep, bass (of sound). 
Jali,i ravia; (also ravlaqJ) lell thickerlthickest, deep-
erldeepest etc. 
J;J... muvalla;: yamiin muvalla; t a binding oath. 
nagaasa mvalla;a (1) {lsi} something{ e.g., faeces) con-
tact with which constitutes a major ritual impurity. 
(2) something filthy and disgusting. dool nagaasa 
mvalla~a they're real dirt. 
.11&.1 rivla;; = vili~. -ava mivla;;. 
JtJt 
jAl;.;1 rilvalvil Ivil to penetrate. fii talat dabbabaat 
tvalvilit fi-x(Uu( i/-laduw there are three tanks that have 
penetrated 
behind 
enemy 
lines. 
ril-fJaqaara 
628 
I-faransiyya tvalvilit fi-m~r French culture spread in 
Egypt. - vn tavalvul; ava mitvalvil. 
jAl;.; tavalva/t 
rilvalvil. 
-vn 
tavalvul; 
ava 
mutavalvil. 
.JJt 
~ 
valafa In pI -aatl foreskin, prepuce. - also lialafa. 
"';')IJ. vilaaf. vulaaf In pI -aat. vi/ifa. rivlifa. r;vlifa r I 
cover, wrapper, casing. vilaaf kitaab book jacket. vilaat 
ris(Uwaana record sleeve. vilaaf dura outer covering of 
a corn-cob . 
..ili. vallif Ivtl to wrap, encase. laayiz ravallif ik-kitaab 
lafaan ma-yixsar1 I want to cover the book so that it 
doesn't get spoilt. -vn tavliif; ava/pva mivallif . 
...ok 1 ritvallif Ivil to be wrapped, be encased. 
ril-lidaan bi-titvallif bi-ralwaafJ iI-markib the ribs are 
encased by the planks of the boat. - iva mitvallif. 
IJ Jt 
~ 
mavlali In pI mavaalilil timber store. 
.:)s. vallali Ivtl 1 to shut, close. vallaliu l-mafJallaat 
kull-a-ha they closed down all the shops. - Ivil 2l to 
finish all one's supplies, sell out. xala~ vallalina we're 
completely sold out. 3 to become hoarse (of the voice). 
~oot-i vallali mit-tahliil my voice went hoarse with 
cheering. -vn tavliili; avalpva mivallali. 
.;1;.;1 rilvallali Ivil to be shut, be closed. - iva mil'l'allar;. 
lJ Jt 
.;L&- valali In pI vulliaan. vulUlia. vi/ilial I small palm 
b~sket with handles (see PI.B, 5). 2 oaf, twit. 
,j')IJ. vallaali In pI vallaalial one (e.g., a street-
sweeper) who works with a valali. 
I J J' 
. 
t 
J&. vall/ (i) Ivtl to, yield. ril-faddaan mil-liamh 
il-maksiiki bi-yvi//' xamastaafar rardabb' w-raktar 
each feddan of Mexican wheat yields fifteen ardebs and 
more. -ava vaali/. 
ili. valla / Icoll nIl wheat. 2 yield (of a grain crop). 
J')IJ. vi/aatt Ipl nl grains, cereals. 
~I ristavall Ivtl to utilize, take advantage of, ex-
ploit. ris-sadd iI-laali ymakkin-na min istivlaal iNahra 
the High Dam enables us to exploit the desert. 
ristavalleet 
iI-fur~a I exploited the opportunity. 
ristavallit noom-i w-xaragit she took advantage of my 
being asleep and left. -vn ristivlaal; ava mist8vall. 
mustavill. 
J~I ristivlaali ladj • and pI -yyal exploitative. 

Z J J' 
. 
t 
~ rall 2 
(i) 
fvtl 
to 
irritate, 
anger, 
annoy. 
ma-bi-yrilli-nii-f qadd i ftimt-u fiyya nothing infuriates 
me like his insults. -vn rail; ava raalil; pva marluul. 
~ rilllnl ill-temper, spleen, rancour. faffeet rill-i f-
mi~aat-i I took my ill-temper out on my wife . 
..sJ'j,&. rillaawi 
ladj 
*1 
ill-tempered, 
splenetic, 
rancorous. 
J.:,ll. raliil = rill. 
j.o;l fitlfalllvil to be irritated, be angered, be annoyed. 
-iva mitrall. 
..s.1 J Jt 
~'j,&. rallaaya J In pi -aatl {print] galley. 
J J t see I loS J t and Z loS J t: ralwa, ralaawa 
';J Jt 
..r ).i;. ralwij Ivil I to make a loud noise in order to 
drown a softer one. raiwiju calayya fik-kalaam they 
raised their voices so that my words couldn't be heard. 
fir-radyu fii ralwafa the radio is crackling. 2 to become 
muffled or fuzzy. ceen-i ralwijit my eyes became blur-
red. fir-radyu ralwij the sound of the radio became 
indistinct. -vn ralwafa; ava miralwij . 
..r);.;1 fitralwij Ivill (impersonal) passive of ralwij 1. 
kull i ma kunt i b-abaawil fakkallim kaan bi-yitralwij 
calayya every time I tried to talk I was shouted down. 
2 to become muffled or blurred. - avaliva mitralwij. 
I loS J t 
J&. rili J, rala J (i) Ivill to boil. siib il-mayya tirli leave 
the water to boil. 2a to boil with anger. qalb-i rili I got 
furious. 2b to bustle with activity. fin-nahar-da l-bur~a 
b-tirli wijjurl a cala widn-u today the Stock Exchange 
is humming with activity and the work never lets up. 
-vn ralayaan; ava raali, ralyaan. 
J&. rala 2 (i) Ivtl to boil. ralet-laha kubbaayit bilba 
I boiled her a glass of fenugreek. II finta ya si zift i marli 
you, you dirty rotter! -vn raly, ralayaan, raliyya; ava 
raali, ralyaan; pva marli. 
~ raliyya Ilvnl IImayyit il-raliyya water in which 
laundry has been boiled. cl¥aayit il-raliyya laundry 
stick (for stirring and extracting items from the copper). 
2 InJ laundry that is boiled (usually the white articles). 
o).i;. ralwa linst n, pi -aatl a boiling. 
fil-cads 
il-mubtaram yistiwi qawaam-ak min ralwa wabda good 
quality lentils cook straight off with one boiling. 
IIma-yaxudji ralwa it doesn't require much effort, as in 
629 
fid-dars il- fawwal rna-xadji ralwa mcaaya the first 
lesson didn't cause me much trouble, finta ma-taxudji 
ralwa mcaaya you're no match for me! 
~~ rallaaya 2 In pi -satl I pot for boiling, kettle. 
2 boiler (e.g., in a steam engine). 
j.A; 1 fitrala Ivil to be boiled. - iva mitrili. 
Z..s J t 
J&. rili 2 (a) Ivil I to go up in price, become more 
expensive. fugrit id-dukkaan rilyit the rent for the shop 
went up. kull" baaga fid-dinya rilyit reer i{-{urfi every-
thing in the world's gone up, except pickles. qult-i-Iu 
b-kaam da - qal-li ma-yirlaaj caleeki ya nawwaara 
I asked him, 'How much is thatT He replied, 'For you, 
blossom, not too much.' 2 to become dear, become 
beloved. rilyit fi-cenay-ya she became dear in my sight. 
-vn riliww, ruluww, rala, ralaawa; ava raali . 
• 'j,&. .'j,&. rala J, ralaaf Inl expensiveness. calaawit il-
rala cost of living allowance. ralaaf il-maciija the high 
cost of living. II bagaat bi-titbaac bil-rala things sold at 
high prices. 
oJ'j,&. ralaawa Inl dearness, preciousness. II wi-bayaat 
ralawt-ak by your dearness to me! by the love I have for 
you! 
JI&. raali ladj */1 expensive. bi-ybiic bil-raali he sells 
at a high price. II fil:raali taman-u fii {prov] "" it pays to 
buy the best. -/adverbiallyl bi-ybiic raali (1) he sells at 
a high price. (2) he plays hard-to-get. 2 dear, trea-
sured, cherished. IIraali wi{-{alab rixi~ {prov] you are 
so ~ear that anything you ask for seems cheap. 
J&.i farla lelt'l more/most expensive. bi-ybiic farla 
mis-suuq he sells at a higher price than the market. 
2 more/most cherished, more/most dear. da farla 
calayya min na;ar-i he is more precious to me than my 
sight. 
JI);.. mirlawaani or marlawaani In pi -yyal one who 
overcharges. 
j&. ralla 2 Ivtl to raise, push up (prices). fil-fazma 
rallit il- fascaar the shortage pushed prices up. -vn 
t~rliyya; ava/pva miralli. 
j.A; 1 fitlfalla Ivil to be raised (of prices). - iva mitlfalli. 
JI&. raalaf Ivil to go to excess. ma-tlfaliijfil-fascaar 
don't ask for exorbitant prices. -vn muralaah; ava 
miraali. 
Jl;.;1 fitlfaala Ivil I =.raala. 2 (impersonal) passive of 
raala. fil-mawquuc itraala fii zyaada can il-lizuum the 
matter was much exaggerated. - iva mitlfaali. 
Ja;-I fistarla Ivt/ I to consider (too) expensive. 
fistarleena g-gild i fajtareena I-bilastik we thought the 
leather was too expensive so we bought the plastic. 2 to 

select for expensiveness. l'istalJ'/a wi-ftiri choose the 
most expensive and buy (it). - vn 1'1StiYla; iva mistalJ'li. 
3 IS J t see IS I J J t : lJ'al/aaya I 
<J-JISJt 
.:,."ll-
lJ'alyuun Inl I smoker's pipe. 2 Ipl lJ'alayiinl 
[obsol} galleon. 
630 
I J rt 
.ri- mmarf (u) Ivtl I to overwhelm. mmaruu-ni b-
rilayit-hum they overwhelmed me with care. 2 [text} to 
steep (cloth). 3 to flood. I'in-nahr' faaq wil-mayya 
mmarit I'araaqi ktiira the river overflowed and the wa-
ter flooded a lot of land. -vn mmr, mmaraan; ava 
lJ'aamir; pva malJ'muur. 
).,.;... malJ'muurf ladj *1 obscure, little-known. kaatib 
ma¥muur an obscure writer. 
..,..0;1 I'itmmar Ivil passive of lJ'amar. - iva mitlJ'imir. 
;.s:. mmmar I Ivtl to flood, inundate. I'in-nahar-da 
I-muzaaril bi-ymmmar il-I'arq' marra wa!Jda bi{-
{urumbaat today the farmer floods the land at one go 
with pumps. -vn talJ'miir; ava/pva mimmmar. 
;a; I I'itmmmar I Ivil to be flooded, be inundated. - iva 
mitmmmar. 
2 Ji" t 
.ri-
¥umr, ¥Imr In pi lJ'lmaarl [rurJ stook, shock (e.g., 
of straw, clover). 
;.s:. mmmar2 Ivtl to pile (e.g., straw, clover) into 
stooks or shocks. - vn talJ'milr; ava/pva miYammar. 
;a; I l'itmmmar2 Ivil passive of mmmar2. -iva 
mitmmmar. 
3 Ji" t 
r~ ¥aamir Ivil to take risks. liI-waa!Jid bi-ylJ'aamir 
bi-l:Jayaat-u lafaan Ylladdif-faaril one takes one's life 
in one's hands to cross the street. -vn mummra; ava 
ml¥aamir. 
.. rIA.. mummra In pi -aatl I risk, hazard. balaaftilmi! 
mummraat wi-tnu((' min iI-qa{r' w-huwwa maafi don't 
take risks by jumping from the train while it's moving. 
2 escapade, adventure. 
rIA.. mu¥aamir /adj *1 adventurous. 
3rt 
:rs-
¥amaz (i) /vtl I to nudge. lJ'amazit-ni lafaan m-
atkallim-j she gave me a nudge to stop me speaking. 
2 to make a furtive passing-on (of s.th.) to (s.o.). 
¥amazt-u b-gineeh I slipped him a pound. -
Ivil 3 to 
wink. bi-ti¥miz h-miin who are you winking at? 
I'i~-~unnaara lJ'amazit (I) the fishing-line twitched. 
(2) the victim has been hooked. - vn lJ'amz, lJ'amazaan; 
ava lJ'aamiz; pva malJ'muuz. 
o:rs-
lJ'amza Ipl -aatl instance noun of lJ'amz. 
,jw, lJ'ammaaz In pi -aatl I blinker (light). 2 fishing 
float. 
o,jw, lJ'ammaaza In pi -aatl I dimple. 2 [mus} (finger) 
key (of an instrument). 
~I l'itlJ'amaz Ivil passive of lJ'amaz. - iva mitlJ'imIZ . 
~I l'inlJ'amaz = l'ulJ'amaz. -iva minlJ'imIZ. 
j.i. lJ'ammiz Ivt/ to nudge repeatedly. - vn talJ'miiz; aval 
pva milJ'ammiz. 
";"'1 l'itlJ'ammiz Ivil to indicate one's scorn by winking 
and 
nudging. 
I'm-naas 
kull-a-ha 
b-tit¥ammIZ 
wi-titlammiz laleeha everyone's sneering at her and 
finding fault. - iva mUlJ'ammiz. 
......rt 
~ 
¥amas (i) Ivtl to dip. l'ilJ'mis iI-muus fil-mu{ahhir 
qabl' ma ti!Jlaq bii dip the razor in antiseptic before you 
shave with it. - vn yams; ava lJ'aamis; pva malJ'muus . 
...... .".;:. mmuus In/ I eating of food using a piece of 
bread as a sop. 2 food eaten using a piece of bread as a 
sop. min istaktar mmuus-u kal !Jaaf [prov} (he who 
revels in the abundance of food he has to eat with his 
bread will one day have only dry bread to eat) == ex-
travagance leads to ruin. 
..,.-.0;1 l'itlJ'amas Ivil to be dipped. - iva mitlJ'imis. 
..,.-.0;1 l'inlJ'amas = l'itlJ'amas.1I I'in¥imaas is-sala{iin fil-
malauaat the sultans' wallowing in pleasures. - vn 
l'inlJ'imaas; iva minlJ'imis. 
~ 
lJ'ammis Ivtl to eat (food) using a piece of bread as 
a sop. bi-ylJ'ammis iI-fuul he eats the beans by dipping 
bread into them. Iisigaara m¥ammisa {slang} cigarette 
packed with hashish. - vn ta¥miis; ava/pva milJ'ammis. 
~I l'itlJ'ammis Ivil to be eaten with bread as a sop. 
l'i!Jna I-I'alaaba iii b-niksab luqmit-na mitlJ'ammisa bi!-
caraq we are the poor whose daily bread is sopping with 
the sweat of our brows. - iva mitlJ'ammis. 
v#rt 
~ 
lJ'imiq (a) Ivil I to close (of the eyes). 2 to be-
come vague or mysterious. - vn mmaqaan; ava lJ'aamiq, 
mmqaan. 
~ 
lJ'amaq (u) Ivtl to close (the eyes). leen-i 
ma-jafit-j iI-mmq I didn't get a wink of sleep. - vn 
mmq; ava mamiq; pva malJ'muuq. 
~ 
mmqa Ipl 
-aatl instance noun of mmq. 
IIfi-lJ'amqit leen in the twinkling of an eye. 

..;a.\&. raamiq ladj *1 obscure. mysterious. l:Jikaaya 
mmqu mysterious affair. 
~ 
rummeeqi ladvl with the eyes closed, blindly. 
bi-yiftiri rummeeqi he buys without inspecting the 
goods. mif malquul waal:Jid zayyak yiggawwiz 
ru.mmeeqi it is inconceivable that someone like you 
should marry without first knowing the girl. 
~ 
rammaq Ivtl I to close (the eyes). ma-qdirtij 
farammaqleen-i wala sanya I couldn't catch a wink of 
sleep. IImmmaq leen-(u) lan to ignore, overlook. 
-zayy il-qu((a I-mirammaqa (as innocent) ~s a blind 
kitten. 2 to blindfold. - Ivi/3 to close (ofthe eyes). -vn 
tarmiiq; avalpva mirammaq. 
~I fitrammaq/vi/l to be closed (of the eyes). 2 to 
be blindfolded. - iva mitrammaq. 
I Jd:. 
~ 
rimiq or rumuq (a) Ivil to turn dark, darken. 
ril-qumaaf bi-yirmaq lamma tbill-u the cloth turns a 
darker shade when you wet it. -vn ramaqaan, 
rumuqiyya; ava ramqaan. 
..;.-\&. raamiq I/adjl dark (of colour). faxqar raamiq 
dark green. 2 rawaamiq Ipl nl dark-coloured items. 
firsili I-rawaamiq li-wal:Jdii-ha wash the dark-coloured 
things separately. 
~i farmaq lell darkerldarkest (in colour). layza 
loon farmaq I want a darker colour. da farmaq 
fi-xuqrit-u lan il-m~ri this is a darker green than the 
Egyptian type. 
~ 
rammaq I/vtl to make darker, darken. rammaq 
il-farqiyya lafaan ir-rasma tbaan darken the back-
ground so that the design stands out. 2 Ivil to turn dark. 
-vn tarmiiq; ava mirammaq. 
';:"1 fitrammaq Ivil to become or be made darker. 
-avaliva mitrammaq. 
~ 
1 firmaqq = rimiq. -ava mirmaqq. 
~I fistarmaq Ivtl I to select for darkness. 2 to 
consider (too) dark. -vn fistirmaaq; ava mistarmaq. 
ZJd:_ 
~ 
rumqiyya 
(also 
rUllqiyya) 
In 
pi ramaaqi, 
ranaaqil {nautl one of the short ribs on either side of a 
stem. 
rd:. 
~ ramm I (u) Ivtl I to depress, make gloomy. 
ril-l:Jikaaya di rammit-ni this affair depressed me. 
man;ar yirumm a depressing sight. 2 to revolt, sicken. 
riil:Ja trumm a revolting smell. -vn ramm, ramamaan; 
ava raamim; pva marmuum. 
631 
~ fin-nifsi rammit lala ... a feeling of queasiness over-
came .... nifs-a-ha rammit laleeha she felt queasy. 
~ ramm 21nl depression. gloom.fakl-ak baayin lalee 
I-ramm you look depressed. l:Ja-tiqlibi l-q3[da ramm 
are you going to spoil the gathering with your 
gloominess? 
~ ramma I In pi -aatl instance noun of ramm. 
... W rimaama, rumaama f In pi -aatl I blindfold. 
2 obstruction to the sight. fana l:Jaasis zayy i ma ykuun 
fii rimaama lala leen-i I feel as though something is 
clouding my vision. 
jW ramaam Icoll nl clouds. 
;"W ramaama lunit n, pi -aatl a cloud. II fil-mu;allal 
bil-ramaama the One Shaded by the Cloud (epithet of 
the Prophet Muhammad). 
;"1 fitramm Ivil to feel depressed, feel sad. - ava 
mitramm. 
~I finramm = fitramm. -ava minramm. 
~rt 
~ 
rumi (i): rumi lalee (laleeha, laleehum etc.) he 
(she, they etc.) fainted. rumi lala fuxt-i lamma simlit 
il-xabar my sister fainted when she heard the news. 
~ 
ruma Inl blindfold for an animal (worn, e.g., 
when turning a water-wheel). 
..;.;:. ramma 2 Ivtl to blindfold, blinker. -vn tarmiyya; 
avalpva mirammi. 
;:..... mirammi ladj 
*1 
I blindfolded, blinkered. 
2 inexperienced, naive. 
';"1 fitramma Ivil to be blindfolded, be blinkered. 
- iva mitrammi. 
~ 
i furma: furma lalee (laleeha, laleehum etc.) he 
(she, they etc.) fainted. laqeet-u murma (or murmi) 
lalee I found him in a faint. -vn firmaaf, firma; pva 
murma, murmi. 
~I fistiramma Ivil to put on a blindfold. -ava 
mistirammi. 
~w.:...i fusturummaaya or fisturummaaya Inl (the 
game of) hide and seek. 
1[..Jt 
~ ranag (u) Ivil {coarsel to utter sounds during sex-
ual intercourse to indicate pleasure and enthusiasm (of 
a woman). - vn rang, rung; ava raanig. 
~ 
runagiyya/fem adj, plrunagiyyiinl = rannaaga. 
~~ rannaaga Ifem adj, plrannagiinl {coarsel ex-
pressing her pleasure in and enthusiasm for sexual in-
tercourse by the use of certain sounds. fil-mil:Jtaaga 
rannaaga {provl ,.. when you want something it shows 
in your actions. 

-,[..;,t 
~ 
yangu <It gancio> Inl hook. 
J ~';'t 
.),;.;s. yandar Ivtl to adorn, make fancy. faxuu-k yandar 
na/s-u min yoom ma jtayal Jit-tilivizyoon your brother 
has made himself a dandy since he started working in 
television. -vn yandara; avalpva miyandar. 
.)J';';s' Yanduur, yanduur In pI yanadral dandy, fop. 
• .)J';';s' Yanduura, yanduura In pI -aatl coquette . 
.)~I fityandar Ivil to become a dandy, become a fop. 
- ava mityandar. 
JI..J,;,t 
1oS.)l.i.;&. Yin/aari ladjl cut on the bias. 
J .;, t see Z J r t: yunq'yya 
r ';'t 
~ yanam Icoll n, pI faynaaml I sheep. II yanam 
baladi white sheep. - yanam yamra brown sheep. 
2 mixed flock(s) of sheep and goats. Ilqaal ya guya 
lidd' yanam-ak - qaal wayda nayma w-wayda qayma 
{prov] someone said, 'Goha, count your flocks!' Goha 
replied 'One's lying down, the other's standing up.' (of 
something too small in number to need counting). 
~ 
yanama lunit n, pI -aatl a sheep. 
~w. yanamaaya = yanama. 
~li:. yaanim: saalim yaanim see saalim. 
~ 
yaniima t In pI yanaayiml booty. 
r~ yannaam In pI yannaamal sheep- and goatherd. 
~ yannim Ivtl to cause to gain. rabb-i-na yyannim-ak 
is-salaama may God grant you safety! -vn taYniim; 
avalpva miyannim. 
~I fityannim Ivil passive of yannim. - iva mityannim. 
';'';'t 
~ yann I (u) Ivtl {ling] to nasalize (certain sounds) in 
reading the Koran. -vn yann; ava yaanin. 
~ yann 2 Inl {ling] nasalized pronunciation of certain 
sounds in Koranic recitation. 
~ yunna In pI -aatl a nasalized sound according to 
traditional Koranic recitation. 
';';1 fityann Ivil passive of yann. - iva mityann. 
[.~,;,,;,t 
' 
r!-.fi:. yannuug: baaba yannuug dip made of sesame 
632 
paste, garlic and mashed roasted egg-plant. 
-' .;, t see I loS .;, t: yinwa, yinneewa 
IIoS.;,t 
. 
• l:&. ,l:&. yuna Inl singing. fir-raq~' wil-yuna dancmg 
and singing. IImakanit yuna {obsol] record-player. 
~l:&. Yinaarit 
ladjl pertaining to song, vocal. 
mu falla/aat yina fiyya vocal works. 
..fi:. yinwa In pI -aatl (lyrical) song. 
i;;;' yinneewa In pI -aatl (lyrical) song . 
~i fuYniyya, fuyniya In pI -aat, fayaanil (lyrical) 
song. 
~ 
mayna InJ song, singing. qac{c{eena leela kull-a-ha 
maYna w-(arab we spent a night full of song and 
enjoyment. 
~ vanna I Ivtl to sing. ya-tyanni yinwa gdiida I-Ielaa-
di she will sing a new song tonight. 2 Ivil to sing. qaac,id 
yiYanni Jil-yammaam he's singing in the bathroom. 
- ava/pva miyanni. 
~ vanna lala to string along, feed a line to. Yanneet lalee 
li-yaayit ma xadt il-/uluus minnu I strung him along till 
I got the money from him. -
vanna bi- to sing the 
praise of, extol. kull-i-na bi-nyanni b-gamaal m~r we 
all extol the beauty of Egypt. 
~ 
muyanni In *1 singer. 
IoSJG.. miyannaawi 
In 
pI -yya, 
miYannawiin, 
miyannawiyyiinl = muyanni. 
JI;" 11,Iiyannawaati In pI -yyal folk singer. 
~I fityanna Ivil to be sung. ril-yinwa di tyannit 
ziyaada lan il-lizuum this song has been sung too many 
times. - iva mit yanni. 
~ fityanna bi- to sing the praise of. fibn-a-ha iii (Uul 
lumr-a-ha b-tityanna bii maat /il-yarb her son whom 
she always idolized died in the war. - fityanna lala 
(impersonal) passive pf vanna lala. fana mif mi-lli 
b-yityanna laleehum I'm not one to be fooled. 
1 loS';' t 
,ji:- yana (i) Ivtl to make wealthy, enrich. ril-yarb' 
yanit-hum the war made them wealthy. rabb-i-na yiynii-
k may Our Lord make you rich! (expression of grati-
tude). -vn yina, yanayaan; ava yaani; pva mayni. 
~ yalla lan to free from, allow to dispense with. 
fik-kutub tiynii-k lan is-safar reading is as good as 
travelling. yaal-i yiyni lan su faal-i my condition speaks 
for itself. 
,ji:- Yina Ilvnlll (da) yina lan (it) allows one to dis-
pense with, as in maknasit ik-kahraba yina lan il-

xaddamiin a vacuum cleaner allows one to do without 
servants. laa rina can there is no dispensing with, as in 
ma-Iuu-j rina canha he can't do without her. 21nl 
wealth, riches. 
ri~-~iit wala I-rina fame (for one's 
riches) counts for more than (the) riches (themselves). 
~\&. raaniyaf In pi rawaani/l coquette. 2 prostitute. 
~ rani I/adj pi runaay, rarniyal wealthy, rich. 
rare[i raniyya bil-fusfuur land rich in phosphorus. 
riI-rani rannuu-Iu wil-fafiiir mineen yirulJuu-Iu {prov] 
people sing for the rich but won't even admit to know-
ing the way to a poor man's house. 2/nl Self-sufficient 
One (epithet of God). II rallaahu I-rani (God is the 
Self-sufficient) == you can be done without! as in mij 
lJa-tsacid-ni - maca s-salama rallaahu I-rani (cannak) 
you won't help me? leave me alone then, I can do it 
without you! 
~ i rarna I lell richer/richest. 
~\ ritrana Ivil to become or be made rich or wealthy. 
-ava/iva mitrini. 
11 ritrana can to be spared, be relieved of, be allowed to 
dispense with. ril-lJamdu 1i-lIaah rinnina traneena can 
iI-lJikaaya di thank heavens we were spared that! 
~i rarna 2 = rana. 
11 rarna can = rana can. 
~\ ristarna Ivil to (be able to) do without. riyna 
ma-nistarnaa-j can bace[ii-na we can't do without each 
other. mumkin tistarna can ik-kitaab fiwayya can you 
spare the book for a while? II rima mistarni can cumr-ak 
ticmil kida are you mad to take a risk like that? 
- ma-nistarnaa-fformula of polite refusal or excuse, as 
in rayl xidma tanya - la ma-nistarnaa-j 'Anything 
else?' 'You are very kind, but no. , ma-nistarnaa-j -
rana b-akallim is-sayyid illi waraak I'm sorry, I wasn't 
talking to you, but to the gentleman behind you. - vn 
ristirna; ava mistarni. 
~ J t see 'oJ" I.S t: raat J• muriit 
.)J t 
.)\&. raar 2 (u) Ivi/l {abusJ to go away, beat it. ruur min 
wijf-i get the hell out of my sight! raarit fi-sittiin dahya 
she's gone away (and good riddance). II tiruur iI-coora 
b-faddan-ha {prov] (let the one-eyed girl go to hell with 
her acre) == never marry an ugly girl. no matter how 
rich! - raar ij-Jirk to hell with going partners. 2f to go in 
deep, penetrate far. riI-qunbula raarit fil-rare[ the 
bomb penetrated deep into the ground. ris-silaay 
633 
raayir fil-/aym the blade is deeply embedded in the 
flesh. lIe[ufri raayir an ingrowing nail. -vn rawaraan; 
ava raayir . 
.)\&. raar3 (i) Ivil to make a raid. - ava raayir. 
.)j:. roor In pi rarwaarl depth . 
.)\&. raar 4 Inl cave. 
..)\&. raara In pi raraatl raid. raara gawwiyya air raid. 
-;';.).,;.1\ riI-ruriyya Iprop nl street and the area around it 
extending from el-Azhar Street to Bab Zuweila and 
containing markets and a number of historic 
monuments. 
• .;1;.. maraara Inil/pi-aati cave. 2 Ino pll {Chr] stable 
of the Nativity. 
.)\.0;\ ritraar l Ivil (impersonal) passive of raar3. rayyi 
hadaf mumkin yitraar calee any target may be raided. 
- iva mitraar. 
.)\&.i raraarf Ivil to make a raid. -vn riraara; ava 
muriir. 
'oJ" J t see 'oJ" I.S t: riI-roos 
..; J t see ..; I.S .J t : riweefa 
~Jt 
<.J"'\&. ra~ (u) Ivil to go deep, submerge oneself. 
laazim iI-rawwa~a tru~ tayt iI-ra/raam the submarine 
has to dive below the mines. r~na fil-mawe[uuc we 
went deeply into the subject. qaacid raay~ fik-kursi 
sitting sunk deep down in the chair. -vn roo~. 
raw~aan; pva raay~. 
<.J"'\~ rawwa~ In pi rawwa~iin. rawwa~al (deep-
sea) diver. 
~\~ rawwa~a In pi -aatl submarine. 
.J..Jt 
.l. j:. riwit (a) Ivil to become deep, deepen. riI-yufra 
riw{it cal-lJabl the hole became too deep for the rope 
(to reach the bottom). -vn riwt. rawataan . 
.l. j:. riwt. ruwt In pi rarwaatl depth. 
~j:. rawiit/adj· and pi riwata/l deep. nUfira rawiita 
a deep hole. ril-balJri hina rawiit the sea is deep here . 
2 crafty. sly and secretive. -
ril-rawiit Ini 3 deep 
water. rana y-acuum fil-rawiit I'm going to swim where 
it's deep. 
.l...,J rarwat lelll deeper/deepest. 2 morelmost craf-
ty, sly or secretive . 
.l.~ rawwat I/vtl to make deep(er), deepen. rawwat 
i1-lJufra deepen the hole. 2 Ivil to go deep. rawwatna 
fig-gabal we went deep into the desert. rawwat fil-

mawt{uul he delved deeply into the subject. -vn 
laYWiit; avalpva mllfawwat. 
.l.~1 rilyawwat Ivil to be deepened. -iva milYawwat. 
.l..,o:;...1 rislaywat Ivtl I to consider (too) deep. 2 to 
select for being deep. -vn risliywaat; ava mislaYWat. 
J-'t 
J ~ mulln pI yilaanl ghoul. II bi-yaakul zayy il-yuul'" 
he eats like a horse. 
~ ~ mula In pI yilaanl female ghoul. II rumm-i-na 1-
yuula or rumm il-yilaan mother mula (in children's 
stories). -miin yiqdar yiquul lil-yuula leen-ik !Jamra 
{proy] who dares tell the mula, 'Your eye is red'? 
J~ yawwillvi/l to extend, spread, branch out. lisiib 
iz-zarl" lala cabill-u yyawwil if you leave the plants 
untended they bush out. yawwil fil-majy' min yeer ma 
y!Jiss he walked too far without realizing it. 2 to make 
inroads. yawwil fil-rakl he consumed quantities of 
food. -vn laywiil; ava mlYawwil. 
J~I rilyawwil = yawwil. -ava mityawwil. 
J.,o:;...I rislaywill Ivtl to consider gluttonous. 2 Ivil to 
encroach, make advances. rislaywil fil-rakl he got 
through huge qllantities of food. -ava mistaywil. 
~-'t 
~~ yiwi (a) Ivtl to become keen on, become enthu-
siastic about, delight in. rana b-aywa I-Iadriis I love 
teaching. -vn yawayaan; ava yaawi. 
~~ yawa (i) MI to tempt, lure. yawaa-ha b-filuus-u 
he tempted her with his money. -vn yayy; ava yaawi; 
pva maywi. 
~JI&. yaawi Inl enthusiast, devotee, fan. yaawi koora 
one who likes (playing or watching) football. riI-yaawi 
ynaqqat bi-taqiyt-u {proy] (the fan will donate his skull-
cap) ... an enthusiast will give away everything he has 
for what he loves. 
~ Yiyya In pI -aall I liking, inclination, fancy. 
rabuu-ya lu Yiyya fis-simiin my father has a liking for 
fat. kaan Yiyya zamaan it was a fad in the old days. 
2 hobby. lu Yiyya fis-sibaaq he's a .race-goer. yiyyit-u 
gaml it-{awaabil his hobby is stamp collecting. 3 flock 
(e.g., of pigeons) kept as a hobby and not for eating. 
- ladj invar/4 kept as a hobby (of, e.g., pigeons). 
IS"" 1 rilyawa Ivil to be tempted, be lured. - iva 
milyiwi. 
lS~i raywaf = yawa. -vn riywa; ava miywi. 
';'~-'t 
~~ Yiweeja 
In ·pl -aal, 
yawaayijl 
I bracelet. 
2 keyhole cover. 
634 
Iy~t 
...,..1&. yaab Z (i) Ivi/l to absent oneself. riI- ruslaaz yaab 
rusbuUl the teacher was away for a week. II yaab il-qu{{ 
illab yafaar {proy] ... when the cat's away, the mice will 
play. 2 to take (a long) time. !Ja-Iyiib will you be long? 
raa!J daaxillil-marmuur yaab la!J;a w-xarag he went in 
to the superintendent, was away a moment and then 
came out again. rir-rux~a bi-Iyiib la-baal ma titlal the 
licence takes a long time to be issued. -vn Yiyaab, 
yayabaan, yeeba; ava yaayib. 
11 yaab lan to slip the memory of, be overlooked by. 
riI-mawt{uul da kaan yaayib lanni I'd forgotton about 
that. 
...,..1.&- Yiyaab Inl absence. xad-u Yiyaab he marked him 
as absent. 
~I.&- Yiyaabi ladjl {leg] in absentia. !Jukm' ryaabi sent-
ence (passed) in absentia. -/adverbiallyl ma-lu!Jkum{' 
ryaabi don't pass judgements before examining facts. 
...,;:. yeeba Inl I absence. yebl-ak il-marra di {awwilil 
you were away for a long while this time. II yeeba bil-
weeba a prolonged absence. 2 talking about people 
behind their backs, backbiting. 
'-:"'!.I&. yaayib ladj *1 absent.lIlal-yaayib from memory, 
as in !Jafa; lala I-yaayib to learn by heart, sammall-i-Iu 
lal-yaayib I recited it to him from memory. - ri/-Yaayib 
ma-Iuu{naayib {proy] (he who is absent has no share) 
... out of sight out of mind. - riI-yaayib !Jiggil-u malaa 
{proy] (he who absents himself has his excuse with him) 
... don't blame someone for not showing up - he must 
have his reasons. -~alaal t1-yaayib {lsi] prayer for the 
dead performed in the absence of the corpse. 
...,...;JI riI-yeeb Inl the unknown, the future. 
...,...,.-J 1 riI-yiyuub: lal/aam il-Yiyuub Knower ofthe un-
known (epithet of God). 
~.",;. yaybuuba Inl unconsciousness, coma. 
~ 
yayyib Ivtl I to record as absent. mumkin 
liyayyib-ni bukra could you mark me down as absent 
tomorrow? 2 to detain, delay, keep waiting. reeh iIIi 
yayyib-ak what kept you? II riI-laada baqa-Ihajahreen 
miyayyibaa-ni my period is two months late. - Ivil 
38 to absent oneself for a long time, be late. yayyibt" 
lanni (or lalayya) (1) it's ages since you came to see 
me. (2) you are late. 3b {coarse] to take a long time in 
reaching orgasm. -ava/pva miyayyib. 
..::.~ muyayyibaat Ipl nl ointments etc. that delay 
orgasm. 
~I rilyayyib Ivil passive of yayyib. -iva milYayyib. 
~I rislaryib Ivtl 1 to consider (too) long absent. 
fislaryibl-ak geel fanadii-k you were too long coming 

so I came to call you. 2 to take advantage of the abs-
lIayyart i ral'y-i I changed my mind. II1Iayyar filuus to 
ence of. I'istallyibuu-k wi-kalu 1-l'akl they took advan-
convert money from one currency to another. -lIayyar 
tage of your absence and ate the food. -vn I'istillyaab; 
ik-kalaam (1) to change the subject. (2) to misinterpret 
ava mistallyib. 
what has been said. -lIayyar ir-riic; to have the first meal 
2 
Y t.$ t see y It: lIaab l• lIaaba 
Y .J Y t.$ t see 
I y t.$ t : lIaybuuba 
I.) t.$ t 
.r-&- lIeer I Inl person(s) other than the one(s) in ques-
tion, other( s). I'amlaak iI-lIeer other people's property. 
!Jagaat lIeer-i things that belongs to those other than 
myself, other people's things. lIeer-ak xad-u someone 
other than you took it. fuuflIer-na find someone other 
than us. laazim nista!Jmil xa{a I' iI-lIeer we have to put up 
with others' mistakes. 2 Iprepl 2a except, apart from. 
da lIeer iI-marqa wig-gar!Ja that's apart from the sick 
and wounded. ma-fii-j lIeeru that's all there is. talatt 
ufhur ma-fii-j lIerhum three months and no more. 
ma-yaxud-ji lIeer sawaani it only takes a few seconds. 
2b different from. I'ana lIeer dool I am different from 
them. da lIeer (da) that is different (from that). 3/neg 
particlel not (also non-, un-etc.). lIeer muna:g:gam un-
organized. yeer iqti~aadi uneconomic. l'iI-kimya I-lleer 
luqwiyya or I'il-kimya lIeer il-lllqwiyya inorganic che-
mistry. qarba !Jllrra lIeer mubafra an indirect free kick. 
fi-lleer ma~/a!Jit iI-balad not in the country's interests. 
~ min ... eer Iprepl without. min ~'eer fuyl without work. 
mif c;aadir I'aliif min ... eerak I can't live without you! 
milllleer ma Iconjl without. mill ... eer ma nilrafwithout 
our knowing. - ... eer lamma Iconjl except, unless. 
ma-b-tuxrug-ji lIeer lamma taaxud I'uxt-a-ha malaaha 
she never goes out without taking her sister with her. 
-ller-j Iconjl but after all, only. I'ay nalam yistaahil 
id-dab!J i lIer-j I'abuu ~a!Jib-na it's true he deserves the 
worst, only his father is a friend of ours . 
.;\,,&. ... iyaar I Ivnl changing (c.g., clothes or dressings). 
I'ooqit ... iyaar changing room. II qi{al ... iyaar spare parts. 
2 In pi -aatl2a replacement (for something worn out). 
l'iI-c;alam xili~ - layiz-Iu ... yaar the pen has run out - it 
needs a refill. 2b change (e.g .. of clothes, dressings). 
bukra !J-a ... sil ... iyaraat iI-l'awlaad I'll wash the children's 
dirty clothes tomorrow. 
~ myyar Ivtl to change, replace, alter . ... ayyar is-siriir 
change the bed-linen! laazim niYayyar I'umbuubit iI-
butagaaz we have to get a new bottle of butane gas. 
of the day. -myyar id-damm to make furious. -vn 
tallyiir; ava/pva millayyar. 
~ 
tallyiir In pi -aatl change, alteration. lamalu 
tallyiraat fil-ma!Jall they made changes in the shop . 
• ~ 
tallyiira In pi -aatl I = lIiyaar 2.2 linst nl a chang-
ing. I'il-mumarriqa ma-lamalit-lii-j lIeer tallyiira wa!Jda 
/iI-l'usbuul the nurse only gave me one change (of 
dressing) in a week. 
;..,. mUl(ayyir. millayyar Inl Changer (epithet of God) . 
sub!Jaan millayyar iI-l'a!Jwaal "" what a change! 
).;1 I'itmyyar Ivil I to be changed, be replaced, be 
altered. l'iI-malaad itllayyar the appointment was 
changed. l'iI-larabiyya mit/a!J!Jama w-mitllayyar laha 
z-zeet the car has been greased and had its oil changed. 
2 to change, become different. l'iI-bala!J loon-u tmyyar 
the colour of the dates has changed. I'id-dillya tmyyarit 
times have changed. I'ana m-atllayyar-ji I'abadan "" 
I am always dependable. I'inta n'ayyart i min gihat-i you 
don't treat me (well) the way you used to.ll/oon-u (or 
damm-u) tmyyar he got upset. -vn tallayyur; avaliva 
minrayyar. 
).; tallayyur In pi -aatl change, alteration. !J~alit 
tallayyuraat kitiir fil-balad many changes have taken 
place in the country. 
~ 
mutallayyir In pi -aatl /mathJ variable. 
2.)t.$t 
.r-&- mar < (i) Ivil to be jealous. bi-y ... iir min l'a~!Jaab-u 
he gets jealous of his friends. bi-y ... iir lala mraat-II he 
gets jealous about his wife. - vn yiira. myaraan; ava 
lIaayir. myraan. 
'.r-&- lIiira Inl jealousy. I'il- ... iira mllrra /provJ jealousy 
is bitter. 
.;~ myyaarl ladj °1 jealous by nature, given to 
jealousy. 
.;.,.&- myyuur = lIayyaar. 
.;lA;1 l'itmar2 Ivil (impersonal) passive of lIaar 5• da 
yityoar minnu he is likely to incur jealousy. - iva 
mitmar. 
J.)t.$t 
.;li. mar (i) Ivil to be ticklish. b-alliir min riglay-ya I'm 
ticklish in my feet. - vn ... iira, ... ayaraan; ava ... aayir. 
... ayraan . 
.;~ myyaar2/adj °1 ticklish. 

4 .) loS t see .) It: mar I 
5 .) loS t see .).J t: lfaar 2, 
lfaar 3, 
lfaar 4, 
lfaara, 
malfaara, falfaar 
V" loS t 
..:;,~ • ..:..~ lfaas, lfaatJ (i) Ivtl to come to the help of. 
ririljt' w-ma-IJadd'-Jlfas-ni I was drowning and no one 
came to my aid. -vn mos, lfayasaan; ava lfaayis. 
..:...,-11 ri/-mos Inl the one who saves (title given in 
popular Sufism to certain saints) . 
..:..~i falfaasf = lfaas. -vn filfaasa; ava mUlfiis. 
~ 
mUlfiis, mUlfiitJ Inl Helper (epithet of God). 
..:..Lo....I fistalfaasf Ivil to call for help. fistalfaasit bit-
bulii~ she sought help from the police. -vn fistilfaasa; 
ava mistalfiis, mustalfiis. 
~Lo....I fistilfaasa In pI -aatl call for help. 
.!.loSt 
¥ 
lfee{ In p'llfe{aanl field. 
lI~ur~aar it-lfee{ [zool] 
cricket. - fabu l-lfee{ Iprop nl village near the Barrages 
north of Cairo, home of a group of musicians and 
dancers who perform at zaar ceremonies. 
JlJ...&. lfe{aani 1 ladj pI -yyal 18 pertaining to the vil-
lage of fabu l-lfee{. Ib pertaining to the fabu l-lfee{ 
troupe. 2/adj invarl farm-fresh (of vegetables). 
j;loSt 
j;~ lfaa; (i) Ivtl 1 to hurt, cause irritation to. marawIJ-i 
bi-tlfi;-ni my lungs cause me irritation. 2 to make irrit-
able, annoy, frustrate, infuriate. filli bi-Ylfi;-ni finn 
636 
in-naas bi-yiftikru finn ig-gawaazJeef sahlwhat annoys 
me is that people think marriage is an easy business. 
3 to tease. - vn lfee;, lfaya;aan; ava lfaayi;. 
¥ 
lfee; 
Inl irritation, annoyance, 
frustration. 
IJa-qaljlj' mit-lfee; she's about to explode with frustra-
tion. muutu b-lfe;-kum (or bi-lfay;-i-kum) "" may your 
vexation kill you! 
j;l;ul fitma; Ivil to be or become irritated, annoyed, 
frustrated or infuriated. - ava/iva mitma; . 
j;Lo....I fistama;J = fitlfaa;. - ava mistalfaa;. 
rlSt 
~ lfeem Icoll nl c1oud(s) . 
~ 
lfeema Inl 1 lunit nj a cloud. IIlfeema w-laddit it 
was bad but it passed, they were bad times but they're 
over now. 2 cloudiness, murkiness, gloom. 
il.,,&. lfayaam (also lfayaan) = lfeem. 
;;"1.,,&. lfayaama (also lfayaana) lunit n, pI -aatl a cloud . 
~ lfayyim (also lfayyin) Ivil to cloud over, become 
cloudy. fig:gaww' lfayyim the weather turned cloudy. 
-vn taryiim; ava milfayyim. 
I.;, IS t 
.:.r-i'-
lfeen Ifem n, pI -aatl nineteenth letter of the Ara-
bic alphabet. 
2 .;, loS t see r IS t : lfayaan, lfayaana, lfayyin 
loS loS t see 1oS.J t: lfiyya 

..; 
J fa-/conj/l (and) so, therefore. ma-kanJi malaaya 
fluus fa-rufJt ii-bank I didn't have any money on me so 
I went to the bank. bi-titfJidif fJadfa mUlayyana fa-bi-
tliff it is thrown in a certain way and so it spins. 2 and 
there, and then. kunti daaxil in-naadi fa-Iamma geet 
land iI-baab 'iabilt· fJasan I was coming into the club 
and then, when I got to the door, I met Hasan. kunt i 
b-asammal fa-'ia{il-ni landi kilmit malluun I was re-
citing, and at the word 'accursed' he interrupted me. 
I..; 
li faa Ifem nl twentieth letter of the Arabic alphabet. 
-also faa r, fih, feeh. 
~ I..; 
• li faar Ifem n, pI -aatl twentieth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also faa, fih, feeh. 
c) I..;) 
;li faar lIn pI firaanl mouse, rat. II ril-faar lilib fi-libb-
i I began to have suspicions, I smelled a rat. -faar is-
sabtiyya see ris-sabtiyya. 
i;li faara In pI -aatl{earp].plane. faarit tajriib smoo-
thing plane. faarit kajf jack plane. 
(jl";) 
jli faal. <Fr> Inl {elee] phase. 
ijli vaal.a or vaal.a, faal.a J or faal.a <It vaso> In 
pI -aal, -aatl vase. 
U""I"; 
...,..li faas In, usu fern, pI fuusl type of heavy hoe or 
mattock (see PI.D, 6).11 wi'iil iI-faasfir-raas {prov] (the 
faas has fallen on the head) things have gone past the 
point of no return. 
• 
u:. 1..; 
Joli faaj Icoll nl bird mite(s). 
~li faaja lunit n, pI -aatl a bird mite. 
JI"; see J.";:faal 
J .J I..; see 3 J.J ..; : faawil 
lSI..; 
~li faaya Inl{naul} halyard. 
~..; see also IS IS ..; 
4:.t fi ra In pI -aal/l civil service employment category 
covering certain salary grades. 2 firaal Ipl nl {pol} 
category in the Egyptian electoral system comprising 
people other than labourers and peasants . 
...;~..; 
i.;i.; fa rfa r Ivil to stammer. - vnfarfara; ava mifarfar. 
J • ..; 
Ji.; ,Jli faal, fa rllnl omen. IIfaal allaah wala faal-ak = 
"God forbid! -xudu fal-kum min liyal-kum {prov] = out 
of the mouths of babes. 
J:lA;\ ritfaaril Ivil to become optimistic. rilfa rill i 
lamma smil' iI-xabar I started to feel optimistic when 
I heard the news. -ava mitfaa ril. 
JjlA; tafaarulf Inl optimism. see further under 
IJ.J"; 
.; y"; 
~ fibr <Fr fibre> Inl compressed cardboard . 
-I.;y"; 
J..\~ fabraayir Inl February. 

I.!JJY"'; 
~J.li fabriika <It fabbrica> In pI -aall factory. 
l.!JJ Y"'; 
.!l.,r.i fabrik <perh It fabbricare> Ivtl to fabricate (a 
story etc.). -vn fabraka; avalpva mifabrik. 
.!l""";;1 'lilfabrik Ivil to be fabricated (of news, a story 
etc.). -vn lifabnik; iva milfabrik. 
.:,,"'; see I.J':""';: fala 
.:".:,,"'; 
..;.; fall (i) I Ivtl to make mto falla. 2 Ivil to prepare 
falla. -vn fall, falalaan; ava faalil; pva mafluul. 
~ falla Inl a dIsh consisting of hot broth, or the like 
(e.g., milk), poured over crumbled bread. fallil lads 
bread m lentil soup. fallil laban bread and milk with 
sugar. 
'-'~ fallaal ladj • and pI fallaalal forever ready to 
sp~mge a meal. 
.....:;i fallll Ivtl to crumble, break into small pieces. - vn 
lafllll; avalpva mifallll. 
~I 'lilfallil Ivil to be crumbled or crumble, be broken 
into small pieces or break into small pieces. - avaliva 
mllfallil. 
c.:,,"'; 
& falay (a) Ivtl la to open. 'llflay iI-baab open the 
door! 'lawwlI yaagafalaYI" lenay-ya laleeha~-~uby the 
first thmg my eyes lighted on m the morning. lumr-a-ha 
ma-falayil buqq-a-ha lala yadd she's never said a bad 
word to anyone! Ilfalay ik-kutfiina (or ik-kilaab) to tell 
fortunes by cards (or by the stars). Ib to open up, make 
accessible. fa/ay-lr beel-u he opened his house to me. 
'lls-slkka mafluyaa-Iak the way is open to you. II wl/aada 
b-fatlj' baln Caesarean delivery. - 'liftay-Ii s-sikka clear 
the (telephone) line for me! -yiftay alla (may God open 
a way!) == certainly not! no go! no way! (in emphatic 
refusal of an offer). - been iI-baayil wifjaari yiftay alla 
(between the vendor and the buyer: may God open a 
way!) == If you don't like my prIce, you don't have to 
buy (or sell)! (said in bargaining). - rabb-I-na yiflay-ha 
Gala ... may Our Lord provide help or profit for ... , as in 
rabb-I-na Ylftay-ha lalayya b-qirjeen may Our Lord 
help me with some money. - 'litd-u (or beet-u) maftuuya 
he's generous and openhanded. 2 to turn on, set going. 
'llftay III-nuur sWitch on the light! IIfatay ~oot-u he let 
out a shout. -fatay III-mfs to stimulate the appetite, set 
one\ mouth waterIng. 3 to set up, establish. fatayt' 
dukkaan I opened a shop. 'laYlbb aftay yisaab 
638 
landukum I'd like to open an account with you.llfa/aY 
beet to set up (one'~ own) house. -huwwafaa/iy iI-beel 
he is the breadwinner. 4 to start, begin.fataYt' may4ar 
I instituted legal proceedings. 5 to conquer.llzayy' ma 
ykuun fatay lakka (as if he had conquered Acre) == as if 
he had accomplished the impossible. -/vil 6 to open, 
open up. 'lil-baab fatay the door opened. 'lil-mayallaat 
falya the shops are open. II 'lll-y~aan haayig -ma-llflay-
luu-j the horse is excited - don't give him his head! 7 to 
be set up, be established. mallam gidiid fatay fik-
kurniif a new restaurant opened on the Corniche. 8 to 
become lighter (of colours). 'III-loon iI-'laymar bi-yiflay 
ft/jams red colours get lighter in the sun. -vn falY, 
fatayaan, futuuy; ava faatiy; pva maftuuy. 
~ 
falya In pI -aatl I In~tance noun offalY. 2 [gramJ 
vowel sign for short a (m Arabic writing). - lalso 
pI futay/3 aperture.fatljaat ifjababitk the openings for 
the windows. IIfatyit ladasa diaphragm of a (camera) 
lens. -fatYII jarag anus 
c..? futuuy Ivnl IIfutuuy rabbaani divine grace bes-
towed on someone (as manifested, especially, in 
wealth). 
e'li faallY I I lad)1 pale, light (of colour). 'lazraq faallY 
light blue. -fawaatiy Ipl nl 2 light-coloured items. 
ma-t;,rsiliij tl-fawaalllj mala ·I-lfawaamiq don't wash 
the light- and dark-coloured thmgs together! 
~WI 'lil-fatya Inl [lsIJ 1 the opening chapter of the 
Koran (often read by parties to a preliminary contract 
or agreement as an earnest of good faith). qarufatyit-ha 
they (i.e. the future bride's and groom's parents) con-
firmed their intentions by reading the opening chapter 
of the Koran. qareena I-fatya lala I-'lamwaat we read 
the Fatiha for the dead, we prayed for the dead. II 'llqra 
I-fatya lala rooy-ak say your prayers, (because I'm 
going to kill you)! 2 fawaatiy Ipl nlprayers for the dead. 
C,:;.;-. mafluul:J Ipva!, IIbtl-maftuul:J openly, frankly, 
candidly. 
~i 'laftay lell lighterllightest (of colour). 
c..\.;;,i fallaay Inl Opener (of the way), Facilitator 
(epithet of God). lIya fallaal:J ya laillm ya razzaaq ya 
kanim == (1) may thiS day be profitable (said at the start 
of a day). (2) the day is rumed for me (said in exaspera-
tion when thmgs go wrong in the morning). 
_~ fallaaya In pi -aatl opener (e.g .. for bottles, tins). 
c..\;:A,. muftaay In pI mafallll:JI I key. ljafalljjaqqa bll-
muftaay he locked the apartment. 2 spanner, wrench. 
muftaal:J 'lingiliizi monkey wrench 3 sWitch, lever, 
(gas) tap. mUftaay nuur light-SWitch. mUftaay hawa gas 
control (of a welder's torch). muftaay (saala) crown (of 

a watch). 4 [mus} peg (of a stringed instrument). 
~\ fitfatal} Ivil 18 to open, be opened. fil-fabwaab 
itfatal}it I-istilibaal iI-lariis the doors were opened to 
receive the bridegroom. Ib to be made accessible. 
fis-sikka tfatal}it-Ii the way was opened to me. 2a to be 
turned on, be switched on, be set going. fir-radyu tfatal} 
fiuaay how did the radio come to be turned on? 
II fitfatal}it fi-goz-ha she lashed out at her husband, she 
snarled at her husband. lb to embark, get going. 
fitfatal}it {ifjakwa she launched into a long complaint. 
fitfatal}u fig-giwaan they've hit a scoring streak. I}a;;-u 
tfatal} he's having a run of good luck. 3 to be set up, be 
established. 4 to be started, be begun. -ava/iva mitfitil}. 
~\ finfatal} 
= 
fitfatal}. -vn finfitaal}; avaliva 
minfitil}. 
C\;A;~\ fil-finfitaal} (also fil-finfitaal} i/-fiqti~aadi) Inl 
[pol} the 'open-door' policy, liberalization of the Egyp-
tian economy instituted by President Sadat in 1974. 
~ fattal} Ivtl 1 to open wide, or repeatedly, or several 
things. fattal} ifjiif open (all) the shutters! IIfattal} fi-
leen-(u) to look (s.o.) in the eye. -fattal} leen-(u) to be 
alert, keep (one's) wits about (one). -fattal}-Iu muxx-u 
give him a bribe! -fattal} fi-(i) to answer (s.o.) back 
rudely. 1 [print} to develop (a plate). - Ivi/3 to open 
one by one. fi/- fazhaar tifattal} fir-rabiil flowers bloom 
in spring. -vn taftiil}; ava/pva mifattal}. 
~ 
mifattal} ladj 01 I seeing, not blind. 1 alert, cun-
ning. laazim iz-zibuun yiblia mfattal} the customer 
should keep his wits about him.llbinti mfattal}a (over-) 
precocious (young) girl. 
~\ fitfattal} Ivil passive of fattal}. -vn tafattul} T ; iva 
mitfattal}. 
c'li faatil} 2 Ivtl to address oneself to, approach. 
I}-afatl}-u fil-mawquul I'll raise the subject with him. 
fatil}-ha fig-gawaaz he proposed marriage to her. -vn 
mufatl}a, mifatl}a; ava mifaatil}. 
c'lA;\ fitfaatil} Ivil to be addressed, be approached. 
-iva mitfaatil}. 
~1 fiftatal} T Ivtl to inaugurate. fiftitaal} qanaat is-
siwees the inauguration of the Suez Canal. - vn fiftitaal}; 
ava miftitil} . 
..,..\:;;;\ fiftitaal}iT ladjl opening. maqaala fiftital}iyya 
leading article, editorial. 
~\:;;;1 fiftital}iyyaT In pi -aatl [mus} overture. 
~1 fista/tal} 1 Ivtl to approach initially. fista/tal}-ni 
bifjitiima he met me with insults. 1 Ivil to open one's 
day's or life's work. sawwaali it-taks istaftal} biyya I was 
the taxi-driver's first customer. fistaftal} i/-mul}aami 
fi- fawwil ma ftayal bi-{alaali sitt the lawyer began his 
639 
career with a woman's divorce (case). I}al/aali bi- faliral 
istaftal} [prov} "" (as unlucky as) a barber whose first 
customer is bald (from ringworm). fistiftaal}-ak laban 
you've set my day off to a good start! (from, e.g., a 
trader to his first customer of the day). - vn fistiftaal}; 
ava mista/tal}. 
I .) ..:;.. ...; 
i.;.i /atra In pi -aat, /ataraatl period of time. /atrit i/-
xu{uuba the engagement period. bi-yiftayal fil-/atra 1-
masafiyya he works the evening shift. 
).j fitr Inl span, or measurement equivalent to the 
span, between the extended thumb and index finger. 
1 .) ..:;.. ...; 
).j fitir (u) Ivil to become tepid. fi/-lilaliaat illi benna 
fitrit relations between us have cooled. mayya /atra 
lukewarm water. - vn futuur; ava faatir. 
3 .) ..:;.."'; see .).J":;" ...; : /atuura 
iJ u .),,:;,,"'; 
~.;.i vatriina <It vetrina> In pi -aat, vatariinl display 
case, display window, shop window. -also batriina. 
IJ" ..:;.."'; see IJ" u ..:;.. ...; : fitees, fitiis 
J...:;.."'; 
.? fataf (i) 1 Ivtl to disclose, reveal, divulge. miin 
/ataf is-sirr who let the cat out of the bag? IIsirr-u 
maftuufhe can't keep a secret. 1 Ivil to act as informer. 
I}-a/tif laleek I'll tell on you. -vn fat/. /atafaan; ava 
faatif; pva maftuuj. 
..,:.:;.a; 1 fit/ataf Ivil to be disclosed, be revealed, be di-
vulged. - iva mitfitif . 
..;.:Ai 1 fin/ataf = fit/ataj. -iva minfitif· 
.? fattif 1 Ivtl to make an inspection or search of. 
ta/tiif laff luggage inspection. /attifu I-beet wi-lafiu 
muxaddaraat they searched the house and found drugs. 
llvil to make an inspection or search. lialadti sa8Ga 
fafattif la/a I}ittit iI-warafia di I spent an hour hunting 
for this bit of paper. fin-naffaal bi-yirkab i/- futubiis 
lafaan yifattif-Iu lala ~eeda the pickpocket rides the 
buses in order to search out his prey. -vn ta/tiif; ava 
mifattif· 
~ 
ta/tiif In pi ta/atiifl district, inspectorate. ta/tiif 
raYl irrigation circle, irrigation district. 
..;.a. mUfattif In 01 inspector. 
~\ fit/attif Ivil 1 to be inspected, be searched. 
1 (impersonal) passive of fattif 2. fil-muxaddaraat 

itfattif laleeha f-kull' !Jitta the drugs have been hunted 
for everywhere. - iva mitfattif. 
-Jt.;J.J 
~ 
I.J-.i.,i futuYTafya <It fotografia> In pI -aatl 
{obsol] camera. 
JI.J-.i.,i futulfraafi 
ladjl 
photographic. 
~uura 
futulfrafiyya photograph. 
.;J.J.;J.J 
.::.&a fatfit Ivtl to crumble, break into tiny pieces. 
fatfitna I-leef we crumbled the bread. - also farfit. - vn 
fatfata; ava/pva mifatfit. 
~ p 
fatfuuta In pI fatafiitl tiny piece, crumb. fatafiit 
xafab slivers of wood. fatfuutit leef a crumb of bread. 
-'llso farfuuta. 
. - ;-;;1 ritfatfit Ivil to be crumbled, be broken into tiny 
pieces. - also ritfarfit. - iva mitfatfit. 
J.;J.J 
~ fatat; (a) Ivt/ I to rip open (a garment) at the 
seams. 2 to deflower (a virgin). -vnfatt;, fatat;aan; ava 
faatit;; pva maftuut;. see further under J.;J IS .J 
~ fatt; In pI futuut;1 I rent, tear. 2 {path] hernia. 
~ 
fatt;a Ipl -aatl instance noun of fatt;. 
~Ia fitaat; In pI -aatl {path] hernia, rupture. 
~I ritfatat; Ivil I passive offatat;. 2 to come open at 
the seams. - ava/iva mitfitit;. 
~ 
1 rinfatat; = ritfatat;. -ava/iva minfitit;. 
.:iJ fattat; I Ivt/ to cause to t~ar or rip. kutr if-fadd' 
bi-yfattat; iI-t;umaaftoo much stress will tear the mate-
rial. II !J-afattat;-Iu I'll split his seams (so all his dirty 
secrets will come out), I'll expose him to the world. 
2 Ivil to rip opep, split (at the seams, of a garment). 
- ava mifattat;. 
~ 
mifattat;a Inl jam-like mixture of spices, herbs, 
nuts and molasses (eaten by women as a fattener). 
~I ritfattat; lvil to rip open at the seams (of a gar-
ment). ril-ban(aloon itfattat; the trousers burst at the 
seams. - ava mitfattat;. 
.!.I.;J.J 
..d:i fataH (a) Ivil to wreak de.struction. fataku b-
r8[da r-hum they annihilated their enemies.llfatak bil-
rakl he wolfed down every last morsel of the food. - vn 
fatakaan, fatk! ava faatik. 
..d:i fitik ladj *1 I clever and capable. 2 successful with 
women (of a man). 
4S"1a fataaka. In! cleverness and capability. 
.!l:o.iil ritfatak Ivil (impersonal) passive of fatak. 
640 
ritfatak biihum waa!Jid waa!Jid they were wiped out one 
after the other. - iva mitfitik. 
.iliA; 1 rinfatak = ritfatak. -iva minfitik. 
IJ.;J.J 
J:a fatal (i) Ivt/ I to spin, twist together into strands. 
fatl iI-!Jibaal rope-making. II min dat;n-u wi-ftil-Iu {prov] 
(if he wants a rope, take hairs from his beard and make 
it for him) "" make him pay for all he gets. 2 to roll 
(dough) into strands. -vnfatalaan, fatl; avafaatil; pva 
maftuul. 
~ fatla Inl I Ipl-aatl instance noun offatl. 2/pl-aat, 
fitall thread, piece of thread. fatlit xee( a length of 
thread. fatlit dubaara a piece of string. naqqaf bil-fatla 
to pluck out facial hair with a twisted double thread (the 
hair is caught between the two strands and pulled out as 
the thread is passed over the face).lIlala I-fatla exact, 
precise (i.e. to the last thread). - ribn' fatla a crafty 
fellow. -fammal iI-fatla he ran off, he beat it. 3 Iplfitall 
strand (e.g., of hair, dough). 
Jp fatuul In pI fataayill tampon. 
j.:i fitiil In pi fataayill 18 lamp wick. Ib pilot-light. 
2 fuse (for setting off an explosive charge). 3 tampon. 
4 square-headed screw. Slcoll n! seed onion(s). 
~ 
fitiila In pI fataayill I = fitiil! and 2.11 !Jaa' fii filiila 
he added fuel to the fire, he exacerbated the situation. 
2 strand (of dough). 3 {med] sponge. - lunit n, pI -aat, 
fataayill 4 a seed onion. 
J:;.i;1 ritfatal Ivill to be spun, be twisted together (into 
strands). 2 to be rolled into strands (of dough). II bald 
iI-liid ma-yitfatil-f' ka!Jk {prov] (after the festival kabk 
is not made) ... one doesn't hang streamers after Christ-
mas. - iva mitfitil. 
J:Ai 1 rinfatal = ritfatal. - iva minfitil. 
;; fattil Ivt/ to twist, roll (into strands) repeatedly. 
t;alad yifattil fawarb-u he sat twirling his moustache. 
bi-nfattil iI-lagiina we' make the dough into (lots of) 
strands. - vn taftiil; ava/pva mifattil. 
;"1 ritfattil Ivil to be twisted or rolled (into strands) 
repeatedly. - iva mitfatlit . 
Z J .;J.J see • IS .;J .J : futeel 
~lSr.;J.J 
..r.-l:.i fitamiin, vitamiin <Fr> In pI -aatl vitamin. 
I~.;J.J 
.:;; fatan (i) I Ivtl to charm, enchant. gama/-ha yiftin 
iI-lat;1 her beauty would turn your head. 2 Ivil to tell 
tales, tattle. ridda-lna gneeh lafaan ma-niftin-f' [alee 

he gave us a pound so that we wouldn't squeal on him. 
-vn fitna, fatn; ava faatin; pya maftuun. 
Q 
fitna Ini I Ivnl telling tales, tattling, squealing. 
-
Ipl -aat, fitanl 2 conflict, discord, dissension. 
3 sedition. 
,:,W fattaan I/adjl alluring, enchanting. 2 In • and 
pI fattaanal blabbermouth, tattler, squealer. 
.:y.j i raftan lell I morelmost charming. 2 morelmost 
tattling. 
~ fattin Ivtl to make (s.o.) blab. bawilt afattin-u 
laleek ma-fidirt il I tried to make him squeal on you, 
but without success. -vn taftiin; ava/pva mifattin. 
;"1 ritfattin Ivil passive of fattin. - iva mitfattin. 
2 oj"::" ...; 
Q 
futna Inl {bot] cassie, popinac (Acacia farnesiana). 
o ..::.....; see 0 IS ..::.. ...; : futeeh 
I J ..::.."'; see also ojJ"::""'; 
,;; fata 1 In pI fityaanl youth, young man . 
• la fataah In pI fatayaatl young woman. 
• p futuwwa r Inl {obsol] military training (in 
schools). 
• p fitiwwa 
In pI -aatl I {obsol] neighbourhood 
strong-man and protector of local interests. 2 bully, 
tough guy, hood. - ladj invar/3 tough. waadfitiwwa a 
tough kid. bint i ftiwwa a tough no-nonsense girl. 
~Ip fitiwwaaya In pI -aatl {obsol] neighbourhood 
virago acting as protector of local interests. IIbint i 
ftiwwaaya a tough girl, hoyden. 
Z J ..::.....; see I IS ..::.. ...; : fatwa 
JJ"::" ...; 
.;.,.li fatuura <It fattura> In pI fawatiirl I invoice, 
bill. 2 {text] sample. 
ojJ"::" ...; 
~"a fatwana In/l verbal noun of ritfatwin. 2 {obsol] 
sum of qualities (strength, courage, generosity etc.) 
expected of a fitiwwa. 
,:,.fAi1 ritfatwin Ivil to act the tough, behave in a bul-
lying fashion. -vn fatwana; ava mitfatwin. see further 
under I J"::""'; 
I IS"::" ...; 
,;; fatal (i) Ivi/l to issue a legal opinion. 2 to make 
pompous pronouncements, lay down the law. -vn 
fatwa; ava faati. 
641 
1S"a fatwa In pI -aat, fataawi/legal opinion, ruling. 
,;;i rafta Ivil = fatal. daar iI-riftaarr or daar iI-rifta 
central office of the Mufti of Egypt. -vn riftaar, rifta; 
ava mufti. 
,;;.. mufti In ·1 {lsi] mufti. 
~I ristafta Ivtl to ask for a legal opinion. -vn 
ristiftaar; ava mistafti . 
.I.:.i:o-I ristiftaar In pI -aatl referendum. 
2 IS ..::.....; see I J ..::.. ...;: 
fata I, 
fityaan, 
fataah, 
fatayaat 
V"IS"::""'; 
~ 
fitees, fitiis <Fr vitesse> Inl {auto] gear-shift 
lever. 
J IS ..::.....; see 0 IS ..::.. ...; : futeel 
o IS"::" ...; 
~,i futeeh (also futee/) <Fr fauteuil> In pI -aatl 
armchair. 
c r ...; 
.4.; fagra ladvl suddenly. maat fagra he died 
suddenly . 
11 fagratan r = fagra. 
~~ fugaari ladjl surprise, surprising. taftiiJ fugaari 
surprise inspection. 'lil-xabar gaa-Ii b-{ariifia fuga~iyya 
the news reached me in an unexpected way. 
~li faagir Ivtl to surprise, catch by surprise. fagir-ni 
I-laya w-'lana f-maktab-i b-a/taral the illness hit me 
suddenly while I was working at the office. -/the liter-
ary passive occurs! fugirt i lamma/uft-u I was taken by 
surprise when I saw him. -vn mifagra; ava m;faagir, 
mufaagirr; pya mUfaagarr. 
'~lA.. mUfagra In pI -aatl surprise. kaanit mUfagra 
saciida liyya it was a happy surprise to me. 
~l.i;1 ritfaag;r Ivil to be caught by surprise or unpre-
pared. -iva mitfaag;r. 
rr"'; 
~ fagg (i) Ivil to burst forth, pour forth (of odour ,light 
etc.). -vn fagg, fagagaan; ava faagig. 
I 
• 
Jr .... 
.r:J fagar (u) I/vtl to burst open. 'lil-larabiyya daasit 
ik-koora fagarit-ha the car ran over the ball and burst it. 
II raabit mafguura fil-liyaa{ she burst into tears. 2 Ivil to 
overstep the bounds of decency. kull i maada 
wi-b-tufgur illi bawaleek the more time passes the more 

outrageous your behaviour becomes and the more you 
harm those around you. lamil-ni b-fugr he treated me 
outrageously. -vn fugr, fagr, fuguriyya, fuguur f; ava 
faagir; pva mafguur, mafguur. 
~ 
fugr Inl immorality. 
~~ fuguriyya = fugr. 
• ~ 
fagra Ipl -aatl mstance noun of fagr. lIya fagrit-i 
minkum I've had all I can stand from you! 
~\j faagir In • and pI fagara, fuggar/libertine, rake. 
.~\j fagra In pI -aat/loose woman. 
~ 
fagr Inll dawn. mala fawwil xiyuu( iI-fagr at the 
crack of dawn. 2 morning prayer, the first of the five 
obligatory daily prayers of Islam. 
~~ fagriyya Inl (time of) dawn. 
~ 
i fafgar lell morelmost immoral. 
.r.i' \ finfagar Ivill to burst, be burst. 2 to explode, be 
exploded. riI-ijunbiia nfagarit laleehum the bomb ex-
ploded on them. -vn finfigaar; ava/iva minfigir. 
)~ 
\ finfigaar In pI -aatl explosion. similna ~oot 
infigaar we heard (the sound of) an explosion. 
riI-infigaar is-sukkaani the population explosion. 
,r.-&;\ fitfagar = finfagar. - ava/iva mitfigir. 
;.; faggar Ivtl to blow up, cause to explode. faggaru 
g-gabal bid-dinam;;t they blasted through the hill with 
dynamite. -vn tafg;;r; avalpva mifaggar. 
~\ fitfaggar Ivil to be blown up, be exploded. - iva 
mitfaggar . 
.:.\~ mutafaggiraatf Ipl nl explosives. 
Z J [...J see J.J [. ..J : faguura 
I t[...J 
& fagal l (a) Ivtl to afflict, cause anguish to. 
rabb-i-na fagal-na b;;k the good Lord has punished us 
with your presence! -/the literary passive occurs! 
fugilna lamma/ufna g-garfJa we were deeply distressed 
when we saw the wounded. -vnfagalaan; avafaagil; 
pva mafguul. 
~\j faagila, 
fagla I 
In 
pI fawaagill calamity, 
disaster. 
~ 
fagiila In pI fagaayill calamity, misfortune, 
disaster. 
~\ fitfagal l Ivil to be or become deeply distressed, 
suffer great anguish. fitfagaeit lamma diryit bi-moot 
ibn-a-ha she was grief-stricken when she heard the news 
of her son's death. -avaliva mitfigil. 
~ 
\ finfagal l = fitfagal l . - avaliva minfigil. 
Z t[...J 
& fagal 2 (a) Ivtl to arouse greed in, make glutto-
642 
nous. -vn fagalaan; ava !aagil; pva mafguul. 
t.~ mafguul/adj *1 gluttonous. 
~ 
fagla 2 Inl gluttony. 
.:,~ faglaan ladj 'I gluttonous. see further under 
,:, t[...J 
~~ fagaala = fagla 2 • 
~\ fit!agal 2 Ivil I to become maddened with de-
sire, have one's appetite strongly aroused. fitfagalt' 
lammafuft-a-ha liryaana I went crazy with desire when 
I saw her naked. fit/agal lamma famm iI-lafJma 1-
mafwiyya appetite overwhelmed him when he smelled 
the grilled meat. 2 to become a glutton. kaanit nifs-u 
lafiifa fil-fakl' w-min saalit ma miji wayyaahum 
itfagal he had a delicate appetite (at first), but from the 
moment he started going a~ound with them he turned 
into a glutton. -avaliva mit/igil . 
~ 
\ finfagal 2 = fitfagal 2• - ava/iva minfigil. 
,:, t [...J see also Z t [. ..J 
~ 
faglana Inl gluttony, greed. 
~\ fitfaglan Ivil to be gluttonous, eat ravenously. 
-ava mitfaglan. 
[...J[...J 
~ 
fagfig Ivil to spread all over (of odours, light, and 
the like). -vnfagfaga; ava mifagfig. 
~\ fitfagfig Ivil = fagfig. - ava mitfagfig. 
J[...J 
~ 
figllcoll nl radish(es). lubya ya figl' lubya [ven-
dor's cry] radishes (as tender as) black-eyed peas! figl' 
baladi type of white elongated radish native to Egypt. 
figl afrangi round red-skinned radl~hes. 
~ 
figla lunit n, pI -aatl a radish. 
~~ figlaaya = figla. 
.J[...J 
.~ /agwa In pI -aatl gap, breach. 
J.J [. ..J 
.)~ faguura <It figura> Inl court card, face card. 
..::..c..J 
.;...; /afJat (a) I Ivtl to dig, dig up, excavate (especially 
a wide area). fafJatu f-faaril kull-u they dug up the 
whole street. 2 Ivil to dig, dig around (especially over a 
wide area). lammaliin bi-yif!Jatu f-waadi l-miluuk 
yidawwaru lala maijaabir gidiida they're always dig-
ging in the Valley of the Kings in search of new tombs. 
II fil-faafJit naazil wil-baani (aalil [prov] (the digger de-

scends and the bl!ilder rises) ... the malicious will come 
to harm and the good will flourish. -vnfabataan, fabt; 
ava faabit; pva mabfuut. 
.;:......i fabt In pi fubuutl hole, trench, excavation. 
~ 
fabta linst n, pi -aatl an excavation, a dig. 
..::.-A; 1 fitfabat Ivil to be dug, be dug up, be excavated. 
- iva mitfibit. 
..::.-A; 1 finfabat = fitfabat. - i~a minfibit. 
.;..;.; fabbat I Ivtl to dig up or excavate repeatedly. 
2 Ivil to dig around. -vn tafIJiit; avalpva mifabbat. 
':":""1 fitfabbat Ivil passive offabbatl. -iva mitfabbat. 
Jc J 
.rd fabar (a, u) Ivt/l to dig. bi-yifIJarufjaaril lafaan 
iI-mawasiir they dig up the street on account of the 
pipes. II fallaah yifIJ.ar roob-u God's curse on his soul! 
(of one deceased). 2 to make a groove or grooves in, 
chisel, carve, etc. - Ivil 3 to dig, make holes. 
ma-tifIJarji fil-beeta stop scratching holes in the wall! 
Ilbi-yifIJar waraaya he's scheming behind my back. 
-bi-yifIJar laleeha he's looking for it everywhere. -vn 
fabr; ava faabir; pva mafIJuur. 
;"..;.. mafIJuur ladj • and pi mafabiirl accursed, 
damned (of a deceased person). wil-mafIJuur gooz-ik 
kunti layfa malaa fizzaay ... your late husband -damn 
his black soul- how could you live with him? -ya wlaad 
iI-mafabiir ... you offspring of the damned! 
e.rd fubra In pi -aat, fubarl hole. 
e ~ 
fabiira In pi fabaayirl ditch, trench. 
;~ mufIJaar In pi mafabiirl carpenter's chisel. 
......... 1 fitfabar Ivil passive of fabar. - iva mitfibir. 
......... 1 finfabar = fitfabar. -iva minfibir. 
~ fabbar Ivti to dig repeatedly or in several places. 
riI- faraanib fabbarit iI- farqiyya the rabbits have dug up 
the ground. -vn tafIJiir; avalpva mifabbar. 
;";'1 fitfabbar./vil passive of fabbar. - iva mitfabbar. 
~cJ 
~ 
fubf Inl act of an outrageous or highlY immoral 
sort. 
..;-li faabif ladjl outrageous, extreme. ;ulm i faabif 
monstrous injustice. 
~li fabfa, faabifa t In pi fawaabiffl (act of) adul-
tery, fornication. 
~I; fawabfi ladj • and pi -yyal adulterous. 
U'" C J 
...,.-i fab~ (a) Ivtl to examine, scrutlmze. fab~ 
iI-waraqa kwayyis qabli ma baai fimqit-u laleeha he 
scrutinized the paper carefully before signing it. -vn 
643 
fab~; ava faab~; pva mafIJu~. 
...,.-i fab~ In pi fubu~1 test, examination. fubu~ 
tibbiyya medical tests . 
~I 
fitfab~ Ivil to be examined, be scrutinized. 
- iva mitfib~ . 
~I 
finfab~ = fitfab~. -iva minfib~. 
~.!lCJ 
~ 
fabkif Ivtl {slang] to put into disorder, dis-
arrange·falr-a-ha mfabkifher hair is dishevelled. - also 
falkif· -vn fabkafa; avalpva mifabkif. 
~I fitflJbkif Ivil{slang] to become disordered, be 
put into disorder. - vn tifabkiif; avaliva mitfabkif. 
Jc J 
JH fabl In pi fubulal I stud bull. IIfabl i b~allarge 
onion. 2 irrigation ditch (see PI.E, 17). 
JHi fafIJallell{deris] morelmost hulking or oafish. 
~ 
fabballviJ {deris] to grow into a hulking oaf. -vn 
tafIJiil; ava mifabbal. 
J-i;-I fistafIJa/l/vil to go too far, get out of hand. 
2/vtl (deris] 2a to consider hulking or oafish. 2b to 
sele<:t as hulking or oafish. -vn fistifIJaal; ava mistafIJiI. 
1 
• 
r'C u 
~ 
fabm Icoll n, pi fubumaatl charcoal(s), coal(s). 
IIfabm· bagari anthracite. -fabm i nabaati charcoal. 
-fabm i kuuk coke. 
~ 
fabma lunit n, pi -aatl a piece of charcoal, a piece 
of coal. 
~t-.; fabmaaya = fabma . 
~ 
fabmi ladjl charcoal-grey . 
r-li faabim ladjl intense, saturated (of black colour). 
falri fiswid faabim jet black hair. 
rL::.; fabbaam In ·1 charcoal dealer, coal merchant. 
~ 
fabbam I Ivtl to burn to ashes, reduce to charcoal. 
fabbam iI-xafab he burned the wood down to charcoal. 
2 ~vil to be reduced to ashes, be reduced to charcoal. 
law iI-baraara zaadit lan iI-matluub iI-biiastik bi-
yfabbam if the required temperature is exceeded the 
plastic burns up. - vn tafIJiim; avalpva mifabbam . 
~I fitfabbam Ivil to burn or be burnt to ashes, be or 
become reduced to charcoal. - ivalava mitfabbam. 
1 
• 
r'C u 
~ 
fabam (i) Ivtl to overcome (of weeping). -vn 
fabamaan; ava faabim; pva mafIJuum . 
~I fitfabam Ivil to be overcome (by weeping). -iva 
mitfibim. 
~I finfabam = fitfabam. -iva minfibim. 

.::.ot...; 
.:..>.i faxat (a) Ivtl to pierce. faxatit leen-u bi-~bal-ha 
she poked him in the eye with her finger. raagil bi-leen 
mafxuuta a one-eyed man. - also faxas. -vn faxataan, 
faxt; ava faaXit; pva mafxuut. 
..:;..;..A;'I ritfaxat Ivil to be pierced. - ava/iva mitflXit. 
.::.J.; faxxat Ivtl to pierce (the eyes). II fI-afaxxat-lak 
lenee-k ... I'll give you hell. -vn tafxiit; ava/pva 
mitaxxat. 
..:;..;..A;'I ritfaxxat Ivil to be pierced (of the eyes). - iva 
mitfaxxat. 
tt...; 
t:! faxx In pi fuxuux, fixaaxl trap, snare.faxx' tallab a 
fox trap. wiqil fil-faxx he fell into the trap. 
~ t...; 
w .~ faxd Ifem n, pi rifxaad, flXaadl thigh, 
haunch. 
i~ faxda In pi -aat, flXadl 1 {butcher} haunch, leg, 
shank. 2 thigh. 
I.J t...; 
~ 
faxr Inl boasting, bragging. bi-yflibb iI-faxr he 
likes to show off. II ... wala faxr ... and that's enough 
honour to speak for itself, as in rana baqa bn' lali baala 
wala faxr I am the son of Ali Pasha - no need to say 
anything more. 
~i rafxar leU morelmost excellent. rid-duxxaan da 
rafxar nool this tobacco is the finest. 
J# faxuur ladj *1 proud, feeling pride. riflnafaxuriin 
biik we're proud of you! 
.,> li faaxir lad jl of outstanding quality. rakl' faaxir 
superb food. mubilya faxra top quality furniture. 
.,>U.I ritfaaxar Ivil to boast, brag. dayman yitfaaxar 
bi-fluus-u he's constantly bragging about his money. 
- vn tafaaxur; ava mitfaaxir. 
.;..:a 1 riftaxar Ivil to feel pride. rabuu-ya miftixir biyya 
my father is proud of me. -vn riftixaar; ava miftixir . 
.;.a. muftaxar l/adjl = faaxir. IIqumaal muftaxar 
cheap quality cotton material for peasant galabiyas. 
2 Inl ril-muftaxar the Pullman train. 
1 
' 
, 
.JC"" 
JI~ faxaraani In pi -yyal potter, manufacturer of 
pottery. 
iJ~li faxuura In pi fawaxiirl pottery workshop.loola 
k-kasuura ma-kaanit iI-faxu#ra' {prov} were it not for 
644 
breakages, there would be no potteries . 
1S~~li faxuuri In pi -yyal potter. 
J\;..; fuxxaar Inl fired clay, earthenware. 
~t"'; 
~ 
faxas (i) Ivtll to pierce (the eye). -alsofaxat . 
2 to cause to sink. fI-axflS biih i/- rart/, I'll ram him into 
the ground! ritwalad wi-qurt-u mafxuusa he was born 
with a low forehead. -vnfaxs, faxasaan; avafaaxis; pya 
mafxuus. 
~I ritfaxas Ivil passive offaxas. -iva milJUlS. 
~I rinfaxas = ritfaxas. -iva minflXis. 
t...;t...; 
~ 
faxfaxa Ivnl luxurious living. 
~I ritfaxfax Ivil to live in lUXUry. -ava mitfaxfax. 
C~"'; 
c.')li faadifl/adjl heavy, serious. xusaara fadfla heavy 
loss. 
.J ~ ...; 
i.;.l"J fudra <perh It fodera> In pi fudarl pressing 
cloth, ironing cloth. 
t~...; 
t oU fadar (a) Ivtl to crack open, split open, burst open. 
fadar id-dimmil he burst the pimple. kaan il-baab 
misankar fa-raafl fadr-u b-ma(raqa fataflit-u the door 
was locked, so he broke it open with a hammer. -vn 
fadr, fadaraan; ava faadir; pva mafduur. 
t..li,;l ritfadar Ivil to be cracked, split or burst open. 
- iva mitfidir. 
t.a; 1 rinfadar = ritfadar. - iva minfidir. 
oj ~ ...; 
.:,1':;; faddaan In pi fadadiin, rifdina, fidnl land mea-
sure equal to 1.038 acres, feddan. IIqiraa( fla;;' wala 
faddaan la(aara {prov} ... an ounce of luck excels a 
pound .of wit. -qiraa( fil-liyya wala faddaan fil-kuruu! 
{prov} ... quality counts more than quantity. 
.J ~...; see IS ~ ...; : fadw 
IS~"'; 
lSoU fada (i) Ivtl to ransom, redeem. fadeet ~iyaam-i 
b-tarkiillifriin maskiin I redeemed my (not) fasting by 
feeding twenty poor souls. rif-fuhada raaflu fida l-mOlr 
the war dead died as a ransom for Egypt. kull-u yhuun 
fida lil-larabiyya any sacrifice is worth it for the car. 

IIfadaa-k it has gone as a ransom for you, it has taken 
the danger that was around on itself and left you un-
harmed (polite expression used to one who has broken 
or lost something). - rafdii-k bi-roolJ-i I would lay down 
my life for you, I'd do anything for you. -vnfady, fadw, 
fida; ava faadi; pva mafdi. 
J~ fadw InJ {lsi] food or money given to the poor in 
compensation for the omissioll of certain religious 
duties. 
~~\i faadi InJ {Chr] Redeemer (epithet of Jesus 
Christ). 
~~ fidya In pi -aatl ransom. xatafu I-layyil wi-talabu 
fidya they kidnapped the child and demanded a 
ransom. 
.I~ fidaar InJ {Chr] redemption. 
~I~ fidaari In °1 commando, one of the fedayeen. 
~~\i faada Ivtl to avoid (e.g., hitting s.th.). dust; 
faraamil la/aan rafaadi I-matabb I stepped on the 
brakes to avoid (hitting) the pot-hole. -vn mifadiyya; 
ava/pva mifaadi. 
~~U;I ritfaada I Ivtl to avoid, keep away from. 
bi-titfadaa-ni leeh why are you avoiding me? 2 Ivil pas-
sive of faada. -vn tafaadi; ava/iva mitfaadi. 
AJhJ see AJj"'; 
'::..:J J ...; 
iWJ) firutta, furutta <Itfrutta> Inl I Icolll fruit(s) (on 
a restaurant menu). 2 fruit flavours (of hard candy, ice 
cream). firutta m/akkila assorted fruit-flavoured 
sweets. 
lA..:JJ ...; 
Ioll;) fartik Ivt/ I to rip apart, tear ( to pieces). 
rafartik-ak lJitat I'll rip you to pieces! 2 to squander 
(money). -also fartin. -vn fartaka; ava/pva mifartik. 
1oll;.);"1 ritfartik Ivil to be ripped apart. rik-kawitp 
mitfartik the tyre is in shreds. -vn tifartiik; ava mitfartik. 
Z A ..:J J"'; see A\.S..:J J ...; : funeeka 
1 iJ ..:J J ...; 
.;;) fartin I Ivt/ to squander, waste. fartinit il-t;irfeen 
she squandered the money. -also fartik. -vn fartana; 
ava/pva mifartin . 
.;;.);"1 ritfartin I Ivil to be squandered, be wasted. - iva 
mitfartin. 
Z iJ..:J J ...; 
4) furteena <perh T firtzna from It> Inl trouble, 
645 
discord. dayman tilmil furteena been in-naas she is 
constantly trying to stir up trouble between people. 
.;;) fartin 2 Ivtl to separate, cause a rift between. 
tann-u waraahum lamma fartin-hum min balt/. he 
wouldn't rest until he had caused a rift between them. 
-vn fartana; ava/pva mifartin . 
.;;.);"1 ritfartin 2 Ivil to be separated, be split (up). - iva 
mitfartin. 
A\.S..:JJ"'; 
~.); furteeka J <perh Gr phourketa> In pi -aat, 
faratiikl hairpin. 
1 [.J"'; 
[.) farag I (i) Ivtl to alleviate, dispel. rabb-i-na yifrig-
ha may God show (us) a way out! -/the literary passive 
occurs! furigat (wal-lJamdu li-llaah) everything is all 
right now (thank heavens)! -vn farag, faragaan; ava 
faarig; pva mafruug. 
[.) farag 2 Inl release, deliverance. farag rabb-i-na a 
godsend. 
[.) farg In pi furuugl female genitalia. 
[.) firig ladjl large, roomy, spacious. ~aala firga a 
large hall. 
~) faragiyya In pi -aatlloose robe, wide gown (worn 
by religious figures): 
[.1) farraag: rabu farraag the Great Deliverer, 
epithet of el-Sayyid Badawi. 
[..);"1 ritfarag Ivil to be alleviated, be dispelled. - iva 
mitfirig. 
[.) farrag l Ivtl to alleviate, dispel. rabb-i-na yfarrag 
dit;t-ak may God dispel your worries! -vn tafriig; ava/ 
pva mifarrag. 
[.::""1 ritfarrag I lvil to be alleviated, be dispelled. -iva 
mitfarrag. 
[.)i rafrag I Ivti to provide (a problem or dilemma) 
with a timely solution (of God). bi-nistanna l-lJadd; rna 
rabb-i-na yifrig-ha laleena b1aITaaia kwayyisa we're 
biding our time until, God willing, a suitable maid turns 
up. bukra rabb-i-na yifrig-ha ... tomorrow is another 
day. 2/vil to grant release, grant freedom. rafragu 
lannu b-kafaala they released him on bail. -vn rifraag; 
ava mufrig; pva mufrag. 
[.I)! rifraag I Ivnl II rizn; rifraag release permit (spe-
cifically for goods in customs). -/ihaadit rifraag t/.ariibi 
certificate showing that taxes have been paid in full 
(required of an heir before he can claim his inheri-
tance). 2 InJ release permit. rifraag karantiina quaran-
tine release permit. 
[.? I riftarag Ivil to ease up, let up (of a problem, crisis 

etc.). II ma daac;it rilla ma ftaragit (provl ... the darkest 
hour comes before dawn. -vn riftiraag; ava miftirig. 
r;:.,;.A.- muftarag: leela muftaraga night of joy. 
Z [,) .J 
~) furga Inl I Ivnl viewing. furgit iz-zaffa kwayyisa 
min il-balakoona there is a good view of the bridal 
procession from the balcony. madaam rintu mil c;add 
il-furga wac;fiin tibafJlac;u leeh since you can't afford to 
watch (the show), why are you standing and staring? 
2 sight, show, spectacle. lamma daxalit fJamaat-u 
fil-xinaac;a bac;it furga when his mother-in-law joined in 
the row it became a (real) spectacle! IItarabiyyafurga a 
stylish car. 
r;:::.s farrag 2 /vtl to show, cau~~ .0 look.farrag-ni tala 
1- riwac[ show me the rooms! win-nabi I-afarrag-ha ... by 
God, I'll show her a thing or two! IIfarrag in-naas (or 
xalc; iIIaah) talayya he made a public spectacle of me. 
- rilli fJabb-u rabb-u farrag-u tala mulk-u {provl God 
will show his kingdom to whl'm He loves (i.e., he will 
enable him to travel). -vn tafriig; aya mifarrag. 
r;:::';'" 
ritfarrag 2 Ivil to look, take a look. taawiz 
ratfarrag /iwayya min iI-/ibbaak I want to look out of 
the window a bit. tataala ritfarrag tala beet-i g-gidiid 
come and have a look at my new house.llxalla iii ma 
yiftiri yitfarrag to make a public spectacle, make a 
scene, as in fJ-astanna li-fJadd' raaxir if-/ahr' w-riza 
ma-dafatt'-/ fJ-axalli iii ma yiftiri yitfarrag I'll give you 
till the end of the month and if you don't pay I'll make a 
real scene. -ava mitfarrag. 
r;:fo mutafarrigT In *1 spectator, onlooker, member 
of an audience. 
C,) .J 
C) firifJ (a) Ivill to become happy, glad or joyful, 
rejoice. riI-balad kullit-ha firfJit the whole town re-
joiced. firifJt' bil-hadiyya I was overjoyed with the pre-
sent. 2 to celebrate, hold a celebration. ri;-;aahir rinn' 
ma-fJadd'-/ fil-bilaad di yitraf yifrafJ min reer 
mikrufoon wi-xamas sammataat it seems no one in this 
country knows how to celebrate without a microphone 
and five loudspeakers. gat il-fJaziina tifrafJ ma-Iac;it-/' 
laha macrafJ {prov I ... one who is born to suffer will find 
no opportunity to rejoice. IItayziin nifrafJ biik we're 
looking forward to seeing you married. -vnfarafJ; ava 
farfJaan. 
11 firifJ fi- to gloat over (s.o's misfortunes). 
C) farafJ In pi rafraafJl I joy. riI-farafJ id-daayim 
yitallim rr-rac;~ {provl (unceasing joy teaches dancing) 
646 
... practice makes perfect. 2 wedding celebration. 
3 festivity. rin/a-lla fil- rafraafJ ... may we eat and drink 
with you on happy occasions (said to a host). 
C) farfJ Inl joyousness. fi-farfJ-u-hum mansiyyiin 
wi-f-hamm-u-hum madtiyyiin (provl (you're) forgot-
ten when they're happy, but invited to share their woes. 
__ ) farfJa Inl joy. 
,:,1.) farfJaan ladj *1 happy, joyful. 
~') farayfJi lallj invarl cheerful, gay (of colours, 
music). galabiyya zarc;afarayfJi a bright blue galabiya. 
IIganaaza farayfJi (or farayfJiyya) (1) {joel a funeral 
where the feeling is one of relief rather than grief. 
(2) (Chrl in the Orthodox Church, a prayer for those 
who die during the fifty days between Easter and Pente-
cost, during which period funeral services do not take 
place. 
c::.s farrafJ Ivtl to delight, cause joy to, make happy. 
rir-rac;~' b-yfarrafJ-na kull-I-na we all like dancing. ya 
xabar yifarrafJ what joyous newsf -vn lafriifJ; ava/pva 
mifarrafJ· 
~.Ju. tafariifJ Ipl nl gaiety, fun-making. da bass' 
mgarrad tafariifJ that's just for fun. fJa-yrac;c;uu-k 
lafari/fJ they'll promote you just for the fun of it. 
- .J C,) .J 
oJ..=--) farafJfaza <P farah-afzil> Inl /musl mode in 
Arabic music beginning on G and having B flat and E 
flat. 
I t,) .J 
t) farx I Ipl furUxal I Inl chick. riI-farx il-f~iib 
fil-beec[a y~iifJ {prov I (the bright chick crows while it's 
still in the egg) talent shows itself early. 2 Imase and fern 
adjl thickset, heavily built, stocky. - In pi rifrux/3 one 
of the connecting pieces which make up a ma/raftyya 
design (see PI.G, 4). 
~) farxa In pi -aal, firaaxl hen, chicken. ftraax 
ringiliizi any large variety of chicken similar to Rhode 
Island Reds. II zayy il-farxa d-dayxa ... too tired to think 
straight, whacked, bushed. 
t::.s farrax Ilvtl to incubate (eggs). matmal tafriix 
chicken incubator. 2/vil to incubate (of eggs). -vn 
tafriix; ava mifarrax. 
t::';'" ritfarrax Ivil to be incubated, be hatched artifi-
cially. -iva milfarrax. 
Z t,) .J 
t) farx 2 In pi furuux, rufrux, furUxal sheet (of 
paper). 

I ~ j"; 
~) farad, firid (i) I Ivtl to straighten, extend. Yifrid 
diraal-ak stretch out your arm! Yifrid ij-firaal unfurl 
the sail! faradit iI-Ij~iira fif{ams she spread out the mat 
in the sun. faradt iI-lagiina I rolled (or stretched) out 
the dough. falr-a-ha mafruud she's had her hair 
straightened. II Yifrid wijf-ak don't frown so! cheer up! 
2 Ivil to become straight, become extended. fuuf 
iI-walad firid Yizzaay see how the boy has grown! - vn 
faradaan, fard; ava faarid; pva mafruud. 
• ~) farda I Ipl-aatl instance noun offard.llkaan wijf-u 
mafruud farda he grinned from ear to ear. 
~'pi Yitfarad Ivil to be straightened out, be extended. 
Yit-toob bi-yiigi malfuuf wi-bBldeen yitfirid the bolt of 
cloth comes rolled up and then it is unwound. 
ril-lagiina b-titfirid bi-naffaaba the dough is rolled out 
with a rolling-pin. II Yitfiridfiwayya relax! unwind a bit! 
-iva mitfirid. 
~,;; 1 Yinfarad = Yitfarad. - iva minfirid. 
~:; farrad, farrad Ivtl to spread out. farradu s-sibaax 
la/-Yart[ they spread the manure over the ground. 
farradit ir-ruzz a lafaan tinatjtjii she spread out the rice 
so she could pick it over. - vn tafriid; avalpva mifarrad, 
mifarrad. 
~:-"'I Yitfarrad, Yitfarrad Ivil to be spread out. - iva 
mitfarrad, mitfarrad. 
1 ~ j ..; 
~) fard T Inl Ilpl Yafraadl a single person, an indi-
vidual. fard; min iI-Yusra a member of the family. ra Yiis 
fuYuun iI-Yafraad personnel manager. 2 Ino pll2a One 
(epithet of God). 2b epithet of Rajab, the seventh 
month in the Muslim year. 
• Yafraadan: Yagwaazan wi-Yafraadan to an extreme 
degree. 
~) fard Inl I lin appositionl la a single unit (as 
opposed to a double or compound unit). mUftaalj fard a 
single switch. suluuk fard single-strand wires. siriir fard 
a single bed, a bed for one person. Ib odd number. 
2 male pigeon. - Ipl furuudl 3 pistol. - Ipl furuud, 
furudal 4 large type of tjuffa. 
-.~) farda 2 In pi -aat, firadl lone of a pair. farditeen 
gazmafmaal two left shoes. 2 (also fardit kawitfl (auto-
mobile) tyre. 3/agric/ one of the major sections into 
which a field is divided to facilitate the control of irriga-
tion (see PI.E, 18). 4 pistol. - Ipl -aat onlyl S piece of 
hashish of approximately half a kilo in weight. 
..s~) fardi ladj *1 individual. raYy; fardi individual 
opinion. 
647 
..s~) fardi ladjl odd (of numbers). 
-.~) firda ladvl separately, alone, apart from others. 
tjaldiin firda l-waljdii-hum they are sitting alone. 
Jb) faradaani ladj invarl I composed of a single 
unit. sillim faradaani a straight (as opposed to a folding) 
ladder. 2a accomodating one person. Yoot[a faradaani 
a single room. (ayyaarafaradaani a single-seater plane. 
2b pulled by one animal (of a vehicle). larabiyya 
{aradaani a one-horse (or one-donkey) cart. - ladvl 
3 alone. huwwa laayij faradaani he lives alone. 
b-aljibb i Yaakul faradaani I like to eat alone . 
J..) fariid ladjl I lonely, solitary. laazib wi-laayij 
{ariid waljiid he's a bachelor living all alone and by 
himself. 2 unique, matchless, peerless. fariid iI-Ijusn of 
singular beauty. di zahra fariida f-nol-ha it's a unique 
kind of flower. 
..s~I:; farraadi, farraadi = faradaani. 
~';;I YinfaradT Ivil I to withdraw, retire alone (with 
s.o.). Yinfarad biyya lafaan yitjul-li l-xabar he took me 
off alone to tell me the news. 2 to stand alone, be 
unique. YiI-maljaW da b-yinfirid bi-nool ig-gizam di 
this store is the only one to have that type of shoe. - vn 
Yinfiraad; ava minfirid, munfarid. 
..s~I';;1 YinfiraadiT ladjl individual, solitary. Ijabs 
infiraadi solitary confinement. 
~;:.. munfaridT ladj *1 single, individual. tamrinaat 
munfarida individual exercises. 
~,;.. mifrid ladj invarl composed of a single unit. 
mafatiilj mifrid single switches. (ayyaara b-karaasi 
mifrid a plane with single seats. 
~,;.. mufrad I/ni/gram/ singular. 2/adjl single. xa{{i 
mufrad single-track railway line. 
• bi-mufrad-(u) ladvl alone. misaafir bi-mufrad-u he's 
travelling by himself. 
Jb';" mufradaani ladjl single. 
..::..b';" mufradaatT or mufradaat T Ipl nil units, indi-
vidual items. mufradaat iI-murallab the individual items 
contained in a breakdown of the salary. 2 lexical items. 
mufradaat ii-lura the lexicon, or vocabulary, of the 
language. 
~,}.;-I Yistafrad Ivi/: Yistafrad bi- to take advantage of 
(s.o.'s being alone). baldi ma miskuu Yistafradu bii 
w-t[arabuu after they caught him, they took him off 
alone and beat him up. faf-ni matj(uula min{agara 
wi-stafrad biyya he saw that I was alone in the world 
and took advantage of me. -vn Yistifraad; ava 
mistafrad. 
IJ" .J ~ j ..; 
'-"'J~) firdoos Inl paradise. 

I .).) ...; 
:,. farr, farr (i) I/vil to run fast.firr' waraa rilbafi-u zip 
after him and catch up with him. farr' minni he sped 
away from me. rid-dumuu£: farrit min £:een-u he wept 
uncontrollably. 2/vtl to flip through, go quickly 
through (a book, or the like). b-afirr ik-kitaab fiabl' 
m-axuff il-imtibaan I'll have a quick flip through the 
book before I go into the exam. - vn firaar, farr; ava 
faarir; pya mafruur. 
0:" firra In pi -aat, firarl epidemic (particularly among 
poultry). firrit kulira cholera epidemic. 
;I) faraar ladj invarl slippery. dool naas faraar they 
are shifty customers. 
oJ-:" furreera In pi -aat, farariirl I spinning-top. 
lI£:adda zayy' il-furreera he flashed past. 2 epidemic. 
1.).)"'; 
~;I) farargi In pi -yyal poulterer. 
I j.) ...; 
648 
j) faraz I (i) Ivt/l to sort, separate into components 
or parts. farz' ra,vwaat vote-sorting. faraz il-Iaban to 
skim milk. 2 to scrutinize. farazu I-£:aruusa min tabt' 
l-foOfi they inspected the bride from top to toe. -vn 
farz, farazaan; ava faariz; pya mafruuz. 
j) farz I Ivnl II laban farz skimmed milk. 2 Inl [mil} 
medical test for recruits. 
oj) farza I linst n, pi -aatl a sorting. fiU{1l' rawwil 
farza first-grade cotton. 2/adj invarl rejected. xiyaar 
farza small poor-quali~y cucumbers. 
ojl:" farraaza, farraaza In pi -aatl machine for sorting 
or separating. II mitnafifiiyyiin £:al-farraaza selected 
with great care. 
.i!.:" farriiz In pi farriizal one who sorts or grades. 
farriiz fiu(n cotton grader. 
j,.,iil ritfaraz Ivil to be sorted, be separated into com-
ponents. -iva mitfiriz. 
j.).:1 rinfaraz = ritfaraz. -iva minfiriz. 
Z j.) ...; 
0.i!.) fariiza or fireeza <Fr fraise> In pi -aat, faraayizl 
I [metal} milling machine. 2 [dent} dental unit. 3 ream 
(of paper). 
j:" farraz Ivtl I [carp} to cut a rabbet in. 2 [metal} to 
mill. -vn tafriiz; ava/pya mifarraz. 
0.i!.,.,ii tafriiza In pi -aatl [carp} rabbet. 
j:;'1 ritfarraz Ivi/l[carp} to be rabbeted. 2 [metal} to 
be milled. -iva mitfarraz. 
3 j.) ...; 
j) faraz 2 (i) Ivtl to secrete, ooze. rig-garb' b-yifriz 
midda the wound is oozing pus. -ava faariz; pya 
mafruuz. 
j) i rafraz Ivtl to secrete, ooze. -vn rifraaz; ava mifriz, 
mufriz T ; pya mufraz T . 
jl)! rifraaz In pi -aatl secretion. 
4 j .)...;. see j.J.)"';: faruuz, faruuz, faruuzi 
5 j.)"'; see j IS.)"'; :firiiz 
IV".)"'; 
..r) faras In pi rafraasl mare, (loosely) horse. IIfaras 
in-nabi praying mantis. -faras il-babr hippopotamus. 
~) farasa In pi -aatll mare. 2 bridge (of a stringed 
instrument, see PI.1, 14). 
~J) furusiyya ~nl horsemanship. 
..r.J\i faaris I 
In pi ftrsaan, fursaanl I horseman. 
2 knight . 
..r;l.,i fawaaris: rabu I-fawaaris Father of Horsemen 
(epithet of Antar (£:antar ibn' faddaad), and thus of any 
brave man). 
1V".)"'; 
~) fariisa In pi -aat, faraayisl prey. 
..r? 1 riftaras Ivtl to devour (of an animal). rit-ta£:lab 
iftaras il-farxa the fox devoured the chicken. 
II riftarasit-na fil-kalaam she beat us hands down in the 
discussion. -vn riftiraas; ava muftaris. 
3 
• 
V",)u 
~ I) faraasa Inl intuitive understanding. 
..r:;'1 ritfarras Ivil to gaze intently (into s.o.'s face). 
lafieet-u b-yitfarras fi-wiff-i zayy' ma ykuun yifabbih 
£:alayya I found him scrutinizing my face as if trying to 
place me. -ava mitfarras. 
4V".)"'; 
..r) faras (i) Ivtl to, infuriate, enrage. -vn farasaan; 
ava faaris; pya mafruus. 
~) farsa linst n, pi -aatl an enraging. rammafaras-ni 
farsa did he ever make me furious! 
..r,.,iil ritfaras Ivil to be or become infuriated, be or 
become enraged. -ava/iva mitfiris. 
..r .).: 1 rinfaras = ritfaras. -ava/iva minfiris. 
5 
• 
V".)u 
..r.J\i faaris 2 /prop nl Persia. 
~.J\i farSi, faarisiT I/adj *1 Persian. IIxaa' farsi a 
flowing slanted Arabic script. 2a In *. and pi fursl a 
Persian. II bilaad il-furs [obsol} Persia. 2b Ino pI/ the 
Persian language. 

I.!.I~J"'; 
~) firiska <perh It fresca> InJ I type of light-
weight woollen material. 2 sweet biscuit popular at 
beach resorts, made of two wafers stuck together with 
honey or other filling. 
\SJ~J"'; 
lei L..) firsalya Inl type of stiff artificial silk (used in 
linings). 
.:J~~J"'; 
..:;..;.... J) furusint <Engl>: lamba furusint fluorescent 
light. -also fulurusint. 
I~.)~ 
..;.) faraJ, faraJ (i) Ivtl I to spread, layout. bi-nifriJ 
iI-batatiin foolj is-sutuuy we lay the blankets out on the 
roof.llfaraJit-lu I-milaaya = she bawled him out, cursed 
him and made a public spectacle of it all. 2 {constr] to 
layout (a roof) by putting in the reinforcement rods 
prior to laying the concrete. 3 to furnish, provide the 
necessary accoutrements. Jaljlja mafruuJa a furnished 
flat. faraJit is-siriir she made up the bed. - vn farj; ava 
faariJ; pva mafruuj. 
..;.) farJln/1 furnishings, appointments.farjil-rooqa 
the furnishings of the room. farj il-[arabiyya the in-
terior (furnishings and accessories) of the car. farj" 
[aza a set of (caterer's) furnishings for condolence cere-
monies (e.g., a marquee. chairs, loudspeakers etc.). 
IIfar/ gazma insoles. 2 working surface (e.g., a coun-
ter-top, the top of a vendor's stall). 3 bedding. hawwi 
I-farj air the bedding. milayaat farj bed sheets. Ilfarji 
w-ya{a everything. 4 (constr] bottom layer of a two 
layer grid of metal rods over which concrete is poured 
to form a floor or roof. 
4..) farja In pi -aat/l set of bedding. 2 pavement ven-
dor's spread of merchandise. 3 = farJ 4. 
..;.1) faraaJ Icoll nIl butterflies. 2 moth(s). 
4.:.1) faraaJa In pi -aatl I lunit nl la a butterfly. Ib a 
moth. 2 butterfly stroke (in swimming). 
4.:.1) firaaJa Inl I Ipl -aatl caterer's set of furnishings 
for a marriage, mourning ceremony, or the like (Le., a 
marquee, chairs, microphones etc.). 2 Ino pI/ ril-firaaJa 
catering, the catering profession. 
..;.1:'; farraaJ In °1 office employee with janitorial and 
messenger duties, office servant. 
..;.).. mafraJ In pi mafaariJl I table-cloth, table-mat. 
2 bed spread. 
";'.;iil ritfaraJ Ivil passive of faraJ. -iva mitfiriJ . 
..;. .;; I rinfaraJ = itfaraj. -iva minfiriJ. 
649 
..;.:'; farraJI 
Ivil 
to sprawl, lie spread-eagled. 
[arabiyya xaba{it-u nizil mifarraJ [al- rarq a car ran into 
him (and) he fell sprawled out on the ground. -vn 
tafriiJ; ava mifarraj. 
z. 
. 
~J"" 
4.:.) furJa <T flr,a> Inl I Ipl furaJ! brush. furfit id-
daljn shaving brush. 2 {coarse] frottage. 
..;.:'; farraJ2 Ivtl I to brush. 2 (coarse] to indulge in 
frottage with. -vn tafriiJ; avalpva mifarraJ. 
Jl..:.). mifaraJaati In pi -yyal frotteur . 
";'::""1 ritfarraJ Ivil t to be brushed. 2 (coarse] to be 
subjected to frottage. -iva mitfarraj. 
ed-J"'; 
e:.) farjay (also farjax) I/vtl to spread apart, spread 
open. farJay riglee he opened his legs. farJayit i1-furfiina 
she opened the hairpin. 2 Ivil to spread apart, spread 
open. -vn farjaya; ava/pva mifarjaY. 
e:..;iil ritfarjay Ivil to be spread apart, be spread 
open. -iva mitfarJaY. 
t d- J"'; see e d- J ...; : farjax 
~\Sd-J"'; 
~) furJiina <It forcina> In pi faraJiinl hairpin. 
vi' J"'; 
4...0) fur~a In pi -aat, fur~1 opportunity. 
~) 
fur~agi In pi -yyal opportunist. 
Jt# J"'; 
...,#) faraq (i) Ivtl I to impose, make incumbent. 
damm-u tljiil wi-b-yifriq wuguud-u [aleena feel wi-
nhaar he's an insensitive boor and imposes his presence 
on us day and night. bi-yifriq [aleehum rataawa he 
makes them pay protection money. ~iyaam mafruuq 
obligatory fasting. 2 to suppose, assume. rifriq 'linn 
ik-kalaam bitaa[-u ~ayy suppose that what he says is 
true. faraqna ma-gaa-Jlet's suppose he doesn't come. 
II wi-friq so what! - vn farq; ava faariq; pva mafruuq. 
...,#) farq In pi furuuql I duty, obligation. yubb 
iI-watanfarqa [aleena love for our country is our duty. 
2 {lsi] obligatory ritual act (as, e.g., the five ritual 
prayers, 
giving 
of alms 
etc.). 
3 assumption, 
supposition . 
...,#J).. mafruuq or riI-mafruuq linvarl I it is con-
sidered proper, the right and proper thing would be, as 
in riI-binti mafruuq rinnaha titgawwiz a girl should get 
married. mafruuq is-su raal da ma-yitljal-jthat question 

ought not to be asked. ma-kan1' mafruuc( yiruu!J he 
shouldn't have gone. riI-mafruuc( ilti yibtidi !Jaaga 
yxall~-ha one should finish what one begins. 1 it is 
assumed, the assumption is, as in kaan mafruuc( nikuun 
w~alna ma~r' min saeteen we should have reached 
Cairo two hours ago. riI-mafruuc( rinnu yiigi I-Ielaa-di 
he's supposed to be coming tonight. ril-mafruuc( rinnu 
eayyaan bass' fuft-u fif1aarie he's supposed to be sick, 
but I saw him in the street. 
ui ..... ' ritfarac( Ivil to be imposed. c(ariiba tfarac(it eala 
l-falla!Jiin a tax was imposed on the peasants. - iva 
mitfiric(. 
ui,;;1 rinfarac( = ritfarac(. -iva minfiric(. 
ui,ril riftarac( Ivtl to suppose, assume. riftarac(na 
rinnu mif gayy we assumed he wasn't coming. -vn 
riftiraac(; ava miftiric(. 
.J:,.I~ 
.lo) farat (u) I Ivtlla to disjoin or break up into con-
stituent parts. fara{it II-eutjd she unstrung the necklace. 
Ib to undo. ti!Jibb' tufru{ faer-a-ha she likes to let her 
hair hang loose. Ie to scatter. faratit iI-hiduum eas-siriir 
she flung the clothes all over the bed. II rafrut-ak ,.. I'll 
break you into a million pieces! llvil to become dis-
joined, break up. kuuz id-dura lamma yinfaf bi-yufrut 
the ear of maize. when it dries, breaks up (into separate 
kernels). -vn fart. farataan; ava faari{; pva mafruut. 
.lo) far{ I ladvl (bought and sold) individually (usually 
of cigarettes). b-afukk iI-eilba w-rabiie is-sagaayir far{ 
I undo the pack and sell the cigarettes one by one. 
l/adj invarl loose, unpackaged. duxxaan far{ loose 
tobacco. einab far{ grapes which have fallen off the 
bunches and are sold off cheaply. 
.lo) firi{ ladj */1 excessive, extreme. wilaad-u fir[iin 
fit-[uul his sons are exceedingly tall. 1 extravagant, 
wasteful. riid-u firta he's an extravagant spender. 
~I) furaata = fart. IInaas furaata riff-raff. rabble. 
.lo ..... 1 ritfara{ Ivill to become disjoined, break up into 
component parts. 
ri~-~u!Jba tfara{it the posy came 
apart. faddit fil-eutjd' tjaam itfara{ minha she pulled at 
the necklace and it broke scattering the beads. 
2 passive of farat. -avallva mitfiri{ . 
.lo';;1 rinfara{ = ritfara{. -avaliva minfiri{. 
.lo) farrat Ivtl to disjoin or break up (several items) 
into constituent parts. bi-nfarra{ id-dura we strip the 
maize of its kernels. -vn tafriit; ava mifarra{. 
11 farra{ fi- to be negligent in keeping a hold on. 
bi-yfarrat fi1araf-u he is careless with his integrity. 
huwwa lissa gdiid wi:m-atjdar1 afarra{ fii it's still new 
and I can't part with it. 
6~O 
.lopl ritfarra{ Ivil to be disjoined, be broken up into 
constituent parts (of severa' items). - iva mitfarra{. 
11 ritfarra[ fi- (impersonal) passive of farra{ ft-. 
c.J:,.I~ 
el.) far{a!J I Ivtl to flatten. far(a!J-u min iI-ginaab flat-
ten it at the sides. llvil to become flat. -vn far{aba; 
avalpva mifar{a!J. 
el. ..... ' ritfar{a!J Ivill to be flattened. 2 to become flat. 
-vn tifar(ii!J; ivalava mitfar(a!J. 
t.l~ 
t) fare In pi furuue. rafrue. rufrue, !urueaJI 
la branch, bough (of a tree). II yurzit fare {needlew} 
stem-stitch. Ib branch (of the Nile). fare' dumyaa(the 
Damietta branch of the Nile. Ie {mus} variant on a 
basic mode. furuue rast the subsidiary modes based on 
the mode rast. 2 subdivision, branch (of a commercial 
establishment). riI-bank' luu furuue ft-kull' ba/ad the 
bank has branches in every town. 
..r) farei ladj *1 branch, subsidiary. tlrea fareiyya 
subsidiary canal. 
t). ftrie ladj *1 tall, erect, well-grown. 
t)1 rafrae lell morelmost erect etc. 
t)' faarie ladj *1 tall, erect well-grown. 
t) farrae Ivil to branch, branch out. ri/1agara 
farraeit eag-gineena wi/1aarie the tree (grew and) 
spread its branches over the garden and the street. -also 
farean. -vn tafme; ava mifarrae. 
~ 
..... tafriiea In pi -aatl branch, division. tafriieit in-
niil branch of the Nile. 
tPI ritfarrae Ivil to branch out, divide. rin-niil 
bi-yitfarrae hina the Nile divides here. - ava mitfarrae . 
I oj t.l ~ 
<JT) faraeoon. ftreoon In pi faraenal I pharaoh . 
1 tyrant. 3 giant, a mountain of a man. 
JT) faraeooni. fireooni ladjl pharaonic. rasaar 
faraeoniyya relics of the pharaonic period. 
.:;&-) farean I Ivtl to turn into a tyrant, make arrogant 
and wilful. da/ae rwnm-u lu farean-u his mother's 
spoiling him made him into a little tyrant. ril-tjirfeen 
farean,uu-hum money made them think they could be-
have as they wanted. ya faraeoon reef farean-ak. -liaal 
ma-!Jadd'1 radd-i-ni [prov} They said, 'Tyrant, what 
made you tyrannical?' He said, 'No one corrected me.' 
-vn fareana; ava/iva mifarean. 
.:;&-..... ' ritfarean Ivil to behave like a tyrant, behave 
wilfully and arrogantly. -vn tifareiin; ava mitfarean. 

2.;, t J "'; 
.:.r) farr;an! Ivil to flourish and spread (of a plant). 
-also farrar;. -vn farr;ana; ava mifarr;an. 
t,J"'; 
t,) firi¥ (a) Ivil I to become empty. fif-fiwaalfiri¥the 
sack emptied. ril-ba{{ariyya fir¥it the battery has dis-
charged. c;azaayiz far¥a empty bottles. IItuuta tuuta 
fir¥it il-ljadduuta terminating phrase for a children's 
story"" (and) so the tale is done. -fir;'! il-hizaar - ma 
bac;a filla g-gadd Iprov] "" the time for joking is over. 
2 to 
become 
unoccupied. 
become 
at 
leisure. 
lj-akallim-ak lamma fafra¥ mif-fu¥laana di I'll speak to 
you when I'm finished with this job. - vn furuu¥, 
fara¥aan; ava faari¥; pva mafruuy. 
tJ) furuu¥ Ivnl II bi-furuu¥ ~abr impatiently. 
~ J) furu¥iyya Inl emptiness. Ilfuru¥iyyit r;een 
insatiable greed. 
t)j faariY I laval lIr;eell-u far¥a he is insatiably 
greedy. 2/adjl void of meaning. inane, senseless. 
kalaam faari¥ senseless talk or behaviour. nonsense. 
II fil-bikaaya kull-a-ha far¥a the whole thing's totally 
unimportant. 
.;.&.)\; fana In pI -aatl kerosene tank (of a primus 
stove). 
t) >" fawaari~' Ipl nl empty bottles. lamma tr;uuz tiftiri 
biira laazim tigiib il-fawaari¥ mar;aak when you want to 
buy beer you must bring the empties with you. 
tJ';" mafruu¥ 
Ipval 
II famr i 
mafrUUl! 
millnu 
(I) something virtually, or as good as, done. (2) a mat-
ter of complete agreement. 
t)i fafra~' lell morelmost senseless. inane or 
meaningless. 
tl) faraa¥ Inl I emptiness. space. fii faraa¥ beell 
~inaan-u he's gap-toothed. 2 leisure, freedom from 
work. wac;t it-faraa¥ free time. 
;J:.I) faraam Inl I emptiness.llfaraa¥it r;een insatiable 
greed. 2 Ipl -aatl empty space. fimqi fil-faraam di sign 
in this space. bu{{ il-r;arabiyya fil-faraam hnaak park 
the car in the space over there. 
tj farra¥ or farra¥ Ivtl 18 to empty out (contents). 
Itlrra¥t il-filuus mill geeb-i I emptied the money out of 
my pocket. farra¥ kimmiyyit [iina tanya pour out 
another quantity of clay! Ib to empty out the contents 
of farra¥ iI-bakar he unwound the spools. farra¥ 
il-musaddas fii he emptied the gun into him. tafrii¥ 
il-markib the unloading of the ship. 2 to free, make 
unoccupied. lj-afarra!' nafs-i l-xidmit-hum I'll devote 
myself to serving them. 38 to transfer (contents, by 
6S1 
copying). farra¥ nimar i[-[alaba fi-kfuuf xa~~a he trans-
ferred the students' marks to special lists. 3b to transfer 
the contents of (by copying). farra¥-Ii f-firii[ he copied 
the tape for me. 4 to hollow out, make a hollow in. 
laazim tifarra¥ bawaleen kull' fatla you must make a 
hollow around each seedling. [uub mifarra¥ hollow 
brick. - Ivil 5 to discharge contents. fil-musaddas 
farra¥ fi-wiff-u the gun went off in his face. 6 to become 
hollow. xuduud-u farra¥it his cheeks became hollow. 
- vn tafrii¥; avalpva mifarra¥. mifarra¥. 
t.); tafrii¥ Inl Imed] dilation and curettage (D and C). 
.,;.",,); tafrii¥a Inl concavity, hollow. 
t);1 fitfarra¥ or fitfarra¥ Ivil 18 to be or become 
emptied out (of contents). Ib to be emptied (of a con-
tainer). 28 to be transferred (by copying, of contents). 
2b to be transferred (by having the contents copied). 
fil-lista tfarra¥it fid-daftar the list was transferred to the 
ledger. 3 to become hollow. be hollowed out. 4 to gain 
leisure time. disengage oneself (for a particular activ-
ity). fil-minba xallit-ni fatfarra¥ lik-kitaaba the grant 
left me free to write. -avaliva mitfarra¥. mitfarray. 
t); tafarru¥ In pI -aatl I (also minbittafarru¥) grant. 
scholarship. 2 (also badaltafarru¥) subsidy. 
t);-I fistafra¥, fistafra¥ Ivil to vomit. -vn fistifraa¥; 
ava mistafray. 
";""';J ...; 
...;...j) farfit Ivtl to break into tiny pieces. crumble. -also 
fatfit. -vn farfata; avalpva mifarfit. 
;,:; >") farfuuta In pI farafiitl tiny piece, crumb. -also 
fatfuuta. 
";";);1 fitfarfit Ivil to be broken into tiny pieces. be 
crumbled. - also fitfatfit. - vn tifarfiit; iva mitfarfit. 
I J"'; J"'; 
)) farfar. farfir Ivil I to flutter the wings. 2 to shake 
oneself, squirm. 3 to be convulsed before dying (of an 
animal). - Ivt/4 to gin (cotton). - vn farfara; avalpva 
mifarfar. mifarfir. 
));1 fitfarfar Ivil to be ginned (of cotton). -iva 
mitfarfar. 
2 J"'; J ...; 
)) firfir In pI faraafirl revolver. handgun. -also 
rifulfar. 
..;. ...; J ...; 
...,..;) farfifl Ivtlto make happy, cheer up. kaanbaziin 
bawilt afarfif-u he was depressed, so I tried to cheer 

him up. 2 Ivii to become happy or cheerful, enjoy one-
self. taeaala nifrab wi-nfarfifil-lelaa-di come, let's drink 
and be merry tonight. -vnfarfafa; ava mifarfif. 
..;.i;';1 ritfarfif Ivil 1 to become happy, cheer up. 2 to 
be made happy. -vn tifarfiif; ava/iva mitfarfif. 
..1."';J ...; 
.lu) farfat Ivt/ to spread out or scatter. farfap' il-xaraz 
t;uddaami eafaan ranat;t;i k-kubaar I spread the beads 
out in front of me so I could pick out the big ones. 
IIfarfap-i-lu snaan-u I knocked his teeth out. -vn 
farfata; ava/pva mifarfat. 
.lu;';1 ritfarfat Ivii to be or become widely spread out, 
be or become scattered. ril-birfaam wit;ie min riid-i 
wi-tfarfat eal-rarc[ the pills fell from my hand and scat-
tered over the ground. -vn tifarfiit; ava/iva mitfarfat. 
JJ"'; 
.:;) farat; (i) 1 Ivii to differ, be different. f~iyyit-u 
b-tifrit; eanf~iyyit-i his personality differs frfilm mine. 
II ma-tifrit;i it makes no difference. - raagil ean raagil 
yifrit; there are men and then there are men! 2 Ivt/2a to 
separate. ril-fJarb' farat;it-na ean baec[ the war sepa-
rated us. 2b to make a parting in (hair). -vnfart;; ava 
faarit;; pva mafruut; . 
.:;) fart; In pi firuut;, furuut;, firut;aat, furut;aatl 
1 difference, variation. ma-fiii fart; there's no differ-
ence. 2 balance. badil-ni ealafantit-ak w-adfae-Iak il-
fart; give me your bag in exchange and I'll pay the 
difference. 3a break, divide, gap.fiifart;' waasie been 
~-~affeen there's a wide gap between the two rows. 
3b parting (in the hair). 
.:;)i faarit; J In pi fawaarit;1 = fart;. 
~) firt;a In pi firat;1 1 (organized) group, troupe. 
firt;it tamsiil an acting troupe. firt;it daggaliin a band of 
swindlers. 2 team. firt;it koora football team. 3 [mil} 
division (of an army). 4 [mil} training course (in the 
work of a particular unit). xadt' firt;a dfaae madani 
I took a course in civil defence. 
.:;1) firaat; or furaat; Inl separation, parting. ril-firaat; 
~aeb parting is difficult. II rahi leela w-firat;-ha ~ubfJ 
[prov} = after the dark the dawn. 
~.J.Jli farut;iyya Inl [obsol} forage cap. 
,j!) fariit; In/I Iplfirat;1 [sport} team. 2 Iplfuraqaarl 
[mil} general. 
.:;;'; 1 ritfarat; Ivil 1 to separate, be separated. 2 to be 
parted (of hair). -ava/iva mitfirit;. 
.:;;; 1 rinfarat; = ritfarat;. -ava/iva minfirit;. 
.:;:; farrat; Ivtl 1 to cause to separate, break up. 
ril-buli~ farrat;u I-mu;ahra the police broke up the 
652 
demonstration. 2 to distribute. farrat;na 1-I'akl" ,ai-
valaaba we distributed the food among the poor. farralj 
ik-kutfiina deal out the cards! - Ivii 3 to bring about a 
separation. ril- I'ayyaam farrat;it benna time separated 
us. 4 to make a distinction, differentiate. ma-ti,raH' 
tfarrat; benna she can't tell us apart. -vn tafrUt;; ava/pva 
mifarrat; . 
.:; ); 1 I'itfarrat; Ivil to be made to separate or separate, 
be dispersed or disperse. minfiddit iz-zafJma tfarraljna 
the crowd was so thick we were forced to split up. baed 
il-rahl' ma maatu ritfarrat;it il-eeeia after the parents 
died the family split up. - ava/iva mitfarrat; . 
':;.Jli faarit; 2 Ivil to separate oneself from, depart from. 
II (ruufJ) farit;-na get los.t! - rif-fibbaak mifaarit; there is 
a gap between the window-frame and the wall. -vn 
mufart;a, mifart;a; ava mifaarit;. 
~.Ju.. mufaaraqa In pi -aatl absurdity. I'id-dunya 
malyaana mufaaraqaat life is full of absurdities . 
.:;) ... 1 I'itfaarit; Ivil passive of faarit;2. -iva mitfaarilj. 
.:;? 1 I'iftarat; Ivil 1 to differ. ril-madrasteen bi-yiftirlju 
ktiir ean baec[-u-hum there's quite a difference between 
the two schools. 2 to part company. ma-b-yiftirljuuf 
ean baec[' xaa/~ they're never out of each other's sight. 
- vn riftiraat;; ava miftirit;. 
..1.J J ...; 
~li) furqaata f <It fregata> In pi -aatl frigate. 
tJJ"'; 
r:!) fart;ae 1 Ivtl la to cause to burst, cause to ex-
plode. fart;ae ballont-i he popped my balloon. 
IIfart;aeit-u she blew the date with him, she stood him 
up. - fart;aeit-u baed' I'arbae siniin varaam she broke 
with him after four years'of passion. Ib to cause to make 
an explosive sound. fart;ae ik-kurbaag he cracked the 
whip. 2 Ivi/2a to burst, snap. I'il-eagala fJa-tfarqa, the 
tyre is about to burst. l'it-fJabl' fart;ae the rope snap-
ped. 2b to make an explosive sound. simi,t iI-farlja,a 
btaaeit ik-kurbaag I heard the cracking of the whip. -vn 
fart;aea; ava mifart;ae. 
~) fart;aea In pi -aat, farat;iiel explosion. 
r:!) furt;ue: furt;ue 1001. type of black beetle which, 
when overturned, jumps with a cracking sound to right 
itself. zayy' furt;ue looz always jumping about. 
~) furt;eeea In pi -aatl = fart;a,a. 
..:.W';" mufarqaeaat, mufart;aeaat Ipl nl explosives, 
fireworks . 
r:!;.;1 I'itfart;ae Ivil passive of fart;ae. -vn tifarqii,; iva 
mitfart;ae . 

~JJ)"'; 
~) farqilla In pI -aat, faraqill, faraaqill drover's 
whip.ll/isaan-u zayy il-farqilla he has a vicious tongue. 
.!l) ...; 
.!I) farak, farak (u, i) Ivtll to rub. rittaawib wi-farak 
lenee he yawned and rubbed his eyes. 2 to rub to bits, 
crumble. rufruki I-lee/ crumble the bread. -vn fark, 
firaaka; ava faarik; pva mafruuk. 
";s) farka linst n, pI -aatl a rubbing, a rub.llfarkit kalb 
(a rubbing ofthe heel) a short distance, a stone's throw. 
";sJ).a mafruuka In! [rur] type of fine maize couscous, 
usually eaten with milk and sugar. 
";Sl) furaaka In! fragments of matter cleaned off a 
surface by rubbing. furaakit oalla cooking-pot 
scourings. 
4.) firiik In! green wheat which has been cut and 
roasted. 
.!I1).a mufraak In pI mafaarikl wooden whisk twirled 
between the hands (used, especially, to break up 
cooked mallow) (see PI.B, 6). 
.!I.;. I ritfarak, ritfarak Ivil 1 passive of farak. 2 to be-
come crumbly. tibissi d-diqiiq wis-samn i mar;a bal(t 
I-oadd i ma yitfirik you work the flour and clarified 
butter together until it becomes crumbly. - avaliva 
mitfirik. 
.!I.,Ai I rinfarak, rinfarak = ritfarak. - avaliva minfirik. 
d- JJ )"'; 
..;s) farkif Ivtl to scatter, disperse. ni1.il fiihum 
bi-qarb if-fuum la/aan yifarkif-hum he went at them 
with a cudgel to disperse them. -vn larka/a; ava 
mifarkif· 
4) furkee/a In! [slang] disarray, shambles. 
..;s';'1 ritfarkif Ivil to be scattered, be dispersed. -vn 
tifarkiif; iva mitfarkif. 
I r) ...; 
r) faram (u) Ivtl to mince, grind (e.g., meat). laoma 
mafruuma minced meat. -vn farm; ava faarim; pva 
rnafruum. 
. 4.).a maframa In pI mafaariml mincer, meat grinder. 
r';'l ritfaram Ivil to be minced, be ground. - iva 
mitfirim. 
r.,Ai I rinfaram = ritfaram. - iva minfirim. 
Z ( r) ...; ) 
4.;'; furma <It forma> In pI -aat, furam/la matrix, 
mould, pattern. 
Ib [print] forme. 
2 hair style. 
653 
3 physical condition, fitness. llfil-furma in (good) 
shape, fit. 
4.) firma <It firma> In pI -aat, firaml 1 decorative 
form or shape. 2 signature characterized by flourishes . 
~ 1 r) ...; 
.;,1..) faramaan <T ferman from P> In pI -aatl 
1 [obsol] firman. 2 [joe] pronouncement. 
:-IJ"r)"'; 
~) 
farmisilla (also /ukulaata farmisilla) <Fr 
vermicelle> Inl chocolate vermicelli, chocolate strands 
(for cake decoration). 
J r) ...; 
4l..) farmala In pI faraamill brake. 
.r.J..) farmalgi In pI -yyal brakeman (on a train). 
J..) farmil/vil 1 to brake, apply the brakes. y~doobak 
farmilt i qabl i m-raxbatfii I only just managed to brake 
before I ran into it. - Ivtl 2 to apply the brake to. 
ma-tfarmil-/ 
il-larabiyya 
la/aan 
rarkin-haa-Iak 
kiwayyis don't leave the hand-brake on, so that I can 
park the car nicely for you. 3 to block, obstruct. II lamal 
farmala [soccer] to make a blocking play. -vn farmala; 
avalpva mifarmil. 
J..';'I ritfarmil Ivil passive of farmil 2 and 3. -iva 
mitfarmil. 
I ~) ...; 
.;,) furn In pI rafraan, firaan/la oven (for an illustra-
tion of a traditional mud oven see pte, 6). makaroona 
fil-furn baked macaroni. II tiobai fil-furn i w-tiwlid fig-
gurn [prov] (she conceives in the oven and gives birth in 
the village square) '" your sins will find you out. 
Ib kiln. 2 bakery. fu'rn i baladi a bakery making tradi-
tional types of bread. furn afrangi a bakery making 
western types of bread. 
.;,1) farraan In "I baker . 
Z~)"'; see) I...;: firaan 
[.~)...; see also [.~)...;. 
~) farnaga Ivnl aping of Westerners. 
rt';'l ritfarnag Ivil to ape the Europeans, affect Euro-
pean manners and tastes. -vn tafarnugj ava mitfarnag. 
rt';:'" mitfarnag ladj "I Europeanized, Westernized. 

654 
~<Jj"'; 
i-") faranda, varanda <It> In pi -aall veranda. -also 
barallda. 
V" <J j 
...; 
L....;) faransa Iprop nl France. 
...,...;) farallsi, firillSi I ladj 
Frenchman. 
~JL....;) faransaawi 
I ladj 
farallSawiyyiin French people. 
"I French. 2/n "I 
"I 
French. 
naas 
sill' faransawiyya a 
Frenchwoman. farankaal farallSaawi French francs. 
II muflaalJ faransaawi adjustable spanner, monkey 
wrench. 2 In "I a Frenchman. 3 In, no pll the French 
language. 
..r<Jj"'; 
~) faranfa <perh Fr frange> In pi -aall (decora-
tive) fringe, braid. 
.£l<Jj"'; 
.!.l;) firank, farank <Fr> In pi -aall franc. firankaal 
siwisriyya Swiss francs.llnll,l",v" frank {obsol} two pias-
tres, a two-piastre coin. 
~. j"'; 
.a) farhad Ivil to become totally exhausted. farhadl' 
min kUlr Iz-zalJma I was completely worn out by all the 
crowds. -vn farhada; ava mifarhad. 
.a.,iil rilfarhad = farhad. -vn lifarhiid; ava milfarhad. 
.J j ..J 
J) farw Icoll nl fur(s), fleece(s). 
oJ) farwa lunit n, pi faraawil a fur, a fleece. farwil 
xuruuf a sheepskin. II rabu farwa chestnut(s). -qa((ac 
fi-farwit(-u) to speak badly of (s.o.) behind his back. 
spread scandal about (s.o.). 
~.Jj ...; 
JJ) firwid <Engl> I In pi farawdal {soccer} forward 
(player). 2 farawda Ipl nl minions. 
j.Jj"'; 
)J.r-i faruuz, faruuz <P jfroza> Inl turquoise. 
~jJ.r-i faruuzi ladj invarl turquoise. 
I J.Jj"'; 
JJ) farwil I/vtl to crumble (between the fingers). 
2 Ivil to become crumbly. riI-fitiir mifarwil xaali,v the 
pastry is very crumbly. -also barwll. -vn farwala; aval 
pva mifarwil. 
JJ.,ii1 ritfarwillvil to be crumbled or become crum-
bly. -also ritbarwil. -ava/iva mitfarwil. 
2J.Jj..J 
~JI) firawla, 
farawla 
<It fragola> 
Icoll 
nl 
I strawberries. 2 a drink of fresh strawberry juice. 
.~ ~JI) firawlaaya, /arawlaaya, farawlaaya lunit n, pi 
-aatl a strawberry. 
~~JI) firawliyyaaya, farawliyyaaya, farawliyyaaya 
= firawlaaya. 
~j..J 
~.;il riftara Ivil I to act unjustly. bitaac iI-xuqaar 
bi-yiftiri fil- rascaar the greengrocer charges unfair 
prices. 2 to go to excess. riftareena fil-rakl' lamma 
kaan lJa-ygi-lna tuxma we stuffed ourselves with food 
till we almost got indigestion. 3 to make an unjust 
accusation. riftaru cala I-caskari rinnu xad rafwa they 
unjustly accused the policeman of taking a bribe. -vn 
riftira, riftira; ava miftiri . 
~.;;.. muftari ladj "I I ruthless and unjust. 2 having 
insatiable appetite(s). muftari fil-rakl gluttonous. 
j~j"'; 
j!.) firiiz <prob Fr> In pi -aatl frieze. skirt (of 
furniture ) . 
jj~j"'; 
.;j!.) firiizar, fireezar <Engl> Inl freezing compart-
ment in a refrigerator. 
IoJ j"'; see IoJ ~ j ..J : fiziila 
J ~j"'; 
.:;:;-; fuzduq (also fusluq) Icoll nl pistachio(s). 
~ 
fuzduqa (also fuituqa) lunit n, pi -aatl a 
pistachio. 
~\A;...; fuzduqaaya (also fustuqaaya) = fuzduqa. 
..j.::-j fuzduqi ladjl pistachio-coloured. pale green. 
I jj"'; 
.;) fazar (u) Ivtl to burst. cagala mafzuura a burst tyre. 
fazart iI-bal/oolia I popped the balloon. -vn fazr, 
fazaraan; ava faazir; pva mafzuur. 
.;jAil ritfazar Ivil to burst. be burst. batn-a-ha kbiira 
tqul-f' lJa-litfizir her stomach's so big it looks as if it's 
about to burst. -ava/iva mitfiZir . 
.;,} fazzarl Ivtl to make a split in, burst open (the 
weave of s. th.). libis jakillit-i w-fazzar-ha min qahr-a-ha 
he put on my jacket and split it down the back. 
IIlJ-afazzar-ak I'll split your seams! I'll tear you apart! 

-/aym-a-ha mfazzar she has stretch marks on her 
body (as, e.g., after pregnancy). -vn tafziir; avalpva 
mifazzar. 
.);"1 rit/azzar Ivil to be split open (of weave). wayda 
mdamliga hdum-ha mitfazzara laleeha a woman so cur-
vaceous that her clothes are bursting on her. rik-kawit/ 
raay mitfazzar the tyre shredded. -iva mit/azzar. 
Z.Jj"; 
i')Jj fazzuura In pI fawaziirl riddle, conundrum. 
.)j fazzar2: yazzar fazzar make 'a guess! 
jj ..; 
j fazz (i) Ivil to get up abruptly, spring up.ljuumfizz 
on your feet! IlfizZi min hina buzz off! -vn fazz, 
fazazaan; ava faaziz. 
ij fazza linst n, pI -aatl a springing up, a jumping up. 
jJjA.- mafzuuz ladj ·1 restive, jumpy, nervous. 
jj fazziz Ivtll to kick (s.o.) out of his seat. fazziz-u 
min hina chuck him out of here! 2 to make restive or 
restless. ril-yumma kaanit bi-tfazziz-u the fever made 
him toss and turn. -vn tafziiz; avalpva mifazziz. 
j;" I ritfazziz Ivil passive of fazziz. - iva mitfazziz. 
);,-1 ristafazz Ivtl to provoke, incite. kalaam-u 
stafazz-i-ni what he said made me lose my temper. -vn 
ristifzaaz; avalpva mistafizz, misti{I1.Z. 
jlji;-I ristiftaaz In pI -aatl incitement, provocation. 
\Sjlji;-I fistifzaazi ladjl provocative. 
tj"; 
tj fazal (a) I Ivtlto frighten, startle.,s-uwat-hafazar;-
na her screams startled us. ljaamit min in-noom 
mafzuula she woke up with a start. 2 Ivil to make a 
scary sound. geet min wara w-fazalti fii I came up from 
behind and scared him. -vn fazal; ava faazil; pva 
mafzuul· 
~ j fazla linst n, pI -aatl a fright. 
tjAil fitfazal Ivil to be given a fright, be startled. -iva 
mitfizil· 
tjAi I finfazal = fitfazal· - iva minfizil· 
t;"1 fitfazzar; Ivil I to gather one's strength (before 
striking s.o.). fitfazzalti w-tfarabt-u lja/am ljafal leen-u 
I gathered all my strength and gave him a slap that 
closed his eye. 2 to feign an attack. -ava mitfazzal. 
.!.IJj"; 
.ill j 
fazlik Ivtl {joe} to fuss over, go to pernickety 
lengths over. ma-b-tinzil1i mil-beet veer lamma tkuun 
mifazlika roy-ha lal-faaxir she never leaves the house 
without having first dolled herself up to the nines. -vn 
655 
fazlaka; ava mifazlik. 
~.ii fazlaka In pI -aat, fazaalik/l {joe} (short) com-
ment. landi faz/aka lj~ayyara lan i1-mawtfuul I have 
a few words to say on the subject. 2 fuss, ado. 3 palm-
greasing, bribery. 
.ill jAil fitfazlik Ivil {joe} to act in a fussy or pernickety 
way. -ava mitfazlik. 
.;,Jj"; 
.r.Jj\i fazliin, vazliin r <trade name Vaseline> In! 
I petroleum jelly. 2 hair cream, brilliantine . 
.:) j 
fazlin Ivtl to apply fazliin to. -vnfazlana, vazlana; 
avalpva mifazlin, mivazlin. 
.:) jAil fit/azlin Ivil passive of fazlin. -vn tifazliin; aval 
pva mit/azlin. 
lJ\Sj"; 
~j fiziita <It visita> Inl {med} consultation fee. 
.;,IIJV""; 
.:"W fustaan <prob T {/Ston from It; cf Englfustian> 
In pI fasatiinl woman's dress, frock. 
J IJ V" ..; 
see 
J "j ..; : 
fustulj, 
fustulja, 
[ustuljaaya 
';'.J IJ V" ..; 
.:,,~ {/Sloon <Fr feston> In! {needlew} scallop. vurzit 
{/Stoon buttonhole-stitch. 
~ ~ 
{/Stoona = {/Stoon. 
c. V" ..; 
c:-i fasay (a) Ivtl to clear, make room in. fifsay i{-
{ariilj make way! IIfasaynaa-lu magaal la/aan yifarik-na 
fir-riyla we gave him the opportunity of joining us on 
the trip. -vn fasayaan; ava faasiy; pva mafsuuy. 
4-,.j fusya In pI fusayl 18 stroll, outing. Ib interval 
between classes, recess. 2 {children} 2a act of excret-
ing. 2b excrement. 
4-,.j fasaya In pI -aatl I hallway, vestibule. 2 open 
area, open space. 
c:-ii fafsay I lell morelmost spacious. 
~I fitfasay Ivil to be cleared, be made spacious. 
-iva mit{/SiY . 
c-'il rinfasay = fitfasay. -vn fin{/Saay; iva min{/SiY. 
~ 
fassay I Ivtl 18 to take for a stroll, take for an 
outing. fassay-ni fil-haram he took me out to the Pyra-
mids. Ib {criminal slang} to take for a walk, rub out. 
2/vil to make room, give room. fit/allaljt· las-sillim 

lafaan ma-fassal;u-lii1 guwwa l-futubiis I hung on to 
the steps because they wouldn't make room for me 
inside the bus. -vn tafsiil;; ava mifassal;. 
~I fitfassal; Ivii 1 to stroll around, go for a stroll, go 
on an outing. fitfassal;na lal-kurniifwe went for a stroll 
along the river road. 2 to relieve oneself, ease nature. 
ril-layyil itfassal; lala nafs-u the child soiled himself. 
-ava mitfassab. 
~ 
i fafsal; 2 = fasal;. -vn fifsaab; ava mufsil;. 
It~""; 
~ 
fasax, [lSix (a) Ivtl 1 to sunder, disjoin. fasax 
if1atla mit-pin he pulled the seedling out of the soil. 
fifsax riglee-k open your legs! 2 {leg] to declare (a 
contract) invalid. IIfasaxit xu{Ubit-ha she broke off her 
engagement. -vn fasx, fasaxaan; ava faasix; pva 
mafsuux. 
~I fitfasax Ivil 1 to be sundered, be disjoined. 
2 [leg] to be declared invalid. - iva mit[lSix. 
~I finfasax = fitfasax. -iva min[lSix. 
~ 
fassax I Ivtl to tear apart. fafassax-ak I'll tear you 
apart! bi-ngiib il- fanfaar wi-nxallii-hum yifassaxuf-fatl 
we bring the labourers and have them break up the 
(bundles of) seedlings. -vn tafsiix; ava/pva mifassax. 
~I fitfassax I 
Ivii to be torn apart. -ava/iva 
mitfassax. 
1 • 
• 
·C~'-' 
i;:::-i [lSiix Icoll nI salt-cured fish, especially grey mul-
let.llyilmil min il-[lSiixfarbaat {prov] = he makes silk 
purses out of sows' ears. 
~ 
[lSiixa lunit n, pi -aatl a salt-cured fish.llnaam 
zayy il-[lSiixa he slept like a log. 
Jl;....i fasaxaani In pi -yyal maker and seller of salt-
cured fish. 
~ 
fassax 2 /vtl to salt-cure (fish). - vn tafsiix; ava/pva 
mifassax. 
~1 fitfassax 2 Ivil to be salt-cured (of fish). - iva 
mitfassax. 
J t Ij'''''; see t.J ~ ....; : fasuux, fasuuxa 
.)~....; 
~ 
[lSid (a) Ivii 1 to become corrupt. faxlaaq-u[lSdit 
his morals became corrupt. 2 to go off, spoil. fil-labma 
[lSdit the meat went bad. -vn fasaad, fasadaan; ava 
fasdaan, faasid. 
~ 
fasad (i) Ivtl 1 to corrupt. fif1ubbaan tifsid-ha 
l-filuus ik-kitiir too much money corrupts the young. 
fin-naas fasaad in-naas (prov] nothing corrupts people 
656 
like people. 2 to put out of order, ruin. miin fasad 
ir-radyu who put the radio out of order? 3 to spoil, 
cause to go off. ril-barr' fasad il- fakl the heat spoiled 
the food. -vn fasaad; ava faasid; pva mafsuud. 
~W fasaad Inl I rottenness, decay. 2 decadence. 
3 corruption, immorality. 
.JI~ fasdaan ladj *1 I morally corrupted. 2 rotten, 
bad, spoiled, decayed. 3 out of order. 
~i fafsad l lell morelmost spoiled, corrupted etc. 
....I....A.. mafsada In pi mafaasidl cause of corruption, 
source of evil. kutr il-fuluus mafsada lif1ubbaan too 
much money corrupts the young. 
~i fafsad 2 = fasad. -vn fifsaad; ava mufsid. 
.) ~....; 
~ 
fassar Ivtl I to expound, explain in detail. tafsiir 
il-qurfaan the exegesis of the Koran. fassar (ft-wiff-) to 
detail misfortune or possible misfortune (to S.o. 's face) 
thus tempting providence and jeopardizing the other's 
plans. 28 to interpret (dreams). 2b to confirm (a dream 
vision) in reality. 3 to show details (of a picture). 
f~-~uura mfassara wiff-ik xaal~ the photo shows your 
face very clearly. II wiff-a-ha mfassar she has clear fea-
tures. -vn tafsiir; ava/pva mifassar. 
~ 
tafsiir 
In 
pi -aat, 
tafasiirl 
I explanation. 
2 commentary, exegetic work. 
;""1 fitfassar Ivil passive of fassar. - iva mitfassar. 
.r-A:-1 fistafsar I Ivil to inquire. ril- fal;san tistafsar 
minnu you'd better inquire with him. 2 Ivtl to ask, 
consult. ruub istafsar-u lan il-qaqiyya go and ask him 
about the case. -vn fistifsaar; ava mistafsar. 
.r-A:-1 fistifsaar In pi -aatl inquiry. 
~~....; 
.;; [ISS lonoml sound of air escaping, hiss. 
.;; fass (i) I Ivil to leak air or gas. fil-kawitf' raab 
faasis the air hissed ou~ of the tyre. 2 Ivtl to let air or gas 
out of (a tyre, tank etc.). fiss-a-hafwayya lafaan tiqallil 
iq-qart let a little air out of it to reduce the pressure. -vn 
fasasaan; ava faasis; pva mafsuus. 
,::.d....;~....; 
.::..lO...,i fusfaat <Fr> Icoll nl phosphate(s). 
~....;~....; 
..,...i-i fasfts Ivil to erupt (of the skin), break out in 
pimples. -vnfasfasa; ava mifas[lS. 
4-.,..... fasfuusa In pi fasaftisl skin eruption, pimple. 
fasfuusa sooda blackhead. 
~W 
fasaftisi ladj invarl unstable, capricious, 

guided by whim. ma-yibqaa1 laql-ak fasafiisi don't 
t J. .J 
make a fool of youself! 
~ 
fa fax (a) Ivt/ [coarse] to spread open, open wide. 
fafax riglee he spread his legs. IIma-tiffax1; buqq-ak 
jJ.Jt.J".J 
;~ fusfuur, 
fusfoor 
<Fr 
phosphore> 
In! 
phosphorus. 
..s;~ fusfuuri ladjl phosphorous, phosphoric. 
I J t.J".J 
~ 
fasaq f , fasaq (a) Ivil I to indulge in licentious-
ness. 2 to commit adultery, fornicate. fasaq fiiha he 
fornicated with her. -vnfisq, {lSq; avafaasiq, faasiq. 
.;-Ii faasiq, faasiq In • and pI fussaaql moral offender, 
specifically an adulterer. 
~i rafsaq lell morelmost sinful, licentious etc. 
J-Ail ritfasaq Ivil (impersonal) passive of fasaq. 
fi- rayyaam iI-lJuruub yaama byuutfariifa b-yit{lSiq fiiha 
in times of war, many an honourable family becomes 
the victim of rape and licentiousness. - iva mit{lSiq. 
1 J t.J".J 
..;......; fasqiyya In pI -aat, fasaaqil fountain. 
J t.J".J 
J...i faslladj invarl asinine, silly (of a person). 
J...ii rafsallell morelmost asinine or silly. 
~W fasaala Inl pettiness. 
~ 
fasii/a In pI fasaayill palm shoot (growing out 
from the base of the trunk). 
tJ t.J" .J 
t""; fasuux Icoll nl type of black resin, used for burn-
ing as incense and for sticking charms against the evil 
eye onto a baby's head. 
~,...; fasuuxa lunit n, pI -aatl a piece of fasuux. 
~t.J".J 
~ 
{lSi (i) Ivill to leak air or gas (of, e.g., a tyre). 2 to 
break wind silently. -vn {lSa; ava faasi. 
~ 
fasa (i) Ivtl to disrupt, throw into disorder. rawwil 
ma daxal fil-lilba fasaa-ha as soon as he joined in the 
game he made a shambles of it. fiiha I-afsii-ha [children] 
let me play or I'll ruin your game! -vn fasayaan; ava 
faasi; pva mafsi. 
~ 
fasya In pI -aatl noiseless fart. 
~ 
fassa Ilvtl to leak air or gas out of (e.g., a tyre, 
tank). 2/villa to leak air or gas (of, e.g., a ty.re). 2b to 
break wind silently. -vn tafsiyya; avalpva mifassi. 
~I ritfassa Ivil passive of fassa 1. - iva mitfassi. 
tabus] shut your gob! (to one laughing inappropriate-
ly). -vnfafx; avafaaj'lX; pva maffuux. 
~ 
fafxa In pI -aatll instance noun offafx. 2 [deris] 
boast. 
~I ritfafax Ivill [coarse] to spread open, be spread 
open. 2 [abus] to boast, brag. - avaliva mit{if'IX. 
&1 rinfafax = ritfafax. -ava/iva min{if'IX. 
~ 
faffax Ilvtl to spread open, open wide. 2/vil to 
cleave gradually. ril-lJee(a faffaxit the wall has de-
veloped wide cracks. -vn taffiix; ava mifaffax . 
jtJ. .J 
~ 
fafxar Ivil[abus] to go to expense for the sake of 
appearances, squander money ostentatiously. -vn 
fafxara; ava mifafxar. 
,;...:..&;1 ritfafxar = fafxar. - ava mitfafxar. 
IJ~J 
? 
fafar l (a) Ivil to boast, brag, talk big. -vnfafr; ava 
faafir. 
o? fafra In pI -aatl a tall story. 
? 
fafar2 I/interjl nonsense! impossible! 2/n in 
constrl (that which) makes a nonsense of .... Iaha qiima 
fafar iI-lalJma it really beats meat for value. dukkaan 
fafar malJall; ralt lanf a shop to put an emporium to' 
shame . 
. 
;\.:.i faffaar In *1 braggart, big talker. 
1 j J..J 
;~ Naar, fufaar In! popcorn. 
? 
faffar I/vt/ to make (especially corn) pop. dura 
mfaffar popcorn. 2 Ivil to pop (especially of corn). - vn 
tafJiir; avalpva mifaffar. 
,r.A;1 ritfaffar Ivil passive of faffar. - iva mitfaffar. 
I 
.. 
A 
• 
.t.J" t.J" ..., 
..? faff (i) Ivt/ I to deflate. faff iI-laga/~ he let the air 
out of the tyre. IIfaff; rill-u (or raliil-u) to vent one's 
anger, as in faffit rill-a-ha fiyya she vented her anger on 
me. 2 to break, smash.{iffil-lJagarda break this stone. 
- Ivil 3 to deflate, go down. ri/-balloona faffit the air 
went out of the balloon. ri/-waram faff the swelling 
s~bsided. -vn fafafaan; ava faafif; pva maffuuf. 
..? Nf.· {UZ1.; Nf see {UZ1.. 
..;. ~ 
fafuuf ladvl in vain, to no avail. (ilil fafuuf or 
raalJ (lala) fafuufto come to nothing, prove useless or 
fruitless. 

.;.A.o mifaff ladj invar/[slang] given to empty talk, full 
of hot air. 
. 
.;..&;"1 ritfaff Ivill to be deflated. 2 to be smashed. - iva 
"!,itfaff. 
.ro: 1 rinfaff = ritfaff· - iva minfaff. 
~ 
faffif Ivtll to deflate. 2 to smash, shatter. - also 
faffy. -vn taffiif; ava/pva mifaffif. 
..,:..:..A; 1 ritfaffif Ivill to be deflated. 2 to be smashed. 
- iva mitfaffif. 
2~,.;...; 
~ ftffa Ilcoll n/lung(s), light(s). 2 lunit n, pI -aat, 
ftfafl a lung. IIftffit-u layma [deris] (1) he loves to 
laugh, he's a jolly soul. (2) he is a braggart. 
..;..;..;..; 
...,:..t.:.J fafftf Ivtl to crush, break into pieces. faat lalee 
iI-c;atr' faffif dimaay-u the train ran over him and 
crushed his head. -also faffif. -vn faffafa; ava/pva 
mifaffif. 
..,.:..;..:..<;1 ritfaffif Ivil to be crushed, be broken in pieces. 
-vn tifafftif; iva mitfafftf. 
J";"; 
..;.:..t fafac; (i) Ivil to take a long step. - vn fafc;, 
fafac;aan; ava faafic;· 
:u..:.i fafc;a In pI -aatll wide step, stride./ilbit iI-fafc;a a 
children's game in which the contestants try to accom-
plish the longest step possible. 2 distance traversed in a 
stride. 
. 
..;.:..t faffac; Ivil I to walk with a waddling gait. 2 to 
str.addle the legs. -vn taffiic;; ava mifaffac;. 
~I ritfaffac; = faffac;. - ava mitfaffac;. 
J.!J ..; ..; 
~ 
fafkillvt/l to make (s.th.) go wrong, cause to 
fail.l:Jawlu yfafkilu g-gawaaza they tried to break up the 
marriage. 2 to sap the energy of, debilitate. ril-bard' 
fafkil-ni the cold made me feel rotten. - Ivil 3 to go 
wrong, fail. -vn fafkala; avalpva mifafkil. 
~I rit/afkil Ivil I passive of fafkil 1 and 2. 
2 = fafkil 3. - vn tifafkiil; ava/pva mitfafkil. 
I J ..; ..; 
J..:.' fafal l , fifil (a) Ivil to fail. riI/i b-yiffalfil-imtil:Jaan 
bi-Yliid is-sana whoever fails the examination repeats 
the year. -vnfafal; avafaafil. 
J..:.' fafal 2 Inl failure, flop. 
J.:.l; faafil ladj *1 unsuccessful. gawaaz bil-lafya 
658 
malnaa gawaaz faafil a forced marriage tneans an un-
successful marriage . 
J..:.' i raffallell morelmost unsuccessful. 
2 J ..; ..; 
J..:.' fljllcoll nl dung (of beasts of burden). 
~ 
fifla lunit n, pI -aatl a piece of dung, a dropping . 
~~ ftflaaya = fifla. 
J..:.' faffil Ivil to drop dung (especially of beasts of 
burden). II kaanit bi-tirdal:J /ina wi-tfaffil fitiima zayy 
it-tuub she showered us with abusive language. -vn 
taffiil; ava mifaffil. 
~ J..; ..; 
~ 
ftfill In pI -aatl[deris] fatso, fatty. yaffillhey fatty! 
~ 
ftfilla = fifill . 
.!J oj ..; ..; 
~ 
fifink <prob T f4ek> ladj invarl blank (of car-
tridges).lItilil fifink it came to nothing. -raagil fifink a 
nobody, a wash-out, a failure . 
.J ..;..; see ...;";";: fafw 
...;";"; 
~ 
fafa (i) Ivtl to divulge, reveal. gaabu sawwaac; 
ma-yiffiif iI- rasraar they got a driver who is discreet. 
-vnfafy, fafayaan, fafw; avafaafi; pva maffi. 
~I ritfafa Ivil to be divulged, be revealed, be bet-
rayed (especially of secrets). - iva mitfifi. 
~i raffa = fafa. -vn riffaar; ava miffi, muffi . 
~ 
miftifi: bil-miftifi bluntly, in plain words. 
~I ~..; 
;~L.ai fa~aada: rabu f~aada [zool] wagtail. Illaamil 
zayy· rabu f~aada he's acting like a buffoon. 
Ic:.~"; 
~ 
f~il:J ladj * and pI f~al:Jal = f~iil:J. 
'->L.ai f~aal:Ja Inl eloquence. 
~ 
f~iil:J ladj pI f~al:Jal eloquent. II bil-larabi 1-
f~iil:J (1) in literary Arabic. (2) in plain Arabic, in plain 
speech. - rid-diik iI-f~iil:J min iI-beeqa y~iil:J [prov] == 
talent shows itself early. 
~i raf~al:J I lell morelmost eloquent. 
~I 
riI-f~l:Ja Inl the literary Arabic language. 
~i raf~aI:J2: raf~al:J lanf to give expression to. 
raf~al:J lan illi fi-nafs-u he came out with what was on 
his mind. -vn rif~aal:J; ava muf~il:J. 

2 c..,....; 
~ 
r~b: liid il-r~b lChr] Easter. 
I J..,.. ..; 
~ 
f~ad (u) Ivtl to draw (blood). f~d id-damm; 
mil-liruuq yinazzil iq-qart bloodletting lowers blood 
pressure. -vn f~d, r~aada, fa~adaan; ava fa~id; pva 
maf~uud . 
..1.44;1 
fitf~ad Ivil passive of f~ad. - iva mitr~id. 
2 J ..,....; see J I ..,.. ..; : f~aada 
..,....,....; 
~ 
f~~ In pI f~u~1 I segment, detachable piece (of 
a fruit orthe Iike).f~~; burtuqaan a segment of orange. 
f~~; toom a clove of garlic. f~~; malb a crystal of coarse 
salt. IIf~~; malb; w-daab "" he vanished into thin air. 
2 pinch (of hashish, opium etc.). 3 gemstone. 4 pastern 
joint (of a horse, cow etc.). 
~ 
f~~~ Ivtl I to divide into segments. Ilf~~~ 
bisilla to shell peas. 2 to dissect, analyse (a subject). 
-vn taf~i~; ava mif~~~. 
~I 
fitf~~~ Ivil I to be divided into segments. 2 to 
be dissected, be analysed. -iva mitf~~~. 
J..,.. ..; 
J..aj f~al (i) Ivtl I to separate, detach. bi-yif~ilu r-raas 
qabl; ma yusluxu g-gism they detach the head before 
flaying the body. fit-tirmustaat 
bi-yif~il it-tayyaar 
lamma s-saxxaan yisxan qawi the thermostat discon-
nects the current when the heater gets too hot. IIf~l; 
quwwaat [mil] disengagement of forces. 2 to expel, 
sack. f~aluu mik-kulliyya they expelled him from the 
faculty. filtibir nafs-ak maf~uul min bukra consider 
yourself fired as from tomorrow. - Ivil3 to separate, 
become detached. fil-lazq; b-yif~illamma yiqdam the 
adhesive tape comes off when it gets old. 4 to act as a 
divide. fil-qatuul bi-yif~il been il-lanaabir wil-mutoor 
the bulkhead serves to separate the holds from the 
engine. Sa to decide, be decisive. rafy il-qaaqi liuwwa 
lli fa~il fil-qaqiyya it's the judge's opinion which is 
decisive in the case. Sb to decide, arrive at a decision. 
kifaaya kalaam laazim tif~il kida faw kida that's enough 
talk, you must decide one way or the other. 6 to name a 
price. da b-kaam. - fif~il inta 'How much is that?' 'You 
name your price.' -vn f~l, f~alaan; ava fa~il; pva 
maf~uul. 
J..aj f~l In pI f~uul/ la classroom. Ib class.2a act (of 
a play). 2b chapter, section (of a book). 3 season (of 
the year). 4 trick. lamal fiina f~l he played a trick on 
659 
us. 
;a..u f~la I linst n, pI -aatl a separation, a division, an 
expulsion. 
J...li fa~ill In 
pI fawa~ilI I partition, divide. 
lamalna fa~il been ig-ginenteen we made a partition 
between the two gardens.llfa~il musiiqi musical inter-
lude.2 [anat] meniscus. 3t section, defined part. fa~il 
min bayaat-i a chapter from my life. 
:a.....li f~la2 In pI -aatl comma. 
~ 
f~iila In pI f~aayilll type, kind, species. f~iilit 
damm blood group. 2 [bot, zaol] family. 3 [mil] 
platoon . 
J..ai. maf~a[f In pI mafa~ilI joint (of the body). 
J-.i.. maf~ali ladjl pertaining to the joints (of the 
body).lIrumatizm; maf~ali rheumatoid arthritis. 
j...aA;1 
fitf~al Ivil I to be or become detached. 
bi-y~rar wi-byitf~il it shrinks and separates. 2 to be cut 
off, be disconnected. fik-kahraba tf~alit the electricity 
was disconnected. 3 to be expelled, be sacked. fitf~al 
min il-firqa he was expelled from the team. 
4 (impersonal) passive of f~al 4, 5 and 6. -ava/iva 
mitr~il. 
J...:z.<; 1 finf~al = fitf~al. -vn finr~aal; iva minr~il. 
JLaA; 1 finr~aal In! [path] detachment. finr~aal fif-
Jabakiyya detachment of the retina. 
~ 
f~~al Ivtll to cut and tailor to measure. naaxud 
il-qumaaj nif~~al-u lal-batroon we take the cloth and 
cut it to the pattern. layz-ak tif~~al-li jakitta I want you 
to make me a jacket. 2 to have tailored. f~~alt 
il-bantaloon da land; miin where did you have those 
trousers made? 3 to expound, explain in detail.f~~al-li 
l-mawquul he gave me a detailed account of the mat-
ter. -vn taf~iil; ava/pva mif~~al. 
J.,....aA; 
taf~iil I Ivnl II bit-taf~iil in detail. 2/adj invarl 
made-to-measure. 
~ 
taf~iila In pI -aat, taf~iill I cut (of a garment). 
badla 
taf~iila famrikaani an American-style suit. 
2 detail. taf~ilaat il-mawquul the details of the subject. 
J.,..ai.; taf~iili ladjl detailed. w~t taf~iili a detailed 
description. 
~ 
mif~~al Ipva/llmif~~al lala perfectly fitted to, 
made for, as in fif-furlaana di mf~~ala lalayya this job 
suits me to aT. 
a:u... mif~~ala In pI -aat/' hinge. 
~I fitf~~al Ivil to be cut and tailored to measure. 
-iva mitf~~al. 
~ 
mitf~~al liva/II mitf~~al lala perfectly fitted to, 
as in fij-jakitta mitf~~ala lalee the jacket fits him 
perfectly. 

j...li fa~il2 I/vii to bargain, haggle. f~ilna {IS-sicr 
we bargained over the price. 2/vtl to bargain with, 
haggle with. f~ilt it-taagir I haggled with the dealer. 
-vn {~aal, mif~/a, muf~/a; ava mifa~iI. 
JI...U waalln! bargaining. ma-eagab-naa-Jf~aal-u we 
didn't like the way he bargained. ma-eanduu-Jwaalhe 
charges fixed prices. 
j...l.i;1 
ritfa~iI Ivii I to bargain with one another. 
2 (impersonal) passive of fa~il2 1. rir-ragil-da 
ma-yitf~iI-J' meaa this man cannot be bargained with. 
-ava/iva mitfa~iI. 
IS J v'" ...; 
lJ"....li f~ulya <perh T fasulya from Gr> Icoll n! hari-
cot bean(s). f~ulya beeqa dried beans. f~ulya xaqra 
green beans, French beans. 
r v'" ...; 
rL..U;1 
rin{~aam r In! splitting. 
rin{~aam /~iyya 
{path] schizophrenia. 
c: u" ...; 
& 
faqal:J (a, i) Ivtl to subject to scandal, disgrace. 
ma-tiddi-Iuu-J ljir/' f-raaxir iI-earq' yiftf.al:J-ak if you 
don't give him a piastre at the end of the show, he'll 
make you a public spectacle. II rallaah yifqil:J-ak ... God 
damn you! - rallaah la yifqil:J-lak wiliyya {beggars] ... 
may God protect the reputation of your womenfolk! 
-vn faql:J; ava faaqil:J; pva mafquul:J. 
;.,...;u faql:Ja linst nl a scandal, a public disgrace. 
e"'li faaqil:J ladjl scandalous, indecent. fill' faatf.iI:J 
{leg] indecent act (e.g., indecent exposure, streaking 
etc.). 
c.~ mafquul:J In • and pi mafatf.iil:Jl moral reprob-
ate. Ilfuuf iI-maftl.uul:Ja bint iI-mafatf.iil:J ... just look at 
the shameless slut! 
~ 
fuqal:Ji ladj • and pl .... yya/ scandal-mongering, 
mud-slinging. 
&i rafd.~1:J lell more/most disgraceful, scandalous 
etc. 
~ 
fitf.iil:Ja In pi faqaayil:Jl scandal, public disgrace. 
ma-rtf.it-/' ratkallim la/aan m-acmil-J' ftf.iil:Ja fif-Jaaril 
I kept quiet, so as not to cause a scene in the street. 
ya-di-l-fiqiil:Ja how shocking! lIya fqil:Jt-i {trad soc] ... 
God forbid! (an expression of indignation or disbelief, 
used by women on hearing malicious gossip). 
~WU faqayl:Ji ladj • and pi -yya/ I scandalous. 
2 scandal-mongering, mud-slinging. 
~I ritfatf.al:J lvii to be subjected to scandal. -iva 
mitfitf.il:J. 
660 
~I rinfaqal:J = ritfaqal:J. -iva minfitl.il:J. 
I u" u" ...; 
.).; faqq (u) Ivtll to put an end to, have done with. ga 
I-buli~faqq iI-xinaalja the police came and broke up the 
fight. 2 to rid (o.s.). futf.q-i-na min di s-siira let's drop 
the subject! fuqq-ak mik-kalaam quit gabbing! 
IIfuqq-ak balja have done! enough! 3 to break (a seal). 
IIfaqq' bakarit-ha he deflowered her. -vn faqaqaan, 
fatf.tf.; ava faatf.itf.; pva maftf.uutf. . 
.;u.1 rinfaqq Ivii passive of faqq. -iva minfaqq. 
Ju;1 ritfaqtf. = rinfatf.tf.. -iva mitfatf.q. 
2 u" u" ...; 
~ faqqa I IntI silver .lIfiluus faqqa coins (in contrast 
with paper money). 2 {obsol] para, one fortieth of a 
piastre. 
~ 
faqqi ladj/l made of silver. lumla faqtf.iyya silver 
currency. 2 silver-coloured. wara!; fatf.r/i silver paper, 
tinfoil. 
~~ far/r/aaya lunit n, pi -aatl of a piece of silver. 
~ 
faqqiyya Icoll n, pi -aatl I silverware. 2 silver 
coins. 
~ 
far/r/ar//vtl to silver. II waralj mifaqqaq silver 
foil, tinfoil. -vn taftl.iiq; ava/pva mifaqqaq. 
~I ritfaqqaq Ivil to be silvered. -iva mitfaqqaq. 
u"..Ju""'; 
~ 
fa4faq Ivtl to unburden oneself of (feelings 
etc.). rinfarad biyya la/aan yifa4faq-1i llif-ljalb-u kull-
u he took me off alone to pour out to me all that was in 
his heart. rinta laawiz waal:Jid mumkin tifa4faq-lu you 
need someone you can open your heart to. -vnfa4faqa; 
ava mifa4faq. 
~I ritfa4far/ Ivii 
passive of fa4faq. 
-iva 
mitfa4faq. 
J u""'; 
J.4i fitf.iI (a) Ivi/l to remain, be left. (i/eu I-ringitiiz 
fiqtit larabiyyat-hum the English left; their cars re-
mained. far/ii-tina n~~ , saala we still have half an hour 
to go.llfir/ilt' waraa I kept on after him. 2/preverbl to 
continue, go on (doing something). fit/il yib~~' f-sact-u 
he kept looking at his watch. -vnfaqalaan; avafaaqil. 
J.'oli faar/illadj, fem faaqila, pi rafaaqill ... disting-
uished, honourable (a formal epithet accompanying, 
especially in writing, certain titles ).l:Jaqaraat iI-rafaaqil 
... distinguished guests! ril-rustaaza I-faaqila na;rit iI-
madrasa ... the very honourable headmistress of the 
school. 

661 
J.4i faqlln pI faJqaall grace, goodness, favour, be-
nefit. faql-ak larayya kbiir you've been very generous 
to me. bi-faql iIIaah by the grace of God. miin yinkir 
faql it-tacliim who can deny the benefit of education? 
IIbi-faql thanks to, as in kulli da b-faql iI-larabiyya it's 
all thanks to the car - fit-faqli liyya it is (or was) thanks 
to me, I deserved the credit. -min faql-ak please! 
• yiduum faql-ak may your bounty last! (conventional 
reply to fitfaqqal q.v.). 
11 faqlan lan r Iprepl besides, in addition to. bi-yiqbaq 
mukajra fahriyya faqlan lan murattab-u he takes a 
monthly bonus in addition to his salary. 
a..; faqla In pI fiqal, fuqal, fawaaqillleft-over, rem-
nant. fiqal qumaaf remnants of material. II (min) faqlit 
xeer-akJ conventional formula employed when food is 
mentioned, as in xadti malaaya baqa faqlit xeer-ak 
lauma w-burtuqaan wi-mooz "" so I took along with me 
- all from the bounty of your goodness - meat and 
oranges and bananas. 
..::.')Wa; faqalaat Ipl nil left-overs, remnants. II fusbuUG 
iI-faqalaat annual week-long sale of left-over pieces of 
cloth 2 {euphem} excreta, discharges. 
J.4ii faJqallel1 betterlbest, preferable. 
J"...u fuquullnl nosiness, officiousness. 
J"...u fuquuli ladj • and pI -yya/ nosey, meddlesome, 
officious. 
~"...u fuquliyya InI nosiness, officiousness. 
J.e4i faqiil In pI fuqala/ man of sterling character. 
II fil-faqla liI-faqiit (the rest goes to the best) an express-
ion of consolation to someone who is not getting his fair 
share in a deal. 
~ 
faqiila In pI faqaayilll virtue, merit. ma-uaddi-f 
yinkir finn iI-karam faqiila no one will deny that gener-
osity is a virtue. 2 formal title of, and form of polite 
reference to, an Azhar scholar. faqiilit if-feex "" His 
Eminence the Sheikh. 1aauib iI-faqiila "" His 
Eminence. 
J~ miJqaalladj, no pl1 {usu iron} = faaqil. 
J.4i faqqal Ivtl I to prefer, favour. fana fafaqqal 
iI-qism ii- fadabi I prefer the Arts Department. 
faqqal-ak lalayya he preferred you to me. fil-fadab 
faqqaluu lala I-lilm (or lan iI-lilm) {prov} "" better 
well-bred than well-read. fil- fakl iI-mufaqt/allandi my 
favourite food. 2 to leave, leave behind. ma-tfat/qal-fi 
uaagafis-sanduuq don't leave anything in the box. -vn 
taf..qiil; ava/pva mifaqt/al, mUfaqqal. 
J..;a.iil fitfaqqal Ivil I to be preferred. fin-nool 
il-qadiim lissa mitfaqqallan ig-gidiid the old type is still 
preferred to the new. 2 to remain, be left over. bicna Iii 
tfaqqal we sold what was left. 3 to render a kindness. 
fitfaqqallaleena b-xibrit-ak be so kind as to give us the 
benefit of your experience. fitfaqqalu lalayya b-baaqi 
I- fakl they were kind enough to give me the rest of the 
food. ma-titfaqqallaleena b-ziyaara do honour us with 
a visit! mif sid-na f-feex yitfaqqal macaaya nuqlud fil-
qahwa would not the reverend Sheikh be so good as to 
sit with me in the cafe? - ava/iva mitfat/qal. 
11 fitfaqqal Ifem fitfaqqali, pI fitfat/qalul formula of 
invitation. fitfaqqal macaaya please come with me. 
fitfaqqal uqlud please sit down. fitfaqqali ya sitt-i 
please (come in), ma'am! 
IoSvP..J 
~ 
fiqi (a) Ivill to become empty. fif-faqqafitfyitthe 
flat fell vacant. laazim tistanna lamma d-daraga tift/a 
you must wait till the position becomes vacant. 
II fil-baaariyya fitfyit the battery has gone dead. -sact-i 
fitfyit my watch has run down. 2 to become unoccupied, 
become at leisure. bacdi m-aJqa mif-fuYI when I'm no 
longer busy with work. faaqi ya fusta are you free, 
driver? fil-faat/i yilmil qaat/i {prov} "" the idler sets 
himself up as a judge (over other people's affairs). -vn 
faqayaan, faqa, fuqiyy; ava faaqi. 
.L.;.i .L.;.i faqa InI I empty space. fart/i fat/a vacant 
land. 2 interplanetary r.pac... safiinit faqa space-ship. 
3 leisure time. salaat faqaa-hum their spare time. 
~ 
fuqiyy InI (state of) emptiness. fuqiyy if-fawaaril 
xawwif-na the emptiness of the streets scared us. 
,-,""U faaqi ladj ·1 empty. II rigilnafatfyiin we returned 
empty-handed. -kalaam faaqi empty senseless talk. 
-lal-faat/i (1) to no purpose, as in fitkallJ!t1l,!l-faat/i he 
talked to no avail, ga lal-faaqi he came in vain, 
fit- fizaaca xi~it wir-radyu maftuuu lal-faaqi the trans-
mission has finished and the radio is on to no purpose. 
(2) (also lal-faaqi w-lal-malyaan) for no reason, as in 
bi-yitkallim lal-faaqi w-lal-malyaan he'll talk whether 
he has anything to say or not, bi-yiqUak lal-faaqi w-lal-
malyaan he laughs for no reason. 
~i faft/a lel1 morelmost empty. 
~ 
faqt/a 2 Ivtll to empty. faqqeet I-uooq mil-mayya 
I emptied the basin of water. 2 to free, set at leisure. 
faqqi nafs-ak jiwayya make yourself free for a while. 
- lvil 3 to empty, become empty. II fil-baaariyya fat/t/it 
the battery has gone dead. - fis-saaca faqqit the watch 
has run down. -vn t4/t/iyya; ava/pva mifat/t/i. 
~I ritfat/qa lvil 1 to be emptied. 1 to be set at lei-
sure. -iva mitfaqqi. 
~I ristafqa Ivtll to consider free or unoccupied. 
lamma rastafqa nafs-i u-azuur-ak as soon as I can see 
my way out of things I'll visit you. 1 to select for empti-

J'»~ 
662 
ness. fistaf4.a fizaaza w-hat-ha find an empty bottle and 
madfal il- fiftaar the cannon shot announcing the end of 
bring it here. - ava mistaf4.i. 
the daily fasting period during Ramadan. 
I J J.,.J 
)..i fi(ir (a) Ivil I to break a fast. fi(irt' yomeen fi-
ramaqaan I broke the fast for two days during Rama-
dan. finta ~aayim walla faa(ir are you fasting or not? 
~aam wi-fi(ir lala b~ala he observed the fast and broke 
it with but an onion (a comment on illogical behaviour, 
or an expression of sympathy at a disappointing out-
come). 2 to eat breakfast. fil-baafa bi-yl:Jibb' yifrab 
faay fiabl' ma yif(ar the Pasha likes to drink tea before 
he has breakfast. fi(irna b-gibna we had cheese for 
breakfast. fif(ar-bu fiabl' ma yitvadda biik [provJ (have 
him for breakfast before he has you for lunch) get in 
your blow before he gets in his. -vn fu(Uur, fi(aar; ava 
faa(ir, fatraan. 
.JP fu(uur In! I breakfast. 2 meal, eaten at sunset, 
with which the daily Ramadan fast is broken. 
.J1.I..i fi(aar = fu(uur. 
~.J1.I..i fi(aari ladj invarl [ChrJ containing animal pro-
ducts and therefore not permitted during a fast (of 
food). 
)..i fi(r Inl fast breaking. liid il-fitr the Feast of the 
Breaking of the (Ramadan) Fast, Lesser Bairam . 
• )..i fu(ra J Inl nuts, candy and sweets (especially 
those eaten at the feast celebrating the end of 
Ramadan) . 
.,.lU fi(iir Icoll nl rounds or squares of many-layered 
pastry (the plainer sort may be broken in pieces and 
dipped into cheese, honey, cream etc., while the finer 
sort are made of flaky pastry with a sweet or savoury 
topping or filling). llfi(iir laft rich pastry made with 
cream, eaten with cheese or honey. -fi(iir mafili type of 
ro~nd pastry cooked by frying. -fi(iir ir-ral:Jma type of 
pastry distributed to the poor by those visiting the 
tombs ?f their dead relatives. -fi(iir mifaltit large rounds 
of rich multi-layered pastry, specifically those baked in 
mud ovens (coD$idered a delicacy) . 
• .,.lU fi(iira lunit n, pi -aat, fa(aayirl a round or square 
of fi(iir. 
~)ol.l..i fa(a(riln pi -yyal professional fi(iir cook, mak-
er and seller of fi(iir. 
~ fa((ar I Ivil to constitute fast-breaking. fil-fJufian 
bi-lfattar fi-ramaqaan do injections break the Ramadan 
fast? 2 Ivll to give breakfast to. fil-Iukanda bi-tfattar 
iz-zabaayin the hotel provides breakfast for the custom-
ers. -vn taf(iir; ava rnifattar. 
;"1 fitfattar Ivil to be given breakfast. - iva mit/attar. 
.J1.I..i! fif(aar Ivn! breaking of the (Ramadan) fast. 
Z J J.,.J 
)..i fa(ar (u) Ivll to distress. fil-l:Juzn' fa(ar fialb-i sor-
row broke my heart. -vnfa(r, fa(araan; avafaa(ir; pva 
maf(Uur. 
)u;1 fit/alar Ivil to become heavy or distressed (of the 
heart). fialb-i Gala fibn-i t/a(ar wi-fialb ibn-i la/ayya 
zayy il-l:Jagar [provJ (I was heart-broken over my son, 
but my son's heart was like stone to me) == children are 
certain cares, but uncertain comforts. -ava mitfi(ir. 
)u; 1 finfa(ar = fitfatar. -ava minfi(ir. 
~J.,.J 
...,..Iai fitis I (a) Ivil la to suffocate, choke. fanafaesaan 
min il-fJarr' da I'm suffocating from this heat. Ib to 
become fed up. fitist' min iI-liifa di I got choked off 
with that life. 2 [derisJ to perish (of a person). fiesit 
tal:Jt a larabiyya she got snuffed out in-a car accident . 
llfitis (lala rool:J-u) mid-difJk he almost died laughing. 
3 [lslJ to die (of animals) without being slaughtered 
according to the precepts governing ritual purity. (aUal 
fii fil-fiU(a( il-faesa [provJ (he claimed it had dead cats in 
it) he could find nothing but bad to say for it. -vn 
fa(asaan; ava faatis, fa(saan. 
...,..Iai fa(as (u) Ivtl to depress, press down. fil-Iakma 
fatasit manuiir-u the blow flattened his nose. -vn faes; 
ava faatis; pva maf(uus . 
...,..Iai fitis 2 /adj °1 gluttonous. 
...,..Iaii faf(as ladj fem fa(sa, pi fu(sl flat, bashep-in. 
manuiir fatsa a boxer's nose. 
..,...lo.i fi(iis ladj invarl I [lslJ not slaughtered according 
to Islamic precepts and hence considered inedible. 
2 suffocating, airless. fid-dinyaf(iis the weather is stifl-
ing. - ladv/3 in vain, for nothing. raafJ fi(iis it ended up 
a waste, as in tscab-i raafJ fi(iis my efforts were in vain, 
fil-larabiyya raafJit fi(iis the car was a total write-off. 
maat fi(iis (1) he died for nothing. (2) he died in total 
obscurity . 
...,..lU;1 fit/alas Ivill to be depressed, be pressed down. 
2 to cave in. -ava/iva mitfi(is . 
...,.Ju; 1 finfatas = fit/a(as. -ava/iva minfitis. 
..,.-'i fattas Ivlll to choke, suffocate. 2 [slangJ to kill, 
snuff out, bump off. -vn taf(iis; ava mifattas. 
~I fitfattas Ivil passive of fauas. -iva mitfauas. 
J.,J.,.J 
1; fact (u) Ivil to spring, bound. fiq-qufdal raal:J faa(il 
the frog hopped away. kaan bi-yillab bi-fastik raaI:J 

fQ(J(i(fi-wif/-u he was playing with a rubber band and it 
shot into his face. - vn face. fa(a(aan; ava {aa(i(. 
~ facta linst n, pi -aatl a jump. a leap. 
~ 
faeeae Ivtl to cause to jump. -vn tafcii(; ava/pya 
mifa«a(. 
ilil. fitfaua( Ivil I to jump up and down. 2 to be 
made to jump. -ava/iva mitfaua(. 
~ .J .1 .1..; see 1.J.1";: fa(a(ri. fa(a(riyya 
.1..;.1..; 
.lulu facfa( Ivil to jump up and down. jump about. -vn 
facfa(a; ava mifacfa(. 
r.1 ..; 
~ fa(am (u) Ivtl to wean. fa(amit-u lala sana she 
weaned him at a year. IIfa(am ir-rayya lan to cease 
irrigating (a crop). -vn fi(aam. fa(m. fa(amaan; ava 
faa(im; pya maf(uum. 
4J.; fa(ma 1 Ipl -aatl instance noun of fa(m. 
W,U faa(ima r. fa(ma 2 /prop nl (the Prophet's daugh-
ter) Fatima. sitt-i-na fa(ma. fis-sayyida faa(ima, or 
fa(ma z-zahraa f the Lady Fatima. -also fa(na. 
..,JoU faa(imif. fa(mi I ladj ·1 Fatimid. fid-dawla 1-
faa(imiyya (or I-fa(miyya) the Fatimid dynasty. 2/n"1 a 
Fatimid. 
~I fitfa(am Ivil to be weaned. -iva mitfi(im. 
~I finfa(am = fitfa(am. -iva minfi(im. 
1.;,.1 ..; 
J.; fiCin 1 (a) Ivil to be (astutely) aware. law fi(int i 
liI-mawquul mil-fawwil kunt i manalt-u if I'd been 
aware of the matter from the beginning. I would have 
put a stop to it. -vn fa(aana. 
J.; fiCin 2 ladj " and pi fu(anal astute. 
~1.Iat fa(aana In! astuteness . 
.;,..I.i fa(iin ladj pi fu(anal astute. 
~I fitfa«an = fiCin I. 
kunti mitfa«an 
Ii-kull i 
mufamrat-hum iI-xabiisa I was fully aware of all their 
evil schemes. -vn tafa((un r ; ava mitfa«an. 
Z.;,.1 ..; 
W,U fa(na Iprop n! variant of the name of (the 
Prophet's daughter) Fatima. -see r.1..; 
~~..; 
iu fa;; ladj pi fUHaa;. fu;a;al insolent. loutish, rude. 
~lh; fa;aa;a In! insolence. 
663 
t~"; 
~ lh; fa;aala 
Inl 
I hideousness, 
repulsiveness, 
heinousness. 2 Ipl -aatl atrocity. 
~ 
fa;iil ladj pi fu;aall I abominable, hideous, 
terrible. 2 prodigious, tremengous, terrific. 
e1Ui faf;allell I more/most abominable, hideous or 
terrible. 2 more/most prodigious, tremendous or 
terrific. 
~I fistaf;al/vtl to consider abominable, hideous 
or atrocious. -vn fistif;aal; ava mistaf;al . 
v" t"; 
~ 
fal~ (a) Ivtl to squash, crush. riI-larabiyya 
fal~it iI-waad the car crushed the boy. -vn fau. 
fal~aan; ava faal~; pya maflu~. 
v""";" maflu~ ladj pi mafali~1 runty, undersized. 
finta lissa layyil maflu~ you're still just a little pip-
squeak. fir-raagil i/-maflu~ da that little runt of a 
man. faxuu I-maflu~ da that worthless squirt of a 
brother of his. 
~I fitfal~ Ivil to be squashed, be crushed. -iva 
mitfil~· 
~ 
fall~ I/vtl to crush (totally or successively). 
quu(a mfall~a squashy tomatoes. 2 Ivil to poke 
around. balaa/ tifall~ fil-fakl stop poking around in 
the food. ma tUlilUd-/ tfall~ fi-leen-ak don't keep 
rubbing your eyes. -vn tafli~; ava/pya mifalla~. 
~I fitfall~ Ivil to be crushed (totally or succes-
sively). -iva mitfall~. 
.";'.£l t"; 
~ 
falkif Ivtl to put into disorder, disarrange. 
IIkidb i msaawi wala sudqi mfalkif {pray] ... a smooth 
lie is more effective than an awkward truth. -also 
fal:Jkif. - vn falka/a; ava/pya mifalkif. 
~I fitfalkif/vil to become disordered, be thrown 
into disorder. -vn tifaekiif; ava/iva mitfalkif. 
Jt"; 
J..i falal (a) I/vtl to do, perform. ma-yl:Jibbi-Jyiflal 
iI-xeer he doesn't like to do good. 2/vil to act. lamma 
tliuullaazim tiflal when you promise (something) you 
should act (on it). riI-fism i I-(Uuba wi/-filii I-fam/iir 
{pray] (talk for (the cold month of) Tuba and action for 
(the stormy month of) Amshir) the action doesn't 
match the words. -vn fill. falalaan; ava faali/; pya 
mafluul. 
~ falal fi- to .fornicate with. 
J..i filllnpi faflaal,filaalll action. fik-kalaamsahl i 
laakin ii-fill i ~alb t9 talk is easy, to act hard. II radd i fill 

reaction. -bil-fill in fact, really, truly. 2/pl faflaal 
onlyl {gram] verb. 
• fillan ladvl in fact, really, truly. fir-rakk' fillan lar-
raagil it does indeed all depend on the man. fil-beet 
maskuun fillan the house really is haunted. 
J..i filii ladjl actual, real. fit-tax(iit il-filli the actual 
planning. 
j&. \; faalil Inl I Iplfalalal doer. falalit xeer charitable 
people. haniyyaa-Iak ya faalil il-xeer {beggars] may it 
reward you well, you charitable one! 2 Ipl also fUlala/ 
(unskilled) labourer. 3/pl -iinl {gram] subject (of a 
verbal sentence). -
fil-faalil Ino pU 4 unskilled manu-
allabour force. tiqul-J' b-tiftayal fil-faalil you're acting 
as if you had to do menial work! 
~\; faaliliyyat Inl efficacy. lu faaliliyya la;iima 
f-fifaaf il- famraac{ it has great efficacy in curing 
diseases. 
j.&.1"'; fawalli I In pI -yyal (unskilled) construction 
worker. 2 ladj pI -yyal {deris] hardworking, characte-
rized by brawn rather than brain. 
J y.A.. mafluul In/I effect. fil-musakkin da lu mafluul 
gaamid this sedative has a powerful effect. II naafiz il-
mafluul effect!ve. -saari I-mafluul valid. -sariil il-
mafluul quick-acting. 2 Ipl mafaliill {gram] object. 
j..i.;1 fitfalal Ivil passive of falal. - iva mitfilil, 
mit/alai. 
j..i; I finfalallvil I to react in an emotional or excited 
fashion, become excited, become stirred up. finfalalt' 
bil-fJikaaya dj 1 got worked up by this story. 
2 = fit/alaI. - vn finfilaal; ava/iva minfilil. 
JW;I finfilaali ladjl melodramatic, emotional. 
j&.lA.. mufaalil In pI -aatl reactor. mufaalil zarri nuc-
lear reactor. 
j&.U;1 fitfaalilf Ivil {chem] to react, interact. -vn 
tafaalul; ava mutafaalil. 
j&.U; tafaalu[f 
In 
pI -aatl 
{chem] 
reaction, 
interaction. 
J...A.;-I fistaflaU,' fistaflal fi-J to fornicate with. 
layzaa yistaflal fiiha she wants him to sleep with her. 
- ava mistaflal. 
~ J"; 
..w faqad (i) Ivtll to cease to maintain, cease to keep, 
lose. faqadt il-fJamaasa f-n~~ is-sikka 1 lost enthusiasm 
half-w3\-y through. faqad is-saycara lala nafs-u he lost 
control of himself. faqad il-walY he lost consciousness. 
- Ithe literary passive occursl salt-i fuqdit minni 1 lost 
my watch. 2 to bring about the downfall of. fit-tamal 
huwwa lli faqad il-fJaraami it was greed which ended the 
664 
thiers career. muzakrit-u mala f~fJab-u faqadit-u his 
studying with his friends led to his failure. - Ivi/3 to 
retire from life's struggle, give up caring. faqadt· xala~ 
ma-lad-J' fJadd' yhimm-i-ni I've thrown in the towel 
-I don't care about anyone anymore. -vn faqadaan; 
ava faaqid; pva mafquud. 
...Ii\; faaqid ladjl I lost. II badalfaaqid replacement for a 
lost official document (e.g., a passport, a driver's li-
cence). 2 desperate. 
.).,ALo mafquud In °1 missing person . 
..wi fafqad leU morelmost desperate or ruthless. 
fafqad walad fil-fJitta the most ruthless character in the 
neighbourhood. 
.I"AAJ I fil-faqiid, fil-faqiid Inl the late lamented. 
..i.U,;1 fitfaqad Ivil passive of faqad 1 and 2. -iva 
mitfiqid. 
~I finfaqad = fitfaqad. -iva minfiqid. 
..i.U,;1 fitfaqqad 
Ivtl 
to 
inspect, check up on. 
bi-nitfaqqad fJaal iz-zarl we inspect the crops. -ava 
mitfaq q ad. 
..I.A;;i1 fiftaqad Ivtl {Chr] to visit and encourage (lapsed 
church members). fJa-nitlal iftiqaad qabl il-liidwe'll go 
out encouraging people to come to church (a few days) 
before the feast. -vn fiftiqaad. 
1 ~ J"; 
jAj fiqir or fuqur (a) Ivil to become poor. -vnfaqaraan, 
faqr; ava faqraan. 
jAj faqar (i) Ivtl to impoverish. fis-suuq kal filuus-i 
w-faqar-ni the market devoured my money and re-
duced me to poverty. - vn faqr; ava faaqir. 
jAj faqr Inl I poverty. 2 want, lack, shortage. IIfaqr' 
damm anaemia. 
.:,ljAj faqraan ladj °1 poor, destitute. 
"sjAj faqri ladj *1 bringi~g bad luck, unlucky. yaam 
faqri an unlucky day. daal naas faqriyyiin - kull' 
m-azur-hum fatnifJis those people have a curse on 
them; whenever 1 visit them 1 have bad luck. 
~ 
faqiir ladj pI fuqara, faqaaral (miserably) poor. 
fil-faqiir rifJt-u wifJfa {pray] = the reek of poverty 
drives people away. xuduu-hum faqaara yimii-ku llaah 
{pray] marry into a poor family and God will make you 
wealthy . 
jAji rafqar leU morelmost destitute. fafqar min 
ganaafJ id-dabbuur {pray] (poorer than« wasp's wing) 
poorer than a church mouse. 
"s;.w faqayri ladj invl poor, humble. 
~ faljljarl Ivtl to reduce to abject poverty, make 
destitute. -vn tafqiir; ava mifaqqar. 

11 faCjCjar lala to jinx with constant ill-wishing. 
pi riftaCjar !viJ to become poor. fallis wi-ftaCjar he 
went bankrupt and became poor. -ava miftiCjir. 
1.11,; ...i 
• .;Ai faqrat In pI faqaraatl 1 vertebra. 2 paragraph. 
.s fi faqri t ladjl vertebral, vertebrate. ril-lamuud il-
faqri the spinal column. lJayawanaat faqriyya verte-
brate animals. 
\11'; ...i 
fi faCjCjar2/vii I to sway rhythmically (as'at a zikr or 
zaar). 2 to nod, rock (e.g., from drowsiness or pain). 
II rif-jamla bi-tfaCjCjar the candle is flickering. -vn 
tafCjiir; ava mifaCjCjar. 
.V"'J...i 
...,..;.; faCjas (i) I IviJ to hatch, hatch out. beeqa faCjsa a 
hatched egg. kuW lalla laazim titnaCjCja Cjabl; ma tifCjis 
each egg-cluster must be picked off before it hatches. 
2 Ivtl to catch out (s.o.) in trickery, catch out (a trick). 
kaan bi-yisralJ biyya bass a rana faCjast-u he was trying 
to fool me but I caught him out. faCjasu l-malluub they 
uncovered the trick. -vnfaCjs, faCjasaan; avafaaCjis; pva 
maCjfuus. 
..,..Ai faCjs In! hatch, brood. balta w-faCjs-a-ha a duck 
and her newly-hatched brood. 
;;.....u faCjsa linst n, pI -aatl a hatching out. 
..,...0.;;1 ritfaCjas Ivil to be caught out. -iva mitfiCjis, 
mitfaCjas. 
..,...0.;; 1 rinfaCjas = ritfaCjas. -iva minfiCjis. 
~ 
faCjCjas I/vtl to cause to hatch. ril-lJaraara 
faCjCjasit il-beeq badri heat caused the eggs to hatch 
early. 2 Ivil to hatch successively at short intervals (of 
eggs). -vn tafCjiis; avalpva mifaCjCjas. 
~I ritfaCjCjas Ivil passive offaCjCjas 1. - iva mitfaCjCjas. 
1 V'" J...i see V"'.J J J ...i : faCjCjuus, faCjCjuusa 
";J...i 
..;:u faCjaj (i) Ivtl to break, crack. faCjajt il-beeqa 
I broke the egg. -vn faqf, faCjajaan; ava faaCjif; pva 
mafCjuuj. 
..,:..u.1 ritfaCjaj IviJ to be broken, be cracked. - iva 
mitfiCjif, mitfaCjaj. 
.;..u.; 1 rinfaCjaj = ritfaCjaj. -iva minfiCjif· 
~ 
faCjCjaj Ivtl to smash (s.th.) or break (several 
things) in succession. -vn tafCjiif; avalpva mifaCjCjaj. 
,.,:.iA.1 ritfaCjCjaj /viJ to be smashed (repeatedly or of 
several things). - iva mitfaCjCjaj. 
665 
oJ~ 
.l.J...i 
Ja.u faqa{, faCja{ ladvl only (so much and no more), 
altogether (after a sum of money). ril-rooqa di 
li/-mudarrisiin faqa{ this room is for teachers only. 
~ 
faCjCja{ Ivtl to write Qut (the figures expressing a 
sum of money) in words. - vn tafCjii{; avalpva mifaCjCja{ . 
~ 
tafCjii{a Ipl -aatl instance noun of tafCjii{. 
Jai&.1 ritfaCjCja{ Ivil to be written out in words (of the 
figures expressing a sum of money). - iva mitfaCjCja{. 
tJ...i 
~ faCjal (a) Ivtl 1 to burst. balloona mafCjuula a burst 
balloon. qa¥a{ bi-~awabl-u lad-dimmil faCjal-u he 
pressed the boil with his fingers and made it burst open. 
IIfaCjal gi~ he ripped off a loud fart. -faCjal dilJka he 
burst out with a laugh. -faCjal-u Cjalam he gave him a 
resounding slap. -bi-yifCjal il-maraara it's infuriating . 
-bi-yifCjal il-beqaan [coarse] it's a real balls-ache. 2 to 
infuriate, incense. - Ivi/3 to burst out. faCjalit b~-~oot 
she burst out screaming. -vn faCjalaan, faCjl; ava 
faaCjil; pva mafCjUUl. 
e~ faaCjil ladjl bright, vivid, loud (of colours). 
~I rafCjal fell 1 more/most vivid (of colours). 
2 more/most extreme. 
t"'1 ritfaCjal Ivil I to burst, be burst. 2 to be or be-
come infuriated, be or become incensed. -avaliva 
mitfiCjil· 
eo-1 rinfaCjal = ritfaCjal· -avaliva minfiCjil· 
~ faCjCjal Ivtl 1 to burst repeatedly or successively. 
2 to bake (bread) twice over. - Ivi/3 to become lean or 
thin. gism-a-hafaCjCjal mil-laya she lost weight because 
of the illness. - vn tafCjiil; avalpva mifaCjCjal. 
~I ritfaCjCjal Ivil passive of faCjCjal 1 and 2. - iva 
mitfaCjCjal· 
J...iJ...i 
..;.w faCjfaCj Ivil to blister. ridee faCjfaCjit his hands came 
out in blisters. -vn faCjfaCja; ava mifaCjfaCj. 
iJ"w faCjfuuCja In pI -aat, faCjafiiCjI blister. 
,;);i fUCjfeeCja = faCjfuuCja. 
V"'.JJJ...i 
V"'"iU faCjCjuus 
Icoll 
nl 
half-grown 
honeydew 
melon(s). II rin-naas landak xiyaar wi-faCjCjuus == you 
differentiate unfairly between people. 
'-"iU faCjCjuusa Ipl -aatl unit noun of faCjCjuus . 
oJ...i 
-.Ai fiqh t Inl Islamic jurisprudence. 
~ 
fiqhif ladjl pertaining to jurisprudence. 

~ filii In pI fUliaha/1 professional reciter or teacher 
of the Koran. 2 one who combines sanctimonious 
hypocrisy with low scavenging ways. see further under 
oj. J ~ 
oj.J~ see also .J~ 
~ 
falihana Inl sanctimoniousness combined with 
low scavenging ways. 
~1 ritfalihan Ivil to behave in a sanctimonious yet 
base and greedy way. -ava mitfalihan. 
loS J ~ see • J ~ : filii 
,).!l ~ 
fo fikr Inll thought, thinking. bi-yidris fikr' syaasi he 
studies political thought. fikr-ak reeh what is your opin-
ion? fikr-ak yibil-Ii bit-tasliira do you imagine he'd sell 
to me at the fixed price? 2 care, worry. landu fikr he 
has something on his mind. balaafil-fikr stop worrying! 
• fo fikra In pI rafkaarl thought, idea, conception. 
ma-landii-j fikra xaal~ I haven't the slightest idea. 
fikra gdiida fit-(ibaala a new idea in printing. lawziin 
naaxud fikra lan if-juyl we'd like to get some idea ofthe 
work. Illaia fikra by the way, incidentally. 
jlJ faakir laval I thinking. kunt' faakir rinnak mif 
l.Ja-tiigi I thought you weren't coming. 2 remembering. 
mif laazim tifakkar-ni - rana faakir kull a l.Jaaga you 
don't have to remind me, I remember everything. 
ma-l.Jadd'-j fiiku fakir-ni does none of you remember 
me? 
fo fakkar Ilvtl 18 to address (s.o.) with intent to 
remind. fakkar-ni rakallim-u bukra remind me to speak 
to him tomorrow. Ib to call or bring to (s.o.)'s mind. 
bi-yfakkar-ni b-raxuu-ya he reminds me of my brother. 
ril-ruyniyya fakkarit-ni b-rayyaam fabaab-i the song 
Qrought back to me memories of my youth. 2 Ivil to 
ponder, give thought. xallii-ni rafakkar fiihafwayya !et 
me give it some thought. bi-yfakkar fiiha lala {Uul he 
thinks about her all the time. fakkart abaaal is-sagaayir 
I thought of stopping smoking. II ri?-labd' fit-tafkiir 
wir-rabb' fit-tadbiir {prov] ... man proposes, God dis-
poses. -vn tafkiir; avalpva mifakkar . 
• j:.A.. mufakkira In pI -aatl diary, memo book, 
notebook. 
j.;.;1 ritfakkar Ivill to be reminded. 2 to ponder, give 
thought. titfakkar titlakkar {prov] the more one thinks 
(about one's affairs), the more one gets depressed. 
- ivalava mitfakkar . 
.foi 1 riftakar Ivtll to think of as, take as. riftakart-ak 
if-jeex lali I took you for Sheikh Ali. tiftikir it-tBlyiin 
666 
sahl do you suppose it's easy to get appointed? 2 to 
recall, remember. lala m-aftikir ma-juft-uu-j liabl' kida 
as far as I remember I never saw him before. 
ma-lidirt'-j raftikir ism-u I couldn't remember his 
name. 3 to think of. balieet raftikir kalaam in-naas lan 
miraat-i I started to think of what people had said about 
my wife. II riftikir l.Jaaga l.Jilwa (or lidla) change the 
subject to something nicer! -kunt iftikir l.Jaaga ral.Jsan 
(you should have mentioned something better!) ... talk 
of the devil! (when an unwelcome subject of conversa-
tion appears). -rabb-i-naftakar-u he died. - riftikaar-u 
ral.Jma the fact that God thinks (of us) is a (sign of). 
divine mercy (said as a consolation at times of anguish 
and distress). -vn riftikaar; ava miftikir. 
.!l.!l~ 
;U fakk I (u, i) Ivtl 18 to undo, release, free. fakkit 
iz-zaraayir she undid the buttons. fakk' hduum-u he 
loosened his clothes. fakkeet ~-~amuula I unscrewed 
the 
nut. 
b-afukk 
is-sagaayir 
w-abil-hum fart 
I unpackage the cigarettes and sell them one by one. 
Ilfakk' gild to soften leather. -fakk' wiff-u he stopped 
frowning, he cheered up. -fukk-a-ha cheer up! - rahu 
kalaam fakk' magaalis it's just small talk, it's just said to 
make conversation. Ib to make null, invalidate. huwwa 
l.Ja-yfukk-i-lak is-sil.Jr he will undo the spell for you. 
fakk' wuquww-u he invalidated his ablution (e.g., by 
going to the lavatory). 2a to take apart, dismantle. 
fakkeena I-mutoor we dismantled the engine. fakk' il-
lUlida he untied the knot. l.Jabl' mafkuuk unravelled 
rope.llrabb-i-na yfukk' lUlidit-ha may God find her a 
husband. -rabb-i-na yfukk a laliit-ha may God grant 
her a child. -yilraf yifukk il-xatt he just about knows 
how to read. -fakk iz-zimaam {admin] demarcation of 
land boundaries. 2b to change (money) into smaller 
units. tifukk-i-Ii gneeh could yau change a pound for 
me? II rafukk-ufeen ... a.fat lot of good that does me, as 
in rana raasif giddan. - rafukk-a-ha feen rana raasif di 
'I'm very sorry.' 'What bloody use is your being sorry to 
me?' 2c {agric] to plough (land), break up (soil) for the 
first time after a previous crop has been cleared, or after 
irrigation. 3 to solve, relieve (pressure, tension). fakk' 
zanliit-i he got me out of a tight spot. l.Ja-nfukk 
il-mufkila di rizzaay how can we resolve this problem? 
IIfakk a l.JaJrJ to urinate, have a pee. -xud il-filuus 
wi-fukk' nafs-ak take the money and relieve yourself of 
your worries. - lvil 4 to come apart, loosen. 
ril-faraamil fakkit the brakes have become loose. Sa to 
relax,let up (of pressure, tension), go down (ofa swell-
ing). ril-waram lissa ma-fakk'-j lanni the swelling still 

hasn't left me. ri{-{awaarir fakkit the emergency blew 
over. riz-zamta fakkit the hot spell (of weather) broke. 
dic;t-u fakkit his troubles have come to an end. 5b to 
relax, have one's mind relieved of worry. xud i1-l:Juc;na 
w-fukk" l:an nafs-ak get the injection and stop wor-
rying. 6 to make off, run off. xad i1-filuus wi-fakk he 
took the money and ran. fakkeet minnu I escaped from 
him. -vn fakakaan, fakk; ava faakik; pva mafkuuk . 
.J; fakk2 In pI fukuukl jaw. 
is; fakka In pI -aat/l small change, coins or notes of 
low denomination. ma-mal:ii-ffakka radfal: it-taks I've 
no change with which to pay for the taxi. 2 change 
(given for a larger sum of money). mal:aak fakkit xamsa 
gneeh do you have change for five pounds? 
.!J">; fukuuk Inl incense (thus named because of its use 
in breaking spells). 
~ 
fakiik: c;aal ya fakiik "" to take to one's heels. 
nataft; minnu l-mal:Jfa;a w-c;ult i ya fakiik I snatched the 
wallet from him and made off. 
~ 
mifakk In pI -aatl screwdriver. 
~ 
1 ritfakk Ivi/ passive of fakk J I, 2 and 3. II maftl,l"/-i 
tfakkit (1) I went limp (from exhaustion). (2) my joints 
t~rned to water (from fright). -iva mitfakk. 
~I rinfakk = ritfakk. -iva minfakk. 
~ 
fakkik Ivtl I to undo successively, release succes-
sively. 2 to dismantle, take apart pi.ece by piece. 38 to 
cause to be loose. siwac;t-ak l:Ja-tfakkik i1-faraamil your 
driving willlQosen the brakes. 3b [agric] to loosen (the 
soil with a plough). 4 to heat and so soften (stale 
bread). -vn tafkiik; ava/pva mifakkik. 
~I ritfakkik Ivil I passive of fakkik. 2 to come 
loose. -avaliva mitfakkik. 
I • .!I ...; 
~lt fakha Icoll n, pI fawaakih/ fruit(s). IImaW 
fawaakih liver salts. 
J~ fakahaani In pI -yya/ fruiterer. 
1 • .!I ...; 
4i.lS:i fukaaha Inl humour. 
~ 
fakiih /adj * and pI fukahalmerry, full of humour, 
funny. 
~i rafkah lel/ I morelmost funny, entertaining etc. 
(~f persons). 2! morelmost attractive etc. (of things). 
~I ritfakkih /vil to engage in light-hearted conversa-
tion, kid around. -vn tafakkuh; ava mitfakkih. 
j I J"'; 
) ~.,; fulaar <Fr foulard> Inl type of cheap un pat-
terned cotton cloth. 
667 
..; I J"'; 
...;.'J,j filaaf <Engl> In pI -aatl I [phot] flash attach-
ment. 2 torch, flashlight. 
iJ I J ...; 
..,'J,j fulaan J <Fr flan> In pI -aatl [print] flong. 
.:..J"'; 
.;.l; filit or falat (i) I Ivil to slip away, slip loose. 
riI-c;alawooz itkasar fa-~-~amuula filtit the thread broke 
so the screw slipped out. filit min riid-i he slipped from 
my grasp. filitt i mis-sign I escaped from prison. 
ril-Iu{al: iIIi filtit min in-nac;aawa I-yadawiyya the egg-
clusters that were missed during hand-picking. filit 
minhum iz-zimaam they lost control. 2 Ivtl to let slip 
away. ma-tiflituu-f min riid-ak don't let it go. II/eeh 
lisaan-ak mafluut why are you so insolent? -[iyar-ha 
mafluut she-has no sense of proportion. - also fala{. - vn 
fait, falataan; ava faalit; pva mafluut. 
;;.ill falta In pI -aat/l instance noun offalt.llfaltit lisaan 
a slip of the tongue. 2 prize specimen, one in a million. 
..:..).1.. mafluut ladj *1 loose, out of control. mafluut 
i1-lisaan loose-tongued, foul-mouthed and rude. 
J'J,j falaati In pI -yyal skirt-chaser, womanizer. 
.;:...L;.;I ritfalat Ivil I to work loose, slip (away). 
2 passive of falat 2. - ava/iva mitfilit. 
..;...li; 1 rinfalat = ritfalat. - ava/iva minfilit. 
.:.1 fallit Ivt/l to let go, let slip (away).fallit kalaam to 
make a slip of the tongue. - Ivi/2 to slip away, make 
off. 3 to break wind. -vn tafliit; ava/pva mifallit. 
~ 
tafliita linst n, pI -aat, tafaliitl a slip. -/adverbiallyl 
xaragu mil-maktab tafaliit they sneaked out of the 
office. 
..:.1;1 ritfallit Ivill to slip away one after the other. 2 to 
be let go, be let slip. - ava/iva mitfallit. 
J.':" .:.. J ...; 
.,ili filittu <It filetto> Inl I [butcher] filet of meat. 
28 decorative edging, piping. 2b fillet, decorated bor-
der or edge (e.g., around tiles or the face of an l:uud). 
j.:..J"'; 
..iW filtar <Engl> In pI falaatir/ filter. filtar zeet oil 
filter. 
- j':" J"'; 
~.rY filtireeh <Fr fil tire> Inl [needlew] drawn-
thread work. 
(J"'; 
dlt faalig Inl [path] hemiplegia. 

Ic. J "; 
~ falal:J, filil:J (a) I/vil to do well, succeed, prosper. 
ma-/alal:J-j' fil-madrasa he didn't do well at school. 
ma-fii-j l:Jaaga yilmil-ha w-yiflal:J he does not succeed in 
anything he does. rit-tigaara falal:Jit fi- riid-u the busi-
ness flourished under his direction. lumr il-xaayin ma-
yiflal:J the treacherous never prosper. lIya faalil:J wise 
guy! 2 Ivtl {non-Cairene] to deflower (especially with 
the finger). -vn filaal:J, falal:Jaan; ava faalil:J; pva 
mafluul:Ja. 
lc. J "; 
~ fill:J ladj invarl boorish, uncouth, rough. 
~ 
fileel:J, filiil:J: rabu fleel:J a yokel, a hick. 
c.':N fallaal:J In *1 1 peasant, fellah. reel larraf 
il-fallaal:J bi-rakl it-tiffaal:J {prov] (what does the 
peasant know of eating apples?) .... what can you expect 
a bumpkin to know of life's refinements? 2 ril-fallal:Jiin 
Ipl 
nl 
the 
countryside. 
layjiin 
fil1allaI:Jiin 
wi-ma-landuhum-j' rayy' fikra lan il-bandar they live 
in the country and don't know anything about city life. 
u->)u fallaal:Ji ladj invarl pertaining to peasants.libs' 
fallaal:Ji peasant dress. daar fallaal:Ji village house built 
around a farmyard.llgibna fallaal:Ji cheese made from 
skimmed milk. -leel fallaal:Ji large thin round flat 
loaves of bread, usually eaten dry. 
cf.; fallal:J Ivil to become a fellah. saab il-madrasa 
w-/allal:J min zamaan he left school and began working 
as a fellah long ago. -vn tafliil:J; ava mifallal:J. 
c:lA:-1 ristaflal:J Ivtll to regard as a hick. 2 to select for 
boorishness. ya-bn-i di mif tjimt-ak - tiruul:J ral:Jsan 
tistaflal:J laha waal:Jid zayyaha w-titgawwil-U my son, 
she's not for you; she had better find herself a husband 
as uncouth as she is. - Ivil3 to behave like a boor. -vn 
ristiflaal:J; ava mistaflal:J. see further under <J C. J ...; 
IJ"'c. J "; 
4...-li fall:Jasa Ivnl cocksurene~s, conceited know-it-all 
behaviour. 
IJ"'.,..J.i fall:Juus ladjl smart-alecky, conceited. 
...,-..u;1 ritfall:Jas Ivil to give oneself know-it-all airs, be 
smart-alecky. - ava mitfall:Jas. 
oj C. J"; see also 1 C. J ..; 
~ 
fall:Jana Ivnl boorishness, boorish manners. 
.rJ.ii1 ritfall:Jan Ivil to display boorish manners. - vn 
tifall:Jiin; ava mifall:Jin. 
.) J"; see .) I J ..; : fulaar 
668 
-IJ"'.)J"; 
~J.))i fulurusint <Engl>: lamba flurusint fluores-
cent light. - also furusint. 
I IJ'" J"; 
<JL..li falsaan ladj *1 penniless, broke. rana falsaan 
if-jahr'da I am broke this month. 
..,..ii falas Inl penury. mif tjaadir yaakul min il-falas illi 
huwwa fii he's so broke he can't feed himself. 
IIma-landuu-j riil:Jit il-falas he doesn't have a penny to 
his name, he has absolutely nothing. 
11 bil1alas ladvl gratuitously. riC-calaba b-yingal:Ju 
l-rayyam-di bil-falas these days, students pass exams 
without doing any work for them. 
~L..li falasangi In pI -yyal [joe] bankrupt, penniless 
man . 
..,..ii i raflas 1 lell morelmost penurious. 
IJ"')i filuus Ipl nI money. filuus waratj banknotes. 
filuus 
farleta 
coins. 
llfiluus 
migammida 
large-
denomination notes. - rilli fluus-u l:Jaraam yilraf baab 
il-mal:Jkama {prov] (he whose money is tainted will 
know the door of the court-house) .... having to take 
your disputes to court is the surest way to financial ruin. 
- rilli fluus-u f-geeb-u ma-ybaan leeb-u {prov] .... the 
shortcomings of a rich man are gold-plated . 
..,.1 fallis 1 Ivtl to reduce to penury, cause to go ~ank­
rupt. lilb i/-kutjiina fallis-ni playing cards has left me 
broke. - Ivil 2 to become broke, go bankrupt. :J to 
reach the end of one's resources. rana fallist' mil-wad-
da I ~ive up on that boy! -vn tafliis; avalpva mifallis. 
~ 
tafliisa In 
pI -aat, 
tafaliisl declaration of 
bankruptcy. 
~ 
mifallis In 
*1 bankrupt, penniless person. 
ril-mifallis yifattif fid-dafaatir il-tjadiima {prov] (8 
bankrupt will search in old account books) .... a desper-
ate man will clutch at any straw. 
~, ritfallis Ivil to be reduced to penury. -iva 
mitfallis. 
..,..iii raflas 2 T Ivil to go bankrupt.llsiyaasit il-wi/aatj 
raflasit the policy of detente has failed. -vn riflaas; ava 
muflis . 
IJ'" ':N l riflaas Inl bankruptcy. 
llJ"'J"; 
..,..ii fils In pI riflaasl {coarse] anus, arsehole. 
IJ'" IJ'" J"; see IJ"'''; J ..; : falsuus 
-~IJ"'J"; 
.:J..-li filis(iin or falasCiin Iprop nI Palestine . 

~ 
filis{iiniorfalas{iini I ladj ·1 Palestinian. 1 In·1 
a Palestinian. 
tlJ"J..J 
e-U falsB(; Ivil to skedaddle, hop it. kulli yoom yiruufJ 
iffuyli yim4,i wi-yfalsal every day he goes to work, 
signs in and beats it. ristalaf iI-filuus wi-falsal he bor-
rowed the money and was never seen again. -vn 
falsaea; ava mifalsal. 
..J IJ" J ..J 
~ 
falsafa In pI -aatl philosophy. ril-fa/safa 1-
rislamiyya Islamic philosophy. 
~ 
falsafi ladjl philosophical. 
.... ~ 
faylasuuf, 
filasuuf 
(also 
falyasuuf) 
In 
pI falasfall philosopher. 1 egghead, intellectual. 
...A.-.lA;1 ritfalsif Ivil to split hairs, engage in casuistry. 
-ava mitfalsif. 
- iJ IJ" J..J see I IJ" J ..J : falasangi, falasangiyya 
~J..J see ~IJ..J:filaaj 
~~J..J 
.;.u filujj <Engl> In! flush (in cards). 
.J~J..J 
,..all; fa~u <Itfalso> ladj invarl I false, counterfeit. 
filuus fa~u counterfeit money. 1 of poor quality, 
worthless. raagil fa~u a worthless man. riz-zaman 
illi-fJnafii zamanfa~u this is a lousy age that we are in. 
I,l,J..J 
.kI.i fala{ (u) I Ivil to slip away. ril-rarnab fala{ min 
rid-ha the rabbit wriggled out of her hand. 1 Ivt/ to 
allow to slip away. -alsofalat. -vnfal{, fala{aan; ava 
faaU{; pya mafluu{. 
J..liil ritfala{ Ivil I to slip away, escape. 1 to be let slip. 
-ava/iva mitfili{. 
J.U; I rinfala{ = ritfalat. - ava/iva minfiU{. 
Jal; falla{ I Ivtl to allow to slip away successively or 
repeatedly. 2/vil to slip away one after the othet. 
fallatna mil-madrasa mil-fJ~~a 1-ruula we slipped out of 
school right from the first period- -vn ~aflii{; ava/pya 
mifalla{. 
JJ.,;, ritfalla{ Ivil I passive of falla{ 1. 1 to slip away, 
escape. -ava/iva mitfalla{. 
1 ,l, J..J see ,l,.J J J .; : falluu{, falluu{a 
669 
c,l,J..J 
doli fal{afJ Ivtl I to widen (by flattening) at one end. 
1 to make concave. -vn fal{afJa; ava mifal{afJ. 
~ 
mifal{afJ ladjl I flat, shallow. ra{baat.j mifal{aba 
dinner plate. 1 concave. ladasa mifal{afJa a concave 
lens. 
d-lli' ritfal{afJ Ivil I to flatten out at the edges. 
1 pas!iive of fal{ab. -vn tifal{iib; ava/iva mitfaltab. 
tJ..J 
~ falla In! huff. balaaj iI-falla btaet-ak di there's no 
need for you to be so huffy. 
elli' ritfa/ae Ivil to get into a huff. bi-nkallim-u tfalal 
wi-sab-na we started to talk to him, but he left us in a 
huff. -ava mitfiUl. 
~tJ'; 
~ 
fall~ I Ivt/ to make chubby. 1 Ivil to become 
chubby. -vnfall~a; ava/pya mifall~. 
~ 
mifall~ ladjl chubby, plump. 
~"...li fallu~ ladjl {deris} self-important, uppity. 
~, 
ritfall~ lvil to behave haughtily or over-
bearingly. bi-yitfall~ lan-naas lala ma-fiif he looks 
down on people although he is really nobody. -vn 
tifalli~; ava mitfall~. 
IJ" ..J J ..J 
4....lli falfasa Ivnl {joe} high-flown drivel. 
1J".,ill falfuus (also fa/suus) In pI falafiisl {joe} clever 
dick, smart-aleck. 
..,....a.a;' ritfalflS Ivil {joe} to give oneself know-it-all airs. 
-vn tifalfiis; ava mitfalflS. cf ..J IJ" J .; 
~';J..J 
~ 
falf~ Ivil to wriggle (out of bonds, out of a tight 
spot). fi4,ilt afalf~ U-fJadd i ma fakkeet nafs-i mit-taktiifa 
I kept wriggling until I worked myself free of the 
bonds. misku fiyya lajaan iI-yada bass i t.jdirt afalf~ 
miz-zant.ja di they pressed me to stay for lunch but 
I managed to wriggle out of that tight spot. -vnfalf~a; 
ava mifalf~. 
~.,ill falfu~ In pI falafi~1 a shifty individual, a slip-
pery customer. 
~I 
ritfalf~ = falf~. -vn tifalfi~; ava mitfalf~. 
J..JJ..J 
J.il.i filfillcoll nl pepper( s), peppercorn(s). filfil riswid 
black pepper. filfil ruumi sweet peppers. filfil baladi 
chili peppers. 

4llli filfila lunit n, pI -aatl a pepper, a peppercorn .11 ya 
filfila ya kaydaa-hum you saucy tease! 
~")lili filfilaaya = filfila. 
ji')l.i fa/aafil Ipl nI common dish consisting of dried 
broad beans soaked and pounded together with herbs 
and spices, shaped into balls and deep-fried in oil (more 
often called taGmiyya). 
J.i.I.i falfillvtll to pepper, apply pepper to. 2 to cook 
(especially rice) plain. ruzz' mfalfil plain boiled rice. 
- Ivil 3 to become incensed, become agitated. 
bi-tlJaawil tixallii-ni fafalfil mil-viira she's trying to 
make me burn with jealousy. -vn falfa/a; ava/pva 
mifalfil. 
J.ill.. mifalfilladjl kinky (of hair). 
J.illil fitfalfil/vill to be seasoned with pepper. 2 to be 
cooked plain (especially of rice). 3 to become incensed, 
become agitated. -vn tifalfiil; ava/iva mitfalfil. 
JJ'; 
..;l.i fa/at;. (a) Ivt/l to split, crack in two.fa/at;. dimav-ha 
bil-balta he split her head in two with the axe. 2 to 
annoy, irritate, incense. di lJaaga tiflat;. this is madden-
ing! -vnfalt;., fa/at;.aan; avafaalit;.; pva mafluut;. . 
..;l.i fait;. In pI fuluut;.1 I split length of a (palm) trunk 
(used in rural building as a rafter, prop etc.). 2 crack. 
fait;.' fil-lJeeta a crack in the wall. 
4lli falt;.a In pI -aatll linst n/la a splitting, a crashing. 
Ib an irritation, an annoyance. 2/also pI filat;.1 half (of 
s.th. split in two parts).lIfalt;.it t;.amar (a slice of moon) 
... a beauty. 
jli faalit;. In pI fawaalit;.1 fault (in the earth's crust). 
4lli fa/at;.a Inl pI -aatl staff with a rope looped through 
its ends which, when twisted, secures the feet of one 
who is to be bastinadoed. -also fa/aka. 
Jilil fitfa/at;. Ivil passive of fa/at;.. II fitfilit;. ... if you 
don't like it,lump it! -xallii yitfilit;. he can go to hell! -iva 
mitfilit;.. 
~ 
I finfa/at;. = fitfa/at;.. -iva minfilit;.. 
..;l.i fallat;. Ivtll to split into several pieces. fallat;.t-a-ha 
ta/at lJitat I split it in three. 2 to administer the bastina-
do to. - Ivil 3 to become cracked, become covered 
with cracks. farq' mfallat;.a cracked (parched) earth. 
4 to take to one's heels, beat it. S [naut] to drift away 
from dockside. -vn tafliit;.; avalpva mifallat;.. 
~l.i; tafaliit;. Ipl nI [text] dye-streaks. 
Jilil fit/allat;. Ivil I to become cracked. fil-lJetaan 
itfallat;.it the walls have become covered with cracks. 
2 to be split into several pieces. 3 to be bastinadoed. 
-ava/iva mit/allat;.. 
670 
""" J J .; 
.rAli falt;.BS I/vtl [coarse] to make (s.o.) bend over. 
2/vil to bend over. -vn falt;.BSa; ava/pva mifalt;.BS. 
...,..Al.i;1 fitfalt;.BS Ivil I to bend over. 2 to be made to 
bend over. -vn tifalt;.iis; ava/pva mitfalt;.BS. 
l.!l J'; 
.ill; fa/ak In/l universe, celestial sphere. Gilm i1-fa/ak 
astronomy. 2 Icoll nl metal discs on the bottom of a 
threshing sled (see Pl.D, 2). 3 Ipl fa/aayikl buttocks. 
4/n pI faflaakl star, planet. 
~ 
fa/aka I lunit n, pI -aatll one of the metal discs on 
the bottom of a threshing sled (see PI.D, 2).2 [slang] a 
buttock. 
~ 
fa/aki ladj/l astronomic(al). 2 astrological. 
2.!l J'; 
-.s)j filuuka In pI fa/aayikl felucca, (small) boat with 
sail. 
~')I.i fa/ayki In pI -yyal sailor of a felucca, boatman . 
l.!l J'; 
~ 
fa/aka 2 <T fa/aka> In pI -aatl staff with a rope 
looped through its ends wbich, when twisted, secures 
the feet of one who is to be bastinadoed. -also fa/at;.a . 
.ill; fallik Ivtl to administer the bastinado to. -vn 
tafliik; ava/pva mifallik. 
~I fitfallik Ivil to be bastinadoed. -iva mitfallik. 
(""".!lJ';) 
~ 
fa/alcs <Engl flux> In! soldering alloy. 
~.; vulkis or fulkis or fululcs <Germ trade name> 
Inl Volkswagen car. 
v!o.!lJ'; 
~ 
falkif Ivtl to up~et, throw into disarray. falkift 
ig-gawaaza I upset the marriage arrangements. -vn 
falka/a; ava/pva mifalkif . 
~I fitfalkif Ivil to be upset, be thrown into dis-
array. -iva mitfalkif. 
I J J'; 
j; fall 1 (iJ Ivil to slip away, make off. fit-lJabl' fali' 
min fiid-u the rope slipped out of his hand.llfali' w-taar 
he sped off. - vn fall, fa/a/aan; ava faalil. 
Jlli faalilladjl unravelled, untwisted. lJabl' faalil un-
ravelled rope. 
j; fall 2 Inl cheap quality jute cloth used for sacking. 
it falla I lunit n, pI -aatl piece of jute cloth. 

. 
Jiil fitfalllvii to unravel, untwine. ril-lJabl itfall the 
rope has untwisted. - ava mitfall. 
Z J J..J 
j; fall 3 T (i) Ivtl to dent (iron). -commonly used in 
unelevated speech in the expressions ma-yfillij 
iI-lJadiid filla l-lJadiid {prov] (only iron dents iron) = 
diamonds cut diamonds. lamal-ha b-{ariir;a tfill iI-
lJadiid he did it with great force. -vnfall, falalaan; ava 
faalil; pva mafluul. 
3) J..J 
Ji fill <Gr phellos> Icoll nl cork. 
;ill filla I In pI -aatl I lunit nl a cork, a piece of cork. 
2.cigarette filter. 
~')I.i fillaaya = filla. 
4 J J..J 
j; fulllcoll nl Arabian jasmine (Jasminum sambac). 
- applied metaphorically with a complimentary sense: 
bint i zayy ii-full a perfectly lovely girl. fil- faslaar 
rixi~a w-maer;uula w-zayy ii-full the prices are cheap, 
reasonable and just dandy. xallit ifjar;r;a zayy ii-full she 
left the flat in perfect condition. fana lawza l-hiduum 
zayy ii-full I want the clothes white as snow.lI"abaalJ-ak 
full and "abaalJ ii-full = a lovely morning to you! -ya 
miit full cheerful greeting or compliment. -full" laleek 
well done! 
~ fulla lunit n, pI -aatl a jasmine flower. 
~')I.i fullaaya = fulla. 
I J J..J 
~ villa, filla 2 J <It villa> Ifem n pI -aat, vilalll villa, 
detached house, bungalow. villit-ak or fil-villa btalt-ak 
your villa. 2 self-contained apartment comprising two 
storeys within a larger building, duplex apartment. 
j".JJJ..J 
J. ~ falluu{ ladj pI falalii{l self-important. 
~ ~ falluu{a Inl pompous person. 
':'.;JJ..J 
~ 
filliin Icoll nl I cork. 2 {bot] phellem. 
~ 
filliina, falliina lunit n, pI -aatl a cork, a piece of 
cork. 
r J..J 
~ film <Engl> In pI faflaaml I film, movie. 
2 photographic film. 
671 
.!l':'rJ..J 
~ 
falamank <prob T felemenk> (also gibna 
falamank) Inl Edam(-type) cheese. 
I.:,J..J 
.:,')I.i fulaan 2 or filaan In, fern fulaana or filaanal de-
signation substituted for the name of an unspecified 
person. bi-yr;uulu lala waalJid fulaan r;alb-u lJnayyin 
they say about someone, 'So-and-so has a kind heart'. 
fulaan iI-fulaani Mr. So-and-so.lis-sitt ik-kibiiraflS-sinn 
ar;uul ya xalt-i fulaana an older woman I address as my 
Aunt So-and-so. -/frequently used to avoid mentioning 
one's own namel r;ul-lu flaan bi-ysallim laleek = give 
him my best wishes. 
J')\; fulaani or filaani ladj *1 adjectival equivalent of 
fulaan. di n~am-ha tirkab bi{-{ariir;a l-fulaniyya it 
should be mounted in 
such-and-such a way. 
ma-tr;ul-liij raalJ lJitta - r;ul-Ii raalJ iI-lJitta l-fulaniyya 
don't just tell me he's gone somewhere; tell me where 
he went exactly. 
Z.:, J..J see.:, I J..J: fulaan l 
3 .:, J..J see .:, loS J J ..J : filliin, filliina, falliina 
.!l.:,J..J 
.d:li falank <T felenk> lcoll n! sleeper(s), tie(s) (in a 
railway track). 
~ 
falanka lunit n, pI -aatl a sleeper, a tie (in a rail-
way track). 
~~ falankaaya = falanka. 
.:, .:, J..J see J J .:, ..J : falinna J 
.J J ..J 
.P falw Inl colt. 
o.p filwa In! filly. 
loS. J ..J 
~')\; fallaaya In pI -aatl fine-tooth comb. 
j; falla 2 /vtll to remove lice, nits, fleas or bugs from 
the hair or clothes of (s.o.). ril-fumm i bi-tfalli lyal-ha 
the mother picks the lice and nits from her childrep's 
hair. 2 to do a thorough and careful job on. fana 
lawz-ak tifalli l-larabiyya kull-a-ha I want you to go 
over the whole car with a fine-tooth comb. -vn tafliyya; 
ayalpva mifalli. 
j.A;1 fitfalla Ivil 18 to be removed from the hair and 
clothes (of lice etc.). Ib to remove one's lice etc., or 
have them removed. fic-ceer bi-yitfalla w~-"ayyaad 

fiaalid yitfialla [prov} (the birds pick at their nits while 
spends straight ofr. -vn tifangiir; ava mirfangar. 
the hunter is on tenterhooks) while the unwary are at 
ease, he who wishes to exploit them tensely makes his 
plans. 2 to be gone over carefully and thoroughly, be 
gone over with a fine-tooth comb. -ava/iva mirfalli. 
- ...,.. I.S J"; see ..;...,.. J ..; : falyasuuf 
~ I.S J"; see J J ~ ..; : fa/aayin 
tl.SJ"; 
4 
fileeh <Fr> In pI -aarl filet (of meat). 
II.SJr"; 
l.l:,..U familya <It famiglia> In pI -aatl family. II !'i1-
familya polite form of reference to a wife. 
('('..; 
;. fumm In pI !,ifmaam, fimaaml la mouth, orifice. 
Ilfumm i1-milda the epigastrium. -fumm i1-xaliig a dis-
trict in Cairo, opposite Roda Island, at the entrance of 
the ancient Canal. - !'irkallim bil-fumm i1-malyaan he 
didn't mince his words. -yislam fumm-ak well said! 
-yislam fumm illi sammaa-k ... well said! well done! 
(indirect compliment to the person addressed). 
Ib mouth-piece (of, e.g., a water-pipe, see PI.I, 6). 
fumm' sgaara cigarette-holder. 2 (one) washing. 
!'i1-rasiil laayiz fummeen fiabl' ma t~tlal i1-bufial the 
laundry needs a couple of washings before the stains 
will come out. 
.)I~"; 
.J\;.i fanaar <T fenar from Or> In pI -aatllighthouse. 
• ~..; see I I.S ~ ..; : finaa!' 
~ I [. ~..; see J [. ~ ..; : fingaan 
.)[.~..; 
~ 
fangar I Ivtl to lavish money on. juufi gooz 
!'uxr-ik mifangar-ha !'izzaay just look how your sister's 
husband showers money on her! 2 Ivil to spend lavishly 
(on s.o.). !'awwil ma fiabarj iI-.fiirjeen raa!:J fangar 
biihum la/a !'1lI!:Jaab-u as soon as he had cashed the 
money he went and blew it all on (things for) his friends. 
-vnfangara; ava/pva mifangar. 
1oS~ fanjari In pI -yyal big spender. 
~I !'itfangar Ivil to spend money lavishly. be pro-
digal with money. 
!'ayy' !:Jaaga 
rUfiBG fi-riid-u 
b-yitfangar biiha everything that comes his way he 
u"[.~"; 
~ 
fanglll[deris} I Ivtl to lavish money on. 2 Ivil to 
live in high style. -vn fangllla; ava mifangllI. 
~I 
!'itfangllI/vil to spend money lavishly, be a big 
spender. -vn tifangi~; ava mitfanrllI. 
J[.~"; 
J~ fingaal (also fingaan) In pI fanagiil, fanagiinl 
cup. fingaal fiahwa (1) a coffee-cup. (2) a cup of coffee. 
~ 
fangill/vtl to make (the eyes) round as saucers. 
2/vil to become wide open (of the eyes). IIlenee 
mifangila he is wide awake. -vn fanga/a; ava/pva 
mifangil. 
~I !'itfangillvil to grow round as saucers (of eyes). 
- ava mitfangil. 
t~"; 
~ fanax (a) I/vtl to undo, break up. fanaxu 1-
xu{Uuba they broke the engagement. 2/vil to fail, col-
lapse. !'ig-gawaaza fanaxit the marriage has failed. -vn 
fam:, fanaxaan; ava faanix; pya mafnuux. 
~I !'itfanax Ivil 1 to fail, come to naught. 2 to be 
m~de to fail. be brought to naught. -ava/iva mirfinix. 
~ fannax Ivil to feel lazy, drowsy or listless (e.g., 
after a heavy meal). -vn tafniix; ava mifannax. see 
further under t loS ~ ..; 
I ,) ~..; 
loli,,; funda <It fonda> linterjl [naut} drop anchor! 
~I~~"; 
.:,I..\:.i fundaan <Fr> Inl fondant. 
j,;1..\:.i fundaana lunit n, pI -aarl a piece of fondant. 
~\.;..\:.i fundanaaya =,fundaana . 
J ~ ~..; 
~..\:.i fundufi In pI fanaadifil hotel. 
~..\:.i fandafi Ivtl to open completely (e.g., a door). 
miin mifandafi iI-baab kida who's left the door wide 
open like that? -vnfandafia; ava/pya mifandafi. 
~x..t;1 !,irfandafi Ivil to be opened completely. -iva 
mirfandafi . 
I.S,)~"; 
loSoli,,; fundi <perh It fondo> Inl 1 make-up base. 
foundation cream. 2 toe and heel reinforcements (of 
shoes). 

.) .:,"'; see .) 1 .:, ...; : fanaar 
1(..,..:,"';) 
...,....:i fans ladj invarl useless, pointless. ri!Jla fans a 
useless trip . 
...,..;.,; funs <prop n Alphonse> In! Alphonse man-
goes. IIlaamii funs "" full of himself, -also falfuns. 
2 ..,. .:,"'; see ..,..J':'''';: fanuus 
673 
I.;..:,...; 
~ 
fin if <Engl> Inl finish, finishing off (in carpentry, 
varnishing etc.). lamalt i finif lik-kursi I've put the 
finishing touches to the chair. fidda l-maktab warniif 
il-f!.nif he gave the desk the final coat of varnish. 
~ 
fannif Ivtl 1 to leave unfinished. fannift if-julfla 
leeh why did you drop the work in midstream? 2 to fire, 
give the sack to. -vn tafniif; ava/pva mifannif. 
~I fitfannif Ivil 1 to be left unfinished. 2 to be fired, 
be sacked. - iva mitfannif. 
2';,:,"'; 
.;..:.0.. mifannif: manaxiir mifannifa wide, flaring 
nostrils. 
1..1..:, ...; 
J..;j fun( <perh It punto> In! champ, scorer. !Jaawil 
yilmil fun(i quddaam il-banaat he tried to show off in 
front of the girls. 
2..1..:,...; 
k fanna( Ivtl to shuffle (cards). fanna( il-kutfiina w-
qa(al-ha he shuffled the cards and cut them. II fana 
fanna(t il-mugtamal I've been all through society, I've 
riffled through society. - vn tafnii(; ava/pva mifanna(. 
~I fitfanna( Ivil to be shuffled (of cards). IInaas 
mitfanna(iin [slang] select people, the creme de la 
creme. -iva mitfanna(. 
j 1 ..1. .:,"'; see ..,. 1 ..1. .:, ...; : fun(aaz 
..,.1..1..:,"'; 
..r\1;.j • fun(aas, fintaas (also fun(aaz) In pI fana(iis, 
fana(iizl large storage tank. fun(aas gaaz kerosene tank. 
jj,.:,"'; 
~~ fan(aziyya <It fantasia> 1 Inl extravaganza. 
lamma tirgal !Ja-nilmil fan(aziyya when you return 
we'll put on an extravaganza. lamalu fan(aziyya fid-
dukkaan they've done up the shop quite imaginatively. 
hidum-ha baqit fan(aziyya her clothes, now, are mere 
whimsy. qaq.l!.eena yoom faaxir fan(aziyya we've spent 
a most fantastic day! 2 ladj invarl fanciful, capricious. 
kalaam fantaziyya fanciful talk, talk not to be taken 
seriously. liifa fantaziyya life of pleasure, dolce vita. 
3 ladvl for free, gratis. fiddaa-ni k-kitaab fantaziyya he 
gave me the book with no charge. rikibna l-futubiis 
fantaziyya we got a free bus ride. 
~ 
fantaz 1 Ivtl to show a good time to. fana 
!J-afantaz-ak lamma fanga!J I'll take you out on the 
town when I pass my exams. 2/vil to enjoy oneself, 
have a good time. - vn fantaza; avalpva mifantaz. 
)..:.0;1 fitfantaz Ivil 1 to enjoy oneself, have a good 
time. 2 to give oneself airs. finta b-titfantaz lala feeh 
what makes you so cocky? 3 to be given a good time. 
-ava/iva mitfantaz. 
-.)t':''''; 
JI.)-y"; funulfraaf <Fr> In pI -aatl [obsol] phono-
graph, record-player. 
.!I .:,"'; see .!lIS':'''';: finiik 
J J.:,"'; 
ok fanilla (also falinnaJ) <prob T fanila from It> In 
pI -aat, fanaayil, falaayinl 1 vest, undershirt. 2 any 
short-sleeved casual shirt of lightweight (usually knit-
ted) material, T-shirt. - Ino pll 3 flannel. bantaloon 
fanilla flannel slacks. 
IISJ.:,"'; 
l,,1.;li fanilya or .vanilya (also banilyaJ) <It vaniglia> 
Inl vanilla. jilaati vanilya vanilla ice cream. 
.:,.:, ...; 
:; fann In pI funuunl 1 art. fann is-sinima the art of the 
cinema. ril-funuun ig-gamiila the fine arts. II fibn i fann 
a skilled, dexterous person. - fig-gunuunfunuun [prov] 
madness is of (all) kinds, it takes all sorts. 2 ril-fann the 
art of Egyptian popular song. lfaawi l-fann devotee of 
popular music and song. fahl il-fann singers and 
musicians . 
. 
~ fanni ladj *1 1 artistic. maghuud fanni artistic 
effort. rattibit il-ward i b-tariiqa fanniyya she arranged 
the flowers artistically. lamal fanni a work of art. 
2 expert. fUlfl i fanni expert workmanship. naas 
fanniyyiin fin-nukat expert jokers. 3 technical. talliim 
fanni technical training. m~tala!Jaat fanniyya technical 
terms. li-fasbaab fanniyya for technical reasons. qarba 

qatfya 
fanniyya 
technical 
knockout. 
- In 
·1 
4 ~certified) technician. 
,:,~ fannaan In ·1 artist. 
.;,.:i fannin Ivil to be ingenious, be inventive. bi-tfannin 
fil-fakl she is a creative cook. fannin fin-nayama he 
juggled cleverly with the tune. IIsafalt-u sufaal duYri 
wi-r;alad yifannin I asked him a straight Question but 
he went on beating about the bush. -vn tafniin; ava 
mifannin. 
~ 
tafniina Ipl-aat, tafaniinl instance noun of tafniin. 
II ~abu t-tafaniin a versatile man, a man of many talents. 
~I fitfannin = fannin. 
fin-naas iI-fayyaam di 
b-yitfanninu fil-hayaafa people these days are masters 
of triviality. -ava mitfannin. 
IJ" .J ~ ..; 
...... .;li fanuus <Gr phanos> In pI fawaniisl lantern. 
fawaniis ramaqaan lanterns carried by children (origi-
nally by children begging a traditional tip) during 
Ramadan. IIfanuus larabiyya car headlight. -fanuus 
sil;ri epidiascope, magic lantern. 
I ~~..; 
~ fini (a) Ivil to come to nothing, perish. yaama gii/ 
fini baed' gii/ how many generations have come and 
gone! I;abaayib ktiir finyu tal;t' riglee-ha many lovers 
were destroyed by her. -vnfana; avafaani. 
~ fana (i) Ivt/l to cause to perish, cause to come to 
nothing. fiz-zinuub hiyya ladiww-i-na I-faani sins are 
our mortal enemy, sins are our undoing. 2 to spend to 
no avail, waste. faneet lumr-i f-xidmit-hum gum 
iI-faaxir daasu lalayya I wasted my whole life in their 
~rvice, and in the end they treated me like dirt. yaama 
faneet warar; fi-ktaabit gawabaat how much paper I've 
wasted writing letters. -vn fan~yaan; ava faani; pva 
mafni. 
Jli faani ladj ·1 I transient, ephemeral. fid-dinya 
fanya the world is ephemeral. kull-u faani {provJ no-
thing will last forever. 2 mortal. 
.loa finaa fr In pI -aat, fafniyal courtyard. finaa f iI-
madrasa school yard, school playground. 
~I fitfana Ivil passive of fana. - iva mitfini. 
z~~..; 
4.i'; funya <T funya from Gr> In pI -aat, funay, funy, 
fawaanil nozzle (e.g., of a primus stove). 
t~~"; see also t~..; 
~ 
fanyax Ivtll to prevent the fulfilment of. fanyax 
674 
iI-fusl;a he called off the outing. - Ivil 2 to fail to be 
fulfilled, come to nothing. fil-luzuuma fanyaxit the 
party never took place. riI-ittifaar; fanyax the agree-
ment came to nothing. 3 to lie about, laze about. -vn 
fanyaxa; avalpva mifanyax. 
~I fitfanyax Ivi/l passive offanyax 1. 2 to feellazy, 
feel drowsy (e.g., after a heavy meal). -vn tifanyiix; 
ivalava mitfanyax. 
J~~"; 
.JW funyaar In pI -aat, fanayiirl flaming torch, lamp 
with a naked flame. 
.r.J fanyar Ivil to shine brightly (of a lamp, and the 
like). -vnfanyara; ava mifanyar. 
.!l~~"; 
~ 
finiik <Fr phenique> Inl carbolic acid . 
. 
..; 
... fih Ifem n, pI -aatl twentieth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also faa, faa f, feeh. 
~ . 
..; 
..Ifi fahd In pI fuhuud, fuhUda/leopard. 
IJ" J • ..; 
...... ~ fihris, fahras I In pI fahaarisl index, catalogue. 
fihris mul;tawayaat ik-kitaab index of the contents of 
the book. fihris kuruut a card catalogue. 
...... ~ fahras 2 Ivtl to make a list of, index, catalogue. 
bi-yfahrasu I-mawaqiil ilti I;a-titzaal they list the topics 
that will be broadcast. -vn fahrasa; avalpva mifahras; 
pva mufahras. 
...... #1 fitfahras Ivil to be indexed, be catalogued, be 
listed in order. -iva mitfahras. 
J."; 
, 
~ 
fahar; (a) Ivil to gasp, catch one's breath (in sur-
prise or awe).lIfahar;itfi-wiff-u she has cast an evil spell 
on him (by gasping with envy in his presence). -vnfahr;, 
fahar;aan; ava faahir;. 
~ 
fahr;a In pI -aatl I linst nl a gasp. 2 facial skin 
blemish (believed to be caused by the gasp of a person 
with the evil eye). 
~I fitfahar; Ivil (impersonal) passive of fahar;. 
fitfahar; fi-wiff(-a-ha) (she is) under a spell (caused by 
the gasp of a person with the evil eye). -iva mitfihir;. 
.J J • ..; 
~H fahlawi <Ppahlawi> ladj • andpl-yya/clever, 

shrewd. !'il-walad da fahlawi that boy is a smart 
operator. 
;~ fahlawa Inl cleverness. xalll¥ if-jur/i b-fahlawa 
he accomplished the work with nimble thinking. nigilj 
bil-fahlawa he pulled it off with his wits. 
r 0"; 
r+i fihim (a) Ivtl la to understand. comprehend. 
ma-fhimti-j id-dars I didn't understand the lesson. 
rinta miffaahim ljilmit kalaam-i you don't realize what 
I'm saying. bi-nifham balt:{ we understand each other. 
fihimt il-maljlab I caught on to the trick. Ib to see the 
reason for. rana mif fahma ljillit radab-ak di I don't 
understand your rudeness. 2 to have a grasp of. 
ma-b-yifham-j ingiliizi he doesn't understand English. 
3 to assume (to be plausible). kunti faahim rinnu 
msaafir I understood that he was out of town. - Ivil 
4 to have knowledge, be knowledgeable. bi-tifham fil-
muljasba do you know anything about accounting? 
hiyya b-tifham fil- r~uul she knows how to follow the 
code of social conduct. -vn fahm; ava faahim; pva 
mafhuum. 
i.J4A.. mafhuum r In pi mafahiiml notion, concept. 
ril-masal da rala{ bil-mafhuum ig-gidiid that proverb is 
wrong according to the new way of thinking. 
~.J4A.. mafhumiyya Inl I understanding, judgement. 
mafhumiyyit-i lil-mawt:{uul rinnu mif Ija-yingalj as 
I understand the matter, it will not succeed. lIyikuun 
fi-mafhumiyyit-ak rinn be informed that, as in yikuun 
fi-mafhumiyyit-ak rinni mif Ij-aagi I-ll¥r for your in-
formation, I shan't be coming in the afternoon. 
2 understanding, sympathy. rinta rabu I-mafhumiyya 
or 
rinta 
kull-ak 
mafhumiyya 
you 
are 
very 
understanding. 
~t;i fahhaama r ladj invarl discerning, intelligent, 
sharp. 
~ 
fahhiim ladj pi fahhiimal discerning, intelligent, 
sharp. 
r+"'1 ritfaham Ivil passive of fihim. -iva mitfihim. 
r+"'1 rinfaham = ritfaham. -iva minfihim. 
rfi fahhim Ivtl to make understand, explain to. 
fahhim-na yalni reeh tell us what it means. xallii-ni 
rafahhim saami lafaan ma-yiZlal-j let me explain to 
Sami so that he doesn't get upset. -vn iafhiim; ava 
mifahhim. 
~I ritfahhim Ivtl I to have (s.th.) explained. 
ritfahhimna I-mawt:{uul kull-u we had the whole thing 
explained to us. 2 to arrive at an understanding of. 
xallii-ni ratfahhim il-mawljif ig-gidiid li-waljd-i let me 
675 
figure out the new situation by myself. -vn tafahhum; 
ava mitfahhim. 
,...l.i;1 ritfaahim Ivill to seek a mutual understanding. 
ljaladti yoom bi-Ijaal-u ratfaahim malaa min reer 
fayda I spent a whole day trying to come to a mutual 
understanding with him, but it was no use. sib-hum 
yitfahmu mala balt:{ leave them to work it out between 
themselves. 2 to arrive at a mutual understanding. 
ritneen 
yifarku 
balt:{i f-jaljlja 
laazim 
yikuunu 
mitfahmiin two people who share a flat must be in 
mutual agreement. - vn tafaahum; ava mitfaahim. 
,...l.i; tafaahum Inl understanding, agreement. suur 
tafaahum misunderstanding. 
~I ristafhim Ivil to inquire, make inquiries. yalla 
nistafhim minhum lan il-ljat:{iyya let us ask them about 
the case. Illalaamit istifhaam question mark. -vn 
ristifhaam; ava mistafhim. 
J \.,..; 
JI.,i fuwaal, vuwaal (also buwaa{J) <Fr> In! cotton 
voile. 
I.:;...J"; 
.:..\1 faat (u) Ivtll to leave behind. fuutuf-juna{ landi 
leave the bags at ~y place. ma-han-/ lalayya ramji 
w-rafut-kum I didn't h3ve the heart to go away and 
leave you. fatuu naas-u his family abandoned him. 2 to 
pass by, slip by. rid-door faat-ak you missed your turn. 
ma-yfut-ak-ji wala hamsa not a whisper escapes you. 
fat-ni 1-rutubiis I missed the bus. IIfat-ha I-lja{r she's 
missed the boat, she's on the shelf. -Ij-afut-Iak di 1-
beela you can have it at your price this time. - rilli 
faat-akfuut-u {prov] "" don't waste time with those who 
neglect you. -faat-ak n~~ i lumr-ak you missed some-
thing wonderful as in faat-ak n~~ i lumr-ak illi 
ma-kunti-j malaana rimbaarilj bil-Ieet you really mis-
sed something by not being with us last night! - Ivi/3 to 
elapse, go by. faat kaam yoom a few days went by. 
ris-sana lIi faatit last year. II rilli faat maat {prov] "" what 
is done is done, let bygones be bygones. -xalli yoom-ak 
yifuut lala xeer "" layoff (or else)! -yoom (or leela etc.) 
mif faayit a day (or night) of unending trouble. 
-nahaar-ak miffaayityou won't see another day! I'll get 
you for that! 4a to pass, pass by. bi-tfuut min hina kulli 
yoom she passes through here daily. !'il-mayya bi-tfuut 
min taljt il-baab the water flows under the door.llfuut 
lalee bil-makwa give it a going-over with the iron. 4b to 
slip by, slip past. law ik-koora faatit minnu tiblja goon if 
the ball gets past him it's a goal. rin-nuktafaatit lalee he 
didn't get the joke. 5 to pay a call, drop in. fuut bukra 

drop in tomorrow. futt" [ala raxuu-ya I paid a call on 
my brother. ma-tfuut [aleena come and see us! IIfuut (or 
fuutu) biina [ala ... let's be ofCto .... 6 to become clear, 
become unblocked. ril-masuura faatit the pipe became 
unblocked. -vn foot, fawaat, fawataan; ava faayit. 
~ faat fi- to pass through, go through.llyifuut fil-fJadiid 
"" he is invincible. 
j,;) foota linst n, pi -aatl I (short) visit. futna 
[aleehum foota q~ayyara we dropped in on them for a 
short visit. 2 bout, fit (of illness). rikminnaha fJaamil 
bi-tfuut [aleeha fotaat kull' saa[a wit-tanya since she's 
pregnant she has frequent (fainting) spells . 
.:;.. ~ fawwit Ivtl I to allow to elapse. ya rabb' fawwit 
il-rayyaam di [ala xeer 0 Lord, let these days pass 
without harm! 2 to allow to go past, let through. 
ril-buli~ ma-fawwit-naa-f min if-faari[ the police 
wouldn't 
let 
us 
through 
the 
street. 
ril-baab 
ma-bi-yfawwit-fil-[arabiyya the doorway is too narrow 
for the car. fawwit-Iu I-ral{a overlook his mistake. 
II ril-baab yifawwit gamal (the door can let a camel 
through) "" go then! no one's stopping you! - risma[ 
min hina w-fawwit min hina let it in one ear and out the 
other. -fawwit(-ha) never mind! forget it! - dool 
fawwituu-ha [aleek they seem to have put one over on 
you. 3 to pass, cause to go along or through. xad 
ik-koora w-fawwit-ha tafwiita fJilwa he took the ball and 
made a beautiful pass. fawwit iI-xee[ fil-xaraz string the 
beads I 4 to sanction, permit. madaam [arabiyyaat 
if1irka [a{laana fawwituu-li rugrit it-taks since the com-
pany car is out of order allow me the taxi fare. Sa to 
cause to pass by, take past. fawwit-ni min is-suuq he 
took me past the market. Sb to cause to visit, take for a 
visit. fawwitt-a-ha [ala rumm-i I took her to visit my 
mother. -
Ivil 6 to slip. rit-tiruus bi-tfawwit the gears 
slip. II muxx-i fawwit I've slipped a cog, I can't keep my 
mind on things. -fawwit fi-laqdiir he miscalculated. 7 to 
be leaky. ris-sifoon bi-yfawwit the cistern leaks. 8 to 
break wind silently. -vn lafwiit; ava mifawwit. 
~.,A; tafwiita Ipl -aatl instance noun of tafwiit . 
.:;.. ~I ritfawwit Ivil passive of fawwil. - iva mitfawwit. 
':;"JlA;1 ritfaawit Ivil to vary. mustawayaat mitfawta 
varying standards. -vn tafaawut; ava mitfaawit, 
mutafaay, it. 
1..:.."...; 
.:;..) fuut <Engl foot>: gazma fuut soccer boots. 
C"...; 
C) foog In pi rafwaagl group, party, band. 
676 
C" ...; 
eli faafJ (u) Ivil to spread, diffuse itself (of an odour). 
II rifJt-u faafJit "" his reputation has begun to stink. 
- takl-u yruufJ tifarraq-u yfuufJ [prov] "" food eaten is 
gone, food distributed to the poor is not forgotten. -vn 
foofJ, fawafJaan; avafaayifJ· 
e~ fawwafJ I Ivtl to cause to diffuse, spread (a smell). 
2 Ivil = faafJ. -vn tafwiifJ; avalpva mifawwafJ. 
.) t" ...; 
.;» 
fooxar Ivil to become hollow, disintegrate from 
within. ril-fJee{a mfoxra the wall is full of cavities. 
lI[aql-u mfooxar he has holes in his head, he's loony. 
-ava mifooxar. 
1.)"...; 
.;I.i faar2 (u) Ivil to boil to overflowing. rib[id ii-laban 
[an in-naar qabl' ma yfuur take the milk from the fire 
before it boils over. II damm-u faar his blood boiled, he 
became furious. -vn fawaraan; ava faayir. 
J.. li faayir ladjl I (too) large. maqaas faayirlarge-size. 
rij-jakitta fayra [alee the jacket is too big for him. 
2 vivacious and (too) accessible (of a girl). 3 ripe (of 
fruit). 
)) foor1: [ala I-foor immediately, straight away. 
~ fawran ladvl immediately, straight away. 
i..S)) fawri ladjl instantaneous. IItargama fawriyya 
simultaneous translation. 
i..S)) foori 
ladvl 
immediately, 
straight 
away. 
ril-mufJaami b-yiqbaq iI-muqaddam foori the lawyer 
cashes the advance payment immediately.· daf[' 
b-taqsii{ raw foori payment in instalments or all at once. 
)~ fawwaar ladj invarl effervescent, fizzy. 
)~ fawwar l Ivtl to cause to boil up. ma-tfawwar-f 
iI-qahwa lafJsan yiruufJ iI-wiff don't let the coffee boil up 
or it'll lose its 'head'! IIfawwar damm-i he made my 
blood boil, he made me furious. -vn tafwiir; ava/pva 
mifawwar. 
)~I ritfawwar l Ivil to be boiled up. -iva mitfawwar. 
1.)"...; 
0)) fooro <Itfuori> Inl score set before the start of a 
game, the first player to reach it being the winner. 
)li faar 3 (u) Ivil to be completed (of a game, the play-
ers having reached the set score). -vn fawaraan; ava 
faayir. 
)~ fawwar2 Ivill to reach the set score (in a game) . 
- Ivtl 2 to reject, dispense with, drop. fawwarna 
xamsiin fil-miyya min iI-muwa;;afiin we dismissed fifty 
percent of the employees, fawwaru I-mafruu[ they 

dropped the project. laazim tifawwar il-beet you must 
see further under dt'..s..i 
get the house off your hands. 3 to dismantle, take 
apart. fawwar i(-(Urumba he dismantled the pump. 
markib mifawwara an un rigged ship. - vn tafwiir; ava/ 
pva mifawwar. 
.J~I ritfawwar2 Ivil passive of fawwar2. 
-iva 
mitfawwar. 
j., ..i 
..ili faaz (u) Ivil to win. faazu bil-matf they won the 
match. fuzt· talee I beat him. faaz bi-farafto win hon-
ourably. -vn fawazaan. fooz; ava faayiz. 
j; fooz Inl victory. 
j!.li faayiz In *1 winner, victor. 
Idt'.,..i 
~; fawtf.a In! chaos . 
..s~; fawtf.awi I/adj * and pl-yyal chaotic, anar-
chical. 2 In * and pI -yyal anarchist. 
';:~.,All ril-fawtf.awiyya In! anarchism. 
~; 
fawtf.agi ladj pI -yya/l anarchical, disorderly. 
2 heedless, irresponsible. 
ldt'.,..i 
v#~ fawwatf.l. fawwitf. Ivtl I to entrust, commit. 
fawwitf.t i ramr-i liik ya rabb Lord, I have entrusted my 
fate to You! 2 to empower, commission. 'lana 
mfawwatf.-ak fil-mawtf.uut I've given you full powers to 
act in the matter. -vn tafwiitf.; ava/pva mifawwatf.. 
v#~ mufawwatf. ladj *1 empowered, authorized. 
waziir mufawwatf. minister plenipotentiary. 
~~ mifawwatf.iyya. mufawwatf.iyya In pI -aatl (di-
plomatic) legation. 
v#~1 ritfawwatf.1 Ivill to be entrusted, be commit-
ted. 2 to be empowered, be commissioned. - iva 
mitfawwatf.. 
V#Jli faawitf. Ivtl to negotiate with. !Ja-nfawitf.-hum 
tala !Jt;ut;-na are we going to negotiate with them about 
our rights? -vn mifawtf.a. mufawtf.a; ava mifaawitf.. 
4.;,J lA.. mufawtf.a In pI -aatl negotiation. 
V#JU;I ritfaawitf. Ivil I to negotiate (with one 
another). 2 to be negotiated with. -vn tafaawutf.; ava/ 
iva mitfaawitf.. 
3 dt'., ..i 
v#~ fawwatf.2 Ivtl to leave (as a remnant). lahafu 
1-rakl i w-ma-fawwatf.u-lii-f !Jaaga they wolfed down the 
food and left me nothing. -vn tafwiitf.; ava/pva 
mifawwatf.. 
V#~I ritfawwatf.2 Ivil to be leftover. -ivamitfawwatf.. 
J..,..i 
41:.; fu",(a In pI fiwa(, fuwa(ll. towel. fuu[it wiffhand 
towel. Ib napkin. 2 dusting cloth. 3 saddle cloth . 
4 covering or veil for a woman's head. 5 sanitary towel. 
4I:.1~ fawwaa(a In pI -aatl towel rail, towel rack. 
j" ~ fawwa( Ivtl I to cover with a fuuta. sawwaat; 
it-taks i fawwat il-taddaad tafaan ma-!Jaddi-f yit;ul-Iu 
rut;af the taxi-driver wrapped the meter with a duster 
so that no-one would tell him to stop. 2 to dry with a 
towel. fawwa[it ras-ha she dried her hair with a towel. 
- Ivil 3 to put on a sanitary towel. -vn tafwii(; ava/pva 
mifawwat· 
j" ~I ritfawwa( Ivil to be covered or cover oneself with 
a fuu(a. - ava/iva mitfawwa(. 
J.,..i 
~li faat; (u) I Ivtl to surpass. faat; i/-kull he surpassed 
everyone. !Jubb i yfuut; ·il-wtllf a love beyond descrip-
tion.2 Ivil to return to one's normal state of conscious-
ness. lissa talayya n-noom - ristanna lamma rafUUt; I'm 
still sleepy, wait till I'm properly awake. faat; min ta rsiir 
il-minawwim he recovered from the effect of the sleep-
ing pills. fut;t i w-tirif;i ramfi I sobered up and found 
I could walk. faayit; wi-raayit; in the best of (mental or 
physical) health. IIfaat; Ii-nafs-(u) to regain (one's) 
senses, start behaving in a reasonable manner again. 
-da-ntafaayit; ... so you're in the mood (well, I'm not). 
-vn fawat;aan; ava faayit;. 
~; foot; I (also foot; min) Iprep, w pron suff also 
fot;ii- (1st sing foot;i or fot;iyya)1 I. on top of. foot; 
is-su(Uu!J on the roof. bi-yitlibis foot; ir-raas it is worn on 
the head. wit;it min foot; i/-madna he fell from the top 
of the minaret. lamma I-t;uu(a tissabbik xaa/~ flS-samna 
w-tibt;a foot; minnaha when the tomatoes are well 
cooked in the clarified butter and it has risen to the top. 
IIfoot; ir-rii!J windward. Ib over and above, in excess of. 
!J-a!Ju{{-i-lak di foot; il-beeta I'll throw this in for you 
free of charge. tadad-humfoot; il-miyya there are more 
than a hundred of them. Ie above and beyond. di~atba 
foot; rimkaniyyit if-fubbaan this is too difficult for the 
young. foot; il-taada extraordinary. 2/advl above. 
ma-fii-f!Jaddi foot; there's no one above, there's no one 
upstairs. bi-yittayyinu min foot; they are appointed 
from above. bi-yaaxud karti min foot; w-karti min ta!Jt 
he takes a card from the top and a card from the 
bottom. btll~it-Ii min foot; li-ta!Jt she looked me up and 
down. IIbat;a foot; he improved his lot. - rilli yb~~i 

fOOlj yitlab [prov] (who looks up will tire) "" envying 
those who are richer than yourself will bring you grief. 
• foolj ma Iconjl above what, beyond what. b-al:Jibb-ik 
foolj ma til1awwari I love you more than you imagine. 
ri/-faay mUTT' foolj ma d-dinya mUTTa the tea is more 
bitter than life! -foolj lan Iprepl more than. lumr-u 
foolj lan miit sana it is more than a hundred years old. 
Jli; fOljaani ladj ·1 upper, uppermost. ril-fakk il-
fOljaani the upper jaw. ril-foljaani tal:Jtaani upside-
down, topsy-turvy. 
~; fawwalj Ivtl to restore to (one's normal state of) 
consciousness. riddii-Iu ljalam yifawwalj-u give him a 
slap to bring him to. -vn tafwiilj; ava mifawwalj. 
~~I ritfawwalj Ivil 1 to be brought to normal con-
sciousness.2 (also tafawwaq) to excel. ril-lju(n il-mfliri 
b-yitfawwalj fit-tiila Egyptian cotton has the best staple. 
nagal:J bi-tafawwulj he passed with high marks. -vn 
tafawwulj; avaliva mitfawwalj. mutafawwiq. 
I J.J"'; see also J ~...; 
J; fawwill Ivil to mention possible misfortune, thus 
tempting Providence. ma-tfawwil-f' lalee don't jinx 
him by going on about it! -vn tafwiil; ava mifawwil. 
J~I ritfawwil/vil (impersonal) passive of fawwil l . 
dool wahmagiyya I-daragit rinnuhum yixaafu min rayy' 
l:Jaaga yitfawwil laleeha they are so superstitious that 
they fear anything one can possibly associate with an 
omen. -iva mitfawwil. 
lJ.J"'; 
J; fuullcoll nl bean(s) (especially broad beans, one 
of the staples of the Egyptian diet). fuul midammis 
dried broad beans cooked in a stoppered container over 
a slow fire or in hot ashes. fuul naabit (1) dried broad 
beans soaked till they sprout. (2) a dish made of the 
same, variously seasoned.llfuul sudaani peanuts. -fuul 
ruumi a variety of large broad bean. 
~; fuula 'unit n, pi -aatl a bean, a broad bean.llkull' 
fuula w-/aha kayyaal [prov] (every bean has its 
weigher) "" every Jack has his Jill. -ma-titball'-f 
fi-buljlj-u fuula [prov] he can't keep his mouth shut 
about anything, he has a big mouth. -Ialja{t il-fuula 
I saw through the trick. -laawiz yilraf il-fuula w-miin 
zaral-ha he wants to know every little detail. -fuula 
wi-tljasamit nU§~een as like as two peas in a pod. 
..... 'i; fUlaaya = fuula. 
~; fuliyya Inll di~h of peeled sprouted broad beans 
cooked with tomatoes. 2 confection made with 
peanuts. 
678 
JI; fawwaal In 
pi fawwaalal grain-seller, 
corn-
chandler. 
~ I; fawwaala In pi -aatl urn-shaped pot used for slow-
cooking beans. 
3J.J"'; 
JJ\i faawil <Engl> In pi -aatl foul, instance of foul 
play (in team games). qarab fawlaat kitiir he committed 
a lot of fouls. 
J; fawwil 2 Ivil to play dirty (in team sports). -vn 
tafwiil; ava mifawwil. 
4 J.J"'; see J I .J ...; : fuwaal 
loS"'; 
J fi- Iw pron suff fii- (1st sing fiyya)1 preposition in-
dicating 1 location or position, both tangible and in-
tangible. fil-beet in the house, at h~me. flS-sUUlj on the 
market. ljabilt-u flS-sikka I met him on the way. fir-
radyu on the radio. mitrakkib flS-saljfmounted on the 
ceiling. fil-miraaya in the mirror. fit-tilifoon on the tele-
phone. rid-dalwa fil-mal:Jkama the case is in the court. 
fii f-raas-u l:Jagaat (1) he is planning something, he has 
designs. (2) he has something on his mind. Il/aabis 
raxqar f-axqar dressed all in green. 2 direction toward 
or to a position of contact with. ramit nafs-a-hafil-bal:Jr 
she threw herself into the sea. ma-tbu§~ '-ffif-fams don't 
look into the sun. wi/f' f-wi/fface to face. manaxiir-u 
flS-sama he has his nose in the air, he is conceit .. d. 
ril-maqrab xabat fit-tarabeeza the bat knocked against 
the table. 3 circumstance or condition. fil-bard in the 
cold. fin-natara in the rain. fi-faljr in poverty. fi-ryaab-
ak in your absence. fi-liu. in-noom in the depths of 
sleep. ljult' f-sirr-i I said to myself. 4 position or point 
in time. ril:Jna rasfiin rinn' ginaa-Iak fis-salaa-di we're 
sorry to have come at ~uch an hour. fi-yoom il-gumla 
on Friday. fi-mawaliid mul:Jaddada at specified times. 
ma-ljult'-lii-f fil-rawwilleeh why didn't you tell me in 
the first place? ril:Jna f-fahr' sitta this is the month of 
June. 5 qualification or specification. rarbiliin santi 
fit-tuul forty centimetres in length. 6 object of atten-
tion, endeavour or design. bi-yitkallimfif-furl he's talk-
ing about work.l:J-almil reehfir-raagil da what am I to 
do with this man? huwwa iii lamal-hafiina he's the one 
who did it to us. ljaddim fiyya lariiqa he presented a 
petition against me. raw~aaf ma-hiyyaa-f fii inapposite 
descriptions of him. rana fi-lii bald' kida I'm worried 
about what's coming. xud-Iak fiiha bariiza take ten 
piastres for it. raf!' fil-mizaan he rigged the scales. fiiha 

reeh law xaragti l-wafJd-i what's wrong with my going 
out on my own? 7 cause or reason.eiyi fiiha he became 
ill because of it. ritxanqu fi-bint they quarrelled over a 
girl. xadti fiiha talatt iyyaam giza I was docked three 
days' pay because of it. 8 multiplication. talaata f-
talaata three times three. 9. ratio. dasatiir xamsiin fi-
xamsiin building stones, fifty by fifty. eafara fil-miyya 
ten percent. 9b rate. root[a bi-tneen gineeh fif-fahr a 
room for two pounds a month. 10 partitive rela-
tionship. waafJid fiina one of us. fJadd i fiikum muetarit[ 
does anyone of you object? miin fiihum rafJ~an xayyaat 
which of them is the best tailor? II rinta iii fiihum you're 
the best among them. 11 sequential relationship. yoom 
fi-yoom day after day. sigaara f-sigaara cigarette after 
cigarette. 12 Iwith transitive verbs! intensification or 
prolongation of action. bi-yfJayyuf-baet[ they greet one 
another warmly. bi-ynat[t[af flS-silaafJ he's cleaning 
away at the weapons. t[arab fiyya he gave me a beating. 
zaakir fi-duruus-ak rafJsan-lak you'd do better to work 
at your lessons . 
.... fii, fiih Ipartl there is, there are. fii earabiyya barra 
there is a car outside. ma-fii-f fJadd i hina there is no one 
here. fii sittaat bi-yiftalfalu fil-fJukuuma there are 
women working in the government. fii naas ~anayeiyya 
b-tilbis eafriita there are some workmen who wear 
overalls.llfii reeh what's up? what's the matter? - (lissa) 
ma-fii-fthere has not (yet) elapsed, as in mifi min hina 
ma-fii-f saaea he left here less than an hour ago, lissa 
ma-fii-f gumea less than a week ago. 
J"::"";"'; see also J..::.."'; 
~ 
feetat; Ivil to develop a hernia. - ava mifeetaq. 
~..; ...; 
~li faad (i) Ivtll to benefit. da mumkin yifiid il-balad 
kitiir that could help the country a lot. 2 to apprise. 
fad-ni ean istilaam gawaab-i he acknowledged receipt 
of my letter. 3 to reply to (s.o.) in response to a request 
for information. ma-fidti-nii-f bil-matluub you didn't 
give me the information I asked for. -vnfayadaan; ava 
faayid. 
.~li •• ~li fayda In pi fawaayidll benefit, advantage. 
reeh faydit il-lfamm what's the use of worrying? di 
balzaqafi-lli ma-luu-ffayda this is squandering money 
for nothing. II ma-fii-ffayda it's no use, there's no point, 
as in rana garrabt i kull" fJaaga bassi ma-fii-f fayda 
I have tried everything, but nothing works. 2 interest 
(on an investment). sier il-fayda the rate of interest. 
~i rafyad lell morelmost beneficial, morelmost 
advantageous. 
679 
.,lii rafaadr = faad. -vn rifaada; ava mufiid. 
• .,li! rifaada In pi -aatl 1 response to a request for in-
formation. 2 notification. 
~ 
mufiid ladjl I useful,' beneficial. rakli mufiid 
nourishing food. II ril-muxt~ar il-mufiid in short. 
2 [gram} complete (of a sentence) . 
.,lA;...1 ristafaad (yistafiid. yistafaadJ) Ivil to derive be-
nefit. rid-dars illi teallimnaa t[aruuri nistafaad minnu 
we'll surely benefit by the lesson we've learned. -vn 
ristifaada; ava mistifiid, mustafiid. 
~ 
mustafiid In *1 beneficiary. 
~..; ...; 
.r-i feer <Fr fer> In pi -aatl curling or crimping iron. 
j..; ...; 
• .;,.i fiiza. viisa <prob Fr> In pi -aat, fiyazl visa. 
.l.IU"";"'; 
~l.i fiyaska <Itfiasca> In pi -aatl flask. 
J...;"'; 
~ 
fiif <Fr fiche> Icoll n! I. counter(s), token(s), 
chip(s) (in games). Ib metal tokens stamped by the 
bank with the number of a promissory note and re-
tained by the drawer. 2 index cards. - In! 3 fiif wi-
tafbiih official police document bearing finger-prints 
and a photograph which a citizen must present when 
applying for the Civil Service or the Armed Forces. 
~ 
fiifa I In pi -aatl electric plug. 2 lunit n pi -aat, 
fiyafl 2a a counter, a token, a chip (in games). 2b a 
metal token given to the drawer of a promissory note. 
2c an index card. 3 Ino pll = fiif w-tafbiih. 
.;.;; fayyif Ivtl to make a record of (promissory notes, 
of a bank). -vn tafyiif; ava mifayyif. 
~I ritfayyif Ivil passive of fayyif. kimbiyaala 
mitfayyifa recorded promissory note. -iva mitfayyif. 
~..;...; see also 3~.J"'; 
..;>li faat[ (i) Ivil 1 to be left over, remain. faat[ 
maeaaya xamsa saalf I was left with five piastres. rilli 
yfiit[ mid-diriis yiwakkiluu lil-bahaayim the dried clover 
that's left they feed to the animals. 2 to flood, overflow. 
ril-bafJri faat[ the river flooded. eenay-ya faat[it bid-
dumuue my eyes flooded with tears.llfaat[ biiha I-buka 
she could not restrain her tears. -faat[ biihum they had 
enough, they oecame fed up. -ealafeet[ il-kariim (living 

on the bounty of God) penniless. -vn feeq, fayaqaan: 
avafaayiq. 
.:,~ fayaqaan In pI -aatl flood. 
~~...; 
~\.j faayi; 
In! 
I excess, 
overflow, 
surplus. 
rif-Jakmaan bi-y{alla[ iI-faayi; min iI-[arabiyya the ex-
haust-pipe lets the excess gases out of the car. 
2 overflow outlet. faayi; iI-banyu the bath-tub overflow 
outlet. 3a usurious rate of interest. xad [alee faayi; he 
charged an excessive rate of interest on it. bi-ysallif 
bil-faayi; he makes loans at usurious rates. 3b ril-faayi; 
usury. !urlit-u I-faayi; his profession is usury. 
~\.j fayi;gi In pI -yyal usurer. 
Ja;; fayya; I Ivtl to relieve or carry off an overflow. 
ril-xurm' bi-yfayya; iI-mayya lamma tziid the hole lets 
out the water when it rises. 2 Ivil to act as an outlet for 
an overflow. ril-balf' bi-yfayya; li-wa!Jd-u the (relief) 
valve works automatically. 3 to practise usury. -vn 
tafyii;; ava/pva mifayya;. 
t~"'; 
t \.j faa[ (i) Ivill·to spread, diffuse (of an odour). 2 to 
bestir oneself to (vigorous) action. fi[t' fiihum qarb' 
bil-[~aaya I fell upon them with the stick. -vn feel, 
faya[aan; ava faayi[. 
~ fee[a linst n, pI -aatl a spurt of activity. 
i! fayya[ Ivtl I to diffuse (an odour). 2 to arouse to 
(vigorous) action. kal {Ur!i fayya[-u fil-rakl' xall~ 
[alee the pickles he ate made him attack the food with 
gusto so that he polished it off. -vn tafyii[; ava/pva 
mifayya[. 
~I ritfayya[ Ivil to be aroused to (vigorous) action. 
- iva mitfayya[. 
I J~"'; 
j.i fiil In pI fiyala, rafyaal, fiyaal, fiyuul, fuyuuI, 
fiyula, fiyi/al I elephant. II ban{aloon rigl iI-fiil bell-
bottomed trousers. -sinn iI-fiil ivory. - daa r iI-flii {path! 
elephantiasis. 2 bishop (in chess). 
41..; fii/a / In pI -aatl female elephant. 
~ fayyillvil {deris! to grow to elephantine propor-
tions, become big and fat. -vn tafyiil; ava mifayyil. 
1 J ~...; 
;J"i fiila 2 <Gr phullo> Inl paper-thin sheets of dough 
used in flaky pastry, mille-feuille. 
- ..,.. J ~...; see ...;..,.. J ...; : faylasuuf 
680 
! J J ~...; 
')y fiyilla <trade name Viyella> In! twill-weave flan-
nel made of a mixture of cotton and wool. 
,:, ~...; 
.:r-i feen I linterrog advl where? at what place? 
sagayr-i feen where are my cigarettes? huwwa saakin 
feen where does he live? rinta ru!Jt' feen where did you 
go? II di kaanit feen w-ana feen or wi-da kan-li feen "" 
how in the world did this happen to me? - rinta feen-ak 
where've you been keeping yourself? -feen wi-feen 
lamma it seemed like an eternity, it took a long time, as 
infeen wi-feen lamma ga taks' w-wiC;ifit seemed like an 
eternity before a taxi came and stopped! feen wi-feen 
lamma yxall~ it takes him ages to finish! feen wi-feen 
lamma tlaac;i I-mubilyaat di this furniture is hard to find, 
you'll spend ages looking for it! -feen ... exclamation 
expressing nostalgia or nostalgic regret"" ah, alas, how 
long ago ... , as in feen rayyaam-ak lamma kunna 
b-niftaral sawa alas, how long it's been since we worked 
together! feen min yoom ma kunna sawa f-bariis ah, 
how long ago it was that we were in Paris together! 
- (bass ') feen ... but alas, as in kunt' [awza rasaafir 
bariis bass' feen I wanted to travel to Paris, but alas .... 
2/rel pron! wherever. feen (arabeezit iI-rakl' tlac;ii 
gambaha wherever the dining table is, you'll find him 
beside it. II law kunt' feen wherever you may be, as in 
!J-agiib-ak taani law kunt' feen I'll bring you back no 
matter where you may be. 
.!l,:, ~...; 
;0:;".. fiyunka <T fiyonga from It> In pI -aatl bow. 
[amalit laha t/firteen bi-fyunka she put her hair in two 
plaits tied with a bow. 
.J':'~"'; 
H fiinu <It fino> '/adj invarl fine, fine-textured. 
xarasaana fiinu fine-textured concrete. II[ee! fiinu 
French(-style) bread (usually made with white flour). 
t~ ...; 
~ feeh Ifem n, pI -aatl twentieth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. - also faa, faa r, fih. 
I~~.J 
~ .~ fiyya In pI -aatl grade, category. ril-c;umaa! 
fiyyaat taba[ guudit ~-~anf cloth comes in different 
grades according to the quality of the type. riddii-ni 
talat {awaabi[ min fiyyit [a!ara saar give me three ten-
piastre stamps. see further under • ...; 

t;i fayya Ivtl to grade, categorize, sort. ril-beeq nifayyii 
basab iI-bagm we sort the eggs according to size. -aval 
pva mifayyi. 
~I ritfayya Ivil to be graded, be categorized, be 
sorted. -iva mitfayyi. 
1 IS I.S.J see I.S I .J : faaya 
r J I.S I.S .J 
r ~I ril-fayyuum Iprop nl the Fayoum, large oasis 
south of_Cairo (one of the richesf agricultural areas of 
681 
Egypt, considered, by some, to be the dividing point 
between Upper and Lower Egypt). 
..r;'; fayyuumi ·/pl -yyal l/adjl pertaining to the 
Fayoum. II (linab) fayyuumi variety of sweet yellow 
grape. -farxa fayyuumi variety of speckled chicken. 
Z In! an inhabitant of the Fayoum. 
IJ"I.SI.SI.S.J 
~ 
fayyiis ladj pI fayyiisal extravagantly generous, 
excessively open-handed. 

t I J see t.J J : qaal, qaala, tjaala 
~IJ 
J\i qaaf Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-first letter of the Ara-
bic alphabet.llgabal qaafname oflegendary mountain, 
said to lie at the end of the earth and to be the place 
upon which Adam descended after being expelled from 
the Garden. 
J\i tjaaf" bi-yitkallim bil-tjaaf {deris] he speaks in a 
pompous way. 
r I J see 
I r.J J : tjaama 
yyJ 
~ tjabb (i) Ivil I to rise, swell. fik-karbunaatu yxalli 
l-keeka ttjibb baking-soda makes the cake rise. 2 to bob 
up, surface. lfi(is wi-tjabb' bliid lanni he dived and 
surfaced far from me. II tjabb' bil-filuus he came up with 
the money (i.e. having dived into his resources or pock-
ets for it). -vn tjabb, tjababaan; ava tjaabib. 
~ tjabba I In pi -aat, tjabaabiJ I neck opening of a 
galabiya or sideeri. 
~ tjubba In pi tjubab, tjubbaatl I dome, cupola. 
lIyilmil min il-I;abba tjubba {proy] == he makes a moun-
tain out of a molehill. -faakir finn' tal;t il-tjubba jeex 
{proy] (he is) under the impression thatthere isa buried 
saint under the dome (of one who is deceived by out-
ward appearances). 2 roof of a mud oven (see PI.C, 7). 
~ 
tjabbib Ivtl I to puff up, cause to swell. ril-xab(a 
tjabbibit tjurt-u the blow made his forehead swell. 
fif-Jams' tjabbibit gild-i the sun blistered my skin. 2 to 
cause to rise, cause to surface. - Ivil 3"10 break out in 
blisters. -vn tatjbiib; ava/pva mitjabbib. 
~ 
mitjabbib ladj *1 domed, convex. 
~I fittjabbib Ivil" passive of tjabbib 1 and 2. - iva 
mittjabbib. 
.. 
c.yJ 
~l.i -tjabaal;a Inl I obscenity. kalaam tjabaal;a {chil-
dren] dirty words. 2 rudeness. 
~ 
qabiil; ladjl ugly. 
~ 
tjabiil; ladj pltjubal;a, tjubaal;l obscene (especial-
ly in language). walad tjabiil; foul-mouthed kid. film' 
tjabiil; blue movie. 
C!Y tjabaayil; Ipl nl dirty tricks, low acts. 
~I fatjbal; 
lell I more/most obscene or foul-
mouthed. 2 more/most ugly. 
c.~ tjabbuul;: tjabbuu!J ya tjabbuul; == what a crying 
shame! (the opening line of a folk song surviving only in 
a children's counting game). 
~ tjabbal; Ivil to b!!have in an obscene or objection-
able manner (especiall~ by using bad language). -vn 
tatjbiil;; ava mitjabbal;. 
~I fittjabbal; Ivil (impersonal) passive of tjabbal;. 
yaama ttjabbal; fiyya how many times I was abused! 
- iva mittjabbal;. 
.)yJ 
.r.i tjabar (u) Ivt/ to d~stroy, ruin (s.o. or s.o.'s career). 
tatjriir il-mudiir tjabar il-muwa;;af bi-!Jirmaan-a mit-
tartjiyya the manager's report has ruined the employee 
by depriving him of promotion. -vn tjabr; ava tjaabir; 
pva matjbuur . 
.r.i tjabr In pltjubuurl grave, tomb. II rigl-u wil-tjabr he 
is too old to live long. -laha leen b~~it-ha wil-tjabr == 
she has an evil eye that is lethal. 
'.r,A-o matjbara In pi matjaabirl I grave. Ilbald' ma 
raal; il-matjbara batja fii sukkara {proy] == he was 
praised only after death (of one who, when alive, suf-
fered from people's ingratitude). 2 lalso pi maqaabirl 
graveyard . 
..".Ail fittjabar Ivil to be entombed. fahu tl;abar allaah la 

yirl:Jam-u "" now he's buried may God have no mercy on 
him! - iva mitc;ibir. 
...,.0.;1 finc;abar = fitc;abar. - iva minc;ibir. 
IJ'" J y J 
1J"'..r.i c;ubr~ Iprop nl Cyprus . 
.r>..r.i c;ubr~i Ipl c;abar~al I ladjl pertaining to Cyp-
rus.lll:Jumaar c;ubr~i breed of tall black donkey. 2 In! a 
Cypriot. 
IJ'" y J 
~ 
c;abba~ I Ivtl to knead (dough). 2 Ivil {coarse] to 
masturbate, jerk off. -vn tac;bii~; ava/pva mic;abb~. 
~I fitc;abb~ Ivil to be kneaded (of dough). - iva 
mitc;abb~. 
.;.. y J 
..;..,; c;abac[ (a) Ivtl I to cash, convert into cash. 
c;abac[ti jiik I cashed a cheque. c;abac[ il-murattab he 
cashed his salary. 2 to receive payment, get paid. 
bi-yic;bac[ mil-murattab talatiin gineeh he receives thirty 
pounds in salary .I:J-aragga[-Iak il-filuus lamma fac;bac[ 
I'll return the money to you when I'm paid. 3 to depress 
(emotionally). ril-man;ar da l:Jac;iic;i c;abac[-ni that sight 
really depressed me. c;alb-i mac;buuc[ or nifs-i 
mac;buuc[a I'm depressed. - Ivi/4a to take hold. c;abac[ 
fiyya he seized me. IInafas-i mac;buuc[ I can hardly 
breathe. 4b to make an arrest. lamma c;abac[u [alayya 
fi[taraft i· c;uddaam il-bulii~ when they arrested me 
I confessed before the police. - vn c;abc[, c;abac[aan; ava 
c;aabic[; pva mac;buuc[. 
~ 
c;abc[a In pI -aat, c;ubac[1 I linear measure equal to 
12.5 centimetres. 2a fist. II c;abc[it l:Jadiid knuckle-
duster. - c;abc[it baab door knocker. 2b hilt, handle. 
2c crosspiece forming the grip on the upright handle of 
a plough (see PI.D, 17). - Ino pll 3 depression . 
• : .;..~ c;abc[iyya In pI -aatl cash payment (of salary or 
wages). 
,;"."A.- mac;buuc[ Inl down payment. 
............ mac;bac[ In pI mac;aabic[1 handle. mac;bac[ il-
baab door knob. 
............ muc;bic[ 
ladj 
*1 
depressing, 
oppressive. 
ma-c;dirti-j fastal:Jmil il-gaww il-muc;bic[ da I couldn't 
bear that heavy atmosphere. 
~I fitc;abac[ Ivil I to be cashed, be converted into 
cash. 2a to be gripped, be seized. fitc;abac[ti min kitf-i 
I was seized by the shoulder. 2b to seize up, contract. 
fir-ral:Jim 
itc;abac[ 
the 
uterus 
contracted. 
2c (impersonal) passive of c;abac[ 3b. fitc;abac[ [al-
l:Jaraami the thief was caught. 3 to become depressed. 
683 
fitc;abac[na min il-film we were depressed by the film. 
- avaliva mitc;ibic[ . 
~ 
1 finc;abac[ = fitc;abac[. - vn finc;ibaac[; ava/iva 
minc;ibic[ . 
.;a;:. c;abbac[ Ivtl to hand over (money due) to. 
I:J-ac;abbac[-ak bukra I'll pay you tomorrow. f~-~arraaf 
ma-rc[ii-jyic;abbac[-ni the cashier wouldn't give me my 
money. - vn tac;biic[; avalpva mic;abbac[. 
~I fitc;abbac[ Ivil to be paid. - iva mitc;abbac[. 
~ 
mitc;abbac[ 
Inl 
I down 
payment. 
2 ril-
mitc;abbac[ the first part of the marriage settlement (the 
second being payable in the event of divorce or of the 
death of the husband). 
J"yJ 
J..,i C;ib{i Ipl fac;baa{, c;aba{, c;iba{1 I /adjl Coptic . 
2 Inl 2a a Copt. 2b Ino pll the Coptic language . 
.,1J"yJ 
.:..lJ...i c;ub{aan, c;ab{aan <It capitano> In pI c;aba{nal 
ship's captain. 
.yJyJ 
..,.,1A,.i c;ubc;aab In pI c;abac;iibl I pair of pattens, pair of 
wooden-soled sandals (see PI.F, 19). lIc;ubc;aab bi-
[agal pair of roller-skates. 2 {auto] tilting blocks for a 
car. 
~l,.i c;abac;iibi ladj invarl pertaining to c;abac;iib, 
clog-like. II musmaar c;abac;iibi {carp] tack. 
lyJyJ 
..,.i,.i c;abc;ib, c;abc;ab I Ivtl to cause to swell or blister. 
feeh illi c;abc;ib jafayf-ak kida what gave you these 
blisters on your lips? 2 Ivil to become puffy, swell. [eej 
mic;abc;ib light puffy bread. - vn c;abc;aba; ava/pva 
mic;abc;ib, mic;abc;ab. 
• JyJ 
J,.i C;ibil, c;abal l (a) Ivtl la to accept. fik-kulliyya 
c;iblit-ni the college accepted me. ma-b-ac;bal-ji rajwa 
I don't take bribes. fin-nabi C;ibil il-hadiyya the 
Prophet accepted gifts! (in urging acceptance of s.th.) . 
Ib to find acceptable. fil-makana di ma-b-tic;bal-f 
banziin this machine won't take petrol. fir-raagil da 
m-ac;bal-uu-j xaali~ I can't stand that man! IIl:Jaaga 
tic;bal-ha l-[een something pleasing to the eye. - Ivil 
2 to be accepted, be admitted. C;ibilfi-kulliyyit i{-(ibb he 
was admitted to the faculty of medicine. 3 Ipreverbl to 
find it acceptable to, be willing to. ma-c;iblit-ji 
titgawwiz-u she wasn't willing to marry him. -vn 

qabalaan, qubuul, qabuul; ava qaabil, qablaan; pva 
maqbuul. 
11 qaabil (or qaabil) li- t capable of, susceptible to, as in 
qaabillil-iftilaal combustible, raagilc;aabillil-iqtinaal 
a man who can be convinced, ril-iqtiraalJ qaabil lit-
tanfiiz the suggestion is practicable. 
J ~ qubuul, qabuul, qubuul, qabuul 
approval, 
acceptance. 
II (fimtilJaan) 
elementary school certificate. 
In! assent, 
il-qubuul 
~ 
Ii qaabiliyya In/l inclination. ma-lii-J qaabiliyya lil-
fakl I don't feel like eating. ma-luu-J qaabiliyya 
yitkallim fil-mawtfuul da he doesn't feel like talking 
about that. 2 susceptibility. landu qaabiliyya lil-bard 
he is susceptible to colds. 3 capability. ma-luu-f 
qaabiliyya lit-tafaahum he's incapable of being 
reasoned with. 
J,,;A.o maqbuullnl [aead] the university grade Satisfac-
tory (the lowest pass grade). 
~ 
qabiila In pI qabaayill tribe. 
J,A;I fitqaballvil to be accepted. fitqabal fil-mustaffa 
he was admitted to the hospital. -iva mitqibil. 
J,A;I finqabal = fitqabal. -iva minqibil. 
J..i qabbil J Ivtl to cause to be accepted. daragaat-i 
qabbilit-ni fil-l.Juquuq my grades secured me a place in 
the (faculty of) law. - ava/pva mic;abbil. 
~I fitqabbil Ivtl to accept, receive. rabb-i-na 
yitqabbil ~-~ala God hears (our) prayers. fitc;abbilna 
l-laza we received condolences. ma-b-titqabbil-f' 
kalaam-i she doesn't accept my advice. - ava mitqabbil. 
2 JyJ 
J.,.i qabl (also qabl' min) Iprep; w foil pron suff also 
qablii- (1st sing qabliyya)1 before. miin kaan saakin 
hina qablina who was living here before us? ga qabliiha 
b-yoom he arrived a day before her. fitlayyin qabl' 
minni b-xamas siniin he was appointed five years before 
me. lila qabli wala baldi "" my like has not been seen 
before nor will it be seen again! as in fiftara larabiyya 
bi-tquulla qabli wala baldi he bought a car the like of 
which has never been seen. - fin-nahar-da qabl' bukra 
the sooner the better. 
11 qabl' rna Iconjl before. bi-yaakul kitiir qabl' rna 
ynaam he eats heavily before going to sleep . 
.:.".l.,i qableen: la baldeen wala qableen retort used as a 
response to baldeen (q.v.) "" never mind about later! 
lJa-taaxud fugrit-ak baldeen. -la baldeen wala qableen 
fana layiz-ha dilwaqti 'You will get your wages later.' 
'Never mind later, I want them now!' talaala zur-na 
baldeen fil.Jna maflfuliin dilwaqti. - la baldeen wala 
qableen lumr-ak ma-lJa-ifuf-ni landak 'Come and visit 
684 
us some other time, we are busy now.' 'There won't be 
any other time; you'll never see me at your place!' 
II wi-baldeen. - wala qableen 'Whatever next!' 'Don't 
make such a fuss -it's nothing to get excited about.' 
J.,.i qabla ladvl before, first. fana gayya bass· lawza 
fafuut lala fumm-i qabla I'm coming, but I want to 
drop by my mother's first. kallim-u qabla speak to him 
first! 
~ 
qabLiyya = qabla. 
4.l,.i qibla Inl [lsi] I direction towards which Muslims 
face in prayer. (i.e. the direction of the Kaaba in Mec-
ca). 2 niche in the wall of a mosque indicating the 
direction for praying. 
J,i qibli I ladjl southern. baab qibli southern door. 
II fil-wagh il-qibli Upper Egypt. 2 Iprepl to the south of, 
in the south of. ril-madrasa qibli l-balad the school is in 
the southern part of town. 3 ladvl south(ward). fir-riib 
bi-thibb' min qibli the wind is blowing from the south. 
J.,.i qabal2 = qubaal. 
JW qubaal Iprepl I facing, opposite. balakonit-hum 
qubaal balakonit-na their balcony faces ours. 2 in re-
turn for, in exchange for. xud ik-kitaab da qubaal illi 
xadt-u minnak fimbaarib take this book in return for 
the one I took from you yesterday. 
J,;:i qabbil2/vil to go south, go in a southern direction. 
- ava miqabbil. 
JIi qaabil/vt/l to meet (s.o.) at an expected place or 
time. ma-lJadd'-f qabil-ni fil-mataar no one met me at 
the airport. II fibqa qabil-ni law ... "" come and have a 
laugh at my expense if ... , as in fibqu qabluu-ni law 
kaan fii {afa it's a sure bet there'll be no supper! fibqa 
qabil-ni law gawwizt-a-ha I'll eat my hat if you (manage 
to) marry her off! 2a. to encounter, come across. 
ma-qabilt'-f zayyak kitiir fi-bayaat-i I haven't come 
across many like you in my lifetime. 2b to make the 
acquaintance of. qabilt-a-ha w- fana Lissa taalib I met 
her while I was still a student. 3 to meet, welcome, 
greet. qabluu-na muqabla kwayyisa they received us 
well. 4 to correspond with. fil-fuulland il-m~riyyiin 
yiqaabil il-makaroona land it-talayna broad beans are 
to the Egyptians what pasta is to the Italians. llfi-
muqaabil in return for, as in xadt' salt-u f-muqaabil 
salt-i I took his watch in return for mine. -bi-duun (or 
min lfeer) muqaabil without compensation, gratis. -vn 
muqabla; ava muqaabil, miqaabil. 
~\A.. muqabla In pI -aatl meeting, encounter. 
Jli;1 fitqaabil Ivil I to meet together. ba-nitqaabil 
fi-bariis in faa f allaah we'll get together in Paris, God 
willing. 2a to encounter one another. fitqabilna fif-

faaric we ran into each other in the street. 2b to make 
become concave. - ava/pva mistiljabbi. 
one another's acquaintance. fitljablu fayyaam ii-barb 
they met during the war. 3 passive of ljaabil. -ava/iva 
mitljaabil. 
J,.ii faqbalf 
Ivil to respond with enthusiasm. 
gumhuur kitiir faqbal cal-film; the film was very popu-
lar. -vn fiqbaal; ava muqbil. 
J.a. mUljtabal: ft-muljtabal ... in the early stages of 
.... fi-muljtabal iI-cumr in (one's) youth. 
j.A.;-1 fis.taljbillvt/l to receive. baftit istiljbaal is-saftir 
the reception for the ambassador: finfatabit iI-fabwaab 
I-istiljbaal iI-cariis the doors were opened to receive the 
groom. fir-radyu b-yistaljbil maba((aat biciida the radio 
picks up distant stations. 2 [naut] to anchor. fistaljbilu 
I-markib fil-xaliig they anchored the ship in the bay. 
- Ivil 3 [naut] to be anchored. -vn fistiljbaal; ava 
mustaljbil; ava/pva mistaljbil. 
11 fistaljbil il-ljibla [lsi] to face in the direction of Mecca 
for the purpose of ritual prayer. 
Jl,A.:-1 fistiljbaalln pi -aatl reception lobby, reception 
area, reception desk. 
J,.i;.-. mustaljbal, 
mustaljbitJ 
Inl 
I future. 
fil-mustaljbal bi-yadd iIIaah [prov] the future is in 
God's hands, God alone knows the future. 2 (future) 
career. riI-ljumaar qayyac-Iu mustaljbal-u gambling 
lost (him) his career, gambling ruined him. 
':'yJ. 
4.;l,i ljibaana Inl 18 weighing (with a steelyard). 
Ib profession of weighing (with a steelyard). 2 fee for 
weighing (with a steelyard). 
J~ ljabbaani In pi -yyal one who weighs with a 
steelyard. mizaan ljabbaani a steelyard. 
,;; ljabbin Ivt/l to weigh with a steelyard. - Ivi/2 to 
become a professional steelyard weighing man. 3 to tip. 
tUljl iI-buqaaca xalla I-carabiyya ljabbinit li-wara the 
weight of the goods made the cart tip backwards. 
riI-mizaan ljabbin the scale tipped. -vn taljbiin; ava 
miljabbin. 
';""1 fitljabbin Ivil to be weighed with a steelyard. -iva 
mitljabbin. 
.JyJ 
.",; ljabw Inl vault, cellar, tunnel. 
0""; ljabwa In pi -aat, ljibawll vault, inside of a dome. 
2 arcade. 
~ ljabba 2 Ivtl to make concave. -vn taljbiyya; ava/ 
pva miljabbi. 
~I fitljabba Ivil to be made concave. - iva mitljabbi. 
~I fistiljabba J I Ivt/ to make concave. 2/vil to 
I.S Y J see .J y J : ljabba 2, fitljabba, fistiljabba J 
y':"J 
...,...a ljatab In pi filjtaabl hump (on the back). fabu 
lja!ab hunchback. 
...,...a ljattib 1 Ivt/ to cause to be hunched. kaan ljaacid 
miljattib qahr-u he was sitting with his back hunched. 
2 Ivil to become hunched. ljattibit min kutr iI-muzakra 
she became hunched from so much studying. -vn 
ta~tiib; avalpva miljattib. 
...,..:;.&;1 fitljattib Ivil to be or become hunched or bowed. 
qahr-u tljattib min tUljl iJ-feela his back was bent from 
the weight of the load. - also ljootab. - ava/iva mitljattib. 
I,?,:" J 
..;..;.i ljattit Ivil to be niggardly, be stingy. bi-Yljattit cala 
cyaal-u maca finnu rani although he is rich, he is stingy 
towards his children. -vn taljtiit; ava miljattit. 
2 .:.. .:.. J see I.S':" J : ljatta, ljattaaya 
.J.':" J 
fl ljattar Ivil to be stingy. rani wi-mljattar batta cala 
roob-u he is rich but tight-fisted even toward himself. 
-yn taljtiir; ava miljattar . 
.J\.A;I fitljattar Ivil (impersonal) passive of ljattar. batta 
I-xaddamiin {afafu min kutr; ma tljattar caleehum even 
the servants have left because they were given such 
stingy treatment. - iva mitljattar. 
J':"J 
.? ljatal (iJ I Ivt/ to kill, murder. cawziin baaga 
cafaan ljatl iI-bafaraat we want something to kill the 
insects. II ma-fti-f reer-ik badd; ljatal-ni - win-nabi 
tirbami it's you alone who have slain me; - I implore 
you, have mercy! (flirtatious remark to a girl). 2 Ivil to 
commit murder. babasuu cafaan ljatal he was impris-
oned for murder. ljatl; xa{a f or ljatl; min reer ljl¥d [leg] 
manslaughter. ljatl" camd; maca sablj iI-f~raar [leg] 
premeditated murder. -vn ljatl; ava ljaatil; pva 
maljtuul . 
:ilii ljatla In pi -aatl I linst nl a killing. IIljatla wJibra 
type of children's marble game. 2 brawl. 
J;li ljaatil J In plljatalal killer, murderer. 
J.,:;i ljatiilln plljutalal one killed. II naam zayy iI-ljatiil 
he slept like a log. -yiljtil iI-ljatiil wi-yimJi f-ganazt-u 
[pro v] he murders the victim and (then) walks in his 
funeral procession (applied to a ruthless person). 

J\;;,i qattaal: qattaal qutala a hardened murderer. 
J.;.A.. maqtal In pi maqaatill mortal spot, vulnerable 
spot. fimJarab fi-maqtal he was fatally wounded. 
j;;.i;1 fitqatal Ivil to be killed, be murdered. -iva 
mitqitil. 
~ 
I finqatal = fitqatal. -iva minqitil. 
Ja qattil Ivtl to kill (in numbers). bi-yqattilu 
(fi)k-kilaab is-salraana they're killing off rabid dogs. 
- ~n taqtiil; avalpva miqattil. 
j;;.i;1 fitqattil Ivil to be killed (in numbers). - iva 
mitqattil. 
J;li qaatil2 Ivtl to fight against, engage in a struggle 
with. lammaal yiqaatil (f)in-noom he keeps fighting 
against sleep. -vn qitaal, miqatla; ava miqaatil. 
J\;;,i qitaal Inl fight, struggle. midaan qitaal a 
battlefield. 
4l>Lo.. muqatla In pi -aatl fighter (plane). 
J;Lo.. muqaatilln 'I {mil] private soldier. 
J;\A;I fitqaatil Ivil to fight, do battle. fin-naas 
bi-yitqatlu lal-bi4,aala the people are fighting over the 
goods. - ava mitqaatil. 
J;.A:-I fistaqtil Ivil to fight desperately. bi-yistaqtilu 
feel wi-nhaar la!aan luqmit il-lee! they strive desper-
ately day and night for a livelihood. -vn fistiqtaal; ava 
mistaqtil. 
r~J 
~li qaatim ladjl dark (of colour). 
f' qattim 1 Ivtl to darken, blacken. fi/-fams I qattimit 
wi/Iu the sun tanned his face. 2 Ivil to become dark. 
wi/Iu qattim miz-zala/his face darkened with fury. -vn 
taqtiim; ava miqattim. 
..s.~.J 
.l:i .Q qatta Icoll nl variety of long cucumber (Cucu-
mis sativus). II bi-yaakul fi-qatta maflluula "" he has an 
ea~y life. 
~ \;;,i qattaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a cucumber of the qatta 
variety. 
~Lo.. maqaata In pi -aatl melon and cucumber planta-
tion. IIxayaal il-maqaata scarecrow. 
• .!.oJ see ..s~J 
yr J 
........ qaflba In pi qaflaayibl whore, harlot. ya-bn il-
qaflba son of a whore! 
rrJ 
i:! quflfl ladj invarl through and through, one hundred 
686 
percent. fal/aafl quflfl a peasant through and through. 
flumaar quflfl a complete idiot. 
.l.r J 
J..,:;; qaflfla{ 1 Ivtl to scrape, strip. qaflfla{ il-buuya min 
la{-{arabeeza scrape the paint off the table! ril-qumaar 
qaflfla{-u gambling cleaned him out, gambling made 
him penniless. 2 Ivil to dry up, become parched. zoor-i 
qaflfla{ mi~-~iyaam my throat became parched from 
fasting. II fana qaflfla{t I mil-filuus I became penniless. 
-vn taqflii{; avalpva miqaflfla{. 
J...:.i;1 fitqaflfla{ Ivil to be scraped, be stripped. -iva 
mitqaflfla[. 
"';r J 
...w qaflf In pi qUfluu!. qUflufa/l broad part of a palm 
branch (where it joins the trunk). 2 (strong) brute. 
~J 
...Ii qad f ladjl 1 (also laqad) Iw foil perf vI already. 
2/w foil imperf vI perhaps. 
I 
-
r~~ 
C...li qadafl I (a) Ivtll to heat to the required tempera-
ture. qadaflit ii-fum she heated the oven to baking 
temperature. laazim tiqdafli s-samn you must heat the 
clarified butter to smoking point (i.e. ready for frying). 
2 to strike (a light) with flint or steel. II qadafl-ni qalam 
he gave me a slap (that made the sparks fly). 3 to throw, 
cast. - Ivil 4 to reach the required' temperature. 
ril-furn I qadafl the oven is hot and ready for baking. 
-vn qadfl, qadaflaan, qadiifl; ava qaadifl; pva maqduufl· 
........Ii qadfla linst n, pi -aatl 1 a heating. 2 (physical) 
affliction. gat-(ak) qadflaf-gittit-(ak) {abus] may (your) 
body be afflicted! 
C...lii faqdafl lell morelmost striking. fliyya faqdafl min 
fuxt-a-ha fig-gamaal Ilhe's more strikingly beautiful 
than her sister. 
C..lA;I fitqadafl Ivil to be or become heated to the re-
quired temperature. fiz-zeet IIqiJdafl the oil has reached 
smoking point (i.e. it is ready for frying). -avaliva 
mitqidifl· 
CJ.4; I finqadafl = fitqadafl. -avaliva minqidifl· 
1 
-
r~~ 
C...li qadafl21n pi faqdaafl, qidaafll dry measure equal 
to 2.062 litres. ma-yiksar-! i{-{afluuna ilia fabu qadafl 
{prov] (it's the man with only a small quantity to grind 
who breaks the mill) poverty and bad luck go hand in 
hand. 

I ~ ~ J 
.J.i ljadd I (u) Ivtl to split. e{arab-u e{arba ljadd-u n~~een 
he gave it a blow and split it in two. -vn ljadd, 
ljadadaan; ava ljaadid; pva maljduud. 
.J.i ljadd 2 /nl 1 size. ya reet-u lala ljadd-i I wish it were 
my size. ljaadir yifiil rarbala ljadd-i he can carry four 
people the size of me. 2 extent, amount.fJa-t'(iib ljadd i 
reeh how long will you be away? ljadd i kida this much 
(big, long etc.). ljiwwit ig-geej lala ljadd i rimaan if-
jalb the power of the army is commensurate with the 
faith of the peopie. ljadd i reeh is-sitt i di gamiila how 
beautiful that woman is! ljadd i bale{ i fil-irtifaar; Of 
equal height.llmif ljadd i kida not good, pretty bad, as 
in rifJit-ha mif ljadd i kida she doesn't smell very nice. 
-ljadd id-dinya a world's worth, as in b-afJibb-u ljadd 
id-dinya I love him enormously! r;andik fasatiin ljadd 
id-dinya you have masses of dresses! taagir ljadd id-
dinya a thriving merchant, raagil ljadd id-dinya a man 
of inestimable worth, a superior man. 3 calibre, capac-
ity. rima mif ljadd-i you're no match for me. huwwa-nta 
ljadd-i-na do you really imagine you're in the same 
league as us? II rana muj ljadd il-fustaan I can't afford 
the dress. -lala ljadd-(u) of little worth or capacity, as 
in Xa((aa(lala ljadd-u a mediocre calligrapher, na~ar-u 
lala ljadd-u his vision is limited, m~ruuf-u lala ljadd-u 
he has little to spend, laljl-u lala ljadd-u he's not very 
bright, kalaam-u lala ljadd-u he speaks naively, raagil 
lala ljadd-u or raagillala ljadd i fJaal-u a poor man. 
11 (lala) ljadd i ma Iconjl (1) as much as. bi-yidfallala 
ljadd i ma yiljdar he pays what he can. ljumaaj ljadd i ma 
yilmil ljami~ enough material to make a shirt. 
(2) however much. lala ljadd i ma rasallim lalee bare{u 
mif laawiz yilabbar-ni however often I greet him he 
still doesn't want to pay me any attention. 
687 
• .J.i ljadda In pi -aatll instance noun of ljadd. 2 strip or 
material used in applique designs (see PI.H, 15). 
o.J.i ljidda In pi -aat, ljidadl levelling board (for 
mortar). 
JJ,i; ljuduud: ljadd i (or ljadd-... ) wi-ljuduud the match 
of ... and more. da-na ljadd-ak wi-ljuduud I'm your 
equal and more! 
~I ritljadd Ivil to be split. - iva mitljadd. 
~I rinljadd = ritljadd. - iva minljadd. 
2 ~ ~ J 
J.J.i ljaddid 1 Ivtl to dry by heat. xud il-leej ljaddid-u 
take the bread and dry it. 2/vil to dry up. IImara 
mljaddida a skinny woman. -vn taljdiid; avalpva 
miljaddid. 
J~I ritljaddid Ivil to be dried by heat. - iva mitljaddid. 
I .) ~ J 
J,i; ljidir (a) Ivill Ipreverbl to be able to, be capable 
of. ma-ljdirnaa-! niigi we were unable to come. tiljdar 
tiljul-li gara-lhum reeh can you tell me what happened 
to them? fJadd i flina yiljdar yiftal; fJanak-u is anyone of 
us in a position to speak out? 2a to be master, be in 
command. ma-yiljdar lala l-ljudra rilla rabb-i-na 
[pray] "" only God can do the impossible. ma-yiljdar-F 
r;aleeha rayy i fJadd nobody could do it. da b-yiljdar lala 
k-kalaam bass he's a man of words, not action. 
IIma-ljdir-f lala l-fJumaar rifja((ar lal-bardala [pray] 
he couldn't master the donkey so he took it out on the 
saddle. 2b to bear, be able to bear. m-aljdar-f lala 
zalal-u I can't bear his being cross! tiljdar lal-wagal 
can you stand the pain? -vn ljudra, ljadaara; avaljaadir; 
pva maljduur. 
.),i; ljadaara In! impertinence, cheek. ya ljadart-ak 
how cheeky you are! 
JJli ljaadir 1 laval II rabb-i-na ljaadir lala kull i jeer "" 
anything is possible in God's creation! 2 Inl Almighty 
One, Omnipotent One (epithet of God). IIbi-ljudrit 
ljaadir"" for no rhyme or reason. -jaayillabd il-ljaadir 
"" he looks as though he's carrying the troubles of the 
whole world on his shoulders. - ladj *1 3 cheeky. 
4 wealthy, of means. rilli yitgawwiz itneen ya ljaadir ya 
faagir [prov] the man who marries two wives is either 
rich or debauched! 
~JJWI ril-qadriyya Iprop nl Sufi order founded by 
Abd el-Qadir el-Gilani. 
JJ..IA.. maljduur 1 Ipvalll maljduur lala manageable, as 
in da fJaaga maljduur laleeha this is something that can 
be managed. - In/2 capacity, ability. kull i waafJid wi-
maljduur-u each according to his means. fi-maljduur ... 
within the capacity of, as in fi-maljduur-u yaakul toor 
li-wafJd-u he's capable of eating an ox on his own. 
3 ril-ml1ljduur what is fated, what is destined. 
.)!.>1.A11 ril-maljadiir, ril-maqadiir Ipl nl Fate, the Fates. 
ljaliil it-tadbiir yifJiillala l-maljadiir [pray] the disorga-
nised man leaves matters to Fate. 
J,i; ljadr Inl 1 worth. ljadr-ak mafJfuu~ your worth is 
maintained.llbi-galaalit ljadr-.. [deris] "" in all (one's) 
shining glory, as in huwwa lamma yiigi b-galaalit lja'dr-u 
fJa-yxawwif-na "" does his lordship imagine he'll scare 
us when he arrives? 2: leelit il-ljadr [lsi] a night in 
Ramadan on which, it is believed, a light ((aaljit il-ljadr) 
appears to a chosen few, who thereby acquire fulfil-
ment of a wish. (aaljit il-ljadr infatafJit-lak "" the world is 
at your feet, you have a bright future! 
oJ,i; ljudra In pi -aatl capacity, capability. landaha 

tjudra timfi masafaat (iwiila she is capable of walking 
long distances. lala basab ljudrit-ha iii-barb according 
to its fighting capacity. bi-ljudrit iIIaah by the power of 
God. 
;,Jj ljadar, qadar In pi faljdaar, faqdaarl Fate, Des-
tiny. Iisaacit il-ljadar yilma I-b~ar {prov] (when it is 
time for Fate (to be realized), (one's) sight is blinded) 
no amount of wisdom can help one escape one's fate. 
J'-,Jj ljadiir, qadiirt I/nl Almighty One, Omnipotent 
One (epithet of God). 2 ladjl having mastery, capable. 
o;olA.. maljdira, maljdara Inl financial capability. 
ma-landuu-f maljdara yiftiri labma he can't afford to 
buy meat. 
;lolA.. mUljdaar, miljdaar Inl I Ipl maljadiirl quantity, 
amount. bi-yistahlik miljdaar kibiir min il-banziin it 
consumeS' a large quantity of petrol. yikuun biliid lan 
il-fart/.' b-muljdaar xamastaajar santi it is fifteen cen-
timetres above ground. 2/no pll worth, value. yilizz' 
mUljdaar-ak {women in trad soe] response to xa(Wa 
laziiza (q.v.) ... may your worth be increased. 
;~I fitljadar Ivil (impersonal) passive of ljadar 2. 
kull-u yitljidir lalee filla I-la(aj everything is bearable 
except thirst. - iva mitljidir. 
;...Iiil finljadar = fitljadar. - iva minljidir. 
;~ ljaddar Ivtl I to (pre)destine (of God). kull-u 
mljaddar everything is fore-ordained.lIljaddar wi-Ia(af 
... it could have been worse. 2 to en~ble (of God). 
rabb-i-na bi-Yljaddar-na laj-furl God enables us to do 
our work. rabb-i-na Yljaddar-ni lala xidmit-ak may 
God enable me to serve you (deferential expression of 
one's willingness to be of service). 38 to appraise, esti-
mate. fawarrii-k il-larabiyya wi-nla Iljaddar it-taman 
I'll show you the car and you make an estimate of the 
price. ljaddart' finnu mumkin yikuun zallaan min 
il-bikaaya di I reckoned he might be upset by this mat-
ter. 3b to appreciate, esteem. fii zabaayin bi-tljaddar 
il-baaga I-bilwa there are customers who appreciate 
nice things. ma-bi-Yljaddar-nii-fhe doesn't value me (as 
he should). -vn taljdiir; avalpva miljaddar; pva 
mUljaddar. 
11 ljaddar finn ... suppose that ... , what if ... , as in 
ljaddar finn' naas baramiyya (illU lalee what if thieves 
had attacked him? ljaddari finn' ma-Ikii-f fixwaat sup-
pose that you didn't have any brothers or sisters. 
J'-...Iii taljdiir In pi -aatl I appraisal, estimate. lala 
faljall' taljdiir at lowest estimate. 2 {aead] grading, 
ranking (of achievement). xadt' taljdiir gayyid fil-
imtibaan I got a ranking of Good in the exam. 
~J'-~ taljdiiri ladj/l pertaining to individual estima-
688 
tions, relative. masaafil taljdiriyya matters of (person-
al) judgement. 2 approximate. faslaar taljdiriyya 
approximate prices. 
;.l;.. miljaddar, mUljaddar In pi -aatl destiny. 
;.:i.i;1 fitljaddar Ivil I to be appraised, be estimated. 
farbit-i biiku ma-titljaddar-f my joy in you cannot be 
estimated. 2 to be appreciated, be esteemed. -iva 
mitljaddar. 
;~ mUljtadir I/adj "I financially capable. finta 
mUljtadir wi-tiljdar tif~~al badla you can well afford to 
have a suit of clothes made. 2 (also muqtadir) Inl 
Omnipotent One (epithet of God). 
z .; ~ J 
o;,Jj ljidra Iplljidarl urn-shaped metal or earthenware 
vessel (see PI.A, 5). 
I\J"'~J 
..r,Jj ljuds, quds In! {Chr] holiness. ljuds il-filjdaas or 
ljuds il-faljdaas or quds il- faqdaas the holy of holies. 
IIljuds-ak form of address to Coptic clergy. -ljuds abuu-
na formal term of address or reference to a Coptic 
priest. 
..r...IA.I1 fil-ljuds, riI-quds Iprop nl Jerusalem. 
..r,Jj ljudsi, qudsi ladjl {lsi] sacred, divine (especially 
of Muslim tradition in which God himself speaks). 
~,Jj ljudsiyya t Inl holiness, sacredness. ljudsiyyit il-
makaan the holiness of the place . 
..r,Jj qudus or ljudus: fir-roob il-qudus {Chr] the Holy 
Spirit . 
..r,Jjj faqdas lelJ morelmost holy. 
i-1,Jj qadaasa Inl holiness. qadaasit il-baaba His Holi-
ness the Pope. ~aabib il-qadaasa His Holiness . 
..rl~ ljuddaas In plljadadiis, ljuddasaatl {Chr] liturgy 
of the Mass, eucharistic liturgy . 
..rJ~ qudduus In! Most Holy One (epithet of God). 
...,.-!~ ljaddiis, ljiddiis, qiddiis In "I Christian saint. 
..r1,Jjj filjdaas, faljd~as, faqdaas see ljuds. 
..r~ ljaddis Ivi/l {Chr] to make a pilgrimage to Jeru-
salem. 2 {Chr] to celebrate Mass, celebrate the Euchar-
ist (of a priest). - Ivtl 3 to sanctify, bless. 4 to hold 
sacred, venerate. bi-Yljaddis il-bayaah Iz-zawgiyya he 
holds married life sacred. -vn taljdiis; ava miljaddis; 
pva mUljaddas . 
..r.l;.. miljaddis In "I a Christian who has made a pil-
grimage to Jerusalem . 
..r.l;.. mUljaddas or muqaddas t ladj "I holy. fil-leela 
I-muljaddasa the Holy Family. fik-kitaab il-muljaddas 
(or il-muqaddas) the Holy Bible. riI- fart/. il-muqaddasa 
the Holy Land, Palestine. 

689 
r')J 
..ri<.;1 fitqaddis Ivil passive of qaddis 3 and 4. -iva 
wife is sweet even if she's a clod) "" the old shoe is more 
mitqaddis. 
comfortable than the new. -gaab il-qadiim lag-gidiid to 
2 ..r ~ J see ..r.J ~ J : qaduus 
1~~J 
J..Ii qadaf' (i) Ivtl to make (a stroke) in rowing. qadaf 
qadfiteen wil-miqdaaf itkasar he rowed two strokes and 
the oar broke. -vn qadf; ava qaadif. 
~..Ii qadfa' linst n, pi -aatl a stroke (in rowing). 
JI.lA.. miqdaaf, muqdaaf In pi ,maqadiifl oar. - also 
migdaaf, mugdaaf. 
J..u;1 fitqadaf' Ivil to be rowed (of strokes). - iva 
mitqidif. 
J..u;1 finqadaf' = fitqadaf'. - iva minqidif. 
J:Ii qaddiJ' Ivil to row. -vn taqdiif; ava miqaddif. 
Ji<.;1 fitqaddif' Ivil to be rowed, be propelled by oars 
(of a boat). - iva mitqaddif. 
2~~J 
J..i.i qadaF (i) Ivtl to aim at, or strike by throwing. 
qadaf-ha b-!Jagar he threw a stone at her. - vn qadf, 
qadafaan; ava qaadif; pva maqduuf. 
J..i.i qazaf (i) Ivtl I to bombard. qaz!, bil-qanaabil 
bombing. 2 to libel, defame. - Ivi/3 to ejaculate, eject 
semen. -vn qazf; ava qaazif; pva maqzuuf. 
~..i.i qadfa 2 linst n, pi -aatl a throw. 
~~li qaazifa In pi -aatl ejector. qaazifit qanaabil bom-
ber. qaazifit lahab flame-thrower. 
JJ.iA. maqzuuf In pi maqaziif/ bullet. 
~..i.i qaziifa In pi qaZ'aayifl shell, bomb. qaziifa 
yadawiyya hand-grenade. 
J..iA;1 fitqadaF Ivil passive of qadaF. -iva mitqidif. 
J..iA; 1 finqadaf2 = fitqadaF. - iva mitqidif. 
J1; qaddiF Ivtl to pelt. qalad yiqaddif-ni (or yiqaddif 
fiyya) b-!Jigaara he kept pelting me with stones. -vn 
taqdiif; avalpva miqaddif. 
J1.1 fitqaddiF Ivil to be pelted. -iva mitqaddif. 
1 r ~ J 
r..li qidim, qudum (a) Ivil to become old. lamma 
I-larabiyya tiqdam when the car gets old. fin-nukta di 
qidmit that has become an old joke. - vn qudumiyya, 
qidam, qadamaan. 
~..Ii qudumiyya Inl oldness, age. 
f'!..Ii qadiim, 
qadiim 
ladj 
pi qudaam, 
qudama, 
qudamaafl old, ancient. min qadiim iz-zamaan from 
ancient times. qudamaaf il-m~riyyiin the ancient 
Egyptians. Ilgibna qadiima sharp aged white cheese. 
- fil-qadiima ti!Jla wa-Iaw kaanit wa!Jla [provJ (the first 
dredge up the past. -qadiim fil-mihna or qadiim r~­
~anla or qadiim fik-kaar experienced, of mature 
"skill(s). - m~r il-qadiima Old Cairo, the southernmost 
"-district of Cairo proper, situated on the eastern bank of 
the Nile at the site of the fortress and settlement con-
quered by the Arabs in 641. 
r..lii faqdam lell olderloldest. 
~..Iii faqdamiyya In pi -aatl seniority. 
r...IA:.-1 fistaqdim Ivtl I to reject as (too) old. 2 to select 
for oldness. -vn fistiqdaam; ava mistaqdim. 
2 r ~ J 
r..li qadam, qadam Ifem n, pi faqdaaml I foot. 
II qadam-ak xeer lalayya "" your arrival has brought me 
good fortune. - faqdaam wi-faltaab (wi-nawa~i) (feet 
and thresholds (and corners» all a matter of luck, a 
toss-up. fin-naas faqdaam wi-faltaab [provJ some 
people bring good luck, some bring bad. 2 foot (linear 
measurement) . 
4...Ii qadama In pi -aatl [geomJ vernier caliper. 
rJ..Ii quduum Inl coming, arrival. quduum-ak xeer (we 
consider) your arrival to be a good omen. {awaaf il-
quduum [lslJ the greeting of the Kaaba (by circuiting it) 
on arrival in Mecca. 
rl:li quddaam I Iprepl in front of. filii quddaamu fi{-
{abuur the one ahead of him in the queue. quddaam 
lenee before his very eyes. II rilli waraa wi-iii quddaamu 
all his worldly goods. 2 ladvl in front. larabiyya fiiha 
mutoor quddaam a car which has the motor in front. 
fit/,i1 yimfi I-quddaam he continued moving forward. 
II quddaami in front of me "" get moving! get going! 
JI..I:Ii quddamaani ladj *1 front, frontal, foremost. 
lagal quddamaani front 
wheel. 
misik kitf il-
quddamaniyya he grasped the shoulder of the girl (or 
woman) ahead of him. 
4.J-Y qayduuma Inl [nautJ prow. 
r.lA.. muqdim ladj * and pi maqaadiml smart-alecky. 
r:li qaddim Ivtll to cause to advance, cause to move 
forward. qaddimu malaad safar-hum they moved up 
the date of their journey. 28 to present, introduce. 
kaatib il-mu!Jaami bi-yqaddim id-dalwa liI-ma!Jkama 
the lawyer's clerk presents the case to the court. qaddim 
musawwaraat talyiin-u he presented his credentials. 
38 to offer. qaddim-lina faay he offered us tea. 
mustaliddi yqaddim !Jayaat-u I-m~r he's prepared to 
offer his life for Egypt. 3b to hand over, deliver. 
qaddim il-filuus he handed over the money. - Ivi/4 to 
advance, move forward. salt-i bi-tqaddim my wat.ch 

gains time. ramacf.aan kull' sana bi-yr;addim !Jawaali 
!Jdaajar yoom lan is-sana iii r;abliiha Ramadan comes 
about eleven days earlier every year. 5 to make haste. 
r;addim - fi!Jna milfaxxariin hurry up! we're late! 6 to 
apply, make application. mif kull' waa!Jid yir;dar 
yir;addim [il-fazhar not everyone can apply to el-
Azhar. -vn lar;diim; ava/pva mir;addim. 
4.~ mur;addima. 
muqaddima r 
In 
pI -aall 
I forefront, vanguard. mur;addimil ig-geej the van-
guard 
of 
the 
army. 
2 introduction. 
bi-duun 
mur;addimaal nizil fiinajliima ... without any warning 
he showered us with insults. 
r~ mur;addam Inl la down payment, advance pay-
ment, initial payment of a larger sum which is due. 
Ib part of the marriag~ settlement paid to the bride at 
the time of marriage. 2 front part, forepart. mur;addam 
iI-markib huwwa I-biriwwa the forepart of the ship is 
the bow. 
~ mur;addaman ladvl in 
advance, beforehand. 
fid-dafl' 
mur;addaman 
payment 
in 
advance. 
IInaliiman mur;addaman complimentary remark made 
during the cutting of hair or during shaving ... may it 
make you feel good! 
r~ muqaddim. muqaddam In "I lieutenant-colonel. 
r:i.A;1 filr;addim Ivill passive of r;addim. 2 to progress. 
make progress. riI-balad ilr;addimil r;awi the country 
has made great progress. filr;addim [i(-(abuur he moved 
up in the queue. 3 to present oneself. submit oneself. 
kull' sana i(-(aalib b-yilr;addim liI-imli!Jaan every year 
the student presents himself for 
examination. 
filr;addim-Ii kliir rafacf.l-u-hum kull-u-hum many 
(suitors) have presented themselves to me, (but) I've 
refused them all. -vn lar;addum; avalpva milr;addim. 
r.J.a:.. milr;addim In "I applicant. 
J r ~ J see r.J ~ J : r;aduum 
IJ".J ~ J 
..rJ.)li r;aduus In pI r;awadiisl I large funnel or cone 
which receives material for processing. r;aduus (1{-
(a!Juuna) (mill) hopper. 2 jar of a water-wheel (see 
PI.E, 11).3 bell-shaped pigeon-hole. 
p~J 
rJJ.i r;aduum In pI r;awadiiml mason's adze, hammer. 
690 
.l.1.JJ 
.1.1.r-i r;iraa( In pI r;ararii(1 I approximate measure 
equal to a finger's width, about an inch. 2 dry measure 
equal toO.064Iitres. 3 square measure equal to 175.035 
square metres. lIr;iraa( baxl' wala faddaan ja(aara 
{proy] ... better an inch of luck than a mile of clever-
ness. 4 carat, a unit of weight equal to 0.195 grammes. 
farbala w-lifriin r;iraa( (twenty-four carat) expression 
indicating superlativeness ... top-notch, one hundred 
percent, as in kunl' mabsuu( farbala w-lifriin r;iraa( 
I was totally happy. 
~I.JJ 
:it I) r;araafa In pI -aatl cemetery. riI-r;araafa large 
Muslim cemetery on the eastern edge of Cairo at the 
foot of the Muqattam hills, the site of many tombs of 
historical and artistic importance. 
·Y.JJ 
..,..) r;urub. r;irib (a) Ivil I to become near. r;urb-ik 
naar your nearness is (like) fire. m~r' r;urbil (Cairo has 
become near) we're almost at Cairo. 2/imperf onlyl to 
be a kinsman, be a relative. huwwa yir;rab-Ii he's a 
relative of mine. bi-yir;rab-Iak feeh how is he related to 
you? - vn r;urb. r;araaba. 
~ I) r;araaba I Ivnl [ii ~ilal r;araaba benhum there is a 
bond of kinship between them. 2 Icoll n. pl-aall kin-
dred, relatives. mif !Ja-yilrafuu-na - dool r;arabaal 
biliida they won't recognize ,us - they're distant 
relatives. 
..,..) r;urb Iprepl I near, near to. r;aldiin r;urb I balcf. 
they are sitting near each other: saakin r;urb I min iI-
maklab he lives near the office. 2 about. r;urb I saala 
almost an hour, nearly an hour. 
,:,4.} r;urbaan Inl (Chr] 1 Icoll nl small round loaves 
impressed with a stamp, either consecrated as commun-
ion bread or distributed among the congregation after 
the eucharistic liturgy. 2 Ipl r;arabiinl offering. 
... 4) r;urbaana In pI -aatl unit noun of r;urbaan 1. 
~I) r;arabni In pI -yyal (Chr] baker of r;urbaan. 
'-r"'-) r;ariib 
1 In 
pI r;araayibl relative, kinsman. 
2 = r;urayyib. fil-r;ariib i1-laagil in the immediate fu-
ture. kull' faalin r;ariib {proy] everything (destined) to 
come is (relatively) imminent. fid-duxxaan iI-r;ariib 
yilmi {proy] ... you can't see the wood for the trees. 
l..!.} qariiban r ladvl soon, shortly . 
..;.) r;urayyib I/adj "/la near, nearby. fll-bilaad iI-
r;urayyiba the nearby towns. II riI-bicf.aala r;rayyiba the 

goods are available. - rif/aa c;urayyib he's easy to please. 
-mihna c;rayyiba alT easily-acquired skill. Ib recent. 
Ii-lfaayit mudda c;rayyiba until recently. 2 ladv/2a near, 
nearby. saakin c;urayyib he lives nearby. 2b soon. 
ba-tiigi c;rayyib she'll be coming soon. 
..,...) i fac;rab lell I nearer/nearest. 2 soonerlsoonest. 
..,...) c;arrab Ivi/l to come near. c;arrabna lal-beet we 
approached the house. c;arrab lallJyya he drew nellr to 
me.2 Ipreverblto reach the point of (doing s.th.). kaan 
c;arrab yitallac;-ha he almost divorced her. kaanit 
c;arrabit timuut she came close to dying. Ii-lfaayit ma 
tc;arrab tin/at until it has almost dried out. - Ivtl 3 to 
cause to come near. c;arrab-Ii I-mikritoon move the 
mike close to me! -vn tac;riib; ava mic;arrab. 
~.;; tac;riib IIlala wagh it-tac;riib and bit-tac;riib 
approximately. 
11 tac;riiban ladvl approximately. ril-yoom tac;riiban xi/~ 
the day is almost over. 
'-"".;; tac;riibiladj *1 approximate. farqaam tac;ribiyya 
approximate numbers. 
..,...).. muc;arrab, muqarrab f In *1 close companion, 
favourite. w-aadi waabid mil-muc;arrabiin Ii-galalt-u 
here's one of His Majesty's favourites . 
..,... pi fitc;arrab Ivil I to become close or closer (in a 
relationship). c;alad yitc;arrab laha 1i-l:Jadd; ma ritfyit 
tiggawwiz-u he went on cultivating his relationship with 
her until she agreed to marry him. 2 to be brought near. 
ril- fakl itc;arrab mi/-kalb the food was brought close to 
the dog. -vn tac;arrub; ava/iva mitc;arrab. 
..,...)i c;aarib 1 Ivtl to become close to, approximate. 
fibna bi-nc;aarib balC( tis-sinn we're close to each 
other in age. -vn mic;arba; ava mic;aarib . 
..,...;I.A.;I fitc;aarib Ivil to become close to one another, 
approximate one another. humma mitc;arbiin fit-tuul 
they're close to each other in height. - ava mitc;aarib. 
..,...}::-I fistac;rab Jvtl I to consider close. fistac;rabt 
i/-masaata wi-mifiit lala riglay-ya I thought it a short 
distance so I walked. 2a to render shorter. fistac;rabna 
s-sikka lan tariic; ig-gaamil we took a short cu~ by way 
of the mosque. 2b to render sooner. fistac;rab i/-
malaad he moved up the appointment. -vn fistic;raab; 
ava mistac;rab. 
Z(YjJ) 
~) c;irba In pi c;irabl la water-skin. IIbi-yuntux 
fi-c;irba mac;{Uula (he puffs on a torn water-skin) "" he's 
flogging a dead horse. Ib hot-water bottle. 2 (set of) 
bagpipes. musiiqa I-c;irab bagpipe music . 
..,...)i c;aarib 2 In pi c;awaaribl I rowing boat. 2a oval-
shaped platter. 2b sauce-boat. 
691 
jYjJ 
jell) c;arabiiz, c;arabiiz (also c;arbuuz): fi-c;arabiiz-, 
fi-c;arabiiz- (also ti-c;arbuuz) in the area ofthe responsi-
bility of, in the lap of. batteet il-l:Jikaaya t-c;arabiiz-u 
I dumped the matter into his lap, I left the matter up to 
him. wiC;il fi-c;arbuuz-i it devolved upon me . 
j, Yj J 
~) c;arbat Ivil to limit one's spending, cut down on 
one's expenses. c;arbatt" lala nats-i flS-sagaayir I cut 
down on what I spent on cigarettes. -also c;arma(. -vn 
c;arbata; ava mic;arba(. 
~';;I fitc;arbat Ivil (impersonal) passive of c;arbae. 
kaan bi-yitc;arbat laleehum wi-humma~lfayyariin when 
they were young, they were kept short of money. -vn 
tic;arbiie; iva mitc;arbat. 
tYjJ 
~) c;arbal Ivtl to gulp down. b-ac;arbal fingaan 
c;ahwa c;abl; m-aruub if-fUlfl I gulp down a cup of coffee 
before going to work. -vn c;arbala; ava mic;arbal . 
~';;I fitc;arbal lvii' to be gulped down. - iva 
mitc;arbal· 
-t.lr.jJ 
_ 
;~)i qargalfaar <T karcigar> In! {mus] mode in 
Arabic music beginning on D and having E half flat and 
A flat (see also fuuri). 
j.J Ir..j J 
.i~I;I '.i~I) c;aragooz <T karagoz> In! puppet 
show similar to Punch and Judy. 
1 
-
CjlJ 
c..) c;aral:J I, c;aral:J (a) Ivtl to upset, hurt (s.o.). yaama 
c;alb-a-ha kaan mac;ruu!J mi/-lfiira how much her heart 
was wounded by jealousy. ya c;arl:Jit-hum minha how 
upset they are by her! -vn c;ar!J, c;ar!J, c;arba, t;ar!Ja; ava 
c;aari!J; pva mac;ruu!J, mac;ruu!J. 
c..) c;arab 2 (a) Ivil to become shameless, hardened or 
tough. -vn c;arl:J, c;uru!Jiyya; ava c;aari!J. 
c..) c;urb In! shamelessness, insensibility to disgrace. 
ril-t;ur!J; bi-ytull; min lenee-ha "" she has a brazen 
look. 
~) c;ur!Ja, qur!Ja In pl t;ura!J, qura!J1 ulcer, sore. 
c..) t;iri!J ladj * and pi t;ura!Jal bold, hardened, 
shameless. kaddaab wi-c;iril:J a shameless liar. 
~J) c;uru!Jiyya = c;ur!J. di t;uru!Jiyyit leen minnu 
this is shameless behaviour on his part! 
c..';;l fitt;arab, fitc;ara!J Ivil to be made or become 

upset, be or become hurt. - ava/iva mitqirifJ. 
c.;'; 1 rinqarafJ. 
rinqarafJ 
ritqarafJ. 
- ava/iva 
minqirifJ· 
c.) qarrafJ. qarrafJ 1 Ivt/ to make sore. ril-fJuzn' 
qarrafJ qalb-a-ha "" sadness made her heart heavy. 
- Ivil 2 to become sore. jafayf-u qarrafJit mil-bard his 
lips became sore from the cold. 3a to become fixed or 
ingrained. ril-wasaaxa mqarrafJa fil-Iibs the dirt is in-
grained in the clothing. ril-kidb' mqarrafJ fii lying is 
ingrained in him, he's an inveterate liar. 3b to become 
seasoned, hardened, or well-tried. -vn taqriifJ; ava/pva 
miqarrafJ. miqarrafJ. 
c.); 1 ritqarrafJ. ritqarrafJ Ivil to be made sore. -iva 
mitqarrafJ. mitqarrafJ. 
2 
• 
c..J~ 
~) qariifJa: bil-qariifJa intuitively. qidirt afham 
i1-mawc[uul bil-qariifJa I was able to understand the 
subject intuitively. 
c..;.il riqtarafJ Ivtl to propose, suggest. bi-tiqtirifJ reeh 
what do you propose? -vn riqtiraafJ; ava miqtirifJ. 
miqtirifJ; pva muqtarafJ. 
c.1.;.i1 riqtiraafJ In pi -aat. -aatl suggestion, proposi-
tion, proposal. 
.:..~.?-- muqtarafJaat Ipl nl suggestions. propositions. 
proposals. 
I ~.J J 
;.; L;.~) qardaxaana (also qardaraana) In pi -aatl noise, 
uproar .lamal qardaxaana he made a big hullabaloo, he 
raised pandemonium. 
~) qird In pi quruudl baboon, ape. ril-qird' f-leen 
rumm-u razaal (prov] "" love is blind. 
Jb) quradaati In pi -yyal street entertainer who per-
forms with a baboon or monkey. 
~) qarrad Ivil to be responsible for monkey-like peop-
le (usually children). rifJna l-mudarrisiin baqa qaldiin 
~iqarrad (uul in-nahaar we teachers, now, are training 
monkeys all day long! ratgawwiz bint' lumr-a-ha n~~' 
lumr-i - huwwa-na fJ-aqarrad baqa marry a girl half my 
age? do you think I have the patience to humour and 
play with kids! -vn taqriid; ava miqarrad. 
1 ~.J J 
~I) quraad Icoll nl tick(s). 
;~I) quraada lunit n, pi -aatl a tick. 
c.~.JJ 
..r"-~) qurdeefJi ladj invarl of poor quality, second-
rate. mUbilya qurdeefJi cheap shabby furniture. rakl' 
692 
qurdeefJi miserable food (without meat). 
- t ~ .J J 
see I ~.J J : qardaraana 
.J~.JJ 
.:..b) qirdaan: rabu qirdaan white egret, cattle egret. 
II zayy' I'abu qirdaan haayif wi-nc[iif "" meticulous and 
tidy but simple-minded. 
.:..~) qardin Ivil to become thin (like an egret). ma-lha 
qardinit kida what's happened to make her lose weight 
like this? -vn qardana; ava miqardin. 
I 
• 
.J.J ~ 
) 
qarr I, qarr (i) Ivil to confess, come out with the 
truth. min qarr' b-zamb-u rafar-lu rabb-u (prov] God 
forgives him who admits his fault. -vn qarr, qarr. 
qararaan; ava qaarir. 
)) qaraar In pi -aatl 1 bottom, bottom part. bafJr' 
ma-luu-j qaraar a bottomless sea. II gaab qaraar-u he did 
him in. - ma-fJadd'-J lirif-lu qaraar no one could trace 
him, he wasn't to be found. 2 (mus] 2a bass register, 
lowest octave of an instrument. 2b instrumental piece 
played as intreduction to a singer, and repeated as 
refrain. 
.s)) qiraari ladj * and pi -yyal inveterate, seasoned . 
)) qaraart In pi -aatl 1 decision. 2 decree, ruling. 
qararaat gumhuriyya presidential decrees. 
).. maqarrt In pi maqaarrl I site. maqarra lamal 
work site, work premises. 2 headquarters. maqarr 
i1- rumam i1-muttafJida the Headquarters of the United 
Nations. 
;). qarra t. qaarra t In pi qaarraatl continent. 
.;) qarrar Ivtl 1 to cause to confess, force the truth out 
of. 2 to question (s.o.) with the intention of extracting a 
confession. -vn taqriir, taqriir; avalpva miqarrar. 
.;) qarrart Ivtl 1 to fix, stipulate. f'eeh ik-kutub illi 
qarrarit-ha wzaarit it-(alliim lis-sana g-gayya which 
books has the Ministry of Education set for the coming 
year? rasm' muqarrar set fee. 2 to decide. qarrart 
asaafir fil-fJaal I've decided to travel immediately. 
qarraru (rinn ') yigtimlu they decided to hold a meet-
ing. -vn taqriir; ava muqarrir; pva muqarrar. 
./-;'; taqriir In pi taqariirl report. bi-yfartif wi-yiktib 
taqriir he makes an inspection and writes a report . 
.;).. muqarrirt In *1 chairman. 
.;).. muqarrart In pi -aatl syllabus. 
.;);1 ritqarrar Ivil passive of qarrar. -iva mitqarrar. 
.;);1 ritqarrart Ivil 1 to befixed, be stipulated. 2 to be 
decided .• iva mitqarrar. 
))! riqraart In pi -aatl declaration. riqraar zimma 

maliyya civil servant's declaration of personal assets. 
fiqraar gumruki customs declaration. 
fo.-I fistaljarr, fistaqarr Ivil to settle down, become 
settled. c:aawiz yitgawwiz wi-yistaljirr (or yistaljarr) he 
wants to get married and settle down. laazim yastaqirru 
c:ala rafy they must make a decision. -vn fistiljraar, 
fistiqraar; ava mistiljirr, mistaljarr. 
Z 
-
J J \J 
::,; ljarr2 (u) Ivil I to jabber on about something, thus 
risking attracting the evil eye. min kutr; ma ljarreeti 
(c:aleehum) ma-tgawwizuuj you jinxed their getting 
married with all your jabbering (about them).llya naas 
ya jarr; kfaaya ljarr phrase (found in particular in-
scribed on vehicles) intended to discourage envious 
comments. 2 to nag. tic:ibt; min ljarr; mraat-i I got tired 
of my wife's nagging. 3 to rumble, growl (of a sto-
mach). -vn ljarr, ljararaan; ava ljaarir; pva maljruur. 
);1 fitljarr Ivil (impersonal) passive of ljarr2. min 
yoom ma tljarr" c:ala ~il}l}it-u w-huwwa c:ayyaan he's 
been ill since the chatter about his being so healthy and 
strong. -iva mitljarr. 
);1 finljarr = fitljarr. - iva minljarr. 
I. 
-
4J" J \J 
...r} ljaraf, ljaraj (u) Ivtl to crunch, crush with the 
teeth. ljac:ad gamb; minni yUljruj c:ala nyaab-u he sat 
next to me grinding his teeth.lIljaarifmall}it(-u) always 
picking on (s.o.). -vn ljarj, ljarj, ljarajaan; ava ljaarif; 
pva maljruuj, maljruuj. 
...r.,;;1 fitljaraj, fitljaraj Ivil to be crunched, be crushed 
with the teeth. - iva mitljirif. 
...r;; 1 finljaraj, finljaraj = fitljaraj. - iva minljirif. 
z. 
-
4J" .J \J 
...r} ljirjl <T kurWj> In plljuruuj, ljurujal la one 
piastre, a one-piastre coin. rilli ma-mac:-huujljir/ 
ma-ysawii-j ljirj [prov] who hasn't a penny isn't worth a 
penny. IIljirjeen (1) two piastres. (2) indeterminate 
sum of money. -ljirj abyaq half-piastre coin. - ril-ljirj 
il-fabyaq yinfac: fil-yoom it-fiswid [prov] "" save for a 
rainy day. Ib [non-Cairene] half a piastre, a half-
piastre coin. 2 unit of weight for measu~ing hashish 
based on the obsolete half-piastre with a hole in the 
centre. 
...rJ} ljuruuj Ipl nl fish scales. 
..,r-J} ljuruuji ladj invarl dappled. I}~aan fazralj 
ljuruuji a dapple-grey horse. 
693 
J. 
-
4J" J \J 
...r} ljirf2 Inl shark. samakit ljirj a shark. 
4 ..;. J J see ..;. IS J J : ljariif 
,:,I";'J"; 
;i.;\",,} ljarajaana In pi -aatl old battle-axe (of a 
woman). 
I""'JJ 
,-"",} ljar~ (u) Ivtl I to sting, bite (of an insect, a 
snake).lIma-Jasiq-j; fir-raagit da - da-na lissa maljru~ 
minnu don't trust that man! I've just been stung by him! 
2 to pinch, tweak. IIma-titc:abj; mac:aa - da b-yuljr~ 
iz-zahrdon't play with him, he cheats with the dice! 3 to 
tighten, pull tight. fUljr~ it-I}izaam tighten the girth! 
-vn ljar~; ava ljaar~; pva maljru~. 
llljar~ c:ala to apply pressure to. c:aawiz I}add; yUljr~ 
c:alee c:ajaan yiftayal he needs someone to constrain 
him to work. ljar~ c:ala fiid-i he squeezed my hand. 
ljar~ c:al-banziin he stepped on the gas. 
,-"",) 
ljir~, ljuru~ (a) Ivil to be bitten, be stung (by an 
insect or a snake). - vn ljar~; ava ljar~aan. 
;;,...} 
ljar~a Ipl -aatl instance noun of ljar~ . 
.;,L.:.} ljar~aan ladj *1 I bitten or stung (by an insect or 
snake). 2 [slang] -penny-pinching, tight-fisted. naas 
ljar~aana (c:al-fituus) penny-pinching people . 
,-"",";;1 
fitljar~ Ivil passive of ljar~.llga c:ajaan itljar~ 
c:alee he came because he was constrained. -iva 
mitljir~. 
'-"'" ;; 1 finljar~ = fitljara~. -iva minljir~. 
'-""'::,; ljarr~ I Ivtl I to sting, bite (repeatedly, of an 
insect). fin-namuus ljarr~-ni bit-leel the mosquitoes 
ate me up last night! 2 to pinch, tweak (hard or 
repeatedly). -vn taljri~; ava miljarr~. 
,-"",);1 
fitljarr~ I Ivil I to be stung or bitten (repeated-
ly, by an insect). 2 to be pinched or tweaked (hard or 
repeatedly). -iva mitljarr~. 
Z""'JJ 
,-"",} 
ljur~ In pi filjra~, faljra~1 la disc, something 
disc-shaped.llljur~; gil/a a dung cake. -ljur~ ig-gamal a 
camel's chest-callus. :-ljur~ it-makana vaporization 
chamber of a primus stove. -ljur~; tilifoon telephone 
dial. -ljur~; c:asal honeycomb. Ib [athl] discus. 2 pill, 
tablet. ljur~; mnawwim a sleeping pill. 
;;,...} ljur~a In pi -aat, ljur~1 la large disc-shaped roll 
of bread. Ib disc-shaped piece of kal}k. 2 any of various 
objects having a disc-like or circular shape (e.g., sewn-
in crown-piece of a cap or hat, small round mat to 

protect a table surface). 3 panel of wood (especially as 
part of a piece of furniture). c;ur~it maktab top of a desk. 
c;ur~it kursi seat of a chair. 
"",,:" c;arra~2 Ivtl to shape (dough) into rounds. -vn 
tac;rii~; ava mic;arr~. 
"",,);1 
ritc;arr~2 Ivil to be shaped into rounds (of 
dough). - iva mitc;arr~. 
J V" .; J see I V" .J .; J : c;aru~, c;aru~a I 
4 V" .; J see 2 V" .J .; J : c;aru~a 2 
~V".;J 
-.:....) c;ar~ana Inl piracy. ri/-c;ar~ana I-gawwiyya air 
piracy, hijacking. 
,:,L...) c;ur~aan, 
qur~aan In pi c;ar~na, qara~naf! 
pirate. 
I loS V" .; J 
\"...01) c;ar~ya <Gr kerasia> Icoll nl prune(s). 
~\"...ol) c;ar~yaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a prune. 
I,""".; J 
'""") c;araq I (u) Ivtl I to punch (paper). ri/-kumsari 
c;araq it-tazaakir the conductor punched the tickets. 
2 to scrub (clothes). 3 to gnaw on (of rodents). - Ivil 
4 to gnaw. ma-tuc;ruqj' f-qawafr-ak don't chew your 
finger-nails! II c;araq lala snaan-u he gnashed his teeth 
in anger. -vn c;arq, c;araqaan; ava c;aariq; pva 
mac;ruuq. 
...;. ~I ritc;araq Ivii passive of c;araq. - iva mitc;iriq . 
..;. ,;.; 1 rinc;araq Ivi/l = ritc;araq. 2 to become extinct. 
-vn rinc;iraaq; ava munqariq; iva minc;iriq. 
2,""".; J 
..;.) qarqt In pi quruuqlloan . 
..;. .... i raqraq Ivtl to lend (s.th.) to (s.o.). -vn riqraaq; 
ava muqriq. 
..;. ,;i 1 riqta1aq t Ivii to borrow (money), take a loan. 
-vn riqtiraaq; ava muqtariq. 
J '""".; J 
j;) . ..;.) c;araq2 Icoll nl pods of the sunt tree (used 
medicinally and in the manufacture of ink). 
~) .4::0) c;araqa lunit n, pi -aatl a pod of the sunt 
tree. 
1.1.;J 
.1.) c;ara{ (u) I Ivtl to cut off. liil riid-ak ya waad 
I-ac;ru{-ha take your hand away, kid, or I'll cut it off! 
694 
c;ara{-u bi-snaan-u he bit it off. 2 Ivil to tighten, become 
tight. rig-gazma b-tuc;ru{ lala rigl-i the shoe pinches my 
foot. ril-baab c;ara{ lala ~baal-i the door squashed my 
finger. ba{n-i b-tuc;ru{ lalayya my stomach has cramps. 
- vn c;ar{, c;ara{aan; ava c;aari{; pva mac;ruu{. 
~) c;ar{a In pi -aatl I instance noun of c;ar{. 2 lalso 
pi c;uratl (head) kerchief. 
~J"'" mac;ruu{a In pi mac;arii{1 sawn-off shotgun . 
.1. ~I ritc;aratlvil to be cut off. - vn mitc;iri{. 
.1. ,;.; 1 rinc;arat = ritc;ara{. - iva minc;iri{ . 
.1.:" c;arra{ Ivtl I intensive of c;ara{ 1. 2 to tighten. 
rir-rubaa{ laawiz tac;rii{ the bandage needs tightening. 
c;arra{ ~-~amuula he tightened the screw. -/elipticallyl 
ma-tc;arra{l' lala ba{n-i don't tighten (e.g., the belt) 
round my stomach! - Ivil 3 to press, apply pressure. 
c;arra{ lal-faraamil step on the brakes! c;arra{t" lalee 
lalaan yiigi I pressed him to come. - vn tac;rii{; ava/pva 
mic;arra(. 
~,;.; tac;rii{a Ipl -aatl instance noul) of tac;rii{. 
.1.);1 ritc;arra{ Ivil passive of c;arrat 1 and 2. - iva 
mitc;arra(. 
2 .1 .; J see .1 I .; J : c;iraa{ 
..,....1.; J 
...,..11) c;ur{aas 
In 
pi c;ara{iisl 
1 paper 
cornet. 
2 cuckold. 
...,..1,; c;ar{as Ivtl I to make a cornet of (paper). 2 to 
make a cuckold of. miraat-u mc;ar{asaa his wife is put-
ting horns on him. -vn c;ar{asa; avalpva mic;ar{as. 
...,..1 ~I ritc;ar{as Ivil passive of c;ar{as. - iva mit,ar{as . 
..J.1.;J 
...A1) c;ar{af Ivtl to strip of leaves, defoliate. rirsili 
I-muluxiyya c;abl' ma-tc;ar{afii-ha wash the muluxiyya 
before you pluck off its leaves. - also c;anaf. -vn c;ar{afa; 
avalpva mic;ar{af . 
...A1 ~I ritc;ar{af Ivil to be stripped of leaves, be defoli-
ated. - vn tic;ar{iif; iva mitc;ar{af . 
Ir.1.;J 
r.1) c;ar{am Ivtl to nibble at, take (small) bites of. 
bi-yc;ar{am ir-ririifhe is eating away the roafwith small 
bites. ba{{al tic;ar{am (fi-Nawafr-ak stop biting your 
finger-nails! -vn c;ar{ama; ava/pva mic;ar{am. 
r.1 ~I ritc;ar{am Ivil passive of c;ar{am. -vn tic;ar{iim; 
iva mitc;ar{am. 
2r.1.;J 
r.1) ljur{um Inl safflower, safflower seeds. 

J:, J J see J. 
-
~ 
J \J 
ItJJ 
t) c;arl I Icoll nl gourd(s). c;arl i ruumi pumpkin 
(Curcubita pepo). Ciarlo lasali or c;arl is[ambulli win-
ter ~quash (Curcubita maxima). 2a corruption, corrupt 
behaviour. rij-Jalb i c;irif mil-c;arl illi f-kull i I]itta the 
people became fed up with the corruption everywhere. 
2b empty boasting. 
~) c;arla In pi -aatl lunit nl a gourd. 
"-!~) c;arlaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a gourd. 
~) c;arlagi In pi -yyal lone who is vena"! or cor-
rupt. 2 braggart. 
t) c;arral l Ivil I to become venal or corrupt. 2 to 
brag. engage in empty boasting. -vn tac;riil; ava 
mic;arral· 
2tJ J 
tJ" C;iril. c;urul (a) Ivil to be or become bald from or 
afflicted by ringworm. II rid-dukkaana C;irlit the shop 
was cleared out (of stock). -vn c;aral; ava c;arlaan. 
~ J" c;arala In pi -aatl I head afflicted by ringworm. 
2 / deris j bald head. 
t)i rac;ral ladj. fem c;arla, pi c;urll I afflicted by 
ringworm. riI-c;arla titbaaha b-falri bint uxt-a-ha 
/provj the bald woman boasts of her niece's hair. 2 old-
hat. stale. nukta c;arla a tired joke. I]araka c;arla an 
obvious 
trick. 
I! ba{[iixa 
c;arla 
white 
tasteless 
water-melon. 
tl) c;uraal Inl ringworm. 
[)I ric;rau Ivil to be or become afflicted by ring-
worm. -ava mic;rall. 
JtJJ 
t) c;aral (i) Ivtl to curb. check. ma-fii-f I]add i yilraf 
yic;ril-u no one can keep him in line. - ava c;aaril; pya 
mac;ruul. mac;ruul· 
;;..;.. mac;rala In pi mac;aarill switch of split cane. 
t);'1 ritc;aral Ivil to be curbed. be checked. - iva 
mitc;iril· 
t:'; c;arral 2 
Ivtl 
to chide, 
upbraid. lammaal 
yic;arral-na min saalit ma w~al he's been carping at us 
since he arrived. -vn tac; riil; ava mic;arral. 
4tJ J 
;;..) c;urla In pi -aatl I settling a question or making a 
choice by drawing lots or tossing a coin. I]a-ywazzalu 
f-Juc;ac; bil-c;urla they will assign the flats by drawing 
lots. 2 [obsolj medical test for military conscription. 
695 
raal] il-c;urla he was called for the medical test to deter-
mine whether or not he would be conscripted. 
I"";JJ 
...;) c;irif. c;uruf (a) Ivil to b~come fed up. disgusted, 
sickened or repelled. rana c;rift i mil-liija di I became 
sickened by this life.ll/amuuna f-balad c;arfaana [provj 
"" just what's needed. -vn c;araf. c;arafaan; ava c;arfaan. 
...;) c;araF (i) Ivtl to disgust, sicken, repel. da-nta 
b-tic;rif-ni moot you make me sick! humma mac;rufiin 
minnu "" they are fed up with him. -vn c;arf, c;araf; ava 
c;aarif; pya mac;ruuf. 
...;) c;araF Inl filth. something disgusting. 
"';);'1 ritc;araf Ivil to be disgusted. sickened or repel-
led. - iva mitc;irif. 
...;:,; c;arraf Ivtl to disgust, sicken. repel. man;ar 
yic;arraf ii-bani raadam a sight to sicken a man. -vn 
tac;riif; ava/pva mic;arraf. 
"';);1 ritc;arraf Ivil passive of c;arraf. - iva mitc;arraf. 
"';)i c;aariflvtl to bore (s.o.), make (s.o.) fed up. -vn 
mic;arfa; ava mic;aarif. 
"';) .• ,;1 ritc;aarif Ivil to be bored, be made fed up. - iva 
mitc;aarif· 
...;;.. muc;rif ladj *1 disgusting. sickening. repellent. 
...; ji;-I ristac;raf I /vtl to consider repellent, disgust-
ing or sickening. ristac;raf il- rooqa w-rafaq-ha he found 
the room repellent and refused it. 21 Ivil to become 
disgusted, sickened or repelled. - ava mistac;ror. 
(Z"";JJ) 
;U) c;irfa I Inl cinnamon. 
;U) c;irfa 2 In pi c;irafl luck (of a deal), way things turn 
out (on a deal). riI- rarqi gat c;irfit-ha kwayyisa the land 
turned out to be a good buy. rig-gawaaz c;iraf [prov] 
marriage is all a matter of luck. I! [illit c;irfit-ha wil]fa she 
turned out to be a lousv deal as a wife. 
J ....; J J see ....; 1 J J : c;araafa 
~"";JJ 
~) 
c;arf~ Ivil to squat on one's heels. -vn c;arf~a; 
ava mic;arfa~. 
~I) c;arafii~: c;alad lala c;arafii~(-u) to squat on 
one's heels. 
JJJJ 
)) c;arc;ar Ivil to rumble, growl (of the stomach). 
ba[n-i bi-tc;arc;ar mig-guul my stomach is growling from 
hunger. -vn c;arc;.ara; ava mic;arc;ar. 

J.JJ 
.:;) c;arac; (u) Ivil to grumble, grouse. dayman tuc;ruc; 
wi-ma-tbaaal-/' c;arc; she's always grousing and never 
stops! - vn c;arc;. 
.:;1) c;arraac; ladj *1 given to grumbling and grousing. 
.:;) c;arrac; Ivil to chortle, cackle. -vn tac;riic;; ava 
mic;arrac; . 
I 
..... 
.. 
IJ" I.J .J I.J 
..?) c;arc;af, c;arc;iJ Ivtl to chew, crunch (crisp food). 
IIraagil yic;arc;aj iI-l:Jadiid a man who eats nails, a real 
tough guy. - fin laamit c;arc;ajt' w-fin lfirc;it c;arc;ajt,.. 
it's all the same to me. -vn c;arc;aja; avalpva mic;arc;af, 
mic;arc;iJ· 
4.:.";) c;arc;uuja In pi c;arac;iifll a kind of dry biscuit, 
cracker. 2 cartilage. 
..?.;;I fitc;arc;af, fitc;arc;iJ Ivil to be crunched, be 
crushed by the teeth. - iva mitc;arc;aj. mitc;arc;iJ. 
z ~ J .J J see ~.J J.J J : c;arac;ooj 
~J.JJ 
..Jt;d) c;arc;aq Ivtl to gnaw on. II kalb' yc;arc;aq fi-
laqma one who is engaged in something devoid of 
importance or consequence. -vn c;arc;aqa; avalpva 
mic;arc;aq. 
4.;.";) c;arc;uuqa 
In 
pi c;arac;iiql 
small 
piece, 
fragment . 
..Jt;d';;1 fitc;arc;aq Ivil to be gnawed. c;aqm' mitc;arc;aq 
chewed-up bone. -vn tic;arc;iiq; iva mitc;arc;aq. 
tJ.JJ 
r!) c;arc;ac; Ivil to ring out, echo, resound. dil:Jkit-u 
bi-tc;arc;ac; tisammac; id-dinya his laugh rings out loudly 
for all to hear. - vn c;arc;ala; ava mic;arc;ac;. 
~.JJ.JJ 
";''';1) c;arac;ooj <T prop n 
karak~>: l:Jukm' 
c;arac;ooj tyranny, complete dictatorship. 
I r.J J 
r) c;aram (u) Ivtl to bite hard into, bite off. wi-hiyya 
bi-tdaafil c;an nafs-a-ha raal:Jit c;arma draac;-u while she 
was defending herself, she bit deeply into his arm. -vn 
c;arm; ava c;aarim; pva mac;ruum. 
4.) c;arma Ipl -aatl instance noun of c;arm. 
r) c;irim ladj *1 tough, hard-bitten. 
r.;;1 fitc;aram Ivil to be bitten into, be bitten off. 
y~al:Jl:J iI-c;eej yitC;irifll bis-sinaan kida is it right that (a 
loaf of) bread should be bitten into like that? -iva 
696 
mitc;irim . 
r';; 1 finc;aram = fitc;aram. - iva minc;irim. 
r) c;arram Ivt/l to harden, toughen (e.g., of experi-
ence). fis-suuC; ilti c;arram-u it is the market which has 
toughened him. wiliyya mc;arrama a hardbitten 
woman. IImic;arram (c;al-filuus) miserly. 2 to top and 
tail (vegetables). -vn tac;riim; ava mic;arram. 
r);1 fitc;arram Ivil passive of c;arram. - iva mitc;arram. 
z 
-
r.J I.J 
4.) c;urma <Gr kormos> In pi c;uram/l tree stump. 
2 chopping block. 
Jr.JJ 
loS;,.) c;urmuzi, qurmuzi ladjl scarlet. fil-l:Jumma 1-
qurmuziyya {path} s.carlet fever . 
~r.J J 
..;...) c;armiJ I/vtl to chew, crunch (crisp food). 
fanaam fizzaay wi-nta bi-tc;armiJ baskawiit fi-widn-i 
how can I sleep with you chewing biscuits in my ear! 
III:J-ac;armiJ-ak I'll crunch your bones to meal! 2 Ivil to 
become dry and crisp. xalli I-makaroona fil-furn' 
c;ajaan tic;armiJleave the pasta in the oven so it may get 
crisp. -vn c;armaja; ava mic;armiJ. 
";,,,';;1 fitc;armiJ Ivi/l to be chewed or crunched. 2 to 
become dry and crisp. 3 to sizzle with annoyance or 
indignation. -avaliva mitc;armiJ. 
j"r.JJ 
Ja.) c;arma( Ivil to limit one's spending, cut down on 
one's expenses. c;arma(it lala l-c;iyaal fil-m~ruuf she 
cut down on what she spent on her children. -also 
c;arba(. - vn c;arma(a; ava mic;arma(. 
j".Jr.JJ 
j, ".) c;armuu( In pi c;aramii(1 Clarias anguillaris, 
Clarias lazera, a type of catfish found in the Nile. 
II raagil c;armuu( a slippery character. 
I~.J J 
oJ) c;arn In pi c;uruunl I pod. c;arn' xarruub carob 
pod. c;arn' filfil a single pepper. 2 {anat} amniotic sac. 
3 hom. c;arn' gamuusa a buffalo horn. c;uruun c;itba 
horns that grow towards each other over the head. 
c;uruun musaaal:Ja flat backward-growing horns.llraayit 
id-dinya lala c;arn-u he's very depressed. - wal:Jiid it-
c;arn rhinoceros. -min c;arn-u fadhin-lu {prov} ,.. make 
him pay for all he gets. - Ino pl/4 cuckold. 5 horn (as a 

material).lImatwa t;arn flick-knife (of a type originally 
made with a horn handle). 
~} t;arniyya or qarniyya In pI -aall [anal} cornea. 
<J} t;irn: l.Jaatit t;irn-(u) min t;irn-( .. ) (he's) always 
ready to pick on (s.o.). -also nit;r. 
~) t;arran Ivtll to cuckold. di bill; sayba l.Ja-lt;arran 
illi yiggawwiz-ha rakiid she is a loose girl who will 
certainly cuckold (the man) who marries her. 2 to top 
and tail (vegetables). - Ivil3 to become cuckolded (of 
a husband). 4 to produce pods (ofa plant). -vn lat;riin; 
ava/pya mit;arran. 
<J);I rilt;arran Ivi/l to be cuckolded. 2 to be topped 
and tailed (of vegetables). - iva milt;arran. 
Z';u J 
<J} t;aran f 
(i) 
Ivtl 
to connect, Jom, 
unite. 
ma-t;arant;j been i1-rilneen 1 didn't connect the two 
(things), I didn't see the connection between them. 
l.Jawagb-u mat;ruuna his eyebrows grow together. -vn 
t;iraan; ava t;aarin, t;aarin; pya mat;ruun. 
<J1} t;iraan Inll verbal noun of t;aran. 2 perverseness. 
humma lamliin t;iraan mala bal4. '" they're making 
things difficult for each other. 
<J1} qaraan f, qiraan f Inl marriage. qaraan saliid 
(I wish you) happy marriage! 
<J} qarn In pI quruunl century. ril-quruun i1-wusta the 
Middle Ages. 
<J} t;irin ladj *1 perverse. 
..J!.} qariin r In pI quranaa 'll formal term of reference 
to a husband. malikil 'lingillirra w-qarin-ha the Queen 
of England and her consort. II qariin is-suu 'l one associ-
ated with what is evil. 
..J!.} t;ariin In plt;uranal (in popular belief) one's spir-
itual double, one's counterpart in the spirit world (more 
commonly 'laxx). 
~} qariina Inli Ipl-aall formal term of reference to a 
wife. 2/pl qaraa'linl clue, indication. 
~} t;ariina I In plt;araayinl (in popular belief) one's 
spiritual double, one's counterpart in the spirit world 
(more commonly 'luxl). 
<J;\i qaarin Ivt and viI to compare. ma-lit;darj; Iqaarin 
beeni w-beenu (or Iqarin-ni bii) you can't compare be-
tween him and me. -vn muqarna; avalpva muqaarin, 
miqaarin. 
~;l.i.. muqarnaf In pI -aall comparison. 
<J;I.A;I 'lilqaarin Ivil to be compared. - iva milqaarin. 
3 i,)j J see ~.J J J : t;aruun 
4 ~ J J see ~ ~ J J : t;ariina z 
697 
-Y~JJ 
~} t;arnabiit <perh T karnabil> Icoll nl cauli-
flower(s). 
~} t;arnabiita lunit n, pI -aall a cauliflower. 
~ ~} t;arnabi{iyyaaya = t;arnabiita. 
IJ"~JJ 
...,..;';" mit;arnas InI (in Islamic architecture) stalactite 
work, honeycomb work. (see PI.G, 14). 
J "';~J J 
jA;} t;urunfillcoll nl I c1ove(s). 2 carnation(s), 
ill.;} t;urunfila lunit n, pI -aall I a clove. 2 a 
carnation. 
~')I.A.;} t;urunfilaaya lunit n, pI -aall a clove. 
-
"';~J J 
Je.ii} t;aranfiil: lirs i1-t;aranfiil bevel gear (of a watch). 
1 
" 
.J J I.J 
,} t;arw <Copt> Inl [bol} oak. -also rarw. 
Z.JJ J 
see ~J J: qarawi 
~I.JJJ 
<JI,} t;arawaan <T karavana> Icoll nl metal or porce-
lain basin(s) (smaller than tifl q.v.). 
~I,} t;arawaana lunit n, pI -aall a metal or porcelain 
basin (smaller than a tifl q. v.). t;arawaanil muuna rough 
metal bowl for carrying mortar or concrete. 
..r.-i I,} t;arawangi In pI -iyyal construction labourer 
who carries mortar in an t;arawaana. 
1~.JJJ 
v'" ,;\i t;aru~ Inl Marone labrax, a type of bass found 
in the Nile and the Mediterranean. -also [aruus. 
.... ,;\i t;aru~a I lunit nI a bass. 
Z~.JJJ 
.... ,;\i t;aru~az <prob It grossa> In pI -aatl carton, 
(containing a set number of packets). t;arU~il sagaayir 
a carton of cigarettes. 
~L...,;\i t;ar~aaya = t;aru~a. 
1 • 
" 
IJ.JJI.J 
<J,;\i t;aruun Iprop nl lake in the Fayyum. IImaal 
t;aruun immense wealth, as in landu maalt;aruun he's 
filthy rich. 
Z ~ .J J J see ~ I .J J J : 
t;arawaan, 
t;arawaana, 
t;arawangi 

IIS.H; 
i) fjara (a) Ivtll to read. 'lifjrii-li g-gawaab read me 
the letter. II fjara I-fingaan to read (the future in the 
dregs of) a coffee-cup. - fjara k-kaffto read (the future 
in) a palm. 2 to recite (the Koran). IIxud xamiis-u !'in 
fa-lla ma-fjara see xamiis 2c. - Ivi/3 to read. lilraflifjra 
can you read? II miin yifjra w-miin yismae = who gives a 
damn (what the problem is)? -vn fjiraaya; ava fjaari; 
pva mafjri. 
.)~I !'iI-qur!'aan, !,iI-quraan Inl the Koran. 
1);1 !'ilfjara, !'ilfjara Ivil I to be read. 2 to be recited 
(of the Koran). II !'ilfjaril falljil-ha (her fallja (of the 
Koran) has been recit~d) she has become engaged. 
3 (impersonal) 
passive 
of 
fjara. 
!'in-nuur 
da 
ma-yilfjirii1fii one can't read in that light. - iva milfjiri. 
I.)' I !'infjara = !'ilfjara. -iva minfjiri. 
i:,. fjarra, fjarra Ivtl I to cause to read. 2a to cause to 
recite (the Koran). !'illi Yfjarrii zayy illi yxarrii {prov} 
(he is so undiscriminating that in his eyes) the one who 
teaches him the Koran is exactly like the one who gives 
him a hard time. 2b to hire (s.o.) to recite the Koran. 
-vn lafjriyya; ava mifjarri. 
1);1 !'ilfjarra, 
!'i~fjarra Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
t;arra. bi-yilt;arra eal-mayyiliin fil- !'aeyaad during 
feasts the Koran is recited for (the souls of) the dead. 
- iva milt;arri. 
:S;.. muqri!'f In "I professional Koran reciter. 
1';:-1 !'islat;raJ Ivtl to try to read. !,islat;ra-Ina g-
gawaab he tried to read us the letter. -ava mislat;ri. 
ZIS.JJ 
..... ) qarya T In pI qural village. 
ISJ) qarawif I/adjl pertaining to villages. !'ii-magUs 
iI-qarawi the village council. 2 In *1 villager. 
. J.IS.JJ 
~) fjariij: gibna t;ariij kind of non-fat salted white 
cheese. 
"";IS.JJ 
...i....) t;aryifl/vtl to displease, make gloomy, depress. 
suluuk-u fjaryif-ni his behaviour got me down. 2 Ivil to 
become displeased, gloomy or depressed. -vn t;aryafa; 
avalpva mit;aryif . 
...i....);1 !'itt;aryif, !,ilt;aryaf Ivil to be displeased, be 
made gloomy, be depressed. - iva milt;aryif. 
"'IS.JJ 
~) fjariina 2 <Gr karina> In pI -aall {naul} keel. 
loolj iI-fjariina garboard-strake. 
698 
",Ij J 
oJlj t;azaan, t;izaan <T kazan> In pI -aall boiler, 
cauldron. 
cjJ 
c..j 
t;azalj (a) Ivill to leap. 2 to go uninvited, appear 
where one is not wanted. {uul in-nahaar yit;zalj eandaha 
he's always imposing himself (on her) in her home. 
- Ivt/3 to leap across. fjazalj iI-fjanaaya he leapt across 
the stream. -vn t;azlj, t;azaljaan; ava t;aazilj. 
__ j 
t;azlja linst n, pI -aall a leap. 
c..) t;azzalj Ivtl to cause to leap. II fjazzaljl-u sana I got 
him to skip a year. -vn lat;ziilj; avalpva mit;azzalj. 
C~I !'ilt;azzalj Ivil passive of t;azzalj. -iva milt;azzalj. 
.J j J 
.J..ii qazir lad j *1 dirty. naas qaziriin dirty people 
(morally or physically). 
)..iii !'aqzaarf Ipl nl dirt, filth. 
.::..1.JJj\,i qazuraal/pl nl dirt, filth. 
o)..ii qazaara, t;azaara Inl dirtiness. 
I • • 
-
.J .J 'oJ 
j) t;azziz, qazziz Ivtl to disgust, sicken. man~ar 
yit;azziz in-nifs a sickening sight. -vn lat;ziiz; ava 
mifjazziz, muqazziz. 
j);1 !'ilt;azziz Ivil to be sickened, be disgusted. !'ana 
b-alt;azziz min {ariit;il mUeamlil-u lis-sill' blall-u I am 
sickened by the way he treats his wife. - iva milt;azziz. 
Z jj J 
jlj fjizaaz I Icoll n! glass. (affaaya t;izaaz a glass 
ashtray. fjizaazfibbaak window pane.llt;izaaz !'ingiliizi 
frosted glass. 2/nl window (p~ne). !,it;fil il-t;izaaz close 
the window! 
oj Ij t;izaaza In pI -aalll lunit nl piece or pane of glass. 
2 Ipl also t;azaayizl bottle. t;izaazil biira a bottle of beer. 
3 a glass cover or shield. fjizaazil saaea watch glass. 
t;izaazil maklab glass desk-top. t;izaazil lamba glass 
chimney of a lamp. 
jI) t;szzaaz I 1 In "I window pane and mirror seller. 
2/adjl shiny. IIgazma fjazzaaz patent leather shoes. 
- warat; ljazzaaz cellophane. 
J •• -
.J .J 'oJ 
) t;azz I In! silk. duud t;azz silkworms. 2 ladj invarl 
raw (of silk). Ijariir t;azz raw silk. 
jl) t;azzaaz 2 In *1 {lexl} hand-loom worker. 

.J!.:) qazziir <Gr kassileros> Inl 1 soldering alloy 
(made up of two parts lead to one part tin). 2 tin. - also 
ql¥diir. 
t..iJ 
~:) qUZla ladj invarl [derisj short (of persons). 
"';..iJ see 2"';~J: qazaf, 
qaazifa, 
maqzuuf, 
qaziifa 
r. 
I 
-
• 
-
IJJIJ 
J:) qazaq I <T klzak> In pi -aall 1 dolly, trolley. 
2 [naulj slipway. 
2 
• • 
• 
IJJIJ 
J:) qazaq2 <T kazlk> Icoll nl telegraph pole(s). 
:..;:) qazaqa lunit n, pi -aall a telegraph pole. - also 
kazaka. 
..iJ..iJ 
:):) qazqaz, qazqiz Ivtl 1 to crack (seeds) between the 
front teeth. 2 to crunch on, munch (nuts, seeds etc.). 
IIqazqiz fi-siiril in-naas to gossip maliciously about peo-
ple. -vn qazqaza; ava/pva miqazqaz, miqaZC;iz. 
:)).;1 filqazqaz, filqazqiz Ivil passive of qazqaz. - iva 
milqazqaz, milqazqiz. 
(r..i J l 
4.:) qazma <T kazma> In plqizaml pick-axe. 
r:) qizm In pi faqzaaml dwarf, pigmy. 
oJ ..i J see oJ I ..i J : qazaan, qizaan 
..,... ..,... J 
~ qiss r In pi qasaawisal formal term of reference to 
a priest or minister of the church . 
...,....:.; qassiis In plqusus, qusasa, qusuus, qasawsal 
priest, minister of the church. 
.1..,...J 
L 
qis[ In pi raqsaa[, qisaa[1 1 instalment (of money 
due or paid). 2 Ipl also qusuu[1 metal can (e.g., milk-
man's churn). 
1..:.J c;assa[ Ivtl 1 to divide up equally. 2 to pay for in 
instalments. bi-yC;assa[ id-diyuun illi lalee he pays his 
debts in instalments. 3 to allow payment for in instal-
ments. qassa[ lamall i/-rart/," lala I-mullaak ig-gudaad 
he allowed the new owners to pay the price of the land 
699 
in instalments. IIbil-laqsii[ on the instalment plan, by 
instalments. - vn laqsii[; ava/pva miqassa[ . 
.J....:...;;I rilqassa[ Ivil passive of C;assa[. - iva milC;assa[. 
J.1..,...J 
.)......0 qas[ara Inl {medj catheter. 
r..,... J 
r-i qasam I (i) Ivtl la to divide, divide up. maC;suum 
Ilu~~een divided in half. C;asam if-jalri w-lafF kull' 
x~/a he sectioned off the hair and rolled up each lock. 
Ib {malhj to divide (a sum). fiC;sim xamsiilllaia lajara 
divide fifty by ten. 2a to ordain, destine (of God). 
rabb-i-na c;asam laha 1-l:Jizn mill badri Our Lord 
ordained sadness for her (too) early (in life). 2b [Chrj 
to ordain. C;asamuu qassiis they ordained him priest. 
-vn c;asamaall, qisma; ava qaasim; pva maqsuum. 
r--' qisim, C;usum (a) Ivil to be destined, be ordained 
(i.e. by God). ril-l:Jizll i qisim laha sorrow was destined 
for her. IIlibc;a f-buqC;-ak wi-liqsam (or wi-Iuqsam) Ii-
¥eer-ak {provj "" there's many a slip 'twixt the cup and 
the lip. -vn qasamaall, C;isma. 
lIlala (C;add') ma qusum according to what is available, 
in the measure of what has been provided. 
;(.....j qisma linst n, pi -aal, qisaml 1 a division, a 
(fated) lot. lI~alaat iI-c;isma {Chrj fraction prayer pro-
nounced when breaking the Host. - filii lu C;isma 
f-l:Jaaga yjuf-ha {provj "" one's fate will be fulfilled, 
that's fate! (phrase of condolence). -xad iIIi fii liI-qisma 
(I) he took a gratuity. (2) he got a scolding. 2 {malhj a 
division sum. 
r-li c;aasim I Iprop nl male given name. IIllawwil 
qaasim see Ilawwa. 
r-i C;ism, qism In pi raC;saam, raqsaam/l section, di-
vision, department. rams iI-c;ism department head . 
2 police station, precinct station. 
......... qasiima 
In 
pi qasaayiml 
1 receipt, 
stub. 
2 certificate. c;asiimil gawaaz a marriage certificate. 
qasiimil beel a bill of sale. 
~I rilqasam Ivil passive of qasam. - iva milqisim . 
~I rilC;isim Ivil (impersonal) passive of qisim and 
c;usum. ritqisim-Iu bil-l:Jizll sadness was his ordained 
fate. - iva milqisim. 
~I rinqasam = filC;asam. -iv~ millC;isim. 
~ C;assim Ivtl la to divide up. subdivide. qassimu 
ma~rd lala sill' mallaa[iC; they divided Cairo into six 
areas. Ib to distribute, share out. qassimlla 1- rakl" lal-
¥alaaba we distributed the food among the poor. 
2 {elecJ2a to distribute (the circuitry of wiring). 2b to 

regulate (electric voltage). fik-kahraba fil-larabiyya 
lawza ta(jsiim the car's electrical voltage needs regulat-
ing. 3 {mus] to improvise around (of a solo in-
strumentalist). (jassim-Iinafwayyit rast improvise a bit 
of rast for us. - Ivil 4 {mus] to improvise (of a solo 
instrumentalist). (jaalid {uul in-nahaar yi(jassim lal-
luud he sits all day improvising on the luud. -vn 
ta(jsiim; avalpva mi(jassim. 
~ 
ta(jsiim In pI ta(jasiiml (land used in a) develop-
ment scheme. 
:i...".-.i; ta(jsiima In pI -aatl I instance noun of ta(jsiim. 
2 Ipl also ta(jasiiml {mus] short improvisation on a given 
melody type, either as a self-contained piece, or as a 
cadenza within a given piece. 
~I fit(jassim Ivil passive of (jassim. -iva mit(jassim. 
f"""1i (jaasim2/vtl to share with (s.o. in s.th.). (jasim-ni 
fil-fakl' da share that food with me! -vn mi(jasma; ava 
mi(jaasim. 
f""" U.I fit(jaasim I Ivtl 18 to distribute amongst or 
share out with one another. fit(jasmu I-fakl divide the 
food among yourselves. Ib to divide up (with another, 
with others). fit(jaasim is-sudaani malaaya he shared 
the peanuts with me. 2 Ivil to make a distribution 
amongst one another. fit(jasimnafil-fak/we shared out 
the food amongst ourselves. -ava/pva mit(jaasim. 
ZrlJ"J 
r-i (jasam 2, qasam t (i) In! oath. 
• (jasaman: (jasaman bi- ... I swear by .... (jasaman 
la;aman ... ,.. I swear the greatest (possible) oath ... , 
as in (jasaman la;aman I:J-afanyar-u law ma-(jabb '-j 
bil-filuus I swear by all that is sacred, I'll do him in if he 
doesn't come up with the money! 
r-i i faqsam t Ivil to take an oath, vow. fuqsim bi-
lIaah I swear by God. - iva muqsim. 
.J IJ" J see t.S IJ" J : (jaswa, (jasaawa 
t.SIJ"J 
~ 
(jisi (a) Ivil to become cruel, become hard. 
((jalb-u) (jisi lalayya fa-sibt-u he became cruel so I left 
him. -vn (jasayaan, (jaswa; ava (jaasi. 
i,...i (jaswa, qaswa Inl cruelty. 
iJW (jasaawa Inl cruelty. 
..,...Ii (jaasi ladj "I cruel, hard. kaanu b-yiftayalu 
f-;uruuf (jasya they were working in harsh conditions. 
~i fa(jsa leI! crueller/cruellest, harder/hardest. 
...,......1 fit(jasa Ivil (impersonal) passive of (jisi. yaama 
t(jasa laleehafil-madrasa how cruelly she was treated at 
700 
school! - iva mit(jisi. 
~I fin(jasa = fit(jasa. -iva min(jisi. 
~ 
(jassa Ivtl I to render unfeeling, render callous. 
(jasseet (jalb-i lalee I hardened my heart against him. 
2 to harden (iron) by quenching. -vn ta(jsiyya; ava 
mi(jassi . 
..,... Ii (jaasa I Ivtl to suffer from. riI-wil:Jda iii b-yi(jasii-
ha the loneliness he suffers. 2/vil to suffer. huwwa 
m(jaasi min i1-l:Jubb he's suffering from the pangs of 
love. -vn mi(jasiyya; ava mi(jaasi. 
~I~J 
J~ (jifaani (also nifaaniJ) <Kashan (in Iran» 
Inl 
glazed tiles, glazed tiling .. 
c~J 
e:.i '(jafal:J (a) Ivtl to drive away, get rid of. dahya 
titiJal:J-u may a disaster carry him off! -vn (jaf/J, 
(jafal:Jaan; ava (jaafil:J; pva matiJuul:J. 
~I fit(jaf.a1:J Ivi/l to be driven away. 2 to clear off. 
fit(jifil:J min hina walla fandah i1-bulii~ get out of here or 
I'll call the police! - avaliva mit(jijil:J. 
~ 
1 fin(jafal:J = fit(jafal:J. -avaliva min(jijil:J. 
.)~J 
? 
(jafar (i) I/vtl to peel (usually a small area). fi'i/ir 
l:Jitta min i1-ba{a{saaya w-juuf lon-ha min guwwa peel off 
a bit of the potato and see what colour it is inside. - Ivil 
2 to peel off. fig-garl:J' (jafar li-wal:Jd-u the scab came 
off the wound by itself. 3 to become healthy-looking, 
put on a glow. -vn (jafr, (jafaraan; ava (jaafir; pva 
matiJuur. 
? 
(jifr Icoll nl I (natural) outer skin or layer. (jifr' 
b~al onion skin. (jifr' samak fish scale(s). Ilbi-yimfi 
lala (jifr' beeq (he walks on eggshells) ,.. he's too per-
nickety about things. -(jifr' bayaaq Lates niloticus, a 
type of perch found in the Nile. 2 dandruff. 
i,r.i (jifra In pI -aat, (jufuurll unit noun of (jifr. (jifrit 
burtu(jaan a piece of orange peel. "(jifrit i1- farq the 
earth's crust. -(jifrit lool:J and (jifrit zind {butcher] shoul-
der cut. 
-ya daaxil been 
i1-ba~ala w-(jifrit-ha 
ma-ynuub-ak filla ~annit-ha {prov] (you who get be-
tween the onion and its skin will only be rewarded by its 
filthy smell) ,.. don't interfere in others' affairs for you 
will only cause trouble for yourself. 28 wood veneer . 
lamalt i1- fooqa b-(jifra I had the suite made with 
veneer. 2b metal (especially gold) plating. faswira 
(jifra a gold-plated bracelet. riI-xaatim da mif flaaga -
(jifra bass that signet ring isn't much to speak of -it's 
only plated stuff. 

~I? qifraaya In pi -aall a piece of peel. 
• .r-<- mac;Jara In pi maqaajir. maqaajirl peeler . 
.,; qajjar I Ivtl to remove the natural outer layer 
(e.g .• peel. hull, skin) of. hiyya mqajjara l-manga she 
has peeled the mangoes. ril-makana bi-tqajjar ir-ruzz 
the machine husks rice.llqajjar-haa-Ii he handed it to 
me peeled (i.e. having done all the preparation, on a 
silver platter). - fik-koora gal-Ii mqajjara the ball came 
to me nicely set up (for a play). - (/aqil-u) beeqa 
mqajjara (she found him) a push-over. 2 Ivil to peel. 
gild-i bi-yqajjar my skin is peeling: fil-burunz id-dahabi 
qajjar min il-birwaaz the gilt has peeled off the frame. 
-vn lac;Jiir. lac;Jiir; avalpva miqajjar. 
~I filqajjar Ivil passive of qajjar. - iva milqajjar. 
I 
........ 
• '-'" '-'" \J 
..;.t qajj} (u) Ivtl I to sweep up, sweep away. qujj 
il-waraq illi wiqil mif-jagar sweep up the leaves that 
have fallen from the trees. II dahya lqujj-u-hum '" may 
disaster take them! 2 to sweep out, sweep clean. 
II ril-yaraami qajj il-beel the thief stripped the house 
bare. - fil-waad yiqujj jack-takes-all (alternative name 
for the card game b~ra q.v.) - Ivil 3 to sweep. quj/ 
layl i{-{arabeeza sweep under the table! -vn qajj. 
qajajaan; ava qaajif; pva mac;Juuf. 
.;.. qajj2 Icoll nl I straw. 2 dry rubbish, sweepings. 
~ qajja lunit n, pi -aall a straw, piece of straw. 
Ilxiyaar qaJIa type of gherkin. -lala leen-ak qajja 
{children] '" you're exposed, your private parts are 
showing. 
~L.i qajjaaya 
= 
qajja. 
fi/-yarqaan yillallaq ft-
qajjaaya a drowning man will clutch at a straw. 
..;W qajjaaj ladjl slow, stopping at every station (of a 
tr~in). 
~ 
miqajja In pi -aall broom. 
...,:.A; 1 filqajj Ivil I to be swept away. 2 to be swept 
clean. - iva milqajf. 
~ 
1 finqajj = filqajf. - iva minqajj. 
~ 
qajjif I Ivtl to rob. clean out. qajjifuu-ni ftk-
kutfiina they cleaned me out at cards. 2 Ivil to gather 
straw or sweepings, collect dry rubbish. II qajjif lala 
mayyil-ak lisxan {prov] (gather straw for (the fire 
under) your water and it will heat) '" take care of your 
affairs if you want them to flourish. -vn lac;Jiif; ava/pva 
miqajjif· 
~I filqajjif Ivil passive of qajjif. - iva milqajjif. 
1 
" 
.. 
.. 
.'-'" '-'" \J 
..;.t qifj Inl <T kll;> [naut] stern. after-end of a ship. 
kawirlil il-qifj the afterdeck. 
701 
Ibu!-J 
.l...:.J qaja{ (u) Ivtl I to scrape off. fuc;Ju{ il-buuya 
scrape off the paint! 2 to skim off. fuc;Ju[i r-riim min 
il-maraqa clear the scum from the broth. qaja{l il-qif{a 
I skimmed off the cream. 3a [metal] to mill. 3b [carp] 
to plane. 4 to cut or sharpen (a reed pen). -vn qaj{. 
qaja{aan; ava qaaji{; pva mac;Juu{. 
;J..:.; qif{a Inl la [rur] crearil", sour cream. Ib clotted 
cream. Il.sabaay il-qif{a a very good morning to you! 
-sayyid qif{a hippopotamus. 2 Icoll nl custard apple(s). 
~ l1...:..i qif{aaya lunit n, pi -aall a custard apple. 
1...:..i. mac;Ja{ In pi maqaaji{1 long slender knife used to 
sharpen reed pens. 
~ 
mac;Ja{a 
In 
pi maqaaji{1 
I [melal] milling 
machine. 2 [carp] planing machine. 
.\a...:..i;1 fitqaja{ Ivil passive of qaja{. -iva mitqifi{ . 
~ 
1 finqaja{ = filqaja{. - iva minqifi{. 
~ 
qajja{ Ivtl I to scrape off. 2a {metal] to mill. 
2b [carp] to plane. 3 to rob, strip (one) of one's belong-
ings. fin-naas dool qajja{uu-na those people robbed us 
blind! -vn lac;Jii{; avalpva miqajja{. 
bl filqajja{ Ivil passive of qajja£. - iva milqajja{. 
Ib u!- J 
.1.Li qujaa{. qifaa{ Inl I Icoll nl pieces, counters, men 
(in, e.g., backgammon, dominoes). 2 lunit n, pi -aal. 
qujil{a. qiff{a. fic;Ji{al a piece, a counter, a man (in, e.g., 
backgammon, dominoes, chess). 3/pl -aatl leather 
strap. 
JoLi qujaa{a, qifaa{a = qujaa{ 2. 
tu!-J 
~ 
qajal (a) Ivtl to drive away, kick out. -vn 
qajalaan; ava qaajil; pva mac;Juul. 
~I filqajal Ivil I to be driven away. 2 to clear off. 
- avaliva milqifil. 
,;tu!-J 
~ 
qajlar I Ivtl to give goose pimples to, cause to 
shiver. yiss-u bi-yqajlar-ni his voice sends shivers down 
my spine. 2 Ivil to get goose pimples, shiver. ril-man;ar 
xallaa-ni faqajlar the sight made my flesh creep. -vn 
qajlara; avalpva miqajlar. 
...iu!-J 
:i.A..:..i qiffa In pi qifafl crust (of bread). rind (of hard 
cheese). 
~ 
qajaf Inl chapping, roughening . 
:i.A....i qajafa In pi -aall a small area of chapped skin. 

~~ qafafaaya = qafafa. 
~ 
qaffif 1 Ivtl to chap. fil-bard' qaffif fiday-ya the 
cold weather chapped my hands. 2 Ivil to chap, become 
chapped. II raagil miqaffif a scruffy-looking man. - vn 
ta'ifiif; ava/pva miqaffif. 
.........., taqaffuf Inl austerity (of life-style). 
.;...iJ.J 
.;....; qaffarlvtl [slangj to relieve (s.o.) of (all) money. 
qaffart iz-zibuun I took the customer to the cleaner's. 
- also faffar. - vn qaffara; ava/iva miqaffar. 
;""'<;1 fitqaffar Ivil passive of qaffar. -iva mitqaffar. 
J.~J.J 
~ 
qafqif/vt/l to gather bits and pieces, collect bits 
of straw (for, e.g., fire). daayir yiqafqif luqma hina 
luqma hnaak he goes around scavenging - (picking up) a 
bit here, a bit there. 2 to sweep away. qafqifu kull illi 
!Jilt-I they took all I possessed. - vn qafqafa; ava 
miqafqif· 
~I fitqafqif Ivil passive of qafqtJ. - iva mitqafqif. 
JJ.J 
..,'J-i qaflaan ladj *1 broke, penniless. 
J..:i qafal Inl pennilessness, penury. 
J..:..i qaffil 1 Ivtl to render destitute or penniless. 
miraat-u mqaffilaa fawwil bi- fawwil his wife keeps him 
steadily broke. 2 Ivil to become broke, become penni-
le~s. -vn tali/iil; ava/pva miqaffil. 
j...:.A;1 fitqaffil Ivil passive of qaffil 1. -iva mitqaffil. 
JIJJ.J 
,j'J.-j qUflaaq <T kl~lak> In pi -aatl [milj barracks. 
!Jabs' qUflaaq [milj confinement to barracks. 
rJ.J 
~ 
qafiim Inl frizzled bits which remain after fat 
(especially sheep's tail) is rendered down and strained 
off for cooking (eaten with bread). 
oJ J. J see oJ 1 J. J : qifaani 
[.1...,., J 
(.t-t qu~aag <T klsa~> In pi -aatl (watchmaker's) 
pliers, pair of pinc€1rs. 
y...,.,J 
~ 
qa~ab Icoll nl la sugar cane. la (loosely) cane, 
reed(s). 2 gold or silver thread, (loosely) gold braid, 
gold brocade. 
702 
~ 
qa~aba In pi -aat, 
faq~aab, 
fiq~aab, q~aabl 
1 lunit nI a piece of sugar cane, a reed.llgat-ak qa~aba ,.. 
may you be impaled! 2 any of various objects resemb-
ling a piece of cane. q~abit (ir-rigl) (1) shin-bone. 
(2) cannon bone. qa~abit burqul [obsolj metal (usually 
gold) nose-piece of a face-veil (see PI.F, 7). 3 linear 
measure equal to 3.55 metres. 
~ L..:.i qa~~abiyya In pi -aat, -aatl 1 [agricj sled-like im-
plement drawn by an animal and used to skim off top-
soil (see PI.D, 7). 2 nose-piece of a camel halter . 
.,....;... q~~ab Ivtl 1 to skim top-soil off (land) with an 
q~~abiyya. 2 to measure (land) in 3.55 metre lengths. 
-vn taq~iib; ava/pva miqa~~ab. 
~I fitqa~~ab Ivi/. 1 to be skimmed with an 
q~~abiyya (of land). 2 to be measured in 3.55 metre 
lengths. - iva mitqa~~ab. 
[. ...,., J see [. 1 ...,., J : q~aag 
~...,., J 
~ 
qa~ad (u) Ivtl 1 to intend, mean. bi-yuq~ud feeh 
what does he mean? ma-q~adt'-J!Jaaga I had no (evil) 
intention. -las preverbl ma-qa~adt'-f fazaual-hum 
I didn't mean to upset them. 2a to go in the direction 
of, aim for. qa~ad beet-u he made for his house. 2b to 
make an approach to (s.o.). qa~ad-nif-n~ii!Ja he came 
to me for advice. -vn qa~d, qa~adaan; ava qaa~id; pva 
maq~uud. 
~ 
qa~d Inl intention, purpose. qa~d-ak feeh bi;-;ab[ 
what exactly are you getting at? II bi-qa,5d' finn ... in 
order that .... -bil-qa,5d intentionally, on purpose. 
- bi-duun qa,5d unintentionally. - ril-q~d in short, to be 
brief. 
~L...i qu~aad Iprepl 1 opposite, across from. fig-gaar 
illi saakin qU,5adna the neighbour living across from us. 
2 in return for, in exchange for. xadt' xamsiin qirf' 
qu~aad il-xidma iii lamalt'-haa-lu I got fifty piastres for 
the service I did him. II di qu~aad di tit for tat. 
~ 
qa,5iid r: beet 
il-qa~iit/ the main point, the 
essence. 
.~ qa~iida In pi qa~aayidl poem. II fawwll il-q~iida 
kufr ,.. it's off to a bad start! 
..1.0:>\.4.. maqaa~id: 
rabb-i-na 
ynagga!J 
maqa,5d-ak 
[beggarsj God grant you success in your aims! 
...I..a.4;1 fllqa,5ad Ivil to be approached (for some pur-
pose). fitqa~ad fi-gmiil he was asked for a favour. -iva 
mitqi,5id. 
...I..a.4; 1 finqa~ad = fllqa~ad. -iva mtnqi,5id. 
~I fitqa,5,5ad Ivtl to single out for harassment, pla-
gue. ril-mudams dayman mitqa,5,5ad-ni the teacher is 

always picking on me. -ava milfi~~ad. 
..I...a;.jl 
rifil~adr Ivil to economize. rifil~adfr-m~ariif­
U he cut back his spending. -vn riqli~aad; ava muql~id. 
~l-al riql~aad Inl I economy. riql~aad iI-balad the 
economy of the country. 2 economics. bi-yidris 
riql~aad he's studying economics. 
.s~l-al riqli~aadi ladj *1 I economical. larabiyya 
ql~adiyya an economical car. 2 economic. majaakil 
riqli~adiyya economic problems . 
..I.Ai:;...I 
rislafi~ad = 
rilfia~~ad. - vn 
riSlifi~aad; ava 
mislafi~ad. 
j I.S ~ v'" J 
J-..I4i fi~diir <Gr kassileros> Inl I soldering alloy 
(made up of two parts lead and one part tin). 2 tin. 
-also fiazziir. 
Ijv"'J 
rU fi~ir, fi~ur (a) Ivil to become short, shorten. 
rin-nahaar bi-yifi~ar fiffila the daytime shortens in win-
ter. -vn fiu~r; ava fiaa~ir. 
.;M fi~ar (i) I Ivtl to limit, cause to fall short. fi~arli 
rigl-i lanhum (or min landuhum) I didn't visit them. 
fi~ar iffarr he didn't let the trouble develop. 2 lvi/ to 
become reduced (of liquid, from evaporation). 
riI-marafia fia~aril min iI-¥a/iyya the broth has boiled 
down. -vn fi~r, fi~r; ava fia~ir; pva mafi~uur. 
11 fi~ar /i- ( I) to put on a short leash, limit the freedom 
of action of. (2) to be brusque or curt with (s.o.). 
rU fi~r Inl shortness. fi~r; deel (ya raZlar) {prov{'" 
sour grapes. II fi~r ik-kalaam and fi~r-u ... to cut a long 
story short. 
r-lt fia~ir In * and pi fi~~arl[leg] minor. 
o;..,...u.. mafi~uura Inl enclosure to which only a specific 
category of spectators is admitted (e.g., that containing 
the best seats in a stadium, the reviewing box at a 
parade. section for women in a mosque). ril-mafi~uura 
I-malakiyya the royal box (e.g., in a theatre). 
;rU fi~uur Inl negligence, laxness . 
.r.ai fi~iir, 
q~iirr ladj 
pi fi~aarl = fi~ayyar. 
IIgab-ha min fi~ir-ha to cut the matter short, as in badal 
ma yqayyal wafil-u gab-ha min fi~ir-ha w-dafal rather 
than waste his time he cut things short and paid. 
~ 
fi~ayyar ladj * and pi fi~aarl short. na;ar 
fi~ayyar short sight. 
rUi rafi~ar lell shorterlshortest. 
~I rilfi~ar Ivil passive of fi~ar. -iva milfii~ir. 
~I rinfi~ar = rilfi~ar. -iva minfi~ir. 
~ 
fi~~ar Ivtl I to shorten. riI-fuslaan laayiz lafi~iir 
the dress needs shortening.llfi~~ar rafiabl(-u) to cause 
703 
(s.o.) to lose dignity. as in SUfiUU(-U fi~~ar rifiabl-i 
fiuddaam in-naas his failing (the exams) put me to 
shame in front of everyone. - Ivi/2 to become scarce. 
run short. riI-mayya fi~~ar;l landina we've run short of 
water. 3 to be remiss or negligent (especially in one's 
obligations to one's fellow human beings). hiyya 
bi-lfi~~ar fil-waagib mala le/il-ha she neglects her 
family obligations. 4 to fail to pass or graduate. huwwa 
fi~~ar is-sana iii faalil he flunked last year. -vn lafi~iir; 
ava mifi~~ar. 
';""1 
rilfi~~ar Ivil to be shortened (of a dress. a rope 
etc.). - iva milfi~~ar. 
~I rifil~ar Ivil I to limit oneself. restrict oneself. 
rifili~ir lanhum keep away from them! II riI-ifili~aar 
libaada [prov] keeping oneself to oneself is (tanta-
mount) to worship (of God). 21 to be limited. be res-
tricted. riI-l:Jafla fila~aril lala I-fiaraayib the party was 
restricted to relatives. -vn rifil~aar; ava mifil~ir. 
~I 
rislafi~ar Ivt/l to consider (too) short. rafaqil 
liggawwiz-u lajaan mislafi~araa she refused to marry 
him because she thought him too short. 2 to select for 
shortness. -vn riSlifi~aar; ava mislafi~ar. 
l(jv"'J) 
.;M fi~r/n pi fi~uurl palace. II ril-fia~ror fi~ril-leeni 
Kasr el-Aini. a large government teaching hospital. 
';'rU fia~riyya In pi -aal, fi~aaril I flower or plant 
pot. 2 chamber-pot, bedpan . 
.r'"-' ~I ril- rUfi~ur, l-ufi~ur Iprop nl Luxor. 
~rjv"'J 
J.. ~ 
Cj~rumill, fi~rimill/nl mortar made of ashes. 
dirt. lime and sand. 
I v'" v'" J 
..;.... fi~~ I (u) Ivt/l to cut. fi~~-i-/i nigma warafi he cut 
me out a paper star. fi~~eeljalr-i(l) I had my haircut. 
(2) I cut my (own) hair.llmakaroona mafi~u~a macar-
oni. -fi~~ (ik-kutfiina) cut the cards! _fi~~i min ... to 
deduct from (s.o.'s salary etc.). as in bi-Yfi~~U min 
mahiyyil-u mabla¥ kibiir they deduct a 'Iarge sum from 
his salary. 2 to shear. clip. bi-yiigi marrileen frs-sana 
Yfi~~ iI-xeel he comes twice a year to clip the horses. 
-vn fi~~, fi~a~aan; ava fia~i~; pva mafi~u~. 
;.;u fi~~a Ipl -aatl instance noun of fil¥~. fiuul 
1iI-l:Jal/aafi iI-fi~~a lIi-nla lawiz-ha tell the barber the 
kind of cut you want. 
~..,...u.. mafi~u~ In pi mafi~ii~/IQck of hair in front of 
the ear. pin curl in front of the ear (properly affected in 
traditional society only by a married woman). 

4...."...u.. mali~u~a In pi -aatl broad straining spoon. 
~ 
li~~a In plli~~/la hair cut over the forehead in 
bangs, fringe. Ib (bird's) cere. 2 brow-band (of a 
bridle). 
4...L...i q~a~a In pi -aatl small bit or scrap (usually of 
paper). 
'"'"'t.:u li~~a~J In·1 clipper, one who shears animals. 
.;.u.. mali~~ In pi -aatl 1 pair of scissors. mali~~' 
mfarfar (1) pinking shears. (2) thinning scissors. 
2a any of various implements which operate like a pair 
of scissors (e.g., crucible tongs). mali~~' makwa curl-
ing (or straightening) tongs. 2b any of various shapes 
resembling an open pair of scissors (e.g., crossed staff 
and sword insignia worn by a major-general or briga-
dier-general). 3 [mech} shears (apparatus for hoisting 
heavy weights). 4 [soccer} angle formed by the top of 
the goal frame and the side post. 5 tripping technique. 
xad-ni mali~~ he tripped me. 
~ 
mali~~i ladj ·1 scissored, scissor-style. fi(-(ariilia 
I-mali~~iyya fil-wasb iI-laali the scissor-style high 
jump. 
.;.u.1 
fitli~~ J Ivil 1 to be cut. 2 to be sheared, be 
clipped. - iva mitli~~. 
~I finli~~J = fitli~~J. -iva minli~~. 
..,....:... li~~~ Ivtll to cut up (in pieces). lalieet iI-waad 
mili~~~ fustaan-i I found the kid had cut up my dress! 
2 to pluck (feathers from live fowl to prevent their 
flying). -also li~li~. -vn tali~i~; av~pva mili~~~· 
~I 
fitli~~~ J Ivil 
passive 
of 
li~~~. - iva 
mitli~~~· 
l~~J 
~ 
li~~2 (i) Ivtl to tell, recount (a story, anecdote 
etc.). li~~a lalayya kull iI-mawt{uul he told me the 
whole story. -ava lia~~. 
~ 
li~~a, q~~at In plli~~, q~~1 story, tale. II feeh 
li~~it-ak what's the matter with you? 
.;.u.1 
fitli~~2 Ivil to be told, be recounted. - iva 
mitli~~· 
~I finli~~2 = fitli~~2. -iva minli~~. 
~I 
fitli~~~21/vtl to seek out information about 
(s.o. or s.th.). bi-nitli~~~ faxbaar il-laduw we try to 
find out secretly all about the enemy. 2/vi/to spy out. 
fiblat waayid yitli~~~ laleehum send someone to 
keep (secret) watch on them. -ava mitli~~~. 
:J~~J 
..,....:... li~~J (u) Ivtl to follow (a track). fil-badw' 
mafhuriin bi-li~~ iI- fasar the bedouin are famous for 
tracking. -vn li~~. li~~aan; ava lia~~. 
704 
'"'"'t.:u li~~a~2: li~~a~ fasar Ipl li~~a~iin fasarl 
tracker. 
.;.u.1 
fitli~~ J Ivil to be followed, (of a track). -iva 
mitli~~· 
4~~J 
,",",L...i q~a~ Inl punishment, penalty (particularly 
hanging for murder) . 
~I filit~~ Ivil to exact punishment. rabb-i-na 
yilit~~' minhum la-iii lamaluu fiina may God punish 
them for what they did to us! -iva milit~~. 
t~J 
~ 
li~al (a) Ivtll to sprain. li~alt' rigl-i I sprained 
my ankle. fil-hudr' li~al rigl-i the fall sprained my 
ankle. 2 to bend (part of the body), cock (the head) to 
one side. liaalid mali~uullak-kurs/ sitting sprawled on 
the chair.llli~alit id-diyka she laughed saucily. - Ivil 
4 to be or become excessive (of sweetness or saltiness in 
food). yuduliiyyit ir-ruzz' li~alit or fir-ruzz' lil¥al 
bil-yuduliiyya the rice was very salty. -vn lil¥l. 
li~alaan; ava lial¥il; pva mali~uul . 
~ 
li~la In pi -aat. li~all 1 instance noun of lil¥l. 
2 bowl or basin without a base (especially that used to 
carry mortar). llli~lit is-sarg the seat of the saddle . 
3 sound box, body of a musical instrument. lil¥lit luud 
belly of a luud (see PI.J, 15). 
~I fitlil¥al Ivil passive of li~al. - iva mitli~il. 
~I fitli~~allvilto move one's body voluptuously. 
mafya titli~~al she walks along swinging her hips. -vn 
tali~iil; ava mitli~~al' 
.J,",",J 
.....o...i li~af (u) Ivtlto snap (in two), break (off). lil¥af 
iI-lialam he broke the pencil. II ril-moot li~af fabaab-u 
death cut him down in his prime. - (fallaah) YUli~uf 
lumr-ak ... God strike you dead! - waad mali~uuf ir-
raliaba brat, devil of a kid. -vn li~f. li~afaan; ava 
lia~if; pva mali~uuf. 
4i t.:u li~~aafa In pi -aatl 1 pair of heavy-duty shears, 
pair of wire or cable cutters. 2 pair of clippers. lil¥~aafit 
t{awaafir nail clippers . 
....;..u;1 
fitli~af!ViI to be snapped (in two), be broken 
(off). -iva mitli~if. 
~I finli~af = fitli~af. -iva minli~if . 
....a.:u li~~af Ivtlto cause to be broken (completely or 
successively). fil-makwa bi-tli~~af iJ1alr using curling 
tongs breaks the hair. -vn tali~iif; ava/pva milil¥~af. 
~I fitli~~af Ivil to be broken (off, completely or 
successively). -iva mitli~~af. 

~J~J 
~ 
c;~c;~ Ivtl 18 to snip into small pieces. Ib to 
trim, clip. c[awafir-ha mc;~c;~a her nails are trimmed. 
2 to pluck (feathers) from live fowl to prevent their 
flying. 11c;~C;~i teer-ik la yluuf bi-r-eer-ik [proy] clip 
your bird's wings if you want him to stay home (advice 
to women to keep their husbands short of money). 
-also c;~~~. -vn c;~c;~a; ava/pva mic;~c;~. 
4... JUd c;~c;u~a In pI c;~ac;i~1 strip or scrap (usually 
of cloth). 
~I 
fitC;~C;~ Ivil passive of 
c;~c;~. -iva 
mitc;~c;~. 
J~J 
J...ai c;~al = c;~ala. 
~ 
c;~ala Icoll nl knotty parts of stalks of wheat and 
barley separated out during winnowing and used for 
fuel. 
~')L.ai c;~alaaya Ipl -aatl unit noun of c;~ala. 
4l...aA.. mac;~ala In pI mac;a~ill guillotine. 
J-,~J 
J~ c;~wal Ivtll to deduct unjustly from (a sum of 
money). 2 to rob, ruin (s.o.) financially by cheating. 
-vn c;~wala; ava/pva mic;~wal. 
J,..u;1 
fitc;~wal Ivil passive of c;~wal. -vn tiC;~wiil; 
iva mitc;~wal. 
..s~J 
~i fac;~a. 
faq~a leU morelmost extreme. fana 
zac/aan minnu 1- fac;~a Ijadd I am as angry as can be 
with him. II ril-masgid il-faq~a the principal mosque in 
Jerusalem. - fif-Jarc; il- faq~a the Far East. - fil-mar-rib 
il-faq~a Morocco. 
~I fitc;~~a Ivtl to investigate thoroughly, make a 
thorough enquiry about. dayman yitc;~~a 1-faxbaar he 
always enquires extensively about the news. -ava 
mitc;~~i. 
~ 
I fistac;~a Ivtl to investigate thoroughly, make a 
thorough inquiry about. ruulj istac;~a faxbar-hum go 
and make thorough inquiries about them. - vn fistic;~a; 
ava mistac;~i. 
11 fistac;~a lan to inquire about or into, as in c;aladna 
mudda nistac;~a lan beet-u we spent a lot of time trying 
to find out where he lived. 
Yu':'J 
~ 
c;ac[iib In pI c;uc[baanl 18 metal rod, bar. c;ac[iib 
il-c;a(r rail (of a railway). Ib railing. 2 [text] 2a hank of 
70S 
about five-hundred cotton threads. 2b twill stripe. 
3 [euphem] penis. 
...J.; c;ac[c[ab Ivtl to strip (s.th.) bare. II ril-liyaal 
if-Jahr i da c;aqc[abuu-ni the children left me flat broke 
this month. -vn tac;c[iib; ava/pva mic;ac[c[ab. 
~I fitc;ac[c[ab Ivil to be stripped bare. -iva 
mitc;aqc[ab. 
u':' u':' J 
..;.u.1 finc;ac[c[, finqac[c[t Ivil to pounce. fil-bulii§ 
inc;ac[c[8 lala I-Ijaramiyya the police pounced on the 
thieves. -vn finqic[aac[; ava minc;ac[c[. 
..su':'J 
~ 
c;ac[a I (i) Ivtl I to attend to, carry out. talab-ak 
mac;c[i your request is taken care of. bi-tiC;c[i mifwaar 
she's on an errand. fac;qi Ijagt-i b- fiid-i wala fac;uul 
lil-kalb i ya siid-i [proy] "" better help yourself than 
grovelfor a dog's help. 2 to spend (time). c;ac[eenafahr i 
b-tuul-u f-bariis we spent a whole month in Paris. 3 [lsi] 
to compensate for, make up for (a missed religious 
obligation). - vn c;ac[a, c;ac[ayaan; ava c;aac[i; pvamac;qi. 
11 c;ac[a lala to make an end of. c;ac[a lal-fakl he 
polished off the food. c;ac[eet lalee I finished hilll off, 
I did him in. IIqarba qacf.ya knockout (blow). 
.l.4i c;ac[a 2 /nl I fate. II c;ac[a faxafP min c;ac[a ... (1) it 
could have been worse. (2) the lesser of two evils. 
2 judicature. 3 [lsi] compensation for missed prayer or 
fasting. 
.l.4i qac[aa f Inl I fate. II qac[aa f wi-qadar as a matter of 
fate, as an act of God, as in fil-Ijadsa Ij~alit qac[aaf 
wi-qadar the accident was totally unavoidable. 
2 judgement. II ril-qaqaaf il-laali the High Court. 
3 jurisprudence. 
~l.4i qac[aafit ladj *1 judicial. fic[-c[abt il-qac[aafi 
[leg] the right of apprehension. 
~li c;aac[i In pI c;uc[aahl judge. ril-faac[i yilmil c;aac[i 
[proy] "" idle people occupy themselves by interfering 
in others' affairs. II/uc;mit il-c;aac[i see luc;ma. 
~ 
c;ac[iyya In pI c;ac[aaya, c;awaac[il law-suit, court 
case. 
~ 
muc;c[a: ma-fii-J waraa muc;c[a Ijaaga you can't 
get (him) to do anything. 
~I fitc;ac[a Ivil passive of c;ac[a l • -iva mitc;ic[i. 
~I finc;aqa Ivil I = fic;ac[a. 2 to elapse. fil-
Ijikaaya di nc;ac[a laleeha ktiir that affair is way in 
the past. -ava/iva minc;ic[i. 
~ 
c;aqc[a Ivtl I to attend to, carry out. c;ac[c[a 
m~/aljit-hum he attended to their interests. 2 to spend 

(time). e;aqqa sanaleen fi~-~abra he spent two years in 
the desert. 3 to suffice for. fit-e;umaaf ba-ye;aqqi 
fuslaan the material will be enough for a dress. fil-filuus 
mifmir,aqqiyyaa-ni the money does not meet my needs. 
-
Ivi/4 to last, suffice. ril-mayya mif ba-Ie;aqqi I-bukra 
the water won't be enough to last until tomorrow. -vn 
laCi.,qiyya; ava/pva mie;aqqi. 
~I file;aqqa Ivil passive of e;aqqa. - iva mile;aqqi. 
.,..;.tt e;aaqa Ivtl to arraign (s.o. before a judge). fana 
b-ae;aqii-k e;uddaam iI-mabkama I'll take you to court. 
- vn mie;aqiyya: ava mie;aaqi. 
.,..;.lA;1 file;aaqa Ivil to be arraigned. - iva mile;aaqi. 
~I fie;laqa Ivtl to require. bi-yie;liql furl' kliir it 
calls for a lot of work. - ava mie;liqi. 
~ 
muqlaqa: bi-mue;laqa according to, in accord-
ance with. 
.;..1.,..;a:;.A.. mue;taqayaal, mue;laqayaal Ipl nl require-
ments, needs. basab mue;laqayaal iI- fabwaal according 
to the dictates of circumstances. 
~I fislae;qa Ivtl I to acquire. raabil lislae;qa 
xuqaar mis-suue; she went to get vegetables from the 
market. 2 to prevail upon (s.o.) to do (s.th.). m-ae;dar-f 
aslae;qaa baaga lean 't get him to do anything. -vn 
fislie;qa; ava mislae;qi. 
oJ I .1. J 
.:..lb,i e;U{aan, e;i{aan <T kaylan> In pi e;1{inal cord, 
piping, edging. 
ly.1.J 
..,..hi e;a{ab (u) Ivtll to make a tuck in, sew a fold in (a 
garment etc.). qa(abil deel fllslan-ha [afaan lie;a~~ar-u 
she made a tuck in the hem of her dress to make it 
shorter. 2 to section off. 
mumkin nue;(ub billa 
mil- fooqa w-ni[mil-ha maxzan we can section off a part 
of the room and make it a store. -vne;a(b, Cja(abaan; ava 
e;aa(ib; pva mae;{uub. 
11 e;a(ab [ala to corner, harass. fana fufl-ak lamma 
e;a(abl" [ai-binI' fif-faari[ I saw you when you cut in on 
the girl in the street. 
;;"l..i e;a{ba In pi -aatll fold, tuck (in a garment etc.). 
[a/aan lI(awwlli I-fuslaan fUkki e;a(bil id-deel in order to 
make the dress longer, let down the hem. 2 sectioned-
off part (e.g., of a room). 
-,J.A;I file;a{ab Ivil passive of e;a{ab. - iva mile;i{ib. 
~I finCja(ab = file;a(ab. -iva mine;i(ib. 
.,..k; e;a{{ab Ivtl I to sew folds in (e.g., several gar-
ment~).11 e;a{{ab bawagb-u he knitted his eyebrows. 2 to 
section off parts in (several rooms). 3 to patch (a wall) 
with plaster. sadd if-fanaayif wi-e;a{{ab iI-bayaaq he 
706 
plugged up the holes in the wall and patched it wi~h 
plaster. -
Ivil 4 [conslrJ to put plaster patching 
(around a door- or window-frame, to make it flush with 
the wall). [aawiz lae;{iib [ala f-fababiik the window-
frames need plaster patching. -vn lae;(lib: avalpva 
mie;a{{ab. 
2y.1.J 
..,..hi e;u{b, qu(b In pi fae;(aabll axis, pole. 2 [lsIJ high 
rank in the Sufi hierarchy. 
~ 
e;u{bi, qu{bi ladjl polar. fin-nigm iI-e;u(bi the Pole 
Star. 
I J .1.J 
).i qa{ar' (u) Ivtl la to tow. e;a{aru I-[arablyya ill-
warfa they towed the car to the garage. Ib to hitch, 
couple. sawwaae; iI-Iuun e;a{ar iI-mae;{uura the lorry-
driver hitched up the trailer. 2 to trail. badd' e;a(ar-ak 
did anyone follow you? -vn e;a{r. e;a{araan; ava e;aa(ir; 
pva maCj(uur. 
)u e;a{r In pi e;U{Uraal, e;u(ural railway train. IIfal-ha 
I-e;a{r"" she's missed the (marriage) boat, she's on the 
shelf. -faal-u I-e;a{r he missed his chance. 
0;)..;.. maCj(uura In pi maqa{lirl I trailer. 2 [coarseJ 
whore, hooker. 
)a.t e;U{r f, qu{r f In pi f'ae;(aar, f'aq{aarl I diameter. 
nu~~' qu(r radIUS. 2 country, land. ril-qu{r iI-ma~ri 
Egypt. gamii[ iI-Cju(r the whole country. 
).l..o qi(aarT In pi -aall railway train. 
)..ri;1 f'iICja(ar' Ivil passive of Cja(ar '. - iva miICji(ir . 
~ 
I f'ine;a{ar' = fiICja(ar'. - iva minCji{lr. 
.,,6 qa{{ar' Ivtl to tow. -vn laCj{lir, laCj(i,,; avalpva 
mie;a{{ar. 
~I f'iICja({ar' Ivil to be towed. - iva mIlCja((ar. 
2J .1.J 
).i qatar! (u) I Ivtl t~ drip. gism-i b-yuCj{ur [arae; my 
body is running with sweat. 2 Ivil [medJ to administer 
eye-drop~. xallll YUCj(ur-lak mil-Cja(ra di get him to 
administer those eye-drops to you. -vn Cja(r, Cja(araan; 
ava qaa{ir: pva maCj(uur. 
;).i qa(ra Inl I Ipl -aatl drop. 2 Ipl Cju(arl eye-drops. 
.;~ qa{{aara Inll (eye- or nose-) dropper. 2 [chernJ 
pipette. 
;)1 .. J I riI-qa((aara: munxafaq iI-qa{(aara the Qattara 
depression, in the Egyptian western desert. 
)...;1 f'ilqa{ar! Ivil passive of qa(ar!. - iva miICji(ir. 
)..A; I f'inqa{ar! = f'ilqa{ar!. - iva minqi(ir . 
..,,1.; qa({ar! I Ivil to administer eyedrops.1I bi-yCja{{ar-li 
bil-qa((aara "" he's very stingy with me. 2 Ivt/2a to drip, 

cause to drip. 2b to distil. mayya mc;a({ara dislilled 
water. - vn tac;{iir, tac;{iir; ava/pva mic;a({ar . 
.,b;1 fitc;a({ar2 Ivil passive of c;a{{ar2. - iva mitc;a{{ar. 
"u j, J 
.:-".)ai c;a{raan, c;i{raan Inl tar. lIya;;-i {iin wi-c;a{raan 
my luck is rotten. 
.:,p c;a{ran I Ivtlla to eoat with tar.lb to cause to be 
awful or loathsome. c;a{ranit r;ijt-i she's ruined my life! 
2 Ivil to become awful or loathsome. mazaag-u 
mic;a{ran he's in a filthy mood! '- vn c;a{rana; ava/pva 
mic;a{ran. 
.:,)..4;1 fitc;a{ran Ivil to become or be made awful. 
r;ijt-u tc;a{ranit min yoom ma ¥awa I-c;umaar "" he's 
ruined himself since he fell for gambling. - ava/iva 
mitc;a{ran. 
.;. j, J 
~ 
c;a{aj (u) Ivtl to chop off. fil-yuruub zamaan 
kaanu yiC;{uju wdaan wi-manaxiir il- fasra in wars long 
ago they used to chop off the captives' ears and noses. 
-vn c;alf, c;a{ajaan; ava c;aa{ij; pva mac;{uuj. 
..,Jaii fac;{aj ladj, fern c;alfa, pi c;ulfl mutilated by 
amputation (particularly of ears and noses). 
707 
...,Ja..;-I fitc;a{aj Ivil to be chopped off. - iva mitc;i{ij. 
~ 
1 finc;a{aj = fitc;a{aj. - iva minc;i{ij. 
~ 
c;a({ajlvtl to chop off (repeatedly, collectively or 
successively). - vn tac;{iij; avalpva mic;a{{aj. 
~I filCja{{aj Ivil passive of c;a{{aj. - iva mitc;a{{aj. 
1j,j,J 
1.. c;a{{ (u) Ivtl I to nip off. cut off with a neat single 
movement. yic;u{{ il-c;alam bi-zawya munasba l-noor; 
il-xa{{ he cuts the (nib of the reed) pen to an angle 
suitable for the type of script. 2 to take a quick nip at. 
lIc;a{{i boosa min xadd-a-ha he gave her a quick kiss on 
the cheek. 3 [soccer} to foil (an opponent's tackle) with 
a sudden feint. - vn c;a{{, c;a{a{aan; ava C;aa{i{; pva 
mac;{uu{ . 
..w c;a{{a 
In 
pi -aatl 
I instance 
noun of c;a({. 
2 sideburns. 
1..;,. mac;a{{ In pi -aatl bit of bone or stone on which the 
nib of a reed pen is cut. 
1.0.1 fitc;a{{ Ivil passive of c;a({. - iva mitc;a{{ .. 
Zj,j,J 
1; C;U{{ In pi c;u{a{1 tom cat. ¥aab il-c;u{{ ilr;ab ya faar 
[prov} when the cat's away the mice will play. IIbeeni 
w-beenu ma been il-C;u{( wil-faar "" we're natural ene-
mies. -gibna f-siirit il-c;u{{ i ga ynu{{ [prov} "" talk of the 
Devil! - C;U({-U gamal[prov} "" all his geese are swans. 
..w c;u({a In pi c;u{a{, c;u({aatl female cat, (loosely) any 
cat. 
Ja"l..t c;i{ee{a In pi c;a{aayi{1 kitten. ya c;{ee{a ¥assili wijj-
ik [children} wash your face, kitty! 
tj,J 
~ 
c;a{ar; (a) Ivt/l to cut (up), tear (up). c;a{ar; il-yabl 
he cut the rope. c;a{ar; is-sadd d r;ajaan yiftayr;al-mayya 
he breached the obstruction to open the way for the 
water.llc;a{ar; ik-koora to slice the ball (in ping-pong) 
(ef sense 3). - c;a{ar; ik-kutJiina to cut the pack (of 
cards). -Ia yic;{ar; r;irc; i wala ysayyab damm "" he's 
indecisive. - c;a{ar; ziriiba [rur} to clean up an animal 
pen by cutting and removing from it blocks of earth 
mixed with dung (for use as fertilizer). 2a to sever and 
remove. c;a{ar;U draar;-u they amputated his arm. xalli 
g-gazzaar yic;{ar;-Iak kiilu layma have the butcher cut 
you a kilo of meat. fic;{ar;-li warac;a min id-daftar tear 
me out a page from the notebook. c;a{ar;na kull i warac;a 
r;aleeha lu{ar; we plucked every leaf that had egg-
clusters on it. IImac;{uur; min jagara cut off from, or 
without, family or friends. - fic;{ar; lisaan-ak shut up! 
2b [Chr} to excommunicate. 3 to suspend and termin-
ate. c;a{ar;U I-mayya eajaan ta~liiy i{-{urumba they cut 
off the water to repair the pump. c;a{ar; mahiyyit-i he cut 
off my salary. fana r;awza fac;{ar; il-xalafI want to stop 
having children. c;a{ar;it il- famal fi-rguur;-u she's given 
up hope of his return.llc;a{ar; in-nafas and c;a{ar; il-c;alb 
to leave one panting, leave one short of breath, as in 
fik-kuyya c;a(ar;it nafas-i the cough left me panting. 
- C;a(ar; kalam-na he interrupted our talk. - c;a(ar;t i rigl-u 
mil-beet I stopped him coming to the house. -c;a{ar; 
ik-koora he intercepted the ball (ef sense 1). -xawwif-ni 
xallaa-ni c;a(ar;t il-xalaf "" he gave me a ball-shrivelling 
scare. 4a to issue, sell (usually tickets or cloth). 
fik-kumsari c;a(ar;-li tazkarteen the conductor issued 
two tickets for me. 4b to buy (usually tickets or cloth). 
mij ya-tic;dar tic;{a[ tazaakir you won't be able to get 
any tickets. 4c to buy the cloth for (a garment). c;a(ar;ti 
gallabiyya I bought a length of cloth for a galabiya. 5 to 
cover (distance, ground). c;a(ar;na xamsiin kiiluf-yoom 
waabid we covered fifty kilometres in one day. 6 to 
cost, amount to. c;ac[eet il-majawiir bi-taks i w-c;a(ar; 
kitiir I did the errands by taxi and it came to quite a bit. 
ri/-c;amii~ c;a(ar; gineeh the shirt cost a pound. -
Ivil 
7 to break, snap. fis-silk i c;a{ar; the wire snapped. 8 to 
break off, terminate. fil- firsaal c;a{ar; the transmission 
ceased. fin-nuur bi-yic;(ar; kuW jwayya the electricity 
keeps going off. 9 to curdle (of milk). - vn c;a(r;, 

c;a(alaan, c;a(liyya; ava c;aa(il; pva mac;(uul . 
• c;a(al nafs-u Ii- to devote oneselfto (s.th.). -yic;(al ... 
(God) damn ... ! yic;(al-u w-yic;(al illi gabuu damn him 
and his forebears! - C;U(Ul ... Ifem C;U(lit, pI C;U(lul 
damn ... ! ... be damned! C;U(lit il-futubisaat the buses 
be damned! C;U{lit il-xilfa w-sirit-ha to hell with this 
business of having children! 
Wai c;a(la Ipl -aatl instance noun of c;a(l. c;a(lit c;alb 
heart-break.lIc;a(la bala w~/a (an unjoinable cut) ... 
good riddance. 
w... qa(lan f I/advl decidedly, definitely. rafaqit 
qa(lan she has definitely refused. 2 linterjl certainly! of 
course! 
:(J.i c;a(liyya In/l cutting, method of cutting (usually 
of meat). fig-gazzaar da c;a{liyyit-u mif lagbaa-ni 
I don't like the way that butcher cuts. Iisikkiinit 
c;a(liyya [plumb! wheel cutter. -sanduuc; c;a(liyya 
[carpI mitre box, block. 2/pl -aatl [butcher[ cut (of 
meat). 
t)u... maC;{UUl/n pI mac;a(iil/loafer, idler, wastrel. 
fiblid lanhum - doolfiwayyit mac;a(iil keep away from 
them - they're just a lot of good-for-nothings! 
~)u... maC;(UUla f In pl-aatl (musical, literary etc.) 
composition. 
4-)u... maC;(Uliyya Inl piece-work (as opposed to 
salaried work). 
~ 
c;i(la. fju(la. qi(la In pI c;i(al. c;u(al. qi(all 
I part, piece. C;1{al riyaar spare parts. C;U(lit c;umaaf a 
piece of. cloth. b-aftayal bil-c;i(la I work on a piece-
work basis. 2 (plant) cutting. 
t ll.i qi(aal f In pI -aatl sector, section. qi(aallaamm 
wi-qi{aal xa~~ public sector and private sector. 
t)u c;a(uul/n pI c;awa(iil/l partition. furl iI-banna 
b-yibtidi fil-be(aan wil-c;awa(iil the work of the brick-
layer begins with the walls and partitions. 2[nav/ 
bulkhead. 
~ 
c;a(iila [women in trad soc! exclamation of ex-
asperation ... (oh) drat! (oh) blast! as in c;a(iila - nisiit 
fagiib filuus oh blast! I forgot to bring any money! 
c;a(iila - ril-bint' di tfaxxarit leeh drat! why is this girl 
late? 
t \hi. c;a({aal/n */: c;a({aal (uruc; bandit. robber. 
.,r ll.i c;a((aali I Inl retailing. tigaarit il-c;a({aali the 
retail trade. bi-ybill iI-biqaala bil-c;a((aali he sells the 
goods retail. 2 ladvl off and on. in interrupted bits (as 
opposed to continuously, at one go). b-aakul c;a({aali 
I grab a bite here and there. I eat my meals in bits and 
pieces. bi-yiftaral c;a({aali he does his work by fits and 
starts, he works now and then. 
708 
~ 
mac;(al i In pI mac;aa(ill I section. passage (of 
music. poetry etc.). 2 measure of cloth required (to 
make a particular article). mac;(al gallabiyya material 
enough for a galabiya. 3 cutting instrument. mac;{al 
warac; letter-opener, paper-knife. 
~ 
maq(al. mac;(al 2 In pI maqaa(il. mac;aa(ill 
syllable. 
~I fitc;a(al Ivil I to be cut (up), be torn (up) or 
become cut. become torn. 2a to be severed and re-
moved. 2b [Chr! to be excommunicated. 3 to be sus-
pended. be terminated. fil-laada tc;a(alit landaha she 
stopped having her period. fil-lilaqaat id-diblumasiyya 
tc;a(alit diplomatic relations were cut. 4a to be issued. 
be sold (usually of tickets or cloth). 4b to be bought 
(usually of tickets or cloth). 5 to be covered (of dis-
tance, ground). ril-masaafa tc;a(alit fi-yomeen the dis-
tance was covered in two days. - iva mitc;i(il. 
~ 
I finc;a{al = fitc;a(al. - iva minc;i(il. 
c!» c;a({al Ivtl I to cut up, tear lip (extensively or 
successively). c;a((alu il-film they cut a lot of the film. 
bac;it tusrux wi-tc;a({ae falr-a-ha she started screaming 
and tearing her hair. lIc;a({alU farwit-u they gossiped 
maliciously about him behind his back. - c;a((alt' c;alb-i 
... I'm all cut up about you! - mic;a((al is-samaka w-del-
ha he is.committing every vice. 2a to issue, sell (usually 
many tickets or many pieces of cloth). 2b to buy (usual-
ly many tickets or many pieces of cloth). - Ivil 3 to 
keep breaking down. fin-nuur bi-yc;a((al the electricity 
keeps going off. - vn tac;(iil; avalpva mic;a((al. 
~u. tac;a{iil (il-wiff) Ipl nl (facial) features: 
~I fitc;a({al/vil to be or become cut up. be torn up 
(extensively or successively). - ava/iva mitc;a({al' 
doli c;aa{il Ivtl I to interrupt. c;a(ilt-i-ni lafaan kida 
you interrupted me for that? 2 to boycott. c;a{lu 1-
maballaat they boycotted the stores. - Ivi/3 to make a 
guess concerning thin~s supposed to be known only to 
God (e.g., life span, future gains etc., such an act being 
tantamount to blasphemy). dayman yic;aa(illala rizc;-u 
he is always counting God's future bounty (as if he had 
Him in his pocket). - also c;oo{al. - vn muc;a(la; ava 
mic;aa(il· 
t ll.i'jl fil- fiq(aal Inl feudalism . 
.,rll.i[ fiq{aali 
ladj 
*1 
I feudal, 
feudalistic . 
2 oppressive, exploitative (of a person). 
4-ll.i[ fiq(aliyya In pI -aatl feudal estate. 
~I fistac;(al/vtl Ii to deduct. bi-yistac;(al minnu 
I-fugra he deducts the rent from it. 2 to exploit (peo-
ple). fit-turgumaan da fannaan fi-stic;(aal is-suwwaa!J 
that dragoman is expert in the exploitation of tourists. 

-vn fistilj{aac:; ava/pva mistalj{ac:. 
t.\hA;;..1 fistilj{aac:; In pi -aatl deduction. fistilj(aac: iq-
qariiba the tax deduction. 
l..;j,J 
...Jai lja{af (u) Ivtl to pick, pluck. lja{afit-li ward she 
picked me some flowers. - vn ljatf; ava ljaa{if; pva 
malj{uu[. 
~ 
ljatfa linst n, pi -aatl a picking, a plucking.llJaay 
fawwil ljatfa freshly made tea (as opposed to tea made 
from adding water to used leaves). 
....;).i. malj{uuf ladjl pallid (usually of the face). wiff-u 
(or loon-u) malj(uuf he looks pale. -also max{uuf. 
...Jai ljutf In pi lji(aaf, filj{aafl bunch (of grapes) . 
....J.A.. malj{af In pi maljaa(if/ flexible two-handled bas-
ket made of palm fronds (see PI.B, 7). 
..Al..A;1 fitlja{af Ivil to be picked, be plucked. bi-yitlji{if 
faxqar ljabl i ma yinfafit is picked green, before it dries. 
- iva mitlji{i[. 
~ 
lja((af Ivtl to pick or pluck (successively). -also 
ljar{a[. -vn talj{iif; ava/pva milja((a[. 
~I fitlja((af Ivil to be picked, be plucked (succes-
sively). -iva mitlja((af. 
2(";j,J) 
~ 
lja{iifa Inl la velvet. Ib (also lja{iifa lju{n) cor-
duroy. 2 Indian or African marigold(s) (Tagetes 
erecta). 
~ 
llai lja{aayif Ipl nl small pancakes stuffed with nuts 
or other sweet filling fried and moistened with syrup or 
honey. 
j,Jj,J 
J.;.I..i lja{ljuu{ In pi lja{aljii{1 cutie, doll. 
.1AhA.. milja{lja{ ladj *1 dainty, petite. 
rj, J 
r.lai lja{am (u) I Ivtl to break (off). lja{am-li fJittit ljf¥ab 
he broke me off a piece of sugar cane. lja{am 
iI-musmaar bik-kammaafa he snapped off the nail with 
the pincers. yUlj{um raljabt-ak may He break your 
neck! IIsaac:it mafafuu-ni lja{amu k-kalaam the moment 
they saw me they broke off their conversation. -lja{am 
saakit to fall silent. -ga-k lja{m i wis{-ak may you be 
halved! 2 Ivil to break (off). fi~-~ulbi naafifwi-Iamma 
niigi niftaral fii b-yulj{um the steel is brittle and when 
we come to work on it, it breaks. sinn iI-ljalam lja{am 
the nib of the pen has snapped off. -vn lja(m, lja{amaan; 
ava ljaa{im; pva malj{uum. 
w... lja(ma In pi -aatl I instance noun of lja(m. 2 bite, 
709 
mouthful. xud-Iak lja{ma min if-jukulaata di have a bite 
of this chocolate! 
~I fitlja{am Ivil to be broken (off). -iva mitlji{im. 
~I finlja{am = fitlja(am. -iva minlji{im. 
r1i lja((am Ivtl la to break up, break off (extensively 
or successively). fibn-i bi-yfJibb i ylja((am filj/aam-u 
c:afaan yibrii-ha taani my son likes to break his pencils 
so he can sharpen them again! 2 to discourage with 
ridicule. c:umr-ak ma-bi-tjaggac:-ni - dayman bi-
tlja((am-ni you never give me any encouragement, 
you're always running me down! - Ivi/3 to break up, 
break off (extensively or successively). -vn talj{iim; 
avalpva milja((am. 
~I riI-mulja((am Iprop nl I chain of hills running 
north and south to the east of Cairo. 2 district in the 
easternmost part of Cairo, situated on the Muqattam 
hills. 
~I fitlja((am Ivil passive of lja({am. -iva mitlja((am. 
.;,j,J 
Jai lju{n I Icoll n, pi falj{aanl cotton. II lju(n i {ibbi cot-
ton wool, absorbent cotton. 2 In pi lja{aanil field of 
cotton plants. 
~ 
lju{na In pi -aatl piece of cotton. II fJa-taaxud minha 
feeh reer iI-lju{na what can you take from this world but 
the piece of cotton (placed in the anus by the 
corpse-washer)? 
Jai lju{n.if ladj *1 made of cotton. 
~ 
lju{niyya Inl I cotton-based fabric with a silky 
finish and woven stripe. 2 Ipl-aatl garment made of this 
fabric . 
.Jj,J 
I.SJIht lja((aawi Inl large variety of pigeon raised for 
food and breeding, characterized by a large crested 
head and light-brown plumage. 
1 ~ t.J 
oW ljac:ad (u) Ivil la to sit, sit down. ljac:ad mirabbac: 
c:ak-kursi he sat cross-legged on the chair. tic:ibti min· 
iI-ljuc:aad I got tired of sitting. ljac:adit gambi she sat 
down next to me. II riI-ljuc:aad mac:aa fJilw he's good 
company. -ljuc:aad i1'xazaana wala gawaazit in-
nadaama [prov] "'" better miserably single than·regret-
fully married. - da kaan ljaac:id c:ala ljalb-i "'" his pre-
sence was oppressive, I didn't like him. -ljaac:id c:ala 
fauaab-u he is tense. - ljac:ad c:ala fiid(-u) to keep an 
eye on (s.o. working), supervise closely, as in fUlic:ud 
c:ala fiid-u I-raayit ma yxallf¥ stand over him until he 
finishes! Ib [naut] to run aground. 2 to stay, remain. 

salaat bi-YUC;lUdu fil-balJr' fasabiil sometimes they 
stay at sea for weeks! mif lJa-yuC;lud laha {uul lumr-a-
ha he won't wait around for her all her life. c;aladt' 
zallaan (uul ll-leel I stayed upset all night long. 
II fUC;lUdi b!l-lafya J '" keep well! (said to or by a 
woman on parting). 3/preverbl to continue to. 
fis-suxuniyya c;aladit tiruulJ wl-tiigi the fever kept com-
Ing and going. fm-llaas c;aladu ynaadu lat-taksi the 
people kept calling for the taxi. c;alad yiftikii-Ii he kept 
complaining to me. - vn c;ulaad. c;aladaan. c;uluud; 
ava c;aalld . 
• ..w c;alda I In pi -aatl la a sitting down. Ib sitting 
position. di c;alda ma-titc;illd-j' wil-mudiir mawguud 
you shouldn't sit in that position when the boss is 
around! 2a what is sat upon. seat. C;aldit ik-kursi seat of 
the chair. C;aldit ik-kabineeh lavatory seat. haat karaasi 
w-c;aldaat bring chairs and whatnot to sit on! 2b pair of 
buttocks. posterior. 3 informal gathering, gettogether. 
II fll- fafyuulI ma-Iuu-J c;alda taking opium is a solitary 
business. 
• oW qilda. qalda: zu I-qilda the eleventh month of 
the Muslim year. 
.~I.o C;8lda! Inl I/pl -aatl base. stand. pedestal. 
C;aldit i1-marwalJa base of the fan. C;aldit is-sindaal 
body of the anvil. C;aldu if-Jiifa stand and water-vessel 
of the water-pipe. 2 Ipl c;awaalid. qawaalidl 2a base, 
seat (of operations). c;awaalid lJarbiyya military bases. 
2b basis. foundation. c;alda xarasaniyya cement found-
allon. 2c rule. principle. qawaalid in-nalJw rules of 
grammar. 
JYU C,-aluud In pi C;lldaanl young male camel. 
.......... maC;lad In pi mac;aalidl 1 [rur} second-floor 
room. 2 posterior. buttocks. 
........... maC;lada. mUC;lada Inl posterior, buttocks. 
..w.;1 fitc;alad Ivil (impersonal) passive of c;alad. di 
I-bmt !Iii yuC;illd malaaha this is the girl to be seated 
with! lJa~lira YUC;llld laleeha a mat to be sat on. makaan 
yitC;illd fil a p~ace to be sat in. - iva mitc;ilid. 
..w.; I fmc;alad = fuc;alad. - iva minc;ilid. 
.w {iar;lad Ivtl 1 to cause to sit, ;eat. c;allad iz-zibuun 
{Juddaamu he sat the customer down before him. 2 to 
cause to stay. c;alladuu-naf-Iukanda they put us up in a 
hotel. mlc;allad-ha lal-baab he is stationing her at the 
door. - vn tac,-llld; avalpva mlc;allad. 
~I fUc,allad IVII passive of c;allad. - iva mitc;allad. 
2 ~ t. J 
..w C,ild Inl {cook} amount of liquid (usually salt wa-
ter) appropriate to a particular dish. fil-C;lld' btaal 
710 
i1-ftraax kubbayteen mayya I-kull' farxa the amount ot 
liquid to be added in the cooking of chickens is two cups 
of water per chicken. - also liC;d. 
~..w C;ildlyya In pi -aat. c;ildaanl small earthenware 
kneading-crock. 
3 ~ t. J 
~I fistaC;lad J Ivil to believe (in the effectiveness of 
s.th., e.g. magic). - also flStalc;ad. - vn flStiC;laad; ava 
mistaC;lad. 
jt.J 
~ c;alar (a. i) Ivtl 1 to pierce the bottom or base of. 
baasib c;alart i{-{abla careful, you've punctured the 
drum! kursi maC;luur a chair without a seat. 2 [coarse] 
to deflower. - vn C;al'. c;alaraan; ava c;aalir. c;aalir; 
pva maC;luur. 
.;d c;alr In pi c;ulllur. c;ulural 1 bottom. bottom part. 
c;alr il-xa{{ bottom of the furrow. 1ls-sukkar fi-c;alr 
i1-fmgaal the sugar is in the bottom of the cup. fil-vaaza 
laha c;alr' mdawwar the vase has a circular base . 
2 [coarse} cunt. 
......... 1 fitc;alar IVII passIve of c;ular. - iva muc;ilir. 
~ c;ullar Ivtl 1 to hollow out. make concave. 
2 {pottery/ to attach the bottom part to (a pot). - 3 to 
fall to a low level. fil-mayya c;allarit fiz-ziir the water 
went low in the water-jar. -vn taC;liir; avalpva 
mic;allar. 
;'<;1 fitc;allar Ivil pas;ive of c;allar I and 2. -Iva 
mitc;allar. 
I J J ;ee J J J : "ala 
jJJ 
;.t c;afaz Ii) 1 to leap across. jump over. c;a(azt it-Urla 
I leapt across the canal. 2 Ivil to Jump. leap. fil-bll~aan 
mitmarran lal-c;afz the hor;e i; well-trained in jump-
ing. -vn c;afz. c;a(azaan; ava c;aa(iz; pva mac;fuuz. 
.).i c;afza linst n. pi -aatl a jump. leap. a vault. 
;"A.i c;afiiz In pi c;afaayiz. c;ifzaan. fic;fiza. c;iJizal bond-
ing clip. 
.;...u;1 fitc;afaz Ivil to be Jumped over (of a distance. a 
fence etc.). - iva mUC;lfiz. 
~ c;aftaz Ivtl to cause to Jump. - vn lac/ilz; avalpva 
mic;affiz. 
.;. J J 
...,....u c;afa! (I! Ivtl I to grip. seize. "afaft' flid-u 
I caught his hand. fagfa c;afa! (fi-)zoor-i he suddenly 
gripped my throat. IIxad ... c;af/ to seize ... with a 

sudden movement. fiI-mudiil' daxal wi-xadt-u c;affthe 
director entered and I grabbed him straight away. -xad 
i~-~anla c;aff he learnt the trade in a random fashion. 
2 to catch out_ catch in the act. c;a/afuu b-yisrac; they 
nabbed him (in the act of) stealing. muwaga/ kaan 
laa(if luhdit-u w-!'ana /Ii c;a/aft-u an employee was fil-
ching what was entrusted to him and I'm the one who 
caught him at it. - Ivi/3 to jam, seize up. fiI-/araamii 
bi-yiC;fifu la(-(aara the brakes jam on the rim. !,it-tiruus 
bi-tiC;/if the gears seize up. 4 to wisecrack. -vn c;aff. 
c;a/afaan: ava c;aa/if: pva mac;/uuf. 
~ 
c;affa In pi -aatl instance noun of c;aff. 
..,...u;1 !,itc;a/af Ivil passive of c;a/af. -iva mitc;i/if . 
..,..&&; I !,inc;a/af = !,itc;a/af. -iva minc;i/if. 
..,.i; c;a/fif Ivtl 1 to nab, catch (a number of people). 
2 to fondle, squeeze (a woman's sensitive parts). c;affif 
(fi-!bzaz-ha he fondled her breasts. - Ivil 3 to jam, 
seize up. -vn tac;fiif: avaliva mic;affif. 
~I !,itc;affiflvi/l passive of c;affifl and 2.2 = c;affif 
3. - iva mitc;affif. 
IJ'" .J J 
..,...u c;af~ In pi !'ac;faa~. c;ifaa~. c;if~al 1 cage or crate 
of palm stalks, used to transport fruit, produce, poul-
try. II bae[it-Iu fil-c;af~ "" good fortune just fell into his 
lap. 2 {anatJ rib cage. II (huwwa) nafas fi-c;afa~ (he is) 
bart;.ly alive. 3 prisoner's dock. 
,-,,"W 
c;affaa~ In °1 maker of palm-stalk crates . 
..,.ai. c;aff~ Ivtl to crate (in palm-stalk crates). c;affa~u 
t-tiin they crated the figs. -vn tac;fii~: avalpva mic;aff~. 
-".u;-
tac;fii~a In pi -aatl la large crate made of palm 
stalks. Ib fence or enclosure made of palm stalks. 
tac;fii~it firaax chicken coop. 2 {constrJ grid of rein-
forcement bars of the foundation base of a post or 
pillar. 
~I !'itc;affa~ Ivil to be crated (in palm-stalk crates). 
- iva mitc;aff~. 
.:,IJ:..JJ 
.:,\l..u c;uf(aan <T kaftan> In pi c;afaliinl kaftan, long 
loose robe (usually made of striped cotton-silk mate-
rial) worn under outer garments by men in traditional 
Egyptian society (see PI.F, 16). 
t..JJ 
~ c;affall Ivtl to cause to shrivel up, emaciate. 2 Ivil 
to be or become shrivelled up or emaciated. - vn tac;fiil; 
ava mic;affal. 
• __ ..u..- tac;fiila Ipl -aatl instance noun of tac;fiil. 
711 
~I !,itc;affal Ivil to become or be made shrivelled or 
emaciated. - ava!iva mitc;affal. 
.J.JJ 
~ c;uffa In pi c;ufaf! large flexible two-handled basket 
of palm stalks similar to a mac;(af (see PI.B, 7), but 
larger. !,iI-c;uffa iii laha widneen yifiluu-ha tneen {provJ 
"" many hands make light work. II waac;il min c;alr 
iI-c;uffa overlooked as trivial, unjustifiably disregarded, 
as in ma-dalu-nii-f lal-faray - tic;ul-fi waac;il min c;alr 
iI-c;uffa they didn't invite me to the wedding, as if 
1 were a nobody . 
.JJ.JJ 
...iA.U c;afc;af Ivil to shiver with cold, - vn c;afc;afa: ava 
mic;fc;af· 
I J.J J 
J.U c;afal (i) Ivtl 1 to close, shut. !,ic;fil iI-baab close the 
door! c;afalt-u bil-muftaay did you lock it? II !,ic;fil is-
sikka hang up the phone! -c;afalti ysaab-i fil-bank 
1 closed my account at the bank. -xaana mac;fuula 
point occupied by a specific number of counters of one 
player (in backgammon). ~ zawya mac;fuula {mathJ 
acute angle. - ba((iixa mac;fuula a matter of luck, as in 
!'ig-gawaaz ba((iixa mac;fuula marriage is (like) a closed 
water-melon (you can't tell how it's going to turn out). 
-nifs-u mac;fuula minni mUf laarif leeh he's indifferent 
to me -I don't know why! 2 to turn off, switch off. !'ic;fil 
ir-radyu turn offthe radio! ma-c;afalti-fil-yanafiyya you 
didn't turn off the tap! - Ivi/3 to close. !,if-firka b-tiC;fil 
yoom ig-gumla the firm closes on Fridays. !'ig-gamla 
c;afalit the university closed down. - vn t:;afl. c;afalaan; 
ava c;aafil: pva mac;fuul. 
ilia c;afla In pi -aatl 1 instance noun of c;afl. 2 closing 
passage, final section. c;aflit iI-rinneewa kaanit zift the 
end of the song was terrible. 
J.U c;ifl Ipl !'ac;faall 1 Inl lock, padlock. 2 ladj invarl 
2a inflexible. raagil c;ifl a dogmatic man. 2b {abusJ in-
experienced, naive. walad c;ifl a green kid. 
J.U.;I !,itc;afal Ivil 1 to be closed, be shut. !,is-sifaara 
tc;afalit the embassy was closed down. 2 to be switched 
ofr. be turned off. - iva mitc;ifil. 
J.U;I !,inc;afal = !,itc;afal. -iva mint:;ifil. 
JiJ t:;affil Ivtl la to close up, close off. !,i1-wiffeen illi 
bi-yc;affilu I-mutoor the two sides that close off the 
motor. c;affil ii-beet close up the house! lIc;affilt iI-!'are[ 
you blocked the play (in cards). - !'iI-bulii~ mic;affil-ha 
laleena the police are clamping down on us . 

- ril-bal{agiyya Cjaffilu l-Cjahwa the thugs made a sham-
bles of the coffee-house (Le. caused it to be closed 
down). Ib to close (a number of things). Cjaffil kull 
if-Jababiik close all the windows! 2a to finish up, finish 
off (a job). Cjaffilt il-beela I wrapped up the sale. 2b to 
assemble, put together. Cjaffil il-ljalCj he assembled the 
door-frame. taCjfiil nihaa fi a final assembly. - Ivi/3 to 
close (of a number of things). fi'lzil il-balad yaam 
il-Ijadd' tlaaCji mUl;am il-maljallaat miCjaffila if you go 
downtown on Sunday you'll find most of the stores 
closed. IImuxx-i Cjaffil my mind has jammed, my mind 
has stopped working. - ma-tkallim-uu-J wi-huwwa 
mCjaffil don't talk to him when he's in a bad mood 
(u.nreceptive, closed)! -vn taCjfiil; ava/pva miCjaffil. 
J.U.. miCjaffil 
ladj 
*1 
I inflexible, 
dogmatic. 
2 inexperienced, naive. 
Jio;I fitCjaffil Ivil I to be closed up, be closed off. 
fif-Juna{ kull-a-ha tCjaffilit bil-muftaalj the suitcases 
have all been locked. 2a to be finished up, be finished 
off. fif-Juyl itCjaffil the work was all wrapped up. 2b to 
be assembled, be put together.lja-yitCjaffil fi-makaan-u 
it will be assembled in situ. - iva mitCjaffil. 
2 J"; J 
ilili Cjafla, qaafila f In pi Cjawaafil, qawaafill caravan. 
qaafilit ~eed hunting expedition. 
,,";J 
\Ai Cjafa In pi Cjafawaat, fiCjfiyal I nape. xadt-u Cjafa 
I gave him a blow on the back of the neck. II xalla wiff-i 
zayy' Cjafaa-ya he humiliated me with his bawling. -lala 
Cjafa mm yifiil plentiful, abundant, as in fis-samak hina 
lala Cjafa min yifiil here fish is plentiful. -lala Cjafa ... at 
the expense of ...• as in huwwa laayif lala Cjafaa-ya he's 
living at my expense. -lamma yfuuf Cjafaa min Yeer 
miraaya {pray] when he sees the back of his neck with-
out a mirror (i.e. never)! - filii tikrah (tifuuf) wiff-u 
yiljwig-ak iz-zaman li-Cjafaa {pray] Time may put you in 
need even of the nape of the neck of one whose face you 
do not (at present) like to see. 2 Ipl Cjafawaat onlyl an 
oafish person. 
:yli Cjafya In pi -aat, Cjawaafil witty repartee centring 
on a single subject. each remark punning a particular 
aspect of the subject. in a form similar to 'knock-knock' 
jokes. daxalna l-balq' Cjafya we engaged in witty repar-
tee.llbala CjafyaJ seriously. no joke intended, all kid-
di!lg aside. 
...,u;1 fitCjaffa Ivtl I to watch (s.o.) closely, subject to 
close scrutiny. 2 to pester. harass. pick on. fiblid lanni 
712 
finta mitCjaffii-nii leeh keep away, why are you needling 
me? - ava mitCjaffi. 
~I fistaCjfa = fitCjaffa. -ava mistaCjfi. 
~I fistiCjaffa J = fitCjaffa. - ava mistiCjaffi. 
..s ..; J see " ..; J : Cjafya 
.yJJ 
...,.J.i Cjalab (i) Ivtl la to invert, turn over. fiCjlib il-
martaba turn over the mattress. Cjalab ig-gallabiyya w-
hazz-a-ha he turned his galabiya inside out and gave it a 
shake. II fakaltaljaaga Cjalabit mildit-i I ate something 
which upset my stomach. -Cjalab dimaay-i b-kalaam-u 
he set my head spinning with his talk. -Cjalab sibnit-u he 
scowled. -Cjalabit-u lalayya she turned him against me. 
-Cjalabt il-beet lak-kitaab da I turned the house upside 
down looking for that book, I looked everywhere for it. 
-ma-tilmil-f' kida laljsan babaa-k yiCjlib id-dinya don't 
do that or your daddy will make one hell of a row! Ib to 
knock over. Cjalab if-Jaay he knocked over the tea. 2 to 
convert into, turn into. Cjalab il- faaqa maktab he 
turned the room into an office. Cjalabit-u Cjird she turned 
him into a monkey. ma-tiCjlib-haa-J yamm don't make 
things gloomy! II Cjalbin-ha buu;a (1) they are having a 
riotous time. (2) they've made the whole thing chaotic. 
- Ivil 3 to become inverted, turn over. fil-markib 
Cjalabit the boat capsized. bir-raalja laljsan il-Ijumuula 
tiCjlib lalayya take it easy or the load will tip onto me! 
4 to undergo a change, become converted. ba;;-i Cjalab 
my luck changed. fil-Ijafla Cjalabit (bi-)yamm the mood 
of the party became funereal. -vn Cjalb, Cjalabaan; ava 
Cjaalib; pva maCjluub. 
4,..li Cjalba linst n, pi -aatl an inversion, a turning up-
side-down, a conversion. IICjalbit dimaay fuss and 
bother . 
.,.,fo maCjluub ladjl inverted, reversed·llbil-maCjluub 
(1) upside-down. 
(2) inside-out. 
(3) back-to-front. 
(4) backward, in reverse order. - buus fiid-ak bil-
maCjluub kiss your hand back and front (as a sign of 
gratitude to God). 
4,..li Cjalaba Inl noise. fuss. ba{[al Cjalaba be quiet! 
.,.,)u Cjallaab In pi -aat/l cement mixer. 2 tipper truck. 
3 flap (e.g., on a pocket or cuff). 4 Cjallaab in-nuur 
[auto/dipper. 
..,.JA.. maCjlab In pi maCjaalibl I (dirty) trick, prank. 
qarab-na maCjlab he played a dirty trick on us. 2 refuse 
dump . 
..,..lA;1 fitCjalab Ivil la to be inverted, invert. kull 
il-fanagiin bi-titCjilib lala wiff-a-ha bald' ma tityisil all 

the cups are turned upside down after being washed. 
riI-larabiyya ttjalabit lala t/.ahr-a-ha the car was turned 
right over! Ib to be knocked over. 2 to be converted. 
ril-limaara ttjalabit lukanda the building has been con-
verted into a hotel. -ava/iva mittjilib . 
.,.a..; 1 rintja/ab = rittjalab. -vn rintjilaab; ava/iva 
mintjilib. 
.,..')U;I rinqilaab, \'intjilaab In pi -aatl coup. rinqilaab 
l~kari military coup . 
..,..li tjallib Ivt/la to invert (one thing successively or a 
number of things). bi-ytjallib-u 'bil-midra he turns it 
over and over with a winnowing fork .11 tjallib fi-gyuub-u 
he rummaged around in his pockets. Ib to stir. tjallib 
iI-buuya he stirred the paint. tjallib-hum fi-balt/. stir 
them together! IIbeet/. mitjallib scrambled eggs. 
-bi-ytjallib lalayya I-mawaagil he stirs up old wounds 
of mine. 2 to examine thoroughly, check carefully. 
tjallib (fJiI-larabiyya he gave the car a careful check-
over. tjallib (f)il-l:Jumaar tjabl; ma tiftirii look the donk-
ey over carefully before you buy it. II tjalad yitjallib 
fik-kitaab 
he 
leafed through the book. 
- wiff 
~-~uramaati ytjallib-u w-yirmii (a face which even a 
cobbler would only examine and discard) '" an ugly 
m~g. - vn latjliib; ava/pva mitjallib. 
..,..lA;1 rittjallib Ivi/la to be inverted (of one thing suc-
cessively or of a number of things). riI-kubbayaat 
kull-a-ha tittjallib bald; ma titrisil the glasses are all 
upturned after they are washed. Ib to turn oneself over 
and over. tjalad yi/tjallib lis-siriir he kept tossing and 
turning in bed. 2 to be stirred. - ava/iva mittjallib. 
Z"=,, J J 
..,..li tjalb In pi tjuluubl I heart. IIlandu I-tjalb he has 
heart trouble. -l:Jalta rid-ha lala tjalb-a-ha she's 
apprehensive. -tjalb-u witjilli-riglee '" his heart was in 
his mouth. -yigii-Iak tjalb have courage! -tjalb-i 
malaak and tjalb-i landak I sympathize with you, my 
heart isowith you. - riI-tjuluub land; balt/.-a-ha '" a 
person can always tell when another likes him. - tjalb-i 
laleek (I) 1 have your interest at heart. (2) 1 worry 
about you. -tjalb-i Gala ribn-i nlatar wi-tjalb ibn-i 
calayya zayy iI-l:Jagar [provJ (I was heart-broken over 
my son, but my son's heart was as hard as stone towards 
me) children are a certain care but an uncertain com-
fort. -ya tjalb umm-u poor darling, as in kaanit ya tjalb 
umm-a-ha cayyaana she was sick, poor darling! 
2 centre, core, inside. tjalb is-silk core of the wire. tjalb 
if-fams the sun's core. tjalb iI-makana the inside of the 
machine. tjalb; x~~ lettuce heart. huwwa waatjilfi-tjalb 
713 
iI-mallab he's standing in the centre ofthe pitch. II tjalb; 
tambuur axle-rod of an ATchimedes' screw. - tjalb ; 
gooza cylindrical stem which leads out of the water-
vessel of a gooza and supports the tobacco (see PLI, 9). 
- fi-tjalb- Iprep, w foil pron suff tjalbii-I 3 in, inside. 
fi-tjalb is-siriir in the bed. fi-tjalb iI-mayya in the water. 
li-tjalb id-dulaab inside the wardrobe. 
~ 
tjalbiyya In pi -aatl centre, core, inside. tjalbiyyit 
iI-Iurn; suxna the inside of the oven is hot.llfi-tjalbiyyit 
within, inside, as in latjeet iI-tjutta I-tjalbiyyit if-fanta 
1 found the kitten inside the suitcase. 
..,..J1i tjaalib In pi tjawaalibl I block, cube. tjaalib 
sukkar sugar cube. tjaalib {Uub brick. 2 mould, matrix. 
tjaalib ig-gazma shoe-last. 
I C. J J see c..J J J : tjaluul:J, tjaluul:Ja 
~.J J 
.ill tjallid Ivtl to imitate. ril:Jna bi-ntjallid rurubba 1-
luyub-ha we are imitating Europe in her faults. tjallid 
~oot iI-batta he imitated the sound of a duck. - vn tatj/iid; 
ava mitjallid. 
~ 
taqliid In pi tatjaliid, taqaliidl tradition, custom . 
~ 
tatjliid ladj invarl imitation. leen 
iI-/~u~ 
it-tatjliid illi landak where are the imitation stones you 
have? Iinaas tatjliid unreliable people. 
~~ tatjliidi, taqliidi /adj/ traditional. 
.ill. 1 rittjallid Ivil to be imitated. - iva mittjallid. 
V" J J 
4-li tjilsa In pi tjilasl[rurJ hobble of a type resembling 
rope handcuffs. 
~JJ 
..;.li tjalaf (i) I Ivtl to oust, throw out. tjalafuu min 
i1-firtja they threw him out of the team. 2 Ivil [soccer] 
2a to miss completely or graze the ball (in aiming a 
kick).2b to be missed completely or be grazed (ofa ball 
at which a kick has been aimed). - vn tjalf, tjalafaan; ava 
tjaalif; pva matjluuf . 
.;.14;1 rittjalaf Ivil to be ousted, be thrown out. - iva 
mittjilif· 
~ 
1 rintjalaj = rittjalaj. - iva mintjilif. 
..;.li tjallif = tjalaf. - vn tatjliif; ava/pva mitjallif. 
,ji.S~JJ 
.r.:J.i tjalfiin <T kal,in from It> Icoll n pI tjalajiinl 
puttee(s). 

~ 
c;alfiina lunit n, pi -aatl a puttee. 
~JJ 
..,ali c;a/~ (i) Ivil I to move back onto the hind legs (of 
a horse). fil-l:J~aan c;ala~ the horse reared back. 2 to sit 
back on the hindlegs (of a horse). 3 to make a break for 
it. -vn c;a/~, c;a/~aan; ava c;aa/~. 
~ 
c;a/~a Ipl -aatl instance noun of c;a/~. 
~ 
c;alla~ = c;ala~. -vn tac;li~; ava mic;all~. 
~ 
taqallu~r In pi -aatl contraction, cramp. 
1.1 J J 
.kli c;ala{ (u) Ivtl [coarse] to excrete an c;alluu{. - vn 
c;al{; ava c;aali{; pva mac;luu{. 
;;.hI.i c;al{a Ipl-aat, c;ula{1 [coarse] instance noun of c;al{. 
J., fi c;alluu{ In pi c;alalii{1 [coarse] large firm turd (pro-
duced by a human) . 
.la.lA.;1 fitc;ala{ Ivil [coarse] to be excreted (of an 
C;alluu{). - iva mitc;ili{. 
.J.li c;alla{ Ivtl [coarse] to excrete c;alalii{. -vn tac;Iii{; 
ava mic;alla{. 
2.1 J J 
.kli c;i/i{ ladj *1 arrogant, conceited. 
.klii fac;la{ leI! morelmost arrogant. 
;J.)I.J c;alaa{a Inl arrogance, pride and conceit, 
haughtiness. 
.l..,1i c;alii{ ladj pi c;ula{al arrogant, conceited. 
.1JlA.;1 fitc;aali{ Ivil 
to behave arrogantly. 
- ava 
mitc;aali{. 
3.1 J J 
~ 
ljalii{a In pi c;alaayi{1 [path] varicocele. 
.lal".i c;ee/a{ Ivil to develop an c;alil{a. II ljee/a{t , 
mil-liyaal dool I suffered much worry and pain on 
account of those children. - ava miljee/a{. 
ItJJ 
~ c;alal (a) Ivtl I to pull out, uproot. laazim tic;/al 
id-dirs'da you must have that molar pulled. II fizral 
ibn' faadam yic;/al-ak [prov] == if you help make a man 
strong he will destroy you (comment on human ingrati-
tude). 2 to take off, pull off (clothing, jewelry). naam 
min 'lfeer ma yiC;lal hiduum-u he went to sleep without 
undressing. lja/alit id-dibla she took off her ring. - Ivil 
3 to undress. c;alal mal{ he stripped naked. 4 to change 
from outdoor clothes to indoor clothes or nightwear. 
-vn ljall' c;alalaan; ava c;aalil; pva maljluul. 
t)IA.. muc;/aal' mic;/aal In pi maljaliill slingshot, 
catapult. 
714 
~I fitc;alal Ivil I to be pulled out, be uprooted. 
fif-Jagara tlja/alit the tree was uprooted. 2 to be taken 
off, be pulled off (of clothing, jewelry). -iva mitc;ilil. 
&1 finlja/al = fitc;alal. -iva minqilil . 
c}.t ljallal Ivtl I to pull out, uproot (a number of 
things). ljallal sinaan-i kull-a-ha he pulled out all my 
teeth. c;allal if-Jital he pulled up all the seedlings. 2 to 
cause to take off (clothing, jewelry). ril-lasaakir 
ljallalUU hduum-u the soldiers made him undress. 
- Ivil 3 to run (off). fawwil mafaf-ni raai:J mic;allal as 
soon as he saw me he took to his heels. ljallal waraaha 
he tore after her. - vn tac;liil; avaliva mic;allal . 
-...,.u; taljliila In pi tac;aliill I craze, fad, (passing) fan-
cy. kull' yoom bi-yi{/al bi-tac;/iila gdiida every day he 
comes up with a new craze. -/adjectivallyl raagil 
tac;Uila a man given to eccentric behaviour. 2 [rur 
O?so/] performance given by itinerant players. 
~I fitc;allal Ivil passive of c;allal. -iva mitc;allal. 
2( t J J) 
~ C;ill' ljall In pi c;u/UUl' ljilaall I sail. 2 sailcloth, 
tent-cloth. 
;.J.; c;alla In pi -aatl I fortress. 2 fi/-c;alla' 28 the 
Citadel (of Muhammad Ali, east of Cairo, on the Mu-
qattam Hills). 2b district around the Citadel. 
.1t JJ 
.kJi c;alla{ Ivtl [deris] to pay excessive attention to the 
arrangement of (clothes, personal adornment). -vn 
c;alla{a; avalpva mic;alla{. 
J.,\.Ji ljillaa{ = lja/luu{. 
J.,,,J.i c;allUU{ In pllja/alii{1 [abus] == stuck-up bas-
tard, pompous twit. 
.l..J.A;-1 fitc;alla{ Ivil I passive of c;alla{. 2 to primp, 
preen. 3 to behave like an c;allUU{. -vn tic;a/lii{; ava 
mitc;alla{. 
.JJJ 
;..ili ljalafa In pi -aatl foreskin, prepuce. - also 'lfa/afa. 
.1.JJJ 
.1.ili Cia/fat <prob It calafatare> Ivtl I to caulk. 2 to 
make (s.th.) acceptable in appearance (but not neces-
sarily in .reality). ljalfa{ il-[imma he made the turban 
neat and perfectly shaped. ljalfa{-Iu f-Ju'lf/aana [ala ma 
timfi min ljuddaamu just do the job so it will look O.K. 
to him till you leave. -vn c;alfa{a; avalpva mic;a/fa{. 
J.,W,i ljilfaa{ In pi c;alafii{1 I caulking-chisel. 28 one 
whose work is quickly and superficially performed. 
2b confidence trick.ster. 

Jalli c;alaf{i In pi -yyal caulker. 
.l..llA;1 filc;alfa{ Ivil passive of c;alfa{. - iva milc;alfa{. 
,:,"";JJ 
~"ill c;alafuniyya <Gr> Inl rosin, colophony, resin. 
.:.rUi c;alfin Ivtl to cover or coat with c;alafuniyya. c;oos 
ik-kamanga ma-ygibJi ~OOI min reer ma nc;alfin-u the 
violin bow doesn't produce sound unless it is rubbed 
with rosin. -vn c;alfana; avalpva mic;alfin. 
~I filc;alfin Ivil to be covered or treated with 
c;alafuniyya. -vn lic;alfiin; iva milc;alfin. 
IJ JJ 
.;Ii C;iliC; (a) Ivil I to become worried or anxious. 28 to 
wake suddenly. C;iliC;l" c:ala ~OOI c:arabiyya I woke at 
the noise of a car. 2b to be restless and unable to sleep. 
c;ac:ad/' c;alc;aan {uul il-leel I was tossing and turning all 
night long. - vn c;alac;, c;alac;aan; ava c;alc;aan. 
..;l.i c;alac; J (i) Ivtl to cause to worry, make anxious, 
disturb. feeh illi c;alac;-ak c:alee what's making you wor-
ry about him? -vn c;alac;, c;alac;aan; ava c;aalic;. 
~I filc;alac; Ivil I to be made worried or anxious. 
2 to be woken from, or disturbed in, one's sleep. - iva 
milc;ilic;. 
71S 
2 J J J 
.;Ii c;alac; 2 Inl smudge of dirt (on the seat of a 
garment). 
~ c;alac;a = c;alac;. 
.;Ii c;allac; I Ivtl to soil, dirty the seat of (a garment). 
c;allac; ig-gallabiyya he got the seat of his galabiya dirty. 
2 Ivil to become soiled, become dirty (of a garment). 
-avaliva mic;allac;. 
..,..IJ JJ 
,-""Wi c;ulc;aas <Gr kolokasia> Icoll nl taro (Colocasia 
antiquorum). 
.... Wi c;u/c;aasa Ipl -aall unit noun of c;u/c;aas. 
~L..Wi c;ulc;asaaya = c;u/c;aasa. 
JJJJ 
Jill c;a/c;a/, c;a/c;il Ivtl la to work (s.th.) loose. c;alc;ill 
iI-musmaar min il-yee{a I wriggled the nail out of the 
wall. Ib to budge (s.th. heavy). ma-c;dirli-f fac;a/c;al 
id-du/aab min makaan-u I couldn't budge the wardrobe 
from its place. 2 to cause to falter or waver. ka/aam-u 
c;a/c;a/-ni his words made me waver. - Ivi/3 to faiter, 
waver. c;a/c;a/ fifJihaada c;uddaam i/-maykama he fal-
tered in (his) testimony before the court. /amma geel 
fasammac: c;a/c;all when I came to recite I stumbled 
(over the text). -vn Cia/Cia/a; avaliva mic;a/c;il, mic;a/c;a/ . 
J..ili c;u/c;ee/lcoll nl clods of earth. 
~ 
c;u/c;ee/a lunit n, pi -aal, c;a/ac;iill a clod of earth. 
j.ii.lA;1 filc;a/c;a/, filc;a/c;il Ivil 18 to work loose, be 
worked loose. Ib to budge, be budged. 2 to falter or 
waver, be made to falter or waver. - ava/iva milc;a/c;a/, 
milc;a/c;il. 
I.J J J 
Ji c;all (i) I Ivtl to reduce, lessen, decrease. fiI-c:iyuub 
bi-IC;il/i c;iimil il-c;umaaf defects reduce the value of the 
cloth. fi{-{amac: yiC;il/i ma gamac: {prov] "" greed will 
make you lose even what you have (while you are too 
busy thinking about how to get more).IIc;alli fadab-u 
c:a/ayya he was rude to me. 2 Ivil to become less, de-
crease. fiI-xu{uura c;allil the danger lessened. riyaab-i 
mifya-yc;iI/" c:an yomeen I'll be away at least two days. 
kulli ma s-sinn i yC;iI/ ... the younger one is .... -vn c;all, 
c;~/a/aan, c;illa, c;illiyya; ava c;aa/i/; pva mac;/uu/ . 
~ c;il/a Inl scarcity, scantiness. C;illil i/-c:aC;/ foolish-
ness, sil~iness. C;illil il- fadab impoliteness, bad man-
ners. II faysan min c;illil-ha better than nothing. -min 
C;illil ma-fiiJfor lack of anything better, as in bi-naaku/ 
c:eef yaaf min C;illil ma-fii-f we are eating dry bread 
because there is nothing else we can afford. 
J.,1i c;alii/I ladj pi c;u/a/aal, in constr onlyl lacking in, 
having little of. c;aliil i1-baxl unlucky. lIc;aliil id-diin 
(1) one who does not observe religious practices. 
(2) cheat. 
2 Inl 
small 
amount, 
small 
number. 
c:adad-hum c;aliil they are few in number. raaqi b-c;a/iil-
(u) content with little. IIfaal il-ki/iir ma-bac;aaJ fil/a 
/-c;aliil "" the worst is over. 3 ladvl 3a little, not much. 
niml i c;alii/ I didn't get much sleep. 3b rarely. c;a/iil 
/amma yiksab he rarely earns any money. bi-nfuuf-u 
c;aliil we don't see much of him. 
~ 
c;u/ayyill ladj *1 little, few. naas c;u/ayyiliin few 
people. mac:aaya filuus c;u/ayyila I have little money 
with me. fiNubyi badri it-lUkt1sa c;layyila fifJawaaric: 
early in the morning there are few taxis in the streets. 
2 Inl small amount, small number. c:aayif bil-c;ulayyi/ 
he lives on little. 3 ladvl 38 little, not much. c:andu 
suxuniyya wi-b-yaaku/ c;u/ayyil he has a fever and 
doesn't eat much. 3b rarely. ma-b-aruy-J' hnaak filla 
c;/ayyil I go there only rarely . 
. , 
Jil fac;all lell lesslleast, fewerl fewest etc. fac;all i ~OOI 
bi-yxawwif-ha the slightest sound scares her. huwwa 
fac;all' minni fis-sinn he is younger than me. da fac;all' 
waayid bi-yiflara/ he's the one who works the least. 
II fac;all i min iI-c;aliil "" less than nothing. - fac;all i ma 
fiiha and c:a/a /- fac;all at least. 

4;i faqalliyyat In pI -aatl minority. 
jA; 1 fitc; allivil to be reduced, lessened, or decreased. 
- iva mitc;all. 
~I finc;all = fitc;all. -iva minc;all. 
j; c;allillvtl to reduce, lessen, decrease. c;allil (min) 
suxunt-u he reduced its heat. b-alJaawil fac;allil (min) 
it-tadxiin I'm trying to cut down on smoking. -vn tac;liil; 
ava mic;allil. 
jA;1 fitc;allil Ivil to be reduced, be lessened, be de-
creased. -iva mitc;allil. 
~ 
1 fistac;alll Ivtl to deem trifling, consider to be of 
little value. bi-yistac;alla lac;l-i he underrates my intelli-
gence. fistac;all il-murattab he thought the salary a pitt-
ance. 2 Ivil to become independent, become separate. 
fij-falb' bi-ytaalib bil-istic;laal the people are deman-
ding independence. -vn fistic;laal; ava mistac;all, 
mistic;ill. 
j.&..... mustaqillladj *1 independent. 
1.J J J 
;a; c;ulla In pI c;ulall earthenware water-jug (see PI.A, 
l).lIkasarna waraa c;ulla ... we said 'good-bye and good 
riddance' when he left! -qarab bil-c;ulla to bray angrily 
and thrust out the tongue so it looks like a water-jug, (of 
a camel). 
Jl.i c;ulali In pI -yya/ maker or seller of earthenware 
water-jugs. 
JWI ril-c;ulali Iprop nI quarter in Cairo, immediately 
to the south-west of the main railway station. 
J J J J see 1 J.J J : C;ill 
IJ"'~JJJ 
4...P c;alluusa In pI -aat, c;alaliisl {Chr} hat worn by 
Greek and Coptic Catholic clergy. 
rJJ 
~ c;alam In pI fic;lima, fic;laam, c;iI(",aJ I pen, pencil. 
c;alam fabanoos or c;alam l:Jibr fountain pen. c;alam 
gaaffball-point pen. c;alam bast reed pen (as used by 
calligraphers). Ilfurja c;alam pointed brush. -l:Jagar 
c;alam pen-light battery. 2{hort} 28 stalk, shoot. 
fij-fagara gaabit fic;laam the tree put out shoots. 
2b type of grafting. 3 department, division. c;alam iI-
muruur Traffic Control Board. 4 slap (especially on the 
face). fiddeet-u c;alam mij l:Ja-yc;uum minnu jahr' 
jahreen I gave him a slap that will take him a couple of 
months to recover from! II waaxid c;alam fi-nafs-u he's 
stuck-up. 
716 
4J.&. mac;lama In pI -aatl pen or pencil case. 
~ c;allim Ivtl I to trim, clip. bi-nc;allim in-nul' 
marriteen fif-jita we prune the palms twice during the 
winter. 2 to stripe. c;umaajmic;allim striped cloth. -vn 
tac;liim; ava/pva mic;allim. 
~I fitc;allim Ivil passive of c;allim. -iva mitc;allim. 
~JJ see ~.JJ.JJ:qawloon 
.JJJ 
..>.P qalawi ladjl alkaline. 
~,u qalawiyya In pi -aatl I alkali: 2 alkalinity. 
(.J J J see also (J.J J 
c..,11i c;aluul:J Icoll nl corn cob(s). 
~.,I1i c;aluul:Ja lunit n, pi -aat, c;awaliil:Jl a corn cob. 
- also kaluul:J. 
.l;.JJJ 
.l;JJ')U c;alawoo;, c;alawuu; <T kllavuz> Inll thread 
(of a screw). musmaar c;alawoo; screw. lamba 
c;alawoo; screw-in light-bulb. 2 Ipl -aatl screw. 
.l;'p c;alwa; Ivtl I to cut a thread, form a thread on. 
2 to fix by screwing. c;alwa; iI-mawasiir lala balq he 
screwed the pipes together. 3 to form into a ball shape. 
xudi l-lagiina di c;alwa;ii-ha take this piece of dough 
and make it into a ball. -vn c;alwa;a; ava/pva mic;alwa;. 
.l;.,LA.. mic;alwa; /adjl [joe} finely formed, nicely put 
together. limma mc;alwa;a a nicely wrapped turban. 
l:Jikaaya mc;alwa;a a neat story. Ilgitta mc;alwa;a cur-
vaceous figure. 
.l;).4;1 fitc;alwa; Ivil passive of c;alwa;. -iva mitc;alwa;. 
I..> J J 
Ji c;ala (i) Ivtl I to fry. samak mac;li fried fish. 2 to 
roast (grains, cereals etc.). bunn' mac;1i roasted coffee 
beans. -vn c;aly, c;aliyya, c;alayaan; ava c;aali; pva 
mac;li. 
~ c;alya linst n, pI -aatll a (single) frying. 2 amount 
of food used in a single frying. 
~ c;aliyya = c;alya. 
..::..Q.A.. mac;liyyaat Ipl nl fried foods. 
~~ c;allaaya 1 In pI -aatl deep fryer. 
llA.. mac;la 1 In pI -aat, mac;aalil container for roasting 
coffee beans. 
llA.. ,Ji. mac;la 2, mic;/a In pI -aatl shop selling nuts, 
popcorn, roasted seeds etc., snack shop. 
~~ mac;laaya = mac;la I. 
J.i;1 fitc;a/a Ivil to be fried. -iva mitc;iIi. 
ji;1 finc;a/a = fitc;a/a. -iva minc;ili. 

Ji r;alla Ivtl 1 to fry lightly. 2 to keep (s.o.) on ten-
terhooks. - Ivi/3 to make lar;liyya. - vn lar;liyya; ava 
mir;alli. 
~ 
lar;liyya Inl any of a variety of combinations of 
onions andlor garlic with other ingredients, fried and 
used as a garnish or to enrich stock or sauce. 
· 
jA;1 filr;alla Ivil 1 to be fried lightly. 2 to be kept on 
tenterhooks. 3 (impersonal) passive of r;alla 3. 
ri/- fakla di ma-yilr;alla-Ihaafthis dish is not made with 
lar;liyya. -iva milr;alli. 
\sJJ 
~~ r;allaaya 2 In pi r;a/aali, r;allayaall {Chr) monk's 
cell. 
cr J 
~ 
r;amy Icoll nl wheat. 
~ 
r;amya lunit n, pi -aall 1 a grain of wheat. 
2 measure of weight (for metals and precious stones) 
equal to 0.07523 grains troy weight. 
~6...i r;amyaaya = r;amya 1. 
~ 
r;amyi ladj invarl light brown, wheat-coloured 
(especially of human face and features). 
· -
.JrlJ 
~ r;amar In pi far;maarl 1 moon. r;amar ~inaali 
satellite. II r;amar id-diin sheet(s) of dried, pressed apri-
cots; drink made by dissolving the sheet in water; pud-
ding made from the sheet. -yagar i1-r;amar {min) sele-
nite.2 epithet for a beautiful person. ya bint; ya r;amar 
... you gorgeous girl! 
• ~ r;amara I Inl 18 moonlight. -/adjectivallyl leela 
r;amara a moonlit night. Ib a moonlit place. - Ipl-aall 
2 beautiful girl. 3 aperture in or above a door for the 
purpose of admitting light. 
..s ~ r;amari, qamariladj/lunar. fis-sana I-r;amariyya 
the lunar year, lunar calendar. 
~~ r;amariyya In pi -aall 1 skylight. 2 arbour. 
~I~ r;amaraaya Inll moonlight. 2 moonlit place. 
JI~ r;imaraali In pi -yyal glazier. 
.;";; r;ammuur ladj ·1 cute, sweet, darling. 
z 
-
.J r IJ 
..s~ r;imri, r;umri Icoll nl variety of turtle-dove. 
~~ r;imriyya, 
r;umriyya 
lunit 
n, 
pi -aall 
a 
turtle-dove. 
3 
-
.JrlJ 
.;W r;umaar Inl gambling. 
717 
J.;W r;umarli, r;amarti In pi -yyal gambler, gamester. 
4 
-
.JrlJ 
~ r;ammar I Ivtl to soften (~tale bread) by heating. 
II faxalli r;afaa-k yir;ammar leej I'll give you a burning 
slap on the nape! - rigil r;afaa yir;ammar leej he re-
turned humiliated. 2 Ivil to become softer by heating 
(of stale bread). -vn lar;miir; ava/pva mir;ammar. 
;"'1 filr;ammar Ivil to be softened by heating (of stale 
bread). -iva milr;ammar. 
5 
-
.JrlJ 
• ~ r;amara 2 <It camera> In pi -aatl cabin (in a ship). 
JrJ 
~I filr;ammiz Ivil to move flauntingly. -vn lar;mi;z; 
ava milr;ammiz. 
IJ" r J 
IJ",,-Ii qamuust In pi qawamiisl dictionary. 
.. -
IJ" r IJ 
4.:..i r;amja I Inl (type of) cloth. f~-~uuf da r;amfil-u 
mif kuwayyisa this wool is of poor quality. 
..;.W r;umaaj In pi far;mifa, r;umajaatl cloth, fabric. 
4.:.W r;umaaja/unitn,pl-aalll piece of cloth. 2 (type 
of) cloth. 
";'W r;ammaaj In • and pi r;ammaajal cloth vendor. 
~I filr;ammif Ivil to dress in one's best clothes. 
-ava milr;ammif. 
Z. 
-
IJ" r IJ 
4.:..i r;amja; <T kam~i> In pi -aall whip, lash used by 
cart-drivers. 
·v"'rJ 
..,-.i r;amD1 (u) Ivtl to cause to sulk, cause to be sulky. 
-vn r;a~, r;amD1aan; ava r;aam~; pva mar;mu~. 
...,........1 filr;amD1 Ivil 1 to sulk. 2 to be made sulky. 
-ava/iva milr;im~. 
..,-Ai 1 finr;amD1 = filr;am~. - ava/iva minr;im~ . 
...,..:. r;ammD1lvil to buck (of a donkey). -vn tar;mi~; 
ava mir;ammD1. 
Zv"'rJ 
..,..... r;ami~ In pi r;u~aan, fir;m~a, r;im~all shirt. 
r;u~aan noom nightgowns. 
r;ami~ taylaani slip. 
2 piston-casing. 
~l..a....i r;u~angi In pi -yyal shirtmaker . 

3 ,.;# r J see ,.;# r r J : qumm~ 
j,rJ 
.la...i c;ama( (u) Ivil to tighten (on or around), squeeze. 
-vn c;am(, c;ama(aan; ava c;aami(; pva mac;muu(. 
~ 
c;am(a Inl I Ipl -aatl instance noun of c;am(. 1 Ipl 
-oat, c;uma(lla strip or piece of black cloth, tied like a 
brow-band, worn to keep a woman's head-covering in 
place. lb vice, clamp. 
.bW c;umaa( In pi ric;mi(al infant's binder (worn while 
the navel heals). 
Jow c;ammaa(i: (acmiyya c;ammaa(i finger-shaped 
(acmiyya. 
.k:i c;amma( I Ivt/ to swaddle the belly of (an infant) 
with an c;umaa(. 1 Ivil to become tight. - vn lac;mii(; 
avalpva mic;amma(. 
Ja.:A;1 !'itc;amma( Ivi/l to be swaddled on the belly with 
an c;umaa( (of an infant). 1 to affect tight clothes (e.g., 
of a hippie). 3 to become starchy in behaviour. -ava/iva 
milc;amma(. 
trJ 
~ c;umc In pi ric;maacl I funnel. II c;umc' sukkar 
sugar loaf. -caamil c;umc he's showing off. 1 [bot] 
calyx. 
~ c;ammac Ivt/ to remove the stem end or calyx. 
c;ammacil iI-firawla she hulled the strawberries. 
tac;miic iI-bamya topping the okra. - vn lac;miic; aval 
pva mic;ammac. 
~I rilc;ammac Ivil I to have the stem end or calyx 
removed. 1 to swagger, behave in a conceited manner. 
rinta b-tilc;ammac ca/a miin who are you being so high 
and mighty with! -ava/iva mitc;ammac. 
rJrJ 
r.A...i c;umc;um In pi c;amaac;iml bottle with long narrow 
neck, used for sprinkling scented water. IIsakniin fi-
c;umc;um they live in a tiny place. 
JrJ 
J...t c;amllcoll n/lice. 
~ 
c;amla lunit n, pi -aatl a louse. IIzayy iI-c;amla 
f-raas iI-!'ac;rac [prov] (as insecure) as a louse on a bald 
head. 
~~ c;amlaaya = c;amla. 
~ 
c;ammillvil to become infested with lice, become 
lousy. - vn tac;miil; ava mlc;ammll. 
uJ 
..:; c;imma In pi c;imaml I (also qimma r) top, apex. 
718 
IImu!'tamar qimma summit conference. 1 {rurJ street 
corner. 
,.;#jr J 
....,-.i c;umm~ In pi c;ama~al {Chr] archpriest, 
hegumen. 
~\JrJ 
~ 
c;amiina <prob Gr kaminos> In pi c;amaayinl 
kiln . 
I~J 
l.:i c;ina Iprop nl I Qena, province in middle-Upper 
Egypt. 1 Qena, capital of the province of that name, a 
town well known for its earthenware products. 
\JJl.;i c;inaawi I ladj invarl pertaining to Qena. 
1 In • and pi c;inawiyyal an inhabitant of Qena. 
J I ~J 
JI.;; qanaal <Fr>: qanaal is-siwees or !,i1-qanaal the 
Suez Canal. -also kanaa/. 
Y.~J 
...,.:.i c;innib Inl twine, hemp. habl' c;innib a turned 
hemp rope. 
jy~J 
.;::; c;ambar I Ivtl to cause (usually posteriors or 
bosoms) to protrude or bulge. hiyya labsa sutyaan 
bi-yc;ambar bizaz-ha she is wearing a bra that gives her 
breasts prominence. llvil to become prominent, prot-
rude, bulge. -vn c;ambara; avalpva mic;ambar. 
,r..a;1 !'ilc;ambar Ivil to become or be made prominent 
or bulging (especially of posteriors or bosoms). -vn 
tic;ambiir; iva milc;ambar. 
ty~J 
~ c;ambac Ivil to put out seed pods (of a plant). -vn 
c;ambaca; ava mic;ambac. 
~ 
c;umbica In pi -aatl seed pod. 
~ ~ c;ambuuca In pi -aatl one of the connecting 
pieces which make up a mafrafiyya design (see PI. G, 5). 
Jy~J 
~ 
c;unbila. qunbula In pi c;anaabill bomb, shell. 
c;anaabil zamamyya time-bombs. c;unbila yadawiyya 
hand-grenade. 
':"~J 
0~ qunuut: ducaa!' iI-qunuut {lsi] special prayer of 
petition inserted after the second morning rakca. 

I J.)';'J 
J..I,;,t c;andil Ivt/ to botch, make a mess of. rin-naggaar 
ga yi~allalJ i{-{arabeeza c;andil-ha the carpenter came to 
repair the table and made a mess of it. II baxt i mc;andil 
wretched luck. - vn c;andala; avalpva mic;andil. 
J..I.:.O,. mic;andil In *1 hopeless blunderer, good-for-
nothing. 
J..I:.i;I fitc;andil Ivil I to be or become botched or mes-
sed up. 2 to fail utterly, flop. II ritc;andil ,.. go to hell! 
- vn tic;andiil; avaliva mitc;andil. 
2J,).JJ 
J....I,;,t c;andiil In pi c;anadiill I oil-lamp. II wallac;-Iu 
c;andiil he praised him in front of everyone. -~alaat 
i1-c;andiil [Chr! prayer accompanying the unction ofthe 
sick, traditionally said in private homes as a blessing 
during Lent. 2 jellyfish. 
~..I,;,t c;undeela: balalJ c;undeela type of yellow date. 
cj.;,J 
C? c;anzalJa Inl [deris! snobbishness. 
CJ? c;anzuulJ ladj pi c;anaziilJI [deris! snob. 
erA'1 fitc;anzalJ Ivil [deris! to behave snobbishly. -vn 
tic;anziilJ; ava mitc;anzalJ. 
1u"'';'J 
~ 
c;ana~ (i) Ivtl to cause to become sulky or moody. 
- vn c;an~; ava c;aani~; pva mac;nu~. 
~ 
c;an~a instance noun of c;a~. 
~I ritc;an~ Ivil to become or be made sulky or 
moody. -ava/iva mitc;ini~. 
2u"'.;,J 
.\.4i j 
c;uni¥a In pi c;awaani~1 gizzard. 
~I.:.i c;unaa~a In pi c;awani~1 gizzard. 
Ju"'';'J 
~ 
c;u~ul <perh It console> In pi c;ana~ill consul. 
II bint i1-c;u~ul poinsettia. 
~ 
C;u~uliyya In pi -aatl consulate. 
~I 
I'itc;an~al Ivil to behave snobbishly. ma-tlJibb i-j 
lJadd i yitc;a~al c;aleeha she doesn't like anybody treat-
ing her disdainfully. - ava mitc;a~al. 
..l.';'J 
Ja.:t c;ini( ladj * and pi c;una(al disdainful, pernickety 
(usually in respect of food). 
Ja.:ti rac;na( lell morelmost disdainful. 
~I.:.i c;anaa(a Inl disdain, pernicketiness (usually in re-
spect of food). 
719 
~I ritc;anna( Ivil to behave disdainfully. 
mitc;anna{. 
.l:.;l.i;l ritc;aani{ = ritc;anna(. - ava mitc;aani(. 
-ava 
~I ristac;na( = fitc;anna{. -vn ristic;naa{; ava 
mistac;na(. 
I J..l..;, J 
)..;.e c;an(ar Ivtl I to arch, bend in a curve. c;an{ar qahr-
u he arched his back. 2 to bend or hang(s.th. s.o.) over. 
drape. c;an(ar roolJ-u min iI-balkoona he leant out over 
the balcony. - vn c;an{ara; avalpva mic;an{ar. 
;;)..:.i c;an(ara 
In 
pi c;anaa(irl 
I arch. 
2 bridge. 
II ril-c;anaa(ir iI-xayriyya Iprop nl the Barrages, situated 
fifteen miles north of Cairo at the entrance of the Nile 
Delta. 3 (saddle) pommel. 
)..:A.; I ritc;an(ar Ivil I to be arched, be bent in a curve. 
2a to be bent or be hung (over), be draped. 2b to bend 
or hang oneself (over), drape oneself (over). - avaliva 
mitc;an(ar. 
2J..l.';'J 
J\l..:i c;in(aar in pi c;ana(iirl measure of weight equal to 
44.93 kg. IIbil-c;incaar ,.. by the hundredweight! as in 
bi-tlJibb iI-manga - bil-c;in(aar do you like mangoes? 
- very much, indeed! 
It.;,J 
~ c;unuc;, c;inic; (a) Ivil to become content. or satis-. 
fied. ril-c;anaac;a kinz [prov! contentment (with one's 
lot) is a (limitless) treasure. - vn c;anaac;a, c;anac;aan, 
c;unuc;iyya; ava c;aanic;, c;anc;aan. 
~ c;anac; (i) Ivtl I to convince. laazim tic;nic;-u 
b-rinnak~alJlJ you must convince him that you're right. 
2 to satisfy. rac;all i luc;ma tic;nic;-u the slightest morsel 
satisfies him. - vn c;anac;aan; ava c;aanic;; pva mac;nuuc;. 
t? c;anuuc; ladj * and pi c;unaac;1 content, satisfied. 
~I fitc;anac; Ivil I to be convinced. 2 to be satisfied. 
- iva mitc;inic;. 
~i rac;nac;, faqnac; Ivtl to convince. - vn fiqnaac;; ava 
muqnic;. 
~I ric;tanac;, riqtanac; Ivil to be convinced. Ii-yaayit 
in-naas ma tic;tinic; until people are convinced. - ava 
muqtanic;, mic;tinic;. 
~I ristac;nac;J = c;unuc;. -ava mistac;nac; . 
2 t ';'J 
t \:.t c;inaac; f In pi raqnic;al mask. 
Jt';'J 
~ 
c;anc;ar Ivtl [deris! to raise or put into prominence 

(s.th., usually part of the body) in an ostentatious and 
arrogant fashion. -vn tjanlara; ava/pva mitjanlar . 
• ~ 
tjanlara InJ {deris] arrogance, pomposity. 
j~ tjanluur In pi tjanaciirl (deris] braggart. 
pI fittjanlar Ivil to become arrogant or pompous, 
behave arrogantly or pompously. - vn titjanliir; ava 
mittjanlar. 
~I fistitjanlarJ = fittjanlar. -ava mistitjancar. 
I~';'J 
..A.;i tjunuf, tjiniF (a) Ivil to become revolted or dis-
gusted. bi-yiddi/:i finnu tjinif min libs-a-ha I-mak!uuf 
he claims to be disgusted by her revealing clothes. -vn 
tjanafaan, tjanaafa. 
..A.;i tjinip ladj ·1 I given to being revolted or dis-
gusted. :1 finicky . 
..A.;ii fatjnaf lell morelmost given to feeling disgust or 
revulsion. 
1 ~ .;, 1.5 see ~ I .;, .;, 1.5 : tjunnaafa 
~~';'J 
..i.i.;; tjunfid In pi tjanaafidl hedgehog. 
.l.i.:i tjanfid I IvtI to cause to curl up like a hedgehog. 
fil-bard' tjanfid-ni the cold made me curl up like a 
'hedgehog. :1 Ivil to curl up like a hedgehog from the 
cold. -vn tjanfada; ava/pva mitjanfid. 
.l.i.:A;1 fittjanfid Ivil to curl up like a hedgehog. -vn 
titjanfiid; iva mittjanfid. 
J';'J see JI';'J:qanaal 
r .;, 1.5 see r.J';'';' 1.5 : tjannuuma 
1,:,,:,1.5 
.:,;li tjanuun l , qanuun/npl tjawaniin, qawaniin/law, 
canon. II bil-tjanuun in a carefully calculated fashion, as 
in bi-yitkallim bil-tjanuun he weighs his words carefully 
when he speaks. 
J;li tjanuuni, 
qanuuni ladj 
·1 
lawful, 
legal, 
canonical. 
.r&.o mutjannan InJ fixed amount, ration, quota. 
lama/-Iuhum mutjannan he set them a quota. IIbil-
mutjannan in a carefully calculated fashion. 
1.;,.;,1.5 
,,;li tjanuun 2/n pi tjawaniinl {mus] zither-like instru-
ment with a large trapezoidal sound-box, set horizon-
720 
tally before the performer (see PU, 23). 
~;li tjanungi In pi -yyal tjanuun player. 
3.;,,:,1.5 
~ 
tjananiyya, tjaniniyya In pi -aat, tjanaani/l bottle. 
:1 {obsol] glass drinking-bowl. mala I-tjanaani w-satjaa-
hum he filled the pots of wine and gave them to drink. 
~I';'';'J 
~~ tjunnaafa In pi -aatl {rur] peg on yoke of a plough 
to which a draft animal's collar is attached (see PI.D, 9). 
r .J.';' .;, 1.5 
.....,;.i tjannuuma Inl mormyr, a Nile fish (Mormyrus 
kannume). 
loS';' 1.5 
l:i tjana I (i) Ivtl to keep (domesticated animals). 
bi-yitjni IJamaam he keeps pigeons. lifiraax tjaniyya 
hens kept for laying. -ya baxt iI-tjaani how lucky the 
husband is! (flirtatious remark to a woman). -vn tjany, 
tjaniyya; ava tjaani; pva matjni. 
il:i tjana 2/coll n, pi tjunyl irrigation channel(s), small 
canal(s).11 fimfl sana wala txacti tjana {prov] (walk for a 
year rather than cross a ditch) .... slow but sure is best. 
.l:i qanaah t In pi qanawaatl I canal. fil-qanaah or 
qanaat is-siwees the Suez Canal. :1 television channel. 
- qanawaat Ipl nJ 3 fallopian tubes . 
~l:i tjanaaya In pi -aat/l unit noun of tjana (see PI.E, 
17). :1 groove. 
~I fittjana Ivil to be kept (of domesticated animals). 
- iva mittjini. 
I.J .1.5 
,Ai tjahar (u) !vtl to cause (s.o.) frustration or grief. 
-vn tjahr; ava tjaahir; pva matjhuur. 
,Ai tjahr Inl prostrating grief . 
',Ai tjahra linst nIl state of depression and prostrating 
grief. :1 sense of oppression and subjugation . 
.:,1,Ai tjahraan ladj ·1 oppressed, frustrated. 
J"li qaahirt ladjl compelling. lUZr' qaahir a compell-
ing excuse. 
i J"LiJ I fil-qaahira Iprop nJ Cairo. 
~ J"li qahrif ladjl compelling. ;uruuf qahriyya un-
avoidable circumstances. 
~J"li qaahiri ladjl Cairene, pertaining to Cairo. 
jlf; qahhaar InJ Vanquishing One, Conquering One 
(epithet of God). 
.JfAi1 fittjahar Ivil to be caused frustration or grief. -iva 
mittjihir. 

.JfAi1 finfiahar = fitfiahar. -iva minfiihir. 
Z J • J 
,Ai fiuhr In! promiscuity. 
,.,..Ii fiaahir ladj */1 impertinent. 2 promiscuous. 
.J • J 
;;.".; fiahwa I In! coffee. 2 In pI fiahaawil coffee-
house, cafe: IIbitaBG fiahaawi idler. 
~.".; fiahwagi In pI -yya/l coffee-house proprietor. 
2 coffee-house employee. 
Y.JJ 
'-:'.} fiuub In! {path} tetter. 
~.} fiuuba In pI -aatl patch of tetter. 
~~.} fiubaaya = fiuuba. 
.;:J.JJ 
..:..} fiuut In pI faqwaatl foodstuff, nourishment. 
fil-fiuut i4,-4,aruuri essential nourishment. 
..:. ~ fiawwit 
Ivtl to 
feed, 
nourish. 
fitlJaramit 
il-maskiina lJatta min lUfima tfiawwit-ha the poor 
woman was denied even a morsel (enough) to keep 
body and soul together! -vn tafiwiit; ava/pva mifiawwit. 
..:.~1 fitfiawwit Ivil to be fed, be nourished. -iva 
mitfiawwit. 
y.;:J.JJ 
..,.;.} fiootab Ivil to become hunched. fiootab min kutr 
ik-kafya laJ-Ju'fl he became hunched from so much 
bending over (the work). -also. Fitfiattib. - ava 
mifiootab. 
C.JJ 
c.JIi fiaawilJ (also kaawilJ) Ivtl to argue with, wrangle 
with. fiadd iz-zibla wi-mfiaawilJ it-tayyaar {prov} (he is) 
the size of a (sheep-)dropping and he tries to go against 
,the current. - v.n mifiawlJa; ava mifiaawilJ. 
c.J U;1 fitfiaawilJ 
Ivil to 
argue, 
wrangle. 
-ava 
mitfiaawilJ . 
~.J J 
.)Ii qaadr (u) Ivtl to lead, give leadership to. -vn 
qiyaada; ava qaayid. 
1,$.)1.,i qiyaadi ladj/leading. door qiyaadi leading role. 
~Ii qaafidr 
In 
pI quwwaad, 
qaadal 
leader, 
commander . 
.)1~ fiawwaad In *1 pimp. 
-I 
-
J.J !oJ 
;;.).} fiuura In pI fiiwar, fiuwar, fiuraatl I forehead. 
721 
llfiurt-u dayyafia he's thick. - fifrid curt-ak cheer up! 
2 brow-band (of a bridle). 
)~ fiawwaar, fiuwwaar In pI fiawawiirl {rur} broken-
off bottom of an earthenware jar (used as a water-dish 
for chickens). II kasar waraa l-fiawwaar "" he said 'good-
bye and good riddance' when he left . 
;;)~ fiawwaara, fiuwwaara = fiawwaar. 
;;.),,&.. mafiwara In pI mafiawiirl vegetable corer. 
),,&.. mifiwaar or mUfiwaar = mafiwara. 
.)~ fiawwar I/vtl to scoop out, hollow out. fiawwarit 
ik-koosa she scooped out the courgettes. 2 Ivil to make 
a round hollow. fiawwar lJawaleen ij-Jagara make a 
hollow around the tree. -vn tafiwiir; avalpva 
mifiawwar. 
;;;.".. tafiwiira In pI -aat, tafiawiirl curved neckline or 
sleeve-line (of a garment) . 
.):,a.. mifiawwar I/adj *1 concave. 2/n pI -aatl 
= tafiwiira . 
.)~1 fitfiawwar Ivil to be scooped out, be hollowed 
out, become hollow. - avaliva mitfiawwar . 
ZJ.JJ 
.).} fiawar (i) Ivtl to strain (the eyes). fil-muzakra 
fiawarit leen-i studying strained my eyes. -vn fiawar, 
fiawaraan; ava fiaawir; pva mafiwuur. 
.)"..1 fitfiawarlvil to be strained (ofthe eyes). II fijta'fal 
lamma tfiawarit leen-u "" he worked until his eyes pop~ 
ped out. - iva mitfiiwir . 
rJ.J J 
4...)JIi fiawirma <T kavurma> In! dish of braised meat 
cooked with onions. 
4SJ.JJ 
I,$;.} fiuuZi <T kuzu> ladj invarl young (of mutton). 
xaruuf fiuuzi lamb. 
V".J J 
..r.} fiOOS In pI fifiwaas/la are, curve. Ib parenthesis, 
bracket.lllJua; di been fioseen keep this aside, make a 
mental note of this for the moment. Ie: bow. fil-fiOOS 
{astrol} Sagittarius. fiOOS rabaaba rebab bow (see 
PI.J, 2). fiOOS il-minaggid cotton-f1uffer's bow. 2 plough 
shaft (see PI.O, 14) . 
..r~ fiawwis I/vtl to curve, bend in a curve. fiawwis 
il-luud he bent the stick. 2 Ivil to curve, bend in a 
curve. 4,ahr-u fiawwis his back arched. fis-safit fiawwis 
the ceiling has sagged. -vn tafiwiis; ava/pva mifiawwis . 
..r~1 fitfiawwis Ivil to be curved, be bent in a curve. 
- iva mitfiawwis. 

IJ.,.JJ 
.1:;; ljawwa[ Ivtl to swmdle by overcharging. - vn 
taljwii[; avaliva miljawwa[ . 
..,11:"" miljawwa[aali In pi -yyal one who swindles by 
overcharging . 
.1 ~I fi/ljawwa[ 
Ivil 
to 
be 
overcharged. 
- iva 
mi/ljawWa[. 
2J.,.JJ 
J:,.,i ljuu[a Icoll nl tomato(es). 
~11.,i lju(aaya lunit n, pi -aatl a tomato. 
tJ.,.JJ 
~.,i ljoo[al, ljoo[il Ivil to make a guess concerning 
things supposed to be known only to God (e.g., life 
span, future gains etc., such an act being tantamount to 
blasphemy). min 'leer (or bala) mljo[la barring the 
unforeseen, God willing, as in ba-nsaafir bukra bala 
mljo(la we're leaving tomorrow if all goes well. - also 
ljaa[il. -vn miljo[la; ava miljoO[al. 
t.J J 
t It qaal r In pi qilaanl hottom, bottom part. qaal 
il-babr bottom of the sea. II qaal il-leen [analJ retina. 
~lt qaala r In pi -aatl hall (e.g., for lectures, con-
certs). qaalil mubaqraal lecture hall. 
~lt ljaala In plljilaan, ljalaall [rurJ winter room 
which has a built-in fum (q.v.) under a raised floor. 
I 
-
-
IJ.JIJ 
JI.,i ljuwaalj Inl screeching (like that of an owl). 
fi/-waad ma-ballal-/' ljwaalj the bahy never stopped 
screaming. 
J!". ljuweelj: fumm' ljweelj I owl. 2 woman of witch-
like appearance. 
J~ ljawwaq IVII I to screech. i to acquire a pale and 
withered appearance (especially of the face or fea-
tures). -vn laljwiilj; ava miljawwalj. 
2 J.J J see J.J.J J : ljawuulj 
tJ.JJ 
r:!.,i ljooljal Icoll nl snail(s). 
4d.,i ljUljala In plljawaaljill a snail. 
r:!;;; fllqawqal r Ivil to become introverted, withdraw 
into one's shell. -ava milqawqal. 
IJ.JJ 
J~ ljaal (u) Ivtl la to utter, say. ma-ljull'-j kilma 
I didn't say a word. ljaal (finnu) ba-yiigi bukra he said 
722 
(that) he would come tomorrow.lIljuul ya rabb == rely 
on God! trust in God! -ma-tljul-j' klda don't say such 
(things)! don't say (things) like that! -zayy' ma 
rabb-i-na Yljuul as God wills (it). -liljuul feeh == (it's 
absurd) but what can one say, what can be done about 
it? as in dtlwalj/i I-banaal majyiin llryaniin laakin tiljuul 
feeh these days girls walk about half-naked, but what is 
there one can say? - b-aljuul(-Iak) feeh (1) say, I say, as 
in b-aljuul feeh -ba-tiigi landina bukra I say, are you 
coming to see us tomorrow? b-aljul-Iak feeh - gibt 
ik-kilaab illi kkallimna lalee say, did you bring the book 
we were talking about? (2) (I'll) tell you what, as in 
b-aljul-Iak feeh - haal finta I-gibna w- fana b-aruub 
fagiib il-leejtell you what, you bring the cheese and I'll 
go and get the bread, b-a.ljul-Iak feeh balja - niruub 
yoom il-ilneen tell you what, then, we'll go on Monday. 
Ib to recite, say (poetry). ljalad yiljuul mawwaal fi-
mawwaal he continued to recite one mawwaal after 
another. Ie to tell, recount. ljul-it iii ba~al tell me what 
happened! ljal-Ii sirr he told me a secret. kaan 
bi-Yljul-lina lar-ribla he was telling us (something) ab-
out the trip. 2 to stipulate. fi/-qanuun bi-Yljuul 
is-siwaalja lal-yimiin the law requires that driving be on 
the right-hand side (ofthe road). fiz-zoolj yiljuullaazim 
faruub politeness demands that I go. fil-masal bi-Yljuul 
xud il-habla bini il-laljla the proverb recommends one 
to marry the daughter of a well-balanced mother even if 
the daughter herself is unbalanced. - vn ljool, ljiwaala, 
ljawalaan; ava ljaayil. 
lIljaal modal of incredulity == just imagine! fancy that! 
as in ljaal feeh -xaayifmin il-ljulla just think! he's afraid 
of the kitten! ba-yilgawwiz -ljaal he's getting married! 
fancy that! badal ma ylaalib il-layyi/ljaal feeh - yujXU[ 
fii instead of playing with the kid - can you credit it - he 
bawls him out! -ljaal ... (ljaal) exclamation of jeering 
disbelief == nonsense! baloney! humph! as in ljaal hiyya 
mumassila so she's an actress - baloney! ljaal il-fariilj ga 
yjuf-ha ljaal so the General came to see her, eh? what a 
load of rubbish! - (bi-)Iiljuul fiiha exclamation of strong 
assertion == no question about it! you bet! you said it! as 
in ljidirt' Irudd" lal-mudiir - bi-tljuul fiiha w-jatamt-u 
kamaan 'Did you dare to answer the boss back?' 'You 
bet I did! and I cursed him too!' feeh rafy-ak nirawwab 
nil'ladda - bi-/ljuul fiiha 'What do you say to going home 
for lunch?' 'You bet!' -ljaallala- (I) to mention, refer 
to. ma-ljull'-j lalee bil- fism you didn't mention him by 
name. lju/t' lal-blkaaya I-fabuu-ya I mentioned the 
matter to my father. (2) to ask for in marriage. naas 
kiliir ljaalu lalayya bass' fana ma-rqit-j I had a lot of 

suitors but 1 refu~ed them all. (3) to gossip (usually 
maliciously) about. bi-yquulu laleeha kalaam kitiir 
they say a lot (of nasty things) about her. -c;uul ... say 
.... 'i'adfal-Iak dilwaqti quullafara gneeh I'll pay you 
now, say ten pounds. kull i waa!Jid minkum !Ja-ygiib 
quul talaata mitr each one of you will bring, let's say, 
three metres. -tic;ul-f(you might (almost) say) ... just as 
if, as in bi-yqaffil beet-u b-xamas qifaal tiqul-f il-bank 
il-'i'ahli he locks up his house with five padlocks as if it 
were the National Bank, bi-tiftimfii tic;ul-finta iii zooC; 
you are running him down as if you were polite 
yourself! 
~.; c;oola linst n, pi -aatl a saying, an utterance. 
ma-tc;ul-f il-c;oola di don't you say that! 
~l; c;aala Inl (unpleasant) rumour, what the word is. 
j. qill: qal(-Iu) t-qill response indicating one's 
annoyance at being told 'I told you so' ... to hell with 
what you said! mif 'lana c;ult-i-Iak kida - c;al-Iak il-C;ill 
'Didn't I tell you so?' - 'To hell with what you told me!' 
JI.,ii I'ac;waallpl nl court testimony. 
J\l. maqaatr In pi -aatl essay, article. 
~ \l. maqaala f, maqaala f = maqaal. 
723 
Jl.i;\ I'itqaallvil passive of c;aal. da kalaam ma-yitqal-f 
that's something that shouldn't be said. - iva mitc;aal. 
Jl.i;1 I'inc;aal = I'itc;aal. - iva minc;aal. 
J~ qawwillvtl to attribute (e.g., a statement) falsely 
to (s.o.). ya baga!Jt-ak - !Ja-tc;awwil-ni iii lumr-i ma-
qult-u what a nerve you've got! are you going to attri-
bute to me things 1 never said? -vn tac;wiil; ava 
miqawwil. 
J'J~ miqawwilaati In pi -yyal one who engages in the 
false attribution of words to others. 
J~I I'itc;awwillvi/l to have words falsely attributed 
to one, have words put in one's mouth. 2 to be falsely 
attributed (to s.o., of, e.g., a statement). - ava/iva 
mitc;awwil. 
11 I'itqawwillalaf to gossip about, spread (damaging) 
reports about. 
JJli qaawill/vtl to enter into a contract with (s.o.) .. 
qawilt-u lal-buna (1) I contracted the building-work 
out to him. (2) I contracted to do the building for him. 
2 Ivil to take on the role of contractor. c;aawillal-buna 
liyya he took on the building contract for me. -vn 
miqawla; ava miqaawil. 
~J\l. muqawla, miqawla In pi -aatl contract, deal, 
transaction. }irkit muc;awlaat contracting company. 
IIbil-miqawla on a piece-work basis, by the job. 
JJ\l. miqaawil/n *1 contractor. 
JJl.i;\ I'itc;aawillvi/l to assign or be assigned a task on 
a contracted basis. 2 to enter jointly into a contract. 
- ava/iva mitqaawil. 
1 J.J J 
J'; qool <T kol> In pi -aatl {mil obsol] convoy, 
column. 
cJ.J J 
C}.; c;oola!J Icoll nl corn cob(s). 
a.; c;olli!Ja, c;ol!Ja lunit n, plc;awaali!J1 a corn cob. 
,j.,J.JJ 
<J)'; qawloon f Inl {anat] colon. 
I r .J J see also I r ..s J 
rli c;aam I (u) Ivi/la to stand, get up, arise. c;uum lala 
!Jeel-ak stand up! qaam min lala I-maktab he got up 
from the desk. Ib to recover from a state or condition. 
qumti min in-noom I woke up. lissa ma c;amit-fi min 
il-m~iiba she hasn't yet recovered from the disaster. 
I'infaal' allaah !Ja-tc;uum lala xeer God willing you'll 
recover. 2 to go into action. !'iI-hawa c;aam the wind 
rose. !'iI-mutoor ma-bi-yqum-f the motor won't start. 
3 to depart. I'il-qatri qaam min il-ma!Jacta the train left 
the station. lIc;uum. biina let's get going. 4a modal of 
launching an action. quumu ftiku go and complain! 
c;umti ladalt-u qalam I upped and slapped him. c;uum 
ruu!J get going! 4b modal of consequent action. nisiit 
ma!Jfa;t-i fil-beet c;umti rgilt I forgot (and left) my 
wallet at home so I came back. ma-fakkart-uu-f c;aam 
ma-gab-f ik-kitaab I forgot to remind him so he didn't 
bring the book. qaddimt-i-Iu I-kart i qaam b~1i fii 
w-raggal-u taani I presented the card to him and he 
looked at it and gave it back. -vn c;oom, c;awamaan, 
c;iyaam; ava qaayim. 
11 c;aam lala (1) to rise up against. I'in-naas qaymiin 
lala I-!Jukuuma people are revolting against the gov-
ernment. I'id-dunya c;ayma lalayya everyone is up 
against me. (2) to set about (doing s.th.) to (s.o. or 
s.th.). c;aamit lal-liyaal !Jammit-hum wi-Iabbisit-hum 
she turned to the kids and bathed and dressed them. 
-c;aam bi- to deal with, attend to, cope with. I'ana 
!J-ac;uum bit-takaliif I'll see to the expenses. c;aam 
bil-milza l-wa!Jd-u he polished off the (whole) goat on 
his own. 
rli c;aam 2 (i) Ivt/la to raise, lift up.liaam ik-kubbaaya 
lala fafayf-u he raised the cup to his lips. Ib to set 
upright. c;iim il-limdaan lal-!Jeeta set the props up 
against the wall. 2a to mount, set up. c;imt il-Ia!Jma 
lah-naar 1 put the meat on the fire. liaam if-fanta lala 

kitf-u he lifted the suitcase on his shoulder. 2b to hold, 
set up. fJa-nc;iim farafJ kibiir we're going to put on a big 
wedding celebration. 3 to perform (a ritual prayer). 
c;aam ~-~ala lala roofJ iI-mawta he said the prayer for 
the souls of the deceased. 1/ riI-rimaam c;aam ~-~ala 
{lsi} the imam uttered the formula signalling the wor-
shippers to rise for the prayers. -vn c;iyaam; ava 
c;aayim. 
rlei c;iyaam loJ {text} warp. 
;..1.Al1 ril-c;iyaama loJ the Resurrection. liid iI-
c;iyaama {Chr} Easter. yoom iI-c;iyaama {lsi} the Day of 
Judgement. II (wi-)c;aamit iI-c;iyaama .... (and) all hell 
broke loose! 
;..; c;ooma linst n, pI -aatl a standing up, a getting up. 
c;aam n~~' c;ooma he half rose. w-allaah-i ma-nta 
c;aayim - ya salaam dil-c;ooma liik 'You really mustn't 
trouble yourself to get up!' 'My goodness! If one gets up 
for anyone it should be for you!' 
~ li c;aayim I laval 1/ riI-balad c;ayma lala rigl the town 
is hopping with excitement. -c;aayim naayim always, 
constantly, as in c;aayim naayim yikallim nafs-u he's 
always talking to himself. -c;aayim bi-zaat-u auton-
omous, as in riI-butagaaz luh xazzaan c;aayim bi-zaat-u 
the gas stove has a separate tank. - wazn' c;aayim gross 
weight. -keel c;aayim loosely-filled or loosely-packed 
measure. 21 In pI c;awaayiml any vertical support, 
prop, pillar. 
~li .~ li c;ayma In pI c;awaayimll any vertical sup-
port, prop, pillar, post. c;aymit (arabeeza table leg. 
c;aymit baab door post. 2 list. c;aymit iI-mamnuciin 
black-list. 1/ c;aymit iI-laf/list of items of furniture which 
a bridegroom is sometimes required by the bride's fami-
ly to sign as guarantor of their value in case of loss, 
damage or divorce. 
;..li c;aama In pI -aatl I stature, build. 2 surveyor's 
levelling staff. 
rl"; c;awaamT loJ I consistency. ri(-(iin wi-huwwa 
lagiina c;awaam-u zayy iI-lasal the clay, while it is a soft 
mass, has the consistency of honey. 2 stature, build. 
- ladvl 3 (also c;awaam-ak) quickly, right away. 
r;; qayyuum loJ Everlasting One, Eternal One 
(epithet of God). 
r\.i;1 ritc;aam Ivil passive of c;aam 2• -iva mitc;aam. 
r~ c;awwim Ivtl la to cause to stand, cause to rise. 
c;awwim i1-fJumaar get the donkey on its feet! 
c;awwimna I-xee.ma we put up the tent. c;awwimjalr-i it 
made my hair stand on end. 1/ c;awwim nifs-i it made my 
gorge rise, it made me feel sick. Ib {Chr} to resurrect. 
2 to set in motion, activate. c;awwim i1-larabiyya he 
724 
started up the car. c;awwimna xnac;aat kitiira we picked 
a lot of quarrels. c;awwim fil-balad zee(a he raised a 
rumpus in the town.l/c;awwimna mufJaami we hired a 
lawyer. 3a to cause to depart, cause to set off. 
c;awwim-ni badri min mf¥r he got me to leave Cairo 
early. 3b to send off, dispatch. fJa-nc;awwim-/ak 
larabiyya we'll send a car for you. c;awwim-u bi-
mutusikl he sent it off by motor-cycle. c;awwim lagna he 
sent off a committee. -vn tac;wiim; avalpva mic;awwim. 
• c;awwim lala to incite against, - set against. 
c;awwimit-hum laleena she set them up against us. 
-c;awwim bi- to cause to attend to, cause to see to. 
c;awwimuu-ni bil-rakl they got me to see to the food. 
~;;; tac;wiim In pI tac;awiiml calendar. 
~iz-ziraaca 
f-mf¥r' c;ayma lat-tac;wiim iI-C;ib(i the agricultural cycle 
in Egypt follows the Coptic calendar. 
r~1 ritc;awwim Ivilla to be stood up, be erected, be 
raised. Ib {Chr} to be resurrected. 2a to be caused to 
depart. 2b to be sent off, be dispatched. -iva 
mitc;awwim. 
• ritc;awwim lala to be incited against, be set against. 
rJli c;aawim Ivtl to resist, oppose. c;aawim it-tacab he 
resisted fatigue. muc;awmit-u (Ii-)I-laya his resistance 
to the disease. -vn muc;awma; ava mic;aawim. 
;"JIA.. muqawma Inll {phys} resistance. 2 {pol} resist-
ance movement. 
rlii raqaamT I/vtl to erect, put up. niqim-Iu timsaa/ 
we erect a statue to him. 2/vil to stay, reside.lltafJdiid 
riqaama {leg} house arrest. - (tarjiirit) i1-riqaama resi-
dence visa. -vn riqaama; ava muqiim. 
rU:-1 ristac;aam I (yistic;iim) Ivil to become right or 
proper. laawiz ratgawwiz w-astac;iim I want to get 
married and lead a decent life. I/xaa' mustac;iim a 
straight line. -t/arba mustac;iima ymiin straight right (in 
boxing). -vn ristic;aama; ava mustac;iim, mistic;iim. 
rU:-1 ristac;aam 2, ristic;aamJ (yistac;aam) I/vtl to 
straighten out, unbend. 'mumkin tistac;am-Ii l-fJadiida di 
could you straighten out this piece of iron for me? 2 Ivil 
to become unbent. riI-malwuug yistac;aam las-sindaal 
{prov} (the crooked (object) straightens up on the 
anvil) .... those who don't mend their crooked ways 
voluntarily will be set straight by force. -avalpva 
mistac;aam. 
~ 
mustaqiim ladj 
*1 correct, proper. raagil 
mustaqiim an upright man. r~-~iraa( i1-mustaqiim .... the 
straight and narrow. 
2 
-
r ~ \J 
r; c;oom: min laajir i1-c;oom rarbiliin yoom ~aar 
minhum {prov} (1) the people among whom one lives 

are considered one's kinsfolk. (2) if you live amongst 
people (even for as little as) forty days you find that you 
acquire their habits. 
...r"; qawmif ladj *1 national. ril-ramn iI-qawmi 
national security. 
~.,; qawmiyya Inl 1 nationalism. 2 Ipl -aatl ethnic 
group. 
,:lJ J 
4J"; /fuuna In pi -aatl {ChrJ icon. - also riquuna. 
JJ.JJ 
J.J.J\.i /fawuu/f <T kavuk>: hazz-i-I(u) /fawuu/f (to 
shake one's cap for s.o.) to be obsequious to (s.o.). 
~.JJJ 
4J.J.J\.i /fawuun <T kavun> Icoll nl variety of 
musk-melon . 
.4;.J;\.i /fawwuuna lunit n, pi -aatl a musk-melon. 
1..s..JJ 
0.>"; /fiwi (a) Ivil to find strength, become strong. 
huwwa ma-yi/fwaa-! lalafeel iI-ljimli da he isn't strong 
enough to carry this load. -vn /fiwwa, /fuwwa; ava 
/fawyaan. 
o~ /fuwwa or /fiwwa Inl power, strength. /fuwwit 
if-!alb i tib/fa /fuwwit ig-geefthe strength of the people 
is the strength of the army. /fiwwit iI-mutoor the power 
of the motor. bi-/fuwwa strongly, firmly, powerfully. 
II bil-/fiwwa with considerable effort, as in bi-yitnaffis 
bil-/fiwwa he can hardly breathe. -ya /fiwwit illaah ex-
clamation of wonderment at the immensity, magnitude 
or might of something"" such is the power of God! 
0.>"; quwa: rallaab iI-quwa track and field sports. 
riI-quwa [-lamIa (\) labour force. (2) (also ridaarit 
iI-quwa I-lamIa) government employment agency. 
ul~ quwwaat: quwwaat iI-geef the army forces. 
ril-quwwaat iI-musallalja the armed forces. 
0.>; /fa wi I/adj • and pl/fuwaay, ra/fwiya/ strong, 
powerful. raagil /fawi a strong man. riilja /fawiyya 
powerful smell. garra /fawiyya strong pull. II rartt 
/fawiyya rich fertile land. -mif /fa wi not much to speak 
of. not so good, as in riI-maktab Ijilwi bass if-!urli mif 
/fawi the office is pleasant but the work is only so-so. 
2/advl to a great degree or extent. Ijilw i /fawi very 
pretty. mumkin /fawi quite possible. kilaaya /fawi quite 
enough·lagib-ni /fawi it pleases me very much. 3 (also 
725 
qawi) Inl Almighty One, Omnipotent One (epithet of 
God). 
o.>.,;i ra/fwa, raqwa lell strongerl strongest. 
o.>~ /fawwa Ivtl to strengthen, fortify. ril-gumbaaz 
bi-Y/fawwi l-laqalaat bitaalit iI-gism gymnastics streng-
then the body's muscles. rabb-i-na Y/fawwii-k may God 
give you strength (to S.o. up against a difficult task). -vn 
ta/fwiyya; avalpva mi/fawwi. 
0.>';" mi/fawwi or 
mU/fawwi, 
muqawwi 
In 
pi 
-yaatl 
1 strengthener, 
fortifier. 
2 mi/fawwiyaat, 
muqawwiyaat Ipl nl vitalizing medicines, tonics. 
0.>~1 rit/fawwa /vii to be strengthened, be fortified. 
- iva mit/fawwi. 
0.>"A.":-1 rista/fwa Ivtl to consider strong. II bi-yista/fwa 
nals-u (he thinks himself strong) "" he throws his weight 
around. - ava mista/fwi. 
z ..s ..J J see Z..s J .:.. : ta/faawi 
IJ" I ..s J 
..rY /fiyaas I In pi ri/fyisa, /fiy£sa, /fiyasaatl large reed 
mat. 
'..s J 
• .) qeerf Inl vomiting. 
:;;.. muqayyir 1 ladjl emetic, vomitive. radwiya 
muqayyira emetic medicines. 2 In pi -aatl emetic, 
vomitive. 
~ lA;1 rit/faaya Ivtl to vomit. -vn mi/fayaah; ava 
mit/faaya, mit/faayi. 
~ l£-I risti/faaya J Ivtl to vomit. risti/faaya kull illi kal-
u he vomited everything he'd eaten. - ava misti/faaya, 
misti/faayi. 
.:.. ..s J see ..s':" J : ma/faata 
c..s J 
ci /feelj Inl pus. II rumm iI-/feelj core of a boil. 
~ /fayyalj 1 Ivtl to cause to suppurate, cause to fester. 
riltihaab ig-garlj i /fayyalj-u the inflammation of the 
wound made it fester. 2 Ivil to suppurate, fester. 
riI-garlj i b-yilqal yi/fayyalj the wound continues to fes-
ter. -vn ta/fyiilj; ava mi/fayyalj. 
~I rit/fayyalj Ivil to suppurate, fester, be caused to 
suppurate, be caused to fester. -ava/iva mit/fayyalj. 
I ~..s J 
..I"i /feed Inl I/pl /fuyuudl la bond, fetter, hobble. 
II tjeed iI-miljraat rope by which the yoke of the plough is 

attached to the beam. Ib restriction, reservation. 2/pl 
quyudaatl 2a entry, registering, booking. raljljal 
il-quyudaat lid-daftar ir-rasmi transfer the entries to the 
official 
ledger. 
kaatib 
quyudaat 
registrar. 
2b enrolment. lalab il-qeed application for enrolment. 
~ qayyid Ivt/ la to bind, tie up, hobble. II qayyid ya 
rfaali {obsolJ render (it) harmless, Saint Rifa'i (on 
seeing a snake). Ib to restrict, limit. ma-tqayyid-J' 
Ijurriyyit-i don't limit my freedom! 2a to register, note 
down. bi-nqayyid il-mabilaat il-yomiyya fid-daftar we 
enter the daily sales in the ledger. 2b to enroll. -vn 
taqyjid; ava/pya miqayyid. 
~I ritqayyid Ivil passive of qayyid. -iva mitqayyid. 
l~ISJ see also ~J.J 
.)li qaad (i) I Ivt/ to light, kindle. qaad il-lamba he lit 
the lamp. IIqaadit in-naar fi-qalb-i she set my heart 
aflame. 2 Ivil to catch fire, burn. rin-naar qayda the fire 
is lit. II ril-beet qaayid naar the house is in a turmoil. -vn 
qiyaada, qayadaan; ava qaayid. 
.)LA;I ritqaad Ivil passive of qaad. -iva mitqaad. 
.)\A;I rinqaad = ritqaad. -iva minqaad. 
3 ~ IS J see 
~.J J : qiyaada 
('.J ~ IS J see 1 (' ~ J : qayduuma 
1 ~ISJ 
~li qaas (i) Ivt/I to measure, take the measurement 
of. qaas il-masaafa he measured the distance. II waaxid 
is-sikka qiyaas he travels back and forth along the road. 
2 to tryon for size. qiisi l-fustaan qabl' ma tiftirii try on 
the dress before you buy it. 3 to probe (a hen) for an 
egg. -vn qiyaas, qayasaan; ava qaayis. 
~lei qiyaas 2 In pi -aatl measure, measurement. 
;;....lei qiyaasa linst n, pi -aatl a measuring. seef (or 
dibal) qiyaasa ring gauge. 
~t;i qayyaas In • and pi qayyaasal lone who mea-
sures. 2 (land) surveyor. 
;;....t;i qayyaasa Inl type of large sailing boat with a high 
prow. 
~\A. maqaas In pi -aatl I size, dimension. maqaas 
gazma shoe-size. 
2 measuring instrument (e.g., 
measuring tape, dip-stick) . 
...,..\.,A.. miqyaas In pi maqayiisl I measuring instru-
ment, gauge. miqyaas in-niil the Nilometer. 2t (also 
miqyaas, pi maqayiis) standard. bi- rayy' miqyaas by 
any standard . 
...,..LA;I ritqaas Ivil to be measured. -iva mitqaas. 
726 
...,..\A;I rinqaas = mitqaas. -iva minqaas. 
~\A. muqaysa In pi -aatl I specification (of dimen-
sions, materials etc. required of a job). 2 preliminary 
cost estimate. 
1 ~ IS J see ~ lIS J : qiyaas I 
..; IS J 
~ 
li qaayif <T kayl!j> In pi qawaayif/l leather strap 
(especially one used as a razor-strop). 2 thick leather 
belt (especially the type worn by soldiers). 
.;.;. qayyif I Ivt/ to beat with a leather strap. 2 Ivil to 
dress in one's best, be dressed in one's best. -vn taqyiif; 
ava/pya miqayyif. 
';';"1 ritqayyif Ivill to be beaten with a leather strap. 
2 to dress or be dressed in one's best. -ava/iva 
mitqayyif· 
J IJ'# IS J 
IS~ qay~ari: (lamaliyya) qay~ariyya {surgJ Caesa-
rean section . 
..JIll IS .J 
~li qaayiq/vt/ to barter with (s.o.),.trade with (s.o.) 
by exchange of commodities. qayiq-ni lala qami~ 
bi-Ijiltit qumaafhe traded me a piece of cloth for a shirt. 
-vn qiyaaq, muqayqa; ava miqaayiq. 
~ 
\A. muqayqa In pi -aatl barter deal. 
~ 
LA; 1 ritqaayiq Ivill to barter, trade by the exchang-
ing of commodities. 2 (impersonal) passive of qaayiq. 
ril-Ijagaat di ma-yitqayiq-J' laleeha these things are not 
to be bartered. -ava/iva mitqaayiq. 
"';ISJ 
J.ilei qiyaafa loJ style, elegance, chic. kaan laabis 
raaxir qiyaafa he was very stylishly dressed. II ril-bint' di 
qiyaafa that girl is a regular fashion-plate. 
~I ritqayyif Ivil to dress stylishly and with chic. -ava 
mitqayyif· 
1 J IS J 
JlA;..1 ristaqaal, ristaqaallvil to resign. -vn ristiqaala; 
ava mistaqiil, mustaqiil. 
41lA;..1 ristiqaala In pi -aatl (letter of) resignation. 
1 J IS J 
41t;i qayyaala loJ midday heat, hottest part of the day. 
.ki qayyil Ivill to be burning, be scorching (of midday 
heat}. ril-qayyaala qayyilit laleena the midday heat 

blazed around us. 2 to rest in the hottest part of the day. 
kaanu mqayyiliin tal.Jt'/agara they were taking a siesta 
under a tree. -vn taqyiil; ava miqayyil. 
~ 
taqyiila In pi -aatl midday rest, rest in the hottest 
part of the day. xud-Iak taqyiila take a siesta. 
.1 J IS J see J..b J J : qeelat 
I r IS J see also I r .J J 
~ qiima In pl_qiyaml I value, worth. qimt-u qaliila 
it's of little value. rijta'lfalt' b-qiimit i1-'lfQraama I did 
work to the value of the fine.l!bint d laleeha I-qiima a 
respectable-looking girl. 28 approximate duration. 
bald' qiimit sana after about a year's time. min qiimit 
mudda (I) some time ago. (2) for some time past. 
2b approximate measure. qiimit nu~~ i santi about half a 
centimetre. gaab qi~mit kiilu sudaani he brought about 
a kilo of peanuts. 
~ qayyim ladj *1 [deris] precious (of a person). 
rIA. maqaam In pi -aatl I worth, status. kibiir ii-
maqaam of high standing. layza raagil yilrafmaqaam-i 
I want a man who appreciates (the worth of) me. 
I! rin-naas maqamaat "" not everyone has the same 
727 
worth. -huwwa-l.Jna mij qadd i1-maqaam so (you im-
agine) we're not up to standard? - bi-yilmil maqaam 
li-mraat-u he treats his wife with respect. - rism-alla 
lala maqaam-ak [women in trad soc] "" begging your 
pardon, no offence intended (often prefaces a contra-
diction, objection or mention of any mundane or lowly 
object; cf muraxza). 2 tomb of a saint, site of a saint's 
tomb wherein his presence is thought to be felt. 3 {mus] 
mode, scale, melody type (in Arabic music). 
~ qayyim J T Ivtl to estimate, value, appraise. -vn 
taqyiim; ava muqayyim. 
~I ritqayyim Ivil to be estimated, be valued. be 
appraised. rif-xaatim da mitqayyim bi-kaam how much 
is this ring valued at? - iva mitqayyim. 
1 r IS J see I r .J J: qaam, qiyaam, rif-qiyaama, 
qaayim, qayma, qayyuum 
IS IS J see 
~ IS J : ritqaaya 
rlSISJ 
~ qayyim 2 <Syr> In *1 sacristan (in the Coptic 
Church). 

.!.l 
.!.l ka- t prefixed preposition indicating role, capacity 
or status. bi-yifltifi; bii ka- farfiif bi-yirgal ri/ee fi- fayy' 
walft he keeps it as a record to which he can refer at any 
time. tan;iim il-maktab ka-kull the organization of the 
office as a whole. 
~ ka-ma (It) Iconjl as, just as. kaan liryaan ka-ma 
wildit-u fumm-u = he was as naked as the day he was 
born. (2~ ) Iprepl Uke. mifi ka-ma I-kalb = he left with 
his tail between his legs. - ka-misO Iprep/like. bint' 
ka-misl il-Ififta = a girl like peaches and cream. 
- ladverbially, by ellipsisl fiYsil il-larabiyya bil-gaaz 
wil-Iuuri ka-misl wash the car with kerosene, and the 
lorry similarly. - ka-finn Iconjl as if, as though. 
bi-yi~arraf ka-finnu mudiir he acts as if he were boss. 
fikkarral ka- finnu waakil xaruuf he belched as if he 
had eaten a sheep. 
(yl.!.l) 
..,.,IS" kaab I <Fr> In pi -aatl cape. 
..,.,IS" kaab 2 <Engl> In pi -aatl (military) peaked cap. 
c) l.!.l) 
)IS" kaar <P kllr> In pi -aatl occupation, trade. fiflna 
wilaad kaar waaflid zayy' balt!. we're all in the same 
trade together. firib ik-kaar min ~uYr-u = he imbibed 
the trade with his mother's milk.llda-bn' kaar (1) he's 
made for the job. (2) he's crafty. 
O)IS" kaara In pi -aatl (coarse slang] arse. 
IS.) I .!.l 
IS)IS" kaari <Engl> Inl curry. 
IS j l.!.l 
ISjlS" kaazi <It cazzo'> In! {coarse slang] penis, cock. 
~I.!.l 
~IS" kaas In pi -aat, ku fuusll wine-glass or any other 
stemmed glass. kaas hawa cupping glass. - fil-moot kaas 
daayir lan-naas {prov] = death comes to all. -lenee-ha 
zayy' kasaat id-damm her eyes are very bloodshot. -ya 
kaas-i (women's mourning cry) = oh woe is mt!! 2 glass 
of alcohol. talaala nifrab kaas let's go and have a drink. 
II fibn' kaasbibber, boozer. 3 (also kafs) {Chr] chalice. 
4 beaker (in a laboratory). - Ipl -aat, onlyl 5 {mus] 
wood block. 
j,..1S" kaasa In pi -aatll glass (for ice cream). 2 {callig] 
tail, flourish (e.g., of the letter siin). 
(~I.!.l ) 
..;.IS" kaafl <Engl> ladvl I with a single payment (as 
opposed to by instalments). fiftiri kaaf - farxa,f buy 
outright, it's ch~per. 2 in cash (as opposed to by che-
que). balaaf fikaat fana laayiz kaafno cheques! I want 
(payment in) cash! 
..;.IS" kaaf2 <Fr cache> In pi -aatl {phot] masking 
frame. 
..; l.!.l 
JIS" kaaf Ifem n, pi -aatll twenty-second letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. 2 {chem] abbreviation for carbon 
(karboon). 
l.!.ll.!.l 
.!lIS" kaak onomatopoeia for the call of the crow. zayy' 
gamliyyit iI-rirbaan fawwil-ha kaak wi-faxir-ha kaak 
{prov] like a group of crows, saying 'caw!' from first to 
last (said of those who indulge in fruitless talk). 

Z .!.II.!.I see IS.!.I.!.I: kaaka, kaaka 2, kaaka 3 
I.!.II.!.I 
IS'IS' kaaka I (also kakkaa) <prob T kaka InJ [children] 
excrement, cack. IIkida kakkaa - ma-tilmil-l kida 
na!lghty, naughty -don't do that! 
( IS .!.II .!.I ) 
JIS' kaaki I <Engl> I Inl la khaki cloth. Ib army 
uniform made of khaki cloth. 2 ladj invarl dust-
coloured, khaki-coloured. 
JIS' kaaki 2 <perh It cachi> Icoll nl persimmon(s). 
Irl.!.l 
~IS' kaama <It camma> In pi -aatl [mech] cam. 
ojl.!.l 
;.;IS' kaana <perh It canna> In pi -aatl [constr] 
I square metal spacer or frame to which longitudinal 
reinforcement rods are fastened within a concrete 
beam. 2 metal support sunk into a wall to support a 
wooden cornice, door- or window-frame. 
IS oj I.!.I 
JIS' kaani: kaani w-maani <Copt> one thing or 
another, as in gineeh waalJid madfuulli-kaani w-maani 
one pound which was paid for something or other. 
lJa-tqul-li kaani w-maani are you giving me a lot of 
excuses? 
":-' _.!.I 
~is" kafaaba InJ melancholy, depression, gloom. 
~ 
kariib ladj *1 melancholy, depressed, gloomy. 
loon kariib a cheerless colour . 
..,..i..s"1 fiktafab Ivil to become depressed. landu 
fiktifaab wi-ma-daxal-J il-imtilJaan he's in a state of 
depression and didn't take the exam. -vn fiktifaab; ava 
miktifib, muktafibT. 
IJ" _.!J see IJ" I .!.I : kafs 
oj oj • .!.I see .!J: ka-finn 
I ":-,,,:-,.!.I 
~ kabb l (u) Ivtll to pour, pour out. kubbi mayyit 
il-vasiil fil-lJooq pour the washing water into the sink. 
fiz-zabbaal kabb ~-~afiilJa fil-quffa the garbage man 
729 
emptied the rubbish bin into the basket. 2 to spill, 
upset. 3 [joc] to throw to the ground. fil-lJ~aan kabb-u 
the horse threw him. - 4 Ivil [coarse slang] to ejacu-
late, come. -vn kabb, kababaan; ava kaabib; pva 
makbuub. 
* kabba I In pi -aatl I instance noun of kabb. 
2 [mech] standard feeding load. 
~ 
mikabba I In pi -aatl protective cover (for food). 
~I fitkabb or fikkabb Ivill to be poured, be poured 
out. 2 to be spilled, be upset. 3 to become engrossed or 
absorbed. mitkabb a lala ktaab-u poring over his book. 
-ava/iva mitkabb. 
~I finkabb = fitkabb. -ava/iva minkabb. 
Z,,:-, ,,:-,.!.I 
* kubba I In pi kubab, kubbaatl I lump. lamalt 
il-lagiin kubba I made the dough into a lump. 2 plague 
boil, bubo. IIgat-ak kubba may plague befall you! (ex-
clamation which may be accompanied by the holding up 
of a spread palm in front of someone's face). 3 clumsy 
person. 
..,..\$ kabaab InJ shish kebab, pieces of meat, fish, or 
fowl skewered and grilled. II kabaab ~iini cubeb. 
~\$ kabaaba: kabaaba ~iini cubeb. 
~ 
\$ kababgi In pi -yyal one engaged in the prepara-
tion, serving and selling of kebab. 
~ 
kubeeba InJ dish composed of hollow balls of 
cracked wheat dough stuffed with minced lamb and 
spices. 
'-\$ kubabiyya, kubbabiyya In pi -aatl ball (of string, 
wool etc.) . 
..:.? kabbib I Ivtl to make into a lump. kabbibit 
il-mandiil wi-lJattit-u f-geb-ha she wadded the handker-
chief into a ball and put it in her pocket. 2 to pile up, 
throw in a pile. finta bass i tkabbib-li l-vasiil fir-rukn 
just pile the laundry in the corner for me. - Ivil 3 to 
thrust one's open palm in someone's face (a gesture of 
imprecation, cf. kubba I 2). raalJu mkabbibin~lu f-wiff-
u they thrust their palms at his face, as if to say 'May 
plague befall you!'. -vn takbiib; ava/pva mikabbib. 
~ 
takbiiba I lunit n, pi -aat, takabiibl a lump. 
2 linst n, pi -aatl gesture of holding up the palm, claw-
like, before someone's face . 
...;:s;.. mikabbib ladj "I round, rounded, spherical. 
nalJla mkabbiba a spherical spinning top. sidr-a-ha 
mkabbib her bosom is full and firm. geeb-u mkabbib his 
pocket is bulging. 
~I fitkabbib or fikkabbib Ivill passive of kabbib. 
2 to pile up. naas mikkabbiba lal-malJall people crowd-
ing round (the door of) the shop. -ava/iva mitkabbib. 

.3 .......... .!J 
~ kabb 2 (u) Ivil to use a cupping bowl (as a medical 
treatment). b-akubb" lala qahr-i I'll have my back 
cupped. -vn kibaaba; ava kaabib. 
~t;5 kubbaaya In pI -aatl I drinking glass, tumbler. 
kubbaayit mayya a glass of water. II ribn' kubbaaya 
bibber, boozer. -qarbit kubbaaya blow with the side of 
the fist (in boxing). -naqqaraat tjalr' kubbaaya [joe} 
thick eyeglasses. 2 tub, small carton. kubbaayit jilaati a 
tub of ice cream. 3 socket, sunken recess. kubbaayit 
~aari step of a mast. 
~ 
mikabba 2 In pI -aatl cupping bowl. 
J~ mikabbaati In pI -yyal {obsol} practitioner of a 
treatment (usually for rheumatism) involving the use of 
suction bowls. 
4 ( .......... .!J ) 
~ kabba 2 Inl I five-stones, jacks. -also gabba. 
2 gambling game with cards. 
~ kubba 2 <It coppe> Inl (suit of) hearts (in cards). 
~ I .......... .!J 
~t;5 kabbaad Icoll nl sour orange(s), Seville orange(s). 
~ r::. .......... .!J see z .......... .!J: kababgi 
~~ .......... .!J 
~ 
kubbaniyya <It compagma> In pI -aatl I gang, 
group. 2 {obsol} (water or electricity) utility. 
~ .J .......... .!J . 
~;? kabbuud (also 
kabbuut) <Fr capote> In 
pI kababiidl I {auto} la hood or bonnet (of the en-
gine). Ib convertible top. 2a hood of a coat. 2b car 
cover. 3/usually kabbuutl condom. 
I..:" ..... .!J 
.::...$ kabat (i) Ivtl to suppress, repress. kabt i1-burriyya 
the suppression of freedom. nifs-u y(allal (atjt-u 1-
makbuuta he wants to find an outlet for his suppressed 
energy. -vn kabataan, kabt; ava kaabit; pva makbuut. 
.::...$ kabt Inl repression. rik-kabt ig-ginsi sexual 
frustration. 
4 
kabta Ipl -aatl instance noun of kabt. 
~I ritkabat or rikkabat Ivil to be suppressed, be 
repressed. - iva mitkibit. 
..::..,S::; I rinkabat = ritkabat. - iva minkibit. 
Z ..:" ..... .!J see 
~.J .......... .!J: kabbuut 
730 
~..:" ..... .!J 
~IS" kabtin <Engl> In pI kabaatilll I captain (of a 
ship or aircraft). riI-kabtin bitaal iI-markib the ship's 
captain. 2a sports coach. 2b captain (ofa games team). 
2c polite form of address to an athlete. 2d form of 
address or reference to a young man (sometimes used 
ironically). 
~I ritkabtin or rikkabtin IVII to be bossy. 
ba-titkabtin laleena are you going to throw your weight 
around with us? -vn kabtana; ava mitkabtin. 
-~..:" ..... .!J 
"'" ~ 
IS" kabituneeh <Fr capitOline> Inl quilt-stitching. 
tjumaaf kabituneeh quilted material. 
I ~ ..... .!J 
4 
kabad (i) Ivtl to cause distress to. -vn kabd; ava 
kaabid; pva makbuud. 
4 
kibd In/liver. zeet kibd iI-buUlcod-liveroil.lIlandu 
k-kibd he has liver trouble. -ya kibd-i lalee(k) {women 
in trad soc} "" (you) poor little thing! (expression of 
concern). - ribn-ak billa min kibd-ak "" your son is your 
own flesh and blood (so treat him accordingly). 
-.4 kibda In pI kibad/liver (as food). IIzayy iI-kibda 
very red. 
~I ritkabad or rikkabad Ivil to be caused distress. 
- iva mitkibid. 
~I rinkabad = ritkabad. -iva minkibid. 
~ kabbid, kabbad f Ivtl to inflict (losses, damage) on. 
-vn takbiid; ava mikabbid; pva mukabbadf. 
~I ritkabbid or rikkabbid Ivil passive of kabbid. - iva 
mitkabbid. 
Z ~ ..... .!J see 
~ I ..... y .!J : kabbaad 
.3 ~ ..... .!J see 
~.J ..... Y, .!J : kabbuud 
J ..... .!J 
.;$ kibir, kubur (a) Ivi/l to increase in size, increase in 
dimension. riI-waram kibir the swelling has increased. 
kullafaan tikbar eat so you'll grow! rin-naas iddaxxalit 
wil-xinaatja kibrit people interfered and the dispute 
grew. 2a to increase in age. rana kbirt' xalaf¥ 
wi-ma~batjit-f' ratjdar raftaral (uul in-nahaar I'm past it 
now and can no longer work the whole day. kull' ma 
yikbaru ylaatju d-dinya tjasya the older they get the 
more they find that the world is cruel. 2b to reach 
maturity. riI-bint ~-~urayyara lamma tikbar tiltjal 
when a little girl ~rows up she becomes sensible. lamma 

I-qu{n i yikbar yi{allac nawwaar when the cotton 
reaches maturity it puts out blossom. - vn kubr, kabar, 
kibar; ava kabraan . 
.;$ kubr Inl I largeness, immensity. fuuf kubr-u see 
how big it is! IIkubr il-gum i walafamaatit il-racaadi 
{prov] "" putting up a show is better than being the 
object of gloating. 2 advancement (in age). 
.;$ kabar, kibar Inl advanced point in age. raalj 
il-madrasa cala kabar he went to school late in life. 
• .;$ kabra Inl advanced point in age. bacd ik-kabra 
gibba Ijamra {prov] (a red gibba in very old age) ex-
treme senility brings second childhood . 
.;::$ kibiir, kabiirT ladj pi kubaar, kibaarT! I big, 
large. cilbiteen kubaar two big boxes. mudda kbiira a 
considerable period. camal ¥ala( kibiir he made a big 
mistake. cadad kibiir min banaat il- rayyaam di a great 
number of today's girls. II qalb-u kbiir he's big-hearted. 
-muxx-u kbiir (I) he's clever. (2) he's broad-minded. 
2a advanced or senior in age. raxuu I-kibiir his elderl 
eldest brother. ris-sitt ik-kibiira designation for the 
eldest female member of a household (usually the 
grandmother). 2b adult, full-grown. ril-kubaar laazim 
yiquumu badri y~allu the adults should get up early to 
pray. yicmiluu-ha ~-~u¥aar wi-yuqacu fiiha I-kubaar 
{prov] the young start them (i.e. fights among them-
selves) but the adults (i.e. the parents) get dragged into 
them. 3 senior, superior (in rank). kibaar i~-~ubbaa( 
senior officers. II kibiir il-beet head of the household. 
-kabiir 
il-muhandisiin 
{naut] 
chief 
engineer. 
4 outstanding, eminent. kuttaab kubaar great writers. 
I"ik-koora ma-Iha-f kibiir nobody is invincible in soccer. 
II kabiir rumaraa r I-biljaar {obsol] Admiral of the Fleet. 
- In/5 {rur] large horizontal cog of a water-wheel (see 
PI.E,7). 
• .;::$ kibiira In pi kabaayirl major sin. marist iz-zina -
kibiira min il-kabaayir I committed adultery - one of 
the greatest sins . 
.;$i rakbar lell I larger/largest. 20lder/oldest, etc. 
huwwa rakbar minni b-sana he's a year older than I. 
3 greater/greatest.11 rallaahu rakbar God is most great. 
/. lS'i rakaabir Ipl nl people of high standing, people of 
distinction. bint il-rakaabir ¥alya wa-Iaw tikuun garya 
{pro v] (the daughter of the great has quality even if she 
is a serving-girl) true worth can never be lost . 
..s.;$ kubra J t Ifem ell I greater. ril-qaahira I-kubra 
Greater Cairo. 2 major. rid-duwal il-kubra the major 
powers. 
-4.;$ kibriyaar Inl pride, haughtiness. II ril-kibriyaar 
/i-llaah "" what have you to be conceited about? 
'..I~ kubbaara ladj invarl I socially distinguished. 
731 
raagi! kubbaara a man of standing. 2 old. 
;? kabbar Ivtl 
la to enlarge, expand. cayziin 
nikabbar ~uwar il-faralj we want to enlarge the wedding 
pictures. ril-cadasa bi-tkabbar i~-~uwar the lens magni-
fies the images. naqqaara mkabbara binoculars. rimfi 
min hina w-ma-tkabbar-Jil-Ijikaaya get out of here and 
don't make things worse! IIkabbar caql-ak be reason-
able! Ib to enhance, raise (the level of). ril-hum i 
ykabbar i~-~oot the bell (of the trumpet) amplifies the 
sound. II qaalid min i~-~ublj i ykabbar maqam-ha (or 
min maqam-ha) he's been praising her all da}\. Ie to 
cause to grow or increase in size. bi-ykabbaru fraax 
cafaan yibicuu-hum they fatten up chickens to sell. 2 to 
cause to mature, bring u.p. 
rabbeet 
rawlaad-i 
w-kabbart-u-hum wi-daxxalt-u-hum il-gamca I raised 
my children and sent them to the university. 3 to give 
the appearance of age. ril-fustaan da bi-ykabbar-ha 
that dress makes her look older. bi-ti/rab sagaayir 
cafaan tikabbar nafs-a-ha (or fi-nafs-a-ha) she smokes 
cigarettes to seem older. 4 to seek a large(r) size of. 
kabbari k-kubbayaat illi ca{-(arabeeza put bigger glas-
ses out on the table. - Ivil 5 to utter the formula 
rallaahu rakbar. - vn takbiir; ava/pva mikabbar. 
.~ takbiira, takbiira linst n, pi -aat, -aatl (single) 
utterance of rallaahu rakbar. 
~ 
mukabbirt In pi -aatl I loudspeaker, amplifier. 
2 {phot] enlarger. 
.~ mukabbira In pi -aatl magnifying glass. 
~I ritkabbar or rikkabbar Ivil I passive of kabbar. 
2 to be disdainful or haughty. yitkabbaru leeh caleewhy 
should they look down on him? - iva mitkabbar, 
mutakabbir. 
~ 
mutakabbir, mitkabbar ladj *1 conceited, stuck 
up. 
/.IS' kaabir Ivil to argue back (out of unWillingness to 
listen to the other's point of view). rismac kalaam-i 
balaaf mikabra listen to what I say, don't be so opinion-
ated. - vn mikabra, mukabra; ava mikaabir. 
fo,l ristakbar Ivtl I to consider (excessively) large 
or old. 2 to select for size or age. - Ivt and vii 3 to give 
(oneself) airs, feel superior. bi-yistakbar caleehum he 
looks down on them. mistakbara nafs-a-ha caf-fu¥laa-
di she thinks that job is beneath her dignity. -vn 
ristikbaar; ava mistakbar. 
I ,; ':-' .!l 
1/.,,5" kubra 2 (also ticbaan kubra) Inl cobra. 
''':'',;,:-,.!l 
u.;$ kabrit Ivtl to sulphurate. - vn kabrata; ava/iva 
mikabrit. 

~~ kabriillnl 1 sulphur. kabriil in-nalJaas copper 
sulphate. IIkabriil il-eBmuud raw sulphur. 2/colll 
matches. kabriil mift book matches. 
-;.;..,.~ kabriila linst n, pi -aal, kabariill a match. 
eandak kabriila got a light? 
..:.~~ kabrilBallni sulphate. 
.J.o:i.~ kabriliid Ini [chem} sulphide. kabriliid il-
fidrujiin hydrogen sulphide. 
~~ 
kabriliik: l:Jaamiq kabriliik [chem} sulphuric 
acid. 
..:.~I filkabril or fikkabril Ivil to be sulphurated. 
-iva milkabril. 
2.:.0 
....,.!I 
J • 
.. J, ~ kubirla <It coperla> In pi -Ball coverlet for a 
bed, bedspread. - also kufirla. 
"sJY.!I 
..sJ,~ kubri <T koprii> In pi kabaaril 1 bridge. 
2 [dent} bridge. 3 thwart (of a Nile boat). 
11 eamal kubri (1) to allow the ball to pass between 
one's legs (in soccer). (2) to arch the back in order to 
avoid a shoulder penalty (in wrestling). 
I"sJY.!I 
~.)..,$ kaburya <perh Gr kabouras> Icoll nI crab(s). 
~\o!.)..,$ kaburyaaya lunit n, pi -aall a crab. 
o"sJY.!I 
4!~ kabareeh <Fr cabarel> In pi -aall night-club. 
loI""y.!I 
..,..$ kabas (i) Ivtl 1 to compress, press down, p~ck 
tightly. bi-nikbis il-iiu{li , fil- fakyaas we pack the cotton 
down in the sacks. 2 to frustrate or embarrass by pro-
ving wrong. kabas-ni w-nigil:J to my embarrassment, 
and contrary to my expectation, he succeeded. 3 to 
fend off (one's opponent, in wrestling). 4 [magic} to 
jinx into sterility. 5 to press down on. fikbis ig-garl:J' 
b-bunn press ground coffee on the wound (to stop it 
from bleeding). 6 [coarse} to copulate with, .stuff. 
- Ivil 7 to exert pressure. batn-i kabsa ealayya I feel 
bloated. Sa to converge, close in. b~t iiabl iz-zal:Jma 
ma likbis take a look before the crowd closes in. 
IIfin-noom kaabis ealeeha sleep is overcoming her. 8b to 
raid. fil-buli~ kabas eal-rurza the police raided the 
hashish den. - vn kabasaan, kabs; ava kaabis; pva 
makbuus . 
..,..$ kabs Ivn/ileagaia kabs a solid tyre. -l:Jafiif kabs 
poor grade of hashish. 
732 
'-$ kabsa In pi -aal/l instance noun of kabs. II kabsa 
[joc} there! got you! (when proving that someone is 
wrong). 2 pressing, any item pressed by machine, parti-
rularly in the record industry or in metal-work. 
3 surprise search, raid (usually for contraband). 
..,..$ kubs In pi fikbaasl [elec} plug . 
\J"~ kabbaas In pi -Ball plunger, piston. II fid-dunya 
funya wiz-zaman kabbaas [prov} == time waits for no 
man. -l:Jagar il-kabbaas stone rubbed against mother-
of-pearl in folk medicine, for the treatment of women in 
confinement and those with purulent ophthalmia . 
\J"-'!IS" kabuus In pi kawabiisl nightmare. 
..r.:$ kabiis ladjl pressed, compressed. balalJ kabiis 
pressed dates. II sana kabiisa leap year. 
...,..$.. makbas In pi makaabisl 1 pressing machine, 
press. 2 piston, plunger. 
~I filkabas or fikkabas Ivil passive of kabas. -iva 
milkibis . 
~ 
I finkabas = filkabas. - iva minkibis. 
~ 
kabbis Ivtll to pack down, press down. kabbisil 
id-diiiiiii N-~afa'ayil:J she packed the flour down in the 
tins. 2 to ·massage. kabbis qahr-i give me a back-rub! 
3 to mate with (offowl). -vn lakbiis; ava/pva mikabbis. 
Jt...;S:... mikabbisaali In pi -yyal[lrad soc} masseur (in 
a Turkish bath): 
...,..;s:.1 filkabbis or fikkabbis Ivil passive of kabbis. 
-iva milkabbis. 
.:.olol""y.!I 
~ 
~ kubisla <T kiipe§le from Gr> In pi -aall 
(wooden) handrail. - also kubifla. 
J.J 101"" y.!I 
J"...$ kabsuul <Fr> Icoll nI capsule(s). 
'41"...$ kabsuula linst n, pi -aal, kabasiill a capsule. 
.J.JloI""y.!I 
",,,...$ kabsuun <poss Fr capsule> lcoll nI 1 snap 
fastener(s), press stud(s). 2 eyelet(s). 3 cap(s) (for toy 
guns). 
4;"...$ kabsuuna lunit n, pi -aal, kabasiinl 1 a snap 
fastener, a press stud. 2 an eyelet. 3 a cap. 
I u:. y.!I 
..;.$ kabaj (i) Ivtl 1 to take a handful of. kabaj 
milabbis wi-ddaa-ni he took a handful of sugar-coated 
almonds and gave them to me. 2 to clutch, clutch at. 
b-al:Jiss' f-batn-i zayy , ma Ikuun l:Jaaga kabjaa-ha I feel 
as if something were clutching at my stomach. -vn 
kabajaan, kabj; ava kaabif; pva makbuuj. 

733 
Io:"~~ 
------------------------------------------------------~ 
~ 
kabJa In pI -aat, kubajl I handful. l:Juai kabJit 
~abuun mabJuur fi-mayyit if-rasiif put a handful of soap 
flakes in the washing water.lIlandu kabfit liyaa/he has 
a bunch of children. 2 ladle. rifli riddaa-hum bik-kabJa 
yiddii-na bik-kustibaan (prov] may He who gave them 
by the ladle(ful) give to us by the thimble(ful) (said of 
one who has been fortunate). 
~ 
I ritkabaJ or rikkabaJ Ivil passive of kabaJ. -iva 
mitkibif· 
~ 
kabbif Ivil 1 to take successive handfuls. lali 
baaba daxal if-maraara wi-kabblf fil-filuus Ali Baba 
entered the cave and grabbed the money in handfuls. 
nil:Jua is-simaad bit-takbiifwe put down the fertilizer by 
handfuls. 2 to cling. mikabbif fil- rarcf. clinging to the 
ground. -vn takbiif; ava mikabbif. 
l<..;y.ll) 
..;.$ kabJlnpl kibaaJ, rakbaajl(stud)ram.llkab/fida 
scapegoat. 
~ 
kubJa <T koprta> In pI kubajl hook and eye. 
,:,,";y.!l 
~.,> kubifta <T kupe§te from Gr> In pI -aatl 
(wooden) handrail. -also kubista. 
.ll y.ll see .ll.J y .ll : kabuuk 
y.lly.ll 
~ 
kabkib Ivtl to spill repeatedly. -vn kabkaba; aval 
pva mikabkib. 
~I ritkabkib or rikkabkib Ivil passive of kabkib. 
-vn tikabkiib; iva mitkabkib. 
IJy.ll 
J. IS" kabl <Fr> In pI -aat, kawaabif, kababii/J , 
kawabiill (electric) cable. 
1 J y.ll see ..s J.J y .ll : kabuuli 
o..s J y.!l 
~.,> kubleeh <Fr couplet> In pI -aatl verse of a song 
or poem. 
I ...... .ll 
101. 
see ..s 4J y y .ll : kubbaniyya 
1 ...... .ll 
101. 
see 4J .J y .ll : kubuun, kubuuna 
l4J y.!l see 4J ..s y .ll : kabiina 
o..s4Jy.ll 
-.;.$ kabineeh <Fr cabinet> In pI -aatllavatory, toilet. 
kabineeh rafrangi pedestal lavatory upon which one 
sits. kabineeh baladi lavatory with foot pedestals over 
which one squats. IIlamal kabineeh and raal:J if-
kabineeh he used the lavatory, he went to the 
bathroom. 
.ll.J y.ll 
.ll.,$ kabuuk In! kapok, Java cotton. 
..sJ.JY.ll 
J.J!IS" kabuuli <poss It capolo> In pI kawabiifl 
I prop. 2 cantilever, bracket, corbel. 
4J.JY.ll 
iJ.,$ kuboon, kubuun <Fr coupon> In pI -aatl 
I coupon. 2 {finan] dividend certificate. 
-;';.,$ kuboona, kubuuna = kuboon. 
l..s y.ll 
~ kaba (i) Ivil 1 to become dull (of colours). 2 to 
become dim (of light). -ava kaabi. 
IJ.IS" kaabi ladj *1 1 dull, matt (of colours). rabyacf. 
kaabi off-white, whitish. 2 lustre1ess, tarnished (of met-
al surfaces). 3 greyish, ashen (of complexion). 
l..s y.ll 
I.!"> kubya <It copia> Inl (carbon or xerox) copy. 
qalam kubya copying pencil, indelible pencil. lliaay 
kubya {deris] extra strong tea. -Ieela (or yoom) kubya 
one hell of an evening (or day), as in lelt-ik l:Ja-tibqa 
kubya you're in for a very tough evening! 
4J..sy.ll 
~IS" kabiina <It cabina> In pI kabaayinl I cabin. 
kabiina Jamsiyya beach tent. 2 compartment (in a 
train). 3 caterer's hamper of crockery. 
.:.. .J I .:.. .ll 
';"Jl;S' kataawit 
<Engl 
cut-out> 
{auto] 
voltage 
regulator. 
y.:...ll 
~ 
katab (i) Ivt/l to write. miin katab if-muzakkira di 
who wrote this memo? rid-duktoor katab-Ii ruJitta the 
doctor wrote me a prescription. ril-kitaaba lal-makana 
typing. II katab kit~ab-u lal-bint {lsi] he made the con-
tract to marry the girl. -katabuu-Ii l:Jittit rarcf. they made 
a piece of land over to me, they wrote a piece of land in 
my name. 2 to foreordain, destine (of God). -vn 
kitaaba, katb, katabaan; ava kaatib; pva maktuub. 

~ \;S" kitaaba In pI -aatl 1 writing, piece of writing. 
II ni[mil qur[a - malik walla ktaaba let's spin a coin 
- heads or tails? 2 inscription. 3 Ino pll writing system, 
script. 
..,...lS" kaatib 1 
1 laval 
II raala 
katba 
typewriter. 
I:J-at[allim raala katba I shall learn to type. - Inl 2 Ipl 
kuttaab, katabal secretary, clerk. bafkaatib chief clerk. 
kaatib iI-mal:Jkama clerk of the court. qalam ik-kuttaab 
secretarial pool. 3 Ipl kuttaab, katbiinl writer, author. 
kaatib bil-l:Jitea a freelance writer. 
..,.. p.. maktuub ladjl predestined. 
rilli maktuub 
[al-gibiin laazim tifuuf-u I-[een [prov] ... what will be 
will be . 
..,..\;S" kitaab Inl 1 Ipl kutubl book. riI-kitaab iI-
muqaddas the Bible. kitaab iIIaah the Koran. 
II wi-kitaab illaah oath to enjoin belief in the speaker's 
words, as in wi-kitaab iIIaah iI-wiliyya di nal:Jasit-ni this 
woman has really jinxed me! 2 Ino pll marriage 
contract. 
IJ.\;S" kitaabi ladjl 1 written. ramr' ktaabi an order in 
writing. 2 clerical. rik-kadr' ik-kitaabi the clerical 
grade (as an entire group). 
~ kitabiyyan r ladvl in writing. bi-yqaddim ir-rary 
iI-qanuuni kitabiyyan he presents the legal view in 
writing. 
~ 
kutubgl In pI -yyal book dealer. 
..r.S kutbi In pI kutbiyyal book dealer. 
~~I rik-kutubxaana Iprop nl [obsoll the Egyptian 
National Library. 
4.,;S katiiba In pI kataayib, kataaribf I [mill grouping 
corresponding roughly to a battalion. IIl:Jizb iI-kataayib 
(or. iI-kataarib) the Phalangist Party (in Lebanon). 
..,..\;S" kuttaab In pI katatiibl traditional school in which 
the Koran is taught. II/amma faab wadduu ik-kuttaab 
[prov I after he had become an old man, they sent him to 
elementary school (said in respect of an action taken 
after its proper time). 
~ 
maktab In pI makaatib/l office, bureau. maktab 
fanni a technical bureau. 2 desk. I:J-aquum min [ala 
maktab-i I'll get up from my desk. 3 (also rooqit 
maktab) study. 
~ 
maktaba In 
pI -aatl 1 bookshop. 2 library. 
3 stationery shop. 4 bookcase. 
..r.>-- maktabi ladj °11 pertaining to an office. [amal 
maktabi office work. radawaat maktabiyya office sup-
plies. 2 pertaining to a library. tan;iim maktabi library 
science. 
~ 
maktabgi In pI -yyal [obsolJ book dealer. 
~I ritkatab or rikkatab 1 to be written. 2 to be 
foreordained, be destined. II rikkatab-Iu [umr' gdiid he 
734 
had a new lease of life. -iva mitkitib. 
~I rinkatab = ritkatab. -iva minkuib. 
-4 kateib Ivtl to cause to write, make write. kateib-ha 
gawaab he made her write a letter. - ava mikattib. 
~I ritkattib or rikkattib Ivil passive of kattib. - iva 
mitkattib. 
..,...lS" kaatib 2 Ivtl to write to, correspond with. la 
bi-ykatib-ni wala b-akatb-u he doesn't write to me and 
I don't write to him. -vn mikatba, mukatba; ava 
mikaatib. 
..,...~ mukaatib In '1 correspondent (of a newspaper 
etc.). 
4,;"~ mukatba In pI -aatl item of (written) correspond-
ence. yisallim iI-mukatbaat iI-xa~~a bil-qaqiyya he deliv-
ers correspondence particular to the case. mukatbaat 
rasmiyya official correspondence . 
..,...\S:;I rukaatlb Ivil to write to one another, carryon a 
correspondence. -ava mitkaatib. 
...,..::::S"I riktatab Ivil to subscribe, pay a contribution. 
riktatabu fil-mafruu[ iI-xayri they subscribed to the 
charity proJect. -vn riklitaab; ava miktitib. 
~I ristaktib /vtl to force 
(s.o.) to write. 
ristaktibuu-ni riqraar they forced me to write a confes-
sion. -vn ristiktaab; avalpva mistaktib. 
I .:.. .:.. .d 
~ kate 1 (u) Ivtl [rurl to chop, mash (food for chicks) . 
kateil iI-barsiim lik-kalakiil she chopped up the clover 
for the chicks. -vn kate, kalalaan; ava kaalil; pva 
makluul. 
.::.S kute lonom/: kute' kurl' kute' ... sound made to call 
chicks. see further under I.:...d.:...d 
~ 
I ritkatt or rikkatt Ivil passive of katt I. - iva milkate. 
.:s:..1 rinkatt = rukatt. - iva minkatt. 
..;s kattil l = kate I. - avalpva mikattil. 
~ 
I rilkattu 1 or rikkattit 1 Ivil passive of kattit I. - iva 
milkattil. 
Z.:.. .:.. .d 
~ katt 2 (u) Ivtl 1 to throw out, kutt-u barra throw him 
out! 2 to secrete, ooze. wiff-u katt" [araq his face was 
dripping with sweai. - Ivil 3 [slangl to make off. kutt' 
ya waad buzz off, kid! katt' min is-sign he escaped from 
pri~on. - vn kalalaan; ava kaalil; pva makluut. 
..::.-;S kutteel In pI kutteelal [mil slangl one who fre-
quently goes absent without leave. 
~ 
kattil 2 Ivtl to send off, shoo away. raxiiran kateitna 
l-waad finally we chased the kid away. -avalpva 
mikateil. 

~I fitkallit 2 or fikkallit 2 Ivil to be sent off, be 
better. lila bi-ktiir wala b-qaliil not for anything. -faat 
shooed away. - iva mitkallil. 
iI-kitiir ma-baqa filla I-qaliil "" the worst is over. 
J.:;., .:;., .!.l 
..;;s kallit' Ivtl to tangle, snarl. - vn taktiit; avalpva 
mikallit. 
..;..;S.... mikallit ladjl I tangled, snarled. 2 kinky, frizzy 
(of hair). 
~I fitkallit' or fikkallit' Ivil to be tangled, be 
snarled. - iva mitkallit. 
4 .:;., .:;.,.!l see j, j, .!l 
.J.:;.,.!l 
fo .j.S kitir, kutur (a) Ivil I to become numerous, 
proliferate. kitrit iI-[a~afiir min xamsiin sana sparrows 
have become numerous over the last fifty years. lamma 
[-[alq' yiktar wi-yiigi wara bale/. when the labour con-
tractions increase and come in (quick) succession. 2 to 
become widespread, become extensive. fil-faqri kitir 
fil-ba/ad poverty has become widespread in the coun-
try. 3 to increase in intensity, be or become compound-
ed, become more so. kitir za[a/-u he got more upset. 
- vn kutr, kutra. 
fo .fo kutr Inl I great deal. large amount. min kutr-u 
y[allac,uu fi-l:Jbaal there's so much of it they hang it on 
ropes. 2 overabundance. kutr iI-makwa bi-ywaqqa[ if-
Ja[r too much use of curling tongs makes the hair fall 
out. kutr iI-l:Juzn i Ylallim il-buka [prov] too much grief 
teaches one to weep. 
11 min kutr' rna because of the (great) extent to which. 
bi-till:Jas ~awabi[-ha bald il-fakli min kutr i rna hiyya 
mabsuu[a she licks her fingers after eating, so delighted 
is she. 
.;5 .• ? 
katra. kutra. kasra' Inl (large) quantity, 
abundance. fiI-katra thdib if-Jagaa[a [prov] numbers 
overwhelm 
courage. 
bi-katra (I) in 
abundance. 
bi-yifrab 
bi-kutra 
he 
drinks 
a 
lot. 
(2) often. 
bi-yusta[mal bi-kasra it is often used . 
.r-S . p;5 kitiir I ladj pi kutaarl many, numerous, 
banaat kitiira (or kitiir) many girls. [iyaal kitiir (or 
kutaar) many children. fin-naas kutaar qawi there are a 
great many people, fanwaa[ is-sibaal:Ja ktiir there are 
many styles of swimming. Ilfiwayya ktaar (I) a good 
few, a good many. (2) a good while, 2 Inl great deal, 
great number. kitiir min in-naas mif laqyiin sakan a 
great number of people can't find housing, ni[iif 
bil-c,aliillamma ygii-na I-kitiir we live on little until we 
have plenty. fal:Jsan bi-ktiir better by a long shot, mueh 
- bik-kitiir at most, as in l:Ja-mdib nu~l saa[a bik-kitiir 
we'll be gone half an hour at the most. 3 ladv/3a much, 
a lot. [ayza tnaam kitiir she needs to sleep a lot. 
3b often. kitiir lamma niftal:J il-balal:J nilaaqi l:JaJaraat 
often, when we open up dates, we find insects. kitiirlaw 
(arrwrna lOob nilaaqi faxr-u mkarmif often, if we un-
, ravel a bolt (of cloth), we find that the end piece of it is 
crumpled. 
fli .j.Si faktar lell more, most. (finta) [aawiz faktar 
min kida (1) do you want more than this? (2) what 
more could you ask for! mif lja-nuq[ud faktar min 
nUN' saa[a we won't stay more than half an hour . 
faktar waqt i mumkin the longest possible time. falam 
yidawwax-u faktar rna huwwa daayix a pain which 
makes him even more dizzy . [awz-u yjuf-IiJaqqa bukra 
faw ba[d i bukra [ala I-faktar I want him to find me an 
apartment tomorrow or the next day at the latest. 
- ladverbiallyl fik-kul:Jl:Ja b-tiigi faktar bil-Ieel the cough 
comes more frequently at night. 
~;5i .~?i faktariyya. 
faktariyya 
Inl majority. 
faktariyyit in-naas' most people. II bil- faktariyya at 
most. 
.1,r.S .1p;5 kitiira Inl [botl tragacanth. 
fo .;.s kallar Ivtl I to increase in number or quantity. 
l:Ja-ykallar min id-dibiil:J he'" get a lot of meat together.· 
ma-tkallar-Iahaa-jil-mayya don't add much water to it. 
IIkallar (fait) xeer-ak (may God increase your bounty) 
"" thank you very much. -
Ivi/2 to go too far. laqeet-u 
l:Ja-ykallar fa-quit' balaajxinaaq I saw he was going to 
turn abusive so I decided to stop quarrelling. II mif 
I:J-akallar [aleek I'll make it short, I won'; take too 
much of your time. 3 to seek a large quantity. fil-ba/aaj 
kallar minnu {prov! make the most of what is free. 4 to 
become broody (of a hen etc.). - vn taktiir; ava mikallar. 
)s:,;1 fitkallar or fikkallar Ivil to be increased in num-
ber or quantity. - iva mitkallar. 
.T\5:; .,;\5:;1 fitkaatir or fikkaatir Ivil I to be numer-
ous, be many. fitkatru [alayya they outnumbered me. 
2 to multiply, increase in number. - ava mitkaatir. 
~I .~I fistaktar Ivtl I to consider (too) much. 
2 to seek or provide in quantity. - vn fistiktaar; ava 
mistaktar. 
.:;., .!l .J .:;., .!l 
l:S"1? katarakta Inl {path! cataract. 
(';.:;.,.!l ) 
..;.::S kat! <Engl and Fr>: mu~ar[it kat! catch-as-

catch-can style of wrestling. 
..;.;.J kuif <Engl> In pi -aatl (sports') coach. 
iJ ~ .;. .::.. .!J 
;;.;...:.;.J kuifiina <perh It giochina a little game> Inl 
I Icoll nl playing-cards. 2 Ipl katafiinl deck of cards. 
t.::...!J 
e. katal Inl deformity of the arm. 
el faktal ladj. fern katla. pi kutll having a de-
formed arm. 
p kattal Ivtl to leave (s.o.) with a crippled arm. 
ITxaccaac mikattal a grossly inept calligrapher. -vn 
taktiil; ava/pva mikattal. 
~I fitkattal or fikkattal Ivil passive of kattal. - iva 
mitkattal· 
~.::...!J 
...A:;5 kitf In pi kitaaf, faktaaf. kutuuJ! la shoulder. 
faalit iI-bint· la/a kitf-a-ha she carried the girl on her 
shoulder.faal iI-masfuliyya la/a ktaaf-u he shouldered 
the responsibility. II fiI-haziima bil-kitf (in wrestling) 
defeat of the opponent by pinning both his shoulders to 
the ground. - warrii-ni larq' ktaaf-ak let me see the 
back of you! - fiid-i la/a kitf-ak ... I'm with you all the 
way! - fibn-u lala kitf-II w-huwwa daa)'ir yidawwar 
lalee {prov) ... he can't see what is under his nose. 
Ib {soccer) shoulder push. Ie withers (of a horse). 
2 side support. kit!, baab door-jamb. faktaaf kubri end 
supports of a bridge. sillim bi-faktaaf {naut) ladies' 
ladder. 3 {naut) bow. kitf iI-yimiin the starboard bow. 
~ katifan: katifan silaal.J {mil) shoulder arms! 
~~ kattaafa In pi -aatl epaulette. shoulder pad. 
...A:;5 kattif Ivt/la to bind the arms of. truss up. ta/aata 
ykattifuu w-yil.JiII' nafs-u thre~ people tie his hands 
behind his back and he gets himself loose. Ib to truss (a 
fowl for cooking). wizza mkattifa (I) a trussed goose. 
(2) a whole goose. 2 to pin (s.o.'s) shoulders to the 
ground (in wrestling). -vn taktiif; ava/pva mikattif. 
~ 
taktiifa In pi -aatl instance noun of taktiif. 
.i':s... mikattif Ipva/ II babuur mikattif {naut) a weather-
bound ship. -makana mkattifa a labouring engine. 
~I fitkattif or fikkattif Ivil passive of kattif. - iva 
mitkattif. 
I.::...!J.::...!J see also I.::...::...!J 
.;:.s.;s katkit I Ivtl to call (chicks) by making the sound 
of kut-kut-kut. -vn katkata; avalpva mikatkit . 
.;:. fi;S katkuut In pi ~atakiitl chick. young chicken. 
filii yxaaf min iI-l,irsa ma-yrabbii-f katakiit {prov) he 
736 
who fears the weasel raises no chicks. II fil-katkuut 
iI-fa~iil.J mil-beeqa y~iil.J {prov] ... talent shows itself 
early. 
"::'s\;S" kataakit: ya c;alb' ya kataakit yaama-nta faayil 
(or saamil) wi-saakit {women in trad soc) poor heart, 
how much you bear in silence! 
~I fitkatkit l or fikkatkit l Ivil passive of katkit l • 
-vn tikatkiit; iva mitkatkit. 
1.::...!J.::...!J see also 3.::...::...!J 
.;:.s.;s katkit 1 Ivtl to make (hair) frizzy. -vn katkata; 
ava/pva mikatkit. 
..::.5&... mikatkit ladj ·1 kinky. frizzy (of hair). 
~I fitkatkit 1 or fikkatkit 1 Ivil to become or be 
made frizzy (of hair). -ava/iva mitkatkit. 
J.::...!J 
:lliS" kutla In pi kuta/, kutlaatl 1 block. kutlit xafab a 
block of wood. kutlit tirbaas breech block. 2 bloc. 
fik-kutla f-farc;iyya the Eastern bloc. 3 {phys) mass. 
~ kattillvt/l to pile up. throw in a pile. kattil iI-lilab 
iI-fatf.ya fir-rukn' da pile up the empty cans in that 
corner. 2 to mass. kattilu dabbabaat lal-l.Juduud they 
massed tanks along the border. - Ivil 3 to clot, form 
clots (of blood. and the like). - vn taktiil; avalpva 
mikattil. 
~I fitkattil or fikkattillvi/la to be piled up. Ib to be 
massed. 2a to form a (political) bloc. 2b to gang up. 
3 to clot. form clots. -avaliva mitkattil. 
[.J J.::...tI 
r:..};S kataloog 
<Fr> 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 -:atalogue. 
2 (instruction) manual. 
.tI~J.::...tI 
.!l.J;ts' katuliik <Fr> Icoll nl Catholics. also kasuliik. 
~;.ts' katuliiki 1 {adjl Catholic. 2/nl a Catholic. 
also kasuliiki. 
r'::".tI 
~ katam (i) Ivtl 1 to restrain. curb. suppress. katam 
nafas-u he held his breath. zililt' moot minnu bass' 
katamt' f-nafs-i I got very upset with him but hid my 
feelings. II fiktim sirr-ak (wi-fki I-rabb-ak) {prov) keep 
your secret (and complain (only) to your Lord). 2 to 
muffle. dampen (sound). fif-fakmaan bi-yiktim ~oot 
iI-mutoor the exhaust system muffles the sound of the 
engine. 3 to stop up. seal. katam i1-c;idra c;abl' ma 
kamar-ha he sealed the fuul pot tight before burying it 
in the earth. fif-fiifa maktuuma the water-pipe is blOck-

ed.4 to inhale (smoke) and hold it in. 5 to silence, shut 
up. ma liklim iI-waad why don't you shut the kid up! 
6a [soccer] to trap (the ball) with the foot. 6b to block a 
smash (in tennis or volleyball). - Ivil 7 to become 
close, stuffy or oppressive (of weather). 8 to have an 
oppressive effect. riI-fakli kalam la/a Cjalb-i the food 
made me feel bloated. -vn kalamaan, kalm, kilmaan; 
ava kaalim; pva makluum. 
4.;;5 kalma I Inl I Ipl -aall instance noun of kalm. 
IIfilkalam kalmil ii-lads (or iI-bunn) to clam up. 2/no 
pll stillness, closeness (of weather). 
oJl....:S' kilmaan r Inl secrecy, confidential relationship. 
r'1S' kaalim lava/likaalim ~OOI silencer (of a gun). 
~IS' kalma:! In pi -aall damper (on a piano). 
r F. kaluum ladj *1 uncommunicative, reticent. 
~ 
kUlleemi ladvl in secret. filgawwizu kUlleemi 
they married secretly. 
~I filkatam or fikkalam Ivi/l passive of kalam. 2 to 
stop talking. fikkasa/l i wi-kkalaml I got embarrassed 
so I shut up. filkilim kalma shut up! - avaliva milkilim. 
&1 finkalam = filkalam. -ava/iva minkilim. 
~ kallim Ivil to keep quiet, maintain sil"nce. kallim 
lala I-mawc{uul da keep quiet on that subject. -vn 
lakliim; ava mikallim. 
~I filkallim or fikkallim Ivtl to keep quiet about. 
fikkallimil xabar wiladl-u she concealed the news of his 
birth. - ava milkallim. 
.;, ~:.I.!l 
oJ\;) killaan Inl I flax. bizri killaan linseed. 2 linen. 
3 tow (used in caulking boats). 
..:;.. ~ ..:;...!.l see ..:;.. ~ I ..:;.. .!l : kalaawil 
.;, IS":;" .!l 
41S' kaliina >It calena> In pi -aal, kalaayin/l (fine) 
chain. kaliinil saala watch chain. 2/aUlo/ timing chain. 
.... .!J.!l see J.... 
.!l 
• 
• IJ" 
...; .!J.!l see 2"'; IJ" .!l 
..:;..c.!l 
.::-S kaljal (a) Ivtll to ~crape. 2 / surg/ to curette. -vn 
kayl, kaljalaan; ava kaaljil; pva makljuUl. 
737 
.::..,,:..S !..aYiil ladj pi kaljaayill seasoned, hardened, 
weathered. mara kaljiila a woman who's been around. 
~W" kaljljaala In pi -aall curette. 
~I filkaljalor fikkaljallvil passive of kaljal. - iva 
milkiljil. 
~I finkaljal = filkaljal. -iva minkiljil. 
.::..:.s kaljljallvtl '0 scrape (a number of things, or one 
thing a number of times). -vn lakljiil; avalpva 
mikaljljal. 
.::..:..s.... mikaljljal ladjl penniless. 
~I filkaljljal or fikkaljljal Ivil passive of kaljljal. 
- iva milkaljljal. 
cc.!l 
if kablj (u) Ivil to cough. -vn kaljlj, kaljaljaan: ava 
kaaljilj. 
~ kaljlj i mala to argue with (s.o.). 'lima Ija-Ikuyb I 
mlaaya will you argue with me? 
..:.s kaljlja linst n, pi -aall a single act of coughing, a 
cough. 
~ 
kuljlja Inl cough. ailment characterized by 
coughing. kublja wiljfa a bad cough. 
.!lc.!l 
<.!.6.S' kaljk Icoll nl cookies of flour, butter, and some-
times a sweet filling or a dusting of sugar, baked for 
~pecial occasions (religious feasts in particular). bal1 
iI-liid ma-yin/ililfi kaljk /prov/ (after the feast, (the 
dough for) kaljk is not twisted) ... you don't hang up 
streamers after Christmas. 
~ 
kaljka In pi -aall I lunit nl a cookie. riI-kabka 
/-fiid i/-yaliim lagaba /prov/ (a cookie in the hand of an 
orphan is a marvel) to some, a little can mean a lot . 
2/naul/ salvage float. 3/slang/ five-pound note 
(among pickpockets). 4/slang/ fail-grade (among 
school-children). 
~IS::..S kaljkaaya = kaljka 1,3, and 4. 
c.!lc.!l 
r:f-S kaljkalj Ivil I to have a severe cough. 2 to be-
come decrepit. larabiyya mkaljkalja a worn-out old 
car. -vn kabkalja: ava mikaljkalj. 
r:f-S kuljkulj ladj invarl old, decrepit . 
~.!lc.!l 
.!-S kaljku Inl style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). -also kalku . 
Jc.!l 
~ 
kaljal (i) Ivtl I to apply kohl to (the eyes). 

2/collstr/ to point (hricks). -vn kal.Jalaan; ava kaal.JiI; 
pva makljulIl. 
~ 
kll!,llnl kohl, a hlack co~metic powder based on 
antimony ~ulphide and used a~ eye-liner. II fid-dinya 
kuljl it's pitch dark out. -gibaal Ik-kul.J/' tifnii-ha 1-
maraawicl/prol'/ "" nothing last~ forever, however gra-
dually it may he u~ed up. -yisralj lI-kul.J/' mil-leell 
/prol'/ "" he could steal the spectacles off your nose (of 
an adrOit thief). 
.a...5" kuljla I Inl manner or style of kul.Jl adornment. 
;u.s kllljla" Inl /collstr/ mortar between bricks, point-
mg. kul.Jla malj~ulI~a decorative pointing. 
J....S" kllljlt ladj invarl dark hlue. 
~i fakl.Jal ladj, fern kal.Jla, pi kul.JtrI intensely 
black. fakl.Jal II-lUll having mtensely dark irises con-
trasting with the surrounding whites. 
J"...s- kul.Juul In pi -aatl alcohol. 
J.,...S kul.Jeel, kal.JiiI lad]1 I intensely dark (of the iris of 
the eye). 2 Ipl kal.Jaayill of good breed (of a horse). 
J"...s- kul.Jull In pi -aatl methylated alcohol, medicinal 
alcohol. 
J"...s- kul.Julll, klll.Juuli ladjl alcoholic. tasammum 
klll.Julli alcoholic poisoning. 
~(. muk!Jlla In pi makaa!JiII vessel (usually of brass) 
for kohl. maat wi-balja laqm-u makaa!JiI/provJ (he's 
dead and his bones have become kohl vessels) he's been 
dead for ages. 
~I fitkal.Jal or fikkal.Jal Ivil pasive of kal.Jal. - iva 
mitkll.JiI. 
~I finkal.Jal = fitkal.Jal. - iva millkil.JiI. 
~ 
kal.Jl.Jal Ivtl to adorn (the eyes) with kohl. ka!J!Jalit 
lenee-ha w-ba~~it fil-miraaya she made up her eyes with 
kohl and looked in the mirror. IIlayza layyil 
tikalj!Jal-bu lllee-ha she wants a child to be proud of. 
-ga Ylkal.Jl.Jal-ha lamaa-ha /pro,l'/ "" he came with the 
best of mtentions and bungled badly. -vn tak!JiiI; aval 
pva mika!J!Jal. 
~I fitkal.Jl.Jalor fikkal.Jl.Jal Ivil to be made up with 
kohl (of eyes). - iva mitkal.J!Jal. 
IS C Jl 
..rS kil.Ji (a) Ivil to become exhausted, become worn 
out. falla k!Jiit mif-Juvl I'm dead beat from work. -vn 
ka!Jayaall; ava ka!Jyaan. 
.:,l"...S' kal.Jyaan ladj *1 worthless, rundown, worn out. 
larabiyya ka!Jyaana a beat-up old car. [aalib falf' gneeh 
lala frijideer ka!Jyaan asking a thousand pounds for a 
worthles~ two-bit refrigerator. 
, , Jl 
c:.c 
..;..s kuxxa or kixxa (also ku.u or kixx {childre/I/ 
738 
I/adj invarl bad, dirty. 2 linterjl don't touch! 
I ,) Jl 
I..IS' •• ..IS' kida ladvl I (also kldahli) thu~, ~O, 10 this (or 
that) way. fll-fawwil tirbu{-II kida flr~t you lighten it up 
hke this. kida mifsaamll I can't hear hke this. mifklda 
(walla feeh) i~ that so (or what)? fahll "ula I-kalaam 
(walla balaaf) that IS the way thmgs ~hould be ~aid (or 
else not at all). tllrudd d lalee kula trlldd"lalee kida (or 
tlrudd' klcla k,da) l.Ja-ti!J~allarka If you pick an argu-
ment with him a fight will hreak out. II kula w-kida in a 
make-believe way. as in b-aljul-/II xad lalaawa klda 
w-klda I was pulling hi~ leg when I told him he had 
been given a rise. -ma-fli-J kida nothing like it, as in 
raagll ma-fii-J kida a man 10 a cla~s of hl~ own, radwa 
ma-fll-J klda a marvellous dmner. -bass' klda is that all'? 
-mif ljadd' kida not very good, ~o-so. -kida klda (Ili~ 
it) just ~o (comment of appreciation or approval). -kida 
walla kida 
~uperlluou~, unaccounted for. as in 
ma-lalldak-J' IUljma kida walla klda haven't you some 
left-over mor~e1 or other? 2 approximately, ahout. 
talaala kida .I-saala xamsa come around five o'clock. 
I.J-agii-Iak bald' fusbuUl kida I'll come to ~ee you in 
about a week. l.Jaaga klda an indescribable thing, as in 
fii !Jaaga kida wara I-baab there is something I cannot 
make out behind the door. similt d l.Jaaga kida bl-madii-
IIi I heard something, I didn't know what, calhng me. 
3 finally, at last, after all that time. fUl.Jarrak kida just 
get a move on! l'annll klda ya banaat won't you ever 
sing. girls!? IIruul.J kida get the hell out of here! 
- Idemonst pronl 4 this, that. e;al-Iak ki4a did he tell you 
this? miilllamal kida who did this? falla mwaafle; lala 
kida I agree to this. fiid-ak lala kida let us shake hands 
on that. m-ae;bal-f' faljall' mill kida I accept nothing 
less than this.lllaia klda (1) 10 this (or that) way, as in 
ljaladt d lala kida fahr I carried on like this for a 
month. wi-lala kida balja bi-t!Jibb so, are you in love? 
(2) at this (or that) point. as in siku lala kida at that he 
stopped talking. (3) that being the case, as in Irllwwa 
lala kida mif l.Ja-yiigi if that's the way things are, he 
won't be coming . 
1jS" kaza 
I Iquantifier, w foil 
indef nl several. 
fil-milaffaat di lala kaza lIool these folders are of 
several types. kaza !Ju~aall several horses. 2 (also kaza 
w-kaza) indicator of an unspecified thing or action. 
fif-fiik raqam kaza cheque number so-and-so. lamalt' 
kaza w-kaza I did sueh-and-such. 
,,:,,1,) Jl 
.... jS" ..... ..IS' kidib or kadab (also kizlb) (i) Ivil to lie, tell 

a falsehood. finta l:Ja-tikdib laleena kamaan are you 
going to lie to us too? riI-masal ma-yikdib-jthe proverb 
speaks true. -vn kidh; ava kaadib. 
,-:,j$ ''-:'.J5 kidh (also kizb) Icoll nl lie(s). IIkidb i 
msaawi wala ~idlji mbalzalj [prav/ straight lying is 
more credible than garbled truth. riI-kidb i ma-/lllI-j 
rigleen [prov/lies have no legs. 
4!.J5 kidba (also kizba) lunit n. pi -aatl a lie. a false-
hood. II kidbit fabriil April fool. 
,-:,;lS' kaazib ladjl false.l:Jaml i kaazib false pregnancy. 
balaalf kaazib [leg! a false 
r~port to the police. 
II riI-gudari I-kaazih chicken pox. 
,-:,~i fakdab lell morelmost false. lying or deceptive. 
,-:,Ij$ ,,-:,I~ kaddaab (also kauaab) lad; *1 I lying. 
given to lying. 2 false. spurious. II nibill iI- farl/.' bal/a 
kaddaaba we wet the ground superficially. -xayla 
kaddaaba much ado to no purpose. - In *1 3 liar. 
IIxallii-k wara k-kaddaab 1i-l:Jaddi baab id-daar [prov! 
(keep after the liar as far as the door of the house) go 
along with a liar until he gives himself away. -~aal:Jib 
baleen kaddaab (wi-~aal:Jib talaata fakdab) [prov/ one 
who tries to do two things at once is fooling himself (and 
he who tries to do three fools himself even more). 
-kaddaab iz-zaffa one who is all talk and no action. 
4 Ino pll sulphuric acid when used to determine the 
purity of gold. 
,-:,~I fitkadab or fikkadah Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of kadab. fitkadah laleena we were lied to. - iva 
mitkidib. 
,-:,k ''-:'~ kaddib (also kauib) Ivt/l to give the lie to. 
accuse of lying. ljaamit kaddibit-ni !-wiff-i she up and 
called me a liar to my face. II riI-mayya tkaddib iI-m[[aas 
[prov/ "" the proof of the pudding is in the eating. 2 to 
contradict. deny. kazzib xabar moot fabuu he denied 
the news of his father's death. katab gawaab bi-ykaddib 
fii maqaalit fimbaaril:J he wrote a letter in which he 
refuted yesterday\ article. 3 to refuse to believe 
lamma ljult-i-Ihum il-l:Jikaaya di kaddibuu-ni when 
I told them the story. they refused to believe me. 
II ma-kaddib-J' xabar to act without delay (if somewhat 
blindly). as in ma-kaddibti-j xabar wi-rul:Jt aftiri fraax 
mig-gamliyya without pausing for thought I went off to 
buy chickens from the co-op (as soon as I heard they 
had some for sale). - Ivi/4 to misfire (of a gun). -vn 
takdiib; avalpva mikaddib. 
,-:,~I fitkaddib or fikkaddib Ivil passive of kaddib 1.2 
and 3. - iva mitkaddib. 
(J..!l 
c..J5 kadal:J r (a) Ivil to work hard. toil. ma-ba([alnaa-j 
739 
kadl:J I (uul in-nahaar we worked hard all day long. 
fi(-(abalja l-kadl:Ja the working class. -vn kadl:J; ava 
kaadil:J. 
I J J ..!l 
~ kadd (u) Ivtl [trad soc/ to comb. ruul:Ji kuddifalr-ik 
go and comb your hair. ljalda bi-tklldd i I-bint-a-ha 
she's combing her daughter's hair. -vn kadd; ava 
kaadid; pva makduud. 
~I fitkadd or fikk,add Ivil to be combed (of hair). 
- iva mitkadd. 
~I finkadd = fitkadd. - iva minkadd. 
~~ kaddid Ivll to comb (hair) hard or repeatedly. -vn 
takdiid; avalpva mikaddid. 
~~I fitkaddid or fikkaddid Ivil passive of kaddid. 
- iva mitkaddid. 
1 J J ..!l 
~ kadd (i) Ivil to toil. bi-tkidd d lafaan bint-a-ha she 
slaves (at her work) for the sake of her daughter. -vn 
kadd; ava kaadid. 
..s~J.J5 kuduudi. kaduudi ladj *1 miserly. tight-fisted. 
~J.J5..... makduud ladj *1 exhausted. tired. 
I.) J..!l 
j.J5 kadar Inl perturbation. disquiet. riI-liifa kul/-a-ha 
kadar life is full of trouble. 
j~ kaddar Ivtl I to perturb. trouble. klllr iI-m~ariif 
kaddarit lifit-na great expenses have spoiled our lives. 
2 [mil/ to give a talking to. give a dressing-down. 
fi;-;aabi( bi-ykaddar iI-lasaakir the officer is giving the 
soldiers a dressing-down. 
-vn 
takdiir; ava/pva 
mikaddar. 
j~1 fitkaddar or fikkaddar Ivil passive of kaddar. 
- iva mitkaddar. 
j~ takaddur Inl discomfort. uneasiness. 
1 .) J ..!l 
j~lS' kadr I <Fr cadre> In pi -aatl I frame. bi-yirkab 
fil-kadr i btaal iI-biyaanu it fits into the piano frame. 
2 Ipl also kawaadirl = kaadir. 
j~lS' kaadir (also kadr:!) <Fr cadre> In pi kawaadir, 
kadraatl I pay scale. ril-kaadir iI-laamm the general 
pay scale. riI-kaadir iI-fanni the professional. scale. 
2 organizational group, cadre. fil-kawaadir is-siyasiyya 
the political hierarchy: kawaadir it-tan;iim the group-
ings within the (party) system. 
[,1.)J..!l 
~lj.J5 kadraaj <Fr cadrage> Inl [einJ centring. 

4J" ~ .!l 
...,...js kaciciis Ivtl to pile up. l.ibaala mkaddisa lala 
balq-a-ha rubbish in piles. -vn lakdiis; avalpva 
mikaddis. 
...,...Ail filkaddis or fikkaddis Ivil to be piled up. -vn 
lakaddus; ava milkaddis. 
I .;. ~ .!l 
..;.JS kadaf Inl bushy hair. kinky hair . 
..;.js kaddif Ivtl to back-comb (hair). -vn lakdiif; aval 
pva mikaddif. 
Z';'~.!l 
..;....JS kadiif Inl work horse. nag. IIgamuusa kadiif an 
old worn-out buffalo. 
r~.!l 
;.,.JS kadma In pI -aall bruise. contusion. 
• ~.!l see 1 ~ .!l : kidahri 
( IS ~.!l ) 
"!,.),,) kudya I <Amharic> In pI -aall professional lead-
er of the Sudanese type of zaar (usually a black 
woman). 
"!,JS kudya:! In pI -aal, kudayl {rurl bushy plant. kudyit 
barlilm a clump of clover. 
.J11S~.!l 
4;~..$ kudyaana In pI -aatl {coarse slangl a woman to 
take to ned. a lay. 
..!lJ~..!l see 1..1 
;.!l ~t:e also 1;.J.!l 
i.J kura f In pi -aatl I sphere. fll-kura I-farqiyya the 
earth. the globe. ni~f' kura hemisphere. IIkuraat id-
damm corpuscles. 2 ball (game). kurat iI-qadam foot-
ball. 
kurat is-salla basketball. 
ril-kura {-{aafira 
volleyball. 
S).J karawl, kurawiT ladjl I spherical. 2 pertaining 
to ballgames. 
(; I;..!l) 
).J karaar (also kalaar) <Gr kelari> In pi -aatl pan-
try. ~toreroom. cellar. yil]arras iI-quCC· lala mUftaal] 
740 
ik-karaar {provl (to make the cat the guardian of the 
storeroom key) appointing the fox to guard the 
chickens. 
i).J karaara <Carrara (in Italy» 
Inl Carrara 
marble . 
J I;.!l 
JI;,,) kuraal <perh Fr> Inl choir. chorale. 
I,,:-,;.!l 
,,-:,.J karb Inl I misery. wretchedness. 
fil-fallaal] 
fi-blad-na I]alt-u karb the peasant in our country is in a 
bad way. 2/pl kuruubl affliction. tribulation. ya 
mufarrig iI-kuruub (0 you who dispel troubles) invoca-
tion to God in times of hardship. fiza fladda I-karbu 
haan (provl the severer hardship gets the nearer it is to 
being relieved == the darkest hour is just before dawn. 
~.J kurba I In pi kurabl state of wretchedness . 
z ":-' ; .!l 
";...;,,) kurba:! <perh It curva> In pi -aat, kurabl 
{obsolJ street corner. midaan ik-kurba well-known 
square in Heliopolis. 
"-:' '.J karrab Ivtl It'onslrl to bend (pipe. rod~). -vn 
takriib: avalpva mjkarrab. 
,,-:,~I fitkarrab or flkkarrab Ivil passive of karrab. 
- iva mitkarrab . 
":-' ,,:-,;.!l 
~.J kiribb <Fr crepe> In pi -aall crepe fabric. gazma 
kribb crepe-soled shoes. 
I~,,:-,;.!l 
~~.J kurbaag (also kurbaak) <T klrbaf> In 
pi karabiigl horsewhip. 
r:::-.J karbag (also karbak) Ivtl I to whip. fll-waad 
karbag m-nal]la the boy whipped the spinning top. 2 to 
drive (~.o.) hard (to do s.th.). -vn karbaga: avalpva 
mlkarbag. 
r:::- fol frtkarbag or flkkarbag Ivil passive of ka~l?al!. 
-vn tikarbiig: Iva mitkarbag. 
z ~ ":-'; .!l 
r:::-.J karbij <Fr crepage> Ivtl to back-comb (hair). 
-vn kiribaaj: avalpva mikarbaJ. 
- ; ":-'; .!l 
ft J..J karbirateer. karbarateer <Fr> In pi -aatl 
carburettor. 

U'" Y .; .!l 
...r..J karbis Ivtl I to throw topsy-turvy in a pile. 
karbisit il-huduum fir-rukn she threw the clothes in the 
corner. 2 to trip. cause to stumble. karbis-ni ribn ik-
kalb the s.o.b. tripped me up. -vn karbasa; avalpva 
mikarbis . 
...r.';';1 'i'itkarbis or 'i'ikkarbis Ivil passive of karbis. -vn 
tikarbiis; iva mitkarbis . 
.!l y .;.!l see 1 ~ Y .; .!l : kurbaak, karbak 
j;. y.;.!l 
~j:.. mikarba~ ladjl chubby. 
J y.;.!l 
J~.J kurbaal In pJ karabiill coarse-meshed riddle 
(used in threshing). 
-.Jy.;.!l 
.::..l.; Yo.J karbunaat, karbunaat <Fr> Inl I carbonate. 
2 baking soda, sodium bicarbonate. -also bikarbunaat. 
..;l.; Yo.J karbunaatu <It> = karbunaat. 
-oy.;.!l 
.::..1.JJ.eA Yo.J karbuhidraat <Engl> Icoll nl carbo-
hydrate(s). 
.J.Jy.;.!l 
,",Yo.J karboon <Fr> Inl carbon. warat; karboon 
carbon paper. 
.JloSy.;.!l 
~.J karbiina <It carabina> In pI -aatl carbine. 
I..:;,.; .!l 
v.J karat I, kirit (iJ Ivtl 1 to clap, slap. karat-u la/a 
t;a/aa (1) he clapped him on the back of the neck. 
(2) he humiliated him. 2 to scratch. 'i'ik-kalb; b-yikrit 
rat;abt-u the dog is scratching his neck. - vn Rart; ava 
kaarit; pva makruut . 
.::..';';1 'i'itkarat 1 or 'i'ikkarat 1 Ivil I to be clapped, be 
slapped. 2 to be scratched. -iva mitkirit. 
.::..;;; 1 'i'inkarat 1 = 'i'itkarat I. - iva minkirit. 
.::..".J karrat Ivtl to clap (s.o.) on the back of the neck. 
-vn takriit; ava/pva mikarrat. 
,-,~I 'i'itkarrat or 'i'ikkarrat Ivil to be clapped on the 
back of the neck. -iva mitkarrat. 
Z..:;,.;.!l 
.::...Ji 'i'akrat ladj, fern karta, pI kurtl frizzy. kull-u-hum 
741 
jalr-u-hum 'i'akrat they all have frizzy hair. 
3 ..:;, .;.!l see also 3 ~ .; .!l 
.::...J karat 2 (iJ <prob Engl> Ivtl to card (cotton). -ava 
kaarit; pva makruut . 
.::..';';1 'i'itkarat 2 or 'i'ikkarat 1 Ivil to be carded (of cot-
ton). -iva mitkirit . 
.::..;;; 1 'i'inkarat 1 = 'i'itkarat 1 • - iva minkirit. 
4 ( ..:;, .; .!l ) 
.:..)5' kart <Fr carte> In pi kuruut, kurilta, kurutaatl 
1 card. kull; kart; maktuub Iii raqam iI-kitaab each card 
has the book number written on it. kuruut mUlayda 
greetings cards. 'Iii-kart; bustaal and 'Iii-kart iI-bustaal 
the postcard. 2 menu. - lcoll n!l playing-cards. tillab 
kart do you want to play cards? 
":"I".J • .::..I".J kurraat Icoll nlleek(s). kurraat 'i'abujuuja 
leek (Allium porrum). kurraat m~ri or kurraat baladi 
Egyptian leek (Allium kurrat) . 
..:;, ..:;, .; .!l 
i.J karitta <It carretta> In pi -aatllight carriage, on 
two or four wheels, drawn by a single draught animal. 
.J ..:;, .;.!l see also -..:;, i.J.; .!l 
.:;.J kartin Ivil 1 to effect a quarantine. kartinu lal-
balad they put the town in quarantine. 2 to hold (on to 
s.th.), retain (s.th.) for oneself. kartinu lala kutub iI-
maktaba they hung on to the library books. -vn 
kartana; ava mikartin . 
.:;';';1 'i'itkartin or 'i'ikkartin Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of kartin. ril-mantit;a kull-a-ha tkartin laleeha the en-
tire area was put under quarantine. -iva mitkartin. 
1 .J.J ..:;, .; .!l 
,",..;.J kartoon I, kartuun 1 <Fr carton> In! cardboard. 
4; ..;.J kartoona, kartuuna In pI -aat, karatiinll lunit nl 
piece of cardboard. 2 cardboard box: carton. 
Z(.J.J":;'.;.!l) 
,",..;.J kartuun 1, kartoon 1 <Engl> Ipl -aatl animated 
cartoon . 
,",..;.J kiritoon <Fr cretonne> In! heavy cotton fabric, 
cretonne. kiritoon sataan satin-finished cretonne. 
.;1oS..:;,.;.!l 
;;)S karteer <Fr carter> In pi -aatl {auto} oil pan, 
(also sometimes) crankcase. 

.:" -s .:.0 J .!l 
-.;.;; j 
karlllna <It carlina> thin cardboard (used in 
book-binding). 
.-s.:.oJ,J 
..,.1)5' karaleeh Inl karate. 
I ..;;" J.!l see 4.:.0 J .!l 
1 ..;;" J.!l ~ee -'..r J .!l 
.:" I tJ.!l 
'" l> j 
karaxaana <T kerl;ane> In pll -aall brothel. 
kaan bayy il- fazbakiyya mafhuur bli-karaxaalla 1-
klbilra the Ezbekiya quarter used to be famous for its 
large brothel. 
I ~ J .!l 
~ j 
kllrd Icoll nl Kurds. 
...s~ j 
kurdi I ladjl Kurdl~h. 2 In pi fakraadl a Kurd. 
hliaad il-fakraad KurdlMan 3 In. no pll the Kurdish 
language. 
1 ~ J .!l 
,-!~J j 
kurudya <perh T koroydo> Imasc and fern n. 
pi -aal/very gullible or naive person. a swindler's mark. 
,-!~~J j 
kurudyaaya Inl very gullible or naive female. a 
~windler's mark. 
~J'<';"'I flslakrad Ivtl to dupe. take advantage of the 
gullibIlity of. bl-YlSlakradu I-mudarris ig-gldlid they 
take the new teacher for a ride. - vn fisllkraad; ava 
mmakrad. 
3(~J,J) 
~ j 
kard <Engl card> Inl carding of flbre~ prepara-
tory to \pinning. fll-{;II[Il' b-yruulj mill lamallyyll 
Ii-kard" lala I-Iam/II[ the cotton goes from carding to 
the combing process. \ee further under 3.:.0 J .!l 
.~.;~ kurda <It corda> In pi -aall cord. wire. 
0.; ~ kurd Inl /musj mode in ArabIC musIC beginning 
on D and having E nat and B nat. 
( .:" I ~ J .!l ) 
:.,I~ j 
klrdaan' <perh P garddn> In pi -aal. karadiinl 
I heavy gold necklace with pendant decorations (e.g .. 
,ee PI F. 20). 2 Ipl -aal onlyl /musj name gIven to the 
note C. octave above mIddle C 
:.,I~j klrdaan 2 
(also lamuud Ii-klrdaan) <prob 
Engl> In! /aUloj Cardan JOint. transmIssIon shaft. 
742 
~ J ~ J.!l 
J~ j 
kurdlila <It cordelia> In pi -aall cord by whIch a 
hunter secures and carnes his game . 
.:" -' ~ J .!l 
':"J~ j 
kurdooll <Fr cordon> In pi -aall I cordon. de-
corative cord. kurdooll roob dressing-gown cord. 
2 cordon. kurdoon bulii~ police cordon. kurdoon ~iljbi 
cordon sanitaire. 
I J J.!l 
'} karr' (ul Ivtl I to unravel. unwind. bl-ykurr il-xee[ 
min il-bakara he's unwinding the thread from the spool. 
2 to spill out. spout forth. safalt-u lan fanwaal 
is-samak in-nuli qaam karr-i-li lalallill fism I asked him 
about the vaneties of Nile fIsh and he upped and rattled 
off thirty names. - Ivil 23 to come unravelled. 
fil-lirtkooh karr the knitting has become unravelled. 
3 to run (of a Mocking). - vn brr. kararaan; ava kaarir; 
pva makruur. 
'} karr 1 ladvl nuently (of recitation from memory) . 
sammall-u karr I recited it without a hitch. 
";.;1 j 
kurariyya In pi -aall ball (of string. wool etc.). 
};;I fllkarr or fikkarr Ivil passIve of karr I and 2. - ava 
mllkarr. 
};;I flllkarr = fllkarr. -Iva mlllkarr. 
.;'} karrar Ivll I to repeat. do over. bald" lafarl 
Iyyaam mkarrar Ii-laZliq wlr-rayy' marrileell after ten 
days we repeat the hoeing and irrigation twice. 
Illalaamillakriir [musj repeat sIgn. 2 to distil. refine. 
flf-flrka b-Iaaxud Ii-bilrool wl-lkarrar-u the company 
takes petroleum and refines it. malmallakriirrefinery. 
- vn lakrtir. lakraar. IIkraar; avalpva mikarrar; pva 
mllkarrar. 
.;I j.:; lakraar. likraar Inl repetition. kUlr il-Iakraar 
yilallim il-bumaar [provj much repetition teaches 
(even) a donkey. 
.;}.. mllkarrar ladverblall I bis. 
fi~-~af/Ja I-lalla 
mukarrar page three bis. page 3a. 2 in tied or equal 
position. {ilil il- fawwil mukarrar he came first equal, 
he tied for fir~t place. 
.;};;I filkarrar or flkkarrar Ivil I to be repeated. 2 to 
recur. 3 to be refined. be dIstilled. - iva milkarrar. 
2 J J.!l see J I J .!l : karaar. karaara 
3 J J.!l see I J -s J .!l : kureera 
-'JJ.!l 
J'} karru 
<It 
carro>: 
(larablyya) 
karru 
Ipl 
larabiyyaal karrul animal-drawn cart. 

I j J.!l 
'j! j 
kiraaza Inl [ChrJ I domain or jurisdiction 
of the (Coptic) church. 2 preaching the Gospel, 
evangelization. 
j'j karraz Ivtl [ChrJ to consecrate, dedicate (to the 
s~rvice of God). fabuu-na karraz ii-beet the priest con-
secrated the house. - vn takriiz; ava/pva mikarraz. 
j~1 fitkarraz or fikkarraz Ivil to be consecrated, be 
dedicated (to the service of God). - iva mitkarraz. 
2 j J.!l see 
I j ..s J .!l : kireez. kireeza. kirezaaya 
2 j J.!l see 2 j ..s J .!l : kiriiza 
I..,.. J.!l 
If'" j 
kursi In pI karaasil I chair. kursi qahr straight-
backed chair. kursi hazzaaz rocking chair. 2 stand. 
kursi m~baf Koran stand. II faayit ik-kursi [lslJ the 
'throne verse' (Koran 2:255). recited for safety in time 
of 
danger. 
3 [ChrJ 
see. 
4 [mechJ 
48 seating. 
4b bearing. 5 single filling (of tobacco or hashish) for a 
water-pipe. 6 motif used in tent applique work (see 
PI.H.24) . 
..r'j karras 1 Ivtl to prepare (a filling of tobacco or 
hashish) for smoking in a water-pipe. - vn takriis; aval 
pva mikarras . 
..r ~I fitkarras 1 or fikkarras 1 Ivil passive of karras I. 
- iva mitkarras. 
2..,.. J .!l 
..rl'j kurraas. karraas In pi -aat. karariisl copybook, 
exercise book. 
..... I'j kllrraasa, karraasa = kurraas. 
..r'j karras 2 Ivtl to dedicate, devote. karras bayaat-u 
lil-jann he devoted his life to art. - vn takriis; ava/pva 
mikarras. 
..r~1 fitkarras 2 or fikkarras 2 1vil passive of karras 2 . 
- iva mitkarras. 
..r'j.;;.. mlllakarris In *1 [ChrJlayman who has given up 
\ccular employment to work within the church. 
J ..,.. J .!l 
.... )LS' karsa In pi kawaaris. karsaatl catastrophe. 
,-,,;5'1 fiktaras r Ivil to show concern, display interest. 
leer muktaris bi-ma~aayib fahi-ll indifferent to his 
family's plight. -vn fiktiraas; ava muktaris. miktiris. 
r I..,..J.!l 
c..L j 
kursaaj <Fr corsage> Inl top half of a dress. 
hodice. 
743 
..:.;..,.. J.!l 
:.;.. j 
karasta 
<T kereste> 
Inl 
I lumber mill. 
2 cabinet(s), cNpboard(s). 
-..:.;..,.. J.!l 
J~j kiristaal <Fr> Inl crystal (glass). 
- J..,.. J.!l 
......r j 
karusreeh (also kursaleeh. karsaleeh! <Fr 
carrosserie> In pi -aatl body of an automobile. 
..J.,..,.. J.!l 
Ja... j 
karas[a In pi -aatl carpet-saver made of glass, 
castor-cup. 
t..,..J .!l 
t".. j 
karsuur; In pi karasiir;/ elhow. baa[i[ karasiir; 
leaning on his elbows. II fumm I karasiir; a hony hag. 
- J 1J"").!l see - J ..,.. J .!l : kursaleeh. karsaleeh 
.;,..s ..,.. J .!l 
,J.:-J ~ kirusiin <Engl> Inl kerosene. paraffin. 
o ..s ..,.. J .!l 
~ 
j 
kurseeh <Fr corset> In pi -aatl corset. 
I ..;. J .!l 
...rj karaf, karaf (II) Ivt/ I to drive away. drive off. 
karaft I mraat-ak barra leeh why did you throw your wife 
out? lamma fanaam lat-tilitwaar yiigi I-¥afiir Yllkruf-ni 
when I \Ieep on the sidewalk the watchman comes and 
drives me away. 2 to dismiss. fire. expel. fil-mudiir 
karaf-ll min if-fUyl the director sacked him. 3 to cause 
(hreathing) to he lahoured. nafas makrullf lahoured 
hreathing. dy\pnoea. - vn karf, karafaan; ava kaarif; 
pva makrllllf. 
..... j 
karfa In pi -aatl in~tance noun of karj. karfit 
na/as (attack 01) dy\pnoea. 
...r';""1 fitkarat: fitkaru( or fikkaraf. fikkaraf I to be 
driven away. 2 to he di\mi\sed. he expelled. fit-tilmii;: 
itkaraf mil-madrma the student wa; expelled from the 
school. 3 to he made or hecome labourcd. na/as-ll 
yitkirifhc's hecoming ~hort 01 hreath. -ava/iva mitkirif. 
...r j:; I finkarl((. 
rinkaraf 
fitkaraf. 
- ava/iva 
minkirif· 
2";'J.!l 
...rj kirfln pi kurllujl paunch. pot helly. 
'- j 
kirfa Inl tripe. II c,aliil il-baxt I ylaac,i I-laqm i fil-

klr/a /prov/ the unlucky man finds bones (even) in 
tripe. - bi-y(allal fil-kir/a laqm "" he looks for the worst 
in everything. 
..;'-} kura/aali In pi -yyal tripe-seller. 
..r'j karra/lvil I to develop a paunch or pot belly. 
2 to buckle, warp. - vn lakriif; ava mikarraf. 
3 .;. .J.!.I see ';'.J.J.!.I: kuruu/ 
4 .;. .J.!.I see ';'..s.J.!.I: kuree/a 
o ..s .;. .J .!.I 
...... J} kuru/eeh <Fr> Inl crochet. 
It.J.!.I 
t'j karral Ivtl to cause to belch. - vn lakrill; ava 
mikarral· 
...... .}.; lakriila linst n, pi -aall a belch. 
t~1 rilkarral or rikkarral Ivil to belch, burp. yaklu 
I-fatta w-yilkarralu w-yiymidu rabb-i-na they eatfatta, 
burp (contentedly), and praise the Lord. - ava 
milkarral· 
It.J.!.I 
t.J\S" kaarll I In pi kawaartll camel. sheep or cow's 
foot used for food. trotter. 2 kawaaril Ipl nl pretty legs. 
~.J.!.I 
...;} karaf (u) Ivil to absorb an odour from surround-
ings (of food. and the like). -vn karf; ava kaarif. 
... } 
karfa Inl I odour absorbed by food. tobacco etc. 
from their surroundings. 2/palhJ eczema. 
':;-":"~.J .!.I 
Q} karafatta. karafitta <It eravatta> In pi -aall tie, 
cravat. - also garafalla. 
~~.J.!.I 
..r-i} karafs Inl celery. 
I.!.I.J.!.I 
J1...J,j kureek I <T kurek> In pi -aal, kawarilkl 
I shovel. 2 baker's peel. 
.!ll'j karraak In pi karraakal /eonslrJ workman who 
controls the shovel that is dragged through concrete to 
mix it. 
4S"1'j karraaka In pi -aall dredger. d1larabiyya walla 
karraaka "" what this car needs is a new car. 
.!l'j karrak Ivtl to. dredge. - vn lakriik; ava/pva 
mikarrak. 
744 
.!l~1 rllkarrak or r,kkarrak IVII to be dredged. -iva 
mllkarrak. 
1.!.1.J.!.I 
J1...J,j kureek! <Fr we> In 
pi -aal, kawarlikl 
I (hydraulic) lifting ramp. 2 car jack. 
.!l.J\S" kaarik I Ivtl to jack up. 2 Ivil to pump repeatedly 
(e.g .• when pumping the brake pedal). -vn mlkarka; 
1Wa/pva mikaarik. 
3.!.1.J.!.I 
.!l} kurk <T kurk> Inl fur. 
4 .!.I .J.!.I ~ee ..s.!.l.J.J.!l: kuruuki 
.':.d .J .!.I 
...,.s} karklb Ivil I to make a clattering noise. naazil 
yikarklb b,-rtglee las-sill,m he is clattering down the 
~tairs. II ba{n-i bl-Ikarklb (I) my stomach is rumbling. 
I have an upset stomach. (2) I feel apprehensive. 
I have butterflies in my stomach. 2 to become topsy-
turvy. rid-dmya karklbil everything became chaotic. 
- Ivtl 3 to throw into confUSion. karkib iI-beel wi-mifl 
he made a mess of the house and left. -vn karkaba; 
avalpva mikarklb. 
,,-!,j} karklluba I In pi karakiibl piece of junk. 
worthless possession. 2 lad] invarl old. tottering. 
~} karkubba = karklluba 2. 
...,.s.}.;1 rilkarklb or rikkarklb Ivil I to make a clatter-
ing noise. 2 to be thrown into confusion. -vn likarkllb; 
ava/iva mllkarklb . 
-..:...!.I.J .!.I 
.r.S} kartkaleer <Fr> In mvar. also pi -aall carica-
ture. cartoon. 
-~.!.I.J.!l 
..... .JS} karkadeeh Inl I type of mallow (Hibiscus sab-
darifa). the dried (purple) flowers of which are used in 
the preparation of a popular mfusion. 2 a drink so 
prepared. 
.J.!.I.J.!.I 
}} karkar Ivil I to gurgle. make a gurgling sound (of 
liquid). IIbi-ykarkaru (lag-gooza) they're smoking a 
water-pipe. 2 to pink. knock (of a car engine). 3 to 
laugh at length. karkarna (mm Id-dlyk) we laughed and 
laughed. -vn karkara; ava mikarkar. 
t.!.l.J.!.I 
e} karkal IVII I to make a rattling sound. simill' 

karkalafil-mutoor I heard a rattling in the motor. 2 to 
guffaw. karkal (min id-diyk) he roared with laughter. 
-vn karkala; ava mikarkal. 
r.!Jj.!J 
rS J kurkum Inl turmeric. 
~ ~.!J j.!J 
..s.xS.1 karakandi In pi -aatl type of tumbler pigeon 
with pale grey plumage. 
J J .!J j.!J see ~ J .!J j .!J : karakool 
~J.!Jj.!J 
<;~I.1 karakoon (also karakoo/) <T karakol> In pi 
-aatl police station. II karakoon silaay present arms! 
D..s.!J j .!J 
4$ J.1 kurukeeh. kirukeeh <Fr> Inl croquet. 
J j.!J see J I j .!J : kuraal 
I r j.!J 
i.1 kllram 1 J (i) Ivtl to favour, be generous to, bestow 
good fortune on. karamuu-na they were most generous 
to us. rabb-i-na karam-ni w-Iac;eet taks· lala (uul I was 
lucky enough to find a taxi right away.lIleen makrduma 
{euphem/ blind eye. -vn karam; ava kaarim: pva 
nwkrllllm. 
r.1 karam 2 Inl generosity. II karam iI-faxlaac; decency. 
401.1 karaama Inl I dignity, honour, self-respect. 
talanit-lli f-karamt-i she hurt my pride. 2 Ipl-aatl mira-
cle performed by a saint.llkllll-ak karamaat you can do 
the impossible. 
~.1 kariim ladjl I/pl kiraam, kuraam, kuramal 
generous, munificent. rabb-i-lla kariim "" God will pro-
vide (phrase used in times of stress and as a gentle 
refusal to give to a beggar). Ilkariim leen {euphem/ 
one-eyed person. 2/pl kiraaml honourable. noble. ma 
tcf.llmm i na/s-ak Ii-Jillit naas kiraam why don't you get 
involved with some honourable people? 1I\'i1-qurfaan 
iI-kariim conventional designation of the Koran. 
-yagar kariim precious stone. - Inl 3 Generous One 
(epithet of God). liina rabbi fism-u I-kariim we have a 
Lord whose name is the Generous One (expression of 
despair or helplessness or, when addressed to another. 
of consolation). 
........ .1 kariima Inl I Ipl -aatl formal mode of reference 
to a daughter. 2/no pillioe] a kiss on the hand. \'iI(al 
iI-kariima kiss the hand! 
745 
i.1i I'akram 1 lell morelmost generous, munificent etc. 
i fol I'itkaram or I'ikkaram Ivil passive of karam I. - iva 
mitkirim. 
i ~I l'inAaram = I'itkaram. - iva minkirim.· 
i'.J karram Ivtl to honour. yaflit takriim party given in 
someone's honour. -vn takriim; avalpva mikarram. 
i~1 I'itkarram or fikkarram Ivil I to be honoured. 
2 to be generous, be kind. fiza tkarramt if you would be 
so kind, please. - avaliva mitkarram. 
i)1S kaarim Ivtl to treat generously. da-yna zabayn-ak 
ya-xllll-ya - karim-na we're your steady customers, why 
don't you give us special treatment? -vn mikarma; ava 
mikaarim. 
i.1i I'akram 2 = karam 1 (the literary passive yukram 
also occurs). I'allaah yikrim-ak (I) expression ofthanks 
for a service rendered or to be rendered, or for a com-
pliment paid. (2) response to a beggar's importuning "" 
may God grant you good fortune! - fakram-ak allaah no 
offence taken! (said in the event of unseemly words or 
behaviour). - fikraam iI-mayyit da/n-u {prov/ the (best) 
favour you can do a dead man is to bury him. -vn 
fikraam; ava mikrim. 
4-I.1l fikramiyya 
In 
pi -aatl 
gratuity. 
tip. 
di 
ma-lIIltabar-Ji ra/wa di fikramiyya this shouldn't be 
considered a bribe. irs a gratuity. 
Z r j.!J 
iJ.1 kUrllUm ipl nl I grape~. 2 vineyards. 
.' j j.!J see j..s j .!J : kireem. kiriim. kireema 
~ I r j.!J 
<;l...1 Airmaall/nl woollen carpet characterized by red 
colour and geometric pattern. 
yjj.!J 
..,....1 kllrumb Icoll nl cabbage(s). kurumb i ya-lli tiyfi 
{vendor's ery/ cabbage for stuffing! 
~.1 kllnllnba lunit n. pi -aatl a head of cabbage. 
..ft-.1' kurumbi ladj invarl pale green, cabbage-green. 
- Y jj.!J 
~.1 kirimbiliill <Engl> Inl crimplene, a synthetic 
jersey fabric. 
.; r j.!J 
...,.....1 karmif I Ivtl to wrinkle. crumple. 2 Ivil to be-
come wrinkled or crumpled. - vn karma/a; avalpva 
mikarmif· 
...,.... fol I'itkarmif or I'ikkarmif Ivi/l to become wrink-

led or crumpled. 2 to be wrinkled or crumpled. -avaliva 
0 J .!l 
mllkarmij. 
..J kirih. karah (a) Ivtl to hate. detest. ''''/llIkrah-1i 
~ J ~ J.!l 
;.L..J karalll/I/a <It caramel/a> I leoll nl caramel. 
toffee. 2 lunit n. pi -aatl a p,ece of caramel. a toffee. 
~ ')\,..J karamlilaaya = kart/lillI/a 2. 
.J J.!l ,ee .J..s J .!l : kmina 
..,., .J J.!l see ..,., ~ J .!l 
- ..:.> .J .).!l see abo .J..:.>.).!l 
...:.,:;.;.J karallllllla <It qllaralllella> Inl quarantine. 
~ ~.J J d 
t.J:,;§ kllrlllldllm <Engl> Inl corundum 
J.JJ.!l 
j;§ kllnlar <Engl> In pi -lIlII. kart/all/rl I /.\()ccerl 
la corner kIck. Ih corner of a ,occer pitch. 2 corner 01 
a boxing nng.lltJa{[-1I j-kllmllr he cornered hIm. he put 
hIm m an awkward or dlilicult po"tion. 
.!l.JJ.!l 
d.;.J karallk <Engl> In pi -aatl cran". llihll Ii-karclIlk 
crankca,e. lamlilid II-karallk cranhhaft. 
-~.JJ.!l 
..I'--y).J kllrlllllllllllr <Fr> In pi -aatl chronometer. 
0..l .J .) .!l 
.,,;.J kllmlill. kllmooll <It como> In pi -aatl 11111151 
I French horn: partlculanzed as kllmllll fimlll.laall'l. 
2 cor anglm,. Engl"h horn. partlculanzed a, kllmlill 
flllglill;:l. 
..:.> ..s.J J .!l 
.......;.J kllmeel <Engl> Inl 11111151 cornet. 
..r..s.JJ d 
~;§ ""mll/. kllmeej<Frcorll/clle> Inl I road that 
,"Irt, a nver or sea. 2Ia,,111 corlllce. - Ipl karalliijl 
3 fnll. ruHle. flounce 
o..s.JJ.!l 
"",.J kameeh <Fr Ca!"el> In pi -aatl I Identity card. 
2 member,hlp card 
ytJlhb-1I Jeer-ak Iprovl what you hate another likes. one 
man\ meat b another man\ pOl,on. I}lhh' I\'-waa" 
wl-krah wi-daan 1,,1'01,/ = ,how your love discreetly. 
but hide your hate completely. -vn kllrh, karaaha, 
karalliyya, kllrllll/I'ya: ava kaanll. pya IIIlIkrllllll 
~.J ka,."h lad, 
'1 hatelul. odious. obnoxIous. 
loathMlme . 
.;i fa"rah I Iell morcimo,t hateful. odious etc. 
fakrllh ma lalal'ya ... the thmg [ hate most IS 
.. 
.';;;' fll"arall or flf..karall Ivil to be hated. be dete,ted. 
-Iva IIIlIkmll. 
.}:;' flllkllrall = fll"arall -Iva IIl1l1ki"h . 
.): "arrall IvtJ to caw.e to hate flr-raagll da kllrrah-ha 
flg-gall'aa;: that man made her hate marnage. - vn 
takriih: ava III/"arrall. 
.):.;1 fllkarrall or flkkarrah Ivil to be made to hate. 
-Iva mitkarrah. 
• .Ji fakrah! Ivtl to force. coerce. fakrah-Ili [as-slrlja 
he forced me to ,teal. - vn fl"raah: ava mllkrih: pva 
/lllIkrall. 
.'.J! flkraall Inl coercIOn. force. 1I.llrlja hll-flkraah 
armed robbery 
..l J.!l 
;)).J karall'aall In pi -ami curlew. any of the various 
type, of ,hore 1'1Ird, of the genu, Numenll" 
":'>..lJ d 
V).J "anm Ivtl to do carde"ly fll-.lahhaak "arwil 
ijilly/' I\'-Iaah Ii-I,wwfiYI'<lal hHUI/T the plumber did a 
,Ioppy Job and left the tap' Iea"ing. - vn karll'ala: aval 
pva 1I11kan"'t. 
V).?v' fllkan"'l or f,f../..,JI'III1IV11 to be done carele,s-
Iy. - vn IIkanl'lit: ava IIIII"an"'t 
-..r..lJ.!l 
,:,L I).J kllrwasallll <Fr> Inl crols,ant. 
";..l J.!l 
-r).J kllrlluj <Fr croche> In pi -aall /mlls/ quaver • 
eighth-note. dubl' kllrlllljscml-quavcr. ,ixteenth-note. 
..s.!ln.!l 
.} J.J kllrllukl <Fr croqllls> Inl I rough sketch. 
2 sketch map. 
~..l J.!l 
t).J kllroom <Engl> Inl chrome. 

(.JJj.!ll 
i.JJI} kirawill <Engl> Inl Idemj crown or cap of a 
tooth. 
'"J} kuroolla <It corolla> In pi -aatl I/autoj dif-
ferential gear. 2 crown or button (ofa watch). 3 wreath 
(of flowers etc.). 
I J j.!l 
oJ} karool! <Fr earl"£'all> In pi -aatl I check, square. 
ljumaaj karol!aat checkered or plaid cloth. 2 shoulder 
pad (in men's tailoring). - Ino pll 3 diamond(s) (in 
cards). 
IoSJj.!l 
..... JI} kClrawya Inl caraway. 
':"IoSJj.!l 
~J} karall'eeta. "arall'iita <T kerel'et> In pi -aatl 
I wooden bench. 2 sofa. 
IloSj.!l 
loS} karOl (i) Ivtl to rent, hire.l.Ja-lIikri lClrabiyya we'll 
rent a car. -vn kira: ava kaari: pva makri. 
loS} kira Inl rental fees, rent. 
1oS.f.;1 i'itkara or i'ikkara Ivil to be rented, be hired. 
- iva mitkiri. 
1oS~1 i'illkara = i'ilkOlra. -iva minkiri. 
1 loS j.!l sec loS j I .!I : kaari 
IjloSj.!l 
1..1'-;'; kllreerOl <It co/aOl> Inl cholera. - also ku/eera. 
I j loS j.!l 
j..} kireez <T kiraz> Icoll nl cherries. 
ij..} kireeza lunit n. pi -aatl a cherry. 
~Ij..} kirezaaya = kireeza. 
ljloSj.!l 
oj..} kiriiza <Fr cri~e> In pi -aatl outburst. gat-Ii 
kriizit di!Jk I burst out laughing. 
..rloSj.!l 
"-!;.; kllreeja Inl I thin crepe fabric. 2 crepe paper. 
(rloSj.!ll 
('"!} kirl!l!m, kiriim <Fr creme> Inl I cream. gibna 
e/llb/' kreem double cream cheese. kireemjalllii whip-
ped cream. 2 Ipl -aatl cosmetic cream (for the hair or 
face). kireem i'asaas foundation cream. 
747 
Jww.} kireema <It crema> Inl 
I (also kireeml1 
/abbOlalli) cream. 2 white sauce. 3 cream pudding. 
.J!.Sj.!l 
~} kiriilla <poss It crille> Inl shredded vegetable 
fibre (especially palm fibre) used as flock in upholstery. 
IloSj.!l 
..... } 
karl!l!h <Fr carre> In pi -Olatl I ~quare cut (in 
hairdressing). 2 four-of-a-kind (in poker). 
I j.!l see I J .!I : kaza 
.!II j.!l 
.!II)" kazaak <Fr casaqlle> Inl shirt worn loose (as 
opposed to being tucked into the trousers). 
.!I J I j.!l see I j : ka-zaalik 
y j.!l sec y J .!I: 
kizib. 
kizb. 
kizba. 
kaazib. 
kazzaab. kazzib 
j yj.:J 
oJ'.)" kuzbClra (also kusbara) Inl coriander. 
I j j.!l 
:; kazz I (i) Ivil to bite down. kaz::." la/a~ubaal-i he bit 
down on my finger. kaz::" la/Ol i'Olsllaall-u he clenched 
hi~ teeth. -also gaz::.. -vn ka::.::. kazazaan: ava kaaziz. 
1 jj.!l 
:; kazz! (i) Ivil I to contract. ~hrink. riI-(llstaan kazz 
the dress has shrunk. II kOl:::: lOl/ayyOl cI-cli!Jk I felt I was 
going to burst out laughing. 2 to feel aver~ion or dis-
taste. bi-ykizz i mill i1-ka/aam III-mCllI'ac[iil if-Jax~iyya 
he hates to discuss personal matters. 3 to feel disgusted 
or revolted. kazuet mill rii!Jit i1- i'akl I was revolted by 
the smell of the food. - Ivtl 4 to shrink, contract. 
riI-mayya kazzit i1-(lIstaall the water made the dress 
shrink. II raClgii kazz tightwad. skinflint. -vn kazz. 
kazazaall: ava kaOlziz . 
.' j j.!l see j J j .!l : kaZllllza. ka::'III1::'CI 
l.!lj.!l 
.5)" "a::.aka <T "azlk> In pi -aat. kazakl pole. post 
(for telephone. telegraph. lighting). -also lja:.:alja. 
1 .!I j.!l see .!II j .!l : ka::'Olak 

l.!l Jj.!l 
..!U:J kazlak <T gezlik> In pi kazaalikl small sharp 
knife used for boning, skinning etc. 
Z .!l J j.!l see I j : ka-zaalik 
.;, j.!l see also j.J.!l 
~:; kazzin Ivil to put forth ears (of maize). -vn takziin; 
ava mikazzin. 
.J.;,j .!l 
~jlS" kazinu (also kaziinu) <It casino> In pi -haat. 
-waatl I place of refreshment (often in the open air). 
2 night-club. 
j.Jj.!l 
oj)jlS" kazuuza. kazuuza <Gr gazoza> Inl pop. any 
sweet carbonated beverage. Ilqaal fil-kazuuza "" it 
went down the drain. - also fazuuza. gazuuza. 
'oS j.!l see 'oS j I .!l : kaazi 
.J .;, 'oS j.!l see .J';' j .!l : kaziinu 
1 • .: . .1 ..,.. .!l 
1.;\....lS" kasaata <It cassata> Inl Neapolitan ice cream. 
I~..,...!l 
~ 
kisib (a) Ivtl I to earn (money), make (money). 
bi-tiksab kaam fij-Jahr how much do you make a 
month? !J-aruu!J faJtaral fil-kuweet w-aksab ziyaada 
lan hina xamas marraCll I'm going to work in Kuwait 
and earn five times what I get here. IIkisibna ~alaat 
in-nabi we made nothmg out of the deal. 2 to win, gain. 
flksab malrakt-ak hina 1- fawwil win your battle here 
first. 3 to defeat (in a game). riI-fahll ksib-ku talaata 
~Ifr the Ahli team defeated you three nil. - Ivil 4 to 
make a profit. beela kasbaana a profitable sale. - vn 
kasb, kisb; ava kaasib, kasbaan. 
~ 
kasb r Inl profit. earnings. qariibit kasb iI-lamal 
tax on earnea income. 
~i \'aksab I lell morelmost profitable. 
~ 
kassiib In pi kassiibal one who earns good 
money. man of steady means. ya baxt-a-ha gawwizit 
billl-a-ha I-gadal kasslib what luck! she married her 
daughter to a good earner. 
~ 
maksab In pi makaasibl profit, gain, earning. 
~I fitkasab or fikkasab Ivil I to be earned. 2 to be 
won. - iva mitkisib. 
~I finkasab = fitkasab. -iva minkisib. 
748 
~ 
kassib Ivtl I to cause to make money. fazmit 
is-lukkar kassibit-u ktiir the sugar shortage earned him 
big profits. II fallaah la ykassib-ak may you never be 
successful! 2 to cause to win. kaanit i~-~uruuf bass i/li 
kalslbit-u I-musabt;a it was only the circumstances that 
allowed him to win the competition. 3 to cause to be 
won. fil-kalaam mij huwwa /Ii ykassib iI-!Jarb it isn't 
talking that will win the war. -vn taksiib; ava mikassib. 
~I fitkassib or fikkassib Ivil passive of kassib. -iva 
mitkassib. 
~i faksab 1 Ivtl to impart to, cause to acquire . 
fij-ju!Juum bi-tiksib ii-gild' raxaawa tallow makes the 
leather soft. -vn fiksaab; ava muksib. 
~ 
muksibT In pi -aatl additive or agent (used to 
impart a specific quality). muksibaat t;awaam thicken-
ing agents (in printing or dyeing). muksibaat it-(alm' 
wil-Ioon wir-rii!Ja additives which impart taste, colour 
and smell (to foods). 
..,.......;S"I fiktasab Ivtl to acquire, gain. fiktasabt iI-xibra 
di fil-maktab I acquired this skill at the office. -vn 
fiktisaab; ava miktisib, muktasib; pva muktasab . 
Zy..,...!l 
~ 
kusb <P kusb> Inl animal fodder made of press-
ed cotton seed. 
...,...s kusba Inl se~ame seed pressings (a favourite food 
of children). 
Jy..,...!l 
~l,.S kusbaan Ipl nl dunes. 
j y ..,...!l see j y j .!l : kusbara 
-y':"..,...!l 
.:.,l,.;..$ kusllbaan In pi -aatl I thimble. Ilkustibaan 
bu~/a compass cap. 2 Ipl kusablinl thimble-shaped 
plectrum. 
.:...:....,...!l 
:;..,...s kasitt <Fr> In pi -aatl I cassette (of film or 
magnetic tape). 2 cassette tape-recorder or player. 
I j':"..,...!l 
.J,,;.-S kastuur <perh Engl castor> Inl cotton flannel. 
winceyette. kastuur is-sittaat or kastuur sataan f1eecy-
backed cotton satin. 
j...S kastar I Ivtl [textl to impart a napped surface to, 
nap. -vn kastara; avalpva mikastar. 

2 J .:;.. ...... .!.l 
j...S kastar 2 <Engl> Inl custard. custard powder. 
- also kastard(a}. 
~ J.:;.. ...... .!.l 
.~.;-5 kastarda (also kastard) <Engl> Inl custard. 
custard powder. -also kastar. 
(J J.:;.. ...... .!.l) 
:i..s kastilla <poss It castello> In pI -aatl I tank or 
body of a primus stove. 2 {coarse} arse. 
~ 
kustilla: zawyit kustilla {eng, carp} mitre square. 
- J.:;.. ...... .!.l 
~ 
kustaleeta, kustuleeta. kustaleeta. kustalitta <It 
costoletta> In pI -aat, -aatl cutlet. chop. 
.:,.:;.. ...... .!.l 
~ 
kastana 
<perh 
Gr kastano> 
In 
pI -aatl 
I chestnut. 2 stopper. 
.sJ\.:.;..S kistinaawi ladjl dark grey (of a horse). 
-:..:,.:;.. ...... .!.l 
~ 
kastanilla <prob It castagnetta> In pi -aatl 
castanets. 
) .s.:;.. ...... .!.l 
.r.-S kastiir <T kusture> In pi kasatiirl {carp} iron. or 
cutter. of a plane. 
I c. ...... .!.l 
c:-S kasal:J (a) Ivtl la to sweep. clear out. clear away. 
IiJsa b-yiksal:Ju 1- falyaam mi{-{uruc, they're still clearing 
the roads of mines. Ib to drain or pump out (a cess-
pool). 2 to rout. wipe out. kasal:Jt-ufif-Ja{arang I wiped 
him out in chess.llxa/f' kaasil:J he came charging in. -vn 
kasl:J; ava kaasil:J; pva maksuul:J. 
~ 
kasl:Ja I Ipl -aatl instance noun of kasl:J. raal:J fi-
kasl:Ja he went to hell . 
....... ~ kasI:Ja 2 In pi kaasil:Jaatl sweeper (ship). kasl:Jit 
fai¥aam mine-sweeper. kasl:Jit talg ice-breaker. 
~W kassaal:Ja In pi -aatl sweeper (ship). kassaal:Jit 
falyaam mine-sweeper. 
~I fitkasal:J or fikkasal:J Ivil passive of kasal:J. - iva 
mitkisilj. 
~I finkasal:J = fitkasal:J. -iva minkisil:J. 
~I fiktasalj Ivtl to dominate. 'IiI-fahii ktasal:J il-
mallab the Ahli team dominated the field. - vn 
fiktisaalj; ava miktisil:J. muktasilj. 
749 
2 c. ...... .!.l 
c:-S kisil:J (a) Ivil I to become crippled. 2 to become 
bent (of metal). - vn kasal:Jaan. kasl:J; ava kasl:Jaan. 
CLS kusaal:J Inl rickets. 
~ 
kasiil:J ladj pi kusal:Jal crippled. 
e,:.s kassaf:J Ivtl I to cripple. 2 to bend (metal). -vn 
taksiil:J; avalpva mikassal:J. 
~ 
taksiil:Ja In pi takasiil:JI angle. bend (in metal). 
~ 
mikassal:J In *1 cripple. Ilmikassal:J yugurr; 
mkasJalj wi-yc,uul yalla nitfassal:J [prov} one cripple 
pulls another and'says 'Come on! Let's go for an out-
ing!' (of those who disregard their defects or 
limitations). 
~I fitkassal:J or fikkassal:J Ivil I to be crippled. 2 to 
be bent (of metal). -iva mitkassal:J. 
~ ...... .!.l 
..J...S kisid (a) Ivil to stagnate. fif-/uyl; kaasid iI-yomeen 
dool business is slow these days. -vn kasaad; ava 
kaasid, kasdaan. 
~LS kasaad Inl stagnation. slackness (of business) . 
~ 
kassid. kassad Ivtl to cause to stagnate. -vn 
taksiid; avalpva mikassid. 
~I fitkassid or fikkassid Ivil to become stagnant. 
-ava mitkassid. 
I J ...... .!.l 
rS kasar (a) Ivtl I to break. fracture. fingaan 
maksuur a broken cup. faksar dimaay-ak I'll break 
your head! II kasar ir-raqam iI-qiyaasi he broke the re-
cord. - kasar bi-xaa{ir see xaa{ir. -kasar leen(-u} (1) to 
lower the eyelids. (2) to buy (s.o.) off. as in l:Ja-tiksar 
leen-i b-yadwa do you think you can buy me off with a 
lunch invitation? -kasar in-nal:Js to break the (run of) 
bad luck. -kasar il-fifaara to shoot (or run) the traffic-
light. -kasar waraa c,lIlla (he broke a pitcher behind 
him) he said good riddance to him. -kasar l:Jiddit to take 
the edge off. as in fid-dawa kasar l:Jiddit iI-wagal the 
medication numbed the pain. -maksuur iI-ginaal:J help-
less. in need of protection. -nifs-u maksuura he is 
downcast. - fiksar if-Jarr let's avoid ill-feeling (by argu-
ment etc.). 2 to break open. force entry into. 
fiI-ma{aafi kasaru /-Jac,c,a the firemen broke into the 
apartment. 3 to lower (a flag or the like). fis-sawwaaq 
kasar iI-bundeera the driver flipped the meter-flag over. 
4 to cut (front teeth. of animals). - Ivil5 to break (in 
billiards or pool). 6 to veer. swerve. sawwaaq l:Jumaar 
kasar lalayya fif-/aaril an ass of a driver swerved in 
front of me in the street. 7 {mils] to lose the beat. -vn 
kasr, kasr; ava kaasir; pva maksuur, maksuur. 

rS karr In pi kusllllrl I breakage(s). damage(s). 
lIisba mll-xidma mixa~~a~a Ii/-kasr a percentage of the 
~ervicc charge allotted for breakage. 2 fracture. 
l'iI-migahharaati Ylaaltg tf-!"mullr the bonesetter treats 
fracture~. 3{geolj fault. 4 traction. l'iI-kusuur tf-
illlyacil,l'ya common fracllon~. ftf-kusuur iI-lajriyya 
decimal fractions. n~~' saala W-kUlllur half an hour 
and then some. yitkallif gllleeh wi-kusuur it costs a little 
over a pound. 5 {slallgl fifty-pia~tre note. - ladj invarl 
6 fragmented. scrap. xajah kasr wood chip~. (uub kasr 
broken bnck. dahah kasr gold scrap. 
'rS kasra, kasra 2 In pi -aat, kllsa,./) linst nl a break. 
a fracture. 2 break. indentation. 3 crea~e. 4 dart. tuck 
(in dressmaking). - Ipl -aat onlyl 5 {gramj vowel sign 
for short I (in ArabiC writing). 
• rS k,sra I In pi k,sar. kilraatl fragment. small piece. 
kisrit leej a crumb of bread. 
• ) • ..5' Allsaara Icoll n. pi -aatl chips. 
;r-S kasllllr ladJI fragile. 
.;r-S kllsllura. loola k-klllL/IIra ma-kaanit iI-faxuura 
see faxuura . 
.r--S kasiirT ladJI shattered. defeated. kasiir iI-qalb 
broken-hearted. 
• ).:S kassallra In pi -aatl any implement used for 
breaking. II kassaarll blllldlll, nutcracker. 
.,...s:... maksar: (ba((iix) lala I-maksar (water-melon) 
sold after being cut open in order to reveal its ripeness. 
ya bll((lix ya-lli lala I-maksar {velldor's cryl guaranteed-
ripe water-melon! 
",...s:.;1 fitkasar or fikkasar IVII passive of kasar. - iva 
I1l11kBtr. 
",...s:.;1 fillkasllr = fitkasar. - iva millkistr. 
~ 
mlllkisir ladj '1 down-trodden. rahb-I-Ila mala 
l-millkBrtill 
(gaabir) 
{pro\'j 
God 
i~ 
with 
the 
down-trodden. 
;.s kalSar Ivtl ) to break into piece~, smash to bit~. 
fukaSlar iI-lat/,m' bis-sa(ullr I break up the bone~ with 
the cleaver. bi-ykassar guzf' mll1llLl b-dinumiit he blows 
off part of it with dynamite. II kassart , dmaal'-i you've 
driven me up the wall! -kassar maljadii((-u) "" to take 
the wind out of (s.o,'s) sails. -kassar kalaam(-u) to 
di~obey (s.o.). 2 to break (down). tikassar-ltI-gmeeh da 
mill fat/,I-ak would you give me change for thi~ pound 
note. please! 3 to crease. crumple. fij-fall(a kassarit 
iI-huduum the ~uitease crumpled the clothes. 4 to copu-
late with. impregnate (of a male domestic fowl). - vn 
takliir; avalpva mikassar . 
..... I;.s;.. mlkassaraat Ipl nl nuts (usually almonds. wal-
nuts and hazelnuts) and raisins etc. 
~I fitkassar or fikkassar Ivil I to be broken into 
7S0 
pieces. be sma~hed. 2 to shatter. break into pieces. 
l'iI-cjizaaz itkassar the gla~~ shattered. 3 to be or be-
come tired out. rtglay-ya tkassllrit my legs have given 
out. muxx-I tkassar my bram I~ worn out. -avaIl va 
mitkcBsar. 
rlS' kaustr Ivtl I to Jostle, pu~h and elbow. bl-,I'uljaj 
fil-fLIIllblis Ylkaastr (ill-naal) wi-yzaalJlI11 he stands in 
the bus Jostling (people) and ~hoving. IlI'iI-larabl,VYu 
kusrit-Ill the car cut in and hit me. 2 to play at Indian 
wresthng with. - vn mikalra. ava ml!..aul". 
2 .J 1J".!l see .J..::...!l: kasra I 
I .J IJ" .!l 
..srS klsra! Iprop nl Cho~roe~. law lallcil maal kiua 
ma-kaffa if I had Cho~roe~' wealth It would not be 
enough . 
~J.JV".!l 
~J rS kasarLIlla <It casseruo/a> In pi -aatl ~aucepan 
<J .J .J IJ" d 
'"JrS kasaroolla = kasarulla . 
IJ" IJ" .!l 
..:;..s ku.u In pi f,ksaus, kUSIIUS, faksaasl{coarsej cunt. 
kus.I umm-ak (up) your mother\ cunt! 
~ 
kasslis In pi kassllsal {coarse slangj arse-kl~~er. 
brown-no~er. 
..,..:.s kaslls Ivil {coarlej to ki~~ ar~e. brown-no~e. 
fuxii-na da daymall bl-ykallil Itl-mllcillr our friend 
there i~ alway~ brown-no~lng the director. - vn takllll: 
ava mikassls. 
.;L...:.s;,. mlkasslraall In pi -yyal {coarsej arse-kls~er. 
brown-noser. 
~I fitkallls or f,kkall/l Ivil (Impersonal) pas~ive 
of kassis. mllkaslil/llhllm they're much fawned on. - iva 
milkalSls. 
rtlJ".!l 
r---S kaslam Ivtl to demoh,h. wipe the floor with. 
fiskut walla fakaslum-uk ~hut up or I'll flatten you! - vn 
kuslama; ava/pva mlkullam. 
~I fitkaslam or flkkalr.am IVII pa~sive of kaslam. 
- iva mllkaslam. 
I ...; IJ" .!l 
....A...S kasaf (i) Ivtl I to 
~hame. make ashamed. 
II fallaah yiksif-ak you ~hould be ashamed. shame on 

you! 2 to embarrass. 3 to cause to be shy. -vn kasafaan, 
kasf, kusuuf; ava kaasif; pva maksuuf. 
......s kasfa In pI -aatl I instance noun of kasf. 2 sharp 
reply, rebuff, brush-off. 
J.,-S kusuuf Inl eclipse. kusuuf if-jams solar eclipse. 
...o.....s:;1 '1itkasaf or '1ikkasaf Ivil I to be or become 
ashamed. 2 to be or become embarrassed. 3 to become 
shy. -ava/iva mitkisif. 
...o.....s:; I '1inkasaf = '1itkasaf. -ava/iva minkisif. 
2 .J ..,... .£l 
'-ilS kasaafa Inl density. ril-kasaafa s-sukkaniyya 
population density. 
...A.;$ kasiif ladjl dense, thick . 
..;,s . ...D kassif Ivtl I [chem. phys] to condense. 
2 [phot] to apply a double-fixing process to (film). -vn 
taksiif; avalpva mikassif . 
..is... mukassif In pI -aatl condenser. 
~I • .......:s;;1 '1itkassif or '1ikkassif Ivil passive of 
kassif. - iva mitkassif. 
~ 
takassuf Inl condensation. 
.:; .. :d..,....£l 
~ 
kaskitta <Fr casquette> In pI -aatl cap with a 
peak. 
I..,....£l..,... .£l 
..r>-S kaskis 1 Ivtl to back (up) (usually an animal or 
vehicle). 2 Ivil to move backwards, back up (usually of 
an animal or vehicle). - vn kaskasa; avalpva mikaskis. 
~I 
'1itkaskis or '1ikkaskis Ivil to be backed up, be 
moved backwards. -iva mitkaskis. 
2..,... .£l ..,... .£l 
~ 
kuskusi Inl couscous, dish based (in Egypt) on 
granules of steamed dough. 
JV".£l 
J-S kisil (a) Ivil to behave lazily. bi-yiksal lan kuU" 
&aaga he's too lazy for anything. -vn kasa/; ava kaslaan. 
J-S kasal Inl laziness, sloth. 
(J'J-S kaslaan ladj pI -iin, kasaala f! lazy, sluggish. 
ma-tibCjaa-j kaslaan don't be lazy. kibd-i kaslaan my 
liver is sluggish. IIfatlit ik-kaslaana overlong thread (in 
sewing). 
J-S kusali or kisali ladj· and pi kusaliyya/lazy, sloth-
ful, indolent. 
J-Si '1aksal lell morelmost lazy, sluggish etc. 
J.,-S kasuulladj • and pI ·kasaalal lazy, indolent. 
J.S kassill Ivtl to make lazy. kassilt-i-ni lan is-safar 
751 
you've made me feel that it's too much effort to go 
away. 2/vil to let things slide, make no effort to do 
anything. kaan landijurl; ktiir laakin kassilt I had a lot 
of work to do but couldn't bring myself to make ~he 
effort. - vn taksiil; avalpva mikassil. 
J-15:;1 '1itkaasil or '1ikkaasil Ivil to act lazily. lamma 
ykuunu mif layziin yilmilu juYla yitkaslu when they 
don't want to do a job, they slack. -vn takaasult; ava 
mitkaasil. 
.£l J V" .£l 
~ 
kaslaka Inl Catholicism, Catholic practice. 
4J;\.S' kasuliik Icoll nl Catholics. - also katuliik. 
..?,);\5" kasuliiki I ladjl Catholic. 2 In pI kasuliikl a 
Catholic. - also katuliiki. 
~ 
-" lS:J I ril-kasulikiyya Inl Catholicism. 
~I '1itkaslik or '1ikkaslik Ivil to convert to Catholic-
ism, become Catholic. - ava mitkaslik. 
-.£lJV".£l 
(J..,s;.,J;lS:J1 '1il-kasulikuun <Gr ~atholfk6n> Inl [Chr] 
the Catholic Epistle(s) . 
r'V".£l 
r-.5 kasm <T kesim> Inl shape, form, appearance. 
-.......s kasma Inl fit (of a garment). 
~ 
kassim Ivtl to fit (an item of clothing) to the form. 
fustaan mikassim a well-fitted dress. -vn taksiim; aval 
pva mikassim. 
~I '1itkassim or '1ikkassim Ivil passive of kassim. 
- iva mitkassim. 
.J ';.£l see loS V" .£l : kiswa 
1oS..,....£l 
..rS kasa (i) Ivtl I to clothe, provide with clothing. 
ma-fii-j filuus '1aksi wlaad-i I have no money to clothe 
my children. rabb-i-na kasii-ha b-gamaal-u God has 
clothed her in beauty. 2a to cover (usually with cloth). 
2b to upholster. - vn kisa, kasayaan; avil kaasi; pva 
maksi. 
".,-S k!swa In pI kasaawil I clothing, wear. kiswit ~­
~eef summer wear. 2 covering. kiswit il-kalba the black 
embroidered canopy which covers the Kaaba. 
~I '1itkasa or '1ikkasa Ivil I to be clothed. 2a to be 
covered (usually with cloth). 2b to be upholstered. -iva 
mitkisi. 
~I '1inkasa = '1itkasa. -iva minkisi. 
cJ-.£l 
~ 
,<ajab (a) Ivll I 10 scrape away, remove by scrap-

ing. rikfalj-ha b-sikkiina scrape it off with a knife. 
2 {slang] to drive away, chase away. - vn ka.f1J. kafaljaan; 
ava kaafilj; pva makfuulj. 
~I rinkafalj Ivil 1 to be scraped away, be removed 
by scraping. 2 {slang] 2a to push off. bugger off. 
II rinkifilj fi-dahya min sikkit-i get the hell out of my 
way! 2b to be driven away, be chased away. 3 (slang] to 
pop off, kick the bucket. -ava/iva minkifilj. 
~I ritkafalj or rikkafalj = rinkafalj. -ava/iva 
mitkifilj. 
~ ";.!l see 
~ I.S ..; JJ : kafiida 
.;";.!l 
rs kifir ladj °1 grim-faced, beetle-browed, frowning. 
rsi rakfar 1 lell more/most grim-faced etc. 2 /adj 
fe!ll kafral grim-faced. 
rs kaffar Ivil to frown, scowl, knit one's brows. 
laazim tidljak mif tikaffar you should laugh not scowl. 
-,:n takfiir; ava mikaffar. 
~I ritkaffar or rikkaffar Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
kaffar. ma-y~aljlj '-f yitkaffar liI-liyaal lanublj one 
shouldn't frown at the children first thing in the morn-
ing. - iva mitkaffar. 
I.S .; ..; .!l 
loS rs kufari <Hindi khichrf> Inl di~h of rice, lentils, 
and sometimes macaroni topped with fried onions and 
hot sauce. IIljafiif kufari mixture of tobacco and pow-
dered hashish. -faay kufari drink of tea made in a glass 
by adding water to the leaves. 
I.";";.!l 
...;S kaffl (i) Ivil 1 to shrink, law yitrisil bi-mayya 
suxna ykiffif it is washed in hot water it will shrink. 2 to 
shrink, draw back. bi-tkiff' minni leeh why do you 
shrink from me? II kaff' f-gild-u he was scared stiff. - kiff 
(I) keep to the limits of decency! (2) shoo! (to a dog). 
- vn kaff, kiffiyya, kafafaan; ava kaafif· 
~ kaff' fi- to snap at, burst out at. 
~. kaffa /pl -aatl instance noun of kaff. 
.;.L:S kaffaaf ladj °1 timid, cowardly. 
~I ritkafF or rikkaffl Ivil (impersonal) passive of 
kaffl. ritkaff' fiiha she was snapped at. -iva mitkaff. 
~I rinkaffl = ritkaffl. -iva minkaff. 
..;::s kaffifl Ivtl to cause to shrink. -vn takfiif; ava/pva 
mikaffif· 
~I ritkaffifl or rikkaffifl Ivil passive of kaffifl. 
- iva mitkaffif. 
752 
2..;..;.!l 
..;s kiff <P kish> (also kiff' malik) /interjl 1 check! 
(in chess). 2 {slang] behave yourself! 
..;s kaff2 (i) Ivtl {chess] to put (a king) into check. - vn 
kaff. kafafaan; ava kaafif; pva makfuuf. 
~I ritkaff2 or rikkaff2 Ivil passive of kaff2. -iva 
mitkaff. 
~I rinkaff2 = ritkaff2. -iva minkaff. 
..;::s kaffif2 Ivtl {chess] to put (a king) into check. - vn 
takfiif; ava/pva mikaffif. 
~I ritkaffif2 or rikkaffif2 Ivil passive of kaffif2. 
-iva mitkaffif . 
..b..;.!l 
Ja..:.s" kafa{ (u) Ivtl 1 to scrape, scrape clean. kafa{l 
iI-barkeeh wi- riddeetu blastik I scraped the parquet 
floor clean and gave it a plastic surface. 2 to scrape off, 
scratch off. rayy' kaft' fif-fiik yilrii any scratching-out 
on the cheque will invalidate it. -vn kaf(; ava kaafi(; pva 
makfuu{. 
;J,W" kaffaa{a In pi -aat/ scraper. 
~ 
makfa{ In pi makaafi{1 whittling knife. 
~I ritkafa{ or rikkafa{ Ivil I to be scraped, be 
scraped clean. 2 to be scraped off, be scratched off. -iva 
mitkifi{. 
~I rinkafa{ = ritkafa{. -iva minkifi{. 
.;.,..b..;.!l 
o;)...:.$" kaf{uura <It costura> In pi -aatl patch (of 
cloth, leather, plastic, and the like). 
";";.!l 
...A.:S kafaf (iJ Ivtl I to expose, uncover. kafaf j/-kizaan 
lif-fams· lafaan tiiifafhe put the corn cobs in the sun to 
dry. rikfifii lafaan rafuuf iI-garlj uncover him so that 
I can see the wound. kafafna yal{it-u we exposed his 
mistake. IIkafaft-ak I've found you out, I've got your 
number! - wiff-u makfuuf he's shameless. -lilba 
makfuufa an obvious trick. -lala I-makfuuf openly, 
frankly, as in xallii-na nitkallim lala I-makfuuf let's 
speak frankly. 2 to remove (a covering). rikfifis-sitaara 
lan if-fibbaak pull the curtain away from the window . 
II raagil makfuuf lannu I-Ijigaab a man who can read the 
unknown. - Ivi/3a to make an investigation. bi-yikfifu 
lan iI-bitrool they are looking for oil. kafaft· lala 
I-larabiyya min guwwa I inspected the inside of the car. 
rid-duktuur kafaf lalayya the doctor examined me. 
3b to subject oneself to a medical examination. (jabl' 
ma safirt' ruljt' kafaft before I travelled, I went and 

had a medical examination. -vn kaff, kafafaan; ava 
kaafif; pva makfuuf. 
753 
..;..;s kaffI Ivn/llgazma kaffslip-on shoe. -faaril kaff 
[carpj jack plane. -
In pi kufuuf! 2 discovery. 3 (first) 
medical examination (at which a doctor makes a di-
agnosis and prescribes treatment - as opposed to a prog-
ress check). - lalso pi kufufaall 4 list. register. kaft 
I:Jsaab bill. invoice. list of expenditures. kufufaal iI-
mural/abaal payroll. 5 [musj upper register. 
~ 
kaffa In pi -aall ) instance noun of kaff. 
2 discovery. 
...A..:.lS' kaafif' 
In 
pi kUffaafl 
[obsolj 
provincial 
gov;rnor. 
..;L:.S" kaffaaf In 
pi -aall ) spotlight. searchlight. 
kaffaaf larabiyya car headlight. 2 list. kaffaaf higaari 
an alphabetical list. - Ipl kaffaafal 3 scout. - Ipl -iinl 
4 inspector. kaffaaf nuur electricity meter reader. 
kaf[aaf gumruk customs inspector. 
~~I rik-kaffaafa Inl the Boy Scout Organization. 
...A...:.S:.;I rilkafaf or rikkafaf Ivil passive of kafaf. - iva 
milkiJif. 
~ 
I rinkafaf = rilkafaf. - iva minkiJif. 
...A..:.lS' kaafiF Ivtl to speak plainly to (s.o.). put (s.o.) in 
the picture. y~al:Jl:J i Ikaafif raxuu-k bil-mawquul liab1i 
ma yismal bii min barra you' d better let your brother in 
on the matter before he hears about it from an outsider. 
- vn mikaffa. mukaffa; ava mikaajif. 
...A..:.~I rilkaafif or rikkaafif Ivil passive of kaafiF. 
-iva milkaafif. 
~I riklafaf Ivtl to discover. riklafafu malibara 
firloniyya they discovered a Pharaonic tomb. baldi 
mudda klafafl inni YOI{aan after a while I discovered 
that I was mistaken. - vn rikliJaaf; ava mikliJif. 
muklafif; pva muklafaf. 
~I 
rislakfif Ivil to explore. reconnoitre. -vn 
riSlikfaaf; ava mislakfif. 
~ 
muslakfif In *1 explorer. 
I .!l .;. .!l 
<.!l.S kufk' Inl elongated swirl of feathers found on the 
breasts of pigeons of certain breeds. 
.u..:s kufuk ladjl having a kUfk (of a pigeon). 
..?-S kUfki In pi kufkaall pigeon having a kufk. 
2(.!l';'.!l) 
<.!LS kiJk <P kashk> Inl ) dish of a creamy con-
sistency based on chicken stock thickened with milk or 
yoghurt and f1our.llhuwwafarxa b-kiJk he (or: it) is the 
favourite. as in huwwa farxa b-kiJk· land iI-mudiir he's 
the boss's pet. l:Jaaga farxa b-kiJk· landi something 
I really like. 2 Icoll nl small round cakes made of 
crushed green wheat. salt and sour milk and dried hard 
to be eaten either uncooked or stewed in a stock as I. 
..d.:S kufe (also kufuk [rur}) <T ko§k> In pi kiJaak. 
rikfaak. rakfaakl ) kiosk. 2 any small wooden hut 
(e.g .• kennel. sentry-box. signal-box). 3 metal stand or 
oven placed over fire on which a makwagi heats his 
irons. 
J I .!l .;. .!l 
.;IS...;$ kufkaar. kiJkaar Inl coarsest grade of flour. 
kiJkaar daayim wala lalaama mali{uula [provj better 
continuing coarse flour than intermittent fine flour. 
.;..!l.;..!l 
JS..:$ kafkiJ Ivtl) to gather (cloth). 2 Ivil to be gath-
ered. smocked. pleated etc. (of cloth). - vn kafkafa; 
ava/pva mikafkiJ. 
~I 
rilkafkiJ or rikkafkiJ Ivil to be gathered. - iva 
milkafkiJ· 
-J.!l';'.!l 
.1lll <.!.l.:S • .illl d.:S kiJkalmaaz <T kU§konmaz> Inl 
asparagus. 
J.J.!l';'.!l 
J.,>..:.s kafkuul <P kashkal> In' pi kafakiill ) thick 
copybook. thick exercise book. 2 scrapbook.llkafkuul 
mallumaal a grab-bag of information. 
J IS r .;. .!l 
~ 
kafmiir <Engl> Inl ) cashmere (wool). 2 leaf 
design typical of paisley pattern (used on cloth and 
wood carving). - ladj invar/3 decorated with a paisley 
pattern. 
J IS .;. .!l 
;~ kafiida <T ke§ide> Inl [calligj lengthening line 
between two letters. 
• IS .;. .!l 
~fi kufeeh <Fr couche>: wardli kufeeh art paper • 
coated paper. 
j,j,.!l 
~ .15- ka{{ <prob Engl CUI> ladj invarl ) short. 
kumm i ka{{ short slee~e. faraab ka{{ ankle-length 
socks. 2 sleeveless (of a dress). fuslaan ka{{ a sleeveless 
dress. hiyya labsa ka{{ she's wearing a sleeveless dress. 

Jo.Jo..!I 
.ks"1 rikta;; Ivil to become packed to capacity. -vn 
rikti;aa;; ava mikta;;. 
j;\la;S'1 rikti;aa; Inl overcrowding. 
k 
mikta;; ladjl overcrowded, jam-packed. 
yt.!l 
~ 
kacb In pi kucuub, kicaab, kucuba J Ila heel (of 
a foot). II kacb' daayir a ubiquitous person. -farkit kacb 
just a step, a stone's throw. Ib heel (of a shoe). hiyya 
labsa kacb she's wearing (high) heels. II kacb , caali a 
woman, as in "aasib ya rUS{a fii kacb' caali watch it, 
driver! there's a skirt getting on (or off)! Ie spur (of a 
chicken's foot). IImitcallim il-kacb' wil-xa~ar he's 
been around, he waSn't born yesterday. Id object re-
sembling a heel in function or position. kacb' c~aaya 
ferrule. kacb' ktaab spine of a book. 2 end, bottom. 
kacb' mux{aaf anchor crown. kacb' ~af/Ja bottom of a 
page. kacb' il-£jiyaas the end of the mat. 3 official stub, 
duplicate in brief. ril-kucuub bitaacit if-fikaat cheque 
stubs. kacb' "waala stub of a money order, used as a 
receipt. kacba camal stub from the government em-
ployment ·office, acknowledging receipt of an applica-
tion for work. - Ipl kucuub only/4 corner motif in tent 
applique work (see PI.H, 20). 
i.,.6:.J1 ril-kacba Iprop nl the Kaaba, the shrine in 
Mecca to which Muslims perform the pilgrimage and 
-owards which all Muslim prayers are directed. 
~ 
kuceeb: rabu kceeb mumps. 
IJ.W' kauaabi ladvl on foot. xadt-a-ha kauaabi 
I went by shanks' pony . 
..;s kaccab Ivtl I to cube (a number etc.). mitr' 
mkauab cubic metre. 2 to determine the cubic 
measurement of. kauabu I-beet they took the cubic 
measurement of the house. -vn takciib; ava/pva 
mikauab. 
;;"....s:; takciiba In pi -aatl trellis, espalier. 
~ 
takciibi ladjl cubic. gizr' takciibi cube root. 
Ilfann' takciibi Cubist art. 
~I rit-takcibiyya Inl {art] Cubism. 
..;s... mukauab, mikauab I ladjl cubic. 2 In pi -aatl 
cube. 
~I ritkauab or rikkauab Ivil passive of kauab. 
- iva mitkauab. 
.I Y t.!l 
.r.-S kacbar (also kacwar) I/vtl to wad, form into a 
shapeless lump. kull' m-aktib waraqa rakacbar-ha w-
rarmii-ha every time I write a page I screw it up and 
754 
throw it away. 2/vil to grow podgy or dumpy. -vn 
kacbara; ava/pva mikacbar. 
fo mikacbar (also mikacwar) ladj ·1 bulging, bul-
bous, lumpy. fakl-a-ha mkacbar she has a dumpy fi-
gure. II qaacid mikacbar sitting all hunched up . 
..,...s:.;1 ritkacbar or 
rikkacbar (also 
ritkacwar, 
rikkacwar) Ivil to be wadded, be formed into a lump. 
-iva mitkacbar. 
~yt.!l 
..;..,.$ kacbif Ivtl I to crumple, rumple. rif-fan{a 
kacbifit huduum-i the suitcase crumpled my clothes. 
2 to cramp (the fingers). -vn kacbafa; ava/pva 
mikacbif· 
~I ritkacbif or rikkacbif Ivil I to become crum-
pled, become rumpled. 2 to become cramped (of fin-
gers). -ava/iva mitkacbif. 
Jyt.!l 
J.,.S' kacbil/vtl I to cause to stumble, trip. ril-"abl' 
kacbil-ni the rope tripped me up. 2 to tangle. xee{ 
mikacbil fi-baccf.-u a tangled thread. -vn kacbala; aval 
pva mikacbil. 
MI ritkacbil or rikkacbil/vi/l to stumble, trip. min 
laxmit-u tkacbil fil-baab because of his confusion he 
stumbled at the door. II qaliil il-baxt yitkacbil [IS-sideeri 
(or fi-bcf.aan-u) {prov] an unlucky man will trip over his 
waistcoat (or his balls). 2 to become entangled. -vn 
kacbala; ava mitkacbil. 
tt.!l 
e kaU (u) Ivtl to pay up, cough up, fork out. II kaueet 
damm' qalb-i or kaueet ig-gild' wis-saq{ I paid 
through the nose. -vn kaU; ava kaacic. 
(f;1 ritkau or rikkau Ivil passive of kaU. -iva 
mitkau· 
~ 
I rinkau = ritkau. - iva minkau. 
~ kauac Ivtl to cause (s.o.) to payout. kauact-u 
cafara gneeh I made him cough up ten pounds. -vn 
takciic; ava mikauac . 
~I ritkauac or rikkauac Ivil to be caused to 
vomit. - iva mitkauac. 
.!It.!l 
M 
kackf = ka"k . 
.,.!It.!l 
# 
kacku Inl style of serving in the game of xara 
(q.v.). -also ka"ku. 

t.J A t A 
skewer) and cooked. 2/adj invarl worthless. raagil 
~ ~ 
kar;kuula In pi kalakiicl knee (of a camel). 
kufta a worthless man. 
~rtA 
,.;...S kalmij Ivtl to crumple, rumple. huduum 
mikalmija crumpled clothes. -vn kalmaja; ava/pva 
mikalmij. 
~I Yitkar;mij or Yikkalmij Ivil to become crum-
pled, become rumpled. -ava mitkacmij. 
.J.Jt A see .JytA: 
kalwar, 
mikalwar, 
Yitkalwar, Yikkalwar 
I~~A 
i.US' kafaaYa r In! I competence. xibrit-ha Yaksabit-ha 
kafaa Ya fil-maga/-da her experience has given her com-
petence in this field. 2 efficiency. ril-kafaaYa 1-
Yintagiyya efficiency of production. Yi{-{uub iI-YalJmar 
luu kafaaYa lalyaf-lazl iI-lJaraara red brick is a highly 
efficient heat insulator. 
• --is kufY 7adj pi YakfaaYT! efficient, capable. lJaaga 
Yakuun mij kufy i liiha something I'm not up to doing. 
tAs-i YakfaY lell morelmost efficient or capable. 
JIS' kaafiY Ivtl to reward. kafiY-ni b-calqa he rewarded 
me with a beating. -vn mikafra, mukafYa; ava 
mikaafiY, mukaafiY; pva mukaafaY. 
iUts:.. mukafra In pi -aatl reward, bonus. mukafraat 
tajgiliyya incentive payments. II bi-yijtaralu b-mukafra 
they work on a lump payment basis. 
Jts:.. mukaafiY ladjl 
[chem} 
equivalent. 
wazn i 
mukaafiY equivalent weight. 
ji\S;;' takaafuyr Inl equivalence, evenness, parity. 
mubaraah ma-f-haa-f takaafuY an unevenly matched 
football game. takaafuY il-fur~ equal opportunities for 
all. 
I.:,,~A 
.:..AS kUft Inl membrane between the white and the 
shell of an egg. II bi-yilraf ik-kuft he knows everything, 
he's very clever. -laayij cak-kuft spending nothing on 
on!self, living on a shoestring. 
.:..AS kaffit Ivtl to inlay (with metat). -vn takfiit; ava/pva 
mikaffit. 
l.:,,~A 
~ 
kufta <T kofte> I Inl dish of (spiced) minced 
meat, fish or chicken shaped into patties (or around a 
-.J':"~A 
~.r.A5 kafitirya, 
kafatirya 
<Engl> 
In 
pi -aatl 
I cafeteria. 2 coffee-shop. 
c.~A 
c.US' kifaalJ In! struggle, effort. 
dIS' kaafilJ Ivtl to struggle against, combat. mukafIJit 
il-Yummiyya illiteracy programme. -vn mikafIJa, 
mukaflJa; ava mikaafilJ. 
d \S;;'I YitkaafilJ or YikkaafilJ Ivil passive of kaafilJ. - iva 
mitkaafilJ· 
I.J ~ A 
)5 kafar', kifir, kufur (a) Ivill to deny God's exist-
ence, blaspheme. Ilhuwwa-lJna kafama iii skinna 
landak ... did we do something wrong in coming to stay 
with you? 2 to become fed up. kaJart i min ij-furl 
I became sick and tired of the work. II Yil-carabiyya 
kafarit the car wore out. -vn kufr; ava kafraan, kaafir . 
)5 kufr Inl blasphemy. ma-fii-f bald ik-kufr i 1.amb 
[prov) there is no sin worse than atheism. 
.:,,1)5 kafraan ladj "I exasperated. 
) IS' kaafir In pi kuffaar, kafaral unbeliever, infidel. 
IIYi.flab lala I-kaafir ... it would wring tears from a 
stone. - ril-guul kaafir [prov} hunger knows no laws. 
)5i Yakfar lell morelmost blasphemous, sinful, etc. 
i,JUs- kaffaara Inl [lsi} pious act in expiation or com-
pensation for misdeeds.llyoom il-kaffaara [Jud} Yom 
Kippur, Day of Atonement. 
)s kaffar Ivtll to cause to blaspheme, cause to deny 
God's existence. 2 to consider or judge to be a blas-
phemer or infidel. 3 to tire, weary, sicken. di liija 
tkaffar what a wretched life! fi4,i1 yidayiq-ni lamma 
kaffar-ni he kept on annoying me until I had it up to 
here. 4 to cause to do penance for, make atone for. 
II lJ-akaffar sayyiYaat-u I'll give him hell! - Ivil 5 to do 
penance, atone. kaffart" lan 1.unuub-i I did penance 
for my sins. -vn takfiir; ava/pva mikaffar. 
~ 
takfiir Inl I atonement, penance. 2 inquisition. 
,;s:.1 Yitkaffar or Yikkaffar Ivil passive of kaffar. - iva 
mitkaffar . 
1(.J~A) 
)5 kafr In pi kufuur, kufural small village, hamlet. 
kafr ij-feex Ip'rop nl Kafr esh-Sheikh, a town and pro-
vince in the Delta. 
)5 kafar 2 <Engl cover> In! outer or inner bladder C'~ 

an inflatable football. koora kafar inflatable football. 
;.,i1S" kafuur Inll eucalyptus tree(s) (Eucalyptus glo-
bulus). 2 camphor. 
.JJ"';.!l 
~.;,) kufirla, kuvirla <It coperla> In pI -aall coverlet 
for a bed, bedspread. -also kubirla. 
0t.SJ"';.!l 
... )5 kufreeh <Fr coffret> In pI -aall {elecl terminal 
box. 
I"'; "';.!l 
.js" kaffl (i, u) I Ivtl to restrain. laazim tikiff ibn-ak 
lan miJaksit iI-rawlaad you ought to keep your son 
from picking fights with the other kids. II kaff' riid-u lan 
to wash one's hands of, as in kaffeet riid-i lan iI-ljikaaya 
I washed my hands of the matter. 2/vii to refrain, 
abstain. raljsan-Iak tikiffa lan il-tadxiin you had better 
not smoke. -vn kafafaan, kaff; ava kaafif; pva makfuuf. 
.js" kaff2 In pI kUfuufll palm (of a hand). qarab kafr 
lala kaffhe clapped his hands (as a gesture of despair). 
IIkaff-u maftuulj he's open-handed. -lala kaffa lafriit 
== in a precarious situation. -fal-ni lala kufuuf ir-raalja 
he treated me very well. -zahra kaff is-sabl motif used 
in tent applique work (see PI.H, 26).2 object resemb-
ling a palm in function or position: kaff' migdaaf oar 
blade. kaff' muxlaaf inner face of an anchor fluke. 
- Ino pl/ 3 slap. 
~ kaffa I In pI -aatll pan (of a balance scale). 2 block 
(of a bicycle pedal). 
~ IS" kaffit In in constrl all of. kaffil in-naas all the 
people. 
..;.;s kafiif ladj pI kufafal blind. 
.;~ makfuufladj"1 =kafiif. 
~I rinkaff Ivii I to be restrainea. 2 (impersonal) 
passive of kafF 2. mawquul yinkafr lannu something 
one should stay away from. -ivalava minkaff. 
.Js:;1 ritkafflor rikkaffl = rinkaff. - ivalava mitkaff. 
2"'; "';.!l 
.js" kaf!3 (i) Ivtl to hem(stitch) (a garment). -vn 
kifaafa; ava kaafif; pva makfuuf. 
~LiS" kifaafa In! hemming, hemstitching . 
.Js:;1 ritkaff2 or rikkaf!2 Ivil to be hemmed, be hem-
stitched. - iva mitkaf! . 
..ill" kaffif Ivtl to hem(stitch) (a garment). -vn takfiif; 
avalpva mikaffil . 
..A.is:;1 ritkaffif or rikkaffif Ivii to be hemmed, be hem-
stitched. - iva mitkaflif. 
756 
J"';.!l 
J.iS" kafal l r (i) Ivtll to look after, be responsible for. 
kafalu I-layyil they took responsibility for the child. 
2 to guarantee, ensure. riI-qanuun bi-yikfil-Iu I-Ijat;t; 
the law guarantees him the right. - vn kafalaan, kafaala; 
ava kaafil; pva makfuul. 
J.iS" kafal l ln pI kufuul, rakfaalll rump (of a beast of 
burden). 2 hips. 
41LiS" kafaala Inl {Iegl bail. 
41..,iS" kafuula In pI kawafiill piece of cloth used as a 
baby's napkin. 
~ 
kafiil I/adjl apt, liable. riI-lamla di kafiila 
b-rinnaha twaddii-k is-sign this act (of yours) is liable to 
land you in prison. 2 In " and pI kafalal guarantor. 
~I ritkafal or rikkafal Ivil passive of kafal l. -iva 
mitkifil. 
fo kaffil Ivtl to make responsible, put in charge. 
kaffil-ni bir-radda lat-lilifoon he assigned me to answer 
the phone. - vn lakfiil; ava/p.va mikaffil. 
jk;1 ritkaffil or rikkaffil Ivil I to be ensured, be 
guaranteed. 2 to be made responsible, be put in charge. 
3 to assume responsibility. - avaliva mitkaffil. 
J J"';.!l 
)LiS" kafallu <It cavallo> Inl inside leg measurement. 
0t.SJ"';.!l 
41S" klJvileeh 
<Fr clavier> 
In 
pI -aatl piano 
keyboard. 
~"';.!l 
.;;s kafan In pI rakfaanl shroud, winding sheet. yiigi 
mala I-laban yiruulj mala I-kafan {provl == from birth 
to death, life is but a passing show . 
Js kaffin Ivtl to enshroud, wrap in a winding sheet . 
rassilna I-marljuum wi-kaffinnaa we washed the de-
ceased and wrapped him in a shroud. -vn lakfiin; ava 
mikaffin. 
JWs:.. mikaffinaati In pI -yyal {obsoll undertaker . 
Js:;1 rilkafftn or rikkaffin Ivil passive of kaffin. -iva 
milkaffin . 
1 t.S ...; .!l 
..;s kafa I (i) Ivtll to suffice, be sufficient for. ril-rakl' 
ma-yikfi-naaJ kull-i-na there is not enough food for all 
of us. ma-kafa-kJ illi fufl-u haven't you been through 
enough? ma-dda-niiJ mallumaal kafya he didn't give 
me enough information. 2 to shield from, protect from 
(of God). rabb-i-na yikfii-na farr i1-balaawi (may the 
Lord protect us from the evil of afflictions) == God help 

us! IIkaf-allaffarr ... God forbid, God protect us! kaafi 
xeer-u farr-u indifferent, neither good nor bad, as in 
waac;if kaafi xeer-u farr-u just standing there minding 
his own business. -vn kifaaya; ava kaafi. 
~l.iS" kifaaya Ilnl sufficiency, a sufficient amount. 
kulli maballi yaaxud kifayt-u min iI-biqaaGa each store 
takes enough of the merchandise to meet its needs. 
I'a;unn ana c;ult i kfaaya I think I've said enough.llxad 
kifayt(-u) to get satisfaction, have one's fill, as in fiaGad 
yirii; iI-l'awlaad lamma xad kifayt-u he teased the chil-
dren to his heart's content. l/interjl enough! kifaaya 
d-dawfa di that's enough of this racket! 3 ladj invarl 
sufficient. ma-gabuuf I'akl i kfaaya they didn't bring 
enough food. 
Js kaffa Z I Ivil to suffice. l'iI-gineeh ma-Gadfi 
bi-ykaffi b-baaga a pound doesn't buy much these days. 
II I'ana mkaffi Gal-witaad bit-tiila I can hardly provide 
for my children. 1 Ivtl to be sufficient for, satisfy. 
l'iI-kimmiyya di ba-Ikaffii-k baCia will this amount be 
enough for you then? rilli fiina mkaffii-na we've got 
quite enough on our minds as it is. - vn lakfiyya; ava 
mikaffi· 
. 
~I riktafa r I Ivil to content oneself, be satisfied. 
I'iktafeet bi-kubbaayitfaay I made do with a glass oftea. 
II l'iI- I'iktifaa I' iz-zaali self-sufficiency. 1 Ivtl to be spared 
(s.th.), be protected against. ru{lub Ii-gaar-ak iI-xeer-
rin ma-nilti minnu liktififarr-u [prov} wish your neigh-
bour well; then if he doesn't help you at least he won't 
harm you. -vn I'iklifa, riktifaar; ava miktifi. 
~I ristakfa Ivil to have one's fill, have enough. 
Giyaal-u mistakfiyyiin min kull-u his children have 
enough of everything. -vn ristikfa; ava mistakfi. 
1~"';.!l 
lAS" kafa 2 (i) Ivtl I to turn upside-down. II I'ikfi 
Gal-xabar maguur (invert a kneading crock over the 
news)' ... keep it under your hat. -makfi Gala gbiin-u 
resting his forehead on his arm. -makfi Gala Geen-u 
stupid, dumb. - rikfi t-c;idra Gala fumm-a-ha tillaG 
iI-binti I-rumm-a-ha [prov} ... like mother,like daugh-
ter.l to make fall, bring down. law ma-skittifb-akfii-k 
Gala buuz-ak if you don't shut up I'll send you sprawling 
on your ugly mug! -vn kafy, kafya, kafayaan; ava kaafi; 
pva makfi. 
~\5" kafya Inl disaster, catastrophe. I'iffurb i gab-Iu 
k-kafya drinking brought him to ruin. 
~I ritkafa or rikkafa Ivil I to be turned upside-
down. 1 to fall down. I'ikkafeet Gala wiff-i I fell flat on 
my face. -ava/iva mitkifi. 
~I I'inkafa = ritkafa. -ava/iva minkifi. 
757 
J ~ "';.!l see "';.J.!l: kUfiyya 
.J ~"';.!l 
.r-i'; kufeer <Fr couvert> Inl I place setting. 
1 service charge. 
.J I .!l .!l 
JISS kakal1w <Fr cacao> Inl cocoa. 'lIzibdit kakaaw 
lip-salve. 
J~.:J.!l.!l 
~.; kuktiil, kukteel <Engl> In pI -aatl cocktail. 
1 .!l .!l.!l see l.!l 1 .!l : kakkaa 
.!l.J.!l.!l.!l 
.; .; .;.; kukukuuku linterjl cock-a-doodle-doo! 
- .J .!l .!l.!l see 1 J.J .!l .!l : kukakuula 
(J.J.!l.!l) 
"'';\5" kakuula I In pI -aal, kawakiililong straight over-
coat with buttons down the front and half-collar 
(usually worn by members of the Muslim religiou~ pro-
fessions, see PI.F, LS), 
"i';\5" kakoola, kakuula 2 (also kukakuula) <trade n> 
Inl Coca Cola, 
~.!l.!l 
\5"\5" kaaka, kaaka 2 (i) Ivil to cackle, cluck (of chick-
ens). IIb-aqrab-u lamma raxallii yikaaki I'll beat him 
until I make him gibber. -vn mikakiyya; ava mikaaki, 
mikaaki. 
\5"\5" kaaka 3 Inl[children} chicken. 
~ ~ ~ .!l.!l see I ~ ~ .!l : kukayiin 
.J1 J.!l see .J1.J.!l:kalaar 
~I J.!l 
~~ kulaala, kalaa{a <It culatta> Inl[butcher} rump. 
J I J.!l 
..,~ kilaala <prob Copt> In pI -aatl wooden strut to 
which a pot on a water-wheel is attached (see PI.E, 13). 
",:"J.!l 
~ 
kalab I (i) Ivtl to infect with rabies. Gaqq-u kalb j 
~OGraan kalab-u a rabid dog bit him and gave him 

rabies.llka/b' yiklib-u to hell with him! -vn kalabaan; 
ava kaalib; pva makluub. 
-.JS' kalib. kalab 2 (also daaY iI-kalib) loJ rabies. 
-.JS' kalb In pi kilaabll dog. II kalb iI-baJ;r seal. - Yibn' 
kalb (1) {abus} bastard, son of a bitch. (2) lappositive 
with masc n referent, bint' kalb with fern n referent/ ... 
terrific, as in xatabt' J;ittit xutba bint' kalb I gave a 
terrific speech. -ya gins' kalb you dog! -kalb a J;ayy' 
wala sabl' mayyit {prov} (a live dog rather than a dead 
lion) ... a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush. - Yin 
kan-Iak land iI-kalb· J;aaga c;ul-Iu ya siid-i {prov} ... 
endure any humiliation to get what you want. -lumr' 
aeel iI-kalb' ma-yinlidil {prov} ... a leopard doesn't 
change his spots. - Yik-kalb' ma-Ylucf.cf.'f fi-widn' 
Yaxuu {prov} ... crows will not pick out crows' eyes. 
2 jaw (ofa clamp or the like). 3 piece, man (in the game 
of siiga}. 
4,.lS" kalba In pi -aatll female dog, bitch. II baalil kalba 
always yapping. 2 link (of a chain). 3 jig fixture. 
.:,\¥ kalbaan ladjl rabid, mad (of a dog). 
<oJ '% kilaabi lad jl canine. 
~~ kullaaba In pi -aatl1 pair of pliers. 2 pair of ex-
traction forceps. 
~I Yitkalab or Yikkalab Ivil to be infected with 
rabies. - iva mitkilib. 
...,.ts;.; I Yinkalab = Yitkalab. - iva minkilib. 
yyJ.!.l 
";:'}S kulubb <Engl globe> In pi -aatl mantle-lamp. 
J~}S kulubbaati In pi -yyal {obsol} one who sells, 
mends or tends mantle-iamps. 
I.I"yJ.!.l 
..r¥ kilibs <Engl clip> In pi -aatl fastening device 
which clips or grasps. kilibs' liffalr hairpin. kilibs' 
warac; paper clip. J;alac; kilibs clip-on earrings. 
-I.I"yJ.!.l 
~.fi kulbasti <T kiilbasll> Inl a dish consisting of 
poultry, game, or meat either grilled or fried gently in 
very little fat. Yaraanib kulbasti rabbit saute. 
.J.yJ.!.l 
..;.¥ kalabf <T kelepr;e> In pl-aatl handcuff. J;attuu 
fik-kalabf(or fik-kalabfaat) they put him in handcuffs, 
they took him off to jail. 
..;.¥ kalbif Ivtl 1 to grip and hold immovable. 
rir-rumatizm' kalbif rukab-i rheumatism made my 
knees too stiff to move. - Ivil 2 to grab, hold, fasten 
758 
on. riI-muxtaaf lamma yitrimi ykalbif fil- rarcf. when the 
anchor is tossed it catches on the bottom. 3 to knot up, 
cramp. lamma raakul simiin batn-i tkalbif when I eat 
greasy food my stomach gets cramp. -vn kalbafa; ava 
mikalbif· 
~I Yitkalbif or Yikkalbif Ivil to be or become clen-
ched or clamped together. gism-u yxaffib wi-c{abbit-u 
titkalbif his body becomes rigid and his jaw clenches. 
-ava mitkalbif. 
Ji,yJ.!.l 
~ 
kalba; Ivil to become plump. -vn kalba;a; ava 
mikalba;. 
Jo.,¥ kalbuu; ladj pi kalabii;1 plump, chubby. ya 
kalbuu; ya mkalba; hey, fatso! 
~I Yitkalba; 
or 
Yikkalba; 
= 
kalba;. 
-ava 
mitkalba;. 
.J..JyJ.!.l 
...,;..,¥ kalaboof <perh Sp calabozo jail> Inl {joe} 
handcuff. 
( ..:.0..:.0 J.!.l ) 
~}S kulutt <Fr culottt!> In pi -aatl men's or women's 
or children's underpants. kulutt' naylun plastic pants . 
~)lS' kalutta <It calotta> In pI -aatl skullcap. 
.J. ..:.0 J.!.l 
..r"'% kalatj <Engl> In pi -aatl {autol clutch. 
Ic:.J.!.l 
dS kiliJ; I (a) Ivil to fade (of colour). II YiklaJ; baCia you 
ought to be ashamed of yourself! - wif/' kaaliJ; (1) a 
scowling face. (2) one who brings misfortune. -vn kallJ. 
kalaJ;aan; ava kalJ;aan, kaaliJ;. 
dS kalaJ; (a) Ivtl to cause to fade. IIkalaJ;naa min 
landina we got rid of him. -vn kalJ;, kalalJaan; ava 
kaalilJ; pva makluuJ;. 
dS. kiliJ; 2 ladj *1 insensitive, thick-skinned, cheeky. 
dSl YaklaJ; lell morelmost insensitive etc. 
~I YitkalaJ; or YikkalalJ Ivil 1 to fade away, vanish, 
disappear. 2 to be made to fade. -avaliva mitkililJ . 
~ 
I YinkalaJ; = ritkalaJ;. - avaliva minkiliJ; . 
~I YistaklaJ; Ivil to display cheekiness. -ava 
mistaklaJ; . 
2c:. J .!.l 
c.)lS' kaluuJ; In pi kawaaliJ;1 corn cob. -also c;aluulJ· 

iJ1.PJ.!l 
,j!.~,}S kuludiin <Fr claudine>: kool kuludiin see 
kool. 
I .) J.!l see I.) ~ J .!l : kulira 
-iJ.)J.!l 
~)"jS kalarneet, kilarinett <Engl> Inl clarinet. 
1~.)J.!l 
~),}S kulurya Inl a small hard cake. 
~~.)J.!l 
J..,,),}S kuluriid <Fr> Inl chloride .. 
-u..,.J.!l 
... ~ 
kilistooma J Inl [obsol} ankylostomiasis clinic. 
-.!l..,.J.!l 
jS:..-)$ kilusikl <Fr> Inl kilocycle. 
~L)$ kilusaykil <Engl> Inl kilocycle. 
iJ~..,.J.!l 
.;,,,...lS' kalsoon, kalsuun <Fr ealefon> In pi -aat, 
kalasiinl men's long or short underpants. 
.)~..,.J.!l 
r--"jS kilaseer <Fr classeur> In pi -aat/loose-Ieaf file, 
ring-book. 
.!l~..,.J.!l 
~"jS kilasiiki <Fr classique> ladjl classical. 
musiiqa klasikiyya classical music. 
-~..,.J.!l 
r."....1S' kalsiyum <Fr> Inl calcium. 
- iJ ..; J.!l see 3 J J .!l : kulliJinkaan 
• ~";J.!l 
~ 
kilifeeh <Fr cliche> In pi -aatl I cliche, hack-
neyed phrase. 2 [print} cliche. -also raklafeeh. 
IJ'" J.!l see IJ'" I J J .!l : kulla~ 
r~J.!l 
~ 
kalc[am Ivil I to become sulky, pout. 2 to be-
come chubby or heavy-jowled. -vn kalc[ama; ava 
mikalc[am. 
~\ ritkalc[am or rikkalc[am Ivil (impersonal) pas-
759 
sive of kalc[am. ritkalc[am laha she was given the cold 
shoulder. -iva mitkalc[am. 
j, J.!l see j, I J .!l : kulaa(a, kalaa(a 
I"';J.!l 
:wS' kulfa Inll expenditure. 2 trouble, fuss (put on for 
guests). - Ipl kulaf! 3 trimming, garniture (of a dress, 
sh!rt etc.). 
J"jS kallaaf In ·1 [rur} stable-man (responsible for 
feeding livestock) . 
...is' kalliF Ivtll to go to the expense of. kallif laleeha 
xamsa gneeh he forked out five pounds for it. 2a to put 
to expense. bi-ykallifuu-ni ktiir they put me to a lot of 
expense. l:Ja-ykallif-ak lalaata gneeh it will cost you 
three pounds. qadd; rna (or zayy; rna) ykallifwhatever 
it costs, whatever the cost. 2b to put to great trouble 
(particularly in hospitality). min reer takliifthere is no 
need to stand on ceremony. ril:Jna mif C[uyuuf ma-fii-f 
luzuum tikallif nafs-ak kida we're (friends) not guests, 
you don't have to go to so much trouble. kallifit xa(ir-ha 
w-gabit-Ii t-tazkara she went to the trouble of getting me 
the ticket. 3 to charge, entrust. kallif-ni bil-mal:Jall he 
put me in charge of the shop. II ramr; takliif [aead} 
obligation of graduates in certain subjects to work for a 
period in public service. 4 to trim (a garment). kallifit 
ig-gallabiyya b-qi(aan l:Jariir she trimmed the galabiya 
with silk piping. - vn takliif; ava mikallif; pva 
mukallafT. 
~ 
takliif In pi takaliif! la expenditure, outlay . 
Ib expense, cost. 2 [leg} 2a responsibility for paying 
taxes on land. 2b terrier, land register. 
~ 
taklifa Inl If expense. 2 basic cost. bi-silr it-
taklifa at cost price . 
...k.. mukallafa In pi -aatl terrier, land register. 
...Ak;\ ritkallif or rikkallif Ivil I passive of kallif. 2 to 
cost. dirast-ak itkallifit ralt gneeh your studies cost a 
thousand pounds. -avaliva mitkallif . 
...Ak; takallufT Inl pretentiousness, affectedness . 
~ 
mitkallif ladjl fancy, elaborate. 
~ 
mutakallifT ladj ·1 pretentious, affected. 
~\ ristaklif Ivtl to consider too troublesome. 
ristaklifit titawlit nafs-a-ha she thought it was too much 
trouble to put on make-up. -ava/pva mistaklif. 
Z"'; J.!l 
...A.IS' kalafT Icoll nl freckle( s). 
...is' kalliF Ivil to break out in freckles. -ava mikallif· 

..:;.."; J ~ 
~ 
kilifti <Engl clifty. cf also Gr klephtes> ladj 
invarl [joe] crooked. dishonest . 
.;:...i.IS kalfit Ivt/l to deal with (s.o. or s. th.) hastily and 
in slapdash fashion. lI'aawi ykalfit jUll'/-u he's given to 
hasty slapdash working. kalfitt iI-mudiir wi-ma4,4,eet-u 
lala ragazt-i I bustled the director into signing (approv-
al) for my holiday. 2 to bundle up. wrap up. kalfit 
iI-huduum wi-hat-haa-li bundle up the clothes and bring 
them to me! kalfit nafs-ak mil-bard wrap yourself up 
against the cold. -vn kalfata; ava/pva mikalfit. 
J~ 
mikalfitaati In pi -yyal slapdash worker. 
..::..AlS:;1 ritkalfit or rikkalfit Ivil passive of kalfit. - vn 
tikalfiit; ava mitkalfit. 
~J~ 
.illS' kalk <Fr calque>: waralf kalk tracing paper. 
,,?..:;..~J~ 
.::..$'% kilakitt, kalakitt <Fr c1aquette> Inl {ein] clap-
per board. clap-stick. 
IJ"~J~ 
.rSJS kalaks, kilaks <Fr klaxon> In pi -aatl {auto] 
horn. riddii-Iu klaks give him a toot on the horn. 
t~J~ 
tfJS kalkal Ivil to become lumpy. form a lump. 
rid-damm' kalkal the blood clotted. -vn kalkala; ava 
mikalkal· 
fJ5... mikalkalladj ·!lumpy·lJaaga mkalkalafil-bizz 
if-fimaal something lumpy in the left breast. 
~ ~ 
kalkuula In pi kalakiill lump. clot. 
~ 
kulkeela In pi kalak/ill lump. clot. 
~I ritkalkal or rikkalkal = kalkal. -ava 
mitkslkal· 
J~J~ 
~ 
kalkillvil to become lumpy. -vn kalkala; ava 
mikalkil. 
~I ritkalkil or rikkalkil = kalkil. -vn tikalkiil; ava 
mitkslkil. 
-J~J~ 
.)S)S kulukluuh <Fr c1ou-c1ou> Inl ice-cream cone 
sealed with a hard chocolate topping. 
j.J~J~ 
j.fi)S kulukooz, kuluukooz <Fr> Inl glucose. 
760 
I J J~ 
~! rikliilln pi rakaliill I wreath or crown. particu-
larly as worn by the bride and groom during an Ortho-
dox wedding ceremony. 2 Orthodox wedding cere-
mony .lIlalfd' rikliil marriage certificate. marriage con-
tract. - n~~' rikliil formal engagement service con-
d~cted by a priest. 
J1S' kallillvt/l to crown. 2 {Chr] to perform the mar-
riage ceremony for. marry (of a priest). -vn lakliil; ava 
mikallil. 
jk.1 ritkallil or rikkallil Ivil I to be crowned. 
mulJawlaat-u tkallilit bin-nagaalJ his efforts were 
crowned with success. 2 (Chr] to get married. -avaliva 
mitksllil. 
2.J J ~ 
JS' kall (i) Ivil I to become blunt. 2 to become jaded . 
kalleet min kutr if-full'l I became jaded with overwork. 
-vn kalal, kalalaan; ava kaalil. 
~ 
kaliil ladj ·1 weak. feeble. kaliil 
i1-b~ar 
weak-sighted. 
l.J J ~ 
JS' kulllnli whole. totality. entirety. da I-beet kull-u 
that's the whole of the house. rid-dawja di kull-a-ha all 
this noise. ril-kull' b-yislalidd' liI-yoom da everyone's 
getting ready for that day. kull if-julfalf mafruuja all the 
flats are furnished. dulaab kibiir kull-u sakakiin a big 
cupboard full of knives. kull-ak xeer you are all kind-
ness. kull-ak na;ar ... I leave it to your discretion. kull' 
mafil-ramrinn all it amounts to is that .... as in kull' ma 
fil-ramr innu ~alJb-u fa-ralflfaa he's his friend. so he 
promoted him - that's all there is to it. II rumm U 
kalsuum kull-a-ha raalJit Umm Kalthum herself went. 
- bitaal kull-u (I) jack of all trades. (2) know-all. 
-kull-a-hafarkit kalb it's no more than a stone's throw. 
-kull-a-hajahr' jahreen it's just a matter of a month or 
two. - kull-i-na laha death comes to us all. -sitt iI-kull a 
jewel among women. -da-nta I-kull' fil-kull ... every-
thing depends on you. - wi-kull-u and all that. and what 
not, as in bald' ma kalna w-kull-u rulJna s-sinima after 
we'd eaten and everything. we went to the cinema. 
-kull-u rilla anything but. as in kull-u rilla kida every-
thing but that. -lala kullin or mala kullin or maca kull' 
zaalik ~nyhow. as in lala kullin rana mif Ifa/lfaan any-
way. I'm not worried. 2 Iw foil indef nounl every, each. 
kull' yoom every day. kull' jwayya every so often. kull' 
waalJid fiikum each one of you. lala kull 8 IJaai in any 
case. 
IIbi-kull' 
dilflfa 
very 
precisely. 
-bi-kull' 
mamnuniyya with the greatest of pleasure. 

11 kulli ma Iconjl whenever. kulli ma yiblal fakwa 
fablal farbala whenever he lodges a complaint I lodge 
four. - kuW ma ... (kull i ma) Icorrel conjl the more ... 
(the more). kulli ma kaan il-Iaraddud laali kuUi ma 
kaanil iI-mooga Cj~ayyara the higher the frequency the 
shorter the wave. kull i ma yikbar ii-mas fuliyya l:Ja-lxift 
mi~ lalee as he gets older his responsibility will lessen. 
..:-;s kulleel = kull 1 . 
.:::'% kullaal[non-Cairene] = kulll. 
.¥. kulli ladj/total. bing i kulli general anaesthetic. 
~ kulliyya In pI -aall college, faculty (of a universi-
ty). kulliyyil i{-{ibb the Faculty of Medicine. 
11 kulliyyalan ladvl completely . 
.:,~ kullifinkaan ladvl haphazardly, carelessly. 
ma-fii-jwaCjI-laazim nixall~-ha kullijinkaan there's no 
time, we have to finish it any way we can. 
;a..lS" kaliila: fil-kull i kaliila one and all, every (last) 
one, as in xaduu-hum iI-kull i kaliila they took them one 
and all. yillan fabuu-ku I-kull i kaliila God damn you 
all! 
4JJ.!l 
is' kulla <It colla> Inl paste, glue. malzuuCj bi-kulla 
lala I-xafab stuck onto the wood with glue. 
5 J J.!l see J I J .!l : kalaala 
v"IJJ.!l 
v"'-J.s kulla~ <Copt> Inl a kind of ziir (q.v.). 
-,.J J.!l 
)IS' kallu <It callo> Ipl nl corns (on the foot). 
I r J.!l 
4...lS" kilma In pI -aal, kalimaall I word. kilma kilma 
word for word. riI-kilmileen dool fossaru fiyya those 
few words affected me. bi-lillarraf bil-kilma di it is 
defined by this term. ma-Cjal-ji wala n~~i kilma he 
didn't utter a single word. II fibn i kilma a man easily 
swayed, a gullible person. - fil-kilma laleeha she is 
spoken for (in marriage). -kilmil-u wal:Jda (1) he's a 
man of his word. (2) he sticks to one price (you can't 
bargain with him). -kilma kida walla kida offensive 
talk. - bald i kilma minni w-kilma minhum after a lot of 
debate between us. - (hiyya) kilma w-raddi va{aa-ha 
keep it short! give a brief answer! - raagilluh kilma (1) a 
man of his word. (2) a man of authority. -raagil 
ma-Iuu-j kilma a man whose word cannot be trusted. 
761 
- kilma Igiib-u w-kilma Iwaddii he's easily led. 2 phrase, 
utterance. 
kilma 
mafhuura 
a 
famous 
saying. 
II ma-Ifaaxiz-nii-jfi-di I-kilma forgive me for saying this. 
J address. talk: kilma fiftital:Jiyya opening address. 
r'% kalaam Inl I speech, talk, words. da (or fahu) 
kalaam that's (just) talk! fil-kalaam fil-l:Jubb i mif 
kifaaya talking about love is not enough. riI-kalaam 
sahl innama I-filii ~alb [prov] easier said than done . 
miji la kalaam wala l:Jadiit he left without a word. hiyya 
di layza kalaam does this really need discussion? it goes 
without saying. land i miin ik-kalaam da says who? 
Ilkalaam-ak your bid! (in card games). -raagil Galee 
kalaam a man of dubious reputation. - riI-kalaam 
laleeha she is spoken for. - bi-yi{lal lalee kalaam peo-
ple say things about him. - ma-fii-f kalaam it goes with-
out saying. da kalaam garaayid newspaper talk (i.e. not 
to be believed)! - fana gay-Iakfik-kalaam I'm coming to 
that. -maffa kalaam-u he had his way. -huwwa land i 
kalaam-u he is keeping his word. -simil ik-kalaam to 
do as one is told, as in ma tismal kalaam baaba do as 
daddy says! -yibiil bi-kalaam waal:Jid he sells at fixed 
prices. -kalaam iI-leel madhuun bi-zibda lamma yi{lal 
lalee n-nahaar yisiil:J [prov] (evening words are but-
tered; when the sun rises they melt away) ... evening 
words are not like those of morning. 2 state of affairs, 
condition. fizzayy ik-kalaam da how could that be? min 
fimta k-kalam-da when did that happen? riI-kalaam da 
kaan Z(lmaan all that was a long time ago. da kalaam 
laani that's another matter! that's a horse of a different 
colour! IIda mif kalaam thafs not possible! that's non-
sense! - baCja da kalaam da now, really, does that make 
any sense, can you really accept such a state of affairs? 
fayyi ka/aam (I) nonsense. piffle. as in da kalaam 
fayyi kalaam thafs just a lot of rubbish. (2) any old 
way, sloppily, as in da b-yilbis fayyi kalaam his dress is 
careless and sloppy, fin-naggaar lamal ik-karaasi fayy i 
kalaam the carpenter knocked those chairs together 
any old how. - wi-kalaam min da or wi-kalaam zayy i 
kida and that sort of thing. and so on and so forth, as in 
ma-bi-tralii-j fawlad-ha w-ka/aam zayy i kida she 
doesn't take care of her children and stuff like that. 
J (also lilm ik-kalaam) [lsi] Islamic theology. 
~ 
kalamangi In pI -yyal big talker, chatterbox, 
loudmouth. 
~ 
maklama Inl [deris] any place used for idle chat-
ter. fintu l:Ja-tilmilu I-maktab maklama are you going to 
make the office into a place for idle talk? 
ll~ mukalma In pI -aatl telephone call. 
Jws:.. muklimaani In pI -yyal = ka/amangi. 
~ 
maklamangi In pI -yyal ='kalamangi. 

. 
r1S' kallim Ivtl to speak to, address. ma-tkallim-nii-/ 
bis-siim don't speak to me in riddles. kunt' b-akallim-U" 
fil-fJubb I was speaking to him about love. IIbi-txallii 
yimji ykallim nafs-u she drives him out of his mind. -vn 
takliim; ava mikallim. 
11 kallim Ifem kallimi, pI kallimul you're wanted, some-
one wants (to talk to) you. kallim it-tilifoon you're 
wanted on the phone. kallim barra you're wanted 
outside. 
~I fitkallim or fikkallim 1 IviJ to speak, talk. di 
masaa fil riI-waafJid ma-yitkallim-/' fiiha these are mat-
ters that shouldn't be discussed. bi-titkallimufi- (or lan 
or lala) feeh what are you talking about? finta 
b-titkallim izzaay what the hell are you talking about? 
kunt' b-atkallim fit-tilifoon 1 was talking on the tele-
phone. IIfJadd itkallim has anyone called (on the 
phone)? - fitkallim laleeha he asked for her hand in 
marriage. 2 Ivtl to speak (a language). bi-titkallim kaam 
IU1(a how many languages do you speak? -vn takallum; 
ava mitkallim. 
~ 
mutakallim In ·1 speaker. 
Z r J.:l see r I.S J .:l : kiliim 
.) ..:;.. r J.:l 
;"').$ kilumitr <Fr kilometre> In pI -aatl kilometre. 
1oS.r-).$ kilumilri ladjl kilometric. fiftiraak kilumitri 
train ticket calculated on a basis of distance. 
-..:;.. r J.:l 
[.I.r-).$ kilumitraaj <Fr> Inl mileage. 
~ J.:l see ~ I.S J .:l : kuliin 
I.S [~ J.:l see I ~.J J .:l : kalungi, kalungiyya 
II.S~J.:l 
leJS". kulunya <It colonia> In pI -aatl cologne. 
'I.S~J.:l 
":!-i)5 kaloneeh <perh Fr galonne> In pI -aatl {need-
lew} tuck. 
.JJ.:l 
.)5 kilwa In pI -aal, kalaawi/l kidney (as food). beet 
iI-kalaawi (meat from) the area round the kidneys. 
2~ Ipl -aat only! kidney (as an organ of the body). 
II kilwil iI- fiid ball of the thumb. 
~ kilya Ipl -aat, kilal {anat} kidney. 
1oS)5 kala wi ladjl 1 pertaining to the kidneys, renal. 
762 
ma1(~ kalawi renal colic. 2 kidney-shaped. 
":;".J J.:l 
.::..)5 kuluut: kuluut beeh Clot Bey Street in Cairo, 
once famous for its red-light district. 
.).JJ.:l 
;)5 kuloor ~Fr chlore> Inl chlorine. 
~.J J.:l 
..;.)5 kulooj <Fr cloche> ladj invarl wide, full (of a 
garment or its part). fustaan kulooj a full-skirted dress. 
I~.J J.:l 
.:,)lS" kaluun, kaloon In pI kawaliin, kalunaall door 
lock. mafatiifJ liI-kawaliin keys for the locks. 
~)lS" kalungi In pI -yya/locksmith. 
~I}" kawalingi In pI -yya/locksmith. 
Z(~.JJ.:l) 
.:,)5 kuloofl <Fr collant> In pI -aatl tights. 
~)5 kuloona <It colonna> In! acrobatic feat in which 
three men balancing on each other'S shoulders support 
a fourth who performs tricks . 
I.S J.:l see .J J .:l : kilya 
1.)I.SJ.:l 
I-r-I}" koleera (also kulira) <It>'/nl cholera. -also 
koreera. 
rl.SJ.:l 
~ 
kiliim <T kilim> In pI -aat, kilimal woven rug. 
kiliim mixalta{ lal-mabrad a diagonally-striped rug. 
~I.SJ.:l . 
..,,;}" kuliin <Fr> Inl kaolin. 
r.:l 
rlS" kaam, kam 1 !interrog quantifier! how many? how 
much? fistannee~ kaam saaca how many hours did you 
wait? kaam silt' kida zayy-ik how many women are like 
you? fJisab-hum kaam how much is their bill? dafalt' 
kaam how much did you pay? riI-fjuU{a b-kaam in-
nahar-da how much are tomatoes today? fiftareet-u 
b-kaam for how much did you buy it? 2 !interrog 
numerary specifierl what (number)? fis-saaca kaam 
what time is it? nimril it-tilifoon kaam what's the tele-
phone number? fi-sanat kaam in what year? lala bued' 
kaam at what distance? tiigi lala kaam what time are 
you coming? 3 lunspecific quantifierl some, a few. faat 

763 
')r.!J 
kaam yoom a few days went by. fiddii-ni kaam Ijittit 
to capacity (of a cinema etc.). 2 complete (of a res-
§abuun give me a few bars of soap. nisyit il-kaam kilma 
taurant meal). 3 sold out (of tickets, and the like). 
iii quit i -ha-Iha she forgot the few words I told her. been 
kUlli.kaam caskari ;aabi{ between every few soldiers 
- ,:, ":' r .!l 
there is an officer. 
"'J~.J kumbinezoon <Fr combinaison> In pi -aatl 
~ 
kimmiyya, kammiyya In pi -aatl amount, quanti-
(women's) slip, petticoat. 
ty. yizawwid kimmiyyit il-banziin in-nazla fil-mut.oor it 
increases the amount of petrol going into the engine. 
Ij-agib-/ak kimmiyyaat tanya min il-cizba I'll bring 
further quantities from the estate. 
[I r.!l 
CI..S kimaag <P kumaj> Icoll nl type of wheat bread. 
~I..S kimaaga lunit n, pi -aatl a loaf of kimaag. 
I,:, 1 r .!l 
..,I..S kamaan J ladvl 1 also, too, as well. finta kamaan 
lak sul{aat you too have powers? saakin fi-Jaqqa gdiida 
w-gamiila kamaan he lives in an apartment which is new 
and pretty as well. mif Ij-alj{walla marljala talta wa/a 
rabca kama an I won't reach either the third or the 
fourth stage. 2 in addition, more. haat qahwa kamaan 
bring another coffee. kamaan nooba one more time. 
fistanna kamaan Jiwayya wait a little more! 
2,:, 1 r .!l 
..,I..S kamaan 2 <T keman from P> 1 Icoll nl violin(s). 
2 = kamanga. see further under [,:, r .!l 
J 1 r.!l see ..s r .!l : kamaawi, kamawiyyaat 
":' r .!l 
...,...lS' kamb <Engl> In pi -aatl camp. 
..rJ ":' r.!l 
..r)~ kumbars <Fr comparse> linvar nl {ein] extra. 
- J ":' r.!l 
JJ-~ kumburisuul <Fr compresseur> In! air 
compressor. 
.;. ":' r .!l 
..;.r.-S kambooJ Inl untidy head of hair. 
..;:....s kambif 1 Ivtl to dishevel (hair). 2 Ivil to be dis.-
hevelled (of hair). -vn kambaJa; ava/pva mikambif. 
~I fitkambif or fikkambif Ivil to be or become 
dishevelled (of hair). -avaliva mitkambif. 
- J ":' r.!l 
.y.,.s kumbileeh <Fr complet> ladj invarl 1 full, filled 
.:;., .J ":' r .!l 
.::..r.-S komboot <Fr> In pi -aatl compote. 
..s ":' r .!l 
~ 
kambyu <It cambio> Inl currency exchange. 
sicr ik-kambyu rate of exchange. 
-..s ":' r.!l 
~l",.S kimbiyaala, kumbiyaala <It cambiale> In pi -
aatl promissory note. 
J':;" r.!l 
..s~ kummitra Icoll nl pear(s). ril-gawaafa I-baladi 
(Ii zayy il-kummitra {vendor's cry] guavas as fine as 
pears! kummitra xaJJaabi variety of hard pear. 
~ I ~ 
kummitraaya In pi -aat, kummitraatl 1 lunit nl a 
pear. 2 free-hanging electric light-switch. 
[. r.!l see [. 1 r .!l : kimaag, kimaaga 
tr.!l 
e:s kammax Ivil to become musty. law sibna l-lfasiil 
min lfeer naJiir yikammax if we don't hang out the 
washing it gets musty. -vn takmiix; ava mikammax . 
I J r .!l 
.>...5 kamad (i) Ivtl to sadden, grieve. ril-xabar kamad-
na the news filled us with sadness. -vn kamadaan; ava 
kaamid; pva makmuud. 
;.>...5 kamda Inl grief, sorrow. 
;~W- kammaada In pi -aatl compress. kammaada 
suxna a hot compress . 
;~ mikammada In pi -aatl compress . 
~I finkamad Ivil to be saddened, be grieved. -iva 
minkimid. 
~I fitkamad or fikkamad 
= 
finkamad. -iva 
mitkimid. 
1 J r.!l see ..s J r .!l : kumiidi 

lS~rJJ 
~..I".o'; kumidya <It comedia> Inl comedy. 
1S..I".o'; kumiidi ladjl comic. film' kumiidi a comic film. 
(-IS~rJJ) 
':'~..I".o'; kumidyaan In invarl comedian. 
.f-...J.S kumudiinu <It comodino> In pi kumudinaa~1 
bed:side table. 
l.JrJJ 
.;oS kamarl (u) Ivtl I to clamp (wood) for charcoal 
making. 2 to (partially) bury or clamp (grains,fuul, and 
the like) so as to process them by slow generation of 
heat. -vn kamaraan, kamr; ava kaamir; pva makmuur. 
.)YS... makmuur Inl a kind of stew prepared in an 
earthen~are pot buried in hot ashes. 
i.)yS... makmuura In pi makamiirl covered excavation 
in which beans etc. are slow-cooked. 
i).S kammaara In pi -aat/l = makmuura. 2 charcoal 
kiln. 
i ~ 
makmara Inl compost pile. bi-nilmil min it-tibn' 
btaal iI-Iuul makmarit sibaax ba/adi we use the bean 
stalks to make a compost pile for fertilizer. 
~I fitkamar or fikkamar Ivil passive of kamarl. 
-iva mitkimir. 
~I finkamar = fitkamar. -iva minkimir. 
lJrJJ 
.;oS kamarz <T kemer cf Gr kamara> Inll Icolll steel 
beam(s), girder(s). 2/pl also kamarl broad belt of 
leather with pockets for keeping of valuables, money 
belt. 
i.;oS kamara l lunit n, pi -aatl a steel beam, a girder. 
3(.Jr JJ ) 
i.;oS kamira, kamara <Engl> In pi -aatl camera. 
i.;oS kamara z In pi -aatl {anat] glans penis. 
..;. .J .J r .!l 
, .. h.;oS kamaroof Inl 
blow-job (in 
homosexual 
jargon). 
.J1S.JrJJ 
iJ'-.;oS kamareera <It cameriera> In pi -aatl nanny, 
children's nurse. 
~1S.Jr.!l 
,jI.)"'; kumariin Inl artificial lavender oil. 
764 
lS.JoJ"r JJ 
1S.r-S kumsari <It commissario> In pi kumsariyyal 
conductor (of a bus, train or tram). 
- IS oJ" r.!l 
.:,,,,,...,.s kumisyoon <Fr> In pi -aatl I [admin] com-
mission. IIkumisyoon (ibbi central clinic for medical 
examination of government personnel, medical board. 
2 [comm] commission. 
~""...,.s kumisyungi In pi -yyal salesman working on 
a commission basis . 
..;. r .!l 
..,..,.s kamaf (i, u) Ivt/lto grab, take hold of. kamaf-u 
min raliabt-u he grabbed him by the throat. 2 to cause 
to cower, make shrink. zalali fii kamaj-u by yelling at 
him he made him cower. - Ivi/3 to shrink, cower. -vn 
kamafaan; ava kaamif; pva makmuuf. 
4.:.t.:s' kammaafa In pi -aatl pair of tongs, pincers. 
~I fitkamafor fikkamaflvi/l to be grabbed. 2 to 
be made to cower. 310 cower, shrink, contract. 
fitkamaf li-rukn-u w-naam he withdrew into his corner 
and slept. -avaliva mitkimif. 
~I finkamaJf = fitkamaf. -vn finkimaaf; avaliva 
minkimif· 
Jr.!l 
jS kimil (a) Ivil to become complete, become per-
fect. kimlit larfJit iI-laruusa the happiness of the bride 
became complete. fahu I-liami~ wiz-zaraayir kamla 
here's the shirt with all its buttons. fil-fJilw'ma-yikmal-
f {prov/ nothing can be perfect. -vn kamaal; ava 
kaamil. 
JI..S' kamaallnl perfection. fik-kamaalli-lIaah perfec-
tion belongs to God (alone). IIsitt' ~afJbit fadab wi-
kamaal a real lady. 
JI..S' kamaali ladjlluxury, non-essential. 
..::..QI..S' kamaliyyaat In pI! non-essentials, luxuries. 
Ilfalilia bil-kamaliyyaat a well-appointed flat. 
J..lS' kaamilladjl complete, perfect. dayra kamla com-
plete circle. muslim kaamil a perfect Muslim. IIkaamii 
in-nuur epithet of the Prophet Muhammad. -bi-kaamil 
iI-liudra at full capacity. - bil-kaamil in toto. 
~I..S' kimaala In pi -aatl balance, complement, supple-
ment. kimaalll i1-kimmiyya the make-weight.llkimaalit 
ladad useless or inconsequential person or persons. 
J.S kummal ladj invarl well-bred, genteel. sitt' 
kummal a real lady. 
jSi fakmal l leI! morelmost complete or perfect. lala 
fakmal wagh in the best possible way. 

J.S kammil Ivtl 1 to complete, finish. 
laazim 
nikammil il-majawiir we must finish (our) errands. 
kammil fakl-ak bar;deen finish your food later on. 
r;aayiz fakammil kalaam-i I want to finish what I'm 
saying. II kammil gimiil-ak (if you do someone a favour) 
do it all the way. -I:J-akammilr;ajaa-ya noom I'll go 
without supper. -kammil n~~ i diin( -u) to get married 
(of a man). 2 to make up, add up to, make complete. 
fil-fakka /Ii mr;aaya ma-tkammil-/ gneeh I don't have a 
pound's worth of change on me. - Ivil 3 to keep on 
(toward a conclusion). nikammil bi-nafs i{-{ariilja /Ii 
faatit we carryon as before. yikammil gary he continues 
running. ma-tkammil-j - fana r;arfa 1-l:Jikaaya kull-a-ha 
don't go on, I know the whole story. - vn takmiil; aval 
pva mikammil, mukammil. 
~ 
takmiilif ladil complementary, supplementary. 
r;aawiz sana teen diraasa takmiliyya I need two years of 
supplementary study. 
ll..5:; takmila In pI -aatl supplement. 
~I fitkammil or fikkammil Ivil 1 to be completed, 
be finished. 2 to be made up, be made complete. - iva 
mitkammil. 
J..S"i fakmal 2 r = kammil. -vn fikmaal. 
J.:SI fiktamaiT 
Ivil to become complete. -vn 
fiktimaal; ava miktimil, muktamil. 
~ 
1 fistakmil Ivtl 1 to make up for a lack of. fii 
l:Jagaat nalj~a mafnlftt/. nistakmil-ha there are things 
missing which we should replace. 2 to complete, fulfil. 
wizaarit i~-~il:Jl:Ja b-tiddii-k fur~a l-istikmaal iJiuruu{ the 
Ministry of Health gives you an opportunity to fulfil the 
conditions. -vn fistikmaal; ava mistakmil. 
IS J r.!l 
~ 
kamilya Inl camellia. 
IU.!l 
~ kumm In pI fakmaam, kimaaml sleeve. ljamii~ 
bi-n~~ i kumm a short-sleeved shirt.lIl:Jarakaat in-n~~ i 
kumm a con game. 
~W" kimaama In pI -aat, kamaayiml 1 (face) mask. 
2 gag. 3 muzzle. 
r.-S kammim Ivtl 1 to gag. 2 to muzzle. - vn takmiim; 
avalpva mikammim. 
~I fitkammim or fikkammim Ivil 1 to be gagged. 
2 to be muzzled. -iva mitkammim. 
2 r r.!l see r.!l: kimmiyya, kammiyya 
765 
I';'r.!l 
.:rS kaman (i) Ivil to set an ambush, lie in wait. 
faggar-lu uaaba kamanit-/i fil-l:Jaara he hired a gang to 
lie in wait for me in the alley. - vn kumuun; ava kaamin. 
.;,olS" kaamin ladil latent, inherent. 
~ 
kamiin In pI kamaayi1l1 ambush. 
.;,oS... makman In pI makaaminl lair.llmakman iJiarr 
source of evil. 
l';'r.!l 
...,;.s kammuun Inl cumin. 
~;.s kammuniyya Inl a dish of meat prepared with 
cumin. 
[.;,r.!l see also l.;,lr.!l 
~W" kamanga <P kamdncha> In pI -aatl violin. 
J4YW" kamangaati In pI -yyal [deris] violinist. 
~';'r.!l 
-..J:.o.,) kumanda <perh It comando> Imasc n pI -aatl 
1 (ship's) captain. 2 boss. 
-~';'r.!l 
...,1..1.:..05 kumandaan, 
commandant> 
In 
kumundaan, kumindaan <Fr 
pI -aatl 
1 ship's 
captain. 
2 commanding officer. 
J r.!l see IS r .!I : kimaawi, kimawiyyaat 
ISr.!l 
.w kimya Inl chemistry. 
ISJW" kimaawi 1 ladil chemical. bi-ynat/.t/.afu I-fat/.t/.a 
l-mifaksida b-mawadd i kimawiyya they clean tar-
nished silver with chemical preparations. 2 In *1 chem-
ist. 3 In, no pll chemical fertilizer. m~nar; kimaawi 
chemical fertilizer factory. 
04JL..5" kimawiyyaat Ipl nl chemicals. 
';'J IS r.!l 
...,.,..5 kamyoon <Fr camion> In pI -aatl lorry, truck. 
J I.;,.!I 
.)l.;S" kinaar <P kindr> In pI -aaJI trimming (on the 
edge of a garment). 
.J I.;,.!I 
~ l.;S" kunaafa In pI -aatl fresh fine noodles used as the 
basis for a pastry of the same name, often stuffed with 

nuts, baked with butter and soaked in syrup or honey. 
~li\':s" kunafaaya lunit n, pI -aatl piece of kunaafa. 
Jli\':s" kanafaani, kunafaanilnpl-yya/onewhomakes 
and sells kunaafa. 
JI.i.:5" kunafaati In pI -yyal = kanafaani. 
J I ,j.!/ 
J\.:S" kanaal <Fr>: kanaal is-siwees or riI-kanaal the 
Suez Canal. - also qanaal. 
'":-' ,j .!/ 
~ kanaba <Fr canape> In pI -aatl sofa. kanaba 
baladi ottoman. kanaba studyu (or fafrangi) studio 
couch . 
...,.:S kanab Icoll nl sofa(s). 
.:J ,j .!/ 
.;..;S kint In pI -aatl run, straight (in cards). kint' ryaal 
royal flush. 
.!/1.:J,j.!/ 
.!I\:;,:S" kuntaak <Fr contact> Inl fmech] ignition. - also 
kuntakt. 
1,;.:J,j.!/ 
j.;S kantar Ivtl 1 to stand (s.o.) up. baed' kull 
ik-kalam-da kantar-ni after all that talk he stood me up! 
2 to do or perform in a slipshod manner. riI-mikaniiki 
bn ik-kalb' karitar eamaliyyit ;ab{ i/- fazbarateer xaa/~ 
the s.o.b. of a mechanic did a lousy job when he set the 
distributor. -vn kantara; ava/pva mikantar. 
;.:s:.;1 fitkantar or fikkantar Ivil passive of kantar. - iva 
mitkantar. 
2,;.:J,j.!/ 
~;::5 kuntargi <T kunduracl> In pI -yyal fobsol] 
shoemaker, cobbler. - also kundargi. 
(-,;.:J,j.!/) 
..,;1;::5 kuntaraatu, kunturaatu <It contratto> In 
pI kuntarataat, 
kuntaratuhaat, 
kunturataat, 
kunturatuhaatl contract. mac{c{uu-ni eal-kuntaraatu 
btaae i/-Jafifia they made me sign the lease for the 
apartment . 
...,..~;::5 kuntirbaas <Fr contrebasse> In pI -aatl fmus] 
contrabass. 
~.Jl;::5 kuntrubulti <It contrappunto> In! fmus] 
counterpoint. 
J.,;::5 kunturool <Fr contrOle> In! 1 office within a 
university for administering and registering examina-
766 
tions. 28 point at which tickets are collected and check-
ed at an entrance door. 2b an official of a private club 
who checks membership cards and issues tickets to 
visitors. 3 point at a shop exit at which goods are hand-
ed over to the customer against receipts for money 
paid. 4 any kind of check-point. 
.:J .!/ .:J ,j .!l 
..::.S.:zS kuntakt <Fr contact> In! fmech] ignition. -also 
kuntaak. 
.-'.:J,j.!/ 
jNS kantu <It canto corner> Inl junk. sUUfi i/-kantu 
flea market. 
,; ..s .:J ,j .!/ 
~ 
kantiir In pI -aatl 1 kind of high-pitched drum . 
2 silk or metal-spun euud string(s). kantiir buseeni (pair 
of) A strings. 
U'" ..s .:J ,j .!/ 
~.; kunteesa <It contessa> In pI -aatl countess . 
,j ..s .:J ,j .!/ 
.r.:S kantiin <Engl> In pI -aatl 1 canteen, refresh-
ment coqnter. 2 (water) canteen. 
([,,j.!/) 
~ 
kinja I In pI -aatl pentagonal panel used in Ijajw' 
baladi (see PI.G, 11). 
~ 
kinja 2 In pI -aat, kinagl (pair of) football boots. 
.-',;[,,j.!/ 
.J...r:o:S kangaruu <Engl> In pI -aatl kangaroo. 
(..s[,,j.!/) 
~ 
kingi I <T ikinci> In! second one in a series. 
~ 
kingi 2 <perh Engl king> Inl breed of pigeon 
with long legs and a short body. 
,;~,j.!/ 
;,xS kundara <T kundura> In pI kanaadirl fobsol] 
(pair of) shoes. 
~;,xS kundargi <T kunduracl> In pI -yya/ shoemak-
er, cobbler. - also kuntargi. 
-,j~,j.!/ 
~,xS kundinsar <Engl> In pI -aatl condenser. 
j.-' ~,j.!/ 
J.,,xS kanduuz In! meat from a mature buffalo or cow. 

.; .;,.!l see .; I .;, .!l : kinaar 
11S.;';'.!l 
~)\.:5 kanarya <Fr canari> 1 In pi -aatl canary. 2/adi 
invarl canary-yellow. 
l..i';' .!l 
;S kanaz I (i) Ivtl to hoard (money). -vn kanazaan, 
kanz: ava kaaniz: pva maknuuz. 
;S kinz. kanz In pi kunuuzl treasure . 
..s;S kunazi In pi -yyal miser, one who hoards money. 
maal ik-kunazi lin-nuzahi /prav] ,., what the miser 
hoards his heir will squander. 
~I fitkanaz or fikkanaz Ivil to be hoarded. - iva 
mitkiniz. 
~I finkanaz = fitkanaz. -iva minkiniz. 
2..i .;, .!l 
;S kanaz 2 (i) Ivil to shrink (of cloth). -vn kanazaan. 
;S kiniz ladi *11 narrow.jaaric kiniz a narrow street. 
2 stocky (of a person). 
,;,fi faknaz lell morel most narrow. 
;S kanniz Ivtl to make narrow. -vn takniiz; ava 
mikanniz. 
;s:,1 fitkanniz or fikkanniz Ivil to be made narrow. 
-iva mitkanniz. 
I..,....;, .!l 
..rS kanas, kanas (u. iJ Ivtl to sweep. fiz-zabbaal 
bi-yiknis iz-zibaala the garbage man sweeps up the gar-
bage. fuknus beet-ak wi-rujj-u - ma-ticrafmiin yixujj-u 
/prav! sweep and sprinkle your house - you never know 
who may enter it. -vn kans. kans. kaniis; ava kaanis, 
kaanis; pva maknuus. 
-....:s kansa In pi -aatl 1 instance noun of kans. 2 ritual 
of sweeping a saint's tomb as an act of devotion. 
;i...\.:5 kunaasa 
Inl 
sweepings. 
kunaasit 
if-Jaaric 
street-sweepings. 
..,...\.:5 kannaas In * and pi kannaasal street sweeper . 
....:s... maknasa. muknisa In pi makaanisl broom. 
maknasa kahraba vacuum c1eaner.llnawwit il-muknisa 
and nawwit baac;i I-muknisa see nawwa. 
~I fitkanas or fikkanas Ivil to be swept. - iva 
mitkinis . 
..r+1 finkanas = fitkanas. -iva minkinis. 
..rS kannis = kanas. - vn takniis; avalpva mikannis. 
~I fitkannis or 
fikkannis 
fitkanas. 
-iva 
mitkannis. 
767 
2..,... .;, .!l 
"-,,;S kiniisa In pi kanaayisl church. c;aalu ya kniisa 
fislimi. - c;aalit filii fil-c;alb i fil-c;alb /prav! (they said to 
the church, 'Become Muslim.' She said, 'What is in the 
heart is in the heart. ') ,., you can change what I say but 
not what I think . 
...,...... \.;S" kanaysi Inl type of majrafiyya design (see PI.G, 
8). 
~ 
kanasi ladi *1 of or pertaining to the church, 
ecclesiastical. fil-qanuun i1-kanasi canon law. 
-..:....,....;, .!l 
J.,.;-y}" kunustabl <Engl constable> In pi -aatl 
mounted policeman, motor-cycle policeman. 
J..,....;, .!l 
J-:5" kansil <Engl> Ivtl to cancel. kansil iI-macaad 
il-Ielaa-di cancel tonight's appointment. IIma-tduc;c;i-J 
cala kalam-ha - kansil don't fret about what she says 
- forget about it! -vn kansala; avalpva mikansil. 
~I fitkansil or fikkansil Ivil to be cancelled. -iva 
mitkansil. 
- J..,....;,.!l 
,,:;.L.;}" kunsultu <It cansulta> In pi -haatl group of 
medical specialists (called together to make a joint 
diagnosis) . 
J .. h .. ""';'.!l 
J".aS kun~aal <Frcansale> In pi -aatl console table. 
1.J.;,.!l 
....;.,;s kiniif. kaniif In pi -aatl /trad sac] toilet, lavatory. 
kunaafa. 
kunafaaya. 
kanafaani. kunafaani. kunafaati 
t I .J .;, .!l 
.lA.:S kanavaah <Fr canevas> Inl embroidery canvas. 
jurli kanavaah needlepoint work, tapestry work . 
.!l.;,.!l 
~ 
kanaka <T teneke> In pi -aatl pot for brewing 
Turkish coffee (see PI.B, 3). 
.!l.:.S" kanak Icoll nl 1 pots for brewing Turkish coffee. 
2 large metal containers for liquids. 
~ 
mikannik ladj *1 crammed together in a disorder-
ly fashion. kutub mikannika f-Janta books crammed 
together into a bag. 

, .;, A.;, A 
AIlS';' A 
~ 
kankin I Ivil to stay at home. -vn kankana; ava 
.!lL,.;.,s' kunyaak <Fr cognac> Inl cognac, brandy. 
mikankin. 
1 .;, A .;, A 
wlS:.;$' kunkaan Inl rummy (card game). 
~ 
kankin z Ivil to win a hand of rummy. -vn 
kankana; ava mikankin. 
J .;, A see J I .;, A : kanaal 
'.;,.;,A 
::; kann (i) Ivt/l to hide away, shut away (s.o.). kinn' 
bint-ak /il-beel keep your daughter at home! 2 [non-
Cairenej to hide away, shut away (s.th.). - vn kann; ava 
kaanin; pva maknuun. 
"~I ri/-kinaana Iprop nl epithet for the land of 
Egypt. 
~I rinkann Ivi/l to be hidden away, be shut away. 
2 to calm down, settle down. ma linkann' ya waad 
I-al(u!-ak [ala buuz-ak shut up and settle down, kid, or 
I'll whack you one on the snout! - avaliva minkaan. 
~I rilkann or rikkann = rinkann. - avaliva milkann. 
~ 
muslakinn ladjl [palhjlatent. 
1 .;, .;, A see .;, J .;, .!l : kanuun 
3 .;, .;, A see .;, IS .;, A : kiniin 
o .;, A 
.s kunh f Inl true nature, essence. 
';'J';'.!l 
w"; IS' kanuun In pi kawaniinl clay or mud-brick hearth 
for cooking. rakkibu I-kahraba w-ba((alu I-kanuun they 
installed electricity and stopped using the open hearth. 
IS';' A 
~ kunya In pi -aall respectful form of address or 
reference compounded of rabu (for males) or rumm 
(for females) and the name of the father or eldest son 
(or, especially in the case of women who have no sons, 
the name of the eldest daughter). rumm" m!Jammad 
the mother, or daughter, of Muhammad. rabu saalim 
the father, or son, of Salim.llraagi/ ma-/llu-J kunya a 
worthless man. 
~l.:S kinaaya In pi -aall metaphor. IIbi-yilkallim bil-
kinaaya he beats about the bush, he speaks indirectly. 
11 kinaaya [an tantamount to. 
.;, IS';' A 
.:r.:S kiniin <Fr> Inl quinine. 
YJ o.!l 
...,.. ~ kahrab Ivtl 1 to electrify, apply electricity to. 
2 to shock, electrify. IIkahrabl' kuu[-i I hit my funny 
bone. 3 to thrill, electrify. -vn kahraba; avalpva 
mikahrab. 
~ ~ kahraba Inl electricity. rassaala bil-kahraba an 
electric washing machine. rir-raagil bilaa[ i1-kahraba 
the electricity man. 
d.~ kahrabi1 ladjl electric, electrical. 
.;~~ kahrabaari, kahrubaari I/adjl electrical. 
rit-law~ii1a I-kahrabariyya the electrical connection. 
2/n pl-yyal electrician. ri/-[idda iii b-yisla[miluu-ha 1-
kahrabariyya the equipment which electricians use. 
...,.. ~I rilkahrab ~r rikkahrab Ivil passive of kahrab. 
- iva milkahrab. 
( - i" J 0 A) 
w\.. ~ kahramaan Inl amber. 
~\.:A.J~ kahrumarna(iisi f ladj 'I [physj electro-
magnetic. 
...; 0 A 
...A.tS' kahJf In pi kuhuuf! cavern, cave. 
JoA 
J+S' kahlladj pi kuhuull middle-aged. 
~* kuhuula Inl old age. 
, .;, 0 .!l 
¥ 
kuhna <P kuhna> I Icoll nl scrap, junk, rags. 
lI!Jabl' kuhna old rope. 2 In pi -aal, kuhanl a rag . 
.;,fs' kahhin Ivtl to scrap. throw out. -vn lakhiin; aval 
pva mikahhin. 
~I rilkahhin or rikkahhin Ivil to be scrapped, be 
thrown out. - iva milkahhin. 
l.;,oA 
~ 
kuhn Inl (womanly) guile. 
i,;~ kahaana Inl (womanly) guile. 
~ 
kahiin ladj pi kuhanal guileful, wily. see further 
under.;, J 0 .!l 
~i rakhan lell morelmost guileful. 
.J'IS' kaahin In pi kahana/l priest. 2 soothsayer, seer. 
.:;.,~ kahanool Inl 
1 priesthood. 
holy orders. 

tintiisim rutab iI-kahanoot fila sabal daragaat the ranks 
of the priesthood are divided into seven grades. 
2 pontificating dogmatism, punditry. 
~I fitkahhin T or fikkahhin T Ivil to make predic-
tions. -vn takahhun; ava mitkahhin. 
~ 
takahhun In pi -aatl prediction, prophecy. 
oj.J • .!l see also 2oj • .!l 
w.,.! kahwin I/vtl to make (s.o.) sly, wily or guileful. 
2/vil to become sly, wily or guileful. -vn kahwana; 
ava/pva mikahwin. 
w".s:.;l fitkahwin or fikkahwin Ivil to become or be 
made sly, wily or guileful. - avaliva mitkahwin. 
I .J .!l 
I,} kawa I: such expressions as ri/-laruusa n-nuusa 
kawa n-nuusa ,.. bridey-widey. ya laziiza n-niiza kawa 
n-niiza lovey-dovey Aziza. 
Y.J ,l) 
..,..,} kuub <Fr coupe> In pi fakwaabl I bell-shaped 
lamp shade. 2 suit-Ieqgth tof material). 
'f' 
U.J .!l 
~~I fil-kuuta: tafalj (or caraf or jirib) it-kuuta to 
work oneself to exhaustion. Ij-acaffalj-ak iI-kuuta I'll 
give you a hard time! ma-Ijilt-uu-J iI-kuuta he hasn't a 
penny to his name. 
.) u.J.!l 
;,} kootar <Engl> In pi kawaatirl{naut{ cutter. 
";'u.J.!l 
..?JIS kawitf <It caucciu> 
Icoll 
nI I rubber. 
2 (loosely) anything made of rubber. kawitf it-
larabiyya automobile tyres. (gazma) kawitfgym shoes. 
-":';JIS kawitfa lunit n, pi -aatl piece of rubber. 
~L! •• )IS kawitfaaya = kawitfa. 
-,,;,u.J.!l 
.!l"':';JIS kawitfuuk = kawitf. fir-raagil ik-kawitfuuk 
contortionist (circus act). 
C.J.!l see C.J J: kaawilj 
t.J.!l 
t,} kuux In pi fakwaaxl shack, hut. 
I ~.J .!l 
~,} kuud <Engl> In pi -aatl code. 
769 
IS~,} kuudi ladjl in code, coded. 
2 ~ .J,l) see ~ ~ ,l) : kudya 
I .) .J,l) see also .),l) 
.,),} koora In pi -aat, kuwar, kiwarl I ball. koora 
{ibbiyya medicine ball. koorafaraab ball made of socks 
or rags used in street soccer games. koora tayra vol-
leyball. 2 {sport] ball play. koora Ijilwa (or saliima) 
good play. koora tawiita long shot (soccer). koora salita 
drop shot (tennis). 
,)",; kawwar Ivtl I to make into a ball, make round. 
kawwar iI-lagiina he shaped the dough into a ball. 
l14.arba tkawwar lenee a blow which will make his eyes 
puffy. 2 to clench. kawwar fiid-u he clenched his fist. 
- Ivii 3 to become ball-shaped or round. 4 to become 
clenched. bald ii- fak/; m~ariin-i tkawwar after eating, 
my intestines knot up. -vn takwiir; ava/pva mikawwar . 
• J'.~ takwiira Ipl -aatl instance noun of takwiir. 
,) ~I fitkawwar or fikkawwar Ivi/l passive of kawwar 
1 and 2. 2 to curl up, assume a round shape. fitkawwar 
{IS-siriir he curled up in bed. - ava/iva mitkawwar. 
2(.).J.!l) 
,),} koor <Fr corps> Inl {print] unit of type size 
(according to Didot points). 
,),} kuur In 
pi fakwaar, 
kiraanl 
(blacksmith's) 
bellows. 
3 .).J.!l see .) I .!l : kaar, kaara 
u.).J.!l 
~,),} kawirta <It coperta> In 
pi -aatl I deck . 
2 awning (on a boat). 
~').J,l) 
IJ"'),} kooras <Engl> Inl chorus. 
,l) .n ,l) 
,l),),} kawirk ladj invarl {mil slang] raw, green (of a 
recruit). 
j.J .!l 
j,} kuuz In pi kizaan, fakwaazll tin mug, pitcher or 
old can used as a vessel for water. ya raagil ya laguuz 
manaxiir-ak c;add ik-kuuz {children] ,.. you silly old 
man with a nose as big as a billy can (a mocking chant). 
II kuuz iI-lasal variety of melon, egg-shaped and re-
sembling the cantaloupe in colour, size and taste. 
2 (also kuuz dura) ear of maize. IIljalalit; b-kuuz dura 

your haircut is dreadful. 3 (also kuuz liin) prickly pear. 
see further under .J.i.!l 
I .r.J .!l 
..... .,) koosa, kuusa Inl I Icolll zucchini, courgette(s). 
2 operating through connections and bribery. furl Ii-
koosa use of connections and bribery. 
~ L....,) kusaaya lunit n. pi -aall a zucchini. a courgette. 
.r'.; kawwls Ivtl to make progress in (a situation) by 
the use of connections and bribes. laazim likawwis 
iI-lamaliyyaa-di lafaan limfi you've got to work with 
connections and bribes in this thing in order to get it 
moving. -vn lakwiis; avalpva mikawwis . 
.r~1 filkawwis or fikkawwis Ivil passive of kawwis. 
fil-mawquul ilkawwls the matter was handled by 
means of connections and greasing palms. -iva 
milkawwis. 
1 .r .J.!l see l.r IS .!l : kawaasa. kllwayyis. kiwayyis 
..;. .J .!l 
~.,) koofa <perh P gosha> In pi kuwaf. kofaall 
I dais on which bride and groom sit during a wedding 
celebration. 2 rubber block or clamp on a bicycle 
brake. brake-block. 3 small ring connecting items of 
jewelry. 4 hook and eye. 5 burner (of a primus stove). 
..;..'.; kawwij Ivil to take exclusive possession. gain a 
monopoly. fll-Iuggaar ik-kubaar bi-ykawwiju lala 1-
lamwiin the big merchants make a corner in rationed 
goods. - vn lakwiij; ava mikawwij. 
~~ lakwiija Ipl -aal, lakawiifl instance noun of 
kawwij . 
..;.. ~I filkawwij or fikkawwij Ivil (impersonal) pas-
sive of kawwij. ri/- faklllkawwif lalee the food has been 
appropriated. -Iva milkawwij. 
t.J.!l 
t.,) kUUl In pi kilaanl I elbow.llkuUl ririlf end of a 
loaf. heel of a loaf. -ma-yilraf1' kuul-u min bUUl-U "" 
he cannot discriminate. -sae;eel-u I-murr' min kilaan-u 
"" I gave him a hard time. 2 elbow bend. elbow joint (of 
a pipe etc.). 3 bend. curve (in a road). 
~.,) kuula In pi -aall = kUUl: 
t'.; kawwal Ivtl I to bend into the shape of an elbow. 
- Ivi/2 to curl up. take a nap. 3 to fail (in an examina-
tion). -vn lakwiil; avalpva mikawwal. 
~ ~ lakwiila In pi -aal. lakawlill elbow bend. elbow 
joint (of a pipe. and the like). 
t ~I filkawwalor fikkawwal Ivil to be bent into the 
shape of an elbow. -iva milkawwal. 
770 
...; .J .!l 
,j.,) kuufi: (xa{{') kuufi Kufic script (characterized by 
straight lines and angles as opposed to the cursive 
script) . 
.;,;.,) kufiyya In pi -aall I kaffiyeh. 2 (man's) scarf. 
.) IS ...; .J .!l 
;.:il.,) kawafiirJ, kuwafeer <Fr coiffeur> In pi -aatl 
hair stylist. 
.!l.J.!l 
.!J.,) kuuk <Engl>: faljm' kuuk coke. 
y.!l..,.!l 
.."s.,) kawkab or kookab In pi kawaaklbl heavenly 
body. star. planet. II kawkab fis-siima film star. 
- kawkab ij-fare; epithet for the late Umm Kalthum. 
IJ.J.!l 
J.,)i fakwalladj. fern koola. pi kuull yellowish (ofthe 
plumage of a certain variety of tumbler pigeon). 
lJ.J.!l 
J") kooiT <Fr col> In pi -aall collar. koolfaal shawl 
collar. kool kuludiin Peter Pan collar . 
.j.,) koala In pi -aall collar. 
- .J J.J.!l see I.J.J J .!l : kawalingi 
.rISJ.J.!l 
.roll.,) kawaliis <Fr caulisse> Ipl nl [Iheal] back-
drops. wara I-kawaliis backstage. 
r' .J .!l 
r.,) koom In pi fakwaam, fikwaam, kuwaaml pile, 
heap. landi furl ikwaam I have piles of work (to do). 
bil-koom in quantity. in abundance. IIraagii ralbaan 
fi-rae;abl-u koom laljm a poor man with a lot of children 
to support. - finlafaakir bi-ngiib-u min lal-koom "" do 
you think we get it for nothing? do you think it grows on 
trees? -kubr ik-koom walafamaalil iI-ladiwwiin [prov] 
"" better to make a show than be gloated over by your 
enemies. - da koom wi-da koom these are two entirely 
different things. as in fir-rafwa koom wil-maljsubiyya 
koom bribery is a far cry from favouritism, kull 
iI-fasbaab di koom wi-fmnak ma-giI1' koom all these 
reasons have nothing to do with the fact that you didn't 
come. 
4A.,) kooma In pi -aall pile. heap. 

r'§ kawwim I Ivtl to heap in piles, pile. nilJammil 
il-ljamlJ a lag-gimaal wi-nkawwim-u fil-gum we trans-
port the wheat by camel and pile it up on the threshing 
floor.!lqarab-u lallja kawwim-u he floored him. 2/vil 
to pile up. accumulate. fif-furl i mkawwim lalayya 
work is piling up on me. -vn takwiim; avalpva 
mikawwim. 
r:-,s;.1 fitkawwim or fikkawwim Ivil to pile up, be 
accumulated. kaan lJaljlj-i {aradt-u-hum fawwil ma 
tkawwimit il- fugra laleehum I should have thrown 
them out as soon as their back rent began to accumu-
late. - ava mitkawwim. 
I.Sr.J~ 
IS""> koomi Inl I an Egyptian card game (known also 
as 
b~ra, q.v.. and fil-waad yiljuf/). 2 seven of 
diamonds. 
oj.J ~ 
.:,IS' kaan (u) Ivi; the following variants frequently 
occur: 1st sing kutt, 2nd sing masc kutt, 2nd sing fern 
kutti. 2nd pI kuttu, 3rd sing fern kaat/l to be, exist. da 
zayy illi ykuun beeni w-beenu taar he acts as if there 
were a feud between us. koon-i faljlud ljuddaamak da 
mif leeb the fact of my sitting in front of you is not 
wrong. koon if1iik ft- fiid-i da ma-yikfti1 the cheque's 
being in my hand is not enough. II fayyuha maxluuljin 
kaan any human being. - filli kaan kaan what's done is 
done (and cannot be undone). 2a Iwith copulative func-
tionl to be. lJayat-ha malaa lJa-tkuun saliida her life 
with him will be happy. fiza kaan da ~alJiilJ if this is 
right. 2b to be situated (in place or time). ril-beet 
bitaal-u kaan gamb i bet-na his house was next to ours. 
3 auxiliary verb in perfect tense to form 3a pluperfect. 
kaan lamal il-waagib lamma rulJr-i-lu or kaan laamil 
il-waagib lamma rulJt-i-lu he had done his homework 
when I went to see him. 3b continuous or habitual past. 
kaan bi-yilmil il-waagib lamma rulJt-i-lu he was doing 
his homework when I went to see him. kaan bi-yilmil 
il-waagib lamma kunt i b-arulJ-lu he usually aid his 
homework when I went to see him. 3c inchoative fu-
ture. kaan lJa-yilmil il-waagib lamma rulJt-i-lu he was 
going to do his homework when I went to see him. 3d a 
hypothetical past conditional. law kunt i giit if you had 
come. law kunt i f-makaan-ak if I had been you. 
4 auxiliary verb in the imperfect tense to form 4a future 
perfect. lJa-ykuun lamal il-waagib lamma farulJ-lu or 
lJa-ykuun laamil il-waagib lamma farulJ-lu he will have 
done his homework when I go to see him. 4b habitual 
future perfect. bi-ykuun lamal (or laamil) il-waagib 
771 
lamma b-arulJ-lu he will usually have done his home-
work when I go to see him. 4c continuous or habitual 
future. lJa-ykuun bi-yilmil il-waagib lamma farulJ-lu he 
will be doing his homework when I go to see him. 
bi-ykuun bi-yilmil il-waagib lamma b-arulJ-lu he will 
usually be doing his homework when I go to see him. 
4d hypothetical future conditional. law tikuun lJa-tiigi if 
you were to come. -vn koon; ava kaayin . 
.:,.,> koon I In pI fakwaanl cosmos, universe. ya-xi 
laayiz ti~allalJ il-koon well my friend, do you want to 
reform the world?! 2: ragiil ik-koon rice husks. 
,J.,> kooni, kawni ladjl cosmic. fafiua kawniyya cos-
mic rays . 
.}IS' kaafin In pI -aatl being, creature. kuW kaafin 
lJayy every living creature. 
.:,1.$ kayaan, kiyaan Inl identity. min yoom ma 
gibt-i-lak siirit xa4.ra finljalab kayaan-ak ever since 
I told you all about Khadra you've been a different 
person. II bi-yuflur bi-kayaan-u malaak he feels impor-
tant when he's with you. -baljaa-li kayaan I felt impor-
tant. - raagillu kayaan fil-mugtamal a man of standing 
in society. -raagil maali kayaan-u a man worthy of his 
position . 
.:,Is:.. makaan In pI famaakinl place, locality, area. 
lJa-nx~~~ makaan mustaqill' lil-bus{a we'll allot a 
separate place for the mail. fildil il-lJaaga makan-ha 
put the thing in its (proper) place. xud makaan-ak {athl] 
on your mark! bi-yilrafmakan-ha he knows where she 
is. law kunt i makaan-ak if I were (or, had b,een) in your 
place. filraf makaan-ak know your place! 
~Is:.. makaana Inl (high) position, standing, rank. 
.:,'§ kawwin Ivtl to give existence to, form. laayiz 
fakawwin ftrlja musiqiyya I want to set up a musical 
troupe. fif1ubbaan illi zayy i lJalar-na lissa bi-ykawwinu 
nafs-u-hum young men like us are still seeking to estab-
lish themselves. -vn takwiin; ava mikawwin; pva 
mukawwan, mikawwan. 
,jI.';'; takwiin Inl composition, formation. takwiin il-
farq composition of the earth.lIsifr it-takwiin the Book 
of Genesis . 
.:,"fi.. mikawwin In pI -aatl component, ingredient, 
constituent . 
.:,:-,s;.1 fitkawwin or fikkawwin Ivil to be formed, be 
made up. - iva mitkawwin. 
.:,~I fistakaan Ivil to resign oneself. fistakaanit lil-
wa4.l she resigned herself to the situation. -vn 
fistikaana; ava mistakiin. 
'.J ~ 
• ..; kuuh <Fr coup> In pI -aatl turn, go (in cards). 

lima txuf/' malaana fik-kuuh do join us! - finta mif 
maeaana fik-kuuh you don't follow us, you're not in 
tune with us. 
t.S.J JJ 
t.S'; kawa (i) Ivtl I to iron, press. min fimta kunti 
b-tikwi I-milayaat since when have you been ironing 
sheets? 2 to straighten (hair) with curling tongs. 3 to 
mark by burning, brand. 4 to burn out, cauterize. 
fif1aaa tikwi g-garl:J chilis cauterize the wound. 5 to 
sting. burn. lamal fiyya f~/' kawaa-ni he played a dirty 
trick on me. -vn kawy, kawa, kayy, kawayaan; ava 
kaawi; pva makwi. 
...s'; kawa .l/vnlll bil-yala wik-kawa at painfully exorbi-
tant prices, as in batia l-bayaa4, bil-yala wik-kawa tin-
ning has become outrageously expensive. 
...sJIS' kaawi ladjl caustic. ~ooda kawya caustic soda. 
~JIS' kawya In pi -aatl soldering iron. 
~I~ kawwaaya In pi -aatl = kawya. 
...sfi... makwa In pi makaawill iron, flat iron. 2 press 
(for clothes etc.). 3 (pair of) curling tongs. - Ino pI/ 
4 ironing, clothes ready to be ironed, or just ironed. 
~ 
fi... makwagi In pi -yyal one whose trade is ironing 
clothes. 
...sfol fitkawa or 'i'ikkawa Ivil passive of kawa. -iva 
mitkiwi. 
...sfol finkawa = fitkawa. -iva minkiwi. 
u ...s .J JJ 
~~I 'i'il-kuweet, 
fil-kiweet, 
fik-kiwiit Iprop nI 
Kuwait. 
,j!.'; kuweelll ladj *1 pertaining to Kuwait. 2 In * and 
pi kawaytal a Kuwaiti. 
.::..~ kawwil/vtl to Kuwaiti-ize. :vn takwiit; ava/pva 
mikawwil. 
..... :;s;,.1 'i'lIkawwil or 'i',kkawwil Ivil to be or become 
Kuwaiti-ized. -avaliva milkawwil. 
..r t.S .J JJ see 1..r t.S JJ : kuwayyis, kiwayyis 
JJ I t.S JJ 
.!.ll,$ kiyaak (also kiyahk) <Copt> Inl fourth month of 
the Coptic year (early December to early January). 
kiyaak ~abaal:J-ak misaa-k yixa/li fatuur-ak huwwa 
lafaa-k jingle concermng the shortness of daytime dur-
ing the month of kiyaak. 
":" t.S JJ see ":" I t.S JJ .: 'i'ikyaab 
772 
.) ":" t.S JJ 
.r.:f kiibar <Engl>: gool kiibar {soccer] goalkeeper, 
goalie. 
(ut.S JJ ) 
.::..$ keet: keel wi-keel this and that. tiaalu laleeha keel 
wi-keel they said this and that about her. 
.::..$ kiit <Fr quitte> ladvl even, quits (in gambling). 
(t.S JJ 
c..1S' kaal:J (i) Ivtl I to tease. battal tikiil:J fuxt-ak ii-
~uyayyara stop teasing your little sister! 2 to bother, 
irritate.fii dimmilfi-kitf-i kayil:J-ni I've got a boil on my 
shoulder that's been bothering me. -vn keel:J, 
kayal:Jaan; ava kaayil:J. 
'i.:...$ keel:Ja linst n, pi -aatl a teasing. 
c..t;s' kayyaal:J I/adj *1 given to teasing. 2 In *1 a perpe-
tual tease. 
c..~1 fitkaal:J or 'i'ikkaal:J Ivil I to be teased. 2 to be 
bothered, be irritated. -iva mitkaal:J. 
c..lS:.il finkaal:J = 'i'itkaal:J. -iva minkaal:J. 
~ 
IS' kaayil:J Ivtl to tease persistently, rill:Jatii ya maama 
fall:Ji lammaal yikaayil:J if1ayyaala mummy, mummy, 
Fathi keeps teasing the maid! -vn mikayl:Ja; ava 
mikaayil:J . 
~~I fitkaayil:J or fikkaayil:J Ivil to be teased persis-
tently. - iva milkaayil:J . 
~ t.S JJ see also I ~ JJ • 
JIS' kaad (i) Ivtl I to spite, thwart. yalla nfarfif wi-
nkiid-u let's go and have a good time and spite him. 2 to 
vex, annoy. kidt "l:Jamaat-i b-;uraat-i {prov] (I annoyed 
my mother-in-law with my farting) = I cut my nose off 
to spite my face. -vn keed; ava kaayid . 
-.4 keeda linst n, pi -aatl a spiteful act. l:J-aruul:J 
bil-keeda fiiku I'll go if only to spite you! 
Jt;s' kayyaad lad j *1 spiteful. 
-.J.$,.. makiida 
In 
pi makaayidl I plot, intrigue, 
scheme. 2 trap . 
J~ mikyaad In pi makayiidl penis (in the jargon of 
homosexuals) . 
J~I filkaad or fikkaad Ivil I to be spited, be 
thwarted. 2 to be vexed, be annoyed. -iva mitkaad. 
JlS:.il finkaad = filkaad. -iva minkaad. 
~IS' kaayid Ivtl to play malicious tricks on, spite. 
wal:Jda lamalit da mkaydafiiha some woman did that to 
spite her. -vn mikayda; ava mikaayid. 
~ 
~I 'i'itkaayid or 'i'ikkaayid Ivil passive of kaayid. -iva 
milkaayid. 

J-i . ..sA 
;:;$ kayzar Icoll n! bread rolls. 
I IJ" ..s A 
...,..$ kiis In pI kiyaas, rikyaas, rakyaasl I sack, bag. 
rakyaas mixaddaat pillow cases. kiis dahab a purse of 
gold. kiis naylun polythene bag. kiis filuus (lady's) 
money purse, change purse. II kiis duhni {path] 
sebaceous sac. 1 bath mitt of coarse wool. 
i....$ kiisa In pI -aatl little sack or bag. 
~ 
kayyis Ivtl I to massage and scrub (s.o.). l~ to 
save (money). raagil baxiil bi-yit;bacf.filuus wi-ykayyis-
ha he is a miser who gets money and stores it up. - vn 
takyiis; ava mikayyis. 
~ 
mikayyis ladj *1 rich, wealthy. 
Jt...;s:.. mikayyisaati.'n pI -yya/ public bath attendant 
who massages and scrubs patrons. 
~I ritkayyis or rikkayyis Ivill to be massaged and 
scrubbed. 1 to be saved (of money). - iva mitkayyis. 
1 IJ" ..s A 
i.-I.,S" kiyaasa r Inl tact, diplomacy. 
i.-I.,s" kawaasa Inl niceness, excellence. rin-nibiit da 
raaxir kawaasa this wine is top-notch. 
~.,s" kuwayyis, kiwayyis I/adj *1 nice, good, fine. 
raagil kuwayyis a good man. raagil kuwayyis fi-jur/-u a 
man who is good at his work. t;irfeen kiwayyisiin a good 
sum of money. mafy-a-ha mif kuwayyis her comport-
ment is not nice. fizzayy-ak. - kuwayyis iI-IJamdu ti-
lIaah 'How are you?' 'Fine, thanks.' l/advl well. fana 
larf-u kwayyis I know him well. 
llJ"'..sA 
...,..$ kees <Fr caisse> I In pI -aatl pay desk, cashier's 
desk. l/interjl call by shop assistant for sold merchan-
dise to be taken for wrapping and collection by 
customer. 
.;. ..s JJ 
4.!.$ kiifa ladj invarl spineless. raagil kiifa ·spineless 
man, jellyfish type. 
..; ..s A 
..;.? keef Inl 
I preference, 
liking, 
inclination. 
ma-landii-j keef lis-siima I-Ielaa-di I'm in no· mood for 
the cinema this evening.landu keef yifrab nibiit he feels 
like drinking wine. lala keef-ak as you like. IInisiib 
id-dinya timfi lala kef-ha ... we'll let the world go hang! 
- finta w-keef-ak it's up to you. -huwwa b-keef-ak ilti 
b-yiigi hina is it up to you who comes here? 1 addiction. 
773 
- Ipl kuyuufl 3 narcotic . 
..;.? kiif linterrog advl (non-Cairene] how? fig-gaww i 
b-yilmil kiifhow's the weather doing? fabuu-k laamil 
kiif how's your father? 
W kayfiyya Inl manner, way. nikkallim lan kayfiyyit 
lamal iI-kunaafa let's talk of how kunaafa is made. 
~ 
kayyiif In pI kayyiifal I buff, enthusiast. kayyiif 
t;ahwa a coffee buff. 1 connoisseur, sophisticated de-
votee. kayyiif mazziika a devoted music lover. 
...(.) kayyif Ivtl I to give pleasure to. falraf fakayyif 
iz-zibuun I know how to make the customer happy. 
laawiz mara mitwaddika tkayyif-u w-tibsi(-u he wants 
an experienced woman who can please him in every 
way. 1 to adjust, adapt. laazim tilraf tikayyif nafs-ak 
fi-maliifit ig-geef you must learn to adapt yourself to 
army life. -vn takyiif; ava/pva mikayyif. 
~ 
takyiif Inl adaptation, adjustment. takyiif hawa 
air conditioning. 
~ 
mukayyif 
In 
pI -aatl 
I narcotic. 
lair 
conditioner. 
J~ mikayyifaati In pI -yya/ hedonist, epicurean. 
....;s:.1 fitkayyifor rikkayyiflvi/l to be given pleasure. 
1 to be adapted, be adjusted. 3 to adapt oneself. naas 
ma-tkayyifit-ji mala I-mugtamal people who have not 
adapted themselves to society. -ava/iva mitkayyif. 
'A..sA 
oJJ.$ keek <Engl> Icoll nl small cake(s). 
~ 
keeka In pI -aatl I type of plain cake, sometimes 
containing raisins or jam. 1 blank, block (of plastic or 
other raw material to be pressed or stamped by a 
machine). 3 {mil] mess tin. 
~\S:.,S" kekaaya lunit n, pI -aatl a small cake. 
1 A ..s A see A I ..s A : kiyaak 
J..sJJ 
J$ keel In! volume, measure. kaan laban marfuuf 
wi-kamaan ii-keel naat;~ the milk was adulterated and 
the amount was short too. 
4L.S" keela In pI -aatl I dry measure of 16.72 Iitres, 
being one-twelfth of an ardeb. 1 container for measur-
ing such a quantity . 
Jt;s" kayyaalln *1 measurer (particularly of grains) . 
riI-kayyaal bi-ykayyil iI:ralla the man with the measure 
measures out the wheat. IIkull i fuula w-Iaha kayyaal 
[prov] (every bean has its weigher) every Jack has his 
Jill. 
J~ mikyaalln pI makayiill measuring container (for 
liquids). 

J.s' kaYY11 Ivtl to measure by volume. kayyil lalaala 
litr' laban he measured out three Iitres of milk. -vn 
lakyiil; ava/pva mikayyil. 
~I filkayyil or fikkayyil Ivil to be measured by 
volume. - iva milkayyll. 
.JJIS.!l 
).,,) kiilu <Fr kilo> In pI -waall 1 kilogram. kiilu 
lalJma w-n~~' killu ruzz one kilogram of meat and half 
a kilogram of rice. 2 kilometre. fiI-larabiyya blall-u 
"alalit farbiliin kiilu mbaarilJ his car covered forty 
kilometres yesterday. 3 kilowatt. daffaaya blaalil kiilu 
w-m~~ a one-and-a-half kilowatt heater. 
I .J IS .!l 
..Jo!.\S' ~ kukayiin <Fr cocaine> Inl cocaine. 
774 
.;.s:.1 filkayyin or fikkayyin Ivil to become high on 
cocaine. - ava milkayyin. 
2 .J 1S.!l see .J.J.!l: kayaan. kiyaan 
J .J 1S.!l see .J 1 .!l : kaana 
1 .J IS .!l 
l:.$ kiina <It china> Inl 1 quinine. Ilxajab kiina 
singaabi cinchona. Peruvian bark. 2 tonic wine based 
on a cinchona extract. 
.!l 0 1S.!l see .!l 1 IS .!l : kiyahk 

J 
J 
J Ii- Iw pron suff and independently: liyya, liklliik, 
likilliiki, 
lu(h)lIii(h), 
lahallihalliiha, 
linalliina, 
lukumlliikum, luhumlliihum; enclitically: -Ii, -Iak, -lik, 
-Iu, -Iha, -Ina, -Ikum, -Ihuml preposition indicating 
I direction in space or time. ba~~uu-Ii they looked at 
me. mil-farct I-fooe; from the noor up. Ii-faaxir in-
nahaar to the end of the day. min sana I-sana from one 
year to the next. 2 dative relationship. e;aluu-Ii kida 
they told me so. Ijjbb-ak finta liyya your love for me. 
xadl"ljaaga lik-kuljlja I took something for the cough. 
fi[mil-Ii ma[ruuf do me a favour. rakkib laha n-nuur he 
installed the electricity for her. 3 preferential or sup-
portive relationship. saybaa Ii-waaljid taani she has 
left him for another. filjna liiha miyya fil-miyya we're 
for it one hundred per cent! yoom liik wi-yoom [aleek 
[prov/ one day is for you, another against you. Ilia liyya 
wala [alayya minding my own business, doing no harm. 
4 appertainment. ma-Ihaaj beet she doesn't have a 
house. huwwa-na liyya reer-ak do I have anyone but 
}ou? kulli lukanda liiha mudiir every hotel has a mana-
ger. gidd-u I-fabuu his paternal grandfather. lu lajarl 
iyyaam fi-m~r he's been in Egypt ten days. lu talatt 
iyyaam ma-gaa-j he hasn't come for three days. 
5 entitlement. ma-Ijaddij lu landi Ijaaga I don't owe 
anything to anyone. liik lalayya tneen gineeh lowe you 
two pounds. 6 ethical dative. rawwaljt i w-Iae;et-Iak 
ijjae;e;a kull-a-ha duxxaan I returned home and,lo and 
behold, the nat was full of smoke! ruljt i katib-Iak Ijittit 
diinjakwa so I wrote up, I certainly did, a real bitch of 
a complaint! 
~ Ii- finn Iconjl because. qarabt-u 1- finnu narviz-ni I hit 
him because he annoyed me. 
J la- 1 Iconj, esp after v xaaf or imperl lest. fuskut 
la-yiqrab-ak be quiet lest he hit you. fana xaayif 
la-ykuun i1-mablar mij lagb-ak I'm afraid that the 
amount may not please you. 2 emphatic particle intro-
ducing strong assertion or oath. Ijilfit la-tifarrae; leej 
[al-masakiin she swore that she would distribute bread 
to the poor. law kunt i fajargi la-kunt astie;ii1 mi~-~ublj if 
I were a traffic cop I'd resign tomorrow for sure! 
IJ 
;" ." • 'i la orlaa orla f orla ffa linterjl no! finta gayy. 
- la fana majruul 'Are you coming?' 'No, I'm busy.' 
finta raayilj walla laf are you going or not? 
~ la (or laa) ... wala Icorrel conjl neither ... nor, as in la 
rani wala fae;iir neither rich nor poor. ma-fiij la e;ahwa 
walajaay there's neither coffee nor tea. Ilia liyya wala 
lalayya minding my own business. - for frozen contexts 
commencing with la (e.g.,la budd), look up the second 
component. -Ia ffa lamma tluff-(ak) [abus/ retort to 
laffa when said in a brusque or offensive way. 
'i la- negative particle used in the formation of such 
compounds as lasilki Inl wireless. riI-lajuluur r Inl the 
unconscious. fil-Iamubalaah r Inl apathy. 
.!ljl; tiluff-ak: laffa lamma tluff-ak [abus/ retort to 
laffa (q.v.) when said in a brusque or offensive way. 
-.JjIJ 
~.J.J)'i laazaward Inl [min/lapis-lazuli. 
(IJ"IJ) 
4-'i laasa I In pI -aatl white wrapper of fine linen or 
silk worn around a cotton skullcap. 
__ 'i laasa 2 J In pI -aatl gum (of the teeth). - also lisa, 
lasa. 
1.!lIJ 
1S''i laaka <It lacca> Inl lacquer, lac. shellac. xajab 
laaka lacquered wood. 

J I J see ..s J J : laala 
.:,.!lIJ 
~ laakin (also lakin, lakiin) )conj; w foil pron suff 
lakinn-I but. IIma-lakin:f = there are no ifs and buts 
about it. 
~IJ 
r'i laam I Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-third letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. II baCia laam ralif = he got staggering 
drunk (since the ligature 'i in Arabic script resem-
bles a pair of legs crossed at the ankles) . 
• J and •• J see I J : la r, la rra, tilu rr-ak 
I ~. J 
r" laram (u) (also laran) ivii to behave with deceit or 
cunning. 
ril-wad da laram laleena w-xallaa-na 
saddaCinaa the kid pulled the wool over our eyes and 
made us believe him. huwwa lammaal yilrum lafaan 
yaaxud il-rart/.' rxi~a he's trying all the sly tricks he can 
think of to get the land cheap. -vn lurm; ava laarim. 
r;J lurm (also lurn) Inl cunning. 
~;J lurumiyya (also luruniyya) = lurm. 
~ lariim (also lariin) ladj plliraam, lurama (also 
liraan, lurana)1 cunning, sly. raagil larum bitaal 
maCiaalib a cunning man given to intrigues. rid-dunya 
laruma it's a wicked world. 
r "i ralram (also ralran) lell morel most cunning or 
sly. 
~)\.;I ritlaarim I (also ritlaarin) Ivil to behave devious-
ly or cunningly. rima b-titlaa rim laleena leeh -fakir-na 
mif fahmiin-ak why are you being so devious with us? 
do you think we don't know what you're up to? - ava 
mitlaa rim, mutalaa rim f . 
r±-I ristalrim (also ristalrin) I Ivtl to consider cun-
ning. 2/vil to behave cunningly. -vn ristilraam; ava 
mistalrim. 
z ~ • J 
~'i laarim f 
Ivtl to suit, be compatible with. 
ril- rigra raat illi tlaa rim ;uruf-na the procedures consis-
tent with our circumstances. -vn mularma; ava 
mulaarim. 
f'"! 'i laayim Ivtl I to content, suit, (s.o.). lab - !Ja-nruu!J 
lafaan nilayim-hum bass O.K. we'll go just to make 
them happy.lllayim-ha take it easy! -layim-hafwayya 
malaa go easy on him! - rid-dinya ma-laymit-haa:f 
776 
malaaya things haven't gone my way. 2 to enable to get 
hold (of s.th.). layim-ni lal-ftluus let me get my hands 
on the money! -vn milayma; ava milaayim . 
~)\.;I ritlaarim 2 f Ivil to be compatible, go well 
together. {abilt-u ma-titlarim-!' mala n-naas dool he 
has no rapport with those people. -vn talaarum; ava 
mutalaa rim. 
~)\.;I ritlaayim Ivil passive of laayim. - iva mitlaayim. 
rhll rilta ram f Ivil to heal (of a wound). -vn riltiraam; 
ava miltirim, multarim. 
~ ~ • J see I ~ ~ • : la-rimma, la- rimman 
.:, • J see ~. J: la ran, lu rn, lu runiyya, la riin, 
ralran, ritlaa rin, ristalrin 
.:, 1,":-, J 
.:,l,l libaan I <Copt> Inl tow rope (of a Nile sailing 
boat). 
1,":-, '":-' J 
~ lubb f In! I pith, pulp (of fruit etc.). 2 essence, 
essential part. lirif lubb il-!Jikaaya lala {uul he grasped 
the essence of the matter immediately. 3 mind, reason-
ing power. 
~ libb Icoll nl edible seeds (mainly) of plants of the 
cucurbit family. 
4 liliba Inl I lunit n, pi -aatl a single libb seed. 
II ba{{iixa n~~' libba a medium-ripe water-melon. - Ipl 
also libabl 2 base of the neck. 3 gold necklace (of the 
choker type). 
~W libbaaya = libba l. 
-,...l labab Inl martingale. 
~l,l libaaba, lubaaba Inl soft inner part (e.g., of 
bread). 
..,..,.,.J labiib ladj pi ralibbal sensible. kullu labiibin 
bil-rifaarati yafhamu {prov] = a nod for a wise man. 
~ labbib Ivtl to make a gash in (a water-melon, to 
test its ripeness). Illabbib kirf-a-ha he sliced open her 
belly (like a water-melon). -vn talbiib; ava/pva 
milabbib. 
~)\.; talabiib: ril-mask' min (or ft-) talabiib(-u) tak-
ing hold of (s.o.) by the front of his clothes. 
..;t I ritlabbib Ivil to be incised with a gash (of a water-
melon, to test its ripeness). - iva mitlabbib. 
z,":-, '":-' J 
~ labb (i) I Ivtl {slang] to hit, whack. ril-buli~ labb-u 
lalCia !Jilwa the police gave him a good going-over. 
2 Ivil to quiver, shake. ril-miladdiyya bi-tlibb' ta!Jtiik 

the footbridge shakes under you. -vn labb, lababaan; 
ava laabib; pva malbuub. 
~I fitlabb Ivil {slang} to be hit, be whacked. - iva 
mitlabb. 
.!J.IS ~ ~ J see I IS ~ J: labbay-k 
.I.;J~J 
..hi libitr <Fr pupitre> Inl music rack (of a piano). 
It~ J 
e.J labax I (i) Ivtl to perplex, confuse. -vn labaxaan, 
labx, labxa; ava laabix; pva malbuux. 
:b..,.I labxa Inl I Ipl -aat, libaxl poultice. 2 linvarl bung-
ler, inept person. 
e.J i falbax lell morelmost inept. 
e.tl fitlabax Ivil to be or become perplexed or con-
fused. fitlabaxna labxit il-kilaab we were at a complete 
loss. - ava/iva mitlibix. 
8. labbax Ivil I to apply a pOUltice. labbax la/a 
I-xurraag li-lJadd; ma yistiwi apply a poultice to the boil 
until it comes to a head. 2 to make a mess. maaji 
tlabbax fi(-{iin leeh why are you stomping about in the 
mud? fi/-wa/ad da labbax fil-imtilJaan that boy made a 
complete mess of the examination. -vn talbiix; ava 
milabbax. 
11 labbax fik-kalaam (I) to commit a solecism. (2) to 
speak rudely or offensively. 
~I fistalbax I Ivtl to con, dupe. 2 Ivil to play the 
fool. -vn fistilbaax; ava/pva mistalbax. 
2t~ J 
e.J labax 2 Icolll lebbek tree(s) (Acacia lebbek). 
I ~~ J 
.1.,1 labad or libid (a, i) Ivil I to lurk, lie in ambush. 
labid-Iu fid-dura lurking in the maize, waiting to get 
him. IIzayy it-tilbaan yUljr~ wi-yilbad like a snake he 
strikes and then lies low (said of one who is secretly 
malicious). 2 /slang} to hang about, outstay one's wel-
come. -vn labadaan; ava laabid. 
0.1.,1 libda I In pi libadl blind, hide (for shooting). 
~I fitlabbid I Ivi/l to lurk,lie in ambush. 2 {slang} to 
hang about, outstay one's welcome. - ava mitlabbid. 
~I fistalbad J , fistalbid = labad. - ava mistalbid. 
~ 
1 fistilabbad, 
fistilabbid 
= 
fistalbad. 
- ava 
mistilabbid. 
2 ~ ~ J 
O.l.,l libda 2 In pllibadl {obsol} cap of heavy felt (worn 
777 
by Egyptian peasant men). 
IS.) ~ libuudi or lubuudi In pi -yyal maker of felt caps. 
.)41 libbaad Inl ·felt. 
0.)41 libbaada In pi -aatl I lunit nI a piece of felt. 
2 saddle pad . 
~ labbid Ivtl I to felt (wool, hair, grass etc.). 
2 {metal} to sinter. - Ivil 3 to become matted . 
jalr-a-ha xijin wi-mlabbid zayy i;-~uufher hair is coarse 
and matted like fleece. - vn talbiid; ava/pva milabbid . 
..41;1 fitlabbid 2 Ivil I to be felted (of wool, hair, grass 
etc.). 2 {metal} to be sintered. - iva mitlabbid. 
~.1 ~ J 
J.r.l libru <It libero>: {naut} mux(aaf libru anchor 
a-weigh! 
IIJ"~J 
~ 
libis (i) Ivtl I to don, put on, get dressed in. filbis 
huduum-ak put on your clothes. libsit is-saala she put 
on the watch.lllibis xazuulj to fall for a dirty trick. 2 to 
wear, be dressed in. fana b-albis badla (uul in-nahaar 
I wear a suit all day. 3 to possess (of a demon). 
fis-sawwaalj malbuus the driver is possessed by the 
Devil. - Ivil 4 to get dressed (in clothes suitable for 
going out). ma-tinzil-J ij-jaaril bil-bijaama - laazim 
lilbis don't go out in the street in your pyjamas -you 
must be properly dressed. 5 to fit. fig-gawanti da 
b-yilbis fi- fiid-i these gloves fit me. 6 to strike home (of 
a blow). taalit marra q-qarba libsit at the third try the 
blow struck home. larabiyya libsit fiyya fil-garaaj a car 
ploughed into me in the garage. fi/-koora libsitfig-goon 
the ball slammed into the goal. II fil-fikra libsit fi-
dmaar-u he became obsessed by the idea. 7 {naut} to 
run aground. -vn libs, labasaan; ava laabis; pva 
malbuus . 
~ 
libs I I Ivnl II (fij-Jiwaal) kaan lu libs (the sack 
style» used to be worn, it had its time as a fashion. 2 Inl 
clothing, dress, attire. libs; koora soccer outfit. libs· 
laskari police uniform. 
.:..L..~ malbusaat/pl nl clothes, clothing. 
~ 
labs f Inl misunderstanding. 
lJ~al labs; fil-
mawquul some confusion arose in the matter. 
;(...,.I labsa Ipl -aatl instance noun of libs. yadoobak 
labsiteen wi-yillaakil hardly two wearings and it gets 
frayed. gat-/aha labsa she became possessed. 
IJ"'l.! libaas In pi filbisa, libisal I underpants, drawers. 
2 motif in tent applique work (see PI.H, 14). 
IJ"'.,.J lubuus Inl I Icolll suppositories. 2 Ipl -aatl 
suppository. 

~ 
labbiis Ipl/abbiisal I Inl [obsol] valet, body ser-
vant. 2 ladjl well-dressed. elegant, having dress-sense. 
~ 
labbiisa In pl/abablisl I (also labbiisit gazma) 
shoehorn. 2 cap, cover (e.g., for a pen). 
1.1"'! ')I.. ma/aabis Ipl nl clothes, clothing . 
...,...1;1 fitlabas Ivil I to be worn. II ma-yitilbisf' [alee 
hduum clothes are not worn on it (said, e.g., of some-
thing painful), as in fik-ka/am-da ma-yitlibisf' [alee 
huduum such talk causes much pain. 2 to be possessed 
by a demon. -iva mitlibis . 
...,..;, labbis Ivtl I to dress. labb/Sl-u fal1mar I dressed 
him in red.ll/abbis II-xunftsa tiblja silt in-nisa and labbis 
il-bu~a tiblja [aruusa [prov] "" clothes make the per-
son. 2 to cause to wear./abbist-a-ha I-bal{u I made her 
wear the coat. II/abblsuu I-[Imma they fooled him. 
-/abbist-u {-{arabeeza I crowned him with the table. 
-/abbisuu-ni xazuulj they put a dirty trick over on me. 
3 to fit. fiI-kababgi labbis il-Ial1ma fis-siix the kababgi 
fitted the meat on the skewer. -vn talbiis; ava/pva 
milabbis. 
4.....,l; talbiisa In pi talabiisl I instance noun of talbiis. 
2 set of false teeth. 3 belly-dancer's outfit. 4 [mech] 
plain bearing. 5 bac:;king of certain designs in tent appli-
que work (see PI.H, 28). 
~ 
milabbis I/adjl fatty (meat). 2/coll nl sugar-
coated almonds, (loosely also) any hard sweets or 
candies. 
~ 
milabbisa lunit n. pi -aatl a sugared almond, 
(loosely also) a hard sweet or candy. 
~L;:.l. mllabbisaaya = milabbisa. 
~ 
1 fulabbls Ivi/l passive of labbis. 2 to take posses-
sion (of a demon). fis-sawwaalj if-Ji{aan mulabbis bii 
the Devil has possessed the driver. - avaliva mitlabbis. 
~ 
talabbus Inl [leg] flagrante delicto. 
~ 
mutalabbis ladj ·1 [leg] in flagrante delicto, 
red-handed. 
...,-::;II filtabasT Ivil to become confused or mixed (with 
s.th. else) in such a way as to give a false impression. 
fi~-~uwar iltabasit bi-ba[4. the pictures were superim-
posed on each other. filtabas [alee fil-famr he misin-
terpreted the situation. -vn filtibaas; ava miltibis, 
multabis. 
z~":-' J 
..,..,J libs 2 Inl a carp-like Nile fish (Labeo niloticus and 
other varieties). 
..,...,J libiis <Copt> = libs 2. 
.;,I~,,:-,J 
.;.,L.J labsaan <P labsan> Inl black mustard. 
778 
~,,:-,J 
...,:.,J lib/ <Copt> Icoll nl I bundle( s) (of certain 
plants, e.g .. carrots, onions, sugar cane). 2 bushy 
growth put out by plants of the cucurbit family. 
3 [constr] (concrete) slab foundation. 
W lib/a Ipl -aatl umt noun of libJ. 
fiI-ba{{iixa 
ma-tikbarf' fillaf-libftt-ha [prov/ "" a fruit cannot grow 
off the tree. 
~I..:..J lib/aaya = lib/a. 
...,..;, Idbbif Ivtl I to incapacitate. ftr-rumatizm' labbif 
riglee-ha rheumatism left her unable to walk. ftl-bard' 
mlabbif gism-i the cold is paralysing me. ~abal1t' 
[enay-ya mlabbifa I got up in the mormng unable to 
open my eyes. 2 to bundle and tie (certain plants, e.g., 
carrots, onions, sugar cane). - IVl/3 to become bushy 
(of plants of the cucurbit family). -vn talbiif; avalpva 
milabbif· 
~I fitlabbif Ivil I to be incapacitated. fitlabbift' 
mil-xoofI was paralysed with fear. 2 to be bundled and 
tied. - iva mitlabbif. 
oJ'# ":-' J 
~ 
lab~ (u) Ivil I to jerk, dart, start. fls-samak 
[ammaal yilb~ fil-mayya the fish are darting through 
the water. fiftakaru I-walad maat lakinnu ba[d'/wayya 
lab~ wi-l1arrak glsm-u they thought the boy had died 
but after a while he quivered and moved his body. 2 to 
playa trick. - vn lab~. lab~aan; ava laab~. 
~ 
libi~ lad] ·1 evasive, deceptive, deceitful. 
j,,,:-,J 
.k,J laba{ I (u) Ivtl to knock to the ground. -vn lab{; ava 
laabi{; ava malbuu{. 
~ lab{a linst n, pi -aatl a knock that fells to the 
ground. II malbuu{ lab{a sooda. In an awful dilemma, 
going through a terrible crisIs . 
.k,J libi{ ladj • and pi laba{1 contentious, trouble-
seeking, bullying. 
.k,J laba{2 Inl [path/ vitiligo. 
.k,Ji falba{ ladj, fern lab{a, pl/ub{11 piebald (of anim-
als). 2 afflicted with vitiligo (of humans). 
~l,l labaa{a Inl contentiousness, trouble-seeking, 
bullying. 
.1.,.1;1 fitlaba{ Ivil to be knocked to the ground. -iva 
mitlibi{. 
~ labba{ Ivtl I to splash, spatter, blot. 2 to smear, 
soil. -vn talbii{; avalpva milabba{. 
Ja;l;1 fitlabba{ Ivil I to be splashed, be spattered, be 
blotted. 2 to be smeared, be soiled. -iva mitlabba{. 

~ 'i laabi{ Ivtl to wrestle with. - vn milab{a; ava 
milaabi{. 
~ 
')1;1 fitlaabi{ Ivil to wrestle (with one another). - ava 
mitlaabi{. 
t.yJ 
~ labal (a) Ivtl I to startle, scare. fiskut labalt 
il-walad wi-xalleet-u ysarrax stop that! you've given the 
child a fright and made him cry. 2 to hustle, rush. 
maa-Iak malbuul kida what are you rushing like that 
for? -vn labla, labalaan; ava laabil; pva malbuul. 
~1 fitlabal Ivil I to be ~tartled, be frightened, be 
scared. 2 be hustled, be rushed. - iva mitlibil. 
JyJ 
J.,.I labiq r ladj *1 well-spoken, polished in manners 
and speech. 
-.il.J labaaqa r Inl polish of manners and speech. 
'!'!yJ 
d,.l labak (u, i) Ivtl I confuse, muddle. ri/-walad kaan 
bi-yitkallim kiwayyis wi-nta IIi labakt-u w-xalleet-u 
yilrla{ the boy was speaking perfectly well but you got 
him in a muddle and made him slip up. 2 to cause to be 
lumpy. ruzz' malbuuk lumpy rice. - vn labk, labakaan, 
labka; ava laabik; pva malbuuk. 
~I fitlabak Ivil I to be confused, be muddled. 2 to 
become or be made lumpy. - ava/iva mitlibik. 
cl;J labbik I Ivtl to cause to be lumpy, gummy or 
sticky.labbikit ir-ruzz she made the rice lumpY.ll/abbik 
il-maw4.uul he made things complicated. 2 Ivil to be-
come lumpy, gummy or sticky. fil-lagiin milabbik the 
dough is lumpy. makaroona mlabbika gummy pasta. 
-vn lalbiik; ava/pva milabbik. 
~1 fitlabbik Ivil to be made or become lumpy, gum-
my or sticky. -vn lalabbuk; ava/iva mitlabbik. 
~ 
lalabbuk Ivnl Illalabbuk fil-milda indigestion. 
yJyJ 
..,.1.,.1 lablib I Ivil to grow fresh and supple (of plants). 
ril-qll{n' lablib lamma Jirih the cotton plants were in-
vigorated when they were watered. 2/vtl [slang} to 
cane, beat (with a pliant stick). - vn lablaba; ava/pva 
milablib. 
..,.1.,.1 lib lib ladj • and invarl [slang} quick-witted and 
talkative. naadi I-waad il-liblib illi hnaak da call that 
boy over there who's so full of quick answers. liblib fi-
fluent in, as in ril-bint' di liblib fil-faransaawi this girl is 
fluent in French. zayy il-liblib fluently, as in bi-tilkallim 
779 
fingiliizi zayy ii-lib lib bar4.u she speaks English fluently 
too. 
..,.,)\.,J liblaab Inl [bol} hyacinth bean (Dolichos lablab) . 
..,.,),.1 labluul; In pi labaliibl la tendril. Ib switch, 
whippy stick. Ie [constr} lath. 2 labluub i/-wirk inner 
thigh 3 = liblib. 
~1 fillablib Ivil I to bend. fil-xarazaana {ariyya wi-
b-tillablib the cane is supple and bends easily. 2 [slang} 
to be caned. - ava/iva mitlablib. 
'.;,y J 
~ laban Inl I milk. laban fJaliib fresh milk. laban 4.arb 
buttermilk. laban raayib curdled milk. sinaan ii-laban 
milk teeth. IInahaar-ak laban may your day be fine! 
-~aafi ya laban formula of reconciliation after a quarrel. 
- fumm' laban [bol} spurge. 2 [coarse} 2a semen, 
come.llfilm i laban a sexy film. -Ieela laban an orgiastic 
evening. - fabu laban insulting form of address or refer-
ence to the driver of a horse-drawn carriage. 2b vaginal 
secretions produced during sexual excitement, love 
juice. 
.:,l.Ji falbaan Ipl nl I typesofmilk.llmuntagaat falbaan 
dairy products. 2 dairy, shop selling dairy products. 
~ labani ladjl la pale blue. Ib milky (of colour). 
2 sucking (of a young animal). 
.:,W labbaan 
In 
and 
pi labbaanal 
milkman, 
milk-seller. 
~W labbaana In pi -aatl I milk jug. 2 milkmaid. 
JW labbaani linvarl I ladjl sucking (of a young anim-
al). ligl' labbaani a nursing calf. 2 Inl [butcher} young 
veal. 
~ libbeen Inl wild lettuce, acrid lettuce (Lactuca 
virosa). 
2.;, Y J 
.:,l.J libaan 2 Inl chewing gum. lala wifJ-ak libaan .va 
maddaar i/-libaall [prov} "" whatever you do, it will 
show. lllibaan dakar resin of frankincense, olibanum. 
-libaan nilaaya a natural chewing gum. 
;';l.J libaana lunit n, pi -aall a piece of chewing gum, a 
piece of frankincense.lllibanil-ha zarqa [prov} she's a 
malicious gossip. 
.:r.L malban Inl Turkish delight.llfallafJ leen-ak laakul 
malban [prov} "" keep alert and you'll gain the best 
prize. -bint' malban a voluptuous girl. 
.) labbin Ivil to mumble, or talk in in a garbled 
fashion. -vn lalbiin; ava milabbill. 
~ labbin lala to put the evil eye on (s.o .. by talking 
about him). 

~~J 
780 
J oJ y J see oJ I y J : libaan I 
'? ..:.. J 
..::J latt (i) I Ivtl to knead. tirubb il-lagiin wi-tlitt-u you 
oJ I oJ y J 
beat the dough and knead it.llfJikaaya maltuuta an old 
,:,L:.,.l libnaan, lubnaan Iprop nl Lebanon. 
story (i.e. something heard before). 2 {slang] to give a 
JL:.,.l libnaani, lubnaani I/adj 'I Lebanese. 2 In 'I a 
thrashing to. fabuu-k fJa-ylitt-ak your father will give 
Lebanese. 
you a good hiding. - Ivi/3 to chatter, prattle. qaladit 
tilitt' (fil-kalaam) mala I-mumarriqaat she sat chatter-
J oJ Y J 
ing with the nurses. II latt , w-lagn endless chatter. -vn 
'4 labanda <It alia banda>: {naut] saqaala labanda 
latt, latataan; ava laatit; pva maltuut. 
hard-a-port. sangaq labanda hard-a-starboard. 
~ latta In pi -aatl piece of kneaded dough. II fit-tiina 
min it-tiina wil-Iatta mil-lagiina {prov] "" like father, 
.,yJ 
• ."J labwa 
In 
pi libawl I lioness. 2 highly-sexed 
woman. see further under oJ., y J 
oJ., y J see also., y J 
;;';."J labwana 
In! 
{coarse] 
I unseemly conduct. 
2 demeanour or behaviour of a highly-sexed woman. 
;;';.".lo milabwina Ifem adjl {coarse] highly-sexed. 
,:,~I fitlabwin Ivil I {coarse] to behave coarsely (of 
women). 2 {abus] to be troublesome or nagging (of 
men). - ava mitlabwin. 
l...syJ 
.). labba I Ivtl to comply with (a request). 2 Ivil {lsi] 
to utter the formula beginning labbay-ka fallaahumma 
labbay-k ('I answer your call, 0 God', recited by Mus-
lims on pilgrimage to Mecca, and by all Muslims after 
the prayers recited during ril-liid il-kibiir and the three 
days following). -vn talbiyya, talbiya r; ava milabbi. 
~I fit-talbiyya Inl (lsi] the formula beginning 
labbay-ka fallaahumma labbay-k. 
.). labbay: labbay-ka fallaahumma labbay-k see 
labba 2. 
~I fitlabba Ivil to be complied with (of a request). 
- iva mitlabbi. 
2...s y J 
~) ,l.!) lubya <P lubiya> I/coll nl cow-pea(s), 
black-eyed pea(s) or bean(s) (Vigna sinensis, Vigna 
catjang, Dolichos lubia, Dolichos sesquipedalis). 
II/ubya sudaani cajan pea(s), pigeon pea(s) (Cajanus 
indicus). 2 ladj invarl fresh and young (of vegetables). 
xiyaar lubya young and crunchy cucumbers. lubya ya 
figl' lubya (vendor's cry] tender radishes! II bint' lubya a 
dishy girl. -nahaar lubya a lucky day. 
l...sy J 
Y libya Iprop nl Libya . 
..,...J liibi I adj 'I Libyan. 2 In 'I a Libyan. 
like son . 
S'\.:;) lattaat In ' and pi lattaatal chatterbox. 
..:..1;1 fitlatt Ivil I to be kneaded. 2 {slang] to be 
thrashed. -iva mitlatt. 
~..:..J 
fi litr (also ritO) <Fr litre> In pi -aatllitre. 
...sJ":" J 
~;) lutiriyya, lutariyya <It lotteria> In pi -aatl 
lottery. 
oJ I j ..:.. J 
,:,1.rJ ,,:,1;)1 latazaan 
(also 
xajab 
latazaan) 
Inl 
whitewood planking. - also latazaan. 
;;';I.r' ,;;';1;)1 latazaana = latazaan. -also tazaana, 
latazaana. 
r":" J 
iW 'i\.:;) litaam In pi -aat, litimal veil or cover (for the 
lower part of the face). fJaraami laabis litaam a thief 
~eari?g a scarf (or the like) over his face. 
~ ,~ lattim Ivtl I to veil or cover the lower face of. 
2 to bind the jaw of (a corpse, to prevent it falling). -vn 
ta • .'tiim;. ava/pva milattim. 
~ 
1 .r± 1 fitlattim Ivill to be veiled or covered (of the 
lower part of the face). 2 to be bound (of the jaw of a 
corpse). - iva mitlattim. 
oJ...s":" J 
~)I latiini ladj 'I Latin. -fil-fJuruuf il-Iatiniyya Latin 
characters. ril-kanaayis il-Iatiniyya {Chr] the churches 
following the Latin rite. II finta fJa-tkallim-ni latiini 
don't speak to me in double-Dutch! 
..:.. J see ..r J and ..r I J 

~~J 
~ lagaf (a) Ivil to resort, have recourse. di faaxir 
IJaaga b-yilgaf laha this is the last thing to which he 
resorts. -vn luguuf; ava laagif; pva malguuf. 
:r:. 'i laagi f In ·1 refugee. 
~ 
malgaf In pI malaagifl (place -of) sanctuary, re-
fuge, home, asylum. malgaf faytaam orphanage. 
malgaf lagaayiz home for the aged. 
4-i falgaf Ivtl to cause to resort, cause to seek support. 
feeh illi falgaf-ak lik-kidb what made you resort to 
lying? -ava milgif. 
~\ riltagaf Ivil to seek refuge, seek support, resort. 
filtagafti I-rabb-i-na I asked God for help. huwwa 
dayman miltigif liihum he's always trying to get support 
from them. -vn riltigaaf; ava miltigH'. 
~~J 
2 lagg (i) Ivil to insist, nag. -vn lagagaan, lagg; ava 
laagig. 
~~ lagaaga Inl nagging. 
-.:;..J~J 
.J';~ laglatoor <poss Fr regulateur> In pI -aatl tun-
ing key (of piano). 
~J~J 
~ 
laglig Ivt and viI to cause to stutter. fil-xat/t/a 
lagligit-ni the shock left me stuttering. -vn laglaga; 
avalpva milaglig. 
~\ fitlaglig Ivil I to be caused to stutter. 2 to 
stutter. -avaliva mitlaglig. 
r~J 
r~ ligaam In pI filgima, lig(mal bridle. 
~ laggim Ivtl to bridle.fiil is-sarg i bass i xalli I-IJ~aan 
milaggim remove the saddle, but leave the horse bri-
dled. yilaggim-u rabb-i-na yoom il-iiiyaama b-ligaam 
min naar may Our Lord bridle him with a bridle of fire 
on the day of resurrection! -vn talgiim; avalpva 
milaggim. 
~ 
talgiima In pI -aatl headstall and reins of a 
bridle. 
~\ fitlaggim Ivil I to be bridled. 2 to be dumb-
struck, become speechless. saalit ma faa! il-iiaat/i 
tlaggim when he saw the judge he couldn't utter a word. 
-avaliva mitlaggim. 
.;,~J 
~ lagna, lugna J In plligaan, lugaan J II committee. 
2 examination room in a school. 
781 
.). laggin Ivtl to appoint committees for. fil-IJukuuma 
lagginit il-mafruul the government assigned the project 
to a committee (or several committees). -vn ta/giin; 
avalpva milaggin. 
.;J;\ fitlaggin Ivil to be assigned to committee(s). -iva 
mitlaggin. 
cc J 
2 laIJIJ t (i) Ivil to insist. laIJIJeet lalee yiigi malaana 
I insisted he come with us. -vn laIJIJ, laIJaIJaan; ava 
laaIJiIJ· 
c:..f laIJuuIJ t ladj ·1 insistent. 
c:.LL. laIJIJaaIJ t ladj ·1 insistent. 
2 i falaIJIJ t = laIJIJ· - vn filIJaaIJ; ava mulilJlJ· 
2-- mulilJlJ T ladjl pressing, urgent. IJikaaya mulilJlJa 
an urgent matter. 
I ~c J 
.1.l laIJd In pI luIJuud, luIJudal underground chamber 
in which the corpse of someone important (or of anyone 
not wanting his bones removed from the site) is 
interred. 
.)~ laIJIJaad In "I gravedigger . 
.1.l laIJIJad Ivtl to entomb. -vn talIJiid; ava miiaIJIJad. 
~\ fitlaIJIJad Ivil to be entombed. - iva mitlaIJIJad. 
2 ~ C J 
.)LL.! rillJaad T Inl atheism. 
~ 
mulIJidt In "I atheist. 
I..I"'C J 
...,.J- laIJas I (a) Ivtll to lick. bi-tilIJas ~awabil-ha bald 
il- fakl she licks her fingers after eating. ruuIJ 
Ii-fumm-ak tilIJas-ak (go to your mother and she'll lick 
you) == run home to your mother (a patronizing and 
usually offensive remark). II/aIJas ka/aam-u he went 
back on his word, he broke his promise. -bi-yilIJas 
iI-/ahluuba he's an audacious thief. - fa/IJas misann-i 
w-fabaat mihanni {prov] (I'll lick my grindstone and 
sleep happy) == better go without than get into debt. 
2 to render temporarily blind (of a bright light, exces-
sive reading etc.). 3 to deal (s.o.) a slap (especially, on 
the back of the neck). -vn laIJs; ava laaIJis; pYa 
malIJuus . 
..;J. laIJas 1 (i) Ivtl to drive crazy (often with pleasure). 
ril-binti laIJasit-ni the girl really made me flip. 
larabiyya tilIJis a mind-blowing car. -vn laIJas; ava 
laaIJis; pva malIJuus. 
I..I"'~ malIJuus ladj pI ma/aIJiisl soft in the head, 
cuckoo. 

..,...l;i ral!Jas lell morelmost touched, nutty or crazy. 
...,..t.J. la!J!Jaas In *1 lone who licks. 2 one who slaps. 
rid-dafa lafa wil-bard'la!J!Jaas il-t;afa [prov] warmth is 
health, cold is like a blow on the back of the neck . 
...,....,.J;I rllla!Jas I Ivil passive of la!Jas I. - iva milli!Jis. 
...,....,.J;I rilla!Jas 2 Ivil to be driven crazy or go crazy 
(often with pleasure, wonder etc.). rilla!Jasl" lal-badla 
I b!ew my mind over the suit. - avaliva milli!Jis . 
..,J. la!J!Jas Ivtl to give to lick, give to suck. ril- rumm' 
la!J!Jasil ibn-a-ha ~-~u'tfUyyar il-ma~~aa~a the mother 
gave her little son a lolly to suck. ril-walad da kibir lala 
1-lal!Jiis that child is too big to be bottle-fed (or breast-
fed). -vn lal!Jiis; avalpva mila!J!Jas . 
...,..;..tl rilla!J!Jas Ivil I to be given to lick or suck. ri(-(ift 
illa!J!Jas klliir the child was breast-fed (or bottle-fed) 
frequently (or for a long time). 2 to yearn (for, e.g., 
food). t;aalid yilla!J!Jas lal-rakl he's sitting licking his 
lips in anticipation of the food. - avaliva milla!J!Jas. 
,:, ...,.. c:. J see ':'...,.. c:. 
.:,.J. la!Jsan = ra!Jsan I 2. 
j;, c:. J 
Y 
la!Ja; r (a) Ivtl to notice. - vn la!Ja;aan; ava laa!Ji;; 
pva mal!Juu;. 
Y 
la!J; In pi ral!Jaa;1 [poel] glance, look. ral!Ja;-ha 
ligra!J (the arrows of) her glances wound. 
~ 
la!J;a In pi -aall moment.fi-raaxir la!J;a at the last 
moment.llfi-la!J;a wa!Jda at one and the same moment. 
- raxbaar raaxir la!J;a hot news. 
;J; ~ 
mal!Juu;a In pi -aat, mala!Jii;;1 note, comment, 
observation, remark. 
.b ~ laa!Ji;; Ivtl I to notice, take note of. la!Ji;t 
innuhum naas (ayyibiin I realized that they were kind 
people. -/the literary passive imperfect also occursl 
yulaa!Ja;; laleehum rinnuhum buxala they are noted for 
being miserly. 2 to pay attention to. laa!Ji; i(-(abiix 
lan-naar keep an eye on the food on the gas! -vn 
mula!J;a; ava milaa!Ji;; pva mulaa!Ja; r. 
~)I... mula!J;a In pi -aatl observation, comment, 
remark . 
.b)l... mulaa!Ji; In *1 overseer, superintendent, officer 
in charge . 
.b')l;1 rlllaa!Ji; Ivill to be noticed, be noted. 2 to be 
given attention. - iva millaa!Ji;. 
....; c:. J 
Jt.J. li!Jaaf In pi ril!Jifa, li!Jifal quilt. lala t;add' 
l!Jaaf-ak maddid riglee-k [prov] (according to the size of 
782 
your quilt, stretch out your legs) "" cut your coat 
ac~ording to your cloth. 
~ la!J!Jaf Ivtl [agric] to level off by hand (inundated 
land unreachable by the lawwaa{a). -vn lal!Jiif; avalpva 
mila!J!Jaf. 
......:.tl rilla!J!Jaf Ivil passive of la!J!Jaf. - iva mitla!J!Jaf . 
I J c:. J 
..;.I. li!Jit; or la!Jat; (a) Ivtl I to reach, catch up with 
(with implication of speed). ril!Jat;-na las-sUUt; catch us 
up at the market. ma-l!Jit;naa-f II-cju{r we didn't make 
the train. ril-waksa 'lilli la!Jat;il-u the misfortune which 
overtook him. rig-gadal huwwa IIi yil!Jat; ma{ra!J fil-
rUlubiis the champ is !he one who manages to get a seat 
on the bus. 2 to come to the rescue of, hurry to the aid 
of. ril!Jat;uu-ni bid-duktuur bring me the doctor quick-
ly! 
'li/-mumassiliin 
bi-ybu~~u liI-mulat;t;in lafaan 
yil!Jat;-hum the actors look to the prompter to help 
them out. 3 Ipreverbl 3a to have time to. ma-l!Jit;I'J 
ra!JU{lqan yimiin I didn't have time to pull over to the 
right. 3b to hurry (to do s.th.) before it's too late. yalla 
lafaan lil!Jat; tiruu!J is-suut; wi-tgiib iI-t;uu{a I-!Jilwa di 
hurry off to the market and get those nice tomatoes 
(before they're all gone). 'li/!Jat; tuub hurry and mend 
your ways (before it's too late for you). II mal!Juuqa 
(barqak) it's not too late (for you to do something about 
the matter). 3c to begin or manage (to do s.th.) earlier 
than expected. ya m~ibt-l li!Jt;u y~addu damn! they're 
already rusting! huwwa h!Jlt; yiftaat; li-bn-u has he 
started to miss his son so soon? - vn la!Jat;aan; ava 
laa!Jiq; pva mal!Juut;. 
~I ritla!Jat; Ivil passive of la!Jaq. -iva mitli!Jiq. 
..;1 la!J!Jat; Ivtl to cause (s.o.) to catch up WIth or be in 
time for. la!J!Jat;t-u {-{uyyaara I helped him make the 
plane. - vn lal!Jiit;; avalpva mila!J!Jat;. 
~ 
mila!J!Jat; lad] *1 capable of keeping up with 
things. mif mila!J!Jat; lala lyaal-u he can't make ends 
meet family-wise. 
J> ~ laa!Jit; Ivt and viI to keep up (with). mtjmilaa!Jiq 
la/Jwd he can't keep up with the work. w-ana 
b-amallii-k la!Jiq-ni fil-kitaaba keep up with me in writ-
ing when I dictate to you. 'lana mifmila!Jit;-humfil-rak{ 
I can't eat as fast as they do. II ma-tla!Jiq-niiJ fil-kalaam 
don't keep anticipating what I'm going to say! -vn 
mila!Jt;a; ava milaatit;. 
11 laa!Jiq lala to keep (s.o.) supplied. mif milaa!Jiq 
laleehum filuus I can't keep up with their demands for 
money . 
..;.I.i ral!Jat; Ivtl to cause to join, enrol, register. leeh 

ma-tilljiCj-J ibn-ak bi-malhad ~inaali why don't you 
enrol your son in a technical institute? - vn 'lilljaaCj; ava 
milljiCj; pva mulljaCj. 
~ 
mulljaCj In pi malaaljiCjI I supplementary ex-
amination. 'i'i/-waad saCja[ fil-larabi w-landu mulljaCj 
the boy failed in Arabic and has to do a supplementary 
examination. 2 annex (of a building). kul/ istudyu Iii 
mulljaCj each studio has an annex. 3 appendix (to a 
book). 4 employer's copy of a payroll paid by a bank on 
his behalf. 
- Ipl 
-iilll 5 attache. xaff' wizaarit 
i/-xaarigiyya ka-mulljaCj he entered the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs as an attache. - ladj °1 6 attached, 
annexed. kul/' maktab liqaari mulljaCj bii maktab 
handasi each real-estate office has an engineering office 
attached to it. 
~\ 'liltaljaCj r Ivil I to enrol, register oneself. 
'liltaljaCjt' bil-malhad I enrolled in the institute. 2 to 
take up work (in an occupation or institution). 
lja-yiltiljiCj bi-wa:;iifa gdiida he will take up a new post. 
- vn 'i'i/tiljaaCj; ava miltiljiC;. 
2 J C. J see J.J C. J : luljuuc;i 
c.Jc. J 
eLL laljlalj Ivtl to stir to actIVIty, set moving. da 
kaslaan xaali~ - m-alraf-J alaljlalj-u 'lizzaay he's very 
lazy -I don't know how to get him moving. huwwa 
l-bacJiif illi ylaljlalj-u it's the tip that makes him move. 
mif c;aadir 'lalaljlalj i/-larabiyya min ma[ralj-ha 1 can't 
budge the car from its place. - vn laljlalja; ava/pva 
milaljlalj. 
.......LL laljlalja Inl resourcefulness. 'lir-rizCj i yljibb ii-
laljlalja {prov} == fortune shines upon those who bestir 
themselves. 
~ 
milaljlalj ladj °1 lively and resourceful. 'lilli 
b-yingalj huwwa f-Jabb il-milaljlalj the one who suc-
ceeds is the enterprising young man. 
c.)Y. liljlaalj Icoll nl {bot} I thistle(s). 2 meadow 
saffron. 
c.# laljluulj In pl/aIJaliilj1 {slang} an Egyptian pound 
(especially in contexts of bribing). 
ob # 
laljluulja: 'lik-kalba I-Ialjluulja {coarse} a pair of 
mating dogs. 
r-\ 'litlaljlalj Ivil I to be stirred into activity. 2 to get 
going, get moving. 'lit/aljlalj laljsan malaad iI-yada Ija-
yfuUl get a move on or you'll mi~~ the lunch appoint-
ment. - ava/iva mitlaljlalj. 
I ~ c. J 
~ laljam (i) Ivtl I to join (by welding, ~oldering, splic-
783 
ing etc.). 2 to patch, mend. 'i'i/-lagala lawza Iljaam the 
tyre needs patching. -
Ivil 3 to heal (of a wound). 
li-Ijadd' ma I-garlj' yi/ljim until the wound heals. - vn 
liljaam, laljm, laljamaan; ava laaljim; pva malljuum. 
i\.J. liljaam I Ivnl IIfirii[ liljaam soldering flux. liljaam 
bun[a spot welding. 2 In pi -aatl join, joint. 'i'i/-liljamaat 
illi b-tibCja been i/-balaa(a wit-tanya the joins between 
one tile and another. 3 {text} weft. 
.i.J. laljma I linst n, pi -aatl a weld. 
...J. liljma In pi -aatl {text} weft. lamalna fin-nasiig 
sida Cju(n' w-liljmitljariir we made a warp of cotton and 
a weft of silk in the fabric. 
i\.J. laljljaam In *1 one who solders, welder. 
......L malljama In pi malaaljiml epic. malljamit ii-
'lilyaaza the Iliad. 
~\ 'litlaljam Ivil I to be joined (by welding, solder-
ing etc.). 2 to be patched, bc mended. -iva mitliljim. 
~ laljljam I = laljam I and 2. - vn talljiim; ava/pva 
milaljljam. 
~\ 'litlaljljam I = 'litlaljam. - iva mitlaljljam. 
r->)I;\ 'litlaaljim r Ivil to close with one another. 
'litlaljmu bis-silaalj ii- 'labyatf they fell upon each other 
with knives and bayonets. - ava mitlaaljim. 
~\ 'i'i/taljam r Ivil I to heal over (of a wound). 
2 = 'litlaaljim. - vn 'liltiljaam; ava miltiljim, multabim. 
~ 
multaljama Inl {anat} conjunctiva. 'i'iltihaab ii-
multaljama conjunctivitis. 
2 ~ c. J 
~ laljm Inl I flesh. dool min laljm-i-na w-damm-i-na 
they're our own flesh and blood. huwwa ga b-Ialjm-u 
w-damm-u he came in person. laljm' ktaaf-ak min xeer-i 
(the flesh of your shoulders is from my goodness) you 
owe everything to me. IIlala I-Ialjm with nothing on 
underneath, as in laabis bafkiir lala I-Ialjm wearing a 
towel with nothing on underneath. -lala laljm i ba[n-u 
on an empty stomach. - kallaljm' 'labuu he spoke ill of 
his father. - raagil yalbaall fi-raljabt-u koom labm a 
poor man with a lot of (helpless) children. - dafal min 
il-Ialjm iI-ljayy he paid what he could ill afford. 2 Ipl 
luljuuml meat. labm' xanziir pork. luguul iI-labm 
calves for meat. II 'laxd' laljm d lala latfm taking the 
good with the bad. - kal-ha laljm' w-ramaa-ha latfm he 
used her when she had something to offer and threw her 
out when she was finished . 
...J. laljma 2 Inl meat. laljma b-xutfaar meat and veget-
able stew. IIliid iI-Ialjma {slang lsi} the Greater Feast 
(cf liid il-ratfba). - ma-fafp laljma {slang} he's a virgin, 
he'~ never had a woman. 

~ l...L laIJmaaya In pi -aatl fleshy growth in or on the 
body. 
4 
laIJmiyya In pi -aatlla piece of extraneous flesh, 
fleshy growth. Ib adenoids. 2 inner fleshy surface (of 
the skin). laIJmiyyit iI-leen {anat} conjunctiva. 
IIlalJmiyyit iI-/uxxaar the unglazed surface of the 
earthenware. 
~ 
milIJim ladj " and invarl fleshy, fat. mara milIJima 
(or milIJim) a plump woman. 
~ laIJIJam] I/vtl to dress (a hide, by removal of flesh 
etc.). 2/vil to become fleshy, become fat. -vn talIJiim; 
ava miiaIJIJam. 
~I ritlaIJIJam] Ivil to be dressed (of a hide, by the 
removal of flesh, etc.). - iva mitlaIJIJam. 
,:,c J 
.;,.L. laIJan (a) Ivil to make an error (in grammar, Kora-
nic recitation etc.). -vn laIJII; ava laaIJin. 
4.;.l. laIJna linst n, pi -aatl error, slip (in grammar, 
Koranic recitation etc.). 
.;,.L. laIJn In pi ralIJaanl melody or musical composition 
(especially vocal music}. 
J. laIJIJan Ivtl to set (words) to music. laIJIJant-a-ha 
laIJn' samaali I composed the music for it by ear. -vn 
talIJiin; avalpva miiaIJIJan. 
~ 
mulaIJIJin In "I composer of music (especially for 
songs). 
.;J;I ritlaIJIJan Ivil to be set to music. -iva mitlaIJIJan. 
J.Jc J 
.)"J. IUIJUUlii Inl type of shallow cooking pan. 
~cJ 
4,.l. liIJya t In pi liIJal beard. 
j,ytJ 
.J..;t. laxbat I/vtl to muddle, confuse, make a mess of. 
IJikaaya tlaxbat iI-laql a matter that confuses the mind. 
IIIJ-alaxbat kayaan-u I'll give him what for! -IJ-alaxbat 
wifl-u I'll give him a bloody nose! -maa-lik milaxbata 
wiff-ik kida why have you slapped all that filthy make-
up on your face? - raxallii-k timfi lal-lagiin ma-tlaxbat-
uu-f == I'll teach you manners! 2 Ivil to act or speak 
improperly. IJa-ylaxbat malaana /il-filuus he'll try and 
cheat us. laxbatu malaana fik-kalaam they used bad 
language with us. -vn laxbata; ava/pva milaxbat. 
~ 
laxbata In pl/axabiitl muddle, confusion, mix-up. 
IJl¥alit laxbata fit-tazaakir there was a mix-up over the 
tickets. 
784 
.l..,.>J;1 ritlaxbat Ivii to be or become muddled up, be-
come confused, become messed up. laqeet iI-IJikaaya 
tlaxbatit I found that things had become muddled. 
- ava/iva mitlaxbat. 
ttJ 
t:! laxx (u) Ivil to tell a tall story. -vn laxx, laxaxaan; 
ava laaxix. 
til laxxaax In " and pl/axxaaxal teller of tall stories. 
lJ'f'.t J 
~ 
laxxl¥ Ivtl to summarize. -vn talxi~; ava/pva 
mil~xl¥. 
~ 
mulaxxl¥ In pi -aatl summary. 
~I ritlaxxl¥ Ivil to be summarized. -iva mitlaxxl¥. 
.:, ...itJ 
.;,AlL lax/in Ivtl to muddle, confuse, perplex. -vn 
lax/ana; ava/pva milaxfin. 
~I ritlaxfin Ivil to be muddled, confused or per-
plexed. -iva mitlaxfin . 
ItJtJ 
t:}J- laxlax I Ivtl to loosen, allow play. 2 Ivil to become 
loose, have play. rukab-i laxlaxit min iI-mafy my knees 
become rubbery from walking. -vn laxlaxa; ava/pva 
milaxlax. 
rl ritlaxlax = laxlax 2. - ava mitlaxlax . 
Z t J t J see t J t J r : muluxlux 
rtJ 
~ laxam (i) Ivtl to overtax, fluster and confuse with 
excessive demands. goz-ha laxim-ha fil-wilaad her hus-
band has given her so many children she's at her wit's 
end. rana malxuuma lafaan ma-kunt'-f lamia IJsaab-i 
rasaafir dilwaqti I'm all in a mOddle because I had not 
reckoned to be leaving now. - vn laxma, laxamaan; ava 
laaxim; pva malxuum. 
4.J. laxma Inl I confusion, embarrassment. Il/amma 
b-aqa/ quddaam iI-mudiir b-aqrab laxma when I stand 
before the director, I get confused. 2 linvarl slow-
witted person. 
~I ritlaxam Ivil to be overtaxed, become flustered 
or confused. -ava/iva mitlixim. 
~ 
I ristalxam 
Ivtl 
to 
consider 
slow-witted. 
ristalxamu I-muwa;;a/ ig-gidiid wi-IJattu la/a dmaar-u 
f-fur/' kul/-u seeing that the new employee was a bit 
dim they piled all the work onto him. -vn ristilxaam; 
ava/pva mistalxam. 

~ ~ J see 1 j j J : ladd. ladiid 
t~J 
t.iJ .t..u ladar; (also ladal') (a) Ivtll to sting. bite (ofa 
snake or scorpion). affect (s.o.) sharply with (s.th.). 
rit-tir;baan ladar;-u mawwit-u the snake bit him and 
killed him. ladar;-ni ljalam he gave me a stinging slap. 
fJ-aldar;-ha gawaab yixallii-ha tgii-li r;ala mala wiff-a-ha 
I'll send her a letter that will make her jump and come 
running to me. ladar;naa-humfakwa we put in a strong 
complaint against them. 2 to steal, swipe. raafJ laadir; 
iI-filuus he went and swiped the money.ll/adar; iI-rakla 
he polished off the food. 3 {metal] to fuse. rif-faraara 
ladar;it iI- rablatiin the sparks fused the contact breaker. 
- Ivi/4 {metal] to become fused. -vn ladr;. ladar;aan; 
ava laadir;; pva malduur;. 
~.iJ .~..u ladr;a In pi -aatl I (also ladl'a I) linst nl a 
sting. 2 {metal] spot-solder, spot-weld. 
t~ "lI laazir; r ladjl biting, harsh and hurtful. naqd; 
laazir; biting criticism. 
tJ..il.. .tJ..I.l.. malduur; In pi maladiir;1 {coarse] son ofa 
bitch. ril-fJitta di kull-a-ha naas maladiir; 'this whole 
place is (filled with) rotten bastards. lI(allar; maladiir; 
(-i) {coarse] he gave (me) hell. 
~ 
J..il.. .~ J..I.l.. malduur;a In pi maladiir;1 {coarse] loose 
woman. whore, tart. ribn; malduur;a '" son of a bitch. 
t..u.1 ritladar; (also ritladal') Ivil passive of ladal. - iva 
mitlidir;. 
It~J 
t.~ yuldul' (fik-kalaam) limperf vi to speak with de-
fective pronunciation (especially rhotacism). -vn 
ladal'aan. 
~..u ladl'a 2 In pi -aatl instance of defective pronuncia-
tion (especially rhotacism). 
t...ui raldal' ladj, fern ladl'a, plludl'l having defective 
pronunciation (especially rhotacism). 
1 t ~ J see t ~ J: ladal'. ladl'a I. ritladal' 
I .J ~ J 
.:,~ laddin Ivtl {rur] to dry out (bread) by baking it a 
second time. r;eef miladdin twice-baked bread. IIsitt; 
mladdina a skinny or bony woman. -vn taldiin; ava/pva 
miladdin . 
.:,.i.l.1 ritladdin Ivil passive of laddin. - iva mitladdin. 
1 .J ~ J 
.:r,.1..u ladaayin r Ipl nl plastics. 
785 
11 J see 2 j j J 
r..l J 
(.J"lI larj <Fr large> ladj invarl generous. 
r.J..IJ 
r;:J"lI laring <P narang> Icoll nl Seville oranges.- also 
naring. 
.!I J I j J see I j : li-zaalik 
r jJ 
(.J lazig. lizig ladjl I viscous. 2 boorish. 
~JJ luzuuga Inl viscosity. 
I jj J 
) 
lazz 1 (i) Ivtl to push, shove. lazz i(-(arabeeza r;al-
fJee(a he pushed the table against the wall. IIlazzuu 
r;allja (ayyiba they gave him a good thrashing. - vn lazz. 
lazazaan; ava laaziz; pva malzuuz. 
);1 ritlazz 1 Ivil to be pushed, be shoved. II ritlazz a 
r;allja suxna mbaarifJ he got a thorough beating yester-
day. -iva mitlazz. 
1 jj J 
lJ lazz 2 (i) Ivtl to please, delight. yilizz-u rinnu yiqrab· 
he gets pleasure out of beating. di fJaaga bi-tlizz-u rinnu 
yir;mil-ha this is something which he is delighted to do. 
II mimma lazza wa-(aab r '" the choicest of food. -vn 
lazazaan; ava laaziz; pva malzuuz. 
~ ladd (i) Ivil to appeal, meet with approval.fakl-a-ha 
ladd" r;alayya her appearance appealed to me. rinfa-lla 
1- rakl; ylidd" r;aleek I hope you find the food to your 
taste. -vn ladd. ladadaan; ava laadid. 
• .iJ lazza In pi -aatl pleasure. lazza rofJiyya a spiritual 
joy . 
.it.iJ laziiz ladj pl/uzaaz. luzazal nice, pleasant. rakl; 
laziiz tasty food. bint; laziiza a sweet girl. 
-'!...u ladiidJ: ladiid ya tirmis {vendor's cry] delicious 
lupin seeds! 
lJ i . ralazz lell more/most nice or pleasant. 
.:.I..il.. malazzaat Ipl nl sensual pleasures . 
.l\;1 ritlazz 2 Ivil to obtain sensual pleasure. fii naas 
ma-titlazz;-/ mil- rakl iI-masluulj there are people who 
d?n't enjoy boiled food. - ava mitlazz. 
~.ilil ritlazziz Ivil to experience enjoyment, feel plea-
sure. ritlazzizt; min iI-musiiqa I enjoyed the music. 
- ava mitlazziz. 

..i::.I1 riltazz = ritlau. - ava miltlzz. 
.il;;...1 I'lslilazz. r,slalazz I Ivtl to find enjoyable, find 
pleasurable. ristilazz il- rakl' c,aam Ja[{ab lalee he 
found the food delicIOus so he poli~hed it off. 2 Ivil to 
find enjoyment. find pleasure. ristalazz' tid-daJa c,aam 
naam finding comfort in the warmth, he went to sleep. 
- vn ristilzaaz; ava mlstilazz. mistalazz. 
t. j J see t. J J : laazil 
JjJ 
,-,) Itvc, 
(a) 
Ivil to adhere, stick. 
rti-racJaab 
tI-baI:Jnyya filii b-tl/zac, lal-marklb the seaweed which 
adhere~ to the ship. - vn lazac,aan. Itwc,; ava laaZllj. 
,-,) lazac, (a) Ivtl I to stick, affix (with adhesive mat-
ter). bl-yilzac, il-xaJab fi-balq-u bil-lfira he glues the 
wood together. 2 to slap. lazaq-m lala sdaalf-i he slap-
ped me on my cheeks. - vn lazq; ava laazic,; pva 
malzuuq. 
.Y..) tiziic, Inl adhesive matter. 
..;) lazej Ivnl Ilxab[' lazq abruptly and bluntly, as in 
raaI:J xab[' lazq d l:Jaka 1-I:Jikaaya he plunged right into 
the story, he blurted out the story. 
.... ) lazqa In pi -aat, luzac,1 I sticking plaster, adhesive 
tape. Ilhuwwa lazc,a b-lftra == IS one never to be rid of 
him? 2 poultice. 
..;I} lazzaaq I ladjl sticky, adhesive. waraq lazzaac, 
maskmg tape, sticky tape. 2 Inl glue. 
.... J.. malzaqa In pi malaaZIc,1 clamp. 
,-,pi ritlazaq Ivil I to be stuck, be affixed (with adhe-
sive substance). 2 to adhere, attach oneself. ritlizlc, 
gamb II-baab stick close to the door! - avaliva IImltzic,. 
..;} lazzaq I Ivtl to affix, stick .lIlazza{j It-tuhma haI:Jb-
u he pinned the rap on hi~ friend. 2 to make (dung) into 
cakes. l:Jalta g-gilla ylazzaquu-ha wl-ywallalu bitha 
even cattle dung they mix witli straw and shape into 
cakes to use for fuel. - Ivi/3 to stick, be sticky. laljeet 
iI-mixadda laleeha buc,la ~afra bi-tlazzaq I found that 
the pillow had a sticky yellow mark on It. - vn tahllc,; 
avalpva milazzac,. 
J)I rltlazzac, Ivil I to be affixed, be stuck. 2 be made 
into cakes (of dung). -iva mitlazzaq. 
r j J 
r) Itzim (a) I/vt and viI to be necessary (for). 
YI/zam-ak l:Jaaga or yilzam-Iak l:Jaaga or lazm-ak l:Jaaga 
or lazim-Iak l:Jaaga do you need anything? tizim-ak 
l:Jaaga etc. did you need anything? kaan ytlzam-ak 
l:Jaaga were you in need of anything? yilzam-ak badla 
you need a suit. ti/zam-ak tI-badla dl do you need this 
786 
suit? riI-I:Jagaat illi ma-tllzam-naajthe things we don't 
need. II.Vllzam xldma can I be of service? - rilli 
ma-mallllljma-ytizam-lIu-J [prov/ he who has nothing 
cannot (afford to) need anythmg. 2/vtl to keep to. 
r//zam l:Jadd-ak (or l:Judlilid-ak) (keep to your limits!) 
mmd your own busme~s! rtlzam fadab-ak mmd your 
manners! - vn lizuum. luzuum; ava laazim; pva 
malzullm. 
r) lazam I 
(I) 
Ivtl 
to 
hold 
responsible. 
rinta 
lamalt-a-ha tibqa malZl/llln biiha you're the one who 
did It so you're responsible. - vn lizuum. /uzuum; ava 
laazim; pva malZUlim. 
rJ ) 
tiZUlim. luzuum Inl I need. ma-fll-J Itzuum tlkallif 
lIafs-ak there's no need for you to trouble yourself. 
lalld iI-luzuum at need, when nece~sary. 2 use, func-
tion. ril-bafra Itzum-ha I-laff Is-sagaayir cigarette paper 
IS used for rollmg cigarettes. 
r j'i laazim I I laval II ril-Iaazim what is necessary, as in 
takillf raktar mill il-Iaazim more trouble than neces-
sary, c,1I1-1t 1-laaZlm WI-bass just tell me what is neces-
sary. rit-tamarglyya lamalit laha I-Iaazim the nurse 
gave her the required treatment, riddii-Iu I-Iaazim 
bltaal-li b-I:Jees 1'1111111 ma-ytJtlkll-J give him what he 
needs so he won't complain. 2 hnvarl 28 modal of ne-
cessity. laaZlln tlkJlf land' duklOor klwaYYls you must 
be exammed by a good doctor. mtJ laaZlm yllgl (I) he 
must not come. (2) he need not come. (3) he should not 
come. kaalllaaZlm tillaiJa malaana you (really) should 
have had supper With us. 2b modal of probability. 
laaZlm rawwaI:J1t she mu~t have gone home. rilli xad 
tr-radYlllaazim yikulill raxull-k it must be your brother 
who took the radio . 
... j'i lazma Inl I need. lamma ykllun fll lazma li/-
larab,yya when there IS a need for the car. ma-Ihaa-J 
lazma it is 
unnece~sary. 2 use, function. lazmit 
Is-sandllllq rlllllll Ylalllfn tI-I:Jarakaat the function of the 
vaulting box is to teach exercises. -
Ipl -aatl 3 [mus/ 
instrumental interlude in a song 
- Ipl lawaaziml 
4 mannerism. kititr min il-lIllidarrlSllllliihllm lawaazim 
tldal:Jl:Jak many teachers have funny mannerisms. 
rjl) lawaaVIll Ipl nl equipment. requisites. lawaazim 
tI-xayya{iill tailors' requisites. 
r) /azam! ladvl in the closest propinquity. bet-hum 
gambma /azalll their house is right beside us. raxuuya 
/azam my german brother. 
r)i ralzam I lell morelmost necessary. 
... J.. lIla/zama In pi ma/aazim. ma/zamaatl I [print/ 
signature (of eight or sixteen sheets). 2 [aead/ set of 
stencilled lecture notes. 

i);1 'litlazam Ivil passive of lazam'. -iva millizim. 
iJ lazzim Ivtl to hold responsible. lamma kasar 
il-cagala lazzimuu biiha when he broke the bicycle they 
held him responsible for it. -vn talziim; ava/pva 
milazzim. 
i);1 'lillazzim Ivil to be held responsible. -iva 
mitlazzim. 
ij"l laazim! Ivtl 1 to stick to, adhere to. 'lil-fa(fr i 
mlazim-hum poverty clings to them. Ilya-1Ii I-gooza 
mlazmaa-k you who are never without a gooza. - sill' 
mlazma I-firaaf a bed-riddcn woman. 2 to accompany 
(musically). -vn milazma; ava milaazim. 
()'j... mulaazim In *1 1 (also mulaazim taani) [mil] 
second-lieutenant. II mulaazim 'lawwal first-lieutenant. 
2 fnavJ sub-lieutenant. Ilmulaazim taani midshipman, 
acting sub-lieutenant. 
i)i 'la/zam! = lazam '.lIsinn i 'lilzaam school age. -vn 
'lilzaam; ava milzim, mulzim; pva mulzam. 
..rl) l filzaami ladjl compulsory. lacliim filzaami com-
pulsory schooling. 
i;J I filtazam Ivil 1 to undertake an obligation or re-
!>ponsibility. kull i waaljid minhum bi-yiltizim bi-fJaaga 
mucayyana each one of them is responsible for a par-
ticular thing. 2 to adhere, be committed. fii naas 
miltizmiin bil-IawaayifJ there are people who stick to 
the rules. 3 [obsolJ to be the holder of a concession or 
franchise. -vn fillizaam; ava miltizim, multazim r. 
il;J I liltizaam In pi -aall 1 obligation, responsibility. 
2 fobsolJ concession, franchise. 
i.rJ.. mullazim In *11 adherent. 2 [obsol] holder of a 
concession or franchise. 
i);;...1 fisla/zam f Ivtl to require, deem necessary. -vn 
fislilzaam; ava mistalzim; pva mustalzam . 
.... \..J-... mustalzamaat Ipl nl equipment, requisites. 
..,..J 
:w lisa or lasa In pi -aatl gum (of the teeth). kayy ii-lisa 
cauterization of the gums. - also laasa. 
..:....,..J 
;.;...J lista <It lista> In pi -aat, lisatl 1 list (of any kind). 
2 bill of fare, menu. 
I ..,.. ..,.. J 
~ lissa ladv, w pron suff lissaa-I I still, '(not) yet. 
huwwa lissa ~uYayyar he's still young. lissaa-ku ma-
rufJtuu-f haven't you gone yet? lissa talaata saar still 
three piastres (to go, owing etc.). saafir lissa ma-fii-f 
gumca it's not yet a week since he left. lissa fJ-awaddi 
I-kutub I've still to deliver the books. gah walla lissa has 
787 
he come yet or not? fuft iI-mudiir. -lissa 'Have you seen 
the manager?' 'Not yet.' IIhuwwa-nta lissafuft d fJaaga 
you haven't seen anything yet! -lissa badri it's early yet, 
there's still plenty of time (said, e.g., to encourage 
departing guests to stay longer). -lissa badri cala it's 
still too soon for, as in fil-ba{{iix {ilic laakin it-tiin lissa 
badri calee water-melon is in season but it will be a 
while before the figs come in, fi{-{ifT i ~rayyar - lissa 
badri cala I-mafy the baby is very young - it's too early 
for him to walk. - 'listafJmilna ktiir - wi-lissa we've put 
up with a lot. and there's more to come! 2 just, just 
now, only recently. di lissa kaanit wa(ffa gambi min 
sanya she was standing next to me just a second ago. 
da-nti lissa diik in-nahaar kunti b-titkallimi can il-
gawaaz why, only the other day you were talking about 
marriage! 'lis-sill illi kaanit lissa gayya min cand 
id-duktuur farhadit the lady who had just come from the 
doctor's fainted . 
t..,..J 
~ lasac (a) Ivtl 1 to scorch. fil-makwa s-suxna lasacil 
il-huduum the hot iron scorched the clothes. 2 to sting. 
lasacit-ni nafJla a bee stung me.ll/asac-u (falam he gave 
him a stinging slap. ~ [slangJ to steal. lasac minni ktaab 
he pinched a book from me. - Ivi/4 to become stinging 
or acrid (of taste). -vn laSe; ava laasic ; pva malsuuc. 
......J lasca linst n, pi -aatl a scorch, a sting, etc. 
t."..J.. malsuuc ladj *1 jumpy, easily startled. 
c-tl 'litlasac Ivil 1 to be s~orched. xallii-ha titlisic 
fuwayya b-naar il-fJubb let her be scorched a little by the 
fire of love. 2 to be stung. 3 [slang] to be stolen. - iva 
mitlisic · 
.!l..,..J 
~ 
laska <It laseo> Inl [naut] slack (of a rope) . 
'licmillaska slacken the rope! 
d.:J lassik Ivil [nautJ to slacken a rope. -vn talsiik; ava 
milassik . 
.!lJ..,..J 
.?J-~ lasilki Inl wireless. 
.j..,..J 
.:,W lisaan In pllisina; lilsinal I tongue (of an animal 
or human). rism-u cala kull i Isaan his name is on every 
tongue. nu~~i Isaan wi-snaan ciira half a tongue and 
false teeth (said of one who does not speak well). 
yikkallim can lisaan-i he speaks on my behalf. 'li(f{ac 
lisaan cadiww-ak bis-salaamu caleekum [provJ (cut the 

tongue of your enemy with a greeting) disarm your 
enemy by means of courtesy. lisaan-ak Ij~aan-ak !'in 
~unt-u ~aan-ak [provj your tongue is (like) your horse; 
if you take care of it, it will take care of you. II express-
ions referring to 'pulled' and 'long' tongues indicate 
insolence, thus lisaan-u (awiil (his tongue is long), 
huwwa magruur min lisaan-u (he has been pulled by his 
tongue), zayy illi d-daaya garraa min lisaan-u (like one 
whose tongue was pulled by the midwife), mitlaffal 
bi-Isaan-u (his tongue is so long that he can be wrapped 
in it). -laayiz sikirteer milyoon lisaan fi-buljlj-u he 
wants a secretary who can deal with a million things at 
once. - waakil lisaan gidy he has eaten a billy goat's 
tongue "" he talks too much. 28 (roughly) tongue-
shaped object. lisaan gazma shoe-tongue. lisaan ~arf 
envelope flap. 2b spit (of land). 2c wedge. 2d [carpj a 
tenon. - Ipl also !'alsunl 3 (foreign) language, (fore-
ign) tongue. kulliyyit il-!'alsun (Ain Shams University) 
College for foreign languages. II !,it-takallum bi/-!'alsun 
[Chrj speaking with tongues. 
~ 
lass in Ivil I to hang out, loll (of the tongue, from 
tiredness). 2 to speak unkindly or slanderously. 
bi-ylassin lalayya he says bad things about me. - Ivtl 
3 to wedge. -vn talsiin; avalpva milassin . 
.;xl !,itlassin Ivil (impersonal) passive of lassin 2. 
ril-bint' di tlassin laleeha ktiir this girl has been the 
subject of a lot of slanderous gossip. - iva mitlassin. 
.r~.rJ 
..,..;L.J lisans.lasans <Fr licence> In pi -aatl degree of 
Bachelor of Arts. lisans I ljut;UUlj bachelor's degree in 
law. 
t-'.r J 
t."..J laswall Ivt/18 to scorch. !'in-naar laswalit !'iid-
i the fire scorched my hand. Ib to give a scorching or 
stinging pain to. !'ik-kurbaag laswal riglay-ya the whip 
stung my legs. 2 Ivil 28 to be scorched. 2b to burn or 
sting with pain. -vn laswala; ava/pva milaswal. 
t.".J.;1 !,itlaswal Ivil I = laswal 2. 2 be scorched on 
top and undercooked inside (of a dish of food). - iva 
mitlaswal· 
01.S.rJ 
~ 
'J laseeh <Fr lacet> Inl type of lace work em-
ploying braid. 
~-'I.S.rJ 
(.)y.:-) lusyoon <Fr> In pi -aatl lotion. 
788 
I.S..;.J 
~ 
')1.;1 !,itlaaJa r I Ivtl to avoid. Ijaawil titlaaJa I-ralat 
iI-marra g-gayya try to avoid making a mistake next 
time. 2 Ivil to disappear. -vn talaaJi; ava mitlaaJi. 
~~J 
~ 
I~~ In pi l~u~1 thief, robber. 
~.,...al I~~iyya Inl thievery. 
~i !'a/~~ lell morelmost thieving. ma-Juft'1 !'a/~~' 
minnu fif1irka he's the biggest thief I know in the 
whole company. 
~I 
!'it/~~~ Ivil to snoop, spy. -vn la/~~~r; ava 
mill~~. 
J~J 
.:;....aJ 
I~alj, I~aq r (a) Ivtl to glue, stick, affix. 
II !,il-tarkiib bil-Ia~q [horlj approach grafting. -vn I~lj, 
I~q; ava la~ilj, la~iq; pva ma/~uulj, ma~uuq. 
.:;....aJ 
I~lj, I~q r Inl adhesion, adhesiveness. ma-lhaa1 
!'ayy' ljuwwit I~lj it has no sticking power. 
..::..l.i..a.l. mu/~aljaal, mu/~aqaal r Ipl nl notices, posters., 
advertisements . 
..;..a.l;1 
!'it/~alj Ivil to be glued, be stuck, be affixed. 
- iva mitli~ilj. 
..; W I 
!'il/~aalj, 
!'illi~aaq r : 
!'ilt~aalj ir-rukbileen 
knock-kneedness. 
!'ilti~aalj 
fil-m~ariin intestinal 
lesions. 
r~J 
~ 
I~~am Ivtl to do a temporary or slapdash fixing-up 
job on (s.th.). I~~amit iI-fuslaan li-raayi/.ma Igiib 
waaljid gidiid she fixed up the (old) dress to carry her 
through till she could get a new one. I~~am il-baab 
li-raayil ma yaaxud il-filuus wi-yimJi he has fixed the 
door so that it will just hang together until he gets his 
money and goes away. -vn ta/~iim; avalpva mil~~am. 
;;........t la/~iima linst n, pi -aall a temporary or slapdash 
fixing-up job. 
~I !'ill~~am Ivil I to be temporarily or sloppily 
fixed. 2 to find or seize on a pretext. !'itla~~amit-Iu lala 
kilma w-sabi/-Iu I-beet she seized upon a word (he said) 
as an excuse for leaving him. - avaliva mill~~am. 
r"'" J 
r-4' laqam (u) I Ivtl to thread. laqm il-!,ibra threading 
the needle. laqamil sabal Ijabbaal fil-falla she strung 
seven beads on the string. 2 Ivil to connect firmly, join 
together closely. -vn laqm, laqamaan; ava laaqim; pya 
malquum. 
1I1aqam mala to join with (in conversation etc.).laqam 

mll[aa fik-kalaam he got into conversation with him. 
lae[amu mala bale[; fi!-fitiima they started insulting one 
another. 
~I ritlae[am lvi/ to be threaded. - iva mitlie[im. 
~~J 
~I riI-lae[a: such expressions as mif laafii I-Iae[a, 
ma-landuu{ iI-lae[a etc. he is penniless. 
~I ritlae[e[a Ivil to be tortured, suffer pangs (oflove, 
hunger etc.). ritlae[e[a mig-guul he was starved. -ava 
mitlae[e[i. 
. .1J 
~ lacax (u, i) Ivt/l to smear, soil. lacaxu l-fJeeca b-Ciin 
they smeared the wall with mlld.lacax fiami~-u b-damm 
he got blood on his shirt. 2 to deal (a blow or the like) 
to. -vn lacx, lacaxaan; ava laacix; pva malcuux. 
~ lacx In pi lucuux, luCr1xal obtuse and rude person, 
stupid and boorish person. 
~ 
lacxiyya linst n, pi -aatl a smearing. lacaxna 
l-fJeeca taani lacxiyya w-bare[u !afifiafiit we plastered 
over the wall a second time but it still developed cracks. 
~i ralCax lei! morelmost obtuse, stupid, clumsy etc. 
~I ritlacax lvi/ I to be smeared, be soiled. 2 to be 
dealt a blow or the like. - iva mitlicix. 
~ laceax Ivtl I to smear or soil thoroughly. 2 to deal 
many blows to. - Ivi/38 to talk insultingly. 3b to talk 
nonsensically. -vn talciix; avalpva milaccax. 
~I ritlaceax Ivil to be thoroughly smeared or soiled. 
-iva mitlaccax. 
~I ristalcax Ivtl I to consider dimwitted. 2 to 
select for stupidity. ristalcaxu r-raagil wi-difJku ealee 
w-xadufluus-u they picked on the man as a fool, tricked 
him and got his money. - lvi/ 3 to behave boorishly. 
rinta fJa-tistalcax lala miin what do you think we are for 
you to be rude to us? -vn ristilcaax; avalpva mistalcax. 
~lj.1J 
.:,1)aJ • .:,I).~ lacazaan 
(also xa!ab lacazaan) 
Inl 
whitewood planking. -also latazaan. 
~ I). ~ lacazaana = lacazaan. -also latazaana, tazaana. 
~.1 J 
..;..bJ laca! (u) Ivtl I to steal, filch. riI-liyaal laca!u 
l-mafJfa;a btaet-i the kids swiped my wallet.!Vayfin-na 
mifJtagin-hum yulCU!u zayy; ma humma layziin they 
realize that we're dependent on them so they take us for 
all they can get. 2 to hit, strike. riI-larabiyya lacafit-u 
the car struck him. riI-balcagi laca!-ha fialameen the 
thug knocked her about. rilcu! iI-fJeeca wifl buuya slap 
789 
a coat of paint on the wall.lldamm-u yulcu!he's anti-
pathetic. -kubbaayit biira b-tulcu!-u he gets drunk on 
one glass of beer. 3 to scorch. rin-naar laca!it huduum-u 
the fire scorched his clothes. II rif-!ams; laca!it-u he got 
sunstroke. - Ivi/4 to be scorched. riI-xa!aba lacafit the 
piece of wood got scorched. -vn laCf; ava laa(i!; pva 
malcuu!. 
..;..bJ laCf Inl {carp! process of attaching something to a 
surface without using joints (i.e. by gluing, nailing 
etc.). 
4.:.lal laCfa In pi -aatl I instance noun of laCf. latfit lams 
(bout of) sunstroke. 2 blot, smudge . 
.;.).L. malcuu! I lad j • and pi malaCiifl touched in the 
head. 2 In pi malaCiifl {slang, deris! an Egyptian pound. 
.;.lhJ laccaa! In pi -aatl {text! rubbing leather (of a 
loom). 
4.:.lhJ laccaa!a In pi -aatll leather bandage to prevent a 
horse's legs from knocking together. 2 = laceaaf. 
~ 
malca!a Inl butt (for jokes, scorn, anger etc.). 
..;Ja1;1 ritlaca!lvi/l to be stolen, be filched. 2 to be hit, 
be struck. 3 to be brushed against. - iva mitli(if. 
.;.bJ lacca! Ivt/l to slap, hit. xud-u lacea!-Iu wif!-u take 
him and give his face a slapping. 2 to blotch, blot, make 
blotchy. - Ivi/3 to flail or blunder about as though in 
the dark, behave in a.slapdash manner, make a mess of 
things. maa!i ylacea! fie[-e[alma going blundering about 
in the dark. rid-duktuur lacea! fit-ta!xi~ the doctor 
botched the diagnosis. rid-dinya mlaaa!a mll[aaya life 
messes me around. 4 to blotch, blot. r~-~ablfa laaafit 
the dye blotched. mumkin i1-fJibr; ylaaa!fil-warafi the 
ink may make blotches on the paper. -vn tal(iif; avalpva 
milacca!. 
fol ritlacca! Ivil passive of laaaf. -iva mitlaaaf. 
1.1.1J 
11 laa (u) Ivtl to touch (lightly). riI-fJagar id-daayir la 
budd; min laa-u {pray! ... a rolling stone is bound to get 
a bit of a knock. -vn lace, lacacaan; ava laa(iC; pva 
malcuuc· 
~ lacca linst n, pi -aatl a slight touch. 
11.1 ritlaa Ivil to be touched. II rinta tlaaeet fi-raas-ak 
have you gone crazy? -iva mitlaa. 
Z.1.1J 
11 lua <Engl> In pi -aatllot (in an auction). 
t.1J 
ebJ lacae (a) Ivtl I to stick (s.th. or s.o. onto s.th.). 
riddeet-u!alluutlaeae-ufil-l:Jeeca I gave him a kick that 
had-him flat against the wall. II rileal i1-kariima kiss the 

hand. 2 to leave (s.o.) stranded. -vn la{alaan, la{l, 
la{la; ava laa{il; pva mal{ULll. 
;.J.J la{la I Ipl -aatl Instance noun of la{l. 
...J.J III{la, la{la 2 In pi It/{all patch or cluster (of insect 
eggs. on leavcs. plants etc.). 
~I rllla{al Ivil to be kept waiting. - iva mllli{ll. 
~I rllla{{al/vil to delay. hang about. ritla{{al gamb 
t/-l:Jee{a he hung about by the wall. kul/' ma rablat-ha 
f-jllyla ttmjt ttlla{{al whenever I send her on an errand 
~he dawdles along. - ava mllla{{al. 
..;j,J 
...AkJ la{af (u) Ivil to show mercy (of God). rul{uf 
bt-labitd-ak ya rabb have mercy on Thy servants. Lord 
(prayer used In time of hard~hip). ral/a yul{uf-bu may 
. God be kind to him (implYing mental deficiency). -vn 
Itlf}; ava laa{tf; pva mal{uuf. 
...AkJ IlIrf I In pi ral{aaf! mercy. kindness. lurf-ak ya 
rabb (I seek) Thy mercy. Lord. ya xaftyy iI-ral{aaf 
Ilaggll-na mtmma nxaaf 0 possessor of unknown mer-
cie~. save us from what we fear! II rt/-Iurfd land t/-tjaqa 
(may God show) mercy in the administration of fate. 
-
Ino pI! 2 gentility. raagtl kul/-u lurf he's gentility it-
~c1f. da bass' mm IlIrf-ak = you are too kind (In reply to 
a compliment). 3 silliness. softness in the head. landu 
IlIrf and l:Ja~al-lu lurf he's touched. 
-.i l1.J la{aafa Inl charm. pleasantness. II bt-~anlllla{aafa 
with per~uaslve charm. 
.......w la{iif I ladj 
pi lu{aafl 
pleasant. charming. 
rtl-bim' dijakl-a-Iza la{lIfthls girl has a pleasant appear-
ance. lIL1kat la{lIfa amusing Jokes. r,g-gills iI-la{lIf the 
fair sex. 2 Inl Merciful One (epithet of God). ya la{iif 
(I) God forbid! (2) God protect us! 
...AkJi ral{af lell more/mo~t pleasant. agreeable. nice or 
charming . 
...;kJ la{{af I Ivll to make pleasant or refreshing. ruj!' 
mllyya barra tla{{af tg-gaww sprinkle water outside the 
door to cool the air. rtfrab l:Jaaga satjla tla{{af tjalb-ak 
have a cold drink to refresh you. 2 Ivil to become 
plea~ant. rig-gaww' la{{af the weather grew pleasant. 
-vn tal{tif; avalpva mtla{{af. 
....J.'/ laa{if Ivtl to humour. indulge. be nice to. -vn 
mtlarfa. mulada; ava mtlaa{lf. 
....J.')\... mtlaallf lad] 'I companionable 
~I rtstC/l{af Ivtl I to consider agreeable or 
plea~ant 2 to ~elect for plea~antnes5. - Ivil 3 to be-
have in a pleasant manner. -vn rtsttl{aaf; ava mistal{af. 
rj,J 
~ lalam (U) I' Ivtl to ~Iap. 2 Ivil to slap one's face (in 
790 
grief or lamentation).lIlaaytz gallaaza ytfbal fiilza la{m 
he wants (to find) a funeral where he can slap his face to 
his heart's content (of one who looks for other people's 
troubles to enjoy). -vn la{m; ava laa{im; pva mal{uum . 
...JaJ la{ma linst n. pi -aatl a slap. 
~ 
mal{ama In invarl butt (for anger. scorn etc.). 
r.hl la{{am Ivtl to knock repeatedly one way and 
another. rtz-zaman ~alam-III w-Ia{{am-III life has been 
unfair to me and given me some hard knocks. IIraagii 
mila{{am a hard-bitten person. hard nut to crack. -vn 
tal{itm; avalpva mt/Cl{{am . 
~I ritla{{am Ivil I to be knocked about. be pushed 
around. batjeet ratla{{am fi-l:Jayaat-i life began to be 
hard for me. rllla{{Clmt' mill maktab Ii-maktab I was 
pushed around from offlcc to office 2 to be hardened 
by experience. ri/-wa~iifa dt ttl:Jtaag waal:Jid mitla{{am 
fiwayya this job reqUlre~ someone seasoned by a bit of 
experience. - iva mllla{{Clm. 
~J~J 
.&.llaJ 
lazla~ Ivil to become plump. -vn la~/a~a; ava 
milazla~. 
~)laJ la#uu~ lad] • and pl/ClzalitZi plump. 
IS ~ J see IS';:' J 
yt J 
..,....J liltb (a) Ivtl Ia to play (a game or sport). 
bl-yillabu koora they play football. b-allab gumbaaz 
I do gymnastics. bi-lIIllab t/-Cjumaar we gamble .lIliltb 
it-ta/at waratjaal laleelzllm he cheated them. Ib to 
make a play with.ltltb ik-koora li-ml:Jammad he passed 
the ball to Muhammad. Itltbt il-lalzr I threw the dice. 
Itltb tS-sabla he played the seven. Ie to play (a musical 
instrument). bt-yillab gllaar he plays the gUitar. 2 to act 
(a role or part). Itltbt' door t/-ba{ClI I took the part of 
the hcro. - Ivil 3 to, play. rt/-ltyaal bl-ytllabu ftg-
gmeena the children are plaYing In the garden. xud 
baal-ak mt/-faras - bt-ytllab ktlllr watch out for the 
horse - it's very frisky. IIltllbl' fil-bur~a I gambled on 
the stock exchange. -bt-ytllab bi-dee/-u (I) he's not 
straight. he messes around. (2) he ~Ieeps around. he's 
not faithful. 4 to play around. tinker. me~s around. 
rt/-llyaallilbu fir-radyu kassaruu the children tinkered 
around with the radio and broke it. bt-ytllab ft-
manaxiir-u he picks hiS nose. Sa to be loose (of parts). 
ri/-raks' b-yillab the axle has some play. Sb to wag. 
wiggle. juuf ik-kalb in-nuunu dee/-u b-yillab rizzaay 
see how the darling little dog's tail wags! Se to become 
choppy or rough (of the sea). Sd to heave. pitch (of a 

ship). - vn lir;b; ava laar;ib; pva malr;uub. 
1Ilir;ib r;ala to cheat. dupe. 
..,.J lir;ba In pl/ir;ab. lir;baatl I toy. - Ipl falr;aabl 
2a game. sport. falr;aab il-quwa field and track sports 
(including weightlifting). 2b move. pass. shot etc. in a 
game or sport. 3 trick, stratagem. lir;ba makfuufa an 
obvious play. falr;aab sibriyya conjuring tricks. 4 act or 
turn (in a circus). falr;aab fakrubatiyya acrobatic turns. 
~ lir;alJi ladj pi -iyyal feckless, frivolous. 
~ 
'1 laar;ib J In '1 I player. 2 (circus) performer. 
...,.. ~ 
malr;uub I Ipval II di kaahit malr;uubl! that was 
deliberate, that was no nuke. - da malr;uub jii {coarseJ 
he's a queer. 2 In pi malar;iibl trick. camalu fiyya 
malr;uub they played a trick on me. 
...,..W lucaab Inl saliva. 
...,.."J lacuub ladj invarl dissolute. 
~ 
lauiih In pi lauiihal (skilled) player. ya lauiib 
what a pro! 
..,..J.. malcah In pi malaacihl I area where a game is 
played, athletics field. pitch, (tennis) court etc. 
2 playground. 3 playpen 
..,..J... malcaha Inl one played around with or played 
tricks on, plaything. 
..,..J.. mulcah ladj invarl I socially attentive (of a man). 
2 seductive (of a woman, usually with the accompany-
ing connotation of being sexually amenable). 
'-!"Ji fulcuuha In pi fa/aciihl trick, stratagem. 
,:,l,.Jl fulcuhaan ladj invarl cunning and treacherous. 
~I fitlacah Ivil to he played. fil-licba di b-titlir;ib 
hi-ca~aaya mil-xafah this game is played with a wooden 
stick. - iva mitlicib. 
..,...J lauah. lauib Ivtl to cause to play. lauab il-
r;ayyil have the child play! play with the child! Il/auab 
ljawagb-u he wiggled his eyebrows. - vn talciib; ava/pva 
milauab . 
~ 
'1 laar;ib:! Ivtl to play with, have a game with. 
laar;ib il-cayyil play with the child! tilar;ib-ni kutfiina 
will you have a game of cards with me? - vn milacba; 
ava/pva mitaacib. 
~ 
')\.;1 fitlaar;ib Ivil I to playa match or the like with 
one another. 21 to play around, play tricks. huwwa-na 
malcabt-ak titlaacib biyya am I your plaything to do 
with as you like? fit-talaacub fil-mizaniyya monkeying 
with the budget. - vn talaacub r; ava mitlaar;ib. 
mutalaacib r . 
..b y t J 
.J..,..J lar;ba( I/vtl to distort. twist (out of shape). 
fil-farraan lar;ba( il-r;eef the baker spoilt the shape of 
791 
the (loaves of) bread. 2 Ivil to twist or contort oneself. 
fis-samak hi-ylacba( fil-mayya the fish weave ahout in 
the water. - vn 1acba(a; ava/pva milacba( . 
.k,...L. milacba( (also fi{iir mitacba[) Icoll nl large pastry 
consisting of many layers of dough and clarified butter 
or cream, baked and eaten with cream, honey or cheese 
(more commonly called mifaltit). 
.1.,...1;1 fitlacba{ Ivil I to twist or contort oneself. 
fir-raqqaa~a tlacba(it zayy it-tir;baan the dancer twisted 
herself like a snake. 2 to be twisted or contorted. - aval 
iva mitlacbll( . 
.!lyt J 
4.J lacbik Ivtl to tangle. fit-qu{{a lacbikit id-dubaara 
the cat got the string in a tangle. - vn lacbaka; ava/pva 
milar;bik . 
..s::.,..J lacbaka In pi lacabiikl tangle, confusion. mess. 
fif-fabaka kllll-a-ha lacabiik the net is a mass oftangles. 
bayat-ha kull-a-ha lar;abiik her life is one big mess . 
d,...l;1 fitlacbik Ivil to be or become tangled. - ava/iva 
mitlacbik . 
~.J ~ t J 
~J..w lar;duud In pi lar;adiidl oaf. clod, simpleton . 
Jt J 
..;J lacaq (a) Ivtl to lick.qaacidyilcaqfi-~awabc-u he's 
licking away at hIs fingers. - vn lar;q. lar;aqaan; ava 
laar;hj; pva malclllllj 
""J lucllluj. licllluj In pi -aatl electuary. 
~I fitlacaq Ivil to he licked. - vn mitliciq. 
..,J lacr;aq Ivtl to cause to lick. - vn talciiq; ava 
mitauaq 
~I fit/auaij Ivil passive of lauaq. -iva mitlauaq. 
I Jt J 
J...l lacli ladj invarl bright red 
2 J t J see 2 J J t: lar;alla 
..bJt J 
.kW lar;la( Ivil to shimmer. gleam. fin-niguum lacla(it 
the stars twinkled. !'il-carabiyya bi-tlacla{ the car is 
gleaming. qumaaf milllcla{ scintillating material. -vn 
lar;la{a; ava milacla( . 
.l..W;1 fitlacla( = lach/(. - ava mitlacla(. 
tJt J 
fJ laclar; Ivil la to shine brightly. fil-qamar bi-
ylaclac the moon is shining brightly. loon milaclar; a 

bright colour. Ib to get into a radiant and sparkling 
mood, feel wonderful.famma wabda xallit-ni ra/ar;lae 
o,ne sniff and I was in heaven. 2a to ring out, sound 
clear (of a voice) .100t-u balja ylar;lar; fif1aljlja his voice 
echoed round the flat. 2b to have a splendid noisy time. 
r;amalna bafta kunna mlar;laeiin labbaabi we had a 
party, making a huge din until morning. -vn lar;laea; 
ava milar;lae. 
J J t J see 1 J J t: lar;alla 
~tJ 
.;,..I lar;an (a) Ivtl to curse. (rallaah) yilr;an rabuu-k 
(may God) curse your father! lar;ant is-saar;a IIi twa/ad 
fiiha I cursed the day he was born! lIyilr;an diin rumm-
ak (may your mother's religion be damned!) ,.. damn 
you! -also nar;a/. -vn lar;n; ava laar;in; pva malr;uun. 
4.:.J lar;na linst n, pI -aatl a curse. r;alee lar;nit allaah 
may God's curse be upon him. IIda raagil lar;na the 
man's a plague! 
.:...,...l. malr;uun ladj pI ma/ar;iinl I cursed, damned, 
wretched. 2 crafty and treacherous. See further 
under ~tJr 
.;,..Ii ralr;an left morelmost wicked or abominable. 
rinta ralr;an mi-lli b-yisralj you're worse than one who 
steals. ralr;an mayya hiyya btaar;it it,turfi the worst kind 
of liquid is that from pickles. 
~ 
lar;iin f ladj pl/ur;anal accursed. 
.:,-1;1 ritlar;an Ivil to be cursed. - iva mittir;in. 
~I riltar;an = ritlar;an. 
I.;" t J 
~.,..J lar;walj Ivil to toady, indulge in obsequious flat-
tery. -vn lar;waCja; ava mtlar;waCj. 
~..,..l;' ritlar;walj = lar;walj. -ava mitlar;waCj. 
t J see .J t J : lura 
~t J 
~ lurd In pI liraad, luruud, lurudal double chin. 
~ lanad Ivil to develop a double chin. -vn ta/riid; ava 
mitanad. 
.it J 
jiJ lurz In pI ra/raazl I (verbal or manual) pUlzle (to 
be solved for fun). kitaab ra/raaz a puzzle book. 
2 enigma, mystery. 
j"t J 
.lMI larat Inl I {path} (heart) murmur. 2 hum of con-
792 
versation.llfii larat kitiir fil-mawrfuur; da there is a lot of 
gossip about this subject. 
t.t J 
~ Ian (u) Ivil I to lap with the tongue. 2 to eat and 
drink in a greedy and disgusting fashion. II battal it-/aIT 
itti bi-tluIT-u da ,.. stop eating so piggishly! -vn Ian; ava 
la.arig. 
t:J laITar Ivtl {rur} to force-feed. -vn ta/riir; ava/pva 
mliaITar . 
. 
~I ritlanar Ivil to be force-fed. -iva mitlaITar. 
tJt J 
~ lar/ar Ivtl to force-feed. -vn larlara; avalpva 
milar/ar. 
t)AI larluur In pl/araliirl root (usually of the 
tongue). 
~)AI larluura = larluur. 
tw" ritlar/ar Ivil to be force-fed. - iva mitlar/ar. 
rt J 
rAI larm, lurm, laram <T laglm> In pI ra/raaml (ex-
plosive) mine . 
~ laITam Ivtl to mine, plant mines in. II ril-bitta 
mlaITama bulii,f the place is stiff with police. -geeb-u 
mlanam he's loaded (with money). -vn ta/riim; ava/ 
p~a mitaITam. 
~, ritlanam Ivil to be mined. be planted with mines . 
- iva mitlanam. 
I.J'I' r t J see j" r t J : larmC/1, ritlarmC/1 
j"rt J 
J....;J larmat (also larmC/1) Ivtl to s~ear, soil. ridee 
milarmatafukulaata his hands are smeared with choco-
late. -vn larmata; ava/pva milarmat. 
J....;.l;1 ritlarmac (also fitlarmC/1) Ivil to be smeared, be 
soiled. - iva mitlarmac. 
.Jt J 
~ lura In pI -aatl I language. ril-Iura 1-ringiliziyya the 
English language. 2 speech, manner of speaking. lurit 
i,f-lir;iid the speech of Upper Egypt . 
• ,;.1 larwa J In pI -aatl language, speech . 
~,;.I iurawi, iarawiJ I ladj/linguistic. ril-magmae il-
iura wi the Arabic Language Academy of Egypt. 2 In ·1 
linguist. 
~ 
'J laara Ivtl I to make conversational overtures to, 
approach in a pleasant and friendly way. baaga 
gazabit-ni Iii fa-btadeet raiarii something attracted me 

to him, so I started to draw him into conversation. laari 
l-laskari b-sigaara give the policeman a cigarette to 
break the ice. 1 {magic} to converse with (spirits, in 
their own tongue). - vn milariyya; ava milaari. 
..j-)tl ritlaara Ivil passive of laara. -iva mitlaan. 
~.JtJ 
~,,-J lalfW~ I Ivtl to smear, soil. lalfW~ti t;ami~-i 
uet I got my shirt smeared with oil. 1 Ivil to act messily. 
ril-layyillalfW~ fil- rakl the child made a mess with his 
food.lIlalfW~nafil-mawtfuul we 'became embroiled in 
the matter. -vn larw~a; avalpva milarw~. 
4...,,-J larw~a In pI larawi~1 mess. dool Jiwayyit 
larawi~ faytfiin min il-rakl they're (just) some messy 
bits of left-over food. 
.,;# jJ.;1 
ritlarw~ Ivil to be or become smeared, be-
come soiled. -ava/iva mitlarw~. 
~tJ 
~ lara (i) Ivtl to make void, annul. lareet l-ittifaat; 
leeh why did you cancel the agreement? ris-sawra 
lamma gat larit il-rabzaab kull-a-ha when the revolu-
tion came it abolished all political parties. -vn lall}', 
larayaan; ava laari; pva malri. 
..j-'i laari ladj *1 annulled. 
..;1;1 ritlara Ivil to be made void, be annulled. 
bi-~uduur il-qanuun it-taani ritlara 1-rawwa/aani with 
the promulgation of the second law, the first became 
void. - iva mitliri. 
~i ra/ra' = lara. -vn rilra; ava mu/ri, milri. 
I.:;,..J J 
..::.AI lafat (i) Ivtl I to turn, redirect. rilfit raas-ak 
in-nabya t-tanya turn your head the other way. 1 to 
draw (attention). laayiz yibiss innu b-yilfit na;ar 
r~baab-u he wants to feel that he attracts the attention 
of his friends. lafat na;ar-i Iil-mtifkila he directed my 
attention to the problem.ll/aft i na;ar {admin} warning 
that further negligence will be subject to diSl;iplinary 
action. -vn laft, lafataan; ava laafit; pva malfuut. 
i.:AI lafta I In pI -aat/l instance noun of laft. 1 gesture. 
di tibt;a lafta kwayyisa nnina nzuur-u fil-mustaJfa it 
would be a nice gesture for us to visit him in hospital. 
o'i lafta 2 ' In pI -aatl notice, sign. -also yafca. 
4li talfiita In pI -aatl glance aside. ma-fiif talfiita 
b-ab~~ i ma-Iat;etf iffanca I just looked away for a 
second and the bag was gone. hiyya talfiita kaan 
in-nahaar xil~ before you could say Jack Robinson the 
day was over. 
793 
. 
.:;.&1;1 ritlaffit Ivil to look from side to side. wi-nta 
bi-tsuut; ma-titlaffitf don't keep looking about when 
you drive! IIb-axallii yimJi yitlaffit waraa I'll put him in 
fear for his life! -ava mitlaffit . 
..:..i:J1 riltafat Ivil I to turn one's face and look. 1 to 
give one's attention. riltifit lifurl-ak pay attention to 
your work! -vn riltifaat; ava miltifit. 
.::...U;...I ristalfat, ristalfit Ivtl to attract (the attention, 
the gaze). ristalfat na;ar-i w-rana maaJi man;ar il-babr 
the view of the sea caught my eye as I was walking. 
II baaga ma-tistalfitf in-na;ar a trivial thing. -vn 
ristilfaat; ava miStalfit, mustalfit. 
2.:;,..J J 
..::.AI lift I Icoll nl turnip(s). 
i.:AI lifta lunit n, pI -aatl a turnip . 
~\:.il liftaaya = lifta. 
3.:;,..J J 
..::.AI Iift 2 <Engl> Inll hydraulic car lift. la lift, eleva-
tor. lb dumb waiter, service lift. 
c...J J 
~ lafab (a) Ivtl I to catch (of wind etc.). ril-hawa 
lafab-u a gust of wind caught him. 1 to catch and affect 
the colour of (of sunshine, fire etc.). riffams i lafabit 
wifJ-i my face caught a touch ofsun. - vn lafIJ; ava laafib; 
pva malfuub. 
~ 
lafIJa linst n, pI -aatl a sudden touch. lafIJit hawa a 
gust of wind. gat-Ii lafIJit bard I got a touch of cold. 
~ 
talfiiba In pI -aat, ta/afiifl narrow woollen scarf 
worn by men (see PI.F, 2).- also tarfiiba, talfiila. 
~I ritlafab Ivil passive of lafab. - iva mitlifib. 
cllil ritlaffab .'vil to don a talfiiba. -ava mitlaffab . 
~..JJ 
.luJ lafa; (u) Ivtl I to reject, dismiss. 1 to utter. -vn 
laf;; ava laafi;; pva malfuu;. 
.luJ laf; In pI ralfaa;1 (spoken) expression, utterance. 
.J;u~ malaafi; Ipl nllanguage, (spoken) vocabulary. 
ril-wa/ad da malaf;-u wibJa that boy has a nasty turn of 
phrase. bassin malaf;-ak don't be rude! 
.li.i1'1 ritlafa; Ivil to be rejected, dismissed. -iva 
mitlifi;· 
~I ritlaffa; Ivil to give utterance. ma-tlaffa;fi b-
barf he didn't utter a word. -ava mitlaffa;. 
t..J J 
~ lafal (a) Ivil to cast (upon one's shoulder). lafacti 
mlayt-i (la/a kitf-i) I threw my wrap over my shoulder. 

-vn lafc. lafacaan: ava laafic : pva malfuuc. 
~I litlafac Ivil to be cast (upon the shoulder). - iva 
mitlific · 
t"l laffac Ivtl to wrap (s.o .. particularly about the head 
and shoulders). lis-silt' laffacit Ibn-a-ha bit-talfiica the 
woman wrapped her son around with the scarf. - vn 
talfiic : ava/pva milaffac. 
...".a.I; talfiica In pi -aat. talafiicl narrow woollen scarf 
worn by men (see PI.F, 2). - also tarfiiYa. talfiiya. 
~I litlaffac Ivil to be wrapped or wrap oneself (parti-
cularly about the head and shoulders). IImitlaffac bl-
lsaan-u Insolent. -ava/iva mitlaffac. 
~I 1lsttlaffacJ Ivil to put on a talfllca. -ava 
mistilaffac· 
"';"';J 
..lI laff' (i) Ivt/ la to wrap, envelop. ltff'-haa-li f-
waralj' wrap it in paper for me. Itftl-lna sgaara roll us a 
cigarette. Ib to wind, twist. cOIL laffit il-xlI~la car-
rlliooh she wound the lock of hair round the curler. 
laffu l-lj'alc they furled the sail. 2 to cause to turn. llff 
ik-kllrSI nabya-I turn the chair towards me. yu{(i 
d-dilj'iilj' fil-may.Va w-liffil put the flour in the water and 
stir it around. lj'acada tillft il-mal'zal she kept on twirl-
ing the spindle.lIlaft' dmaal'- to get a hold over. influ-
ence. as in laff' dmal'-ha b-ktlmiteen yilwilll he took her 
in with a few sweet words, f'il-bint' lafta dimaal'-II the 
girl turned hiS head. 3a to move in a circle around, 
make a circuit of. ltl- lutllbllS laff tl-midaan the bus 
went round the square. llz-zaffa laffit il-balad the pro-
cession made a circuit of the village. 3b to go around. 
go about. laffeet tl-yawaari I walked about the alley-
ways. laffeena lllrubba kull-a-ha we travelled all over 
Europe. 4 to round off. make rounded. llll-naggaar laff 
il- la[raaf the carpenter rounded off the edges. 
zarradlyya b-buuz malflluf round-nosed plier~ - Ivil 
Sa to turn. make a turn. Itff' Jmaal r;and ik-kubn turn 
left at the bridge. ltl-ma~aa[lb laffa daaxilll-yagz the 
benches run round the walls of the detention cell.lj'arn' 
laafif a curly horn. IIlaft' maca r-rilY [naut/ to wear. 
5b to twist, warp. f'il-xaJab in-naaJif ma-ylift'-J dry 
wood doesn't warp. 5c to rotate. revolve. calj'aanb 
is-saaca bl-tliff' ymlln the hands of the clock rotate 
clockwise. lil-cagala bl-tltfl" cal-faaqi the wheel re-
volves freely. II lid-dinya bl-tliff [prov/ (I) things are 
always changing. (2) it's a small world. 6 to go around. 
go about. laffeet waraa flJ-Jawaartc I followed him 
about through the streets. b-altff' macaahum kitiir I go 
about with them a 10t.lIlaft' w-daar to knock around. 
794 
gain experience here and there. as in lil-waad da laf!, 
w-daar that kid's been around. 7 to be devious, be wily. 
ma-tliff'-Jmacaaya don't play games with me! - vn laff. 
lafafaan: ava laa/lf: pva malflluf. 
lllafl" cala to take in, dupe. 
..lI lafF Ivnl IIfi[lir laff rich pastry made with cream 
eaten with cheese or honey. - ltl-laff' wid-dawaraan 
(I) beating about the bush. (2) deviousness. - wara/j' 
laff wrapping paper. 
.iI laffa Inl 1 Ipl -aatl Instance noun of lafr 
1llS{UWanaat xamsa w-larbiclln laffa 45 r.p.m. gramo-
phone records. waaxid Il-cagala la/fa taking the bike for 
a spin. laffa Ill/xab,yya electIOn campaign tour. - Ipl 
lifafl2 parcel. package. 3 roll.lafta waralj' tuwalitt a roll 
of lavatory paper. 4 strip of cloth worn wound about 
the head. Sa swaddlIng cloth. 5b nappy. diaper. 
....;".a.. malfllllf lad JI cylindrical. 
.ijW lifaafa In pllafaayifl [Chr/ napkin held over the 
mouth by a communicant to prevent any of the host 
fall~ng to the ground. 
"";W laffaaf In pi laftaafa. laffafiinl 1 person engaged 
in rolling, COilIng etc. 2 loafer. 
.:a. milaff. malaft In pi -aatl 1 folder. file; dossier. 
mllaff Il-xidma employment record. milaff il-/j'aqiyya 
case file. 2 [text/ tuft of cotton. 3 [elee/ coil. 4 bow-
drill. 5 curve. bend (in a road). xad tl-malaff' gaamidhe 
took the bend sharply. 
...i1.;1 litlaff Ivil 1 to be wrapped. be enveloped. 
II llld-ak titlaff' f-yartlr your hand de,erves to be wrap-
ped In silk! (to a craftsman in appreciation of his skill). 
2 to be wound. be tWisted. be COiled. 3 to be turned. be 
turned round. 4 to be rounded, be rounded off. -iva 
mi!laff. 
....AAl laffiflvt/l to wind or tWist or coil repeatedly. 2 to 
turn repeatedly. 3 to round off repeatedly. 4 to take 
around. laffitm ma~r he took me round Cairo. -vn 
talflif: ava/pva nlliafflf. 
";"';')1; talafiif: lumm a-talafiif [zool/ omasum. many-
pli.es. - also lllmm ijialatia. lllmm Il-lafaliif. 
....u.l.;1 litlafftf Ivil passive of laffif. - iva mitlaffif. 
J"';J 
..:;AI lafalj' (II) Ivtl to baste, tack. sew with temporary 
st~tches. - vn laflj'. lafalj'aan: ava laafilj': pva malfuu/j'. 
..:;AI laffalj' Ivtl to concoct. fabricate. laffalj'it-lu /j'aq,iyya 
she concocted a case against him. she framed him. -vn 
talfiilj': ava/pva milaffalj'. 
~ 
talfiilj'a linst n, pi talafi/lj'1 a fabrication. 
J.il.;1 llliaffalj' Ivil to be fabricated. be concocted. -iva 
mit/affalj'. 

795 
~J~J 
...A.W laflif Ivtl to wrap up. lalUf nafs-u min il-bard he 
wrapped himself up again~t the cold. -vn laflafa; aval 
pva milaflaf. 
~ 
lufleefa In pi -aat, lafalii/l I wrap. 2 crease. 
IIl'umm il-lafaliif {zool} omasum, manyplies. 
-.A.W;I I'itlaflif Ivil to be wrapped up. - iva mitlaflif. 
.;,1 r ~ J 
yL..,i"i lal'umaanu <It lavamano> In pi lavumanaatl 
{plumb} basin. sink. 
t IS ~ J 
~ lifeeh <Fr lel'ee> In pi -aatl (small) support used in 
work with sheet metal. 
yJJ 
..,...oJ laqab, laqab 1 (also naqb J) In pi I'alqaabl I title, 
honorific. 2 family name. 
I CJ J 
e"i laac;i~ ladj *1 penniless. broke. scrounging. 
cAl 
laqc;a~ I Ivtl to dump. throw down or out in a 
. casual or dismissive way. laqqa~ il-bal(u lak-kursi he 
tossed his coat down on the chair. bi-yiigi fil-yoom 
lIobteen talaata ylaqqalj il-biqaala he comrs two or 
three times a day to dump off the goods. larabiyyit-ak 
c;idmit qawi - lacjqay-ha baqa your car's completely 
passed it -why don't you dump it? IIlac;c;ay lala-... 
bi-kalaam to throw out insulting comments about 
(s.o.). -lac;c;ay gittit-u lala- to impose one's presence 
on (s.o.). as in kull' yoom bi-yiigu ylac;c;aYII gittit-hum 
laleena every day they come hanging around us when 
they're not wanted. - vn talqiiy; avalpva milaqcjaY. 
-.,....l; talc;iilja Inl I Ipl talaqiiyl one who imposes him-
self on others. burdensome boor. 2 linst n. pi -aatl a 
dumping. 
~I I'itlacjljay I Ivil to be dumped or dump oneself. 
l'i(-(lIub da baqaa-lll fahr' mitlaqljay lar-ra~iif those 
bricks have been sitting there on the pavement for a 
month. I'ima mitlaC;ljay gambi kida leeh why have you 
parked yourself next to me like that? - avaliva 
mitlaljcja/,. 
~I I'istalljalj Ivil to impose oneself (on others). - vn 
I'istilljaalj; ava mistalljaY. 
~I I'istilaljqay 
Ivil {ablls} 
= l'itlaqljaY. 
- ava 
mistilaljcjalj . 
2 cJ J 
c.W liljaalj. liqaalj Inl I pollen. 2 vaccine. 
cAl /aqqay~, laqqay Ivtl I to fertilize. fecundate, pol-
linate. talqiiy ~inaali artificial insemination. 2 to inocu-
late. - vn talc;iiy; avalpva milaqqaY. 
~I I'itlac;c;a~ ~ Ivil 
passive 
of laqljay ~. 
- iva 
mitlaqqay. 
~ J J see 
~ J : /aqad 
.) ~ J J see J .) ~ J : /-uq~ur 
..1.JJ 
.l.AI laqa( (u, i) Ivtl I to gather. collect. bi-tu/qulqu(n 
she picks cotton. II laqa( nafas-II he caught his breath. 
- I'il-Iiyaam bil-I'uksijiin yulqll( nazar-i oxygen welding 
blinds me. 2a to pick up. catch onto. bi-yu/c;u( kull i 
ral(a he catches every mistake. l'iI-marnaliis bi-yulqu( 
masamiir the magnet picks up nails. mikrufoon yassa as 
bi-yu/qu( dabbit in-namla a sensitive microphone that 
picks up the footsteps of an ant (i.e. the slightest 
sound). II laqa( il-fuu/a to see the catch. catch on. 
-Cjaalid lis-sacila wil-laCj(a waiting for anything that may 
come one's way. 2b to pick up (a stitch. in knitting). 
3a to take. accept (dye etc.). bi-yu/qu(is-sabra kwayyis 
it takes the dye well. 3b to become impregnated with (a 
taste or smell). I'if-faay laaqi( gaaz the tea smells of 
paraffin. 4 {needlew} to stitch. sew (by hand). I'ulqu(i 
d-deel makaan ma tfakk stitch up the hem where it has 
come undone. 5 {phot} to take an exposure of. snap. 
IImuftaa~ il-lalj( shutter release (of a camera). - vn laq(, 
laqa(aan; ava laaqi(; pva ma/C;lIu(. 
J..ij laq(a In pi -aatl I instance noun of laq(. 2 {phot] 
exposure. snap. 3 {ein] take. 
J..ij luq(a Inl bargain. rare find. lucky find. I'il-lariis da 
/uc;(a that bridegroom is a good catch. 
.k,..;.J laqii( In pi /uqalal foundling. 
.k,..;.J liC;ii( Inl {agric] I cotton pickings. 2 seed dropped 
into the furrow behind the plough. 
kl. ma/qa( In pi malaaljill tweezers. II (fi-)~alqal (fi-) 
ma/qa( see ~alljal. 
.1.w.. mlllqaal In pi malaqiill I tweezers. 2 {slang] 
pickpocket. 
.kiJ laC;ljal Ivtl I to pick up one by one. I'il-firaax 
bi-tlaljlja{ il-ljamy the chickens peck up the grain. 2 to 
make final improvements on. smarten up. bald' ma 
nistaldil i~-~aag nilaljlju{-II after straightening the sheet 
metal we go over it and remove any remaining irregu-
larities. 3 {agric] to sow (seed~) by dropping them one 
by one into the furrow behind the plough. - vn talljii{; 
avalpva milaljlja{. 

¥ 
ralqii{a In pi -aarl defect, fault (on a surface, in 
material etc.) . 
.kit I I'irlaqqa{ Ivil passive of laqqa{. -iva mirlaqqa{ . 
.l..&.l::-I I'isralqa{ Ivil to look for haphazardly or without 
any special plan. I'asralqa{-Ii I'ayy' jurla mwaqqara I'm 
going to look for any temporary job that may come my 
way. I'isralqa{-lak I'ayy' baaga mir-ral/aaga r~biira take 
anything you happen to find in the refrigerator as a 
snack. -vn I'isrilqaa{; ava misralqa{. 
.... JJ 
....uJ laqaf (u) 1 Ivt/ to catch, catch hold of. I'il-goon 
laqaf ik-koora the goalkeeper caught the ball. 2 Ivil to 
be laboured (of breathing, heartbeats). nafas-u b-
yulqufhis breathing is laboured. -vn laqf, laqafaan; ava 
laaqif; pva malquuf. 
"""' laqfa Ipl -aarl instance noun of laqf. laqfa bilwa a 
go~d catch. 
;ij~ laqqaafa In pi -aarl water-wheel scoop. 
...A".il laqqiifln pl/aqqiifal catcher (e.g., in an acrobatic 
performance) . 
....u.l. malqaf In pi malaaqif/ 1 device built on a roof for 
catching the breeze and conducting it to the rooms 
below (specifically, in old houses, a large wooden shed 
with a sloping roof open to the north). 2 malqaf hawa 
draught of air. l'iwGa ruqaf fi-malqaf hawa wi-nta 
Garqaan don't stand in a draught when you're sweating! 
~I I'irlaqaf Ivil to be caught. - iva mirliqif. 
...AA.I;I I'ir/aqqaf Ivtl to snatch up, swipe quickly. - aval 
pva mir/aqqaf. 
~I I'istalqaf Ivtl to catch (s.th. thrown). -vn 
I'isrilqaaf; avalpva misralqaf. 
~ I'isralqaf Gala to long for. I'il-waabid bi-yisralqaf Gala 
ga~aab yiigi minnu I am dying to get a letter from him. 
~ 
I I'isrilaqqaf = I'isralqaf. -ava misrilaqqif. 
~ I'isrilaqqaf Gala = I'isralqaf Gala. 
JJJ 
jJ laqq (u) 1 Ivtl to rattle (s.th.). 2/vil to make a 
rattling sound.llbeeqa bi-rluqq an egg whose albumen 
can be felt to move when the egg is shaken (i.e., a bad 
egg). -laqq' b-kalaam (I) to talk a lot of claptrap, run 
on nonsensically. (2) to speak spitefully. -vn laqq, 
lali,.aqaan; ava laaqiq; pva malquuq. 
JW laqqaaq ladj *1 over-talkative. 
.j1;1 I'irlaqq Ivil to be rattled. - iva mirlaqq. 
.J~JJJ 
.:,W laqqaan (also ~alaar il-laqqaan) Inl {Chr] cere-
mony of the washing of the feet. 
796 
4iW laqqaana In pi -aarl earthenware tub for kneading 
dough, similar to a maguur (see PI.A, 8), but smaller. 
JJJJ 
.;W laqlaq 1 Ivtl to make unsteady or unstable, cause 
to wobble. laqlaq il-musmaar jiwayya ease the nail 
sideways a little. 2 Ivil to be hesitant (in speech).laqlalj 
fik-kalaam to intersperse one's talk with endless ums 
and ers. -vn laqlaqa; ava/pva milaqlaq. 
~ 
milaqlaq ladj *1 indecisive . 
J~ liqlaaq Inl tell-tale, tale-bearer . 
..;lAl;1 I'ir/aqlaq Ivil I to be made unsteady or unstable . 
2 to wobble. - avaliva mirlaqlaq. 
rJJ 
rAI laqam (u) Ivtl to take a bite of. Gammaal yilqum 
is-sandawifhe's biting away at the sandwich. I'il-kalb' 
laqam rigl-i the dog took a bite out of my leg. -vn laljm, 
laqamaan; ava laaqim; pva malquum. 
'-il laqm~ linst n, pi -aarl a bite . 
'-il luqma In pi -aar, luqaml I morsel, mouthful 
(especially of bread). luqma b-gibna a bit of bread and 
cheese. ma-fii-J fil-beer wala luqmir Geej there's not 
even a scrap of bread in the house. baqqaru luqma they 
prepared a bite to eat. IIluqmir il-qaaqi a confection 
consisting of balls of deep-fried batter dipped in honey, 
syrup or cream. -huwwa zayy il-Iuqma liz-zoor he sticks 
in one's craw. - I'il-luqma l-haniyya rkaffi miyya {prov! 
== a meal in pleasant company goes a long way. 2 basic 
sustenance, keep. I'il-fuqara b-yinJirlu bil-gary' wara 
luqmir-hum the poor are busy trying to keep body and 
soul together. laazim rifrarali b-Iuqmir-ik you must earn 
your keep. 3 {mech] 3a jaw of a chuck. 3b leaf of a leaf 
spring. 3c wheel chock. 3d (loosely) any small flat 
piece of metal. 4 {mus] short reed acting as the mouth· 
piece of an I'arruul. 5 motif in tent applique designs 
(~ee PI.H, 21). 
rAI laqqam Ivtl I to feed in small quantities, feed bit by 
bit. ralqiim Il-I'adaal spoon-feeding of children. 
II/aqqamr-u gneeh I slipped him a pound. 2 to feed, 
charge. laqqamr' ik-kanaka bunn I put the proper 
amount of coffee into the cannikin. laqqam i/. 
bunduqiyya he loaded the rifle.llralqiim iz-zarG placing 
fertilizer under plants in handfuls. -vn ralqiim; ava/pya 
milaqqam . 
~ 
ralqiima In pi -aar, ralaqllml a sufficient quantity 
for one feeding, loading or charging. Gandina ralqiimll 
bunn' wabda bass we only have enough coffee for one 
p~t. 
~I I'irlaqqam Ivil passive of laqqam. -iva mir/aljljam. 

I ~J J 
.;iJ lac;c;an Ivtl I to prompt. lamma kunt i b-atkallim 
fit-tilifoon lac;c;anuu-ni k-kalaam when 1 was speaking 
on the phone they told me what 1 ought to say. 
bi-ylac;c;in il-mumassiliin lamma yinsu k-kalaam he 
prompts the actors when they forget their lines. 2 [lsi] 
to instruct (a deceased person at his grave) how to reply 
to anticipated questions by the two angels charged with 
questioning the dead. 3 [mil] to brief. -vn talc;iin; aval 
p~a milac;c;an. 
~ 
mulac;c;in In *1 prompter. , 
.;;.1;1 fitlac;c;an Ivtl passive of lac;c;an. huwwa tlac;c;an 
ir-radd i c;abl i ma yitsifil he was given the answer before 
the question was asked. -iva mitlac;c;in. 
1 (,) J J see (,) I J J J : lac;c;aan, lac;c;aana 
.JJJ 
.".;..1 lac;wa Inl tetanus (as a disease of cattle). 
I IS J J 
..;J lac;a I, liC;i (a) Ivtl I to find, come upon. lac;eet 
ik-kitaab iq-qaayiG 1 found the book that was lost. 
IIlac;a yaakul (usually in negative contexts) to make 
enough money to keep alive, as in hiyya mif lac;ya 
taakul she's hardly managing to make a living, 
huwwa-!Jna lac;yiin naakul Ga/aan niruu!J fiskindiriyya 
we're hardly mam~ing to get by, let 'alone go off to 
Alexandria! 2 to realize, perceive. lac;eet in-naas bi-
tb~~-i-li 1 realized that people were looking at me. lac;u 
1- fUlubiis mif raayi!J il-!Jilla iii humma ray!Jin-ha they 
found that the bus wasn't going where they were going. 
- tilc;aa 3 modal of probability. ti/c;aa-ku ma-kaltuu-J 
you probably haven't eaten yet, 1 don't suppose you've 
eaten yet. tilc;aa ma-gaa-/ Gala/aan Gayyaan he prob-
ably hasn't come because he's ill. -vn lac;ayaan; ava 
laac;i; pva malc;i. 
W luc;a Inl meeting, encounter. luc;aa-na maG a baGq 
our meeting with one another. 
• W liqaafr In pi -aatl encounter, meeting. fila I-liqaaf 
until we meet again, au revoir. 
.;\.A.l; tilqaa fi r /adjl spontaneous. 
11 !ilqa fiyyan ladvl spontaneously . 
..;11 fitlac;c;a = fistilac;c;a. -ava mitlac;c;i. 
..)'1 laac;a Ivtll to discover, perceive. fadawwar Gala 
mraat-i falac;ii-ha xaragit 1 look for my wife and find 
that she has gone out. tilac;ii fa~/aG you'll find him bald. 
2 to meet. !J-alac;ii-k feen where shall 1 meet you? 
IIlac;ii-ni wala tyaddii-ni '" a warm welcome is worth 
more than a meal. - waa!Jid yiqrab wit-taani ylaac;i one 
is tough and the other is kind. - tilaac;i 3 modal of 
797 
)~J 
probability. tilaac;ii-k ma-kunt i-J Gaawiz tiigi you prob-
ably just didn't want to come. tilac;ii c;aaGid Gandu 
fil-beet he's probably at home now. tilaac;i finn i fii 
Gandu ma/aakil kitiira he probably has a lot of prob-
lems. -vn milac;iyya; ava milaac;i. 
11 yilac;ii-ha min ... walla min ... '" to be beset by 
troubles. falac;ii-ha mineen walla mineen 1 am plagued 
by difficulties . 
.}')\;I fitlaac;a Ivil I to be found. fitlaac;itta!Jt i koom 
kutub it was found under a pile of books. 2 to meet one 
another. !Ja-nitlaac;a Gan-na~ya we'll meet on the cor-
ner. -ava/iva mitlaac;i . 
..;Ji falqa r Ivtl I to recite, make or deliver (a speech, 
recitation etc.). falqa c;a~iida gamiila min fait' leela 
w-Ieela he recited a lovely poem from The Thousand 
and One Nights. nooG min il-yuna been il-yuna wil-
filqaaf a kind of singing which is between singing and 
recitation. 2 to throw down, drop. fil-c;anaabil illi 
!Ja-yilqii-ha I-Gadiww the bombs which the enemy will 
drop. -vn filqaaf; ava mulqi; pva mulqa. 
..;..II filtac;a Ivtl I to find, perceive. filtac;a nafs-u 
ntac;al min ig-ganna li-gihannam he found himself 
transported from Heaven to Hell. 2 to encounter, come 
across. filtac;eet-u fif-JaariG w-ana maa/i 1 found it in 
the street as 1 was going along. dawwar iz-ziir Gala Ya{aa 
lamma Itac;aa [prov] (the water-jar looked for its lid 
until it found it) '" every Jack has his Jill. - Ivil 3 to 
meet together, get together. !Ja-niltic;i fimta when shall 
we get together? - ava miltic;i. 
~I fistalc;a: fistalc;a waGd-ak receive your due! 
y'!u're in for it now! 
~I fistilac;c;a 
Ivtl 
to 
receive. 
bi-yistalac;c;a 
t-taGlimaat mil-Gumda he gets his instructions from the 
mayor. fistilac;c;uu-ni bif-Jitiima they received me with 
insults. II ruu!J istilac;c;a waGd-ak (go and meet your 
fate!) go if you must, but don't say you haven't beep 
warned! - wiC;iGti mis-sama wi-nta stilac;c;et-ni (I fell 
from the sky and you caught me) 1 was in desperate 
straits and you helped me. - ava mistalac;c;i, mistalac;c;a . 
1 IS J J 
..;J lac;a 2 (i) Ivtl [text] to string (a warp thread on a 
lo?m). -vn lac;y; ava laac;i; pva malc;i . 
..;J lac;c;a Ivtl [text] to string (warp threads on a loom). 
- ~n talc;iyya; ava/pva milac;c;i . 
.)1. milac;c;i In *1 [text] draw-frame operator. 
,;.!lJ 
j'1 lakar <Engl> Inl 
lacquer (coating on a 
gramophone record). 

jl!JJ 
j.!l J 
;?J lakaz (u. i) Ivtl to hit. poke. dig (especially with the 
elbow). kull'fwayya yi/kuz faxuu b- riid-u f-gamb-u he 
keeps digging his brother in the side with his arm. -vn 
lak::.. lakazaan; ava laakiz; pva malkuuz. 
o;?J lakza linst n. pi -aall a hit. a poke. a dig (especially 
with the elbow). 
jSJ;1 fillakaz Ivil to be hit. poked or dug (especially 
WIth the elbow). - iva mllhk,z. 
.r.!l J 
..,..s"J luks <Fr IlIxe> ladj invarl de luxe. laayiz 
fasaafir f(id-daraga) il-Iuks' walla balaaf I want to 
travel luxury class or not at all. II baaga IlIks the perfect 
thing. just the thing. -fa(j(ja luks a flat meeting certain 
government specifications stipulating high quality. 
-fa(j(ja nu~~' luks a flat one grade below fa(j(ja luks. 
-fa(j(ja IlIh ' IlIks a flat of the highest grade according to 
these same specifications. 
.;.!l J 
~ 
lukf Icoll nl [rurJ small undeveloped melon(s) . 
......s::J lukfa lunit n. pi -aall {rurJ a small undeveloped 
melon. 
~LSJ IUkfaaya = lukfa. 
t.!lJ 
fJ likil ladj *1 given to dawdling or loitering. 
~ lakala Inl dawdhng.loitering. da mlfwa(jl'lakala 
thIs IS no time to dawdle. 
~ 
hkall or IlIkall Ipl-yyal I lad]1 given to dawdling 
or lotlenng. 2 Inl dawdler. 
~lSJ lakaala = lakala. 
& la/kill = lakala. 
~I fillakkal Ivil to loiter. dawdle. min ~u¥r-a-ha 
lbibb' lillakkal fli-maballaal ever since she was young 
;he \ had a liking for hanging around the shops. - ava 
milldkkal· 
e'j.., I flllaakil Ivil to dawdle. take (too much) time. 
bl-Ylllaakll tiffin-/' wl-Yla{[al mu~aalil:J In-naas he 
waste; time over the work and so damages people's 
Intere;ts. - ava millaakll. 
~.!lJ 
-ill lakk (II) IVII to chatter. prattle. -vn lakk. lakakaan; 
ava laakik. 
.!llSJ lakkaak lad] *1 over-talkaltve. given to chattenng 
and pratthng. 
~I fitlakklk IVII to search for or pIck on some trivial 
matter as an excuse (for anger etc ). -ava millakkik. 
798 
.!lJ.!lJ 
dlS:.J lakllk Ivtl to do (s.th ) in a slapdash way. do 
(s.th.) carelessly and badly. - vn laklaka; ava mi/aklik. 
~I fitlaklik Ivil to be done in a ;Iapda~h way. be 
done carelessly and badly. - iva millakhk. 
11 fitlaklik lala to pick on (s. th.) as a pretext. fitlaklik-h 
lala ki/ma w-qarab-m he used a word I said as an 
excuse to hit me. 
r.!l J 
~ lakam (t) Ivtl I to hit WIth the fl;t. punch. 2 to 
surfeit. cause to feel over-full (of food). fid-dlhn' b-
yliklm fat makes for satiety. fll-fakl' b-.Vllkim == the 
food b so heavy and filling that one can't draw a proper 
breath. - vn lakm; ava taakim; pva malkuum. 
...s:J lakma Ilnst n. pi -aat. lakamaatl a blow with the 
fiM. a punch. 
~ 
IlIkkamlyya In pi -aat. lakakliml blow with the 
fi;t. punch. 
~I ril-Iukkeem (al;o fabll 1-llIkkeem) Inl {pathJ 
mumps. 
~I fitlakam Ivill to be given a blow with the fISt. be 
punched. 2 to be surfeited. be made to feel over-full. 
- iva mitlikim. 
~':1 laakim Ivil to box. fight with the fists. - vn 
mulakma; ava milaakim. 
~')... mulaakim In *1 boxer. prize-fighter. 
~)\.;I fitlaakim Ivil to fbt-fight (with o.a.) 
-ava 
mlllaakim. 
I.) .!l J 
.oJ laklla. lukna In pi -aatl foreign and defective 
accent. 
2 .) .!l J see .).!ll J : lakin. laakln. lakiln 
~ .) .!l J 
,.-;LS""J lukanda <It locanda> In pi -aatl hotel. 
.)J.!l J 
.J.fJ lakoor <Fr raccord> In pl/awakllr. lakoraatl 
pipe couphng. 
o-s.!lJ 
...$':1 lakeeh <Fr laqlll?> In pi -aatl lacquer. lac . 
shellac. 
~JJJ 
J')IJ I ril-Ialll 
Inl 
playfulne;s. 
light-heartedne;s. 

riI-l/ird' b-yillab iI-lalli the monkey is frolicking about. 
bu((al fUlfl iI-lalli stop mucking about! 
I LS J J 
~~ laala I Ivil to glitter. shimmer. fin-nuguum bi-Ilaali 
the stars shine. - vn milaliyya; ava milaali. see further 
under LS J ~ J 
Z LS J J 
J~ laala:! <Copt> Ivil to ring out (of voice).lIda (uul 
il-Ieel yilaali all night long he calls out (from pain). - vn 
milaliyya. ava milailli. 
r J 
r lam J Ineg particlel never. gamilallam rafal-u leen 
beauty the like of which has nevcr been seen. 
oJ I r J 
.:,L....,J • .:,L.) lumaan <Gr limen> In pi -aall prison. 
.,r.W L....,J • .,r.W L.) lumangiln pi -yyal one who is always 
in and out of prison. jailbird. 
'"=" r J 
~ lamba (also lamc/.a J and lanc/.a J) <It lampa> In 
pi lambaal. lumac/.. lunaql I lamp. lambil maklab desk 
lamp. lambil gaaz paraffin lamp. lambu ~afiiy or lamba 
fawwaa(i small oil-lamp (see PI.B. 2).lI/amba l/a(liyya 
(welder's) acetylene torch. 2 Iight-bulb.ll/ambil radyu 
radio valve. 
-
~ '"=" r J 
J-~ lambadeer <Fr lampadaire> In pi -aall standard 
lamp. 
crJ 
cl lamay (a) Ivtl to glimpse. catch sight of. - vn lamy, 
lamayaan; ava laamil]; pva malmuuy. 
-.l lamya linst n. pi -ailll a glimpse. fi-Iamyil b~ar in 
th~ twinkling of an eye. 
CU lammaayT ladj 'I perceptive. 
C"' ')\.. malaamiy Ipl nl facial features. II baayin lalee 
malaamiy iI-Ifuc/.ab he looks angry. 
~I fillamay Ivil to be glimpsed. be caught sight of. 
- i~a millimiY. 
cl lammay Ivil to hint. lammay-Ii finnu laayiz qirfeen 
he hinted to me that he wanted some money. lammay-Ii 
b-yaqab-u he gave a hint of his anger .lI/amma n-nahaar 
yilammay when the day fir~t breaks. -vn lalmiiy; ava 
milammay. 
~I fillammay 
Ivil 
I (impersonal) 
passive 
of 
799 
lammay. mugarrad ma Ilammay-/ll fihim lala (uul as 
soon as a hint was dropped he understood straight 
away. 2 to catch a glimpse. fillammaYli bii w-fana 
maafi I caught sight of him while I was walking along. 
-avaliva millammaV. 
j.r J 
) 
lammiz Ivil assonant intensifier used in conjunction 
with Ifammiz (q.v.). lalfmiiz wi-Ialmiiz nudging and 
winking. -vn ,almiiz. 
;tl fillammiz Ivil assonant inten~ifier used in con-
junction with filrammiz (q.v.). -ava millammiz. 
IJ" r J 
..,..l lamas (i) Ivll I to touch. yaawil Iilmis rukab-ak 
bi-raas-ak try to touch your knees with your head. 2 to 
perceive. sense. lamasl innll mildaayil/ I sensed that he 
was upset. - vn lams. lamasaan; ava laamis; pva 
malmuus . 
W lamsa linst n. pi -aall a touch. 
..,..".J... malmuus f ladjl tangible. palpable. concrete. 
fana laayiz nalaayig malmuusa I want tangible results. 
..,.....L. malmas f In pi malaamisl I touch. feel. l/umaaf 
naalim iI-malmas cloth soft to the touch. 2 feeler. 
antenna. tentacle. 
...,-1;1 fillamas Ivill to be touched. 2 to be perceived. 
be sensed. - iva millimis. 
..,..l lammis Ivll to cause or allow to touch. lammis-ni 
I-l/umaaf he gave me the cloth to feel. -vn lalmiis; 
avalpva milammis. 
~I fillammis 
I Ivtl 
to 
probe. 
search 
out. 
fillammis-Ii 1- falzaar he tried to find excuses for my 
behaviour. 2 Ivil to be caused or allowed to touch. - iva 
millammis. 
V--~ laamis Ivtl to touch. come into contact with. 
fil- faslaak lamsil balq-a-ha w-ya~al maas the wires 
touched and a short-circuit occurred. -vn milamsa; aval 
pva milaamis. 
v--)\;I fillaamis Ivil to touch one another. come into 
mutual contact. -ava millaamis. 
...,-;;11 rillamas Ivtl to request. solicit (s.th. from s.o.). 
- vn fillimaas; ava millimis. 
IJ"l..:.Il fillimaas Inll request. solicitation. 2 petition. 
31 leleel short-circuit. 
...,...:;.l. mullamas Inl petition. 
lu':'rJ 
.;al limic/. ladj , and pi lumac/.al loquacious. voluble. 
..... U lamaac/.a In/loquacity. volubility. 

U 
.~I fitlammaq Ivil to smack the lips. ku/l' 
m-adxul iI-matbax fa/aljii bi-yitlammaq every time I go 
into the kitchen I find him smacking his lips. II kal wi-
tlammaq he ate and smacked his lips too, he thoroughly 
enjoyed the meal. -ava mitlammaq. 
.;a..')I.;1 fitlaamlq Ivil I to talk a lot. 2 to engage in 
repartee. -ava mitlaamiq. 
2 ~ r J see Y r J : lamqa 
~rJ see l~rJ 
tr J 
d- lamal (a) Ivil to shine. -vn laml. lamalaan; ava 
laamil· 
W lamla Inl shine, lustre. II fabu lamla epithet for an 
extravagant boaster (after a popular comedian of the 
same name). 
~ lamli ladjl shiny. 
~ lamliyya Inl brightness, shine. 
d-l falmallell morelmost shiny. 
t U lammaal In pl/ammaala. lammaliinl polisher, 
on~ who polishes. 
~.U lammaala In pi -aatl polishing cloth. 
eo1 lammill ladjl gleaming, shining. wid-dahab fii 
lammiil wi-Iii maTfi as for gold, there is shiny (gold) and 
dull (gold). II gild' lammiil patent leather. - waralj 
l~mmiil glossy photographic paper: 
d- lammal/vtl to polish, make shine. lammal gazmit-
ak polish your shoes! -vn talmiil: avalpva milammal. 
~ 
talmiila linst n, pi -aatl a polishing. 
~I fitlammal Ivil to be polished. - iva mitlammal. 
~ 
I fistalmal/vt/l to consider shiny. 2 to select for 
shininess. fistalmal gazma wi-ftirii-ha choose a shiny 
pair of shoes and buy them. ~ava mistalmal. 
rJrJ 
~ lamlim I Ivtl to gather up, gather together. lamlim 
yagaat-ak wi-mfi gather up your stuff and g.et out! 2 Ivil 
to mix with people below one's station, go slumming. 
-vn lamlama: avalpva milamlim. 
~I fitlamlim Ivil to be gathered up, be gathered 
together. - iva mitlamlim. 
rrJ 
r lamm (I) Ivtl I to collect, gather. limm iI-waralj 
wi-rmii fls-sabat collect up the paper and throw it in the 
basket. lammit iI-rasiil min la/-yabl she gathered the 
washing from the line. fIlii ylimm-u min hina ybaltar-u 
min hina whatever he acquires from one quarter, he 
800 
squanders in another.lllimm' riid-ak (1) to make a fist. 
(2) don't be so extravagant. 2 to hold in check. limm' 
lsaan-ak hold your tongue! filii mlaa kilmaylimm-a-ha 
he who has a word (of reproach, or protest) should keep 
a check on it. 3 {soccer{ to take over (a ball). - Ivi/4 to 
come together, gather. fin-naas ya-tlimm" laleena 
people will gather around us. 5 to heal over (of a 
wound). -vn lamm. lamamaan; ava laamim; pva 
malmuum. 
a lamma I Inl crowd, mob. II ril-baraka fil-lamma ... 
the more the merrier. - ril-yikaaya baljit lamma it be-
came pandemonium. 
;"U limaama Inl riff-raff, rabble. 
rU lammaam In "I collector, gatherer. da lammaam 
sabaaris wi-zbaa/a he collects cigarette ends and 
rubbish. 
~ ma/amm In pi -aatl gathering place. beet-i ma/amm 
everyone congregates at my house. 
;tl fitlamm Ivil I to be collected, be gathered. 2 to 
gather, mass, assemble. fin-naas itlammit laleena 
people gathered around us. fitlammu lalee wi-qarabuu 
they ganged up on him and beat him up. -avaliva 
mitlamm. 
• fitlamm" lala (1) to get in contact with (s.o.). 
ma-landii-f iI-linwaan wi-mij laaril fatlamm" laleeha 
I don't have the address and I don't know how to get in 
touch with her. fitlamm"lala kabflt liyaal ~uyyal he 
joined up with a bunch of no-good kids. (2) to take a 
hold on (o.s.), get a grip on (o.s.). mijljaadir fatlamm" 
la/a nals-i I can't get a hold of myself, I can't pull 
myself together. mij laaril fat/amm a la/a gism-i I can't 
get my body in order. 
~i falammT Ivil I to happen (to s.o.). falammit bii 
m~iiba a disaster befell him. 2 to familiarize oneself. 
fana falammeet bil-mawquul ku/l-u I acquainted my-
self with the whole subject. -vn filmaam; ava mulimm. 
rUt rilmaamT Inl'capability, adequate knowledge or 
ability. landu filmaan bi-luluum ik-kimya he has a fair 
knowledge of the chemical sciences. 
~ mullmmT ladj "I capable, having adequate know-
ledge or ability. mulimm' bil-ljiraaya wil-kitaaba he can 
read and write. 
I.r r J 
U lamma 2 Iconjl I when. ma-kunt'-f b-alral lamma 
tuxrug I used not to know when she went out. lamma 
laljeet iI-filuus inbasatt when I found the money, I was 
happy. 2 until. yaklu lamma yifbalu they eat until 
they're full. ma-baljenaa-f nijuf-ha lamma nsiina 
fakl-a-ha feeh we haven't seen her for so long we've 

801 
J,oJ 
forgotten what she look~ like. I'isma[ lamma I'aqul-Iak 
..;.. .J J see Y ~ J : lamt[a 
hang on till I tell you! 3 if, since. lamma I'inlu 
misla[giliin waqfiin kida leeh if you are in a hurry, why 
are you standing around like that? 4 even if. lamma 
I'akuun b-amuut even if I were to die. mif ba-yaxd-u 
lamma ykuun I'almaa; he wouldn't take it even if it 
were diamonds. 
I IJ ~ J see IJ I ~ J: lumaan, lumangi 
1 IJ ~ J see IJ J ~ J : lamuun, lamuuna. lamuuni 
-IIJ~J 
~\;,..J lamunaala <It limonala> Inl lemonade. 
'.)\;,..J lamunaada = lamunaala. 
IJ.J~J 
.:,,..J lamuun Icoll nl lemon(s); particularized as 
lamuun baladi Egyptian lemon(s) (Citrus Iimonum var. 
pusilla) and lamuun I'at[alya common lemon(s) (Citrus 
limonum var. vulgaris). lamuun bilw round bland var-
iety of lemon. 
j,;,..J lamuuna lunit n, pi -aall a lemon. IIlamuuna 
f-balad qarfaana [prov] "" just what's needed. 
J,..J lamuuni ladjl lime-green. 
OIoS~J 
.-.".. "1 lameeh <Fr lame> Inl fabric with a glittering 
finish, lama, (loosely also) satin. 
YIoS":"IJJ 
..,..,,;.,:.1 linutiib <Fr> Inl linotype. makan linuliib 
linotype machines. -also linyu. 
..:.. j ":"IJ J 
u.Fl lanluut In pi lanatiitl peg on the beam of a 
plough, or of asaqya, for the attachment of harness (see 
PI.D, 13). - also I'anluut. banluut. 
~IJJ 
~ lang: gidiid lang brand-new. 
IJ~IJJ 
.:,...1:.1 landan. lundun J Iprop nl London. 
.; IJ J 
-rJ lanj <Engl> In pi -aall [naut] launch. 
IJ';IJJ 
~ 
tanjun <Engl> Inl (beef) luncheon meat, (beef) 
luncheon sausage. 
• .,:.1 linooh <Fr linon> Inl lawn. qamii~ linooh a lawn 
shirt. 
IoSIJJ 
4,.;J linya <It linea> In pi -aall lone-eighth of an inch. 
I'azmiil linya a chisel with a one-eighth inch bit. 
musmaar linyileen a screw with a one-quarter inch 
thread. 2 electric power cable. 
JIoSIJJ 
~ linyu <Fr linolype> Inl linotype. makan linyu 
linotype machines. - also linutiib. 
yo J 
..,.J. lahabf Icoll nl flame(s) . 
..,...:;JI I'illahabf Ivil I to become ignited. 2 to become 
inflamed. -vn I'illihaab; ava millihib. 
..,..~ 1 I'illihaab In pi -aall inflammation, (loosely also) 
infection. 
~ 
mullahib ladjl flammable. 
..:.. 0 J see ..:.. J 0 J : lahuul 
..!J 0 J see IJ" 0 J 
I~OJ 
rt lahag (i) Ivtl to cause to rush, hustle. malhuug [ala 
I'eeh what is the rush? - vn lahagaan; ava laahig; pva 
malhuug . 
~ 
lahga I linst n, pi -aall a rush, a hurry. 
&1 I'illahag Ivil to be rushed, be hurried. - iva 
millihig. 
l~oJ 
~ 
lahga 2 In pi -aall I dialect. 2 accent. 3 manner of 
speaking. 
IJ" 0 J 
.;..A lahasf (a) Ivil to pant. -vn lahs; ava laahis. 
.l .. J 
JaJ. lahat (a) Ivtl I to guzzle (food). 2 to embezzle 
(money). -vn laht. lahataan; ava laahit; pva malhuut. 
i.la.\ lahta In pi -aall large mouthful (of something soft, 
e.g., jelly, cream, etc.). lahtil qifta a large mouthful of 
cream. bill i zayy lahtil il-qifta a delicious girl. 
¥I I'illaha{ Ivil I to be guzzled (of food). 2 to be 
embezzled (of money). - iva millihit. 

~oJ 
...; 0 J 
....;;, lahaf (a) Ivtl I to snatch. swipe.lahafd-bint' minni 
b-kilmiteen yilwiin he stole the gIrl from me with a 
couple of sweet words. law ¥lfdt' lallnu dc;iic;a ya-yilhaf 
fduus-ak if you take your eye~ off him for a minute. he 
will pinch your money. 2 to hit. strike. lahaftt-u 1-
larabiyya the car struck him. fd-mudarris lahaf-u 
c;alameen the teacher gave him a slapping. - vn lahf: ava 
laahif: pva malhuuf. 
1I/ahaf lala to give cause to worry over. cause to be 
anxious about. finta dayman laahlf fumm-ak laleek 
kida leeh why do you alway~ have to make your mother 
anxious about you like that? 
.... lahfa Inl I worry. anxiety. lahf/t-ha lala-bn-a-ha 
her anxiety over her son. ILra lahfll nafs-I = alas! 
2 yearning. desire. 
J..,.l. malhuuf ladj *1 yearning. longing. excited. 
~I Yitlahaflvil I to be stolen. be ~wiped. 2 to be hit, 
be struck. - iva mitliluf. 
~I fitlahhaflvil to yearn. be eager. b-atlahhaflalee 
I am longing to see him. - vn talahhllf' ; ava mitlahhif. 
y J 0 J 
...,.u lahlib Ivtl I to sear (of acid. dry heat and hot 
liquids). fif-jllrba lahhbll-h bll{iC;-1 the soup burnt my 
mouth. fll-Yaamul. bi-ylahlib d-gild acid burns the skin. 
2 to cause a burning sen~ation in. fil-yumma lahhbit 
glsm-I the fever burned me up. II fi/-blllt' lahilbit-Ill the 
girl set my heart aflame. - faslaar mdahliba horrendous 
prices. -
Ivi/3 to be seared. gdd-i lahhb mil-yaamiq my 
skin was burnt by the acid. 4 to experience a burning 
sensation. gism-u mlahlib mll-ywnma his body is burn-
Ing with fever. - vn lahlaba; avalpva mdahlib. 
~ 
milahlib ladj *1 actIve. dynamIC. on-the-ball. 
yp lahlllllb In pilahaillbi flame. tongue (of fire). 
"-i p 
lahlllllba 
In 
pi lahahibl 
I flame. 
II gayyiin 
waraana zayy il-Iahlllllba coming up after us lickety-
split. 2 active and dynamic person. ball of fire. 
.".,JIA lahalilbll In/{slang} active and dynamic person, 
ball of fire. 
~I fitlahlib Ivil I to be seared. 2 to experience a 
burning sensation. ba{11-I b-lIIlahhb I get a burmng feel-
ing in my stomach. - iva mitlaMb. 
o J 0 J 
ill lahlah Ivtl to cause to pant. rush and flurry. - vn 
lailiaha: ava mllahlall. 
~I flliahiah Ivil to be made to pant. be rushed and 
flurried. finta gay.\' , mlliahlah lala feeh what are you 
rushing here in such a state for? - iva mitlahlah. 
802 
r 0 J 
rA laham i (i) Ivtl to Inspire. rabb-I-na lallam-ni faagi 
n-nahar-da God made me come today. -vn /ahamaan; 
ava laahim. 
rAi fa/ham (also fanham i ) Ivtl to Inspire (s.o.) with 
(s.th.). falham-II rabb-i-na Nabr God inspired him 
with patience. - vn filhaam; ava mlilhim: pva mlilham. 
rIA! fdhaam r Inl in~plration. 
~I flSlalham r IVII 
to 
draw 
inspIration 
for. 
fistaillam il-(i/~~a mill sllrajalblyya he drew the inspira-
tion for the story from a folk epic. - vn fi.wlhaam: ava 
mllstalhim. 
.J 0 J see .,s 0 J : lahw. lallwa 
":;".J 0 J 
~ y. '1 lahlllll Inl {Chr} I dIVInity. lahlllll d-masllY WI-
nasliUl-1i 
the divinity and humamty of Christ. 
2 theology. kulhYYlllahliUl theological college. 
..,y.'l lallulllI {Cllr} 
I/ad)1 theological. 2 In 
*1 
theologian. 
~.JoJ 
c,k lahwig Ivtl to rush. hurry. lahwig-Ill xallaa-1lI 
fabawwa~ if-ju~'1 he rushed me and made me mess up 
the work. - vn lahwaga; avalpva mllahwig. 
(.-*1 flllahwig Ivil to be hurried. be rushed. -Iva 
mitlahwig. 
.,soJ 
..) lalla (i) Ivtl I to di~tract. fdlll I-kalb' b-laqma 
{prov} dl~tract the dog WIth a bone (and It won't bite 
you). 2 to afflIct (In context~ 01 cursing or abUSing). 
.VI/llii-k lala leen-ak ya bllld may you be afflIcted with 
the lo~s of your ~ight! feeh ilh lallaa-k xallaa-k fiddet-
lIulI-/Ii why the hell have you given It to hIm? - vn 
lallayaan. lallw; ava laahi; pva lila/hI. 
;. lallw Inl distractIon (caused by anguish or bewilder-
ment). ya lah»'-i conventional exclamation of dismay or 
distress. ya lall»'-i laleek ya-xllll-ya {women III trad ~oc} 
what a disaster it 
i~ to lose you! (exclamation of 
mourning). 
0;' lahwa = lallw . 
..#- mailla In pi malaallil night-club. II (madiinit) d-
malaahi fun-fair. amusement park. 
~ 
milahlyya Inl distraction. 
~I fll/aha IVII I to be or become di~tracted fltlaha 
f-kitaab he became absorbed in a book. 2 to be afflicted 
(in contexts of cursing or abUSing). fitlilll fl{lal min 

hina get the hell out of here! fitlihi get lost! stop being.a 
nuisance! shut up! - avaliva mitlihi. 
J J see also I J J J and I i J J 
) law Iconjl I lusu introducing hypothetical conditionl 
if. huwwa law kaan hina kaan ljatal-ak if he had been 
here. he would have killed you. law kaan faxuu-ya hina 
kaan l:Ja-yiddii-lak if my brother were here. he would 
give (it) to you. law tiigi bukra I:J-addii-Iak il-filuus if you 
come tomorrow. 1"11 give you the money. Ilragarit law 
ma-b-ti{ral:J-fi [prov/ the 'if tree doesn't bear fruit. 
2 even if. fana law miwaafilj lala kida miJ I:J-awaafilj 
lala kull' kalaam-ak even if J agree to that. J shan't 
agree to all you say. 
~ wa-Iaw jconjl I (also wa-Iaw finn) even though.,even 
if. b-al:Jibb-ak wa-Iaw finni ~allaana minnak J love 
you. even though J am angry with you. xud il-fa~iila 
wa-Iaw kaanit lal-!la~iira [prov/ marry a well-born 
woman even if she be poor. 2 even as much as. even as 
little as. faljdar fagiib wa-Iaw miit kiilu kabaab J can 
bring as much as one hundred kilos of kebab. xallii-na 
nfuuf-ak wa-Iaw marra fis-sana let us see you, even if 
it's only once a year. - linterj/3 so what! even so! fana 
rul:Jt-i-lu mbaarilj. - wa-Ia"! - laazim tirul:J-Iu bukra 
barqll'J went to see him yesterday.' 'So what! You still 
have to go and see him again tomorrow.' 
.J I J J 
I)) liwaan (also fiwaan f ) <P aiwan> In pi -aatl 
[obsol/ I raised floor on either side of a dllrljaala, 
estrade. 2 small recess with a raised floor off the main 
room of a public bath. 
~\) liwangi In pi -yyal [obsol} male upper servant. 
~\) liwangiyya In pi -aatl [obsol} female upper 
servant. 
• J J see 2,.; J J 
YJJ 
'-:') luub <Fr loupe> In pi -aatl magnifying glass. 
I ,.; Y J J see 2,.; Y J : lubya 
..:..oj J 
...... ) 
111111 Inl Mediterranean, and Red Sea fish of the 
species Sciae. 
.:., J J see <oJ" J J 
803 
~J J 
C) loog, looj <Fr loge> In pi falwaag. falwaajl 
theatre or cinema box. 
.(JJ 
. 
C) lawal:J (i) Ivtl to twist. bend (out ofshape).lawal:Jt' 
rigl-i J twisted my ankle. II/awal:J-ni b-la~aaya he beat 
me out of shape with a stick, he gave me a real whack-
ing. - bint; tilwil:J "" a stunning girl. - vn lawal:Jaan. 
lawal:J; ava laawil:J; pva malwuul:J. 
;,...) lawl:Ja linst n, pi -aatl a twist, a bend. 
c.); \ fitlawal:J Ivil to be or become twisted or bent (out 
of shape). rigl-II tlawal:Jit his leg got twisted. -ava/iva 
mitliwil:J. 
c.) lawwal:J I Ivil 11 to wave (with the hand). 2 [path} 
to suffer spasms. -vn talwiil:J; ava milawwal:J. 
~); talwiil:Ja linst n, pi -aat. talawiil:Jl [path} a spasm. 
2(JJ 
c.) 1001:J In pi falwaal:Jl la plank, board. 1001:J bunti 
scaffolding 
plank. 
Ib baker's 
wooden 
tray. 
Ic winnowing shovel. 2 sheet, plate (of metal, glass 
etc.). 1001:J (firdiwaaz) schoolroom slate. II/ool:J talg 
block of ice. 3 shoul<;ler blade, scapula. beet il-lool:J 
shoulder (of meat). 4 oaf. xlld malaak iI-lool:J 
is-sawwaalj ig-gidiid da take that dimwit of a new driver 
with you. 
4>.) 100I:Ja In pi -aat. Iiwal:Jl I board (induding, e.g., 
notice-board, sign-board, drafting board, panel). 
2 plate (induding, e.g., name-plate, number-plate, li-
cence-plate).3 painting, drawing, design draft, sketch. 
4 [print} frame of type. 5 chart. 
c.) lawwal:J 2 Ivtl to fit with (wooden) planking or 
(metal) plating. -vn talwiil:J; ava/pva milawwal:J. 
c.); \ fitlawwal:J Ivil to be fitted with (wooden) plank-
ing or (metal) plating. - iva mitlawwal:J, 
c.);... \ fistalwal:J Ivil I to act like a dullard. waaqif 
mistalwal:J leeh why are you standing around like a 
blockhead? 2 to consider, or take for, a dullard. - vn 
fistilwaal:J; ava mistalwal:J. 
• ~ J J 
~'1 laad (u) Ivil to suffer. fil-waal:Jid laayid min ig-guul 
I am starving. - vn looda. lawadaan, layadaan; ava 
laayid . 
J....'1 laayid ladj *1 low, loutish, sluttish. fibn i/-Iayda 
son of a bitch. 
~) lawwid I Ivtl to subject to protracted discomfort. 
xad-l1i y¥addii-ni lawwid-ni mig-guul he took me to 

have lunch and kept me waiting till I was starving. 
W-bubb' lawwid e;alb-u love set his heart aflame. - vn 
lalwiid; ava milawwid. 
J~I fitlawwid Ivil to be subjected to protracted dis-
comfort. - iva mitlawwid. 
2 ~.J J 
J ~ lawwid 2: la tbawwid wa/a tlawwid it goes straight to 
the target. 
~.J J see 2 j.J J 
.J J.J J 
JJJ'J lawru (also warae; lawru) <It lauro> Icoll nl bay 
leaves. 
"sJ.JJ 
"sJ) luuri <Engl> In pl/awaari, luriyyaatl I lorry, 
truck. 
2 hand-operated 
truck 
used 
by 
railway 
labourers. 
I j.J J 
j) looz Icoll nil almond(s).lIlooz ya tirmis looz (ven-
dor's cry/ delicious lupins as sweet as almonds! 2 cotton 
boll(s). - ladj invar/3 delicious. bint' looz e;awi a real-
ly delectable girl. 
;j) looza lunit n, pi -aatl I an almond. Illooza sail 
motif in tent applique design (see PI.H, 9). 2 a cotton 
boll. - In pl/iwaz/3 tonsil. landu I-liwaz he has tonsil-
litis. 4 leather reinforcing patch put on a slipper of the 
bul'(a type at the point where the leather heel and sole 
strips meet. 5 kind of spot weld. 
j ~ lawwiz I Ivtl to put a .Iooza on (a slipper of the 
bul'(a type). 2 Ivil to form bolls (of cotton). -vn talwiiz; 
ava milawwiz. 
j~1 fitlawwiz Ivil to be reinforced with a looza (of a 
slipper of the bul'(a type). -iva mitlawwiz. 
2 j.J J 
~'J laaz (u) Ivil to take refuge. fin-naas illi bi-tluuz 
IlIhum dool mif ba-yinfaluu-k those people you're re-
lying on will let you down. fana laayiz bi-ganaab iIIaah 
I am taking refuge in God. -vn lawazaan; ava laayiz. 
IJ".J J 
.... ~ lawwis 1 Ivtl to pollute, contaminate. - vn talwiis; 
avalpva mi/awwis. 
U ~I fitlawwis 1 Ivil to be polluted, be contaminated. 
-vn ta/awwus; iva mitlawwis. 
804 
~.JJ 
..;.'J laaj (u) Ivtl I to gobble up, devour completely. 
fid-diib laaj iI-xaruuf the wolf gobbled up the sheep. 
2 to embezzle (money). 3 to deal (a hard blow or the 
like) to. laj-ni e;a/am he slapped me hard./aj-ni kurbaag 
he gave me a whipping. 4 to sting (of a scorpion, snake 
etc.). - vn lawajaan; ava laayif. 
:\";'I~ lawwaaja In pi -aatl twitch (for restraining an 
animal). 
..;.')\;'1 fitlaaj Ivil I to be gobbled up. 2 to be embez-
zled. 3 to be dealt (e.g., a blow). 4 to be stung. -iva 
mitlaaj . 
..;.~ lawwif I Ivtl {agric/ to tie (a crop) into sheaves or 
bundles. 2 Ivil to grope about (in the dark, in the man-
ner of a blind person, etc.). -vn talwiif; ava/pva 
milawwif· 
~); talwiifa In pi -aat, ta/awiifl a sheaf, a bundle (of 
a crop, especially sugar cane). 
..;.~I fitlawwif ivil to be tied into bundles or sheaves. 
- iva millawwif. 
u'" .J J 
u"''J la~ (u) Ivil to be at a loss, be in a muddle. la~ 
fil-imtibaan he was at a loss in the exam. -vn law~aan, 
lay~aan; ava laay~. 
4..:» 
loo~a In pi -aatl state of bewilderment, fix. 
u"'J 'J laaw~ Ivil to dither, vacillate. prevaricate. 
e;alad yilaawi~ wi-ma-rcf.ii-J yiltirif bil-bae;e; he kept 
shilly-shallying and wouldn't tell the truth. -vn 
milaw~a; ava milaaw~. 
,-""J')\;'I 
ritlaaw~ = laawi~. -ava mitlaawi~. 
1j,.JJ 
.l.'J laat' (u) Ivil to loaf around, hang about. tuul 
in-nahaar laayi{ barra he hangs around out (in the 
streets) all day long. -vn lawa{aan; ava laayi{. 
;J.I~ lawwaa{a In pi -aatl (animal-drawn) beam used 
for levelling tillage under water. 
.l. ~ lawwa{ Ivtl to level or smooth (land which is under 
water) with a lawwaa{a. - vn talwiit; avalpva milawwa(. 
.l. ~I fitlawwa{ Ivil passive of lawwa{. - iva mitlawwa{. 
2j,.JJ 
.l.'J laa{2 (u) Ivil to have sexual relations with another 
male (of a male). -vn lawa{aan; ava laayit . 
.»» 
luuti In pi -yyal active homosexual. 
t.J J 
~) loola, lawla Inl (mental) agony. ba-tiktim 

10lit-ha guwwa ljalb-a-ha she will conceal her agony in 
her heart. 
t) lawal Inl deviousness. da malyaan lawal he is all 
deviousness. 
ti lawwal Ivtl I to subject to subtle (and usually 
protracted) torment. fil-bubb i lawwal-ni love made 
me suffer agonies. fil-muwagaf lawwal-na kull i yoom 
bi-Yljuul bukra the employee kept us on tenterhooks, 
saying 'Tomorrow' every day. 2 to make devious or 
tortuous. ma-tlawwal-F kalaam-ak don't mince your 
words! - Ivi/3 to act in a devious or tortuous way. -vn 
talwiil; ava/pva milawwal. 
t~ milawwal/adj *1 artful, worldly-wise. 
t).;1 fitlawwal Ivil I to be subjected to subtle (and 
usually protracted) torment. 2 to act or be made to act 
in a devious manner. - iva mitlawwal. 
t J ~ laawil Ivtl to string (s.o.) along, bamboozle. 
fis-simsaar lawil-ni I-badd i ma xassar-ni faIt gneeh 
the agent led me on and lost me a thousand pounds. -vn 
milawla; ava milaawil. 
tJ)I.;1 fitlaawil Ivil to act deviously. fit-taagir itlaawil 
laleehum fit-taman the trader swindled them over the 
price. ma-titlawil-lii-j don't play games with me! - ava 
mitlaawil· 
I ~ .J J see also I ~ J. and I ~ J.J 
J~ laaf (u) Ivil to become friendly or intimate. 
fil-walad da laayif lala (or bi-) f~baab mif kuwayyisiin 
that boy is associating with unpleasant companions. 
fil-binti diyya bi-tluuf lala (or bi-) fayyi waabid this 
girl takes up with anyone. - vn loof, lawafaan; ava 
laayif. 
J)I.;I fitlaaf Ivil (impersonal) passive of laaf. dool naas 
yitlaaf laleehum are these people of the type (one) 
comes to feel at home with? - iva mitlaaf. 
J i lawwif I Ivtl to cause to feel friendly or intimate. 
fil-bint i di lawwifit-u laleeha min yoom waabid this girl 
managed to hook him in one day. 2/vil to become 
friendly or intimate. -vn talwiif; ava/pva milawwif. 
J).;I fitlawwif Ivil passive of lawwif 1. -iva mitlawwif. 
1~.J J 
J) luuf Icoll nl loofah plant, dish-cloth gourd (Luffa 
aegyptica, the fibre of which is commonly used as a 
scouring pad).ll/uuf fabmar palm fibre. 
;ij) luufa Ipl -aatl unit noun of luuf. 
IJ.JJ 
J) lawalj Inl pronouncing of r as y (a speech defect). 
80S 
J)i falwalj ladj, fem loolja, plluuljl having the 
speech defect called lawalj. 
lJ.JJ 
J) luulj, loolj: baab iI-Iuulj, baab iI-Ioolj Iprop nl 
district of central Cairo. 
.!l.J J 
.!l~ laak (u) Ivil to speak critically, bring accusations. 
bi-yluukuf-sumlit-ha they are tearing her reputation to 
shreds. - ava laayik. 
.!li lawwak Ivjl to chew at.lammaal yilawwak il-fakl i 
j-buljlj-u he keeps chewing the food around in his 
mouth. -vn talwiik; avalpva milawwak. 
.!l).;1 fitlawwik Ivil I to be chewed at. 2 to chew away 
(at s.th.). - avaliva mitlawwik. 
J.J J see ..; J.J J : luuli, luliyya 
I J.J J see also .J J and I r .J J 
~ ) 
loola (also lolaaj) Icon j, w foil pron suff lolaa-I 
but for, were it not for. lolaay kaan ljatal-ak but for me, 
he would have killed you. loola musaldit faxuu-ya 
kaan lalj/-i (aar but for the help of my brother, I should 
have gone crazy. lolaa-J ik-kalb i hina ma-kunti-J lirift 
inn il-baraami fi/-beet had the dog not been here 
I wouldn't have known the thief was in the house. -also 
looma. 
1IIooia finn but for the fact that, were it not for the fact 
that. loola finnu liyi kaan malaana dilwaljti if he 
hadn't fallen ill, he'd be with us now. 
Y J.J J 
..,.J) lawlab In pi lawaalibl I spring, coil. lawlab 
baakim valve spring. 2 coil (intra-uterine device). 
~) lawlabi ladj 
*1 I spiral, helical. 
Ilraljlja~a 
lawlabiyya undulating dancer. 2 devious. 
.JJ.JJ 
.,I) lawliw Ivt/ to twist, coil. II ril-mayya s-saljla 
lawliwit m~ariin-i cold water gave me cramps in the 
stomach. -vn lawlawa; avalpva milawliw. 
));1 fitlawliw, fitlawlaw IvitI to slip away, wriggle 
away. 2 to become twisted. babl it-tilifoon fitlawlaw the 
telephone cord has become twisted. - ava mitlawliw. 
..; J.J J see also I..; J J 
J) luuli Icoll nl I pearl(s). 2 [fig] gleaming teeth. 
4) luliyya I lunit n, pi -aatl a pearl. 2 In pllawaalil 
copper mounting for the reed of the muzmaar. 

~.JJ 
1S~':l.JJ 
r'J laam! (u) Ivtl to blame, reproach. mlraat-u 
IS,J;) lawindi Inl highfalutin talk. -ladverbiallyl 
bi-tluum-u lala m~ariif-u I-kitiira his wife blames him 
bi-yikkallim lawindi he talks like a toff. 
for his heavy spending. -vn loom, malaam, malaama, 
lawamaan: ava laa.Vlm: pva maluum r . 
... ;J... malaama Inl blame. reproach.lliooia I-malaama 
... were It not reprehensible ... , as In loola I-malaama 
klint' qarabt-II Ijalam but for the shame of doing it, 
I would have slapped him. 
(,)1.;1 
flllaam Ivil to be blamed. - iva mitlaam. 
I ~ .J J see also .J J and I J.J J 
L.) looma (also lomaa-!) Iconj, w foil pron suff 
lomaa-I but for, were it not for. lomaa laleehum 
ma-kanuujl,CjYu yaklu but for his helping them they 
wouldn't have had anything to eat. - al~o loola. 
<J I ~ .J J see <J I (' J : lumaan 
I <J.J J 
;;) loon In pi falwaanl I colour. loon-u fazraCj it's 
blue. 2 colouring matter. falwaan mayya water col-
ours. falwaan!aml wax crayons. falwaan zeet (artist's) 
oil paints. 3 style. type.{!i fa!kaal wi-falwaan there are 
all sorts and types. kull' muranm lu loon every singer 
has his own ~tyle 
;;) Iiwm ladi *1 outgoing and (perhaps a little too) 
approachable (usually of a woman). 
;;} lawwm I Ivtl to colour. fin-naCjCjaa! lawwin 
i1-ljetaan faljmar the decorator coloured the walls red. 
-
Ivil 2 to begin to wear coloured clothes (of women, 
after wearing black during a penod of mourning). 3 to 
ripen (of fruit). -vn talwim: avalpva milawwm. 
;;~ mllawwm ladil muill-coloured. Cjamli~ milawwin 
a coloured (as opposed to a single colour) shirt. 
;;~. mulawwan ladj *1 coloured, non-white. 
;;};I flllawwm Ivil to be coloured .. fil-Cjuma!aat 
bi-wlawwin bls-sabra fabrics are coloured by means of 
dye. II fli-mamkaan wlawwin ljasab Ii-fustaan the model 
takes on the characterisllcs of the dress. - iva 
mlllawwm . 
.:..};.. mutalawwin ladi '1 time-serving. opportunist. 
Z <J .J J ~ee <J I .J J : "waan, "wangi, iiwangiyya 
~ <J J J 
o,J;) lawmda <It lavanda> Inl lavender. mayyil 
lawmda lavender water. 
IIS.JJ 
IS) lawa (i) Ivtl I to bend. huwwa raagillitra Yllra! 
yilwi I-ljadiid bi-fiid-u he's a strong man, able to bend 
iron (bars) with his bare hands. 2 to twist. '1I/awa buuz· 
(u) or lawa wif!-(u) to scowl. - Ivi/3 to'writhe. ba{n-u 
b-tiwgal-u b-yilwi biiha his stomach hurts and he is 
writhing with it. -vn lawy, layy: ava laawi: pva malwi .• 
~ layy I Ivnl II {ayy , la/a layy on an empty stomach, as 
in baat (ayy' la/a layy he went to bed supperless. 
~) lawya linst n, pi -aatl a bend. a twist, a writhe. 
~ layyl In pi -aatl flexible hose (of a water-pipe, see 
PI.J,4). 
...;:) lawlyya Inl convolvulus . 
.,$J;J... malaawi Ipl nl [rurl pegs (of a rebab). 
•• I,,;J I filtiwaafa r I In pi -aatl twist or bending (of the 
b6dy). 2 fiI-filllwafaat Ipl nl [pathl nitrogen narcosis, 
the bends. 
.,$);,1 fitlawa IVII I to be bent. 2 to be twisted. -iva 
mitliwi. 
.,$};I flllawwa Ivil to wnthe, squirm. Cjalad yitlawwa 
min i1-wagal he kept wnthlng With pain. - avamlllawwl. 
ZIS.JJ 
.1) .1) Iiwa Inl [mill I/pl Iiwafaat, falwiyafl bri-
gade. 2 Ipl I,wa faatl 28 major-general or brigadier-
general. 2b Iiwa baljri rear-admiral. 
J lIS J 
~l.l liyaaCja I <T yaka> In pi -aatl collar (of a gar-
ment). nu~~' lyaaCja mandann collar. half collar. -also 
yaaCja. 
":-" IS J see I IS ":-" J :' liibi 
~ISJ 
~ 
'1 laayig lad] *1 restless. laCjeet-u laayig !i1-beet 
I found him pacing about the house. leneen layga shifty 
eyes. 
CISJ 
c. '1 laalj (I) Ivil to appear from a distance. lamma 
I-fagr' laalj when dawn broke. -vn layaljaan: ava 
laayilj. 
-;"";'1 laylja r In pi lawaayiljl set of reg~lations. laybll 
i1-barild the post office regulations. luquuba ljasab i/-
lawaayilj a penalty according to the regulations. 

807 
r4SJ 
J loS J see J.J J : laayid 
it's only right and fitting that he should behave that 
.J J IoS,J 
J~ liidu Inlludo (game). 
I ....... loS J 
~ 
layyis Ivtl I to stop up or seal up (with mud). 
2 {slangj to shut (s.o.'s mouth). layyis-Iu buqq-u shut 
his trap for him! - vn talyiis; avalpva milayyis. 
~I fitlayyi~ Ivil I to be stopped up or se.aled up 
(with mud). 2 {slangj to shut up or be made to shut up. 
fitlayyis shut your gob! -avaliva mitlayyis. 
...,..;L. mitlayyis ladj *1 stupefied with hashish. 
2 ....... loS J 
...,...,J laysa laym fil/a and no more, and that's that. 
as in gineeh laysa fil/a one pound and not a penny more, 
huwlVa kiilu laysa fil/a it's a kilo (you'll be getting) and 
that's all. 
I..,.. loS J 
L.a"J 
lii~a linterjl hubb' lii~a heave-ho! 
.1IoSJ 
J."J Vee{a Inl mire~ 
.Ja;J layya[ Ivtl to smear with. layya[u I-bee[a [iin they 
daubed the wall with mud.layya{t' hduum-i bUllya I got 
my clothes smeared with paint. - vn talyii[; avalpva 
milayya{. 
¥I fitlayya{ Iv)1 to be smeared. -iva mitlayya[. 
....iIoSJ 
...A,J liif Icoll n, pi falyaaf/ fibre(~), palm fibre(s). 
~ liifa In pi -aatl I tuft of palm fibres used as a brush. 
2 bath sponge, loofah. 
.).l liifi ladjl fibrous. 
~ layyif I Ivtl to scrub with a liifa or a luufa. 2/vil 
23 {pathj to become cirrhotic. 2b to become fibrous. 
- vn talyiif; avalpva milayyif. 
~I fitlayyiflvi/l to scrub oneself with a liifa. 2 to be 
scrubbed with a liifa. 33 {pathj to become cirrhotic. 
3b to become fibrous. - avaliva mitlayyif. 
~ 
talayyuf Inl {pathj cirrhosis. 
I J loS J 
J'l laalj (i) Ivilto be suitable, be fitting, be apt. bi-yliiq 
r;aleek ii-loon iI-bllnni brown suits you. ta~arrufaat mif 
layqa improper behaviour. yiliq-Iu finnu yir;mil kida 
way. da ma-yliq-J' minnak you shouldn't do that kind of 
thing. -vn layaqaan; ava laayiq . 
~\,J liyaaqa 2 , liyaaqa Inl I suitability, appropriate-
ness. jaabb • r;andu Iyaaqa qawi a most eligible young 
man. 2 fitness. tamariin liyaaqa badaniyya physical fit-
ness exercises. 
2 J loS J 
~ liiqa In pi liyaql pad of silk or cotton fibre placed in 
an inkwell to absorb and hold ink. 
J J loS J see J I loS J : liyaaqa J 
JIoSJ 
J,l leel Inl night-time. 'i'id-dinya baqit leel night came . 
{uul il-Ieel all night long. tisr;a w-nu~~' bil-Ieel nine-
thirty at night. fimbaarib bil-Ieel last night. II fibn i teet 
burglar. - fii-Ieel bi-faxr-u [prov] "" one can't tell how 
things will, turn out till the end. -ya leel 'ya r;een 
ya leel traditional opening formula of a mawwaal. 
-/adjectivallyl fiswid leel pitch black. 
..l.,J leela In pi layaali. lelaatl I evening. night. lelt-ak 
sar;iida good evening. leelit fimbaarib last night. 'i'il-
lelaa-di tonight, this evening. leelit iI-xamiis (il-gumr;a 
etc.) Wednesday (Thursday etc.) night. [i-Ieela mil-
layaali one night. Ilya leela beeqa exclamation of joy. 
-Iayaali bamra nights of sensual pleasure. orgiastic 
nights. -Ieelit il-r;iid the eve of the feast. - fil-Ieela k-
kibiira the last and climactic night of a muulid. 2 a 
gathering extending into the nocturnal hours. often 
with food and music and culminating in a zikr. open to 
the neighbourhood, and usually sponsored as a gesture 
of thanks to God for a specific deliverance (e.g .• recov-
ery from illness) or to gain religious merit. -
layaali Ipl 
nl 3 opening section of a mawwaal improvised by the 
singer on the traditional formula ya leel ya r;een ya leel . 
1lleelit ma Iconjl (on) the night when.leelit ma tqabilna 
(on) the night we met. 
J..,l layli ladj invarl nocturnal. (ayaraan layli a night 
flight. 
..;')\"J lelaati ladvl nightly, every night. 
....Q layyilit Ivil to turn to night. (fid-dinya) layyilit 
r;aleena night overtook us. - ava milayyila. 
I r loS J 
~ liim Inl pitch line (in marbles). 
2 r loS J see 2 r • J : laayim, fitlaayim 

.JISJ 
.J 'J laan (i) Ivil to become pliable, supple, flexible, soft 
or yielding. bi-yrattabu l-kittaan laJaan yiliin they mois-
ten the flax to make it pliant. liin il-latfm softening of 
the bones. qulub-hum laanit their hearts softened. 
II ris-sitt' lanit-lu the woman yielded to his advances. 
-vn liin, layanaan; ava laayin. 
.;",l liin 
Inl 
I softness, 
yieldingness, gentleness. 
ritlaamil malaahum· bil-liin treat them gently. 
2 looseness of the bowels, mild diarrhoea . 
.) layyin J ladj *1 pliable, flexible, soft, yielding. kursi 
layyin a soft chair. raagillayyin (1) an easy-going man, 
a flexible man. (2) a spineless man. II silt , layyina a 
woman of easy virtue. 
4;,.J liyuuna or luyuuna Inl pliancy, flexibility, soft-
ness, yieldingness. rir-r~a~ fii liyuuna lead is pliable . 
.) layyin 2 Ivtl I to make pliable, supple or flexible, 
soften, cause to yield. ril-mayya layyinit il-xaJab the 
water softened the wood.lIlayyin raas- (or dimaay-) to 
wear down the resistance of, persuade, as qaladit 
tilayyin dimaay-i bil-filuus marra w-bit-tahdiid marra 
she kept on at me to change my mind, now offering 
money, now threatening. 2 to run in, break in (a car). 
808 
- avalpva milayyin. 
~ 
mulayyin In pi -aatl laxative . 
~I I'itlayyin Ivil I to be made pliable, supple, flexi-
ble, soft or yielding. 2 to be run in, be broken in (of a 
car). - iva mitlayyin. 
~ 
talayyun r Inl suppleness. 
.r.h-I I'istalyin Ivil I to consider (too) soft. 2 to select 
for softness. II ristalyinu I'axuu-hum wi-xadu kull' f1uus-
u they realized that their brother was easy to fool so 
they took him for all his money. - ava mistalyin. 
o IS J 
...,J leeh I linterrog advl why? leeh il-badla di why this 
suit? rinta waaqif kida leeh why are you standing like 
that? sa I'al-ni ma-zurtu-huu-J leeh he asked me why you 
didn't visit him. 2 Iconjl whY.lirift' leeh zar-ni I found 
out why he visited me. 
'ISISJ 
4 liyya Inl I Ipl -aatl tail of a sheep. 2 Ino pI! fat from 
the tail of a sheep. 
2 IS IS J see 
I IS.J J : layy 

r r mi- contracted form of min (q.v.). 
I r 
l.. ma I particle occurring with certain prepositions and 
nouns to form phrasal conjunctions, as either a con-
tinuous or discontinuous unit. bald; ma s-sibaat; ibtada 
or bald is-sibaat; ma btada after the race began. - for 
phrasal conjunctions with ma, see under the respective 
preposition or noun; fused classical conjunctions (e.g., 
mimma, lamma) look up as headwords. 
l.. ma- 1 particle lending emphasis to a suggestion or 
invitation. ma-tUt;lud come on, sit down! do sit down! 
ma-balaaj come on, forget it! ma-yismal so what if he 
hears! let him hear! 2a Iwhen occurring w a foil n or 
pron (or pron suff in the case of 3rd pers ma-hu, ma-hi 
and ma-hum)1 particle signalling expostulation. ma-una 
larfiin kida but we know that already! ma-I-mafruucf. 
rinnak tistanna 
but you're supposed to wait! 
ma-I-liyaal raubaab allaah after all, children are God's 
loved ones. ma-hu (or ma-huwwa) t;aal kida but that's 
what he said! 2b Iwhen occurring w foll3rd pers pron or 
pron suff plus a n or pron (in the case of a foil 3rd pers 
pron, ma-hu only)1 particle signalling emphasis of ex-
postulation. ma-hu (or ma-huwwa) riuna larfiin kida 
but we know that very well already! ma-hu (or ma-
huwwa) I-mafruucf. rinnak tistanna but the point is that 
you're supposed to wait! ma-hu (or ma-huwwa or ma-hi 
or ma-hiyya) I-liyaal raubaab allaah after all, the fact is 
that children are God's loved ones. ma-hu huwwa t;aal 
kida but that's really what he said! 3 las a part of the 
discontinuous unit ma-... -fI negating particle. ma-
titkallim1don't speak! ma-lamalt a-haa1I didn't do it. 
ma-nii1 kaddaab I am not a liar. siriir ma-lalehuu1 
martaba a bed with no mattress on it. ma-fii1(1) there 
is not (any), there are not (any). (2) nothing, nought, as 
in Uilt-u ma-fii1he has nothing to his name. (3) nought, 
none, blank (in such games as dominoes). -/occasional-
Iy, after an oath in a colloquial context, or in classic-
isms, without the second constituentl w-allaahi ma-na 
raakib by God, I will not get on! ma-yit;dar lal-t;udra 
rilla rabb-i-na only God is master of fate. 
l.. maa, ma 2 1 linterrog pronl what? maa ra ry-ak bat;a 
f- rinn; rana lissa jayf-u so what do you say to the fact 
that I've just seen him? IImaa 1- (1) what's wrong with 
. .. ? what's the matter with ... ? as in maa lak what's the 
matter with you? maa I-rigl-ak what's the matter with 
your leg? maa lak bi-tt;ul-ha kida now what makes you 
say it like that? (2) what has it to do with ... ? rana maa Ii 
what business is it of mine? -wi-maa lu (1) so what? 
(2) that's O.K., that's fine. -maa 1-... wi-maa 1-... what 
has ... to do with ... , as in maa lak wi-maa liI-walad what 
concern of yours is the boy? (i.e. why don't you stop 
interfering with the boy?). maa Ii rana w-maa liI-bint 
(1) what have I got to do with the girl? (2) I have no 
longer any wish to be involved with the girl, I wash my 
hands of the girl. 2t Irel pronl that which. malaak ma 
yisbit rinnak lUcf.w do you have anything to prove 
you're a member? 3t Ipron used in apposition to an 
indefinite nI certain, particular. rila uaddin maa to a 
certain extent. fi-makaanin maa in a certain place. 4 Iw 
foil el form as vI particle indicating surprise or wonder. 
riI-uubb; maa raulaa love is wonderful. maa rarzal-ak 
how cheeky you are! 
11 maa lada Iprepl except. 
Iclr see also Il.Sl.Sr 
.l.. maar l t Inl water (occurring in common speech in 
set phrases, proverbs, riddles etc.). maar ii-ward 
rose-water. 

';L. maal'l lad] *1 pertaining to water. magaart 
mal'iyya water channels. 
1.1 r 
• L. maal'] onomatopoeia for the bleating of a sheep or 
goat. see further under • r • r 
J 1 r see loS J r : maada 
,;Ir 
1oS;L. maart <Syr> Inl /Chr] title for a male saint. 
maari girgis Saint George. 
1J",;lr 
",,;L. maarlS I <Fr mars> Inl March. 
1 j 1 r 
I~L. maaza: maaza wa-l'iIla ... or else ... ! l'awwII 
if-fahr' I'aaxud iI-filuus maaza w-I't1la on the first of the 
month I take the money or else ... ! 
IJ" 1 r 
""L. maas <Fr masse> Inl /e/ec] short-circuit. 
.;. 1 r 
~L. maa!a <P mlisha> In pi -aatl pair of fire tongs. 
J 1 (' see J.J (' : maall, maalt, maltyya 
1 r 1 r 
L.L. maama In. constr maamlt-I I mummy. mother.llya 
maama /children] exclamation of fear. 2 affectionate 
form of address to young girls and. by women. to young 
boys. 
1,:,l r 
l.;L. maana: aaana w-maana see aaana. 
loS ,:, 1 (' 
JL. maam: kaam w-maani see kaam. 
• 1 (' 
~ec loS loS • r : mahlyya 
.J loS 1 r 
,y.L. maayu Inl May. 
..:.. J • r see also ..:.. J • 
..::..ltcl l'itmal'/lI Ivil to make fun (of s.o.). dayman 
810 
yitmal'/itu laleeha they are always poking fun at her. 
-vn mal'lata; ava mitmal'/lI. 
IJ" J • r see also IJ" J • 
wi. mal'/asa Inl derision . 
...,Jlcl I'lImal'/is Ivil to enjoy disparaging or depreciat-
ing. ballal timal'liis lala n-naas stop laughing at people! 
- vn tima I'/lIs: ava mitma I'lis. 
~ i · r ~ee also 1. 1 r 
L.L. mal'mal' Ivil to bleat. -vn mal'mara: ava 
mlmarmar. 
,:, • r see ':'.J r : murna, maruuna 
1 ,; ..,.. r see I,;..,..':': mambar, mimbar 
1 ,; ..,.. (' see ,; 1 ..,.. ,:, r : mllllbaar 
1 loS J..,.. r 
l..l.!".. mUbilya (also nabulya J) <It mobIlia> In 
pi -aatl furniture. 
I.":" ..:.. r 
..;... matt I 
(i) 
Ivil to be 
or become related. 
ma-b,-ymitt'-f Ima b-~t1a he is in no way related to us . 
-ava maallt. 
1.":" ..:.. r 
..;... matt} Inl /hort] cord fortifying a graft. 
I ,; ..:.. r 
fiA mllr l <Fr metre> In pi ramtaarl I metre (unit of 
length). !'iI-Justaan r;aYlz-lu talatt Imtaar Cjumaa! the 
dress will need three metres of cloth. 2 tape-measure, 
metre rule. 
~.r- mitri ladjl metric. 
fiA mattar Ivtl to measure by the metre. -vn tamti,r; ava 
mimattar. 
~I ritmattar IVII to be measured by the metre. -iva 
mitmattar. 
1(,;..:..r) 
fiA mitr} <Fr maitre> Inl title of, and form of address 
or reference to, a lawyer or head waiter. 
;... mitr.i In pi I'amtaarl navigable canal (in the jargon 
of Nile boatmen) . 
J,; ..:.. r 
~.r- matrid In pi mataaridl earthenware vessel similar 

811 
~r~r 
in shape to a maguur (see PI.A, 8), but smaller. 
~i famlan lell more/most solid, strong etc . 
-
J.J":;" r 
j.",J? milrilyooz 
<Fr 
milrailleuse> 
In 
pi -aall 
machine-gun. 
.J.J ..:;.. r 
J? milru <Fr metro> Inl metropolitan electric train. 
milrul-fanfaac, underground train system. 
..,.,";.J ..:;.. r 
..r..? malriis <Fr malrice> In pi malaarisl {lechJ 
matrix. 
-";.J":;"r 
J y-? malriyool Inl {chemJ nitric acid. 
J.!l..,.,..:;.. r 
.;s:.,... y ~ mUlusikl <Fr> In pi -aall motor-cycle. 
.;. ..:;.. r 
....,...;\.. matJ or matJ <Engl> In pi -aal, -aall match, 
game. matJ' koora football match. 
t":;"r 
-..;;.. mUlla, milla In pi mlllall enjoyment, pleasure. 
e--. milil ladj *1 {derisJ strong. tough. brawny. 
e--I famlal lell more/most enjoyable. 
t. \.;... mataall In pi famlilal luggage. 
e-- mallal Ivtl to give pleasure to, cause to rejoice. ya 
rabb' mallal-lIa!-xil!il-na 0 Lord. let us live to enjoy 
o~r children! - vn lamliil; ava/pva mimallal. 
f'1 filmallal Ivil I to derive enjoyment. laazim li~l:Ja 
badri lafaall lilmallal bi-hawa ~-~ubl:J you must wake 
up early so as to enjoy the morning breeze. 2 to be 
privileged. bi-yilmallal bi-fidaaf gumruki he enjoys 
customs exemption. - ava milmallal. 
~I fislamlal Ivil to derive enjoyment. fislamlal 
bi-l:Jayaal-u faaxir iSlimlaal he enjoyed his life to the 
full - vn fislimlaal; ava mistamlil. 
J ..:;.. r see J..,., r . fislamlil 
<.J":;"r 
..,;\.;... malaalla Inl solidity. strength. durability. gizam 
zamaall faaxir malaalla in the old days shoes were 
really tough. 
.:.r-:-- maliin I ladj pi mlllaan. mUlanal solid. strong. 
durable. 2 Inl Dependable One (epithet of God). 
.y...:;-I fislamlin Ivtl I consider strong or durable. 2 to 
select for strength or durability. -vn fislimlaan; ava 
mislarntill. 
.J .J ..:;.. r 
.JY\.. '.J.r- mllloor, mUluur, maluur <Fr moleur> In 
pi -aal, mawaliirl motor. 
J..:.. r see J..,., r 
I 
• v..,.,r 
J~r 
~ magd In pi famgaadl glory. 
¥. magiid Inl Glorious One (epithet of God). 
~\.. maagid Inl Glorious One (epithet of God). 
~ maggid Ivtl to glorify. bi-nmaggid rabb-i-na we 
glorify God. - vn lamgiid; ava/pva mimaggid. 
~I filmaggid Ivil to be glorified. - iva milmaggid . 
t J ~ r see t J ~: magdal. magdala 
I 
.J ~r 
.r7 magar Inl eighteen carat gold (goldsmiths' term). 
.r.JI fiI-magar Iprop nl Hungary. 
..r7 magara In pi -aall gold or golden disc (similar in 
size and often in design to a half-sovereign) used in 
cheap necklaces and bracelets. 
,,;.r7 magari I ladj *1 Hungarian. II (fid-diizi/J iI-
magari express train (Hungarian-made). 2 In *1 a 
Hungarian. 3 In. no pll the Hungarian language. 
2 .J ~ r see .J.J ~ r : magllllr 
r .J ~ r see also 
I r .J ~ 
r,&' filmagram Ivil to act or behave in a cruel ruthless 
way. -vn magrama; ava milmagram. 
-..:;....,., ~ r 
~\.. majisleer <Fr magisler> In pi -aall {acadJ 
master's degree. 
~r~r 
~ 
magmig Ivil to become soft. become wobbly. 
fid-dimmil lIlaglllig the boil softened up. II kalaam 
lIlimagmig 
empty 
words. 
-vn 
magmaga; 
ava 
mimagmig. 
~I filmagmig lvi/ to wobble. fil-mihallabiyya Iissa 
{ariyya b-lilmagmig the blancmange is still soft and 

~~r 
812 
wobbly. bi-timJi titmagmig fi-ba[q-a-ha min it-tuxn 
ritmal:Jl:Jak [i-kilma w-[amal-Iu dawJa he picked on a 
she's so fat that her whole body shakes when she walks. 
word (that was said) and used it to stir up a lot of fuss. 
- ava mitmagmig. 
1.J[.r 
l;~ maggaanan ladvl gratis. 
J~ maggaani ladj *1 gratis. ta[liim maggaani free 
education. bil-maggaani for free, gratis. 
2 , .., [. r 
~ mugana <It mogano> Inl mahogany. 
'-'"' .J [. r 
~ 
magna~ Inl very strong person . 
..,..,~ magaani~ Ipl nl latissimus dorsi muscles. lIya 
raagil ya magaani~ hey, muscle-man! 
J.J [.r 
.J~L. maguur In pi mawagiirllarge earthenware bowl 
(for kneading etc., see PI.A, 8). Ilkafa [ala I-xabar 
maguur '" he kept the news under his hat. 
JI.S[.r 
~ 
majeer <Fr majeur> ladj invarl [mus] major. 
sillim iI-majeer major scale. 
C,C r 
~ mul:Jl:Ji r: ri/-kiis iI-mul:Jl:Ji the yolk sac: 
J C r see also 
I J .J C 
~ mal:Jl:Jar Ivtl [constr] to smooth or level (plaster) 
with a mal:Jaara. -vn taml:Jiir; avalpva mimal:Jl:Jar. 
,;.cl ritmal:Jl:Jar 
Ivil 
passive 
of 
mal:Jl:Jar. 
- iva 
mitmal:Jl:Jar. 
..;:. C r 
~ 
mal:Jaq (also mal:Ja£) (a) Ivtl [abus] to give birth 
to. yil[an rabu iii mal:Jaq-u (God) curse his parentage! 
.1. C r see' ..;:. c r : mal:Ja{ 
.!l C r 
4,...i taml:Jlik Ivnl I ingratiation, toadying. 2 using 
pretexts. 
~ 
taml:Jiika Ipl tamal:Jilkl instance noun of taml:Jiik. 
~I ritmal:Jl:Jak Ivill to ingratiate oneself (with s.o.) 
for ulterior motives. ritmal:Jl:Jakt' fil-mudiir [aJaan 
ra{lub ragaaza I made up to the director in the hope of 
getting a holiday. 2 to use a pretext, pick (on s.th.) as an 
excuse for carrying out one's own intentions. 
- ava mitmal:Jl:Jak ~ 
~I 
ristiml1l:Jl:Jak J 
= 
ritmal:Jl:Jak. 
-ava misti-
mal:Jl:Jak. 
IJ" J C r 
~ 
mal:Jlis Ivil to toady to, make up to. -vn mal:Jlasa; 
ava mimal:Jlis . 
...,.-WI ritmal:Jlis Ivil to speak or behave in an unctuous 
toadying way. qa[adittitmal:Jlis [ala rabuu-ha I-lfaayit 
ma waa[iq [ala safar-ha she kept on wheedling her 
father till he finally agreed to let her make the journey. 
- ava mitmal:Jlis. 
.J C r 
~ mul:Jn Inl cunning born of affliction. 
~ mil:Jna Inl hardship, distress, affliction. dool' 
[ayJiin fi-mil:Jna min nahaar rabuu-hum ma saab iJ-julfl 
they've been having a hard life ever since their father 
stopped working. 
w~ maml:Juun ladj *1 sexually experienced (espe-
cially of women). quul Itl-mara l-maml:Juuna dl tiskut 
telf that slut of a woman to shut up! 
.;: mal:Jl:Jan Ivtl to torment with desire. misik ruzam 
il-filuus quddaam qarayb-u w-qa[ad yimal:Jl:Jan-hum 
[aleeha he picked up the wads of money in front of his 
relatives and had them itching to get their hands on it. 
-vn taml:Jlin; avalpva mimal:Jl:Jan . 
.;..cl ritmal:Jl:Jan Ivil to be or become tormented with 
desire. qa[diin yitmal:Jl:Janu [ala Jaqqa l:Jilwa they are 
longing to get a nice flat. - avaliva mitmal:Jl:Jan. 
~I rimtal:Jan Ilvtl to examine, set (s.o.) an ex-
amination. 2 Ivil to take an examination. laazim 
yimtil:Jin fil- ringiliizi he has to take an examination in 
English. -vn rimtil:Jaan; avalpva mlmtil:Jin. 
w\.:...:...I rimtil:Jaan In pi -aatl examination. 
~I 
ristaml:Jan J = rimtal:Jan. -vn ristiml:Jaan; aval 
pva mistaml:Jan . 
.J C r see I.S C r : mal:Jw 
I.S C r 
~ mal:Ja (i) Ivtl to obliterate. riml:Ji l-mawquu[ da min 
muxx-ak erase that matter from your mind! l:Ja-niml:Jii 
we'll finish him off! -vn mal:Jy, mal:Jwr, mal:Jayaan; ava 
maal:Ji; pva maml:Ji. 
~ mal:Jw Ivnl IImal:Jw iI-rummiyya eradication of 
illiteracy (among the adult population). 
.r-L. maal:Ji ladj */1 useless, ineffectual (of a person). 

~aljb-ak da maalji maljayaan that friend of yours is 
utterly useless! 2 penniless, poverty-stricken. 
~i I'amlja Iell morelmost ineffectual (of a person). 
~I I'itmalja Ivil to be obliterated. -iva mitmilji. 
(( r 
t:' muxx In pi I'amxaax, mixaaxl brain. ma{[am kibda 
w-muxx a liver and brain restaurant. fallalj muxx-ak 
(I) be alert! (2) you'd better give (him) a tip. II I'in-naas 
doolat I'amxaax those people are stupid. -kaan muxx-i 
Ija-y(iir I was about to lose my'mind! 
813 
t! maxxax, maxxix I Ivtl to improvise, invent. 2/vil 
[deris] to play the pundit. c;aa[id yimaxxix wi-yxarraf 
min ¥eer ma yi[raf Ijaaga he keeps making pronounce-
ments and rambling on without knowing anything 
(a~out the subject). -vn tamxiix; avalpva mimaxxax. 
t"-'I I'itmaxxax Ivil to be improvised, be invented. 
- iva mitmaxxax. 
.1 t r 
1~ muxaa( Inl mucus, snot. 
J:.~ muxaa(i ladjl slimy, snotty, mucous. 
~ maxxa( Ivil to produce mucilage, become slimy (of 
certain vegetables during preparation or cooking). -vn 
tamxii(; ava mimaxxa( . 
..bi..cl I'itmaxxa{f Ivil to blow one's nose. - ava 
mitmaxxa(. 
J.ktr 
• ~ 
max(ara Inl swaggering gait. 
~I I'itmax(ar Ivil to swagger, strut. xad dabbuura 
gdiida w-rigi[ beet-u yitmax(ar biiha he got a new pip 
and went home to swagger about with it. - ava 
mitmax(ar. 
JJ tr 
J"i' maxwil Ivtl to confuse, perplex. -vn maxwala; 
ava/pva mimaxwil. 
J #1 I'itmaxwil Ivil to be or become perplexed. - aval 
iva mitmaxwil. 
J ~ 
1 l'istimaxwi[J = I'itmaxwil. - ava mistimaxwil. 
(' ~ r 
el.M madaalj: sadaalj madaalj see sadaalj. 
I r ' ~ r 
~I.M madaam I <Fr madame> In pi -aatl title of, and 
form of address or reference to, a (usually middle- or 
upper-class) married woman. madaam samiira. Mrs. 
Samira (Samira being her given name). madaam 
darwiif Mrs. Darwish (Darwish being her husband's 
given or family name). II \'il-madaam bita[t-i my wife. 
2 r ' ~ r see also 
I r J ~ 
~bL. .~I.M madaam 2 (also I'adaam 2 J) Iconjl since, so 
long as. madaam miljammad hina yibqa laazim tizur-na 
since Muhammad is here you must visit us. madaam 
I'intu giitu since you have come. madaam humma 
ta[baniin ma-fii{lazma nrulj-luhum so long as they're 
ill, there's no point going to see them. 
I(~r 
e.M madalj (a) Ivtl to praise. \'il-[ariis da kull in-naas 
madaljit-u everyone has praised this suitor. -vn madlj, 
madaljaan, madiilj; ava maadilj; pva mamduulj. 
C!-.M madiilj Inl I eulogy. 2 songs in praise of God and 
the Prophet Muhammad. 
el.lA maddaalj In • / singer of songs in praise of God and 
the Prophet Muhammad . 
e.:i... maddalj Ivil to utter repeated or extravagant 
praises. I'il-maddaalj [ammaal yimaddalj fin-nabi the 
singer keeps praising the Prophet. IImaddalj in-nabi 
name your price! (said by a salesman to a buyer of, e.g., 
livestock or poultry). -vn tamdiilj; ava mimaddalj. 
2 ( 
~ r see (' ~ IJ" : madaalj 
~ ~ r 
.:i... madd I (i) Ivtl I to extend, stretch out. I'i/-minabbih 
t:[arab - madd i I'iid-u sakkit-u the alarm clock rang, he 
stretched out his hand and silenced it.llmadd i I'iid-u Ii-
(1) to assist, as in madd i I'iid-u liyyafi-wac;t if-Jidda he 
helped me when times were hard (2) to ask for or 
accept bribes from, as in I'ana lamma I'amidd i I'iid-i 
mafruut:[ m-amidd"-haa{li-waaljid zayyak when I ask 
for a bribe it should not be from a (poor) man like you. 
(3) to beg, as in wala ymidd i I'iid-u l-waaljid he doesn't 
beg from anyone. - madd i I'iid-u [ala (1) to steal, as in 
[umr-i ma-maddeet I'iid-i [ala Ijagaat ¥eer-i I've never 
stolen anyone else's things. (2) to hit, as in I'iza maddeet 
\'iid-ak [alee Ij-at:[rab-ak if you lay a finger on him, I'll 
hit you. 2 to prolong, protract. laazim timidd i/-
I'iqaama you have to (get permission to) extend the 
period of your residence. rabb-i-na ymidd i (f-)[umr-ak 
may God give you long life! 3t to supply. rusya 
maddit-na b-si/aalj Russia supplied us with arms. - Ivil 
4 to extend, creep (usually of plants). I'in-nabaat 
bi-ymidd" [as-suur the plant climbs over the wall. 
lI[uud madd stake for plants to climb on. - I'i/-[irc;i 

814 
ymidd' I-saabil gidd {provl "" like father like son. 5 to 
hasten one's stride. maddeel Ii-yaayll rna !Ja~~all-a-ha 
I hurried until I caught up with her. -vn madd. 
madadaan; ava maadid; pva mamduud . 
.i. madd~ Inll pull (of a tide. flood etc.). 2 drawing 
out of the voice over long vowels. !Juruuf (or f~waal) 
i1-madd long vowels . 
• .i. madda I In pi -aall I instance noun of maddz. 
2 {lingl diacrital mark over the letter falif denoting 
hamza vocalited with long aa (faa). 
• ;L. madda 2. maadda r In pi mawaadd. maddaal J I 
18 substance. matter. ftl-mawaadd i1-bilroliyya pet-
roleum 
products. 
Ib material. 
fiI-fis{uwanaal 
bi-lillammin !Jasab t1-madda I-musaggala laleeha the 
records are priced according to the material recorded 
on them. madda xafllfa light subject-matter. 2 school 
or umversity subject. 38 place (usually a specially 
erected pavilion) where condolences are received at a 
funeral. 3b mourning. period of mourning. 
~;L. maddi. maaddl ladj '1 I material. daliil maddi 
material evidence. 2 materialistic. raagtl maddl a 
materialistic man. -
In *1 3 materialist. 
~;L. maddlyya Inl matenalism. 
~ J'u mamduud lad jl {lingl followed by a long vowel (of 
a consonant). 
• .i. mudda In pi -aal, mudadll penod (of time). min 
muddll sana a year ago. baljaa-fi mudda ma-jufl"-haa-j 
it's been a while since I saw her. II kull' mudda every so 
often. 2 {slangl pnson term. stretch. 3 {comml umt of 
three minutes used for measunng long-distance tele-
phone calls. 
• .i. midda Inl pus. 
~...\..o madad Ilnl supply. supplies. 2/mter]1 Ilsll aid! 
(cry for aid to God or saints). 
~...\..o madild r lad]1 extended. prolonged.lumr' madild 
a long life. 
~I.i. maddaad In pi -aall I creepmg plant. 2 Imechl 
connecting arm. 
:u: I fllmadd IVII to be or become extended or stretched 
out. -Iva mllmadd. 
~.i. maddid Ivtll to ~tretch out. layout. maddld nafs-
ak stretch out. lie down. 2 to extend. prolong. - Ivil 
3 to ~uppurate. discharge pus. -vn lamdiid; avalpva 
mlmaddid. 
• ~~ lamdilda Ipl -aall mstance noun of lamdiid. 
~:U:I fllmaddid Ivil I to be stretched out. 2 to be ex-
tended. be prolonged. 3 to stretch oneself out. lie 
down. fana raaYI!J falmadd,d f,s-siT/ir I'm gomg to 
stretch out on the bed. - avaIl va mllmaddid. 
.i.i famadd r Ivtl to supply. -vn flmdaad; ava mimldd. 
~I...\..o! fimdaad In pi -aalllmlil supply. 
j 
~ r see J ~ j 
~ : mldra 
t ~ r see t ~ .J : mada)·. madYa, filmaday 
J J ~ r see J ~ ~ r : mudill 
~ J ~r 
~...\..o mldalya <It medaglia> In pi -aall medallion . 
r ~ r ~ee r I ~ r : madaam 
-.Jr~r 
...k.iI".I...\..o madmiwazeel, 
madamwazeel <Fr ma-
demoiselle> In pi -aall title of and form of address or 
reference 
to. a 
young unmarried lady. 
-also 
mazmazeel, mazmazeeh. 
I .J ~ r 
J...\..o madani lad] 'II civil. fiI-ma!Jaaklm II-madaniyya 
the civil courts. 2 civilian. fibs' madani civilian dress. 
laabis madani wearing civihan clothes. - In 
*1 
3 civihan. 
~...\..o madamyya r Inl civilization. civilized world . 
labsiin lju~ayyar - di madamyya'wearing short skirts -is 
that (a sign of) civilization?! 
~...\..o madiina In pi mudunl city. maglis madiina city 
council. 
.J.i. maddm Ivtl to civilize. - vn lamdiin; avalpva 
mimaddin . 
.J:U:I filmaddlll Ivil to be or become civilized. -vn 
lamaddun (abo lamadyulI); avaIl va milmaddm. 
z .J ~ r see I.J j • : madlla 
J .J ~ r see 
~ ~ r : Imdaall 
~ ~ r 
~...\..o mada Inl I extent. degree. measure. lala mada 
fusbuleell for two weeks. throughout two weeks. 
2 penod of time. lala (11U1 Ii-mada mumklll )llyoyyar 
rafy-u with the pa~sage of time he may change his mind . 
~~L. maada: kull' maada (I) with the passage of time. 
kull' maada wl~-~udaal bi-yzlid the headache gets 
worse as time goes by. (2) every once in a while. kull' 
maada lala rna yidfal he takes hl~ time before he pays 
up. kull' maada w-maada lala rna .vllgi he comes very 
rarely. 

J~,PI" 
..h~-", mudee/ 
(also 
mudill) 
<Fr modele> 
In 
pi mudillaatl I fashion, style, model. mudillaat ir-
rabiil spring fashions. r;arabiyya raaxir mudee/ a car of 
the latest model. 2 fashion model, mannequin. 
''; I" 
• )1 riI-marr Inl a person, one. yoom /-imtiyaan 
yukram iI-marr i raw yuhaan [prov[ (on examination 
day one is either honoured or llumiliated) "" it is 
through trial that every man's worth is discovered. 
• r mara In in absol state onlyl I [derog] la woman. 
rimi)'a mara hey you, woman! lIya mara you weakling! 
you spineless creature! (insult to a man). - ribn i mara 
(cowardly, unreliable) bastard. I b wife. riI-mara btar;t-
U"" his old woman. 21 woman (as opposed to man). 
ril-mara ma-tiwris-F ljadd ir-raagil a woman does not 
inherit as much as a man. 3 a real woman, a feminine 
female. 
.ir marraT 
Inl 
I woman, 
wife. 
2 womankind. 
!JUljUUlj iI-marra women's rights . 
.... Ir miraat Ifem n, in constr onlyl wife of. miraat-i my 
wife. miraat id-duktuur the doctor's wife. miraat rabuu 
his stepmother. 
•• Jr maruura J, muruura Inl helpfulness, generosity. 
gallantry. 
.;r miriwwa Inl stamina. strength. 
.:;.,.; I" 
~ r murta Inl milk solids left after clarifying butter (by 
a process which involves adding salt to the butter and 
boiling it at length; the brown salty milk solids are eaten 
as a delicacy). 
-
J':;".; I" 
~.,i; r murtadella <It> Inl mortadella sausage. 
I" j.:;.,.; I" 
rJJ-'" maratizm J or muratizm J (also muracizmJ) 
<Engl> Inl rheumatism. - also rumatizm. marmatism. 
jlS':;".;r 
:#r martiiz Inl hammer (of a piano). 
1[';1" 
,:,~ r murgaan. margaan Inll coral. 2 sea bream. 3 a 
Nile fish (Barilius nilotica. Barilius loati). 
J~ r murgaani. margaani ladjl pertaining to coral. 
815 
2[';1" 
~r marag: harag wi-marag turmoil, chaos. 
C['; I" 
~ 
r margay Ivtl I to swing. ljaar;id wi-bi-ymarga!J 
rig/-u he·s sitting swinging his leg. ka/aam mimargay 
indecisive talk. 2 to push (s.o.) on a swing, merry-go-
round or seesaw. - vn marga!Ja; ava mimarga!J . 
~ 
r murgee!Ja In pi maragiiyll swing. 2 merry-go-
round. 3 seesaw. 
~ 
.r I ritmarga!J Ivill to swing or be swung. 2 to vacil-
late. -avaliva mitmarga!J . 
J [.; I" 
~ee also 
1 J [.; 
~ 
r margillvtl to make a man of (s.o.). kull-a-ha 
),omeen mar;aana wi-nmargil-u in just a few days we·1I 
make a man out of him. -vn marga/a; ava/pvamimargi/. 
mimarga/. 
~ 
r marga/a Inl manly behaviour. 
~ 
.r I ritmargillvi/l to behave in a manly way. 2 to be 
made a man of. - avaliva mitmargil. 
C';I" 
cr maray Inl gaiety, cheerfulness. 
Cr mari!J ladj *f happy, cheerful. 
C::,. marra!J Ivil to stretch out, relax. ljaar;id mimarra!J 
lak-kanaba reclining on the sofa. -vn tamrii!J; ava 
mimarra!J. 
tN 
~)I riI-marriix Iprop nl (the planet) Mars. 
1 J.; I" 
~;l .. maarid In pi maradal giant. 
~:f I ritmarrad Ivil to rebel. - vn tamarrud T; ava 
mitmarrad. 
.):,..:.. mutamarrid' In */ rebel. 
2 J .; I" see 1 J.;.J : murtida. murda 
t J.; I" 
t.~ r mardalf Ivtl to roll in the dirt. -also marralf. 
marmalf. - vn mardalfa; avalpva mimarday. 
t.~}1 ritmardalf Ivil to roll, or be rolled, in the dirt. 
- also ritmarralf. ritmarmalf. -avaliva mitmarmalf. 
1 ';';1" 
::,. marr (u) Ivill to elapse, go by, pass. riI-rayyaam 
bi-tmurr the days go by. Ii-!Jadd i ma tmurr iI-razma 

until the crisis is over. 2 to pass, run, flow, go. 
fil-mayya bi-tmurr' f-qalr iI-xatt the water flows along 
the bottom of the furrow. fil-musmaar bi-ymurr' fii min 
id-daaxil the nail goes through it from the inside. 
fil-larabiyyaat bi-tmurr' min talJt ik-kubri the cars pass 
under the bridge. 3 to take place. fil-lamaliyya di 
bi-tmurr' tabiili giddan fi-mll1r this kind of thing passes 
without comment in Egypt. -vn marr, mararaan, 
muruur; ava maarir. 
11 marr" lala (1) to pass by with a brief stop, as in 
b-amurr" lalee kull' yomeen I call in on him every two 
days, marreet lala sayyid-na l-lJuseen I dropped by the 
Hussein mosque. 
(2) to check, inspect, as in 
fig-garraalJ bi-ymurr" lal-layyaniin the surgeon 
makes the rounds of the patients, murr"lalee bil-qalam 
iI-falJmar qabl' rna yruulJ iI-matbala check it over 
(marking) with a red pencil before it goes to the press. 
(3) to come to the attention of, as in ma-marrit-f' 
laleek ik-kilmaa,-di haven't you come across this word? 
-marr' bi- (1) to undergo, as in fii maraalJiI bi-tmurr' 
biiha it goes through several stages, filJna marreena 
b-nafs iI-mafaakilwe have suffered from the same prob-
lems. (2) to make a brief stop at (a place) in passing, as 
in fana marreet bi-bariis fi-tariiq-i I-Iandan I stopped 
off at Paris on my way to London. 
• :,. marra In pi -aatl instance, time. talat marraat three 
times. nizilt' marra wi-tneen wi-talaata I went down 
once, and then a second and third time. k~II' waalJid 
yiJuut marra each one shoots once. (fi-)marra kunt' 
malzuum mala mraat-i once I was invited with my 
wife. misiir-i f-marra fll1taad-ak ya lirra I'm bound to 
get you sometime, you scoundrel! IImarraat (1) many 
times, time and again. (2) sometimes, occasionally. 
-marra walJda (1) at one and the same time, simul-
taneously, as in bi-n~ubb is-saqf' wil-'kamaraat marra 
walJda we lay the roof and the girders at one go. (2) all 
at once, as in kaan faqiir wi-marra walJda baqa rani he 
was poor and suddenly he became rich. -marra ... 
wi-marra or marraat ... marraat at times ... at other 
times, as in marra lik wi-marra laleek ... you can't win 
them all. - bil-marra (1) at the same time (as s.th. else), 
as in madaam finta naazil is-suuq hat-Ii kabriit bil-marra 
since you're going shopping, get me some matches 
while you're at it, ma-naaxud taks' wi-nwll1~al-u bil-
marra let's take a taxi and drop him off on the way. 
(2) lin neg contexts! (not) at all, as in fllJlif ma-tiJrab 
(sagaayir) bil-marra swear you'll never smoke! miJ 
laawiz fafuuf-ak hina bil-marra I don't want to see you 
here at all! 
816 
.)J r muruur Inl traffic. qalam iI-muruur the Traffic 
Department. mll1r' muruur Cairo transit (post office). 
~ mamarr In pi -aatl I passageway, corridor. 2 path. 
.):,. marrar I Ivtl to cause to pass. -vn tamriir; ava/pva 
mimarrar . 
• JI.} tamriira In pi -aatl a pass (in soccer, hockey etc.). 
::"':"'1 fistamarr 
Ivil 
to 
continue. 
bi-nistamirr' 
fin-naqaawa I-yadawiyya I-mudditfahreen we continue 
hand-picking for two months.lJa-yistamirr' fil-lilba lin-
nihaaya he will stay on in the game till the end. -vn 
fistimraar; ava mustamirr. 
)",..:-1 fistimraar Inl continuousness, continuation. 
bi-stimraar continuously. 
~)",..:-I fistimraari ladjl continuous. 
z JJr 
:,. murr I ladjl bitter, galling. qahwa murra sugarless 
coffee. liJt-i malaahum murra my life with them is 
bitter. II feef ramaa-k lal-murr. - qaal filii famarr' 
minnu [prov] ... one is sometimes forced to choose the 
lesser of two evils. 2 Inl myrrh. 
.:,. murra Inl hardship. riI-lJilwa wil-murra ... good and 
bad, thick and thin. waqfa gamb' goz-ha fil-lJilwa wil-
murra she stands by her husband through thick and 
~hin. 
..,I.)r mararaan Inl bitterness. 
:,.i famarr lell morelmost bitter, morelmost galling . 
) r maraar Inl bitter suffering. 
.) r maraara Inl I bitterness, gall. b-alJiss' bin-nadam 
wi-bil-maraara I feel regret and bitterness. 2 gall blad-
der.1I marart-u dayyaqa he is short-tempered. -di lJaaga 
tifqal iI-maraara this is enough to make you blow a 
gasket! 
Jl.r mariir' ladjl bitter, galling . 
.):,. marrarz Ivii to become bitter or galling. riI-fakl' 
marrar the food became bitter. riI-lJikaaya marrarit 
qawl the affair went ~rom bad to worse. - ava mimarrar. 
.)",..:-1 fistamrar Ivtl to consider (too) bitter. kunt' 
fil- fawwil b-astamrar iI-qahwa s-saada at first I used to 
find sugarless coffee too bitter. - ava mistamrar. 
jJr 
j.r-' mirz Icoll nl pieces of mother-of-pearl cut to shape 
for use in inlay. 
I 
IJ" J r 
...,...:fl fitmarras Ivil to become thoroughly familiar 
(with s.th.), become an adept. da mitmarras bis-suuq 
tamaam he knows the market inside out. -vn tamarrus; 
ava mitmarras. 

IJ"JI... maaris 2 Ivtl 1 to practise, engage in. mumkin 
iNalaba ymarsu koora tayra the students can take up 
volley-ball. bi-ymaaris ig-gins he engages in sexual 
activity. 
2 to 
perform, 
execute. 
bi-ymaaris 
mas rutiyyaat-u he carries out his responsibilities. -vn 
mumarsa; ava mimaaris. 
4..J\( mumarsa In' pi -aatl sale by private agreement. 
IJ"J\( mumaaris In */: mumaaris r;aamm general 
practitioner. 
IJ"),I ritmaaris IYil 1 to be practised, be engaged in. 
2 to be performed, be executed. - iva mitmaaris. 
1 IJ".J r 
IJ" J' mars <P mars> In pi -aatl a round in backgam-
mon in which the winner removes all his chips from the 
board before his opponent removes any, a gammon (cf. 
ruyun). 
J IJ".J r see IJ" .J I r : maaris J 
4 
see IJ" ~ .J r: ril-miriisi 
IJ".J r 
5 ..,.. .J r see IJ" .J J : miraas 
- o:;.J..,...J r 
.:,l::... J' murustaan <P maristan> Inl lunatic asylum, 
bedlam. II r;amaluu-ti murustaan fi-dmaar-i they caused 
a babel in my brain. 
c. ..,.. .J r see c..J..,..: marsab 
<JJ..,...J r 
.:,.,... J' marasoon <Engl> Inl [athl] marathon. 
~""'.J r 
...r' J' mirsii <Fr merci> linterjl thank you! mirsii c;awi 
thank you very much! 
-
~""'.J r 
IJ"~ J' marseedis or marsiidis <prop n Mercedes> 
Inl Mercedes car. - also marfeedis, marjiidis. 
..,.. ~ ..,...J r 
...,..-J' marsiis: xarsiis marsiis see xarsiis. 
..r.;r 
..; J' mar! <Fr marche> In pi -aatl 1 march. rit-tabla 
di rilti b-yitabbitu r;aleeha I-marfaat this drum is the one 
on which they beat out the marches. 2 [auto] 
817 
2a ignition, starter. 2b marf aryeer reverse, back up. 
rir;mit marf aryeer back up! 
-~..r.Jr 
...r~ J' marjeedis or marfiidis <prop n Mercedes> Inl 
Mercedes car. - also marseedis, marsiidis. 
.;:. .J r 
...,., J' miriq (a) Ivil to fall ill, become sick. -vn maraq; 
ava marqaan. 
...,., J' maraq J (i) Ivtl I to cause to be ill. huwwa 1- rakl 
itti maraq-ni it was the food which made me ill. 2 to 
upset, annoy. - vn maraqaan; ava maariq; pva 
mamruuq . 
...,., J' maraq2 In pi ramraaql illness, disease. ramraaq 
nisa gynaecological diseases or disorders. II maraq it-
kalb rabies. - ril-raraq maraq [prov] (prejudice is a 
disease) "" you cannot judge things properly if your 
interest is in the way. 
.fo-J' maraqi ladjl pertaining to illness. ragaaza 
maraqiyya sick-leave. 
~J' mariiq Ipl marqa, muraqaJ I I ladjl ill, sick. 2 Inl 
patient. 
...,.,)1 ritmaraq Ivil to be or become depressed or ex-
asperated. rana tmaraqt i mif-furlaa-di I'm fed up with 
this job. - avaliva mitmiriq . 
...,., ~ marraq Ivtl to nurse (the sick). -vn tamriiq; ava . 
mimarraq. 
...,.,~ mumarriq In *1 male professional nurse . 
..... ~ mumarriqa In pi -aatl female professional nurse. 
...,.,:;1 ritmarraq Ivil to be nursed (medically). - iva 
mitmarraq. 
...,.,),1 ritmaariq Ivil to feign illness. bi-yitmaariq 
r;afaan yaaxud ragaaza he pretends to be ill in order to 
get leave of absence. - vii tamaaruq; ava mitmaariq, 
mutamaariq. 
r j J:, .J r see r j o:;.J .J r : muratizm 
t.Jr 
tJ' marar;J (a) Ivtl 1 to rip, tear up. 2 to inflate the 
pride of. - Ivil 3 to boast extravagantly, tell fishing 
stories. -vn marr;; ava maarir;; pva mamruur; . 
~ J' marr;a J instance noun of marr; . 
tl~ marraar;J ladj *1 boastful. 
t)1 ritmarar;J Ivil to swell with pride. - ava mitmirir; . 
t~ marrar; J Ivtl to rip, tear up. lamma gaa-Iu ~-~arar; 
marrar; hiduum-u when he had a fit of epilepsy he tore 
his elothes. -vn tamriir;; avalpva mimarrar;. 

t::''' fitmarralJ 
Ivil 
passive 
of 
marral· 
-iva 
mitmarral· 
t.;r 
t",. marall' (u) Ilvtl to roll (s.th. or s.o.) in the dust. 
2/vil to delay, tarry, take a long time. ma-tumrull'-J' 
fis-sikka don't dilly-dally on the way. 3 Ivil to talk non-
sense. - vn marall'aan, man'; ava maar;"'; pva mamruull'. 
t",.. mlrill'/adj ·1 easy-going, leisurely and slow. 
t",.1 famrall' lell morelmost leisurely or slow. 
tl::" marraall'/adj */1 = mlrill'. 2 over-talkative. 
t}1 fitmarall' Ivil to be rolled m the dust. - iva 
mitmirill'. 
t::" marrall' Ivtl to roll successively on the ground or in 
the dust. - also mardall', marma)·. - vn tamrilll'; avalpva 
mimarrall'. 
t)1 fitmarrall' Ivil to roll or be rolled successively on 
the ground or in the dust. II fin Jaat-ak iI-miiri fitmarrall' 
!i-traab-u /prov] "" a government job, no matter how 
base, is better than any other job. - also fitmardall'. 
fitmarmall'. - avaliva mitmarra)·. 
~1oS";.;r 
,:r.iJ>" murfii" <Fr> Inl morphine. 
I 
-IJ.;r 
..;",. mlric; ladj "I I runny, liquid (of food). 2 slow, 
confused (of people). 
..;",. marae; Inl stock, bouillon, broth. IIbae;a larae;-i 
marae;-i "" I'm burmng with embarrassment. 
~",. marae;a = marae;. 
..;}I fitmarae; Ivil to become moist or liquid (of food). 
- ava mltmmc;. 
..;::,. marrae; Ivtl to make (food) moist or hquid. -vn 
tamrlie;; avalpva mimarrae;. 
lJ.;r 
..;",. marae;J (u) IVII to go at a fast pace. fimrue; min 
hina push off! - vn marae;aan; ava maarie;. 
J::" marrae;J Ivtl to lel(s.o. or s.th.) pass. - vn tamnie;; 
ava mimarrae;. 
~J.;r 
....... ",. mure;~ Iprop nl /Chr] male given name. maari 
mure;u~ St. Mark. 
~",. mure;~i lad)1 pertaining to St. Mark. c:amalu 
I-Jara!J fi(l-kinilsa) l-m!lre;~lyya they had the wedding 
in St. Mark's Church. 
tJ.; r 
C!",. mare;ac: Ivtlto make (s.o.) frivolous or flighty. -vn 
818 
mare;ala; ava mlmare;ac:. 
e J' 1 fitmare;al Ivil to dally, tarry, potter. layzaa-Ii 
raagilla yltmare;ac: wa/a yiskar I want a man who won't 
dilly-dally around or get drunk. - vn mare;ac:a; ava 
mitmare;al· 
( .!l.; r ) 
.!l",. mark <Fr marque> In pI -aat. -aatl tailor's 
marker. 
.!l",. mark <Fr marque> In pI -aatl metal or plastic 
token (purchased and then given up in exchange for, 
e.g .. drinks in a snack bar). 
-5",. marka = mark. 
-5",. marka I = mark. II walad marka a lad who's 
on-the-ball. 
-5) .. marka] <It marea> In pI -aatl brand, make. 
trade name. 
j .!l .; r see also j.!l.; 
:;",. marklZ Ivtl I to determme the centre. marklZ Id-
dayra he determined the centre of the circle. 2 to put 
into a central position, centrahze. marklZ iI-koora 
centre the ball! markiz wasaafllll-fintaag !i-ma"{Ie;a 
wa!Jda he centralized the means of production in one 
area. - vn markaza; avalpva m,milrk,z. 
:; J'I fltmark,z Ivil passive of milrk,z. - iva mltmark,z. 
-:,j.!l.;r 
~:;",. markazllt <Fr> Inl marquisctte (fabriC) . 
IJ".!l';1 
.s-S",. markisi <prop n Marx> I ladj "I Marxist. 
2 In ·1 a Marxist. 
~",. markislyya Inl MarXism . 
..rS",. markis Ivtl to make (s.o. or s.th.) Marxist or 
(loosely) leftist. - vn markilsa; avalpva mimarkls. 
..rS J'I fitmarkls Ivil to be made Marxist or (loosely) 
leftist. - iva mitmilrk/S'. 
-J.!l.;r 
J~",. markoo"i <prop n Marconi> Inl /naut] wire-
less operator. 
loS I J.; r see I.; r • : mlralaay 
-..::.Jr.;r 
r:r-",. marmatizm J <Engl> Inl rheumatism. - also 
maratizm. muratizm, rumatizm. 
.;r.;r 
",.",. marmar Inl alabaster, translucent marble. 

j,(,N 
J.... J" marma( Ivtl to mishandle, bear hard on, victi-
mize. marma(uu-ni c;uddaam illi yiswa wi-iii ma-yiswaa-
/ they treated me like dirt in front of everyone. 
marma(it-u fil-maljaakim she dragged him through the 
courts. -vn marma(a; ava/pva mimarma(. 
J....)I I'itmarma( Ivil to be given a hard time, be victi-
mized. I'itmarma( fi-Ijayaat-u he's had a wretched life. 
- iva mitmarma(. 
-j,(,N 
.:,)..oJ" marma(oon <Fr marmilOn> In 
pi -aatl 
drudge, scullion. 
t(')(' 
C:J" marmarlvtlto roll (s.o. ors.th.) in the dirt. -also 
mardar. marrar. -vn marmara; avalpva mimarmar. 
c:)1 I'itmarmar Ivil to roll or be rolled in the dirt. 
- also I'itmardar. I'itmarrar. - avaliva mitmarmar. 
I • . u (' 
':'J" marin. mirin ladj "I pliant, flexible. 
.:,1 J" miraan T Inl practice. l'iI-xibra wil-miraan experi-
ence and practice. 
'"JJ" muruuna Inl pliancy, flexibility . 
.:,::,.. marran Ivtl to cause to practise, train. marranit-ni 
fis-sibaalja she gave me swimming practice. callim-ni 
w-marran-nif-jurl-u he taught me and trained me in his 
work. Ilfatra tabt it-tamriin probationary training 
period. -vn tamriin; ava/pva mimarran. 
.:r..) tamriin In pi -aat. tamariinl exercise. tamrinaat 
riyaqiyya (I) physical exercises. (2) mathematical 
exercises. 
.:,)1 I'itmarran Ivil I to be trained, 2 to practise, do 
exercises. bi-yitmarran cal-biyaanu he's practising at 
the piano. - avaliva mitmarran. 
Z • 
• 
•• 
\J ) (' see \J IS ) (' : mamna 
J ) (' see .) (' : miriwwa 
IS) (' see IS.): miraaya 
I IJ" IS ) (' see also IJ".) 
'-!J" maryasa Inl overbearing behaviour, bossiness. 
..r..) 1 I'itmaryis Ivil to act the boss, throw one's weight 
around. -ava mitmaryis. 
ZIJ"IS)(, 
..,-!)I I'il-miriisi <Copt> Inl south wind (in the jar-
gon of Nile boatmen). 
819 
<.JIS)(, 
~J" mariina In pi maraayinl [constr] standard-size 
wooden beam four metres by ten centimetres by ten 
centimetres. 
-<.JIS)(, 
.r";~J" maryanoos Inl [obsol] kind of thick cotton 
material. 
~)(' 
~:r maloag T (i) Ivtll to mix, blend. 2 to put in a good 
mood. -vn malog. 
maloagaan; ava maaloig; pva 
mamlouug. 
~I:r maloaag In pi I'amziga. mazagaatl I humour, 
mood. fancy. lala maloaag-ak as you like. lakkar 
maloaag-i it put me in a bad humour. ma-lii-j (or 
ma-landii-f) mazaag I don't feel like it, I'm not in the 
mood. bi-mazaag eagerly and with pleasure. IIbi-
mazaag-(u) (1) whenever or however (one) pleases, as 
in b-a/taral bi-maloaag-i I work to suit myself. (2) of 
(one's) own free will, as in l'iI-mudiir bi-yakul-ha b-
mazaag-u the director knowingly allows himself to be 
duped. -daxal mazaag ... to be pleasing to ... , as in 
l'iI-birt i daxla mazaag-i c;awi the girl is just my cup of 
tea, c;ablit iI-mudiir wi-daxalit mazaag-u she met the 
director and gained"his approval. -xad maloaag-(u) to 
have (one's) fill, as in lamma I'aaxud mazaag-i min 
iI-larabiyya di b-aftiri rer-ha when I've had enough of 
this car, I'll buy another. -~aaljib maloaag a man fond of 
good living. 2 object of one's fancy, object of pleasure. 
da mazaag landu it gives him pleasure. 3 I'il-maloaag 
hashish.llmaloaag laali high quality of hashish. -I'ibn i 
maloaag hashish-smoker. 
~:r maziig Inl medical preparation, mixture . 
C) 1 I'itmazag T Ivil passive of mazag. -iva mitmiloig. 
~). mazzig Ivt and viI to please, gratify. -vn tamloiig; 
avalpva mimazzig. 
~)I I'itmazzig Ivil to be or become pleased or grati-
fied. - avaliva mitmaZloig. 
~j1 .• maazig Ivtl to humour, gratify the fancy of (s.o.). 
c;aladt amazig-ha l-raayit ma ritfyit I kept humouring 
her until she agreed. -vn mimazga; ava/pva mimaazig. 
~jlil I'itmaaloig Ivill to be humoured, have one's fan-
cy gratified. 2 to amuse oneself. - ava/iva mitmaazig. 
j,)j (' 
1),)1 I'itmazrat Ivil labus] to put on airs, shoot a line. 
-vn malora(a; ava mimalora(. mitmalora(. 
I •• 
))(' 
). mazz I (i) Ivtl to card (cotton, wool etc.). -vn maloZ; 

ava maaziz; pva mamzuuz. 
oj.. mazza I Ipl -aatl instance noun of mazz. mazzu 
~-~uuf mazza Ijilwa they gave the wool a good carding. 
.5'1 fitmazz Ivil to be carded (of cotton, wool etc.). - iva 
mitmazz. 
z •• 
.;.;r 
X,. miziz ladjl sour. ri/-Iamunaata mizza the lemonade 
is sour. 
.:,Ijjo mazazaan Inl sourness, tartness. 
ojljo mazaaza = mazazaan. 
jj.. molzziz I Ivil to become sour. - vn tamziiz; ava 
mimszziz. 
J •• 
.;.;r 
oj\.. .oj.. mazza z <T meze from P> In pI -aatl hors 
d'oeuvres served with drinks. 
j.. mazz Z (i) Ivil to pick (at hors d'oeuvres served with 
drinks). -vn mazz; ava maaziz. 
jj.. mazziz Z Ivil to eat mazza. -ava mimazziz. 
tjr 
tjo mazal (a) I/vt/la to rip. mazal iI-warae; n~~een 
wi-ramaa f-wiff-i he ripped the papers in half and threw 
them at me. Ib to rip off, wrench off. natal iI-baab 
mazal-u min ma[ralj-u he wrenched the door and rip-
ped it off its hinges. 2 Ivil to tell whopping lies, spin 
yarns. -vn mazl; ava maazil; pva mamzuul. 
~jo maZls In pl-aatl tall story, whopping lie. 
t) famzal lell morelmost given to telling extrava-
gant lies. 
tlj.. mazzaalln *1 teller of whopping lies. 
tjl fitmazallvi/la to rip, be ripped. Ib to be ripped 
off, be wrenched off. 2 to become inflated with pride. 
fitmazallamma e;aluu-Iu finta gadal it made him feel 
good when they told him he was a fine fellow of a man. 
-l\valiva mitmizil. 
tj..· mazzallvtl to tear to shreds. -vn tamziil; avalpva 
mimatzal· 
t.5'l firmazzallvi/l to tear, become torn. 2 to be torn 
to shreds. - ava/iva mirmazzal. 
Jjr 
Jjo mazae; (u) Ivtl to tear (a muscle). mazae;t' qahr-i 
w- fana faylaa I strained my back when I was carrying 
him. -vn mazae;aan, maze;; ava maazie;; pva mamzuue;. 
~jo maze;a In pI -aatl I instance noun of maze;. 2 a 
tear, Ii sprain. 
Jjl fitmazae; Ivil to tear or be torn (of a muscle). 
- avaliva mitmizie;. 
820 
.u 
.;j.. mazzat; Ivtl to tear up, cut to shreds. mazzsliit ... lu 
hduum-u she tore up his clothes. -vn tamziie;; avalpva 
mimazzae; . 
J.5'I fitmazzae; Ivil I to tear (of muscles). 2 {lsi] to 
become an unbeliever (Sufi usage). 3 to be torn up, be 
cut to shreds. - avaliva mitmazzae;. 
.£ljr 
~j.. mazziika Inl I music. 2 Ipl mazaziikl mouth-
organ. 
J~j.. mazzikaatO In pI -yyal (musical) instrument-
alist. 
.!Ij.. mazzik Ivil to make music. e;aac:id yimazzik 
fig-gineena lafaan Ijadd' yiddii-Iu e;irj he sits playing 
music in the park so that people will give him a piastre. 
-vn tamziik; ava mimazzik . 
.!I.5'1 fitmazzik Ivil (impersonal) passive of mazzik. 
laazim yitmazzik-Iu lafaan yinaam be has to have music 
played to him before he can get to sleep. -iva 
mitmazzik. 
JJjr see also JJj 
Jljo mazlae; Ivil to become slimy. ri/-fakl' mazlae; 
wi-lYayyar (alm-u the food become slimy and its taste 
changed. -vn mazlae;a; ava mimazlae;. 
- ~ r j r 
~jo mizambiliih <Fr mise en plis> In pI -aatl 
hair-set( ting). 
jrjr 
jo jo mazmiz Ivil I to nibble at food. 2 to enjoy at lei-
sure. xadt il-lafara gneeh e;aladt amazmiz fiihum lala 
mazaag-i I took the ten pounds and enjoyed spending 
them bit by bit. -vn mazmaza; ava mimazmiz. 
-jrjr 
J.jo jo mazmazee[J 
<Fr mademoiselle> Ifem n, 
pI mazmazillaatl title of, and form of address or refer-
ence 
to, 
a 
young 
unmarried 
woman. 
-also 
madimwazeel, madamwazeel. 
~jojo mazmazeehJ 
Ifem 
n, 
pI mazmazehaatl 
= mazmazeel. 
~ j r see ~ j ~ : mizaan, mizaniyya 
-V"~jr 
.r.-i:r-- mizanseen <Fr mise en scene> Inl direction (of 
a play, film). 

J.Jjr 
'J))\.. mazuura <It misura> In pi mawaziirl I {mus] 
measure, bar. 2 tape-measure. 
..sjr 
;';',;,. maziyya In pi mazaayal merit, virtue. 
.J.!J ~j r 
~,;,. muzayku <It> Inl I mosaic. 2 name given to 
various manufactured imitations of marble. 
(11J"r 
[.L... masaaj <Fr> Inl massage. 
.!JUlJ"r 
~ 
.~ mistika <Gr mastikha> Inl mastic. 
.!J ..s U IJ" r 
~ 
mastiika <Gr mastikha> Icoll nl chewing gum. 
( IJ" r see (I IJ" r : masaaj 
c.lJ"r 
e-' masafJ (a) Ivtl I to wipe (clean). fimsafJ wiff-ak 
bil-mandiil wipe your face with the handkerchief! 
fimsafJ-li g-gazma polish my shoes for me! filii Yljuul-u 
n-nahar-da yimsafJ-u b- fastiika bukra "" what he says 
one day, he denies the next. fJ-amsafJ biik il- farq I'll 
wipe the floor with you! IImasafJ-I(u) guux to toady to 
(s.0.).2 {Chr] to anoint. 3 to survey, scan. 4 to smooth 
(with a plane). 5 {agric] to deepen (furrows) with a 
mattock after ploughing. - Ivil 6 to glow with health, 
look glossy and in good condition. -vn masfJ, 
masafJaan; ava maasifJ; pva mamsuufJ. 
e-' masfJ I/vnl Ilkawi{t masfJ a worn tyre. -maqrab 
masfJ ping-pong bat with a smooth rubber surface. 2 In! 
{agric] (season of) the widening of furrows iii prepara-
tion for planting cotton. 
:i.....-. masfJa In pi -aatl instance noun of masfJ. 
~ 
masfJiyya = masfJa. 
.6....... misfJa In pi -aatl {non-Cairene] mattock, hoe. 
~L... misaafJa In pi -aatl surface area, space. 
ril-fJukuuma bi-tfJaddid il-misafJaat il-mazruula lju{n 
the government specifies the surface area of cotton that 
may be planted. II m~/afJit il-misaafJa the Survey 
Department. 
~I ril-misiifJ or ril-masiifJ Iprop n! the Messiah, 
821 
Christ. wi/-misiifJ i/-fJayy by the Living Christ! fil-misiifJ 
(or 
ril-misiix) 
id-daggaal (or ig-gaddaaiJ) 
the 
Anti-Christ. 
~ 
misiifJi or masiifJi I/adj *1 Christian. 2 In *1 a 
Christian . 
~ 
misifJiyya or masifJiyya Inl Christianity. 
C. L.. massaafJ In *1 surveyor. 
~L.. massaafJa In pi -aatl wiper. massaafJit larabiyya 
car (windscreen) wiper. 
~ 
mamsafJa In pi mamaasifJl I mop. 2 doormat. 
~ 
I fitmasafJ Ivil passive of masafJ. -iva mitmisifJ. 
~ 
massafJ I Ivtl to wipe. 2 Ivil to make a pass or 
passes (with the hand over s.o. or s.th.). - vn tamsiifJ; 
ava mimassafJ. 
~ 
tamsiifJa Ipl -aatl instance noun of tamsiifJ. 
~I fitmassafJ Ivil I to rub oneself (against s.th.). gat 
il-lju{{a titmassafJ Ji-rigl-i the cat came and rubbed up 
against my leg. II bi-yitmassafJ fiina lafaan 1(adwa he 
hangs around us hoping for a meal. 2 to create an 
appearance of relationship (e.g., with influential per-
sons). lammaal yitmassafJ fil-leela di he's always mak-
ing himself out to be a member of this family. 3 to be 
wiped. -ava/iva mitmassafJ. 
c.lJ"r 
t::-- misix (a) Ivil to become tasteless or insipid. -vn 
masaxaan; ava maasix, masxaan. 
t::-- masax (a) Ivti to transform into (s.th. inferior). 
rabb-i-na masax-u ljird God changed him into a monk-
ey.llkalaam mamsuux garbled words. -vn masaxaan, 
masx; ava maasix; pva mamsuux. 
t:-\.. maasix ladj *1 tasteless, bland, insipid. II xallaa-ha 
masxa he exceeded the bounds of good taste. -faay 
maasix watery tea. 
~ 
musxa In pi musaxl laughing-stock, object of 
ridicule. 
t::--i famsax Iell more/most insipid, bland, tasteless 
etc. 
C;e-ll ril-misiix, ril-masiix: ril-misiix id-daggaal (also 
fil-masiifJ id-daggaa/) Iprop nl the Anti-Christ. 
e-'I fitmasax Ivti to be turned into, transformed into 
(s.th. inferior). - iva mitmisix. 
~ 
massax I Ivtl to mar, spoil. kutr il-mikyaaj massax 
gamal-ha too much make-up spoiled her beauty. 
II massax i/-kalaam laleena he spoke unpleasantly about 
us. 2 Ivil to become tasteless or bland. ril-fJikaaya di 
massaxit ljawi this affair has gone quite stale. -vn 
tamsiix; ava/pva mimassax. 
~I fitmassax Ivil to be marred, be spoiled. - iva 
mitmassax. 

ltlJ"'r 
J t V" f' see also I J t V" 
~ 
masxar Ivtl I to slate, abuse. kunt axaaf fajrab 
kitiir la-yir;rafu fil-beet fa-ymasxaruu-ni I was afraid to 
drink a lot lest they find out at home and give me a 
tongue-lashing. 2 {slang} to beat soundly, leave (s.o.) 
without a leg to stand on (e.g .. in a match, competition, 
argument etc.). -vn masxara: avalpva mimasxar. 
• ~ 
masxara Inll Ipl masaaxlr r I (piece of) prepost-
erous behaviour. farce. 2 ridicule, sarcasm . 
.;.-cl fitmasxar Ivill passive of masxar. 2 to become 
derisive, engage in mockery. - avaliva mitmasxar. 
J V" f' 
~ee J.J V" f' : masuura 
I J V" f' 
I.S J-" misra <Copt> Inl Misra. the twelfth month of 
the Coptic year, early August to early September. 
fl-mlsra tigrl kull' tirr;a r;isra {prov} during Misra all the 
canals flow in sultry weather (rhyme indicating that it is 
the time of the Nile flooding). 
JI.SJV"f' 
~ 
J-" masariuja Inl fatty covering, covering of the 
intestine. 
V" V" f' 
:;.... mass' (i) Ivtll to touch (lightly). 2 to reflect upon, 
cast aspersions on. mass' karamt-u it undermined his 
dignity. fin yadd' mass' {araf-ak bi-kilma fana I-
masfuu/lf anyone insinuates anything about you, I'll 
take care of it. ma-fiilyaagafit-tac;riirtimiss-ak there is 
nothing in the report that reflects on you. 3 to affect (of 
a demon, spirit). 4 to apply a (medicated) swab to. 
mziil iI-yifaaf wi-nmiss iI-ma{ray we remove the mem-
brane and swab the area. - Ivil 5 to apply a (medi-
cated) ~wab. fid-duktuur mass· r;al-r;een the doctor 
~wabbed the eye with medication. 
-vn mass, 
masasaaan; ava maasis; pva mamsuus. 
:;.... mass 2 1n/l medication applied with a swab to eye 
or gum infections. 2 treatment of eye or gum infections 
with medication. 
~ massa' linst n, pi -aatl a single application of a 
(medicated) swab. 
~I fllmass Ivil passive of mass '. - iva mitmass. 
..;.U lamaass Inll contiguity.llxa{{ it-tamaass {soccer} 
touch-line. 2 {malh} tangency. 
- J.b V" f' 
..J!)""'" mas{areen In pi -aatl builder's trowel. 
822 
J V" f' see J I.S V" f' : musiiqa, mlsiiqi 
J I J V" f' see also J I.S V" f' 
;lA..,.-.JA musiqaar In pi -aall expert musician, maestro. 
LJJV"f' 
.i.&....... misac;c;ar;a Inl dish whose main ingredients in-
clude minced meat and egg-plant, moussaka. 
I.!IV" f' 
.!l.... mlSik (i) Ivtll to take hold of, grasp. mlsikt-a-ha 
min 
fid-ha I took hold of her by the hand. 
fis-suxuniyya timsik-ni bil-Ieel the fever grips me at 
night. II fimsik nafs-ak get a hold on yourself, pull your-
self together! - fimslk II-xajab touch wood! (Le. for 
luck). - fimsik iI-r;~aaya min in-n~~ == keep all possibi-
lities open. - ftl-yagar maasik nafs-u kwayyis the rock is 
of solid consistency. 2 to capture, arrest. misk-u I-buli~ 
the police arrested him. 3 to take on, be in charge of. 
kull' ;aabic fil-markib bi-yimsik wardiyya each officer 
on the ship takes a watch. kull' lagna maska q{aar; each 
committee is in charge of a sector. mask' dafaatir book-
keeping. 4 to harp on, keep on about. miskuu-Iu I-yal{a 
iii r;amal-ha they kept reminding him of his mistake. 
- IvilS Ipreverbl to up and .... misikt-a-ha qarabt-a-ha 
r;alc;a suxna I upped and gave her a good thrashing. 
6 to stick, adhere. hold. fis-sabya b-timsik (awwaali the 
dye sets immediately. fir-riiya b-timsik fil-huduum the 
odour clings to clothing. II fimslk flmaal-ak keep to the 
left! -r;ajaan ba{n-a-ha limsik so that her bo~els will 
firm up. - ri/-keef mislk fl-dmaay-u he became addicted. 
-vn mask, masakaan; ava maasik; pva mam.muk. 
~ misik fi- (1) to invite pressingly, as in misik fiyya 
r;al-yada he insisted on my lunching with him. (2) to 
pick a quarrel with, as in {uul in-nahaar yimsik fi-lli 
raayiy wi-III gaay he's always picking quarrels with the 
passers-by. 
;0:...... maska linst n, pi -aatl a grip, a hold. ri/-maska 
mneen how does one hold (it)? 
.!.l.....C I fitmasak Ivil passive of misik. -iva mllmisik. 
~ 
massik' Ivtl I to cause to take hold of. maSSlkuu 
fanuus they put a lantern in his hand. 2 to cause to hold, 
cause to adhere. famasslk kull' ruloteen bi-klibs 
I secure each pair of rollers with a hairpin. 3 to charge 
with, entrust to. massikt axuu-ya I-mayall I put my 
brother in charge of the store. -vn lamsiik; ava/pva 
mimassik. 
<!G I filmassik' Ivil I passive of massik. 2 to insist. 
fil-muyaami tmasslk bi-nuc;{a figrafiyya the lawyer 

clung to a point of procedure. - vn lamassuk f; ava 
mUlamassik; avaliva milmassik. 
d-\.cl filmaasik Ivil to take hold of oneself. laazim 
lilmaasikjiwayya you should be a bit firm with yourself. 
-vn lamaasuk; ava milmaasik, mUlamaasikf. 
d-\i lamaasukf Inl consistency, cohesiveness. 
d-\"';;" mUlamaasik f ladi *1 cohesive. 
<!L...i famsak Ivil [IsI[ to fast from dawn to sunset in 
Ramadan. -vn fimsaak; ava mumsik. 
.!lL....! fimsaak Inl la abstention. Ib [fsll time before 
dawn in Ramadan when Muslims are suppo~ed to stop 
eating. 2 constipation. 
~L....! fimsakiyya Inl Ramadan calender giving the 
times of the five prayers, thejuruuq and the fimsaak. 
2 .!l1.J" r 
<!L... misk Inl musk. 
~ 
miska Icoll nl [euphem! cattle dung. 
~ 
massik! Ivtl perfume with musk. 
II~abuun 
mimassik scented toilet soap. - avalpva mimassik. 
~I filmassik 2 Ivil to be perfumed with musk. -iva 
milmassik. 
.;,.!l1.J" r 
.:.r.$--- maskiin. miskiin ladi pi masakiinl pitiable, 
wretched. da maskiill ma-llIlI-j l:Jadd he is to be pitied 
for he has no one. maskiina - goz-ha maal in-nahar-da 
poor woman, her husband died today. hllwwa maskiin 
fi-la{j/-ll he's simple-minded. 
~I filmaskin Ivil I to feign humility and submis-
siveness. filmaskin lamma lilmakkill [prov! "" fawn and 
beg until you get your chance. 2 to pretend to be piti-
able or wretched. - vn maskana; ava milmaskin. 
( IS .!l1.J" r ) 
..s>--", muski <poss Moscow> Icoll nl type of pitch 
pine. 
..s>-"ll fil-mllski <poss Fr mosqllee> Iprop nl street 
in Cairo running from Ataba to el-Azhar through a 
market area. 
Jl.J"r 
J... mist Inl like thing, peer. ma-Ia{jel-P misl-ak I did 
not find the like of you. misl i zaalik like this. bil-misl 
similarly, in similar fashion, as in f'il-mlllamia bil-misl 
tit for tat. ka-misl see ka-. 
J... masal In pi famsaall I proverb, saying. lala rafy 
il-masal as the proverb says. 2 example, instance. fana 
miJ faahim - fiddii-ni masal I don't understand - give 
me an example. IImasal falla ideal (person). 
823 
11 masalan ladvl for example, for instance. 
JL..i famsaallpl n, in constrl the likes of. fil-qllwwaad 
il-kubaar famsaal-ll great leaders like him. 
JL.. misaal In pi famsilal I example. lala sabiil i/-
misaal by way of example. 2 sign, symbol. misaal is-
sallllls a symbol of the Trinity. 3 like thing, peer. 
ma-Ihaaj misaal there is nothing like it, it is beyond 
compare. 4 ideal model. exemplar. misaalliJ-jagaala a 
model of courage. 
JL.. misaali ladj *1 I ideal, exemplary. 2 living in a 
world of one's own, living in an ivory tower. 
~L.. misaliyya Inl perfectionism. 
J.,... masiil Inl like thing, peer. ma-Ihaajmasiil there is 
nothing like it. it is beyond compare. 
J. L.i famaasiN 
I Ipl adil staunch, reliable. naas 
famaasil solid citizens. 2 Ipl nl fuss, trouble. kllll i yoom 
yiigi yilmil-ill famaasil hina every day he comes here 
and creates a scene. 
JL.. massaa[f In *1 I cast maker. 2 sculptor. 
Jw: limsaal In pi lamasiill statue, statuette. limsaal 
ni!fi bust. 
J... massillvtl I to act (a role). bi-Imassi/ door il-ba{ala 
she plays the part of the heroine. 2 to represent. massif 
il-hayfa fil-muflamar he represented the organization 
at the conference. fil-Iamsiil id-dibillmaasi diplomatic 
representation.llbadal lamsiil expense allowance. 3 to 
depict, portray. fi/- falwaan il-lfamqa bi-Imassi/ il-l:Juzn 
the dark colours represent grief. - Ivi/4 to act, play-
act. finta layyaan fillan walla bi-Imassil are you really 
ill or just putting it on? lamsii/~aamil mime. - vn lamsiil; 
ava mimassil. 
:'\..i: lamsiliyya In pi -aall drama, play. 
J..- mllmassil/n *1 I actor. 2 representative. mllmassil 
niyaaba counsel for the prosecution. 
:.l.,( mllmassila 
In 
pi -aall 
I actress. 
2 woman 
representative. 
J.cl filmassil Ivil I to be acted, be acted out. 2 to be 
represented. - iva milmassil. 
J. L. maasil Ivtl to correspond to. fi~-~lIura bi-Imaasil 
il- fa~1 the copy corresponds to the original. - vn 
mumasla; ava mimaasil. 
J.I,( mllmaasil ladi 
*1 analagous, corresponding, 
similar. 
J..:;..I fimlasal Ivil to submit, subject oneself. kull-i-na 
mimlisliin Ii- famr illaah we all surrender to the will of 
God. - vn fimlisaal; ava mimlisil. 
~I fislamliN Ivil to submit, acquiesce. fislamlil 
1i-l:Jukm illaah he submitted to God's ruling. - vn 
fislimlaal; ava mislamlil. 

r J IJ" r see also r J IJ" 
rl-C1 fitmaslim Ivil [derog] to become a Muslim, con-
vert to Islam (for reasons of convenience). -ava 
mitmaslim. 
oJlSJlJ"r 
.:r-1-.J" musiliin (also llariir musiliin) <Fr mousseline> 
Inl type of artificial silk. 
.; r IJ" r see also 2 .; r IJ" 
~ 
masmar Ivtl 1 to nail. 2 to quilt-stitch. -vn 
masmara; avalpva mimasmar . 
.r-el fitmasmar Ivil 1 to be nailed. 2 to be quilt-
stitched. - iva mitmasmar. 
I. i.)lJ"r 
j,;\;... ,j,;L.. masaana Inl [anat] bladder. 
2 oJ IJ" r see oJ IJ" : misaniyya 
3 ,) IJ" r see oJ.J IJ" r 
masuniyya 
.; .J IJ" r 
masuun, 
masuuni, 
fi!-
OJ.,...\'" masuura <prob P miis.hilra> In pi mawasiir, 
masuraatll pipe, tube. masuurit [armala brake cable. 
masuurit ik-kabbaas piston casing, piston shaft. 
2 marrow-bone. 
oJ .J IJ" r 
.:,.,...\... masuun Icoll nl Freemasons. 
J.,...\... masuuni 1 pertaining to freemasonry. mall[al 
masuuni masonic lodge. 2 Inl a Freemason. 
~.,... U I fiI-masuniyya Inl freemasonry. 
IS IJ" r 
.L.. misa or masa, misaaff or masaaff Inl evening. 
misa I-xeer (or masaaf iI-xeer etc., or sa I-xeer) good 
evening! good afternoon! IImiit misa and misa s-su(al 
greeting used between hashish-smokers. 
11 misaafan or masaafan ladvl in the evening, in the 
afternoon. fis-saac;a sitta masaafan six o'clock in the 
afternoon. 
';L.. misaafi or masaafi ladj °1 pertaining to the 
evening. duruus masa fiyya evening classes. 
~i fumsiyya f Inl soiree, evening gathering. 
.;... massa 2 Ivtl 1 to cause to spend the evening (of 
God). fallaah yimassii-k bil-xeer God grant you a good 
evening! 2 to deal with (s:o.) in the evening. massaa-ni 
b-c;alqa he wound up my day for me with a beating. Ilia 
824 
t~abball-u wala tmassii "" keep well away from him! -/vil 
3 to spend the evening. ~aballna f-c;aknana w-masseena 
f-xinaaqa we started the day in irritation and ended it in 
a quarrel. 4 to say good evening. -vn tamsiyya; ava/pva 
mimassi. 
~ 
tamsiyya In pi tamaasil evening greeting. masaa f 
it-tamaasi [joe] the best of good evenings to you! 
~I fitmassa Ivil 1 passive of massa 2 1 and 2.2 to be 
late in the evening. fitmasseena qawi c;ala ma qafalna 
d-dukkaan leelit fimbaarill we were very late in closing 
the shop last night. -avaliva mitmassi. 
JlSlJ"r 
~.J" musiiqaf <Gr> Inl music. 
~.J" musiiqif l/adjl musical. falaat musiqiyya 
musical instruments. 2 In '1 musician. see further under 
.;IJlJ"r 
.J IS IJ" r 
."...... misyu <perh Fr monsieur> Inl informal term of 
address to a male or (occasionally) a female foreigner. 
..rr 
...;... mif, mUf Ipartl not. mif kida (1) not like that. 
(2) isn't that so? da mifmumkin that's impossible. mif 
ll-aqul-Iak I shan't tell you. 
-..r ..:.. ..r r see I IS ...; ..r : muftaffa, miftaffa 
J~..rr 
J...I..:..tI fitmafdaq Ivil 1 [deris] to chew. (uul in-nahaar 
titmafdaq bil-libaan all day long she chews gum. 2t to 
repeat erudite words senselessly. - also fitfaddaq. - vn 
mafdaqa; avalpva mitmafdaq. 
~..r r 
...;... miff Inl seasoned milk-based liquid culture in 
which cheese is fermented for about two years, the final 
product consisting of lumps of fermented cheese in a 
thick liquid. miff' daayir fully thickened and matured 
miff. II zayy ii-miff - kull' saac;a fil-wiff [p ro v] like miff, 
it's always around (said of something boringly famil-
iar). -zayy' duud ii-miff' minnufii [prov] "" rot begins 
from within. 
~ 
. maffif Ivil to become rotten, decay. fil-beeq 
maffif min iI-llarr the eggs have gone off because of the 
heat. -vn tamfiif; ava mimaffif. 
j, ..r r 
.1.:... mif( In pi mifaa(, 
famfaa(, miff(al 1 comb. 

II kabriil mift book matches. -mif( kabriil a book of 
matches. -fUrfa mift flat paint brush. -faara mift [carp} 
roughening plane. -mift; musaddas cartridge clip. 
-daxal fi-mift-il became fond of him. 2 ball of the foot. 
II fiddaa-Iu mift he tripped him up. 3 (also mift; samak) 
a fish (usually of the perch type). 
41...:.1.. mafta Inl woman employed to make up and pre-
pare a bride. feeflilmil il-maftafil-wiffil-likir [prov}'" 
you can't make a silk purse out of a sow's ear . 
.J..!... maffat Ivtll to comb. card. 2 to rake. -vn lamfiit; 
ava/pva mimaffat. 
~I rilmaffat Ivill to be combed, be carded. 2 to be 
raked. - iva milmaffat. 
c.!l';'r 
c.~ mifkaal:J given name used in proverbs (in com-
bination with the equivalent female name riima (q.v.)) 
to signify a good-for-nothing man. 
e- mafkal:J Ivil to idle about, loaf around. c;aalid 
yimafkal:J ftf1aaril - la fur/a wa/a mafra/a he hangs 
about the street without a job of work or anything to do. 
-vn mafkal:Ja; ava mimafkal:J. 
~I rilmafkal:J = mafkal:J. -ava milmafkal:J. 
r .;. r see r..s';': mafiima 
';'r';'r 
..;.-:... mifmif Icoll nl apricot(s). lifil-mifmif ... that'll 
be the day. I should live so long! as in l:Ja-ygib-1i I-fuluus 
bukra. - 'i'iI-ka/aam da fil-mifmif 'He'll bring me the 
money tomorrow.' 'That'll be the day!' - bukra fil- . 
mifmifwhen pigs fly. 
~ 
mifmifa lunit n, pI -aall an apricot. 
~L:....:.... mifmifaaya = mifmifa. 
~ 
mifmifi ladj invarl apricot-coloured. 
~ 
mifmifiyya Inl I dried apricots. 2 fruit com-
pote of stewed dried apricots (sometimes including cur-
rants and nuts). 
~~';'r 
4:..:.. mifanna <perh Copt> In pI -aall large shallow 
basket made of withies (see PI.B, 9). 
,;.J .;. r 
.l":" mifwaar In pI mafawiir/l errand. rul:Jna mifwar-
na we went on our errand. 2 distance. huwwa msaafir 
wi-mifwaar-u tawiil he is travelling a long distance. 
taxx; mifwaar see taxx. 
;,.:... mafwar Ilvtl to send on (numerous or long) 
errands. cause (s.o.) to go a long way. 2/vil to go on 
825 
numerous errands. -vn mafwara; ava/pva mimafwar. 
;".:.cl rilmafwar Ivil to be sent a long way or on long 
errands. - iva milmafwar. 
l..s';'r 
~ 
mifi (i) Ivill to walk. geel maafi I came on foot. 
2 to go, move away.l:Ja-limfi Wi-Isib-ni zallaan kida are 
you going to go and leave me upset like this? rimfi shoo! 
away with you! get out! 3 to move, move along. 
'i'iI- rUlubiis kaan maafi b-surla the bus was moving fast. 
maafi bil-koora he's dribbling the ball. IIla/a I-maafi 
cursorily, as in I:J-aakulla/-maafi I'll grab a bite to eat. 
4 to proceed. kull-u maafi lamaam everything's going 
well. kunt; maafifil-raaya w-baldeensibl; kilma I was 
going along (reciting) the verse and then I skipped a 
word. kilma minnak wi-bass; w-kull-u yimfi one word 
from you would get things moving. 
rid-dinya 
ma-b-limfii-f rilla b-kida ... that's the way the world 
goes round. II ka/aam-u maafi what he says goes. - ralla-
kilmil xaddaam limfi la/a kilmil raxuu-k what's this! 
the word of a servant overrules that of your brother? 
-mafayaan il-batn diarrhoea. -batn-i mafya I have di-
arrhoea. -ma-limfii1 wara batn-ak ... don't eat every-
thing you feel like eating. 5 to conduct oneself, behave. 
bi-yiigu mf¥r; w-ma-yilrafuu1 yimfu xaa/~ they come 
to Cairo and they haven't any idea how to behave. 6 to 
function. rig-gihaaz ma-b-yimfii1 ma;buut the equip-
ment doesn't work properly. l:Ja-yrassar lala mafyil 
is-saala it will affect the working of the watch. - vn 
mafy, mafayaan; ava maafi. 
~ 
mafya In pI -aall I instance noun of mafy. 
2 manner of walking, gait. 
~1.. maafi linterjl O.K., all right. l:Ja-nfuuf-ak hina 
bukra. - maafi 'We'll see you here tomorrow.' 'All 
right.' 
;;"":'1.. maafiya r Icoll n, pI mawaafil cattle. 
.1..;.. mufaah Ipl nl I infantry. 2 pedestrians. 
~ I..;.. maffaaya In pI -aalll walkway, path. 2 long nar-
row carpet for a corridor, runner. 38 baby-walker. 
3b child's scooter. 
~ 
mamfa In pI mamaafill path. 2 [naul} gangway, 
ga,?gplank. 
~ 
maffa Ivtl to cause to walk, cause to move, cause 
to go etc. bi-nmaffi fiiha mayya we let water pass 
through it. di mumkin limaffi f1url this may get the 
work moving. IImaffa ka/aam-(u) to have one's own 
way. -maffa l:Jaal-(u) (1) to look out for oneself, prom-
ote one's own interests. (2) to get moving, get a move 
on. -vn lamfiyya; ava/pva mimaffi. 

.r-cl ritmaffa Ivill passive of maffa. 2 to walk, go for 
a walk, stroll.lala baal ma ratmaffa I-lfaayit iI-madrasa 
tkuun baljit sabla by the time I've walked to school, it'll 
be seven. II nitmaffa mala t-tilmllZ lala ljadd' ridraak-u 
we go along with the student keeping step with his level 
of comprehension. 38 to defecate (particularly after a 
spell of constipation). 3b to have diarrhoea. - vn 
tamfiyya; avaliva mitmaffl. 
~ 
tamJiyya In pi -aatl stool. 
..rUI ritmaafa r Ivil to get along with, agree with. 
laazim nitmaafa mala g-gaww == we have to go along 
with the tide. - ava mitmaafi. 
1 IS ..; ~ see ..; I ~ : maafa 
.!J.;:.. ~ 
~ see .!J.;:....,.. ~ 
I.) ~ 
~ 
.;4" m~r Ifem prop nIl Egypt. ma~r' rumm id-dunya 
{prov! Egypt is the cradle of civilization == Egypt is the 
best place on earth. 2 Cairo. II m~r ig-gidlida Heliopo-
lis, a suburb north-east of Cairo. - m~r iI-ljadiima Old 
Cairo, an area of southern Cairo east of the Nile. - ribn' 
m~r a Cairene '(usually with implications of polish, 
politeness and sophistication) . 
..s.;4" ma~ri Iladj 'I Egyptian. IIhawa m~ri north 
wind. 2 In 'I an Egyptian. 3 In no pI! drum rhythm (in 
the zaar). 
..sJI.;4" masrclCllt"lJ ladl 
and pi -.n-al Calrene (01 
people. with thc Implication 01 ~ophl~l1cal1on). 
~ 
m~~ar Ivtl to Egyptianize. -vn tam~lir; ava/pva 
mim~~ar . 
.;..cl 
ritma~~ar Ivil I to be Egyptianized. 2 to take 
Egyptian nationality. - avaliva mitma~~ar. 
l.)~~ 
.:,1.;4" mu~raan 
lIn 
pi ma~ariinl 
mtestine. 
ril-m~raan iI-ralwar the appendix. riI-m~raan i/-
lfalii; the colon. 2 m~ariin Ipl nl intestines, entrails, 
bowels. lI{allal ma~ariin-(u) to give (s.o.) a bad time. 
I.~~~ 
...... m~~ (u) Ivtll to suck. bi-ym~~' ~baal-u he sucks 
his thumb. ljaldiin yimu~~u lja~ab sitting sucking the 
juice out of sugar cane. IIma~~ ... (zayy iI-)lamuuna to 
take all there is to get (from s.o. or s.th.). 2 to absorb 
(liquid). riI-fanilla bi-tm~~ iI-laralj the undershirt 
absorbs sweat. 3 to emaciate, enervate (of an illness 
etc.). -vn m~~, m~~tian; ava ma~~; pva ma~u~. 
;,;.. m~~a linst n. pi -aatl a suck. 
826 
~L.... mi~a~a Icoll nl that which remains after juice or 
sap has been extracted. ml~aa~it iI-lj~ab bi-tidxul 
fi-~naalit iI-xafab iI-ljubaybi sugar-cane fibre is used in 
the manufacture of chipboard. 
~t.:... m~~aa~a In pi -aatl sucker, lollipop. 
~I ritm~~ Ivil passive of m~~. -iva mitm~~. 
~ 
m~~~ Ivtl to give to suck. m~~a~it-u lamuuna 
lafaan ma-yistafralf1she made him suck a lemon so he 
would not vomit. -vn tam~ii~; avalpva mlma~~~. 
~I ritm~~~ Ivil to be given to suck. - iva 
mitma~~a~. 
~I rimt~~ Ivtl to absorb. ralju{{' rami" lafaan 
yimt~~ iz-zeet I put down sand to absorb the oil. 
II rimt~~' lfaqab iI-gamahiir he neutralized the anger of 
the people. -vn rimti~aa~; ava mlmta~~ . 
l~~~ 
...,.....;.. m~~ii~ Inl plaster of Paris . 
yj,~~ 
~ 
m~{aba In pi ma~aa{ibl I bench of mud, brick 
or concrete built up against the wall of a building. 
2 {agric! ridge between two furrow~. 3 {nautj'gridiron, 
cradle. 4 mastaba, stone tomb (ancient Egyptian). 
~.)j,~~ 
.~)....... .o~)a..... m~{arda 
<It 
mostarda> 
Inl 
mustard . 
J~~ 
J-. m~/ln pi ram~aa/l vaccine, serum. 
~~~~ 
~ 
m~ma~ Ivtl I to chew and suck on. riI-kalb I 
kaan bl-ym~ma~ (nil-laqma the dog was chewing on 
the bone. m~m~fafayf-u he sucked his lips. 2 to rinse 
out, swill. -vn m~m~a; avalpva mim~ma~. 
~I 
ritma~ma~ Ivil I to be chewed and sucked on. 
2 to be rinsed out. -iva mitm~m~. 
t.J ~ 
~ see also t J ~ 
t.,-. m~wal Ivil to loaf about, bum around. -vn 
m~wala; ava mim~wal. 
t..,...a.tl 
ritm~wal = m~wal. -ava mitm~wal. 
- y .) ~ 
~ see - y .) j, r : maqrabii{a 
t ~ 
~ see t ~ iJ : maqalf, maqlfa, ritmaqalf 

JP~JP~ 
.;a....;a.. maqmaq/vtl to rinse (one's mouth), swill water 
around in (the mouth). -vn maqmaqa; avaliva 
mimaqmaq. 
....:-.;.... maqmaqa Inl mouthwash. 
~I fitmaqmaq/vil to rinse one's mouth, swill wa-
ter in the mouth. -ava mitmaqmaq. 
I..sJP~ 
~ 
maqa I (i) Ivi/l to sign one's name. laazim timqi 
lal-fistimaara you have to sign the form. macf.a lalee 
bil-miwafqa he signed his consent on it. - Ivtl2 to sign. 
fimqi-sm-ak finta mij ism i mraat-ak you sign your own 
name, not your wife's. waraqa maqii-ha rafiis iI-qism a 
paper signed by the department chairman. 3 /slang] to 
put (hashish) on the tobacco (when preparing a water-
pipe). -vn fimcf.a; ava maacf.i; pva mamcf.i. 
• l.4.! fimqa In pi fimqafaatl signature. 
~I fitmaqa Ivil to be signed. -iva mitmicf.i . 
.;... maqqa I Ivtl I to cause (s.o.) to sign his name. 
bi-yruul:! liI-muddala lalee wi-ymacf.cf.ii lala l-fa~1 he 
goes to the defendant and makes him sign the original. 
2 tp cause to be signed. xud il-waraq~di macf.cf.ii-ha 
minnu take this paper ang get it signed by him. -vn 
tamcf.iyya; avalpva mimacf.cf.i. 
~I fitmaqqa l Iv11 to be made to sign one's name. 
- iva mitmacf.cf.i. 
l..sJP~ 
~ 
macf.a 1 (i) Ivil to pass, become part of the past. 
kulli feef faat wi-macf.a everything is over and done 
with. -vn macf.ayaan; ava maacf.i. 
,-",,"I.. maacf.i I/adj *1 /gram] past. filii maacf.i past 
tense verb. 2 Inl riI-maaqi 28 the past. fil-maaqi in the 
past. 2b parts already memorized (in Koranic study). 
.;... macf.cf.a 1 Ivtl to pass, spend (time). zimil-na 
bi-ymaqqi kull i waqt-u Jil-qahwa our colleague spends 
all his time in the coffee shop. - vn tamqiyya; avalpva 
mimaqcf.i. 
~I fitmacf.cf.a 1 Ivil to be passed, be spent (of time). 
riI- fagaaza tmaqqit fi-lazaab the holiday was passed in 
anguish. - iva mitmacf.cf.i. 
.)j,~ 
)... malar Inl rain. 
• )... ma(ara Inl rain. -also lIa(ara. 
,;;.. ma((ar Ivil to rain. fid-dillya (or riI-ma(ara) 
ma((arit it rained. fid-dillya (or fil-ma(ara) bi-tma((ar it 
is raining. -also na((ar. -vn tam(iir: ava mima((ar. 
827 
.jl.)j,~ 
.:,1)... mu(raan <Syr> In pi ma(arnal /Chr] metro-
politan. 
~I)a.. mu(raniyya Inl /Chr] I area of a metropolitan's 
jurisdiction. 2 residence and administrative centre of a 
metropolitan. 
-,,:-,.)j,~ 
~)... ma(rabii(a (also maqrabii(a) <It madrevita> 
In pi -aatl /mech] large thread-cutting stock and die. 
I j, j, 
. 
~ 
.la.. mall I (II) I Ivtl to stretch. pull out. II ma((i fafayf-u 
he smacked his lips. 2 Ivil to stretch. fil-fastik mall the 
elastic has stretched. - vn mall, ma(a(aall; ava maa(i(; 
pva mam(uu(. 
~ mCl((Cl linst n. pi -aatl a stretching. 
1\1... mCl((Cla( If Inl rubber. 2 ladjl rubbery, elastic . 
J<.\1... ma((aa(if ladjl of or pertaining to rubber. 
I:!izaam mallaa(i a rubber belt . 
.i..cl fitmd(( Ivil to stretch or be stretched. - avaliva 
"!i!ma((. 
~I 
J.1... mCl((U( Ivtl to stretch out. II malla( fafayf-(u) to 
grimace in disagreement. - vn tam(ii(; ava/pya mima((a(. 
J."l..c tam(ii(a instance noun of tam(ii(. II nooma 
w-tall!(ii(a fal:!san mill faral:! (ii(a [provJ a sleep and a 
stretch-out (at home) are better than (pointless) 
party-going . 
.la.b.1 fitmCl((a(lvil I to be stretched out. 2 to stretch 
oneself. fil-qll((a qalda titma((a( wi-tiftal:! buqq-a-ha the 
cat is stretching and yawning. - avaliva mitma((a(. 
1 j, j, 
. 
~ 
.la.. ma((1 <prob Fr> ladj invarl matt. dull (in colour). 
zeet ii-mall oil used in applying a matt finish . 
tj,~ 
~ 
tam[iila Inl stretching and yawning. 
~ 
1 fitma((Cll/vil to stretch oneself. - ava mitma((al. 
Jj,~ 
Jl.1.. ma-a[iI (also maati[J) Ivtl to put off with fake 
excuses. prevaricate with. baC;1I yma(luu-ni fil- fugra 
they started stalling with the rent. -vn mima(la; ava 
mimaa(iI . 
..s.jj,~ 
;..;lh.. ma(anya <Gk metanoia> Inl /ChrJ prostration. 
fiqrab-Iu ma(allya bow down to the ground before him. 

.J J:, r see IS.J J:, : matwa 
J.JJ:,r 
J;'" ma(Willvil to prevaricate, be evasive (particular-
ly in paying one's debts). -vn ma(Wala; ava mima(WiI. 
IS J:, r 
~ 
matiyya In pi mataayal mount (usually a donkey). 
lIG'amlin-ni matiyyil-hum "" they are using me as a 
door-mat. 
tr 
t:: maG'a Iw pron suff macaa-; 1st sing maG'aayal pre-
position 
indicating 
I accompaniment. 
filfat/.t/.alu 
maG'aana please come with us. maG'aahum waIJda sill 
there's a woman with them. maG'aak il-Iazkara do you 
have the ticket with you? ma-maG'ii1 fakka I haven't 
any change on me. fana mabsuut maG'aakum I'm happy 
to be (e.g., living or working) with you.llxallii-k maG'a 
lIaah "" place your trust in God. -maG'a zaalik in spite of 
that. 2 concurrence of direction. law fima maaji maG'a 
1-lirG'a yibqa bel-na G'alajmaal-ak if you're walking in 
the same direction as the flow of the canal, our house is 
on your left. 3 concurrence of action. bi-lihil maG'a 
surG'il i1-muloor it disconnects as the motor picks up 
speed. maG'a I-waql with the passage of time. 
4 agreement or support. fana maG'aak (1) I agree with 
you. (2) I'm on your side. IImaG'aahum macaahum 
G'aleehum G'aleehum when things are going for them he's 
with them, when things turn against them so does he (of 
one who has no mind of his own). 5 interaction. 
fillafaql' maG'a g-giraan I came to !In agreement with 
the neighbours. ziG'1i1 maG'a goz-ha w-sabil-u she had a 
row with her husband and left him. zaG'/aniin maG'a 
baG't/. on bad terms with each other. 
11 maG'a finn Iconjl although, in spite of the fact that. 
Ii~tr see also Ii~t 
~ 
maG'gin Ivtl to fill and smooth over (holes in a 
surface), dress (a surface preparatory to painting etc). 
ma-maG'ginl'1 i1-lJeeta kwaYYls qabl' ma bayyat/.I-a-ha 
you didn't dress the wall properly before painting it. 
-vn maG'gana; ava/pva mimaG'gin. 
~I filmaG'gin 
Ivil passive 
of maG'gin. 
- iva 
milmaG'gin. 
I J tr 
o~ miG'da Inl stomach. fumm i1-miG'da epigastrium. 
II kalaam-i mif G'ala l-miG'da people can't stomach what 
I say. 
828 
IS~ macidiT ladjl pertaining to the stomach . 
Z J t r see J t.J : maG'aad, miG'aad 
.J t r 
J"'" maG'ar (u) Ivil to brag, boast of one's exploits. -vn 
maG'r. 
OJ"'" maG'ra Ipl -aall instance noun of maG'r . 
.J~ maG'G'aar Inl idle boaster. 
jtr 
ojo.o miG'za In pi -aal, miG'iiz, miG'szl I (nanny) goat. 
2 coward. 
- .J v6 t r see I.J v6 t : mauaraawi 
r~tr see also r~t 
~I film(lG';am Ivil I (iron) to do great things, per-
form great feats. filmaG';am wi-gaab n~~' kiilu ruzz he 
performed the great feat of bringing half a kilo of rice. 
2 to be stuck up or pompous. -ava milmaG';am. 
~~Jtr 
..r+l- maG'aliff, maG'alihf, maG'aliffi, maG'aleej linterjl 
I never mind, don't worry about it. 2 sorry! excuse me! 
trtr 
~ 
maG'maG'a Inl turmoil, thick of things. 
Ii t r 
oJ""'\.. maG'uun In, dual maG'unteen, pi mawaG'iinl 
I kitchen pot. II da min macuun battaal he comes of bad 
stock. 2 mawaG'iin Ipl nl pots and pans, kitchen utensils 
in general. 
IS tr 
.lo..i famG'a, famG'aaf Ipl nl intestines. 
IS",.,. maG'awi ladjl pertaining to the intestines, intes-
tinal. nazla maG'awiyya intestinal infection. 
.,;, tr 
.:.\A.. mUll'aal or mUll'aal Inl I roots of Glossostemon 
brugieri. 2 an infusion of the same (traditionally drunk 
by recently delivered mothers and their visiting 
well-wishers). 
v6tr 
~ 
mall'~1 (u) Ivilto be afflicted with cramps or colic 

(of the stomach or kidneys). ba{n-i b-tumr~ (lalayya) 
I've got a stomach-ache. -vn mar~, mar~aan; ava 
mar1aan. 
~ 
mar~2lnl colic, stomach cramps. II mar~ kala wi 
renal colic. 
~ 
mar1a In pI -aatl an attack of colic. 
...,-. maIT~ I/vil to be affected by (severe) colic. 
lamma ba{n-u maITlJ1it raab bi-surla lid-duktoor when 
he got severe stomach cramps he went quickly to the 
doctor. 2/vtl to make colicky. -vn tamrii1; avalpva 
mi"!aIT~. 
~I ritmaIT~ Ivil to be made colicky. -iva 
mitmaIT~. 
.l.oJtr see also -.l.oJtr 
.la:;.. marna{ Ivtl to magnetize. -vn marna{a; avalpva 
mimarna{. 
J..;ail ritmarna{ Ivil to be magnetized. - iva mitmarna{. 
-.l.oJtr 
~ 
marna{iis (also marma{iis) <Gr magn~t~s> Inl 
magnet. 
~ 
mavna{iisi ladjl magnetic. II rit-tanwiim it-
. mavna{iisi hypnosis. see further under .l. oJ t r 
I..:.. J r 
.::..i.o mattat~) Ivtl to cause (health or a general situa-
tion) to deteriorate. -vn mattt, mattataan; ava maattit; 
pva mamttuut . 
.::..i.o mattt Inl hatred. 
~ mattta Inl gloominess, moodiness. 
.:...iiI ritmattat Ivil passive of mattat. - iva mitmittit. 
1 ..:.. J r see ..:.. J .J : miqaal, miqaati 
- .J ,) J r see -.J') J Y : mattduunis 
J.J r 
..;A. mattttitt I/vtl to strain (the eyes). II mattttitt 
lenee-na min kUlr i/-inti;aar he made us wait for him a 
hell of a long time. 2/vil to pore (over s.th.), give close 
attention (to s.th. written). rinta bi-Imattttittfig-gawaab 
leeh why are you scrutinizing the letter? -vn tamttiitt; 
avalpva mimattttitt. 
¥ 
tamttiitta Ipl -aatl instance noun of tamttiitt. 
..;.iiI ritmattttitt Ivil to be or become strained (of the 
eyes). -ava/iva mitmattttitt. 
J J r see 
I I.S J J : mattia, mittla 
829 
JI.S~.!lr 
j.:~ mikariil (also miikaariil) Iprop nil male given 
name. 2 the archangel Michael. 
,?..:...!l r 
..::.,$l.. makitt <Fr maquette> In pI -aatl[print] dummy 
lay-out. 
~l.. makitta = makitt. 
J.!lr 
~ 
makar (u) Ivil to act with deceit. xalli baal-ak 
minnu la-yumkur laleek (or biik) be carefullest he take 
you in. -vn makr; ava maakir . 
• ~ makra linst n, pI -aatl a deceitful trick . 
.lIS... makkaar ladj ·1 cunning, deceitful, sly . 
~i ramkar tell more/most cunning, deceitful or sly. 
fol ritmakar Ivil (impersonal) passive of makar. 
laazim itmakar laleek you must have been taken in. 
- iva mitmikir. 
-..JJ.!lr 
..,.,i ~ 
mikrufoon, makrafoon <Fr> In pI -aall 
I microphone. 28 loudspeaker system. 100t-u laami/ 
wala I-mikrufoon his voice blares more than a loud-
speaker. 2b loudspeaker (e.g., of a radio). 
Y.JJ.!lr 
'-:'J~ mikroob, makroob <Fr microbe> Icoll n, 
pI -aatl germ(s), microbe(s). 
oJ.JJ.!lr 
";J~ makaroona <It maccheroni> Inl pasta . 
Ilmakaroona xawaatim (or matt1U~a) macaroni. 
.!l1.SV".!lr 
~I rit-maksiik <Fr> Iprop nl Mexico. 
~ 
maksiiki I/adj ·1 Mexican. 2 In ·1 a Mexican. 
I;J .!l r 
~ makka Iprop nl Mecca. 
j.. makki ladjl pertaining to Mecca. 'i'il-baram i/-
makki (1) area around Mecca considered sacred. 
(2) the Kaaba Mosque. 
1 .!l • .!l r 
.!l ~ makkuuk In pI makakiik, makaaki/l [text] shut-
tle. IIlaami/ zayy i/-makkuuk he rushes to and fro. 
2 bobbin (of a sewing machine). Ilfirii{ makkuuk 
gathering tape (for curtains). 

I.:,.!.l r 
.:f.. mukn J ladJ invarl solid (of quality), sound, raagil 
mukn a Merling fellow. rakla mukn a great meal.lalqa 
mukn a sound beating . 
.:J... makkin Ivtl to enable, give (s.o.) the upper hand. 
makkin-ni raxrug he enabled me to go out. ~aabib zayy I 
ma-nta laayiz bass I ma-Imakkin-J' badd I minnak make 
friends as you wish, but don't let anyone get a hold on 
,you. II makkinil-u min nafs-a-ha she gave herselfto him. 
-vn lamkiin; ava/pva mimakkin. 
~I rilmakkin Ivil to be enabled, manage to gain 
supremacy. rumakkin bi-makr-u min riff-a-ha he was 
enabled by his cunning to cheat her. rilmaskin Ii-raayil 
rna litmakkin /prov/ == fawn and beg until you get your 
chance. - vn lamakkun f; ava milmakkan. 
.:f..i ramkan (yimkm) I/vtl it was (is) possible for. 
ma-yimkin-haa-flifliri waabid gidiid it isn't possible for 
her to buy a new one. yimkin-ni ranaam is it possible for 
me to sleep? 2 Ivil it was (is) possible. riza ramkan if 
possible. yimkin miraal-u b-lifrab sagaayir perhaps his 
wife smokes. huwwa yimkin lalbaan perhaps he's sick. 
- vn rimkaan; ava mumkin. 
.:,(S;..! 'i'imkaan,lln/l capability, power. 'i'llmil kull illi 
f-rimkaan-ak do all that is in your power. 2 possibility. 
~(S;..! 'i'imkaniyya In pi -aall I capability. di ~alba 
fooq 'i'imkaniyyil if-Jubbaan this is too difficult for the 
young.21 possibility. -
'i'imkaniyyaal/pl n/3 facilities. 
'i'is-sinima 
l-mC¥riyya 
lalbaana 
lafaan 
ma-fii-J 
'i'imkaniyyaal Egyptian cinema suffers because there 
are no facilities. 
~ 
mumkin I/adj/possible. kull i(-(uruq I/-mumkina 
all possible ways. 2 modal of possibility. mif mumkin 
liigl n-nahar-da she cannot come today. mumkin 
liddii-ni fikra lanha can you give me an idea of it? 
2.:,.!.l r 
6... makana 
<It macchina> lunit 
n, 
pi -aall 
I machine, 
instrument. 
makaml xiyaa(a 
sewing 
machine. makanil (bilaaqa) safety razor. II kalab la/-
makana to type. -rna kana larabi an Arabic typewriter. 
2 power-driven machine. makanil in-nasiig power 
loom. makaml mayya powered water-pump. makanil 
markib ship's engine. 
.:f.. makan Icoll nl mechanical instruments, machines, 
machinery. 
4"L. makllna In pi -aall machine, machinery. laamil 
makinaal i(-(uruq road-machinery operator. 
J .:, .!.l r see ':'.J.!.l: makaan 
830 
(-IS.J.!.lr l 
~I>.".. mikamikl <It meccanico> I/adjl mechanic· 
ai, mechanized. IImufaah mikamkiyya armoured 
troops. 2 In pi -yyal mechanic, technician. mikaniiki 
larabinaal car mechanic . 
...:.-,;1>.".. mikaniisl <Fr mecamsle> Inl [Iheal] tech-
nical director. 
[11S.!.lr 
[.1$.. mikyaaj or makyaaj <Fr maquillage> Inl make-
up, cosmetics. ballU mlkyaa) she put on make-up. 
JISIS.!.lr 
.r-$L. makyiir <Fr maquilleur> In pi -aall make-up 
man . 
IJr 
')\.. mala I: lall1 mala wiff( -u) hurriedly and under con-
straint. lamma smill' 'linn if-fa(jqa nbaraqil geel gary· 
la/a mala lYiff-i when I heard that the flat was on fire, 
I rushed off Just as I was. ga l-laskaTi xad-u I-qism· 
la/a mala wiff-u the policeman came and bundled him 
off to the station . 
.J1Jr 
~')\.. malaana Icoll nl green chick-pea(s). 
~Jr see ISJr 
.J ":-' J r see .J ":-' J : malball 
J.J.:..Jr 
";'.i) yo mulUloof: 
qumbula 
mulUloof 
Molotov 
cocktail. 
.J.J.:..Jr 
.:,ji.. mlluoon <Fr mollelon> Inl table felt. 
C J r 
& malb In/l salt. Ilmalb mgjlilzi Epsom salts. -leef 
wi-malb true friendship (reference to the sharing of a 
meal bemg a sign of true friendship). -liruff iI-malb ' 
ma-ymzil-J (the place IS so crowded) if you threw salt it 
wouldn't land. -zayy iI-malb I mabfuriin fl-kull ' fee 'I '" 
poking their noses mto everythmg. -butt' f-leen-ak 
aa~waayil mala == have some shame! 2 [rur] chemical 
fertilizer. - Ipl 'i'amlaabl 31 mineral salt. 
......L. malba lunit n, pi -aall piece of coarse salt. II malba 
f-leen IIIi ma-y~alli lan-nabl a grain of salt in the eye of 
him who refuses to bless the Prophet (a formula of 

protection against the evil eye, all who hear it being 
expected to bless the Prophet, unless they be the one 
with the eye). -ljaarifmalfJil ... always picking on ... , as 
in leeh finla ljaarifmall:Jit iI-wad-da why are you always 
picking on this boy? 
~~ mall:Jaaya = mall:Ja. 
..,..)\.. milaal:Ja r Inl navigation. 
~}.. muluul:Ja lcoll nl I salted pickled fish (a special-
ity of Upper Egypt). 2 saltiness. 
coL miliil:J. ma/iil:J r I ladj pi milaal:Jl good, nice. 
fil-maliil:J ma-yikmal-f [prov] ,,"' nobody is perfect. 
2 milaal:J Ipl nl chicks. la yirabbi l-milaal:J filla l-milaal:J 
[ve"ndor's cry] only nice people keep chicks . 
..,..)\.. mallaal:Ja In pi -aall salt cellar. 
elL. maalil:J ladj *1 salty. (fil-bal:Jr) iI-maalil:J the sea. 
II kalaam maalil:J coarse language. -eaflj-u maalil:J [mus] 
he plays (on a stringed instrument) slightly out of tune 
(by pressing the strings inaccurately). 
eI.l.J" mawaalil:J f Ipl nl citrus fruit(s). 
& mallal:J Ivtl I to salt. - Ivi/2 to become salty. 3 to 
lose strength or effectiveness (of batteries, solutions 
et~.). -vn tamliil:J; avalpva mimallal:J. 
cUI fitmallal:J Ivil to be salted. - iva mitmallal:J. 
t J r 
& malax (u) Ivtl 18 to uproot. Ib to dislocate. kilf-i 
mamluux my shoulder is dislocated. 2 to put forth 
(leaves etc.). fil-euud bi-yumlux if-furraab the stem 
puts out inflorescences. - Ivil 3 to sprout, burgeon. 
-vn malx. malaxaan; ava maalix; pva mamluux. 
;;.;..l. malxa Ipl -aall instance noun of malx. 
Ci'l filma/ax Ivil 18 to be uprooted. Ib to be dislo-
cated.2 to be caused to sprout (of leaves etc.). - avaliva 
mitmilix. 
& mallax Ivtl to uproot successively. bi-nmallax ir-
ruzz we pull up the rice plants (one byone). -vn tamliix; 
avalpva mimallax. 
tJ t J r 
r 
muluxlux: ya muluxiyyil iI-muluxlux cry of the 
muluxiyya vendor. 
loS t J r 
4 
muluxiyya <Gr molokhe> Icoll nl Jew's mallow 
(Corchorus olitorius). 
IIoSJJr 
~))\.. malarya <prob It> Inl malaria. 
831 
..,.. J r 
..,.J.. malas I (i) Ivtl [agric] to draw a bundle or ball of 
mud and straw through (an irrigation ditch) to smooth 
and seal the sides against seepage. -vn mals. malasaan, 
miliis, milaasa; ava maalis; pva mamluus. 
..,.J.. malas 2 Inl I Austrian crepe (fabric). 2 wrap, 
milaaya of Austrian crepe (worn by women) . 
..,.J.. milis ladj *1 sly, sneaky. raagil milis a slippery 
character. 
..,.J..i famlas ladj, fern malsa, pi mulsl smooth. 
bu~tuljaan famlas smooth-skinned oranges. 
..,..)\.. mallaas Inl muddy ball of straw drawn through 
an irrigation ditch to smooth and seal the sides against 
seepage. 
~ 
I fitmalas Ivil passive of malas I. - iva mitmilis. 
..,.J.. mallis Ivil I to make a stroking motion. mallis 
eala daljn-u he stroked his beard. II law mallis ealeek 
if-feex fJa-ttiib if the sheikh blessed you (with his hand) 
you would recover. 2 to engage in mollycoddling. -vn 
tamliis; ava mimallis. 
..,....LeI filmallis Ivil (impersonal) passive of mallis. 
fiI-waad da tuul ma b-yitmallis ealee mifnaafie as long 
as the boy is mollycoddled he'll never make the grade. 
II fin-naas ilmallisit bii the people got him to bless th~m 
(with his hand). - iva mitmallis. 
oJ'" J r 
...,..J.. mala~ (u) I Ivtl to wrench out. fJ-amlu~ widaan-
ak I'll pull off your ears! 2 Ivil to slip away, escape. 
mala~ minhum wi-hirib he escaped from them and got 
away. -.vn ma/~, mala~.an; ava maali~; pVII mamluu~. 
~I filmala,~ Ivil to be wrenched out. - iva milmili~. 
...,..J.. mall~ Ivt/ to pull off or away. -vn tamlii~; aval 
pv~ mimall~. 
..,..u I fitmalla~ Ivil to be pulled or pull oneself off or 
away. -ava/iva mitmall~. 
l.b J r 
.J..iL. malta Iprop nl Malta.llbi-yiddan fi-malta [prov] 
(he's calling to prayer in Malta) "" he is flogging a dead 
horse. - baed; xaraab malta"" (closing the stable door) 
after the horse has bolted. 
)alL. malti I/adj *1 Maltese. IIl:Jamaam malti large 
type of pigeon raised for food. - (diik) malti a cock with 
a long featherless neck. -fJumma maltiyya undulant 
fever. 2 In *1 a Maltese. 3 In, no pll the Maltese 
language. 
2.b J r 
.la.L. malat (u) Ivtl I to strip off (clothes, feathers, skin 

etc.). mala{t' ljduum-i w-na((eet fil-baljr' waraa I threw 
off all my clothes and jumped in the sea after him. 2 to 
strip bare. malatit dirac-ha mil-cagiin she scraped her 
arms clean of dough. - Ivi/3 to become skinless. wijf-i 
mala{ mij-jams my face peeled from expo~ure to the 
sun. 4 to come off (of skin). gild-i mala{ my skin peeled. 
-vn mal{, mala{aan; ava maali{; pva mamluu{. 
.la.L. mal{ ladj invarl bare, naked. ciryaan (zal{') mal{ 
stark naked. IIma-tgib-j is-sarg - lj-arkab mal{ don't 
bring the saddle, I'll ride bareback. 
.w.cl ritmala{ Ivil I to be stripped off. 2 to be stripped 
bare. - iva mitmili{. 
JJ.. malla{ Ivtl to strip, lay bare. {i1cu calee I-ljaramiyya 
malla{Uu min kull illi calee the robbers attacked him 
and stripped him of all he had. -vn tamlii{; ava/pva 
mimalla{. 
JaUI ritmalla{ Ivil to be stripped, be laid bare. -iva 
mitmalla{. 
3J,Jr see JJ,r:maali{ 
.JtJr see also .Jt J 
.;,..1.. malcan Ivtl to cause to be rascally. dalac 
rumm-ak fiik huwwa /Ii malcan-ak it is your mother's 
spoiling you that's made you so naughty. -vn malcana; 
ava/pva mimalcan. 
.;,-iC1 ritmalcan Ivil to be or become rascally. 
ritmalcan min ~ul(r-u he's been up to. no good since he 
was small. -ava mitmalcan. 
J J r 
ill.. malaqa I InI open space, waste land (used, e.g., 
for games etc.). 2/adj invarl spacious. beet malaqa a 
very large house. 
.!l J r 
.ill... malak J, milik (i, u) Ivtl I to possess. yimlik beet he 
owns a house. II rimlik waqt-ak get a move on (so that 
you will still have time, i.e. be on time). 2 to get a grip 
on. law milikt-u lj-addii-Iu ljittit calqa if I get my hands 
on him, some beating I'll give him! rimlik rac~aab-ak 
steady yourself! min i1-man~ar ma-mlikt'-f nafs-i the 
sight made me lose all self-possession. 3 Ipreved" to be 
able to. min iz-zaljma ma-milikt'-j ralju{{' riid-i f-geeb-i 
it was so crowded I couldn't get my hand into my pock-
et. -vn milk, mulk; ava maalik; pva mamluuk. 
.ill... milk In pI ramlaakl I private property. ril-lj~aan 
da milk-i I own this horse. ~aaljib milk property owner. 
~aaljib ii-milk tire landlord. raagil milk' nafs-u a man 
who is his own master. 2 ramlaak Ipl nllands, landed 
832 
property. tf.ariibit ramlaak property tax. 
.ill... mulk Inl I reign, kingship. wi-bacdeenfaruuq xad 
i1-mulk' baed abuu then Farouk ascended the throne 
after his father. 2 ril-mulk 28 the universe. xalli I-mulk' 
lil-maalik = leave things be! II~aaljib i1-mulk God. 
2b the Heavens, one of the five parts of tlie Sufi 
cosmos. 3 a thing sui generis, a world unto itself. 
rir-ragil-da mulk that man lives in a world of his own . 
.ill\.. maalik In pI mullaakl proprietor, owner. II maalik 
i1-mulk Sovereign of the universe (epithet of God). 
~UI ril-malki: ril-mazhab i1-malki one of the four 
schools of Muslim jurisprudence (named after Malik b. 
Anas) . 
.!l.# mamluuk In pI mamaliikl white male slave, 
mameluke. 
.;.# mamluuki ladjl mameluke. 
~ 
milkiyya Inl ownership. 
.ill... malak 2 = malaak. 
~ 
malaka In pI -aatl knack, aptitude. malakit il-ljif; 
the ability to learn by heart. 
. 
.ill... malik In pI miluuk, muluukl king. Ilmalik walla 
ktaaba heads or tails? 
~ 
malika In pI -aatl queen . 
.?J.. malaki ladjl royal, regal. ni~aam malaki monar-
chical system.lIlaabis malaki wearing plain clothes, out 
of uniform. 
.;).. muluuki or miluuki ladj invarl marvellous, mag-
nificent. ril-ljafla kaanit miluuki it was a marvellous 
party. IIcinab miluuki variety of grape having a tough 
skin of a mottled reddish-green colour . 
.!.l)l... malaak In pI malaykal angel. riza ljatf.arit il-
malayka zahabit ij-jaya{iin [pro v] when angels enter 
devils leave (and vice versa).lImalaykit-u xufaaf= he 
has a cheerful disposition. -malaykit-u haf/it I have a 
feeling he's about to arrive. -bi-yaakul ruzz' maca 1-
malayka = he's fast asleep . 
.;'-:A. mallaaki ladj invarl privately-owned. carabiyya 
mallaaki a private car. 
~ 
mamlaka In pI mamaalikl kingdom. 
..::.. fiJ.. malakoot, malakuut Inl I God's creation. 
faakir rinnak lja-tcaddil il-malakoot do you think you 
can set the whole world to rights? Ilmalakuut allaah 
[Chr] the Kingdom of God. -hina malakoot every-
thing's topsy-turvy here, it's a madhouse. -cayfa 
f-malakoot taani she lives in a dream world. 2 ri/-
malakuut the seven Paradises, one of the five parts of 
the Sufi cosmos. 
~I ritmalak Ivil passive of malak J. - iva mitmilik. 
.ill... mallik Ivtl 1810 give (s.o.) possession of. 
ril-ljukuuma mallikit kull' fallaalj xamas fadadiin the 

government gave every peasant possession of five fed-
a. mulla 2 In pI mulal, mullaatl that part of a bed on 
dans. Ib to give ownership of. fiI-flukuuma mallikit 
which the mattress rests, mattress base. 
xamas fadadiin Ii-kull i fallaafl the government gave five 
feddans to every peasant. 2 to cause (s.o.) to gain the 
upper hand. ma-tmallikuujminnak don't let him get a 
hold on you! -vn tamliik; ava mimallik. 
4li tamliik Inl ownership. Ilfat;t;a tamliik a privately 
owned apartment (as opposed to one for which rent is 
paid). 
~I fitmallik 1 Ivtl to be given possession of. - Ivil 
2 to be given in ownership. fil- farft b-titmallik 1iI-
fallafliin the land is given to the peasants to own. 3 to 
gain supremacy. fil-yat/ab itmallik minnu anger got the ") 
better of him. -vn tamallukT; ava/pva mitmallik . 
.ill::..1 fimtalak Ivtl to possess, own. fumm-i timtilik 
xamas fadadiin my mother owns five feddans: -vn 
fimtilaak; ava mimtilik; pva mumtalak. 
.;:.\SJ;.( mumtalakaat Ipl nl possessions. 
.:, l.!l J r 
.:,\S:.l... malakaan lcoll nI slots into which the slats of a 
shutter are fitted. filmil iI-t;aayim da malakaan make 
that upright slotted (to hold slats). warat; malakaan 
slats (of a shutter). 
I) J r 
J.. mall (i) 1 Ivil to become bored. fit-tamsiliyya 
xallit-ni famill the play bored me. 2 Ivtl to find boring. 
malleet ir-rutiin I found the routine boring. -vn malal, 
malalaan; ava maalil; pva mamluul. 
JL. malallnl boredom. 
. 
J.l mumill ladj *1 boring. 
Jil fitmall Ivil 1 to be found boring. 2 (impersonal) 
passive of mall 1. kalaam-u ma-yitmallij minnu his 
conversation is not boring. -iva mitmall. 
1 J J 
. 
r 
4l.. milia, mulla I J In pI milall 1 religion. II raagil 
rna-Iuuj milia a ruthless man. 2 religious community. 
j.. millil ladjl pertaining to a religious community. 
maglis milli {ChrJ council of laymen which governs 
internal, financial and administrative affairs of the 
church. 
3.< J J r ) 
4l.. malla I Inl warmth in an oven away from, or after 
~he extinguishing of, the fire. 
J". mull <Fr b~mol> Inl {musJ flat. mw i mull quar-
ter tone flat. -also bimull. 
~ J J r 
J.. milli2 <Fr millimetre> Inl millimetre. llbil-milli 
precisely, as in fI-at;abl-ak is-saala tisla bil-milli I'll 
meet you at nine o'Clock on the dot. 
r~ J Jr 
~ 
malliim (also malliin J) <Fr millieme> In 
pI malaliim, malaliinl one tenth of a piastre, millime. 
r J r see r loS J J r : malliim 
JrJr 
~ 
malmat; Ivt/ to splash, slop. malmat; mayya ktiir 
wi-huwwa b-yiysil fidee he splashed a lot of water 
around while washing his hands. - vn malmat;a; ava/pva 
mimalmat; . 
..;..LeI fitmalmat; Ivil to be splashed, be slopped. -iva 
mitmalmat; . 
JrJr 
J...1. malmil Ivtl to cause to become restless or fidgety. 
-vn malmala; ava mimalmil. 
j.1C1 fitmalmil Ivil to become or be made restless or 
fidgety. -ava/iva mitmalmil. 
I':'Jr see .:,1 Jr:malaana 
1 .:, J r see r loS J J r : malliin 
I.J J r 
.;... malwa I In pI -aat, malaawil dry measure equiva-
lent to one fourth of a keela (q.v.). 
1.J J r see 1 loS J r : malw, malwa 2 
IIoSJr 
')I... mala 2 (a) Ivt/ 1 to fill. fimla I-t;u/la mayya fill the 
pitcher with water. mala I-xanaathe filled in the blanks. 
II fana raagil ii-beet wi-Iaazim famla markaz-i I'm the 
man of the house and I must live up to my position. 
raagil malwi hduum-u a respected man. -mala I-leen 
(1) to be worthwhile, as in fiza kunta laayiz tilmil 
flaaga xallii-ha timla I-leen if you want to do something, 
let it be worthwhile. (2) to satisfy, as in huwwa-na mif 
maali leen-ak walla feeh "'" aren't I good enough for 
you, or what? fil-bani faadam ma-yimlaajleen-u filla 

t-turaab [prav] "'" only the grave can put an end to man's 
greed. 2 to restring (e.g., a sieve). fis-silk' ya-lli timli 
I-manxul [vendor's cry] (here is) mesh, you who would 
restring your sieve! 3 to wind (a watch or clock). 4 to 
cut (a gramophone record). l:Ja-yimla fus(uwaana he 
will cut a disc. -vn maly, malw, malayaan; ava maali; 
pva mamli. 
j,. malw Inl quantity sufficient for one filling. malw' 
kubbaaya a glassful. 
oj,. malwa 2 
Ipl 
-aatl instance noun of malw. 
fil-mac/.rab laayiz malwa gdiida the racket needs 
re-stringing. 
;y.. malya = malwa. 
.J.. mali ladj *1 comfortably-off, wealthy. 
.:,L,1.. malyaan ladj */1 full. fif-Jaaril malyaan naas the 
street is full of people. II qalb-i malyaan minnu I've had 
enough of him. -yic/.rab fil-malyaan he shoots to kill. 
- kalaam fil-malyaan meaningful words. 2 plump. 
3 rich, wealthy. 
)t. malla 2 In pi mallayiinl I water carrier who fills re-
ceptacles with water for householders without a mains 
supply or pump. 2 [rur] mosque employee whose job it 
is to pump-fill the water-tank of the mosque. 
~)I.. milaaya In pi -aat, mily, miilll bedsheet. milaayit 
lil:Jaaf loose covering for a quilt. 2 (also milaaya laft) 
black wrap worn by women in public (see PI.F, 17). 
II fa raJ il-milaaya Ii- to abuse publicly and vulgarly, as in 
fiskut la-tifrif-Iak il-milaaya keep quiet or she will give 
you a slanging! 
J.C I fitmala Ivil passive of mala 2. - iva mitmili. 
j.. malla I Ivtl [agric] to irrigate by flooding. bi-nmalli 
1- farc/.' tamliyya xafiifa muddit fusbuleen we flood the 
ground lightly for two weeks. - vn tamliyya; ava 
mimalli. 
jil fitmalla' Ivil to be irrigated by flooding. - iva 
mitmalli. 
J:;; I fin tala Ivil I to become full. 2 to be filled. 
fil-kubbaaya ntalit li-l:Jabbit len-ha the glass has been 
filled to the brim. - avaliva mllltili. 
1 ~ J r 
.)1..1 fimla, fimlaafT In pi famaalil dIctation. 
j.. malla 4 Ivtl to dictate (to). mallii-Iu d-dars dictate 
the lesson to him. mallii-ni dictate tome! -vn tamliyya; 
ava mimalli. 
jil fitmalla 2 /vil to be dictated. -iva mitmalli. 
J ~ J r see I J r : mala' 
- ~~ J r 
.,,;.~ milyuneer <prob Fr> In pi -aatl millionaire. 
834 
~.J~Jr 
.:,~ milyoon, malyuun <Fr> I Inurn pi malayiinl 
million. 2 fil-milyoon ladj invarl the millionth. 
rr 
r-"' mam (also mammah) <poss Copt> [children] I Inl 
food. 2 linterjl eat! -also famm, hamm. 
-.;Yrr 
~.r. mambarii(a, mambaree(a <perh It tamburetto> 
In pi mambaraayi(1 porthole. 
-~Yrr 
...r.# mambanoos <perh T bomblres from It> Inl 
[naut] bowsprit. 
- jyu 
~j""'" mambuzya Icoll nl Burdekin plum(s). 
I.r r r 
\.( mimma T Iconjl I a thing or fact which. fahmalu 
f-tanfiiz il-marl:Jala 1- fuula wlf-tallya mimma fadda 
I-ta fxiir il-marl:Jala t-talta they were negligent at the first 
and second stages, which led to the delaying of the 
third. 2 among the things or facts which. duxul-hum 
fi-l:Jugrit it-taftiif mlmma ylflaanc/. mala figrafaat il-
famn it was contrary to security regulations for them to 
enter the inspection chamber. II mlmma lazza wa-(aab T 
"'" the choicest of food. 
• r r r see r r : mammah 
I. I.Jr 
.r mill' loften shortened before def art to mi-; w pron 
suff minni, minnak, mlllnik, millllU, minhalminnaha, 
minnalmlllnina, minkulminnuku, minhumlmlllnuhumi 
preposition indicating la pomt of origin or departure, 
tangible or intangible. ga mll-balad he came from the 
village. dafal talal/in gllleeh mill geeb-u he paid thirty 
pounds out of his own pocket. ~al:Jl:Jaa-lli min lizz' 
noom-i he woke me from deep sleep. fi(lal min landak 
come out from where you are! flllzil min las-sill,m 
come down off the ladder! bi-yaaxud min bariiza w-
(aalil he charges (anything) from ten piastres upwards. 
II fismal ya fandi minnak lu listen. all of you (i.e. from 
first to last)! - bi-yitgawwiw minhumfilhum they marry 
within the family. - la mlllnu wala kfaayitJarr-u not only 
does he make no helpful contributions, he does not 
even spare us his eVIl-doing. - wiqil min (uul-u he fell 
down flat. Ib passage through. talaala min hina mif 

min hinaak come through here, not through there! 
rif1ams i ma-bi-tladdii-j minha sunlight does not pass 
through it. 2a relation between past and present time. 
min talatiin sana thirty years ago. kunt i hina min 
zamaan I was here a long time ago. rawwalJ min nU§~i 
saala he went home half an hour ago. 2b duration from 
a point in past time up to the present. min talatiin sana 
for thirty years. 'lana hina mill zamaan I've been here 
for a long time. min ~uvr-u since his childhood. 
bi-yiftaval muhandis min ljiimit mudda he's been work-
ing as an engineer for some time. 2c incipience. bi-yiigi 
min ~abaalJit rabb-i-na he comes first thing in the morn-
ing. bi-yi~lJa mil-radaan he gets up at dawn. 3 cause or 
reason. maat min iI-lacaj he died of thirst. lamalt i da 
min vulb-i I did that out offrustration. Zillu minnu they 
were upset with him. 4 comparative relationship. hiyya 
I-burtuqaana rakbar min iI-ba{{iixa is an orange bigger 
than a water-melon? raktar min nU§~ i saala more than 
half an hour. 5 partitive relationship. lJagar garaniit 
minnu ralJmar wi-minnu !,iswid there is red granite and 
black. min (q.imn i) rasbaab iI-lJadsa among the reasons 
for the accident. ladad kibiir min banaat iI- rayyaam di 
a great number of today's girls. II rin-nahar-da 
sabaltaajar minnu today is the seven teeth of the 
month. -minnu bawwaab wi-minnujayyaal he is both 
doorman and porter. -minnu Iii all in one, as in siriir 
wi-kanaba minnu Iii a bed and a sofa all in one. - ... 
wa-llazi minnu ... and what not, as in bald it-talJiyyaat 
wa-llazi 
minnu 
after greetings 
and 
so 
forth. 
6 derivational relationship. gizam min gild iI-vazaal 
gazelle-skin shoes. lamal mil-lJabba qubba == he made 
a mountain out of a molehill. 7 reference, regard or 
consideration. lJaasib mif1ams beware of the sun! 
malJruus mil-leen protected from the evil eye. xalli 
baal-ak mil-rU§uul behave properly! leen-ak mil-baab 
keep your eye on the door! widn-ak mi-I/i bi-yquluu 
lend an ear to what they say. 8 lack of control over a 
circumstance. riI-lJu§aan ramalJ minnu the horse bolted 
with him. riI-la~/uura maatit minni the bird died on me. 
v".:.. mineen I linterrog advl whence? humma mneen 
where are they from? lJa-niftiri xuqar-na mneell where 
shall we buy our vegetables from? II 'lana lJ-alaqii-ha 
mneen walla mneen == I've got troubles on every hand. 
-lJineen wi-mneen see lJineen 2 • 
Z':"r 
V' min 2 Irel pronl he who, whoever. min qaddim 
is-sabt i yilqa l-lJadd == the good you sow today you reap 
tomorrow. 
835 
.;IY':"r 
.)~ • .)\.,.t mimbaar <T mumbar> Icoll n, pi manabiirl 
sausage(s) made of the lower end of intestines stuffed 
with rice and spices. 
cl'::"':"r 
~l:;;.,.. muntaaj <Fr> Inl montage. 
.; ..s'::" .:" I' 
~.,.. muntiir, mllnteer <Fr monteur> In pi -aatl (ein) 
editor, cutter. 
c':"r 
~ 
manga I Icoll nl mango(es). 
~~ mangaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a mango. 
..s.; C.:" I' 
(~ mangariyya <prob Engl slang mungaree> Inl 
(joe slang) food. 
I ( J C.:" 1') 
~ 
mangal <perh Copt> In pi manaagill type of 
large sickle. 
~ 
mangala <Gr mengele> In pi manaagill (meeh) 
bench vice. 
Z J C.:" I' see J..s C .:" • : mangaliyya 
• C.:" I' 
~ 
mangih Ivtl to set (s.o. or s.th.) up well, provide 
(s.o. or s.th.) with elegance and luxury. walad !'aaxir 
mangaha a swank kid. - vn mangaha; ava mimangih. 
~I ritmangih 
Ivil 
passive 
of 
mangih. 
-iva 
mitmangih. 
..s C.:" r 
~ 
mangi <prob Engl slang mungy> Inl (slang) 
food. 
~ 
yimangi Ivil he digs into the grub, he eats. 
c:.':"r 
& manalJ (a) Ivtl to grant. - vn manlJ; ava maanilJ; pva 
mamnuu!J. 
~ 
minlJa 
In 
pi -aat, 
minalJI 
grant, 
award, 
scholarship. 
e'l ritmanalJ Ivil to be granted. -iva mitminilJ. 
t.:" r see t.J':": manaax 

- Jt';'r 
l.I,,;.w manaxulya <Gr melankholia> Ini disturbance 
of the mind. 
< J ~.;, r ) 
J..w mandallnl {magic} contemplation of the surface 
of a reflecting liquid such as ink or oil (for the purpose 
of divination). t/.arab (or lamal or fatal:J) mandai to 
divine by this means. ~aal:Jib mandai one who practises 
this type of divination. 
411..w mindaala In pi -aatl tamping-iron. 
- J ~.;, r 
.r-!J..w manduliin <Fr mandoline> Ini I una corda 
pedal (piano). 1 mandoline. 
J~ ~';'r 
J...w mandiilln pi manadiilll kerchief. mandiil (raas) 
triangular handk~rchief (see PI.F, 9). mandiil (fiid) 
handkerchief.la fatty tissue covering the underbelly of 
an animal (e.g., sheep, cattle). lb membranous cover-
ing of the intestine. 
<v:.';'r) 
..;.:... manf <Fr manche> In pi -aatl sleeve. II (bal:Jr) 
iI-manJ the English Channel. 
..;..; J" munJlnl {text} texturized filament. 
.:: ~ v:. .;, r 
..:.,....;\.. manfitt <Fr mancllette> In pi -aatl ba mer 
headline (in a newspaper). 
- J j, .;, r see - J j, .;, ~ : ma'}(aloon 
.J.l=o';'r see also .J.l=o.;, 
0)..:.. man;ara I 
Ivnl 
showing-off, 
affecting 
superiority. 
~I fitman;ar Ivii I to show off, swank. 1 to act in a 
s~perior manner. lammaal yitman;ar lala zumalaat-u 
leeh - huwwa fal:Jsan minhum why is he lording it over 
his friends? is he any better than they? -ava mitman;ar. 
t';'r 
&" manal (a) Ivt/I to forbid. manal-ha mil-xuruug he 
forbade her to go out. mamnuul it-tadxiin no smoking. 
1 to prevent. fil-Iaft' b-yimnal ir-ru(uuba wrapping 
keeps out the moisture. Ill:Jubuub manl iI-l:Jaml birth 
control pills. -vn manl, manalaan; ava maanil; pva 
mamnuul· 
836 
11 manal lan to keep (s.th.) away from (s.o. ors.th.).ya 
fawliyyit allaah timnalu lannu I-laks saints of God, 
protect him from the work of bad spirits! -manlan Ii in 
order to avoid. fal:Jsan nirayyar iI-mawt/.uu[ manlan 
liz-zalal it is better to change the subject in order to 
avoid annoyance. 
~\.. maanil In pi mawaanill obstacle, impediment. 
IImaani[ ~ada rust preventer. -ma-fii{ maanil that's 
O.K., there's no objection, as in ma-fii{maanil yikuun 
ir-raagil mibar(al-u it's entirely possible that the man is 
bribing him. -landak maanil do you have any objec-
tion? -ma-landii{maanil I've no objection, it's O.K. 
by me. -sibaat; iI-mawaanil {sport} obstacle race. 
~l:.. manaala Ini I immunity (from a disease) . 
1 impermeability. fi(-(ibaala bil-manaala {text} a batik 
type of printing. 
t-'I fitmanac Ivii I to be forbidden. 1 to be prevented. 
- iva mitminil. 
~I fimtanal Ivil to abstain, refuse to have anything 
to do (with s.th.). wi-hiyya layyaana b-timtinil lan 
i/- fakl she refuses to eat when she's sick. -vn 
fimtinaal T; ava mimtinil. 
-~""';'r 
oJ.J'I.&,.;\.. manifatuura <T manifatura from It> Ini 
{obsol} I/coll nl hand-woven fabric(s). llpl -aatl 
2a factory or workshop producing hand-woven goods . 
lb fabrics department (in a store) . 
-~""';'r 
~ 
manaflStu <It manifesto> In pi -haatl bus con-
ductor's ticket control sheet. 
.J J .... .;, r 
')I.A;\.. manafilla <It manovella> In pi -aatl crank . 
.;, I J.I.;, r 
.:,IS:..;\.. manikaan <Fr> In pi -aatl I fashion model. 
1 mannequin (dummy). 
- [ J .;, r see also [.J J .;, r 
~};.. .~,J,;.-. munulugist <Fr monologuiste> 
In pi -aatl entertainer who sings humorous munulogaat 
(q.v.), which he dramatizes with comic gestures and 
intersperses with jokes. 
.J J.;, r 
~\.. manilla Iprop nI Manila. II warat; manilla manila 
paper. -l:Jabl' manilla Manila hemp rope. 

~JJiJr 
J..:.. manilli Inl support of a chair arm. 
~.J J iJ r see also - ~ J iJ r 
[.),;... munuloog <Fr monologue> In pI -aatl type of 
popular entertainment consisting of a solo song of inde-
terminate length and of varied themes characterized by 
a refrain of one or two lines which is repeated after each 
section. 
jo.:JriJr 
J....;L. manumitr <Fr manometre> In pI -aatl press-
ure meter, pressure gauge. 
l iJiJr 
;. mann I (i) Ivil I to disburse, bestow in a conde-
scending fashion. 2 to enumerate favours one has done 
(for s.o.). riI-mann i yifsid i1-malruufreminding some-
one of the assistance you have afforded him spoils the 
good deed itself. -vn mann; ava maanin; pya 
mamnuun. 
<J# mamnuun ladj *1 grateful, obliged. 
~ # 
mamnuniyya 
Inl 
gratefulness. 
II bi-kull i 
mamnuniyya with pleasure, as in mumkin tisallif-ni 
ktaab-ak. - bi-kulli mamnuniyya 'Could you lend me 
your book?' 'With pleasure.' 
':""1 fimtann Ivi/l to enumerate favours one has done 
(for s.o.). 2 to express one's gratitude for favours done. 
fana mumtann i liik I am grateful to you. -vn 
fimtinaan; ava mumtann. 
ZiJiJr 
;. mann 2 Icoll n! honeydew-producing species of 
aphis that attacks plants. 
j .J iJ r see 3 j.J iJ : munawra, minawra 
..;. IS J <J r see ";.J iJ : manawiiJi 
IS iJ r 
Ii" many, mani In! semen. 
~ munya In pI munal desire, wish. munyit i1-t;alb 
heart's desire. muna [een-i my greatest desire. yoom 
i1-muna greatly-desired day. 
~i fumniya, fumniyya In pI famaanil wish. 
j.. manna Ivtl to raise hopes in (s.o.). mannaa-ni 
ygawwiz-ni bint-u he raised my hopes that he would 
marry his daughter to me. Ilma-luu{ [ala rabb-i-na 
tamniyya (he has no wish to ask of God) ... he has 
837 
everything that anyone could wish for. -vn tamniyya; 
ava mimanni. 
~I fitmanna Ivil to wish. fatmanna I-fartt tin/a'i'ii 
w-tibla[-ni would that the earth would split and swallow 
me up! II fana b-atmanna tfufri min tfawafr-ak ... 
I would give anything to serve you. - ava mitmanni. 
~ }amanna T = fitmanna. -vn tamanni. 
.::.~ tamanniyyaat Ipl n! wishes. tamanniyyaat-i {-
{ayyiba my best wishes. 
~ 
1 fistimanna J Ivtl to long for, yearn for. 
II fil-waafJid bi-yistimannaa-k ir-ritfa tirtfa one is eager 
to satisfy your slightest wish. -ava mistimanni. 
";t.SiJr 
..;.,;.. minee/ <Fr manege> In pI -aatl ring (e.g., circus 
ring, ring for horse training). 
JJ t.S iJ r see also JJ t.S iJ 
~I fitmanyik Ivil {coarse} to waste time, mess about, 
fuck around. -vn manyaka; ava mitmanyik. 
liJt.SiJr 
~ 
mineen 2 /nl biscuit made of flour,. clarified butter 
and salt, flavoured wi~h sesame, fennel etc., and shaped 
into thin rectangles. - also bineen. 
Hr 
..If.oo mahd In pI muhuudl cradle. 
~ mahhid Ivtl to prepare, set in order, pave (e.g., a 
way for s.o.). mahhiduu-/ak i{-larii'i wi-[aleek i1-baa'ii 
they have prepared the way for you and the rest is up to 
you. - vn tamhiid; ava/pya mimahhid. 
~ 
tamhiid Inl I preface (of a book). 2 {mus} un-
• metred musical introduction. 2 period of time between 
the raising of the conductor's baton and the beginning 
of a musical selection. 
~I fitmahhid Ivil passive of mahhid. -iva mitmahhid. 
I j • r 
-* mahr In pI muhuurl money paid by a groom's fami-
ly to the bride's as a cO'!tribution to the gihaaz (q.v.). 
Z j • r 
-* muhr In pI muhuur, muhura/l colt. 2 {gym} small 
vaulting horse or buck. 
Ok muhra In pI -aatl filly. 

3 JOr 
.; 4-- mahaara In pi -aatl skill. 
.;A>1.. maahir ladj * and pi maharal skilled. 
.:,IJo r 
,);"...1.. mahuraan Inl [mus] name given to the note F 
(on the fifth line of the staff). 
-[.Jor 
.:,~ -*" mahragaan <P mihrgan> In pi -aatl parade, 
festival. carnival. 
J 0 r 
'*' mahaq (u) Ivtl [abus] to cause to smirk. finta 
mamhuuq leeh - ma-Juft'-f illi l:Ja~al what the hell are 
you so happy about. didn't you see what happened? -vn 
mahaqaan, mahq; ava maahlq; pva mamhuuq. 
:u..... mahqa linst n, pi -aatl a smirk. 
,,*,1 fitmahaq Ivil to smirk. -ava mitmlhiq. 
.!.I 0 r 
4 
mahak (u) Ivtl to mash. puree (vegetables etc.). 
IImara mamhuuka a loose woman. -vn mahk; ava 
maahlk; pva mamhuuk. 
~I fltmahak Ivil passive of mahak. -iva mitmihik. 
~I finmahak = fitmahak. - iva minmihik. 
""or 
J+.. mahl, mihllnl respite, delay. fll-filuus lala l-mah{ 
the money can wait. IIlala mahl- without haste, as in 
bi-,Vlmfi lala mahl-u he goes at his own pace, bi-yi{lal 
,s-sill,m lala mahl-u {jawi he takes ages to climb the 
stairs, lala (faqall' min) mahl-ak take your time! take 
all the time you want! 
.-4- muhla In pi -aat, muhal! respite, delay. I:J-addii-k 
faax/r muhla lid-dafl I'll give you a last delay on the 
payment. 
J+. mahhil/vtl to give (s.o.) extra time, give respite 
to. mahhil-Ilifwayya w-fana fasaddid illi lalayya give 
me a little time and I'll pay my debt. -vn tamhiil; 
ava/pva mimahhil. 
J+tl fitmahhillvi/l to give (extra) time (to s.o.), grant 
a respite (to s.o.). fana tmahhill" lalee ktiir I've given 
him plenty of time. 2 to be given extra time, be granted 
a respite. - ava/iva mitmahhil. 
J+..i famhallvtl to allow (s.o.) time, give respite to. 
fimhil-ni give me time. II (rabb-i-na) yimhil wa-la 
yuhmil [pro!'] "" God may give respite but He will 
eventually judge. - vn fimhaal; ava mimhil. 
838 
J+..;-I fistamhill/vtl to give (s.o.) extra time, give 
respite to (s.o.). fistamhilt-u ktiir I've given him plenty 
of time. 2! Ivil to delay. tarry. mistamhil fi-fuyl-u 
zyaada lan il-luzuum he takes too much time over his 
work. II gal-lu m~iiba ma-stamhil-J a disaster befell him 
and (after that) he didn't last for long. -ava mistamhil. 
y J J • r see 2 y J 0 : mahallabiyya 
I r 0 r 
I.+- mahma Iconjl no matter how much. fii naas 
bi-lidl:Jak mahma kaanit in-nukta bayxa there are 
people who laugh no matter how stale the joke. mahma 
blidna da-l:Jna wlaad-ik no matter how far we are from 
you we are your children. 
j r 0 r see also j r 0 
jo+o mahmiz Ivtl to urge on, stimulate, encourage. 
mahmiz ibn-ak jiwayya w-xallii yitja{{ar lafaan yingal:J 
push your son a bit and get him to put some effort into 
his work so that he'll pass (the exam). -vn mahmaza; 
ava/pva mimahmiz. 
.;4 mihmaaz In pi mahamiizl spur. 
jo+Cl fitmahmiz Ivil I to be urged on, be stimulated, 
be encouraged. 2 to arouse oneself to greater efforts. 
fil-l:Jamdu li-llaah Itmahmiz fiwayya mill yoom ma 
kallimt-u since the day I talked to him he's pulled his 
socks up, thank God. - ava/iva mitmahmiz. 
.1. r or 
.la....., mahma{ I Ivtl to stretch out of shapl:. riglee-k 
ik-kibiira mahma(il if-faraab your big feet have pulled 
the socks out of shape. 2 Ivil to become stretched out of 
shape. riI-l:Jibaal ik-kiuaan bi-Imahma{ bald' ma lilball 
flax ropes stretch after being wetted. -vn mahma{a; 
ava/pva mimahma{. 
~I fitmahma{ Ivil to be or become stretched out of 
shape. - ava/iva mitmahma{. 
.:, 0 r 
~ 
mihna In pi mihanl profession. kull' waal:Jid wi-lu 
mihna (every person has his own trade) "" it is natural 
for a person not to know much about other people's 
skills. 
~ 
mihani ladj *1 professional. ril-mihaniyyiin pro-
fessionals. ({aabil) damya mihaniyya a duty stamp used 
on official documents concerning particular professions 
(e.g., mihan tallimiyya for the Ministry of Education, 
mihan (ibbiyya for the Ministry of Health). 

~I I'imtahan Ivtl to run down, belittle. leeh timtihin 
karaamit nafs-ak biflakl-i-da why compromise your 
good name in this manner? -vn I'imtihaan; ava 
mimtihin. 
'oS 0 ~ 
~ 
muhya In pi -aay/large two-handled flexible bas-
ket woven from palm leaves (fishermen's jargon). 
~ 
oS 0 ~ see also ~ 
oS 0 
~ 
mahya~ Ivil to have a good time, indulge 
oneself. -vn mah ya~a; ava mimah ya~. 
..,.,4-
mihyaa~ ladj pi mahayii~1 whimsical, capri-
cious. 
,-",",*,1 
I'itmahya~ = mahy~. - ava mitmahya~. 
oSoSO~ 
~L. mahiyya <T milhiye> In pi -aat, mahaayal 
monthly salary. 
~.J ~ 
.::..L. maat (u) Ivi/l to die. maatitfil-l:Jarb she died in the 
war. miin mat-Iak who of your family has died? Iida 
baxiil yimuut [ala c;irfhe's so stingy he'd give his life for 
a piastre. -maat fi-gild-u he was scared to death. - I'iid-i 
maatit [al-c;alam my hand was gripping the pen so 
tightly that now I cannot open it. 2 to be checkmated 
(of a king in ches~. -vn moot. 
11 yimuut fi- to be crazy about, as in b-amuut fiiki I'm 
crazy about you. bi-ymuut fil-carabiyyaat he's wild ab-
out cars. -maat can (1) to die leaving. maat can talatiin 
faddaan he died leaving thirty feddans, maat [an zooga 
w-talat ciyaa/ he died leaving a wife and three kids. 
(2) to die at the age of. maat can cifriin sana he died at 
twenty. 
.::...,. moot I/nl death. masl'alit l:Jayaah I'aw moot a 
matter of life or death. II moot wi-xaraab diyaar death 
and destruction, total ruin. 2 ladvl extremely, to the 
utmost. I'ana tacbaana moot I'm tired to death. 
b-al:Jibb-ak moot I love you madly. 
"'''' moota linst nl a death. moota mhabbiba a terrible 
death. IIhiyya moota walla tneen "" one can only die 
once (so there's no reason to be a coward). 
4 
meeta J ladj invarl miserly, stingy. 
.:,\.;".. maytaan ladj *1 weak, sickly, looking ready to 
die. 
..:..;. mayyit Ipl -iin, I'amwaatl I ladjl dead. II I'ana 
miyyit min il-guuc I'm starving! 2 Inl deceased person. 
I'il-masiib c;aam min been il-I'amwaat Christ rose from 
the dead. 
839 
11 bil-mayyit at least. I'ana mc;addar I'inni I'altic;i fiiha 
bil-mayyit [afara I'itnaafar gineeh I reckon I'll find at 
least ten or twelve pounds in it. 
.::..L:- mamaatf Inl death . 
..:...."l mumiit I ladjl lethal, deadly. I'itcarraqti l-xatar 
mumiit I faced a terrible danger. 2 Inl Bringer of death 
(epithet of God). 
.::..~ mawwit Ivtl I to kill. ya tmawwituu-hum ya 
t~taduu-hum cafaan in-naas takul-hum either kill them 
(outright), or hunt them so that people may eat them. 
bi-ybarram fi-fanab-u b-fakli ymawwit min id-dibk the 
way he twirls his moustache is enough to kill (one) with 
laughter. 2a to smooth. 2b to round off (an edge). 3 to 
checkmate (a king, in chess). -vn tamwiit; ava 
mimawwit. 
'-'Jli:1 I'itmaawit Ivi/l to pretend to be dead. 2 to pre-
tend to be very sick. -ava mitmaawit. 
~."..:;-I I'istamwit Ivil I to pretend to be on one's 
death-bed. rubna nzuur-u lac;enaa mistamwit wi-caamil 
nafs-u cayyaan we went to visit him and found him 
pretending he was ill and about to die. 2 to exert oneself 
to 'the utmost. I'il-lauiiba mistamwitiin cafaan yiksabu 
the players are really fighting to win. -vn I'istimwaat; 
ava mistamwit. 
~.J~ 
C.,. moog Icoll nl wave(s). 
~.,. mooga lunit n, pi -aat, I'amwaagl a wave. 
'-!. ~.,. mogaaya Ipl -aatl = mooga. 
C~ mawwig Ivt/l to cause (a surface) to become rip-
pled or wavy. 2 to cause to vibrate or oscillate. - Ivil 
3 to ripple. 4 to show variation of tone (of colours). 
leeh il-[arabiyya lon-ha mmawwig kida why is the col-
our of the car not even? - vn tamwiig; ava/pva 
mimawwig. 
C~I I'itmawwig Ivil I to be made or to become rip-
pled, become wavy (of a ~urface). 2 to vibrate, oscil-
late. -vn tamawwug; avaliva mitmawwig. 
C~ tamawwug In pi -aatl I ripple, wave (on a sur-
face). 2 vibration, oscillation. 
J.J~ 
J'" moor <Fr mort> Inl [auto] neutral (gear). bUll 
il-carabiyya fil-moor put the car in neutral. 
J ~ mawwar Ivtl to put (a car etc.) in neutral gear. -vn 
tamwiir; avalpva mimawwar. 
J~I I'itmawwar Ivil to be put in neutral gear (of a car 
etc.) - iva mitmawwar. 
~ J .J ~ see also • I ~ 
~)JL. .~).,. maward Inl rose water. 

.J.Jr 
j.,- mooz Icoll nl banana( s). ,fubaal mooz one banana. 
mooz bi-laban banana milk-shake. 
oj.,- mooza lunit n, pI -aatl 1 a banana. 2 shin (of 
meat). moozit qaani shin of lamb. 
~I).,- mozaaya In pI -aatl = mooza. 
..,.. .J r 
..,...,- muus In pI famwaas, miwaasl razor blade. 
II (taalib) muus swot, grind. 
.;:. .J r 
:i..;..,- mooqa <It moda> In pI -aat/ fashion, style. 
{aalil mooqa l-yomeen dool it's in fashion these days. 
t.J r see tIS r : mawwal, fitmawwal 
.J.J r 
...;.,- mooy, muuy <Fr> ladj invarl malJve. 
IJ.Jr 
JL. maal l In pI famwaall 1 wealth, property. ril-maal 
il-laamm public property. zakki lan maal-ak give alms 
that your wealth may be blessed. maal ik-kunazi lin-
nuzahi [proy} "" what the miser hoards his heir will 
squander. ril-maal is-saayib yilallim is-sirqa [proy} "" 
the hol~ calls the thief. 2 [agricJ annual tax on agri-
cultural land. 
J L. maali lad jl monetary, fjpancial. fis-sana l-maliyya 
the fiscal year. Yaraama maliyya cash fine. II fawraaq 
maliyya (1) banknotes. (2) stocks and shares certifi-
cates. suuq il- fawraaq il-maliyya the stock exchange. 
4L. maliyya Inl finance, monetary affairs. wizaarit il-
maliyya the Ministry of Finance. 
J~ mawwil l Iv!1 to finance. -vn tamwiil; ava/pva 
mimawwil. 
J ~I fitmawwil Ivil to be financed. - iva mitmawwil. 
2J.Jr 
JI~ mawwaal In pI mawawiill song in popular tradi-
tion characterized by a prelude which is an improvisa-
tion on the formula ya leel ya leen followed by a section 
in one of two rhyme-schemes (AAABA or AAABB-
BA); the singer draws out this section with improvisa-
tion and ornamentation. II ril-l:Ju,raan da lu malaaya 
mawwaal that horse and I have quite a story to tell (i.'e. 
we've been through a lot together). 
J~ mawwil2 Ivil 1 to compose and/or sing mawawiil. 
2 [derisJ to speak incessantly and boringly. - vn tamwiil; 
ava mimawwil. 
840 
•. ,., r 
~.,- muunaT In pI miwanl 1 mortar (for bricks). 
muuna samra mortar of mud and straw. 2 solder con-
taining copper (used in brazing). ril-lil:Jaam bil-muuna 
brazing. 
3 ingredients (of a 
mixtiJre). 
4 parts, 
materials. ' 
~;. mufna In pI mufanl provisions, stock, supply . 
~J;" mafuuna = mufna . 
.:"I~ mawwaan In • and pI mawwaanal 1 dealer in 
buIlding supplies. 2 building worker whose job it is to 
carry mortar . 
.:" ~ mawwin Ivtll to provision, supply with an allotted 
share (of goods). 2 to fuel. l:Ja-nmawwin il-larabiyya 
we'll fuel the car.llmawwin il-huguum [soccer] to feed 
the attack (by passing the ball to the forwards). - Ivil 
3 to draw one's allotment of goods, draw one's rations. 
-vn tamwiin; ava/pva mimawwin . 
.:.x..J. tamwiin In pI -aatl allotted share of goods, ration . 
bitaaqit tamwiin ration card. mabaal:Jis it-tamwiin gov-
ernment supply control office. XU{UU{ il-fimdaad wit-
tamwiin [mil} supply lines. 
~.J. tamwiini 
ladjl 
pertaining 
to 
rationing. 
fil-muqarraraat it-tamwiniyya ration allocations. 
.:" ~I fitmawwin Ivil passive of mawwin 1. - iva 
mitmawwin. 
O.J r 
o~ mawwih I/vtl to camouflage. 2/vil to feint. 
bi-yaaxud il-koora w-bi-ymawwih bi-gism-u he takes 
the ball and feints with his body. II balaaj tamwiih 
lalayya stop being evasive with me! - vn tamwiih; a\a 
mimawwih. 
o~1 fitf1}awwih 
Ivil 
to 
be 
camouflaged. 
-iva 
mitmawwih. 
..,.. lIS r 
..,..L,.. miyaas Inl kind of Mediterranean fish. 
I ..;;.J IS r 
4 
meeta 2 Iconjl [non-Calrene} when. 
mayyit, 
meeta l , 
maytaan, 
mumiit 
J ..;;.J IS r see 2 IS IS r : miit 
(~lSr) 
o~ meeda In pI miyadl I [constr} foundation girder. 
2 [naut} keelson. 

.:"I..I.:!-o midaan In pi mayadiinl I public square. 2 field 
of battle. 3 sports track. midaan sabat; race track. 
JlSr 
1S.r-" miiri ladj invar/l pertaining to the government. 
ra~(f miiri government-owned land. rin faat-ak i1-miiri 
ritmarral/' Ji-traab-u {prov} "" a government job, 
however base, is better than any other job. 
28 pertaining to the army. laabis miirL in uniform. 
2b militaristic and rigid, inflexible, obdurate. ka/aam 
miiri (1) straightforward talk. (2) inflexibility of atti-
tude or behaviour. 
in J IS r 
':").r-" meeruun <Gr muron> In! {Chr} chrismal oil. 
IjlSr 
Iflo miiza I In pi -aat, miyazl I merit, advantage. 
2 characteristic, distinctive feature. 
;.. mayyiz Ivtl I to distinguish. rit-taks i luu loon 
bi-ymayyiz-u lan i1-larabiyyaat the taxi has a colour 
that distinguishes it from (other) cars. 1 to single out 
(for preferential treatment). ma-tmayyiz-uu1 lala 
xwaat-u don't treat him better than his brothers. - Ivil 
3 to be sensitive. ramma raagil ma-landuu1 tamyiiz 
bi-~al:Jiil:J what a thick-skinned man! -vn tamyiiz; ava/ 
pva mimayyiz. 
~ mumayyizT ladj *1 distinctive. lal:Jn i mumayyiz 
signature tune. 
;..cl ritmayyiz Ivil I to be distinguished, be characte-
rized. 2 to be given an advantage. -iva mitmayyiz. 
j\;"1 rimtaaz Ivil I to be excellent. rimtaaz lan kull 
in-naas he excelled everybody. 2 to be distinguished, 
be distinctive. -vn rimtiyaaz; ava mumtaaz. 
jl.,.;..l rimtiyaaz In/i/no pilla distinction, excellence. 
ritli bi-ykassib iI-l:Jarb in-ni;aam wil-imtiyaaz what wins 
war is order and high achievement. Ib {med} in-
ternship. 2 Ipl -aatl privilege. II ril-imtiyazaat i1-
ragnabiyya {hist} the Capitulations granted by the Sub-
lime Porte to foreigners. 
j~ mumtaaz ladjl excellent. II rayyis mumtaaz highest 
rank of a Nile boat captain. - rid-duyuun i1-mumtaaza 
(1) low-interest debts. (2) {hist} Egypt's foreign debts 
of three and a half percent (under the Khedive Ismail). 
ljlSr 
Iflo miiza 2 <Fr mise> Inl kitty, pot (in gambling). 
I u: IS r 
\.J"'\!'" mayyis Ivil to bluff one's way around. rinta 
841 
bi-tmayyis lala miin who are you trying to take in? -vn 
tamyiis; ava mimayyis . 
..,..~ mayyaas' In * and pi mayyaasal I bluffer. 
2 braggart. 
l(lJ"lSrl 
\.J"'\!'" mees <Engl> Inl {mill mess. 
\.J"'\!'" miis Inl target or goal in several children's ball 
games.llcamlin-ni miis they are always hitting at me. 
3 IJ" IS r see IJ" I IS r : miyaas 
-
.:J IJ" IS r 
),;..-... L. mayistiru <prob It maestro> In pi -haatl {mus} 
conductor. 
IJ'# IS r 
...,..L. ma~ (i) Ivil to become pampered or spoilt. -vn 
maya~a, may~aan; ava maay~. 
..,..;. mayy~ Ivtl to spoil, pamper. ~al:Jb-ak mayy~ 
banaat-u w-ma-lad1i t;aadir yilimm-u-hum your friend 
was too soft with his daughters and now he can't control 
them. -vn tamyi~; ava/pva mimayy~. 
~I ritmayy~ Ivil to be spoilt, be pampered. -iVa 
mitmayy~. 
v""!. I.e 1 ritmaay~ Ivil to behave in a spoilt manner. -ava 
mitmaay~. 
,jtI1S r see 1S,jtI.J: meeqa 
tlSr 
t. L. maal (i, u) Ivil I to become bland. rif1urba 
maalit min kutr i1-mayya the soup has become tasteless 
because of being too watery. II nifs-i maalit lamma/ribt 
if-/arbaat drinking the cordial made me feel queasy. 
2 to behave in a spoilt manner. baaali mayaala ya/a(ra 
stop behaving like a spoilt child, young lady! -vn 
mayaala, mawaala, mayacaan, mawacaan; ava 
maayil· 
~ mayyal (also mawwal) Ivt/l to cause to diminish 
or dwindle. mayyalu l-mawquul wi-sabuu l-l/'aayit ma 
maat they played down the subject until (interest in) it 
died. 2 to cause to become bland. II rit-rakli mayyal 
nifs-i the food made me feel queasy. -vn tamyiil, 
tamwiil; ava/pva mimayyal, mimawwal. 
~I ritmayyac (also ritmawwac) Ivil passive of 
maYYBG. -iva mitmayyal, mitmawwal· 
t,lSr 
~ meel/'a Inl chaos, utter confusion. 
~L. maayil/' ladj *1 mixed-up, chaotic. 

- I .!J ..s r see J..s ~ .!J r : miikaa fiil 
I J..s r 
J\.. maal 2 (i) Ivil I to incline, bend. fil-wabda tmiil 
bi-ras-ha wi-tbaawil tilmis rukab-ha one bends one's 
head and tries to touch one's knees. fid-duktuur maal 
[alee the doctor bent over him. la(jeet-u maayil [al-
bee{a I found him leaning against the wall. 2 to be 
inclined. b-amil-lu faktar I prefer him. (jalb-i bi-ymiil 
liiha I'm fond of her. II baxt-u (or baal-u) maal his luck 
turned bad. - fin maal [aleek iz-zaman mayyil [ala 
draac-ak /provJ depend on yourself when times are 
bad. -vn meel, mayalaan; ava maayil . 
.}..o meel l In pi miyuull I slant, angle. 2 inclination, 
liking, longing. 
:a".. meela Ipl -aatl instance noun of meel. ya medII 
baxt-i /womenJ how unlucky I am! 
.}..oi famyal lell more/most inclined or sympathetic 
(towards). fin-naas dool famyal liina min it-tanyiin 
these people are more sympathetic towards us than the 
others. 
Jt.:. mayyaalladj °1 inclined. fana mayyaal (jawi lis-silt 
I'm very fon~ of the lady. 
J. mayyil I Ivtl to bend. fil-hawa bi-ymayyil in-
nabaat the wind bends the plants.llmayyil baxt(-u) to 
cause (s.o.) to have a rotten deal (particularly in mar-
riage). -
Ivil 2 to bend, lean. fil-(jifra l-xacf.ra tmayyil 
li-tabt' w-yi;har il-(ju{n the green outer skin curls down-
wards and the cotton appears. mayyilt' w-sababt 
is-sikkiina min talp if-faraab I bent down and pulled the 
knife out of my sock. mayyil[alayya lean towards me. 
3 to be biased in one's judgement. ma-tmayyil-J' fif-
fihaada don't deviate from the truth in your testimony. 
- vn tamyiil; ava/pva mimayyli. 
~\ fitmayyil Ivil to be caused to lean to one side. 
- ava/iva mitmayyil. 
.}..Ii\ fitmaayil Ivil to sway. maafi yitmaayil yimiin wi-
fmaal going rolling along. - ava mitmaayil. 
J~\ fistamaallvtl to win over, win the favour of. 
fistamaal il-[askari bis-sagaayir he won over the police-
man with cigarettes. - vn fistimaala; ava mistimiil. 
2 J ..s r 
.}..o miil, meel2 <Fr mille> In pi famyaall mile. miil 
babari nautical mile. 
842 
( .;,..s r ) 
.:r.:" miin I linterrog pronl who? finta miin who are 
you? miin iI-mudiir who is the director? [and' miin at 
whose place? 
11 ya miin ... oh for someone to .... ya miin yi{ammin-ni 
[ala ~ibbit-ha I am longing for someone to bring me 
(good) news of her health. 
.:r.:" miin 2: been kull" biin wi-miin see biin. 
.l.;".. miina I In pi mawaanil port. 
.l.;".. .l.;".. miina 2 Inl I glaze, enamel. ma{li bil-miina 
enamel-coated. 2 Ipl -aatl watch dial. 
• J ..s r 
.",.. mayooh <Fr maillot> In pi -aatl bathing suit. 
I ..s ..s r see also I ~ I r 
;,;. mayya Inl la water. II raagil mayya min tabt' tibn a 
cunning sly man. - ng[1I il-mayya l-magarii-ha "" the 
quarrel has been patched up. -mayyit-u garya he has a 
lot of money. - fil-mayya tkaddib Il-m{{aas /provJ (the 
water gives the lie to the diver) "" the proof of the 
pudding is in the eating. - bi-yitkallim fingiliizi mayya 
he speaks fluent English. - mayyit naar any strong acid. 
-[amal (or faxx') mayya to urinate. -doorit mayya 
lavatory. -fwd' [ala mayya beecf.a honest work. 
Ib (any) Iiquid.llmlzaan mayya spirit level. - fil-mayya 
z-zar(ja 
glaucoma. 
- fil-mayya 
l-beecf.a 
leucoma. 
Ie juice, sap. fil-lamuun malyaan mayya the lemons 
are very juicy. Id navigable river channel. Ie /euphem 
slangJ wine and spirits. 2 cutting edge. bi-yaakul 
fi-mayyit il-muus it wears down the edge of the razor 
blade. 3 mood. fuuf mayyit-u feeh sound him out. 
mayyit is-suu(j the state of the market. 
2..s..s r 
~ miyya I Inum; constr miit, dual miteenl a hundred. 
miyya w-[tfrun one hundred and twenty. miteen wi-
xamsiin two hundred and fifty. miit gmeeh a hundred 
pounds. 2 fil-miyya ladj invarl the one-hundredth. 3 In 
pi -aatl (unit of a) hundred. naas bil-miyyaat people in 
hundreds. xamastaafar fil-miyya fifteen percent.llfuyl' 
miy{'a (fil-jmiyya top quality work. - miyya miyya or 
miyya l-miyya certainly, definitely. 

• U 
Y l,j 
..,..\; naab I In pi niyaab, nuub, ranyaabl canine, tooth, 
fang. II naab-u razra{j (or zaari{j) he's wily and cunning. 
-{jarat/. lala naab-u he became furious. 
j l,j see 
I j J ,j : naar, naari 
V"' I ,j 
...,..\; naas In, functioning either as fern sing or as pll 
I group of people. naas kitiir gat-Iak (or guu-Iak) a lot 
of people came to see you. ribtirim in-naas illi bi-
tkallim-ak (or bi-ykallimuu-k) show respect to those 
talking to you. rin-naas illi trabbeet malaahum (or 
malaaha) the people with whom I grew up. fti naas 
~anaYliyya b-tilbis lafriita there are some craftsmen 
who wear overalls. II ribn i (or bim') naas a young man 
(or girl) of good family. -larabiyya bint i naas a good 
reliable car. -baaga kwayyisa wi-rxayyi~a w-bint i naas 
(something good in quality, cheap in price and of good 
origin) "" something good, ~heap, and reliable. _Si"i 
min naas ;z;amaan a lady of the old school. 2 people in 
general, mankind. ma tismal kalaam in-naas why don't 
you do what people tell you! rabb-i-na xtaar-u la/aan 
yihdi n-naas Our Lord chose him to guide mankind. 
rilba{ju ya naas help! lIya naas a rhetorical appeal for 
help, witness etc., addressed to no one in particular. as 
in badd i {jaal kida ya naas could anyone be so foolish! 
whoever would say such a thing! -zayy in-naas (1) like 
other people, as in ribna mif zayy in-naas we are not 
like other people. (2) properly, as in ritkallim zayy 
in-naas speak properly! - rig-gabalaaya mif bayna min 
hina zayy in-naas the hillock doesn't show up properly 
from here. -lamal zayy in-naas /euphemJ to go to the 
lavatory. see further under U J V"' ,j 
~ l,j 
...i\; naaf In pi nuufl yoke (for a draught animal. e.g., 
see PI.D, 11; E. 5). 
J l,j see J J ,j : naa{ja 
IS I ,j 
IS\; naay In pi -aatl end-blown reed flute. 
..;~\; nayaati In pi -yyal player of the naay . 
.y,j 
t,; nabar In pi rail baa 1'1 (item of) news. da nabal' zayy 
iz-zift that's a lousy piece of news. na/rit ranbaa I' news 
bulletin, newscast. wikaalit ran baa I' news agency. 
~I I'itnabbal' Ivil to prophesy. zimil-na tnabbar 
bil-qanuun {jabl i ma yillal our colleague predicted the 
regulation before it came out. - vn tanabbu 1'; ava 
mitnabba r. see further under IS Y ,j 
(' J I y,j see (' J y ,j : nabaalim 
UJYY,j 
..::..;' nabbuut/n pi nababiit/long heavy stick. quarter-
staff. II bin-nabbuut by force, using the big stick. 
-nabbuut iI-raftir Icoll nl halva sticks with sesame seed. 
I U y,j 
.:..,.: nabat (i) Ivil to grow up, sprout. nabatit-Iu/alra 
f-leen-u he got an ingrowing eyelash.llfuul naabit dried 
broad beans. soaked till they sprout./urbit naabit soup 
made fromfuul naabit (given especially to the sick). -vn 
nabataan, nabaat; ava naabit . 
..::..1,; nabaat I Ivnlll laa/u [-tabaat wi-nabaat wi-xallifu 
~ubyaan wi-banaat "" they lived happily ever after and 
bore both boys and girls (the traditional closing formula 

of fairy-tales). 2/coll nI plant(s). IIsukkar in-nabaat 
crystallized sugar (sold in lumps to be eaten as sweets). 
~4i nabaata lunit n. pI -aatl a small plant. rit-tafiaawi 
di ma-llill' minha wala nabaata not one littJe plant 
came up from t~ese seeds. 
J4i nabaati ladjl 1 vegetable. nifa nabaati vegetable 
starch. 
ralyaaf 
nabatiyya 
vegetable 
fibres. 
2 vegetarian . 
..Joi4i nabatiin IrJ vegetable fat. 
~ 
manbat In pI manaabitl place of growth. source. 
ril-f~/' da manbat iI-fasaad fil-madrasa this class is the 
source of all the corruption in the school. II manbat 
iflalr coronary band (of a horse). 
. .;..;; nabbit I 1 Ivtl to cause to sprout. bi-tnabbit iI-fuul 
she leaves the beans (in water) to sprout. 2 Ivil to 
sprout. bi-nsiib iI-rarq' lamma I-fuul yinabbit we leave 
the ground until the beans sprout. -vn tanbiit; ava 
minabbit. 
":';:"1 ritnabbit I 
Ivil passive of nabbit I 
1. -iva 
mitnabbit. 
.::.,.:::..1 ristanbit Ivt/ to breed (plants). 
wi~aarit 
iz-ziraala b-tistanbit kull' sana r~naaf gidiida min 
iI-fiuln' wil-fJubuub every year the Ministry of Agricul-
ture develops new kinds of cotton and other seeds. -vn 
ristinbaat; ava/pva mistanbit. 
Z.:;,y.:, 
~4i nibaata Inl sewing over a seam a second time for 
strengthening and neatening . 
.;..;; nabbit 2 Ivtl {needlew1 to sew the seam of (a gar-
ment) a second time with fine stitches (by hand or on a 
machine). -vn tanbiit; ava/iva minabbit. 
":';:"1 ritnabbit 2 Ivil passive of nabbit 2 • - iva mitnabbit. 
3.:;,y.:, 
~ nibiit Inl wine. 
~ 
nibiiti ladj invarl wine-red. maroon. 
4 .:;, y':' see ':;'.J y y .:, : nabbuut 
..s J. .:;, y.:, see 1 y .J .:, : nabatji, nobatfi 
c.y':' 
~ nabafJ (a) Ivil 1 to bark. rik-kalb' dayman 
bi-yinbafJ gamb' bet-na w-m-alrafl anaam the dog is 
always barking next to our house and I can't get any 
sleep. 2/vt/ to make hoarse, strain (the voice). 
ril-waafJid bi-yinbafJ 100t-u (Uul in-nahaar wil-rawlaad 
ya-rimma xumm ' noom raw jaya(iin one shouts oneself 
844 
hoarse all day long but the kids stay fast asleep or 
behave like little devils. -vn nabfJ, nibiifJ, nabafJaan; 
ava naabifJ; pva manbuufJ. 
--... nabfJa Ipl -aatl instance noun of nabfJ. 
~I ritnabafJ Ivil 1 to become hoarse. bi-tsiib-u 
I-raayit ma yitnibifJ min i1-liyaa(she leaves him till he is 
hoarse with crying. 2 (impersonal) passive of nabafJ 1. 
kull' ma yitnibifJ lalee yi(lal gary each time he is barked 
at he runs away. -iva mitnibifJ. 
I.J y.:, 
i.r,i nabrat In pI -aatl timbre. nabrit (or nabaraat) i1-
100t the timbre of the voice. riI-mafruuq i1-mulafifiin 
tikuun nabaraat-u waqfJa the prompter should have a 
clearly modulated voice. kaan bi-ykallim-ha b-nabra 
fJaadda fJabbiteen he was talking to her in a rather sharp 
tone of vo.ice. 
.r.-- mambar, mimbar In pI manaabirl 1 {lslJ minbar, 
pulpit (in a mosque). 2 ril-manaabir Ipl nI {obsolJ 
Egyptian political groupings formed in the Sadat era 
which facilitated the transition from a one-party to a 
mUlti-party system. 
3 .J y.:, see I.J.J Y .:, : nabaraawi 
I.J.JY':' 
IJ.r,i nabarooh Iprop nl Nabarow. a small town in Da-
qahliya province. famous for its salted fish. 
ISJI.r,i nabaraawi 1 In pI -yyal native of Nabarow. 
2 ladjl of or pertaining to Nabarow. fisiix nabaraawi 
(fine quality) flSiix from Nabarow. 
I]y.:, 
~ nabaz I (i) Ivt/ to spurn. ostracize. forsake. kull 
in-naas nabazit-u lajaan lisaan-u (-(awiil everybody 
ostracized him because of his insolence. -vn nabz, 
nabazaan; ava naabiz; pva manbuuz. 
i~ nabza Ipl -aatl instance noun of nabz. 
~..,..:... manbuuz ladj ·1 rejected. outcast. II riI-manbuziin 
the untouchables (of India). 
i~ nubza In pI -aat, nubazl 1 introductory resume. 
2 tract, pamphlet . 
..i,.:il ritnabaz I Ivil to be spurned. be ostracized. be 
forsaken. - iva mitnibiz. 

2 j o.:J ,j 
;. nabbiz Ivil to make insinuations, speak slightingly. 
kull i ma fae;lUd malaahum yinabbizu laleeha b-
ka/aam every time I sit with them they make snide 
remarks about her. -vn tanbiiz; ava minabbiz. 
';;1 fitnabbiz Ivil (impersonal) passive of nabbiz. mif 
fana iii yitnabbiz lalee I am not one to be spoken about 
slightingly. -iva mitnabbiz. 
3 j o.:J,j see IJ" o.:J ,j : nabaz 2 
IJ" o.:J ,j 
~ 
nabas (also nabaz 2) (i) Ivil to utter, speak. e;alad 
fil-galsa ma-nabasli b-kilma he did not utter a word 
during the hearing. -vn nabs, nabasaan; ava naabis. 
~I fitnabas (also fitnabaz 2) Ivil (impersonal) pas-
sive of nabas. ma-tnabasli b-kilma fil-mawquul not a 
word was said on the subject. - iva mitnibis. 
J. o.:J ,j 
..;...;. nabaf (i) Ivt! to dig up, rummage in, scrabble in. 
e;alad yinbiJ (f)ik-karakiib li-yaayit ma lae;a I-muftaalj 
he rummaged around in the odds and ends until he 
found the key. -vn nabajaan, nabf; ava naabif; pva 
manbuuf· 
-..:.,; nabja Ipl -aatl instance noun of nabf. 
...,:..,.:;1 fitnabaf Ivil passive of naba! ril-e;abr itnabafthe 
grave was desecrated. - iva mitnibif. 
..,:.;; nabbif Ivil 1 to scratch (at s.th.). e;alad yinabbif 
fi{-{arabeeza I-yaayit ma bawwa; il-e;ifra he kept 
scratching away at the table till he ruined the veneer. 
2 to make enquiries, try to find out. lissa bi-ynabbifu 
wara (or la/a) I-Ijagaat illi tsarae;it min fae;e;it-hum 
they're still trying to track down the things that were 
stolen from their flat. -vn tanbiif; ava minabbif. 
..)# o.:J ,j 
~ 
nabaq (u) Ivil to palpitate, beat, pulse. e;alb-u 
lissa b-yunbuq his heart is still beating. -vn nabq, 
nabaqaan; ava naabiq. 
~ 
nabtf. In! pulse. IIgass i nabtf.-u (1) he took his 
pulse. (2) he felt him out, he explored his attitude. 
-...,; nabtf.a linst n, pi -aatl a pulse, a beat. fin-nabq 
i{-{abiili lil-e;alb itneen wi-sabliin nabtf.a the heart nor-
mally beats seventy-two times (per minute). 
.J:, o.:J ,j 
.J.;; nabba{ /vii to make insinuations, drop hints. 
e;aalid yinabba{ m~-~ublj i wi-yrammi ka/aam min yeer 
ma ye;uul ta-lli huwwa layz-u bi;-;ab{ he's been beat-
845 
ing about the bush hinting and insinuating things for 
ages without spelling out what he really wants. -vn 
tanbii{; ava/pva minabba{ . 
.1.;:;1 fitnabba{ Ivil (impersonal) passive of nabba{. mif 
dool illi yitnabba{ laleehum these (people) are not the 
type to have insinuations made about them. -iva 
mitnabba{ . 
.k,.;;-I fistanba{ Ivtl to infer, deduce. fistanba{t i min 
ka/am-hum finnuhum {alliin riljla I gathered from 
what they said that they were going to go on a trip. -vn 
fistinbaa{; ava mistanba{. 
to.:J,j 
cf' nabalf (u) Ivil to spring (from a source). fir-rae;l 
iJlare;i naabil min il-biifa oriental dancing is a product 
of its environment. -vn nabl, nabalaan; ava naabil. 
~ manballn pi manaabill source, origin. manaabil 
in-niil the sources of the Nile. fiblid lannu da manbal 
fasaad stay away from him, he's a source of evil! 
fiq-qariiba titx~im min il-manbal the tax is deducted at 
source. 
t~ yanbuulln pi yanabiill spring, well. 
to.:J,j 
~ nabayf (u) Ivil to excel, distinguish oneself. da 
naabiy fil-mazziika he excels at music. -vn nubuuy; ava 
naabiy. 
ttl; naabiyf ladj • and pi nawaabiyl outstanding, 
brilliant. 
~l; nabya ladj pi nawaabiyl of genius. laalim nabya 
xtaral ir-radyu an outstanding scientist invented the 
radio. 
~i fanbay lell more/most outstanding or brilliant. 
Jy,j 
~ nabe;, nabae; Icoll nl jujube(s), jujube fruit. II filii 
sabat; kal in-nabae; (he who comes first eats the jujube) 
... first come, first served. 
~ nabe;a, nabae;a lunit n, pi -aatl a jujube. 
~~ nabe;aaya, nabae;aaya = nabe;a. 
I J o.:J ,j 
~ nibllcoll nl catapult(s), sling-shot(s). 
~ nibla lunit n, pi niba/, niblaatl a catapult, a sling 
shot. 
J,l; naabil: ril-Ijaabilla/a n-naabil see Ijaabil . 
2 J o.:J ,j 
~ nubllnl magnanimity, nobility. 
J.:,; nabiilladj pi nuba/al magnanimous, noble. 

J.,.;i fanbal lell more/most magnanimous or noble. 
..,.Jy.:" 
~ 
\; nablus Iprop nl Nabulus, a town west of the river 
Jordan and north of Jerusalem. 
~\; nabulsl lad) *1 from or pertaining to Nabulus. 
lI,5abuun nabulsi a fine toilet soap made with olive oil. 
r Jy.:" 
r~\; nabalm (also nabaalim) <Engl> Inl napalm. 
I ..s J y.:" see l..s J y r : nabulya 
o y.:" 
;u.l,.; nabaaha Inl cleverness, intelligence. 
~ nabiih ladj pi nubahal clever, intelligent. 
-.,; i fan bah lell morel most clever or intelligent. 
..;; nabbih Ivtl to alert. Iii xa{ar kibiir fana [aawiz 
fanabblh-ak Iii there is a grave danger to which I want 
to draw your attention. -vn tanbiih; ava minabbih. 
11 nabbih [ala to serve notice on. nabblhu [alayya 
fa/Jltar Ig-galsa bukra they served notice on me to 
attend the session tomorrow. 
~ 
tanbiih In pi -aatl I announcement. 2 warning. 
..:;;.. minabbih In pi -aatl alarm clock. 
"';::"1 fitnabbih Ivil I to become aware or alert. 
funabblht' mm noom-I[alajwayyit [iyaal[ammaliin 
yi[aksuu-ni I woke up to find some kids trying to annoy 
me. fil-ljukuuma tnabblhit li-(jtllit tl-malj,5uul the gov-
ernment woke up to the crop shortage. 2 to be alerted. 
-vn tanabbuh; ava/iva mitnabbih. 
11 fitnabbih [ala passive of nabbilj [ala. fltnabbih [alee 
yiljqar il-maljkama notice was served on him to attend 
the court. 
~I fintabah Ivil to take notice, pay attention. laazim 
yizaaktr wi-yintibih li-musta(jbal-u he must study and 
pay attention to his future. bl-yjldd intibaah in-naas Iii , 
he draws people's attention to himself. -vn fintibaah; 
ava mmtibih. see further under 0 y .;., 
.~I finllbaah linterjl [mtll attention! 
~I fistanblh I Ivtl to select for intelligence and skill. 
fistanbih lilmliz wi-b[at-u ylgma[ ma[lumaat li/-
magalia find a bright pupil and send him to collect 
information for the magazine. 2 Ivil to act the wise guy. 
- ava mlstanbih. 
J y.:" see ..s y .:" : nabawi, nibuwwa, nubuwwa 
..s y.:" see also • y .:" 
.ft> nabi Inl I Ipl 
fanbiyya, 
fanbiya, 
fanbiyaa rr I 
846 
prophet. 2 fin-nabi the Prophet Muhammad. II win-
nabi used as w-allaahi (q. v.). - (fism) in-nabi ljars-u 
[women in trad socl may the Prophet's name protect 
him! (used with, or instead of, a child's name to ward 
off the evil eye). -da-ljna zar-na n-nabi (it is as though 
the Prophet had visited us!) we are greatly honoured by 
your visit! - fin-nabl tabassam (even) the Prophet 
smiled! (to get a smile from a girl in the street) . 
..s~ nabawi ladjl pertaining to the Prophet Muham-
mad. fis-siira n-nabawiyya the biography of the 
Prophet . 
• :-,.; nibuwwa, nubllwwa Inl I prophethood. bi-yiddi[1 
n-nubuwwa he claims to be a prophet. 2/pl -aatl 
prophecy. 
.;, nabba: win-nabi wi-IIi nabba n-nabi nabi [women 
in trad socl by the Prophet and Him Who made the 
Prophet a prophet! (a strong oath) . 
'.';" .;., .:" 
..::..; natt (i) Ivil to grunt. ba(ja maaji ynitt' biJ-jeela he 
was going along grunting because of the load (he was 
c~rrying). -vn natt, natataan; ava naatit. 
.-;; natta linst n, pi -aatl a grunt. 
2.;., .;., .:" 
--.; nitt <Fr net> I ladj invarl spot-on, on-target. ljall' 
nitt exactly the right solution. -ladverbiallyl {ili[ nitt it 
turned out just right. II nitt in-mtt sparkling clean, as in 
lj-axalli [arabiyyit-ak mtt in-nitt I'll fix your car so that it 
shines. 2/nl [photl focus. -/adjectivallyl finuura 
ma-hiyyaa-j nitt the picture is not focussed. 
~.;.,.:" 
~ natag (i, u) Ivil to result. bi-yuntug [an il-fazma 
¥ala fas[aar the result of the shortage is a rise in prices. 
,5ada naatig [an ir-ru{uuba rust resulting from the damp. 
- vn natg, natagaan; ava naatig. 
~\; naatig In pi nawaatigl resultant, product. naallg 
il-(jisma [mathl quotient. 
C.F- mantuug In pi -aatl product. 
C\.:;; nitaag, nataag Inl [agricl produce, yield (in crops 
or livestock). 
~ 
natiiga In pi nataaYlgI I result, outcome. natiigit 
imllljaan examination result. 2 calendar. natiigit ljee{ a 
wall calendar. 
11 ~atllgit finn Iconjl as a result of the fact that. 
C\.:;; nattaag lad) pi nattaagal productive. 
~I fitnatag J IVII to result, be caused. fitnatag lannu 
kalaam laari¥ kitiir a lot of nonsense resulted from it. 
- ava/iva mitnitig. 

~i fan tag 
Ivtl 
to 
produce. 
fil:Jna 
b-nintig 
il- fis{uwanaat wi-baldeen bi-nwazzal-ha big-gumla we 
produce the records and then distribute them 
wholesale. -Ithe literary passive form occursl baldii 
bi-tuntag il-tamasiil after this the casts are turned off. 
-vn fintaag; ava muntig; pva muntagf. 
(.\.;;! fintaag Inl production, output. fil-rintaag il-kulli 
li/-mufassasa the over-all output of the organization. 
~\.;;! fintaagif ladjl pertaining to production, pro-
ductive. {aalja fintagiyya productive capacity. 
~ 
muntig I In °1 producer. 2/adj *1 industrious. 
..::...~ muntagaat Ipl nl products. muntagaat ziraliyya 
agricultural products. muntagaat ~inaliyya industrial 
products. 
~I fistantig Ivtl to deduce. huwwa IIi stantig il-l:Jall i 
l-wal:Jd-u min reer musalda he deduced the solution 
alone without any assistance. -vn fistintaag; ava 
mistantig. 
(.\:;,;;;,,1 fistintaag In pi -aatl inference. da stintaag 
walla-ntafillanfuft-u is this a deduction you have made 
or have you actually seen him? 
~..:..;; 
ft .ft natar (u) Ivtl I to scatter, strew, broadcast. 
bi-nuntur is-sibaax bil-fuus we scatter the fertilizer with 
hoes. 2a to jerk. ril-lagala nizlit fi-ma{abb i w-raal:Jit 
mantuura the wheel went into a pothole with a bump. 
fil-lja{r i wiljif marra wal:Jda fa-na{ar kull in-naas li-
ljuddaam the train came to a sudden stop and jerked all 
the people forwards. 2b to toss. bi-yun{ur il-muftaal:J 
fi-fiid-u he's tossing the key in his hand. natart-u bliid 
I tossed it far away. - Ivil 3 to jerk out, spring out, 
eject. fii susta tal:Jt il-musmaar fa-fawwil ma tliff-u 
yuntur there is a spring beneath the screw and, as soon 
as you turn it, it jumps out. susat natr ejector springs. 
Ilfaxa{ wi-natar to shout and gesticulate. -vn natr; ava 
naatir; pva mantuur. 
0ri .0';; natra linst n, pi -aall a jerk, a toss, a 
scattering. 
J"':'" .J";':" mantuur Icoll nl stock(s), gillyflower(s). 
p.;.;1 .p.;.;1 fitnatar Ivil I passivc of natar I and 2. 
2 = natar 3. - ava/iva mitnitir. 
;,.; .;,.; nattar Ivtl I to scatter widely, scatter succes-
sively. nattar iz-zabaayin fi~-~aala he seated the custom-
ers about the room. nattar is-sibaax fil-ree{ he scattered 
the fertilizer over the field. 2 to toss up and down, toss 
repeatedly. -vn tantiir; ava/pva minattar. 
fol .fol fitnattar Ivi/ I to be scattered widely, be 
scattered successively. 2 to be tossed up and down, be 
tossed repeatedly. -iva mitnattar. 
847 
..:.. I ~ ..:.. ;; 
..::...1,;; nalaraat, nitraal <Fr nitrate> Inl nitrate. 
nataraat fac/.c/.a silver nitrate. 
.!l ~ 
~..:..;; 
~,;; nitriik <Fr nitrique>: l:Jaamic/. in-nitriik Inl nitric 
acid. 
J~~..:..;; 
...H.J,il; natureel <Fr naturel> ladj invarl natural. 
..; ..:.. ;; 
...,..:;; nataf(i) Ivtl la to snatch, grab. nalafl il-ljalam min 
fiid-u I snatched the pencil from his hand. nataJ 
il-radwa w-ljaam he gulped down the lunch and left. 
Ib to purloin, swipe. ljallibt-u w-nataft i minnll 1-
mal:Jfa~a I ran through his pockets and swiped his wal-
let. 2 to snatch at, catch at. fik-kursi fii musmaar nataf 
ban{aloon-i there is a nail in the chair that snagged my 
trousers. ril-ma{abb i yintiJ il-lagala truul:J man{uura 
the pothole catches the wheel and it gives a jerk. 
ril-malja~~ it-tilim bi-yintiJiJ-Jalr blunt scissors catch in 
the hair. 3 to deal (e.g., a blow) to. nataft-u ljalam xalla 
wdaan-u t~affar I dealt him a slap on the face that made 
his ears ring. - Ivil 4 to speak in a curt or abrupt 
manner, snap. ma-tintiJ-F ya beeh don't snap (at me), 
sir! 5 to fabricate tales that reflect well on oneself, tell 
cock-and-bull stories of one's exploits. -vn natafaan., 
naif; ava naatiJ; pva mantuuJ. 
4....:;; naifa Ipl -aatl instance noun of naif . 
..,:..:;;i fantaJ lell I more/most boastful. 2 more/most 
magnificent. di fantaflarabiyyafiJjirka this is the most 
luxurious car in the company . 
.r~ nattaaf In *1 1 thief. beet in-nattaaf ma-yillaa-f 
[prov] a thief never prospers. 2 braggart. 
~I fitnataf Ivil passive of nataJ. - iva mitnitiJ . 
..,...; nattiJ Ivtl I to snatch or grab repeatedly. II fin-naas 
lammaliin yinattiJu lal:Jm-i b-sabab-ak people are 
gossiping about mc because of you. 2 to snatch at or 
catch at repeatedly. - vn tantiiJ; ava/pva minattiJ. 
'-'"""'\.;; tanatiiJ Ipl nl odds and ends, bits and pieces. 
lissa lalayya tanatiiJ filuus I still have a few small debts 
to settle. similt' tanatiiJ kalaam I heard some bits of 
gossip. 
~I fitnattiJ Ivil passive of nattiJ. - iva mitnattiJ. 
t..:..;; 
& natal (a) Ivtl I to heave (a heavy weight) with a 
jerk. miJ ljaadir yintal ik-kursi mil- rarc/. he is unable to 
lift the chair an inch off the floor. 2 to deal a heavy blow 

to. raal:J natl-ufalluutfaal-u min lal- rarei he upped and 
gave him a kick in the pants that sent him flying. 3 to 
relieve (s.o.) of a heavy weight. Ilrabb-i-na yintac-ik 
bis-salaama {women} may Our Lord deliver you safely 
(to a pregnant woman). - vn natl, natalaan; ava naatil; 
pva mantuul. 
~ natla Ipl -aatl instance noun of natl. natac iI-baab 
natla xa/acit-u he gave the door a wrench that tore it off 
its hinges. 
~I ritnatac Ivil passive of natal. - iva mitnitil. 
e nattall Ivtl to wrench or jolt repeatedly. wi-huwwa 
bi-yl:Jaawil yifiil if-Jiwaal fiacad yinattac fii Ii-yaayit ma 
lawal:J qahr-u trying to lift up the sack he kept on heav-
ing at it until he strained his back. 2 Ivil to struggle to do 
something. bafia maafi ynattal bif-feela he was going 
along practically collapsing under the load. bi-ynattac 
fik-kitaaba he can write only with difficulty. - vn tantiil; 
a~alpva minattal. 
~I ritnattac Ivil passive of nattal 1. - iva mitnattal. 
...; U 4J 
...Aoi nataf (i) Ivtll to pluck (hair, feathers etc.). nata fit 
iI-farxa she plucked the chicken. nata fit wiff-a-ha bil-
'(jalaawa she removed the hair from her face with de-
pilatory paste. 2 to strike. nataft-u lalfia kwayyisa 
I gave him a good beating. -vn natf, natafaan; ava 
naatif; pva mantuuf. 
;.a.; natfa Ipl -aatl instance noun of natf. 
~ nitfa In pI -aat, nitafll small piece, fraction. reeh 
in-nitfa lIi-nta b-tiddi-haa-/i di what is this tiny piece you 
are giving me! 2 nitfit ... {slang} a fine specimen of .... 
(l:Jittit (diin» nitfit farxa a very delicious chicken. l:Jittit 
(diin) nitfit bint a gorgeous girl, a very sexy girl. 
-.£;;1 ritnataf Ivil I to be plucked (of hair, feathers 
etc.). riI-faras iI-hadya yitnitif.del-ha {prov} (the quiet 
mare gets its tail plucked) a timorous person will be 
ta~en advantage of. 2 to be struck. -iva mitnitif. 
...Aoi nattif Ivtl I to pluck with repeated movements. 
2 to separate into small fragments. - vn tantiif; avalpva 
m~nattif. 
-.£;;1 ritnattif Ivil passive of nattif. - iva mitnattif. 
4JU4J 
,:;; nitin ladj • and pI nutanal I stinking, putrid. 
II rik-kibiir in-nitin the (unlucky) di~e combination of a 
one and two (in backgammon). 2 stingy, mean. fuuf 
in-nitin mistax~ar fiyya kubbaayit faay the rotten miser 
won't even buy me a glass of tea! 
:c.; nitna Inl name given to various plants of t~e goose-
foot family. 
848 
,:;;i rantan lelll morelmost putrid or rotten. 2 morel 
most stingy or mean. 
~\;;; nataana In/l putridness, rottenness. 2 stinginess, 
meanness. ba((al nataana don't be such a mean 
so-and-so! 
4;:;.;.. mintina = nitna. 
. 
,:;; nattin I Ivtlto cause to turn putrid. ril-l:Jarr' nattin-
u the heat turned it putrid. 2 Ivil to turn putrid. 
ril-/al:Jma nattinit the meat turned putrid. bUfifi-U nattin 
min ig-guul his breath turned foul from lack of food. 
-vn tantiin; ava minattin. 
~ .J U 4J 
.;~ natwar Ivtl to scatter, strew. laatfit iI-hiduum 
minatwara f-kull' makaan she found the clothes strewn 
all over the place. -vn n~twara; avalpva minatwar. 
.;."..:;1 ritnatwar Ivil to be scattered, be strewn. -vn 
tinatwiir; iva mitnatwar. 
loS U 4J see I U 4J ~ : nitaaya 
IY[.4J 
~ 
nagab (i) Ivtl {rur} to summon, invite. II l:Jadd , 
nagab-ak has anyone asked your opinion? -vn 
nagabaan; ava naagib. 
..,...t.;; naggaab In pI nagagiib, naggaaba, naggabiinl 
{rur} messenger sent from family to family to announce 
the death of a relative. 
2Y[.4J 
~ 
nigib ladj *1 smart-alecky. 
~ 
i rangab I 
leV 
morelmost 
excellent 
or 
distinguished. 
~ ~ nagaaba Inl I outstanding ability. ~ smartness, 
slickness. ba((al nagaaba wi-kkallim kuwayyis stop 
trying to be smart alid talk properly! 
~ 
nagiib ladj pI nugabal excellent, distinguished. 
tilmiiz nagiib a bright and industrious student. 
~l; naagib ladj * and pI nugabal 1 outstandingly 
able. 2 smart-alecky. 
~\';;I ritnaagib Ivil to act the smart-aleck. - ava 
mitnaagib. 
~i rangab 1 Ivtl to give birth to. rangabit-Iu ta/at 
wilaad she bore him three boys. -vn ringaab; ava 
mungib. 
~I ristangib I/vtlto select for outstanding abil-
ity. 2 Ivil to act the smart aleck. -vn ristingaab; ava 
mistangib. 

C[.iJ 
& 
nagay or nigiy (a) Ivill to succeed, be successful. 
mafhumiyyit-i liI-mafruue !'innu mif ya-yingay as 
I understand the project, it will not come off. 2 to pass 
(in an examination). !'inta ya-tingay wi-ya-tgiib 
magmuue bi-!,izn illaah you'll pass and get a (good) 
'grade, God willing. nigiyti fik-kaff i(-{ibbi I passed the 
medical. -vn nagaay; ava naagiY. 
c.~ nagaay Inl success. II !,istimaarit nagaay [acad] 
form stating that a student has passed a certificate exam 
(e.g., the secondary general (sanawiyya eaamma) ex-
amination) and showing details of his marks. 
~l; naagiy lIn *1 successful candidate. 2/adj ·1 
successful. 
~;i !'angay lell morelmost successful. 
& naggay Ivtl to cause to succeed. rabb-i-na ynaggay 
mali~d-ak may God grant lCPu success in your aims! 
-vn tangiiy; ava minaggay. 
&1 !'itnaggay Ivi/l to be made to succeed. 2 to be 
made to pass (an examination). !'itnaggayit bil-eafya it 
was with great difficulty that she was got through the 
exam. - iva m;tnaggaY. 
I ,) [. iJ 
~ naggid Ivtl I to upholster. !'ik-kanaba twassaxit 
xaa/~ wi-Iaazim !'anaggid-ha the sofa has become very 
dirty and I must have it re-upholstered. 2 to tea~e out 
(compacted cotton) with a wire bow. -vn tangiid; ava/ 
pya minaggid. 
~ 
minaggid In */1 upholsterer. 2 one who teases 
out compacted cotton with a wire bow. 
JI~ minaggidaati In pI -yyal = minaggid. 
¥I !'itnaggid Ivil passive of naggid. - iva mitnaggid. 
l,)[.iJ 
~ nagad (i) Ivtl to help (s.o.) in an emergency, res-
cue, save. -vn nagda; ava naagid. 
i~ nagda I Ivnl II !'ifaarit nagda a distress signal. 
buli~ in-nagda an arm of the police force that is avail-
able to help the public in any emergency. 2/n pI -aatl 
rescue, rescue team. 
¥I !'itnagad Ivil to be rescued, be saved. -iva 
mitnigid. 
~I !,istangid Ivil to appeal for help. !'iyna 
ruynaa-Iu lamma stangid biina we went to him when he 
asked for our help. -vn !'istingaad; ava mistangid. 
1.J[.iJ 
i;~ nigaara Ilnl carpentry, carpenter's trade. 
2 carpentry-work. 
849 
.)t.;; naggaar In *1 carpenter. IInaggaar xarasaana 
[constr] carpenter who erects reinforced concrete shut-
tering. -baab in-naggaar mixallae [prov] (the carpen-
ter's door hangs awry) ... the cobbler's children are 
ill-shod. 
;.. naggar Ivt/la to trim (a branch, a rough piece of 
wood). Ib to knock the rough edges off (s.o.), give 
(s.o.) polish. 2 to work (wood), carpenter (wood). -vn 
tangiir; ava/pya minaggar. 
';':'1 !,itnaggar Ivi/la to be trimmed (of wood). Ib to 
be given or acquire polish. 2 to be worked (of wood). 
-ava/iva mitnaggar. 
1 .J [. iJ se .J [. iJ • : !'angar 
j[.iJ 
;.;.. naggiz Ivtl to execute, complete, carry out. eawziin 
eummaal mumtaziin eafaan ninaggiz iI-eamal we want 
some excellent workers so as to be able to complete the 
job. -vn tangiiz; ava minaggiz. 
';':'1 !'itnaggiz Ivil to be executed, be completed, be 
carried out. - iva mitnaggiz. 
~i !'angaz = naggiz. -vn !'ingaaz; ava mingiz, 
mungizT. 
.:,.:...::-1 !'istangiz Ivtl to hurry. up, speed up, hasten. -vn 
!'istingaaz; ava mistangiz. 
1..1"" [. iJ 
.....~ nagaasa Inl I [usu lsi] ritual impurity resulting 
from certain acts (e.g., sexual intercourse) or contact 
with certain impure things (e.g., faeces, urine). 
2 uncleanness, defilement. 
~ 
nigis ladj ·1 I [usu lsi] la in a state of nagaasa. 
Ib capable of causing nagaasa (of certain acts and im-
pure things). II !'iI-eaya (-(irIS Iii !'id-dawa n-nigis [prov] 
a nasty disease requires a foul medicine. 2a unclean, 
defiled. 2b low, mean, base. 
~ 
i !'angas lell morelmost nigis. 
...r~ manguus ladj • and pI managiis/vile, ruthless . 
...,..;.; naggis I/vtl [usu lsi] to make ritually unclean, 
defile. !,ik-kalb i naggis iI-mayya lamma yatti buuz-u 
fiiha the dog made the water unclean by putting its 
snout in it. 2/vil [slang] to become low, mean or base. 
min yoom ma rgiet i w-huwwa bi-ynaggis maeaaya ever 
since I've returned he's been playing dirty with me. -vn 
tangiis; ava/pya minaggis . 
..,...;wI !'itnaggis Ivil to be made ritually unclean, be 
defiled. - iva mitnaggis. 
~I 
!'istangis Ivtl to reject for being ritually un-
clean. -ava mistangis. 

t~.J 
& nagl In pi nuguull village originally settled by 
bedouin (a term specific to Upper Egypt). 
.J ~.J 
~ 
nagaf Icoll nl I decorative hanging hght-fitting~ 
(especially ones with lustres or the like), chandeliers. 
IIleela nagafJ a wonderful evening. 2 [obsolJ hanging 
decorative lamps with more than one oil-glass. 
~ 
nagafa lunit n, pi -aatl a decorative hanging Iight-
fitting (usually with lustres), chandelier. 
I J~.J 
~ 
nigiillnl any of a number of types of grass (includ-
ing couch grass, Bermuda grass and orchard grass). 
~ 
naggil (i) I Ivtl to free of nigiil. laazim lIinaggli 
ig-gineena laJaan if-fagar yikbar we should clear the 
garden of grass to let the trees grow. 2 IVII to grass, 
produce grass. I'ig-gineena naggliit wif-fagar kibir the 
garden became grassy and the trees grew. -vn tangiil; 
ava minaggil. 
J,:;..:;I I'itnaggillvil to be freed of nigiil. -iva mitnaggil. 
lJ . 
~IJ 
~ 
naglln pi I'angaalll son. 2 I'angaallpl nl (one's) 
children, offspring. 
l J ~.J sce J..s ~ .J • : mangaliyy~ 
4 J ~.J see I J ~ .J ~ : mangal, mangala 
I 
• 
~~IJ 
~ nagam (i) Ivtl to jinx. put the evil eye on. dool naas 
wibJiin nagamuu-na w-basaduu-na the~ are bad people, 
they've jinxed us and put the evil eye on us. -vn nagm; 
ava lIaagim; pva manguum. 
~ 
nagma linst n, pi -aatl a Jinx. 
~ lIigm In pi nuguumll[astrolJ star. planet.bisaab 
ill-nuguum (or in-mgm) horoscope. lIigm-u laali his 
star is riding high, he's in luck. 2 (also nagm) male 
film-star. 
~ 
nigma In pi -aat, lIuguum, niguumll star.llnigma 
I'umm' deeel comet. -mill llI-mgma since the crack of 
dawn. - warraa nuguum iq-quhr he made him see stars. 
- bi-Ylidd in-lIuguum he's daydreaming. -mgmlt iI-babr 
starfish. -nallit in-nigma [athlJ spread-cagle Jump. 
-Jams' w-qamar wi-nguum sparklers. -nu~~' nigma 
motif in panelling (see PI.G, 12).2 (alsonagma) female 
film-star. 
4t~ nigmaaya = mgma. 
850 
~ 
lIigmi ladjl stellar. 
~I I'itnagam Ivil to be jinxed, become the victim of 
the evil eye. -iva mitnigim. 
~ naggim Ivil I to practise astrology. 2 [joeJ to 
guess, surmise. -vn tangilm; ava minaggim. 
~ 
munaggim In *1 astrologer. kadab iI-mullaggimiin 
wa-Iaw sadaqu [provJ the astrologers are (always) lying 
even when they foretell the future correctly (since that 
only happens by chance). 
~I I'itnaggim Ivil (impersonal) passive of naggim. 
mif di I-masaa l'iI illi yitnaggim fiiha these are not mat-
ters for guessing. - iva mitnaggim. 
1 
• 
~~IJ 
~ 
mangam In pi mana,agiml mine. pit. 
o ~.J see 0 ~ .J r : mangaha 
.J ~.J see ..s ~ .J : lIagwa 
..s ~.J 
.r.-i naga, nigi (i, a) Ivil to survive, escape. kaan 
fi- I'utubiis lamalbadsa w-naga he was in a bus that was 
involved in an accident, but he survived. naga b-gild-u 
he escaped with his skin, he had a narrow escape. -vn 
nagaah, nagayaan; ava naagi . 
• ~ nagaah Inl escape.llbabl' nagaah life-Iine.bizaam 
lIagaah life-belt . 
..s~ nagwa Ifem n, pi -aatl innermost desire. 
nagwaa-ya or lIagwit-1 my innermost desire. yillam 
bis-sirr' win-nagwa He (God) knows every secret and 
desire . 
• ~ 
manga~ In pi manaagil haven, refuge. 
~ 
nagga Ivtl I to save, rescue. l'iIaah-1 Yllaggii-k 
[beggarsJ God save you! (in asking for alms). 2 to give 
(s.o.) a treat after a period of austerity. lIaggi nafs-ak 
bi-I'akla kwayyisa treat yourself to a good meal! -vn 
tallgiyya; ava millaggi. 
~ 
munaggi Inl Saver, Rescuer (epithet of God). ya 
munaggi God preserve us! 
~I I'itnagga Ivi/l to be saved. be rescued. 2 to give 
oneself a treat after a period of austerity. -avaliva 
mitnaggi. 
~\.; naaga Ivtl to talk to (one's love or an intimate 
friend) softly and affectionately. -vn minagiyya, 
mUllagaah; ava millaagl. 
~l.;;1 I'itnaaga Ivil I to speak in a soft and affectionate 
manner. 2 to be spoken to softly and affectionately. 
- ava/iva mitnaagi. 

~ 
I fistanga Ivil to wash the anus and genitals after 
defecating (i.e. to save oneself from defilement). -vn 
fistinga; ava mistangi. 
~ C,j 
..:;.....; nayat (a) 
Ivtl 
I to gnaw. 
c;aalid yinyat 
(fi)l-lat/.ma zayy i/-kalb he is gnawing away at the bone 
(just) like a dog. xud-Iak kuuz dura wi-nyat-u take a 
corn cob and gnaw it. 2 to hew. work, sculpt (stone). 
-vn nayt, nayataan; ava naayit; pva manyuut . 
..:;.....; nayt Inl sculpture. 
~ 
nayta Ipl -aatl instance noun of nayt. 
.;:,t.:.; nayyaat 
In 
*1 
I stone-mason. 
2 sculptor. 
3 {derisJ one who is given to gnawing bones. ya 
jayyatiin ya nayyatiin {abusJ you hungry beggars! 
.:...wI fitnayat Ivill to be hewn, be worked (of stone). 
2 to be gnawed. - iva mitniYit. 
....;.;. nayyat Ivtll to cause to gnaw. 2 to gnaw hard or 
repeatedly. -vn tanyiit; avalpva minaYYat. 
~I fitnayyat Ivil passive of naYYat. - iva mitnayyat. 
~C.J 
c3 nayy (i) Ivil to moan, whine. ril-waad da kuU i ma 
yadd i ykallim-u Ylayyat wi-yniyy every time anyone 
says anything to that kid he starts crying and whining. 
-vn nayy, nayayaan; ava naaYiY. 
;;,;.; nayya linst n, pI -aatl a whine, a moan. 
jC,j 
jN nayar (a) Ivtl la to eat away, . erode, corrode. 
fil-mayya nayarit il-xajab the water rotted the wood. 
Ib to affect deeply, get to, catch on the raw. bukaa-ha 
nayar c;alb-i her crying wrung my heart. nayartuu-ni 
bi-lli lamaltuu you've made me quite mad by what you 
did. 2 to swindle, cheat (over money). nayaruu-na 
f-qital il-riyaar they robbed us when they charged us 
for the spare parts. 31 to slaughter (an animal) by 
cutting the throat. Ilyoom in-nayr = liid il-facfya 
(q.v.). -vn nayr; ava naayir; pva manYuur. 
.rw manyar In pI manaayirl yoke (of a garinent). 
roZl fitnayar Ivil passive of naYar. - iva mitniYir. 
;.. nayyar I Ivtl to eat away or erode extensively or 
repeatedly. fis-suus c;alad yinayyar fid-dulaab li-raayit 
ma wiC;il the woodworm kept eating away at the cup-
board until it collapsed. 2 Ivil to be very deeply affected 
emotionally. -vn tanyiir; avalpva minayyar. 
;WI fitnayyar Ivil to be eaten away or eroded exten-
sively or repeatedly. -iva mitnaYYar. 
.J""\,; naayir Ivtl to be in constant conflict with. fil-riira 
bi-txallii-hum dayman yinayru (f-)balcf jealousy keeps 
851 
them constantly at one another's throats. -vn minayra; 
avalpva minaaYir. 
.J""l:.;1 fitnaayir Ivil I to be in constant conflict (with 
one another). 2 to be disputed with. - avaliva 
mitnaaYir. 
.r-:'I fintayar Ivil to commit, or attempt to commit, 
suicide. - vn fintiyaar; ava mintiYir. 
\S;L..:;;I fintiyaari ladjl suicidal, pertaining to suicide. 
lamaliyyaat intiyariyya suicide missions. 
I V" C,j 
...,.-; nay as (a) Ivtl to bring bad luck upon. nayast-i-ni 
min yoom ma geet ti/taral malaaya you've brought me 
bad luck from the very day you started to work with me. 
-vn nays, nayasaan; ava naayis; pva manYuus . 
...,.-; nays Inl ill omen, bad luck. kaanit saalit nays 
is-saala iii lrift-u fiiha it was an accursed hour in which 
I got to know him. -/adjectivallyl sana nays an iII-
orne ned year. 
V" ~ 
manyuus ladj • and pI manayiisl luckless. 
fil-manyuus manyuus wi-law laUac;u lala baab daar-u 
fanuus {provJ a person who is (meant to be) unlucky 
remains unlucky (no matter what), even if they hang a 
lantern over the door of his house. 
...,.-;i fanyas lell morelmost unlucky or iII-omened. 
...,.-.:;-1 fitnayas Ivil to be brought bad luck. - iva 
mitniYis. 
~ 
nayyis Ivil to become unlucky or plagued with 
misfortune. ril-yaala nayyisit malaa wi-kuU i yoom 
yixsar faktar things have got really bad for him and 
every day he loses more. - vn tanyiis; avalpva minayyis. 
2 V" C ,j 
V"6.; nayaas, niyaas, nuyaas r Inll copper; particula-
rized as nayaas faYmar. 2 brass; particularized as 
nayaas f~far. - Icoll nl 3 copperware. 
.... 6.; nayaasa, niyaasa In pI -aatl I {bankJ copper 
token bearing a serial number issued to a customer in a 
bank against a cheque or cheques handed in for 
cashing. 2 {musJ kettledrum. 3 a piece of copper or 
brass. 
~ 
6.; nayaasi, niyaasi,"nuyaasiT ladjll made of cop-
per or brass. lumla nayasiyya copper coins. falaat 
nuyasiyya {musJ brass wind instruments. 2 coppery, 
brassy (in colour). 
~ 
nayyas Ivil to become like copper or brass (in 
colour or character). raas-u nayyasit his head (went 
bald and) turned a coppery colour. IIgild-u mnayyas 
he's' tough, he's resilient. -avalpva minaYYas. 

.; c.~ 
.....u.; niljif (a) Ivil to become thin, become emaciated. 
wiff-ak niljif fiwayya your face has become somewhat 
thin. -vn naljaafa, naljafaan. 
;ij6..; naljaafa Inl thinness, leanness, skinniness. 
~ 
naljiifladj pI nuljaaf, nuljafal thin, lean, skinny. 
!'iI-waad naljiif ziyaada can i1-lizuum the boy's too thin. 
.....u.;i fanljaf lell morelmost thin, lean or skinny. 
~ 
I fistanljaf Ivtll to reject for being too'thin. 2 to 
select for-'thinness. -ava mistanljaf. 
I J c.~ 
~ 
naljal (a) I/vtl to wear bald, wear threadbare. 
fid-dawa naljal raas-i the medicine made my hair fall 
out. rukbit iI-bantaloon manljuula the knees of the 
trousers are worn out. 2 Ivil to become threadbare. 
fil-qami~ naljal mil-yaaqa the shirt wore out at the 
collar. IIgism-i naljal mil-caya my body became thin 
because of the illness. -vn naljl, naljalaan; ava naaljil; 
pva manljuul. 
~ 
naljla I Ipl -aatl instance noun of naljl. naljalu 
raas-u naljla sooda ma-xalluul fiiha wala facra they 
really polished his head for him; there was not a hair 
left! 
Jowl fitnaljal Ivil to be worn bald, be worn thread-
bare. -iva mitniljil. 
ZJc.~ 
~I fintaljal: fintaljalfax~iyyit(-u) to pose as (s.o.), 
take on (s.o.'s) identity. fintaljal f~iyyit duktoor 
wiltaral fi-mustaffa he masqueraded as a doctor and 
worked in a hospital. - vn fintiljaal; ava mintiljil. 
JJc.~ 
~ naljllcoll nl bee(s). 
~ 
naljla 2 /unit n, pI -aatll a bee. 2 a spinning top. 
JL:.::; naljljaalln· and pI naljljaalal bee keeper. 
~ 
manljal In pI manaaljill apiary. 
~c.':; 
~ 
naljnu Ipron of 1st pers pI! we. naljnu huna phrase 
used by youths in trying to attract the attention of girls 
in the street. naljnu huna ya sitt phrase used by a hus-
band to his wife, implying that she ignores his authority. 
c.~c.~ 
~ 
naljnalj Ivtl to take (a child) to defecate or urin-
ate. ruulj naljnalj iI-cayyil take the kid to the bathroom. 
II !'iI-carabiyya di naljnaljit-u w-rarramit-u dihn' qalb-u 
852 
this car drained him of every last penny he owned. -vn 
naljnalja; avalpva minaljnalj . 
rl fitnaljnalj Ivil to clear one's throat, say 'ahem'. 
-vn tinaljniilj; ava mitnaljnalj. 
~ 
I' fistinaljnalj J ' = fitnaljnalj. - ava mistinaljnal;. 
.Jc.~ 
~ naljwt Inl I grammar (of Arabic). 2 syntax (of 
Arabic). 
- Iprepl 3 towards, with respect to. 
waagibat-hum naljw' ba/ad-hum their duties towards 
their country. 
IS~ naljwit ladj/l grammatical. 2 syntactical. 
1ft' ~ naljwagi ladj pI -yyal {derisJ given to speaking 
in elevated language. 
IS~ naljawO I/adj invarl pompous, posh (of 
speech). kalaam-u naljawi he talks posh. 2 fin-naljawi 
Inl posh elevated language. bi-yitkallim bin-naljawi he 
talks posh. 
IS C. ~ 
~li naljya In pI nawaaljil I end, side. fil-musmaar 
bi-yitribit min in-naljyiteen the bolt is fastened at both 
ends. wiqift' fin-naljya I-yimiin min iflaaric I stood on 
the right-hand side of the street. hiyya cam1a zayy 
il1allaaya min in-naljyiteen it looks like a fine-tooth 
comb at either end. 2 aspect, respect, regard. min 
in-naljya d-dawliyya from the international point of 
view. fiaammin min naljyit-ha he was reassured as far 
as she was concerned. 3 lalso pI fanljaa f t I place, local-
ity. fibn in-nal;ya a local, one from the locality. 
fi-gamiic fanljaa f ig-gumhuriyya in all part~ of the 
republic. 
11 naljyit Iprepl in the direction of, towards. b~~' naljyit-
ha he looked towards her. !'iItafatt' naljyit iI-baab 
I turned towards the door. maama xaragit gary' naljyit 
is-suuq Mother rushed off in the direction of the 
market. 
~ 
naljlja (i) Ivtl to put aside, remove. fil-wazilr 
naljljaa bciid Ii-suu f siluuk-u the minister removed him 
(from his post) for his bad conduct. -vn tanljiyya, 
tanljiya; avalpva minaljlji. 
~I fitnaljlja Ivill to step aside, step down (from an 
office). 2 to be put aside, be removed. -avaliva 
mitnaljlji. 
Iyt~ 
.,...0.; naxb In pI fanxaabl toast.firibna naxb ~-~adaaqa 
we drank a toast to friendship. 
~ 
nuxba In pI nuxabl selection, chosen group, select 
few. dool nuxba mumtaaza min id-dakatra these are a 

select group of doctors. 
-,..> \; naaxib t In '1 elector . 
...,...;..;; 1 fintaxab Ivtl I to vote for. fana ntaxabt-u laakin 
ma-nagal:J1 I voted for him but he was unsuccessful. 
2 to elect. fintaxabuu rafiis il-lagna they elected him 
chairman. 
- It he 
literary passive form 
occursl 
l:Ja-yuntaxab il-marra di he will be elected this time. -vn 
fintixaab; ava mintixib; pva muntaxab. 
..,..l;.;,;1 fintixaab In pi -aatl election. 
..;.l;.;,;1 fintixaabi ladjl electoral. d~yra ntixabiyya elec-
toral ward, constituency. gawla ntixabiyya election 
campaign tour. 
~ 
muntaxab Inl [sport] team selected from the 
best players of a number of clubs. muntaxab il-
gumhuriyya the team selected from the various clubs in 
the Republic to form the national team. 
~I fistanxabJ = fintaxab. -vn fistinxaab; ava 
mistanxab. 
1 Y t" 
~ 
n~ab (i) Ivtl to bore into. fis-suus naxab if1agara 
w-xarram-ha W-baldifwayya l:Ja-tUljal the woodworm 
have bored tunnels through the tree and it will soon fall. 
-vn naxabaan; ava naaxib; pva manxuub. 
..,...0...:;1 fitnaxab Ivil to be bored into. - iva mitnixib. 
tt" 
~ naxx (i) Ivil I to kneel (of a quadruped, particularly 
a camel). 2 to slow down or give way under pressure, 
become tired and yield. fis-sitt ik-kibiira naxxit min kutr 
if-fUyl i w-ma-ljidrit-/ tkammil the old woman gave way 
under the heavy work-load and could not continue. 
fil-larabiyya naxxit mil-mafawiir the car packed up 
from being run too much. -vn naxx, naxaxaan; ava 
naaxix. 
~ 
naxxax Ivtll to cause a quadruped to kneel. 2 to 
cause to slow down or give way, cause to become tired 
and yield under pressure. kutr if1uyli naxxax-u the 
pressure of work made him flag. -vn tanxiix;· avalpva 
minaxxax. 
~I fitnaxxax Ivil passive of naxxax. -iva mitnaxxax. 
I J t" 
fJ naxar l (u) Ivil [coarse] to grunt, snort. "vn naxr; 
ava naaxir. 
)~ manxuur = minxaar. 
)l;..;.. minxaar In pi manaxiirl nostril, (loosely also) 
nose. fir-raagil da minxaar-u kbiir ljawi this man has a 
very big nose. 
853 
.r-> L:... manaxiir Ipl nl nose. manaxiir-i sayba my nose is 
running. IIgaab manaxiir-u fit-turaab he humiliated 
him. - rool:J-u baljit fi-manaxiir-u he became furious 
with exasperation. -manaxir-hum [IS-sama their noses 
are in the air, they're stuck-up. 
1 
•• 
Jc.'" 
fJ naxar2 (u) Ivtl to bore into, burrow through. 
fis-suus naxar sinaan-ak decay has rotted your teeth . 
-vn naxr; ava naaxir; pva manxuur . 
~I fitnaxar Ivil to be bored into, be burrowed 
through. - iva mitnixir. 
YJ t" 
..,..fJ naxrab I Ivilto rummage, scrabble. fanasaamil 
firaan bi-tnaxrab wara d-dulaab ik-kibiir I hear mice 
scuttling behind the big cupboard. IIfakkeet ir-radyu 
w-naxrabt i fii fwayya fal:Jaawil f~allal:J-u ma-ljdirti1 
I took the radio apart and tinkered about with it trying 
to fix it, but I couldn't. 2 Ivtl to bore into. fis-suus 
naxrab il-xafab the woodworm tunnelled through the 
wood. -vn naxraba; avalpva minaxrab. 
..,.. ~I fitnaxrab Ivill (impersonal) passive of naxrab 
1. fit-tilivizyoon dayman laayiz yitnaxrab fi-sluuk-u 
l-midaldila di lafaan .yiftayal these dangling wires al-
ways need to be played about with for the television set 
to work. 2 to be bored into. -vn tinaxriib; iva 
mitnaxrab. 
j t" 
:,;.; naxaz (u) Ivtl to poke, prod. ril-walad bi-YGayya( 
lafaan faxuu naxaz-u f-gamb-u the boy's crying be-
cause his brother prodded him in the side. -vn naxz, 
naxazaan; ava naaxiz; pva manxuuz. 
.:,;.; naxza linst n, pi -aatl a prod, a poke. 
~I fitnaxaz Ivil to be poked, be prodded. - iva 
mitnixiz . 
. 
:,;.; naxxiz Ivtl to poke or prod repeatedly. -vn tanxiiz; 
a~alpva minaxxiz. 
~I fitnaxxiz Ivil to be poked or prodded repeatedly. 
- iva mitnaxxiz. 
V" t" 
...,..;.; naxas (u) Ivtl to goad, prod, prick. -vn naxs, 
naxasaan; ava naaxis; p.va manxuus. 
~ 
naxsa In pi -aatl goad. 
~I fitnaxas Ivil to be goaded, prodded or pricked. 
- iva mitnixis. 
...,..;.; naxxas Ivtl to prod, prick or goad repeatedly. -vn 
tanxiis; avalpva minaxxas. 

~I fitnaxxas Ivil to be prodded. pricked or goaded 
repeatedly. - iva mitnaxxas. 
";'.J ..;. t iJ 
..;.~ naxfuuf In pi naxafiifl 1 gill. 2 nasal cavity. 
{illil il-mayya f-naxafiif-i the water got up my nose. 
- also nalffuuj. 
Itt iJ 
r naxal (a) Ivtl 1 to heave against (s.th.) till it yields. 
fig-gamuusa naxalil is-saqya the buffalo heaved over 
the water-wheel. II riI-mu{rib qalad yinxal (uul il-Ieel 
the singer went on braying all night long. 2 to deal (s.o.) 
a toppling blow. naxal-u kaffhe gave him a slap that 
sent him reeling. - Ivil 3 to tell whoppers. tell unbe-
lievable lies. -vn naxl, naxalaan; ava naaxil. 
r.i fanxal lell more/most fibbing or bragging. 
t~ naxxaal/adj °1 fibber. braggart. 
r'1 filnaxal Ivil passive of naxal 1 and 2. - iva 
m!tnixil. 
r naxxal Ivil to jerk. Judder. riI-larabiyya naxxalit 
minnt the car jerked forward out of my control. - vn 
lanxlIl; ava mmaxxal. 
2ttiJ 
t~ nuxaal Inl bone marrow. 
~~ nuxaali ladjl {anal} 1 spinal. saayil nuxaali 
spinal fluid. 2 pertaming to bone marrow. 
I Jt iJ 
~ 
naxal (u) Ivtl to sift. sieve. bi-yunxulu d-diqiiq 
they are sifting the flour. -vn naxl, nixiil, naxalaan; ava 
naaxil; pva manxuul. 
-.r~ nuxaala Inl siftings of flour. bran.llma-yiswaaJ 
malw' widn-u nuxaala he's not worth as much bran as 
would fill his ear! -zayy in-nuxaala I-mabduura scat-
tered far an.d wide and in great abundance. as in 
riI-baqq I zayy in-nuxaala I-mabduura the bedbugs are 
all over the place! 
J.>w manxul In pi manaaxil, manaxiill flour-sifter. 
flour-sieve. 
J.>wl fitnaxallvil to be sifted. be sieved. - iva mitnixil. 
2 J tiJ 
~ 
naxllcoll nl palm tree(s). 
~ 
naxla lunit n. pi -aall a palm tree. 
~~ naxlaaya = naxla. 
~ 
nt .. iiI' = naxl. 
854 
rtiJ 
4.~ nuxaama Inl piece of phlegm. 
~I filnaxxam Ivil to clear one's throat of phlegm 
noisily. hawk. -ava mitnaxxam. 
tiJtiJ 
~ 
naxnax I Ivtl to cause to yield or lose resolution. 
ma-naxnax-uuJlfeer il-bacJiif it is only the tip that 
made him change his mind. 2 Ivil to yield. lose resolu-
tion. -vn naxnaxa; avalpva minaxnax. 
rl fitnaxnax 
Ivil 
to 
lose 
resolution. 
-ava 
mitnaxnax. 
.J.J t iJ 
.;";'; naxwar Ivil to probe (e.g., with the finger). ba{{al 
naxwara f-manaxiir-ak stop rooting around (with your 
finger) in your nose! IInaxwaru fil-mawquulti-lfaayit 
ma gaabu faxr-u they probed into the matter till they 
got to the bottom of it. -vn naxwara; ava minaxwar . 
.;";":;1 fitnaxwar Ivil (impersonal) passive of naxwar. 
fil-manaxiir lamma yitnaxwar fiiha kliir tiwram if you 
pick your nose a lot it will swell. -iva mitnaxwar. 
Iy ~iJ 
..,..,Ai nadab I (i) I Ivtl to bewail. nadabu I-ya;; ilti xan-
hum they bewailed the bad luck that had let them down. 
2 Ivil to utter words of lamentation. raayil nadba lala 
goz-ha she started to wail over her (dead) husband. -vn 
nadb, nadabaan; ava naadib. 
,-:,,!,Ai nidiib Inl mourning. bewailing. lamentation. 
~\.l; naddaaba In pi -aal, naddaabal hired female 
mourner. 
..,....I,;jl fitnadab I Ivil to be bewailed. - iva mitnidib. 
2y ~iJ 
..,..,Ai nadab 1 (I) Ivtl to delegate. commission. fana 
nadabl-ak lanni I've made you my representative. -vn 
nadb, nadabaan; ava naadib; pva manduub. 
~,Ai nadba Ipl -aall instance noun of nadb. 
""'J~ manduub In °1 one with delegated powers. dele-
gate, representative. manduub flrka company repre-
sentative. manduub ~arf employee authorized to make 
payments on behalf of his employers . 
..,....I,;j\ fitnadab 1 Ivil to be delegated. be commissioned. 
- iva milnidib. 
..,...,I;;.j \ finladab' Ivil to appoint to a post in an outside 
institution. second. baqaa-Iu lafar siniin muntadab 
landuhum he's been on secondment to them for ten 
years. -Ithe literary passive occursl mumkin tuntadab 

bis-saar;a you may be seconded by the hour. -vn 
rintidaab; ava mintidib, muntadib; pva muntadab. 
..,.,1.x;;1 rintidaab In pi -aatl mandate, mandatory rule. 
filis[iin kaanit dawla tabt iI-intidaab iI-biri(aani Palestine 
was a country under British mandatory rule. 
JJoJ 
:i; nidd In pi randaadll equal, peer. laazim tir;amil-ni 
mur;amlit in-nidd i lin-nidd you have to treat me as an 
equal. 2 rival, opponent. 
~:i; naddid Ivil to be critical, find fault. magl!s ij-far;b i 
naddid bil-maJariir; ig-gidiida the People's Assembly 
was up in arms about the new projects. -vn tandiid; ava 
milladdid. 
,';';;1 rimaddid Ivil (impersonal) passive of naddid. 
ril- rar;maal di laazim yitnaddid biiha these acts must be 
condemned. - iva mimaddid. 
I .) J oJ 
.;.;; nudur, nidir (a) Ivil to be rare. yindar tilaaqi zayyu 
I-yomeen dool you rarely find the like of it these days. 
mijmumkin tilaqii hina ril/a ma nudur you can only find 
him here very rarely. -vn nuduriyya, nuduura; ava 
naadir. 
.;,\; naadir 1 ladj *1 rare. gamaal naadir rare beauty. 
2 (also nadra or naadir lamma or nadra lamma) modal 
of rarity. rin ikkallim naadir tifham-u when he speaks, 
one can rarely understand him. naadir lamma tjuuf 
il-bagaat di you rarely see these things. 
o.;,\; nadra In pi nawaadirl 1 odd tale, strange story. 
tuqr;ud mar;aa yibkii-Iak nawaadir kitiira when you sit 
with him he tells you a lot of strange tales. II ramma 
lIawaadir how very strange! 2 eccentricity, odd be-
haviour. ris-sitt i di liiha lIawaadir this lady does some 
very odd things . 
.;.;;i randar lell rarer/rarest . 
.;';';;1 rimaddar Ivil 1 to muse on or retell funny happen-
ings or strange stories. 2 to make fun. bi-yitnaddaru 
r;ala IIi ba~al millha 1- rusbuur; illi faat they make fun of 
her for what she did last week. - ava mimaddar. 
2.) J oJ 
.;..i.; nadar (i) Ivtl to vow to offer (food or money to the 
poor or a charitable cause if a wish or prayer is fulfil-
led). lIadarti fuul wi-r;eeJ Ii-rummi haaJim law 
iI-mawt:/.uur; da xili~ I have vowed to offer beans and 
bread (to the poor) for the sake of Umm Hashim (i.e. 
Sayyida Zaynab) if this affair is cleared up. - vn nadr, 
nadaraan; ava naadir; pva manduur. 
855 
.;..i.; nadr Ilvnl IIqilli min in-nadr i wi-wfi [prov! "" 
don't promise more than you can fulfil. 2 In pi nuduurl 
2a vow. 2b something dedicated to be offered in fulfil-
ment of a vow. 
11 nadrin r;alayya I vow (to do so-and-so). nadrill 
r;alayya rin nagabt awazzar; labma r;al-fuqara I vow to 
distribute meat to the poor if I pass (the exam). 
.;~I ritnadar /vil passive of nadar - iva mimidir. 
J .) J oJ see .) j;, oJ : mandara 
t. JoJ 
:i.&..;; nidr;a In pi -aat, nidar;1 drop. nidr;it mayya a drop 
of water. 
t:i; naddar; /vil to drip. ma-na([arit-fi yadoobak 
naddar;it it didn't rain, there were hardly more than a 
few spots. -vn tandiir;; ava minaddar;. 
t';';;l rimaddar; Ivil (impersonal) passive of naddar;. 
yiruubu 
l-mustaJfa 
yimaddar; 
luhum 
nidr;iteen 
fi-r;nee-hum w-xalaa~ they go to hospital to have a few 
eye-drops administered and that is that. - iva 
mitnaddar;. 
tJoJ 
t.;; naday (u) (also maday, mat:/.ayT) Ivtl to chew . 
bi-yunduy libaan he's chewing gum. duxxaan in-nady 
chewing tobacco. -vn nady, nadayaan; ava naadiy; pva 
manduuy. 
~.;; nadya J Ipl -aatl instance noun of nady. 
~.;; nadya 2 (alsomadya, mat:/.m T )/n, pi -aatl chewing 
tobacco. 
~I:i; naddaaya In pi -aat, nadadiiYI stickjaw, caramel 
candy. 
t~1 rimaday (also ritmaday, ritmat:/.ay) Ivil to be 
chewed. - iva mitnidiy. 
IJ JoJ 
J.;; nadlladj pi randaalllow, base, despicable, mean. 
J.;;i randal lell morelmost low, base, despicable or 
mean. 
;JI.;; nadaala Inl baseness, despicability, meanness. 
J:i; naddil Ivil to behave in a low and despicable man-
ner, become low and despicable. wi-marra wabda 
ba~~eet laqeet-u btada ynaddil mar;aaya and all of a 
sudden I found him playing dirty with me. - ava 
minaddil. 
J..I:.;..I ristandil Ivtl 1 to consider low, mean or despic-
able. kull in-naas istandilit-u lamma ma-rt:/.ii-fyitbarrar; 
everybody thought him despicable for not contributing. 

2 to select for despicability and meanness. - Ivil 3 to 
behave in a scoundrelly manner. -vn ristindaa/; ava 
mistandil. 
1 J ~ ~ see J ~ ~ r : mandai, mindaa/a 
r~~ 
r~ nidim (a) Ivil to feel regret, feel remorse. 
ma-tindam-J' la/a lIi/aat don't cry over spilt milk. -vn 
nadaama, nadam, nadamaan; ava nadmaan, naadim. 
"'I~ nadaama Inl regret, remorse.llya nadaama or ya 
nadamt-i {women in trad soc} = good grief! (an express-
ion of exasperation or surprise). 
-~abal:J l:Jaa/-u 
nadaama he became destitute. -fil-laga/a n-nadaama 
{prov} = haste makes waste. 
rl;;1 ritnaddim Ivil to be regretful, be remorseful. -ava 
mitnaddim. 
. 
~~ 
.~ nadah (a) Ivt and vii to call (to), call out (to). 
nadaht it-tales (or lit-tales) I hailed the taxi. ruul:J indah-u 
(or indah-Iu or indah lalee) go and call him. -vn nadh, 
nadahaan; ava naadih; pva manduuh . 
.... ~ nadha linsrn, pI -aatl a call. 
.... 1.l.:J 1 rin-naddaaha Inl evil spirit believed to come out 
at night and call people by their own names and lead 
them mesmerized to certain death by drowning. 
• ...I.:il ritnadah Ivil I (impersonal) passive of nadah. 
II ril-mutriba di b-yitnidih laleeha I-yomeen dool this 
singer is in demand these days, this singer is popular 
these days. ril-l:Janatiir ma-yitnidih-J' laleeha dilwac;ti 
horse-cabs aren't in demand now. 2 to be called (to). 
II ril-moot ma-yitnidih-Jdeath is not something one goes 
looking for. - ril-maxfi I-ism' da iii ma-yitnidih = that 
rotten bastard whose name isn't worth mentioning. - iva 
mitnidih. 
I .J ~ ~ 
IS~ nidi (a) Ivil to become moist or damp (particularly 
with dew). -vn nadayaan; ava naadi. 
IS~ nada I (i) Ivtl to afflict with nadwa. -vn nadw; ava 
naadi; pva mandi. 
IS~ nada 2 In! dew. ya-lli b-nadaa-ki ya l:Jilba bi-nada 
I-reet ya l:Jilba {vendor's cry} dewy fenugreek, fenu-
greek still with the dew of the fields! 
.J~ nadwa I Ipl nadaawil I frost. 2 exudation pro-
duced by certain plant pests. nadwa badriyya exudation 
produced by the fungus Alternaria selani. nadwa 
lssaliyya honeydew, sticky exudation produced by the 
aphis called mann. ' 
856 
~J~ nadawiyya = nadwa. 
1S.)l; naadi I ladj */1 damp, moist. 2 blessed with good 
fortune, blessed with wealth. baxt-u naadi he has good 
luck (with money etc.). nahaar-ak naadi have a profit-
able day! 
.JI~ nadaawa Inl moisture, dampness. 
IS~ nadda I Ivil to drizzle. ral:Jsan-li rafiil iI-rssiil min 
lal-man/ar ral:Jsan id-dinya baayin laleeha l:Ja-tnaddi 
I'd better take the washing off the line because it looks 
as if it's going to drizzle. 2/vtl{agric} to dry (maize) of 
dew gathered from being out of doors overnight (of the 
sun). -vn tandiyya; ava/pva minaddi. 
1Sl;;1 ritnadda Ivil passive of nadda 2. -iva mitnaddi. 
IS-",I rintada Ivil to be afflicted with exudations from 
plant pests. - iva mintidi. 
IS~ 1 ristanda Ivt/l· to consider (too) moist or damp. 
2 to select for moistness. - ava mistandi . 
loS ~ ~ 
.J~ nadwa2 
In 
pI nadawaatl discussion 
group, 
seminar . 
1S.)l; naadi 2 In pI nawaadi, randiyya, randiyal club. 
naadi ryaat[i sports club. naadi sinima cinema club. 
1S.)l; naada Ilvt and viI to call (to), call out (to). 
ril-rumm' bi-tnaadi (la/a or li-)rawlad-ha the mother 
calls (to) her children.l:Jaagib iI-mal:Jkama naada (lala) 
I-muttaham the court usher called for the defendant. 
2 Ivil to call, call out. laazim tirudd' rawwil maf-Jawiif 
yinaadi you have to answer as soon as the sergeant calls. 
ranaadi rac;uul b-~allal:J bawabiir ig-gaaz I call out 
saying 'I mend paraffin stoves!' -vn minadiyya, nida, 
nidaar; ava minaadi. 
11 naada lala to cry (wares). bi-ynaadi lak-katakiit he's 
hawking chicks through the streets. -naada bi- to 
appeal for. ris-sawra bi-tnaadi b-ziyaadit iI-rintaag the 
revolution calls for increased production. 
.I~ ,I~ nida, nidaarT Inl call, cry. rilli bi-ybiilu 
fif-Jaaril kull' waal:Jid luu nida each of those who sell 
(their wares) in the street has a cry. 
1S.)l.:.. minaadi or munaadi In *1 I parking attendant. 
2 {obsol} town-crier, one who announces the decrees of 
the Sultan etc. 
IS.)\.;; 1 ritnaada Ivil passive of naada. - iva mitnaadi. 
t~~ see t~~ 

[J.J see [\.S J .J : nariig 
J\.S[J.J 
~; nargiila <P niirgil> In pI -aat, naragiill narghile, 
water-pipe. 
j J.J see j.J J .J : naruuz, naruuz, neeruuz 
j ....i J .J 
:); narfiz, narviz <It nervoso> Ivt/ to irritate, annoy, 
set one's nerves on edge. man;ar-u bi-ynarfiz-ni the 
(very) sight of him makes me touchy. -vn narfaza, 
narvaza; ava/pya minarfiz, minarviz. 
:); nirfiz <Engl nervous> ladj invarl nervy. 
:).r;1 fitnarfiz, fitnarviz Ivil to behave irritably or be-
come irritable. ma-titnarfiz-f; ealayya don't be bad 
tempered with me! b-alJiss; b-qarabaat tjalb-i tiela qawi 
lamma fatnarfiz I feel my heart beats pounding faster 
when I get upset. - ava mitnarfiz, mitnarviz. 
[.JJ.J 
~)L; naring <P niirang> Icoll nl Seville orange(s). 
-also laring. 
j.JJ.J 
jJ)L; naruuz, naruuz (also neeruz) <P nau-roz> In! 
first day of the Coptic year (11th September). filii 
yizrae dura fi-naruuz yaaxud qaluulJa min yeer kuuz 
(prov] he who sows maize at naruuz gets a cob without 
seeds. 
[\.S.u.J 
~J.rJ1 fin-nurwiig Iprop nl Norway. 
..r...J; nurwiigi 1 ladj *1 Norwegian. 2 In *1 a Norwe-
gian. 3 In, no pll the Norwegian language. 
[\.SJ.J 
~; nariig:fakuuf fabu nariig hammer with a wedge-
shaped edge opposite the striking face. 
c.j.J 
C)' nazalJ (a) 1 Ivtl to empty (of dirty water or the 
like). nazalJit iI-lJooq she emptied out the basin. nazalJu 
l-bakaburt they emptied the cesspool. 2i Ivil to mi-
grate. nazalJu mil-balad baed iI-lJarb they left the coun-
try after the war. -vn nazlJ, niziilJ, nizlJiyya, nazalJaan; 
ava naazilJ; pya manzuulJ. 
4:.. J nazlJa Ipl -aatl instance noun of nazlJ. 
8S7 
Cr'1 fitnazalJ Ivil passive of nazalJ 1. - iva mitnizilJ. 
Jj.J 
)..i;i fanzar Ivtl to give a warning to. II/aqad faezara 
man fanzar {prov] he who who allows you time to mend 
your ways by giving you a warning has every justifica-
tion for acting against you if you pay no heed. -vn 
finzaar; ava munzir. 
;I..i;1 finzaar z 1 Ivn!lI~uffaarit finzaar warning siren. 
- In pI -aatl 2 warning. 3 {pol] ultimatum. 
j j .J 
j nazz (i) 1 Ivil to ooze out. fiza dust" eal- farq; tlaatji 
I-mayya bi-tnizz; talJt; riglee-k if you tread on the 
ground you'll find the water oozes out under your feet. 
2 Ivt/ to ooze, drip with. qurt-u bi-tnizz" earaq his fore-
head is oozing sweat. II riI-fi(iir bi-ynizz; samna the pas-
try is saturated with fat. -vn nazz, nazazaan; ava naaziz. 
jlj nazzaaz ladjl 1 (too) porous. qulla nazzaaza a 
water-pot whose porous texture allows too much water 
to seep through. 2 leaky, seeping, oozing. garlJ; 
nazzaaz an oozing wound. II mara nazzaaza a woman 
who is always crying. 
jj nazziz Ivil to seep, let out liquid continuously. -vn 
tanziiz; ava minazziz. 
Itj.J 
tJ nazae' (a) Ivtl to withdraw, take away (a right). 
nazaeu minnu milkiyyit i1- farq they took from him the 
right to possess the land. naZe is-silaalJ disarmament. 
-vn nazaeaan, naZe; ava naazie ; pya manzuue. 
t.r'1 fitnazae Ivil to be withdrawn (of a right). - iva 
mitnizie · 
tjL; naazie I Ivtl to dispute with, quarrel with. faxuu 
naze-u eala milkiyyit iI- farq his brother disputed with 
him the ownership of the land. -vn munazea, minazea; 
ava minaazie . 
tj\';;1 fitnaazie Ivil 1 to get into a dispute (with one 
another). 2 to be disputed with. -iva mitnaazie. 
t":;;; I fintazae' = nazae· - vn fintizaae ; ava/pya 
mintizie· 
2tj.J 
tjL; naaziez Ivil to moan. bi-yxatraf mis-suxuniyya 
w-yif4.al yinaazie he raves with fever and keeps on 
moaning. -vn minazea; ava minaazie ! 
....ij .J 
JJ nazaf (i) 1 Ivil to bleed, haemorrhage. baed 
iI-wilaada f4.ilt; fanzif kitiir after giving birth I went on 

bleeding a lot. rana b-anzif min manaxiir-i I get nose-
bleeds. 2/vtl to bleed (blood). nazaft' damm' ktiir 
I lost a lot of blood. - vn niziif, naziif; ava naazif; pva 
manzuuf. 
~; niziif, nazii[f Inl haemorrhage. 
"";.;,;;1 ritnazaf Ivil to be lost (of blood). -iva mitnizif. 
"";.;,;:;-1 ristanzifi Ivtl to drain, sap. rij-jurb' b-yistanzif 
{aqt-u drinking is sapping his energy. II !Jarb istinzaaf 
war of attrition. - vn ristinzaaf; avalpva mustanzif, 
mistanzif; pva mustanzaf. 
Jj.j 
J; nizil (i) Ivil I to descend, go downward, move 
downward. sikkiinit il-maqa~~' b-tinzil lala sift ik-
kitaab the blade of the guillotine comes down on the 
bottom of the book. mzlitlalee nuq{lIeen mayya a cou-
ple of drops of water fell on it. ril-larabiyya nizlit 
fi-ma{abb the car went into a pothole. bi-yinzilu 
fil-!Jafr' I-yaayitll-manaslib il-ma{luuba they dig down 
till they reach the required levels. (affa n-nuur wi-nizil 
ta!Jt il-m{a he put out the light and got under the bed-
cover. ri{-{ariiq bi-yinzil min hma the road slopes down 
from here.llnizillalee laraq he broke out in a sweat. 
nizillaleeha damm she started bleeding. nizillaleeha 
I-!Jeeq she started menstruating. 2 to decline, become 
reduced. ril-!Jaraara nizlit the temperature went down. 
ril-raslaar nizlit the prices went down. rana lammaal 
naazil [il-xissiyya I keep losing weight. II nizil min 
na;ar(-u) to go down in (s.o.'s) estimation. -[in-naazil 
on the decline, as in rit-tigaara fm-naazil trade is on the 
decline, baqeel fm-naazilli-yaayitlamma baqeet ramji 
b-la~aaya I continued to get worse till I reached the 
stage where I had to walk with a stick. 3 to disembark, 
dismount. laawlZ ranzilland il-midaan I want to get 
off at the square. rmzil mit-taksi get out of the taxi! 4 to 
depart, set off. nizilt' mil-beet I left the house. nizlu 
(/i-Jl-juyl they went off to work. ril-muwagaf naazil 
ragaaza the official is on holiday. 5 to appear, emerge. 
ril-mulaakim nizil il-!Jalba the boxer came out into the 
ring. ril-fariiq nizil il-mallab the team emerged onto 
the field. ril-mu:;ahraat mamnuul tinzil ij-jaaril it is 
forbidden for the demonstrations to go out onto the 
street. ris{uwaana gdiida nizlit (fi-)s-suuq a new record 
came out on the market. ril-firaax bi-tinzil ig-gamliyya 
kull' yoom talaat chickens are available at the co-
operative every Tuesday. ris-sitt' fiz-zaar bi-tinzil 
lad-daqqa iii bi-trayya!J-ha a woman at a zaar joins in 
(with the others) when the rhythm that soothes her is 
played. 6 to reside, lodge. nizilt" land axuu-ya I stayed 
at my brother's. nizlit fi-Iukanda she stayed at a hotel. 
858 
7 preverb with following verbal noun signalling intensi-
ty of action. nizilt"lalee qarb or nizilt' qarb' [ii I beat 
him for all I was worth. kaan naazil raq~ he was 
absorbed in dancing. hiyya nazla tawqiib fi-xilqit-ha 
she's busy painting her face. -/ellipticallyl nizilt a lalee 
bil-l~aaya I beat him for all I was worth with a stick. 
-vn nuzuul, nazla; ava naazil. 
~ nizil lala to submit to. nizilt d lala kalaam-u 
I cC)mplied with what he said. nizilt d lala !Jukm abuu-
ya I submitted to my father's decision. nuzuulan lala in 
compliance with, as in !J-arajja!J nafs-i nuzuulan lala 
ra¥bit-kum I'll stand for election in compliance with 
your wish. 
;(); nazla In pi -aatl infection. nazla malawiyya intes-
tinal infection. nazla jalbiyya (or jUlabiyya) bronchi-
tis. nazlit bard attack ~f cold. 
JJ.? manzuul In pi manaziill [obsolJ compound of 
opium, hashish and spices. 
~ ':/; nazalaaya 
In 
pi -aatl slope, path sloping 
downwards. 
J-; nazii/ In pi nuzala, nuzalaa r t I temporary resident 
(e.g., in an hotel, prison, hospital). 
J.? manzilt In pi manaazill residence, home. nimrit 
il-manzil home 
(telephone) 
number. 
II!Jamaam 
manaazil domesticated pigeons. 
J.? manzili ladjl household. radawaat manziliyya 
household utensils. !Jajaraat manziliyya household in-
sects. tadbiir manzili domestic science. 
J.? manzal In pi manaazill slope, path sloping 
downwards. 
J; nazzil Ivtl I to close up, bring, take or send down, 
lower. bi-ynazzilu I-laff they are bringing down the 
luggage. nazzilnaa-ha min lal-babuur we took it off the 
primus stove. nisiib-u lijrtin yoom wl-nnazzil lalee 
taalit mayya we leave it twenty days and then water it 
for the third time. 2 to reduce. rin-natara nazzilit il-
!Jaraara the rain brought down the temperature. nazzil 
lina t-taman knock something off the price for us. 3 to 
cause to disembark. rik-kumsari nazzil-hum mil-qatr 
the conductor put them off the train. 4 to cause to 
depart, cause to set off. reeh illi nazzil-ak la~-~ub!J 
what's brought you out so early in the morning? 5 to 
cause to appear or emerge. kull' sana bi-ynazzilu marka 
gdiida ~ach year they put out a new model. - Ivil 6 to 
ejaculate. 7 to pour out (of sweat). ril-laraq nazzillala 
gism-u wil-!Jaraara xaffit sweat poured out of his body 
and the temperature subsided. -vn tanziil; ava minazzil. 
'-4.;,;; tanzii/a Ipl -aatl instance noun of tanzii/o 
Jj.;;1 ritnazzil Ivil passive of nazzil. - iva mitnazzil. 

Jjl; naazillvtl to have a duel with, contest. tinazil-ni 
fig-gary will you race me? -vn minazla; ava minaazil. 
J.i\':;1 !'itnaazil, tanaazaiT Ivil I to act condescending-
Iy. 2 to give way, step down. mij I:J-atnaazillan l:Jaqq-i 
I will not forego my rights. !'itnaazillan il-larfhe abdi-
cated the throne. 3 to contest (witho.a.). 4 to be fought 
against. -vn tanaazul; avaliva mitnaazil. 
J.i\.;;" tanaazuli ladjl in descending order. IIladd i 
tanaazuli count-down. 
J) !'anzal I Ivtl to inspire, reveal (of God). kalaam 
ma-!'anzal allaahu bihi min suliaan "" rubbish, non-
sense. IIl:Jikaaya ma-!'anzal allaahu biha min (iiz gal:Jf 
[coarse! "" bullshit. 2 Ivil to ejaculate. -vn !,inzaal; ava 
mum:.il; pva munzal. 
J.r.- munzalladjl divinely bestowed (especially of the 
Koran). Ilkalaam-u munzal his word is law, no one 
dares to disobey him. 
J.r;-I !'istanziiJ I/vtl to deduct (a sum, from a price). 
ma-tistanzillina qirfeen knock a couple of piastres off 
for us! 2/vil to give way, step down. mij mumkin 
yistanzillan illi f-raas-u he would never give up what he 
has in mind. -ava mistanzil. 
• j oj 
:u.; nuzha In pi -aat, nuzahl promenade, outing. 
.1"; nuzahi ladj pi -yya/l spendthrift, prodigal. maal 
ik-kunazi lin-nuzahi [prov! "" the miser's wealth is 
spent by his prodigal heir. 2 elegant and fun-loving. 
!'aqral wi-nuzahi [prov! his head is afflicted with ring-
worm but he's always dressed to kill (of one who is 
oblivious to his own shortcomings). 
~I; nazaaha Inl honesty, probity, integrity. 
..... ; 
naziih ladj pi nuzahal honest, scrupulous. 
• ) 
!'anzah lell morelmost honest or scrupulous. 
.j nazzih or nazzah Ivt/l to give pleasure and enjoy-
ment to. !'ana malaaya qirfeen wi-Iaazim !'anazzih nafs-
i I have a bit of money so I must give myself a good 
time. 2 to dissociate (s.o., from s.th. undesirable). 
!,il-waal:Jid laazim yinazzih nafs-u lan dool one must 
avoid them like the plague. - vn tanziih: ava minauih, 
minazzah. 
• j;; 1 !,itnazzih or !,itnazzah Ivil passive of nazzih. - iva 
mitnazzih, mitnazzah. 
.? muntazah In pi -aatl park, public garden. 
.JjoJ 
oJ; nazwa In pi nazawaatl I whim, caprice. di nazwit 
fabaab wi-bllkra yilqal it's just a youthful whim; he'll 
know better when he's older. 2 outburst. surge. 
859 
• I I,)" oj 
L..; nisa I: lirq in-nisa sciatica. 
1 I I,)" oj see • .J I,)" oj : nisa:! 
·Yl,)"oJ 
...,.....; nasab 1 (iJ Ivtl to trace back to. da b-yinsibuu 
Ii-baxt-a-ha (-(ayyib this they attribute to her good for-
tune. - vn nasab; ava naasib; pva mansuub. 
...,.....; nasab 2 Inl I pedigree, lineage, family connec-
tions. nasab-u yirgallil-mamaliik his line goes back to 
the Mamelukes. 2 relationship' by marriage. !'abu 
nasab [joe! epithet of a male in-law. !'in-nasab l~ab 
{prov! (one's) in-laws are as valuable as (one's) blood-
relatives. II !,il-l:Jasab win-nasab social standing. 
..,.."....:.. mansuub In pi manasiibl level (in surveying 
etc.). mansuub il-mayya the water level. mansuub il-
l:Jafr the level of excavation. 
..,...,....; nisiib In pi nasaayibl male reldtive-in-Iaw. 
~ 
minassib ladj *1 of good parentage, of good 
pedigree. 
'-:-\.; naasib 1 Ivtl to marry into (a family). naasib naas 
mul:Jtaramiin he married into a respected family. II !'in 
ma-kaan lak !'ahl i naasib {prov! if you have no (worthy) 
family acquire one by marriage. -vn minasba; avalpva 
minaasib . 
,-:-\':;1 !,itnaasib 1 Ivil passive of naasib I. 
- iva 
mitnaasib. 
~I !,intasabT Ivi/l to be associated, associate one-
self. !'alt[aa!' muntasibiin associate members. 2 {acad! 
to enrol as an external student. 
1yl,)"oJ 
........ nisba In pi nisabl proportion, degree, rate . 
!'il-fannaniin luhum nisab min il-mabilaat the artists get 
payments based on percentages of the sales. nisbit il-
kijfiyya the degree of shrinkage. nisbit il-!'ilfaa!' it[-
t[ariibi the rate of tax exemption. nisba mi!'awiyya per-
centage. IIbin-nisba Ii- for, as for, as far as ... is con-
cerned, as in !'iI-libs i da lir-riggaala !'amma bin-nisba 
lis-sittaat fa-b-yilbisu laadi this costume is for the men; 
as for the women, they dress ordinarily, huwwa-nta 
bin-nisba-Inafwayya do you imagine you're nothing to 
us? 
~ 
nisbi ladjl proportional, relative. 
11 nisbiyyan ladvl proportionately, relatively . 
...,.....;i !'ansab lell morelmost appropriate, morelmost 
fitting. 
'-:-\.; naasib 2 Ivtl to be suitable (for), be appropriate 
(to). fil-waqt il-munaasib at the appropriate time. 

bi-~ammim Ii-kull' wal:Jdaf-fakl illi yinasib-ha for each 
woman we design the style that suits her, -vn munasba; 
ava minaasib, munaasib. 
4.-l.:... munasba 
In 
pI -aatl 
occasion. 
rakliteen 
bi-munasbit il-fil:Jraam two rakla to mark the entering 
of the state of being a pilgrim.llfil-munasbaat on special 
occasions, as in l:Jagaat ma-ti(lal-f ilia fil-munasbaat 
things that are brought out only on special occasions. 
- bil-munasba (di) incidentally, by the way, as in 
bil-munasba fakkart-i-ni b-l:Jaaga incidentally, you've 
reminded me of something. - bi-munasbit feeh what 
(ever) for? 
"':-1.:;1 fitnaasib 2 r Ivil to be accordant. t~arrufaat-ak 
ma-titnasib-f' mala markaz-ak your conduct is out of 
keeping with your position. -vn tanaasub; ava 
mitnaasib, mutanaasib. 
"':-I.:; tanaasub In pI -aatl (math] proportion. tanaasub 
laksi inverse proportion . 
......-.:;-1 fistansib Ivtl to select for suitability. -ava 
mistansib. 
~ IJ" ~ see ~.J IJ" ~ : nasuut 
[IJ"~ 
e-' nasag (i) Ivtl to weave. -vn nasg, nasagaan, nasiig; 
ava naasig; pva mansuug. 
~ 
nasiig Icoll n, pI fansiga r I I textile(s). 2 (anat] 
tissue. 
[.W nassaag In *1 weaver. 
[..,....:... mansuug In pI -aatl textile, fabric. 
~I fitnasag Ivil to be woven. -iva mitnisig. 
tlJ"~ 
~ 
nasax (i, a, u) Ivtll to make a copy of. fis-sikirteer 
bi-yunsux-ha lala 1- faala k-katba the secretary copies it 
on the typewriter. 2 (leg] to abrogate. fii qawaniin 
bi-tunsux qawaniin wi-tlaaal fal:Jkam-ha there are laws 
that abrogate (other) laws and abolish their stipula-
tions. -vn nasx; ava naasix; pva mansuux. 
~ 
nasx Inl an Arabic script (commonly used in 
printed books, newspapers etc.). 
~ 
nasxa linst n, pI -aatl I a copying. 2 an 
abrogation. 
:b....; nusxa In pI nusaxl copy, one of the various exam-
ples of the same book or the like. 
c-:'I fitnasax Ivil passive of nasax. -iva mitnisix. 
I 
• 
.JlJ"foJ 
.r-" nisr In pI nusuur, nusural eagle. 
860 
.r---" nisiir Icoll nJ strips or striae of fibre. nisiir liil 
palm-fibre strips. lal:Jma kull-a-ha nsiir red meat (with-
out fat, gristle etc.). -also nisiil. 
0.r---" nisiira lunit n, pI nasaayirl a strip or stria of fibre. 
-also nisiila. 
;..; nassir Ivtl I to pull (s.th. fibrous) into strips. 
I:J-anassir lal:Jm-u I'll tear him to bits. 2 to fray (cloth). 
-vn tansiir; avalpva minassir. 
~I fitnassir Ivi/l to be pulled into strips (of fibrous 
material). 2 to be or become frayed (of cloth). -avaliva 
mitnassir. 
2 
• 
.JlJ"foJ 
).,,-\; nasuur In pI nawasiirl (path] fistula. 
3 
• 
.JlJ"foJ 
).; nasrr Inl prose. 
..>? nasri ladjl pertaining to prose. 
.; IJ" ~ 
...A.-.; nasaf (i) Ivtll to winnow. 2 to blow up with ex-
plosive. nasafu xa((' sikka l:Jadiid they blew up a railway 
line. -vn nas/. nasa/aan; ava naasif; pva mansuuf. 
4.i.....i nasfa Ipl -aatl instance noun of nasf. 
:UW nassaafa In pI -aatl (mil] torpedo boat. 
....&...:;1 fitnasa/lvi/l to be winnowed. 2 to be blown up 
(with explosive). - iva mitnisif. 
...A.-.;j fansal' da baifa min layyinit finna fansafnaa-
kum this (person) is (actually) the type that would 
gobble you up! 
J IJ" ~ 
.:;...; nasaq r Inl pattern, arrangement. kull il-biyuut 
lala nasaq waal:Jid all the houses are of the same layout 
and design. 
~ 
nassaq r Ivtl I to arrange harmoniously. nassaqit 
iz-zuhuur she arranged the flowers. 2 to co-ordinate. 
lagna Ii-tansiiq il-lamal been l-m~aalil:J a committee 
(responsible) for co-ordinating the work among the 
departments. Ilmaktab tansiiq (aead] student place-
ment office (through which students are allocated 
university places). - vn tansiiif, tansiiq; ava munassiq r i 
avalpva minassaif; pva munassaq. 
~I fitnassaq Ivil I to be arranged harmoniously. 
2 to be co-ordinated. -iva mitnassaq. 
~ 
I.:; tanaasaq r Ivil to be in harmony, be properly 
co-ordinated. fil-fawtaar mafruuc[ tatanaasaq mala 
balc[· the strings are supposed to be in tune with one 
another. fil-xadamaat laazim tatanaasaq mala 1- fintaag 
(public) services ought to be co-ordinated with produc-

tion. !'iI-kalaam la yatanaasaq mala 1-lal:Jn the words 
don't go well with the tune. -vn tanaasuq; ava 
mutanaasiq. 
.!JU"oJ 
.!.l...; nusk Inl ascetism. 
~ 
nuski ladjl ascetic, ascetical. 
..d...l; naasik In· and pI nussaakl ascetic, hermit, pious 
man. 
-.J.!JU"oJ 
~ 
niskafeeh (also bunn i niskafeeh) <brand 
name> In! instant coffee. 
IJU"oJ 
J-: nasal (i) 1 Ivil to become unravelled, become 
frayed. nisiila nasalit min iI-c;umaaj a thread became 
unravelled from the cloth. !,it-tanya nasalit the turn-up 
became frayed. 2 Ivtl 28 to unravel, fray. 2b to stone 
(dates). lagwa mansuula stoned pressed dates. -vn 
nasi; ava naasil; pva mansuul. 
:a....; nasla linst n, pI -aatl an unravelling. 
j.....; nisiillcoll nl strips or striae of fibre. -also nisiir. 
4l.-i nisiila lunit n, pI nasaayill a strip or stria of fibre. 
-also nisiira. 
~\...; nusaala, nisaala In/lint. 
~I !,itnasal Ivil I to be or become unravelled or 
frayed. 2 to be stoned (of dates). -avaliva mitnisil. 
~ nassill Ivtl to unravel, fray. 2 Ivil to be unravelled 
or unravel, be or become frayed. -vn tansiil; ava/pva 
minassil. 
~I !,itnassil Ivil to be or become unravelled or 
frayed. -avaliva mitnassil. 
ZJU"oJ 
J-: nasi I Ivnl giving birth, breeding. tal:Jdiid in-nasi 
birth control. 2 Icoll nl offspring, descendants. nasi in-
nabi descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. 
J-I.;;I !,itnaasillvil {bioi] to reproduce. -vn tanaasul; 
ava mitnaasil, mutanaasil. 
J-I.;; tanaasuli ladjl {bioi] pertaining to the reproduc-
tive system. !'amraaq tanasuliyya venereal diseases. 
rU".J 
4.....; nisma In pI nasaayiml breeze. ma-fii-J l:Jalta nismit 
hawa there is not even a breath of wind. kaanit in-nisma 
tariyya trudd ir-rool:J the breeze was cool and re-
freshing. II raal:J wi-rigil zayy in-nisma he went and 
came back as fast as the wind. 
861 
~ 
nasama t In pI -aatl inhabitant (in statistical 
contexts). 
~ 
nisiim, nasiim Inl breeze.llfamm in-nisiim secular 
spring holiday falling on the Monday after Coptic Eas-
ter and celebrated with morning picnics and the eating 
of traditional foods such as onions, flSiix and coloured 
eggs. 
~ nassim Ivtl to wet lightly so as to soften. nassim 
ir-riYiifwet the (dry) bread a little (to make it edible). 
2 Ivil to become breezy and fresh. !'oqt-i bi-tnassim 
bil-Ieel my room catches a breeze in the evening. -vn 
tansiim; avalpva minassim. 
~I !,itnassim Ivil to be wetted lightly and so sof-
tened. -iva mitnassim. 
U"oJU"oJ 
U"\.;...; nisnaas In pI nasaniisl monkey. 
...,...:...; nasnis Ivil to spy, snoop. !,ig-gadal da bi-ynasnis 
l:Jawaleekum leeh why is this guy hanging around you so 
inquisitively? -vn nasnasa; ava minasnis. 
...,....:-:;1 !,itnasnis = nasnis. -ava mitnasnis. 
~U"oJ 
.\...; .\...; nisa 2 Icoll nl women, womenfolk. !'amraaq 
nisa gynaecology. !'iI-laar lan-nisa {provJ the blame 
(for faults in children's upbringing) is to be laid at the 
feet of their mothers. 
.:,1.,...; niswaan Icoll nl {derisJ women, womenfolk. see 
further under oJ ~ U" oJ 
.J--'\...; nasawiin Icoll nl {derisJ women, broads. 
o::J ~ U" oJ see also U" I oJ 
.:.."...l; nasuut <Syr> Inl {ChrJ human nature (of 
Christ). 
oJ ~ U" oJ see also I ~ U" oJ 
.:,""'; naswin Ivtl to make effeminate, turn into a sissy. 
!'umm-u naswinit-u his mother made a sissy out of him. 
-vn naswana; avalpva minaswin . 
.:,,...:;1 !,itnaswin Ivil to become or be made effeminate 
or sissyish. -avaliva mitnaswin. 
..sU"oJ 
~ 
nisi (a) Ivtl to forget. nisyit iI-muftaal:J she forgot 
the key. ma-yinsaa-J iI-malruuf yeer iI-xasiis {provJ 
only the base are ungrateful. -vn nasw, nasayaan, 
nisyaan; ava naasi; pva mansi . 
..,-:J 1 !'in-nasy Inl period of five or six intercalary days 
in early September constituting the thirteenth month of 
the Coptic year. 

IoSG nassaay ladj *1 forgetful, absent-mmded. 
~I ritnasa Ivil to be forgotten. layaali I-ljutn' ma-
titnisiiJthe mghts of the cotton (harvest) are unforgett-
able. - iva mitmsi. 
~ 
nassa Ivtl to cause to forget. nassaa hamm-u it 
made him forget his worries. -vn tansiyya, tanslya: 
avalpva minassi. 
~I ritnassa Ivil to be made to forget. -iva mllnassi. 
..,-l:; 1 ritnaasa Ivtl I to pretend to forget. 2 to forget 
deliberately, neglect. - ava mitnaasi. 
I ..;. ~ see loS";' ~ : niJa 
J~I..;.~ 
.).)1.....; najaadir, nujaadir <P nushadir> Inl I ammonia. 
2 smelling-salts. 
~..;.~ 
L najar l r (a) Ivil I to grow up. ril-balad illi najart' 
fiiha the country in which I grew up. 2 to arise, origin-
ate. ril-l:JaraaYllj bi-tinjar mm ,I-r'hmaal fires are 
caused by negligence. -vn najra, nujuur; ava naajir. 
L naja, naja rZ (I) Ivtl to establish, start. rinta iii 
najeet i;-~ulm' fil-balad-di you are the one who sowed 
the seeds of injustice in this town. -vn najw, lIajr, 
najra; ava naajlr; pva manjuur. 
:'-l; naajlrr In *1 youngster, member of the rising 
generation. 
• L..:.. .~ manjiyya In pI manaajil recently built vil-
lage or suburb. 
LI rllnaja, ritnajar Ivil to be built, be constructed. 
ril-ma~nal da tnajar mil-ladam this factory was built 
from practically nothing. - iva mllmjl r. 
Li ranjar T = Ilaja. -vn rmjaar; ava minjir, munjir; 
pva mUlijar. 
.I.....;! .I.....;! rmja, r,njaa T Inl l/acadJ composition (as 
a school subject). rinja tal:JTliTl written composition. 
rillja jafawi oral presentation of a theme. 2 Ipl -aatl 
structure, construction. - ladJ invarl 3 (rinja only) 
empty, shallow (of talk or wntmg). 
.;I.....;! rmjaar, I ladj *1 pertaining to construction. 
muhalld,s rinjaar, construction engmeer. 2 ladjl emp-
ty, shallow (of talk or writing). kifaaya kalaam rinjaari 
enough of this empty talk! 
.L..:.. munjara T In pl-aatl (commercial, professional 
etc.) establishment, ~hop, workshop etc. 
y";~ 
'-:-' Ilajab T (I, a) I Ivil to break out. fii xatar nujuub 
862 
l:Jarb' been i~-~iin wl-rusya there is a danger of an out-
break of war between China and Russia. rin-naar 
najabit fi-maxzan II-xajab fire started in the timber 
warehouse. 2 Ivtl to drive in, dig in (nails, talons etc.). 
najab cf.awafr-u [-lellee he ~ank his talons into his eyes. 
- v~ Ilajabaan, Ilujuub, najb; ava naajib; pva manjuub. 
~I.....; najjaaba In pI -aatl rolling-pm. 
..,...:...:;1 rllnajabIvil to be driven m (of nails, talons etc.) . 
- iva mllniJib. 
~..;.~ 
~ 
najlld In pi ranajildl ~ong or chant (usually of a 
patriotic or religious nature) sung by a group. najiid 
l:Jamaasl morale-raismg song. najiid i~-~abaal:J song 
sung by the assembled pupils of a school before classes 
start. rm-llajitd il-watani (or ril-qawmi) the national 
anthem. 
~i ranjad Ivtl to chant or sing (religious verse). 
ranjad ljl¥ilda f-madlj m-nabi he sang an ode in praise 
of the Prophet Muhammad. -vn rmjaad; ava munjid. 
~ 
munjid In *1 one who chants or sings religious 
songs. 
J ~ ..;. ~ see J ~ I ..;. ~ : lIajaadIT, nujaadir 
I 
•• 
J..,.'" 
r-' najar l (u) Ivtl I to hang out (e.g., washing). 
najarit il-lll:JaaffiJJams she put the qUilt out in the sun . 
2a to spread abroad, propagate. rid-dibbaan bi-yunjur 
il-ramraacf. flies spread disease. najaru 
rafkaar 
jiyullyya fig-gamla they spread communist ideas m the 
university. 2b to publish (books). -vn najr, najr, nijiir; 
ava naajir, naajir; pva malljuur. 
or-' najra 1 In pI -aatl (news) bulletin . 
.r" l; naajIT In '1 publisher. 
.)~ malljuur In pI -aat, manajlirl la small publica-
tion, leaflet, pamphlet. Ib circular. Ie decree. 2 [physJ 
prism. 
~ 
malljar In pI manaajll I 1 place where clothes are 
hung to dry. 2 c1othe~ horse. 
.,,-:;1 rllnajar l Ivil I to be hung out (e.g., of washing) . 
2a to be spread abroad, be propagated. 2b to be pub-
lished. - iva mitmjir. 
~ lIajjar 1 Ivtl I to hang (~everal thing~) out. 2 to 
spread (things) out. -vn tanjiIT; avalpva minajjar. 
~I ritnajjar 1 Ivil passive of najjar I. - iva mitnajjar. 
.r=:' 1 rintajar IVII I to ~pread. rll-buljal ibtadit tintiJIT 
[t-batn-u w-cf.ahr-u the spots ~tarted to spread on his 
~tomach and back. lamma yiftal:J 11-l:Janafiyya l-bUlagaaz 

!Ja-yintifir guwwa I-ljammaam when he turns the tap, 
~ 
millaJfa In pi -aatl fly whisk. 
the gas will spread in~ide the bathroom. 2 to be wide-
...,....;.;1 fitnaJf Ivil I to be driven off (of insects). 2 to be 
spread, be common. fi/-Iilba di mifmintifraf-ma~rthis 
hit, be struck. - iva milllaff. 
game is not widely known in Egypt. - vn fintifaar; ava 
mimifir, muntaJir. 
1 
., 
jlJ"'" 
,r-J lIafar! (u) Ivtl to saw. - vn lIafr, lIafr; ava lIaafir, 
lIuafir; pya mallfuur, mallfuur. 
• ,r-J lIufra! linst n, pi -aatl a sawing, a stroke of a saw. 
;) • ...; lIifaaru, nufaara Icoll nl sawdust. shavings. 
;I ... ..:.. mUllfuar, minfaur In pi manafiirl saw. lI(aulil 
waakil naazil waakil zayy iI-munfaur "" he doesn't miss 
a single opportunity. - mUllfuar fadd i w-c[ay( lathl! push 
and pull exercises. 
,r-:;I filllafar 2 Ivil to be sawn. - iva mitnifir. 
;...; lIuffar! Ivtll to saw into several pieces. 2 to saw a 
great deal. saw (a large quantity of wood). - vn tallfiir; 
ava/pva milllaffur. 
~I fitnaffar2 Ivil passive of naffar!. - iva mitnaffur. 
J 
•• 
jlJ"'" 
,r-J lIufar I (u) Ivil to ache. gism-i b-yunfur my body 
aches. - vn naJr, lIafr; ava naafir, lIaafir; pya manfuur, 
munfuur. 
I ..... 
jlJ"'" 
.:...,;,-; naJazit (i) Ivil Ilsl! to violate one's marital obliga-
tions (of a wife). lamma s-sitt i tinfiz ma-Ihaafnafaqa 
when a woman violates her marital obligations she 
ceases to have the right to maintenance. sitt i lIaafiz (or 
lIaJza) a woman in violation of her marital obligations. 
- vn nifuuz, lIufuuz; ava lIaafiz. 
l. ... 
jlJ"'" 
,;,L • ...; lIafaaz <P nii-siiz> Imus! I ladj invarl dissonant, 
out of tune. 2 Inl dissonance. 
,;,-; lIaffiz Ivil Imus! to go or play out of tune. - ava 
minaffiz. 
..r ..; iJ 
...,..; naff (i) Ivtl I to swat at, drive off (insects). niff 
id-dibbaan mill lal-fakl shoo the flies off the food! 
Ilyiniffe dibbaan) to be or become idle as in 
fil-ma!Jallaat baqit bi-lIIiff (id-dibbaan) the shops have 
fallen idle. 2 to strike, hit. naffeet-u lalqa SUXlla I gave 
him a good beating. naffuu r~aa~a mawwituu they shot 
and killed him. -vn naff; ava naafif; pya manfuuf. 
:C; lIaffa I Ipl -aatl instance noun of naff. 
.1";iJ 
J.......; nafi( ladjl active. sabyaat lIufi(u Itext! active dyes. 
J.......;i fanfa( lell more/most energetic or active. 
J.,L..; nafaa( In pi -aat, fanfi(al activity. lIufau( 5aqaufi 
cultural activity. lIafaa( riyaac[i sporting activity. 
Ja.....; nafii( ladj * and pi nufa(al active, energetic . 
~ 
naf!a( Ivtl to stimulate. bi-ynaffu( id-dawra d-
damawiyya it stimulates the circulation of the blood. 
fil- faiYaaz bi-tnaf!a( iz-zihll riddles stimulate the mind. 
II tanfii( iI-mabilaat sales promotion. - vn tallfii(; ava/pva 
minaffa(. 
~ 
munaffi( In pi -aatl stimulant. 
~I fitnaffa( Ivil to be stimulated. - iva mitnaffa(. 
t";iJ 
~ nafal (a) Ivil to seep, filter. bi-yimlis iI-quny' 
lafaan iI-mayya ma-tinfalP landu he seals the sides of 
the canals so that the water does not seep onto his land. 
-~n nafl, nafalaan; ava naafil. 
~ naffal Ivil to allow slight seepage. fil-!Jee(a bi-
tnaf!al the wall lets in the damp. -vn tanfiil; ava 
minaffal· 
..J ..; iJ 
....<.:.; nifif (a) Ivil 1 to become dry. fil-yasiil nifif lal-
!Jabl the washing dried on the line. II riiq-u nifif (1) his 
spittle dried, he felt thirsty. (2) he was put to great 
trouble. (3) he became exasperated. -damm-i nifif "" 
my blood curdled (with fear). 28 to become firm, be-
come hard. !Jasseet !Jaaga zayy iI-lac[ma tabt i c[luUl-i 
w-baqit tinfaf I felt something like a bone beneath my 
ribs and it was turning hard. 2b to become tough and 
hardy. fig-geefxallaa-ni fanfafthe army made a man of 
me. 3 to become lean. -vn nafafaan, nUfufiyya; ava 
naafif, naffaan. 
~".:...; nUfufiyya Inl I dryness. 28 solidity, hardness . 
2b brittleness. 3 toughness, hardiness . 
...A-,l; naafif ladj *1 I dry. riiq-i naafif !J-amuut mil-
la(afmy spittle is dry; I'll die o.fthirst.1I fiid-u naffa he's 
tight-fisted. -dimaay-u naffa (1) he's obstinate. (2) he 
can smoke a lot without getting befuddled (in the jar-
gon of hashish-smokers). 28 firm, hard. quu(a naffa 
w-mistiwiyya firm ripe tomatoes. 2b brittle. nabaas 
naafif a brittle alloy of brass. 
....<.:.;i fanfaf fell drier/driest, harder/hardest etc. 

.jL:..; naffaaf (also wara(j naffaaf) Inl blotting paper. 
,uL:..; naffaafa lunit n, pI -aatl piece of blotting paper, 
blotter. 
....;..:..; naffif Ivtl 1 to dry. naffift iday-ya I dried my 
hands. naffif iI-bibr blot the ink! 2a to harden. 
r'is-si(jiyya bi-tnaffif il-badiid templ!ring hardens iron. 
2b.t0 toughen up, make hardy. - vn tanfiif; ava minaffif. 
...A..:...;; I r'itnaffiflvi/l tobedriedordryoneself.2a tobe 
hardened. 2b to be toughened up, be made hardy. 
- ava/iva mitnaffif. 
...A..:...;:;.. I r'istanfif Ivtl I to consider (too) hard or tough. 
r'istanjij II-f~ulya ma-r4.ii-J yijtirii-ha he thought the 
beans too hard and refused to buy them. 2 to select for 
toughness. r'istanfif-Iak waabid rayyis lafaan yilraf 
yimaffi I-lummaal find yourself a tough foreman so that 
he can control thl! workers. 3 to act tough. - iva 
mistanfif. 
,j";'<J 
..;.::.; nafa(j (u) Ivtl to inhale through the nose, sniff up. 
nafa(jit mayya ktiir laakin in-naziif barqu ma-w(jif-Jshe 
sniffed a lot of water through her nose but the bleeding 
wouldn't stop. -vn naf(j, nafa(jaan; ava naafi(j. 
-.;"';'; nijuu(j, nUfuu(j Inl snuff. 
..;-.; naffa(j Ivtl to make (s.o.) sniff. - vn tanfii(j; aval 
pva minaffa(j. 
~ 
tanfii(ja In pi -aat, tanafii(jl 1 an amount (of, 
e.g., snuff) sufficient for a single sniff. 2 a pinch (of 
s.t~. powdery). tanfii(jit misk a pinch of musk. 
..;.:.;;1 r'itnaffa(j Ivil 1 to be made to sniff. 2 to take 
snuff. - avaliva mitnaffa(j. 
~ 
I r'istanfa(j 1 Ivtl to inhale through the nose, sniff 
up.2 Ivil to clean the nose three times by sniffing water 
into it and then expelling the water (as a part of the 
ablutions obligatory before the'performance of any of 
the Muslim ritual prayers). -vn r'istinfaa(j; ava 
mistanfa(j . 
J";'<J 
~ 
nafal (i) Ivtl 1 to scobp (out of liquid). nafal 
iI-labma mij-Jurba bil-ma~fa he scooped the meat out of 
the soup with a straining spoon. nafalu talatiin gussa 
min iI- r'utubiis iI-lfar(jaan they fished thirty bodies out 
of the submerged bus. 28 to pick the pocket of. nafal-ni 
fiz-zabma he picked my pocket in the crowd. 2b to pick 
(s.th.) from a pocket. nafal mabfa;t-i he picked my 
wallet from my pocket. -vn nafl, nafalaan; ava naafil; 
ava manfuul. 
J~ naffaal In ·1 pickpockct. 
864 
pi r'itnafal Ivil 1 to be scooped or lifted out of 
liquid. 2a to have one's pocket picked. 2b to be picked 
from a pocket. 3 to feel relieved, feel uplifted. - ava/iva 
mitnijil . 
J.-:;;I r'intafal 1 Ivtl to lift, raise up, retrieve (out of 
s. th.) r'intafalu I-markib iI-lfar(jaana bil-winfthey raised 
the sunken boat using a crane. 2 Ivil to be uplifted, be 
relieved. saalit ma fuft id-duktoor gaay intafalt when 
I saw the doctor coming I felt unburdened. -vn 
r'intijaal. 
I .... 
..,...,..., 
.:,L.,.; ,.:,L:.; nafaan, nijaan <T ni§an> Inl 1 aim, aim-
ing. nafaan-ak ma;buu{ your aim is good. 2 sight (on a 
firearm) .. r'in-nafaan bitaal. iI-bundu(jiyya ma;buu{ the 
sight of the rifle is accurate. 3 target-shooting game. 
- Ipl nayafiinl 4 medal, decoration. - r'in-nafaan Icoll 
nlS the small gifts (usually of food) given to a bride by 
friends, neighbours etc. 
..r.JL:.; nafangi, nijangiln pi -yya/l marksman, sharp-
sh?oter. 2 good marksman, good shot. 
, 
w-' naffin 1 Ivil to take aim. naffin lag-goon he aimed 
at the goal. 2 Ivtl to aim (s.th.). naffin iI-bundu(jiyya 
kwayyis aim the rifle properly! -vn tanfiin; ava 
mi.naffin . 
.:,,-:;1 r'itnaffin Ivil 1 (impersonal) passive of naffin 1. 
mumkm yitnaffin lalee mm hina it can be aimed at from 
here. 2 to be aimed. - iva mitnaffin. 
2 <J ..;. <J see <J'..;..,j: nijaani 
.J";'<J 
• .,.;.; nafwa Inl elation, ecstacy. 
~I r'intafa Ivil to feel elated.firibt iI-biira wi-ntafeet 
I drank the beer and felt on top of the world. - ava 
mintiji. 
I ..s ..;. <J 
.L:.; ,L:..; nija Inl starch. 
loS"':'; nijawi ladjl starchy . 
.;..~.,.:.; nijawiyyaat t In pI! carbohydrates. 
.,..:; naffa Z Ivtl to starch. naffi I-ya(jaat starch the col-
la~s! - vn tanfiyya; avalpva minaffi. 
..r-:.-- minaffi ladj ·1 1 elegantly dressed, spruce. 
2 {slang] starchy, stuffy, prim. 
~I r'itnaffa Ivil to be starched. -iva mitnaffi. 
..rz.. mima/fi = minaffi I. 
2 ..s ..;. <J see 
~..;. <J : manfiyya 

I Y '-'" oJ 
~ 
nl¥ab (u) I Ivtl to set up, erect, prepare. na~abna 
I-xeema we pitched the tent. na~abna-Ihum laxx (1) we 
played a trick on them. (2) we laid a trap for them. 
Ilnl¥ab qalda to hold a gathering. 2 Ivil to practise 
deception or trickery. fid-daggaliin bi-yintihzu I-Iur~a 
di w-yu~ubu lala n-naas the con men seize this oppor-
tunity and take people in. -vn na~b; ava nal¥ib; pva 
man~uub. 
~ 
nl¥b, 
n~b I 
Inl 
erection. 
nl¥b I 
tizkaari 
monument. 
865 
~ 
nl¥ba In pi -aatl I linst nl la a setting-up, a stand-
ing. man~uub na~bit ig-gabal standing (as firm) as the 
hills. Ib a tricking, a swindling. 2 vendor's stall. 3 [lsi] 
stone post erected over a grave to indicate the position 
of the head and sometimes inscribed with the name of 
the deceased and verses from the Koran. 
~ 
n~bzT: nu~bi leen(ee) in front of, before the 
eye(s) of. 
~ 
i fan~ab lell craftierlcraftiest. 
..,.,L..; 
ni~aab T Inl quota. kull i mudarris luu ni~aab each 
teacher has a prescribed teaching load. 
~ 
nl¥iib Inl I share, portion. kull i waaljid 
Ija-yaaxud na~iib-u mil- farbaalj everyone will get his 
share of the profits. II feeh na~iib-ak min ism-ak == how 
well-matched are you and your name? (thus a girl 
named famaal may be asked this in the sense' Are you 
as optimistic as your name (lit: hopes) implies?'). 2 lot, 
destiny. kullijeef qisma w-na~iib everything is a matter 
of fate. ma-Ijaddij yaaxud filla nl¥iib-u no one gets 
more than his fate ordains. finja-llajjaqqa tkuun min 
nl¥iib-ak I hope you succeed in getting the flat. II fiddaa 
nl¥iib-u or fiddaa iii Iii fin-nl¥iib he gave him what he 
could afford at the time, he gave him a modest tip. see 
further under y loS '-'" oJ loS 
..,.,L.:.; nl¥~aab In *1 confidence trickster, swindler. 
~ 
ma~ab, ma~ib In pi manal¥ibl office, posi-
tion.11 mij bitaal manal¥ib not one who lusts after high 
positions .. 
..,.,L...:... min~aab or mu~aab In pi mana~iibl handle of a 
tool. 
~I fitnl¥ab Ivil I to be set up, be erected. 
2 (impersonal) passive of nl¥ab 2. mij fana iii yitn~ib 
lalayya I am not one to be taken in. 3 to start, get 
under way (of a social gathering, get-together etc.). 
-ava/iva mitn~ib. 
~ 
nl¥~ab Ivtl to appoint (to a job or position). 
nl¥~abt-ak rayyis hina I (hereby) make you boss here. 
-vn ta~iib; ava/pva minl¥~ab. 
~I fitna~~ab Ivil to be appointed (to a job or posi-
tion). - iva mitna~~ab. 
~I finta~ab Ivil la to have an erection. Ib to be 
capable of having an erection. 2 to become erect. -vn 
finti~aab; avaliva mitni~ib. 
2 Y '-'" oJ see 
I y .J '-'" : ni~iiba 
c,'-"'oJ 
~ 
nl¥alj (a) 
I/vtl to advise. 
na~aljt-u bassi 
ma-smilj ik-ka/aam I advised him but he paid no 
heed. 2/vil to become alert, give one's attention. 
fin~alj lil-liyaal keep an eye on the children. - vn n~lj. 
na~aljaan, nl¥aalja; ava naa~ilj; pva man~uulj. 
4>L..; 
na~aalja Inl sharpness, intelligence, brightness. 
fi/-wad-da faaxir na~aalja this kid's really smart. 
C""'t; 
naa~ilj ladj * and pi n~aljal clever, intelligent, 
bright.lIgeet ya naa~ilj [deris} back already, you clever 
dick! 
~i fan~alj lell morelmost clever, intelligent or 
bright. 
............. 
na~iilja In pi na~aayiljl piece of advice. 
~I fitna~alj Ivil to be advised. -iva mitni~ilj. 
~ 
nl¥~alj Ivtl to enlighten, make aware, instruct. 
na~~alj ibn-ak jiwayya w-xallii yaaxud baa/-u put your 
son wise to a few things and make him watch his step! 
-vn tan~iilj; avalpva mina~~alj. 
~I fitnl¥~alj Ivil I to be enlightened, be made 
aware, be instructed. 2 to become alert. - ava/iva' 
mitnl¥~alj. 
~I 
fistall~alj I Ivtl to select for intelligence. 2~ Ivil 
to be alert, be sharp. - ava mista~alj. 
I .) '-'" oJ 
~ nl¥ar (u) Ivtl I to side with, take the part of. 
fabuu-ya tamalli b-yun~ur faxuu-ya la/ayya my father 
always takes my brother's part against me. 2 to cause to 
be successful. rabb-i-na na~ar-ni Jil-qatjiyya God gave 
me victory in the case. fallaah yun~ur-ak la/a IIi Yladii-
k God grant you victory over your enemies! lIyu~ur 
diin-ak == well done! -vn na~r; ava nal¥ir; pva man~uur . 
~ nl¥r Inl I victory. 2 good fortune, success. 
dalet-Iu bin-nl¥r I wished him success. 
;~ nl¥ra linst n, pi -aatl a granting of victory. 
~t; nal¥ir Inl Granter of victory (epithet of God). 
1oS~t; naa~iri I ladjl Nasserite. 2 In *1 a Nasserite. 
~~L:.II fin-nal¥iriyya Inl I quarter in Cairo between 
the Sayyida Zaynab and Abdin districts. 2 Nasserism. 
~ 
nl¥i~r In pi n~aral helper, protector, supporter. 
rabb-i-na dayman nl¥iir il-ma~/umiin God always help~ 
the oppressed. 

~ 
man~ar Inl {obsolJ gang of robbers.feex man~ar 
or raas man~ar (I) leader of a criminal gang. robber 
baron. (2) epithet for a clever cunning person. clever 
devil. 
r-\; naa~arf Ivtl to support. side with. help. -vn 
mill~ra; ava minaa~ir. 
r-l.;;"1 
fitnaa~ir Ivil to be supported. be helped. be 
sided with. - iva mitnaa~ir. 
.rz:;;1 
fillla~ar Ivil to triumph. win. -vn fillli~aar; ava 
millli~ir. 
;WI fillli~aar In pi -aarl victory. 
1 .; o.?' <J 
JI ~ 
n~raani. na~raani f In • and pi na~aaral Christ-
ian. IIgawaazil na~aara (a marriage of Christians. i.e. 
one not easily dissolved by divorce) an unbreakable 
bond. 
..,.;.. na~~ar Ivll I to convert to Christianity. Christia-
nize. 2i to baptize. - vn lan~i"; ava min~~ar. 
r-"'\.;;;II 
fil-Iana~iir (also lJadd il-Iana~iir) Inl {ChrJ 
Baptism Sunday (the Sunday before Palm Sunday). 
~I fitna~~ar Ivil I to convert or be converted to 
Christianity. become a Christian. 2i to be baptized. 
- avaliva mitna~~ar. 
~ 
I 
fislan~ar Ivil to become a Christian. convert to 
Christianity. - ava mislan~ar. 
I o.?' o.?' <J 
;.. n~~' f (u) Ivil to make a stiputation (or stipula-
tions). riI-qanuun bi-ynu~~·[ala ... the law stipulates 
.... -vn n~~; ava naa~i~; pva man~u~. 
;.. na~~2 In pi nu~u~1 I stipulation. clause (e.g .. ofa 
law). 2 text. script.llbin-na~~ in precise terms, exactly. 
~ 
mana~~a In pi -aall dais. podium. man~~il iI-
quqaah the judges' bench. 
~I filna~~ Ivil (impersonal) passive of n~~ '. 
riI-kalam-da ma-tna~~'-J [alee fil-[aCjd this was not 
stipulated in the contract. - iva mitna~~. 
1 o.?' o.?' <J 
;.. n~~ In pi ni~aa~. fan~aa~1 I half. n~~' saa[a half 
an hour. gineeh wi-n~~ a pound and a half. n~~' kariim 
semi-precious. 
n~~' fUlumaliik 
semi-automatic. 
II xasseel in-n~~ I lost a great deal of weight. - n~~' n~~ 
half and half, so-so, as in riI-masralJiyya kaanil nu~~' 
n~~ the play was only so-so. - (bi-)nu~~' kumm short-
sleeved. - n~~'[umrused. not new. second-hand, as in 
[arabiyyaal n~~' [umr used cars. raagil (or mara) 
n~~ , [umr a man (or a woman) without much life left in 
him (or her). -faal-ak nu~~' [umr-ak you missed some-
866 
thing great. - kammil nu~~' diin-u to get married (of a 
man). -raagil fibr' w-nu~~ shorty (of a man). -[ala 
walJda w-nu~~ see waalJid. - ... wi-n~~ certainly. de-
finitely. as in lJa-/Cjuum bil- fagaaza. - lJ-aCjuum biiha 
w-nu~~ 'Are you going to take your holiday?' 'I certain-
ly am!' fli falam fi-kitf-ak. - fii falam wi-n~~ 'Do you 
have a pain in your shoulder?' 'Yes. a dreadful pain!' 
- fin-n~~' btn-nu~~ in half, in two, as in ni/Cjaasim 
iI-filuus in-nu~~' bin-n~~ we split the money two ways . 
-nu~~' flkliil{ChrJ formal betrothal service. 2 halfway 
point, middle. IIU~~ iI-leel midmght. fi-n~~ iI-fusbuu[ 
in the middle of the week. fi-nu~~ ininiyya in the 
middle of the tray. II (/eelit) n~~' fa[baan the night of 
the fiflcenth day of the month of Shaban. on which 
religious Muslims commemorate the changing of the 
direction of the Cjibla from Jerusalem to Mecca. 
-fams-ak wi-n~~ iI-leel openly. for all to see. as in fana 
ma-b-axabbii-J lJaaga [all lJadd' minkum fams-ak 
wi-nu~~ iI-leel I don't hide a thing from any of you, 
everything is on the table. 3 (also nu~~' fa4,4,a) {obsolJ 
one para, acoin equal toone fortieth ofa piastre.llli[bil 
in-n~~ a simple gambling game turning on the toss of a 
coin or substitute. 4 half-piece at the edge of a section 
in tent applique designs (see PI.H. 2). 
~ 
na~~~ Ivtl I to halve, take (away) the half. 
yin~~a~ is-sigaara wi-ysib-ha he half-smokes a cigarette 
and leaves it. 2 to fill half-way. laCjeel-u na~~a~ i~-~ahriig 
I found that he had half-filled the water tank. -vn 
la~ii~; avalpva milla~~a~. 
~I 
fitn~~a~ Ivil passive of n~~a~. -iva mlln~~~ . 
to.?'<J 
~ 
na~a[ (a) Ivil to become bright. wifJ-a-ha n~a[ 
her face lit up. -vn lIa~a[aan. n~u[iyya; ava na~i[. 
t"'\; naa~i[ ladjl bright. naa~i[ II-bayaa4, gleamingly 
white. 
~i fan~a[ lell brighter/brightest. 
I J o.?' <J 
...A...a; 
ni~Jf In pi fan~aaf/ half. II fan~aaf lJuluul com-
promises. middle-of-the-way solutions. 
~ 
ni~fi f ladjl pertaining to or affecting one half. 
partial. fa/al ni~fi hemiplegia. 
;u,..,~ mun~fa, min~fa ladvl in half. in two equal 
parts. wazza[u I-maksab muna~fa benhum they split the 
profit half and half between themselves. 
1 J o.?' <J 
...A...a; 
n~af (i) Ivtl 1 to relieve of injustice. ma-lJadd'-J 
n~af-u filla I-mudiir ig-gidiid no one gave him his full 

rights except the new director. 21 to treat nicely. 
IIma-b-1in.sifP nafs-a-ha (she doesn't do herself justice) 
"'" she's always making trouble. - rabb-i-na yin.sif-ak 
wi-lirgac badri I hope you will come back early this 
time (without your usual dilly-dallying). - vn na.safaan. 
na.sf; ava naa.sif; pya man.suuf. 
~ 
na.safa: yacni huwwa (hiyya. humma) iii na.safa is 
he (she, they etc.) any better? 
....<...;i fan.saf' lell more/most just or fair. 
.....<..a;.; I filna.saf Ivil passive of na.saf. - iva milni.sif. 
....<...; i fan.saF I = na,mf I. fil- fin~aaf[ admin] general 
salary adjustment. -vn fin.saaf; ava mun.sif. 
.....<..a;.; I fiflla~af Ivil to do the right thing (as an excep-
tion). fiflla.safil wi-yasalil wiff-a-ha for once she's 
washed her face! - ava miflli,5if. 
Ju"".J 
J.a; na.sal (u) 1 Ivtl to throw or hurl to the ground. 
jaal-u w-na.sal-ufil-farqi kaan ba-ymawwil-u he picked 
him up and threw him on the ground almost killing him. 
2 Ivil to recuperate, regain health. fil-waad na.sallaani 
bacd il-caya the kid has recuperated after his sickness. 
-vn na.sl, na.salaan; ava naa.sil; pya man.suul. 
:.J...a; na.sla Ipl -aall instance noun of na.sl. 
j...a.;;1 filna.sal Ivil to be thrown or hurled to the 
ground. - iva milni.sil. 
~ 
na,5.sal Ivtl to smash, wreck, destroy. qacad yiqrab 
il-ca.saaya fil-bee{ Ii-mayil ma naNal-ha xaali.s he kept 
on banging the stick against the wall until he smashed it 
completely. -vn lan~'iil; ava/pva mina.s.sal. 
~I filna.s.sallvil 1 to be smashed, be wrecked, be 
destroyed. 2 to exculpate oneself. deny responsibility. 
filnaNal mil-Yala[ illi camal-u he wriggled out of taking 
responsibility for his mistake. -ava/iva milna.s.sal. 
..su"".J 
....... ~ na.sya In pI nawaa.sil corner (of a building or 
street). II faqdaam wi-faclaab wi-nawaa.si see. qadam. 
r ..... .J 
~ 
naqag I (u) Ivil to mature (of, e.g., a personality). 
jax.siyya naqga a mature personality. fikra naqga a ma-
ture idea. -vn nuqg, nuquug, naqagaan; ava naaqig. 
~~ fanqag' lell more/most mature. 
~I fanqag 21 Ivtl to bring to maturity. fis-siniin 
fanqagil-u time gave him maturity. -vn finqaag; ava 
munqig. 
~I fislanqag Ivtl to select for maturity. -ava 
mislanqag. 
867 
c. ..... .J 
~ 
naqab (a) Ivil to ooze, seep. fil-caraq naqab cag-
gallabiyya the sweat seeped through onto the galabiya. 
fit- falwaan bi-linqab cala bacq-a-ha the colours run 
together. -vn naqb, naqabaan, nuquub; ava naaqib. 
~ ..... .J see ~ J:, .J: naqar, naqqaara, naqqaraali, 
manqara 
...; ..... .J 
....Ah; • ....A,.;a; /liqif or Iluquf (a) Ivil 1 to become clean . 
fidcak-ha lamma linqaf scrub them till they're clean! 
II geeb-i nitfif "'" I'm flat broke. -bisaab-ak nitfif your 
account is settled. 2 to improve in character, appear-
ance etc. gallidl ik-kilaab wi-jakl-u nitfifl had the book 
bound and it looked better. raaca rabb-i-na w-nitfifhe 
saw the error of his ways and went straight. 
fi/-carabiyya ni4.fil qawi min yoom ma l-bujehaal 
ilYayyaril the car's been much better since the sparking 
plugs were changed. fir-radyu .soOI-U nitfif the radio's 
sound quality improved. - vn natfaafa; ava na4.faan. 
.ij \1.; .:..t L.<.; natfaafa, 
na~aafa 
Inl 
1 cleanliness. 
fin-natfaafa min il-fimaan [prov] "'" cleanliness is next 
to godliness. 2 fin-Ilatfaafa (also qariibil ill-natfaafa) 
the tax levied on householders to cover street-cleaning 
etc. 
4; .~ nitfiif ladj pillutfaaf! la clean. fil-ciid 
bi-yilbisu hduum gidiida walla Ilqiifa on the day of the 
feast they put on new or clean clothes.lIgeeb-i ntfiifmy 
pockets are cleaned out, I'm broke. Ib free of impuri-
ties. law kaanil in-nabaasa mif nitfiifa ma-liqbal-j il-
libaam if the piece of copper isn't pure it won't take 
soldering. [uul ma z-zeel nitfiif il-babuur yilanll-u 
kwayyis so long as the oil is clean the stove continues to 
work well. 2a decent in appearance, neat and proper. 
bi-yicmil il-laja[iib cajaan yibqajakl-a-ha ntfiifhe adds 
the finishing touches to it so that it looks properly done . 
2b (morally) decent, upright, honest. raagil Ilitfiif 
ma-huwwaa-j bilaac fakl an honest man, not the sort to 
take bribes. fibna b-nixdim cajaan nif4.al cayjiin 
nutfaaf bijaraf-na we work as servants so that we may 
continue to live a decent and honourable life. 3 of high 
standard, excellent.juyli ntfiif good work. xa[[aa[ Ilitfiif 
an excellent calligrapher. licib licba ntfiifa he played a 
great shot. 
....Ah;i • ....A,.;a;i fantfaflell more/most clean, neat, decent 
etc . 
...Ai; . .....: natftfaf Ivtl 1 to clean, clean up, tidy up. 
naqtfaf1i snaan-ak have you cleaned your teeth? 
fil-Jarrajiin illi bi-ynatftfafu l-makaalib the janitors who 

clean the offices. bi-nnat[t[af iI-rart[' bif-Jooka we clear 
the ground with the rake. 2 to clean out (s.o.) of 
money. rin-najjaal nat[t[af-ni the pickpocket cleaned 
me out. 3 to clear away. get rid of. nat[t[afil-waraq iIIi 
lal-maklab clear off the paper that's on the desk. 
lajaan nil:Jji blingaa/l laa,im ninat[t[af qalb-u in order to 
stuff eggplants we must (first) clean out the insides. 4 to 
improve the appearance or character of. give finish or 
polish to. 5 {carp. melall to smooth. plane. riI-xajab 
iI-vajiim laazim /linat[t[af-Il 1-rawwil we have to smooth 
the rough wood first. 6 {needle wI to neaten.firii{lant[iif 
~eam hinding tape. 7 to depilate. nat[t[afil riglee-ha she 
removed the hair from her leg~. -vn lant[iif; avalpva 
minat[t[af. 
~ 
.~ munaHif In pi -aall cleanser. 
.kl .~I ritnat[t[af Ivil passive of nat[t[af. 2 to be-
come clean. -avail va mllnat[t[af. 
~ 
I .~ 
I rislant[af Ivtl I to consider nit[lif. 
2 to ~elect for cleanliness. rislant[af l:Jilla nuqlud fiiha 
choose a clean place for us to sit in. - Ivi/3 to behave in 
a straightforward fashion. ma lislant[af baqa ya lamm' 
w-balaaj juvl in-n~b' da play it straight. man. and let's 
have none of this trickery. -vn ristint[aaf; avalpva 
mislant[af. 
cj,.:, 
~ 
na{al:J (a) Ivtl I to butt. toss (with the horns). 
IIgineeh yin{al:J gineeh "" honest-to-goodness pounds. 
real one-hundred-piastre-apiece pounds. as in dafall' 
xamsa gneeh gmeeh yin{al:J gineeh I paid a whole five 
solid pounds. - rawwil ma yif{al:J yin{al:J as soon as he 
take~ 11 course (of action) he goes (too) far. 2 to reply to 
rudely. treat roughly. -vn /la{l:J. na{al:Jaan; ava naa{il:J; 
pva man{ulll:J. 
....J.; na{ya linst n. pi -aatt'a butt. 
-11.; naa{il:Ja In pi -aall: /laa{il:Jal sal:Jaab skyscraper. 
c.tk. /la{{aal:J. lad]1 given to butting (of sheep etc.). 
ri5-sal:Jl:J id-dal:Jl:J ya xaruuf na{{aal:J children's chant 
urging a ram to butt. 
~I ritna{al:J IVII to be butted. -iva mitnitll:J. 
c11.; naatll:J Ivtl to butt. have a butting match with. 
rlk-kabjeen bi-yna{l:Ju balt[ the two rams are butting 
each other. -vn nqaal:J. minatl:Ja; ava minaatil:J. 
c1l;;\ rllnaa{11:J Ivil I to hutt one another, have a but-
tmg match with one another. 2 to be butted at. - avaliva 
mltnaatil:J. 
Ijj,.:, 
).; na{ar (u) Ivil to rain. rid-dinya na{arit zalat (1) it 
hailed. (2) it rained cats and dogs. 
868 
.J.; natara Inl rain. -also matara. 
,;;. nattar Ivil to rain. (rid-dinya or rin-natara) naaarit 
it rained. (rid-dinya or rin-natara) bi-tnattar it is rain-
ing. -also mattar. -vn lantiir; ava minattar. 
';;':'1 ritnattar Ivil (impersonal) passive of naaar. 
rilaah-i yitnattar laleehum zift' w-qatraan (women in 
Irad socl "" may dirt and filth be rained down on them! 
- iva mitna{tar. 
Z j j,.:, see Z j J j, .:, : natuur 
':'Jjj,.:, 
':"J).; na{ruun Inl natron. II waadi n-natruun Iprop nl 
Wadi Natrun. a valley in the Western Desert on the 
road between Cairo and Alexandria, celebrated for its 
ancient hermitages and monasteries. 
j,j,.:, 
1. natt (u) Ivi/l to jump, make a jump. na((eet mil-qa(r 
I jumped from the train. II ku//' jwayya tnua-i-Ina hina 
fil-beet she's always barging in on us at home. - rif-Jarr' 
l:Ja-ynutt' min leen-u "" he is looking daggers, he is 
glaring. - riftakarna I-qu{(' ga ynu(( "" talk of the Devil! 
-na{{' fiiha to spoil things by interfering, as in ma daam 
fima natteel fiiha tibqa baa;il as long as you've inter-
fered. all is lost. 2 to proceed out of sequence, skip. 
fi;-;aahir rinnu bi-ynutt- gaayiz bi-yaaxud nimra min 
fooq w-nimra min lal:Jt it appears he's skipping - prob-
ably taking one number from the top, then one from the 
bottom. ril- fibra na{{it the needle (of the record-
player) jumped. - Ivtl 3 to jump (a distance). 
riI-masafaal iIIi na{{enaa-ha the distances we jumped. 
II na{{ iI-l:Jabl (the game of) skipping. -na{{ iI-l:Jawaagiz 
{alhll 
hurdling. 
4 to 
skip. 
leave 
out. 
salaat 
iI-mumassiliin bi-ynuttu ~af!Ja faw bi-ynu((u satreen 
lalaala sometimes the actors skip a page or jump two ot 
three lines. 5 to scoop up (a hockey ball) with the stick 
before striking. - vn na{{, na(a(aan; ava naatit; pva 
man(uu{. 
~ natta lala {coarsel to copulate with, ride (a woman). 
~ na{(a linst n, pi -aatl I a jump. 2 fin-natta a chil-
dren's game in which the player jumps or hops from one 
part of a square marked on the ground to another, his 
movements being dictated by an accompanying chant. 
.l.lh; nattaat Icoll nl young 10cust(s).lIzileet wi-mleet 
wi-nattaa( iI-l:Jeet see zilee{. 
k.. mana{{ In pi -aall diving-board. 
~ 
mana((a In pi -aatl a wall low enough to be scaled. 
Ilhuwwa beet-i baqa manatta /i-iii yiswa wi-iii ma-

yiswaa:f (have things gone so far that) all and sundry 
may just barge into my house as they please? 
kl fitnatt Ivil I passive of na(( 3, 4 and 5. 
2 (impersonal) passive of na(( I and 2. - iva mitna(( . 
.w;. nattat Ivtl I to cause to jump. riI-quradaati 
bi-yna((at il-qird i fif:faaril the monkey-man makes his 
monkey jump up and down in the street. 2 to cause to 
bounce. yi{ttal yina((at ik-koora I-raayit ma yiddii-ha 
Ii-zmiil-u he goes on dribbling the ball till he passes it to 
his team-mate. 3 to cause to proceed out of sequence, 
cause to skip. laquuJaatir na((a{uu sana they found he 
was bright (so) they had him skip a year. -vn tan[iit; ava 
minattat· 
11 na((at lala to mate (a male animal) with (a female). 
~I fitnattat Ivill passive of na((at. 2 to jump about, 
jump up and down. -avaliva mitna((at. 
t,l,,:, 
~ natlln pI fantaall uncouth person, lout. fantaal 
i1-balad the rabble of the town. 
~\1.; na{aala Inl uncouthness, loutishness. 
~I fistan(al/vtl I to select for uncouthness. 2 to 
reject for uncouthness. - Ivil 3 to behave uncouthly, 
behave like a lout. -vn fistin(aal; ava mistan(al. 
...; ,l, ,:, 
~ 
nuda In pI -aat, nu(afll drop. 2 sperm. fabuu-ha 
maat wi-hiyya Iissa nuda I-ba(n i fumm-a-ha her father 
died when she was still unborn. 
IJ,l,,:, 
~ na(at; (a) Ivill to speak, give voice. ma-na(at;ti:f 
bi-kilma I didn't utter a word.llna{at; bil-!Jukm {leg] to 
give a ruling, as in fil-t;ac[iyya tfaggilit Iin-nu(t; i bil-
!Jukm the case has been adjourned till the verdict is 
pronounced. - fin(aq a brusque and offensive command 
to speak'" open your mouth! -da rasm i !Ja-yin{aq the 
picture's so good it almost seems to speak! -xalla 
s-siggaada tin{at; '" he fixed the carpet like a dream! 
- riI-xaalit; in-naa{iq '" the spit and image; as in da 
l-xaaliq in-naa(iq faxuu he's the spit and image of his 
brother. 2 to sprout, spring up. fis-simbila na{aqit the 
wheat ear burgeoned. 3 to toss or throw off. na{aqt-u 
min lala c[ahr-i I tossed him off my back. - Ivtl 41 to 
pronounce. bi-yin(aq fingiliizi kwayyis he pronounces 
English well. 5 to put forth (leaves, flowers etc., of a 
plant). fil-t;am!J i b-yin(at; is-simbila the wheat puts 
forth its ears. -vn natt;, nu(q; ava naa{iq; pva mantuuq. 
~ nu(q Inll pronunciation. fik-kilmaa-di nutq-a-ha 
fizzaay how is this word pronounced? 2 enunciation. 
869 
nu(q-u mij kiwayyis he does not enunciate well. 
~ 
mantaq: ma-!Ja((i:f man(aq (he dropped to the 
ground. he fell dead etc.) without uttering a sound. 
~ 
man(iq, man{iq Inl logic. 
~ 
man(iqi, man(iqi ladj '1 logical. 
..;Ja.;;1 fitna(aq Ivil passive of na(aq. -iva mitni(iq . 
.;k; na((aq Ivtl la to cause to speak. cause to give 
voice. maa-Iu qaalid saakit kida -ma-l:Jaddi:f laaril 
yinat(aq-u why's he sitting there so quiet? can't anyone 
get a word out of him? Ib to cause to pronounce. 
na((aqit-hum kiwayyis she taught them good pronoucia-
tion. 2 to set off to advantage. riI-karalatta z-zarqa 
!Ja·tna((aq il-badla the blue tie really brings the suit to 
life. 3 to keep (s.th.) in the air by tossing it up repeated-
Iy. -vn tan(iiq; ava mina((aq. 
~I fitna((at; Ivil passive of na{{aq. - iva mitna{{aq. 
..;10.:::-1 fistan(aq Ivil to vomit. -vn fistin(aaq; ava 
mistan(at; . 
lJ,l,,:, 
...;\1.; ni(aaq, ni(aaq r Inl range, scope. bi-yitwazzal 
lala ni(aaq waasil it is distributed on a wide scale. 
ni(aaq il-lamaliyyaat (mil] the scope of operations. 
~ 
man(iqa, min(at;a r In pI manaa(iql I area, dis-
trict. 
man(iqa 
s~kaniyya 
a 
residential 
area. 
2 administrative zone. man(it;a tallimiyya the area 
under the supervision of a local educational authority. 
II man(iqa !Jaddiyya the upper limit of a tax bracket. 
I .I.J ,l, ,:, 
J)'; na{War Ivtl to scatter about, strew in a disorderly 
fashion. !JaJiij mina{War patchy grass. ma-tna{War:fi 
fluus-ak kida don't fritter away your money like that! 
-vn na{Wara; avalpva mina{War. 
J)';;I fitna(war Ivil to scatter or be scattered about, 
disperse or be strewn in a disorderly fashion. -vn 
tina(wiir; avaliva mitna(war. 
1 .J.J ,l, ,:, 
J)'L; na(uur In pI nawa(iirl stook or shock of maize 
stalks. 
[. j;,:, see .!l j; ,:, : na;aaga 
.Jj;,:, 
)0; na;ar I (u) Ivill to look. fin-naas tun;ur-Iu b-leen 
il-i!Jtiraam people regard him with respect. - Ivt/2 to 
examine.laazim nun;ur (f)il-masfala we must look into 
the matter. -/the literary passive form occurs! fig-ga/sa 
iii ea-tun;ar liiha d-dalwa the session at which the case 

will be examined. 3 to jinx. afflict with the evil eye. -vn 
na;ar; ava naa;ir; pva man;uur. 
)0; na;ar2 /nl 1 (also nacf.arJ) eyesight. na;ar-i cf.ilif 
my sight has become weak. ma-saddaljt'-J na;ar-i 
I couldn't believe my eyes. da fa¥/a la/ayya min na;ar-i 
it is dearerto me than my sight. marma n-na;ar range of 
sight, seeing distance. ya nacf.ar-i [women in /rad soc] an 
affectionate form of address = apple of my eye! rilaah-i 
tilma f-nacf.ar-ak [women in /rad soc] may you be 
afflicted in your sight! 2a consideration, estimation. di 
fafkaar mil:Jtaaga /-filaadit na;ar these ideas need re-
consideration. fin-naas minazzilin-ni min na;ar-hum 
people think nothing of me. 2b judgement, opinion. da 
mif leeb filla f-na;ar-ak that is a fault in your opinion 
alone. IImalduum in-na;ar lacking in sa voir faire, 
gauche. - kull-ak na;ar I leave it to your discretion. 
- fana tal:Jt in-na;ar I'm at your service, I'm always 
available. 
0)0; na;ra l linst n, pI -aatl a look, a glance. b-al:Jiss' 
bil-laar /i- finn in-naas bi-yb~~uu-/i bin-na;ra di I feel 
shame because people look at me that way. IIna;ra ya 
fumm a haafim look upon us, Umm Hashim! aid us, 
Umm Hashim! 
... )0; na;arif ladjl theoretical. diraasa na;ariyya 
theoretical study. 
~)o; na;ariyya In pI -aatl theory. bi-yidris fikr' syaasi 
w-na;ariyya syasiyya he studies political thought and 
theory.llmif di n-na;ariyya you haven't got the point, 
that's not the idea. 
);l; naa;irl Inpl nugaarlsupervisor,overseer.naa;ir 
madrasa headmaster. naa;ir mal:Ja{{a station-master. 
• );l; na;ra 2 In pi -aatl headmistress. 
..,,1.; na;iir 1 In pI na;aayir, nu;aral peer, equivalent. 
fif-Jaay da ma-/uu-f na;iir this tea is peerless. 21 Iprepl 
in return for, in consideration of. 
o.lui; nacf.cf.aara In pi -aat, also pi nacf.acf.iir [joelll pair 
of spectacles. nacf.cf.aara mlagama (or mkabbara) 
binoculars. .nacf.cf.aarit mayya underwater goggles. 
Ilnacf.cf.aarit fuksijiin welder's goggles. 2 [mil, obso/] 
medical centre for examining conscripts for the three 
forces. 
JI)1,; nacf.cf.araati In pi -yyal dispensing optician. 
)0.;... man;ar In 
pi manaa;irl la sight, spectacle. 
man;ar ¥ariib a strange sight. man;ar yifayyib a sight to 
make the hairturn grey. Ib appearance, outward show. 
riI-ward' b-yiddi man;ar the flowers make a (nice) 
show. fid-dinya manaa;ir [prov] all that matters in the 
world is appearances. 2a scene (of a play). riI-muxrig 
l:Jaawil yurbu{ iI-manaa;ir balcf.-a-ha b-balcf. the direc-
870 
tor tried to tie the scenes to one another. 2b stage set. 
2c [einl shot. 
0)0.;... man;ara 2 Ilnl (mere) show, outward (and 
hypocritical) 
appearance. 
bi-yimsik 
is-sibl:Ja 
lil-
man;ara bass he carries prayer beads merely for the 
sake of appearances. bitaal man;ara a show-off. 
2 ladvl for the sake of showing-off. bi-yaxdu l-larabiyya 
man;ara they treat the car as a status symbol. see 
further under J ~ .J r 
0.1..,\;.0 mancf.ara 
(also 
mandara) 
In 
pI manaacf.ir, 
manaadirl [rurl reception room for guests in a village 
house. 
0.l..wl fil-mancf.ara Iprop nl beach and adjacent area in 
the east of Alexandria . 
.lUi..:... min;aar r In pI mana;llrl any of a range of scien-
tific instruments for viewing (as, e.g., a telescope, a 
photo-scope, a speculum). 
~I fJlna;ar Ivill to be jinxed, be afflicted by the evil 
eye. 2 (impersonal) passive of na;ar I. bi-yJlni;ir-lu 
bi-atiraam he is regarded with respect. - iva mitni;ir. 
);l; naa;ir2 Ilvtl to keep a close watch on, watch 
carefully over. fil-xayyaa(a laazim tinaa;ir fu¥l-a-ha the 
seamstress should watch over her work carefully. 2 to 
become similar to. dilwaljti bass' balju mna;riin balcf. 
only now have they become simIlar to one another. 3 to 
debate. -
Ivil 41 to peer, stare. dayman ljaalid 
minaa;ir li/- fakl he is always peering at the food. -vn 
mina;ra. ni;aara; ava mmaa;ir. 
0);L:.. muna;ra In pI -aatl debate. 
);\,;;1 fitnaa;ir Ivil passIve of /laa;ir2. 
-avaliva 
mitnaa;ir . 
);.;.; 1 finta;ar I Ivtl la to waIt for. fmti;ir-ni [ii-beet 
wait for me at home. Ib to expect. flana mmll;riin-ak 
Is-saala xamsa we're expecting you at five. kUlll' 
b-tillli;ir finnu ygib-lak aaaga were you expecting him 
to bring you somethmg? 2/vII to wait. fit-taks' 
b-yaaxud gineeh cala kull' saaca llIi;aar the taxi 
charges a pound for each hour of waiting. fitxatabna 
wi-llIa;ama yitgl sana we got engaged and waited about 
a year. - vn fmti;aar; ava mlllti;ir. mUllla;ir. 
)0.:;;...1 fistan;ar = fmta;ar. - ava mlstan;ar. 
.!l~.J 
J.l.lo.; m;lk = na;tik. 
.s-lla; na;aaka (also na;aaga) Inl elegance. cayflin 
faaxlr na;aaka they are living in style. 
~ 
na;iik ladj pi nu;akal elegant, swish. 

rJ;.o:" 
iu;'; ni;aam 
In 
pi ran;ima, 
rall;ima, 
nu;uml 
I organization. system. institution. rill-ni;aam it-
talliimi the educational system. fil-l:Jarb imtil:Jaan 
li-kul/ il- ran;ima iii lil-balad war is a test of all the 
in~titutions in the country. laazim timfi Gala n;aam 
liI- rakl you must follow a fixed diet. Ilfii lIi;aam reeh 
i1-lelaa-di what are the plans for tonight? -Iii ni;aam 
gooza we'lI be smoking agooza. - reeh in-lIi;aam what's 
the idea! 2 type. variety (especially of fixtures etc.). Iii 
ni;aam taani yirkab bi-masamiir there is anuther type 
which is mounted with nails. Iii ni;aam ism-u divyateer 
there is a type called a two-switch system. 3 proper 
order, orderliness. rayyaam ma kaan Iii lIi;aam in the 
days when things were done properly. IIlandu n;aam 
he's methodical. - bi-lI;aam in order. systematically. 
4 /pol) regime. political system. lIi;aam ijtiraaki social-
ist system. 
1S"u;,; lIi;aami ladj *1 I methodical. ralla ral:Jtarim 
ij-Jax(j in-lIi;aami I do respect those who have order in 
their life. 2 (also nu;aamil ) in regular government ser-
vice (of military or quasi-military personnel). laskari 
ni;aami a regular soldier (in contrast with a drafted 
man). ¥aliir ni;aami a government-employed night 
watchman. 
~i ran;am lell more/most neat or ordered. 
r1' na;;am Ivtl to arrange. organize. Iii mufril riyaaq,i 
bi-Ylla;;am ranfi[it i[-[ul/aab there is a sports supervisor 
who organizes the students' activities. - vn tall;iim; aval 
pya milla;;;am, munagam. 
,..,,1,;; tan:;iim 
In 
pi -aarl organization. grouping. 
wn;iim dimllqraa[i a democratic organization. tan:;iim 
sirri an underground organization. 
~ 
muna;:;im In pi -aatl /mechl regulator. regulating 
device. 
~ 
muna:;:;am ladj *1 orderly. well-organized. [abuur 
[awiil wi-muna:;:;am a long. orderly queue. 
~ 
muna;zama In pi -aatl organization. muna:;;amit 
fabaab youth organization. 
~I ritnaz;am Ivii to be arranged. be organized. - iva 
mitna;;am. 
~I I'ima;am Ivil to become regular. xadt iI-birfaam 
wi-ficlan inta;amit il- riks I took the pill and my periods 
did in fact become more regular. bald iI- ragaaza 
l:Ja-nimi;imlij-Ju¥1 after the holiday we shall start work-
ing on a regular basis. -vn rimi:;aam; ava munta;im. 
.:..to:" 
....-; nalt r In 
pilluluutl I description. 2/gram} 
adjective. 
871 
~to:" 
~ 
nalga In pi -aatl ewe. Ilsiib in-nalga ya .wruul 
/children, abus/leave the ewe alone. you ram (remark 
shouted at a man and a woman walking together in the 
street ). 
Jto:" 
.rU nalar (a) Ivil I to shout. bellow. roar. bukra tismal 
naliir-u (give him time and) you will soon hear him 
holler! (of s.o. following a dubious course of action). 
2 to low (of cattle). -vn nalr, naliir; ava lIaalir. 
'.rU nalra In pi -aatll linst nl a shout. a bellow. a roar. 
2 conceit. 
;; nallar Ivil I to shout and bellow repeatedly. 2 to 
low repeatedly (of cattle). -vn tanliir; ava minaclar. 
..,..to:" 
....,.-; nilis, nalas (a, i) Ivil I to drowse. 2 /rurl to sleep. 
- vn nalasaan; ava nalsaan . 
.:.,L.u nalsaan ladj 
*1 
drowsy. sleepy. luyuun 
nalsaana languorous eyes . 
...,.l.u nalaas Inl /rurJ sleep. sleepiness. rin-nalaas 
kaabis lalayya I am sleepy. 
I"; to:" 
....,.-; nalaf (i) Ivtl to refresh. revive. xud-Iak dUff' 
yinlij-ak have a shower. it'll freshen you up. - vn 
nalaJaan; ava naalij; pva manluuj. 
4......; nada linst n. pi -aatl a refreshing. 
..;....;.. munlij ladjl refreshing. 
..;....:;1 ritnalaf Ivil to be refreshed, be revived. - iva 
mitnilij· 
...,......:;1 rintalaf Ivil I to revive, feel refreshed. 2 to be-
come elated. become cheerful. 3 to thrive, flourish. 
rit-tigaara ntalafit trade flourished. - ava mintilij. 
2..; to:" 
...,;..u nad In pi Iluluuf, nUllifal I /lslJ bier. 2 /ChrJ 
coffin. 
Jto:" 
~ Ilaua(j Ivil I to caw (of a crow). 2 to hoot (of an 
owl). -vn Ililii(j, tanlii(j; ava millaua(j. 
";.!l to:" 
~ 
lIalkij/vtl to put in disarray, mess up. nalkijti 
falr-i I messed up my hair. hiduum-u mllalkija his 
clothes are dishevelled. - vn lIalkafa; ava/pva minalkij . 
Jl.:S...;.. minalkijaati ladj pi -yyal messy, disorga-
nized (of a person). 

...,:.s:.wl fitnalkiJ Ivil to be put into disarray, be messed 
up. - iva mitnalkiJ. 
I Jt,;, 
J.i nall In pI nUluul, nilaal, nUlulal 1 sole (of a 
shoe). 2 {rurJ pair of (peasant) shoes. 
2Jt,;, 
J.i nalal (a) Ivtl to curse. fallaah yinlal fabuu-k God 
curse your father! -also lalan. -vn nall; ava naalil; pva 
manluul. 
J..;il fitnalallvil to be cursed. -iva mitnilil. 
j..:;;1 fintalal = fitnalal. -iva mintilil. 
rt,;, 
r'" nilim (a) Ivil 1 to become smooth, become level 
and even. xad daqn-u wiJfeen 1i-lJadd' ma nilmit he 
gave his chin a double shave, till it was smooth. 2 to 
become fine or soft, reach a fine or soft consistency. 
harast ii-lads' I-lfaayit ma nilim I mashed the lentils to 
a puree.llkalaam-u nilim qawi bald' ma xad iI-lalqa 
he's become sweet-tongued after the beating he re-
ceived. -vn nucuuma, nUlumiyya; ava naalim. 
r'" nalam I (i): nalam la/a to be gracious to, bless 
(s.o. with s.th.), endow (s.o. with s.th.). rabb-i-na 
nalam lalee bil-laql Our Lord endowed him with wis-
dom. finlimi laleena b-na;ra grace us with a glance! 
(when trying to elicit a response from a pretty girl on the 
street). IInalam alia laleek response to nalam2 and 
naliiman. -
fallaah yinlim laleek response to 
naliiman. -vn nalamaan; ava naalim. 
~.,.. nUlumiyya Inl smoothness, softness, fineness. 
~l; naalim ladj *1 1 smooth. riI-qalawoo; yikkisir 
wi/-musmaar yibqa naal,m the thread breaks and the 
screw is left smooth. IIraagi/ naalim (1) an unctuous 
man. (2) a spineless or wishy-washy man. -garr' 
naalim mala and salJab naalim Ii- to sweet-talk, 
humour with unctuous words, as in lamma faxa(t' fii 
fibtada ygurr' naalim malaaya when I snapped at 
him, he started laying on the charm with me. 2a of fine 
consistency. diqiiq naalim line flour. 2b soft. farfa 
nalma soft bedding. 3 rich with clarified butter (of 
certain types of biscuit such as kalJk and lfurayyiba). 
r'" i fanlam I lell smootherlsmoothest etc. 
r'" nilm (the literary variant nilma occurs in elevated 
speech) In in constr statel the best of. da nilm i/- faxlaaq 
he has the best of manners. ya rabb' finnaka nilma 
I-muliin 0 Lord, Thou art the best of helpers! 
~ wa-nilm or wa-nilm' bi- extremely polite response to 
872 
the mentioning of a name. fana lJasan ibn' mlJammad. -
wa-nilm (or wa-nilm' bii) 'I'm Hasan the son of 
Muhammad.' 'Praise be (to your illustrious father)!' 
fana min iJ1arqiyya - wa-nilm (or wa-nilm' biiha or 
wa-nilm' bir-riggaa/a) 'I'm from Sharqiya.' 'Praise be 
(to your illustrious home and its folk)!' - wa-nilm' bii or 
wa-nilm ' bi-lIaah (1) response to the mentioning of the 
name of God. fuft' Iud' rabb-i-na. - wa-nilm' bii 'See 
the kindness of Our Lord!' 'Praise he unto Him!' 
(2) response to tifamnu bi-Ilaah etc .... I accept the 
sincerity of what you say. 
;....; nilma In pI nil am, nalaayiml 1 God's grace, 
God's bounty. nilmit i/-limaad the grace of baptism. 
nilam rabb-i-na ktiira how bountiful is our Lord! 
II wi-lJyaat di n-nilma or win-nilma a conventional oath 
sworn on food, especially bread. 2 comfort, ease oflife. 
ma-b-yirlaa1 in-nilma /Ii huwwa fiiha he's doing no-
thing to safeguard his present comfortable way of life. 
baayin finnak miJwiJf' nilma it seems YQu're not made 
for a life of ease (said to one who refuses a course of 
action regarded by the speaker as profitable). 
r'" nalam 2 response particle 1 indicating attention ... 
yes? what can I do for you? Ilya nalam or nalameen 
familiar or affectionate forms of nalam. 2 requesting 
the repetition of something not properly heard ... ex-
cuse me? I beg your pardon? 3 voicing objection to 
something said ... what (the hell) are you saying! 
~ fay nalam true, that is so (in open-ended acknow-
ledgement of the correctness of a statement). fay 
nalam qarabt-u (Iaakin huwwa yistaahi/) true, I hit him 
(but th!!t's only what he deserves). 
rl.; nalaam Icoll nl ostrich(es). 
j,.,l.; nalaama lunit n, pI -aatl an ost(ich, 
~ naliim Inl great comfort, luxurY.laayiJfi-naliim 
living in heaven-on-earth. gannaat in-naliim paradise. 
~ naliiman linterjl may you feel comfortable! (said as a 
compliment to one who has just taken a bath or had a 
haircut). 
~ I.; nawaalim Ipl nIl soft and refined types of food. 
2 precious, delicate and pampered women. silt' min 
in-nawaalim a pampered woman. 
~I.; nawalmi ladj invarl 1 soft, easy, luxurious. 
liiJa nawalmi an easy life. 2 smooth, unctuous. ka/aam 
nawatmi smooth talk. Ilb~cI"a nawalmi a beguiling 
look. 
~\.;... manaalim Ipl nl protected (and hence soft) areas 
of the human body (e.g., the arm-pit, between fingers 
and toes). fig-garab yi;har i1-fawwil fil-manaalim 
mange occurs first in the soft creases of the body. 

~I fitnacam: fitnacam cala Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of nacam cala. fitnacam calee bil-cilm; wil-fadab he's 
been graced with both learning and good manners. - iva 
mitnicim. 
~ nauam Ivtl I to make smooth, give a smooth finish 
to: baed; ma ysawwii bil-ljaduum bi-yiigi ynauam-u 
biJ1al:Jl:Juu(a after he has evened it with the adze, he sets 
about smoothing it off with the broad chisel. gaab 
faraab camal minnu (aljiyya cafaan yinauamfacr-u he 
got a stocking and made a cap from it, to make his hair 
smooth. IInaccam iI-farc[" cala- to make numerous 
journeys for the sake of (s.o.), as in nauamt" calee 
I-farc[; ma-rc[ii-fyiigi mcaaya (although) I went several 
times to fetch him he wouldn't come with me! 2 to make 
fine or soft, bring to a fine or soft consistency. 
fid-duxxaan 
da 
bi-yduljljuU 
wi-ynaccamuu 
wi-
yunxuluu this tobacco they pound, grind fine, and 
sieve. -vn tanciim; avalpva minaccam. 
~I fitnauam Ivil I to be smoothed. 2 to be brought 
to a fine or soft consistency. 3 to live luxuriously, live a 
life of ease. - avaliva mitnaccam. 
r"'i fancam2f: fancam cala Ivil to be gracious to, 
bless (s.o. with s.th.), endow (s.o. with s.th.). rabb-i-na 
fancam calayya bin-nagaal:J God granted me success. 
-vn fincaam; ava mincim. 
~I fistancam Ivtl I to consider (too) soft, smooth 
or fine. 2 to select for softness, smoothness or fineness. 
- Ivi/3 to act or behave in a spineless or delicate man-
ner. finta l:Ja-tistancam ma tistargil balja w-tiJtayal zayy 
in-naas are you going to start whining, why don't you be 
a man and work properly? - vn fislincaam; ava 
mistancam. 
,;..:, t.:, 
...,...:...; nacniJ I Ivtl to refresh, invigorate. 2 Ivil to be-
come cheerful, 
becom~ light-hearted. 
fil-waal:Jid 
laazim yifarfiJ wi-ynacniJ - huwwa l:Jadd I waaxid minha 
l:Jaaga one has to have a good time and enjoy oneself 
-after all, you can't take it with you! -vn nacnafa; ava 
minacniJ· 
.;.:...:;1 fitnacniJ Ivil I to be refreshed, be invigorated. 
2 to become cheerful, become light-hearted. - vn 
tinacniiJ; avaliva mitnacniJ. 
t.:,t.:, 
~ nacnac Ivil to become fresh, invigorated or heal-
thy. fiz-zarc; lamma firib mayya nacnac the plants 
looked healthy and fresh after being watered. - vn 
nacnaca; ava minacnac. 
873 
~ 
minacnac ladjl I minty. (acm-a-ha mnacnac it 
tastes minty. 2 fresh, healthy. ya mnacnaca ya l:Jilba 
{vendor's cry! fenugreek fresh as mint! 
t \.;".; nicnaac Inl mint. sagaayir bi-nicnaac menth-
olated cigarettes. 
V"'.Jt.:, 
..r"':' nacwis I Ivtl to cause to feel sleepy or drowsy. 
2 Ivil to feel sleepy, feel like sleeping. - vn nacwasa; 
avalpva minacwis. 
..r."..:.;1 fitnacwis Ivil to be made drowsy or sleepy. - vn 
tinacwiis; iva mitnacwis. 
loS t.:, 
.sU naca f (i) Ivtl to announce the death of. - vn nacy; 
ava naaci; pva manci. 
11 naca cala f to blame, criticize, as in nacu caleeha 
finnaha ma-gal-/ maca fixwat-ha tzur-hum they criti-
cized her for not coming with her brothers to visit them. 
.sU nalY Inl obituary notice. 
~I fitnaca Ivil passive of naca. - iva milnici. 
jt.:, 
~ nayaz (u) Ivtl I to cause a pricking or sharp shoot-
ing pain. tal:Jt; bizz-i b-yunmz-ni the place beneath my 
breast gives me pricking pains. 2 to prick, prod. 
II dayman yibibb; yinmz he always enjoys getting in digs 
(at people), he's always insinuating (things). -vn nayz, 
nayazaan; ava naayiz; pva manyuuz. 
o~ nayza linst n, pi -aatl I twinge of pain. 2 a prod, a 
prick. 
0';';'; nuyza In pi -aat, nuyazl small hole, cavity, cleft. lu 
lIuyza f-daljn-u he has a cleft in his chin. IIljacdiin 
bi-ybaffiJu f-nuyza middariyya they're sitting smoking 
hashish in a hidden corner. 
. 
. 
,;,;.; narraz, narriz Ivtl to poke, prod or prick repeated-
ly. kaan bi-ynarraz iI-bumaar bi-ca~aaya txiina w-xiJna 
he was prodding the donkey with a thick rough stick. 
- vn tanyiiz; avalpva minarraz. 
0";';":; tanyiiza linst n, pi -aat, lanayiizl I a severe 
t~inge of pain. 2 a prod, a poke . 
,;,0.:;1 fitnarraz Ivil to be poked, prodded or pricked 
repeatedly. - iva mitnayyaz. 
,;. t':' 
.;.&-\; naayiJ Ivtl to be playful with (especially a mem-
ber of the other sex). - vn minayfa; ava minaayiJ. 
.;.&-L:;I fitnaayiJ Ivil to be playful (with o.a.). ljacdiin 
yitnayfu fil- futubiis ceen-i ceen-ak they're carrying on 
in the bus in front of everyone. - ava mitnaayiJ. 

v!.Jv!t.J 
..r.,-iU narfuuf In pi narafiijl I gill. 2 nasal cavity. 
Ilbiliid lan narafiij-ak not on your nelly! not on your 
life! - also naxfuuf. 
~.t.J 
...,..a; 
Ilarra~ Ivtl to make unpleasant, irritating or 
loathsome. rabb-i-na walad-u b-waljda nan~it lijt-u 
God gave him a wife who made his life hell. -vn tanri~; 
av~pva minan~. 
~I fitnan~ Ivil to become or be made unpleasant, 
irritating or loathsome. - avaliva mitnana~. 
rt.J 
~ naram Icoll n pi fanraaml musical sound. naram 
iI-lUlld the sound of the lute. ma-b-aljibb 'jil-fanraam 
ii- furubbiyya I don't like the sound of European music. 
II c;a{al in-naram he shut up, he became silent. 
-....; narama, narma In pi -aatl I tune, melody type. 
naYa/na Ijaziina a sad tune. nayamit bayaati the bayaati 
melody type. II fahi di n-nayama iii fana xaayif minha 
that's exactly the type oftalk I'm afraid of. 2 note of the 
musical scale. 
~ nanam I Ivtl to make musical, make tuneful. 
ril-bint' di Ijilwa f-kull d Ijaaga -Ijalta kalam-ha I-laadi 
bi-tnarram-u that girl's beautiful in every way - she 
even puts a lilt into her ordinary speech. 2 Ivil to emit 
musical or tuneful sounds. roolj bi-tiddi ~oot waaljid 
wI-tanya b-tiddi tallriim one pipe is for the drone, the 
o~her for the tune. - vn tanriim; avalpva minarram. 
~I fllnanam 
Ivil to be 
made tuneful. - iva 
mitnan·am. 
v!rt.J 
...,:.....a; narmif 1 Ivtl to touch lightly, tickle. fii namla 
bi-tnarmij rigl-i there's an ant tickling my leg. 2 Ivil to 
experience a tickling sensation. -vn narmafa; avalpva 
minarmij. 
~ 
naymafa In pi naramiijl tiny scratch mark, fleck. 
c;umaaf fabyaq fii nayamiif sooda white material with 
tiny black flecks. 
.;..a.:; I fitnarmij Ivil to be touched lightly, be tickled. 
- iva mllnarmij. 
t.Jt.J 
t:'" naYnar Ivtl to pamper, mdulge luxuriously. fiza 
tgawwiztii-ni lj-anaYnal(-ik if you marry me I'll keep you 
in the lap of luxury. - vn narnara; avalpva minarnar. 
~I fitnaYnar IVII to be pampered. - vn tinaYniiy; ava 
mitnamar. 
874 
~ t.J 
~l; naara Ivtl to speak tenderly to (e.g., a child, a 
lover). -vn minariyya; ava minaari. 
~\';;I fitnaara Ivil to be spoken to tenderly. -iva 
mitnaari. 
-J.;..J.J 
.:r.l\;;,Q; naftalim <Fr> In! naphthalene. naftaliin bily 
moth-balls. 
c.J.J 
~ 
nafIJa In pi -aat, nafaljaatl gift (particularly from 
God). 
It J.J 
t:f nafax (u) Ivtl 1 to blow on. II tunfux-u y{iir (1) it's as 
light as a feather. (2) he's a mere weakling, he couldn't 
put up a fight. 2 to blow up, inflate. funfux II-lagala 
pump up the tyre! ril-bikarbunaat bi-yunfux iI-lagiin 
the baking-powder makes the dough rise. II falaat nafx 
{mus] wind instruments. -lamaliyyit nafx {surg] insuf-
flation operation. -xulxaal nafx hollow anklets. - Ivil 
3 to blow. funfux lala ~awabl-ak tidaffii-ha blow on 
your fingers and warm them! II rabb-I-na nafax fi-~lIrt-u 
{deris] "" he, contrary to his usual performance, did 
well this time, as in rabb-i-na yinfux fi-~urt-ak wi-tgiib 
leef malaak I hope you will manage to bring some 
bread with you this time! 4 to huff and puff (with an-
ger), fume. bi-YUC;lUd yunfux wi-huwwa (ahc;aan he 
fumes away when he is fed up. 5 to swell. -vn nafx. 
nafaxaan, nifiix; ava naafix; pva manfuux. 
~ 
nafxa 1 linst n, pi -aatl an exhalation. 2 Inl pom-
posity, conceit. nafxa kaddaaba or nafxa lal-faaql false 
pride, empty conceit. 
t";;" manfuux ladj *1 pompous, conceited. 
~ 
nUffeexa In pi -flat, nafafiixl balloon. 
tlA.:... munfaax, minfaax In pi manafiixl pump, bel-
lows, squeeze-bulb.llkamira munfaax folding camera, 
camera with bellows. 
~I fitnafax Ivil I to be blown on. 2 to be blown up, 
be inflated. 3 to become swollen, become distended . 
II ba{n-I tnafaxll (1) my stomach became swollen. 
(2) I f~lt fed up to the teeth. -beqaan-I tnafaxit {coarse] 
I ~elt fed up to the balls. - avallva mllnif,x. 
t:f naffax I Ivtl to pump up, mflate (several times or 
to a great extent). II feeh illl naffax lenee-k klda what 
made your eyes so swollen? 2 Ivil to swell up.lenay-ya 
mnaffaxa my eyes are swollen. -vn tanfl/x; avalpva 
minaffax. 

~I 'limaffax Ivil to be blown up, be inflated (several 
times or to a great extent). - iva mitnaffax. 
~ 
I 'lintafax T = 'litnafax. - vn 'lintifaax: ava mintifix. 
2t~.;, 
t"i\; nafuux Inl crown of the head, (loosely also) 
head. bi-tfil-ha lala nafux-ha she carries it on top of her 
head. hiyya camlaa-Ii hawsa f-nafuux-i I-daragit 'linni 
mif c;aadir 'lafakkar she's put my head in such a spin 
I can't think. 'linta l.Ja-l(ayyar nafuux-i you'll drive me 
out of my mind! 'linta l.Jaa(i{ iI-ceeb kul/-u cala nafuux-i 
leeh why are you putting the blame on my head? 
II r'liddeet-u mac;lab) {ilil min nafuux-u (I played a trick 
on him) such as he's not likely to forget. 
I ~~.;, 
.Ii; nafad', nifid' (a) r Ivil to cease to be available. 
'li(-{abca I-c;adiima nifdit the old edition isn't available 
any more. -vn nafadaan: ava naafid. 
..IA;.;;..I 'listanfid, 'listanfad Ivtl to use up, exhaust. 
'lil-muwagaf da stanfid kul/ i 'lagazaat-u this employee 
has used up all his holidays. 'li1-caya huwwa /Ii stanfid 
c;uwwit-u it's the sickness that has exhausted his 
strength. -vn 'listinfaad; avalpva mislanfid. 
Ij~';' 
;; nafar' (u) Ivi/la to shy, baulk (of. e.g., a horse). 
Ib to recoil in disgust. min saacit ma ggawwizil-u 
w-hiyya nafra minnu from the moment she married him 
she has not been able to bring herself to go near him. 
2 to snort and thus expel mucus from the nostrils (of. 
e.g., a donkey). -vn nafr; ava naafir, nafraan . 
• ;; nafra Ipl -aatl instance noun of nafr. II nafrit 
l.Jumaar callus (on the hand, supposedly caused by the 
mucus of a donkey or the like falling on the affected 
part). 
~ nifiir In pi -aatl I bugle. 2 horn, hooter (of the 
s9ueeze-bulb type). 3 megaphone. 
;; naffar Ivtl to cause to recoil in disgust or 
annoyance. 'linta mnaffar-ni min lift-i you've made my 
life not worth living. mucamlit-u naffarit in-naas minnu 
his behaviour has made people sick of him. -vn tanfiir; 
a~a/pva minaffar. 
pi 'litnaffar Ivil passive of naffar. - iva mitnaffar. 
::,i\; naafirT Ivt and viI to squabble (with s.o.). -vn 
875 
minafra; ava minaafir. 
.)l:.. munafra In pi -aatl squabble, argument. 
)\,:,;1 'litnaafir Ivil I to be argued with heatedly. 2 to 
draw away (from s.o. oro.a.), fall into disharmony. - vn 
tanaafur; ava mitnaafir. 
)\.:.; tanaafur, tanaafur Inl dislike, repugnance. 
2 (j ~.;,) 
;; nafar2 In pi 'lanfaarl I person, individual. faay 
Ii-miit nafar tea for a hundred people. kursi nafareen a 
two-person seat, a double seat.lltaksi bin-nafar a taxi in 
which each passenger pays a (fixed) fare. 2 hired agri-
cultural or construction labourer. 3 [mil] private 
soldier. 
~ nafiir: la (Iuh) fil-ciir wala fin-nafiir see liir. 
3 j 
~.;, see j.J ~ .;, : nafuura 
"::'>l.Sj~';' 
~;; nafriit: lafriit nafriit see lafriit . 
j~';' 
.i.<; ,.Ii; nifid 2 , nafad 2 
(i) Ivil I to pass through. 
bi-tinfid mil-l.Jee( li-barra it passes through the wall to 
the outside. 2 to escape. 'lil.Jtart izzaay raal.J 'lanfid min 
'liid-u 1 was at a loss as to how I was going to get out of 
his clutches. 'lin nafadt I min iI-mayya mif l.Ja-tinfid min 
if-furba [prov] (if you escape the water, you won't 
escape the soup) = however many dangers you survive, 
there will be more waiting for you. nafad hi-gild-u he 
escaped with his skin. 3 to become pas~able. 'lis-sikka 
nifdit the road has been cleared. -vn nafadaan; ava 
naafid. 
~..,.a.; nifuuz, nufuuz Inl influence. naas luhum (or 
'la~l.Jaab) nifuuz people of influence. 
~ 
manfaz In pI manaafiZI outlet or inlet, entrance or 
exit. 
.i.<; naffiz Ivtl I to carry out, execute. 'lana b-anaffiZ 
iI-'lawaamir I am carrying out orders. 'lil-muttaham 
naffiz il-l.Jukm the accused served the sentence. 2 to 
implement in accordance with a plan. lamma niigi 
nnaffiz mabna ... when we're going to put up a building 
.... tanfiiz ig-gurnaal the production of the newspaper. 
-vn tanfiiz; avalpva minaffiz. 
I.S¥ tanfiizi ladj *1 executive.lagna tanfiziyya execu-
tive committee. 
~ 
munaffiz In °1 [theat, cin] set builder. 
.Ii; naffid Ivtl I to make a hole through, pierce. 
'lik-kahrabaa'li naffid iI-l.Jee{a min iI-ma(bax Ii~-~aala 

the electrician made a hole in the wall from the kitchen 
to the living room. 2 to cause to escape. ma-fii-J yadd· 
ya-yiqdar yinaffid-ak minni no one will be able to get 
you out of my grasp. 3 to bring (s.th.) through from one 
side of a partition to the other. takyiif iI-hawa laazim 
tinaffiduu c:al- foocf.a di kamaan you must bring the air 
conditioning through to this room too. 4 to (be large 
enough to) allow (s.o. or s.th.) to pass through. 
fif-fibbaak da ma-ynaffid-ak-J that window is too nar-
row for you to get through. II ril-baab yinaffid gamal 
(the door is wide enough to let (even) a camel pass 
through) "" kindly get out of here! -
Ivil 5 to lead 
through, pass through. fil-yaara bi-tnaffid c:ala faaric: 
kibiir the lane leads through to a large street. - vn 
tanfiid; ava/pva minaffid. 
..iA;;1 '1itnaffiz Ivil to be carried out, be executed. 
fawamr-i ma-tnaffizit-Jmy orders were not carried out. 
- ~va mitnaffiz. 
...I.A.;;'I fitnaffid Ivil passive of naffid. - iva mitnaffid. 
1\.1"''''''; .;, 
~ 
nafas I (i) Ivtl to jinx, put the evil eye on. ba~~· 
c:al- fakl' nafas-u he looked at the food and gave it the 
evil eye. -vn nafasaan; ava naafis; pva manfuus. 
~ 
nafs Ifem nl I Ipl nufuusl la self, psyche, mind. 
yubb in-nafs self-love. nafs-u yayya he's a sensitive 
person. kaanit nUfuus in-naas mirtaaya people used to 
be relaxed. c:ilm in-nafs psychology. Ib soul. xala~ 
in-nufuus the salvation of souls. 2 lin constr w def nl the 
same .... nafs ir-raagil the same man. fi-nafs iI-waqt at 
the same time. 3 lin constr w pron suffl pronominal of 
reflexivity. YUll' nafs-ak ma(ray-i put yourself in my 
place. laazim n~bur c:ala nafs-i-na we must contain 
ourselves in patience. c:ala r-ra~iif faw c:ala f-faaric: 
nafs-u on the pavement or on the street itself. II bi-nafs-
my-, him-, it- etc. self, as in huwwa da b-nafs-u iii c:andi 
that's (like) the very one I have, fana c:aayiz iI-mudiir 
yiigi hina b-nafs-u I want the director to come here 
personally. -ga c:ala nafs(-u) to compromise, sacrifice 
something of omi's own interest, as in laazim II-waayid 
yistaymil wi-yiigi c:ala nafs-ufwayya one has to put up 
with things and be a little forbearing. 
..,....t; nafsi ladjl psychological. qalaq nafsi mental per-
turbation. yaala nafsiyya psychological state. II fi(-(ibb 
in-nafsi psychiatry. 
11 nafsiyyan ladvl psychologically, mentally. 
• ;.....; nafsiyya In pi -aatl psychological state, state of 
mind. nafsiyyit-i tac:baana I feel low. nafsiyyit-u 
kull-a-ha rill he is full of grudges. bi-y fassar c:ala 
876 
nafsiyyit if-fac:b it affects the people's morale. 
JL.i; nafsaani = nafsi. 
~ 
nifs Ifem nl I appetite, desire. bi-txalli I-waayid 
ma-Iuu-f nifs' lif-Jurl it spoils one's enthusiasm for 
work. wacf.cf.abt il-ba(aa(is wi-xallet-ha tiftay in-nifs 
I prepared the potatoes and made them appetizing. 
fin-nifs' mif (alba fakl' min sana I haven't felt like 
eating for a year. bi-yiftaral bi-nifs he works with enthu-
siasm. nifs-i masduuda I have no appetite, I have no 
desire, as in nifs-i masduuda c:al-muzakra I don't feel 
like studying. 2 nature, character. nifs-u yilwa (or 
xacf.ra) (1) he's gentle and unassuming. (2) he's undis-
criminating (particularly with regard to food or 
women). 3 lin constr w.pron suffl modal of desire or 
inclination. fana nifs-i f-c:arabiyya I wish I had a car! 
fana nifs-i fac:raf bass all I want is to know. nifs-u 
yitc:ayyin fif-Jirka he wants to be given a post in the 
company. 4 envy, the evil eye. di nifs' gat-Iak someone 
must have put the evil eye on you . 
~ 
nafas2 In pi fanfaasl I breath.llnafas fi-qaf~ (a 
breath in a palm crate) "" extremely weak, barely alive. 
-Ussa fii fin-nafas the breath of life is still in him, he's 
still alive. fidda nafas U- to pump air into, as in kull' ma 
tiddi I-babuur nafas yic:la the more air you pump into 
the stove the higher it burns. 2 puff, drag (e.g., on a 
cigarette). - Ino pll 3a strength, energy. ma-fiyyaa-f 
nafas fac:mil faktar min kida I don't have the strength 
to do any more. c:andu sabc:iin sana w-lissa fii nafas 
yaaxud duff' baarid i~-~uby he's seventy years old and is 
still strong enough to take a cold shower in the morning. 
3b support, backing. ril-baraka f-siyadt-ak wi-nafas 
siyadt-ak all the credit is due to you and your efforts (on 
our behalf), Sir! c:awziin nafas-ak mac:aana c:afaan 
il-masfala timfi we need your good offices to make the 
thing work. 4 personal touch (in cooking). nafas-ha 
kwayyis fi(-(abiix she's a good cook with an original 
touch. 
4...A; nafasa Inl I puerperium, after-birth condition in 
which women bleed. -/adjectivallyl fis-sitt' lissa nafasa 
the lady's still in puerperium. 2 [lsi] state of ritual 
impurity of women after childbirth. 
\.I"'\A.; nifaas Inl parturition, childbirth. 
~ 
nafiis ladj *1 precious . 
~ 
i fanfas lell morelmost precious. 
~I fitnafas Ivil to be struck by the evil eye. -iva 
mi~nifis . 
~ 
naffis Ivtl I to cause (s.th. inflated) to leak. ya 
fax-i naffist il-c:agala hey mate! you've deflated the 
tyre! 2 to give (a new mother) proper food and atten-

tion. - Ivil 3 to leak out (of air. gas etc.). ri/-hawa 
bi-ynafflS mil-bislim the air is leaking from the piston. 
4 to have a leak, be holed or punctured. ball mnafflS a 
leaky valve. ril-lilba mnaffisa the can is punctured. -vn 
lanfiis; ava/pva minaffis. 
11 naffis lan f to find an outlet for, give vent to (feelings, 
de~ires etc.). 
~I rilnaffis Ivil 1 to breathe. 2 to utter a word, 
breathe a word. min waraa lind w-tjuddaamu 
ma-litjdar-/ lilnafflS she chatters behind his back but in 
front of him she doesn't dare say a thing. 3 passive of 
nafflS 1 and 2. -avaliva milnaffis . 
..,..L lanaffusT Inl breathing, respiration. lanaffus 
~inaali artificial respiration. 
~ 
lanaffusiT 
ladjl respiratory. 
rig-gihaaz il-
lanaffusi the respiratory system (of the body). 
...,..;\.; naaflS Ivtl to compete with. -vn munafsa; ava 
minaafis. 
...,..;t:.1 ritnaaflS Ivil to compete with one another. -ava 
mitnaafis. 
...,..; t:. lanaafus T Inl competition. 
Zu:"';iJ 
..:..lii naffaas ladjl jet-propelled. mulJarrik naffaas a jet 
engine. 
'" lii naffaasa In pi -aall jet plane. 
..; ...; iJ 
.;.Ai nafaj (i) 1 Ivil to swell, become puffed up. 
rir-ruzz i b-yinfif fil-mayya the rice swells in the water. 
rafandi laabis tjiyaafa w-manfuuja gentleman fashion-
ably dressed and puffed up (with conceit). 2/vtl to 
ruffle, tease (feathers. hair). -vn naff, nafajaan; ava 
naafif; pva manfuuj. 
J-.Ai naff for the phrase laffi naff see laff· 
~ 
naffa Ipl -aall instance noun of naff. 
~I ritnafaj Ivil to be or become ruffled, be teased 
(of feathers, hair). -avaliva mitnifij. 
J-.Ai naffif Ivtl to tease out, fluff out. - vn lanfiif; ava/ 
pva minaffif. 
~I ritnaffij Ivil to be teased out, be or become 
fluffed out. -avaliva mitnaffif. 
..J# ...; iJ 
.;u; nafaq (u) Ivtl to shake out, clean by shaking. 
runfuqi s-sagagiid shake out the carpets! IInafaq riid-u 
min il-lJikaaya kull-a-ha he washed his hands of the 
whole business. -vn nafq, nafaqaan; ava naafiq; pva 
mar'fuuq. 
877 
~ 
nafqa Ipl -aall instance noun of nafq. 
~ 
manfaqa In pi manaafiql 1 any of a range of 
implements for dusting (as a dusting cloth, a feather 
duster, a carpet-beater). 2 ashtray. 
~I ritnafaq Ivil to be shaken or shake oneself. 
ris-siggaad kUll-U tnafaq all the carpets have been 
shaken out. b-atnifiq mil-bard I'm shivering with cold. 
- aV!lliva mitnifiq . 
.;u; naffaq ivt/l to beatthe dust from. naffaql is-siriir 
I shook out the bed linen. naffaq il-badla brush down 
the suit! naffaq-li g-gazma dust off my shoes! 2 to re-
make (a mattress, pillow or the like, by removing the 
cotton stuffing, cleaning it and fluffing it). 3 to make 
penniless. ran a mnaffaq I am flat broke. -vn lanfiiq; 
ava!pva minaffaq. 
~I ritnaffaq Ivil 1 to be cleaned of dust. 2 to be 
remade (of a mattress, pillow or the like). 3 to be made 
penniless. - iva mitnaffaq . 
..;u.:;1 rintafaq Ivil 1 to shake, shudder. 2 to jump, 
start. -vn rintifaaq; ava mintifiq . 
4.4\A;;; I rintifaaqa Ipl -aall instance noun of rintifaaq. 
rintifaaqil moot death-throe. rintifaaqit ig-geej army 
revolt . 
j, ...; iJ 
.laA; naft Inl petroleum. 
t"';iJ 
~ nafal (a) 1 Ivtl to be of use to. rij-jakitta di lillfal-
ak would this jacket be of any use to you? 2 Ivil to be of 
use, be effective. xadl i llaag laakin ma-nafal-f 
I underwent treatment but it did no good. rik-kalaam 
da ma-yinfal-f that's no good, that won't do. nafal-u 
reeh what use is it? whafs it good for? lila kida naafil 
wala kida naafil there's no possible solution. -vn nafl, 
nafal, nafalaan; ava naafil. 
..,..&; nafli ladj "I selfish, opportunist, self-serving. 
~ nafala = manfala. ma-fii-jminnu nafala no good 
is to be had out of him. 
~i ranfal/ell morelmost useful or effective. 
~ 
manfala In pi manaafill interest, advantage. 
ma-fii-fminnu manfala there's nothing to be got out of 
it. ma-lii-f manfala fil-mawquul rve no personal in-
terest in the matter. 
~ 
manfalgi In pi -yyal opportunist. 
~ naffal Ivtl to cause to profit, benefit (by giving 
one's custom to or by giving work to). ma-bi-ynaffal-fi 
lJiJddi min bayyaliin lJarit-na b-tjirj he doesn't give 
custom to any of the dealers in our lane, not even a 

piastre's worth.llya baxt illi naffar; wi-stanfar; {prov] = 
blessed is he who while making a profit profits others. 
-naffar;-na ya beeh your assistance, sir! (said, e.g., by 
b~ggars and petty traders). - avaliva mmaffar;. 
~ 
1 fitnaffar; Ivil passive of naffar;. - iva mitnaffar;. 
~ 
1 fintafar;' = flStanfar;. -vn fintifaar;; ava mintifir; . 
~I fistanfar; Ivil to profit, benefit. b-astanfar; min 
kull' gneeh bi-ta/aata saar I make a profit of three 
piastres on every pound. -vn fistinfaar;; ava mistanfar;. 
...; ...; .:, 
..1; naff (i) Ivil {coarse] to blow one's no~e. -vn naff, 
nafafaan; ava naafif; pva manfuuf. 
~ naffa' In pi -aatl {coarse] I instance noun of naff. 
2 a piece of nasal mucus, snot. 
..1:;1 fitnaff Ivil {coarse] (impersonal) passive of naff. 
fiI-mandiil da ma-yitnaff'-J fii no one could blow his 
nose in this (dirty) handkerchief! - iva mitnaff. 
I J"';.:, 
..;a.; nafalj' (u) Ivil I to pay maintenance (e.g., for 
children, a divorced wife). 2! to give gift~ (to one's 
fiancee). -vn nafaljaan; ava naafilj; pva manfuulj. 
4iAi nafalja In pi -aatl I maintenance, alimony. 2! gift 
of food given to an engaged girl by her fiance on the 
occasion of a festival. 
..;&;;1 fitnafalj Ivil (Impersonal) passive of nafalj '. 
fitnafalj r;a/eeha talat siniin she was given engagement 
presents for three years. - iva mitnifilj. 
Z J ...; .:, 
.,;; l; naafilj Ivtl to act hypocritically (towards). 
bi-ynaafllj iI-mudiir he's making up to the director. - vn 
ntfaalj, minaflja; ava minaaftlj. 
-.;\.0; nifaalj Inl hypocrisy. 
.;il:.. munaafilj In *1 hypocrite. 
";;l:.;1 filllaaftlj IVII to be treated with hypocrisy. - iva 
mitnaafilj. 
J J ...; .:, 
..;a.; nafalj 1 In pi fanfaaljl tunnel, underpass. 
J"';.:, 
j.O; nafl Inl {lsi] supererogatory acts of devotion. 
4lA; nifla In pi -aat, nifall{rur] an extra amount (usual-
ly of land) added at a time of partitioning to compensate 
for some defect. fiddillaa-Iu nifla r;and iI-ljlsma r;a/aan 
xad ii-fare[ iI-bir;iida we gave him an extra share when 
we divided the land because he took the farther plot. 
Jil; nawaafil = lIafl· 
878 
j.O; lIaffil Ivtl {rur] to give (s.o.) an extra amount 
(usually of land) at a time of partitioning to compensate 
for some defect in his share. -vn tanfiil; ava/pva 
m!lIaffil. 
j.i.:;1 fitnaffil Ivil I passive of lIaffil. 2 to perform 
nawaafil. -avaliva manaffil. 
.JYt"';':' 
.ri; lIufimbtr Inl November. 
...;.:,...;.:, 
...A;.A; lIafntf Ivil I to break out m blisters. 2 to subside 
(ofa swelling). 3 to have a runny nose and be constantly 
blowing it or sniffing. r;andu bard' w-ljaar;id yinafnif 
{uul in-nahaar he's got 1I cold and is constantly blowing 
his nose. -vn nafnafa; ava mmafnif. 
.J.J"';,:, 
'.nil; nafuura In pi -aatl fountain. 
IS"';.:, 
.;; nafa (i) Ivtl I to deny. nafu fayy' r;laalja liihum 
bil-mawe[uur; they denied having any connection with 
the matter.llruhuud in-nafy {leg] witnesses for the de-
fence. 2 to exile. -vn nafy; ava naafi; pva mallfi. 
~ nafya Ipl -aatl instance noun of nafy . 
-,!\.O; lIifaaya' In pi -aatl waste matter, rubbish. 
nifayaat iI-ma~aanir; factory wastes. 
...,&:;1 fitnafa Ivil I to be denied. 2 to be exiled. -iva 
mitnifi. 
); naffa 1 Ivtl {agric] I to weed out. bi-ynaffu n-nigiil 
they weed out the couch grass. 2 to clear (s.th.) of 
weeds. naffu r-ruzz they cleared the rice of weeds. -vn 
tanfiyya; avalpva millaffi. 
~I fitnaffa Ivil passive of naffa 1. - iva mitnaffa . 
"pI filltafa = fitnafa. - iva milll/fi. 
.J I J.:, 
1;lA.; lIaljaara: fiI-filuus bi-lrIlulj /aljaara naljaara the 
money is going down the dram . 
I Y J.:, 
...,..A; naljab (u) Ivtl {rur] to make a hole in (a wall) by 
removing bricks (usually, in order to steal what is on the 
other side). fiI-ljaramiyya lIaljabu z-ziriiba the thieves 
made a hole in the wall of the pen (and stole the anim-
als). -vn naljb, naljabaan; ava naaljib; pva manljuub . 
..,..A; lIaljb I Ivnl IllIaljb-u ga (or (ilir; naljb-u) r;ala/oona 
(fae[ya) {prov] (he made a hole in the wall of an empty 

granary) "" his efforts were wasted. 2 Inl pass between 
hills. 
..,... nae;ba Ipl -aall instance noun of nae;b. 
*1 l'itnae;ab Ivil passive of nae;ab. -iva mitnie;ib. 
..,...a; naqqab Ivil to prospect. fii jarikaal I'agnabiyya 
kliira bi-tnaqqab la/a I-bilrool fi-m~r iI-yomeen dool 
there are many foreign companies prospecting for oil in 
E~ypt these days. - vn lanqiib; ava minaqqab. 
..,...0.:;1 I'itnaqqab Ivil (impersonal) passive of naqqab. 
!'iI-bilrool mumkin yitnaqqab lalee fil-bal:Jr oil can be 
prospected for in the sea. - iva mitnaqqab. 
2 ..... J.:, 
,,!\A; nie;aaba, niqaaba In pi -aall I labour union, pro-
fessional association. nie;aabil lummaal in-nasiig the 
textile workers' union. lIie;aabil iI-mihan i(-(ibbiyya the 
association of the medical professions. 2 agricultural 
co-operative. 
.;.\A; niqaabi ladj °1 pertaining to a union, association, 
co-operative etc. 
...,...0.; naqiib In pi nuqabaal'. nuqabal I head of a pro-
fessional association. naqiib i~-~ul:Jafiyyiin the head of 
the journalists' association. IInaqiib iI-l'ajraaf head of 
the descendants of the Prophet Muhammad. 2a [mil] 
captain. 
2b [nav] 
lieutenant. 
2e naqiib (ayyaar 
flight-captain. 
...,...0.; nie;iib: ya baxli min kaan in-nie;iib xaa/-u [prov] 
how lucky is he whose uncle is a man of influence! 
J ..... J.:, see ..... J J : nae;b 
c J ':' 
r::f nae;al:J (a) I Ivil to throb (with pain). gism-i 
b-yine;al:J ma(ral:J iI-lamaliyya my body throbs where 
the operation was done. 2 Ivtl to deal a sharp blow to. 
raal:J na{jl:J-u f-manaxiir-u he upped and busted him in 
the nose. -vn nae;l:J. nae;al:Jaan; ava lIaae;il:J; pva 
mane;uul:J. 
~ nae;1:J ladj invarl terrific, tremendous. I'iddel-Iu 
lale;a nae;1:J I gave him a terrific thrashing. bint i nae;1:J a 
smashing girl. 
r::f i l'ane;al:J leI! morelmost. da na~~aab wi- I'axuu 
l'ane;al:J minnu he's a fraud and his brother is worse. 
~ 
1 I'itnae; al:J Ivil to be dealt a sharp blow. - iva 
mitnie;il:J. 
I ~ J.:, 
.u.; nae;ad (u) Ivtl to hand over (cash) to (s.o.). 
nae;adl-u I'ugril-u I handed him over his wages. -vn 
879 
nae;d, nae;adaall; ava Ilaae;id; pva malle;uud . 
...Ii,; nae;d', naqd' Inl I money, finance. I'idaaril in-
Ilae;d monetary administration. warae;il nae;d currency 
note. 2 cash (as distinct from other forms of payment). 
kull iI-mabilaal bin-nae;d all sales are in cash. IIfiluus 
Ilae;d i w-l:Jurra hard honest cash. - ladvl 3 in cash. 
I'anajarii-ha nae;d I've bought it for cash. 
1I1laqdall ladvl in cash . 
..s..lA; nae;di ladvl in cash. dafalli Ilae;di I paid cash. 
~..IA; Ilae;diyya Inl I Ipl -aall cash payment. 2 Ino pI! 
money, cash. l'iid-ak lan-Ilae;diyya hand over the cash! 
~.,;:. Iluqulld 
Ipl 
nl 
money, 
currency. 
lIuquud 
maldaniyya coins (as distinct from banknotes). 
2 ~ J.:, 
...Ii,; naqad (u) Ivtl to criticize. mij laazim linqud 
la~arrufaal-u e;uddaam in-naas lajaall ma-lil:Jriguuj 
you mustn't criticize his behaviour in front of other 
people lest you embarrass him. -vn naqd; ava Ilaaqid; 
pva manquud . 
...Ii,; nae;d", naqd" r Inl criticism. Ilae;d i I'adabi literary 
criticism. 
..\I\; naaqid In pllluqqaadl critic. naaqid I'adabi liter-
ary critic. 
..u.;;; 1 l'inlae;ad, I'inlaqad Ivtl to criticize. miin yie;dar 
yintie;id kalaam-ak illi kull-u durar who could ever criti-
cize your words, all of which are pearls of wisdom. -vn 
l'intie;aad. l'intiqaad; ava mintie;id. 
~\..i;;;1 I'illlie;aad In pi -aall criticism, critical remark, dis-
approving remark . 
..IA::.;.. muntae;ad ladj 
*1 
deserving of criticism, 
shameful. 
J.) J.:, 
..I.A:,. mane;ad In pi mallaae;idl metal or earthenware 
brazier (see PI.A, 6). 
jJ.:, see jJ.:, 
I 
•• 
JIJ'-' 
;; nae;ar (u) Ivtl la to peck, peck at, peck up. I'id-diik 
bi-yune;ur iI-l:Jabb i mil-l'arq the cock pecks up the grain 
from the ground. Ib to make a hole in. Ilae;ar iI-l'arqi 
b-walad he dibbled the ground with a peg. Ie to ham-
mer in (thin objects in particular). Ilae;ar iI-walad fil-
I'arq he drove the peg into the ground. 2 to deal (s.o.) a 
sharp, quick blow. nae;arl-u b-zalata I hit him with a 
pebble. Illlae;aril-u leen she put the evil eye on him . 
3 [carp] to cut a mortise in. 4 to tap (on), rap (on), 

drum (on). naljart B ([ala) I-baab I gave a tap on the 
door. bi-ylJaawil yunljur iI-bilya btaa[it zimiil-u he tries 
to knock his companion's marble. naljart B [al-maktab 
bi-~awab[-i I drummed on the desk with my fingers. 
II falaat in-naljr percussion instruments. 5 to spot, de-
tect. naljart-u fif-faari[ I spotted him in the street. 
naljar ii-yalta he spotted the mistake. IInaljart' sufaal 
mi-lli gambi I cribbed (the answer to) a question from 
the person next to me. - Ivil 6 to throb. dimaay-i b-
tunljur my head is throbbing. -vn naljr, niljiir, 
naljaraan; ava naaljir; pva manljuur. 
0;; naljra linst n, pi -a.,atl a peck, a dent, a tap, a knock 
etc. II di naljra wi-di naljra this is a different matter 
altogether. 
.)l; naaljir I see niljiir. 
0;; nUljra In pi nUljar, nUljraatl hole, hollow, decliv-
ity.llli[bit in-nuljra a children's game with marbles in 
which one player tries to dislodge his opponent's mar-
ble from a hollow in the ground by throwing his marble 
against it. 
;; niljr: lJaatit niljr-(u) min niljr-( .. ) (he's) always 
ready to picl<. on (s.o.). - also ljim . 
..s;; niljari, nUljari In • and pi -yyal nagger, pesterer. 
J;; naljarti = niljari. 
J;; nUljarti I.n pi -yyal player of any drum struck with 
a stick. 
....... niljiir: ([amliin zayy ') naaljir wi-nljiir always fight-
ing, always at one another's throats .. 
o.)U; nUljljaara In pi -aat, naljaljiirl [non-Cairene] type 
of metal drum played with sticks. 
~.)U; nUljljariyya = nUljljaara. Ilzayy' [tl§ali~ in-
nUljljariyya (as thin as) drum sticks (usually of a 
woman's legs). 
o fo manljara In pi manaaljirl hand hoe of the same 
shape as afaas (see PI.D, 6) Qut smaller. 
.)~ munljaar, 
minljaar In 
pi manaljiirl 1 beak. 
2 [carp] mortise chisel. 
';':;1 fitnaljar Ivil passive of naljar. - iva mitniljir. 
); naljljar Ivtl 1 to peck repeatedly at. 2 to make holes 
in. fil-[itta naljljarit iI-fustaan the moths made holes in 
the dress. 3 [agric] to distribute (seed, fertilizer etc.) 
among a number of holes. bi-naaxud kimaawi 
wi-nnaljljar-u fil-xaa we take chemical fertilizer and 
distribute it along the holes (prepared) in the furrow. 
- Ivil 4 to throb hard or repeatedly. 5 to tap repeated-
ly. 6 to nag. -vn tanljiir; avalpva minaljljar. 
);;1 fitnaljljar lvil passive of naljljar. - iva mitnaljljar. 
.)l; naaljir 2 Ivtl to nag, pester. -vn niljaar, minaljra, 
minaljra; ava minaaljir. 
880 
.)\,:;1 fitnaaljir Ivil 1 to keep nagging each other. 
fitnaljru tuul is-sikka fa-w~ilt il-beet mi~addal tamaam 
they squabbled all the way so I got home with quite a 
headache. 2 to be nagged. - avalpva mitnaalji,. 
2 J J oJ see J I J oJ : naljaara 
jJ J oJ 
j;; naljraz 1 Ivil to drum, make a drumming sound. 
bi-ynaljraz tuul il-waljt" [l¥-~iniyya [afaan yigzib iz-
zabaayin he drums all the time on the tray to attract the 
customers. 2/vtl to keep hitting (s.o.). naljraz-u bil-
[~aaya he kept rapping him with the stick. -vn 
naljraza; avalpva minaljraz . 
.:,Ij;; naljrazaan Inl drum resembling a kettledrum 
but smaller, or a pair of such drums. 
j';':;l fitnaljraz Ivil to be hit repeatedly. -vn tinaljriiz; 
ava mitnaqraz. 
...,.. J J oJ 
...,..;; naljras, nUljrus. naqras r Inl gout. 
';JJoJ 
...;.;; naljraf Ivtl 1 to make gay or colourful. 2 to orna-
ment, decorate. naljrafu I-beet qabl il-faral:J they deco-
rated the house before the wedding. -vn naljrafa; aval 
pva minaljraf. 
...,..';':;1 fitnaljraf Ivil passive of naljraj. - vn tinaqriif; 
ava mitnaqraf. 
jJoJ 
.iA; i fanqaz Ivtl to save, rescue. firmi nafs-ak fil-bal:Jr' 
wi-nqiz-ha throw yourself in the sea and save her! -Ithe 
literary passive also occursl fana 
funqizt' min 
il-mufkila di fil-waqt il-munaasib I was bailed out of 
that problem at the, right moment. -vn fmqaaz; ava 
munqiz. 
..iA.;,. munqiz In '1 rescuer. 
...,.. J oJ 
,-,".,il; naquus In pi nawaljiisl I /ChrJ pair of cymbals 
played to accompany anthems in the Coptic Church. 
2t bell. IInaaquus il-xa{ar == the writing on the wall. 
.; J oJ 
..;..;.; naljaf (u. i) Ivtl la to pattern. ornament. qumaaf 
manljuuf patterned cloth. kal:Jk' manljuuf crimped 
kal:Jk. Ib to make a pattern with. bi-yunqufu 1-l:Jinna 
[ala fidee-hum they make patterns with the henna on 

their hands. 2 {slang] to crib from (a book. another's 
examination paper etc.). -vn nafif, nafiajaan; ava 
naafiif; pva manfiuuj . 
...,..Ai nafifl/vn/llfiumaajnafifpatterned cloth, figured 
cloth. 2 In pi nUfiuufl pattern. ornamentation. 
~ 
nafifa In pi -aall pattern. 
...,..\.0; nafifiaaj In *1 house-painter, decorator. 
...,..lA.:.. munfiaaj, 
minfiaaj In pi manafiiifl pastry 
crimper. 
~I filnafiaj Ivil passive of nafiaf. - iva mitnifiif . 
...,...0; nafifiaj Ivtl to pattern (a number of things one 
after the other). fialadu ynafifiaju fik-kayk i tuul iI-Ieel 
they were up all night decorating the cookies. -vn 
lan.fiiif; ava/pva minafifiaf. 
...,...&.;;1 filnafifiaj Ivil passive of nafifiaf. - iva milnafifiaf. 
.;.il; naafiif Ivtl I to discuss. figlimaal bi-nnaafiif fii 
fil-malraka a meeting at which we discuss the battle. 
2 to hold a discussion with. fil-fiaae{i bi-ynaafiif 
il-muyamiin fil- fasaniid il-qanuniyya the judge is dis-
cussing the legalities of the case with the lawyers. -vn 
nifiaaj, minafifa, munaqfa; avalpva minaafiif. 
.;.\.0; niqaajf, nifiaaj Inl discussion. 
~\.:.. munafifa, munaqfa In pi -aall I discussion, 
argument. 2 quizzing. interrogation.. 
.;.il:;l filnaafiif Ivil I passive of naafiif. 2 to discuss 
together. -avaliva mitnaafiif. 
v" J tJ 
.,pi.i nifi~ or nUfi~ (a) Ivtl I to be lacking from. 
fit-beel yinfi~-u yagaal kiliir the house needs.a lot of 
things. filii naafi~ il-maklab makana what the office 
needs is a typewriter. 2 to lack, be in need of. fil-fiaeda 
kaanil nafi~aa-k you were missed at the get-together. 
II fana mifnaafii~ "" I've had it up to here! -huwwa fiyna 
nafi~iin-ak "" we already have enough on our hands 
without your imposing yourself too! - Ivii 3 to be lack-
ing. be missing. fana yinfi~ minni xamaslaajar gineeh 
I'm fifteen pounds short. mumkin faJlJal minnak illi 
yinfi~ landi min il-Iawaazim may I borrow from you 
the things that I don't have at home? fid-dawa da 
naafi~ min is-sUUfi this medicine is not available on the 
market. II da iii kaan naafi~ "" that's all we needed! 
- naafi~ ... "" the last straw would be ... , all that's 
needed now is .... as in naar;~ lir;ul-li fazanat-ak 
kamaan all I need now is for you to ask me to spoon-feed 
you! 4 to become less. decrease. fit-mizaniyya nifi~il 
is-sanaa-di the budget went down this year.llnifi~ fi-
lenee(-hum) to lose standing in (their) eyes. -vn naq~, 
nUfi~aan; ava naafi~. 
.,pi.i nafi~ (i) Ivtlto empty some of the contents from 
881 
(a container). rinfi~ il-yalla empty some out ofthe pot! 
-vn nafi~; ava naafi~; pva manfiu~ . 
...,..Ai 
nafi~ Inl lack. shortage, deficiency. IImurakkab 
nafi~ inferiority complex. - fir-rafi~ i nafi~ {prov] "" k> 
dance is to lose dignity . 
...,.ul; naafi~ I ladj *1 lacking, deficient. II bi-naafi~ at a 
loss, as in ya-ybil-ha I-waayid zimiil-u yalla bi-naafi~ 
he'll sell it to a colleague albeit at a loss. 2 Inl {elee} 
negative pole. 
~i fanfi~ lell less/least. 
.,pi.i nafifi~ Ivtl to reduce. diminish. nafifi~/-u lalal 
nimar I reduced him three points. nafifi~u yafifi-i they 
cut"my wages. -vn lanfii~; ava/pva minafifi~. 
..,.u..:.1 
filnafifi~ Ivii to be reduced, be diminished, be 
cut. - iva milnafifi~ . 
~I 
rislanfi~ Ivtll to consider lacking, deficient, 
defective or inferior. fislanfi~1 ik-kimmiyya I thought 
the quantity was short. lamma smilli .kalaam-u 
slanfi~/-u wi-lrifl innu nadl when I heard what he'd 
said he fell in my estimation and I realized that he was a 
scoundrel. 2 to selec.t for being lacking, deficient, de-
fective or inferior. fislanfi~-Iak jiwaallajaan lilraf 
liJiil-u choose a sack that is not full so that you can carry 
it. -vn fislinfia~; ava mislanfi~ . 
~JtJ 
.;.Ai nafiae{ (u) Ivtl I to sort through, pick through. 
2 to select. pick out. finfiue{-li kiilu fiuuta gamda lis-
salata pick me a kilo of firm salad tomatoes. 3 to abro-
gate, nullify.leeh ii-may kama nafiae{il il-yukm why did 
the court annul the verdict? nafiae{li wue{uww-i {lsi} you 
have invalidated my ablution. - vn nafie{. nafiae{aan; ava 
naafiie{; pva manfiuue{. 
.;.u.; nafie{ Inl {leg] cassation. maykamil in-nafie{ the 
Court of Cassation. II fayy i yukm i Yfiuul-u ma-fi-huuf 
nafie{i faw fibraam no decision of his is ever 
challenged. 
4.4.&.; nafie{a I Ipl -aall instance noun of nafie{. 2 Icoll nl 
rejects (particularly, of vegetables, small miscellaneous 
consumer items etc.), left-overs. -/adjectivallyl naas 
nafie{a rabble. 
..... \.O;i fanfiaae{. fanqaae{ Ipl nl ruins, rubble, debris. 
fil-beel inhaar wi-fii naas layl il- fanfiaae{ the house has 
collapsed and there are people under the ruins. 
~\.O; nUfiaae{a Icoll nl rejects (particularly of veget-
ables, small miscellaneous consumer items etc.), sur-
plus items. 
~I filnafiae{ Ivil passive of nafiae{. - iva milnifiie{. 
..;oil; naafiie{. naaqie{ f I Ivtl to contradict. fima 

bi-tnaaljitl nafs-ak you're contradicting yourself. 2 Ivil 
to raise an objection. - vn munaljqa, minaljqa; ava 
minaaljiq. 
.;ul:.;1 ritnaaljiq, ritnaaqiq' Ivill to be contradicted. 
2a to stand in mutual contradiction. 2b to contradict 
oneself. - iva mitllaae;iq. 
..;oil:.; tanaaquq' In pi -aatl self-contradiction. 
.jail.;;:.. mlltanaaqlq' 
ladj 
"I 
self-contradictory. 
incompatible. 
.1. J .J 
J.u.; nalja( (u) Ivtl I to cause to suffer a stroke or an 
attack of apoplexy. 2 to mark with a dot. noota 
manljuu(a [mus] dotted note. -vn nalj(. nalja(aan; ava 
/Iaaljit; pva manljuu(. 
J..A; nUlj(a In pi nUlja(1 la a drop nUlj(1t mayya a drop 
of water. nUlja( bi-tittaaxid fil-buljlj (medicinal) drops 
to be taken orally. IIleelit in-nulj(a [Copt Chr] feast of 
St. Michael the Archangel. who is traditionally be-
lieved to put a drop of holy water in the Nile to make it 
rise (12th of the month Abib). Ib spot, dot. 2 point (in 
space). /Iulj(it il-bidaaya the starting point. 3 point 
(e.g., in an argument). rana msallim bin-nulj(a di 
I accept that point. dl nUlj(a layza muna{£/a this is a 
point that needs discussion. 4 score point. faaz bin-
nUe;a( he won on points. 5 station, post. nUlj(it ma(aafi 
fire-station. nUlj(it bulii~ rural police post. 6 motif in 
tent applique designs (see PI.H,. 16). - Ino pll 
7a money given as a present to, e.g., a child at birth or 
circumcision, or a bride or groom at a wedding. 
7b money given to a musician or dancer while perform-
ing (as largesse or in payment for complimentary toasts 
called by the leader of a band). 8 stroke, attack of 
apoplexy. 
;J..,A; nUljuu(a = nUlj(a. 
J..".i; nUljee(a Inl batter of flour and eggs with which 
vegetables are coated before frying. 
;J.Li; naljljaa(a Inl drip-feed apparatus. 
.b;i ranlja( ladj, fern nalj(a. pi nue;(1 speckled. 
spotted. 
.J.u.:;1 rWlae;a( Ivill to have a stroke. suffer an attack of 
apoplexy. 2 to be dotted. - iva mitnicjl(. 
.hi naljlja( Ivtl I to spot. cover with spots. rarqiyya 
mnae;lja(a a spotted background. 
riI-l:Ja~ba nalje;a(ll 
wi/f-i the measles brought my face out in spots. 2 to 
present with (a gift of) money (cf. nUe;(a 7).lInae;e;a(-na 
b-sukaat-ak be so good as to shut up! (e.g .. to one who 
says something stupid). - Ivil 3 to drip. bi-niddil-ha 
s(ubba lafaan ma-tnaljlja(-!we caulk it with oakum so 
882 
that it won't drip. II bUljlj-ak bi-ynaljlja( lasal your 
words are sweet as honey. 4 to give (presents of) money 
(cf. lIulj(a 7). -vn tanljil{; avalpva minaljlja(. 
.lobI ritnaljlja( Ivil passive of naljlja(. - iva mitnaljlja( . 
tJ.J 
~ lIaljal (a) Ivtll to steep. soak. 2 to leak. allow to 
seep. riz-ziir naljal il-mayya kull-a-ha the water-jar 
leaked out all the water. - Ivil 3 to leak. seep. 
fin-na(ara /Iae;alit mis-saljfthe rain seeped through the 
ceiling. -vn naljl, naljalaan; ava naaljil; pva 
manljuul· 
t"a;... manljuul/nl drink made by soaking dry ingre-
dient(s) in water. manljuul il-l"e;' suus liquorice 
drink. IImanljUUl i~-~urar.n (or il-bara(iif) a horrible 
drink. 
:i..A; naljla Ipl-aatl instance noun of naljl.1I fabu naljla 
[abus] bed-wetter. 
~I ritnae;al Ivil to be steeped. be soaked. -iva 
mitniljil· 
~ 
mustanljal. mustanqal/n pi -aat. -aatl swamp. 
JJ.J 
.j; nae;lj (u) Ivil I to nag. miraat-i bi-tIIuljlj· la/ayya 
kulI' yoom lafaan faftiri larabiyya my wife nags at me 
every day to buy a car. 2 to talk incessantly and en-
viously (thus causing the object of comment misfor-
tune). ljaladu ynuljlju lalee 1-l:Jadd' ma xisir kull i11i 
landu they went on about how well-off he was till 
everything he had was lost. - vn naCjlj. naljaljaan; ava 
lIa~ljilj; pva mallljuulj. 
-.;\.ri; lIalje;aae; In "II nagger. 2 one who by his incessant 
envious talk brings misfortune on the object of his 
comment. 
:':'1 fimae;lj Ivil (impersonal) passive of /lalje;. 
m-al:Jibb '-f raakul il-raklll-mltllaljCj" lalee I don't like 
to eat food other people have had their eyes on. -iva 
mitnaCjCj . 
JJ.J 
jA; /lae;al (i) Ivtl I to convey from one place to 
another. transport. fll- futublsaal bl-llIIljtil(-(alaba 1iI-
madaaris the buses transport the students to school. 
lIaljaluu-ni 1iI-risbilalya they transferred me to the hos-
pital. IIlIae;I' damm blood transfusion. 2 to transfer. 
laazim yi/la'ltal f,,-ritf mudda e;abl' ma ),"qu )'/IIljiluu 
m~r he must work for a (certain) period in a rural area 
before they wIll agree to transfer him to Cairo. 3 to 
copy. make a copy of. "alj/' ~af/Ja mill ik-kltaab bl-yflid 

il- farfaal fi-tal:Jsiin il-xa{{ copying a page from the book 
helps the children to improve their handwriting. 
bi-ninc;il i/l-nusxa 1- fa~liyya lala frii[ faa4) we make a 
copy of the original on a blank tape. - Ivi/4 [auto] to 
change gear. laazim tilraf tinc;il kiwayyis c;abl' ma 
tsuuc; fiz-zal:Jma you have to be good at changing gear 
before you drive in heavy traffic. -vn nac;l. nac;alaan; 
ava naac;il; pva manc;uul. 
j.A; /lac;1 Inl I transportation. nac;1 barri overland 
transportation. Illarabiyya nu~~i, nac;1 pick-up truck. 
small open truck. 2 transfer. lamma yiwaafic; il-mudiir 
l:Ja-ygii-lak in-nac;l" lala [uul when the manager gives 
his approval you'll get (notice of) your transfer straight 
away. 3 [auto] transmission. nac;I' futumatiiki automa-
tic transmission. 
J.;; nac;la Ipl -aatl } instance noun of nac;l. 2 load. 
fin-nac;la tc;iila lalee the load is too heavy for him. 
3 gear, speed. larabiyt-i talat nac;laat mif farbala my 
car has three speeds not four. 
JA.: nuc;llcoll nl mixed nut(s). 
;u t...; nac;c;aala In pi -aatl stretcher (for carrying the 
sick). 
J\.i..; nac;c;aali ladi invarl movable, portable, mobile. 
~ ~ nac;c;aliyya In pi -aatl shallow basket of withies 
for bread (resembling a mifanna -see PI.B. 9 - but 
smaller). 
~ 
manc;ala In pi manaac;ilI protractor. 
jA;.;1 fitnac;al Ivil I to be conveyed, be transported. 
fitnac;alit min il-beet lil-mustaffa she was taken from the 
house to the hospital. 2 to be transferred. fi/-maktab 
itnac;alli-skindiriyya the office was moved to Alexan-
dria. II fil-mal:Jkama tnac;alit the court formally moved 
the site of the hearing. 3 to be copied. 4 to convey 
oneself, proceed. nilllic;illin-nuc;[a 1- faxiira let's move 
on to the last point. ma-kanuu-f bi-yitnic;lu xa{Wa fil/a 
bald i ma yidrisu [-[ariic; they would not take a step till 
they had studied the path. 5 [auto] to be changed (of 
g<:,ars). -ava/iva mitnic;il. 
j.A; nac;c;il I Ivtl to transfer repeatedly. naqqilu 
k-koora benhum they passed the ball back and forth 
between them. faaxir if-Jahri nruul:J minaqqiliin if-fatli 
f-qa~aari at the end of the month we transplant the 
seedlings into pots. 2 Ivil to be at the elementary stages 
(in learning s.th.). lissa bi-ynaqqil fil-qiraaya he's still 
very much a beginner in reading. -vn tanqiil; ava 
m~naqqil. 
jA;.;1 fitnaqqil Ivil to be transferred or transfer oneself 
repeatedly, be moved or move oneself from place to 
place. -vn tanaqqul; ava/iva mitnaqqil. 
883 
jL:; tanaqc;ulf. 
tanaqqulf 
In 
pi -aatl 
transfer, 
transference. 
j.i.;.:;.. mitnaqqil, mutanaqqil r ladjl movable, portable. 
[arabezaat mitnaqqila movable tables, trestle tables. 
jA;.;1 fintaqal = fitnaqal. II fintaqal (or fintaqal) 
li-ral:Jmit illaah [euphem] lie passed on to (rest in) God's 
mercy, he died. -vn fintiqaal; ava mintiqil. 
('13':' 
rA' naqam (i): naqam lala Ivil to feel angry with. 
naqamt" lad-dinya kull-a-ha I felt bitter against the 
whole world. -vn naqamaan; ava najlqim. naaqim. 
ri\; naaqim r ladj *1 vengeful, spiteful, bitter. raagil 
naaqim lad-dunya a man who is bitter about life. 
:....A.; naqma In pi niqaml calamity, disaster. II gat-ak in-
niqam "" go to hell! - fir-raagil da naqma the man's a 
plague! 
~I fintac;am Ivil to take revenge. fintaqamt i I-faraf-i 
I avenged my honour. II rabb-i-na yintiqim minnu "" 
may our Lord punish him! -vn fintiqaam; ava mintiqim. 
13':'13':' 
..;;.A.; naqnac; Ivil to eat sparingly, pick or nibble at one's 
food. -vn naqnaqa; ava minaqnaq. 
.J 13':' see 
I loS 13 .:, : naqaawa 
.n 13':' 
o..>"A; naqwara Inl mockery, ridicule. II fakl i w-naqwara 
[prov] eating (at someone's table) and then mocking 
(their kindness), biting the hand that feeds one. 
..>"A.:;I fitnaqwar Ivil to indulge in mockery or ridicule. 
fin-naas yitnaqwaru lalayya wi-yquulu mlaqqad 
people ridicule me and say I have complexes. -lalso 
(impersonal) passive constructionsl mif fana iii 
yitnaqwar lalee I am not to be ridiculed. - ava/iva 
mitnaqwar. 
I loS 13 .:, 
..;:. naqi, naqi ladil pure, unadulterated. sibirtu naqi 
pure spirits. 
oJ\.i..; naqaawa I ladi in'varl select, choice. manga 
naqaawa hand-picked mangoes. naas naqaawa (a) 
select (group of) people. 2 Ivnl selection, choice, pick. 
naqaawit leen-i "" specially selected (Le. by the mer-
chant), as in ya [amaa[im ya gawaahir ya naqaawit 
leen-i [vendor's cry] "" wonderful tomatoes, personally 
selected! lala naqawt-ak as you personally choose, as in 
layziin ya rayyis kaam mangaaya kida bass i ykuunu 

lala naqawt-ak we want a few mangoes, but we rely on 
y~u to pick out some really nice ones. 
~ naqqa Ivtll to select. ru!Jt' lil-lagalaati w-naqqeet 
lagala kwayyisa I went to the bicycle man and picked 
out a good bike. 28 to pick over and clean. bi-tnaqqi 
r-ruzz she picks over the rice and removes the grit etc. 
2b to pick out (impurities), remove (impurities). 
bi-nnaqqi I-{jaf!' w-yif4.al il-!Jabb we pick out the straw 
and the grain is left. 3 to purify. rif-fabba tidxul 
fi-balcf.' maraa!Jil tanqiyyit il-mayya alum is used in 
some stages of water purification. -vn tan{jiyya; aval 
pva mina{j{ji. 
jw minaq{ji ladjl choice. {juu(a mna{j{jiyya choice 
tomatoes. IIgat-lu r~a~a mnaq{jiyya he was hit by a 
bullet with his name on it. - m~iiba miIfJq{jiya a terrible 
disaster. -gaa-Ii su raal minaq{ji fil-imti!Jaan I got a fan-
tastic question in the exam. 
~I ritna{jqa Ivil I to be selected. 28 to be picked 
over and cleaned. 2b to be picked out (of impurities), 
be removed (of impurities). 3 to be purified. -iva 
mitna{jqi. 
11.SJ~ 
.;; na{ja Icoll nl I pipes), pitts). kernel(s). 2 [carp] 
knots in wood (in the jargon of carpenters engaged in 
mafrafiyya work). 
~lA; naqaaye 'unit n, pi -aatl I a pip. a pit. a kernel. 
2 [carp] a knot in wood (cf. na{ja). 
I.:".!l ~ 
.:;.s.; nakat' (u) Ivt/l to insert or remove (s.th.) thus 
making a hole. nakatt il-watad fir-rami I drove the peg 
into the sand. nakatt il-watad mir-raml I pulled the peg 
out of the sand. 2 to deal (s.o.) a blow. -vn nakt, 
nakataan; ava naakit; pva mankuut. 
~ nakta I Ipl -aatl instance noun of nakt. 
~I ritnakat' Ivil passive of nakat'. -iva mitnikit. 
~ nukta III pi nukatl joke. II ribn' nukta one fond of 
(telling and hearing) jokes. 
~ 
nukati ladj pi -yyal given to making jokes. witty. 
.::..K:.. minkaat In pi manakiit, manaakitl fine probe. 
d 
nakkit Ivil to tell jokes. qaladna nnakkit 
wi-nid!Jak lamma kunna !Ja-nsooraq min id-di!Jk we 
went on telling jokes and laughing till we were almost 
fainting from laughter. -vn tankiit; ava minakkit. 
~I ritnakkit Ivil (impersonal) passive of nakkit. 
ritnakkit lalee he was the object of jokes. - iva 
mitnakkit. 
884 
1.:".!l ~ 
.:;.s.; nakat 2 (u) Ivtl I to dishevel. make a mess of. 
daxalu I-!Jaramiyya nakatu f-faqqa min fooq li-ta!Jt the 
burglars came in and turned the flat upside down.llhara 
w-nakat "" to eat one's heart out with frustration, boil 
inwardly. 2 to shuffle (cards). -vn nakt, nakataan; ava 
naakit; pva mankuut. 
~ nakta 2 Ipl -aatl instance noun of nakt. 
~I ritnakat 2 Ivil passive of nakat 2 • - iva mitnikit. 
c..!l~ 
~ naka!J (a) Ivtl If to marry. get married to (a 
woman). 21 [coarse] to copulate with, lay (a woman). 
mara mankuu!Ja a harlot. -vn nikaa!J; ava naaki!J; pva 
mankuu!J. 
~ 
I ritnaka!J Ivil passive of naka!J. -iva mitniki!J. 
~I ristanka!J Ivil [abus] to throw one's weight 
around. II mara mistanka!Ja a slut. -vn ristinkaa!J; ava 
mistanka!J. 
,).!l~ 
.J5..; nakad Inl torment. unhappiness, misery. gaa-k 
nakad may you be miserable! !Jayat-ha nakad wi-hamm 
her life is all misery and worry. 
..s.J5..; nukadi ladj • and pi -yyall miserable by nature. 
2 oppressive, pernicious. 
~~ mankuud In pi manakiidl wrcich, scoundrel. 
.i.:. nakkid Ivtl I to annoy. irritate, put into a foul 
mood. 2 to make (s.o. 's life) a misery. gooz-i mnakkid 
lalayya lift-i lafaan laawiz waad my husband makes 
my life a misery because he wants a son. 'liIaah-i 
ynakkid laleek God make your life a misery! - vn 
tankiid; avalpva minakkid. 
kl ritnakkid Ivil to become or be made annoyed and 
miserable, become or be made depressed and irritable. 
- avaliva mitnakkid. 
.).!l~ 
~ nakar (i) Ivtl to deny. repudiate. miin yinkir facf.1 
it-talliim who would deny the benefit of education? 
nakar gawaaz-u he repudiated his marriage. II nakar 
gimiil to behave ungratefully. - vn nukraan, nakaraan, 
nukraniyya; ava naakir; pva mankuur. 
.JI:. naakir Iprop n/: naakir (or munkar) wi-nakiir two 
angels who, according to Muslim popular belief, visit 
the dead upon their burial and question them severely 
on theirfaith.lIlaamii zayy' naakir wi-nakiirconstantly 
objecting. 
; ~ nakra In pi -aatl a denial. 

;,;..; nakira Ipl -aatl I ladjl unimportant, nondescript. 
2 Inl {gram] indefinite noun. 
,;..; i rankar IT 
lell 
more/most 
unpleasant. or 
objectionable. 
,;$.; nakiir Iprop n/: naakir wi-nakiir see naakir. 
j.:;1 ritnakkar Ivil to affect a disguise. -vn tanakkur; 
ava mitnakkar. 
11 ritnakkar /i- to turn one's back on. ritnakkar /i-xwaat-
u he abandoned his brothers and sisters . 
..s~ tanakkuri ladjl pertaining to disguise. I}aft; 
lanakkuri or I}afta lanakkuriyy~ fancy-dress party, 
masquerade. 
,;..;i rankarzT = nakar. -vn rinkaar; ava munkir; pva 
munkar. 
.f.;... munkar ladjl I abominable (especially in reli-
gious terms). 2 munkar (or naakir) wi-nakiir see 
naakir. - munkaraal Ipl nl 3 abominations. 
FI ristankarT Ivtl to declare one's disapproval of. 
-vn riSlinkaar; ava muslankir. 
j..sJ.!loj 
~,;..; nakriiz <T nikriz> Inl {mus] mode in Arabic 
music beginning on C and having E flat, F sharp and B 
flat. 
~ .!loj 
..r>-; nakas (i) Ivtl I to cause to relapse (into sickness). 
2 to cause a setback (of fortune) to. -vn naks, 
nakasaan; ava naakis; pva mankuus. 
....s..; naksa linst n, pi -aall I a relapse (into sickness). 
2 a setback, a reversal (of fortune). II rin-naksa the 
Egyptian defeat of June 1967. 
~! rinkiis Inl bad luck. nigm-u dayman fil-rinkiis 
he's always unlucky. 
~I ritnakas Ivil I to suffer a relapse (into sickness). 
2 to suffer a setback or reversal (of fortune). -iva 
mitnikis. 
~ 
nakkis Ivtl I to keep low. minakkis raas-u mil-
kusuuf he's hanging his head with shame. leeh 
minakkisiin iI-lalam why are they flying the flag at 
half-mast? 2 to repair (a wall) by replacing crumbled 
masonry. -vn tankiis; ava/pva minakkis. 
~I ritnakkis Ivil passive of nakkis. - iva mitnakkis. 
J. .!loj 
..;5.; nakaj (u) I Ivtl to put into disarray, mess up. 
na~aj jalr-i he ruffled my hair, he messed up my hair. 
bald; m-arattib i1-hiduum gayy; tinkuj-ha you come 
and scatter the clothes around after I've arranged them 
neatly?2 to provoke, stir up (e.g., anger). - Ivi/3 to to 
885 
scratch about, scrabble. ma-Iunkuj-p f-manaxiir-ak 
don't keep picking your nose! nakajt; fit-turaab 
radawwar lat-lalriifa r scrabbled about in the dust 
searching for the half-piastre. II dayman yinkujwaraaya 
he's always trying to make trouble for me (by picking 
holes in my work). -vn nakf, nakajaan; ava naakif; pva 
mankuuf. 
~ 
nakja Ipl -aatl instance noun of nakf. 
~I ritnakaj Ivil passive of nakaf. - iva mitnikif. 
...; .!l oj 
.;>.; nakafi: riI-lfudda n-nakafiyya parotid gland. 
~\.; naakif Ivtl to tease, needle, pester. (uul in-nahaar 
bi-ynaakif ruxt-u all day long he's getting at his sister . 
-vn minakfa; ava minaakif. 
~l;;1 ritnaakiflvil I to tease one another, needle one 
another, pester one another. 2 to be teased. -ava/iva 
mitnaakif. 
~ 
I ristankif Ivil to disdain, consider beneath one's 
dignity. ristankif yigiib /i- raxuu mayya yifrab he re-
sented having to bring water for his brother to drink. 
- iva mistankif. 
IJ.!loj 
~ nakkillT: nakKii bi- Ivil to maltreat, harm. -vn 
lankiil; ava minakkil; pva munakkal . 
~I ritnakkil l: ritnakkil bi- Ivil (impersonal) passive 
of nakkill. leeh yilnakkil bii kida why should he be 
maltreated in this way? - iva mitnakkil . 
2J.!loj 
~ 
neekal <perh Fr nickel> Inl I nickel. 2 Ipl 
nawaakill metal marble. 
J.IS:..; nikla lunit n, pi nikal, niklaat, nakaayi/l {obsol] 
two millimes, two-millime piece. ma-landiijnikla I'm 
penniless. II rabu nikla cheap and shoddy. - raal} f-abu 
nikla to come to nothing. 
~ nakkil2 Ivt/ to coat with nickel, chrome-plate. -vn 
lankiil; ava/pva minakkil. 
~I ritnakkil2 Ivil passive of nakkil. -iva mitnakkil. 
• .!l oj 
~ 
nakha In pi -aatl flavour, aroma. 
oj.JJoj 
<J)'; nuloon (also nawluun) <Gr naulon> In! freight 
charges. 
..s J oj see l..s J r: rintala 

r'~ 
r' lIim <P lIim> Inl {mu5j quarter sharp. 
I 
• 
Jr'1oJ 
.} lIimra <It lIumero> In pillimarl 18 number. 
1I/l1II1I'a rabba winning number, commercial success, hit 
with the public 
-nimar yana~iib lottery tickets. 
Ib score. grade, mark. xadt'llimra kwayyisaf!l-bisaab 
I got a good mark in maths. 28 number, turn (in a 
show). II da-nla lIimra "" you're a real character! -nimra 
Cjarla (I) an old trick, a feeble trick. (2) a disappoint-
in.g failure. 2b trick, wile. 
;I.e lIammaar: xllm' nammaar number stamp, stamp 
for stamping ~erial number~ (e.g .. on cheques). 
.;I.e lIammaara In pi -aatl numbering machine. 
j. lIammar I Ivtl to number, give a number to. -vn 
tallmiir; avalpva mmammar. 
~I fllllammar I Ivil to be numbered, be given a num-
ber. -Iva mllnammar. 
2 
• 
Jr'1oJ 
.r IIImr In pllllmuur. numuur, numural tiger. 
j. nammar2 1vil I to set one's sights (on s.th.). fana 
mllammar la/afaCjCja f-m~r ig-gldiida ba-tifqa CjraYYlb 
I have my eyes on a tlat in Heliopolis that will soon be 
vacated. 2 to crouch and be ready to pounce, stand in 
readiness. fana mnammar-Iu I'm just waiting for a 
chance to catch him. -vn tanm;,r; ava minammar. 
~I fllllammar 2 = nammar2. -ava milllammar. 
~I f,stmammar J = nammar. -ava mistmammar. 
~ J r' ~ 
~J} lIamruud, namruud lad) pi namardal I insolently 
ungrateful. 2 naughty. mischievous. 
~} namrad Ivtl to make worldly-wise, make aggres-
Sive. ma~r' namradit-u Cairo taught him the ways of the 
world. -vn namrada: ava mmamrad. 
~.;o-:.;I fitnamrad Ivil I to behave with insolent ingrati-
tude 2 to become aggressive, behave aggressively. 
fu-sutaat IInamradu I-fayyam-dl "" women these days 
have burnt their bras. -Iva mitnamrad. 
/oJ" r' ~ 
..,.;. mms I In pillumuus. numusal 18 ichneumon. 
Ib astute person, shrewd person. 2 Icoll nl large, elon-
gated variety of water-melon appearing in two forms: 
one with a dark green striped skin (nims' faxqar), the 
other with a light green striped skin (nims' fabyaq). 
...r.i- namw. lad) 'II ~hrewd, astute. 2 cute, appealing. 
886 
~ 
namiisa In 
pi namaayisl [rurj broad gold 
necklace. 
2/oJ"r'~ 
L....:JI fin-nimsa Iprop nl Austria. 
~JW nimsaawi, nimsawi I ladj *1 Austrian. 2 In *1 an 
Austrian. 
J/oJ"r'~ see 
1/oJ".Jr'~: 
namusaaya, namusiyya 
namuus ' , 
4 /oJ" r' ~ see 2 /oJ" .J r' ~ ; namuus 1 
J. r'~ 
namuusa, 
..,.;. namaflcoll nl freckles.landaha namaffi-wiff-a-ha 
she has freckles on her face. 
W 
namafa lunit n, pi -aatl a freckle. 
"-!W namafaaya = namafa. 
..,.;. nammtj Ivil to become freckled. -vn tanmitj: ava 
minammtj. 
br'~ 
.la.c namat In pi fanmaatl I style, pattern. kull-u-hum 
nafs in-llamat they're all the same pattern. 2 method, 
way. bi-yitlimlu b-lIafs m-namat they're made the same 
way. 
.!Jr'~ 
..?J. nimaki lad j • and pi -yyal fussy, finicky, 
fastidious. 
Jr'~ 
J.1 namllcoll nl antes). 
.u namla lunit n. pi -aatl an ant. rilli tigmal-u n-namla 
f-sana yaxd-u g-gamal /i-xulf-u [provj what the ant 
collects in a year the camel carries off on a (single) hoof. 
;""'YJ. namlaaya = namla. 
~ namltyya 
In 
pi -aat, 
lIamaalil 
I food-safe. 
2 dresser or cupboard with doors. 
j 
nammil 1 Ivtl to cause to tingle or have pins and 
needles. 2 Ivil to tingle, have pins and needles. riglay-ya 
btadu ynammilu my legs started tingling. -vn tanmii1: 
ava/pva minammil. 
~I filllammil Ivil to be made to tingle. -iva 
milllammil. 
r'r'~ 
~ namm (i) Ivil to spread scandal, report back to one 
who is the subject of gossip in order to cause a rift. -vo 
namm, namamaan: ava naamim. 

';' namiima Inl back-biting. 
ilC nammaam In *1 scandal-monger. 
il.Jil.J 
r' namnim Ivil I to mumble, mutter to oneself, talk 
under one's breath. ba{{al namnama stop muttering! 
2 to nibble at food. take very tiny pieces of food. - Ivtl 
3 to make tiny. ma-tllamnim-J il-Iuc;ma kida don't cut 
the bread in such tiny pieces. - vn namnama; avalpva 
minamnim. 
r' nimnim ladjl tiny, puny. meagre. very small. 
... jJ. namnuuma In pi -aat. namaniiml tiny piece. 
~\..jJ. namnumaaya In pi -aall = namnuuma. 
~ 
1 fitnamnim Ivil to be made tiny. - iva mitnamnim. 
Jil.J 
.} nama r (u. i) Ivil to grow. namil-luJar:ra f-{ar{uufil 
mallaxiir-u a hair grew on the end of his nose. fil-bilaad 
in-naamiya the developing countries. - vn numuww; 
ava naami. 
~ 
lanmiya r Inl development. lanmiya fiqli~adiyya 
economic development. 
c j J i I.J see C j J i I.J 
CjJil.J 
[.~j. namuuzag <P namudaj> 
In 
pi namaazigl 
I model. namuuzag Ii/-mabna an (architect's) model of 
the building. 2 printed form. blank form . 
..s":"~j. namuuzagi r ladj 
*1 
model, 
exemplary. 
madaaris namuuzagiyya model schools. 
<oJ" J i I.J 
....... ".l; namuus J Icoll nl mosquito(es). 
.... ".l; namuusa lunit n. pi -aall a mosquito. 
~Lj. Ilamusaaya = namullsa. 
~".l; namusiyya In pi -aall mosquito-net. IIsagaayir 
namusiyya small cigarettes. ladies' cigarettes. - fis-sitt i 
fin-namllsiyya Cape gooseberry fruit(s). 
2 
• 
<oJ" J i <.J 
....... ".l; namulls 2 1nl (natural) law.namuus il-kaan r the 
law of the universe. 
,,; i I.J see J i ,:, : lanmiya 
I.':' ,:, I.J 
~ ninna I linterjl word used to lull a child to sleep. 
2 Inl {children! sleep. 
887 
<oJ"~':'':'':' 
........,:.; nannuus ladjl cute sweet (of children). 
( .s I.J I.J I.J ) 
j.; ninni J Inl pupil (of the eye).lIhllwwa zayyi ninni 
r:enay-ya he is very dear to me. he is the apple of my 
eye. -1:J-al:Ju{{-lI f-ninni r:een-i I'll watch over him with 
loving care. 
j.; ninni! Inl little child. ya ninni {deri~! you cry-baby! 
• 0':' see l.s ° I.J : Ililtaa fi 
yo I.J 
'-:"i nahab (a) Ivtl to loot. pillage. rob. - vn Ilahb. 
naltabaan: ava Ilaaltib: pva mallhllllb. 
~ 
niltiiba In pi -aal, nahaayibl property free for the 
taking. fiJ-Jirka hin-nisba 11Ihum niltiiba w-bass as far as 
they're concerned the company is fair game for 
anybody . 
..,..L;.: nahhaab In plnahhaabal looter. pillager, robber. 
~I fimaltab Ivil to be looted. be pillaged. - iva 
milniltih. 
~I fislanhabJ Ivtl to swindle. rob. fillfll l:Ja-
lislanltabuu-na are you going to rob us? di r:amaliyyit 
iSlinhaab this is sheer robbery. - vn fislinhaab; ava 
mistanhab. 
Co,:, 
rj nahag (a) Ivil to have difficulty in breathing, gasp 
for breath. pant. law miJiil fanhag wi-m-ac;dar-J a{lar: 
is-sillim if I walk I have to fight for breath. and I can't 
climb stairs. - vn naltg. nahagaan; ava naahig. 
2 Co,:, 
~ 
mallhag In pi manaahigl I i {acad! curriculum. 
2 t method, procedure. fil-manhag il-tagriibi the ex-
perimental method. 
~ ° I.J 
...Ii naltd. niltd In pi Ilultuud. Ililtuud, Ilultadal breast. 
fil-bitti nltlld-Ita kibrit wi-r:ayza I-r:ariis the girl's 
breasts have filled out and it's time for her to find a 
husband. 
~ naltltid Ivil to fill out, swell. (of breasts). -vn 
lanltiid; ava/pva minaltltid. 
~ 
lanltiid Ivnl sighing. 
.~ tanltiida linst n, pi -aal, tanahiidl a sigh. 
-01 fitnaltltid Ivil to sigh. ficf.lit 
rayl:Ja 
gayya 
w-litnahhid li-l:Jadd i ma wi~il gaz-Ita she went on walk-

ing to and fro and sighing till her husband arrived. - ava 
mitnahhid. 
..IAL; naahid Ivtl to nag, pester. (uul in-nahaar yinaahid 
(f-)ixwaat-u lafaan il-lagala all day long he's nagging 
his brothers and making trouble over the bicycle. -vn 
minahda; ava minaahid. 
..IA \.;; \ fitnaahid Ivil to be nagged, be pestered. - iva 
mitnaahid. 
I 
• 
jOIJ 
flo nahr r In pi fanhaarl I river. nahr in-niil the River 
Nile. 2 column (of print). 
<..Sflo nahri ladj *1 riverine. futubiis nahri river-bus. 
fil-bayriyya n-nahriyya the River Marine Corps. 
2 
• 
jOIJ 
;\i nahaar, nihaar Inl day, daytime. (uul in-nahaar all 
day long. lamma yi(lal in-nahaar when day comes. min 
nahaar gawaaz-ak since the day you got married. 
Ilfin-nahar-da today. -diik in-nahaar the other day. 
-nahaar-ak saliid and nahaar-ak 
fabyaqJ 
and 
nahaar-ak zayy il-fultJ etc. conventional daytime greet-
ings '" good day! have a nice day! -ya nhaar fiswid 
(exclamation of surprise, bewilderment etc.) '" good 
grief! -nahaar-ak fiswid '" you 're in real trouble! 
11 nahaar ma Iconjl on the day that, when. nahaar ma 
tingal:J tiblja tgii-ni wi-tljul-li finnak laaY1Z lagala when 
you pass (your exam), that's when you can come and 
ask for a bicycle. faakir nahaar ma zzal:Jlaljt"las-sillim 
wil-bitt' dil:Jkit laleek do you remember the day you 
slipped on the stairs and the girl laughed at you? min 
nahaar ma lrift illi ya~al wi-fana zallaan ever since 
I got to know what happened I've been upset. 
:u OIJ 
j flo nahriz Ivtl to give a hard time to, subject to ex-
treme pressure. faxuu k-kibiir nahriz-u miq-qarb" 
lafaan yitfaddib his elder brother gave him a sound 
beating so that he would mend his manners. -vn 
nahraza; avalpva minahriz. 
j...r;\ fitnahriz Ivil passive of nahriz. - vn tinahriiz; ava 
mimahriz. 
jOIJ 
~ 
\ fintahaz Ivtl to seize upon (a chance). fintahaz 
fur~a to seize an opportunity. -vn fintihaaz; ava 
mintihiz. 
jY nahhaaz: nahhaa;. lil-fura~ opportunist. 
<..Sj~\ fintihaazi In *1 opportunist. 
888 
..; OIJ 
..ri nahaf (aj Ivtl to bite into, tear off, gnaw at (flesh) . 
IInahaf fi-laym(-u) to criticize (s.o.) severely, as in 
fin-naas bi-tinhaf fi-lal:Jm-i b-sabab-ak people are pull-
ing me to pieces on your account. -lammaliin yinhafu 
larq-u mala finnu ~aayib faql" laleehum they're 
slandering him despite what he's done for them. -vn 
nahf, nahafaan; ava naahij; pva manhuuJ. 
~ 
nahfa Ipl -aatl instance noun of nahJ. 
...,..r;\ fimahaf Ivil to be bitten off, be torn off, be 
gnawed at (of flesh). - iva mimihij. 
~OIJ 
...Jtai nahaqr (a) Ivil to arouse oneself, shake off one's 
sloth. ya ma~ri firgalli-lawayd-ak wi-nhat[ Egyptian, 
return to your old ways and rise again! -vn nuhuuq. 
nahqa; ava naahiq. 
...Jtai nihiq (a) I Ivtl to catch up with. nihiqt-u ljabl' ma 
yidxul il-beet I caught (up with) him before he entered 
the house. 2 Ipreverbl to act quickly, do in a hurry. 
nihiq (affa n-naar ljabl' ma timsik fil-laffhe quickly put 
out the fire before it could get a hold on the furniture. 
fin hat[ (talaala) hurry! -vn nahaqaan; ava naahiq; pva 
manhuuq. 
~ 
nahqa r In pi -aatl revival, renaissance. la~r in-
nahqa the age of the Renaissance. 
~ 
nahhat[ Ivtl to cause to catch up with. -vn tanhiit[; 
avalpva minahhaq. 
~\ fimahhaq 
Ivil 
passive 
of nahhat[. 
-iva 
mitnahhaq. 
,.;a.L; naahiq Ii Ivtl to stand up to, resist. m~r' 
bi-maahiq il-lun~uriyya Egypt fights racism. 2 Ivil to 
cope. fana mij ljaadir fanaahiqlala (alabaat-u I cannot 
cope with his demands. fana y-anaahiqlala feeh walla 
lala feeh '" how can I cope with all this? -vn minahqa; 
ava minaahiq. 
,.;a.\.;;\ fimaahiq 
Ivil 
I passive 
of 
naahiq 
1. 
2 (impersonal) passive of naahiq 2. ma-b-yimahiq-f' 
lalee fluus his demands for money can't be coped with. 
- ava/iva mimaahiq. 
JOIJ 
.if. nahhalj Ivil to bray (of a donkey). YU(( il-yumaar 
fi-riiy il-bayl in ma kaan yitlallim fahiilj-u yitlallim 
nihiilj-u {pray] '" people are bound to pick up each 
other's habits. -vn nihiilj, tanhiilj; ava minahhalj. 
~\ fimahhalj Ivil (impersonal) passive of nahhalj. 
fitnahhalj laleeha she was brayed at. - iva mitnahhalj. 
r 0 IJ see r 0 J: fanham 

0':"0':" 
.:.; nahnah Ivill to neigh. 2 to whimper. -vn nahnaha; 
ava minahnah. 
~I 'litnahnah Ivil to whimper. - ava mitnahnah. 
J ,.:" see I..; 0 .:" : nahwa 
~':"JO':" 
-"JLr nahawand <P nih-iiwand> Inl {mus] mode in 
Arabic music starting on C and having E flat, A flat and 
B flat. 
1";0':" 
..si" naha J (iJ Ivtl to finish. naha j_jur/i b-surca he 
finished the work fast. 'lana ij-anhi-Iku 1-'ligra 'laat I'll 
complete the formalities for you. - vn nahw; ava naahi; 
pva manhi. 
oX- nahwa Ipl -aatl instance noun of nahw. 
..sr- manhi ladjl thoroughly cooked. 
~Lr nihaaya In pi -aatl end. fin-nihaaya in the end, 
finally. 'lana ijaasis 'linn i nhayt-i bi-tqarrab I feel that 
my end is approaching. II nihayt-u "" to cut a long story 
short. 
.;Lr nihaari I/adjl final. rin-natiiga n-nihariyya the 
end result. 2/adv, always w negl at all, whatsoever. 
ma-candii-ffiluus nihaari I haven't any money at all. 
~ nihariyyan ladv, always w neg! ever, at all. 
ma-juftuu-f nihariyyan I haven't seen him at all. 
.,..\.;.;.. mutanaahiT ladjl extreme. ~abri mutanaahi 
extreme patience . 
..si"i ranha f = naha J. - vn rinhaa'l; ava minhi. 
~I 'lintaha J Ivill to come to an end, finish. rintaha 
l-fa~l il- rawwalaani the first act came to an end. 
jahiyyit-i 1iI- rakl intahit my appetite is gone. 2 to die. 
-vn rintihaarf; ava mintihi. 
~ 'lintaha min f to have done with. 
~ 
muntaha In in constrl the extreme of, the ulti-
mate of. fi-muntaha g-gamaal extremely beautiful. 
bi-muntaha d-diqqa with extreme precision. 
1..; 0 .:" 
..si" naha 2 f (i. a) Ivtl to prohibit. rid-diin bi-vinhii-na 
can iz-zina religion prohibits' us from adul;ery. -vn 
nahy, nahayaan; ava naahi: pva manhi. 
~I 'lintaha 21vil to desist (from doing s.th.), comply 
with a prohibition. rintaha can ik-kidb he stopped 
lying. -vn rintiha; ava mintihi. 
I J':" 
I y nawa J <P nawii> Inl {mus] name given to the note 
889 
G above middle C. II nawa 'lasar mode in Arabic music 
starting on C and having E flat, F sharp and A flat. 
J I J':" 
;ly nawaar <Fr noire> Inl {mus] crotchet, quarter 
note. 
1,,":-, J':" 
.,..\.; naab 2 (u) Ivtll it profited (s.o.). ma-nab-nii-jmin 
musacdit-u liyya rilla ca{ala his help brought me no-
thing but delay. la nab-nijurli wala rakl I got neither 
work nor food. ma-nab-nii-f minnu ijaaga reer it-tacab 
I got nothing but trouble from him.llyinuub-ak sawaab 
may you be rewarded (by God). 2 to befall (usually of 
trouble). II !'illi ~aab-u w-naab-u the troubles that befell 
him. -vn noob, niyaaba; ava naayib. 
~ naab can to take the place of. !'il-bilastik mumkin 
yinuub can il-xajab plastic can be used in place of wood. 
!'il-wakiil yinuub can ir-ral'iis fi-ryaab-u the deputy 
stands in for the president when he's absent. 
~ y nooba In pI -aatll time, occasion. kamaan nooba 
one more time. rin-nooba iii faatit last time. gat saliima 
n-nobaa-di it turned out all right this titiJe. baqit tiruuij 
kull i yoom nobteen she took to going twice a day . 
2 bout, fit (of illness). noobit rinfilwinza a bout of 
influenza. nooba qalbiyya a heart attack. 3 shift, turn. 
noobit ijiraasa guard duty. 4 {mil] trumpet call. noobit 
~aijayaan reveille. 
~ 
y ,~y nabatfi, 
nobatfi <T nobe/!;i> In 
pi -yyal one on duty, one taking a shift. ~aabi{ nobatfi 
officer on duty. 
~ L,.; niyaaba Inl office of a public attorney, office of a 
public prosecutor. wakiil niyaaba public attorney, pub-
lic prosecutor.llniyaaba ridariyya department within a 
government ministry responsible for the investigation 
of serious offences. 
.,...:\.; ''":"'!. \.; naayib J, 
naa rib f 
In 
pI nuwwaabl 
I representative, deputy. naa'lib waziir deputy minis-
ter. IImaglis in-nuwwaab {obsolJ the House of Repre-
sentatives (the lower house of the Egyptian parliament 
before 1952). - 'lin-naayib il-caam the attorney general. 
2 {med] houseman. 
'":"'!.\.; naayib 21n pi nawaayibl share, portion. !'il-raayib 
ma-luu-f naayib {provJ "" out of sight out of mind. 
'":"'!.\.; naayib 3 ; xaayib wi-naayib a dead loss, a 
good-for-nothing. 
;;".;\.; nayba In pI -aat. nawaayibl disaster, calamity. 
gat-u nayba - kullijurl-u baayi~ "" the hell with him, all 
his work is lousy. 
.,.. \.:.. manaab J In pi -aatl share, portion. rinta kalt a 

(;alayya manaab-i you've eaten my share! II ril-qu{[a 
taakul manaab-u (he's so tame and helpless that) a cat 
can eat his share (of meat without his being able to stop 
her). 
,-:-,:-'; nawwib Ivtl to depute, appoint as a deputy or 
representative. fana nawwibt-u (;anni f-~arf il-mukaffa 
I have given him authority to cash the bonus on my 
behalf. -vn tanwiib; ava/pva minawwib. 
'-:-' ~I fitnawwib Ivil to be deputed, be appointed depu-
ty or representative. - iva mitnawwib. 
'-:-'Jl; naawib Ivil to take alternative shifts. ninaawib 
ma(;a ba(;q' fiJfwd we should take alternate turns at 
the work. -vn minawba; ava minaawib. 
~Jl:.. minawba In pi -aatl [rur] period when irrigation 
canals are filled (being a part of the irrigation cycle). 
'-:-'Jl:.. minaawib ladj *1 on duty. fl;-;aabi{ ll-minaawib 
the duty officer. 
'-:-'J\.:;I fitnaawib Ivtl to take alternative turns (at). fii 
talat wardiyyaat bi-ytlnawbu (fijI-Juri there are three 
rotating work shifts. -vn tanaawub; ava mitnaawib. 
,-:-,l;i fanaab = nawwib. miin fanaab-ak who's given 
you the right to be a deputy? - vn finaaba; ava muniib. 
'-:-'\.:;.; 1 fintaab f /v.tl to befall, afflict. fintaab-u maraq he 
was stricken with a disease. -vn fintiyaab; ava/iva 
mintaab. 
ly.J,j 
~.rJ1 fin-nuuba Iprop nl Nubia. 
G.y nuubi I ladj *1 Nubian. 2 In *1 a Nubian. 3 In, no 
pll the Nubian language. 
3 Y .J.J see y I .J : naab J 
.:;., .J .J 
.::.. y nuuta. naota <It nata> In pi -aat. niwatl 
I notebook, note pad. II (;an-nuuta on tick, on credit, as 
in bi-yiJtiru (;an-nuuta they buy on tick. 2 [mus] 
2a note. 2b written music. 
r.J.J 
~ y naaga. nuuga <Fr> In pi -aatl nougat. 
C.J.J 
c.l; naaIJ J (u) Ivi/towail, lament. kutrin-naaIJ yi(;allim 
i/-buka [pray] much lamentation gets one into the habit 
of weeping. -vn naaIJ; ava naayiIJ. 
~l:.. manaaIJa Inl place. of wailing, 
place of 
lamentation. 
C) nawwaIJ Ivil to wail or lament repeatedly. -vn 
tanwiiIJ; ava minawwaIJ. 
890 
t.J.J 
t l:.. manaax r Inl climate (physical and metaphorical). 
manaax i/-balad the climate of the country. fil-manaax 
il-fikri the intellectual climate. 
I 
• 
J.J1oJ 
.Jl; naar Ifem n, pi niraan f I I fire. walla(; in-naar light 
the fire. lamma I-laban yifuur fib(;id-u (;an in-naar 
when the milk boils, remove it from the heat.llmayyit 
naar any strong acid (notably nitric acid). - IJagar naar 
grindstone. -naar-u IJamya (1) he is furious. (2) he is 
very active. - been nareen in a dilemma. - (da) naar (;ala 
(;alam he's very famous, he's known everywhere. 
-qaa(;id (;ala naar very anxious, like a cat on hot bricks. 
- faah ya naar-i how furious I am, as in faah ya naar-i 
mil-bitt how furio~s ram with the girl! faah ya naar-i 
law kunt' faqdar faquul lil-baaja faddlb fawlaad-ak 
I really would have given the Pasha a piece of my mind 
had I been able to tell him, 'Discipline your children'. 
-
fin-naar Ino pI/ 2 firing, shooting. xa{[ in-naar the 
line of fire, the battle front. qarab (or fa{laq) naar to 
fire, shoot. 3 hellfire, Hell. fin-naar wala I-(;aar [pray] 
"" death before dishonour. xaduu-ni min id~daar lin-
naar [pray] they took me from (the comforts of) home 
to Hell (e.g., to prison). naar-u wala gannit reer-u 
[pray] Hell with him is better than Heaven with 
another. - ladvl 4 extremely (hot). fig-gaww' suxn' 
naar the weather is terribly hot. II raali naar very 
expensive. 
lS.Jl; naari ladjl I pertaining to fire, fiery. 2 pertaining 
to shooting. faslilJa nariyya firearms. 
.Jy nuur In pi fanwaarl I light. fiqra fin-nuur (;ajaan 
ma-tbawwa;-j' (;nee-k read in the light so as not to ruin 
your eyes. II (;aleek nuur "" bravo! well done! -ya nuur 
(;enay-ya 0 light of my eyes! (exclamation of affection). 
-kaamil in-nuur Full ?f Light (epithet of the Prophet 
Muhammad). -ya nuur m-nabi 0 light of the Prophet! 
(an exclamation of delight). 
-~abaaIJ in-nuur and 
masaaf in-nuur response to any of the conventional 
morning or evening greetings"" good morning ( to you)! 
good evening (to you)! -sabt in-nuur [Chr] Holy Satur-
day. -mafufnaa-k ya nuur filla lamma txazzaqit i/-
(;iyuun [pray] we didn't see you, 0 light, till after the 
eyes had been put out (of something that comes only 
after great trouble and then too late). 2 lighting, (loose-
ly) electricity. fin-nuur (;as-saakin lighting is payable by 
the tenant. ril- fasanseer miJ jarraal (;ajaan ma-fii-! 
nuur the lift isn't working because there isn't any 
electricity. 

O)y nuura In pi -aatl = nawwaara. 
JI)y nuraani ladjl radiant. 
~I)y nuraniyya Inl radiance. wijf-u [alee nuraniyya 
min yoom ma ljagg his face has acquired a radiance 
since the time he went on the pilgrimage. 
;. nayyir, niyyir ladjl [fig] luminous, light-giving. ya 
salaam [aleek wi-[ala fafkaar-ak in-nayyira [joe] "" 
my! what bright ideas you have! 
)~ nawwaar Icoll nl blossom(s). 
o)~ nawwaara lunit n, pi -aatl a blossom. lIya 
nawwaara flirtatious form of add tess to a girl. 
)yi fan war lell more/most bright, luminous or 
shining. 
)y.. man war In pi manaawirl light shaft (e.g., such as 
is found in the centre of a block of flats). 
o;L: .. manaara In pi -aat, manaayirl I lighthouse. 
2 [Chr] church steeple, bell tower. 
)~ nawwar Ivtl la to give light (to), shine (upon). 
nawwar iI-fooqa turn the light on in the room! 
nawwart-i-Iu fa-ddaa-Ii [-[arii(j I flashed my lights at 
him so he gave me the road. fiI-fabajuura mnawwara 
f-wijf-i the lamp is shining in my face. IInawwart and 
nawwart ii-beet and nawwart i ljittit-na you have brought 
light (to the house, to our neighbourhood etc.) (con-
ventional compliments to a guest). - fallaah yinawwar 
([a leek) "" well done! thank you! Ib to enlighten. 
ba(jaa-li talat siniin laayi~ mij laa(ji ljadd' ynawwar-ni 
I've been three years at a loss and found no one to put 
me straight. - Ivi/2 to give light. fii qoof nawwar min 
bi[iid a light shone from a distance. fil-Iamba di bi-
tnawwar this bulb is in working order. 3 to blossom. 
fij-Jatla kibrit wi-nawwarit the seedling gr!,!w and 
flowered. - vn tanwiir; ava/pva minawwar. 
):-':;1 fitnawwar Ivil I to be lit up, be illuminated. 2 to 
be enlightened. - iva mitnawwar. 
).,::;-1 fistanwar Ivtl to select for brightness or light. 
fistanwar-Iak makaan ti(jra fii find a well-lit area where 
you can read. -ava mistanwar. 
)\.:.;..1 fistanaar: fistanaar bi- Ivil to seek enlighten-
ment from. leeh ma-tistinirp b-rafyi waaljid xabiir fil-
qanuun why don't you consult the opinion of a legal 
expert. [ala sabiil il-istinaara (just) by way of seeking 
information, as in falla b-as fal-ak [ala sabiil il-istinaara 
w-mij (ja~d-i finnak fillta IIi tnaffiz il-mafruu[ I am just 
asking you to explain (the matter) - I don't mean you to 
be the one to carry out the project. - vn fistillaara; ava 
mistilliir. 
0)\.:.;..)'1 fil- fistinaara Inl [hist] the Enlightenment. 
r.-- mustalliir ladj *1 knowledgeable, enlightened. 
891 
2 
, 
J.JIJ 
)y nawar Icoll nl I gypsies. 2 rowdy and disreputable 
people. 
<.S)y nuuri lunit n *1 I a gypsy. 2 a swindler. faW 
nuuri wala damanhuuri [prov] a thousand con men are 
preferable to a single Damanhouri (a comment on the 
alleged Damanhouri propensity for cunning and 
swindling). 
J 
• 
J.JIJ 
O)J\.:.. munawra, 
minawra 
<Fr> 
In 
pi -aatl 
manoeuvre. 
)J\; naawir Ivil to manoeuvre. - vn munawra, minawra; 
ava munaawir, minaawir. 
4 J .J iJ see J I .J iJ ; lIawaar 
[,J.JiJ 
(,)y lIoorag In pi nawaarigl threshing sled (see PI.D, 
1). 
~J.JiJ 
,_p;iy nuwardi ladjl blue roan (of a horse). 
..,.. .J I.J 
4..1~ lIawwaasa In pi -aatl night-light, small light left 
burning all night. - also wallllaasa. 
..; .J iJ 
..,..y nawaf (i) 
Ivt/ to confuse, perplex. 
finta 
nawaft-i-ni min xuruug-ak wi-duxuul-ak you've driven 
me to distraction with your comings and goings. 
II fig-gada[ da [andu nawafthis guy is soft in the head. 
- vn nawaf, lIawafaall; ava naawij; pva mallwuuf. 
...rJy.. mallwuuf ladj * and pi mallawiijl soft in the 
head, crazy. touched. 
~J\.:.. manawiiji ladj invarl crazy. cuckoo. 
4-y lIoofa In pi -aat, lIiwafi a disturbance of the mind. 
gat-Iu noofa kida (ja[ad yiqrab fil-[iyaal he went off his 
head for a while and kept hitting the children. 
..,..,,:;1 fitllawaf Ivil I to be or become confused or per-
plexed. 2 to become disturbed in the mind. - ava/iva 
mitniwij. 
..rJ\; lIaawij Ivtl to have a brush with, skirmish with. 
-vn millawfa, munawfa; ava/pva minaawij. 
"':"Jl.;;1 fitllaawij Ivil I to skirmish. fig-gefeell itnawfu 
(jabl iI-ijtibaak il-fi[li the two armies skirmished before 
the real engagement. 2 passive of naawij. - ava/iva 
mitnaawij. 

J, J\J 
892 
.J:, .J ~ 
you and the rest is your business! II raah law yinawwilu-
J.,,; noo( In pi ranwaa(l medal, decoration, order. 
huu-Ii '" if only I could lay my hands on him! -vn 
tanwiil; ava/pva minawwil. 
t.J~ 
t"; nool In pi ranwaall kind, type. ridduu-ni birfaam 
nOleen they gave me two sorts of pills. sagaayir nool 
mumtaaz fine quality cigarettes. da mijmin in-nool illi 
b-afaqqal-u that's not of the kind I prefer. ri(-(alaalj 
ranwaal divorce is of various types. 
rig-ginn' 
b-ranwaal-u rakib-ha she's possessed by every variety 
of jinn.1I tariix i1-milaad wi-nool i1-mawluud the date of 
birth and sex of the child. 
...r,,; nawliT ladjl 1 pertaining to class or type. 
mustawayaat nawliyya Iis-saqaafa various levels of cul-
ture. 2 {phys] specific. l:Jaraara nawliyya specific heat. 
~,,; nawliyya f In pi -aatl type, sort, category. 
munfa raat min kull in-nawliyyaat establishments of 
every sort. 
tj nawwal Ivtl to diversify, vary. nawwalu I-rintaag 
bital-lium lajaan yizawwidu I-mabilaat they varied 
their production so as to increase sales. -vn tanwiil; 
ava/pva minawwal . 
..::,,~ ~ munawwalaat Ipl nl variety acts. 
t~1 ritnawwal Ivil to be or become diversified or 
varied. - ava mutanawwil; avaliva mitnawwal. 
.J.J ~ 
j,jl,.;J1 rin-niyaafa: ~aal:Jib in-niyaafa {ehr] His Grace 
(title accorded to a bishop in the Coptic Church). 
..s.J.J~ 
J,,; noovi <It nuova> ladj invarl brand-new. 
J.J~ 
;;L; naalja In pi nuulj, niyaaljl she-camel. II bizz in-
naalja variety of grape. 
IJ.J~ 
JL; naal (u) Ivtl 1 to obtain, achieve. kull' sana wi-nta 
(ayyib wis-sana g-gayya tnuul kull illi f-baal-ak the sea-
son's greetings and may you achieve all you hope for in 
the coming year. 2 to affect. ma-y~al:Jl:J '-Jyinul-ni qarar 
min lamaayil lfeer-i harm shouldn't come to me 
through the doings of others. - vn nool, nawalaan, 
nawaal; ava naayi/. 
J j nawwil Ivtl 1 to cause to obtain, cause to get hold 
of. rabb-i-na ynawwil-ak illi f-baal-ak may Our Lord 
grant you your desire! 2 to hand over. 
rana 
ranawwil-huu-Iak wil-baalji laleek I'll hand him over to 
J ~I !,itnawwil Ivil passive of nawwil. -iva mitnawwil. 
JJL; naawil Ivtl 1 to hand to. nawil-nif-fakuufhand me 
the hammer.llmaktab munaawil telegraph relay office. 
- !'agr' mnaawil the reward of the carrier, the reward of 
the go-between, as in ran<l Iiyya Jil-xeer illi tlamal da 
!'agr' mnaawil I only deserve credit for acting as go-
between in the. good that was done (i.e., what has been 
achieved didn't cost me anything). 2 {ehr] to adminis-
ter communion to. -vn minawla; ava minaawil, 
munaawilf . 
JJ\.:.. minaawil In *1 builder's mate. IIbanna wi-
mnaawil see banna. 
JJl.;;1 !,itnaawil Ivil 1 passive of naawil. 2 {ehr] to re-
ceive communion. -vn tanaawul; ava/iva mitnaawil. 
JJl.;; tanaawul Inl {ehr] holy communion. 
JJ\.;;.. mutanaawil J, mutanaawal Inl access, reach. 
Ji-mutanaawil ig-gamiil within everybody's reach, 
available or accessible to everybody. fi-mutanaawil i1-
yadd within reach, possible, accessible, available. 
JJ\.;;.. mutanaawil2 In *1 {ehr] communicant. 
2J.J~ 
J,,; nool In pi !'anwaallioom . 
~.J J.J ~ see ~.J J ~ : nawluun 
('.J ~ 
iL; naam (a) Ivil la to sleep.llnaam lala wdaan-u he 
was oblivious, he paid no attention. -naayim lala 
rool:J(-u) living in a world of (one's) own. - !'abu leen 
nayma one feigning innocence and innocuousness. 
- rana naayim I pass (e.g., in card games). -naam mala 
{euphem] to sleep with, have sexual intercourse with. 
Ib to lapse, fall into desuetude. ril-mafruul naam the 
project was shelved. ris-suulj naam the market fell into 
a recession. 2 to lie, lie down, lie flat. rig-gamuusa 
naamit lal-rarq the buffalo lay down on the ground. 
Iil:Jaam lan-naayim welding on a horizontal surface. 
3 to go flat (of a tyre or battery). -vn noom; ava 
naayim. 
11 naam lala- (1) to keep quiet about (s.th. till a future 
date). rana landi faljlja w-naayim laleeha I-lfaayit ma 
!'alaljii-Ii waal:Jid SUluudi raw kuweeti ra!'aggar-haa-Iu 
b-taman ku~ayyis I have a flat I'm sitting on till I find a 
Saudi or Kuwaiti to rent it to for a good sum. (2) to 
neglect, let slide.l:J-asiib i1-mawquul malaak wi-!'iwla 

tnaam [alee I'll leave the matter with you, and don't 
you dare neglect it. 
r j 
noom Inl sleep. II !'abu n-noom poppy. - wa-Iaw 
kunt"l:J-akammil[afaa-ya noom ... even if I have to go 
to bed supperless, as in da !'ana !'a[iif bi-faraf-i wa-Iaw 
kunt"l:J-akammil[afaa-ya noom I'd rather live hOJlest-
Iy even if I go without food. 
4. j 
nooma Inl I a sleep. !'ana lissa ~aal:Ji min nooma 
{awiila I've just got up from a long sleep. raal:Jit [alayya 
nooma I've overslept. 2 Ipl -aatl sleeping place. ruul:J 
gahhiz nomt-ak go and prep-are' yourself a place to 
sleep. II wi-l:Jyaat raas !'abuu-kfi-nomt-u by your father's 
head in his grave (a conventional oath). 
rl:.. manaam Inl I sleep. fue;t i min [izz il-manaam 
I awoke from the depths of sleep. 2 sexual intercourse. 
di kwayyisa fil-manaam she's good in bed. - Ipl -aatl 
3 dream. fuft i talat manamaat il-Ielaa-di I had three 
dreams last night. 
4.l:.. manaama In pI -aatl grave. !,infa-lla !'afuuffiikum 
yoom wil:Jif e;abl m-al:Ju((i raas-i f-manamt-i I hope to 
see you in misery before I die! 
4.\.;11 !'il-manaama Iprop nl Manama, capital of 
Bahrain. 
rl:;1 !,itnaam Ivil (impersonal) passive of naam. da 
makaan ma-yitnam-f fii that's a place not fit to be slept 
in. !,il-mafruu[ itnaam [alee ... the project was left 
aside. -iva mitnaam. 
; 
nayyim Ivtlla to cause to fall asleep, put to sleep 
(usually by natural means). !'is-suxuniyya nayyimit-ni 
the heat made me fall asleep. Ib to allow to sleep. 
!'il-waad mawguu[ bi-snaan-u ma-bi-ynayyim-nii-f 
!'abadan the boy's in pain with his teeth, and won't let 
me get any sleep. Ie to p~t to bed. !,j,(sil wiff-a-ha e;abli 
rna tnayyim-ha wash her face before you put her to bed! 
2 to cause to lie down, lay down. nayyim ik-kitaab 
!'al:Jsan yue;allay the book flat or it'll fall! 3 to cause a 
setback to. e;illit il-filuus nayyimit is-suue; the scarcity of 
cash caused a market recession. nayyimt il-l:Jaala 
b-wiff-ak il-[ikir your ugly mug has jinxed things 
around here. 4 to take in, deceive. ba((al tanyiim fil-
xale; stop trying to kid people! -vn tanyiim; ava/pva 
minayyim. 
r; nawwim Ivtl to put to sleep (usually by artificial 
means). gibt i l:Jubuub tinawwim-ni I got some pills to 
put me to sleep. IItanwiim marna{iisi hypnosis. -vn 
tanwiim; ava minawwim. 
r~ munawwim Inlllpl -aatl soporific, sleeping pill. 
2 (also munawwim marna{iisi) Ipl munawwimiinl 
hypnotist. 
893 
JJ.:J 
~I !'itnayyim Ivil passive of nayyim. - iva mitnayyim. 
r;:;1 !,itnawwim 
Ivil 
passive 
of nawwim. 
- iva 
mitnawwim. 
~I !'istanyim Ivtl to take advantage of(s.o. asleep). 
!'istanyimuu-ni w-sarae;u l-mal:Jfa;a they seized the 
opportunity of my being asleep and stole the wallet. 
-ava mistanyim. 
r.F-1 !,istanwim Ivil to have a wet dream. - vn 
!,istinwaam; ava mistanwim. 
~u~ 
i.Jj nuun Ifem n, pI -aatltwenty-fifth letter of the Ara-
bic alphabet. 
'-"-~ tanwiin In! [gram] nunation. 
I.J~.J~ 
jj nawnaw Ivil to mew. tilraftinawnaw zayy il-e;u{{a 
can you mew like a cat? -vn nawnawa; ava minawnaw. 
j ~I !,itnawnaw Ivil (impersonal) passive of nawnaw. 
laazim yitnawnaw lil-e;u{a{ [afaan tiigi the cats have to 
be mewed at to come. -iva mitnawnaw. 
Z.J~.J~ 
jj nuunu lIn! baby, toddler. 2/adj invarl tiny, 
teeny, weeny. 
'.J ~ 
.; nawwah, nawwih f Ivil to allude. nawwih [an 
iz-za[al ilti benhum wi-been ba[q he alluded to the bad 
relations existing between them. -vn tanwiih; ava 
minawwih. 
~ nawwah bi- to praise. 
I.J.J~ 
; 
naww Inllight wind that blows down the Nile from 
the south. 
i; nawwa / In pI -aatl one of a number of high, often 
rain-bearing, winds that blow at regular intervals on the 
Mediterranean coast during the winter and spring. 
nawwit raas is-sana from 1st January for two days 
(westerly); nawwit il-feeqa k-kibiira from 9th January 
for five days (south-westerly); nawwit il-ru{aas from 
18th January for five days (south-westerly); pawwit 
ik-karm from 27th January for six days (north-
westerly); nawwit baae;i k-karm from 3rd February for 
seven days (north-westerly); nawwit if-fams 
~­
~urayyara from 14th February for two days (north-
westerly); nawwit is-salluum from 4th March for three 
days (north-westerly); nawwit il-l:Jusuum from 8th 

JJ~ 
March for two days (north-westerly or north-easterly); 
nawwit baac;i 1-l:Jusuum from 14th March for two days 
(north-westerly); nawwit if-fams ik-kibiira from 22nd 
March for three days (westerly); nawwit il-Gawwa from 
29th March for three days (north-westerly); nawwit 
baac;i I-Gawwa from 2nd April for two days (north-
westerly); nawwit il-muknisa from 20th November for 
four days (north-westerly); nawwit baac;i I-muknisa 
from 26th November for two days (north-westerly); 
nawwit c;aasim from 4th December for four days 
(south-westerly); nawwit baac;i c;aasim from 10th De-
cember for two days (north-westerly); nawwit il-feeqa 
~-~umyyara from 13th December for two days (north-
westerly); nawwit baac;i I-feeqa from 21st December for 
two days (south-westerly); nawwll Giid il-milaad from 
29th December for two days (north-westerly). 
2 .J.J') see 2 1.5 .J .) : nawawi 
11.5.J.) 
l.5y nawa 2 (i) I/vi and vtl to decide, intend. naweet 
fanzil I decided to get down. ri/li nawyiin Ga~-~eed 
those intending to hunt. 2 Ivt/2a to vow (to undertake 
forthwith) a religious act. naweet win-niyya li-llaah here 
I vow (to do so-and-so) and vows are made to God 
(i.e., they cannot be made deceitfully). 2b [lsi] to initi-
ate (a prescribed religious act). naweet i~-~iyaam I have 
entered a state of fasting. - vn niyya; ava naawi; pva 
man wi. 
~ niyya In pi -aat, nawaayal intention. saliim in-niyya 
well-intentioned. 
ri/- faGmaai 
bin-niyyaat 
[prov] 
(deeds are measured by intentions) it's the thought that 
counts. II Gala myyaat-u gullible. -huwwa nawii-Iak Gala 
niyya he's out to get you. 
21.5.J.) 
..s Y nawa.l Icoll nl pips, pits, kernels. 
,-!Iy nawaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a pip, a pit, a kernel. 
II fin-nawaaya tisnid iz-ziir [prov] (a pip may support a 
water-jar) = important things may depend on paltry 
things. 
;Iy nawaah Inl nucleus. 
..sJY nawawl lad]1 nuclear. fmflgaar nawaWI nuclear 
explosion. 
31.5.J.) 
..si nawwa 2 /vil to mew (of a cat). -vn tanwiyya; ava 
minawwl. 
894 
r 11.5 .) 
iL,; niyaam <Dinka>: niyaam niyaam Icoll nl 
cannibals. 
I Y 1.5.) see Y 1 .) : naab I 
2 Y ..s.) see I y .J .) : niyaaba, naayib 
c,1.5.) 
c.\; naaI:J2 (i) Ivil to become ripe and ready to burst. 
nac;c;i tiina nayl:Ja w-hat-ha pick a plump ripe fig and 
bring it. bint' nayl:Ja 
b-~al:Jiil:J a dish of a girl. -vn 
nayal:Jaan; ava naayil:J. 
c.L,; niyaal:J r Ivnl death, dying. 
21 fitnayyal:J r Ivil [Chr] to die. - ava mutanayyil:J. 
~I ri/-mutanayyil:J In *1 [Chr] polite form of refer-
ence to a dead person = the departed. 
I J 1.5 .) 
;.# niira In pi niyarl [text] heddle-wire. 
2 J 1.5.) see I J .J .) : nayyir, niYYlr. mustaniir 
j .J J 1.5.) see j.J J .) : neeruuz 
";..s .) 
.......,.; nil! <Fr> In pi -aatl niche. 
I ~ 1.5.) 
~ niifa Inl dish of grilled goat meat. 
2 ~ 1.5.) see ~.J,): fin-niyaafa 
.l.l1.5.) 
.!.I\; naak (i) Ivtl [coarse] to fuck. III:J-aniik fafkaar-ak 
I'm going to give you bloody hell! -vn neek. niyaaka; 
ava naayik; pva manyuuk. 
~ neeka linst n, pi -aatl [coarse} a fuck. 
.!.Il:.;l fitnaak Ivil [coarse] to be fucked. - iva mitnaak. 
.!.Il.;;;.. mitnaak In *1 [coarse} passive homosexual, cata-
mite, nance . 
;Ol.;;;.. mllnaaka In pi -aatl /coarse} whore, trollop. 
ya-bn il-mitnaaka you son of a whore! 
~ nayyik Ivtl/coarse] to make, cause or allow (s.o.) 
to fuck. Ilnayyik (-u) n-namla /coarse] to give (s.o.) a 
very hard time, give (s.o.) hell. -avalpva minayyik . 
~I fitnaYYlk Ivil passive of nayyik. -iva mltnayyik. 

J .!l ..s.:" see 2 J .!l .:" : neekal 
1 J..s.:" 
J.,;.ll fin-niillprop nl the Nile. 
J.,; niili ladjl I pertaining to the Nile. samak niili Nile 
fish. 2 [agricJ irrigated by the Nile flood (of crops). 
zarr; i niili summer crops. 
2J..s.:" 
;J.,.; niila Inl I indigo. fazralj zayy in-niila as blue as 
indigo. 2 disaster (usually in a context of abuse). gat-ak 
niila or fitnayyil bi-niila "" go to hell! - ladj invarf 
3 lousy, rotten. r;arabiyyaat mustawaa-ha niila cars in 
lousy condition. 
J-; nayyil Ivtl I to mess up, louse up. fil-barb i nayyilit 
vaal ma~r war loused up conditions in Egypt. 2 [coarseJ 
to fuck. - Ivil 3 to be or become messed up or loused 
up. fil-yaal nayyil thc situation became lousy. - vn 
tanyiil; ava minayyil. 
~I fitnayyil Ivil I to get in a mess. fitnayyilt i wi-
tlabbiJt I got confused and too scared to do anything. 
fil-masfala tnayyilit xaali~ the affair got completely 
messed up. 2 [abusJ to go to hell, get lost. fitnayyil r;ala 
r;een-ak "" go to hell! -Icommonly used as an intensifierl 
la twa;:;aft i wala tnayyilt "" I didn't get the bloody job 
or anything! ma-titnayyiltiruuy il-madrasa why the hell 
don't you go to school! - ava mitnayyil. 
~ 
mitnayyil I laval !lya mitnayyil or ya mitnayyil 
bi-niila or ya mitnayyil r;ala r;eell-ak "" you miserable 
so-and-so! 2 ladj *1 lousy, rotten. ba~~-i mitnayyil 
I have lousy luck. ~abayt i mitnayyil I got up feeling 
rotten. 
895 
.:"J..s.:" 
.:..A\.; naylun (also naylu J) <Engl> Inl I nylon.llkiis 
naylun polythene bag. 21 neon. lamba naylun neon 
light. 
.J J ..s.:" see .:" J ..s .:" : naylu 
1 r ..s.:" see r.J':": 
naayim, 
nayyim, 
fitnayyim, 
fistanyim 
2 r ..s.:" see r I ..s .:" : niyaam 
.:"..s.:" 
;;,;",; lIeena <T nine grandmother> In pi -aatl title of, 
and respectful form of address to, one's mother or any 
elderly female relative. 
.:" .J ..s .:" 
.:..,y,; niyoon <Engl> Inl neon. 
J nayy ladj *1 I raw, uncooked. taaxud il-Iabma 
n-nayya w-tufrum-hll you take the raw meat and mince 
it. fil-Iabma lissa nayya the meat is still (half) raw, the 
meat hasn't been cooked enough. II beet[ n~~ i nayy 
soft-boiled eggs. - nayy i f-nayy [cookJ method of cook-
ing by which meat and vegetables are put together raw 
in a pan and cooked with seasonings and water. 
2 unripe. riI-fakha di lissa nayya this fruit isn't ripe yet. 
xajab nayy unseasoned timber. IItuub nayy sun-dried 
mud brick. 3 spineless, characterless (of people). 
2 ..s ..s.:" see 1..s.J':": niyya 

• see c: ha-
I • 
L. haa Ifem n, pi -haatl twenty-sixth letter of the Ara-
bic alphabet. -also haa f, hih, heeh. 
~ I • 
• L. haaf Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-sixth letter of the Ara-
bic alphabet. -also haa, hill, heeh. 
..:.0 I • 
.::..L. haatlimper, fern haati, pi haalU/bring! fetch! haat 
il-lurabiyya get the car! xud fJisaab-ak wi-haat il-baatji 
take what you're owed and give back·the change! IIhaat 
fiid-ak lend a hand! -haat wi-xud give and take. 
- wi-haat(-ak) }a phrase signalling (\) intensity of ac-
tion, as in .\!adoob iI-lagalladda I-xa{(' wi-haat-ak ya 
Zliltj the wheels had barely swerved over the line when 
shouting started. (2) continuation of action, as in 
tjaladlla IInakkit wi-haat ya taryatja w-difJk' w-fawaziir 
we went on joking, and the mockmg, laughing and 
riddles continued non-stop. wl-haat ya dala lala 
I-farlitj /I-Iaalli going on cursing the other team. -haat 
(wara) back up! -haat (kamaall) go on! continue! 
j I • 
loiA haa;.a f Ifem haazil" f I I Idemonst pronl this, that. 
min fagl' haaza for this (or that) reason. 2/demonst 
adjl wi-f-haa;.ihi ~-;uruuf and in the~e circumstances. 
-lin unelevated speechl It-raayit watjt-i-na haa;.a until 
this very moment. 
L.oiA haaZllha J Idemonst adj, invarl [joe, in films etc.' 
thi~, that. fi-haa;.uha s-saala kUlll' naayim I was asleep 
at that time (of the day). fJ-aaxud faga;.t-I f-haazuha 
I-yoom 1"11 take my holiday on that day. 
I j .£II • 
IA.. haaka;.a (also haka;.a): wi-haaka;.a and so on, 
and so forth. 
J I • 
~L. haala In pi -aatl halo. IIlen-lta fJawaleeha halaat 
she has rings around her eyes . 
r oj I. 
~L. haanim <T hall/m> In pi hawaaniml title of, and 
respectful term of address or reference to, a lady. ya 
(Sill') haanim madam. samiira haanim Madame 
Samira. 
.)1..,. hawanmi ladj invarl feminine, delicate, unman-
ly. sagaayir hawanmi small cigarettes. fidee hawanmi 
he has hands like a woman's. kalaam-u hawanmi he 
talks like a woman. 
~ I. 
~L. haay <Engl hIgh> ladj invarl upper-class. 
fiftakaruu-ni haay they thought me upper-class. dool 
naas haay those arc upper-class people. 
Co • 
" 
., 
t,.t,. hafhaf, hafhaf Ivil to laugh. -vn hafhafa, 
hafhafa: ava mihafllaf, mihafhaf. 
y. see Y • .J: Itiba 
'yy. 
..;... habb I (i) Ivil I to leap up, spring, start. fin-naar 
habbit the fire flared up. riI-laratj habb· lalayya 
I broke out into a sweat. fir-raagil habb' fiyya w-(arad-
ni the man sprang up at me and threw me out.llkull' 
min habb' w-dabb "" every Tom, Dick and Harry. 2 to 

blow (of wind). fill-nisma lamma habbit basseel bin-
noom I felt sleepy when the breeze blew. -vn habb, 
hababaan; ava haabib . 
.;:.. habb 2: habb; gazam all of a sudden, at once and 
unexpectedly. wi-raab mirayyar ra fy-u kida habb; 
gazam all at once he changed his mind. 
Zyy. 
..,.,\.,A hibaab Inll soot.llzayy i1-hibaab bad, lousy, asin 
balt-u zayy i1-hibaab he's in lousy shape,jort-ak illi zayy 
i/-hibaab your rotten advice. 1 {deris] damned thing, 
something not liked. fil-hibaab i11i b-yifrab-u the filthy 
stuff he drinks. feen si hbaab bitac-kum where is your 
lousy Mr. So-and-So? 
~\.,A hibaaba Inl I a speck of soot. 1 {deris] damned 
thing, something not liked. 
....;.. habbiblvt/l to mark with soot. riI-wabuurhabbib 
i1-balla the primus stove has sooted the pot. 1 to do 
(e.g., a job of work) badly, botch up. feeh illi 
bi-thabbib-u da ... what the hell are you messing about 
at? -vn ,ahbiib; ava/pva mihabbib. 
...;... mihabbib ladj "I bad, lousy. liifa mhabbiba a 
rotten life. yoom mihabbib a botched up day, an un-
lucky day. kalaam mihabbib smutty talk, nasty words. 
famma biltit joora mhabbiba what a lousy piece of 
advice! 
~I fithabbib Ivil I to be marked with soot. 1 to be 
botched up. - iva mithabbib. 
J yy • 
.; yo hubb <perh Copt> linterjll heave! heave hoI (cf 
heela hubb, heela hubba). 1 expletive' expressing sud-
denness. lammit i1-huduum wi-hubb; jaylaa-ha lala 
beet fumm-a-ha she gathered the clothes together and 
carried them off to her mother's house. II wi-hubb; (ubb 
without ado, there and then, as in Iissa b-aquul talaalu 
zuruu-na b~~eet hubb; (ubb laqet-hum landi fil-beet no 
sooner had I told them to visit us than there I found 
them at my place. 3 {children] carry (me)! ups-a-daisy! 
~ hubba = hubb 1 and 3. -also fubba, fabbah. 
"y. 
..y. habad (i) Ivll 1 to slam, bang. jaar iI-koora 
w-habad-ha fil- farq he picked up the ball and slammed 
it to the gnnmd. 1 to deal (a hard blow) to. habadt-u 
qalameen I gave him a hard slapping. 3 to wolf down, 
knock back (food or drink). raab haabidfarxa b-bal-ha 
he knocked back a whole chicken. 4 {coarse} to copu-
late with, bang. -vn habd; ava haabid, mahbuud. 
897 
.. ~O 
",r. 
o..y. habdil/pl -aatl instance noun of habd. 
~I fithabad Ivill passive of habad. 1 to crash, slam. 
II fitfaal wi-thabad to create a great fuss, as in mif 
ba-taaxud wala malliim ziyaada lamma litfaal wi-tithibid 
you're not going to get another millime however much 
fuss you make! -ava/iva mithibid. 
~I finhabad = fithabad. - ava/iva minhibid. 
~y • 
;:A habar (u) Ivlll to bite off. grab (a large chunk). 
fik-kalb; habar-u f-rigl-u the dog took a chunk out of 
his leg. 1 to take and not returl1'. pocket. habaru 1-
wallaala they took the lighter and never gave it back. 
riI-bayyaal habar minni xamsa gneeh the salesman 
took me for five pounds. 3 to deal (a blow) to. habart-u 
kafr Gala qafaa I dealt him a slap on the back of his 
neck. -vn habr, habaraan; ava haabir; pva mahbuur . 
~ habar fi- to grab at, clutch at. habarit fi-Jalr-u she 
grabbed at his hair. 
;;;:A habra In, pi -aat, hubarl chunk, hunk (particularly 
of meat). 
~I fithabar Ivil passive of habar. - iva mithibir . 
.roil finhabar = fithabar. - iva minhibir. 
,J!t. haabir Ivil I to tinker, tamper. ma-thabir-J; fir-
radyu don't tamper with the radio. ma-Iuu-J jU'lfla reer 
iI-mihabra (uul in-nahaar he has nothing to do except 
potter around all day long. 1 to struggle, strain, exert 
effort. bi-yhaabir lajaan luqmit iI-leej he struggles to 
earn his daily bread. -vn mihabra; ava mihaabir. 
,J!lf:1 fithaabir Ivil (impersonal) passive of haabir. 
fit-tilifizyon-da mithaabir fii this television has been 
tampered with. - iva mithaabir. 
J.y • 
.j.,A habaj (i) Ivtll to scratch, claw. fil-qU((a habafit-
ni the cat scratched me. 1 to take and not return, 
pocket. 3 to deal (a blow, etc.). habafit-ni qalam suxn 
she gave me a stinging slap. -vn habf, habajaan; ava 
haabif; pva mahbuuj. 
~ habaj fi- to flare up at, snap at. ma-badd;-J 
yikallim-ak filla ma tihbif fii no one c~n speak to you 
without your snapping at him. 
~ 
habja Ipl -aatl instance noun of habj. 
..;.~ habbaaj In "II scratcher. 1 grabber . 
~I fithabaj Ivill to be scratched, be clawed. 1 to be 
dealt (a blow). -iva mithibif. 
.,;.,rl finhabaj = fithabaj. - iva minhibif. 
.;.;. habbif I Ivtl to grab at. snatch at. ma-Iuqlud-J; 
Ihabbif fil- fakl don't keep grabbing at the food! llvil to 
speak abruptly. kalaam-u kull-u tahbiif everything he 

says is short and sharp. - vn lahbiij; avalpva mihabbij. 
\J~ mihabbtJaali In 
pi -yyal snapper-up (of 
money), shark . 
...,..;:rl rilhabbij Ivil to be grabbed at, be snatched at. 
- iva milhabbij . 
..r!u. haabij Ivil I to stretch to reach, reach out. 
rli-layyil bi-yhaabij lal-lilba illi fooq it-tarabeeza the 
child is stretching to get the toy on the table. 2 to 
struggle. strain (to do s.th.). faa}'lf Ik-kilaaba mhabfa 
I can hardly make out the writing. -vn mihabfa; ava 
mihaabij. 
.loy 0 
~ 
habat (u) 
Ilvil to come down, descend. 
rit-tayyaara habatil (I) the plane lost height. (2) the 
plane landed. ril-faslaar habatil prices dropped. 2 Ivtl 
to deal (a blow or the like) to. - vn hubuut. habataan; 
ava haabit. 
~ 
hibi{ (a) Ivil to tire, lose one's energy. finta 
b-lihba{ bi-surla klda leeh why do you become tired so 
quickly? -vn haba{aan; ava hab{aan . 
.1.,.. hubuu{ Inll descent, fall, drop. hubuu{ iq{iraari 
emergency landing, crash landing. 2 physical exhaus-
tion, weakness. rana fJaasI5 bi-hubuu{fidiid I feel utter-
ly exhausted. hubuu{ fil-qalb heart failure. 3 lowering. 
hubuu{ ir-rafJim {palh! prolapse of the uterus . 
.Ja;:. habba{ Ivtll to lower, reduce. habba{ is-surla he 
reduced the speed. ril-mClrwafJa habba{il daragil 
II-fJaraarafwayya the fan has lowered the temperature a 
bit. 2 to calm down, subdue. habba{ull lafaan yuskUI 
get him to simmer down so that he'll be quiet! -vn 
lahbii{; avalpva mihabba{. 
~I rilhabba{ Ivill to be lowered, be reduced. 2 to be 
calmed down, be subdued. - iva milhabba{. 
• Jy 0 
j..II. habal l (i) Ivtl to drive (s.o.) out of his wits, drive 
insane. ril-bint' habalit-II the girl drove him off his 
head. -vn habal. habalaall; ava haabll; pva mahbuul. 
j..II. habal:! Inl silliness, stupidity. 
J-,*, mahbuulladj pi mahabiil/ crazy. 
~l,A habaala Inl simplicity, foolishness. 
Ilsaayiq 
iI-habaala lal-labaa{a acting the complete fool. 
.J.,.,.a habiilladj pi hubalal silly, simple-minded, stupid. 
j..II.i rahbal/adj, fern habla, pi hubl. hibll silly, simple-
minded. fibn iI-habla Yliij raklar {prov! (the son of the 
foolish woman lives longer) it doesn't pay to try to be 
clever and finicky. II ril-laayiz rahbal necessity knows 
no law. 
898 
J.Y. habulli/adj invarl haphazard, disorganized.liija 
habulli an aimless existence. raagil habulli disorganized 
and unthinking man. bli-habulli in a haphazard and 
unpremeditated manner, thoughtlessly, as m laayij 
kida bil-habulli he just takes life as it comes. 
.,h-I rilhaballvil to be driven out of one's Wits, become 
crazy. -ava/iva mllhlbil. 
J,.il rinhabal = filhabal. - avaliva minhlbil. 
J... habbil Ivil to shout as if crazed. -vn ,ahbiil; ava 
mihabbil. 
...k 4-1 rilhaabillvil to act the fool. - ava milhaabil. 
~I rislahbli Ilvtl to take for a fool, treat as a fool. 
fislahbil-m w-xad Ii-larabiyya rxil~a he put one over on 
me and got the car cheap. 2 IVII to play the fool. 
ma-fJadd'-ffiikumfakr-u walla b-lIslahbilu doesn't any-
one remember him or are you Just acting stupid? -vn 
riSlihbaal; ava mislahbll. 
1 Jy 0 
J.+. mihbatr In pi mahaablll vagma. 
J..+. mlhbali r ladjl vaginal. 
J Jy 0 
j..II. habal3 Inl bone-setting as practised by experi-
enced but medically unqualified people. biluUl iI-habal 
bone-setters. rabu habal bone-setter. 
'yoyo 
......... habhab Ivil to bark (of a dog). II fil-kalb' lamma 
yhabhab (or yhabhib) ma-fJadd'-f.Vlrudd d lalee {prov! 
(no-one answers a dog when it barks) "" there's no point 
in responding to insult. -vn habhaba; ava mihabhab. 
mihabhib. 
1y 0 Y 0 
......... hubhub Inlliquor concocted from palm Juice and 
methylated spirits. 
.Jyo 
,.. habw Icoll nl I swirls (of particles. soot etc.). 
ril-wClbuur lama I habw the primus stove made swirls 
(of soot). IIhabw iI-qu{n fine necks of cotton which 
accumulate in a cotton gin during processing. - (fJafiij) 
habw fine quality hashish. 2 blasts (of hot air. from a 
fire etc.). 
.,.. habwa lunit n. pi -aalll a swirl (of particles, soot 
etc.). 2 fine quality hashish. 3 a blast (of hot air. from a 
fire). 

.s yo 
..r-" hibi (a) Ivil to become weak with hunger. -vn 
habayaan; ava habyaan . 
.!of.s yo 
~ 
habyak <T hep yek> Inl pair of ones (in 
backgammon). 
.;..0. hatt (i) Ivtl to cause to flinch, intimidate. rana 
ba~~a wabda minni thill-u one glance from me is enough 
to make him f1inch.llbint' thitt == a stunning girl. -vn 
hatt, hatataan; ava haatit; pya mahtuut. 
11 hatt' fi- to snap at, burst out at. -hatt" cala to attempt 
to frighten (s.o.). hitt" cal-waad bi-kilmiteen xallii 
y;aakir do threaten the boy into studying (his lesson). 
~ hatta Ipl -aatl instance noun of hatt. 
~I rithatt Ivil I to be made to flinch, be intimidated. 
899 
2 (impersonal) passive of hatt. miJ rana iii yithatt i fii 
• 
I am not one to be intimidated. - iva mithatt. 
..:..;.0. hattit Ivtl to scare with (exaggerated) threats. 
dayman yihattit-ha bi[-[alaalj he always scares her by 
hi~ting that he may divorce her. -vn tahtiit; ava mihattit. 
~I rithattit Ivil to flinch, be made to flinch, be 
scared. - ava/iva mithattit. 
J'::"O 
;u. haatir Ivil to engage in a war of words, get into a 
slanging match. bi-yhatru maca bacq: cal-faaqJ they 
are abusing one another for no serious reason. -vn 
mihatra; ava mihaatir. 
;;4.- muhatra In pI muhatraatl slanging match, battle 
of words. ma-yba[[aluu-j muhatraat maca bact/. they 
never stop wrangling with one another. 
~I ristahtar Ivil to underrate, take lightly. huwwa 
mistahtar bil-maxaa[ir he underestimates the dangers. 
ljacadt' tistahtar fii li-badd i ma t/.arab-ak maljlab you 
went on underestimating him until he finally conned 
you. rilli tistahtar-bu yi',,{ib-ak [pray! what you under-
estimate will gain domination over you. -vn ristihtaar; 
ava mistahtar, mustahtir T . 
~ 
mustahtirT ladj *1 careless, heedless, reckless. 
IIbint' (or mara) mustahtira a loose girl (or woman). 
.;. .::.. 0 
...ra hataj (i) Ivil to tell a tall story, shoot a line. 
cumr-u ma-yba[[al hatjhe never stops telling his fisher-
man's tales. -vn hatj, hatajaan; ava haatiJ; pya mahtuuJ. 
~ 
hatja In, pI -aatl a tall story, a fisherman's tale . 
..ria hattaaj ladj *1 given to telling tall stories. 
ma-tsaddalj-haa-J di hattaaja don't believe her; she's a 
fibber. 
-...A.a hataf (i) Ivil to shout a slogan, cheer. rin-naas 
hatafit bi-suljuu[ iz;-~ulm the people clamoured for the 
fall of injustice. - vn hitaaJ, hatafaan; ava haatiJ. 
11 hatafli-( .. ) to lead (s.o.) to act intuitively. hataflina 
haatiJ (or baaga hataJit-lina) rinllina nljuum nirawwab 
something prompted us to get up and go home. 
.jla hitaaJ In pI -aatl shouted slogan, shout, cheer. 
~Ia hitaJgiyya Ipl nl =hattiiJa. 
..j;u. haatiJ In pI hawaatif! voice from the unknown. 
hat:f-Ii haatiJ I had a sudden inspiration . 
.j~ hattaaJ = hattiiJ. 
...A.,.a hatt;;J In * and pI hattiiJal yes-man, hanger-on, 
drummer-up of support. 
~I rithataJ Ivil (impersonal) passive of hataJ. rahu 
da z-zaciim illi yithitiJbi-sm-uf-kull i makaan this is the 
leader whose name is applauded everywhere. - iva 
mithitiJ. 
.!of.::.. 0 
da hatak (i) Ivtl to expose, reveal. hatak satr (or sitr) 
to reveal a secret of (s.o. or s. th.), betray. rallaah yihtik 
sitr-u zayy i ma b-yihtils sitr in-naas may God expose him 
(to humiliation) just as he exposes others. hatak cart/.-
to dishonour sexually, abuse sexually. -vn hatk, 
hatakaan; ava haatik; pya mahtuuk. 
~..f+o mahtuuka In pI mahatiikl whore, woman of 
easy virtue. 
~ 
hatiika In pI hataayikl scandal, disgrace. 
~I rithatak Ivil passive of hatak. - iva mithitik. 
~I rinhatak = rithatak. - iva minhitik. 
~ 
hattik Ivtl to rip up, tear open. rir-r~a~a hattikit 
labm i wirk-u the bullet tore open his thigh. II hattiku 
1- racraat/. they ravished the womenfolk. -mazag-ha 
thattik rastaar xallj iIIaah it's a hobby of hers to expose 
people's secrets. -vn tahtiik; ava/pva mihattik. 
4 
mihattika = mahtuuka. 
~I rithattik Ivil I passive of hattik. 2 to split open 
(particularly of flesh). 3 to become morally lax. -vn 
tahattuk; ava/iva mithattik. 
~ 
tahattuk In pI -aatl tear in the flesh, gash . 
~ 
mistahtik ladj *1 unchaste,licentious, immoral. 
j'::"O 
~ hatam Inl toothlessness. 
~i rahtam ladj, fern hatma, pI hutml toothless. 
~I rithatam Ivi/l to lose one's teeth (especially the 

front teeth). 2 to fall out. be knocked or pulled out (of 
teeth). -aya/iva mithitim. 
.:.. tt.': .. 6 
~I 'fil-hathat Inl epithet for the unknown disaster. 
fin fa-lIq yaxd-ak i/-hathat the Devil take you! 
.::..~I' fil-hithaat = fiI-hathat. 
j.J .:.. 6 : 
),;1.10 hatuur, hatllur <('opt> Inl the third month ofthe 
Coptic year (early November to early December). 
hatuur fabu d-dahab iI-mantuur Hatur (the month) of 
scattered gold (allusion to the sowing of wheat). 
loS .:.. 0 
.ju. haata Ivil to repeat incessantly. lammaal yihaati 
b-talaata saar ya quu(a -Iaakin ma-Ijadd '-/ laayiz yiJtiri 
he keeps shouting 'Tomatoes for three piastres!' but 
no-one wants to buy. II/amma yhaati (not) even if (he) 
keeps on and on about it, as in miJ Ija-taaxud iI-ftluus 
lamma thaati you won't see the money even if you 
scream for it. -vn mihatiyya: ava mihaati. 
leo see loS Co: higa 
CC 0 
~ hagg (i) Ivil to get out, quit (in exasperation). 
haggeet mil-balad I cleared out of town. fin-naas 
bi-thigg' min Ijarr' m~r' f~-~eefpeople flee the heat of 
Cairo in the summer. -vn hagg, hagagaan; ava haagig. 
;.,;.. hagga Ipl -aatl instance noun of hagg. 
& mihagg In pi -aatl {rur] deep circular niche in a 
wall (for storage, or to take the tongue of a wooden 
lock). 
~ 
haggig Ivtl to drive out, cause to quit (in exaspera-
tion or despair). -vn tahgiig; ava/pva mihaggig. 
~I fithaggig Ivil passive of haggig. - iva mithaggig. 
~~o 
~I fithaggid Ivil {lsI] to spend time late at night in 
prayer. -vn tahaggud; ava mithaggid. 
j Co 
r:oA hagar (u) Ivtl to desert, abandon. miraat-u 
hagarit-u his wife deserted him. -vn hagr, hagr, 
hugraan, higraan; ava haagir; pva mahguur. 
)~ mahguur ladjl deserted, abandoned. kalimaat 
mahguura T obsolete words. beet mahguur a deserted 
house. fayy' makaan mahguur any deserted place. 
fiI-ljabiib iI-mahguur the deserted lover. 
900 
• r:oA higra Inl I migration. higrit i(-(Uyuur bird migra-
tion. 2 fiI-higra the Hegira, the migration from Mecca 
to Medina by the Prophet Muhammad. 
loS r:oA higri ladjl relating to the Hegira. sana higriyya a 
yea~ of the Muslim calendar. 
~ 
mahgar Inl place of emigration (particularly with 
reuard to Arab migrants to the Americas). 
r.-il fithagar Ivil to be deserted, abandoned. - iva 
mithigir. 
r.-il finhagar = fithagar. 
;... haggar Ivtl to evacuate (people). -vn tahgiir; ava 
mihaggar; pva muhaggar. 
...;.. muhaggar In *1 forced emigrant. 
~I fithaggar Ivil to be evacuated (of people). 
ft- fayyaam i1-ljarb' sukkaan iI-mudun bi-yithaggaru Iir-
riif during the war city-dwellers are evacuated to the 
countryside. - iva mithaggar. 
~u. haagir, haagar Ivil to migrate, emigrate. (uyuur 
mihagra migratory birds. -vn mihagra, muhagra; ava 
mihaagir. 
~t...- muhaagir In *1 migrant, emigrant, immigrant. 
~co 
...,-.1.10 haagis In pi hawaagisl sudden and troubling 
idea. gaa-ni haagis I was struck by an unsettling 
thought. raagil malyaan hawaagis a man beset by 
worries. 
v"' Co 
~ 
hag~ (u) Ivil {deris] to make false boasts or 
claims. haga~ laleehum wi-xad iI-ftluus he took them in 
with false promises and got hold of the money. -vn 
hagj; ava haag~. 
~ 
hagj Inl {abus] false boasting, bragging. 
~i fahg~ lell {abus] morelmost bragging or 
boasting. 
..,..L;.. hagga~ <perh Copt> In • and pi hagga~al 
{abus] one given to false 
boasting, braggart, 
loudmouth. 
~ 
hagga~ Ivil {derisJ to tell boasting lies, brag. miJ 
faalilj reer finnll yuqlud lala I-qahwa (uul in-nahaar 
yihagg~ lala f~ljaab-u all he's good for is sitting in the 
cafe all day long giving his friends all kmds of spiel. -vn 
tahgi~; ava mihagg~. 
tc 0 
~ 
hagal (a) Ivil to become calm, quiet and still. -vn 
huguul, hagalaan; ava haagil. 
~ 
hagla linst nl a slumber, a snooze. ruulj maddid 

tafJt if{agara w-xud-Iak hagla go and lie under the tree 
and enjoy a sleep. 
n~.· 
~ 
hagam (i) Ivil to make an assault, charge. fin-naas 
hagamit lal-gamliyya fawwil ma fatafJit the people 
stormed the co-operative store as soon as it opened. -vn 
hugum. hagamaan; ava haagim. 
r ~ 
huguum In pi -aatl attack, offensive. huguum 
muqaadd counter-attack. huguum gawwi air raid. fialb 
il-huguum {sport! centre forward. xall it-huguum 
{sport! forward line. 
...,.~ huguumi ladjl offensive, attacking. 
~ 
hagrna In pi -aatl raid. attack. 
~I. fithagam Ivil (impersonal) passive of hagam. 
ma-yithigimf lalee bi-shuula he is not easily attacked. 
- iva mithlgim. 
~I finhagam = fithagam. -iva minhigim. 
~I fithaggim Ivil to launch an attack, make an 
assault. fithaggim lalayya b-kursi he went for me with a 
chair. fig-garaayid ithaggimit lalee the newspapers 
attacked him. -vn tahaggum f; ava mithaggim. 
~L. haagim 
Ivtl 
to 
attack, 
assault. 
fil-fariifi 
bi-yhaagim b-arbalt inlaar the team attacks with four 
persons. -vn mihagma. muhagma; ava mihaagim. 
~lt-- muhagma In pi -aatl = huguum. 
~lt-- muhaagim In *1 {sport! forward, attacker. 
~lf:1 fithaagim Ivil to be attacked, be assaulted. be 
raided. - iva mithaagim. 
.J [ • 
~ 
hagiin I ladj invarl hybrid (particularly with a 
father of good stock and a mother of poor stock). 2 Icoll 
n, pi hignl racing camel(s), dromedaries. 
"L;.. haggaan In pi haggaanal I cameleer. 2 ril-
haggaana Ipl nl the Camel Corps . 
.;;... haggin I Ivtl to cross-breed, hybridize. firaax 
mihaggina hybrid chickens. 2 Ivil to walk like a camel. 
juuf fiuaay bi-thaggin lil-majy see how she' sways 
clumsily like a camel. -vn tahgiin; avalpva mihaggin. 
~ [ . 
• 4uo .4uo higa = higaaya. fJuruufil-higa the alphabet, 
the letters of the alphabet. 
~ 4uo higaaya Inl spelling. 
.;4uo higaafi ladjl alphabetical. 
~I fithagga Ivtl to spell. -vn tahgiyya ava/pva 
mithaggi. 
~I fistahagga Ivtl to spell. mif laarif yistahagga 
901 
J ~o 
fism-u he doesn't know how to spell his name. lliissa 
b-yistahagga to be still at the initial stages. be still a 
beginner, as in fana lissa b-astahagga fis-siwaac;a I've 
jUM started learning to drive. -ava mistahaggi. 
.~.see3~~. 
y 
~. 
..,...a hidb Inl I ipl hadadiibl fringe. 21 Ipl fahdaabl 
eyelash. 
I ~ ~ • 
.a hadd (i) Ivtl I to demolish. wreck. 2 to undermine . 
weaken. fil-fJuzn· hadd-a-ha sorrow has ruined her 
health. bi-yhidd it-fJeel it saps one's strength. -vn hadd. 
hadad. hadadaan; ava haadid; pva mahduud. 
.i.rl fithadd Ivil I to be demolished. be wrecked. 2 to 
be undermined. be weakened. - iva mithadd. 
~I finhadd = fithadd. - iva minhadd. 
~.a haddid Ivtl to threaten. ril-mudiir haddid-hum bil-
xa~m the director threatened to dock their pay. -vn 
tahdiid; avalpva mihaddid; pva muhaddadT. 
~.>.; tahdiid In pi -aatl threat. 
..s~.>.; tahdiidi ladjl threatening. 
~.i.rl fithaddid Ivil I to be threatened. yaama ktiir 
ithaddidu bit-fiatl how many times they've been 
threatened with death! 2 to be intimidated, be cowed. 
fana m-athaddid{i min fJadd I'm not scared by anyone! 
- iva mithaddid. 
2 ~ ~ • 
.a hidd <Engl> In pi -aatl I record-player pick-up 
head. 28 {soccer! play made with the head. 2b blow 
with the head (in wrestling). 
I .J ~ • 
;.a hadar! (u) Ivtl I to cause to fall, knock over. 
hadart-u lal-farq I knocked him to the ground. 2 to 
shed (blood) with impunity. -vn hadr; ava haadir; pva 
mahduur. 
;.a hudr Inl bad fall. kalt i hudr I took a tumble. 
;.a hadarz Icoll nl scraps, left-overs, unwanted rem-
nants. hadar gild ~craps of leather. -/adjectivallyl 
damm-u hadar his blood .may be shed with impunity. 
he's so insignificant no one would avenge his blood . 
-/adverbiallyl raafJ hadar to be wasted, come to no-
thing, as in damm-u raafJ hadar his blood was shed in 
vain, fJafifi-i ma-yrufJ-/ hadar no one's going to tram-
ple on my rights! 

J ~o 
J.i.f-I 'i'ithadar Ivil I to tumble, fall down. 2 to be shed 
with impunity (of blood). - avaliva mithidir. 
J~I 'i'inhadar = 'i'ithadar. - avaliva minhidir. 
J.ai 'i'ahdar f Ivtl to invalidate. regard as invalid. 
'i'ihdaar !Juc;uuc; in-naas transgression of the rights of 
the people. -vn 'i'ihdaar; ava muhdir. mihdir; pva 
muhdar. 
z .J ~ • 
J.a hadar' (u) Ivil to roar. bellow. bi-yuhdur zayy 
d-ba!Jr he's bellowlOg with rage - vn hadiir; ava haadir. 
J .J ~ • 
OJ.a hldra In pi hidar. hidaarl bottom section of a rib 
(that part which forms the bottom of a wooden ship). 
- J.J ~. 
~JJ.J."A hidruliiki <Fr> lad]1 hydraulic. 
- r'.J ~ • 
..!tI..JJ.a hldrumaatik 
Inl 
{autoJ 
automatic 
transmissIOn. 
...; ~ . 
J.a hadaf In pi 'i'ahdaaf/ I target. 'i'it-talc;a ma-gat-f' 
fil-hadar the shot missed the target. 2 aim, objective. 
hadafd-lilba 'i'eeh what IS the object of the game? hadaf 
il-mafr/wl the aim of the project. 3 {sportJ goal 
(scored). 
JI.a haddaaf In pi haddaafal I (also haddaafil-fariic;) 
~corer or top scorer (10 a team game). 2 bombardier. 
J.a haddiflvil {sportJ to aim (well) at the goal, basket 
etc. 'i'il-laallb da bl-yhaddif bi-!Jarfana = this player is 
an expert scorer. - vn tahdllf; ava mihaddif. 
J~I 'i'lstahdif' Ivtl to select as a target. 'lima 
b-lIstahdlf-m blk-kalam-da do you mean that remark 
for'me? - vn flsllhdaaf; ava mlstahdlf. 
I J ~ • 
J.a hadal (I) Ivtl I to let down. let hang, dangle. 
hadalitfalr-a-ha she let down her hair. 2 to cut or chop 
down. f,hdd !Jllla kbllra mm Ig-glsr cut down a large 
,ecllon of the bank. - vn hadl. hadalaan; ava haadil; pva 
mahduul. 
J.a hadla Ipl -aatl instance noun of hadl. 
J..Ir-I flthadallvil passive of hadal. - iva mllhidil. 
J~I fmhadal = fllhadal. - iva mmhidil. 
J.a haddd Ivtl I to let down, allow to hang loosely. 
labfa fustaan mlhad.Qil·laleeha ka- 'i'innu mif bital-ha 
902 
she is wearing a dress so loose on her that it seems it may 
not be her own. 2 to cut or chop down repeatedly. 
'i'it-turaab mihaddil fil-!Jufra the earth has been cut 
away and is collapsing into the hole. - vn tahdiil; avalpva 
mihaddil. 
J~I fithaddil Ivil passive of haddil. -vn tahaddul; iva 
mithaddil. 
z J ~ • 
.}..a hadlil Inl cooing (of pigeons). 
I r' ~ • 
r.a hadam f (i) Ivtl to destroy, demolish. 'i'il-!Jarilc;a 
hadamll II-beet the fire destroyed the house.llhaadim 
i1-lazzaat death. - vn hadm. hadamaan; ava haadim; pva 
mahduum. 
rl.a haddaam ladjl destructive. nac;d' haddaam des-
tructive crillcism. 
r..lr-I fllhadam Ivil to be destroyed, be demolished, fall 
into ruin. - avaliva mllhidim. 
r~1 fmhadam = fithadam. -vn 'i'inhidaam; avaliva 
minhidim. 
r.a haddim Ivtl to destroy successively and extensive-
ly. fil-raara haddimit munam il-mabaam the raid has 
destroyed most of the buildings. -vn tahdiim; avalpva 
mihaddim. 
i~1 fllhaddim Ivil to be successively and extensively 
destro}ed. - iva mithaddim. 
z r' ~ • 
.... .a hidma In pi -aat. hldaml garment. piece of 
clothing. xad i1-hidma iii lalayya = he took ~ven the 
shirt off my back. 
rJ.a huduum. hiduum Ipl nl clothes. clothing. II raagi! 
malw' hduum-u a respected man. -fi-nu~~' hduum-u 
extremely embarrassed. 
~ ~ . 
'-i.a hudna In pi -aatl truce. armistice. 
~ . 
~ . 
.a.a hudhud. hidhid In pi hadaahidl {zooll hoopoe. 
II.S~. 
1.S.a hada I (I) Ivtl to guide. set on the right path (of 
God). b-adli-Iha 'linn' rabb-i-na yihdii-ha I pray that 
our Lord may guide her. rabb-i-na yihdii-k may our 
Lord guide you on the right path (often said in critic-
ism).lIyihdii-k yirqii-k see raqa. - vn huda. hidaaya; ava 
haadi; pva mahdi. 

..s~L. haadi I Inl Guider, as epithet of (1) God. IIlissa 
bi-Y(juul ya haadi he's just getting started, he's just 
warming up, (2) the Prophet Muhammad. 
,,!..lA hudya In pi -aat, hudayl rear driving-pole on a 
water-wheel (see PI.E, 6). 
..s-lil fithada Ivil to be guided, be set on the right path 
(by God). -iva mithidi. 
..s-lil finhada = fithada. - iva minhidi . 
..s~ I fistahda Ivil to ~eek the right road. fistahda 
bi-llaah w-balaaj xinaa(j "" ask God's guidance and stop 
fighting·lliissa b-yistahda to be just at the initial stages, 
as in da fibna lissa ma-stahdenaa-J fil-fakl we haven't 
even ~tarted eating yet. - vn fistihda; ava mistahdi. 
2 ..s ~ 0 
..s..lA hada 2 (i) Ivtlto giv~ (s.o.) a present (of). fahdii-k 
feeh what shall I give you? - ava haadi. 
~..lA hidiyya, hadiyya In pi -aat, hadaayal gift. fin-nabi 
(jibi! i/-hidiyya the Prophet accepted gifts (said in press-
ing a gift etc. upon someone). kal il-hidiyya w-kasar 
id-di(j(jiyya [pray! he took the present and broke the 
pot in which it was brought (of ungracious behaviour). 
..s~L. haada Ivtl to give (s.o.) a pressent (of). hadet-ha 
bi-(jzaazit riiba I presented her with a bottle of per-
fume. -vn mihadiyya; ava mihaadi. 
..s~lf:1 fithaada Ivil I to exchange presents. 2 to be 
given presents. fil- fafraab yithaada I-r;ariis wil-r;aruusa 
b-~ubab ii-ward at weddings, the bridegroom and the 
bride are presented with bunches of flowers. -iva 
mithaadi . 
..s..lAi fahda I Ivtl I to make a gift (of) (s.th.) to. 
fil-hidiyya r;ala (jadr' muhdii-ha [pray] (the value of) a 
present reflects the value of the one who gives (not the 
value of the one to whom it is given, said in apologizing 
for the inadequacy of a gift). 2 to dedicate (a work). - vn 
fihdaaf; ava mihdi, muhdi. 
.1..lA! fihdaaf In pi -aatl [lit! dedication. 
~ ..s ~ 0 
..s..lA hidi (a) Ivil to become calm, abate, die down. 
fin-naar hidyit the fire abated. bass' fihda w-bar;deen 
Ilitkallim just calm down and we'll talk afterwards. - vn 
hadaawa, hadayaan, hidi~w, huduuf; ava haadi. 
..s~L. • 
..s~L. haadi 2 ladj *1 calm. raagi! haadi a quiet 
man. II falwaan hadya quiet colours. - naar hadya a low 
fire. 
i..lAi • ..s..lAi fahda 2, 
fahda f 
lell 
quieterlquietest, 
calmer/calmest. 
i.:a . ..s.:a hadda Ivtl to calm down, quieten, cause to 
903 
abate. haddeet-u I calmed him down. haddi nafs-ak (or 
far;~aab-ak or faxlaa(j-ak) calm yourself! haddit in-
naar she lowerep the heat. haddu I-/ir;b they slowed 
down the game. fit-taks i hadda s-surr;a the taxi slowed 
down. haddi ya sawwaa(j slow down, driver! haddit 
baal-i (or sirr-i) she put my mind at ease. -vn tahdiyya; 
avalpva mihaddi . 
..s~ . 
..s~ muhaddi, muhaddirT In pi -aatl tranquil-
lizer, sedative. 
i~1 • ..s~1 fithadda Ivil to be calmed down, be 
quietened, be abated. - iva mithaddi. 
..s~1 fistahda Ivtl I to consider (too) quiet. 2 to 
select for quietness. - vn fistihda; avalpva mistahdi. 
I~o see Ijlo 
Y 
~ 0 see y j 0 
J 
~ 0 see J j 0 
..s ~ 0 see ..s j 
0 
• J 0 see ..s J 0 
YJ 0 
,:-,.;A hirib, harab (a) Ivil to escape, flee. hirib bi-gild-u 
he escaped with his skin. fid-damm I harbaall min wiff-u 
the blood has drained from his face. bi-yihrab min 
h/.-qaraayib he's evading taxes. IIdamm-i hirib "" my 
blood ran cold. - vn harab, huruub, harabaan; ava 
haarib. 
0~.;A harbaan ladj *1 runaway, fugitive. 
~~.;A harabangi In pi -yyal one given to evading 
work, responsibilities or commitments, shirker. 
':-'J-* mahruub: fi/-maktuub ma-minnuu-J mahruub 
[pray] there can be no flight from Fate. 
':-' -* mahrab Inl refuge, sanctuary. 
':-'~ harrab Ivtl I to smuggle. 2 to hide away. mif 
mumkin tiharrab minni baaga she would never hide 
things from me. -
Ivil 3 to run down, go dead (of a 
battery). II muxx-u harrab he flipped his lid. - vn tahriib; 
avalpva miharrab. 
;"""'fi- tahriiba In pi -aatl I instance noun of tahriib. 
2 consignment of smuggled goods. tahriibit bafiifsmug-
gled batch of hashish. 
':-' k muharrib In '1 smuggler. muharrib muxaddaraat 
drug smuggler. 
,:-,~I fitharrab Ivil to be smuggled. -vn taharrub; iva 
mitharrab. 
~ fitharrab min r to get around, evade. 

~ Y,;· 
~ ~ harbid Ivtl to rip to pieces. riI-kalb' harbid 
hiduum-i the dog ripped my clothes to pieces. - vn 
harbada; avalpva miharbid. 
~ ft=1 ritharbid Ivil to be ripped to pieces. - vn 
tiharbiid; iva mitharbid. 
i~ ft= tiharbiida linst nl a ripping. a tearing. 
~,;. 
C~ harag Inl muddle. confusion. harag wi-marag tur-
moil. chaos. 
C:" harrag. harrig Ivil to fool around. clown about. 
bi-yharrag fil-f~1 he turns the classroom into a circus. 
-vn tahriig; ava miharrag. 
11 harrag lala- to overwhelm with noise. shout down. 
harragt" lal-mudarris xalleet-u ma-yilraf-f' ydarris 
I kept interrupting and shouting at the teacher and 
made him unable to teach. 
~::,... muharrig In ·1 clown. 
C~I ritharrag Ivil (impersonal) passive of harrag. 
saalit ma yitharrag lalee ma-yilraf-f' yitkallim 
whenever there is an attempt to shout him down he 
(loses his composure and) can't manage to speak 
coherently. - iva mitharrag. 
J~,; • 
~ 
~ hargil Ivtl to mess up. put into disarray. 
ri(-{abuur maafi mhargil the queue is moving in a dis-
ordered fashion. riI-muwa;;af ig-gidiid hargil if-furl' 
xaali~ the new employee messed up the work complete-
ly. -vn hargala; ava/pva mlhargil. 
~ 
ft=1 rithargillvil to be messed up. be put in disarray. 
-iva mithargil. 
r ~,; • 
r~~ hardim Ivtl to ruin. tear down. destroy. ril.-l.ill.aal 
hardim iI-mabaani the earthquake tore down the build-
ings. -vn hardama; avalpva mihardim. 
r~ft=1 rithardim Ivil to be ruined, be torn down. be 
destroyed. -vn tihardiim; iva mithardim. 
~~.Ji- tihardiima Ipl -aatl instance noun of tihardiim. 
I,;,;. 
:,. harr (u) {coarse] I Ivtl to pass as diarrhoea. harr illi 
kal-u he passed all he had eaten. IIharreet barabra == 
I shat bricks (with fright). 2 Ivil to have diarrhoea. have 
the trots. -vn harr. hararaan; ava haarir; pva mahruur. 
i:" harra linst n, pI -aat! a passing of diarrhoea. II rabu 
harra {coarse] == spineless coward, pants-shitter. 
904 
;I ~ huraar. hiraar Inl {coarse] diarrhoea. squitters. 
;I:" harraar ladjl I allowing a free flow. manxul 
harraar {rur] sieve too coarse to catch the particles that 
should be separated out. 2 cowardly . 
.):,. harrar Ivtl{coarse] to cause to shit (especIally with 
fear). riI-la/Cja harrarit-u lala rooy-u the beating had 
him shitting in his pants. -tahriir; ava miharrar. 
1 ,; ,; • 
:,. hirr: leen iI-hirr tiger-eye (stone). 
I \.1"'; • 
..r ~ haras (i) Ivtl to crush. ri{-{almagi bi-yihris iI-fuul 
the {almiyya maker mashes the broad beans. xuqaar 
mahruus pureed vegetables. -vn hars; ava haaris; pva 
mahruus. 
'-~ harsa I Ipl -aatl instance noun of hars. 
~ 
~ hariisa Inl any of a number of sweet confections 
made with flour. clarified butter. and sugar (also. some-
times. nuts. coconut etc.) . 
..rl:" harraas In pI -aatl roller (especially a road 
roller). 
'-I:" harraasa = harraas. 
..r1J+' mihraas. mihraas In pI mahariisl large pestle 
(especially for large amounts of spices or broad beans). 
-also, a surface upon which the material to be crushed is 
placed. 
..r ft=1 ritharas Ivil to be crushed. ~awabl-i tharasit fil-
baab my fingers were crushed in the door. -iva mithiris. 
..r .,..: 1 rinharas = rithara.l. - iva minhiris. 
1(\.1"';.) 
'-~ harsa <prob Fr herses> Inl (theat] fly light(s). 
'-~ harsa 2 J Inl {path] bilharziasis. 
.;.,; . 
..r ~ haraf (u) Ivtl I 'to scratch (to satisfy an itch). 
Ilharafuu fi-lafara gneeh they touched him for ten 
pounds. - ruhruffi-geeb-ak scratch in your pocket (and 
find something for me). -harafuu harfa they gave him a 
good beating. -haraft-a-ha Cjabl' ma ylabbisuu-ni 
maCj/ab I caught on to it before they could trap me. 
-harafuu-Iu muxx-u they drove him around the bend. 
-harl' lidda wear and tear on tools. -kutr iI-harl' 
y{al/al iI-bala {prov] (much scratching gets rid of man-
ge) any problem can be solved by perseverance. 2 to 
bribe. -vn harf. harf. harafaan; ava haarif; pva 
mahruuf· 
..;. ~ harf Inl {path] ringworm. 

.... 1:,.. harraaja In pi -aatl backscratcher. 
cog of the sac;ya (see PI.E, 4). 
;;,.;;, -*' mahraja In pi -aatl backscratcher. 
..r .Ji I 'i'itharaj/vil passive of haraJ. - iva mithirif· 
..r.Ji1 'i'inharaj = 'i'itharaj. - iva minhirif . 
..r:";1 'i'itharraj/vil to scratch oneself extensively and 
vig?rously. -ava mitharraj. 
r";.;o 
~.;1' harjim Ivtl to cause an injury to (the face or part 
of it). harJimti manaxiir-u I gave him a bloody nose. 
-vn harjama; avalpva miharjim. 
~.Jil 'i'itharjim Ivil passive of harjim. - iva mltharjim. 
";.;0 
J:'" harrac; Ivil I to laugh loudly. ma-tharrac;-Ji 
fid-di&k I la-yismaluu-k don't laugh so loudly lest they 
hear you. 2 to make fun, make a laughing-stock (ofs.o. 
or s.th.). c;aladu yharrac;u las-silt iI-laguuza they went 
on making fun of the old woman. -vn tahriic;; ava 
miharrac;. 
J~I 'i'itharrac; Ivil (impersonal) passive of harrac;. 
muj 'lana IIi yitharrac; lalee I am not one to be laughed 
at. - iva mitharrac;. 
.l.I.;o 
.!l.;1' harak (u) Ivtl to mash. bataatis mahruuka mashed 
potatoes. -vn hark; ava haarik; pva mahruuk. 
.!l.Ji1 'i'itharak Ivil to be mashed. - iva mithirik. 
.!l xl 'i'inharak = 'i'itharak. - iva minhirik. 
r.;o 
~.;1' haram In pi 'i'ahraam, 'i'ahramaatl pyramid. 1I'i'iI-
haram (I) the Pyramids of Guiza. (2) area between 
Guiza Square and the Pyramids. 'i'i&na sakniin fil-
haram we live out near the Pyramids. - 'i'ibn iI-haram 
{obsolJ epithet for an Egyptian. -Iamma I-haram 
yit&arrak min ma{ra&-u when the pyramid is moved 
from its place (i.e .. never). 
<J".;1' harami ladjl pyramidal. 
~* miharram ladjl pyramid-shaped. 
2 r.;o 
4..;1' hirma Ifem adjl old and seedy (of a woman). ya 
'i'ibn il-hirma == you son of a filthy old hag! 
'J.J r .; 0 
'-'yo.;1' hurmoon <Engl> In pi -aatl hormone. 
V""sr.;o 
,-"""",.;1' harmiis In pi haramiisl vertical axle of the main 
1.J,;0 
'-'.;1' hum <Engl horn> In pi -aatl bell (of a wind 
instrument). 
.;0.;0 
.;1'.;1' harhar Ivill {coarseJ to pass diarrhoea, squitter. 
2 to wobble. shake (of flabby flesh). -vn harhara; ava 
miharhar. 
J.u 0 
JJ.;1' harwillvil to walk fast, half run. -vn harwala; ava 
miharwil. 
;U J.;1' harwala Inl quick pace. 
JJ -*' miharwil ladj *1 loose and ill-fitting (of a 
garment). 
"s.;o 
<.S.;1' hara (i) I Ivtl to cause to disintegrate. 'i'iI-yaliyya 
harit iI-huduum boiling wore out the clothes. harit 
iI-leej liI-firaax she crumbled the bread for the chick-
ens.llbis-simm iI-haari == may it do you harm! (said on 
parting with something. especially food, very reluctant-
ly). -liya{-ha hara c;alb-i == her crying tore into my 
heart. -Ilizil fiyyajtiima lamma hara badan-i == he went 
on insulting me till I couldn't bear it any longer. 2 Ivil to 
feel agitated, fume. xallii yihri w-yinkut let him eat his 
heart OUI (with frustration). hara f-badall-u he fumed 
with anger. -vn hary, harayaan, hariyya; ava haari; pva 
mahri. 
"-!.;1' harya Ipl -aatl instance noun of hary. 
<.S.Ji1 'i'ithara Ivil I to disintegrate. 2 to be made to 
disintegrate. - ava/iva mithiri. 
<.S xl 'i'inhara = 'i'ithara. - avaliva minhiri. 
I.J"sJ';o 
,J..J.r-I' hiruwiin <Fr> Inl heroin. 
.)o!1.JJA hurayiin = hiruwiill. 
"s ~ 0 see "s j 0 
~ j 0 
i..t' haza 'I (a) Ivil to behave disdainfully, behave scorn-
fully (towards s.o.). daymall yihza'i' bi-mraat-u 
c;uddaam in-naas he always treats his wife with con-
tempt in public. - vn huz'i', haza 'i'aan; ava haazi'i'. 
j..t' huzu 'i'/adj invarl insignificant, contemptible, open 
to ridicule. 

~jo 
ijloi I'ahzal' lell morelmost insignificant, contemptible 
etc . 
• jjlo huzul'!'a ladj invarl [slangj = huzu!'. 
.iH 
mahza!'a Inl scorn. ridicule. 
ij.. hazza!' Ivtl to belittle. cut down to size. hazza!'it-ni 
f-wis[ in-naas she humiliated me in front of everyone. 
-vn tahzii!,: ava mlhazza!'. 
i":;'" muhazza!' ladj *1 inspiring scorn and contempt. 
raagil muhazza!' fil-bitta kull-a-ha a man looked down 
on by the whole neighbourhood. 
i~1 !,ithazza!' Ivil to be belittled, be cut down to size. 
!,ithazza !'nafil-matfwe were trounced thoroughly in the 
match. - iva mithazza!'. 
i.*-I !,istahza!' Ivil I to assume insignificance (of 
s.0.).2 = haza!'. -vn !,istlhzaa!'; ava mistahza!'. 
yj t 
yl. hazzib Ivtl I to give (s.o. or s.th.) polish or finish. 
hazzib !'axlaaq-ak smarten up your manners! 21 to trim 
(the edges of s.th.), even up. xalil I-mizayyin yihazzib 
jalr-ak jiwayya get the barber to trim your hair a bit! 
- vn tahziib: ava mihazzib. 
y-4- muhazzab ladj *1 decent. respectable. raagil 
muhazzab a decent man. mUlamla muhazzaba polite 
treatment. 
y.if:1 !,ithazzib Ivil passive of hazzib. - iva mithazzib. 
Jjt 
)jIo hizaar Inl frivolity, fooling around. !'ij-julfl' mij 
hizaar work is no occasion for fooling around. 
.)j.. hazzar Ivil to be frivolous, fool around. da-bna 
b-nidbak malaakl w-bl-nhazzar we are just having a 
laugh with you and joking around. - ava mlhazzar. 
jjt 
j.. hazz (i) Ivtl I to ~hake. hazz' raas-u he shook his 
head. b-ahizz' nafs-i lal-kursi I rock myself in the 
chair. II hazz' wis[-(u) to belly-dance. -hizz' [uul-ak 
tabus] get a move on! -hizz' ya wizz ... shake it baby! 
- bi-yhizz-i-Iu I-qawuuq he doffs his cap to him (with 
excessive deference). 2 to shock. upset. !'il-xabar da 
hazz-i-na the news shook us. 3 to sift (grain). -vn hazz, 
hazazaan: ava haaziz: pva mahzuuz. 
.j.. hazza linst n. pI -aall a shake. a tremor. hazzaat 
!'art[iyya earth tremors. 
jJH mahzuuz ladj *1 shaken. shaky. IIda raagil 
mahzuuz fi-JUlfl-u ... he is a failure in his work. -muxx-u 
mahzuuz he's nutty! 
oj IjIo hizaaza Inl I chaff. 2 that which remains in a 
sieve after sifting. 
906 
jlj.. hazzaaz ladjl I shaking. swaying. kursi hazzaaz 
rocking chair. bamaam hazzaaz pouter pigeon. - In 
pI -aatl2 vibrator.llhazzaaz xar~aana [eonstr] cement 
mixer. 3 springboard. 
~I !,ithazz Ivil to be shaken. tremble. markaZ-1 thazz 
my position was shaken. ma-thazzit-lii-J jalra I didn't 
turn a hair. -avaliva mtthazz. 
1:1 !,inhazz = !,ithazz. -ava/iva minhazz. 
~I !,ihtazz f Ivil to shake. vibrate. II !,ihtazz I min il-
badsa he was shaken up by the accident. -vn !,ihtizaaz; 
ava mihtazz, muhtazz. 
IJjt 
JjIo hazal l (I) Ivtl to cause to lose weight. make lean. 
layaa-ha I-muzmin hazal-ha her chronic illness made 
her thin. -vn huzaa.l, hazalaan; ava haazil: pva 
mahzuul. 
JjIo hazarl Inl weakness, debility. 
JljIo huzaal Inl weakness. debility. 
oJ'ijlo hazlaan ladj *1 weak, debilitated. 
'y"jIo haziil f = hazlaan. 
J,;,rl !,ithazal Ivil to lose weight, be made or become 
lean or emaciated. lIyalni ba-tithizil law gibt.,I-!'akl' 
I-nafs-ak do you think it would hurt you if you were to 
get your own food! - avaliva mithlzil. 
J,;,rl !'inhazal = !'ithaza/. - avaliva mmhizil. 
lJjt 
JjIo hazl Inl fun. joking. jesting. di mas!'ala gadd' 
wi-kfayaa-k hazl' fiiha ... stop making fun ofthiscase. it 
is a serious one! 
JjIo hazli ladjl farCical. comical. masrablyya hazliyya a 
farce, farcical play . 
..::.J jIo hazulat linterjl what a pass things have come to! 
now I've seen it all! as in w-allaahl hazulat lamma 
bat[rit-ak baqeet tikallim-m bif-Jakl-i-da things have 
reached a fine Mate when you come and speak to me 
like that! 
;;J H 
mahzala In pI mahaaZIl! farce, farcical situation. 
rjt 
r jIo hazam (i) Ivtl to defeat. hazamuu-na fil-matf they 
defeated us in the match.llhaazim i1-/azzaal death. -vn 
hazm, hazamaan; ava haazim: pva mahzuum. 
~jIo haziima In pI hazaayiml defeat. roob i1-haziima 
defeatism. 
rxl !,ithazam Ivil to be defeated. -iva mithizim. 
rxl !,inhazam = !,ithazam. -iva minhizim. 
IS"lxl !,inhizaamiT ladj °1 defeatist. 

j 0 j 0 
jA jA hazhiz Ivtl to shake. bi-thazhiz iI-[ayyil fi-lJigr-a-
ha she dandles the baby on her lap. -vn hazhaza; aval 
pva mihazhiz. 
jAjil rithazhiz Ivil to be shaken, shake or tremble. 
m-[ayyil yilJibb i yithazhiz the child likes to be dandled. 
mafya tithazhiz she wiggle~ as she walks. bi-yithazhiz 
[ak-kursi he rocks back and forth in the chair. - avaliva 
mithazhiz. 
IoSjo 
1S.a haza (i) Ivil to rave, talk deliriously. -vn 
hazayaan; ava haazi. 
IJ" IJ" 0 
..;.... hass (i) Ivil I to hiss. 2 to shut up, comply with a 
command to shut up. saa[it ma raliul-/ak huss i thiss i 
eawwaali as soon as I tell you to shut up, you shut up! 
IIma-fii-fbass i wa/a Izass "" shut up yourself! (retort to 
one who says huss). -vn hass, Izasasaan; ava haasis. 
..;.... huss linterjl shush! hush! 
..;.... hiss linterjl whoa! (to stop, slow down, or calm an 
animal). 
I 
• 
• 
IJ" IJ" 0 
.j... haff' (i) Ivtl to drive away (flies or birds). hiff 
id-dibbaan min [ala wiff-ak shoo the 'fIies off your face! 
lila yhiff wala yniff "" he's good for nothing, he can't do 
a,?ything. -vn haff, hafafaan; ava haafif; pva mahfuuf. 
J..A hiff linterjl I shoo! (said when driving off flies or 
b!rds).2 whoa! (to stop, slow down or calm an animal). 
.rf=1 rithaff Ivil to be driven away (of flies or birds). 
-!va mithaff. 
.rf=1 rinhaff = rithaff. - iva minhaff. 
1 
• 
• 
IJ" IJ" 0 
~ 
haff" ladj °1 delicate, fragile. m-[acf.mi bta[-ha 
lzaJf its bones are fragile. 
.!l~o 
..!.l....e. hiffik: hiffik hiffik interjection indicating plea-
su~e in the presence of dancing, revelry or the like . 
..!.l....e. haffik Ivtl to dandle (a child). -vn tahfiik; avalpva 
mi~affik . 
.!.l....f.1 rithaffik Ivil to be dandled (of a child). -iva 
mithaffik. 
r ~ 
0 
~ 
lA haafim Iprop nl male given name. rumm" haafim 
epithet of Sayyida Zaynab. 
907 
~ 
haffim f Ivtl to smash, crush. -vn tahfiim; avalpva 
milzaffim. 
~I rithaffim f Ivil to be smashed, be crushed. -vn 
tahaffum f; iva mithaffim. 
rU#o 
~ 
hacf.am (i) Ivtl to digest. mi[dit-i mif liadra tihcf.im 
iI-rakl id-dasim my stomach cannot digest rich food. 
hacf.am id-dars he inwardly digested the lesson, he took 
the lesson to heart. II ma-nilidarp nihcf.im iI-mudiir we 
can't stomach the director. - rir-raagil da haacf.im lJalili-i 
that man has gobbled up my rights. - vn Izacf.m; ava 
haacf.im; pva mahcf.uum. 
~I rithacf.am Ivil to be digested. II rir-raagil da ma-
yitlzicf.im-f that man is insufferable. - iva mithicf.im . 
~I rinlzacf.am = ritlzacf.am. -iva minlzicf.im. 
~ 
hacf.cf.am Ivtl to cause to digest. rid-dawa da 
yhacf.cf.am iI-rakl this medicine aids digestion of food. 
-a.va mihacf.cf.am. 
,......... mulzacf.cf.im In pi -aat, -aatl digestive . 
pU#o 
-i.."...lA hacf.uuma In pi hawacf.iiml large chunk (of 
meat). - also hancf.uuma. 
JbO 
~ 
ha[[al Ivil to be slow and weak, be slack and indis-
ciplined. bi-ylza[[al fi-mafyit-u he ambles awkwardly 
along. bi-yha[[al fi-kalaam-u he rambles on when he 
talks. miha[[al fi-libs-u sloppy in his dress. -vn taheiil; 
ava milza[[al . 
-loSrt o 
1J".f.<-o""'" hirumeenus <Gr hegoumenos> Inl [ehr} 
hegumen. - also rirumeenus. 
~ I...; 0 
\';lilA havaana, havaana <Fr Izavane> ladj invarl light 
brown . 
."';0 see loS"'; 0 
.:;.. ...; 0 
..:;..Lt. hifit (a) Ivil to become weak or exhausted (from 
hunger or the like). rana hfilli mig-guu[ I felt spent 
from hunger. -vn hafataan; ava haftaan. 
.;,\.:;.A.to haftaan ladj *1 weak, spent, exhausted, faint 
(fr,?m hunger), starved. 
..:;..Lt. haffit I Ivtl to make weak or exhausted. 

f'iniyaam it-tawii/ bi-yhaffit-ni long fasting exhausts 
me. 2/v11 = hI/it. -vn tahfllt; avalpva mihaffit . 
..;:..j1.f:1 f'ithaafit Ivil to flock, crowd, rush together. 
f'if-Jubbaan bi-yithaftu lala s-sinima the kids fall over 
one another to get into the cinema. - ava mithaafit. 
- I j,...;, 
('!l.Ia.u. haftaayim <Engl> Inll half-time (in a match). 
2 (also taayim) half (in a match). f'i/-haftaayim i/-
f'awwalaani the first half. 
I ...; ...; , 
:.... haff (i) Ivil I to blow past, pass quickly by. 
f'iI-hawa haff a gust of wind came. haffit laleena riil:Jit 
kabaab we caught a whiff of kebab. - Ivtl 2 to 
appropriate quickly for oneself. Izaff i/-qirfeen wi-mifi 
he snaffled the money and went off. nizlu haff' fil-f'akl 
they set upon the food greedily. II haffeet mifwaar wi-
rgilt I popped out on an errand and came back. 
- haffeena sandawitfeen fis-sikka we snatched a couple 
of sandwiches on the way. -haff-i-Iu sal teen fil-maktab 
he snatched a couple of hours in the office. 3 to give a 
quick going-over to. haffit i/- f'oO(ia she gave the room a 
quick sweep round. haffeet daqn-i wiff I gave myself a 
quick once-over with the razor. 4 to assail with, set 
upon with. haff-i-ni qalam he up and slapped me. 
haffeet-u f'inzaar I gave him a warning. -vn haff, 
hafafaan; ava haafif; pva mahfuuf. 
11 nifs-(u) haffit-(u) or mazaag-(u) haff-(u) to have a 
sudden yen or a desire. nifs-i haffit-ni 
f'aruul:J 
f'iskindiriyya I had a whim to go to Alexandria. 
nifs-a-ha haffit-ha lala kaasit dandurma she had a sud-
den yen for a dish of ice cream. -haff" lala to make 
(s.o.) nostalgic. f'iI-balad haffit lalayya I became nos-
talgic for my home town. 
:...;,.,. haffa Ipl -aatl instance noun of haff. IIga/-1i haffa 
I was taken by a (crazy) whim. -da raagil haffa he is a 
man of odd mentality. 
...;".;.... mahfuuf ladj • and pi mahafiifl touched in the 
head, odd. 
:....i f'ahaff lell morelmost touched in the head or odd. 
~I f'ithaff Ivil passive of haff. II f'ithaff' J-muxx-u he 
became slightly touched. he went a bit strange. - iva 
mithaff. 
2 ...; ...; 0 
:.... hufflinterj/l sound of blowing out a fire or cooling 
off a hot object. qaal huff' (afa I-Iamba he puffed out 
the lamp. 2 expletive expressing briefness. hUff' tilil 
908 
in-nahaar and in as short a time as it would take to say 
huff, tltt.: day dawned! 
J"'; 0 
..;.0.. hafaq ladj invarl insignificant, of no worth or sub-
stance. f'abadan ma-tsammi-hum-j' riggaala - dool 
hafaq never call them men, they're trash! 
.;, ...; 0 see .;, I ...; 0 : havaana, havaana 
~ 
hajhif, hajhaf Ivil to billow. f'iI-hawa b-yxalli 
l-fustaan yihajhifthe wind makes the dress billow out. 
falr-a-ha 1-l:Jariir bi-yhajhif lala wiff-a-ha her silken 
hair wafts about her face. -vn hajhafa; ava mihajhif. 
...;~ hijhaaf ladjl thin and fine. fifoon hijhaaffilmy 
chiffon. 
J"';o 
;".... hafwa f In pi hafawaatl slip, error. samil:J-ni di kat 
hafwa minni yu~b·lanni forgive me, it was a mistake 
I made unwillingly. 
IS ...; , 
~ 
hafiyya Imasc and fern adj, pi hafaayal insignifi-
cant, light-weight (of people). f'axuu mul:Jtaram wi-Iii 
qiima laakin huwwa hafiyya his brother is respected and 
has some position in society, whereas he himself is a 
nobody. 
~I f'istahfa Ivtll to consider worthless and insigni-
ficant, belittle. 2 to select (s.o.) for worthlessness. 
f'istahfit laha raagi! wi-gawwizit-u f'uxt-a-ha I-fasdaana 
she found a submissive little nobody and got him to 
marry her flighty sister. - ava mistahfi. 
J J 0 
:;... haqq (u) Ivil to slouch, skulk, slink. maafi yhuqq 
slouching along. 
kutr' haqq-u l:Jawaleeha 
xalla 
k-kalaam yiktar laleeha his hanging around her so 
much set people's tongues wagging about her. -vn 
haqq; ava haaqiq. 
, ~ .!l 0 see '..i.!l' 0 : hakaza 
t:'o 
~ 
hakkal Ivil to grow old and feeble. hiyya 
bi-tfat/Aal taaxud ir-raagi! i!-mlhakkal da lafaan 
fuluus-u she would rather marry this decrepit old man 

because of his money. ril-larabiyya hakkalit the car 
has become very old and dilapidated. -vn tahkiil; ava 
mihakkal· 
.!l.!l. 
.ili. hakk (u) Ivil to stagger from weakness. l:J~aan 
lalbaan maaJi yhukk a sick horse barely able to stagger 
along. ~abiyya tliif riuaay mala laguuz yihukk how 
can a young girl live with a decrepit old man? -vn hakk; 
ava haakik. 
r .!l • 
~I rithakkim f Ivil to behave scornfully (towards 
S.o. or s.th.), pour ridicule (upon s.o. or s.th.). -vn 
tahakkum: ava mithakkim. 
J. 
jA hal interrogative particle. hal ik-kalam-da ~al:Jiil:J is 
that true? hal iI-walad da l:Ja-yingal:J will this boy suc-
ceed? laazim lifuuf hal humma naas kuwayyisiin walla 
lar you must find out whether or not they are good 
people. layziin nilraf hal huwwa l:Ja-yUgi walla lar we 
want to know whether he is coming or not. ya hal tara 
I wonder. 
I Y J. 
...,...lA hilb In pI hilfba. rahlaabl I grapnel anchor. 
2 meat hook . 
...,...lA hallib Ivtl to pick up (money) from here and there 
in.a dishonest way. -vn tahliib; ava mihallib. 
..,...If:1 rithallib Ivil passive of hallib. - iva mithallib. 
2 Y J. 
(~. mahallabiyya Inl blancmange (often flavoured 
with vanilla or rose water). -lad jectivallyl bint i 
mhallabiyya a dish of a girl. 
,?..JyJ. 
.::..,.loo halbatt <perh T helbet from Ar ral-batt> ladvl 
probably, possibly. 'liI-rutubiis mif bayin-Iu rasar -
halbatti l:Ja-nuljaf liI-ma'lfrib there's no sign of the bus; 
we may well have to stand here till sunset. mif raaqi 
yxall~ iI-waralj - halbatti ykuun layiz-ni 'lana ralmil-u 
he's not willing to finish off the papers; he probably 
wants me to do them. 
..J J. 
..:..lA halt <Engl> In pI -atlll {obsol] halt, small railway 
station. 
909 
IIJ"J. 
..,..Lo hals In/l wenching, debauchery. 2 (kalaam) hals 
el1!pty talk, nonsense . 
..r~ hallaas In " and pI hallaasal I libertine, profli-
ga~e. 2 braggart . 
..,..Lo hallis Ivil I to go wenching, go in search of de-
bauchery. 2 to talk nonsense. -vn tahliis; ava mihal/is. 
JI....4- mihallisaati In pI -yya/libertine, profligate. 
1 IJ" J. see IJ".J J J • : hal/uus 
..;. J. see IJ".J J J • : halluuJ 
r~ J. 
~ 
halqam/vi/l to mumble, mutter. 2 to talk drivel, 
talk nonsense. - Ivt/3 to appropriate for oneself, bag. 
rayy i mabla'lf yiigi {araf-u yhalqam-u any sum of money 
that comes his way he snaffles. -vn halqama; ava 
mihalqam. 
rl..4.lA hilqaam lad j pI halaqUm, hilqaamal I given to 
senseless talk. ma-tismal-Iuu-j kalaam da {uullUmr-u 
hilqaam don't listen to him - he always talks nonsense. 
2 evasive, slippery. 
..J.JJJ. 
.::.,a. halfuut ladj pI halafiitl worthless. walad halfuut 
a feckless youth. 
l.!l J. 
.ill.. hilik (a) lvi/to be exhausted, be consumed. hilikti 
mif-ju'lflthe work has worn me out. Ilru'lfl it-tamrUq da 
halaak nursing is hell! -vn halaak; ava halkaan. 
.ill.. halak (i) Ivtl to exhaust, consume. ril-l:Juzn i halak-
ha sorrow has worn her out. halak iI-filuus kull-a-ha he 
spent every penny of the money. -vn halk. halakaan. 
halaak; ava haalik; pva mahluuk. 
.:,1Sle. halkaan ladj "I spent, exhausted, worn out, 
con~umed . 
..!lIt. haalik I ladj "I {lsI] mortal. k,,!lIi Jeer haalik rilla 
wagh allaah everything is transient except for God.llya 
haalik you infidel! -min haalik Ii-maalik from bad to 
worse. 2 Icoll nl (industrial) waste . 
.!lp haluue = haluuki. 
~ p haluuki In pI -yya. halukiyyiinl squanderer, ex-
travagant spender. 
..!lI~ mahaalik Ipl nl fatal calamities, death-bringing 
disasters. ya munaggi min iI-mahaalik 0 Rescuer from 
death! (invocation uttered on witnessing an accident or 
the like). 

~Jo 
.ill.f:1 fithalak Ivil to be or become exhausted. - avaliva 
mithilik . 
.iliA hallik Ivtl to exhaust, consume utterly. hallik-na 
mid-dil}k he has almost killed us with laughter. - avaliva 
mihallik. 
.ill.f:1 fithallik Ivil to be exhausted, be utterly con-
sumed. - iva mithallik. 
~I fistahlik, fistahlak Ivtl 1 to consume, use up. 
bi-nistahlik Itneen {inn' zeet fil-yoom we consume two 
tons of oil per day. 2 [finan[ to amortize (a debt etc.). 
-vn fistihlaak; avalpva mistahlik; pva mustahlak. 
.)'')4.:;...1 fistihlaaki ladjl pertaining to consumption. 
gamciyyaat istihlakiyya consumer co-operatives. 
4-- mustahilk In *1 consumer. 
4-- mustahlak ladjl not fit for use, used up. 
carabiyya 
mustahlaka 
worn-out 
car. 
sagaayir 
mustahlaka [joe] lousy cigarettes. 
2..!l J. 
.!l)l.I. haluuk 2 Icoll nl {bot] broom-rape, a weed para-
site on various crops (especially broad beans and 
tomatoes). 
•. J J. 
jA hall (i) Ivil to appear, reach its season, start. 
fiJ-Jahr illi yhill the commg month. fil-ba{[iix hallit 
bafayr-u the early-ripened melons started appearing 
(on the market). saacit ma thill' thill il-m~aayib 
macaak disasters befall (us) as soon as you show up. 
II hall' hlaal-ak ya ramaqaan welcome, 0 month of 
Ramadan! -hall' hlaal-ak (or nuur-ak) your crescent 
(or light) has appeared! (welcoming someone after a 
long absence). -vn halalaan; ava haalil. 
J)\o. hilaal In pi fahillal 1 crescent moon. 2 crescent 
(shape). fil-hilaal il-fal}mar the Red Crescent. 3 bani 
hilaal the Beni Hila!, a North African Arab tribe, being 
the tribe of Abu Zayd el-Hilali. 
J)\o. hilaali lad jl 1 pertaining to the crescent moon. 
fahr' hlaali a lunar month. 2 crescent-shaped. fatl}a 
hilaliyya a crescent-like aperture. 3 pertaining to bani 
hilaal. fabu zeed il-hilaali warrior hero of a folk epic. 
fis-siira I-hilaliyya the folk epic of which Abu Zayd 
el-Hilali is the hero. 
4')1.1.1 ril-hilaliyya Icoll nl the people of the tribe of 
Beni Hilal. 
J+;-I fistahall Ivtl to begin, start. fistahall' xu{bit-u 
biJ-Jicr he started his speech with poetry. -vn fistihlaal; 
ava mistahall. 
J+;-. mustahall Inl beginning, start, introduction. 
kaan mustahtir fi-mustahall' fabaab-u w-dilwaqti baqa 
910 
raagil masfuul he was reckless in his early youth, but 
now he has become a man of responsibility. 
2 ~ J • 
:..l.,.IJ. hulleela In pi -aatl scene, row. camalit-Ii hulllll!la 
she made a scene with me . 
;;J ~ halluula = hulleela. 
J.Lo. hallillvil 1 [lsi] to say la rilaaha flila llaah. 2 to 
cheer, vociferate in approval. bacd' ma 
xalla~1l 
il-kubleeh In-naas kull-a-ha halllilt when she finished 
the verse. everyone broke into a storm of applause. 3 to 
make a scene, kick up a row. balaaf tuqcud tihalill 
fal}san tilimm" caleena n-naas don't go on making a 
scene or everyone will gather around us. -vn tahliil; ava 
mihallil. 
Jl.r:1 fithallil Ivil 1 to be delighted, rejoice, light up 
(with joy). bi-mugarrad mafafit-u wiJf-a-ha thallil bil-
faral} as soon as she saw him, her face beamed with 
delight. 2 (impersonal) passive of hallil. yaama 
thallil-Iu lamma kaan rayyis caleehum wi-dilwaqti tnasa 
how much he was cheered when he was their boss, now 
he's forgotten! - vn tahallul; avaliva mithallil . 
J J J • 
)i.. halla 2 linterjl how wonderful! halla halla cal-gadd' 
wil-gadd' halla halla calee three cheers for seriousness! 
(expression of appreciation of, and exhortation to, 
seriousness) . 
4 J J. see • J • : halla I 
..,.~JJ. 
..rP halluus (also halluuj) <Copt> Inl 1 type of 
pondweed. 2 Icoll nl cobwebs. 
u J. 
;.u. halumma ladj inyarl very abundant, very numer-
ous. filuus halumma masses of money. naas halumma 
masses of people. II wi-halumma garra and so on, et 
cetera. 
~.;, J • 
I~~.,. hulanda Iprop nl Holland. 
...s~~.,. hulandi 1 ladj *1 Dutch.lIsamn' hulandi cook-
ing fat made from a mixture of animal and vegetable 
fats. 2 In *1 a Dutchman. 3 In. no pll the Dutch 
language. 
J • J • 
» halhil Ivtl 1 to make tattered, wear out. leeh 

halhilt il-qami~ kida why have you made your shirt so 
ragged? 2 to abuse severely. misikt-u halhilt-u I gave 
him a piece of my mind. -vn halhala; avalpva mihalhil. 
~ -*" halhuula In pi halahiill tattered garment. 
~ 
hulheela = halhuula. 
J+.,lA hilihli ladj invarl slapdash. juyli hlihli slapdash 
work. -ladverbially! laayiJ hilihli he lives chaotically. 
J.f.Lf:1 rithalhil Ivil I to become or be made tattered. 
huduum-u thalhilit his garments wore out. 2 to be 
abused, be given a dressing-down. - avaliva mithalhil. 
IJ"JJ. 
..rP halwis Ivil to suffer from delirium or hallucina-
tions. w-ana qaayim min il-bing i kunti b-ahalwis as 
I was coming out of the anaesthetic I was hallucinating. 
-vn halwasa; ava mihalwis. 
.... p halwasa Inl hallucination, delirium. l:Jubuub il-
halwasa hallucinatory drugs. 
-.!.l ~ J. 
.fo.';)"A hilyukubtar (also tayyaara hilyukubtar) 
<Engl> In pi -aatl helicopter. 
.!.l Yr. 
~ 
hambak <poss Engl humbug> Ivil to make a 
fulsome and false show (of servility, in boasting etc.). 
hambaka laleena w-baldeen fajuuj we get endless 
humbug - and then nothing. - vn hambaka; ava 
mihambak. 
.!.l~ himbaak In pi hambakiyyal hypocritical flatterer 
or braggart. 
[. r • 
~ 
hamagi ladj pi hamagl uncouth, barbaric. 
rin-naas illi fooq hamag the people upstairs are 
savages. 
4.- hamagiyya Inl disorderliness. laal.im tisiib-ak 
min l:Jaalit il-hamagiyya iii nta laayiJ biiha you must put 
an end to this disorderly way of life you are leading. 
~ r • 
.)J> himid (a) Ivil to become exhausted, become spent. 
rana hmidt' min kutr iJ-Juyl I felt worn out from so 
much work. rin-naar himdit the fire died down. 
II rihmad be quiet! shut up! -vn humulld, hamadaan; ava 
hamdaan. 
.)J> hamad (i) Ivtl to hurl down. misik iJ-janta 
w-hamad-ha lal- rarc[ he seized the bag and hurled it to 
the ground. -vn hamadaan; ava haamid; pva 
mahmuud. 
911 
..-..rl rithamad Ivil I to be hurled down. 2 to become 
exhausted or spent. - ava/iva mithimid. 
.A.il rinhamad = rithamad. -ava/iva minhimid. 
;.,. hammid Ivtl to exhaust, debilitate. 
gism-i 
mhammid my body is exhausted. -vn tahmiid; ava/pva 
mihammid. 
~I rithammid Ivil to become exhausted, become de-
bilitated. - ava mithammid. 
.) r • 
.r'" hamr ladj invarl {non-Cairene{ made of a certain 
fine heat-resistant type of clay (of cooking-vessels etc.) . 
Jr· 
:r" hamal. t (i) Ivtl I to spur (a horse). 2 to write the 
haml.a over (a letter). 3 to enunciate (a word) with a 
glottal stop instead of a vowel. -vn haml.; ava haamil.; 
pva mahmuul.. 
:r" haml. Inl backbitting, malicious gossiping. nil.il 
haml. i (w-Iaml. i) f-sumlit-ha he attacked her reputa-
tion with a vengeance. 
i:r" haml.a In pi -aatl I instance noun of haml.. 
2 glottal stop. 3 written sign for a glottal stop. II kaanit 
haml.it il-Wl¥li benathum she was the connecting link 
between them. 
.1.,..... mahmuul. In pi mahamiil.l spur. 
.14- muhmaal., mihmaal. = mahmuul.. see further 
under j r • r 
r-;:I rithamal. Ivil passive of hamal.. - iva mithimil. . 
r-;:I rinhamal. = rithamal.. -iva minhimil.. 
IJ" r • 
...rJ' hamas (i) Ivil to whisper. hamas fi-widn-i he whis-
pered in my ear. -vn hams; ava haamis; pvamahmuus. 
L.Io hamsa linst n, pi -aatl I a whisper. 2 a brief mo-
ment. ristannaa-ni miJ l:J-aYiib hamsa wait for me, 
I won't be a moment. 
....,-.;:1 rithamas Ivil (impersonal) passive of hamas. 
yaama rayy i ktiir bi-yithimis fi-wdaan-i lala n-naas how 
much gossip about other people has been whispered in 
my ears! - iva mithimis. 
....,-.;:1 rinhamas = rithamas. 
~I rithammis Ivil to whisper together. rintu 
bi-thammisu lala reeh what are you all whispering 
about? - ava mithammis . 
..,...1.f:1 rithaamis = rithammis. -ava mithaamis . 
I 
• 
IJ" r • 
...,:..1. haamiJ In pi hawaamiJI margin.llxalli l-majruul 

da tal-haamif dilwaljti w-baldeen nibbas:u let's leave 
this project aside for the time being; we'll discuss it 
later. -siib-ak minnu da raagillal-haamif never mind 
him, he's nobody! 
~lA haamifiT ladjl marginal. radwaar haamifiyya 
bit parts . 
..;:.. hammif Ivtl to make notes in the margin(s) of (a 
book or the like). hammift ik-kitaab kull-u I wrote 
no~es in the margins through the whole book. -vn 
tahmiif; avalpva mihammif. 
~I rithammif Ivil 
passive 
of liammif. 
- iva 
mithammif· 
2 
• 
..,.. r 0 
...;....t' hamaf (i, u) Ivtl [slang] to gobble up, eat in a 
hurry. hamaf il-yadwa f-sawaani w-ljaal ma-fii-f baaga 
taani he wolfed down the food and asked for more! 
IIhamafuu-ni lallja suxna they gave me a good hiding. 
-vn hamf, hamafaan; ava haamif; pva mahmuuf. 
..;...;1 rithamaflvil [slang] to be bitten, to be eaten up 
with quick bites. - iva mithimif. 
~ 
I rinhamaf = rithamaf. 
3 ~ r 0 see ";.J i 0 : hamuuj 
J"; r 0 
..s.r-'" hamfari ladj pI -yyal I huge, colossal. raagil 
hamfari a gigantic man. 2 generous and expansive . 
• 
.k r 0 
1.JO hamal (u) Ivtl to guzzle down (soft or semi-liquid 
food). nizil fil-manga ham( he guzzled down the man-
goes. -vn ham(; ava haami(; pva mahmuu(. 
J:.....rl rithama( Ivil to be guzzled down. - iva mithimi(. 
.Ja:,. hamma( Ivtl to soften. 
l'il- rawwil tittakka 
lal-bitingaana wi-thamma(-ha first you press the egg-
plant a'nd soften it. -vn tahmli(; avalpva mihamma(. 
J..:.rl rithamma( Ivil to become or be made soft. 
!'iI-martaba thamma(it the mattress became floppy. 
- avaliva mithamma(. 
.!l r 0 
d,A. hamak (u) Ivtl to mash, puree (vegetables etc.). 
-vn hamk; ava haamik; pva mahmuuk. 
.!l..,..... mahmuuk ladj *1 absorbed, deeply involved. 
mahmuuk lal-faaqi busy doing nothing. 
d.f:1 rithamak Ivil to be mashed, be pureed (ofveget-
ables, etc.). - iva mithimik. 
d.f:1 rinhamak 
Ivil 
It to 
become 
engrossed. 
minhimik fi-fUyl-u absorbed in his work. 2 to be 
912 
mashed, be pureed. -vn rinhimaak; ava munhamik; 
ava/iva minhimik. 
Jro 
J.a hamal (i) = rahmal. -vn haml, hamalaan; ava 
haamil; pva mahmuul. 
J..f:1 rithamal Ivil to be neglected. baalit il-mariiq 
saarit li-rinnu thamal mudda {Wiila the patient got 
worse because he was neglected for a long time. - iva 
mithimil. 
J...rl rinhamal = rithamal. - iva minhimil. 
s,.. hammil I Ivtl to neglect. kaanit magbuura lala 
rinnaha thammil goz-ha lafaan xaa(ir fuyl-a-ha she was 
forced to neglect her husband because of her work . 
2/vil to be negligent al)d careless. bizint' lamma 
fuft-a-ha mhammila f-nafs-a-ha bald' (alalj-ha I felt 
sad to see her neglecting herself after her divorce. -vn 
tahmiil; ava/pva mihammil. 
hi rithammillvil to be neglected. rayy' garb' riza 
thammillurqa lit-tasammum any wound. if neglected. 
is liable to become infected. - iva mithammil. 
J.ai rahmal Ivtl to neglect. rahmalit wagib-ha she neg-
lected her duty. huwwa muhmil wi-bi-yti¥laq fuyl-u 
he's negligent and careless in his work. -vn rihmaal; 
ava muhmil; pva muhmal. 
..::..~ muhmalaat' Ipl nl waste. sallit muhmalaat 
wastepaper basket. 
I r r 0 
;.. hamm I (i) I Ivtl to be of interest to, concern. 
ma-thimm '-nii-f il-filuus money doesn't interest me. 
rilli yhimm-i-ni dilwaljti l-mustaljbal what concerns me 
now is the future. wala yhimm-ak don't bother about it, 
don't let it worry you! rilli ma-yhimm-ak wa~~i lalee 
gooz rumm-ak [prov] you may entrust to the care of 
your stepfather (only) things you don't care too much 
about. 2/vil to step up the pace. himmu f-fuyl-u-ku 
move the work! -vn' himma, hamamaan; ava haamm. 
haamim; pva mahmuum. 
11 hamm' bi-' to be about to (do s.th.). hammu bir-
rabiil they were about to set off. 
~ himma Inll zeal, spirit. warrii-ni himmit-ikfil-beet 
show me how well you can do in the house. II rabu 
himma epithet for an energetic man. - rilmil-lak 
himma get a move on! hurry up! put some guts into it! 
2 Ipl himaml strenuous effort (to be helpful to others). 
naas ra~baab himam helpful people. 
i"""" mahmuum ladj *1 worried. 
;.. hamm 2 In pI humuuml worry, concern, anxiety. 
hamm' w-yamm worry and gloom, toil and trouble. 

hamm-ak lala ba(n-ak all you care about is your belly. 
IIgaa-k hamm may worry beset you! - ratqal mil-hamm· 
lal-qalb intolerable. - raktar min (or zayy) il-hamm· 
lal-qalb very numerous. -rittiina bil-hamm i wil-hamm i 
mijraat/J (biina) {proll] we put ourselves out but despite 
that we cannot please (said, e.g., when one offers to 
-marry an ugly girl, and is refused). 
;"i rahamm leIl morelmost important. 
~i rahammiyya Inl importance, significance. 
it... humaam ladj "I generous in performing services 
for others, helpful. 
r~ mahaamm Ipl nl (official) duties, tasks. 
~ muhimm l/adj *1 important. masrala muhimma 
an important matter. II ril-muhimm the point is ... , to 
get to the point .... -xallii-na fil-muhimm let us concen-
trate on what matters. 
~ 
muhimma In pI -aatl task, job. 
r~-~arraaf 
muhimmit-u rinnu ywaual il-murattabaat the cashier's 
job is to hand out the salaries . 
..::..~ muhimmaat Ipl nl equipment, supplies. 
,:a I rihtamm Ivil to take an interest, be concerned. 
ril-mudiir fax~iyyan bi-yihtamm i biina the director 
himself takes an interest in us. laazim tihtamm i b-
sinaan-ak you must take care of your teeth. - vn 
rihtimaam; ava mihtamm, muhtamm. 
1 U 0 
;.. hamm <Copt> (children] 1 Inl food. 2 linterjl eat! 
- also ramm, mam. 
I r r 0 see I J J 0 : humma 
r 0 r 0 
r+-" hamham, hamhim Ivil to mutter, mumble. - vn 
hamhama; ava mihamham, mihamhim. 
..; J r 0 
..r..,..1A hamuuf Icoll nl gnat(s), midge(s). 
4-..,..1A hamuufa lunit n, pI -aatl a gnat, a midge. 
~L....,..IA hamufaaya = hamuufa. 
iJJl.Sr o 
Jy.t... hamayooni <P humdyun> lladvl haphazard-
ly, arbitrarily. ma-b-tit!Ja((i-j kida hamayooni it is not 
put in just any old way. 2 Inl ornate style of calligraphy. 
.iJo see l.SiJo 
LiJ 0 
ta hina ladv/ here. talaala hina come here! baqa fii 
913 
min hina mafaakil kitiir from that point there were lots 
of problems. min hina w-raay.i!J from now on. IIfiqilti 
waraa min hina l-hina (1) I followed him around every-
where. (2) I kept on trying to persuade him in every 
possible way. - wi-min hina l-hina after a lot of effort, 
after a lot of discussion, as in qaladti rafa~il wi-min 
hina l-hina x~am lafara saay I kept on bargaining and 
after a lot of talk he came down ten piastres. -hina walla 
hina somewhere, as in !Ja-tlaaqi fuyl i hina walla hina 
you'll find work sOll1ewhere. - wala huwwa hina he 
doesn't give a damn, he couldn't care less. -la hina wala 
hnaak of no importance, neither here nor there. 
-yaama hina (w-)yaama hinaak see yaama. 
11 min hina wi-... (min hina) Icorrel conjl as soon as, the 
moment that, as in wi§ilna min hina w-(abb i min hina no 
sooner had we arrived than he dropped in, raa!J ij-juyli 
min hina w-nizilt a las-suuq min hina the moment he 
went to work, I went shopping. 
ta huna ladv/: na!Jnu huna (phrase.used by youths in 
trying to attract the attention of girls on the street). 
na!Jnu huna ya sitt phrase used by a husband to his wife, 
implying that she ignores his authority. 
.!lliJo 
.!.Ita hinaak 1 ladvl there. ruu!J hinaak go there! yaama 
hina (w-)yaama hnaak see yaama. la hina wala hnaak 
see hina. 2t Ipart! there is, there are. riza kaan hinaak 
!Jaaga tzallal-ak ... if there's anything that annoys you 
. ... hinaak (ariqteen fis-sibaaya there are two methods 
of dyeing. 
I J iJ 0 
x.J.1 ri/-hind Ifem prop nl India. Iliaffeet is-sind i wil-
hind I went everywhere. -gooz hind coconut(s). goozit 
or gozaayit hind a coconut. 
I.SJ.:.A hindi /pl hunuud, hanadwal 1 ladjl Indian . 
II manga hindi smallish green variety of mango. - mijmij 
hindi large variety of apricot. -farxa hindi Indian chick-
en, a strain of domestic fowl larger than the farxa baladi 
and distinguished by its dark red plumage and long legs 
and neck. -!Ja(ab hindi dry stalks of cotton used for 
kindling etc. -mazaag hindi hashish. -yasmiin hindi 
pagoda tree, frangipani. -xafab hindi green heart. 
-faliira hindi variety of barley the seeds of which are 
used as a laxative. 2 In/28 an Indian. hunuud !Jumr Red 
Indians. 2b dupe, fool, fall guy. rintafakir-ni hindi do 
you take me for a fool? 
l.S~ta hanaadi: ri/-hanaadi l-milaa!J or ri/-katakiit il-
hanaadi cries of the vendor of chicks. 

,)~O 
914 
2 ~ ,j t 
noise. fi/-beet malyaan hank' w-rank the house is full of 
..I.:A hand (also handibool) <Engl hand> Inl [soccer] 
brouhaha. IIfurl ii-hank' wlr-rank "" a bit of slap and 
touch foul. 
tickle (ranging from flirtatious remarks and gestures to 
the sexual act) . 
...... ~ ,j t 
.\.r..I.:A hindiba Inl endive. 
I j 
~ ,j t 
; j\..I.:A hindaaza (also hindaasa) In pi -aatl unit oflinear 
measurement equal to 0.656 metres. see further under 
..,.. ~ ,j t 
2 j 
~ ,j t 
j..I.:A handiz I Ivtl to spruce up, make elegant. 2 Ivi/ to 
behave with sensitivity or consideration. handiz 
fiwayya have a heart! - vn handaza; ava mihandiz. 
11 handiz cala to check on (s.o. or s.th.). mif cayziin 
yadd' yhandiz caleena we don't want anyone checking 
up on us. 
j~1 'lithandiz Ivil (impersonal) passive of handiz. 
'lana ma-yithandizj' calayya I am not one whose work 
is to be checked up on! -iva mithandlZ. 
..,.. ~ ,j t see also 
I j 
~ ,j t 
.... ..I.:A handasa 
Inl 
engineering. 
II 'i'iI-handasa 
1-
micmariyya architecture . 
..s-..I.:A handasif lad] *1 I pertaining to engineering. 
II rasm' handasi technical drawing. 2 geometric . 
...,.~ muhandis (also muhandiz. mlhandiz J ) In *1 en-
gineer. II muhandis ~oot sound engineer. -muhandis 
micmaari architect. -furl' muhandisiin carefully plan-
ned work. 
;(;\;....~I fi/-muhandisxaana Inl [obsol] the former 
School of Engineering. 
~ ~ ,j t 
i..I.:A handim Ivtl to dress (s.o.) elegantly. - vn 
handama; avalpva mihandim. 
il..I.:A hindaam In/ attire. kull-u zooq wi-yusn' hmdaam 
he's thoroughly pohte and well-groomed. 
i~1 'lithandim Ivil to dress or be dressed elegantly. 
-vn tihandiim; avaliva mithandim. 
~.J~,jt 
;;.."..:..a hanquuma In pi hanaqiiml large chunk (of 
meat). - also haquuma. 
.!l ,j t 
da hank: hank' w-rank onomatopoeia for a medley of 
J .!l ,j t 
? 
hankar Ivil to potter about, mess about, be busy 
doing nothing. tacaala niskar w-nhankar come on, let's 
get drunk and mess about a bit! - vn hankara; ava 
mihankar. 
.J~ hinkaar ladjl one who busies himself doing 
nothing. 
~ ,j t see r,j It: haanim. hawanmi 
,j .,j t 
.:"a hannin Ivtl to rock and sing (a baby) to sleep. -also 
hanhin. -vn tahniin; ava mihannill. 
~I fithannin Ivil to be rocked and sung to sleep (of a 
child). -also fithanhin. - iva mithannin. 
,jt,jt 
~ 
hanhin Ivtl to rock and sing (a baby) to sleep . 
-also hannin. - vn hanhana; avalpva mihanhin . 
.:rN-1 fithanhin Ivil to be rocked and sung to sleep (of 
child). 
- also 
fithanmn. 
- vn 
tihanhiin; 
avalpva 
mithanhin. 
~,j t 
~ hini (a) Ivil to give pleasure or gratification. 
fil-YUrba ma-hinyit-f' lu being away from home 
brought him no joy or satisfaction. kull i111 ticmil-u 
yihnaa-Ii everything you do gives me pleasure. -vn 
hana; ava haani . 
• \a .\a hana Inl well-being, good health, happiness. 
IIbacd ii-han a b-sana [prov] after the appropriate time. 
- bil-hana wif-fifa "" r~ glad you have enjoyed (or: are 
enjoying) it! (response to compliment on food). -cariis 
il-hana the right man, Mr. Right, Prince Charming .... 
il-hana may ... bring you wellbeing, as in noom t1-hana 
have a good sleep! mifwaar il-hana have a pleasant 
outing! xabiiz i/-hana (may the bread you bake bring 
good health) "" happy baking! -ya hanaa(-k) law ... 
how happy (you) would be if .... as in ya hanaa-ya law 
zurt-i-ni how happy I would be if you were to visit me! 
.~ .~ hani /adjl enjoyable, pleasant. fayyaam 
haniyya happy days. ftl-Iuqma I-hamyya tkaffi miyya 
[prov] (even) a piece of bread eaten in a friendly atmos-
phere suffices for a hundred. 

11 haniyyan "'" good health! (said, e.g., to a guest who 
has just finished eating or drinking). -haniyyaa-(lak) 
how good it is for (you)! fin taab haniyyaa-lu how 
fortunate he would be if he repented! haniyyaa-lak ya 
faacil il-xeer (wis-sawaab cand allaah) [beggarsJ how 
blessed are you who give charity (for God will reward 
you). 
C. .~ hanna 1 Ivtl la 
to make happy. gooz-i 
mhannii-ni my husband does all I could desire to make 
me happy. fil-faral:J ga w-hannaa,-ni joy has come and 
gladdened me. la mhanni wala mfanni giving no joy 
whatsoever.llma-hannaa-(nii)jcala ... (he) prevented 
(me) from enjoying ... , as in ril-ciyaal ma-hannu-naa-f 
can-noom fimbaaril:J the kids didn't let us have a good 
sleep 
last 
night, 
faat 
caleena 
saacit 
il-rada 
w-ma-hannaa-naaj calee he stopped in at lunch time 
and (so) didn't let us enjoy it. Ib to grant good health to 
(of God). fallaah yihannii-k response to bil-hana (q. v.) 
and haniyyan (q.v.). 2 to congratulate. -vn tahniyya; 
ava/pva mihanni. 
Jlf: .Jlf: tahaani Ipl nl congratulations, felicitations. 
tillirraaf 
tahaani 
a 
congratulatory 
telegram. 
(jaddimnaa-lu 
t-tahaani 
we 
offered 
him 
c~ngratulations. 
~I fithanna Ivil to be made or become happy. 
fithanni rejoice! ticiifwi-tithanna may you live long and 
be happy! filii waaxid ca(jl-ak yithannaa-bu [joe] may 
he who has stolen your mind be made happy by it! (to 
one who is daydreaming, apparently of his beloved). 
-ava/iva mithanni. 
~I fistahanna i = fithanna. -ava/iva mistihanni. 
1111 
• t.. hih Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-sixth letter of the Arabic 
alphabet. -also haa. haa f, heeh. 
J II see I J J II : huwwa 
YJII 
...,..:;. hawwib Ivil to approach, go near. fiyyaa-k 
tihawwib nal:Jyit i/-baab don't you dare go near the 
door! ma-txalliijil-cayyil yihawwib nal:Jyit ii-fum don't 
let the child go near the stove! hawwib bi-c~aayit 
iI-cizz i wala til/rab biiha [prov] "'" it's better to com-
mand respect for one's power than actually to use it. 
-vn tahwiib; ava mihawwib. 
(J II see also (IS II 
~ 
J" hooga In pi -aatl I confusion, commotion. 
915 
.) )0 
fig-gamciyya n-nahar-da hooga the co-operative is 
bedlam today. 2 uprising, insurrection. hoogit curaabi 
the Urabi uprising. 
CJ"i fahwag ladj, fern hooga, pI huugl rash, reckless. 
J(J II 
~ 
J" hoogal <Copt> In pI hawaagill flail (for 
threshing) . 
I ~ J II 
~Ju. haawid Ivtl to go along with, be reasonable with. 
hawid-ni fis-sicr he was reasonable with me over the 
price. ma-yhawid-niij fi-l:Jaaga he won't go along with 
me in anything. - vn mihawda, hawaada; ava mihaawid. 
;~I J" hawaada 
Inl 
gentleness. 
tismal:J 
tikkallim 
bi-hawaada mcaaha li- finnaha l:Jassaasa (jawi will you 
talk gently to her, for she's very sensitive. 
~Jlf:1 fithaawid Ivil 1 to be reasonable. raagil {ayyib 
wi-mithaawid maca n-naas fi-kull"l:Jaaga a good type 
who goes along with people in everything. bi-yithaawid 
fis-sicr he's flexible over the price. 2 to be gone along 
with. fil-ciyaal ma-dthawidji f-fayyi l:Jaaga tu{lub-ha 
children are not to be given in to every time they ask for 
something. II raagil ma-yithawidji cala ca(jl-u a naive 
man. - ava/iva mithaawid. 
~J~ mithaawid. mutahaawidf ladjl low, moderate 
(of price). bi-ybiicu b-sicr i mithaawid can sicr is-suu(j 
they sell at a price lower than that of the market. 
2 ~ J II see also 
~ J II IS 
~:;. hawwid Ivtl I to convert (s.o.) to Judaism. 2 to 
Judaize. -vn tahwiid; ava/pva mihawwid. 
~:-WI fithawwid Ivil 1 to convert or be converted to 
Judaism. 2 to be Judaized. - ava/iva mithawwid . 
(~JII 
C~J" hoodag Inl camel litter. 
I .)JII 
J:-WI fithawwar Ivil to behave recklessly. bi-yithawwar 
fis-siwaa(ja he drives recklessly. -vn tahawwur; ava 
mithawwar, mutahawwir. 
J:"":' mutahawwirf 
ladj 
*1 
rash, 
reckless, 
ir-
responsible. 
2 .)JII 
J\.rl finhaar Ivil to fall apart, collapse. ril-cimaara 
nhaarit the building collapsed. lamma fuft il-Ijadsa 
finhart when I saw the accident I went to pieces. -vn 
finhiyaar; ava minhaar. 

JJO 
J\,.rl finhiyaar In pI -aatl breakdown. finhiyaar c~abi 
nervous breakdown. 
J j.J 0 
o)~ hawwaara Iprop nl Hawwara, a bedouin tribe in 
Upper Egypt. i;-;ar(' liI-hawwaara wiq-qarb' 1iI-
fallabiin [prov] the Hawwara fart and the peasants get 
punished for it. 
I..."..J O 
....r.Y" hawas (i) Ivtl to drive (s.o.) to the point of mad-
ness. babbet-ha qawi bi{akl' yihwis I loved her to dis-
traction. qal-Ii nukta hawasit-ni mid-dibk he told me a 
joke which almost killed me with laughter. -vn hawsa, 
hawasaan; ava haawis; pva mahwuus. 
:i.-.Y" hawsa Inl bedlam. ba({alu I-hawsa di stop that 
noise! II bint' hawsa a maddeningly beautiful girl. -hiyya 
camlaa-Ii hawsa f-muxx-i she's driving me wild (e.g., 
with passion). - wil-hawsa di kull-a-ha and all that jazz, 
as in qacadna nitkallim fil- fadab wil-fann' wil-hawsa di 
kull-a-ha we sat talking of literature and art and all that 
jazz. 
....rJ-* mahwuus ladj * and pI mahawiisl foolish, 
crazy. ma-taxud{' cala kalaam-u da raagil mahwuus 
don't take what he says seriously; he's completely 
dotty. 
....r.Y"i fahwas lell morelmost crazy.lI~abiib hiyya bint' 
hawsa laakin fuxt-a-ha fahwas minha it's true that she's 
maddeningly pretty, but her sister is (even) more 
beautiful! 
....r.,rl fithawas Ivil I to go mad, become insane. 2 to 
be driven mad. - ava/iva mithiwis. 
....r.K1 finhawas = fithawas. -iva minhiwis. 
2 ( ..."..J 0 ) 
....r.Y" hoos 
<Copt> 
In 
pI -aatl 
{Chr] 
hymn. 
II fd- farbal hosaat four hymns taken from the Old 
Testament. 
....,...,..Y" hawiis In pI hiw(sa, fahwisa. hawisaatl (river or 
canal) lock. 
";.J 0 
..;.1 ~ hawwaaj In * lone who puts on a show in order to 
deceive . 
....r ~ hawwif Ivtl 1 to put on a show in order to de-
ceive. fil-mudiir hawwif-ni wi-ctaraft the director 
bluffed me (with threats he did not intend to carry out) 
into confessing. 2 to make unstable, make confused. 
gamal-ha hawwif caql-i her beauty drove me crazy. 
916 
fafkaar mihawwifa woolly ideas. -vn tahwiif; ava 
mihawwif· 
~.,r tahwiifa linst n, pI -aat. tahawiifl a bluff. 
JL:.;"" mihawwifaati In pI -yyal one who puts on a 
show in order to deceive . 
..;. ~I fithawwif Ivil 
passive 
of hawwif. 
-iva 
mithawwif· 
loS .!l .J 0 
..}.Y" hooki <Engl> Inl hockey. 
J.J O 
J.Y" hool In pI hawaayil. fahwaall overwhelming ter-
ror. min hool il-m~iiba furma caleehum they were so 
overwhelmed by the disaster that they fainted. jufna 
I-hawaayil we saw awful things. II fabu I-hool the 
Sphinx. lamma fabu I-hool yintaq [prov] when the 
Sphinx speaks (Le. never). 
~i fahyal lell morelmost wonderful or marvellous. 
J.:L. • ..hL. haayil ladj *1 wonderful, marvellous. fikra 
hayla a fantastic idea. man;ar haayil a wonderful scene. 
..h1.Y" hawaayillpl nl awesome things.jufna I-hawaayil 
we've seen shocking things. Ilyisawwi I-hawaayil (he) 
works wonders. 
J -* mahuulladj *1 awesome, fantastic.[ikra mahuula 
a marvellous idea. fakl' mahuul fantastic food . 
tarabeeza mahuula a colossal table. 
J~ hawwil Ivtl to exaggerate, blow up, make a big 
fuss about. xilaaf basiit wi-hawwil-u (it was just) a 
minor disagreement and he made a big thing of it. -vn 
tahwiil; ava mihawwil. 
J ~I fithawwillvil to be exaggerated, be blown up, be 
made a big fuss over. - iva mithawwil. 
J-*,"I fistahwil Ivtl to consider overwhelming. finta 
mistahwil il-bikaaya cal-faaqi there is no reason for you 
to consider the matt~r so enormously difficult. -vn 
fistihwaal; ava mistahwil. 
I .J , 0 
oJL. haan J (u) Ivil I to become of little value, become 
insignificant. 
fid-dinya haanit calayya everything 
seemed pointless to me. fahuun laleek am I nothing to 
you (that you should treat me like this)? ma-thun-f' 
calayya fasib-ha she means too much to me for me to 
leave her. kull-u yhuun fi-xidmit ig-gumhuur all diffi-
culties are as nothing in the service of the public. mif 
haayin calee finn ... it is no easy matter for him to .... 
ril-lifra ma-thun{ {p ro v] intimacy should not be lightly 
betrayed. 2 to near the end, draw towards a close (espe-

cially of s.th. arduous). xala~ iI-mifwaar haan be pa-
tient, the journey is nearly over. haanit xala~ it's 
almost over. -ava haayin. 
"IA haan 2 (i) Ivtl to insult, humiliate, debase. min 
haan-ak hiin-u {proy] insult him who insults you. hiin 
fjirf-ak wala thiin na/s-ak {proy] it's better to hurt your 
wallet than yourself. -/the literary passive occurs! yoom 
l-imtifJaan yukram iI-marri raw yuhaan {proy] on ex-
amination day one is either honoured or humiliated = it 
is through trial that each man's ,worth is discovered. 
-ava haayin. 
~ hayyin ladjl I easy, simple. fuvl i hayyin easy 
work. 2 trivial, slight, insignificant. mafaakil hayyina 
trivial problems. 
""..i !'ahwan lelll morelmost easy or simple. 2 morel 
most trivial or insignificant. tiigi lala !'ahwan sabab = 
great things (may sometimes) take place for insignifi-
cant reasons. 
"I".. hawaan Inl degradation. ma-yifjbal-f iI-hawaan 
veer iI-labiid {proy] none but slaves will accept 
degradation. 
.;.".. huwayyin, hiwayyin ladj *1 I easy, simple. 
2 insignificant, trivial. 
4ilt-o mahaana Inl degradation. 
,,If:1 !,ithaan Ivil to be humiliated, be brought low. 
rawlaad-i gaaeu wi-thaanu my children were reduced to 
hunger and humiliation. - iva mithaan. 
"lrl rinhaan = !'ithaan. - iva minhaan. 
,,~ hawwin Ivtl to ease, make bearable. !'allaah 
yihawwin iI-m/Jjiiba laleek may God make the misfor-
tune easy for you! -vn tahwiin; ava mihawwin. 
"* mihawwin Inl Easer (epithet of God). ya 
mhawwin (hawwin) (0 God, grant relief!) = whenever 
shall (I) see the end of all this! (said in suffering or 
frustration). 
"lAi !'ahaan = haan 2• -vn !,ihaana; ava muhiin. 
4i1A! !'ihaana, !'ahaana In pi -aatl I insult. IIwif/ 
!,ihaana one worthy of rebuke. 2 hard and menial work. 
"Jlf:1 !'ithaawin Ivil to be lax, be heedless. I'iI-laskari 
thaawin malaana the policeman let us off. -ava 
mithaawin. 
".,.:..1 !,istahwin Ivt!l to consider easy. 2 to select for 
ease or easiness. -vn !,istihwaan; ava mistahwin. 
11 !,istahwin bi- to consider insignificant, underestimate. 
bi-tistahwin bii you don't realise its true worth. 
"I.t:-I !,istahaan: !,istahaan bi- to consider insignifi-
cant, underestimate. -(the literary passive occurs) da 
raagil ma-yustahan-fi bii this man is not to be taken 
lightly, this is a man to be reckoned with. -vn 
!,istihaana; ava mistihiin, mustahiin t . 
917 
Z,j.J. 
"..JIA hoon In pi hiw(na, !,ihwaanl mortar. !'iiq hoon 
pestle. 
"JIA hawin (also mad/al hawin) In pi -aatl {mil] 
mortar. 
• .J • 
.".. huuh: ya huuh I (also ya salaam ya huuh or ya naas 
ya huuh) intensifying exclamatory expression. ya huuh 
lal-gamal-da wow! how beautiful! ya huuh lala damm-
ak how clumsy of you! ya naas ya huuh mif kida for 
Heaven's sake, stop it! 2 everyone! anyone! (a call, for 
help). rufJafjuu-na ya huuh help, anyone! 
.J • .J • 
"..".. hawhaw Ivil to bark.ll/amma thawhaw (not even) 
if you (should) bark (i.e. never). -vn hawhawa; ava 
mihawhaw. 
.J.J. 
~ hiww Inl void. wifjil min i{-{ayyaara Ii/-hiww he fell 
out ofthe aeroplane into the void. saakinfil-hiww living 
in the back of beyond, living at the ends of the earth. 
-/adjectivallyl !'aggarti !'ooqa hiwWi mutti fiiha mil-
bard 1 rented a big draughty room in which 
1 (practically) froze to death. 
i ~ huwwa J, hiwwa In pi -aatl chasm, abyss. 
\.J.J. 
~ huwwa 2 Ifem hiyya, pi hummal I personal pro-
noun of the 3rd person. huwwa (hiyya, humma) hina he 
is (she is, they are) here. ma-huwwaa-f or ma-huu-f 
(ma-hiyyaa-for ma-hii-f, ma-hummaa-for ma-hum-fi) 
hina he is (she is, they are) not here. Ilmif huwwa Iw 
masc referent!, mif hiyya Iw fem referent! not as it ought 
to be, as in {alm-u mif huwwa it doesn't taste as it 
should, {ariifja mif hiyya an improper way, an incorrect 
method. -huwwa huwwa Iw masc referent!, hiyya hiyya 
Iw fem referent!, humma hummaIw pi referent! (1) the 
self-same, as in rik-kalaam bi-yixtili/laakin i1-maena 
huwwa huwwa the wording may vary, but the meaning 
is just the same, I'iI-larabiyya hiyya hiyya Iii ga fiiha 
mbaarifJ it's the very same car that he came in yester-
day, rigilti baedi sana w-Iafjeet iI-giraan humma 
humma 1 went back a year later and found the same 
neighbours (as I'd known before). (2) the exact replica, 
as in riftareet fjami~ huwwa huwwa IIi laleek 1 bought a 
shirt exactly like the one you're wearing, !'i/-mooqa 
btaaeit is-sanaa-di hiyya hiyya btaaeit il-xamsinaat the 
fasbion this year is just the same as that of the fifties, 

IS )0 
fi(-(alaba humma humma laakin gibna mudarrisiin 
ziyaada we have the same number and type of students 
but we have increased the number of teachers. 
2 lemphatic pron of the 3rd personl 2a emphasizing a 
preceding noun. lali huwwa IIi xad-u it was Ali who 
took it. fumm-i hiyya iii yayba it's my mother who's not 
here. ril-lummaal humma iii ftaku it's the workmen 
who complained. 2b emphasizing a preceding suffix. da 
beet-u huwwa mif beet faxuu it's his house, not his 
brother's.fuft-a-ha hiyya mifls-sikritlira btalit-ha I saw 
her personally, not just her secretary. ril-larabiyya 
btaalit-hum 
humma 
it's 
their 
(own) 
car. 
3a introductory signal to a subject referent. huwwa 
I-bilastik landina nOleen we have two kinds of plastic. 
hiyya famiira raalju feen where has Amira gone? 
humma malaak iI-fawlaad are the children with you? 
3b introductory particle emphasizing a following de-
monstrative. huwwa da s-sufaal illi mafruue{ yitsirilthat 
is the question that should be asked. hiyya di I-mufkila 
that is the problem. humma dool iIIi gum fimbaarilj 
they are the people who came yesterday. - Ihuwwa 
only/4 interrogative particle signalling surprise or mild 
disbelief. huwwa ma-fii-f Ijadd' guwwa is there nobody 
inside? huwwa s-sittaat bi-tifham do women really 
understand (anything)? huwwa-nta liik Ijae;e;' tikkallim 
do you (really) have the right to speak? 
'IoSJO 
...s y. hawa I (a) Ivtlto be devoted to, have a passion 
for. fana b-ahwaa-ha I'm crazy about her. fana b-ahwa 
gaml i(-(awaabill have a passion for collecting stamps. 
- vn hawa, hiwaaya; ava haawi. 
...sy. hawa 2 1nl I love. II fahl iI-hawa lovers. -banaat 
iI-hawa prostitutes. 2 temperament, inclination. lala 
hawaa- as ... likes, as in fimfi lala hawaa-k do as you 
please! siib-u lala hawaa lamma yiigi lala e;afaa {prov] 
'" .give a thief enough rope and he'll hang himself. 
fif-fuYlaana gat lala hawaa-ya the job was to my liking. 
II hawaa-hum ga lala bale{ they hit it off together. 
~ 1 Y. hiwaaya In pI -aatl hobby, pursuit. ~eed ~-~ae;r' di 
hwaayit iI-muluuk falconry is the hobby of kings. 
hiwayaat riyae{iyya athletic activities. 
...sJlA haawi l 
In pI huwaahl enthusiast, amateur, 
hobbyist. 
...s".:;-I fistahwa I Ivtlto catch the fancy of, appeal to. 
fir-rae;~' b-yistahwii-ni dancing appeals to me. - ava 
mistahwi. 
lloSJO 
.Iy. .Iy. hawa.1 Inl I air. fil-hawa (-(ale; in the open 
918 
air. bi-yfimm iI-hawa he takes a breath of fresh air. 
II kalaam fil-hawa empty talk. -filuus-u raaljit fil-hawa 
his money was used up fruitlessly. -lala I-hawa 
(1) {broadcast] on the air. (2) precariously, as in waae;if 
lala I-hawa precariously balanced. -laaYif lala I-hawa 
living on thin air. 2 breeze, wind. ril-hawa fdiid the 
wind is strong. II filjnafil-hawa sawa (I) we're insepar-
able friends. (2) we're in the same boat together. 
- wie;ilt' walla I-hawa ramaa-k {prov] '" 'Welcome to 
my parlour', said the spider to the fly! 3 cold chill. xad 
hawaf-mildit-u he got a chill on the stomach. 4 {auto] 
choke. - ladvlS quickly.lj-a(bux hawa I'll cook quick-
ly. talaala hawa come as fast as you can! 
...sy.i fahwa lell morelmost airy. 
.)Iy. hawaafi ladjl I in the air, aerial. kablaat 
hawafiyya overhead cables. 2 whimsical, capricious. 
-
In pI hawafiyyaatl 3 aerial. 
~I~ hawwaaya In pI -aatl air vent, ventilator. 
...sJlA haawi 2 ladjl airy. fooe{a ha~ya airy room. 
...s ~ hawwa Ivt/l to air, air out, ventilate.lja((it ii-far/' 
fil-balakoona lafaan tihawwii she put the bedclothes on 
the .balcony to air them. fiftalj if-fibbaak wi-hawwi 
I-fooe{a open the window and air out the room. II 
hawwli-na push off! 2 to let air out of, deflate. 
ril-lagalaati bi-yhawwl I-lagala I-manfuuxa e;awi the 
bicycle man deflates the over-pumped tyre. 3 to loosen. 
fana mhawwi ~-~awamiilI'm loosening the nuts. hawwa 
I-Ijizaam bald iI- fakl he loosened his belt after eating . 
II fil-m~iiba hawwit masamiir muxx-u the disaster sent 
him dotty, the disaster left him with a screw loose. 
-hawwii-Iu "'let him brag, what harm does it do (said to 
stop interference with someone who is telling exagger-
ated tales). - Ivil 4a to become deflated. ril-lagala 
hawwitthe tyre went flat. II lae;l , mihawwi featherbrain, 
twit. -geeb-i mhawwi my pocket's cleaned out, I'm 
penniless. 4b to fart. 5 to become loosened. ~amuula 
mhawwiyya a loose nut. -vn tahwiyya; avalpva 
mihawwi. 
...s~1 fithawwa Ivil I to get an airing. Ij-a(lal 
fathawwa fwayya I'm going out for a breath of air. 
II fithawwa shove off! 2 passive of hawwa. -ava 
mithawwi . 
1oS".:;-1 fistahwa 2 Ivilto catch a chill, catch cold.llya 
lahw-i ya mistahwi {women in Irad soc] '" what a mess 
you've made of that, you good-for-nothing! (mildly 
insulting exclamation used in 
badinage). 
-ava 
mistahwi. 
~1oS0 
4 
hayfa In pI -aatl I organized body, institution. 

hay!'it iI-maktab the office staff. hay!'it iI-bariid the Post 
Office Organization. hay!'aat lilmiyya academic orga-
nizations. hay!'it tal:Jriir editorial board. 2 form, shape. 
hay!,it-ha !'eeh what does it look like? damm i naazil 
la/a hay !,it sarsuub blood coming out in a trickle. II kaft 
hijy!'a inspection of presentability and bearing (e.g., at 
military academies). 
t;.. hayya!' Ivtl I to prepare (mentally and physically). 
laazim iI-waal:Jid yihayya!' nafs-u lif-fUlfl one must pre-
pare oneself completely for work. 2 to put in good 
shape, give a good finish to. !,in-naCiCiaaf fa{(ab ii-beet 
wi-hayya!'-u the decorator put the finishing touches to 
the house and made a good job of iLIl !'iddenaa-Iu la/Cia 
hayya!,it-u we gave him a beating that really worked 
him over. -vn tahyii!,; avalpva mihayya!'. 
~I !'ithayya!' Ivil I to be prepared (mentally and phy-
sically). 2 to be put in good shape, be given a good 
going-over. 3 it seemed apparent, it appeared. 
!'ithayya !'-li !'inn i gittit-i kul/ i l:Jitta rayl:Ja f-nal:Jya I felt 
as though each piece of my body had gone a different 
way. bi-yithayya !'-Iu !'innu saakin li-wal:Jd-u fil-kura I-
!'arc[iyya he imagines he's the only man on earth. 
!'in{asseet fi-na;ar-i yoom ma thayya !'-/i !'inn i hawaa-ya 
yUgi la/a hawaa-ha I was blind the day I thought 
I could hit it off with her. !'ana mithayya!'-/i fuft· 
l:Jac[rit-ak Ciabl i kida it seems to me I've seen you before. 
lIyithayya!'-/i !'aCiuum !'ahiff-u Cialameen nuc[aaf I feel 
like giving him a good beating. -vn tahayyu!'; ava/iva 
mithayya!'. 
..... I~ tahayyu!'aat 
Ipl 
nl 
delusions, 
fantasies. 
ma-tsaddaCiuu-f -di kul/-a-ha tahayyu !'aat don't believe 
him; these are all delusions (of hi~). 
~I !'istahayyaI'J = !'ithayya!' 3. - ava mistahayya!'. 
Y loS t 
.,..lA haab (a, i) Ivtl to feel respect and fear for. b-ahaab 
!'abuu-ya I've a healthy respect for my father. -vn 
hayabaan, heeba; ava haayib. 
4,..A heeba Inl respect, veneration. lu heeba f-fUlfl-u he 
is respected at work. raagillalee heeba a man whose 
appearance commands respect. !'iI-malik min hebt-u 
b-yinfitim fi-lfebt-u [prov] because of his imposing pre-
sence a king is abused (only) in his absence ... a criticism 
given in one's absence may be a sign of veneration. 
~I+o mahaaba = heeba . 
.,..1+0 muhaab ladj *1 treated with respect and obedi-
ence. huwwa muhaab fi-beet-u he is respected and 
obeyed in his household. 
~I !,ithayyib Ivt and viI to fear, feel afraid of. 
919 
kul/-i-na thayyibna (min) man;ar-u lamma wiCiif 
Ciuddamna yiwli;fiina we all f~1t awe-struck as he stood 
before us preaching. - vn tahayyub; iva mithayyib. 
~ loS t 
elA haag (i) Ivil I to become wild and violent, go 
berserk. lamma ygii-Iu d-door yihiig when the fit seizes 
him, he goes berserk. !,iI-bal:Jr i haag the sea became 
rough. 2 to become sexually aroused. -vn hayagaan, 
hiyaag, hayaag; ava haayig. 
~ hayyig Ivtl to arouse, excite (emotionally or sex-
ually). hiyya b-tilbis kida min baab it-tahyiig she dresses 
like that to stimulate passions. - vn tahyiig; ava/pva 
mihayyig. 
~I !'ithayyig Ivil to be aroused, be excited (emo-
tionally or sexually). -vn tahayyug; iva mithayyig. 
.J loS t see 2.J.J t: !'inhiyaar 
-t.JloSt 
..;.J.i:-J.r-" hiirulfliifi, hirulfliifi I Inl hieroglyphics. 
II bi-yitkallim hirulfliifi he speaks double-Dutch. 2 ladjl 
hieroglyphic. 
!,iI-xall 
iI-hirulfliifi 
hieroglyphic 
calligraphy. 
~ 
J.r-" hiirulfliifiyya, hirulflifiyya Inl hieroglyphics. 
..; loS t 
...,..lA haaf (i) Ivil to become fluffy. nic[rab is-sukkar 
wis-samn i 1-l:Jadd i ma yibc;a haayif we beat the sugar 
and butter until it becomes fluffy. -vn hayafaan; ava 
haayif· 
...,..;.. hayyif I Ivtl to make fluffy. !'ir-riil:J hayyif falr-a-
ha the wind fluffed out her hair. 2 Ivil to grow wild (of 
trees, grass, hair etc.). saab daCin-u ti{walli-l:Jaddi ma 
hayyifit he let his beard grow until it was really shaggy. 
-vn tahyiif; avalpva mihayyif. 
~I !,ithayyif Ivil to be made fluffy. - iva mithayyif. 
~ 
loS t 
..r"lA ha~ (i) Ivil to become uproarious. !'iI-mallab 
ha~ the playing field erupted in pandemonium. 
wi-kaan iI-faral:J haayi~ li-l:Jadd iNubl:J the wedding par-
ty continued uproariously till the morning. II !,il-l:Jikaaya 
ha~it the affair got out of hand. -vn hee~a. hay~aan; 
ava haayi~. 
11 haa~ fi- to let fly at (s.o.). ha~ fiyyaftiima he let fly at 
me with insults. 

~ 
hee~a In pI -aatl row, commotion. II wi-hee~a and 
all the rest of it, and so on, as in bi-yaaxud badal tamsiil 
kibiir wi-carabiyya w-hee~a he gets a big expense-
allowance, and a car and the whole works . 
....,.,4-
mihya~ Inl rowdy and raucous person. see 
further under ""...s t r 
~ 
hayy~ Ivil I to make a commotion. lamma 
I-mudarris yi(lac mil-f~1 iI-ciyaal bi-yhayy~u when the 
teacher leaves the classroom, the kids raise Cain. 2 to 
enjoy oneself, indulge in boisterous fun. ya reet kunt' 
zayy' bac;iit ig-gidcaan illi bi-yhayy~u w-yidljaku 
I wish you were like the rest of the lads who horse 
around and laugh.lja-niskar wi-nhayy~ we'll get drunk 
and paint the town red! -vn tahyii~; ava mihayy~. 
J~ 
mihayy~aati ladj pI -yyal boisterous, rowdy 
(of people). 
....; ...s t 
...;u. haaf (i) Ivil I to be petty, be trivial. huwwa haayif 
ma-yicraf-f' yikkallim fi-fayy' mawquuc he's trivial, 
unable to talk about any subject. 2 to be unable to get 
one's share. kull-u-hum ja((abu cal-fakl' w-ma-fii-j 
filla fana filii h!ft' f-wis(ii-hum they all wolfed down 
the food and I was the only one among them to miss 
out. -vn hayaafa, hayafaan; ava haayif. 
~\..,A hayaafa In pI -aatl triviality. 
...... i fahyaf I lell morelmost trivia~, feather-brained 
etc. 2 Inl {slang] pound (money). riI-carabiyya fumm· 
xamast alaaf fahyaf the five-thousand quid car. 
~ 
hayyif Ilvtl to cause. (s.o.) to lose his share. 
hayyift-i-ni mil-yada you made me miss the dinner. 
2 Ivil to miss, fall short. riI-bunduc;iyya hayyifit the rifle 
misfired. bi-yhayyif fil-fakl he's a poor eater. -vn 
tahyiif; ava/pva mihayyif. 
~ 
I fistahyif Ivtl I to regard as trivial. 2 to select 
for triviality. fistahyifit laha raagil wi-tgawwizit-u 
cajaan timajjii cala kef-ha she chose to marry a nobody 
so that she could keep him under her thumb. - Ivi/3 to 
behave in a childish manner. -vn fistihyaaf; ava/pva 
mistahyif. 
J.!l...s t 
~ 
haykal In pI hayaakill I internal structure, 
frame. haykal ca;mi skeleton (of a body). haykal 
(ayyaara framework of an aeroplane. haykall-ittiljaad 
I-iftiraaki the structure of the Socialist Union. 
2 dummy. 
920 
~ 
heekal In pI hayaakill {Chr] sanctuary (of a 
church). 
I J...s t 
Ju. haal (i) Ivtl to pile, heap up. haalu calee t-turaab 
they piled the earth over him. -vn hayalaan; ava haayil. 
JI.rI fithaal Ivil to be piled, be heaped up. -iv.a mithaal. 
JI.rI finhaal = fithaal. -iva minhaal. 
2 J ...s t see J.J t: fahyal, haayil, hawaayil 
I J...s t 
~ heela <prob Copt> linterj/: heela hubb, heela 
hubba heave! heave ho!jaal-(u) heela beela he hustled 
(him) off. 
"";...s J...s t 
~~u. haylayif <Engl high life> ladj invarl upper-
class. b-yictibir nafs-u min in-naas iI-haylayif he thinks 
he's upper-class. 
r...s t 
ru. haam (i) Ivil to be distracted (especially by thoughts 
of one's beloved). b-ahiim bi-fafkaar-i fil-maljbuub 
I am distracted by thoughts of my beloved. -vn 
hayaam, hayamaan; ava haayim . 
.:,l..,.. haymaan r ladj *1 infatuated, madly in love. fana 
haymaan [i-caalam iI-fann' wil-gamaal I feel I am lost 
in the realm of art and beauty! 
<.Jr...s t 
~ 
haymin Ivil to preside, exercise control. mafruuq 
finn iI-mudarris yihaymin cala f~/-u the teacher is 
supposed to control his class. -vn haymana; ava 
mihaymin. 
.:r-:+- muhaymin Inl Controller (epithet of God). 
<.J ...s t see I <.J.J t : hayyin 
( t ...s t ) 
~ heeh I Ifem n, pI -aatl twenty-sixth letter of the 
Arabic,alphabet. -also haa, haaf hih. 
~ heeh 2 linterjl hurrah! 
I ...s ...s t see I.J.J t : hiyya 

J 
J 
J wi-. wa-I/conjl and.furaab fabmar wi-fanilla beeqa 
red socks and a white jersey. wi- feeh - mif eagb-u and 
what's more. he doesn't like it. II wi-feeh yaeni so what! 
2 particle introducing an oath. wi-bayaat-ak by your 
life! w-allaahi by God! 3 particle introducing a circum-
stantial clause. ya reet tigii-ni fluUS w-ana Ciaaeid kida 
I wish I could get money while just sitting down like 
this. (uul eumr-i w-fana nifs-i f-earabiyya all my life 
I've wanter: ~ car. 
11 (pron) wi-... (suff) it depends on ...• as in finta w-
ba;;-ak it depends on your luck, huwwa w-mazaag-u it 
depends on his mood. -
fana wi-(pron) wi-(def n) 
we'll go straight to ... , as in fana- wi-nta wil-mabkama 
we'll go straight to the court (to see what's going to 
happen). II fana w-huwwa wiz-zaman (awiil one day I'll 
get even with him. 
.I J 
.IJ waa f onomatopoeia for the sound of a baby crying. 
riI-waad eala Cioolit waaf miNubb the baby has been 
howling since morning. see further under • J - J 
.:" IJ 
..:..IJ waat <Engl> In pi wattaatllelec] watt. -also watt. 
c:. IJ 
~IJ waaba In pi -aatloasis. 
~IJ 
.)IJ waad = walad 1. 
JotlJ 
~IJ waaYif I Icoll nl insect(s). 2 ladj invarl (of 
people) common, \\orthless. 
J IJ 
JIJ waaCi. waaq: waaCi i1-waaCi or waaq iI-waaq where 
everything 
is 
topsy-turvy, 
wonderland, 
as 
in 
ril-bagat-di ma-tib~al-f wala f-bilaad waaCi i1-waaCi 
these things don't happen, not even in wonderland. 
JIJ 
JIJ waaw. waaw Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-seventh letter 
of the Arabic alphabet. II xallaa-ha waaw he caused a lot 
of trouble. 
IJIJ 
6JIJ waawa. waawa <perh Copt> In pi -aat. -aatllchil-
dren] hurt place.juufil-waawa IIif-rigl-i see the hurt on 
my leg. 
r- J 
jiJ wafm Inl good match, compatible type, suitable 
kind. fil-huduum di mif wafm-ak these clothes don't 
suit you. fil-wa;iifa mif wafm-u the job isn't good 
enough for him. II min wafm ... of the class of ... , as in 
kull i waabid yaaxud illi min wafm-u everyone should 
marry someone of his own class . 
~IJ waafim Ivtl to suit, match. da mif if-!ax~ illi 
yawafim-ni that's not the person who suits me. -vn 
muwafma. miwafma; avalpva miwaafim. 
~Iyl fitwaafim Ivi/l to be made to suit or match. 2 to 
become suitable or compatible. - ava/iva mitwaafim. 
-J-J see also .I J 
iJiJ wafwaf (also waCiwaCi) Ivil I to cry (of a baby) . 
nizil yiwafwaf min ba{n umm-u he was born crying. 
2 to stutter, stammer. -vn wafwafa; ava miwafwaf. 
iJiyl fitwafwaf Ivil 
to 
stammer, stutter. -vn 
tiwafwiif; ava mitwafwaf. 

~ Y.J 
grist mill. wabuur l:Jaliig ginnmg factory. wabuur zala[ 
~J wabaf. waba (i) Ivtl I to infect. contaminate. 
steamroller. -also babuur and baguur. 
rif-firaax i/-layyaana waba fit i/-firaax is-saliima the dis-
eased chickens infected the healthy ones. 2 to corrupt 
or affect morally. dool wabafu I-man[iqa they lowered 
the tone of the neighbourhood. Ilmara mawbuufa a 
loose or immoral woman. -vn wabafaan. waba; ava 
waabif; pva mawbuuf . 
• ~J wabaafr. waba In fawbifal epidemic. 
~,;I fitwaba f. fitwaba Ivil passive of waba f. -iva 
mitwibif. mitwibi. 
~,; 1 finwaba f. fmwaba = fitwaba f. 
ty.J 
e.J wabbax Ivtl to scold. rebuke. -vn tawbiix; avalpva 
miwabbax. 
~,; tawbiixa linst n. pi -aatl a scolding. fiddaa-Iu 
tawbiixa kwaYYlsa he gave him a good talking-to. 
e.';1 fitwabbax Ivil to be scolded. be rebuked. - iva 
mitwabbax. 
IJy.J 
;,J wabar Inl camel hair. [aqiyya wabar a skullcap 
made of camel hair. II l:J-anl:Jal wabar-u ... I will give him 
a hard time. -dihaan lala wabar see dihaan. 
o;'J wabara Inl nap. pile. 
;'J wabbar Ivil to develop a pile. become fluffy. 
fi/-xoox miwabbar the peaches are downy. fi~-~uuf da 
wabbar min fawwi/ fibs this woollen cloth felted the 
first time it was worn. -vn tawbiir; ava mlwabbar. 
Z J Y.J see J.J Y .J : wabuur 
(~Y.J ) 
...,-!J wabf ladj invarl clumsy. gigantic. fatal:Jt i/-baab 
laqeet mara wabf'.kida quddaami I opened the door to 
find a hulking great woman before me. 
...; .. U wabaf Icoll n. pi fawbaafl rabble. riff-raff. saakin 
fi-l:Jitta kull-a-ha naas fawbaaf I'm living in a rough 
neighbourhood. 
J.JY.J 
.).J!IJ wabuur <It vapore> In pi -aat/l (primus) stove. 
wabuur sibirtu spirit stove. wabuur gaaz primus stOl1e. 
2 ship. motor-driven vessel. 3 locomotive. train. 
wabuur biqaala goods train. wabuur fiksibrees express 
train. 4a engine or motor. wabuur larabiyya car en-
gine. 4b any of a vari~ty of machines driven by a motor 
or engine. wabuur i/-l:Jariiqa fire-engine. wabuur [il:Jiin 
..s Y.J see 
~ Y .J : waba, fitwaba, finwaba 
~':;".J 
.}YJ watad In pi witaad, fawtaad, witidal I peg. stake. 
IIluqdit watad clove hitch. 2 [agric! dibble. 
iJ watar In pi fawtaarl I string (of a musical instru-
ment). II (qarab lala) I-watar i/-l:Jassaas (to touch on) a 
sensitive spot. 2 [geom! 2a chord. 2b hypotenuse~ 
..siJ watari ladj *1 having strings, stringed. falaat 
w.,atariyya stringed instruments. 
i,;1 fuwattar Ivil to 'become tense. become nervous. 
- vn tawattur; ava mitwattar. 
..s ':;".J see ..s.:;.. ~ : waata 
Y .!J.J see Y iJ" .J 
J .!J.J see Z J iJ" .J 
JI[.J 
J~J wigaaq <T ocak> In pi -aatl I brass bowl for 
holding a basket of draining [almiyya. 2 oven in which 
irons are heated for pressing. 
Y[.J 
~J wagab I (yiwgab. yuugab. yagib) Ivill to become 
incumbent. 
become 
obligatory. 
fi~-~oom 
I/Ssa 
ma-wagab{' lalee fasting is not obligatory for him yet. 
2 [lsI! to reach its prescribt!d time (of any of the five 
obligatory prayers). ,talaala bald' ma tiwgab i/-l~r' 
b-n~~' saala come half an hour after the afternoon 
prayer (has started). -vn wtguub, wuguub; ava waagib. 
• yagib Ivil modal of incumbency. yagib finn i/-finsaan 
yikuun [aahir ig-gism' wiq-qamiir one must be pure in 
body and in conscience. yagib la/a I-muwagaf yaqal 
n~b ' lenee ... the civil servant must direct his attention 
to .... yagib tizuruu-na kul/' fwayyiteen you ought to 
visit us every now and then. ma-yagib{' tilmi/ kida you 
shouldn't do that. 
~J wagab 2J linterjl (response to a command or re-
quest) it is (only) my duty! your word is my command! 
~IJ waagib I modal of incumbency. bi-yma[lu 
fi/-fugra w-fabuu-ya waagib yi[afib-hum they are slow 

in paying the rent, so father is obliged to demand it of 
them. mij waagib tikallim !'abuu-k bijlakli da you 
shouldn't speak to your father like that. - In pi -aatl 
28 duty, obligation. ma daam il-waaljid mi!'addi 
waagibaat-u yixaal min !'eeh as long as one is fulfilling 
one's obligations, what is there to be worried about? 
laluk waagib liihum you have a duty towards them. 
waaljid landu waagib or bitaal waagib one who is 
socially alert. waagib laleena (it is our duty) = it is we 
who should invite you (response to an offer of hospital-
ity). waagib lal-Ijaaqir it is the duty of the one who is 
around (reply to waagib laleena).iilamal waagib Ii- to 
behave with deference to, show consideration for, act 
with respect towards, as in da lamal waagib Ii-!'umm-u 
wi-ma-raddillala ~aljbit-ha he showed respect for his 
mother in not retorting to her friend. - !'adda waagib to 
offer congratulations, condolences, get-well wishes etc. 
(on occasions when social convention so demands). 
2b lalways defl hospitality. lamal (or !'adda) il-waagib 
Ii-~ljaab-u he gave hospitality to his friends. liaamit 
bi-wagib-na !'arbala w-lijriin liiraat she showed us 
great hospitality. II/aazim taxdu I-waagib il-!'awwil you 
must have some refreshment first (said to visitors who 
are in a hurry to leave). 3 (school) homework. 
j;~IJ wagibatli ladj * and pi -yyal socially alert, nev-
er missing a chance to be courteous. 
~J wagba In pi -aatl (complete) meal. bi-yaakul talat 
wagbaat ftl-yoom he eats three meals a day. fti wagbaat 
muljaddada lir-rijiim there are prescribed meals for 
dieting. 
,.,~) !'awgab I lell morelmost obligatory, compulsory 
or necessary. !'awgab fee!' ziyaarit il-mariiq one's most 
important duty is to visit the sick. 
~J waggib Ivtl to show respect for, behave with de-
ference towards. !'inta laazim tiwaggib in-naas illi 1-
beet-ak you should show respect to the people who are 
visiting you. -vn tawgiib; ava miwaggib. 
~,,;I !,itwaggib Ivil to be shown respect, be treated 
with deference. - iva mitwaggib. 
~) !'awgab 2 lvtl to make compulsory, make obliga-
tory. rabb-i-na ma-!'awgabli laleek illi looli {alit-ak 
God did not ask you to do what is beyond your capabili-
ties. ma-lii-/ muugib liz-ziyaara di there is no necessity 
for such a visit. -vn !'iigaab; ava muugib; pva muugab . 
.,..~! !'iigaab Inll f lsi] offer of a contract. !'il-!'iigaab 
wil-qabuul the offer and acceptance of a contract, e.g., 
in a marriage ceremony. 2 affirmation. bil-!'iigaab in 
affirmation. 
.;.~! !'igaabi ladj *1 positive, responsive, active. 
923 
!'il-Ijiyaad il-!'igaabi active neutrality. 
11 !'igabiyyan ladvl positively. 
~~! !'igabiyya Inl I positivism. 2/pl -aatl positive 
feature, point in favour. 
~ 
J'" muugib I In pi -aatl requirement. 
11 bi-muugib Iprepl by authority of, by virtue of. 
!,il-ftluus tittaaxid bi-muugib ij-/iik bass money can only 
be taken on the authority of a cheque. tistaljalili· 
lalaawa b-muugib xidmit-ak it-tiwiila you are entitled 
to a rise by virtue of your long service. 
~ 
J'" muugab, muugib 2 ladjl felee] positive. 
~.;;-I !,istawgib (yistawgib, yastawgib T) Ivtll to de-
serve, merit. ma-liilljaaga tistawgib il-xinaalia di kull-
a-ha there is nothing to justify such a quarrel. !'ana 
m-astawgibli da kull-u minnak I have done nothing to 
deserve such (bad) treatment from you. 2 to require. di 
mas !'ala tistawgib I-intibaah this is a matter that calls for 
attention. - ava mistawgib. 
[[J 
(.J wagg (i) Ivil to flare, flare up. !'in-naar waggit ft-
hduum-i fire flared up in my clothes. !'il-babuur wagg i 
I-wij/-i the primus stove flared up in my face. 
!'il-xinaalia wagga mi~-~ublj the quarrel has been on for 
a long time. -vn wagg, wagagaan; ava waagig. 
,)[J 
~J wagad' (yagid) Ivtl to encounter, find, discover. 
-Ithe literary passive occursl yuugad landina ba{{iix 
kitiir there are lots of water-melons at our place. -vn 
wuguud; ava waagid; pva mawguud. 
~J wagad 2 (yiwgid, yuugid) Ivtl to cause, create. 
!'ij-/itiima hiyya iii wagadit iz-zalal benna it was bad 
language that caused the rift between us. - ava waagid; 
pva mawguud. 
~ ~ 
J wuguud Inll presence, existence. li-wuguud-u in 
his presence. 2 !'il-wuguud the universe. lIyaa!'is min 
il-wuguud he is in complete despair. 
,.P~J wuguudi ladj *1 existentialis~. 
;';"~~J wugudiyya Inl existentialism. 
~IJ waagid I/adj invarl plentiful.landuj1uus waagid 
he has a lot of money. 2 Inl Creator (epithet of God). 
~~ 
J'" mawguud ladj *1 I present, in attendance. Iii 
Ijadd i mawguud is anyone here? sitt il-beet mij 
mawguuda the lady of the house is not here. rabb-i-na 
mawguud God is with us (and will take care of our 
problems) (said at times of difficulty). 2 available, to 
hand. !'il-kutub il-mawguuda Ijaliyyan the books avail-
able at present. huwwa da in-nool il-waljiid illi 

j~J 
mawguud flS-suuq this is the only kind available on the 
market. ma-titlibii-! nafs-ik -
fana Ij-aakul illi 
mawguud don't put yourself to any trouble - I'll eat 
anything that's going. 3 present, current, existing. 
fir-rafy iI-mawguud current opinion. fin-ni;aam iI-
mawguud existing practice. 
~ 
J wagd In!love (in poetry and songs). riI-wagd' zaad 
lal-bulaad (our) love has increased with our being 
apart. 
.:,I~J wigdaan, wugdaan Inl (inner) consciousness, 
imagination, mind. hiyya lay!a f-wigdaan-i she is al-
ways in my thoughts. fil-wigdaan iI-m~ri the Egyptian 
mind. riI-wigdaan l-igtimaaliT social consciousness. 
~.,.I fitwagad Ivil 1 to become available, come into 
existence. fin itwagad ii-lee! yibqa I-mallj' ba!raqa 
[pray] (if there is bread, salt is a luxury) "" first things 
first. 2 to be found. - avaliva mitwigid. 
~.,; 1 finwagad = fitwagad. -ava/iva minwigid. 
~I.,.I fitwaagid Ivil to become present, become avail-
able. laazim kull-i-na nitwaagid fil-maljatta qabl iI-qa(r' 
b-saala lal- faqall we must all be present at the station 
at least one hour ~efore the train arrives. - vn tawaagud; 
ava mitwaagid, mutawaagidf. 
~) fawgad (yiwgid, yuugid) Ivtl to cause, create. 
finta iii fawgadt iI-mu!kila wi-nta iii tljill-a-ha you are 
the one who created the problem and you should be the 
one to solve it. - vn fiigaad; ava muugid. 
j [..J 
~J. wagiiz f ladj *1 brief. bald' mudda wagiiza after a 
short while. 
~) fawgaz f (yiwgiz, yuugiz) Ivtl to make brief, make 
concise. fiwgiz fil-libaara make the statement short. 
- vn fiigaaz; ava muugiz; pva muugaz. 
..,.. !Z..J 
~.,.I fitwaggis. fitwaggas Ivil to feel apprehensive, 
have premonitions (of evil). Ijarakaat-u xallit-ni 
fatwaggis mil-mawc/.uul da his behaviour caused me to 
be apprehensive about this matter. - ava mitwaggis. 
~.,. tawaggus In pI -aatl apprehension, premoni-
tion. siib-ak mit-tawaggusaat di rid yourself of these 
fears. 
t. [..J 
c::: J wagal l (a) Ivtl to hurt, cause pain to. dimaay-i 
b-tiwgal-ni I have a headache. fintu b-tiwgalu (fi-) 
nafuux-i (or raas-i) you're giving me a headache. 
II fallaah yiwgal qalb-ak tabus] "" may you suffer great-
924 
Iy! -vn wagal, wagalaan; ava waagil; pva mawguul. 
C:::J wagal 2 I~ pI fawgaall pain. landi wagal fil-
milda I've got a stomach-ache. wagal iI-ba(n' wala 
kabb i(-(abiix [pray] (to a fool) stomach-ache (through 
over-eating) is preferable to throwing away (surplus) 
food. II wagal saala wala kull' saala [pray] pain for an 
hour rather than pain every hour (said when something 
unpleasant has to be endured in order to gain some 
relief). - wagal qalb thankless toil, worthless effort, as 
in tarbiyyit iI-wilaad iI-yameen daal baqit wagal qalb 
raising children these days has become a real heartache, 
lift-i qaraf wi-wagal qalb my life is miserable and 
wearisome. -ga-k wagal fi- [abus] may you be struck in 
... , as in ga-k wagal fi-niJfuux-ak ya-bn iI-kalb may you 
be struck in the head, you son of a bitch! ga-k wagar: 
fi-ba(n-ak may you suffer pain in your stomach! 
11 bil-wagal hardly worth anything. daal fitneen gineeh 
bil-wagal these are two miserable pounds. da maqaal 
waaljid bil-wagal illi katabt-u it is only one single article 
that I wrote. 
,,4J waglaan ladj *1 1 in pain. 2 complaining ex-
aggeratedly of one's pain. 
;;'-"J wagiila In pI mawaagil, wdgaayill pain, painful 
spot (particularly used in imprecations). ga-k wagiila 
f-ba(n-ak may you have a stomach-ache! 
11 ga (or gat) la/-wagiila it hit the nail right on the head, 
it found the right point. (ablan miwaafiq la!aan 
kalam-ha ga-lak lal·wagiila of course you agree, since 
what she says is what you wanted to say (or do) all 
along. 
c:::1.".. mawaagil Ipl nl 1 old wounds, bad memories, 
bad experiences. bi-yqallib lalayya l-mawaagil he stirs 
up old wounds of mine. 2 weak points (of which 
another can take advantage). miraat-u larfa mawagl-u 
feen his wife knows where his weak spots lie. 
c:::.,.1 fitwagal Ivil to be hurt, be caused pain. -iva 
mitwigil· 
c::: .,; 1 finwagal = fitwagal· - iva minwigil· 
~.,.I fitwaggallvil 1 to suffer pain. 2 to voice one's 
pain in an exaggerated manner. -ava mitwaggal. 
c::: I .,. I fitwaagil, fitwaagal Ivil to show or voice pain 
in an exaggerated manner. fuqlud fitwaagil baqa 
ka- finn' ma-Ijadd '-I xad Ijuqna filla-nta go on moaning 
now, as if no one but you had been given an injection. 
II finta b-titwaagilli-miin who are you fishing for sym-
pathy from? -ava mitwaagil. 
J [..J see J I [..J : wigaaq 
J [..J 
~J wagallnl reticence. 

r [-' 
~.J wagam (a) Ivii to feel despondent. saalit mafaaf 
iz-zuwwaar wagam as soon as he saw the visitors he 
became dejected. -vn wuguum; ava waagim. 
p~ . .J wuguum In! despondency, dejection. 
,j [-' 
4.J wagna In pi -aat, waganaatl cheek. 
t[-' 
~ 
giha In pi -aat/l direction. fima raayil; fanhi giha 
- gihit iz-zatuun where are you heading, towards Zey-
toon? fuft if-jawiif gayy I gihat-i I saw the sergeant com-
ing towards me. fif-flbbaak bi-ytulli gihit in-niil the 
window faces the Nile. ril-layyil qaalid bi-yqaaal 
warl:'t; wi-b-yirmi f-kull il-gihaat the boy is tearing up 
paper and throwing (the pieces) in all directions. maayil 
gihat il-yimiin tending to the right. 2a side. fana 
I:J-acaddi lal-giha t-tanya I'll cross over to the other 
side. 2b side, aspect, viewPoint. ma-tfil-/ hamm 
il-mawc[uul mig-giha di biz-zaat don't worry about the 
problem from this particular point of view. la ya 
duktuur mig-giha di finta yaltaan no, doctor, you are 
wrong about this. min gihat-i fana ma-landii-jmaanil 
fasaafir as far as I am concerned I don't mind travell-
ing. min-giha ... wi-min giha tanya on the one hand ... 
and on the other hand, as in min giha maksuuf faruul:J 
il-beet bil-I;aala di wi-min giha tanya m-aqdar-ji 
fanaam barra on the one hand I am ashamed to go 
home in this state, but on the other hand I can't sleep 
out. 3 district, locality, place. gihit baab il-Iuuq the Bab 
el-Luq quarter. gihat il-lamaiT place of work. raal; 
t;ism il-bulii~ fig-giha iii saakin fii-ha he went to his local 
police station. 4 administrative division, department 
(of the government), establishment. fayy i fhaada min 
giha l:Jukumiyya laazim tikuun maxtuuma any certifi-
cate from a government department should be stamped 
(with a seal). laazim titfawru mala l-gihaat il-muxt~~a 
you should consult with the authorities in charge. 
fig-gihaat il-l:Jukumiyya government departments. 
fig-gihaat illi baltaa-kum bi-titbammil m~arif-kum the 
establishments that sent you cover your expenses. 
~.J wagh In pi wuguuh, fawguhl I aspect, facet. 
fal:Jad wuguuh il-mufkila one aspect of the problem. 
feeh wagh if-jabah been il-mawc[uleen dool what is the 
point of similarity between these two matters? dool 
mutafabhiin min kull il-wuguuh these are similar from 
every point of view .1I1i-.. wagh having pertinence, as in 
kalam-ha Iii wagh there's a point in what she says. 
925 
- fil-wagh il-bal:Jari Lower Egypt. - ril-wagh il-t;ibli Up-
per Egypt. 21 face.llfi-wagh facing up to, as in furubba 
wiqfit fi-wagh i turkiyya tultumiit sana Europe stood up 
to Turkey for 300 years. - waghan Ii-wagh face to face. 
~ Ii-wagh Iprepl for the sake of, as in basana Ii-wagh 
illaah {beggars] alms for God's sake. -lala (or bi-)wagh 
Iprepl in the manner of, by way of, as in lala wagh 
it-tat;riib approximately, lala wagh is-surla quickly, 
lala wagh il-lumuum generally. 
~I.J wagha In pi -aatl front, fa<;ade. waghit il-limaara 
the fa<;ade of the buildin.g. IIlaazim tigiib bint i la{iifa 
tkuun wagha lil-mal:Jall you should get a pleasant girl to 
act as an attraction for the shop. 
~.J wigha/npl -aatll direction. wighit-akfeenwhere 
to? 2 point of view. ril-masfala fiiha wighaat kitiira 
there are various points of view in the matter. min 
il-wigha di fana msallim malaak from this particular 
viewpoint I am in agreement with you. wighit na;ar-i 
fana veer kida my own opinion is different. 
~~.J wagaaha Inl elegance, style.fabaab il-fayyaam 
.di labsiin faaxir wagaaha the youth of today are very 
smartly dressed. II fiqtiraal; fi-yaayit il-wagaaha a very 
good suggestion. 
~.J wagiih Iladj pi wugahal elegant, stylish. Iida 
sufaal wagiih that's a good question. 2/n pi wugahaafl 
{obsol] title of, and form of address to, a man of high 
social standing, particularly of the royal family. 
~.Ji fawgah lell morelmost elegant or stylish. 
";.J waggih, waggah Ivtll to direct, give direction to. 
waggih ihtimaam-ak lil-I;aaga iii tinfal direct your 
attention 
to 
what 
is 
useful. 
II fin-niyaaba 
ma-waggahit-Iuu-j fayy i tuhma the prosecution did not 
charge him with any crime. 2 to guide, steer. 
bi-ywaggihuf-juyli w-yibt;u maskiinfi-fdee-hum kull" 
I;aaga they direct the work and control it absolutely. 
-vn tawgiih; ava miwaggih, muwaggih; pva muwaggah. 
~.; tawgiih In pi -aatl directive. fii tawgihaat 
maktuuba b-tiigi min foot; there are written directives 
which come from above. 
~.; tawgiihi ladj 
*1 directing. II fif-flhaada t-
tawgihiyya or fit-tawgiihi {obsol] (1) certificate of 
secondary education. (2) last year of secondary school. 
";..JA muwaggih In *1 I director of activities (in a 
school, club, civic organization etc.). 2 school 
inspector . 
..;.; .";.;1 fitwaggah, tawaggah r Ivii to turn to, 
direct oneself towards. ril-yoom illi titwaggah fii 
lil-mantit;a t-tallimiyya the day you go to the education-
al zone. fawwill:Jaaga tawaggahna lik-kalba first we 

turned towards the Kaaba. - vn tawagguh f; ava 
mitwaggih, mutawaggih r . 
~IJ waagih Ivtl to confront, face. fii duwal waghit-ha 
mufkilit il-guul there are countries that have been 
faced with the problem of hunger. marfJalit il-muwagha 
f-Jamla mala l-ladiww the stage of total confrontation 
with the enemy.llfi-muwagha to the face of, as in rana 
c;ult ik-kalaam da fl-muwaghit-u I said so to his face. 
-vn muwagha; ava miwaagih, muwaagih f ; pva 
muwaagahf. 
~I.il ritwaagih Ivil to be confronted, be faced. -iva 
m!twaagih. 
~I rittagah Ivil to take a direction, turn, head (for 
s.th.). fJa-nittigih Ii-feen wi-rizzaay where shall we head 
for and how? rittigih Ylmiin turn to the right! -vn 
rittigaah; ava mittigih. 
• ~I rittigaah In pi -aatl I direction, course. mumkin 
taaxud il-c;atr' min m~r' f-rayy' rittigaah you can take 
the train from Cairo in any direction.llfaaril bi-ttigaah 
waafJid one-way street. 2 trend, tendency. fii rittigaah 
iftiraaki fil-laalam in-nahar-da there is a trend towards 
socialism in the world today . 
• ~ tigaah, tugaah r Iprepl towards. lamalt' wagb-i 
tgaah-u I did what is right by him. mifiina tigaah ig-
gamla we walked towards the University. 
~.;:-I ristawgah (a) Ivtl I to consider (s.o.) good-
looking or elegant. II baayin laleek mistawgah nafs-ak 
you obviously think you're very dashing. 2 to select for 
elegance. rinta b-tistawgah iz-zabaayin walla reeh do 
you pick out the elegant customers first or what? -vn 
ristiwgaah; ava mistawgah. 
[..J [. J 
C~J wagwig Ivil to flare up intensely. -vn wagwaga; 
ava miwagwig. 
.)C.J 
;..\> fJida 2: lala fJida separately. 
..\> J wafJd (also li-wafJd-) ladv, w pron suff also 
wafJdii-1 alone, by oneself. dasaakinftl-beet (1i-)wafJd-u 
he 
lives 
in 
the 
house 
by himself. bi-naakul 
(1i-)wafJdii-na kull' leela we eat alone every night. 
tic;dar tirfal-u (1-)wafJd-ak can you lift it by yourself? 
mifif-fac;c;a (1-)wafJd-a-ha (or It-wafJld-ha) iii tfJarac;it-
lar da I-beet kull-u kamaan it wasn't just the flat which 
was burned out, but the whole building as well. 
JI..\>J wafJdaani ladj *1 alone in the world. hiyya 
wafJdaniyya ma-Ihaa-J slwaa-k ya rabb she is alone in 
the world; she has no-one but you, Lord. rana 
926 
wafJdaani mac;{uul min fagara I'm alone in the world 
with no relatives. 
'I..\>J wafJdaniyya Inl oneness (of God). daliillala 
wafJdaniyyit iIIaah a proof of God's oneness. 
IoSJ..\> J wafJdawi In 'I {poll unionist. 
;..\> J wifJda, wafJda f In pi -aatl la unit, elementary 
unit. 
riI-wifJda 
1-rasasiyya 
liI-ittifJaad I-iftiraaki 
mukawwana min lifriin luqw the basic unit of the 
Socialist Union consists of twenty members. wifJdit 
il-muqawma hiyya 1-room {elecl the unit of resistance is 
the ohm. Ib branch, regional or local centre. wifJda 
~ifJl.Jiya local health centre. wifJda ziraliyya regional 
agricultural centre. wifJda mugammala (rural) com-
munity centre. Ie {musl.a single occurrence of the pat-
tern of a rhythmic mode. !,il-wafJda ~-~urayyara 214 
time. !,il-wafJda k-kibiira 4/4 time. 2 unity. riI-wifJda 
I-wataniyya national umty. 3 solitude, loneliness . 
!'ig-gawaaz ma-huwwaa-f lilaag liI-wifJda marriage is 
no cure for loneliness. !,il-wifJda xayrun min galiis is-
suur {prov} solitude is better than bad company.jalar 
bil-wifJda he felt lonely.ll/eeill il-wifJda first night spent 
by the dead in the tomb. 
Joe> J wafJiid ladj pi wufJaad, wafJidiinl sole, only. 
ribn-a-ha l-wafJiid her only son. rig-geef ma-xad-uu-J 
lafaan wafJiid he was not conscripted because he's an 
only son. nusxa wafJlida a single copy. II wafJiid il-
rabaween an only child. - wafJiid il-qarn rhinoceros. 
-huwwa l-wafJiid fik-kabaab he makes the best kebab 
around. -ladverbiallyl c;aalid wafJiid he is sitting by 
himself. 
..\>IJ waafJid I/numl one. waafJid fil-miyya one per-
cent. II !,if-fur/' da nimra waafJid this is top quality work. 
-lenee makruuma lafra w-waafJid he is one-eyed. 
-waafJid 
wi-talatiin 
(1) Egyptian 
card 
game. 
(2) {coarsel masturbation. -c;aal waafJid wi-sittiin he 
took to his heels. - Ifem wafJdal2 ladJ/2a single, lone. 
nimra wafJda bass 'only one number. 2b uniform . 
kull-a-ha loon waafJid it is all the same colour. 
II kull-u-kum waafJid landi you are all the same as far as 
I am concerned. 3/pronl someone, somebody, a cer-
tain person, a certain .... !'ayy' waafJid anyone. waafJid 
reer il-muwa;;af ig-gidlid someone other than the new 
employee. fii waafJid barra layz-ak there is someone 
outside to see you. !'ana c;abilt' waafJid muhandls c;al-Ii 
kida I met a certain engineer who told me so. II !'il-
waafJid one (used very frequently instead of the per-
sonal pronoun), as in riI-waafJld laazim yiftaral bi-
qamiir one should work conscientiously, - !'iI-waafJid 
xala~ mif c;aadir yistafJmil !'aktar min kida I've taken 

just about all I can stand. -kull i waaljidfi- or !'iI-waaljid 
fi- each one of, as in kuUi waljda fiina miljtaaga 
I-waaljid yiljmii-ha every woman among us needs a man 
to protect her, ril-waaljid fiikum laazim yilmil illi lalee 
each of you must play his part. 4 Inl unit, one (of many). 
laawiz waaljid walla tneen do you want one or two? 
wala waaljid not a single one. bi-ybiilu I-beeel. bil-waljda 
they sell eggs singly. !'iI-fakha di mitnaqqiyya bil-waljda 
(these fruits are individually selected) = these are 
choice fruits. dool maldudiin bil-waljda these are 
counted exactly. II waaljid waaljid one by one. - waljda 
waljda slowly, easily, gently, as in suuq waljda waljda 
drive slowly, waljda waljda lal-layyil be gentle with the 
kid. -lala waljda w-mw keeping to the baladi drum 
rhythm (in folk dancing). -mafya lala waljda w-n~~ 
walking with a (provocative) wiggle. - Inl 5 One 
(epithet of God). 
~J waljljid or waljljad Ivtl I to join together, unite. 
labd in-na~ir Ijaawil yiwaljljad il-larab Nasser tried to 
unite the Arabs. 2 to standardize, unify. hiyya 
I-Ijukuuma iii bi-twaljljid il-maqayiis it's the govern-
ment which standardizes measures. -vn tawljiid; ava 
muwaljljid; 
avalpva 
miwaljljid, 
miwaljljad; 
pva 
muwaljljad. 
~ waljljad allaah to pronounce the formula la rilaaha 
rilla lIaah.llma-landuu{wala qir/ ywaljljid allaah he 
hasn't got a penny to his name. - wala waaljid yiwaljljid 
allaah not a living soul. - waljljiduu interjection for 
breaking an embarrassing silence, in the hope that the 
response la !'iIaaha rilla llaah will make people relax 
and talk. 
~.,:;II rit-tawljiid Inl I the doctrine of the oneness of 
God. 2 [lsi} theology. 
~ 
J" miwaljljad, muwaljljad ladj *1 unified. II talriifa 
mwaljljada flat rate. 
~.,;I ritwaljljad Ivil 
passive of waljljad. 
- iva 
mitwaljljad. 
~.;;.. mutawaljljid In °1 [Chrj hermit, anchorite. 
~I rittaljad Ivil to join together, unite. ris-sittaat 
ittaljadu w-qa(lu I-Ijagaat il-'lfalya the women united 
and boycotted the expensive items. rik-kabriit yittiljid 
mala I-ruksujiin 
sulphur unites with 
oxygen. 
II ril-rumam 
il-muttaljida 
the 
United 
Nations. 
- ril-wilayaat il-muttaljida the United States. -vn 
rit~iljaad; ava muttaljid, mittiljid. 
.)~I rittiljaad In pi -aatl union. rittiljaad i(-(ullaab stu-
dents' union. ril-ittiljaad is-suvyitti the Soviet Union. 
ril-ittiljaad I-iftiraaki (I-larabi) the (Arab) Socialist 
Union. 
\_p~1 rittiljaadi ladjl [pol} federal. 
927 
IJ'" C.J 
...,-.>J waljas (i) Ivtl to confuse, embarrass. raqall i 
mufkila b-tiwljis-u the smallest problem throws him 
into confusion. maa lak mawljuus kida why are you so 
confused? lIya mawljuus lala leen-ak [womenj you 
muddle-headed dimwit! - vn waljasaan; ava waaljis; pva 
mawljuus. 
~J waljsa In pi -aatl muddle, confusion, dilemma. 
reeh iI-waljsa s-sooda 1Ii-ljna fiiha di what's this terrible 
mess we're in? 
...,-.>.,;' ritwaljas Ivil to be or become confused or 
embarrassed. -avaliva mitwiljis. 
...,-.>.,;1 rinwaljas = ritwaljas. - iva minwiljis. 
I 
• 
IJ'" C.J 
...,-.>J waljf In pi wuljuufl wild animal, beast. law tigri 
ya-bn i raadam gary iI-wuljuuf 'lfeer rizq-ak ma-tljuuf 
[provj = man proposes, God disposes.lldi mara wal:Jf 
she's a gluttonous woman. 
...,.-J waljfi ladj *1 wild, barbaric, fierce. mUlamla 
wal:Jfiyya cruel treatment. IIljumaar waljfi zebra. 
...r-J wiljif ladj *1 I bad, unpleasant, nasty. riljt-u 
wil:Jfa it has a nasty smell. raagil wiljif an unpleasant 
man. Ija~alit-Iu Ijaaga wiljfa he had an unpleasant ex-
perience. kida wiljif [childrenj that's a bad thing (to 
do). ma-tjuf-/ wiljif may you never know any un-
pleasantness (conventional reply to waljaft-i-na q.v.). 
2 ugly. laqa(il-ha wiljfa her features are ugly. 
""-'>Ji rawljafl lell I worse/worst. 2 uglierlugliest. 
~l,..J waljaafa Inl I unpleasantness, unkindness. 
balaaf il-waljaafa di stop this unkind behaviour! 
2 ugliness. fi-yaayit il-waljaafa extremely ugly. 
';';J waljljafl (a) I Ivtl Is to make unpleasant. reeh 
illi waljljaf-ak kida what made you become so unkind? 
Ib to make ugly. rinta lammaal tiwaljljaf fil-fustaan 
leeh why are you making the dress so ugly? - Ivil 2 to 
become fierce-looking. 
raxuu-ki waljljaf wi-baqa 
yxawwifyour brother has become so fierce-looking that 
he is frightening. 3 to become overgrown (of plants and 
animals). ril-quu(a kibrit wi-waljljafit the tomato plants 
have grown up and become wild. -vn tawljiif; ava/pva 
miwaljljaf. 
..;.; .,; I ritwaljljaf Ivil I to become fierce or fierce-
looking. 2 to become overgrown (of plants and anim-
a!s). -ava mitwaljljaf. 
...r-JI riwljaff Ivil to become ugly, become unattrac-
tive. lamma I-Ijibla tiwljaf/ yibqa IIi f-ba(n-a-ha walad 
when a pregnant woman becomes unattractive it means 
she is carrying a boy. -ava miwljaff. 
...,..:-.,;-1 ristawljifl, ristawljafl Ivtl I to consider ugly. 

fistawl}afit il-cariis she cqnsidered the suitor too ugly 
(and refused to marry him). 2 to select for ugliness. 
fistawl}af fustaan wi-Jtara-hu-lha he picked an ugly 
dress and bought it for her. - Ivi/3 to become fierce, 
become beastly. fistawl}affil-fakl he wolfed down the 
food. -vn fistiwl}aaf; ava mistawl}if. mistawl}af. 
2 ~ c..J 
..r-J wal}af (a) Ivtl to be missed by (s.o.). wal}aft-i-na 
we missed you (conventional greeting after a period of 
separation or absence). I}a-tiwl}af-na ktiir we shall miss 
you a lot. finta waIJif-ni win-nabi w-wal:Jfaa-ni l-qahwa 
iii kunna nifrab-ha mala balt/. I miss you, you know, 
and I miss the coffee we used to drink together. Uk 
"al}fa you have been missed. -vn waIJafaan, wal:Jfa; ava 
waaIJif· 
..;.:. J wal}l}if, wal}I}af2 Ivil {obsol} to sing tawal}iif. -vn 
tawl}iif; ava miwaIJl}if. 
~.; tawIJiifa In pI -aat, tawal}iifl {obsol} poem 
lamenting the departure of the month of Ramadan 
chanted from roof tops between midnight and dawn. 
..r-Ji fawl}af2: la fawIJaf allaah minkum (may you 
not be missed for long) may we soon see you again! 
..r-,;-I fistawl}if2, fistawIJaf2 Ivil to feel lonely. 
lamma daxalt il-beet istawl}aft' w-qalb-i tqabat/. upon 
entering the house I felt desolate and had a sense of 
gloom. -vn fistiwl}aaf; ava mistawl}if. mistawl}af. 
11 fistawl}afU- to long for. fana stawl}aft' liI-ciyaa/l am 
longing to see the children. 
J c..J 
J>J wal}al (i) Ivtl I to bog down (in mud). I}aasib 
l}a-tiwIJiI nafs-ak fiC-Ciin careful, you will get yourself 
stuck in the mud! 2 to implicate, involve (in trouble 
etc.). finta wal}alt-i-na malaak fil-qat/.iyya min yeer 
luzuum you've unnecessarily involved us with you in 
the case. finta mawl}uul fiiha l-Juft-ak you are in it up to 
your ears. -vn waIJalaan, wal}la; ava waal}il; pva 
mawl}uul. 
~J wal}la Inl mire. fism-u baqa fil-wal}la his name 
was dragged in the mud. 
J>J wal}lf In pI fawIJaa/, wul}uull mud. 
..,":i-J wal}laan ladj *1 stuck, aground. fil-markib 
wal}laan wi-dool mif larfiin yicallacuu the boat is 
stranded and they cannot free it. dool wal}laniin 
fi-mufkila cawi~a they are bogged down in a big prob-
lem. fintu wal}laniin fi-feeh what (triviality) is it that 
you are caught up in? 
J>.;I fitwal}allvil passive of wal}a/. -iva mitwil}il. 
J> .; 1 finwal}al = fitwal}al. -iva minwil}il. 
928 
~J wal}IJa/l/vtlla to cover with mud. fintawal}IJalt' 
hduum-ak xaal~ you've smothered your clothes with 
mud. Ib to turn into mud. II finta wal}l}alt id-dunya 
you've made a big mess. - Ivil 2 to become muddy. 
fil-fart/.' wal}l}aUtthe ground turned to mud. 3 to wade 
(in mud). ma-twal}l}al-J' fil-macara don't go wading out 
in the rain. -vn iawl}iil; ava/pva miwal}l}al. 
J>,;-I fistawIJallvill to consider (too) muddy. 2 to 
select for muddiness. -ava mistawIJa/. 
r c..J 
~ 
J wal}ma Inl I craving for a certain type of food 
(experienced particularly by a pregnant woman). 2/pl 
-aatl birthmark. 
~ 
J wal}am Inl craving eXperienced by a pregnant 
woman. 
~.;I fitwal}l}am Ivil to experience a craving (for par-
ticular kinds of food, especially of a pregnant woman). 
fil-I}aamil bi-titwal}IJam laadatan lala I-IJawaadiq a 
pregnant woman usually craves salty foods. -vn 
tawl}iim; ava miIWal}l}am . 
~.; tawl}iima linst nI a craving. fit-ta"'wl}iima di 
laazim sabab-ha I-IJaml this particular craving you have 
now must be caused by pregnancy. 
c..J c..J 
c..~J wal}wal} Ivi/l to whine, snivel (particularly of a 
child). 2 to chatter from cold (of the teeth). -vn 
wal}wal}a; ava miwal}wal}. 
cot>'; 1 fitwal}wal} = waIJwal}. -ava mitwal}waIJ· 
~.J c..J 
~ot>J wal}awi nonce word in children's Ramadan 
jingle. 
I ~ c. J 
~J wal}y Inl I inspiration. 2 {theol} inspiration, 
revelation. 
~,i fawl}a Ivil I to give inspiration. 
feeh illi 
fawl}aa-Uk bil-fikra di what gave you that idea? 
rabb-i-na fawl}aa-lu yhaagir min makka God inspired 
him to emigrate from Mecca. 2 to be suggestive, be 
indicative. kull a I}arakat-ha b-tuul}i big-gins her whole 
behaviour is sexually suggestive. -vn fiiIJaaf; ava 
muul}i. 
~,;-I fistawl}a I Ivtl to derive or seek inspiration 
from. fil-lool}a di mustawl}aa min ir-riif il-mQ1ri this 
painting was inspired by the Egyptian countryside. -vn 
fistil}aaf; ava misl}awl}i, mustawl}i; pva mustawl}a. 

1 I.S c..J 
~ 
J waya J (i) Ivtl to goad. incite. miin illi wayaa-k 
lat-talaaq who gave you this bad idea of divorce? Yinta 
mawyi r;alayya you've been incited against me. -vn 
wayayaan; ava waayi; pva mawYi . 
.?J wayya = waYa. -vn tawyiyya; ava/pva miwaYYi. 
.?.il Yitwayya Ivil to be goaded or incited. -iva 
mitwaYYi. 
).1 fittaya Ivtl to victimize incessantly or obsessively. 
fittayit iI-waad biq-qarb i lamma krih-ha she kept on 
beating the boy until he hated her. -ava mittiYi. 
.?.,-:-I fistiwayya Ivtl to goad vigorously. incite 
emphatically. -ava mistiwaYYi. 
J I.S c..J 
~J waya 2: fil-waya I-waya {magic] quickly. with top 
speed (formula used in demanding services from 
spirits). 
~ t.J see 
~ t • : waaxid. waxxid. fitwaxxid 
I.S j t.J see j t • : waxri 
Jt.J 
j>J waxaz T (i) Ivtl to prick. II waxz iq-qamiir prickings 
of conscience. -vn waxz. waxazaan; ava waaxiz; pva 
mawxuuz. 
'j>J waxza linst n. pi -aatl a prick. 
j> .i 1 fitwaxaz Ivil to be pricked. -iva mitwixiz. 
(' t.J 
r->J waxam Inl drowsiness. sluggishness. quum bala 
waxam get up. get a move on. wake up! 
",I.}-J waxmaan ladj °1 drowsy. sluggish. 
r-> J waxxam Ivil I to become stuffy. become con-
gested (of air). 2 to become slothful (of people). 
fiI-waayid waxxam min qillit iI-yaraka one is feeling 
sluggish because of lack of activity. -vn tawxiim; ava 
miwaxxam. 
~~.J 
;J wadd (i) Ivtl to feel affection for. saar;it ma fuft-u 
qalb-i wadd-u I fell for him as soon as I saw him. tuul 
r;umr-u w-huwwa bi-ywidd-i-ni he has felt affection for 
me all his life. -vn wadadaan, widd. wudd; ava waadid; 
pva mawduud. 
11 wadd a r;ala to pay a friendly visit on. fibqa widd a 
r;aleena do call on us sometime. 
;J widd Inl affection. liking. kaan fii widd i benhum 
there was affection between them. yutlubu widd-i 
929 
r;afaan feeh why should they seek my friendship? II law 
iI-widd i widd ... were it up to .... as in law iI-widd i 
widd-i ma-kan-f daxal ii-beet if I had my way. he would 
not have set foot in the house. - ka-widd i waayidJ on 
the same level. as in xalli iI-balatteen ka-widd i waayid 
lay the two tiles level with each other. 
11 bi-widd- (also bidd-) modal of desire. bi-widd-i (or 
bidd-i) fasaafir I want to travel. kaan bi-widd-u-hum 
(or kaan bidd-u-hum) yiigu laakin ma-laquu-fmuw~/a 
they would have liked to come but couldn't find any 
means of transport. -ma-bidd "-haa-J it's high time to 
act. as in saar;it ma fuft iI-xanaagir ;aharit quit i 
ma-bidd Q-haa-Jas soon as I saw the daggers coming out 
I decided there was no time to waste. 
IS;J widdi. wuddi ladj °1 amicable. friendly. taswiya 
widdiyya (1) amicable settlement. (2) (leg] out of court 
settlement. 
;) fawadd lell morelmost desirable. fawadd i ma r;ala 
qalb-i finn iI-buli~ yimsik-ak there is nothing I want 
more than that the police catch you. 
~bJ widaad Inl affection. love. 
~J~J waduud 1 ladj °1 affectionate. 2 Inl Favourably-
disposed One (epithet of God). 
~I;J waddaad ladj °1 sociable. di kaanit sitt i waddaada 
she was a very sociable woman. 
.;.,. mawadda In pi -aatl liking. affection. 
;.il fitwadd Ivil passive of wadd. - iva mitwadd. 
";.il fitwaddid. fitwaddad Ivil to show affection. -vn 
tawaddudT; ava mitwaddid. 
;I.il fitwaadd Ivil to exchange social courtesies or ex-
pressions of affection. -vn tawaaddT; ava mitwaadd. 
I t ~.J 
t.~J wadar; J (a) Ivtl to lodge. deposit. place in custody. 
mumkin tiwdar; filuus-ak wi-taaxud r;aleeha farbaay 
you can deposit your money and earn interest on it. 
laazim niwdar;-ak fil-yagz i I-bukra we must place you in 
custody until tomorrow. 
fil-maykama b-tuykum 
bi-fidaal iI-walad fil-malgaf the court rules that the 
boy should be placed in a children's home. -Ithe literary 
passive frequently occurs! fif-fihaada btar;t-ak laazim 
tuudar; fi-qalam it-tasgiil your certificate has to be depo-
sited in the registry. -vn wadar;aan; ava waadir;; pva 
mawduur;. 
t.bJ widaar;, wadaar; Inl farewell. yaflit widaal 
farewell party.tawaafil-wadaar; {lsi] last ritual step in 
the pilgrimage which consists in making farewell cir-
cuits of the Kaaba. 
~I~J wadaala Inl gentleness. mildness. 

t-~J wadiir;' ladj *1 gentle, mild. 
~~J wadiir;a In pi wadaayir;1 deposit, thing or sum 
deposited. II fi~aal wadiir;a a receipt for goods deposited 
with the customs upon arrival from abroad for subse-
quent clearance. -maxzan li-wadiir;a the depot where 
such goods are deposited. 
t~yl fitwadar; Ivil to be lodged, be deposited, placed 
in custody. - iva milwidir;. 
t;J waddar;1 Ivtl to bid farewell. waddar;t-u ljab/' ma 
fasaafir I said goodbye to him before he went away. 
2 Ivil [joe] to pop off, kick the bucket. -vn tawdiir;; ava 
miwaddar;. 
t;.,.. miwaddar; ladjl departing, dying out. fil-xiyaar 
miwaddar; il-yomeen dool it is the end of the season for 
cucumbers. 
t; yl fitwaddar; Ivil to be bidden farewell. - iva 
mitwaddar;. 
t~) fawdar;' = wadar; l._vn fidaar;;avamuudir;;pva 
muudar;. 
tl..-,!! fidaar; In pi -aall deposit. fidaar; ta fmiin security 
deposit. 
t~.,.. muudir; In *1 depositor. 
t~.,:;-I fistawdar; Ivtl to entrust to. fistawdar;t-ak 
il-filuus di I-raayit m-argar; mil-Ijagg I entrust this 
money to you until I return from the pilgrimage. 
II fislawdar;l-ak rabb-i-na go in God's keeping. - vn 
flStiwdaar;; ava/pva m,stawd'r;. mistawdar;. 
tl..~::....1 fistidaar; 
Inl [mil] pension. 
fitljaal r;al-
fistidaar; he was retired. 
t~,,:;-. mustawdar; In pi -aatl depot. 
z t ~.J 
t~J wadar;2 Icoll nl sea-shell(s). II"arb il-wadar; 
method of fortune-telling by throwing down shells and 
examining the positions in which they fall. 
~~J wadar;a lunit n, pi -aatl a seashell. 
~l&.~J wadar;aaya = wadar;a. 
.!l~.J 
.!l;J waddik Ivtl I to season or condition (s.o.), cause 
(s.o.) to mature. mif Ija-ywaddik-ak fiUa furl is-suulj 
there's nothing like getting out to work for making you 
grow up. 2 to fire (pottery) in a kiln. -vn tawdiik; ava 
miwaddik. 
.!l; yl fitwaddik Ivil I to be or become seasoned or 
matured. 2 to be fired in a kiln (of pottery). - ava/iva 
milwaddik. 
.J~.J 
.J~J widn Ifem n, pi widaanl I ear.ljalamit il-widn lobe 
930 
of the ear. fil-Ije[aan liiha wdaall walls have ears. yiddi 
I-Ijalalj li-Ui bala wdaall [prov] (He gives earrings to 
those who have no ears) '" the best goes to those least 
equipped to appreciate it. II (r;amal) widn' min [iin 
wi-widn' min r;agiill '" (to let things) in one ear and out 
of the other. -r;ala widn-u abundant, as in kaani/ljaf/a 
kbiira w-kaan if-jurb" r;ala widn-u it was a big party 
with a lot of drinking. -wldn-ak mllleen ya gulja (Goha, 
where's your ear?) '" why do you make simple matters 
complicated? - widn' lju{[a flat soft piece of bread, 
shaped like a scoop for dipping in food. - widn-u Ijilwa 
he has a good ear (for music). - flddli-ni widn-ak '" lend 
me your ear, give me your attention. - taxxan widn(-u) 
to flatter (s.o.), swell (s.o.) up with (undue) praise. 
- widll 
il-fiil 
[bot] 
elephant's 
ear 
(Caladium 
esculentum). 2 (roughly ear-shaped) handle, lug. 
widn I fingaan cup handle. fli-ljuffa iii laha widneen 
yifiluu-ha tneen [prov] (the basket with two handles is 
to be carried by two) '" many hands make light work. 
~ widallaat-ak: Ijalalj dahab fl-wdanaat-ak a line of a 
song traditionally sung for yo am is-subuur;. 
;';~J widna Inl I name of various wild plants, such as 
varieties of navelwort, scorpion's tail, plantain, and 
indigo plant. ~abbaara wldna name of various succulent 
plants, such as Christmas cactus. 2 hangnail. 
J~J widani ladj *1 fond of listening to gossip. 
,j!.~J wideeni = wldani. 
~.J ~.J 
~J~J wad wid Ivil to tell malicious tales, gossip. ljar;adu 
ywadwidu kuU is-sahra they sat gossiping all evening 
long. - vn wadwada; ava miwadwid. 
~ wadwid 11- to goad, incite. qar;adu ywadwiduu-Iu 
I-raayil ma [aUalj miraal-u they kept on at him until he 
divorced his wife. 
~J~ yl fitwadwid Ivil to exchange confidences, ex-
change secrets. ljar;diill yitwadwldu mi~-~ublj they've 
been whispering secrets to each other for ages. -ava 
mitwadwid . 
-j.J~.J 
J..:IJ~IJ wadwazii/. wadwazeel In pi -aatl [slang] effe-
minate man, pansy. 
1..s~.J 
I.S~IJ waadi In pi widyaalll valley, gully, ravine. waadl 
n-nii! the Nile valley. waadi I-muluuk the Valley of the 
Kings. ba[n li-waadi bed of the ravine. II huwwaf-waadi 
wi-nta f-waadi you and he are not on the same 
wavelength. 

21oS~" 
I.S;J wadda 
Ivtl 
I to convey, 
take. 
'li[-[abbaax 
ba-ywaddi i~-~awaani (cala) I-fum the cook will take 
the trays to the bakery.ljal-li I-caskari tacaala macaaya 
w-waddaa-ni I-:faabi[ taani the policeman said, 'Come 
with me'. and took me to another officer. yiwaddii-k 
iI-babr; wi-ygiib-ak catfaan (he takes you to the river 
and brings you back thirsty) '" he can twist you round 
his little finger. raadi s-sillim illi ba-ywaddii-k il-
balakoona there are the stairs that will lead you to the 
balcony. rif-faaric da ywaddi cala feen where does the 
street lead to? IIcalj/-a-ha ywaddi wi-ygiib she is anxious 
and distracted. - kalaam-ak la ywaddi wala ygiib what 
you are saying is pointless. 2 to send. wadduu-ni maca 
waabid tamargi camal-Ii bUljna they sent me off with a 
nurse who gave me an .injection. waddeet ibn-i madrasa 
fil-xaarig I sent my son to a school abroad. lil-balad illi 
twaddi rabsan min illi tgiib [prov] (the place that sends 
people away is better than that which brings them in) '" 
good riddance. II rawaddi wiff-i (minnu) feen I am very 
embarrassed (to see him). - wadda(a) f-dahya to ruin 
(s.o.), give (s.o.) a hard time. -vn tawdiyya; ava 
miwaddi. 
15;.,;1 ritwadda Ivil I to be conveyed, be taken. 2 to be 
sent. -iva mitwaddi. 
I j" see 2 loS j ., : wara 
Yj" 
'-!JJ warab (i) I Ivtl to cut (a woven fabric or paper) on 
the bias. laazim tiwrib il-ljumaaf caJaan ir-rasma tiblja 
ma~buu[a you should cut the material on the bias so that 
the design is right. 2 Ivil to hang awry (of cloth). -vn 
warb; ava waarib; pva mawruub. 
'-!JJ warb, warb Inl I obliqueness, slant. 2a diagonal. 
bil-warb diagonally. rakkib il-bittiteen bil-warb fix the 
two pieces together by the oblique sides. 2b [text] bias. 
bil-warb on the bias. 
,-!J.,;I ritwarab Ivil I to be cut on the bias. 2 to hang 
awry (of cloth). - iva mitwirib. 
'-!)J waarib (i) Ivtl to cause to be ajar. waarib il-baab 
Jiwayya open the door just a little bit. -vn muwarba, 
miwarba; avalpva miwaarib. 
~I,.. muwarba I Inl evasiveness. ritkallim min reer 
muwarba don't be evasive, speak directly. 
,-!).,;I ritwaarib Ivil to be left ajar. - iva mitwaarib. 
I ~ j" 
~jJ warad (yiwrid, yaridl) Ivil I to be mentioned, 
931 
~')J 
occur. lil-iNilaab da warad fi-kutub kitiira this express-
ion occurs in many books. 2 to meet (with s.o.), come 
to the attention (of s.o.). yaama warad caleena 
zabaayin how many (different) customers have come to 
us! lIyaama warad caleena we've seen them all. -baaga 
ma-waraditfsomething unique. 3 to arrive (of corres-
pondence etc.). ril-muzakkara di waradit bi-tariix 
tamamaaJar this memo arrived on the eighteenth. 
II maktab il-wuruud [communic] telegraph receiving 
office. - maktab il-waarid [communic] the office for 
incoming mail. -daftar il-waarid [admin] the register of 
incoming mail. - ril-lja[r il-waarid the incoming train. 
-xitm il-waarid [communic] stamp showing the arrival 
date of letters etc. -vn wuruud; ava waarid. 
01~)J waaridaat Ipl nl imports. lil-waaridaat wi~­
~aadiraat imports and exports. 
~J.J wird In pi 'lawraad, wiraad, wuruudl I land-tax 
form issued to landowners to show tax instalments paid 
by them. 2 [lsi] schedule of specified prayers and sec-
tions of the Koran read during private worship particu-
larly between midnight and dawn. 
~JJ wariid In pi rawridal vein. 
l.S~jJ wariidi ladj *1 venous, veinal. 
~J.J" mawridl In pi mawaaridl I source, resource. 
mawaarid il-mayya sources of water. mawaarid maliyya 
financial 
resources. 
2 source of income. 
ma-
canduhumf; mawrid reer-u they have no other source 
of income. 
.~J.J" munida, murda In pi -aatl slope leading down to 
the water's edge in a canal or the Nile, where villagers 
wash their clothes and dishes and fill their water-pots 
(water-carrying being treated by eligible girls as an 
opportunity for appearing socially - hence the frequent 
reference to the munida in love songs). 
~~J warrad J Ivtl I to supply. rig-game a bi-twarrad 
liina k-kutub wid-dafaatir the university supplies us 
with the books and notebooks. 2 to dispatch, deliver. 
dool dayman bi-ywarradu I-biqaacafil-waljt il-ma~buu[ 
they always deliver the goods on time. -vn tawriid; ava 
miwarrad, muwarrid I; pva miwarrad, muwarrad I 
~j"; tawriid In pi -aatl supply. maktab tawridaat pur-
chasing department. ramr; tawriid [admin] supply 
order. 
~~.J" muwarrid In °1 supplier. 
~~.,;I ritwarrad Ivil I to be supplied. 2 to be dispatch-
ed, be delivered. -iva mitwarrad. 
~I..r..l riraad In pi -aatl I revenue, take. mutawassi[ 
f'iraad rayy; maba[[it banziin kibiir the average revenue 
of any petrol station is considerable. 2 income. qariibit 
il-riraad il-camm income tax. 

,)J..,....I fistawrad Ivtl to import. m~r' b-tistawrid 
fjamlj' min famriika Egypt imports wheat from Amer-
ica. -/the literary passive imperfect occurs! riI-makana 
di b-tustawrad min barra this machine is imported from 
abroad. IImaktab istiraad wi-t~diir impQrt and export 
office. - vn fistiraad; ava mistawrid, mustawridT; pva 
mustawrad. 
Z~J.J 
')JJ ward Icoll nl I flower(s). fil-ward' mif ii-iii 1.ara, 
il-ward' ii-iii gana {proy] ... the work we do today will 
profit those who come after us. II warda ,aleek how 
wondc:rful you are! ~ (also ward' baladi) rose(s). l-agl 
il-ward' yitsifji l-,ulleefj {proy] for the sake of roses the 
creepers are watered. xajab ward rosewood. mayyit 
ward or maaf ward or maward rose water. ma-lafjuu-/ 
fil-ward' ,eeb fjaluu-lu y-aljmar il-xaddeen {proy] (they 
found no flaw in the rose, so they called it rosy-
cheeked) ... you would find fault with a fat goose! filii 
ylj;bb il-ward' yistaljmil jook-u (proy] he who loves a 
rose should bear its thorn. 
0,) JJ warda I Inl I lunit n. pI -aatl 18 a flower. Ib a 
rose. tidbal il-warda w-riljit-hafiiha {proy] (a rose may 
fade yet its scent remains) ... one's good qualities are 
not changed by one's lot in life. 2/pl wiradl (mech] 
metal washer. 
~ b JJ wardaaya = warda I. 
,.SolJJ ward; ladj "I rose-coloured, rose-pink. 
,)~J warrad2 Ivil I to blossom. fiz-zar,' warrad the 
plants 
blossomed. 
2 to 
become 
rosy-coloured. 
xudud-ha mwarrada her cheeks are rosy. - Ivtl 3 to 
make rosy in colour. -vn tawriid; ava miwarrad. 
,)~.;I fitwarrad Ivil to become rosy in colour. wifj-a-ha 
twarrad xaal~ ba,d' ma xadit y;tam;naat she became 
healthy-looking after she 
took vitamins. 
-ava 
m;twarrad. 
3(~J.J) 
b JJ warda 2 <It guarda> linterj/look out! stand clear! 
';hJ wardiyya <It guardia> In pI -aat, waraadil 
I shift, scheduled period of work. 2 group of workmen 
scheduled to work during a particular shift. 
J~J.J 
J')JJ wardul <Gr bardoulo> Inl welt (of a shoe). 
-r'~J.J 
"I..,)JJ wardamaan <It guardamano> In pI -aatl hand-
rail (e.g., above the steps of a bus). 
932 
JJ.J 
~J warr l (i) Ivil I to whirr, produce a humming or 
buzzing sound. fit-tilifoon ma-bi-ywirr'-/ xaal~ the 
telephone gives no dialling tone. 2 to revolve, move 
around quickly. fin-naljla ,ammaala twirr the top is 
spinning hard. II fil-fagaaza mif ma,naa-ha finnak 
tiwirr' fif-/awaari, (Uul in-nahaar being on holiday does 
not mean that you should run around in the streets all 
day long. -vn warr, warr, wararaan; ava waarir. 
~J warr2, warr In! hum, humming noise. warr it-
tilifoon dialling tone. 
~J.J 
uJJ waras, waras, wiris (i) (also firis J, faras J) I/vtI 
18 to inherit. fil-beet illi wrist-u ,an fabuu-ya qarbafj 
the house I inherited from my father collapsed. Ib to 
be an heir to. ,amm-i maat w-ana wrist-u my uncle died 
and I am his (sole) heir. 2/vil to come into an inheri-
tance. lamma tiwris fiw,a tinsa iii ,aleek when you 
come into your inheritance don't forget your debts. 
waras fi- to share in (s.o. 's estate), as in waras fi-,amm-
u he was one of his uncle's heirs. -vn wirs, wiraasa; ava 
waaris; pva mawruus, mawruus. 
uJJ wirs (also firsJ) Inllegacy, inheritance. 
~IJJ wiraasa 
In 
pI -aatl 
I legacy, 
inheritance. 
2 heredity. guzf' kbiir min iz-zakaaf bi-ykuun bil-
wiraasa intelligence is largely a matter of heredity. 
~IJJ wiraasi ladj "I hereditary. 
u)J waaris In " and pI warasal heir, inheritor. 
~JJ wariis (also fariis J) In pI wurasal heir. huwwa 
I-wariis il-waljiid he is the only heir. 
ul ...... miraas In pI mawariisl legacy, inheritance. 
fja,diin yitfjasmu I-miraas they are dividing up the 
legacy. 
U I.; turaas T In! legacy . fit-turaas il- fadabi the literary 
heritage. 
uJ.;1 fitwaras, fitwaras, fitwiris Ivil to be inherited. 
riI-beet itwaras ,an gidd-i the house was inherited from 
my grandfather. fitwaras bil-Ijaya his property was 
divided up (among his relatives) while he was still alive. 
- iva mitwiris. 
":"'~J warris, warras (also farras J) Ivtll to bequeath 
to. fabuu warris-u sarwa his father left him a fortune. 
II riI-ljaya fir-rigaal yiwarris iI-fafjr {proy] timidity in 
men leads to poverty (an injunction to be more aggres-
sive). 2 to divide up (an inheritance) according to the 
law amongst the ones who are eligible to share in it. -vn 
tawriis; ava/pva miwarris. 
• warras fi(i) to give (s.o.) the right to share in (an 

inheritance). ma-warras-hum-/ fil-beet he did not leave 
them a share in the house. 
u ~.,. miwarris In 01 testator. 
":"'~jl I'itwarris, I'itwarras (also l'itl'arrisJ) Ivil I to 
divide up an inheritance (of inheritors). saabu r-raagil 
mayyit lala sriir-u w-ljaamu yitwarrisu fii they left the 
dead man on his bed and started dividing his property 
among themselves. 2 to be divided up (of an inheri-
tance). 3 to be made an heir. -ava/iva mitwarris. 
u.)) I'awras t Ivtl to leave (as a result). ril-l:Jaya 
bi-yiwris il-faljr modesty leads to poverty. -iva miwris. 
":"')jl I'itwaaris, 
I'itwaaras 
(also 
l'itl'aarisJ) 
I'itwarris 1. -ava mitwaaris . 
..:...) j 
tawaaras t Ivtl to inherit generation after gen-
eration. tawaarasu~-~anla I'abban lan gidd they passed 
the craft down from father to son. -vn tawaarus; ava 
mutawaaris; pva mutawaaras. 
(J.J.J) 
...r.)) warf Inl [rur] I butcher's chopping block. 2 axle 
rest or bearing at the water exit of an Archimedes' 
screw (see PI.E, 16). 
;,.;..)) warfa <prob Engl> In pi wiraJi workshop. 
.J:, J.J 
.1.)) wara( (i) Ivtl to cause to be involved in difficulties, 
get (s.o.) into a predicament. I'inta iii wara(t i nafs-ak 
min yeer luzuum you've got yourself into trouble un-
necessarily. -vn wara(aan, war(a; ava waari(; pva 
mawruu(. 
J..)) war(a In pi -aatl difficult situation, predicament, 
fix. 
.1.) jl I'itwara( Ivil to be or become involved in difficul-
ties. -ava/iva mitwiri(. 
.1.)yl I'inwara( = I'itwara(. -ava/iva minwiri( . 
.1~) warra( Ivtl to put on the spot, embroil in difficul-
ties. 1'~-~al:Jafi warra(-u fik-ka/aam the journalist talked 
him into a tight spot. -vn tawrii(; ava/pva miwarra(, 
muwarra( . 
.1~jl I'itwarra( Ivil to be or become involved in diffi-
culties. -ava/iva mitwarra(. 
tJ.J 
(.)) waral Inl godliness. 
(.)) waril t ladj 01 God-fearing. 
(~jl I'itwarral Ivil to be reticent or reserved. 
ma-yitwarral-/ lan I'akl i maal in-nabi he would not 
hesitate to steal (even) the Prophet's money. -ava 
mitwarral· 
933 
JJ.J 
.j.)) waralj Icoll n, pi I'awraaljl I paper. waralj zibda 
greaseproof paper. waralj lal:Jma thick cartridge paper. 
waralj garaayid newsprint. waralj naffaaf blotting pap-
er. waralj sanfara sandpaper. waralj laffwrapping pap-
er. waralj bafra cigarette paper(s). tUljljaalit waralj 
paperweight. dabbuus waralj paper clip. manadiil 
waralj paper handkerchiefs, tissues. kiis waralj paper 
bag. II ril-yomeen dool if-!ubbaan waralj young people 
are soft these days. -la/-waralj on paper, in theory, as 
in I'ana b-aljbatf. miit gineeh lal-waralj on paper I get 
paid a hundred pounds, \'il-xi((a kwayyisa ljawi la/-
waralj the plan seems fine in theory. -l:Jibrala/a waralj 
empty (written) words, as in I'ik-kitaab da ka/aam-u 
kull-u l:Jibra la/a waralj that book has no substance. 
2 document(s), (official) paper(s). I'awraalj I-iltimaad 
credentials. 
I'awraalj 
maliyya stock certificates. 
waralj-ak mitla((alJiwayya your papers have been held 
up. laazim tiljaddim I'awraalj-ak fil-milaad you should 
present your papers on time'. 3 ticket(s), stamp(s), or 
other paper(s) of small size. waralj bus(a postage 
stamp(s). waralj damya (1) fiscal stamp(s). (2) sheet(s) 
of paper with a fiscal stamp (for applications etc. to 
government departments). waralj yan~iib lottery tick-
et(s). ril-waralj (min fatf.l-u-kum) tickets (please)! 
4 playing card(s). (uul in-nahaar maskiin il-waralj fi-
I'dee-hum they play cards all day long. 5 paper patterns 
(in dressmaking). di mif bass i fa{ra fit-taf~iil - bi-tilraf 
tilj~~ il-waralj kamaan she's not just good at dressmak-
ing -she even knows how to make paper patterns. 
6 foliage, leaves. mal:Jfi waralj linab (dish of) stuffed 
vine-leaves. II waralj madya (a quid of) chewing tobac-
co. 7 petal(s) . 
'-i.)) waralja lunit n, pi -aatl I a piece of paper, a sheet 
of paper. waraljit zibda a piece of greaseproof paper. 
waraljit garaayid a sheet of newspaper. 2 a document, 
an official paper. I'iddii-ni waralja I'adxul biiha 1-
mustaffa give me an official note so I can be admitted to 
the hospital. II waralja (or waraljit (alaalj) [lsi] bill of 
divorce, as in goz-ha balat laha waraljit-ha her husband 
sent her the document registering the divorce, I'iddii-ni 
waraljt-i [women] divorce me! - waraljit I'uktoobar gov-
ernment policy statement issued after the War of Octo-
ber 1973. 3 a note. l!Ia-Ialjet-uu-! fil-beet fa-sibt-i-Iu 
waralja I didn't find him at home so I left him a note. 
4 a ticket, a stamp, or other paper of small size. I'ana 
gibt il-waralja xala~ I've already bought the ticket. 
waralja b-laJara (gneeh) a ten-pound note. 5 a playing 
cafd. II I'it-talat waraljaat (1) three-card trick, find the 

I!J.J J 
lady. (2) swindling, as in raagil bitaal it-talat warac;aat a 
con man, a swindler. 6a a (small) packet. warac;itfaay a 
(small) packet of tea. 6b a parcel wrapped in paper. 
II warac;it laama (1) a piece of cartridge paper. (2) dish 
of meat, onions, spices and sometimes potatoes, 
cooked in this paper. 7 a leaf. II mayooh warac;it tuut a 
fig-leaf bikini, a very brief bikini. 8 a petal. 
.).JJ waraC;1 ladjl of paper, made of paper. lumla 
warac;iyya paper currency. 
JI~J warraac; In *1 paper supplier, paper dealer. 
";~J warrac; I Ivtl {rur] to remove the bottom leaves of 
(maize) for use as fodder. 2/vil to produce leaves, 
become leafy. - vn tawriic;; avalpva miwarrac;. 
J~,,;I fltwarrac; Ivil {rur] to be removed for use as 
fodder (of maize leaves). - iva mitwarrac;. 
.!lJ.J 
.!l.JJ wirk Ipl wiraak, fawraakl I thigh (of a rabbit or 
fowl). 2 {coarse] human thigh. 
.!l~J warrak, warrak Ivil {coarse] to become thick-
thlghed. -vn tawriik: ava mlwarrak . 
.!l.JJI fiwrik: fiwrik-ni wi-~dir nafs-ak {prov] give me 
the leg and you take the breast"" nobody is expected to 
promote others above his own head. 
~J.J 
r.JJ wlrim (a) Ivil to swell. sweli up. lac;eet liwaz-i 
wirmit c;add il-beet/.a I found my tonsils had swollen to 
the size of eggs. -vn waramaan, waram: ava waarim. 
r.JJ waram In pi fawraaml swelling, lump. waram 
xablls malignant tumour. 
r.JJi fawram lell morelmost swollen. 
~~J warram I/vtl to cause to swell. landi rumatizm' 
fil-mafaa~11 wl-salaat bi-ywarram-ha I have rheumat-
Ism in my jOlflts and sometimes it makes them swell. 
II watram d,maaY(-u) to give (s.o.) a headache. warram 
buyuut/.(-U} {coarse] to annoy or disgust (s.o.), give 
(s.o.) a balls-ache 2/vII to swell up. riglay-ya f~-~eef 
b'-IWarram in the summer my feet swell. - vn tawriim; 
avalpva miwarram. 
r~". miwarram lad] *1 [abus] sulky. 
~~,,;I fitwarram Ivi/l to swell up. 2 [a bus] to become 
annoyed. fitwarram mmni lal-faaxIr he was ready to 
burst with anger at me. - ava mitwarram'. 
..; ~J.J 
~.JJ warnllf <It vermce> Inl I varnish. 2 wax pol-
I~h. 3 ~hoe poh~h. fit/.rab Ig-gazma warmif have the 
,hoe~ poli,hed! 
934 
"';";.JJ warnif, warnaf (i) Ivtl to polish, wax. xud 
Ig-gazma warnif-ha take the shoes and have them 
polished. -vn warnafa; ava/pva miwarnif. 
..,..o.J,,;1 fitwarnif, fitwarnaf Ivil to be polished, be 
waxed. - iva mitwarnif. 
J.JJ.J 
.JJ.JJ wirwir <Copt> lad] invarl I crisp and young 
(vegetable vendor's cry). 
riI-figl il-wirwir fresh 
radishes! 2 green, inexperienced (of people). finta lissa 
wirwir you are still inexperienced. riI-bint' di wirwir 
this girl is young and naive. 
.JJ.JJ warwir (I) Ivil I to become crisp, sappy and 
flourishing (of plants). riI-x~~' warwir the lettuces 
have become crisp. 2 to become fresh and healthy-
looking (of people and especially girls). ri/-bint' 
warwirit bald' ma ~ayyifit fi-swisra the girl glowed with 
health after she spent the summer in Switzerland. -vn 
warwara; ava mlwarwir . 
o.JJ.JJ wlrwira In 
pi waraawirl 
I young chicken. 
2 [slang] girl. - waraawlr Ipl nl 3 fresh produce! 
(vegetable vendor's cry). flgl II-waraawir fresh 
radishes! 
I IS J .J 
IS~J warra (Ylwarri. yiwrt) Ivtl to show. lJa-nwarrii-ku 
~uwar gawaz-na we'll show you our wedding pictures. 
warreet-u fmni mistalfrab min (alab-u I let him see that 
I was astofllshed at his request. II rabb-i-na ma-ywarrii-
k or fallaah la yiwrti-k "" may you never see such a 
thing! (said when mentioning some misfortune). 
- warrii-ni lart/.' ktaaf-ak "" beat it! - warraa n-nuguum 
fi-lizz it/.-t/.uhr "" he gave him a hell of a time. - w-allaahi 
I-awami-k by God I'll show you! -vn tawriyya; ava 
miwarrt. 
I.S~,,;I fitwarra Ivil to be shown. - iva mltwarri. 
llSJ.J 
.I.JJ .I.JJ wara Iprep, w pron suff waraa-, 1st sing 
waraayal I behind. riI-c;u{{a wara d-dulaab the cat is 
behind the cupboard. wiC;ift astarayyalJ b~~eel lac;eet 
I(-(abuur da wlc;if waraaya I stopped to rest, looked 
round and saw this line of people had stopped behind 
me. II waraayafulflI have work to do. - waraana naas we 
have people to consider. -min wara minni or min 
waraaya without my knowledge. -Ia waraa wala 
c;uddaamu he has nothing. -~arafu filii waraahum wi-iii 
c;uddamhum they spent all they had. 2 after, following. 
fagib-lak l~afiir fizzaay - fa(iir waraahum fis-sama 

how am I supposed to get sparrows for you? should 
I fly after them in the sky? ma{ralj ma truulj (fana) 
waraak wherever you go I'll follow. fig-garas t/.arab 
marriteen wara bact/. the bell rang twice in succession. 
fir-ru~aa~ gayy' wara ba[t/.-u the bullets are coming 
thick and fast. 
JI~J warraani ladj *1 rear, back, at the back. riI-baab 
iI-warraani the back door. 
4...;y tawriya r In pi -aatl /Iit} allusion. 
..s)J waara r Ivtl to obscure, veil. waarit wifJ-a-ha she 
hid her face. Iizum-ha feeh i1-miwariyya wh!lt is the 
need for dissimulation? ljibb i w-waari wi-krah wi-daari 
/prov} '" show your love discreetly, but hide your hate 
completely. -vn miwariyya; ava/pva miwaari . 
..s) yl fit waara r Ivil to hide oneself. - ava mitwaari. 
I 
' 
))J 
;jJ wizr In pi fawzaarl I sin. 2 fault. 
')jJ wizaara, wazaara In pi -aatl (governmental) 
ministry. 
..s)jJ wizaari ladjl ministerial. 
.;!.jJ waziir In pi wuzaral I government minister. 
111i[bit iI-waziir any of several children's games in which 
one child is chosen to decide rewards and punishments. 
baab iI-waziir quarter of Cairo north of the Citadel. 
2 queen (in chess). 
;j,,:;-I fistawzar J Ivil to become a government minis-
ter. filaah-i lislawzar wi-libtia raagil [a;iim may you 
become a minister and an important man. -ava 
mislawzar. 
2 
' 
))J 
• ;jJ wazara In pi -aat, wuzarl I any structural device, 
such as a baseboard, which goes around a room. 
2 lintel. 
I, • 
))J 
jJ wazz (i) Ivtl I to tempt. fif-Ji(aan wazz-i-ni [ala 
J-Jurb Satan tempted me to drink. 2 to incite. wazzu 
I-mudiir [alayya they set the director against me. - vn 
wazz, wazazaan; ava waaziz; pva mawzuuz. 
.jJ wazza Ipl -aall instance noun of wazz. tiabli ma 
saafir gat wazza [alee somebody reported on him be-
fore he left the country. 
jljJ wazzaaz ladj *1 factious, contentious, seditious. 
jyl fitwazz Ivil I to be tempted. 2 to be incited. -iva 
milwazz. 
jyl finwazz = fitwazz. -iva minwazz. 
935 
2 •• 
)),J 
SJl ,SJ wizz Icoll nl goose, geese. 
fibn iI-wizz" 
[awwaam /pravj"" he's a chip off the old block. II wizz i 
[raatii swans. - ril-[izz' w- fakl iI-wizz "" a life of luxury, 
as in doal milrabbiyiin fil-[izz' w- fakl iI-wizz they were 
brought up in the lap of luxury. - hizz i ya-wizz '" shake 
it baby! (phrase used to girls in the street). - filii lakl-u 
wizz i wizz i yi{la[ [ala [nee-k ball' ball {prav} '" you 
will always pay for your deeds. - zayy il-wizz' ljinniyya 
bila bizz /prav} (like a mother goose who loves her 
goslings yet does not breast-feed them) '" you say you 
love but do nothing to prove it. 
,SJl "SJ wizza In pi -aall I lunit nl a goose. 2 plump 
girl. 
tj,J 
t SJ wazza[ Ivtl I to distribute. min fat/.I-ak wazza[ 
iI-manJuraat di [ala I-muwagafiin please distribute 
these circulars to the employees. Il/oaljiltawzii[ /eleej 
circuit board. 2 to pass on. farm out. rafUs iI-fidaara 
wazza[ i1-tiat/.iyya [ala muljaami kwayyis the adminis-
trative head dealt the case out to a good lawyer. 3 to get 
rid of. send away. liziti-Ii w-ma-[rift'-J fawazza[-u he 
stuck to me and I couldn't give him the brush-off. 
4 /musj to arrange. -vn lawzii[; ava/pva miwazza[. 
~jy lawzii[a linst n, pi -aatl a way to get rid of some-
one. faJuf-lu tawzii[a I'll find a way to get rid of him. 
tS". muwazzi[ In *1 I distributor. muwazzi[ il-bariid 
postman. muwazzi[ iI-farzaati (or iI-lju;uu;) God, the 
distributor of fortune. 2 /musj arranger, orchestrator. 
J\&. S". miwazza[aati In pi -yyal one expert in passing 
his work on to others, shirker. muwa;:;afiin iI-ljukuuma 
mwazza[aliyya daraga fuula government employees 
are first-class shirkers . 
tS yl fitwazza[ 
Ivil 
passive 
of 
wazza[. 
- iva 
miIWazza[. 
I.Jj,J 
~jJ wazan (i) Ivtl I to weigh. determine the weight of. 
fiwzin if-Jiwaaltilatiii naatii~ talaata kiilu weigh the sack 
and you'lI find it three kilos short. II fil-mudiir lil- fasaf 
ma-b-yiwzin-J i/-fumuur ma:;buu( unfortunately the 
director doesn't have good judgement. 2 to balance, 
make even or level. fil-bayyaa[ il- famiin bi-yiwzin 
kaffiteen iI-mizaan tiabl' ma yisla[mil-u an honest ven-
dor balances his scales properly before using them. 
II fiwzin i/-muraar tune up the engine! - bi-yiwzin rigl-u 
[ala I-binziin he has an even touch on the accelerator. 
-firib kaseen [afaan yiwzin dimaay-u he had a couple of 
drinks to clear his head. - riI-badla mawzuuna [alee the 

suit fits him well. - Ivi/3 to equal or amount to (s.th.) 
in weight. ris-sanduuc; yiwzin xamastaafar kiilu the 
crate weighs fifteen kilos. II calil-i yiwzin cafara min illi 
zayy ir-raagil da I'm ten times smarter than the likes of 
that man. 4 to weigh much, be heavy. rif-Jeela di tiwzin 
this load is weighty. -vn wazn; ava waazin; pva 
mawzuun. 
<JjJ wazn In pI rawzaanl I weight. rascaar id-dibal 
bi-tibc;a lJasab wazn id-dahab illi fiiha the prices of plain 
rings depend on the weight of gold in them. rincidaam 
il-wazn weightlessness. II ril-wazn in-nawci specific 
gravity. -raagil ma-luu-J wazn a man of no consequ-
ence. 2 {mus} time signature. 3 {poet} metre. 4 {gram} 
Arabic morphological pattern. wazn i1-ficl verb 
pattern. 
~jJ wazna Inl Ilpl -aatl an item or load which is 
weighed. wazniteen kull' walJda xamsa kiilu two 
weighed loads of five kilograms each. 2/no pV balance, 
equilibrium. rid-dulaab Iii wazna law ixtallit yuC;ac a 
wardrobe is balanced (upright), and will fall if its 
equilibrium is disturbed. II waznit mutoor engine 
tune-up. 
<JjJi rawzan le.11 morelmost level-headed. 
,:,15J wazzaan In *1 professional weigher. 
<J1.:,... mizaan In pI mawaziinl I balance, weighing 
scales. mizaan lJassaas precision balance. mizaan 
c;abbaani steelyard. candi mzaan ~uyayyar cafaan 
rawzin c;i{ac il-lJafiif I have a small scale for weighing 
the pieces of hashish. ril-bit/.aaca titbaac bil-mizaan the 
merchandise is sold by weight. II mizaan {abliyya weigh-
bridge. - riid-u mzaan he has a precise hand. - ritkallim 
bi-mzaan to weigh one's words. -mizaan iI-madfucaat 
{finan} balance of payments. 2 meter, gauge. mizaan 
lJaraara thermometer. mizaan it/.-t/.oor light-meter. 
mizaan xee{ plumb-line. mizaan mayya spirit level. 
3 {mus} time signature. 4 ril-mizaan {astrol} Libra. 
S {dent} articulator. 
~ I.:,... mizaniyya In pI -aatl la budget. mizaniyyit il-
beet the household budget. Ib quota, amount (of s. th.) 
as a budget item. mizaniyyit id-dukkaan min is-sukkar 
ritneen {inn the shop's sugar quota is two tons. 2 level. 
ril-lJallaac; bi-ysaawi.jacr-u mizaniyya walJda the bar-
ber cuts his hair all one length. 
<Jj.,.1 ritwazan Ivill to be weighed. 2 to balance or be 
balanced, be made level or even. - iva mitwizin. 
<Jj.,;1 rinwazan = ritwazan. -iva minwizin. 
<JjlJ waazin I Ivil to make a comparison, note similar-
ities and differences. rana b-awaazin been if-Jac;c;iteen 
dool I am comparing between these two flats. 2/vtl 
2a to equal, 
have 
similar 
standing. 
fi-na;ar-i 
936 
l-carabiyyiteen yiwaznu bact/. in my opinion the two 
cars are alike. 2b to balance. waazin nafs-ak cal-lJabl 
balance on the rope! -vn miwazna; ava miwaazin. 
<JjI.,.1 ritwaazin Ivil passive of waazin. -iva mitwaazin. 
<Jjl.,. tawaazun. Inl equilibrium, balance. 
rilJfa; 
tawazn-ak (1) keep your balance! (2) keep a level 
head! . 
<Jyl rittazan Ivil to be well-balanced. raagil muttazin a 
level-headed man. -vn rittizaan; ava mittizin, muttazin. 
..s j J 
IoSjlJ waaza (i) Ivtll to be parallel with.faaric ramsiis 
yiwaazifaaric silimaan baafa Ramses Street runs para-
llel with SUleyman Pasha Street. r~-~oot laazim yiwaazi 
~-~uura the sound must match the picture. 2 to be com-
mensurate with. riI-!'ugra ma-twazii-J it-tacab the pay is 
not commensurate with the effort. -vn miwaziyya, 
muwazaah t; ava/pva miwaazi. 
IoSjl.,.1 ritwaaza Ivil passive of waaza. -iva mitwaazi, 
mutawaazi. 
IoSjl.,::.. mutawaazi ladjl parallel. mutawaazi 1-rat/.laac a 
parallelogram. 
.Jo!.jl.,::.. mutawaziyeen Idual nl {gym} parallel bars. 
Y IJ" J 
""';J wasbT In! {athl} jumping. ril-wasb il-caali high-
jump. riI-wasb' biz-zaana pole vault. riI-wasb i{-{awiil 
lon.g jump. 
..,..I:J wassaab ladj 
*1 lively, enterprising. roolJ 
wassaaba a dynamic nature. 
tlJ"J 
C:--J wasax Inl Ilpl rawsaaxl dirt, filth. II wasax il-
widaan ear wax, cerumen. -naas zayy' wasax il-widaan 
unpleasant people. 2/no pll excrement, faeces. 
C:--J wisix ladj * and pI rawsaaxl dirty, filthy. II ribn 
il-wisxa son of a whore. 
<J~J wasaxaan Ivnl soiling, dirtying. 
C:--Ji rawsax lell dirtier/dirtiest. 
'->l-J wasaaxa = wasax. 
r::. J wassax I Ivtl to dirty, soil. riI-bint' wassaxit 
hudum-ha bif-fukulaata the girl has made her clothes all 
dirty with the chocolate. II caayiz tiwassax ism-i are you 
trying to blacken my name? 2 Ivil to behave immorally, 
sink low (morally). riI-bint' di wassaxit c;awi that girl 
has become very immodest. wassax c;awifil-kalaam he 
used foul language. -vn tawsiix; ava/pva miwassax. 
r::.';1 ritwassax lvill to become dirty, become soiled. 
timfi xa{Witeen fil-balad di wig-gazma titwassax you go 

two steps in this city and your shoes are dirty. 2 to be 
soiled. -ava/iva mitwassax. 
~I rittasaxf Ivil to become dirty, become soiled. 
ril-yaatja ttasaxit the collar has become dirty. -vn 
rittisaax; ava mittisix. 
&.,......1 ristawsax Ivtl I to consider (too) dirty. 
ristawsax i/- rooc[a tjaam baat barra he thought the 
room dirty and so he slept outside. 2 to select for dirti-
ness. -vn ristiwsaax; ava mistawsax. 
j, IJ" ~ 
&"IJ wasta In pI wasaayitl lone who deploys influ-
ence on another's behalf. gab-Iu wasta he found him an 
intermediary. wastit xeer a conciliator, an influence for 
good. 2 recommendation, influence for obtaining 
advantage. ritwa;;af bi-wasta he got a job by pulling 
strings. 
11 bi-was{it Iprepl by means of. bi-niktiJif iI-guzr 
iI-maksuur bi-was{it raghizit iI-tjiyaas we discover the 
broken part by using meters. 
.l....J wist, wust In! I waist. !Jatt; riid-u f-wist-u he 
placed his hand on his hip. IItimuut 
ir-ratjtja~a 
w-wist-a-ha bi-yillab (a belly-dancer's waist goes on 
wiggling even when she's dying) ... one's habits stay 
with one forever. - wist-i txa/al mil-watjfa ... I'm about 
to collapse from standing for so long. 2 Iw pron suff also 
wis{ii-, wustii-I middle, centre. heart, midst. wist it-
tarabeeza the middle of the table. wist iI-ba/ad the city 
centre. tjlq~ il-xeet fil-wist cut the thread in the middle. 
ft-wistii-na in our midst. II (fi-) wist in-naas in public, for 
everyone to see. - wist id-daar [rur] central courtyard of 
a house. 
Jll....J wistaani, wustaani ladj"·1 middle, central. see 
further under ~ j, IJ" ~ 
'll....J wustaniyya Inl [naut] stern-post. 
.l....J wasa( I/adjl medium, average, middle. xayru 
1-rumuur iI-wasat compromise is best. xaftif wasat [athl] 
welterweight. - In pI rawsaatl 2 agent, medium, in-
strument. 3 milieu. ril-wasa{ iI-fanni the artistic milieu. 
4 average, middle. min rawsaat in-naas from the com-
mon people . 
.l....Ji rawsat f ladj, fem wustal middle, central. 
rif-jarq iI-rawsat the Middle East. ril-quruun iI-wusta 
the Middle Ages. 
~L..J wasaata, 
wisaata 
In 
pI -aatl 
mediation, 
intervention. 
~J wasiit In pI wusatal I medium (in spiritualism). 
2 vehicle, medium. laazim yikuun wasiit fi-natjl ii-loon 
rila I-tjumaaf there must be a medium for transferring 
937 
the colour to the c1oth.lllaamii wasiitcatalyst. - ladjl 
3f middle. ril-l~r iI-wasiit the Middle Ages . 
.l....IJi rawaasi(f 
Ipl nl (roughly) central part. 
!Ja-yiw~al ft- rawaasit iI- rusbuUl he will arrive sometime 
around the middle of the week. raagil min iI- rawaasit an 
average man. rawaasit rurubba Central Europe. 
J..:.J wassat Ivt/l to use (s.o.) as an intermediary or a 
go-between. 
rana m-a!Jibb;-j !Jadd; ywassat-ni 
f-masaaril gawaaz I don't like anyone to ask me to 
mediate in things to do with marriage. 2 to position or 
situate in the middle. wassat iI-!Jizaamfiwayya bring the 
belt more to the middle. -vn tawsiit; ava/pva miwassat. 
J..:..,;-I ritwassat Ivi/l to act as an intermediary or go-
between. 2 to position or situate oneself in the middle. 
3 to be placed or positioned in the middle. -ava/iva 
mitwassat· 
J..:....fA mutawassit ladj ·1 I medium, middle, in-
termediate. ril-mooga I-mutawassita [broadc] medium 
wave. ril-mar!Ja/a I-mutawassita leduc] intermediate 
school level. murahha/aat (or fihadaat) mutawassita 
intermediate (secondary school level) certificates . 
II ril-ba!Jr iI-rabyac[ iI-mutawassit the Mediterranean 
Sea. 2 average. mutawassit it-tuul of average height. 
ftl-mutawassit on the average. 
.l....1.,;-1 ritwaasi{, ritwaasa{ Ivil to act as mediator or 
go-between. -ava mitwaasit. 
.l.... .,......1 ristawsat I Ivtl to select or make towards the 
middle. ristawsat wi-jiil remove those that are in the 
middle. 2~ Ivil to act as a go-between. -ava mistawsat. 
~ j, IJ" ~ see also j, IJ" ~ 
Ja-J was{an Ivtll to make average. was{an iI-fustaan 
make the dress medium-fitting. silt; mwastana a woman 
with an average build. wastan iI-!Jikaayafwayya ... let's 
compromise on the price. 2 to place in the middle . 
was{an ii-beet wastana ma;buuta fig-gineena he built the 
house right in the middle of the garden. -vn wastana; 
ava/pva miwas{an. 
Ja-.,;-I ritwas{an Ivil to place oneself or be placed in 
the middle. -ava/iva mitwas{an. 
tlJ"~ 
f::" J wisil (a) Ivil to become wide. -vn wisl, wasalaan; 
ava wlJIaSil. 
~ .t ~ yisaal, yisac, yasal f Ivt imperfl to be spa-
cious enough to accommodate, have capacity for. 
ril-ristaad bi-yasal !Jawaafi miit ralfthe stadium holds 
about a hundred thousand. 
f::"J wisl In! spaciousness, wideness. ril-fustaan fti 

t~J 
wiSl the dress can be let out.llfi wiSl- in the power of, as 
in fu{lub wi-IIi f-wisl-i falmil-u state what you want 
and I'll do what I can, f1lmil kull illi f-wisl-ak do your 
best. 
40-.1 wisla Inl I abundance, wealth. IImin wisla with 
plenty to spare, as in fil-filuus kaffit. - min wisla 'Was 
there enough money?' 'More than enough.' wi-w~iltu 
fil-malaad. - min wisla 'Did you arrive in time?' 'With 
time to spare.' 2 magnanimity. ma-landuu-jwisla he is 
petty-minded. 
t'"I.1 waasil ladjl spacious, wide. 
IIlja~iirit il-fahl' 
wasla = there's always room for more at a friend's or 
relative's house. -sidr-u waasil he is patient. - ba{n-u 
wasla he is a swindler. -muxx-u waasil he is broad-
minded. -zimmit-u wasla he is unscrupulous. -lala 
I-waasil on a large scale. 
J.&.,,-.,.. mawsuula In pi -aatl encyclopaedia. II raagi/ 
mawsuula a very knowledgeable man. 
:....- sila Inl capacity. ril-qizaaza di silat-ha litr' waaljid 
this bottle holds one litre. 
40-.1 wasala In pi -aatl space, elbow room. yalla ni{/al 
barra fil-wasala let's go outside where there's room to 
breathe. 
~L.....1 wasalaaya In pi -aatl a capacious area. fistanna 
fil-wasalaaya landak stay where you've got space. 
II wasalaayit labdiin Abdin Square. 
e:-) fawsal lell I wider/widest. 2 roomier/roomiest. 
C:-.1 wassal I Ivtl to widen. bi-ywassalu j-jaaril 
quddaam beet-i they are widening the road in front of 
my house. wassal famlaak-u he increased his property 
holdings. II wassal madark-ak broaden your mind. 
- wassal is-sikka get out of the way! 2 Ivil to make 
room. ma-twassalu-Ihajwayya why don't you make a 
little room for her? II quIt ' ya-lli f-wifj-i wassaluu-/i = 
I took to my heels. -vn tawsiil; ava/pva miwassal. 
11 wassal lala to cause to prosper. rabb-i-na ywassal 
laleek God grant you good fortune! ril-waaljid laazim 
yiwassal lal-liyaal fil-liid one should give the kids a 
good time (with food and presents) on the feast. 
J..,,-,; tawsiila Ipl -aatl instance noun of tawsiil. 
~';I fitwassal Ivil to be widened. - iva mitwassal. 
C:-.; tawasslll f In pi -aatl expansion, widening. lja~al 
tawassul fi- falmaal ifJirka there was an increase in the 
company's activities. 
~I fittasal Ivil I to widen, become wide. kaan fii 
xlaaf basii{ ittasal min reer ma ljadd' yuq~ud there was 
a simple disagreement which spread through no one's 
intention. 2 to have capacity. fil-foOlja di b-tittisil 
li-xamsiin nafar this room holds fifty people. -vn 
fittisaal; ava mittisil, muttasil. 
938 
t'",,;-I fistawsal Ivtl I to consider (too) wide. 
fistawsal il-badla w-raggal-ha lit-tarzi he thought the 
suit too loose and returned it to the tailor. 2 to select for 
width. fistawsal kursi w-qalad fii he chose a wide chair 
and sat in it. -vn fistlwsaal; ava mistawsal. 
I J ..,..,} 
";".1 wasaq I (I) Ivtl to load. wasaq il-ljumaar he loaded 
the donkey. markib mawsuuqa a loaded boat. -vn 
wa&iq; pva mawsuuq. 
2 
-"" ..,..,} 
';'.1 wasaq 2, wasiq f (yiwsiq, yasiq f) Ivil to have confi-
dence, trust. siq tamaaman finni b-aljibb-ak (you can) 
be very sure that I love you. -vn siqa, siqa f; ava 
waasiq; pva mawsuuq: 
..... ' slqa, siqa f Inl trust. confidence.ladam is-siqa mis-
trust, lack of confidence. 
";"".1 wasliq, wasiiq f lad) *1 firm, strong. ~adaaqa 
wasiiqa strong friendship. 
....... .1 wasiiqa f, wasiiqa In pi wasaa fiq f, wasaayiql 
document, evidence . 
.;.) fawsaq, fawsaq lell I morel most trustworthy. 
2 firmer/firmest. 
..,L.,.. misaaq f, misaalj In pi mawasiiq f I agreement, 
charter. 
fil-misaaq 
(d-wa{ani) 
Egypt's 
National 
Charter. 
.;..;1 fitwasaq Ivil (impersonal) passive of wasalj 2. da 
raagil ma-yltwasaq-j' fii that man is not to be trusted. 
- iva mitwisiq. 
;.1 wassaq, wassaq f Ivtl I to attest, authenticate. 
fil-mubaYla b-duun tawsiiq ma-tinfalJ an unauthenti-
cated bill of sale is worthless. 2 to strengthen. balaaj 
tiwassaq ~ilat-ak big-gadal da don't deepen your rela-
tionship with that guy. -vn tawsiiq, tawsiiq; ava 
miwassaq, muwassiq f; pva miwassaq, muwassaq. 
,j.,.. muwassilj In *1 notary public. 
;.;1 fitwassaq, fitwassaq f Ivil I to be attested, be 
authenticated. 2 to be strengthened. -iva mitwassaq, 
mitwassaq f . 
.;.,,;-1 fistawsaq, fistawsaq Ivtl to make certain of, 
verify. ruulj istawsaq il-xabar minnujax~iyyan go and 
verify the information from him personally. -vn 
fistiwsaaq; ava mistawsilj. 
loS,!)..,..,} 
~J wiski <Engl> Inl whisky. 
J..,..'} 
;u,.....1 wasiila In pi wasaayil, wasaafill means, way. 

bi-ku/l iI-wasaayil iI-mumkina by all possible means. 
ril-l/'aaya lubarrir iI-wasiila the end justifies the means. 
wasaal'iI 
il-muw~/aal means of transportation. 
wasaa ril ii- I'iqaab explanatory aids. 
~,,;I I'ilwassil, I'ilwassallvil to plead, make an entrea-
ty. b-alwassal !'ileek lisamib-ha I beg you to forgive her. 
- ava mitwassil. 
~,,; lawassalf Ivil to beg, make a plea. -vn lawassul; 
ava mUlawassil. 
,~ .. :j • .:;,,,; lawassulaal/pl nl [lsI] songs of supplication to 
God sung by the muezzin prior to the dawn prayer and 
by professionals at the celebrations of saints' birthdays. 
r..,...J 
rL..J wisaam 
In 
pi I'awsimal 
medal. 
wisaam 
iI-gumhuriyya min id-daraga I-lalla Order of the Re-
public, Third Class. 
... L..J wasaama Inl beauty, good looks. fiiha wasaama 
she's good-looking. 
r-J wasiim ladj *1 handsome, good-looking. fakl-u 
wasiim he is good-looking. 
r-) I'awsam lell morelmost handsome. 
r-J" muusim, mawsim In pi mawaasiml I season. da 
muusim iI-burluCjaan this is the season for oranges. 
2 (public) occasion (usually religious). !'il-I'alyaad wit-
mawaasim feasts and festivals. muusir,n sabla w-lifriin 
ragab the feast of the twenty-seventh of (the month of) 
Ragab. 
.,r-J" muusimi, mawsimi' ladj *1 seasonal. lamal 
muusimi seasonal work. I'ir-riyaab iI-muusimiyya the 
monsoon winds. 
~,,;I I'itwassim, I'ilwassam Ivtl to sense or detect (a 
feeling). I'itwassaml i fiik ir-rQ'(ba fil-musalda I sensed 
that you wanted to help. lac;eel raagil fif1aaril 
ilwassaml i fii I-xeer xalleel if1an{a landu in the street 
I found a man I felt to be honest and left the bag with 
him. - ava milwassim. 
<J ..,.. .J 
,JJ wasan In pi I'awsaanl idol. l'iI-larab c;abl in-nabi 
kaanu b-yilbudu I-I'awsaan before the Prophet the 
Arabs used to worship idols. 
.$'J wasani ladj '1 pagan, idolatrous. 
~J wasaniyya Inl paganism, idolatry. 
..,...J..,...J 
..r.J-J waswis I Ivil to bud, form buds (of cotton). 
!'il-Cjll{n iblada ywaswis the cotton began to bud. -vn 
waswasa; ava miwaswis . 
..r1.J-J wiswaas I Icoll nl cotton bud(s). 
939 
.. .. 
.r.rJ 
z V".JV".J 
V".J-J waswis 2 Ivil to instil evil, awaken doubt. -vn 
waswasa; ava miwaswis. 
"-.J-J waswasa Inl wariness, suspicion, the state of 
being obsessive . 
..r.J-J" miwaswis ladj '1 obsessed, finicky. 
..r1.J-J wiswaas 2 1nl I Ipl wasaawis, wasawiislobses-
sive suspicion. 2 ril-wiswaas the Tempter, Satan . 
..r.J-,,;1 I'ilwaswis Ivi/l to become obsessive, become 
suspicious, become doubtful. 2 (impersonal) passive of 
waswis 2• I'ilwaswis-Iu bad ideas were put into his head. 
-ava milwaswis. 
I loS ..,.. .J 
~J wisiyya In pi wasaaya/l [obsol] large estate (par-
ticularly one belonging to members ofthe royal family). 
2 place in which graft and embezzlement are indulged 
in unchecked. l'if1irka bac;il wisiyya the company has 
become something free for the taking. 
Z loS ..,.. .J 
..,-IJ waasa Ivtl to comfort, console. -vn muwasaah; 
ava miwaasi, muwaasi. 
..,-1,,;1 I'ilwaasa Ivil to be comforted, be consoled. - iva 
milwaasi. 
r loS V" .J 
..r<:-J wiseemi ladjl type of sheep (from Oussim in 
Egypt) characterized by its thin tail (in contrast with the 
baladi type). 
'C.~.J 
e-J waffab Ivil to sing lawafiib. -vn lawjiib: ava 
miwaffib: pva miwaffab. 
ee-"; lawfiib In pi lawafiibl stanzas of classical Arabic 
p~etry sung in praise of the Prophet. 
e-J" muwaffab In pi -aall lyrical poetry set to music 
(of Andalusian origin). IIlamal muwaffab to cause a 
commotion, cause a fuss, as in miraal-U dayman 
bi-tilmil-Iu muwaffab lamma b-yitl'axxar his wife ai-
ways .. gives him a lot of trouble when he's late. 
Jt-..J" muwaffabaati 
In 
pi -yyal 
singer 
of 
muwaffabaat . 
I 
• 
• 
.. ..,.. ..,...J 
..rJ wiff In pi wufuuf, wifuuf, wifaaf, I'awfaafll face 
(of a person or animal). wiff-u nla~fukulaala his face 
was smeared with chocolate. wiff-u lis-sabbuura he is 
facing the blackboard. Ilbooq wiff wash-basin. -kal 
wiff(-u) to reproach (s.o.), as in I'in-naas kalit wiff-i 

.. .. 
"r"r J 
kminni skitt" lal-mawe{uul da people reproached me 
for having kept silent about this subject. -xad wiff-a-ha 
he deflowered her. - !,ir-raagil da b-wiffeen that man is 
two-faced. - wiff-ak wala I-e;amar long time, no see! 
-lala mala wiff-u in haste and under constraint, as in ga 
I-laskari xad-u I-e;ism" lala mala wiff-u the policeman 
came and bundled him off to the station. - !'awaddi 
wiff-i (minnu) feen I am very embarrassed (to see him). 
-ma-Iuu-f wifl' ykallim-ni he's too embarrassed to talk 
to me. -ma-!,iddet-hum-f' wiff I ignored them. 
- bi-kull' wiff' makfuufbrazenly. - wifl' fil- !'are{ embar-
rassed, as in xalleetu wiff-i fil- !'are{ you caused me great 
embarrassment. -Ia wiff-ak wala e{ahr-ak that's all there 
is to it, and that's that. - wiff-u yie;{al il-xamiira min 
il-beet he brings bad luck with him. -fil-wifl' mraaya 
w-fil-e;afa sillaaya [prov] ... he'll smile to your face and 
stab you in the back. - wie;if fi-wiff(-u) to stand up to 
(s.o.). -fi-wiff-u wa/a triff-u frankly, without beating 
around the bush. -wiff-u zayy' e;afaa in bad shape, 
badly beaten. -zayy' wiff-u bad, no-good, awful, as in 
!,iddet-Iu kilmiteen zayy' wiff-u I gave him one hell of a 
telling-off. - wi- !'aadi wiff ie{-e{eef and no more was 
heard from (him), as in xad ig-gineeh wi-!'aadi wiff 
ie{-e{eef he took the pound and has never been heard 
from since. -xad gineeh bi-wiff-u he got a whole pound. 
-ya wiff- how impudent, how cheeky, as in ya wiff-ak 
lamma tistilif min layyil ~urayyar zayy' da it's shame-
less of you to borrow money from a small child like that. 
-di f-wiff-i !'ana this reflects badly on me. - !'ana 
ma-b-addi-Iuu-f wiff I don't encourage him. - wiff-u f-
wiff-i I'm face to face with him. - wiff-u Ijilw • (or wiljif) 
la/ayya he brings good (or bad) luck to me. 2 mask. 
laabis wiff he's wearing a mask. wiff' Iljaam welder's 
mask. 
3a surface, 
upper surface, outer layer. 
!'il-m~awwaraati dalae; il-madda la/a wiff iz-zinka the 
photographer poured the substance on the surface of 
the zinc plate. fii samna lala wifl' ~niyyit il-ba{aa{is 
there is clarified butter over the top of the dish of 
potatoes. II wiffil-e;ahwa foam on the surface of Turkish 
coffee. - wiff ii-laban the skin of the milk (e.g., after 
boiling). - wiff ig-gazma vamp of a shoe. 3b front, 
fa~ade. raas iI-xaruufmilallae;a la/a wiffis-sandara the 
sheep's head is hung on the front of the loft. wiff is-
sideeri the front of the vest. II buus !,iid-ak wiff' w-e{ahr 
(kiss the front and back of your hand) be grateful to 
God. - wiff ik-kabbaas screw-top on a pump-cylinder 
(of, e.g., a primus stove). -Ij-axd-u min wiff-ak I'll 
spare him your attention. - ruur min wiff-i get lost! 
3c side. !,il-mutoor marbuu{ bi-musmaar min in-n~~' 
940 
w-Iu t~(/multeen mil-wifaaf the engine is attached by a 
bolt in the centre and two rivets on the sides. II wiff 
il-!'us{Uwaana the side of a gramophone record. - wiff 
il-e;umaaf the right side of the fabric. 4 layer, coat. 
dahan iI-!'ooe{a wiff' buuya he gave the room a coat of 
paint. II !'aaxir wiff [agric] last crop of the season pro-
duced by an everbearing plant. - Ijalae; dae;n-u wiffeen 
he shaved his face twice. -xad ig-gild' wifl' tafliir he 
went over the hide once (with a razor) removing the 
hair. - lin constrl 5 the type for, the sort cut out for. 
baayin laleeha mifwiff' nilma she seems not to be cut 
out for the soft life. da wifl' suguun he's a jailbird. da 
mifwiff' kida he isn't that sort. da mifwifl'furl he's not 
the hard-working type. diJ mifwiff' gawaaz he is not the 
marrying type. da wifl' fae;r he's poverty prone. 
6 verge, proximity, brink. bae;eena (f-)wiffiNublj it is 
nearly morning. lala wiff id-daraga I-xamsa about to 
att~in the fifth (civil service) grade. 
";-.J waffif Ivtl to arrange with an attractive top layer. 
da raagil raffaaf - waffif e;af~ il-manga w-e;alb il-e;afl¥ 
kull-u manga xasraana the man's a swindler - he's put a 
layer of good mangoes on top ofthe crate, but inside it's 
full. of rotten ones. -vn tawfiif; ava/pva muwaffif. 
';":'.il !,itwaffif Ivil passive of waffif. - iva mitwaffif. 
z • • 
oJ" oJ" .J 
";'.J wafp (i) Ivil to buzz, hum. widaan-i bi-~affar wi-
bi-twiff my ears are whistling and buzzing. -vn waff, 
wafafaan; ava waafif. 
";'.J waff2 /n/. hum, shushing sound. 2 craziness, idio-
cy. landu waffhe's dotty. - ladj invar/3 crazy, idiotic. 
raagil waffa screwball of a man. mihna waffa madden-
i~g profession. 
oJ".i1 !'itwaff Ivil to become crazy. !,inta twaffeet fi-
laffl-ak have you gone mad? - ava mitwaff. 
JJ J..J 
.!l..;.J wafak. wafk: lala wajak or lala wafk on the point 
of, as in w~alna I-maktab wi-huwwa la/a wafk innu 
yie;fil we reached the office just as it was about to close. 
4,.;..J wafiik ladj *1 near, imminent Ijall' wafiik an im-
minent solution. 
.d...Ji !'awfak Ivil • to be about (to do s.th.) !'is-sana 
d-dirasiyya !'awfakit !'innaha tix/~ the academic year is 
about to finish. 2 to draw near. !'il-liid !'awfak the feast 
is nearly with us. - ava muufik T . 
rJ..J 
r-.J wafam T (i) Ivtl to tattoo, have tattooed. wafam-Iu 
!'asad lala sidr-u he had a lion tattooed on his chest. -vn 

wafm; ava waafim; pva mawfuum. 
~., wafm Icoll nI tattoo(s), tattooing. 
W., wafma lunit n, pi -aall a tattoo. 
~..;I filwafam Ivil to be tattooed. -iva milwifim. 
iJ ..;. .J 
i.:..:.., wifna <T vilne> Inl sour cherry, morello cherry. 
";'.J";'.J 
..;. r" wafwif Ivtl to whisperto (s.o.). nadahl ir-rayyis 
wi-wafwifl-u ca/afaan ma-l:Jaddl-J yismae 1 called the 
waiter and whispered in his ear so that no one could 
hear. II wafwifid-dakar (I) {magic] whisper to the male 
(sea-shell) and tell it what you want to know about (said 
to customers by fortunetellers who use sea-shells for 
soothsaying). (2) (joc] come tell it all to papa. -vn 
wafwafa; ava/pva miwafwif. 
.~.,.:.., wafwafa 
Inl whisper. 
II (cilm) il-wafwafa 
method of psychomancy in which the medium allegedly 
communicates with spirits by whispering. 
..;..,-..;1 filwafwif Ivill to whisper. fil-Ialamza kaanu 
b-yilwafwifu maca bacc[ the students were whispering 
together. 2 (impersonal) passive of wafwif. bi-ll:Jibb i 
yilwafwif laha she loves to be whispered to. -vn 
liwafwiif; avaliva milwafwif. 
IS ..;. .J 
or" wafa (i) Ivil to inform (on s.o.). wafa biihum 
li/-buli~ he betrayed them to the police. -ava waafi. 
~ \..:.., wifaaya In pi -aall (defamatory) tale, (malicious) 
gossip. 
..r..;1 filwafa Ivil (impersonal) passive of wafa. 
filwafa bii li/-bulii~ he was betrayed to the police. -iva 
milwifi· 
;.., waffa f (i) Ivtl to embroider. -vn lawfiyya; ava 
m~waffi, muwaffi; pva miwaffi, muwaffa. 
..,.:...;1 filwaffa Ivil to be embroidered. -iva milwaffi. 
..; ~.J 
...AJ., w~af (i) Ivtll to describe. fizzaay nifidar niw~if 
il-I~arruf da how can we describe this behaviour? -I the 
literary passive form occursllaa yUlI,I"afbeyond descrip-
tion. 2 to prescribe. bi-yiw~ifuu-ha lin-naas illi cayza 
Ibarral is-sagaayir they prescribe it for people who want 
to give up cigarettes. -vn 
w~f; ava 
wa~if; pva 
maw~uuf. 
...AJ., w~f In 
pi faw~aafl I description. 
ril-w~f 
il-Iahiili li/-muloor the detailed description of the 
motor. l:Jaaga IfUUfi il-w~f something indescribable. 
II filfia(ac w~f-u it is unique, there is nothing like it any 
941 
more. - bi-w~f- in the capacity of, as in fana 
b-akallim-ak bi-w~f-i mudiir if-Jirka di 1 am speaking 
to you in my capacity as director of this company. 
2 faw~aaf Ipl nl characteristics, qualities. ril-l:JlI,I"aan 
il-carabi lu faw~aaf mucayyana the Arab horse has 
certain characteristics. kaamil il-faw~aaf immaculate. 
:u....., w~fa In pi -aall I set of instructions or direc-
tions. fiU!I-i-lhum w~fil il-beel calafaan yilafiuu b-
suhuula 1 gave them directions to the house so they 
could find it easily. 28 prescription. w~fa baladi folk 
remedy, folk prescription. w~fa li/-l:Jabal ma-Ixayyib-J 
an infallible method for becoming pregnant. 2b recipe. 
w~fil keek cake recipe. 
~., w~fi ladj *1 descriptive. IIfahrasa w~fiyya de-
scriptive cataloguing. 
:u.... ~ifa In pi -aalll characteristic, quality, attribute, 
trait. fawl:Jaf ~ifa fii hiyya k-kidb the worst thing about 
him is his lying. 2 position, capacity. feeh ~ifall:Jaqril-ak 
fil-mawc[uuc da what is your concern with this matter?! 
bi-Ikallim-ni b-~ifal feeh. - bi-~ifal-i waal:Jid lihimm-u 
m~/al:Jl-ak 'Who are you to be speaking to me?' 'I am 
speaking as one who is concerned for your welfare.' 
dafae il-mablar bi-~ifal lafmiin he paid the sum of 
money as a surety.llbi-.dfa in a (certain) manner, as in 
b~-~ifaxa~~a especially, 
bi-~ifa caagila urgently. 
-ma-Iuu-J ~ifa of no consequence, as in da mawquue 
ma-Iuu-J ~ifa bil-marra this is a very trivial matter in-
deed, ma-Iuu-J ~ifa macaana he has nothing to do with 
us. 
~., w~iifa Ifem n, pi -aal, 
w~aayifl {obsol] 
lady-in-waiting . 
.:..u.....I.,.. muw~afaallpl nIl specifications.l:Ja-nicmil 
il-magaari l:Jasab muw~afaal il-l:Jukuuma we'll make 
the drains according to government specifications. 
2 properties, qualities. ril-fiumaaf da lu muw~afaal 
munasba I-camaliyyil ~-~ibaara this cloth has prop-
erties which make it suitable for dyeing . 
...AJ.,.I 
filW~af Ivil I to be described. IIma-lW~af-J 
unique, the likes of which have neve.r been seen, as in 
balwa ma-Iw~afil-J an unprecedented calamity. 2 to be 
prescribed. - iva milW~if . 
...AJ ..; I finw~af = filw~af. - iva minw~if. 
.....;.., w~~af (a) Ivtl to extol, enumerate the qualities 
of. min yoom ma rigcu w-humma fialdiin yiw~~afu 
(fi-)lli fafuu f-makka since their return they have been 
continually describing what they saw in Mecca. -vn 
law~iif; ava/pva miw~~af. 
.....;. jl filw~~af Ivil passive of w~~af. - iva milW~~af. 
....... 1 fill~aff Ivil to possess as a characteristic, quali-

ty, or peculiarity. fil-mudarris in-naagib bi-nagid rinnu 
b-yatta~if bi-bact/.' ~ifaat iI-qaa rid we find that the suc-
cessful teacher is marked by some of the qualities of 
leadership. - vn ritti~aaf; ava mittl~lf, mutta~if. 
......... y.-. mustaw~af In pi -aatl welfare clinic. 
JU"'.J 
J...J 
wi~iIJ, wa~alJ (a) Ivt and viII to reach, come to. 
lamma niw~al (/i-)makka ninzil fi-beet il-mu[awwif 
when we arrive at Mecca we stay at the pilgrim guide's 
house. laazim iI-rigaar yiw~al-ni rawwil if-Jahr I must 
get the rent on the first of the month. w~al-Ii gawaab 
rimbaarib I got a letter yesterday. 2 to attain. 
fil-muwa;;af wi~iI (Ii-)daraga mucayyana the civil ser-
vant reached a certain grade. rana wi~ilt id-daraga s-
sadsa I reached the sixth grade. 3 to extend to, reach as 
far as. bitat iI- rart/. i111 I-Iawwaa[a ma-b-tiw~al-haa-J 
parts of the ground which the drag does not reach. 4 to 
become as much as. fi~-~eef iI-burtaqaan bi-yiw~al 
(Ii-)gineeh il-kiilu in summer oranges go up to a pound a 
kilo. sacaat [ul-ha yiw~al (Ii-)mitreen sometimes it 
reaches two metres in length. 5 to go (somewhere) 
briefly and return. xallii-k hina cala baal ma raw~al 
ii-beet stay here while I nip over to the house. w~iI 
mifwaar he's gone on an errand (but will soon be back). 
- Ivil 6 to arrive. goz-ha wi~iI wi-tca//a her husband 
came (home) and had his supper.ll/ar ma-tiw~al-/no, it 
won't come to that. - filii ba~al wa~al "" it's no use crying 
over SpIlt milk. 7 to arrive (at an objective). 
rid-daggaal Ylw~al It-natiiga tuctabar cagiiba the im-
postor achieves a result which is considered amazing. 
mif ba-niw~alli-ball we shall not arrive at a solution. 
II caayiz yiw~al bi- rayy' [ariiqa he wants to succeed by 
any means. - vn wu~uul; ava waa~iI. 
J...J wa~al2, Wi~112 (I) Ivtl to link, join together. riw~iI 
il-bittiteen dool fi-bact/. join these two pieces together. 
- vn wa~alaan, wa~/; ava waa~il; pva maw~uul. 
J.J-""J w~uul Inl arrival. IIcilm' wu~uul [eommunie] 
receipt of delivery for a registered parcel or letter. 
J.J-""J wu~uuli ladj *1 opportunist. raagll w~uuli 
opportunist, social climber. 
.;J.J-"" J wu~uliyya Inl unscrupulous self-seeking, oppor-
tunism, sycophancy. 
J...J wa~1 In pi wu~ulaat, w~ulal receipt. bi-nibfa; 
wu~ulaat il- rigaar Ii- rinn' ~aablb II-beet baraami we 
keep our rent receipts because the landlord is a crook. 
;J..., J 
wa~/a In pi -aatl 1 joint: connection. rig-gild' fii 
wa~/a there is a Joint in the leather. 2 section. bUll' 
kamaan wa~/a III-masuura add another section to the 
942 
pipe. 3 through-way. fii wa~/a qurayyiba min hina cala 
/aaric silimaan there's a short cut from here to Suley-
man Pasha Street. 4 one of several songs or other items 
in a performance, each followed by an interval. 5 extra 
supply, refill (in cafe jargon). haat wa~lit sukkar bring 
some more sugar. haat wa~/a lif-JII/a bring another 
piece of charcoal for the water-pipe. 
J.J-"".>' maw~uul Inl /mus] pipe of the muzmaar type, 
constructed so that joints may be added or removed to 
change the key. 
;;,L, ~i1a, ~ila In pi -aatl connection, link. fii benna ~i1it 
bubb there's a love-relationship between us. 
~ilit 
qaraaba family connection. 
J\...,) raw~aal Ipl nl !imbs, members (of the body). 
rin-na/aa[ dabb' f- raw~aal-i I felt a burst of energy in 
my limbs. 
J....,;I 
ritw~al Ivil passive of wa~aI2. -iva mitwa~al. 
~ 
J 
wa~~al Ivtl la to convey, take from one place to 
another, deliver. fil-carabiyya di ca/aan tiwa~~al-u f-
/wd this car is for taking him to work. ris-saaci 
bi-ywa~~al ig-gawabaat the office-boy delivers the let-
ters. Ib to accompany from one place to another. 
b-awa~~al-ak li-badd' ma tirkab it-taks I'll go along with 
you till you get a taxi. 2 [elee] to conduct. rin-nabaas 
gayyid it-taw~iiIlik-kahraba copper is a good conductor 
of electricity. 3 to connect, Join. fil-xar[uum bi-yw~~al 
id-dooraq bil-mabsam the hose connects the glass jar 
(of the water-pipe) to the mouth-piece. - Ivi/4 to act 
as a connection. fil-masuura di bi-twa~~al been is-sifoon 
wik-kabineeh this pipe connects the cistern and the 
lavatory. - vn taw~ii1; ava miwa~~al, muw~~iI; pva 
miwa~~al, muwa~~al. 
;a.....,; 
taw~lila In pi -aat, tawa~iilll /elee] contact, con-
nection. 2 ride (from one point to another). fiddaa-Iu 
taw~ii1a Ii/-madrasa he gave him a Itft to the school. 
3 connecting road. taw~lila Iiz-zaqaZliq a road that leads 
to Zagazig. 
~.>' muwa~~iI In pi -aatl [elee] conductor. muwa~~il 
gayyid a good conductor. 
... )t..7,.>' miwa~~alaati In pi -yyal /deris] messenger, 
go-between. 
~.,;I fitwa~~al Ivil passive of waNat. -iva mitwa~~al . 
~.,; tawa~~alf Ivil to attain, achieve. tawa~~alli-ball 
he arrived at a solution. - vn tawa~~ul; ava mutawaHiI. 
J...IJ waa~i1, waa~al Ivtl 1 to continue, persevere in. 
yiwa~il iI-cibaada feel maca nhaar he goes on praying 
day and night. 2 to have a love affaIr with. - vn wi~aal, 
muwa~ala; ava mlwaa~iI. 
J\...,J wi~aal Inl 1 meeting (of lovers), (lovers') tryst. 

fana (aalib il-w~aal 1 want a get-together with my love. 
2 close relationship, communion, mutual understand-
ing. rabb-i-na ydiim i/-w~aal may God keep (us) always 
close to each other. 
a.,1,. muw~/a In 
pi -aatl means of transport. 
bi-yiy~al kitiir finn in-naas mif laqya muw~/a trawway-
hum it often happens that people can find no way to get 
home. laawiz yilyaq furl-u qabl i zaymit il-muw~/aat 
he wants to get to work before the rush hour. II wizaarit 
iI-muw~laat Ministry of Communications. 
J...1.i1 
ritwa~il, fitwaa~allvil passive of wa~il. -iva 
mitwa~i/. 
J...I.,;.. mutawaa~iI ladjl continuous. lamaliyyaat 
mutaw~/a continuous operations. 
J...Ji faw~a[J: feef faw~al-ak finta liihum you don't 
reach their standards. 
J4! r~aal, 
fi~aalf In pi -aatl receipt. bi-ygib-li 
f~aal mUltamad mil-xaziina he's bringing me a receipt 
approved by the cashier's office. 
~I fitt~al Ivil I to be in contact, get in touch. 
ma- falraf-f att~il biik 1 don't know how to get in touch 
with you. Ij-atta~il biik bukra bit-tilifoon I'll telephone 
you tomorrow. 2 to be connected. fil- faks i mitt~il bid-
darabuks the axle connects with the gear-box. II raagil 
mutt~il a well-connected man. - vn 
fitti~aal; ava 
mitt~il, mutta~il. 
J~I fitti~aal In pI -aatl connection, link. kunt i 
b-akallim-u bit-tilifoon lamma I-itt~aal itqa{al 1 was 
talking to him on the phone when we were cut off. 
fis-safiir lu fitt~alaat wasla the ambassador has exten-
sive connections. 
fitti~aal ginsi sexual intercourse. 
IIlala tt~aal in contact with, as in xallii-k la/a tti~aal 
big-gamla stay in contact with the university. -lamal 
itt~alaat to get in touch with people. 
J...,,:;-I 
ristaw~a[J Ivil to find out, discover or detect 
after great effort. fana 
Ij-astaw~al luhum lamma 
ykuunu taljt il- farq I'll find them even if they're at the 
other end of the earth. Ilhuwwa-yna nistaw~al == we 
cannot place ourselves on the same high level as your-
self (polite response to a suggestion of equality between 
the two speakers). - ava mistaw~al. 
~ v4 J 
i......>J w~mar In pI -aatl disgrace, mark of disgrace, 
blemish. di w~ma f-sumlit il-leela this is a slur on the 
family's reputation. w~mit laar great shame. 
,J v4 J 
~J w~i In pI faw~iya/legal guardian. II w~i lala 1-
larf regent. 
943 
~L..J w~aaya Inll guardianship. ru-wi~aaya titfakk" 
lannak baldi sana your guardianship ends in a year's 
time. 2 mandate. 3 recommendation. kaan mitlayyin 
bi-w~aaya 
he 
was 
appointed 
because 
of 
a 
recommendation. 
~J w~iyya, w~iyya In pI w~aayal I advice. di 
w~iyyit-i lik this is my advice to you. II fil-w~aaya I-lafr 
the Ten Commandments. 2 last will and testament. 
fatalju I-wi~iyya w-qaruu-ha they opened the will and 
read it. fil-wa~iyya I-wagba [leg] compulsory will in 
which a man whose son has died leaving children is 
obliged to bequeath to those children that share of his 
estate which their father would have inherited. 
';'J w~~a (i) Ivtl I to enjoin, direct. 
w~~eet-u 
yrawwalj {awwaali 1 urged him to go home immediate-
ly. filii w~~a laleeha I-Ijakiim == just what the doctor 
ordered, as in lalqa mi-lli wa~~a laleeha I-Ijakiim just 
the thrashing needed. IIma-twa~~i-nii{ don't press me 
(I am already aware of the necessity). 2a to enjoin the 
concern of (s.o.). waHit-ni lal-wilaad she asked me to 
take care of the kids. fibqa w~~i I-mudiir lala-bn-i do 
recommend my son to the director. fin-nabi w~~a lala 
saabil gaar == even the most distant neighbour should 
be given good treatment. 2b to solicit the help of (s.o., 
in obtaining something). fibqa w~~i I-fum "lala keeka 
lalafaan iI-Ijafla get the bakery to prepare (or send) a 
cake for the party. -vn taw~iyya; ava miw~~i. 
11 wa~~a bi- to bequeath. w~~it bi-kulli sarwit-ha li/-
qu{{a she bequeathed all her wealth to the cat. 
~,; taw~iyya 
In 
pI -aatl 
recommendation. 
ma-Ijaddi{ yitlayyin fil-wizaara min reer taw~iyya no 
one can get a job in the ministry without a 
recommendation. 
.;.,. muw~~a Ipvalll muw~~a lalee [communic] reg-
istered (of the mail ). 
';',;1 
fitw~~a Ivill to behave considerately or gener-
ously. fig-gazzaar bi-yitw~~a biyya lafaan ibn-u landi 
fil-f~1 the butcher gives me special treatment because 
his son is in the class 1 teach. II fitwa~~aa-bu give him a 
hard time! - da ma-yitw~~aa{ he is terrible. 2 passive 
of w~~a. - ava/iva mitw~~i. 
~) faw~ar Ivil to make a bequest. faw~at-li b-kull 
illi landaha she bequeathed to me everything she had. 
-ava mu~i; pva mu~a. 
~.Y-
yiw~iJ Ivt, imperf onlyl to urge, advise. raw~ii-k 
lumr-ak ma-tkallim in-naas dool 1 urge you never to 
talk to these people. 
• ..;:. J see ,J";:' J 

y~.J 
~J wacf.cf.ab Ivtl to prepare, put in order, adjust, 
arrange. 
ris-sikirtiira 
wacf.cf.abit-li muqabla maea 
l-mudiir the secretary arranged a meeting with the 
director for me. laazim rawacf.cf.ab il-larabiyya I must 
get the car fixed. b~~' fil-miraaya w-wacf.cf.ab nafs-u he 
looked in the mirror and tidied himself up. wacf.cf.abi 
l-fakl a Gala baal ma fargal have the food ready by the 
time I come back. wacf.cf.ab ig-ga;iida {journ] to layout 
the pages. IIqism it-tawcf.iib {print] layout division. 
- wacf.cf.ab il-qacr {communic] to couple a train. -xud-u 
ya laskari wacf.cf.ab-u officer, take him and teach him a 
les~on! -vn tawcf.iib; ava/pva miwacf.cf.ab. 
~.". muwacf.cf.ib In °1 {print] layout specialist. 
Jt,..;...". miwacf.cf.abaati 
In 
pi -yyal {print] 
layout 
spe.cialist. 
~..;I fitwacf.cf.ab Ivil to be prepared, put in order, 
adjusted or arranged. - iva mitwacf.cf.ab. 
c.~.J 
~J wacf.al:J (a) Ivil to become clear, become obvious. 
ril-masfala wacf.al:Jit dilwaqti the matter has become 
clear now. -vn wucf.uul:J; ava waacf.il:J. 
~I~ waacf.il:J ladj °1 clear, obvious. 
~JI fawcf.al:J J leU c1earer/clearest. 
~J wacf.cf.al:J Ivt/ to explain, clarify. miJ laarif 
fawacf.cf.al:J il-mawcf.uul I don't know how to clarify the 
matter. -vn tawcf.iil:J; ava/pva miwacf.qal:J. 
~..; tawcf.iil:Ji 
ladjl 
illustrative, 
explanatory. 
fiddii-ni rasma tawcf.il:Jiyya l-mutoor il-larabiyya give 
me: an illustrative drawing of the car engine. 
~..;I fitwacf.cf.al:J Ivil to be explained, be clarified. - iva 
mitwacf.cf.al:J. 
~Ji rawcf.al:J2f Ivtl to clarify. -vn fiicf.aal:J. 
c.~! ficf.aal:J, riicf.aal:J Inl clarification. wasaa ril il-
ficf.aal:J leduc] explanatory aids. 
~I fittacf.al:J Ivil to become clear. rittacf.al:J liina finn' 
miJ huwwa iii kaan hina leelit fimbaaril:J it became 
evident to us that it wasn't he who was here last night. 
-vn fitticf.aal:J; ava mitticf.il:J. 
~.;:-I ristawcf.al:J Ivt/ to seek (and gain) clarification 
of. rana stawcf.al:Jt il-l:Jikaaya min fawwil-ha l-faxir-ha 
I clarified the matter from beginning to end. - vn 
fistiwcf.aal:J, fisticf.aal:J; ava mistawaal:J. 
t~.J 
~J wacf.al (yiwcf.al, yacf.al f) Ivt/ 1 to put, place. leeh 
tiwcf.al nafs-ak fll-mawqif il-mul:Jrig da why are you 
placing yourself in this embarrassing situation? laazim 
944 
tacf.al m~lal:Jit fixwaat-ak fi-ltibaar-ak you should take 
the interests of your brothers and sisters into considera-
tion.11 wacf.al yadd-u lal-limaara he took possession of 
the building by occupancy. - wacf.l il-yadd (1) squatters' 
rights. (2) {Chr] laying on of hands. - wacf.al taqriir to 
make a repo~t. - finta wacf.alt' xitm-ak laleeha {abus] 
(have you placed your seal on it?) have you taken 
possession of it? 2 to establish, set up. ril-l:Jukuuma 
wacf.alit ni;aam gidiid the government established a 
new system. 3 to give birth. wacf.alit binayya zayy il-
qamar she gave birth to a very pretty little girl. fagaazit 
wacf.l maternity leave. -vn wacf.l; ava waacf.il; pva 
mawcf.uul· 
~J wacf.l In 
pi rawcf.aall la position, location. 
bi-taaxud nafs il-wacf.l' btf!.al is-siriir it takes the same 
position as the bed. Ib position, status. il-mudiir lu 
wacf.l-u the director has his own status. 2 situation. 
ril-wacf.l' kaanfawcf.a the situation was chaotic. 3 pose. 
xad laha~uwar fl- fawcf.aal muxtalifa he took pictures of 
her in different poses. 
t""""" mawcf.uul 
In 
pi mawacf.iil, 
mawcf.ulaatl 
I subject, topic, theme. rixtaar mawcf.uul wi-ktib lalee 
choose a subject and write about it. feeh mawcf.uul 
ir-risaala what's the topic ofthe thesis? 2 matter, affair, 
business. rana Jaayil fiid-i min il-mawcf.uul da I'm 
washing my hands of this affair. kaan il-mawcf.uul maaJi 
ma;buuc everything was going along fine. II fil-
mawcf.uul finn- the fact of the matter is, as in 
ril-mawcf.uul finnu tgawwiz il-bint the fact of the matter 
is that he married the girl. 
...r""""" mawcf.uulif ladj °1 I objective. xallii-na 
mawcf.uliyyiin fll-munatifa let's be objective in the dis-
cussion. 2 according to subject. ta~niifmawcf.uuli clas-
sification according to subject. 
11 mawcf.uliyyan f ladvl objectively. laazim tinaqiJ-ni 
mawcf.uliyyan you've got to discuss with me objec-
tively. 
~ W. J wacf.aala Inl baseness, meanness. raagi/ fl-yaayit 
il-wacf.aala a very contemptible man. 
~J wacf.iil ladj °1 base. faxlaaq wacf.iila low 
manners. 
~) rawcf.al leU baser/basest. 
~.". mawcf.il In pi mawaacf.ill place, spot. fi-nafs i/-
mawcf.il on the same spot. 
~.". mawcf.ili ladj °1 local. bing' mawcf.ili local 
anaesthetic. 
~ 
..; 1 fitwacf.al Ivil passive of wacf.al. -iva mitwicf.il. 
~ 
..; 1 finwacf.al = fitwacf.al. -iva minwicf.il. 
~I..;I fitwaacf.al Ivil to be humble, act in a modest 
way. wi-iii yitwaacf.al yibqa yalcaan is he who behaves 

modestly at fault? -vn tawaatful t; ava mitwaatfil, 
mut~waatfil . 
t I..:a;I rittitfaal In! humility, modesty, self-effacement. 
t"'.,:-I ristawtfal Ivtl to consider base. lamma /ufna 
raflaal-u stawtfat;naa when we saw the way he behaved 
we marked him out as a low type. -ava mistawtfal. 
4S JIIJ 
• ~J wutfuww, witfuww In! [lslJ ritual ablution before 
prayer. ril-rinsaan ilti laayiz y~alli laazim yitwatftfa 
wutfuww i ma;buut a person who wishes to pray must 
perform the ritual ablutions correctly. 
~ 
meetfa In pI -aatl fountain for ablutions in a 
m~sque. 
~J watftfa Ivtl[lslJ 1 to assist (s.o.) to perform ritual 
ablutions before pr!lyer. talaala lamma rawatftfii-k 
come, I'll help you wash for prayer. 2 to suffice (of 
water) for the performing of the ablution. ril-mayya di 
twatftfi la/ara this is enough water for ten (i.e. a lot of 
pe?ple) to wash for prayer. -vn tawtfiyya; ava miwatftfi. 
~..;I ritwatftfa Ivil [lslJ to perform ritual ablutions. 
-vn tawtfiyya; ava mitwatftfi. 
'~J see 4S~J 
~~J 
~J wa[iidt ladj ·1 firm. ~adaaqa wa[iida strong 
friendship. 
.u..,i rawtad lell firmer/firmest. 
.u:J wattad Ivtl to make firm, strengthen. wattad 
lilac;t-u biiha he strengthened his relationship with her. 
rana wattadti nafs-i lala kida I inured myself to the 
situation. -vn taw[iid; ava/pva miwattad . 
.u:..;1 ritwattad Ivil to be made firm, be strengthened. 
-iva mitwa((id. 
I.J~J 
j.J wattar Ivtl to frame (a space) for the purpose of 
construction or decoration. -vn taw[iir; ava/pva 
miwattar. 
j...;1 ritwattar Ivil passive of wattar. - iva mitwattar. 
z .J~J 
).J watar In pI rawtaarl objective, aim, end. lamma 
xad watar-u minha sab-ha w-raalJ ti-lfer-ha when he had 
got what he wanted out of her, he left her and went off 
to someone else. 
~~J 
JoJ watan In pI rawtaanl homeland, nation. 
945 
~J watani ladj ·1 1 national. II ril-lJayy iI-watani 
[obsolJ the native quarter. 2 patriotic, nationalistic. 
~J wataniyya Inl patriotism, nationalism. 
Jo ~ maw[in t In pI mawaa[inJ 1 native place, home 
town. reeh iI-maw[in iI-r~ti btaal-ak where do you 
come from originally? 2 source, centre. laazim c;ism 
iI-ridaar yinabbih in-naas lala mawaatin iI-xu(Uura f-
buyut-hum the fire department ought to alert people to 
sources of danger in their homes. mawaa[in itf-tfalj 
points of weakness. 
JoI~ muwaatin In ·1 citizen. 
JJ wattan Nt} 1 to cause to settle down. taw[iin iI-
badw the settling of. the nomads. 2 to accustom, get 
(s.o.) used (to s.th.). ma-y~alJlJ if tiwattan-hum lala 
kida you shouldn't get them used to this. laazim 
tiwattani nafs-ik min dilwac;ti lala rinnik misafra 
mlaaya you must get yourself accustomed from now on 
to the fact that you are going away with me. - vn taw[iin; 
ava/pva miwattan. 
J..;I ritwattan Ivil 1 passive of wattan. 2 to settle, 
take up residence in a new place. ritwattanu fi-
skindiriyya they took up residence in Alexandria. 3 to 
beco~e endemic. ril-bilharsiya twattanit fi-m~ri min 
zamaan bilharziasis became endemic in Egypt a long 
time ago. -vn tawattun; ava/iva mitwattan. 
Jo.,:-I ristawtan Ivtll to settle, take up residence in a 
new place. 2 to become endemic. ramraatf mustaw[ina 
endemic diseases. -vn ristiitaan t; ava mistawtan, 
mustawtin; pva mistawtan, mustawtan . 
~J~J 
.11)'J wi(Waat, wa(Waat In pI watawiitl [zoolJ bat. 
lamliin zayy iI-watawiit (they are behaving just like 
bats) they never come out before dark. 
4S ~ J 
~J wi[i (a) Ivil 1 to become low(er), decrease in 
height. riI-mayya wityit fil-biir the water (level) in the 
well has gone down. II lili walla wi[i whatever his stand-
ing, whatever people say of him. 2 to become quiet(er). 
~oot-u wi[i his voice became quieter. 3 to becom€ 
low(er) (in pitch). 4 to fall, decrease (statistically). 
daragit iI-lJaraara wityit the temperature fell. 5 to de-
cline, fall (morally, socially etc.). -vn wi[iww; ava 
waa[i. 
~IJ waati ladj ·1 1 low. mayyit in-niil watya f~-~eef 
the water of the Nile is low in summertime. II ril-lJuruuf 
iI-watya (1) Arabic letters which dip below the line. 
(2) lower case letters in the Latin alphabet. -gaab 
laliirha wa[ii-ha he turnpd everything upside-down, he 

upset things completely. - riI-muus fii laali w-waati the 
razor blade is dented. - ma-bi-yyu{{'-fwaati rabadan he 
never acts humbly. 2 subdued, low. c[ayt' waa{i low 
pressure. 3 quiet. ~oot waati a quiet voice. 4 low in 
pitch. S base, inferior. raxlaali watya low moral stan-
dards. naas watyiin ill-mannered people . 
• u..J watra Inl pressure, intensity. riI-marac[ xaffit 
watrit-u the illness let up. 
U. J wata Inl footwear. \I ribn iI-wata low bastard! - balia 
laamil zayy iI-wata he was reduced to shame-faced 
silence. 
Jo) rawta lel/lower/lowest. 
jJ watta Ivtl I to lower, make low. watti ktaaf-ak 
Jiwayya lower your shoulders a bit. 2 to quieten. wat{i 
r-radyu turn down the radio! watti ~oot-ak lower your 
voice! 3 to cause to fall (statistically). rid-dawa 
ya-ywatti c[-c[ayt the medicine will lower the blood 
pressure. 4 to cause to decline (morally, socially etc.). 
rabuu-ya wattaa-ni w-gooz-i lallaa-ni (my father 
lowered my rank but my husband raised me) I married 
into a higher class. - Ivil S to bend down. watta lala-
bn-u he bent over his son. 6 to become lower, go down. 
rit-tayyaara lammaala twatti the plane is continuing to 
lose height. 7 to become quiet(er). rir-radyu watta 
xaall~ the radio became very faint. -vn tawtIYya; aval 
pva miwatti. 
j.;1 ritwatta Ivil passive of watta. -iva mitwatti. 
u..1.; .Jol.; tawaataf Ivil to connive. -vn tawaatur; 
ava mutawaati. 
Jo .;;-1 ristaw{a Ivtl I to consider (too) low. ristaw{a 
1- rooc[a ma-rc[li-f yiskin fiiha he wouldn't live in the 
room because he thought the ceiling too low. 2 to select 
for lowness. ristaw{a wi-ggawwiz he selected (a girl) 
from a lower class and married (her). - vn ristiw{a; ava 
mlstaw{l. 
~.l; .J 
...,..1;) 
raw~ab lell morelmost regular. 
...,..I;IJ wad~ib. waa:;ab Ivil to act regularly. rit-taalib 
Ik-kuwayyis bi-ywaa:;ib lala d-duruus a good student 
attends classes regularly. - vn muwa:;ba; ava miwaa:;ib. 
...,..1;1.;1 
ritwaa~ib Ivil (impersonal) passive of waa~ib. 
rid-dawa laazim yitwaa~ib lalee the medicine should be 
taken regularly. - iva mitwaa~ib. 
...; .l; .J 
~J wa~iifa In pI wa~aayif, wa~aarifr I I employ-
ment, Job, situation, !'Illanaat wa~aayif situations 
vacant ads. wafllfa mm yeer wafiifa a job with no 
function, sinecure. 2 function. 
wa~iifit iI-laddaad 
946 
rinnu yiysib I-istihlaak the function of the meter is to 
keep account of consumption. lilm 
wa~aarif iI-
ralc[aar physiology. 
~J wa~iifiT ladjl of or pertaining to employment. 
ris-sillim iI-wa~iifi [admin) the employment scale. 
~J waHaf Ivtl to employ, make use of. wa~~af-ni 
fif-firka btalt-ak give me employment in your com-
pany. fii yaaga ma rmuuna twa~~af fiiha fluus-ak is 
there something safe for you to invest your money in? 
- vn taw~iif; ava/pva miwaHaf. 
~.J" muwa~~af In */1 government official, civil ser-
vant. bukra !'agaaza I-muwa~~afiin iI-yukuuma tomor-
row is a holiday for government employees. 2 white-
collar worker. rabuu-ya muwa~~affil-bank my father is 
a bank employee. 
~.;I ritwaHaf Ivil to obtain employment, especially 
as a white-collar worker. bald' ma txall~ tacliim-ak 
ya-titwa~~af wi-titgawwiz after you've finished your 
education you will get a job and get married. -ava 
mitwaHaf. 
...AI.; .;;-1 
ristaw~afJ Ivil to obtain a post or employ-
ment. ruuy ristaw~af-Iak fi-firka go find yourself a job 
with a company. rabuu staw~af fi-wzaarit ir-rayy his 
father obtained a post with the Ministry of Irrigation. 
- ava mistaw~af. 
...AI.; ii-" mustaw~afJ In *1 one who has a job with the 
government or a company. 
.l;.J.l;.J 
1 )oJ wa~wi~. wa~wa~ Ivil [joe slang) to mature (of a 
girl), become nubile. riI-bitt' wa~wa~it marra wayda 
the girl bloomed all of a sudden .ll/amma twa~wa~ ,., not 
on your life! -vn wa~wa~a; ava miwa~wa~. 
~J)oJ wa~wuu~a Ifem adj, pI wa~awii~1 [joe slang) 
voluptuous (of a girl). -/nominallyl riI-wa~awii~ the 
girls. 
• t.J see Z..s t.J: wllaar 
"r't.J 
~.;;-I ristawlab Ivtl I to hold, have room for. 
lawziin rooc[a wasla tistawlib magmulaat kiblira we 
need a large room that can hold big groups. 2 to com-
prehend, 
understand, 
grasp 
the 
meaning 
of. 
!,istawlabu 
d-dars 
they 
mastered 
the 
lesson. 
ristawlabna n-naksa we realized the significance of the 
(1967) defeat (and learnt from it). -vn ristilaab; aval 
pva mistawlib. 
.)t.J 
.l&oJ walad (iJ Ivtl I to promise. rabuu walad-u b-

larabiyya his father promised him a car. 'lawlid-ak 
niqaqqi yoom fil-haram I promise you we'll spend a day 
at the Pyramids. 2 to provide (of God). rabb-i-na 
walad-ni bil-Ijagg God has enabled me to make the 
pilgrimage. II di liI-mawludiin mif 1iI-ljassiiba {prov] 
.(good fortune is) for those who have it provided by 
God, and not for those who scheme and plan. - vn 
wacd; ava waalid; pva mawluud. 
J.&. J wald In pI WUluudl 1 promise. 2 provision (from 
God).lIya wald-i expression of praise and admiration, 
as in 'laxuu-yaftara larabiyya gdiida ya wald-i laleeha 
my brother bought a wonderful new car! -da waldi 
w-maktuub it is all predestined (said in times of disas-
ter). - 'lis-sald' wald good fortune is a gift from God. 
-Ija-tistilaqqa wald-ak you'll get the punishment you 
deserve. 
~r.J" mawluud 
1 ladjl 
prescribed, 
stipulated. 
fil-yoom il-mawluud on the appointed day. 2 In *1 for-
tunate one. da min il-mawludiin he's a lucky man. 
oJ.&. J wilda In pi -aatl commitment, pledge. kaan fii 
wilda beeni w-beenu he and I were mutually 
committed. 
-¥-J waliid Inl wrath. xaaf min waliid rabb-i-na wi-mfi 
kwayyis fear the wrath of God and behave yourself. 
J.&..J" mawlidf 
In 
pI mawaliidl appointed time. 
IImawaliid il-qatr train timetable. 
~L..,... malaad, milaad In pI mawaliidl 1 appointed 
time, set time. ma-bi-yguu-j fi-mawaliid if-jU'..t il-
ma;buuta they don't come to work on time. milaad 
il-1rada qarrab it's nearly lunch time. 2 appointment, 
engagement. landi mlaad is-saala sitta I have an 
appointment at six o'clock. laazim taxdi mlaad min 
id-duktuur you should make an appointment with the 
doctor. mawaliid-u mif ma;buuta he is not punctual. 
- mawaliid Ipl nl 3 timetable, schedule. mawaliid 
is-sikka l-Ijadiid the railway timetable. 
J.&.;I 'litwalad Ivil I to be promised. 2 to be granted 
good fortune. 'lin fa-lla titwilid may you have 
similar good fortune (said on happy occasions such as a 
marriage, a visit to Mecca etc.). - iva mitwilid. 
J.&. jl 'linwalad = 'litwalad. - iva minwilid. 
~;I 'litwauad Ivtl to threaten. 'lil-mudiir itwauad-u 
quddaam zumalaat-u the manager threatened him in 
the presence of his colleagues. - avalpva mitwallad. 
J.&.IJ waalid, waalad Ivtl to make an appointment 
with, arrange to meet (s.o.). 'lana ma-walidt-ak-ji 
lal-waqt i da I did not make an appointment with you 
for this time. -vn miwalda; ava miwaalid. 
J.&.I;I 'litwaalid Ivil to make an appointment with one 
another. -ava mitwaalid. 
947 
,.1&.) 'lawlad = walad. 
J.&.'y-I 'listawlid Ivtl to threaten. 'listawlid-u b-lalqa 
he threatened to thump him. - ava mistawlid. 
.) t J 
OJ r J wUluura f Inl ruggedness. 
/"IJ waalir ladj *1 {slang] rugged, dangerous. sikka 
walra a rough road. II raagil waalir unscrupulous man. 
-mara walra highly-sexed woman. -leen-u walra he's 
an insolent shameless man. -siniin walra hard times. 
/"'y-I 'listawlar Ivil to become wild. - ava mistawlar. 
..i tJ 
r J walaz f (iJ Ivil to give an intimation. 'leeh illi 
walaz-lak bil-fikra di what put this idea into your head? 
- ava waaliz; pva mawluuz. 
r) 'lawlaz f = walaz. -vn 'liilaaz; ava muuliz; pva 
muulaz. 
Ja, t J 
~J wala; (i. aJ Ivtl to give religious instruction to, 
preach to. baldi rna nismal il-qur'laan il-waali; 
bi-yiwli; in-naas after we have listened to the Koran 
the preacher preaches to the people. -vn wal;. 
wala;aan; ava waali;; pva mawluu;. 
~J wal; Inl sermon, lecture. 
~J wal;a In pI -aatl {Chr] homily, sermon. 
~ 
I., waali; In pI wuuaa;1 preacher. 
J:.&. li;a f In pI -aatl sermon, lecture. 
~.J" mawli;a In pi mawaali;1 I speech, sermon. 
2 sign (from God). haziimit yunyu kaanit mawli;a min 
allaah the June defeat was a lesson from God. 
~;I 'litwala; Ivil to be edified, learn a lesson. 
'lis mal kalaam 'labuu-k wi-twili; minnu listen to what 
your father says and learn from it. - avaliva mitwili;. 
~;I 'linwala; = 'litwala;. - ava/iva minwili;. 
~I 'littala; f = 'litwala;. - avalpva mittili;. 
~'y-I 'listawla;J Ivil to take heed, be taught a good 
lesson. - ava mistawla;. 
tt J 
tJ wau (i) Ivtl to vomit. wau illi f-batn-u he vomited 
what was in his stomach. -vn wall, walalaan; ava 
waalil· 
t J will Inl sound of vomiting. qaal will he started to 
vomit. 
.!l t J 
~ 
J walka In pI -aatl mild sickness. 

.!l.r.JA mawluuk ladi *1 suffering from a mild sickness 
or indisposition. 
'*'.;1 ritwalak Ivil to become slightly ill, become in-
disposed. - ava mitwilik. 
~.;I ritwauak = ritwalak. -vn tawauuk; ava 
mitwilik. 
t.Jt.J 
t.r.1 walwal Ivil to whimper or snivel out of weak-
ness and cowardice. -vn walwala; ava miwalwal. 
IloSt.J 
~.1 wili (a) Ivill to take care. wili Ii-fluus-u he took 
good care of his money. 2 to take heed, pay attention: 
wili /il-ka/aam illi tc;aal he took heed of ~hat was said. 
3 to (be old enough to) retain a memory (ofs.th.). rana 
m-awlaa1la/-varb il-laa/amiyya t-tanya I don't re-
member the Second World War. fana ma-wlitj' 1-
gidd-i I wasn't old enough to know my grandfather. 
4 to move away. wili min gamb i{-{arabeeza he moved 
away from the edge of the table. riwla mis-sikka get 
out of the way! riwla kida xalli I-hawa yxuJJmove away 
and let the air'come in. -vn walY, walayaan; ava 
waali. 
11 riwla or riwlaa-k limper; fern riwli or riwlaa-ki, 
pi riwlU or riwlaa-kul (1) Iw foil imperf of kaanl let it 
not be that. riwla tikuun va-timJi I hope you won't be 
going away. riwla tkuun v~alit vaaga I hope that no-
thing has happened. (2) Iwit" foil verb other than kaanl 
don't, be careful not to. fiwlu timJu min hina don't 
leave this place! riwla t[addi l-[ataba be careful not to 
cross the threshold. (3) Iwith no foil verb; fiwla, fiwli, 
fiwlu onlyl be careful (of)! watch out (for)!. fiwla 
raas-ak watch your head! fiwla t-tilbaan be careful of 
the snake! fiwla I-liyaal watch out for the kids! 
~.1 walY Inl consciousness, awareness. yaayib lan (or 
faac;id) il-walY unconscious. law landaha Jeef min 
il-walY' kaanit tilraftit~arraf fizzaay if she had her wits 
about her she would know how to behave. 
IIma-huwwaa1 fi-walY-u he's not in his right mind. 
~I.1 waali ladi °1 I aware, attentive. fi/-mulac;c;in 
laazim yikuun waali fasnaaf larll il-masraviyya the 
prompter must pay close attention during the perform-
ance of the play. 2 experienced in the ways of the 
world. raagil waali a man who knows his way around. 
3~ grown-up (of a child). walad waali a big boy. 
~) fawla lell I more/most aware or attentive. 
2 more/most grown-up. 
';'.1 ",alla Ivtl I to make aware (especially of dan-
948 
ger) , caution. laazim tiwaui l-waad wi-tfahhim-u 
you've got to make the boy aware and explain to him. 
2 to indoctrinate. tawliyit il-gamahiir indoctrinating 
the masses. -vn tawliyya, tawliya r; ava miwalli. 
';'.;1 fitwaua Ivil I to be made aware, be cautioned. 
2 to be indoctrinated. -iva mitwaui. 
~.f-I fistawla Ivtl I to consider or deem aware. 
2 ~ to consider (a child) grown-up. -ava/pva mistawli. 
1 loS t.J 
~.1 wilY Icoll nl crockery, pots and pans. bald il-yada 
iJ1arraaia b-tiysil il-wilY after lunch the maid washes 
the dishes. 
~\&..1 wilaaya, walaaya In pi -aatl cooking-pot, pan. 
.1&..1 wilaafr In pi fawliyal container, receptacle. 
fil-fawliya l-Iimfawiyya the lymph nodes. ril-rawliya 
d-damawiyya the blood vessels. II wilaaf qariibi tax 
bracket. 
J t..J 
J.i;..1 wayd ladi pi fawyaadl scoundrelly. 
.; t..J 
..f.11 fawyorr Ivtl to provoke to animosity. feeh illi 
fawyar ~adr-ak lalee what caused you to have these bad 
feelings about him? - ava miwyir; pva mawyuur. 
J .t..J 
J&..;I fitwarril Ivil to make progress, advance, make 
(good) headway. huwwa twarrilfit-tigaara c;awi he got 
on very well in business. -ava mitwarril. 
~.J t..J 
...;..,&..1 waywiJ, waywaJ Ivt/ to cause to be anxious or 
doubtful. ka/aam id-duktuur waywiJ-ni xaal~ what the 
doctor said worried me a great deal. -vn waywafa; 
ava/pva miwaywiJ. 
"';'.,&..;1 fitwaywiJ Ivil to become or be made anxious. 
- ava/iva mitwaYWiJ. 
~ "";.J see 1oS"";.J: wafaaf 
J"";.J 
.,».1 waf ad (i) Ivil to come from a distance, especially as 
a delegate or delegation. bi-yiwfid la/a m~r' suyyaav 
kitiir many tourists come to Egypt. -vn wafadaan, 
wufuud; ava waafid. 

..Ii IJ waafid In *1 visitor from abroad. II ridaarit il-
waafidiin office responsible for foreign students in 
Egypt. 
..IiJ wafd, wafd In pI wufuudl delegation. wafdi m~ri 
f-hayrit il-rumam Egypt's delegation at the UN. 
II ril-wafd (il-m~ri) Egypt's largest political party be-
fore the 1952 Revolution. 
..Ii 1.;1 ritwaafid Ivil to arrive in number and in succeS'-
sion, come in waves. -ava mitwaafid. 
..IiJi rawfad Ivtl to send (a delegate). rig-gamla 
lJa-tiwfid {albeen li-faransa lafaan yidrisu radab the 
university will send two students to France to study 
literature. rana muufad min land iJ-jirka I have been 
sent on behalf of the company. -vn rifaad; ava muufid; 
pva muufad. 
,;JJ 
)J wafr In pI wufuraatl savings. wufuraat il-mizaniyya 
unspent balance in the budget. IIlummaal wufuraat 
workers discharged as redundant. 
o)J wafra In! abundance. bi-wafra abundantly. 
)Ji rawfar lell I morelmost abundant. 2 morelmost 
economical. 
piJ wafiir ladj *1 abundant. 
)IJ waafir ladj "I abundant. gamaal waafir great 
b~auty. 
)J waffar Ivtl I to save, save up. waffaru flus-ku 
w-hatu-lku titifizyoon save up your money and buy 
yourselves a television. II daftar tawfiir a post-office sav-
ings book. 2 to be sparing with, economize on. waffar 
talb-ak spare yourself the trouble. riJ-jirka lJa-twaffar 
xamsiin laamil the company will economize (by laying 
off) fifty workers. II rilli landu kilma ywaffar-ha keep 
your opinions to yourself! 3 to provide in abundance. 
waffarit-lu kulli wasaaril ir-raalJa she got everything 
together to make him comfortable. -vn tawfiir; ava 
m..iwaffar. 
).;1 ritwaffar Ivil I to become abundant, become 
plentiful. r~-~abuun itwaffar fis-suue; soap has become 
freely available on the market. 2 to be saved up. 3 to be 
economized on. lummaal kitiir itwaffaru a lot of work-
ers were laid off (as a part of an economy drive). - ava/ 
iva mitwaffar. 
)1.;1 rilwaafar Ivil I to become abundant. 2 to be 
fulfilled (of conditions). -vn tawaafur t; ava mitwaafir, 
mutawaafirt. 
JJJ 
.:;iJ wife; lIn! accord, harmony, agreement. rahamm a 
949 
lJaagafil-gawaaz il-wife;i been is-silti w-goz-ha the most 
important thing in marriage is harmony between the 
woman and her husband. 2 Iprepl according to. door 
il-mudarris bi-yit¥Qyyar wife; ilJtiyagaat i(-(alaba the role 
of the teacher changes according to the needs of the 
students. 
11 wifqan t li-, wUfqan li- in accordance with. wifqan 
li{-{alabaat in accordance with the requests . 
.:;iJi rawfae; lell morelmost appropriate, suitable or 
harmonious . 
"';\;J wifaae;, wifaaq t Inl concord, harmony. ma-fii-j 
wifaae; beenu w-been miraat-u there is no harmony be-
tween him and his wife. ril-wifaaq id-dawli inter-
national detente. 
.:;iJ waffae; Ivtl I to harmonize, match up. landi 
bluuza layza rawaffae; laha riJarb I have a blouse for 
which I want to find a matching scarf. II waffae; raseen 
fil-lJalaal to arrange a marriage, make a (marital) 
match. -ma-gamal rilla-mma waffae; {prov] "" birds of 
a feather flock together. 2 to grant success to. rabb-i-na 
waffae;-ni fil-imtilJaan bi-jakl God granted me a great 
success in the exam. wa-ma-tawfiiq-i rilla bi-llaah I can 
only succeed with God's help. -Ithe literary passive 
occursl wuffiq fi-lamal-u he was successful in his work. 
3 {mus] to tune (instruments of an orchestra) to a given 
pitch. -vn tawfiie;; ava/pva miwaffae;. 
11 waffae; been to make peace between. law lJawilt i 
twaffae; benhum lJa-t~balJ rinta l-ladiww if you were to 
try to make peace between them you would become the 
enemy. 
~? 
1 rit-tawfie;iyya Iprop nl district of central Cairo, 
between Midan el-Tawfiqiya and Ramses Street, re-
nowned for its fruit, vegetable and meat market. 
J;il.; tawafiiljt Ipl nl mathematical combinations . 
.:;i.;1 rilwaffalj Ivil I to agree together. 2 to be 
brought into agreement. - avaliva mitwaffae; . 
.:;i IJ waafie; I Ivil to agree, consent. rahamm' lJaaga 
hiyya rinn i rabuu-ha ywaafilj lal-gawaaz the most im-
portant thing is that her father should agree to the 
marriage. ril-miwaafie; yirfal riid-u whoever agrees, 
raise his hand! 2 Ivtl to suit, be agreeable to. rixtaar 
rayyi lja[ri ywaflj-ak in-nahar-da choose whichever 
train suits you best today. ma-b-yilmil-filla iii ywaflj-u 
he only does what he feels like doing. If fil-fJadd ig-gaay 
yiwaafilj lafara maaris next Sunday is the tenth of 
March. -vn muwafe;a; ava miwaafilj. 
~I". muwaflja In pI -aatl approval, authorization. 
ma-lad-ji lazim-na muwafe;it il-lJukuuma e;abli ma 
nsaafir we no longer need government authorization 
before we can go abroad. 

..;i 1.,;1 ritwaafie; Ivil (impersonal) passive of waafie; 
1. riI-mawc{uuG itwaafie; Galee the matter has been 
approved. -iva mitwaafie; . 
..;i I.,; tawaafue; f, tawaafuq f In! co-ordination, har-
mony, congruity, concord. rit-tawaafue; il-Gaqali il-
G~abi muscular-nervous co-ordination. 
~I.,; tawaafuqi f ladj 
*1 {musJ harmonic. 
rin-
na.ramaat it-tawaafuqiyya harmonics. 
.;.iJ1 rittafae; Ivil to agree, come to an agreement. 
rittafae;t' m8Ga~aal:Jib il-Garabiyya lat-taman I came to 
an agreement on the price with the owner of the car. 
IIdool mittife;iin maGa baGqthey are in league together. 
-vn ritt!faae;; ava mittifie;; pva muttafae;. 
~ l:Jasab ma yittifie; haphazardly, irregularly. bi-
nrawwal:J il-beet hasab ma yittifie; we go home at no fixed 
time . . 
~1..i;1 rittifaae; In pi -aatl agreement. tamm il-ittifaae; 
Gala xu(uubit il-bint' li-bn· Gamm-a-ha the girl's en-
gagement to her cousin was agreed upon. IIl:Jallit 1-
ittifaae; (the pot of) food which the bride and groom eat 
together privately on the night of the duxla (q.v.). 
;';;U;I rittifae;iyya In pi -aatl agreement. 
LS ";.J 
j., wafa (i) Ivil to act faithfully, be reliable. wafit-Iu 
1-raaxir lal:J;a she was faithful to him until the very last. 
laazim tiwfi b-waGd-ak you must fulfil your promise. 
-vn wafa, wafaa 'I f ; ava waafi. 
.Ii., wafaar Inl loyalty, faithfulness. IIwafaar in-niil 
{obsolJ the inundation of the Nile to a height consi-
dered adequate for the fulfilment of agricultural needs. 
jl., waafi ladjl abundant, copious, generous. gism' 
waafi large well-built body. mizaan waafi full weight 
and more. 
jJ wafi ladj *1 faithful. da xiII' wafi there's a faithful 
friend. 
j.,i rawfa lell 1 morel most faithful. 2 morelmost 
copious, generous or abundant. 
.liJ wafaah In pi wafiyyaat, wafayaatl death (usually 
by natural causes). daflar il-wafayaal register of deaths. 
~~f/Jit il-wafiyyaal the obituary page (in a newspaper). 
jJ wafta Ivt/l to give in full. waftii-ni l:Jae;e;-i give me 
all my rights. 2 to fulfil, complete. wafta b-waGd-u he 
kept his promise. wafta n-nadr he fulfilled his vow. 
wafta muddil is-sign he served the prison term. -vn 
I~wfiyya; ava/pva miwaffi. 
j.,;1 rilWafta Ivil to die. rilwafta l-ral:Jmil illaah he 
~assed away to the mercy of God. -ava milwafti. 
j,,:.. mitwafti, mUlawaftir In *1 deceased. 
950 
jlJ waafa 1 Ivtl to make a delivery to.l:Ja-nwafii-kum 
bil-mablar da we will hand over this sum to you. 2 Ivil to 
approximate. waafa las-sittiin he nearly reached sixty 
(years of age). -ava miwaafi. 
j.;;-I 'i'islawfa Ivtl 1 to fill in (details on a form). 
laazim liJliri rislimaara w-lislawfi kull il-bayanaal il-
lazma you must buy a form and fill in all the necessary 
information. IlfawiiJ I-isliifa desk sergeant (in the 
police). 2 to be exhaustive of, be complete in. 'i'akl' 
mislawfi kull il-Gana~ir il-/azma food containing all 
essential elements. 3 to exact or obtain in full. rislawfa 
rawraac;-u he obtained all the papers he required. 
lamma lislawfi dyuun-ak when you collect all your 
debts. -vn ristiifa, 'i'isliifaarr; avalpva mistawfi, 
muslawfi f ; pva muslawfa f . 
.J'J.J 
;liJ waifaar Icoll nl sea bass, grouper(s). 
.;\i J wae;aara lunit n, pi -aall a sea bass, a grouper. 
.:.. J.J 
.:..i., wae;t In pi 'i'awe;aall 1 time, period of time, time 
span. rin-na~r' masralil wae;tvictory is a matteroftime. 
'i'arx~ l:Jaaga Gandina l-wae;1 the cheapest thing in our 
view is time. ma-Gandinaa{wae;t we haven't (enough) 
time. maGa I-waijl in due time. wae;1 il-faraar free time, 
leisure. 2 point in time, moment. wae;t ~-~ala time of 
prayer. kull' waifl' w-Iu 'i'adaan {provJ there is a (dif-
ferent) call for each prayer == times change. fi-nafs 
il-wae;1 or fil-wae;I' nafs-u at the same time, simul-
taneously. ga f-wae;l-u he came at just the right mo-
ment. ga ijabl' wae;l-u he came prematurely. lae;eel 
il-wae;I' miJmunaasib I found it an inconvenient time. 
fii rawifaal bi-liigi Galayya w-'lana b-al:Jiss' bil-laGab 
there are times when I feel great weariness. -/preposi-
tionallyl wae;1 il-raara n-naas bi-ligri lil-maxaabirwhen 
an air raid takes plac~ people run to the shelters. 
11 rawe;aal ladvl sometimes. 'i'awe;aal ... 'i'awe;aal at 
times ... at others. - wae;t-a-ha ladvl then, at that time. 
-dilwaC;li and riI-wae;li ladvl now, as in 'lana lissa gayy' 
dilwae;li I came just now, 'i'iGmil-u dilwae;ti do it 
immediately! 
...:.~ miqaal In pi mawaqiil, mawaqiill 1 appointed 
time, set time. mawaqiil ~-~ala the times of prayer. 
2 point, outside the Mecca area, at or before which 
arriving pilgrims should don the ril:Jraam (q.v.). 
- mawaqiil Ipl nl 3 times of arrival and departure, 
timetable, schedule. 
J~ miqaati 1 ladjl pertaining to timekeeping. saBGa 

m~qatiyya time-clock. 2 In pi -yyal{obsol} timekeeper. 
~J wat;t;at Ivtl to time, schedule. wat;t;atna kulli 
taljarrukat-na fir-riljla we timed everything we would 
(need to) do on the journey. -vn tawt;iit; avalpva 
miwat;t;at. 
..::,.i y tawqiit Inl timekeeping. tawqiit ~eefi summer 
time. tawqiit maljalli local time. tawqiit girinitfGreen-
wich mean time. 
~y tawqiiti ladj *1 of or pertaining to timing or 
timekeeping. IIsaala tawqitiyya stop-watch. 
.:i.J" muwat;t;at, mU!'aqqatT ladjl temporary, short-
term. rux~a muwat;t;ata temporary licence. bi-~ifa (or 
bi-~uura) mu!'aqqata temporarily . 
• ~uwat;t;atan, mu!'aqqatan T ladvl temporarily. 
.:..i yl !,itwat;t;at Ivil to be timed, be scheduled. - iva 
mitwat;t;at. 
C. J.J 
c!J waqilj, waqilj ladj * and pi wuqaljaa!,T/impudent, 
impertinent, insolent. walad waqilj a rude boy. 
_liJ waqaalja 
Inl 
impertinence, 
impudence. 
!'amma-nta waqilj waqaalja your rudeness is incredible. 
c! Iy 1 !'itwaaqilj T Ivil to act insolently. (uul in-nahaar 
yitwaaqilj lala r-raayilj wig-gaay he is being rude to 
everybody all day long. -ava mitwaaqilj. 
JJ.J see also lJISJ 
~';J wut;uud, waquudT Icoll nl tuel(s). ril-waquud iz-
zarri atomic fuel. 
~J wat;iid Inl wood, straw, dung etc. used as fuel. 
~liJ wat;t;aad In '1 fireman (in a locomotive), stoker. 
.Ii.J" mawt;ad In pi mawat;iidl {rur} metal or earthen-
-vare brazier used for heating (see PI.A, 6). 
..Ii.;:-... mustawt;ad Inl I furnace for heating a public 
bath. 2 metal frame which holds an t;idra over the 
flame. 
..IiJi !'awt;adT Ivtl to kindle, light (a fire). 
I 
-
JIJ.J 
;liJ waqaar Inl serenity, dignity. 
;';J waquurT ladj '1 dignified, respectable. jeex 
w,.aquur a dignified old man. 
}.J" muwaqqar ladj *1 respectable. 
1 J J.J see J I J .J : wat;aar, wat;aara 
tJ.J 
eJ wit;il' wat;al (YUt;al, yuUt;al, yiwt;al) Ivil I to 
fall, fall down. !'iknis iz-zibaala iii wit;lit min i~-~afiilja 
951 
sweep up the garbage that fell out of the rubbish bin. 
t;abl in-naar ma {{affit is-sillim wit;il before the fire was 
extinguished the stairs collapsed. Ij-awt;al min {uul-i 
I am about to collapse. !'i{-{abat; wit;il minnu he drop-
ped the plate. wit;ilti mis-sama wi-nta stitat;t;et-ni "" 
you are the very person who can help me out. !'inta 
Wt;ilti walla I-hawa ramaa-k "" whatever landed you in 
this mess? lamma I-bat;ara tUt;al tiktar sakakin-ha 
{prov} "" people rush to take advantage of anyone in a 
position of weakness. !'illi wit;il yi~allalj {prav} "" no-
thing is so bad it can't be put right.llyimiin-u wit;il his 
oath was violated. - wit;il it-!'arq to fail, as in !,if-Jeex 
sarljaan Ijigaab-u ma-yut;al-j iI-!'arq Sheikh Sirhan's 
talismans never fail, !'ana kalaam-i ma-YUt;al-J iI-!'arq 
what I say goes. - wit;lit fi-larq-u she threw herself on 
his mercy. -misiir-ak tUt;al fi- !'iid iI-bulii~ one day you 
will fall into the hands of the police. - wit;ilti wala 
Ijaddi-J samma laleek "" you are down and out and 
no one will help you. -ma-yut;al !'illaj-Jaa{ir (only the 
clever man falls) "" it happens to the best of us. - wit;ilt i 
f-ma{abb I got into a sticky situation. -t;alb-a-ha wit;il 
fi-riglee-ha she was scared stiff. -t;alb-i wit;il (mig-
gUUl) I'm starved! - !'ir-raagil da YUt;al waat;ifthat's a 
very resourceful man. - wit;lit-Iu she yielded to his adv-
ances. 2 to occur, happen. wit;il iI-mat;duur that which 
was fated took place. m~iiba wit;litlala dmar-na mis-
fortune befell us. mumkin iI-ljarb i tUt;al fi- !'ayy i lalj;a 
war could break out at any moment. 3 to mount (of a 
male animal). !'ig-gamal wit;illaleeha the camel mated 
with her (the female). -vn wat;la, WUt;UUl; ava waat;il. 
• wit;il fi- (1) to become embroiled in, become entang-
led in, as in !'in-naas firljit lamma Wt;ilti fil-t;aqiyya 
people were glad when I got mixed up in the case, wit;il 
fi/-rala{ he made a mistake, yilmiluu-ha ~-~uraar 
wi-YUt;al fiiha k-kubaar {prav} the young start them 
(i.e. fights among themselves) but the adults (i.e. the 
parents) get dragged into them, wit;il fi-Jarr i !'almaal-
u "" he was hoist by his own petard, wit;ilt i fik-kalaam 
I said more than I intended. (2) to suffer as a result of 
bad judgement, as in wit;ilna fid-duktuur we were dis-
appointed in the doctor we chose to consult, wit;ilti 
fil-beela I made a bad business deal. (3) to fight with, 
as in !,ir-rukkaab wit;lU f-balq the passengers set about 
each other. 
;".jJ wat;la In pi -aatl affair, occurrence. lIya waC;la 
saoda and ya waC;lit-.. {women} oh what a terrible thing 
to happen, as in ya waC;lit-u what a terrible thing hap-
pened to him! - wat;lit-ha kaanit Ijilwa she married 
well. - waC;la zuljal (I) a bad deal. (2) a bad business. 

~IJ waaliil. waaqillnl ,eality. finti laazim tiliifi fil-
waaqil you should be more practical. II fil-famr iI-
waaqil fait accompli. -min waaliil on the basis of. as in 
bi-yubkumu 
lal-muraffa~. min waaqil 
~ilat-hum 
iI-x~~iyya bii they judge the candidate on the basis of 
their own personal relations with him. -fil-waaqil as a 
matter of fact. as in fiI-bint' di gamiila xaa/~ fil-waaqil 
this girl is indeed very pretty. 
""';IJ waaqili ladj *1 realistic. real. 
~IJ waaqiliyya Inl realism. reality. bi-yit~arraf bi-
waaqiliyya he acts realistically. 
~ 
J waql T Inl effect. impression. kalam-ha lu waql' 
gam iii fi-wdaan-i her words sound impressive to my 
ears. fil-lamla di kaan laha waql' wibif land' fabuu 
this incident had a bad effect on his father. 
~IJ waqlaT In pi waqaafil/l accident. event, hap-
pening. leeh ma-ballalftuu1 lan iI-waqla saacit ma 
b~alit why did you not report the incident when it 
happened? - waqaafil Ipl n/2 facts (ofa subject, mat-
ter or story). 3 minutes (of a meeting). laazim tisaggil 
waqaafil ig-gaisa you should write down the minutes of 
the meeting. 
~Ji fawlial lell morelmost appropriate. 
c!J wiliiil ladj invarl pertaining to an animal, or the 
meat of an animal, slaughtered owing to illness or in-
jury and used for food. 
~J waliiila, waqiila T Inl incitement (of people 
against each other). 
~,. mawliil, mawqil In pi mawaaliil. mawaaqill 
I site, location. fil-muhandis baddid iI-mawliil the 
architect marked off the (building) site. 2 position, 
situation. b-yitkallim min mawqil iI-masfuliyya he 
speaks from a position of responsibility. 
e
J walilial I Ivtl I to cause to fall. baasib da-nta 
ba-twalilial ~-~ubuun min fiid-i watch out! you'll make 
me drop the dishes! II finta walil;alt' lialb-i you really 
gave me a fright! - walilial yimiin-u he broke his oath. 
- finta ba-twalilial kalaam-i fil- farti will you ignore 
what I said? - finta laayiz tiwalilial-na f-balti' walla 
feeh do you want to set us against each other or what? 
2 to mislead, cause to maJ(e an error. 
fana 
walilialt-a-ha fik-kalaam bil-fas fila btalt-i I tripped 
her up with my questions. 3 to do ~s.th.) forcefully and 
rapidly. walilial id-dibk he burst into laughter. 
walilialt' fii ti-tiarb I rained blows on him. - Ivi/4 to 
cause enmity, create divisions (between people). fis-sitt 
il-laliraba di bi-tbibb' tw~~al kalaam wi-twalilial been 
in-naas this malicious woman loves to spread gossip and 
cause trouble between people. -vn tawliiil; ava/pva 
miwalilial· • 
952 
. 
~J walilialz, waqqal T Ivil to put a signature. tismab 
tiwaliliac hina would you please sign here? -vn tawliiil, 
tawqiil; ava miwalilial. muwaqqil; pva miwalilial, 
muwaqqal· 
c:i.i tawliiil. tawqiil T In pi -aatl signature. bi(aaliit 
it-tawqiil {bank] card for verifying one's signature. 
e.il fitwalilial 'Ivil I to be dropped, be knocked 
down. II fana b-atwalilial fi-larti-ak I plead with you. 
2 to be misled. be tricked. 3 to be talked into a state of 
animosity (towards s.o.). - (also fitwaqqal T) Ivtl4 to 
expect. fitwalilial faswa f I-ibtimalaat he feared the 
worst. 5 {geog] to be scaled down (on a map). 
yitwalilial miliyaas waabid lala falfit is scaled down to 
one in a thousand. -ava mitwalilial. 
t~! fiqaal In pi -aatl rhy,thm. ;ab( iI- fiqaal setting 
the tempo. 
..r~! fiqaali ladjl rhythmic, rhythmical. fiI- falaat i1-
fiqaliyya rhythm instruments. 
.J J.J 
...AiJ wiliif (yuliaf, yiwliaf, yuuliaf) Ivi/l to come to a 
stop, halt, pause. mif liaadir faliaf - ma-landii1 
faraamil I can't stop, I have no brakes. fil-beel wiliif 
selling has stopped. fid-damm' wiliifthe bleeding stop-
ped.11 fil-baal wiliif business is bad. -rigl-i wilifit xaa/~ 
my leg is numb. -muxx-i wiliifI can't think any more. 
- fil-Iulima 
wilifit lala lialb-i I have heartburn. 
-damm-u waali!lhe's a drag. - fiid-u walifa he's a poor 
worker. 2 to stand, stand up. min fatil-ak ma-tuliaf1 
don't stand up, please. walifiin hina b-tilmilu feeh what 
are you standing here for? zibb-u wiliif {coarse] his 
penis became erect. laazim tUliaf lala riglee-k you must 
stand on your own two feet.falr' raas-i wiliifmy hair 
stood on end. II wiliif lala fiid ... to stand over, watch 
constantly. as in fin ma-kan-f iI-waabid YUliaf lala 
fideen iI-lummaal if1ulf/' ma-yitlimil1if one does not 
breathe down the workers' necks, the work never gets 
done. -lal-waaliif hurriedly, without bothering to sit 
down, as in kal lal-waaliif he had a quick snack. 
- fil-wUliuuf fil-lfariili treading water. - fiI-wuliuuf la/a 
I-fiid hand-stand. -mamnuul iI-wUliuuf no parking. 
- wiliif mawliif to adopt an attitude, take a stand, as in 
bi-yuliaf mil-bayaah mawliif salbi he has a negative 
attitude towards life. -vn wUliuuf; ava waaliif. 
11 wiliif mala to stand up for, support. wiliif malaaya 
walit iz-zanlia he stood by me in a time of need.' - wiliif 
/i- to be on guard against. b-aliaf-Iu bil-mir~aad ... 
I shall be on the watch for any mistakes he may make. 
-wiliiffi-wiffto resist (s.o.). ma-fii1baaga tUliaffi-wiff-

u-hum there's nothing that can stand against them. 
- wifiif qidd to resist, stand against. - wifiif tala to cost 
(s.o.) (after a business transaction). ril-beet wifiif 
taleek bi-kaam how much did the house cost you? 
ril-beeta di tUfiaf talayya b-xusaara this sale represents 
a loss for me. 
...AiJ wafiaf (yiwfiif) Ivt/ I to suspend, put a stop to. 
miin fial-Iak tiwfiif if-Ju ... 1 who told you to stop the 
work? ga I-muhandis wafiaf-ni tan iI-tamal the en-
gineer came and suspended me from work. II rintu bass i 
ma-fii-f bawaleeku lIa wafif iI-baal the only thing you 
can cause here is trouble. -bukm i mata wafit t-tanfiiz 
{Ieg{ suspended sentence. 2 to endow (property). 
zamaan kaan fii naas kitiir tiwfiif raraaqi /iI-razhar in 
the past many people used to place land in trust for 
el-Azhar. ril-bukuuma la ... it ni;aam iI-wafifthe govern-
ment abolished the wafifsystem. -vn wafif, wafiafaan; 
ava waafiif; pva mawfiuuf. 
...AiJ wafif, waqf In pI rawfiaaf, rawqaaf/ property 
placed in a religious trust. wizaarit iI-rawfiaafthe minis-
try responsible for (Muslim) charitable endowments 
(and in the past for property placed in trusts for mem-
bers of a family). wafit xayri endowment for charitabie 
purposes. wafit rahli endowment for members of a 
family. 
4UJ wafifa In pI -aatl I position, stance. ril-taskarl 
k-kuwayyis yibaan min wafifit-u you can tell a good 
policeman by his stance. -
riI-wafifa 2 ritual stand on 
Mt. Arafat during the pilgrimage. 3 (also yoom iI-
wafifa) eve of a feast. 
~J wafifiyya In pI -aatl deed of an endowment. 
...Ai". mawfiif In pI mawaafiif/I (also mawfiaf) stop-
ping place, stand. mawfiifit-taksiyaat taxi rank. 2 (also 
mawqif, pI mawaaqif) 2a position, opinion, attitude. 
riza r~arri waabid min i(-(arafeen tala mawqif-u yibfia 
ma-fii-f ball if one of the parties to the dispute insists on 
his position, it means there is no solution. 2b situation. 
ril-mawqif is-siyaasi t ... ayyar the political situation has 
changed. 
...Ai". 1 ritwafiaf Ivil to be suspended, be discontinued. 
-iva mitwifiif. 
~".I rinwafiaf = ritwafiaf. - iva minwifiif. 
...Ai J wafifiaf Ivtl I to stop, bring to a halt. rilli yifidar 
yiwafifiaftaks i ywafifiaf-u will anyone who can (please) 
stop a taxi. laazim tiwafifiaf id-damm you must stop the 
bleeding. rabb-i-na ywafifiaf-Iak wilaad iI-balaal = may 
God send good people to help you. 2 to desist from, 
discontinue. rana tayza rawafifiaf iI-bur/aam I want to 
stop taking the pills. 3 to set up, cause to stand. ris-sitti 
953 
wifitit min (ul-ha w-rana wafifiaft-a-ha the woman fell 
down and I helped her up. raxiiran fiidirti rawafifiaf-u 
tala riglee eventually I got him to stand on his own two 
feet. II rana wafifiaft-u-hum tala rigli wabda I had them 
on tenterhooks. 4 to cause to wait. mij taayiz 
rawafifiaf-ak kitiir I don't want to keep you waiting 
long. - Ivil 5 to come to a halt, come to a standstill . 
rana b-awafifiaf hina wi-ntu tinzilu I will stop here and 
you get off. wafifiaf hina ya-s(a stop here, driver! -vn 
ta~fiiif; aVa/pva miwafifiaf. 
...Ai". 1 ritwafifiaf Ivill to depend, be contingent. ribna 
tandina t-tarfiiyya titwafifiaf tala f-Ju ... 1 promotion for 
us depends on the (quality of) work. 2 passive of 
wafifiaf. - vn tawafifiufT ; ava/iva mitwafifiif, mitwafifiaf. 
...AiJi rawqafT, rawfiaf = wafiaf. -vn riiqaaf; ava 
muuqif; pva muuqaf. 
...Ai,,;-I ristawfiaf, ristawqaflvtl to arrest, attract (the 
attention). ma-fii-J baaga stawqafit na;ar-ak wi-nta 
faayit wasn't there anything that attracted your atten-
tion while you were passing? - ava mistawfiaf, 
musta'Yqif. 
J J.J 
~i '~J wififia In pI -aat, wifiafil {obsol] oka, unit of 
weight equal to 1.248 kg. 
I J.J J.J see J \.J : waafi iI-waafi, waaq iI-waaq 
1 J .J J.J see ~.J - .J : wafiwafi 
I loS J.J see also I loS J .;.. 
~\iJ wifiaaya, wiqaaya Inl protection, safeguard . 
riI-wiqaaya rabsan min iI-tilaag {prov] prevention is 
better than cure. 
jlJ waaqi, waafii ladjl protective. bal(u waafii mil-
malar waterproof coat. 
lloSJ.J 
~Ji '~J wlfilyya In pI -aatl ounce, unit of weight 
equal to 37 grams . 
- .!l.J see 1oS.!l.;..: takkaaya, rittaka, rittakka 
"=" .!l .J 
...,!". mawkib In pI mawaakibl procession, parade. 
...,!IJ waakib t Ivt/ to keep up with. mumkin iI-balad 
tiwaakib surtit iI-tilm it is possible for the country to 
keep up with the pace of science. -vn miwakba; ava 
miwaakib. 

J.!J~ 
.JJ wakr In pI rawkaar/l nest, bird's nest. 2 hideout. 
wakr d yaramlyya den of thieves. 
V".!J ~ 
..rSJ wakas (i) Ivtl {slang] to thwart (s.o.), cause (s.o.) 
a setback. -vn waksa, wakasaan; ava waakis; pva 
mawkuus. 
-.....5J waksa In pI -aatl {slang] misfortune. lIya-di I-
'waksa {women] what a misfortune! -da waksa he's a 
failure. 
..rS,,;1 ritwakas Ivil {slang] to be thwarted. - iva 
mitwikis. 
..rS.,;1 rinwakas = ritwakas. - iva minwikis. 
IJ.!J~ 
JS"J wakalT (yakil) Ivtl to delegate, entrust (to s.o.). 
riza kunt J ya-takil 'liIayya ridaarit ralmaal-ak yib(ja 
laazim tisib-ni rat~arraf bi-yurriyya if you are going to 
charge me with managing your affairs, you must let me 
act freely. - ava waakil; pva mawkuul. 
41IS"J wikaala Inl I {leg] proxy, power of attorney. 
ritgawwlz-ha bil-wikaala he married her by proxy. 
2 {admin] deputyship. - Ipl -aatl 3 agency. wikaalit 
ranbaar news agency. II wikaalit iI-balay scrap metal 
market in Boulak. 4 lalso pI wakaaytll {obsol] caravan-
serai. IIhiyya wkaala min yeer bawwaab (is this an inn 
with no doorkeeper?) you should ask permission before 
coming in. - wikaalit yimilr {obsol] a stable where riding 
animals could be left for a fee. 
j..S" J wakiilln pI wukala/l representative, a!;:nt. kaan 
wakiil iI-laruusa rabuu-ha the bride's proxy was her 
father. miin wakiil marsiidis fi-ma~r who is the Mer-
cedes agent in Cairo? wakitl in-myaaba attorney of the 
department of public prosecuti'ons. II wakiil muyaami 
lawyer's clerk. - rallaah wakiil God is my witness! 
2 assistant, vice-. waklil wizaara under-secretary of 
state. wakiil iI-lamlid or wakiil ik-kulliyya assistant 
dean (in a university). 
J~ tukaal Inl dependence. (jult iI-/Ja(j(j' wit-tukaal 
lala lIaah I have spoken the truth, and trust in God (to 
protect me from the consequen~es). xalli tukaal-ak 
lalee depend on Him only. 
JS"I,,; tawaakullnl heedlessness, freedom from care. 
jJ wakkil1, wakkallvtl to engage, appoint (s.o.) as 
an agent. riza rafalit laleek (jaqiyya laazim tiwakkil 
muyaami if she takes you to court, you should hire a 
lawyer. -vn tawkiil; ava muwakkil; pva muwakkal. 
j..S",,; tawkiil/n pI -aat/l agency, franchise. 2 power of 
954 
attorney. tawklil rasmi {leg] power of attorney which is 
legalized in the registration office. 
j.,. muwakkilln *1 [leg] client. 
j";l ritwakktl 2 Ivill to put one's trust (in God), en-
trust one's fate (to God). II ritwakkil (lala lIaah) go! go 
away! - 'lana y-atwakkil ba(ja I'm leaving now . 
- rilmil-ha wi-twakktl (do your duty first and then leave 
everythmg to God) == God helps those who help them-
selves. 2 to be appointed as an agent. 3 [joe] to die, 
pass away. - avaliva mllwakkll. 
~I rillakallvll to put one's trust (in s.o.), entrust 
one's fate (to s.o.). rllllklilaia lIaah put your faith in 
God (also a reply to beggars). rillikillala nafs-ak be 
self-rehant. II rlili yillikillaleeku yillikillala lIaah (he 
who depends on you might as well depend on God) == 
you are useless. -vn rllllkaal; ava millikil. 
Z J .!J ~ see J.!J.: rawkal, wakkil', ritwakkil' 
IJ~ 
'iJ wala Iconjl I but not, rather than. rin-naar wala 
I-laar (give me) hellfire rather than disgrace. 2/pre-
ceded by negl and not, nor. ribn-i mif laayiz yaakul 
wala yifrab my son will neither eat nor drink. laa rinta 
yabiib-i wala ~a/Jb-i you're not my sweetheart and not 
my friend. ma-fii-f ni;aam wala /Jaaga there's no 
organization or anything. - Iparticle negating the ex-
treme case of something more generally impliedl 3 not 
even. ma xadt'-f wala (jirf I didn't get even a piastre. 
wala y-axallii-k tifuuf-u I won't even let you see him. 
4 surpassing even .... landuhum fis-sudaan rayaani 
wala rayaam rumm /I kalsuum in the Sudan they have 
songs even better than those of Umm Kalthum. 
muyaami wala kull iI-muyamiyya fll-balad the best of 
all the lawyers in town. 
~ J~ 
..IIJ wilid (i) 1 Ivil to give birth. fii sillaat bi-yiwlidu 
fil-mustaffayaat some women give birth in hospital. 
2 Ivtl to bear (young). 'liI-(ju{{a wildittalaata the cat had 
three (kittens). -vn wilaada; ava waalid; pva mawluud. 
;'.)'iJ wilaada Inl childbirth, confinement, delivery. 
(jism iI-wilaada the maternity ward. kaanit wilaada 
(abiliyya it was a normal delivery. wilaada lisra a diffi-
cult delivery. 
..IIIJ waalid Inl father (in polite usage). 'liI-xaal waalid 
[prov] the maternal uncle is like one's father.llya wald-i 
affectionate form of address to an elderly man. 
11 'liI-waldeen Idual nl parents. 

• ..J I) walda I In pi walidaat, waldaatl mother (in polite 
usage, cf. fumm). 
.) J'" mawluud In pi mawa/iidl infant, new-born child. 
filjna gayyiin nifuuf iI-mawluud we've come to see the 
baby. kull' mawluudin walad [prov! every son of man is 
(and can be addressed as) a boy,., man has no grounds 
to be proud. IIhuwwa min mawaliid sanat xamsa w-
sittiin he was born in '65 . 
• ..J) walda 2 In pi -aatl a birth, a delivery. wildit walda 
waljda she gave birth once . 
..J) wild Icoll nl offspring. wild il-lamm J paternal 
cousins. ya baani f-yeer milk-ak ya mrabbi f-yeer wild-
ak [prov! (if you build on another's property, you are 
like one who raises another's children) ,., you will not 
profit from your labour. falazz iI-wild i wild il-wild the 
dearest children are the children of one's children. 
II beet ii-wild uterus. 
• ..J) wilda Inl I brood (of nestlings), litter (of small 
animals). 2 newly formed fruit or vegetables still under 
the blossoms. yadoob iI-xiyaara lissa tarija wilda the 
cucumber plant has just formed tiny fruits. 
• I..J) wildaah: ya wildaah [women! poor thing! as in 
wi-huwwa maafi ya wildaah xabatit-u larabiyya while 
he was walking along, poor thing, a car hit him. 
..J) walad In pi wilaad, fawlaadl 1 (also waad) boy, 
male child. - note vocative apocopate form (ya) walah. 
II (~uura) walad jack (in cards). 2/pl onlyl children. 
II filjna wlaad in-nahar-da let's forget the past and turn 
over a new leaf. - wilaad balad (\) compatriots. 
(2) those who adhere to traditional social values. 
- wilaad kaar enterprising people, go-getters. - wilaad 
i~-~anla colleagues in a trade. - fawlaad it-{ariilj follow-
ers of Sufi orders. -kull-i-na wlaad tisla [prov! (we are 
all born after a nine-month's pregnancy) ,., we are all 
equal. -kull-i-na wlaad faadam (wi-Ijawwa) ,., we are 
all equal. -ya wlaad everyone (nonspecific form of 
address), as in feeh iI-balwa di ya wlaad what is this 
disaster, I ask you! 
.)) walluudi ladj *1 [slang! clever, sharp. 
•• "...;) wallaada Ifem adjl bearing many children. 
Ilma-gabit-ak{' wallaada i [women! you are so damn 
clever! 
..J J'" mawlad Inl 1 Ino pI! biography of the Prophet 
Muhammad, read as an act of piety. fi-faaxir iI-leel 
if{eex yiljra I-mawlad wi-~ixtim at the end of the night 
the sheikh reads out the biography of the Prophet and 
then concludes. - Ipl mawaalidl 2 celebration held in 
the home, a central feature of which is the reading of 
the biography of the Prophet. lamma I-waad yitiib 
laazim tilmilu mawlad wi-twakkilu I-yalaaba when the 
9SS 
boy recovers from his illness you should hold a celeb-
ration in honour of the Prophet and feed the poor. 
..J J'" muulid, mawlid f In pi mawaalidl 1 popular reli-
gious festival on the anniversary of a venerated reli-
gious figure, usually held in the locality with which he, 
or she, is closely associated. fil-muulid or muulid in-
nabi or fil-mawlid in-nabawi the Prophet Muhammad's 
birthday. 2 uproar, chaotic situation. ma-fii{ ni~aam 
ya lamm' da muulid there's no organization, my good 
man, it's complete chaos! II nifuuf faaxir il-muulid we'll 
see this mess through to the end. - muulid wi-~aljb-u 
yaayib a free-for-all . 
..s..JIJ'" mawaldi In pi -yyal man whose protession it is 
to read or chant the mawlad and other texts in praise of 
the Prophet. II fir-raagil da laamil zayy iI-mawaldiyya 
,., that man is a scavenger. 
• '"j.",.. milaad Inl birth. fahaadit iI-milaad birth certifi-
cate. liid milaad birthday. IIliid iI-milaad Christmas. 
..s.'"j.",.. milaadi ladj *1 pertaining to the birth of Christ. 
fit-tariix il-milaadi the Christian calendar. fis-sana 1-
miladiyya the year A.D . 
~yl fitwalad Ivil to be born. - ava mitwilid. 
..J) wallid Ivtl 1 to assist in birth, deliver. fidduu-ni 
bing i w-walliduu-ni bil-lidda they gave me an anaes-
thetic and carried -out the delivery with forceps. 
II wallidu I-bayla ,., they did the impossible. 2 to gener-
ate. taw/iid ik-kahraba generating of electricity. 
fiq-qay{' ywallid I-infigaar (too much) pressure causes 
an explosion. 3 to compose. yismal illi b-yitljaal 
wi-ywallid minnu Ijkaaya he listens to what is said 
around then creates a story out of it. -vn tawliid; ava 
miwallid, muwallidf; pva miwallid, muwalladf. 
..J J'" muwallid 
In 
pi -aatl 
generator. 
muwallid 
ka~rabaa fi electrical generator. 
.~ J'" muwallida In pi -aatl midwife. 
..J J'" miwallad, muwallad ladj *1 clever, sharp-witted, 
crafty. 
..J yl fitwallid Ivil to be or become generated. -avaliva 
mitwallid . 
..Jlyl fitwaalid Ivil to reproduce, multiply. -vn 
tawaaludf; ava mitwaalid. 
..,. J.J 
-rl) wils Inl covering .up (e.g., people's faults). law 
in-naas tixla mil-wils i yo am waaljid kunna ningalj if 
people would rid themselves of duplicity for one single 
day, we should succeed. 
..,J) wallis = waalis. -vn tawliis; ava miwallis. 
-rlIJ waalis Ivil to plot together, conspire. fir-riff' 

waalis malaahum the referee was prejudiced in their 
favour. -vn mlwalsa; ava miwaalis . 
..,..}I.,. muwaalis In *1 accomplice. 
t J.J 
c} J wilil (a) Ivil 1 to catch (offire), catch fire. fin-naar 
will it fi-hduum-u his clothes caught fire. II fakal-ha 
walla to snap up an opportunity. 2 to come on (of light, 
radio etc.). fin-nuu~ wilil fil- footia the light came on in 
the room. sibna t-tilivizyuun waalil we left the tele-
vision on. -ava waalil. 
~J willa 
In 
pi -aatl 
1 camp-fire, 
open 
fire. 
ril-lummaal qaldiin lJawaleen il-willa the workmen 
are sitting around their fire. 2 ember, something burn-
ing, something alight. willa wiqlit mm fid-ha lJaraqit 
IS-siggaada she dropped a coal and it burned the carpet. 
3~ light (for a fire, cigarette etc.). haat willa lis-sigaara 
give (me) a light for my cigarette! - ladj invarl 
4/s1angJ smart, on-the-ball (of a person). walad willa 
w-¥inn a clever go-getter. 
~)'J wallaala In pi -aatl cigarette lighter, gas lighter. 
c}J wallal'/vtl 1 to light, kindle, set fire to. bi-twallal 
il-babuur she lights the paraffin stove. II wallal 
~awabl-u l-lafara to do one's best. 2 to switch on, turn 
on. wallalit in-nuur she turned on the light. wallal 
it-tillvizyuun turn the televIsion on! - Ivi/3 to make a 
fIre, kindle a flame. wallalt d lal-fakl min saala I put 
the food on to cook an hour ago. wallal fi-nafs-(u) to 
commit, or attempt to commit, sUIcide by burning one-
self to death. 4 to catch fire. fik-kabrut da ma-bi-
ywallal-fthese matches don't strike.lliafayf-i wallalit 
min if-faaa my lips are burning because of the chilis. 
-lJa-ywallal min l-ri"a he's burning with jealousy. 
- f/g-gaww' mwallal (naar) the weather is scorching 
hot. - kull" lJaaga mwallala l-yomeen dool everything is 
so expensive these days. 5 to come on (of light, radio 
ete.). fil-lJamdu 1I-lIaah in-nuur wallal thank God, the 
light came on. 6/s1angJ to take to one's heels. 
ril-lJaraaml wallal the thief ran away. -vn tawliil; iva 
mllwallal· 
c}..,;1 fitwallal Ivil 1 to be set alight. 2 to be switched 
on (of light, radio etc.). -iva mitwallal. 
I ...; J.J see also I"'; J. and '""';.J J 
...;..JJ waliif In *1 1 sweetheart, 101ler. kull' waliif wi-
walift-u each one has his own lover. 2 mate (of birds 
and monogamous animals). ril-l~fuur maat lJuzn· 
lala walift-u the bird died of sorrow over the loss of his 
mate. 
956 
...AIJ wallif Ivtll to blend, mix. 2 to accustom (s.o. to 
s.th.). ril-lJubb' wallif-hum lala baltilove brought 
them together. - Ivi/3 to become accustomed (to s.o. 
or s.th.), become affectionately familiar (with s.o. or 
s.th.). filii min layyina walJda bi-ywallifu lala bale['" 
birds of a feather flock together. dool miwallifiin lala 
balti (1) they're used to each other. (2) they're in love 
with each other. 4 to mate (of animals). ril-lJamaama 
wallifit lala dakar fiswid the hen pigeon took a black 
cock bird as a mate. -vn tawliif; ava miwallif. 
4&J..,; tawliifa Inl a blend. tawliifit duxxaan a blend of 
to?accos. tawliifit lalaf livestock food mixture. 
...AI..,; I fitwalliflvill = wallif3 and 4. 2 passiveofwallif 
1 and 2. - ava/iva mitwallif. 
Z"'; J.J 
...AIJ wulf<Engl wolf>: kalb' wulf Alsatian dog. 
I J J.J 
~ 
J walla I Icon jl 1 or. taaxud ba(aa[is walla quu(a will 
you take potatoes or tomatoes? ma-fii-ftaksiyyaat walla 
feeh are there no taxis or what? 2 lafter an oathl may 
I be ... (if I am lying). wi-lJyaat in-naar di walla-tlJiriq 
biiha finnu huwwa lli xad-ha he is the one who took it, 
and may I be burnt by this fire (if I am lying)! 
I • J.J 
':'~J walhaan ladj *1 passionately in love. 
.J J walah I Inl passionate love. 
Z • J.J see also J J .J 
.J J walah 2 abbreviated form of walad, occurring parti-
cularly as a form of address. 
J.J J.J 
J)J walwil Ivil to wail in lamentation (of women). 
fis-sillaat kaanu bi-ywalwilu wara l-mayyit the women 
were following the dead man and wailing. -vn walwala; 
ava miwalwil. 
loS J.J 
:""')'J wilaaya Inl 1 guardianship, custody. ril-fumm' 
laha wlaaya lala fawlad-ha bald' fabuu-hum the 
mother has the legal custody of her children after their 
father. 2 qualities common to a wali (q.v.). ;aharit 
lalee lalamaat il-wilaaya the signs of his being a wali 
were manifested. 3 succession to the throne. - Ipl-aatl 
4 state. ril-wilayaat il-muttalJida the United States. 
JJ wali In pI fawliya. fawliyya J I man noted for his 

piety and religious mien, saint. yiruulJu m~ri yzuuru 
1-fawliya they go to Cairo to visit (the shrines of) the 
saints. 
J.,i fawla lell morelmost entitled, morelmost deserv-
ing. filJna fawla bii we are more entitled to it, filJna 
fawla nikkallim we have a better right to speak. 
~.hi fawlawiyya In pi -aatl priority. 
JJ waliyy In pi fawliyaaf/l (also waliyyi famr) legal 
guardian. naa;ir it-madrasa r;ayz-ak tigiib waliyy i 
famr-ak the school principal wants you to bring along 
your guardian. 2 successor, heir. waliyy· r;ahd heir 
apparent, crown prince. II waliyy in-nir;am [absal] title 
of the Khedive of Egypt. 
~J wiliyya In pi wa/aayal I woman (generally of the 
lower classes). Ilba/aaj majaakit mar;aaha - di wliyya 
stop troubling her -she's just a helpless woman! 2/pl 
onlyl dependant females. fir-raagit da r;andu wa/aaya 
that man has (many) female dependants. 
J.,. mawla In pi mawaalill lord, master. ya mawlaa-
na term of address or reference to an older Muslim 
religious man specifically a teacher at el-Azhar. 2 ril-
mawla the Lord (epithet of God). filii yustur-u I-mawla 
ma-yifqalJ-uufit-r;abd [prav]'" with God's protection 
one is invulnerable. ya-mawlaa-ya kama xa/aljt-i-ni ,., 
as naked as the day that I was born (i.e. penniless). 
jJ walla 2 Ivt/l to put (s.o.) in charge, grant custody 
to (s.o.). miin wallaa-k famr-iwho appointed you as my 
custodian? 2 to turn (s.th.) towards (s.o.). wallit-u 
qahr-a-ha she turned her back on him. - Ivi/3 to flee. 
zaman iffabaab walla the days of youth are gone. saar;it 
majaf-ni walla as soon as he saw me he ran away. -vn 
tawliya, tawliyya; avalpva miwalli. 
J jl fitwalla Ivtl I to be in charge of. fis-sifaara 
b-titwalla ml¥aalilJ rar;ayaa-hafil-xaarig the embassy is 
in charge of its citizens' interests abroad. rabb-i-na 
yitwallaa-na b-ralJmit-u may God protect us with his 
mercy! 2 to be put in charge. - ava/iva mitwalli. 
JIJ waa/a Ivtl to apply oneself continuously or repe-
atedly to. niwaali n-nigiit fusbuur; bil-mayya we water 
the grass continuously for a week.llljird i mwaa/i wa/a 
lfazaaljaarid {pray] (a baboon that is near is better than 
a gazelle that is far away) ,., familiarity is more endear-
ing than beauty. -vn miwaliyya; avalpva miwaali. 
Jljl fitwaa/a Ivil passive of waa/a. -iva mitwaali. 
J.,:;-I fistawla Ivi/l to take possession. fistawlu r;as-
sulta they seized power. II fistawla r;a/a r;alj/-a-ha he 
controlled all her thinking. - fistawlit r;a/a ljalb-i she 
stole my heart. 2 to pretend to be or act as a wali. - vn 
fistiila. fistiwla; ava mistawli. 
957 
~ ~ J see -> ~ J 
V" ~ J 
...,.....,. muumis Ifem n, pi -aatl prostitute, harlot, 
whore. 
-> ~.J 
l.J 'fJ"J wama Inl hint, slight indication. 
filJna 
b-nifham bit-wama just a nod is enough explanation for 
us. 
[. .;, J 
rtJ wing <Engl> Inl {spart] I wing. 2 Ipl -aat. 
wunugal winger. 
V" .;, J see also 
I V" .;, ~ 
~J wanas I/adj invarl lively, abounding in social 
activity (of a place). ba/aaj tiskunu fil-mar;aadi -
fid-duljlji wanas faktar don't live in Ma'adi; Dokki is 
more lively. 2 Inl company, companionship. xadt-a-ha 
mar;aaya wanas I took her with me for company. 
b-aljr;ud r;anduku I-agl il-wanas I come and spend time 
at your place (just) for the sake of company. 
"'-';J waniis In invar and fem waniisal companionable 
person. bint-i kaanit falJsan waniis (or wl}niisa) liyya 
fir-rilJla my daughter kept me company. on the trip 
bet~er than anyone else. 
'-~J wannaasa In pi -aatl night-light. -also nawwaasa. 
~J wannis Ivtl to keep company with, while away 
time in the company of (s.o.). ljar;adit mar;aaya 
twannis-ni I-lfaayit gaaz-i ma ga she sat with me to keep 
me company until my husband arrived. -vn tawniis; 
av~/pva miwannis. 
~ jl fitwannis Ivil passive of wannis. - iva mitwannis. 
..; ';'J 
"';';J winj <Engl> In pi fawnaaj. winjaatl winch, 
cra~e. mara zayy it-winj a big fat woman. 
...,;.l;J wannaaj In • and pi wannaajal crane operator. 
~ .;, J 
I..JJ wann (i) Ivil I to hum or whir (of revolving ob-
jects). fin-nalJla nizlittiwinn the top came down whirr-
ing. 2 lusu w neg! to slow down. da-na ma-b-awinn if 
tuul in-nahaar I never slacken up all day long. ruulJi 
findahii-Iu wi-wr;i twinni go and call him and don't 
waste time. -vn wann; ava waanin. 
':;J wannin Ivil {slang] to get drunk. -vn tawniin; ava 
miwannin. 

I.JJIJJ 
;.,";J wanwm IVII to wail, groan. mij l:Ja-taxud-ha 
lamma twanwlll you won't take it even if you moan (all 
day about it). -vn wanwana: ava miwanwin. 
Y OJ 
o...:-AJ wahab (i) Ivtl to grant, bestow, give (s.th.) free. 
wahabt' nafs-i I-xidmu t1-flxwaan I have devoted my-
self to the service of friends. fabuu-ya wahab-ni Ii/-
fazhar my father dedicated me to (studying at) el-
Azhar. wahabit-u nafs-a-ha she gave herself to him. 
rabb-I-na wahab-u z-zakaaf wtl-maal wil-wilaad God 
blessed him with intelligence, money and children. 
fil-mucgizaat 1111 rabb-i-na wahab-ha I-sayyid-na muusa 
the miracles the Lord granted Moses to perform. - vn 
wahba. hlba. wahb: ava waaillb: pva mawhuub. 
;"""J wahba J In pi -aat/l tip. gratuity. 2 gift. present. 
~ hiba In pi -aatl donation, gift. IIhibit il-manquul 
percentage paid to the government on transfer of 
property. 
'-:' YO.JA mawhuub ladJ *1 gifted. talented. 
J~J wahhaabi ladj *1 Wahhabite. 
~~"JI fil-wahhablyya Inl Wahhabism. 
~.JA mawhiba In pi mawaahibl talent, gift, natural 
abihty. 
o...:-A.,;I fuwahab Ivil to be granted, be bestowed, be 
given free. - iva mitwlhlb. 
(. ° J 
r!'J wahag I (I) Ivtl to confuse, fluster. - vn wahagaan. 
wahga; ava waahig; pva mawhuug. 
r!'.,;1 fitwahag Ivil to be or become confused or flus-
tered .• avaliva mitwihig. 
r!'.,;1 finwahag = fitwahag. -ava/iva minwihig. 
2 (. ° J 
r!'J wahag 2 Inl glare, glow. 
rf,,;1 fuwahhag Ivil to glow, flame, glare. -vn 
tawahhug; ava mitwahhig. 
JOJ 
./'J wahar (i) Ivtl to frighten, alarm. fir-raagil min 
wahrit-u za(jq iI-waad kaan l:Ja-ywaqqac-u the man in 
hl~ fright pushed the boy and nearly knocked him 
down. - vn wahar, wahra, waharaan; ava waahir; pva 
mawhuur . 
./',,;1 fuwahar Ivil to be or become frightened or 
alarmed. - avallva muwihir. 
./'.,;1 fmwahar = fuwahar. -ava/iva mmwihir. 
958 
JOJ 
:u...J wahla r: min fawwil wahla at first sight. 
jOJ 
r"'J waham (i) Ivil 1 to delude, deceive, dupe. huwwa 
b-yiwhim in-naas bi-finnu b-yicraf kull a l:Jaaga he 
makes people believe that he knows everything. 2 to 
worry, alarm, scare. kalaam id-duktuur waham-ni what 
the doctor said worried me. waaqif fiq-qalma cafaan 
yiwhim iI-walad he is standing in the dark to give the 
child a fright. - vn wahm; ava waahim; pva mawhuum. 
r"'J wahm In pI fawhaam/l unreality, illusion.caalam 
il-wahm the world of fantasy. geeti 
t~al:Jl:Jii-ni min 
noom-i ca1afaan iI-wahm' da iii f-caql-ik did you come 
to wake me from my sleep because of this fantasy in 
your mind? 2 hypochondria. candu wahm' gaamid he 
is a hypochondriac. 
<f"'J wahmi 
ladjl 
fictitious, 
false. 
~ahar 
finn 
il-cinwaan illi fidda-huu-ni wahmi it turned out that the 
address he gave me was a false one. 
~J wahmagi In pI -yyal 1 superstitious person. 
2 hypochondriac. 
r"',,;1 fitwaham Ivil 1 to be deluded, be deceived, be 
duped. 2 to be or become worried, be alarmed, be 
scared. - avaliva mitwihim. 
rA,,;1 fitwahham Ivil to suffer delusions, imagine 
things. -ava mitwahham. 
(JOJ 
CYOJ wah wIg Ivil to burn violently. fin-naar wahwigit 
the fire rose high. buqq-i wah wIg mijja({a my mouth is 
burmng from the chilis.llcaql-u mwahwig he is bright. 
-vn wahwaga; ava miwahwig. 
Cyo,,;1 fitwahwig = wahwig. -ava mitwahwig. 
0JOJ 
'YOJ wah wah Ivil to moan or groan with pain. -vn 
wahwaha; ava miwahwah. 
YIoSJ 
~J weeba <Copt> In pI -aatl [obsolJ measure equal 
to one-sixth of an ardeb. Ilfiluus bil-weeba lots of 
money. -xeeba bil-weeba a gross failure. 
1oS31oSJ 
IoSj..J wiizi Inl pound note (in the Jargon of those who 
practise the three-card trick). 

(.!lIS.J) 
6.....J weeka <perh Copt> Inl dish of okra cooked with 
water and butter to a soupy consistency. 
~J wiika ladj invarl [slangJ cheeky, playful. banaat 
wiika coquettish girls. !,inta ya wiika ya btaae i1-bulitiika 
==. you cheeky devil! 
J IS.J 
.Y.J weellnl agony. goz-ha warraa-ha I-weel fa-falabit 
it-talaaq her husband made her life a misery so she 
asked for a divorce. ya-weel ... woe is ... , as in ya weel-i 
woe is me.llya weel-ak (1) tough luck! (2) I'II-give you a 
rough time! -ya-weel-u ya-sawaad leel-u he is in for a 
terrible time. 
rlS.J 
f'"!J wayam Inl approximation. xadt i1-maqaas bil-
959 
wayam I took an approximate measurement. 
f'"!IJ waayim Ivtl to approximate, estimate. niwaayim 
eaff if-faqqa 1- I'awwil wi-baedeen niemil i1-mazaad we 
first estimate (the value of) the furniture in the flat and 
then hold the auction. -vn miwayma; ava/pva 
miwaayim. 
~I-", miwayma Inl approximation. 
bil-miwayma 
approximately. Iida eaayif bil-miwayma he leads a 
happy-go-lucky kind of life. 
IISIS.J 
4J wayya Iprep, w pron suff w8yyaa-, 1st pers sing 
wayyaayal with, together with, accompanying. miin 
wayyaak who is with you? II wayyaak wayyaak ealeek 
ealeek (he) follows others without examining the situa-
tion (of one who has no mind of his own). 

~ 
( 1 ~) 
~ ya I I vocative particle. ya mlJammad Muhammad! 
ya silt Madam! ya-bn-i my boy! ya-bn i1- feeh you son of 
a so-and-so. 2 particle of self-apostrophization. filJna 
ya m~riyyiin we Egyptians. layzin-ni fana ya rariib 
fafassalJ-u you want me, a complete stranger, to show 
him around? 3 exclamatory particle. ya gamaal-ik how 
beautiful you are! II (faah) ya-ana or y-aani exclamation 
of distress or pain = 0 me 0 my! as in y-aani mil-lJubb 
poor me, when it comes to love! -y-aadi, y-adi Iw foil n 
without agreement! what a ... ! as in y-adi n-nahaar 
i1- fiswid what an awful day! y-aadi n-nuur expression of 
welcome = what a light (which illuminates our house)! 
Look up ya fimma, ya baay, ya tara, ya reet and ya huuh 
under fimma, baay, rafa, reet and huuh respectively. 
for yadoob see ':-' ~ ,) ~ ; for yalla see I J J ~ . 
~ ya 2 <P ya> Icorrel conjl either ... or. ya tUC;lud ya 
timji laakin ma-tuc;aff' kida either sit down or go, but 
don't just stand there like that. huwwa ya c;add-ak ya 
bil-kitiir fakbar minnak bi-sana he's either your age or, 
at the most, a year older.llya fana ya finta n-nahar-da 
I'll show you here and now! 
~ yaa Ifem n, pi yahaatl twenty-eighth and last letter of 
the Arabic alphabet. - also yaaf, yih, yeeh. 
.1 ~ 
.~ yaa f Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-eighth and last letter of 
the Arabic alphabet. min iI-falif rua I-yaaf from A to 
Z. - also yaa, yih, yeeh. 
,:-,I~ 
.,...~ . yaab <prop n Yapp>: tag/iid yaab kind of book-
binding in limp leather with decorated edges. 
JI~ 
~~ yaac;a <T yaka> In pi -aatl collar (of a garment). 
.. 
n~~' yaac;a mandarin collar, half collar. -also liyaac;a. 
1 r 1 ~ 
\..~ yaama lexclam partl how! how often! how much! 
how many! yaama n~alJt-ak how often have I advised 
you! yaama-na lJaznaan how sad I am! yaama b-titlab 
lafanna how much trouble you go to for us! yaama fii 
fuc;ara how many poor there are! yaama fil-babs' 
ma;a/iim [prov] how many are those who are wrongly 
imprisoned! II filii Ylilfyaama yfuuf [prov] = the longer 
you live the more you see. -yaama tfuuf or yaama bukra 
tfuuf = that's the least of it, that's nothing to what you'll 
see later. -yaama hina yaama hnaak (1) everywhere, 
all over, as in ru-mufkila di mif fi-m~r' bass - yaama 
hina yaama hnaak this problem is not restricted to 
Egypt -it's the same story everywhere. (2) well-off, as 
in fiftakart innu yaama hina yaama hnaak wi- fatabii 
mifallis I thought he was well-off, but it turns out he's 
broke (cf la hina wala hnaak). 
1 ,;., 1 ~ see 1 ~ : ya-ana 
- vP';" 1 ~ see ':-' ~'vP';".,;: yaan~iib 
.,; ,;., 1 ~ see I.,;: y-aani 
.1 ~ 
.~ yaah linterjl exclamation of surprise = well I never! 
my! yaah da-lJna tfaxxarna c;awi my! we really are late! 
J~I.,; 
JA yaawir <T yaver> In pi -aatl aide-de-camp . 
.JIJJ~ yawraan: kibiir iI-yawrao·1 chief of protocol. 
.,;1.,; 
.,;~ yaay <T yay> In pi -aatl small coil or spring. 

...".~..s 
~ 
yifis (a) Ivil to despair. yirist i minnu I despaired 
of him. may fuus min hopeless, as in fi/-rabaawa maraq 
mayfuus minfifaa stupidity is a disease for which there 
is no hopeofa cure. - vnyafs; avayaafis; pva mayfuus. 
..r~ yafs Inl despair. Iisinn il-yafs menopause. 
wL..~ yafsaan ladj *1 despairing, in despair. 
...".(.;1 fityafas Ivil (impersonal) passive of yifis. riqa 
rabb-i-na ma-yityifis-f minnu God's salvation is not to 
be ,despaired of. - iva mityifis. 
...".~ ya!'fis Ivtlto make (s.o.) despair. ma-fi~-ffabadan 
baaga tya ffis-ni min ral:Jmit illaah nothing would make 
me, despair of God's grace. - vn tayfiis; iva miyaffis. 
...".l,.;1 fityaffis Ivil passive of yaffis. - iva mityaffis. 
..,..:~ yaafis Ivil to take a chance in desperation, take a 
risk as a last resort. ya fist i w-laffeet in-naar bi- fiid-i 
I risked it and put out the fire with my hand. - vn 
miyafsa; ava miyaafis. 
~ ~ ~..s see 1 ~ ~ ~: ya fimma, ya 
fimman, ya 
fimmatan 
oJ 1 y..s 
w~l"J1 fil-yabaan Iprop nl Japan. 
J~~ yabaani 1 ladj *1 Japanese. 2 In *1 a Japanese. 
3 In, no pll the Japanese language. 
..s 1 y..s see ..s 1 y : ya baay 
j y..s see 
I j Y ~ : meebar 
...".Y..s 
...,.-.,.! yibis (a) Ivil to get dry or stiff in consistency. 
fiI-[agiin yibis [al-xabiiz the dough has become too 
stiff to bake well. - vn yabasaan, yibuusa, yubuusa. 
;... ~ yibuusa, yubuusa Inl dryness, stiffness. 
wl....!. yabsaan ladj *1 = yaabis. 
.r.~ yaabis ladjl dry. [agiina yabsa stiff dough. 
~ 
yabbis Ivtl to dry and stiffen in consistency. 
fiI-l:Jaraara wil-hawa yabbisu wiff il-[agiina heat and air 
dried the surface of the dough. -vn taybiis; avalpva 
miyabbis. 
""':;"1 fity·abbis Ivil to be or become dried and stiffened 
in consistency. fil-[agiina di (ariyya zyaada laazim 
tityabbis bi-fwayyit diCjiiCj this dough is too wet, it 
should be stiffened with some flour. - vn tayabbus r ; 
ava/iva mityabbis. 
J y..s see J..s y ..s : yubiil 
961 
oJ y..s see oJ 1 y ..s: fil-yabaan, yabaani 
J..sy..s 
..k Yo yubii/ <Heb> Inl jubilee. fil-yubii/ il-faqqi silver 
jubilee . 
1 j u..s see ..s ~ j 
: ya tara 
I ~ u ..s 
~ yitiim, yatiim In pi yutama, faytaam, yataamal 
1 ladjl 18 deprived by death of a parent. yitiim i/- fabbi 
wil-fumm parentless. 
Ib sole, only. 
fil-madrasa 
l-yitiima f-balad-na the only school in our village. 
II fig-gum[a l-yatiima last Friday in Ramadan. 2 In! 
fatherless child. [afa l-yataama [aleek ya rabb [women 
beggars] the fatherless children's supper depends on 
y?u, 0 Lord! 
~ yattim Ivtl to orphan, render an orphan. fil-badsa 
yattimit-ha the accident made her an orphan. -vn 
t8)'tiim: ava miyattim. 
~I fityattim Ivil to be orphaned. fi/-[iyaal ityattimu -
ma-lhum-f reer rabb-i-na the children have been 
orphaned - they have no one but God. - iva mityattim. 
2 u..s 
C 
r-'L. .~ may tam In pi mayaatiml gathering for, or 
place of, paying condolences during the three days 
immediately following a death . 
y C..s see y C.J : yagib 
C.Jc..s 
C~ yaguug: ([amliin) zayy i yaguug wi-maguug 
(they are behaving) in a very rowdy way. 
ut..s 
~ 
yaxt <Engl> In pi yuxuut, yuxutal yacht. naadi 
l-yaxt yacht club. 
..soJt..s 
~ 
yaxni <P yakhnf> Inl baked meat or fish dish with 
onion and tomato. IIxalla 1-l:Jikaaya yaxni he made a 
mess of the affair. 
~..s 
~ yad r Ifem n, pi faydil hand. bi-yad-i la bi-yadi [amr 
[prov] I'd rather do it myself (unpleasant as it is) than 
have someone do it for me. 

~J-'!. yadawi ladjl pertaining to the hand, manual. 
munjaar yadawi handsaw. gaml' yadawi manual type-
setting. see further under 
~ ~..s and 
~..s. 
~ ~..s see also 
~..s. and 
~..s 
~ yadd Ifem n, pI 'i'ayaadil I hand (especially in ab-
stract senses). malmuul bil-yadd (or bil-'i'iid) hand-
made.lIlala yadd (or lala 'i'iid) (1) in the presence of. 
(2) under the supervision of. -lan yadd under the hand 
of, as in maktuub lan yadd' waaljid muljaami written 
under the hand of a lawyer. - kul/-u b-yadd iIIaah it's all 
in God's hands. - rabb-i-na yaaxud bi-yadd-ak God help 
you! God grant you success! -ma-bil-yadd' Ijiila there's 
nothing I can do, I'm powerless to act. - waql iI-yadd 
(1) {leg] squatter'srights. (2) {Chr] laying on of hands. 
- kul/-u-hum yadd' waljda they act as one man, they're 
united. 2 grip, handle. yadd' musaddas a revolver butt. 
.J~~..s 
J~ yaddu Inl style of serving in the game xara (q.v.). 
.J ~..s see 
~..s: yadawi 
Y.J~..s 
""'J~~ yadoob ladvl barely, (only) just, hardly. 'i'iljna 
yadoob lar/iin niliifwe are barely able to survive. 'lana 
yadoob waaxid na/as-i I have barely caught my breath. 
'lana yadoob ma-xadt' j na/as-i (1) I'm just on the point 
of catching my breath. (2) I've just this very second 
caught my breath. 'lana yadoob sinn-i sitta w-lifriin I'm 
barely twenty-six years old. 
~J~~ yadoobak = yadoob. 
~ .J ..s 
o~ J- yarda, yarda <Engl> In pI -aat, -aatl yard 
(measurement) . 
(J.J..s) 
~ J- yaralia, yaraqa In pI -aatllarva. 
.:,\i J- yarac;aan, yaraqaan f Inl jaundice. 
..s ~).J ..s 
J J- yarni ladvl /slang] in cash.laawiz/iluus-u yarni he 
wants his money in cash. 
..:.. ..s .J..s see ":"..s.J: ya reet 
-Iyj..s 
\S""'~jJ! yuzbaaJi <T·yuzba~l> In pI -yyal {mil, obsol] 
captain (replaced by the rank of naqiib). 
962 
[.Jj..s 
~)j~ yazirga <perh P ziiycha> In pI -aatl table of 
magic numbers and letters used in telling fortunes etc. 
-also zayirga. 
J.Jj ..s 
JJ..t.. yazool <prob Engl> Inllysol. 
-";..:....,....s 
..s~J! yusta/andi <prop n> Icoll nl tangerine(s). 
- also yusa/andi, 
yuusl/ 'i'a/andl, 
yus/i, sa/andi, 
'i'ista/andi. 
~~~J! yusta/andiyyaaya lunit n, pI -aatl a tanger-
ine. - also yusa/andiyyaaya, yuusi/ 'i'a/andiyyaaya, 
sa/andiyyaaya, 'i'ista/andlyyaaya. 
I.J ..,.. ..s 
.r-'- yusrl Inll ease, facility. 2 wealth, affluence . 
.r-'- yasir: maa'i' yasir soft water. 
.r-'-i 'i'aysar lell easierleasiest. 
JO""'!. yasiir ladj, fern yisra, yasliral easy.llmayya yisra 
soft water. 
or-e-' maysara Inl comfort, wealth, prospeHty. naas 
landuhum maysara well-to-do people. leela layJa /-
maysara a well-off family. 
).J-<:'" maysuur ladj *1 well-off, well-to-do. 'i'eeJgab-na 
lin-naas iI-maysuriin iI-Ijaal dool what are we compared 
with those rich people? 
;.,. yassar Ivtl I to facIlitate. 2 to ease the financial 
circumstances of (s.o.). -vn taysiir; ava miyassir, 
mlyassar; pva muyassar. 
~ 
muyassir Inl Facilitator (epithet of God). 
;"'1 'i'ityassar Ivi/ 18 to become easy, be made easy. 
Ib to thrive, become prosperous. 
'i'ir-raagil da 
mityassar that man is well-Qff. 2 to be possible. 'i'id/al 
illi yityassar-Iak pay what you can. - avaliva mityassar. 
;... tayassarf = 'i'itYassar. ma tayassar what's avail-
able. kul 'i'ahi luc;ma la/a ma tayassar == help yourselfto 
a bite of what's going. 'i'ifjeex Ija-yilira ma tayassar min 
iI-qur'i'aan the sheikh will read certain verses of the 
Koran . 
2.J ..,....s 
) ... .,31 'i'iI-yasaar Inl the (political) left. 
..s)~ yasaari Iladj */leftist, left-wing. 2 In *1 a leftist. 
3 .J ..,.. ..s 
.r-'- yusr2: siblja yusr precIous black coral or jet prayer 
beads studded with silver. 

4 .) IJ" IS see I.) IJ" ~ yusara 
Y .) IJ" IS 
Y fi yasrib Iprop nl labsal} pre-Islamic name of Medi-
na in Arabia. fin fa-lia titwilid bil-l:Jiggi w-bi-:z;yaarit 
faup yasrib lfsl} may you make the pilgrimage (to 
Mecca) and visit Medina! 
- iJ .,j IJ" IS 
1Sx.i-y- yusafandi <prop n> Icoll nl tangerine(s). 
-also yustafandi, yuusif fafandi, 
yusfi, safandi, 
fistafandi. 
~ 4x.i-y- yusafandiyyaaya lunit n, pI -aatl a tangerine. 
-also 
yustafandiyyaaya, 
yuusif 
fafandiyyaaya, 
safandiyyaaya, fistafandiyyaaya. 
1S.,j1J"1S 
,.;-y- yusfi <prop n> 
yusafandi, 
yustafandi, 
fistafandi. 
iJ IS r IJ" IS 
Icoll nl tangerine(s). -also 
yuusif 
fafandi, 
safandi, 
.r.-~ yasmiin <P ydsamin> Icoll nl jasmine. yasmiin 
baladi common jasmine. lIyasmiin hindi pagoda tree, 
frangipani. 
;;.;.......~ yasmiina lunit n, pI -aatl a jasmine flower or 
plant. 
~l;"..-~ yasminaaya = yasmiina. 
t.J IJ" IS 
t.t-! yasuul Iprop nl IChr} Jesus. 
..r.t-! yasuuli In *1 Jesuit. riI-fabaaf iI-yasuciyyiin 
the Jesuit Fathers. 
iJ IS IJ" IS 
..r. . .:.e-~ yasiin Iprop nl name ofthe thirty-sixth sura 
of the Koran (see also liddiyyit yasiin). 
Y";IS 
~ 
yajb Inl jasper. 
JJ r ,j. IS 
~ 
yafmak <T ya~mak> Inl labsal} face-veil. 
IS iJ t IS see IS iJ t: yalni 
d:.1S 
~ 
yarma <P yaghmd> Inl booty, plunder. 
II riI-l:Jikaaya batjit yarma the affair turned into a 
free-for-all. 
963 
~ 
yarmagi In pI -yya plunderer, grabber. 
";uiJtu 
~ 
yarniij: riI-rijF wil-yavniij deceit. 
,l,.,ju 
;;J.;~ yafta <T yafta> In pI -aat, yufatl sign-board, 
notice-board, something written for display. yaftit 
dukkaan shop sign. yaftit qurfaan a verse or phrase 
from the Koran written in calligraphy for display. -also 
lafta. 
j;Ju 
~ 
yaqi~ ladj *1 alert, vigilant. 
~ 
yaqa~a Inl wakefulness. ma-tjdirti-f fasaddatj 
lenay-ya - fana f-yaqa~a walla f-manaam I couldn't 
believe my eyes! Was I awake or just dreaming? 
Jo.i.;I 
fityaqqa~ Ivil to become alert, vigilant or cau-
tious. -vn tayaqqu~; ava mityaqqa;. 
Ju.,::.-. mistayqi~ ladj *1 alert, vigilant. 
iJJIS 
~ 
yaqiin Inl certainty.llyaqiin-i bi-lIaah yaqii-ni my 
faith in God protects me. lala yaqiin sure, as in fana 
lala yaqiin finnu /issa ma-w~al-f I am dead sure he 
hasn't yet arrived. 
~ 
yaqiini ladjl certain, absolute. furuuq fibh i 
Ya..qiniyya disputable assumptions . 
.;,-<.;1 fityatjtjan Ivil to make sure (of s.th.). kafaft 8 
lak-kilma fil-qamuus lafaan fatyatjtjan min malnaa-
ha I looked up the word in the dictionary to be sure of 
its meaning. -ava mityatjtjan. 
'::".JJIS 
..... .".~ yatjuut Inl ruby. lIyatjuut f~far topaz. 
~.".~ yatjuuta lunit n, pI -aatl a ruby. 
v.".~ yatjuuti ladj invarl of or pertaining to ruby. 
fal:Jmar yatjuuti ruby-red. 
.IJJIS 
o~ yakaah <T yegdh from P> Inl ImusJ I name given 
to the note G below middle C. 2 mode in Arabic music 
beginning on bottom G and having B flat and E flat. 
~JJIS 
~ yakk <P yak> Inl one (in dice). xaanit iI-yakk first 
point (on a backgammon board). II fitzanatj fi xaanit 
iI-yakk he is in a tight corner, he's been trapped. 

.!lJ.s 
~ yalak <T yelek> In pi -aatl [obsol] (woman's) 
vest, waistcoat. 
I J J.s 
')1.4. yalla linterjl come on! get on! move! yalla biina 
let's go! let's get on with it! yalla kul come on, eat! yalla 
nnaam let's go and lie down! lIyalia s-salaama "" God 
protect us! (to ward off disaster). 
11 ma-tyalla come on! get moving! 
.sJ.s 
4 Y- yulya Inl July. 
."Jy- yulyu Inl July. 
~Itr.s 
;;,;~ yamaxaana <T yemekIJane> In pi -aatl [mil, 
obsol] mess. II finta fakir-ha yamaxaana hina do you 
think this place is a free feeding house?! - also 
yamakxaana. 
..; r.s see ";.s r .s : yamiif 
.!lr.s 
~ 
yamak <T yemek> Inl [mil, joe] food, chow (par-
ticularly lentils). 
;;,;~ yamakxaana In pi -aatl [mil, obsol] mess. -also 
yamaxaana. 
~ 
yammiik Inl [mil, joe] glutton, chow hound. 
~ 
yammik Ivil [mil, obsol] to wolf one's food. -ava 
miyammik. 
I U.s 
;:. yamm Inl direction. ruyt' yamm il-baab I went to-
wards the door. fiwea tiigi yamm-u-hum don't come 
near them! 
~ yamma Inl side. fil-yamma I-bieiida on the far side. 
2 U.s 
~I fityammim Ivil [lsi] to perform ritual purification 
of oneseif with sand or dust (in the absence of water). 
-vn tayammum; ava mityammim. 
3 U.s 
i~ yamaam Icoll nl dove(s)·lIzayy beet[ il-yamaamya 
einab [vendor's cry] "" grapes as large and rich as doves' 
eggs! 
4..~ yamaama lunit n, pi -aatl a dove. 
964 
I ~ r.s 
0-""! yumn Inl good luck, good fortune, prosperitY.liid 
saliid yieuud ealeekum bil-yumn' wi/-barakaat happy 
feast, may it return with all prosperity and blessings. 
~ 
yimiin I, yamiin I 1 Inl la right( -hand side). eala 
ymiin if-jaarie on the right-hand side of the street. 
II eut[w il-yimiin [leg] second-ranking judge on a three-
judge panel. Ib ril-yimiin, fil-yamiin the (political) 
Right. 2 ladj invarl right, right-hand. rin-nayya 
I-yimiin min if-jaarie the right-hand side of the street. 
-/adverbiallyl liff' ymiin tUln right! yimiin duur [mil] 
right face! 
..r.w.. yimiini, yamiini 1 ladj *1 rightist, right wing . 
2 In *1 a rightist. 
0-"--!i 'layman r ladjl right(-hand side). fil-ganaay il-
'layman [soccer] the right flank. 
-.:...,.. maymana Inl right side. geejil-maymana [mil] the 
right flank. II r/¥yaab (or rahl) il-maymana [lsi] the 
blessed. 
;,.,....".. maymuun 1 ladjl blessed. qiraan maymuun 
blessed marriage! 2/nl monkey attached to a street 
performer . 
J.,....".. maymuuni Inl type of majrafiyya pattern (see 
PI.G, 13) . 
~ 
tayammun r Inl auspiciousness. 
11 tayammunan ladvl as a good omen. fii naas tisammi 
fawlad-ha myammad tayammunan bi-sm in-nabi there 
are people who name their children Muhammad hoping 
to invoke the blessing of the Prophet's name. 
2 ~ r .s 
~I fil-yaman Iprop nl Yemen. 
~ 
yamani 1 ladj *1 Yemeni.IlYamaam yamani large 
variety of pigeon, not generally domesticated, although 
a household may keep one for good luck. 2 In *' a 
Yemeni. 
J~ yamaani = yamani. II rir-rukn il-yamaani [lsi] 
corner of the Kaaba which pilgrims touch or point at as 
part of the pilgrimage ritual. 
3 ~ r.s 
~ 
yimiin2, yamiin 2 Inl 1 Ipl faymaan, raymanaatJt 
oath. lalayya I-yamiin I swear. yilift' ymiin bit-talaac; 
min miraat-i m-akallim-u I swore that my wife would be 
divorced if I spoke to him. II wi-maa-Iak ealayya yimiin 
"" and although you have no right to demand an oath 
from me that the case is so, nevertheless I swear it is. 
-
raymaan, raymanaat J Ipl nl 2 descriptive intensi-
fier. huwwa taalie diin raymaan fahl-u fiffwd "" he's 
working fit to bust a gut. 

..; I.S r I.S 
~~ yamiif <T yemi~> InJ nuts and raisins (especial-
ly as ingredients for sweets) sold during Ramadan. 
.;, 1 .;, I.S 
.:,li.,J1 fil-yunaan Iprop nl Greece. 
Jli..f! yunaanil/adj *1 Greek.lltjaalib yunaani last for 
a round-toed shoe. 2/n ·1 a Greek. 3 In, no pI/ the 
Greek language . 
.J ~ I.;, ~ 
J,.~ yanaayir Inl January. 
t.J Y .;, ~ see t y .;, : yanbuul 
';'.J V"';' ~ 
.:,~ yansuun Inl aniseed; a hot drink made of the 
same. 
YI.Sv#';'~ see also ·YV#';' 
~~ 
yan~iib, yaan~iib InJ lottery. waratjit il-
yan~iib lottery ticket. 
~.;,.;,~ 
~ yanni Iprop nl Greek male given name. IIsakrit 
yanni ... as drunk as a Greek barman can make one. 
~.;,~ 
~..f! yunya InJ June. 
";..f! yunyu Inl June. 
( . 
~) 
~ yih I Ifem n, pi -aatl twenty-eighth and last letter of 
the Arabic alphabet. -also yaa, yaa f, yeeh. 
4! yih2, yuh, yah exclamation indicating wonder, 
admiration or awe. 
~.J • ~ see further under 1 ~.J • 
I.P*- yahuudi Ipl yahuud/l/adjl Jewish. 2 InJ a Jew. 
faflas min il-yahuudif-yoom is-sabt [prov] more broke 
than a Jew on the Sabbath.llyahuudi (fibn i yahuudi) a 
miser. - fil-yahuudi lamma yfallis yifallif /i-dafatr-u 1-
tjadiima [prov] (when a Jew goes bankrupt he looks 
through his old ledgers) ... when a man goes bankrupt 
he'll imagine all sorts of debts owed to him. - fitbawagu 
lil-yahuudi -tjaal il-yoom liid-i [prov] (they needed the 
Jew's help; he said 'Today is my feast day') ... he who is 
unwilling to help will always find a good excuse. 
~~*- yahudiyya Inl 1 Judaism. 2 simple variety of 
backgammon. 
965 
I[..JI.S 
~..f! yuuga, yooga <Engl> InJ yoga. 
~..f! yuugi, yoogi <Engl> In pi -yyal yogi, teacher of 
yoga, expert in yoga . 
~ .J I.S 
~..f! yuud Inl iodine. sabrit yuud tincture of iodine. 
.J .J I.S see .J.J 1 I.S : yaawir, yawraan 
..J V"JI.S 
lS.l.:ii ....A-..f! yuusif fafandi <prop n> lcoll nl tanger-
ine(s). - also yustafandi, yusafandi, yus/i, safandi, 
fistafandi. 
~~.l.:ii ....A-..f! yuusif fafandiyyaaya lunit n, pi -aatl a 
tangerine. 
- also yusafandiyyaaya, 
safandiyyaaya, 
fistafandiyyaaya . 
r~ I.S 
r..f! yoom In pi fayyaam/l da}. kull i yoom every day. 
la/art iyyaam ten days. tjabl a faaxir if-Jahr i b-yomeen 
two days before the end ofthe month. (abatj il-yoom the 
dish of the day. yoom it-talaat Tuesday. yoom il-bisaab 
Judge'Pent Day. lIyoom lasal wi-yoom b~al [prov] 
there are good days and bad days. - fibn i yomeen 
ma-Ylif-p talaata [prov] ... no man can exceed his allot-
ted life span. -hiyya lala yom-ha w-Ielit-ha she's about 
to give birth. -/i-yoom min il-fayyaam (1) one day, one 
of these days. (2) once upon a time. -yom-ha and 
yomii-ha at that time, the same day. -min yom-ha and 
min yomii-ha since that day, from that day on, as in 
gidd-i (ilil /i-tjurlit il-bigg i w-min yom-ha I-beet zayy i 
xaliyyit in-nabl my grandfather's name came up to go on 
pilgrimage and from that day on the house has been like 
a beehive! -min yoom- ... from the start, as in fana kida 
min yoom-i I've been like this since the day I was born, 
min yoom-i w-fana nabs I've been unlucky all my life. 
- fil-yomeen doolor fil-fayyaam di these days, nowa-
days. -zayy il-yomeen dool at about this time last year. 
-yoom-u b-la/ara he's very slow. 2 appointed time. 
kull i waabid liih yoom [prov] ... every dog has its day. 
rabb-i-na yiglal yoom-i tjabl i yoom-ak may my time of 
death be before yours. -
fayyaam Ipl nJ 3 (particular) 
period of time. fayyaam il-faralna (in) the days of the 
Pharaohs. fayyaam id-diraasa school days. fayyaam 
zamaan (in) the old days, the past. II fayyam-ha at that 
time, in those days, as in kaan fayyam-ha sinn-u fatjall i 
min lifriin sana at that time he was less than twenty 
years old. 
~ yoom ma Iconjl (on) the day when. yoom ma-Jtaret-ha 

(on) the d.ay when I bought it. huwwa t;aarifmalbit-na 
min yoom ma rafaqna fibn-u he's had it in for us since 
the day we refused his son (in marriage). - fayyaam ma 
lconjl (in) the days when. fayyaam ma kaanfii ni~aam 
(in) the days when thmgs were run properly. fayyaam 
ma kaan ig-gineeh gineeh in the good old days (when a 
pound was a pound) . 
..rYo yoomi I/adjl daily. birnaamig yoomi daily 
schedule. gariida yomiyya daily newspaper. 2 ladvl ev-
ery day. da b-yiigi hinayoomi he comes here every day. 
~ yomiyyan, yawmiyyan ladvl daily. 
~Yo yomiyya In pi -aatl I daily pay rate, daily wage. 
bi-yiftaral bi/-yomiyya he works on a daily rate. 
2a day's labour. bald' yomiyyit-i rubt' /iI-mudiir after 
my day's work I went to (see) the director. 3 (also 
daftar i1-yomiyya) [adminJ daybook. 4 lonly in constrl 
the day of. min yomiyyit i/-badsa since the day of the 
accident. 
.;..t;.. Yo yawmiyyaat r Ipl nl diaries. 
966 
J\.. Yo yomaati ladvl daily. yomaati b-at;abl-u hnaak 
every day I meet him there. 
~JL:.- miyawma 1 ladvl on a daily basis. filla/at; finnu 
yiftaral-Ii myawma he agreed that he would work for 
me by the day. 2 Inl work on a daily basis. bi-yiftaralu 
bil-miyawma they work by the day. 
• J ..; 
0Yo yooh, yuuh exclamation indicating exasperation. 
yooh finta Iissa gaay and here you come after all this 
time! yooh da-na nsiit oh rats, I forgot! lIyooh gat-ak 
feeh expression of delight (in joking). 
J";J"; 
YoYo yuuyu <Engl> In pi yuyaatl yo-yo. 
. 
..;..; 
<Ie! yeeh In pi -aatl twenty-eighth and last letter of the 
Arabic alphabet. -also yaa. yaaf. yih. 

ILLUSTRA TIONS 

Plate A 
Plate B 
Plate C 
Plate D : 
Plate E 
Plate F 
Plate G : 
Plate H 
Plate H 
Plate I 
Plate J 
LIST OF PLATES 
Vessels 
Implements and Containers 
Rural Items 
Agricultural Implements 
Irrigation and Cultivation 
Apparel 
Mafrafiyya work 
Xiyamiyya work 
Xiyamiyya work 
Pipes 
Musical Instruments 
971 
972 
973 
974 
975 
976 
977 
978 
979 
980 
981 

1 
5 
1 (julia 
2 fabrii(j 
3 maylaba 
4 burma 
5 (jidra 
Plate A 
2 
3 
& 
8 
9 
Vessels 
0 
4 
A 
10 
6 man(jad, maw(jad 
7 ziir 
8 maguur 
9 tift 
10 ballaa~, balla~i, garra, zalca 
971 

972 
Plate B 
1 
5 
8 
1 maxraca 
2 lamba ~afiifJ, lamba fawwaaci, 
lamba saruux, lamba b-simbila 
3 kanaka 
4 macrafJa 
Implements and Containers 
2 
3 
6 
9 
5 ralac; 
6 mufraak 
7 mac;caf 
8 rafJaaya 
9 mifanna 
7 

3 
6 
1 qabba 
2 (ab/iyya 
3 burg' lJamaam 
4 ~umala. maxzan raUa 
5 xumm. xunn. ~umala 
6 fum 
Plate C 
Rural Items 
• 
4 
-----
7 tjubba 
8 lar~a 
1 
7 
9 balaa(a. lar~a 
10 milJma 
11 !aruutja 
973 
2 
11' 

974 
Plate D 
5 
8 
I noorag 
2 falaka 
3 Jlcba 
4 yabil( 
5 battaana 
6 faas 
7 qa~~abiyya 
Agricultural Implements 
A 
6 
20 
8 mlyraat 
9 difiida. c;unnaafa 
\0 l~fuura 
II naaf 
12 Jaahid. l~fuura 
13 c;antuut. bantuut. lantuut 
14 c;oos 
3 
4 
15 lac;rab 
16 qufdala 
17 c;abqa 
18 rumy 
19 balanga 
20 silaay 
21 basxa. ba~xa 

,\. 
..., 
~ 
0::: 
~ 
~ 
1 saqya 
2 ~aduud 
3 gazya 
Plate E 
19 
4 dabbuus, r;aruu~a, harmiis 
5 naaf 
6 hudya 
7 kibiir 
8 ~ayiir 
9 4.irs 
10 sahm 
11 qaduus 
Irrigation and Cultivation 
11 
-= 
12 
17 
12 tuunis. (uunis 
13 kilaala 
14 faduuf 
22 
15 baddaala. l:Jalazoona. (ambuur 
16 warj 
17 misqa. r;abbaara. r;abbuura. fal:Jl. qanaaya 
18 farda 
19 beet 
20 bim. bitniyya. riwaal 
21 riifa 
22 tabuut, l:Jalazoona. l:Jalluufa. (ambuur, (ambuufa 

976 
Plate F 
Apparel 
18 
17 
19 
1 taqiyya 
8 burljuc 
15 kakuula 
2 tarfiil:Ja, talfiil:Ja, talfiica 
9 tarbiica, mandiil raas 
16 ljuftaan 
3 sideeri 
10 tarl:Ja 
17 milaaya 
4 baj7iik 
11 gallabiyya samra 
18 cabaaya 
5 gallabiyya baladi 
12 cimma 
19 ljubljaab 
6. bulra 
13 tarbuuj 
20 kirdaan 
7 q~abit burljUl 
14 jaal 

1 
9 
1 ~ahriigi dayya(j 
2 ~aliib malyaan 
3 ~aliib faatf.i 
4 farx 
5 (jambuuc:a 
6 mixarraz 
7 ~ahriigi waasic: 
Plate G 
2 
3 
Mafraf;yya work 
J 
>--< 
13 
8 kanaysi 
9 va/wi baladi 
10 sarwa 
11 kinga 
12 n~t nigma 
13 maymuuni misaddis 
14 miqarnas 
977 
7 
14 

978 
Plate HI: Xiyamiyya work 

4 
2 
5 
6 
25 
1 rube 
2 nu~~ 
3 sinn 
4 tarbiiea 
5 buqga 
6 booq 
7 qufr 
Plate H II: Xiyamiyya work 
8 zahra 
9 looza salt 
10 balaba 
11 jamea 
12 raas tiebaan 
13 bUCjga 
14 libaas 
----12 
~13 
14 
_ 
=15=~_ 
-
-_. -=z: 
16 
27 
28 
15 qadda 
16 nUCj{a 
17 {abaq baladi 
18 xaatim 
19 rank 
20 kaeb 
21 luqma 
979 
22 maxnuuqa 
23 rukn 
24 kursi 
25 jarafa 
26 zahra kaff is-sabe 
27 turunga 
28 talbiisa 

980 
1 fiifa 
2 yagar 
3 (aasa 
4 layy 
5 bannuura, dooraq 
6 mabsam, fumm 
Plate I 
1 
Iift.-- 9 
Pipes 
6 
7 gooza 
8 bu~a, yaaba 
9 qalb 
10 bukfa 
11 buuri 

Plate J 
Musical Instruments 
981 
1 rabaaba 
8 bangat; 
15 t;~9a 
22 rakiiza 
2 qoos 
9 YinJ 
16 Yarruul 
23 qanuun 
3 rat;ma 
10 miraaya 
17 mabsam, balu~ 
24 mastara 
4 simsimiyya 
11 raqaba 
18 muzmaar baladi 
25 earba 
5 tabla 
12 jamsiyya 
19 mabsam 
26 jamsiyya 
6 yuqq 
13 raqma 
20 buut; 
7 euud 
14 Jarasa 
21 muzmaarturki 

