A Guide to Building Outdoor Stairs  
 
Building a stairway can be one of the most intimidating tasks any builder–amateur or professional–tackles. But an 
outdoor stairway is generally not a difficult project, as long as it is planned and executed carefully. This document 
covers building procedures for a straight-run utility stairway, typically used on porches and decks.  
Local building codes regulate the width and slope of a staircase, as well as how the assembly is supported and 
braced, how the landing is built and whether railings are required. ALWAYS CHECK WITH YOUR LOCAL 
BUILDING DEPARTMENT BEFORE DESIGNING A STAIRWAY, AND FOLLOW ALL LOCAL CODES.  
The following instructions are intended as general guidelines only, and local requirements should be your primary 
guide.  
In this document you will find information about:  
• 
Stair-Building Terms  
• 
Designing Your Stairs  
• 
Building Your Stairs  
 TOOLS AND MATERIALS 
  
2x10 Stringers  
Hex Bolts
Hammer
1x8 Risers 
16d Galvanized Nails
Carpenter's Square
5/4" or 2" Tread Material
8d Galvanized Nails
Measuring Tape
2x6 Pressure-Treated Cleat 
4x4 Posts
Adjustable Wrench
Angle Iron
2" Railing Material
Joist Hangers
  
Anchor Bolts
Baluster Material
  
 
STEP 1 
 
FIG. 1 - How a stairway is built 
depends primarily on the total rise–
the vertical dimension from the 
upper floor to the lower floor. The 
total run–the horizontal length of 
the stair assembly–depends on the 
slope of the stairway, which is 
determined by building codes. 
From the Sunset book, Basic 
STAIR BUILDING TERMS 
• 
There are five basic design elements you'll need to consider when 
planning outdoor stairs: 
• 
The Total Run (Fig. 1) is the total horizontal distance covered by the 
staircase, from the edge of the upper floor (porch or deck) to the edge 
of the staircase where it rests on the landing. 
• 
The Total Rise (Fig. 1) is the total vertical distance from the surface of 
the landing to a point level with the surface of the upper floor (Note: 
You can't find the rise simply by measuring straight down from the 
upper floor because the ground directly below may not be level with 
the landing). 
• 
Run (Fig. 2) is the horizontal distance from the leading edge of one 
tread to the leading edge of the next tread. 

Carpentry Illustrated, © Sunset 
Publishing Corporation. 
 
FIG. 2 - The components of a 
stairway, with basic stair-building 
terms. From the Sunset book, 
Decks, © Sunset Publishing 
Corporation  
 
FIG. 3 - The components of a 
railing. From the Sunset book, 
Decks, © Sunset Publishing 
Corporation  
• 
Rise (Fig. 2) is the vertical distance from the surface of one tread to 
the surface of the next tread. 
• 
Passage Width (Fig. 2) is the width of the stairway. 
• 
The ratio of the total rise to total run (or rise to run) determines the 
slope of the stairway. As a rule, that slope should be between 30 
degrees and 35 degrees; an outdoor stairway may be slightly 
shallower but should not be steeper. The ideal riser height is 7" with an 
11" run–which also works out well with standard lumber widths–but 
you may have to vary the proportions somewhat to make the height of 
each step work out evenly between the landing and the upper floor. 
• 
The passage width can also vary, depending on how heavily you 
expect the stairs to be used. As a rule, 36" is the minimum; 48" is 
better for a single person, and you may want to go to 60" to allow room 
for two people to pass comfortably. 
• 
A stairway consists of four basic components: 
• 
Stringers (Fig. 2) are the sloped members that support the stairway. 
2x10s are generally allowed for stairs with four treads or fewer, but 
2x12s are sturdier. 
• 
In most cases, you'll need good quality material with no large knots, 
either pressure treated or cut from heart redwood or cedar, to resist 
decay. Stringers should be placed no more than 24" apart if the treads 
will be 5/4 material or 36" apart for 2"-thick lumber. 
• 
Treads (Fig. 2) are the horizontal members that you walk on. When 
building an outdoor stairway, they are typically cut from the same 
material as the upper floor deck or porch–5/4" pressure-treated pine or 
2"-thick lumber. 
• 
Risers (Fig. 2) are the vertical members at the back of each tread. 1" 
surfaced boards (3/4" net thickness) are the most common material 
used. 
• 
The Railing Assembly (Fig. 3) consists of posts, a cap rail and 
vertical balusters between each post. 4x4 is the most common post 
material with a 2x4 handrail. Codes regulate the overall height of the 
railing assembly (usually 30" to 34") and may specify a maximum 
width for the handrail.  
 
 
STEP 2 
 
DESIGNING YOUR STAIRS 
• 
To design the stairway, first find the total rise. Divide that number by 7 
(the ideal riser height) to find the number of steps. You'll probably have 

FIG. 4 - Common tread-to-riser 
ratios. From the Sunset book, 
Decks, © Sunset Publishing 
Corporation.  
a fractional remainder, so round your result up or down to the nearest 
whole number. 
• 
Then divide the total rise by that number to find the exact height of 
each riser. For example:  
1) Total rise = 40-1/2"  
2) 40-1/2" divided by 7" per riser = 5.78 risers  
3) Round 5.78 up to 6 risers, then 40-1/2" divided by 6 = 6.75" or 6-
3/4" per riser  
This document assumes that the total run is not limited, so you can 
make the assembly as long as you want. Use the following table to 
determine the width of the treads, depending on your riser height.  
Riser Height  
Run Width  
6" 
14" 
6-1/4" 
13-1/2" 
6-1/2" 
13" 
6-3/4" 
12-1/2" 
7" 
12" 
7-1/4" 
11-1/2" 
7-1/2" 
11" 
 
• 
To find the amount of material needed for risers, simply multiply the 
number of risers by the passage width. To find the amount of tread 
material, subtract 1 from the number of risers (you'll need one fewer 
tread than risers) and multiply by the passage width. Remember to 
double up if you'll be using two boards for each tread. 
• 
To find the length of the stringers, you'll need a calculator with a 
square root function. First, find the total run (number of treads 
multiplied by the width of each tread). 
• 
Then find the square of the total run (total run multiplied by itself) and 
the square of the total rise and add them together. 
• 
The square root of the result gives you the exact stringer length; round 
up to the nearest standard lumber length, then multiply by the number 
of stringers you'll need.  

 
 
STEP 3 
 
FIG. 6 - Stringers may be hung 
from the rim joist with a joist 
hanger so the first step is flush 
with the deck surface. In this 
configuration, a piece of pressure-
treated lumber is bolted to the 
landing pad and the stringer is 
nailed to it with 16d galvanized 
nails. From the Sunset book, 
Decks, © Sunset Publishing 
Corporation.  
 
FIG. 7 - The stringer can be bolted 
to the end of the joist so the first 
step is one step below the surface 
of the deck. At the landing pad, the 
stringer may be fastened to an 
angle iron (the angle should be 
galvanized) bolted to the concrete. 
From the Sunset book, Decks, © 
Sunset Publishing Corporation.  
BUILDING YOUR STAIRS 
• 
To build the staircase, first notch the stringers for the treads and risers. 
Fasten two stair gauges to a carpenter's square at the dimensions of 
the rise and run (for example, at 6-1/2" on one leg and 13" on the 
other). Set the square on the stringer so the gauges are flush against 
the edge and trace the notch along the edge of the square (Fig. 5).  
FIG. 5 - Set the carpenter's square on the stringer so the riser 
and tread dimensions are at the edge, then trace along the 
square. Move the square to the previous mark and repeat the 
process. Subtract one tread thickness from the layout at the 
bottom so the last step is equal in height to the rest. From the 
Sunset book, Decks, © Sunset Publishing Corporation.  
• 
"Step" your way down the stringer, repeating the process until you 
have laid out the correct number of notches. Use the carpenter's 
square to lay out the top cut on the stringer. The height of the last riser 
should be less than the others by an amount equal to the thickness of 
the tread. That way, when you nail the last tread in place, the step 
down to the lower floor will be equal to the others. 
• 
You can set the stringer directly on the lower floor (typically a landing 
pad) and bolt it in place with a piece of angle iron, or bolt a length of 
pressure-treated 2x6 to the floor and nail the stringer to it. 
• 
If you plan to set the stringer on a 2x6, you may have to notch the 
bottom of the stringer to allow for that piece. 
• 
Once the stringer is laid out, cut the notches partway only, using a 
circular saw. Take care not to cut beyond the layout lines. Finish the 
cuts with a handsaw. 
• 
Once you have one stringer finished, set it in place to make sure it is 
cut correctly, then use it as a template to lay out your cuts on the other 
stringers. 
• 
You can hang the stringers to the rim joist with joist hangers (Fig. 6), or 
bolt them in place to a joist (Fig. 7). If you need to pour a concrete 
landing pad at the bottom of the stairway, set the stringers in place 

temporarily and lay out the location of the pad. Pour the pad and set 
anchor bolts for the angle iron or 2x6 base. Instructions for pouring 
concrete are in another brochure in this series. 
• 
Once the landing pad is cured, secure the stringers at the top and 
bottom. Rip the risers to the same width as the height of the riser cut in 
the stringers. Then cut them to length and nail them to the stringers 
with 8d galvanized nails. 
• 
Measure the distance from the face of the riser to the edge of the 
notch cut, then rip the treads to width so they extend 1" to 1-1/8" 
beyond the edge of the notch. If you're using two boards side by side 
as treads, rip half the dimension from each board so both will be the 
same width. Cut the treads to length and nail them to the stringer with 
16d galvanized nails. 
• 
To build the railing, first secure 4x4 posts at the top and bottom of the 
stringer. Notch the posts 1-1/2" deep and bolt them to the sides of the 
stringers with 1/2x4-1/2 hex bolts, using a level to keep them plumb. 
Use decay-resistant lumber for the posts. They should be at least long 
enough to extend 36" above the surface of the treads. Leave them a 
few inches too long at the top so you can cut them after they are in 
place. 
• 
Measure from the bottom of the stringer up the posts to the location of 
the top and bottom rails. The top surface of the upper rail should be 
30" to 34" above the tread; the rail should be about 6" above the tread. 
Lay the railing material against the posts and lay out angled cuts for 
any rails that will be fastened between the posts. 
• 
Cut the railings to length and toenail them with four 8d galvanized 
nails. If you'll be using balusters, cut them to length and nail them to 
the rails. Check local codes for spacing requirements on balusters.  
 
 
 

