
 
A Newbies Guide to Apple Watch:
The Unofficial Guide to Getting the Most Out of Apple Watch (Updated for
watchOS 2)
Minute Help Guides
Minute Help Press
www.minutehelp.com
 
© 2015. All Rights Reserved.
 
Cover Image © baibaz – Fotalia.com
Table of Contents
Introduction
Part 1: Meet the Apple Watch
Apple Watch Under the Hood
Apple Watch and iPhone
Let’s Get Started!
Part 2: Apple Watch Basics
2.1 Unboxing Your Apple Watch
2.2 Power and Charging
2.3 Pairing Your Apple Watch
2.4 WatchOS 2
Watch Faces
Activation Lock

Siri
Mail
New Achievements
Music
2.5 Navigating Apple Watch
Digital Crown
Home Button
Side Button
Touch and Force Touch
Microphone and Speaker
Haptic Feedback
Heart Rate Sensor
Siri
2.6 The Apple Watch Interface
Watch Face
Home Screen
Friends
Notifications
2.7 The Apple Watch App
2.8 Handoff
2.9 Practice Makes Comfort
Part 3: Personalizing Your Apple Watch
3.1 Watch Faces
Modular
Simple
Motion
Astronomy
Color
Solar
Chronograph
Mickey

X-Large
Utility
Saving Customized Watch Faces
3.2 Managing Notifications
Haptics Notifications
3.3 Apple Pay
3.4 Friends and Digital Touch
Digital Touch
3.5 Changing Apple Watch Bands
3.6 The Only Constant Is Change
Part 4: Apple Watch Onboard Apps and Glances
4.1 Onboard Apps
Activity
Alarm
Calendar
Camera Remote
Mail
Maps
Messages
Music
Passbook
Phone
Photos
Remote
Settings
Stocks
Stopwatch
Timer
Weather
Workout
World Clock

4.2 Glances
Settings Glance
Now Playing
Heartbeat
Battery and Power Reserve
Activity
Calendar
Weather
Maps
Stocks
World Clock
Managing Glances
4.3 Getting the Hang of Apps and Glances
Part 5: Getting Started with Third Party Watch Apps
5.1 Adding Third Party Apps to Your Watch
5.2 Our Top Twenty Apple Watch Apps
Amazon (free)
CNN (free)
Dark Sky ($3.99)
Emergency by American Red Cross (free)
ESPN (free)
Foursquare (free)
Instagram (free)
Mint (free)
MyFitnessPal (free)
Pacemaker (free)
Pandora (free)
PowerPoint (free)
RunKeeper (free)
Shazam (free)
Starbucks (free)

Trivia Crack ($2.99)
Twitter (free)
Uber (free)
Wunderlist (free)
Yelp (free)
5.3 Exploring Further
Conclusion


Introduction
Congratulations on your new Apple Watch! The Apple Watch is a game changer in the
world of wearable tech, and you’ll be amazed at all the ways it will help you stay in touch,
in shape and in sync. With revolutionary technology that brings the power of Apple
innovation to your wrist and a range of designs guaranteed to suit your personal style, the
Apple Watch is an impressive addition to any tech-loving household.
Apple Watch is an unparalleled wearable experience. It’s an excellent fitness tracker,
thanks to its built-in heart rate sensor, which regularly monitors your pulse, its
accelerometer and gyroscope, which keep track of the steps you take and the speed you
take them, and its connection with your iPhone, which allows it to take advantage of your
phone’s GPS to measure distance. Apple Watch is also a communication tool. You can
respond to and initiate messages and phone calls, and you can even share live sketches and
heartbeats with other Apple Watch users. Your Watch can replace your wallet, thanks to
Apple Pay, and you can use it to present boarding passes and tickets without having to dig
around for pieces of paper or, for that matter, for your iPhone. Finally, Apple Watch can
help you get around and stay informed by keeping you in the know regarding the weather,
your location, your stock’s performance, and more. And like every Apple product, the
Watch’s built-in apps are only the beginning – third party developers are extending the
Watch’s functionality constantly, and there’s no end in sight.
In addition to its practical applications, we also think that Apple Watch has the power to
change our relationship to technology. It brings your digital life closer than ever before by
putting it in constant physical contact with your body. Apple Watch won’t replace your
iPhone, but it will help you manage it and maybe even reduce the time you spend staring
at a screen.
In this guide we’ll show you every nook and cranny of your Apple Watch (and despite its
small size, there are a surprising number of nooks and crannies tucked away inside its
elegant interface). In Part 1: Meet Apple Watch, we’ll introduce you to your device, its
hardware and its philosophy. In Part 2: Apple Watch Basics, we’ll show you everything
you need to get started, from unboxing to setup to navigation. In Part 3: Personalizing
Your Apple Watch, we’ll help you fully customize your Watch, from the way it looks to
the way it talks to you. Then, we’ll get very specific in Part 4: Apple Watch Onboard
Apps and Glances as we look at every single app that comes pre-installed on your Watch.
Finally, we’ll share our favorite third party Watch apps in Part 5: Getting Started with
Third Party Watch Apps.
This book has been updated to include the newest watch update: watchOS 2.
There’s a lot to cover, but we think you’ll enjoy getting to know this beautiful piece of
technology and exploring all of the ways it can make your life easier.


Part 1: Meet the Apple Watch
Apple Watch is an entirely new, entirely exciting product line from Apple – the first real
new product from the company since it introduced the iPad in 2010. So, in order for you to
get started, some introductions are in order.
The Apple Watch is Apple’s first “wearable” device. Wearables are a relatively young tech
family, with smart watches being the most commercially viable branch (at least for now).
Of course, the ancestors of modern wearables include the plain old pedometer, which
could count steps, estimate distance and calories, and maybe detect elevation changes. In
recent years, dedicated fitness trackers from FitBit, Jawbone, Garmin and Pebble have
moved way beyond step counts by sending their data to smartphone apps and online
platforms, giving users ways to visualize and use that data to set goals and improve
performance. These companies also pioneered the first steps toward a full-featured “smart
watch” by adding things like call and text notification.
Apple Watch is not the first smart watch out there. The Android Wear platform has already
released seven Android-based smart watches, with more in the works. Microsoft is
looking to get into the wrist game as well, with the Microsoft Band being released in
2015. So why choose Apple Watch? It’s not the cheapest option, nor is it the only option.
Still, if you are an iPhone user, Apple’s hardware is gorgeous, its software is powerful, and
it builds on the interface that you already know and use.
If you’re interested in fitness tracking, Apple Watch can compete with the big names, and
thanks to third party apps, users can greatly extend its utility past the out-of-the-box
configuration. If you want to wear something you’ll like looking at, the Apple Watch
comes in several different models, including the rough-and-tumble Watch Sport (with an
aluminum case and a sweat-proof plastic band), Watch (with a stainless steel case and
your choice of a variety of band styles) and, for high rollers, Watch Edition (with a gold
case), which can run you up to $15,000. You can also purchase bands separately, meaning
you can take advantage of the comfortable and water-resistant Sport band when you’re
working out and still wear something a little more elegant when out on the town. In short,
it’s a highly personalized and highly sophisticated device with excellent features and
revolutionary technology. What’s not to love?

Apple Watch Under the Hood
The technology inside the Apple Watch is an impressive achievement in and of itself. If
you were to open up the Watch’s case (note: don’t actually do this!), you’d find a single
chip inside. That chip – named the S1 Processor - contains an entire computer system, and
it’s the first of its kind. It’s particularly awe-inspiring when you remember that the earliest
computers took up entire rooms!
The Watch case also includes the all-new Taptic Engine. This piece of hardware provides
haptic feedback, meaning it taps and buzzes on your wrist to let you know that
something’s up. On the back of the device, you’ll find its heart rate sensor, which uses
infrared and LED lights to monitor and record your pulse.
Finally, your Apple Watch includes an incredibly strong display. Apple Watch and Apple
Watch Edition models feature a sapphire glass display (which, incidentally, is second only
to diamond in durability). The less expensive Sport model’s display is made of
strengthened Ion-X glass, which is also tough enough to withstand the demands of your
daily life.

Apple Watch and iPhone
Before we get too much further, we should be clear about something. You must have an
iPhone, or Apple Watch will be pretty useless. The Apple Watch is designed to work with
an Apple iPhone 5 or later. Unfortunately, anything older than iPhone 5 can’t keep up with
the Watch in terms of technology. Furthermore, your iPhone needs to be running iOS 8.2
or later. The iOS 8.2 update adds a dedicated Apple Watch app to the iOS interface, and as
an Apple Watch owner, you’ll be using that app to control and customize your Watch. If
you don’t have it yet, open the Settings app on your phone and then tap General, then
Software Update to update to the latest version of iOS.
Apple Watch talks to your iPhone through Bluetooth – a wireless technology found in
cars, headphones, wireless keyboards and more. That connection makes it possible for
Apple Watch to send messages, stream media and give directions. Your iPhone shares its
wireless or data connection with the Watch, which can’t connect to either on its own.
However, Apple Watch can send messages and receive and make phone calls if it is
connected to the same wireless network as its paired iPhone, but many other features
won’t be available. Long story short, you’ll want your iPhone within 30 feet or so (the
standard Bluetooth range) of your Watch to get the most out of it.

Let’s Get Started!
Now that you know what you’re working with, read on to get familiar with Apple Watch
basics by setting up your Watch and learning to navigate it.


Part 2: Apple Watch Basics
In this chapter, we’ll take you from zero to sixty with your Apple Watch by showing you
everything you need to know to work it. This section includes all of the basics – unboxing,
charging, pairing and navigating, as well as an introduction to the major elements of the
interface and of the iPhone companion app. Take your time with this section. Apple Watch
will require you to learn some new behaviors, so be patient with yourself as you
acclimatize to this new style of mobile computing.

2.1 Unboxing Your Apple Watch
When you first open your Apple Watch box, you’ll find the Watch itself inside a plastic
case. Underneath that case, you’ll find a long envelope with some minimal use
instructions and safety information, a USB charger cable with the Watch’s new magnetic
charger on one end, and an AC power adaptor. Depending on your band purchase, you
may also find a band adaptor for larger wrist sizes.
Gently remove the protective plastic from your Watch before putting it on. Many Apple
Watch bands, including the Sport models, have a slightly different clasping mechanism
than most wristwatches. You’ll feed the perforated end down into the slot in the end with
the snap, which will fit snugly inside its hole. However the Watch buckles or clasps, it
should feel secure and comfortable on your wrist.

2.2 Power and Charging
The Apple Watch comes with a magnetic charger, USB cable and power adaptor. Plug the
adaptor into a power source and connect the USB cable. Your Watch will sit on top of the
circular magnet as it charges. Your Apple Watch should ship with enough of a charge for
you to get started, but you’ll want to figure out a workable charging routine pretty quickly,
since charging will generally be a nightly task.
Your Watch will hold a charge for about a day’s worth of normal use. You may see longer
or shorter battery life, depending on how you use your Watch. Apple claims that the
battery will last for three hours of talking, six and a half hours of streaming music, and six
and a half hours of fitness tracking. By putting your Watch in Power Reserve mode, you
can expect to be able to check the time for up to 48 hours (more on this later on in Part
4.2). Expect a full charging cycle to take about two and a half hours.
When your Apple Watch is charging, you’ll see a small green lightning bolt on your
Watch Face, indicating that it’s charging, as seen below.
Screenshot 1: A Charging Apple Watch

2.3 Pairing Your Apple Watch
Now that you’re familiar with the hardware of your Apple Watch, it’s time to start using
the software it supports! We’ll walk you through the process of pairing your Apple Watch
and your iPhone so that you can get started. To complete this setup process, you’ll need
your Watch, an iPhone 5 or later, a reliable wireless or data connection, your Apple ID and
password, and five to ten minutes of your time.
First, open the Apple Watch app on your iPhone. You’ll need to be updated to iOS 8.2 or
later to have this app, and you must have it installed in order to use an Apple Watch.
Screenshot 2: Apple Watch App Welcome Screen
Then, turn on your Apple Watch by pressing the slender silver button next to the digital
crown along the right edge of the Watch. The Apple logo will appear. It may take several
minutes for the initial setup options to appear.
When the display shows your language options, choose your language by tapping it.
English is at the top of the list, but if you want to see how the knob on the side of the
Watch called the Digital Crown works, twist it to scroll through the rest of the options.
Apple Watch will then ask you to pair it with your iPhone. Tap Start Pairing to reveal the
graphic containing everything your iPhone needs to know.
Next, on your iPhone, tap Start Pairing in the Apple Watch app. You can pair your Apple
Watch automatically or manually. The more fun method is the first one presented to you –
simply line up your Watch with the square on the iPhone, and the two devices will pair
using Bluetooth, courtesy of the animated identifying graphic on the Watch.

Screenshot 3: Pairing an Apple Watch Using the Camera
If you’re having trouble with this method, you can tap Pair Apple Watch Manually at the
bottom of he screen. You’ll then choose your Apple Watch from the list of available
devices. In most circumstances, we imagine this will be a fairly short list. If you’re unsure
though, tap the little circled i in the upper right corner of your Watch to find your device’s
name. Once you’ve selected it on your iPhone, a six-digit code will appear on your Watch.
Type that code into your iPhone to complete the pairing process.
Screenshot 4: Manually Pairing an Apple Watch
You’ll then see an iPhone confirmation screen letting you know that the two devices are

happily talking to each other.
Screenshot 5: Pairing Confirmation
Now, you’ll use your iPhone to finish setting up your Watch. Tap Set Up Apple Watch to
continue.
First, choose your wrist preference by tapping Left or Right (you can change this later if
you need to). Then, tap Agree, indicating you’ve read and agreed to the terms and
conditions. Tap Agree again in the popup confirmation box. Then, sign in with the Apple
ID associated with your iPhone. You can skip this step if you want, but we strongly
recommend signing in. An Apple ID is required for some of Apple Watch’s more exciting
features, including Apple Pay. Enter your password and tap Next in the top right corner.
Next, you’ll see information about Location Services and Siri. These features are enabled
or disabled based on your current iPhone settings. If Location Services are off on your
iPhone, they’ll be off on your Apple Watch as well. These particular features really
enhance the Apple Watch experience, and we do recommend enabling them on your
iPhone if necessary. Tap OK to confirm you understand each setting.

Screenshot 6: Location Services Confirmation
Next, decide whether or not to send diagnostic and usage data to Apple by tapping either
Automatically Send or Don’t Send. This one, unlike the Terms and Conditions
agreement, is entirely up to you!
After that, you’ll be given the option of entering a passcode. A passcode is a four-digit
code that you’ll need to enter if you take off your Watch, which will lock whenever it’s
removed. If you’re going to use Apple Pay, you’ll be required to set up a passcode in order
to access the feature. However, you can tap Don’t Add Passcode if you don’t plan to use
Apple Pay and don’t think you need that level of protection. If you’re on the other end of
the security anxiety spectrum, though, you can tap Add a Long Passcode to use a longer
string of numbers.
The next screen asks you if you’d like to install apps on your iPhone that are compatible
with Apple Watch. We do recommend selecting Choose Later at this point. Apple Watch
does have a little bit of a learning curve, and we suggest getting used to the interface and
navigation before adding more elements to it. You can (and should!) add third party apps
at any time, and we’ll show you how in Part 5.1!

Screenshot 7: Installing Available Apps
The final step of setup is a syncing process that may take a few minutes. You can pass the
time by tapping See How Apple Watch Works to view a short video explaining the
Watch if you like. Your Apple Watch will tap you on the wrist as soon as it’s finished.
You’ll receive a message on your iPhone (and all of your other iDevices) that a new
device is using your Apple ID.
When your Watch is ready, the iPhone app will display a confirmation screen, and your
Apple Watch will display its default Watch Face (Modular View), which will look
something like the screenshot below.
Screenshot 8: Apple Watch Modular View
At this point, tap OK on your iPhone to reveal the Apple Watch management features of
the iPhone app. We’ll be coming back to this screen later on, but for now, let’s start
learning our way around your Watch!

2.4 WatchOS 2
If you are new to watchOS, don’t worry! The recent update is a feature update—not a full
update. What this means is the software on the watch will look and act the same way;
Apple has just updated it to have a few new features.
Before talking about those features, let’s quickly see how to update the watch.
To update the watch, open the Apple Watch app on your iPhone, tap My Watch, then
General, and finally software update. You’ll need to make sure your phone and watch are
near each other, your watch is charged at least 50% (and plugged into the charger), it’s
connected to wi-fi, and Bluetooth is turned on.
Next, wait. It’s not a big download (less then 1 GB), but depending on how many people
are downloading the same update as you, the servers at Apple might be a little crowded,
which slows things down. Alternatively, you can also go to your local Apple Store, which
often has better download speeds. Expect to wait 1 to 5 hours for the download to
complete.
Now that it’s downloading, let’s cover what’s changed with OS 2.
Watch Faces
Cosmetically, once of the most noticeable changes to OS 2 is new watch faces. There’s
three of them. To use the new faces, follow the same instructions in this book for changing
other faces.
Photo Face

The first new face lets you show either one photo or an entire photo album as your watch
face. If you pick an album, then a new face will display each time you lift your wrist.
Time-lapse Face
The next face is more dynamic; it shows different locations that change based on time. So,
for example, if you have a photo of New York City and look at your wrist at 10am, the
picture will be daylight, but if you look at it at 10pm, the picture will be night.
Nightstand Mode
The final new mode is nightstand mode. This mode is activated whenever the watch is
placed on its side while be charged in the charger; it turns the watch into a small digital
alarm clock. When the digital crown is touch, the screen lights up. In this mode, the side
button acts as a snooze button.
Activation Lock
This is a feature you probably won’t notice or even know about. With the first OS, it was
possible to bypass the passcode—which meant a stolen Apple Watch could be paired with
a new iPhone. Once you update to OS2 that will not be possible. The owner’s iCloud
credentials is now needed to reset the device.

Siri
Just like iOS 9 on the iPhone and iPad, watchOS 2 gave much needed attention to Siri. Siri
is now able to answer more requests and do even more tasks. For example, you can say,
“Siri, start a 50-minute outdoor walk.”
You can also tell Siri to open a glance up, look up words in the dictionary, and do simple
mathematical equations.
Mail
The first version of watchOS would not let you reply to email; you could only view and
organize it. Replies had to be done on your computer, phone or iPad. With watchOS 2, you
can dictate a response or reply with an emoji or preset response (like you can with text
messages)
New Achievements
New fitness achievements have been added to the software; these achievements can now
be shared on social networks like Twitter and Facebook.
Music
The music app on the watch has been updated to match that of Apple Music on the phone.
The interface makes it easier to like songs. There’s also a “Quick Play” setting to give
users a fast way to get the music on their phone.

2.5 Navigating Apple Watch
In this section, we’ll show you how to interact with your Watch and clue you in as to how
your Watch will interact with you. The Apple Watch interface is a little less intuitive than
that of iOS. We found it took us a couple of days to really get the hang of it, so don’t
worry if you’re not immediately up on your feet.
Longtime iOS users especially may need to spend some time getting used to Apple
Watch’s controls. An iPhone is almost entirely controllable through the touch screen, with
the Home button being about the only exception. The Apple Watch is a touch screen
device, but the smaller size of the screen effectively limits your precision when tapping
and swiping. Here’s how the Apple Watch compensates.
Digital Crown
The Apple Watch’s Digital Crown feels like a throwback to the scroll wheels of early
iPods. However, it makes quite a bit of sense as an alternative to pinching to zoom or
using a finger to scroll. The Digital Crown is the knob located on the right edge of the
Watch, where you’d expect to find a setting mechanism on a traditional wristwatch. Twist
it to zoom in on a screen, scroll through a list, or select an option.
Home Button
The Digital Crown also functions a button – you can press the whole thing down. This
serves as your Home button. You’ll use it to return to your Home screen or to your Watch
Face. To move quickly between recently opened apps, simply double tap the Home button.
Side Button
The Side Button (located next to the Digital Crown on the right edge of the device) picks
up a few loose end features. Perhaps most obviously, it serves as a power button. Press and
hold it to power Apple Watch on or off. Pressing it briefly will show or hide your Friends
screen, discussed later on in Part 3.4. It’s also important for Apple Pay – tap it twice to
activate that feature.
Touch and Force Touch
Apple Watch adds another dimension to the now-familiar touch screen repertoire. Apple
Watch actually registers force in addition to position and duration of your taps through
something Apple calls Force Touch. Forcefully pressing your Watch will allow you to
access options and features for many apps – a little bit like right clicking on a computer.
We found that Force Touch required really forceful tapping, so don’t be afraid to poke
your device like you mean it – we promise you won’t break it!
Microphone and Speaker
Your Watch can hear you and talk to you, courtesy of the tiny microphone and speaker
located on the back of the device.

Haptic Feedback
Haptic means related to touch, and Apple Watch’s Taptic Engine allows your Watch to tap
back. The Taptic Engine is located on the back of the Watch and sits flush against your
wrist. An incoming notification will cause your Watch to give you a nudge to get your
attention.
Heart Rate Sensor
Apple Watch’s built-in heart rate monitor is located on the back of the device and can
quickly take your pulse for you and store the information in Apple Health.
Siri
Siri, Apple’s famous digital assistant, is built into the Apple Watch. Even if you’ve never
been a huge Siri user, we think you’ll be converted, at least where your Watch is
concerned. Since an onscreen keyboard would be highly impractical on such a small
device, Siri takes over as your primary means of text entry. She can help you send
messages, search for locations, set up calendar events and more. On the Apple Watch,
she’s especially helpful when it comes to opening apps, which are represented by tiny
circles. Once they start accumulating, it may be easier to ask for them than to poke around
your Watch.
To access Siri on Apple Watch, simply raise your Watch-bearing wrist toward your face
and say, “Hey Siri!” This will activate Siri. Speak your command, and Siri will work her
magic. Of course, if you’re a bit embarrassed by shouting at your Watch in public, you can
also press and hold the Digital Crown to activate Siri with a little more dignity.
By now, Siri is a pretty smart lady. She can understand a fairly large range of inquiries.
Here are some common ways to ask Siri to help out on your Watch:
“Open Maps.” (launches the Maps app)
“Create a calendar event for Team Meeting on June 2 at 3:00.” (adds an
event to your calendar)
“Remind me to pick up milk.” (creates a reminder on your iPhone)
“Play Tom Waits.” (plays music from your iPhone)
“Tell Chris I’m going to be home late.” (sends a text message)
For more suggestions, activate Siri on your iPhone by pressing and holding the Home
button. Then, tap the question mark in the lower left corner.

Screenshot 9:Siri Suggestions

2.6 The Apple Watch Interface
Now that you know how to get around, let’s look at all the places you can go. On your
Apple Watch, you’ll need to be familiar with your Watch Face, Home screen, Glances,
Friends and Notifications in order to feel comfortable getting around. Let’s take a look at
each of these elements one at a time.
Watch Face
When you look at your Apple Watch, the first thing you’ll see is your Watch Face. This is
customizable (and we’ll show you how soon in Part 3.1), but straight out of the box, you’ll
see the “Modular View” of your Watch Face. This includes the time, date, upcoming
calendar events, weather, Activity information and your world clock. You can tap on each
piece of information to open it in its respective Watch app (for example, tap the three
concentric circles to launch Activity).
Screenshot 10: Watch Face
From here, you can do a few other things. Press the Digital Crown to view your Home
screen, which we’ll talk about next. Swipe down to view Notifications. Swipe up with
your finger to open your Glances.
Home Screen
The Home screen is quite similar to that of an iPhone, though instead of a neat grid, your
apps are arranged in a circular cloud. To open an app, tap it, or use your finger to move
around the app cloud and then use the Digital Crown to zoom in. If that proves a little too
difficult, ask Siri to help (“Hey Siri, open Maps”). You can rearrange this screen just like
you can on your iPhone. Tap and hold an app until they all start shaking. Then you can
drag them around into your preferred configuration. Of course, we think it’s much easier
to do on your iPhone’s bigger screen. To edit your layout on your iPhone, open the Apple
Watch iPhone app and tap App Layout.

Screenshot 11: Apple Watch Home Screen
Friends
Pressing the Side Button reveals a list of up to twelve of your friends. You can make calls
or send text messages from your Watch, and if your friends are lucky enough to have
Apple Watches, there are some other fun ways to stay (nearly literally) in touch with each
other. For more on adding friends, see Part 3.4.
Notifications
Your Apple Watch will notify you as new stuff comes in, whether it’s a new text message,
a Facebook Messenger message, a reminder to stand up and move around, or many other
possibilities. Your Watch will sound a tone and tap you on the wrist to let you know about
an incoming notification. You’ll also see a red dot appear at the top of your Watch Face, as
shown below.
Screenshot 12: Notification Icon
To view your notifications, swipe down from the top of your Watch Face. You can dismiss
notifications on your Watch or on your iPhone. The screenshot below is an example of a
notification from an app on our iPhone. Breeze, at the time of writing, is not a Watch app,
but any app that displays notifications on your iPhone can notify you on your Watch as
well. This can get overwhelming quickly. Don’t worry, we’ll show you how to handle it in
Part 3.2!

Screenshot 13: An iPhone App Notification (from Breeze)
Many Apple Watch app notifications can be handled as they come in. For example, you
can respond to text messages and calendar invites from within the notification screen on
your Apple Watch. To dismiss a notification, tap Dismiss at the bottom of the notification.
Screenshot 14: Dismissing Notifications

2.7 The Apple Watch App
The Apple Watch app on your iPhone is a key player in your Apple Watch ownership
experience, and you’ll want to familiarize yourself with it sooner rather than later. You’ll
use this app to customize your Watch’s layout and many of its settings, as well as discover
and install Watch-friendly apps.
The Watch app includes four major sections, which you’ll find at the bottom of the screen
– My Watch, Explore, Featured and Search. The first section – My Watch – is where
you can manage all of your Apple Watch settings (with the exception of your custom
Watch Face, which we’ll explore later on in Part 3.1). We’ll be visiting this screen
throughout this guide.
Screenshot 15: The Apple Watch App
The Explore section includes several Apple Watch promotional and tutorial videos. We
found these videos to be a bit heavy on marketing and bit light on instruction, but they’re
well produced and will make you feel quite good about your purchase!
The Featured section is a bit more practical. This screen is actually a Watch-friendly
subsection of the Apple App Store, where you’ll find curated lists of the best third party
Apple Watch apps.

Screenshot 16: Featured Watch Apps
Finally, the Search screen will allow you to search for a specific Watch-compatible app
(and check out Part 5.2 for some of our favorites!).

2.8 Handoff
Apple Watch can send things like Mail messages over to your iPhone. This is a great way
to work between two devices. When you open a calendar event, text message, email or
any number of pieces of content on your Apple Watch, a small icon will appear in the
lower left corner of your iPhone’s lock screen. Tap that icon to go directly to that item on
your iPhone for editing or closer reading.
Screenshot 17: The Handoff Icon indicating a Calendar event is being viewed on Apple Watch

2.9 Practice Makes Comfort
Apple Watch may feel a little strange at first. We promise though that you’ll get the hang
of it after a day or two of use. The best way to get used to the different screens and buttons
is to play with them. Eventually, you’ll get into the rhythm. Take your time and have fun
learning your device, and it will be second nature before you know it! The next order of
business is truly personalizing your Watch. Read on to learn how.


Part 3: Personalizing Your Apple Watch
Apple Watch is designed to be an incredibly personal device. Consequently, it works best
when it’s customized to your own needs. In this chapter, we’ll show you how to truly
make your Apple Watch your own, through customizing your Watch Face, managing your
notifications, adding your friends to the Friends screen and communicating using Digital
Touch, and changing out your Watch’s bands.

3.1 Watch Faces
To start, let’s talk about the most watch-like aspect of Apple Watch – the Watch Face.
Your Watch Face displays every time you flick your wrist toward your face, using the
natural and familiar gesture of checking a normal wristwatch. It’s a brilliant design that
allows this expensive and sophisticated piece of tech to function just like a standard
wristwatch, in addition to everything else it does!
Of course, there’s more to the Watch Face than just telling time. Your Watch Face is the
most customizable feature of your Watch, and it’s probably the one you’ll look at the most
often.
At the time of writing, the Apple Watch includes ten different styles of Watch Face –
Modular (the default), Simple, Motion, Astronomy, Color, Solar, Chronograph, Mickey
(sure to generate a fair bit of nostalgia!), X-Large and Utility. Watch software updates will
likely include additions to this list, and while Apple currently does not allow third party
Watch Face development, the company has hinted that it might be possible in the future.
Most of Apple’s styles are customizable in terms of their look and feel and in terms of the
information displayed. We highly recommend considering which Watch Face style will
work the best with your own sense of personal style and with your own unique utilization
of the Watch itself. If you can’t decide on just one, don’t worry – it’s easy to switch back
and forth!
To change your Watch Face style, Force Touch the display while the Watch Face is
showing. Swipe left and right to see all of the available styles.
Modular
The Modular Watch Face is fairly straightforward. It includes the time (of course) and has
space for five widget-like app connections. This means that the Modular Watch Face can
give you a pretty large amount of information in a single glance, without having to touch
or adjust your Watch at all. The four smaller squares can be customized to display the date
and day of the week, the current moon phase, the time of today’s sunrise/sunset, the
current temperature, stocks information, your Activity stats, the Apple Watch alarm, the
Apple Watch timer, the stopwatch, your remaining battery, or each World Clock location
you’ve entered into the World Clock app on your iPhone.

Screenshot 17: Customizing the Modular Watch Face
To customize Modular, Force Touch the display while the Watch Face is showing. This
will bring up the customization button. There are two customization screens available –
color and widget selection. Swipe left and right to move between these two screens. To
change the color of the text, scroll using the Digital Crown while on the Color screen. To
change which app data is displayed, tap the app widget you want to edit and use the
Digital Crown to scroll through your options.
     
Screenshot 18: Modular Options             
Simple
The Simple Watch Face is a bit more classic than Modular, though you can fit in almost as
much app data. In Simple, you can adjust how much detail the clock shows, from a bare
clock face with nothing but the hour, minute and second hands to a face calibrated down
to the second. You can also adjust the color of the second hand by swiping to the Color
screen and using the Digital Crown to scroll through the color choices. Finally, Simple
includes five locations for app info. Tap them and use the Digital Crown to select your
preferences.
Screenshot 19: Simple Watch Face
Motion
Compared to its some of its fellow styles, Motion is one of the more pared-down Watch
Face. It includes the time and date, and the date’s format can be adjusted or it can be

turned off altogether, but other than that, Motion doesn’t display any of your apps. Instead,
you can choose between three lovely lightly animated image sets – butterflies, flowers and
jellyfish (we’re partial to the jellyfish, personally!). In the customization screen, use the
Digital Crown to choose your image set. To see the next image in the set while the Watch
Face is displayed, tap the screen lightly.
Screenshot 20: Motion Watch Face
Astronomy
The Astronomy face is one of our favorites, and it’s sure to appeal to space and science
lovers. This Watch Face gives you three different views – the Earth (and your current
location on it), the moon in its current phase, and the planets in their current positions
around the sun. For all three Astronomy features, you can use the Digital Crown to move
forward and backward in time. It’s very cool and fun to show off!
Screenshot 21: Astronomy Watch Face
Unlike styles with app widgets, the Astronomy face is what-you-see-is-what-you-get.
There are no customization options available.
Color
The Color face is very similar to the Simple face. It includes a customizable color clock
face and four app widgets. It also includes a monogram area in the middle of the clock,
which can be turned on and off.

Screenshot 22: Color Watch Face
Solar
The Solar style shows you the sun’s current position in its daily trajectory. Like
Astronomy, this style can’t be customized, but it’s neat to look at. You can use the Digital
Crown to move the sun around and discover at what time solar noon, solar midnight,
twilight, sunrise and sunset will occur / have occurred.
Screenshot 23: Solar Watch Face
Chronograph
The Chronograph style is useful for people who need to use their Watch as a stopwatch
regularly. It’s designed to measure time extremely precisely, and includes a start button for
stopwatch functionality. In addition, it can be customized to include four app widgets and
the color of the stopwatch face can be altered.

Screenshot 24: Chronograph Watch Face
Mickey
The Mickey Watch Face style should be familiar to kids and former kids alike! Unlike a
traditional Mickey Mouse watch, though, the Apple Watch version of this classic includes
three customizable widget areas and an animated Mouse.
Screenshot 25: Mickey Watch Face
X-Large
The X-Large style is the most minimal style of the bunch. It displays nothing but the
current time. You can change its color by Force Touching the display, tapping Customize,
and then using the Digital Crown to find the perfect hue, but that’s about it. This is a great
choice for users who like to keep things as simple as possible.

Screenshot 26: X-Large Watch Face
Utility
The Utility style is a no-nonsense watch presentation. It includes three customizable
widgets and an optional date stamp in the middle of the clock. You can also adjust the
level of detail on the clock face and the color of the second hand.
Screenshot 27: Utility Watch Face
Saving Customized Watch Faces
As you can see, you can customize your Watch Face in hundreds of different ways. When
you customize a style, it will retain your customizations, even if you switch to a different
style. If you’d like to save a customization and create another Watch Face based on the
same style, Force Touch the Watch Face display and swipe all the way to the end of the
list. Here you’ll find a plus sign labeled New.

Screenshot 28: Adding a New Watch Face
Tap it and then use the Digital Crown to find the style you’d like to base your
customization on. From there, make all the alterations you need. Your new Watch Face
will be retained in your Watch Face style line up. Unfortunately, you currently do not have
the ability to rename your creation, so you’ll find multiple entries for the base style.   If
your list starts getting too unruly, you can delete Watch Faces by swiping up and then
tapping Delete.
Screenshot 29: Deleting a Custom Watch Face

3.2 Managing Notifications
We strongly – strongly – recommend getting a handle on your notifications. This can be
the difference between a happy and productive Apple Watch user and an anxiety-ridden
wreck. Okay, maybe that’s a slight exaggeration, but a Watch that’s constantly ringing,
buzzing and thumping you may not be an ideal daily companion for anyone.
Most of your notifications will mirror the notifications on your iPhone, but they don’t
have to. To change Apple Watch notifications without affecting your iPhone settings, open
up the Apple Watch iPhone app. Then tap Notifications.
Here, you can adjust some global Watch settings, including whether notifications are
indicated with a red dot (recommended) and whether or not you’d like to turn on
notifications privacy. This will prevent notifications from displaying any detail, saving
you from embarrassing boardroom moments.
Beneath that, you’ll see the nine apps that come pre-configured to notify you – Activity,
Calendar, Mail, Maps, Messages, Passbook & Apple Pay, Phone, Photos and Reminders.
We know that your intentions are good, but the constant Activity notifications may start
wearing on you, particularly the hourly Stand Reminders. You can turn those off, as well
as progress updates and a few other options.
Screenshot 30: Activity Notification Settings
The other apps in this top list default to mirroring the settings on your iPhone. However,
by tapping Custom, you can change their behavior on your Watch. You can turn visual
alerts, sound and haptics (thumps) on and off here, and tell Watch whether or not you want
it to repeat unread alerts, and if so, how many times.

Screenshot 31: Customizing Watch Notifications
Underneath these nine special cases, you’ll find a list of every app on your iPhone that
currently sends notifications. The apps in this list are going to send notifications to your
Apple Watch too, unless you stop them! Simply use the sliders (green for on) to turn
notifications for each app on or off.
Screenshot 32: Managing iPhone App Notifications
Haptics Notifications
We were a bit nervous about the Apple Watch’s haptic features at first. However, we found
them to be much more gentle than we’d feared – too gentle, in fact. Fortunately for tough
cookies like us, you can adjust the strength of your Watch’s haptic feedback. Open the

Settings app on your iPhone and tap Sounds and Haptics. There, you can adjust the
strength of the haptic action, or turn on Prominent Haptic, which is much less
ambiguous! You can also adjust these settings in the onboard Settings app on the Watch
itself, but we found the sliders easier to manage on the iPhone.
Screenshot 33: Sounds & Haptics

3.3 Apple Pay
Apple Pay on the Apple Watch completely eliminates the purse fumble at the grocery store
by making it possible for you to use your Watch as a payment method, provided your bank
supports it. You can find a regularly updated list of supported banks at
https://www.apple.com/apple-pay/.
You’ll need to set up Apple Pay on your iPhone before you can use it on the Watch. To do
so, open the Passbook app on your iPhone. Follow the directions to enter a new card,
either by using the camera or by entering the card number and expiration date manually.
Screenshot 30: Setting Up Apple Pay in the iPhone Passbook App
You can also set up Apple Pay in the Apple Watch iPhone app. Just tap Passbook &
Apple Pay, and then tap Add Credit or Debit Card.
In order to use Apple Pay with Apple Watch, you must set up a Watch passcode. You can
do this in the Apple Watch iPhone app by tapping Passcode.
Once that’s done, you’re all set to shop. When you’re in a store that can take Apple Pay
payments, simply double tap the Side Button to open Apple Pay on your Apple Watch.
Then move the face of the Watch so that it lines up with the Apple Pay reader (note that
your Watch doesn’t need to actually touch the reader). Not every store you visit will be
equipped to accept payment through this method, but the numbers that do are steadily
growing!

3.4 Friends and Digital Touch
Your Favorites are accessible by pressing the Side Button once. This brings up a wheel of
up to twelve contacts of your choosing. Use the Digital Crown to scroll through your
friend wheel.
Screenshot 31: Friends
You can add friends to this display through the iPhone Apple Watch app. Open it and then
tap Friends. From there, tap Add Friend in each open slot and choose one of your
preexisting iPhone contacts to fill the slot. You can also tap Edit in the top right corner of
the screen to delete friends and rearrange their order.
You may find it useful to add yourself as one of your contacts. This gives you the ability
to send yourself iMessage memos through Siri.
Digital Touch
Apple Watch is a great tool for communicating with all of your contacts, but there are
some extra communication features for your fellow Apple Watch owners.
You’ll be able to tell which of your friends have an Apple Watch through the Friends
screen. When you select an Apple Watch friend using the Digital Crown, you’ll see the
Digital Touch icon (a pointing finger) appear underneath your friend’s picture. You can
send your Apple Watch friends a sketch from here, which they’ll receive as an animation.
You can also send your heartbeat by pressing two fingers on the screen, or you can
literally poke a friend by tapping the screen once (be careful with this – we have a feeling
a little of this behavior can go a long way!).

3.5 Changing Apple Watch Bands
You can switch out Apple Watch bands fairly easily by pressing the small silver buttons on
the back of the Watch itself. Press each button and slide off each half of the band you want
to replace. Reverse the process to put a new band on. You might choose a classy leather
band paired with the Simple Watch Face for a night out after your afternoon run with a
sport band and the Chronograph Watch Face, for example.

3.6 The Only Constant Is Change
One of our favorite things about Apple Watch is how quick its customizations are. It’s a
snap to change the entire look of your Watch depending on your mood – only to revert
back to an earlier configuration within seconds later on. Apple Watch can easily keep pace
with your changing moods, environments and needs. In fact, it’s specifically designed to!
Take advantage your options, whenever and however often you need to.
Next up, we’ll learn how to use all of your Watch’s onboard apps!


Part 4: Apple Watch Onboard Apps and Glances
Now that you have a pretty good idea of where things are and your Apple Watch is
starting to feel a little more personal, it’s time to get more specific about what it can do for
you. In this chapter, we’re going to cover every onboard Watch app and Glance that’s built
in to your Watch. When you’ve finished this chapter, you’ll be able to truly consider
yourself an Apple Watch expert.

4.1 Onboard Apps
Your Watch includes nineteen native Watch apps. These nineteen apps can’t be uninstalled
or hidden, but we don’t think you’d want to get rid of many of them. These apps make up
your Home screen, which you can get to at any time by pressing the Digital Crown. We’ll
give you a brief overview of all nineteen here.
Activity
The Activity app is one of the most exciting features of the Apple Watch. It takes square
aim at fitness wearable competitors like FitBit and Pebble by providing passive and active
tracking, as well as health metrics and personalized goals. The first time you open
Activity, you’ll be prompted to enter your personal information to help the app give you
accurate calorie burn estimates. Activity needs your age, gender, height and weight to
function best (if you’ve already entered this information in Health, then Activity will bring
it over from your iPhone for you). Next, you’ll follow Activity’s prompts to set your
goals.
Activity tracks three metrics, nicknamed Move, Exercise and Stand. You’ll be prompted
to set goals for each, and you can (and should) adjust them as needed. The main Activity
screen shows your progress toward all three goals by showing three circles. Scroll down to
see your daily step count, active calories and distance traveled.
              
Screenshot 37: Activity Main Screen
From the main Activity screen, swipe left to see detailed information about each of your
goals. In each goal screen, you can swipe down to see a graph of your daily activity.
To adjust your calorie-based Move goal, Force Touch any Activity screen. Note that
Activity automatically assigns Stand (one minute every hour) and Exercise (thirty minutes
every day) goals for you.
Alarm
Since Apple Watch will most likely need to be charged every night, you probably won’t
use the Alarm app as a morning alarm very often. However, the subtle haptic alarms of
Apple Watch can still serve as useful reminders or gentle nap enders.

To add an Alarm, open the Alarm app from the Home screen. Then, Force Touch the
display and tap the New icon. From there, you can adjust your alarm’s time, reoccurrence
and whether or not you’ll be able to hit Snooze on it. You can even use the Alarm app as a
substitute for your iPhone’s Reminders app by giving your alarms labels. Note that in
order to change the time of your alarm, you’ll use the Digital Crown to scroll to the
correct time.
Screenshot 38: Setting an Apple Watch Alarm
Calendar
The Apple Watch Calendar app is an extension of its iPhone equivalent that allows you to
see the current date and your upcoming calendar entries quickly and easily. You can get to
the Calendar from your Watch Face if it’s enabled there (see 3.1 for more information) and
from its related Glance as well.
              
Screenshot 39: Calendar
Calendar will open to an event summary view, but to see the full month, just tap the date
in the top left corner of the display. You can also Force Touch the display to see the option
to get a day planner view.
Since Apple Watch doesn’t include an onscreen keyboard, you can’t create events on your
Watch by typing. You can, however, enlist Siri for creating and editing events. Say, “Hey
Siri, create calendar event titled [name] on [date] at [location]”. Siri will then give you a
chance to confirm that she heard everything correctly. If everything looks good, tap
Confirm and your Calendar will be updated on both your iPhone and your Apple Watch.

Screenshot 40: Creating Calendar Events with Siri
Apple Watch will also notify you of incoming Calendar invites. You can respond to them
directly from the Apple Watch notification.
Siri is great at entering simple events, but we do recommend using your iPhone or another
Apple device to enter more complicated information, like location, event organizer contact
information, notes and images. For more complex events, Apple Watch can help you stay
on top of your schedule by giving you “Leave Now” reminders and helping you find
directions to an event.
To set a Leave Now alert, you’ll need to be sure that Travel Time is enabled in the event’s
details on your iPhone. When you turn on Travel Time, you can either set a time from the
list or base it on a certain location. When that’s configured, your Watch will alert you
when it’s time to go.
Screenshot 41: Travel Time Enabled on an iPhone Calendar Event
To get directions to an event, open the Calendar app and Force Touch the event. A button
labeled Directions will appear. Tap that, and the Maps app will launch and load the
directions from your current location to that of your event, and you’ll be good to go!
Reminders

While Apple Watch doesn’t have a dedicated Reminders app, it will notify you of any
iPhone Reminders you may have set. You can also ask Siri to create Reminders for you
using Apple Watch (“Hey Siri, remind me to pick up milk.”).
Screenshot 42: Using Siri to Create a Reminder
Camera Remote
The Camera Remote Watch app functions as a remote control for the camera on your
iPhone. It’s a great way to take a picture without shaking your iPhone and blurring your
image or to shoot a hands-free selfie or a group shot that includes you!
To use the Camera Remote app, first open the Camera app on your iPhone and set up your
shot (if the Camera app isn’t open, your Apple Watch will launch it on your iPhone for
you). Then, use the shutter button on your Apple Watch to take the picture, or use the
shutter delay for a three-second delay. Using the delay will cause your iPhone to take a
burst of shots, so you’ll definitely get at least one good one!
Screenshot 43: Camera Remote
Photos you take using Camera Remote will be stored on your iPhone, but you can review
your most recent shot by tapping the lower left corner of the Watch screen after you shoot.
However, you’ll lose this preview as soon as you close the Camera Remote app.
Mail
We found that we did most of our email reading through the Notifications screen as new
messages came in, but Apple Watch’s Mail app provides access to your full backlog, if

you ever need it. At the time of writing, you can’t reply to messages in Mail, but you can
take advantage of Handoff to open the message in Mail on your iPhone and reply there.
Mail on Apple Watch is fairly no-frills. You can perform some basic email management,
though. When you’re reading a message, you can Force Touch the display to reveal the
options to flag or delete/archive a message or mark it as unread. Note that the
delete/archive setting can be configured in the Mail app Settings on your iPhone.
Screenshot 44: Managing Mail
Bear in mind that unlike its iPhone cousin, the Apple Watch is not designed to be a
reading device. It’s great for short messages, but email with lots of multimedia will not
display perfectly on your Watch and you may want to read these sorts of messages on your
iPhone instead. Handoff will make this much easier!
Mail Settings
If you get a lot of email, you may quickly tire of being thumped every few seconds. We
highly recommend customizing your Mail settings to help make your Apple Watch a
useful way to stay in the loop, as opposed to a constant stream of irritation!
To manage Mail settings, open the Apple Watch app on your iPhone. Then, tap Mail.

Screenshot 45: Mail Settings in the iPhone Apple Watch App
By default, your Watch is set to mirror the settings on your iPhone. However, if you tap
Custom, you can change settings on your Watch without affecting Mail notifications on
your iPhone. Here, you can turn alerts off for specific accounts (like that throwaway
account you use for online shopping, perhaps). If you’re drowning in email, we highly
recommend setting up a VIP list consisting of friends and colleagues and then only
receiving alerts from that list.
You can also decide which mail account you want to view on your Watch. Unfortunately,
if you have more than one email account, you’re limited to either choosing one account or
viewing all of them in an unsorted list (All Inboxes). You can also adjust the length of
email message previews, the flag style, whether or not you want Apple Watch to confirm
deletion, and whether or not you want your mail sorted by message thread.
Screenshot 46: Apple Watch Mail Settings
Maps
The Maps app on your Apple Watch can help you figure out where you are and how to get
where you want to go. When you open this app, you’ll see your current location
represented by a blue dot. You can use the Digital Crown to zoom in and out as needed.

Screenshot 47: The Maps App at Maximum Zoom Out
To search for other locations, Force Touch the display. You’ll then have the option to
search for an address or look up a contact’s address.
Screenshot 48: Maps Options
If you tap Search, you’ll be able to search by speaking an address or by scrolling through
a list of recent Maps searches on your iPhone. One handy trick we picked up was
searching for an address on our iPhone first and then opening the Maps Watch app and
getting the location through the Recent list.
Searches for public places may include lots of other information, like a phone number, star
reviews and hours of operation. Scroll down with your finger or the Digital Crown to see
all of this information. You can tap phone numbers to place calls. You’ll find directions
listed here too, just above the map.

Screenshot 49: Maps Search Result for the Field Museum
When you’ve requested directions, Apple Watch will load your route. Tap Start to begin
your travels.
Screenshot 50: Starting Directions

Of course, you can always ask Siri for help. Just say, “Hey Siri, directions to [address].”
Once you’ve entered a route and started directions, Apple Watch will help you navigate
through the display and through its Taptic Engine. Twelve steady taps mean that you have
a right turn coming up. Three pairs of taps mean that you’ll turn left. We promise that
you’ll get the hang of it quickly.
Once you arrive, Apple Watch will vibrate to let you know that you’re there. If you need
to exit directions before then, just Force Touch the display and tap Stop.
You can also use the Maps app to find an address of a location. Press and hold the screen
until a purple pin drops on the map. Then tap the pin to see the address of its location, as
shown below.
Screenshot 51: Viewing the Address of a Dropped Pin
Messages
Like Mail, Messages may get the most use in the Notifications screen, especially since
unlike Mail, you can actually respond to Messages directly from your Apple Watch! When
you receive a text message on your iPhone (SMS or iMessage), your Watch will buzz,
unless you ask it not to and a notification will appear. Just tap Reply underneath the
message to respond. Alternatively, you can open the Messages app from your Home
screen to see every message you’ve received on Apple Watch. Tap on a conversation to
view it.

Screenshot 52: The Messages App
You have a few options for responding to a message on your Apple Watch. You can use
some generic canned responses (scroll down to see the entire list), or you can respond with
animated emojis or any of the standard iOS emojis. Tap the smiley face to enter the emoji
menu.
Screenshot 53: Responding to Messages on Apple Watch
Swipe left and right to cycle through the basic emoji categories (animated faces, animated
hearts, animated gestures and standard emojis). On each screen, you can use the Digital
Crown to see every option available in each category.
Screenshot 54: Animated Emojis
If you’d like to add your own default Messages responses, open the Apple Watch app on
your iPhone. Tap on Messages. Then, tap Default Replies. Type your new default reply

(or replies) in the blanks.
                            
Screenshot 55: Managing Messages Default Replies in the iPhone App
You can also use dictation to send a message (and we recommend this, because it
definitely feels like Star Trek!). Tap the microphone and speak your message into the
Watch. You can send your message as an audio message if you prefer, or as a normal text
message. Just tap either the audio recording or the text message to send it.
Screenshot 56: Sending a Message with Dictation
You can also use your Apple Watch to send your location to fellow Apple enthusiasts.
Force Touch the display in a Messages conversation to reveal the option to reply, see
contact details, and send your current location in the form of a map.

Screenshot 57: Sending Your Location
You can delete conversations by swiping left, and you can see when individual messages
were sent by swiping right.
Music
The Music app on your Apple Watch is your onboard music player. Most of the time,
you’ll probably be streaming music from your iPhone, but it is possible to load a modestly
sized music library directly onto your Apple Watch.
Music’s most simple function is as a playback remote control for your iPhone. When you
open Music on your Watch, you’ll see the entire Music library of the iPhone you’ve paired
with the Watch. You can browse your music by artist, album, song or playlist.
Screenshot 58: Music
Tap on a song to play it. Note that playback will occur on your iPhone. When a song starts
playing, Apple Watch will display the Now Playing screen. Force Touch the display here
to reveal additional options, including Repeat, Shuffle, Source and AirPlay.

              
Screenshot 59: Playback Controls
The Source icon lets you switch between music saved on your iPhone and music on your
Apple Watch (more on this in a minute). The AirPlay icon will let you send audio to any
AirPlay device you may have.
If you have Bluetooth headphones and don’t feel like taking your iPhone along for your
walk or run, you can save music on your Apple Watch and listen to it any time, regardless
of whether or not it’s connected to your iPhone. To add music, open the Apple Watch
iPhone app. Tap Synced Playlist. Next, choose a playlist to sync with your Apple Watch.
Note that you can control how much of a playlist to sync using the Playlist Limit on the
Music settings screen. Apple Watch can hold up to 2 GB of music, which comes out to
approximately 200 songs.
Screenshot 60: Syncing a Playlist
At the time of writing, you can only sync one playlist. You might consider creating a
special Apple Watch playlist specifically for this purpose.
Once you’ve synced a playlist, you’ll need to pair your headphones to enjoy your tunes,

since your Watch’s tiny speakers aren’t quite up to the task. To do this, open the Settings
app on your Watch and tap Bluetooth. Wait for the Watch to discover your headphones,
and then tap them to pair.
Passbook
The Passbook app mirrors its iPhone counterpart by providing a place to store boarding
passes, tickets and more. We’ve had the best luck with Passbook in airports, which seem
to have adopted onscreen boarding passes almost universally. There are other very
practical uses for it, though, including the Starbucks Card, Fandango movie tickets, and
more.
Passbook works by loading all of your passes in the iPhone Passbook app and then
syncing them with your Watch. If you thought having a boarding pass on your iPhone was
convenient, the wrist-worn version is even more accessible! Adding passes to Passbook
usually requires the use of a Passbook-compatible app, like the Starbucks, Fandango,
Airbnb, American Airlines, Eventbrite, Target and Walgreens apps (and plenty more).
Purchasing tickets through those apps will result in Passbook-friendly passes. You can
find a full list of Passbook-compatible apps by opening Passbook on your iPhone and then
tapping the plus sign in the Passes section of the screen. This will give you the option to
tap Find Apps for Passbook.
Screenshot 61: Finding Passbook-Friendly Apps
The Passbook app on your iPhone also stores your credit cards for Apple Pay purposes.
You can add additional Apple Pay cards through Passbook or through the Apple Watch
app. Just remember that you will need to add a passcode to your Watch in order to make
Apple Pay purchases. For more information about Apple Pay, see Part 3.3.
Phone

If you want to feel like the future is now, just make or take a call on your wristwatch. The
Phone app on Apple Watch lets you make and answer calls through your iPhone, and it’s
awfully satisfying to do so! Of course, if you ever need or prefer to take a call on your
iPhone, you can swipe up on your Watch to answer on your phone instead.
Screenshot 62: Making a Call Using the Watch Phone App
When you first open the Phone app on your Watch, you’ll find your Favorites, Recents,
Contacts and Voice Mail. All of this information comes from your paired iPhone.
Screenshot 63: Phone App Menu
Tap a menu item to open it. Note that you can listen to and delete your voice mail
messages without having to touch your phone!

Screenshot 64: Listening to Voice Mail
If you ever need to quickly silence a ringing Watch, simply cover the display with your
hand. This will temporarily silence the device.
Photos
The Photos Watch app is similar to the Music Watch app. Nothing will appear here unless
you sync it using the Apple Watch app on your iPhone. To do this, open up the iPhone
Watch app and tap Photos. In the Photos settings screen, you’ll find the Photo Syncing
heading. Tap the Synced Album text to set up a new synced album.
Screenshot 65: Photos App Settings in the iPhone Watch App
You can only sync one album at a time, but any photos in a synced album are stored on
your Apple Watch, so you can enjoy them with or without your iPhone nearby. When
selecting a photo album to sync, keep in mind that the Apple Watch is somewhat limited
in storage space and will let you store up to 75 MB in Photos, which translates to about
500 pictures.
Your synced photos will appear in the Photos app in a mosaic. Use the Digital Crown to
zoom in for a closer look at any of them.

Screenshot 66: A Photo Album on Apple Watch
While you can’t take Photos on the Watch itself, you can take screenshots, which will be
saved in your iPhone Photos app. Press the Digital Crown and the Side Button
simultaneously to capture whatever’s currently on your Apple Watch’s screen.
Remote
The Remote app can be used to control iTunes on a Mac or PC, or to control an Apple TV.
In order for this to work, your iPhone and computer and/or Apple TV need to be
connected to the same wireless network.
To get started, you’ll need to pair your devices. Open the Remote app on Apple Watch and
tap the plus sign to add a device.
Screenshot 67: Adding a Device to the Remote App
Your Apple Watch will then display a four-digit passcode. To set up a connection with
iTunes, click the Remote icon that appears in the top left corner of the iTunes screen (this
icon will only appear if iTunes detects an Apple Watch running Remote on the same
wireless network).

Screenshot 68: The Remote Icon in iTunes
Then, enter the four-digit passcode from your Apple Watch. iTunes will confirm that you
can now control it using the Apple Watch Remote app.
Back on your Apple Watch, you’ll now find your iTunes library in the Remote app. Tap
the music note to control it.
Screenshot 69: Controlling iTunes with the Remote App
Follow the same steps to pair your Watch with an Apple TV. While you can’t do much
with iTunes apart from playing, pausing, advancing and moving backward through the
active playlist, you can actually swipe left, right, up and down on your Apple Watch to
move through Apple TV’s menu structure.
Settings
The onboard Settings app contains some – but not all – of the settings found in its iPhone
counterpart. However, there is one setting you can only manage on the Watch itself. If
you’d like to set your Watch ahead in an attempt to panic yourself into arriving on time,
you can do so by tapping Time. All other settings described here can also be accessed on
your iPhone’s Watch app.

Screenshot 70: Adjusting Your Watch’s Clock Time
You can turn Airport Mode, Bluetooth and Do Not Disturb Mode on and off from the
Settings app, though we’ve found it easier to use the Settings Glance (see 4.2) to manage
these common settings.
The General heading in the Watch’s settings includes some useful information. Under
About, you’ll find your Watch’s name, version, serial number, MAC address and more.
You can also check your available storage space here and see how many songs, photos and
apps are currently stored on your Watch.
       
Screenshot 71: Settings > General > About
Under Orientation, you can change wrists and Digital Crown sides. Under Activate on
Wrist Raise, you can enable/disable your Watch waking up when you raise your wrist.
You can also scroll down on this screen to choose whether your Watch will display the
Watch Face or your most recently used app when you wake up your Watch.

Screenshot 72: Resume Action on Wrist Raise
The Accessibility settings available onboard the Watch include VoiceOver, Zoom, Reduce
Motion and On/Off labels. Under Siri, you turn the “Hey Siri” command on and off. The
Regulatory heading includes some required FCC information.
Finally, you’ll find Reset at the very bottom of the Settings screen. Resetting your Apple
Watch returns it to its factory default state and removes all of your personal information,
content and settings. It’s permanent, but since Apple Watch is so heavily dependent on
your iPhone for content anyway, it’s not a terrible way to start over from the beginning
should you feel the urge. You will definitely want to do this before you sell or give away
your Apple Watch (not that you’ll ever want to!).
Screenshot 73: Resetting Apple Watch
The main Settings app menu also includes the ability to manage your Watch’s brightness
and text size. Keep in mind that more brightness requires more battery! You can also
enable bold text here to make your Watch a little easier to read. Under Sounds & Haptics,
you can manage the volume of audio alerts or mute them altogether. You can also decide
how forcefully you’d like the Taptic Engine to nudge you when notifications come in.
Finally, under Passcode, you can enable, disable or change your passcode.
Stocks
The Apple Watch Stocks app mirrors the Stocks app on your iPhone, meaning it will show
you any and all stocks you follow on your phone. Use the Digital Crown to scroll through
your list of stocks, and tap on any stock name to see details about it.

     
             
Screenshot 74: Stocks App
Stopwatch
The Stopwatch app is a handy way to time events. To use it in its default presentation,
open it up and tap the green start button in the lower left corner. Tap the white button in
the lower right corner to record laps. When you’re done timing, tap the red button.
Screenshot 75: Stopwatch
Once you’re finished, you can swipe up to see your recorded laps.
You can also view the Stopwatch in Digital, Graph and Hybrid views by Force Touching
the display. We found the Digital view to be the easiest to use, but you may have a
different preference. Try them all out!
  
  
  
Screenshot 76: Stopwatch Views
Timer
The Timer is a simple and useful app that behaves exactly as you’d expect. Open the app

and enter the duration you’d like to time. Tap the hour box and/or the minute box and use
the Digital Crown to enter values. If you need to set a timer for longer than twelve hours,
Force Touch the display and then tap 24.
              
Screenshot 77: Setting a Timer
Weather
The Weather app mirrors your Weather app settings on your iPhone, so if you’ve saved
multiple locations on your iPhone, you’ll be able to see them on your Apple Watch by
swiping left and right.
The Weather app’s default opening screen displays conditions in your current location for
the next few hours. Tap the display to switch between temperature, cloud cover and
precipitation forecast views. You can scroll down to see the ten-day forecast as well.
              
Screenshot 78: The Weather App
You can change your default weather city in the Apple Watch iPhone app. Tap Weather
and then Default City. Choose the city from the list of cities currently associated with
your iPhone’s Weather app, or use your current location.

                            
Screenshot 79: Changing the Default City in Weather
Workout
The Workout app is designed for users who want to track serious cardio efforts. While the
Activity app is a passive tracker that’s very useful for making incremental lifestyle
changes, Workout will help dedicated walkers, runners, cyclists, rowers and stair steppers
keep track of their time, pace, mileage, heart rate and more. Start by choosing one of
several available workouts – outdoor or indoor walking, running, cycling, elliptical
machine, rower, stair stepper or “other” (in which Workouts will record calorie burn at the
rate of a brisk walk).
Screenshot 80: Workout Options
Once you’ve chosen your workout type, you’ll choose whether you want to base your
workout on duration, distance or calories burned. After you’ve completed a few workouts,

the app will suggest goals for you based on past performance. Of course, you can also
choose an “open” workout, which will continue until you stop the tracker.
Tap Start when you’re ready to go, and Workout will give you a count of three before it
starts tracking.
As you work out, you can glance at your Apple Watch, which will display your elapsed
time. You can swipe left and right to see more – distance, calories, etc. If you’ve started a
workout with a time, distance or calorie goal, you’ll see a progress ring that lets you know
quickly how close you are to finishing.
Screenshot 81: Workout In Action
When you’re finished, Force Touch the display to end your workout. You’ll see a
summary that lets you know how far, fast and hard you went, and you can save or discard
the workout.
To review your saved workouts, open the Activity app on your iPhone. Tap the date of
your workout and then scroll down until you find the Workouts heading. Tap the workout
(in the screenshot below, it’s labeled “246 Calorie Outdoor Run”) to see its details.
                            

Screenshot 82: Reviewing Workouts in the iPhone Activity App
World Clock
The World Clock app mirrors the World Clock app settings on your iPhone. It’s a very
useful app if you have family, friends or business in other time zones. You can add various
international locations and figure out at a glance what time it is there.
Screenshot 83: World Clock
To add locations to your World Clock, open the Clock app on your iPhone. Tap World
Clock at the bottom of the screen, and then tap the plus sign in the top right corner to add
locations. You’ll choose from a fairly extensive list of major international cities
representing all of the world’s time zones.
Screenshot 84: World Clock iPhone App

4.2 Glances
Now that you’re familiar with all of your apps, let’s turn our attention to Apple Watch
Glances. Glances are based on the age-old action of glancing quickly at a wristwatch to
check the time, and they’re one of our favorite Apple Watch features. You can certainly
glance at the time with Apple Watch, but you can also glance at the weather, your heart
rate, stocks, your personal calendar and more through the magic of Glances.
Glances are like extensions of your Watch apps that display the most relevant information
in a format that you can process in an instant. By default, Apple Watch will display all of
its included Glances – Now Playing, Heartbeat, Battery, Activity, Calendar, Weather,
Maps, Stocks and World Clock. Many third party apps also include Glance views, which
can be enabled on your iPhone.
To view your Glances, swipe up on your display. Then, swipe left and right to move from
Glance to Glance. You’ll find a handful of hidden features here as well, and so in this
section, we’ll cover each Glance on your Watch.
Settings Glance
On of the most useful Glances is the Settings Glance – here you can see if your iPhone is
currently within range of your Apple Watch and quickly turn on/off handy features like
Airplane Mode, Do Not Disturb and Silent Mode. Another very useful feature can be
found here that allows you to play a sound on your iPhone. We seem to be constantly
misplacing ours, and this locator feature is much easier to get to than digging out the iPad
or MacBook and loading Find My iPhone! To play a sound on your missing phone, just
tap the iPhone button at the bottom of the Settings Glance.
Screenshot 85: Settings Glance
Now Playing
The Now Playing Glance controls whatever audio your iPhone is playing (or has most
recently paused). This includes the iPhone/Apple Watch Music app, but it also might
include Podcasts, Pandora, YouTube, or any other audio source, whether or not it’s
available as a full Apple Watch app. Think of Now Playing as a sort of remote control for
your iPhone’s audio. You can advance or go back to a previous track, play/pause playback,
and control volume.

Screenshot 86: The Now Playing Glance
Heartbeat
Apple Watch’s built-in heart rate monitor is one of its most exciting features, particularly
if you’re interested in improving your fitness. You can use the monitor through the
Heartbeat Glance. When you open this Glance, it will begin measuring your heart rate.
You can also see the last measurement taken and its time stamp.
Screenshot 87: Heartbeat Glance
The Heartbeat Glance isn’t connected to a dedicated Watch app, but it is connected to your
iPhone’s Health app. Whether or not you use the Heartbeat Glance, your Watch will read
your pulse every ten minutes. It then sends its readings to Health, giving you a stream of
health data over time that might be useful for conversations with your physician or for
tracking your personal fitness goals.
If you don’t want your Apple Watch to track your heart rate or other fitness information,
open up the Apple Watch iPhone app, tap Privacy, then Motion & Fitness. Slide the
Heart Rate and/or Fitness Tracking sliders off.

Screenshot 88: Turning Off Fitness Tracking
Battery and Power Reserve
The Battery Glance lets you know how your Apple Watch is doing and how soon you’ll
need to charge it. The other really useful feature of this Glance is Power Reserve. Power
Reserve shuts off every Apple Watch feature except for the time to help you prolong your
battery life if needed. Once you enter Power Reserve mode, you can exit it at any time by
pressing and holding the Side Button.
Screenshot 89: Battery Glance
Activity
The Activity Glance gives you a quick peak at how you’re progressing toward your daily
fitness goals. For us, it’s easier to use the shortcut on our Watch Face to get to the full
Activity app, but the Glance offers another way to see how things are going.

Screenshot 90: Activity Glance
Tapping the Activity Glance will open the full Activity app.
Calendar
The Calendar Glance lets you know what’s happening today and tomorrow. Tapping the
display will open the full Calendar app.
Screenshot 91: Calendar Glance
Weather
The Weather Glance uses your current location to let you know what’s going on outside.
The Glance will only show your current location, but tapping the display will open up the
full Watch app where you can check on other saved locations.

Screenshot 92: Weather Glance
Maps
The Maps Glance shows your current location. It was disappointingly slow to load for us,
but once it does, it’s a great way to get oriented in a new place.
Stocks
We’re not entirely sure where Apple’s commitment to its native Stocks app comes from,
but if this is up your alley, you’ll love this Glance!
Screenshot 93: Stocks Glance
World Clock
The World Clock Glance shows your first selected World Clock location. Tapping the
display will launch the app.
Screenshot 94: World Clock Glance
Managing Glances
Unlike native apps, every Glance can be hidden. To manage your Glances, open the Apple
Watch app on your iPhone. In the My Watch screen, tap Glances about halfway down the
screen. You’ll then see two lists of available Glances. The top list shows the Glances
currently installed on your Apple Watch. To remove any of them, tap the red circle to the
left of the Glance’s name. To reorder your Glances, use the three-line icon on the right to
drag Glances up and down the list.

Screenshot 95: Managing Glances
When you remove a Glance, it will move to the second list – the Do Not Include list.
Glances on this list can be quickly added to your Apple Watch by tapping the green circle
to the left of the Glance’s name. Third party app Glances will appear here as well. Quite a
few popular apps – Instagram, Twitter and Pandora, to name a few – come with their own
Glance view, so be sure to check this list for extra Glances to add as you install new apps!

4.3 Getting the Hang of Apps and Glances
We’ve given you a lot of information in this chapter. If you’re feeling a little
overwhelmed, keep in mind that you don’t have to use every single feature of your Watch,
and in fact, you probably won’t. Go ahead and trim down your Glances so that they only
contain the information you really need and want. If an app doesn’t do anything for you,
don’t worry about it! The best thing you can do to really get the hang of your Apple Watch
is to identify its most useful features and practice using them. It’s much easier to get used
to swiping up for Glances and using the Digital Crown to find apps when the actions are
connected to outcomes that are worth your time and attention.
At this point, we’d recommend taking a little time to get used to your native apps and
Glances, because in the next chapter we’re going to introduce you to the wide, wonderful
world of third party apps!


Part 5: Getting Started with Third Party Watch Apps
In this section, we’ll help you get started adding third party apps to your Watch. Selecting
and installing a great batch of apps is a critically important step in getting the most out of
your Apple Watch. The native apps discussed in the previous chapter provide a great
starting point, but it’s the integration of the platforms and services you use everyday that
really makes the Watch shine.
We’ll start by explaining how to add third party apps, and then we’ll share twenty of our
favorites to help you get started!

5.1 Adding Third Party Apps to Your Watch
Getting new Watch apps is a fairly simple process, but you’ll need to do it all on your
iPhone. When you download a Watch-ready app, you’re actually downloading the iPhone
version. The Watch extension is built-in. Similarly, if you already have apps on your
iPhone that are listed as Watch-friendly, updating to the latest version will make the Watch
extension available for you.
To add an app to your Watch, open the iPhone Apple Watch app. There, scroll down past
the built-in Watch apps until you find a list of Watch-ready apps. You can tap on each one
to toggle Show App on Apple Watch.
      
             
Screenshot 96: Adding Third Party Apps to Apple Watch
If you have a lot of apps and this seems too tedious, you can also turn on Automatic
Downloads. This will automatically add new Apple Watch apps to your Watch as you
download them from the App Store on your iPhone. To do this, open the iPhone Watch
app. Then tap General, then Automatic Downloads. Turn on Automatically Download
Apps.

5.2 Our Top Twenty Apple Watch Apps
As the newest member of the Apple family, the Watch is only just beginning to amass its
app stable. However, we expect it to explode as developers catch up with all of this
device’s technological opportunities. That said, the apps available straight out of the gate
are nothing to sneeze at! Read on for some of our favorites.
Amazon (free)
The trouble with having Amazon on your wrist is that it becomes that much easier to
impulse shop! The Amazon Watch app allows you to search Amazon using dictation. It’s a
great way to do a quick price check on an item, and it works with Handoff to make it
quick and easy to pick up your iPhone to view more product details. It’s also possible –
and possibly dangerous – to turn on 1-click ordering for Apple Watch.
CNN (free)
The CNN iPhone app is a great way to stay informed about what’s happening in the world,
and its customizable push notifications options make it a great fit with Apple Watch. It’s
hard to catch much besides the headlines, but you’ll never miss a major story.
Dark Sky ($3.99)
Dark Sky is a bit pricey as apps go, but trust us, this one is worth it. Dark Sky is a weather
app focused on keeping you dry. It lets you know exactly when precipitation is going to
start up to an hour in advance, so you can go about your business knowing exactly what to
expect. It also includes some of the most immediately practical notifications in the history
of push notifications – you’ll know in advance every time it rains and every time a storm
heads your way. These notifications make it a wonderful addition to your Watch,
especially if you spend a lot of time outside.
Emergency by American Red Cross (free)
The Emergency app is a great way to stay up-to-date on emergency conditions in multiple
locations. You can add your hometown, your brother’s city, your daughter’s university,
etc. to the app on your iPhone, and it will monitor hazards for you, including hurricanes,
earthquakes, floods, tornadoes, blizzards, tsunamis, fire, storms, heat, volcanic activity, air
quality and more. Apple Watch will alert you if anything happens, and you can review
alerts and family safety directly on the Watch. If you’re nervous about loved ones’ safety
in far away places, this app may offer some peace of mind.
ESPN (free)
If you need to know the score, this is the app for you. Sign in on your iPhone with a ESPN
account to set up your favorite teams, and then let Apple Watch keep you up to speed in
real time by notifying you every time your team scores or relevant breaking news hits.
Foursquare (free)
If it’s been a while since you used or thought about Foursquare, a lot has changed recently.

Location sharing and badges are all gone. The new Foursquare is a recommendation
engine – sort of like Netflix for places. It gets to know your tastes and serves up
recommendations accordingly. The Apple Watch version is a great way to find something
good to eat in a new city. We recommend giving it a try!
Instagram (free)
The Instagram social photo service works pretty well on the wrist. When you open the
Apple Watch app, you can choose to either view your feed or your account activity. It’s
easy to scroll through photos and like them as you go. Commenting is a pretty convoluted
process, but for a quick peak while in line at the grocery store, this Watch app works well.
Mint (free)
We just don’t have words for how much we love and depend on this budgeting app. This
iPhone app and website helps you manage your money by connecting securely to your
bank accounts and helping you set up a realistic personal budget. The Watch extension is a
great way to stay on top of your finances, as it shows you how you’re doing with regard to
your savings goals and budget limits. We remain amazed that this is a free service.
MyFitnessPal (free)
MyFitnessPal shines as a calorie counting app. You can set it up so that it works with
Health (and, therefore, with the step/calorie burn information on your Apple Watch and/or
your third party workout apps). The Watch extension shows you at a glance how many
calories you’ve eaten, how many are left in your daily calorie budget, and how your daily
nutrition is progressing thus far. It’s a really handy way to stay on top of your diet, and its
integration with Health and Apple Watch truly seals the deal.
Pacemaker (free)
This music mixer app is a ton of fun to play with, and moving it to your wrist will let you
control the party from every room of the house. It comes with three effects, but more are
available for purchase in the iPhone app. You can put as much or as little effort into the
mix as you want – tapping a track will create an instant mix for you to enjoy.
Pandora (free)
The Apple Watch version of Pandora requires you to sign into the iPhone version of the
app first. From the Apple Watch, you can then play your existing stations or create new
ones using dictation. Apple Watch will play Pandora through your iPhone’s speaker or
through Bluetooth headphones.
PowerPoint (free)
Adding the PowerPoint app to your wrist has one major, major perk – you can use it as a
remote control. Run a presentation on your iPhone, hook your iPhone up to a projector,
and with Apple Watch, you’re free to roam the lecture hall at your pleasure. You can
create a basic PowerPoint presentation with a free Microsoft account, but you’ll need a

paid Office 365 subscription to use all of its features.
RunKeeper (free)
RunKeeper is still primarily an iPhone app, but it succeeds in two places where Apple
Workout fails – elevation and mapping. When you install RunKeeper on your iPhone,
you’ll be able to install the Watch version as well. This will allow you to start your run (or
walk, or cycle, or whatever) from your wrist instead of unlocking and fumbling with your
iPhone. Pair that with a set of Bluetooth headphones and your favorite music, controllable
through your Watch, stash your phone in a belt or armband, and you can enjoy a relatively
unencumbered run!
Shazam (free)
Shazam makes a lot of sense on your wrist. This app, with one tap, will listen to whatever
music is playing, identify it for you, and give you lyrics and a quick way to purchase the
track through iTunes on your iPhone, courtesy of Handoff. Never be stuck wondering
what you’re listening to and never forget the name of that great song playing last night
ever again.
Starbucks (free)
If you’re a loyal Starbucks customer, you’ll probably want, no, need this one. The
Starbucks app is great on the iPhone, and the Watch version includes its best features. You
can locate the nearest store, view your Rewards balance and pay for your coffee without
reaching in your pocket a single time.
Trivia Crack ($2.99)
The name says it all here. We’re a bit skeptical of most games on Apple Watch, due to the
tiny display area, but this one really does work well. Trivia Crack is a turn-based trivia
game in which you square off against friends to answer randomly selected trivia questions.
The first person to get a question right in each of the game’s six categories (Science,
Entertainment, Art, Geography, Sports and History) wins.
Twitter (free)
The Twitter Watch app allows you to scroll through your own Twitter feed or through
trending tweets. 140 characters work surprisingly well on the Watch’s screen, and this is
one example of a Watch text-based app that we think works pretty well. Of course, you
can’t load links to websites or view multimedia, which does limit the experience
somewhat, but you can retweet and favorite, and you can tweet yourself by Force
Touching the display.
Uber (free)
If your location offers Uber, you’ll want this free app on your wrist. Uber is a car service
that will pick you up within minutes of requesting a ride. The app will handle payment by
storing your credit card information. The Watch app makes it faster than ever to get where

you need to go.
Wunderlist (free)
Wunderlist is our favorite list-making app out there. Wunderlist is great for groceries,
work tasks, life goals and any other sort of list you can dream up. You can also share lists
with friends and family, making this app a fantastic collaboration tool. The Apple Watch
version syncs with your iPhone, allowing you to see and check off items on your lists
straight from your wrist. You’ll also receive reminders for any items that you’ve set to
alert you, and you can receive and respond to invitations to share lists.
Yelp (free)
The Yelp Watch app will help you find and choose nearby restaurants, coffee shops and
bars using your current location. You’ll be able to quickly scan your options, using Yelp’s
star ratings and reviews. You can also see hours of operation and launch directions
through the Maps app.

5.3 Exploring Further
When the Apple Watch debuted on April 24, 2015, there were hundreds of Watch-ready
apps already waiting for it. That number has nowhere to go but up! You can always use
the Featured screen on the Apple Watch iPhone app to see the latest and best-reviewed
apps for Apple Watch. The Categories button in the top left corner of that screen can help
you break things down as well. And don’t forget about old-fashioned Internet searching –
typing “Apple Watch apps” into a search engine will yield plenty of reputable sources, like
CNET, 9to5Mac, Engadget, and more. Don’t be shy about trying new things, especially if
they’re free!
We do firmly believe that patient Watch owners will be richly rewarded. Apple Watch is a
very different animal, and we feel confident that the apps that take full advantage of its
unique abilities and limitations are just around the corner. There are plenty of great apps
available right now, but we also suspect that the best ones are still to come, so stay tuned!


Conclusion
We hope you’ve enjoyed getting to know your new Apple Watch. Now that you know how
to navigate and customize your device, use all of its preloaded apps and features, add your
favorite third party apps, and explore new possibilities in the App Store, you’re all set.
Whether you’re traveling, working out, killing time, making plans or sharing with friends,
your Apple Watch is ready and willing to assist.
Apple Watch is new now, but if its predecessors the iPhone and the iPad are any
indication, we expect wrist worn technology is going to be a ubiquitous feature of our
society soon enough. By purchasing a first generation Apple Watch, you’ve jumped ahead
of the curve. Getting in on the ground floor of a new technology paradigm like the Apple
Watch not only means that you’ll have some serious bragging rights a few years down the
line, but also that you’ll be poised to adapt as this technology continues to develop and
begins to change our day-to-day world.
Of course, by investing in your future technological wellbeing, you’re also opening up a
whole new world of convenience, innovation, and plain old fun for today! This guide has
given you a solid foundation to start on, but as you continue to experiment and explore,
you’ll find uses for your Watch that would never have occurred to us. So don’t be afraid to
try out new ways of using your Watch – a device this personal works best when you figure
out how to bring it into alignment with your own personality.
Thanks for reading, and have fun with your Apple Watch!

