
A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
2
Internet of Things
Whether these 
deﬁnitions 
and forecasts 
are accurate 
or not, it can 
be downright 
confusing.
INTRODUCTION
Deﬁning the Internet of Things isn’t easy. When it’s deﬁned in terms 
of market size, some focus on the potential revenue (it’s in the tril-
lions), while others focus on the number of potential “Things” (it’s in the 
billions). Some deﬁnitions focus on the exponential growth of sensors, 
excluding smartphones, tablets and desktop computers, while others 
only consider devices with an IP address. Whether these deﬁnitions and 
forecasts are accurate or not, it can be downright confusing.
How would you deﬁne the Internet of Things (or IoT, as it is commonly 
called)? If you were to ask 20 people, you would most likely end up with 
21 diﬀerent deﬁnitions, including yours. And guess what? That’s OK. It’s 
not important that we all agree on a single deﬁnition. What’s important 
is that we understand the context or frame of reference in which the 
Internet of Things is being discussed. 
A good case in point is big data. When the term started to become 
popular in 2011, almost every article, research report, interview and 
panel discussion for the next few years began with a deﬁnition of big 
data. Was it necessary to deﬁne each time? Yes, it was – and it still is 
– because it is the responsibility of an author/speaker to provide the 
proper context for the reader/listener – especially when it involves 
emerging terms like big data and the Internet of Things. 
Diﬀerent Ways to View the IoT
While you won’t ﬁnd a canonical deﬁnition of IoT in this guide, it’s still 
interesting to note how diﬀerent organizations describe it. Here are a 
few:
•
The IoT links objects to the Internet, enabling data and insights 
never available before. (Cisco)
•
The network of physical objects that contain embedded technolo-
gy to communicate and sense or interact with their internal states 
or the external environment. (Gartner)

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
3
Internet of Things
These 
illustrative 
descriptions 
highlight IoT’s 
common traits 
while giving 
us a good 
sense of the 
tremendous 
impact it will 
have on life as 
we know it. 
•
A global infrastructure for the information society, enabling ad-
vanced services by interconnecting (physical and virtual) things 
based on existing and evolving interoperable information and 
communication technologies. (IoT-GSI)
•
IoT describes a world where just about anything can be connect-
ed and communicate in an intelligent fashion. In other words, with 
the Internet of Things, the physical world is becoming one big 
information system. (Techopedia)
•
It’s a concept of everyday objects – from industrial machines to 
wearable devices - using built-in sensors to gather data and take 
action on that data across a network. (SAS Institute)
These illustrative descriptions highlight IoT’s common traits – connec-
tivity, “things” and data/information – while giving us a good sense of the 
tremendous impact it will have on life as we know it. For a more thor-
ough discussion on the Internet of Things – including its history, impor-
tance, who uses it and how it works – read Internet of Things (IoT): What 
it is and why it matters on sas.com. 
About This Guide
This A-to-Z guide includes 101 common terms related to the Internet of 
Things. It’s not an exhaustive list of terms, given that IoT is evolving so 
quickly, but rather a quick go-to resource for the technically savvy data 
professional who wants to get a handle on this vast IoT ecosystem. Even 
though this guide is for the “non-geek,” it does include some technical 
terms, but they are explained sans technical “geek speak.” 
We also want to help you understand how a term may be connected to 
a larger discussion. The table on the next two pages will help you with 
that. It groups the terms by category, such as Analytics or Connectivity, 
so that it’s easier to quickly grasp a group of related terms (and catego-
ries). 
Each category also has its own colored icon — for example, 
  
represents “digital currency.“ Throughout the guide, each term is tagged 
with at least one category icon and may include one or more links to 
other terms.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
4
Internet of Things
THE 101 TERMS 
by Category
ANALYTICS
ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE
APPLICATIONS
CAPABILITIES
COMPUTING
CONNECTIVITY
Advanced 
Analytics
Analytics of 
Things (AoT)
Big Data 
Analytics
Descriptive 
Analytics
Predictive 
Analytics
Prescriptive 
Analytics
SAS Analytics 
for IoT
SAS Event 
Stream 
Processing 
(ESP)
SAS Visual 
Analytics (VA)
SAS Visual 
Statistics (VS)
Streaming 
Analytics
Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence (AI)
Augmented 
Reality (AR)
Automation
Chat(ter)bot
Cognitive 
Computing
Deep Learning
Facial 
Recognition
Machine 
Learning
Machine-To-
Machine (M2M)
Neural Network
Speech 
Recognition
Vehicle-To-
Vehicle (V2V)
Virtual Reality 
(VR)
Voice Assistant
Connected 
Customer
Connected 
Factory
Connected 
Vehicle
Smart City
Smart Grid
Smart Home
Automation
Digitalization
Digitization
Legacy
Optimization
Real Time
Ubiquitous
Cloud 
Computing
Cognitive 
Computing
Edge 
Computing
Fog 
Computing
Grid 
Computing
Subcategory: 
WIRELESS
Botnet
Connectivity
Geofencing
GPS
Integration
Interconnectivity
Internet of 
Everything (IoE)
Interoperability
Mirai
Network
Platform
Protocol
Proximity 
Network
RFID
Standards

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
5
Internet of Things
DATA
DIGITAL  
CURRENCY
INDUSTRIES
PEOPLE
THINGS
WIRELESS
Subcategory:  
ANALYTICS
Subcategory: 
COMPUTING
Algorithm
Big Data
Data Lake
Data 
Streaming
Digitalization
Digitization
Governance
Monetization
Privacy
Quality
Security
Yottabyte
Bitcoin
Blockchain
Cryptocurrency
Digital 
Currency
Ethereum
Health Care
Industrial IoT 
(IIoT)
Manufacturing
Retail
Tele-
communications
Transportation
Utilities
Connected 
Customer
Data 
Scientist
Hacker
Innovation
Jobs
Kevin Ashton
Talent
Drone
Mobile 
Device
Quantiﬁed 
Self
Sensor
Things
Wearables
Xcoﬀee
4G LTE
Bluetooth
LoRa
Mesh 
Networking
WiFi
Wireless
Zigbee
Z-wave

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
6
Internet of Things
4G LTE
4G LTE is a high-speed wireless network. On 
mobile devices, connection speeds are at least 
100MB/second; on stationary devices, speeds are 
at least 1GB/second. The anticipated rollout of 
5G is in 2020 and will focus on supporting more 
users and data in a given density versus making 
speeds faster. Given the anticipated growth of IoT 
devices by 2020, 5G will be necessary to handle 
the network volume.
ADVANCED ANALYTICS
As SAS Chief Technology Oﬃcer Oliver Schaben-
berger puts it, “Data without analytics is value not 
yet realized. Wherever there is data, there should 
be analytics.” This is especially true of IoT data. 
For example, advanced analytics allows compa-
nies to conduct what-if analyses and understand 
the impact of changing a business strategy. 
Advanced analytics includes: predictive analytics, 
data mining, big data analytics, forecasting, text 
analytics, optimization and simulation.
Learn More:  
THE 101 TERMS 
in Alphabetical Order

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
7
Internet of Things
ALGORITHM
An algorithm is a software procedure, i.e., a set 
of instructions designed to perform a speciﬁc 
task. Since there’s typically more than one way to 
complete a task, an algorithm may be modiﬁed 
over time to improve its performance, eﬃciency 
or even accuracy. Algorithms determine what data 
you will see in your Google search results or Face-
book news feed.
ANALYTICS OF THINGS (AOT)
AoT is the analysis of IoT data, which is the data 
being generated by IoT sensors and devices. Data 
creation is the easy part; analyzing it is not. Without 
this data analysis, generating all this IoT data is a 
futile eﬀort. Don’t collect the data if you don’t have 
an aggressive plan to analyze it and take action on 
it.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
AI is intelligence exhibited by machines, some-
times referred to as machine intelligence.  AI 
focuses on making machines perform equal to or 
better than a human when it comes to accuracy, 
capacity and speed. AI is what’s bringing a lot of 
our IoT Things to life, like Amazon Echo’s “Alexa.”
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
8
Internet of Things
AUGMENTED REALITY (AR)
AR is the blending of virtual reality and real life. 
AR appeals to the senses by inserting computer-
generated sounds, videos, graphics or GPS data 
into an existing real life setting. AR is converging 
with IoT; for example, data from hundreds of 
sensors can be visualized simultaneously, over-
laying relevant and useful information from your 
environment through a headset.
AUTOMATION
The automation of data-driven decisions and 
actions is an obvious direction for the Internet of 
Things (and Industrial IoT). Analyzing all this IoT 
data will be a hefty task in itself, but the ability 
to automate decisions and actions based on this 
analysis will separate the leaders from the laggards 
in this IoT race.
BIG DATA
Paul Kent, Vice President of Big Data at SAS, 
describes big data simply as “the size or the 
complexity of your data that puts you on the other 
side of your comfort zone.” Big data became all 
the rage in 2011. What we know now is that it was 
just the opening act for what we now call IoT data.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
9
Internet of Things
BIG DATA ANALYTICS
Big data analytics is a subset of advanced 
analytics. It allows you to examine large volumes 
of data to uncover hidden patterns, correlations, 
market trends and other insights. With today’s big 
data technology, you can get answers to your busi-
ness questions a lot quicker than with your tradi-
tional BI tools.
Learn More: 
BITCOIN
Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency powered by the block-
chain. Unlike government-issued currencies, 
bitcoin is operated by a decentralized authority 
and provides lower transaction fees than tradi-
tional payment mechanisms.
BLOCKCHAIN
The blockchain is the technology that powers 
bitcoin. It’s a distributed database that serves as a 
public ledger of all transactions in a given system 
that have ever been executed. The blockchain is 
constantly growing as newly completed blocks are 
added to it. Blocks of transactions are added in a 
linear, chronological order through cryptography, 
ensuring that the blockchain is a tamper-proof 
record of all transactions on the network. It’s also 
accessible to all participants.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
10
Internet of Things
BLUETOOTH
A radio broadcast communication system that 
allows you to exchange data over a short distance, 
typically 30 feet (but it can range from three to 300 
feet). Bluetooth is commonly used with portable 
devices, many of which are IoT devices.
BOTNET
Also called a zombie army, a botnet is a collection 
of connected Things (basically anything with an IP 
address) that has been set up to forward transmis-
sions, typically spam or viruses, to another unsus-
pecting machine on the internet, often forcing 
it oﬄine. The owners of these connected Things 
are not aware that their Thing has been part of a 
botnet; hence, a key reason why IoT security is so 
important.
CHAT(TER)BOT
Similar to a voice assistant, chatbots are services 
you access through a chat interface. Some chat-
bots are powered by AI and some by a set of rules. 
Typically, a chatbot provides a single service, like 
updating you with the latest on weather or news, 
helping you pick out groceries, or scheduling a 
meeting for you.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
11
Internet of Things
CLOUD COMPUTING
Cloud computing is a major player in IoT. Like 
grid computing, cloud computing reduces costs 
by maximizing existing resources. The diﬀerence 
is that in cloud computing, an app doesn’t access 
these resources directly. Instead, it accesses 
resources indirectly through a service, which in 
turn engages the physical resources necessary to 
respond to the app.
COGNITIVE COMPUTING
SAS describes cognitive computing as the holy 
grail of AI. Imagine asking a machine a ques-
tion (like you do with Siri or Alexa) and having 
the machine answer. Then imagine the machine 
providing you with additional information about 
your question you never thought to ask, along with 
a narrative summary and suggestions on how to 
analyze further. This is how cognitive computing 
works. It brings the “smarts” to IoT. 
Learn More: 
 
COLLABORATION
Collaboration can be tough, especially within your 
organization. But it’s only going to get tougher as 
we move into this IoT age. IoT will not only require 
increased collaboration and cooperation within 
your own organization, but also between tech-
nology vendors, the developer community, secu-
rity ﬁrms, the open source community and govern-
ment agencies. IoT is changing the game of how 
we all get along.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
12
Internet of Things
CONNECTED CUSTOMER
Have a smartphone? Consider yourself connected 
then. Whether you’re commuting to work, shop-
ping, or eating at your favorite restaurant, your 
favorite businesses and sites are using IoT to make 
sure you stay connected 24/7 any way you like.
Learn More: 
CONNECTED FACTORY
Industrial IoT is improving how factories operate. 
By utilizing streaming data in real time, manu-
facturers have the opportunity to respond more 
quickly to changing conditions, tune up their 
operations for peak performance and maximize 
the value gained from their factory investments.
Learn More: 
CONNECTED VEHICLE
The race is on. Automakers and tech companies 
alike are building out the next generation of smart, 
connected cars. Not only are they making cars 
safer to drive, but they’re working on giving the 
responsibility of driving to the car itself. The vision? 
Collision-free driving and stress-free passengers. 
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
13
Internet of Things
CONNECTIVITY
IoT connectivity boils down to how Things connect 
to each other. Connections can either be wired or 
wireless. This guide highlights some of the more 
popular “non-geek” connections: 4G LTE, Blue-
tooth, GPS, LoRa, mesh networking, RFID, WiFi, 
Zigbee and Z-wave.
CRYPTOCURRENCY
It’s a type of digital currency that uses cryp-
tography for security and anti-counterfeiting 
measures. Public and private keys are often used 
to transfer cryptocurrency between people. Bitcoin 
is a popular cryptocurrency.
DATA LAKE
A data lake is essentially a storage repository that 
can hold any and all types of data in its original 
format. Unlike a data warehouse, the data doesn’t 
have to be cleaned up or structured before it’s 
stored. This makes it easy for organizations to 
quickly capture and store all their big, IoT data.
DATA SCIENTIST
SAS deﬁnes data scientists as a new breed of 
analytical data experts who have the technical 
skills to solve complex problems and the curiosity 
to explore what problems still need to be solved. 
Read more about who these data scientists are, 
what they do, and why you want to be one: sas.
com/en_us/insights/analytics/what-is-a-data-scien-
tist.html

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
14
Internet of Things
DATA STREAMING
Real-time data streaming processes data on the 
ﬂy instead of waiting to process it after it’s been 
stored in a database, which could be too late to 
react. Popular streaming applications include fraud 
detection, network monitoring, e-commerce and 
risk management.
DEEP LEARNING
Deep learning is a subset of machine learning, 
which is a subset of AI. Deep learning helps 
automate predictive analytics. It can take lots of 
unstructured, unlabeled data (like IoT data) and 
create its own highly accurate predictive models. It 
emulates how we learn, as humans, to gain certain 
types of knowledge. Common applications include 
image and speech recognition.
Learn More: 
DESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
Descriptive analytics is the simplest form of 
analytics. Its primary purpose is to answer the 
question: “What has happened?” It transforms 
large volumes of stored data into useful summa-
ries of insightful information. Descriptive analytics 
is a foundational component in many BI/data visu-
alization environments.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
15
Internet of Things
DIGITAL CURRENCY
Digital currencies are intangible, electronic 
payment methods that can be used to purchase 
goods and services through the internet. They 
allow for instantaneous transactions and border-
less transfer of ownership, and they eliminate the 
middle man, such as a bank. Cryptocurrencies and 
virtual currencies are two types of digital curren-
cies.
DIGITALIZATION/DIGITIZATION
Gartner deﬁnes digitalization as “the use of digital 
technologies to change a business model and 
provide new revenue and value-producing oppor-
tunities. It is the process of moving to a digital 
business.” This parallels what the IoT journey is all 
about: transforming our analog world into a digital 
one. So whether we’re digitizing a document (e.g., 
scanning a PDF) or digitalizing our city, it’s all part 
of making our world smarter and more connected.
DRONE
A drone is essentially a ﬂying robot. More speciﬁ-
cally, it’s an unmanned aircraft guided by remote 
control. Drones are not just for the military 
anymore. Consumers are buying drones with 
cameras, delivery companies are ﬁguring out how 
to deliver your next bag of groceries, and farmers 
are using them to help with crop management.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
16
Internet of Things
EDGE COMPUTING
In a traditional IoT architecture, the data that is 
collected or generated by a Thing is often sent to 
the cloud for storage and analysis. This isn’t very 
eﬃcient because a lot of unnecessary data gets 
sent, which takes up bandwidth and slows down 
response times. Both edge computing and fog 
computing focus on pushing intelligence and 
processing capabilities to the network edge, closer 
to where the data originates and away from the 
cloud. 
The diﬀerence between the two is that with edge 
computing, Things are hardwired into a smart 
controller. The controller then decides how to 
handle the data coming from the Thing, i.e., store 
the data locally or push it to the cloud. 
Fog computing, in contrast, works with the local 
area network (LAN). Data is gathered, processed 
and stored within the network via an IoT gateway 
or fog node. Each computing solution tackles the 
same problem in very diﬀerent ways. Leave it to 
your technical folks to determine which one is a 
better ﬁt for your company.
ETHEREUM
Ethereum is a platform that oﬀers many beneﬁts 
for the IoT. It uses its own decentralized public 
blockchain to store, execute and protect smart 
contracts securely. For example, with Ethereum, 
your washing machine could request more deter-
gent from your grocery store and provide an auto-
mated payment.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
17
Internet of Things
FACIAL RECOGNITION
How would you like to unlock your door with your 
face? It’s possible with facial recognition software, 
which uses facial features in a digital image or 
video frame to identify a person. Making our smart 
homes more secure is just the beginning of how 
facial recognition is converging with the Internet of 
Things.
FOG COMPUTING
See edge computing.
GEOFENCING
Geofencing uses GPS and RFID technologies to 
create a virtual geographic boundary, like around 
your home property. A response is then triggered 
any time a mobile device enters or leaves the area. 
It’s another smart way to turn the lights oﬀ when 
you leave and on when you get back home.
GOVERNANCE
When big data arrived on the scene, compa-
nies began asking about big data governance 
frameworks. That was the wrong question. What 
they needed to do was extend their existing data 
governance framework to address big data. The 
same holds true for IoT data.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
18
Internet of Things
GPS
GPS is another way our Things – like our smart-
phones, ﬁtness bands and connected cars – keep 
track of where we are and where we’re going. 
The Global Positioning System (GPS), originally 
developed by the US Department of Defense, is a 
free satellite-based navigation system that works 
anywhere, at any time, under all weather condi-
tions.
GRID COMPUTING
Grid computing is another major player in IoT. Like 
cloud computing, grid computing reduces costs 
by maximizing existing resources. This is accom-
plished with multiple machines working together 
to solve a speciﬁc problem. It’s especially powerful 
with number-crunching problems.
HACKER
A hacker is a highly skilled computer expert 
capable of breaking into computer systems and 
networks using bugs and exploits. “White Hats” 
are ethical hackers who specialize in making sure 
an organization’s information systems are secure. 
“Black Hats” are hackers who maliciously break 
into a system to destroy ﬁles, steal data, etc., for 
some future purpose, like blackmail or ransom. 
“Grey Hats” may violate laws or ethical standards, 
but not with malicious intent like a Black Hat. The 
weak, or missing, security within the IoT ecosystem, 
existing and future, makes it a rich playground for 
the hacker community. 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
19
Internet of Things
HEALTH CARE
IoT is aﬀecting the health care industry. Many of 
us use wearables to monitor our physical activity, 
sleep patterns and other health-related habits. 
Hospitals use IoT sensors to better monitor 
patients and track equipment. This is just the 
beginning of how IoT will be used to improve our 
health and help save lives.
Learn More: 
INDUSTRIAL IOT (IIOT)
IIoT is the use of IoT technologies in manufacturing 
and is part of the Industry 4.0 trend. It incorporates 
machine learning, big data technologies, sensor 
data, M2M communication and automation tech-
nologies. The philosophy behind IIoT, according to 
TechTarget, is that "smart machines are better than 
humans at accurately, consistently capturing and 
communicating data." 
INNOVATION
When it comes to IoT, the truth is that innova-
tion is less about technology and more about the 
creative and disruptive transformation of business 
processes, many of which are decades old. Process 
innovation — for instance, streaming a patient’s 
secure vital signs to the smart device of a specialist 
thousands of miles away — can not only save time 
and money. It can save lives. 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
20
Internet of Things
INTEGRATION
Data silos are an age-old issue, and data integra-
tion is an age-old challenge. With the growing 
volumes of big data, IoT data and yes, data silos — 
organizations are being forced to address integra-
tion in a larger, more comprehensive way. This is a 
must-do for any data-driven organization. 
INTERCONNECTIVITY
Interconnectivity is about the quality of being 
connected, or the potential to connect in an easy 
and eﬀective way. This is especially important for 
consumers as they make their world a little bit 
smarter and a little more connected, one step at a 
time.
INTERNET OF EVERYTHING (IOE)
A term originally coined by Cisco, IoE is the intel-
ligent connection of people, data, process and 
things. In essence, IoE adds network intelligence 
to IoT.
INTEROPERABILITY
The success of IoT in your organization may very 
well be dependent on your ability to get your 
ecosystem of IT systems and software applica-
tions communicating and exchanging data more 
eﬃciently and eﬀectively with each other. This is 
called interoperability. Your systems have to talk to 
each other for the data to be combined.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
21
Internet of Things
JOBS
The projected growth of IoT (market size, number 
of devices) over the next ﬁve years is mind-
blowing. Not only will data scientists continue 
to be in high demand, but watch for jobs in data 
security and cloud computing to increase. We 
will also see a whole host of new roles rise. Does 
anyone want to be a wearable tech designer?
KEVIN ASHTON
Known as the “father of the Internet of Things.” It 
all began with a tube of brown lipstick in 1999: 
newsweek.com/2015/03/06/meet-kevin-ashton-
father-internet-things-308763.html
LEGACY
If IoT is about getting Things connected to the 
internet, what are organizations doing if they have 
value-adding Things that weren't designed to 
connect? One approach is to develop IoT strate-
gies that drive technology/process improvements 
and enhancements for existing investments. What-
ever your approach, one thing is certain: doing 
nothing is not a sustainable option.
LORA
LoRa is a long range, low power wireless platform 
that's being used to build IoT networks world-
wide, especially by smart cities and communities. 
It securely transmits data and is being integrated 
into many Things, including connected vehicles, 
street lights and home appliances.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
22
Internet of Things
MACHINE LEARNING
Machine learning (ML) is a subset of AI. Modern 
ML techniques use neural networks to help 
machines learn without human intervention. 
For example, Facebook uses ML to dynamically 
personalize your news feed based on what you're 
stopping to read, like and comment on. ML helps 
make our IoT data smart.
Learn More: 
MACHINE-TO-MACHINE (M2M)
Some say this is where IoT got its start. M2M began 
when mobile devices started to become smart 
and were able to connect and send data to other 
devices through cellular (or wired) networks. M2M 
typically refers to isolated instances of device-to-
device communication, while IoT has a broader 
scope by automating and managing communica-
tion between multiple devices.
MANUFACTURING
Manufacturing is one of the early adopters of IoT 
and is often referred to as Industrial IoT. Data-
collecting sensors embedded in factory machinery 
or warehouse shelves can communicate problems 
or track resources in real time, making it easy to 
work more eﬃciently and keep costs down.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
23
Internet of Things
MESH NETWORKING
In a wireless mesh network, the network is spread 
out among dozens of Things that communicate 
with each other. The more Things in the mesh 
network, the stronger the network. Only one Thing, 
called the controller, needs to be hardwired to the 
internet via a modem/router. Mesh networks are 
growing in popularity in smart homes, especially 
Zigbee and Z-wave.
MIRAI
Mirai is a popular malware program that turns 
Linux-based machines into bots that can be used 
as part of a botnet in a large-scale network attack. 
Mirai tends to target remote cameras and home 
routers by using the default passwords that come 
with the devices. It's a cautionary reminder to 
always change the password on all devices that are 
added to your network, at work or home.
MOBILE DEVICE
A mobile device is a portable, handheld computer 
– like a smartphone, tablet or DSLR camera. They 
are battery powered and typically connect via 
WiFi, Bluetooth and/or a cellular network. 
MONETIZATION
Companies are looking for ways to monetize their 
IoT data. Here are four possible approaches: (1) 
improve internal processes, (2) enhance existing 
products/services, (3) enhance the customer 
experience, and (4) develop new digital products/
services.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
24
Internet of Things
NETWORK
A computer network, also called a data network, 
uses a mix of wired and wireless technologies to 
connect "endpoints" (servers, personal computers, 
phones, etc.) for the purpose of transmitting, 
receiving and exchanging data, voice and video 
traﬃc. Each endpoint has a unique identiﬁer, often 
an IP address or media access control (MAC) 
address, to identify the source and destination of 
the transmission. This is the foundation upon which 
the Internet of Things is built.
NEURAL NETWORK
It's a powerful computer system used in modern 
machine learning and deep learning that's 
patterned after the operation of neurons in our 
human brain. Some popular applications of neural 
networks include speech-to-text transcription, 
facial recognition, musical genre/song recogni-
tion, data classiﬁcation and ﬁngerprint recognition 
(even if your hands are sweaty).

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
25
Internet of Things
OPTIMIZATION
Optimization happens when business scenarios 
are improved mathematically using data. Improve-
ments in data collection, storage and processing 
have made analytics more responsive, scalable 
and eﬃcient just at the time when IoT data is 
making big data even bigger. The result is that 
organizations can realistically use all the available 
data (as opposed to sampling and extrapolation) 
to optimize their operations and do it in real time. 
Robust event stream processing is what underlies 
an innovative approach to optimization based on 
IoT data.
Some important considerations include: 
•
Are you able to analyze big data while it’s in 
motion and make instant decisions?
•
Can you get measurable value from low- 
latency responses to high-volume through-
put at millions of events per second?
•
Do you consolidate streaming data sources 
to process data streams out to the edge?
PLATFORM
An analytics platform is a must-have for the 
data-driven organization, especially if IoT data is 
involved. It's a software foundation that makes 
it easier to derive insights from your data in any 
computing environment and supports every phase 
of the analytics life cycle – data, discovery and 
deployment. SAS® Viya™  is a strong example.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
26
Internet of Things
PREDICTIVE ANALYTICS
Predictive analytics is the next step after descrip-
tive analytics. Its primary purpose is to answer the 
question: "What could happen?" It uses the data 
you have to predict data you don't have. It's not a 
fortune teller, though. Its job is to help you under-
stand the future based on the data you provide.
PRESCRIPTIVE ANALYTICS
Prescriptive analytics comes after predictive 
analytics. Its primary purpose is to answer the 
question: "What should we do?" It can recommend 
one or more courses of action and show you the 
likely outcome of each decision. Self-driving cars 
live and breathe oﬀ of prescriptive analytics.
PRIVACY
Big data privacy isn’t a discussion reserved for data 
geeks and privacy freaks anymore. It’s for all of us. 
With data and Things growing at an alarming rate, 
we can no longer aﬀord to sit on the sidelines. We 
each need to take proactive steps to protect our 
data and our privacy.
PROTOCOL
A protocol is a set of communication rules for 
hardware and/or software that deﬁne how two or 
more entities are to communicate with each other. 
For example, HTTP is a protocol. For a protocol to 
be accepted, the participating parties must agree 
on the rules. A protocol may be developed into a 
standard to help reach an agreement. 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
27
Internet of Things
PROXIMITY NETWORK
Also called a near-me area network (NAN). It 
allows devices in close proximity to wirelessly 
communicate with one another. For example, two 
smartphones with diﬀerent mobile carriers can 
communicate, even though the communication 
path could be a long distance — i.e., going from 
one phone's LAN through the internet to the other 
phone's LAN.
QUALITY
One of the challenges of IoT data, such as sensor 
data, is the sheer volume and velocity at which it's 
being created. The tricky part is to quickly iden-
tify and isolate the "right" data for analysis. Once 
identiﬁed, this is the data you'll want to prep for 
service. 
QUANTIFIED SELF
The quantiﬁed self is all about self-tracking and 
lifelogging. Equipped with wearables and body 
sensors, an individual can keep track of every 
aspect of his life – from exercise to sleep, heart 
activity to calorie expenditure, and nutrition to 
food consumption – and that's just for starters. The 
IoT is changing how we perceive and interact with 
our bodies.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
28
Internet of Things
REAL TIME
Real time describes an immediate (or nearly 
immediate) level of responsiveness by a device or 
machine. If the response is suﬃciently immediate 
or if the machine is keeping up with some external 
process (like showing us up-to-the-minute weather 
changes), we say it's functioning in "real time." 
Note that "real time" describes our sense of time, 
not a machine's.
RETAIL
As consumers, retailers can take advantage of our 
mobile devices to provide us with a better, more 
personalized shopping experience. Retailers can 
also use IoT sensors and devices for inventory 
tracking or security purposes.
Learn More: 
RFID
RFID (radio-frequency identiﬁcation) uses electro-
magnetic ﬁelds to identify and track tags attached 
to objects automatically. These tags can carry up to 
2,000 bytes of data. Kevin Ashton, the father of the 
Internet of Things, studied RFID technology while 
at MIT.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
29
Internet of Things
SAS® ANALYTICS FOR IOT
This solution is a bundle of SAS' core oﬀerings 
for IoT: SAS Event Stream Processing, SAS Visual 
Analytics and SAS Visual Statistics. It's a powerful 
industry-independent platform for IoT analytics.
Learn More: 
SAS® EVENT STREAM PROCESSING
If you need to analyze IoT data on-the-ﬂy, then 
SAS Event Stream Processing is the streaming 
analytics solution you're looking for. It can analyze 
millions of events per second, detecting patterns 
of interest as they occur. It will help you take imme-
diate action and store what's relevant so that you 
can ignore the rest.
Learn More: 
SAS® VISUAL ANALYTICS
To make sense of all your IoT data, you need to 
visualize it. SAS Visual Analytics is an intuitive drag-
and-drop web application that allows anyone in 
your organization to explore the data, ﬁnd perti-
nent answers, and then collaborate and share with 
others.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
30
Internet of Things
SAS® VISUAL STATISTICS
Fully integrated with SAS Visual Analytics, this SAS 
product allows users to create and reﬁne descrip-
tive and predictive models interactively. SAS Visual 
Statistics’ distributed, in-memory processing 
provides you with results in minutes, not hours or 
days.
SAS® VIYA™
This next generation of SAS analytics has been 
built from the ground up to handle today's 
analytics challenges. The open, cloud-ready plat-
form of SAS Viya is ready for anyone to use – from 
business analysts to data scientists and developers 
to executives. It’s a product made for the IoT age.
Learn More: 
SECURITY 
Security is a hot topic, and it could well make or 
break the Internet of Things. It's not only about 
securing the Things of IoT, but also all the data 
and the networks that tie it all together. Security by 
design is one of the rally cries for the IoT.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
31
Internet of Things
SENSOR
A sensor is a device that can detect an event or 
change in the environment, and send that informa-
tion to a machine that can then act (or not) on the 
data it has received. Sensors have become ubiq-
uitous and contribute signiﬁcantly to the Things 
population. 
SMART
Any physical entity that can exchange data with 
another entity through a wired/wireless connection 
is said to be “smart.” From smartphones to smart 
homes to smart cities, it is hard to ignore or escape 
the transformational changes being ushered in by 
the IoT.
SMART CITY
Local governments can take advantage of all the 
IoT data coming from water and energy resources, 
housing, traﬃc and parking, social media – not to 
mention open data. Today’s technologies are not 
only cheaper, they’re faster and allow governments 
to do more with less.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
32
Internet of Things
SMART GRID
You may already have a smart meter collecting 
your energy usage data. This is just a small slice 
of the IoT data utility companies need to manage. 
With IoT analytics, they can more easily predict 
equipment failures before they occur, integrate 
renewable resources more eﬃciently, and restore 
power more quickly after a storm. 
Learn More:  
SMART HOME
There's no easier way to experience IoT than to 
bring it into your home. Add a voice assistant like 
Amazon Echo or Google Home to the mix, and 
you're now controlling your home access, lighting, 
temperature, entertainment system, window cover-
ings, and security system with your voice.
SPEECH RECOGNITION
It's the ability for a machine to "listen" to 
spoken words and phrases and convert them 
into machine-readable text. Natural language 
processing (NLP) can then take this text and 
extract its meaning. Voice assistants, like Siri, use 
both speech recognition and NLP techniques to 
respond to you.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
33
Internet of Things
STANDARDS
To maximize the reliability and safety of a product, 
method or service, a standard will be developed 
to establish consistent protocols that can be 
universally understood and accepted. Per the IEEE 
Standards Association, "it is only through the use 
of standards that the requirements of interconnec-
tivity and interoperability can be assured." Many 
standards apply to IoT; however, some standards 
compete, while others overlap. It's still not clear 
which standards will prevail for IoT.
STREAMING ANALYTICS
Streaming analytics makes use of data in motion 
just as traditional analytics makes use of data at 
rest. Streaming analytics works in real time on data 
streaming in from applications, sensors, social 
media, devices and more – handling up to 1GB of 
data per second. Streaming analytics can be used 
to issue alerts immediately when fraud is detected 
or trigger a speeding ticket for the speedy tollway 
driver. 
TALENT
The Internet of Things is forcing companies to ask 
this question: Do we have the right talent onboard 
to take on the opportunities and challenges of IoT? 
Whether the talent is internal or external, getting 
the right people in place should be a key priority 
for any data-driven organization.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
34
Internet of Things
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
The telecommunications industry will be signiﬁ-
cantly aﬀected by the IoT since it will be charged 
with keeping all the data the IoT uses. Smart-
phones and other personal devices must be able 
to maintain a reliable connection to the internet for 
the IoT to work eﬀectively.
Learn More: 
THINGS
When we talk about the Internet of Things, what 
exactly is a “Thing?” The answer depends on who 
you ask. There's no single "right" answer because 
it depends on context - and it's your job to under-
stand that context. But generally speaking, a Thing 
may refer to a sensor, a device (mobile or not), 
and/or anything with an IP address. One point 
all will agree on is that the Things population is 
exploding. By 2020, there will tens of billions of 
Things on the planet. Without connectivity, a smart 
Thing won’t really be smart, and the IoT vision will 
become stagnant.
TRANSPORTATION
In addition to connected vehicles and vehicle-
to-vehicle communication, IoT is changing how 
delivery companies manage their ﬂeets and how 
roadways are being monitored. IoT is not only 
making the transportation industry more eﬃcient, 
it's making our roadways safer for all.
Learn More: 

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
35
Internet of Things
UBIQUITOUS
Inherent in the concept of connecting Things, IoT 
is transforming our world into one where the lines 
are blurring between online and oﬄine. 
Connected devices are growing in number to the 
point that IoT is fast becoming ubiquitous. That 
ubiquity by its sheer size is synonymous with big 
data, so it’s no surprise that IoT is making big 
data bigger. That means the importance of data 
management is growing (along with data integra-
tion, data quality and data governance), as are the 
opportunities for value creation with analytics.
UTILITIES
Smart meters not only collect data automati-
cally, they also make it possible to apply analytics 
that can track and manage energy use. Likewise, 
sensors in devices such as windmills can track data 
and use predictive modeling to schedule down-
time for more eﬃcient energy use.
Learn More: 
VEHICLE-TO-VEHICLE (V2V)
This technology will allow vehicles – including cars, 
trucks, buses and trains – to “talk” with one another. 
By exchanging important safety and mobility infor-
mation, these vehicles could help save lives, ease 
traﬃc congestion and improve the environment.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
36
Internet of Things
VIRTUAL REALITY (VR)
VR is the term used to describe a three-dimen-
sional, computer-generated environment that you 
can explore and interact with. It's an immersive 
experience that makes you feel like you're actually 
interacting with your digital environment. Early IoT 
pioneers are exploring how to integrate VR into 
our smart cities. 
VOICE ASSISTANT
Also known as an intelligent personal assistant. 
With your voice, you can ask an "assistant" to 
perform a task or service for you, like manage your 
schedule or provide traﬃc info. Many assistants 
are integrated with IoT – like Alexa (Amazon Echo), 
Google Home and Apple Siri – but some are not 
(such as Microsoft Cortana).
WEARABLES
Wearables are Things that are worn under, with, or 
on top of clothing. They are a primary tool for the 
quantiﬁed self.
WIFI
A popular networking technology that allows you 
to connect to the internet or other devices wire-
lessly. It's similar in concept to Bluetooth. This is 
how many, if not most, IoT devices communicate 
with one another. Even though connecting is easy, 
you need to make sure your device is secure.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
37
Internet of Things
WIRELESS
It’s a form of communication that uses electro-
magnetic waves, not physical wires or cables, to 
transmit a signal. Popular wireless technologies 
include WiFi, Bluetooth and mesh networking.
XCOFFEE
Also called the Trojan Room coﬀee pot, it's one 
of the ﬁrst examples of IoT in action. It was 1991, 
and the ﬁrst webcam was set up outside the Trojan 
Room at CERN to watch a coﬀee pot. Read the 
story, written by one of the academics who wrote 
the code: https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/coﬀee/qsf/
coﬀee.html
YOTTABYTE
A yottabyte is one septillion bytes, or 1024. It's 
bigger than a zettabyte, which only has 21 zeros. 
For you Star Wars fans, the yottabyte was named 
after Yoda.
ZIGBEE
A wireless mesh networking protocol popular 
in home automation. It provides a way for all the 
smart Things in your smart home to communicate 
with one another. It competes with Z-wave.
Z-WAVE
Another wireless mesh networking protocol 
popular in home automation. It competes with 
Zigbee.

A Non-Geek’s A-to-Z Guide to the Internet of Things
38
Internet of Things
SUMMARY
The term Internet of Things (IoT) may shift as we progress towards a 
more connected planet, but we can count on its ubiquity. Regardless of 
the label, IoT is changing life as we know it.
The 101 terms (and categories) in this A-to-Z guide have provided you 
with IoT’s building blocks. It’s a good start, but it’s just the beginning of a 
richer, and yes, quite complex discussion of what IoT means for you and 
your company. You’re not alone. SAS is here to help with that discussion. 
Learn how SAS has been working with companies to give context to the 
Internet of Things, allowing them to digitize their businesses, increase 
customer satisfaction, and improve the bottom line.
Regardless of 
the label, IoT is 
changing life 
as we know it.

© 2016-2017 SAS Institute. All rights reserved.
SAS Institute Inc.
100 SAS Campus Drive
Cary, NC 27513-2414
USA 
Phone: 919-677-8000
Fax: 919-677-4444
About the Author
TAMARA DULL is the Director of Emerging 
Technologies for SAS Best Practices, a 
thought leadership team at SAS Institute. 
Through key industry presentations, provoca-
tive articles and straightforward publications, 
she delivers a pragmatic perspective on big 
data, the Internet of Things, open source, 
privacy and cybersecurity. Tamara began her 
high-tech journey long before the internet 
was born, and has held both technical and 
management positions for multiple tech-
nology vendors and consultancies, including 
a non-proﬁt. She is listed in the IoT Institute’s 
50 Most Inﬂuential Women in IoT, as well 
as the Big Data 2016: Top 100 Inﬂuencers 
and Brands and Top 100 Big Data Experts to 
Follow in 2016 lists. 
SAS and all other SAS Institute Inc. product or service names are registered trademarks or trademarks of SAS 
Institute Inc. in the USA and other countries. ® indicates USA registration. Other brand and product names are
trademarks of their respective companies.  108846_G28182.0417

