A Practical Guide to
Designing 
for the Web
by Mark Boulton
Five 
Simple
Steps
www.allitebooks.com

A Practical Guide to Designing for the Web  
by Mark Boulton
Published in 2009 by Mark Boulton Design Ltd
Studio Two, The Coach House
Stanwell Road
Penarth
CF64 3EU
United Kingdom
On the web: www.ﬁvesimplesteps.co.uk
Please send errors to errata@ﬁvesimplesteps.co.uk
Publisher: Mark Boulton Design Ltd.
Printer: Qualitech Group, UK
Production Editor: Robert Mills
Interior Design: Mark Boulton, Nick Boulton, Benn Pearson
Cover Design: Nick Boulton
Copyright © 2009 Mark Boulton Design Ltd. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording or 
any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from 
the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-9561740-1-7
A catalogue record of this book is available from the British Library.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>
www.allitebooks.com

www.allitebooks.com

PART ONE
Getting Started
Designing for the web
The Job
Understanding Workﬂow
The Tools
Working for yourself
PART TWO
Research and Ideas
The Design Process
The Brief
Research
Ideas
Putting it together
Contents
3
9
13
17
27
41
51
57
63
69
iv
www.allitebooks.com

PART THREE
Typography
Anatomy
Classiﬁcation
Hierarchy
Typesetting
Printing the web
PART FOUR
Colour
The Colour Wheel
Hue, Saturation and Brightness
Colour Combinations and Mood
Designing without Colour
Colour and Brand
75
77
89
99
117
129
135
141
159
163
171
189
199
211
219
247 
PART FIVE
Layout
The Basics of Composition
Spatial Relationships
Grid Systems
Breaking the Grid
Bringing it all together
Conclusions
v
www.allitebooks.com

This little book is about graphic design. It’s a book about the 
craft of graphic design practice as applied to the web. It’s not a 
book about CSS or Usability. I may well touch on those subjects 
throughout, but only to support a point I’m making in relation 
to design. 
     Web design should use the principles of graphic design, but 
the topic of web design tends to focus on web standards, browser 
technology, user behaviour and backend development. Many web 
design books touch on some elements of graphic design, but they 
usually address the subject brieﬂy and superﬁcially. Even most 
graphic design books just show pretty pictures of other people’s 
work. There are not enough books outlining the principles, 
practicalities and tools of the graphic design trade. 
Who Should Read This Book?
A Practical Guide to Designing for the Web is for people who 
want to learn the basics of graphic design and apply them to 
their web designs—producing more eﬀective, polished, detailed 
and professional sites. It’s also helpful for graphic designers who 
want to brush up on the basics or learn how to integrate what 
they already know about design with the demands and quirks of 
designing speciﬁcally for the web. 
Some Assumptions
That although the book contains little HTML or CSS, it assumes 
that you have a working knowledge of web standards.
That you work in web design and development. Business owners 
and managers and others who want a well—designed site may 
also beneﬁt from reading this book, but the book is directed at the 
people who plan and create websites. 
That this book doesn’t aim to be a deﬁnitive guide to web design 
or graphic design. It simply presents some of the theory, tips and 
processes I’ve learnt in the past ﬁfteen years.
ß
ß
ß
vi
www.allitebooks.com

Credit
I never imagined I’d ever ﬁnish writing this book. Without the help 
of the following people, it simply would not have been possible: 
Carolyn Wood, whose enduring patience is only outweighed by 
her attention to detail. Carolyn helped shape this book out of a 
few disparate blog posts, and was instrumental in forming the 
structure of what you’re about to read. 
Robert Mills, Nick Boulton, and Benn Pearson at Mark Boulton 
Design for project management, typesetting and production.
Steven Teerlinnk for building the backend of the website.
The Britpack, in particular Andy Clarke, Simon Collison and 
Richard Rutter. Norm also gets a nod for never failing to mention 
the late book every time I spoke to him.
Cameron Moll for his support when he was releasing his own 
self—published book, Mobile Web Design.
The guys at Beanlogic for continually listening to me complain 
about the amount of work to do on this book whilst still trying to 
hold down the day job. 
Last, but certainly not least, to my wife, Emma, and daughter, Alys, 
for putting up with me as I spent hours and hours in front of 
a screen. 
vii
www.allitebooks.com

In the summer of 2005, just before the ﬁrst @media conference in 
London, I wrote an article on my blog called ‘Five Simple Steps to 
Better Typography’.  It was a ﬁve part series and presented some 
simple facts about typography that I felt needed to be addressed, 
particularly on the web.
     Within two months, the traﬃc on my site had doubled. In the 
following months I was Dugg twice, and Slashdotted once, which 
brought my server to its knees—along with a hefty hosting bill. You 
might say the articles had taken oﬀ somewhat.
     After working as a designer solely for the World Wide Web 
since 1997, I’ve been aware — sometimes painfully — of the amount 
of web ‘designers’ in the industry who haven’t been to design 
school. Don’t get me wrong, I’m not presenting some kind of design 
snobbery here, but the popularity of those articles two years ago 
highlighted the widespread desire for some basic graphic design 
tips and techniques that are not generally well known outside of 
design school.
     When I ﬁnished school, I attended college to study a two—year 
course in Art, then on to a Foundation course in Art and Design. 
The ﬁrst course after school was well within my comfort zone. We 
painted, and drew in charcoal, pen and ink. It was art, as I knew 
it. Foundation was a whole other ball game. I liken it to working in 
a kitchen, or starting in the army. First oﬀ, they tell you to forget 
everything you’ve done before. It’s a bit melodramatic, but they 
break you down, and rebuild you from strong foundations. 
     I went to university in Portsmouth in the UK. It’s a small 
university and had, at the time, one of only two undergraduate 
typography degrees oﬀered in the UK. Following a higher diploma 
in graphic design, I wanted to specialise in typography, as I felt 
there was still much more to learn than in the six months devoted 
viii
Introduction
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>
www.allitebooks.com

to the subject at university. In Portsmouth I was educated by two 
book designers approaching retirement. When I arrived, I wanted 
to learn about type, but on a Mac. I’d spent the summer as an 
intern at an advertising agency in Manchester, setting tables and 
forms on an old Quadra. But no, the course in Portsmouth was 
about the basics.
     In the ﬁrst few weeks, they had us drawing type and grids on 
a drawing board. I felt more like an architecture student than a 
typography student. Wasn’t I supposed to be working on a Mac? 
Surely that’s what designers need to know?
     In the past few years, I’ve begun to understand the simple 
lessons I was learning back then. To really get to grips with 
letterforms, you have to draw them. Even now, I loosely 
hand—render type in my sketchbook. If the type is a sans—serif, I 
hand—render a sans serif. If I plan on using Georgia, I hand—render 
a close approximation. 
     As design for the World Wide Web is maturing, we are seeing 
a growing appreciation and willingness to learn good graphic 
design practice. Studios such as Happy Cog, and Coudal Partners, 
whose adoption of simple, powerful graphic design as a central 
service of their oﬀerings, have been inﬂuential. Now, three 
years on, we see a constant chatter about grid systems and good 
typography. A few people are even art directing.
     Simple, sophisticated graphic design is making a shift from 
the oﬄine world to the web as more designers are ﬁnding that 
the tools which were formerly so constrictive — the browsers — 
now allow them to create the layouts that once were diﬃcult or 
impossible. The web is looking good, and will only get better.
     Originally devised over three years ago, and announced over 
two years ago, this book has moved far beyond the original idea 
of rehashing some old blog posts. Some articles are still included, 
but mostly, this book has been written from scratch, and is based 
on the premise that was central to those original blog posts: Five 
Simple Steps to Designing for the Web.
ix
www.allitebooks.com

1
Getting               
Started         
Designing for the web is diﬀerent than designing for any other 
medium. The breadth of skills required is sometimes daunting. 
The depth of experience required, seemingly unobtainable. Yet, 
the medium attracts designers from all spheres of design practice: 
from engineering and architecture, to product and graphic design. 
This chapter aims to provide a snapshot of the current state of the 
medium, and our role as practitioners working within it.
1
www.allitebooks.com

2
   1 
2

3
Chapter One
Designing for 
the web
I regularly receive emails from students 
and budding designers asking for my 
opinions and advice on how they can get 
started in this industry. 
‘How can I get my ﬁrst job?’, ‘What skills do you think I need to 
land my dream job?’, ‘If I want to be a web designer, what should I 
study at school?’. Where do you start? Maybe you’re a developer 
who needs to improve the quality of your design. Maybe you’re 
a print designer who wants a change. Firstly, before making a 
decision on what course to attend in school, or what software 
package you need to learn, I believe you need a solid grasp of 
what the web is today, where it came from and where it might 
be heading.
     Any medium can be deﬁned by its constraints. These 
constraints eﬀect how a designer is able to work within the 
medium. To push the boundaries, you need to know where the 
edges are.
     When I started designing for the web I was attracted by the 
immediacy of the medium. I was a print designer at the time, 
so this meant I was constrained by print run lead times and the 
ﬁnality of print. Once a job is printed, then that’s it, it’s printed, 
ﬁnalised, and in the world. With the web, I was able to change 
things. I was able to evolve the design beyond a deadline. I could 
tweak, ﬁddle and redesign — all to my hearts desire. The web 
created a revolution in graphic design. This was in 1997.
What followed was a tidal wave of creative professionals entering 
the online industry. From writers to graphic designers, we all 
found the new medium liberating and exciting. The mistake we 
all made was trying to make the web what it wasn’t. We tried 
imposing other media conventions on technology that it wasn’t 
designed for. A small example of this is HTML tables. HTML 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

4
data tables are supposed to be for tabular data but, with their 
cells, rows and columns, they spoke the same visual language of 
graphic designers who had been using Quark XPress for all those 
years. They were grids. Before you knew it, every site was made 
from nested tables and spacer gifs. 
The Changing Browser
The browsers are one of the windows by which we consume the 
web. Web browsers speak to web servers, using a protocol called 
HTTP, to get and display web pages. When the web ﬁrst began 
gathering pace as a medium, several browser manufacturers 
clambered for the market share. This lead to many of them 
developing proprietary technologies to handle diﬀerent media 
types. The result of this was a proliferation of non—standard code, 
which lead to increasing problems with interoperability. Through 
the tireless work of the Web Standards Project, and the W3C, this 
is all now looking a lot better. The browser manufacturers are 
listening to the designers and developers and, together with the 
W3C, are developing towards exciting browser developments, 
such as font—embedding. 
     Web browsers are probably the most common way of 
interacting, searching, playing and communicating on the web. 
But, increasingly, the web is being accessed by other programs 
and devices. The once—clear line between online and oﬄine is 
being continually blurred.
     Like many people I know, I use an RSS reader to keep track of 
the various news sites and blogs I read regularly. An RSS reader 
isn’t a web browser. It’s a program that takes RSS ‘feeds’ and 
then displays them as a list that you can scroll through and read 
articles item by item. RSS focusses on delivering content. All style 
and design is removed, and just the article text is displayed, along 
with any associated images. 
     People can of course use email to track their web activity. 
Through notiﬁcation emails — from blogs, discussion forums, web 
applications and services — you can engage with the web. You can 
track a discussion, reply and participate without ever opening a 
web browser.
     Through something called an API (Application Program 
Interface), another program can access data on the web, and then 
display it somewhere else. This brings the web to the desktop. A 
program I use regularly is Flickr Uploader. It’s a small plugin for 

5
iPhoto and allows me to upload images from my galleries to my 
Flickr account online. From there, it can be shared with family 
and friends. Flickr Uploader does this by using the Flickr API. By 
adding my account details, Flickr Uploader can ‘talk’ to Flickr, 
make sure it’s uploading the images in the right place, give them 
a title and any other meta data, and perform the upload. Again, I 
haven’t opened my web browser to do this.
     Up to now, I’ve only been talking about accessing the web 
via a computer. Of course, there are several other channels for 
the delivery of web content — from mobile phones and PDAs to 
televisions and game consoles.
     The iPhone is of particular interest to me (mostly because I own 
one). Not only is the browser that ships with the iPhone a fully—
ﬂedged, fully—featured web browser, but there are an increasing 
number of iPhone applications that use the web. For example, 
the Facebook application is so good, I prefer using it to the web 
browser version. Likewise, with Twitter clients. On my iMac, I 
use Twitteriﬁc — an OS X application — and on my iPhone I use 
TwitterFon. I hardly ever use a web browser to log in to Twitter.
     What I’m trying to illustrate here is the web isn’t just limited 
to Internet Explorer or Firefox. From mobile devices to your 
Playstation 3, the web is everywhere.
The Changing User
Ten years ago, a lot of people used the web, but the skew was 
towards a younger, male, technically—savvy audience. Five years 
later, and adoption had shot through the roof. All sorts of people 
were using the web to buy gifts or book holiday tickets. Blogging 
was born, and with it a fundamental change in journalism and 
how people read news on the web. Now, ﬁve years later, my mum 
is using Facebook. Doesn’t that say it all? The web has changed 
from a publishing medium, to one of tools and applications that 
enrich people’s lives. The audience is now massive and broad—
reaching. The technology is getting increasingly pervasive. It’s all 
incredibly exciting! But, with this rapid change, how can we be 
sure the audience we’re designing for today has the same desires, 
needs and motivations as the audience of six months ago? 
     The role of research in web design is more important now than 
ever. By speaking to the potential users of a site and by gathering 
data on their behaviour, we can then design to their needs. We 
cannot assume that all users are the same. Just because we, as 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

6
designers, think a design is appropriate to a given audience, 
doesn’t mean it is. The audience is changing, and we have to 
keep up.
The Changing Designer
The web moves fast. Really fast. What is new today, will be a 
convention in six months time. To keep up, a designer not only has 
to be at the fore—front of current trends and conventions, but also 
has to be a user of the products and services that deﬁne 
those conventions.
     Take Twitter for example. Twitter is a web application that lets 
you tell other people — who you ‘follow’, and who ‘follow’ you — 
what you are doing. In Twitter’s own words:
‘Twitter is a service for friends, family, and co—workers to 
communicate and stay connected through the exchange of quick, 
frequent answers to one simple question: what are you doing?’
     When Twitter ﬁrst arrived, in 2006/07, I really didn’t get it. I 
had friends I’d keep in contact with via email, and I had a blog for 
my own expression. Why did I need to use a service like Twitter? 
For a long time, I didn’t use Twitter in favour of using services 
I was familiar with. Then something started to happen in the 
bloggersphere — everyone went quiet. ‘Weird’, I thought. ‘Maybe 
they were all busy. That’s it.’ Then, over time, respected designers 
and developers were redesigning their blogs to incorporate 
postings from these web services and products: Twitter, Flickr, 
Delicious links, You Tube, Vimeo etc. The blog design became a 
reﬂection of the designers ‘lifestream’. And, I was missing out on 
a big discussion. The interesting thing to note is that, recently, 
I’ve been working on projects for clients who also want to start 
incorporating these services. Design conventions are being born, 
maturing online, and now business is starting to see the beneﬁt. 
Now, if I wasn’t using these products or services, if I wasn’t a 
consumer of the web, I’d be blind to what was possible. It’s not 
enough to rest on your laurels. If you’re a web designer, you need 
to be a web consumer.
     I mentioned earlier that it’s diﬃcult to keep up sometimes. 
A web designer’s role seems to encompass everything from 
information architecture, and user experience design, up to 
front—end development — such as CSS, HTML. Throw in a bit of 
JavaScript, and a sprinkling of other scripting languages such 
as PHP, and you get an idea of how broad a web designer’s job 

7
could be. It wasn’t so long ago that every job advertisement for a 
web designer required most of what I mentioned. I think — well, I 
hope — that those days are behind us. Modern web design is just 
too broad a discipline to be moderately good at everything. In fact, 
I personally wouldn’t hire anyone who claimed to do it all — Jack 
of all trades, Master of none. The web design profession is now 
splintering into specialisms and this is a very good thing.
Web designers need to be specialists. 
Being specialist is diﬃcult when you’re a freelancer, or work in a 
small company. Your boss may ask you to skill up in other ﬁelds 
and diversify. The desire to learn something new can take you 
spinning oﬀ into new directions. But, in the midst of all this, don’t 
lose sight of what your core oﬀering as a designer should be. Mine, 
for example, could be layout. With my experience, traditional 
background and my leaning towards typographic design, clients 
come to me because of that. I have other skills on the periphery — 
such as knowing how to hand—write HTML and CSS, and project 
management — but my primary ‘selling point’ as a designer, would 
be my knowledge and practice of graphic design layout as applied 
to the modern web. To lose sight of that would be dangerous — both 
in terms of running a business, but also in my continued growth of 
a designer. 
     A web designer has to be adaptable. Willing to learn, and ready 
to embrace change. A web designer has to be willing to shed 
previously high—held design sensibilities and start from scratch. 
They have to accept, challenge and manipulate the constraints of 
the web. They must do all of this whilst keeping one eye ﬁrmly on 
their own personal design journey; where they’ve come from, and 
where they’re going. 
     All of that is why I love the web. If you give it chance, it’s an 
enriching design medium, and one from which many 
never return.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

8

9
Chapter Two
The Job
Working for an Agency
I started out designing for the web whilst working for a small 
agency in Manchester in the UK. It was 1997, the web was 
gathering pace, and many small communications studios were 
dabbling — keen to take advantage of a new medium to ‘sell’ 
to clients. 
     Like me, many designers naturally gravitate towards working 
in design agencies. Providing a wide variety of work, the smaller 
agencies oﬀer the designer an opportunity to spread their creative 
wings. The larger agencies oﬀer the big accounts. With one, you 
get to make big decisions, the other, you make decisions for big 
clients — you’re very much a cog in a bigger machine. I’ve worked 
in both environments, for big agencies and small, and being a 
designer is diﬀerent in each.
A big ﬁsh in a little pond
Being a designer in a small company is fun. You get to see projects 
through from start to ﬁnish and you’re generally involved in all 
aspects of the design process — from initial concepts through to 
the ﬁnished product. But, with that added breadth in the role, 
comes more involvement in other parts of the business. You 
should be willing to get stuck in to all sorts of tasks. In my ﬁrst job, 
I was making tea, ordering stationery, phoning couriers, raising 
invoices etc. I was doing all of this, in addition to my design work. 
A little ﬁsh in a big pond
I’ve also worked in a large agency, AGENCY.COM — a large, 
US—based agency of over 500 staﬀ. At the time (1999 — 2001), 
I worked on accounts for big blue—chip clients such as British 
Airways and Intel. I ended up being the Senior Art Director on the 
redesign of the One 2 One website (now T—Mobile). And during 
that time, not once did I meet a client face to face. This is the single, 
biggest diﬀerence between a large and small agency that has a 
direct relationship to the work you do every day. Feedback comes 
third hand from project managers. You have to second—guess 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

10
the creative brief. You are provided with signed oﬀ, prescriptive 
wireframes that detail every element on the given design — 
actually leaving little room for any design problem solving. You 
are a cog in a machine. A worker bee.
     For some designers, this is great. The pay—oﬀ of working on 
such accounts far outweighs the disadvantages and frustrations of 
dealing with account executives, (no oﬀence to account executives 
intended), and invisible clients. For me, I’m far happier in a 
working environment where I can make a diﬀerence, and that 
means having contact with my clients.
The In—House Designer
Time with Auntie
Following my stint in London working at Agency.com, my wife and 
I decided that we’d had enough of the big city and moved to Wales 
where we both worked at the BBC in Cardiﬀ. It took me a while 
to get used to it, but working client—side — inside a company or 
organisation — is a whole diﬀerent kettle of ﬁsh.
     I was a member of a small design team, in the end, just two 
of us would work on the English and Welsh language output 
of BBC Wales, in addition to some projects for the wider BBC 
network. There was a lot to do for just two of us. I arrived to the 
new job, ready to apply what I’d learnt in a busy, global design 
agency. On my ﬁrst day, I was given mountains of documentation 
to read — processes, editorial guidelines, technical guidelines, 
design guidelines, brand documentation, the list went on and on. 
Immediately I felt as if the brakes had been applied. Hard.
Diﬀerent pace, diﬀerent mindset
I think it took about six months to get used to the change in pace. 
That was one thing. The other, and most important, change is one 
of projects and products. As a designer in an agency you become 
very good at moving from one project to another and from one 
client to another. You begin to relish the challenge of solving the 
next problem presented by a client. You thrive on a variety of 
clients; from telecoms to manufacturing, from startups to blue chip 
organisations. You don’t like working on the same project for very 
long, as you feel yourself getting stale. But working in—house is 
all about working on the same project. Sure, you can get smaller 
projects that make up a whole, but generally you have one client; 
the company you work for.

11
At the BBC, I worked on one project for over two years. During that 
time, there were a lot of smaller projects under that larger project 
umbrella, but basically, it was the same thing. This required a 
shift in thinking. Instead of focussing on the next project to come 
through the door, I began to focus on the ‘product’, and improving 
it through incremental change with the rest of my team. This 
represented more of a move towards product development than 
web design. 
     Following my time at the BBC, I feel every designer should, if 
they can, spend some time working in—house. It has certainly 
changed the way I approach design.
‘I’m not a Designer’
This book isn’t just for designers. I’m hoping that some of you will 
be developers, project managers or journalists. How is design part 
of your job? Maybe you work in—house and don’t have a dedicated 
designer available to work with you. Maybe you run your own 
website and do everything from the design to the Wordpress 
theme. 
     I’ve worked with loads of great, talented developers over the 
years. I’ve been fortunate to sit next to them, rather than sitting 
next to designers, and as a result have learnt a lot by osmosis. 
Most of those developers feel they struggle with the practicalities 
of design; the craft of design. Sure, they’re incredible problem 
solvers, they can write complex software that solves complex 
problems in elegant ways. But when it comes to knowing what 
colour to use, many of them were stumped. I’m hoping this is 
where this book will be helpful. Graphic design isn’t magic. 
Making typeface choices, knowing what tertiary colour to use 
with green or how to design a ﬁve column grid system. These are 
all tools. There are general rules you can follow.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>
www.allitebooks.com

12

13
Chapter Three
Understanding 
Workﬂow
I’m going to talk about the design process a bit later on in this 
book, but there are certain parts of the process that generally 
fall outside a designer’s role, stuﬀ that happens during a project 
lifecycle that’s useful to know about.
One Mockup or Many?
About eight years ago, I’d moved to Cardiﬀ from London, and 
worked in a company that predominantly produced design for 
print. I was part of an expanding web team that produced web 
sites for clients who came to the agency for print work. It was 
assumed that web design followed the same process as print 
design. So, the agency would, as part of their pitch for the work, 
produce speculative designs and present them. This included 
designs for the web. Then, upon winning the work, we would 
generally go back a step and then produce three diﬀerent design 
directions for the client to pick their preferred route. This was bad 
for the client, and bad for the agency.
     When designers go through that process, they will always 
produce a preferred design. They will produce a design that they 
feel best solves the problem. Any other design produced is just 
playing lip—service to the process and nothing more. For many 
years now, following a brief from a client, I’ve been producing one 
design and then iterating and amending to improve it. This has 
several advantages:
No time is wasted. The process I described would see lots of 
wasted time — ﬁrst the speculative work, and then the other two 
design directions.
More involvement and understanding from the client. The client 
is involved earlier in the process. Working iteratively means more 
contact with them and a shared direction.
If the design is inappropriate, you can start again without too 
much time and money being wasted on other design directions.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
ß
ß
ß

14
Design Meets Development
Those of you who work in-house, or even within large agencies, 
will be well aware of the tensions between designers and 
developers. In part, these tensions have been created by a lack 
of understanding by designers early on in the web’s history. As 
I mentioned in earlier chapters, designers thought they could 
apply print-based design methods and characteristics to web 
design. We all thought it was ﬁne, but we didn’t have to build 
the sites. Developers would receive the designs and, at the time, 
despair at the thought of trying to interpret the layouts and create 
HTML pages. It wasn’t until I sat next to a developer for over two 
years that I began to appreciate the value in communicating with 
developers as much as possible through the design process. 
     Corporations spend thousands and thousands of pounds 
every year trying to achieve eﬃciency in departments where, 
in my opinion, a simple seating change would suﬃce. If you’re 
a designer working in a large agency, do yourself a favour, and 
don’t sit next to other designers. Likewise, if you’re a developer, 
or project manager, sit next to your project team members, not 
your discipline peers. In two companies that I’ve worked, we did 
this. And I continue to share a studio with a web development 
company. Even if you don’t work on projects directly, the shared 
interests and passions for the web are invaluable at raising the 
understanding of the two diﬀerent aspects of web design 
and development.
The Perfect Design Methodology
There isn’t one. There, I’ve said it. In all of the agencies I’ve 
worked, each had their own way of doing things. In the BBC, we 
tried a few diﬀerent methodologies, such as Agile and SCRUM, but 
I’m coming round to the idea that applying a blanket process to 
every project you work on just doesn’t work.
     In a large agency, it’s important that everyone — from 
client services, to strategy — understand the web design and 
development process that is being adopted. That way, when they 
speak to the client, the client will understand. Having a strong, 
transparent process is always helpful for clients, too — it puts 
them at ease. However, for all of this eﬃciency, transparency and 
project management rigor, a rigid process is dangerous for any 
designer or agency.

15
I take a simple view on this. Every design problem is diﬀerent, 
so how can every approach to solve the problem be the same? A 
cookie-cutter approach to web design and development is about 
maximising proﬁt and eﬃciency with minimal innovative and 
original thinking or problem solving. For example, an architect 
cannot apply the same design and building process to every 
building. Various factors determine the approach, from the client’s 
wishes, the local government regulations to the constraints of the 
building materials. All of this shapes the process and the same 
can be said for web design. An example of this would be a recent 
process my studio worked on, the Drupal.org redesign. 
     The Drupal.org website is primarily a community site 
representing an ecosystem surrounding the open source content 
management system, Drupal. Our job was to redesign it. The new 
Drupal.org would be built and updated by the very community 
that created it, and to do that, we needed to engage with them in 
a completely diﬀerent way. We couldn’t adopt a traditional design 
approach. We needed to bake the community involvement into 
the process from the very beginning. We did this through 
many channels:
Twitter accounts
Flickr — for sharing wireframes, logo ideas, and site maps
Blogs — both mine (markboulton.co.uk), and Leisa Reichelt’s, the user 
experience design consultant on the project, (disambiguity.com)
Online card sorts
Remote usability testing
The Drupal.org website
IRC
and a few more…
With this continued involvement from the community, along with 
iterative design development in the form of weekly prototype 
releases, there is just no way we could adopt a traditional agency 
production model. It would have been a disaster and the project 
would have failed. In this instance, the project deﬁned the process 
— we were just along for the ride!
     Understanding web design and development workﬂow is as 
much about understanding the design problem as anything else. 
Being adaptable to new approaches, to question and revise your 
approach is as much a part of web design as creating layouts in 
Photoshop or HTML.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

16

17
Chapter Four
The Tools
Just like a carpenter, a designer will have 
his favourite tools. 
Just like a carpenter, diﬀerent designers have diﬀerent tool 
preferences. One will like a claw hammer, the other, Photoshop! 
I, for example, prefer Adobe Photoshop over Adobe Fireworks 
for creating layouts. I prefer sticky notes and layout pads over 
Omnigraﬄe for creating wireframes. I prefer Panic’s Coda over 
Textmate for writing my HTML and CSS. The designer’s toolbox 
could be rammed full of diﬀerent applications to suit diﬀerent 
needs. In fact, many designers continue to search for the perfect 
application to suit a particular job. What follows in this chapter are 
the tools I prefer. There is no right or wrong, best or worse — these 
are just the tools that I have found suit me best.
Pen and Paper
If there’s one thing I can be sure of, I’d be completely and utterly 
lost without a pen and a sketchbook at arms reach. Even now as I 
type this, I can see three sketchbooks on my desk. You don’t need 
a Moleskine or anything fancy — any sketchbook will do. I often 
keep several going at a time:
A Moleskine esque sketchbook — A5 size, this one goes with 
me everywhere.
An A4 lined notepad. This lives on my desk at work — mostly for 
writing ideas down or that kind of thing.
An A3 layout pad — You can buy these in most art and design supply 
shops. The paper is thin, which makes tracing easy. I tend to do most 
of my wireframing and large scale sketching on this pad.
Little A6 book — This one stays in my coat pocket. Perfect for jotting 
down those ideas whenever they may occur.
Now, I’m fussy when it comes to pens. I can’t stand ordinary, cheap 
ball—point pens, (they leak), or fountain pens, (they leak too). For a 
while now I’ve used two types of pen: a Sharpie Twin Tip, (black), 
and a Pilot V—5 Hi Techpoint. The Sharpie has a thick nib, the Pilot 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
ß
ß
ß
ß

18
a small nib. They don’t leak, and, if you can stand the smell of the 
Sharpie, they last for ages.
Browsers 
One of the challenges of designing for the web is not knowing the 
user’s browsing experience. They could be viewing your carefully 
crafted design in the latest version of Firefox, or, Internet Explorer 
5. There are many browsers for the users to choose from, all with 
multiple versions, each slightly better than the previous. I’m going 
to highlight a few here, that I believe are the top browsers, (by 
usage), in the world today.
Internet Explorer
The most ubiquitous browser on the planet, totaling over 68% of 
the browser market share in 2008 (for versions 4 — 8)*  shipped 
with the Windows operating system, Internet Explorer has been 
responsible for more wasted development hours, and lost sleep 
and hair, than perhaps any other browser in the web’s relatively 
short history. Up until version 6, Internet Explorer got a lot 
wrong, particularly with CSS, that made designing for it a bit of 
a nightmare. This perpetuated the ‘browser sniﬃng’ — where a 
script in the web page detects what browser the user is viewing 
the site on, and a diﬀerent stylesheet is served — that should’ve 
died with Netscape 4. Then, along came version 7, and things got 
a lot better.
     Internet Explorer 7 is a lot easier to develop CSS for. It renders 
styles similarly to its nearest rival, Firefox.
* Source: Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers

19
Mozilla Firefox
Firefox is a free, open—source browser managed by the Mozilla 
Corporation. In its relatively short life, it has cornered a 
remarkable 21.34% of the market share. It has done this by being 
available on various platforms — from Mac OS X and Windows, 
to Linux and other Linux derivatives — and also its unwavering 
support of Web Standards, and speed of rendering.
     Firefox is considered by many designers as their browser of 
choice — particularly when authoring and testing HTML and CSS. 
Generally, it gets it right. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
* Source: Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Usage_share_of_web_browsers

20
Safari
Safari is Apple’s proprietary browser available on Windows, OS X, 
iPhone and iPod touch, (Mobile Safari).

21
Opera
Opera is a browser developed by the Opera Software company. It 
actually does a heap more than just web browsing. You can chat 
on IRC (Internet Relay Chat), download BitTorrent ﬁles or read 
RSS feeds.
Browser tools and add—ons
Firefox extensions
Web Developer Toolbar is a Firefox add—on that adds a menu and 
toolbar to the browser to help web designers and developers. It 
includes some fantastic functionality such as being able to turn on 
and oﬀ styles, use user stylesheets and more. 
     Firebug is an amazing addition to Firefox. It adds an incredible 
array of tools to help web design and development whilst you 
browse around the web. From tweaking CSS on-the-ﬂy, to 
inspecting DOM elements, it has pretty much everything you 
should need.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>
www.allitebooks.com

22
Bookmarklets
XRAY http://www.westciv.com/xray/
XRAY is free bookmarklet that ‘lets you see the box model in 
action’. It’s a piece of cake to use. Navigate to the page you want 
to ‘XRAY’, click the bookmarklet and a little ﬂoating window will 
appear. Now, clicking any element in the browser will review 
its size, relative position, ID and class, together with any CSS 
attributes that have been applied to it. It’s the perfect companion 
when bug—ﬁxing CSS.
Desktop Software
When it comes to moving pixels around on screen, I only use a 
handful of tools that I’ve used for years. I’ve been using Apple 
Macs for ﬁfteen years now, so these tools are predominantly for 
Apple Macs — although the Adobe tools, and Dropbox, is cross-
platform. I keep trying new tools as they come on the market, but 
these old favourites are never more than a click away. 
Adobe Photoshop
Photoshop has been around as long as I’ve been using Apple 
Macs. I think the ﬁrst version I used was version two. Let’s put it 
this way, I’ve been using Photoshop long enough to remember 
what a big deal it was when Adobe introduced Layers into version 

23
three. I primarily use Photoshop for layout. The introduction of 
editable text, and functionality like the Save For Web option, made 
designing for the web a lot easier than it used to be. Years ago, 
I would have sliced images from Photoshop, creating my HTML 
from the slices. Nowadays, I use Photoshop purely as a layout tool 
before moving onto creating the layout from scratch in HTML 
and CSS. It has its quirks, for sure. Its becoming increasingly 
bloated as Adobe tries to apply the product to a broad industry. 
It’s increasingly unstable as a result — not to mention its uncanny 
ability to turn the cursor into a spinning beach ball at the drop of 
a hat. But, all that said, I couldn’t bring myself to use anything else. 
With over ﬁfteen years of using it, for me, using Photoshop is like 
wearing that old, battered pair of slippers. You know you should 
probably replace them, but try as you might, you can’t bring 
yourself to do it.
http://www.adobe.com/photoshop
Adobe Illustrator
Illustrator is another software package I’ve used for a long time, 
almost as long as Photoshop. It can be used to create incredibly 
complex illustrations, or, as a website layout tool. I don’t use it for 
layout, but that is more of a habitual thing, rather than a deﬁciency 
in the software. I use Illustrator for creating logotypes and logos, 
illustrations and icons. Basically, any vector artwork. 
http://www.adobe.com/illustrator
Adobe Fireworks
Fireworks is worth a mention. Fireworks is aimed at web 
professionals — it’s designed around our needs. For example, 
the latest version, CS4, has a primary selling point of being 
able to convert to standards-compliant HTML and CSS for 
‘Rapid Prototyping’. I used to use Fireworks for a lot of my web 
production needs when it ﬁrst came out in 1999, (when it was 
Macromedia Fireworks). Since Photoshop started to integrate 
more web-focussed features, I’ve never gone back to using 
Fireworks, even though I know a lot of its optimisation is more 
sophisticated. Its workﬂow seems to be much improved, and 
the feature set looks great. But, I keep giving it a try for a day 
or so, only to go back to what I’m more productive with. To 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

24
me, Fireworks feels like a new pair of slippers; uncomfortable, 
diﬀerent and unfamiliar. 
http://www.adobe.com/ﬁreworks
HTML editors
I used to let Dreamweaver create my HTML. That was when I 
didn’t understand, or want to understand the inner workings 
of HTML. I thought that was a developer’s job, not mine. Upon 
seeing the error of my ways, I started using BBEdit by Bare 
Bones Software. BBEdit is now on version 9 and is still a superb 
text editor for the Apple Mac. It allows the creation of ‘sites’ and 
auto-complete — amongst other features — and proved to be a 
perfect replacement for Dreamweaver. I used that until Coda, 
from software company, Panic, was released a couple of years 
ago. Coda was like a breath of fresh air. Whereas BBEdit had 
grown up from Mac OS System 9, and never really felt like a 
native Apple Mac application, Coda felt every much like a native 
application. The latest version includes a Terminal right there in 
the application, and SVN, (Subversion), integration. It’s simply a 
fantastic text editor.
http://www.adobe.com/dreamweaver
http://www.barebones.com/products/bbedit
http://www.panic.com/coda/
Other tools 
I use two other applications all the time. For all FTP, SFTP, (Secure 
FTP), and Amazon S3 transfers, I use Transmit, again by software 
company Panic. I also use a relatively new software product called 
Dropbox. Dropbox is simply fantastic. It’s free, for 2GB of online 
storage. It creates a folder in your home directory called ‘Dropbox’, 
and everything that you put in there is synced and uploaded to 
the web. Then, if you have Dropbox installed on another computer, 
you can have access to it. Dropbox comes into its own when 
you use it as part of a team’s workﬂow as we’ve been trialing 
recently at Mark Boulton Design. We have a couple of employees 
and contractors working throughout the UK and Europe. To 
streamline the sharing of documentation, we use a company-wide 
shared Dropbox. This simple addition has probably increased 
productivity ten-fold over the past three months of continued use. 
Another worthwhile mention for Dropbox is that there is version 

25
control included. So, if you accidently delete a ﬁle, you can go back 
through history and retrieve it. And it’s free, did I mention that?
http://www.panic.com/transmit/
https://www.getdropbox.com/home
In this part so far, I’ve talked about the various tools I use, some 
factors that inﬂuence design workﬂow, and the various roles a 
designer takes within large and small organisations. But many 
designers either start oﬀ working by themselves, or, like me, 
end up there after several years of working for ‘The Man’. In 
the next chapter, I’m going to outline the steps and discuss the 
considerations one has to consider if you are planning on working 
for yourself.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

26

27
Chapter Five
Working for yourself
So you want to work for yourself? And 
why not. 
You can dictate your own hours, have the freedom to take time oﬀ 
when you want it without getting into trouble from the boss; you 
can do what you want to do, when you want to do it. At least, that’s 
what I thought when I started working for myself a year ago. I 
couldn’t have been more wrong.
     The freedom of being in control is terrifying. The pressure of 
knowing it really is down to you whether you succeed or fail can 
weigh heavy.
     Where I live almost 400 people a week start their own business. 
Everybody is diﬀerent and end up giving it a go for a variety of 
reasons. However, most of these people share common ground. 
Things that they need to think about when planning to go it alone.
     As I said, I’ve only been my own boss for a couple of years now, 
so I wouldn’t call myself an expert on this. I can however tell you 
my story, and the mistakes I made along the way. This section is 
a bit longer than the previous as, when I was ﬁrst contemplating 
going freelance, I had so many questions and practical advice was 
lacking. Also, this section speciﬁcally deals with UK company and 
Tax laws, but I’m sure, in your country, the rules are similar and 
can be easily applied. Remember, I’m no lawyer!
Why do it in the ﬁrst place?
Starting a business is one of the most challenging, but rewarding, 
things you can do. The reason most people never end up doing 
it, although I’m sure many would love to, is because they think it 
takes luck, a clever idea or just knowing the right people. That’s 
not true. It’s about you.
     Maybe you have a great idea that you just can’t keep a secret 
anymore. Maybe a colleague has approached you to setup a 
business with them on the back of a contract they’ve just secured. 
Maybe you just hate your job and wish you were your own boss. 
The catalyst is diﬀerent for everyone. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

28
For many people, including myself, they’ve found their career 
takes a certain path where self—employment is the next natural 
progression. I was working full—time at the BBC as a designer 
when my enquiries to do freelance work reached such a peak that 
I was doing two jobs. At that point, one of them had to go before my 
wife did!
     Whatever the reason to set up business, it’s a personal one that 
only you can make.
Do you need a business plan?
A Business Plan is just that; a plan about your business. It’s used to 
look ahead, allocate resources, focus on key points, and prepare 
for problems and opportunities. It doesn’t need to be a scary 
document that you take months to write. However, some banks, 
investors, or other funding bodies will insist on a well—written, 
concise Business Plan on which to base their decisions, so in that 
sense, it’s a very important document.
Executive Summary: Write this last. It’s the summary of the 
document. 
Company Description: This details how and when the company 
was formed. 
Product or Service: Describe what you’re selling. 
Market Analysis: You need to know your market. Establish the 
need for your product and why people need it. 
Strategy and Implementation: Be speciﬁc. Investors love this stuﬀ. 
They need to know you have a clear plan of attack. 
Management Team: Include backgrounds of key members of 
the team. 
Financial Plan: Include a proﬁt and loss account, cash ﬂow 
breakdown and a balance sheet. 
Make no mistake, writing a business plan can be a daunting 
prospect, but it doesn’t have to be great the ﬁrst time around. A 
business plan should be revised throughout the business’ lifetime 
— it’s not just for startup businesses. I’ve just gone through my third 
draft in my ﬁrst year of business.
Get help
This is perhaps the most important step in setting up your own 
business. You will realise you can’t do it on your own. You will 
need good advice from the following people:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

29
An accountant: Preferably a small business specialist. 
A bank manager: All new businesses should be allocated a small 
business specialist from their chosen bank. 
A ﬁnancial advisor: You will need the advice of somebody who 
can assist in the ﬁnancial direction of the company. 
The Government: Yes, the government can help. 
Out of all of these, I’d advise you spend the most time trying to ﬁnd 
a really, really good accountant. Many business owners will tell 
you that a good one is worth their weight in gold. In addition to the 
usual accounts stuﬀ they can give you invaluable advice.
The diﬀerent kinds of ‘company’
To register as self—employed in the UK, you have to register with 
the Inland Revenue as one of several company types:
Sole trader
Being a sole trader is the easiest way to run a business, and does 
not involve paying any registration fees. The downsides are you 
are personally liable for any debts that your business incurs and, 
if you do well, you could be paying high income tax.
A Partnership
A partnership is like two or more Sole Traders working together. 
You share the proﬁts, but also the debt.
A Limited Liability Partnership (LLP)
An LLP is similar to a Partnership. The only diﬀerence is the 
liability, or debt for example, is limited to investment in 
the company.
A Limited-liability Company
Limited Companies are separate legal entities. This means the 
company’s ﬁnances are separate from the personal ﬁnances of 
their owners.
Franchises
A franchise is like a license to an existing successful business.
Social enterprises
This one probably doesn’t apply to web development. According 
to Business Link, Social enterprises are ‘businesses distinguished 
by their social aims.’ There are many diﬀerent types of social 
enterprises, including community development trusts, housing 
1.
2.
3.
4.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

30
associations, worker—owned co—operatives and leisure centres.’
     The choice of company is something you must do in order to 
pay your taxes. Speak to your accountant about which will suit 
your needs better.
How to ﬁnance yourself
Before I made the leap into full—time self—employment, I read a 
lot of articles which said I’d need six months salary in the bank 
before I went out on my own. Although that is good advice, 
depending on your salary, that is quite a hefty chunk of cash that 
will be hard to save.
     Like most people, I didn’t have that sort of money knocking 
about so I had to have a close look at cash ﬂow over the ﬁrst few 
months of business to ensure I could pay myself. This cash came 
from several sources.
Money in the bank.
I did have some money in the bank. Not a huge amount, but I 
had some. 
Contracts. 
I had a number of contracts signed and ready to go when I went on 
my own. These proved invaluable in kick—starting my cash ﬂow. 
Funding.
There are many funding options available. Grants, loans and 
private investment. All of them except grants require you to pay 
them back though, and for that you need a good business plan 
and an idea of how you’re going to pay them back. Grants and 
small business loans are available from local government bodies 
for example. I’d advise making an appointment with your local 
Business Link to discuss your options. 
The Bank.
Get an overdraft facility. Mostly, even for limited companies, 
these will have to be personally guaranteed — which means if you 
default on paying it back then you’re personally liable — but they 
can provide a vital buﬀer for cash ﬂow in those early days.
Charge up—front.
When you get a contract in, especially if it’s for ﬁxed cost, then 
charge a percentage up—front. This will help with the cash ﬂow. 
If you can’t charge up—front, then make sure you charge monthly. 
Again, it will keep the cash ﬂow nice and happy. 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

31
Basic accounting
What is Cash Flow?
Cash Flow is the life blood of your new company. It’s the ebb and 
ﬂow of cash coming in and going out. The aim is to have a positive 
cash ﬂow, so there is more cash coming in than there is going out 
once you deduct all your overheads.
     You will also need to forecast your cash ﬂow. This is still one of 
the most sobering things I have to do regularly because it clearly 
shows the current state of your business. Every month I review my 
cash ﬂow and I forecast for three months, and for six. I make a list 
of all the invoices that need to be sent in those two time periods 
and make sure I’m hitting my monthly and quarterly cash ﬂow 
targets. Like I say, it can be scary at times.
Tax
There are two types of tax: Income Tax and Corporation Tax. For 
Sole Traders, Partnerships and LLPs, you will be charged income 
tax on your proﬁts. That’s important, so I’ll say it again. You’ll only 
be taxed on your proﬁts. Things like equipment costs, rent, phone 
and other oﬃce expenses are deducted from this.
     Limited companies are charged Corporation Tax on their 
proﬁts. The employees of that company are charged income tax 
on their income. As with a Sole Trader etc. Limited Companies are 
only taxed on their proﬁts.
VAT
At the time of publication if your business earns £64,000 or more 
in a ﬁnancial year, you have to register for VAT. If you think you 
might hit that target during the year, you can voluntarily register 
before hand.
     Being VAT registered means you have to charge your 
customers for VAT on top of your services. Currently in the UK, 
VAT is 15%. You’re in eﬀect collecting taxes for your government. 
Nice aren’t you? One of the advantages of being VAT registered 
is that you can claim VAT back on purchases for your business, 
so for example if you buy a new computer, you can claim the VAT 
back from that purchase.
     All this VAT gets added up and you have to pay the government 
every quarter.
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
www.allitebooks.com

32
For more information about your obligations as a business to pay 
your taxes, go to the Inland Revenue website. There are some 
great tools on here to help you — you can even ﬁle your tax 
return online.
Establishing a customer base
Prior to starting my own business, I worked full time. As a 
designer, or developer, you will probably get enquiries to do 
freelance work in your spare time. This is the time to start 
building up your customer base whilst you still have the security 
of a full—time job. Sure, it means burning the candle at both 
ends, but it does ensure a smoother transition from employed to 
self—employed.
Schmoozing
A good way to drum up business is to network. This can be done 
traditionally, such as Business Club lunches and events organised 
by your local authority. One of the most eﬀective ways of getting 
your face known is by attending the many web conferences, 
workshops and meetups going on throughout the world. From 
learning events such as An Event Apart and Web Directions North 
to the larger conferences such as SXSW and IA Summit, they all 
provide a great platform to meet people in the industry who may 
require your services.
Contribute and Interact with your market
If you’re a design studio that designs websites but has a strong 
focus on User Experience design, write a company blog about that 
subject. If you write interesting content, and give it away free, then 
traﬃc to the site will increase as will your page rank in Google. 
This means that if a potential client searches for User Experience, 
they will get your site in their search results and there is a clear 
path into your site from some quality content.
     Giving a little quality content away for nothing may make the 
diﬀerence in landing that next big project.
Making the switch from being employed to self—
employed
The power of the Day Job
If you’re employed, but planning to go freelance, then keep your 
day job for a while. Secure some freelance projects to work on 
in your spare time, but use the cash that generates as a buﬀer 

33
for when you go it alone. Make sure the two worlds don’t collide 
though. Keep your boss happy in work, but now is the time to be 
a bit of a jobsworth. Get in on time, leave on time, take an hour 
for lunch — do everything you can to maximise the time you have 
available to work on the freelance projects.
A smooth transition
Working two jobs is hard, and you won’t be able to keep it up for 
long. This stage in starting up your business is perhaps one of the 
most diﬃcult. The aim is to ensure a smooth transition from being 
employed to self—employed. You will need some cash in the bank 
and a few contracts for your ﬁrst couple of months of being on 
your own. The hard thing is keeping your current boss happy in 
the process. It’s not easy.
     There are a number of great job boards that advertise 
design and development projects regularly. The two I’ve used 
successfully in the past to drum up some business are the 
37Signals Job Board, and Cameron Moll’s Authentic Jobs.
How to achieve long term success
Keep one eye on the future
Forecasting business can be quite diﬃcult. How will cash ﬂow look 
in three months time? Are you saving enough money for the end of 
year tax bill? To succeed in business I think you need one eye on 
the present and one eye ﬁxed ﬁrmly on the future. The short—term 
future. Whilst it’s great to have dreams and aspirations for your 
new business, that shouldn’t be at the expense of ensuring you 
have enough work coming in over the next six months.
Customer service
Remember if you’re a designer or developer, you’re providing a 
service. We’re in a service industry and with that comes Customer 
Service. I know it may sound a bit trite, but treat clients as you 
would like to be treated. Treat them with respect and never lose 
sight of that fact that they are paying the bills.
Ten things I wish I’d known
10. Wearing many hats
Before I set up business, I’d read a fair few ‘how to’ books and a 
number of blogs that talked about the many roles you would have 
to adopt whilst running your new business. I still struggle with it. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

34
On a typical day I am a designer, a project manager, a salesman 
and a book—keeper. Each role requires a diﬀerent mindset and it 
can be very diﬃcult to switch between them.
9. Home is for home things
Keep work and home separate. When you work at home, this can 
be diﬃcult. When I had my workplace in my house, I made sure 
it was a completely diﬀerent room which was furnished like an 
oﬃce—not just your spare room with a desk in it. One tip which 
worked for me: wear your shoes during the day, when you’re 
working, and at night, take them oﬀ. It’s a silly little thing, but you 
will soon associate shoes with work. So, when you take them oﬀ, 
that’s home time.
8. What goes around comes around
Be nice to people. Business doesn’t have to be unpleasant. Treat 
people how you expect to be treated. Be fair, professional and 
above all, polite.
7. Don’t take on too much
This one is a killer. I still do it and probably will for many years to 
come. When you don’t have any work booked in in three months 
time, the tendency is to get more work in now with the hope that, 
ﬁnancially, you’ll be more stable in the months you don’t have 
work. It makes sense, but you end up working too hard. As a 
result, quality dips, customers get a bad service and, over time, 
your business will dry up.
6. Hire somebody before you need to
I’ve recently had this problem. I’ve been so busy recently that 
I needed help. After hiring someone, I realised I’d been in this 
position for too long. I needed help about three months before I 
thought I did.
5. Don’t under—charge
Work out your costs on an hourly, or daily, basis and then add 
30%. It covers costs and, until you get the hang of it, you’re 
probably under—charging anyway. I was.
4. Conﬁdence
Remember, you’re the expert. You’re not doing this job because 
you’re average at it. If a customer wants to buy your product, or 
hire you, it’s because you’re good at what you do.

35
3. Customer Service
If you’re a web designer or developer, unless you’re producing 
and selling a product, you will be providing a service. With a 
service comes Customer Service and, yes, customers are 
always right.
2. Accounting Software
I was using a homemade system coupled with an Excel 
spreadsheet for my accounting needs. As the business grew, 
I needed something a little robust. I wish I’d learnt Sage or 
something sooner because now I don’t really have the time.
1. Plan for tomorrow
I have three to—do lists. A Month list, a Three Month and a Six 
Month. Each list has a bunch of things I need to do for that time 
period. This allows me to have short, mid and long term goals. 
I class Six Month as long term here as, in this industry, I believe 
you need to be adaptable and can’t really plan for more than six 
months in advance.
 
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started

36
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

37
Designing for the Web  ~  Getting Started
Wrapping up
Making a leap of faith is the ﬁrst step to starting a business. 
However, for your business to grow and ﬂourish, you will need 
much more than faith. First oﬀ, you must have upmost conﬁdence 
in your ability to make it work. You need to be aware of the 
risks, but not scared to death by them. You’ll need to have good 
organisational skills, ﬂexibility and a high degree of commitment. 
Most of all, you need to have fun and love what you do.
Timeline: Six months to taking the plunge
January
6 Months to go
Start building a customer 
base. Trawl the freelance 
websites, (job boards — 
authentic jobs etc), and get 
yourself a few freelance 
gigs. Register your 
business with the Inland 
Revenue, (see section on 
deciding what business 
you should be). I’m afraid 
for the next six months, 
you’ll be working two jobs. 
If you can get funding 
for your venture, start 
researching what you can 
get and when.
February
5 Months to go
Continue to get those 
freelance gigs in. Begin 
to research a good local 
accountant. Book an 
appointment with several 
banks — you’ll need to get 
a business bank account 
— but it’s worth shopping 
around. Have meetings 
to discuss funding 
opportunities.
March
4 Months to go
Found a good accountant? 
Right, you need to have 
a meeting with him/
her regarding your new 
venture. Finalise your 
bank account with your 
chosen bank. Continue to 
build up your customer 
base. Now is the time to 
speak with some local 
companies to see if they 
need freelance help. Are 
you going to be working 
from home? If not, you 
need to start looking for 
somewhere to 
work from.

38
April
3 Months to go
You should be getting 
some money in from your 
freelance gigs by now. 
Save it—you might need it 
in a few months.
May
2 Months to go
You should be working 
like a dog now and 
really looking forward 
to working for yourself. 
At this stage, everything 
should pretty much be 
in place for you to make 
that smooth transition 
from employed to 
self—employed.
June
1 Month to go
Hand in your resignation. 
If possible, try and get 
some work booked in for 
the ﬁrst three months of 
being on your own. Make 
sure you also get paid by 
these clients monthly so 
cashﬂow isn’t an issue.

39
Research           
& Ideas
How would you answer the question: ‘What is design?’ Do you 
imagine that it’s primarily an act of creativity, perhaps something 
beautiful that an artist might produce? Do you think that it’s more a 
question of technical issues and accuracy? 
     While good design invariably has an eye on aesthetics
and a concern for technical accuracy and perfected details, 
graphic design, (whether for the web, print, or screen), is essentially 
about solving problems. Each project has its own set of unique 
problems to address. What is the ﬁrst step in problem solving? 
You begin with research. You immerse yourself in the needs of the 
client, audience/readership, and the project itself, and become as 
informed as you can be.
     Like most people, I often struggle to envisage original, eﬀective 
ways to solve the problems presented by each project. This struggle 
has many causes: a complex or ill—deﬁned brief, lack of constraints, 
or an environment or process that, rather than inspiring creative 
thinking, deadens or impedes the idea—generating part of your 
mind. This section aims to help you overcome these obstacles. 
     We’ll go through the design process step—by—step, look closely 
at how research helps you generate those brilliant new ideas you 
promised, and spell out how to move smoothly from the initial 
problem— as the client presented it to you—to something you’ll be 
proud to put in your portfolio. We’ll also look at tools that make it all 
easier, ones I’ve used almost daily over the past few years to help 
me as I work. 
 
39

40
   2
40

41
Chapter Six
The Design Process
Before delving into design principles for 
the web, let’s look at the traditional design 
process which I was taught in school—still 
the standard in use today by the graphic 
design industry. 
The Traditional Design Process
1. Brief
The brief is comprised of a couple of documents:
     The client brief is what the client gives you. It might be a 
formal Request For Proposal (RFP), or simply a short email. It 
generally outlines the initial aims and objectives of the project, the 
deliverables, and may indicate many of the client’s expectations 
about the ﬁnal work’s function or appearance. Deliverables 
include documents, content, sketches, everything that the client 
will provide to you and anything that you’ll provide to them. The 
client may also provide deadlines for each deliverable, though 
whether they deliver theirs on time is a long, sad tale we’d need to 
cover in a separate book.   
     The creative brief is a document produced by a designer in 
response to the client brief. Sometimes, it is an oral brief given 
at the start of the project by a senior creative, meaning someone 
on the design team, such as an art director, creative director or 
designer. It outlines the creative elements of the project. In order 
for the designers to focus on their part of the process, this is the 
only document they tend to see.
     Already, in this ﬁrst stage of the process, you can begin to see 
the cracks. The designers are being separated from the process. 
They’re given their own brief. Why is that? Are designers not 
capable of extracting that information from the client, the client’s 
RFP, or even from researching the project directly? Design, as 
we’ll see, is not a process that exists in isolation. The job of design 
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
www.allitebooks.com

42
isn’t just to make information look pretty or to decide if an element 
on a page should be blue or orange. 
     It may involve deciding where on a page to place an element, 
(such as a heading or image), how much emphasis should be given 
to that element, and how to emphasise it. It looks at readability and 
how to most eﬀectively arrange information. Good design arises 
from the initial problem, goals, audience or readership needs, and 
business plans, and reﬂects the identity and brand of the client. 
Clearly, bringing in the designer as a type of decorator after all the 
important decisions have been made is not the smartest approach. 
2. Research
Research is vital to the success of any design solution. A designer 
should be as informed as they can be about the project. 
     Research can be conducted in a number of ways, many of 
which I’ll discuss in detail later in this section. The ﬁndings of this 
research provide three key deliverables in the design process:
Insights to help generate ideas for the design. 
Data with which to ‘sense—check’ design solutions. An example 
of this would be research that led to the generation of project 
personas, or pen portrait’s.
Frame the design solution in the real world. Solutions to   
design problems can often be developed in a bubble. As   
such, they can quickly become divorced from reality. 
Designers don’t need to be involved in the actual research, 
but they do need access to the results. Quite often, research is 
compiled into a debrief document by a research agency who has 
been commissioned to conduct the research.
1.
2.
3.
	
		
	
	


43
3. Design
The designers get to work. First, they sketch up ideas, which the 
senior creative’s on the team approve, reject or discuss. Ideas are 
shortlisted, and sense—checked against the Creative Brief before 
they are worked up to a ﬁnal solution. This is then presented to 
the client.
4. Amends after amends after amends
The designers then spend time amending the design to reﬂect 
the changes or problems highlighted by the client—sometimes 
endlessly. I’ve lost count of the number of times that I’ve 
spent needlessly making changes to a design because of 
miscommunication further back in the process in conversations 
between people at meetings to which the actual designers were 
not invited. More often than not, the problems arise because the 
expectations of either party have not been managed properly.
5. Production
The designers now have to make the design solution into a 
product — be it a brochure, some vehicle livery, or a website. This 
is, once again, a frequently painful point in the process. More often 
than not, it’s because questions have not been answered during 
the previous stages. 
You can see that this linear design process is fraught with 
potential for going completely wrong — and it does, much of the 
time. Oﬃces around the world have closets full of unﬁnished, 
unpublished projects and hours of work that produced nothing 
more than arguments and disappointment. The fault often lies 
with miscommunication between project managers, account 
executives and designers and it still goes on every day in design 
and advertising agencies all over the world.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

44
Out with the old, in with the new
I’m not saying I have a better approach, but I’ve spent enough 
time shoe—horned into these unworkable processes to have an 
informed opinion on how they can be improved for both the 
designer and the end—product. I use a process whose focus is 
research, ideas generation and iteration. 
     Like designing for print, or designing products, designing for 
the web is a somewhat linear process. But with all its hyperlinks, 
moving parts, usability and accessibility issues, frequent content 
updates, sometimes by a large number of authors, and a wide 
variety of users who may be visiting the site for a whole spectrum 
of reasons, the web design process can be much less directly 
linear than other forms of design. The website design process 
is best described, (and conducted), as a series of iterative stages, 
incorporated into an overall linear process, similar to 
product design. 
     The web design process follows the more traditional route 
closely, but frequently with the addition of these oﬀshoots 
and cycles of iteration before moving onto the next phase of  
development. One clear distinction between the traditional route 
and good web design is that testing is almost always missing from 
the former but used frequently, or even continuously, in the latter.

45
The Web Design Process
1. The Brief
As with the traditional process, the web brief should usually be 
comprised of a few documents:
Client Brief: This brief is written by the client and is usually the 
ﬁrst document produced.
Technical Brief: This can be produced by the client or agency 
(or freelance designer). It sets out the technical requirements and 
scope for the website project.
Creative Brief: This is produced by the agency in response to the 
Client Brief. It is used as a central document for the creative phase 
of the project.
Idea Brief: This brief — discussed in detail in the next chapter — is 
a short document, (in fact no longer than a couple of sentences), 
produced after a period of consultation with the client. It aims to 
clearly describe the project and is used as a springboard for ideas 
in the idea generation phase.
2. Research & Insights
As with the traditional process, the designer or creative team 
should conduct research. For a web project this could include 
the following:
Page Impressions — a request to load a single page of an 
internet site.
Unique Users — the number of individual users to a site over a 
deﬁned period, often a month.
User Flows — a diagram showing a user’s journey, used to show most 
likely user experience.
Personas — ﬁctitious characters that are created to represent the 
diﬀerent user types within a targeted  demographic that might use a 
site or product.
Use Cases — a description of a system’s behaviour as it responds to a 
request that originates from outside of that system.
1.
2.
3.
4.
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
During this phase, it’s the 
designer’s job to:
Interrogate the client’s brief
Ask questions
Change and re–deﬁne the brief
Get to the root of the problem that 
must be solved
Produce the ﬁnal Idea Brief
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

46
These should be coupled with more traditional ways of gathering 
data such as:
One—on—One — person to person interviews with speciﬁc questions 
asked by the interviewer to gain a speciﬁc understanding of the 
interviewee’s behaviour/thoughts associated with a service 
or product.
Focus Groups — a form of qualitative research in which a group of 
people are asked their thoughts on a product, service, or concept.
SWOT Analysis — a strategic planning tool used to evaluate the 
Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats involved in 
a project.
Questionnaires — a research instrument consisting of a series 
of questions and other prompts for the purpose of gathering 
information from respondents.
Market Segmentation —  groups of peoples or organisations sharing 
one or more characteristic that causes them to have similar product 
needs. E.g. location, age, gender, or socioeconomic status.
If you’re lucky enough to have access to all these types of data and 
tools, you can begin the project extremely well informed. Even if 
you only have a few of these, you can still gain much insight about 
the audience. Whilst data is important in research, it’s the insights 
that you will get, based on the data, that will lead to a successful 
design solution.
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
	







free movement between stages

47
3. Ideas Generation
Calling this the Ideas Generation stage simply formalises what a 
designer does in any process. In college, I was taught to sketch out 
my ideas — to move from one brush—stroke to another quickly. The 
aim was to get as many ideas down in as short a time as possible — 
not to stop and judge or analyse, but just to make marks.
     Ideas for website designs should be treated the same way. 
Have the idea, write it down, and then move on to the next one. 
Don’t judge, analyse or criticise them — that will come later. This 
frees you to be experimental, to step outside of ‘the box’, to be 
subjective, (or, at times, even more objective), inventive, original 
and fearless. 
The ideas could be generated in the following ways:
Mark—making and Sketchbooks
Mood Boards
Mind Maps
Ideas Sessions
Everyone is involved in the Ideas phase. The client will have a 
more informed view of their customers, (though surprises may 
come later with user testing),  so their contributions are essential. 
The project management team should be involved, as should the 
designers. The aim is to generate ideas and several heads are 
better than one. One warning: Be sure to identify this to everyone 
as just the Ideas Phase, not a decision—making phase. Later, when 
decisions are made, you’ll discover that ‘design by committee’ is 
a direct path to a mediocre website. By the time everyone on the 
committee has strongly inﬂuenced the colours, the functions, the 
placement of content, and every other detail, you’ll be left with a 
lifeless, senseless, overloaded site, and a powerful headache.  
     The Idea Brief is used as a springboard to help generate those 
ideas. It’s a central point of reference and could be something as 
simple as ‘We want to make our gardening website more engaging 
for a younger audience’. You’ll be thankful for it when clients or 
others on the team make suggestions that aren’t congruent with 
the ﬁnal Idea Brief. Does someone suggest stilted language or dull 
colors? You can just point to the Idea Brief to remind them of the 
track you’ve all agreed on. 
ß
ß
ß
ß
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

48
4. Solution
The results from the Ideas Phase, along with the brief and the 
research data, are compiled to create a clear design direction.
Lo Fi
This could be a sketch of the page—types, wireframes done 
in Visio, or an HTML prototype. The point is to get something 
sketched out, in as complete a state as possible, and begin to solve 
those problems as they arise. The aim is to do it quickly, 
and cheaply. 
Test and Iterate
Once you’ve got something that you’re happy with, the next stage 
is to test those results. Testing can be done formally at a usability 
lab, or in more guerilla fashion with colleagues, friends or family. 
The point is to get a real person using this lo ﬁ product. That could 
validate any problem areas.
Design Comps
Design visuals of key pages are done in this phase. They can be 
produced in tandem with the lo ﬁ work and should be as iterative. 
The diﬀerence is, the Design Comps focus on elements such as 
brand, colour & typography. They are not being done in isolation 
from any usability or interaction design though — in fact, the same 
designer can be working on both the lo ﬁ and Design Comps.
5. Production
Now we’re getting into factory mode. The heavy thinking has 
been done and the project now turns towards realising the project 
goals: building a website.
     The Design Comps should be completed and signed oﬀ early in 
this stage. They should represent a cross—section of the site and 
form the basis of the unique templates that need to be produced.
     The lo ﬁ prototype now needs to be scaled up to a full 
production model. This is where it’s important that the iterative 
development of the prototype stays as close as possible to the 
Design Comp process. The last thing you need, so late in the day, 
is a huge gulf between the visuals the client has signed oﬀ and the 
prototype you’ve produced internally.
     That very problem — which happens a lot — is a symptom 
of there not being enough collaboration. Designers need to 
work alongside as many disciplines in the process as possible, 

49
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
particularly project managers, account executives, writers and — 
most importantly — developers. Design and development should 
happen at the same time following the Ideas Phase. All the pieces 
are in place for each discipline to pick up and run with.
One Of Many Ways
The design process, regardless of ﬁnal delivery medium, pretty 
much follows the same path: Brief, Research, Ideas, Solution, 
Production and ﬁnally, Product. The web design process I’ve 
described here follows those top—level headings, but has slight 
deviations and is leaning towards the design aspects of 
the process. 
     There are many variants to the process of designing for web. 
Some advocate a larger proportion of time dedicated to the 
research phase—the ﬁndings of which inform the production of 
lo ﬁ prototypes. Others focus on the design phase, particularly 
if the user experience of a brand is high on the agenda. The 
process is the same, but the outcome is slightly diﬀerent. Each 
phase of the process grows or shrinks to accommodate the 
project requirements or the working preference of the agency 
or individual. Many development companies, and in larger 
organisations with in—house teams—prefer an agile development 
process, such as Scrum. Agile development is a useful process for 
developing products or applications, but can be resource—heavy 
which makes it diﬃcult to work in a commercial environment.
The important thing to take away from this chapter is there is no 
right way to designing a website. Try diﬀerent methods and ﬁnd 
what suits you and the project. 

50
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

51
Chapter Seven
The Brief
The Brief, in its diﬀerent forms, represents 
the start of a project and a point of 
reference throughout a project’s life cycle. 
Most of the time though, the ﬁrst brief you will get from a client 
will be inadequate. It will have vital information missing, it will be 
focussed internally on the clients business, there will be a lack of 
focus, and almost always the budget will be omitted. Sometimes, 
they even provide you with a solution! Clients don’t make it easy 
for us. But, it’s not their fault. Nine times out of ten, they will never 
have written a brief before. Have you?
     How do you write a good brief? What’s involved in creating the 
four brieﬁng documents discussed in the previous chapter?
The Client Brief
This is the initial brief from a client. Sometimes, it’s just a phonecall 
or an email. If you’re lucky, you might get a comprehensive RFP 
including preliminary research results and detailed budgets and 
timescales, but this is the exception rather than the rule. 
     Most of the time, regardless of complexity, an initial brief is like 
a handshake. It’s an introduction. Some of the time, the client is just 
looking for validation from you that they’ve produced a document 
that you will ﬁnd useful in getting a price to them.
     As with all handshakes, unless you want to be seen as rude, 
they should be reciprocated. It’s important to note that receiving a 
brief from a client is the start of a conversation.
The Technical Brief
This brief is almost always invisible, unless you request it 
speciﬁcally. Sometimes, it’s found in amongst a Functional 
Speciﬁcation document, or as part of an RFP. If you aren’t supplied 
one, I suggest you try and create one from whatever sources you 
can. Discuss it with a client and take pieces from the client brief 
— even if it’s just a quick note on what browsers you’re going to 
develop for, or what backend the system is going to run on.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
www.allitebooks.com

52
The important thing is to begin to draw a line in the sand as to 
what development is being done and to cover your back to 
some extent.
The Creative Brief
If you’re heading up a large team — a senior designer, or team 
leader for example — then you will need to extract information 
from the Client Brief in order to brief your team on the job at hand. 
It falls on your shoulders to create this brief from scratch. 
     Typically, writing a Creative Brief involves asking the client 
questions and speaking to a lot of people about diﬀerent aspects of 
the project. For example:
Are there any brand guidelines to adhere to? If so, who’s the   
brand guardian?
Will you be building the website, or is the client doing it 
in—house?
Who will be signing oﬀ design on the client—side?
Who will be responsible for feeding back comments 
and amends?
Who are the people involved in the project on the agency and    
client side?
Is there any research available?
The aim is to get together a working document with which to:
Brief your team
Refer to throughout the project to check you’re on the right 
creative track.
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

53
The Idea Brief
The Idea Brief is a sentence that describes the project aims. A 
good Idea Brief is a problem statement looking for a solution. It’s 
used as a springboard for having ideas in Ideas Sessions 
(or Brainstorms).
     An Idea Brief is sometimes the most diﬃcult to write. It needs 
to be short, concise and open. Good starting points for Idea 
Briefs are:
‘How to…’
‘We want to…’
‘How do we…’
They start the sentence oﬀ in the right way — by asking a question. 
It’s the designer’s job to come up with the answer.
The Right Pair of Briefs
So, you have your four documents, (or maybe, they’re just 
discussions and scraps of paper at the moment — that’s ok, they 
don’t have to be manicured documents), now what do you do? 
Chances are, the brief is still going to be way oﬀ something that 
is actionable. Why? Well, let me introduce you to my briefs to 
explain all.
Flowery Briefs
A ﬂowery brief uses langauge that no one can understand. It’s full 
of acronyms and abbreviations. There is no focus, but an emphasis 
on trying to impress the reader with over—complicated terms. 
It winds this way and that, and then, like an episode of LOST, 
abruptly stops leaving you with a head full of questions.
Woolly Briefs
Woolly briefs are vague and lacking speciﬁcs. Whilst they’re 
better than a Loose Brief, they will still provide little insight into 
the direction of the project. They leave too much to 
the imagination.
ß
ß
ß
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

54
Tight Briefs
A tight brief is the opposite of loose. Restrictive and too focussed, 
they spell out the requirements and provide a solution. It’s then left 
to the designer to just implement them. Depending on the client, 
these are the worst kind of brief to receive — unless your design 
matches the clients perceived solution exactly, then they’re not 
going to be pleased. If one of these lands on your desk, think twice 
about taking it on.
Loose Briefs
Loose Briefs are too open and not focussed. ‘I want you to give me 
ideas’ would be the classic ﬁrst line of someone giving you a loose 
brief. Worse still, they generally end there. 
Ideal Briefs
The ideal brief is a brief that isn’t too loose, or too tight. It’s not 
woolly, or ﬂowery, but ﬁts just right. It is open enough to facilitate 
the creation of the other briefs, particularly the Idea Brief. It is 
clear, and uncluttered. 

55
The Funnel of Focus
The Funnel of Focus is an important visualisation aid in further 
deﬁning a brief. Imagine a funnel: wide at the top and narrow 
at the bottom. At the top, is the ‘blue—sky’ thinking—purely 
conceptual. At the bottom is speciﬁc, focussed thinking. 
Somewhere in the middle is the place for the ideal brief. 
     A brief may start at either end of the Funnel. With deﬁnition, it 
could travel up, or down, to that centre point. You’re after a brief 
that is tight enough to be clear, but loose enough to be able to be 
used as a springboard to create the Idea Brief and Creative Brief.
 
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

56





	


	

57
Chapter Eight
Research
Research is a profession in its own right, 
but it’s also an aspect of design that is vital 
to the success of any design solution. 
My wife is an Audience Researcher for the BBC, so it’s a profession 
I’m close to and have a fairly good grasp of its importance. In 
addition to the type of research my wife does, there is another 
type of research that should be done by a designer on an almost 
daily basis: visual research. Combining professional research, 
with a designer’s visual research, can create solid foundations on 
which to build ideas.
Asking Questions
Successful design solutions are successful business solutions. 
The ﬁrst priority in any design task is to understand the business 
behind the product or website for which you are providing a 
service. As a designer, you need to understand the company that 
hired you and the business they are in.
     You can get this information from several sources: reading 
strategic documents and whitepapers; the company’s Annual 
Report, (that is a good one!), or, what I’ve found most valuable in 
the past, interviewing key stakeholders.
     First of all, you need to ﬁnd out who those people are. If it’s a 
one—man—band you’ve been hired by, then it’s just them. If it’s 
a bluechip organisation, you need to understand the pecking 
order. For example, you’ve been hired by a large energy provider 
to provide consultancy on the redesign of their website. Their 
web team is comprised of members from multiple departments — 
each responsible for diﬀerent business output: Marketing, Press 
and Communications, Corporate, HR etc. This could be a large 
team, and it probably wouldn’t be cost—eﬀective, or necessary, to 
interview all of them. You will need to establish key members of 
this team, but remember, the client can help you out with this one.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

58
Interviewing the right people
It might be a little too formal to call these discussions interviews. 
In my experience, they are more like chats—it’s a time to build trust 
and rapport with a new client. A more informal approach puts you 
and the client at ease and you’re more likely to gain some valuable 
insight if everyone is having a pleasant time!
Market Research
Market research is the collecting, analysing, and reporting of data 
or information that aﬀect customers, products or services. It’s a 
huge, specialised ﬁeld. However, anyone can do market research 
— you don’t need to be a recognised member of the Chartered 
Society of Marketing. With something as simple as a web—browser 
and Google, you can conduct your own research. 
     The diﬃculty with just searching for stuﬀ on Google, or asking 
your grandmother to do some usability testing for you, is the 
information gathered might not be accurate or representative. If 
it’s not accurate, or trustworthy, you’re already oﬀ to a shaky start 
in gathering information for your ideas. There is a bewildering 
array of techniques and methodologies that enable the 
professionals to provide us with accurate research.
     As a designer, I’ve had to read market research agency results 
and brieﬁng documents as part of a research phase. They can 
provide vital insight, but, for a long time I found the terminology 
confusing. I didn’t have a clue what they were talking about and I 
was too embarrassed to ask. Anyway, after years of cobbling my 
way through documents, I’d like to give you a head start and list 
some of the terms and deﬁnitions.
Qualitative Research
Qualitative research is a type of research conducted to establish 
the audience’s beliefs, feelings, motivations and triggers. Results 
are often rich in insights.
Quantitative Research
Quantitative research is a type of research that provides valid 
data. It’s all about the numbers. Insights can be diﬃcult at times, as 
quantitative research requires analysis to identify trends. 
Primary Research
Primary research is new, not old, information.
Questions to ask during 
stakeholder interviews.
Describe your products or 
services
What are your three most 
important business goals?
Who is your target market?
What makes you better than 
your competition?
How do you market your product 
or service?
What are the trends that may 
aﬀect your industry in years to 
come?
Is there any impending, or 
current, legislation that will 
aﬀect  your business?
If you could communicate 
a single thing about your 
company, what would it be?
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

59
Secondary Research
Secondary research is research performed on old data. E.g. New 
analysis on data gathered last year.
Segmentation
You hear a lot about ‘Market Segmentation’. It means the market of 
the product, or service, is segmented into groups. Those groups, 
or segments, represent a part of the customer group or audience. 
They are usually grouped by demographics such as sex, age, 
ethnicity, income, occupation etc.
Focus Groups
Focus groups are moderated group discussions whose 
participants are selected to accurately represent the audience 
or customer.
Task—Based Usability Testing
Users of a website are asked to complete a task whilst being 
observed. The people tested are selected to accurately represent 
the audience or customer.
Visual Research
Visual research is the gathering of visual information, stuﬀ that a 
designer will ﬁnd useful in solving the problem. Visual research 
is generally the domain of the designer, or the project team, rarely 
the client. 
Sketchbooks
Since being in art college nearly twenty years ago now, I’ve 
always kept sketchbooks. They’re places where I keep my doodles 
and ideas — where I’m free of judgement. A place where it’s okay 
to make a mistake. A sketchbook is a vital tool for a designer — I 
really can’t stress that enough.
     A designer’s sketchbook is not so diﬀerent from an artist’s. 
If you opened an artist’s sketchbook, it’s probably full of 
sketches, paintings, doodles and studies. If you open a designer’s 
sketchbook, there will be doodles and drawings, but the studies 
will be written. There will be notes — sometimes pages and pages 
of the written word punctuated by small diagrams. 
     Designers tend to think visually. Sometimes, these sketchbooks 
are works of art in their own right. They’re treasured tools of a 
designer’s trade and generally follow them everywhere. But there 
lies a danger. Designers need to take heed — sketchbooks are just 
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

60
tools — not diaries. They should form part of the research of a 
project just as a market research document should. They shouldn’t 
be precious.
     If you’re new to design, or maybe you fell into web design from 
another discipline, then try keeping a sketchbook for a couple of 
months. Instead of using sticky notes, or till receipts for recording 
those moments of inspiration, jot it down in your sketchbook. If you 
see some nice type on a ﬂyer whilst you’re out and about, stick it in 
there. You’ll be surprised at how quickly it ﬁlls up with interesting 
and relevant visual information. 
Virtual Sketchbooks
If you work all day on the web like me, then it’s not very 
environmentally friendly, or cost—eﬀective, to take a screengrab of 
something, print it out and then stick it in your sketchbook. This is 
where applications such as iPhoto, or Flickr are invaluable.
     If, whilst browsing around, you see something that you fancy, 
then grab it and pop it into Flickr, or iPhoto. Start building a virtual 
sketchbook. Many people have already started to do this on Flickr 
and it’s proving to be a great resource for doing visual research. 
Take the typography pool for example. It’s jammed full of really 
great photographs of typography from all over the globe, and it’s 
updated daily. Where else could you get this information? It’s a 
fantastic resource.
Flickr is a great way to keep 
a visual sketchbook on the 
go using iPhone app, Airme

61
Moodboards
Moodboards are created speciﬁcally for a project. The aim is to 
present a visual language on one sheet of paper. For example, let’s 
say you were designing a website for a builders— merchants. To 
establish the overall feel of the visuals for the site, you might go 
and print out a lot of competitor’s websites and couple that with 
some material from related trades. The material could include 
images, photography, colour, typography, layout, illustration or 
patterns. Anything visual to build up a language.
     These scraps of paper, (or digitally if you prefer), would then 
be stuck on a piece of paper to give an overall impression of the 
proposed visual language for the new website.
Gaining Insight
So, you’ve got all this stuﬀ, now what do you do with it? 
Remember, for a designer, the aim of the research is to provide 
insight. Insights that will act as springboards when you come to 
generating ideas.
     Start to focus in on the research by applying some lightweight 
analysis. A good tool to use to focus in on the problem, is one 
which marketeers use called the SWOT analysis. Strengths, 
Weaknesses, Opportunities and Threats. Strengths are the 
strengths of the current product or service. Weaknesses are 
where it falls down. Opportunities are how you can make it better, 
and Threats are those things that could undermine its success. It’s 
a simple tool that can be extremely eﬀective in providing simple, 
top—level research that is, above all, easy to understand by the 
whole team.
     Once you’ve established some insights, and these might be as 
simple as two or three word sentences, you need to record them 
and stick them on a wall or something. Insights can only act as 
springboards for ideas when they are presented in isolation from 
the rest of the other research material. Now we can start to have 
some fun.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
www.allitebooks.com

62

63
Chapter Nine
Ideas
Ideas. They’re at the heart of every creative 
process. However, almost no really good 
ideas are ﬂashes of inspiration. They 
may start that way — a single glimmer of 
something special — but in order to work, 
they need to be honed.
They need time spent on them. You see, the ‘ﬂash of inspiration’ 
idea, (the Eureka moment), is only part of a longer process that, 
if ignored, will see most ideas simply ﬁzzle out. So, how do you 
‘have’ ideas? Sit about and wait for them to pop into your head? 
If only most of us had the luxury to do so. No, for most designers, 
ideas have to be squeezed out of us every day. To stand up to this 
challenge, designers need to arm themselves with some 
good tools. 
Creative Thinking
When I receive a brief, along with research, I try and formulate an 
Idea Brief, (if I haven’t received one already). As discussed earlier, 
an Idea Brief is a sentence, or two, that will sum up the project and 
frame it as a problem statement. Something like: 
     ‘We need to redesign our News service to appeal to a more   
     global audience’ 
or
     ‘How do we engage an older audience for our social  
     networking product?’
This simple sentence is the question you are trying to answer and 
should be referred to throughout the process of having ideas. 
     I start out the ideas process on my own, with my sketchbook. 
I take myself away from my every—day working environment to 
somewhere with a comfy chair and an endless supply of tea (yes, 
a teashop). I generally sit there for a while staring into space. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

64
Most of the time, nothing happens until I start doodling. As I start 
making those initial marks, then more will follow and I’ll start 
taking notes. The key here is to move from one idea to another 
quickly. If you think something works — and you will get these 
ideas where you think ‘that’s it, I’ve solved it’ — then park it, and 
move on to the next. 
Inspiration
Inspiration is a completely subjective thing: One person’s junk, 
maybe another person’s pet project. Coupled with insights, 
inspiration is the other half of generating ideas. You can get 
inspiration from all sorts of places. Many people ﬁnd music 
inspiring for example, or a long walk by the beach. Pieces of 
inspiration are like the springboards of insights of idea briefs: they 
send you oﬀ in directions that haven’t yet been explored.
     I tend to ﬁnd inspiration in a lot of things. Actually, I’ve 
got a confession to make, I’m a terrible hoarder of all sorts of 
printed stuﬀ. Wherever I go, I always seem to come home with a 
newspaper, a ﬂyer or two or some photographs of some signage 
or typography I’ve seen. My wife has asked on several occassions 
why I need all this stuﬀ. ‘You only end up putting it on a shelf and 
never looking at it again’. Probably true, but it’s not the ‘thing’ 
that I’m interested in — it’s what’s on it. That gets looked at, the 
inspiration that that gives generally springboards my imagination 
oﬀ somewhere else — they’re useful objects.
     At @media 2007, a web conference in London, Jon Hicks, 
(of Hicksdesign), gave a presentation on ‘How to be a Creative 
Sponge’. It was a lighthearted look at how designers can gain, 
catalogue and store inspiration from all sorts of sources. One in 
particular stood out for me — it turns out I’m not the only one who 
has a taste for ﬂyers. Jon described the ﬂyer stands you ﬁnd in 
theatres, cinemas and information centres as an ‘all you can eat 
buﬀet’ of inspiration. Next time you’re out, just have a look over 
one of these stands. See if there is any visual style you can draw 
inspiration from in one of your designs. 
Inspiration
Mass culture
Pop culture
World culture or heritage
Poetry
Colours
Symbols
Metaphors
Values
Dreams
Television
Music
Art
History
Analogies
Sounds
Science
Technology
Myths
Legends
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

65
The Rules of Brainstorming
All ideas are equal
We’re here to have lots of ideas
No Judging
Analyse the ideas later
Everyone’s equal (no pulling rank)
Have fun
Keep to time
One idea at a time
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
Structured Ideas
As I said earlier, it’s not enough to rely on those sparks of 
inspiration for ideas. Most of the time, they have to be worked at. 
Luckily we have one good tool to help us with that: Brainstorming, 
or Ideas Sessions as I like to call them.
Ideas Sessions
Ideas Sessions are group activities that take place with key 
members of the project team. This is important. In order for the 
ideas to be taken seriously, they need buy—in from the people 
who matter, namely the CEO, or Marketing Director. Without that 
internal buy—in on the client side, an idea, no—matter how great, 
will almost always fail. 
     Another important member of an ideas session is the facilitator. 
They should be trained in creative facilitation and are there to 
coax and squeeze the best ideas the team has to oﬀer. 
A typical running order of an ideas session would be:
Attendees — get them to bring a random object
Reveal the brief — the aim of the day
The rules of brainstorming 
First Burst
Stimulus
a.   The Four R’s
b.   Eg. Related World
      i.     TV show of cooking — a related world to gardening
      ii.    List points on a ﬂipchart
      iii.   Use those points to come up with ideas, E.g. Get
              celebrity chefs to write articles on the new
              gardening website
Repeat using another technique to push the attendees in a 
new direction.
Passionometer, (a fancy name for some stickers). Use stickers — 1 
for not so good, 3 for great. It doesn’t matter it it’s not on brief — the 
important thing is how people feel about it.
The ﬁrst thing to do once you’ve established the rules of an ideas 
session and discussed the brief, is to have a First Burst. A ﬁrst 
burst aims to get those really obvious, preconceived ideas out 
and on paper before moving on. Everyone will come to an ideas 
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

66
session with some pre—conceived ideas of how the project should 
look. Generally, they are the most obvious ideas and they will have 
been worked out in some detail. More often than not, they are the 
safest, less—risky ideas.
     Once that is out of the way, and the ideas have been recorded, 
it’s the facilitator’s job to begin coaxing the ideas out of the 
attendees by using stimulus. The Four R’s, (which I’ll come to), is 
a very useful tool in steering ideas generation without a session 
becoming stuck down a certain line of thinking.
     The facilitator will use the Idea Brief and insights gathered 
during the Research Phase as springboards to send the attendees 
into other areas of thought.
     The facilitator will record all the ideas on a single sheet of 
paper. After the session is ﬁnished, the facilitator will go through 
all of the ideas one by one and the group will rate them by the 
Passionometer. One sticker for ‘not feeling it’, and three for ‘wow, 
this is great’. 
     The most highly rated ideas are shortlisted and then enter the 
next phase of development.
 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

67
Revolution:
Revolution is turning an idea on its head. 
Taking assumptions and reversing or 
removing them. E.g. A pub has four walls 
and a roof. What if it didn’t have walls, but 
still had a roof?
The Four R’s
I mentioned the Four R’s as a tool for generating ideas. A facilitator 
uses them in an ideas session to move the attendees from one idea 
to the next so they don’t begin to analyse or judge previous ideas, 
or become stale. The Four R’s are:
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas
Re—Expression:
Re—express the idea in a diﬀerent way or 
point of view. E.g. What if you were ﬁve 
years old and your parents were buying 
a booster seat for you. What makes a cool 
booster seat in your eyes? 

68
Related Worlds:
Think of a related world and use ideas from 
that world. E.g. Cooking and Gardening. 
What elements of gardening could be used 
to sell more recipe books?
Random Links:
Forcing a connection with a random object. 
E.g. A social networking website and a 
cactus. Random links often generate ideas 
which are oﬀ brief, but that doesn’t matter. 
Sometimes, the most truly innovative ideas 
can come with random links. I’m sure 
Citroén designers were using Random Links 
when they decided to make the 2CV look 
like a snail.

69
Chapter Ten
Putting it together
Case Study for a gardening website
A client has come to you with a proposal 
to redesign a popular gardening website. 
The website sells gardening products – 
everything from plants and tools, to seeds 
and lawnmowers – a one—stop—shop for 
every gardener’s needs. 
You’ve been tasked with generating ideas for the project and 
presenting your ﬁndings to the client. So, where do you start?
The project team and client team
The ﬁrst thing to do is establish roles and responsibilities in 
both the project team and the client team. Ensure you have 
representatives from most areas of the development process: 
Design, Client Services, Technical, IA/Usability, and Strategy. If 
you’re part of a small business, then this team could just be you, 
the client and some of their staﬀ — that’s just as good. Remember, 
the most important thing at this stage is to have everyone’s buy—in 
to the process — it will come in really handy further down the line 
when you have to present the ideas.
Gathering research
The intial phase of this project is to gather research — not 
commission it. First of all, try and get your hand on anything 
related to the project. Spend time consuming the media that the 
customers of this site will — magazines, tv shows, direct mail and 
catalogues, packaging and Point of Sale materials — anything 
that will give you an insight into the gardener’s world. This is 
particularly important for the designer in the team. The other 
members can gather the materials, but you will begin to make 
connections and have ideas almost immediately.
     Next, you should try and work through any existing quantitive 
research the client may have to see if you can establish any 
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

70
trends. Look at referrers, user journeys, demographics and 
segmentation. If the client has any focus group ﬁndings, get hold of 
it, even if it’s quite old — it could still have some bearing on the new 
website ideas.
     If you can, interview some gardeners. Get a script prepared 
with some carefully considered questions. You can use a market 
research agency to gather together some gardeners, (called a 
‘sample’). They will ensure the sample accurately represents the 
target audience of the website.
     Now is a good time to audit the existing content of the website. 
This is the beginnings of an Information Architecture task, but 
also has relevance to the visual design and branding, and the 
content ideas of the new site. If it’s a redesign, you need to know 
what you’re redesigning.
     As this is a gardening site that sells gardening stuﬀ, then the 
core proposition of the site is to sell products, over the World Wide 
Web, to its customers. The other stuﬀ on the site is to drive traﬃc 
into that process. Currently, this site is just an online catalogue 
plugged into a payment gateway — it’s about selling products. 
However, the client has indicated that they want to add more value 
to the website, to retain existing customers, and pull in 
new customers.
     As the website is shifting its focus away from just selling things, 
then we need to establish 1, What market is it moving into and 2, 
Who are the competitors in that market.
A competitor audit
A competitor audit is still a data gathering process. You start by 
examining the competitions brand, product oﬀerings and key 
messages in the marketplace. What’s great about using the World 
Wide Web for your research is you can actually experience the 
brands and service of the competitors, rather than just gathering 
visual material.
     A competitor audit can be as detailed as you need it to be to 
build a complete understanding of the business and its place 
within the market.
     For this website, we’ve established that there are three main 
competitors: The BBC Gardening website, The Royal Horticultural 
Society website, and its biggest commercial rival, Crocus.

71
1.
2.
3.
Stick it all up
This is where your project starts to resemble a crime case in a 
classic 70’s cop drama. Stick everything you have on a wall. Write 
down key phrases of research ﬁndings, scraps of paper to indicate 
visual styles, printouts of the competitors website — everything you 
have so far. Make sure they are just small chunks of information 
though as these are easier to trend — you don’t want reams of 
paper on the wall.
     Step back and try and spot the trends. There may be content 
trends, visual trends or branding trends. Try and identify some 
opportunity areas or insights. For this website, we’ve established 
the following insights gained from the research.
Relationship between gardening and cooking
Organic, sustainable gardening
Gardening in small spaces
The next step is to write an idea brief for each of these opportunity 
areas:
How do we use the relationship between gardening and  
cooking to sell more products?
How can we inﬂuence our customers to be more organic  
and sustainable?
How can our customers buy the right products for their 
small gardens?
These idea briefs are the springboards to be used in our 
ideas session.
Idea Development
Gather the team together — the project team and client team if you 
can — and work through an ideas session using the running order 
described in the previous chapter. Once you have your ideas 
recorded, you need to shortlist them. Try and get them down to 
three ideas for each idea brief. That will give us nine ideas to 
run with. 
     Next, we need to reﬁne this list to just three ideas — one for each 
idea brief; and answer the question they pose. For the sake of 
this example, we’ll use an idea in response to the ﬁrst idea brief: 
How do we use the relationship between gardening and cooking 
1.
2.
3.
Designing for the Web  ~  Research & Ideas

72
to sell more products? The idea we came up with for this was to 
introduce an editorial element to the website. Have celebrity chefs 
write articles and endorse gardening products and tools. 
     To further reﬁne this idea, you can use a great tool for this 
called AN. A.B.C.
AN stands for Audience Need. Who is this idea for? Will they want 
it, or use it. Ideally, are they crying out for it?
A stands for Approach. This is about implementation. How are 
you going to do it? You really don’t need to get completely bogged 
down in the nitty—gritty of this just yet, but an overall plan would 
be good at this stage.
B stands for Beneﬁt. Why should it be done in the ﬁrst place? Will 
there be a competitive advantage? Will you be ﬁrst to market with 
this idea? 
C stands for Competition. What will be your place in the market? 
Going through this process should give you a much clearer 
picture of your idea.
Creative Brief
So, you have your three ideas. They’ve been dreamt up by the 
project team and client, so everybody should feel ownership of 
the ideas. Next, the designer should write a creative brief. This 
document details the creative requirements for the project. So, for 
our idea, the creative brief could include:
Produce a branded content vehicle for the new celebrity 
chefs section
Document proposed user ﬂow with new content
Establish a new design based on the visual research associated 
with cooking
The important thing to note here is that the creative brief is 
leading the design team down a road based on the ideas. The 
ideas were based on insights from the research. 
1.
2.
3.

73
Typographic design is one of those ﬁelds in design that is taken for 
granted. Many designers just choose a cool font and away they go. 
Lacking an understanding of the subject as a whole, some see it 
as the designing of typefaces, whilst others see it as being closely 
related to the printing industry or print design. Some just see it as 
fonts. Well, it’s all of those things and more.
     In 2005, Information Architects, a small web agency in Tokyo, 
Japan, wrote a couple of articles on their blog. The title seemed to 
cause quite a stir: ‘95% of the web is Typography’. It may not come 
as much of a surprise, but I agree. 
     Of course, the User—Experience Consultants in the industry will 
tell you the web is about how users interact with and experience 
the websites and services they use — it’s not just about typography. 
But what facilitates the experience? Words, mostly. What is the 
practice of setting and arranging words to convey a message or 
interface? Typographic design. Information Architects were bang 
on the money in my view.
     Typography is a core building block for brands. Companies 
such as Microsoft, Audi and the BBC are instantly recognisable, 
in part due to their typography. This is one of the interesting 
things about typography on the web. We can’t guarantee the 
fonts that are installed on a user’s machine, therefore, we can’t 
rely on bespoke fonts, or speciﬁc brand typefaces, in order to 
convey a brand. This is where a good understanding of the craft of 
typographic design can make all the diﬀerence.
     When we ﬁrst look at typefaces, only the most dramatic 
diﬀerences are apparent. With our lack of experience, we could 
see the diﬀerence between serif and sans—serif, but had no clue 
which typefaces were good and which weren’t. Someone more 
experienced would come along and completely transform a 
Typography     
73

74
   3
dull page into a work of clarity and beauty just by changing the 
typeface. We knew the typeface they’d chosen was better — 
but why? 
     Knowing the history of typography, the anatomy of letters, and 
the classiﬁcation of typefaces helps us in many ways, even when 
using the limited fonts supplied by browsers or— with the use of 
image replacement techniques—thousands of others. Immersing 
ourselves in typography in design school, and studying these 
aspects of typefaces, we become keenly aware of even subtle 
diﬀerences between them. We learn to see typefaces in an entirely 
new light: when the use of each was appropriate; when their 
features best expressed the intent of the brand, author, or project; 
and when the use of one face rather than another was an elegant, 
thoughtful choice, giving a certain ‘look’ to a page. We learn to 
stop and think about type. 
74

75
Chapter Eleven
Anatomy
Typefaces, like most things, are made up 
of constituent parts. It is the characteristics 
of these parts that gives typefaces their 
character.
Ascender Height
Cap Height
X—Height
Baseline
Descender Line
9
10
3
4
5
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

76
1.
2.
3.
4. 
5.     
6.
7.
8.    
9.
10. 
11.     
12.
13.
14.    
15.
16.
Tail
Spine
Apex
Serif
Bowl
Finial
Counter
Descender
Character width
15
16
14
13
12
1
8
2
6
7
11
Stem
Spur
Link
Loop
Ear
Ascender
Arm
crossbar

77
Chapter Twelve
Classiﬁcation
Typefaces, like other elements of design, 
such as colour and imagery, communicate. 
They have deﬁning characteristics that 
give them personalities. 
A good designer will be aware of the diﬀerent characteristics of 
typefaces and match those characteristics with the story they 
are trying to tell.  The characteristics of type can be broadly 
categorised, as we’ll see in the following section, based on some of 
their main design elements.
Serifs
A typeface will have serifs, or it won’t. If it doesn’t, it’s called a 
sans—serif. If it does, then the serif will either be a bracketed, a 
hairline, a ﬂare, or a slab serif.
The example shows a 
bracketed Serif
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

78
Contrast and whitespace
The relative thickness of the strokes of a typeface determine 
the amount of whitespace the character has. To introduce more 
whitespace into a block of text for example, whilst not increasing 
your leading, you could experiment with using a typeface with 
less typographic contrast. An example of this would be a typeface 
that has smaller, or hairline, serifs and wider, more open, counters.
x—height
The x—height of a typeface is the height of a lowercase ‘x’. Diﬀerent 
typefaces have diﬀerent x—heights in relation to their cap—height. 
X—heights can eﬀect the legibility of typefaces, particularly at a 
small size. Larger x—heights are more useful for body copy of serif 
typefaces on the web. 
        Minimum contrast                                            Extreme contrast
Axly
The relative thickness of 
the strokes of a typeface 
determine the amount of 
whitespace the 
character has.
Cap Height
X Height
Baseline
Descender Line

79
Stress
Stress is the direction of the stroke weight. The more stress, 
the more acute the angle of the stroke weight. This can give 
letterforms a more fanciful and intricate appearance. 
Weight
Weight is the thickness of the stroke weight. This characteristic is 
perhaps the one of which people are most aware, such as the use 
of a bold weight. 




oo
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
                        More stress                                                     No stress

80
*Movable Type is the system of printing and typography using movable pieces of 
metal type, made by casting from matrices struck by letterpunches.
Classiﬁcation
Typefaces can be classiﬁed into groups based on their diﬀerent 
characteristics. Designers have been trying to establish a 
universally recognised classiﬁcation system for many years. The 
most widely accepted one is based on the 1964 classiﬁcation by 
the Deutsche Normenausschuss. This system classiﬁes typefaces 
into ten groups.
1. Graphic
The production of typefaces, as we know them, originated in 
Germany. Gutenberg, of the famous Bible, used movable metal 
letters instead of the old wooden pieces, and revolutionised 
printing in the process. Graphic typefaces, based on this Movable 
Type* system, resemble the local handwriting called Gothic, 
Blackletter or Textura. This typeface group is the basis for all 
those terrible heavy metal band logos. Interestingly, the much—
maligned Comic Sans belongs to this classiﬁcation.
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor 
Lucida Blackletter  
Comic Sans

81
2. Humanist
Humanist is a type style based on 15th century manuscripts. 
Humanist is also a sub—category of Lineale. 
3. Garalde
Modern typeface styles have their roots in Italy. When printing 
was introduced there, they too wanted to replicate the 
handwriting of the time. At that time, documents were written in 
a style called Chancery Italic. Some of the typefaces developed to 
mimic this style are Garamond, Goudy Old Style and Caslon.
At this stage, you can see how two things inﬂuenced type design: 
the local handwriting style and preference, and the sophistication 
of the printing process. Gradually, those two drifted apart as the 
materials for printing, (the presses, paper and ink), allowed for 
more stylised type designs to be developed.
Lorem ipsum dolor 
Lorem ipsum dolor 
Lorem ipsum dolor 
Lorem ipsum dolor
Garamond
Goudy Old Style
Centaur 
Berkeley  Oldstyle
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

82
4. Transitional
Transitional typefaces are lighter in appearance than Garalde. 
The serifs are more horizontal, and the emphasis is vertical 
rather than slanted. John Baskerville designed possibly the most 
well—known, named after himself, in the mid 18th century. 
5. Didone
Didone is home to elegant type with highly contrasting strokes 
and hairline serifs. Bodini is perhaps the typeface that exempliﬁes 
this group.
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
AdgZb^ehjbYdadg
Lorem ipsum dolor
 
Baskerville 
Georgia
Bodini
Didot

83
6. Slab Serif
As technology advanced, so the type designs changed. The 
Industrial Revolution brought with it the introduction of 
mechanical typesetting. It also fueled an advertising market that 
demanded strong and powerful typefaces to sell products. Slab 
Serif, or Egyptian, type designs were born. A good example of a 
classic is Rockwell. A more contemporary version would be the 
typeface for the new Guardian newspaper redesign in the UK. 
7. Lineale
This is the classiﬁcation for sans—serif typefaces. Originally 
designed for posters and headlines, sans—serif typefaces quickly 
became standard fare for printing. This group is divided into four 
subcategories: Grotesque, Neo—grotesque, Geometric, 
and Humanist.
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Jubilat
Rockwell
Franklin Gothic Book 
News Gothic MT 
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

84
8. Glyphic
This categorisation has been the centre of some debate over the 
years. Glyphic is supposed to be the classiﬁcation of stone—carved 
forms, rather than handwritten forms. However, stone—carved 
forms are based on hand—painted letter forms, (it’s where serifs 
are widely regarded as originating from). 
9. Script
Script type designs emulate ornate, swishing handwriting. 
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Trajan Pro
Optima 
Zapﬁno 
Brush Script MT 

85
10. Stylised
Stylised type designs are one large classiﬁcation for all those 
weird and sometimes wonderful typefaces that have become 
available since the advent of cheap computers and programs 
which allow anyone with a bit of skill and an idea to create and 
distribute a typeface.
Iconic typefaces
At certain times, typefaces can come to represent a speciﬁc era. 
It takes a collection of designers or typographers to suddenly 
start using a particular typeface in inﬂuential publications for 
the snowball to slowly start gathering momentum. Before you 
know it, the most unlikely of fashionable typefaces crop up in 
unfashionable places.  
Poor Template Gothic
As a young designer in the 1990’s, I was reading all the 
publications everyone else was: Emigré, Raygun, Eye, The Face, 
etc. During this time, Emigré was very popular amongst my 
industry peers. They produced and commissioned typefaces as 
well. One proved to be so popular in the 1990’s it was a victim 
of its own success and was overused. As a result, I don’t think 
I’ve seen it used by graphic designers in the last ten years. The 
typeface was Template Gothic, designed by Barry Deck.
The ﬁrst time I saw Template Gothic in use, (rather than only 
being displayed in Emigré), was in the mid—nineties in Raygun 
magazine. Raygun was the music magazine piloted by every 
designer’s hero of the time, David Carson. If David Carson thought 
this typeface was cool, then of course, we did too. Every designer 
Lorem ipsum dolor
Lorem ipsum dolor
Mido 
Fontin Sans 
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

86
across the globe began to set headlines in Template Gothic. Then, 
the fashion spread from editorial design to advertising and ﬁnally, 
packaging. It was at this point, as had happened to Helvetica Light/
Thin in the early nineties, every designer stopped using it—except 
the bad ones, of course. Template Gothic was then shunned by 
most designers, as it was used in the most inappropriate places—a 
real shame.
What makes a classic?
A classic typeface is like a classic suit: durable. It can be used 
to convey multiple messages on varying media over decades—
sometimes centuries. It survives fads, it’s versatile, and it’s so well 
designed that designers from diﬀerent eras or with diﬀerent tastes 
respect it.  
Other examples of classic or iconic typefaces
VAG Rounded
VAG Rounded was commissioned by Volkswagen and Audi Group, 
(hence the name). Similar in many ways to Helvetica Rounded, 
VAG Rounded has a youthful, playful feel and has been widely 
used for all manner of applications — from refrigerator magnets to 
children’s toys.
Lorem ipsum dolor
Template Gothic 
Lorem ipsum dolor
VAG Rounded

87
Meta
Like most typefaces, Meta was designed for a speciﬁc purpose. 
It was designed by Erik Spiekermann as the corporate font for 
the Deutsche Bundespost, the German equivalent of the Post 
Oﬃce. Like Helvetica, Meta has been widely used as a corporate 
typeface. It has a somewhat soulless character, (though not as 
much as Helvetica), which makes it easy to adopt as a corporate 
typeface— it’s safe, clean, and modern.
Mrs. Eaves
Mrs. Eaves is actually a redraw of another classic, Baskerville, by 
type designer Zuzana Licko, of Emigré font foundry. Its elegant 
italics and ligature weight captured designers’ imaginations in 
the late 1990’s. Emigré released a very useful little application 
with this font that made setting type with the extensive ligature 
characters, (which we’ll discuss later), as simple as copying and 
pasting — years before widespread Open Type adoption.
0SVIQMTWYQHSPSV
Meta
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Mpsfn!jqtvn!epmps
Mrs. Eaves

88

89
Chapter Thirteen
Hierarchy
Typographic hierarchy
Typographic hierarchy, put simply, is how diﬀerent faces, weights 
and sizes of typefaces structure a document. It may do this by 
separating sections, by indicating the degree of importance of 
each piece of information or by making the organisation of the 
document immediately apparent to the reader.  Some of these 
hierarchical devices are well—established conventions, such as 
cross heads and folios. 
     To keep it simple I’m going to concentrate on two things: size 
and weight.  
     Early typographers usually created their manuscripts using 
one font, one size, and one colour, interspersed with hand—painted 
illuminations. The product of such typographers gives a ﬂat 
quality to the information, almost mesmeric.
     Take a look at some early manuscripts and the letters 
themselves—especially the older Blackletter styles— appear similar. 
M’s look like u’s, y’s look like p’s and so on. As beautiful as these 
manuscripts are, other than the illuminations, they are devoid of 
structure within the content. There is no typographic hierarchy.
Evolution of the scale
In the Sixteenth Century, European typographers developed a 
series of typeface sizes, a scale, (the musical analogy is a good 
one — stick with me). As shown in the diagram, they are sizes we’re 
all familiar with. Six point through seventy—two point type has 
remained pretty much intact for over four hundred years. In fact, 
they are the default font sizes in many applications, (give or take 
a few).  
     So, what’s so special about these sizes? Well, because this scale 
of sizes has been used for centuries, and the size of each point in 
the scale relates in a speciﬁc ratio to the size of the others, if set 
correctly type in this scale will appear more pleasing to the eye.  
An interesting point: originally the sizes in the scale were referred 
to by name instead of by point size. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

90
Here are a few examples of some of the older names:
6pt: nonpareil
7pt: minion
8pt: brevier or small text
9pt: bourgeois or galliard
10pt: long primer or garamond
11pt: small pica or philosophy
12pt: pica
14pt: english or augustin
18pt: great primer
21pt: double small pica or double pica
24pt: double pica or two—line pica
36pt: double great primer or 2—line great primer
New software and modern methods of typesetting, have allowed 
character heights that fall outside of, and within, this scale. This 
freedom has resulted in a typographic free—for—all, allowing 
designers to pick sizes that may not be related to one another as 
they are with this scale. Is this a bad thing? I’d argue that it is.
     Let’s go back to the music analogy. It’s like composing a 
discordant piece of music: clashing notes, clashing type. If it’s 
clashing you’re after, that’s ﬁne. If, however, you’re after harmony 
and melody that stands the hairs up on the back of your neck, 
stick to the notes in the scale, folks!
Application of the scale
So let’s put some of this into practice. I’m going to use my design 
studio’s website, markboultondesign.com, as an example.
     I started oﬀ designing this website with something very speciﬁc 
in mind — strong typography. I wanted to make sure this site would 
work based on a simple, clear hierarchy of typography set against 
a simple modular grid, with plenty of white space on which to 
‘hang’ a number of design elements, (the company’s work, 
for example).
     Following the typographic scale described in the previous 
section, I set about applying this to the CSS—based design.
a a a a a a a a a a a a a a a 
6  7  8   9  10 11   12  14   18     21     24       36            48                60                    72

91
These are the elements for the typographic hierarchy. Note, I’m 
using pixels as my base measurement, not points. And, yes, I do 
know the pixels are diﬀerent on diﬀerent platforms, (for example, 
Mac versus Windows).
     The thing about type sizes in CSS is that if you want to 
remain true to typographic tradition, you must specify ems or 
percentages based on an absolute unit of measurement — in this 
case a pixel. If you use the relative — small, x—small etc. — there 
aren’t enough declarations to complete the scale, and the sizing 
of each increment is ﬁxed at 1.5 going up the scale or 0.66% 
going down, (apparently this depends and was also changed to 
somewhere between 1.0 and 1.2 in CSS2). Anyway, I don’t want to 
get ﬁxated on the best CSS approach to this. This chapter is about 
typography, not CSS.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

92
These are the pixel sizes for my main headings:
11px / 16.5px — Body copy and leading.
24px — Main heading used as section headings on the home  
page, portfolio home page and entries.
18px — Headings for journal entries and portfolio subheadings.
16px — All navigational and content tertiary headings.
13px — All other headed elements.
This would give me the following styles visually:
These translate in the following way in CSS, using percentages for 
scaling purposes, basing the scaling from an 11px base size.
11px / 1.5em — Body copy and leading.
218% — Main heading used as section headings on the home page, 
portfolio home page and entries.
164% — Headings for journal entries and portfolio subheadings.
145% — All navigational and content tertiary headings.
118% — All other headed elements.
H1 – Section Headings   
H2 – Entries Headings
H3 – Navigation Headings 
H4 – All other headed elements 
Body copy and leading

93
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
So, within my CSS ﬁle, it looks like this:
body {
 
font: 11px/1.5em “Georgia”;
}
h1, h2, h3, h4, h5, h6 {
 
font—family: georgia, times, sans—serif;
 
font—weight: normal;
}
h1 {
 
font—size: 218%;
}
h2 {
 
font—size: 164%;
}
h3 {
 
font—size: 145%;
}
h4 {
 
font—size: 118%;
}
Using these values for the size of the headings creates a natural 
relationship between them. The typography is harmonious as a 
result and it only took about ﬁve minutes to implement. 
Size really does matter
It really does. If you take anything away from this chapter, please 
let it be this: Stop and think about your type sizes, just for ﬁve 
minutes. Plan them; don’t just choose whatever you feel like from 
the dropdown in Photoshop. Make sure they are ‘in tune’ and 
then apply the theory to whatever medium and content you are 
designing for.

94
Style and weight
Typeface weights are the diﬀerent styles within a typeface family. 
It can be confusing, as the term ‘weight’ does not mean ‘more bold’, 
or ‘heavier’. Many typefaces have a core set of weights: Roman, 
(normal weight), Italic, Bold, Bold Italic and Small caps. There are 
many variations to this, and many typefaces have a huge range of 
weights, from Thin, through to Extra Bold, from Ornamentals 
to Ligatures. 
     Typeface weight, and the choice of weight, is perhaps one 
area of typography that to most designers is simply a matter of 
choice—they are presented with an entire family of weights within 
a typeface to choose from. 
     That choice is often dictated by answering a design problem 
that is aesthetically or content—motivated. Maybe a designer wants 
to set some headlines in ALL CAPS just for some variation; all he 
has to do is choose that weight from a dropdown or to deﬁne it in 
their CSS. What many designers do not realise is that there are 
rules which should govern the choice of weight, (a typographic 
pecking order), which when followed, aid the designer’s 
typesetting and can produce stunning results.
Solving the design problem
Let’s start by addressing the root of the decision to set type in 
diﬀerent weights to solve a design problem. I mentioned that this 
problem stems from two main concerns:
An aesthetic problem. The designer sets type in a certain  
weight to add style or solve some kind of visual or 
compositional issue.
A content problem. The designer needs to set a diﬀerent 
weight because the content dictates it. The main reasons are  
that the language of the content may dictate special   
typographic treatment, the tone of voice may be diﬀerent, 
it may be a quote, or it may be a structural device such as an 
unordered list.
There may be other reasons as well, but I believe these are the 
main cause.
ß
ß

95
Here you can see some of the weights set out and joined by 
lines. The red lines represent the core typeface family. Some 
typographers would argue that without these core weights, 
typefaces are reduced to being used for titles only. I’ll leave that 
one open for debate!
     The other lines show how designers can move along the lines 
when setting type. 
     For example, if a designer has set type in roman and they need 
to add emphasis to a certain point in the copy, they would follow 
the lines to any on the second lines — bold lower case, small caps, 
full caps, and italic lower case or sloped small caps. If they were 
to jump to, say, bold italic lower case, or a more extreme example, 
bold sloped caps, the eﬀect would be horrible.
     If the designer is setting type in bold lower case they could go 
on to add bold caps, or bold italic lower case without much bother. 
You get the idea?
     So, following this simple roadmap can ensure that your 
typography adheres to some simple hierarchical rules and as a 
result your typography will take on a harmonious feel. Don’t just 
take my word for it though, set some type, use the rules and 
you’ll see.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

96
BOLD 
CAPS
bold 
italic
lower 
case
SWASH 
AND
SLOPED 
CAPS
BOLD 
SLOPED
CAPS
SLOPED
SMALL
CAPS
bold 
lower 
case
roman
lower 
case
FULL 
CAPS
SMALL
CAPS
italic
lower 
case
Core Family

97
First a bit of history
Uppercase and lowercase, and the relationship between them, 
have been around for over twelve hundred years. Small caps, 
ornamentals and Arabic ﬁgures were early additions to 
the roman.
     Italics were a strange bunch to begin with. They didn’t associate 
themselves with lower case roman, as we usually see today, but 
with roman caps and small caps. It’s only in recent times that 
usage of italic, within roman, was deemed to be typographically 
correct.  Some of the newest additions to the weights of typefaces 
came with bold, and condensed, as late as the early nineteenth 
century. These were generally used in place of italics and small 
caps. Bold typefaces have now become a standard way of 
diﬀerentiating in typesetting, particularly on screen where italics 
are a little more diﬃcult to read.
     A type family with all of these weights forms a balanced series 
that is not only historically accurate but creates harmonious 
typography. If the setting of copy was reversed, so italics were 
used as body copy, Caps was used as pull—quotes and bold was 
used as access structure, (folios, running heads etc), not only 
would the body of text look terrible, it would also be very diﬃcult 
to read.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Primary  
roman lower case
Secondary 
Roman Upper Case
 
 
ROMAN SMALL CAPS
 
 
italic lower case
Tertiary  
True Italic (Cursive) Upper Case
 
 
SLOPED SMALL CAPS
 
 
bold lower case
Quaternary 
False Italic (Sloped Roman) Upper Case
 
 
Bold Upper Case
 
 
BOLD SMALL CAPS
 
 
bold italic lower case
Quintary  
Bold Italic (Sloped Roman) Upper Case
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

98

99
Chapter Fourteen
Typesetting
Typographic design is such a large topic 
in the practice of design that some of the 
constituent parts need a bit of 
individual attention. 
Take type design, for example. The font industry is big business, 
and rightly so, but to many people this is what typography is, 
simply choosing a font. That’s it. ‘My typography is done, move on 
to the colours.’ Hang on one minute; you’ve forgotten typesetting.
Typesetting, as deﬁned by Dictionary.com, is:
     ‘To set (written material) into type; compose.’
Not very enlightening, but the word ‘compose’, used in this context 
is an important word. ‘Composition’— amongst the many deﬁnitions 
relating it to typesetting, I like this one: 
     ‘Arrangement of artistic parts so as to form a 
     uniﬁed whole.’
Typesetting has a rich history in the craft of the printing trade 
where compositors worked, by hand and later by machines, to 
produce printed material. Then, along came desktop publishing 
and things changed. The basic principles, (I’ll get onto some of 
them), remained the same, but something was lost in translation. 
Typesetting was no longer being done by skilled tradesmen, 
(compositors), but by graphic designers, who arguably didn’t have 
the skills, but were cheap because they worked on labour—saving 
computers. So, from the late 1980s onwards, typesetting suﬀered 
and, as a result, typography suﬀered.
     This may be a little melodramatic for the print—based world, but 
things are a whole lot worse on the web. True, there are technical 
constraints relating to which font you can have, but as I said, 
there’s more to typography than the font.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

100
The measure
The ‘measure’ is the name given to the width of a body of type. 
There are several units of measurement used for deﬁning the 
measure’s width. The three basic units are:
One point = 1/72 of an inch
One pica = 12 points
One em = The distance horizontally equal to the type size, in  
points, that you are using,  e.g., 1em of 12pt type is 12pt. 
 
But, with the advent of DTP packages and website design the 
following are also now used:
Millimetres = mm
Pixels = px
X—height = ex
There is a measurement of ex in CSS which relates to the x—height 
of a character, (at least it’s supposed to), but in reality it’s half an 
em. The x—height isn’t embedded information in most fonts, so the 
browser just interprets it in terms of ems. Interestingly, this is one 
thing that IE5 on a Mac did well; it internally renders a lower case 
x, of the font you are using, and then counts the number of pixels.
     There is an optimum width for a measure, for legibility, and that 
is deﬁned by the number of characters in the lines on a page. A 
general good rule of thumb is two to three alphabets in length, or 
52 — 78 characters, (including spaces). Keep your measure within 
these guidelines and you should have no problem with legibility. 
Please note that this ﬁgure will vary widely with research; this is 
just the ﬁgure I use and it seems to work well as a general rule 
of thumb.
CSS and ﬂuid layouts?
How does a measure react to the increase and decrease in size 
of the body of text in a ﬂuid layout? The entire grid would have 
to adapt to these CSS—deﬁned changes. This is an interesting 
discussion point and challenge. While staying true to the 
philosophy of the ﬂuidity of web design, the designer must still 
make readability a priority. 
ß
ß
ßƹ
ß
ß
ßƹ

101
The measure and leading.
A fundamental rule is that your leading should be wider than your 
word spacing. This is because when the balance between them is 
correct, your eye will move along the line instead of down 
the lines.
     If your measure is wider than the guidelines for optimum 
legibility, then increase the leading — or ‘line—height’ as it’s 
sometimes called. This will have the eﬀect of increasing legibility. 
Your leading should increase proportionally to your measure. 
Small measure, less leading. Wide measure, more leading. It’s a 
simple but eﬀective rule.
Reversing out?
When reversing colour out, e.g., white text on black, make sure 
you increase the leading and tracking, and decrease your 
font—weight. This applies to all widths of measure. White text on 
a black background is a higher contrast than black on white, so 
the letterforms need to be wider apart, lighter in weight and have 
more space between the lines.
Tracking
The general rule of thumb in tracking your words, (not the 
characters), is that the shorter the line length, the tighter the 
tracking should be, and longer line lengths call for 
looser tracking.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
The big pink bus, 
was big, pink and 
most importantly, 
a bus.

102
Your responsibility
Following these simple rules will ensure your bodies of text will 
be as legible as they can be. These rules come from a typographic 
craft background and unfortunately, for our industry in particular, 
they aren’t being taught as much as they should be in the art 
schools around the world. As a result, they aren’t being practiced 
and correct, well—considered typography is taking a nose—dive.
     It’s our responsibility, as designers, to embrace the rules that 
were born of a craft that goes back hundreds of years.
Leading
Leading, or line—height, is the distance between lines of text. The 
term comes from a time when blocks of letters were spaced by 
adding lead strips. The more strips that were added, the more 
the leading. 
     For most applications, you should add a little more leading than 
you think necessary. For 9pt type, I always set my leading at 13pt, 
which is right at the supposed tolerance level for legibility.
     Type can be aligned to the leading values in a document — this 
is called a ‘baseline grid’ as shown below. 
The big pink bus, 
was big, pink and 
most importantly, 
a bus.

103
Leading can also have fractional values of this baseline grid, 
which is called ‘incremental leading’. For example, if a document 
has type set 9pt on 13pt, the baseline grid is 13pt. If there is a 
caption, where the type is smaller than the main body — say 7pt — 
then it would be odd if this was aligned to the main baseline grid 
because the leading would be too great. With Incremental leading, 
the leading of the caption has a fraction of the baseline grid value.
     As shown on the diagram below, the caption type (a) aligns 
with every ﬁfth line of the main body of text (b). The result is a 
relationship between the two, that if an arbitrary leading were 
chosen, wouldn’t exist previously.
The right glyph for the job
One of the aspects of typesetting which seems to be lacking in the 
design profession — and I’m as guilty of this as the next designer—is 
that of a thorough understanding of the written word, and a good 
grasp of punctuation, grammar and structure. Good typesetters 
should really know the language in which they are composing.
     A glyph is the visual representation of a character in a 
font. Sometimes, glyphs can represent one character or a few, 
(depending on the language). Using the right glyph in the right 
place is vitally important for good typesetting. Sometimes, this 
responsibility falls squarely on the author’s shoulders, particularly 
for punctuation, but more often than not, it’s a joint responsibility 
between author, editor and typesetter.
     
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Lorem ipsum dolor 
sit amet, consectetur 
adipiscing elit. 
Vestibulum mattis nisi 
Lorem ipsum 
dolor sit amet, 
consectetur 
adipiscing elit. 
Vestibulum 
b
a

104
The ellipsis
An ellipsis is a punctuation mark comprised of a series of dots, 
or points (…) indicating an omission in the text, an interruption or 
hesitation. The ellipsis is usually three dots, although there are 
instances when it appears to be four. Here are some guidelines for 
using ellipses properly:
     Most fonts have a built—in ellipsis character, so you can use the 
following to insert an ellipsis:
Mac: Option—semicolon
Windows: ALT 0133
XHTML entity: &hellip;
Character reference: &#8230;
Unicode reference: u2026
There are a few grammatical/typographic rules to follow:
An ellipsis at the end of a sentence is not followed by a 
full—stop (period) unless it’s inside a quote or the following 
sentence is functionally complete, e.g.,  I thought ‘we could go…’.
When a complete sentence is ended in an ellipsis, indicating  
some omitted material, there is a full—stop and the next 
sentence begins with a capital letter, e.g. Well, I thought…  Never 
mind, it doesn’t matter.
Sentences ending in an exclamation, or question mark retain   
their mark after the ellipsis, e.g., Could we…?
…
ß
ß
ß
ß
ßƹ
1.
2.
3.

105
Quotation marks
Quotation marks, also called ‘inverted commas’, are used to wrap 
quotations. In the UK, it is common practice to use single marks 
(‘’) except for when there are quotes within quotes, where double 
marks are used. In the US it is common practice to use double 
marks (“”). Again, the proper methods of inserting these marks 
should be used:
Single marks:
Mac: Option+] for left, Shift+Option+] for right
PC: ALT 0145 for left, ALT 0146 for right
XHTML entity: &lsquo; for left, &rsquo; for right
Character reference:&#0145 for left, &#0146 for right
Unicode reference:&#8216 for left, &#8217 for right
Double marks:
Mac: Option+[ for left, Shift+Option+[ for right
PC: ALT 0147 for left, ALT 0148 for right
XHTML entity: &ldquo; for left, &rdquo; for right
Character reference:&#0147 for left, &#0148 for right
Unicode reference:&#8220; for left, &#8221; for right
Quotation marks are the poor fellows who have perhaps suﬀered 
the most at the hands of computing and desktop publishing. The 
marks on your keyboard next to the colon and semi colon are not 
quotation marks, they are primes and double—primes. A prime is 
the symbol commonly used for feet (12'), a double prime for inches 
(12' 6"). Primes can be slanted and can therefore sometimes look 
like quotation marks, so care needs to be taken to make sure you 
use the right glyph. Some typefaces have so—called neutral quotes. 
They look a bit like primes, but are in fact quotation marks without 
the slant — a relic from the typewriter age.
“”  ‘’
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

106
Ligatures
Ligatures are combinations of letters—some of them are functional, 
some are decorative. They are more commonly seen in serif faces, 
although ligatures in sans—serif faces—such as Gill Sans and Scala 
Sans—are important to the typeface and should be used.
     They are generally comprised of certain characters that are 
created to stop collision of elements of letterforms. Take the letter 
‘f’ of a serif typeface. In lower case, especially italic, the top and 
tail of the f move into the character space next to it. These overlaps 
are what typographers call kerns.
     It’s when these overlaps collide with letters next to them that we 
have problems. Take lower case ‘f’ and lower case ‘i’, probably the 
most widely used ligature. When set in Roman, the ascender of the 
‘f’ collides with the dot of the ‘i’; the eﬀect is much worse when set 
in italic. Type designers therefore combined the character into the 
‘ﬁ’ ligature. As you can see, the dot from the ‘i’ is simply removed.
gj!!ß!!!!ehÝ
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

107
Examples of Ligatures
Ligatures and language have been closely tied throughout 
typographic history. Typographers in the sixteenth century 
devised ligatures to cope with common occurrences of letters in 
latin — ﬁ, ﬂ, ﬀ, ﬄ,  (shown above). You will ﬁnd at least a couple of 
these in most fonts. But, as language has changed to incorporate 
diﬀerent words, especially English, the need for more obscure 
ligatures has grown.
     Take the word fjord for example. The ascender of the ‘f’ will 
collide with the dot of the lower case ‘j’. This is resolved the same 
way as the ﬁ ligature in that the dot is removed from the ‘j’. The 
trouble with less common ligatures like this is that they generally 
aren’t in the standard character set of a font, so we kind of have 
to make do, or if setting type in a program like Adobe Illustrator, 
make them by hand. And this brings me neatly onto practical 
usage of ligatures.
Usage in print
I tend to use ligatures speciﬁcally for headlines. Occasionally, if 
the job demands it, I will use ligatures for body copy as well, but 
this does tend to make typesetting a little time— consuming.
     If, for example, I’m creating a logotype for a coﬀee shop called 
‘Flow’s Fine Beans’, (a convenient amount of ligatures present 
there!), the name could simply be set in a font that does not require 
ligatures, but this could make the logotype quite plain. The font 
chosen could be serif, which might include ligatures, but special 
care must be given to the kerning and overall appearance when 
setting logotypes that use ligatures. 
ß!à!Ø!!ï
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

108
This logotype, shown above, is typed using Mrs. Eaves. See how 
the ligatures appear too close to each other creating dense areas 
of type? The gaps between certain letterforms are also unsettling 
to the eye. This needs to be manually kerned.
     If the type is set carefully, the ligatures add typographic interest 
to the words. They add character and begin to tell a story about 
Flow’s shop — it’s a classy place with nice coﬀee too!
     Careful attention to detail at this stage can help deﬁne a 
logotype and go a long way to help deﬁne brand message — all 
through the simple use of ligatures.
But what about on the web?
Ligatures are in the hands of the fonts and the browsers. As with 
all web design, there are inconsistencies between the two, so use 
them wisely. Also, screen readers are bound to have a hard time 
with ligatures, as will Google. Like a lot of web design, until the 
technology catches up, we may have to leave them out.
 
àpxÖt!Ýmdad`mr
gmpxÖt!ehmdad`mr

109
Dashes
The hyphen
The hyphen, or the ‘hyphen—minus’, is what you get when you 
press the key next to zero on the standard qwerty keyboard— well 
mine anyway, (for all those pedants out there). It’s the shortest of 
the three types of dashes and is often used incorrectly. I’ll look at 
the most common correct uses of the hyphen ﬁrst, before moving 
on to the dashes it is often used, incorrectly, to replace.
     There are two types of hyphen: the ‘soft’ hyphen and the ‘hard’ 
hyphen. Sometimes they are diﬀerent lengths, but this depends on 
the typeface.
Hard hyphen
The hard hyphen joins two words together wherever they are 
positioned on the same line. For example, ‘run—of—the—mill’. It’s set 
closed up, (which means no space either side).
Soft hyphen
The soft hyphen indicates where a word has been split at the end 
of a line. Arguably, there’s very little use for the soft hyphen on the 
web when the user has so much control over the presentation of 
the type.
     There are many grammatical rules associated with hyphens, 
which diﬀer greatly from language to language. For British 
typesetting, and the English language, I’d recommend getting 
yourself a copy of the Oxford Guide to Style, (the old Hart’s 
Typesetter’s Rules).
72pt.
Hyphen
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

110
* It’s common practice in North American typesetting to use an em dash for this 
purpose.
The en dash
The en dash is one en in length. It’s slightly longer than a 
hyphen and half the width of an em dash. Em and en are 
typographic measures based on point size. An em is equal to 
the size of the set type (E.g. 12pt) and an en is half that. 
An en dash is used, closed up, (meaning, without spaces on 
either side), in—between elements that show a range, e.g,  
Monday—Sunday, 1985—2005. It is also used when the end  
element is not known: Joe Bloggs (1984—)*.
The en dash can be used to show the meaning of to and from, 
e.g., on—oﬀ switch.
The en dash can also be used to join compound adjectives that 
include multiple words or hyphens already. In this case the 
en dash clariﬁes what is grouped with what, for example, 
high—priority—high—pressure tasks.
In Unicode, the en dash is U+2013 (decimal 8211). In HTML, the 
numeric forms are &#8211; and &#x2013;. The HTML entity 
is &ndash;.
72pt.
En dash
1.
2.
3.
4.

111
The em dash
The em dash, as its name suggests, is one em in width. The em 
dash has been neglected by many writers and designers over 
recent years. Frequently replaced by the hyphen, or that relic 
from typewriter days, the double hyphen ( —— )*, I think it’s about 
time we gave this little fella the time of day.
     Once again, there are diﬀering grammatical usages depending 
on the language being used, and the country in which the text is 
written. In British and North American typesetting there are a few 
simple rules:
Use the em dash closed up in written dialogue to indicate an 
interruption, for example,  ‘What a load of—’, but his words were 
lost on her. 
It can also be used to indicate an interruption in thought within 
a sentence, when a comma would be too weak to separate the 
thought from the rest of the sentence, and a period would be too 
strong. This might happen at the end of a sentence or it can be 
used either side of an interruption—like this one—and is set 
closed up.
In Unicode, the em dash is U+2014 (decimal 8212). In HTML,   
the numeric forms are &#8212; and &#x2014;. The HTML 
entity is &mdash;.
It’s worth noting that em dash usage is inconsistent, not only 
across languages, but also across house styles. The most common 
replacements are an en dash and the hyphen, both set with a 
space, (or a hair space), either side.
72pt.
Em dash
* The usage of this is of course valid on a typewriter where, as with most monospaced 
fonts, the hyphens, em and en dashes all are similar length.
1.
2.
3.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

112
Lists and hanging punctuation
Hanging punctuation, too, has suﬀered at the hands of certain 
software products. The term refers to glyph positioning that 
creates the illusion of a uniform edge of text.
     It’s most commonly used for pull—quotes, but I feel the most 
neglected use is that of bulleted lists.
     With the advent of desktop publishing it suddenly became very 
easy and cost—eﬀective to produce bodies of text. 
     The problem was these bodies of text work within a box. 
Every character in this box had to be within the box — hanging 
punctuation requires characters, such as a quotation mark at the 
beginning of a quote, to be outside of the box. 
     This was a problem for the software and as a result 
was ignored. 
     An important aspect of typesetting was just swept under the 
carpet like that. It’s a great shame.
     Things are now improving: Adobe Indesign is oﬀering support 
for hanging punctuation, and the latest version of Quark may, too. 
Not sure about Microsoft Word — probably not.

113
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Lists
Without hanging bullets
Ranged—left body of type is pretty much destroyed, aesthetically, 
when punctuation isn’t hung. The eye looks for straight lines 
everywhere, and when type is indented in this way, it destroys the 
ﬂow of text.
With hanging punctuation, the ﬂow of text on the left side is 
uninterrupted. The bullets, glyphs or numbers sit in the gutter 
thus highlighting and unifying the list itself. This representation of 
a list is more visually sophisticated and more legible.
Mpsfn!jqtvn!epmps!tju!bnfu/
¦!!Evjt!ufnqvt!evj!ofd!evj/!
¦!!Dvsbcjuvs!tbqjfo!ojci-!vmmbndpsqfs!tfe-!!
!!!!dpowbmmjt!je-!ujodjevou!fhfu-!tfn/!
¦!!Qfmmfouftrvf!ibcjubou!npscj!usjtujrvf!
tfofduvt!fu!ofuvt!fu!nbmftvbeb!gbnft!bd/!
!!!Mpsfn!jqtvn!epmps!tju!bnfu/
¦!!Evjt!ufnqvt!evj!ofd!evj/!
¦!!Dvsbcjuvs!tbqjfo!ojci-!vmmbndpsqfs!tfe-!!
!!!!dpowbmmjt!je-!ujodjevou!fhfu-!tfn/!
¦!!Qfmmfouftrvf!ibcjubou!npscj!usjtujrvf!!!
!!!!tfofduvt!fu!ofuvt!fu!nbmftvbeb!gbnft!bd/!
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

114
Pull—quotes
Without hanging punctuation
Nothing is more irritating than badly typeset quotes. The 
interruption of the ﬂow is considerable and the overall eﬀect 
is unsightly.
Quotation marks should be ‘hung’ as you see in the diagram 
above. In this example, the quotation marks are hung either side 
of the quote. Once again, this allows uninterrupted reading for 
the audience.
Mpsfn!jqtvn!epmps!tju!bnfu/
Ó!!Dvsbcjuvs!tbqjfo!ojci-!vmmbndpsqfs!tfe-!!
dpowbmmjt!je-!ujodjevou!fhfu-!npscj/Ô!!
Qfmmfouftrvf!ibcjubou!npscj!usjtujrvf!
tfofduvt!fu!ofuvt!fu!nbmftvbeb!gbnft!bd/!
!!!Mpsfn!jqtvn!epmps!tju!bnfu/
Ó!!Dvsbcjuvs!tbqjfo!ojci-!vmmbndpsqfs!tfe-!!
!!!dpowbmmjt!je-!ujodjevou!fhfu-!npscj/!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!Ô!!
!!!Qfmmfouftrvf!ibcjubou!npscj!usjtujrvf!!!
!!!tfofduvt!fu!ofuvt!fu!nbmftvbeb!gbnft!bd/!

115
Tables and forms
Tables of data and forms should be given careful design 
consideration. If you forget the usability factors associated with 
forms on the World Wide Web for just one moment, the actual 
visual design of tables and forms should be quite simple: Use 
space well and make sure things line up. Well, it’s not always 
that easy. 
     I had a baptism of ﬁre with forms and tables. When I was 
21, I had a summer internship at an advertising agency in 
Manchester, UK. In addition to the usual lowly tasks of being 
the ‘Spraymount Boy’ — yes, for a while there, I virtually lived 
in the cutting room — I was tasked with helping one of the 
artworkers, (unfortunately, not my best mate who got me the 
job, but a rather grumpy little man from Warrington), to help 
set the tables and forms for a huge plumbing catalogue.
     This thing was enormous — close to a thousand pages of 
cutouts, tables and order forms. The grid was set, the type 
styles were signed oﬀ, and it was just left to me and this bloke 
to ﬁll the pages with thousands upon thousands of little nuts, 
bolts, thingemies and whatsits. Next to each cutout was a table 
that referred to the item’s speciﬁcations, which, in turn, related 
to an enormous order form in the back of the catalogue. Yes, 
this was in the days of mail order — way back in 1994.
As tedious as that particular project was, it taught me some 
valuable lessons for setting tables and forms. Here are some 
of them:
Use a thick rule to denote headlines and thin rules to 
separate lines.
Don’t use alternate background colours in rows, just use one  
and white.
If you can, don’t use vertical lines. Let the data in the tables 
indicate the columns.
To give emphasis to a column heading, set it in CAPS.
To emphasise a column, set it in bold, or highlight with a  
diﬀerent background colour.
Range numerical data right.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

116
Give more padding to the bottom of items than to the top. You can 
still keep the same overall line—height, but this gives the reader a 
sense of more whitespace.
7.
AW      
AW  
AW  
AW  
AW  
AW  
Pontypridd d
——      
——      
0519
——      
——      
——      
Trefforest d
—— 
—— 
0521
—— 
—— 
—— 
Cathays d 
—— 
—— 
0539
—— 
—— 
—— 
Caerfﬁli/Caerphilly d
—— 
—— 
—— 
—— 
0600 
—— 
Heol y Frenhines/
Cardiff Queen Street d
—— 
——
0544
——
0615
——
Caerdydd Canolog/
Cardiff Central d
 
0515
0542
0550
0607
0625
0645
Grangetown d
0519
0546
0554
0611
0629
0649
Heol Dingle/Dingle Road d
——
——
——
——
——
0653
Penarth a
——
——
——
——
——
0657
Cogan d
0522
0549
0557
0614
0632
——
Eastbrook d
0525
0552
0600
0617
0635
——
Dinas Powys d 
0527
0554
0602
0619
0637
——
Tregatwg/Cadoxton d
0531
0558
0606
0623
0641
——
Dociau’r Barri/Barry Dock d 
0533
0600
0608
0625
0643
——
Y Barri/Barry d
0537
0604
0612
0629
0647
——
Ynys y Barri/Barry Island a 
0542
0609
——
0634
0652
——
Rhoose d 
——
——
0618
——
——
——
Llantwit Major d
——
——
0629
——
——
——
Bridgend a
——
——
0642
——
——
——
1
3
6
4
7
5
2

117
Chapter Fifteen
Printing the Web
The screen is just one of the media types 
for which we have to design. Another 
media type, which I feel is often neglected 
during the design process for a website, 
is print.
There are times when a web designer has to know about print 
design—not just the values and aesthetics of designing for print, but 
the terminology, measurements and production values that are 
important in print, including typesetting. 
     Print alternatives to web pages have been around for a while; 
we've all seen them, in one form or another. Usually, they are 
associated with a 'print version' button, which upon clicking, 
renders the page without any navigation and, if you're lucky, 
increases the font size. This is generally about it. Many sites oﬀer 
this functionality but I have to question whether, due to time 
constraints, users click this button, or if like me, they just print the 
page straight from their browser. 
     In which case they will get something like this, (prints from 
Guardian Unlimited and The Times).
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

118
The Times Online
www.timesonline.co.uk
The Guardian
www.guardian.co.uk

119
There is a way, other than 'print only' versions, of rendering this 
content for a printer. I’m referring to print style sheets, or, more 
speciﬁcally, a CSS ﬁle, which has been authored for print media 
and declared as 'print' in the 'media' attribute of the link tag.
The last to be thought about
It's been my experience over the past few years that, despite a 
very clear need for users to print out web pages, designers very 
rarely address this need. Why is that? Do we think that print is 
important in a screen—based environment? Jason Santa Maria, 
graphic designer, had this to say when I asked about it recently:
        ‘Many people still see the web as a temporary medium,    
        one that is always changing and where content is potentially 
        irretrievable. I know many people who love to print things 
        they ﬁnd on sites, from articles to recipes to photos, to view 
        when they are away from the computer or for their own 
        personal archive. There's no reason that information 
        shouldn't either support your brand or be designed with the 
        same care as your site.’*
Khoi Vinh, Design Director of  NYTimes.com and the popular 
weblog, Subtraction.com, agreed with Jason:
        ‘Having developed web solutions for many text—heavy  
        publications in my career, at least one user scenario remains: 
        people like to print long passages of screen—based text for 
        reading oﬄine.’
This then begs the question: If printing from the web is so 
important for users, then why do we see print—based templates 
either being left to the last minute, or being developed by technical 
teams, rather than designers? In addition to implementation 
though, what else inﬂuences the decision for oﬀering a print 
alternative? Khoi makes some valid points about revenue 
generation, through advertising, in the print versions:
        ‘Designers are focused on the immediate, knowable and 
        sharable result of what gets rendered on the screen, so it's         
        natural to consider print media stylesheets an afterthought. 
        But other factors contribute to this, too, notably the 
        monetization of 'printer friendly' versions of articles at many 
        publication sites.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

120
        That is, rather than oﬀer a print—based set of CSS rules, 
        many sites will oﬀer an alternative screen rendering of 
        the same article, slimmed down to just the primary text—
        we've all seen this. Very often, those print—friendly views 
        are sold to advertisers for sponsorship, so in those cases at 
        least, there's a ﬁnancial reason not to create a print media 
        style sheet.’        
This is something that I hadn't really considered when 
researching this book. Jason also raised some interesting points 
about the medium:
       ‘Because print stylesheets are perceived as somewhat non—
        essential to most site creators, their main focus is their 
        website and the appearance of it in various browsers. I think 
        many people see print as a secondary medium, like mobile 
        phones, that is optional. And I suppose it is a secondary 
        medium, as far as the web is concerned, but there is very 
        little preparation involved in producing some simple styles 
        for print.’
Perhaps designers assume that because print styles are deemed 
secondary that they can be added at a later date. 
     This can, at times, be true, but developing the example for this 
book, I found that creating a print style called for revisiting the 
code in the template to make sure the content ﬂow was correct 
and that design elements could be added. So, in that sense, I'm not 
sure that assumption is true.
* Extracted from blog post http://www.markboulton.co.uk/journal/comments/ﬁve_
simple_steps_to_typesetting_on_the_web_printing_the_web/

121
Now that I’ve given you some context, I'll get into the actual design 
of the printed page.
Printing the web: The Guardian
For a good example, I looked for a text—heavy site, with a strong on 
and oﬄine brand that could beneﬁt from print styles. I chose the 
British newspaper, The Guardian.
     Why? Well, The Guardian has an established website. The 
paper version was recently redesigned and now there is 
somewhat of a gap between the appearance of the website and 
printed material. The ﬁrst task was to design what the printed 
page from the website would look like.
Design the printed page
I feel the process of designing the printed content of a website is 
as important as designing for other media: screen readers, mobile 
and small screen. The design process is the same as designing 
for any other media. You have to understand the context, the 
production and the delivery.
     Luckily I chose an example with a very strong oﬄine design 
from which to draw inspiration. I began by researching The 
Guardian's redesign and analysing its components: the grid, 
typography, colour and composition.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

122
I chose a typical page layout, which included running heads, 
article headline, date, author, noting all the content that would go 
into the online version.
     It was clear from this example which areas of the design I 
would need to replicate to ensure a quality reproduction for the 
print styles. I then began to shape up the design.
Shaping the page
I begin most design tasks by drawing thumbnails. This one was 
no diﬀerent.
     As you can see, I knew there were some important issues I 
wanted to address even at this early stage. Width of the measure 
is an essential consideration for printing on an average desktop 
printer. I opted for a full—width measure. Although this may hinder 
legibility due to the long line length, I feel this is acceptable, 
considering the potential savings on paper and toner if the 
measure was narrower.
     From this quick sketch, I worked up a larger, full—size sketch to 
get an idea of proportion of type areas, rules and white space.
     Working at this full size, in pen and paper, gives an immediate 
idea of the scale of the elements on the page. I really would 
recommend this for when you design print alternatives for your 
websites. Draw it out on paper ﬁrst. It's quick and will save you a 
lot of time in the long run.
Quickly sketching the thumbnails 
allows me to solve design 
problems with minimum 
investment.

123
Digitising and colour
I then took the sketch and worked it up in Photoshop, (you could 
use InDesign or Illustrator if you like), to use the typeface I wanted 
and to add colour.
Working at this full size, and then printing it out, gave me a 
template on which to base my CSS measurements. Remember, 
with the printed page we are dealing with absolutes again, rather 
than ﬂuid layouts or diﬀerences in browsers. You can deﬁne type 
size, leading and measurements, which all exist in a ﬁnite space: a 
piece of paper.
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

124
I found that completing this stage of the process really helped in 
pulling the styles together later on.
The ﬁnished article
This shows the ﬁnished printed article page shown next to an 
open spread of the paper. As you can see, it shows a continuation 
of the brand and the content is presented clearly and legibly.

125
A few rules of thumb
This is a bit of a disclaimer. Most browsers print diﬀerently — 
wildly. If you develop a print stylesheet, with an intricate layout on 
Safari, and then print it using IE on a PC, chances are, it will break. 
     Although it’s possible to create fantastic layouts using CSS and 
print media stylesheets, the reality is, you have to keep it 
fairly simple. 
Avoid using absolute positioning.
Use points for your type measurements. For printed text, 
standard 9—12 pt type is considered optimal for legibility.
For line—height of 9—12 pt type, set the value to the type—size 
plus 1 to 4 pt. Incidentally, in graphic design, 9 pt type 
with 13 pt leading is written in shorthand as 9/13, (which 
looks like CSS, but isn’t), and is spoken as ‘nine on thirteen’.
Consider changing your markup. Your html markup is not 
sacred. If there is a need for print stylesheets, then adding 
class names—such as ‘standﬁrst’ to a <p> tag — is 
perfectly acceptable. 
Optimise to black, white and grey. By all means make your 
printed page in colour, but be careful of legibility when it is 
just printed in black and white. Always check it ﬁrst because 
many readers will be using black and white printers.
Experiment with typefaces. Some typefaces don’t work on 
screen, but work very well in print and are available on 
almost every computer, (Zapf Chancery, for example).
Don’t use too much black. You’ll waste loads of toner and your 
users will hate you.
Always set type smaller than you think. The default type size  
in Microsoft Word is 12pt. That’s the largest you really should 
have to set text.
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
Designing for the Web  ~  Typography

126
A ﬁnal word
Typography has suﬀered from the advent of technology, (and I'm 
not just talking about computers here). Designers on the whole 
have divorced themselves from the letterforms and the setting of 
them. As a result, they've forgotten, or not been made aware of, 
the simple typesetting rules which were core to the old system of 
printers’ apprenticeship.
     Typography to me is about design. It's about words and the 
conveyance of meaning. It's about setting words that people read. 
A certain amount of it is creative, a certain amount is expression 
and aesthetics, but mostly, it's about people reading stuﬀ. Do them 
a favour and don't make it diﬃcult.

127
Design and Colour is a monsterous topic. I’m certainly not going 
to cover it all in this section, but that’s not the intention. This book 
is about the basics of graphic design as it applies to the web and, 
as such, I’m going to take what I feel is useful in colour theory and 
just present and explain that. Colour theory can be complicated 
because, over time, it has come to represent three areas of study: 
scientiﬁc, artistic and psychological. 
     Within this chapter, I’m just going to talk about one area — 
artistic — and touch on another, psychological. I’m not going to be 
discussing the science of colour and how that applies to things like 
accessibility on the web; whole books have been written on that 
subject alone. 
     Designing with colour is perhaps the element of graphic 
design which is the most diﬃcult to get right. Why? Because it is 
the most subjective. For some, a palette of dark grey with splashes 
of bright pink will be just great; to others it would just be all wrong. 
Too many designers, whether schooled in colour theory or not, 
end up making subjective decisions about colour and then when it 
comes to explaining those decisions to a client, things begin 
to unravel.
     This chapter will help you move beyond the subjective and 
provide you with the foundation you need to make objective 
decisions. It’s about getting to grips with simple colour theory, 
creating eﬀective colour combinations and making sure you don’t 
oﬀend a traditional Chinese wedding company by designing their 
website in predominantly white (which is associated with funerals, 
by the way).
Colour                
127

128
   4
128

129
Chapter Sixteen
The Colour Wheel
Colour theory involves a great deal of
complex terminology; in this chapter, I’ll 
outline some of the basics.
At its heart, colour theory is concerned with the creation of colour 
combinations via relationships. The relationships are created by 
the position of the colours on the colour wheel. 
     The complexity of colour theory really kicks in when you start 
taking into account diﬀerent hues, shades and tones. It can all get 
a bit too much. So here, I’m keeping things very simple and I’m 
starting at the beginning with primary colours. 
Primary Colours
Primary colours can be divided into two diﬀerent types: additive 
and subtractive. The additive primaries are those which are 
obtained by light: red, green and blue. They combine to form 
white and form the basis of colours on screen, (your TV works in 
RGB, as does your computer screen). Subtractive primaries are 
those obtained by the subtraction of light: cyan, magenta and 
yellow. They form the basis of ‘four colour’ printing and combine 
to form black, the K in CMYK.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Primary colours: 
Red, Green, Blue, and Cyan, 
Magenta,  and Yellow.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

130
The Colour Wheel
The colour wheel not only helps understand the relationship of 
diﬀerent colours but also the classiﬁcation of colours. It also, as I 
said, provides a quick reference to the primary, secondary and 
tertiary hues.
left: Subtractive colours
combine to form black.
right: Additive colours 
reduce to produce white.
The Colour Wheel

131
Primary, secondary and tertiary colours
The primary, secondary and tertiary hues are shown in the 
diagram below. As you can see, it’s pretty straight—forward to 
see how each is produced; primary colours combined create 
secondary colours. Tertiary colours are created by combining a 
Primary and a Secondary. Things start to get interesting when you 
isolate diﬀerent combinations of colours and this is when we get 
into the realms of colour wheel selections.
left: Primary
right: Secondary
bottom: Tertiary
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

132
Colour Wheel selections
Colours, when selected from the colour wheel in certain 
combinations, interact together. This is the basis of colour palettes; 
the interaction of colours. Knowing the basis of these colour 
combination types is essential in creating palettes. 
True, you can rely on gut instinct, (as many designers do), but 
more often than not these decisions are based on experience of 
seeing these colour combinations everywhere in everyday life. 
Really, once you start to notice these diﬀerent combinations, it will 
drive you bonkers.
Monochrome
Monochrome selections are simply one colour from the 
colour wheel.
Monochrome can be any 
colour from the colour wheel

133
Complementary
Complementary selections are based on contrasting colours. 
Sometimes they look horrible and simply do not work. 
However, sometimes they are just the ticket. I generally use them 
if I want a vibrancy in a palette, or if I need to draw the readers 
eye to something. Hues of these colours work great as a highlight 
colour. They are deﬁned by the colours opposing each other on 
the colour wheel.
Triads
Triads are really interesting. They provide tension, which can be 
important in some designs, because their strength is relatively 
equal. Triad colours are any three colours which are equidistant 
on the colour wheel. As all three colours contrast with one another 
they can clash and this is where the tension is created.
Complementary colours 
are deﬁned by the colours 
opposing each other on the 
colour wheel.
Triad colours are any 
three colours which are 
equidistant on the 
colour wheel.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

134
Other Colour Wheel selections 
There are other selections which can be used to form palettes: 
Analogous, Mutual complements, near complements and 
double complements.
     ‘Colours, when selected from from the colourwheel in  
 
     certain combinations, interact together. This is the basis of    
     colour palettes; the interaction of colours.’
Analogous colours, for example, are those which sit immediately 
adjacent on either side of a selected colour on the wheel. However, 
I ﬁnd that I rarely use these four types of colour wheel selections 
consciously. Designers are more likely to choose these selections 
unconsciously, as they appear around us naturally. 

135
Chapter Seventeen
Hue, Saturation and 
Brightness
Describing colour can often be confusing. 
How would you describe brown? Darker 
than red, or more muddy than peach but 
with a bit of red in it, oh and some yellow. 
Having some standard terms to help you describe and organise 
colour would be a useful thing at this point. Enter hue, saturation 
and brightness.
     Hue, saturation and brightness are ways to organise and 
describe colours.
Hue
Hue refers to a speciﬁc tone of colour. It is not another name for 
colour as colour can have saturation and brightness as well as 
a hue. 
A Hue can be any tone or 
shade of any colour on the 
Colour Wheel.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

136
Saturation
Saturation refers to the purity, or intensity of a colour. It is the 
intensity of a hue from grey. At maximum saturation a colour 
would contain no grey at all. At minimum saturation, a colour 
would contain mostly grey.
Brightness
Brightness refers to how much white, or black, is contained within 
a colour.
More Grey                                                                                                                  No Grey
More White  
 
                                                              Less White
More Black  
 
                                                               Less Black

137
The illustration above shows the diﬀerence between saturation 
and brightness. We ﬁrst pick a hue from the colour wheel and then 
reduce the saturation so that the colour becomes more and more 
grey. Then picking a lesser saturated tone, you can see that by 
adding white or black, the brightness of the hue is aﬀected. 
     An important thing to notice is that increasing brightness is not 
the same as decreasing saturation. Decreasing saturation turns 
the colours into shades of grey, increasing brightness turns the 
hue lighter but without making it grey.
     This can be seen more clearly when the same theory is applied 
to a photograph.
     
Saturation
Brightness
The illustration shows a grid 
of colours based on Hue. 
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

138
Here you can see a photograph which has had no tampering on 
the left. First of all, I’m going to decrease the saturation of the 
yellows in the photograph. You can see that the yellows have now 
turned to greys. 
If I increased the brightness at this point, the yellows retain their 
new grey feeling, but just become lighter. Similarly if I decrease 
the brightness — in eﬀect add black — then the yellows retain their 
grey colouring and just turn darker.
left: Original
right: Decreased Saturation 
of Yellow. 

139
Now, If I take the original photograph again and increase the 
saturation of the yellow, the yellows become more pure and more 
vibrant but more importantly, they become more pure and more 
vibrant because they contain less grey. I’ll go through the same 
process again and alter the brightness. The colours, as you would 
expect, retain their new saturation but the white and black content 
is altered accordingly.
left: Decreased Saturation 
of Yellow. 
right: Increased Brightness 
of de—Saturated yellow 
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

140
left: Original
right: Increased Saturation 
of yellow 
left: Increased Saturation 
of yellow 
right: Increased Brightness 
of Saturated yellow 

141
Chapter Eighteen
Colour combinations 
and mood
Colours chosen from diﬀerent spokes on 
the Colour Wheel will provide a variety of 
colour combinations. Deciding upon and 
selecting a colour combination that works 
will very much depend upon the job 
at hand.
Will it communicate what you want it to? Or, are you just choosing 
it because you, or the client, like it? These are diﬃcult questions 
to answer because any designer or client will let their personal 
style and preference interfere with their decision—making. Colour 
combinations tend to evoke certain reactions, based on cultural or 
personal experience. Understanding these experiences will help 
you create colour combinations that tell a story. That is what good 
colour theory can give you: designs that tell a story.
     I’m going to go over a few combinations here to demonstrate my 
thinking, but before I get onto that, it’s worth noting how palettes 
can be presented to potential clients or in design documentation.
Presenting Combinations and Palettes
I’ve always presented palettes in two diﬀerent ways depending 
on the amount of colours. In a broad palette, with many colours, 
I display these left to right with dominance and usage being 
denoted by the size of the square, or block, of colour. For smaller 
palettes and combinations, I use the rectangle containing a line 
and a square. I was taught this simple device in university but it 
is similar to many other examples I’ve seen. You can use circles, 
blobs, lines, squares. It’s up to you. The important thing is to 
indicate the relative weight of colour.
     I was tempted to call this combination a Triad. However, if you 
think back to the Colour Wheel, this is not the case.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

142
In colour theory, “triads” aren’t just any combination of three 
colours. Triads are based on colours which are equidistant on the 
Colour Wheel. 
Colour palette showing 
range of colours and relative 
weight.

143
2
1
3
Subordinate, or base colour. This is a visually weak or subordinate 
colour. It should contrast or complement.
Dominant or main colour. This colour deﬁnes the communicative 
values of the combination.
Accent or highlight colour. The accent colour can be sympathetic 
to the subordinate or dominant colour. Or, instead, you may choose 
an accent colour that is visually strong and striking, and appears to 
compete with the dominant colour. This can provide tension within 
a combination.
Examples of Colour Combinations
Active / Vibrant
Active combinations are intense. They feature bright, 
often complementary, colours on the colour wheel and are 
combinations of primary, secondary and tertiary colours. To 
many people, colour combinations such as this evoke feelings 
of noise, ﬂamboyance and energy. It’s a young combination, 
(although not in all cultures), aimed at young adults. Usually these 
colors aren’t the ones I describe as ‘natural’ on the next page, 
although they may be more intense tones of those same colours — 
and therefore, useful for ‘natural’ applications, such as the 
travel industry.
Colour combination showing 
Subordinate, Dominant and 
Accent colours
1. Subordinate or base colour
2. Dominant or main colour
3. Accent or highlight colour
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
1.
2.
3.

144
Muted / Calm
Muted palettes have a lot of white in the hues. This example 
uses blues and introduces lavender as the dominant colour. The 
resultant colourway, (or combination), is balanced and calming. 
Hues in the blue, green and violet areas of the colour wheel 
convey a visual quietness. The accent is almost always used as 
sympathetic to the dominant. Often used in the cosmetics 
industry, the visual softness of the colours usually portrays a 
feminine quality.
Beneﬁt Cosmetics use of 
Calm colours

145
Pastel
A pastel combination is similar to the muted combination, in that 
it is often based on colours containing a lot of white, (or lack of 
white, if you are using the subtractive CMYK colour model used in 
print work). Where they diﬀer is that pastel combinations combine 
warm and cool tones readily. This combination can portray 
youth and innocence, (babies!), and has a warmth that the muted 
combination fails to deliver.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Coolspotters use of Pastel 
colours throughout

146
Natural
Natural combinations are those colours that are borrowed from 
the great outdoors. Rusty reds, browns, sky blues and warm pinks 
are the order of the day. I ﬁnd the easiest way to create these 
combinations is to go outside, take a photograph and then choose 
some colours from that; you really can create some stunning 
combinations. When you need to communicate rustic charm or 
the feeling of walking through autumn leaves, then this is the type 
of combination you’re after.
The Body Shop’s use of 
natural colours

147
Rich
This is a good one: hues of royalty, tradition, (often religious), and, 
above all, wealth. Rich colour combinations are the combinations 
which are so engrained in culture. True, the actual colours used 
may diﬀer, but the overall eﬀect is seen throughout the world. 
Maroon is often mixed with gold and strong shades of green. For a 
fuller palette, add colours from the natural combination 
described earlier.
Part of the Design Solution
I hope I’ve conveyed what an important role colour plays in the 
design solution. By selecting the best combination of colours, you 
can go a long way toward ensuring the success of your design. 
     We’ve looked at some colour combinations here, but what about 
the individual colours? They communicate their own meanings 
and make a signiﬁcant impact on the mood and tone of a given 
design. Next, I’ll move on to discussing colour and mood. What do 
individual colours mean?
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
ghd’s use of rich colours

148
Moody Stories 
Colours can tell a story in a very eﬀective way because they create 
an emotional reaction from the reader. These reactions can form 
the basis of how a design is perceived. So, if a design uses a lot 
of red and orange, it could be described as ‘angry’, ‘hot’, ‘wealth’, 
‘divine’ or ‘pure’. The latter two in this list account for cultural 
diﬀerences in interpretation of the colour red. In the same way, 
a design which is comprised of a predominantly blue colour 
combination could be described as ‘cold’, ‘calm’ or ‘reserved’.
     Designers must be sensitive to the cultural aspects of the 
meaning and symbolism of colours. Let’s take the example I’ve just 
used of red. In the West, red is seen as a hot colour. It’s vibrant, 
ﬂashy, and angry. In fact, a common saying is ‘seeing red’, or ‘the 
red mist descends’,  indicating anger or fury. However, in the East, 
red is seen as a colour associated with wealth, purity and good 
fortune and sometimes divinity. Another great example is black 
and white. In the West, black can be associated with death and 
mourning. The opposite is sometimes the case in the East; white is 
the colour of mourning. 
     Choosing colours should therefore not only be an exercise in 
ﬁnding the right balance and aesthetic combination of colours, but 
also an exercise in studying the target audience’s cultural norms. 
The consequences of getting it wrong could be disastrous.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

149
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Colours that aren’t colours
Black
In looking at the connection between colour and mood, we begin 
with a colour that isn’t really a colour. Black is the absence of 
colour. In the West, it’s associated with death and mourning, 
but also has an authoratitive, oﬃcial feel. It can sometimes be 
used in branding to give a sense of style; a classy touch. In this 
sense, black can suggest wealth and oppulance. Black should be 
used sparingly, though, especially on the web, due to its value of 
perceived weight. A user will always think a black web page loads 
quicker than a white one.

150
White
White, too, isn’t a colour. Again, there are cultural diﬀerences. In 
the East, white is associated with funerals, death and mourning. 
In the West, the opposite is the case, where white is associated 
with simplicity, purity and goodness. We see white everywhere in 
branding, businesses and buildings where we want to feel calm. 
White is perhaps the most important component of most colour 
palettes because it provides a base colour on which all other 
colours will work.

151
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Primaries
Red
As discussed, red is an interesting subject. In the West: hot, 
passionate and demanding attention and in the East: good fortune, 
wealth and purity. It is also a tricky colour to use eﬀectively in a 
design because of its strength and vibrancy. It is often used as 
an accent colour, to draw the attention of a user or reader. When 
darkened to wine red or burgundy, it has a classier feel, especially 
when coupled with warm oranges and golden yellows. Lighten 
it up and you get pink. I’ve always struggled with pink as a 
colour. I ﬁnd it incredibly diﬃcult to use unless it is part of a 
pastel combination.

152
Blue
Blue is a strong colour. Associated with a calm and soothing 
feeling, when darkened to navy it can also convey traditional 
values. Blue works well with white, and has a wide range of tones 
which also work well with a large variety of colour combinations. 
It can be used to elicit a feeling of trust when combined with 
grey. Modern palettes can be created by adding lime green or 
a calming lilac. Paler blues, more in the pastel range of tones, 
suggest a youthfulness so often seen in products for baby boys; it 
seems that everything designed for them is powder blue.

153
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Yellow
Yellow is a cheerful and bright colour. In its purest form, it has 
associations with nature, childhood, the sun and happiness. 
However, add red to it and you start to move towards autumnal 
feelings. Add green to it and things go a bit horrible; associations 
with disease and illness. The best advice for yellow is to take it 
easy; don’t use too much. When coupled with black, yellow is 
the highest contrast colour, which is why you see it on so many 
warning signs, airport signage, and so many other signage 
systems. We are, of course, just copying nature here, bees and 
wasps use these colours to great eﬀect.

154
Green
A natural colour, green suggests ﬁelds, grass, and trees and 
with this, a sense of calm and well—being. It’s commonly used on 
environmentally—friendly products for the same reason. It can also 
be very vibrant when combined with black and other primary 
colours such as red.

155
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Secondaries and Tertiaries
Orange
As orange has its basis in red and yellow, it shares some of the 
characteristics of its parents. It’s a hot colour, but playful in a way 
red isn’t. This is the youthful yellow in the colour. Orange also 
features highly in natural colour combinations along with greens 
and browns. The associated feeling of changing seasons, growth 
and warmth inspire its use alongside green in packaging for 
organic produce, for example.

156
Brown
Also a natural colour, brown can be used as a replacement for 
black in a natural colour combination. In fact, the impressionist 
artists of the late 19th century did just that. The warmth and 
vibrancy in paintings by Monet is largely due to black being 
replaced by browns and purples. So, if you want to warm up your 
palette, get rid of black and replace it with dark brown — especially 
if you have other natural colours present.

157
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Purple
Purple is a royal colour. Used with golden yellows and light lime 
greens, it can suggest royalty and wealth. Combine it with red and 
orange, and purple tempers the heat of the two other colours, in 
this case it can provide depth. Purple is also associated with the 
feeling of mystery and imagination. Because of this, it is regularly 
used in children’s products.
A lot of this may seem a bit ‘away with the fairies’ and at too high a 
level for the average design project. But the meaning, and cultural 
diﬀerences, of diﬀerent colours really can help inform a design’s 
colour combination.

158

159
Chapter Nineteen
Designing without 
colour
Lowering the Tone
Years ago, when I was in my ﬁrst year on a Foundation Art and 
Design course in Stockport in the UK, I wanted to be a painter, 
(well, an illustrator, to be precise). In the ﬁrst week of this course 
we were all told to get rid of our nice new paintbrushes that we’d 
just purchased for the course. We were told to leave all our new kit 
at home and to go outside and ﬁnd some nice twigs and get some 
black ink from somewhere. I was not chuﬀed. How was an artist 
meant to create with these primitive tools?
     The lecturers had us painting with twigs, our feet, blindfolded — 
the works. At the time I hated it; I couldn’t see the point. Now, I look 
back and really see the value of this horriﬁc couple of weeks. They 
were teaching us how to look and produce marks that weren’t 
dictated to by our tools. In other words, because we had colourful 
paints and lovely sable brushes, the temptation is to use them. 
Without the brushes and the colourful paint, we were forced into 
trying to communicate colour with tone alone.
Removing Colour
One of the things I like about editorial design, speciﬁcally 
typographic design, is the emphasis on black and white. True, 
colour is a very important part of any typographic exercise, but 
primarily I begin by looking at tone and form. I think there’s a 
lot of value in removing colour from the equation entirely and 
focussing on the tonal aspects of a design before applying 
the colour.
     There are a few notable examples of how designing with just 
black make for a unique and attractive design.
     Of course, no discussion about designing with black and white 
on the web would be complete without mentioning Khoi Vinh’s 
site, Subtraction.com. Khoi works with black and white and 
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

160
accents of orange, (in his navigational rollovers), to harmonise 
with the spare, grid—based Swiss undertones of the design. 
Khoi Vinh’s
Subtraction.com is a prime 
example of how to use black 
and white eﬀectively

161
Form, a German design magazine, uses black and white 
typography, (and a strong grid), to convey its brand to the users 
of the site. By choosing black and white for the framework of the 
magazine, any showcased, full—colour work really stands out.
Begin with grey
Next time you start a design, try to follow my simple heading: 
Begin your design using only tones of grey. Don’t introduce any 
colour until the design is working in black and white. Chances 
are, your decisions on palette and colour will be made a lot easier 
because the design — or elements of the design — aren’t relying on 
colour for their function or meaning. This of course is very useful 
for designing with accessibility in mind. I’m not addressing any 
accessibility issues within these articles, as I’d like to focus on the 
graphic design, but it’s an important consideration that shouldn’t 
be overlooked. Designing with black and white ﬁrst will ensure 
that the solution doesn’t rely on colour to work.
German design magazine, 
Form. Full colour works 
very well against a backdrop 
of stark black and white
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

162
I often use colour to highlight speciﬁc elements of the design, 
but generally those elements have a function within the design 
solution, such as the horizontal lines on this site. Another example 
might be highlighting a search button, or elements of a navigation 
bar. Using colour to pick out key functional elements in 
the interface. 
     The beneﬁt of working this way, like other tools at the disposal 
of designers such as grid systems, is that it solves a certain amount 
of problems for the designer. I ﬁnd it focusses my attention on tone 
and composition so that I needn’t worry if this colour matches that. 
Focus on the composition’s tone and, once that’s sorted, move on to 
the colour.

163
Chapter Twenty
Colour and Brand
Can you imagine a classic coke can in any 
other colour? How about the golden arches 
of McDonald’s – can you see them in blue?  
     The essense of the brand is expressed 
through that single colour. Consumers 
rely on that colour recognition to make a 
choice about a brand. One of my favourite 
branding stories is about colour.
Michael Wolﬀ, of the famous branding consultancy Wolﬀ 
Olins, was invited to pitch for the original rebranding of British 
Petroleum (BP). There was tough competition from some of the 
brightest branding companies on the planet. But Michael Wolﬀ 
had the nerve to give a presentation with no words, no brand 
strategy document, no hint of new logo. He just showed slides of 
rolling ﬁelds and trees. He proposed BP owned the colour green. 
The colour green would be the linchpin for the 
rebranding exercise.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

164
top: Coca Cola’s famous red 
hand script
bottom: McDonalds famous 
golden arches

165
BP took this a step further when they merged with Amoco in 
1998. They ‘needed to reinvent the energy business, to go beyond 
petroleum, not by abandoning oil and gas, but by improving the 
ways in which it is used and produced so our business is aligned 
with the long—term needs of the world.’ (Lord John Browne, Group 
Chief Executive, BP).
     Landor Associates were tasked with the redesign. BP has such 
a strong brand, the green was retained and built upon with a new 
positioning, ‘Beyond Petroleum’, and a new logo which took the 
relationship with nature a step further.
left: Old BP Logo
Right: New BP Logo
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

166
Colour expresses personality
Colour is used in branding to evoke a reaction and stimulate 
brand association. 
     The Orange brand was created in 1994 for Hutchison 
Telecom’s UK mobile phone network. Immediately, the brand was 
distinctive, fresh and appealing to the target market. The brand 
used primarily Helvetica as the typeface, but it was the simple, 
bold and consistent colour usage that made the bold statement 
in a brand marketplace. The orange colour was often coupled 
with white, or black, presenting a simple, sophisticated image. 
The resultant modernist appearance appealed to a certain 
audience demographic; mostly young, professional men with a 
high disposable income. Orange were perhaps the ﬁrst mobile 
phone network to introduce style in order to sell phones. They 
were an aspirational brand; they wanted people to aspire to use 
their products. They built this up through advertising, marketing, 
sponsorship and careful product placement. Throughout all of 
this activity, the primary vehicle in brand recognition was a 
colour: orange.
Colour brand basics
Own a colour
As discussed earlier in this chapter, owning a colour is the holy 
grail of brand identity. 
Use colour to build meaning
In chapter thirteen, I described the various meanings colours 
have. If you can align your brand, or design, with a colour that 
makes sense, this will reinforce the meaning of your design.
Develop the best tools to get consistency of colour
On the web, we have good standards for colour reproduction 
— RGB and Hex values. The only down side is the discrepancies 
between monitors. LCD screens tend to wash colour out — 
speciﬁcally pastel tones. PC’s and Apple Macs have diﬀerent 
gamma settings — PCs generally being slightly darker and richer 
in tone. Ensuring colour is consistent across all of these devices is 
impossible, but you should still stick to the standards. Any slight 
deviation can undermine a brand.

167
Consistency across all media
Not only do diﬀerent monitors display slightly diﬀerent colours, as 
described over leaf, but diﬀerent media display colours diﬀerently. 
For example, mobile phones may have diﬀerent screen settings. 
TV and cinema screens, diﬀerent compression codecs in video 
compression can aﬀect colour. Make sure you know the problems, 
and design for the middle ground. 
Be careful with colour coding
You may decide to assign diﬀerent sub-brand colours to diﬀerent 
sections of a website. Colour coding diﬀerent sub—brands is a 
common practice, but depending on the amount of sub-brands, 
can quickly turn into a nightmare. You see, there aren’t enough 
colours with suitable contrast — you can quickly run out. To 
circumvent this, build a brand that does not rely solely on colours 
to determine diﬀerentiation. 
Colour usage should be a considered design decision as part of 
the broader design process. Your colour choices can be based on 
your intuition, or by following some of the theory I’ve discussed — 
both are correct approaches. Your intuition will be informed by 
colour you see around you and you may be surprised at how it 
closely it follows the theory.
     When working with clients, or other members of a team, be 
mindful that every one has a favourite colour, or one they hate. It’s 
your job — however diﬃcult — to provide considered rationale for 
choosing a particular colour. It shouldn’t be because you like it, 
but because it’s the right choice.
Designing for the Web  ~  Colour

168

169
Laying out a website design is where all of the diﬀerent aspects 
of web design come into play. From research, information 
architecture, and user experience design through to the 
typography, colour and grid systems. Creating a layout combines 
all of these, but as web designers, we have to factor in other 
variables such as browser type, screen size and resolution. Do you 
go ﬁxed width, liquid, or elastic? What about other media types 
like print? What about other devices such as the iPhone?
     Creating layouts for the web can be a headache.  With such 
a bewildering array of choices before us, I’ve found time and 
time again that going back to basics — at least initially — helps 
enormously in designing layouts. By using simple tools of 
composition, combined with good typography and colour usage, 
you can achieve a lot with your designs. 
     It’s very easy to become distracted by modern web design. 
The speed at which this medium evolves is sometimes terrifying, 
and with it, the perceived job of a web designer evolves too. I know 
sometimes I’ve felt overwhelmed, confused, and directionless: 
‘Should I learn Javascript?’, ‘What about CSS3?’, ‘How do I ﬁnd 
time to do all of this?’ Sound familiar? At times like this — and I do 
ﬁnd myself asking those questions from time to time — I go back to 
basics. I go back to composition theory, and colour basics. I refresh 
myself with the nuances of setting headlines. I get back to what I 
fell in love with in the ﬁrst place, and layout is one of those things.
Layout                
169
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

170
   5
170

171
Chapter Twenty—One
The Basics of 
Composition
For centuries there has been a link 
between art and mathematics, but how 
can you quantify beauty? How can you 
create a formula for aesthetic appeal? 
Philosophers, mathematicians, architects 
and artists have tried to answer these 
questions for thousands of years.
During art college I was subjected to a lecture on the Golden 
Section, (who remembers that lecture, come on hands up?), 
that ambiguous set of rectangles that is requisite art school 
discussion. During this lecture I was shown slide after slide of 
seemingly tenuous links between paintings and sculptures, and 
this set of rectangles. My lecturer at the time seemed as equally 
uninterested, droning along in self—imposed boredom. What he 
failed to convey at the time, has taken me over 15 years to even 
begin to understand. So what is the importance of these boring 
rectangles and how do they relate to design?
The Golden Section
Many theories on aesthetic measurement have their basis in 
numerical patterns that occur naturally such as the proportions 
of the human body, for example the distance between your elbow 
and the tip of your ﬁngers compared to the distance between your 
elbow and your wrist. Theories, such as the Golden Section, (and 
its many other names), arise from these natural patterns and they 
are applied to art, (either consciously or subconsciously), to create 
‘beauty’ by way of considered composition.
     The Golden Section, Golden Ratio, and the grandiose Divine 
Proportion are all names for the same thing; a ratio of 1.618. 
Nodding oﬀ? Not yet? Good! Bear with me. Here’s the math: the 
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout

172
Golden Ratio is the ratio between two segments so that the ratio 
between point ac/bc is 1.618.
     This may not seem that important, but the Golden Section is 
found throughout nature, mathematics, architecture, art and 
design. It is derived from a naturally occurring number, called Phi, 
which has intrigued humanity for thousands of years.
Many usages of the Golden Section in art — and architecture 
speciﬁcally — were no doubt by complete accident. Artists and 
architects are visually—aware people. Those early experimenters 
were in tune with the proportions of their surroundings and 
incorporated what they saw into their art. They did it because it 
felt right. And it’s this word, ‘felt’, that interests me.
     Throughout art school I was taught to ‘feel’ my way round 
composition. I was taught that when something was right, it ‘felt’ 
right. This school of thought went all the way up through college to 
university and my ﬁrst job as a designer. Composition was about 
feel, not thought. This seemed to go against the very nature of 
what I understood to be design communication and 
problem solving. 
     The biggest problem with the Golden Section is the 
mathematics involved. Using the ratio as a basis for deriving 
layout measurements is, frankly, a bit of a nightmare. Very quickly, 
you can end up with unworkable numbers. This is where the Rule 
of Thirds comes in.

173
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The Rule of Thirds
Photographers have used the Rule of Thirds for years, who 
borrowed it from, yet again, classical artists and architects. The 
theory is simple — which is why it’s easy to apply in your day—to—
day design work. Divide any workspace, or layout, into thirds 
horizontally and vertically, and align key focus points of your 
composition to where the lines intersect. 
1(3
1(3
1(3

174
The Rule of Thirds is easier to use than the Golden Section. The 
simple division of space can easily be applied to designing for 
the web. For ﬁxed width designs, (E.g., 960px wide), the space 
can be broken down into three 320px columns. For ﬂuid designs 
— those that use percentages for layout — they can be divided into 
33% columns. The challenge, however, for applying this theory to 
modern web design, is that we can’t be sure on the vertical space. 
This is where subdividing the Rule of Thirds comes in handy.
1(3
1(3
1(3
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

175
On a web page, we can’t be sure how long a page will be. 
Therefore, we can’t apply the Rule of Thirds to the vertical space, 
but, we can attempt to put some loose guidelines in place. 
     We start by dividing the 960px wide ‘page’ into thirds, giving 
us three, equal columns of 320px wide. We also use the same 
measurements vertically. This will give us nine equal squares of 
320px by 320px. What I’m really interested in here, is seeing how 
we can use this simple sub—division to create guidelines for nearer 
the top of the page — this is where a designer will have the most 
control of vertical space.
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
320px
320px

176
Now, I sub—divide each square into nine equal squares. I’m slightly 
jumping ahead of myself here, as this is now starting to look like a 
grid, and I’m going to come onto talking about that in a couple of 
chapters time.
The only problem with this is that we start getting odd numbers 
cropping up. 320px divided by 3 is 106.66666. We can simplify 
this by rounding up to 107, but having the last division as 106. 
Remember, this is only for approximate guidelines for layout.
     Now, we have some horizontal lines that we can use as a basis 
for laying out elements on the vertical plane. The same process 
can be done with percentages for ﬂuid width designs. The beauty 
of this process is that vertical space is now not based on any 
arbitrary values. There is a direct relationship between anything 
aligned to these lines, to the overall width of the design, to the 
width of the columns, to the width of the sub—divisions and so on. 
Any composition based on this grid will hang oﬀ this 
connected ‘skeleton’.
107 px
107 px
106 px
106 px
107 px
107 px

177
Looking Room
Think back to last night. There you are, settled down in front of the 
TV, watching your favourite soap opera, with a nice hot cup of tea 
in hand. Did you notice — whilst engrossed in the latest love—
triangle — that the cameraman has worked very hard to support 
your eye’s natural movement on—screen? He’s carefully framed 
individual shots to create balance.
     Think back to last week. There you were, sat with your mates 
watching the big match. Did you notice that the cameraman 
frames the shot to go with the direction of play? A player moving 
right will always be framed so that he is on the far left, with plenty 
of ‘room’ to run into.
     Both of these cameramen use a technique called Looking Room, 
sometimes called Lead Room. Looking Room is the space between 
the subject, (be it a football, or a face), and the edge of the screen. 
Speciﬁcally, Looking Room is the negative space on the side the 
subject is looking or moving towards.
     The great thing is, it’s not just limited to photography, ﬁlm or 
television; we can use it in web design too.
Basic Framing
Before we get into Looking Room, and how it applies to web, we 
need to have a look at some basics of photographic composition.
     Many web sites use imagery, or photographs, to enhance the 
content. But even with professionally—shot photographs, without a 
basic understanding of framing or composition, you can damage 
how the image is perceived.
     A simple, easy way to make photographs more interesting is to 
ﬁll the frame.
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout

178
Take this rather mundane photograph of a horse:
By closely cropping, and ﬁlling the frame, we can instantly change 
the mood of the shot.
I’ve also added Looking Room on the right of the horse. This 
is space that the horse would be walking into. It gives the 
photograph ‘movement’.

179
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Subject, Space, and Movement
Generally speaking, a portrait photograph will have a subject and 
space around them. Visual interest in portrait photography can 
come from movement; how the eye moves around the shot. To get 
the eye moving, the photographer modiﬁes the space around 
the subject.
Look at this portrait:

180
The photographer has framed the subject on the right, allowing 
for whitespace, or Looking Room, in the direction the subject is 
looking. The framing of the subject (1), with the space to the left (2) 
— the Looking Room — creates movement, shown by the arrow (3).
     Note the subject is not framed centrally, (shown by the lighter 
dotted line).
1
2
3

181
If the photographer had framed the subject with equal space 
either side, (1 & 2), the resulting composition is static, like 
our horse.
1
2
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

182
If the photographer framed the subject way over on the left, as 
the subject is looking that way (1), the resulting whitespace on the 
right (2) leads to a very uncomfortable composition.
The root of this discomfort is what the framing is telling our eye 
to do. The subject, looking to the left, suggests to us that we should 
do the same. However, the Looking Room on the right is telling our 
eye to occupy this space. The result is a confusing back and forth.
2
1

183
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
How Looking Room applies to the web
We can apply the same theory to laying out a web page or 
application. Taking the three same elements — Subject, Space, and 
resulting Movement — we can guide a user’s eye to the elements 
we need to. As designers, or content editors, framing photographs 
correctly can have a subtle but important eﬀect on how a page is 
visually scanned. 
Take this example:
The BBC homepage uses great photography as a way of promoting 
content. Here, they have cropped the main photograph to guide 
the user’s eye into the content.
By applying the same theory, the designer or content editor has 
applied considerable Looking Room (2) to the photograph to 
create balance with the overall page design, but also to create 
movement of the user’s eye toward the content (1)
2
1

184
If the image was ﬂipped horizontally, the Looking Room is now 
on the right. The subject of the photograph is looking oﬀ the page, 
drawing the user’s eye away from the content. Once again, this 
results in a confusing back and forth as your eye ﬁghts its way 
over to the left of the page.
A little bit of Art Direction
Art Direction can be described as the act or process of managing 
the visual presentation of content. Art Direction is diﬃcult to do on 
the web, because content and presentation are, more often than 
not, separated. But where there are images, and when we know 
the templates that those images will populate, we can go a little 
way to bridging the gap between content and presentation.
     By understanding the value of framing and Looking Room, and 
the fact that it extends beyond just a good looking photograph, 
we can start to see photography playing more of an integral role 
in the communication of content. We won’t just be populating 
templates. We’ll be art directing.

185
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The Triangle
The humble triangle is a powerful aid in composing layouts. For 
centuries, the triangle has been used to guide the eye of the reader 
or viewer, particularly in ﬁne art. The Last Supper, by Leonardo 
da Vinci, is perhaps one of the most well known paintings to use 
triangles as a primary compositional device.

186
In order to guide the onlooker’s eye to the main subject of the 
painting — Jesus Christ — Da Vinci created whitespace, in the form 
of a triangle either side of Him. Christ Himself is composed in a 
triangular pose, with His disciples also adopting triangular poses.  
A simple, but powerful device for guiding the eye. 
This theory has been taken and used in photography, 
architecture, and graphic design for many years. Having three 
points of focus on a design provides a balance and subsequent 
movement of the reader’s eye. But how can this theory of 
composition work on the web? An example of how to use this is on 
the teaser site for this very book.

187
The design for the teaser site was purposefully simple. A few 
colours, a few blocks of ﬂat colour. With so many spare content 
elements, the challenge is providing enough emphasis to guide 
the user. I designed it using the triangle, with the three points 
corresponding to three important content elements; the Five 
Simple Steps logo in the top left (1), the orange circle letting our 
readers know when the book would be launched (2), and the 
yellow book cover (3). The natural movement of the eye is from 
left to right in the western world, so the user would naturally 
begin at the Five Simple Steps logo, move over to the orange circle, 
and then be drawn to the yellow cover.
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
3
2
1
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

188
The challenge, when using a triangle as a compositional aid, is 
ensuring it’s not overt and overbearing. The triangle should aid 
composition, not be evident in the design itself — unless of course, 
that is the intention. The triangle is such a powerful visual device; 
there is a danger the readers eye will skip from one point to 
another without reading, or viewing, the content in—between.
     Any compositional tool — such as those I’ve outlined in this 
chapter — are there to help. They can provide answers to tricky 
layout problems. They can go towards making your designs look 
better. But, unfortunately for us, they’re not a quick ﬁx for every 
project. Just because you use the Golden Section, or compose your 
layout based on the Rule of Thirds, it doesn’t automatically mean it 
will be eﬀective. These few tools are just meant to be a 
starting point.

189
Chapter Twenty—Two
Spatial Relationships
Space is important in layout. Space can be 
created by content – such as text, images, 
lists, logos etc. – or it can be created by the 
space in—between content, called negative 
space, or whitespace. Space can be 
passive; a by—product of the layout process. 
Or, it can be active; there for a reason, to 
guide the user’s eye, or help them make 
a decision.
Size and Shape
Shapes are elements that can communicate ideas — for example, 
the BP logo I previously discussed in Part 2. Unusual shapes can 
attract attention, whilst conventional shapes — when combined 
with colour — convey meaning. Take a red triangle for example. 
From computer software, to road traﬃc signs, a red triangle 
means warning. Something’s wrong. Whereas a green circle, 
means everything’s good. Proceed.
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout

190
In classical design, there are three types of shape: geometric, 
natural, and abstract. Geometric shapes are what you’d expect: 
circles, squares, triangles, rectangles and diamonds. Natural 
shapes are derived from what we see around us. Abstract shapes 
can be both representative — impressionistic — or they can be 
expressionistic. Like the art movements, impressionistic abstract 
shapes are meant to represent something else. Expressionistic 
shapes convey meaning, or emotion.
Shape and size are two of the basic elements of graphic design 
that determine space. If I change the shape of something, then I’m 
changing the space around it. If I increase the size of the shape, I 
decrease the space around it. 
     Now, all of this is quite abstract at the moment. How can you 
apply this theory to your every day work? How will knowing the 
diﬀerence between abstract and geometric shapes make any 
diﬀerence to you? Well, it’s about learning how to look.
.6
           Geometric                                                      Natural                                                                  Abstract

191
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Throughout art school, then through design school, my lecturers 
and professors would encourage me to view things diﬀerently. 
To simplify my environment into shapes. To look at the space 
in—between things. To have an appreciation of shape, size, and 
tone. By looking at the world this way, you can start to understand 
the richness and complexity of design all around us. 
Typographic Colour
Typographic colour refers to the density of type on a page — either 
a physical page, or on screen. The ‘shade’ of typographic colour 
can have an impact on legibility — too dark, with no typographic 
hierarchy, and your content will be diﬃcult to read. Too light a 
shade of typographic colour, and your content will also be diﬃcult 
to read with readers ﬁnding it hard to read line to line. But there’s 
plenty you can do to make things easier for your readers.
Let’s look at some examples of dark typographic colour:
The ﬁrst paragraph here is set in Helvetica. Clearly, the leading 
— or line—height — is set too small. The second paragraph 
uses correct leading but italic, serif typefaces generally have 
letterforms set too closely together.
3VYLTPWZ\TKVSVYZP[HTL[JVUZLJ[L[\YHKPWPZJPUNLSP[0UHZHWPLU*YHZULJSLJ[\Z+VULJ
[YPZ[PX\L[YPZ[PX\LW\Y\Z<[YPZ\ZZHWPLUJVUZLJ[L[\YZP[HTL[YOVUJ\Z]LS]\SW\[H[L]LS[VY[VY
(LULHUMH\JPI\Z7YVPU]P[HLZHWPLU:\ZWLUKPZZL]LULUH[PZ[LTWVYHYJ\(SPX\HTLYH[]VS\[WH[
4H\YPZTH\YPZ7YVPULSP[VYJP\SSHTJVYWLYH[WSHJLYH[]P[HLNYH]PKH[YPZ[PX\LUPIO
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. In a sapien. Cras nec lectus. Donec tristique tristique 
purus. Ut risus sapien, consectetur sit amet, rhoncus vel, vulputate vel, tortor. Aenean faucibus. Proin vitae 
sapien. Suspendisse venenatis tempor arcu. Aliquam erat volutpat. Mauris mauris. Proin elit orci, ullamcorper 
at, placerat vitae, gravida tristique, nibh. 
Top: Paragraph set in 
Helvetica with leading 
too tight
Bottom: Paragraph set in 
Garamond Italic with poor 
letter spacing

192
To correct these two paragraphs, we need to add more leading to 
the ﬁrst, and add some letter—spacing to the last. But remember, 
don’t add too much. Type designers have carefully crafted 
the distances between letterforms. To disrupt that distance 
is to tamper with the very ‘feel’ of the typeface, and can have 
disastrous consequences.
Now, let’s look at some examples of light typographic colour:
3VYLTPWZ\TKVSVYZP[HTL[JVUZLJ[L[\YHKPWPZJPUNLSP[0UHZHWPLU*YHZULJSLJ[\Z+VULJ
[YPZ[PX\L[YPZ[PX\LW\Y\Z<[YPZ\ZZHWPLUJVUZLJ[L[\YZP[HTL[YOVUJ\Z]LS]\SW\[H[L]LS[VY[VY
(LULHUMH\JPI\Z7YVPU]P[HLZHWPLU:\ZWLUKPZZL]LULUH[PZ[LTWVYHYJ\(SPX\HTLYH[]VS\[WH[
4H\YPZTH\YPZ7YVPULSP[VYJP\SSHTJVYWLYH[WSHJLYH[]P[HLNYH]PKH[YPZ[PX\LUPIO
3VYLTPWZ\TKVSVYZP[HTL[JVUZLJ[L[\YHKPWPZJPUNLSP[0UHZHWPLU*YHZULJSLJ[\Z+VULJ
[YPZ[PX\L[YPZ[PX\LW\Y\Z<[YPZ\ZZHWPLUJVUZLJ[L[\YZP[HTL[YOVUJ\Z]LS]\SW\[H[L]LS[VY[VY
(LULHUMH\JPI\Z7YVPU]P[HLZHWPLU:\ZWLUKPZZL]LULUH[PZ[LTWVYHYJ\(SPX\HTLYH[]VS\[WH[
4H\YPZTH\YPZ7YVPULSP[VYJP\SSHTJVYWLYH[WSHJLYH[]P[HLNYH]PKH[YPZ[PX\LUPIO
Lorem ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. In a sapien. Cras nec lectus. Donec tristique 
tristique purus. Ut risus sapien, consectetur sit amet, rhoncus vel, vulputate vel, tortor. Aenean 
faucibus. Proin vitae sapien. Suspendisse venenatis tempor arcu. Aliquam erat volutpat. Mauris 
mauris. Proin elit orci, ullamcorper at, placerat vitae, gravida tristique, nibh. 
Lor em ipsum dolor sit amet, consectetur adipiscing elit. In a sapien. Cras 
nec lectus. Donec tristique tristique purus. Ut risus sapien, consectetur sit 
amet, rhoncus vel, vulputate vel, tortor. Aenean faucibus. Pr oin vitae sapien. 
Suspendisse venenatis tempor arcu. Aliquam erat volut pat. Mauris mauris. 
Pr oin elit orci, ullamcor per at, placerat vitae, gravida tristique, nibh. 
Top: Paragraph set in 
Helvetica with leading 
corrected
Bottom: Paragraph set 
in Garamond Italic with 
corrected letter spacing

193
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Using the same typefaces as before, this example shows that by 
setting a paragraph with too much leading, or too much letter—
spacing, can also result in an uncomfortable reading experience.
     Typefaces themselves can also have a bearing on typographic 
colour. Some typefaces have wide, open counters, and large spaces 
between the letterforms, (called kerns). Whilst others have tight 
counters, with minimal open space in the letterforms. Even the 
choice of typeface can play a signiﬁcant role in the typographic 
colour of your ﬁnal design. 
White Space
My ﬁrst design job was based in a small studio in Manchester city 
centre in the UK. It was mostly a print design agency that produced 
work for various large and small clients alike, in varying media: 
packaging, publications, marketing support material etc. One of the 
avenues of output for the studio was Direct Mail.
     Designing for Direct Mail is actually quite tricky, for one simple 
reason: it goes against the fairly sophisticated graphic design 
principles, which is standard fare in college. Instead, designing 
Direct Mail is about as sophisticated as a small lump of concrete. 
Direct—Mail clients want to appear down—market, there is no getting 
away from the fact that it works as well: big, bold and brash design 
is the order of the day. And in the words of one client, words that I 
will never forget as long as I’m a practicing graphic designer; ‘White 
Space is empty space’.
     However, for the most part, he couldn’t have been further from 
the truth.
Deﬁnition 
White, or Negative Space is the space in—between elements in a 
composition; be that a web page, a web app or a spread in 
a magazine. 
     Actually, that’s only a part truth. The space between major 
elements in a composition is Macro White Space. Micro White 
space, is, yes you’ve guessed it, the White Space between elements 
such as list items, the space between a caption and an image, or the 
space between words and letters. 

194
Legibility
A while ago I was lucky enough to go and see Erik Spiekermann 
give a lecture. Part of his talk was about his redesign of The 
Economist magazine. He mentioned one of the primary reasons for 
the redesign was the Economist thought their design was too heavy. 
The content was diﬃcult to read.
     In newspaper design — which has so many parallels with web 
design — information is dense. Sometimes, as in web design, it’s 
diﬃcult to add white space because the content makes it hard to 
do so. Newspapers often deal with this by using a typeface for the 
body, which is quite light and has plenty of white space within, 
and around, the characters. This was part of Erik’s solution for the 
redesign of the Economist. 
     He redesigned the typeface slightly, whilst retaining the 
quirkiness of the original. He added more whitespace to the 
individual characters. He set the type slightly smaller I believe, 
with more leading. All of this was adding Micro White Space to the 
design. The overall result was subtle. The content was more legible 
and the overall feeling of the magazine was lighter, yet there was 
still the same amount of content.
I learnt from Erik that day that, in order to achieve a lightness and 
an increase in legibility in a design, and this especially applies 
to the web, you don’t have to look at the design at a macro level. 
Looking at the space between the tiny stuﬀ, at the micro level, can 
have a big impact on the eﬀectiveness of a design.
                            Macro white space                                                                         Micro white space
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

195
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
White Space helps position brands
For years, designers have been using White Space in their designs 
to create a feeling of sophistication for upscale brands. This is 
where the Direct Mail client was actually correct in his view on 
white space for his product; adding white space to his design would 
position his product more upscale than it was. 
     Coupled with a sensitive use of typography and photography, a 
careful use of White Space is seen all over certain brand markets 
to align themselves with their competitors. Take cosmetics for 
example, in fact most luxury goods, use white space in their 
marketing material to ‘tell’ the reader that they are sophisticated, 
of high quality and generally expensive. The opposite can be said 
of most Direct Mail you get through your letterbox; Red, white and 
black, bold typography and very little whitespace. The result is a 
down—market impression.
Take the following example.
The content is the same on both designs, as are the elements such 
as photography. The design elements diﬀer however, to create two 
designs which are at opposite ends of the brand spectrum. 
     Of course, this is a very simpliﬁed view of the world and there’s a 
lot more that goes into brand recognition than simply White Space. 
But what I’m trying to get at is if a brief lands on your desk for a 
luxury brand, I’ll bet the client and audience of that product expects 
white space in their marketing material and plenty of it to align it 
with their competitors.
                 Less space = cheap                            White space = luxury

196
Active and Passive White Space
White Space is often used to create a balanced, harmonious layout. 
One that just ‘feels’ right. It can also be used to take the reader on a 
journey through the design. In the same way a photographer leaves 
‘looking room’ in a portrait shot, by positioning the subject oﬀ the 
centre of the frame and having them looking into the remaining 
space, a designer can do this to increase the eﬀectiveness of 
their design.
     Another way of looking at white space is by how a reader, or 
user, reacts to it. White space can not only be used by the designer 
to create harmony and balance in design, or to help position a 
brand, but it can be used to lead a reader from one element to 
another. This is called Active White Space. 
Let’s take the following example before any active white space 
is applied:
So, everything is pretty cramped here. We then need to add some 
white space to create the harmony and visual comfort in the design. 
Here, I’m adding margins, changing the type family and weight and 
also adding some leading, (or line—height as it’s also known).
7VU[PUNKLMLUKZ,UNSHUKOPLYHYJO`
;YP\TWOHU[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPU9PJR`7VU[PUNILSPL]LZ[OLSL]LSVMJYP[PJPZTHPTLKH[,UNSHUKJVHJO
+\UJHU-SL[JOLYHUKJHW[HPU(UKYL^-SPU[VMMPZ\UMHPY
(\Z[YHSPH^VU[OLÄYZ[[OYLL;LZ[Z[VYLNHPU[OL(ZOLZHUKOH]L^VUV\[VMV]LYHSSZPUJL[OLPY
SVZZPU
¸;OLYLHYLN\`ZPU[OL[LHTVYPU[OLZX\HKHUKP[Z]LY`OHYZO[VISHTL[OLJVHJOHUKJHW[HPU¹
OLZPHK
¸;OL`OH]LU[WSH`LKHU`^OLYLULHYHZ^LSSHZ[OL`»KSPRLKI\[^LOH]LU[NP]LU[OLT[OLVWWVY[\UP[`
[V¹
7VU[PUNPZVUS`[V^LSSH^HYLVM[OLLTV[PVUZ[OH[-SL[JOH[HUK-SPU[VMMHYLL_WLYPLUJPUNHZP[PZVUS`
TVU[OZZPUJLOLILJHTL[OLÄYZ[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPUMVY `LHYZ[VSVZLHU(ZOLZZLYPLZ7VU[PUN
^OVJLSLIYH[LKOPZUKIPY[OKH`VU;\LZKH`OHZYLZWVUKLKTHNUPÄJLU[S`^P[O[OLIH[PU[OLJ\YYLU[
ZLYPLZTHRPUNV]LYY\UZPUOPZÄYZ[ZP_PUUPUNZ
PUJS\KPUN[^VIPNJLU[\YPLZ

197
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The white space that has been added here is Passive White Space. 
There is a theory that Passive White Space is white space that is 
present within a composition that is unconsidered. I disagree: that’s 
just bad design. Passive Whitespace still has an important job to 
do; it’s there to create breathing room and balance. Now, within 
this content is something that I want the reader to see, the second 
quote. I could highlight it with a diﬀerent colour or make the type 
size larger. I could do all of those at the same time. In this instance 
however, I’ve added white space around the element to draw the 
users eye, in addition to reducing the white space of the type, not 
the tracking, but actually making the type bold. This is Active 
White Space. White Space that is added to a composition to better 
emphasise or structure information.
7VU[PUNKLMLUKZ,UNSHUKOPLYHYJO`
;YP\TWOHU[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPU9PJR`7VU[PUNILSPL]LZ[OLSL]LSVMJYP[PJPZTHPTLKH[,UNSHUKJVHJO
+\UJHU-SL[JOLYHUKJHW[HPU(UKYL^-SPU[VMMPZ\UMHPY
(\Z[YHSPH^VU[OLÄYZ[[OYLL;LZ[Z[VYLNHPU[OL(ZOLZHUKOH]L^VUV\[VMV]LYHSSZPUJL[OLPY
SVZZPU
¸;OLYLHYLN\`ZPU[OL[LHTVYPU[OLZX\HKHUKP[Z]LY`OHYZO[VISHTL[OLJVHJOHUK
JHW[HPU¹OLZPHK
¸;OL`OH]LU[WSH`LKHU`^OLYLULHYHZ^LSSHZ[OL`»KSPRLKI\[^LOH]LU[NP]LU[OLT[OL
VWWVY[\UP[`[V¹
7VU[PUNPZVUS`[V^LSSH^HYLVM[OLLTV[PVUZ[OH[-SL[JOH[HUK-SPU[VMMHYLL_WLYPLUJPUNHZP[PZVUS`
TVU[OZZPUJLOLILJHTL[OLÄYZ[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPUMVY `LHYZ[VSVZLHU(ZOLZZLYPLZ
7VU[PUN^OVJLSLIYH[LKOPZUKIPY[OKH`VU;\LZKH`OHZYLZWVUKLKTHNUPÄJLU[S`^P[O[OLIH[PU
[OLJ\YYLU[ZLYPLZTHRPUNV]LYY\UZPUOPZÄYZ[ZP_PUUPUNZ
PUJS\KPUN[^VIPNJLU[\YPLZ
7VU[PUNKLMLUKZ,UNSHUKOPLYHYJO`
;YP\TWOHU[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPU9PJR`7VU[PUNILSPL]LZ[OLSL]LSVMJYP[PJPZTHPTLKH[,UNSHUKJVHJO
+\UJHU-SL[JOLYHUKJHW[HPU(UKYL^-SPU[VMMPZ\UMHPY
(\Z[YHSPH^VU[OLÄYZ[[OYLL;LZ[Z[VYLNHPU[OL(ZOLZHUKOH]L^VUV\[VMV]LYHSSZPUJL[OLPY
SVZZPU
¸;OLYLHYLN\`ZPU[OL[LHTVYPU[OLZX\HKHUKP[Z]LY`OHYZO[VISHTL[OLJVHJOHUK
JHW[HPU¹OLZPHK
¸;OL`OH]LU[WSH`LKHU`^OLYLULHYHZ^LSSHZ[OL`»KSPRLKI\[^LOH]LU[NP]LU[OLT[OL
VWWVY[\UP[`[V¹
7VU[PUNPZVUS`[V^LSSH^HYLVM[OLLTV[PVUZ[OH[-SL[JOH[HUK-SPU[VMMHYLL_WLYPLUJPUNHZP[PZVUS`
TVU[OZZPUJLOLILJHTL[OLÄYZ[(\Z[YHSPHJHW[HPUMVY `LHYZ[VSVZLHU(ZOLZZLYPLZ
7VU[PUN^OVJLSLIYH[LKOPZUKIPY[OKH`VU;\LZKH`OHZYLZWVUKLKTHNUPÄJLU[S`^P[O[OLIH[PU
[OLJ\YYLU[ZLYPLZTHRPUNV]LYY\UZPUOPZÄYZ[ZP_PUUPUNZPUJS\KPUN[^VIPNJLU[\YPLZ

198
Practice, practice, practice
Sometimes, the only way to get to grips with a concept that can 
be as arbitrary and subjective as White Space, is to practice. In 
the same way martial artists have to spend hours upon hours of 
drilling simple techniques, graphic designers have to do the same. 
For many designers, this part of the craft is all but forgotten once 
you leave High School and replaced with classes on lateral thinking 
and design history. Working under the pressure of real clients 
demanding real work leaves little room for the time needed for 
these design ‘drills’. If you do ﬁnd yourself with a spare hour or two 
though, I have a great place to start.
     Graphic design students have conducted these types of 
compositional exercises for decades and luckily for us, some of the 
design legends of past years have documented the process. One of 
my favourites has to be Emil Ruder.
     Emil Ruder was a Swiss typographer who died in 1970. After 
21 years of teaching typography, he produced a book called 
‘Typography: A Design Manual’ (ISBN: 3—7212—0043—8). 
     ‘The book is deliberately restricted to pure typography, to 
     working with prefabricated types which are subordinated 
     to a precise system of measurements. Its purpose is to 
     make apparent the laws of typography and — in spite of certain 
     common features – the contrast between it and graphic design 
     which in both the selection and means of their application, is 
     freer and more complex.’
So, in that sense, Ruder’s teachings are fairly black and white. 
There is a focus on typography and the subtlety of designing with 
letterforms. Ruder takes you through the rights and wrongs, which 
is a great place to start learning the fundamental principles. There 
are some great exercises in there covering not only white space, but 
also other compositional devices. It’s chock—a—block with drills. It’s 
expensive, but I urge you to buy this book and follow the examples.
     White Space is not about the space in between things; the space 
‘left over’. Knowing how to design and manipulate the space outside, 
in and around your content will not only give your readers a head 
start, or your product the right market positioning, but will perhaps 
make you see your content in a new light.

199
Chapter Twenty—Three
Grid Systems
Before we even begin to tackle designing 
grid systems we need to have a basic 
understanding of what they are, why we 
use them and where they came from.
In the context of graphic design, a grid is an instrument for 
ordering graphical elements of text and images. The grid is a 
child of Constructivist art and came into being through the same 
thought processes that gave rise to that art movement. Clear links 
can also be drawn between the Concrete—Geometrical art of 
the Zurich school in the 1930’s and several notable artists of this 
movement made important contributions to typography through 
their ﬁne art.
     It was around this period that the grid system moved from the 
domain of art and into one of typography and 
commercial design.
     First of all when talking about grid systems we have to mentally 
separate form and function. We have to think about aesthetics and 
proportions as a result of considered construction. This can be 
quite tricky for designers who have been schooled in the ‘you’ll 
know it’s right when it feels right’ school of composition. But as you 
read earlier in this part, ‘feeling right’ is an emotional reaction to 
construction, to mathematics.
     Ratios and equations are everywhere in grid system design, 
such as my example from the chapter on the Rule of Thirds. 
Relational measurements are what deﬁne most systems, from 
simple leaﬂet design to the complexity of newspaper grids. To 
design a successful grid system you have to become familiar with 
these ratios and proportions, from rational, whole—number ratios 
such as 1:2, 2:3, 3:4 and those irrational proportions based on the 
construction of circles, such as the Golden Section 1:1.618 or the 
standard DIN sizes 1:1.4146.
     These ratios are ubiquitous in modern society, from the 
buildings around us to patterns in nature. Using these ratios 
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout

200
successfully in a grid system can be the deciding factor in 
whether or not a design, not only functions, but has aesthetic 
appeal too.
     A grid system is a grid design that has been designed in such a 
way that it can be applied to several diﬀerent uses without altering 
its form. An example of this would be a grid system for a book 
whereby you have many diﬀerent page types — part—opening, 
title, half—title etc. — and would need only one grid to use on all the 
page types. Or a website that has a homepage, a section index, 
a category index, and an article page. A grid system provides 
consistency across these pages or sections.
     The danger with designing a system to cope with many 
diﬀerent variants is complexity. When you add complexity, you 
can decrease usability and there is a danger the grid would 
become so complex the designer can’t use it. This thought should 
always be running through your head when designing a grid 
system — keep it simple, but comprehensive, and above all, usable.
     It is often said of grid systems that they limit the scope for 
creativity or leave no freedom. Karl Gerstner, one of Switzerland’s 
pre—eminent graphic designers, was aware of this conﬂict with the 
designer’s adoption of grid systems.
     ‘The typographic grid is a proportional regulator for type—
     matter, tables, pictures and so on. It is a priority programme 
     for a content as yet unknown. The diﬃculty lies in ﬁnding the 
     balance between maximum formality and maximum 
     freedom, or in other words, the greatest number of constant 
     factors combined with the greatest possible variability.’
The grid is a regulatory system that pre—empts the basic formal 
decisions in the design process. Its preconditions help in the 
structuring, division and ordering of content. I’m not saying a 
well—designed grid will solve all of your compositional problems, 
far from it, but it goes some way to creating a coherent structure 
in design that in turn creates the aesthetic values all of us are 
seeking in our designs.

201
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Constructing a Grid System
The canvas for a grid system is determined by the media size; a 
book, magazine, signage, or a website. The beneﬁt for designing 
in more traditional media forms is that your canvas will remain 
constant. It will not change its shape. Of course on the web, the 
user can not only view your site in many diﬀerent browsers, on 
multiple platforms, but can also resize their browser window to 
the resolution of their screen. Designing to such variables is a 
challenge. To successfully design a grid system for the modern 
web, we have to look at a best—case scenario, and graceful 
degradation. 
In 2006, Jakob Nielsen wrote on his famous Alertbox:
‘Optimise web pages for 1024 x 768 pixels’
Then, 60% of all monitors were set at 1024 x 768 pixels. Now, in 
2009, that number is down to 30%, with the majority of monitors 
shipping with higher resolutions. 800 x 600 px resolution is 
hovering somewhere in the region of 5%.
     If we use 1024px as the base, that means we will be 
accommodating over 90% of users. Many of our users will be 
using higher resolutions, so we have to take that into account also.
The Brief
Any grid system design will begin with a brief. With that brief 
will come constraints. What I look for in a brief is a ﬁxed element 
from which to derive the grid. That element could be the screen 
resolution, (as best we can estimate), or it could be something as 
simple as image sizes.
     For example, if you were redesigning a site and the site owner 
had a huge amount of images that he still required in the new site, 
I’d start by looking at the horizontal size of the images, and seeing 
if I could subdivide to create by unit size. If the images were 240px 
wide, you could divide them by 4, to give 60px, then use 10px of 
that for your gutter, giving you a unit size of 50px. Extrapolating 
that value out would give you a grid of 16 columns of a 50px unit, 
with a 10px gutter. The beauty of this approach is that you can 
be sure that the ﬁxed part of the brief — the constraint — can be 
accommodated with ease.

202
Ratios
Ratios are at the core of any well—designed grid system. 
Sometimes those ratios are rational, such as 1:2 or 2:3, others 
are irrational such as the 1:1.414, (the proportion of A4 paper). 
As I discussed earlier in this Part, you can use the Rule of Thirds 
to create a grid system, or the Golden Section to create more 
complex grid structures. The challenge is using these ratios 
in a way that will help you create more balanced, harmonious 
compositions.
960px
50px
Unit
10
px
240x240
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

203
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Grid Anatomy
Gutter
Field
Unit

204
Hanging Line
Hanging Line
Margin
Hanging Line

205
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Relational units
At the heart of every grid is the unit. The unit is a base piece from 
which the rest of the grid is derived. As discussed in the previous 
example, the unit can be derived from constraints such as the 
content elements you have to work with, or it can be derived from 
the maximum screen resolution you are designing to. 
     When designing for books, or other printed material, the unit 
is normally derived from the typeface size. So, if you are setting 
12pt type, the unit of the grid is 12pt, or a multiple of 12. There is 
a relationship between the layout and the size of the typeface. 
Em—based, or ‘elastic’ layouts make this possible on the web.
     If you are setting your type at 1em — the default in most 
browsers for this is 16px — then your unit size could also be 
derived from this measurement.
 
By doing this, you are creating a relationship between your 
typography, and your layout. They will be tied together. The 
grid created from the unit will be related to type size. Any layout 
created on this grid — any element placed within the composition 
— will be harmoniously connected. And, as the user resizes their 
text, the composition and layout can be retained. The relationship 
isn’t lost.
     Creating grids in Photoshop or on paper is one thing, making 
them work in a browser, across multiple browsers and operating 
systems is another. To help us achieve this, you can use a 
CSS framework.
M
2 em
1 em

206
Using CSS Frameworks
CSS frameworks can help make building your grid easier. They 
can ensure that potentially complex layouts render correctly on, 
ahem, diﬃcult browsers — yes, I’m looking at you IE 6!
As deﬁned by Wikipedia, a CSS framework is:
     ‘A CSS framework is a library that is meant to allow for 
     easier, more standards—compliant styling of a webpage using 
     the Cascading Style Sheets language. Just like programming 
     and scripting languages, CSS frameworks package a number 
     of ready—made options for designing and outlaying a webpage.’
Which all sounds good. The aim of a CSS framework is to take 
away some of those repetitive tasks, whilst remaining conﬁdent 
your site won’t break if you build another layout.
     There are a number of frameworks you can download, ranging 
from the complex, (such as the Yahoo! UI Library grid framework), 
to the simple 960.gs. I’m going to talk about one framework here — 
Blueprint — and speciﬁcally how to use it as a basis for your 
grid layout.
Blueprint
Available at http://www.blueprintcss.com
The theory behind Blueprint started life in the minds of a few 
great designers and developers at The World Company, a news 
media company, in the US. Jeﬀ Croft, together with Nathan Borror 
and Christian Metts devised a CSS framework for the website 
LJWorld.com. Jeﬀ wrote an article about it on A List Apart, and 
Olav Bjorkoy made the theory real, and Blueprint was born.
Blueprint does the following things:
Resets standard browser behaviour.
Applies a sensible typographic stylesheet.
Provides a ﬂexible grid stylesheet.
Has a basic, but serviceable, print stylesheet.
Is tested, and works in, IE 6.
All of these styles can be overridden of course. Speciﬁcally, it’s 
important to point out that the grid.css can be customised by way 
of the extremely handy Grid Generator.
ßƹ
ß
ß
ß
ß

207
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Grid generator: http://kematzy.com/blueprint-generator/
This allows you to break out of the cookie—cutter approach of 
the 950px grid. Not every site we design will start from this base 
measurement or the web would look like a very boring place. 
Make sure you design your grid ﬁrst, and then use this generator 
to create the Blueprint grid.css ﬁle for you.
     Blueprint ships with a plugin architecture. To add elements, 
such as icons or tabs, simply create a new stylesheet in the plugin 
directory to hook in your new styles.
     Blueprint is a large framework, and has been criticised for 
making you add non—semantic class names in your HTML, 
like ‘span—8’. The main point of criticism is that these are 
presentational class names, indicating how a column in a grid 
will look. Good web standards HTML requires you to add class 
names with semantic value, like ‘navigation’, ‘content’, or ‘sub—

208
content’. Well, you can add semantic value to a Blueprint layout by 
including them as well. For example:
<div class=”navigation span—24”>
     Your navigation
</div>
Alternatively, you can add the semantic value to the ID of the div.
<div id=”navigation” class=”span—24”>
     Your navigation
</div>
Using Blueprint, you will end up with more HTML markup in your 
document. You will have more divs, with more class names and 
IDs. If you can live with that, and if Blueprint helps you create 
great, ﬂexible layouts, then I think that’s ﬁne. 

209
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Drupal.org – a redesign process using Blueprint
I’ve seen great value in Blueprint when using it for rapid 
prototyping. Speciﬁcally, Mark Boulton Design, the small design 
studio I run, used Blueprint to build the prototypes for the 
redesign of Drupal.org.
     The process for the redesign of Drupal.org was a twelve 
week exercise. We released weekly prototype designs based on 
information architecture, user testing and feedback, community 
feedback, and revised business goals. With such tight timeframes, 
we needed to focus on the user experience and design of the site, 
rather than worrying about ﬁxing IE 6 bugs. We needed a 
CSS framework.
     We started out using Blueprint to create quick lo ﬁ HTML 
prototypes. These were essentially wireframes created using the 
various classes and styles available with Blueprint. As time went 
on, we needed to create more and more plugins for Blueprint for 
things like tabs, buttons, tables etc. 
     When the prototype reached a certain point — iteration 6 — 
we needed to start applying a visual design to the completed 
wireframes. This is where Blueprint came into its own. With 
minimal changes to the HTML documents, we were able to add 
a Drupal.css stylesheet to override a lot of the default styles and 
start to apply a Drupal design. Through the iterative process, we 
were able to build upon this to produce quite diﬀerent looking 
designs from release to release. All the while, the Blueprint core 
css ﬁles remained the same. That way, we could ensure that if we 
needed to upgrade Blueprint for whatever reason, we’d be able to 
do so without breaking the site.
     The ﬁnal version of the redesigned Drupal.org, in all likelihood, 
will not use Blueprint as its CSS framework. Whilst the various 
templates look great, the HTML in the background is bloated, and 
could be dramatically improved. If you plan on using Blueprint 
for a production environment, or on a live site, make sure that you 
pay particular attention to this. Make sure you keep your HTML 
nice and trim.

210
Left: Drupal.org wireframes 
created using Blueprint
Right: Drupal.org redesign
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

211
Chapter Twenty—Four
Breaking the grid
One of the biggest complaints from 
designers that I’ve heard in relation to 
grid—based design is that they can limit 
your creativity.
I don’t agree, actually, but I can see how that viewpoint has 
arisen. Sticking to a rigid grid can seem stiﬂing when compared 
to a free, creative, ﬂuid design process many designers are 
comfortable with. At times, designing using a grid can feel more 
like mathematics or engineering. As designers, it’s our natural 
inclination to want to do things diﬀerently. Not to conform. And 
you know what? That’s okay. It’s okay to break free of the grid 
every now and then. In fact, I’d encourage it.
Should Everything Always Line Up?
Before CSS was widely adopted by the browser manufacturers 
as a good thing, web designers used HTML tables to layout their 
web pages. At the time, this was good. It allowed web designers 
to create layouts in a visual language they understood — columns, 
rows, gutters, (or padding), and margins. But, we all know now 
that tables for layouts are a bad thing. Now, we use CSS to lay out 
our web sites. We can still use the same terminology to create our 
columns and rows, our gutters and margins. The only diﬀerence 
is, we’re using diﬀerent HTML markup in the background. Of 
course, CSS uses the ‘box model’ to render the various elements 
such as padding, margins and content. This is good as well — boxes 
ﬁt well into our columns. 
     But what happens when we want to break free of those boxes?  
Why would you want to do that?
     Grid systems provide answers to compositional problems. 
They’re there to help. But sometimes, it’s useful — no, crucial — that 
we break free of the grid to provide emphasis, importance, visual 
interest, or increased usability. Sometimes breaking free of the 
grid is exactly the thing you should be doing. The trick is, knowing 
when to do it.
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout

212
Breaking your own rules
First thing to remember is that this is your grid system. You 
designed it to help you with a layout. It shouldn’t be a rigid tool 
that you can’t change. There are many times when I’m halfway 
through a project, for whatever reason, i realise that the grid 
system is not helping me. Either there is not enough ﬂexibility in 
the columns, or I failed to grasp the complexity of the constraints 
of the project. Both of these things necessitate tweaking your grid 
system, or, in some cases, going back to the drawing board.
     And, you know what? That’s just ﬁne. Don’t beat yourself up 
about it. Projects are ﬂuid, and things sometimes don’t work out. 
So, change them.
Content Out
Designing grids for print publications is similar to designing grids 
for the web. For newspapers, the grid design is abstracted from 
the content — a designer doesn’t know day—to—day what content is 
going to populate the grid. Instead of guessing, a designer needs 
to establish what content ‘types’ will populate the grid. These can 
range from simple lists, headings, and paragraphs through to 
more complex tables and illustrations. 
Finding patterns
On the web, most of the time, we don’t know what the content will 
be that will inhabit our templates. However, we can make a pretty 
good estimation as to what the content types will be. If we’re 
redesigning an existing site, and repurposing existing content, we 
can look through that content to try to establish patterns. This is 
called a Content Audit, and is usually conducted by an Information 
Architect, or a site editor. Whilst useful, the content audit focuses 
solely on content, rather than content types or patterns. It’s a 
designer’s job to delve into this content and try and establish 
the patterns.
     For a new design, the job is somewhat easier and less laborious. 
By talking it through with the client, you can establish the types of 
content they need on the new site. Testing or interviewing users 
will also help massively in giving an indication of what type of 
content you should be designing.
     The web is already full of design patterns and conventions for 
particular content types. For lists, through to comment forms, and 
registration processes. The web is maturing to the point where 

213
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
we don’t need to rethink these patterns from the ground up every 
time we start a new project. This is where continued research, and 
being actively involved in the web — both as a professional, and 
a ‘consumer’ — can really pay dividends. By continually looking 
at the web, and by using the web, you become familiar with the 
patterns — you start to see them everywhere. 
Designing to worse case scenario
I try and adopt this approach on every design project I undertake. 
I try and design to the worse case scenario. What happens if 
the user increases the font size by 200%? What happens if the 
editor of the site uploads the wrong size image? What happens 
if an administrator of the site chooses the wrong template for 
that section? With all of the questions, how can you be sure your 
design will stand up to it? This is the modern web. Things can 
‘break’ very easily. That crafted design is only moments away 
from looking a complete disaster unless you take steps to 
protect it.
     You may have heard the term ‘graceful degradation’ in 
web design. That, and ‘progressive enhancement’. The former 
ensures that sites degrade gracefully in older browsers, but also 
when other factors inﬂuence the presentation such as the user 
increasing the font size, or Javascript being turned oﬀ. The latter 
describes the use of technology — be it CSS, or Javascript — to 
take advantage of newer browsers. Well, you can take the same 
approach when designing the fundamentals of your grid systems. 
Make sure that when viewed on older browsers, your grid system 
adapts, ensuring the content is still readable. Ensure that when 
using newer browsers, you take advantage of new technology 
available to you — for example, the new tags in HTML 5, such as 
<header>, or <footer>.
Less, not more
It’s easy on any project to bite oﬀ more than you can chew. 
Auditing a site for a redesign may throw up over twenty diﬀerent 
content types, all of which have to be designed, built, and 
accommodated into a ﬂexible grid system. It’s a considerable 
undertaking. So, start oﬀ small.

214
I like to start oﬀ any design with establishing the core typographic 
content types. These are:
Headings
Paragraphs
Lists (unordered and ordered)
Tables
That’s it, just four typographic content types. These will form the 
basis of probably 80% of your content — in one form or another. 
ßƹ
ß
ß
ß

215
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Emphasising content
Emphasis can be given to content in a variety of ways, many 
of which I’ve talked about in this book. But, when using a grid 
system, one of the best ways to draw the user’s eye, is by NOT 
placing that element on the grid. A loose placement on the grid, 
either by nudging an element this way or that, will make it stand 
out against its strictly aligned neighbours. Use an image on an 
angle, or nudge navigation 10% higher.
The Crate and Barrel website is a ﬁne example of grid-based 
design. The under—pinning grid structure provides a skeleton 
upon which the visual elements of the website are arranged. The 
grid provides unity between sections:

216

217
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
However, strict adherence to a grid comes with some pit-falls and 
I believe Crate and Barrel has inadvertently fallen down one of 
these pits. 
     The site has a calm, even appearance. No doubt, this is by 
design. But the design has an even appearance that makes 
drawing attention to any content, button, product, or widget  
diﬃcult. You can understand the designers wanting to draw 
attention to the product photography through a simple, clear 
design. But, with some simple changes of position, we can provide 
some much-needed emphasis to certain page elements.
     The emphasis, on this occasion, is provided by NOT aligning 
a content element to the underlying grid. The content element is 
moved slightly oﬀ the line — and the amount is up to you, there is 
no magic formula for this. It’s just enough to show that this element 
is diﬀerent, it’s special or important, and we want the user to see it 
as soon as possible.
     Breaking the grid does require an understanding of how a grid 
is constructed. Just like a building, if you remove, or break some of 
the load—bearing structure, a grid system will fall apart. If you’ve 
designed a grid, and part way through the layout process, things 
just aren’t working out — maybe you’re having to create extra 
columns, or change the size of the unit — that’s ﬁne. Don’t see the 
grid as a structure that, once created, cannot be changed, revised 
or thrown out completely. 

218
Product page. The title and 
product description are 
uncomfortably aligned to 
the grid.
For my version, I keep the 
title and price aligned, but 
increase the size and move 
the description oﬀ the grid 
and align it with the list of 
links above.
It’s a subtle, but eﬀective 
change. The resultant 
whitespace around the title 
is now giving emphasis.

219
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Chapter Twenty—Five
Bringing it all together: 
De Standaard
In June 2008, a team from De Standaard 
– www.standaard.be – approached my 
design studio with a request to see if we’d 
be interested in redesigning their website.
De Standaard is a Flemish daily newspaper published in Belgium 
with a circulation of over 100,000. It is a high quality newspaper 
with an interesting history spanning eighty years — through Nazi 
occupation of Belgium, to political unrest, through to bankruptcy.
     This case study is somewhat of an exclusive for this book at the 
time of publication. The new De Standaard site was relaunched 
in Q1 2009.
 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

220

221
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The Brief
The ﬁrst meeting took place in the National Portrait Gallery in 
London on a nice sunny day. Immediately I was struck by the lofty 
goals of the redesign of the website. The New York Times website, 
together with The Times in the UK, and The Guardian, were all 
mentioned as the benchmark that needed to be set for the design. 
The bar was indeed set high.
     It was important, during that initial brieﬁng session, that I 
understood the motivations behind the need to redesign. They can 
be summarised as:
Improve the core content
Improve the brand and appeal to the users of the website, not the 
readers of the paper
Improve the innovation of the new site
Improve the business model (better ad positioning, sell 
subscriptions, cross promotion)
Outdated look and feel.
Integration of new content management system.
As you can see, the breadth of the design problem was 
considerable. From the business strategy and revenue models, all 
the way up to the typography and brand perception. All of it had 
to be considered, rationalised, researched, and designed.
Should a newspaper online look oﬄine?
During the research and discovery phase of the project, I kept 
asking myself the same questions regarding newspapers online. 
Do they need to look like their oﬄine siblings? Should I try to 
be emulating some of the conventions used in the physical 
newspaper?
     It’s an important consideration, and something I’m not alone 
in contemplating. Information Architects, (iA), the small design 
studio in Japan, wrote a seminal document called ‘The Future 
of News’, where they highlighted the risks and opportunities for 
newspaper companies in the coming years to take advantage of 
the web. Many of these were relevant for this project.
ßƹ
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

222
Front cover, back page and 1 
page spread from the Future 
of News document by 
Oliver Reichenstein

223
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
iA highlighted the following of threats to not migrating to 
the web:
‘Lower reading experience.’ 
Printed newspapers are easy to read. On the train, the 
underground, on the way to work. The web isn’t.
‘Losing journalistic quality.’
‘Severing cultural roots.’
The printed word has a rich, important heritage.
However, the opportunities, in my mind, far outweigh 
the threats.
‘Optimised reading experience’. 
Given the immediacy of news content, having relevant supportive 
content — in the form of text, image, video and multimedia — 
enriches the reading experience.
‘Improved democracy’. 
The user can have their say. And, in a ‘web 2’ world, that is 
actively encouraged. It was a key component of De Standaard 
redesign that the user engagement was an integral part of any 
redesign, not just an add—on.
‘Historic development’. 
Newspapers will eventually migrate to the web, and printed 
newspapers will be a luxury. We’re already seeing this with a 
steady decline in newspaper circulation.
These threats and opportunities underpin the design strategy 
for the new site. How could I lower the risks, and exploit the 
opportunities in the design system we produced?
1
2
3
1
2
3

224

225
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The Constraints
All projects have constraints. Without them, designing would be 
incredibly diﬃcult. However frustrating they can be, they are 
our boundaries; a framework in which to work. And typically, De 
Standaard had plenty of them.
Existing content
www.standaard.be had been around for years. During that time, 
there had been attempts to enforce standards; from ads to image 
sizes. It was our job to audit as much of that content as possible, 
and then to deﬁne new standards that ﬁt the patterns and trends.
Brand integration
As I mentioned, De Standaard is a newspaper with a rich 
history. The readership however, is typical of a once—broadsheet 
newspaper; older, male, white—collar. The website, however, has 
a slightly diﬀerent audience. Still predominantly male, they are 
younger, less conservative in their political views, and regular 
consumers of the web. In that sense, the two brands are related 
but not the same. This subtle diﬀerence had to be accounted for in 
the design.
Revenue
Like most newspapers, De Standaard relies on advertising and 
subscriptions for its revenue. 
     Previously, www.standaard.be used some standard ad sizes, 
and some bespoke ads for running internal promotions and 
competitions. With so many diﬀerent sizes, some standardised, 
and some not, any changes to design and global layout were 
challenging. Ads were shoe—horned in where they would ﬁt, 
rather than strategic positioning.

226
Modular Content, Modular Grid
Newspapers, like most text—based material, are comprised of 
typographic elements. During the initial discovery and research 
phase, we conducted a number of audits on the content elements 
on the site.
Content objects
We were provided with a list of content object requirements as 
part of the project brief. These ranged from simple article lists, 
and teasers, to more complex video players and tv listings. 
Promo section links
Title links to articles within 
the speciﬁc section.

227
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Article teaser
Used to focus users to 
articles within news.
Homepage article summary
These summaries have a title, 
summary, image, read more, 
read later, star rating, links to 
media and 
related articles.
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

228
Typographic elements
All written content can be structured into typographic elements; 
such as paragraphs, lists, headings, captions, blockquotes etc. 
Newspapers cover such broad stories, so from an editorial 
standpoint, the writers need all of the typographic elements they 
are used to working with. Any audit of content objects, should also 
incorporate an audit of the typographic elements required for the 
hugely varying content.
Left: Font and Sizes used for 
headlines and body copy.
Below: Module Titles and 
Navigation

229
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Lead article variations
To cope with the variety of importance of lead news story items, 
a number of variations were explored and designed. It was also 
important we explored how stories can escalate. A news story can 
start small — breaking news — with small amounts of information 
and associated content such as photos and video. Over time, the 
story gathers more pace, more content, more exposure, and more 
importance. All of this has to be structured into a content object 
that allows the display of that ﬂux.
     We designed several versions ranging from a simple lead story, 
right up to the extra large version.

230
Lead Story
Small — Half width article.
Medium — Full width article 
with half width image.
Large — Full width article 
with full width image.
Extra Large — Full width 
article with full width
image including video and 
photo thumbnails.

231
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Several diﬀerent sections with diﬀerent audiences
Like most newspapers, De Standaard has daily and weekly 
supplements — ranging from the popular ‘Economie’ business 
supplement, to the ‘Lifestyle’ magazine. The various sections 
not only needed to be accommodated in the new site, but they 
also had to appeal to the diﬀerent audiences. Economie, for 
example, required a ﬂexible design to incorporate the various 
graphs and stock information, together with the usual editorial 
content. Lifestyle required a brighter, more approachable, look. 
Large photographs, multimedia galleries etc. were the order of 
the day.
     Both Lifestyle and ‘.biz’ use a slightly diﬀerent masthead and 
logo, and diﬀerent colour palettes. This reinforces the sub-
brands but also the provides orientation for the user.

232

233
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
Designing the Grid 
The constants deﬁne the columns. De Standaard uses standard 
advertising units as deﬁned by Interactive Advertising Bureau. 
For the new site, it was proposed the following ad units would 
be incorporated:
300 x 250 IMU — (Medium Rectangle)
728 x 90 IMU — (Leaderboard)
These ad units are relatively common for commercial sites, 
but particularly common for the newspapers. The New York 
Times, Guardian, and Times Online, (the three sites indicated as 
a benchmark for the redesign of De Standaard), all carried the 
Medium Rectangle, and all but the New York Times uses 
a Leaderboard.
     In addition to these standard ad sizes, we also had to contend 
with existing image sizes employed by De Standaard for several 
years. All of this legacy content had to be included in the new 
design without breaking the layout.
     These elements are constants. The size of these elements are 
ﬁxed, and will not change over time so they are a safe starting 
point for us to design the grid around.
ßƹ
ß
Leaderboard banner
Medium Rectangle advert
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

234
Asymmetrical columns
A lot of grids on the web are based on even numbers of grids: 12, 
16, 24. On researching this project — especially by reading a huge 
variety of newspapers from around Europe — it became clear that 
actually in physical newspapers, an odd number of columns is 
the norm: either 5, 7, or rarely 9 columns. I believe this creates an 
imbalance, and therefore an opportunity to create tension in a 
layout. Let me explain a little.
     An even number of columns is a little like using a square for 
composition. It’s stable, balanced, and even. Using a square as a 
compositional base can result in a balanced layout, but the danger 
is the resulting design will have no movement. It’s more diﬃcult 
to lead the eye around a layout that has a strong symmetrical 
base. Think back to earlier in this part where I discussed the 
advantages of using a triangle as a primary compositional device.
     For this reason, I opted for a ﬁve—column master for the new 
De Standaard grid. These columns would each be separated by a 
generous gutter.

235
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
These master columns then can be subdivided to give ten columns 
to provide more layout ﬂexibility.
The master columns of this grid allow for a number of 
permutations, shown opposite.
     Particularly on the initial homepage design, the ﬁve column 
layout allows for uneven, interesting layouts.

236
1—2—2 grid
3—2 grid

237
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
3—2 grid with design

238
Design Exploration
Once I’d worked through the initial wireframes, and functional 
requirements for the various templates on the new site, I got down 
to some design exploration. We adopted an iterative approach to 
the design development. In total, there were more than ten rounds 
completed before we delivered the ﬁnal design framework. Here’s 
a walkthrough of the major design milestones:
The initial design direction set the typographic and colourway 
tone. Predominantly black and white, with a spot colour 
of orange.
Iteration 1

239
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
A more conventional layout was adopted for the second iteration, 
with a column conﬁguration of 3—2.
Iteration 2

240
This version included a completely revised masthead and main 
navigation bar. The previous version was too dark and visually 
heavy. The aim was to draw users beyond the masthead and into 
the content below. The previous version was acting as a 
visual barrier.
Iteration 3

241
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
More subtle revisions to the masthead. Incorporating orange 
colour into the links creates a strong horizontal line of links. No 
need for a background tone to tie all of that together.
Iteration 4

242
Final Homepage Iteration
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

243
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The ﬁnal design as applied to the homepage and subsequent 
pages throughout the site. The ﬂexibility of the grid helped create 
a coherence between sections. Shown here are the section for the 
TV guide.
TV Guide

244
Design a system, not a website
This project had limited budget, and limited time. We didn’t have 
the luxury of working in—house, or crafting a user experience for 
every single user journey on the new site. How do you approach 
a project of this scale, with limited resources and time? By 
designing a system, and not a website.
     As highlighted in this chapter, we approached this project as 
designing a kit of parts — as a framework. A skeleton of a grid 
system, with modular content objects that could be placed in the 
grid, in various conﬁgurations, to create the site. If that approach 
is combined with a sensible colour palette, opportunities for art 
direction, and sensitive typography, as a designer, you are arming 
the editorial teams with all the tools they need to create a site from 
new and old content without designing individual pages.
     We delivered the various bits and pieces together with a visual 
language document.
Pages from Visual 
Language document

245
Designing for the Web  ~  Layout
The visual language guide documents how the site can be 
built out in the future. From the various colourways for each 
section, through to how the various content objects work in the 
grid. It’s important to note that this document is by no means a 
comprehensive guide to cover every eventuality. Those types of 
guideline—design documents generally fail. Many designers  do 
not like to work within strict constraints. Instead, we proposed 
this document to be a starting point. It touches on all the diﬀerent 
elements of the visual language, but provides enough scope for 
creative movement for the various editors and designers who will 
be working on the site. Providing this framework allows people 
to be creative in the future, and by doing so, they should feel a 
degree of ownership. The visual language will begin to represent 
the ongoing content on the site, not describing a designer’s vision. 
That is a subtle but important distinction. 
The principles of layout — from composition theories to grid 
systems – largely do not rely on the medium of the design’s 
delivery; most of the layout theories I’ve discussed are derived 
from either print design or photography. There’s a good reason 
why they shouldn’t be discounted.
     In ‘Getting Started’, I highlighted that early in the development 
of web design, many designers practicing web design were print 
designers. They used established conventions and graphic design 
practice to create web sites. This wasn’t a bad thing — it was all 
they knew — but over the past ten years the words ‘print’ and ‘web’ 
are often met with grimaces from web designers working in the 
industry now. The old ‘the web is not print’ argument raises its 
head every now and then, and we cover the same ground, and 
reach the same conclusions. The result is that web designers are 
not learning applicable graphic design craft. There is still much 
we can learn from the practice of graphic design and layout is 
just one.

246

247
Conclusion
What does it really feel like to be a designer in this 
industry today?
     Well, let me ask you, what was the most rewarding aspect of 
the last project you ﬁnished? My guess is that the answers will be 
incredibly varied, from solving a particularly diﬃcult interaction 
design problem, through to some really well constructed CSS. 
Modern web design is a discipline that spans a huge range 
of skills. Often though, the wider the span, the thinner the 
knowledge. That needs to change.
     Graphic design has such a rich, and useful history. For example, 
elements of modern typography and typesetting have evolved 
over hundreds of years. Having at least a basic understanding of 
this heritage of the craft is going to arm you with some of the right 
tools to make a diﬀerence in your daily work.
     The craft of graphic design has changed little in the past ﬁfty 
years. We’re still communicators. We still use colour, image, 
type, illustrations and layout to tell the story for our clients or 
customers. Language is still the vehicle for communication on the 
web. We still use research to inform our decisions. One of the few 
things that are diﬀerent is the delivery medium: the web. And with 
that diﬀerence comes one fundamental change.
     We don’t control the content, the users do. The data is theirs to 
do with as they wish.
     Graphic designers have long been in control. We take the brief 
from the client. We control how that message is conveyed. We 
control the type, the imagery and the production. We spend a long 
time getting it just right. Then along comes the web and gives all of 
that control to the user. 

248
Suddenly, they can change the font size. They can break our 
carefully constructed layout. The considered whitespace goes 
out of the window as they move the browser window. They can 
choose the colours—even upload style sheets of their own. Is it any 
wonder so many advertising and design studios insist on using 
Flash and resizing the browser window to 100%. It’s all about 
control. To control the message and delivery. The user will see this 
how I want them to. 
     I cannot understate how much of a shift that is. From schooling, 
right up through early career development, graphic designers 
rely on that constant.
     Good graphic design, be it on the web, print, or broadcast, is the 
successful marriage of content and presentation. But, on the web, 
content is often abstracted from the presentation, such as being 
presented in an RSS reader, or content is delivered last in a project 
and ‘plugged—in’ to a template. This is one of the biggest hurdles 
many great designers have to get over. Embracing the web means 
knowing your crafted design might be viewed diﬀerently. I think 
this is a good thing for graphic design.
     Graphic design — as I hope I’ve illustrated throughout this book 
— is much more than how something looks. Typographic design in 
particular pays attention to how language is structured, chunked—
up, listed, and tabulated, not just the typeface choice. Web design 
needs to move beyond layout, fonts and colours, browser quirks, 
and the latest JavaScript library, and embrace the true roots of the 
practice: the communication of information.
     And we can do plenty of that when we’re out of control.
By working closely with Information Architects, Writers, 
Developers, and Clients. By being involved in the process from 
day one. By paying attention to content. By art directing and trying 
to tell stories with our designs and interfaces. By passionately 
embracing the medium. And, by constantly learning. 
     We don’t need to be completely in control to communicate. 
Writing a book on design for the web isn’t the easiest thing to do. 
The web moves fast. Conventions come and go. Best practices 
change every six months. To write a book that is a snapshot of this 
ﬂux would not only be a mistake, but actually pretty diﬃcult. In 
fact, a book probably wouldn’t be the best medium for that type 
of content. 
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

249
But this little book isn’t about documenting a moment in time, or 
providing pretty pictures of the latest trends and biggest, best 
designs on the web. It’s about the basics of graphic design craft 
— the basics of communicating by design. I hope it will act both 
informatively and as an ongoing reference. 
Now, why not go back to the beginning, and read it again. You may 
have missed something.

250

251
Attributions  In order of appearence 
2. Research
Deﬁnitions from http://www.reference.com  ||  Flickr Homepage http://www.ﬂickr.com
Four R Photos
Revolution ~ gailf548 ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/galfred/127552283/  ||  Re-Expression ~ Ingrid ~ Ingorrr ~ http://www.
ﬂickr.com/photos/ingorrr/377182375/  ||  Related worlds ~ Randy ~ Randy Son Of Robert ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
randysonofrobert/464791157/  ||  Random links ~ Jürgen Schiller García ~ schillergarcia ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
schillergarcia/2836059154/
3. Typography:
 
Mark Boulton Design ~ http://www.markboultondesign.com  ||  Times Online ~ http://www.timesonline.co.uk  ||  Guardian.
co.uk ~ http://www.guardian.co.uk
4. Colour
Photo of boy with camera attributed to Nick Boulton  ||  Yes Insurance ~ http://www.yesinsurance.co.uk  ||  Beneﬁt Cosmetics 
~ http://www.beneﬁtcosmetics.com  ||  Coolspotters ~ http://www.coolspotters.com  ||  The Body Shop ~ http://www.
thebodyshop.co.uk  ||  GHD ~ http://www.ghdhair.com/uk
Black Photos
Life doesn’t have to be Black & White ~ banoootah_qtr ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/banoootah_qtr/2781726403
My hat is to Fabulous for my head!! ~ Chris Morrow ~ Hi I’m Chris... {or Birdman} ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/crush_
images/3016352014/   ||  Incunsueta Spello ~ Alessandro Scarcella ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
alexscarcella/1092142727
homeless in rotterdam  ||  Revi Kornmann ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/revi/224825330  ||  Mar 27 05  ~ mookielove ~ 
http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/mookielove/9868042/  ||  Eisteddfod ~ Attributed to Nick Boulton
White Photos
First Scuﬀ!! ~ .....dotted..... ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/colourcrazy/2399790749/in/set-7215760399407985  ||  VW 
Bus-Glasgow ~ David Johnson ~ Manky Maxblack ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/maxblack/2668793746/  ||  Ice ~ Marko 
Milošević ~ Nictalopen ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/nictalopen/221960735  ||  People probably thought I was weird... ~ 
.....dotted..... ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/colourcrazy/2379003286  ||  grand central terminal ~ Laure Padgett~  
http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/laurapadgett/2954855991
Red Photos
7 Up ~ Kevin Dooley ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/pagedooley/2239200286/  ||  Red drum with paint ~ tanakawho 
http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/28481088@N00/2327920735/  ||  Stack ~ Knut Arne Smeland ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/
photos/44988721@N00/229432914  ||  Open ~ Steve Navarro ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/snavarro/456166500  ||
yes, I’m feeling lucky ~ Tinou Bao ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/tinou/137973013  ||  choke when it really counts ~ erin MC 
hammer ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/balladist/2843633256/
Blue Photos
Blue ~ Lisa Norwood ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/lisanorwood/1045562729  ||  Blue sixteen ~ piermario ~ 
http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/piermario/2104143438  ||  Blue Lego ~ JC i Núria ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
nuriaijoancarles/2866493684  ||  can you push me ~ Ryan ~ pimpexposure ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
shiznotty/3032867052  ||  0 GB ~ Mike ~ SqueakyMarmot ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/squeakymarmot/399925350
Designing for the Web  ~  Attributions

252
Yellow Photos
Yellow Cab ~ Seamus Murray ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/seamusnyc/486999643  ||  Yellow for feet ~ Joe Seggiola 
~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/joeseggiola/2779317752  ||  Yellow 22 ~ ﬂattop341 ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
ﬂattop341/228001614  ||  ‘56 Yellow bus ~ Jessica Merz  ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/jessicafm/176739416  ||  Perú > Lima 
~ antiﬂuor ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/antiﬂuor/2074560932  ||  Yellow ~ wonderferret ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
wonderferret/1169897941
Green Photos
Green curves ~ tanakawho ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/28481088@N00/2589282065  ||  green banana ~ Mauren Veras 
~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/mauren/2322667800  ||  Green Leaf ~ Christopher Woo ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
deks/2209559360  ||  Green Study 3 ~ Wrote ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/wrote/1452627659
Hannah’s green Converse ~ Benny Mazur ~ benimoto ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/benimoto/505273689/sizes/o  ||  
Green Bug ~ waywuwei ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/waywuwei/2275595332
Orange Photos
Got My Orange Crush ~ ﬂattop341 ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/ﬂattop341/223306484  ||  Orange Force One ~ Incase 
Designs ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/goincase/479050237  ||  Numbers in the orange ~ Leonid Mamchenkov ~ http://
www.ﬂickr.com/photos/mamchenkov/517724404  ||  Orange E on a Baby Blue Dumpster (Washington, DC) ~ takomabibelot 
~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/takomabibelot/3031496925  ||  oranges... ~ Junichiro Aoyama ~ jam343 ~ http://www.ﬂickr.
com/photos/jam343/2048123
Brown Photos
Shroom ~ Jesse Kruger ~ macroninja ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/jessekruger/1110294641/  ||  not oversize...just plus 
size! ~ Brandi Sims ~ House Of Sims ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/houseofsims/1061023797  ||  untitled ~ Procsilas Moscas 
~ procsilas ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/procsilas/11315954  ||  DSC_1316 ~ Daniel danorth1 ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/
photos/danorth1/2310940711  ||  Sweet Brown Grindage ~ Thomas & Dianne Jones ~ FreeWine ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/
photos/freewine/307109717
Purple Photos
Purple top turnips ~ Antoaneta ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/antoaneta/2612913617  ||  purple shelf and tag ~ 
Anthony Easton ~ PinkMoose ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/pinkmoose/550616797  ||  Glass Curve ~ Andreas Levers 
~ 96dpi ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/96dpi/2921822107  ||  Tea cups ~ gifrancis ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
gifrancis/2734874253  ||  Local color ~ Roger H. Goun ~ sskennel ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/sskennel/2695594975
http://www.subtraction.com  ||  http://www.form.de  ||  Coca-Cola © 2008 The Coca-Cola Company, all rights reserved. Coca-
Cola® and the contour bottle are registered trademarks of The Coca-Cola Company  ||  McDonald’s  ©2009 McDonald’s. All 
rights reserved.  ||  BP © 1999-2009 BP p.l.c.
5. Layout
Five Simple Steps ~ http://www.ﬁvesimplesteps.co.uk  ||  White Horse ~ Luis Argerich ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/
lrargerich/3201420582/   ||  Scout Trooper ~ Balakov ~ http://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/balakov/505986437/ || BBC 
Homepage ~ http://www.bbc.co.uk  ||  Last Supper ~ http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Last_supper  ||  Grid Generator ~ http://
kematzy.com/blueprint-generator/  ||  Drupal iterations ~ drupal.markboultondesign.com/iteration1  ||  De Standaard ~ www.
standaard.be  ||  The Future of News by Oliver Reichenstein
Download from Wow! eBook <www.wowebook.com>

