
A Story of Islamic Art
Providing an introduction to the artistic and architectural traditions of the Islamic 
world, A Story of Islamic Art explores fifty case studies, taken from different 
regions of the Islamic world and from the seventh to the twenty-first centuries.
The novel aspect of these case studies is that they are presented as fictional nar-
ratives, allowing the reader to imagine art and architecture, either in their original 
cultural settings or at some later point in their histories. These stories are supported 
by a scholarly framework that allows the reader to continue their exploration of the 
chosen artefacts and their historical context.
The fifty case studies take the form of short stories, each of which focuses on 
one or more object from the Islamic world. These encompass portable items in a 
wide variety of media, book illustrations, calligraphy, photographs, architectural 
decoration, buildings, and archaeological sites. The book also provides a detailed 
introduction, maps, timeline, glossary, and guides for further reading. This book 
offers accessible answers to key questions in the scholarship on Islamic art and 
architecture from its earliest times to the present. The issues dealt with in each of 
the stories include iconography, attitudes towards representation, the role of script, 
the elaboration of geometric decoration, the creation of sacred and secular spaces 
in architecture, and the socio-cultural context of art production and consumption. 
Artistic interactions between the Islamic world and other regions including Europe 
and China are also discussed in this book.
A Story of Islamic Art is an engaging and informative introduction for interested 
readers and students of Islamic art, history, and architecture.
Marcus Milwright is British Academy Global Professor at the University of York. 
His research interests include Islamic art and archaeology and the study of tradi-
tional crafts. He is the author of The Queen of Sheba’s Gift: A History of the True 
Balsam of Matarea (2022).


A Story of Islamic Art
Marcus Milwright

Designed cover image: The History Collection / Alamy Stock Photo
First published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2024 Marcus Milwright
The right of Marcus Milwright to be identified as author of this work has 
been asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, 
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced 
or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, 
now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, 
or in any information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or 
registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and explanation 
without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-1-032-44814-5 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-44815-2 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-37404-6 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046
Typeset in Times New Roman
by KnowledgeWorks Global Ltd.

List of Figures	
viii
Acknowledgements	
xiii
Notes for the Reader	
xv
	 	 Introduction	
1		
Glossary	
18		
Timeline Relevant to Chapters 1–50	
25	
1	 Sanaʿa, 660	
29
	 2	 Aswan, 691	
33	
3	 Aleppo, 695	
37
	 4	 Damascus, 714	
43
	 5	 Qusayr ʿAmra, 746	
48
	 6	 Akhmim, 751	
53
	 7	 Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776	
56	
8	 Basra, 841	
61	
9	 Samarra, 856	
66
	10	 Qayrawan, 863	
70
	11	 Bukhara, 930	
75
Contents

vi  Contents
	12	 Rusafa, 998	
80
	13	 Baghdad, 1000	
84
	14	 Tripoli, 1070	
89
	15	 Samarqand, 1085	
93
	16	 Kharraqan, 1093	
97
	17	 Harran, 1104	
101
	18	 Herat, 1183	
105
	19	 Mecca, 1199	
109
	20	 Kashan, 1201	
114
	21	 Wasit, 1236	
119
	22	 Palermo, 1248	
124
	23	 Tabriz, 1306	
130
	24	 Cairo, 1361	
134
	25	 Granada, 1375	
139
	26	 Xi’an, 1402	
144
	27	 Panjakent, 1490	
149
	28	 Nizwa, 1531	
154
	29	 Venice, 1547	
158
	30	 Erzincan, 1568	
163
	31	 Sofia, 1582	
168
	32	 Isfahan, 1637	
174

Contents  vii
	33	 Agra, 1643	
179
	34	 Hawizeh Marshes, 1673	
184
	35	 Istanbul, 1733	
188
	36	 Breslau, 1766	
193
	37	 Lahore, 1799	
198
	38	 Nafplio, 1831	
203
	39	 Kuala Lumpur, 1886	
208
	40	 London, 1892	
213
	41	 Edirne, 1899	
218
	42	 Simunul, 1902	
223
 43 Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908 
229
	44	 Manzala, 1910	
234
	45	 Hindiyya, 1918	
240
	46	 Rabat, 1937	
244
	47	 Cleveland, 1956	
249
	48	 Djenné, 1985	
253
	49	 New York, 2015	
258
	50	 Anywhere, 2020	
262
Appendix: Notes on Chapters 1–50	
267
Further Reading	
300
Index	
304

Figures	
I.1	
Map showing sites in mentioned in the text	
8	
I.2	
Detailed map of sites in Europe and the Mediterranean	
8	
I.3	
Detailed map of sites in the Middle East, the Caucasus,
and Central Asia 	
9	
I.4	
Detailed map of sites in the Middle East	
9	
I.5	
Detailed map of sites in North Africa and West Africa	
10	
1.1	
Qurʾan palimpsest parchment leaf with Hijazi script from 
“Sanʿaʾ I,” mid to late seventh century. Verso (a) and recto 
(b). David Collection, Copenhagen 	
29	
2.1	
Grave marker of ʿAbassa bint Jurayj, Aswan, 19 April 692 (14 
Dhu al-Qaʿda 72 H). Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo 	
34	
3.1	
“Standing caliph” dinar. Minted in Damascus, Syria, 693–97 
(74–77 H). (a) Obverse and (b) reverse 	
37	
3.2	
“Standing caliph” copper coin (fals), 690s. Minted in Aleppo, 
Syria. (a) Obverse and (b) reverse 	
40	
3.3	
“Arab-Byzantine” copper coin (fals), c. 685–90 with imperial 
bust. Minted in Hims (Emesa), Syria. (a) Obverse and (b) reverse 	
41	
4.1	
Section of the mosaic frieze (“Barada panel”) in the western arcade 
of the courtyard of the Umayyad Mosque, Damascus, 706–16 	
43	
4.2	
Mosaic on a spandrel in the western arcade of the courtyard of the 
Umayyad Mosque, Damascus, 706–16 	
46	
5.1	
View of Qusayr ʿAmra, Jordan, 740s 	
48	
5.2	
Central section of the west wall of the reception hall, Qusayr ʿAmra 	
50	
5.3	
Lunette above the doorway leading from the apodyterium to the 
reception hall, Qusayr ʿAmra 	
51	
6.1	
Silk textile fragments containing a tiraz in the name of caliph 
Marwan II. Inscription added in Tunisia, 744–50 	
53	
7.1	
Diagram showing intersection of circles and the creation of a 
star and hexagon 	
56	
7.2	
Stucco grille, Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi (West), Syria, 724–27. 
National Museum of Damascus 	
58	
7.3	
Marble window grille and mosaic above, western arcade of the 
Umayyad Mosque, Damascus, 706–16 	
59

Figures  ix	
8.1	
Tin-glazed bowl with painted cobalt inscription, probably reading 
“Made by Abu al-Baqi.” Iraq, possibly Basra, ninth century. David 
Collection, Copenhagen 	
61	
8.2	
Lustre-painted tin-glazed bowl with standing figure. Iraq, 
possibly Basra, tenth century. Interior (a) and side view 
(b). Excavated in Nishapur, Iran. Metropolitan Museum 	
63	
9.1	
Bevelled style stucco panels within House no. 5, Site H 12, near 
to the Great Mosque of Samarra. Ninth century 	
66	
9.2	
Minaret and part of the outer wall of the Congregational 
Mosque of Samarra, Iraq, 848–51 	
68
	10.1	
Courtyard from the southeast, the Congregational Mosque of 
Qayrawan, Tunisia. Ninth century and later 	
70
	10.2	
Mihrab and minbar of the Congregational Mosque of 
Qayrawan, Tunisia. Ninth century 	
71
	10.3	
Reconstruction showing how the Qayrawan tiles could be 
arranged to create decorative friezes 	
72
	11.1	
Obverse (a) and reverse (b) of silver dirham of Nasr ibn Ahmad 
(Nasr II, r. 914–43) 	
75
	11.2	
Obverse (a) and reverse (b) of the Bornholm amulet. Samanid 
dirham (885–896) overwritten with Latin text in Runic 
characters. Found in c. 1770, possibly in Bornholm, Denmark. 
National Museum of Denmark  	
78
	12.1	
Carved ivory pyxis, Madinat al-Zahraʾ near Córdoba, Spain. 
964 (353 H). Museo Arqueologico Nacional, Madrid 	
80
	13.1	
Carpet page of the Qurʾan of Ibn al-Bawwab. Iraq, 1000–1001 
(391 H). Chester Beatty Library 	
84
	13.2	
Opening page of the Qurʾan of Ibn al-Bawwab with Surat al-
Fatiha and part of Surat al-Baqara. Iraq, 1000–1001 (391 H). 
Chester Beatty Library 	
85
	14.1	
Rock crystal ewer made for caliph al-ʿAziz B’illah, Cairo. 
975–96. Treasury of San Marco, Venice 	
89
	15.1	
Image of a balsam tree from an Arabic translation of Pedanius 
Dioscorides, De materia medica. 1083. Leiden University Library 	
93
	16.1	
View of the two tombs at Kharraqan, Iran 	
97
	16.2	
Entrance façade of the 1067–68 tomb at Kharraqan	
99
	17.1	
Samite silk textile fragment (Shroud of St Josse), Khurasan, 
before 961. Musée du Louvre, Paris 	
101
	18.1	
Bobrinski Bucket. Cast copper alloy with silver and copper 
inlay. Herat, 1163 (559 H.). Hermitage, St Petersburg. IR-2268	
105
	18.2	
Detail of the last part of the dedicatory inscription on the rim of 
the Bobrinski Bucket 	
106
	19.1	
Basalt grave marker of Yusuf b. ʿAbdallah b. Yusuf b. Abu’l-
Fath, 2 June 1199 (5 Shaʿban 595 H), al-Maʿla cemetery, Mecca 	
109
	19.2	
Basalt grave marker of a father and daughter, April 1118 
(Dhu al-Hijja 511), al-Maʿla cemetery, Mecca 	
111

x  Figures
	20.1	
Glazed stonepaste beaker with painting in minaʾi style. Iran, late 
twelfth century. Freer and Sackler Galleries, Washington DC 	
114
	20.2	
Schematic drawing showing the painted designs on the three registers 	117
	21.1	
Half of the double frontispiece of the Maqamat of al-Hariri, 
Iraq, 1237. Bibliothèque Nationale de France, Paris 	
120
	21.2	
Illustration of maqama 12 showing the tavern at ʿAna. From the 
Maqamat of al-Hariri, Iraq, 1237. Bibliothèque Nationale de 
France, Paris 	
122
	22.1	
Obverse and reverse faces of a gold tarì from the reign of Roger 
II. Minted Palermo, 1142 (537 H)	
124
	22.2	
Section of the painted wood muqarnas ceiling of the Cappella 
Palatina, Palermo, Sicily, mid twelfth century	
126
	22.3	
Painted wooden panel from the muqarnas ceiling showing a 
seated ruler and attendants. Cappella Palatina, Palermo, Sicily, 
mid twelfth century	
128
	23.1	
Jonah (Yunus) and the whale. Jamiʿ al-Tawarikh (World 
History) of Rashid al-Din. Tabriz, 1307–14. Edinburgh 
University Library 	
130
	24.1	
Three enamelled and gilded glass beakers, Syria or Egypt, mid-
thirteenth century. Nasser D. Khalili Collection, London	
134
	24.2	
Enamelled glass lamp made for the complex of sultan al-Nasir 
Hasan. Cairo, c. 1360. Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo 	
136
	25.1	
Wooden ceiling of the Hall of the Ambassadors, Alhambra 
Palace, Granada, 1333–54	
139
	25.2	
Court of the Lions, Alhambra, Granada, 1370–1391	
141
	25.3	
Carved stucco and wooden vaulting from an arcade, Court of 
the Lions, Alhambra, Granada, 1370–91	
142
	26.1	
Tower of the third courtyard of the Congregational Mosque of 
Xi’an, China. Fourteenth century and later	
144
	26.2	
View of the central zone of the prayer hall and mihrab of the 
Congregational Mosque of Xi’an, China. Fourteenth century and later	
146
	27.1	
Fighting demons. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. Late 
fourteenth or fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul 	
149
	27.2	
Merchants and donkey. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. 
Late fourteenth or fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul 	 152
	27.3	
Dancing male figures. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. 
Late fourteenth or fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul 	 153
	28.1	
Stucco mihrab with inset blue-and-white porcelain vessels. 
Shawadhina mosque, Nizwa, 1531	
154
	29.1	
Portrait of Giovanni della Volta with his Wife and Children. 
Lorenzo Lotto. Oil on canvas, 1547. National Gallery, London	
158
	29.2	
Large fragmentary Ushak “Quatrefoil” carpet, sixteenth century, 
Anatolian. Turkey, Ottoman period. Saint Louis Art Museum	
160
	29.3	
“Lotto” carpet, wool, sixteenth century. Attributed to Turkey. 
Metropolitan Museum of Art	
162

Figures  xi
	30.1	
Court of Gayumars. Shahnama of Shah Tahmasp. Tabriz, 
c. 1524–25. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto 	
163
	30.2	
Detail of the Court of Gayumars showing Siyamak and 
surrounding landscape. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto 	
166
	31.1	
Colophon page from a lost section of a thirty-part Qurʾan 
written by Ahmad b. al-Suhrawardi, probably in Baghdad, 
c. 1302–1307. Metropolitan Museum of Art
168
	31.2	
Banya Bashi Mosque, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1566. View from north 
showing entrance	
170
	31.3	
Banya Bashi Mosque, Sofia, Bulgaria. 1566. View from south	
171
	31.4	
Engraving of sultan Süleyman. Venice, c. 1540–50. The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art	
172
	32.1	
Interior of the dome chamber of the Shaykh Lutfallah mosque, 
Isfahan, 1603–19	
174
	32.2	
Interior of the North Dome Chamber, Masjid-i Jamiʿ, Isfahan, 1088–89	
177
	33.1	
Taj Mahal, Agra, 1631–47	
179
	33.2	
Illustrations and text from Gaspard Bauhin, Pinax theatri 
botanici (Basle, 1623), p. 2 	
181
	33.3	
Carved marble dado with parchinkari bands, Taj Mahal, Agra, 1631–47	
182
	34.1	
Suaid men constructing a house from qasab. Eastern Marshes, 
Umm al Malih, Iraq	
184
	34.2	
Mudhif. Abra, Iraq	
186
	35.1	
Illustration of mermen from İbrahim Müteferrika, ed., Tarihü’l-
Hindi’l-Garbi el-Müsemma bī Hadis-i Nev, Müteferrika press, 
Istanbul, 1730 (1142 H). The Lilly Library, Indiana University, 
Bloomington 	
188
	35.2	
Map of Anatolia and surrounding areas from Katib Çelebi’s 
Cihannüma, Müteferrika press, 1732 (1145 H). The Lilly 
Library, Indiana University, Bloomington 	
191
	36.1	
Ottoman robe of honour (hilʾat) with gold thread, Turkey, early 
eighteenth century. Museum of Islamic Art—Staatliche Museen 
zu Berlin	
193
	36.2	
Textile boots, cap, belt (a) and trousers (b), Turkey, eighteenth 
century. Current location unknown 	
195
	37.1	
Entrance façade of the Wazir Khan Mosque, Lahore, 1634–41 	
198
	37.2	
Shell with Qurʾanic inscriptions incised into the mother-of-
pearl, eighteenth century, India. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto	
201
	38.1	
Fountain on Kapodistriou Street, Nafplio, Greece, 1734 	
203
	38.2	
Detail of 1734 fountain 	
204
	38.3	
Fountain on Staikopoulou Street, Nafplio, Greece, 1773 	
206
	39.1	
Nineteenth-century Malay waistcoat made from the inner kiswa 
of the Kaʿba. (a) Front face; (b) Back face. Museum of Islamic 
Art Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur 	
208
	40.1	
Ardabil carpet, wool and silk. Iran, 1539–40. Victoria and Albert 
Museum, London 	
213

xii  Figures
	40.2	
Dove and Rose pattern fabric. Legacy Art Galleries. Designed 
1879. Legacy Art Galleries, University of Victoria	
216
	41.1	
Lower part of tile panel probably from the Cihannüma Kasrı, 
Edirne, mid sixteenth century. Benaki Museum, Athens 	
218
	41.2	
Reconstructed panel probably from the Cihannüma Kasrı, 
Edirne, mid sixteenth century  	
219
	42.1	
Opening pages showing Surat al-fatiha (a) and part of Surat al-
Baqara (b) in a Qurʾan from Mindanao, Philippines. Princeton 
University Library 	
223
	42.2	
Betel box made of copper alloy with silver inlay. Mindanao, 
Philippines, nineteenth or twentieth centuries. Doris Duke 
Foundation for Islamic Art	
227
	43.1	
Minaret of the Congregational Mosque from Qalʿat Bani 
Hammad, Algeria, eleventh century 	
229
	43.2	
Plan of Qalʿat Bani Hammad, Algeria	
230
	44.1	
Leather puppet of a horse and rider, with sections of coloured 
fabric. Bought by Paul Kahle in al-Manzala, Egypt, 1909. 
Linden Museum, Stuttgart 	
234
	44.2	
Leather puppet of a servant carrying tray. Bought by Paul Kahle 
in al-Manzala, Egypt, 1909. Linden Museum, Stuttgart 	
236
	44.3	
Leather puppet of chained captives. Bought by Paul Kahle in al-
Manzala, Egypt, 1909. Linden Museum, Stuttgart 	
238
	45.1	
Chased brass platter commemorating Armistice day, Iraq, c. 
1918. Victoria & Albert Museum, London 	
240
	45.2	
Detail of the platter showing the execution of Sadiq Effendi 	
243
	46.1	
Photograph showing the manufacture of the wooden ceiling for 
the living room of the Shangri La. Rabat, Morocco, c. 1937 	
244
	46.2	
Living room, Shangri La. Courtesy of the Doris Duke 
Foundation for Islamic Art 	
245
	47.1	
The Wade Cup with Animated Script, 1200–1221. Iran. The 
Cleveland Museum of Art 	
249
	47.2	
Sketch of the animated inscription 	
252
	48.1	
Exterior façade of the Congregational Mosque of Djenné, Mali 	
253
	48.2	
Aisle in the prayer hall wall of the Congregational Mosque of 
Djenné, Mali 	
255
	49.1	
Les Femmes du Maroc #4, 2005. Chromogenic print. © Lalla Essaydi 	
258
	49.2	
Les Femmes du Maroc: La Grande Odalisque, 2008. 
Chromogenic print. © Lalla Essaydi 	
259
	50.1	
Face masks with epigraphic decoration designed by Ayhan 
Altun (a) and Tom Gowanlock (b), 2020 	
262
	50.2	
Brass amuletic bowl with impressed images and writing 	
265

Acknowledgements
Although the original idea and a little of the writing belong to the summer of 2019, 
this book can reasonably be called a product of the pandemic. With abundant time 
spent at home in Victoria and limited opportunities to conduct new research, I 
experimented with writing an alternative introduction to the field of Islamic art 
history. The motivations and goals of this enterprise are discussed in greater de-
tail in the Introduction, but it is worth emphasising here that, although this book 
charts a different path in telling the story of Islamic art, it could not exist without 
the commendable survey texts that have already been published (listed in Fur-
ther Reading). I have, of course, relied upon these works and the insightful re-
search of countless other scholars who have contributed to the fields of Islamic art 
history, archaeology, history, ethnography, and literary studies in books, articles, 
chapters, and reference works. I also owe a debt of gratitude to the author, al-Hariri, 
whose masterpiece, the Maqamat, provides the central structure and the dramatis 
personae for the present book.
The first chapter drafts (like those of the Maqamat of al-Hariri, they were not 
composed in the order they appear in their published state) were written as a per-
sonal experiment, but as five became ten and ten became twenty, I started to con-
sider whether this might have the makings of a viable publication. The first readers 
were my daughter, Clio, and my mother, Mary. I subsequently received valu-
able advice about avenues for publishing the book from Nicola Ramsey, Melanie 
Gibson, Fahmida Suleman, and Ruba Kana’an. It was an email exchange with 
Laura Pilsworth about another project that led finally to the decision to complete 
the manuscript for publication. This is an ideal opportunity to acknowledge grate-
fully her enthusiastic support for this book. I also offer sincere thanks to Leslee 
Michelsen, Richard McClary, and the anonymous reader for their assessments of 
the proposal submitted to Routledge. They brought forward important critiques, 
which I have tried to address in the revisions to the final manuscript.
Many others have provided citations, technical assistance, contacts, and research 
tips through the writing of the book, and it is a pleasure to mention them here: 
Finbarr Barry Flood, Ulrike al-Khamis, Margaret Graves, Glaire Anderson, Ruba 
Kana’an, Richard McClary, Mohammad Alsubaie, Iona Hubner, Mike Huston, 
Teddi Dols, Sheila Blair, Jonathan Bloom, Robert Hillenbrand, Leslee Michelsen, 
Mariam Rosser-Owen, Oya Pancaroğlu, Jehad Haroun, Abdullah Alzaharani, 

xiv  Acknowledgements
Mohammad Alahmari, Anne Pedersen, Mina Moraitou, James Kohler, AnnaLee 
Pauls, Roel Muñoz, Anahita Ranjbar, Michael Chagnon, Bita Bourvash, Allan 
Antliff, Francesca Leoni, Nahla Nassar, Anna Holmes, Mette Korsholm, Denis 
Genequand, Stéphane Pradines, Philip Grover, Abdurraouf Oueslati, Noah Pacina, 
Omniya Abdel Barr, Ahmad Siyam, Sinéad Ward, Silvia Vermetten, Michelle van 
den Berk, Katja Scharff, and Erika Dowell. None of those listed above (or anyone 
else that I have inadvertently omitted) are, of course, responsible for errors that 
appear in the book. Thanks to Georgia Lloyd and Laura Pilsworth at Routledge for 
their advice during the preparation of the manuscript for publication.
I am also most grateful to those who generously permitted their own photo-
graphs to be reproduced in this work. All of these are acknowledged in the captions, 
but I would like to thank here: Robert Hillenbrand, Heba Mostafa, Alain George, 
Mariam Rosser-Owen, Alastair Northedge, Mark Horton, Nancy Steinhardt, Sheila 
Blair, and Jonathan Bloom. Thanks also to Lalla Essaydi for graciously allowing 
me use two of her photographs and to the staff of the Edwynn Houk Gallery in 
New York for their work in facilitating this agreement. Maps and diagrams were 
produced Seyedhamed Yeganehfarzand and Clio Milwright, and photo editing was 
undertaken by Loukas Milwright.
Finally, the greatest debt is owed to my family, Eva, Loukas and Clio. Their 
love and support have made this work possible. Heartfelt thanks for the welcome 
reminders to step away from the computer screen and enjoy the world in their de-
lightful company!
This book is dedicated to the students who have attended my classes over the 
past two decades. Your perceptive questions and moments of perplexity have in-
spired the chapters that follow.

This book adopts a flexible approach to the range of languages employed for per-
sonal and place names. Personal names and technical vocabulary in Arabic and 
Persian are transliterated according to the International Journal of Middle Eastern 
Studies, but without the macron over the long vowels or the dots under selected 
consonants. The Arabic letters ‘ayn (ʿ) and hamza (ʾ) have been retained in most 
cases, though some have been simplified, such as Aisha (rather than ʿAʾisha). Some 
Arabic words have been translated in variant manners in the following stories. 
This has been done for reasons of style and context. For example, the word rasul is 
given variously as “prophet,” “messenger,” and “apostle” as seemed appropriate in 
each chapter. I have followed the standard convention of capitalising pronouns that 
refer to Allah in translations of Qurʾanic passages and Muslim religious formulae. 
Quotations from the Qurʾan are mostly drawn from the well-known translation by 
Yusuf ʿAli and are referenced in the Appendix according to their chapter (sura) 
and verse (aya) numbers. Conventional sura names are sometimes also given. The 
spellings of place names are generally as they appear in historical, art-historical, 
and archaeological publications. The years and centuries mentioned in the book are 
given according to the Common Era, but with some Hijri dates maintained where 
this plays a role in the narrative or provides important information for the reader.
Notes for the Reader


DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-1
A reader searching for an introduction to the study of Islamic art can select from a 
range of excellent survey texts. Penned by some of the greatest names in the field, 
these publications rely on the diligent scholarship of many other specialists.1 Such 
is the diversity of Islamic visual culture that no single author could claim to be able 
to do justice to all of its manifestations across the world from the seventh century 
to the present day. In response to this formidable challenge, surveys often demar-
cate the boundaries in geographical terms, omitting from consideration areas such 
as Southeast Asia, Western China, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Eastern Europe. Many 
opt not to deal with art or architecture produced after about 1800. The wisdom of 
this somewhat arbitrary chronological division has been the subject of debate in re-
cent years.2 Allowing for these caveats, it is still the case that the available surveys 
represent a strong starting point for an exploration of Islamic visual traditions. It 
can reasonably be asked, therefore, whether there is any value in creating another 
introduction to this field, even if such a book incorporates unfamiliar material from 
under-represented areas or integrates into its structure a critical examination of the 
arts of the past two centuries.
The existing surveys are certainly thoroughly researched and aim to provide 
a fair and accurate representation of what the community of specialists hold (at 
least, up to the time of the publication) to be the most significant artistic achieve-
ments of each major dynasty. Even where survey books offer divergent readings 
of specific objects or styles, the reader can feel confident that these points of disa-
greement are grounded in the interpretation of reputable art-historical or archaeo-
logical research. In all, there has been relatively broad consensus about the basics 
of what a student of this field should become familiar with (what might be loosely 
termed a “canon”), and how those monuments and objects can be located within 
evolutionary pathways from the inception of Islam through to about 1600 CE. 
What is sometimes less obvious is why particular objects or buildings should have 
secured their canonical status in Islamic art history. In common with art-historical 
surveys of other visual cultures, the reader might question whether the preference 
for certain items simply reflects what has survived the vagaries of time. Art histo-
rians are also not immune to wider academic fashions, leading to the privileging 
of selected styles over others. Another pressing concern in the present context 
Introduction

2  Introduction
is the plethora of media that appear in surveys of Islamic art, from manuscript 
painting and calligraphy to decorated ceramics, textiles, and woodwork. Archi-
tecture and architectural decoration are similarly diverse, the latter category in-
cluding everything from mosaic to glazed tiles and sculpted stucco, stone, brick, 
and wood. In other words, Islamic art surveys must move beyond the traditional 
realms of “fine art” to include detailed discussions of what is often designated as 
“applied art” or “craft.”3
This breadth of interest is certainly one of the strengths of this field of study, 
though it may not always be apparent whether one can adopt the same analytical 
criteria in dealing with, for example, an illustration in a Safavid Shahnama (Book 
of Kings) manuscript and a glazed bowl produced under the same dynasty. The 
former comprises a figurative design with a rich iconography that relates to the 
Persian source text (Firdawsi’s epic poem) as well as other political or cultural 
concerns, while the latter is likely to have been made by a pottery workshop as part 
of a consignment. The decoration of the bowl might well be visually beguiling, but 
at the same time is relatively generic, not necessarily designed to communicate a 
specific reading for the viewer. Furthermore, the bowl is a functional item, mean-
ing that its aesthetic qualities are in the service of its primary utility: the serving 
and consumption of food or drink. These discontinuities between singular luxury 
items and utilitarian domestic objects produced in bulk are sufficiently familiar to 
specialists that they are often passed over without comment.4
For those seeking a serviceable introduction to Islamic art the challenge pre-
sented by these contrasts between “high” and “low” visual culture are more acute, 
particularly when the authors of survey texts do not offer explicit justifications for 
the inclusion of seemingly mundane portable objects into discussions dominated 
by luxury media and architecture commissioned by political and economic elites. 
In the area of architectural decoration one could point, for example, to the carved 
and moulded stucco recovered from the ninth-century Iraqi city of Samarra (the 
subject of Chapter 9). There can be little doubt that this medium provided a cheap 
and convenient way to ornament large interior surfaces. In some ways it was like 
wallpaper, creating a background texture that presumably would have generated 
much less discussion among visitors than the lavish textiles and other furnishings. 
Why then have scholars devoted so much attention to these stucco panels? It is pos-
sible to find explanations for this in the poor survival of other forms of architectural 
decoration in this period, the role of Samarra in the subsequent evolution of stucco 
in the eastern Islamic lands, the broader evolution of two- and three-dimensional 
repeated patterns, and the historiography of Islamic art history itself (Samarra hav-
ing been one of the first Islamic sites to be extensively surveyed and excavated in 
the early twentieth century).5 If these circumstances are not made explicit, how-
ever, the reader can be left rather adrift.
The growth of Islamic art history as a discipline from the late nineteenth cen-
tury onward presents further challenges. Two issues can be highlighted in this re-
spect. Firstly, the dividing lines between art history and the related disciplines of 
archaeology and ethnography are not always clearly defined.6 Particularly for the 
earlier Islamic centuries, substantial amounts of the portable objects, paintings, 

Introduction  3
mosaics, and buildings analysed by art historians have been recovered through 
excavations and archaeological surveys. The same objects can, of course, be ex-
amined through different methodologies—derived from art history, archaeology, 
history, or ethnography—but a more difficult question in the present context is 
whether a subgroup of things can be separated, as “art,” from the totality of an 
excavated assemblage simply on aesthetic or iconographic grounds. What, for ex-
ample, makes one decorated ceramic fragment suitable for art-historical analysis 
when others from the same excavated context are not? A similar problem exists 
with the study of living crafts by ethnographers in that their methods encompass all 
types of human manufacturing and use; only a small proportion of what has been 
studied across the Islamic world would normally be considered the province of the 
art historian.7 Secondly, Islamic art history, especially in its formative period in the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries was closely allied to the art market. 
This relationship established certain fashions in both scholarship and collecting 
that have persisted to the present day. The illicit manner in which many objects 
were acquired also created substantial assemblages of poorly provenanced objects 
that continue to be prominent in survey texts and research literature.8
The impact of these issues can also be seen in the evolving practices of display 
in public and private collections of Islamic art. An early resolution of the problem 
of what subgroup of objects to privilege as “art” was to appeal to the European 
concept of the “masterpiece.”9 In this way, curators argued that the finest objects 
from the pre-Modern Islamic world could be placed on the same pedestal as 
paintings and sculptures created by the accepted canon of significant artists from 
the Renaissance onward. While this approach reflected an understandable desire 
to highlight the aesthetic and technical achievements of the Islamic world in a 
manner that would resonate with early twentieth-century audiences in Europe 
and North America, it failed to acknowledge that the categorisation of the sin-
gular masterpiece, or more broadly of “Fine Art,” has no obvious relationship 
to the ways in which visual and material culture were discussed in most Islamic 
primary sources prior to the advent of Modernity.10 The fact that so many objects 
in these displays were meant to perform practical functions was also frequently 
glossed over. Several major museums have redesigned their galleries devoted to 
Islamic art in recent years, finding different ways to address the question of what 
to display, including the diversity of modern and contemporary Islamic visual 
culture, and how to deal with the uncertain provenance of many artefacts.11 These 
ambitious curatorial projects demonstrate an active engagement with the prob-
lematic early history of Islamic art history, archaeology, and the art market for 
Islamic objects, though questions inevitably remain about what might represent 
a stable core of object types or monuments that could illustrate for the general 
reader the fundamental principles of Islamic art from the seventh century to the 
present day.
It would be presumptuous to claim that this book will be able to solve these 
problems. I argue, however, that it remains a worthwhile endeavour to encompass 
the range of media dealt with in Islamic art, while also providing the means for the 
reader to appreciate what makes each one deserving of analysis.

4  Introduction
Inspirations and Goals
The title of this book draws its inspiration from Ernst Gombrich’s The Story of Art, 
first published in 1950 and, at the time of writing, in its sixteenth edition. This work 
starts: “There is no such thing as Art. There are only artists.”12 One way of dealing 
with this claim is to say that our attention is best focused on skilled practitioners 
(or “artists,” though this rather culturally specific label should be expanded to en-
compass all artisans who make objects possessing meaningful aesthetic qualities), 
what they create, and the context in which this process occurs. One might go fur-
ther to observe that art exists within human society, and requires an audience and 
a social and cultural setting in which it can operate. Gombrich takes his readers on 
a journey from the earliest cave paintings through to modern times, providing il-
lustrations of every item discussed in the text. Gombrich’s concise and lucid prose 
presents complex ideas in an approachable manner. These factors have ensured 
the enduring success of The Story of Art, though contemporary readers might well 
question the Eurocentric emphasis, the gender imbalance, and the relative lack of 
consideration for minority perspectives.13
The inclusion of the word, “story,” in the title is also important for it implies not 
only that “art” as a whole can be conceptualised as a narrative but that individual 
works of art also have tales to tell. This recognises that art (however this is defined) 
is made at a particular moment in time, but can continue to exist long after the disap-
pearance of the society for which it was first produced. Those objects that exist over 
this long life cycle tend to be reinterpreted by successive societies, sometimes being 
pressed into service in ways that could not have been predicted by their original mak-
ers and patrons. They might also be adapted or changed—a new frame on a painting 
or additional decoration applied to the surface of an object—or transported to a new 
space (for example, from the sanctuary of a church to a gallery or museum). This has 
led to the scholarly practice of writing of object “biographies,” tracing how things 
move locations, shift functions, and undergo physical changes over the course of 
decades or centuries.14 Alternatively, one can try to reconstruct the ways in which 
paintings, objects, and buildings elicited responses at the time that they were pro-
duced. This relates to Michael Baxandall’s well-known idea of the “period eye,” the 
drawing out of the complex relationships between the demands and expectations of 
patrons and the production of art. Baxandall’s approach is a speculative one, though 
it is certainly strongly grounded in a deep study of contemporary literature and visual 
culture.15 What we lack in most cases are the precise conversations and actions that 
occurred in the presence of art works at the time they were first produced.
These considerations provide the stimulus for the present volume. Simply put, 
this book is an attempt to chart a course through the history of Islamic art and archi-
tecture in the form of imagined narratives. Some of these narratives take place at the 
time a given piece of art was being made or completed, and suggest ways in which 
audiences may have interacted with the makers of art and those who commissioned 
or oversaw their work. The remainder deals with the appreciation of objects or 
buildings after they were completed, sometimes involving an elapse of only a few 
years and in other cases, decades or centuries. This allows for a discussion of the 

Introduction  5
ways in which the meanings attached to art change over time, and how objects and 
buildings can be adapted and changed by new owners. The book is arranged into 
fifty chapters, each one set at a specific location and date, starting in the second half 
of the seventh century and finishing in the twenty-first century. Every chapter takes 
as its subject matter one or more extant paintings, drawings, photographs, portable 
objects, buildings, or architectural fittings that are, in some way, representative of 
their time and place. While the main protagonists in these narratives are fictional 
(see below), they occasionally engage with real historical figures from the worlds 
of politics, religion, scholarship, and literature. Real events—such as earthquakes, 
battles, conquests of cities, and exhibitions—are mentioned. I have tried to make 
the characters in the story address questions that might belong to their own time.
In order to provide some thematic coherence, I have borrowed a plot device from 
one of the masterpieces of pre-modern Arabic fiction, the Maqamat (Assemblies) 
of al-Hariri (d. 1122). This is a collection of stories featuring the same two central 
characters, a merchant called al-Harith ibn al-Hammam and a wandering trickster, 
named Abu Zayd al-Saruji. Al-Harith’s role as a merchant provides the explanation 
for the fact that the stories occur at different locations across the Islamic world. 
A common conceit in these narratives is that al-Harith does not at first identify 
his companion, the moment of recognition taking place when Abu Zayd begins to 
speak. Although the fifty chapters are set in dispersed locales, these represent merely 
convenient backdrops for the central literary focus: the inventive use of language. 
Abu Zayd is not above stealing, drugging, and deceiving those around him, but is re-
deemed by his eloquence. He has cause to use his extraordinary facility with words 
to extricate himself from difficult situations or to enrich himself. The reader is also 
confronted with further levels of textual sophistication with al-Hariri experimenting 
with visual aspects of the Arabic language, including the alternating words made up 
of dotted and undotted letters sharing the same grapheme.16
Given his interest in wordplay, it is perhaps predictable that he has relatively 
little to say about art, architecture, and the wider context of made objects. An ear-
lier Maqamat, produced by al-Hamadhani (d. 1007) does give these dimensions 
of the human environment more attention, even to the extent of naming maqa-
mas after objects: an amulet (maqama 23), a spindle (maqama 31) and a dinar 
(maqama 43).17 The earlier author’s concentration is, however, on pun, allusion, 
and metaphor, rather than on information that might be of direct use to an art his-
torian, such as the discussion of aesthetic or material qualities. The visual world 
of al-Hariri’s stories was given greater attention in illustrated manuscripts of the 
Maqamat produced during the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries. Al-Hariri’s lin-
guistic fireworks are not an easy subject for illustration, leading painters to concen-
trate on the human and physical context of the stories in order to provide further 
entertainment for the wealthy patrons of these manuscripts. Illustrations are popu-
lated by people of different ages, ethnicities, and socio-economic groups, and they 
move around in diverse urban environments, including mosques, houses, taverns, 
caravanserais, and markets, as well as rural settings. The stories sometimes require 
the protagonists to travel by sea, providing illustrators with the chance to offer their 
audiences accurate depictions of commercial vessels. The best illustrators were 

6  Introduction
sensitive to matters of clothing, architecture, musical instruments, fittings within 
domestic spaces, and tents used by travellers and pilgrims. It is this material world 
that the art historian and the archaeologist tend to pay most attention, even if it 
remains secondary to al-Hariri’s text.18 Manuscript paintings are a valuable source 
for the study of pre-Modern Islamic material culture and craft practices (see, for 
example, the construction trades shown in the late fifteenth-century painting of the 
building of the castle of Khwarnaq used as the cover illustration for this book), 
though their potential in this respect remains relatively untapped.19
The present book adopts al-Hariri’s central characters, al-Harith and Abu Zayd, 
but focuses not on linguistic virtuosity—after all, it is a rare scholar who would 
wish to compete with al-Hariri on this playing field20—but on the artistic achieve-
ments of the Islamic world. Two more characters have been added. The first is 
Aisha, the daughter of al-Harith who travels with him and also acts as the narrator 
in most of the stories. The second is Salim, al-Harith’s servant who assists him in 
business matters, and is also well-versed in religious knowledge. Following the 
lead of the Maqamat, al-Harith is a merchant engaged in various forms of local 
and international trade. This allows him to travel extensively, and each chapter 
takes place in a specific locality (including areas beyond the borders of the Islamic 
world). Al-Hariri’s text is not specific about dates or times of year, though one may 
assume that the encounters all happen over the course of years or, at most, one or 
two decades. The primary difference with the present book is that, unbeknownst 
to them, the four protagonists—al-Harith, Aisha, Salim, and Abu Zayd—travel not 
just in space but through time. Hence, the first story occurs in 660 CE and the last 
in the year 2020. I have also tried in each chapter to make them products of their 
age; they don’t bring with them knowledge of their pasts in previous chapters nor 
are they afforded glimpses of their futures. In this way I hope that their interac-
tions with art and architecture are centred on perceptions and beliefs that could 
conceivably have existed in the year the given chapter is set.21 It should be noted, 
however, that I lack the ability to emulate the literary style or colloquial idiom (in 
Arabic, Persian, Turkish, and other languages) operating at the time in which a 
given chapter is set. As a result, there is inevitably an anachronistic quality to much 
of the reported speech and descriptive content given by the fictional narrators of 
each chapter. This decision to adopt a contemporary form of written expression 
will hopefully allow for a readable and accessible text.22 Another anachronism that 
cannot be entirely avoided is the adoption of familiar building names that post-
date the time when the story is set. Examples include the titles of courtyards and 
rooms in the Alhambra (many of which have their origins in the nineteenth century) 
(Chapter 25) and the Shaykh Lutfallah mosque in Isfahan (Chapter 32).
The entirely speculative nature of this enterprise should be emphasised. I pos-
sess no direct knowledge of what it was like to experience the paintings, objects, 
buildings, and exhibitions at the times when they were made or first seen in public. 
I certainly do not claim to speak on behalf of people from the past of whatever 
background and cannot trace familial links to any part of the Islamic world. The 
Nigerian author, Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie has spoken lucidly about the power 
and potential danger of a “single story.”23 Her personal reflections illustrate the ways 
in which we can all end up minimising the lives and experiences of others through 

Introduction  7
the unquestioning acceptance of a dominant narrative. To represent another person 
or group of people is, to a greater or lesser extent, to exert control over them. The 
present book is made up of separate short stories, but at the same time could reason-
ably be called a “single story” in the sense that they are written by one person. Fur-
thermore, these stories entail the representation of people (fictional and real) largely 
drawn from parts of the world that I know not as a native but as visitor or through 
the study of print publications and other media. It is incumbent upon all “Western” 
scholars of the Islamic world (of which I am one) to acknowledge the corrosive na-
ture of Orientalist representations of other cultures in the fields of history, religious 
studies, and art history.24 The troubling colonial heritage of the discipline of archae-
ology has to be considered when studying buildings and artefacts recovered from 
excavations across the Islamic world.25 With these cautions in mind, I have tried to 
write in a way that encourages further dialogue through shifts in genre, literary style, 
and narrative voice, while avoiding the implication that “definitive” interpretations 
exist for given objects, monuments and ideas. It will, of course, be left to the reader 
to decide on the relative success or failure of this approach.
The goal of presenting ideas about Islamic art through fictional narratives was, 
therefore, to find an alternative means to share with readers about what, on the basis 
of scholarly interpretations, seems to make each chosen piece deserving of deep ex-
amination. Sometimes this can be to delve into issues of iconography or aesthetics, 
and on other occasions it is to highlight the roles that art may play in society. Art, in 
its broadest sense, can be fascinating because of the technical skill involved in its 
manufacture or for the ways in which its meanings are transformed over time. Trans-
formations can also occur as art passes across borders into new visual cultures. All 
of the objects discussed in the following chapters invite a wide range of approaches 
to their physical and visual properties as well as the functions they performed.
It will be apparent from the comments made above that this book is not designed 
to replace existing introductory surveys of Islamic art and archaeology. Rather, 
my hope is that this study can complement these surveys by providing a different 
means to engage with the major questions promoted by the study of Islamic objects 
and buildings. In this respect, the structure of this book takes inspiration from the 
radio/podcast series, A History of the World in 100 Objects. Presented by Neil 
MacGregor, the broadcasts (subsequently published as a book) employ artefacts 
from the collection to tell the story of human creativity from the first stone hand 
axes through to a plastic credit card.26 MacGregor chose the objects to illuminate 
a range of issues, including the development of technology, the exchange of com-
modities, and the expression of group identity, belief, and social status. The chap-
ters of the present book also draw out stories from artefacts, and probe their social 
and cultural contexts, often with an emphasis on art-historical and archaeological 
concerns. The difference is that the present book employs fictional narratives as a 
means to communicate interpretations that have been advanced in previous schol-
arship.27 For this reason, I have selected examples that, from my perspective at 
least, offered the chance to generate interesting conversations and actions between 
the fictional protagonists. Often these are deservedly famous works, though I have 
also identified lesser-known objects or monuments when they can be used to ex-
plore an important question highlighted in prior scholarship.

8  Introduction
Figure I.1  Map showing sites in mentioned in the text. Created by Seyedhamed 
Yeganehfarzand.
Figure I.2  Detailed map of sites in Europe and the Mediterranean. Created by Seyedhamed 
Yeganehfarzand.

Introduction  9
Figure I.3  Detailed map of sites in the Middle East, the Caucasus, and Central Asia. Created 
by Seyedhamed Yeganehfarzand.
Figure I.4  Detailed map of sites in the Middle East. Created by Seyedhamed Yeganehfarzand.

10  Introduction
Scope and Major Themes
A few words are needed to explain the geographical approach adopted in the book. 
I have tried to encompass all of the major areas normally defined as being part of 
the Islamic world. This includes regions that commonly appear in introductory sur-
veys of Islamic art—the Middle East, North Africa, the Iberian Peninsula, Central 
Asia, and the Indian Subcontinent—as well as others that tend to receive more lim-
ited coverage in such publications. Among these are western China (Chapter 26), 
Southeast Asia (Chapters 39 and 42), Sub-Saharan Africa (Chapter 48), and Eastern 
Europe (Chapters 31 and 38). The distinctive forms of Islamic art and architecture 
exerted an influence over the development of visual and material cultures beyond 
the boundaries of the Islamic world, and this issue encouraged the creation of sto-
ries set in Sicily under the Norman kings (Chapter 22), Venice (Chapter 29), and 
Breslau (modern Wrocław in Poland; Chapter 36). The growth of scholarship on Is-
lamic art, architecture, and archaeology from the late nineteenth century broadens 
the geographical scope further, with chapters set in Britain (Chapter 40) and North 
America (Chapter 47). It should be acknowledged, however, that in common with 
al-Hariri’s Maqamat, the focus remains on the Middle East, with significant atten-
tion also paid to North Africa, the Iberian Peninsula, and Central Asia. While it 
could be argued that more chapters should have been devoted to several of the other 
regions mentioned above, I decided that it was important to deal with a reasonable 
Figure I.5  Detailed map of sites in North Africa and West Africa. Created by Seyedhamed 
Yeganehfarzand.

Introduction  11
selection of the objects, paintings, and monuments that occur most frequently in 
published surveys of the field.
No single scholar can claim to have an equal familiarity with all the visual 
cultures of the Islamic world from the seventh century to the present, and this is a 
good place to make a frank admission that the writing of this book took me well be-
yond my normal “comfort zone.” I hope that experienced researchers in the many 
regions and periods covered will not judge too harshly the ways in which I have 
presented the historical and art-historical evidence—such as I have been able to as-
semble it—in both the fifty chapters and the appendix. There were times also when 
I departed from the common academic understanding of events and the actions or 
characters of known individuals. This was done in the service of the narrative in 
each case, with changes of this nature signalled in the entries in the appendix. I 
trust that these discordant details will not prove too jarring to specialist readers and 
advanced students.
I have tried to address the fullest possible range of materials and object types in 
the following chapters, as well as diverse modes of architecture and architectural 
decoration. The buildings themselves vary in terms of function, including mosques 
(Chapters 4, 9, 10, 26, 28, 31, 32, 37, and 48), tombs (Chapters 16 and 33), elite 
residences or palaces (Chapters 7, 25, and 41), a bathhouse (Chapter 5), a fountain 
(Chapter 38), and a royal chapel (Chapter 22). One chapter deals with the reed con-
structions of the Marsh Arabs in southern Iraq (Chapter 34). An important consid-
eration that runs through the chapters on religious architecture is the way in which 
the same fundamental functional and liturgical requirements can be interpreted in 
different ways depending upon available materials for construction and ornamenta-
tion, as well as the interplay of historical, cultural, and political factors in the given 
locality. The selections were also designed to touch upon many of the major themes 
in the visual and material cultures of the Islamic world from their earliest manifes-
tations through to modern times. The central role of writing, particularly that of the 
Qurʾan but also including religious invocations, political messages, and poetry, is a 
recurrent issue in the following chapters. The writing of the Qurʾan in manuscript 
form is dealt with in Chapters 1, 13, and 42, with the presence of scriptural citations 
on buildings and objects is discussed elsewhere in the book.
Another dominant theme is commemoration. This takes an obvious form in the 
erection of monumental tombs (Chapters 16, 24, and 33) and the creation of in-
scribed grave markers (Chapters 2 and 19). The dead might also be memorialised in 
more unexpected ways in architectural decoration (Chapter 5), while other objects 
could capture events, such as the birth of a child (Chapter 12) or the completion 
of the pilgrimage, or hajj (Chapter 39). The extraordinary fresco cycle in Qusayr 
ʿAmra (Chapter 5) is a good reminder of the role of representation—of humans, 
animals, and the natural world—in Islamic visual culture. While the depiction 
of animate life was largely held to be inappropriate in Muslim religious contexts 
(this prohibition is discussed in Chapter 37), humans and animals are common-
place in the secular realm, from manuscript painting, printed books, and other 
works on paper (Chapters 21, 23, 27, 30, 35, and 50) to metalwork (Chapters 18, 
45, and 47), ceramics (Chapters 8 and 20), shadow puppets (Chapter 44), ivory 

12  Introduction
(Chapter 12), rock crystal (Chapter 14), and textiles (Chapter 17). Representa-
tional themes occasionally appear on Islamic coinage, particularly during the late 
seventh century, as a means of communicating royal authority (Chapter 3). Power 
is expressed in many other ways, including the addition of inscriptions (such as 
the embroidered tiraz band discussed in Chapter 6) and the conferring upon oth-
ers of items made of luxurious materials (such as the Ottoman silk garments dis-
cussed in Chapter 36).
Islamic art is, of course, well known for its endless experimentation with forms of 
repeated ornament, based around geometric principles. Two- and three-­dimensional 
patterns (the latter including, from the late eleventh century, the muqarnas vault) 
appear on secular and religious architecture (Chapters 7, 9, 10, 16, 22, 25, 28, 31, 
and 46). Complex geometric or vegetal patterns, sometimes combined with bands 
of inscription, are often encountered in manuscripts as well as portable objects 
(Chapters 6, 12, 13, 14, 19, 20, 24, 36, 40, 42, and 47). Art can exist at the intersec-
tion between different areas of human activity—as is the case with pharmacological 
manuscripts (Chapter 15), and amulets (Chapter 50)—or between different cultures. 
The medieval Islamic world drew heavily on the Graeco-­Roman past (Chapters 5, 7, 
and 15) while also interacting with contemporary polities, including the Byzantine 
empire (Chapter 4) and China (Chapter 28). Influence could also travel in the other 
direction, manifesting itself in adaptations of Islamic coins (Chapter 11), the storage 
of Islamic artefacts in European church treasuries (Chapter 17), and architectural 
decoration in Norman Sicily (Chapter 22).28
A further phase of interaction with Europe can be traced from the second half of 
the fifteenth to the late eighteenth centuries. New technologies emerge in Europe, 
including the printed book, along with an aggressive approach to the expansion 
of trading opportunities through the creation of trading outposts in North Africa, 
East Africa, and the Persian Gulf. This changing world is addressed in three sto-
ries concerned entirely or in part with printing (Chapters 31, 33, and 35) and the 
inclusion of Turkish rugs into Italian painting (Chapter 29). The experiences of 
early Modern European travellers to parts of the Islamic world are mentioned in 
Chapters 32, 34, and 36. The nineteenth and twentieth centuries bring new issues, 
particularly as the result of industrialisation and European military expansion into 
parts of the Islamic world (Chapters 43, 45, and 46). Another dynamic at this time 
is the growth of the art market, resulting in the licit and illicit transfer of many 
objects, manuscripts, and architectural fittings to private collections and museums 
in Europe and North America (Chapters 40, 41, and 47). Archaeology is another 
mode of acquisition of the material remains of the Islamic past. The colonial roots 
of this discipline are explored in Chapter 43. There can be little doubt that the rep-
resentations of the Islamic world by European and North American artists—even 
those with evident sympathy for their subject matter—should not be accepted at 
face value (for example, the Venetian depiction of the Ottoman sultan Süleyman I 
Qanuni mentioned in Chapter 31). While often visually captivating, Orientalist 
painting communicates inaccurate and sometimes damaging stereotypes, which 
have been submitted to critical examination by scholars, as well as by artists from 
the Islamic world (Chapter 49).29 Finally, mention should be made of the role of 

Introduction  13
memory and specifically the ways in which people might have formed personal vi-
sions of artworks not via direct experience, but through oral and written testimony 
(see particularly Chapters 16, 17, 18, 20, 22, 25, and 30). This is a useful reminder 
of the fact that in the contemporary context we have relatively easy access to print 
and online photographs of artworks from across the globe.
In order to give a better sense of the scholarly context for the stories, I have 
included a glossary, timeline, and a substantial appendix featuring notes on each of 
the chapters. This decision was taken to avoid encumbering the fifty chapters with 
endnotes that would affect the flow of the narrative. The discussions in the appen-
dix are by necessity condensed in nature but try to capture in more conventional 
art-historical language the principal interpretations established in academic publi-
cations. Obviously it is not feasible in this concise format to incorporate all of the 
differences of opinion that might exist between scholars on particular questions, or 
to present a full examination of the wider political, cultural, economic, and techno-
logical context, relevant comparative data from other sites, scientific analysis, or 
evidence from conservation reports. Each section in the appendix includes citations 
for those wishing to explore the interpretations of any given artefact. These may at 
times conflict with the ideas advanced, or implied in the fifty chapters of this book. 
In common with all art-historical surveys, I have relied on the insights and research 
of many others while also taking the liberty, where appropriate, to suggest my own 
readings of the available evidence.
I have included the essential photographs, plans, or diagrams to support the 
narratives. However, this often meant choosing only one view of a given object or 
only one part of a building. Clearly, this constraint is most glaring in the case of 
the architecture surveyed in the book, and readers are encouraged to consult pub-
lications cited in the appendix (as well as online sources) for further photographs, 
plans, and elevations. In the case of objects and paintings, some photographs could 
not be acquired for practical reasons, while others have become inaccessible due 
to contemporary political factors. In those cases, I have produced line drawings to 
show the main features. These are, of course, only a partial substitute for high qual-
ity colour photographs. In most cases, images of these missing items can be found 
easily in print and online publications (see: Further Reading).
Notes
	 1	 See the publications listed in the Selected Bibliography.
	 2	 On this issue, see Finbarr Barry Flood, “From Prophet to Postmodernism? New world 
orders and the end of Islamic Art,” in Elizabeth Mansfield, ed., Making Art History: A 
Changing Discipline and its Institutions (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 31–53. On the 
re-evaluation of nineteenth- and early twentieth-century visual culture in the Islamic 
world, see: Doris Behrens-Abouseif and Stephen Vernoit, eds. Islamic Art in the 19th 
Century: Tradition, Innovation, and Eclecticism, Islamic History and Civilization: Stud-
ies and Texts 60 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2006); Margaret Graves and Alex Dika 
Seggerman, eds, Making Modernity in the Islamic Mediterranean (Bloomington: Indi-
ana University Press, 2022).
	 3	 For example, see the discussion of this distinction in Marcus Milwright, Islamic Arts 
and Crafts: An Anthology (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2017), pp. 1–15.

14  Introduction
	 4	 On the challenges of creating art-historical interpretations of Islamic “luxury” objects, 
see Amanda Phillips, Everyday Luxuries: Art and Objects in Ottoman Constantinople, 
1600–1800 (Berlin: National Museums and Verlag Kettler, 2016. Reprinted 2018), 
pp. 12–21.
	 5	 On the nature and influence of the early archaeological work at Samarra, see: Alastair 
Northedge, “Friedrich Sarre’s Die Keramik von Samarra in perspective,” in Karin Bartl 
and Stefan Hauser, eds., Continuity and Change in Northern Mesopotamia from the Hel-
lenistic to the Early Islamic Period, Berliner Beiträge zum vorderen Orient 17 (Berlin: 
Reimer Verlag, 1996), pp. 229–58; idem, “Ernst Herzfeld, Samarra, and Islamic archae-
ology,” in Ann Gunter and Stefan Hauser, eds, Ernst Herzfeld and the Development of 
Near Eastern Studies, 1900–1950 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2005), pp. 385–403. Also 
Thomas Leisten, Excavations in Samarra. Volume 1: Architecture. Final Report of the 
first Campaign, 1910–1912, Baghdader Forschungen 20 (Manz am Rhein: Phillip von 
Zabern, 2003).
	 6	 On the early history of these disciplines and the role of collecting, see contributions 
in: Stephen Vernoit, ed., Discovering Islamic Art: Scholars, Collectors and Collections 
(London: I. B. Tauris, 2000); Linda Komaroff, ed., Exhibiting the Middle East. Special 
issue of Ars Orientalis 30 (2000). On the early history of Islamic archaeology, see also: 
Stephen Vernoit, “The rise of Islamic archaeology,” Muqarnas 14 (1997): 1–10.
	 7	 See, for example, the activities and objects surveyed in Hans Wulff’s classic study, The 
Traditional Crafts of Persia: Their Development, Technology, and Influence on Eastern 
and Western Civilizations (Cambridge MA: The MIT Press, 1966). Also Marcus Mil-
wright, “The Manual Crafts and the Challenge of Modernity in late nineteenth-century 
Damascus,” in Margaret Graves and Alex Dika Seggerman, eds, Making Modernity in 
the Islamic Mediterranean (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2022), pp. 139–54.
	 8	 For studies dealing with the relationships between dealers, scholars, and curators, see: 
David Roxburgh, “Disorderly conduct?: F. R. Martin and the Bahram Mirza album,” 
Muqarnas 15 (1998): 32–57; Bita Pourvash, “Building the Islamic art collection at the 
Royal Ontario Museum: The first decades,” in Marcus Milwright and Evanthia Baboula, 
eds, Made for the Eye of One Who sees: Canadian Contributions to the Study of Islamic 
Art and Archaeology (Montreal and Toronto: McGill-Queen’s University Press and 
Royal Ontario Museum, 2022), pp. 311–29.
	 9	 On the origins of the idea of “masterpieces” of Islamic art, see Avinoam Shalem, “The 
1910 exhibition ‘Meisterwerke muhammedanischer Kunst’ revisited,” in Andrea Lermer 
and Avinoam Shalem, eds, After One Hundred Years: The 1910 Exhibition “Meiserwerke 
muhammedanischer Kunst” reconsidered (Leiden: Brill, 2010), pp. 1–15.
	10	 Adam Mestyan, “Arabic lexicography and European aesthetics: The origins of fann,” 
Muqarnas 28 (2011): 69–100.
	11	 For perspectives on these redesigned displays of Islamic art, see: David Roxburgh, “The 
new galleries for ‘The Art of the Arab Lands, Turkey, Iran, Central Asia, and Later 
South Asia,’ the Metropolitan Museum of Art,” Art Bulletin 94.4 (2012): 641–44; Stefan 
Weber, “Pulling the past into the present: Curating Islamic art in a changing world, a per-
spective from Berlin,” International Journal of Islamic Architecture 7.2 (2018): 237–61; 
Valerie Gonzalez, “The religious plot in museums or lack thereof: The case of Islamic 
art display,” Religions 13.4 (2022). https://www.mdpi.com/2077-1444/13/4/281/htm 
(last consulted: 12 December 2022). See also contributions in Benoît Junod, Georges 
Khalil, Stefan Weber, and Gerhard Wolf, eds, Islamic Art and the Museum: Approaches 
to Art and Archaeology of the Muslim World in the Twenty-first Century (London: Saqi 
Books, 2012).
	12	 Ernst Gombrich, The Story of Art (London: Phaidon, 1960), p. 1.
	13	 For example, see the critical evaluation of Gombrich’s abiding academic concerns and 
their relationship to current art-historical practice in James Elkins, “Ten reasons why 
E. H. Gombrich is not connected to art history,” Human Affairs 19 (2009): 304–10 (for 
The Story of Art, see pp. 305–306). https://www.degruyter.com/document/doi/10.2478/

Introduction  15
v10023-009-0044-6/html (last consulted: 27 December 2021). Elkins also wrote an al-
ternative introduction to art history, suggesting multiple narratives. See his Stories of Art 
(London: Routledge, 2002).
	14	 For example, see: Igor Kopytoff, “The cultural biography of things,” in Arjun Appadurai, 
ed., The Social Life of Things: Commodities in Cultural Perspective (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1986), pp. 64–91; Michael Rowlands, “Value and cultural 
transmission of things,” in Wim van Binsbergen and Peter Geschiere, eds, Commodifi-
cation: Things, Agency and Identity (The Social Life of Things revisited) (Münster: Lit, 
2005), pp. 267–81. For a demonstration of this approach, see George Beech, “The Elea-
nor of Aquitaine vase: Its origins and history to the early twelfth century,” Ars Orientalis 
22 (1992): 69–79.
	15	 His most famous exploration of this concept is Michael Baxandall, Painting and Ex-
perience in Fifteenth-Century Italy: A Primer in the Social History of Pictorial Style 
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1972).
	16	 Translations include: The Assemblies of al-Harîrî, trans. Thomas Chenery (London: 
Williams and Norgate, 1867); The Assemblies of al-Harîrî, trans. Francis Steingass 
(London: The Royal Asiatic Society, 1898); Le Livre des malins: Séances d’un vaga-
bond de génie, trans. René Khawam (Paris: Phébus, 1992). Most recently, see al-Hariri, 
Impostures, trans. Michael Cooperson with a foreword by Abdelfattah Kilito, Library of 
Arabic Literature (New York: New York University Press, 2020). On the literary form 
of the Maqamat, see: Abdelfattah Kilito, Les Séances: Récits et codes culturels chez 
Hamadhânî et Harîrî (Paris: Sindbad, 1983).
	17	 For an English translation of this text see: Badiʿ al-Zaman al-Hamadhani, The Maqámát 
of Badíʿ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, translated and annotated with an introduction by 
William J. Prendergast (London and Madras: Luzac and Co. and S. P. C. K. Depository, 
1915). Available online at: https://www.sacred-texts.com/isl/mhm/mhm00.htm (last 
consulted: 3 December 2022). My thanks to Barry Flood for drawing my attention to 
this work. For an attempt to draw out information on material culture from al-Jahiz’s 
famous, Book of Misers (Kitab al-Bukhalaʾ), see: Oleg Grabar, “Silks, pots and jugs: 
Al-Jahiz and objects of common use,” in Bernard O’Kane, ed., The Iconography of 
Islamic Art: Studies in Honour of Robert Hillenbrand (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer-
sity Press, 2005), pp. 197–200.
	18	 For studies of the illustrated manuscripts, see: Oleg Grabar, “The illustrated Maqamat 
of the thirteenth-century: The bourgeoisie and the arts,” in Albert Hourani and Samuel 
Stern, eds, The Islamic City: A Colloquium, Papers on Islamic History 1 (Oxford: Bruno 
Cassirer and University of Pennsylvania Press, 1970), pp. 207–22; idem, Illustrations 
of the Maqamat (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984); Shirley Guthrie, Arab 
Social Life in the Middle Ages: An illustrated Study (London: Saqi, 1995); Robert 
Hillenbrand, “The Schefer Hariri: A study in Islamic frontispiece design,” in Anna Con-
tadini, ed., Arab Painting: Text and Image in illustrated Arabic Manuscripts, Handbook 
of Oriental Studies: Section 1. The Near and Middle East 90 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 
2007), pp. 117–34; David Roxburgh, “In pursuit of shadows: Al-Hariri’s Maqamat,” 
Muqarnas 30 (2013): 171–212.
	19	 The painting appears in a copy of the Khamsa of Nizami, made for Sultan ʿAli Mirza 
Barlas in 1494–95 (British Library, ms. Or. 6810, fol. 154v). On this and other Per-
sianate images of construction work, see Richard Piran McClary, “Persian paintings as 
documents of social history: Images of craftsmen at work,” Iran 56.2 (2018): 215–27. 
On the reconstruction of Ilkhanid royal material culture using manuscript paintings, see 
Robert Hillenbrand, The Great Mongol Shahnama (New Haven and London: National 
Museum of Asian Art and Qatar Museums in association with Yale University Press, 
2022), pp. 75–92.
	20	 See, however, the wonderfully imaginative approach taken by Michael Cooperson to 
the creation of an English version of the text in al-Hariri, Impostures. Each of the fifty 
chapters is written in a different literary style or mode of English (slangs, dialects, 

16  Introduction
and pidgins). Although I had started the present project before coming across Impos-
tures, Cooperson’s idea of shifting styles from story to story did inspire me to adopt 
different genres during the writing process.
	21	 This brings to mind Robert Harris’ claim in the author’s note in Imperium, the first of 
his trilogy about the Roman orator, Cicero: “… the majority of the events it [the book] 
describes did actually happen; the remainder at least could have happened; and nothing, 
I hope (a hostage to fortune, this), demonstrably did not happen.” See Robert Harris, 
Imperium (London: Arrow Books, 2007), page after p. 480 (italics as they appear in the 
original).
	22	 For example, see the comments on pre-Modern Arabic prose fiction in Robert Irwin, 
“Ibn Zunbul and the romance of history,” in Julia Bray, ed., Writing and Representa-
tion in Medieval Islam: Muslim Horizons (London and New York: Routledge, 2001), 
pp. 3–15.
	23	 Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie, “The danger of a single story,” TED Talk, 2009: https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=D9Ihs241zeg (last consulted: 28 December 2021).
	24	 The foundational study is Edward Said, Orientalism (New York: Vintage Books, 1979. 
Reissued with new foreword, 1994). On the critical reaction to Said’s ideas, see: A. 
L. Macfie, ed., Orientalism, a Reader (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2000); 
Robert Irwin, For Lust of Knowing: The Orientalists and their Enemies (London: 
Penguin Books, 2007), pp. 310–30.
	25	 On this issue, see: Talal Asad, “Anthropology and the colonial encounter,” in Gerrit 
Huizer and Bruce Mannheim, eds, The Politics of Anthropology: From Colonialism 
and Sexism to a View from Below, World Anthropology (The Hague: De Gruyter, 1979), 
pp. 85–96; Neil Asher Silberman, Digging for God and Country: Exploration, Archae-
ology and the secret Struggle for the Holy Land, 1799–1917 (New York: Alfred A. 
Knopf Inc., 1982); Nadia Erzini, “Cultural administration in French North Africa and 
the growth of Islamic art history,” in Stephen Vernoit, ed., Discovering Islamic Art: 
Scholars, Collectors and Collections, 1850–1950 (London and New York., I.B. Tauris, 
2000), pp. 71–84; Stephen Vernoit, “The rise of Islamic archaeology,” Muqarnas 14 
(1997): 1–10; Daniel Hull, “Orientalism: Islamic archaeology and its colonial context,” 
in Claire Smith, ed., Encyclopaedia of Global Archaeology (New York: Springer, 2014), 
pp. 5614–22.
	26	 A History of the World in 100 Objects (The British Museum and BBC Radio 4): 
https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00nrtd2/episodes/downloads 
(last 
consulted: 
28 December 2021). Neil MacGregor, A History of the World in 100 Objects (London: 
Allen Lane for the British Museum and BBC Radio 4, 2010).
	27	 For an example of an art-historical study incorporating fictionalised components, see: 
Michael Camille, Master of Death: The Lifeless Art of Pierre Remiet, Illuminator (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1996). I have drawn inspiration from novels that use 
artworks as significant elements of the plot. For example, see: J. L. Carr, A Month in the 
Country, Penguin Classics (London: Penguin Books, 2000); Peter Ackroyd, Chatterton 
(London: Abacus Books, 1988); Arturo Perez-Reverte, The Flanders Panel (New York: 
Vintage, 1997).
	28	 The bibliography on these cultural interactions is extensive, but the following provide 
a starting point for further study: Franz Rosenthal, The classical Heritage in Islam 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1975); Dimitri Gutas, Greek Thought, Arabic 
Culture: The Graeco-Arabic Translation Movement in Baghdad and early ʿAbbasid 
Society (2th–4th/8th–10th Centuries) (London and New York: Routledge, 1998); Eva 
Hoffman, “Pathways of portability: Islamic and Christian interchange from the tenth to 
the twelfth century,” Art History 24.1 (2001): 17–50; John Carswell, “Ṣīn in Syria,” Iran 
17 (1979): 15–24; idem, Blue and White: Chinese Porcelain around the World (London: 
British Museum Press, 2007); Anthony Cutler, “Gifts and gift exchange as aspects of 
Byzantine, Arab, and related economies,” Dumbarton Oaks Papers 55 (2001): 247–78; 
Eva Hoffman and Scott Redford, “Transculturation in the Eastern Mediterranean,” in 

Introduction  17
Finbarr Barry Flood and Gülru Neçipoğlu, eds, A Companion to Islamic Art and Archi-
tecture (Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell, 2017), I: 405–30. Jeremy Johns, “The Norman 
kings of Sicily and the Fatimid caliphate,” in Marjorie Chibnall, ed., Anglo-Norman 
Studies 15 (Woodbridge: Boydell Press, 1993), pp. 133–59; William Tronzo, “Intersect-
ing Sicily,” in Melia Belli Bose, ed., Intersections: Art and Islamic Cosmopolitanism 
(Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2021), pp. 41–55.
	29	 On Orientalist painting of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, see: Donald 
Rosenthal, Orientalism: The Near East in French Painting, 1800–1880 (New York: 
Memorial Art Gallery of the University of Rochester, 1982); Çeylan Tawadros, “Foreign 
bodies: Art history and the discourse of 19th-century Orientalist art,” Third Text 2.3–4 
(1988): 51–67; Caroline Williams, “John Frederick Lewis: ‘Reflections of reality,’” 
Muqarnas 18 (2001): 227–43; Edhem Eldem, “Making sense of Osman Hamdi Bey 
and his paintings,” Muqarnas 29 (2012): 339–83. On the artistic critique of Orientalist 
painting, see the citations for Chapter 49.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-2
Abu (Arabic):  Father. Often combined with a name or term as a form of title.
Adhan (Arabic; in Persian, azan):  The call to prayer, usually made by the muez-
zin from the minaret of a mosque.
Agha (Persian):  Male formal title.
Ahl al-kitab (Arabic):  Literally, “People of the Book,” and referring to all faith 
communities that are centred on scripture (Jews, Christians, Zoroastrians, and 
Muslims).
Alif (Arabic):  First letter of the Arabic alphabet according to the hijaʾi system.
Al-Salamu alaykum (Arabic):  Conventional form of Muslim greeting, meaning 
“peace be upon you.”
Andalus (Arabic):  Used to describe the Muslim-held territories of the Iberian 
Peninsula.
ʿAsabiyya (Arabic):  Describing a sense of shared identity within a group of peo-
ple, such as a tribe.
Baba (Persian):  Familiar term meaning father.
Balangay (Filipino):  Traditional wooden ship with outriggers used in the Philippines.
Baraka (Arabic):  Blessings. The term is sometimes found on Arabic inscriptions.
Barija (Arabic):  Type of large trading vessel.
Basmala (Arabic):  Term for the phrase, bism allah al-rahman al-rahim (“In the 
name of God, the Merciful, the Compassionate”). Used at the beginning of 
all but one of the suras (q.v.) of the Qurʾan (q.v.), and as an opening phrase of 
Islamic formal documents and inscriptions.
Bayt Allah (Arabic):  Literally “House of God,” and referring to the Kaʿba in Mecca.
Bayt al-Haram (Arabic):  Honorific name for the city of Mecca.
Bayt al-Hikma (Arabic):  Literally, “House of Wisdom,” and referring to the cen-
tre for translation and scholarship established by caliph al-Maʾmun (r. 813–33) 
in Baghdad.
Bazar (Persian):  The market area of a town or city.
Bektashis:  Sufi (q.v.) order established in the Ottoman empire in the sixteenth 
century. The Bektashi order was popular among the Janissary corps (q.v.).
Bidʿa (Arabic):  Used in legal discourse. Refers to innovations that were unknown 
at the time of the Prophet Muhammad.
Breccia:  Decorative hard stone with variegated patterns, commonly used in veneers.
Glossary

Glossary  19
Caliph (Arabic: khalifa):  Title given to the spiritual leaders of the Muslim com-
munity after the death of the Prophet Muhammad in 632. The word itself 
means “representative.”
Çatma (Turkish):  Form of silk velvet, often employing metallic threads, popular 
in the Ottoman Empire.
Çeşme (Turkish):  Public fountain providing fresh water.
Colophon:  Inscription usually placed at the end of a manuscript giving de-
tails about its production, including the names of scribes, illuminators, and 
illustrators.
Commander of the Faithful (Arabic: amir al-muʾminin):  The title given to the 
caliph (q.v.).
Dal (Arabic):  Eighth letter of the Arabic alphabet according to the hijaʾi system.
Dato Dagang (Malay):  A title for the head of the merchant group.
Dervish:  Alternative name for a sufi (q.v).
Dhu al-Hijja (Arabic):  Twelfth month of the Islamic lunar calendar. This is the 
month during which the hajj (q.v.) is undertaken by Muslims.
Dinar (Arabic):  Most common form of gold coin issued in the pre-Modern 
Islamic world.
Dirham (Arabic):  Most common form of silver coin issued in the Islamic world.
Div (Persian):  Demons or monstrous creatures that appear in Persian folklore and 
literature.
Drachma (Greek):  Currency of the modern Greek state prior to the adoption of 
the Euro. Also an ancient currency used in the Greek-speaking world from the 
fifth century BCE. The Arabic, dirham (q.v.) derives from this Greek term.
Dragoman:  Derived from the Arabic, tarjuman, and referring to a guide who 
would be hired to translate and make other arrangements for journeys in the 
Islamic world.
Effendi (Turkish):  A title meaning lord or master, and used in the Ottoman empire.
Fajr (Arabic):  The dawn prayer (salat al-fajr), the first of five required daily 
prayers.
Fondaco (Italian):  Derived from the Arabic, funduq, and referring to an urban 
compound used by foreign traders.
Fur Route (or Fur Road):  Name sometimes given to the routes running north 
from the eastern Islamic world. So called because furs were among the goods 
purchased by Muslim traders.
Ghuffa (Arabic):  Circular river craft used on rivers such as the Tigris and Euphrates.
Girih, or gereh (Persian):  Literally meaning “knot,” and referring to complex 
geometric interlace patterns found in Islamic art and architecture.
Greater Syria (Arabic: Bilad al-Sham):  Historical region comprising the mod-
ern polities of Syria, Lebanon, Jordan, Israel, the Palestine Authority, and the 
southern parts of Anatolia (Turkey).
Hadith (Arabic):  Written records of sayings and actions attributed to the Prophet 
Muhammad and his companions. The hadith (plural: ahadith) form the basis 
of Islamic law (see Shariʿa).
Hajib (Arabic):  Doorkeeper or chamberlain.

20  Glossary
Hajj (Arabic):  The annual pilgrimage to Mecca, and one of the five “pillars” of Islam.
Hajji (Arabic):  Person who has performed the hajj (q.v.).
Hamdu lillah, al- (Arabic):  Common phrase meaning “praise be to God.”
Harmattan (Akan):  Cold, dry, winds coming from the northeast or east in the 
western Sahara, usually from late November to mid-March. These often create 
sandstorms and haze.
Hilʾat (Turkish):  Derived from the Arabic, khilʿa, and referring to ceremonial 
robes, often made of silk, conferred by the Ottoman sultan.
Hijra (Arabic):  The migration of the Muslim community from Mecca to Yathrib 
(subsequently named Medina) in 622 CE.
Hijri (Arabic):  The Muslim dating system based around the lunar calendar and 
counting from the hijra (q.v.) in 622 CE.
Ibn (Arabic):  Son. Often combined with a name or term as a form of personal 
title.
Ifranj (Arabic):  Literally “Franks” (sing. franj), often used to refer to non-­Muslim 
Europeans and North Americans.
Insha allah (Arabic):  Commonly employed Arabic expression meaning “if God 
wills.”
Iwan (Persian):  Vaulted chamber open at one end, often facing onto a courtyard.
Jahiliyya (Arabic):  Literally “age of ignorance,” and referring to the time before 
the revelation of Islam at the beginning of the seventh century.
Jalabiyya (Arabic):  Loose-garment covering the whole body from neck to ankle. 
Worn by men and women.
Janissary corps:  The elite infantry units of the Ottoman military.
Kaʿba (Arabic; in English, Kaaba):  The cuboid ritual sanctuary located in Mecca. 
The Kaʿba provides the orientation (qibla) for prayer, and is the focus for the 
Muslim pilgrimage (hajj).
Kalima (Arabic):  Prayer recited by Muslims. The “six kalimas” include the pro-
fession of faith, or shahada (q.v.).
Kallak (Arabic):  Raft used on rivers such as the Tigris and Euphrates. Typically 
made of logs suspended on inflated animal skins.
Kashi-kari (Persian):  Glazed tile mosaic.
Kashkul (Persian):  a container, usually suspended on a chain, for the collection 
of alms by a mendicant sufi (q.v.) or dervish (q.v.). Kashkuls can be made from 
a variety of organic (including, famously, the shells of the coco-de-mer) or 
inorganic materials, and may be highly decorated.
Khamr (Arabic):  Wine or other intoxicants. The consumption of khamr is dis-
couraged both in the Qurʾan (q.v.) and hadith (q.v.).
Khamsin (Arabic):  Annual desert winds that blow across parts of the Middle 
East. So named because they are said to occur over fifty days.
Khatib (Arabic):  The person who delivers the sermon (khutba) in a mosque.
Khurasan (Persian):  Historical region focused on the northeast of modern Iran 
and Turkmenistan, but at its greatest extent expanded to include parts of 
Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Kazakhstan.
Kiswa (Arabic):  The cloth covering over the Kaʿba (q.v.) in Mecca.

Glossary  21
Kufic:  Form of Arabic characterised by its rectilinear character and sparing use 
of diacritical marks. Kufic is one of the earliest formal Arabic scripts, and was 
most commonly used for the writing of the Qurʾan and for inscriptions from 
the late seventh to the eleventh century. The name comes from the tradition 
that the script originated in Kufa, Iraq.
Kufiya (Arabic):  Square piece of fabric worn as a headdress, often held in place 
with a cord known as an aʿqal.
Lam (Arabic):  Twenty-third letter of the Arabic alphabet according to the hijaʾi 
system.
Lam-alif (Arabic):  Two Arabic letters that are attached together in writing. The ver-
tical strokes of these two letters may be knotted together for decorative effect.
Lustre-painting:  Decorative technique used on glass and glazed ceramics in 
which a thin layer of copper and silver is fired onto the surface to produce an 
iridescent effect.
Madrasa (Arabic):  Religious school.
Maestro (Italian):  Master.
Maghrib (Arabic):  The western part of the Islamic world. The Maghrib prayer is 
the fourth of the five prayers of the day, occurring at sunset.
Mahmal (Arabic):  A litter covered in ornamented textiles carried by the lead camel 
of the hajj caravan. It carries no passengers and has a ceremonial function.
Malik (Arabic):  King or ruler. Often used as part of a longer set of titles.
Malika (Arabic):  Queen or consort.
Mani (Greek):  Mountainous region in the southern Peloponnese in Greece.
Maqamat (Arabic):  Plural of the Arabic, maqama, meaning “assembly.” Maqamat 
in this context refers to a series of interconnected stories based around conver-
sations and word play.
Maqsura (Arabic):  Area within the prayer hall of a mosque usually enclosing the 
mihrab (q.v.) and minbar (q.v.). This area was set aside for the ruler or local 
governor and his retinue, and often contained the most lavish decoration in the 
building.
Masjid (Arabic):  Mosque.
Masjid-i jamiʿ (Persian):  Congregational Mosque (also Friday Mosque or Great 
Mosque).
Mawlid (Arabic):  Birthday, most importantly the celebration of the birth of the 
Prophet Muhammad (mawlid al-nabawi). Shrines of saints and prophets are 
often celebrated by local communities in annual mawlids.
Maydan (Arabic):  Open square or parade ground.
Mihrab (Arabic):  Recess located in the wall of the prayer hall of a mosque ori-
ented towards Mecca (i.e. the qibla). The mihrab is often the focus for the 
most lavish decoration within the interior space of a mosque.
Mim (Arabic):  Twenty-fourth letter of the Arabic alphabet according to the hijaʾi 
system.
Minaret:  Derived from the Arabic, manar, and usually referring to the tower at-
tached to a mosque from which the muezzin (q.v.) makes the call to prayer, or 
adhan (q.v.).

22  Glossary
Minbar (Arabic):  The pulpit of a mosque from which the sermon (khutba) is given 
after the congregation prayer on Friday. Usually located next to the mihrab (q.v.).
Muʿallim (Arabic):  Master of a given craft.
Mudhif (Arabic):  Large structure made of reeds by the Marsh Arabs. Used for 
meetings and other community activities.
Muezzin:  English version of the Arabic, muʾadhdhin, and referring to the person 
who makes the call to prayer, usually from a minaret (q.v.).
Muqarnas (Arabic):  Complex stalactite vaulting. This decorative mode first ap-
pears in the Middle East in the late eleventh century.
Mushrikun (Arabic):  Those who commit the sin of shirk (q.v.). Usually refers to 
pagans or polytheists, though it may be used pejoratively against Christians.
Musulman:  Adjective sometimes employed in academic publications of the first 
half of the twentieth century to describe things from the Islamic world. See 
also Saracenic (q.v.).
Napoléon (French):  Colloquial term for French gold coins in denominations 
from 5 to 100 francs.
Naqqash (Arabic and Persian):  Painter, though the term can also be used for an 
artisan responsible for applying chased and inlaid decoration on metal vessels.
Naskh (Arabic):  A cursive script of Arabic that is commonly employed in Qurʾans 
and inscriptions from the eleventh century onward.
Nastaʿliq (Persian):  Formal script that developed in Iran from naskh (q.v.), and 
was in common use from the thirteenth century onward.
Noria:  English version of the Arabic, naʿura, and referring to a waterwheel, com-
monly made from wood. These wheels are often employed to extract water 
from a river and deposit it into irrigation canals.
Okir (Filipino):  Rhythmic, plant-based decorative forms used extensively in the 
arts of the southern Philippines.
Palazzo (Italian):  Palace or elite residence.
Parchinkari (Persian and Urdu):  Form of decoration in which pieces of different 
coloured hard stones are cut and fitted together to make a design.
Parchmenter:  Person who makes parchment.
Pasha (Turkish):  Title accorded to high officials, including governors, in the 
Ottoman sultanate.
Pyxis:  Circular box.
Qadi (Arabic):  Muslim judge.
Qaʾid (Arabic):  General or other military leader.
Qibla (Arabic):  Direction of prayer in Islam, towards the black stone set into the 
eastern corner of the Kaʿba (q.v.) in Mecca.
Qurʾan (Arabic):  Sacred book of Islam, according to Muslim tradition, revealed 
to the Prophet Muhammad by the archangel Gabriel.
Rabʿ-i Rashidi (Persian):  The district created by Rashid al-Din Hamadani 
(d. 1318) in Tabriz. This area was famous for its scholars and for the produc-
tion of illustrated books.
Rashidun (Arabic):  Meaning “Rightly Guided,” and referring to the first four ca-
liphs of the Islamic period, between 632 and 661.

Glossary  23
Rock crystal:  The purest form of quartz, thought by some medieval sources to 
result from the petrification of water.
Ruh (Arabic):  Spirit. Referring to the quality possessed by animate life (although 
fish and birds are sometimes exempted from this category).
Rusʾ (Arabic):  Term that can be translated as “Russians,” but in the time of Ibn 
Fadlan (d. 960) probably referred to Vikings and other peoples of Scandinavia.
Sahiba (Arabic):  Feminine form of the term for lord (sahib).
Saracen:  Ancient term, versions of which are found in Greek and Latin. Refers to 
the inhabitants of the Arabian Peninsula, and subsequently employed to refer 
to Muslims.
Sayyid (Arabic):  Male title equivalent to “lord” or “master.”
Saz (Turkish):  Long leaves with serrated edges used in Ottoman ornamental designs.
Shaduf (Arabic; English: shadoof):  Simple lever device employed on the banks 
of rivers like the Nile for lifting water to irrigated lands.
Shahada (Arabic):  The Muslim profession of faith, declaring the oneness of God 
(Allah) and the prophethood of Muhammad. One of the five “pillars” of Islam.
Shahnama (Persian):  Epic poem composed by Firdawsi (d. 1025). The word 
means “Book of Kings.”
Shaman:  Religious figure who employs ritual practices to interact with the spirit 
world.
Shaykh (Arabic):  Old man or chief. Can also refer to the head of a guild. The 
English version of this word is sheikh.
Shiʿa (Arabic):  From the term, shiʿat ʿAli (‘the party of ʿAli’), and referring to 
those Muslims who recognise ʿAli and his family line as the true successors 
to the Prophet as leaders of the Muslim community. These Muslims are also 
known in English as the Shiah or Shiites.
Shirk (Arabic):  The sin of associating gods with the true God, Allah. Refers to all 
forms of polytheism and idolatry, seen from the perspective of Muslim scholars.
Silk Road:  General term to describe the land routes leading from western China 
to the Black Sea and the Middle East.
Sin (Arabic letter):  Twelfth letter of the Arabic alphabet according to the hijaʾi 
system.
Sind (Arabic):  Northern part of the Indian Subcontinent.
Sini (Arabic):  Term used to describe objects made in China and other parts of 
Southeast Asia. May be used on its own to denote Chinese ceramics, including 
porcelain and celadon.
Souk (Arabic: suq):  The market place within a town or city.
Sublime Porte:  Refers to the main gate (Turkish: Bab-i ʿAli or Bab-i Hümayün) 
to the Topkapı Palace in Istanbul. The term comes in European sources to 
stand for the Ottoman State as a whole.
Sufi (Arabic):  Muslim mystic. Also dervish (q.v.).
Sultan (Arabic):  Title for a Muslim ruler.
Sunna (Arabic):  The model for a moral life provided by the recorded actions and 
practices of the Prophet Muhammad. This term is the basis for Sunni (q.v.), the 
most populous sect of Islam.

24  Glossary
Sunni (Arabic):  Those Muslims who follow the sunna (exemplary practice) of 
the Prophet Muhammad. Often called Orthodox Muslims.
Sura (Arabic):  Chapter in the Qurʾan (q.v.).
Tarada (Arabic):  A type of large canoe, particularly used by the Marsh Arabs of 
southern Iraq.
Tarì (Italian):  Small gold coin used in Norman Sicily. The name derives from the 
Arabic, tari, meaning “fresh” or “newly minted.”
Tawaf (Arabic):  The practice of circumambulating the Kaʿba (q.v.) as part of the 
hajj (q.v.) to Mecca.
Thuluth or thulth (Arabic):  A curvilinear form of Arabic script that comes into 
common use during the eleventh century.
Thuya (Arabic):  Type of conifer, the wood of which is commonly used by car-
penters in Morocco.
Tiraz (Arabic):  The practice of adding embroidered inscriptions onto textiles.
ʿUlama (Arabic):  Religious scholar.
Ustadh (Arabic):  Master of a workshop.
Vizier (Arabic: wazir):  Chief minister to a caliph (q.v.) or sultan (q.v.).
Waqf or waqfiyya (Arabic):  Charitable bequest, usually established to support the 
running of a Muslim religious institution.
Zakat (Arabic):  Charity. One of the five “pillars” of Islam.
Zarf (Turkish):  Ornamental holder, often made of metal, for a coffee cup.
Zin-i palang (Persian):  Panther skin garment said to have been worn by Rustam, 
one of the heroes of the Shahnama (q.v.).

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-3
Notes: For further information on Muslim dynasties and key dates in Islamic his-
tory, see: Nicolle, David, Historical Atlas of the Islamic World (London: Mercury 
Books, 2004). All dates are given according to the Common Era.
	
622:	
The migration (hijra) of the Muslim community from Mecca to 
Yathrib (subsequently renamed as Medina).
	
629–30:	
The followers of the Prophet Muhammad take the town of Mecca. 
According to Muslim tradition, the idols in the Kaʿba were taken 
out and smashed and all but one of the paintings on the walls of 
the interior were expunged.
	
632:	
Death of the Prophet Muhammad (born c. 570).
	
632–61:	
The phase of the Rashidun (“Rightly guided”) caliphs, compris-
ing Abu Bakr (r. 632–34), ʿUmar (r. 634–44), ʿUthman (r. 644–56), 
and ʿAli (r. 656–61).
	
634:	
Arab forces take Damascus.
	
636:	
Foundation of the garrison settlement (misr) of Basra.
	
637:	
Arab forces take Jerusalem.
	
638:	
Foundation of the garrison settlement (misr) of Kufa.
	
651:	
Death of the last shah, Yazdigird III. Marks the end of the Sasan-
ian dynasty (c. 223–651)
	
661–750:	
Umayyad caliphate. Founded by Muʿawiya b. Abi Sufyan 
(r. 661–80).
	
670:	
ʿUqba ibn Nafis establishes the town of Qayrawan.
	
680:	
Martyrdom of Husayn b. ʿAli, grandson of the Prophet Muham-
mad, at Karbalaʾ in Iraq.
	
685–705:	
Caliphate of ʿAbd al-Malik.
	
691–92:	
Date (72 Hijri) given on the mosaic inscription of the Dome of the 
Rock in Jerusalem.
	
705–15:	
Caliphate of al-Walid b. ʿAbd al-Malik (Walid I).
	
706:	
Start of construction on the Congregational Mosque of Damascus 
(completed in c. 716).
	
711–20:	
Arab and Berber forces conquer much of the Arabian Peninsula, 
leading to the creation of al-Andalus.
Timeline Relevant to Chapters 1–50

26  Timeline Relevant to Chapters 1–50
	
724–43:	
Caliphate of Hisham b. ʿAbd al-Malik (Hisham I).
	
743–44:	
Caliphate of Walid b. Yazid (Walid II).
	
744–50:	
Caliphate of Marwan II.
	
749–1258:	
Abbasid caliphate. Founded by caliph al-Saffah (r. 749–54).
	
756–1031:	
Umayyad rule in al-Andalus. Amirate (756–929) and caliphate 
(929–1031).
	
762–66:	
Construction of Baghdad (Madinat al-Salam) by caliph al-­Mansur 
(r. 754–75).
	
771:	
Start of the construction of al-Rafiqa, near to the existing town of 
Raqqa, Syria.
	
800–909:	
Aghlabid dynasty in North Africa.
	
819–999:	
Samanid dynasty in Iran and Central Asia.
	
836–92:	
Tenure of the Abbasid caliphs in the city of Samarra.
	
836–75:	
Aghlabid reconstruction of the Qayrawan mosque.
	
847–61:	
Caliphate of al-Mutawakkil.
	
868:	
Death of the scholar and satirist, al-Jahiz.
	
869–83:	
Zanj rebellion in southern Iraq.
	
887:	
Death of Ibn Firnas, the man credited with the first successful hu-
man flight.
	
909–1171:	
Fatimid caliphate in North Africa, spreading to Egypt, Greater 
Syria and the Hijaz after 969.
	
921:	
Ibn Fadlan (d. 960) begins his journey from Baghdad to the ruler 
of the Bulghars of the Volga river.
	
929:	
The Umayyad ruler, ʿAbd al-Rahman III, declares himself caliph 
in al-Andalus.
	
940–41:	
Death of the vizier and calligrapher, Ibn Muqla.
	
961–76:	
Caliphate of al-Hakam II in al-Andalus.
	
969:	
Foundation of the Fatimid city of al-Qahira (Cairo) in Egypt.
	
1002:	
Death of al-Mansur, chamberlain (hajib) of the Umayyad cali-
phate in al-Andalus.
	
1000:	
Ibn al-Bawwab (d. c. 1022) completes the cursive Qurʾan manu-
script now held in the Chester Beatty Library in Dublin.
	
1010:	
Abu al-Qasim Firdawsi (d. 1019 or 1025) completes the 
Shahnama (Book of Kings).
	 1037–1154:	
Great Saljuq Empire in Central Asia and the Middle East.
	
1068–91:	
Norman Conquest of Sicily.
	
1068:	
Sale of the contents of the Fatimid treasury in Cairo.
	
1070:	
An earthquake affects much of Greater Syria.
	
1085:	
Capture of Toledo by Christian forces.
	
1092:	
Death of the Saljuq vizier and scholar, Nizam al-Mulk.
	 1098–1291:	
Crusader period in the Middle East.
	
1098:	
Capture of Antioch by the First Crusade.
	
1099:	
Capture of Jerusalem by the First Crusade.
	
1104:	
Defeat of Crusader forces by the Saljuq army at the battle of 
Harran.

Timeline Relevant to Chapters 1–50  27
	
1122:	
Death of al-Hariri, author of the Maqamat.
	
1130–94:	
Norman kingdom of Sicily.
	
1131:	
Death of the Persian poet and mathematician, ʿUmar Khayyam.
	
1146–74:	
Rule of Nur al-Din Mahmud Zangi over Greater Syria and north-
western Iraq.
	
1171–93:	
Rule of Salah al-Din (Saladin) over Egypt and, from 1174, over 
Greater Syria.
	
1187:	
Defeat of Crusader forces at the battle of Hattin.
	
1204:	
Sack of Constantinople during the Fourth Crusade (1202–04).
	
1219:	
Mongol army defeats the Khwarazmshah dynasty and starts the 
conquest of the eastern Islamic world.
	 1230–1492:	
Nasrid dynasty of Granada.
	c. 1235–1670:	
Mali Empire in West Africa.
	
1240:	
Death of the sufi scholar and poet, Ibn ʿArabi.
	
1245:	
Expulsion of Muslims from Sicily to Lucera.
	 1250–1517:	
Mamluk sultanate of Egypt. For Greater Syria, 1260–1516.
	 1256–1335:	
Ilkhanate Empire. Mass conversion of the Mongols of the Ilkhan-
ate occurs in 1291.
	
1258:	
Mongol conquest of Baghdad and the death of the last Abbasid 
caliph in the city.
	
1260:	
Mamluk army defeats the Mongols at the battle of ʿAyn Jalut.
	 1271–1368:	
Yuan dynasty of China.
	 1299–1922:	
Ottoman sultanate.
	
1310:	
Death of the author and oculist, Ibn Daniyal.
	
1318:	
Death of the Persian vizier and scholar, Rashid al-Din Hamadani.
	
1347:	
First appearance of the Black Death in the Middle East.
	
1363:	
Completion of the Mosque-Madrasa of sultan al-Nasir Hasan in 
Cairo.
	 1368–1655:	
Ming dynasty of China.
	
1384:	
Reconstruction of the Congregational Mosque of Xi’an by em-
peror Hongwu (r. 1368–98).
	
1406:	
Death of the scholar and politician, Ibn Khaldun.
	
1453:	
Ottoman capture of Constantinople by Sultan Mehmed II Fatih 
(“the Conqueror”).
	
1488:	
Bartolomeu Dias sails around the Cape of Good Hope.
	 1496–1903:	
Sultanate of Aceh (also Kingdom of Aceh Darussalam).
	
1498:	
Vasco da Gama lands in Calicut, opening European maritime 
trade with India
	 1501–1736:	
Safavid dynasty of Iran and surrounding regions.
	
1517:	
Martin Luther (d. 1546) publishes the Ninety-five Theses, mark-
ing the start of the Reformation in Europe.
	
1520–66:	
Rule of the Ottoman sultan, Süleyman I Qanuni (or in Europe, 
“the Magnificent”).
	
1521:	
Fall of Belgrade to Ottoman forces.
	 1526–1858:	
Mughal dynasty of India.

28  Timeline Relevant to Chapters 1–50
	
1529:	
Ottoman siege of Vienna.
	
1571:	
Defeat of the Ottoman fleet at the Battle of Lepanto.
	
1588:	
Death of the Ottoman architect, Mimar Sinan.
	
1625–58:	
Rule of the Mughal emperor, Shah Jahan.
	
1632–53:	
Construction of the Taj Mahal in Agra.
	
1745:	
Death of Ibrahim Müteferrika, founder of the Müteferrika Press 
in Istanbul (established 1729).
	
1799:	
Start of Sikh rule over Lahore. Lasts until the British annexation 
of Punjab in 1849.
	
1821–29:	
Greek War of Independence.
	 1830–1962:	
French occupation of Algeria.
	
1831:	
Assassination of the Greek prime minister, Ioannis Kapodistrias.
	 1874–1904:	
Dutch War. Fought against the Sultanate of Aceh.
	
1881:	
Kuala Lumpur destroyed by fire and flooding. The reconstruction 
of the modern city starts in 1882.
	
1896:	
Death of the designer and writer, William Morris.
	 1899–1902:	
Philippine-American war.
	
1901:	
Declaration of Martial law in the Philippines by General Arthur 
MacArthur.
	
1902:	
Capture of Philippines President, Emilio Aguinaldo by American 
forces.
	
1904:	
Death of the French artist, Jean-Léon Gérôme.
	
1912–56:	
French Protectorate of Morocco.
	
1914:	
Beginning of World War I.
	
1918:	
Armistice of Mudros marks the formal defeat of the Ottoman Em-
pire in World War I.
	
1920:	
Iraqi Revolt. Uprising against the British administration 
(May–October).
	
1939–45:	
World War II.
	
1940–43:	
North African campaign.
	
1956:	
Sudan gains independence.
	
1973:	
Death of Pablo Picasso.
	
1979:	
Islamic Revolution in Iran ends the Pahlavi dynasty.
	
1980–88:	
Iran-Iraq war.
	
1992:	
Death of Doris Duke.
	
2001:	
Destruction of the Bamiyan Buddhas by the Taliban in Afghanistan.
	
2010–12:	
The “Arab Spring” demonstrations affect countries across North 
Africa and the Middle East.
	
2011:	
Beginning of the Syrian Civil War.
	
2016–17:	
Battle of Mosul, leading to the defeat of Islamic State in Iraq.
	
2020:	
Beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic (declared as such by the 
World Health Organization on 11 March 2020).

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-4
How do people live in this strange place where every dwelling reaches towards the 
sky? The alley was like a mountain pass with only a strip of sky visible between 
the looming walls. A figure sat in a simple doorway shrouded in the shadow of a 
towering house.
Sanaʿa, 660
1
Figure 1.1  Qurʾan palimpsest parchment leaf with Hijazi script from “Sanʿaʾ I,” mid to late 
seventh century. Verso (a) and recto (b). Photograph: Pernille Klemp. David 
Collection, Copenhagen. 86/2003.   (Continued)

30  Sanaʿa, 660
I’d expected him to be old, perhaps stooping, with a lined face and grey beard. 
The man we found that morning had a slim frame and a round, lively face. Curls 
of dark hair poked out from under his simple white cap. He was sitting on a step, 
cutting a reed to make a pen. The blade of his knife moved in curving strokes as 
he formed the nib. Salim whispered in my ear. “Young he may be, but ʿAbdallah is 
the son of the great Zayd ibn Thabit, scribe to Muhammad himself—peace be upon 
him. Truly, ʿAbdallah was born to write the words of God.”
Hearing our steps, he looked up. “I’ve been expecting you.” We followed him 
up a narrow staircase leading from floor to floor. Finally, he pushed aside a curtain, 
allowing us to enter a simple, whitewashed room with a roof made of stout beams. 
A single window let in a cool breeze. Our host smiled, “Fresher up here than on the 
street, isn’t it? If I need inspiration I’ve only to look out at the mountain of Prophet 
Shuʿayb, may God be pleased with him. Forgive the untidiness; when I pick up my 
pen I forget everything else. My mind is taken up only with the flow of the ink and 
the movement of my hand.”
I looked around the cramped space, noticing the drawing board, knife, and ink-
pot on the floor. Leaves of discoloured parchment were stacked against one wall. 
Traces of lettering remained, though they were too faint to make out.
Figure 1.1  (Continued)

Sanaʿa, 660  31
My father gestured towards Salim, who held a sheaf of parchment in the crook 
of his arm. “As promised, here are the sheets I was asked to bring. One hundred and 
twenty in all. The finest quality I assure you.”
The scribe pushed aside his tools to make space on the floor. “Set them down 
here.” We watched in silence as ʿAbdallah inspected the topmost sheets, running 
his fingers over the surface, checking for faults. “Very fine, al-Harith,” he said with 
satisfaction. “May Allah be pleased with you! Tell me, where did you find such 
unmarked and even-coloured skins?”
“Not easy. I got this consignment through contacts in Syria. My agent claims 
that these came from the stock of a Christian parchmenter. The sheets have been 
sitting in a chest for many years, even as far back, he says, as our conquest of those 
lands. No more where these came from, I’m afraid.”
“Then I’ll have to make the best use of every sheet.” ʿAbdallah picked up the 
unfinished reed and inspected it. “Such a simple thing, yet capable, with the aid of 
a little ink, of recording divine revelation! I’d better cut you well if you’re to grace 
the smooth surfaces delivered to me today.”
“Now that you have these new sheets what will you do with these other ones?” 
I asked.
“They are destined for another commission,” he answered. “Nearly done, with 
just a few suras still to complete.”
“But they already have writing on them. Doesn’t that make it difficult for you?”
ʿAbdallah sighed. “Parchment is a precious thing, and I don’t always have the 
choice about my materials. These were brought to me last year from the mosque 
in our city. The keeper of the building, a man by the name of Abu Zayd, had un-
stitched the pages from their bindings. He brought all the sheets and told me to 
make the words again as new.”
“You had to erase the words written there already?”
He nodded. “Every page had to be scraped clean with the edge of a blade. It took 
more hours than I care to estimate.”
Salim could barely contain his anger. “This is desecration! Sacred words should 
never be treated so lightly.”
Al-Harith put a hand on Salim’s shoulder. “Please excuse my servant, ʿAbdallah. 
Perhaps you could tell us why this Abu Zayd made such a strange request.”
“He didn’t say,” ʿAbdallah replied, “but I’ll tell you my guess. My father taught me 
more than the art of the pen. Every day when I was growing up he’d recite verses and 
make me learn them. Over many years I had the whole text off by heart, both to speak 
and to write. Scraping away the lettering from the parchment, I noticed mistakes.”
“What do you mean,” I asked.
He picked up a sheet with the shadows of rounded lettering, running in uneven 
lines across the surface. “At first I thought my eyes were playing tricks on me, 
or that flecks of dirt were obscuring the words. As I continued scraping, I found 
more and more. Letters missing, sometimes the wrong consonant in the middle of 
a word, or an alif placed where it was never meant to be.”
“It seems such a small thing,” I said. “Did all the words really have to be re-
moved? What of the scribe who spent months writing the text?”

32  Sanaʿa, 660
“Not such a small thing as it turns out,” he replied. “You know, my father was 
commanded by caliph Abu Bakr to write down the Qurʾan from beginning to end. 
He compiled it from the memories of Muhammad’s companions and what sec-
tions had been committed to scraps of parchment and papyrus. It was a mighty 
endeavour, but imperfect. It was left to caliph ʿUthman to finish the task. Again, my 
father led the way, working with other scholars, gathering all the known copies and 
locating within them the pure text they all shared. It was ʿUthman’s conviction that 
every Muslim should know the words as they’d been revealed to the Prophet, and 
that errors, however small, would only grow over time, taking the believers away 
from the righteous path. When it was done ʿUthman ordered copies to be sent to all 
the centres of the faith. It is this text that we use today.”
“I heard that there were some who didn’t want to part with their books,” Salim 
observed.
ʿAbdallah nodded. “ʿUthman was strict in his instructions. Once his Qurʾan was 
complete, all other copies, whole or fragmentary, were to be burned. But there was 
one who stood against him in Kufa. Ibn Masʿud was proud of his learning, having 
recited verses before the Prophet. He claimed ʿUthman’s version contained suras 
unknown to Muhammad—peace be upon him—and that this deceit would become 
known on the Day of Resurrection. When soldiers came to his house, Ibn Masʿud 
had already hidden his precious books. Maybe they still reside somewhere.”
“Do you think these scratched-out words were copied from Ibn Masʿud’s 
Qurʾan?” I asked.
“Only Allah knows the truth of these things. I’ve never met anyone who’s seen 
Ibn Masʿud’s manuscript,” ʿAbdallah replied. “Hardly matters now, as we all have 
the same radiant words to guide us. That’s what I have been writing over the top of 
its imperfect sister. If you will excuse me, I must return to my work. You can make 
your own way out?”
I went to the window. The peak of the mountain glowed pink in the setting sun. 
Turning back I saw the scribe, kneeling on the floor holding a sheet of parchment 
on his writing board. His pen moved in languid strokes, pausing occasionally to dip 
into the inkpot. The ghostly letters were being replaced by a sloping, bold script. 
Still, the old was not entirely erased by the new. That manuscript would forever tell 
two stories, almost matching up but never identical. ʿAbdallah was so transfixed by 
his craft, I don’t suppose he even heard us descend the stairs to the street below.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-5
The first thing I saw was the crowd. They were standing silently as the body was 
lowered into the ground. A path from the riverbank ran past the cemetery and 
into town. I didn’t mean to stare, but my attention was caught by the mourners. 
Wrapped in a simple linen shroud, the body was so light that a single man was able 
to hold it with ease.
I heard Salim whispering to my father. “A venerable old woman, I’m told. She 
was well respected by all who live here.” The body was being laid on one side on 
the bare soil of the grave. The man cupped her fragile head in his hands, aligning it 
tenderly on the smooth rock that would be her pillow for her next journey.
Salim looked on with satisfaction. “They’ve made a good calculation of the 
direction of prayer. Her gaze is toward Mecca, and so it will remain until the angels 
come to collect her. May it bring her solace as she waits.”
I turned my gaze back to the muddy water moving slowly on its long journey to 
the sea. The Nile had seen so many people, even dynasties, come and go, and yet 
it continued to flow oblivious to the passage of time. One person’s journey from 
cradle to grave seemed so insignificant next to the ancient river.
“Are you coming Aisha?” My father was already at the edge of the town. As-
wan was a drowsy place, even on this bright spring morning. We would be here 
for some days before sailing north to the bustling misr of Fustat. I needed to find 
something to do while he and Salim were engaged in the market.
The next day I was out soon after breakfast, wandering aimlessly near the river. 
A man was using a shaduf to lift water to his fields. Birds wheeled in the sky. 
There was an insistent sound: metal against stone. I followed the taps, moving back 
towards the houses. Turning a corner I found myself in a small patch of ground 
filled with stone slabs, stacked on the ground or leaning against mud-brick walls. 
Some were only roughly shaped, while others already carried carved decoration. 
Curiosity led me forward.
The mason heard my steps and turned around, still holding his chisel and mallet. 
“I’ve enough work to last me until summer. If there’s been a death in the family, 
I’m sorry for your loss, but you’ll have to find someone else.”
“No, nothing like that. I was just interested in your work.”
He mopped his bald head with a rag and stood up. “That’s a relief. Grave-
stones are good business, though sometimes I’d like to carve something else. 
Aswan, 691
2

34  Aswan, 691
Figure 2.1  Grave marker of ʿAbassa bint Jurayj, Aswan, 19 April 692 (14 Dhu al-Qaʿda 
72 H). Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo. Drawing: Marcus Milwright.

Aswan, 691  35
Maybe a fountainhead or some pretty vines running around a window frame. 
Problem with gravestones is that people have no patience. Always has to be 
done straight away.”
I saw crosses on the slabs. “Are all the people you work for Christians.”
“Most times,” he replied, “but they can be Muslims too. I believe their Prophet 
didn’t hold with making memorials to the dead. Of course, old habits can be hard 
to break.”
I glanced at the wooden cross hanging from a string around his neck. “What are 
you doing today?” I asked.
He gestured towards a plain-looking slab of stone. Inside the simple border were 
lines of Arabic writing. “A man by the name of Abu Zayd ordered this. He didn’t 
want anything fancy. The family were very particular about the words, and even 
gave me the text written on papyrus so I wouldn’t make mistakes.”
It wasn’t like anything I had seen before. Working slowly, line by line, I read it 
aloud: “In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. The greatest calam-
ity of the people of Islam is that which has befallen them on the death of Muham-
mad the Prophet, may Allah grant him peace. This is the tomb of ʿAbassa daughter 
of Jurayj. May clemency, forgiveness, and satisfaction of Allah be upon her. She 
died on Monday, the fourteenth day of Dhu Qaʿda of the year one and seventy, con-
fessing that there is no god but Allah alone, without partner, and that Muhammad 
is His servant and His apostle, may Allah grant him peace.”
“A pious and generous women, they say.” He paused, before continuing in a 
lower voice, “May God forgive me, but I’m not so sure.”
“Whatever do you mean? I passed the burial yesterday morning, and I saw noth-
ing but reverence. Isn’t that enough?”
“Perhaps you’re right,” he replied. “It’s difficult for Christians like me to see 
one of our own turning from the faith.”
“How do you know that?”
He pointed at the inscription. “Look at her name. Her father, Jurayj, was Chris-
tian. She must have converted, though it may have been a long time ago. My guess 
is that explains why the text says God has no partner. She knew members of her 
own family stayed true to the Trinity—Father, Son, and Holy Spirit—and wanted 
them to know that she was following a new religion.”
“Is that so bad?”
He smiled apologetically. “I’ve offended you. Please understand that not so long 
ago it was Christians who ruled this land. Now we must learn to live under new 
masters, who profess a belief that was only taking hold in Arabia when ʿAbassa was 
a young girl. You even take our saviour and tell us he is just a messenger, not the 
son of God. It’s difficult when we see one of our own embracing this prophet from 
Arabia. The roots of Christianity are strong here, though even the mightiest tree can 
wither away if it cannot grow new leaves.”
“I’ve not see the name of Muhammad written down before.”
He nodded. “Traders in Aswan say it’s been appearing on a few coins. This is the 
first time I’ve been asked to carve it on stone. Maybe it’s all the whispers that have 
been passing through the streets that the Day of Judgement is not far off. We’ll all 

36  Aswan, 691
be hoping for someone to speak for us at the end of days: our folk will look to Jesus 
and the saints, and perhaps for you it’ll be your prophet.”
This talk made me shiver. Walking back to the market, I wondered how long 
ʿAbassa would have to wait for Judgement. Would I be alive or dead when that 
dreadful day arrived?

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-6
The guard posted at the door allowed no chance of learning more about what was 
going on inside. My father had brought ingots of copper from a mine further south, 
and he’d evidently come with the hope of having them made into something. My 
mind conjured up bowls, jugs, and jars. What sort of decoration might be cast or 
engraved on their surfaces?
The sun was high in the sky, leaving few shaded areas on the street. I heard 
footsteps in narrow alley next to the building. A group of young men emerged onto 
Aleppo, 695
3
Figure 3.1  “Standing caliph” dinar. Minted in Damascus, Syria, 693–97 (74–77 H). (a) Ob-
verse and (b) reverse. Drawing: Marcus Milwright.   (Continued)

38  Aleppo, 695
the street, wiping off sweat with dirty rags. Without another thought I darted into 
the alleyway. It led around to a small courtyard, filled with sacks of charcoal and 
scrap metal. Wooden posts supported a pitched roof under which was a workshop. 
Heat from the crucible radiated into the little space. Checking that I was not being 
observed, I stepped carefully under the roof. There were tools lying on the floor 
and ceramic moulds, still with flecks of metal across their surfaces. The moulds had 
circular depressions, like thumbprints, arranged in neat rows. A bronze bucket held 
the copper pieces, each the size of a chickpea.
“Stop right there! None’s allowed ‘ere ‘cept the workers.”
Moments later I was being shoved through a door. There were no windows, the 
light coming from oil lamps set on the benches. As my eyes grew used to the dim-
ness, I saw that all eyes were turned on me.
The guard’s fingers dug into my shoulder. “Li’le scoundrel bin eyein’ up the 
copper round the back. Thief, an’ no mistake.”
“That’s not true!” I spat back. “Sorry for entering without permission. I’m no 
thief!”
My father stepped forward. “This is my daughter, Aisha. She meant no harm. 
It’s my responsibility, and you have my apologies, muʿallim.” His eyes were turned 
to the foreman of the workshop, a short, bald man with a leather apron stretched 
across his squat frame. The man rubbed his neck wearily. “Bored were you? Don’t 
suppose you’ll find this any more interesting.”
Figure 3.1  (Continued)

Aleppo, 695  39
My father turned the conversation back to practical matters. “How many coins will 
you make from the copper I brought you and what’s your commission on the work?”
“Well, each one is forty barley grains, so ….” The foreman made some calcula-
tions on a sheet and handed it to my father.
“I’d like to see the new design you’re using for the dies. I’ve heard that they’re 
different from the ones I’m used to. Merchants are wary of change and I don’t want 
something that my customers won’t accept.”
“It’s true,” he responded. “We had orders from Damascus, and they even sent a 
us a brand new gold dinar from Damascus to work from. This is it.”
My father turned it over in his hand. On the front was a standing man, sur-
rounded by a band of writing. “Is that an image of the emperor, like we usually see 
on coins?” I asked.
“They’ve finally got rid of him, Allah be praised,” replied the foreman. “Look 
closely and tell me what you see.”
The coin found its way to me. “A bearded man standing tall and facing us di-
rectly. He’s wearing a long robe and his head is covered with a kufiya. There’s a 
cord hanging from his waist that ends in three tails. He’s holding something large 
across his body. Is it a sword in a scabbard?”
The foreman smiled. “My guess is this stands for the power of our faith.”
“But who is it?” I asked.
“Our mighty ʿAbd al-Malik, the commander of the faithful, of course! Now we 
have an image of our leader, an Arab, to challenge the emperor in Constantinople. 
On the other side there’s another message for the Christians if they care to look.”
I turned it over. Another band of Arabic writing framed a simple image. “I see 
some steps and at the top a pole. What does it mean?”
“There’s a story in that. My old dad—may his soul be accepted on Judgement 
Day—used to run this very mint back during the reign of Muʿawiya. You’ve heard 
of him?” I nodded, and the foreman continued his story. “Copper coins in his day 
were clumsy affairs, just copying the types made by the Christians. The only dif-
ference would be the odd word in Arabic to say the coin you were getting was good 
quality. Even kept the crosses on the crowns of the emperors.”
“What’s so bad about that?” I asked.
“Depends upon who you ask,” he responded. “Some Muslims feel it goes against 
what the Qurʾan says about Jesus being a prophet, and not the son of God. Chris-
tians use the cross to remind them of their Jesus rising from the grave. And there’s 
my old man—and the bosses of other mints, bless ‘em all—sending out crates of 
coins with crosses all over them! On the gold coins made in Constantinople there’s 
a picture of a giant cross on top of a set of steps, just like the one in Jerusalem. How 
this vexed Muʿawiya! There’s simple solution to the puzzle, of course: cut out the 
crossbar and all that’s left is a pole on some steps.”
“So it’s just taking away from what was there? Couldn’t they find a new image 
that would say something about Islam?”
He saw my frown. “You’re not the only one to think that. Governors across 
Syria love their silver and gold, but don’t look so carefully at copper. Mints like 
mine have been dreaming up with their own schemes. Come and see.”

40  Aleppo, 695
Figure 3.2  “Standing caliph” copper coin (fals), 690s. Minted in Aleppo, Syria. (a) Obverse 
and (b) reverse. Collection of the author. Photo: Iona Hubner. 

Aleppo, 695  41
Figure 3.3  “Arab-Byzantine” copper coin (fals), c. 685–90 with imperial bust. Minted in 
Hims (Emesa), Syria. (a) Obverse and (b) reverse. Collection of the author. 
Photo: Iona Hubner. 

42  Aleppo, 695
We walked to the room that faced onto the street. Two men were working on 
the floor. Between them was a thick iron rod driven into the ground. In a steady 
rhythm, one would place a copper pellet on top before covering it with a short iron 
rod. The second man brought down a heavy mallet. Thud! Quickly, the finished 
coin was dropped into a bucket and the process started again.
The foreman waved for them to stop. He gestured towards the man holding the 
mallet. “This is my die cutter, Abu Zayd. Show them the new design you’ve made.”
Abu Zayd drew us closer, pointing at the delicate carving at the ends of the two 
rods. “This is what makes the marks on the two faces of the coins.” He picked up 
a coin and tossed it over to me.
It felt coarser than the dinar. He smirked at my look of disappointment. 
“Copper’s not as forgiving as gold. Copied the caliph from the coin we got from 
Damascus, but we’ve our own ideas for the back.”
I turned it over. The pole on steps had a circle drawn across the centre of the 
shaft. “What does it mean?”
“They’ve been making similar designs in other copper mints,” he replied. “Some 
have a star in the sky beyond. What’s it mean? If you want my idea, the caliph is the 
pole and the circle is the community of believers moving around him. That’s how 
the poets used to talk about the chiefs in Arabia before the birth of the Prophet.”
“A fresh image using old ideas?” I asked.
Abu Zayd knelt down to continue his work. “Isn’t everything? If you invent a 
new language, that might be a grand thing. Problem is there won’t be anyone to 
understand what you’re talking about!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-7
“Don’t say anything and keep your head down! We can’t stay for long or the guards 
will catch us. Pretend you’re a lad in my service.” I wrapped a length of linen cloth 
around my head, and moments later we were pushing through the crowds leaving 
through the northern gate after the midday prayer. The marble paving of the court-
yard caught sun’s rays, dazzling my eyes. My father’s hand pulled me to one side. 
“We have to go over here.”
The mosque was becoming quieter. We walked around the lofty arcade towards 
the western side. Many of the walls of the mosque were still blank, though I could 
make out places where sheets of marble had been pinned to the lower surfaces. The 
western arcade was different, with the whole area from floor to ceiling obscured by 
scaffolding and dust sheets.
Damascus, 714
4
Figure 4.1  Section of the mosaic frieze (“Barada panel”) in the western arcade of the court-
yard of the Umayyad Mosque, Damascus, 706–16. Photo: Dosseman, 2009. 
Wikimedia Commons.

44  Damascus, 714
“It will be years before this monumental task is finished. Who knows how much 
it will cost us?” He sighed. “For the glory of Islam, I suppose, though is Allah not 
as pleased with a prayer offered in a humble brick mosque with an earthen floor?”
We stopped by a ladder. “Remember, no talking unless you are asked! The fore-
man, Abu Zayd has allowed us to glimpse at what they are doing, but we’re not 
supposed to be here.”
We found him on the second level, standing confidently on the uneven planks. 
He was in conversation with one of the workers. I couldn’t understand the lan-
guage they were speaking. “It’s Greek,” my father whispered. “I heard these men 
were sent from Constantinople as a gift from the Christian emperor to our caliph, 
al-Walid.”
Abu Zayd sensed our approach and turned to greet us. “Al-Harith, my dear 
companion! As you can see, the work progresses well.” He moved his hands ex-
pansively, drawing our gaze across the surface.
The glittering colours were almost too much to take in; it was like looking at a 
wall of gemstones. My father and Abu Zayd began talking, giving me the chance 
to look at each detail in turn. The long wall was punctuated by giant trees, each 
reaching down towards a stream that ran along the base. Between the mighty trunks 
closest to me, there was a landscape with houses clustered together on a hill. I’d 
seen villages like that nestled in the mountains of western Syria. The closer I gazed 
the more unfamiliar they seemed. How to make sense of the forms, the tiled roofs 
perched at impossible angles, the shadows of the walls slanting in odd directions? 
There was something else too: where were the people, where were the animals? I 
glanced again at the stream below my feet: no fish! What were these strange places? 
Why would anyone want to depict abandoned villages? Or was it that no one had 
ever lived in them? At first this seemed like the best answer, but another question 
came to me: who had tended the trees, cutting the lower limbs from the trunks?
Abu Zayd saw my frown and laughed. “These images are meant to lift the soul, 
and yet they vex your young servant. Come now, what’s bothering you?”
I glanced anxiously at my father. He nodded his permission for me to speak. 
“It’s a beautiful world, but not alive. There should be men and women standing 
in the doorways, and children playing in the meadows. It would be a silent place 
without the sounds of animals and the singing of birds.”
Abu Zayd was staring at me intently. I shifted uncomfortably from one foot to 
the other. “And what do you guess about this strange land?” he asked.
I took some time before answering, peering intently at the sections of the mosaic 
on either side. “It feels like it’s waiting to come alive,” I said slowly. “Almost as if 
time has stopped, even though the water in the stream is flowing and the leaves on 
the trees are being agitated by a gentle breeze. These villages and buildings haven’t 
been abandoned. No, they’ve never been lived in.”
“I’ve seen similar things on the mosaic floors of churches further south,” my fa-
ther remarked. “Those are just made of coloured stone, of course, but you also see 
buildings like these. All of those have inscriptions giving you the name of a town 
or city. I even heard of one pavement that was a giant map, with Jerusalem in the 
centre all laid out flat so that you could make out the gates, streets and churches.”

Damascus, 714  45
“I can’t see any churches or mosques in these mosaics. Will some appear in 
other panels around the courtyard?”
Abu Zayd shrugged. “Couldn’t say. I’m only in charge of the workers along this 
wall. The director doesn’t share his plans with someone as lowly as me. Naturally, 
I’ve my own ideas.”
“My guess is that there won’t be,” my father responded. “These images don’t 
represent our world.”
We walked to a different part of the wall. There were much grander houses. I 
saw domes, columns with carved capitals, and elegant balconies. Some parts re-
minded me of the mosque itself, though I still couldn’t make sense of what I was 
seeing. Why were there giant pearls hung on chains inside the doors?
“It’s a puzzle, isn’t it?” Abu Zayd smiled, pointing to the balcony. “Look at the 
columns supporting the roof. They all connect to the balustrade at the front, but 
what happens to them as they ascend.”
I looked at it again. “That can’t be! Half of them connect to the back of the roof. 
A building like that would just fall down.”
“So it’s not just the lack of people; you also have structures that can’t support 
themselves. Is it just that my mosaicists don’t know what they’re doing?”
Hearing the creaking of the ladder, we all turned around to see Salim. “A thou-
sand apologies for the intrusion. My master has been called to the goldsmith’s 
market to settle a dispute.”
Abu Zayd looked disappointed. “I thought there’d be time for you to find you 
way to the heart of this mystery.”
Salim was now standing next to us, captivated by the mosaic pictures. My father 
spoke to him. “Fresh eyes might solve this. Why are there buildings that don’t be-
long in our world and where are all the people, the beasts, and the birds in the sky? 
Is it a place from which life has departed or one waiting for it to arrive?”
Salim looked uncertain. “I can’t see into the hearts of the artisans who laid this 
mosaic. What greets my eyes is a vision of paradise before the day our souls will be 
judged. Do we not see here the ‘lofty chambers’ meant for the believers.”
“You are right indeed!” exclaimed Abu Zayd. “Is it not written about in Surat al-
Saba that ‘there awaits them the double recompense for what they did, and they shall 
be in lofty chambers in security’? If my faulty memory serves me, Surat al-Zamar 
talks of chambers above which are still more chambers, just like we see here.”
Salim was keen to show his knowledge. “That verse you remember also says 
that rivers flow beneath these wondrous structures. What a sight to encounter after 
tasting the bitterness of death!”
One thing still bothered me. “The pearls. Why are they hanging on chains in so 
many doorways?”
“There I have no answers,” replied Abu Zayd. “You’ll find other pearls in the 
mosaics of the Dome of the Rock, built by this caliph’s father, ‘Abd al-Malik. 
Some say the strange crowns, vases, and jewelled plants on the walls are found in 
paradise, and others that they celebrate the conquests of Islam. The last glass cube 
was laid in those mosaics only twenty years’ ago, yet already we’re arguing over 
what they mean!”

46  Damascus, 714
Figure 4.2  Mosaic on a spandrel in the western arcade of the courtyard of the Umayyad 
Mosque, Damascus, 706–16. Drawing: Marcus Milwright. After Richard Etting-
hausen, Arab Painting (New York: Rizzoli, 1977).

Damascus, 714  47
“Perhaps it’s all about light? Doesn’t light shine out from a pearl?” I asked.
“The verse of light,” added Salim. “The glass of the lamp is like a pearly star.”
My father patted Salim on the back. “You may be right, though it’s not just 
Muslims who find in pearls a faint echo of the divine. I’ve heard from my Christian 
friends that the heavenly Jerusalem they seek will abound with pearls. Perhaps 
each believer finds their own meaning in these mosaics. Besides, the precious items 
I seek are nearer at hand. Come on, let’s not keep the goldsmiths waiting!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-8
“You’ll find nothing of value in there. The wretch who once owned it was a stran-
ger to virtue. Insha allah, his name will soon be forgotten.” These were Salim’s last 
words before closing his eyes. I gazed up at the stars. The compact building lay at 
the bottom of the shallow valley, silent but enticing. As sleep took me, I resolved 
to see it for myself.
I woke with the sun still below the horizon. Salim and my father were wrapped 
in blankets, lying motionless beside the embers of the fire. I grabbed some bread 
and slung a canteen over my shoulder. Blades of thin grass brushed against my 
legs. My steps alerted a gazelle, which sprang away into the gloom. We’d travelled 
along this route last summer; I would never have guessed how a little water could 
change such parched land, seeding it with tiny flowers. Stepping over a low wall, I 
entered the compound. The doors of the building had been torn off, leaving nothing 
between me and the secret world within.
Qusayr ʿAmra, 746
5
Figure 5.1  View of Qusayr ʿAmra, Jordan, 740s. Photo: Daniel Case, 2009. Wikimedia Commons.

Qusayr ʿAmra, 746  49
The room within was spanned by two arches. Beyond lay a narrow vaulted 
space ending in a flat wall. Light shone weakly through small windows high in 
the walls, leaving many areas lost in shadow. Signs of destruction were all around; 
flag stones pulled from the mortar and the plaster on the walls marked with deep 
scratches and soot from campfires. Would there be anything left to see?
As the sun rose in the sky, outlines of painted panels began to emerge. The first 
thing I saw were standing women on the undersides of the arches. I realised with 
shock that they were naked above the waist. They regarded me impassively, with-
out shame. What sort of place would have such paintings? Salim’s words from the 
previous night came back to me. Did these unsettling things have something to do 
with the man who once owned the building?
My eyes were drawn to the paintings along the right hand wall. It was split into 
three parts. Nearest were acrobats, their bodies full of energy. That was straight-
forward enough, though the next part shocked me. Again I was confronted by a 
woman, tall and unclothed, but for a loincloth, standing on the edge of a pool. 
Framing her were the outlines of a building, with faces looking down from balco-
nies at the extraordinary sight below. I returned my gaze to the woman’s turbaned 
head. That expression! No modesty, no embarrassment, only the face of one used 
to wielding power. It made no sense to me.
The last panel had three men standing in a row, with three more behind. They 
were dressed in the richest robes, some with crowns on their heads. The three at 
the front looked most important, each one a king or emperor. Their gesturing right 
hands sent the eye away to some other place. I was about to give my attention to 
other painted scenes when I heard a yawn and the rustling of fabric. The pile of rags 
in the opposite corner of the room began to move, a head emerging from one end.
The man sat upright and scratched his back, while looking at me intently. It was 
not an unkind face, but weathered and deeply lined. “While I don’t mind having 
visitors to my home, I ask that they call on me after I have risen from my bed.”
I didn’t know what to say. He finally broke the awkward silence. “No matter, a 
guest is a guest whenever they choose to arrive. My name is Abu Zayd al-Saruji. 
By the way, have you finished with that bread?”
I handed him the remaining piece. He ate greedily before snatching my canteen. 
“You can get more from the well out there,” he gasped, wiping his mouth. “Now, 
in return for your kindness, I can answer questions you may have. I’ve spent many 
nights pondering these paintings, and heard tales of the man who once passed care-
free nights in here after a day’s hunting.”
“How did he come to be here?” I asked.
“He was a companion of the prince, Walid ibn Yazid, and travelled with him up 
until the end. Walid became caliph, most powerful man in the world. For all that, 
he couldn’t outrun his fate. His enemies tracked him down to Bakhraʾ in the north 
and slit his throat.”
“What about the man who told you about this place?”
Abu Zayd smiled. “He saw which way the wind was blowing, and slipped away. 
Even took a few of the prince’s trinkets with him.”
“He was a thief?”

50  Qusayr ʿAmra, 746
“And a coward too, may Allah accept his soul all the same! Sadly, most of us 
don’t turn out to be the heroes we hear about in songs.” He took another swig of 
water. “I expect you’ve been wondering what sort of a place this is? The simplest 
answer is the one you will find by walking through that door. It’s in those little 
rooms that you could take a bath. The walls are filled with the sorts of paintings you 
might have seen elsewhere: women and children in the countryside, vines, animals, 
and, in the steam room, a dome with a map of the stars. There are darker themes 
too, but I think you are more interested in what you see around you.”
“Yes, what do these pictures mean?”
He spread his arms wide. “Pictures are like poems: they can’t be boiled down to 
one meaning. To each person they say something different, and sometimes they’ll 
make you think about more than one thing at the same time. Just look at this lively 
painting: what do you see in the uppermost panel?”
Looking again at the fresco on the right-hand wall, I noticed the thin segment 
below the arch. “Animals running in one direction, and nearer to us ropes and flags 
held up by poles.” I peered closer. “There are people too, though I can’t see their 
bodies. What’s happening?”
“A kite. It’s a type of desert hunting that’s happened for as long as anyone can 
remember. They are driving the beasts into an enclosure where archers will bring 
them down.” He waved at another wall. “Over there you’ll see the slaughter and 
butchering. The question is: why do princes hunt? If it’s just for food or skins 
couldn’t they send someone else out to do it?”
Figure 5.2  Central section of the west wall of the reception hall, Qusayr ʿAmra. Photo: Heba 
Mostafa.

Qusayr ʿAmra, 746  51
Figure 5.3  Lunette above the doorway leading from the apodyterium to the reception hall, 
Qusayr ʿAmra. Photo: Heba Mostafa.
I thought for a moment. “I suppose they must enjoy hunting. Is this whole wall 
is about pleasure? If it’s to be found in hunting, there might be joy too in watching 
acrobats? The next panel shows a palace and a pool. Is the woman in the centre a 
singer or dancer?”
“You might have half the answer,” he conceded. “What about the kings over 
there? They look at us and point to somewhere else. Tell me, what else might you 
think when someone subdues a beast in a hunt? What does it say about them?”
“That they have some power over animals, deciding whether they live or die?”
He nodded. “And we’re just harmless gazelles and onagers subject to the will 
of the caliph. Walid wanted everyone to know where they stood when they were 
with him. See those six kings? Seem pretty grand in their fancy gear, don’t they? 
Look closer and you’ll see that half of them have been defeated by the armies of 
Islam. Not just that, but they all point toward the next patch of wall. That shows the 
Umayyad family, rulers of the world.”
It was a lot to consider. “Pleasure and power all in one image. Why does my 
eye keep coming back to the woman? She’s almost naked, but stands there like a 
queen, staring right at us.”
“Is she looking at us, or past us? I’ve often wondered too about the curtain 
drawn back behind her.”
“Is she coming out from behind the curtain?” I asked.
“Or withdrawing to another place,” he responded. “Sometimes a curtain can be 
the threshold of death.”

52  Qusayr ʿAmra, 746
“What makes you think that?”
He waved at the entrance to the bathhouse. “If you stand in the changing room 
over there you can see her looking at you. Look above the door and there’s a mourn-
ful painting of a young man staring down at a shroud. A winged boy floats above. 
My guess is that the fine lady standing there is his lost love. I’ve heard that all the 
parties, the wine, and the singing, were just to fill the void left in Walid’s heart by 
the death of his beloved Salma. Now he too has departed this mortal realm. Perhaps 
this quiet refuge is the one place where they can be together?”
When I returned, Salim had everything packed for the day’s journey. A pile of 
charred stones and ash were the only signs of our camp; the words spoken under 
the stars were already cast adrift on the desert winds.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-9
“Over there! He’s running away.”
We stumbled through the orchard, weaving between the trees. Salim caught the 
man by the ankle as he tried to scramble over a wall. Landing in a crumpled heap 
on the ground, the mysterious figure was still holding the package under his arm. 
We dragged him, moaning, back to the entrance of the monastery. The abbot stood 
at the open doorway. He bent down to examine the prone figure. “Bring him to the 
infirmary.”
“I’d rather just send him to the authorities. The qadi would know what to do 
with this scoundrel,” growled Salim as we entered the building.
The thief lay quietly as the monks washed and bandaged his leg. I saw his flinty 
eyes scan the room for a means of escape. The abbot must have sensed his thoughts. 
“You won’t be going anywhere until you’ve given an account of your actions.  
Akhmim, 751
6
Figure 6.1  Silk textile fragments containing a tiraz in the name of caliph Marwan II. Inscrip-
tion added in Tunisia, 744–50. Victoria & Albert Museum, London: 1314.1888, 
1385.1960.

54  Akhmim, 751
Why did you take this from our treasury? There’s plenty of silverware, and yet you 
made straight for this.”
The abbot was holding a bundle, wrapped in canvas. “Can we see what’s in-
side?” my father asked.
“I don’t see why not.” He walked over to a long table, untying the cords holding 
the package together. I saw a flash of crimson through the drab wrapping. A mo-
ment later the magnificent textile came fully into view. The abbot shook it gently 
and draped it over the table. We gathered around, marvelling at the quality of the 
weaving and the rich colours. The crimson field was closely packed with patterned 
circles of yellow and green, the smaller gaps containing rosettes. At either end the 
weavers had added bands of ornament. I could make out hearts, dots, and squares 
arranged in lines.
The abbot ran his hand over the surface of the cloth. “We Copts are famous for 
our woven and embroidered fabrics. For centuries the wools and linens from our 
looms have been sent far and wide by land and sea, but we produce nothing like 
this splendid silk.”
I couldn’t resist touching the cloth. “Where was this wonderful thing made?”
My father answered. “Look here between the main design and the border. An 
inscription has been embroidered in yellow thread.”
The abbot nodded. “Only a caliph can order such a tiraz. This one says it was 
made for Marwan, Commander of the Faithful, in his workshop in Ifriqiya.”
“Where’s that?” I asked.
“Travel north along the Nile as far as the Delta. All you have to do then is take 
the long route west along the coast,” answered Salim. “You’ve heard of Qayrawan 
and Tunis?”
“How did it come to be here?” I asked. “Surely this was meant for one of the 
caliph’s relations or maybe a high official.”
“If you had any manners, you would have asked me that question!” The sono-
rous voice came from behind us. We turned round to see the thief staring at us.
“What would you know about such things?” Salim exclaimed. “I might as well 
ask one of the farmers ploughing the fields hereabouts. What have we to learn from 
a shameless vagrant who steals from a church.”
The thief glanced down at his tattered clothes. “I might look like a beggar now, 
but I’ve known better times, my friend. If you desire some answers, then just ask 
me, Abu Zayd the poet, to enlighten you.”
“I did ask for your story,” sighed the abbot. “Keep it short, mind. Then I’ll de-
cide what to do with you.”
“Maybe you know the names of the famous poets who wrote and sang praises of 
the caliphs?” Abu Zayd began. “The likes of Farazdaq and Jarir might mean some-
thing to you. I don’t doubt that they’ll still be spoken of in centuries to come. For 
each of those shining stars there are dozens of others plying their craft just for wine 
and food. Their finely crafted words are soon forgotten even by those who heard 
them. I was such a journeyman versifier, hanging around the fringes of the court 
of ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn Muʿawiya. Some called him the ‘Falcon.’ Not an impor-
tant man, I suppose, though a member of the noble Umayyad family all the same.  

Akhmim, 751  55
I travelled with his retinue, seeking what favours I could, looking for opportunities 
to impress. It wasn’t a bad life, and easier than many. All that stopped the day that 
caliph Marwan died, cut down by the followers of Abu’l-ʿAbbas. Now that killer’s 
the caliph, known by the title, al-Saffah. It’s a nickname he earned a thousand times 
over!”
He must have caught my puzzled expression. “It means ‘the blood-letter’; a bit-
ter title for me to pronounce,” he explained. “Abu’l-ʿAbbas made it his business to 
track down every member of the Umayyad family and put them to the sword. My 
old master, ʿAbd al-Rahman, went into hiding. I was with him much of the time, as 
he moved from place to place. At first there were friends who gave shelter. As the 
danger grew doors were closed, old favours forgotten. The once-proud Falcon was 
reduced to offering gifts in return for a meal and a bed. His gold running low, he 
turned to other possessions. Last of all were his silks.”
“Why did he save them? Are they really more valuable than gold?” I asked.
“To some they are,” he replied. “Silk cloth is certainly costly, but that’s not the 
whole story. You see, each one bearing that inscription has been placed on the body 
of the caliph himself. Marwan, and the others who came before him, would wear 
each one before handing them over to friends and allies. A coin is a dirty thing, even 
ones struck from gold. So many hands have held them. What makes these silks so 
special is that they’ve been touched by the representative of Allah on earth.”
The abbot was looking impatient. “Abu Zayd, I don’t have time to waste. Finish 
your tale!”
“ʿAbd al-Rahman was getting desperate when he ended up here in Akhmim. He 
was looking for a passage north along the Nile and then west. It brought a tear to 
my eye to see him buy a berth on a trading boat using his most precious posses-
sions. That silk you see draped over the table was part of the price. I heard him say 
once that it would follow him to his grave. It was not to be. Never saw him again 
after that day.”
“But how did you come to be here?”
“I decided that I had to get that silk, if only to remind myself of my patron. I fol-
lowed the merchant and watched the precious thing change hands in the town. Last 
one was an old man. I tracked him here. You Christians like to give things away to 
unburden yourself of sin. I made a plan to break in and have it for myself.”
“And what were you going to do next?” I asked.
“My days are numbered,” he said. “If nothing else, I thought it could be my 
shroud if anyone hears of my connection with ʿAbd al-Rahman.”
The abbot was silent for a moment. “Until it’s safe to leave, you’ll stay with us 
living the life of a simple monk. Be warned, Abu Zayd: it’s hard work we expect 
of you, not clever verses!”
As he was led away by the monks, my father asked one last question. “Did ʿAbd 
al-Rahman escape from the caliph’s men?”
Abu Zayd shrugged. “Allah knows all things. If it were me I wouldn’t stop run-
ning until I could see the ocean where the sun sets. Maybe there’s a good life to be 
found there … al-Andalus, I believe they call it.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-10
“Tell me again. I still don’t understand.”
Salim wiped the sweat from his forehead. “Let’s begin again. I promised al-
Harith that you would learn this before we meet him again in Raqqa.” He thought 
for a moment, “We can try this another way. You remember the fountain in the 
courtyard at home?”
Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776
7
Figure 7.1  Diagram showing intersection of circles and the creation of a star and hexagon. 
Drawing: Clio Milwright.

Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776  57
“Yes, but how will that help?”
“The Prophet—peace be upon him—said, ‘Reconcile yourself to patience in 
order to be rewarded’.” He caught my scowling face. “You might begin there on 
the path to wisdom … Now, let’s start again. What happens when you drop a peb-
ble in the water?”
“It makes ripples that spread out to the edges of the pool.”
“And what shape do the ripples make?”
“A circle, of course.”
“Imagine,” he continued, “that you and a friend dropped pebbles at the same 
time, but on different sides of the pool. What would happen when the ripples meet 
in the middle?”
I frowned. “Different shapes would form as the two circles passed each 
other.”
Using his walking stick, he sketched two intersecting circles on the dusty ground. 
“Now, imagine that you have two friends with you, each equidistant around the rim 
of the pool. Three pebbles now, all at the same time.”
He drew a second picture in the dirt, showing how the three circles made new 
shapes. “We must imagine a point in time, with the ripples frozen to reveal this 
image. Next we can draw lines connecting those outermost junctions between the 
circles. Do you see?”
“A triangle,” I replied. “One with all the sides the same length.”
He drew more lines. “If we take the points where the pebbles were dropped and 
join them together, we get another triangle at a different angle to the first. Can you 
see what’s been created?”
“A six-pointed star. I seem to remember that shape has a name.”
“Some call it the shield of Sulayman—may Allah bless him. We can do more. 
Take the stick and make lines to join the points of the star.”
I did as he asked and watched as the hexagon formed itself. “I like that, but why 
go to all this trouble when I can just draw these shapes on their own?”
“Because a circle is perfect,” he explained. All you need are a simple set of 
compasses, and you can make it over and over again. Same every time. If you know 
where to overlap the circles, and you have a straight edge, there’s no end to the pat-
terns you can make, extending out as far as you can go.”
He pointed at the grand building in front of us. “Not so long ago this was a pal-
ace of a caliph by the name of Hisham. Most powerful man in the world, though 
now his dynasty’s no more than a memory. It looks like the building is lamenting 
its lost master.”
Rough boulders and mortar were already showing through the cracks in the 
white stucco that covered every surface. The sculptures that once stood above 
the entrance lay shattered on the ground; heads, arms, and bodies half buried in the 
shifting sand. The wooden doors had been prised from their hinges. Inside there 
were ugly scars where carved panels had been ripped out of the walls.
“There’s no one here now. Shall we look around?”
All around were panels of carved stucco, some picked out with patches of red, 
blue, green, and yellow. I saw paintings with images of sea monsters, musicians, 

58  Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776
and horsemen. What caught my eye were the windows pierced with insistent pat-
terns of curving lines. Each arched space contained a different design, moulded and 
carved from stucco, bleached as white as old bones in the desert.
Salim stood beside me. “These designs are meant to confuse the eye, knotting 
in and out. At heart they are quite simple. Just like we did before, start with the 
places where they would first have inscribed intersecting circles. How many can 
you see?”
I counted them. “Seven with more that are cut off around the edges. It’s like the 
frame shows us a pattern that stretches endlessly in all directions.”
He nodded, “Just a glimpse of infinity. Our eyes only see a fraction of com-
plexity of creation. The intersecting circles suggest oblique lines ascending and 
descending. How did the artisans use these elements to make a more beguiling 
design?”
Looking again, I saw that the circles had been transformed into hexagons, but 
with curving lines. The points of intersection between had become voids so as 
to confuse the eye. Dotted across the surface were six pointed stars pierced into 
incised medallions. Six triangular voids around each one created another, larger 
star. These new stars expanded with more lines before being subsumed into the 
hexagons. “The circles are a skeleton. The pattern they’ve made is like the muscle 
and skin. One can’t exist without the other.”
Figure 7.2  Stucco grille, Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi (West), Syria, 724–27. National Museum 
of Damascus. Photo: Sheila Blair and Jonathan Bloom.

Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776  59
“Though with one such skeleton you can make any number of different an-
imals,” he replied. “Once mastered, the principles of geometry can take you in 
many directions. Do you remember the mosque in Damascus? There were win-
dows just like this, dotted around the courtyard. Each one had a pattern different 
from its neighbours.”
“Fine words indeed, but you have forgotten one thing!” We both turned in the 
direction of this new voice. An old man stood crookedly before us, so thickly caked 
in the grime of the road that it was hard to guess the original colour of his cloak. 
He shook himself like a dog, creating a dusty cloud. “Abu Zayd’s my name. I’d be 
glad of a drink from your canteen.”
Salim poured some water into a metal cup and handed it to him. “You’ll find 
more behind the building; a canal feeds water into a cistern. It’s not so fresh, but 
you’ll need every drop if you are travelling north in the summer. Now, what did I 
forget about this place?”
The old man smiled. “I knew this place in its prime, long before you were born. 
I worked for old Hisham, chopping vegetables and baking bread in his kitchens. 
Never saw him much, though I heard the laughter from his chambers. Wafts of 
wine and perfume seeped into every corner of the palace. Sometimes we would 
sneak a glimpse around a curtain and hear the poets singing. Enough to melt your 
heart with melancholy and joy!”
Figure 7.3  Marble window grille and mosaic above, western arcade of the Umayyad 
Mosque, Damascus, 706–16. Photo: Alain George.

60  Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 776
“Do you remember any of their songs?” I asked.
“Too many years have passed,” he sighed. “Only fragments remain. Much like 
this old place. Do you wonder why time has been so harsh on the palace and its 
ornament when the mosque in Damascus still shines like jewel? It’s not just the 
desert winds that tears things apart.”
Our eyes flitted over the walls, hunting for clues. Salim was first to speak. 
“Hisham’s family is gone, all of them dead. While there’s no call to save a palace, 
it would be a poor Muslim ruler who did not put money into the upkeep of a place 
of prayer, even one built by his enemy.”
“There’s truth in that,” replied the old man, “but Hisham’s purse is the key to 
this mystery. I never met a more miserly man. Used to have the servants count the 
silver drinking cups after his friends had gone in case one had left in someone’s 
pocket. Wanted the best, but never liked paying for it. Which other caliph would 
have received guests in a patched caftan? I swear that he took pride in looking like 
a vagabond!”
“And it was the same with his buildings?” I asked.
“Most I’ve seen are falling down,” he said with a sweep of his hand. “Problem 
is the materials: rubble instead of cut limestone, stucco instead of marble veneer. 
Look at that beautiful window you’ve been talking about. Might seem like the ones 
in Damascus, but each of those was carved from a single sheet of white marble. 
Must have taken a year or more to make, and will look the same long after your 
grandchildren are dead. Nothing so fine for Hisham! Knock it up quick, all for 
show.”
He led us to the floor near the main staircase. “Marble or mosaic on the floor? Of 
course not! Nothing but cheap frescoes, already cracked with age. Don’t stay here 
too long my friends, or you may share their fate.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-11
Slate-grey smoke rose in the sky before being pulled south on the winds. My father 
looked up with satisfaction. “It’s moving away from the city. This place is unbear-
able when the breeze sends that filthy ash into the streets. You can taste it in the 
air, feel it clinging to your skin.” He brushed a fleck of charcoal from his robe. 
“Let’s not spend longer here than we must. Salim, where’s Abu Zayd? After I buy 
Basra, 841
8
Figure 8.1  Tin-glazed bowl with painted cobalt inscription, probably reading “Made by 
Abu al-Baqi.” Iraq, possibly Basra, ninth century. Photo: Pernille Klemp. David 
Collection, Copenhagen: 21/1965.

62  Basra, 841
his wares, we can head north to get more supplies. Perhaps there we’ll find more 
wholesome air.”
“And sweeter water,” Salim added. “Basra is no place for a civilised person to 
live.”
It seemed a strange thing to say, for we had seldom seen busier streets on our 
travels. The world came to this port to trade; it was said that there was nothing 
that could not be bought in its markets. Even men, women, and children, reduced 
to commodities, were being paraded in chains in the slave market near the docks.
We made our way east, passing from the showy houses of the merchants to the 
poorer districts of town. Drains from these simple dwellings spilled directly out 
into the streets, seeping into the open sewers. The stench hung in the sultry air. We 
held perfumed kerchiefs to our faces and forged ahead, ignoring the cries of beg-
gars and water sellers.
My father pointed ahead. “Not far now. It’s just next to those workshops.”
After a few minutes we reached our destination, a simple mud-brick building 
with a roof made of reeds. We were ushered through the doorway into a room lit by 
oil lamps. A small brazier was burning in the corner, giving off sweet smoke. The 
old man sitting beside it rose slowly to his feet.
“Not for warmth on such a hot day,” he said by way of explanation. “My 
doctor—bless his hands—tells me the smoke keeps away the pestilence that seems 
to live in the very air of Basra. Last year many good people were taken, and who 
knows when the plague will come to our doors this summer?”
Greetings made, we all sat on the cushions spread across the floor. My father and 
Abu Zayd were soon deep in conversation. We were sailing next month to Socotra 
and thence to Zanzibar. Space had been purchased in the cargo hold. The plan was 
to fill it with fine items to sell at our destinations.
Their mutual expressions of dissatisfaction suggested that a deal had been 
struck. I’d seen these exchanges often enough to know that a good merchant has 
many masks, each one covering the true emotion beneath. My father offered a thin 
smile. “There’ll be no money, my friend, until I’ve checked the goods for myself.”
Abu Zayd led the way to the other room. Laid neatly on trestle tables were 
stacks of pottery vessels—plates, jugs, bowls, and jars—each one covered in a 
thick glaze the colour of polished ivory. Some had bold patterns painted in blue or 
green. I picked a bowl, admiring the glossy surface, and the inky depth of the blue 
pigment. My fingers ran across the rounded surfaces.
The old man looked at me. “Pulled out of the kiln yesterday morning, but many 
weeks in the making! You know, these potters might have all the fine clay they 
could ask for, but everything else has to be brought by sea or down the rivers. That 
blue is cobalt, brought all the way from Khurasan. Even white glaze needs lead and 
tin, transported here from distant regions.”
“Who made them?”
He noticed the vessel in my hand. “It’s in front of your eyes! The words running 
across the middle makes it clear: made by Abu al-Baqi. A gifted artisan, to be sure, 
but not one afflicted by modesty.”

Basra, 841  63
Figure 8.2  Lustre-painted tin-glazed bowl with standing figure. Iraq, possibly Basra, tenth 
century. Interior (a) and side view (b). Excavated in Nishapur, Iran. Rogers 
Fund, 1940. Metropolitan Museum: 40.170.27. CC0. 

64  Basra, 841
I replaced the bowl gingerly to its place, turning my attention to the remain-
der of the consignment. These vessels were painted all over with lines, dots, and 
dashes, making up designs of people, birds, animals, and strange buildings. In the 
dimly lit room their colours seemed dull: muddy yellow and reddish-brown.
Abu Zayd caught my disappointed expression. “Not much to look at are they? 
And yet, these are the best pieces I have. Maybe the sun will bring some answers.” 
He opened the shutters. A shaft of light cut through the room. In an instant eve-
rything changed. What was once drab now sparkled, jumping out from the white 
glaze beneath.
“It’s gold!” I gasped.
“You’re not far from the truth.” He picked up a bowl and brought it near the win-
dow. Turning it in the light, the colours changed, an iridescent sheen playing across 
surface. He passed it over to me. A simple figure filled the inner face. Holding a 
long-necked vase in one hand, the mysterious person regarded me impassively. A 
woman? Was it hair or a cowl that ran down her back? It was as if she were chal-
lenging me to comprehend her expression and gestures.
“Lustre is in demand everywhere,” Abu Zayd continued. “I just sent a crate full 
of bowls with the same design to a merchant friend in Nishapur. His letter says 
there will be no problem selling them.”
“Was this technique invented here?” I asked.
This trick was first performed on glass in Egypt. It was here in Basra that our 
potters mastered the art. A mixture of silver and copper is made into a paint. When 
it’s put in the kiln, they tinker about with the fuel, first wood for heat, and later 
grass to make it smoky.”
“What does that do?”
“A bit beyond me,” he admitted, “though what I do know is that all the other 
parts of the paint are burnt away, leaving just this layer of metal, thinner than a hair 
on the back of a flea! It just sits there on the surface, shining like gold and glitter-
ing like ruby. Only a few artisans in the city know the secret, and even they don’t 
always get it right. Sometimes a whole batch goes wrong; all the metal burns off or 
stains the colour of blood. Everything gone in the blink of an eye.”
“They throw them all away?”
My father was standing next to Abu Zayd. “Everything has a price,” he said. 
“These mistakes have greater value than the best work of most other potters. I’ve 
seen vessels from Basra in Egypt, Arabia, and even in the ports of India. Some of 
these masters are so famous they put their names on their best pieces.”
“These clueless workmen would do well to remember their place. There’s a 
price to pay for such hubris!”
We all turned around to see a tall, ruined figure, leaning heavily against the wall. 
He brought with him the fumes of a tavern, I was captivated for another reason. 
There was no avoiding his eyes: both pushed out unnaturally from the remainder of 
his face. Abu Zayd saw our perplexity and introduced the stranger. “You will have 
to forgive my friend, for he loves date liquor more than is prudent. For all that, he’s 
carved out quite a reputation for his sharp tongue and the honey that flows from his 
pen. Perhaps you have heard of Abu ʿUthman ibn Bahr al-Kinani?”

Basra, 841  65
We looked blankly at Abu Zayd. The stranger was the first to respond, pointing 
towards his face. “They’re more likely to know me for these ridiculous things. My 
nickname is ‘the google-eyed’.”
Salim nodded. “Al-Jahiz, your fame spreads well beyond this city. What’s 
wrong with these potters signing their names if, like you, their skills are esteemed 
across the world?”
Al-Jahiz smiled. “All our talents are given by Allah, I’ll grant you that. Of 
course, the same goes for the farmer ploughing his field and the baker kneading 
dough. A potter may make something of beauty, but which person with education 
would wish to change places and endure the dirt and hardship of the workshop?”
“If they all serve society, can they not have equal value?” I asked.
“Perhaps it might have been that way in the first societies in ancient times, 
though in our world the merchant stands above the makers of things. Did not the 
Prophet Muhammad—peace be upon him—make a living through trade? Above 
them both are those who craft words, for is not the word a gift from the Divine?”
I frowned. “Among artisans there must be some who are placed above others 
through talent or through the value of the materials they fashion? Silk costs more 
than cotton, just as silver outprices copper.”
“For centuries, we Arabs have distrusted weavers. Aside from such silly tradi-
tions, you’re right: no potter or blacksmith will ever rise to the status of a gold-
smith. No matter how pretty these fine glazed wares might seem, they’ll never 
replace the precious stuff in the dining rooms of the rich and powerful. The pots 
you see about you are made for those who cannot afford such trinkets.”
Salim looked annoyed. “Is this lustre painting just a cheap illusion, so a man 
might fool his guest into thinking he owns things made of gold when they are just 
baked clay? You would be a miser to try such a thing, like serving chewy mutton 
and calling it tender lamb!”
“I know a bit about misers,” al-Jahiz replied, smiling, “and the ones who buy 
lustre bowls rather precious metal for their evening meals have, at least, some wis-
dom. The Prophet once said that those who eat and drink from golden vessels will 
have fire in their bellies on Judgement Day. Mark these words well: keep your gold 
in your pocket and well away from your lips!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-12
The wall felt cool against my back. The upper part of the wall was blank white, 
punctuated by elaborate carved openings. The lower section, to the height of my 
waist was formed of stucco marked with repeated undulations. This band ran 
around the four walls of the giant room. I hadn’t really noticed it when we entered, 
but now there was time to look at the patterns more closely. It was all white, like 
bleached bones, save for a few dots of colour painted into notches throughout the 
design. It was hard to tell where one form began and another stopped. Sinuous lines 
blended one into another in a relentless rhythm. I closed my eyes, allowing my 
fingers to trace the furrows and mounds of stucco.
Samarra, 856
9
Figure 9.1  Bevelled style stucco panels within House no. 5, Site H 12, near to the Great 
Mosque of Samarra. Ninth century. Photo: Alastair Northedge. Samarra Archae-
ological Survey.

Samarra, 856  67
It was the second such house we’d been into that day. We’d been delivering 
goods brought from Raqqa, far to the northeast on the Euphrates. My father had 
commissioned kallaks to bring his goods downstream to the canals that link the 
great river to Baghdad. He’d sold some stock there, though there was more money 
to be made in Samarra. The caliphs had moved themselves and their troops to 
this new city twenty years ago. They were soon followed by the noble families 
of Iraq and the merchants who catered for their every whim. Now a man called 
al-Mutawakkil ruled. His thirst for luxury surpassed anything seen before. On the 
long journey down the river Salim had told me of the palaces constructed by this 
man, and of how he spent the unimaginable wealth of the state on banquets and 
entertainments. On board the kallak one evening, Salim had just finished telling the 
story of one such party when he turned in disgust and spat into the water.
“I don’t know why I even tell you about these things,” he said bitterly. “This 
caliph has forgotten his duty to the faithful, spending his time in leisure rather than 
raising armies to fight against the infidel. I even heard that he built a catapult to 
fling a poet through the air and into a fishpond. Is that the way to treat a man of who 
has mastered the written word, the most precious divine gift?”
The place that greeted us was so unlike Salim’s stories. While life inside the 
forbidding palace walls might be full of excitement and intrigue, the markets of 
Samarra were bleak, lacking the beating heart of other cities. Wide, dusty avenues 
led across the length of this vast settlement, much of it arranged in perfect grids. 
House after house looking the same as its neighbours, as if each one had been cast 
from the same mould. These were the simple living quarters for the countless Turk-
ish soldiers of the caliph.
We were delivering luxuries from Syria: apricots stuffed with almonds, blown 
glass vessels from the Mediterranean coast, fine silks from Aleppo, and silverwork 
from Damascus. I thought back to the decoration of the first house we’d entered 
that day. There too I had stood with my back against a stucco wall while my father 
and Salim had conducted their business. I hadn’t paid much notice to the decora-
tion. I knew now that something had been different. What was it?
My concentration turned to my hands. In the previous house, my fingers had just 
fitted into the grooves cut by the craftsmen. I could feel the holes they had drilled 
across the surface. I tried to remember the rhythmic patterns of these dots and fur-
rows as they traced the outlines of stems, leaves, and clusters of fruit. I wondered if 
I could sketch them just from the memory of moving my hands across the surface.
I returned my thoughts to the contours of this new stucco surface. My fingers 
found no carved channels to fit themselves into; instead, there were smooth curves, 
one intersecting with another. These lines felt like the gutter of an open book, 
flanked on both sides by the gentle curve of the pages. My mind drifted to the 
ridges of wet sand left by a receding tide and ever-changing ripples created by 
norias as their buckets plunged back into a flowing stream. Although the stucco 
was entirely still, it somehow felt as if it were in constant motion, never entirely 
balanced.
“You, girl, stop that at once!”

68  Samarra, 856
I opened my eyes in shock to find that my father and Salim had already moved 
to another room with their client. Instead I was confronted by an angry bearded 
face beneath a white cloth cap. “Eyes open at last, eh? What do you think you were 
doing rubbing your filthy hands on the master’s fine walls? How did you sneak in 
here anyway?”
“I, I, didn’t mean any harm,” I replied, my voice shaking. “I am here with al-
Harith, the merchant. Th-they must have gone to another room.”
The trace of a smile played on his lips. “Only just cleaned the dust from that 
panel, and thought I’d be spending my afternoon polishing dirty marks left by an 
uninvited guest. Come now, let’s find this al-Harith and his servant.”
As we walked together through the house I saw more rooms decorated with 
similar stucco panels. The man caught my gaze. “It’s the latest thing, so I’m 
told. Not sure what to make of it myself. I liked it when you could tell what it 
was supposed to be: a vine, a tree, or some such thing. Perhaps I’m just old-
fashioned. My master finds something intriguing in these new designs, though 
I suspect it’s mainly because he’s seen the same in the palaces of the caliph. 
Ambitious men like him always want to follow the latest fashion whether they 
understand it or not.”
“What do you think they represent?” I asked. “When I look at them it feels as 
if I don’t know what is at close at hand and what is far away. It shifts all the time.”
He laughed. “Perhaps that is the point. For me it’s like dissolving all we think 
we know from the natural world and then extracting some essence from it. When I 
look at them in the light of day I see the teasing hints of plants, waves, and rocks, 
but at night when lamplight flickers across those same forms my imagination con-
jures up swooping birds and leaping beasts. Nothing is ever what it seems … bit 
like this place, I suppose.”
“What do you mean?”
Figure 9.2  Minaret and part of the outer wall of the Congregational Mosque of Samarra, 
Iraq, 848–51. Photo: Fakhri Mahmood, 2021. Wikimedia Commons.

Samarra, 856  69
He led me out of a door onto a verandah facing towards the vast mosque of 
Samarra. Pointing to the spiral minaret, rising high above everything else around 
it, he said, “In my youth, a minaret might be round or square in plan. At heart it 
was always a simple tower with a balcony at the top for the call to prayer. They 
had thick walls on the outside and a staircase on the inside. What do they do here 
but make their minaret solid at the core and put the stairs on the outside! I’ve even 
seen our caliph riding to the top in order to survey his city as the day breaks. Is this 
imposing structure for delivering the word of Allah or just for the amusement of 
the Commander of the Faithful? Sometimes I think that’s the secret to this whole 
place.”
“Samarra has houses, markets, and roads. Doesn’t that make it into a real city?”
“You may be right,” he replied. “It feels to me like it’s been built without foun-
dations. One healthy breath of wind could blow everything away. If Allah grants 
you a long life, you could come back here to find all the grand palaces abandoned. 
These great avenues will do no more than connect one sad ruin to another.”
We were interrupted by a voice shouting from another part of the house: “Abu 
Zayd, where have you got to? This careless merchant has mislaid his daughter!”
He sighed. “I’d better show you all out. If you want my advice, don’t spend too 
much time in Samarra. There’s money and power to be sure, but linger in this place 
and soon nothing makes any sense.”
As we walked back to the entrance, I brushed my hand along one of the moulded 
stucco panels. What had once seemed full of life now chilled my skin, like the icy 
touch of a marble lid laid over an ancient tomb.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-13
This place is called a forest of stone by people in the city. Only now did I under-
stand what they really meant. Standing near the centre of the prayer hall, there 
were columns in every direction. Up close they were all different—some pale grey, 
some bluish and others a deep, mottled purple—but seen together in the gloom, 
they looked alike. Lamps hung in some of the bays lending the weak illumination 
of a woodland at dusk, shafts of sunlight barely able to pierce the thick canopy 
of leaves. I tried to orient myself in the cavernous space. Peering along the aisles 
brought some order, pairs of columns supporting arches, one after another until 
they faded into blackness. Glancing obliquely only brought confusion, as columns 
intersected one another in a seemingly meaningless pattern. I looked downward at 
Qayrawan, 863
10
Figure 10.1  Courtyard from the southeast, the Congregational Mosque of Qayrawan, Tunisia. 
Ninth century and later. Photo: Andrew Watson, 2012. Wikimedia Commons.

Qayrawan, 863  71
the reed mats covering the stone floor. Some had designs of arches, directing the 
faithful in prayer.
I heard Salim’s voice behind me. “Aisha, you shouldn’t be wandering around. 
Your father is with the artisans. I’m bringing the last of the supplies.” Behind him 
was a group of men carrying wooden crates.
The mosque was nearing completion. The scaffolding was being removed from 
the great minaret. Final pieces of decoration were being applied to the maqsura, the 
royal compound at the centre of the qibla wall. I surveyed this area that would soon 
be forbidden to all but the most powerful men of Qayrawan. Where the remainder 
of the prayer hall was dark, intimate even, this part was tall and airy, surmounted 
by a stone dome. The dome itself rested on four recesses, each sculpted like the 
Figure 10.2  Mihrab and minbar of the Congregational Mosque of Qayrawan, Tunisia. 
Ninth century. Photo: Citizen59, 2010. Wikimedia Commons.

72  Qayrawan, 863
interior of a shell. There was a painted inscription running around the four walls. 
So high up! Why put the words where they can scarcely be read?
“Unpack the crates.” The words were spoken by an old man, leaning on a stick. 
Soon tiles were being lifted gingerly from the straw. “Set them down next to the 
minbar so we can get a good look at them.”
Tiles from other crates had already been laid in neat rows on the floor. Coming 
closer I realised that they glittered, as if painted all over with gold. My father had 
told me about this magical technique of fusing silver and copper onto the surface of 
the glaze. Indeed, he’d even brought bowls and jugs with lustre painting from Iraq. 
My guess was that these tiles had come from the same place.
My father walked over to inspect this new consignment. “Abu Zayd, I was or-
dered to bring all these to you now that the work on the palace has been halted. 
Such beautiful tiles could hardly go to waste, but what will you do with them?”
“Our amir Abu Ibrahim Ahmad was a man of ambition, may Allah accept his 
soul. His plan was to have the most magnificent residence west of Egypt. Nothing 
but the best for him! Who knows what he paid for these pretty things?” He gestured 
with his stick. “All very well, though there are so many different patterns. The 
potter who made them left for Basra months’ ago, and I’ve no one to guide me in 
assembling them on the wall.”
Figure 10.3  Reconstruction showing how the Qayrawan tiles could be arranged to create 
decorative friezes. Created by Naomi Shields.

Qayrawan, 863  73
“Surely it’s a simple matter of laying them into mortar one next to another?”
Abu Zayd shook his head. “Look closely, my friend. See the way that some are 
symmetrical on one axis and others on two. It’s not just that. Most designs can be 
divided down a line running through the centre of one edge of the tile to the centre 
of the opposite edge. That’s straightforward enough, but others are symmetrical 
along a line that connects opposite corners. How can I resolve these differences in 
one arrangement?”
My father knelt down and began to rearrange some tiles into patterns. “That’s 
not your only problem,” he observed, looking at the blank expanses around the 
mihrab. “You scarcely have enough for a dado. How will you fill the entire qibla 
wall of the maqsura?”
The two men were soon deep in conversation, placing tiles next to one another, 
sometimes touching along their sides, other times just at the corners. I tired of their 
discussion and wandered over to the mihrab. I’d never have another chance to see 
it, and soon I was immersed in the patterns that ran around the curving interior 
space. A central spine of plaques was ornamented with arches supported on little 
columns. On either side were more panels with endless scrolling plants, like those 
on the minbar. I wondered if the same artisans had carved both marble and wood. 
The upper panels intrigued me most because the spaces between the stems and 
leaves had been drilled all the way through. Peering into these gaps I found a dark 
void beyond.
“You’re not the first person to notice that.” I turned to see one of the craftsmen, 
holding chisel. “I’ve still to remove some excess stone, if you’ll excuse me.”
“Why carve out these areas if everything behind them is left in darkness?”
“Only Allah knows for certain,” he replied. “What I heard is that the builders 
left standing one part of the first mosque built here by ʿUqba ibn Nafis, just one gen-
eration after the Prophet, peace be upon him. This may be where the first mihrab 
was located.”
“How will those who pray in the building know that this remnant remains hid-
den inside the fabric of the mosque?’ I asked.
He smiled. “Masons have always left secrets inside buildings, little details that 
most pass by without a second thought. These mysteries will only reveal them-
selves to the patient few who can listen to their faint whispers!”
As the sun dipped towards the horizon we found ourselves back in the courtyard 
of the mosque. Soon worshippers would be shuffling in for the Maghrib prayer. 
“We should get ready to leave,” my father said. “I’m anxious to get make the jour-
ney east.”
I glanced over at the minaret, warm light bathing its western side. “These 
Aghlabid amirs seem so keen to copy their masters in Iraq. After all, why bring 
lustre tiles from so far away when they have painters who can decorate their walls 
for a fraction of the price? There’s one thing I don’t understand. If they know so 
much about the wonders of Baghdad and Samarra, why not build their minaret as a 
spiral, just like the caliphs would do?”
“Why should we care?” Salim broke in. “The companion, Bilal, simply called 
out the adhan from the roof of the mosque in Medina. What need have good 

74  Qayrawan, 863
Muslims for these giant towers? The caliphs should know better than to expend 
their wealth on these things, and now their governors are committing the same er-
ror. The Prophet said, ‘Whoever builds a masjid for Allah, Allah will build him a 
house like it in Paradise.’ True indeed, but he said nothing of lofty minarets!”
“The idea for these towers must come from somewhere,” I said. “Why do they 
look different in each place we go?”
“We can’t help but draw from what’s around us” my father replied. “I’ve heard 
that there’s an ancient tower on the coast that used to be a lighthouse. Looks just 
like this minaret. In Syria, they copy the belltowers on churches.”
“Why not just create something new?”
“Like it or not, we’re bound to the past, even to the centuries of the Jahiliyya.” 
He pointed at the base of the minaret. “See that doorway? In order to ascend the 
stairway, you have to pass under a marble lintel from a long-lost pagan building. 
Same too, I guess, for every piece of marble in the prayer hall. Each column came 
from some old ruin. When he founded the city and built his mosque ʿUqba would 
have seen that past clearer than we can. Now he too is part of the long history of 
this place.”
As we left the building I thought about that old lighthouse, guiding sailors at 
night. Was the minaret like a beacon shining light out to the faithful of Qayrawan 
and beyond? I recalled the shafts of sunlight streaming through the windows in the 
drum of the dome, a point of brilliance in the shadowy prayer hall. The pale marble 
panels of the mihrab seemed also to shine out against that strange dark space be-
hind them. Lastly, my mind went back to the lustre tiles scattered across the floor; 
their glittering, iridescent surfaces were like the setting sun catching the crests of 
the waves on the wide Mediterranean Sea.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-14
It was our first day in the great city, gateway to the Silk Road. The winter sun cast 
crisp shadows onto the streets. Our breath formed clouds in the crystalline air. Stalls 
had been set out, and already there were crowds of shoppers bargaining for vegeta-
bles, cloth, perfume, and copper pots. My father had business in the market of the 
weavers. By his side strode Salim, holding his master’s documents in a satchel.
The theft only took an instant: a boy rushed forward with a stick, rapping my 
father’s shin. Stumbling forward he was caught by a helpful passerby. This was the 
Bukhara, 930
11
Figure 11.1  Obverse (a) and reverse (b) of silver dirham of Nasr ibn Ahmad (Nasr II, 
r. 914–43). Collection of the author. 
Source: Marcus Milwright.
  (Continued)

76  Bukhara, 930
sign, and in a flash an old man leant across and plucked the purse of coins from his 
pocket, and hobbled back into the shadows.
Salim was first to understand, launching himself at the old man. “Stop, thief!” 
He lost his footing as the three brigands darted off down different alleys. The old 
man knew the souk well, darting around corners and through the backs of shops. 
Salim took a different course and after a few minutes we had the old man cor-
nered in shabby courtyard. Leaning against the brick wall and breathing heavily, he 
pulled back his hood to reveal his thin face and unkempt beard. “Abu Zayd, that’s 
what you may call me.” Reaching down he pulled open wooden lid of a cistern.
This strange man appeared unconcerned by his situation. He tossed the purse 
from one hand to the other, before loosening the strings and peering inside. “Ever 
thought about the journeys these little things have made only to end up nestling 
together in here? They are indeed tenacious travellers, halting in every market, 
tavern, bathhouse, and caravanserai before continuing on their way. Verily, one in 
here must have been prised from the hands of a stingy fellow in Ahwaz and another 
was spent in Rayy by a man with a talkative tongue.”
He seemed lost in thought for a moment, not noticing Salim moving towards 
him. Salim’s hand hovered near the knife that hung from his belt. Suddenly, Abu 
Zayd’s head snapped back up, “Steady my friend, you don’t want your master to 
lose this do you? One more move and I will cast the money into the water! Do you 
fancy climbing down to get it?”
We stood like pieces on a chessboard awaiting the next move. Finally, Abu 
Zayd’s face broke into a crooked smile. “If I can tell you something you don’t 
Figure 11.1  (Continued)

Bukhara, 930  77
know about the first coin I draw from this bag, you’ll give me another five. If I 
lose, you keep them all and I’ll put myself in the hands of the inspector of police. 
Do we have a deal?”
“You are a fool if you think a merchant doesn’t know his own money. I accept 
your challenge. By nightfall you will be staring at the sky through iron bars.” My 
father’s voice was full of scorn, though I could tell he was intrigued.
Abu Zayd’s hand dropped into the bag, his fingers rubbing gently over the sur-
faces of the coins. One was drawn out, and he peered at for a moment before drop-
ping it disdainfully on the ground. Another and another followed the same way.
My father was indignant. “That’s not the deal! I won’t stand for any more 
cheating.”
Abu Zayd held up his palm: “Is it not said, ‘Surely Allah forgives all sins. In-
deed, He is the most Most Forgiving, the Most Merciful’? Now, just a moment and 
you will have your reward.” Closing his eyes, he again allowed his fingers to probe 
in the darkness. Suddenly, his expression changed to one of delight, and his hand 
shot in the air. “I am blessed indeed, for this one has a fine story to tell!”
Between his forefinger and thumb he held a greying disc of silver, its writing 
already worn down from passing through many hands. The three of us peered at 
this dull trinket, wondering if the old man had made a mistake. Salim was first to 
speak. “Why that’s nothing to speak of. Not even a new striking from the Samanid 
mint. It must be thirty or forty years old; I can scarcely make out what it says.”
Abu Zayd was triumphant. “Just so! What could some coin, freshly minted, 
have to tell us except what the prince, snug in his palace, wants us to know? For all 
their fine words and deeds, all these great men desire is to see their names and titles 
stamped on silver and gold. Ah, but then these pretty things start their lives, mov-
ing from one place to the next, bringing happiness and sadness in equal measure. If 
their skins are a little dirty, and their robes threadbare, they’ve at least gained some 
knowledge along the way.”
“We know that already,” I said. “You haven’t told us anything new.”
Abu Zayd glanced at me for the first time. “Like some people I have met on my 
travels, coins can have two faces.” He spun the coin around, to reveal a maze of 
scratchings, each blackened with dirt. The elegant Arabic had almost disappeared 
beneath the angular markings that covered the surface.
My father was first to speak. “This is the work of a madman, one who hates the 
prince whose name was stamped on the coin.” Abu Zayd wagged a finger. “No, 
that’s not it. Look again: there’s care in the way this was done.”
Salim leant in, rubbing his thumb gently over the surface. “These scratchings 
are magical signs, like you see on copper bowls and pendants. Foolish people be-
lieve these worthless things will save them from danger and bring them fortune. 
There’s nothing but nonsense written on these talismans. They will do the gullible 
no good on the Day of Judgement.”
Abu Zayd nodded. “You have drawn half of the picture, and now I must map out 
the rest. You have given us images of people, not their faces, the land but not the 
sky above. Shall I continue? I’ll need my payment first.”
With a sigh, my father took the purse from the old man and drew out five silver 
coins. “Let’s have your story.”

78  Bukhara, 930
Figure 11.2  Obverse (a) and reverse (b) of the Bornholm amulet. Samanid dirham (885–896) 
overwritten with Latin text in Runic characters. Found in c. 1770, possibly in 
Bornholm, Denmark. CC-BY-SA. National Museum of Denmark. Bh 61. Inv. 
CCCCLXXVII. 
Source: Lennart Larsen.

Bukhara, 930  79
“I’ve always had a skill with languages, and there’s money to be made in that 
line as a dragoman.” He paused and looked at me. “Ever heard that name before?”
“A sort of guide on long journeys,” I replied.
“That’s about it. On one of those trips I found who made those scratches. I was 
organising the journey of a solemn gentleman from Baghdad by the name of Ibn 
Fadlan. He’d been sent by the caliph to meet some northern folk called the Bul-
ghars. A hard journey and no mistake! We stayed west of the Caspian, and skirted 
the banks of the Aral Sea before entering the steppe lands. Nothing to see for days 
on end except grass, and no tracks to follow.”
“How did you know where to go?” I asked.
“Not an easy thing,” he replied, “but traders go that way each year. Some call 
it the ‘Fur Road,’ because that’s what everyone wants. Walrus tusks, honey, and 
slaves also make their way south in merchant caravans and find a ready market 
here in Bukhara. And what do the people of the north want in return?” Abu Zayd 
glanced back at the coin: “Silver and not much else. They have an unquenchable 
thirst for dirhams. I’ve seen that some folk poke holes in them and wear them 
around their necks, while others just bury them in the ground.”
“Do they melt them down to make their own coins?” asked my father.
Abu Zayd shrugged, “Only Allah knows for sure. I never saw any. I heard tell 
that they make elegant bangles and brooches. The best were worn by a strange 
people called the Rusʾ. Met them on the banks of the Volga River. Ibn Fadlan told
me they travelled from far away on their long boats. Such towering figures, these 
yellow-haired men and women from the north. Their swords and axes were like 
nothing you could imagine. For all that, these barbarians were strangers to civilisa-
tion. I don’t think any one of them had ever seen the inside of a bathhouse. Such 
grime and stench, as you’d scarcely believe! I’ll tell you where I saw those mark-
ings. They carried with them wooden posts that they drove into the ground, then 
worshipped in front …”
Salim looked disgusted. “Heathens, curse them for their idolatry!”
Abu Zayd was silent for a while. “That may be, my friend, but on my travels 
I’ve learned that this world contains many things that are beyond understanding. 
It’s best not to form quick judgements about Allah’s creation. Anyway, back to my 
story! These pieces of wood were marked with angular lines. I guess it was their 
writing. Must be important to them, though I don’t think many could read it.”
“What do you think it says on the coin?” I asked.
The old man shuffled impatiently. “Does it matter? What can a barbarian know 
that’s not already in one of our libraries? There’s more wisdom collected in this one 
city than in all the vast expanses of the north.” He held the coin aloft again. “After 
all’s said and done, it’s only a scrap of silver. Even in this sad state, I expect it’s 
enough to get me a good meal and a bed for the night. If that’s all you want from 
me, I’ll be on my way.”
Pushing me aside in his haste, Abu Zayd hobbled out of the courtyard and was 
soon lost among a sea of turbaned heads on the street outside.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-15
Rusafa, 998
12
Figure 12.1  Carved ivory pyxis, Madinat al-Zahraʾ near Córdoba, Spain. 964 (353 H). Formerly 
Treasury of Zamora Cathedral. Museo Arqueologico Nacional, Madrid. 52113.
Source: Album/Art Resource NY.

Rusafa, 998  81
“According to the verses I heard as a boy, the inventor was standing on the roof of 
the building over there. You can never trust poets not to throw in little fancies of 
their own, but apparently he’d made himself an outfit covered in feathers. Sturdy 
ones, I suppose, from a goose or an eagle or even a vulture … well, you’ll have to 
picture the scene for yourself. Strapped on his back were two great wings made of 
fabric and strips of wood. Waddles to the very edge and looks over. No going back 
now!”
“Did he realise in that moment the folly of his actions?” asked Salim. “After all, 
Allah created birds to fly and humans to stay firmly planted on the land.”
“Ibn Firnas was not like other men,” Abu Zayd responded. “He questioned all 
that he saw and would risk everything for knowledge. There was no doubt what to 
do when he stood on the precipice. He jumped!”
“What happened next?” I asked.
Abu Zayd sliced through the air with his open hand. “Swooped, yes that’s the 
word! Swooped over the garden like a majestic hawk, landing—so I’m told—
hundreds of cubits from where he started. Might have managed it without a few 
scrapes and bruises had he just remembered one thing.”
Hearing no response from us, Abu Zayd pointed at a flock of pigeons roosting 
in a nearby tree. “Only when he was in the air did Ibn Firnas discover that those 
feathers at the rear end aren’t just for decoration: they help the birds steer. Without 
a tail, he hit the ground head-first. Still, the inventor was the only one in al-Andalus 
who’s ever tried it and survived to tell the tale. I might call this strange episode the 
tale of the tail!”
My father stirred the coals in the brazier. “We’ve a lot of work to do tomorrow. 
Let’s get some sleep.”
A fine mist cloaked the garden as we got to work. Abu Zayd had explained the 
unpalatable task to my father the night before when we had left Madinat al-Zahraʾ 
for the short journey to Rusafa. “Subh, the mother of the Commander of the Faith-
ful, al-Hisham, has fallen out of favour in the court. They don’t share much with 
someone as humble as myself. What I gathered is that there was a struggle for 
power among the advisors to our caliph, may Allah protect him and strengthen 
his reign. Not the first time this has happened, though something’s different this 
time. Seems like the patience of the mighty chamberlain, al-Mansur, has finally 
run out. One of his officials finds me yesterday and gives this order: ‘The mother 
of al-Hisham keeps Rusafa as her private residence. You are to go there and gather 
up everything of value. My master, al-Mansur has ordered that the best items be 
brought to him. As for the rest, that can be sold in Córdoba.’ The drab functionary 
sniffed disdainfully. ‘Abu Zayd, you’ve been chosen for this job because you spend 
too much of your time among merchants and other seedy types in the city. Make 
sure to get the best prices or there’ll be trouble for you.’ That’s why I need you, 
al-Harith. There was no one else I could trust.”
Through the morning we went from room to room in the royal apartments, 
opening closets and noting down their contents. My father, Abu Zayd, and Salim 
worked methodically pulling out folded silk robes, metal vessels, and carved 
wooden boxes. I’d seen some beautiful things in the houses of officials in the city, 

82  Rusafa, 998
though never so many in one place. Every piece they examined that day would 
have been the crowning treasure of any other collection. For the mother of a caliph, 
these were simply what was required for existence. And yet, these were the very 
things that were being taken away by order of al-Mansur. Surely there was malice 
at work; he knew that she would be reduced by this loss.
When surrounded by such overwhelming luxury, a single object, however rare, 
can start to seem commonplace. Nearly all, at any rate: one item simply refused to 
let a veil be drawn across its unique beauty. It was Abu Zayd who encountered it 
first, on a table in a private chamber. “My friends, stop what you are doing. We can 
spare a few moments to come together in wonder! I’ve heard tell of these things, 
but never thought I’d see one, let alone hold it in my hands.”
We gathered in that little space. Salim drew back the shutters, flooding the room 
with light. Abu Zayd was grasping a small, cylindrical box with a dome-like lid. 
The surfaces was delicately painted in places. My father leaned over to get a bet-
ter view. “Ivory, though I’ve never seen a block of this size. Sometimes you come 
across carving in the markets, but it’s always thin sheets nailed onto a wooden 
frame.”
Abu Zayd passed it reverentially to my father. “Feel the weight of it. The master 
artisans only use the lowest section of the largest tusks. I’ve heard that the head 
of the caliph’s workshops travels all the way to Sijilmasa just to purchase the best 
ivory.”
What struck me first was the continuous pattern playing across its surfaces, 
stems and leaves constantly passing over and under one another. A second glance 
revealed birds, the shape of their bodies seeming to obey the sinuous plants that 
surrounded them. But that wasn’t everything: almost hidden beneath their tail 
feathers were two tiny gazelle, lost among the giant foliage.
“Gazelles might refer to the beauty of the recipient of this vessel,” Abu Zayd 
explained. “The peacocks are trickier; I’m told that these birds are skilled at killing 
snakes. Perhaps they protect the owner from evil?”
“They are the purest of animals, a symbol of paradise,” Salim observed.
“Could be all of those things,” my father added. “Shame we can’t ask the carver 
what he was thinking.”
The raised inscription around the lid was picked out in gold on a deep blue 
ground. My father revolved the object in his hands, reading slowly. “This was 
given by caliph al-Hakam II Mustansir Billah, Commander of the Faithful. Now 
who was it made for? It says: the noble lady, mother of ʿAbd al-Rahman. Dates to 
the time of his birth in 964, more than thirty years’ ago. Died young, if I remember 
rightly.”
Abu Zayd took back the container. “The noble lady is Subh. I’ve heard she was 
born a Christian. Aurora, they once called her. What a rise from servitude to become 
the consort of a caliph! And yet, all power is transient. See what’s happened …”
Hearing the sound of footsteps, we all turned. A woman led the way, with an 
entourage following in her wake. Everything about her spoke of grandeur from the 
rich fabrics of her outfit to her confident stride. Her thin, angular face registered no 
expression, though her eyes were fixed intently upon us.

Rusafa, 998  83
She turned back to one of her servants. “What depths will the chamberlain sink 
to in his quest for vengeance? Tell these scoundrels to explain themselves.”
Abu Zayd spoke deferentially. “The protector of the caliphate, al-Mansur, has 
given the order that we clear all the items of value from this residence.”
Subh regarded Abu Zayd coolly, “You are merely a nameless instrument of your 
master’s will. I have played the games in Madinat al-Zahraʾ long enough to know 
what is happening here. He can take my things and sell them in the markets if that 
pleases him, but this box is mine. If he wants it so much, tell him to come here 
and prise it from my hands. There’s no other way I will relinquish a gift from the 
departed caliph, al-Hakam, may Allah accept his soul.”
Abu Zayd placed the vessel into her hands before backing his way to the door. 
“I crave your pardon, Sahiba Malika Qurtuba!”
She waved him away. “You have until sunset. I will be watching your every 
move.”
The last bundles tied onto the backs of the pack animals, we stood at the gate 
of Rusafa waiting for the signal to leave. I glanced back towards the garden. Lost 
in the afternoon shadows was the seated figure of Subh—Aurora, exalted queen of 
Córdoba, consort and mother of caliphs—deep in thought. She cradled the ivory 
pyxis, like a newborn child. What made this object so precious? Was it the materi-
als and workmanship or the memories it held? The stones and mortar of the palace 
would forever be bound up with the miraculous flight of Ibn Firnas. Might this 
ivory box also retain traces of the words and actions of the people lucky enough to 
have run their fingers over the endless rhythms carved across its walls?

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-16
Baghdad, 1000
13
Figure 13.1  Carpet page of the Qurʾan of Ibn al-Bawwab. Iraq, 1000–1001 (391 H). Chester 
Beatty Library. CBL Is. 1341, fol. 7v.

Baghdad, 1000  85
“Why do I need to see the son of a doorman? What good will he be to me? I need 
a master scribe, the best you can find!”
My father placed his hands on the other man’s shoulders. “Ahmad, have I ever 
let you down? My servant Salim has asked everyone in the bookseller’s quarter. 
One name kept coming up. His father may have had a humble calling in life, but 
there can hardly be a better hand in the City of Peace than Ibn al-Bawwab.”
The other man looked unconvinced. “Ten years’ ago I could have walked into 
the bookshop of Ibn al-Nadim – may Allah accept his soul – and asked for the name 
of Baghdad’s greatest scribes. This was a man who met with Ibn Muqla himself. 
Figure 13.2  Opening page of the Qurʾan of Ibn al-Bawwab with Surat al-Fatiha and part 
of Surat al-Baqara. Iraq, 1000–1001 (391 H). Chester Beatty Library. CBL 
Is. 1341, fol. 9v.

86  Baghdad, 1000
Imagine that: a mighty vizier who was also a master of the art of the pen! And now 
this noble craft is so reduced that the best the city has to offer, this Ibn al-Bawwab, 
comes from such a poor background.”
Salim emerged from a doorway. “The scribe can meet us now.”
My father looked across to his client. “Just a few minutes of your time, my 
friend. If his work does not meet your exacting standards, I’ll find someone else.”
Salim led us through a narrow corridor, the plastered walls cracked and discol-
oured. There was a small courtyard beyond, half-bathed in shadow. From the upper 
floor I heard clattering of pots as a meal was prepared. There was laughter and the 
sound of small feet running on a wooden floor. Then silence. The ground floor was 
scattered with ceramic pots filled with plants. Almost lost among the foliage was a 
kneeling man with his back to us. His body moved in a slow rhythm, arms extended 
forwards.
Hearing our approach, he stood up, wiping beads of sweat from his forehead. He 
held a wooden tool with a flat, dark stone set into its surface. “Peace be upon you 
all,” he began. “Excuse my appearance; I just received these beautiful sheets and 
was anxious to prepare them for writing.” He gestured towards the curved wooden 
board on which was placed a sheet of gleaming paper.
“Don’t you have someone to do this menial task for you?” my father asked.
“There’s a boy in the neighbourhood who has a gift for burnishing, though I 
couldn’t entrust this work to anyone else. You might not believe it, but these sheets 
have come all the way from China! My last client offered me a purse of coins or 
this cache of paper. I’d never seen the like before and had to bring them home.” He 
paused, glancing towards the upper story of the house. “… of course, there was a 
price to pay for my curiosity. My wife – may blessings shower upon her – didn’t 
see the wisdom of my impulsive transaction. Who will pay for the food, she asked, 
who will settle the bill with the tailor for our children’s new clothes? Good ques-
tions for which I had no answer. So now I find myself confined to the ground floor 
while my family lives upstairs.”
“How will you make things right?” I asked.
“The way I always do,” he sighed. “Pick up my pen and write. That’s what 
people pay me for! Of course, this paper requires a little more work than the local 
stuff. I’ve heard that the Chinese sometimes form words with the point of a brush. 
You can feel it in the open texture of the paper. To make a reed pen glide over the 
surface a little more rice water must be added. And then much polishing.”
He led us from the courtyard into a simple room lit by a single window. “My 
studio. The most recent Qurʾan is just back from the binder. You are welcome to 
look at it.” He disappeared into another room, leaving us alone with the book.
My father picked it up, running his fingers over the smooth leather stretched 
over the boards and spine. A delicate rosette had been stamped on the front and the 
back, with hints of gold leaf picking out the leaves and tendrils. “Fine workman-
ship, if a little simple,” he mused, “Let’s see what we can find inside.”
He opened the book to its first decorated page. The paper was the colour of straw, 
with the design in blue and gold. Ibn al-Bawwab had made a frame into which were 
placed six octagons, and between them two smaller hexagons. Around them all 

Baghdad, 1000  87
ran a network of lines, flowing over and under one another like the stiff fibres of a 
basket. In every space were flowers and repeated patterns, some cut in half by the 
frame. The wide margins were interrupted only by a strange plant-like form that 
spread to the edge of the page.
Ahmad was looking over my father’s shoulder. “He knows how to paint. What 
of his writing? I can’t guess much from these knotted characters set into this pat-
tern. Let’s find a page of text and judge his skill from that.”
“What better than the opening?” replied my father. “Here it is! The Su-
rat al-Fatiha, and the first ayas of Surat al-Baqara. What do you make of his 
penmanship?”
Salim was the first to speak. “I’ve seen this script, naskh, many times on documents, 
but never to write the Holy Qurʾan. See how he makes the everyday into something 
beautiful, each letter given its fitting proportions, never too long or too short. Look at 
the basmala and the way he stretches the stroke connecting the sin and mim; a single, 
faultless curve that leaves just enough space for the remainder of the phrase.”
Ibn al-Bawwab joined us at that moment, tucking the the last section of fabric 
into a fold in his turban. “When I first learned my craft we were told that only one 
script would do for this most precious of tasks. I heard that in Kufa they first came 
up with the heavy, magisterial writing that you see in ancient manuscripts. Even 
in my youth scribes still worked with a sparer, more linear form in their Qurʾans.”
“Why did you make this change?” I asked.
“There were all these other scripts that we see all around us,” he replied, “and 
I wanted to make something that would speak to our lives today. I chose naskh for 
the text due to its flowing quality. Note how I’ve marked in all that’s needed – every 
dot, every vowel stroke – to read the words out loud. Nothing should be hidden; 
after all, these words are for everyone.”
“And yet the titles are not the same,” Ahmad noted.
Ibn al-Bawwab smiled, “you are right. There is a little mystery in the noble thu-
luth, something to puzzle over. Perhaps I want my readers to take a breath before 
they continue their journey through the book. Now, do you wish for something like 
this or shall I produce something to please a more … conservative taste?”
Ahmad was the last to leave the room. I looked back to see him slip one of the 
scribe’s pens into a pocket of his coat. He brushed past me without a word.
We picked our way between fruit sellers and the crowds of shoppers on the 
street. Soon my father’s friend bid us farewell. I tugged at my father’s sleeve. “Did 
you see him steal one of Ibn al-Bawwab’s reed pens? Why would anyone take 
something so cheap? One pen is the much the same as any other.”
My father shrugged. “A keepsake perhaps? Or maybe he thought to learn some-
thing from the way a master scribe shapes a reed. Each cut with the knife might 
change the flow of the ink and the width of the strokes. I know he wants his son, 
Zayd, to have a profession. Such a pen could instruct the boy in elegant writing.”
Salim leaned towards me. “Neither Zayd nor his father will benefit from his 
actions. They may escape the attention of the qadi for this petty crime, but they 
should remember that the Qurʾan says of thieves that the ‘heavy punishment is 
theirs in the Hereafter.’ There’s no escaping from that!”

88  Baghdad, 1000
“Can anyone really learn much from a pen? He must have thought it was impor-
tant enough to take the risk.”
Salim considered this for a moment. “Collectors of manuscripts will also seek 
out the writing tools of great scribes from the past. I’ve heard that some claim even 
to have the pens held by ʿAli b. Abi Talib, peace be upon him. Perhaps they believe 
that touching such items will bring them closer to the men who used them?”
“Do you think that?”
“At best it’s foolishness, at worst, shirk,” he responded sharply. “Let Christians 
delude themselves by supplicating before relics. Not us! We should concentrate on 
the sacred words made by these pens, not on the hands of those wielded them. For 
all that, it warms my heart to see the Qurʾan written in a beautiful script. Perhaps 
this Ibn al-Bawwab points us to the future with his plain naskh and solid thuluth? 
Allah knows best.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-17
Tripoli, 1070
14
Figure 14.1  Rock crystal ewer made for caliph al-ʿAziz B’illah, Cairo. 975–96 with Italian 
sixteenth-century brass fittings. Treasury of San Marco, Venice. No. 80.
Source: Cameraphoto Arte, Venice/Art Resource NY.

90  Tripoli, 1070
It cast a shadow over everything that was said. Something small, hidden beneath 
a velvet cloth. I looked past the harbour to the calm sea, ignoring the animated 
conversation. The warm, morning sun reflected on the water. Squinting at the 
horizon, I could just make out some pale grey smudges; many ships were arriv-
ing with their cargoes to unload at the port, but where from? There were rumours 
that some were coming from Amalfi. I’d not yet seen any their sailors wander-
ing through the markets. It was a turbulent time, and news had reached us that 
Christian soldiers from the north were taking over Muslim lands in Sicily. How 
much longer would it be before they turned their attention to the wealth of Syria 
and Egypt?
“Aisha, we’ve heard nothing from you. Is there anything that catches your eye 
or should we move on to someone with better stock to sell?” My father’s voice 
broke through my thoughts. I surveyed the dull, lifeless goods on the table: unpol-
ished brasswares, chipped pots, and threadbare embroideries. Rolls of dusty rugs 
were coiled and stacked against a wall. The plain piece of velvet, the deep crimson 
of a ripe cherry, at the other end of the table appeared newer than the rest. Even that 
was only interesting for what it might be covering.
“I’d like to see what’s under that cloth,” I declared.
He gave the merest shake of his head. “Already sold. A gentleman will pick it up 
after the midday prayer. Not your business now is it?”
“Could we just take a look?” I asked.
The trader ignored my plea, and turned his attention back to my father. “There’s 
plenty of other things here, and if it pleases you I can bring out the finest swords 
from Sind, or delightful engraved glass made just down the coast in Qaysariyya. 
I am your servant to command!”
“Will they delight me as much as this?” my father responded with a contemp-
tuous sweep of his hand. “Now, my daughter asked you a question. What’s your 
answer?”
He scratched his ear uncomfortably. “That puts me in a difficult spot. Nothing 
would be easier than to show you, but I’d be breaking my word. My buyer was ada-
mant that it should be kept from prying eyes until he came to pick it up.” Without 
another word, he scooped the object up and placed it into his strongbox.
As we walked along the quayside the same thought seemed to form in all our 
minds. Salim was the first to speak. “There’s more to this than meets the eye. I want 
to know why it’s such a secret.”
“We have some time this afternoon,” my father offered. “We could keep watch 
and maybe find something out about this mysterious buyer.” The plan was agreed. 
After leaving the mosque, we all took up positions around the market place. Crowds 
began to swell around the stalls. The chatter of voices and the braying of animals 
filled the air.
We did not have long to wait. My father was the first to spot the hooded fig-
ure making his way towards the merchant we had spoken to. A purse of coins 
was handed over. Moments later the object, still wrapped in its velvet shroud, was 
placed into the hands of the stranger. He moved away quickly, down a road and 
then an alleyway. This precaution did him little good as we too knew the plan of 

Tripoli, 1070  91
the town. A few minutes later we confronted him in a shabby courtyard. Sensing 
the danger, he drew out a narrow-bladed knife.
My father raised his palms. “Excuse us, we didn’t mean to scare you. We fol-
lowed you because there’s a question we must ask.”
“Scare me? I’d like to see you do that! In any case, is that any way to treat a 
friend?”
He drew back his hood. It was Abu Zayd. Laughing, he reached into his cloak 
and pulled out the bundle. We gasped as he revealed a jug, made from flawless rock 
crystal. It glittered in the sunlight, casting beams of different colours.
“Got it for a fraction of its true price,” he continued. “That trader has owed me 
a favour. Now he has more than repaid his debt.”
We came closer to admire this wonder. Abu Zayd glanced at me. “You like it? I 
don’t suppose you’ll ever see its equal again.”
I ran my fingers slowly across the cool, hard material, feeling the ridges and 
furrows cut by some nameless artisan in a royal workshop. Around the body of the 
jug were two lions, sitting calmly on either side of a strange tree. “This must have 
been made for a ruler. Is that his name around the neck?”
Salim peered at the angular lettering. “Do I see the name of ʿAziz? Wasn’t he a 
Shiʿi caliph in Cairo many years ago?”
Abu Zayd nodded. “I heard tell that he always wanted the best of everything. 
Most of all he loved this stuff.” He tapped the vessel, enjoying the resonant sound it 
made. “It’s not often such a big piece of crystal is mined. Even the raw stone would 
cost a fortune. Add to that the months of cutting, drilling, and grinding to make a 
jug with walls the thickness of a stalk of wheat. Truly the work of a master!”
“What use did ʿAziz have for such a precious jug?” I asked.
“For drinks, what else? Something special, I suppose, but then even goat’s milk 
would look enticing inside such a fine container.”
I pictured the carved vessel sitting beside others at some royal celebration or 
the mawlid of the Prophet. “Were lions special to the Egyptian caliph? Did he have 
some in his palace? And why don’t they look fierce?”
“Too many questions! I don’t think he kept a zoo, but lions might well be 
special. Imam ʿAli, the son-in-law of the Prophet, is sometimes called a lion. 
Perhaps that’s it.” He thought for a moment. “Then again, maybe the two lions 
don’t look fierce because they’re in paradise. After all, did you ever see a tree 
looking like that?” It was true: even in my dreams I had never imagined this 
strange creation.
“I’ll worry about paradise when I see it,” scoffed Salim. “What concerns me 
more is what the Egyptian authorities will think when word gets out that you have 
something from the royal treasury. The caliph has spies everywhere.”
“I’m not worried about that,” replied Abu Zayd. “Didn’t you hear the news 
from Cairo? A few years of bad harvests and the caliph found himself bankrupt. 
Wouldn’t be so bad, but he couldn’t pay his soldiers. What do you think they did? 
Marched straight into the palace and got their hands on his best silks, gold, silver, 
and stuff like this. Sold rock crystal pieces by the dozen in the markets, while the 
caliph sat like a prisoner in his own throne room.”

92  Tripoli, 1070
“What will you do with it now?” asked my father. “I expect you’ve spent all 
your money. Who will buy such a thing?”
Abu Zayd was already looking around for ways to escape. “Since you’re my 
friend, I’ll tell you. I met a captain by the dock who sails under the flag of Venice. 
He promised me a fortune for a choice item from the caliph’s palace. He’s sailing 
on the next tide.”
I held his arm. “You can’t! Those barbarians won’t understand its beauty. It will 
be smashed in pieces within a year. Please …”
Our conversation was halted by a juddering, grinding roar. The ground shook, 
as plant pots on balconies crashed onto the ground around us. We pushed towards 
a doorway, sheltering as broken stucco and roof tiles hurtled through the air. I’d 
heard stories of earthquakes, but never understood the terror they brought. What 
once seemed solid was now flimsy and brittle.
My father drew his cloak over my head as I cowered on the ground. “Hold on,” 
he shouted. As quickly as it had struck the quake abated, leaving an eery calm. 
Everyone stood like statues, unable even to wipe the dust from their rigid faces. 
Another judder came, and then another. One more, softly this time, then nothing. 
We had been spared!
One thing had changed. Three were standing where once there had been four. 
Abu Zayd had disappeared down a side street, carrying his treasure with him. Many 
times in later years I have closed my eyes, trying to recapture the shimmering pat-
terns that danced across the surface of the ewer.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-18
Samarqand, 1085
15
Figure 15.1  Image of a balsam tree from an Arabic translation of Pedanius Dioscorides, De 
materia medica. Samarqand or Bukhara, 1083. Leiden University Library. Or. 
289, fol. 12.

94  Samarqand, 1085
There was no sign of Salim at breakfast. His prayer mat sat in the courtyard still 
rolled up. “That’s unlike him to have missed the fajr,” my father mused, his mouth 
still full of bread. “Aisha, can you check his room?”
I found Salim sitting beside his bed, coughing and holding his head. The colour 
drained from his skin, his clothes were drenched in sweat. We soon found the name 
of a doctor in the city. Before the sun had risen fully over the rooftops, we were 
standing outside his door. The doctor ushered us inside, taking Salim into his con-
sultation room. A servant directed us to a small courtyard, filled with glazed pots, 
each one planted with medicinal herbs. We sat in silence on the stone ledge of a 
pool, taking in the array of scents. Some of the herbs were familiar from our home 
in Baghdad, but many were unknown to me.
The doctor led us into a simple, whitewashed space. Salim was lying on a 
wooden cot beside a tall cupboard. The door was open and inside were shelves 
stacked with medical tools, stoppered bottles and books. A heavy, leather-bound 
volume was laid out on a table.
“An inflammation of the lungs. Not too serious, though best treated right away.”
“What would cause such a thing in the heat of the summer?” my father asked. “I 
thought this would be an ailment of the winter months.”
The doctor smiled. “Cold is indeed the key to this diagnosis. However, you must 
look inside the body for answers rather than to the weather you find outside your 
door.”
I didn’t grasp what he meant. “Is the disease not carried in the cold air?”
“There are indeed plagues that float in the air. You must understand that all of 
the fundamental qualities of the world—heat, cold, dry, and wet—also govern our 
bodies, and the working of our organs. Inside your body you will find four hu-
mours, each possessing some of the qualities I just mentioned: blood is both warm 
and moist, yellow bile has heat but is also dry, black bile cools and dries, and, the 
last one, phlegm is cold and wet.”
“Where do illnesses come from?”
“A fine question,” he responded. “A healthy person has all these humours in 
balance, but should one become dominant over the rest then we start to see disease. 
This might come from an outside cause, or even from an excess of some food and 
drink. At other times it is within our constitutions. Have you ever noticed how peo-
ple have different characters, some placid and others quick to anger?”
I nodded. “Is this related to our humours? I’ve heard of people being choleric 
and phlegmatic. Is that what you mean?”
“Quite right! Melancholy comes from excess of black bile, a fiery temperament 
from too much blood. I am sure you can guess the rest. This will not help your 
servant, of course, because it is his lungs not his mood that need our attention. His 
complaint springs from an excess of phlegm, leading to a build-up of coldness and 
moisture. What he needs is something that will produce heat and aridity, bringing 
his body back to its natural balance.”
“How will you know what plants to use for this?” I asked.
The doctor tapped the book on the table with his finger. “Here we enter a new 
realm, the study of plants and other elements from the natural world. My guide is 

Samarqand, 1085  95
the greatest scholar of such matters in the ancient world. His name was Diosco-
rides. He wrote about how each plant could be used in the treatment of illnesses. 
I was lucky enough to borrow this precious text from the library of the governor. 
It’s from the first Arabic translation of the Greek text, though greatly improved by 
another local scholar about a century before our time. I believe he added plants 
that were unknown to the Greeks. With the help of this book I’ve been stocking 
my house with medicinal herbs. I expect you saw them while you were waiting.”
My father was growing impatient. “Interesting I’m sure, but which of your 
plants will cure my servant?”
“My apologies, sayyid,” he replied. “It’s not often that my clients want to talk 
about medicine. All they want is a potion and to be shown the door. For Salim, I 
could prepare some pastilles from local species. It might do the trick, though …” 
He glanced down at the book, seemingly lost in thought.
“Is there something better?” my father asked. “I want Salim up on his feet as 
soon as possible, doctor. I’ll pay for whatever’s needed.”
The doctor, turned a few pages and pointed to the painting of a tree. The trunk 
was topped with branches each carrying slender leaves and round, red berries. 
The painter had also shown the roots that spread below ground. While these 
features might have belonged to many species, one detail drew my eye: knives 
had been driven into the bark, with cups hanging below to catch the liquid that 
dripped out.
My father was peering at the image. “On my travels to Arabia I came across 
trees that are harvested like this for their aromatic resin. There’s good profit to 
be had selling frankincense, myrrh, and sandarac on the Mediterranean coast. I 
thought this might be the myrrh tree but the leaves don’t look right.”
“Much rarer than myrrh,” the doctor replied. “What you can see is a balsam tree, 
only cultivated in Egypt. The resin it exudes stays liquid and possesses more power 
than any other.” He lifted from the cupboard a tiny glass bottle and pulled out the 
stopper. The overpowering aroma of spices and citrus fruit filled the room.
“Is it just a perfume?” asked my father.
“No indeed! This is one of the finest medicines you can find, either on its own 
or combined with other products. You will find it in pills that counteract poisons, 
like the theriac of the ancient king Mithradates. What it does best is heat and dry 
the body. Nothing to match it, I assure you.”
A hacking cough made us all turn around. Salim’s head was still resting on a 
pillow. His bloodshot eyes regarded us with suspicion. “I’ll take nothing that was 
not recommended by Muhammad himself—peace be upon him. I don’t need pa-
gan sorcery to cure me when devout Muslim scholars describe every useful plant 
known to the Companions of the Prophet. Make your cures from those and leave 
the rest for the feeble-minded and weak of faith!”
The doctor waved a hand dismissively. “The pagans you distrust were good 
enough for al-Razi, Hunayn ibn Ishaq, and all the finest doctors of our age. Why 
else did the caliphs in Baghdad order the translation of Galen and Dioscorides if 
not to use their knowledge? It’s not just medicine. After all, what area of science 
from engineering to astronomy is not affected by the learning of the Greeks?”

96  Samarqand, 1085
My father could see Salim trying to rise from his cot. “You’ll have the best treat-
ment, whether you like it or not. Lie down there and do what you’re told! We have 
business to attend to in the city, and we can’t do that if you are unwell.”
The doctor was writing a list of ingredients on a sheet of paper. “I’ll put these 
pills together now and you can collect them in the afternoon. A little balsam in each 
one, of course.” He paused for effect, “… sadly, this is the last of my supply, and, 
as I said before, it doesn’t come cheap.”
Bargaining prices was familiar ground for my father. Soon a hushed conversa-
tion was taking place in the corner of the room. I was surprised when my father 
emerged into the courtyard looking as pale as Salim. Without another word being 
exchanged, we helped Salim rise from the cot and slowly made our way back to 
the lodgings.
It was only when Salim was asleep that my father spoke again. “Worth its 
weight in gold, so I’m told. Must be true judging by the number of coins that doctor 
charged me. I’ll never hear the end of it from Salim if this balsam doesn’t have him 
on his feet by the end of the week. Even if it works, he’ll be grumbling for months 
about having pagan medicine forced down his throat!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-19
Aisha always tells me I have no feeling for art. What does she know? Don’t my eyes 
draw into themselves the same patterns of light and colour as hers? My sense of 
touch is no different from any other person; I can feel the rough edges of a brick, 
the smoothness of a glazed bowl, the enticing sheen of silk, and the strange heavi-
ness of gold. Allah has blessed us with these faculties, allowing every soul to ap-
prehend the wonder of creation.
Kharraqan, 1093
16
Figure 16.1  View of the two tombs at Kharraqan, Iran. The 1067–68 (460 H) tomb in the 
background and the 1093 (486 H) tomb in the foreground.
Source: Robert Hillenbrand.

98  Kharraqan, 1093
And yet, perhaps there’s some truth in what she says. In my mind I can hear her 
words, even though she is many miles away. “Salim, do you really take the time to 
look at what’s in front of you?”
I think it’s because my chosen world is one of books. Al-Harith, my master, indulges 
my habit, allowing me the time to explore the Islamic sciences. There I find all that 
sustains me. The Qur’an and the sayings of the Prophet guide my life, and though I am 
surrounded by the worldly wealth of a prosperous merchant, I desire for little.
For all that, I don’t want to disappoint al-Harith’s only child. She likes to hear 
about the places we have travelled and the buildings we have seen. With this in 
mind I am writing a little tract as I sit in a tent on the road to Ghazvin. If Allah 
spares my life on the long, dangerous road home, I’ll show her my words.
Aisha bint al-Harith, I present to you my observations on the two tombs just beyond 
my tent, one having weathered twice as many winters as you, and the other still to 
be completed. To help me in my description I have summoned up the memory of al-
Harith’s disreputable friend, Abu Zayd. I bring him to mind, not for his morals—which 
are those of a backstreet conjuror—but because of his beady eyes; there’s little that 
escapes his gaze even if he has little taste for art. He will be my interlocutor as I recre-
ate these handsome monuments using only the words that flow my pen.
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Abu Zayd:	 Salim, you’ve dragged me out to the wilds, far away from the warm com-
forts of my favourite tavern. What’s worth such a long, dusty journey?
Salim: 
Now that we’re finally here I’m not sure where to start.
Abu Zayd:	 (trying not to show his impatience) Come now, what made you stop at 
these structures when you pass by most without a second glance? There 
must be something that you want to share with me. Quickly now, my 
feet are getting cold!
Salim:	
(taking a moment to gather his thoughts) In front of us are two tombs, 
each made of brick with a dome rising high above the main drum of the 
building. Truly, they are masterpieces of the mason’s art, with dazzling…
Abu Zayd:	 Stop, stop, you are running ahead too fast. Think of how you might 
describe it to someone who could only picture it through your words.
Salim:	
Let me start again. The two tombs are alike. To draw their imprints 
upon the ground I would need to lay out an octagon, but with circles 
drawn at every corner. Each building is pierced by a single door, with 
no other way in or out. I see arched openings at the base of the dome, 
but relatively few for such grand edifices.
Abu Zayd:	 Much better. What does the lack of windows tell you about the interiors 
of these structures?
Salim:	
That they are dark; not meant for many visitors. In fact, their intended 
residents will never leave! Taking this thought further, we might say 
that these buildings are meant to be viewed from the outside. Just as we 
circle the Kaʿba and never penetrate the inner chamber, so it is only the 
outer form of these tombs that can be truly appreciated by the eye.
Abu Zayd:	 And what can you see on these outer facades? Paint a picture in my 
mind.

Kharraqan, 1093  99
Salim:	
I will break it down into pieces to make my task more manageable. 
Amidst this profusion, I see how the sides are made up of smaller sec-
tions. There is a band of ornament running between the body of the 
tomb and its dome. Beneath this, the sides are each dominated by a shal-
low arch that projects a little from the flat wall. This allows the masons 
different spaces in which they can create patterns in the brick. I have 
never seen so many in one place. Some look like the threads in woven 
cloth, and others like the angular outcrops of crystals on the walls of a 
cave. It is as if the bricks have come alive, like the dancing men incised 
onto metal jugs. The invention continues across the curved surfaces of 
the buttresses. It is enough to dazzle the eye!
Figure 16.2  Entrance façade of the 1067–68 tomb at Kharraqan.
Source: Andrew Marsham.

100  Kharraqan, 1093
Abu Zayd:	 Which area is reserved for the choicest decoration?
Salim:	
The single entrance provides the link between the dead and the world 
outside. It’s there that I would place the most lavish work. Indeed, I see 
panels of interlaced lines that exceed the boundaries of my knowledge.
Abu Zayd:	 Now I know what’s common to these two monuments, tell me what 
makes them different?
Salim:	
First thing I see is that one stands complete, though its brother is yet to 
be finished. The conical dome has only been constructed a few courses 
of bricks above the arched windows. The masons still need more wood 
to erect the final scaffolding. Not much timber in this windswept valley. 
They will have to seek out supplies from the forests of Azerbaijan.
Abu Zayd: What do you learn from the unfinished dome?
Salim:	
I see that the outer shell hides another dome. While the outer one points 
sharply toward the sky, the inner is lower, more rounded, providing 
intimacy for the body interred within. As to why the outer one is built 
taller, my guess is that it gives a grander aspect, making the tomb easier 
to see from a long distance.
Abu Zayd:	 Why might that be important?
Salim:	
I can tell you my own experience. I had no intention of visiting the tombs, 
but came across them riding along this trade route. I spied them from many 
miles away, thinking they looked like giant tents. It was only getting closer I 
realised they were formed of baked brick. And yet, there’s something about 
the rhythmic ornament that reminds me of embroidered and woven panels 
on the textile canopies of the Saljuq sultans and their courts. I’m told they 
have little taste for cities and prefer to pitch their tents in the countryside.
Abu Zayd:	 So these buildings are like tents for the dead, standing immovable 
through the sun, wind, rain, and snow until Judgement day?
Salim:	
You’ve given precise form to my thoughts!
Abu Zayd:	 But did the grandiose men resting in their brick tents choose to be sur-
rounded by the same ornament? Remember what I asked you before 
Salim, and look more closely.
Salim:	
My eyes have become lazy, locating the forest but missing the trees! Let 
me focus them again. Returning to the walls I see that each one fills the 
spaces with different patterns, like the finest silks produced on looms of 
Isfahan. Not a single one is the same. I judge that the completed tomb is 
the work of the master. The second is more like an essay upon the first; 
the project of a brilliant apprentice who still remains in the shadow of his 
teacher. Maybe I am being too harsh, for only Allah knows the answer. 
Does it even matter, for the Prophet didn’t hold with such commemora-
tions of the dead? He knew that earthly magnificence will count for noth-
ing in the end.
Abu Zayd:	 You may be right my friend, but masons care little for your hadiths so 
long as there’s good money to be made building tombs!
Aisha, can you sketch out the buildings using just my words? I’ve wasted time 
on this. If there’s going to be a hot meal this evening, I must step outside my own 
humble canvas home and light a fire.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-20
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate.
Six years! For six years I have been away from my home, torn from those I love. 
Most of all, my precious daughter, Aisha. How many events from her life have I 
already missed? We will be reunited soon, but will she view me as a stranger or 
embrace me as the father she once knew? As surely as she has changed, grown up 
over these years, so too has the passage of time affected me. My ribs are prominent 
on my chest, while my arms and legs lack the vigour they once had. The streaks of 
grey in my beard tell their own mournful tale.
Two years’ ago Salim received news that we were held by the devilish Franks 
and started to assemble the ransom that might gain my freedom. Allah in His  
Harran, 1104
17
Figure 17.1  Samite silk textile fragment (Shroud of St Josse), Khurasan, before 961. Musée 
du Louvre, Paris. OA 7502. © Musée du Louvre, Dist. RMN-Grand Palais.
Source: Raphael Chipault/Art Resource NY.

102  Harran, 1104
mercy had other plans, ordaining that these barbarians should be defeated utterly 
on the battlefield, not far from the austere city of Harran. Thus, it was divine will 
and not the exchange of dinars that ensured our freedom. I have Salim’s letter in 
my pocket with instructions about how to find him and Aisha. There are promissory 
notes too, providing us with the means to make the journey in relative ease.
Those years I have lost with my daughter will never come back. During our stay 
in Harran, I can, at least, tell her something about my life. I’ve made a vow to write 
it all down, though perhaps not in the order that everything occurred. The break-
ing of the siege of Nicaea, the wanton slaughter of innocents, and our capture are 
too raw in my memory even now. The humiliation of being marched bare-foot and 
ragged out of the gates of the city rips at my heart, just as the cruel, iron manacles 
did to the skin of my wrists and ankles. On the hard days that followed, I repeated 
words learned in childhood: “O you who believe! Seek help with patient persever-
ance and prayer, for Allah is with those who patiently persevere.”
Aisha, I shall give you an account of my first encounter with one of these Frank-
ish lords who think they can lay claim to our lands. I choose this, not just to expose 
his flaws, but also to describe a treasure that came into his possession. Although I 
only saw it only fleetingly, I can still recover it in my memory despite the passing 
of the years.
Verily, Abu Zayd is like a cat, always landing on his feet, whatever the situation. 
I’ve had cause to wonder whether he concealed on his person a powerful talisman 
ensuring his perpetual good luck. Of course, I can hardly complain at the way he 
transformed our fortunes. Just through his keen hearing and nimble mind he was 
able to pick up the strange language of these barbarians. Elevated to the role of in-
terpreter by the Franks, Abu Zayd was given much freer movement around Nicaea. 
I shall be eternally grateful to him for his next act, which was to request me as his 
assistant in conducting his duties. It was not merely charity on his part; he knew 
that my merchant’s eye would be useful as the Franks greatly desired the luxuries 
of our lands, despite the disdain they had for our customs and faith.
Little-by-little our lives changed for the better. We had more opportunity to 
observe these strange, pale-skinned men who now controlled us. My recollections 
of their martial virtues and personal weaknesses can wait for now I must tell you 
about a leading lord in the whole enterprise. I’ve no skill in reading their script 
though I am told his name in our language is Istifan. Abu Zayd explained to me that 
he ruled over a sodden territory in the northern Frankish lands called Blois.
From the time of our first meeting with him in Nicaea to our last at the siege of 
Antioch a year later, Lord Istifan was constantly searching for treasures: fine metal-
work, precious stones, and jewellery. His eye was especially taken with woven and 
embroidered fabrics. The Franks came here wearing woollen cloth, hard-wearing, 
but a little dull. Perhaps through their contact with the emperor in Constantinople 
and his dazzling court, Frankish men began to wrap themselves in silk ornamented 
with golden threads.
As weeks passed, the siege of Antioch established a weary rhythm. While the 
common soldiers were constantly being given tasks to keep them busy, a profound 
lassitude descended upon the knights and their lords. Istifan was no exception. 

Harran, 1104  103
We were presented to him in his tent. Leaning languidly on a bolster, he scarcely 
had the energy to acknowledge our presence. Abu Zayd greeted him brightly in 
words that I did not understand. I guessed that his pronouncements were sprinkled 
heavily with unearned praise, for they elicited a spark in our host’s eyes. He roused 
himself, and pointed a finger towards a wooden chest braced with ribs of iron. 
“Open that and see what you make of the contents.” Abu Zayd cautiously opened 
the lid, letting out a slight gasp.
Lord Istifan smiled conspiratorially. “A raiding party came back with bundles of 
cloth, purloined from a merchant caravan that foolishly passed this way. I couldn’t 
get my hands on everything, but this wasn’t going to escape my grasp. Show your 
friend and ask what he knows of it.”
The heavy saddle cloth was spread on the ground before us. I directed my 
thoughts to the technique and what might be learned from the motifs and inscrip-
tions. With Abu Zayd translating, I began to describe the work. “I judge that this 
is made with many weft threads running through and over a single set of warps. 
Perhaps, my lord, you will notice that the vertical threads are entirely covered by 
those that run horizontally.” I turned the corner over with one hand. “This is the 
same on the other side also, allowing complete patterns to be viewed on the front 
and the back.”
Lord Istifan looked thoughtful, his fingers tousling the sparse beard on his chin. 
“The rich crimson of the ground is made from some vegetable dye, I suppose, but 
how are the golden threads fashioned?”
Luckily, I had seen this done in a Baghdadi workshop. “Men draw out animal 
gut and wind it round with gold leaf,” I answered. “Silver may also be used this 
way. Only the finest textiles are woven with these threads, and few indeed can have 
such lavish employment of these expensive materials.”
“The product of some royal loom hereabouts?” he mused.
Only the inscription could help in identifying the location. Abu Zayd and I knelt 
close to one band of angular golden writing, puzzling over its content. We spoke 
among ourselves, and Abu Zayd offered his translation of the text to Lord Istifan: 
“‘Glory and prosperity to Qaʾid Abu al-Mansur Bakht-tegin, may Allah perpetuate 
his happiness.’ Qaʾid means chief, and from this I guess that this was made for a 
general, perhaps further east in Iran.”
“Then I won’t be meeting this fellow on the battlefield?”
I rubbed the silken surface. “See the patches of wear on the exposed threads? 
This was made many years’ ago. Angular script of this sort has not been in fashion 
for some time, even in the east.”
Lord Istifan nodded. “Just as well for him. My sword is much feared by the 
Turks, or so I’m told.”
We exchanged glances, saying nothing. Lord Istifan continued: “For all that, I 
wouldn’t like to face someone who brought elephants onto the battlefield. Never 
seen one, though they say these beasts can kill a man with one sweep of their 
mighty trunks.” He sank into a brooding silence. Abu Zayd sensed that we should 
leave, but had one question. “My lord, may I ask what you plan to do with this 
magnificent piece?”

104  Harran, 1104
He pondered this for a moment. “Too good for battle or hanging on a wall. I 
think the local abbey back at home will have some use for it in their treasury.”
Abu Zayd registered his surprise. “Will they not be offended to have something 
made for a Muslim?”
He laughed. “If I can’t read what it says, I don’t suppose they’ll do any better. 
Besides, the Church loves such baubles. Their priests say that the gifts we bring 
will lighten our immortal souls!”
We never saw him again. Abu Zayd heard rumours that he’d packed up his 
things and abandoned the siege, much to the chagrin of his comrades. I suppose we 
should celebrate that one of these Franks has gone. If Allah wills it, may we be rid 
of all of them soon!
Aisha, perhaps my words give the merest hints at the appearance of this won-
drous fabric. I can picture it draped across the back of a Turkish warrior’s proud 
stallion, but what use could such as saddle cloth have for an ignorant churchman 
in Blois? Abu Zayd told me of the great reverence the Franks have for the bones 
of long-dead saints. They put them in golden caskets, wrapped up in silken cloth. 
Perhaps this same fate awaits for Lord Istifan’s textile? It would be odd indeed for 
the remains of some Christian martyr to spend eternity in intimate communion with 
a gift made for a Muslim nobleman! But we live in strange times, and nothing now 
seems impossible. Allah alone knows all things.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-21
Herat, 1183
18
Figure 18.1  Bobrinski Bucket. Cast copper alloy with silver and copper inlay. Herat, 1163 
(559 H.). Hermitage, St Petersburg. IR-2268.
Source: Drawing by Marcus Milwright.

106  Herat, 1183
My dear Aisha, I know that you always like to have reports of evenings that I 
spend in the company of interesting people. One such event occurred a few nights’ 
ago when I was invited to dinner in the company of a notable qadi. His table talk 
eclipsed even the tempting fare dished out by his cooks! Knowing how much you 
like the new styles of metalwork, I thought this might amuse you.
Abu Zayd belched delicately as he nestled his ample frame deeper into the clus-
ter of embroidered cushions. Staring at his striped blue caftan set amid the floral 
abundance of the covers, my mind conjured the image of a fast-flowing stream 
enclosed on either side by lush meadows. Only the sound of birdsong was missing 
from this pleasant vision.
My host’s booming, magisterial voice broke through my momentary reverie: “I 
crave your pardon, sayyid, for this indiscretion; fine food must be given its due ac-
knowledgement!” He clapped his hands. “What better way to finish a meal than a few 
dates? None but the most succulent here: sweet delights brought from Bam this very 
week.” The servant appeared carrying a diminutive cauldron filled with preserved fruit.
After sampling the contents, I turned my attention to the dazzling container. I 
pulled it closer to me. Small in scale, the vessel was heavy due to the process of 
casting. The inlay was even better than I had first imagined, from the vibrant scripts 
to the details of clothing and the facial expressions of the lively men in the friezes. 
My fingers ran across the surface, feeling the raised lines and panels of silver ham-
mered into the base metal. Moving it round slowly with my hands, I started to 
decipher the three bands of decorative text. The lowest was the simplest, though 
there was doubtless much skill in its design, especially in the insistent rhythm of 
the vertical strokes. The middle inscription was smaller, drawing the eye with its 
endless knotting of contiguous letters. The final band allowed the upper portion of 
each rising stroke to take the shape of a little person.
My drowsy eyes struggled to take it all in. “What do they say?”
“You’ll not find much of interest there,” my host scoffed. “All the usual platitudes 
about good health and enduring fortune. I have those already, as you can see. A good 
naqqash can design such texts with his eyes closed! No, if you want a piquant puzzle 
look at the words written around the top. Tell me what you make of that.”
Figure 18.2  Detail of the last part of the dedicatory inscription on the rim of the Bobrin-
ski Bucket. Reads: “Rashid al-Din ʿAzizi b. Abu’l-Husayn al-Zanjani, may his 
fame endure.”
Source: Drawing by Marcus Milwright.

Herat, 1183  107
Shoe-horned uncomfortably into the narrow confines of the inward-facing lip, 
this passage of writing was less enticing. I reached for an oil lamp; its flickering 
flame picked out the raised silver letters. Experience told me to find a familiar set of 
words located at the beginning or the end of such inscriptions. Soon I found what I 
was looking for: “this work was ordered …” Under the searching eyes of my host 
I persevered at my task.
Having eaten his fill of dates, Abu Zayd tapped his fingers impatiently on the 
table. “Well, what do you have for me?”
“Forgive me for any errors, but what I can make out is: ‘This was ordered by 
ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn ʿAbdallah al-Rashidi, cast by Muhammad ibn ʿAbd al-Wahid, 
made by the hajib Masʿud ibn Ahmad, the naqqash of Herat. To the owner, the 
eminent hajji Rukn al-Din, the glory of the merchants, trusted man of the Muslims, 
adornment of the hajj and both the holy places, Rashid al-Din ʿAzizi ibn Abu’l-
Husayn al-Zanjani, may his fame endure!’”
My host’s eyes twinkled in the lamplight. “I believe you have all the words cor-
rect. What do they really mean?”
“I’ve not lived here long. These names mean nothing to me.”
“I know that. What does the inscription tell you about how they might be related 
to one another?”
“I see the names of two artisans,” I began, “one who created the body and the 
elegant handle, and the other who calls himself the naqqash of Herat. He must 
value his services highly to make such a bold claim!”
“Indeed he did,” Abu Zayd replied. “For my money, no one in the city could 
handle silver wire better than him. Take note also that it says that he ‘made’ the ob-
ject. Surely that honour belongs to Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahid, the founder, without whom 
there would be nothing for me to fill with dates?”
I thought for a moment. “The craft of the inlayer sits above that of the founder 
because he employs the more precious material. That’s not the only explanation. 
We need to understand what is being ‘made,’ for I think the word refers to the 
elegant design that covers the surface. After all, it would be a miserly host who 
served his guests from plain copper pots.”
Abu Zayd roared with laughter. “I can almost feel al-Jahiz looking down on us 
now, leafing through his catalogue of skinflints! Let’s leave our artisans for now. 
Tell me about the other men.”
“One man—this al-Rashidi—ordered it for the other. If I knew when that took 
place I might guess more.”
Abu Zayd pointed at the words on the handle. “See here? Muharram in the 
year 559.”
“That’s the month of gift-giving. I surmise it was a present to the man with the 
high opinion of himself, perhaps to commemorate the performance of a hajj to 
Mecca and Medina.”
“You don’t much care for this pilgrim do you?” Abu Zayd said with a smile.
“Your pardon, I meant no offence,” I replied. “We men of business understand 
our place in the world. It is a noble activity, practised by the Prophet himself—
peace be upon him—though we know better than to give ourselves grand titles. 

108  Herat, 1183
We live in the shadows of princes and sultans; the men of the sword don’t take 
kindly to competition. ‘Glory of the merchants, adornment of the hajj!’ What was 
he thinking?”
Abu Zayd reflected on my words. “Times are changing. You must have noticed 
that old orders are being contested. Money is starting to challenge the primacy of 
the pen and the sword. You talk of shadows, but there are some, like this al-Zanjani, 
who are emerging into the light, making their names known to the world.”
“So is this just a gift for a wealthy merchant, made by two skilled craftsmen?”
“Perhaps a little more complex than that,” he responded. “And who should we 
credit for this beautiful design?”
“Well, Masʿud is called the naqqash, so it must be him.”
“Consider the fact that it says that al-Rashidi ordered the work. With a little 
training in law, you’d know that this is a contract. Al-Rashidi had established most 
of what would occur from the outlines of the design to the weight of the silver. My 
guess is that Masʿud simply cut the lines and hammered in the silver as al-Rashidi 
commanded.”
I pondered this new direction. “Where does the merchant fit into all this? It 
sounds less like a gift now, and more like al-Rashidi has some obligation to al-
Zanjani. The inscription calls him the ‘owner.’ I’d assumed it was simply the caul-
dron, but now I think the whole operation belonged to him. Did al-Rashidi run the 
workshop on his behalf?”
“I think that’s it,” Abu Zayd replied. “You know, I first saw this little treasure 
when I arrived in the city as a young man. After some years of living by my wits, 
I’d decided to make my way in the legal profession. I used to pass the workshop 
of old ʿAbd al-Rahman al-Rashidi on my way to the madrasa. Used to see him 
sometimes, sitting at the doorway, drawing out stencils for the next day’s work. The 
vessel you have in your hands was prominently displayed as evidence of the fine 
craftsmanship he had to offer. I purchased it when the workshop was finally wound 
up. It was only then that I had the chance to see the inscription and find the names 
of two of his prized artisans. I suppose they never did much of what they wanted, 
being bound in service to their master. As for our proud merchant, I had dealings 
with him when I worked for the last qadi. This al-Zanjani was once examined for 
fraud. It turned out that he owned property across the city. I suspect al-Rashidi’s 
workshop was among his assets.”
We sank back into a pleasant silence, each of us engaged with our own musings. 
My eyes were drawn back to the little vessel. This time it was not the words that 
drew me, but the parade of little figures, seemingly always in movement and yet 
destined never to escape from their confines. I thought back to Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahid 
and Masʿud ibn Ahmad; despite their abundant skills, they were captive forever to 
the whims of others.
But perhaps, Aisha, that’s what we all face whether we know it or not? After all, 
does not the Verse of Obedience tell us: “O ye who believe! Obey Allah, and obey 
the Messenger, and those charged with authority among you”?

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-22
My tears disappeared into the freshly dug soil. Beneath that earth a body lay still, 
one that only days before had been alive with the joy of words, of laughter, of pos-
sibilities. No longer. I looked around me at the rows of basalt headstones, each one 
left in its natural form, like tree stumps, petrified over centuries. That wasn’t it: old 
teeth, chipped and jagged?
Mecca, 1199
19
Figure 19.1  Basalt grave marker of Yusuf b. ʿAbdallah b. Yusuf b. Abu’l-Fath, 2 June 1199 (5 
Shaʿban 595 H), al-Maʿla cemetery, Mecca. Qasr Khizam Museum, Jedda. 411A-B.

110  Mecca, 1199
My mind had been wandering. I turned back to my friend’s headstone. Unlike 
its companions this one has been roughly shaped into a rectangle. The flat surface 
in front of me was densely carved. A lamp hung under an arch: the pearly light of 
Allah that would forever be with him. It was the words, the poetry, that would give 
him the greatest comfort as he waited for the angels. “Yusuf ibn ʿAbdallah ibn Yu-
suf ibn ʿAbd al-Fath, I know you can’t hear me now, but I’ll remember those verses 
you loved so much and keep them in my heart all my days!”
There hadn’t been time to look at the stone on the day of the funeral. I wasn’t 
supposed to be here now. Still, I wanted to learn what the texts on that stone might 
say about my friend. I thought back to the times that his family had visited our 
house and about the stories that he told of his homeland of al-Andalus. I longed 
to see these places for myself. The opening invocation of the central panel came 
as no surprise: “Surely the God-fearing shall dwell amid gardens and a river in a 
sure abode, in the presence of the King Omnipotent.” Salim had told me that many 
families chose this for their loved ones. Below was a doleful stanza:
Oh you who find fault with me, be gentle, oppress me not
I refuse to be blamed
Had fate struck you as it did me
You could only have let your tears flow.
There was more but I had to stop and catch my breath. I read further, pausing 
on the lines before his name. “May his tomb be sated by the clouds laden with rain 
which shall flow over him.” May the rain replace my tears and bring you peace!
I heard sounds behind me and turned to see my father and Salim picking their way 
through the graves. Salim hissed urgently, “Aisha, you shouldn’t be in this place! The 
Prophet—peace be upon him—didn’t hold with lingering at burial places. Too much 
like the cursed idolatry from the jahiliyya. I don’t suppose he would have been much 
pleased with these commemorations of the dead. Do these good people not think that 
Allah will recognise them and weigh their sins when the time comes?”
I ignored him, turning back to the gravestone. The words running along the 
frame sang out: “Every day death unfurls its shroud and yet we persist heedless of 
what awaits us. Give not your trust to this world and its beauty …”
“Aisha, my dear, we should go. Say your goodbyes. We have to pack for the 
journey north.” He glanced down at the gravestone. “A handsome piece of crafts-
manship. The family paid for the work of the family of Abi Harami al-Makki no 
less. Salim, do you remember when we took some Meccan carved stones all the 
way to Dahlak? Brought some fat, shiny pearls back with us. A tidy profit made 
from that trip, by the grace of Allah.”
I glared at him. “Is making money all you think about?”
His expression was sheepish, though I knew he wouldn’t back down. “As you 
well know, there’s no shame in commerce. Have not Hanafi scholars long argued 
that the acquisition of wealth is meritorious if it benefits the whole community? 
Your young friend—may his soul rest in peace—knew it too; his family have been 
traders even longer than our own.”

Mecca, 1199  111
My father looked around him. “It’s an honour indeed to be buried so near the 
Bayt al-Haram. Many of those lying here came to the Holy City in search of some-
thing and discovered instead that their days were numbered. Disease doesn’t dis-
tinguish between the pilgrim coming here for spiritual sustenance and the merchant 
seeking an honest living through his wits. Let me show you something.”
We walked slowly around the stones. “See this one?” Salim said brightly. “Aus-
tere it might be, but this marks the body of Ruqayya bint al-Qasim.” Seeing my 
blank look, he continued. “Read the inscription Aisha, and you will find that only 
nine generations separate her from ʿAli ibn Abi Talib, the son-in-law of the Prophet, 
peace be upon them both!”
Figure 19.2  Basalt grave marker of a father and daughter, April 1118 (Dhu al-Hijja 511), 
al-Maʿla cemetery, Mecca. Qasr Khizam Museum, Jedda. 251B.

112  Mecca, 1199
My father was still searching for something. “Ah, here it is! This little slab has 
a story I think you should hear.”
The front face carried an inscription lightly carved into the unforgiving basalt, 
the words contained within a gabled frame. At the summit I could make out a 
crescent moon. The basmala was there, as always. The tangle of angular letters 
underneath was difficult to make out. Salim was looking over my shoulder. “Surat 
al-Rahman,” he began, “‘Everything upon earth will perish, and there will remain 
the face of your Lord, owner of majesty and honour.’ Yes, very appropriate! Below 
you will find the name of the deceased.”
My father nodded. “And not one this time but two. Here’s what it says: ‘This 
is the grave of Rajib, son of Yahya, son of Hasan, son of Ahmad, son of ʿAbdallah 
al-Safidi al-Hasani and buried with him was his daughter Munifa, died in the mid-
dle of the month of Dhu al-Hijja of the year 511, may Allah grant them Mercy …’”
Even though the events described occurred more than eighty years’ before, I felt 
a chill running through me. “Did they both die together while performing the hajj?”
“I know what happened from my grandfather, though it took place just before 
he was born. He told me that his father and this Rajib were close, like brothers, 
and made many journeys together, by land and sea. There was quite a competition 
between them to make the best deals, bringing wealth back to their families. One of 
these trips took them to Jidda, and since it was close by, they both agreed to make 
the hajj. It was in this place that Rajib was struck down with a stroke. My great 
grandfather paid for his care, staying for weeks at his bedside. When the poor man 
finally breathed his last, there was scarcely any money to pay for the burial. His 
plot was left unmarked.
“My great grandfather always planned to return and set up a headstone. In the 
meantime he had given money to support Rajib’s family. When he finally had the 
chance to return to the Holy City, again in the month of pilgrimage, he brought with 
him Rajib’s daughter, Munifa. She came here to this very spot, but days later died 
in a bout of pestilence that sometimes afflicts this place. It’s for this reason that 
they both lie here together until the end of days. The stone is a simple one, for the 
best carvers were busy with the many others who had died that season. My great 
grandfather procured the services of a man by the name of Abu Zayd. There’s no 
doubt he knew how to wield a chisel, though there were rumours that he wasn’t 
to be trusted.” My father sighed. “And that’s the sad tale behind this inscription.”
We stood for a while in silence. “But why does this stone mean so much for 
you?” I asked.
He tapped the back of the stele. “Look what’s written there.”
I knelt down and stared at the faint marks. “I can’t make it out.” I rubbed the 
rough stone with my finger. “Is, is it … al-Harith?”
He nodded. “It was only after Munifa was laid to rest that we found out that this 
Abu Zayd had removed another stele from al-Maʿla to make this one. Allah alone 
knows who al-Harith was, and how well he’d lived out his days. My great grand-
father made an oath that his first son would bear that name. I suppose he meant it 
as repayment of the debt to the man who’d lost his marker in death through Abu 
Zayd’s cunning.”

Mecca, 1199  113
“And that’s how you came to be called al-Harith too?”
He glanced at the mountains beyond the cemetery. “There’s much more to life 
than the creation of wealth, of course. In the end what counts is how you use your 
money. That’s what I will be judged for when all is done. My name reminds me of 
that every day.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-23
Whoever drinks wine in this world and does not repent from that, he will be de-
prived of it in the Hereafter.
This hadith has always puzzled me. Anas reports that Muhammad—peace 
be upon him—ordered the flogging of a man for drinking liquor, and yet this 
hadith tells us that there will be wine in the afterlife. I’ve never let the cursed 
Kashan, 1201
20
Figure 20.1  Glazed stonepaste beaker with painting in minaʾi style. Iran, late twelfth cen-
tury. Freer and Sackler Galleries, Washington DC. F1928.2.

Kashan, 1201  115
stuff pass my lips, but will I know its pleasures in the paradise that awaits the 
faithful? There will be no answer until I have passed through the veil of death. 
The question keeps coming into my mind after the events of last night. Aisha, I 
am glad that you were not there to see your father as he consumed khamr in the 
company of his disreputable friend, Abu Zayd. However, since you are so fond 
of literature and clever verse-making, I will describe the events of that night as 
best I can remember them.
Our evening was spent in the house of a wealthy merchant. He was in the habit 
of gathering around him men possessing quick wit or profound learning. The ac-
curacy of his assessments is not my concern, though I was surprised to see that life 
Abu Zayd hanging around the fringes of the group. Having satisfied our hunger, 
we moved from the dining chamber to a more intimate room, lit on all sides by 
oil lamps fashioned from brass. Around the walls were cushions, covered with 
embroidered silk. Our host clapped his hands. This was the signal for servants to 
pass around the room with beakers. They soon returned carrying jugs inlaid with 
gleaming silver. There was no time to take in the profusion of finely wrought detail, 
as they were passed from one hand to the next.
Our host spread his arms out as if to pull everyone into his warm embrace. 
“Friends, welcome to my humble abode for this celebration of beauty! Let the fine 
wine of Qom and the date liquor carried here from Basra loosen your tongues and 
free your imaginations.” With that, he settled himself on his dais with a satisfied 
smile. I did not know who might break the expectant silence, but was not surprised 
to see Abu Zayd step into the centre of the room. He cleared his throat: “Here’s 
something that might please you all:
Ah, my beloved, fill the cup that clears
Today of past regrets and future fears:
Tomorrow!—Why tomorrow I may be
Myself with yesterday’s sev’n thousand years.
For some we loved, the loveliest and the best
That from his vintage rolling Time hath pressed,
Have drunk their cup a round or two before,
And one by one crept silently to rest.”
Another man rose slowly to his feet and responded, “ʿUmar Khayyam! I remem-
ber another quatrain or two:
Before the phantom of false morning died,
Methought a voice within a tavern cried,
‘When all the Temple is prepared within,
Why notes the drowsy worshipper outside?’
And, as the cock crew, those who stood before
The tavern shouted—‘Open, then, the door!

116  Kashan, 1201
You know how little while we have to stay,
And, once departed, may return no more.’”
“There’s more, of course, of wine and love,” Abu Zayd replied. “Our poet continues:
A book of verses underneath the bough,
A jug of wine, a loaf of bread—and thou,
Beside me singing in the Wilderness
Oh, wilderness were paradise enow!”
Many verses, some drawn from memory and others conjured from the air, were 
spoken as the assembly imbibed. There was a lull in the proceedings, causing our 
host to call out: “I have a challenge for you all.” So saying, he reached for a little 
beaker made from white clay and covered all over with painting in every colour. “A 
little speciality of Kashan, the home, I daresay, of the world’s most dextrous potters 
and the finest painters! See around the outside, three bands of designs. My question 
for you is what story can you read within them?”
The little vessel was passed reverently around the room. My fleeting view was 
enough to know that this was the work of master. I’d never seen such vivacity and 
guessed that the painter must also have decorated manuscripts. Perhaps he had 
taken his compositions from his illustrated books, but how was so much crammed 
into these narrow spaces? Looking closer I saw that each band was made up of sev-
eral scenes, featuring men, women and animals. There were other details too: tents, 
weapons, a throne, and the gateway of a castle. How to guess at what it all meant? 
Where even did the story begin and end?
Each person seemed lost in thought. Your father was the first to break the si-
lence. “I’ve seen bowls from Kashan like this with a line of poetry inscribed around 
the rim. The images on this piece must be from a well-known tale for our painter 
gives us neither a title nor the names of the characters.”
“The story of Layla and Majnun?” suggested one of the guests. “After all, there 
are scenes with a lover and his beloved.”
My father called for a servant to bring the beaker to him. Studying the scenes 
again, he shook his head. “No, I remember the bones of that tale and it just doesn’t 
fit. I see scenes of enthroned kings, and the hunting of an animal …”
“Bahram Gur,” replied the other man. “He was an expert hunter. Nobody better 
with a bow! I’ve seen his image on pottery from the city.”
My father pondered the enigmatic designs. “But the scene I remember had the king 
atop a camel with his consort. And where are the gazelles who flee from his shots?”
I could see Abu Zayd’s eyes sparkling in the lamplight. “I believe the piquant 
food and sumptuous wine have dulled the senses of my noble colleagues! Perhaps 
a few lines from the court of shah Kai Khusraw will jog your memories?
The glance of beauty, and the charm
Of heavenly sounds, so soft and thrilling,
And ruby wine, must ever warm

Kashan, 1201  117
The heart, with love and rapture filling.
Can aught more sweet, more genial prove,
Than melting music, wine, and love?”
Abu Zayd took hold of the beaker and pointed to a scene in the upper register. 
“It’s here that you must begin the story,” he explained. Seeing that we were none 
the wiser, he continued. “Look at the hunt, do you glimpse a gazelle? No, it’s a 
boar. Are you any closer to the answer?”
“The Shahnama,” one said slowly. “Firdawsi’s great poem is where I might look 
for the times of Kai Khusraw. The great champion of that age was Rustam. I recall 
he wore a garment made from the skin of a panther!”
“The zin-i palang, you are quite right!” responded our host. “But the little fig-
ures on our vessel are too small for such details. If this were the story of Rustam, 
what might we see?”
Voices called from across the room: “the slaying of the dragon,” “the white 
elephant,” “the seven labours.” Abu Zayd raised his hand, bringing silence. “Your 
clue is near the end. Look at the lowest register: we see Rustam using his strength 
to lift a rock. Who was he rescuing?”
At last, our eyes were opened to the truth: Bihzan was being released from the 
pit! I recreated the earlier scenes in my head. Now it was all clear, from Bihzan’s 
departure from the court of Kai Khusraw to his fateful meeting with Manizha. 
Reading the images further I found Bihzan bound by the troops of Afrasiyab and 
Rustam’s quest to release him. So much packed within so small a space!
As the wine flowed, Abu Zayd recited the story from memory. Some verses 
drew sighs of admiration from the inebriated audience, none more so than these:
There is a time for war and strife,
A time to soothe the ills of life.
Figure 20.2  Schematic drawing showing the painted designs on the three registers. Draw-
ing: Marcus Milwright.

118  Kashan, 1201
Drink of the cup which yields delight,
The ruby glitters in thy sight;
Steep not thy heart in fruitless care,
But in the wine-flask sparkling there.
Next morning I woke as usual before sunrise for the fajr prayer. Al-Harith even-
tually joined me, his eyes bloodshot. Last night’s liquor still surrounded him like 
some unwholesome cloud. Aisha, I did not try to stop his devotions, though in my 
mind I could hear the warning in Surat al-Nisaʾ: “Do not go near prayer, while you 
are stupefied, until you know what you are saying.”
I feel no desire to return to such a den of sinfulness, though I’ve no regrets 
for being present that night. Never have I experienced such verbal dexterity, such 
displays of memory! Most of all, my thoughts return to that beaker and its delicate 
paintings. I have immersed myself in writing throughout my life, but this vessel 
was like a key that could unlock a trove of stories. All of this without a single word! 
It made me question whether word or image comes first in human understanding. 
And how do our memories form, with visions that stimulate stories or some other 
way? Though my faith commands me to revere the word, the pictures composed 
within our minds are indeed seductive in their beauty.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-24
“It’s good to be home. I’ve been in Baghdad too long. City of Peace it may be, 
but there’s no peace to be had even with the doors and shutters of the house firmly 
shut! Uncouth traders shouting out their wares from dawn to dusk and when the sun 
goes down gangs fighting in the streets.” He raised himself stiffly from the saddle 
and placed his feet on the dusty ground. His camel snorted with displeasure, rising 
swiftly from her kneeling position.
He glanced at me, snapping his fingers. “Take the beasts to the pen and give 
them food and water. No slacking!” I had only just picked up the reins when there 
was another insistent snap. “No wait, before you do that, bring the saddle bags in-
side. I can’t risk them being left unattended, not for a moment. Thieves everywhere 
these days, even inside my own household.”
Did the grumpy old goat suspect me? Pushing the thought to the back of my 
mind, I untied the bags and bundles, lifting them from the backs of the camels. He 
was already sitting with his feet up when I came through the door, red-faced and 
sweating under the weight. “Put them over there. Next, you can get some water 
from the well. I’m thirsty.”
I shot him a dark look. He brushed dust from his cloak. “I show such kindness 
to your father and you repay me with this wretched sullenness! It was only a week 
ago he arrived at my door in such agitation. ‘Muʿallim Yahya ibn Mahmud, I have a 
great favour to ask of you,’ he says without so much as an enquiry after my health, 
‘can you look after my daughter Aisha? I’ve some business in Tabriz. The Mongol 
threat casts a shadow over the whole of Persia. I cannot risk taking her on such a 
dangerous trip. Your family has always been close to our own and I’ve no one else 
in the city that I can trust. Will you do this for me, most esteemed muʿallim? I know 
that you are leaving soon for Wasit; it would ease my heart to know that she was 
safe there. As Allah is my witness, I’ll bring you back some handsome silks for 
your trouble.’ After such a desperate plea, what else could I do? Little did I know 
how much you would cost me in food and lodgings.”
It wasn’t the first time I’d heard this lament. He was still mumbling unhappily 
as I walked into the courtyard and removed the cover from the well. Returning with 
the jug, I found him cutting up a melon cradled between his knees. “The maid just 
brought this from the market. Never tasted better than the fruit from Wasit. When 
my cup is filled you can have a slice.”
Wasit, 1236
21

120  Wasit, 1236
The sweet juice washed over my dry throat, unlocking a door in my tired mind. 
Suddenly, I was able to take in my surroundings. The floor of the white-washed 
room was littered with tired cushions and threadbare rugs. No one had cleaned for 
weeks. Pinned on the walls were sheets of paper, some with drawings and others 
with writing. Jagged lines of ink criss-crossed some of the pages with others over-
written with hurried notes. 
Figure 21.1  Half of the double frontispiece of the Maqamat of al-Hariri, Iraq, 1237. Written 
and drawn by Yahya ibn Mahmud al-Wasiti. Bibliothèque Nationale de France, 
Paris. Arabe 5847, fol. 2r. © BNF, Dist. RMN-Grand Palais.

Wasit, 1236  121
“Never satisfied,” a voice whispered behind me, “with his work … or, for that 
matter, with anything else.”
I turned to see a bent figure wearing a mottled jalabiyya, his turban perched 
uncertainly on his head. “Abu Zayd,” he said, “in case he hasn’t thought to mention 
me. Served him for years, though I don’t ever recall a word of thanks. I was sent 
ahead to get this place prepared for his arrival. Come on, you can help me unpack.”
We moved from one room to the next unloading items into cupboards. Finally 
we came to a bright, well ordered space with stacks of new paper, reed pens, and 
lines of sealed paint pots. “This is where he works. Doesn’t care what anything else 
looks like, but this room has to be kept pristine.” He opened the saddle bags and 
eased out the sheets contained inside. “Do you want to take a peek? More interest-
ing than the dull stuff he normally works on. He wanted some quiet in his home 
town to put together the final touches.”
The sheets had curled at the edges from their time in the bag. Abu Zayd smoothed 
them gently with his hands. “Careful now, the master won’t be pleased to find any 
smudges. Let’s see how he’s progressed.” The top sheet was for protection. When 
it was drawn aside I saw two paintings of seated men surrounded by elaborate 
frames. “When it’s all bound into a book, those two pages will be the first things 
you see. One must be the author, and the other is the man who’s paying for this 
copy.”
“You mean he drew his own image on the first page?” I asked.
Abu Zayd spluttered with laughter. “A fine calligrapher he may be, but he’s no 
writer! No, this is a famous work penned by al-Hariri of Basra more than a century 
ago. Perhaps you know its name: the Maqamat? Many have copied it, but my mas-
ter wants his to have the finest illustrations ever seen. See the living colours and the 
gold expended just on the opening pages.” He placed the first sheet to one side and 
started to leaf through the remainder.
“What’s al-Hariri’s book about?”
“That’s a hard question to answer, for each maqama is a tale of its own set in a 
different place. What I can tell you is that there are two main characters. The first is 
a merchant who tells us the stories. In every place he happens on the same man, a 
scoundrel who just happens to have a silver tongue. Verses fall like pearls from his 
mouth, getting him out of trouble oftentimes.”
“What are their names?” I asked.
He grimaced. “I’ve often had occasion to curse old al-Hariri for that, because 
his loquacious scoundrel bears my name. My master never stops reminding me, 
though I’ve tried to live my life according to the sunna of the Prophet—peace be 
upon him.” He paused, pulling out an illustrated sheet. “See that vain old man sit-
ting in that throne. Remind you of someone?”
I peered at the painting. In a few lines Yahya ibn Mahmud had captured his serv-
ant’s essential features. A little fatter than the man who knelt beside me on the floor 
of the studio, but unmistakably the same.
“It’s my master’s little joke, I suppose. I’ve laboured for his family since he was 
a child, and this is the repayment I get!”
“I can see it’s the inside of a building with a balcony above. What’s going on?”

122  Wasit, 1236
Abu Zayd kindly expression returned. “I’m not surprised that a young woman 
doesn’t recognise this. What you see is a scene of debauchery: a tavern in ʿAna.”
“Where’s that?” I asked.
“Travel north on the Euphrates and you will find it. The story ended there after a 
journey through the desert from Damascus. It’s a hard, dry trek. Al-Hariri’s villain 
could have slaked his thirst with pure water, but instead his mind became befuddled 
with alcohol in that drinking den.”
Figure 21.2  Illustration of maqama 12 showing the tavern at ʿAna. From the Maqamat of 
al-Hariri, Iraq, 1237. Written and drawn by Yahya ibn Mahmud al-Wasiti. Bib-
liothèque Nationale de France, Paris. Arabe 5847, fol. 33r.

Wasit, 1236  123
I looked again at the image. Wicked it might be, but the tavern looked welcom-
ing; I imagined the sweet sounds being played on the oud. An African boy, clad in 
only a loin cloth, was pulling on a rope to move a fan. Wasit was stifling; I longed 
for something to stir the lifeless air. There were sealed jugs in a storeroom above 
the boy in the picture, and on the balcony patrons sipping at forbidden liquor. “I re-
member seeing something like this when I was taken to see a shadow play.”
“Indeed you are right,” he replied. “You know, my master often goes out at night 
in Baghdad, despite my warnings. I’d assumed it was just his fondness for date 
wine. Perhaps it was the entertainments of the taverns that chiefly drew him. How 
many times have I said …”
I never heard the rest. There was a crashing sound from another room. “Who left 
that mop and bucket lying there? Did someone in this house put the evil eye on me? 
Abu Zayd, where are you? Clean this mess up at once!”
Abu Zayd sighed. “Quickly now, let’s get these pages back into order, or I’ll be 
for the chop.”
“I forgot to ask you. What’s the name of the narrator of these tales?”
“I should have told you that first,” he replied with a smile, “for you know it well: 
he’s called al-Harith.”
I glanced for one last time at the man conversing with Abu Zayd in the painting. 
His profile, the angle of the beard, the tilt of his head. Had the sly scribe secretly 
drawn my father’s likeness during one of their meetings? As Abu Zayd placed the 
manuscript pages into a cabinet, I wondered how many of Yahya ibn Mahmud’s 
friends and relations had been captured by his pen and brush, their earthly forms—
even fragments of their souls?—destined to be forever trapped between the covers 
of a volume tucked away in some rich man’s library.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-25
“We must be among the last,” Salim spoke in a whisper. “There have been ships 
coming here every month recently, picking up new groups. I’ve heard we’re being 
taken to Lucera. Perhaps that’s no more than a rumour. Only Allah knows the truth.”
I looked along the quayside at the families huddled together, clutching at untidy 
bundles of cloth tied up with cords. Every one of them taking what few possessions 
they could carry. The sun was just started to rise over the placid sea. Cold was seep-
ing into my bones.
Palermo, 1248
22
Figure 22.1  Obverse and reverse faces of a gold tarì from the reign of Roger II. Minted 
Palermo, 1142 (537 H). 
Source: Drawing by Marcus Milwright, after British Museum. 1860,0703.23.
  (Continued)

Palermo, 1248  125
My father noticed me shivering. “Take my cloak.” He reached into a pocket 
concealed within his inner garment. “I have a few coins left. Let’s buy some bread 
and fruit before we set off on the voyage.”
He had in his hand a scattering of little gold and silver coins. “I never thought it 
would be Abu Zayd who would turn us over to the king’s guards. Our years of friend-
ship meant nothing to him after he’d renounced Islam. I suppose all my wealth now 
sits under the floorboards of his house.” His attention was suddenly captured by a tiny, 
grubby yellow coin. “My, my, you don’t these old tarìs so often now. Look at this!”
I could hardly feel the fragile sliver of gold in my hand. The design didn’t seem 
so special, a long cross boldly placed through the centre, and on either side Frank-
ish writing. Only after squinting at the outer margin did I made out some fragmen-
tary passages of Arabic. “The letters in the middle look like Latin, just like we see 
on coins issued by king Conrad,” I said.
“Not Latin but Greek,” Salim broke in. “The top row gives the name of their saviour, 
and the second row, nika, meaning victory. You still see Greek inscriptions inside their 
churches, if you care to go into the spaces of those accursed mushrikun.”
I glanced questioningly over to my father. “He means idolators: those who as-
sociate gods with Allah. Salim finds little to admire in the Christian passion for 
depicting Jesus, son of Mary—peace be upon him—still less for the fact that old 
kings of Sicily sometimes had themselves represented in the presence of this divine 
messenger. Turn the coin over and tell me what you can see.”
“Arabic arranged in circles around a central dot,” I replied. “I like the way all 
the vertical strokes lead toward the centre. It’s like light bursting forth from a star.”
Figure 22.1  (Continued)

126  Palermo, 1248
“I don’t suppose you’ll remember when we made that last voyage to Cairo, but 
there are inscriptions on buildings just like that. Built when the Shiʿi caliphs used to 
rule the place. So what do you make of this half Christian and half Muslim coin?”
I had no answer. My father smiled, “there are stories of the king who had these 
coins struck here in Palermo. Roger was his name, the ruler over this island a hun-
dred years’ ago. A mighty man, revered and hated in equal measure.”
“Sometimes called the half-pagan king,” Salim added. “And that was by his 
own Christian kinfolk.”
“Is that why the coin has different messages on its two faces?” I asked. “I 
thought the Christians here obeyed their father in Rome and didn’t owe allegiance 
to the Churches of the east.”
“I don’t have all the answers, though I can tell you what I learned from my one 
visit into the royal palace. In the company of Abu Zayd, as it happens. He’d got 
himself a reputation as a poet in any language you pleased to hear. Such were his 
skills that he’d even been invited to perform at the court.”
“How did you come to be there?” I asked.
“I’d been arranging for the shipping of a consignment of ivory from the African 
coast,” he replied. “There was some official in the palace to meet, and Abu Zayd 
had been chosen to be my guide. I was early for my appointment, and with time 
on our hands, we decided to stroll around the corridors, seeing what rooms might 
be open to us.”
Figure 22.2  Section of the painted wood muqarnas ceiling of the Cappella Palatina, 
Palermo, Sicily, mid twelfth century.
Source: Robert Hillenbrand.

Palermo, 1248  127
“Wasn’t that dangerous? I don’t suppose the king likes uninvited guests.”
He sighed. “It was foolish, but which inhabitant of Palermo hasn’t wondered 
what goes on behind the palace walls? It’s a place of mystery and for one brief mo-
ment I had a chance to revel in the grandeur that’s hidden from sight.”
“Like the palace in the City of Brass?” I asked.
“Perhaps, though life had departed from that magical place while the king’s pal-
ace was full of vigour. We’d been wandering aimlessly when we found ourselves 
in an elegant courtyard, enclosed on its four sides by colonnades. I remember that 
Abu Zayd took a moment to get his bearings. He looked stealthily about him. In 
the heat of the afternoon, all was quiet. ‘I’ve only glimpsed it once before. There 
lies the greatest treasure of the palace. If you’re willing to take the risk, let’s go 
in.’ Forgetting my fear, we quickly passed through the gateway and into the dim, 
candlelit space beyond.”
“Why was this place so important?”
“The simple answer is that it’s a church. That’s not all, of course. Here Roger 
would sit in majesty, wielding his authority over the ahl al-kitab. As my eyes ad-
justed to the darkness, forms began to emerge on the walls. Faces and bodies sur-
rounded by glittering with gold were picked out in the light of candles, leaving 
other areas in cavernous darkness. Some, I suppose, were saints. Elsewhere there 
were figures in landscape. Abu Zayd saw my questioning stare. ‘They show events 
from the life of Jesus,’ he explained. ‘I’ve seen the same things in painted books 
in the royal library. You know, king Roger even collected Arabic books. One was a 
wonderful guide to all the lands on earth. It’s not the only time he relied upon the 
skills of our people.’ He pointed toward the ceiling.”
“What did you see?” I asked.
“The mosaic gave way to a vault, dominated by repeated eight-pointed stars. All 
about them were geometric forms. What was most strange, more worthy of wonder, 
was that they pushed out toward us. It was like contemplating the roof of some 
ancient cave. As I peered deeper into the gloom, I saw that these projections were 
broken down into further facets of different shapes. It would have taken weeks to 
make sense of it all.”
“How had his artisans made it? Stone would be too heavy.”
He nodded. “My guess is wood, thousands of pieces, each one designed to lock 
into its neighbours on all sides. They call it muqarnas. Every surface had been plas-
tered and covered with paint, accented all over with gold. To my abiding sadness it 
was too distant to see properly.”
“What do you think was painted there?”
“Abu Zayd claimed to have seen some parts better from windows in an upper 
gallery. According to him, there were animals, birds, mythical creatures, and even 
people, all painted in the way you sometimes see on the domes of bathhouses. 
There were even images of King Roger himself. I can’t tell you the truth of it, 
sadly, for I don’t possess the keen eyes of a falcon! Time was our enemy that day. 
Abu Zayd heard the voices drifting in from the courtyard and tugged urgently at 
my sleeve. While I never saw that place again, the memory of it will stay with me 
to my dying day.”

128  Palermo, 1248
In the corner of my eye I saw a figure emerge from a side street to converse with 
the soldiers. Some coins were exchanged, and he began to move towards us. My 
father recoiled in disgust. “How you dare show your face here, Abu Zayd? Come 
to gloat at our misfortune?”
The other man held up his hands. “It was another who reported you to Conrad’s 
men. It’s true that I took the money from your house, but only to keep it safe. A 
good part of it was spent to buy you safe passage. I return to you all that could be 
saved.”
Figure 22.3  Painted wooden panel from the muqarnas ceiling showing a seated ruler and 
attendants. Cappella Palatina, Palermo, Sicily, mid twelfth century.
Source: Robert Hillenbrand.

Palermo, 1248  129
He proffered a leather pouch filled with coins. My father took it grudgingly. 
“You could have stayed true to your community. Did the chance of fame in the 
court turn your head?”
Abu Zayd regarded him impassively. “We all have to survive one way or an-
other. I keep the faith in my own way, just as servants of the Christian kings al-
ways have. Times are changing and you’ll be no better off in Lucera than you are 
now. I’ve found you berths on a ship bound for Tunis. You have contacts there, 
al-Harith, and your family will thrive. No time to waste, we have to be in Syracuse 
by nightfall.”
No one paid any heed to the four figures hurrying away that morning. I glanced 
back at the mass of huddled families. They were already vestiges of the past, as 
this island entered a new chapter. I wished I could have seen that royal church. 
Would the memory of the different peoples—Christian, Jew, and Muslim—who 
made these extraordinary things be forgotten in centuries to come?

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-26
We visited Rabʿ-i Rashidi twice that year, such was the demand from the scriptoria 
for pigments, reeds, inks, and gold leaf. Oh yes, and manuscripts, lots of manu-
scripts. The scribes and painters employed by the puissant minister, the man with 
his hand in all things, Rashid al-Din, were constantly searching for books in every 
language. Never had there been such a thirst since al-Maʾmun established the Bayt 
al-Hikma in Baghdad in the golden age of the caliphate! Perhaps this enterprise 
might even outdo the mighty labours of the caliph’s legendary translators in the 
City of Peace? In order to explain things properly, I should tell you about our first 
visit in the month of Safar in the hijri year 706, when we …
Tabriz, 1306
23
Figure 23.1  Jonah (Yunus) and the whale. Jamiʿ al-Tawarikh (World History) of Rashid 
al-Din. Tabriz, 1307–14. Edinburgh University Library, Centre for Research 
Collections, Or. Ms. Arab 20, fol. 23v.

Tabriz, 1306  131
Stop! This won’t do at all. I’ve begun this narrative without introducing myself. 
I crave your pardon for this unforgivable lapse in manners. Where to start? I’ve 
been called the new Chrysostom by some in the lands of Rum, for the golden words 
that flowed from my tongue. I’ve gone by many monikers in my home land of Iraq. 
Let’s keep it simple for now: you can call me Abu Zayd, a native son of Saruj, but 
one who declares his home to be wherever there’s a bed for the night and a plate of 
food on the table. Now that’s settled, let’s get back to that first visit in the company 
of my dear companion, the endlessly gullible, al-Harith, his disquietingly inquisi-
tive daughter, and that insufferably pompous servant who never leaves their side.
Rabʿ-i Rashidi reminds me of nothing more or less than a beehive in springtime. 
People are coming in and out all the time, and around the workshops there’s a 
constant buzz of activity. No time now to describe the many crafts that this suburb 
of Tabriz supports, as I’m sure you, my dear reader, will want to hear about the 
production of the compendium of chronicles that will eclipse all other works of his-
tory in its scope and erudition. This mighty labour bears the name of Rashid al-Din, 
though my suspicion is that the book is really the product of many minds. After all, 
how could he run the state for the Mongol khans, while spending time burrowing 
through the libraries of Persia for historical titbits?
The aim was to produce many copies of Rashid al-Din’s world history for distri-
bution across the towns and cities of the empire. Truly a noble undertaking, but not 
without its challenges, particularly for the painters. You see, these poor fellows had 
been trained to depict animal fables, plants in medical books, and maybe a scene 
or two from Firdawsi’s interminable parade of kings. Nothing had prepared them 
for the task of giving visual form to events across the world from the dawn of time 
through to our present. In short, how were they to conjure such diversity using just 
their flimsy imaginations?
I fancy this was the very question occupying the chief illustrator. Cradling his 
bearded chin in the palms of his delicate hands, with elbows firmly planted on a 
table, he was pondering a partially finished sheet with a rectangular gap left by a 
scribe. “I wish they’d ask me first,” he announced, without even looking up. “What 
am I supposed to do with this? The infant Musa discovered in the river.” He pulled 
the sheet aside to expose another. “This one has a space left aside for the story of 
Yunus and the sea monster.”
“It grieves me to see you so downcast,” I called out. “Tell us what makes your 
labour so irksome.”
He forced a thin smile. “I see you bring an entourage with you today. Perhaps 
you have also brought a multitude of solutions.” He pointed to one of the blank 
spaces. “We painters like to work from existing models, adapting and trimming 
them as needed. And yet, our patron, Rashid al-Din, expects us to invent new com-
positions at will. Easy enough with battle scenes for one looks much like another; 
just change a few faces, swap around the armour and the weapons. Only an eagle-
eyed reader would spot the trick.”
I was about to say something when al-Harith’s precocious daughter butted 
in with her own question. “Can’t you do the same with the stories of Musa and 
Yunus?”

132  Tabriz, 1306
Well, you can imagine that my painter friend wasn’t pleased with this flippant 
inquiry. “Where would these come from? Even the Ilkhan himself hasn’t ordered 
a Qurʾan with pictures, though he doesn’t seem to mind having images of the 
Prophet, peace be upon him.”
It was time for me to save the day! Beckoning to the wretched Salim to un-
pack the travelling chest, I chose words that might reassure our host. “Esteemed 
muʿallim, I have the answer to your problem. Knowing the challenges you might 
be facing, I have scoured the lands of Rum in search of Greek manuscripts. These 
are the choicest volumes, and I had almost to wrestle them from the hands of their 
owners. Of course, the generous offers of dirhams from the purse of the excellent 
merchant, al-Harith, were usually enough for them to loosen their grip.”
“Christian books, I suppose?” the painter asked.
Salim was laboriously stacking our trove on the table. Not waiting for this tardy 
fellow to finish his task, I pulled out a book of saints’ lives. The colours of the 
paintings fairly glowed on the glossy parchment. “The Greeks call this a Menolo-
gion, as it records the lives of saints and prophets. See here? Musa rescued from 
the river.”
The illustrator was nodding appreciatively. I scarcely gave him time to digest 
this image before confronting him with another. “A Psalter, a book of daily prayer. 
Look how the artist has captured the tribe of Israel crossing the Red Sea and the 
inundation of the Pharaoh?” I flicked to another page. “Need Samson destroying 
the temple? Well, here it is.”
I won’t weary you with his expressions of heartfelt gratitude, much though they 
warmed my soul. They fairly flowed out of him like water from a mountain spring! 
The workshops of Rashid al-Din are indeed well funded, and we left that day hav-
ing secured handsome prices for our books. It was some months before we re-
turned, this time with jars full of rare pigments. We were all intrigued to see what 
the illustrators had made of the images in those Greek books. Time allows me to 
provide you, dear reader, with only the briefest sketch of that meeting, though per-
haps your imaginations can fill in the gaps in my own reconstruction.
Our business concluded, it was al-Harith who voiced the question that had 
been stewing in all our minds on our journey from the beating heart of Tabriz to 
Rabʿ-i Rashidi. “If it is not too much of an imposition, muʿallim, could you show us 
whether your artists have drawn inspiration from those Greek illustrations.”
He reached below the table and retrieved a set of three stitched volumes. “We’ve 
been busy since you were last here. Your timing is good, for these will go to the 
binder tomorrow. I don’t see why you shouldn’t have a look.” He spread them on 
the table, inviting us to draw near. We turned over page after page, admiring the 
brushwork of the painters under his charge. There were some compositions that 
easily betrayed their prototypes. The best offered fresh insights, just as a fine singer 
can breathe new life into an old, familiar song.
“You were troubled by the story of Yunus. What was made of that scene?” I 
asked.
He thumbed through the pages. There it was: a painting of the prophet basking 
not by the ocean, but on the verdant banks of a river. More striking was the creature 

Tabriz, 1306  133
from whence he had sprung! The painter noted my surprise. “Our far-sighted and 
blessed Ilkhan’s gaze sometimes turns west, but more often to the east. We would 
be wise to follow his lead. Why create some monster of the deep when the artists 
of China have provided us with delightful images of lithe carp? All we did was 
expand the beast far beyond its natural scale.”
Al-Harith was peering at another volume. “This one appears to be lifted almost 
complete from one of those Christian books. I see a reclining woman attended by 
maidservants, while angels hold the newborn child. This must be the birth of ʿIsa 
ibn Mariam, peace be upon him. See the old man seated on the other side of the 
column? My guess is that this is Yusuf.”
My friend looked triumphant. I should have known al-Harith’s daughter would 
want to deprive him of this trifling victory. “I remember seeing the birth of ʿIsa in 
the Greek books. Did they not also show three kings, each holding gifts?”
Salim too wished to undercut his master. (I would never have allowed such in-
solence, but then, of course, I don’t have the money to pay him.) “There might be 
other sources,” he noted. “I recall seeing depictions of the death of Mariam, with 
her soul being born upward among angels in the form of a swaddled child.”
I’m glad to tell you that it was the painter who had the last word. Looking like 
a cat with a struggling mouse under his paw, he responded. “You have all grasped 
part of the truth. Turn to the text of the book for your answer. What you see before 
you is none other than the birth of Muhammad himself. Leaf through the following 
pages, and you’ll find the paintings that illuminate his life, even his first moment 
of revelation.”
What more need be said? Finally, artists have had the courage to draw back 
the veil, using their skills to represent the formerly unrepresentable! Will believers 
of future generations admire their bravery or condemn them for their hubris? I’ll 
leave the answer to that weighty question for a wiser head than mine.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-27
The news spread like a forest fire, igniting one neighbourhood after another 
into fierce debate. As the blaze reduced to smouldering embers, a spark would 
be carried on the breeze to bring flames to a different part of the metropolis. The 
whispers started in the mansions of the rich and powerful—where else?—before 
being carried by servants to the marketplaces. From there the dispersal became 
uncontrollable, leaping unseen from shops to warehouses, from madrasas and 
khanqahs to the countless homes of labouring folk. By nightfall even the scaven-
gers of the waste heaps of Barqiyya and the beggars on the streets would know 
what had occurred. At least, they would know some nugget of the truth of the 
event, for the story seemed to grow ever more elaborate as it passed from one 
person to the next.
My father was in thoughtful mood as we picked our way among the workshops 
of Fustat that afternoon. “Merchants are wary of change among the ruling classes,” 
Cairo, 1361
24
Figure 24.1  Three enamelled and gilded glass beakers, Syria or Egypt, mid-thirteenth cen-
tury. Nasser D. Khalili Collection, London. GLS 578.

Cairo, 1361  135
he told me. “Perhaps we shouldn’t worry so much if one Mamluk kills another; 
after all, they always want their taxes paid no matter what. The markets stay busy 
nonetheless. Still, these events are like a pebble thrown into placid water; the rip-
ples will wash over us whether we like it or not.” He gestured towards the work-
shops and kilns that surrounded us. “This place was covered with houses in the 
days when the Franks blighted the lands of Islam. The people of Cairo heard that 
the infidel armies were coming to sack the city and orders were given to set this 
whole place alight.”
“Why would they do that?” I asked.
“Perhaps to stop the buildings becoming a staging post for a further attack on the 
heart of the city? It must have been quite a conflagration. I’ve heard that the potters 
and glassworkers here sometimes come across the charred remains of walls and 
roofs when they are digging flues for their furnaces. Allah alone knows the truth! 
I don’t suppose the regrettable death of a young sultan will lead to such a catastro-
phe, but we should take care. There are spies who take note of casual words, even 
those said in jest.”
He stopped, trying to orient himself in the maze of alleyways. “This way, I 
think. Salim went on ahead to talk to the muʿallim of the glassworks. Insha allah, 
my order will be ready. I’m not sure he’s entirely reliable, though there’s no deny-
ing that he employs the best glassblowers and painters in the city.”
The workshop looked much like its neighbours with drab mud-brick walls sur-
rounding the sheds and furnaces. One difference was the presence of stout, wooden 
packing cases heaped into an untidy pile outside the entrance to the compound. 
Each box was painted with a round design cut through the middle by a horizontal 
bar filled with writing. My father whistled. “See that roundel? That’s the emblem 
of the sultan himself. The muʿallim will have been paid a pretty sum for this com-
mission, whatever it is.”
Salim led the way past furnaces, their heat pushing against us. The glassworkers 
were blowing and shaping the molten glass. Others were working with completed 
lamps, applying enamel colours. “They still have dozens more to do for the build-
ing,” Salim observed. “It’s said that the arches around the great courtyard are taller 
even than those of the Taq-i Kisra!”
He noticed my blank expression. “In the days before the revelation of Islam, the 
lands to the east were ruled by Persian kings,” he explained. “One of them built 
a great palace near the banks of the Tigris, with an open vault at its centre. It was 
here that he would sit in majesty, with a giant crown suspended above his head on 
a golden chain. That vault was the tallest in the world. The sultan hears about this 
and, without a second thought, orders the vaults of his building to be even higher.”
“He didn’t send someone to measure the height of the Persian king’s palace?” 
I asked.
“Sounds like a tall tale,” my father scoffed. “Still, there’s no doubting that the 
sultan—may Allah accept his soul—possessed an ambition only matched by his 
desire for money. That building is like a yoke for the necks of the Egyptian peo-
ple! Have they not suffered enough with the waves of pestilence that afflict these 
lands?”

136  Cairo, 1361
The muʿallim’s office was little more than a hut topped with reeds. He emerged 
into the sunlight, his eyes fixed on a ledger grasped in his bony hands. “A curse 
upon the man,” he muttered under his breath. His tone brightened as he caught 
sight of us. “Al-Harith, my best client! It is good to see your face in these dark 
times. I expect you’d like to see the pieces you ordered.”
He led us to a storeroom filled with smaller boxes. Opening the lid of one, he 
revealed glass beakers, packed in sets of three. They nestled inside one another. 
My father lifted one group from the straw, gingerly pulling them apart. The beakers 
were patterned all over with delicate traceries of red enamel paint, forming tendrils, 
leaves, and flowers. Dabs of vivid colour danced across the surfaces.
“I trust they meet with your satisfaction? Travellers like them because they fit 
so neatly together. We used to turn out many of these in my father’s glassworks in 
Aleppo. I was lured to Cairo in my youth by the promise of riches—making the 
finest items for sultans and princes—but my heart belongs to Syria. Besides, these 
great men in Cairo often forget to pay their bills, leaving us wondering how to put 
bread in the mouths of our families.”
Figure 24.2  Enamelled glass lamp made for the complex of sultan al-Nasir Hasan. Cairo, 
c. 1360. Museum of Islamic Art, Cairo. 288.

Cairo, 1361  137
“Surely it’s not as bad as that,” my father replied. “I see that you have been 
working on a commission for the grandest monument in the city. Will you not show 
us what you are making?”
The muʿallim gave a resigned shrug, before taking us to another storeroom. 
“Best stuff we’ve ever produced, I reckon. Might ruin us too.” The door opened to 
reveal shelves, each one stacked with glorious lamps. I gasped, trying to take in the 
intense hues of the inscriptions and the flowing patterns. Behind both lay accents 
of glittering gold.
“My friend, I’ve never seen such mastery,” my father cried out.
Salim squinted at the inscriptions running around the flaring necks of each lamp. 
“The light verse. For is not the light of Allah like a lamp hanging within a niche? 
‘A pearly white star, lit from the oil of a blessed olive tree, neither of the east nor 
the west’ and a light that guides the faithful to Him.”
“And light will shine through those sacred words when the lamps are in use” I 
added. “What about the strange plants painted around the body? They don’t look 
much like olive trees.”
“Indeed not,” replied the muʿallim with a smile. “They leave us to work out 
the details for ourselves. This one was painted by a man who came to us from 
Jerusalem. My guess is that he’s remembering the fabulous trees of Paradise in the 
mosaics of the Dome of the Rock. Perhaps his paintings also show what awaits the 
faithful after death?”
“Each lamp is marked with the emblem of the sultan. I can see his names and 
titles written through the centre of each one,” my father remarked. “Is that what 
you are worried about? You must have been well paid in advance for these beauti-
ful things?”
The muʿallim shook his head sadly. “I have to deal with a rogue, known as Abu 
Zayd. He’s an overseer for the construction project. Came here with big promises 
of the sacks of dinars we’d make. First, he provided money to buy materials. That 
all seemed good and the task commenced. We’ve delivered some lamps already. 
What we get in return is deliveries of charcoal, white sand, soap ashes, and pig-
ments. We need these things, of course, but it’s been weeks and I’ve no money to 
pay my workers. Now the sultan is dead. Perhaps the work on his building will just 
cease?”
“Can’t you just sell these pieces to other clients?” I asked.
“Not with the sultan’s name on every lamp,” my father cut in. “I suppose, the 
only market for them would be outside the empire.”
Salim’s eyes lit up. “Muʿallim, I think you worry without cause! Although a 
mosque, a madrasa, or even a mausoleum might be the project of one ruler, they 
always survive after their deaths. No new sultan can leave such a building unfin-
ished and still call himself a good Muslim. Besides, my guess is that the sultan set 
up a hefty bequest to keep the place afloat for decades to come. Just think of all the 
lands and property that came into his hands from the amirs who lost their lives to 
plague.”
“Unless this Abu Zayd has run off with those riches, you will receive the right-
ful payment for your labours!” my father added, patting the muʿallim on the back.

138  Cairo, 1361
The sun was setting when we finally left the workshop, our beakers carefully 
packed into crates ready for their next journey. I imagined what those lamps would 
look like in their new home, forever filled with oil-fed, tongues of flame, picking 
out eternal words of revelation alongside the name of a man whose time on earth 
had already passed.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-28
We’d only just entered the narrow doorway of the house when we heard a cry of 
irritation. Something small clattered onto the stone flags, skidding to the end of the 
corridor. I rushed over to pick it up. A reed pen, ink still damp on the nib. Scanning 
the courtyard I saw a middle-aged man sitting on cushions in a shady area, sheaf 
of papers in his lap. His eyes were directed downward, staring fiercely at the unfin-
ished page. I could just make out a tiny puddle of black halfway down.
Granada, 1375
25
Figure 25.1  Wooden ceiling of the Hall of the Ambassadors, Alhambra Palace, Granada, 
1333–54.
Source: José Luis Filpo Cabana, 2014. Wikimedia Commons.

140  Granada, 1375
I approached him cautiously. “Excuse me, sayyid, I …”
He looked up sharply, “I’ve important matters to attend to. Why are you disturb-
ing me?”
I held out the pen. “Sorry, I didn’t mean to offend you. You, umm … dropped 
this.”
The man’s expression softened, the trace of a smile forming beneath his greying 
moustaches. “It is I who should apologise. You offer me a simple kindness, and I 
repay it with ingratitude!” He rose slowly, reaching out to retrieve his pen. The man 
hardly had any flesh on his bones. I imagined him crossing arid lands and mountain 
ranges, enduring the harshest conditions. But the intricate embroidery on the edg-
ing of his woollen cloak marked him out as an official, someone used to the best 
things that life had to offer. Was he wasting away with disease?
Seeing my father and Salim approaching, the man introduced himself. “My 
name is Ibn Khaldun, a native son of Tunis, though Allah had chosen a nomadic life 
for me. I have called many places home. Now I will have to seek another refuge.”
“Will you not stay here for a while longer?” my father asked. “Surely, our host 
can accommodate another visitor in his house. He has an apartment on the upper 
floor that would suit a person of your status. Let me talk with him.”
“It’s because we are acquainted that I am here,” Ibn Khaldun answered. “We 
became close the last time I was in Granada. I knew that he would give me shelter 
while arrangements were made for my passage back to Fez.”
“Why leave at all?” Salim asked. “After all, this is a fine city, if a little quiet.”
He shook his head ruefully. “I judge that your lives remain untouched by politi-
cal intrigue. Indeed, I envy you. I once tried to withdraw from this world to the 
monastic calm of scholarship, but ever the machinations of royal courts drag me 
back. My departure now is at the command of the amir, Muhammad, and his vizier. 
I’ll only be safe when I set sail from Málaga.”
“When were you last in Granada?” I asked.
“In happier times,” he responded, “I served the same amir ten years’ ago. Then 
his vizier was the wise Ibn al-Khatib, my mentor. Now he has been supplanted by 
Ibn Zamrak. An able administrator and a fine poet, but untrustworthy. It’s because 
of his scheming that I have lost favour. It’s a choice between leaving here at dawn 
and contemplating again the inside of a prison cell.”
It would have been indelicate to ask how so grand a person came to be impris-
oned. There was something else that I just had to find out. “If it’s not an imposition, 
could you tell me a little of what the palace looks like. From the streets of Granada 
it’s only possible to see the forbidding walls and gates. I suppose it must look very 
different inside.”
I thought he was going to brush away my question, but after a moment’s silence, 
he leaned down and spoke softly. “There’s something about you that reminds me 
of my eldest daughter. She would be about your age. In payment of your courtesy 
earlier, I’ll tell you what I can.”
He turned over the spoiled page of writing. “This one’s no good to me now. 
Let’s see if I can sketch the place from memory.” He drew a series of intercon-
nected boxes, marking lines to show how one moved from one to the next. When he 

Granada, 1375  141
was satisfied with his composition, he began to talk, recounting what he could 
remember about each space. I was surprised to learn that building work was still 
continuing, amir Muhammad commanding yet more courtyards and reception 
chambers. With his words, Ibn Khaldun led me through the gardens, courtyards, 
halls, and chambers that finished at the Court of the Myrtles, where a mirror-like 
pool reflected the perfection of the arcaded façade. Next we entered into the Hall 
of the Ambassadors, its magnificent wooden roof studded with stars. Finally, he 
pointed to a last rectangle on his plan. “Here’s where Muhammad is most engaged. 
There’s an old fountain that he plans to make the centrepiece of the space. Twelve 
carved lions support the central bowl on their backs. Water gushes from the mouth 
of each beast into four shallow channels of water cut into the marble floor. Why 
four do you think?”
“One for each side of the courtyard,” I offered, before pausing to consider it fur-
ther. “Can it stand for the rivers that flow through paradise? I’ve heard that Persian 
gardens do the same. They even place the same design on carpets.”
He nodded. “And have you noticed how marble and water are so often com-
bined? Perhaps it’s because of the lines that run through the stone like a petrified 
stream. I was told that the unscrupulous Ibn Zamrak had his own verses inscribed 
on the fountain, claiming that ‘water and marble seem as the one, without letting 
us know which one of them is flowing.’ I expect he hopes to ingratiate himself with 
his master by likening him to a prowling lion or a cloud that brings sustenance to a 
parched land! If only rulers were not so vain.”
Figure 25.2  Court of the Lions, Alhambra, Granada, 1370–1391.
Source: Mariam Rosser-Owen.

142  Granada, 1375
“What did the rest of the courtyard look like?”
“The place is still a construction site,” he responded. “One side was nearing 
completion. I saw slender marble columns supporting arches covered with the most 
refined carving. What interested me was the arrangement of the columns, some-
times one, sometimes two, even four clustered together. There was a pattern within 
it, though I could not make it out.”
“Why not use the same number each time. Were supports more needed where 
the building was to rise higher?”
He shook his head. “If you want my guess it’s like the rhythms in music. Just as 
the fountain carries verses that can be spoken aloud, so the surrounding courtyard 
will echo the instruments that play within for the amusement of the amir.”
It was difficult to take in everything he said. My mind was filled with images 
of stucco laden with endless tracery hiding within it yet more patterns, of beautiful 
gardens fed by miniature canals, and of soaring vaults like the dome of heaven. I 
pictured a place in which poetry and music abounded. Also one where those same 
media were somehow embedded into the very fabric of the courtyards and halls. 
“The Nasrid dynasty must be fabulously wealthy, powerful too, in order to com-
mission such wonderful structures.”
“Wealthy? Perhaps, though the dynasties that came before them—Almohads, 
Almoravids, Umayyads—laid claim to greater territories,” he replied. “Does this 
Figure 25.3  Carved stucco and wooden vaulting from an arcade, Court of the Lions, 
Alhambra, Granada, 1370–91.
Source: Mariam Rosser-Owen.

Granada, 1375  143
opulence, this insatiable desire to build and decorate, truly reflect a polity at its 
zenith or can the seeds of decline already be seen?”
This confused me. “If they can afford all the best things is this not a sign that the 
regime is at the height of its power?”
“This question has been much on my mind. If Allah wills it, I’ll soon find the 
time to draft a tract on this issue. The key to it all, I believe, is ʿasabiyya.” Seeing 
my uncomprehending look, he explained. “All societies must have this quality—
call it solidarity—in order to survive. Think of the Arabs who first rose under the 
banner of Islam to take over half the world or the Berbers who now control the 
Maghrib. Both groups were uncorrupted by urban life.”
“Why is that a good thing?” I asked. “Aren’t towns and cities where we see the 
greatest sophistication in learning, commerce, and the arts?”
“All societies can aspire to these things, but they are often at the expense of 
ʿasabiyya. Tribal people in the deserts and mountains have no choice but to act col-
lectively in order to survive. It is this spirit that gives them the ability to carve out 
great empires. Look to the east and see how the Mongols have swept across Asia. 
When these nomads enter the cities their ʿasabiyya can only last a few generations 
before it dissipates.”
“And then another dynasty rises to take its place?” I suggested.
“Precisely! That’s what you see in that palace on the hill. They’ve all become 
consumed by luxury and petty squabbles. If ʿasabiyya exists anywhere in Anda-
lus, it is with the accursed Christians of Aragon and Castile. If they should sweep 
through this place, will they value the delicate paintings and fragile stucco that so 
delights the Nasrid amir? Or will the Alhambra become another ruin, joining those 
that already stand across the Maghrib as mournful reminders of human folly? Allah 
inherits the earth and whoever is upon it.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-29
Xi’an, 1402
26
Figure 26.1  Tower of the third courtyard of the Congregational Mosque of Xi’an, China. 
Fourteenth century and later.
Source: Nancy Steinhardt. Edited by Loukas Milwright.

Xi’an, 1402  145
“How could anyone tell it was him?”
Abu Zayd was surveying the thronging street in front of us. “We’d better throw 
ourselves into this river of people and see if we can navigate our way. The Muslim 
quarter is in that direction, I think.” He took a deep breath, glancing back at me. 
“One burned body’s probably much like another. Insha allah, we’ll never have 
to see such a gruesome thing! In the taverns they’re gossiping that the Jianwen 
emperor was killed when his palace was set on fire. Last act of a bloody civil war 
with his uncle leading the opposition to his rule. This uncle is now emperor, calling 
himself Yongle. A short temper and vengeful … or so they say.”
“Yongle was able to identify his nephew’s corpse?” I asked.
“Only Allah knows the truth. Maybe he spotted something that looked familiar, 
an imperial ring perhaps. Of course, he might just be saying those charred remains 
are Jianwen to keep people from asking awkward questions.”
I was intrigued. “You mean he’s not dead?”
Abu Zayd leaned close and whispered. “Rumours are flying around that it was 
all a ruse to allow Jianwen to escape. Disguised himself and just disappeared into 
the night. He could be plotting his return as we speak.” There was no more time to 
talk; he grasped my hand and pulled me into busy thoroughfare. It hardly seemed as 
if I had to put one foot in front of the other as the crush of moving bodies propelled 
me forward. My only task was to keep hold of Abu Zayd’s hand. Without that 
anchor I could have been swept down any one of the alleyways branching off the 
main road. Heads, shoulders, and chests clouded my vision leaving only my view 
the sky above unimpeded. The sound of voices—whispered, hissed, shouted—
filled the air. It was only the smells of the city that created some sort of map: burn-
ing logs in one place; caustic lye drifting from a laundry; the warm stench of refuse; 
and the steam rising from rich, oily, sweet, salty food repeated from the countless 
cook houses. Every one of these aromas could have come from a town or city in 
our homeland, but here they were just a little different, like a familiar song played 
on a new instrument.
“Aisha, this way.” Lost in my thoughts, I didn’t hear him at first. “Pay attention! 
We’re here.” I looked up in surprise at Abu Zayd, and then noticed Salim standing 
a little way off on steps leading to an imposing gateway. His voice raised above the 
clamour. “You’re late. At least you got here unscathed. Let’s go.”
Salim was in no mood for pleasantries; we moved swiftly inside without 
another word spoken. I’d understood little of what I’d seen and heard since we 
arrived in the city. There was only one thing to do at these times: keep my mouth 
shut and eyes and ears open. The pillars and lintels of the first gate were of stone, 
but given life by panels of painted wood. What did the writing mean? What sort 
of place were we visiting? Pretty gardens were inscribed with walkways pass-
ing through free-standing arches. Trees dotted about each space, shedding their 
leaves onto stone-flagged pavements. We passed through another gate and into 
a new courtyard. This one was dominated by a tall building with three rows of 
curving pitched roofs covered in ceramic pantiles. Was the plan an octagon or 
a hexagon? Under each of these roofs was a gallery, enclosed by balustrades. I 
imagined being able to stand, protected from the weather, leaning on the wooden 

146  Xi’an, 1402
rail and surveying the gardens below as they changed from season to season. 
Didn’t they call these structures pagodas? My eye was caught by the carved 
wooden finials that jutted out from the tiles; crested dragon heads, painted vivid 
green and snarling viciously towards the sky. I recalled the tales from my home 
of the dragons in the heavens that would swallow the sun or moon before spit-
ting them out again.
The next gate opened onto a larger court. Some paths led to low buildings on the 
side walls. Our journey took us forward, along the main axis towards the largest 
structure of all. Set on a stone platform, it was a great hall, topped with a gabled 
pantile roof. We climbed the steps and passed into the entrance arcade, shaded from 
the autumn sun. The wooden structure was painted in bright colours, looking like 
a lacquer box made for a giant. Heavy columns carried golden characters running 
vertically down their faces.
Nodding at an old man sitting by one of the entrances, Salim whisked us into the 
dark space. Glancing upward, I saw the criss-crossing of the stout beams holding 
up the roof. It was much bigger than I’d guessed, for the interior was composed of 
two joined halls of equal size. In the centre of the far wall the building extended 
even further though I couldn’t make out much in the gloom.
Figure 26.2  View of the central zone of the prayer hall and mihrab of the Congregational 
Mosque of Xi’an, China. Fourteenth century and later.
Source: Gerd Eichmann, 2012. Wikimedia Commons.

Xi’an, 1402  147
“They’re meeting us over there,” Salim announced, pointing towards the an-
nex. We approached more slowly now, taking time to look around. Bamboo mats 
and carpets covered the stone floor, all of them laid in the direction we were 
heading. Lamps suspended from the beams illuminated the intricate carving of 
the woodwork. As we entered this final area I noticed a huddle of men in earnest 
conversation. Salim tapped my shoulder. “We have matters to discuss. Wait over 
there.”
I wandered over to the end wall of the building. Sunk into the wall was shal-
low arch enclosed by repeated frames. Arabic was carved into the bands around 
the arch. A rectangular panel above had more Arabic script surrounded by a 
continuous band of flowers. Everything was coloured, red in the background, 
with green, blue, and gold dancing across each panel. It was then that the veil 
was drawn from my eyes: I was staring at a mihrab! How could I have wan-
dered through this place, from the first gate to here without realising this was a 
mosque? I was glad that no one was nearby to guess at my foolishness. I knew 
that many Muslims lived here. What had I been expecting them all to do for the 
Friday prayer?
My ruminations were cut short by Abu Zayd. “Aisha, a decision has been made. 
Many of those merchants you see with your father became rich by working with 
members of Jianwen’s court on the transport of luxuries from east to west along 
the Silk Road. The new emperor might not take a kind view of their contacts with 
Jianwen and his followers. I expect there will be demand for their services again 
when things become more settled, but most have fixed on leaving while there’s still 
a chance.”
“Will it be so bad for them here?” I asked.
“Allah alone knows the truth of these things,” he replied. “Who would choose 
uncertainty over safety in a foreign land? We are tolerated here, no more than that. 
It would only take a little spark to ignite a bonfire of resentment against the Syrian, 
Iraqi and Persian traders who have made their fortunes in Xi’an and other cities 
across the empire.”
People were starting to gather for the ʿasr. As we hurried out of the hall I 
caught the last of the adhan. It was coming from the pagoda. It seems simple 
now, but I’d never expected so familiar a feature to look so strange. After all, 
was it really that surprising? In every place we’d visited on this arduous journey 
there had been minarets attached to mosques and each one was unlike the next. 
Sometimes the distinctive character of a minaret was embedded in the land it-
self, drawing inspiration from the ancient buildings, the mountains, the forests, 
the deserts, and the rivers.
I thought again of the rumours that Jianwen had disguised himself to evade cap-
ture. What would it be like for so proud a man to obscure his true nature beneath 
the humble clothing of common men? Perhaps Xi’an’s minaret was not so differ-
ent, blending in with the other monuments of the city? How else could the native 
Muslims of this region live among their neighbours, and maintain such a vast place 
of prayer without provoking hostility?

148  Xi’an, 1402
“Aisha, we need to pack for the journey to Urumqi. Take only what’s really 
needed. I’ll use what influence I have to get the official papers for us to leave. We 
set out at dawn.” My father had already turned to give Salim and Abu Zayd instruc-
tions. I took one last look at the mosque. They say that Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas ar-
rived in Xi’an in the time of the Rashidun caliphs and met with the T’ang emperor 
himself. Islam surely has deep roots in this land, though so much remains below the 
surface. Not attracting attention, just as we must do on our long trek west.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-30
We pitched our tents on the eastern fringes of the town, a little way from the river. 
The fields were green with young wheat, laced here and there with cornflowers. 
Panjakent grew from the river bank up to the slopes of the hills. Only the upper 
section was now abandoned, with hulking mud-brick buildings gradually losing 
their forlorn struggles against sun, wind, and rain. Floors and vaults had long since 
disappeared, walls eroding over centuries into jagged peaks.
Panjakent, 1490
27
Figure 27.1  Fighting demons. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. Late fourteenth or 
fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul. Hazine 2153, fol. 37b.

150  Panjakent, 1490
“Why did they abandon that part of the town?” I asked.
Salim was stacking kindling over clumps of dry moss. “I’ve been told by locals 
that there was a great city here before the revelation of Islam. It even survived for a 
while after the Muslim conquest. Oftentimes people build on high ground because 
it’s easier to defend. Maybe things a little safer now? Of course, they might just 
have gotten fed up with hauling water from the river all the way up there. Allah 
knows best.”
“Did the local people say if there are valuable things buried in the abandoned 
structures?”
My father snorted. “The feeble-minded always think there’s treasure hidden 
away in old buildings. The most anyone’s come up with is a dusty coin or two. 
After all, why waste time digging holes when there’s good money to be made in the 
markets of Panjakent? We won’t venture much further east because all the Chinese 
wares we need—silks, lacquer, jade—can be bought here in the bazar. Seems like 
half the world finds its way to this town.”
“But is there anything of the ancient town left besides the walls?” I persisted.
“They say that winter storms sometimes wash away soil that has settled inside 
the buildings,” said Salim. “It gives glimpses into lower rooms. There are stories 
that their houses and temples were decorated with colourful murals.”
“What was painted on the walls?”
This question irritated Salim. “Does it matter what people painted during the 
jahiliyya? Idols, I suspect; things that displease Allah.”
My father patted his servant on the back. “No need to lose your temper. The 
heat should be coming from the flames, not from your tongue!” He turned to me. “I 
heard from a merchant friend who spent his spare time poking around in the ruins 
that there were images of hunts and falconry, battles, and feasting. I suppose there 
must have been ancient deities as well. What caught my friend’s attention was 
the clothing of the figures: silk embroidered with roundels containing animals and 
birds. So different from the stuff we see today, though I’ve occasionally seen scraps 
of fabric like it in the linings of old jewellery boxes. Wish I could get my hands on a 
few cubits. What a price ancient silk would fetch back in Baghdad or Cairo if there 
were enough even for a single robe!”
At that moment we were distracted by shouting a little way off. A man, wrapped 
in a hooded cape, hobbled around a group of tents pulling a rope. Next came a 
scrawny donkey, braying in dismay as it was dragged forward. Last of all came 
a band of traders. Their ankle-length woollen coats and heavy boots were not de-
signed for running and they soon gave up the chase, contenting themselves with 
shouting curses.
The hooded figure was moving in our direction, his body heaving from the 
effort of evading his pursuers. He stopped to console his beast of burden. “Now, 
my precious,” he muttered, “don’t pay any heed to those brutes. Let’s loosen 
that cord around your neck.” He reached into a pocket and drew out some 
oats. The donkey accepted them eagerly, burying her muzzle into the man’s 
open hand. Man and animal seemed unaware of our presence. My father was 

Panjakent, 1490  151
intrigued to know more. “Excuse me, agha, we have a fire started and would be 
happy to offer you a bite to eat.”
The man turned towards us, his face remaining in shadow. “I’ve no desire to be 
in another’s debt. What need have I of the company of strangers?”
My father was not be deterred by this rebuff. “Why the combative tone, friend? 
We only offer to share our meagre rations.” He peered into the distance. “Might 
discourage those men from giving you more trouble?”
The man removed his hood. “I have lived years without burdening others. 
There’s no way …”
Salim didn’t give him the chance to finish. “The Prophet—peace be upon 
him—once said, ‘it is not permissible for the guest to overstay his welcome, 
such that he burdens his host.’ How could you cause us trouble by staying for a 
bowl of broth?”
The man sighed and settled himself by the fire. While Salim cooked, the 
stranger entertained us with tales from his travels across these wild lands. He’d 
followed the Silk Road east as far as Turfan, south to the Hindu Kush, and north 
to the lands of the Turkic nomads. Ever the practical man, my father asked. “I 
can tell that you live simply, but every trip requires a little gold or silver to pay 
for supplies, and the occasional night in a caravanserai. Are you a trader or do 
you earn money some other way? A scribe perhaps, or an artisan, even an itiner-
ant poet? As you haven’t waved a begging bowl in front of our noses, I don’t 
suppose you’re a dervish.”
The man laughed. “Too many of those on the roads already! No, Allah has cho-
sen a different way for me. Fetch the saddle bag from the donkey and I’ll show 
you.” Carefully packed into one pocket was a sheaf of drawings. I lifted them out 
and handed them to our guest. He passed them among us.
I’d never seen anything like them. Figures and animals painted directly onto the 
blank paper. No landscape or plants. Black predominated, combined with muted 
greys, browns, and reds. These brutal images were so different from the delicate 
work of Tabriz and Herat. There were paintings of merchants and nomads, some-
times with ill-fed horses and mules. Another set of paintings made me gasp: mon-
sters, their faces grimacing with pain or pleasure. I held one page with writhing 
monsters, grabbing at one another by the beard and tail.
Salim’s expression spoke of his displeasure. My father must have noticed and 
quickly broke the silence. “Are these the divs that appear in Persian stories?” he 
asked. “I’ve never seen them depicted so vividly.”
“From Persia all the way to China there are tales of demons,” he replied. “Here 
on the Silk Road everything mixes before being born into a new form, quite unlike 
its many parents.”
One last image captivated me: two men in a strange, crouching dance, staring 
intently at one another. Red fabric partially covered their legs, though they were 
naked above the waist. Each man held lengths of blue cloth in their hands, creating 
rhythmic shapes across the page. “Their skin is black.” I said.
“Does anyone have Nubian slaves this far east?” my father asked.

152  Panjakent, 1490
Our guest took the drawing. “Not Africans. Some call them shamans. They live 
out in the wilds and rub ashes into their skins to make them dark. I’ve seen them 
praying and dancing. I suppose they’re like dervishes, following a life of poverty 
to get closer to Allah.”
My father rubbed the corner of one sheet. “You’d make more money illustrating 
the Shahnama or the Khamsa of Nizami. That way you could commit your work to 
better paper than this coarse stuff.”
The man nodded. “My pen and brush would glide more easily over the pol-
ished paper of Samarqand, but I’ve no desire to copy the work of others. There are 
patrons who appreciate my vision of the world. Not wealthy men, I’m sad to say. 
Mostly I swap my drawings for a place to stay and a good meal.”
“Why were those men chasing you earlier?” I asked.
“They took exception to this.” He drew a scuffed notebook from his pocket and 
opened it to a sheet of vigorous sketches. “Monsters spring from inside here,” he 
said, tapping his head. “My people come from observation. I make these notes dis-
creetly to avoid an unfriendly reception.” He yawned. “Despite the kind allowance 
of the Prophet, I am indeed a guest who has overstayed his welcome.” He slung the 
saddle bag over the back of his donkey. “Come princess, we have some miles to 
cover before sleep can draw us into her embrace.”
We watched as he led the donkey up the slope towards the ruins. He was nearly 
lost in the half-light of dusk when I realised there was something we’d forgotten to 
ask. “What’s your name?” I shouted.
He turned. “In my home town of Saruj I was known as Abu Zayd, but no one 
calls me that any more. The people of this region have given me another silly title. 
It’s stuck like glue ever since.”
Figure 27.2  Merchants and donkey. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. Late fourteenth 
or fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul. Hazine 2153, fol. 84a.

Panjakent, 1490  153
“Please, will you tell me?”
He held something aloft, but I couldn’t make it out in the gloom. Without an-
other word he turned and was gone. Confused, I looked over to Salim. “I saw his 
reed earlier, heavily stained with ink,” he remarked. “That was his answer. If I’m 
right, they call him Black Pen.”
Figure 27.3  Dancing male figures. Attributed to Muhammad Siyah Qalam. Late fourteenth 
or fifteenth century. Topkapı Sarayı Library, Istanbul. Hazine 2153, fol. 34b.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-31
Nizwa, 1531
28
Figure 28.1  Stucco mihrab with inset blue-and-white porcelain vessels. Shawadhina 
mosque, Nizwa, 1531.
Source: Ruba Kana’an.

Nizwa, 1531  155
“Pull the cloth away from your face.” The doctor leaned in close, scrutinising my 
nose. The blood was still flowing freely. He gestured for me to replace the cloth. 
“Pinch a little to stem the flow while I prepare something.” He strode into another 
room, leaving me with Salim.
“Al-Harith said to meet him at the mosque when we’re finished here. Tomorrow 
we’ll return to Suhar. I expect the ship will have arrived with the consignment.”
“Can I stay here until you both get back?” I asked. “The hills are so much cooler 
than the coast. Suhar is like an oven.”
Salim nodded. “I’ll ask him. The port is no place to live, by Allah. Scorching hot and 
beset by biting flies! It’s only with the digging of canals that they can bring fresh water 
to the place. All the things for a good life are to be found in Nizwa and round about.”
After a few minutes the doctor reappeared. “I’ve prepared this paste.”
“What will it do?” I asked.
“It’s a trick I picked up in Iran,” he replied. “Soaks up the blood and dries the 
affected area, giving the sensitive membrane the chance to heal. I made some extra 
that you can use if the problem returns.”
In a short time I was able to clean my face. Salim was settling the bill. “What’s 
in this preparation?” he asked casually.
“Secrets of the profession,” the doctor responded. “What I can tell you is that 
there’s a mixture of fragrant gums, drawn from trees in this region of Dakhiliyya.”
“What makes the paste so white?”
“Since you press me, it’s ceramic, crushed down to a powder.”
“Wouldn’t that make a different colour?” I asked. “The pots I’ve seen here are 
reddish or ochre.”
“Not ordinary local stuff! Only the white-bodied sini will work for this purpose. 
Nothing else can be ground so fine.”
Salim looked shocked. “You break apart precious porcelain bowls for medicine! 
How can anyone but princes afford your treatment?”
“Nothing so extravagant. I employ boys to gather the sherds thrown away at the 
port. However carefully the crates are unloaded, something always ends up getting 
smashed. The bits and pieces are just tossed in the refuse. Seems like no one else 
knows their value.” He paused. “I’m told that porcelain dust is used for plugging 
holes in decayed teeth. Allah knows best if that’s true.”
Later that morning we walked to the Shawadhina mosque. Nearing the building 
I noticed a strange absence. “Salim, there’s no minaret. Haven’t they finished the 
construction?”
He looked disappointed. “If you’d paid more attention since we arrived in Oman 
you would know that the people hereabouts never build towers on their mosques. I 
talked with one of their scholars; he said it was bidʿa.” Salim saw that I didn’t un-
derstand. “Something that was unknown when the Prophet—peace be upon him—
was alive. Since there was no minaret in his mosque, these Ibadis say they don’t 
want them either.”
“Are other Muslims mistaken when they employ minarets to make the adhan?”
Salim put a finger to his lips. “Best not continue this discussion as we enter their 
place of worship as guests.”

156  Nizwa, 1531
Leaving the clamour of the silversmith’s souk behind us, we crossed the thresh-
old into the mosque. My father was in the prayer hall. Standing beside him was a 
barrel-chested figure leaning heavily on stick. They had their backs to us and were 
gazing at the huge mihrab. It dominated the space, rising to more than twice the 
height of a man. I knew that it was formed from stucco, and yet it looked like a 
huge, ghostly carpet fixed to the qibla wall. Most of it was flat, with dense patterns 
carved into bands. At its centre was a recessed arch, rising to a hood, sculpted into 
delicate ridges. Moving closer, the ornament came into greater focus. Every area 
offered new things to look at. The outer band was the most complex, with a series 
of recessed discs providing a steady rhythm among the profusion of patterns.
My contemplation was broken by a sonorous voice. “Greetings to our humble 
mosque! I see that you are enjoying the mihrab, only completed a year ago. I’m 
proud to say that some of my own wealth went into its manufacture.”
“Salih al-Amiri comes from a distinguished line of jurists,” my father explained, 
“but he chose to devote his life to trade. His network is wide indeed, reaching from 
Zanzibar in the south to Gujarat in the east. Nothing that he can’t get for a client … 
if the price is right.”
Salih shuffled round to face us properly. “Business means little if the profit 
doesn’t find its way back to the community. It’s said that a mosque was founded 
here by one of the Companions. That old building was in a sorry state and a few 
years’ back we decided to build it anew.” He pointed with his stick. “This mihrab 
was the last commission, the crowning glory!”
“I like the writing along the top,” I said. “What does it say?”
“I can make it out, even though the style is unfamiliar,” Salim broke in. “Aisha, 
see the first part is a lam-alif followed by the name of Allah. You might be able to 
guess the rest.”
I looked again, moving slowly from one word to the next. “It’s the first kalima: 
there is no god but Allah. Muhammad is the Prophet of Allah.”
Salih thumped the end of his stick on the ground with satisfaction. “We still 
have a taste for older scripts. So much better for writing a phrase spoken by the 
first Community in Medina. Now, Aisha, what do you make of the decoration of 
our mihrab?”
“When I first saw it, I thought of carpets. Now I see designs like the printed cot-
tons that are shipped here from India.”
This pleased him. “Perhaps you are right. Like the Gujarati textiles that are sold in 
the shops hereabouts. Though the land is blessed with fertility, we’d be a poor place 
without the ocean on our doorstep. Keeps us connected to far-off places, bringing 
luxuries from every direction. Trade by land and sea has left its mark on us and eve-
rything we do. Even a stucco carver who’s never left this place, has that feeling in his 
bones. These patterns tell stories about the journeys of people and things.”
“Is that why there are glazed bowls pressed into the stucco?” I asked.
“I suppose so. No ordinary bowls though,” he responded. “Every one of them 
was brought from China. At no small cost, I should add.”
We moved closer to look at these strange additions to the mihrab. Most were 
modest in size, containing simple designs painted in deep cobalt. I could just reach 

Nizwa, 1531  157
one of the lowest, and ran my fingers across the flawless glaze. “The Chinese make 
these little pieces for drinking tea. Wish I knew how their potters create that white, 
hard body; no craftsman here has ever been able to emulate it. Tap the edge of a 
bowl like that and it rings like a bell.”
“I’ve heard strange tales about what sini can do,” my father added. “The green-
glazed ware is supposed to change colour when poison is placed inside it.”
Salih nodded. “Some say that toxins make the glaze sweat.”
“Can that really be correct?” I asked.
“Allah alone knows the truth,” he replied. “I expect it’s why sultans and princes 
are so keen on Chinese bowls and plates; always worrying about whether some 
rival might have tainted their food.”
The biggest vessel lay at the centre of the design, above the niche and framed 
by its own arch. The border of the plate contained scrolling stems and leaves in-
terspersed with flowers. My eyes were caught by the central design, a long-necked 
bird with outstretched wings. The creature’s trailing tail feathers finished in curls. 
“Is that the Simurgh?” I asked.
“A phoenix, another bird of legend,” Salih replied. “It’s said to die in flames, but 
be reborn from the ashes. Some call it a symbol of everlasting life.”
“It hardly matters what it means,” Salim burst in. “How can you have an image 
of an animal within the confines of a mosque?”
My father placed a hand on Salim’s shoulder. “My servant sometimes forgets his 
tact, though his question is a good one. Salih, how did this bowl come to be chosen 
for such an important location.”
Salih returned his gaze to the mihrab, seeming to lean more heavily on his stick 
as he pondered. “I was elsewhere when the stucco workers were finishing their job. 
I know that nothing with ruh—a spirit or spark of life we all contain—should be 
inscribed within a place of prayer. Some scholars in the madrasa tell me that birds 
and fish have no ruh, and others that they do. It’s puzzle and no mistake.”
“But the phoenix is only a story or does it really exist in this world?”
He shrugged. “We may never have the answer. I’m not likely to forget it, as the 
fabulous bird will be before my eyes every time I enter this place. I just hope it 
doesn’t drive another worshipper to distraction!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-32
In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate. Written on the twenty-third 
day of Jumada al-Awwal, 954. Although the candle by my bedside has nearly gut-
tered, I won’t sleep until an account of this day is written. I owe these notes to the 
kindness of our interpreter who repeated the conversations on returning to the fon-
daco this afternoon. We set out tomorrow for Cyprus, if Allah wills it. I’ll never forget 
my time here, though I won’t be sorry to leave. I long to feel dry land under my feet, 
and be away from the suspicious gazes of the inhabitants of this watery domain.
Venice, 1547
29
Figure 29.1  Portrait of Giovanni della Volta with his Wife and Children. Lorenzo Lotto. Oil 
on canvas, 1547. National Gallery, London: NG1047. Bequeathed by Miss Sarah 
Solly, 1879.

Venice, 1547  159
The tales they told in Egypt were all about the dangerous beauty of this strange 
city, floating in a lagoon. In mid-summer it was not my eyes that were overwhelmed. 
We’d hired a gondola to get to his studio and in every canal along the way a stench 
rose from the water. I’d followed the lead of the fine ladies in other craft, holding a 
perfumed kerchief close to my face. This simple trick had helped, though the stale 
reek still crept through the fabric.
The lower stories of these houses were dark and damp, useful for little more 
than storage. The painter’s studio was near the top; ascending the narrow stairs 
I caught glimpses of a grand sitting room facing out onto the canal. The play of 
sunshine reflecting from the water below cast ever-changing patterns of light on the 
delicately moulded plaster of the ceiling. Perhaps it was this light, the shimmering 
brilliance of it, that kept people living in the city?
“Aisha, there’s no time for gawping,” my father called out, “Ustadh Lotto has 
only a little time to spare.” Salim and the interpreter were holding rolled carpets 
under their arms, each one wrapped in plain linen.
Turpentine and oil vapour hung in the air of the studio. The interpreter noticed 
my pale face. “Might we open a window, maestro? I fear the signorina is unused 
to the smells of paint.”
The painter emerged from a back room. “As you wish.” He surveyed the space 
with a weary expression. “There was a time when the great esteem for my work 
bought me more spacious studios than this. Now weeks and months can go by 
without commissions. I can barely afford to keep one assistant, let alone the team 
that used to hang on my every word. It’s as God decides, of course. What can I do 
but submit myself to His infinite grace?”
While the interpreter made the introductions, I looked around the room. There 
were chairs, couches, and brocade textiles organised in one area, well away from 
the paints and brushes. The easel carried a large canvas. Other canvases, some al-
most completed, were hanging in a rack arranged along one wall. The painter was 
an austere man, all dressed in black, his abundant hair tucked partially into a large 
velvet cap. The beard must once have been nut brown, but was now flecked with 
white. His face was dominated by a narrow nose, like the rudder of a boat. Then 
there were those alert eyes, as shiny and dark as polished jet.
The painter addressed the interpreter directly. “My patron, Giovanni della Volta, 
will be arriving soon. A fussy and demanding man, it must be said. He and his 
wife have seen my portraits in the houses of friends and want one of their own. 
All very good, but there’s a catch; they don’t want their painting to have the same 
furnishings as those of their friends. I’ve managed to borrow some new furniture, 
but I have need of carpets. Many years ago I bought some handsome pieces from 
a merchant from the Orient—Abu Zayd, I think his name was—though they have 
suffered a little since I bought them.”
“I selected him myself, maestro,” the interpreter said anxiously. “He came highly 
recommended, able to procure the finest rugs from Turkey. I hope the products were 
not defective; I understood they would remain bright and fresh for many years.”
The painter smiled ruefully. “Nothing like that, though my heart told me this 
Abu Zayd was a rogue, as so many Saracens are—no offence meant to you,  

160  Venice, 1547
Signor Harith. The fault is my own. Painter’s studios are not the kindest places for 
such precious items; damp, flecks of paint, drops of varnish, and moths have all 
taken their toll.” He picked up the corner of one of the rugs, lying discarded in a 
pile. “See, dirt, holes, and fraying edges! I can hardly place this tattered thing in 
the centre of my new composition. What would any discerning client say, let alone 
one like Giovanni della Volta?”
Figure 29.2  Large fragmentary Ushak “Quatrefoil” carpet, sixteenth century, Anatolian. 
Turkey, Ottoman period. Wool. 119 × 90.25 inches. Saint Louis Art Museum, 
Gift of James F. Ballard: 98.1929.

Venice, 1547  161
My father took this as his cue. While Salim laid out sheets over the dirty floor-
boards, he untied the fastenings on the carpets. One after another was laid down 
under the watchful eye of the painter.
As the last of the batch was unrolled, the painter spoke. “No, no, these won’t do 
at all. The colours, the designs, they’re wrong.”
The interpreter explained to my father who looked perplexed. “But these are the 
finest Ushak rugs, made in my own workshops in Anatolia. Tell the ustadh Lotto that 
he will find nothing better than this in Venice today. What is it that he is looking for?”
“All this fussy detail! Even if my brush could capture it all, the viewer would 
only see it with a magnifying lens. No, what I need is something bold, something 
with yellows, reds, and blacks as a centrepiece for my painting.” He walked over 
the rack and pulled out a canvas. I’d seen some of these European paintings before 
but never so close. Its oily surface shone. I gasped at the way the paint captured vi-
sions of people and things as if they were standing before me. How did mere paint 
copy the sheen of silk, the grain of polished wood, and the softness of fur? Even the 
individual knots of the carpet were picked out in minute brushstrokes.
Master Lotto spoke again. “Only a painter, a master of his craft, can truly un-
derstand, but there must be balance in the composition of a painting. There is a 
geometry that undergirds my work, and the right carpet can add to that harmony 
through its pattern and tone. That is what I want.”
My father rubbed his nose thoughtfully. “Salim, go back down to the boat, and 
fetch the other pieces. They were destined for another client. Rather coarser than 
my Ushaks, but perhaps one will please the ustadh.”
Scowling at his master, Salim headed down the narrow stairs. He returned, puff-
ing, with two more coiled rugs on his shoulder. The painter looked unimpressed 
as the first was rolled out, but his mood brightened as the second was unfurled. 
“That is it! Much better than those flowery meadows you showed me before. See 
the crispness of these shapes and the vivid colours. This will sing in the centre of 
my painting. I have a question for the merchant. What is this border, looking like 
knotted rope? I’ve not seen its like before.”
I’d never given these patterns much thought. They brought to mind tilework 
on the mosques of Bursa. Were there words hidden in these repeated designs? The 
translator was relating the painter’s question to my father. I heard his hushed words 
of reply. “I’ve seen ones like this with simple phrases like ‘dominion belongs to Al-
lah.’ In this case it is just pleasant shapes. Tell him it says something like ‘blessings 
to the owner’ over and over. Should keep him happy.”
As Master Lotto listened to the translator, a smile spread across his face. “That 
will please my client greatly. You can tell the merchant I’ll buy this carpet if he can 
offer me a good price.” My father narrowed his eyes in anticipation of the negotia-
tion. Salim and I busied ourselves rolling up the unwanted carpets.
Back in the gondola, my father soon fell into conversation with the interpreter. 
I turned to Salim who was tightening the cords around our remaining stock of car-
pets. “There’s something I don’t understand. As soon as these Venetians buy our 
carpets, they place them on top of tables and chests. Don’t they know carpets are 
meant for the floor?”

162  Venice, 1547
Salim threw up his hands. “Allah alone knows all things. They don’t even seem 
to want our best wares, preferring tough, everyday carpets like the one ustadh Lotto 
chose. I’d never let one like that anywhere near my table. Would you entertain a 
guest with plates of delicious food that were placed on a rug soiled by the feet of 
strangers?”
Figure 29.3  “Lotto” carpet, wool, sixteenth century. Attributed to Turkey. Rogers Fund, 
1908. Metropolitan Museum of Art: 08.167.1. CC0.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-33
Erzincan, 1568
30
Figure 30.1  Court of Gayumars. Shahnama of Shah Tahmasp. Tabriz, attributed to Sultan 
Muhammad, c. 1524–25. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto. AKM 165.

164  Erzincan, 1568
“They’ll be heading east to Sivas or Amasya. That’s no use to us. We should be 
journeying further south to Malatya and then on to Iskenderun. We can get a ship 
from there to the Egyptian coast.” Salim was holding my father’s ledger. He’d 
spent the time before dinner poring over the accounts, tutting in displeasure at our 
recent run of poor fortune. “These people have everything they need. They’re not 
looking to buy goods from traders like us.”
My father sighed. “I suppose you’re right. Tomorrow we make our way to 
Malatya. Still, it’s been good to tag along with an imperial caravan if only for the 
protection it brings on the roads. Even the most foolhardy gang of bandits would 
hesitate before attacking this convoy. I’ve never seen so many of the shah’s troops, 
each one armed to the teeth!”
“That’s all very well,” Salim persisted, “but it’s time we gave some thought to 
filling our empty purses. Why have we stayed so long with the shah’s caravan?”
“I’ve been hoping to speak with a friend. He serves in the Safavid court. I heard 
he’d been charged with the safe-guarding of some of the treasures. Might have 
some things for me.”
“And what is this friend’s name?” Salim asked, his eyes narrowing.
“Abu Zayd,” my father replied warily. “Don’t grimace at me, Salim! You know 
as well as I do that he’s helped us out many times before.” He stepped out of the 
tent to avoid the argument that was already simmering in the air.
I joined him outside while Salim returned his attention to the ledger. We were 
camping for the night outside a grand caravanserai. The monumental stone façade 
was picked out in the light of the setting sun.
“Why is the shah sending goods west into the territories of the Ottomans?” I 
asked.
“He’s dispatching a gift to the new sultan of the Turks. Selim, I think he’s 
called,” he replied.
“Don’t the Safavids and the Ottomans hate each other? Erzincan used to be part 
of the shah’s empire and now he’s sending presents to the Sublime Porte.”
“These people aren’t like the rest of us,” my father responded. “Even in times of 
war, rulers exchange the finest gifts. Not because they like each other. It’s a com-
petition to see who can find the rarest, most precious things. I heard about Muslim 
sultans even sending elephants and giraffes to European kings. Poor beasts! Don’t 
suppose they lasted long during the icy winters.”
While he was speaking, an elderly man passed through the gate of the caravan-
serai and hobbled urgently in our direction. It was only when he was a few paces 
away that my father recognised him. “Abu Zayd, it’s good to see you!”
We sat silently in the tent while our visitor regained his breath. Salim had been 
sent outside to make some tea. “Not really meant to be here, but I couldn’t pass up 
the chance to see you, al-Harith. Life being kind to you? You always knew how to 
stay afloat even in times of strife.”
My father’s expression gave nothing away. “Always looking for new opportuni-
ties. You have anything for me?”
Abu Zayd glanced briefly towards the caravanserai. “A few little baubles I don’t 
suppose they’ll miss. After all, I was one of those who compiled the inventory. 

Erzincan, 1568  165
Perhaps in a distracted moment I undercounted a few jewels, one or two inlaid 
perfume boxes?” Reaching under his cloak, he retrieved a leather bag. He laid each 
item carefully on the mat. “Insha allah, you’ll get a good price for these in the 
markets further south.”
“It’s as well that Salim is not here to see this,” said my father as he ran his 
fingers over the ornamented metal containers. “Such wonderful workmanship is 
beyond my means. We’ve had some lean time of late.”
Abu Zayd grasped my father’s shoulder. “Why don’t you take them on credit? 
Next time we meet, just give me half of what you make on them.”
The kettle was whistling on the fire. Abu Zayd quickly returned the objects to 
their bag, stuffing it behind a cushion. “Salim, you treat us like the shah himself,” 
he said brightly. “While we drink, I could tell you about the greatest rarity among 
the many treasures assembled in the caravan.”
“Is it a Qurʾan?” Salim asked. “I heard rumours that a great manuscript was be-
ing sent from the shah to the sultan.”
“I suppose they must have found something like that to please the dry, old schol-
ars in the sultan’s court,” Abu Zayd sniffed. “I was talking about something much 
more precious, the Shahnama-yi Shahi itself!”
Seeing that this name meant nothing to us, he explained. “My friends, simply 
the finest Shahnama ever completed. It was assembled early in the reign of Tah-
masp, though it was his father who commissioned it.”
“What makes this manuscript so special?” I asked.
“Where to start?” he began with a smile. “The best polished paper from Tabriz, 
the colour of flawless marble and every bit as shiny. The margins of each sheet 
are dusted with gold. The most talented calligraphers in the empire employed to 
commit the verses of Firdawsi onto every page. Did I say every page? Well, that’s 
not quite true as this book has more paintings than any before it. I don’t suppose 
anyone will attempt something so ambitious ever again.”
“Did many painters work on the book?”
“When I was a young man, I’d occasionally take supplies to their studios,” he 
replied. “Busy as ants around a honey pot they were, some drawing out designs and 
others adding in the colour. Never seen such fine brushes, just a few hairs each. A 
single painting might take months, such was the detail. Some of it you could only 
see if you were inches away from the surface.”
My father leaned over to Abu Zayd. “This is like a table set out with a fine meal 
that we’re forbidden to eat! Can you satisfy our hunger by painting a picture with 
your words. Tell us what we might see in one of these glorious paintings.”
His friend considered for a moment before answering. “When no one was look-
ing last week I opened the covers and saw a few pages. Let me tell you about 
one that appears at the beginning. Do you remember the name of the first king of 
Persia?”
“Gayumars,” Salim responded.
“Quite so! A noble ruler and the first to dispense law to his people. Why, even 
the animals would bow down to him. This kingdom existed even before men had 
learned to build houses and women to spin thread. It’s said that everyone lived in 

166  Erzincan, 1568
caves and draped themselves with animal pelts. It was this scene that fascinated the 
renowned master, Sultan Muhammad. How could he envision this world so differ-
ent from our own?”
“If there was no palace, how did he show the king attended by his court?” 
I asked.
“It was as if nature itself had created the courtyard and the throne. Sultan 
Muhammad created a ring of rock dotted with plants, pushing out beyond the pic-
ture frame. The peaceable folk living under the rule of Gayumars were arranged 
inside. Only three were raised above the rest on rocky outcrops. The king at the 
centre, gazing tenderly down at his son, Siyamak. The other I guess to be the angel 
who brings the news of Ahriman’s plot to kill the king’s child.” He paused, as if 
trying to recover more details from the scene. “Every face, every gesture spoke to 
Figure 30.2  Detail of the Court of Gayumars showing Siyamak, son of Gayumars, and sur-
rounding landscape. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto. AKM 165.

Erzincan, 1568  167
me, but in truth it was neither the people nor the tame beasts that captivated my 
eye. No, it was the rocks.”
My father frowned. “Why would you concern yourself with such unimportant 
matters?”
“At first I thought it was just the colours, as if a rainbow had settled over the 
mountainside. Then I realised it was more than that. The wily painter had hidden 
messages in the stones, in the fluid lines defining the outer shapes and inner mark-
ings of each crag. The more I looked, the more there was to see, though I couldn’t 
always discern what had been placed there by the artist from what was simply 
conjured in my mind. Those rocks were alive with animals, from fierce dragons and 
lions to lowly mice and rabbits!”
“Maybe you saw more than you bargained for because of your fondness for 
wine?” my father suggested with a sly smile.
I expected him to take offence, but Abu Zayd laughed. “There might be some 
truth in that! I heard that rumours that some in the court are in the habit of taking 
opium. Not just for sickness. Who knows what visions they experience in front of 
these dazzling paintings?”
Our route the next day took us through a mountain pass. As my donkey picked 
her way along the narrow track, I stared at the outcrops of rock. Just dead stone or 
did I see the outlines of living creatures in the striations? The head of a gazelle ap-
peared momentarily before my eyes, blending seamlessly into the suggestion of a 
leaping cat. Was that a flock of birds flying above or merely the accidental arrange-
ment of crags and patches of lichen? I’d heard stories of people seeing trees, faces, 
and beasts appearing from within the liquid markings of marble panels on the walls 
of mosques and churches. Were they placed there by Allah for us to find or do our 
minds create mere fantasies in moments of idleness? I took a long breath of cool air 
and focused myself on the road ahead.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-34
He’d dozed off again, his bearded chin nestling into his chest. The raking sunlight 
cast tiny shadows into every line of his wrinkled face. I glanced out of the open 
window at the mosque dominating the square. The building looked warm and invit-
ing, constructed of russet bricks with windows picked out in white. Even the shaft 
Sofia, 1582
31
Figure 31.1  Colophon page from a lost section of a thirty-part Qurʾan written by Ahmad b. 
al-Suhrawardi, probably in Baghdad, c. 1302–1307. Metropolitan Museum of 
Art. Rogers Fund 55.44. CC0.

Sofia, 1582  169
of the slender minaret was formed of brick, interrupted only by the elegant balcony, 
supported on a muqarnas cornice. The domes were clad in sheets of lead. The sum-
mit each dome was marked by a finial topped with crescent moons. Covered in 
gold, they glittered against a flawless blue sky.
The old man opened his eyes. “An admirable mosque and no mistake! I can see 
why it captures your attention, but shouldn’t you be attending to your task?” He 
gestured wearily towards the cloth-bound portfolio stuffed with papers. “Sayyid 
Ibn al-Hammam said he’d pay a good price for the best pieces in my collection. 
We’ve only been through a few sheets. Be ready to write the descriptions in your 
notebook after you’ve held each one up.”
He sighed in satisfaction as I suspended the next page. “Such control of naskh, 
and such an admirable balance of writing and illumination! My eye tells me this 
is the work of the great Yaqut al-Mustaʿsimi. Truly a master of the six scripts! It 
must have come from a wonderful manuscript. I fancy that some of the other pieces 
you’ll find underneath are by his illustrious student, Ibn al-Suhrawardi. This is rare 
indeed for it is the colophon of some great Qurʾan. On the first line he records his 
name in the most exquisite thuluth. Simply breathtaking, don’t you think?”
After reviewing a few more pages of calligraphy, I paused. “Excuse me for ask-
ing, but why are you selling these beautiful things?”
I wasn’t sure if he heard my question. Were his eyes drooping again? A fly cir-
cled the room, finally finding a resting place on an untidy pile of books. “You know, 
I was involved in the construction of that mosque,” he said, at last. “Not in laying 
the bricks and mortar. Or applying the stucco and painting for that matter.” He no-
ticed my questioning expression. “I see that you like a story more than cataloguing 
fine calligraphy! Very well, the other papers can wait for now.”
“Were you an engineer or did you design the building?” I asked.
His laugh was noiseless, shaking his fragile frame. “I’m touched by your faith 
in my abilities! More than my parents had at any rate. When I was only a boy they 
sold me into the janissary corps. The hardest years of my life, torn from the world I 
knew and trained every day with the bow, sword and axe.” His eyes returned to the 
mosque. “Still, gave me opportunities I never could have dreamed of growing up in 
a simple village. Show some talent and there were chances of learning new skills. 
Happened to me when I was assigned to work for Mimar Sinan.”
“He created mosques for sultan Süleyman?”
The old man nodded. “I don’t suppose he’ll ever be surpassed in his craft. He 
too was a janissary. My job was to take papers between his office and the Sublime 
Porte. I carried orders from the sultan, as well as drawings of buildings that Sinan 
was planning.”
“What did the drawings look like?” I asked.
“Leaf through those papers,” he responded. “You’ll find something in there to 
answer your question. I don’t suppose your father will want it, but it might interest 
you.”
Near the bottom of the pile I came across a folded sheet of waxy paper, scuffed 
and discoloured. I opened it out to reveal the inner surface. A grid of small squares 
covered the surface. Some of the squares were filled with black ink, forming lines, 

170  Sofia, 1582
squares and rectangles. The grid also formed the background for different shapes: 
circles, octagons, and others for which I had no name. He noticed my bewilderment 
and explained. “This drawing was made in Mimar Sinan’s workshop, maybe a few 
parts are in the master’s own hand. It’s the plan of the building you see out of my 
window, the Banya Bashi mosque.”
“What do all these black lines and forms mean?”
“Try to imagine the floor of a mosque before anything else has been erected. 
This drawing tells you where all the walls and supporting elements will be located. 
It tells you more too, for some parts of the mosque are higher than others. The great 
dome rises above everything else. This is a burden on everything below it. See how 
Figure 31.2  Banya Bashi Mosque, Sofia, Bulgaria. Designed by Mimar Sinan and com-
pleted 1566. View from north showing entrance.
Source: Wikicont007. Wikimedia Commons.

Sofia, 1582  171
the walls and piers are thicker around the dome in order to carry the weight? Turn 
your attention to the portico, and you find that slender columns are enough to do 
the work of carrying the smaller domes.”
“How did they know the precise dimensions of each part? I can’t see anything 
on the drawing.”
He pointed at the grid. “It’s all in these squares. If each one is expanded by the 
same amount, you can build the mosque to whatever size you want. They employ 
many units of measurement across the empire. Using these squares allows local 
masons to work with the units they know best. See also how they can build in all 
sorts of materials, brick here in Sofia and stone in places where it’s more plentiful.”
Figure 31.3  Banya Bashi Mosque, Sofia, Bulgaria. Designed by Mimar Sinan and com-
pleted 1566. View from south.
Source: Wikicont007. Wikimedia Commons.

172  Sofia, 1582
“Then Mimar Sinan didn’t supervise the construction?” I asked.
“The old sultan mostly kept him occupied in Istanbul. That’s where I come into 
the story. I was the messenger, bringing this plan and other drawings of the walls 
and domes to Sofia. Stayed here all the time from the laying of the foundations to 
the setting of the last glazed tile on the qibla wall. When they’d finished their work, 
no one wanted a drawing covered in grubby finger marks and spilt coffee. That’s 
how I came to have it.”
Figure 31.4  Engraving of sultan Süleyman. Anonymous printmaker after a design by Ago-
stino Veneziano, Venice, c. 1540–50. Harris Brisbane Dick Fund, 1942. The 
Metropolitan Museum of Art: 42.41.1. CC0.

Sofia, 1582  173
I glanced down at the pile of papers, and noticed one with repeated black lines 
forming the shapes of feathers. Pulling it out, I realised that this was the topmost 
part of a larger design: a man’s head and shoulders in profile, and above that the 
most extraordinary hat I’d ever seen. Conical in form, it rose high above the wear-
er’s skull. Four crowns of varying sizes were set into it, each one embellished with 
finials carrying giant pearls. A strap ran under the wearer’s chin and connected to 
a flaring neckguard. Could such a scrawny man really have borne the weight? “Is 
this just a fantasy?” I asked.
“If you read the Latin script at the base, you’ll have an answer. A Frankish print-
maker fashioned this as a representation of sultan Süleyman.”
I looked at him incredulously. “But he wore a turban! Surely even they know 
that?”
“You might not believe it, but the sombre Süleyman had a different character 
in his youth. Wanted to prove himself to the greatest rulers of Europe. What you 
see was fashioned in Venice at the sultan’s order. Cost more gold than we’ll ever 
see in our lifetimes. I even glimpsed it once when I was part of a detachment sent 
to escort the vizier, Ibrahim Pasha, all the way to Ragusa. Handed over in a grand 
ceremony and then the vizier had to ensure the safe passage back to Istanbul in its 
own carriage just as if this precious hat were a Christian princess sent to join the 
sultan’s harem.”
The old man took the print from my hands and studied it. “You asked me ear-
lier why I’m selling everything. The simple answer is that I need the money. My 
son, Zayd is blessed with many children, but not the means to raise them properly. 
That’s not all, of course. My time’s nearly gone. I’ll have enough to account for 
when Judgement comes without weighing down my soul with needless posses-
sions. These sheets have given me pleasure, though are they anything more than a 
dim reflection of the truth?”
“Are they just a worthless distraction?”
“More than that, I think,” he replied slowly. “Call them a guide. While the hand 
of the calligrapher inscribes the word of Allah, isn’t the true Qurʾan kept within the 
heart of the believer or shared with the world through the gift of speech? Same too 
with that plan. It directs the masons in their work. Ultimately it’s their skill and 
labour that will create a solid structure where the faithful gather in prayer.”
“What about the print of the sultan’s crown?”
“For that I have no answer. May such as such a frivolous thing never be made 
again! Süleyman regretted his hubris, never putting it on his head. Perhaps the print 
just offers us a warning.” The mosque was now glowing pink in the rays of the set-
ting sun. Turning his eyes from the building, Abu Zayd spoke again: “Gold, pearls 
and jewels might seduce our senses, but there’s more value to be found in even the 
most humble place of worship. Make no mistake: the bricks and stone you see out 
of my window will still be there when fancy crowns are long forgotten.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-35
Isfahan, 1637
32
Figure 32.1  Interior of the dome chamber of the Shaykh Lutfallah mosque, Isfahan, 
1603–19.
Source: Amirpashaie, 2021. Wikimedia Commons.

Isfahan, 1637  175
“I was told to find him on the other side of the maydan. Don’t know how I will 
recognise him, as one European gentleman looks much like another.”
My father’s concerns were unfounded. The man was standing with his back to-
wards us, admiring the entrance to a building. Clad in an embroidered velvet jacket 
and pantaloons, he was just as I imagined the member of a foreign embassy would 
look. No chance had been missed to attract the eye with colour, texture, and pattern. 
Even his broad-brimmed felt hat was topped with a dyed ostrich feather.
“Agha Olearius,” my father called out. “You are expecting us?”
The man had turned, revealing a broad face with ruddy cheeks, a long, straight 
nose, and inquisitive eyes. The greying hair hanging on both sides of his head 
reminded me of the floppy ears of the Saluki dogs that Persians kept for hunting 
expeditions.
“Peace be upon you, esteemed agha,” my father continued briskly. “We’ve been 
asked to take you wherever you desire in this fine city. There is, of course, so much 
to see. Do they not say that Isfahan is half the world?”
His words were followed by a confused silence. “I don’t think the agha under-
stood anything you said,” Salim whispered.
Olearius turned towards an open gate leading to the bazar and waved at an old 
man standing half in the shadow. Seeing the signal, he hurried towards us. Bowing 
low, he introduced himself. “Abu Zayd, dragoman to the diplomatic mission of 
the illustrious duke of Holstein-Gottorp. At your service.” He paused to catch his 
breath. “I crave your pardon for being detained as you arrived. I believe you will 
be conducting the agha around the city today?”
With Abu Zayd acting as interpreter, the introductions were made again. Olear-
ius whispered instructions to Abu Zayd. “My master is a man of deep learning. 
What intrigues him most is the study of mathematics. We might find him some 
scientific equipment in the market, though first he would like to see how the prin-
ciples of geometry are manifested in the buildings of Isfahan. What structures best 
illustrate how Persian masons use this knowledge to conduct their work?”
Salim was the first to answer. “What better than to start with the mosque just 
a few steps away?” He pointed towards a muqarnas vault set within a rectangular 
frame. Just beyond it lay a dome glittering in the morning sunlight. The drum of 
the dome was set with turquoise tiles. Arched windows were interspersed with 
angular inscriptions. Another band of text in flowing cursive on a deep blue ground 
formed the junction with the dome. I’d hardly looked at it before, and was surprised 
to find the tiles were dull yellow, like the endless sand of the Dasht-i Kavir. Over 
this muted surface was arranged a continuous tracery of stems, leaves and blooms.
Olearius busily wrote in a notepad while my father recounted what he knew of 
the building. Soon we were ascending the stairs and passing through the doorway. 
A dimly lit corridor turned at an angle, hiding the splendour within. The dome 
chamber revealed itself, the reflective tiles seeming to glow in the sparse sunlight 
filtering through the grille windows high above us.
The space was empty and we stood for a while in silence. Indeed, the chamber 
seemed to demand a hushed reverence, a concentration on the beauty of the propor-
tions and the enveloping ornament. The colours of the exterior were repeated on the 

176  Isfahan, 1637
interior, though the effect was not the same; it was like standing in a mine rich with 
seams of precious stones glittering in the darkness. These seams contained continu-
ous patterns and bands of writing. I looked across to Olearius to see if he shared 
my sense of wonder, but on his face there was only a shadow of dissatisfaction. My 
father noticed it too and asked through Abu Zayd for Olearius to share his thoughts.
“Sometimes what is simply appealing to the eye hides the most important beauty 
beneath. I can divine some of the proportional relationships within this building 
and how the weight of the dome is channeled through those concave forms to the 
supporting walls below. This fussy ornament only hinders my concentration on 
these issues. If only there were some way to strip it away to reveal the bricks and 
mortar.”
“I may have an answer,” Salim responded. “It’s a short walk from here through 
the bazar, but the old Masjid-i Jamiʿ might be more to the taste of the agha. The 
northern dome chamber is much admired and is said by some to have been de-
signed by ʿUmar Khayyam himself.”
Seeing an explanation was required, my father continued: “A poet, and like 
yourself, a scholar of mathematics. Five hundred years ago, ʿUmar Khayyam 
served the Saljuq sultans who ruled lands from the borders of China to the Medi-
terranean Sea.”
Our guest gave his assent and we emerged from the quiet of the mosque into 
the urgent clamour of the market, the clanging of hammer against metal competing 
with the shouts of cloth merchants, bakers, and water sellers. Olearius was easily 
distracted, stopping to take notes on the activities of artisans and shopkeepers. It 
took us more than an hour to reach our destination, the blank brick walls giving 
little hint at what lay within. Through the northern gate, we turned east and found 
our way into another dome chamber, this one dominated by the pale tones of baked 
brick and stucco.
Salim pointed south. “This once stood apart from the mosque. Over time the 
sacred space has spread, enveloping this structure. I’ve heard that this was a private 
place for the sultan before he entered the mosque for Friday prayers, though Allah 
alone knows the truth. Abu Zayd, could you ask the agha if this place is more to 
his liking?”
The question was hardly necessary; Olearius was striding purposely from one 
side to the other, occasionally patting the walls contentedly and letting out sighs of 
admiration. While he busied himself with writing and sketching, I looked around 
me. The space seemed unenticing, drained of colour and ornament. What was this 
strange foreigner seeing that I could not? I tried again, allowing my gaze to pass 
slowly from the apex of the dome to the magisterial squinches, and down to the 
weighty supporting structures. What had first seemed stark, like the impassive face 
of a cliff, now seemed full of life. Patterns existed everywhere, not announcing 
themselves openly but waiting to be glimpsed by an attentive eye. Some were ap-
plied in stucco and others in the bricks themselves, laid in a myriad of configura-
tions. Patterns and structure were united! There was something else too, deeper, 
almost beyond human perception. Was it the sense of balance, a relationship of 
parts to the whole that could not be improved? I had no answer.

Isfahan, 1637  177
Olearius was still deep in contemplation. “We might call it a tale of two cities,” 
he said at last. Seeing our questioning gazes, he continued, “or perhaps a tale of 
the same city transformed entirely as we embrace the modern age of gunpowder, 
tobacco, coffee, and the printed page! The fundamental skeleton of our two domed 
spaces is much the same, but the skin clothing the later one speaks of a new era, a 
new mentality. Shah ʿAbbas had a vision for a capital that could rival any in Europe 
and perhaps his successor means to follow the same path.”
I was troubled by his remarks. “Will all these great centres end up looking the 
same as they seek to outdo one another?”
He shook his head. “Every place has a spirit, something essential that cannot be 
erased. Look at the market we have just walked through. Teeming with activity, just 
as one might see in Vienna, Budapest or Paris. What might be the greatest luxury 
for buyers in those places—saffron, inlaid metalwork, and lampas silks—are in 
Figure 32.2  Interior of the North Dome Chamber, Masjid-i Jamiʿ, Isfahan, 1088–89.
Source: Diego Delso, 2016. Wikimedia Commons.

178  Isfahan, 1637
Isfahan almost commonplace. What reasonable person is not seduced by sweet pas-
tries, and yet the ones here are laden with nuts and soaked in rosewater. No baker 
in Leipzig or Magdeburg would dare to do such a thing!”
“Each place takes new ideas and bends them to fit local traditions?” I asked.
“A mere secretary to an ambassador might be wise to keep his thoughts to him-
self. I must get back to the court.” He replaced his hat with a flourish and took one 
last look around him. “Still, I can’t help thinking that with each new thing we gain, 
something else is lost. Look at this place, with its sombre grandeur, as if it had been 
hewn out of a mountainside. I don’t doubt that my master, Duke Frederick, would 
be captivated by the glittering delights of that other building just as he will be by 
the coloured silks gifted to him by the shah. But the pleasures they bring are fleet-
ing, unlike the eternal consolations of geometry! The designer of the dome under 
which we stand understood that point, imbuing a mass of bricks and mortar with 
the hidden proportions and symmetries that inform the natural world. Perhaps ar-
chitects in future centuries will do the same, stripping away the surface decorations 
to expose the simpler beauty beneath.”
As we left I thought about how a city of the future might look shorn of its paint-
ings and glazed tiles. Drab and lifeless? Or would the simplicity allow us to focus 
on what was most significant? I could hear Salim muttering. I caught one phrase 
before his voice was lost in the bustle of the street: “No vision can grasp Him, but 
his grasp is over all vision: He is the knower of subtleties, the All Aware.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-36
A strange place to find such a plump, leather-bound volume. It didn’t look Persian. 
No flap across the exposed edges of the sheets and little ornament on the cover. 
Only shiny, brown leather. No one looking? I’ll just take a quick look inside.
The pages felt weighty, creaking softly as they were turned. Not like the pli-
ant, polished paper I was used to. These surfaces were more absorbent, suitable 
for printing ink. Even the smell of the book was different: musky, oily. The title 
page was covered in strange writing. I knew the Frankish alphabet, though the 
writing didn’t mean much to me. The uppermost word seemed to be in a different 
script. Come back to that later. I slowly worked my way through the first two lines: 
THEATRI BOTANICI. CASPARI BAVHINI. I’m not much the wiser after that. 
Perhaps I should leaf through some of the book to get some clues?
Agra, 1643
33
Figure 33.1  Taj Mahal, Agra, 1631–47.
Source: Matthew T. Rader. Wikimedia Commons.

180  Agra, 1643
There was a shout from the other side of the workshop and I froze in fear. “You, take 
your hands from that!” A bulky man, sweat glistening on his forehead, rushed towards 
me, with my father and Salim following anxiously in his wake. His high-pitched voice 
was out of keeping with his size. “It’s more than my life’s worth if it gets damaged. I 
can picture the look on the chief librarian’s face if I return one of his precious tomes 
with scuffed covers or torn pages. Just the sort of thing some thoughtless girl might 
do. May Allah preserve us!” I hardly had time to take a breath before he snatched the 
book, placing it firmly under one arm and fixing me with a malevolent stare.
My father sought to calm the situation. “No harm done, ustadh Jaʿfar! Perhaps 
you could show us what you are working on, and how we might assist you.”
The man’s expression brightened. “You are right, of course, but I’ve had trouble 
before with the imperial library; they lend us books but always expect them back in 
perfect condition. Don’t they know this is a stone-cutting workshop? It’s not like the 
pristine calm of their reading rooms! Besides, this one won’t be of much use to me.”
“Why do you need these volumes in the first place?” Salim asked. “I’d imagine 
that you already had plenty of designs in you pattern books.”
“You’re not wrong,” he replied. “We’ve all sorts of designs to work from. I 
inherited albums of drawings from my father, and he from his. An invaluable re-
source for my artisans if a little dusty and thumbed at the corners. Shah Jahan, our 
glorious master, wishes for something different for his new monument. Or so he 
tells our boss, and he tells his underlings, and they come us with our orders. What 
can we do but obey?”
“What is it that they want?” my father asked. “I’ve seen the work of your carvers 
and inlayers. There’s no one better in Agra.”
The ustadh bathed in the compliment, a smile flickering on his lips as he spoke. 
“Your kind words are like rain on parched land! We need all our skill for the present 
task. Our orders are to make new designs using the images in books like these.” 
To illustrate what he meant, the master placed the volume on a bench, opening it 
somewhere near the middle. We all gathered round. He pointed a gnarled finger at 
one of the engravings. “When we draw a plant, we distill our memories of all those 
we have seen before in order to produce something pleasing to Allah, the one crea-
tor. If you are to represent paradise or the glories of creation, why concern yourself 
with what a single plant looks like when it’s possible to share with the viewer the 
experience of many species all in one image?”
I wasn’t sure if I should speak. “Excuse me, master. What is the difference with 
the images in this book?”
He patted the pages. “Since you were so interested in what secrets hide between 
these covers, why don’t you tell me what you can see?”
Each page had two columns of dense writing in the lower part, but it was the im-
ages that attracted me. There was no colour, only lines to describe every part of a 
plant from its roots to its leaves, flowers, and berries. There was no background, as if 
the plants had been ripped from the soil and simply pressed onto the page. Pointing at 
one, I described it as best I could. “At the base I see a root comprising one main part 
with small tendrils attached. Above the soil the plant divides into many stems. Leaves 
emerge from these stems at regular intervals from the bottom until near the top. Each 

Agra, 1643  181
Figure 33.2  Illustrations and text from Gaspard Bauhin, Pinax theatri botanici (Basle, 
1623), p. 2. Missouri Botanical Garden’s Materia Medica. Biodiversity Herit-
age Library, 2015. Wikimedia Commons.

182  Agra, 1643
stem is crowned with clusters of four-petalled flowers. I like the way the artist has 
placed some leaves behind, making them appear in shadow. Others curve toward or 
away from our eye just as they do in a shrub in a garden. There’s no symmetry from 
left to right. It’s as if the artist were looking at a plant in his workshop.” Jaʿfar was 
nodding appreciatively, but there was something that bothered me. “If it was drawn 
from one plant, why don’t the leaves all look the same in shape and size?”
Salim peered at the page. “Perhaps these Europeans, for all their learning, don’t 
really look carefully enough. The illustrator probably forgot what he was told and 
made mistakes.”
Jaʿfar laughed. “I believe that the author kept a close eye on his artists. This 
picture is trying to tell you about the plant at the different stages Allah has granted 
to its lifespan, how leaves grow, and buds form and burst into life. Look at the 
companion plant on the same page and you’ll see the same. This is not an image 
for pleasure, but for instruction.”
“I still think they look beautiful,” I offered.
“I suppose you’re right,” he conceded. “We had another book last month that 
was the work of a great master. Besler was the name. Each print coloured by hand 
with vibrant colours. It was as if you could feel the textures of every stem and petal, 
smell the fragrance rising from the page. You can see what one of my draughtsmen 
made from the prints.”
Figure 33.3  Carved marble dado with parchinkari bands, Taj Mahal, Agra, 1631–47.
Source: Matthew T. Rader. Wikimedia Commons.

Agra, 1643  183
He opened a portfolio, each sheet containing a drawing of a single plant. Turn-
ing them over, he revealed an iris, a lily, and then a narcissus. There was such grace, 
combining the close observation of leaves and flowers with a natural sense of pat-
tern. There were pin pricks along every line and faint traces of powder. “These are 
what we use for cutting the marble,” he explained. “A dusting of red chalk, high-
lighted with ink and brush, provides the guidelines for my carvers. Same process 
repeated across the dado. Come and see.”
We went outside, following the rhythmic sound of chisels biting into stone. 
Three men were kneeling in front of a long panel of unveined marble. The after-
noon sun raked across the surface, casting shadows from the raised elements of the 
design. Jaʿfar drew us closer until we were looking over the shoulder of one carver. 
“You see it nearly complete,” he announced proudly. “Imagine the panel after pol-
ishing, how every leaf and petal will mimic the fragility of a living species, but now 
frozen in place until the end of days.”
“All of the plants in this design are symmetrical,” my father observed. “It’s as if 
real, living things have been cast in their perfect forms. What will surround these 
carved panels? If it were mine I would want a little colour.”
“That is why I need you,” he replied, picking up a long panel. Already grooves 
had been incised into its surface. I could make out elegant curves running across 
the marble, but the pattern was difficult to make out. “I’m running low on tur-
quoise, lapis, and jade to inlay the stone. I don’t even have as much jasper as I’d 
like. My men will soon have to sit idle if you can’t supply me.”
“They call it parchinkari,” Salim whispered to me. “It’s like setting mother-of-
pearl into wood, but even more demanding to master.”
Leaning against a wall I saw a finished section, the deep greens, reds, and blues 
seeming to float on the gleaming white marble. I went closer and saw Flame of the 
Forest, every vibrant bloom framed by a leaf cut from jade. These endless repeat-
ing patterns were more familiar to my eye, providing colour and animation against 
the carved marble plants, the latter seemingly life-like though really no more than 
a ghostly presence. After all, which was truer to the natural form, the inlay or the 
carving?
I was still pondering this question as we reached the confines of the great enclo-
sure. I looked back at the glorious, still unfinished tomb, the last resting place of 
Mumtaz Mahal. Were the flowering plants meant to create a paradise on earth or 
were the artisans trying to imagine what we might hope for after death? There was 
no one to answer my question. Turning on my heel, I hurried to rejoin the rest of 
the caravan on the long road north.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-37
“Those bites aren’t going to get any better if you keep scratching them!”
Salim’s words brought me out of my daydream. I hadn’t even noticed my finger-
nails raking across the reddened skin of my ankles. I fixed him with a stare. “Why 
did I have to come on this trip? You could have left me in Amara with friends while 
the two of you came to the marshes. I’ve never seen so many mosquitos. How does 
anyone live here?”
Salim gave a weary sigh. “A little honey might help with the itching. I’ll find 
some this evening. We’re nearly there. At least you will have some ground beneath 
your feet again. I know you don’t much like travelling by tarada.”
Hawizeh Marshes, 1673
34
Figure 34.1  Suaid men constructing a house from qasab. Eastern Marshes, Umm al Malih, 
Iraq.
Source: Wilfred Patrick Thesiger, 1956. © Pitt Rivers Museum, University of Oxford. Accession num-
ber: 2004.130.13666.1.

Hawizeh Marshes, 1673  185
He was right about that; these canoes were so narrow that it felt like the slightest 
movement would tip them over, launching us into the dark water. I ran my hand along 
the outer surface of the craft, feeling the smooth, hard layer of bitumen. Our oarsman 
was making steady progress, navigating past banks of tall reeds. Everything was still, 
the breeze unable to penetrate this strange, secluded environment. I thought of the 
thick forests at the source of the Tigris, and how the endless trees seemed isolated, 
far from the easy comforts of city life. The marshes provoked the same uneasy feel-
ings, but there was something more, like being transported to a place where time had 
stopped. Was this sodden land a relic of the ancient world, or had the people herea-
bouts glimpsed our urban ways and simply chosen to shun them?
A ribbon of smoke was rising into the cloudless sky. Soon triangular shapes of 
buildings emerged beyond the reeds. “What’s this village called?” I asked. Our 
guide steered the slender boat around a last patch of sedge, running the long bow 
into a sloping bank of mud. “Imam ʿAbdullah, my home,” he replied, flashing a 
toothless smile. Eager children were pulling the craft onto land. Salim tossed them 
a worn copper coin and stepped ashore. He didn’t wait for me, striding towards the 
largest structure while giving orders for our baggage to be unloaded.
I was left alone in the boat, ignored by all. Did I count for any more than the 
bales of cloth we’d brought downriver? I was just about to climb out of the boat 
when a slim, pale hand reached out for mine. “Tsk, leaving a lady unattended in 
such a … wild place! Perhaps I can offer some assistance?”
I glanced up to see a young man with an open, friendly face. He could not have 
been more out of place, dressed as he was in leather shoes with brass buckles, 
stockings rising to closely fitting trousers, and a frock coat cut from fine linen. His 
grand apparel betrayed the signs of travel: frayed seams, mud, and water staining. 
The only concession to local custom was the loosely woven fabric wrapped unti-
dily around his head.
“I’ve been learning your language since my arrival in Aleppo last year. There is, 
I fear, much left to master.” He gave a slight bow. “Ambrosio Bembo, a proud son 
of Venice but an adventurer at heart.”
“Aisha bint al-Harith,” I responded. “How did you end up in the marshes?”
“We’ve been following the mighty river south from Baghdad. My dragoman, 
Abu Zayd, bought us places on kallaks headed for Basra. Remarkable craft and no 
mistake: just logs floated on animal skins. When they reach their destination, the 
boatmen sell all their goods and the logs as well. Once the air is released from the 
skins they can carry them back up river and start the process over again. It’s a long, 
dusty walk. Rather them than me!”
“Why go to Basra?” I asked.
“That’s my gateway to the Gulf and, if God wills it, the passage to India.”
I pondered what he’d said. “This must seem an odd place to you.”
“So many questions! My own city is built in a lagoon, giving me some little 
understanding of the people of this region.” He paused, surveying the settlement. 
“It’s a fine protection to be surrounded by water. I’d be glad to see more brick and 
stone, of course. For all that, I admire the ingenuity of these marsh folk, making the 
most of what surrounds them.”

186  Hawizeh Marshes, 1673
Our conversation was interrupted by shouting a little way off. Without anything 
better to do, we walked in the direction of the voices. This took us past small dwell-
ings and animal pens made of reeds and pressed mud. Women and children were 
kneeling on the ground cutting reeds into narrow strips and pounding them with 
mallets. In the clearing beyond we saw men carrying reeds bound tightly together 
to form columns. One arch was already partially assembled, with two of the giant 
bundles set into the ground and being bent towards one another. One of the builders 
was perched on top of a simple scaffold made of three reed bundles lashed together. 
Bellowing orders to his compatriots, he struggled to connect the two sides of the 
great arch. Sweat glistened on his face as he worked in the unrelenting sun.
“Abu Zayd described this process to pass the time on the kallak, though I didn’t 
think I’d ever see it being done,” Ambrosio said excitedly. “He told me that their 
biggest houses are made with six or more of these arches. They almost have the 
strength of the stout wooden beams that hold up the roofs of our palazzos.”
Salim was approaching us in the company of an older man, who I guessed to 
be my companion’s dragoman. Ambrosio saw them too. “Abu Zayd, you’ve taken 
your time! I trust we now have the supplies needed for the coming days.”
Abu Zayd was about to speak, but Salim cut in. “Aisha, you and the Frankish 
sayyid are required. The village chief wants to meet you in his mudhif.”
Seeing my puzzled expression, Abu Zayd explained. “The great reed houses 
carry this name. Guests are entertained and agreements are made in such places. It 
doesn’t do to keep such a man waiting.”
Figure 34.2  Mudhif. Abra, Iraq.
Source: Wilfred Patrick Thesiger, 1956. © Pitt Rivers Museum, University of Oxford. Accession num-
ber: 2004.130.16027.1.

Hawizeh Marshes, 1673  187
We hurried towards the heart of the village. The mudhif stood out from all the 
structures around it. The entrance was marked by tapering clusters of reeds as thick 
as the masts of sea-going dhows. Unlike the arches, these constructions had no 
other purpose than to provide a sense of grandeur. Above the opening at the centre 
was a delicate lattice of interwoven reed strips.
The heavy aroma of boiled mutton filled the long room. My father sitting cross-
legged on a densely woven reed mat beside some dishes filled with steaming meat 
and rice. He beckoned us forward and introduced our host. A fragmented conversa-
tion took place between mouthfuls of food, under the watchful eye of the village 
chief. To provide hospitality like this was more than a duty for him; his expression 
told of his pleasure at having such diverse company.
It only took one unguarded comment to change the tone. Abu Zayd, who knew 
the marshes well, casually remarked, “Your mudhif is a fine structure. I believe it is 
only bettered by those constructed the families who live on the western side of the 
Euphrates river. They are indeed masters of the craft.”
His honour offended, the chief glared across at us. Ambrosio leapt to his feet. 
He bowed low, while planting his hand deep into a coat pocket. Drawing it out, his 
open hand revealed gilded glass beads. “Please forgive the ungracious words of 
my dragoman! The smallest gesture of gratitude for your hospitality, noble shaykh. 
Perhaps these pretty things from my home will charm your children.” After a mo-
ment’s silence, the gift was accepted, the tension dissolving into the evening air.
As he sat down, Ambrosio pressed one last bead into my hand. “I’d hoped to 
keep these trinkets until I stepped onto the shores of India, but they are clearly 
destined to stay here. Your bead, I think, may make longer journeys than the rest.”
We set off next morning in a convoy of taradas loaded with woven mats. At 
Amara the cargo would be transferred to a barija on which we’d sail north along 
the Tigris to Baghdad. I let my hand drift into the water, relishing the cool sensation 
on my fingers. I thought of the people of Imam ʿAbdullah lined up on the bank as 
they watched our departure. Men and women standing as straight as reeds; plant 
and human both as essential to this place as the water, the earth, and the air above. 
The reeds formed an enclosing wall around the people since the beginning of time, 
shielding them from enemies, nurturing their animals, and providing them with the 
roofs over their heads.
I drew the bead out of my pocket and marvelled at the delicate filaments of 
red, green, and gold snaking through the flawless glass. Though this little object 
delighted my eyes, the marshes sent out a more potent challenge. Nothing here was 
wasted, with things fashioned from reeds eventually rotting back into the water 
only to be replaced by newly harvested plants. An endless cycle so different from 
the mounds of refuse that built up each day in every city. Had we become too ac-
customed to luxury, forgetting our link to the natural world?
Salim was quietly reciting the words of Surat al-Hijr: “And the earth We have 
spread out like a carpet; set thereon mountains firm and immovable; and produced 
therein all kinds of things in due balance.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-38
Istanbul, 1733
35
Figure 35.1  Illustration of mermen from İbrahim Müteferrika, ed., Tarihü’l-Hindi’l-Garbi 
el-Müsemma bī Hadis-i Nev, Müteferrika press, Istanbul, 1730 (1142 H). The 
Lilly Library, Indiana University, Bloomington. DR 403. M825, fol. 49r.

Istanbul, 1733  189
Whyever did he buy me a monkey? Baba came back from the market this morning 
with a foolish smile on his face. “This cheeky fellow will keep you company while 
I am away. I saw him and thought you’d like his velvet jacket,” he said before leav-
ing to the other room to pack his bags. I could hear his muffled voice coming from 
his dressing room, “Salim will look after you this week. Take the animal out with 
you when you go to the warehouse.”
I sighed at the thought of the dull day that awaited me. Istanbul had been gripped 
by a craze for glazed pottery from Dresden and Marseilles. Baba was gambling that 
there were be good profits to made when the fashion spread to the countryside. A 
large consignment of brightly painted coffee cups was sitting inside packing crates 
in the warehouse. It was going to be my job to check the cups for faults and arrange 
them into sets while Salim did the stocktaking.
Next morning we were walking through the streets of the Fatih quarter on 
the way to our destination. The monkey was perched on Salim’s shoulder, like a 
princely rider astride his stallion. I ignored him, looking instead at the houses on 
our way to the warehouse. We were making our way towards the commercial dis-
trict, where the sounds of tools rang out from workshops. Our warehouse was far 
from grand: a simple brick building roofed with pantiles. Salim handed the monkey 
over to me while he fished in his pocket for a key. I slipped my hand through the 
leather strap at the end of the delicate chain that ran around his waist. “Just behave 
yourself,” I said, putting on my sternest face. He responded by opening his eyes 
wide and baring his teeth.
There was a nail driven into the wall near the door. Salim hung his cloak on it, 
before heading inside to find the ledgers. “That will do for you as well,” I said, 
hooking the leather strap over the same nail. I placed the monkey down on the 
ground. “I’m keeping an eye on you, so don’t get any ideas!”
Salim had levered open the packing crates. Each cup was wrapped in a sheet of 
thin paper. Different colours, patterns, and accents of gold peaked out from their 
paper cocoons, and soon I was engrossed in my task. The vessels were as hard 
and thin as Chinese porcelain. Turning them over, I noticed a mark of tiny crossed 
swords. I held one up to Salim. “Do you know what this means?”
“Maybe the potters in Europe don’t know how to write their names. It could be 
the mark of some painter,” he suggested.
“But it appears on all sorts of pieces. It can’t be the work of just one man.”
Salim showed no interest in this. “These Franks are always fighting with one 
another. Perhaps that’s why they have swords marked on their cups? Curse them!”
Coffee cups seemed a strange way to send such a message, but I said nothing 
in reply. My mind drifting, I scanned the boxes stacked around the walls, My gaze 
meandered towards the doorway. Something was wrong! The monkey was climb-
ing up the hem of Salim’s robe. Before I could get to my feet, he pulled the leather 
strap from the nail and bounded away. I dived towards the chain that trailed after 
him, but missed and was left sprawling on the floor. Jumping from box to box he 
spotted a gap between two rafters and darted through.
I rushed outside just in time to see him leap onto another roof, his claws scratch-
ing on the tiles. I followed his progress from one roof to the next, wondering when 

190  Istanbul, 1733
he would choose to come down. Three roofs down the street he found a hole in 
some brickwork and disappeared from view. Without stopping to think I squeezed 
my way through an iron fence, and made my way towards the open door of the 
large building. I could hear the sounds of several men hard at work. Odd, metallic 
smells drifted into the air.
I moved slowly to the door and peeked in. Across the space were large wooden 
constructions, looking like those for squeezing fruit. There were shelves carrying 
row after row of tiny metal blocks. Some men were picking these out and placing 
them into trays. Others were rubbing thick, oily ink into trays that must already 
have been filled with the blocks. A last group were taking sheets of damp paper to 
the presses. They would go in white and emerge with patterns and lines of writing 
glistening on their surfaces. And all around the walls were drying sheets hanging 
from pegs. They reminded me of the laundry hanging in the courtyard of our house 
on washing day.
“Who might you be?” The voice thundered behind me. I turned to see a rotund, 
red-faced man, leaning on a cane. “A spy is it? You wouldn’t be the first. Many in 
this city are keen to know my secrets.” He looked me up and down. “Mostly they 
send street urchins. You’re better dressed at least.”
I brushed the dust from my cloak, and stood straight. “I’m no spy, effendi. I 
admit to looking inside, but I’d lost something valuable and I thought it had …”
He leant back roaring with laughter. “A likely story! How could something of 
yours have miraculously ended up in my workshop?” His expression changed, 
squinting into the distance. “This valuable thing you mentioned. Is it something 
that … moves?”
The little beast was there, perched on the top of one of the presses. “I am sorry 
to cause you trouble. Could I get him back?”
We moved slowly towards him, me making soothing noises to bring him to 
my side. To my disappointment, the monkey sprang into the arms of the man. He 
laughed again, before revealing a pear stored in his pocket. “Poor little thing is 
probably hungry, aren’t you my boy! This was to be my lunch, but I think you need 
it more.”
The monkey lunged greedily at the fruit, retreating to a safe corner to eat. The 
man turned to me. “We should introduce ourselves. My name is İbrahim, and this is 
my workshop. I call it the Müteferrika press; the first of its kind in the empire, and 
perhaps even across the world of Islam.”
“Aisha bint al-Harith,” I replied. “I’ve seen books being made in many cities. 
Can I ask what’s different with these?”
“A good question, Aisha. I expect you’ve seen how long it takes a scribe to copy 
a book? Months of work, even before the volume is handed to the illuminator and 
then to the binder. What we do is print the pages in these presses, just like they do 
in Europe. We take those metal letters you see on those shelves and arrange them 
into plates. The pictures are cut from a sheet of wood or metal and printed the same 
way.”
“Will that not take much longer than a scribe with his pen?” I asked.

Istanbul, 1733  191
“Indeed it does, but think about what happens next. Where a scribe can make 
one page, we can print each plate dozens, even hundreds of times.” He picked two 
bound volumes from a stack beside him and opened them to the same page. “What 
do you see?”
“There’s lines of writing and an image on the page. There are mountains and 
the sea. Two men are standing, one holding a club and the other a rope. The rope is 
caught around some sea creatures, with fish tails but the bodies of men.”
“Yes, but what do you notice when you look at the same page in the two books.”
“They are identical,” I replied.
“Quite right! Every single one the same. This is one of my most popular books. 
It’s a description of the Indies of the West, what in Europe they call the ‘New 
World.’” He looked down at the monkey. “That’s where you came from, isn’t it 
my boy?”
“What other books have you made?” I asked.
“I can scarcely remember them all myself,” he sighed. “What interests me most 
is what I’m doing at the moment.” He pulled down some sheets and laid them flat 
on a bench. Beckoning me over, he continued: “This will be my greatest work. 
Figure 35.2  Map of Anatolia and surrounding areas from Katib Çelebi’s Cihannüma, Müte-
ferrika press, 1732 (1145 H). The Lilly Library, Indiana University, Blooming-
ton. DR 403. M835.

192  Istanbul, 1733
A book with maps of the entire world. Even the great Piri Reis couldn’t match this! 
Take a look at this one.”
The design spread across the entire page. I struggled to make sense of it. 
“I can see two land masses that almost join together. Where in the world are they 
located?”
He pointed towards a compass rose. “Maybe this will help. See that it is oriented 
with north at the base. Direct your attention a little higher. Think about where you 
can find a narrow sea almost enclosed by land at both ends.”
I peered closer, trying to make out the writing. “Marmara. So it is the expanse 
of water that joins the Aegean to the Black Sea!” At the eastern end I saw the 
straits that separated Asia from Europe. The latter was outlined in yellow and titled, 
Rumelia. “What are those islands at the top of the map” I asked.
“See for yourself,” he answered. “Everything on the map is given a name.”
“Rhodes and Cyprus,” I announced triumphantly. “I was with my father in Nico-
sia last year. It never occurred to me to think about the shape of the entire island.”
I was about to turn my attention to another one of the sheets but he raised his 
hand. “Enough, there is work to be done.”
I reached down to retrieve the monkey. He shrank away from my grasp. İbrahim 
regarded us thoughtfully. “I’ll make a deal with you, Aisha. It’s clear to me that you 
and this precious little fellow are not going to be friends. You might loan him to me 
and in return I’ll give you the choice of my books.”
There would be a lot of explaining to do on my return to the warehouse. I ran my 
fingers along the spines until I came to the one I wanted. “It has to be the volume 
about the New World. This place is like nowhere I’ve ever seen.”
Stroking the monkey under its chin, İbrahim said, “You’re going to need a 
name.” He pondered for a while. “I remember reading long ago some stories about 
a man as mischievous as you. Now, what was he called?” I was nearly at the door 
when I heard him speak again. “Abu Zayd, that was it! How do you like that name 
my little one?”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-39
Breslau, 1766
36
Figure 36.1  Ottoman robe of honour (hilʾat) with gold thread, Turkey, early eighteenth 
century. Museum of Islamic Art—Staatliche Museen zu Berlin; Inv. No. 6894.
Source: Georg Niedermeiser.

194  Breslau, 1766
His fingers tapped a regular rhythm on the gilded armrest. Framed by a copious, 
powdered wig, the gaunt face of the esteemed Gregorovius seemed to be sculpted 
by decades of storms and icy winds. Rain was beating against the window panes, 
obscuring the view of the city beyond. Earlier that day I had seen the solid brick 
and stone buildings of the city, a few with brightly painted facades. Did they use so 
much colour to distract themselves from this miserable weather? I longed to feel 
sunshine on my face. Insha Allah, we’d soon be making the return journey.
“Quality,” our host intoned, breaking through my unstructured thoughts. “Qual-
ity is the one thing above all else that I look for. You might say it guides the way I 
live my life.” He lazily waved a hand, directing our eyes around the room. “Only 
the best, you understand. A tapestry from Antwerp, silver tableware from Augs-
burg, glazed pottery from Delft, and a landscape by an apprentice of the incompa-
rable master, Claude Lorraine. And that is just what I place in this chamber. I will 
leave the rest of the house to your imagination.”
He slumped a little in his chair as if this exposition had drained his remaining 
energy. His chin sunk into the lace of his undershirt. The sound of crackling of logs 
in the fireplace dominated the wood-panelled room. Our interpreter, Abu Zayd, 
related the contents of our host’s words as my father nodded his head solemnly.
With Abu Zayd’s assistance, my father responded. “We are indeed blessed to 
spend a few precious minutes in your noble presence. I hope that the things we 
have brought today will meet your exacting standards.” He gestured to Salim, who 
opened our travelling chests, retrieving the items we’d hoped to sell on this journey 
along the Oder river. Following Abu Zayd’s advice, we’d kept some Turkish silks 
and velvets aside for our meeting with Gregorovius.
“I worked for him a few years’ back,” he explained before the meeting. “He was 
sent by emperor Frederick on a mission to Istanbul. They picked up a few drago-
mans along the way. I was lucky enough to be one of them. Good pay, decent food, 
and even the odd bed at an inn. Nobody told me the reason behind the mission, but I 
heard he met with the Grand Vizier. Don’t think he got an audience with the sultan. 
The man loves dropping names, and my guess is he’d tell us if he had bowed and 
scraped in the presence of the great Mustafa in all his finery!”
Salim had nearly covered the floor of the reception room with objects. 
Gregorovius remained taciturn, his eyes slowly scanning the room. The best pieces 
that remained from our trip were the textiles from Bursa. My eye was drawn to 
the cushion covers with their decorative flaps. The surfaces of these çatmas were 
covered in ornate symmetrical designs, the backgrounds made up of velvet. The 
colours—crimson, gold, azure blue—were so rich and deep. Gregorovius bent 
down to rub his fingers through the velvet. “I remember these from my visits to the 
houses of the nobility,” he remarked. “The old ones had more velvet and less plain 
weaving. Artisans today seem to be cutting corners in their craft.”
Nearing the completion of his inspection of our wares, the old man’s expres-
sion remained unchanged. Had nothing pleased him? Might he, at least, purchase 
a length of silk fabric to make the journey worthwhile? Salim was just picking up 
one of a set of delicate zarfs, when Gregorovius happened to glance into our near-
empty chest.

Breslau, 1766  195
“Nothing of interest in there I fear. Only a few trinkets from …” my father be-
gan before noticing the animation in our host’s face.
“Why did you not show me these earlier? Bring them out at once.” Gregorovius 
pointed to a pair of boots, made of printed cotton, sat on top of other garments. Salim 
drew them out of the chest, revealing patterned caps, trousers, and undershirts.
“One moment,” Gregorovius exclaimed, before rushing out of the room. We 
waited for his return, perplexed by this turn of events. We heard his footsteps in 
Figure 36.2  Textile boots, cap, belt (a) and trousers (b), Turkey, eighteenth century. Current 
location unknown. Reproduced from: Ernst Kühnel, “Erinnerungen an eine 
Episode,” Oriens 5 (1952), figs 3, 4. Reproduced by permission of E. J. Brill. 

196  Breslau, 1766
the corridor. The door was opened with a flourish as he strode back in. His frock 
coat was gone, replaced now by an ivory coloured gown, woven with metallic 
threads. Even on this dull day, the gold shimmered against the plain cotton ground. 
The patterns were formed around large circles, broken into dense passages of flow-
ers and leaves.
Abu Zayd was quick to recognise the outfit. “My lord, you grace us indeed 
with this magnificent creation. I don’t doubt that this is the product of the impe-
rial workshops! It is a sign of your own eminence that such a treasure was given 
to you!”
Gregorovius casually deflected the compliment. “I wasn’t going to share any 
of this,” he began, puffing out his chest, “though I suppose I can tell you a little of 
my role in the highest affairs of state. I was chosen personally by our beloved sov-
ereign, Frederick, as emissary to the Sublime Porte. The highest honour—among 
many accolades, it must be said—of my long career of public service.”
We did our best to register looks of surprise and awe at his announcement. Evi-
dently satisfied with the effect of his words, he continued. “I won’t bore you with 
details about the city itself. After all, you could hear this from any traveller. One 
of my vivid memories was my invitation to the residence of the Grand Vizier. As 
you know, very few are allowed into his presence, and I had to wait a little time 
before my turn came. Such magnificence, as we went from room to room, each or-
namented with tiles, woodwork, and painting. Finally, I was admitted to the elegant 
reception room of the chief minister, and we engaged in enjoyable, but serious 
conversation on pressing issues. I suppose it was from this visit that I gained my 
refined taste for Turkish handicrafts, particularly the fabrics. I don’t think I could 
ever wear those cumbersome turbans. You know, there are so many styles but the 
vizier surely had the most complex I had ever seen.”
He continued his description for several minutes, pausing to look at each of us in 
turn for our reactions. “I cannot break confidentiality as to whether I met with the 
sultan himself, of course. Suffice to say that I became intimate with the workings 
of the imperial palace during my sojourn, and my knowledge has, as you might 
imagine, been much valued since my return to the court of emperor Frederick.”
My father spoke softly to Abu Zayd, who translated the question. “It is an hon-
our to hear your account, but why do you want these simple items from the bazar 
when already you own such a treasure?”
Gregorovius coughed uncomfortably. “By some unfortunate oversight, I fear 
that the palace officials delivered only one part of my outfit. You see, the ceremo-
nial robe, but no pantaloons, undershirt, boots, or cap. I’ve scoured the records of 
earlier embassies and those men all received a more extensive uniform. I don’t 
want it to appear that I was short-changed when past visitors were so handsomely 
rewarded.”
“Of course, your excellency, though these pieces count for little against your 
imperial hilʾat. Will they not look out of place?” asked Abu Zayd.
He smiled conspiratorially. “You know that and so do I. How many nobles in 
Breslau will have any inkling of the truth? The illusion will be quite sufficient for 
the unlearned eyes of my acquaintances.”

Breslau, 1766  197
As we sat in our inn that evening, I turned to Abu Zayd. “Do you think 
Gregorovius will fool all his friends if he chooses to wear his outfit when hosting 
guests?”
Abu Zayd peered at the window pane, watching the droplets of rain tumble to 
the frame below. “Only Allah knows for sure. I’d be surprised if any of the right-
eous businessmen and plump clergymen hereabouts would tell marketplace stuff 
from products of the palace workshops.” He returned his attention to the window. 
“… Another trick’s been played on Gregorovius, of course.”
“You mean there’s something wrong with the hilʾat?” I asked.
“Not wrong exactly,” he replied, “though it’s not quite as grand as he thinks. 
While he was off seeing the high-and-mighty, I visited an old friend in the Topkapı 
kitchens. We’d been talking for a bit, when he mentioned an upcoming banquet. 
Everyone who was in charge of creating a dish for the feast had to bring it out on a 
tray and serve it to the guests. So that they didn’t appear in greasy aprons they were 
each given a hilʾat, embroidered with gold.”
“Can you describe the cook’s robe?”
Abu Zayd cracked a smile. “Don’t ever tell old Gregorovius, but it looked just 
like one he was so proudly wearing. Our noble ambassador’s hilʾat might just get 
him a job serving tables at the sultan’s court!”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-40
“And where did this report come from?”
“I read it in the Muwatta of Imam Malik ibn Anas. He tells us that it came 
from Nafiʿ al-Madani, the revered transmitter of traditions, who received it from 
al-Qasim ibn Muhammad. Al-Qasim heard it from the mouth of Aisha bint Abi 
Bakr herself.”
“What is Aisha really telling us? My friend, can you recite the hadith one more 
time?”
The khatib cleared his throat and, with a trace of irritation lingering in his voice, 
repeated the report: “… she bought a cushion which had pictures on it. When the 
Lahore, 1799
37
Figure 37.1  Entrance façade of the Wazir Khan Mosque, Lahore, 1634–41. Photo: Muhammad 
Ashar, 2014. Wikimedia Commons.

Lahore, 1799  199
Messenger of Allah—may Allah bless him and grant him peace—saw it, he 
stopped at the door and did not enter. She recognised disapproval on his face and 
said, ‘Messenger of Allah, I turn in repentance to Allah and His Messenger. What 
have I done wrong?’ The Messenger of Allah—may Allah bless him and grant him 
peace—said, ‘What is the meaning of this cushion?’ She said, ‘I bought it for you 
to sit and recline on.’ The Messenger of Allah—may Allah bless him and grant 
him peace—said, ‘Those who make such pictures will be punished on the Day of 
Resurrection. It will be said to them, “Bring to life what you have created.’ Then he 
said, ‘The angels do not enter a house in which there are pictures.’”
We were standing in the booksellers’ bazar, just beyond the mosque. “All pic-
tures? Is that really what is meant? Look around you. I could go into any one of 
these shops and pick out books containing lively paintings. Give me just a minute 
and I could fill your bag with tempting copies of the Shahnama, the Khamsa of 
Nizami, and the Bustan of Saʿdi, or even instructive treatises on medicine, geo-
mancy, or astrology. More than you could carry back to your humble dwelling. Are 
all the painters, all the readers of such works to be punished at the end of days?”
He waved for me to stop. “I’ve no use for such trivial works. You asked me a 
question and I have given you an answer. It is up to everyone to look inside them-
selves, though who knows what they will find: ‘The soul is by command of my 
Lord, and of knowledge you have been vouchsafed but a little.’”
“Angels don’t seem to much like dogs, or so I’ve heard.”
He nodded. “Some versions of this hadith conclude that angels will not enter a 
house with a picture or a dog. This animal, like the pig, is considered as unclean. 
Allah knows best.”
“What sense does that make, my friend? Even if they are unclean, were these 
beasts not made by the Creator of all things? If Allah made the Two Worlds, why 
would angels reject one of His creations, clean or unclean?”
“You would have made a fine ʿulama, Abu Zayd, were it not for your weakness 
for wine! It’s not for me to judge the great transmitters of tradition, though I too 
have noticed the way that one report seems to challenge another. I recall one hadith 
that deals with a fabric hanging containing pictures woven into its surface. The 
Messenger of God condemned its use, but then allowed his wife Aisha to cut it up 
and sew the pieces together as cushions.”
“And what do you think made a hanging different from a cushion?”
“If you want my guess, it’s because something on the wall would catch the eye. 
Imagine praying and then being distracted by pictures! That would be akin to idola-
try. No chance of that if they are spread across the floor.”
“It’s not the eye that adores the pictures on a cushion though another part of the 
body would appreciate its softness.”
He tutted disapprovingly. “There is much that is mysterious about the first com-
munity of Believers, though none of it, Abu Zayd, is a proper subject for humour. 
You questioned me about whether all images were bad. It reminds me of a story in 
the Sirat al-nabi, when the Muslims captured Mecca from the accursed pagans.”
“I know that one. The Messenger of God ordered all the idols to be destroyed. The 
paintings on the walls were washed off. That way the sacred House was cleansed.”

200  Lahore, 1799
“There’s more to it than that,” he replied. “Ibn Hisham tells us that the Messen-
ger ordered everything to be destroyed, save what was under his hands. You know 
what was there? It was a painting of Mariam and ʿIsa, like those venerated by the 
Christians.”
We passed in silence toward the gate of the Wazir Khan mosque and halted 
just outside. The gate was covered in kashi-kari, glinting in the sun and I could 
glimpse more decoration inside. My companion’s mood had lightened. “See 
the wondrous decoration around you! Human hands have fashioned count-
less items of beauty with none of them offending against the sunna of the 
Messenger!”
“What do you mean? I see many representations of the natural world.”
His face was beamed with satisfaction. “Nature itself presents no obstacle. 
All that one needs is to avoid representing things with ruh. It is this essen-
tial spirit, contained within animals and man, that cannot be imitated. After 
all, who would set their own abilities as a creator against the supreme maj-
esty of Allah. As was said in the hadith I recounted: those who compete with 
the Creator will be asked to breathe life into their creations on the Day of 
Resurrection.”
I sighed. “Endless trailing branches, replete with leaves and blossoms! As pretty 
and vivid as an oasis in the desert, no doubt, but can we Muslims compete with 
the carved temples of Hindus and Buddhists or the painted churches of Christians? 
People thirst for stories of saints and heroes, not flowers and fruit!”
“Let them keep their worthless idols,” he scoffed. “Everywhere you glance, you 
will find something to feed your soul. The vegetation is but a frame for the words. 
Words all around you. I know you are fond of Persian verse, so tell me what you 
see just to the side of the gate.”
I took a moment to read aloud the first quatrain, written in flowing nastaʿliq.
The edifice, which like the sanctuary of heaven,
Is a source of bounty–
Has like the temple of the Kaʿba for its object
  the benefit of mankind,
To the congregation may its gate ever remain open
  with prosperity until the Day of Resurrection.
Before I could draw breath, my companion recited the verses of the second 
panel:
In the corn-field of this world, O well-conducted man,
  wherever is sown by man,
  is reaped by him in the world to come.
In your dealings, then,
  have a good foundation in the world,
For all have to prove their way to heaven
  through the gateway at last.

Lahore, 1799  201
He smiled contentedly. “Words that form pictures in the mind, Abu Zayd! What de-
ceitful painting, what flimsy drawing could ever do justice to those magisterial verses? 
This is why the proper work for an artist is to make the letters themselves as beautiful 
as they can be: with fine proportions, looping strokes, and pleasing colours.”
I paused for thought, for truly there was something in his claim. Could not im-
ages lead us along the wrong paths, taking us away from the worship of Allah? 
When all else was stripped away, isn’t that what those hadith were telling us? I 
looked back at him, standing with one hand sunk into the capacious pocket of his 
coat. Was he holding something?
Seeing my questioning expression, he drew out a shell a little wider than the 
palm of his hand. The mother-of-pearl covering the inner face glittered in the sun. 
Beneath this dazzling surface, I sensed there was something else. A ring of nastaʿliq 
script around a central roundel? He handed it to me.
“It’s fine work, combining several scripts. All of it from the Qurʾan?”
His voice rose with excitement. “You are right. Only a master of cutting seal 
rings could have accommodated so much writing on this restricted space. Never 
have I seen such penmanship! But that’s not all. The curved shape of the shell holds 
a mouthful of water. Drinking from it, I can almost feel the sacred words infusing 
into my muscles, organs, and even my blood.”
Figure 37.2  Shell with Qurʾanic inscriptions incised into the mother-of-pearl, eighteenth 
century, India. Aga Khan Museum, Toronto. AKM 665.

202  Lahore, 1799
I fixed him with a stare. “That sounds a little like magic to me.”
“You are right, I suppose. ʿUqba ibn Amir tells us that the Messenger of Allah 
once received nine men so that they might pledge their allegiance. He would not 
accept it of one until he broke his amulet. If my memory serves me, the Messen-
ger told him, ‘Whoever hangs an amulet around his neck has committed an act of 
idolatry.’”
“Then why do you carry this alluring thing if you know it is forbidden?” I asked.
He gave a rueful smile. “Insha allah this shell will not weigh to heavily on my 
soul when I am called for reckoning. Why do I carry such an amulet? Look around 
you. We live in troubled times, ruled over by warring clans who care little for 
the city and its mosques. Why last year the nobles of Lahore even requested one 
warlord invade the city to depose another! The once-mighty Mughal sultans can 
no longer intervene on our behalf. Do you blame me for seeking out a little extra 
protection?”
I had no answer, and returned my attention to the lines of miniscule writing. 
Sadly, beyond the powers of my old eyes. Was it such a sin to own such a thing, 
fashioned with infinite care, and held with such tenderness?
Al-Harith, if I ever get to tell you this tale in person it will finish with one simple 
message: better to trust your wits in a tough place than rely on an amulet. You can 
tell that to your boot-faced servant. It might even cheer him up to know that my life 
is now guided by one hadith, even if I pay little heed to all the rest!

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-41
Nafplio, 1831
38
Figure 38.1  Fountain on Kapodistriou Street, Nafplio, Greece, 1734. Photo: Marcus Milwright 
and Evanthia Baboula, 2007.

204  Nafplio, 1831
She was there again, on her knees scrubbing the steps of the church. The water in 
her bucket had been drawn from the fountain in the little square, only a few steps 
away. I expect that she would be there every morning until the last of the blood had 
been removed. And yet these dark stains endured as a stubborn commemoration, 
resistant to her efforts. The woman straightened her back before plunging the brush 
back into the water.
Could the memory of those terrible events be so easily erased? My dreams had 
been troubled and I awoke, groggy, before dawn. I’d quietly dressed in the dark, 
picking my way past the other beds, and set off for a walk around the town. There 
was still mist hanging in the air. Needing to clear my head, I sat on the edge of a 
fountain.
“You, girl, what are you doing there? You’ll catch cold.”
Figure 38.2  Detail of 1734 fountain. Photo: Marcus Milwright and Evanthia Baboula, 2007.

Nafplio, 1831  205
I looked up to see an old man, his hand grasping the shutter of a window. His 
face was in shadow, though I could make out his stubbly chin and unkempt hair. 
“Wait a minute,” he called out. “Don’t move. I’ll be out in a moment.”
I was unsure what to do. I hadn’t asked him to come down and yet he seemed 
to have something to tell me. Moments later he emerged, wrapped in a moth-eaten 
gown, from the doorway of a small shop. His hair was now hidden under a velvet 
cap. “I’ll make some tea. We can drink it here or maybe you’d prefer to sit inside?”
I joined him inside the shop. While he busied himself in the back room, I glanced 
around me. The window was stacked with narghiles, each with brightly painted 
glass vessels. The leather tubes and mouthpieces wound neatly around the wooden 
stems. There were shelves containing baked clay pipe bowls and decorated pipe 
stems. Labelled glass jars filled with tobacco formed a neat line across the counter.
The old man emerged carrying two cups. “Careful, they’re hot.”
I cradled the delicate vessel in my hands, enjoying the warmth. “My father set 
up this business many years ago,” he said. “He reckoned there’d always be a good 
market for tobacco. Fashions for pipes might change, but he was right—God rest 
his soul—for, revolution or not, there’s always an appetite for a smoke, whether it’s 
at home, in the coffee house, or out on the open road.”
“Have your family always lived here?” I asked.
“No, only one more generation before my father,” he explained. “My grandfa-
ther was called Mahmud Pasha. Born in Albania, he rose to become a senior officer 
in the Janissary corps. You know what that is?”
“The personal guard of the sultan himself.”
“Indeed they are,” he continued, “and back in those days a terrifying fighting 
force. I didn’t see much of him when I was young. In truth, I was pretty scared of 
his red face and waxed moustaches. Those beady eyes could penetrate your very 
soul! He was posted to govern over this place, even left some monuments here. 
The fountain you were perched on just now has his name carved on one of those 
marble panels.”
“Why would a soldier commission a fountain for a place like this?” I asked.
“The inscription gives you the answer. He was a Bektashi. It’s a dervish order 
popular among the Janissaries. If you wander toward the centre of the town you 
will find another fountain built by a follower of the Bektashis back when my father 
was a young man.”
“What do the Bektashis believe?”
He shrugged. “All a bit beyond me. I think they take something from every sect 
of Islam, revering the family of the Prophet as well as the teachings of the Sunnis. A 
little Christianity sprinkled in there too. For them it’s a case of searching all faiths 
to reach beyond the outer world and find the hidden truth of Allah.”
“Why build a fountain?”
“For the same reason any good Muslim might! You should know the five pillars 
of the faith. It’s a fine example of zakat to supply everyone, whatever their creed, 
with fresh water to drink. Remember your Qur’an? What’s paradise but a place of 
shade and water? No shade by the fountain, but that’s why they added the carvings 
of cypress trees. At least you’d have the idea of a shady tree when you bend down 

206  Nafplio, 1831
for a drink. My grandfather wasn’t just thinking of people: his fountain was meant 
in part for horses to quench their thirst.”
“I like that. Are there springs in the rock below the castle that supply the water?”
He shook his head. “Though it’s been a bitter struggle to drive the Turks from 
this land, there’s much to thank them for. The water that flows in my grandfather’s 
fountain, and all the others in the streets of the town, comes from an aqueduct. The 
sultan commissioned it to connect Nafplio with a spring about four miles from 
here. Before the aqueduct, everyone had to drink whatever brackish water they 
could get hold of.”
I thought for a moment. “You said that your grandfather was a Janissary. Doesn’t 
that make you one of the Turks.”
He put a finger to his lips. “Not too loud! If you must know, I held to the faith 
of Islam until the war broke out. When the tide turned against the sultan’s troops I 
was left with a weighty decision: leave my shop and make my way to the heartlands 
of the empire or take another journey, a migration of the soul. One day I was Abu 
Zayd, son of Mehmed, son of the great Mahmud Pasha, and the next I was baptised 
Nikolaos. You can call me Nikos, if you like.”
He noticed my scornful expression: “Don’t think I can’t guess your thoughts! 
People are always sure of themselves until they’re faced with a reckoning. During 
the War of Independence men and women disappeared in the night never to return. 
Soon enough I’ll find out whether it was the right choice. That’s not for you or me 
Figure 38.3  Fountain on Staikopoulou Street, Nafplio, Greece, 1773. Photo: Marcus Milwright 
and Evanthia Baboula, 2007.

Nafplio, 1831  207
to decide. The Bektashis took what was good from all around and my thinking is 
that it’s the same God, no matter which book you read to understand Him.”
The old man became calmer. “That’s part of the reason I’m talking to you now. 
I saw you in the crowd that gathered after poor Kapodistrias was killed. You, your 
father and that servant of his were noticed, and not just by me. Now that the leader 
is slain, the foolish will be looking for someone to blame.”
“I thought the murder was committed by two brothers from Mani?”
“That’s true, but there’s been talk of bigger conspiracies. I don’t want you get-
ting caught up in any trouble. Take this message to your father. Tell him to leave 
this place. There’s a brig heading east from Corinth in a day or two. I know the 
captain. Give him my name and he’ll find you a cabin for the voyage to Cyprus. 
There won’t be any luxury on board but, God willing, you’ll be safe.”
I hardly had time for words of thanks for as soon as the old man had finished 
speaking he hurried me out of the door. “Remember what I said. No delays!”
My mare bent her head to drink from the stone trough of the fountain. I thought 
back to the old man’s words. An Ottoman monument at the heart of this infant 
Greek state. If the minarets were being taken down across this new territory, how 
long would these simple monuments to Muslim piety remain? Perhaps the gift of 
fresh water might always overcome the struggles between religions?
“Come on, why are you dawdling?” Salim was waving at me from the far side of 
the little square. No more time for idle thoughts; we had a long ride ahead to reach 
our destination by sunset.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-42
Kuala Lumpur, 1886
39
Figure 39.1  Nineteenth-century Malay waistcoat made from the inner kiswa of the Kaʿba. Silk 
probably manufactured in Bursa, Turkey, c. 1800. (a) Front face; (b) Back face. 
Museum of Islamic Art Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur. 1998.1.4156.   (Continued)

Kuala Lumpur, 1886  209
“Tin.” That was Salim’s terse answer.
Without another word he stepped out of the shelter of the overhanging roof and 
into the pounding rain. I watched him weaving between the potholes on his way to 
the meeting. Although the monsoon deluge brought an end to the suffocating heat, 
it had done little to improve everyone’s mood. I’d only asked Salim what it was that 
kept us in this drab little town for so many weeks. In truth, I’d known the answer all 
along. Kuala Lumpur was expanding like yeasty dough because of the trade in that 
strange metal. The nearby mines were controlled by powerful merchant families. 
My father and Salim were not alone in trying to secure the rights to some of that 
mineral wealth. Steam ships were on hand at the coast to transport consignments 
across the world for use in countless foundries.
I resigned myself to an afternoon staring out of the window at the sullen clouds 
and drenched buildings. Nothing here seemed permanent. I’d been told that the 
Figure 39.1  (Continued)

210  Kuala Lumpur, 1886
whole place had burned down two decades’ before. Some dispute or other. Now a 
starchy English gentleman was giving the orders about how the place was to be run. 
He’d opined that the old wooden houses with their palm frond roofs were no longer 
suitable. Henceforth, traditional architecture was to be replaced by solid European 
bricks and mortar.
Rainwater formed into rivulets snaking down the wooden columns and collect-
ing in pools on the verandah. The rain might be constant, though the patterns it 
created were ever-changing. My thoughts returned to the transformation of Kuala 
Lumpur. Would the mosques of Malay obey this relentless tide of change? Might 
the people look for models to the brick mosques of Iran or the carved stone of 
India? Would some arrogant European come and make the decision for himself? 
The first mosque we’d seen had been near Kota Bharu. Salim had sought it out for 
the Friday prayer. Raised above the ground on stilts, the building had pitched roofs 
rising on all four sides towards a central point. How deliciously cool it felt inside 
that shadowy space!
“Wake up! We have guests.” My father was leaning over me. I shook my head, 
trying to focus down the street. I could just make out a slight figure approaching 
our residence. A servant was holding an umbrella over his head as he skipped deli-
cately over the puddles.
“Who is it?” I asked, rubbing my eyes.
“His name is Haji Mohamed Taib. He’s fast becoming one of the most impor-
tant men in the town. Controls some lucrative mines, rubber plantations, and many 
other businesses. They say he might one day become the dato dagang.”
He saw my blank face. “Don’t you remember? It’s that local phrase meaning 
‘chief of the traders.’ Bit like being the shaykh of a guild.”
“Why’s he coming to see us?”
“He made the pilgrimage to the Holy Cities a few years’ ago and now he is 
arranging for his parents to do the same. As they are frail, he wanted someone to 
accompany them. I volunteered Salim for this important task.”
Salim was leaning sullenly against the door frame. My father turned to face him. 
“You know full well that it was the only way I was going to get the rights to the tin 
destined for the Persian Gulf. Besides, you said yourself that it’s been years since 
you performed the hajj. Now’s your chance!”
Our conversation was interrupted by the sound of footsteps on the verandah. 
“Al-salamu alaykum! May I come in?”
My father pushed past Salim in his eagerness to welcome Haji Mohamed. “I 
beg your pardon for leaving you on the doorstep. Please enter our humble abode.”
I watched through the doorway as the two men removed their coats. They both 
wore long, buttoned shirts over loose trousers. I guessed the smaller man couldn’t 
be more than thirty years’ old, yet he exuded quiet authority. His dark eyes scanned 
every face, trying to divine the secrets it might be concealing. To my surprise, he 
spoke in Arabic. “I understand some of your language. My assistant can translate 
anything that escapes me.”
There was something else that kept bringing my eyes back to him: an item of 
clothing the like of which I’d never seen before. It was a waistcoat of crimson silk, 

Kuala Lumpur, 1886  211
covered with silvery-white writing. This flowing script zigzagged sharply across 
the two front faces. I only caught a glimpse before he turned his back and walked 
into the sitting room accompanied by my father.
I was about to follow when Salim caught my arm. “They have important matters 
to discuss. Help me make tea.”
While the kettle heated on the stove, I asked Salim about the waistcoat. “We 
were in a meeting earlier and I read as much of it as I could,” he began. “The bigger 
text is easiest. Maybe you guessed it yourself? La ilah illa llah Muhammad rasul 
allah.”
“There is no god but Allah. Muhammad is the prophet of Allah. I like the way 
the alifs cut across the vertical letters as the words ascend. Did you see the lamps 
at the bottom of the design?”
“Lamps? Could be,” Salim allowed. “What’s written inside is more important: 
ya mubin! It means clear, just like the illuminated words of scripture.”
“Is the smaller lettering made up of verses from the Qurʾan,” I asked.
“Most likely,” Salim replied. “Let’s take the drinks to our guests.” We found 
them deep in conversation, with the aid of the interpreter. The arrival of tea brought 
a brief lull. Salim was the first to speak. “Haji Mohamed, can I ask if your waistcoat 
was a memento of your pilgrimage?”
“In a way. It was assembled here by local tailors, but the silk was purchased 
during my journey.”
“It looks like the finest Turkish workmanship. How did you find it?”
Our guest blew the steam from his cup, delicately sipping at the contents. “I’m 
sure you remember how many beautiful fabrics can be seen in Mecca during Dhu 
al-Hijja. A good Muslim should devote himself entirely to the rituals of pilgrimage, 
but what merchant hasn’t cast the occasional admiring glance at the sumptuous 
weaving and embroidery of the mahmal or the kiswa? You know that the sultan in 
Istanbul orders a new cover for the Kaʿba every year from the finest workshops of 
the empire? This kiswa is a complex piece, black with gold embroidered inscrip-
tions on the side that every hajji sees while making their tawaf. But there’s another, 
inner face that’s almost as glorious.”
“Why spend so much time making something that can’t be seen?” I asked.
“The inner surface is the one that actually touches the blessed stones of the Bayt 
Allah. That’s what makes it special. They encase the building in writing. Here in 
Malay many people believe in spirits and the inscribing of numbers and letters on 
objects is protective magic, whatever faith you hold. Only Allah knows for certain 
if they work, of course.” He took another sip. “I expect you’d like to know where 
I got these fragments?
We nodded and he continued speaking. “While in Mecca I heard rumours that 
torn pieces of old kiswas sometimes came up for sale. It was during a visit to a 
doctor, one ʿAbd al-Ghaffar, that I gained the name of someone who might have 
some scraps for me. The doctor evidently didn’t think much of this man, Abu Zayd 
al-Saruji, but grudgingly gave me his address. His crumbling house was near the 
Maʿla cemetery. The simple façade gave me no hint of what I would find within; 
Abu Zayd led me through a narrow corridor to his storeroom. What treasures!”

212  Kuala Lumpur, 1886
“Many silks from the kiswa?” my father broke in.
“Not just that,” he replied, “but also parts of old covers from the tomb of the 
Prophet in Medina. There was the finest metalwork, porcelain, carpets from every 
land. Even an old key for the lock on the door of the Kaʿba. Too many things to 
describe.”
“How had he assembled these rarities?” I asked.
“I had my suspicions that theft had been involved and I told him as much. He 
smirked at my outrage, explaining that he had no need to steal when it was easier 
to buy at whatever price he wanted. Seeing that I didn’t understand, he explained 
that many pilgrims spent their life savings on the journey and sold their possessions 
along the way for supplies. I remember his eyes sparkling as he talked of swapping 
bags of fruit at the hajj markets for the choicest rugs, crockery and silverware. As 
for the textile fragments, he said there were other means for traders to get them in 
the dead of night from officials tasked with their care.”
Salim did little to hide his dissatisfaction. “If Abu Zayd was so unscrupulous, 
why did you buy these silks from him?”
Haji Mohamed directed his gaze at my father. “Your servant is forthright, al-
Harith, but he asks a valid question.” We waited while he took another measured 
sip from his cup. “Can the blessings that come with a precious thing outweigh the 
circumstances in which it was obtained? I don’t have an answer, though the words 
woven into this waistcoat remind me every day that my faith, not the endless pur-
suit of profit, provides the key to a good life. That’s something, I suppose.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-43
“Are those minarets?” I asked, pointing in the distance. “Do many Muslims live 
there?”
My father squinted through the foggy window. “Not that I’ve been told, though 
I don’t know much about London. All I have is the address of a dealer on Wigmore 
street, wherever that is. We’re seeing a man called Robinson. Insha allah, he will 
want our stock of old carpets. Then we’ve another journey to Manchester to see 
Sayyid Ziegler. An order from him will keep my workshops in Qazvin busy for a 
year or more.”
Farms and woodland had given way to lines of simple red-brick houses with 
slate roofs interspersed with drab commercial buildings. I looked again at the tow-
ers and saw smoke billowing from each one. “Chimneys. What are they all for?”
Salim was sitting on the facing seat in our compartment. “Those ugly structures 
are the beating heart of this country. You’ll be seeing more of them before our jour-
ney is done. Factories everywhere producing goods that are sent across the world. 
We’d do well to follow their example to compete in this modern world.”
London, 1892
40
Figure 40.1  Ardabil carpet, wool and silk. Iran, 1539–40. Victoria and Albert Museum, 
London. 272-1893.

214  London, 1892
He was first to alight from the train at Waterloo station, rushing away for a han-
som cab. We were soon looking through another window, taking in the busy streets 
of this unfamiliar place. Salim leaned across to my father: “Our interpreter will 
meet us outside the gallery. He comes highly recommended.”
“What’s his name?”
Salim consulted some notes in a folder. “Abu Zayd al-Saruji. Says here that he 
trained in the Dragoman Academy in Istanbul and has worked for European clients 
buying antiquities from Egypt all the way to Persia. They all speak well of him, 
though I have a suspicion that not everything he sells to these wealthy travellers is 
what it seems.”
“What do you mean?”
“Just that there are many artisans who can produce fine pieces of carved wood, 
glazed tiles, and inlaid metalwork. Sometimes these helpful dragomans sell them 
as real antiquities. There’s tidy profit to be made for maker and middle man alike.”
My father waved his hand. “Let’s not make judgements before we meet him. 
Only Allah knows what’s truly in his heart.”
The cab was slowing to a halt outside a confident, brick edifice, punctuated at 
the street level by giant windows. I had been learning how to read English and 
slowly made out what was written on the sign: Robinson and Co. Gallery. Beside 
the door stood an old man, looking as glum as the weather. As Salim opened the 
carriage door, the old man sneezed thunderously, burying his face in a red handker-
chief. He gathered himself as we assembled on the pavement. “I am at your service. 
Shall we enter?”
Once he was out of the cold Abu Zayd transformed, smiling and warmly shak-
ing hands with Sayyid Robinson and his staff. He was soon busy translating the 
exchanges, while Salim handed around photographs of my father’s best carpets. 
They were soon whisked away to an upstairs office. Expecting the negotiations 
would take some time, I glanced around the spacious ground floor of the gallery in 
search of distraction. Shelves were stacked with carpets. Rolled up, they looked so 
lifeless, like giant cigars. A few examples were spread on the ground: deep blues 
and livid crimson mixed with accents of black, yellow and pearly white.
“You’re a long way from your native land, I think.”
I turned, surprised to hear words spoken in Farsi. “I am, but then so are you!” I 
replied. “My name is Aisha.”
“ʿAli, a native of Mashhad,” came the response. “I work for Ziegler’s company, 
mostly restoring the old rugs.”
“Are you mending a rug at the moment.”
“Just finished work on one. I was entrusted to bring it here to London.”
“May I see it?” I asked.
Smiling, he pointed to the floor, just beyond where I stood. “I don’t suppose 
you’ve encountered anything like this before!”
“It’s, it’s so big,” I stammered. “However was it made?”
ʿAli walked slowly around the perimeter of the giant rug. “It was one of a pair 
ordered by the great Shah Tahmasp, though perhaps the work started under his 
father, Ismaʿil. They sat for centuries in the shrine of Shaykh Safi al-Din in the city 

London, 1892  215
of Ardabil until an earthquake twenty years’ ago. Sold to pay for the repairs to the 
shrine. A sad day for them but a good one for Ziegler.”
I knelt next to the giant carpet, drinking in the details. At the centre was a star-like 
shape, floating on a sea of blossoms. I soon realised that a quarter of this elaborate motif 
was repeated at the edges. Along the central spine were two lamps, like those that hang 
within mosques. Finally, a complex border as wide as a normal carpet.
“Those lamps, what do they mean?”
“You’d have to ask the master who made it,” he replied. “It makes me think 
of the verse in the Qur’an that likens Allah to the light shining from a lamp. Then 
again, maybe it was just meant to look like the lamps around the shrine?”
“And who was this master?”
“Look beyond the bigger lamp to the edge of the border. It’s seldom you see 
the maker’s name so plainly; must have been proud of his work. He calls himself 
Maqsud Kashani. There’s also a date: 946, or 1539 in the Christian reckoning.”
“Where might this wonderful thing go next?” I asked.
ʿAli smiled, “You should ask this gentleman. Mr Morris holds its fate in his 
hands.” I hadn’t noticed him all this time: a plump, bearded man with thick, un-
kempt hair. He was perched on a stool, a notebook and pencil in hand. He stood 
up, smoothing the folds of his silk waistcoat. “ʿAli, would you be good enough to 
translate what you’ve been talking about?”
Having listened intently to ʿAli’s summary, he moved towards me with an out-
stretched hand. “You can call me William. Those are interesting questions, Aisha. 
I expect you have some more?”
“Thank you sir,” I replied. “Do you work here too?”
ʿAli put my words into English, and William chuckled. “It would be a fine thing 
to be surrounded by such beautiful old things. My work is elsewhere: you might 
say that I too am in the business of making things to delight the eye. Like the master 
who oversaw the making of this carpet, I appreciate that true and lasting beauty 
must be tied to function.”
“I’m not sure I understand.”
William showed me a page of pencil drawings from his notebook. “This one 
was the basis for a fabric design I created some years ago. What can you see?”
“A dense pattern,” I replied. “Leaves and flowers, all connecting to stems and 
branches. There are birds facing one another.”
He tapped the page with his pencil. “Do you notice how at each edge the pattern 
begins again, but in mirror image? The same idea is in the carpet: lines of sym-
metry that allow the design to grow out toward the borders. The arts from your 
homeland have provided me with much inspiration.”
“Mr Morris is famous for these designs,” added ʿAli. “You’ll see them on tex-
tiles, on wallpaper, on furniture. Nothing he does is just for show. Each beautiful 
thing also has a job to do in the house.”
“William, why did you come here today?” I asked.
“A London museum asked me if they should buy this carpet. Having seen this 
treasure for myself, I have no doubt. The price is high, but this unique masterpiece 
must be bought for the pleasure and the instruction of the British public.”

216  London, 1892
I thought for a moment. “Will it be left on the floor for people to walk on?”
He smiled. “I have wondered that myself. It’s too good to be worn down by 
countless muddy shoes. That’s a problem I’ll leave for the curators to solve. Who 
knows what clever scheme they will come up with?”
Mr Morris left us to join the group upstairs. I turned back to ʿAli. “Sayyid Wil-
liam said that the carpet was unique. I thought you said this one had a sister in the 
shrine at Ardabil.”
ʿAli bent down and turned over one corner of the great carpet. “Sadly, this trade 
thrives on secrets. Collectors pay higher prices if they think an object stands above 
all others. Run your hand across this section.”
I did what he asked. “There are ridges where extra stitching has been applied. 
Are they repairs?”
Figure 40.2  Dove and Rose pattern fabric. Legacy Art Galleries. Jacquard woven silk and 
wool. Designed 1879. Gift from the collection of Edmund N. Parker. Legacy 
Art Galleries, University of Victoria: U984.44.1.

London, 1892  217
He sighed. “More than that. Whole sections of the border have been added to 
the carpet.”
“People made sections that copied the original pieces of the border?”
He shook his head. “They come from the sister carpet. Large parts were re-
moved, leaving it a shadow of what it once was. The Ziegler company will find a 
buyer for it, of course.”
“Is what we see here just a deception?”
“Doesn’t everything change over time?” he replied. “When you replace a bro-
ken tile on the wall of a mosque has the whole building changed beyond measure? 
Should we never glue together the sherds of a shattered bowl? If the result still 
delights your eye is that not enough?”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-44
Al-Hammam Brothers
Dealers in Antiquities and Objets d’Art to discerning Clients
Souk al-Hamidiyya, Damascus
For: Antonis Benakis,
Queen Sofias Avenue, Athens, Greece.
Edirne, 1899
41
Figure 41.1  Lower part of tile panel probably from the Cihannüma Kasrı, Edirne, mid six-
teenth century. Manufactured in Iznik, c. 1570–74. Benaki Museum, Athens. 
No. 92.

Edirne, 1899  219
Figure 41.2  Reconstructed panel probably from the Cihannüma Kasrı, Edirne, mid sixteenth 
century. Manufactured in Iznik, c. 1570–74. Benaki Museum, Athens. No. 92 
with scans of tiles from: Victoria & Albert Museum, Gulbenkian Museum, 
British Museum, MAK Museum in Vienna. © Benaki Museum, Athens.

220  Edirne, 1899
Description: Six glazed tiles with exquisite decoration, originally from an old 
palace in Adrianople (Edirne). Two tiles have missing sections. Some minor chip-
ping and scuffing elsewhere. The vivacity of the colour remains across the surfaces 
reflects the finest of Turkish craftsmanship.
Price: One hundred and twenty drachma (or its equivalent in Napoléons, as is 
convenient). This sum covers the tiles and the associated expenses.
Invoice respectfully submitted by Harith ibn Hammam, from Edirne on the thir-
teenth day of June in the year 1899
—
To the most esteemed sayyid Benakis,
I trust that the last consignment of Turkish glazed platters and tankards met 
with your satisfaction. The trip to Lindos in the spring was a valuable one; though 
many inhabitants of the island sold their wares to dealers in earlier decades, some 
of the smaller villages still retain undiscovered items. However, word has spread 
that ancient pottery is much prized in the auction houses of Europe. Prices have 
increased as a result. On this topic, I thought it necessary to explain the con-
siderable sum being charged for the precious set of tiles brought to you by my 
assistant, Salim.
As you may recall, my plan had been to return home in order to find more of 
the Damascus ware that is so popular now. With that in mind, I concluded my pur-
chasing campaign in western Thrace and made for Istanbul in the hope of finding 
a steamship headed for Beirut. My journey took me through Edirne. I tarried there 
for two days, visiting acquaintances and buying supplies. During that time I was 
informed about an old woman who claimed to own some fine glazed tiles. Know-
ing that these might be of interest to you, I went to an address in a disreputable 
neighbourhood near my pension.
I will not detain you with the particulars, other than to state that I left the meet-
ing satisfied with neither the quality and provenance of the items for sale nor the 
probity of the vendor. It was clear enough that she was representing the interests of 
another individual, who wished to remain unknown. What did attract my attention 
was a discarded fragment that must have broken off another tile. While she was 
engaged elsewhere, I slipped it into my pocket (may Allah forgive me this small 
indiscretion!) This was not the inferior later work of Kütahya, but something I sur-
mised to be from the time of sultan Süleyman the Lawgiver himself. The depth of 
the colours and the clarity of the lines were quite unmistakable. This, at least, war-
ranted further investigation. Asking among my contacts, I found the name of the 
shadowy figure, one Abu Zayd from Saruj. When I arrived at his house, the maid 
informed me that he had left the previous evening with a cargo of goods.
The hunt took me east. I was unable to intercept him on the road to the imperial 
capital. The trail had gone cold, though I did have the opportunity to see my dear 
daughter. Having shown her the fragment, we made our way separately through 
the bazar looking for clues. It was Aisha who spotted them, in the display case of 
a prominent dealer: six tiles in all, with the regrettable damage you will, I expect, 
be examining as you read this letter. While the price agreed was high, it came with 
something else of value: the current lodgings of Abu Zayd.

Edirne, 1899  221
Why should I still seek him out if I now possessed the six tiles? The answer will 
now be before you. Attend to the elegant floral border of the upper row of three 
and it is apparent that they once continued upwards at each extremity. Hence, the 
next row of three tiles would have this border in their lower parts, and something 
else in the upper section. I deduced, therefore, that this was the predella of some 
more ambitious composition. Note also the elegance of the central mandorla, and 
the designs that surround it. Aisha was the first to notice its resemblance to stone 
veneer cut from dark breccias. I recall seeing this patterning before on a panel of 
Turkish tiles; if one stares long enough, the merest suggestion of birds and fish rise 
up from the ambiguous forms around them.
This larger composition would be treasure indeed. That night I lay in wait near 
the door of Abu Zayd’s humble abode. As the sun set, he emerged. I followed him 
to a tavern. I have no taste for such places, but could see no other solution than to 
draw him into conversation.
As liquor soon loosened his tongue, I hardly had to coax information from him. 
Playing the part of a gullible dupe with pockets too heavy with coins, I plied him 
with cup after cup, sprinkling pointed questions into a mass of otherwise inconse-
quential chatter. As the Prophet is my witness, I am not proud of my actions that 
night. In my defence, I was eager for the truth of the matter. How many tiles made 
up the whole and in what building had they once been installed? I eventually got 
what I wanted, though not before gaining my fill of the Turkish, Persian, and Ara-
bic verse—verily, the man was an encyclopaedia of poems, at one moment impos-
sibly lyrical and the next unbearably scatological.
Edirne was to be my destination. I set out early the next morning. The tiles 
came not from a mosque or dervish lodge, but from the palace, built in the fifteenth 
century and continually improved and expanded thereafter. You doubtless recall 
the terrible war between the Turks and the Russians? At that time the palace was 
blown up to impede the advance of the army of the Tsar, and since then it has often 
been plundered. Abu Zayd and his accomplices had been excavating the rubble 
each night for many weeks, focussing their attention on the remains of the struc-
ture known as the Cihannüma Kasrı. Beneath the debris they had uncovered lavish 
decoration, undisturbed by robbers.
Soon I found myself standing in this very spot, scanning among the ruins while 
also keeping an eye out for wild dogs and scavengers. Abu Zayd’s description took 
me to the right location. Fragments of tile and stucco, all of little value, lay all 
around. With my spade, I dug away at the loose dirt and fallen masonry. Sweating 
from the labour, I finally exposed enough of the wall to understand my error. The 
mortar was still in place, looking like a skeleton without the flesh and skin. The 
tiles had been prised off not long before. A message was scrawled in red ink: To the 
nameless man pursuing me: while you were trailing me in Istanbul I sent word for 
my men to remove the rest of these tiles. Happy hunting among the rubble!
Cursing my credulity, I recalled the cunning look on Abu Zayd’s face when 
he confided the information about the ruins. I resolved, however, to find out what 
had happened to the tiles. Luckily one of his men was amenable to bribery. For a 
small sum I gained entry to Abu Zayd’s storerooms. While time did not allow for 

222  Edirne, 1899
an extensive search, I located a camera and dark room. Among the spoiled albumen 
prints were arrangements of tiles that came from the palace. Even these mottled 
images gave me a sense of the splendour that once was. Seven more rows of tiles 
created a tall arched space containing the finest repeat pattern: saz leaves and stems 
interspersed with flowers in full bloom. Above this was another five rows sketch-
ing out a ribbed dome rising to a finial topped by a boldly drawn crescent. Truly, a 
masterwork from the imperial potteries of Iznik!
A few more coins bought me further information from Abu Zayd’s man. Crates 
had been sent for shipping to Cairo, London, and Portugal only the day before. I 
could get no more from him, though scratched on the back of one photograph was 
the name, Gulbenkian. You are acquainted with this gentleman?
And that, for all its faults, is my explanation for the costs incurred (receipts at-
tached). If Salim arrives after your departure to Alexandria, I have instructed him to 
package the tiles safely for shipping to you in Egypt. My search for the remainder 
continues. Insha allah, there will be good news on this later in the year.
Your loyal servant,
Harith ibn Hammam

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-45
Simunul, 1902
42
Figure 42.1  Opening pages showing Surat al-fatiha (a) and part of Surat al-Baqara (b) in a 
Qurʾan from Mindanao, Philippines. Princeton University Library.   (Continued)

224  Simunul, 1902
The wind shifted, filling the sails once more. Ropes tightened as the balangay listed 
to starboard. An outrigger slapped down, slicing through water and leaving a trail 
of bubbles in its wake. The island was drawing closer now; the profiles of wooden 
houses emerged from what had once been a haze of greens, blues, and yellows. 
“Baba, tell me again what this place is called?”
“Simunul,” he replied. “It’s said that this was the first island to embrace Islam. 
An Arab trader, Makhdum Karim, carried the message here. There’s a mosque that 
still bears his name. There’ll be no time to visit it, sadly. We must find Abu Zayd 
straight away.”
“What’s the hurry?”
“The Americans,” he answered. “For years now we’ve managed to plot our 
course around the Philippines avoiding conflicts. Not for much longer, I fear.”
Figure 42.1  (Continued)

Simunul, 1902  225
“Why? There are so many islands and we’ve got friends at most of the ports.”
He laid a hand on my shoulder. “Things are getting worse. MacArthur declared 
martial law and now the Americans have captured President Aguinaldo. I fear that 
it’s no longer place for an honest merchant to ply his trade. Abu Zayd sent word 
that he needs to see me. After that, we must leave.”
We remained lost in private thoughts for the remainder of the journey. Stepping 
onto the jetty, I glanced back at the boat. Its carved wooden prow was picked out 
in the early morning light. The surface was covered with undulating patterns of 
trailing plants, emerging in high relief and then slipping back into shadow. Too 
far away to touch, my fingers traced through the air, imagining the feeling of the 
smooth ridges and furrows.
“You like the work of our local carpenters?” I looked round in surprise to see 
a boy, not much older than me. “I expect you have seen these same patterns else-
where on your travels. We call it okir.”
“What does that mean?” I asked.
He shrugged. “Allah knows all. Just a name, I suppose. For all that, it’s some-
thing that is ours alone. Arabs, Turks and Persians all have their own patterns. 
Drawing from the same sources, yet a little different from one another. Same for 
us; though Muslim traders from the west brought with them the seeds of this art, 
the beautiful plants that grew from them have their roots firmly planted in our na-
tive land.”
Salim had finished unloading our bags. “Have you come to help or to provide us 
with a lecture on local culture?”
The boy ignored Salim, his chestnut eyes remaining on mine. “I’m forgetting 
my duties,” he replied with a smile. “I am to guide you to Abu Zayd’s dwelling.”
The house had a familiar form: wooden walls raised on stilts, all covered 
by a thatched roof. A set of steps led to the living area. The split bamboo floor 
creaked softly as we entered the shadowy space within. Every surface was filled 
with objects and books. It felt as if the blinds had not been drawn up in weeks.
The boy gestured towards a side room. “You will find my master in there. These 
days he spends most of his time in bed. Visits must be kept short.”
How many years had passed since we last saw him? In that time he had shrunk, 
only a husk remaining of the force of nature we had once known. Muscles had 
withered on his limbs and even through the mosquito net it was possible to see the 
line of each of his ribs. The bulbous swelling of his throat and jaw stood out in this 
landscape of decay.
His eyes flickered then opened, a trace of a smile playing on his lips. “Al-Harith, 
al-hamdu lillah, you’ve come.” He paused to draw breath, scanning the room. “Ai-
sha is so grown up now. My friend, you must be proud of her! And Salim, well, 
Salim looks … the same as ever.”
My father drew back the net and leaned over to brush away the hair sticking to 
Abu Zayd’s damp forehead. “It’s been too long. I had no idea that your illness had 
progressed so far. Have you the medicines you need?”
Abu Zayd feebly waved on hand. “No need for doctors now. Sent them away. 
Their potions and powders will do nothing for me, except to lighten my purse. 

226  Simunul, 1902
I’ve only to wait for the end, when I will be judged for every deed, good and … 
bad.” He gave a wheezy laugh, exposing his reddened teeth, the colour of terracotta 
tiles.
“You didn’t stop. I’ve been telling you for years that betel quid would cost you 
your health.”
“Not you too, al-Harith! I heard that often enough from the doctors, tutting 
their disapproval. As if their frowns would somehow cure me.” Abu Zayd gestured 
towards a lacquered cabinet. “Open that. There are a few things I would like you 
to have.”
The shelves inside were stacked with textile bags, each tied with a drawstring. 
“In those you will find gems and the finest pearls, collected over many years. Can’t 
take them with me, but you can put them to work. Zakat, my friend, whether it’s 
to feed the poor or to help the weary pilgrims making their way to the Holy Cities. 
Makes no difference to me, so long as these pretty things are not weighing down 
my soul when the time comes.”
There were account books stacked on the lower shelf. Salim was drawing them 
out when he paused, his hand on a thicker volume enclosed in wooden covers. 
“What’s this? A Qur’an?”
“Bring it over to me.” Holding the volume on his lap, Abu Zayd carefully 
opened the outer cover, exposing vivid painting of the beginning of the text. The 
verses of Surat al-fatiha were enclosed within the red, ochre, and black framing 
designs on the first page, while the second carried the opening verses of Surat 
al-baqara.
Abu Zayd ran his fingers gently across the fibrous paper. “Perhaps the tru-
est comfort is to be found here? I should concentrate my attention on the words, 
though sometimes my mind wanders. See how each little design seems to fold into 
the next? Always in movement, like the leaves of a palm tree caught in monsoon 
winds.”
He seemed transfixed by some distant memory. My father broke the silence. 
“Shall I keep this precious thing safe?”
Abu Zayd’s eyes focused again. “I’ve heard foreigners are buying up these 
manuscripts. Sell it if you think that’s best. Maybe they’ll be safer in some far-off 
library than in this troubled place? God alone knows what the future holds?”
I heard Salim whispering behind me: “With Him are the key of the Unseen, the 
treasures that none knoweth but He.”
A brass chain was just visible on a lower shelf. I assumed it must be attached to 
a kashkul. Pulling at it exposed a brass box, covered in silver inlay. The top com-
prised two hinges connecting to four lids. The same patterns were repeated in every 
panel across the sides and the top. Their flowing, symmetrical character reminded 
me of the prow of our boat, and even of the painted ornament framing the pages of 
the painted Qurʾan.
Abu Zayd caught the eye of his servant. “Abubacar, take that from the young 
lady and tip out its contents.” The boy returned moments later, placing the box back 
into my hands. “I’m glad the workmanship caught your eye,” Abu Zayd continued, 

Simunul, 1902  227
raising his head with great effort. “Much more lasting than the transitory delights 
of betel leaf.” His eyes lost their focus as he struggled to recover this thoughts. 
Finally he spoke again:
You have made my face yellow with sorrow and grief;
You have made your teeth red, o betel-bodied one.
Since your pearly teeth have become carnelian.
My onyx eyes have become rubies.
Abu Zayd sank back exhausted. “Aisha, I expect it would be a fine place to store 
needles and thread.”
The island was disappearing into the dusk. Our boat was labouring in choppy 
waters, heading southwest to Surabaya. Abu Zayd’s letters of introduction 
would buy us a little time as we planned our journey west. My fingers ran over 
the cool, smooth surfaces of the brass box. I drew it out of my bag, allowing my 
eyes to skate across the fluid patterns covering every facet. The curving silver 
rhythms were like the endlessly changing whitecaps of the waves caught in a 
rays of the midday sun.
The smells of areca nut and the leaves of betel and tobacco still clung to the 
lidded chambers. I determined to scrub each compartment until no trace of the 
original contents remained. A question persisted in my mind: could the ugliness 
of bodily corruption ever be separated from the sinuous beauty of this little box? 
Figure 42.2  Betel box made of copper alloy with silver inlay. Mindanao, Philippines, nine-
teenth or twentieth centuries. Doris Duke Foundation for Islamic Art, Shangri 
La, Honolulu: 54.79.

228  Simunul, 1902
The container spoke of a ruinous habit; whatever pleasures might be promised, 
there was a terrible price to pay in the end. I thought of Abu Zayd’s suffering 
and his desire to answer for his misdeeds before it was too late. His last gasping 
words to us as we left were those of the Prophet: “the reward of deeds depends 
upon the intentions and every person will get the reward according to what he 
has intended.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-46
Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908
43
Figure 43.1  Minaret of the Congregational Mosque from Qalʿat Bani Hammad, Algeria, 
eleventh century. Photo: R. Hakka, 2019. Wikimedia Commons.

230  Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908
He was distant enough that only the broader details of his appearance could be 
discerned in the shimmering heat. His skin was burned red by long hours in the 
sun. Squinting, I could just make out his closely trimmed moustache, an adornment 
to the face of such a military man every bit as essential as the gold braid on his 
starched white uniform!
His gaze suddenly shifted towards us. “Aisha, get down! Abu Zayd’s boy told us 
to stay out of sight. The last thing we need is for the Colonel Bulaiee—or whatever 
his name is—to stride over here and start asking awkward questions.”
“What are we doing here anyway?”
Figure 43.2  Plan of Qalʿat Bani Hammad, Algeria. Drawing: Seyedhamed Yeganehfarzand. 
After Golvin, Recherches archéologiques à la Qalʿa des Banû Hammâd (Paris: 
G.-P. Maisonneuve et Larose, 1965).

Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908  231
He scratched his forehead in frustration. “Last time he was in Tunis Abu Zayd 
said he had some fine old Berber rugs to sell. So we trekked all the way out to this 
fly-infested spot to find him digging holes in the ground. He’d better have some-
thing good to show me.”
I edged my way to the top of the trench and peered cautiously around. There 
were labourers at work across the site, each group clustered within areas marked 
off by ropes. Aside from the Colonel, there were other Europeans with crisp suits 
and flushed faces diligently writing in notebooks. I saw tents filled with wooden 
packing crates and equipment. “If what they want is to unearth treasures, why are 
they wasting their time with all this other stuff?”
Salim drew close to me. “It’s a new craze among these strange people. Their sci-
ence has become like a new religion. In order to be understood everything has to be 
measured, weighed, taken to pieces, and put back together again. Surely, they have 
forgotten that true knowledge rests in belief. Doesn’t the holy Qurʾan say, ‘Allah 
will exalt by many degrees those of you who have attained to faith’? There is no 
wisdom to be found poking about in this dry soil.”
“For all that, there are excavations like this across the lands of Islam,” my father 
responded. “Even the Turks have joined this game, seeking out the ancient relics 
at Sidon. Dozens of marble tombs were shipped to their new museum in Istanbul. I 
heard that they’ve even driven the antiquities dealers out of Raqqa in order to keep 
all the glazed pottery for themselves. It’s becoming difficult for an honest trader to 
make a living.”
I eyed him suspiciously. “What did Abu Zayd promise for you?”
He shifted uneasily. “Well, rugs for sure … and if Colonel Bealuee should be 
distracted from his task for a few moments, a few coins or other ancient baubles. 
There’s an Italian gentleman Algiers who will buy anything I can find.”
Our conversation was cut short, by the sound of footsteps. “Al-Harith, I thought 
that was your voice! No need to hide down here; the Colonel and his men have 
been called away. Let me show you around.”
We walked towards a stone tower, the solitary feature that had weathered the 
centuries since this place had been abandoned. How long ago had that been? I tried 
to imagine the people who once made this place their home. Now, the traces of 
streets and buildings could barely be sketched out among the mounds of rubble.
“This was once the mosque of the Bani Hammad, but I expect you guessed that 
already. Perhaps that tower was their answer to the massive minaret of Qayrawan? 
No matter: what engages the attention of my employer lies further up the slope. 
That’s where he has sunk most of his trenches.”
“Who were the Bani Hammad?” asked Salim.
“Allah knows best. What I’ve been told is that their dynasty ruled over this 
land four hundred years after the hijra. They were respected even by the caliphs in 
Baghdad; this city became home to poets, scholars, and artisans from every land.”
“Why would anyone want to live in this arid place?” I asked.
“I had that very question for Colonel Baylioo—I think that’s how they say it—
when he hired me as a site foreman,” he replied. “I remember him pointing at a 
volume on his desk. ‘That book,’ he explained ‘was penned by a fellow called 

232  Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908
al-Bakri, who lived at the time of the Bani Hammad. If you take the time to see 
this place through his eyes, you’d know that there was water in abundance, with 
fountains and pools set within gardens. A veritable paradise, Abu Zayd, but to have 
more than just the words of this Mohammaden author, we must employ picks, 
shovels, and men by the dozen! That is why I need you.’ And here I’ve been ever 
since with scarcely a chance to rest my bones.”
Before us were the remnants of a massive wall punctuated by buttresses. “We 
entered this site through the thick outer wall, but this looks like more defensive 
work,” Salim observed. “Is this some inner fortress?”
Abu Zayd shook his head. “Remember what I told you about the water. Follow 
the walls and you will trace out a giant rectangle. The inner faces of the walls were 
once lined with thick layers of plaster. This was a pool created to entertain the in-
habitants of the palace beyond.”
“Amusement, is that all?” I said. “Could it not be used for drinking or some 
other practical purpose.”
Abu Zayd pondered the expanse of sand and pebbles. “Fish perhaps. Who 
doesn’t like a little grilled trout for their dinner? You wouldn’t want to drink from 
this pool; there are tales that the princes used to come here to watch naval battles 
being played out in this very spot. Imagine how filthy the water would become!”
My father was growing impatient. “Will the Colonel be back soon? Don’t you 
have anything to show me?”
Abu Zayd led the way towards the tents, in front of which was a small group of 
labourers brewing tea over an open fire. “I once worked in Egypt for an English-
man, Petrie, as he dug for the remains of the Pharaohs. He was a wily, old fox! At 
the end of every day he’d have the worker turn out their pockets. Never failed to 
find some beads, a gold ring, a scarab, or some other little treasure. Our boss hasn’t 
learned that ruse and now the local men come to me. They know I’ll buy whatever 
they find.”
He whistled through his teeth. Hearing the signal, one of the men recovered a 
metal box from under a pile of canvas. Abu Zayd pulled open the lid to reveal a 
tangled mass of ancient coins and jewellery. The gold and gems flashed in the sun-
light. “Treasures hidden in the ground for centuries. Al-Harith, you’ll find a ready 
market for this among your contacts on the Mediterranean coast. If you can offer 
me the right price, naturally …”
The conversation ended abruptly. The Colonel and his entourage were march-
ing in our direction. Abu Zayd moved forward to greet them while other hands 
concealed the box.
“You know my orders: no unauthorised people on the site! What is your expla-
nation for this outrage?”
Without hesitation, Abu Zayd gestured towards my father. “Colonel, I have 
good news. This gentleman has come all the way from Cairo to see you. He is a 
journalist with al-Ahram, one of our oldest Arabic newspapers.”
The Colonel’s thunderous expression transformed into a look of sly satisfaction. 
“I’m not surprised our discoveries are becoming so widely known,” he beamed. 
“Léon de Beylié at your service. I would be honoured to give you a personal tour.”

Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908  233
My father nodded his head dumbly. “I’m most grateful Colonel … err, Beelaee.”
“That’s Beylié.” He sounded out the letters slowly. “BAY-LI-EH.”
“A thousand apologies, sayyid. I’ll get it right this time: Bi-lay-iee.”
The Colonel forced a thin smile. Salim pressed a notebook and pencil into my 
father’s trembling hands, before he was whisked away. Two hours passed before 
we saw him again back at the tents, sweaty and tired. The tour nearly over, the 
Colonel was opening crates to display the finds from his excavations. “Look, sir, 
at these tiles, turquoise glazes alternating with ones painted in lustre. Cut into star 
shapes and crosses, they create patterns across the walls. Their palaces must have 
been magnificent indeed, a feast for the eye and the mind!”
We made camp that night on the road north to the coast. As the sun set over the 
mountains I looked over at my father. “Did you really plan to buy those pieces from 
Abu Zayd? They weren’t really his to sell.”
He took his time answering. “I suppose that’s true, though who truly has rights 
over the past? Should this French officer do as he pleases, taking the choicest items 
back to country, just as the Turks are hoarding ancient treasures in their storerooms 
in Istanbul? What will happen to us if all our history ends up in the hands of others? 
Our culture will become weak, like a sapling trying to grow with no soil to sustain 
its roots.”

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-47
Manzala, 1910
44
Figure 44.1  Leather puppet of a horse and rider, with sections of coloured fabric. Bought by 
Paul Kahle in al-Manzala, Egypt, 1909. Egypt, fourteenth–seventeenth centu-
ries. Linden Museum, Stuttgart. No. 84666.

Manzala, 1910  235
The late evening sun was glinting on the surface of Lake Manzala. We’d spent the 
day visiting the excavations in Tanis. My father was now intent on buying some 
fish for our evening meal. We idly watched him negotiating with the fishermen. 
Salim sighed, “It’s too late to get back to Port Said this evening. We’ll have to find 
a place for the night in Manzala, not to mention someone who’ll cook our dinner. 
If we hadn’t spent so much time looking at those pagan ruins, we could have been 
back well before sunset.”
I scowled at him. “You could be more open-minded, Salim. There’s much 
to learn from ancient sites, and Egypt has some of the most magnificent in the 
world.” He offered no response and remained taciturn as we made our way by cart 
to Manzala.
We soon located a simple hotel for the night. While my father was talking with 
the kitchen staff about frying the fish, I sat on the balcony. Crowds would soon 
come out to enjoy the cool evening air. My eyelids were starting to droop when a 
figure came into view who seemed familiar. Thin and angular, he hurried along the 
shady side of the road, carrying a substantial package under his arm. As he came 
closer, I realised who it was: my teacher from the Lutheran school in Cairo.
I waved. “Excuse me, excuse me! Is it you Dr Kahle?”
He looked up, confused. “Um, yes, who are you please?”
“Aisha bint al-Harith,” I replied. “I am in your class. Will you come in for a cup 
of tea?”
I soon regretted my decision. My teacher shuffled awkwardly in the guest room 
as the tea was prepared. He kept glancing at his watch. Hoping to draw some con-
versation from our guest, my father posed the question I had been too shy to ask. 
“You are holding tight to that bundle, professor. I expect you have something valu-
able in there?”
He was taken aback by my father’s directness. “Sir, I’m sure it would not be 
of interest to a wealthy gentleman like you. These are items only of fascination to 
scholars, I’m afraid.”
My father was not easily dissuaded. “Come now, will you not show us? Aisha is 
the bookish sort; I’m sure she would enjoy the contents. Anyhow, I insist you join 
us for dinner. I hope you will reveal these learned treasures this evening.”
My teacher could see there was no escape. “Delighted, of course,” he mumbled 
with a slight bow.
After the meal had been cleared away, my father leaned across the table. “Will 
you show us what you were carrying?”
Our guest untied the strings. The canvas wrapping fell away to reveal a multiple 
sheets of brownish-black skin, stretched as thin as packing paper. We looked at 
him confused by the dull contents of the package. For the first time in the evening, 
he had the advantage. Enjoying the moment, he paused to polish his horn-rimmed 
glasses. “They might look a little disappointing, but they are one of the most in-
triguing discoveries of my career. A little light will help.” He pulled the first sheet 
upwards and held it in front of a benzine lamp.
“It’s beautiful!” I reaching out to touch the puppet. The skin had been cut into the 
shape of a horse and rider. All over the surface there were delicate pierced patterns. 

236  Manzala, 1910
Many of the larger holes in the skin were covered with patches of translucent, col-
oured silk. He pulled another from the pile, this time revealing a servant carrying 
a tray on his head.
I looked at the stack still on the table. “However many are there?”
“I haven’t made a complete tally,” he replied, “for some are broken into pieces. 
You see, many are jointed so that the puppeteer could move them during the shows. 
There are about eighty in all.”
Figure 44.2  Leather puppet of a servant carrying tray. Bought by Paul Kahle in al-Manzala, 
Egypt, 1909. Egypt, fourteenth–seventeenth centuries. Linden Museum, Stutt-
gart. No. 84674.

Manzala, 1910  237
My father picked up another depicting a servant carrying a tray. “I remember 
these Karakuzati shows from when I was a child. A cotton sheet was set up with 
lamps behind it. It was here that the entertainer would work, pressing the puppets 
onto the screen and using sticks to move them around. It was the shadow that the 
audience would see through the sheet. He’d speak in all sorts of voices, and have 
lots of jokes. My mother disapproved of such things because the crude language 
that would often seep into the performances.”
Dr Kahle nodded. “I’ve read plays by a man named Ibn Daniyal, who lived five 
hundred years ago. Some of his words made me blush, though there’s fine poetry 
there too. Nothing I can share in mixed company, I’m afraid.”
Salim was unimpressed. “Why look at such stuff when there are so many great 
writers of Arabic? No serious person should ever concern themselves with base 
entertainments like shadow play.”
“There you are wrong,” he replied. “No less a scholar than the great sufi, Ibn ʿArabi, 
wrote on the topic. He likened the images on the screen to our imperfect knowledge of 
the divine, much as Plato had judged our limited perception of the world to be no more 
than shadows on the walls of a cave. A follower of Ibn ʿArabi penned some beautiful 
lines about shadow plays. If I remember it right, one part reads:
His puppets were the forms in which,
  with the aid of a screen,
He displayed his action:
  they became naught and withdrew when he revealed himself;
And my soul resembles him in action,
  for my sensation is like the puppets, and the bodily clothing is my screen.
When I removed the screen from me, as he removed it,
  so that my soul appeared to me without any veiling.
I liked the verse. “However did you end up finding these puppets in 
Manzala?”
“Do you remember from our literature lessons the notion of the frame story?” 
he asked.
“It’s when a person inside a story narrates another one, and sometimes that story 
contains another narrator who tells one more tale.” I replied quickly.
He looked satisfied with my answer. “And there’s no end to the way these stories 
can be nested one inside another. The best known are Scheherazade’s tales in The 
Thousand and One Nights. Now, just to show how it works I will tell you what I 
know of these puppets as a set of frame stories.”
He cleared his throat and began: “A German scholar with a taste for Arabic 
literature makes the acquaintance of an old puppeteer living in Cairo. While they 
sip coffee near his home, the old puppeteer tells him about a family who practised 
the same craft, but moved from the capital to a place in the north, named Manzala. 
This family, he claims, are the keepers of old manuscripts, containing plays used 
by puppeteers for generations. Eager to see these treasures for himself, the German 
scholar travels north, before …”

238  Manzala, 1910
“You have told your first frame story and returned back to the first?” I asked.
He smiled. “You were paying attention. Let’s continue. When the scholar arrives 
at his destination, he speaks with the head of the family, called Hajj ʿAbdu, who 
shows him the manuscripts, and also a cupboard filled with old puppets. Then, sit-
ting together in that simple house, this Hajji ʿAbdu gives his guest a sad account. 
He had heard from his grandfather, who had heard it from his father that the pup-
pets had come from the house of an Ottoman Pasha in Egypt. The Pasha tells this 
ancestor of Hajj ʿAbdu that the puppets had been bought for his son to play with. 
The poor lad had died of fever. Struck by inconsolable grief, the Pasha could not 
bear to have his son’s toys in the house.”
“I spotted two more frame stories. Is that the end?” I asked.
“No, but for the next part we have only the puppets to tell us.” He pointed to the 
circular design enclosing a diamond that adorned several examples. “This means 
Figure 44.3  Leather puppet of chained captives. Bought by Paul Kahle in al-Manzala, 
Egypt, 1909. Egypt, fourteenth–seventeenth centuries. Linden Museum, Stutt-
gart. No. 84677.

Manzala, 1910  239
that the Pasha’s puppets were already three or four centuries old when he gave 
them to his son. The design is the emblem of a Mamluk prince, who lived at the 
same time as Ibn Daniyal. Did he employ his own troupe to entertain his household 
on cold, winter nights? Now that is something I’d like to know!”
I was holding in my hands a woman, a little hunched as she bore the weight of 
a baby on her back. Another child nestled against her skirts. The intricately carved 
face stared impassively across the room. Lost in the contemplation of her eyes, I 
nearly missed the chain running from neck to her outstretched hands. Captives, but 
from what battle? What stories had this mournful mother and her children been 
forced to tell in palaces or taverns? I willed her to speak but she remained defiantly 
mute, her secrets buried beneath countless layers of soot.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-48
We found him squatting on his haunches, staring intently at a battered kettle sitting on 
a kerosene stove. Retrieving a penknife from the pocket of his khaki shorts, he pierced 
two holes in the top of a tin of condensed milk. A little of the thick liquid was delicately 
poured into an empty mug. My father cleared his throat, causing the man to glance up 
at us. “Ah yes, good of you to come Mister … err, Hammam. A cup of tea?”
He must have noticed me gazing at the tin. “I can hazard what you are thinking! 
Not everyone agrees about putting milk in first before the tea. Can’t say I’ll ever 
Hindiyya, 1918
45
Figure 45.1  Chased brass platter commemorating Armistice day, Iraq, c. 1918. Victoria & 
Albert Museum, London. M.17-2002.

Hindiyya, 1918  241
get used to the condensed stuff, though I’m lucky to be able to purloin even this 
from the army stores.”
“You are a British officer?” my father asked haltingly.
The man smiled. “Army, no, not exactly. I’m an engineer. Bing’s the name. 
Worked on that great barrage just up the river from here before the War. I’ve been 
called back to repair the damage caused by the recent skirmishes.”
“Sayyid Bing, what do you want with me? It’s safe now to make the journey 
to Baghdad, and we are anxious to be on our way. My servant, Salim has already 
made the arrangements and is waiting at our warehouse.”
The kettle was whistling. He decanted the scalding water into a China teapot. 
“Quite right. I won’t detain you more than necessary but I’ve been asked to inves-
tigate a small matter. Hindiyya is a place I know rather well, even picked up a little 
Arabic over the years. As you have dealings with the artisans here, I thought you 
might be just the person to help.”
My father shuffled uncomfortably without answering. Bing patted his shoulder. 
“Don’t worry, old man, I’m not asking you to inform on anyone. Nothing seedy 
like that! Besides … the quicker my questions are answered, the sooner you and 
your daughter will be on your way. Now then, how about some tea while we chat?”
He pulled over some canvas chairs. “Shall I be mother?” He noticed our confu-
sion. “Silly English expression, excuse me. Here’s your tea.”
While we sat cradling our mugs, he stepped into his tent. Moments later he 
edged his way out carrying a large brass tray, covered with dense engraved lines. 
“Mr Hammam, I need your help with this. Why don’t you look it over while I hunt 
down some biscuits. I’m sure one of the other chaps had some.”
My father discreetly poured the beige liquid in his mug onto a nearby plant. 
“Ugh! These ifranj have no idea how to brew tea. Now, which way up is this sup-
posed to be?” He turned the brass tray round slowly before resting it on the ground 
between us.
“See that wide strip running through the centre? That’s a stretch of water, judg-
ing by the sailboats and the ghuffa, though I’m not sure if it’s the Euphrates or the 
canal. Both run through the town. I believe we’re looking at the river because of the 
barrage there at the top and a bridge further down. See the people walking across?”
“Why are they carrying banners?” I asked.
My father tapped his teeth thoughtfully with a teaspoon. “I think they’re meant 
to be white flags. I’ve seen it a few times during the war: they signal surrender or a 
request for safe passage. You can see why if you look above them.”
I puzzled over the strange motif gouged into the shiny metal. There were two sets 
of lines crossing one another. The wider of the two had a series of small, straight 
strokes, as if showing sticks holding something together. My father laughed. “Your 
answer is in the sky as we speak.” There was a whining sound far off, marking 
the approach of a biplane. “The British kept a lookout along the river and into the 
western desert with these strange contraptions,” he explained.
Returning to the platter I saw another one, this time flying over land and partly 
lost among the profusion of surrounding detail. Our conversation was interrupted 
by Bing’s footsteps. “No biscuits, I’m afraid, not even a digestive to be found 

242  Hindiyya, 1918
anywhere.” He slurped his now-tepid tea, emitting a sigh of satisfaction. “To busi-
ness, Mr Hammam: what I need is some information about this tray, for I think you 
know its maker: Abu Zayd, who settled here some years ago after moving from 
Saruj. Soldiers made a routine search of his workshop and came across this fine 
piece. Quite unlike his other designs; he claims a British officer commissioned it, 
though I hardly think that can be true.”
My father shrugged. “Why all the suspicion? Can’t an honest naqqash choose 
his clients as he sees fit?”
Bing’s eyes narrowed. “I don’t suppose even his best friends would call Abu 
Zayd honest! We heard rumours that copperwares aren’t the only things he trades. 
Secrets perhaps, or maybe there’s someone who wants to find their way down the 
river to Basra or across the desert to Syria without the proper papers. Who would 
they seek out for that, I wonder?”
I didn’t like this dangerous line of conversation. “Excuse me sayyid, but do you 
know what’s happening in this design? I’m a bit confused.”
Mr Bing took another sip of tea, still keeping his eyes trained on my father. 
“Well, where to start?” he replied. “Our engraver, or naqqash as you call him, is 
interested in the world he sees around him. I suppose that’s a nice change from 
just copying old designs—endless wispy plants, pointed stars, and such like. Aside 
from animals and local people there’s space on this piece for armoured vehicles, 
cannon and guns.”
“And lots of soldiers,” I added, pointing out some of the angular faces topped 
with peaked caps.
“That’s what worries me,” he replied. “Do we just see a simple desire to record 
life in Hindiyya at the closing of the Great War or is there something darker at 
work? Not everyone welcomes our presence here, even as we try to rebuild the 
country. I’ve no idea why they’re so hostile; after all, didn’t we rid this place of 
Turks?”
My father and I exchanged glances. Our host continued speaking. “At this deli-
cate time we have to watch out for seditious voices who would bring chaos. Does 
this Abu Zayd wish to glorify or to mock and what of the person who ordered this 
piece? I’d hardly be questioning the motives were it not for this.”
I hadn’t noticed the scene before: a man hanging from a gallows. To his left 
were British officers, some looking casually towards the dead figure. One even 
had a cigar in his mouth. To the right and below, it seemed as if life were going on 
oblivious to the suffering of the hanged man; there were men, women, and animals 
all parading together towards the river. I looked again and saw more white flags 
and, on the banks of the Euphrates, a soldier manning a monstrous gun. Was even 
this part of the design sending a coded message?
“An unfortunate episode, to be sure, though necessary to maintain order. That 
wretch, Sadiq Effendi, was tried fairly and executed for the callous murder of the 
British soldier. Now Mr Hammam, could you read the inscriptions for me? I never 
mastered the script and would be most grateful for your assistance.” He handed my 
father a pencil and paper to write down translations of the Arabic texts that were 
dispersed across the design.

Hindiyya, 1918  243
Bing took his time reading through the notes. Finally satisfied that there was 
nothing there to raise a rebellion, he let us leave. Barely a word passed between us 
until we were in sight of the warehouse. I broke the silence. “That man believed the 
British are here to help get the country on its feet again. Is he right?”
“He isn’t the first to think that he knows how to run this place better than those 
who have always lived here.” My father paused, gazing at the slow-flowing water 
of the Euphrates. “He won’t be the last for that matter. This old river has seen em-
pires come and go, and the British, for all their confidence, won’t be here long.”
“But what will happen next?” I asked.
“Only Allah knows for certain,” he replied, “but the design on that tray speaks 
of a changing world from which there will be no return to the comforts of the past. 
Foreigners have found wealth beneath the soil and we’ll see many more like that 
man Bing, drawn here by the oil that powers their machines. Who can say whether 
this natural bounty will bring joy or sadness?”
Figure 45.2  Detail of the platter showing the execution of Sadiq Effendi. Drawing: Marcus 
Milwright.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-49
Rabat, 1937
46
Figure 46.1  Photograph showing the manufacture of the wooden ceiling for the living room 
of the Shangri La. Rabat, Morocco, c. 1937. Courtesy of the Doris Duke Chari-
table Foundation Historical Archives, David M. Rubenstein Rare Book and 
Manuscript Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.

Rabat, 1937  245
… five, four, three, two, one. Out of the developer and into the stop bath. I counted 
twenty seconds in my head. With the tongs the sheet was transferred to the fixer. I 
leaned closer, poring over the details in the photograph. There was a slight blurring 
around the head of the muʿallim.
Can’t be helped; the workshop had been dark, necessitating a longer exposure 
time. Everything else looks sharp. I’ll make some more copies.
The other images from the day were hanging on pegs.
Once the prints are dry, I’ll tell Salim to send them to Baba in Paris. Another 
set for Monsieur Martin. He’ll want to dispatch them to the Cromwells. Where did 
he say they were building their house? Bermuda, Jamaica? No, somewhere further 
away. Hawaii? Yes, that’s it.
I tried to picture this far-off place in my mind, but the only vision that formed 
was coconut trees on the fringes of a pale beach with deep-blue sea beyond.
There must be more to it than that. Different from this place, in any case.
That morning I walked through the Medina towards the Kasbah. Rue des Con-
suls narrowed like the middle of an hourglass. People and animals slowed, jostling 
for space. Two French soldiers in their khaki uniforms nearly knocked me off my 
feet. The Hassan tower was at my back and on my left I could just make out the 
minaret of the Friday mosque. I exhaled as the road widened again. Nearly there. 
What was the name again? I checked my notebook: 21 Souk el Ghzel. It wasn’t 
difficult to locate: an open space surrounded by shops and houses looking like they 
had seen better days.
Figure 46.2  Living room, Shangri La. Courtesy of the Doris Duke Foundation for Islamic 
Art, Honolulu.

246  Rabat, 1937
I was greeted at the door by a young man clad only in his bathrobe and slippers. 
He ran a bony hand through his oiled hair. “Y-y-you were expected a little later, 
mademoiselle, umm, Hammam? Excuse my … dishevelled appearance.” He fum-
bled for a crumpled packet of cigarettes.
“I am here to meet Monsieur Martin. He was expecting me at 10 am.”
“You are too early, I think.” he consulted his wristwatch. “See, it’s only 7.45.”
“But it was two hours later than that when I left the hotel,” I replied.
The man tapped the face of his watch. “Ah yes, must have forgotten to wind it 
yesterday. W-we enjoyed some, how do you say, evening entertainments in another 
part of the city, and were … a little late to bed.” He tightened the cord of his robe. 
“Do come in! I’ll fetch René. I expect he will have completed his toilette.”
I chose a chair looking onto the courtyard of the house. Much of it was still in 
shadow, though I could make out the shapes of furniture covered in dustsheets.
“Your papa said you would be coming this morning. I see that you have all 
your equipment. Très bien.” René Martin was making his way down the stairs, still 
fastening the top buttons of his shirt. He fished a tie out of his pocket and looped 
it through his collar.
“Monsieur Martin, I …”
“No formality here. René, please,”
“Will we be going to the workshops today?”
He glanced across to his assistant. “Still in bed at this hour? Tssk! Get some 
clothes on and bring round the Citroën.”
The other man sighed audibly before retreating to his room. René waited until 
he was out of earshot. “Very useful but without the blessing of refined manners. 
While we wait, shall I show you some of the work we have commissioned? Bring 
your camera.”
Already there were panels of carved and painted woodwork ready for shipping. 
“How will they know how to reassemble everything when it arrives at its destina-
tion?” I asked.
“Everything done according to our own designs. Just needs to be pieced to-
gether like a jigsaw,” he replied. “Monsieur Vary—Paul I should say—measured 
it all out most carefully so that it will fit snugly in its new location. We then go to 
the workshops here and in Marrakech and give the men the correct dimensions.”
“Is the house being built like one of the grand mansions in the Medina?”
He laughed, “I’d pay good money to see a Moroccan villa perched on the shores 
of a Pacific island. No, this new place will have the spirit of modernity—clean lines, 
steel frame, concrete, plates of glass—but with a touch of the Musulman world in 
each room. I’d hoped the Cromwells would order everything from me, but their trips 
to the Middle East have given them new ideas. Other dealers have been circling the 
couple like vultures; it was too much to hope that I’d keep them to myself.”
A horn sounded outside. Paul was sitting at the driving wheel of a dented van 
with corrugated sides. We loaded my tripod in the back and squeezed into the front 
seat. I knew that we were heading away from the coast, but soon lost track among 
the labyrinth of alleys. The brakes whined as we finally halted in front of a nonde-
script warehouse.

Rabat, 1937  247
René reached over me to open the passenger door. “Here it is. You’ll be 
amazed at their workmanship.” Once we had entered, I understood why they had 
chosen such a tall space; one section of a huge wooden ceiling was propped up 
against a wall. Further sections were being assembled on the ground. A muʿallim 
sat quietly on the floor, his legs crossed. Occasionally, he would speak softly 
to his assistants or indicate by the merest gesture some change they needed to 
make in assembling the sections. In another part of the workshop a group of men 
were cutting and planing each component, guided by templates drawn on stained 
sheets of paper.
René spoke in an undertone. “The master, Abu Zayd, takes charge of the manu-
facturing. They work to his drawings and nothing escapes his beady eyes. I think 
his apprentices are terrified to put a foot wrong. He has such exacting standards, 
luckily for me. Uses the best materials for the marquetry. See the strips of dark 
thuya wood used to create the principal lines?”
Abu Zayd took no notice of us. René advanced holding out his hand, but was 
pointedly ignored.
“No matter. He’s always like this.” René said breezily. He waved to Paul. “Can 
you explain to him about the photographs? Don’t want him getting angry.”
While I set up my camera, Paul engaged in a whispered conversation with the 
muʿallim. Abu Zayd shot me a hostile glance before giving his assent. I transferred 
my thoughts to the lens, picking the aperture and focusing. The image sharpened 
in the viewfinder. Abu Zayd’s eyes avoided the camera and the other two engaged 
with their work, applying patterns onto the flat surfaces. My frame took in some 
of the side panels, stacked against the wall on either side. A weak shaft of sunlight 
raked across the ceiling, emphasising the sunken facets of the repeated stars. I 
checked my light meter one last time. Perfect! As the shutter clicked, I noticed that 
the boy had turned to face me directly.
Abu Zayd’s expression told me that his patience had run out. René sensed the 
same, ushering me quickly out of the workshop.
“The design of the ceiling was different to the ones I’ve seen in the houses of 
Rabat.”
He beamed at my observation. “My own idea. Old techniques, but with a mod-
ern twist. Notice the greater simplicity of the motifs; each part is distinct. No 
trailing vines and plump fruit, no panels of poetry. All the beauty of Morocco 
fused with the rigorous clarity of the modern world.” He paused, perhaps for me 
to absorb the grandeur of his vision. “Anyway, many more ateliers to visit today. 
Paul, allons-y!”
Later that day they returned me to my house in the Citroën. The motor was 
still running as René leaned out of the window. “Tell Monsieur Hammam that I 
can have anything made for his European clients. Traditional, modern, big, small. 
Whatever he wants, I have the men to do it.” He reached into his top pocket and 
handed me his card—S.A.L.A.M René Martin. “Add this to the parcel when you 
post him your photographs. Au revoir!” Smoke spat out of the exhaust, and the van 
lurched back to life. Moments later the vehicle disappeared around a corner, kick-
ing dust into the air.

248  Rabat, 1937
… five, four, three, two, one.
Out of the developer and into the stop bath. Twenty seconds, then the fixer. 
Always the same process over and over. Isn’t that like those artisans making the 
ceiling? Each piece has to be cut just the same size as the next so that they fit 
together seamlessly. Hours, days, weeks spent on the same tasks.
I examined the print for flaws. I expect the Cromwells would find the life of a 
master carpenter a dull one, reproducing the same items hundreds, even thousands 
of times. The rich always want something new, endless distractions.
I turned my gaze to the unfinished ceiling in the photograph. The boy stared back 
at me questioningly. Simple motifs—stars, squares, crosses, rosettes—carrying lit-
tle meaning on their own but becoming complex and fascinating through the act of 
repetition. And now a single moment in that process was frozen in time, the image 
on celluloid itself capable of limitless reproduction. I don’t suppose I’ll ever see the 
ceiling in its intended home; through the alchemy of photography a faint residue of 
its original aura will be mine forever.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-50
I travelled for two years in Tibet, therefore, and amused myself by visiting Lhassa, 
and spending some days with the head lama. You may have read of the remark-
able explorations of a Norwegian named Sigerson, but I am sure that it never oc-
curred to you that you were receiving news of your friend. I then passed through 
Persia, looked in at Mecca, and paid a short but interesting visit to the Khalifa at 
Khartoum the results of which I have communicated to the Foreign Office. Return-
ing to France, I spent some months in a research into the coal-tar derivatives, 
which I conducted in a laboratory at Montpellier,…
Cleveland, 1956
47
Figure 47.1  The Wade Cup with Animated Script, 1200–1221. Iran. Brass inlaid with silver; 
overall: 11.5 cm (4 1/2 in.); diameter: 16.1 cm (6 5/16 in.). The Cleveland Mu-
seum of Art, Purchase from the J. H. Wade Fund 1944.485.

250  Cleveland, 1956
My father was waving at me. Closing my book, I rose from the bench and joined 
him and Salim in the next room of the museum. I could hear another man speaking 
to them in fluent Arabic. It was not until I passed through the doorway that I saw 
him properly. He was middle-aged with receding hair combed carefully over the 
back of his head. I was struck by his large ears and round cheeks, but most of all by 
the mischievous eyes deep-set beneath straight eyebrows. An immaculate pinstripe 
suit was complemented by his expensive shoes, the shiny points of which reflected 
the electric lights in the ceiling.
“We haven’t seen each other in years. He happened to be here for a conference. 
It’s only by chance that we bumped into each other.” My father caught my confused 
expression. “In all the excitement I forgot to introduce you. Aisha this is Susya 
Reich. He helped our family in the dark days at the end of the war. It was just a few 
months before you were born.”
“These days most people know me as David,” the man responded gently. “Aisha, 
I am delighted to make your acquaintance. I see that you are a keen reader. What 
book is it?”
“The Return of Sherlock Holmes,” I replied. “I’m reading it to improve my Eng-
lish. I like the ways in which the answers are found through a process of deduction. 
Even the smallest thing can lead to the unmasking of a murderer.”
“A fine method for an art historian too. That’s what I do these days, by the way.” 
He showed us the cover of his book. “It’s about a wonderful piece in this very col-
lection. I am here to give this copy to the curator.”
“Do you have time to show us?” asked Salim.
David led us into another room towards a glass case. In it was a metal bowl, 
decorated over its exterior with delicate engraved decoration. Coming closer, I saw 
the signs of silver. There must have been  much more when it was first made. The 
bowl now looked a little forlorn, like a beggar standing in torn clothes.
His next words were as if he’d heard my thoughts. “Not quite as glorious as it 
once was, I’m afraid, but fascinating nonetheless. Every line, ever shape carved 
into the brass would once have been filled with silver. These flourishes may fall out 
over time. Sometimes knives wielded by greedy hands will prise them off. Those 
fragments of silver would have been melted down long ago. Still plenty left to 
study, however; enough at least for me to fill a slim volume!”
“Why did you choose this piece when there are others that have more of their 
original decoration?” I asked.
“A fine question, Aisha. Sometimes we have to look beyond surface imperfections 
to see the real story. In this case, I was intrigued by the inscriptions on this bowl.”
My father peered through the glass. “I think you’re mistaken, Susya. Did you 
bring us to the wrong case? I can see swirling designs framing figures and animals, 
as well as a band of little men running around the top. There are no words. Do you 
mean on the inside or even underneath?”
His friend chuckled. “Turn it upside down and you will find simple engraved 
words. Interesting in their own way, though that’s not what I mean. Aisha, the hero 
of your novel would, I think, be pulling out his magnifying glass to take a closer 
look. Can you see any clues?”

Cleveland, 1956  251
I started on the inside of the bowl. The designs were almost lost. I imagined 
that there were once fish swimming around the central band. Around it were 
regularly spaced roundels, each one connected to the next. Finding nothing there 
I moved to the outside. “Do the knotted designs running around the body create 
characters from the Arabic alphabet? I’ve seen inscriptions hidden in that way 
on buildings.”
“A good guess, but that’s not it.”
“I can’t make out what’s happening around the foot of the bowl. All that’s left is 
the little men around the lip. Surely it can’t be them?”
“Let’s see if we can find an answer,” he replied. “In 1943 I was in Libya. Peo-
ple who know those harsh lands can pass through the desert into Egypt carrying 
secrets. My job was to interview these couriers who were picked up by the army. I 
remember one very well. He was brought before me, his face and clothes spattered 
with sand. Hardly uttered a word at first and claimed to be called Abu Zayd. I never 
found out his real name.”
My father’s expression registered surprise, as if David’s words had brought an 
old thought to mind. “What was it made this Abu Zayd so memorable?”
“I got him talking eventually. He had such a gift for language; verses seemed 
to flow through his veins! It was something else entirely that connects him to this 
bowl, for among his belongings we found a notebook filled with simple images 
of human figures in different poses.” He paused, gesturing towards my book. “If 
memory serves, one of these chapters has just what I am looking for.”
I handed over my book and he flicked through the pages finally finding one with 
drawings of lines of stick men. “Ah, this is it! The Mystery of the Dancing Men. 
The detective solved the code for these and apprehended his quarry. Sadly, no one 
in Allied Intelligence, myself included, ever penetrated Abu Zayd’s cipher.”
“Are the little men on this ancient bowl a secret code, each one standing for an 
Arabic letter or word?” I asked.
“Not quite,” he replied, “though every man does indeed stand for a letter or two. 
You know, craftsmen liked to make inscriptions difficult to read, maybe to create 
some entertainment for the owners. A key to reading them is to decide beforehand 
what sort of thing they might say.”
“What do you mean? How can you guess at what it says before you’ve read it?”
“That’s just what I do. If you take this one, I had a suspicion what it might say, 
and soon I confirmed it as ‘Glory and success, and government, and bliss, and 
prosperity, and peace of mind, and mercy, and well-being, and good health, and 
duration, and increase, and satisfaction, and care, and continuance to its owner.’”
“But how did you work out all the words,” I asked.
“That takes more time. I can show you a little of it. Some letters are easier to 
spot. See that curving zigzag with three upturned points? That’s the letter sin. Fol-
lowing that are two figures running in opposite directions. Where their legs cross, 
that makes the linked form of lam and alif. Next comes the circle of the mim. From 
this sequence of letters I can find the word, salama, or peace. Before this word 
there’s another zigzag followed by an ʿayn. These are followed by a standing figure
forming an alif and one lying down for a dal. It doesn’t take too much to be able 

252  Cleveland, 1956
to read, saʿada, meaning soundness or prosperity. Each word is a new little puzzle 
to solve!”
“They took all that time to design it and then forget to mention who owned it,” 
exclaimed my father. “If it had been my money, I’d have ordered the inlayer to 
make my name clear for everyone to see.”
David smiled. “There’s a world of master artisans and patrons that remains a 
mystery to us, I’m afraid. A piece like this was made by a workshop to be sold 
to the first person with sufficient coins in his purse. Sometimes a name would be 
added then, as we might today. Mostly what we find are the grand titles of princes 
and sultans and not businessmen like yourself, al-Harith. I expect some prosperous 
trader owned this chalice, though even the great Sherlock Holmes couldn’t extract 
his name after all this time!”
Figure 47.2  Sketch of the animated inscription. Drawing: Marcus Milwright after original 
in D. S. Rice, The Wade Cup (1955).

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-51
Dear Salim,
If you were to ask me the most powerful impression from those first days in 
Djenné, I’d have no difficulty in giving an answer. The metallic taste of grit, forc-
ing its way past my lips, my teeth, and embedding itself to the walls of my mouth. 
My tongue felt like shoe leather! Most of the time I could hardly talk due to these 
insistent little particles soaking up my saliva. Hardly fair on your home town, I 
know, but memories are like that. It’s the visceral ones that clamour for atten-
tion, pushing everything else into the background. In case you now think that my 
trip will result in nothing of value, I should tell you about a chance meeting that 
Djenné, 1985
48
Figure 48.1  Exterior façade of the Congregational Mosque of Djenné, Mali. Photo: Mark 
Horton, 1981. Image provided by the Aga Khan Documentation Center, MIT 
Libraries (AKDC@MIT).

254  Djenné, 1985
occurred on my fourth day here. The whining, desiccating wind still had us all in its 
clutches; at least, I was given something else for my mind to focus on.
I nearly didn’t meet her at all. Walking back to your parents’ house, I passed 
the Great Mosque. The towers were almost lost in the haze. It’s even worse than 
the khamsin in Syria, the wind pulling the sand from the Sahara and flinging it 
relentlessly at the fields, streets, houses, and mosques. I’d have stayed inside 
all day if it were not for the need for groceries. Was there a figure, standing 
near the end of the façade? A gust of wind blew me sideways. I looked again 
but saw no one. Had I imagined it or was this person simply cloaked from sight 
by the clouds of grit? Rubbing my eyes, I peered into the grey-brown air. There 
was someone, a small woman, her head wrapped in bright fabric. I shifted my 
direction, moving towards the nearest entrance to the monumental platform. 
Her long dress was flapping around her legs as she struggled to keep hold of 
a notepad. Ascending the stairs, I looked again to see her moving around the 
corner of the structure. I followed, hoping to find her as well as some respite 
from the wind.
She was standing close to the wall, using this momentary oasis of calm to write 
in the pad. Absorbed in her work, she didn’t hear me approaching. “Excuse me 
for disturbing you. I couldn’t help noticing you writing. Are you interested in 
the building?” Her dark eyes regarded me levelly. I wondered if an introduction 
might help. “I won’t disturb you as I can see you are busy. My name is Aisha bint  
al-Harith. I’m just here visiting.”
Her face broke into a wide grin. “We don’t have many visitors during the har-
mattan. You can’t be a tourist. No one would pay to come here during this weather. 
Every year these desert winds drive me crazy.”
“My father’s business partner was born here.” I explained. “I’m staying with his 
family for a while. I want to study architecture. My father thought I should travel in 
order to get some ideas. This mosque is like nothing I’ve seen before.”
Wind whipped around the corner, nearly knocking us down. We both reached 
out to one of the bundles of branches sticking out of the walls. “The masons didn’t 
put them here to stop people from falling over,” she said, catching her breath. “I’m 
glad of them all the same.”
I’d never really thought about what these strange features were for. “Reinforces 
the mud structure,” Fatoumata continued, anticipating my question. “Also allows 
the masons to climb the walls when making repairs. Wind and rain both take their 
toll. Every now and then they’ll be up and down the walls, filling in cracks and 
repairing the mortar.”
“They remind me of some spiny creature, a porcupine or maybe a sea urchin,” I 
replied. “It’s like the building’s trying to protect itself from something.”
Conversation being difficult, she suggested we move inside the building. I 
learned that her name was Fatoumata Traoré (I expect you have come across that 
family name before). I wanted to know more about what she was doing but Fatou-
mata was more interested in showing me around the interior. The nearest portal 
took us directly into the prayer hall. We found ourselves in one of the aisles run-
ning parallel to the qibla. The massive piers dominated the space, creating a narrow 

Djenné, 1985  255
avenue like a ravine cut into a mountain. The piers rose to steep arches with simple 
wooden roofs spanning the gaps between. “Adobe can be made quickly from river 
mud,” Fatoumata explained “Once the bricks are dried in the sun they can bear 
enormous weight.”
“These huge supports remind me of the Mosque of Ibn Tulun in Cairo,” I re-
marked, “though there’s less space between them in this building. I’ve never seen 
such steep arches.”
“It’s difficult to span the gaps,” she replied. “They build the arches that tall 
because the bricks can’t take much lateral pressure. Makes me think of the Gothic 
arches of cathedrals in Europe, though they’re mostly made from stone.”
Figure 48.2  Aisle in the prayer hall wall of the Congregational Mosque of Djenné, Mali. 
Photo: Mark Horton, 1981. Image provided by the Aga Khan Documentation 
Center, MIT Libraries (AKDC@MIT).

256  Djenné, 1985
We cut across the aisles, making towards the qibla. Each of the towers on the 
exterior marked the position of a deep mihrab. “They’re like caves.” I said, trying 
to understand this strange space. “It all looks so ancient, like it’s been standing here 
forever. Almost as if it emerged from the soil without the help of human hands.”
She smiled. “Appearances can be deceiving. What you see hasn’t even been 
standing here for a century, though there has been a mosque on this site for much 
longer.” Seeing my surprise, she explained further. “The place was in ruins and 
the French authorities ordered that it be reconstructed. I heard that many people 
in nearby village were forced to work on the building site. Someone decided the 
back-breaking labour might be easier with music and there was drumming to keep 
a steady rhythm. People died of overwork and disease. There’s not much I’d thank 
our old colonial masters for. At least, we ended up with this beautiful place. I have 
another reason to respect it: the guiding hand in its construction was my own great-
grandfather, Ismaila. Important man back in those days, as head of the guild of 
masons. This design was his vision. He saw it through from beginning to end.”
“You still haven’t told me why you are here. You must know this place so well, 
and yet you were writing up notes on the building when I first spotted you.”
She opened her notepad. “There’s always new things to learn, even about a 
building you have visited hundreds of times.” She paused, looking at her jottings. 
“What I’ve been doing is trying to see this place through fresh eyes. I’m not here 
this time just as one of the faithful. Have you heard of UNESCO?”
I nodded. “The government wants recognition for our native architecture,” she 
continued. “What better example can there be than the old town of Djenné? This 
mosque is almost like a member of the family; I was lucky enough to get the job 
of writing part of the report. Insha allah, the application will be approved and our 
home and its surroundings will be understood as a vital part of the heritage of our 
world.”
“Do you think it will be successful?”
“I don’t worry about what’s beyond my control,” she replied. “There’s an archi-
tect in Egypt, Hassan Fathy, who believes that many of the answers to our problems 
can be found in reviving simple building techniques. I share his conviction. After 
all, you have only to look around you to see what can be done with mud, dung, 
straw, sand, and wood. It’s both ancient and modern all at the same time.”
Salim, did you know that the government is seeking this honour for Djenné? 
Perhaps all this is familiar to you already. I wonder what would Fatoumata’s great-
grandfather think of his work joining the elevated company of Baʿalbak, Palmyra, 
and the Taj Mahal? Does the age of something really matter if there’s nothing 
better of its type in the world? The fact that the mosque is constantly changing, al-
ways being repaired with parts replaced, makes it seem organic, like a living being. 
Doesn’t the Qurʾan say somewhere that Allah made man from clay? That same clay 
can become a simple animal enclosure, a house, and even a mosque. I suppose that 
people have been making their buildings from mud since the beginning of time. 
Mud bricks crumble into dust, rain mingles with the dust forming it back into mal-
leable clay, and, finally, the hands and feet of countless souls shape the clay back 
into bricks. An endlessly repeating process, imprinting itself on human memory.

Djenné, 1985  257
I can smell frying onions laced with cumin. There’s the sound of vegetables be-
ing chopped and laughter is drifting down the hall. Time for me to help out in the 
kitchen. Ask Baba to write soon. Make sure he doesn’t get into any trouble while 
I’m away!
Your family sends their fondest love and ask when you will visit again,
Aisha
30 November, 1985

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-52
New York, 2015
49
Figure 49.1  Les Femmes du Maroc #4, 2005. Chromogenic print. © Lalla Essaydi, Courtesy 
of the artist and Edwynn Houk Gallery, New York.

New York, 2015  259
Standing in that box, they looked like the jury at a trial. Except for the phones. 
Men and women, earnest expressions, ears clamped to a phone, sometimes looking 
down or glancing across to the auctioneer. Hands covering their mouths to shield 
their conversations with clients. Who or what was on trial? Lot 8A. We didn’t even 
get to see the painting, just an image on a digital screen. There was another screen 
with the price in dollars, euros, yen and pounds. Were those two screens the same 
size? Was the painting more important than the money or the money more than 
the painting? Good to get some fresh air. Anyway, fresh as it can be on West 49th! 
Rockefeller Center, then round the corner onto Fifth Avenue. Have to write this up. 
Editor will want my copy by end of day. What am I going to say, what’s the angle? 
Money. Is money what people want to read about? That’s easy enough. Where did 
the bidding start? One hundred million. Designed to hit the headlines on its own, 
but then it was one hundred and twenty. Seemed to stall for a while. Auctioneer 
doing some theatrics to get things moving again. One hundred and thirty, forty, 
fifty. More nervous phone conversations. One-fifty-nine, then another five hun-
dred thousand. Finally one-sixty, before the hammer fell. What’s that with buyer’s 
premium? Must be getting on for one-eighty. Doesn’t make for much of a story. I 
could work out what else can be bought for that amount? Or how much Picasso got 
for the painting when he sold it in that Paris gallery in the ‘50s?
Figure 49.2  Les Femmes du Maroc: La Grande Odalisque, 2008. Chromogenic print. 
© Lalla Essaydi, Courtesy of the artist and Edwynn Houk Gallery, New York.

260  New York, 2015
Tiffany’s. Need a coffee. East Village? No, I’ll try Lenox Hill. Must be some-
where good around there. Need the exercise. DON’T WALK. Why do people 
salivate over diamonds? How many Tiffany watches adorned the wrists of the au-
dience just now? Would they be seeking out more drama at Broadway this even-
ing or did the sale of Les Femmes d’Alger drain them of their emotional energy? 
WALK. How can simple materials like paint on canvas become more valuable than 
diamonds? Nike. Versace. Cartier. DON’T WALK. What’s the name of the cathe-
dral behind me? Saint, saint, P–, P–, never mind. I’ll check it later. One hundred 
and eighty million. There has to be a better story than that. Did Picasso ever go to 
Algiers? Don’t think so. Picked up on things that came to France. Matisse—yes, 
that’s it—he showed Picasso a statue from Ghana. Did Matisse go to Algiers? No, 
that’s not it. WALK. Morocco. What coffee shall I get? No froth. No milk. Black 
with sugar. Quick, get across before the crosswalk light changes.
St Thomas’ church. Gothic, nice stonework. Must stop inside sometime. What 
would the builders think, seeing it surrounded by skyscrapers? Still need an angle. 
Picasso stayed in Paris. Never travelled to Algiers. Let the world come to him. 
Trocadéro, that was where he went to see African art. 54th Street. DON’T WALK. 
Perhaps Les femmes d’Alger was about something else. A painting about a paint-
ing. Is there a story there? WALK. Three taxis in a row. Flag one down? Don’t 
be so lazy. Walk will do you good. Delacroix, yes, he painted the first one. Saw it 
in the Louvre last year. 1830ish. You can do better than that. Think. Think. 1834, 
that sounds right. When did the French invade? Must have been only a year or two 
before. DON’T WALK. Nothing much to look at. Let’s cross the road to the other 
side. Did Delacroix consider that his trip to Algeria came about because of military 
conquest? Couldn’t be flitting about wherever he wanted without French soldiers 
on the streets. WALK. Can I run to the next crosswalk and beat the lights? … Yes, 
catch your breath and over 56th. Was it all just exotic, colourful, different, or was 
he trying to tell us something? What did the painting mean for Picasso, just a start-
ing point for invention? DON’T WALK. Did he talk with Matisse about Morocco? 
WALK. Over 57th, I can cut through just past Louis Vuitton and take a right on 
58th to Madison Avenue. Nearly there. Haven’t noticed that gallery before. Edw-
ynn Houk. Photographs. Got a few minutes to spare.
Should I try to look like I might buy something? Don’t suppose the assistant 
cares one way or the other. Hope she doesn’t come over to talk with me. I shouldn’t 
think that. Okay, come over if you want to. Seems more interested in her phone. 
Just walk past like you own the place. Should have checked my hair in the reflec-
tion before opening the door. White walls, bright lights. What would photos look 
like against red walls, blue, pink? Whose work? Lalla Essaydi. Sounds familiar. 
Where have I seen that name before? Might come to me later. Colour photos, but 
with the colour drained out. Just white, cream, brown. Like old sepia or the tones 
of skin. Expect there’s a leaflet somewhere with her biography. Find one before 
I leave. First photo: Les femmes du Maroc #1. Four women, one standing, three 
sitting. Hands, feet, faces. Everything else covered. Standing figure is looking in. 
Can’t see her face. Is there a conversation? Has the curtain just been drawn back? 
Writing everywhere, curving, looping. Line after line. Covers the drapes, the walls, 

New York, 2015  261
even the floor. Clothing as well. Is there writing on skin? Hands, feet, faces. More 
words. What about the skin beneath the fabrics? Triptych photo. Standing woman, 
facing left, facing forward, facing right. Abaya, hijab, niqab in ivory white. Hands, 
eyes, forehead. Skin overwritten. Words flow across her garment, the wall, the 
floor. Do the letters say anything? Parts of words, some complete. Can’t tell. Why 
three photos? Mugshot? No, that’s not it. Passage of time? Ai Wei Wei and that 
ancient vase. Couldn’t he have used something new, just made to look old? Wrong 
direction, think again. Something scientific? Nineteenth-century. Ethnography. Re-
cording different people as if they are species of plants, insects, birds. Another 
photo. Can’t spend too much time here today. Work to do. Standing figures. Are 
some of them men? Why’s a hand reaching into her mouth? Biting? Delacroix? 
No, slave dealer. Not him. G–g … Gérôme! Yes, but his woman was naked among 
clothed men. And surrounded by colour. Carpets, silks, the patterns of stonework. 
Colour bleached from here. Lalla’s woman is clothed. Glad her skin is not exposed. 
Only hands and face. And her long, dark hair. Another photo. Reclining figure, 
looking at me directly. Arm draped across her hip and touching her calf. Odalisque. 
Renoir. No, Ingres. Bare back and breast now covered up. Ingres’ model’s feet were 
flawless pink, like she’d never trodden on the ground. Dark brown soles in this 
photograph. Henna. Painting the bride’s hands and feet with henna. Remember do-
ing that last year in Zarqa at my cousin’s wedding What were the designs? Flowers 
mostly. Words, why did she choose words? The lettering loops around her arms and 
legs. Protecting the body like an amulet? Words can define, demarcate, oppress. 
Can’t read what they say. Can anyone? She’s looking directly at me. Judgement 
or curiosity. Have I broken into her space? Her face, her expression. It makes me 
uncomfortable. Is it because I’ve intruded on her privacy? There’s something else. 
The tilt of the head, the dark, kind eyes … I remember her looking at me like that 
when I burst into the kitchen from the garden, babbling about some tiny discovery 
or crying over a scraped knee. She’d glance over her shoulder, steam rising from 
the cooking pots. Then her eyes might widen, her mouth broaden slowly into a 
smile. Perfect white teeth just showing through. Why has she been absent from my 
thoughts this week? How is it that my memories seem fluid, malleable, while I can 
visualise a painting with so little effort, placing each line and dab of pigment in its 
proper place?
Need to sit down. Why did you have to die? I was only small. Needed you so 
much. Couldn’t you have stayed just a little longer? Still have her words, hand-
written in journals bound in floral fabrics. Stacked together the bindings are like a 
meadow on my bookshelf. Haven’t taken one down in too long. Is work so very im-
portant? Was writing letters before I started school. She’d inscribe the alif and lam 
slowly into the dust on the stone step. I’d have to add new strokes to make words. 
Did they all make sense? Can’t remember now. Feelings come through stronger 
now, the details blurring over the years. Last look at the photo in front of me. I 
know the words are there, across skin and fabric. Just beyond sight. They’ll fade 
and wash away in a week or so. Invisible, yet somehow always present. What’s the 
time? Coffee, black, one sugar. Must get moving.

DOI: 10.4324/9781003374046-53
Anywhere, 2020
50
Figure 50.1  Face masks with epigraphic decoration designed by Ayhan Altun (a) and Tom 
Gowanlock (b), 2020. Collection of the author. Photo: Marcus Milwright. 

Anywhere, 2020  263
A package arrived at my door yesterday afternoon. I recognised Salim’s bold 
hand on the back: Don’t open this until we have spoken! I checked my watch: 
still time to make some toast. I ambled back to my room balancing a mug on the 
edge of my plate. Closing the door with my foot, I sat at my desk. Pressing a but-
ton, the screen came to life. I glanced at my inbox; Salim’s email read, Are you 
up yet? Your father has a few minutes between meetings. Switch on Skype once 
you are ready.
I was still chewing when the ringing started. One click later and I was staring at 
my father’s office. No one was sitting there; I found myself looking at the tops of 
the chairs and the blue sky beyond. So different from the dirty clouds lumbering 
past my window.
“Aisha, can you hear me?” While I’d been distracted by the forbidding weather, 
my father had eased himself into the seat. “Aisha dearest, can you put your sound 
on? I’m not getting anything from your side.” He was anxiously tapping on his 
keyboard.
“Good morning Baba. No need to worry. I’m here. How’s everything in 
Dubai?”
“Can’t complain, al-hamdu lillah. See for yourself,” he answered, picking up 
his laptop and directing the camera out of the window.
“Point it further down. I want to see the boats.” I could just make out the wooden 
dhows sandwiched between the container ships tied up at the port. “That’s the thing 
I miss most, Baba.”
“But there you are on the other side of the world, and still you have the ocean on 
your doorstep!” he said. “If you are feeling homesick, go to the harbour. I’m sure 
there are plenty of fine craft to see.”
“Only cruise ships and pleasure boats. Not many of those at the moment.”
He nodded gravely but said nothing. A tray of coffee and pastries slid across the 
screen, held by a familiar hand. Part of Salim’s face came into view. “I trust you are 
keeping safe. Your father worries about you. Remember that the Prophet—peace 
be upon him—said ‘There is no disease that Allah has created, except that He has 
also created its treatment.’ Very true!”
My father waved him away. “I expect so, though there’s no treatment yet. Or did 
I miss something on the news? Haven’t you got some work to do on the accounts?” 
I heard muffled words of protest as Salim retreated to his desk.
“Did you receive the parcel?” he asked, regarding me over the rim of his cup.
I lifted the box onto the desk for him to see. “Open it,” he said urgently.
“You need to be more patient, Baba! You haven’t even asked me how my studies 
are going this term.”
“Sorry. It’s hard having you so far away. Of course, I want to know about what 
you’ve been learning at university. It’s because of that I thought of sending you 
some things to keep you healthy.”
I cut through the parcel tape and opened the lid of the cardboard box inside. 
Keep me healthy. What was he talking about? The box was full of little wrapped 
packages. “Salim prepared everything, and added a few things of his own.”

264  Anywhere, 2020
I tore the paper off the topmost ones to reveal a printed silk scarf. Next was a 
small parcel wrapped in newspaper. It was a plastic box containing transparent yel-
low nuggets. I opened the lid and sniffed the contents suspiciously. Salim’s voice 
broke in: “It’s myrrh. Good for coughs and for clearing your chest! As used by the 
Prophet himself.”
My father rolled his eyes. “I heard that the ancient Egyptians also embalmed 
corpses with it. I’ve put in something that might be more useful in protecting your-
self. Look for the one covered in blue paper.”
Tearing the wrapping I found a packet of textile face masks. “Baba, I already 
have one of these. You know I keep safe all the time.”
“Have a proper look. They’re made by my friend Abu Zayd in his factory. He’s 
rather proud of them.”
I pulled them from their cellophane sleeve. Each one was printed with a design. 
The first had a section of wall with geometric patterns and a window. Above were 
lines of writing. There wasn’t time to read them now. The second one had Arabic 
written on the fabric running from one side to the other. Above and below were 
squares filled with more writing. I held it up to the camera.
“Let’s see if you remember what you’ve been taught. Can you read it?” he 
asked.
“Of course, Baba! The script is easy enough: bismillah al-rahman al-rahim. Do 
you think I’d forgotten everything just because I’ve been away from home for a 
year?”
Salim had left his seat and was standing behind my father. “Most efficacious,” 
he beamed. “In the name of Allah, the Merciful, the Compassionate! Just think that 
you have these precious words next to your skin. Baraka, blessings upon blessings 
simply through the act of wearing it. I shouldn’t wonder if, -ff, -fff …”
They’d frozen. I was left with the blurred image of my father leaning back in his 
chair to admonish Salim. His words were lost in the electronic ether. How many 
years had they worked together? I turned my attention back to the masks. The first 
mask showed a wall ornamented in carved stucco. Was it from Morocco or Spain? 
The writing above had elegant, curving lettering in gold. There were circled num-
bers, probably marking the verses of a sura. I liked the squares on the other one. I 
remember seeing things like this when we went to Bukhara; giant designs in glazed 
tiles that you could stare at for hours.
They were moving again on the screen. “Aisha, did you press the wrong 
button?”
“Just a slow connection, Baba, that’s all. Salim, you don’t believe these masks 
are like amulets, protecting me more than a plain one? That sounds like hocus-
pocus, not faith. I thought you didn’t hold with that sort of thing.”
Salim was looking sheepish. “I expect you won’t like the other thing I packed. 
It’s the one covered in bubble wrap.”
This one was next out of the box. Peeling away the plastic I caught sight of brass. 
It wasn’t heavy, and the surface had been stamped with letters and designs. A small 
bowl revealed itself, but it wasn’t until all the bubble wrap was gone that I saw the 

Anywhere, 2020  265
simplified form of a hand, cast in white metal sticking up in the middle. Around it 
were attached many smaller pieces of sheet metal. I looked at it perplexed.
“Salim picked this up in the market from a Persian shopkeeper,” my father ex-
plained. “They’re called magic bowls, by the way.”
“Good magic,” Salim added anxiously. “There’s so much packed in this lit-
tle object. Fatima’s hand is surrounded by keys to lock away any malign spirits. 
Around the sides you can see the evil eye, a magic square, and even the image of 
a shrine.”
“What’s a magic square?”
“Look at the numbers,” he replied. “Add together each set of three in the rows 
and columns and you’ll find every one amounts to the same. Squares like this have 
been protecting people for centuries.”
“Isn’t a bowl for drinking something? This one wouldn’t work very well; all the 
liquid would pour out of the hole drilled in the centre.”
My father looked thoughtful. “You know, I heard that during the Black Death 
people would write parts of the Holy Qurʾan in ink on the inside of pottery bowls. 
When water was placed inside the ink dissolved.”
I frowned. “What good was that? All the hard work of the scribe just washed 
away.”
Figure 50.2  Brass amuletic bowl with impressed images and writing. Purchased in Iran by Fa-
himeh Ghorbani in c. 2015. Collection of the author. Photo: Marcus Milwright.

266  Anywhere, 2020
“Not gone, just held within the water. You had only to drink it and scripture was 
absorbed into your body.”
I picked up one of the masks. “Just like the air will pass through the words on 
the fabric and into my lungs?”
He threw up his hands. “Maybe, perhaps, possibly … well, who can tell? Doesn’t 
hurt to try, does it? After all, writing or no writing it’s still a mask. I suppose that’s 
what matters most!”

Sanaʿa, 660: The earliest physical evidence for the Qurʾan comprises citations 
on monumental inscriptions (most importantly those in the Dome of the Rock in 
Jerusalem, dated to 72/691–92) and manuscript fragments. The latter group are 
undated, though scholars have established a framework for distinguishing the man-
uscripts that were probably produced in the first century of Islam. Some pieces 
have also been subjected to carbon-14 testing, though this fixes the chronological 
range for the parchment rather than the writing added to it. It is quite conceivable 
that parchment was only used years or even decades after it was produced, as has 
been suggested about a fragment in the Mingana Collection in Birmingham, which 
provided a carbon-14 range of 563–645 CE though its layout and script suggest a 
date in the 670s or later. The first Qurʾans were written in a sloping Arabic script 
called hijazi or maʾil; this was replaced in the late seventh century by the more 
proportionate angular script commonly known as Kufic. A cache of ancient Qurʾan 
fragments was discovered in the Congregational Mosque of Sanaʿa in Yemen. One 
of these (DAM 01-27.1) was found to be a palimpsest. In other words, one text 
had been erased and another had been written over the top. The earlier text prob-
ably dates to the late 650s or 660s, and contains readings that diverge in subtle 
ways from the canonical text associated in tradition with caliph ʿUthman. For the 
purposes of the story, the scribe worked in Sanaʿa, though it is unknown where this 
manuscript was actually produced.
Further reading: Déroche, François, Qurʾans of the Umayyads: A first Overview. 
Leiden Studies in Islam and Society 1 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2014).
George, Alain, The Rise of Islamic Calligraphy (London: Saqi Books, 2010).
On the dating of the Mingana Qurʾan fragment, see: https://www.birmingham.ac.uk/
facilities/cadbury/birmingham-quran-mingana-collection/birmingham-quran/ 
index.aspx (last consulted: 21 July 2020).
Aswan, 691: The grave marker naming ʿAbassa bint Jurayj (dated to 72/691) 
is one of the most important surviving inscriptions of the seventh century. Like 
the mosaic inscription running around the interior of the Dome of the Rock in 
Jerusalem, the text on ʿAbassa’s grave marker gives prominence to a profession of 
Muslim belief (known as the shahada) emphasising the oneness of God and the 
Appendix
Notes on Chapters 1–50

268  Appendix
prophethood of Muhammad. Notable too is the early reference to the religion of Is-
lam in the phrase ahl al-Islam (“people of Islam”). The profession of faith appears 
in coins around this time, but both ʿAbassa’s memorial and the Dome of the Rock 
add in a new component: wahdahu la sharika lahu (“alone, without partner”). This 
addition may well have been aimed at Christians, taking issue with the concept of 
the Trinity (i.e. the Father, Son and Holy Spirit). This point of contention between 
the two confessional communities is addressed in greater detail in the Dome of the 
Rock through the employment of passages from the Qurʾan. Assuming that ʿAbassa 
was indeed a convert to Islam—as the second part of her name implies (bint Jurayj, 
or “daughter of little George”)—those who commissioned the grave marker may 
have chosen this form of profession of faith to distinguish her from Christian fam-
ily members and neighbours in Aswan. The script exhibits some similarities to 
those found in the Dome of the Rock, illustrating the increasing interest in the 
aesthetic dimensions of Arabic writing at the end of the seventh century.
Further reading: Bacharach, Jere and Sherif Anwar, “Early versions of the shahāda: 
A tombstone from Aswan of 71 A.H., the Dome of the Rock, and contemporary 
coinage,” Der Islam 89 (2012): 60–69.
For the translation of this grave marker and other inscriptions of the first century of 
Islam, see: https://www.islamic-awareness.org/history/islam/inscriptions/ (last 
consulted: 21 July 2020).
Aleppo, 695: The first documented Islamic coins were copies of silver drachms 
of the Sasanian dynasty of Iran (223–651) produced in 651. The Muslim authori-
ties also produced copies of Byzantine copper coins in Greater Syria and Egypt 
soon after. In both cases, only minimal changes were made to the prototypes, most 
importantly in the form of Arabic inscriptions, including the phrase bism allah 
(“in the name of God”) and single words such as tayyib (“good”). Notably, the cop-
ies of Byzantine coins (known as Arab-Byzantine) even retain the crosses on the 
headgear and orbs held by the Christian emperors. A new phase of experimental 
coinage starts in the 690s during the rule of the Umayyad caliph, ʿAbd al-Malik 
(r. 685–705) and includes the famous “standing caliph” design. The coin reverses 
transformed the Byzantine image of a cross on a stepped base through the omission 
of the cross bar (creating a pole-on-steps motif). Copper mints exercised consider-
able freedom in the design of their coins, with the reverses sometimes adding the 
enigmatic circle and star motifs to the pole-on-steps. The meanings communicated 
by these designs remains obscure, though they may relate to themes in pre-Islamic 
poetry. In 696–97 ʿAbd al-Malik started to issue coinage that omitted images, car-
rying instead only religious inscriptions in Arabic.
Further reading: Heidemann, Stefan, “The evolving representation of the early 
Islamic empire and its religion on coin imagery,” in Angelika Neuwirth, Nicolai 
Sinai and Michael Marx, eds, The Qurʾān in Context: Historical and Literary 
Investigations into the Qurʾānic Milieu. Texts and Studies on the Qurʾān 6 
(Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2010), pp. 149–95.

Appendix  269
Jamil, Nadia, “Caliph and quṭb: Poetry as a source for the transformation of the 
Byzantine cross on steps on Umayyad coinage,” in Jeremy Johns, ed., Bayt 
al-Maqdis II: Jerusalem and early Islam (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1999), pp. 11–57.
For examples of coins of this period, see: https://www.islamic-awareness.org/
history/islam/coins/ (last consulted: 21 July 2020).
Damascus, 714: Caliph al-Walid b. ʿAbd al-Malik I (al-Walid I; r. 705–15) 
was an active patron of religious architecture across the Umayyad Empire. The 
Congregational Mosque of Damascus is his surviving masterpiece and was re-
vered in Medieval Islamic sources for its magnificent structure and lavish deco-
ration. The mosaics that originally adorned the upper parts of the three arcades, 
the courtyard façade of the prayer hall and the interior walls of the prayer hall are 
justly famous. Fires, most notably in 1893, have obliterated much of this orna-
mental program, though significant areas of early eighth-century mosaic remain 
in the western arcade. The largest of these is known as the Barada panel (named 
after the river that flows through the Syrian capital), measuring about 37 m in 
length. The panel comprises a series of architectural arrangements alternating 
with oversize trees. A swift-running river forms the baseline. Later writers as-
sert that the Byzantine emperor sent workers in mosaic and marble to assist in 
al-Walid’s projects. This connection is suggested by both the general style of the 
Barada panel and specific motifs, such as the hanging pearls. While the mosa-
ics probably communicated numerous messages, one plausible reading of the 
Barada panel is that it depicts paradise prior to the Day of Resurrection (yawm 
al-qiyama).
Further reading: Brisch, Klaus, ‘Observations on the iconography of the mosaics 
at the Great Mosque in Damascus,’ in Priscilla Soucek, ed., Content and Context 
of visual Arts in the Islamic World (University Park and London: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1988), pp. 13–23.
Flood, Finbarr Barry, The Great Mosque of Damascus: Studies in the Makings of 
an Umayyad visual Culture, Islamic History and Civilization, Studies and Texts 
33 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2001).
George, Alain, The Umayyad Mosque of Damascus: Art, Faith and Empire in Early 
Islam (London: Gingko Library, 2021).
Qusayr ʿAmra, 745: During the Umayyad caliphate (661–750) numerous 
palatial residences (qasr, pl. qusur) were constructed in Greater Syria, western 
Iraq, and northern Arabia. In some cases bathhouses were also included as part 
of a complex of buildings. Hammam al-Sarah and Qusayr ʿAmra, both in Jordan, 
are well preserved examples of bathhouses. The latter is particularly remarkable 
because it retains most of its original fresco decoration, albeit damaged through 
centuries of neglect. This painted cycle has a strongly representational quality, 
including numerous nude or semi-nude female figures. Some of the themes are 
classical in nature, but others relate closely to the circumstances of the first half 

270  Appendix
of the eighth century. The most impressive surviving panel runs along the west 
wall of the reception hall and comprises the standing woman in front of an ar-
chitectural backdrop, acrobats, and a composition known in scholarship as the 
“Six Kings.” This last part has inscriptions in Greek and Arabic, allowing for 
the identification of the Byzantine emperor, the Sasanian shah, the Visigothic 
king of the Iberian Peninsula (d. 711 or 712), and the Negus of Abyssinia. They 
gesture towards a representation of the Umayyad family on the north wall, sug-
gesting the victory of the Islamic Empire over its enemies. Recent research has 
identified the patron of this structure as Walid ibn Yazid, who ruled briefly as 
caliph in 743–44.
Further reading: Fowden, Garth, Quṣayr ʿAmra: Art and the Umayyad Elite in Late 
Antique Syria (Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 2004).
Vibert-Guigue, Claude and Ghazi Bisheh, Les peintures de Qusayr ʿAmra: Un 
bain Omeyyad dans la Bâdiya Jordanienne (Beirut: Institut français du Proche-­
Orient and Department of Antiquities of Jordan, 2007).
Akhmim, 751: The fragmentary woven and embroidered fabric known as the 
Marwan tiraz is a crucial piece of evidence about early Islamic textile produc-
tion. The term tiraz refers to the application of a band of writing to a textile. The 
inscription in this case is embroidered in yellow thread and identifies Marwan—
mostly likely Marwan II (r. 744–50) although Florence Day argues for an at-
tribution to Marwan I (r. 684–85)—using the standard caliphal honorific, amir 
al-muʾminin (“Commander of the Faithful”). The place where the embroidery 
was applied is given as Ifriqiya (i.e. modern Tunisia). Elements of the main de-
sign suggest that the silk was woven in Iran, Central Asia, or even in the Byz-
antine Empire. Recent analysis of the dyes provides interesting, if ambiguous 
results: the yellow was made from Persian berries while the red employed mad-
der and kermes. The latter derives from the crushing of scale insects (from the or-
der of Hemiptera) and has not been located in silks from Central Asia. Dyes were 
traded and the extract of the Persian berries could have been sent west for use in 
a workshop in the eastern Mediterranean region. It is not certain that the Marwan 
tiraz was found in Akhmim, though many Late Antique and early Islamic textiles 
were recovered from burials near the town during the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries.
Further reading: Baker, Patricia, Islamic Textiles (London: British Museum Press, 
1995).
Moraitou, Mina, Mariam Rosser-Owen and Ana Cabrera, “Fragments of the so-
called Marwan tiraz,” in Helen Evans and Brandie Ratliff, eds, Byzantium 
and Islam: Age of Transition, 7th–9th Century (New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press for the Metropolitan Museum of Art), pp. 238–41.
Day, Florence, “The tiraz silk of Marwan,” in George Miles, ed., Archaeologica 
Orientalia in Memoriam Ernst Herzfeld (Locust Valley, NY: J. J. Augustin, 
1952), pp. 39–61.

Appendix  271
Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, 774: There are two Umayyad settlements bearing 
the name, Qasr al-Hayr, one known as al-Gharbi (West) and the other, al-Sharqi 
(East). Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi is a residential complex located on the desert 
route leading from Damascus to the Euphrates river. The two main buildings are 
the palace (qasr) and a structure probably meant to house travellers (known in 
scholarship as the khan). The site was supplied with water via canals connecting 
to the Harbaqa dam. Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi is one of the palatial sites associ-
ated with the Umayyad caliph Hisham b. ʿAbd al-Malik (Hisham I; r. 724–43). 
Although the standing architecture is not well preserved, excavations revealed an 
extensive decorative programme of carved stucco and fresco painting. These are 
now displayed in the National Museum of Syria. This scheme included curious 
elements, such as carved stucco on the entrance portal and sections of the floor 
painted in fresco, both of which suggest a desire to create lavish ornamentation 
at moderate cost. The stucco window grilles invite comparison with the carved 
marble examples in the Congregational Mosque of Damascus, and make use of 
the same geometric principles to form the interlocking patterns. While such com-
positions have their roots in Late Antiquity, they also hint at the more complex 
geometric patterns that would become a characteristic feature of Islamic art from 
the eleventh century onwards.
Further reading: Creswell, K. A. C., A short Account of early Muslim Architecture. 
Revised and supplemented by James Allan (Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1989), 
pp. 135–46 (on the marble grilles in the Damascus mosque, see pp. 54–55).
Genequand, Denis, “Some thoughts on Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi, its dam, its monas-
tery and the Ghassanids,” Levant 38 (2006): 63–83.
Basra, 841: Basra was one of the first garrison settlements (Arabic: misr, pl. 
amsar) established after the conquest of Iraq. It soon developed into a thriving 
economic centre, functioning both as a port on the Persian Gulf and a locus for spe-
cialised crafts. While the early Islamic industrial zone has not received systematic 
archaeological investigation, there is evidence for the production of glazed ceram-
ics. A crucial development was the creation of an opaque white glaze using tin 
oxide. This surface could be animated through the use of cobalt (blue) and copper 
oxide (green) to create simple, but visually arresting designs. The most demanding 
technique was lustre painting, involving the application of a paint containing silver 
and copper chlorides or sulphides to a vessel that had already been glazed and 
fired. A complex final firing process was employed to leave a microscopic layer of 
these metals on the surface of the glaze, providing an iridescent sheen. This tech-
nique later spread to other manufacturing centres from the tenth century onwards, 
including Cairo, Raqqa and Kashan. Both bowls illustrated in this chapter provide 
evidence concerning the value attributed to the finest glazed pottery produced in 
Abbasid Iraq. The first contains the name of the maker written in cobalt pigment as 
the only decorative component of the interior of the bowl (akin to a brand name ap-
plied to contemporary consumer goods). The lustre bowl illustrated in the Chapter 
is not one of the most aesthetically or technically sophisticated works of its time, 

272  Appendix
but is notable in the present context for the fact that it was excavated in the city of 
Nishapur in Khurasan, demonstrating the long-distance movement of such wares 
in Western Asia.
Further reading: Caiger-Smith, Alan, Lustre Pottery: Technique, Tradition and 
Innovation in Islam and the Western World (London and New York: Gentle 
Breeze, 1985).
Mason, Robert, Shine like the Sun: Lustre and associated Pottery from the Medi-
eval Middle East, Bibliotheca Iranica: Islamic Art and Architecture Series 12 
(Costa Mesa CA and Toronto: Mazda Publishers and Royal Ontario Museum, 
2004).
Saba, Matthew, “Abbasid lusterware and the aesthetics of ʿajab,” Muqarnas 29 
(2012): 187–212.
Samarra, 856: The city of Samarra was established on the banks of the Ti-
gris river by caliph al-Muʿtasim (r. 833–42) in 836 and remained the principal 
residence of the Abbasid caliphs until 892. After this time the bulk of this mas-
sive urban development was abandoned. The secular and religious architecture of 
Samarra is notable for its scale, including the Congregational Mosque near the 
centre of the city and the Mosque of Abu Dulaf, located in the northern suburb of 
al-­Mutawakkiliyya. Both buildings have monumental spiral minarets, their distinc-
tive forms influenced by the ancient ziggurats of the region. Many buildings were 
once lavishly ornamented, though only the carved and moulded stucco remains in 
any quantity. Samarran buildings provide evidence for a technical shift from the 
creation of carved panels carrying simple geometric and vegetal motifs through to 
abstracted designs that were impressed into wet stucco using moulds. Known as the 
“bevelled style,” this new decorative mode deliberately eroded the pictorial con-
ventions of foreground and background, also allowing shapes to blend one into an-
other. The “bevelled style” is considered as a significant development, anticipating 
more complex forms of repeated ornament found in Islamic art in later centuries.
Further reading: Northedge, Alastair, The historical Topography of Samarra, 
Samarra Studies 1 (London: British School of Archaeology in Iraq and Fonda-
tion Max van Berchem, 2005).
Milwright, Marcus, “Samarra and ‘Abbasid Ornament,” in Finbarr Barry Flood 
and Gülru Neçipoğlu, eds, The Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, 
Blackwell Companions to Art History (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 2017), I, 
pp. 177–96.
Qayrawan, 863: The Congregational Mosque of Qayrawan in Tunisia was 
founded in about 670, though the present structure is primarily the result of pa-
tronage by the Aghlabid governors (800–909) in the late ninth century, with major 
renovations dating to the thirteenth century. The plan of this hypostyle mosque 
is broadly symmetrical along the axis created by the domed maqsura on the 
qibla (southeast) wall and the monumental minaret set into the northwest arcade. 

Appendix  273
This type axial planning derives from Abbasid prototypes in Iraq and is also found 
in the mosque of Ibn Tulun (877–79) in Cairo. Differing from the helicoidal struc-
tures found in Samarra, the minaret in Qayrawan in believed to draw its inspiration 
from Roman lighthouses constructed along the North African coast. The impact 
of classical architecture is also seen in the extensive employment of ancient mar-
ble columns throughout the interior. The concave mihrab is the focus of the most 
lavish decoration in the prayer hall, including carved marble panels, painted and 
gilded wood, and polychrome lustre-painted tiles. The tiles are laid such that they 
only touch at the corners leaving substantial areas of exposed stucco between. This 
suggests the economical use of a precious resource, with this interpretation sup-
ported by an account left by a fifteenth-century author, al-Naji. Citing earlier texts, 
he claims that the tiles were originally meant for an Aghlabid palace. The Iraqi 
provenance of these tiles is suggested by the fact that more were apparently made 
in Qayrawan by a potter from Baghdad. Al-Naji’s account is important as evidence 
for the dissemination of the technique of lustre painting to the western regions of 
the Islamic world.
Further reading: Allan, James, “Samarran tiles: A reconstruction,” in Chase 
Robinson, ed., A Medieval City reconsidered: An interdisciplinary Approach to 
Samarra, Oxford Studies in Islamic Art 14 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2001), pp. 111–118.
Marçais, George, Les faïences à reflets métalliques de la grande mosquée de Kair-
ouan (Paris: Geuthner, 1928).
Bukhara, 930: Huge numbers of silver coins, minted in cities such as Bukhara, 
Samarqand, Nishapur and Baghdad, have been found in hoards from western Rus-
sia, Ukraine, the Baltic states and Scandinavia. There are mostly silver dirhams 
struck between the late eighth century and about 1000 CE, and provide evidence 
for active trade along what is often known as the “Fur route.” Excavations have 
revealed examples of Islamic coins with runic writing scratched onto their surfaces. 
The most complex of these is known as the Bornholm amulet. This worn Samanid 
(819–999) issue was overwritten in runic Latin with a Christian formula. Unlike the 
fictional coin held by Abu Zayd, however, the Bornholm amulet has scratched writ-
ing on both sides. Ibn Fadlan describes his journey from Baghdad to the Volga river 
in the Kitab ila Malik al-Saqaliba (Book [of the Journey] to the King of the Saqal-
iba). He was dispatched by caliph al-Muqtadir Billah (r. 908–32) on an embassy to 
the king of the Bulghars. The precise identity of the Rusʾ is uncertain, though Ibn 
Fadlan seems to be referring to a group comprising Vikings and Finnish people. His 
description of a boat burial accords broadly with contemporary archaeological finds 
at Viking sites such as Oseberg in Norway. Abu Zayd’s reference to the men of Ah-
waz and Rayy comes from the maqama of the dinar by al-Hamadhani.
Further reading: Frye, Richard, Ibn Fadlan’s Journey to Russia: A tenth-century 
Traveler from Baghdad to the Volga River (Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 
2005).

274  Appendix
Michailidis, Melanie, ‘Samanid silver and trade along the Fur Route,’ Medieval 
Encounters 18 (2012): 315–38.
For the “Bornholm amulet,” see: https://runer.ku.dk/VisGenstand.aspx?Titel= 
Bornholm-amulet (last consulted: 21 July 2020).
For the literary reference, see: The Maqámát of Badíʿ al-Zamán al-Hamadhání, 
translated and annotated with an introduction by William J. Prendergast (London 
and Madras: Luzac and Co. and S. P. C. K. Depository, 1915), pp. 165–66.
Rusafa, 998: The late eighth-century palace of al-Rummaniyya, near Córdoba, 
is known from excavations, and is one of the few surviving elite residences (mu-
nya) of the Umayyad period in al-Andalus (756–1031). Rusafa does not survive, 
but derives its name from a Syrian town and palace favoured by caliph Hisham in 
the early eighth century, and was the site of the first recorded human flight by the 
polymath, ʿAbbas ibn Firnas (d. 887). Circular ivory boxes (pyxides) are among 
the most famous products of the Umayyad dynasty; cut from the thickest part of 
an elephant’s tusk, these pyxides were objects of great value and prestige. They 
appear to have been used primarily as containers for medicaments and perfumed 
products. The thickness of the ivory allowed for deeply drilled and carved decora-
tion across the surface. Traces of painting and gilding have been located on several 
examples; this taste for polychromatic painting draws parallels with the colouring 
of Byzantine ivory icons. The Kufic inscription bands provide important evidence 
concerning the patrons and recipients of these expensive objects. These include al-
Mughira, brother of caliph al-Hakam II (r. 961–76), a prefect of police named Zi-
yad ibn Aflah, and the caliphal concubine, Subh (d. c. 999; though she is recorded 
not by name, only as the “mother of ʿAbd al-Rahman”). Subh played an impor-
tant role in governing during the caliphate of Hisham II (r. 976–1009, 1010–1013) 
along with the chamberlain, al-Mansur (d. 1002). The casket made for her is often 
known as the Pyxis of Zamora and carries the date of 353/964. For the purposes 
of the narrative, Subh was associated with the palace of Rusafa, though this is not 
based on historical evidence. 
Further reading: Anderson, Glaire and Mariam Rosser Owen, “Great ladies and 
noble daughters: Ivories and women in the Umayyad court of Córdoba,” in 
Amy Landau, ed., In Pearls on a String: Artists, Patrons and Poets at the great 
Islamic Courts (Baltimore and Seattle: The Walters Art Museum and University 
of Washington Press, 2015), pp. 28–51.
Prado-Vilar, Francisco, “Visions of fertility of punishment: Caliphal ivory caskets 
from al-Andalus,” Muqarnas 14 (1997): 19–41.
On the Umayyad munya, see: Anderson, Glaire, The Islamic Villa in Early Medi-
eval Iberia (Aldershot: Ashgate, 2013).
Baghdad, 1000: Kufic was the dominant family of scripts employed for the 
writing of the Qurʾan between the late seventh century and the end of the tenth 
century. Kufic scripts are consistently angular in character with a tendency to em-
phasise the horizontal strokes. Other more cursive scripts existed for everyday 

Appendix  275
communications and bureaucratic purposes, but were not considered appropriate 
for the recording of scripture. Reforms were made to the proportionality of Arabic 
scripts by the Iraqi vizier, Ibn Muqla (d. 940), and there are surviving manuscripts 
from the tenth century that illustrate the transformations of Kufic into a more cur-
sive form. Ibn al-Bawwab (literally, “son of the doorman”; d. c. 1022) occupies 
an important position in the history of Arabic calligraphy for his application of 
cursive scripts in the writing of the Qurʾan. His sole extant autograph manuscript 
(in the Chester Beatty Library in Dublin) makes use of naskh for the main text 
and the broader thuluth for the titles. Written on buff-coloured paper, the manu-
script contains the entire Qurʾan into a single volume. Ibn al-Bawwab prioritises 
accessibility in his treatment of the text, providing complete dotting of the letters, 
vowelling and grammatical markings (features applied less consistently in earlier 
Kufic Qurʾans). Although Kufic was retained in some regions, the employment of 
cursive scripts became increasingly commonplace across the Islamic world from 
the eleventh century. The reed pens associated with famous scribes like Ibn al-
Bawwab were collected by medieval connoisseurs. Ibn al-Nadim (d. 995 or 998) 
was a bookseller and author of the Fihrist, an annotated catalogue of books he had 
read or encountered during his career.
Further reading: Rice, David Storm, The unique Ibn al-Bawwāb Manuscript in the 
Chester Beatty Library (Dublin: Emery Walker, 1955).
Roxburgh, David, “On the transmission and reconstruction of Arabic calligraphy: 
Ibn al-Bawwab and history,” Studia Islamica 96 (2003): 39–53.
Tabbaa, Yasser, The Transformation of Islamic Art during the Sunni Revival 
(London: I.B. Tauris, 2002).
Tripoli, 1070: Rock crystal is the purest form of quartz. The Fatimid caliphs 
were avid patrons of rock crystal (known in Arabic as billawr), though inscrip-
tions are only encountered on a handful of extant objects. The most famous of 
these is the ewer in the treasury of San Marco cathedral in Venice, carrying the 
name of caliph al-ʿAziz (r. 975–96). Another similar vessel in the Pitti palace in 
Florence was once owned by the general, Husayn ibn Jawhar, while a crescent-
shaped ornament names caliph al-Zahir (r. 1021–36). The laborious techniques 
involved in carving, drilling and polishing rock crystal are recorded by the poly-
math, al-Biruni (d. 1048) based on his observations of workshops in Basra. The 
sheer volume of carved rock crystal at the Fatimid court is indicated by records 
of the forced sale of items from the treasury of al-Mustansir (r. 1036–94) in 1068. 
The ewer of al-ʿAziz may have been among the precious pieces of rock crystal 
sold at that time; the later Egyptian chronicler, al-Maqrizi (d. 1442) records that 
a vessel bearing the caliph’s name was later sold in the Lebanese port of Tripoli. 
This could account for how the ewer of al-ʿAziz made its way to Venice, though 
conclusive evidence is lacking.
Further reading: Bloom, Jonathan, Arts of the City Victorious: Islamic Art and 
Architecture in Fatimid North Africa and Egypt (New Haven and London: Yale 

276  Appendix
University Press in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2007), 
pp. 101–105.
On rock crystal, see Contadini, Anna, Fatimid Art at the Victoria and Albert 
Museum (London: V&A Publications, 1998), pp. 16–38.
Samarqand, 1085: The first-century CE scholar, Pedanius Dioscorides 
(Pédanios Dioskourídēs), authored the most influential pharmacological treatise 
of the ancient world. Commonly known by its Latin title, De materia medica, this 
work was translated several times from Greek into Syriac and Arabic. The first Ara-
bic translation was produced during the reign of the Abbasid caliph, al-Mutawakkil 
(r. 847–61) in Baghdad by Istifan ibn Basil, though this was soon revised sub-
stantially by the famous translator and physician, Hunayn ibn Ishaq (d. 873). The 
Arabic Dioscorides dating to 475/1083, now in Leiden University Library, is one 
of the earliest surviving Arabic scientific manuscripts and a crucial document in the 
history of Islamic book painting. The colophon states that the text is the result of 
a “rectification” (islah) of the Istifan/Hunayn translation produced in the late tenth 
century at the court of Simjurid amirs. The 475/1083 copy was probably written 
and illustrated in Samarqand or Bukhara. The Egyptian balsam tree is illustrated in 
this manuscript. The tree produced a highly valued aromatic resin that was exten-
sively used in ancient and medieval medicine in the Islamic world, the Byzantine 
Empire and Christian Europe.
Further reading: Collins, Minta, Medieval Herbals: The illustrative Traditions, 
The British Library Studies in Medieval Culture (London, Toronto and Buffalo: 
The British Library and University of Toronto Press, 2000).
Saliba, George and Linda Komaroff, “Illustrated books may be hazardous for your 
health: A new reading of the Arabic reception and rendition of the Materia Med-
ica of Dioscorides,” Ars Orientalis 35 (2008): 6–65.
Kharraqan, 1093: The twin tombs on the Kharraqan plain in northwest-
ern Iran are among the finest funerary monuments of the Great Saljuq period 
(1037–1154). They are located between Qazvin and Hamedan, away from any 
major settlement. The tombs retain fragmentary inscriptions that include se-
lected Qurʾanic verses, the dates of construction (460/1067–68 and 486/1093), 
the names of the interred notables (Abu Saʿid Bijar and Abu Mansur Iltayti), and 
the two master builders. The fact that the builders share the last parts of their 
names (ibn Makki al-Zanjani) indicates that they were related, perhaps a father 
and son. Both tombs have an octagonal plan with round buttresses animating the 
corners. Virtuosity is exhibited in the laying of baked brick in order to create 
a wide variety of geometric designs. These features are seen in other Persian 
tombs of the eleventh and twelfth centuries and suggest connections to other art 
forms of the period, including textiles. Intriguingly, patterns involving raised 
brickwork are known in Persian as hazar baf, or “a thousand weaves.” The 
Saljuq elites favoured living in tents, leading scholars such as Robert Hillen-
brand to suggest that brick tombs might echo some of the visual characteristics 

Appendix  277
of these impermanent structures. The Kharraqan tombs were damaged by a ma-
jor earthquake in 2002.
Further reading: Daneshvari, Abbas, Medieval Tomb Towers of Iran: An icono-
graphic Study (Lexington, KY: Mazda in association with Undena Publications, 
1986).
Stern, Samuel, “The inscriptions of the Kharraqān mausoleums,” Iran 4 (1966): 
21–27.
Stronach, David and T. Cuyler Young Jr, “Three Seljuq tomb towers,” Iran 4 
(1966): 1–20.
Harran, 1104: The Shroud of St Josse is now housed in the Musée du Louvre 
in Paris. Until 1772 it was held in the Abbey of St Josse, located in Boulogne-sur-
Mer. It is believed to have been donated to the abbey at the beginning of the twelfth 
century by Étienne (or Stephen) de Blois (d. 1102), one of the leading figures of 
the First Crusade (1095–99). The Arab version of his given name (Istifan) is em-
ployed in the story. In 1134 the textile was used to wrap the bones of St Josse. It is 
reasonable to assume that Étienne de Blois acquired this luxurious silk saddle cloth 
prior to his departure from the First Crusade at the siege of Antioch in 1098. The 
shroud can be classified as samite (deriving from the Greek héxámiton, meaning 
“six threads”), indicating a heavy silk textile, with a twill weave and often incor-
porating gold or silver threads. Samite became popular in Medieval Europe for 
ecclesiastical vestments. The Arabic inscriptions demonstrate that it was originally 
made in the eastern Islamic world, perhaps in a royal workshop of the Samanid 
dynasty (819–999) in Nishapur or Merv. The recipient was probably Abu Mansur 
Bakht-tegin (d. 961), a general serving ʿAbd al-Malik I, the ruler of Khurasan 
(r. 954–61). The decorative vocabulary ranges from simple repeat patterns, some 
of which draw on pre-Islamic Sasanian prototypes, to ambitious representations 
of Bactrian camels and elephants. The bold Kufic script is particularly striking, 
woven in gold against a dark ground. The Qurʾanic passage quoted by al-Harith in 
the story comes from Surat al-Baqara (2:45).
Further reading: Jacoby, David, “Silk economics and cross-cultural artistic inter-
action: Byzantium, the Muslim world and the Christian West,” Dumbarton Oaks 
Papers 58 (2004): 197–240.
Blair, Sheila, “Inscriptions on Medieval Islamic textiles,” in Muhammad Salim, 
ed., Islamische Textillkunst des Mittelalters: Aktuelle Probleme (Riggisberg: 
Abegg-Stiftung, 1997), pp. 95–104.
Herat, 1183: The Afghan city of Herat was a major centre for the production of 
decorated metalwork during the twelfth century. The best work from the city com-
bines ornamental inscriptions with lively representational components. The small 
cast and inlaid vessel known today as the Bobrinski (or Bobrinsky) bucket cer-
tainly manifests these characteristics, particularly in the bands of epigraphy and re-
peated human figures that run around the body. What has drawn the most scholarly 

278  Appendix
attention is the less conspicuous inscription running around the rim. Not only does 
this text provide a date (Muharram 599, equating to December 1163) and a place of 
manufacture, but also a series of names, comprising the commissioner, the person 
who cast the piece, the decorator (naqqash), and the recipient. The last of these is 
given grandiose titles, including “glory of the merchants.” Inscriptions prior to this 
date give the identities of royal clients, leading some scholars to see the Bobrinski 
bucket as evidence of an increasingly confident mercantile class at this time. As 
noted in the story, the relationships between the men in this inscription can best be 
understood in the context of legal writing on patronage and workshop practices. 
The reading presented in the chapter relies on the interpretation offered by Ruba 
Kana’an. The “Verse of Obedience” is Qurʾan 4:49. Al-Jahiz was the famous sati-
rist, who wrote the Book of Misers (see: Basra, 841).
Further reading: Kana’an, Ruba, “The de Jure artist of the Bobrinski bucket: Pro-
duction and patronage of metalwork in pre-Mongol Khurasan and Transoxi-
ana,” Islamic Law and Society 16 (2009): 175–201.
Ettinghausen, Richard, “The Bobrinsky ‘kettle’: Patron and style of an Islamic 
bronze,” Gazette des Beaux-Arts VI, vol. 24 (1943): 193–208.
For further “signatures” on metalwork, see Mayer, Leo Ary, Islamic Metalworkers 
and their Works (Geneva: Albert Kundig, 1959).
Mecca, 1199: The Maʿla cemetery in Mecca contained a particularly remark-
able group of grave stele, made over an extended period (the earliest dated piece 
comes from 304/916 with the last extant examples attributed to the sixteenth cen-
tury). They were made from basalt gathered from nearby mountains and in most 
cases, the stone was left in its original shape, with the inscriptions and decorative 
content carved onto the largest flat faces. The practice of reusing older stele is at-
tested in several examples. The names of some stonemasons are preserved, with a 
particularly active workshop of ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn al-Harami al-Makki and other 
family members operating in the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries. Other 
examples of their workmanship have been found in a graveyard on the Dahlak 
archipelago off the coast of Eritrea. Among those who were buried in the Maʿla 
cemetery are descendants of the family of the Prophet Muhammad (ahl al-bayt) 
and pilgrims who died during the performance of the hajj. The site was covered up 
during twentieth-century urban expansions of Mecca.
Further reading: Juvin, Carine, “Tombstones of the al-Maʿla cemetery in Mecca,” 
in al-Ghabban, Ali Ibrahim, Béatrice André-Salvini, Françoise Demange, Carine 
Juvin and Marianne Cotty, eds, Roads of Arabia: Archaeology and History of 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (Washington, DC: Arthur M. Sackler Gallery, 
Smithsonian Institution, 2012), pp. 491–519. The passage of poetry quoted in 
the chapter was translated by Jacqueline Chabbi and Abdallah Cheikh Moussa.
On the Hanafi school of law and attitudes to profit, see Bonner, Michael, “The 
Kitāb al-Kasb attributed to al-Shaybānī: Poverty, surplus, and the circulation of 
wealth,” Journal of the American Oriental Society 121.3 (2001): 410–27.

Appendix  279
Kashan, 1201: The late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries were a period of 
considerable technical and aesthetic creativity in Persian ceramic production. The 
city of Kashan appears to have been the preeminent centre for the manufacture of 
the two most important types of glazed stonepaste pottery: lustre and minaʾi ware. 
Both styles are characterised by fine draughtsmanship and a profusion of detail. 
The complex manufacturing process for minaʾi wares usually involved the com-
bination of underglaze painting with overglaze enamel paints. The enamels were 
fired at a lower temperature, allowing for a greater range of intense colours. There 
is a strong figural component in minaʾi ware, suggesting a relationship with the 
style of painting employed in secular manuscripts. This link is particularly strong 
in the beaker now housed in the Freer Gallery of Art. The three bands of orna-
ment have been identified as illustrations from the romance of Bihzan and Man-
izha, which forms part of the epic poem, the Shahnama, penned by Abu al-Qasim 
Firdawsi (d. 1019 or 1026). The Shahnama is a central work in Persian literature 
and has been illustrated many times, though no manuscripts are known from the 
time of the Freer Beaker. Stylistic parallels can, however, be drawn between minaʾi 
painting and an early thirteenth-century illustrated copy of the story of Varqa and 
Gulsha, that was perhaps produced in Anatolia. The lively, stocky people painted 
on minaʾi wares also invite comparisons with the figural representations found on 
eastern Islamic inlaid metalwork (see: Herat, 1183; Cleveland, 1956). The verses 
recited in the chapter come from Edward Fitzgerald’s 1859 rhymed rendition of the 
Rubāʿiyāt (Quatrains) of ʿUmar Khayyam (d. 1131) and James Atkinson’s (d. 1852) 
translation of the Shahnama.
Further reading: Simpson, Marianna Shreve, “The Freer beaker in text and im-
age,” in Robert Hillenbrand, ed., The Making of Islamic Art: Studies in Honour 
of Sheila Blair and Jonathan Bloom, Edinburgh Studies in Islamic Art (Edin-
burgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2021), pp. 300–32.
McClary, Richard Piran, “Rare and complex wares: A study of vessels and sherds 
decorated with mināʾī and lustre techniques,” Journal of Material Cultures in 
the Muslim World 3.2 (2023): 235–66.
Watson, Oliver, Persian Lustre Ware (London: Faber & Faber, 1985).
Wasit, 1236: There are several surviving Medieval texts constructed as 
a series of “assemblies” (Arabic: maqama, pl. maqamat), but the most fa-
mous was composed by al-Hariri (d. 1122), a native of Basra (for more on 
his work, see the Introduction to the present book). Al-Hariri’s composition 
was frequently copied, with several manuscripts dating to the thirteenth and 
fourteenth centuries accompanied by illustrations. Three luxurious thirteenth-
century examples are now housed in Paris (Bibliothèque Nationale Arabe 
5847), St Petersburg (Academy of Science S.23) and Istanbul (Süleymaniye 
Mosque Esad Effendi 2916). The first of these is notable for the presence of 
a colophon, which gives the date (6 Ramadan 634/3 May 1237) and the name 
of the scribe, Yahya ibn Mahmud al-Wasiti. Importantly, al-Wasiti also states 
that he illustrated the manuscript, suggesting a close relationship between the 

280  Appendix
image placement and episodes described in the stories. The margins also con-
tain al-Wasiti’s commentary, written in red ink. The illustrated manuscripts of 
the thirteenth century have attracted considerable scholarly attention. A central 
question remains the extent to which these paintings provide a window into 
the social life of the Medieval Middle East and the world views of mercantile 
patrons. The treatment of the human figure and the flattened picture spaces have 
drawn comparison to shadow plays (Arabic: khayal al-zill). Shadow puppets are 
the subject of Chapter 44 (Manzala, 1910).
Further reading: Guthrie, Shirley, Arab Social Life in the Middle Ages: An Illus-
trated Study (London: Saqi Books, 1995).
George, Alain, “The illustrations of the Maqāmāt and the shadow play,” Muqarnas 
28 (2011): 1–42.
Palermo, 1248: The Norman conquest of Sicily (1061–1191) created an ex-
traordinary culture, combining elements of Latin and Orthodox Christianity with 
that of the Muslim and Jewish communities who also inhabited the island. The 
hybrid quality of the Norman phase is exemplified in the architecture, architectural 
decoration, epigraphy and portable arts. Many of the most important examples date 
to the time of Roger II, king of Sicily (r. 1130–54). The coin discussed in the 
chapter is a tarì (from the Arabic word for “fresh”) minted in Palermo or Messina 
between 1140 and 1154. Such coins adopted on one side the “bullseye” formation 
of gold issues of the Fatimid caliphate (909–1171) and on the other a processional 
cross and Greek lettering surrounded by a marginal field with more Arabic. The 
Cappella Palatina, the palace chapel of the Norman kings, combines Byzantine-
style mosaics on the upper walls, domes and semi-domes with an elaborate wooden 
muqarnas covering the nave. The dado and the floor are both constructed from 
opus sectile, which shows distinct Islamic influences. The wooden muqarnas still 
retains much of its original twelfth-century painting, providing a rich vocabulary 
of human, animal and architectural compositions many of which probably derive 
from Fatimid prototypes. The City of Brass is a tale in the Thousand and One 
Nights; I have no evidence that these stories were available in thirteenth-century 
Sicily, though the trope of the forbidden delights of the palace is common in medi-
eval Islamic literature.
Further reading: Grube, Ernst and Jeremy Johns, The Painted Ceilings of the Cap-
pella Palatina (New York and Genoa: East-West Foundation and Bruschettini 
Foundation for Islamic and Asian Art, 2005).
Agnello, Fabrizio, “The painted ceiling of the nave of the Cappella Palatina in 
Palermo: An essay on its geometric and constructive features,” Muqarnas 27 
(2011): 407–47.
Tabriz, 1306: Rashid al-Din Fadlallah Hamadani (1247–1318) served as 
vizier to the Ilkhan, Ghazan Khan (r. 1295–1304) and his successor, Öljeitü 
(r. 1304–16). He subsequently fell from favour and was executed in 1318. 

Appendix  281
Aside from his political roles, Rashid al-Din was responsible for the creation of 
the scholarly suburb of Tabriz known as Rabʿ-i Rashidi. He also wrote numerous 
works, most importantly, the Jamiʿ al-Tawarikh (“Compendium of Histories”). 
This text was produced in both Arabic and Farsi copies, presumably for distri-
bution around the Ilkhanid state. Rashid al-Din’s wide-ranging study provides 
valuable information on the history of the Mongol and Turkic tribes before and 
after the conquests of Chinggiz Khan (Genghiz Khan; r. 1206–27), drawn from 
sources including the lost Altan Debter (“Golden Book”). Four partial manu-
scripts of the Jamiʿ al-Tawarikh survive from the early fourteenth century. 
While they are clearly the product of numerous scribes and illustrators, there 
are some broad consistencies in style and approach. The illustrations are notable 
for their synthesis of Persian and Chinese painting styles and compositional 
schemes. The artists of Rabʿ-i Rashidi evidently had access to Christian manu-
scripts and some compositions rely on models drawn from Byzantine painting. 
Notable examples are the representations of events from the lives of Jonah and 
Moses. The scene of the birth of the Prophet Muhammad drew upon Byzantine 
images of the nativity.
Further reading: Blair, Sheila, A Compendium of Chronicles: Rashid al-Din’s il-
lustrated History of the World, Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art 27, 
new edition (London: Khalili Collections, 2006).
Allen, Terry, “Byzantine sources for the Jāmiʿ al-Tawārīkh of Rashid al-Din,” Ars 
Orientalis 15 (1985): 121–36.
Hillenbrand, Robert, “Muhammad as warrior prophet: Images from the World 
History of Rashid al-Din,” in Christiane Gruber and Avinoam Shalem, eds, 
The Image of the Prophet between Ideal and Ideology (Berlin and Boston: De 
Gruyter, 2014), pp. 65–75.
Cairo, 1361: Glass lamps were a common feature of Muslim religious buildings 
from the early Islamic period onwards. Some of the finest surviving examples date 
to the Mamluk sultanate (1250–1517) and were manufactured to hang in mosques, 
madrasas and khanqahs (sufi convents). These lamps were often decorated with 
vivid enamel painting. Many were also gilded, though only traces of this orna-
mentation remain. Lamps made for religious spaces usually carry citations from 
the Qurʾan—the “light verse” (ayat al-nur; Q 24:35) was particularly favoured in 
this context—along with the names and titles of the amir or sultan who was the 
patron. These powerful men might also be identified through their personal motif 
(often known as a blazon). The lamp in this story includes the sultanic blazon of 
sultan al-Nasir Hasan (r. 1347–51, 1354–61), but is equally notable for its decora-
tive features, including the elaborate paradisiac trees arranged between the handles 
on the body. This was one of many lamps originally made for the sultan’s giant 
madrasa and tomb complex, located outside the main gates of the citadel of Cairo. 
The construction of this monument lasted from 1356 to 1363. It was built in the 
aftermath of the Black Death, which affected the Middle East from 1347. As noted 
in the story, the wealth of Mamluk amirs reverted back to the sultan on their deaths. 

282  Appendix
One mechanism to avoid this was to establish a charitable deed (waqf) to support 
the construction and ongoing operations of a religious institution. Sultan al-Nasir 
Hasan was assassinated in 1361 and his body was never laid to rest in the tomb 
chamber he commissioned.
Further reading: Atil, Esin, Renaissance of Islam: Art of the Mamluks (Washing-
ton, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1981), pp. 134–35, cat. 52.
Carboni, Stefano and David Whitehouse, Glass of the Sultans (New Haven: Yale 
University Press for the Metropolitan Museum of Art, The Corning Museum of 
Glass, and the Benaki Museum, 2002), pp. 199–273.
Granada, 1375: The Alhambra is the best preserved palace complex from the 
western Islamic world. It stands on a hill above the city of Granada and is sur-
rounded on all sides by fortifications. The area within the walls comprises formal 
gardens, courtyards and buildings that were constructed over an extended period, 
with the most important work dating between the mid-thirteenth and the end of the 
fourteenth centuries. This complex was the palatial residence of the Nasrid dynasty 
(1230–1492) and was subsequently taken over by Isabella I of Castile (r. 1474–
1504) and Ferdinand II of Aragon (r. 1479–1516) in the last act of the Reconquista. 
The Nasrid amir Muhammad V (r. 1354–59, 1362–91) was the patron of famous 
structures such as the Cuarto Dorado and the Palace of the Lions (note: many of the 
names used today date from the nineteenth century and, thus, have little bearing on 
the original functions the spaces once performed). The architectural decoration is 
particularly diverse, featuring intricate carved and moulded stucco, tilework, wood 
carving and painting. The buildings known today as the Hall of the Two Sisters and 
the Hall of the Abencerrajes contain two of the most elaborate surviving muqarnas 
vaults from the Islamic world. Ibn Khaldun (d. 1406) spent time at the Nasrid court 
twice in 1363–65 and 1375. His most famous work, the Muqaddima (Prolegom-
enon) attempts to establish the principles behind human society and cyclical rise 
and fall of dynasties. A key component of his thinking is the concept of ʿasabiyya, 
or group solidarity.
Further reading: Fernández Puertas, Antonio, The Alhambra, vols 1–3 (London: 
Saqi Books, 1997–99).
Ruggles, Dede Fairchild, Gardens, Landscape and Vision in the Palaces of Islamic 
Spain (Philadelphia: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2000).
Irwin, Robert, The Alhambra (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2011).
Xi’an, 1402: Xi’an is located in northwestern China. This name was adopted 
during the Ming dynasty (1368–1644), when the city (previously known as 
Chang’an) was revitalised. This involved the creation of an enclosing wall in 1370, 
which survives to the present. The traditional Muslim quarter of the city contains 
two important pre-Modern mosques: the Congregational Mosque (also Huajuex-
iangsi or Great Eastern Mosque) and the second, a smaller compound located on 

Appendix  283
Daxuexi Alley in the western side of the quarter. Mosques may have been estab-
lished in Xi’an as early as 742, though the earliest physical evidence surviving in 
both buildings can be attributed to the reign of the Hongwu emperor (r. 1368–98) 
and his successors, Jianwen (r. 1398–1402) and Yongle (r. 1402–24). The Congre-
gational Mosque of Xi’an occupies a long rectangle of land, oriented east-west. 
This arrangement is also seen in projects of the imperial court such as the Forbid-
den City, the Confucian temple complex of Qufu, and the Zhihua monastery. The 
space is divided into interconnected courtyards accessed through gateways on the 
central axis. The third courtyard contains a three-tiered octagonal pagoda (named 
Shengxinlou, meaning “Examining the heart tower”) that may have functioned as 
the minaret. The prayer hall can accommodate about 2,000 worshippers and is 
covered with two pitched roofs running parallel to the qibla. The carved wooden 
mihrab combines Central Asian and Chinese components and is located in a cham-
ber at the centre of the qibla wall. There are traditions that the Companion of the 
Prophet, Saʿd ibn Abi Waqqas was sent to China by caliph ʿUthman (r. 644–56), ar-
riving in Chang’an and meeting the T’ang emperor in 651. A tomb attributed to him 
is located in Guangzhou, the city he is said to have resided in until his death in 674.
Further reading: Steinhardt, Nancy, China’s early Mosques. Edinburgh Studies in 
Islamic Art (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2018), pp. 120–30.
Xiaowei, Luo, “China,” in Martin Frishman and Hasan-Uddin Khan, eds, The 
Mosque: History, Architectural Development and Regional Diversity (London: 
Thames and Hudson, 1994), pp. 209–23.
Hagras, Hamada, “The Ming Court as patron of Chinese Islamic architecture: The 
case study of the Daxuexi Mosque in Xi’an,” SHEDET 6.6 (2019): 134–58.
Panjakent, 1490: Panjakent is located on the banks of the Zeravshan river 
in modern Tajikistan. The town rose to prominence in the fifth century as part of 
the Soghdian kingdom and continued to thrive through the early Islamic period. 
Impressive remains of its Late Antique and early Islamic occupation phases re-
main in the upper zone of the town; excavations have revealed polychromatic 
fresco paintings with religious representations and scenes of court life, hunting 
and warfare. It is not known if the painter or painters who are attributed to the 
name [Muhammad] Siyah Qalam (“Black Pen”) visited Panjakent, though they 
must have had some familiarity with Central Asian visual and material culture. 
This group of paintings is now located in the Topkapı Palace Library and appears 
to have entered the collection in 1514. This evidence indicates that they were 
probably produced in the second half of the fifteenth or early sixteenth centuries. 
The draughtsmanship suggests a Persian provenance, though the artist or artists 
were clearly influenced by stylistic features and compositional practices in Chi-
nese scroll painting. The themes range from sensitive animal and human studies 
to striking representations of demons and what may be shamanistic rituals. The 
blackened complexions of the two dancing figures may come from the rubbing of 
soot into the skin. The meanings and intended functions of this set of paintings are 

284  Appendix
difficult now to discern, though they do reflect aspects of the cultural and religious 
hybridity of Central Asian culture.
Further reading: Haydaroglu, Mine, ed., I, Mehmed Siyah Kalem, Master of Hu-
mans and Demons (Istanbul: Yap Kredi Kultur Sanat ve Yayncik, 2005) (Turk-
ish and English text).
Robert Hillenbrand, “The image of the Black in Islamic art: The case of painting,” 
in David Bindman, Suzanne Blier and Henry Gates Jr., eds, The Image of the 
Black in African and Asian Art (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
2017), pp. 215–53 (on the Siyah Qalam paintings, see especially pp. 230–42).
On the use of spatial conventions drawn from Tang and Yuan-period painting, see: 
Cahill, James, “Some alternative sources for archaistic elements in the paintings 
of Qian Xuan and Zhao Mengfu,” Ars Orientalis 28 (1998): 65–75.
Nizwa, 1531: The Ibadi sect of Islam has its origins in the late seventh century 
and remains dominant in Oman through to the present. Ibadis are distinct from 
Sunni and Shiʿa Islam, having their own jurisprudence, theology, and religious 
practices. Large stucco mihrabs are a common feature of Omani mosques. While 
they show some points of comparison with the densely carved stucco mihrabs of 
Saljuq and Ikhanid Iran, the Omani examples make use of a different ornamental 
and epigraphic vocabulary. The example located in the Shawadhina mosque in al-
ʿAqr (Nizwa), dated 936/1530, incorporates several Chinese blue-and-white por-
celain bowls across its surface. Porcelain bowls appear on some other mihrabs of 
this period, reflecting the growth of international maritime trade resulting from the 
Portuguese expansion into the Indian Ocean and Persian Gulf. Some of these bowls 
contain depictions of real or mythical animals (such as a phoenix painted on a bowl 
from the Masjid al-ʿAyn in Manah, dated 911/1505), despite the usual prohibitions 
on the representation of animate life within mosques. Notably, the centre of the 
largest inset bowl in the mihrab of the Shawadhina mosque is now missing, per-
haps indicating that a later worshipper took issue with a motif once painted on it.
Further reading: Costa, Paolo, Historic Mosques and Shrines of Oman, British 
Archaeological Reports International Series 938 (Oxford: Archaeopress, 2001).
Goffriller, Martin, Ma Hongjiao, Soumyen Bandyopadhyay and Julian Henderson, 
“Chinese porcelains and the decorations of Omani mihrabs,” Proceedings of the 
Seminar for Arabian Studies 45 (2015): 123–38.
On the spread of porcelain, see Carswell, John, Blue and White: Chinese Porcelain 
around the World (Chicago: Art Media Resources, 2000).
Venice, 1547: Lorenzo Lotto (d. 1556/57) enjoyed a long and successful ca-
reer producing portraits and religious commissions in locations including Venice, 
Treviso, Ancona and Bergamo. Middle Eastern knotted carpets appear regularly in 
his work, covering tables, steps, or the ledges of balconies. He represented these 
with such accuracy that it is often possible to correlate the designs with surviv-
ing Turkish carpets (collectively often known now in scholarship by his family 

Appendix  285
name, Lotto). His taste for richly coloured floor coverings was shared by many 
other artists of the period, both in Italy and in Northern Europe. For example, Hans 
Holbein the Younger (d. 1543) depicted carpets in his paintings, most famously as 
a table covering in his elaborate 1533 portrait of Jean de Dinteville (d. 1555), the 
French ambassador to the English court and his brother. The fact that both Lotto 
and Holbein place these carpets on tables is worthy of further comment, in that 
these textiles would not have been employed in this way in their places of manu-
facture. Furthermore, they are not among the finest carpets of their time; this points 
to the divergent perceptions of value between early Modern Europe and the Middle 
East. In response to demand from Europe some Turkish makers produced cross-
shaped carpets that were better suited to use over the top of pieces of furniture.
Further reading: Mack, Rosamond, Bazaar to Piazza: Islamic Trade and Italian 
Art, 1300–1600 (Berkeley and London: University of California Press, 2002), 
pp. 73–93.
Mills, John, “Lotto carpets in Western paintings,” Hali 3.4 (1981): 278–89.
Thompson, Jon, Carpets: From the Tents, Cottages and Workshops of Asia 
(London: Laurence King, 1993), pp. 33–49.
Erzincan, 1568: The Shahnama of Shah Tahmasp (sometimes known as the 
Houghton Shahnama) is one of the most lavish Persian manuscripts ever produced. 
Probably originally commissioned by Shah Ismaʿil (r. 1501–24) in the 1520s, the 
book was completed during the reign of his son, Tahmasp (r. 1524–76). Compris-
ing 759 large-format folios and 258 paintings, the manuscript took about two dec-
ades to complete and involved the labour of some of the most famous painters of 
the period, including Sultan Muhammad, Mir Musavvir and Aqa Mirak. The highly 
detailed, polychromatic paintings are set inside wide borders sprinkled with gold 
and have been interpreted as a fusion of Turkmen and Timurid styles. The manu-
script (known by the title, Shahnama-yi shahi) arrived in Edirne in December 1568 
as part of a diplomatic gift from the Safavid shah to the Ottoman sultan Selim II 
(r. 1566–74) and remained in the library of the Topkapı palace until the early twen-
tieth century. Nina Ergin advances the intriguing idea that some sixteenth-century 
readers might have ingested opium or other narcotic substances to enhance the 
experience of viewing vivid paintings such as the Court of Gayumars (also Kayu-
mars). The practice of looking for images in stone can be traced back into antiquity 
and contributed to the creation of complex symmetrical designs in the marble ve-
neer panelling inside churches and mosques. Erzincan is located on the route from 
Tabriz to Istanbul and Edirne. The town played a notable role in Safavid history 
as the place where in 1500 Ismaʿil, founder of the dynasty, rallied 7,000 Qizilbash 
troops prior to his successful campaigns in Iran.
Further reading: Dickson, Martin and Stuart Cary Welch, The Houghton Shahnama. 
2 vols. (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1981).
The painting is currently in the Aga Khan Museum: https://agakhanmuseum.org/
collection/artifact/court-of-kayumars-akm165 (last consulted: 27 April 2023).

286  Appendix
Erin, Nina, “Rock faces, opium and wine: Speculations on the original viewing 
context of Persianate manuscripts,” Der Islam 90.1 (2013): 65–105.
Flood, Finbarr Barry, “‘God’s wonder’: Marble as medium and the natural image 
in mosques and modernism,” West 86th 23.2 (2016): 168–219.
Sofia, 1582: Yaqut al-Mustaʿsimi (d. 1298) was a Baghdadi scribe, possibly of 
Greek origin, who produced some of the finest Qurʾans of the thirteenth century. 
He was known for having mastered the six principal scripts used in the writing 
of the Qurʾan. Ahmad b. al-Suhrawardi (d. 1340) was one of his most prominent 
students and also excelled in Qurʾanic calligraphy. The practice of collecting sheets 
containing calligraphy, drawings and paintings is well documented across the Is-
lamic world from medieval to modern times, indicating considerable levels of con-
noisseurship among dealers and buyers. These items might also be cut up, framed 
with decorative paper, and pasted into albums, several of which still survive in the 
Topkapı Palace Library. European woodcuts and engravings are included in some 
of these albums, providing evidence for their circulation in the Ottoman Empire. 
The print mentioned in the story was an engraving produced in Venice by Agostino 
Veneziano (d. c. 1540) in 1535, though similar versions are known by other Euro-
pean printmakers. While the “portrait” of sultan Süleyman (r. 1520–66) is fanciful, 
the headgear he depicts is believed to be an accurate representation. This piece 
was fashioned by the Caorlini family of goldsmiths in Venice and was valued at 
144,000 ducats (gold coins). Among the influences on its design is the traditional 
papal tiara, which contained three inset crowns. It is known that Islamic architects 
and engineers produced drawings of plans and elevations of buildings, though few 
of these have survived prior to the nineteenth century. Plans of buildings and formal 
gardens were often laid out according to grids, allowing for expansion according 
to local systems of measurement. Mimar Sinan (d. 1588) was a prolific architect, 
best known for the Süleymaniye complex in Istanbul and the Selimiye Mosque in 
Edirne. He also designed many other structures across the empire, including the 
Banya Bashi Mosque in Sofia, Bulgaria.
Further reading: Neçipoğlu-Kafadar, Gülru, “Plans and models in 15th- and 16th-
century Ottoman architectural practice,” Journal of the Society Architectural 
Historians 45.3 (1986): 224–43.
Necipoğlu, Gülru, “Süleyman the Magnificent and the representation of power 
in the context of Ottoman-Hapsburg-papal rivalry,” Art Bulletin 71 (1989): 
401–27.
On the general development of Ottoman architecture, see: Goodwin, Geoffrey, A 
History of Ottoman Architecture (London: Thames and Hudson, 1971).
Isfahan, 1637: The Masjid-i Jamiʿ (Congregational Mosque) of Isfahan con-
tains two major dome chambers, one located on the qibla wall, completed in 
1086–87 and the other at the northern end of the building, completed in 1088. 
They are attributed to the patronage of two powerful viziers, Nizam al-Mulk 
(south dome) and his rival, Taj al-Mulk (north dome). As noted in the story, the 

Appendix  287
north dome was originally separated from the mosque. The two chambers share 
many features, including the materials of construction and the complex zone of 
transition between the square base to the dome. This zone includes elaborate 
squinches, illustrating the sophistication of brickwork during the Saljuq period. 
The north dome is commonly regarded as one of the masterpieces of Iranian 
architecture for its technical sophistication and proportionality and has been con-
nected to the polymath, ʿUmar Khayyam (d. 1131). Many of the same design and 
construction principles can be seen in the dome chamber of the Shaykh Lutfallah 
mosque (built between 1603 and 1619), though the visual impact of the interior 
and exterior is completely transformed by the extensive use of glazed tiles. The 
colour palette and decorative themes of the tiles have considerable parallels with 
the larger Masjid-i Shah (completed in 1629). This masterpiece of the Safavid 
period (1501–1736) is part of the great urban renewal instigated by Shah ʿAbbas 
I (r. 1588–1629) and is one of the major monuments located within the Maydan-i 
Shah, the focal point of this endeavour. The attribution of the mosque to Shaykh 
Lutfallah post-dates the initial construction phase. It remains unclear what func-
tion the building was originally designed to perform. The quote at the end of the 
chapter is from Qurʾan 6:103.
Further reading: Grabar, Oleg, The Great Mosque of Isfahan (London: I.B. Tauris, 
1990).
Özdural, Alpay, “A mathematical sonata for architecture: Omar Khayyam and the 
Friday Mosque of Isfahan,” Technology and Culture 39.4 (1998): 699–715.
Shahani, Mohammadhossein, “Sheikh Lotfallah mosque: A story of daylight in 
sequential spaces,” Space and Culture 24 (2018): 19–36.
On the transformation of Isfahan under the Safavids, see: Sussan Babaie, Isfahan 
and its Palaces: Statecraft, Shiʿism and the Architecture of Conviviality in Early 
Modern Iran (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2008).
Agra, 1642: The naturalistic mode of representation found in late sixteenth- and 
seventeenth-century European printed botanical books attracted the attention of art-
ists in Safavid Iran and Mughal India. One example of this phenomenon is Ustad 
Mansur, painter at the court of Jahangir (r. 1605–27), who produced a study of lilies 
that copies a print by the Flemish engraver, Adriaen Collaert (d. 1618). In this story 
I have referenced two significant botanical works—Gaspard Bauhin’s (d. 1624), 
Pinax theatri botanici (Basle, 1623) and Basilius Besler’s (d. 1629), Hortus 
Eystettensis (Nuremberg, 1613)—as representatives of this genre, though they may 
not have contributed directly to the evolution of Mughal plant representations in 
manuscripts or architectural decoration. Commissioned by Shah Jahan (r. 1628–58) 
as the mausoleum of his consort, Mumtaz Mahal (d. 1631), the Taj Mahal contains 
numerous examples in carved marble and pietra dura (known in Persian as parchin 
kari) of flowering plants, many of which can be recognised as distinct species. The 
broadly naturalistic qualities of the relief carvings of plants draw their inspiration 
from European sources. While the technique of parchin kari has its origins in Italy, 
the manner in which the looping plant forms endlessly repeat relies on traditional 

288  Appendix
modes of Islamic architectural decoration. The Taj Mahal itself was completed in 
1644, with work continuing on other buildings in the complex until 1653.
Further reading: Asher, Catherine, Architecture of Mughal India. The New Cam-
bridge History of India I.4 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
Koch, Ebba, “Flowers in Mughal architecture,” in Sita Reddy, ed., The Weight of 
a Petal: Ars Botanica, Marg 70.2 (December 2018–March 2019), pp. 24–33.
Das, Asok Kumar, Wonders of Nature: Ustad Mansur at the Mughal Court 
(Mumbai: The Marg Foundation, 2012).
Hawizeh Marshes, 1673: Ambrosio Bembo (1652–1705) was born into an in-
fluential Venetian family. In 1671 he embarked on an ambitious journey that would 
take him to Aleppo then on to Iraq and Iran, before making a long sea voyage from 
the Persian Gulf to Goa. He returned to Venice in 1675. A section of his travel jour-
nal describes his voyage by kallak (a type of raft made of logs suspended above 
inflated animal skins) along the Tigris river, south of Baghdad. This took him into 
the extensive region of the Iraqi marshlands and to the south of al-ʿUzayr he records 
seeing “in a great plain a town built of reeds, Imam ʿAbdullah, from the name of one 
of their prophets,” though no other observations are provided. Much more informa-
tion exists about the architectural practices and other crafts of the Marsh Arabs (or 
Madan) in the twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Although settlements may make 
use baked brick or mud brick, the Marsh Arabs are best known for their build-
ings constructed from the abundant river reeds (principally, Phragmites communis; 
Arabic: qasab), bullrushes (Tytha angustata) and sedge (Scirpus brachyceras). The 
main structural elements are formed of tall bundles of reeds that set into the ground 
and then bent together in order to make arches. Known as mudhifs, the largest of 
these structures are used as communal spaces and often have elaborate facades, fea-
turing attached columns and geometric grilles made of interlocking strips. Reeds are 
also employed for the manufacture of mats, which may be sold outside the region, as 
well as baskets, and other items for storage and food preparation. The quote comes 
from Qurʾan 15:19. The photographs used in this chapter were taken by Wilfred 
Thesiger (d. 2003) and appear in his classic study, The Marsh Arabs. His photo-
graphic archive is now housed in the Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford.
Further reading: Bargellini, Clara, trans., The Travels and Journal of Ambrosio 
Bembo, edited with an introduction by Anthony Welch (Berkeley and Los 
Angeles: University of California Press, 2007). His discussion of the marshes 
appears on p. 130.
Thesiger, Wilfred, The Marsh Arabs (London: Longmans, 1964. Reprinted, 
London: Folio Society, 2005).
Ochsenschlager, Edward, Iraq’s Marsh Arabs in the Garden of Eden (Philadelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology, 2004).
Istanbul, 1733: The Nahmias press was established in Istanbul in 1493 for the 
printing of Hebrew texts. This was the first printing house in the Ottoman world 

Appendix  289
and was followed by others catering for Armenian and Greek readers. The technol-
ogy of moveable type was not employed for Ottoman Turkish until the eighteenth 
century. This development was instigated by İbrahim Müteferrika (d. 1745), a Hun-
garian-born convert to Islam. The Müteferrika press concentrated on the produc-
tion of secular texts in order to avoid antagonising the professional scribes, who 
made their livings primarily from copying Muslim religious works. From 1727 
to 1743 the press produced seventeen titles dealing with science, geography and 
language; these books were sold either monochrome or with hand-coloured illus-
tration and illumination. In important respects, the books retain aspects of con-
temporary manuscripts, including catchwords and colophons. İbrahim Müteferrika 
appears to have been particularly interested in cartography, producing single-sheet 
maps of the Sea of Marmara and the Black Sea, as well as an atlas (Katib Çelebi’s 
Cihannüma). These reflect a knowledge of European mapping practices and were 
produced at a time when there was an active trade in goods, such as glazed coffee 
cups from the Meissen factory in Dresden and glass from Bohemia, to the Ottoman 
Empire. Piri Reis (d. 1553) was an admiral and cartographer who produced the 
Kitab-ı Bahriye (Book of Navigation). 
Further reading: Gencer, Yasemin, “İbrahim Müteferrika and the age of the printed 
manuscript,” in Christiane Gruber, ed., Ten Centuries of Book Arts in Indiana 
University Collections (Bloomington and Indianapolis: Indiana University 
Press, 2008), pp. 155–93.
On the export of glazed wares to the Ottoman empire, see: Milwright, Marcus, 
“Imported pottery in Ottoman Bilad al-Sham,” Turcica 40 (2008): 121–52.
Breslau, 1766: In 1764 Gregorovius was sent from Breslau (modern Wrocław 
in Poland) to Istanbul as the envoy of Frederick the Great of Prussia (r. 1740–86). In 
March of that year he met with the Grand Vizier of sultan Mustafa III (r. 1757–74), 
returning to Prussia a few weeks later. The ceremonial robe (hilʾat) and sash now 
in the Museum für Islamische Kunst in Berlin can be connected to Gregorovius’ 
visit to Istanbul; he records that the garment was sent to his residence prior to his 
meeting with the Grand Vizier. The long-sleeved robe is made from cotton orna-
mented with gold thread (i.e. cloth-of-gold) producing bold, symmetrical vegetal 
designs. The fact that the base of the fabric is cotton indicates that the hilʾat is not 
of the highest quality. Similar robes are worn by servants in an eighteenth-century 
manuscript illustration of an imperial banquet. The envoy clearly valued his hilʾat, 
subsequently buying trousers (shalwar), a cap and boots to complete his outfit. 
These additional items are probably products of the bazaar in Istanbul, being made 
from printed cotton. The practice of conferring robes can be traced to the early 
Islamic period. Surviving fragments from these times carry embroidered inscrip-
tions (tiraz) providing the titles of the reigning caliph.
Further reading: Phillips, Amanda, “Ottoman hilʾat: Between commodity and cha-
risma,” in Marios Hadjianastasis, ed., Frontiers of the Ottoman Imagination: 
Studies in Honour of Rhoads Murphey (Leiden: Brill, 2015), pp. 111–38.

290  Appendix
Atasoy, Nurhan, Walter Denny and Louise Mackie, İpek: The Crescent and the 
Rose, Imperial Ottoman Silks and Velvets (London and Istanbul: Azimuth and 
TEB Publishing, 2001).
Lahore, 1799: The Wazir Khan mosque in Lahore was commissioned by 
Hakim ʿAli al-Din, governor of Punjab (from 1627) physician to the Mughal ruler, 
Shah Jahan (r. 1628–58). Completed in 1635 the structure is remarkable for its 
polychromatic decoration, which features extensive use of tile mosaic panels 
(kashi-kari) and fresco painting. The mosque forms part of a religious complex 
and is built around the tomb of a fourteenth-century saint, Miran Shah Gazaruni. 
The ambitious cycle of Arabic and Persian inscriptions includes the foundation 
information, Qurʾanic citations, the kalima, hadith, the names of the rashidun 
(“rightly guided”) caliphs and those of the grandsons of the Prophet, Hasan and 
Husayn, and poetry. The Qurʾanic citation given in the story is from Surat al-Israʾ 
(17:85). The mosque forms the backdrop for a discussion about the legitimacy in 
Islamic practice of images of people and animals. While the Qurʾan has relatively 
little to say on this subject, a group of influential hadith take a notably harsher 
line on representation art. The hadith were assembled into a series of authoritative 
collections from the late eighth century and subsequently became the basis for 
the construction of Islamic law. The example quoted in the story comes from the 
Muwattaʾ (54:8) of Malik ibn Anas (d. 795). Key issues brought up by these ac-
counts are that the presence of images could distract the worshipper during prayer 
(a reason why depictions of humans and animals are not present in mosques) and 
that, in copying the forms of things possessing a spirit (ruh), an artist or craft-
sperson is placing themselves in competition with Allah as creator (musawwir) of 
everything. The practice of carving miniscule Qurʾanic text onto shells (Aga Khan 
Museum: AKM 665) or bowls (cf. Chapter 50) has an amuletic function, point-
ing towards the permeable boundaries that can at times exist between orthodox 
Muslim practice and magic.
Further reading: Dodd, Erica Cruikshank, “The Wazir Khan Masjid in Lahore: 
A study of the inscriptions,” in Marcus Milwright and Evanthia Baboula, eds, 
Made for the Eye of One Who Sees: Canadian Contributions to the Study of 
Islamic Art and Archaeology (Montreal and Toronto: McGill-Queen’s Univer-
sity Press and Royal Ontario Museum, 2022), pp. 98–130.
On the hadith dealing with the legitimacy of images, see: Elias, Jamal, Aisha’s 
Cushion: Religious Art, Perception and Practice in Islam (Cambridge MA and 
London: Harvard University Press, 2012).
For the text and translation of the Muwattaʾ of Malik ibn Anas, see: https://sunnah.
com/malik (last consulted: 15 December 2022).
Nafplio, 1831: The Peloponnese (also known as the Morea) was incorporated 
into the Ottoman Empire in the decade following the capture of Constantinople 
in 1453. The Ottoman sultans retained this region for most of the period until 
the Greek War of Independence in the 1820s, though there was a short phase of 

Appendix  291
Venetian rule (1699–1715). Ports like Nafplio were important for economic and 
strategic reasons and benefited from both Ottoman and Venetian patronage. Naf-
plio still contains several mosques (all now converted for other uses), as well as 
a ruined bathhouse and numerous fountains. The surviving fountains (Turkish: 
çeşme) were built in the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. In common 
with Ottoman fountains located in other Greek towns and cities, the construc-
tion of those in Nafplio resulted from acts of personal piety, with the designs 
varying in both form and decorative characteristics. Patronage by members of 
the Bektashi order, a sufi group founded in the sixteenth century and popular with 
the Janissary corps, is confirmed in two inscriptions, dating to 1147/1734 and 
1187/1773. Ioannis Kapodistrias, the first leader of the modern Greek state, was 
murdered on 9 October 1831 outside St Spyridon church by two brothers from the 
southern region of Mani.
Further reading: Kiel, Machiel, Studies on the Ottoman Architecture of the Bal-
kans: A Legacy in Stone (Aldershot: Variorum, 1990).
Milwright, Marcus and Evanthia Baboula, ‘Water on the ground: Water systems in 
two Ottoman Greek port cities,’ in Sheila Blair and Jonathan Bloom, eds, Rivers 
of Paradise: Water in Islamic Art and Culture (New Haven and London: Yale 
University Press, 2009), pp. 213–38.
Kuala Lumpur, 1886: It remains a common practice to bring back a memento 
of the hajj, such as a flask containing water from the well of Zamzam. The mar-
kets of nineteenth-century Mecca are described by numerous travellers and it is 
clear that a wide array of locally produced and imported items were available for 
purchase. Pilgrims might also sell valued possessions in Mecca or in the markets 
established along the hajj routes to offset the costs of their journeys. The waistcoat 
featured in this story comes from a more unusual source, having been made from 
part of the interior lining of the kiswa, the elaborate textile cover for the Kaʿba. The 
tailoring of the waistcoat is consistent with Malay workmanship. The decorated 
silk panels are thought to have been made in Bursa in c. 1800. The zigzag pattern 
into which the inscriptions are placed is typical for the Ottoman period and is also 
seen in the surviving coverings made for the tomb of the Prophet Muhammad in 
Medina. ʿAbd al-Ghaffar was a doctor in late nineteenth-century Mecca, and was 
one of the first to take photographs of the city and of the hajj. Haji Mohamed Taib 
(d. 1925) was a prominent business man in Kuala Lumpur, with interests in prop-
erty, tin mines and rubber plantations.
Further reading: İpek, Selın, “Ravza-i Mutahhara covers sent from Istanbul to 
Medina with the Surre processions,” Muqarnas 23 (2006): 289–316.
Porter, Venetia, “Textiles of Mecca and Medina,” in Venetia Porter, ed., Hajj, Jour-
ney to the Heart of Islam (London: British Museum Press, 2012), pp. 257–65.
O’Neill, Hugh, “Southeast Asia,” in Martin Frishman and Hasan-uddin Khan, 
eds, The Mosque: History, Architectural Development and Regional Diversity 
(London: Thames & Hudson, 1994), pp. 225–40.

292  Appendix
London, 1892: Until the end of the nineteenth century two carpets commis-
sioned by Shah Tahmasp (r. 1524–76) were housed in the shrine of Shaykh Safi al-
Din Khanegah in Ardabil. There is some doubt about whether these floor coverings 
were made for the Ardabil shrine. Another potential candidate of Shah Tahmasp’s 
largesse is the shrine of Imam Riza in Mashhad. The carpets are consistent in tech-
nical and visual terms with other Safavid pieces of the sixteenth century. They 
employ a silk base with a wool pile and have 300–350 knots per square inch. Sold 
in about 1890 to an unknown buyer (possibly Hildebrand Stevens), they were then 
acquired by representatives of Ziegler and Co. Based in Manchester, Ziegler and 
Co. both dealt in old carpets and manufactured new ones. Using artisans in either 
Tabriz or Anatolia, Ziegler and Co. were responsible for taking sections from the 
more fragmentary of the pair in order to complete the other. The larger example is 
now in the Victoria & Albert Museum, having been bought from the London-based 
dealer, Vincent J. Robinson. The one held by the Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art and Getty Museum, Malibu has the central field, but is now missing the 
border design. It is likely that both carpets were manufactured in Tabriz. William 
Morris (d. 1896), the influential designer and leading light of the Arts and Crafts 
movement, advised the South Kensington Museum (renamed in 1899 as the Vic-
toria & Albert Museum) on the purchase of the Ardabil carpet. Morris regarded it 
as a unique masterpiece (he was unaware of the existence of the second carpet) 
and encouraged the Museum to pay the substantial sum of £2,000. Morris himself 
drew considerable inspiration from Islamic art in the creation of his designs. For 
many years the Ardabil Carpet was hung in a wall cabinet at the Victoria & Albert 
Museum, but it can now be seen laid horizontally in a purpose-built space in the 
Jameel Gallery.
Further reading: Armstrong, Dorothy, “Inventing the Ardabil carpet: A case study 
in the appropriation and transformation of a Persian artifact,” Iran: Journal of 
the British Institute of Persian Studies 58.1 (2018): 110–30.
Beatty, May, “Ardabīl carpet,” Encyclopaedia Iranica 2.4 (1986): 365–68.
On the Ardabil carpet, see: https://www.vam.ac.uk/articles/the-ardabil-carpet (last 
consulted: 21 July 2020).
Edirne, 1899: Antonis Benakis (1873–1954) was an Alexandrine Greek who as-
sembled a major collection of art, now housed in a series of museums in Athens. 
His Islamic collection is particularly strong in Iznik glazed pottery. Iznik was the 
most important centre for the production of decorated stonepaste (fritware) pottery 
in the Ottoman Empire, operating from the late fifteenth to the end of the seven-
teenth centuries. Characteristic features of the mature style of the sixteenth century 
are complex floral designs in a bold polychromatic palette, including a rich red made 
from Armenian bole (clay). There was an active trade in these wares in the late nine-
teenth century, though vessels were often misattributed to the localities where dealers 
had found them in greatest numbers, including Damascus and the Greek islands of 
Rhodes and Lindos. Recent research has established that the six tiles in the Benaki 
Museum of Islamic Art are part of a dispersed set, some of which were bought by 

Appendix  293
Calouste Gulbenkian (1866–1955). They were originally made for the imperial pal-
ace in Edirne. The Cihannüma Kasrı (Panorama Pavilion) was the central construc-
tion in this complex. “Napoléon” was the name commonly given to the gold coins 
issued under Napoléon III of France (r. 1852–70).
Further reading: Dogani, Yanna and Amerimni Galanou, “The reconstruction of 
an Iznik tile panel, Benaki Museum Islamic Art Collection,” Mouseio Benaki 4 
(2004): 159–73.
Atasoy, Nurhan and Julian Raby, Iznik: The Pottery of Ottoman Turkey, revised 
edition (London: Thames & Hudson for Alexandria Books, 1994).
Denny, Walter and Ahmed Ertuğ, Gardens of Paradise: 16th Century Turkish 
Ceramic Tile Decoration (Istanbul: Ertuğ and Kocabiyik, 1998).
Simunul, 1902: According to tradition, Islam first came to the Philippines with 
the arrival on Simunul of an Arab merchant, Makhdum Karim, in 1380. The mosque 
bearing his name in Barangay Tubig Indangan is the oldest in the Philippines, dat-
ing from the seventeenth century. A characteristic feature of the arts of the region 
is the employment of rhythmic pattern based on abstracted vegetal themes, known 
as okir. Designs of this type are also found on Qurʾan manuscripts, many of which 
appear to have been produced on the island of Mindanao. The surviving examples 
probably date from the seventeenth century onwards. The one mentioned in the 
story was acquired near Lake Lanao and is now in Princeton University Library. 
It is notable that many manuscripts, including Qurʾans, from the Philippines found 
their way into European and North American collections through the late nine-
teenth and early twentieth centuries. This movement of books can be connected to 
colonialism in Southeast Asia, including the Dutch War (1874–1904) against the 
Sultanate of Aceh and the American-Philippines War (1899–1902). The chewing 
of betel quid (also known as paan) is an ancient practice in South and Southeast 
Asia. The ingredients were often stored in decorative boxes, such as the example 
in the Doris Duke Foundation for Islamic Art in Shangri La, Honolulu. The silver 
inlay designs of this piece are consistent with the okir mode found across the arts 
of the Philippines. Abu Zayd recites a short excerpt from a Farsi poem about the 
consumption of betel quid by Masʿud Saʿd Salman (d. 1121), a native of Lahore. 
The hadith recalled by Aisha at the end of the story appears in Sahih Bukhari (1:1, 
2:47, 49:13, 83:66, 90:1), while Salim quotes from Surat al-Anʿam (Q 6.59).
Further reading: Gallop, Annabel Teh, “Qurʾan manuscripts from Mindanao: Col-
lecting, histories, art and materiality,” South East Asia Research 30.1 (2022): 
23–67.
Sharma, Sunil, Persian Poetry at the Indian Frontier: Masʿûd Saʿd Salmân of 
Lahore, The Permanent Black Monographs: The “Opus 1” Series (Delhi: Per-
manent Black, 2000), p. 113.
Cielas, Hermina, “Betel chewing in kāvya literature and Indian art,” in Cinzia 
Pieruccini and Paolo Rossi, eds, A World of Nourishment: Reflections on Food 
in Indian Culture (Milan: Ledizioni-LEDI Publishing, 2016), pp. 163–76.

294  Appendix
For text and translation of Sahih Bukhari, see: https://sunnah.com/bukhari (last 
consulted: 15 December 2022).
Qalʿat Bani Hammad, 1908: The excavation of Qalʿat Bani Hammad by Léon 
de Beylié (d. 1910) in 1908 belongs to the formative phase of Islamic archaeol-
ogy and is important as an early exploration of an extensive palatial complex. In 
this respect, this campaign draws closest comparisons with the excavation of the 
tenth-century Madinat al-Zahraʾ in southern Spain in 1910. Madinat al-Zahraʾ 
was likely one of the inspirations for the Hammadid rulers (1008–1152) who 
commissioned the construction work at Qalʿat Bani Hammad, in modern Algeria. 
They occupied this palace city until the sack of the site in 1090–91. Surrounded 
by a substantial perimeter wall, the triangular site contains a mosque, the minaret 
of which still dominates the area and several palatial developments. The most 
important palaces are the Dar al-Manar and the Dar al-Mulk, or Dar al-Bahr. 
The allusion to the sea (Arabic: bahr) is explained by the presence of a large 
rectangular pool (45 x 64 m) that, according to textual sources, was employed 
for mock naval battles. An elaborate fountain with carved lions was uncovered in 
the Dar al-Manar in the 1970s. The palaces are notable for their ornamentation, 
particularly the extensive employment of glazed tiles, indicating the presence 
of skilled artisans from elsewhere in North Africa and the Iberian Peninsula. A 
common approach involved the combination of plain turquoise-glazed stellate 
tiles with cross-shaped panels painted with lustre pigment. Also significant are 
the moulded terracotta corbels, that create a stalactite effect similar to that of the 
muqarnas vault (first seen in a complete form in the tomb of Imam Dur, near 
Samarra, dating to 1085).
Further reading: Golvin, Lucien, Recherches archéologiques à la Qalʿa des Banû 
Hammâd (Paris: G.-P. Maisonneuve et Larose, 1965).
Bourouiba, Rachid, La Qalʿa des Bani Hammad (Algiers: Ministère de l’Information 
et de la Culture, 1975).
On the early history of Islamic archaeology, see Vernoit, Stephen, “The rise of 
Islamic archaeology,” Muqarnas 14 (1997): 1–10.
For illustrations of the glazed and decorated tiles in the National Museum of An-
tiquities and Islamic Arts in Algiers, see: Houria Cherid, “Fragment of a panel 
with ceramic inlay,” in Discover Islamic Art, Museum with No Frontiers, 2023: 
https://islamicart.museumwnf.org/database_item.php?id=object;ISL;dz;Mus01;42;en 
(last consulted: 27 April 2023).
Manzala, 1910: The art of shadow puppetry has its origins in Southeast Asia, 
but found its way to Egypt in the eleventh century or earlier. Puppets were typi-
cally made of stretched animal skins, cut into the desired shapes with gaps often 
filled with coloured fabric. These would be held against a back-lit textile screen 
in order to provide animated shadows for the audience. The oldest surviving 
texts of shadow plays were penned by Ibn Daniyal (d. 1310) and references to 

Appendix  295
performances also appear in chronicles and other sources of this period. Few pup-
pets survive from earlier than the nineteenth century, giving the group discovered 
by Paul Kahle (d. 1964) in Manzala particular importance. Kahle was able to 
trace their history back to the eighteenth century, but concluded that this group of 
puppets were made during the Mamluk sultanate (1250–1517). He based this on 
stylistic factors, as well as the presence of characteristic emblems (known as bla-
zons) employed by members of the Mamluk elite. The fact that one puppet from 
this group is depicted smoking a pipe suggests, however, that some of the Manzala 
puppets were made following Mamluk prototypes, and date after the introduction 
of tobacco to the Middle East in c. 1600. The relocation of Mamluk performers to 
Istanbul in 1517 marks the beginning of the Turkish tradition of shadow puppetry 
(Karagöz). The poetry quoted by Kahle in the story was written by the sufi scholar 
and poet, Ibn al-Farid (d. 1235).
Further reading: And, Metin, Karagöz: Turkish Shadow Theatre, revised edition 
(Istanbul: Dost, 1979).
Milwright, Marcus, “On the date of Paul Kahle’s Egyptian shadow puppets,” 
Muqarnas 28 (2011): 43–68.
The excerpt of poetry is translated in Nicholson, Reynold, Studies in Islamic Mysti-
cism (1921. Reprinted Richmond: Curzon Press, 1994), pp. 260–61.
Hindiyya, 1918: This large brass platter contains a representation of the 
southern Iraqi town of Hindiyya (also called Tuwayrij). It carries the hijri date of 
25 Muharram 1337 (31 October 1918), the day after the signing of the Armistice 
of Mudros, which marked the end of fighting between the Ottoman Empire and 
Allied Forces in the Middle East. It is, however, possible that the events depicted 
on the platter are associated with the later revolt against British authority that 
took place in 1920. The town and its inhabitants are arranged on either side of 
a band of water, most probably the Euphrates river though a canal known as the 
Shatt al-Hilla also runs past Hindiyya. The platter was bequeathed to the Victoria 
& Albert Museum by one Mr Bing. His depiction in the story is entirely fictional. 
It is not recorded where he obtained the piece. For the purposes of the story, I 
have also omitted the name of the patron (possibly reading Major Quilly) who is 
named on one of the inscriptions. The intricate design incorporates inscriptions, 
providing the location, date, and descriptions of details. One striking scene is 
the execution of Sadiq Effendi, who was convicted for the killing of a British 
officer. The engraved design is notable for its engagement with the features of 
the modern world, including mechanised weaponry, motorised vehicles, mili-
tary uniforms and the biplanes employed by the British Royal Airforce. During 
and after World War I Middle Eastern metalworkers also made inventive use of 
spent artillery shell casings in order to make vases and lidded boxes, decorated 
with chasing and sometimes also inlay in silver and copper. These items may 
contain inscriptions referring to military campaigns or specific battles, though 
others have generic figural content or designs and epigraphy that belong to the 

296  Appendix
style often known as “Mamluk revival” (i.e. taking inspiration from the arts of 
the Mamluk sultanate).
Further reading: Stanley, Tim, Mariam Rosser-Owen and Stephen Vernoit, Palace 
and Mosque: Islamic Art from the Middle East (London: V&A Press, 2004), 
pp. 132–33.
See also: https://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O66716/tray-unknown/ (last consulted: 
15 May 2021).
On Islamic metalwork produced during World War I, see Milwright, Marcus and 
Evanthia Baboula, “Damascene ‘trench art’: A note on Mamluk Revival metal-
work in early twentieth-century Syria,” Levant 46.3 (2014): 382–98.
Rabat, 1937: Doris Duke (1913–92) began purchasing Islamic art in 1935. This 
remained the focus of her collecting through to her death. Her interest was sparked 
by journeys to Morocco, Syria and India with her first husband, James Cromwell 
(d. 1990). While the collection contains significant pieces from earlier periods, 
such as an Ilkhanid lustre tile mihrab from Varamin, the main strength lies in works 
from the seventeenth to the mid-twentieth centuries. The enduring monument to her 
creative preoccupation with Islamic visual and material culture is Shangri La itself, 
located on the coast near Honolulu. Designed by Marion Sims Wyeth (d. 1982), the 
house was constructed with modern materials, but with the intention of forming 
a suitable backdrop for specially commissioned architectural features, including 
woodwork from Morocco, tile mosaics from Iran, inlaid stonework from Syria, 
and pierced marble screens and pietra dura from India. The house also contained 
interiors extracted from Ottoman-period houses in Damascus. For these projects, 
Duke relied upon art dealers, such as René Martin (his firm was called S.A.L.E.M 
René Martin), Asfar & Sarkis in Damascus, and Ayoub Rabenou of Tehran, also re-
ceiving advice from the great scholar of Persian art, Arthur Upham Pope (d. 1969). 
Some of Duke’s commissions show an intriguing fusion of traditional crafts with 
modern European/North American inspired aesthetics. This is part of a broader 
phenomenon in which artisans across the Islamic world adapted their working 
practices to the tastes of tourists and international patrons.
Further reading: Mellins, Thomas and Donald Albrecht, eds, Doris Duke’s Shangri 
La, a House in Paradise: Architecture, Landscape and Islamic Art (New York: 
Skira Rizzoli, 2012).
Akhtar, Saima, “Shangri La: Architecture as collection,” International Journal of 
Islamic Architecture 3.1 (2014): 103–28.
Cleveland, 1956: Little is known about the provenance of the Wade Cup, though 
its physical and stylistic characteristics indicate that the vessel was probably pro-
duced in early thirteenth-century Iran. The technique of silver inlay was well estab-
lished in the eastern regions of the Islamic world by this time and comparisons can 
be made with other famous objects, such as the Bobrinski Bucket in the Hermitage 
and the Vaso Vescovali in the British Museum. The Wade Cup is also consistent 

Appendix  297
with trends of the time in that it makes prominent use of astrological motifs. Per-
haps the most intriguing aspect of the vessel is the animated inscription. The leg-
ibility of this text relies upon its fundamentally generic nature, providing blessings 
and good health to the (unnamed) owner. Messages like this were commonplace 
and would have allowed buyers to guess at the likely content of the more challeng-
ing script found on the Wade Cup. Sigismund (Susya) Reich is better known in 
scholarship as David Storm Rice (d. 1962). He wrote the definitive monograph on 
the Wade Cup, as well as influential studies of metalwork produced in Mosul and 
Cairo. He also produced a monograph on the Ibn al-Bawwab Qurʾan (see above). 
Further reading: Rice, David Storm, The Wade Cup in the Cleveland Museum of 
Art (Paris: Éditions du Chêne, 1955).
For a survey of the metalwork of this period, see Allan, James and Ruba Kana’an, 
‘The social and economic life of metalwork,’ in Finbarr Barry Flood and Gülru 
Necipoğlu, eds, A Companion to Islamic Art and Architecture, Wiley Blackwell 
Companions to Art History (Oxford and Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Blackwell, 2017), 
I, pp. 453–77.
Djenné, 1985: The Great Mosque of Djenné in Mali stands on the site of earlier 
mosques, going back at least to the thirteenth century. The present structure was 
completed in 1907 during the phase of French colonial rule (1892–1960). The 
plan and structure of the mosque accord to local styles, with historical evidence 
indicating that the local French authorities were minimally involved in the con-
struction process. Ismaila Traoré, chief of the guild of masons in Djenné, is cred-
ited with the design. Another impressive mosque in this style was constructed in 
Mopti in the 1930s. The first application for UNESCO World Heritage Site status 
for the Old Town of Djenné was made in 1979. A new submission, also including 
sites in the surrounding area was submitted in the 1980s and was finally granted in 
1988. The UNESCO entry notes that this region is “particularly representative of 
Islamic architecture in sub-Saharan Africa,” as well as praising, “the intensive and 
remarkable use of earth specifically in its architecture.” The scale and ambition 
of the Great Mosque of Djenné are indeed remarkable, though it should be noted 
that both mud brick (abobe) and pisé (rammed earth) are extensively employed 
in both domestic and monumental architecture across the Islamic world. While 
these materials lack the strength and durability of baked brick or stone, they can 
be made swiftly, especially in the summer months, and require relatively little 
skilled labour and no fuel. Hassan Fathy (d. 1989) was an Egyptian-born architect 
who developed an international reputation through his use of traditional media in 
his designs.
Further reading: Bedaux, Rogier, Boubacar Diaby and Pierre Maas, eds, 
L’Architecture de Djenné (Mali): La pérennité d’un patrimonie mondial (Leiden: 
Rijksmuseum, 2003).
Bourgeois, Jean-Louis, “The history of the Great Mosques of Djenné,” African 
Arts 20.3 (1987): 54–63, 90–92.

298  Appendix
“Old Towns of Djenné,” UNESCO World Heritage List. https://whc.unesco.org/en/
list/116/ (last accessed: 8 August 2021).
For a critical evaluation of UNESCO’s role in protecting world heritage, see Lynn 
Meskell, “UNESCO’s World Heritage Convention at 40: Challenging the eco-
nomic and political order of international heritage conservation,” Current An-
thropology 54.4 (2013): 483–94.
New York, 2015: Pablo Picasso (d. 1973) produced a series of paintings and 
drawings under the title, Les femmes d’Alger, selling them to Victor and Sally Ganz 
in 1956. The painting in the series known as “Version O” was sold at Christie’s, 
New York, in 2015 for what was at the time a record price of $179.4 million. Picasso 
was inspired by Eugène Delacroix’s (d. 1863), Femmes d’Alger dans leur appar-
tement, painted in 1834, with a later version produced between 1847 and 1849. 
These works by Delacroix are notable for their lack of overt eroticism, unlike many 
other French Orientalist paintings depicting women. Delacroix’s paintings relied 
on drawings and watercolour sketches made during a visit to Morocco and Algeria 
in 1832 as part of a diplomatic mission of King Louis Philippe I (r. 1830–48). The 
French conquest of Algeria began in 1830. Lalla Essaydi (b. 1956) was brought 
up in Morocco and Saudi Arabia before training in Boston. Her acclaimed pho-
tographs engage with nineteenth-century Orientalist artworks, particularly as a 
means to challenge gendered stereotypes. This is seen powerfully in her series, Les 
femmes du Maroc (from 2008), comprising Moroccan women in staged composi-
tions sometimes referencing compositions by Orientalist paintings by artists in-
cluding Delacroix, Jean-Auguste-Dominque Ingres (d. 1867), Jean-Léon Gérôme 
(d. 1904) and Frederick Lord Leighton (d. 1896). Essaydi rejects the saturated col-
ours of Delacroix and his contemporaries, reducing the palette to off-white tones 
covered with calligraphy, written with henna. The partially decipherable epigraphy 
is also applied in henna to the exposed skin of the sitters, perhaps evoking bridal 
practices across North Africa and the Middle East while also opening out other 
readings relating to status of the written word in Islamic cultures, the role of text 
in signalling personal and group identities, and perhaps the presence of Arabic 
pseudo-script in European Medieval and Early Modern art.
Further reading: Rocca, Anna and Lalla Essaydi, “In search of beauty in space: 
Interview with Lalla Essaydi,” Dalhousie French Studies 103 (2014): 119–27.
Benjamin, Roger, Orientalist Aesthetics: Art, Colonialism and French North 
Africa, 1880–1930 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2003).
Anywhere, 2020: Amulets and magic bowls were extensively employed around 
the Mediterranean region and in the Middle East prior to the rise of Islam and 
have continued to be popular through to the present. These portable objects were 
believed to provide personal protection, as well as warding off disease. Images and 
number squares were usually combined with writing or pseudo-script. The legible 
inscriptions could comprise the names of revered figures, blessings, or excerpts 
from the Qurʾan, including Surat al-Rahman (Qurʾan 55) and the “Throne verse” 

Appendix  299
(Qurʾan 2:255). Most extant magic bowls are metal (commonly brass) with chased 
designs, though they can be made of other media, including glazed or unglazed 
ceramic. Qurʾanic texts were also written onto talismanic shirts that could be worn 
under armour. This practice emphasises the protective nature of Qurʾanic text, and 
of shorter phrases such as the basmala (“In the name of God, the Merciful, the 
Compassionate”). This perhaps also explains the placement of such texts on face 
masks. A wide variety of designs has been manufactured during the pandemic, with 
the basmala, written in a variety of Arabic scripts, being a particularly popular 
theme. The examples discussed in this chapter were the creations of Ayhan Altun 
and Tom Gowanlock.
Further reading: Issa, Rose, Juliet Cesar, Venetia Porter, and Hans-Ulrich Obrist, 
Sign of our Times: From Calligraphy to Calligraffiti (London: Merrell Publish-
ers, 2016).
For magical dimensions of Islamic material culture, see Madison, Francis, Emilie 
Savage-Smith and Ralph Pinder-Wilson, Science, Tools and Magic, 2 vols, The 
Nasser D. Khalili Collection of Islamic Art 12 (London: Azimuth, 1997).

Note: I have chosen mostly publications from the 1990s to the present. These 
works contain extensive bibliographies that include important earlier studies of 
Islamic visual and material culture.
Online Resources
Archnet: https://www.archnet.org/
Crafts of Iraq: https://craftsofiraq.uvic.ca/
Crafts of Syria: https://craftsofsyria.uvic.ca/
Heilbrunn Timeline of Art History: https://www.metmuseum.org/toah
Khamseen – Islamic Art History Online: https://sites.lsa.umich.edu/khamseen/
Museum with no Frontiers. Discover Islamic Art: https://islamicart.museumwnf.org/
Qantara: Culture: https://en.qantara.de/menu/culture
Shahnama Project (The Cambridge Shahnama Centre for Persian Studies): http://
persian.pem.cam.ac.uk/projects/shahnama-project
Print Resources
Akbarnia, Ladan, Venetia Porter Fahmida Suleman, William Greenwood, Zeina Klink-
Hoppe, and Amandine Mérat, The Islamic World: A History in Objects (London: Thames 
& Hudson, 2018).
Ali, Zakaria, Islamic Art in Southeast Asia, 830 AD–1570 AD (Kuala Lumpur: Ministry of 
Education, Malaysia, 1994).
Allan, James, Islamic Metalwork: The Nuhad es-Said Collection (London: Sotheby’s, 1982).
Allan, James, The Art and Architecture of Twelver Shiʿism: Iraq, Iran and the Indian Sub-
continent (London: Azimuth Editions, 2012).
Anon., ed., The Message and the Monsoon: Islamic Art in Southeast Asia (Kuala Lumpur: 
Islamic Arts Museum Malaysia, 2005).
Asher, Catherine, Architecture of Mughal India. The New Cambridge History of India I.4 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1992).
Atasoy, Nurhan and Julian Raby, Iznik: The Pottery of Ottoman Turkey, revised edition 
(London: Thames & Hudson for Alexandria Books, 1994).
Atil, Esin, Renaissance of Islam: Art of the Mamluks (Washington DC: Smithsonian Institu-
tion Press, 1981).
Further Reading

Further Reading  301
Behrens-Abouseif, Doris, Beauty in Arabic Culture (Princeton, NJ: Markus Wiener, 1998).
Blair, Sheila, Islamic Calligraphy (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2006).
Blair, Sheila and Jonathan Bloom, The Art and Architecture of Islam, 1250–1800, Pelican 
History of Art (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 1994).
Blair, Sheila and Jonathan Bloom, “The mirage of Islamic art: Reflections on an unwieldy 
field,” Art Bulletin 85.1 (2003): 152–84.
Bloom, Jonathan and Sheila Blair, eds, The Grove Encyclopedia of Islamic Art and Architec-
ture, 3 vols (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2009).
Bloom, Jonathan, Paper before Print: The History and Impact of Paper in the Islamic World 
(New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2001).
Bloom, Jonathan, The Minaret, Edinburgh Studies in Islamic Art (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 2013).
Bloom, Jonathan, Arts of the City Victorious: Islamic Art and Architecture in Fatimid North 
Africa and Egypt (New Haven and London: Yale University Press in association with the 
Institute of Ismaili Studies, 2007).
Broug, Eric, Islamic Geometric Patterns, revised edition (London: Thames & Hudson, 
2019).
Canby, Sheila, Islamic Art in Detail (London: The British Museum Press, 2005).
Carboni, Stefano, Glass from Islamic Lands (London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 
2001).
Carboni, Stefano, ed., Venice and the Islamic World, 828–1797 (New Haven and London: 
Yale University Press and Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2006).
Carboni, Stefano and David Whitehouse, Glass of the Sultans (New Haven and London: 
Yale University Press, 2001).
Contadini, Anna, ed., Arab Painting: Text and Image in illustrated Arabic Manuscripts, 
Handbook of Oriental Studies: Section 1. The Near and Middle East 90 (Leiden and Bos-
ton: Brill, 2007).
Creswell, K. A. C., A short Account of early Muslim Architecture, revised and supplemented 
by James Allan (Aldershot: Scolar Press, 1989).
Déroche, François, Qurʾans of the Umayyads: A first Overview. Leiden Studies in Islam and 
Society 1 (Leiden and Boston: Brill, 2014).
Elias, Jamal, Aisha’s Cushion: Religious Art, Perception, and Practice in Islam (Cambridge 
MA and London: Harvard University Press, 2012).
Ettinghausen, Richard, Arab Painting, Treasure of Asia (Geneva: Skira, 1962).
Ettinghausen, Richard, Oleg Grabar and Marilyn Jenkins-Madina, Islamic Art and Architec-
ture, 650–1250, Pelican History of Art (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 
2001).
Evans, Helen and Brandie Ratliff, eds, Byzantium and Islam: Age of Transition, 7th–9th 
Century (New Haven and London: Yale University Press for the Metropolitan Museum 
of Art, 2012).
Féhérvari, Géza, Islamic Metalwork of the Eighth to the Fifteenth Century in the Keir 
Collection, The Keir Collection 1 (London: Faber & Faber, 1976).
Flood, Finbarr Barry and Gülru Necipoğlu, eds, A Companion to Islamic Art and Architec-
ture, 2 vols. Wiley Blackwell Companions to Art History (Oxford and Hoboken NJ: Wiley 
Blackwell, 2017).
Frischman, Martin and Hassan-Uddin Khan, eds, The Mosque: History, Architectural Devel-
opment and Regional Diversity (London: Thames & Hudson, 1994).
Gonzalez, Valérie, Beauty and Islam: Aesthetics in Islamic Art and Architecture (London: 
I. B. Tauris, 2001).

302  Further Reading
Grabar, Oleg, Illustrations of the Maqamat (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984).
Grabar, Oleg, The Formation of Islamic Art. Revised and enlarged edition (New Haven and 
London: Yale University Press, 1987).
Grabar, Oleg, Mostly Miniatures: An Introduction to Persian Painting (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2000).
Graves, Margaret, Arts of Allusion: Object, Ornament, and Architecture in Medieval Islam 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2018).
Gruber, Christiane, ed., The Image Debate: Figural Representations in Islam and across the 
World, Gingko Library Art Series (London: Gingko, 2019).
Gruber, Christiane and Avinoam Shalem, eds, The Image of the Prophet between Ideal and 
Ideology (Berlin and Boston: De Gruyter, 2014).
Hillenbrand, Robert, Islamic Architecture: Form, Function and Meaning (Edinburgh: Edin-
burgh University Press, 1994).
Hillenbrand, Robert, Islamic Art and Architecture (London: Thames & Hudson, 1999).
Insoll, Timothy, The Archaeology of Islam in Sub-Saharan Africa (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003).
Institut du Monde Arabe, L’Orient de Saladin. L’Art des Ayyoubides (Paris: Gallimard, 2001).
Irwin, Robert. Islamic Art: Art, Architecture, and the Literary World (London: Laurence 
King, 1997).
Issa, Rose, Juliet Cesar, Venetia Porter, and Hans-Ulrich Obrist, Sign of our Times: From 
Calligraphy to Calligraffiti (London: Merrell Publishers, 2016).
Komaroff, Linda and Stefano Carboni, eds, The Legacy of Genghis Khan: Courtly Art and 
Culture in Western Asia, 1256–1353 (New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2002).
Leaman, Oliver, Islamic Aesthetics: An Introduction (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press, 2004).
Mason, Robert, Shine Like the Sun: Lustre and Associated Pottery from the Medieval Middle 
East, Bibliotheca Iranica: Islamic Art and Architecture Series 12 (Costa Mesa, CA and 
Toronto: Mazda Publishers and Royal Ontario Museum, 2004).
Milwright, Marcus, An Introduction to Islamic Archaeology. New Edinburgh Islamic Sur-
veys (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2010).
Milwright, Marcus, Islamic Arts and Crafts, an Anthology (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univer-
sity Press, 2017).
Milwright, Marcus and Evanthia Baboula, eds, Made for the Eye of One Who Sees: Cana-
dian Contributions to the Study of Islamic Art and Archaeology (Montreal and Toronto: 
McGill-Queen’s University Press and Royal Ontario Museum, 2022).
Nicolle, David, Historical Atlas of the Islamic World (London: Mercury Books, 2004).
Petersen, Andrew, Dictionary of Islamic Architecture (London: Routledge, 1996).
Porter, Venetia, ed., Hajj: Journey to the Heart of Islam (London: British Museum Press, 
2012).
Pradines, Stéphane, ed., Earthen Architecture in Muslim Cultures: Historical and anthropo-
logical Perspectives. Art and Archaeology of the Islamic World 10 (Leiden and Boston: 
Brill, 2018).
Pradines, Stéphane, Historical Mosques in Sub-Saharan Africa: From Timbuktu to Zanzibar, 
Handbook of Oriental Studies. Section 1: The Near and Middle East, vol. 163 (Leiden and 
Boston: Brill, 2022).
Roxburgh, David, ed., Turks: A Journey of a Thousand Years, 600–1600 (London: Royal 
Academy of Arts, 2005).
Ruggles, Dede, Islamic Art and Visual Culture: An Anthology of Sources (London and 
New York: Wiley Blackwell, 2011).

Further Reading  303
Ruggles, Dede Fairchild, Gardens, Landscape and Vision in the Palaces of Islamic Spain 
(Philadelphia: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2000).
Shabout, Nada, Modern Arab Art: Formation of Arab Aesthetics (Gainesville: University of 
Florida Press, 2007).
Shaw, Wendy, What is “Islamic Art”: Between Religion and Perception (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2019)
Sims, Eleanor, Boris Marshak and Ernst Grube, Peerless Images: Persian Painting and Its 
Sources (New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 2002).
Steinhardt, Nancy, China’s Early Mosques, Edinburgh Studies in Islamic Art (Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 2018).
Suleman, Fahmida, ed., Word of God, Art of Man: The Qurʾān and Its Creative Expres-
sions. Selected Proceedings from the International Colloquium, London, 18–21 October 
2003 (London and New York: Oxford University Press in Association with the Institute of 
Ismaili Studies, London, 2007).
Suleman, Fahmida, ed., People of the Prophet’s House: Artistic and Ritual Expressions of 
Shiʿi Islam (London: Azimuth Editions in association with the Institute of Ismaili Studies 
in collaboration with the British Museum’s Department of the Middle East, 2015).
Tabbaa, Yasser, The Transformation of Islamic Art during the Sunni Revival (London: IB 
Tauris, 2001).
Thompson, Jon, Carpets: From the Tents, Cottages and Workshops of Asia (London: 
Laurence King, 1993).
Ward, Rachel, Islamic Metalwork (London: British Museum Press, 1993).
Watson, Oliver, Ceramics from Islamic Lands (London and New York: Thames and Hudson, 
2004).

Index
ʿAbassa bint Jurayj 34, 35, 36, 267–68
Abbasid Caliphate 26, 272
ʿAbd al-Ghaffar, doctor in Mecca 211, 291
ʿAbd al-Malik ibn Marwan, caliph 25, 39, 
45, 268
ʿAbd al-Malik I, ruler of Khurasan 277
ʿAbd al-Rahman III, caliph, 26
ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn al-Hakam 82
ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn Muʿawiya 54, 55
Abi Harami al-Makki, family of 110
Abu Bakr ʿAbd Allah ibn Abi Quhafa, 
caliph 25, 32
Abu al-Baqi 61, 62
Abu Ibrahim Ahmad, amir 72
Abu al-Mansur Bakht-tegin, Qaʾid 103, 277
Aceh, sultanate of 27, 28, 293
Adrianople see Edirne
Adichie, Chimamanda Ngozi 6–7
Aegean Sea 192
Afghanistan 20, 28
Afrasiyab 117
Aghlabid dynasty 26, 272
Agra 28, 179–83, 287–88; Taj Mahal 178, 
182, 183, 256, 287–88
Aguinaldo, Emilio 28, 225
Ahram, al- 232
Ahwaz 76
Ahriman 166
Aisha bint Abi Bakr 198–99
Akhmim 53–55, 270
Albania 205
Aleppo 37–42, 68, 136, 185, 268, 288
Alexandria 222
Algeria 28, 260, 294, 298
Algiers 260
Alhambra (Granada) 6, 141–43, 282; 
Court of the Lions 141, 142, 282; 
Court of the Myrtles 141, 282; 
Cuarto Dorado 282; Hall of the 
Abencerrajes 282; Hall of the 
Ambassadors 139, 141, 282; Hall 
of the Two Sisters 282; Palace of 
the Lions (see Court of the Lions)
ʿAli b. Abi Talib, caliph 23, 25, 88, 111
Almohad dynasty 142
Almoravid dynasty 142
Altun, Ayhan 299
Amalfi 90
Amasya 164
Amara 184, 187
American-Philippines War 293
ʿAna 122
Anatolia see Turkey
Ancona 284
Andalus, al- see Iberian Peninsula
Antioch 102, 277
Antwerp 194
Aqa Mirak 285
ʿAqr, al- see Nizwa
Arabia 25, 35, 42, 64, 95, 269
Arabian Peninsula see Arabia
Arabs 143
Arab Spring 28
Aragon 143
Aral Sea 79
Ardabil 213, 214–15; Shrine of Shaykh Safi 
al-Din 214–15, 292
Arts and Crafts Movement, 292
Asfar & Sarkis, art and antiquities dealers 296
Asia 143, 272
Aswan 33–36, 267–68
Athens 218, 293; Benaki Museum 293; 
Benaki Museum of Islamic Art 293; 
Queen Sofias Avenue 218
Atkinson, James 279
Augsburg 194
ʿAyn Jalut 27
ʿAziz B’illah, caliph al- 89, 91, 275

Index  305
Baʿalbak 256
Baghdad 18, 26, 27, 67, 73, 79, 84–88, 
95, 119, 123, 130, 150, 185, 187, 
231, 273, 274–75, 276, 280; Bayt 
al-Hikma 18, 130
Bahram Gur 116
Bakhraʾ 49
Bakri, al- 232
Baltic States 273
Bam 106
Bamiyan 28
Bani Hammad dynasty 294
Barangay Tubig Indangan 293
Basra 25, 61–65, 72, 121, 185, 271–72, 
275, 279
Bauhin, Gaspard 179, 181, 287
Baxandall, Michael 4
Bayt Allah see Mecca, Kaʿba
Beirut 220
Bektashi order 205, 207, 291
Belgrade 27
Bembo, Ambrosio 185–87, 288
Benakis, Antonis 218, 220, 293–94
Berbers 143
Bergamo 284
Berlin, Museum für Islamische Kunst 289
Besler, Basilius 182, 287
Beylié, Léon de 230–33, 294
Bihzan son of Giv 117, 279
Bijar, Abu Saʿid 276
Bilad al-Sham see Greater Syria
Bilal ibn Rabah 73
Bing, Mr 240–43, 295
Birmingham: Mingana Collection 267
Biruni, Abu Rayhan Muhammad ibn 
Ahmad al- 275
Black Death, 27, 265, 281
Black Sea 23, 192, 289
Blois 102, 104
Bobrinski Bucket 105, 109, 277–78, 296
Bohemia 289
Bornholm Amulet 78, 273
Boston 298
Boulogne-sur-Mer: Abbey of St Josse 277
Breslau 10, 193–97, 289
Britain 10
Budapest 177
Bukhara 75–79, 93, 273, 276
Bulghars 26, 273
Bursa 161, 194, 291
Byzantine Empire 12, 131, 132, 270, 276
Cairo 26, 27, 89, 91, 126, 134–38, 150, 
221, 235, 255, 271, 273, 281–82, 
297; Fustat 33, 134; Mosque of Ibn 
Tulun 255, 273; Mosque-Madrasa 
of sultan al-Nasir Hasan 281–82
Calicut 27
Caorlini family 286
Cape of Good Hope 27
Caspian Sea 79
Castile 143
Çelebi, Katib 191, 289
Central Asia 10, 26, 270
Chang’an see Xi’an
China 1, 10, 12, 23, 27, 86, 133, 151, 156, 
176, 282–83
Chinggiz Khan (Genghiz Khan) 281
City of Peace see Baghdad
Cleveland 249–52, 279, 296–97
Collaert, Adriaen 287
Conrad IV, king of Sicily, Italy and 
Germany 128
Constantinople see Istanbul
Córdoba 80, 81, 83, 274
Corinth 207
COVID Pandemic 28
Cromwell, James 245, 246, 247, 296
Crusader period 26
Cyprus 158, 192, 207
Da Gama, Vasco 27
Dahlak Archipelago 110, 278
Dakhiliyya 155
Damascus 25, 39, 42, 43–47, 60, 68, 122, 
218, 220, 269, 296; National 
Museum of Syria 271; Souk 
al-Hamidiyya 218; Umayyad 
Mosque 25, 43–47, 59, 60, 269
Dasht-i Kavir 175
Day, Florence 270
Day of Judgement 35, 36, 65, 77, 173, 199, 
200, 201, 269
Day of Resurrection see Day of Judgement
Delacroix, Eugène 260, 261, 298
De Dinteville, Jean 285
Delft 194
Della Volta, Giovanni 159, 160
Dias, Bartholomeu 27
Dioscorides, Pedanios 93, 95, 276
Djenné 253–57, 297; Great Mosque 253, 
254–56
Dresden, Meissen Factory 289
Dubai 263
Dublin, Chester Beatty Library 26, 275
Duke (Cromwell), Doris 245, 246, 247, 296
Dur, Tomb of Imam Dur 294
Dutch War (Philippines) 28, 295

306  Index
East Africa 12
Eastern Europe see Europe
Edirne 218–22, 285, 292–93; Cihannüma 
Kasrı 218, 219, 221, 293; Selimiye 
Mosque 286
Egypt 26, 27, 64, 72, 90, 95, 159, 222, 232, 
235, 238, 251, 268
Ergin, Nina 285
Eritrea 278
Erzincan 163–67, 285
Essaydi, Lalla 258, 259, 298
Étienne (Stephen) of Blois 102–104, 277
Euphrates River 19, 20, 67, 187, 241, 242, 
243, 271
Europe 1, 3, 10, 12, 27, 173, 177, 190, 192, 
219, 255, 276, 277, 285
Farazdaq 54
Fathy, Hassan 256, 297
Fatima bint Muhammad 265
Fatimid Caliphate 26, 275, 280
Ferdinand II of Aragon 282
Fez 140
Finns see Rusʾ
Firdawsi, Abu al-Qasim 2, 23, 26, 117,  
131, 279
First Crusade 26, 277
Fitzgerald, Edward 279
Florence: Pitti Palace 275
Fourth Crusade 27
France 249, 294
Frederick the Great of Prussia 194, 196, 289
Frederick, Duke of Holstein-Gottorp 175, 178
Fustat see Cairo
Fur Route (or Fur Road) 19, 79, 273
Galen, Claudius 95
Ganz, Victor and Sally 298
Gazaruni, Miran Shah 290
Gayumars, king of Iran 165, 166, 285
Gérôme, Jean-Léon 28, 261, 298
Ghazan Khan 280
Ghazvin 98
Goa 288
Gombrich, Ernst 4
Gowanlock, Tom 299
Granada 27, 139–43, 282; see also 
Alhambra
Great Saljuq period see Saljuq period
Great War see World War I
Greater Syria 19, 26, 27, 268, 269
Greece 21, 218, 291
Greek War of Independence 28, 206, 290
Gregorovius 194–97, 289–90
Guangzhou 283
Gujarat 156
Gulbenkian, Calouste 222, 294
Gulshah 279
Hadith 98, 114, 198–99, 202, 290, 293
Hajj 11, 24, 278, 291
Hajj ʿAbdu 238
Hakam II Mustansir Billah, caliph al- 82, 
83, 274
Hakim ʿAli al-Din, governor of Punjab 290
Hamadhani, Badiʿ al-Zaman al- 5, 273
Hamedan 276
Hammadid dynasty 294
Hammam al-Sarah 269
Harbaqa Dam 271
Hariri, Abu Muhammad al-Qasim b. ʿAli b. 
ʿUthman al- 5–6, 10, 27, 279–80
Harran 26, 101–104, 277
Hasan ibn ʿAli, Imam 290
Hattin 27
Hawaii 245
Hawizeh Marshes 184–87, 288
Herat 105–108, 151, 277–78, 279
Hillenbrand, Robert 276
Hindiyya 240–43, 295–96; Shatt al-Hilla 295
Hindu Kush 151
Hisham ibn ʿAbd al-Malik, caliph 26, 57, 
59, 60
Hisham II, caliph Abu al-Walid 81, 271, 274
Holbein the Younger, Hans 285
Holmes, Sherlock 250, 252
Hongwu Emperor 27
Honolulu: Doris Duke Foundation for 
Islamic Art, Shangri La 244, 245, 
293, 296
Husayn ibn ʿAli, Imam 25, 29
Ibadi Muslims 155, 284
Iberian Peninsula 10, 18, 25, 26, 55, 110, 
143, 270, 274, 294
Ibn ʿAbd al-Fath, Yusuf ibn ʿAbdallah ibn 
Yusuf 109, 110
Ibn ʿAbd al-Wahid, Muhammad 107, 108
Ibn Abi Waqqas, Saʿd 148, 283
Ibn Aflah, Ziyad 274
Ibn Ahmad, Masʿud 107, 108
Ibn ʿArabi, Abu ʿAbdallah Muhammad ibn 
ʿAli ibn Muhammad 27, 237
Ibn Basil, Istifan 95, 276
Ibn al-Bawwab, ʿAli ibn Hilal 26, 84, 85, 
86, 87, 88, 275, 297
Ibn Daniyal, Shams al-Din Abu ʿAbd Allah 
Muhammad 27, 237, 239, 294

Index  307
Ibn Fadlan, Ahmad ibn al-ʿAbbas ibn 
Hammad 23, 26, 79, 273
Ibn al-Farid, ʿUmar ibn ʿAli 295
Ibn Firnas, Abu al-Qasim ʿAbbas 26, 81, 274
Ibn Ishaq, Hunayn 95, 276
Ibn Harami al-Makki, ʿAbd al-Rahman 278
Ibn Jawhar, Husayn 275
Ibn Khaldun, Zayd ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn 
Muhammad 27, 140–43, 282
Ibn al-Khatib, Lisan al-Din 140
Ibn Makki al-Zanjani 276
Ibn Masʿud, ʿAbd Allah 32
Ibn Muqla, Abu ʿAli Muhammad ibn ʿAli 
26, 85–86, 275
Ibn al-Nadim, Abu al-Faraj Muhammad ibn 
Ishaq al-Warraq 85, 275
Ibn al-Suhrawardi al-Bakri, Ahmad 168, 286
Ibn Thabit, Zayd 30
Ibn Zamrak, Abu ʿAbdallah Muhammad ibn 
Yusuf 140, 141
Ibrahim Pasha 173
Ifriqiya see Tunisia
Iljayti, Abu Mansur 276
Ilkhanid Dynasty 27, 131, 132, 280–81
Imam ʿAbdullah 185, 187, 288
India 10, 23, 27, 64, 90, 287, 296
Indian Ocean 284
Indian Subcontinent see India
Ingres, Jean-Auguste-Dominique 261, 298
Iran 20, 26, 119, 131, 151, 155, 249, 268, 
270, 276, 285, 287, 296
Iraq 11, 21, 24, 26, 27, 28, 72, 135, 269, 271
Iraqi Marshlands see Hawizeh Marshes
Iraqi Revolt 28, 295
Isabella I of Castile 282
ʿIsa ibn Mariam see Jesus
Islamic State 28
Isfahan 6, 174–78, 286–87; Masjid-i 
Jamiʿ (Congregational Mosque) 
176, 177, 286–87; Masjid-i Shah 
287; Maydan-i Shah 287; Shaykh 
Lutfallah mosque 6, 174, 287
Iskenderun 164
Islam 1, 44, 51, 190, 231, 267, 268, 298
Israel 19
Israel, Tribe of 132
Istanbul 20, 24, 44, 102, 143, 150, 164, 169, 
172, 173, 188–92, 194, 196, 221, 
233, 279, 285, 288–89, 290, 295; 
Bab-i Hümayün (Sublime Porte); 
Fatih district 189; Süleymaniye 
Mosque 279, 286; Topkapı Sarayı 
(palace) 23, 27, 28, 39, 197; Topkapı 
Sarayı Library 283, 285, 286
Italy 285
Iznik 102, 293
Jahangir I, emperor 287 
Jahiliyya 74, 150
Jahiz, al- (Abu ʿUthman ibn Bahr al-
Kinani) 234, 235–39, 295
Janissary Corps 18, 20, 205, 206, 291
Jarir 54
Jerusalem 25, 26, 44, 47, 137, 267; Dome 
of the Rock 25, 45, 137, 267, 268
Jesus 39, 125, 133, 200
Jianwen Emperor (Zhu Yunwen) 145, 
147, 283
Jordan 19, 269
Kahle, Paul 234, 235–39. 295
Kai Khusraw 117
Kana’an, Ruba 278
Kapodistrias, Ioannis 28, 207, 291
Karagöz 295
Karbalaʾ 25
Kashan 114–18, 271, 279
Kashani, Maqsud 215
Kayumars see Gayumars
Kazakhstan 20
Kharraqan 97–100, 276–77
Khartoum 249
Khurasan 20, 62, 101, 272, 277
Khwarazmshah dynasty 27
Khwarnaq Castle 6
Kota Bharu 210
Kuala Lumpur 28, 208–12, 291
Kufa 21, 25, 32, 87
Kütahya 210
Kyrgyzstan 20
Lahore 28, 198–202, 290, 293; Wazir Khan 
Mosque 198, 200, 290
Lake Lanao 223–24, 293
Layla bint Mahdi (or al-Amiriyya) 116
Lebanon 19
Leiden: University Library 276
Leipzig 178
Lepanto, battle of 28
Lhassa 250
Libya 251
Lindos 293
London 213–17, 222, 292; British Museum 
296; South Kensington Museum 
(see Victoria & Albert Museum); 
Victoria & Albert Museum 292; 
Waterloo Station 214; Wigmore 
Street 213

308  Index
Lord Leighton, Frederick 298
Lorraine, Claude 194
Los Angeles: Los Angeles County Museum 
of Art 292
Lotto, Lorenzo 158, 159, 161, 162, 284–85
Louis Philippe I 298
Lucera 27, 124
Luther, Martin 27
MacArthur Jnr, General Arthur 28, 225
MacGregor, Neil 7
Madan see Marsh Arabs
Madinat al-Zahraʾ 80, 81, 83, 294
Magdeburg 177
Maghrib 143
Mahmud Pasha 205
Majnun (Qays ibn al-Mulawwah) 116
Makhdum Karim 224, 293
Málaga 140
Malatya 164
Malay Peninsula 210
Mali 297
Mali dynasty 27
Malibu: Getty Museum 292
Malik ibn Anas, Imam 114, 198, 290
Mamluk sultanate 27, 281, 295
Maʾmun, caliph al- 18, 130
Manchester 213, 292
Mani Peninsula 207, 291
Manizha, daughter of Afrasiab 117, 291
Manzala 234–39, 280, 294–95
Manzala Lake 235
Mansur ibn Abi Amir al- (Almanzor) 26, 
81, 82, 83, 274
Maqamat (sing. maqama) 4, 10, 21, 27, 121
Maqrizi, Taqi al-Din Abu al-ʿAbbas Ahmad 
ibn ʿAli al- 275
Mariam bint Imran (Mary, mother of Jesus) 
133, 200
Marmara, Sea of 192, 289
Marseilles 189
Marsh Arabs 11, 22, 24, 288
Martin, René 245–47
Marwan ibn al-Hakam ibn Abi al-ʿAs ibn 
Umayya (Caliph Marwan I) 270
Marwan ibn Muhammad ibn Marwan 
(Caliph Marwan II) 26, 53, 54, 
55, 270
Mashhad, Shrine of Imam Reza 292
Matisse, Henri 260
Mecca 18, 20, 21, 22, 24, 25, 33, 109–13, 
199, 211, 249, 278, 291; Bayt al-
Haram see Kaʿba; Kaʿba 18, 20, 22, 
24, 25, 98, 111, 199–200, 211, 212, 
291; Maʿla cemetery 109–13, 211, 
278; Zamzam, well of 291
Medina 20, 25, 73, 156, 212; Tomb of the 
Prophet (Mosque of the Prophet) 212
Mediterranean Coast see Mediterranean Sea
Mediterranean Sea 67, 74, 95, 176, 232, 270
Mehmed II Fatih, sultan, 27
Merv 277
Messina 280
Midan see Marsh Arabs
Middle East 10, 20, 23, 26, 27, 28, 280, 
281, 285, 295, 298
Mindanao 223–24
Ming dynasty 272–83
Mir Musavvir 285
Mithradates VI Eupator, King of Pontos 95
Modernity 3
Mongols 27, 131, 143
Mopti 297
Morea see Peloponnese
Morocco 24, 28, 260, 264, 296, 298
Morris, William 28, 216–16, 292
Mosul 28, 297
Muʿawiya ibn Abi Sufyan, caliph 25, 39
Mudros, Armistice of 28, 240, 295
Mughal dynasty 27, 287–88
Mughira ibn ʿAbd al-Rahman, Amir al- 274
Muhammad, Prophet, 18, 19, 21, 23, 24, 
25, 30, 31, 35, 57, 74, 91, 95, 98, 
107, 110, 111, 114, 121, 132, 133, 
151, 155, 198–99, 200, 202, 205, 
211, 228, 263, 264, 268, 278, 281, 
283, 291
Muhammad, Abu ʿAbdallah (amir 
Muhammad V al-Ghani b’illah) 
140, 141, 282
Mumtaz Mahal 183, 287
Muqtadir Billah, caliph al- 273
Musa (Prophet Moses) 131, 132, 281
Mustafa III, sultan 194, 289
Muʿtasim b’illah, caliph al- 272
Mustansir b’illah I, caliph al- 275
Mustaʿsimi, Yaqut al- 169, 286
Mutawakkil ʿala Allah, caliph al- 26, 67, 276
Müteferrika, İbrahim 28, 188, 192, 289
Müteferrika Press 28, 188, 190, 191, 288–98
Nahmias Press 288
Nafplio 203–207, 290–91; St Spyridon 
Church 291
Naji, al- 273
Napoleon III, 294
Nasir Hasan, sultan al- 27, 281–82
Nasir ibn Ahmad (Nasir II) 75–76 

Index  309
Nasrid dynasty 27, 132, 282
Negus of Abyssinia 270
New York 258–61, 298; Christie’s 298; 
Edwynn Houk Gallery 260, 298
Nicaea see Iznik
Nicolle, David 25
Nicosia 192
Nile Delta see Nile River
Nile River 33, 55
Nishapur 63, 64, 272, 273
Nizam al-Mulk, vizier 26, 286
Nizami Ganjavi 152, 199
Nizwa 154–57, 284; Shawadhina Mosque 
154, 284
North Africa 10, 12, 26, 28, 294, 298
North America 3, 10, 12
Northern Europe see Europe
Norway 273
Nur al-Din Mahmud Zangi 27
Oder River 194
Olearius, Adam 175–78
Öljeitü, Ilkhan 280
Orient 159
Oseberg 273
Ottoman empire 19, 22, 27, 28, 164, 289, 
290, 293, 295
Oxford, Pitt Rivers Museum 288
Pahlavi dynasty 28
Palermo 124–29, 280; Cappella Palatina 
126, 127, 128, 280
Palestine Authority 19
Palmyra 256
Panjakent 149–53, 283–84
Paris 177, 245, 260, 279; Bibliothèque 
Nationale de France 279; Louvre 
Museum (Musée du Louvre) 277; 
Trocadéro (Musée d’Ethnographie) 
260
Peloponnese 21, 290
Persia see Iran
Persian Gulf 12, 185, 271, 284, 288
Petrie, Flinders 232
Philippines 18, 22, 28, 223–24, 293
Picasso, Pablo 28, 259–60, 298
Piri Reis 192, 289
Plato 237
Poland 10, 289
Pope, Arthur Upham 296
Port Said 235
Portugal 222
Princeton, Princeton University Library 293
Prophet, the see Muhammad
Prussia 289
Punjab 28, 290
Qahira, al- see Cairo
Qalʿat Bani Hammad 229–33, 294; Dar al-
Manar, 230, 294; Dar al-Mulk (Dar 
al-Bahr) 230, 294
Qasr al-Hayr al-Gharbi 56–60, 271
Qasr al-Hayr al-Sharqi 271
Qayrawan 25, 26, 54, 70–74, 231, 272–73
Qazvin 213, 276
Qaysariyya (Caesarea) 90
Qizilbash sect 285
Quilly, Major 295
Qom 115
Qufu 283
Qurʾan 11, 18, 20, 21, 24, 26, 32, 39, 86, 
87, 88, 98, 132, 165, 168, 173, 
201, 211, 215, 226, 231, 265, 267, 
268, 275, 281, 286, 288, 290, 293, 
298; Ayat al-Kursi (Throne verse) 
298–99; Ayat al-Nur (Light verse) 
137, 281; Surat al-Anʿam 293; 
Surat al-Baqara 87, 224, 226, 
277; Surat al-Fatiha 87, 223, 226; 
Surat al-Hijr 187; Surat al-Israʾ 
290; Surat al-Nisaʾ 118; Surat 
al-Rahman 112, 298; Surat al-Saba 
45; Surat al-Zamar 45
Qusayr ʿAmra 11, 48–52, 269–70
Rabat 244–48, 296; Hassan Tower 245; 
Kasbah 245; Medina 245, 246
Rabenou, Ayoub 296
Rafiqa 26
Ragusa (Dubrovnik) 173
Raqqa 26, 56, 67, 271
Rashid al-Din Fadhallah Hamadani, vizier 
22, 27, 130, 131, 132, 280–81
Rashidi, ʿAbd al-Rahman ibn ʿAbdallah al- 
107, 108
Rashidun caliphs 25, 148
Rayy 76
Razi, Muhammad ibn Zakariyya al- 95
Red Sea 132
Renaissance 3
Renoir, Pierre-Auguste 261
Rhodes 192, 293
Rice, David Storm (Sigismund Reich) 
250–52, 297
Robinson, Vincent J. 213, 214, 292
Roger II, king of Sicily 124–25, 126, 127, 280
Rome 126
Rum see Byzantine Empire

310  Index
Rumelia 192
Ruqayya bint al-Qasim 111
Rusʾ 23, 79, 273
Rusafa 80–83, 274
Russia 273
Rustam, son of Zal 24, 117
Saʿdi Shirazi 199
Sadiq Effendi 242, 243 
Safavid dynasty 164
Saffah, caliph al- (Abu’l-ʿAbbas) 26, 55
Sahara 20, 254
St Petersburg: Hermitage 279, 296
Salah al-Din (Saladin) 27
Saljuq dynasty 26, 100, 176, 276
Salman, Masʿud Saʿd 293
Samanid Dynasty 26, 273
Samarqand 93–96, 152, 273, 276
Samarra 2, 66–69, 272, 294; Great Mosque 
272; Mosque of Abu Dulaf 272; 
Mutawakkilyya, al- 272
Samson 132
Sanaʿa 29–32, 267; Great Mosque 267
Saqaliba see Bulghars
Saracens 159
Saruj 131, 152, 242
Sasanian dynasty 25, 268
Saudi Arabia 298
Scandinavia 23
Scheherazade 237
Selim I Yavuz, sultan 285
Shah ʿAbbas I 177, 287 
Shah Ismaʿil 285
Shah Jahan I 28, 180, 287, 290
Shahnama 2, 23, 24, 26, 199, 279, 285
Shahnama-yi Shahi 165, 285
Shah Tahmasp I 163, 285, 292
Shiʿa Muslims 23
Shuʿayb, Prophet 30
Sicily 10, 12, 24, 26, 27, 90, 125, 280
Sidon 231
Sijilmasa 82
Silk Road 23, 75, 151
Simjurid Dynasty 276
Simunul 223–28, 293
Sinan, Mimar 28, 169, 170, 171, 172, 286
Sind see India
Sivas 164
Siyah Qalam, Muhammad (Black Pen 
Master) 149, 152, 153, 283–84
Siyamak, son of Gayumars 166
Socotra 62
Sofia 168–73, 286; Banya Bashi mosque 
170, 171, 286
Soghdian kingdom 283
Southeast Asia 1, 10, 293, 294
Spain 264
Stevens, Hildebrand 292
Subh of Cordoba (Aurora) 81, 82, 83, 274
Sub-Saharan Africa 10, 297
Sublime Porte see Istanbul
Sudan 28
Suhar 155
Sulayman (Solomon), king 57
Süleyman I Qanuni, sultan 12, 27, 169, 
173, 220, 286
Sultan Muhammad 163, 166, 285
Sunni Muslims 23, 24
Surabaya 227
Syria 19, 26, 44, 68, 74, 90, 136, 242, 
254, 296
Syrian Civil War 28
Tabriz 22, 119, 130–33, 151, 163, 280–81, 
285, 292; Rabʿ-i Rashidi 22, 130, 
131, 132, 281
Taib, Haji Mohamed 210–12, 291
Taj al-Mulk, vizier 286
Tajikistan 20, 283
Taliban 28
T’ang dynasty 283
Tanis 275
Taq-i Kisra (Ctesiphon) 135
Tehran 296
Thesiger, Wilfred 184, 186, 288
Tigris River 19, 20, 135, 185, 187, 272, 288
Tiraz 12
Toledo 26
Topkapı Sarayı see Istanbul
Toronto, Aga Khan Museum 290
Traoré, Ismaila 256, 297
Treviso 284
Trinity, the 35, 268
Tripoli 89–92, 275
Tunis 54, 140, 231
Tunisia 270, 272
Turkey 19, 161, 279, 292
Turkmenistan 20
Tuwarij see Hindiyya
Ukraine 273
ʿUmar ibn al-Khattab, caliph ʿUmar I 25
ʿUmar Khayyam, Ghiyath al-Din Abu al-
Fath ʿUmar ibn Ibrahim Nisaburi 
27, 115, 176, 279, 287
Umayyad caliphate 25, 51, 269
Umayyad caliphate of al-Andalus 26, 142
Umm al-Malih 184 

Index  311
UNESCO (United Nations Educational, 
Scientific and Cultural 
Organization) 256, 297
ʿUqba ibn Amir 202
ʿUqba ibn Nafis 25, 73, 74
Urumqi 148
Ustad Mansur
ʿUthman ibn Affan, caliph 25, 32, 267, 286
Uzbekistan 20
Varqa 279
Vary, Paul246, 247
Vaso Vescovali 296
Veneziano, Agostino 172, 286
Venice 10, 158–62, 173, 185, 275, 284–85, 
286, 288; San Marco cathedral 89, 
92, 275
Vienna 28, 177
Vikings 23, 273
Volga River 26, 79, 273
Wade Cup 296–97
Walid ibn ʿAbd al-Malik, Caliph (al-Walid 
I) 25, 44, 269
Walid ibn Yazid, Caliph (al-Walid II) 26, 
49, 270
Wasit 119–23, 279–80
Wasiti, Yahya ibn Mahmud al- 119–23, 
279–80
Weiwei, Ai 261
West Africa 27
Western China see China
World Health Organization 28
World War I 28, 242, 295
World War II 28
Wrocław see Breslau
Wyeth, Marion Sims 296
Xi’an 27, 144–48, 282–83; Daxuexi Alley 
mosque 282–83; Great Eastern 
Mosque (Huajuexiangsi) 282–83; 
Shengxinlou (Examining the Heart 
tower) 282–83
Yathrib see Medina
Yazdigird III, shah 25
Yemen 267
Yongle Emperor (Zhu Di) 145, 283
Yuan dynasty 27
Yunus (Jonah), prophet 131, 132, 281
Yusuf (Joseph), prophet 133
Zahir li-Iʿzaz Din Allah, caliph al- 275
Zamora cathedral 80, 274
Zanjani, Rashid al-Din ʿAzizi b. 
Abu’l-Husayn al- 106, 107, 108
Zanj Rebellion 26
Zanzibar 62, 156
Zarqaʾ 261
Zeravshan river 283
Zhihua monastery 283
Ziegler and Co. 213, 214, 217, 292

