A 
TELEPSYCHOLOGY 
CASEBOOK
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your
Professional Practice, edited by L. F. Campbell, F. A. Millán, and J. N. Martin
Copyright © 2018 American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.


EDITED BY 
LINDA F. CAMPBELL, FRED MILLÁN, and JANA N. MARTIN
A 
TELEPSYCHOLOGY 
CASEBOOK
USING TECHNOLOGY ETHICALLY AND  
EFFECTIVELY IN YOUR PROFESSIONAL PRACTICE
American Psychological Association • Washington, DC

Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved. Except as per-
mitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be repro-
duced or distributed in any form or by any means, including, but not limited to, the process of 
scanning and digitization, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
permission of the publisher.
Published by
American Psychological Association
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.apa.org
To order
APA Order Department
P.O. Box 92984
Washington, DC 20090-2984
Tel: (800) 374-2721; Direct: (202) 336-5510
Fax: (202) 336-5502; TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
Online: www.apa.org/pubs/books
E-mail: order@apa.org
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle East, copies may be ordered from
American Psychological Association
3 Henrietta Street
Covent Garden, London
WC2E 8LU England
Typeset in Meridien by Circle Graphics, Inc., Columbia, MD
Printer: Sheridan Books, Chelsea, MI
Cover Designer: Mercury Publishing Services, Inc., Rockville, MD
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such opin-
ions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American Psychological 
Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Campbell, Linda Frye, 1947- editor. | Millán, Fred, editor. | Martin, Jana N., editor.
Title: A telepsychology casebook : using technology ethically and effectively in your
   professional practice / edited by Linda F. Campbell, Fred Millán, and Jana N. Martin.
Description: First Edition. | Washington, DC : American Psychological Association, [2017] | 
   Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2016059929 | ISBN 9781433827068 | ISBN 1433827069
Subjects: LCSH: Psychologists—Professional ethics. | Psychology—Standards. | 
   Information technology—Moral and ethical aspects.
Classification: LCC BF76.4 .T45 2017 | DDC 150.28/4—dc23 LC record available at  
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016059929
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-000

We dedicate this book to our families, who support all our efforts with their  
love, patience, and encouragement—Karen and Jeff Vasquez, Greg, Lee,  
and Alan Campbell; Emily, Marcus, Freddy, Matthew, and Maria Millán;  
Mackenzie, Madison, and Jerry Martin—and to our colleagues,  
whose concern for the well-being of others and quest  
for advancing our profession are an inspiration.


vii
Contents
c o n t r i b u t o r s     ix
p r e f a c e     xi
Introduction    3
Linda F. Campbell, Fred Millán, and Jana N. Martin
Chapter 1.	 Competence of the Psychologist  7
	
Sara Smucker Barnwell, Russell McCann, and Stephen McCutcheon
Chapter 2.	 Standards of Care in the Delivery of  
Telepsychology Services  27
	
Ronald S. Palomares
Chapter 3.	 Informed Consent  47
	
Margo Adams Larsen and Cindy Juntunen
Chapter 4.	 Confidentiality of Data and Information  69
	
Julie M. Landry Poole and Bruce E. Crow
Chapter 5.	 Security and Transmission of Data and Information  83
	
Ronald S. Palomares and Thomas W. Miller
Chapter 6.	 Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies  99
	
Sara Smucker Barnwell and Margo Adams Larsen
Chapter 7.	 Testing and Assessment  121
	
Bruce E. Crow and Julie M. Landry Poole
Chapter 8.	 Interjurisdictional Practice  141
	
Stephen T. DeMers, Eric A. Harris, and Deborah C. Baker
Afterword    165
Linda F. Campbell, Fred Millán, and Jana N. Martin
a p p e n d i x :  g u i d e l i n e s  f o r  t h e  p r a c t i c e  
o f  t e l e p s y c h o l o g y     167
i n d e x     187
a b o u t  t h e  e d i t o r s     197


ix
Contributors
Margo Adams Larsen, PhD, Virtually Better, Inc., Decatur, GA
Deborah C. Baker, JD, Practice Directorate, American Psychological 
Association, Washington, DC
Linda F. Campbell, PhD, Department of Counseling and Human Develop­
ment Services, University of Georgia, Athens
Bruce E. Crow, PsyD, Warrior Resiliency Program, Regional Health 
Command—Central, U.S. Army Medical Command, Fort Sam Houston, TX
Stephen T. DeMers, EdD, Chief Executive Officer, Association of State and 
Provincial Psychology Boards, Peachtree City, GA
Eric A. Harris, EdD, JD, The Trust, Rockville, MD
Cindy Juntunen, PhD, Counseling Psychology and Community Services, 
University of North Dakota, Grand Forks
Julie M. Landry Poole, PsyD, ABPP, Warrior Resiliency Program, 
Regional Health Command—Central, U.S. Army Medical Command, Fort 
Sam Houston, TX
Jana N. Martin, PhD, Chief Executive Officer, The Trust, Rockville, MD
Russell McCann, PhD, VA Puget Sound Health Care System—Seattle 
Division; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle
Stephen McCutcheon, PhD, VA Puget Sound Health Care System—Seattle 
Division; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of 
Washington, Seattle
Fred Millán, PhD, ABPP, NCC, Department of Psychology, State University 
of New York at Old Westbury
Thomas W. Miller, PhD, ABPP, Institute for Health, Intervention and 
Policy, University of Connecticut; Department of Gerontology, College 
of Public Health, and Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, 
University of Kentucky
Ronald S. Palomares, PhD, Department of Psychology and Philosophy, 
Texas Woman’s University, Denton
Sara Smucker Barnwell, PhD, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle; Independent Practice, Seattle, 
WA


xi
Preface
I
n 2010 and earlier, psychologists became more and more aware of the 
increasing provision of services via various telecommunications technolo-
gies. Web searches produced huge results for all types of services and 
fees; however, there was little structure or regulation to oversee or ensure 
quality of care. These activities were known by a host of names, all mean-
ing health service practice by telecommunications. Some of these terms are 
telemental health, telemedicine, telehealth, and telepractice. During this time, other 
health professions were developing policies or guidelines for telecommunica-
tion practices to address the issues as well.
Dr. Melba J. T. Vasquez, who had been recently elected president-elect 
of the American Psychological Association (APA), was well aware of these 
developments. Because of the far-reaching nature of telecommunications, 
she realized that this new extension of practice would significantly involve 
licensure laws and malpractice insurance. Thus, she created a task force to 
develop guidelines for psychologists as the profession entered the age of tele-
communications. This task force included representatives with a broad array of 
perspectives, including individuals from APA to provide the membership per-
spective, individuals from the Association of State and Provincial Psychology 
Boards (ASPPB) to provide the regulatory perspective, and individuals from 
the American Insurance Trust (The Trust) to provide the risk management per-
spective. The cochairs of the task force were Linda F. Campbell, PhD (appointed 
by Dr. Vasquez to represent APA); Fred Millán, PhD (representing ASPPB); and 
Jana N. Martin, PhD (representing The Trust). The cochairs, in turn, selected 
members of the task force, which included Terry S. Gock, PhD; Colonel Bruce E.  
Crow, PsyD (ret.); Margo Adams Larsen, PhD; Sara Smucker Barnwell, PhD; 
Joe S. Rallo, PhD; Eric A. Harris, EdD, JD; and Thomas W. Miller, PhD. The task 
force received excellent support from staff of APA (Ronald S. Palomares, PhD, 
Joan Freund, and Jessica Davis) and ASPPB (Stephen T. DeMers, EdD; Alex M. 
Siegel, PhD, JD; and Janet Pippin Orwig, MBA).
One of the first decisions of the task force was to select a name for prac-
tice via telecommunications technologies by psychologists. They wanted a 

xii
P R E F A C E
clear connection with the discipline and coined the term telepsychology, which has, in 
fact, become the standard name for any services provided via telecommunications 
technologies by psychologists.
Frankly, there was concern at the time about whether three discrete professional 
organizations could collaborate, come to consensus, and avoid the traps of competition, 
pursuits of influence, or incompatible goals and values. Interestingly, the task force not 
only avoided all of those obstacles but completed its work with a unanimous recom-
mendation for the telepsychology guidelines—and it did so in the shortest period of 
time of any APA-related task force that has produced guidelines!
On July 31, 2013, at the APA Annual Convention in Honolulu, Hawaii, the 
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology were approved by a wide margin by 
the APA Council of Representatives. Subsequently, the ASPPB Board of Directors 
and The Trust Board of Directors also approved the guidelines that summer. Since 
then, the guidelines have been widely disseminated, have been the subject of many 
presentations to educate the psychological community, and have stimulated work 
toward possible regulatory changes which could allow the legal interjurisdictional 
practice of telepsychology.
This casebook is the next step in encouraging and highlighting the proper practice 
of telepsychology. It focuses on the applicability of the guidelines in various settings 
in which psychologists practice.

A 
TELEPSYCHOLOGY 
CASEBOOK


3
Linda F. Campbell, Fred Millán, and Jana N. Martin
Introduction
r. Bailey was intrigued with the concept of “telepsychology,” which 
increasingly popped up on electronic mailing lists and in e-mails with 
colleagues. However, she had no interest in developing a telepsychology 
practice. Her office was in Northern California, and many of her clients 
in sales and consultation traveled for several weeks at a time within the 
state. Dr. Bailey often had telephone sessions with her clients and occasional 
e-mail exchanges. Still, she did not consider this practice to be telepsychology 
because there was no web camera or other Internet conferencing technol-
ogy and because she was not practicing interjurisdictionally (i.e., across a 
state line). Furthermore, she did not worry about any ethical or legal issues 
specific to her telephone sessions and e-mails because she believed that her 
skills and knowledge with in-person practice applied the same way to these 
other activities. Then one day, she was shocked to learn that any electronic 
communication, including telephone and e-mail, was considered telepractice. 
Dr. Bailey consulted the American Psychological Association (APA; Joint Task 
Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 
2013) Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, only to find many factors at 
play that she had not considered (e.g., confidentiality, security of transmission, 
standards of care, disposal of e-mails).
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-001
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice, 
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
D

4
C A M P B E L L ,  M I L L Á N ,  A N D  M A R T I N
Dr. Bailey’s reactions are not uncommon. Psychologists have received the develop-
ment of telepsychology as they have other new and emerging aspects of practice—with 
interest, skepticism, curiosity, dread, appreciation, reluctance, enthusiasm, anxiety, and 
other reactions that span the emotional range. To be sure, the practice of videoconfer-
encing as a means of delivering psychological services has previously not been widely 
known to psychologists except in special settings, such as the military. In contrast, the 
practice of using the telephone to communicate with clients is years old. Although both 
of these activities are considered telepsychology, many psychologists have not thought 
of their use of the telephone in that way. Recently, we, the volume editors, were pre-
senting a symposium on telepsychology when a woman in the back of the room raised 
her hand and said, “I’ve been talking on the phone with my clients since 1954. Am I 
practicing telepsychology?” We not only answered her question in the affirmative but 
also declared her a “pioneer in telepsychology”!
Telepsychology is “the provision of psychological services using telecommu-
nication technologies” (Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology 
Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 791). It is not a specialty. It is not a separate 
domain of practice. Telepsychology is an extension of the broad and general prac-
tice of psychology. This conceptualization of telepsychology as an extension of psy-
chologists’ current practice is a valuable perspective to take in that the application 
of telepsychology to practice is not to change fundamental competence, modality of 
practice, therapeutic approach, or other building blocks of psychologists’ practice. 
Rather, telepsychology offers an opportunity for psychologists to apply their skills, 
their ethical decision-making, and the profession’s standards of care to technology-
assisted practice.
As new practice opportunities emerge for psychologists with the growth of telecom-
munications technology, so too emerge new responsibilities. Psychologists must now 
become knowledgeable of new developments, regulations, and guidelines; develop 
new skill sets; become equipped with risk management strategies; and understand how 
all of this is integrated with their ethics code.
Increasing interest in telepsychology within the psychological community is 
evidenced by the special sections and special issues in APA journals and other citation 
sources, including the following:
❚❚Special Issue: Advances in Telehealth and Telepsychology. Psychological Services, 
10(3), August 2013
❚❚Special Section: Telepractice. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 45(5), 
October 2014
❚❚Special Issue: Telehealth and Technology Innovations in Professional Psychology. 
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 42(6), December 2011
❚❚Special Section: Visions for the Future of Professional Psychology. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 43(6), December 2012
❚❚Special Section: Telepractice. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 45(5), 
October 2014
❚❚Special Issue: Training and Professional Development. Psychotherapy, 50(2), 
June 2013

5
Introduction
The purpose of this casebook is to help psychologists understand how standards 
of practice apply to telepsychology and to offer ways in which psychologists may 
think about ethical decision-making regarding their movement into telepsychology.
The foundation of this book is the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (here­
after referred to as “the guidelines”; see the Appendix, this volume), which were created 
jointly by APA, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), and 
The Trust. The guidelines are designed to facilitate practice, much as record-keeping 
guidelines, multicultural guidelines, and others are meant to improve the efficiency, 
effectiveness, and competence in our practice. They are aspirational in intent and not 
intended to be mandatory or exhaustive and may not apply to every professional and 
clinical situation. They are not definitive and are not intended to take precedence over 
the judgment of psychologists (APA, 2017). Guidelines are critically important because 
telepractice incorporates many aspects of in-person practice but in an unfamiliar and 
nonintuitive manner for some people. It is no coincidence, then, that seven of the eight 
guidelines are also current sections or standards of the Ethical Principles of Psychologists 
and Code of Conduct (APA, 2017). These are Competence, Standards of Care, Informed 
Consent, Confidentiality, Testing and Assessment, Security and Transmission of Data, 
and Disposal of Data. There is also a new guideline on the concept of Interjurisdictional 
Practice. Each guideline is represented in a chapter and highlighted in the case studies. 
It is important for psychologists to familiarize themselves with all of the guidelines and 
to think about how each affects their particular practice decisions. Problems of confi-
dentiality breaches, clients with limited technical proficiency, concerns about safe 
transmission of electronic messages, and appropriate disposal of information are but 
a few considerations for telepractitioners. The guidelines build on our existing ethics 
code both to provide a safety net and to lead us toward greater competency in practice.
The format of this casebook is similar to that of the guidelines. All APA Guidelines 
are developed from a template, and this template stipulates that a guideline be 
presented in two sections. The first section is the Rationale, which explains why 
the guideline is necessary, what purpose it serves, and how it facilitates practice. 
The Rationale also identifies the expectations the profession has of the psychologist 
practicing that guideline and describes specific actions as examples of enacting the 
Rationale. The second section of the guideline is the Application, which does just 
that—it answers the question of how psychologists are to implement or “apply” the 
guidelines. Examples are offered, and decision-making factors are presented.
Each chapter covers a guideline. The chapter begins with the specific guideline, the 
rationale for the guideline, and introductory remarks that set the context for under-
standing what the psychologist is to do regarding the guideline. Next are case studies 
that identify the setting; the scenario; key elements, challenges, and decision factors; 
options available to the psychologist; and the best decision possible. The chapter ends 
with the key points from all case studies. The key points provide guidance on how to 
generalize and apply the various thought processes and decisions to other situations 
the psychologist may encounter.
Although the casebook has a similar format to the guidelines, the casebook goes 
beyond the guidelines by providing a structure and method for working from the 

6
C A M P B E L L ,  M I L L Á N ,  A N D  M A R T I N
global situation or dilemma down to the actual decisions that must be made. It pro-
vides a more detailed discussion of how to think through the scenarios presented.
This casebook is written for psychologists in all settings and in all areas of practice. The 
case studies therefore include independent practice, organizational/consulting, counsel-
ing centers, academic settings, public sector agencies, hospitals, Veterans Administration 
facilities, military sites, and other settings in which psychologists practice. Cases vary also 
in types of dilemmas to demonstrate the variety of scenarios that can occur involving 
each of the guidelines.
Telepsychology is often discussed as though the services were uniformly practiced 
and in similar settings when, in fact, the challenge of this emerging medium is just the 
opposite. The practice of telepsychology ranges from the solo independent practitioner 
whose access to technology is a phone, e-mail, and possibly texting, to the Department 
of Defense in which synchronous videoconferencing is conducted between military 
personnel in Austin, Texas, and a soldier in Afghanistan. Further challenges lie in 
the ever-changing status of technology so that what is “state of the art” today is not 
tomorrow.
We tried to represent this broad range of activities and settings in the casebook. 
Every chapter could not incorporate every practice setting; however we, the editors, 
hope that the cases will be relevant and familiar and that the readers can relate to the 
cases in a way that lends guidance and helps each individual develop a decision-making 
model to integrate telepsychology into his or her professional practice.
References
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code 
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf

7
1
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-002
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Competence of the Psychologist
Rationale
Psychologists have a primary ethical obligation to provide professional 
services only within the boundaries of their competence based on their 
education, training, supervised experience, consultation, study, or 
professional experience. As with all new and emerging areas in which 
generally recognized standards for preparatory training do not yet 
exist, psychologists utilizing telepsychology aspire to apply the same 
standards in developing their competence in this area. Psychologists 
who use telepsychology in their practices assume the responsibility for 
assessing and continuously evaluating their competencies, training, 
consultation, experience, and risk management practices required 
for competent practice. (Joint Task Force for the Development of 
Tele­psychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 798)
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct, Standard 2, addresses 
the expectations of all psychologists in attaining and maintaining competence 
Sara Smucker Barnwell, Russell McCann, and Stephen McCutcheon
Psychologists who provide telepsychology services strive to take reasonable  
steps to ensure their competence with both the technologies used and 
the potential impact of the technologies on clients/patients, super­visees, 
or other professionals.
—Guideline 1, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

8
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
in their professional activities (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017). 
Psychologists provide services “only within the boundaries of their competence, based 
on their education, training, supervised experience, consultation, study, or profes-
sional experience” (p. 4). Even in emerging areas where recognized standards might 
not yet exist, “psychologists never­theless take reasonable steps to ensure the com-
petence of their work and to protect clients/patients, students, supervisees, research 
participants, organizational clients, and others from harm” (p. 5).
The following applications are examples of the means by which competency is 
evidenced in the practice of telepsychology. The applications illustrate competence 
through supervision, practice, determining technology appropriateness, and emer-
gency service. Psychological practice is a complex endeavor that requires extensive 
training to achieve competence. This is particularly true when using new and innova-
tive technologies in delivering health care.
Case Study 1: Supervision
The advent of telepsychology offers the opportunity to harness telecommunication tech-
nologies to serve patients, psychologists, and psychology trainees. Supervision refers to
a distinct professional practice employing a collaborative relationship that has 
both facilitative and evaluative components, that extends over time, which 
has the goals of enhancing the professional competence and science-informed 
practice of the supervisee, monitoring the quality of services provided, 
protecting the public, and providing a gatekeeping function for entry into 
the profession. (APA, 2014)
The APA Commission on Accreditation (CoA; APACoA, 2014) identified “telesuper­
vision . . . [as] clinical supervision of psychological services through asynchronous 
audio and video format where the supervisor is not in the same physical facility  
as the trainee.” The CoA (APACoA, 2014) further defined that “in-person supervision 
is clinical supervision of psychological services where the supervisor is physically in 
the same room as the trainee.” Providing supervision services over the telephone, 
Clinical Video Telehealth technology (CVT), e-mail, text, and other online modalities 
creates the opportunity to disseminate quality training opportunities despite barriers 
of geographic distance, physical mobility challenges, or other barriers.
SETTING: POSTDOCTORAL SUPERVISION  
IN A VA HOSPITAL PROGRAM
The Telehealth and Rural Outreach postdoctoral training program (TROP) through 
the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) offers postdoctoral training intended to 
instill advanced competencies in health service psychology (HSP) with a focus on 
the provision of psychological services using telehealth technologies. The 1-year 
fellowship emphasizes the provision of evidence-based treatments to medically 

9
Competence of the Psychologist
underserved veteran populations (e.g., rural, recently returning, female, Native 
American). Using secure CVT, the postdoctoral fellows deliver individual, couples, 
and group therapy to veterans in VA medical centers and community-based out­
patient clinics. Training emphasizes clinical skills and practical considerations specific 
to telehealth (e.g., clinical skills that differ from face-to-face care, security mea-
sures, risk management) and clinical skills training for the provision of evidence-
based treatments.
Although the VA telehealth program is specific, the scenario is illustrative of the 
essential elements of using telecommunication technologies during training supervision.
SCENARIO
Dr. Shante Adrian was a fellow in the telehealth program. She possessed interests in 
telepsychology, rural health, program administration, and evidence-based PTSD care 
and sought to advance her broad array of competencies, with a particular focus on 
provision of services in these areas to rural veterans. After meeting with the training 
director (TD), Dr. Adrian selected the TROP’s team lead as one of her primary super­
visors for the fellowship. The supervisor’s background (telepsychology and evidence-
based PTSD care) aligned well with Dr. Adrian’s interests. The supervisor’s duties as 
program administrator required regularly scheduled days working off-site with rural 
partner clinics that posed logistical challenges.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The prospect of working with a supervisor who regularly traveled off-site posed impor-
tant questions regarding the nature of supervision and the costs and benefits of remote 
supervision. Could the supervisor competently meet Dr. Adrian’s training needs while 
off-site? Should they conduct regularly scheduled supervision over telecommunication 
technologies, or would this modality be limited to additional, “as needed” meetings? 
What technology should the supervisor use to deliver supervision at a distance? What 
were the rules governing distance supervision? The supervisor worked closely with 
the Seattle VA TD and the VA Office of Academic Affiliations (OAA) to address these 
concerns. The CoA Implementation Regulation (IR) C-28 (APACoA, 2014) addresses 
telesupervision and the unique advantages of in-person supervision (e.g., the ability to 
perceive subtle interactions with a trainee, socialization opportunities, superior ability 
to observe trainees). IR C-28 of the Accreditation Standards instructs those considering 
offering telesupervision to develop a telesupervision policy that addresses a variety of 
considerations.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Guided by the CoA Implementation Regulations (APACoA, 2014), the TD worked 
closely with the supervisor and facility leadership to develop a policy that addressed 
these concerns. The TD, supervisor, and supervisee created a training plan to deliver 
weekly in-person supervision with supplemental telesupervision.

10
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
COMPONENTS OF A TELESUPERVISION POLICY
The following policy was written in compliance with and application of the CoA 
Implementation Regulations:
❚❚Telesupervision offers trainees the opportunity to experience CVT firsthand. 
The modality offers trainees consultation with Seattle VA supervisors whose 
role may require them to travel off-site.
❚❚Telesupervision will continue to employ a competency-based approach to 
supervision (see Falender & Shafranske, 2008).
❚❚Telesupervision may not account for more than 50% of the minimum required 
supervision hours (e.g., 1 of the 2 weekly supervision hours). Telesupervisors 
use telesupervision to augment in-person supervision and conduct the majority 
of their supervision in person.
❚❚Postdoctoral fellows with an interest in telehealth may participate in tele-
supervision.
❚❚The relationship between supervisor and supervisee will be initiated at Seattle 
VA, and the majority of supervision will occur at Seattle VA.
❚❚When a supervisor travels off-site, she will designate an on-site supervisor to 
assist the trainee in case of emergency.
❚❚The supervisee may seek nonscheduled supervision at any time from the 
on-site supervisor when the primary supervisor is off-site and/or for sup-
plemental tele­supervision. The authority of the primary supervisor will be 
authoritative in cases of conflict.
❚❚All telesupervision will occur over secure, encrypted, synchronous CVT 
provided through the VA Information Technology infrastructure or via the 
telephone (i.e., not text or e-mail).
❚❚A telesupervisor must receive the recommended trainings in CVT (e.g., online 
courses with the VA Learning Management System, meeting with the Tele-
mental Health team).
Soon after the telesupervision policy was established, a situation arose that would 
demonstrate its value. Dr. Adrian received her first telehealth referral. The client, a 
middle-aged man initially evaluated at his local VA community-based outpatient 
clinic, agreed to receive CVT services at his local clinic. This clinic had limited mental 
health staff resources, and a telehealth consult could facilitate the provision of pro-
longed exposure for PTSD. His provider, Dr. Adrian, delivered care from her office at 
the Seattle VA while the client attended care at his local, rural clinic. Dr. Adrian received 
basic training in telehealth provision, including technology use, safety planning, and 
other fundamentals required in advance of seeing a first client.
The first session with this client occurred on a day when the supervisor would be 
working off-site. Dr. Adrian was familiar with the telesupervision policy, as well as the 
protocol for obtaining on-site supervision, if needed. Upon arriving for his first ses-
sion, the client appeared uncomfortable. A nurse from his local clinic greeted him and 
seated him in a private room with CVT equipment. The nurse connected Dr. Adrian 
and the client via the CVT equipment and exited the room for privacy.

11
Competence of the Psychologist
Although the client had agreed to CVT therapy previously and discussed reser-
vations before seeing Dr. Adrian, he disclosed some reservations about therapy over 
CVT and sharing intimate information during the first few minutes of the session. 
Dr. Adrian managed the situation appropriately, balancing an exploration of his con-
cerns with his right to elect in-person care. She suggested that they use the current 
session as a litmus test for his comfort and decide at the session’s conclusion whether 
to proceed with a telepsychology intervention or refer the client back to in-person 
care at his local clinic. Consistent with empirical literature regarding clients’ reports 
of high rapport with CVT providers (see Glueck, 2013), the client ultimately reported 
feeling very comfortable with Dr. Adrian as his provider and elected to remain on 
her service. After this experience, Dr. Adrian decided to seek supplemental super­
vision to discuss the experience. She contacted her supervisor to discuss the case 
over CVT that day.
Dr. Adrian communicated her reservations that although research indicates most 
clients feel comfortable with CVT care, she worried that her clients would not. She 
and her supervisor examined the benefits of CVT for the specific client (e.g., access 
to specialty care, convenience). They discussed the manner in which aggregate data 
could predict likely outcomes but that Dr. Adrian would need to monitor her client’s 
comfort carefully and respect his preferences. They also reflected on the manner in 
which their supervision, often held over CVT, enjoyed levity, warmth, and other 
indicators of rapport. This fact, perhaps more than research, reassured Dr. Adrian of 
the potential for rapport over the modality.
Supervisee:	  I know research indicates that most clients feel comfortable 
with CVT by the end of the first session. But I am concerned 
that I will not deliver rapport.
Supervisor:  You raise an important point. We know the aggregate data, 
but we can’t be sure how he, as an individual, will react to the 
modality. Am I understanding that correctly?
Supervisee:  Exactly. I haven’t seen clients over CVT. The jump from theory 
to practice is hard—especially when it undermines my faith in 
my ability to establish an alliance with my client.
Supervisor:  Just when you think you’ve covered the basics, we pull the 
rug out from under you!
Supervisee:  (laughing) Exactly!
Supervisor:  Only time will tell regarding this new client. But I wonder if 
this moment between us can inform our thinking regarding 
rapport.
Supervisee:  I see your point. We’re having a good discussion—just like 
our regular meetings. And we’re laughing—something that 
requires us to feel a comfortable rapport. I disclosed something 
difficult to you, my supervisor: not feeling as competent as 
usual. That made me feel vulnerable. It felt like a bit of a risk, 
but an important one.

12
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
Supervisor:  I really appreciate you highlighting that. It takes courage. Now 
we know each other in person as well. This certainly creates a 
foundation for rapport that is carried over to our video meet-
ings. What could you do with this new client to help establish 
more foundational rapport over CVT?
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Psychologists of all experience levels ask whether CVT allows for the emotional con-
nection achieved in person. Information is lost over CVT. Providers miss subtle shifts in 
body posture, changes in the client’s facial expression, sensory cues (e.g., olfactory), and 
other valuable cues to the distance gap. But can we still convey warmth, acceptance, 
and caring? In conducting telesupervision, we have the opportunity to model rapport 
over CVT. The supervisor–supervisee relationship differs vastly from a psychologist–
client relationship. Nonetheless, both relationships require acceptance, openness, and 
boundary-governed rapport. Telesupervision allows a trainee to experience the CVT 
milieu firsthand and engage in a process-oriented discourse over the modality. As tech-
nology is increasingly democratized and more and more human interaction occurs at a 
distance, the challenge to maintain connection, rapport, and understanding remotely 
is perhaps never more important.
Case Study 2: Independent Practice
The first guideline of Competence in the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint 
Task Force, 2013) directs clinicians adopting telepsychology to “assume the responsibil-
ity for assessing and continuously evaluating their competencies, training, consultation, 
experience and risk management practices required for competent practice” (p. 793). 
This guidance is consistent with ethical standards related to emerging areas of practice, 
for which psychologists seek training, consultation, and supervision to enhance their 
competencies. Limited telehealth educational and training resources (Glueck, 2011) 
prevent some practitioners from adopting telehealth technology. Larger institutional 
practice environments may develop their own telepsychology training program. Prac-
titioners in independent practice typically possess fewer resources. Psychologists may 
be uncertain how best to approach assessing their own competence or obtain training 
to augment their skills.
SETTING: INDEPENDENT PRACTICE
Dr. Joyce Hill was a psychologist with an independent practice that included herself 
and other, more junior therapists. Although her practice delivered services to urban 
clients, she had an interest in providing care to traditionally underserved commu-
nities in the state, including rural women. Dr. Hill pursued postdoctoral training in 

13
Competence of the Psychologist
women’s health in a rural community and was familiar with the challenges unique to 
delivering care to rural populations (e.g., distance from care, few providers, dual-role 
relationships in small communities).
Dr. Hill aimed to offer telepsychology interventions to facilitate quality care for 
women in a rural community with few resources. She hoped that others in her prac-
tice would share her enthusiasm and reasoned that telehealth could be a welcome 
opportunity to expand the client base for newer clinicians beginning their practice. 
She felt competent in technology basics (e.g., e-mail, maintaining her electronic med-
ical records and website), but she possessed limited knowledge of telepsychology or 
how to approach its ethical implementation.
SCENARIO
Dr. Hill recalled that her state psychological association and malpractice insurance 
provider sponsored telepsychology presentations in recent years. Dr. Hill resided 
in a state where the state’s psychological association demonstrated a committed 
interest in telehealth and developed resources to promote clinician competence in 
telehealth. Her state association referred Dr. Hill to a psychologist colleague with 
a telehealth consulting practice. She and the consultant met in person and over 
CVT for several additional meetings to identify a path to obtaining the training 
necessary.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Dr. Hill and the consultant conducted a thorough needs assessment. Telepsychol-
ogy is a broad and diverse category of technologies and clinical applications (Joint 
Task Force, 2013). Although there are fundamentals recommended for anyone 
interested in telepsychology (e.g., Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, Joint 
Task Force, 2013; empirical literature review; American Telemedicine Association 
best practice guides, Grady et al., 2011), no single approach to training serves as 
a panacea to establish competency for all telepsychology applications. A thought-
ful needs assessment thoroughly explores the psychologist’s reasons for pursuing 
training; targets technologies that the psychologist intends to use; considers the 
psychologist’s prior experience with the technology; and lays out the psychologist’s 
plans to implement technology, including available training resources. Regardless 
of how much or how little competency psychologists have in technology, a needs 
assessment is the first step in determining the additional training, preparation, 
and experience needed for the chosen telepractice. Some of the determining fac-
tors are identification of client variables (e.g., culture, ethnicity, disability), client 
competencies (capabilities in using various levels of technology from the tele-
phone, texting, e-mail, and social media to videoconferencing), and remote emer-
gency services. Other factors include informed consent tailored for telepsychology 
practice and mutually agreed on understanding of the limits of confidentiality. 

14
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
Independent practitioners further seek competency in securing, transmitting, and 
disposing of online information.
Rationale for Pursuit of Telepsychology
Dr. Hill hoped to deliver telepsychology services to once more offer care to rural com-
munities. Discussion with the consultant revealed that Dr. Hill believed this modality 
would offer financial benefits to her practice because its client base would expand. 
They discussed the challenges she would face, including time and cost of attaining 
competence, identifying referrals in the rural community, coordinating care remotely, 
managing emergencies remotely, negotiating more complicated reimbursement pro-
cesses, and negotiating the costs introduced by telepsychology (e.g., CVT software).
Technology Selection and Relevant Experience
Competence in telepsychology requires psychologists to determine which technolo-
gies need to be used to deliver care in order to focus training. Dr. Hill had read articles 
on CVT care and was enthused about this modality. Competence in telepsychology 
would therefore include a review of concerns specific to CVT. The community Dr. Hill 
hoped to serve had Internet access, but she was uncertain regarding the quality of 
connectivity there. For this reason, the consultant recommended expanding Dr. Hill’s 
training to include an understanding of concerns specific to telephone use (e.g., types 
of telephony, concerns idiosyncratic to use of mobile devices, empirical literature on 
telephones) as an alternative if she experienced problems with CVT. Dr. Hill and other 
psychologists of varying levels of competency would be alert for loss of electronic 
connection with the client and would have a predetermined means of resolving the 
problem or an understanding with the client of next steps.
Dr. Hill had delivered telephone-based care throughout her clinical career. She 
routinely considered issues such as patient location while speaking on the telephone 
due to safety and privacy concerns. She had not previously considered interjurisdic-
tional practice implications of speaking to clients over the telephone, although she 
typically spoke with clients located within her home state. Additionally, she was not 
in the practice of formally establishing and documenting safety plans for telephone-
based clients, largely because these situations were rare and always in addition to 
in-person care. She was aware of how best to bill a telephone appointment. And she 
felt reasonably well apprised of the manner in which the empirical literature found 
equivalence for telephone-based interventions compared with traditional in-person 
care (see Dwight-Johnson et al., 2011).
In contrast, Dr. Hill had relatively little experience with CVT. She had used video-
conferencing with friends and understood the fundamentals regarding operating the 
technology. However, she had not considered the specific concerns relevant to clinical 
applications (e.g., threats to privacy/confidentiality, information security, selecting a 
product appropriate for health care, safety planning for remote clients). For Dr. Hill, 
increasing her telepsychology competence would require training in CVT.

15
Competence of the Psychologist
Implementation Plans
Some clinicians may elect to offer telepsychology to existing in-person clients. Dr. Hill, 
on the other hand, intended to identify new, remote clients who would otherwise 
not receive care. In her model, clients would be encouraged to visit her office in the 
urban community located 1 hour away for initial visits or supplemental in-person 
care as needed (e.g., emergencies, sessions to refresh assessment of telehealth appro-
priateness). Dr. Hill was open to seeing some clients who would only ever be served 
via CVT. For Dr. Hill, understanding the assessment of telehealth appropriateness 
at a distance (see The Assessment of Suitability for Home Based Telemental Health, Shore, 
2011), the challenges of care termination in environments with few referral options, 
authenticating identity remotely, and other considerations unique to clients seen 
primarily at a distance were critical. Regular visits to the rural community she would 
serve would be scheduled to help her reaffirm relationships with referral resources 
and conduct initial telehealth appropriateness assessments with clients to prevent 
clients traveling to her urban office.
Dr. Hill realized that seeing patients remotely only would bring a level of monitor-
ing and awareness (e.g., authenticating identity) that seeing patients intermittently 
in person and remotely would not duplicate. The mixed model of in person and 
remote would allow easier assessment of client status and use of in-person relational 
factors that may be important with specific types of cases or client preferences. Dr. Hill 
would assess the need for CVT for her intermittent in-person and remote clients and 
would determine if the ratio of in-person meetings would satisfy her need to assess 
and reassess the desirability and appropriateness of telepsychology from both the 
client and Dr. Hill’s frame of reference.
Resources Available for Training
The training resources (e.g., time, finances, colleagues with experience) avail-
able to psychologists will significantly affect how they pursue competence. Psy-
chologists in the Department of Veterans Affairs or Department of Defense health  
care systems will likely have access to large-scale institutional training resources (see 
the online courses in the VA Talent Management System), and may even be required 
to pursue these trainings. As a psychologist in independent practice, Dr. Hill was 
initially uncertain where to obtain quality information to pursue competence. She 
soon learned that she resided in a community with rich telehealth resources. She 
had already contacted her state psychological association and malpractice provider 
regarding her interest in telehealth and connected with a local colleague involved in 
telehealth. Dr. Hill possessed an academic affiliation with a local university but had 
been unaware of the university’s telehealth research projects. She and the consul-
tant discussed the value of reaching out to her departmental chair to inquire about 
opportunities in telehealth. She learned of a research consultation group that met 
with regularity at the university, as well as a clinical consultation group that met at 
a hospital affiliate of the university.

16
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
Not every psychologist resides in an area where telehealth resources are readily 
available. Increasingly, national training events, online telehealth communities, and 
online training certification programs offer a valid method for pursuing competence. 
Dr. Hill found herself hoping to pursue information specific to billing Medicare for 
telehealth appointments and was uncertain where best to pursue this information. 
Dr. Hill and the consultant reviewed several options for pursuing training remotely, 
including traveling to conferences for lectures and workshops, watching online webi-
nars related to telehealth, attending her local state association convention meetings 
and lectures, participating in online telemental health consultation groups, or taking 
online courses.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Hill and the consultant developed a personalized training plan that addressed 
her specific interests, technologies targeted, implementation plans, and available 
resources. The plan addressed fundamental information regarding the how-to 
mechanics of telepsychology and focused on information related to telehealth 
ethics (e.g., how to ethically implement care at a distance), information on rural 
health care, and financial information regarding telehealth, its costs, and typical 
approaches for billing telepsychology care (see Human Resources and Services 
Administration, 2015).
Dr. Hill’s plan to pursue telepsychology competencies acknowledged myriad 
practical concerns, such as time and expense. She could gain much of her training 
through free and low-cost mechanisms (e.g., self-study, reviewing the extant litera-
ture, reviewing the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, joining the relevant pro-
fessional organization special interest group). As a small business owner, Dr. Hill had 
limited time to pursue training and hoped to pursue these competencies efficiently. 
Workshops and online trainings incurred fees but saved valuable time.
Dr. Hill completed the recommended readings and trainings. She traveled to 
the rural clinic where she had pursued her postdoctoral training to establish her 
availability as a referral option and discuss how she might best serve the community 
via telepsychology. She successfully recruited several primary care providers to act 
as referral resources and established her practice as a partner in women’s mental 
health. Her next steps were useful and appropriate whether Dr. Hill established a 
remote-only practice or a mixed model of intermittent in-person and remote prac-
tice. She reviewed several CVT products and ultimately selected a product designed 
for health care. She maintained contact with the consultant to discuss issues relevant 
to her first CVT and telephone cases and became a regular contributing member 
at her local telehealth clinical consultation group. She joined online consultation 
groups and became active on their electronic mailing lists and website forums. She 
became familiar with telehealth billing practices and billed insurance for clients 
when possible. With her competencies firmly established and maintained, Dr. Hill 
also became a resource to newer clinicians in her practice and other colleagues 
interested in telehealth.

17
Competence of the Psychologist
Case Study 3: Technology Appropriateness
The Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) emphasize the 
consideration of “current literature available, current outcomes research, best prac-
tice guidance and client/patient preference” (p. 794) when determining whether a 
telecommunication technology is suitable for use in clinical practice. A comprehen-
sive approach to deciding when to use such a technology is critical to the competent 
practice of psychology because the answer to whether a modality is appropriate for a 
given patient is often, “It depends.” Take, for example, a relatively established tech-
nology such as CVT. Research on CVT has generally established the effectiveness 
of this modality (Hilty et al., 2013), and no clinical groups have been identified for 
which CVT is wholly contraindicated (Turvey et al., 2013). Despite this, CVT may 
not be clinically indicated in all instances, such as when a client prefers in-person 
care, there is a lack of privacy at the location where the care would be received, the 
technology needed is not available, or there is a clinical issue that the provider judges 
would be best addressed in person.
SETTING: OUTPATIENT VA CLINIC
Dr. Sally Davis works as a clinical psychologist at a posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) clinic with a Department of Veterans Affairs VA Medical Center. Dr. Davis has 
received training through the VA on CVT, uses this modality with veterans on her 
panel, and brings up the possibility of home-based CVT to all veterans during intake 
and later during the course of treatment as indicated.
SCENARIO
Dr. Davis met with Mr. Salcedo, a 45-year-old Chicano combat veteran of the U.S. 
Army. Mr. Salcedo was discharged from the army subsequent to a diagnosis of PTSD 
after 13 years in service. He had four combat deployments and has multiple service-
connected disabilities, including a 70% service-connected disability for PTSD.  
Mr. Salcedo has been employed as a truck driver since discharge. He lives with his 
spouse of 20 years and their three children, aged 10 to 18 years. Mr. Salcedo pre-
sented with symptoms of PTSD and depression and expressed interest in prolonged 
exposure (PE). Mr. Salcedo commented that it took about an hour and a half to 
drive to the intake appointment. The provider who referred him to the PTSD clinic 
indicated that video-based mental health services might be available.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Considering Literature and Outcomes Research
Dr. Davis informed Mr. Salcedo that CVT might be an option and explored the appro-
priateness of this telecommunication technology with him. Dr. Davis began the 

18
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
process of determining the suitability of CVT for Mr. Salcedo by considering the lit-
erature and research base specific to the primary presenting problem, posttraumatic 
stress. She explained to Mr. Salcedo that research has largely found PTSD treatments 
delivered via CVT to be effective (Sloan, Gallagher, Feinstein, Lee, & Pruneau, 2011). 
She added that PE has been found to be equally effective when administered via CVT 
or in person (Yuen et al., 2015). It was emphasized that although research does not 
necessarily contraindicate the use of CVT for PE, some findings have been inconclu-
sive and suggest the need for additional research.
Client–Patient Preference
Mr. Salcedo indicated that he was excited to hear CVT might be an effective way 
for him to get the care he was looking for without traveling hours back and forth 
for appointments. He expressed interest in receiving PE via CVT to his home from  
Dr. Davis, if possible.
Best Practice Guidance
Dr. Davis applied the American Telemedicine Association “Practice Guidelines for 
Video-Based Online Mental Health Services” (Turvey et al., 2013) by considering the 
veteran’s technological competence, as well as the privacy and appropriateness of his 
home for care. Dr. Davis asked about Mr. Salcedo’s experience with technology rel-
evant to CVT. Mr. Salcedo noted a history of computer use, but he did not currently 
have a working computer at home. He described using a smartphone and high-speed 
Internet at home to browse the web and videoconference without difficulty. Dr. Davis 
was aware that the veteran’s smartphone could be a possible option for CVT. She con-
sidered the small screen size on the smartphone and the limited research on the use of 
these devices for CVT (Luxton, Mishkind, Crumpton, Ayers, & Mysliwiec, 2012). As a 
result, she brought up the possibility of having the VA loan Mr. Salcedo an Internet-
enabled tablet device to use for treatment. Had he declined videoconferencing care, 
Dr. Davis could have considered telephone-based care. Because Mr. Salcedo was ame-
nable to videoconferencing care, Dr. Davis worked to consider the appropriateness of 
his environment for CVT. Mr. Salcedo described being at home alone during the day 
and did not anticipate interruptions during appointments.
Individual Characteristics
Dr. Davis continued by gathering unique individual characteristics to help further 
determine the appropriateness of this telecommunication technology. She considered 
cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic factors that might influence the use of CVT. 
Using the work of Yellowlees, Marks, Hilty, and Shore (2008) to guide this process, 
she recalled research suggesting that Hispanic/Latino individuals were more likely 
relative to non-Hispanic/Latino Whites to have a high affinity for technology but 

19
Competence of the Psychologist
were also likely to have decreased access to and skills with technology (Tolbert & 
Mossberger, 2006). She reflected on how this veteran used technology to communi-
cate with relatives via CVT without incident. Furthermore, Mr. Salcedo has already 
expressed interest in meeting via CVT, which suggests the use of technology to 
communicate with a provider is consistent with his views on technology.
Dr. Davis then considered socioeconomic factors. Poverty has been discussed 
as a barrier to mental health care, both in person and otherwise (Yellowlees et al., 
2008). Furthermore, those in poverty have been found not only to have lower 
utilization rates for mental health services but to have less access to technology 
as well. Limited financial resources might function as a barrier to CVT in terms 
of having a suitable location to receive the care, as well as access to the technol-
ogy needed. When asked, Mr. Salcedo did not endorse concerns about money. 
Additionally, even if finances were an issue, CVT in this instance still could have 
been possible because the VA was able to send a device that includes its own 
Internet source. Resources such as tablets and the ability to provide Internet ser-
vice are more readily available to practitioners in large-scale practice environments 
(e.g., hospitals, health care companies) and less financially viable for independent 
practitioners.
Other Individual Characteristics
Dr. Davis then considered other individual characteristics, such as medical and dis-
ability status and psychiatric stability, to assess the suitability of this modality for 
working with this veteran. She reviewed his medical record to screen for any factors 
that might affect the use of CVT. She noted that Mr. Salcedo has a service-connected 
disability for hearing loss. She asked him how this might affect his receiving care via 
CVT, and he commented that he finds it easier to communicate over technology rela-
tive to in person because he can turn the volume up on his speakers to hear someone 
better. She noted that the veteran is also service connected for a knee injury, and he 
described an added benefit of CVT being that he would not have to walk to and from 
his car as he would for a typical in-person appointment. No other medical issues 
germane to CVT were found in the veteran’s medical record or were reported.
To evaluate for psychiatric stability, Dr. Davis first considered Mr. Salcedo’s risk 
to self or others, being aware that responding to risks remotely can be more com-
plex than doing so in person (e.g., Gros, Veronee, Strachan, Ruggiero, & Acierno, 
2011). Mr. Salcedo endorsed thinking sometimes that he’d be OK if he “didn’t wake 
up” from sleep but denied any current or prior thoughts, intent, or plans to harm 
himself or others. He also denied current or prior self-harm or nonmilitary violence 
toward others. Mr. Salcedo did not endorse a history of inpatient psychiatric care or 
emergency department visits related to behavioral health needs.
Dr. Davis informed Mr. Salcedo that emergencies that happen during the course 
of CVT can differ from those that might occur during an in-person visit. She gave an 
example of how hospital staff could be available to address a medical emergency if 

20
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
the veteran were sitting in her office, but if she were meeting the veteran via CVT, 
emergency services would need to be sent to his location.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
If the veteran and provider did not elect to proceed with this modality, they could have 
worked to consider alternatives. Potential alternative in-person treatment options 
for this veteran to receive PE could have included both VA and community-based 
locations. Given that Mr. Salcedo identified the distance to the clinic as a barrier to 
care, that option was clearly not ideal for him. Care in the community may have been 
a more compelling option for this individual and would realistically be reimbursed in 
such an instance by the VA; however, finding a provider trained in PE near the veteran’s 
residence might have proven difficult.
When Dr. Davis and Mr. Salcedo were considering what technology to use, they 
could have settled on a non-CVT technology, such as the telephone or a virtual envi-
ronment. There is research in support of the use of the telephone for a variety of pre-
senting problems (Leach & Christensen, 2006), but at the time of this writing, there 
is no known research evaluating telephone-based delivery of PE. Although PE may 
well be successfully provided via telephone, the availability of research to support PE 
via CVT would likely make CVT a better choice.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Davis reflected on all of the information discussed and determined that  
Mr. Salcedo was likely an appropriate candidate for home-based CVT. She explained 
that the CVT software used for care is compatible with the Health Insurance Por-
tability and Accountability Act; however, there is always a risk when information 
travels over the Internet. Dr. Davis went on to talk about the benefits associated 
with CVT to the home, to include increased convenience and access care (Pruitt, 
Luxton, & Shore, 2014). Finally, she also informed Mr. Salcedo that the assessment 
of CVT appropriateness in clinical care is ongoing. Mr. Salcedo expressed his under-
standing of these concerns and was amenable to proceeding accordingly. Dr. Davis 
documented her rationale for using this modality for care with this veteran.
Case Study 4: Emergency Management
Remote emergency management poses unique challenges to clients and clinicians 
because it removes the safety conventions of in-person care. As an example, when 
care is provided to a client sitting in his or her home via a telecommunication technol-
ogy, a clinician no longer has hospital or clinic staff onsite to assist in the event of a 
medical emergency. A clinician trained in basic life-saving skills cannot administer care 
or be an active aid in a psychiatric emergency (e.g., walking a client to the emergency 
department in a large hospital setting).

21
Competence of the Psychologist
Challenges associated with remote emergency management are not limited to 
the instant the emergency occurs. An ethical psychologist may contend with chal-
lenges finding an acceptable alternative to telehealth if the modality is deemed 
inappropriate following an emergency. For example, a rural telehealth client requir-
ing a higher level of care after an inpatient hospitalization may experience a dearth 
of in-person treatment options in his community. A return to in-person care could 
represent spending hours in a car to attend a single mental health visit or electing 
to terminate care entirely.
Given that an emergency response is more complex for a client seen via tele­
communication technologies, it is perhaps no surprise that the telehealth literature 
has consistently pointed to the use of an emergency plan in practice (e.g., Gros et al.,  
2011; Luxton, O’Brien, McCann, & Mishkind, 2012). Consistent with this practice 
and the problems that can sometimes arise with discharge from telehealth care, the 
“Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology” (Joint Task Force, 2013) provide direc-
tion for psychologists using telecommunication technologies to competently establish 
an emergency plan and manage the discharge process.
SETTING: RURAL COMMUNITY–BASED CLINIC
Dr. Tom Marion was a counseling psychologist working at a highly rural VA community-
based outpatient clinic (CBOC). Dr. Marion provided mental health services for a 
wide variety of presenting problems and frequently used telecommunication tech-
nologies (e.g., CVT, telephone, secure messaging) to improve clients’ access to care.
SCENARIO
Dr. Marion met Ms. Alana Nieves, a 70-year-old Puerto Rican woman presenting with 
panic disorder, during his walk-in hours. Ms. Nieves lived alone in her home, which 
was situated in a rural location about 30 minutes from the CBOC. She expressed 
interest in therapy to help address panic attacks and scheduled a follow-up appoint-
ment to discuss treatment options.
The day before the follow-up, Ms. Nieves called Dr. Marion to reschedule the 
appointment, citing scheduling challenges. The rescheduled visit came and went, 
and Ms. Nieves again failed to appear at the clinic. Dr. Marion called to inquire 
about the two absences and hoped to reengage her in care. Ms. Nieves explained 
that she felt unable to attend appointments because of a secondary concern regard-
ing driving safety and panic attacks. Dr. Marion provided psychoeducation on 
avoidance and how it functions to maintain anxiety. Ms. Nieves reported that the 
barrier felt insurmountable and indicated that she was no longer interested in 
pursuing care.
Dr. Marion asked if Ms. Nieves might be willing to receive care in her home 
using CVT, with the express intention of working toward in-person visits over 
time. Ms. Nieves was excited about this possibility and noted that this felt like an 
accessible compromise. Dr. Marion evaluated the suitability of the CVT modality for 

22
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
her and concluded it was appropriate. He indicated that before commencing CVT 
care, it would be important to collaboratively establish an emergency plan.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Dr. Marion and Ms. Nieves developed an emergency plan specific to the provision of 
CVT care to her home. Dr. Marion confirmed the client’s phone number and address 
as found in her medical chart and explained that accuracy of information is key to 
emergency planning. He asked if Ms. Nieves would like to identify someone as an 
emergency contact nearby during home-based appointments. She declined, noting 
that she did not wish to disclose being in therapy to others. Dr. Marion noted that 
although a local contact may be helpful in some situations, an emergency contact 
was not required to participate in home-based CVT. He reviewed what would happen 
in case of emergency and set expectations regarding how confidentiality would be 
managed (e.g., mandated reporting in emergencies, contacting emergency services to 
assist others). Dr. Marion documented the emergency plan and sent it to Ms. Nieves 
before their first CVT appointment. The following outlines Dr. Marion’s process in 
developing the plan.
Step 1: Identify Resources and Prepare a Plan
The first step in Dr. Marion’s emergency plan was to record the veteran’s name, phone 
number, and address, which were confirmed over the telephone. Dr. Marion consid-
ered how emergency services might be provided to Ms. Nieves’s home, where she 
would receive care via CVT. Dr. Marion was aware that some for-profit companies 
provide long-distance numbers to directly dial emergency response services, and at 
times these numbers can be found by searching online; however, he documented 
in the emergency plan to call 911 in the event of an emergency and ask to be 
connected to emergency services for the veteran’s location. He chose this route 
because 911 would always reach emergency services, whereas direct-dial numbers 
could become outdated.
He then considered how he might pursue hospital admissions in Ms. Nieves’s 
location. The CBOC itself did not have an emergency department. By searching 
online, Dr. Marion was able to identify the nearest medical facility to the veteran’s 
location, an entry point for emergent medical and psychiatric presentations in that 
area. He added this hospital’s name and address to the emergency plan.
Dr. Marion further considered any local referrals that would be relevant for 
Ms. Nieves. On each emergency plan he drafted, he included the toll free number to 
the Veterans Crisis Hotline, an emergency hotline established to manage psychiatric 
emergencies for veterans. He included this number on Ms. Nieves’s plan, as well as 
the website for 211.org to provide the veteran with a means to research resources in 
her community as needed. Ms. Nieves elected not to identify a support person as an 
emergency contact, and thus Dr. Marion did not include such an individual on the 
emergency plan. He noted in the emergency plan that the client chose not to identify 

23
Competence of the Psychologist
an emergency support person, and he documented their discussions regarding the 
potential benefits and risks of this choice.
Step 2: Communicate Plan
When Dr. Marion met with Ms. Nieves for her first appointment via CVT, he oriented 
her to the technology and verbally reviewed informed consent. They discussed the 
emergency plan and addressed Ms. Nieves’s questions. They discussed the manner in 
which CVT care would act as an interim step to in-person care.
Step 3: Discharge the Plan
Dr. Marion worked with Ms. Nieves to develop a treatment plan that included 
the use of an exposure-based protocol to address panic attacks. During the eighth 
session, they talked about the manner in which Ms. Nieves challenged herself 
by going out in public and increasingly ventured outside her home comfortably.  
Dr. Marion recalled how they had initially planned to meet in person but elected 
to proceed with CVT to the home secondary to her anxiety. They discussed the 
manner in which CVT would provide an interim step to in-person care. Ms. Nieves 
recalled this agreement and commented that she was worried that in-person care 
would still be required. Although she felt she could return to meeting in per-
son and understood how that might be helpful, she preferred the CVT modality 
because of its convenience.
They agreed to meet in person for her next appointment and, depending on how 
that went, to determine how to proceed. Ms. Nieves attended this session in person 
as planned. Visiting the CBOC this time was much easier than the last time they met 
in person. They discussed the benefit of confronting anxiety and how to balance that 
with the convenience of meeting via CVT at home. Ms. Nieves indicated that her pref-
erence for telehealth was related more to convenience than anxiety at this point. For 
clients who declined in-person care due to anxiety and avoidance, Dr. Nieves rarely 
offered care beyond three to five sessions. Dr. Marion agreed to resume home-based 
telehealth with several conditions. First, Ms. Nieves would continue to attend some 
meetings in person with Dr. Marion. Also, Dr. Marion requested that Ms. Nieves 
not avoid appointments with other providers at the CBOC where she received 
medical care. Finally, he requested that she continue the vigorous exposure work 
they had been pursuing as Ms. Nieves confronted problems in other areas of her life. 
Ms. Nieves was happy to resume care via CVT.
After the treatment protocol was completed, Ms. Nieves reported living without 
panic attacks for over a month. She was appreciative of the care she received and 
reiterated how much she enjoyed being able to meet from her home, particularly as 
treatment was getting started. Dr. Marion and Ms. Nieves mutually agreed to termi-
nate care without referral. Dr. Marion told Ms. Nieves that she could contact him in 
the future should she have any future interest in mental health services.

24
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Marion could have required in-person treatment so as not to reinforce anxiety-
related avoidance. He proceeded with CVT because the veteran would likely not engage 
in treatment if in-person care had been the only option at that time. When Ms. Nieves 
reported decreased anxiety later in the course of treatment, Dr. Marion could have 
again required a return to in-person care to facilitate confronting avoidance. He did not 
because he judged the client’s interest in receiving care via CVT at that point more of a 
matter of preference than avoidance. Although behaviorally it is not ideal to reinforce 
avoidance by enabling a client to receive care from home, there is research that suggests 
this concern may not be an issue in practice (e.g., Bouchard et al., 2004).
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚Psychologists must seek out appropriate training experiences to develop and 
maintain competence in delivering telepsychology services.
❚❚Competence includes being able to communicate the benefits and limitations of 
the technology being used in a manner that the patient or client can understand.
❚❚The ongoing appropriateness of telepsychology needs to be assessed and 
documented periodically.
❚❚Telesupervision provides an opportunity for the supervisor to model accep-
tance, openness, and boundary-governed rapport over CVT. It allows a trainee 
to experience the CVT milieu firsthand and engage in a process-oriented dis-
course over the modality.
❚❚Supervisor and supervisee should establish a contract that clearly outlines the 
responsibilities and contingencies for the telesupervision.
❚❚Similarly, it is important to collaboratively establish and document an emer-
gency plan that includes a procedure to follow, local resources and contact 
information, and a discharge plan.
References
American Psychological Association. (2014). Guidelines for clinical supervision in health 
service psychology. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/about/policy/guidelines-
supervision.pdf
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code 
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American Psychological Association Commission on Accreditation. (2014). Policy 
statements and implementing regulations. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/ed/
accreditation/about/policies/implementing-regs.pdf
Bouchard, S., Paquin, B., Payeur, R., Allard, M., Rivard, V., Fournier, T., . . . Lapierre, J. 
(2004). Delivering cognitive-behavior therapy for panic disorder with agorapho-

25
Competence of the Psychologist
bia in videoconference. Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 10, 13–25. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/153056204773644535
Dwight-Johnson, M., Aisenberg, E., Golinelli, D., Hong, S., O’Brien, M., & Ludman, E. 
(2011). Telephone-based cognitive-behavioral therapy for Latino patients living  
in rural areas: A randomized pilot study. Psychiatric Services, 62, 936–942. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1176/ps.62.8.pss6208_0936
Falender, C. A., & Shafranske, E. P. (Eds.). (2008). Casebook for clinical supervision:  
A competency-based approach. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/11792-000
Glueck, D. A. (2011). Telepsychiatry in private practice. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric 
Clinics of North America, 20, 1–11. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2010.08.006
Glueck, D. A. (2013). Establishing therapeutic rapport in telemental health. In  
K. Myers & C. L. Turvey (Eds.), Telemental health: Clinical, technical and administra-
tive foundations for evidence-based practice (pp. 29–46). http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-12-416048-4.00003-8
Grady, B., Myers, K. M., Nelson, E.-L., Belz, N., Bennett, L., Carnahan, L., . . . Voyles, D. 
(2011). Evidence-based practice for telemental health. Telemedicine Journal and 
e-Health, 17, 131–148. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2010.0158
Gros, D. F., Veronee, K., Strachan, M., Ruggiero, K. J., & Acierno, R. (2011). Managing 
suicidality in home-based telehealth. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 17, 332–335. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/jtt.2011.101207
Hilty, D. M., Ferrer, D. C., Parish, M. B., Johnston, B., Callahan, E. J., & Yellowlees, 
P. M. (2013). The effectiveness of telemental health: A 2013 review. Telemedicine 
Journal and e-Health, 19, 444–454. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2013.0075
Human Resources and Services Administration. (2015). What are the reimburse-
ment issues for telehealth? Retrieved from http://www.hrsa.gov/healthit/toolbox/
RuralHealthITtoolbox/Telehealth/whatarethereimbursement.html
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychol-
ogists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psychol­
ogist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf
Leach, L. S., & Christensen, H. (2006). A systematic review of telephone-based inter-
ventions for mental disorders. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 12, 122–129. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/135763306776738558
Luxton, D. D., Mishkind, M. C., Crumpton, R. M., Ayers, T. D., & Mysliwiec, V. 
(2012). Usability and feasibility of smartphone video capabilities for telehealth care 
in the U.S. military. Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 18, 409–412. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1089/tmj.2011.0219
Luxton, D. D., O’Brien, K., McCann, R. A., & Mishkind, M. C. (2012). Home-based 
telemental healthcare safety planning: What you need to know. Telemedicine Jour-
nal and e-Health, 18, 629–633. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/tmj.2012.0004
Pruitt, L. D., Luxton, D. D., & Shore, P. (2014). Additional clinical benefits of home-
based telemental health treatments. Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 45, 
340–346. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0035461
Shore, P. (2011). The Assessment of Suitability for Home Based Telemental Health (ASH–25). 
Unpublished manuscript, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Portland, OR.

26
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L ,  M c C A N N ,  A N D  M c C U T C H E O N
Sloan, D. M., Gallagher, M. W., Feinstein, B. A., Lee, D. J., & Pruneau, G. M. (2011). 
Efficacy of telehealth treatments for posttraumatic stress-related symptoms: A 
meta-analysis. Cognitive Behaviour Therapy, 40, 111–125. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/ 
16506073.2010.550058
Tolbert, C. J., & Mossberger, K. (2006). The effects of e-government on trust and 
confidence in government. Public Administration Review, 66, 354–369.
Turvey, C. L., Coleman, M., Dennison, O., Drude, K., Goldenson, M., Hirsch, P., . . . 
Bernard, J. (2013). ATA practice guidelines for video-based online mental health 
services. Telemedicine Journal and e-Health, 19, 722–730. http://dx.doi.org/10.1089/
tmj.2013.9989
Yellowlees, P., Marks, S., Hilty, D., & Shore, J. (2008). Using e-health to enable cul-
turally appropriate mental healthcare in rural areas. Telemedicine and eHealth, 14, 
486–492.
Yuen, E. K., Gros, D. F., Price, M., Zeigler, S., Tuerk, P. W., Foa, E. B., & Acierno, R. 
(2015). Randomized controlled trial of home-based telehealth versus in-person pro-
longed exposure for combat-related PTSD in veterans: Preliminary results. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 71, 500–512. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/jclp.22168

47
3
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-004
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Informed Consent
Rationale
The process of explaining and obtaining informed consent, by whatever 
means, sets the stage for the relationship between the psychologist 
and the client/patient. Psychologists make reasonable efforts to offer 
a complete and clear description of the telepsychology services they 
provide, and they seek to obtain and document informed consent when 
providing professional services (APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and 
Code of Conduct, Standard 3.10 [American Psychological Association, 
2017]). In addition, they attempt to develop and share the policies 
and procedures that will explain to their clients/patients how they will 
interact with them using the specific telecommunication technologies 
involved. It may be more difficult to obtain and document informed 
consent in situations where psychologists provide telepsychology 
services to their clients/patients who are not in the same physical 
location or with whom they do not have in-person interactions. 
Moreover, there may be differences with respect to informed consent 
Margo Adams Larsen and Cindy Juntunen
Psychologists strive to obtain and document informed consent that 
specifically addresses the unique concerns related to the telepsychology 
services they provide. When doing so, psychologists are cognizant of the 
applicable laws and regulations, as well as organizational requirements, 
that govern informed consent in this area.
—Guideline 3, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

48
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
between the laws and regulations in the jurisdictions where a psychologist who 
is providing telepsychology services is located and those in the jurisdiction in 
which this psychologist’s client/patient resides. Furthermore, psychologists may 
need to be aware of the manner in which cultural, linguistic, and socioeconomic 
characteristics and organizational considerations may impact a client’s/patient’s 
understanding of, and the special considerations required for, obtaining 
informed consent (such as when securing informed consent remotely from a 
parent/guardian when providing telepsychology services to a minor).
Telepsychology services may require different considerations for and 
safeguards against potential risks to confidentiality, information security, and 
comparability of traditional in-person services. Psychologists are thus 
encouraged to consider appropriate policies and procedures to address the 
potential threats to the security of client/patient data and information when 
using specific telecommunication technologies and to appropriately inform 
their clients/patients about them. For example, psychologists who provide 
telepsychology services should consider addressing with their clients/patients 
what client/patient data and information will be stored, how the data and 
information will be stored, how it will be accessed, how secure the information 
communicated using a given technology is, and any technology-related 
vulnerability to their confidentiality and security that is incurred by creating and 
storing electronic client/patient data and information. (Joint Task Force for the 
Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, pp. 795–796)
Informed consent is among the most fundamental of ethics concepts that guide 
psychologists. It provides information that may affect the client’s decision to engage 
in the services offered, including about the treatment itself or the outcome of treat-
ment, that is critically important in respecting the rights of the clients. When applying 
informed consent beyond in-person practice to telepsychology, several new factors 
are introduced.
Psychologists ensure their competencies in their areas of practice and are apprised 
of continuing education, lifelong learning, and other means to maintain their clinical 
competence. Telepsychology introduces technical competence as a requirement for 
practice and ensures that clinical competence will be sustained in this new medium 
of communication. Psychologists are responsible for ensuring that clients are also 
technologically competent to practice electronically. Language, culture, ethnicity, and 
other diversity factors are important in all venues including in telepsychology prac-
tice. When technical competence for both psychologists and clients are necessary and 
diversity competence is necessary for psychologists, these factors become critically 
important areas to be communicated in informed consent so that misinterpretations 
and miscommunications are minimized.
Psychologists will want to clearly identify the boundaries of practice that include 
if and when the psychologist is available to communicate through texting or e-mail 
and how the interactions are treated (e.g., prohibition against forwarding psycholo-
gists’ communication, storing therapeutic material), as well as other out-of-session 
interactions. Confidentiality is an important inclusion for informed consent because 
there are now many inherent risks to confidentiality through technology break-
downs, human error, and equipment failure that do not apply in person and for 
which the client may not be aware without explicit discussion.

49
Informed Consent
Fee structure, billing, and treatment of interruptions are significantly affected 
when applied to telecommunications. Various forms of contact (e.g., video chat, texting, 
telephone, e-mail) will need to be clearly delineated, in addition to the actual ses-
sion interaction. Failures of equipment, human error during telecontact, and other 
variations that are not as prolific in in-person practice need to be agreed on before 
services begin.
Given these few examples, it becomes evident that informed consent is a key fac-
tor in general practice but also in bridging ways of thinking about in-person practice 
to telepsychology practice. Psychologists may meet all of the standards of practice 
for telepsychology, but if the client is not apprised adequately through informed 
consent, then psychologists are, in fact, not meeting standards of practice.
The four case studies in this chapter highlight various setting considerations when 
developing informed consent procedures related to telepsychology: informed consent 
that includes some common “think-ahead” considerations to assist in the progressive 
development of procedures for when clinical situations are significantly risky, when 
care is provided in a training setting, when children are direct service recipients, and 
when services are consultative to an organization but involve many employees. Each 
case study is designed to provide positive strategies and prompt the reader to critically 
consider difficult situations before they become lessons learned.
Case Study 1: Risky Clinical Situations
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists strive to obtain and document informed consent that specifically 
addresses the unique concerns related to the telepsychology services they provide. 
When doing so psychologists are cognizant of the applicable laws and regulations, 
as well as organizational requirements that govern informed consent in this area. 
(Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 795)
SETTING: INDEPENDENT PRACTICE
Dr. Thomas Gray was a psychologist in independent practice. He offered assessment 
and therapy services to adult clients with diverse clinical concerns. Dr. Gray’s clientele 
comprised a relatively diverse population spanning remote service areas. His specialty 
was working with difficult clients, and he was often requested by the court to pro-
vide ongoing therapy to some of the most challenging cases. Dr. Gray was eager to 
explore the world of telepractice, identifying the telephone as an extremely valuable 
tool that had augmented dialectical behavior therapy (DBT) for borderline personal-
ity disorder for many years. He had a group of colleagues throughout the state with 
whom he could share an emergency on-call response schedule. These psychologists 
had developed a call-in network for crisis calls for their patients with borderline and 
personality disorders within the jurisdiction, as was customary of the empirically 
validated DBT treatment model they all practiced. As Dr. Gray’s practice expanded 

50
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
and technology advanced, he saw the potential for using videoconferencing to reach 
more remote clients and to reduce the rate of no-shows within his practice. He was 
familiar with the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013), 
developed by the APA, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards,  
and The Trust. He attended several telepsychology workshops online and through 
his state psychological association. He had routine teleconsultation calls on a weekly 
basis with his DBT colleagues to discuss ongoing case management and sought infor-
mation from the APA.
Dr. Gray was thoughtful in his selection and application of technology products 
to manage his clinical work. At the outset of his practice, he developed a specific and 
detailed set of informed consent procedures that clearly outlined various aspects of 
his clinical services, the nature of the crisis call team, and his rules and requirements 
with regard to videoconferencing services, when in-person office services would be 
required for care, and requirements for confidentiality and commitment to more 
intensive care. In creating the informed consent, Dr. Gray reviewed a risk analysis 
and task checklist related to telepsychology care (see the Self-Assessment Checklist 
in Exhibit 3.1). Dr. Gray had reviewed his state-specific mandatory reporting laws 
and commitment laws, and he reviewed and documented these with each potential 
client before the beginning of services. Given the difficult population with whom 
Dr. Gray primarily worked, he required the initial visit be completed in his office to 
review the detailed informed consent for services, obtain consent signatures, and 
provide copies of these documents to his patients for their future review to engage in 
videoconferencing services.
As part of this consent process, Dr. Gray required his patients to bring the device 
they would use for their videoconferencing services to the initial appointment so he 
could review with them the security and privacy settings and discuss detailed guidelines 
and recommendations with regard to online and digital information sharing. Although 
not an information technologies expert, Dr. Gray had found that taking the time to 
identify some of the user-controlled aspects of device privacy and security helped 
eliminate time spent on this in future sessions. Dr. Gray explicitly indicated that 
he would only read and respond to digital information that was sent through his 
encrypted e-mail portal that was part of his electronic medical record (EMR) system, 
a system his patients used for scheduling and that he used for records management 
and billing. Dr. Gray reviewed his strict requirements regarding the use of video­
conferencing for DBT, and his informed consent form included specific information 
for court-referred/court-ordered therapy services. Finally, he reviewed the consent-
ing procedures for the crisis call team in which he and his colleagues participated and 
how this information, as well as process, worked. Detailed consent and release forms 
had been developed for this purpose, and Dr. Gray required this of all his patients in 
DBT care, including the authentication processes.
Dr. Gray’s practice grew steadily, and the consultation team in which he partici-
pated provided significant professional support as well as opportunities to have brief 
contacts with other clinicians’ cases. Dr. Gray knew that all providers on the five-
person consultation team used the same consenting documentation and paperwork 

51
Informed Consent
E X H I B I T  3 . 1
Informed Consent Self-Assessment Checklist
❚❚Did I inform patients/clients/consultees how I will communicate with them using tech-
nology, what type of information is appropriate to share over this modality, and the 
time frame they may expect a response?
❚❚Did I have a plan for how I will react if I receive sensitive information (e.g., grounds 
for mandated reporting) from a patient/client/consultee through technological 
communications?
❚	 Did I screen patients/clients/consultees for appropriateness with technology-based  
services (e.g., clinical, technological, language)?
❚❚Have I identified any particular risks related to interventions that have or have not 
been tested in a technology-based service delivery? Have I made these risks clear to the 
patients/clients/consultees so that they are able to make an informed decision about 
initiating or continuing with services?
❚❚Did I obtain documented informed consent with all patients/service recipients or their 
guardians at the outset of services?
❚❚Does my informed consent include information about my privacy, security, and data 
storage, transmission, and disposal policies?
❚❚Have I clearly indicated who will have access to the client’s or participant’s informa-
tion, including supervisors or treatment teams within my agency or training clinic, or 
employers and managers in an organization?
❚❚Did I assess how secure my patient’s or consultee’s technological equipment is and how 
my client will access my remote clinical services (e.g., secured land line, secured website)?
❚❚Did I establish a fee schedule related to telecommunications-based services that speci-
fies issues related to technology disruptions?
❚❚Was I knowledgeable about emergency, professional, and consultative local resources 
for the person I plan to serve remotely?
❚❚At the outset of a remote service, did I obtain a contact number for my client in case of 
technological failure or clinical emergency?
❚❚Did I have a clearly articulated plan for transferring clients in the event that the initial 
clinician or trainee cannot provide necessary or recommended services?
❚❚Did I review available resources for informed consent on a yearly basis (i.e., American 
Psychological Association [APA] records management guidelines, Guidelines for the 
Practice of Telepsychology [Joint Task Force, 2013], risk management documents, new 
laws, and seek consultation regarding current practices)?
❚❚Did I understand how jurisdictional (including international) law differences can influence 
the strategies I used to collect, store, and share information gathered by electronic means, 
and have I clearly communicated the implications of these differences to patients/clients/
consultees in language they can understand?
that he had shared with them as a template for participation on the team and that 
all providers were completing release of information forms for patients accessing the 
crisis team line. Furthermore, at the beginning of an emergency call, providers used a 
standard procedure of requesting patient identifying authentication information that 
providers could review with an up-to-date listing, as well as the patient’s first name, 
geographic location and address, method of calling (e.g., cell phone, VoIP from com-
puter, landline), and ongoing provider for the purposes of timely crisis management 

52
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
as well as documentation and billing purposes (including routing the primary pro-
vider a copy of the call notation via encrypted EMR).
Dr. Gray was familiar with the 18 health information identifiers protected by the 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA; 1996), and the crisis 
call team had worked out a sophisticated system in which an authentication code 
was required by patients to access the services, which only they and the care team 
knew. This provided for a HIPAA-compliant approach to multiprovider services in a 
teletherapy situation. In addition, the explicit informed consent process that patients 
were required to complete to participate in this DBT treatment approach had been 
well thought out with regard to informing the patients in an appropriate manner, 
providing detailed information so that providers could implement consistent poli-
cies and procedures; this allowed for videoconferencing as an augmentation to care, 
improving the treatment outcomes for many. The team of colleagues had given much 
consideration to and documented within the informed consent documents specific 
requirements for when clinical needs intensified and telepsychology was no longer 
the best practice delivery system.
SCENARIO
Recently, Dr. Gray was on call and responded to a colleague’s patients who utilized 
the service during increased distress and dysregulation. He requested the authentica-
tion code, which the patient provided along with noting his stated geographic location 
(i.e., where he was calling from on his cell phone) and that Dr. Wo was his primary 
psychologist, per procedures of all crisis calls and informed consent policy. Dr. Gray 
also briefly reminded the patient of the informed consent and exception requirements 
and obtained patient verbal consent to remain on the call. Although Dr. Gray could 
verify the patient’s authentication code with the team’s call list, the veracity of the 
patient’s location was questionable because he was calling from a cell phone. Dr. Gray 
documented all the information shared by the caller, including the client’s expres-
sion of recurrent suicidal ideation through which he had developed a specific plan. In 
addition, he noted other auditory observations, including the timing of what sounded 
like a public alert warning siren, although it was 1 p.m. on a Wednesday afternoon. 
Dr. Gray talked with the patient and followed the DBT crisis call procedures outlined 
in the manual, the consent paperwork, and the call-team policy manual, including 
documenting the call. Despite the call ending with the patient stating he felt positive 
about the safety plan they discussed and that his significant distress had passed after 
talking through the details on the call, Dr. Gray still had a gnawing feeling about miss-
ing something. He attempted to recontact the patient at the stated number, left a mes-
sage per the protocol, and requested the patient return his call within a half hour or he 
would seek further safety assurances for the patient. He knew Dr. Wo was out of town, 
and he could not connect with him to consult. When the client had not returned the 
message on the half hour, Dr. Gray called the patient again. His concern was growing 
given the discussion on the call, and he clinically noted that if everything were as the 
patient described, he would have received a return call by now.

53
Informed Consent
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
There are significant risk factors at play for Dr. Gray in considering what to do next. 
The preparation and planning of the crisis team resulted in having a specific policy, 
consenting with patients at the onset of care as well as the onset of crisis calls, and 
excellent documentation, all of which played a role in the outcome of this case. 
Dr. Gray did not hesitate to contact one of his call-team colleagues to immediately 
review the crisis call, as well as the nagging feeling he was having. In talking through 
the situation with his colleague, Dr. Gallo, he reviewed the elements of the informed 
consent documents, that consent had been reviewed on the call, and that the team 
policy was to ensure patient safety through breach of confidentiality should there 
ever be reasonable concern. Although the nagging feeling wasn’t enough to be con-
sidered “reasonable concern,” the nonreturn of a follow-up call was increasingly 
worrisome. Dr. Gray and Dr. Gallo reviewed their jurisdiction’s laws with regard to 
mandated reporting and documented this as well, confirming that suspicion of harm 
to self was supported by law as a reason to waive confidential information to a public 
protection authority (in this case, the county sheriff’s office). Dr. Gray proceeded to 
contact public safety authorities to complete a safety check. When the initial informa-
tion was insufficient to find the patient, further details related to the safety situation 
were released to the authorities. Dr. Gallo and Dr. Gray reviewed the risks and ben-
efits of breaching the confidentiality, the informed consent procedures, as well as the 
risks related to the population the team served.
Fortunately, Dr. Gray had documented his concerns and his steps in contacting 
local public safety authorities in the area where the patient stated he was located at the 
time of the call. He reviewed the concerns for the client’s safety with law enforcement 
and requested that they conduct a safety check on the individual. Law enforcement 
found no sign that the individual was or had been at the geographic location he had 
indicated, further raising Dr. Gray’s concerns. Dr. Gray revealed additional information 
to the officer, including the cell number, time of the call, observation of the public alert 
at 1 p.m., and that the client had indicated he had access to a gun. With this informa-
tion, the officers were able to narrow down a potential location for the patient and 
found him unconscious in his car smelling of marijuana and with a gun at his side. 
He was transported to the local emergency department. Dr. Gray documented this 
call and follow-up in the encrypted EMR call record. Dr. Wo was alerted as soon as he 
returned to practice and reviewed the situation with Dr. Gray before visiting with his 
client at the county psychiatric facility.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
After this call, Dr. Gray again consulted with the crisis call team to review the pro-
cedures for the group, the DBT process, and the methods with which the policies 
and informed consent were developed and put into place. The team felt the steps had 
been preventive in being able to assist Dr. Gray in following up in this circumstance. 
Further discussion focused on specific time management and using increased techno-
logical processes in authenticating patient locations. The team reviewed the potential 

54
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
for adding video consultation to these calls, having recently learned of an applica-
tion for medical providers that reportedly was HIPAA compliant and could provide 
short-term, urgent, clinic-style consultation for patients seeking medical care for more 
routine type issues. Although the team determined the increased observational data 
available from visual analysis and assessment of the patient and their surroundings 
would be helpful, they reviewed that the psychologists often took crisis calls from their 
homes on weekends and when out in the community, which would place an increased 
burden on the team with regard to finding and ensuring a HIPAA-compliant mobile 
process for a videoconferencing. Given the basis of these calls was for crisis manage-
ment, the team felt that the degree to which confidentiality could not be ensured on 
their personal devices outweighed the benefits they would gain from more informa-
tion. The team opted to continue telephone crisis care.
The team was also interested in following up on GPS apps that could provide 
a positive location for callers to their EMR and were hoping the cost would not 
be prohibitive. Legal consultation was their next step in determining whether this 
service could further augment their crisis call process regarding (a) guidelines for 
informed consent, (b) malpractice carrier consultation, (c) health care attorney or 
information technology (IT) consultants, and (d) colleague and consultation group 
continued discussion.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Gray and his colleagues had consulted early, planned strategically, and used 
many resources as guides for developing their telepractice informed consent and 
model of crisis care. The Self-Assessment Checklist (see Exhibit 3.1) was helpful as 
they considered various situations and procedures that would need to be addressed 
by their informed consent and clinical processes. In addition, as situations arose, 
Dr. Gray and the crisis call team reviewed and revised their procedures as was appro-
priate for their new knowledge, new technology available, and relative comfort with 
high-risk clients.
Case Study 2: University Training Clinic
Within the training clinic context, informed consent includes specific information 
about the role and competency level of the trainee clinician (hereafter called clini-
cian), the supervision received, and the identification of supervisors and peers who 
may be able to observe the services being provided by the trainee clinician. In addi-
tion, because clinicians in training often rotate through various practicum settings, 
their work with clients is often artificially time-limited. For clients receiving tele-
psychology services, who are perhaps not as familiar with the staffing procedures of 
the training clinic, this can add to confusion. Appropriate informed consent at the 
beginning of the process can alleviate stress and support the continuity of therapeutic 
relationships among multiple clinicians for the long-distance client.

55
Informed Consent
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
In addition, [psychologists] attempt to develop and share the policies and  
procedures that will explain to their clients/patients how they will interact 
with them using the specific telecommunication technologies involved. It may 
be more difficult to obtain and document informed consent in situations where 
psychologists provide telepsychology services to their clients/patients who are 
not in the same physical location, or with whom they do not have in-person 
interactions. (Joint Task Force, 2013 p. 795)
SETTING: UNIVERSITY TRAINING CLINIC
As part of its mission, the Counseling and Psychological Services Training Clinic (TC), a 
university-based training clinic in a public state institution, serves the needs of the rural 
state in which it is located. In response to severe mental health professional shortages 
throughout the region, the TC staff and its home department have been encouraged to 
deliver telepsychology services to residents in rural areas throughout the state. The TC 
bills clients on a sliding-scale fee structure, does not bill to third-party payers, and is 
one of the few clinics in the state that can see very poor and uninsured clients. Graduate 
students pursuing master’s degrees in counseling and doctorates in psychology provide 
services at TC, and licensed clinicians supervise all services. None of the supervisors were 
telepsychology providers before their involvement in TC, but all have now completed 
some training in telepsychology service provision and ethics and identify themselves as 
“becoming competent” in this area. All trainee clinicians are required to complete train-
ing in ethics and using telepsychology equipment before being assigned clients. Services 
are provided through a HIPAA-compliant videoconferencing system that is provided by 
the state university system and maintained by university IT personnel.
SCENARIO
A social worker from a rural county in the jurisdiction contacted the TC director, 
Dr. Johnson, seeking services for a child in foster care who was awaiting adoption by 
foster parents. The social worker sought telepsychology services because the nearest 
mental health professional was a 2-hour drive from the foster home, and the parents 
could not afford to take a day from work to manage the necessary travel. The client 
was a 9-year-old girl (Allie) with one male sibling, and both were placed with the 
same foster family and looking forward to being adopted by them. The children’s 
birth parents had released all custodial rights, and the client and her brother had been 
living happily with the foster parents for several months. However, Allie was also 
demonstrating some disruptive behavior and reported feelings of sadness at “never 
seeing” her biological mother again. The goal of therapy, as presented by the social 
worker, was to help Allie deal effectively with the termination of her relationship 
with her biological mother and ease the transition into her adoptive family.
Dr. Johnson learned that Allie had never had any previous counseling or any kind 
of mental health services. In addition, the social worker revealed that Allie and her 
brother had been removed from the parental home after several incidents of neglect 

56
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
and physical abuse, which occurred while both parents were intoxicated. In a follow-
up conversation with the foster parents, Dr. Johnson learned that Allie had some dif-
ficulty trusting adults and that she was having a hard time forming relationships with 
the teachers at her new school. Her younger brother did not have these concerns, and 
the foster parents speculated that Allie may have “protected” her younger brother 
from some of the adults who visited their family home.
In deciding whether to accept this referral, Dr. Johnson consulted with the TC 
supervision team. The first decision the team made was that it would be important for 
the clinician and primary supervisor to meet with Allie, at least one foster parent, and 
the guardian in person for a first meeting to ensure that all involved parties understood 
how the telepsychology system worked and how the TC was staffed. In addition, the 
team felt it was important for Allie to meet her clinician in person before beginning the 
interaction via video so that she would have the chance to build some trust and also to 
ensure she recognized the clinician as a real person, and not just a face on a monitor.
That first meeting occurred at the school Allie attended and where her foster mother 
was a teacher, to which Dr. Johnson and the assigned clinician (Jon Webster) traveled. 
The social worker and foster mother had suggested the school as a meeting site because 
they believed it would be a good location for telepsychology services. The school had 
more a reliable Internet connection than their home, and having the session at the end 
of the school day was convenient for all of them. The school counselor agreed that Allie 
could use a quiet and secure room at the school for counseling sessions, which allowed 
the team to ensure that the computer access was suitable and the surroundings were 
safe for Allie. Dr. Johnson and Mr. Webster confirmed that the room was accessible 
only by the school counselor and principal. Its primary use was for the counselor to 
meet privately with students and maintain necessary paperwork, which was secured in 
locked cabinets and would not be available for Allie to view, even if in the room alone. 
The room was located on the same hallway as the school nurse and another adminis-
trative office, in a relatively quiet and private space of the building. Together, Allie, her 
foster mother, and the school counselor agreed that the school counselor would help 
Allie get started in the session and would then leave the room but remain nearby in 
case Allie needed any help. Sessions were scheduled to occur at the end of the school 
day on Tuesdays, when the foster mother stayed late at the school to prepare lessons 
and the school counselor was able to stay and work on program evaluation activities in 
the office next door. Using this schedule, Allie was able to avoid missing any class time.
This first meeting also allowed the TC team to go carefully through all aspects of 
informed consent with both the social worker and foster mother, as well as explain to 
Allie how the telepsychology sessions would work and how her image and the words 
she spoke into the computer microphone would be protected. Mr. Webster and  
Dr. Johnson explained that all of the sessions would be recorded and that the recordings 
would be saved and stored in the TC computers and not in the school. The recordings 
were accessible only by Mr. Webster, Dr. Johnson, and by another faculty supervisor, 
Dr. Young. Because Dr. Young could not travel with them to attend the meeting, he 
did join briefly via videoconferencing to greet Allie and her foster mother. This allowed 
Allie to see how Mr. Webster would appear on the screen and how the video sessions 

57
Informed Consent
would look and sound. In addition, Mr. Webster explained that Dr. Johnson, Dr. Young, 
and other clinicians at the TC would be able to watch their sessions and described that 
the other clinicians were also students working on their graduate degrees just as he 
was. Allie asked if she could meet the other students who would be watching their 
sessions, and both Mr. Webster and Dr. Johnson indicated that she could see them via 
videoconferencing if she wanted to, although those students would not be able to travel 
to her school. Mr. Webster also told Allie that he would be able to work with her “all 
spring” if she wanted, because he would be graduating in May. Dr. Johnson explained 
to both the social worker and foster mother that only enrolled students can see clients 
at the TC and that once Mr. Webster graduated, he would not be able to see Allie but 
that they could refer her to another clinician in the agency. All of this information was 
also conveyed in the written informed consent and assent forms. Once Allie asked her 
questions and Mr. Webster and Dr. Johnson checked in with her foster mother and the 
guardian social worker to ensure that everyone felt comfortable with the videoconfer-
encing system and the TC supervision process, all of the parties signed the informed 
consent and assent forms.
Mr. Webster began providing services to Allie the following week, which was in 
January. He continued to see her weekly, and she demonstrated a positive response to 
counseling; her foster parents reported decreased acting-out behaviors and increased 
engagement in family activities. Allie’s behavior at school continued to present some 
concerns, however, and in March, she revealed that she did not like one of her teachers 
because she reminded her of the “bad people” who had visited her parents. This revela-
tion triggered a period of disruption for Allie, and it became apparent that during her 
school days, she was remembering past abuse. Together, Dr. Johnson and the TC super-
vision team decided Allie would benefit from trauma-focused cognitive behavior therapy 
(TF-CBT; Cohen, Mannarino, & Deblinger, 2006), which Mr. Webster was trained to 
provide. However, he was going to graduate in May (in approximately 6 weeks) and 
would not be able to continue working with Allie past that point. The decision the TC 
team faced was whether to continue working with Allie and, if so, whether to transfer 
her to a different clinician or have Mr. Webster work with her until graduation.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The informed consent forms of the TC clinic that were reviewed and signed by both 
of Allie’s guardians and the assent form reviewed and signed by Allie clearly stated 
that clinicians were students who would be rotating through the TC and could not 
continue seeing clients after graduation. However, in Mr. Webster’s conversation with 
Allie, he discussed being able to see her “all spring,” and the current situation could 
potentially shorten their work together. This brings up two important considerations 
for the client. First, Allie has established a trusting relationship with Mr. Webster, and a 
change in the treatment plan must be carefully addressed to maintain that trust with a 
new counselor. Second, because their interaction is limited to video communication, 
Allie and her foster parents may be less cognizant of the workings of the TC clinic 
than many clients would be, and so a periodic review of informed consent and assent, 
with both Allie and at least one guardian, would be more important.

58
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
Given the team’s belief that TF-CBT is the most appropriate treatment strategy for 
Allie, they need to assess whether this service falls within the scope of services covered 
in the informed consent. They also need to determine whether there is any evidence 
that TF-CBT has been successfully conducted via telepsychology and if any risks to 
such an intervention have been identified. This evidence and potential risks need to 
be shared with Allie, her foster parents, and the guardian social worker, along with 
the rationale for making changes to the treatment plan. In addition, the foster parents 
need to be fully informed about the expectations for their involvement in TF-CBT, 
which includes parental skills development. This information can be shared with the 
foster parents and Allie via telepsychology. However, it may also be important to have 
another face-to-face meeting with both foster parents present to go over the parents’ 
role if there is any confusion or concern about the expectations.
Another key decision Dr. Johnson and the supervisory team needs to make is 
whether to have Mr. Webster continue working with Allie as he has been, have him 
initiate TF-CBT with Allie, or transfer her now to a new counselor who can begin with 
TF-CBT. In addition to consulting with Mr. Webster and relying on their own super-
vision notes, they will need to gather information from local sources, including foster 
parents, the family’s social worker, and school personnel to better understand Allie’s 
daily functioning and the potential urgency of changing the treatment plan. They will 
also need to gather information about where services will be provided if they continue 
past the end of the school year at Allie’s school. For example, if the school building 
would be available for use by the foster mother who teaches there, would that be a safe 
situation? Or would it be better to prepare for telepsychology services at home? If at 
home, it may be necessary for another face-to-face visit to ensure that there would be 
adequate security and privacy measures in place in the home. If the decision is made to 
transfer Allie to a different clinician, they will need to ensure that that student is trained 
in telepsychology as well as TF-CBT and that the student has appropriate understanding 
of the communication strategies that Mr. Webster and Allie have established to facilitate 
telepsychology interventions. Also, because they do have a training mission, they will 
need to assess the extent to which this assignment will be appropriate for someone who 
is currently learning these skills. In addition, they will need to inform Allie, her foster 
parents, and the social worker of the new clinician’s credentials and supervisor informa-
tion and ensure that the new clinician reviews all aspects of informed consent with the 
family. If the family is agreeable, videoconferencing could be used for these conversa-
tions, but the team will also need to assess whether another face-to-face visit is needed.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
The TC staff could make a decision to refer Allie to another provider outside of the 
TC. However, this would likely place a significant burden on the family, and they 
may be less likely to continue with services if they have to drive long distances for 
appropriate care. To minimize that risk, the TC staff decided how to best meet Allie’s 
needs via telepsychology services. After verifying that telepsychology is not contrain-
dicated for TF-CBT, they discussed the pros and cons of having Jon continue as Allie’s 
provider, knowing that he will graduate before the TF-CBT intervention concludes. 

59
Informed Consent
They assessed the other students available with the appropriate skills and knowledge 
to work with Allie, and identified two students who would be in the clinic for at least 
another year. One of them has met Allie via videoconference because she was part 
of Mr. Webster’s peer supervision group, and Allie asked to see them all early in her 
work with him. The other student was not in that supervision group and was not 
familiar with Allie’s case. Neither student has worked with a client via telepsychology, 
but both have completed the required TC training protocol.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Johnson and the TC supervision team decided that Mr. Webster would begin to 
transition Allie to the trainee clinician, Ms. Wolf, who was part of Mr. Webster’s super-
vision team. They had him set up three transition sessions with Allie. In the first, he 
described the change to Allie and then invited her foster mother to join the session to 
let her know about the changed focus in treatment and the need to transition to a new 
clinician. In this process, he referred to the informed consent process from the first 
meeting, which had also been periodically reviewed as noted earlier, and described 
the ways in which this action is believed to be in Allie’s best interest. He also described 
the potential risks and benefits of conducting TF-CBT via telepsychology. Dr. Johnson 
observed this session and was available for questions at the end. Allie and her foster 
mother asked about the new clinician, and Allie was relieved to hear it was someone 
she had already met. Allie’s foster mother was glad that Dr. Johnson would continue 
to be the primary supervisor because she felt more comfortable with a known contact. 
In the second session, Mr. Webster and Ms. Wolf both met with Allie, and Allie was 
invited to ask Ms. Wolf questions and tell her about her work with Mr. Webster. During 
this session, both clinicians described what the next few sessions of TF-CBT would be 
like. They also spent a few minutes at the end of the session talking with Allie’s foster 
mother. In the third session, Ms. Wolf led the session, and Mr. Webster joined briefly 
to end his work with Allie. He left after the first 10 minutes of the session, and Ms. Wolf 
continued with the session. Through this process, Mr. Webster, Ms. Wolf, and the 
TC supervision team were able to be reasonably sure that all parties understood the 
implications of the transfer and the risks and benefits of the new treatment protocol. 
In addition, they modeled transparency and helped engage the distant clients more 
fully into TC procedures and functions.
Case Study 3: Discrete Trial Distance Learning
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Furthermore, psychologists may need to be aware of the manner in which 
cultural, linguistic, socioeconomic characteristics, and organizational  
considerations may impact a client’s/patient’s understanding of, and the 
special considerations required for, obtaining informed consent (such as 
when securing informed consent remotely from a parent/guardian when 
providing tele­psychology services to a minor). (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 795)

60
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
SETTING: EDUCATIONAL PRACTICE
Dr. Harry Ip is a well-known behavioral interventionist who has been working in the 
area of early intervention and intensive treatments for children with autistic disorder for 
almost two decades. He is a licensed psychologist trained in applied behavior analysis 
(ABA) who has devoted his practice to early intervention for children with autism. 
This treatment approach has been well established as an empirically validated inter-
vention for improving communication and social skills in children with autism and 
pervasive developmental disorders and has its roots with Lovaas (1977) in the mid-60s. 
Dr. Ip is the owner and developer of an online training program for parents and 
behavioral tutors that organizes and analyzes ABA treatment protocols to assist with 
daily intervention determinations. The program Dr. Ip has created includes video-based 
training for clinicians, behavioral assessment tools for parents and therapists/tutors, 
and mechanisms for charting and tracking patient progress through Dr. Ip’s entire 
early intervention program.
SCENARIO
Consistent forms and techniques are used in implementation of this intensive 40-hour 
per week therapy protocol, which has typically generated significant amounts of paper-
work and data tracking for analysis related to a single patient. Dr. Ip is quite excited 
about the potential for the development of a mobile device application that could be 
used to set up the daily treatment protocols for tutors as well as allow them to collect 
data for these trials within the application on the same device. After the completion of 
a daily intervention session, the mobile device could upload the data to Dr. Ip’s EMR, 
which is HIPAA compliant and certified to interact with the data collection software 
system (also HIPAA compliant) to provide tracking analysis and graph the child’s prog-
ress. Dr. Ip is also interested in capturing video observation data from behavior therapy 
sessions to assist with his supervision of the behavior therapy team working with the 
child and to conduct live supervision via videoconferencing directly during therapy 
sessions occurring in patients’ homes.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Dr. Ip is interested in ensuring that all components of his online and mobile ther-
apy program are HIPAA compliant and that all aspects of this process have been 
well-documented and reviewed in his informed consent paperwork and procedures 
with his patients. This is particularly challenging because the treatment receivers are 
children whose parents are requesting services provided by a team of trained and 
supervised individuals. For example, 2-year-old Lincoln’s team includes his parents, 
his 16-year-old sibling, and treatment extension tutors (college age). Confidential-
ity policies as well as mandated reporting policies have been reviewed with all care 
providers and parents. Dr. Ip has consulted with his risk management provider as 
well as his attorney and IT consultant to ensure that all aspects required for review in 
informed consent are indeed present.

61
Informed Consent
Additionally, Dr. Ip has been trained in the various aspects of these domains for 
his understanding of the process to explain to the families with whom he works in 
his practice. He decided that the mobile devices would be best managed through his 
business, and the tutors and families would not be permitted to use their own devices 
because they cannot be secured for data transfer purposes. In addition, the online portal 
requires password protection and authentication, so there are three levels of security 
to keep patients’ confidential protected health information safe within the EMR. With 
this in mind, Lincoln’s parents were educated on the process for signing in to complete 
assessments, choose therapy programs, and to download and upload the daily pro-
gramming to and from the mobile device. Dr. Ip has been quite cautious about who has 
access to the data sets and has taken the steps necessary to obtain business associate 
agreements from the various support companies with whom he works (e.g., mobile 
device store, web host, technology partners). Lincoln’s parents were informed of this as 
well. Dr. Ip’s treatment targets children generally under age 3 years who are non-
verbal and often noncompliant. Although it is unlikely he would be able to obtain 
a meaningful assent process from any of the children, Dr. Ip does briefly go through 
the same informed consent process with each of them to review the strategies for 
personal and mental health record safety. Parents are present during this process 
and also provide their consent. These procedures are documented within his ses-
sion notes, and copies of the information reviewed are provided to the parents  
or guardians; these are also available on the devices provided for the intervention. 
Dr. Ip has considered various ways to authenticate those seeking online access to his 
program and EMR system. Given that treatment primarily occurs within a patient’s 
home or community, the most consistent access that tutors and therapists (and 
patients) would have to the Internet would be public, either in the community (i.e., 
library free Wi-Fi) or the families’ own Internet within their home. Dr. Ip wanted 
to make sure that, to the best of their ability, there could be some level of security 
and privacy with regard to digital communications and data exchanged between 
the mobile device and his online program.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Well-thought-out and documented informed consent policies that are continually 
reviewed with staff and patients make the process for cutting-edge approaches to thera-
peutic intervention increasingly possible. Dr. Ip recognized the value in automating much 
of the behavioral intervention in a manner that used technology to make the data collec-
tion and processing procedures extremely efficient and allowed for immediate feedback 
to the tutor about how the child was doing. Treatments could become streamlined, and 
file cabinets of paper data would become obsolete. The amount of time required by thera-
pists, supervisors, and parents to oversee the program was reduced by more than half, 
which increased the availability of therapists to implement therapy. Dr. Ip saw extreme 
potential in this program and reviewed the specific details with his technology devel-
opment team, his legal consultant, his IT consultant, his professional ABA colleagues, 
psychologist colleagues, and malpractice insurance carrier. He had business associate 
agreements with all of these contacts.

62
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
Although not cheap, the price point that parents were already willing to pay for 
access to the online portion of his protocol had covered some of the basics for the devel-
opment of his mobile application. Dr. Ip was clear that he would need to update his 
informed consent policy or at the very least have two that would address which aspects 
of the behavior therapy intervention the children were receiving, should parents opt 
not to use the digital components due to limited insurance coverage, fee-based services, 
and other concerns. In addition to all the business-related factors, Dr. Ip discovered 
a mechanism that allowed for a virtual private network (VPN, a secure connection 
between a device and a work network over public Internet) between his mobile devices 
and the office, allowing a private and secure approach to both his supervision model 
and the data management.
Dr. Ip used several resources in considering his informed consent processes and 
procedures. He spent time consulting with knowledgeable colleagues and also reviewed 
the APA records management guidelines and specific jurisdictional paperwork related 
to EMRs that APA provided to jurisdictions. He contacted his risk management com-
pany to review aspects of informed consent related to children and particularly vulner-
able populations as well as general risk management considerations for mobile health 
applications. Dr. Ip considered carefully the APA Telepsychology Guidelines, which 
provided various aspects to consider related to the transmission and storage of data and 
how to assist client families in securing their own data. Finally, Dr. Ip also consulted the 
Behavior Analyst Certification Board’s (2014) professional and ethical compliance code 
guidelines related to boundaries and data management.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Ip took all the information and planned his informed consenting procedures for a 
separate visit before the beginning of services. He found the Self-Assessment Checklist 
shown in Exhibit 3.1 helpful to consider as he created his informed consent documenta-
tion. This allowed for review of assent with the child (as appropriate) and consent with 
the parents following a very detailed and in-person visit to establish the basic require-
ments of the program, discuss the boundaries required, and provide brief training to the 
various providers on the use of the VPN system and online educational program (which 
reviewed how the intervention and data tracking/management mobile applications 
worked in more detail). After this session, Dr. Ip returned with a mobile device, and the 
team reviewed specifically how to use the device and get connected via VPN. Over the 
years, Dr. Ip noted that approaching the process in a timely way, step-by-step, worked 
well to improve the technology knowledge for the team members. Dr. Ip discussed the 
use of videoconferencing for supervision with his ABA colleagues. There were strong 
opinions about both using videoconferencing for supervision and training purposes and 
the limitations videoconferencing presented in the context of ABA therapy (which has 
been described as a very “hands-on” intervention). Given that videoconferencing would 
be augmenting a much larger digital therapy program, Dr. Ip determined that the video­
conferencing component would pose no particularly increased risk and that, in fact, 
parents and families were increasingly “online” and preferred this method to the old-
fashioned paper-and-pencil tasks.

63
Informed Consent
Case Study 4: Consultation With an  
Organization With Numerous Employees
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists strive to obtain and document informed consent that specifically 
addresses the unique concerns related to the telepsychology services they 
provide. When doing so psychologists are cognizant of the applicable laws 
and regulations, as well as organizational requirements that govern informed 
consent in this area. . . . Furthermore, psychologists may need to be aware of 
the manner in which cultural, linguistic, socioeconomic characteristics, and 
organizational considerations may impact a client’s/patient’s understanding of, 
and the special considerations required for, obtaining informed consent.  
(Joint Task Force, 2013, pp. 795–796)
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM APA ETHICS CODE:  
3.11 PSYCHOLOGICAL SERVICES DELIVERED  
TO OR THROUGH ORGANIZATIONS
(a) Psychologists delivering services to or through organizations provide 
information beforehand to clients and when appropriate those directly affected 
by the services about (1) the nature and objectives of the services, (2) the 
intended recipients, (3) which of the individuals are clients, (4) the relationship 
the psychologist will have with each person and the organization, (5) the 
probable uses of services provided and information obtained, (6) who will have 
access to the information, and (7) limits of confidentiality. As soon as feasible, 
they provide information about the results and conclusions of such services to 
appropriate persons. (APA, 2017)
Organizational consulting situations often emerge when change that will affect 
an entire system is required or desired. Given the consequences of such changes on 
large groups of people, establishing a trusting relationship is paramount for a success-
ful consultation (Freedman & Perry, 2010). There are many avenues to building trust 
in face-to-face relationships that may not be quite as accessible in telepsychology 
circumstances, but one strategy that does work in those circumstances and facilitates 
a trusting relationship is transparent and accessible informed consent.
SETTING: INDUSTRIAL OR ORGANIZATIONAL
Dr. Ann Cheng is an organizational consulting psychologist whose area of specialty 
is assessing organizational climate and employee satisfaction and morale. She has 
specific expertise in examining the work–family role interface (Allen, 2013) and 
the impact of employer family and health care benefits and policies on employee 
satisfaction and productivity. Dr. Cheng has been working closely with the regional 
vice president in the local branch of Ace Computing (fictitious name used for pur-
poses of example), a multinational organization, over the past 10 months to identify 
and develop responses to the work–family role stressors that contribute to employee 

64
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
dissatisfaction. Dr. Cheng held several meetings with the local executives and focus 
groups of local employees, including supervisors, office workers, production-line 
component manufacturing workers, and custodial staff. Subsequently, she imple-
mented an intervention that has raised employee satisfaction by a full standard devia-
tion and productivity by almost 20%.
SCENARIO
At the last annual board and shareholders’ meeting, the regional vice president reported 
on Dr. Cheng’s intervention and the changes they have monitored in their local setting. 
The CEO and board members of Ace Computing were very impressed with the changes 
and have now approached her with the request to provide similar services to all of their 
branch offices. These include four offices in the United States (in addition to the local 
branch in Texas with which she has been working), three each in Mexico and Canada, 
two in Japan, two in the United Kingdom, and one new office in Dubai, United Arab 
Emirates. Dr. Cheng recognizes that this is an excellent opportunity for her to assess 
the cross-cultural and international relevance of her work and believes she can deliver 
the services in a way that is consistent with her own values and the values and culture 
of Ace Computing, as well as with the “Guidelines for Education and Training at the 
Doctoral and Postdoctoral Levels in Consulting Psychology/Organizational Consulting 
Psychology” (APA, 2007). However, she is also concerned that travel to all of the branch 
offices will be prohibitive. Together, she and the CEO decide that much of the consulta-
tion work can occur via telecommunication.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The client and consultee in this situation are clarified as Ace Computing and its execu-
tive board. However, Dr. Cheng will be gathering information at the level of individual 
employees and units within the organization. Therefore, she will need to clarify how to 
ensure that everyone involved understands the implications and potential consequences 
of her work. Given the distance communications strategies to be used, Dr. Cheng will 
meet directly with only a few individuals in each branch office, but she will be gathering 
information from all employees. Therefore, she needs to provide written informed con-
sent that clarifies the purpose of the process, how information will be collected, how the 
telecommunications system that is used to conduct interviews is made secure, how sur-
veys of all employees will be gathered, and how data from both interviews and surveys 
will be securely stored. She will also need to clarify who has access to and ownership of 
the data, particularly the extent to which executives and the CEO can access data pro-
vided by individual employees. In addition, she will need to clarify whether interviews 
are recorded and the interviewee is identifiable and whether individual employee sur-
veys, completed via an online data collection server, can be traced back to the individual 
through IP addresses or other means.
Another essential element in this situation is the variation in regional and national 
standards regarding informed consent. Dr. Cheng will need to ensure that she clearly 
understands the ways in which national laws affect privacy, informed consent, and 

65
Informed Consent
data storage related to all of her initial considerations of informed consent described 
earlier. In particular, Dr. Cheng will need to research how different countries protect 
or do not protect confidentiality in online communications. In addition, because she 
is examining organizational policy implications, she will need to be aware of jurisdic-
tional issues that may influence the ability either to modify policy or to implement 
the changes she would recommend, in addition to ensuring that her work is cultur-
ally informed and relevant across international populations. Finally, Dr. Cheng and 
the Ace Computing board will need to clarify who will be responsible in the event of 
a major data breach, such as might occur through an incident of hacking. This also 
includes careful delineation of what systems are used to collect and store the data and 
who ultimately controls or owns it.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Cheng consulted with knowledgeable colleagues, reviewed the APA records man-
agement guidelines, met with and retained the services of an international IT attorney, 
and contacted her risk management company representative to identify specific risks 
and benefits related to the Ace Computing consultation. In addition, Dr. Cheng con-
sidered the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) related to 
the transmission and storage of data and strategies for ensuring that all involved indi-
viduals would understand the implications of their involvement through appropriate 
informed consent.
Subsequently, Dr. Cheng considered the implications of selecting the telecom-
munications systems she would use to complete the consultation. Ace Computing, of 
course, had excellent IT capacity and cyber services that would meet all of her needs. 
Using their system would save substantial costs. However, it could also allow knowl-
edgeable employees access to the data collected from other employees. In addition, 
storage and maintenance of the data would therefore be overseen by Ace employees; 
thus, careful controls would have to be established to make use of the Ace Computing 
systems. Dr. Cheng also considered the potential of contracting with another IT ser-
vice. In that instance, she would need to ensure that there were no conflicts of interest 
between the contractor and Ace Computing and would also need to determine that 
the cybersecurity mechanisms were at least as good as those of Ace Computing. The 
benefit of an outside contractor would be that Dr. Cheng would have primary access 
to and control over the information collected.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
After considering the options available and the legal implications of working with an 
international organization primarily via telecommunication means, Dr. Cheng agreed 
to accept this consultation. She was able to gather a knowledgeable team of profes-
sionals with expertise in international cybersecurity, workplace law, and language 
translation. She ultimately decided that working with the existing Ace Computing tele-
communications system provided the greatest security for participants and minimized 
the risk that another company might use the gathered information to its advantage. 

66
A D A M S  L A R S E N  A N D  J U N T U N E N
However, with the assistance of her attorney, she clarified the boundaries of access Ace 
managers could have to the collected data and identified a portal to the data that only 
she and her team could access. Ace Computing ultimately gained control of the 
deidentified data set so that they could conduct additional follow-up work in the future, 
and the informed consents specifically noted that all information stored in the final 
database would have all identifying information (including IP addresses and unique 
demographic data) removed before Dr. Cheng turned it over to Ace.
Dr. Cheng also worked with her attorney and a team of knowledgeable translators 
to ensure that all of the informed consent documentation would accurately commu-
nicate the rights, commitment, implications, and potential risks of the consultation to 
all employees in language that was accessible to them. Different versions of informed 
consent paperwork were prepared for consistency with jurisdictional requirements. 
In addition, Dr. Cheng assessed some of the policies in place in different countries 
(including work-based child care, gender equity rules, and worker protections) to 
ensure that her interview and survey questions were consistent with national laws 
and cultural norms. Given that there would be limited ability for employees to inter-
act directly with Dr. Cheng, this was identified as an important strategy for decreasing 
confusion and increasing understanding of the implications of the consultation for 
individual employees.
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
This chapter, unlike other chapters in the casebook, presents key points to remember 
as a self-assessment checklist (see Exhibit 3.1). This format allows psychologists to 
apply lessons learned and points to remember to their own telepsychology practice 
for current application as well as planning “thinking forward.”
References
Allen, T. D. (2013). The work–family role interface: A synthesis of the research from 
industrial and organizational psychology. In N. W. Schmitt, S. Highhouse, & I. B. 
Weiner (Eds.), Handbook of psychology: Vol. 12. Industrial and organizational psychology 
(2nd ed., pp. 698–718). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley.
American Psychological Association. (2007). Guidelines for education and training 
at the doctoral and postdoctoral levels in consulting psychology/organizational con-
sulting psychology. American Psychologist, 62, 980–992. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/ 
0003-066X.62.9.980
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code  
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
Behavior Analyst Certification Board. (2014). Professional and ethical compliance code 
for behavior analysts. Retrieved from http://bacb.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/ 
160321-compliance-code-english.pdf

67
Informed Consent
Cohen, J. A., Mannarino, A. P., & Deblinger, E. (2006). Treating trauma and traumatic 
grief in children and adolescents. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Freedman, A. M., & Perry, J. A. (2010). Executive consulting under pressure: A case 
study. Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and Research, 62, 189–202. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1037/a0021247
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 
1936 (1996).
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf
Lovaas, O. I. (1977). The autistic child: Language development through behavior modification. 
Oxford, England: Irvington.

69
4
The view(s) expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or 
position of U.S. Army Regional Health Command—Central, the U.S. Army Medical Department, 
the U.S. Army Office of the Surgeon General, the Department of the Army and Department of 
Defense, or the U.S. Government.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-005
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Confidentiality of Data  
and Information
Rationale
The use of telecommunications technologies and the rapid advances 
in technology present unique challenges for psychologists in protecting 
the confidentiality of clients/patients. Psychologists who provide  
telepsychology learn about the potential risks to confidentiality 
before utilizing such technologies. When necessary, psychologists 
obtain the appropriate consultation with technology experts to  
augment their knowledge of telecommunication technologies in 
order to apply security measures in their practices that will protect 
and maintain the confidentiality of data and information related to 
their clients/patients.
Julie M. Landry Poole and Bruce E. Crow
Psychologists who provide telepsychology services make reasonable 
effort to protect and maintain the confidentiality of the data and  
information relating to their clients/patients and inform them of the 
potentially increased risks to loss of confidentiality inherent in the  
use of the telecommunication technologies, if any.
—Guideline 4, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

70
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
Some of the potential risks to confidentiality include considerations 
related to uses of search engines and participation in social networking sites. 
Other challenges in this area may include protecting confidential data and 
information from inappropriate and/or inadvertent breaches to established 
security methods the psychologist has in place, as well as boundary issues that 
may arise as a result of a psychologist’s use of search engines and participation  
on social networking sites. In addition, any Internet participation by  
psychologists has the potential of being discovered by their clients/patients 
and others and thereby potentially compromising a professional relationship. 
(Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for  
Psychologists, 2013, p. 798)
As psychologists exercise their responsibility to protect the confidentiality 
of their patients in traditional in-person therapy, so, too, are they obligated to 
ensure the same level of protection for their telepsychology patients. Standard 4,  
Privacy and Confidentiality, of the Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Con­
duct (American Psychological Association [APA], 2017) sets the stage by stating, 
“Psychologists have a primary obligation and take reasonable precautions to protect  
confidential information obtained through or stored in any medium.” The Guide­
lines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) affirm and clarify this 
responsibility and the implicit obligation of the clinician practicing telepsychology 
to be aware of the special risks unique to the use of electronic communications. 
This chapter identifies some of those risks and raises elements to be considered.  
Although not every risk is enumerated, we hope that the way each one is approached 
and resolved teaches a framework that can be applied to a multitude of other 
scenarios.
Case Study 1: Use of E-Mail With Patients
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists both understand and inform their clients/patients of the  
limits of confidentiality and risks to the possible access or disclosure of  
confidential data and information that may occur during service delivery, 
including the risks of access to electronic communications (e.g., telephone, 
e-mail) between the psychologist and client/patient. (Joint Task Force,  
2013, p. 798)
SETTING: INDEPENDENT PRACTICE
Dr. Emma Parker belongs to a busy group practice in a large metropolitan area where 
she treats individual psychotherapy patients. Her patients are generally adults from 
a relatively diverse population. Although she specializes in eating disorders, she 
also frequently treats depression and anxiety-related conditions. Dr. Parker and her 
colleagues began the practice several years ago, but during the past 6 months the 
practice and its patient base have expanded exponentially.

71
Confidentiality of Data and Information
To successfully navigate the growth of their practice, Dr. Parker and her col-
leagues recently attended a continuing education course hosted by their state 
psychological association. The course focused on business strategies and contem-
porary technology trends among psychologists in private practice. The presenter 
briefly discussed the benefits of recent technological advances but inadvertently 
minimized the complexity and unique ethical and legal considerations related to 
their use.
After the training, Dr. Parker was eager to explore e-mail communication as 
a means to augment her current interactions with patients. The practice’s current 
consent forms and office procedures included a basic statement indicating that 
security measures had been taken to ensure protected health information (PHI) 
was secure during electronic transmission. Despite the brevity and incompleteness 
of the statement, Dr. Parker reviewed the forms and determined revisions were 
not required because electronic transmission was specifically addressed. As she 
began to incorporate e-mail use within her practice, she asked patients if they were 
comfortable with communicating via e-mail and documented this oral consent in 
their records.
Dr. Parker found that e-mail communication with her patients was simple, quick, 
and effective. Realizing how useful it was, she added her e-mail address to her business 
cards and the practice’s website. Her patients also appeared to appreciate the conve-
nience of e-mail messages; several had gradually begun to use e-mail to discuss clini-
cal and therapeutic information. Although Dr. Parker did not plan to use electronic 
communication for this purpose, she did not give it much thought.
SCENARIO
Emily was a 52-year-old married woman who worked in the finance industry. She had 
seen Dr. Parker for four sessions of cognitive behavior therapy for generalized anxiety 
disorder. During their week’s session, Emily reported a significant increase in anxiety 
symptoms, which she attributed to difficulties within her marriage. The day after the 
session, Dr. Parker received an e-mail from Emily. The subject line read “just one more 
thing.” The long e-mail described Emily’s dream the night before and her reaction to 
the dream, which included the decision to leave her husband. Dr. Parker responded, 
praising Emily for the breakthrough. She told Emily she looked forward to hearing 
more at the follow-up appointment the next week.
The following week Emily presented to the session in tears. She told Dr. Parker 
she left her e-mail open on her home computer by accident, and her husband had 
read her e-mail to Dr. Parker, as well as Dr. Parker’s response. Emily was distraught. 
She reported that although she felt good about the decision to dissolve the mar-
riage, she had not yet prepared to discuss the decision with her husband. As Emily 
processed the event in session, she mentioned she had not considered the possibility 
anyone else would see her personal e-mail messages to Dr. Parker. Dr. Parker real-
ized she had not discussed the inherent privacy risks of e-mail use with Emily or her 
other patients.

72
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Although technological advances have proven beneficial within health care set-
tings, the ubiquitous innovations are accompanied by new ethical considerations. 
The use of e-mail unmistakably provides several advantages, including perhaps  
the most obvious example of convenience. Psychologists and patients are able to 
connect at any time from any location. Communication via e-mail additionally 
allows for rapid correspondence. E-mail communication also may enhance com-
munication and provide a way for clinicians to provide additional support outside 
of sessions.
Despite the convenience, e-mail use is also accompanied by risks. Deleted 
e-mails may be easily recovered by Internet service providers. Human error is also 
a potential privacy threat; e-mails may be inadvertently sent to an incorrect address, 
exposing the patient’s private information to the recipient. Messages may also be 
accessible by third parties. Finally, e-mail use also allows for a greater potential of 
boundary violations. Patients may expect a psychologist to be instantly available 
and responsive.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Realizing she had not carefully considered the implications of e-mail communication, 
Dr. Parker thoughtfully reviewed the Guidelines for the Practice of Tele­psychology (Joint Task 
Force, 2013), developed by the APA, the Association of State and Provincial Psychol-
ogy Boards, and The Trust. She also sought further information from APA Division 46  
(Society for Media Psychology and Technology) and reviewed applicable licensing 
board rules and state laws, as well as the Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act (HIPAA; 1996) standards of confidentiality.
During her research, Dr. Parker concluded that if she planned to continue using 
e-mail communication with her patients, she would need to make changes to her cur-
rent practices to meet the APA guidelines and to ensure she was following all relevant 
laws and regulations. She created a list of ideas to discuss with her colleagues before 
implementation. The first item on her list was whether to limit e-mail to adminis-
trative content. Dr. Parker recognized benefits and limitations to this approach and 
therefore determined it would be advantageous to consult with her coworkers before 
making a final decision.
Dr. Parker also recognized that she should be more deliberate when discussing 
the general parameters of e-mail use with her patients (e.g., expectations, boundar-
ies). She would need to ensure they were aware that PHI might be included in e-mail 
exchanges and that it was thus at risk of disclosure. The use of e-mail encryption 
would also need to be addressed. She considered the need to review with patients 
their role in maintaining their own privacy and confidentiality. In addition to dis-
cussing these topics in person, she planned to include this information within the 
written office policies provided to patients.

73
Confidentiality of Data and Information
Case Study 2: Facebook Friend Request  
From a Patient and Supervision
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists who use social networking sites for both professional and per-
sonal purposes are encouraged to review and educate themselves about the 
potential risks to privacy and confidentiality and consider utilizing all available 
privacy settings to reduce these risks. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 797)
SETTING: OUTPATIENT PSYCHOLOGY  
CONSORTIUM INTERNSHIP
Lily was 5 months into her 12-month internship at a rural psychology consortium. The 
program subscribed to a developmental model of training that focused on personalized 
training adapted to the trainee’s level of functioning and provided a diversified clinical 
experience. Interns participated in two major placements within integrated primary 
behavioral care and a traditional outpatient mental health clinic. The structure was 
designed to allow flexibility for students to shape their clinical rotations on the basis 
of individual interests within the core framework of the program.
The integrated primary behavioral care placement provided an opportunity to train 
in the growing area of primary care psychology. Interns served as behavioral health 
consultants within a primary care setting (e.g., family medicine practice, women’s health 
clinic), assessing and treating patients who presented with behavioral concerns. They 
also provided feedback to medical providers regarding clinical impressions and recom-
mended treatment. The rotation emphasized the role of a psychologist on a primary care 
team and the unique ethical issues that arise in primary care settings.
The traditional outpatient mental health rotation provided opportunities for 
short- and long-term psychotherapy, as well as group, family, and couples therapy. 
The placement provided an opportunity to work with a wide range of psychiatric 
conditions in a diverse population. Emphasis was placed on developing and refining 
skills in clinical interviewing, diagnostic accuracy, treatment planning, interventions, 
and documentation.
SCENARIO
Mike presented to the outpatient mental health clinic for treatment as a self-referral 
approximately three months ago due to occupational stressors. He quickly felt com-
fortable with Lily, who was close to his age and had a similar, extroverted personality. 
Following only a few sessions, the job-related stress dissipated, and Mike began dis-
cussing adverse childhood events he had not previously shared with others.
After their most recent session, Lily received a Facebook friend request from  
Mike. She was initially surprised by the request but quickly decided to accept. As far as  

74
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
Lily knew, the consortium did not have any policies that prohibited provider–patient 
contact on public networks. She had a strong therapeutic alliance with the patient 
and thought being Facebook friends might enrich that relationship. Addi­tionally, she 
felt it fit the way she practiced. Although she accepted the request, she made a decision 
she would not discuss any clinical issues via social media for privacy reasons.
During clinical supervision a few days later, Lily briefly mentioned the friend 
request while updating her supervisor, Dr. Stark, on her work with Mike. Although 
she did not intend for it to lead to further discussion, Dr. Stark quickly recognized 
the topic as an opportunity for professional development. Initially, Lily felt confident 
about her choice; however, during supervision, she realized it was likely driven, at 
least in part, by anxiety related to the possible awkward discussion that would result 
from the rejected request as well as fear of how it would affect the relationship.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The use of social media was not discussed during Lily’s graduate education and training 
or when she began her internship, and Mike’s request was the first time she had expe-
rienced a patient invitation to interact on networking sites. The situation also brought 
to Dr. Stark’s attention that the consortium did not have a clear and appropriate writ-
ten policy on use of social media with patients and that, as a supervisor, he had not 
addressed this potential situation. Dr. Stark pointed out several issues Lily had not pre-
viously considered, including why Mike made the request. Lily assumed Mike wanted 
a social relationship in addition to their current professional relationship. Before the 
dialogue with Dr. Stark, Lily did not appreciate that by accepting the friend request, 
she was accepting a role in a second relationship and one that could compromise con-
fidentiality for her patient. She knew multiple relationships were not unethical per se, 
but she recognized she would now be faced with the challenge of maintaining effec-
tive boundaries because of the blurred line created by the social relationship. She also 
realized it was possible that the dual relationship might impair her effectiveness as 
a therapist or even cause harm.
Dr. Stark additionally suggested Lily should consider whether the interactions were 
relevant to providing care or a way to satisfy a voyeuristic curiosity. He expressed con-
cerns related to patient privacy and confidentiality because social networking platforms 
are not usually digitally encrypted. He also asked Lily to consider whether people would 
be able to recognize Mike as her patient, if she would be able to communicate confiden-
tially, and if this was the best venue in which to communicate regarding issues that may 
be related to Mike’s therapeutic work with her.
Lily had not previously thought about disclosure. Mike would learn things about 
her through Facebook she would not have shared with him otherwise. Mike could 
identify and contact anyone in Lily’s friend list, view an extensive collection of her 
photos, and read past conversations and anecdotes on her page. Furthermore, Lily 
might discover things about Mike he had not previously disclosed to her in session. 
She would need to consider the clinical implications of these disclosures.
Finally, Lily and Dr. Stark thoughtfully discussed the generational difference 
between them and its effect on them as professionals. Lily and a large proportion of 

75
Confidentiality of Data and Information
the consortium’s patient population grew up communicating in a digital format. 
She was comfortable using social media sites and did so daily. Conversely, although 
Dr. Stark had a Facebook page, his daughter had created it, and he was unsure how 
to use it.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Lily and Dr. Stark extended their usual supervision time to discuss further the possible 
unforeseen problems associated with social media use. Dr. Stark acknowledged that 
he felt most comfortable limiting Facebook and other networking sites to communi-
cation with friends and family, but he realized Lily might not feel the same and knew 
letting her define what was most comfortable for her as a psychologist was a good 
lesson. He did, however, suggest Lily should consider how she managed her online 
presence (e.g., who could find her, what could they find).
Lily planned to look into the privacy controls on the social networking sites she 
used. Being technologically savvy, she knew even a “private” online presence was 
public. She also considered having a professional presence separate from her personal 
page. After much thought and consultation, Lily decided to talk to Mike in his next ses-
sion about his invitation to determine any therapeutic issues that might be present. She 
also decided to explain to him that she needed to continue to explore being connected 
to her patients through social media, and that for now, she was not going to open her 
personal page to patients. Finally, Lily volunteered to work with Dr. Stark to develop 
a policy for the consortium on the use of social media and other electronic exchanges 
with patients.
Case Study 3: Use of Online Search  
in an Evaluation
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists are cognizant of the ethical and practical implications of proactively 
researching online personal information about their clients/patients. They 
carefully consider the advisability of discussing such research activities with 
their clients/patients and how information gained from such search would be 
utilized and recorded as documenting this information may introduce risks to 
the boundaries of appropriate conduct for a psychologist. (Joint Task Force, 
2013, p. 797)
SETTING: ARMY BEHAVIORAL HEALTH OUTPATIENT CLINIC
Captain (CPT) Jessica Smith was a clinical psychologist in the U.S. Army; she worked 
in a small behavioral health outpatient clinic within the Department of Behavioral 
Medicine, which primarily served active duty service members. The clinic providers 
evaluated and provided treatment for a wide variety of behavioral health conditions, 

76
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
including adjustment disorders, depression, anxiety, and posttraumatic stress dis-
order. On the basis of the patient population, evaluations were often military specific, 
including fitness-for-duty evaluations, occupational evaluations, and evaluations for 
administrative separations.
CPT Smith frequently received consults to perform security clearance evalu-
ations to assess a service member’s psychological suitability to receive or retain a 
security clearance. These evaluations were requested most often after inappropri-
ate conduct had been identified (e.g., criminal behavior, financial irresponsibility). 
Although evaluations could also be related to the presence of behavioral health 
conditions, security clearances were most often denied or revoked based on the 
service member’s failure to seek treatment rather than merely the presence of a 
psychiatric condition.
SCENARIO
Sergeant First Class (SFC) Thompson was referred for a security evaluation after 
he was arrested for driving under the influence (DUI). The adjudicator noted that 
although the charges were dismissed, an evaluation was still required. As CPT Smith 
reviewed the available information, she saw SFC Thompson was also arrested in 
1999 and again in 2003 for alcohol-related incidents. In addition, the soldier’s 
medical records contained objective evidence indicative of physical deterioration 
associated with excessive alcohol use.
CPT Smith contacted SFC Thompson’s first line supervisor to obtain collateral 
information. The supervisor reported the soldier had a history of problematic behav-
ior related to alcohol misuse but indicated disciplinary actions had been lenient due 
to rank. Despite this historic pattern, the supervisor described the events as past 
behaviors rather than recent ones; however, he also mentioned he recently saw an 
Instagram photo of SFC Thompson drinking alcohol at a hail and farewell event. The 
supervisor suggested CPT Smith look up the picture and provided SFC Thompson’s 
Instagram handle.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
CPT Smith had not previously conducted Internet searches on patients. She felt 
confident that obtaining material in this manner was legal and did not present an 
issue with confidentiality because the information was publicly accessible; how-
ever, she was uncertain whether an online search was ethical, and if so, under what 
circumstances. Although she concluded that Googling a therapy patient might 
affect the therapeutic relationship by blurring boundaries and possibly introducing 
multiple roles, she felt a search in the context of an evaluation presented a more 
ambiguous situation.
CPT Smith additionally considered the power differential in the relationship. 
Although an online search might provide clinically relevant information, SFC Thompson 
might feel the search was a breach of his privacy and therefore inappropriate. CPT 
Smith assumed this would affect her ability to establish rapport, and the patient would 

77
Confidentiality of Data and Information
likely question her professionalism. CPT Smith remained aware of her role in the case 
and the importance of differentiating a treatment role from an evaluation role.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
CPT Smith initially considered avoiding the dilemma by simply relying on SFC 
Thompson’s self-report in combination with other available information from  
collateral sources and medical records. After some additional thought, she concluded 
that because the supervisor had made her privy to the photo’s existence, she would 
need to address the information in her report and provide a rationale related to 
her choice about whether to search the Internet for the picture or other relevant 
information.
Although CPT Smith could conduct the search without the patient’s consent (and 
knowledge), she decided she would feel she had not demonstrated the courtesy and 
respect the patient deserved and would not meet the aspirational guidelines set forth by 
the APA. She considered discussing the information the supervisor provided about 
SFC Thompson but was apprehensive because this might inadvertently affect the 
supervisor’s relationship with the soldier. She also feared the patient might not 
provide accurate information based on his desire to present a favorable impression 
of himself.
CPT Smith finally considered requesting SFC Thompson’s consent to conduct the 
online search. If SFC Thompson agreed, she could document the consent and follow 
up on the information the collateral informant had provided, although she would still 
need to determine the most appropriate way to use and document any information 
she discovered.
CPT Smith realized creating and implementing a clear policy about Internet 
searches and sharing that policy with her patients would reduce the need to make 
similar decisions in the future. If she chose to begin using information found online to 
supplement assessments, she would have to consider ways to make these searches a 
collaborative process to respect the patient.
Case Study 4: Meeting HIPAA and Health  
Information Technology for Economic  
and Clinical Health Act Requirements
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
The use of telecommunications technologies and the rapid advances in  
technology present unique challenges for psychologists in protecting the  
confidentiality of clients/patients. Psychologists who provide telepsychology 
learn about the potential risks to confidentiality before utilizing such tech­
nologies. When necessary, psychologists obtain the appropriate consultation 
with technology experts to augment their knowledge of telecommunication 
technologies in order to apply security measures in their practices that will  

78
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
protect and maintain the confidentiality of data and information related to 
their clients/patients. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: INDEPENDENT TELEPSYCHOLOGY 
PRACTICE FROM A HOME OFFICE
Dr. Tom Johnson was a clinical psychologist who was employed by a behavioral health 
agency within the public sector. He practiced in a suburban area of a large metropolitan 
city in the northeastern United States where there was a large number of practicing 
clinical psychologists. He was interested in the prospect of a part-time telepsychology 
practice from his home as a way to generate additional income with little overhead 
costs by reaching potential clientele outside of his immediate commuting area. He did 
not have previous experience with telepsychology but had used videoconferencing 
at work for business meetings and to visit with family. Although he did not consider 
himself to be “tech savvy,” he was comfortable operating a webcam and believed he 
could attract clients who would like to receive discreet and confidential psychological 
services from their home.
SCENARIO
Dr. Johnson wanted to ensure that the telepsychology system and the processes he 
established would safeguard confidentiality of patient information. He considered 
obtaining professional consultation for information technology guidance but was 
concerned about the expense and instead spent time researching other options online.
As Dr. Johnson explored these issues, he concluded that confidentiality was highly 
related to requirements set forth by HIPAA. He was generally aware of HIPAA require-
ments to safeguard against the release of PHI but was not familiar with the legal details 
because he had previously relied on his employer to ensure that information was 
managed in compliance with HIPAA.
As he conducted his online research, he realized that in his home-based private 
practice, he would be considered a covered entity within the terms of HIPAA and must 
therefore comply with requirements to prevent unauthorized disclosures of health infor-
mation. In his search for a videoconferencing system, he discovered there were consid-
erable references to encryption as a means to ensure the security of videoconference 
transmissions, therefore protecting confidentiality of the data as it is transmitted; how-
ever, he was confused about claims that certain equipment and systems were “HIPAA 
compliant,” which he assumed meant they used appropriate encryption processes.
Because this venture was experimental, Dr. Johnson did not want to make a 
large monetary investment in a home videoconferencing system. He selected a well-
known free service to economize. On the basis of the system’s description of encryption 
technology used for transmissions, Dr. Johnson believed he was selecting a HIPAA-
compliant system. Satisfied that he had found an affordable system that transmitted 
data in an encrypted manner, he prepared to install and configure the system on his 
home computer.

79
Confidentiality of Data and Information
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Psychologists who meet criteria to be considered a covered entity under the HIPAA Pri-
vacy Rule are required to protect individually identifiable health information, which is 
considered to be PHI. These requirements were expanded under the Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH; 2009). These requirements 
apply whether the PHI is held or transmitted in any form or media (Solove, 2013). It is 
incumbent on psychologists engaged in telepsychology to ensure the videoconferenc-
ing system used provides safeguards for PHI in a manner that prevents unauthorized 
disclosures and maintains confidentiality of the information.
Videoconferencing equipment and systems are not by themselves HIPAA com-
pliant; rather, it is the way they are used that determines whether a psychologist is 
compliant with HIPAA requirements. The equipment and systems may have elements, 
such as encryption, that facilitate HIPAA compliance, but the HIPAA Privacy Rule 
requires a set of actions by covered entities to ensure that health information is pro-
tected and remains confidential when PHI is transmitted (APA Practice Organization, 
2013). In addition to actions by a psychologist, the actions of a business associate may 
have an impact on HIPAA and HITECH compliance. If a third party, such as a video­
conferencing vendor, transmits PHI on behalf of a covered entity and has access 
to the PHI, that third party is considered a business associate (U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Services, n.d.). In these situations, a psychologist who is the covered 
entity would need a written business associate agreement (BAA) with the video­
conferencing vendor that meets the terms of HIPAA and HITECH. Without a BAA, 
the telepsychologist is at risk for HIPAA noncompliance.
When selecting a videoconferencing system, the telepsychologist must deter-
mine whether a BAA is necessary. If the vendor provides encryption and a written 
BAA, the telepsychologist can have greater confidence that privacy and confidenti-
ality requirements under HIPAA will be met. If encryption and a BAA are not both 
provided by the vendor, the telepsychologist will need additional verification that 
a system meets an exception or otherwise meets the terms of HIPAA and HITECH.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
As Dr. Johnson prepared to set up a telepsychology practice, he realized he was 
unfamiliar with HIPAA requirements and determined he would need additional 
information about the provisions of HIPAA and HITECH as they applied to a tele-
psychology. He likewise discovered that it is difficult to find and access this topic in 
the professional literature and that much of the readily accessible information was 
published on the Internet in the form of blogs and informational websites. He found 
these sites to be variable with regard to citing sources, and at times he found it dif-
ficult to judge the merits of various opinions and observations of the authors. With 
perseverance, he assembled an array of peer-reviewed journal articles and book chap-
ters that addressed these issues. He also discovered some helpful Internet sites that 
provided reviews of videoconferencing vendors and whether they provided encryp-
tion capability that would meet HIPAA requirements. He came to understand that 

80
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
it was important to critically evaluate a vendor’s claims to be HIPAA compliant 
and request that the vendor provide information about how HIPAA compliance is 
facilitated or achieved.
A fundamental decision Dr. Johnson faced when making plans to establish a 
telepsychology practice was selecting a videoconferencing system. In the process of 
researching issues of privacy and confidentiality as they apply to telepsychology, he 
encountered a common theme that presumes telepsychology sessions transmit PHI and 
invoke HIPAA rules for privacy and security. As a result, he concluded that he should 
use a videoconferencing system that had effective encryption methods. He found the 
technical details about encryption to be confusing, and because he was focused on 
keeping costs low, he selected a free videoconferencing system that declared its use of 
encryption would ensure secure data transmissions. Unfortunately, this system did not 
clearly meet HIPAA Privacy Rule requirements. Additionally, Dr. Johnson did not ini-
tially understand the requirements for a BAA, but through his continued research he 
understood that when a third-party vendor has access to and transmits PHI on behalf 
of a covered entity, a written BAA must be provided to fulfill HIPAA requirements.
In addition to the encryption and BAA considerations, Dr. Johnson learned about 
a variety of practices and processes related to privacy and confidentiality. For example, 
in the Technical Guidelines section of the American Telemedicine Association Practice 
Guidelines (American Telemedicine Association, 2013), Dr. Johnson discovered a series 
of recommendations for provider actions to safeguard privacy in the course of practic-
ing telepsychology. These guidelines include recommendations related to the use of 
mobile devices, videoconferencing software, and storage and transmission of PHI. By 
reviewing these and similar recommendations from a variety of sources, Dr. Johnson 
believed he was better prepared to meet HIPAA requirements and to anticipate privacy 
and confidentiality considerations in the use of telepsychology technology.
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚When considering the use of e-mail or other forms of electronic communication 
with patients, establish written policies addressing not only the specific uses of 
e-mail and social media that will be acceptable (e.g., scheduling, therapeutic 
issues) but also how specific risks will be managed and explained to patients to 
ensure informed consent, such as the accessibility of e-mails to unintended par-
ties, the ability of deleted files to be recovered, the consequences of unencrypted 
exchanges, the expectation to be instantly available and responsive, and the role 
of the patient in protecting privacy and confidentiality.
❚❚If you work with an agency, clinic, hospital, or other such entity, be clear about 
its policies regarding telepsychology, social media, e-mail, and any other form 
of electronic communication with patients. If there is no written policy, request 
and document guidance and recommend that such a policy be developed.
❚❚Be very familiar with how to control privacy settings when using electronic 
communication of any type.

81
Confidentiality of Data and Information
❚❚Supervisors and supervisees need to be proactive in learning about the differ-
ent levels of digital knowledge and experience each may have and be sensitive 
to how those differences may influence delivery of services and supervision.
❚❚When conducting an evaluation or providing therapy, psychologists seek infor-
mation and are informed about current laws, regulations, ethical and profes-
sional guidelines and policies, in addition to the therapeutic impact of seeking 
or receiving information from social media, online searches, or other Internet 
sources.
❚❚Psychologists who meet criteria to be considered a covered entity under the 
HIPAA Privacy Rule are required to protect individually identifiable health 
information, which is considered to be PHI. These requirements are expanded 
under the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health 
(HITECH) Act and apply whether the PHI is held or transmitted in any form or 
media (Solove, 2013). It is incumbent on psychologists engaged in telepsychol-
ogy to ensure the videoconferencing system used provides safeguards for PHI in 
a manner that prevents unauthorized disclosures and maintains confidentiality 
of the information.
❚❚Videoconferencing equipment and systems are not by themselves HIPAA 
compliant; rather, it is the way they are used that determines whether a psy-
chologist is compliant with HIPAA requirements. The HIPAA Privacy Rule 
requires a set of actions by covered entities to ensure that health information 
is protected and remains confidential when PHI is transmitted (APA Practice 
Organization, 2013).
❚❚In addition to actions by a psychologist, the actions of a business associate may 
have an impact on HIPAA and HITECH compliance. If a third party, such as a 
videoconferencing vendor, transmits PHI on behalf of a covered entity and has 
access to the PHI, they are considered a business associate (U.S. Department of 
Health & Human Services, n.d.). In these situations, a psychologist who is the 
covered entity would need a written BAA with the videoconferencing vendor 
that meets the terms of HIPAA and HITECH. Without a BAA, the telepsychologist 
is at risk for HIPAA noncompliance.
❚❚It is important to evaluate critically a vendor’s claims of being HIPAA compliant 
and to request that the vendor provide information about how HIPAA compliance 
is facilitated or achieved.
References
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code  
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American Psychological Association Practice Organization. (2013, September). HIPAA, 
What you need to know now. The Privacy Rule: A primer for psychologists. Retrieved from 
http://www.apapracticecentral.org/business/hipaa/hippa-privacy-primer.pdf

82
L A N D R Y  P O O L E  A N D  C R O W
American Telemedicine Association. (2013, May). Practice guidelines for video-based online 
mental health services. Retrieved from http://hub.americantelemed.org/resources/ 
telemedicine-practice-guidelines
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Pub. L. 111-5. 
(2009).
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 
1936 (1996).
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo­
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/
amp-a0035001.pdf
Solove, D. (2013, January 22). The HIPAA-HITECH regulation, the Cloud, and beyond. 
Retrieved from http://www.safegov.org/2013/1/22/the-hipaa-hitech-regulation, 
-the-cloud,-and-beyond
U.S. Department of Health & Human Services. (n.d.). Business associates. Retrieved from 
http://www.hhs.gov/hipaa/for-professionals/privacy/guidance/business-associates

83
5
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-006
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice, 
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Security and Transmission  
of Data and Information
Rationale
The use of telecommunication technologies in the provision of 
psychological services presents unique potential threats to the security 
and transmission of client/patient data and information. These 
potential threats to the integrity of data and information may include 
computer viruses, hackers, theft of technology devices, damage to 
hard drives or portable drives, failure of security systems, flawed 
software, ease of accessibility to unsecured electronic files, and 
malfunctioning or outdated technology. Other threats may include 
policies and practices of technology companies and vendors, such as 
tailored marketing derived from e-mail communications. Psychologists 
are encouraged to be mindful of these potential threats and to take 
reasonable steps to ensure that security measures are in place  
for protecting and controlling access to client/patient data within  
an information system. In addition, they are cognizant of relevant 
Ronald S. Palomares and Thomas W. Miller
Psychologists who provide telepsychology services take reasonable steps to 
ensure that security measures are in place to protect data and information 
related to their clients/patients from unintended access or disclosure.
—Guideline 5, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

84
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
jurisdictional and federal laws and regulations that govern electronic storage 
and transmission of client/patient data and information, and they develop 
appropriate policies and procedures to comply with such directives. When 
developing policies and procedures to ensure the security of client/patient 
data and information, psychologists may include considering the unique 
concerns and impacts posed by both intended and unintended use of public 
and private technology devices, active and inactive therapeutic relationship, 
and the different safeguards required for different physical environments, 
different staffs (e.g., professional vs. administrative staff), and different 
telecommunication technologies. (Joint Task Force for the Development of 
Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 797)
In-person practice has conventionally meant maintenance of paper records and, 
more recently, includes electronic record keeping. The American Psychological 
Association (APA; 2007) Record Keeping Guidelines are detailed and clear on the impor-
tance of security, transmission, storage, and disposal of records. Furthermore, the 
implementation of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA, 
1996) Privacy and Security Rules has both assisted health care professionals and 
challenged them to be alert, vigilant, and informed about the importance of legal 
and ethical maintenance of client records and the communication to others of client  
records. Telepsychology introduces additional challenges to the protection and security 
of records and all client data given that records in this venue are created, maintained, 
transmitted, and destroyed electronically.
Regardless of their competence in electronic record keeping, psychologists, upon 
entering into telepsychology, will want to conduct a risk analysis as they develop 
their record keeping systems and means of protecting data. Access to data is equally 
important because protection of data and assurance that only authorized individuals 
have that access are critical to the standard of care for data collection and security. A 
risk assessment will be valuable in identifying weaknesses and threats to security and 
in developing means to safeguard transmission of data, such as encryption, firewalls, 
and robust password systems.
Clients must be partners with psychologists in technology competence and in 
astute care for their own data and client information. In traditional in-person prac-
tice, including agency, inpatient, independent practice, or other settings, psycholo-
gists and other authorized staff or facilities were the keepers of data and information 
regarding services to clients. In telepsychology, the clients also have some, if not all, 
of the same data on record that are held by the psychologists and other agencies 
or facilities. Clients do not have a confidentiality obligation for data, but electronic 
transmission introduces a risk of error, interruption, and unintended disclosure that 
has not been present in other practice venues. Psychologists have a responsibility to 
inform clients of risks, be vigilant for a breach in client data, and respond and correct 
the breach as soon as possible. Increasingly, improved methods to secure, protect, and 
safely transmit data are available. It is incumbent on psychologists through consulta-
tion or additional training to become familiar with and engage in systems that meet 
the standard of practice.

85
Security and Transmission of Data
Case Study 1: HIPAA and Initiating  
a Telepsychology Practice
SETTING: MULTIDISCIPLINARY HEALTH CLINIC
Dr. Collins, a licensed psychologist, is a partner in a multidisciplinary health clinic. He 
has been with the practice for more than 20 years but has only recently begun offer-
ing telehealth services to clients who live in rural areas. Dr. Collins focuses his work 
on clients who present primarily with problems that are mood based. In addition, he 
only provides services to adults. At present, Dr. Collins has only a handful of individu-
als who are receiving services through telepsychology. In a recent evaluation of those 
services, he was pleased with the process and level of services he is now able to pro-
vide, so he was planning to expand the services to gradually include additional clients 
from within his practice. However, he first invited his colleague Dr. Victoria, a licensed 
psychologist and local expert in telepsychology, to meet with him and help him evalu-
ate his telepsychology services. Dr. Victoria had been providing telepsychology services 
in her own practice setting for more than 5 years, written several research articles for 
the state psychological association publication and one peer-reviewed journal, and 
conducted numerous professional development seminars on the use of technology in 
clinical settings.
SCENARIO
Before the initial offering of telepsychology services, Dr. Collins began his own research 
and gathered numerous articles and other sources of information for guidance on how 
to incorporate telepsychology into a clinical practice. He also attended several profes-
sional development seminars to learn about the current directions and obtain further 
guidance on the use of telepsychology in practice settings.
After this fairly extensive gathering of information and careful consideration of 
how telepsychology could actually enhance the provision of services to his clients, 
Dr. Collins was excited to begin incorporating telepsychology as an option within his 
practice’s services. He then decided that initially he wanted to keep the scope of services 
limited to only an audiovisual interactive therapeutic service arrangement with his cli-
ents. He ultimately ended up with selecting a subscription-based audiovisual program 
that used a web-based server for connecting the two parties and did not require either 
party to download software or purchase additional equipment as long as their computers 
had a video camera and microphone.
With regard to the selection of clients who would potentially use his telepsychol-
ogy services, Dr. Collins set a policy of first meeting with the client face to face in 
his office for a minimum of four sessions. Once he was satisfied that the client was 
capable of engaging in telepsychology services and had the resources to do so, he then 
scheduled a separate session to train and practice using the computers and website, 
as well as go over the additional policies, procedures, and addendums to his privacy 

86
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
and confidentiality policies, before embarking on their telepsychology-based therapy 
sessions. He also made the decision to offer these services to no more than five clients 
at any one time to minimize complexity and ensure that he was able to handle the 
additional demands and evaluate the services without them expanding too fast and 
becoming difficult to maintain.
After the first year of offering these services, Dr. Collins arranged to have Dr. Victoria, 
with whom he had worked earlier, review his telepsychology policies and procedures. 
Drs. Collins and Victoria spent several hours going over the various policies and pro-
cedures he had developed, including successes, struggles, and key changes he had 
incorporated throughout the year. Dr. Victoria congratulated him on his extensive 
and well-planned process incorporating technology into his clinical practice.
However, before Dr. Victoria would allow Dr. Collins to bask in his perceived 
moment of glory for having created a successful resource within his practice, she 
then broke the news that despite all of the careful planning and excellent procedures 
he had put in place, there was a huge problem with the software he was using for the 
therapy sessions: It was not compliant with HIPAA, which sets national standards 
for transmission of electronic health care data. More specifically, it was not compliant 
with the Security Rule, which focuses on electronic protected health information. In 
short, Dr. Collins’s selection of the web-based services to provide the audiovisual con-
nections created a potential legal issue for him. However, Dr. Victoria reassured him 
that if he switched to a HIPAA-compliant service provider, all would be well, and he 
could then truly be pleased with the knowledge that he had developed a successful 
and secure telepsychology-based service for his clinic.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
When reviewing the work in which Dr. Collins engaged to develop a successful tele-
psychology service as an addition to his clinic-based services, it should be noted that he 
did many things correctly. As with any professionals who want to expand their services 
and knowledge, Dr. Collins first began researching what has been done and evaluated 
the information he gathered in a manner that would fit his specific practice and needs. 
He not only read what has been published but also sought professional development 
activities in which he could hear directly from others who have already been success-
ful in similar processes, as well as interact and have his own questions answered while 
learning new aspects and creating a process that would be most successful for him.
After gathering information, Dr. Collins started to put the pieces together for the 
implementation of this new component of his practice. He did not start big, direct-
ing a huge portion of his clientele into this new service. Instead, he began slowly by 
limiting the number of clients using these services to five at any time and, as noted, 
would constantly evaluate the process not only for his clients but also for himself and 
the clinic. In sharing this information with Dr. Victoria, Dr. Collins described how he 
changed various aspects of the service, based on information he learned or ideas that 
came along to improve it.
Unfortunately for Dr. Collins, somewhere during the process, he failed to consider 
the various HIPAA requirements that are a part of telepsychology practice despite  

87
Security and Transmission of Data
Dr. Victoria’s earlier consultation. More specifically, he did not understand the require-
ment to use only HIPAA-compliant software services, ensuring the protection of any 
electronic protected health information generated through the use of those services. 
Thus, the surface-level challenge was to ensure that when extending the services being 
provided by any health care professional, all services were compliant with HIPAA. A 
deeper level challenge here was understanding that the use of technology created new 
HIPAA-compliance challenges that needed to be addressed and then appropriately 
incorporated.
Thus, for Dr. Collins, his decision factors were well thought out and, after Dr. Victoria’s 
review, appeared to be successful. Unfortunately, Dr. Collins was so happy to have 
found a web-based server that didn’t require additional costs, he did not review the 
HIPAA requirements to ensure compliance across all components of the service. This 
oversight highlights the importance of going over resources and information and 
double-checking what is needed for a legal, compliant, ethical, and successful tele-
psychology practice.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
The immediate first step Dr. Collins should take is to stop using the non–HIPAA- 
compliant software services, have his clients see him in his office, and begin research-
ing services that are compliant with federal law. Once he is able to identify a  
HIPAA-compliant program that meets the specific needs of telepsychology services, 
Dr. Collins should then be able to resume providing them. However, he should also 
incorporate a training session with his clients on how to use this new software and 
ensure they are capable of and comfortable with using it. Additionally, Dr. Collins 
should contact his malpractice insurance provider or attorney to obtain a consult to 
discuss any legal obligations he has with his having used a non–HIPAA-compliant 
service and the potential exposure of his client’s electronic health care data.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Given the factors in this case, the best decision is to do the following:
❚❚Only use technological services that are HIPAA compliant to ensure protections 
of clients’ health care data.
❚❚Before embarking on the use of technology within one’s practice setting, gather 
information from both published (trusted) resources and other experts through 
professional development activities and consultation with experienced colleagues.
❚❚Engage clients in face-to-face sessions, including a training session with the hard-
ware and software used in the telepsychology services.
❚❚Invite an expert or experienced colleague who uses telepsychology to evaluate 
and review policies, procedures, and services.
❚❚Consider consulting with your insurance provider or an attorney to ensure 
that newly developed policies and services are compliant with local, state, and 
federal laws.

88
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
Case Study 2: Transferring a Telepsychology 
Training Program to Another Professional
SETTING: UNIVERSITY PRACTICUM  
AND INTERNSHIP PROGRAM
This year Dr. Singh will be retiring from her position as a psychology professor at 
Atwater University. She has been on the faculty for more than 35 years, the last 15 
of which she served as the psychology practicum and internship director for both 
the undergraduate and graduate programs. One of her most recent additions to the 
program was the incorporation of telepsychology in her supervision of students in 
off-campus placements.
SCENARIO
The newly appointed psychology practicum and internship director is Dr. Juba, who 
will head up the program at the end of the semester when Dr. Singh retires. Dr. Juba 
has not previously engaged in any form of telepsychology services. In his first meeting 
with Dr. Singh to discuss the transition of leadership roles, Dr. Juba explained that he 
was concerned with the telepsychology services Dr. Singh had instituted and had par-
ticular concerns about how to protect confidential information. Dr. Juba was unfa-
miliar with the equipment and processes in place for these services and was not sure 
about their purpose. He went on to say that he was uncomfortable being involved in 
something with which he was unfamiliar and would like to know more about why 
Dr. Singh had instituted the use of telepsychology services in the field placement 
processes, as well as their benefits and risks, before moving forward with it.
Surprised by his concerns, Dr. Singh asked to postpone that conversation so 
she could first prepare and then discuss it with him in more detail during their next 
transition meeting. Dr. Singh recognized that she needed to provide him with a com-
prehensive understanding of the use of technology in supervision and to ensure his 
competence in this skill set so that Dr. Juba would be able to meet the requirements 
for the security and transmission of the data and information exchanged between him 
and students and so that he could evaluate properly whether students were guarding 
against unintended access or disclosure. In her preparations for their conversation, 
Dr. Singh outlined the decision-making process she initially went through to deter-
mine whether she should incorporate telepsychology services into the program and 
the precautions she took. She listed the positives and negatives for the use of technol-
ogy, as well as the costs and savings involved, and she described the positive impact 
she had seen since the inception of the use of telepsychology. Dr. Singh then evalu-
ated the entire implementation of the telepsychology services used in the practicum 
and internship supervisory process. With this information gathered and reviewed, 
she then arranged for another meeting with Dr. Juba.
In their meeting, which focused on the use of technology in the practicum and 
internship programs, Dr. Singh began the conversation by going over the Guidelines for 

89
Security and Transmission of Data
the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013), pointing out how those guidelines 
are the foundation of the program she developed. She then discussed the rationale for 
her use of telepsychology. She explained to Dr. Juba that a vital role the university-
based supervisor fulfills is the ongoing communication with and supervision of the 
students in their field placements. Although each student has a field-based supervi-
sor with whom they work closely at their individual location, the university-based 
supervisor must also be in continuous communication to ensure that the student’s 
needs for training and support are being met. Before the addition of technology, spe-
cifically biweekly audio-video meetings, Dr. Singh found herself often traveling to 
the various practicum or internship locations for on-site meetings throughout the 
semester. She was unable to connect with the students as often as she would have 
liked, especially those who were struggling in their placements for a variety of rea-
sons, and felt the long commutes to the numerous locations had wasted much time. 
Although Dr. Singh still felt obliged to make one or two physical site visits per place-
ment each semester, she said she was able to be more productive and felt she was 
actually providing each student with more enhanced supervision than she ever could 
without the use of technology. She discussed some of the training symposia and 
conference sessions she had attended to learn more about telepsychology and how 
other professionals had instituted the use of technology in their practice and training 
settings. From these training opportunities, Dr. Singh explained how she developed 
the current program she was using. She also encouraged Dr. Juba to seek out his own 
training and educational opportunities so that he could learn more about the use 
of technology and become more comfortable with its use.
While discussing the overall time-savings component the incorporation of tech-
nology has given to the internship and practicum program, Dr. Singh also explained 
to Dr. Juba that additional time needed to be spent up-front to ensure each student 
was comfortable with and competent in the use of the technology. She described how 
she spent a portion of her initial orientation meeting with all interns and practicum 
students each semester going over the proper procedures for using the equipment, 
as well as covering troubleshooting procedures. By doing this, she was ensuring the 
students’ understood the need to protect the security of client data and information 
and were compliant with the requirements.
Despite his initial reluctance, Dr. Juba found himself becoming more supportive. 
When talking about his concerns, he confessed that part of it was his own overall 
reluctance to use technology, except when he found himself being forced to adapt, 
across his personal and professional life. He thanked Dr. Singh for her explanation 
of the rationale for the use of technology, the evident extensive studies in which she 
engaged before adopting the use of technology, her continued evaluation of the pro-
cess and outcomes, as well as her enthusiasm for this new component in the intern-
ship and practicum program and for helping him understand ways to ensure the 
security of data and information transmission. He saw the benefits from the addition 
of technology and ways to protect against risk and now needed to learn more so that 
he could be more comfortable with it.
With Dr. Juba’s acceptance and newly discovered support for the use of technol-
ogy in the practicum and internship program, Dr. Singh arranged a training session 

90
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
for him to learn about the equipment, procedures, and processes involved. Dr. Singh 
carefully outlined a plan to walk Dr. Juba through the overall process, discussing the 
expected uses and overall procedures, and describing ways to ensure compliance with 
jurisdictional and federal laws and regulations, ethics, and telepsychology guidelines. 
From her notes and other documents, Dr. Singh then developed a formalized, writ-
ten manual that explained the various policies, troubleshooting steps, procedures, 
and processes involved in the telepsychology services to ensure protection of data in 
transmission and storage, among other important processes included in the psychol-
ogy practicum and internship programs. Finally, Dr. Singh arranged to meet in person 
with Dr. Juba to go over the hardware and software used. She gave him a demon-
stration, and then had him run through a practice scenario using the equipment 
and software by himself. She also identified potential threats to the integrity of data 
and information in the form of viruses, theft and damage of devices, malfunctioning 
hardware, and hackers, among others, and stressed the importance of being aware 
of current and future threats and developing steps to ensure that security measures 
were in place for protecting and controlling access to client/patient data within an 
information system. Finally, she reviewed the policies and procedures she developed 
to comply with guidelines and directives. Drs. Singh and Juba spent a full afternoon 
using the equipment and did not conclude the training until Dr. Juba was comfortable 
enough to use it himself and train others to both use and troubleshoot the equipment 
and software. At the conclusion of their training session, Dr. Juba was confident that 
he knew how to engage in basic troubleshooting steps when minor issues arose, as 
well as whom to call and how to connect with the university’s technology department 
for more advanced help. Later, Dr. Singh followed up again with Dr. Juba to ensure 
that he still felt comfortable with his new skills, and she provided him with additional 
resources in the event that he needed assistance in her absence.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Two key challenges Dr. Singh had to overcome in this scenario were (a) articulating 
the decision steps she took before incorporating telepsychology supervision services 
into the practicum and internship program and then (b) encouraging and support-
ing the continued incorporation of technology within her program. She knew the 
telepsychology supervision services she incorporated were successful because they 
were cost-effective and highly valued by the students. Additionally, she knew that 
she had followed relevant guidelines, research, and other resources to ensure that the 
program was compliant with relevant laws and requirements. To do that, Dr. Singh 
needed to review and reconsider her initial rationale and arguments for and against 
the program enhancement to educate Dr. Juba on the processes that had occurred 
throughout the start-up and continued use of the virtual supervision services. Dr. Singh 
needed to find a clear way to explain what and why she had done to an individual 
who was reluctant to embrace new uses of technology. She knew she needed to give 
him guidance on how to seek out additional trainings to advance his knowledge, skills, 
and overall comfort with the use of technology as well as ensure that he understood 

91
Security and Transmission of Data
the telepsychology guidelines and his responsibility not just for ensuring the security 
of data and transmission but for all of the elements needing attention when using 
telepsychology.
Similarly, Dr. Juba’s first, and largest, challenge was his reluctance to embrace 
technology, except when forced to do so. Having heard about the success of the tele­
psychology components within the program, he knew he had to listen and then 
carefully consider how he would adapt to using it. The final key element—and 
perhaps the most critical of all—in this scenario is the extensive training and prepa-
ration that both Drs. Singh and Juba went through to ensure Dr. Juba could operate 
the hardware and software to the point where he could train others on the proper use 
and troubleshooting procedures necessary for basic users. Only then could they both 
be sure they were safeguarding the security and transmission of data in the process 
of using technology with students.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
With the upcoming retirement of Dr. Singh, all decisions around the actions to take 
were placed directly with Dr. Juba. He knew he was inheriting a successful program, 
in which the use of technology was considered to be a highlight. Dr. Juba found he 
needed to gather more information in order to become more comfortable with how 
the technology was applied and information was protected and to be personally suc-
cessful with it. He knew he needed to find training opportunities and professional 
development activities to enhance his knowledge and skills. After an intensive train-
ing session with the equipment and software and the guidelines, rules, and regula-
tions, Dr. Juba asked Dr. Singh to supervise his initial attempts with the technology 
and to help guide his personal growth around his use of technology for the program.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Given the factors in this case, the best decision is to do the following:
❚❚Seek guidance and support from others who are using technology in a similar 
fashion to how you intend to use it.
❚❚Attend professional development activities to enhance and learn new skills 
around the use of technology.
❚❚Ensure a routine, ongoing process to evaluate telepsychology services, making 
modifications to improve the program and ensure that data are properly secured.
❚❚When evaluating the use of telepsychology services, also evaluate the various 
technologies being used, both software and hardware, and update them as 
necessary.
❚❚When retiring or turning over a program with telepsychology services to another 
professional, conduct a multifaceted briefing that includes the rationale for and 
use of technology, the results of all evaluation processes, and assurance that the 
new individual is competent in the use of all major aspects of the technology and 
understands the legal and ethical responsibilities of using technology.

92
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
Case Study 3: Stolen Laptop
SETTING: PRIVATE PRACTICE
Dr. Davis’s private practice is in a downtown office building in a large urban city. For the 
past 2 years, she has been using an audiovisual, HIPAA-compliant program to conduct 
therapy sessions with clients who live in rural settings, often 100 or 200 miles away, 
but all residing in the same state. As Dr. Davis’s telepsychology client numbers have 
grown, she has begun conducting sessions from her home office, where she is able to 
provide the same level of services to her telepsychology-based clients as she does with 
her face-to-face clients in her office downtown. Because of these new arrangements, 
Dr. Davis is now telecommuting from home 2 days a week, scheduling and providing 
a full range of telepsychology services to clients. The other 3 days a week she is in her 
office meeting with clients directly or engaging in administrative duties and other typi-
cal office duties. Periodically, Dr. Davis will conduct her telepsychology-based sessions 
with clients from her office, as well as always bringing in these clients for at least one 
face-to-face session in which they also practice using the computer-based programs 
before engaging in the distance audiovisual sessions. Because she conducts her audio-
visual therapeutic sessions in various settings, Dr. Davis has purchased a lightweight 
laptop computer that serves as her platform for telepsychology services. She transports 
it to and from her home and downtown office, where she uses it to conduct therapy, 
maintain up-to-date information and notes on her clients, e-mail clients, and maintain 
her schedule. Before she leaves her office each day, Dr. Davis runs a backup program 
to store the data from her laptop on a hard drive that is kept in the office.
SCENARIO
One evening on her way home from work, Dr. Davis stopped at the dry cleaners. While 
she was in the store, a thief broke the window on the side of her car and stole her brief-
case. Inside the briefcase was her laptop computer with all her files, including notes and 
appointments for many of her clients. After her initial reaction of shock and feelings of 
horror, Dr. Davis called the police to report the theft.
After reporting the situation to the police, Dr. Davis then went into “laptop lock-
down” mode. That is, when setting up her laptop, she had it programmed with soft-
ware to allow the capability to remotely lockdown her computer in case it was lost or 
stolen and thus protect the data it contained from being breached. This program was 
connected to her cell phone, and once Dr. Davis activated it from her phone, when 
the laptop was powered up, it would receive the signal sending it immediately into a 
remotely activated memory erase, followed by a shutdown. (Examples of these types 
of programs can be found at http://www.druva.com and http://www.absolute.com.)
While making her report to the police about the stolen laptop computer, Dr. Davis 
was able to retrieve the computer’s identification numbers from her office files, such 
as the computer’s make, model, serial number; its machine access code (MAC) num-
ber; and two photographs she had taken of her laptop. Because she routinely backed 
up her computer before leaving the office, Dr. Davis was not worried about losing 

93
Security and Transmission of Data
any data. However, she feared that even though she had taken the precautionary 
steps to remotely wipe and lockdown the laptop, there was always a chance that her 
clients’ personal information was at risk of being compromised. So Dr. Davis called 
her malpractice insurance company to obtain guidance on what steps she had to take 
legally, ethically, and professionally to let the appropriate agencies and individuals 
know about the potential breach of confidentiality and security loss.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The critical issue Dr. Davis faced in this situation was the potential loss of client infor-
mation as a result of a breach of confidentiality and security of her records. However, 
the decisions Dr. Davis made when she initially began the process allowed her to be 
more successful in her attempts to limit or prevent the loss of information. She pre-
pared for the potential loss by recording key identification numbers and descriptors of 
the laptop to provide the police so they could work on the recovery and identification 
of Dr. Davis as the owner of the laptop.
Dr. Davis also did her research to identify and purchase the software program to 
lockdown her laptop if it were lost or stolen. Her challenge at this step was to find an 
appropriate piece of software that she understood how to operate and could do what 
she wanted—in this case, wipe the memory storage and then shut down the laptop. 
Dr. Davis began her research on the Internet, reading about various programs and com-
panies that offered the type of software she was looking for. As she narrowed down 
her options, she also read the reviews and learned more about what the programs 
did and did not do. Dr. Davis then spoke with several colleagues about the software 
programs they used, asking for positives and negatives. During this research phase, 
Dr. Davis attended a conference that had several telepsychology sessions included. 
She found one that focused on security issues, and she was able to ask the presenter 
and others in the audience about their opinions, experiences, and recommendations. 
Upon completion of her data-gathering phase, Dr. Davis had narrowed her search 
down to two programs that were highly recommended. She then elected to go with 
the one that a close colleague also used.
Finally, in addition to the software program to lock down the laptop, Dr. Davis had 
the laptop password protected, so if someone turned on the power, he or she would first 
have to enter a password. Knowing that simple passwords can often be guessed if the 
individual knows a few things about the owner, Dr. Davis followed the standard criteria 
for generating a more secure password. That is, she created a password that was more 
than eight characters in length, included both uppercase and lowercase letters, num-
bers, and one or more nonalphabetic characters (e.g., @, #, $, %, ^, &; West Virginia 
Office of Technology, n.d.).
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
This situation worked out in a positive direction for Dr. Davis because she had been 
proactive in obtaining security features on the laptop she used to store sensitive and 
confidential client information. She maintained a set of separate records in her office 

94
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
with descriptive information about the laptop in case she had to report it stolen and 
would need to identify it if it was ever recovered. More important, Dr. Davis invested 
in a software program that was able to provide a high level of security to prevent a 
data breach or unauthorized access to sensitive and confidential information. With 
guidance from her malpractice insurance provider, Dr. Davis was directed on how to 
legally and appropriately handle the potential loss with her clients and third-party 
payers, as well as anyone else she needed to connect with for legal purposes.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Given the factors in this case, the best decision is to do the following:
❚❚Research and select a software program that best fits the need to be able to lock 
down or remotely wipe the memory of a computer in case it is lost or stolen.
❚❚Maintain in a safe location the critical information necessary for identifying 
your computer to the police in the event that it is lost or stolen.
❚❚Always use passwords that follow standard recommended criteria for passcode 
protection of your electronic equipment.
❚❚If electronic equipment is stolen, contact your malpractice insurance agency 
for a professional consult on the recommended actions that should be taken to 
contact clients, third-party payers, and insurance companies and other legally 
required steps when there is the loss of patient health information.
❚❚Routinely back up information onto separate secure memory storage, especially 
from a laptop that is transported from location to location.
Case Study 4: The Importance of Knowing 
When One Is Using Telepsychology
SETTING: MULTIDISCIPLINARY HEALTH CLINIC
Dr. Palomino is a psychologist working in an outpatient, multidisciplinary health 
clinic serving a wide range of clients. For the past 10 years, he has been employed 
with this clinic, engaged in a traditional setting and practice where he only provides 
direct services to individuals at the clinic. He does not engage, nor does he profess any 
interest, in expanding the services he provides to include any form of audiovisual 
technology. Dr. Palomino’s practice efforts are predominantly focused on indi-
vidual, face-to-face therapy sessions, while he periodically leads a few therapeutic 
groups when circumstances dictate this as an appropriate avenue for services to his 
clientele.
Although Dr. Palomino does not shy away from using technology in his every-
day life, he does not see the utility of trying to incorporate telepsychology into his 
therapeutic processes at this time. Specifically, he believes that the definition of tele-
psychology is limited to when one uses telecommunications technology to conduct 
therapy or meet with clients when they are in different locations. However, within 

95
Security and Transmission of Data
the past 2 years Dr. Palomino has begun to engage in therapeutic follow-up and mon-
itoring with his clients using e-mail and text messages. He has found that periodi-
cally being able to connect remotely with his clients has dramatically improved client 
follow-through with agreed-on therapeutic objectives and ongoing maintenance of 
skills. Using his phone, Dr. Palomino is able to set up alerts to remind him to connect 
with clients, send e-mail and text messages when he is away from the office, and keep 
in touch when emergencies arise. If asked whether this is a form of telepsychology, 
Dr. Palomino would say it is not, because he is just sending them messages and is not 
talking with or seeing his clients using technology.
Contrary to Dr. Palomino’s perspective, it is important to understand that the 
generally agreed-on definition of telepsychology services, also referred to as tele­practice, 
telemedicine, or telehealth, is a broad one that covers the use of any form of telecommu-
nications technology that uses electronic transmission of information over a distance. 
Examples include the definitions offered by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services (n.d.), the American Telemedicine Association (2014), and the Joint Task 
Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists (2013).
SCENARIO
One evening while he was riding the local public transportation system home dur-
ing the crowded rush hour, Dr. Palomino’s phone was stolen from his jacket pocket. 
He was not aware of the theft until he arrived at home and discovered it missing. 
He was devastated because he had so much personal and work information on his 
phone. Furthermore, he was angry with himself because for several months he had 
been thinking that he needed to password protect his phone, but he enjoyed being 
able to hit the power button and immediately begin working with the various pro-
grams, seeing e-mails, responding to text messages, and so on. As he began to realize 
how devastating this loss was, Dr. Palomino became frantic because he now realized 
that there was a lot of sensitive information on his phone, including clients’ names, 
contact information, and, more important, e-mails and text messages that were of a 
therapeutic nature.
Once his anxiety level calmed to a degree that he could refocus and think about 
what he needed to do next, Dr. Palomino contacted his phone carrier to ask whether 
they could disable and halt service to the phone. He then called the police to report 
the theft. Next, Dr. Palomino called his malpractice insurance company for a legal 
consultation on what steps he needed to take regarding the breach of confidentiality 
and loss of security for mental health records.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Because Dr. Palomino did not believe he was engaged in any form of telepsychol-
ogy services, he had not become properly informed, sought guidance, or gained new 
knowledge about how best to incorporate telepsychology services into his current 
practices. Had he reviewed published the professional guidelines on the use of tele-
psychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) and numerous other resources, both written 

96
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
and in the form of symposia and professional development activities, Dr. Palomino 
would have realized that he was indeed engaged in a form of telepsychology when 
he e-mailed and texted his clients in regard to their therapy goals, processes, and his 
follow-up on their activities. Once he realized that he was engaged in telepractice, 
Dr. Palomino should have followed the guidelines on how to maintain the security 
and safety of the information he was creating and transporting on his cell phone.
Another key element in this scenario is the lack of security Dr. Palomino main-
tained with his cell phone. At a bare minimum, he should have had his cell phone 
password protected to prevent someone from picking it up and being able to access 
the sensitive information.
Overall, the perception that using his cell phone for therapeutic interventions 
was not considered a form of telepsychology and not recognizing the need to protect 
the information in his cell phone were two key errors Dr. Palomino made. Had he 
considered that these were indeed a form of telepsychology, he could have begun to 
question what steps he needed to take to safeguard the confidential, sensitive infor-
mation he was carrying in his device.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Once he realized that using a phone for communications and for storing client-related 
information was engaging in telepsychology services, Dr. Palomino should have imme-
diately sought guidance on steps to safeguard that information. Researching how to 
protect the information by reading the available guidance and research, attending 
professional development events and talking with colleagues and other experts is the 
first step he should have taken. During this research process, Dr. Palomino should 
also have searched out resources on general protection of the device he was using to 
store and transport sensitive information, in this case, his cell phone. For example, the 
Federal Communications Commission (2015) published a consumer guide to protect-
ing one’s smart device. The recommendation includes suggestions to password restrict 
one’s phone and install antitheft software.
After learning about the various requirements and steps to take, Dr. Palomino 
should have immediately set up his phone with password protection and then installed 
antitheft software. Contrary to its name, antitheft software does not prevent the actual 
theft of the device, but most versions allow the individual to locate the device from 
another web-based device and lock the phone so that even if the thief has the pass-
code, access to the information in it is not possible. Additionally, many of these soft-
ware apps also allow the person to remotely remove, or “wipe,” the device by deleting 
contacts, text, and e-mail messages; photos; and user accounts such as Twitter and 
Instagram. So Dr. Palomino should have taken two key first steps by making his cell 
phone password protected and installing antitheft software.
Communication encryption software is another type of software that Dr. Palomino 
should have considered, based on his use of e-mail and texting with his clients. Numerous 
software companies create applications that encrypt various types of communications 
(e.g., text, e-mails, phone calls) on cell phones and tablets. By using encryption soft-
ware, Dr. Palomino could assure his clients that he was taking the appropriate steps 
to maintain the security and confidentiality of their sensitive and private information.

97
Security and Transmission of Data
Finally, Dr. Palomino should have maintained a separate file at home or in the 
office with the key cell phone identification data that were necessary not only to make 
the police report but also for his cell phone carrier to be able to ensure his service 
was terminated and, if possible, remotely wipe the data from his phone. Specifically, 
Dr. Palomino should have stored the phone’s make, model, and serial number. Cell 
phones will have either an International Mobile Station Equipment Identity (IMEI) 
or the Mobile Equipment Identifier (MEID). These are unique identifiers for each 
cell phone and are used by the carriers to determine whether the phone is valid or 
has been reported stolen. A simple search on the Internet will take one through the 
process to retrieve these numbers, or if the individual has the original box the phone 
came in, there is often a panel printed on it with the various numbers and key pieces 
of information that are used to identify the unique phone. (If the original box is avail-
able and it contains the information, one recommendation is to take a picture of the 
panel with the descriptive information and serial number, print it out, and then store 
it somewhere secure.)
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Given the factors in this case, the best decision is to do the following:
❚❚Understand that telepsychology services are broadly defined. There is informa-
tion and guidance on how to best safeguard, protect, and engage in telepsychol-
ogy services. Be sure to determine whether you are practicing telepsychology with 
any of your devices.
❚❚Always have the phone password protected.
❚❚When using a phone to store or access client information, install an antitheft 
software application to be able to remove the data and lock the device if it is 
stolen or lost.
❚❚If you use your phone to conduct therapeutic services, including e-mails and 
text messaging, as well as direct phone calls with the clients, then consider add-
ing a software application that encrypts those communication venues.
❚❚In a safe place, maintain the critical information necessary for identifying your 
cell phone so you can share that information with the police and your cell 
phone service carrier in the event that it is ever lost or stolen.
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚Perform a risk analysis of your system and method of telepractice at the outset.
❚❚Seek consultation and training to ensure you understand proper security and 
transmission of data.
❚❚If a breach is suspected or known, be prepared to notify all affected parties and 
to do all that is possible to control or correct the breach.
❚❚Only use technological services that are HIPAA compliant to ensure protection 
of your clients’ health care data.

98
PA L O M A R E S  A N D  M I L L E R
❚❚Consult with your insurance provider and with an attorney to ensure that newly 
developed policies and services are compliant with local, state, and federal laws.
❚❚The evaluation of the use of telepsychology services should include the vari-
ous technologies being used, both software and hardware, to update them as 
necessary.
❚❚Routinely back up information onto separate secure memory storage, especially 
from a laptop that is transported from location to location.
❚❚Research and select a software program that fits your needs best in being able to 
lock down and/or remotely wipe the memory of the computer in case it is stolen.
References
American Psychological Association. (2007). Record keeping guidelines. American 
Psychologist, 62, 9, 993–1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.9.993
American Telemedicine Association. (2014). Core operational guidelines for telehealth 
services involving provider–patient interactions. Washington, DC: Author.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. (n.d.). Telemedicine. Retrieved from 
https://www.medicaid.gov/medicaid/benefits/telemed/index.html
Federal Communications Commission. (2015). Protecting your mobile device. Retrieved 
from https://www.fcc.gov/consumers/guides/protect-your-mobile-device
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 
1936 (1996).
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf
West Virginia Office of Technology. (n.d.). Password criteria. Retrieved from http://
www.technology.wv.gov/SiteCollectionDocuments/Security%20Monthly%20
Newsletter/2012/Aprilb%202012%20-%20Passwords.pdf

100
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
Psychologists are very familiar with their ethical responsibility to maintain  
client confidentiality in the creation, access, transfer, storage, and disposal of tradi-
tional records and to ensure they are knowledgeable of state and institutional regula-
tions that direct these responsibilities (APA, 2017). Although the APA Ethical Principles 
of Psychologists and Code of Conduct addresses electronic transmission, storage, and dis-
posal “in any medium,” they are more general than specific regarding telepsychology, 
primarily because technology has advanced and provides more opportunities for psy-
chologists and their clients to communicate and work together than were available 
in 2010.
In their development of Guideline 6 (Disposal of Data and Information and 
Technologies) of the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, the Joint Task Force 
(2013), recognizing the differences psychologists face regarding proper disposal of data 
transmitted and stored in various telecommunication systems versus nonelectronic 
systems, described how psychologists might apply the guideline in their practices:
Psychologists strive to securely dispose of software and hardware used 
in the provision of telepsychology services in a manner that insures that 
the confidentiality and security of any patient/client information is not 
compromised. When doing so, psychologists carefully clean all the data 
and images in the storage media before re-use or disposal consistent with 
federal, state, provincial, territorial, and other organizational regulations and 
guidelines. (p. 798)
This chapter provides a more in-depth examination of how psychologists can 
appropriately apply this guideline in an independent practice setting, a Veterans Affairs 
hospital setting, a university, and an industrial or organizational setting. The reader is 
encouraged to note compliance with other telepsychology guidelines throughout the 
scenario, including knowledge of guidelines and ethical standards, informed consent, 
confidentiality of data and information, and security and transmission of data and 
information.
Case Study 1: Cleaning and Disposing  
of Hardware and Software
SETTING: INDEPENDENT PRACTICE
Dr. Jason Carter was a psychologist in independent practice. He offered assessment 
and therapy services to adult clients with a diversity of clinical concerns. Dr. Carter’s 
clientele was a relatively mobile population. He served many business executives 
who traveled frequently for work and college students from a large local university 
who often returned to their home towns during summers. In addition, Dr. Carter, who 
spoke several languages, worked with an outreach group that delivered behavioral 
health services to rural agricultural workers who traveled to the area for seasonal 
employment.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

101
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
SCENARIO
An early adopter of telepsychology, Dr. Carter offered videoconferencing and telephone 
sessions to existing clients who traveled within his licensure jurisdiction. He was knowl-
edgeable regarding regulatory considerations specific to telepsychology, as well as other 
sources of policy and practical guidance. He resided in a state where the psychology 
board had adopted guidelines for telepsychology and that required insurance companies 
to reimburse for telehealth services. Dr. Carter was familiar with state and jurisdictional 
regulation regarding telepsychology. He was familiar with the Guidelines for the Prac-
tice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013), developed by the American Psychological 
Association, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), and 
The American Insurance Trust (The Trust). He attended several workshops related to 
telepsychology online and through his state psychological association. He belonged to 
several online telehealth consultation groups from various professional organizations, 
from which he could access relevant information.
Dr. Carter was thoughtful in his selection and application of technology products 
to manage his clinical work. He encrypted his laptop computer’s drive in accordance 
with the recommendations provided by his malpractice carrier (The Trust, 2014) and 
used only encrypted USB drives to transfer client/patient information. He addition-
ally encrypted and password protected any file with patient information stored on his 
computer. His electronic medical record provider was a well-established company that 
offered appointment reminders through secure text, secure e-mail, or interactive voice 
response technology.
Dr. Carter was diligent in selecting technology products through which he interacted 
with clients directly. After examining several videoconferencing products, he subscribed 
to one designed for health care. He conducted telephone sessions from the landline 
telephone in his office. Dr. Carter used a tablet device with videoconferencing software 
to conduct sessions with clients and colleagues. Although his videoconferencing pro-
gram offered a mobile application, he elected not to conduct videoconferencing on 
his smartphone because he felt that the screen size was too small and he would lose 
valuable visual data. He did not routinely text with clients, but would occasionally 
respond to a client’s text regarding administrative information using an encrypted 
text program designed for health care. He communicated only administrative infor-
mation (e.g., appointment times) with his clients over an encrypted e-mail program 
designed for health care. He obtained a business associate agreement (as required 
by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act [HIPAA], 1996) with all 
technology vendors who could have access to patient information. Overall, Dr. Carter 
demonstrated an awareness of and compliance with telepsychology guidelines and 
ethical standards, as well as state and federal regulations. He identified a videoconfer-
encing product that featured encryption and was compliant with HIPAA.
The demand for telepsychology services in Dr. Carter’s practice grew. Word of mouth 
in the local professional community yielded many referrals. Dr. Carter worked closely 
with the local organization in conjunction with volunteer clinics in rural communities 
to deliver telepsychology services to clients who engaged in seasonal agricultural work. 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

102
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
In light of the growth in his practice and the demands for telepsychology services, 
Dr. Carter decided to upgrade and expand several important tools in his practice. He 
hoped to purchase a new computer and mobile device. He also debated whether to 
update the e-mail program he accessed through the Internet (e.g., web-based e-mail) 
and the software he used to conduct videoconferencing. Dr. Carter, who had consis-
tently been a thoughtful telepsychology practitioner, realized that he knew little about 
best practices related to making these changes.
Dr. Carter was familiar with the APA’s (2007) Record Keeping Guidelines, including 
the recommendation that all records, including electronic records, be maintained and 
disposed of in accordance with HIPAA’s Security Rule and other jurisdictional guide-
lines. In the past, he had destroyed paper records after the amount of time required to 
maintain them in his jurisdiction. However, he had never before replaced the computer 
on which he stored client files. Additionally, Dr. Carter had read the Guidelines for the 
Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) and understood that he was ethically 
required to consider client/patient data on the other hardware and software he used 
to deliver services, including his tablet device, mobile device, and web-based e-mail 
program and videoconferencing software. He wondered also whether there were other 
facets of his practice that he would need to address that were as of yet unknown to him. 
Stated simply, he did know what he did not know.
Could he simply delete his encrypted computer files and dispose of his computer? 
Dr. Carter’s mobile carrier offered discounts to anyone who surrendered their old 
mobile device. Could he simply surrender his old phone? What were his responsibili-
ties regarding patient information on his mobile device? Could he simply close his 
encrypted e-mail account or end his contract with his videoconferencing vendor? 
Dr. Carter realized that this exciting period of growth introduced new challenges. 
Perhaps more important, he was uncertain where best to pursue the information he 
needed. Who was best suited to answer his questions?
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Dr. Carter first focused on which facets of his practice would be affected by these changes. 
He recalled a telepsychology workshop he attended in which the speakers highlighted 
the value of conducting a self-study that addressed multiple facets of technology use, 
including the disposal of data. The speakers provided a document for self-guided assess-
ment (see Exhibit 6.1). After reviewing the self-study, Dr. Carter realized that several 
important aspects of his practice would need to be addressed before updating his office 
equipment, including
❚❚files with client information stored on his personal computer;
❚❚client contact information stored on his mobile device;
❚❚client information stored in the videoconferencing software on his wireless, 
mobile computing device that was touchscreen enabled (e.g., tablet);
❚❚the secure text application on his tablet device and smartphone (e.g., Internet-
enabled mobile telephone device); and
❚❚his web-based e-mail service.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

103
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
Using the criteria in Exhibit 6.1, collegial recommendations, and published stan-
dards available through the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 
Dr. Carter engaged his self-study.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Carter also sought individualized consultation, reaching out to his online consulta-
tion communities. He sent an e-mail detailing his needs to several electronic mailing 
lists. Community list members offered some guidance and largely encouraged him to 
pursue more technically sophisticated guidance through the NIST and, perhaps, even 
an information technology (IT) consultant specializing in health care.
After conducting his self-study and consulting with colleagues, Dr. Carter felt that 
he needed additional technical guidance to help him address his data disposal needs. 
He identified the following resources, the first three of which were recommended to 
him through his online telehealth consultation communities:
❚❚Guidelines for Media Sanitization (Kissel, Regenscheid, Scholl, & Stine 2014) and 
other NIST publications,
❚❚malpractice carrier,
❚❚health care attorney or health care IT consultant, and
❚❚colleague or consultation group.
First, Dr. Carter visited the NIST website to seek specific technical guidance. NIST 
offered Guidelines for Media Sanitization (Kissel et al., 2014), a publication that opera-
tionalized some basic terms and approaches related to disposing of data. The guidelines 
offered Dr. Carter insight into how he might approach data disposal. Dr. Carter was a 
technologically savvy individual, but he found aspects of the NIST information dense 
and challenging to operationalize. He reasoned that he would prefer some guidance 
from someone with experience in the application of NIST principles to health care to 
ensure that he understood how best to proceed.
E X H I B I T  6 . 1
Components of Self-Study
❚ 
❚Do I store patient information on my personal computer, tablet, or mobile device?
❚ 
❚Do I store patient information on a shared computer, tablet, or mobile device?
❚ 
❚Do I transfer patient information using an external data storage device (e.g., USB drive)?
❚ 
❚Do I store patient information on a cloud-based service?
❚ 
❚Do I maintain client contact information on my mobile device?
❚ 
❚Do I use a software program on my computer (e.g., videoconferencing, e-mail, 
contact manager) that retains client information (e.g., telephone number, e-mail 
address, IP address)?
❚ 
❚Do I use a cloud-based service that stores patient information?
❚ 
❚Do I have a business associate agreement with technology product vendors who could 
access patient information?
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

104
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
Next, Dr. Carter contacted his malpractice carrier to consult with risk management 
consultants regarding best practices in data disposal. The attorneys provided specific 
guidance regarding how best to approach deleting client information from his computer 
(e.g., both deleting files and reformatting his hard drive), his mobile device and tablet 
(e.g., deleting contacts, removing mobile applications, deleting the call history and/or 
applying the device’s factory reset after he had removed all contacts that he wished to 
retain), and videoconferencing software (e.g., ensuring that all patient contact informa-
tion and call history had been deleted from his account, contacting the vendor to further 
pursue this change). The risk management consultants also referenced NIST standards 
and helped Dr. Carter conceptualize what information must be addressed before he 
could dispose of the software and hardware in his office.
Now Dr. Carter possessed an understanding of what information ought to be 
addressed and how it ought to be addressed. The question that remained was who 
would be best to perform the tasks. Dr. Carter was somewhat uncomfortable execut-
ing the plan. He had never reformatted a computer hard drive or reset a mobile device 
previously. Online searches yielded videos that could guide Dr. Carter through these 
steps. Again, he wondered if he could benefit from the guidance of an IT expert 
with experience in health care. His online consultation community had provided 
several recommendations, but Dr. Carter worried about the cost this would impose. 
Still, his time was limited because of his growing practice. Although he hoped to  
gain instruction to increase his competencies in this aspect of practice, he did not 
have the time to pursue the information alone. Ultimately, Dr. Carter elected to 
hire an established information technology consultant who was aware of HIPAA 
requirements to assist him in the necessary steps of deleting computer files, deleting 
his computer hard drive, resetting his mobile device, deleting all contacts from his 
e-mail and videoconferencing programs, and selecting products for his next steps 
in practice.
Dr. Carter decided that the benefits of an IT consultant outweighed the costs. 
He contacted the referrals provided to him. The consultant noted that Dr. Carter’s 
considerable work before reaching out would allow them to work efficiently and 
reduce costs. Although the consultant offered clients a business associate agree-
ment, she noted that she hoped she would have no opportunity to interact with 
Dr. Carter’s client data. Instead, the consultant hoped to provide Dr. Carter with 
hands-on instruction that would teach Dr. Carter to dispose of client information 
himself. They met one time for several hours. The consultant visited Dr. Carter 
at his office. They discussed his needs (e.g., to replace hardware and software) and 
his desire to learn strategies to manage similar needs in the future. The consultant 
referenced the APA (2007) Record Keeping Guidelines and NIST’s (Kissel et al., 2014) 
Guidelines for Media Sanitization. Together they removed all client/patient information 
from the hardware and software that Dr. Carter used in his practice. The IT consul-
tant noted that the approach she recommended represented an abundance of caution. 
However, Dr. Carter was pleased to have a straightforward path to managing the 
disposal of client/patient information moving forward and preferred to adopt a 
conservative approach.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

105
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Exhibit 6.2 summarizes Dr. Carter’s data removal plan. After disposing of the data 
together, Dr. Carter and the IT consultant discussed next steps for his practice. The 
IT consultant reinforced Dr. Carter’s responsible practices of selecting telecommuni-
cations products for his practice (e.g., new videoconferencing software, e-mail, text 
programs) that were designed specifically for health care and that offered a business 
associate agreement. The consultant encouraged Dr. Carter to consider a more stream-
lined approach (e.g., a single vendor that offered several of these products) to simplify 
future data disposal efforts. Dr. Carter ultimately elected to use encrypted e-mail and 
text programs integrated into his electronic medical record. After reviewing the pros 
and cons of other products, he selected a videoconferencing program with expanded 
functionality (e.g., superior privacy protections) and a reduced cost.
Documenting the changes in his hardware and software, Dr. Carter noted the steps 
that he took to arrive at his approach to data disposal. He recorded relevant informa-
tion on the methods and procedures he used to dispose of the sensitive information. 
He recorded information on all of the hardware that he recycled or replaced (e.g., 
model, serial number, where he originally purchased the equipment). He authored 
a brief policy regarding how he would take steps to dispose of sensitive information 
in the future. He provided brief information to new clients and posted a copy of the 
E X H I B I T  6 . 2
Dr. Carter’s Data Removal Plan
❚ 
❚Hardware:
❚ 
❚Delete all files from laptop computer.
❚ 
❚Reformat computer hard drive and USB drives.
❚ 
❚Complete “factory reset” or “hard reset” for mobile device and tablet.
❚ 
❚Ensure that no patient information remains on encrypted external storage devices 
(e.g., USB flash drives) by deleting files and reformatting the drive.
❚ 
❚Recycle hardware with local technology recycling company or with vendor offering rebate.
❚ 
❚Software:
❚ 
❚Delete all contacts and call history from text, e-mail, and videoconferencing programs.
❚ 
❚Uninstall software and mobile applications from all hardware.
❚ 
❚Log in to any web-based interfaces (e.g., e-mail program, web management for secure 
text account) to delete any stored information (e.g., stored patient information, call 
logs of prior clinical contacts).
❚ 
❚Contact the vendors for web-based services to inquire how to ensure that all deleted 
information was permanently deleted from any future access.
❚ 
❚Future Steps:
❚ 
❚Select software and mobile applications designed for health care.
❚ 
❚Obtain a business associate agreement from all vendors.
❚ 
❚Consider authoring a policy regarding data disposal to be shared with clients during 
informed consent.
❚ 
❚Ensure that informed consent document includes a review of risks and benefits 
regarding technology use, as well as some basic information regarding record 
maintenance and disposal.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

106
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
policy on his website. He stored the detailed information in his own records, along-
side other documents such as informed consent procedures, releases of information 
procedures, and other documents in his practice. He updated his own documentation 
(e.g., HIPAA privacy policy) with information regarding his new procedures.
Although Dr. Carter was an exceptionally knowledgeable telepsychology practi-
tioner, his struggle to conceptualize data disposal offers insight into a fundamental 
challenge of technology use in health care. Psychologists possess extensive training 
in the science, practice, and ethics of psychology, but little experience in IT. Despite 
this, technology’s increasingly prominent role in psychology requires psychologists to 
stretch beyond their training and expand their competencies. Dr. Carter’s decision to 
seek guidance from an IT expert while bolstering his own competencies represents an 
ethical practice that is fundamental to psychology: seeking consultation in an emerging 
area of practice. By acknowledging the limitations of his knowledge base and recogniz-
ing an opportunity for growth, Dr. Carter advanced his telepsychology practice, offered 
improved access to care, and rendered himself better able to manage his practice and 
consult with his colleagues facing similar challenges.
Case Study 2: Disposal of Cookies  
and Malware
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE APPLICATION
Psychologists also strive to be aware of malware, cookies, etc., and dispose 
routinely of them on an ongoing basis when telecommunication technologies 
are used. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: INDUSTRIAL AND ORGANIZATIONAL
Dr. Jack Murphy was a fairly recent graduate of an industrial and organizational (I/O) 
psychology program, with several major conglomerate companies for clients since he 
had apprenticed with a well-established consulting psychologist for supervised practical 
training before obtaining licensure as a psychologist. Dr. Murphy was eager to get his 
career underway and recognized the value in spending money to make money. He had 
invested in excellent and coordinated gear for his office and ensured via an expert IT 
consultation that he was aware of, developed policies for, and implemented the most 
ethical and technologically savvy I/O practice within a several-state area.
SCENARIO
As a consulting I/O psychologist, Dr. Murphy was interested in applying innovative 
technology to enhance his busy practice. His training model had involved telecommu-
nications for both scheduling and interviewing many client contacts but he was now 
interested in hosting web-based consultation forums, trainings (both interactive live and 
store and forward formats), and even conducting contact interviews and assessments 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

107
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
via a web portal and online assessment services. He was often hired by international 
companies to assess productivity and personnel efficiencies throughout the company 
that could span several thousand individuals in various divisions around the country 
(and sometimes the globe). Data collection costs could be reduced greatly by using 
online strategies that could clump data sets and minimize personal contact with the 
individuals being assessed. This would also decrease his travel and consulting expenses, 
making services more streamlined and fiscally efficient for his clients. The challenges 
that Dr. Murphy faced in considering these potential services were significant, however.  
Dr. Murphy wondered what would happen if a virus got into the e-mail system he used 
to send out invites to the surveys? How could he ensure that cookies were not left on the 
evaluation devices that employees would be using, and what types of systems and meth-
ods would be the most secure for protecting against hacking or infiltration by external 
parties? Developing methods for technology-based evaluation and assessment that meet 
the needs of the client along with the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task 
Force, 2013), particularly related to malware, cookies, and unfortunate instantaneous 
technology events, was critical for Dr. Murphy’s practice. He knew all too well the woes 
of another telepsychologist whose e-mail had been hacked by a virus and sent some 
untoward solicitations to both colleagues and clients and another whose technologi-
cally sophisticated borderline patient hacked into his electronic records system and set 
malware in place to permanently delete the server.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Murphy decided to seek consultation from an IT expert and search for innova-
tive products that might meet his needs. He generated the following list of discussion 
items to address with his consultant:
❚❚How could firewalls protect his server from hackers and/or decrease the func-
tionality of his interactive consulting software?
❚❚Could online portals for data collection and retention systems solve his storage 
needs?
❚❚Would passwords be enough to protect his system and consulting clients’ needs?
❚❚How could he ensure he was not leaving cookies on his devices, and, further-
more, how could he assist his many survey respondents to do the same?
❚❚Was there a mechanism to erase and remove e-mails once they were viewed?
❚❚Were there efficient e-mail methods that could maintain confidentiality and 
guard against security risks?
❚❚Was there a method that he could use that would ensure the technology both 
he and his clients (and thousands of survey respondents) could use such as 
single-use technologies (i.e., providing tablets for the sole purpose of data 
collection)?
❚❚Were there legal aspects that he needed to consider? Dr. Murphy was concerned 
that he may be engaging in interjurisdictional practice because his clients were 
worldwide. Were there special federal guidelines or requirements for data 
transmittal?
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

108
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
❚❚What would be the licensure implications for obtaining information from 
employees in other countries or states? Had he considered the types of services 
that might be allowed without licensure from the location where the services 
were provided?
❚❚How would all of these security measures be best addressed in the informed 
consent process? Was this even necessary, and what level of detail was 
acceptable?
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Murphy managed to complete several of his important to-do items to further the 
development of his office. He recognized that he would not require much overhead 
in office space, which could be set aside for computer and server IT consultation. He 
also realized that not all jurisdictions license the practice of I/O work: All jurisdictions 
license clinical, counseling, and school specialties in the practice of psychology, but less 
than half license I/O and consulting psychologists. Dr. Murphy recognized that aware-
ness and compliance with the regulatory rules regarding licensure would be important 
both for the jurisdiction from which he would be consulting and the jurisdiction of the 
organizational client. Dr. Murphy sought legal consultation to establish best practices 
related to his understanding of and comfort with the distinct, respective regulatory 
definitions of title and scope of practice that might conflict with the proposed work. 
He also confirmed with his malpractice carrier that he indeed had purchased the most 
robust policy for his unique practice setting.
Case Study 3: Developing Data  
Disposal Policies
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE APPLICATION
Psychologists are encouraged to develop policies and procedures for the 
destruction of data and information related to clients/patients. . . . Psychologists 
are encouraged to document the methods and procedures used when disposing 
of the data and information and the technologies used to create, store, or 
transmit the data and information, as well as any other technology utilized in 
the disposal of data and hardware. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: VETERANS AFFAIRS HOSPITAL
The U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) supports the use of telepsychology 
through policy creation, postdoctoral training programs in telepsychology, and the 
implementation of telemental health services throughout the nation’s largest health 
care system. A typical VA telemental health program connects mental health clini-
cians (psychologists, psychiatrists, social workers, among others) to veterans in VA 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

109
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
medical centers, community-based outpatient clinics, and veteran residences via live 
videoconferencing.
Historically, VA telepsychology clinicians used large, costly (e.g., $3,000–$10,000) 
desktop videoconferencing units to deliver videoconferencing care to clients. However, in 
recent years, clinicians increasingly used a simpler solution that consisted of an inexpen-
sive (e.g., $50–$100) web camera with integrated microphone attached to an Internet-
enabled computer (Smucker Barnwell, Juretic, Hoerster, Felker, & Van de Plasch, 2012). 
Software applications (e.g., Cisco Jabber, FaceTime, Vidyo) that were “patched and oper-
ated in accordance with Federal and Department security policies and guidelines in order 
to mitigate known and future security vulnerabilities” (U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs, 2014) provided the necessary security and connection for videoconferencing 
and were relatively inexpensive.
SCENARIO
The transition from larger, costly desktop videoconferencing units to inexpensive 
software-based solutions for clinicians was an important step in the dissemination of 
telepsychology services throughout the VA. Less costly equipment made telepsychology 
a more viable option for VA medical centers with smaller equipment budgets and fewer 
IT staff resources to maintain the complex hardware. With many VA systems receiving 
recommendations from leadership to expand telemental health programming, a sim-
pler technical solution for the clinician was welcome. Some VA facilities were required 
to train most mental health staff in the provision of telemental health services over a 
several-month period. Without the ability to transition to smaller, less costly technology 
options, rapid, large-scale expansion of services would have been delayed significantly.
The transition away from the larger desktop videoconferencing units also intro-
duced a new concern for many telemental health programs: what to do with the old 
hardware. In most instances, the hardware would be placed in a VA community-based 
outpatient clinic, where it would provide telepsychology clinical care for clients who 
are seen there. Those pieces of hardware that were outdated would be decommissioned 
and recycled.
Dr. Ellen Blanche was a psychologist who was navigating this process in her local 
VA. As team leader for her VA telemental heath program, she developed policies for 
her team in conjunction with her VA’s facility leadership, the Office of Telehealth 
Services, and her regional Veterans Integrated Service Network (VISN) telehealth 
leadership. As a psychologist, Dr. Blanche’s application of telepsychology was guided 
by the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013), best practice 
publications from the American Telemedicine Association (ATA), and consultation 
from the robust telemental health consultation community in the VA nationwide. 
Dr. Blanche worked with her VA’s local leadership to author policies for her staff 
related to information security, privacy, and confidentiality when using technol-
ogy. She advocated for integrated information regarding technology use into facil-
ity informed consent documentation. She ensured that all staff verbally apprised 
clients of the risks and benefits of the technology products that they used. She also 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

110
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
encouraged clinicians to apprise clients of their own roles in securing their protected 
health information (e.g., password protecting electronic devices they used to commu-
nicate with her, ensuring privacy in a room where they had a videoconferencing or 
telephone session, others). Dr. Blanche and her team of psychologists were thought-
ful and thorough regarding the creation of telehealth policies.
Dr. Blanche was pleased when she learned that her team would be transition-
ing from the traditional desktop videoconferencing hardware to software programs. 
She understood that this would mean a lower operating budget for the program, the 
opportunity to recruit more psychologists to deliver telehealth care to veterans, and 
an overall simpler technology infrastructure. She also realized that, despite her thor-
ough approach to policy development, she was uncertain of what to do, if anything, 
with the old equipment.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Blanche understood from reading the APA Guidelines for the Practice of Tele-
psychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) that the old hardware could have protected 
health information on it. She felt ethically compelled to ensure the proper dis-
posal of this information. However, she knew little regarding the maintenance of 
this equipment. Like many large-scale hospital systems, the VA possesses compe-
tent, thorough IT staff. As the team leader for her VA’s telemental health program,  
Dr. Blanche was well acquainted with her IT staff at the VA. Her IT department worked 
closely with the national Office of Telehealth Services and was familiar with the 
demands of HIPAA (1996), the Health Information Technology for Economic and Clini-
cal Health Act (HITECH; 2009), and other regulations governing protected health infor-
mation. Was it appropriate for her to convey her concerns regarding the patient data 
potentially stored on her equipment to the IT staff? As a competent telepsychologist, 
Dr. Blanche was still not a technologist and did not possess the training to digest and 
critique IT policies per se. Although she recognized that she needed a positive working 
relationship with her IT department and did not wish to be perceived as distrusting IT 
staff, she was uncomfortable not asking any questions. Was there a role for the mental 
health professionals in disposing of the data? What should be her team’s policy regard-
ing this important matter? Dr. Blanche felt clear that she was required to advocate for 
ethical data disposal, but she wished to manage the issue diplomatically.
The IT department at Dr. Blanche’s VA was collaborative, competent, and 
well-versed in the needs of telehealth. However, Dr. Blanche recalled the guid-
ance that
psychologists are encouraged to develop policies and procedures for  
the destruction of data and information related to clients/patients. . . .  
Psychologists are encouraged to document the methods and procedures 
used when disposing of the data and information and the technologies used 
to create, store, or transmit the data and information, as well as any other 
technology utilized in the disposal of data and hardware. (Joint Task Force, 
2013, p. 798)
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

111
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
She realized that her efforts to generate policies for other aspects of telepsychology 
practice for her team had neglected the issue of data disposal.
Dr. Blanche decided that whatever the role of her clinicians, even if it was one of 
noninvolvement, her team ought to have a clearer understanding of IT data disposal 
practices and a policy for their own data disposal efforts. To pursue the information 
necessary to generate this policy, Dr. Blanche set a meeting with the head of her 
facility’s IT department. To further educate herself on the technical requirements for 
data disposal, Dr. Blanche spoke with her IT staff contact, who suggested that she 
familiarize herself with the NIST (Kissel et al., 2014) Guidelines for Media Sanitization. 
She reviewed some of the basics of NIST media sanitization (see Exhibit 6.3) with 
her team.
Dr. Blanche met with her IT department lead. She was not surprised to learn that 
the IT department had already developed a detailed data disposal plan that complied 
with NIST standards. As a psychologist, however, Dr. Blanche sought to determine 
how she could develop a data disposal policy and documentation process appropri-
ate for her team as well as the expanding number of telepsychologists in the larger 
hospital system. This meeting was critical in providing the information necessary to 
inform policy creation. She expressed her concerns, and listened. Following is an 
excerpt from the meeting:
	
Dr. Blanche:	 Thank you so much for meeting with me. My team and  
I are delighted to be receiving new equipment. As you know, 
I am hoping to discuss how the information stored in the 
old equipment will be managed. I know that our IT depart-
ment has policies that manage the disposal of protected 
health information. The upgrade in equipment and sched-
uled removal of the old videoconferencing units really high-
lighted for me that I do not understand these policies well. 
So please, bear with me as I try to understand how my team 
E X H I B I T  6 . 3
National Institute of Standards and Technology Recommendations for Media Sanitization
❚ 
❚After sanitization, a paper or electronic certificate of media disposition should be 
completed for each piece of electronic media that has been sanitized.
❚ 
❚For a large number of devices with data of very low confidentiality, an organization 
may choose not to complete the certificate.
❚ 
❚The certificate should record at least the following details: product manufacturer, model 
and serial number; organizational identifier (if applicable); media type (i.e., what is 
it) and source (i.e., user or computer the media came from); sanitization description; 
method used to remove data (i.e., overwrite, cryptographic erase, etc.); sanitization tool 
used; verification method (i.e., full, quick sampling, etc.); postsanitization destination 
(if known); and data backup (if applicable).
Note. Adapted from “Guidelines for Media Sanitization, NIST Special Publication 800-88, Revision 1,” by  
R. Kissel, A. Regenscheid, M. Scholl, and K. Stine, 2014 (http://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/
NIST.SP.800-88r1.pdf). In the public domain.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

112
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
can be good partners in the established data disposal pro-
cess and follow our professional guidelines regarding good 
practice.
	
IT:	 Thanks, Dr. Blanche, for calling this meeting. It’s a great 
opportunity for us to teach the staff we support regarding 
their equipment and how best to maintain it. We will be 
moving the old videoconferencing hardware to new loca-
tions within the health care system. Our practices require 
us to perform a reset of the videoconferencing units, clear-
ing all information and restoring it to the state in which it 
existed when we first installed it. Sensitive information can 
be stored in several places on your videoconferencing units. 
Perhaps the most obvious is the Contacts list and the call his-
tory. Our policies prohibit clinicians from storing any patient 
information in the Contacts portion of the hardware, and 
we recommend that clinicians intermittently purge call logs. 
And we double-check.
	
Dr. Blanche:	 That’s a great point. I know that my team knows never to 
store information in the Contacts section, but I wonder if we 
are purging call logs.
	
IT:	 The videoconferencing unit call logs display the patient’s 
video­conferencing account “address,” which typically 
includes a portion of the patient’s name. This is why we rec-
ommend that clinicians clear the call logs to ensure no one 
could tell when and to whom calls were placed. Again, we will 
reset the entire device when we dispose of data using a spe-
cial program that erases it. A good analogy would be mobile 
devices: The mobile phones and tablets that telemental health 
clinicians use to call patients and, sometimes, deliver care 
in remote locations. We intermittently update these devices 
for those staff approved to have them. When we collect the 
old device from clinicians, we purge all contacts and call log 
information.
	
Dr. Blanche:	 I didn’t even think about the mobile devices!
	
IT:	 If you are developing a policy to help your staff think 
through data disposal, I would recommend that you include 
all hardware that is used to communicate with patients—
videoconferencing units, mobile phones, and tablets.
	
Dr. Blanche:	 That’s great input. So once you take these devices away, how 
do you keep track of what happens to them? How do you 
make sure the data are destroyed?
	
IT:	 Each of your devices possesses a bar code. That bar code is 
scanned whenever it is “checked out” or “checked in” by a 
clinician. Important steps of our protocols ensure that the IT 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

113
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
staff member who checks it in clears all the information pos-
sessed on that device. We use a special program to delete data 
and reformat the device to its factory settings. Then we plug 
the device in and manually check to make sure that noth-
ing remains. Our practices conform to NIST media sanitiza-
tion guidelines, and we maintain a digital certification of the 
reformatting.
	
Dr. Blanche:	 That is very helpful. How can my clinicians help?
	
IT:	 They can be diligent not to store inappropriate information, 
such as patient names or patient IP addresses, on the device, 
and to purge the call logs regularly. And of course, they can 
always follow basic security protocols to ensure that sensitive 
patient data are never placed at unnecessary risk: password 
protect the device, secure the devices when not in use, and 
limit use of the devices to professional activities.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
Following the meeting with facility telehealth stakeholders, Dr. Blanche felt reassured 
that the data were being disposed of properly. She also felt empowered to create a policy 
that addressed ethical demands and documentation needs. Together with her IT depart-
ment and facility telehealth coordinator, Dr. Blanche drafted a policy that reminded 
psychologists never to store patient information on their devices used to deliver clinical 
care (e.g., videoconferencing hardware, tablets, mobile devices) and to purge call logs at 
the end of each use. She reminded psychologists to secure hardware when not in use 
and to limit use to professional activities. She also developed a documentation checklist 
that psychologists could use for their own record keeping when devices were replaced. 
Exhibit 6.4 shows an example of the completed documentation.
E X H I B I T  6 . 4
Example of Documentation
Clinician Name: Dr. Ellen Blanche
Date equipment installed: 10/12/2009	
Date removed: 5/11/2013
Equipment Type, Brand, and Model: Desktop videoconferencing. Tandberg, MXP 1700
Serial Number Provided through VA IT: 1200MQ2
Name of VA IT Staff Member Who Removed Equipment: Adam Smith
Reason for Equipment Removal: Upgrade to Cisco Jabber software
All Contact Information Deleted: 5/10/11	
All Call Logs Deleted: 5/10/11
Method Used: Call logs and contact information deleted manually. VA IT will reset device 
in accordance with Office of Telehealth Services and will document this deletion in 
accordance with National Institute of Standards and Technology Guidelines.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

114
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
It is notable that this documentation was not technically detailed. Instead, it reflected 
an accountability and thoughtfulness regarding the disposal of equipment that was con-
sistent with the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013). This 
documentation was not standardized through the VA, and it acted in addition to the 
IT sound practices. Still, this effort ensured that Dr. Blanche, a psychologist, strived 
to attain a high ethical standard of accountability for information disposal and required 
psychologists on her staff to do the same. Dr. Blanche’s efforts also helped to provide 
leadership to the growing numbers of mental health professionals who would be using 
videoconferencing at her hospital for the first time.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Blanche’s story parallels the experience of many psychologists in large health 
care systems as well as independent practice. Many psychologists may elect or even 
be required to have technological aspects of their practice managed by technology 
experts (e.g., IT departments, technology companies, consultants for independent 
practitioners). This allocation of responsibility represents an advantageous division 
of labor among specialists, but it does not relieve the psychologist of her duty to under-
stand the technology that she uses and how it affects her patients/clients. Dr. Blanche 
negotiated the demands of maintaining a positive working relationship with her 
technologist colleagues while simultaneously ensuring that her workplace’s policies 
promoted ethical data disposal. In the end, she authored a policy that was simple, 
straightforward, and complementary to the practices of the technologists with whom 
she worked. In this way, Dr. Blanche and her team meaningfully participated in com-
petent data disposal and provided additional ethical accountability to a small process 
in a large system.
Case Study 4: Storage Technologies
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE APPLICATION
Psychologists are aware of and understand the unique storage implications 
related to telecommunications technologies inherent in available systems. 
(Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: UNIVERSITY COUNSELING CLINIC
Dr. Saritha Rata is the director of the university counseling clinic (UCC) that has 
recently embarked on a partnership with rural nurse practitioners to provide telepsy-
chology services to remote areas within the state. Doctoral-level counseling psychology 
students, supervised by Dr. Rata, provide services at the UCC. Dr. Rata has been licensed 
as a psychologist in the state of the university for 12 years. The remote communities of 
disparate needs include First Nations populations, oil workers, and children. At times, 
graduate psychology students provide services in the rural communities in person and 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

115
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
receive telesupervision from a licensed psychologist via HIPAA-compliant state-based 
care network videoconferencing. At other times, graduate psychology students provide 
telepsychology services from within the university clinic setting to patients located in 
remote communities (e.g., outpatient physical medicine office or a school counselor’s 
office via HIPAA-compliant state-based care network videoconferencing). This is a 
unique and mutually beneficial opportunity for patients in underserved areas with high 
needs, community clinicians, and students. The community mental health perspective 
that provides a foundation for the student’s clinical learning serves them well as they 
rotate through this practicum position.
Before establishing the telepractice service model, Dr. Rata and the licensed psy-
chologist supervisors prepared ahead by consulting with colleagues in established 
telepractice training centers to obtain guidance regarding appropriate student train-
ing curriculums for this medium of care. The faculty supervisors decided that estab-
lishing a highly conservative model of informed consent and description of practices, 
as well as seeking their own supervision for telepractice services, would ultimately 
provide the best level of training and be consistent with best care practices. The fac-
ulty and students experimented with using the state-based videoconferencing before 
commencing with their patient-based services. Faculty members were aware that a 
certification in e-practice was anticipated for licensed providers in the future, and 
they structured their graduate curriculum to include the requirements to prepare 
students for the future practice standard.
A key component on which Dr. Rata focused was to carefully review all aspects of 
the jurisdictional legal requirements for telepractice (often found in the licensure board 
statutes or regulations), the described enforcement of these requirements (generally 
located in the licensure board rules), and any policy documents or white papers their 
jurisdictional board had established. Dr. Rata was surprised to find that within her juris-
diction, regulations for telepractice to patients outside the jurisdiction (more to follow in 
Guideline 8) were actually found within licensure statutes for professions and occupa-
tions. She determined, however, that to minimize complications, the clinic would only 
provide services within the jurisdiction in which the university was located and in which 
the supervisors were licensed. Further, Dr. Rata reviewed HIPAA (1996), the Children’s 
Online Privacy Protection Act (1998), and HITECH (2009) regulations and spent time 
with the university legal counsel as well as her risk management legal consultant to 
ensure that the services planned were provided within these federal guidelines, as well 
as the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act (1974), given the training setting and 
university-based clinic.
Dr. Rata was familiar with the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint 
Task Force, 2013), jointly developed by APA, ASPPB, and The Trust. She was also an 
active member of the Association of Psychology Training Clinics and was a member 
of relevant professional organizations focusing on the use of telecommunications 
technology and psychology. She obtained specific content for discussion with her 
faculty colleagues, as well as posting on electronic mailing lists regarding collaboration 
and sharing of resources and lessons learned from other clinics and colleagues around 
the nation.
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

116
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
SCENARIO
In developing the UCC remote project, Dr. Rata had many questions about the tech-
nology used, electronic medical records, management of student records, university 
computing policies, Title IX sexual violence reporting requirements, whether busi-
ness associate’s agreements were required for the state network for telecare, and gen-
eral practical considerations of how to manage note taking for distant patients, distant 
supervisees, word documentation and encryption, online word processing products 
available through the university, cloud storage on campus, student cloud storage, 
HIPAA offsite vendors versus university-approved vendors, as well as interjurisdictional 
issues in data storage. Beyond this, availability of records for patient access, providing 
reports to patients and security issues, what to do with recorded telepractice sessions 
(retention, storage, disposal), who has access to what and how, and the additional 
complicating layer of testing materials (i.e., copyright status) were all suggestions her 
training clinic colleagues indicated would be important for her to consider.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
There were several elements for Dr. Rata to consider with her colleagues. The first 
was the protection of the public to which the supervised students would be providing 
services. The patients would be referred by a nurse practitioner in their local area, and 
services would be available through this nurse practitioner’s clinic setting. As such, 
there was potential for a secure receiving site of services, with immediate access to 
medical care or emergency services. The second element Dr. Rata contemplated was 
the experience and richness potential of the training opportunity that students could 
have through such a practicum setting. However, guidelines for the requirements of 
supervision within her jurisdiction as well as program accreditation requirements 
would need to be considered. If students were providing services in the remote area, 
although the nurse practitioner would be available for medical assistance, a licensed 
supervisor would need to be available to provide telesupervision if imminent con-
cerns arose (or to view the session live). Finally, students would need to be provided 
a curriculum to support the nuances and challenges related to remote care within a 
rural setting. Fortunately, the program already had a community outreach curricu-
lum in place. Beyond the jurisdictional, ethical, and legal considerations, Dr. Rata 
finally considered the demands that a telepractice clinic would place on her col-
leagues, such as increased on‑site supervision and increased clinical caseloads with 
both students and faculty learning and requiring supervision or consultation. She 
ensured that before implementation, her colleagues were comfortable with the level 
of care and procedures for services that would be developed and that the acceptance 
of referrals began at a slow pace to ensure comfort with the process and the developed 
procedures.
The most significant challenge that Dr. Rata faced with this process was the amount 
of time required to thoughtfully consider all these elements, time involved in consult-
ing with knowledgeable colleagues in telepractice, meeting with appropriate consul-
tants (i.e., attorneys, IT specialists, university and medical setting personnel involved 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

117
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
in telepractice) while maintaining her current workload of teaching and supervision. 
In addition, she knew that mental health services were significantly lacking in the rural 
communities and that local providers were struggling to meet the mental health needs 
of their patients. Dr. Rata worked expeditiously to plan and led her colleagues through 
this process. She included students and the nurse practitioner community provider in all 
aspects of the development and worked at planning for challenges to minimize potential 
risks or problems she knew were inherent in telepractice and telesupervision work (e.g., 
dropped connections, poor video quality, problematic video or audio feeds). She set in 
motion several consultations at the outset of the development process such that plan-
ning and IT, legal, and community consultation could simultaneously occur to reduce 
the timeline for implementation. Also included in the implementation was continued 
consultation at various stages to evaluate the operational services and problem solve 
concerns or deficits.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Rata could simply have jumped in and engaged with the community nurse prac-
titioner to test the waters and see how a single patient service would go and develop 
the practicum along the way. She could also have limited the services to only tele-
supervision, resulting in significant travel and time costs for the graduate student. 
She could have limited the services to only consultation with the nurse practitioner 
on case conceptualization and brief counseling. Services could have been limited to 
one specific need (i.e., anxiety management). Yet none of these options seemed to 
capture the full potential of the service for anyone involved, including patients, rural 
referral source, students, and licensed faculty.
THE BEST DECISION POSSIBLE
Dr. Rata and her colleagues carefully weighed the costs and benefits of these aspects of 
providing care and determined that the unique setting could offer patients increased 
access to care, focusing the nurse practitioner on the more demanding cases (e.g., per-
sonality disorders), and made general practice cases available to students who might 
not typically have the opportunity to work with these rural-based individuals and fami-
lies. With a moderate investment of time in consultation, Dr. Rata and her team were 
able to create a beneficial experience for patients, reduce the demand on commu-
nity providers, provide a meaningful experience for their graduate students, and limit 
increased demands for faculty supervisors.
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚Engage in thoughtful questioning, review, and consultation with knowledge-
able others to determine what you don’t know, what you need to know, and 
what resources you need to access and obtain (e.g., Joint Task Force, 2013, 
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

118
S M U C K E R  B A R N W E L L  A N D  A D A M S  L A R S E N
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology; Kissel et al., 2014, NIST Guidelines for 
Media Sanitization) and then develop a plan of action before engaging in the 
disposal of data and devices used in telepsychology. 
❚❚Carefully review all aspects of jurisdictional legal requirements, including title 
and scope of practice and possible exemptions for telepractice and telesupervision 
(often found in the licensure board statutes or regulations) for all involved juris-
dictions, the described enforcement of these requirements (generally located in 
the licensure board rules), and any policy documents or white papers your juris-
dictional board has established regarding provision of telepsychology services, 
protection of privacy, and disposal of information and records.
❚❚Have a clear understanding of the IT data disposal practices of any setting in 
which you work or consult.
❚❚Remember that you are accountable for proper information disposal. You are not 
relieved of your duty to understand the technology you use and how it affects 
your patients/clients even if you work in or for an agency, business, hospital, or 
other setting.
❚❚Before disposing of hardware, be sure to remove all client/patient information 
from hardware and software due to transfer or storage of such information. 
This includes, at a minimum, deleting contacts, removing mobile applications, 
deleting the call history, and/or applying a device’s factory reset; with video­
conferencing software, ensure that all patient contact information and call 
history have been deleted from your account and contact the vendor to further 
pursue this change.
❚❚Make efforts not to store inappropriate information (e.g., patient names, patient 
IP addresses) on devices, and purge call logs regularly.
❚❚Follow basic security protocols to ensure that sensitive patient data are never 
placed at unnecessary risk: password protect the device, secure the devices 
when not in use, and limit use of devices to professional activities.
❚❚Inform clients/patients on the importance of and how they can safeguard and 
protect their privacy on devices they may use.
❚❚Seek frequent consultation from knowledgeable legal, computer and server IT, 
and malpractice experts.
❚❚Document steps taken to ensure proper disposal of information and technologies.
❚❚Continue to be well-informed of changes and developments in legal requirements 
and technological developments.
References
The American Insurance Trust. (2014, September). Choosing encryption software. 
Retrieved from https://www.trustinsurance.com/resources/articles/choosing- 
encryption-software
American Psychological Association. (2007). Record keeping guidelines. American 
Psychologist, 62, 9, 993–1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.9.993
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

119
Disposal of Data, Information, and Technologies
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code  
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 6501–6506, Pub. L. 105–277, 
112 Stat. 2681–728. (1998).
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act of 1974, 20 U.S.C. §1232g. (1974).
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Pub. L. 111-5. 
(2009).
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 
1936. (1996).
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psychologist, 
68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/amp-
a0035001.pdf
Kissel, R., Regenscheid, A., Scholl, M., & Stine, K. (2014, December). Guidelines for 
media sanitization (NIST Special Publication 800-88, Revision 1). Gaithersburg, MD: 
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved from http://nvlpubs.nist.
gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.SP.800-88r1.pdf
Smucker Barnwell, S. V., Juretic, M. A., Hoerster, K. D., Felker, B. L., & Van de Plasch, R. 
(2012). VA Puget Sound telemental health service to rural veterans. Psychological 
Services, 9, 209–211. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0025999
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs. (2014, November 30). FaceTime. Retrieved from 
http://www.va.gov/TRM/ToolPage.asp?tid=7953
 & R S \ U L J K W  $ P H U L F D Q  3 V \ F K R O R J L F D O  $ V V R F L D W L R Q   1 R W  I R U  I X U W K H U  G L V W U L E X W L R Q 

121
7
The view(s) expressed herein are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the official policy or 
position of U.S. Army Regional Health Command—Central, the U.S. Army Medical Department, 
the U.S. Army Office of the Surgeon General, the Department of the Army and Department of 
Defense, or the U.S. government.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-008
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Testing and Assessment
Rationale
Psychological testing and other assessment procedures are an area of 
professional practice in which psychologists have been trained, and they  
are uniquely qualified to conduct such tests. While some symptom 
screening instruments are already frequently being administered 
online, most psychological test instruments and other assessment 
procedures currently in use were designed and developed originally 
for in-person administration. Psychologists are thus encouraged to 
be knowledgeable about, and account for, the unique impacts of such 
tests, their suitability for diverse populations, and the limitations on test 
administration and on test and other data interpretations when these 
psychological tests and other assessment procedures are considered for 
and conducted via telepsychology. Psychologists also strive to maintain  
Bruce E. Crow and Julie M. Landry Poole
Psychologists are encouraged to consider the unique issues that may arise 
with test instruments and assessment approaches designed for in-person 
implementation when providing telepsychology services.
—Guideline 7, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

122
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
the integrity of the application of the testing and assessment process and 
procedures when using telecommunication technologies. In addition, they are 
cognizant of the accommodations for diverse populations that may be required 
for test administration via telepsychology. These guidelines are consistent 
with the standards articulated in the most recent edition of Standards for 
Educational and Psychological Testing (American Educational Research 
Association, American Psychological Association, and the Council on  
Measurement in Education, 1999). (Joint Task Force for the Development  
of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 798)
Psychometric and clinical assessment has long been an area of strength for psy-
chologists and a skill set that distinguishes them from other mental health profession-
als. Their responsibility for ethical conduct with assessments extends to development, 
training, administration, scoring, interpretation, explanation and release of data, and 
maintenance of security and integrity of many different instruments while also con-
sidering the standardization, reliability, validity, and limitations of such instruments. 
Psychologists are keenly aware of the detrimental effects that improper care of the 
assessment process can cause to the public. The responsibility is no less demanding 
when consideration is given to conducting assessments via telepsychology. In fact, 
because there is limited research and psychometric data on such use, psychologists 
are called to a high standard of protecting and ensuring proper care in conduct-
ing assessments using tele­psychology. In this chapter, we propose several situations 
that require the psychologist to question actively what additional precautions and 
preparation are needed when using telepsychology.
Assessment and Testing Via  
Videoconferencing
Current guidelines for, and ethical considerations of, testing in a videoconferencing 
modality feature the application of face-to-face protocols for standardization of test-
ing conditions and environmental controls to videoconferencing. As telepsychology 
advances, assessment, including aspects of administration, may be conducted online, 
and protocols developed specifically for telepsychology services will be used. The field 
is beginning to produce scholarly works that investigate the effectiveness of tele­
psychology services primarily in the areas of forensics, neuropsychology, and general 
assessment. Representations of the research lines include the following.
FORENSIC PSYCHOLOGY
Forensic assessment videoconferencing is gaining popularity (Adjorlolo & Chan, 2015), 
signaling the need for competence specific to the forensic setting as well as technical 
competence in this area of practice. The use of social media, Internet search engines, 
and other means of networking raises questions regarding their use in conducting 
forensic evaluation and users’ privacy (Pirelli, Otto, & Estoup, 2016).

123
Testing and Assessment
TELENEUROPSYCHOLOGICAL ASSESSMENT
Studies investigate the reliability of an online battery of tests compared with face-to-
face testing. These tests were used in suspected dementia cases and included the Mini-
Mental State Exam (MMSE), Hopkins Verbal Learning Test—Revised, Digit Span, the 
Boston Naming Test, Letter and Category Fluency, and Clock Drawing. Highly simi-
lar results were found between the videoconferencing and face-to-face conditions 
(Cullum, Hynan, Grosch, Parikh, & Weiner, 2014). Another study investigated the 
use of videoconferencing testing compared with in-person evaluation for cognitive 
impairment. Importantly, further study is needed to determine modifications for 
specific testing online and separate normative data (Cullum & Grosch, 2013).
Similarly, another investigation made use of the Repeatable Battery for the 
Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS; test for cognitive impairment) 
and found the videoconferencing to be effective compared with face-to-face test-
ing. RBANS scores were reliably correlated, thus supporting remote administration 
(Galusha-Glasscock, Horton, Weiner, & Cullum, 2016).
GENERAL TELEPSYCHOLOGY ASSESSMENT
Two additional studies conducted with a sample of rural American Indians and a 
VA sample support the reliability and feasibility of videoconferencing administration  
compared with face-to-face conditions. In one study, comparable results were achieved 
with alternative forms of the MMSE, Clock Drawing, Digit Span, Oral Trails, Hopkins 
Verbal Learning, Letter and Category Fluency, and the Boston Naming Test admin-
istered in face-to-face and videoconferencing conditions (Wadsworth et al., 2016). 
In doing matched testing on global cognition, attention, and visuospatial function, 
videoconferencing conditions were found to be comparable to face-to-face conditions 
among outpatient VA geropsychology patients (Grosch, Weiner, Hynan, Shore, & 
Cullum, 2015).
In addition to specialty population research, several studies were conducted that 
advance application in general telepsychology assessment. These studies provide an 
overv­iew of the integration of telecommunication modalities (Parakh, Ghosh, & Mehta, 
2014); highlight data regarding limitations of telepractice, cultural, ethical, and safety 
considerations (Luxton, Pruitt, & Osenbach, 2014); and give attention to benefits of 
videoconferencing, practical concerns, and recommendations for integrity of assess-
ments (Luxton, Pruitt, & Jenkins-Guarnieri, 2015).
Case Study 1: Assessment of Suicidality
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
When a psychological test or other assessment procedure is conducted via 
telepsychology, psychologists are encouraged to ensure that the integrity of the 
psychometric properties of the test or assessment procedure (e.g., reliability 

124
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
and validity) and the conditions of administration indicated in the test manual 
are preserved when adapted for use with such technologies. (Joint Task Force, 
2013, p. 798)
SETTING: ARMY TELE-BEHAVIORAL HEALTH HUB
The behavioral health care system within the Department of the Army includes sev-
eral tele-behavioral health (TBH) hubs. Like traditional outpatient behavioral health 
care clinics, these hubs provide services that are unavailable at military installations 
because of local provider shortages, access to care issues, the need for specialty care 
unavailable at the installation, and other issues. Using secure videoconferencing, the 
clinic staff provide a wide range of psychological services to active duty service mem-
bers and their family members throughout the continental United States.
Dr. Cooper is a civilian clinical psychologist who has been employed by the 
Department of the Army for the past 6 years. Currently, she works full time in a TBH  
clinic where she provides services primarily to active duty service members. Dr. Cooper 
sees both individual psychotherapy patients and assessment patients and specializes 
in the treatment of insomnia.
SCENARIO
Lieutenant (LT) Grey is a single 23-year-old African American active duty army offi-
cer. He presented to his local behavioral health clinic as a walk-in due to a recent 
increase in depressive symptoms. He was triaged by a licensed clinical social worker 
and scheduled for follow up 1 week later with a local psychiatrist. The psychiatrist 
diagnosed LT Grey with major depressive disorder, single episode, severe, and began 
treatment with an antidepressant. LT Grey was also referred to a local psychologist 
within the same clinic for psychotherapy, but he was subsequently scheduled in the 
TBH clinic at his request because of the long wait time to see a traditional face-to-face 
provider.
One month after initially seeking treatment, he is scheduled for an initial therapy 
intake evaluation with TBH psychologist Dr. Cooper. Before the evaluation, Dr. Cooper 
reviews the available medical records and sees that the most recent encounter written 
by the psychiatrist describes suicidal ideation and a specific plan. The notes also indi-
cate that the patient suffers from clinical depression, has extremely poor self-esteem, 
recently broke up with his girlfriend, acknowledges that he often acts impulsively 
(i.e., drinking and driving), and has a poor relationship with his mother.
After a personal introduction and verification of patient identity, Dr. Cooper begins 
to introduce the limits of confidentiality. Before she is able to finish, LT Grey interrupts 
to say he “refuses” to be hospitalized because he feels it is unacceptable for an army 
officer to be treated in an inpatient psychiatric ward. Dr. Cooper empathically listens 
to his concerns and asks questions to gather additional information. LT Grey explains 
he recently began a new position within an armored brigade combat team, and he 
already feels out of place among the other brigade staff officers because of differences 

125
Testing and Assessment
in his education and training. He is worried his peers and superior officers will lose 
respect for him if he needs to be hospitalized for behavioral health reasons. He also 
acknowledges feeling embarrassed about his suicidal thoughts and depressive symp-
toms. LT Grey reports that the depression and thoughts of self-harm have improved 
since initiating psychotropic medication 2 weeks ago, and he insists to Dr. Cooper that 
he will only get better with the addition of the talk therapy.
Dr. Cooper validates LT Grey’s emotions and normalizes the fears and concerns 
he expressed. She explains that inpatient psychiatric hospitalization is not necessar-
ily required when a patient experiences suicidal feelings and thoughts. She clarifies 
that further assessment is needed in order to make the most appropriate treatment 
decision.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
During an initial telepsychology encounter, the psychologist must determine whether 
the patient is appropriate for outpatient care and for assessment or treatment (or both) 
administered via telepsychology. These determinations are based on similar criteria 
(e.g., imminent risk to self or others), but occasionally patients who are suitable for 
outpatient treatment are not ideal candidates for telepsychology. Exclusion decisions 
may be based on the severity of symptoms, poor treatment compliance, and/or com-
plex management. Additionally, the psychologist must assess for any diversity-related 
issues (e.g., language, cognitive impairments) that would necessitate accommoda-
tions if telepsychology assessment and/or treatment were conducted (see Guideline 2: 
Standards of Care in the Delivery of Telepsychology Services; Joint Task Force, 2013, 
pp. 794–795).
A review of the available literature related to suicide assessment via telepsychol-
ogy could provide additional aid in the psychologist’s decision making. The use of 
remote management for behavioral health emergencies (i.e., suicide) can be traced 
back to 1953 when the Samaritans Service offered crisis counseling via telephone 
for United Kingdom and Ireland residents (Godleski, Nieves, Darkins, & Lehmann, 
2008). In 1963, the first suicide prevention telephone service in the United States, 
“Call Bruce,” originated in San Francisco (San Francisco Suicide Prevention, 2007). A 
national suicide prevention hotline was eventually established by the U.S. Substance 
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration with a specific military component 
added in 2007. As the evidence base establishing the comparability of remote and 
face-to-face treatment has developed, providers are increasingly engaging in remote 
suicide risk assessment (Godleski et al., 2008).
On the basis of the growing focus on evidence-based treatment, the psychologist 
would also likely want to determine whether there is an evidence-based, suicide-
specific assessment or treatment available for use with telepsychology patients. The 
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology (2013) guidelines encourage 
psychologists to consider whether the assessment tool may be used in such a way that 
the integrity of the application of the assessment process is maintained. The psycholo-
gist should be aware of and knowledgeable about the accommodations required for 

126
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
suicide assessment via telepsychology. Additionally, the task force recommends that 
patient treatment notes in the medical record specify the assessment was conducted 
via telepsychology and describe any accommodations or modifications made to the 
assessment.
Another important consideration related to telepsychology suicide assessment is 
the requirement for the psychologist to rely on the remote location’s administra-
tive staff. The staff will be responsible for ensuring that the patient completes any 
necessary paperwork and for protecting the security of the assessment process during 
completion of the required forms (e.g., observing to ensure the patient is not using 
a cell phone or discussing with others). The administrative staff must additionally 
return the completed materials to the psychologist on time and in a manner that pro-
tects the patient’s confidentiality and protected health information. Depending on the 
training and skills of the staff, this may require additional considerations on the part 
of the psychologist (see Guideline 1: Competence of the Psychologist; Guideline 2: 
Standards of Care in the Delivery of Telepsychology Services; Joint Task Force, 2013, 
pp. 793–794).
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Dr. Cooper concludes that she has two options. Given the information gathered from 
the medical records and the initial discussion with LT Grey, she may decide that fur-
ther assessment via telepsychology is inappropriate and alert the remote location’s 
TBH clinic staff that the patient requires traditional face-to-face assessment and dis-
position due to the current clinical presentation. Or she may consider conducting 
further assessment herself.
If Dr. Cooper refers the patient for face-to-face assessment, the traditional pro-
vider may be able to detect subtle nuances that could be indistinguishable via tele-
psychology. The provider would be more familiar with local resources and available 
treatment options at the military installation or surrounding. Additionally, the on-post 
provider may have a working relationship with the treating psychiatrist.
Referral to another clinician would also mean that the patient would need to 
see yet another provider. If LT Grey is referred, he will have been evaluated by four 
providers since initially seeking treatment just 1 month ago. Considering the embar-
rassment he currently feels, the lack of continuity of care may prevent him from 
continuing treatment and may exacerbate the dissatisfaction he felt with behavioral 
health services when trying to schedule a therapy appointment. It is also likely 
he will be rescheduled with Dr. Cooper at a later time if he is seen by the in-person 
provider and deemed appropriate for outpatient care. This may lead to difficulty 
developing rapport and an effective therapeutic alliance between Dr. Cooper and 
the patient.
Conversely, Dr. Cooper may decide to conduct the assessment herself. The patient 
has already shared his concerns and fears with her. If she is able to continue the tele­
psychology assessment, she will demonstrate respect for his privacy, which will likely be 

127
Testing and Assessment
paramount in building a successful relationship with the patient due to his fear of the 
potential career impact stigma might cause. Additionally, she may be able to respect 
the patient’s wishes and prevent hospitalization if successful treatment interventions 
are implemented via telepsychology. Also, the patient is already in the room with 
Dr. Cooper. As discussed earlier, referring him to a local clinician for triage would 
involve another provider and could imply to the patient that the providers do not 
care about him.
Dr. Cooper feels most comfortable assessing and treating suicidality through 
the application of collaborative assessment and management of suicidality (CAMS). 
Although the CAMS approach is empirically validated for the assessment and treat-
ment of suicidality, administration via telepsychology has not been studied; therefore, 
Dr. Cooper has another decision to make. She may choose not to administer the CAMS 
if she feels the technique cannot be used in such a way that the integrity of the assess-
ment process is maintained. However, she may decide she is comfortable making the 
necessary accommodations to assess the patient using CAMS via telepsychology. These 
accommodations may include different seating arrangements (i.e., face to face via TBH 
rather than side by side), two sets of forms rather than one shared between the patient 
and provider, or seeking assistance through the administrative staff to forward the 
patient’s form with the patient and vice versa.
On the basis of the presenting problem, Dr. Cooper is interested in obtaining 
additional information about her patient’s diagnosis and psychological status and 
assessing for treatment planning. In the army, TBH is delivered by the provider at 
one military treatment facility (MTF) and received by the patient at another MTF. 
Dr. Cooper has experience with administering the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality 
Inventory—2 (MMPI–2) to patients in her office but not through TBH. She requests 
the patient site MTF administer the assessment and forward her the results. She 
prepares the patient by explaining the rationale for the assessment as well as the pro-
cedures and conditions. Dr. Cooper coordinates with the support staff at the remote 
location to send her the computer-generated scoring report by secured e-mail.
In addition to the MMPI–2, Dr. Cooper also considers including conventional pro-
jective measures. In the past she has found the Thematic Apperception Test to be bene-
ficial for gaining insight into issues to incorporate in the treatment. Dr. Cooper searches 
for guidelines or precedence in virtual administration of the Thematic Apperception 
Test or other projective testing, but the search does not produce any related publica-
tions. In an attempt to replicate conventional administration, she arranges to have the 
behavioral health technician at the remote site join the patient in the treatment room 
and hand cards to him as Dr. Cooper provides instructions and records the narrative 
given by the patient.
Dr. Cooper has used psychological testing and assessment to assist with deter-
mining diagnosis, treatment planning, and conduct a comprehensive assessment of 
suicidality. She found that by making relatively minor adaptations to conventional 
assessment procedures, she was able to capitalize on the benefits of structured psycho-
logical assessment in support of her telepsychology patient care.

128
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
Case Study 2: Referral in Lieu of Telepsychology
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists are thus encouraged to be knowledgeable about, and account 
for, the unique impacts of such tests, their suitability for diverse populations, 
and the limitations on test administration and on test and other data inter­
pretations when these psychological tests and other assessment procedures are 
considered for and conducted via telepsychology. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: UNIVERSITY COUNSELING CENTER
John recently began the clinical psychology internship program at a large university 
counseling center. In this setting, both individual and group therapy are provided, as 
well as psychological assessment and various types of evaluations. There is a strong 
sense of collaboration and support, and interns are considered junior colleagues rather 
than subordinate trainees. Both telepsychology (campus clinic to campus clinic) and 
traditional face-to-face services are provided by the counseling center.
SCENARIO
John is assigned a telepsychology evaluation with a first-year medical student who 
presents to the clinic with concerns related to concentration and attention complaints. 
The patient denies a history of similar problems or a diagnosis of attention-deficit/
hyperactivity disorder. After a thorough clinical interview and review of available 
medical records, John posits that the patient’s difficulties are likely due to a recently 
sustained head injury. The counseling center’s organizational policies require psycho-
logical assessment in any case where academic accommodations or medication may 
be clinically indicated. John also knows that neuropsychological testing would be 
beneficial in assessing for cognitive impairment as well as type and localization of any 
damage subsequent to the concussion.
John discusses the case with his supervisor during their next meeting. Rather than 
give him instructions as to how to proceed, his supervisor encourages him to consider 
the referral question, the evaluation requirements subsequent to the center’s policies, 
and the available resources. John also spends time looking up research related to psy-
chological assessment via telepsychology.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
John finds several journal articles on the use of assessment measures administered 
via videoconferencing. Kobak’s (2004) study was designed to determine whether the 
mode of administration affected the psychometric properties of the Hamilton Depres-
sion Rating Scale. The results demonstrate psychometric equivalence of remote and 
face-to-face administration. A similar study examined face-to-face versus remote admin-
istration of the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale. The researchers found 
comparability of face-to-face administration and remote administration, including both 

129
Testing and Assessment
telephone and videoconference (Kobak, Williams, Jeglic, Salvucci, & Sharp, 2008). A  
more recent study compared videoconference and face-to-face assessments for veter-
ans evaluated using the Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS) for Posttraumatic 
Stress Disorder. The results of the study show significant correlations between admin-
istration of the CAPS via videoconferencing and face to face (Porcari et al., 2009). 
Litwack et al. (2014) also found strong correlations between face-to-face assessment 
and tele­psychology assessment of the CAPS.
Research on the assessment and treatment of traumatic brain injury via telepsychol-
ogy is scarce; however, there is growing evidence showing neuropsychological assess-
ment via videoconferencing demonstrates good agreement with traditional in-person 
assessment (Hildebrand, Chow, Williams, Nelson, & Wass, 2004; Jacobsen, Sprenger, 
Andersson, & Krogstad, 2003; Kirkwood, Peck, & Bennie, 2000; Loh et al., 2004; Vestal, 
Smith-Olinde, Hicks, Hutton, & Hart, 2006). Overall, studies suggest assessment con-
ducted through verbal instructions and responses may be more reliable than others, 
although other tasks may be amenable to modification for TBH purposes (Cullum & 
Grosch, 2013).
Despite the supportive evidence base, John must consider whether testing via 
telepsychology is feasible given the available resources. The counseling center rou-
tinely uses psychological assessment tools via online administration; however, on the 
basis of the presenting problem, John determines that these instruments are inap-
propriate for this particular evaluation. He concludes that a full neuropsychological 
test battery is needed.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
John initially decides to administer the Halstead–Reitan Battery via telepsychology. 
He presents this idea to his supervisor, who praises his recognition of suspected brain 
damage but says the center does not have all of the necessary tests. She reminds him 
that administration via telepsychology would necessitate training a technician at the 
remote location in the use of the assessment measures due to measures that require 
stimulus manipulation.
John considers using a more limited battery based on the center’s assessment 
library but decides full assessment is the best option for the patient. His supervisor 
suggests referral to a local neuropsychologist who occasionally performs assessments 
for university students. Despite the supervisor’s suggestion, John has several concerns 
about making a referral for testing. The patient would need additional appointments—
testing, testing feedback, final determinations related to academic accommodations, 
among others. Because of the multiple appointments, the evaluation will take several 
weeks to complete.
Further consultation with his supervisor and the other interns alleviates some of 
these concerns. John realizes it is in the patient’s best interests to receive a full neuro-
psychological battery administered in person according to the accepted norms rather 
than a limited assessment administered via telepsychology. The in-person administra-
tion conducted by a neuropsychologist would ensure standardized administration of 
the assessment.

130
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
Case Study 3: Army Electronic  
Assessment Battery
RELEVANT EXCERPTS FROM THE GUIDELINE
Psychologists are encouraged to be cognizant of the specific issues that may arise 
with diverse populations when providing telepsychology and make appropriate 
arrangements to address those concerns. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
When administering psychological tests and other assessment procedures when 
providing telepsychology services, psychologists are encouraged to consider 
the quality of those technologies that are being used and the hardware 
requirements that are needed in order to conduct the specific psychological 
test or assessment approach. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: REGIONAL TBH HUBS
The U.S. Army utilizes regional TBH hubs to provide remote telepsychology services to 
military hospitals across the United States. Several military-unique psychological eval-
uations are required by various army regulations before certain types of administrative 
separations and for determining suitability for specific advanced military training or 
special duty assignments. These evaluations are often conducted through telepsychol-
ogy whereby soldiers report to their local behavioral health clinic and complete their 
evaluation in a room configured to receive TBH.
Procedures are performed in accordance with the Army Tele-Behavioral Health 
Operations Manual (U.S. Army Medical Command, 2012). Army policies require sol-
diers to complete a battery of computerized preappointment questionnaires before a 
clinic-based or TBH encounter. The standardized assessments are administered via the 
army’s Behavioral Health Data Portal (BHDP), which was developed by the army as 
a psychological assessment tool that uses a standardized battery of questionnaires for 
initial and follow-up assessments and assesses domains such as general psychological 
distress, depression, anxiety, posttraumatic stress, substance and alcohol abuse, rela-
tionship problems, and suicidal and homicidal ideation. The BHDP enables the psy-
chologist to obtain baseline measurements and to measure changes over time during 
the course of treatment. The BHDP is an example of electronic psychological assess-
ment that can be used in a telepsychology setting. The BHDP is designed so that a 
psychologist can access patient information from any location along with the patient’s 
electronic medical record. Because all surveys and questionnaires are electronically and 
immediately scored, the psychologist has rapid access to results as soon as the patient 
completes their responses.
SCENARIO
Major (MAJ) Smith is an active duty army clinical psychologist who provides telepsy-
chology services at one of the army’s TBH hubs. Staff Sergeant (SSG) Clark has been 

131
Testing and Assessment
referred for a suitability assessment in consideration of selection for special duty as an 
Army recruiter. Recruiters are typically midlevel or senior noncommissioned officers, 
many of whom would benefit from psychological counseling after multiple combat 
deployments and exposures to psychological trauma. Recruiters are often assigned 
to locations distant from military health care facilities and work independently for 
long hours. Standards of conduct for recruiters are high because they are readily vis-
ible as public representatives of the army. Preassignment evaluations are required to 
determine whether there are behavioral health conditions that would interfere with 
a soldier’s ability to perform recruiter duties.
SSG Clark has been on active duty since 2002, having enlisted to serve in the 
military to fight against anti-U.S. terrorists. His first combat deployment was in 2003 
during the ground invasion in Iraq, and he served two subsequent combat tours, one 
in Iraq and one in Afghanistan. His military occupational specialty is infantryman, 
and he has served a total of 3.5 years in combat with many intense combat exposures. 
He has never requested or been referred for behavioral health treatment, although 
he wondered if he should have been.
SSG Clark has been scheduled by his local army behavioral health clinic for an 
appointment to see MAJ Smith, and in accordance with army policies, SSG Clark is 
asked for consent to receive this behavioral health service via TBH before scheduling. 
SSG Clark has given consent, citing his familiarity and comfort with talking to his 
family over the Internet during his multiple deployments. When SSG Clark arrives at 
his home station clinic on the day of his appointment, he is seated at a computer kiosk 
behind a privacy screen and completes the questionnaires on the BHDP. He notifies 
the reception desk staff when he’s done, and he is logged off the session. He is soon 
greeted by a behavioral health assistant in the waiting room, who escorts him to the 
TBH room and orients him to the TBH equipment.
The questionnaires completed by SSG Clark before this initial assessment included 
a standard intake battery. The results were electronically transmitted to MAJ Smith 
in real time as each questionnaire was completed, and he reviewed the results before 
beginning the TBH session with SSG Clark. MAJ Smith also reviewed SSG Clark’s 
electronic medical record at the TBH Hub location to review SSG Clark’s medical and 
behavioral health history as documented by his local health care providers as well as 
those at previous assignment locations. MAJ Smith is notified by clerical staff at SSG 
Clark’s location that he is in the TBH room and ready to be seen. MAJ Smith opens the 
TBH session at his location and is greeted by the assistant, who introduces SSG Clark to 
MAJ Smith before leaving the room. Major Smith ensures that SSG Clark understands 
the purpose of the evaluation and limits of confidentiality because the results of the 
evaluation will be provided to his chain of command.
MAJ Smith observes that SSG Clark appears to fully comprehend his questions 
and maintains good eye contact with the video monitor in the TBH room. His speech 
is clearly audible, he is a native U.S. citizen, educated entirely in U.S. public schools, 
and English was his only language in his home of origin.
MAJ Smith notes that the questionnaires that measure general psychological dis-
tress, depression, sleep disturbance, and PTSD have positive indications of probable 

132
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
psychiatric disorder. In addition, SSG Clark acknowledges a lifetime history of suicide 
ideation, occurring during a recent period of intense relationship problems, although 
he denies any current plan or intent. In SSG Clark’s medical record, MAJ Smith dis-
cerns that with the exception of occasional brief symptomatic treatment of insomnia, 
he has denied any behavioral health concerns during several primary care visits for 
various routine and minor medical issues. During his clinical interview with SSG 
Clark, MAJ Smith inquires about specific responses from the screening question-
naires and carefully expands his interview around these potential symptoms to elicit 
a more comprehensive and salient behavioral history.
Upon completion of the evaluation, MAJ Smith discusses the significance of SSG 
Clark’s clinical history and assessment results. He informs him that although he has not 
previously disclosed behavioral health concerns to health care providers, he is clearly 
experiencing symptoms of probable psychiatric disorder and may be at increased risk 
for suicide thoughts. He discusses the expected benefit of more formal psychological 
evaluation and behavioral health treatment and offers to provide a referral to the 
behavioral health clinic at SSG Clark’s home station. SSG Clark agrees and indicates 
that he feels relief knowing there may be help for the symptoms he reported. MAJ 
Smith also discusses the fact that he will be informing SSG Clark’s chain of command 
that until further evaluation and a course of treatment, he will need to be deferred 
from further consideration for recruiter duty. SSG Clark acknowledges this require-
ment and admits he was secretly worried that if required to serve as a recruiter, he 
would fail and think more seriously about suicide. MAJ Smith prepares a memoran-
dum for SSG Clark’s commander and sends it electronically to the clerical staff at SSG 
Clark’s location to be delivered to his unit.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
MAJ Smith periodically refers to the Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology and is 
familiar with the testing and assessment recommendations that psychologists are 
encouraged to be cognizant of specific issues that may arise with diverse populations 
when providing telepsychology and to make appropriate arrangements to address 
those concerns. He is aware of caveats when obtaining informed consent to use TBH for 
this assessment situation because the evaluation is required by the Army and soldiers 
may feel obligated to consent to TBH despite any reservations they may have. He is 
mindful that there may be barriers to establishing rapport for some soldiers in a TBH 
encounter that may influence his ability to achieve an accurate assessment. He closely 
monitors whether SSG Clark’s nonverbal communication appears degraded by the 
field of view and picture quality of the monitor and whether this inhibits SSG Clark’s 
willingness to disclose important clinical information. Likewise, MAJ Smith is also 
attentive to the possibility that because his military rank is higher than his patient’s, 
SSG Clark may be motivated to appear unaffected by behavioral health symptoms.
Although the BHDP was developed by the army and is a routinely administered 
assessment procedure for all outpatient behavioral health encounters, MAJ Smith is 
aware that the Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for  

133
Testing and Assessment
Psychologists (2013) advises that he consider the quality of the technologies being 
used to support psychological assessment via telepsychology. He understands this to 
mean that he is expected to understand the effects of the BHDP technology on the 
administration process for the questionnaires that compose the assessment battery. 
Although MAJ Smith is aware that the kiosk where the BHDP is administered is stocked 
with high-quality computer and monitor equipment, he confirms with SSG Clark that 
questions on the BHDP were readily understood and there were no concerns or prob-
lems with completing the questionnaires.
MAJ Smith has also studied the BHDP Users Guide to ensure he understands the 
manner in which the questionnaires are presented and the methodology used to score 
them. He notes that the manual does not completely describe the basis for various cut-
off scores, and he finds that he needs to refer to additional documents and publications 
to confirm that interpretation guidelines by test authors or publishers are correctly 
reflected in the automated scoring programs.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
Army policies require that behavioral health patients give specific consent for evalu-
ation or treatment via TBH and always retain the option for clinic-based encounters. 
In many cases, there is a shorter wait time for a TBH provider or greater access to a 
provider with a specialty skill, especially given that many military installations are in 
relatively remote areas of the United States. Because the patient gives this consent 
before scheduling the TBH appointment and before meeting the telepsychologist, MAJ 
Smith ensures that SSG Clark fully understands that he has a choice between TBH and 
a clinic-based appointment. MAJ Smith is prepared to help SSG Clark reschedule with 
a clinic-based provider at his home station location if he chooses. Likewise, as the TBH 
session proceeds, MAJ Smith is prepared to suspend the evaluation if he determines 
that the TBH medium compromises his ability to complete an accurate and appropri-
ate assessment. He pays close attention to whether the manner of presentation of the  
BHDP or the quality of the technology precludes accurate interpretation of the assess-
ment results. He is aware that even if his patient is completely amenable to and comfort-
able with TBH, the technology used in the TBH application of psychological assessment 
measures may alter administering, scoring, and recording of the assessment in a way 
that impedes his clinical decisions.
During this evaluation, MAJ Smith determines that SSG Clark seems quite com-
fortable with the TBH medium and is comfortable discussing symptoms that have 
bothered him for a period of time but for which he did not think help was available. 
He determines that he was well oriented to the BHDP kiosk and reported that it was 
easy for him to navigate through the different assessment modules. He is confident 
that the BHDP assessment technology provides an accurate recording of SSG Clark’s 
responses and that his responses were a good representation of his clinical status on 
the psychological domains assessed.
In the course of the assessment, MAJ Smith must determine whether this one-
time evaluation has detected a need for further assessment or referral to treatment. 

134
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
If a referral is needed, MAJ Smith will need to know how to contact appropriate 
staff at SSG Clark’s location. Similarly, if during the evaluation session MAJ Smith 
determines his patient presents with acute distress and needs urgent or emergency 
management, he will need to invoke patient safety procedures.
MAJ Smith determines that additional assessment is indicated but that SSG Clark 
is not in acute distress or in need of an urgent referral, nor does MAJ Smith need to 
contact his commander because there are no current concerns about risk of harm to 
self or others.
Case Study 4: Child Psychological Assessment
RELEVANT EXCERPT FROM THE GUIDELINE
In addition, psychologists may consider the use of a trained assistant (e.g., 
proctor) to be on premise at the remote location in an effort to help verify the 
identity of the client/patient, provide needed on-site support to administer  
certain tests or subtests, and protect the security of the psychological testing 
and/or assessment. (Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 798)
SETTING: RURAL PRIMARY CARE CLINIC
Dr. Myers is a fellowship-trained and board-certified child psychologist in a mid-
western U.S. metropolitan city that is home to the state’s largest public university. 
A part of her practice is to provide telepsychology services to clients in rural areas of 
her state, and she frequently receives referrals to evaluate children with disruptive 
behaviors at school. Her referrals often come from pediatricians and family medicine 
physicians in primary clinics in small and medium-sized towns. Gaining access to psy-
chological services can be difficult for families who live a considerable distance from 
a specialty practice psychologist, such as a child psychologist. There is an increasing 
use and acceptance of telepsychology as a solution to increase access to behavioral 
services for families in rural and remote areas that would otherwise face travel time 
and cost barriers (Nelson, Barnard, & Cain, 2006; Nelson & Bui, 2010).
SCENARIO
Dr. Myers receives a referral requesting psychological evaluation for Katy, a 9-year-old 
fourth-grade student who attends public elementary school in her small rural town 
with a population of 2,000. Katy has received medical care from a family medicine 
physician at a nearby health clinic since her birth. She has enjoyed good health, and 
with the exception of routine childhood illnesses, physicals, and immunizations, she 
has not needed other medical care. But Katy’s parents have been concerned by increas-
ing problems with her behavior. During the past year, she has become increasingly 
“touchy,” and it seems to her parents that minor stressors readily escalate to tantrums 
and argumentative behavior. At the midpoint of the school year, her teachers begin 

135
Testing and Assessment
sending home notes to notify her parents that Katy has not been turning in home-
work, seems to have trouble paying attention in class, and is having trouble learn-
ing new material. She has become “pushy” on the playground, and other children 
complain that she is “too rude.” The school recently requested a parent conference 
and suggested that Katy be evaluated for possible learning disability, attention-deficit 
problems, or emotional and behavioral problems. In accordance with the school’s pro-
tocol, the school psychologist conducts intellectual and academic achievement testing 
to address the academic problems noted by the teacher and to determine whether 
Katy met criteria for learning disability services; she also conducts classroom observa-
tions and mood disorder screening to identify symptoms that may be interfering with 
school functioning.
The school administrators inform Katy’s parents that they do not provide or make 
referrals for psychological testing to diagnose psychiatric disorder, but if her parents 
are concerned about that possibility, they can obtain an evaluation from a child psy-
chologist of their choosing. Katy’s parents are indeed concerned that she may need 
treatment for a psychological condition that was causing the problem behaviors. Katy’s 
school counselor does not have specific suggestions for obtaining the evaluation but is 
aware that there are child psychologists in the university town, some 100 miles away. 
The counselor suggests that Katy’s parents might be able to get a referral from Katy’s 
doctor “to see someone.” Katy’s parents make an appointment with their family physi-
cian and explain the situation, asking for help in locating a child psychologist. Katy’s 
doctor tells the parents that he does not know a child psychologist to whom he can 
refer them for an in-person evaluation, but he informs them that their primary care 
clinic recently began offering telepsychology at their location. Katy’s parents are inter-
ested and quite relieved they will not need to drive 200 miles round trip for an evalua-
tion that is unfamiliar to them. Katy’s family doctor makes the arrangements, and they 
are scheduled for an appointment with Dr. Myers the next week, right after school 
gets out for the day.
Dr. Myers has provided the clinic with an information sheet that is given to 
parents of the children who are scheduled with her. The information sheet provides 
an introduction and photo of Dr. Myers, a statement of professional credentials, a 
description of services, and a series of frequently asked questions that detail what to 
expect when meeting with a telepsychologist. Katy’s parents know that during the 
first appointment, Dr. Myers will meet with the parents and Katy together, as well 
as privately with the parents and privately with Katy. When Katy and her family 
come to the first appointment they are greeted by a pediatric licensed practical nurse 
(LPN), who explains that she works as an assistant to Dr. Myers and will be their 
point of contact at the local clinic. Katy’s family is shown the room where they 
will meet Dr. Myers, and the nurse explains how the equipment works and that 
she will assist with adjusting audio and video settings at the start of the encounter 
with Dr. Myers.
Dr. Myers meets with the family for two sessions to complete an intake and gather 
relevant clinical history. After the end of the first session, Dr. Myers asks Katy’s parents 
to complete several checklists of her behaviors and requests that Katy’s primary and 

136
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
secondary teacher complete a teacher-specific version. In between the first and sec-
ond sessions, Dr. Myers reads the results of the testing by the school psychologist as 
well as the classroom behavioral observation summary, then reviews Katy’s school 
and medical records. At the second session, Dr. Myers provides more details about 
the assessment she has planned that she believes will answer the concerns raised by 
Katy’s teachers and her parents. The LPN assistant has ensured that documents sent 
to and from Dr. Myers have been securely transmitted electronically and that paper 
copies of questionnaires and checklists are scanned in a readable fashion.
At the third session, Dr. Myers administers a computerized Continuous Per­
formance Test (CPT) to assess attention-related problems, with proctoring by the LPN 
assistant. The proctor ensures that Katy understands the task and stands by in case 
she has any trouble completing the CPT. Katy takes the test on a computer that is set 
up within view of the telepsychology camera, and while she works with the CPT, the 
proctor notes behavioral observations. In addition, Dr. Myers also observes Katy’s 
behavior during testing and maintains a quiet presence. The psychologist asks Katy 
to draw a paper-and-pencil picture of her family; after she finishes, the assistant scans 
the picture to Dr. Myers, who asks Katy to talk about each family member. Dr. Myers 
also instructs the proctor to guide Katy through age-appropriate paper-and-pencil 
self-report measures of depression and anxiety.
After Dr. Myers has collected and reviewed all testing and questionnaire data, 
behavioral observations, school and medical records, and clinical interview infor­
mation, she prepares her report in which she fully acknowledges that the assess-
ment was conducted via telepsychology with the assistance of a proctor. She further 
notes potential limitations on her assessment findings that emanate from modifi-
cations in the testing procedures or from the testing environment. For this evalu-
ation, she has determined that the total assessment and all available data support 
a diagnosis of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, predominantly inattentive 
presentation, and that the assessment data are not consistent with other psychiatric 
diagnoses.
KEY ELEMENTS, CHALLENGES, AND DECISION FACTORS
The guidelines emphasize that it is important for psychologists to consider that a proc-
tor or assistant may be a benefit or even a necessity to ensure that psychological tests 
are appropriately administered and that the integrity of the assessment condition is 
maintained.
When Dr. Myers set up her telepsychology practice with children, she recognized 
that she would need to make some adaptations to the manner of her practice. She is 
aware that building rapport with her patients is often essential to eliciting their opti-
mal performance or willingness to provide frank and candid disclosure of personal 
information. In her clinic-based practice, she conducts her own psychological test-
ing and is therefore able to directly discern whether her patient understands testing 
instructional sets and seems motivated and engaged in the task at hand. She is also 
able to make direct observations of behaviors exhibited during testing that supplement 
the test scores and provide meaningful clinical context.

137
Testing and Assessment
In her telepsychology practice, she relies on an assistant at the remote or patient 
site location to achieve these same parameters. Dr. Myers accepts that it is her respon-
sibility to train her assistant and supervise her ability to meet all standards for cor-
rectly administering psychological testing. She is also aware the assistant must ensure 
an appropriate environment of assessment conditions is maintained that is comfort-
able and supportive for the patient and free from distractions.
OPTIONS AVAILABLE TO THE PSYCHOLOGIST
When Dr. Myers received the referral for Katy, she recognized her behaviors as ones 
that are often addressed through a comprehensive assessment to rule out neuro­
developmental learning problems, attention-deficit problems, or psychiatric disorder. 
For each patient, Dr. Myers makes an initial assessment whether the child is comfort-
able with the telepsychology testing environment and whether there are likely to 
be confounds that would preclude an appropriate remote assessment. She knew that 
previous assessments through telepsychology for similar referrals were successful, 
although some adaptations were necessary to administer the tests at a distance. The 
primary adaptation for Dr. Myers is the use of a trained assistant to serve as a proc-
tor for testing and at times directly administer the tests. As Dr. Myers considered the 
specific potential tests, she did so based on her initial assessment of congruence among 
the test, the patient, and the testing conditions. One essential role for Dr. Myers’s assis-
tant is to facilitate rapport to optimize clinical validity of the assessment outcome. 
Dr. Myers prefers to meet a child and his or her parents for one or more initial ses-
sions and to observe the interaction of the child with the patient site assistant, as well 
the child’s manner of responding to the testing environment. If the child appears too 
uncomfortable, anxious, or otherwise affected by the testing setting, Dr. Myers is pre-
pared to recommend to the parents that a clinic-based setting may be a better option. 
Likewise during the assessment, Dr. Myers arranges to observe the child taking the 
tests and his or her interactions with the proctor. She is prepared to suspend the test-
ing if she believes that the telepsychology conditions are having a negative impact 
on the child’s performance. Finally, Dr. Myers solicits feedback from her patients and 
their parents about the telepsychology testing experience and uses this information 
to improve her telepsychology practice.
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚Psychologists make sure that the psychometrics of tests and the conditions under 
which the manual prescribes administration are maintained when adapted for 
technology.
❚❚The testing environment must either be modified or maintained to meet criteria 
of test protocols.
❚❚Psychologists should be aware of distractions or any other stimuli in the 
remote environment that could affect performance or the test environment 
protocols.

138
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
❚❚Psychologists must be cognizant of factors that could arise regarding diverse 
populations (e.g., language, culture, impairments) and correct or accommodate 
those factors.
❚❚Psychologists must be deliberate in choosing or using technologies that are used 
and the hardware needed to conduct the test or assessment.
❚❚Psychologists must be prepared to account for and explain differences in results 
obtained from face-to-face versus remote administration of tests.
❚❚Psychologists must be aware of and able to explain any modification or 
accommodations made for telepsychology service.
❚❚Psychologists must be alert to and use norms that are developed for telecom-
munication technologies.
❚❚Psychologists must be aware of potential limitations of testing conducted 
through telecommunications technologies and ready to explain the effects of 
the limitations.
References
Adjorlolo, S., & Chan, H. C. (2015). Forensic assessment via videoconferencing: 
Issues and practice considerations. Journal of Forensic Psychology Practice, 15, 185–204. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/15228932.2015.1015363
Cullum, C. M., & Grosch, M. (2013). Special considerations in conducting neuropsy-
chology assessment over videoteleconferencing. In K. Myers & C. L. Turvey (Eds.), 
Telemental health: Clinical, technical, and administrative foundations for evidence-based 
practice (pp. 275–293). Waltham, MA: Elsevier.
Cullum, C. M., Hynan, L. S., Grosch, M., Parikh, M., & Weiner, M. F. (2014). Teleneuro­
psychology: Evidence for video teleconference-based neuropsychological assess-
ment. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 20, 1028–1033. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1017/S1355617714000873
Galusha-Glasscock, J. M., Horton, D. K., Weiner, M. F., & Munro Cullum, C. (2016). 
Video teleconference administration of the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment 
of Neuropsychological Status. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 31, 8–11. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acv058
Godleski, L., Nieves, J. E., Darkins, A., & Lehmann, L. (2008). VA telemental health: 
Suicide assessment. Behavioral Sciences & the Law, 26, 271–286. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.1002/bsl.811
Grosch, M. C., Weiner, M. F., Hynan, L. S., Shore, J., & Cullum, C. M. (2015). Video 
teleconference-based neurocognitive screening in geropsychiatry. Psychiatry Research, 
225, 734–735. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2014.12.040
Hildebrand, R., Chow, H., Williams, C., Nelson, M., & Wass, P. (2004). Feasibility of 
neuropsychological testing of older adults via videoconference: Implications for 
assessing the capacity for independent living. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 10, 
130–134. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/135763304323070751

139
Testing and Assessment
Jacobsen, S. E., Sprenger, T., Andersson, S., & Krogstad, J. M. (2003). Neuropsy-
chological assessment and telemedicine: A preliminary study examining the reli-
ability of neuropsychology services performed via telecommunication. Journal of 
the International Neuropsychological Society, 9, 472–478. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/
S1355617703930128
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf
Kirkwood, K. T., Peck, D. F., & Bennie, L. (2000). The consistency of neuropsychological 
assessments performed via telecommunication and face to face. Journal of Telemedi-
cine and Telecare, 6, 147–151. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/1357633001935239
Kobak, K. A. (2004). A comparison of face-to-face and videoconference administra-
tion of the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 10, 
231–235. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/1357633041424368
Kobak, K. A., Williams, J. B., Jeglic, E., Salvucci, D., & Sharp, I. R. (2008). Face-to-
face versus remote administration of the Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating 
Scale using videoconference and telephone. Depression and Anxiety, 25, 913–919. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/da.20392
Litwack, S., Jackson, C., Chen, M., Sloan, D., Hatgis, C., Litz, B., & Marx, B. (2014). 
Validation of the use of video teleconferencing technology in the assessment of 
PTSD. Psychological Services, 11, 209–294.
Loh, P. K., Ramesh, P., Maher, S., Saligari, J., Flicker, L., & Goldswain, P. (2004). 
Can patients with dementia be assessed at a distance? The use of telehealth and 
standardised assessments. Internal Medicine Journal, 34, 239–242. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1444-0903.2004.00531.x
Luxton, D. D., Pruitt, L. D., & Jenkins-Guarnieri, M. A. (2015). Clinical assessment in 
clinical videoconferencing. In P. W. Tuerk & P. Shore (Eds.), Clinical videoconferencing 
in telehealth (pp. 203–220). New York, NY: Springer International.
Luxton, D. D., Pruitt, L. D., & Osenbach, J. E. (2014). Best practices for remote psy-
chological assessment via telehealth technologies. Professional Psychology: Research 
and Practice, 45, 27–35. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/a0034547
Nelson, E.-L., Barnard, M., & Cain, S. (2006). Feasibility of telemedicine intervention 
for childhood depression. Counselling & Psychotherapy Research, 6, 191–195. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1080/14733140600862303
Nelson, E.-L., & Bui, T. (2010). Rural telepsychology services for children and adoles-
cents. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 66, 490–501.
Parakh, M., Ghosh, D., & Mehta, V. S. (2014). Web based assessment: New avenues 
in psychological testing. Indian Journal of Health and Wellbeing, 5, 504–506.
Pirelli, G., Otto, R. K., & Estoup, A. (2016). Using Internet and social media data as 
collateral sources of information in forensic evaluations. Professional Psychology: 
Research and Practice, 47, 12–17. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pro0000061
Porcari, C. E., Amdur, R. L., Koch, E. I., Richard, D. C., Favorite, T., Martis, B., & 
Liberzon, I. (2009). Assessment of post-traumatic stress disorder in veterans by 

140
C R O W  A N D  L A N D R Y  P O O L E
videoconferencing and by face-to-face methods. Journal of Telemedicine and Telecare, 
15, 89–94. http://dx.doi.org/10.1258/jtt.2008.080612
San Francisco Suicide Prevention. (2007). Retrieved from http://www.sfsuicide.org/
about-sfsp/history
U.S. Army Medical Command. (2012). Tele-behavioral health operations manual. Fort 
Sam Houston, TX: Author.
Vestal, L., Smith-Olinde, L., Hicks, G., Hutton, T., & Hart, J., Jr. (2006). Efficacy of 
language assessment in Alzheimer’s disease: Comparing in-person examination and 
telemedicine. Clinical Interventions in Aging, 1, 467–471.
Wadsworth, H. E., Galusha-Glasscock, J. M., Womack, K. B., Quiceno, M., Weiner, 
M. F., Hynan, L. S., . . . Cullum, C. M. (2016). Remote neuropsychological assess-
ment in rural American Indians with and without cognitive impairment. Archives 
of Clinical Neuropsychology, 31, 420–425. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/arclin/acw030

141
8
Editors’ Note: Despite the challenges outlined in this chapter, interjurisdictional telepsychology 
practice, both its facilitation and regulation to ensure competent ethical practice, is a high prior-
ity for all constituencies involved. The federal government is promoting telepractice across many 
fields. At the time of this printing, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards had 
developed and is promoting an interstate compact for interjurisdictional telepsychology practice 
and temporary in-person practice. The American Psychological Association, The Trust, and other 
professional associations are providing guidance, programing, and services, including malpractice 
coverage. There are private companies sprouting up to address the infrastructure challenges and 
the training needs and provide technical support and consultation. This broad commitment to 
establishing structures will allow for effective, ethical, and legal telepsychology practice to be more 
readily available for patients and more easily provided by psychologists in the future.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-009
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Interjurisdictional Practice
Rationale
With the rapid advances in telecommunication technologies, the 
intentional or unintentional provision of psychological services 
across jurisdictional and international borders is becoming more of 
a reality for psychologists. Such service provision may range from 
the psychologists or clients/patients being temporarily out of state 
(including split residence across states) to psychologists offering their 
Stephen T. DeMers, Eric A. Harris, and Deborah C. Baker
Psychologists are encouraged to be familiar with and comply with all 
relevant laws and regulations when providing telepsychology services to 
clients/patients across jurisdictional and international borders.
—Guideline 8, Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology

142
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
services across jurisdictional borders as a practice modality to take advantage 
of new telecommunication technologies. Psychological service delivery systems 
within such institutions as the U.S. Department of Defense and the Department 
of Veterans Affairs have already established internal policies and procedures 
for providing services within their systems that cross jurisdictional and 
international borders. However, the laws and regulations that govern service 
delivery by psychologists outside of those systems vary by state, province, 
territory, and country (APA Practice Organization, 2010). Psychologists should 
make reasonable efforts to be familiar with and, as appropriate, to address 
the laws and regulations that govern telepsychology service delivery within 
the jurisdictions in which they are situated and the jurisdictions where 
their clients/patients are located. (Joint Task Force for the Development of 
Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 799)
The Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology (Joint Task Force, 2013) conclude 
with a focus on special considerations created when one engages in telepsychology 
practice across state or provincial territorial boundaries. Regulation of all professional 
services, including those provided by psychologists, is governed by state and provin-
cial laws, not federal regulations or statutes. This guideline recognizes that the power 
of and opportunities presented by new digital technologies make the routine provi-
sion of interjurisdictional telepsychology practically inevitable. It also recognizes that 
psychologists and other mental health professionals are likely already providing such 
services. Additionally, this guideline acknowledges that “the laws and regulations 
that govern service delivery by psychologists outside of those (federal) systems vary 
by state, province, territory, and country” (APA, 2010, as cited in Joint Task Force, 2013, 
p. 799), so it is incumbent on the psychologist to be “aware of the relevant laws and 
regulations impacting telepractice both where the psychologist is located and where 
the patient or client is located (if different from where the psychologist is)” (Joint Task 
Force, 2013, p. 799).
It is important to note that concerns about other jurisdictions’ requirements 
mentioned in this guideline pertain mostly to providing services to clients in different 
jurisdictions than those in which a psychologist is licensed, and they likely may not 
apply if a psychologist is using telehealth technology to provide services to a client 
who is in the same state where the psychologist is located and licensed to practice 
psychology. To be sure, however, even within the same jurisdiction, the application 
of regulations, being familiar with rules and regulations approved by the state, as well 
as changes, and familiarity with the interjurisdictional status of telepsychology prac-
tice in one’s state are critically important. The psychologist’s state licensure laws and 
other relevant state policies govern that interaction, and the same risk management 
strategies apply. Current licensing laws, intended to protect consumers within that 
state, were developed at a time when psychological interventions were provided in 
person where the psychologist and client are in the same state and, often, the same 
room. Some states and provinces have adopted special provisions for the delivery of 
psychological services using telecommunications technology. Psychologists provid-
ing such services within their home state or any state where they hold a license to 
practice should make sure they are familiar with and comply with any relevant state 

143
Interjurisdictional Practice
statute or rule that has been promulgated by their own state board of examiners 
involving boundaries, informed consent, confidentiality, and other factors that carry 
across modalities.
However, many states, provinces, and territories have not updated or amended 
their laws or rules to address telepsychology practice. The typical psychology licensing 
act in force today did not anticipate the remote provision of services through a variety 
of technological modalities. Attempts to apply current laws to the provision of digital 
interjurisdictional transactions, including the provision of medical and psychological 
services, have been unsuccessful in producing agreement among commentators and 
different governmental agencies as to what is or is not permitted. This lack of consensus 
makes clear guidance about provision of professional services in which a client is located 
in a different jurisdiction than the psychologist difficult. For this reason, Guideline 8 
(Joint Task Force, 2013, p. 799) does not offer specific direction for lawfully engaging in 
telepractice across jurisdictional lines.
Questions to Consider for Interjurisdictional  
Practice of Telepsychology
The lack of uniformity among states’ laws and the lack of a clear legal mecha-
nism for facilitating interjurisdictional practice prompt a number of key questions 
that must be addressed to practice telepsychology across jurisdictional boundaries  
in compliance with current laws and rules. These questions are listed and dis-
cussed next.
WHERE DOES THE TRANSACTION ACTUALLY TAKE PLACE?
This question is at the root of the legal controversy over which set of laws gov-
ern interjurisdictional transactions. Where does the therapy legally occur when a 
psychologist provides services from where he or she is licensed to a client who is 
located in another state where the psychologist is not licensed? Because we do not 
yet have laws and regulations governing transactions in cyberspace, a decision has 
to be made as to which jurisdiction’s laws and policies govern—the state where 
the psychologist is located and licensed or the state where the client is located and 
receives services? This is an important distinction because it affects actions a psy-
chologist must take in certain circumstances. For example, State A may require a 
psychologist to break confidentiality if a client threatens self-harm or harm to an 
identifiable third party, whereas State B provides no exceptions to confidentiality 
to address potential violence by the client. The requirements for record keeping 
and a client’s access to records may differ from one jurisdiction to another. If insur-
ance benefits are involved, one state may require coverage for telehealth services, 
whereas another state may not have such a mandate. At the time of this writing, 
29 states plus the District of Columbia have enacted insurance mandates prohibiting 

144
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
insurance companies from refusing to cover health care services provided via tele-
health if those same services would be covered if provided in person (Baker, 2015). 
Absent specific federal or multijurisdictional guidance, appropriate professional 
delivery of services is not entirely clear-cut.
IS THE PSYCHOLOGIST REQUIRED TO BE LICENSED  
WHERE THE CLIENT IS?
A number of jurisdictions take the position that the client’s state or province has 
regulatory jurisdiction and that health care providers must therefore be licensed 
where the client is at the time services are rendered regardless of whether the ser-
vices are provided in person or via telehealth technology. For example, California has 
a telehealth statute that specifically requires that health care providers who deliver 
health care services to clients in California via telehealth must be licensed in California 
(Telehealth Advancement Act, 2011). Similarly, Georgia requires providers who offer 
health services to Georgia residents via telehealth be duly licensed (Georgia Tele­
medicine Act, 2015). In fact, the Georgia State Board of Examiners of Psychologists 
“will report out-of-state psychologists to their respective licensing boards for practic-
ing psychology via these means in the state of Georgia without a Georgia license” 
(Georgia Comp. R. & Regs., 2004). Mississippi defines the practice of psychology to 
include any of the enumerated services or interventions that are provided to individu-
als, families, groups, systems, organizations, and the public whether via face to face, 
telephone, Internet, or telehealth (Miss. Code Ann., 2015). This view that providers 
are considered to be practicing in the state where the client is located and therefore 
subject to that state’s licensure requirements has been affirmed at the federal level 
as well. However, federal opinion on the issue is also divided. A federal agency has 
opined that “In the absence of specific agreements . . . states may not discipline health-
care professionals not licensed in their state if patient harm occurs as the result of the 
provision of health care services by an out of state practitioner” (Wakefield, 2010). 
State boards of examiners are authorized by their state to discipline psychologists 
licensed in their state and, with few exceptions, do not have the authority to discipline 
psychologists who are licensed in other jurisdictions. As a result, licensing boards 
typically refer complaints to the jurisdiction in which the psychologist is licensed.
Although some licensure exceptions may exist, such as the temporary prac-
tice provision found in most states’ psychology practice acts, those exceptions are 
not intended to facilitate long-term practice into another state without a license. 
States differ as to who may be exempt from psychology licensure requirements. 
For example, one state may exempt those who teach psychology or who engage in 
research and provide services to organizations or institutions, whereas a neighbor-
ing state may not recognize all of those exemption categories. Certain state laws or 
procedures, such as the process for contacting emergency services when a client is 
in crisis or even initiating involuntary commitment proceedings, may authorize only 
certain providers licensed in the state where the client is. Significantly, this means 
that providers licensed and practicing in another state may have neither the legal 

145
Interjurisdictional Practice
authority nor the qualified immunity to report suspected abuse or hospitalize a client 
who is in a different state.
WHY IS THE PSYCHOLOGY LICENSING BOARD IN THE 
CLIENT’S STATE CONCERNED ABOUT A LICENSED 
PSYCHOLOGIST IN ANOTHER STATE?
It is important to keep in mind that the role of the licensing board is to protect the 
health, safety, and welfare of the state’s residents and to make sure that its laws and 
regulations are enforced. The state establishes procedures for licensing health care 
providers and regulating their practice within the state as well as providing a forum 
wherein concerns about a licensee can be submitted to the licensing board. The board 
can evaluate the merits of the complaint and, if necessary, investigate and even disci-
pline the provider. Whether communicating with a client by telephone, videoconfer-
encing, or e-mail, the licensing board’s objective is to ensure that qualified individuals 
are providing services to clients within the state in a safe, appropriate, and ethical 
manner. So it is important for the licensing board to know who is providing services 
or engaging in licensable activities in the state.
Where opinions likely differ, however, is on the kind of authority the licensing 
board has over an out-of-state psychologist. This is where the state’s authority under 
the Tenth Amendment of the Constitution to regulate activities within its borders may 
conflict with the Constitution’s Commerce Clause, which reserves Congress’s right 
to regulate interstate commerce. As discussed earlier, the rationale for state licensing 
boards’ oversight of licensed health care activities is based on the consumer protection 
mandate. Depending on the individual state’s laws and regulations, the penalty for 
practicing without a license may vary from an administrative remedy (e.g., a cease and 
desist order, an injunction) to a civil fine or even a criminal offense (in most cases, a 
misdemeanor but in at least one state, a felony).
For those who engage in unauthorized practice within the state, the state’s 
authority to impose a penalty is clear. It is not clear whether or how a state’s juris­
dictional authority extends to someone outside of its jurisdictional boundaries, 
however. Without jurisdiction, the state cannot impose penalties of any kind. Given 
the lack of consensus about which jurisdiction has regulatory authority over health 
care services provided via technology in cyberspace, what follows looks at how the 
courts have interpreted who has jurisdiction when providers and patients are in 
different states.
Minimum Contacts Analysis for State’s  
Jurisdiction Over Out-of-State Practitioners
State jurisdiction over citizens of other states has been the subject of case law around 
the country. The courts’ determination is based on the application of the “minimum 
contacts” rule to the specific facts and circumstances of an individual case. Under the 

146
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
minimum contacts rule, a state “cannot assert personal jurisdiction over an out-of-
state resident in a civil proceeding unless he has purposefully availed himself of the 
privileges and benefits of conducting activities within the forum” (International Shoe 
Co. v. Washington, 1945).
No bright line test has emerged to define exactly what facts constitute sufficient 
contacts by the provider aimed at the forum state (i.e., the state in which a lawsuit is 
filed). So the courts have ruled both ways, finding in some cases that the out-of-state 
practitioner is subject to the state’s jurisdiction and deciding under other circumstances 
that jurisdiction is lacking.
Generally, the courts have not exercised jurisdiction in cases where the patient 
travels to another state where the provider resides or is located for diagnosis and treat-
ment. However, in those cases where the doctor–patient relationship crossed state lines, 
the courts tended to focus on the kinds of contacts or activities and the frequency that 
the provider had with the forum state in determining whether it had jurisdiction in the 
underlying malpractice case.
In most cases, the courts have held that the mere fact that a patient received treat-
ment in the state where the practitioner is located and returns to his or her own state 
where the effects of such treatment might be felt is insufficient to confer jurisdiction. 
In those cases, the courts determined that any contacts the provider might have had 
within the forum state were routine, follow-up actions, not the acts constituting diagno-
sis and treatment giving rise to the malpractice claims. Activities deemed by the courts 
as insufficient for jurisdiction include sending a refill prescription to a pharmacy in the 
patient’s state for medication that plaintiff had been prescribed previously (Wright v. 
Yackley, 1972), follow-up calls checking on the patient’s status (Prince v. Urban, 1996), 
and sending letters confirming diagnoses and treatment recommendations made outside 
the forum state (Bradley v. Mayo Foundation, 1999).
Conversely, it appears that the courts have been inclined to find jurisdiction in those 
cases where the patient successfully alleged an ongoing provider–client relationship 
across state lines. Examples of the facts indicating an ongoing relationship include mail-
ing prescription medications to the patient in the forum state (Bullion v. Gillespie, 1990) 
and providing subsequent advice about treatment and medication via telephone calls 
to the patient in the forum state (Walsh v. Chez, 2006). For example, in Jones v. Williams 
(2009), the California court ruled that weekly telephone therapy provided by a therapist 
licensed in New Mexico to a patient in California, as well as the therapist’s traveling to 
California at that patient’s request to provide in-person therapy, was sufficient for the 
provider to be subject to California’s jurisdiction.
But the most notable case is Hageseth v. Superior Court of San Mateo County (2007) in 
which a Colorado psychiatrist was charged with practicing medicine in California with-
out a license, a felony, for prescribing psychotropic medications to a California resident 
through an online pharmacy. California decided to extradite Hageseth to California to 
stand trial. The psychiatrist tried to argue that California had no jurisdictional authority 
to prosecute him as he was never in California nor had he acted through any agent in 
California. However, the California appellate court ruled that although he wrote the 
prescription in Colorado, he knew or should have known that the online prescription 

147
Interjurisdictional Practice
would be filled and mailed to the individual in California, thereby resulting in unli-
censed practice of medicine being “consummated” in California and thus meeting 
the minimum contacts test. On that basis, the appellate court ruled that California 
had jurisdiction.
It is hard to draw clear conclusions about how to rationalize the different court 
interpretations of the minimum contacts rule and apply them to actual cases that psy-
chologists encounter. Most case law that explicates telepractice is taken from the medi-
cal profession; extrapolation to psychology does not yet have a rich history of case law. 
The clearest guidance comes from the court’s interpretation in Prince v. Urban (1996). 
In this case, a patient traveled from California to a center of medical excellence in 
Illinois to get treatment for headaches. When she returned to California, she commu-
nicated regularly with the doctors in Illinois to get follow-up care and advice. When 
she did not get better, she tried to bring suit in California claiming that the telephone 
conversations with the doctors constituted practice in California, giving the California 
courts jurisdiction. The court said no, enunciating the following three principles that 
determined whether the minimum contacts test would be met and would give the 
patient’s location state jurisdiction:
1.  Was the doctor–patient relationship created because of a systematic and 
continuing effort by the doctor to provide services in the client’s state or was 
the location incidental?
2.  Were the doctors’ services grounded in any relationship that they had 
with the state (i.e., did they have offices in the state, were they seeking 
reimbursement for the services from the state)?
3.  Did the state’s interest in providing good medical care for its citizens 
outweigh the potential and severity of any reasonably anticipated harm?
The court’s language in analyzing the third principle above is important and instructive:
In the case of personal services, focus must be on the place where the services 
are rendered, since this is the place of the receiver’s (here the patient’s) need. 
The need is personal, and the services rendered are in response to the dimensions 
of that personal need. They are directed to no place but to the needy person 
himself/herself. . . . [The] “dominant interest” of a state regarding patients/clients  
is “not that they should be free of injury by out-of-state doctors, but rather that 
they should be able to secure adequate medical services to meet their needs 
wherever they may go.” (Prince v. Urban, as cited in Wright v. Yackley, 1972)
The following four principles offer a preliminary basis for risk management guid-
ance to psychologists contemplating providing telepsychology to patients:
1.	 The relationship between the psychologist and the patient comes from the 
patient’s initiative and not as the result of the psychologist’s attempt to advertise 
services interjurisdictionally or the psychologist’s participation in a commercial 
enterprise that provides interjurisdictional services.
2.	 There is a clear rationale that providing services using telepsychology would be 
at least equal, if not superior, to those services which the client could receive 
through an in-person referral to a provider in the client’s jurisdiction.

148
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
3.	 The psychologist takes reasonable steps to ensure the competence of his or her 
work and to protect clients and others from harm. This means psychologists 
at a minimum are conversant and compliant with all of the telepsychology 
guidelines developed by the Joint Task Force (2013).
4.	 The psychologist has conducted a conservative assessment of the client’s diagno-
sis, history, and risk level and determined that these factors do not contraindicate 
providing services via technology.
If these conditions are met, then one may have a persuasive argument that the 
state’s interest in providing good medical care to its citizens outweighs the potential 
and severity of any reasonably anticipated harm posed by an out-of-state clinician 
providing services. It would also be unlikely that the state would seek to take action 
in such a case given the difficulty and uncertainty of action. Further, allowing these 
services does not leave consumers dissatisfied or feeling harmed without recourse. 
They can always file a complaint with the licensing board of the state in which the 
psychologist is licensed and providing services. Although this could create logistical 
issues that would make it hard for the psychologist’s licensing board to investigate 
and adjudicate, it would not be impossible.
Regulators might agree with the described risk management strategy but would 
very likely view interstate telepsychology practice as a high-risk venture. There is cur-
rently no legal mechanism that would permit a psychologist to engage in telepractice 
in another state where he or she is not licensed (other than the temporary practice 
statutes mentioned earlier). So unless a psychologist has multiple licenses or is exempt 
from licensure, regulators would contend that the psychologist engaging in interstate 
telepractice is not lawfully practicing psychology in those other states and is thus risking 
some disciplinary consequence.
Admittedly, pursuing or prosecuting psychologists engaging in unlawful inter-
jurisdictional telepractice may be quite difficult. States have limited resources they 
can devote to disciplinary proceedings against psychologists. Pursuing out-of-state 
psychologists who provide services to clients in their states involves a number of legal 
and procedural difficulties that would require considerable financial expense, time, 
and energy. To proceed criminally against a psychologist, a state would have to extra-
dite the offending psychologist. The question of whether a state could impose civil 
fines is also debatable. Some believe the state may be limited to issuing a cease and 
desist order or other injunctive relief. A cease and desist order is commonly issued for 
the in-person practice of psychology by other mental health professionals and can be 
issued to psychologists practicing in the jurisdiction without a license. This is a com-
mon and easily employed strategy. However, the consequences of a cease and desist 
order, a fine, or certainly any criminal complaint against a psychologist for practicing 
without a license could be significant. Although it may be difficult to imagine that 
a state would use its scarce resources to prosecute a psychologist who complies with 
the preceding guidelines and carefully considers ethical and lawful professional prac-
tice standards or guidelines, the circumstances of the individual client as well as the 
potential risks of such practice given current uncertainties should give any prudent 
psychologist reason to proceed with great caution.

149
Interjurisdictional Practice
Given the short length of time that interstate telepsychology has been practiced, there 
are limited actuarial data about the disciplinary risks involved. There are some data to 
suggest that many psychologists are providing telepsychology services across state lines. 
There are cases in which state licensing boards issued cease and desist orders, but few, if 
any, reported disciplinary sanctions against an out-of-state licensed psychologist for pro-
viding telepsychology services to a client within that state’s licensing board jurisdiction.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that these issues are unresolved at the time of 
this writing and certainly not unique to telehealth or telepsychology. Witness the fact 
that it is still not clear whether consumers of Amazon and other large online retail-
ers have to pay state sales taxes. The issues related to interjurisdictional practice will 
take time and effort to resolve before a practitioner can safely understand the new 
“rules of the road” when it comes to interjurisdictional telepsychology. The increas-
ing demand for telehealth services has, however, cast a sharper focus on these issues, 
resulting in some stakeholders calling for either a national or federal solution to the 
current interjurisdictional barriers or other possible state-based solutions to facilitate 
interstate telepractice to help clarify these unresolved issues.
Federal Initiatives to Address  
Interstate Practice
The growing demand for telehealth services has prompted increasing calls at the federal 
level either to institute policies or to remove obstacles to better facilitate telehealth prac-
tice around the country. One idea is to institute a national health care provider licensure 
system analogous to driver’s licenses. The provider would obtain licensure in the state 
of his or her residence. That license would be recognized by other states if the provider 
is practicing in another state. Should the provider change his or her residence, then the 
expectation is that he or she would then move licensure to the new state. However, 
there is much resistance from state regulators and other stakeholders to this idea because 
of concerns about federalism, decreased ability to oversee appropriate credentialing of 
providers, and a lack of means for disciplining bad actors.
Other proposals call for lifting existing practice restrictions. For example, in 2011, 
Congress passed the Servicemembers’ Telemedicine and E-Health Portability (STEP) 
Act that allows health care providers credentialed in the U.S. Defense Department (DoD) 
to treat military personnel at any location regardless of where the provider or patient 
is located, so long as the provider is practicing within the scope of his or her authorized 
duties. Specifically, the STEP Act expanded the DoD state licensure exemption to allow 
credentialed providers to work across state borders without having to obtain a new 
state license, expanded the definition of exempt health care professional to include 
qualified DoD civilian contractors, and removed the service location requirement to 
allow for care regardless of where the health care professional or patient is located. 
The DoD, however, has jurisdiction over its employees apart from location and can 
determine the location of any employee, thereby making the DoD an entity that com-
mands authority that jurisdictions do not have. Further, the DoD has state-of-the-art 

150
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
technology that allows services to be rendered by a military psychologist in Austin, 
Texas, to a deployed military person in a foreign country.
A similar proposal for the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) has been pursued 
in Congress. The Veterans E-Health & Telemedicine Support (VETS; 2015a, 2015b) 
Act would allow a licensed health care professional credentialed through the VA to 
provide telehealth services anywhere in the United States including the District of 
Columbia, or a U.S. commonwealth, territory, or possession, regardless of whether 
the provider or patient is located at a federal government facility. The current ver-
sion of the VETS Act (HR 2516; 2015a) and its companion bill (S 2170; 2015b) were 
introduced in 2015.
Likewise, federal legislators have been lobbied to ease restrictions under Medicare 
for telehealth services. One example is the TELEmedicine for MEDicare (TELE-MED) 
Act (2015a, 2015b). This bill seeks to amend the Social Security Act to allow a Medicare 
provider to provide telehealth services to a Medicare beneficiary who is in a different 
state from the one in which the provider is licensed or authorized to provide health 
care services. This proposal would vest authority in the state where the provider is 
licensed to regulate the delivery of health care services, instead of the state where the 
patient or beneficiary is. Like the VETS Act, the TELE-MED Act has been introduced 
over the past few congressional sessions. The current bills (S1778 and HR 3081; 2015a, 
2015b) were introduced during the summer of 2015.
Another legislative example is the Medicare Telehealth Parity Act (2015), 
which seeks to expand incrementally the coverage of telehealth services under 
the Medicare program. Specifically, this proposal seeks to extend the definition of 
“originating site” (location where the patient receives services via telehealth) to 
include any federally qualified health center, any rural health clinic, and the patient’s 
home (for outpatient mental and behavioral services, hospice care, home dialysis, 
or home health services). It would add respiratory therapy, physical therapy, occu-
pational therapy, audiology, and speech pathology to the lists of covered telehealth  
services and approved telehealth providers. It would also increase the geographic 
areas where Medicare beneficiaries would be eligible to receive telehealth services 
because Medicare currently limits coverage to mainly rural areas. The current pro-
posal (HR 2948) was introduced in July 2015.
Those are a few examples of the growing number of legislative proposals intro-
duced in Congress to facilitate telepractice. Although many have not progressed very 
far through the legislative process, these concepts are gaining traction among legisla-
tors as calls for solutions from the health care and patient communities, as well as the 
technology industry, continue to build.
Multistate Licensure Compacts
Concurrent with increasing legislative activity at the federal level, some regula-
tory bodies are considering the multistate compact as a mechanism to facilitate 
interjurisdictional telepsychology practice (IJTP). The Nursing Licensure Compact 

151
Interjurisdictional Practice
grants registered and licensed practical and vocational nurses licensed in any of 
the current 25 compact states the ability to practice, physically or electronically, in 
both their home state and other compact states (National Council of State Boards 
of Nursing, 2000). If a nurse moves to another jurisdiction, the nurse would either 
need to declare a new primary residence if in another compact state or obtain 
licensure by endorsement if in a noncompact state. There is a separate compact for 
advanced practice nurses.
The Federation of State Medical Boards (2013) recently developed the Interstate 
Compact to Expedite Medical Licensure and Facilitate Multi-State Practice. This compact 
would allow for qualified physicians seeking licensure in multiple states to pursue 
expedited licensing in all compact states. Its focus is license portability and uniform 
licensing requirements. Therefore, the medical compact still requires physicians to 
obtain medical licenses in each state where the physician practices. The compact would 
not grant a multistate licensure similar to the Nursing Licensure Compact. In 2015, 
11 states enacted enabling legislation establishing the compact.
In 2015, the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) announced 
the development of a similar compact proposal, the Psychology Interjurisdictional 
Compact (PSYPACT), which would authorize licensed psychologists in PSYPACT states 
to engage in “telepsychology and temporary in-person, face-to-face practice of psychol-
ogy across state lines.” Like the Nursing Licensure Compact and the medical com-
pact, participating state licensing boards would agree to share information about 
licensure verification, complaints, and investigations. The Medical Board Compact 
requires licensure in each compact state; however, the PSYPACT for psychologists 
would be similar to the Nursing COMPACT in which psychologists would only 
be required to be licensed in their home jurisdiction. However, the authority to 
revoke a psychologist’s license would rest with the licensing board in the jurisdic-
tion where the psychologist is licensed. Starting with the 2016 state legislative 
season in the United States, ASPPB’s plan was to introduce PSYPACT legislation 
in several states open to such initiatives. PSYPACT, like other compacts, is written 
such that at least seven states must pass the compact legislation before PSYPACT 
can become operational.
Until a mechanism like PSYPACT takes effect and is operational in all 50 states 
and U.S. territories, the challenges of practicing psychology across state lines with-
out multiple licenses remain. In this chapter, the authors present three case studies  
that highlight the complexities of telepsychology practice when practicing across 
state lines within the regulatory environment at the time this was written. The risk 
management and regulatory perspectives for each case study are described and con-
trasted. Readers can evaluate their own situations and gauge the potential risks and 
benefits. Not surprisingly, all sides will not necessarily agree on an approach, under-
scoring why practitioners should give careful consideration to how to proceed if they 
are thinking about engaging in telepsychology across state lines. It should be noted 
that specific states identified in any of the case examples are used strictly for illustra-
tive purposes, demonstrating the thought process for considering whether to engage 
in telepsychology across jurisdictional lines.

152
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
Case Study 1: IJTP for Continuity of Care
Dr. Innovative has been licensed in Rhode Island for 15 years. During that time, she 
has specialized in working with adolescents and young adults. She has experience 
working for college counseling centers in the past, although she is now exclusively in 
private practice. She had been seeing a now 18-year-old client for 3 years. Her client 
will be going to college in Colorado in the fall and wants to continue treatment with 
Dr. Innovative via phone or videoconferencing. The parents are strongly supportive 
of this.
The client comes from an upper-middle-class family and experiences consider-
able stress and tension precipitated by high academic performance expectations both 
internally and externally. She works hard and often has problems completing work 
because of anxiety that her work is not good enough. Her parents are divorced and 
still in some conflict with one another, which has caused considerable discomfort 
for the client on occasion. There is a great deal of pressure on the client from par-
ents who greatly value intellectual performance and professional success. The client 
reports feeling that pressure acutely and has periods of intense anxiety. The client 
has a diagnosis of generalized anxiety disorder rendered by a previous therapist with 
which Dr. Innovative concurs.
The client also uses the treatment to deal with normal developmental issues faced 
in late adolescence and her concerns about going to college. She had a couple of failed 
treatment episodes during the period of conflict between the parents and before 
Dr. Innovative took over the client’s care. Dr. Innovative and the client have a very 
strong alliance, and the client feels Dr. Innovative has helped her greatly. She says 
that she would not start with someone else while away at college because she says it 
would be too much trouble to get to know someone new, and she is doubtful it would 
work anyway. The parents are willing to pay out-of-pocket. The client will see  
Dr. Innovative in person when she returns home during breaks, including Thanksgiving, 
Christmas, spring break, and over the summer.
The client has a psychiatrist who has prescribed a minimal dosage of a benzo­
diazepine for anxiety. Her psychiatrist is willing to monitor her medications and to see 
her on vacations but will only do this if Dr. Innovative continues on the case because 
he feels it isn’t responsible to prescribe when he doesn’t know the therapist.
Dr. Innovative considers herself to be a novice in using technology. She has some 
knowledge of how to operate safely online, but she has never used videoconferencing 
technology except to Skype with her relatives, children, and friends. Dr. Innovative 
is willing to consider taking on the challenge but seeks advice about what she would 
have to do to minimize risk.
RISK MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE
The first step is to consider the clinical presentation involved by comparing the pro-
posed telepsychology treatment to making a referral to a competent colleague in 
Colorado for in-person therapy or referring to the university counseling center. The 

153
Interjurisdictional Practice
university counseling center has its limitations because its aim is to provide short-
term counseling services, which is not what this client wants nor would it be the 
optimal treatment.
There are certainly a number of competent private practitioners in the vicinity of 
the college, but one would have to be found, and it would be hard to determine in 
advance whether the relationship would work out as well as the current relationship 
between the client and Dr. Innovative. Further, a new psychiatrist would have to be 
recruited. Finally, the new psychologist would not be available during vacations and 
both the client and her parents would want Dr. Innovative to be available during 
these times.
All of these issues lead to the conclusion that most likely, continuing the exist-
ing, already beneficial therapy relationship presents the best chance for success. Of 
course, Dr. Innovative should consider whether the client’s dependence on her is 
developmentally problematic and whether it is a good time for the client to separate. 
If Dr. Innovative determines that her continuation would be the most productive 
option, then there are a number of other issues she should consider:
1.	 Dr. Innovative would have to carefully examine the telepsychology guidelines 
developed jointly by APA, ASPPB, and The Trust (Joint Task Force, 2013). 
Because she has little experience in providing services remotely but has con-
siderable experience with providing psychotherapy services both to this client 
and others with similar issues, she might have some doubts about her compe-
tence. To increase her confidence, she might seek out consultation from a col-
league who has actual experience in the area, read some of the many articles 
that are available online about providing remote services, and seek assistance 
from her ongoing consultation group of seasoned therapists. Dr. Innovative 
has a learning curve ahead of her in achieving technical competence, clinical 
competence online as different from in-person, informed consent adaptation, 
and other significant competency factors.
2.	 Dr. Innovative should then check to see what kind of temporary practice is per-
mitted in Colorado by a psychologist licensed in another state. Colorado allows 
for 20 days of practice in a calendar year so long as the psychologist discloses 
to those he or she is serving that he or she is not licensed in Colorado. That 
means that Dr. Innovative could legally provide 20 sessions to her client, which 
would allow her to provide a telepsychology session every other week during 
the academic year. Dr. Innovative and her client could even choose to conduct 
extended 2-hour sessions if it were determined to be clinically appropriate.
Additionally, Dr. Innovative should check to see whether Colorado has a 
policy about telepractice, and after she discovers that it does have such a policy, 
she should become familiar with it to ensure compliance. Colorado adopted 
a telepractice policy applicable to all mental health providers (Department of 
Regulatory Agencies, 2015) that outlines the issues the mental health provider 
must identify and address before providing therapy electronically. Not only does 
this policy recommend that the “initial therapeutic contact be in person and 
adequate to provide a conclusive diagnosis and therapeutic treatment plan” 

154
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
but the clinician needs to comply with the licensing laws and provide periodic 
face-to-face visits. Additionally, the policy states that a provider of telepractice 
needs to identify and address several other criteria both with regard to his or 
her practice and to challenges that may exist and which are specific to provid-
ing psychotherapy electronically. Complying with such a policy is important 
to risk management.
3.	 Dr. Innovative ought to do some research about what kind of communication 
platform would be optimal and meet Health Insurance Portability and Account-
ability Act (HIPAA; 1996) requirements. A number of online sites provide com-
prehensive reviews that she could access to research the question. She could 
also seek the advice of more experienced colleagues through either her state 
association or divisional electronic mailing lists. Before Dr. Innovative agrees to 
this arrangement, she might propose that she and the client conduct a couple of 
videoconferencing sessions to see whether they each feel comfortable with the 
differences from in-person sessions.
4.	 Despite the fact that the client is technically an adult, Dr. Innovative could 
insist on access to the client’s parents during the time she is away at school as 
a condition of her undertaking this kind of treatment. If there are problems at 
school, Dr. Innovative wants to be sure that she and the parents can operate 
as a team to support the client.
5.	 Further, it is recommended that Dr. Innovative seek the client’s agreement 
to check in with the college counseling center to inform them that she is in 
treatment with Dr. Innovative and provide them with authorization to com-
municate with Dr. Innovative in the unlikely event that a crisis might arise. 
In the event of a crisis, the university would be in a much better position to 
take immediate action.
6.	 Dr. Innovative might also negotiate some ground rules about the client’s behav-
ior during the sessions aimed at creating an environment conducive to therapy. 
For example, she could require that the client shut down all electronic commu-
nication devices, video, music, or other potential distractions during their tele-
practice sessions. If the client has a roommate, there will need to be negotiation 
to ensure that the client has the necessary privacy. Dr. Innovative and the client 
should also have a backup plan should the technology fail or be interrupted as 
will almost certainly happen from time to time (see Standards of Care, Guidelines 
for the Practice of Telepsychology, Joint Task Force, 2013).
7.	 Dr. Innovative could clarify with both the client and her parents that since she 
does not have a great deal of experience providing this mode of treatment that 
she reserves the right to stop the treatment with time to terminate appropri-
ately if she feels that it is not working (see Standards of Care and Competence, 
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology, Joint Task Force, 2013).
What is the risk to Dr. Innovative? Although unlikely, the client could prove to be 
unready for college and develop severe anxiety or depression and become suicidal. She 
could find herself involved with drugs, irresponsible or abusive romantic partners, or 
even be the victim of sexual assault. Parental disputes could develop about whether 

155
Interjurisdictional Practice
Dr. Innovative is doing a good job. All of these issues could lead to the client’s being 
or feeling harmed. In any and all of these situations, although it may be unlikely, a 
complaint could be filed with the Colorado psychology licensing board, where the 
college is located.
If a complaint were filed in Colorado, Colorado would have no jurisdiction over 
Dr. Innovative and would be limited to either forwarding the complaint to Rhode 
Island or issuing a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order could be challenged 
in federal court, although it is unlikely that Dr. Innovative would have the resources 
to do so, nor would it be advisable to expend the energy involved in such action. 
However, from a risk management perspective, a cease and desist order does not con-
stitute discipline, although it would have to be listed on applications and could have 
some consequence for Dr. Innovative. If she chooses to provide telepsychology to her 
client, Dr. Innovative’s risk management strategy would be to provide short-term, 
limited telepsychology services to her existing patient under the temporary practice 
provision so long as she follows the requirements and identifies the issues outlined 
in Colorado’s psychology licensing board policy on telemental health. In this case,  
Dr. Innovative would notify the counseling center and the licensing board of her tem-
porary practice, therefore protecting against a complaint about her right to practice. 
She could still be subject, of course, to a complaint regarding her specific work with 
the client just as she is when she sees clients in her office face to face.
At this point, there is little actuarial data that a board has ever processed a com-
plaint or attempted to discipline someone for providing telepsychology services to a 
client who receives the services in a state different from the one in which the psy-
chologist is located and licensed. There is an increased interest from psychologists who 
are deciding to engage in this kind of interjurisdictional practice because they feel that 
it is in the best interests of their clients to continue their investment in helping them 
with their issues.
The risk for Dr. Innovative, based on the case law and data, is very low. Dr. Innovative 
is almost certain to have cases in her caseload that present higher risk than this  
one would present. In the end, when advising psychologists who seek guidance on 
this issue, risk management consultants go over the case carefully, help the psycholo-
gist figure out the pros and cons, including the risk, and leave the choice of whether to 
continue to the psychologist’s personal and professional discretion.
REGULATORY PERSPECTIVE
Colorado, like several other states, has rules related to the provision of psychological 
services that specifically require the provider to be licensed or certified in Colorado 
unless the provider meets one of the exemptions. One of those exemptions is practic-
ing under the temporary practice provision that allows a psychologist to practice for 
20 days in Colorado without being licensed in Colorado as long as the psychologist is 
licensed in his or her own state. Providing telepsychology under the temporary practice 
provision also requires compliance with Colorado’s regulations. If Dr. Innovative does 
not follow the requirements of the temporary practice provision and the telepractice 
policy, the Colorado board may issue a cease and desist order to Dr. Innovative or report 

156
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
her to the Rhode Island psychology board, with significant consequences for the clini-
cian. For example, even if no sanction is ever assessed, Dr. Innovative would have 
to disclose in applications for liability insurance or licenses in subsequent states that 
she had been the subject of a disciplinary complaint or restriction on her license. 
Consequently, the importance of fully understanding the rules and regulations for 
temporary practice and telepsychology practice cannot be overestimated. Therefore, 
in review, it is recommended that Dr. Innovative do the following:
1.	 Carefully review and consider Colorado’s rules or regulations related to the 
provision of telepsychology services whether within the state or outside the 
state. Checking with the Colorado State Board of Psychologist Examiners 
would be the best way to get this information even though there are a num-
ber of other ways to research this question.
2.	 Review Colorado’s provision for temporary practice and structure her ses-
sions with her client to be compliant with that. If Dr. Innovative concludes 
the treatment her client needs cannot be provided within the temporary 
practice provision requirements and the telepractice policy, she should 
advise the client and her parents that regardless of the prior relationship, 
the client would be best served through referral to another licensed provider 
in Colorado.
3.	 Consult with colleagues who have expertise and experience in the area of 
telepractice and her professional malpractice carrier to help her consider all 
factors before proceeding with providing telepsychology to her client in a 
different state.
One other avenue for Dr. Innovative is whether a multistate compact has been 
adopted by the legislatures in Colorado and Rhode Island. If so, then Dr. Innovative 
could practice in Colorado as long as she is licensed in one of the compact states. 
Dr. Innovative would still need to consider, however, the telepractice policy as well as 
all the other concerns about patient privacy, security, and emergency care outlined in 
the risk management section.
Case Study 2: Industrial–Organizational Setting
Dr. Business is a licensed industrial–organizational (I/O) psychologist with 20 years 
of experience and a highly regarded professional reputation as a management con-
sultant. Dr. Business is approached by a large U.S. corporation about running a 
personnel management and evaluation effort for the company’s national workforce 
spread across five states as an independent contractor, not as an employee. Although 
Dr. Business is licensed in three states, he only has a license in one of the five states 
where the company has facilities and wants him to evaluate employees. That state is 
where the company has its main corporate offices. The company tells Dr. Business  
that they want him to design and implement an online assessment system that will use 
employee self-ratings plus ratings from peers and supervisors to evaluate employee 

157
Interjurisdictional Practice
performance and recommend advancement, retention, or termination based on his 
findings.
The company stresses to Dr. Business that he is not making the final decision 
in these cases but that his input will have a major influence on the company’s final 
decision. The company further states that they are looking for someone with his 
skills and abilities who can deliver these assessments using online tools and possibly 
interviewing, but there is no money to support travel to provide face-to-face service.
Dr. Business considers the possible risks to him from assessing individuals and 
recommending advancement, retention, or termination for employees located in a 
state where he is not licensed. However, he accepts the contract by reasoning that, 
first, he is not the ultimate decision maker for these employees and, second, that he 
is licensed where the company’s headquarters is located. Dr. Business feels that the 
company, not the employee, is his client, and therefore he can legally perform these 
services by using informed consent to make the employees aware of the purpose  
of his assessments.
RISK MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE
The first thing that Dr. Business would have to consider is whether I/O psychology is 
part of the practice of psychology or is otherwise exempt in the states where he was 
not licensed. That is, many jurisdictions do not require licensure for consulting or I/O 
psychologists because they are not health service providers. Dr. Business would need 
to be aware of licensure status for his specialty before beginning services. Assuming 
the states in which he needs to work are not exempt, he would be at some risk.
Unlike in Case Study 1 (IJTP for Continuity of Care), there is no question that the 
company’s physical presence in the five states would meet the “minimum contacts” test 
and, therefore, gives the licensing boards jurisdiction. On the other hand, because all of 
the professional activities take place where the psychologist is licensed, it might be hard 
to argue that he is actually practicing across state lines. If the psychologist exclusively 
used empirical instruments to assess the candidates, it would probably be safer. The actual 
interviews with someone in a different state would make the process riskier.
In this case, full informed consent is crucial, which requires that Dr. Business 
also have a clear written contractual understanding with the company as to what the 
company plans to do with the information and that it will be adequately protected. 
Dr. Business would be wise to follow the APA (2017) Ethics Code Standard 3.11, 
which enumerates the requirements for informed consent when working with an 
organization rather than an individual client.
The company could protect itself from some of its liability exposure by having 
contracts with employees that either include compulsory arbitration agreements or 
clauses specifying that the contract would be subject to the laws of the state where 
the company’s home office is located.
But none of this would prevent a disgruntled employee from filing a complaint 
against Dr. Business with the licensing board in the place where the employee is a 
resident, and if Dr. Business is not licensed in the same state, this licensing board 

158
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
could take jurisdiction. It could assess fines that the company could agree to pay if 
this happened, or the licensing board could charge the psychologist with practicing 
psychology without a license, a criminal offense.
A better solution might be to have the psychologist hire licensed individuals to 
administer the tests, but it is critical for Dr. Business to determine what each state allows 
in its licensing laws. If licensed individuals credentialed to practice in the state provide 
such services, they could also conduct the employee interviews, which could then be 
forwarded to Dr. Business, who could then do the analysis and advise the company. That 
would not seem to violate any licensing laws. However, the company might be reluctant 
to spend the money for these additional professionals.
If a multistate compact were in force, if consulting and I/O psychologists were not 
required to be licensed in a given state, or if the state allows temporary practice, this 
case would have a better solution. In the meantime, psychologists have a significant 
responsibility to follow ethical guidelines and state laws.
REGULATORY PERSPECTIVE
This scenario presents a challenging set of issues. Assuming the company is operating 
with the best intentions to recruit and retain the most qualified and talented employees 
possible and that Dr. Business is both competent and willing to develop a valid and 
reliable assessment system based on the latest employee selection research and best 
practices, several major obstacles to accepting this arrangement still remain:
1.	 Is the telepsychology approach of remote evaluations being sought by this 
company the most valid and appropriate way to provide these employees 
with assessments? Should an employee feel harmed by the results of such an 
assessment and decide to take legal action against the company and perhaps 
the psychologist, can the services provided be justified through a strong evi-
dentiary basis for taking such an approach? This use of telepractice may be 
efficient and cost-effective for the company and lucrative for the psychologist, 
but is it valid and defensible for the individuals being assessed?
2.	 Despite the company’s protestations, who is the client? The psychologist and 
the company may agree that the company is the client here. Then, however, 
the employees will need to be provided with clear informed consent about the 
nature and purpose of the evaluations and the confidentiality (or lack of confi-
dentiality), as well as the additional factors noted in the APA (2017) Ethics Code 
Standard 3.11 afforded in this professional interaction with Dr. Business.
3.	 Finally, given the high stakes nature of the assessments being planned and 
conducted by Dr. Business and the fact that livelihoods and careers may be 
negatively affected, one can anticipate that some employees may challenge 
the adequacy of their results. Let’s say an employee objects to the company 
assessment and ends up being terminated. If the employee feels harmed by 
the input from the assessment conducted by Dr. Business, where does he or 
she receive recourse? If the employee was working in Texas and also evalu-
ated there, but the company is headquartered in California and Dr. Business 

159
Interjurisdictional Practice
is licensed in California but not Texas, which state licensing board has juris-
diction over the professional behavior of Dr. Business? In which state was the 
professional service of Dr. Business provided? Or was it provided in cyberspace 
and thus beyond the jurisdiction of either Texas or California? For these rea-
sons, Dr. Business should decline to accept this consulting arrangement unless 
he is willing to obtain a license in every jurisdiction where an employee will 
be evaluated.
Case Study 3: IJTP Therapy Practice
Dr. Digital is an early-career psychologist who is interested in leveraging technology 
and social media to expand his practice. Dr. Digital sees a number of adolescents 
and young adults within his practice, so he is comfortable using technology to com-
municate with some of his established clients for limited purposes. He would like to 
expand his use to grow his practice. He has received solicitations from several online 
therapy companies interested in adding licensed mental health therapists to their 
panels. One of the companies, TalkTherapy (a fictitious company used as example), 
not only offers videoconferencing but also therapy via text messaging and online 
public forums.
In looking at TalkTherapy, Dr. Digital believes that as part of the application pro-
cess, he needs to submit information demonstrating that he is actively licensed in good 
standing in his particular mental health care discipline. The time commitment for 
working with TalkTherapy appears to be flexible. Its website claims that subscribers 
may chat with a licensed therapist wherever they may be and at any time.
But what is not clear to Dr. Digital from reviewing the company’s website is 
how the company assigns or connects one of its therapists to a subscriber, whether 
the company confirms and documents that a subscriber is matched to a therapist 
appropriately licensed in the jurisdiction where the subscriber is located, or how a 
session is scheduled once a subscriber logs on to the site. In addition, Dr. Digital is 
not sure whether he is expected to confirm the identity of individuals with whom 
he may be connected through the website or whether the company is responsible 
for that.
The company does state that its therapists are licensed, pass background checks, 
and are vetted by the company’s advisory board. It also claims that it tries to match 
subscribers to therapists who have special expertise, if applicable, to each individual’s 
needs. But Dr. Digital is not sure how to document his virtual interactions (both 
videoconferencing and text messaging) with users through this platform. He is not 
sure whether he is expected to maintain information beyond what the APA (2007) 
Record Keeping Guidelines recommend or whether he is expected to provide a diagnosis 
or offer psychotherapy based on issues that may arise during his interactions with 
subscribers.
Furthermore, in his existing private practice, Dr. Digital does accept some forms 
of insurance and bills the insurance company directly on behalf of the clients he 

160
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
sees in person. Therefore, he is a “covered entity” under HIPAA and is subject to 
HIPAA’s Privacy Rule and Security Rule requirements. He is unclear as to whether 
he needs to be concerned about whether his involvement with a company like 
TalkTherapy ought to comply with HIPAA. Although the company states that it 
is HIPAA compliant, there is no mention of offering a business associate agree-
ment to the therapists who sign up as providers, nor is there mention of whether 
it is also Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act 
(HITECH; 2009)–compliant.
In addition, some of the types of clients Dr. Digital works with may be considered 
high-risk—for example, high school students who have been bullied by their peers 
and young adults who have either been abused as children or are currently in abusive 
relationships. He wonders whether he should note that as an area of expertise should 
he decide to join the TalkTherapy network. Because he is not certain that he will 
know where the subscriber may be located at the time of a videoconferencing or text 
messaging conversation, he is not sure whether this platform would be appropriate 
for dealing with those kinds of cases.
RISK MANAGEMENT PERSPECTIVE
There is no question that Dr. Digital would be considered to be an agent of TalkTherapy, 
a national business that expressly intends to offer services in his and other states. This 
would clearly meet the “minimum contacts” test and would allow any state where 
a client resides to assert legal jurisdiction. The fact that this is a national company 
would also make it more likely that a state licensing board would consider taking action 
because the company and its business model present a greater threat to consumers 
than a solo practitioner who is providing services to a client where there is a reasonable 
justification for providing services other than a commercial motivation. So Dr. Digital 
would have to be certain that the only clients he is referred actually reside in the state 
where he is licensed. He should also be aware that if there is a problem and a complaint 
is filed, he is likely to be evaluated not only on the work that he actually did with the 
client but on the model that the company is using.
Even if Dr. Digital could establish that the only clients who would be referred to 
him actually reside within his state, there are a number of questions about the way 
the program operates that raise clinical issues that could create serious risk manage-
ment concerns. Dr. Digital does not know how TalkTherapy screens potential clients 
for appropriateness. Are they interviewed by mental health professionals? Is there 
any attempt to screen out those who may be inappropriate for teletherapy? If not, 
Dr. Digital would need to have the ability to conduct an evaluation to determine 
whether the referred clients would be appropriate for his practice and decide not to 
provide services to those whom he deems inappropriate.
How is informed consent provided to potential clients? Would Dr. Digital be able 
to provide clients with the appropriate HIPAA notice forms, or would he have to trust 
TalkTherapy to provide them and secure the appropriate client signatures? What if 
clients had questions about confidentiality and limits to confidentiality? Who would 

161
Interjurisdictional Practice
answer them? What about parental consent, if the clients are minors? He would need 
to assess whether he would have any direct access to the clients referred to him or 
whether all communication would have to go through TalkTherapy. Would a client 
have to pay in advance to reach Dr. Digital? If so, what would happen if his client had 
an urgent clinical need and payment was a problem?
Would Dr. Digital be able to establish appropriate ground rules to make sure 
that remote therapy would meet appropriate professional standards? Would he 
be able to make a contract with clients to ensure that they were in places that 
provided adequate privacy and minimized distractions? This would be particu-
larly important with individuals who are accustomed to lives of multitasking and 
other electronic distractions and could easily leave their cell phones on during 
treatment.
It is possible that TalkTherapy would have satisfactory answers to all of these ques-
tions, but the more that Dr. Digital would have to delegate important legal and ethical 
responsibilities to TalkTherapy, the more vulnerable he would be if TalkTherapy does 
not perform them appropriately. If there were a complaint, Dr. Digital would be held 
responsible for the acts that TalkTherapy performed.
REGULATORY PERSPECTIVE
Dr. Digital seems to have identified a number of troubling and possibly risky aspects 
of joining the TalkTherapy platform. First, and perhaps foremost for purposes of this 
chapter, Dr. Digital has not been able to obtain assurance that he will only receive 
referrals from subscribers residing and receiving services in the state where he holds a 
license to practice psychology. Although the flexibility of TalkTherapy sounds attrac-
tive, it also suggests the very real possibility that therapists are linked with subscribers 
without regard to the state of residence of either therapist or subscriber. Unless  
Dr. Digital can obtain such assurance, he is risking a complaint and potential sanction 
from a state licensing board where he provides services without holding a license. 
This could come in the form of a cease and desist letter or a charge of practicing with-
out a license.
Even if TalkTherapy assures Dr. Digital that he will only be sent subscribers resid-
ing in his state of licensure, he will still need to consider whether his state allows the 
delivery of psychological services using telecommunications technology and under 
what circumstances and with what patient safeguards. If his state has passed guide-
lines for use of technology in the practice of psychology, then Dr. Digital will need to 
make sure his work with TalkTherapy complies with those guidelines. If his state has 
not passed telepsychology guidelines, then he has an even larger burden to consider 
whether this practice modality can be defended as reasonable, competent, and ethical 
should any complaint arise.
Finally, Dr. Digital’s concerns about adequate record keeping, compliance with 
HIPAA and HITECH requirements, and provisions for emergency situations given 
the potentially high-risk population must also be satisfied before joining this online 
therapy service.

162
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
Key Points From the Chapter to Remember
❚❚The psychologist must evaluate whether he or she is really interested in pro-
viding these kinds of services. There is a certain amount of work in becoming 
competent to provide the services, including becoming familiar with the Tele-
psychology Guidelines developed by the APA, ASPPB, and The Trust Joint Task 
Force (Joint Task Force, 2013) and achieving the technological competence 
necessary to provide remote services. Also, providing services across state lines 
involves some disciplinary risk.
❚❚It is important to consider the clinical rationale for providing mental health 
services remotely via telecommunications technologies. Is the client a good 
candidate for these services? Is he or she motivated? How serious are his or 
her symptoms, and how much do they interfere with the client’s functioning? 
Does the client have the capacity to pay for the services out-of-pocket?
❚❚The psychologist ought to carefully consider whether he or she is attempting 
to market his or her practice online or across state lines. Is the client requesting 
telepsychology due to work demands, illness, or other reasons?
❚❚The client’s location is an important factor to take into account. The psycholo-
gist must confirm where the client will be when the telepsychology services 
would be provided. Is the patient in state or in another jurisdiction? In addition, 
the psychologist ought to determine whether the client’s presence in another 
jurisdiction is a temporary or time-limited situation. Is the client permanently 
located in or transferring to another location? Are there equal or better options 
that do not involve interjurisdictional practice? Can a local emergency contact 
be arranged?
❚❚It is incumbent on the psychologist to ascertain whether the state or jurisdiction 
where the client is or will be located has specific policies about telepsychology 
that would affect the mental health professional wanting to provide telehealth 
services. If the client is receiving services through federal benefits (e.g., DoD, VA), 
what are the relevant federal agency policies for providing telehealth services?
❚❚The psychologist should carefully review and consider a state’s rules or regulations 
regarding what kind of temporary practice is permitted in the state by a psycholo-
gist licensed in another state and whether it would accept telepractice within the 
temporary practice framework. Checking with the state’s board of psychologist 
examiners would be the best way to get this information, even though there are 
a number of other ways to research this question.
❚❚The psychologist is strongly encouraged to consult with his or her professional 
liability carrier, colleagues, and professional association to make a risk manage-
ment decision about providing telepsychology services across state lines.
There is clearly no easy answer for when and how a psychologist may provide 
services via telecommunications technologies to a client who is in a state where the 
psychologist is not licensed, but, as always, psychologists benefit from consulting with 
others; keeping the welfare of the client foremost; researching and keeping current 

163
Interjurisdictional Practice
regarding regulations, laws, guidelines, and ethics codes; and using a risk management 
strategy that encourages looking at all options in concert with potential consequences.
References
American Psychological Association. (2007). Record keeping guidelines. American 
Psychologist, 62, 993–1004. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.62.9.993
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code  
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American Psychological Association Practice Organization. (2010). Telehealth: Legal 
basics for psychologists. Good Practice, 41, 2–7.
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards. (2015). Psychology interjurisdic-
tional compact (PSYPACT). Retrieved from http://www.asppb.net/?page=PSYPACT
Baker, D. (2015, August). Federal and state telehealth policies and regulations. In 
L. F. Campbell (Chair), Developing a road map for telepsychological practice: APA guide-
lines and regulatory developments. Symposium conducted at the annual convention of 
the American Psychological Association, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Bradley v. Mayo Foundation, No. 97-204, 1999 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 17505 (E.D. Ky. 
Aug. 10, 1999).
Bullion v. Gillespie, 895 F.2d 213 (5th Cir. 1990).
Department of Regulatory Agencies, Division of Professions and Occupations. (2015). 
Colorado State Board of Psychologist Examiners policies: §30-1 Teletherapy policy—Guidance 
regarding psychotherapy through electronic means within the state of Colorado. Retrieved 
from https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B-K5DhxXxJZbT3I3aWJITVl1YnM/view? 
pref=2&pli=1
Federation of State Medical Boards. (2013). Interstate medical licensure compact. Retrieved 
from http://www.licenseportability.org
Georgia Comp. R. & Regs. r. 510-5-.07, Representation of Services. (2004).
Georgia Telemedicine Act, O.C.G.A. § 33-24-56.4 (2015).
Hageseth v. Superior Court of San Mateo County, 150 Cal. App. 4th 1399 (2007).
Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act, Pub. L. 111-5 
(2009).
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 
1936 (1996).
International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 319, 66 S.Ct. 154, 90 L.Ed. 95 
(1945).
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo-
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf
Jones v. Williams, 660 F. Supp. 2d 1145; 2009 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 91334 (N.D.Ca. 2009).
Medicare Telehealth Parity Act of 2015, H.R. 2948, 114th Cong. (2015).

164
D e M E R S ,  H A R R I S ,  A N D  B A K E R
Miss. Code Ann. § 73-31-3(d)(iii) (2015).
National Council of State Boards of Nursing. (2000). Nurse Licensure Compact. Retrieved 
from https://www.ncsbn.org/nurse-licensure-compact.htm
Prince v. Urban, 49 Cal. App. 4th 1056; 57 Cal. Rptr. 2d 181; 1996 Cal. App. LEXIS 924 
(Cal. App. 4th, 1996).
Servicemembers’ Telemedicine and E-Health Portability Act of 2011, Pub. L. No. 112-81, 
§ 713, 125 Stat. 1298 (2011).
Telehealth Advancement Act of 2011, Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2290.5 (2011 & 
Supp. 2015).
TELEmedicine for MEDicare (TELE-MED) Act of 2015, H.R. 3081, 114th Cong. (2015a).
TELEmedicine for MEDicare (TELE-MED) Act of. 2015, S. 1778, 114th Cong. (2015b).
Veterans E-Health & Telemedicine Support Act (VETS) of 2015, H.R. 2516, 114th Cong. 
(2015a).
Veterans E-Health & Telemedicine Support Act (VETS) of 2015, S. 2170, 114th Cong. 
(2015b).
Wakefield, M. K. (2010). Health Licensing Board: Report to Congress (requested by Senate 
Report 111-66). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Health Resources and Services Administration. Retrieved from https://telehealth.
org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/HEALTH-LICENSING-BOARD-Report_Final.pdf
Walsh v. Chez, 418 F.Supp.2d 781 (W.D. Pa. 2006).
Wright v. Yackley, 459 F.2d 287 (9th Cir. 1972).

165
Linda F. Campbell, Fred Millán, and Jana N. Martin
Afterword
T
here is no question that telepsychology will have an impact on the prac­
tice of psychology. As practitioners, it is up to us to ensure that the 
impact is positive. We have before us an opportunity to provide psycho­
logical services to people who previously either could not or would not 
approach the office of a psychologist. We have the opportunity to provide 
continuity of services to clients who travel for business or pleasure or who 
relocate and have difficulty finding a psychologist who specializes in their 
areas of need or who is available in a timely way. Telepsychology has much 
potential to expand the value of psychology to many. Like other modes and 
techniques of practice, however, telepsychology requires that the psycho­
logist using it is competent; keeps up-to-date on ever-evolving technological 
changes and the standard of care regarding use of telepsychology in therapy 
and assessment; uses proper informed consent; protects the confidentiality of 
the therapeutic relationship, data, and interaction at all times; is responsible 
for safe storage and disposal of client information; and practices legally and 
ethically.
We have endeavored in this book to provide the reader with not only 
the set of guidelines that were developed and approved by the American 
Psychological Association, Association of State and Provincial Psychology 
Boards, and The Trust, but also descriptions of scenarios in which practitioners 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/0000046-010
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your Professional Practice,  
L. F. Campbell, F. Millán, and J. N. Martin (Editors)
Copyright © 2018 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

166
C A M P B E L L ,  M I L L Á N ,  A N D  M A R T I N
of telepsychology may find themselves. The practice of telepsychology presents some 
very different challenges due to the nature of technology, and it requires adaptation 
on the part of the client and the psychologist. Each described scenario, regardless 
of the setting or issue presented, helps psychologists interpret the relevant guide­
lines and ethical principles. Each situation applies a framework for providing services 
therapeutically, ethically, and legally. This educational approach helps readers gener­
alize the framework so that they can apply it to future real-life situations, no matter 
how varied. We hope the casebook will be used in classroom settings, in consultation 
groups, and by individuals as a resource when considering a potential client for tele­
psychology and when reviewing treatment plan progress.
Although many elements of the case studies will remain representative of the 
practice of telepsychology, other elements will become less representative. This is due 
to rapid advances in technology and its intersection with psychological issues, changes 
in evidence-based treatment modalities, and evolving legal and regulatory require­
ments. Certainly, the authors of the guidelines were keenly aware of this, as reflected 
in their call for vigilance and competence in each guideline. This call is also reflected 
in the introduction to the guidelines:
It will be important for psychologists to be cognizant and compliant with laws 
and regulations that govern independent practice within jurisdictions and 
across jurisdictional and international borders. This is particularly true when 
providing telepsychology services. . . . it continues to be the responsibility of 
the psychologist to apply all current legal and ethical standards of practice 
when providing telepsychology services. (Joint Task Force for the Development 
of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 2013, p. 791)
We join the call for vigilance in making the practice of telepsychology a positive one 
for the public and for the profession. Here’s to opportunities to expand the possibilities 
for our profession to provide ethical, effective, accessible psychological treatment for all.
References
Joint Task Force for the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines for Psycholo­
gists. (2013). Guidelines for the practice of telepsychology. American Psycholo-
gist, 68, 791–800. Retrieved from https://www.apa.org/pubs/journals/features/ 
amp-a0035001.pdf

167
Guidelines for the Practice  
of Telepsychology
Introduction
These guidelines are designed to address the developing area of psychologi-
cal service provision commonly known as telepsychology. Telepsychology is 
defined, for the purpose of these guidelines, as the provision of psychological 
services using telecommunication technologies as expounded in the Defini-
tion of Telepsychology. The expanding role of technology in the provision of 
psychological services and the continuous development of new technologies 
that may be useful in the practice of psychology present unique opportunities, 
considerations and challenges to practice. With the advancement of technology 
and the increased number of psychologists using technology in their practices, 
these guidelines have been prepared to educate and guide them.
These guidelines are informed by relevant American Psychological 
Asso­ciation (APA) standards and guidelines, including the following: Ethical 
Prin­ciples of Psychologists and Code of Conduct (hereafter referred to as APA Ethics 
Code; APA, 2017), and the “Record Keeping Guidelines” (APA, 2007). In 
addition, the assumptions and principles that guide the APA’s “Guidelines 
on Multicultural Training, Research, Practice, and Organizational Change 
for Psychologists” (APA, 2003) are infused throughout the rationale and 
application describing each of the guidelines. Therefore, these guidelines are 
informed by professional theories, evidence-based practices and definitions 
in an effort to offer the best guidance in the practice of telepsychology.
The use of the term guidelines within this document refers to statements 
that suggest or recommend specific professional behaviors, endeavors or 
Appendix
A Telepsychology Casebook: Using Technology Ethically and Effectively in Your
Professional Practice, edited by L. F. Campbell, F. A. Millán, and J. N. Martin
Copyright © 2018 American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.

168
A P P E N D I X
conduct for psychologists. Guidelines differ from standards in that standards are 
mandatory and may be accompanied by an enforcement mechanism. Thus, guide-
lines are aspirational in intent. They are intended to facilitate the continued systematic 
develop­ment of the profession and to help ensure a high level of professional practice 
by psychologists. “Guidelines are created to educate and to inform the practice of 
psychologists. They are also intended to stimulate debate and research. Guidelines  
are not to be promulgated as a means of establishing the identity of a particular 
group or specialty area of psychology; likewise, they are not to be created with 
the purpose of excluding any psychologist from practicing in a particular area” 
(APA, 2002, p. 1048). “Guidelines are not intended to be mandatory or exhaus-
tive and may not be applicable to every professional or clinical situation. They are 
not definitive and they are not intended to take precedence over the judgment of 
psychologists” (APA, 2002, p. 1050). These guidelines are meant to assist psycholo-
gists as they apply current standards of professional practice when utilizing tele-
communication technologies as a means of delivering their professional services. 
They are not intended to change any scope of practice or define the practice of any 
group of psychologists.
The practice of telepsychology involves consideration of legal requirements, 
ethical standards, telecommunication technologies, intra- and interagency policies, 
and other external constraints, as well as the demands of the particular profes-
sional context. In some situations, one set of considerations may suggest a differ-
ent course of action than another, and it is the responsibility of the psychologist  
to balance them appropriately. These guidelines aim to assist psychologists in  
making such decisions. In addition, it will be important for psychologists to be 
cognizant and compliant with laws and regulations that govern independent prac-
tice within jurisdictions and across jurisdictional and international borders. This is 
particularly true when providing telepsychology services. Where a psychologist is 
providing services from one jurisdiction to a client/patient located in another juris-
diction, the law and regulations may differ between the two jurisdictions. Also, it 
is the responsibility of the psychologists who practice telepsychology to maintain 
and enhance their level of understanding of the concepts related to the deliv-
ery of services via telecommunication technologies. Nothing in these guidelines 
is intended to contravene any limitations set on psychologists’ activities based on 
ethical standards, federal or jurisdictional statutes or regulations, or for those psy-
chologists who work in agencies and public settings. As in all other circumstances, 
psychologists must be aware of the standards of practice for the jurisdiction or 
setting in which they function and are expected to comply with those standards. 
Recommendations related to the guidelines are consistent with broad ethical prin-
ciples (APA, 2017) and it continues to be the responsibility of the psychologist to 
apply all current legal and ethical standards of practice when providing telepsychology 
services.
It should be noted that APA policy generally requires substantial review of 
the relevant empirical literature as a basis for establishing the need for guide- 
lines and for providing justification for the guidelines’ statements themselves  

169
Appendix
(APA, 2002). The literature supporting the work of the Task Force on Telepsychology 
and guidelines statements themselves reflect seminal, relevant, and recent publi­
cations. The supporting references in the literature review emphasize studies from 
approximately the past 15 years plus classic studies that provide empirical support 
and relevant examples for the guidelines. The literature review, however, is not 
intended to be exhaustive or serve as a comprehensive systematic review of the 
literature that is customary when developing professional practice guidelines for 
psychologists.
Definition of Telepsychology
Telepsychology is defined, for the purpose of these guidelines, as the provision of psy-
chological services using telecommunication technologies. Telecommunications is 
the preparation, transmission, communication, or related processing of information 
by electrical, electromagnetic, electromechanical, electro-optical, or electronic means 
(Committee on National Security Systems, 2010). Telecommunication technologies 
include but are not limited to telephone, mobile devices, interactive videoconferencing, 
e-mail, chat, text, and Internet (e.g., self-help websites, blogs, and social media). The 
information that is transmitted may be in writing, or include images, sounds, or other 
data. These communications may be synchronous with multiple parties communi-
cating in real time (e.g., interactive videoconferencing, telephone) or asynchronous 
(e.g., e-mail, online bulletin boards, storing and forwarding information). Technolo-
gies may augment traditional in-person services (e.g., psychoeducational materials 
online after an in-person therapy session) or be used as stand-alone services (e.g., 
therapy or leadership development provided over videoconferencing). Different tech-
nologies may be used in various combinations and for different purposes during the 
provision of telepsychology services. For example, videoconferencing and telephone 
may also be utilized for direct service while e-mail and text is used for nondirect ser-
vices (e.g., scheduling). Regardless of the purpose, psychologists strive to be aware of 
the potential benefits and limitations in their choices of technologies for particular 
clients in particular situations.
Operational Definitions
The Task Force on Telepsychology has agreed upon the following operational defi-
nitions for terms used in this document. In addition, these and other terms used 
throughout the document have a basis in definitions developed by the following  
U.S. agencies: the Committee on National Security Systems (2010), the U.S. Depart-
ment of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration 
(Wakefield, 2010), U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and 
Technology (2011). Last, the terminology and definitions that describe technologies 
and their uses are constantly evolving, and therefore psychologists are encouraged 

170
A P P E N D I X
to consult glossaries and publications prepared by agencies, such as the Committee 
on National Security Systems and the National Institute of Standards and Technol-
ogy, which represent definitive sources responsible for developing terminology and 
definitions related to technology and its uses.
The term client/patient refers to the recipient of psychological services, whether 
psychological services are delivered in the context of health care, corporate, super-
vision, and/or consulting services. The term in-person, which is used in combination 
with the provision of services, refers to interactions in which the psychologist and the 
client/patient are in the same physical space and does not include interactions that 
may occur through the use of technologies. The term remote, which is also used in 
combination with the provision of services utilizing telecommunication technologies, 
refers to the provision of a service that is received at a different site from where the 
psychologist is physically located. The term remote includes no consideration related 
to distance and may refer to a site in a location that is in the office next door to the 
psychologist or thousands of miles from the psychologist. The terms jurisdictions or 
jurisdictional are used when referring to the governing bodies at states, territories, and 
provincial governments.
Finally, there are terms within the document related to confidentiality and secu-
rity. Confidentiality means the principle that data or information is not made avail-
able or disclosed to unauthorized persons or processes. The terms security or security 
measures are terms that encompass all of the administrative, physical, and technical 
safeguards in an information system. The term information system is an interconnected 
set of information resources within a system and includes hardware, software, infor-
mation, data, applications, communications, and people.
Need for the Guidelines
The expanding role of telecommunication technologies in the provision of services 
and the continuous development of new technologies that may be useful in the 
practice of psychology support the need for the development of guidelines for prac-
tice in this area. Technology offers the opportunity to increase client/patient access 
to psychological services. Service recipients limited by geographic location, medical 
condition, psychiatric diagnosis, financial constraint or other barriers may gain access 
to high-quality psychological services through the use of technology. Technology also 
facilitates the delivery of psychological services by new methods (e.g., online psycho­
education, therapy delivered over interactive videoconferencing) and augments tra-
ditional in-person psychological services. The increased use of technology for the 
delivery of some types of services by psychologists who are health service providers 
is suggested by recent survey data collected by the APA Center for Workforce Studies 
(2008) and by the increasing discussion of telepsychology in the professional litera-
ture (Baker & Bufka, 2011). Together with the increasing use and payment for the 
provision of telehealth services by Medicare and private industry, the development 

171
Appendix
of national guidelines for the practice of telepsychology is timely and needed. Fur-
thermore, state and international psychological associations have developed or are 
beginning to develop guidelines for the provision of psychological services (Canadian 
Psychological Association, 2006; New Zealand Psychological Association, 2011; Ohio 
Psychological Association, 2010).
Development of the Guidelines
The guidelines were developed by the Joint Task Force for the Development of 
Telepsychology Guidelines for Psychologists (Telepsychology Task Force) established 
by the following three entities: the American Psychological Association (APA), the 
Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB), and The Trust. 
These entities provided input, expertise, and guidance to the Task Force on many 
aspects of the profession, including those related to its ethical, regulatory, and legal 
principles and practices. The Telepsychology Task Force members represented a 
diverse range of interests and expertise that are characteristic of the profession of 
psychology, including knowledge of the issues relevant to the use of technology, 
ethical considerations, licensure and mobility, and scope of practice, to name only 
a few.1
The Telepsychology Task Force recognized that telecommunications technologies 
provide both opportunities and challenges for psychologists. Telepsychology not only 
enhances a psychologist’s ability to provide services to clients/patients but also greatly 
expands access to psychological services that, without telecommunication technolo-
gies, would not be available. Throughout the development of these guidelines, the 
Telepsychology Task Force devoted numerous hours reflecting on and discussing the 
need for guidance to psychologists in this area of practice, the myriad, complex issues 
related to the practice of telepsychology and the experiences that they and other prac-
titioners address each day in the use of technology. There was a concerted focus to 
identify the unique aspects that telecommunication technologies bring to the provision 
1The Telepsychology Task Force comprised psychologists with four members each representing the 
APA and the ASPPB and two members representing The Trust. The cochairs of the Telepsychology Task 
Force were Linda Campbell, PhD, and Fred Millán, PhD. Additional members of the Task Force included 
the following psychologists: Margo Adams Larsen, PhD; Sara Smucker Barnwell, PhD; Colonel Bruce E. 
Crow, PsyD; Terry S. Gock, PhD; Eric A. Harris, EdD, JD; Jana N. Martin, PhD; Thomas W. Miller, PhD; 
Joseph S. Rallo, PhD. APA staff (Ronald S. Palomares, PhD; Joan Freund; and Jessica Davis) and ASPPB 
staff (Stephen DeMers, EdD; Alex M. Siegel, PhD, JD; and Janet Pippin Orwig) provided direct support 
to the Telepsychology Task Force. Funding was provided by each of the respective entities to support  
in-person meetings and conference calls of Task Force members in 2011 and 2012. This draft is scheduled 
to expire as APA policy no later than 10 years after the initial date of recognition by the APA. After the 
date of expiration, users are encouraged to contact the APA Practice Directorate to confirm that this 
document remains in effect.

172
A P P E N D I X
of psychological services, distinct from those present during in-person provision of 
services. Two important components were identified:
1.	 the psychologist’s knowledge of and competence in the use of the telecom-
munication technologies being utilized; and
2.	 the need to ensure the client/patient has a full understanding of the increased 
risks to loss of security and confidentiality when using telecommunication 
technologies.
Therefore, two of the most salient issues that the Telepsychology Task Force mem-
bers focused on throughout the document are the psychologist’s own knowledge of and 
competence in the provision of telepsychology and the need to ensure that the client/
patient has a full understanding of the potentially increased risks to loss of security 
and confidentiality when using technologies.
An additional key issue discussed by the task force members was interjurisdictional 
practice. The guidelines encourage psychologists to be familiar with and comply with 
all relevant laws and regulations when providing psychological services across juris-
dictional and international borders. The guidelines do not promote a specific mecha-
nism to guide the development and regulation of interjurisdictional practice. However, 
the Telepsychology Task Force notes that while the profession of psychology does not 
currently have a mechanism to regulate the delivery of psychological services across 
jurisdictional and international borders, it is anticipated that the profession will develop 
a mechanism to allow interjurisdictional practice given the rapidity by which technol-
ogy is evolving and the increasing use of telepsychology by psychologists working in 
U.S. federal environments such as the U.S. Department of Defense and Department of 
Veterans Affairs.
Competence of the Psychologist
Guideline 1. Psychologists who provide telepsychology services strive to take rea-
sonable steps to ensure their competence with both the technologies used and 
the potential impact of the technologies on clients/patients, supervisees, or other 
professionals.
RATIONALE
Psychologists have a primary ethical obligation to provide professional services only 
within the boundaries of their competence based on their education, training, super-
vised experience, consultation, study or professional experience. As with all new and 
emerging areas in which generally recognized standards for preparatory training do 
not yet exist, psychologists utilizing telepsychology aspire to apply the same standards 
in developing their competence in this area. Psychologists who use telepsychology 
in their practices assume the responsibility for assessing and continuously evaluating 
their competencies, training, consultation, experience, and risk management prac-
tices required for competent practice.

173
Appendix
APPLICATION
Psychologists assume responsibility to continually assess both their professional and 
technical competence when providing telepsychology services. Psychologists who uti-
lize or intend to utilize telecommunication technologies when delivering services to 
clients/patients strive to obtain relevant professional training to develop their requisite 
knowledge and skills. Acquiring competence may require pursuing additional educa-
tional experiences and training, including but not limited to a review of the relevant 
literature, attendance at existing training programs (e.g., professional and technical) 
and continuing education specific to the delivery of services utilizing telecommunica-
tion technologies. Psychologists are encouraged to seek appropriate skilled consulta-
tion from colleagues and other resources.
Psychologists are encouraged to examine the available evidence to determine 
whether specific telecommunication technologies are suitable for a client/patient, 
based on the current literature available, current outcomes research, best practice 
guidance, and client/patient preference. Research may not be available in the use of 
some specific technologies, and clients/patients should be made aware of those telecom-
munication technologies that have no evidence of effectiveness. However, this, in and 
of itself, may not be grounds to deny providing the service to the client/patient. Lack 
of current available evidence in a new area of practice does not necessarily indicate that 
a service is ineffective. Additionally, psychologists are encouraged to document their 
consideration and choices regarding the use of telecommunication technologies used 
in service delivery.
Psychologists understand the need to consider their competence in utilizing tele-
psychology as well as their client’s/patient’s ability to engage in and fully understand 
the risks and benefits of the proposed intervention utilizing specific technologies. 
Psychologists make reasonable effort to understand the manner in which cultural, 
linguistic, socioeconomic, and other individual characteristics (e.g., medical status, 
psychiatric stability, physical/cognitive disability, personal preferences), in addition to 
organizational cultures, may impact effective use of telecommunication technologies 
in service delivery.
Psychologists who are trained to handle emergency situations in providing tradi-
tional in-person clinical services are generally familiar with the resources available in 
their local community to assist clients/patients with crisis intervention. At the onset of 
the delivery of telepsychology services, psychologists make reasonable effort to identify 
and learn how to access relevant and appropriate emergency resources in the client’s/
patient’s local area, such as emergency response contacts (e.g., emergency telephone 
numbers, hospital admissions, local referral resources, clinical champion at a partner 
clinic where services are delivered, a support person in the client’s/patient’s life when 
available). Psychologists prepare a plan to address any lack of appropriate resources, 
particularly those necessary in an emergency, and other relevant factors that may 
impact the efficacy and safety of said service. Psychologists make reasonable effort  
to discuss with and provide all clients/patients with clear written instructions as  
to what to do in an emergency (e.g., where there is a suicide risk). As part of emer-
gency planning, psychologists are encouraged to acquire knowledge of the laws and 

174
A P P E N D I X
rules of the jurisdiction in which the client/patient resides and the differences from 
those in the psychologist’s jurisdiction, as well as document all their emergency plan-
ning efforts.
In addition, as applicable psychologists are mindful of the array of potential dis-
charge plans for clients/patients when telepsychology services are no longer necessary 
and/or desirable. If a client/patient recurrently experiences crises/emergencies sugges-
tive that in-person services may be appropriate, psychologists take reasonable steps to 
refer a client/patient to a local mental health resource or begin providing in-person 
services.
Psychologists using telepsychology to provide supervision or consultation 
remotely to individuals or organizations are encouraged to consult others who  
are knowledgeable about the unique issues telecommunication technologies pose 
for supervision or consultation. Psychologists providing telepsychology services 
strive to be familiar with professional literature regarding the delivery of services 
via telecommunication technologies, as well as competent with the use of the  
technological modality itself. In providing supervision and/or consultation via 
telepsychology, psychologists make reasonable efforts to be proficient in the pro-
fessional services being offered, the telecommunication modality via which the 
services are being offered by the supervisee/consultee, and the technology medium 
being used to provide the supervision or consultation. In addition, since the devel-
opment of basic professional competencies for supervisees is often conducted  
in person, psychologists who use telepsychology for supervision are encouraged 
to consider and ensure that a sufficient amount of in-person super­vision time is 
included so that the supervisees can attain the required competencies or supervised 
experiences.
Standards of Care in the Delivery  
of Telepsychology Services
Guideline 2. Psychologists make every effort to ensure that ethical and professional 
standards of care and practice are met at the outset and throughout the duration of 
the telepsychology services they provide.
RATIONALE
Psychologists delivering telepsychology services apply the same ethical and profes-
sional standards of care and professional practice that are required when providing 
in-person psychological services. The use of telecommunication technologies in the 
delivery of psychological services is a relatively new and rapidly evolving area, and 
therefore psychologists are encouraged to take particular care to evaluate and assess 
the appropriateness of utilizing these technologies prior to engaging in, and through-
out the duration of, telepsychology practice to determine if the modality of service is 
appropriate, efficacious and safe.

175
Appendix
Telepsychology encompasses a breadth of different psychological services using 
a variety of technologies (e.g., interactive videoconferencing, telephone, text, e-mail, 
Web services, and mobile applications). The burgeoning research in telepsychology 
suggests the effectiveness of certain types of interactive telepsychological interventions 
to their in-person counterparts (specific therapies delivered over videoteleconferencing 
and telephone). Therefore, before psychologists engage in providing telepsychology 
services, they are urged to conduct an initial assessment to determine the appropri-
ateness of the telepsychology service to be provided for the client/patient. Such an 
assessment may include the examination of the potential risks and benefits to provide 
telepsychology services for the client’s/patient’s particular needs, the multicultural and 
ethical issues that may arise, and a review of the most appropriate medium (e.g., video 
teleconference, text, e-mail, etc.) or best options available for the service delivery. It 
may also include considering whether comparable in-person services are available and 
why services delivered via telepsychology are equivalent or preferable to such services. 
In addition, it is incumbent on the psychologist to engage in a continual assessment 
of the appropriateness of providing telepsychology services throughout the duration 
of the service delivery.
APPLICATION
When providing telepsychology services, considering client/patient preferences for 
such services is important. However, it may not be solely determinative in the assess-
ment of their appropriateness. Psychologists are encouraged to carefully examine the 
unique benefits of delivering telepsychology services (e.g., access to care, access to con-
sulting services, client convenience, accommodating client special needs, etc.) relative 
to the unique risks (e.g., information security, emergency management, etc.) when 
determining whether or not to offer telepsychology services. Moreover, psychologists 
are aware of such other factors as geographic location, organizational culture, techno-
logical competence (both psychologist and client/patient), and, as appropriate, medical 
conditions, mental status and stability, psychiatric diagnosis, current or historic use of 
substances, treatment history, and therapeutic needs that may be relevant to assessing 
the appropriateness of the telepsychology services being offered. Furthermore, psy-
chologists are encouraged to communicate any risks and benefits of the telepsychology 
services to be offered to the client/patient and document such communication. In addi-
tion, psychologists may consider some initial in-person contact with the client/patient 
to facilitate an active discussion on these issues and/or conduct the initial assessment.
As in the provision of traditional services, psychologists endeavor to follow the 
best practice of service delivery described in the empirical literature and professional 
standards (including multicultural considerations) that are relevant to the telepsycho-
logical service modality being offered. In addition, they consider the client’s/patient’s 
familiarity with and competency for using the specific technologies involved in pro-
viding the particular telepsychology service. Moreover, psychologists are encouraged 
to reflect on multicultural considerations and how best to manage any emergency 
that may arise during the provision of telepsychology services.

176
A P P E N D I X
Psychologists are encouraged to assess carefully the remote environment in which 
services will be provided, to determine what impact, if any, there might be to the effi-
cacy, privacy and/or safety of the proposed intervention offered via telepsychology. 
Such an assessment of the remote environment may include a discussion of the client’s/
patient’s situation within the home or within an organizational context, the availability 
of emergency or technical personnel or supports, risk of distractions, potential for 
privacy breaches or any other impediments that may impact the effective delivery 
of telepsychology services. Along this line, psychologists are encouraged to discuss 
fully with the clients/patients their role in ensuring that sessions are not interrupted 
and that the setting is comfortable and conducive to making progress to maximize 
the impact of the service provided since the psychologist will not be able to control 
those factors remotely.
Psychologists are urged to monitor and assess regularly the progress of their client/ 
patient when offering telepsychology services in order to determine if the provision 
of telepsychology services is still appropriate and beneficial to the client/patient. If 
there is a significant change in the client/patient or in the therapeutic interaction 
to cause concern, psychologists make reasonable effort to take appropriate steps to 
adjust and reassess the appropriateness of the services delivered via telepsychology. 
Where it is believed that continuing to provide remote services is no longer beneficial 
or presents a risk to a client’s/patient’s emotional or physical well-being, psychologists 
are encouraged to thoroughly discuss these concerns with the client/patient, appro-
priately terminate their remote services with adequate notice and refer or offer any 
needed alternative services to the client/patient.
Informed Consent
Guideline 3: Psychologists strive to obtain and document informed consent that spe-
cifically addresses the unique concerns related to the telepsychology services they 
provide. When doing so, psychologists are cognizant of the applicable laws and regu-
lations, as well as organizational requirements that govern informed consent in 
this area.
RATIONALE
The process of explaining and obtaining informed consent, by whatever means obtained, 
sets the stage for the relationship between the psychologist and the client/patient. 
Psychologists make reasonable effort to offer a complete and clear description of the 
telepsychology services they provide, and seek to obtain and document informed con-
sent when providing professional services (APA Ethics Code, Standard 3.10). In addi-
tion, they attempt to develop and share the policies and procedures that will explain 
to their clients/patients how they will interact with them using the specific telecom-
munication technologies involved. It may be more difficult to obtain and document 
informed consent in situations where psychologists provide telepsychology services to 

177
Appendix
their clients/patients who are not in the same physical location or with whom they do 
not have in-person interactions. Moreover, there may be differences with respect to 
informed consent between the laws and regulations in the jurisdictions where a psy-
chologist who is providing telepsychology services is located and the jurisdiction in 
which this psychologist’s client/patient resides. Furthermore, psychologists may need 
to be aware of the manner in which cultural, linguistic, socioeconomic characteris-
tics, and organizational considerations may impact a client’s/patient’s understanding 
of, and the special considerations required for, obtaining informed consent (such as 
when securing informed consent remotely from a parent/guardian when providing 
telepsychology services to a minor).
Telepsychology services may require different considerations for and safeguards 
against potential risks to, confidentiality, information security, and comparability of 
traditional in-person services. Psychologists are thus encouraged to consider appro-
priate policies and procedures to address the potential threats to the security of client/
patient data and information when using specific telecommunication technologies 
and appropriately inform their clients/patients about them. For example, psychol-
ogists who provide telepsychology services consider addressing with their clients/
patients what client/patient data and information will be stored, how the data and 
information will be stored, how it will be accessed, how secure is the information 
communicated using a given technology, and any technology-related vulnerability 
to confidentiality and security by creating and storing electronic client/patient data 
and information.
APPLICATION
Prior to providing telepsychology services, psychologists are aware of the importance of 
obtaining and documenting written informed consent from their clients/patients that 
specifically addresses the unique concerns relevant to those services that will be offered. 
When developing such informed consent, psychologists make reasonable effort to use 
language that is reasonably understandable to their clients/patients, in addition to, eval-
uating the need to address cultural, linguistic, organizational considerations, and other 
issues that may impact on a client’s/patient’s understanding of the informed consent 
agreement. When considering for inclusion in informed consent those unique concerns 
that may be involved in providing telepsychology services, psychologists may include 
the manner in which they and their clients/patients will use the particular telecom-
munication technologies, the boundaries they will establish and observe, and the pro-
cedures for responding to electronic communications from clients/patients. Moreover, 
psychologists are cognizant of pertinent laws and regulations with respect to informed 
consent in both the jurisdiction where they offer their services and where their clients/
patients reside (see Guideline on Interjurisdictional Practice for more detail).
Besides those unique concerns described above, psychologists are encouraged 
to discuss with their clients/patients those issues surrounding confidentiality and 
the security conditions when particular modes of telecommunication technologies 
are utilized. Along this line, psychologists are cognizant of some of the inherent risks 

178
A P P E N D I X
a given telecommunication technology may pose in both the equipment (hardware, 
software, other equipment components) and the processes used for providing telepsy-
chology services, and strive to provide their clients/patients with adequate information 
to give informed consent for proceeding with receiving the professional services offered 
via telepsychology. Some of these risks may include those associated with technological 
problems, and those service limitations that may arise because the continuity, avail-
ability, and appropriateness of specific telepsychology services (e.g., testing, assessment, 
and therapy) may be hindered as a result of those services being offered remotely. In 
addition, psychologists may consider developing agreements with their clients/patients 
to assume some role in protecting the data and information they receive from them 
(e.g., by not forwarding e-mails from the psychologist to others).
Another unique aspect of providing telepsychology services is that of billing doc-
umentation. As part of informed consent, psychologists are mindful of the need to 
discuss with their clients/patients what the billing documentation will include prior 
to the onset of service provision. Billing documentation may reflect the type of tele-
communication technology used, the type of telepsychology services provided, and 
the fee structure for each relevant telepsychology service (e.g., video chat, texting 
fees, telephone services, chat room group fees, emergency scheduling, etc.). It may 
also include discussion about the charges incurred for any service interruptions or 
failures encountered, responsibility for overage charges on data plans, fee reductions 
for technology failures, and any other costs associated with the telepsychology ser-
vices that will be provided.
Confidentiality of Data and Information
Guideline 4. Psychologists who provide telepsychology services make reasonable 
effort to protect and maintain the confidentiality of the data and information relat-
ing to their clients/patients and inform them of the potentially increased risks to 
loss of confidentiality inherent in the use of the telecommunication technologies, 
if any.
RATIONALE
The use of telecommunications technologies and the rapid advances in technology 
present unique challenges for psychologists in protecting the confidentiality of clients/ 
patients. Psychologists who provide telepsychology learn about the potential risks 
to confidentiality before utilizing such technologies. When necessary, psychologists 
obtain the appropriate consultation with technology experts to augment their knowl-
edge of telecommunication technologies in order to apply security measures in their 
practices that will protect and maintain the confidentiality of data and information 
related to their clients/patients.
Some of the potential risks to confidentiality include considerations related to 
uses of search engines and participation in social networking sites. Other challenges 

179
Appendix
in this area may include protecting confidential data and information from inappro-
priate and/or inadvertent breaches to established security methods the psychologist 
has in place, as well as boundary issues that may arise as a result of a psycholo-
gist’s use of search engines and participation on social networking sites. In addition, 
any Internet participation by psychologists has the potential of being discovered by 
their clients/patients and others and thereby potentially compromising a professional 
relationship.
APPLICATION
Psychologists both understand and inform their clients/patients of the limits to confi-
dentiality and risks to the possible access or disclosure of confidential data and informa-
tion that may occur during service delivery, including the risks of access to electronic 
communications (e.g., telephone, e-mail) between the psychologist and client/patient. 
Also, psychologists are cognizant of the ethical and practical implications of proactively 
researching online personal information about their clients/patients. They carefully 
consider the advisability of discussing such research activities with their clients/patients 
and how information gained from such searches would be utilized and recorded as 
documenting this information may introduce risks to the boundaries of appropriate 
conduct for a psychologist. In addition, psychologists are encouraged to weigh the risks 
and benefits of dual relationships that may develop with their clients/patients, due 
to the use of telecommunication technologies, before engaging in such relationships 
(APA Practice Organization [APAPO], 2012).
Psychologists who use social networking sites for both professional and personal 
purposes are encouraged to review and educate themselves about the potential risks 
to privacy and confidentiality and consider utilizing all available privacy settings to 
reduce these risks. They are also mindful of the possibility that any electronic com-
munication can have a high risk of public discovery. They therefore mitigate such 
risks by following the appropriate laws, regulations and the APA Ethics Code (APA, 
2017) to avoid disclosing confidential data or information related to clients/patients.
Security and Transmission  
of Data and Information
Guideline 5. Psychologists who provide telepsychology services take reasonable steps 
to ensure that security measures are in place to protect data and information related 
to their clients/patients from unintended access or disclosure.
RATIONALE
The use of telecommunication technologies in the provision of psychological services 
presents unique potential threats to the security and transmission of client/patient 
data and information. These potential threats to the integrity of data and information 

180
A P P E N D I X
may include computer viruses, hackers, theft of technology devices, damage to hard 
drives or portable drives, failure of security systems, flawed software, and ease of acces-
sibility to unsecured electronic files, and malfunctioning or outdated technology. 
Other threats may include policies and practices of technology companies and ven-
dors such as tailored marketing derived from e-mail communications. Psychologists 
are encouraged to be mindful of these potential threats, and take reasonable steps 
to ensure that security measures are in place for protecting and controlling access to 
client/patient data within an information system. In addition, they are cognizant of 
relevant jurisdictional and federal laws and regulations that govern electronic stor-
age and transmission of client/patient data and information, and develop appropriate 
policies and procedures to comply with such directives. When developing policies 
and procedures to ensure the security of client/patient data and information, psy-
chologists may include considering the unique concerns and impacts posed by both 
intended and unintended use of public and private technology devices, active and 
inactive therapeutic relationships, and the different safeguards required for different 
physical environments, different staff (e.g., professional versus administrative staff), 
and different telecommunication technologies.
APPLICATION
Psychologists are encouraged to conduct an analysis of the risks to their practice 
setting, telecommunication technologies, and administrative staff in order to ensure 
that client/patient data and information is accessible only to appropriate and autho-
rized individuals. Psychologists strive to obtain appropriate training or consultation 
from relevant experts when additional knowledge is needed to conduct an analysis 
of the risks.
Psychologists strive to ensure that policies and procedures are in place to secure 
and control access to client/patient information and data within information systems. 
Along this line, they may encrypt confidential client/patient data for storage or trans-
mission and utilize such other secure methods as safe hardware and software and 
robust passwords to protect electronically stored or transmitted data and informa-
tion. If there is a breach of unencrypted electronically communicated or maintained 
data, psychologists are urged to notify their clients/patients and other appropriate 
individuals/organizations as soon as possible. In addition, they are encouraged to 
make their best efforts to ensure that electronic data and information remain acces-
sible despite problems with hardware, software, and/or storage devices by keeping a 
secure back-up version of such data.
When documenting the security measures to protect client/patient data and infor-
mation from unintended access or disclosure, psychologists are encouraged to clearly 
address what types of telecommunication technologies are used (e.g., e-mail, tele-
phone, video teleconferencing, text), how they are used, and whether telepsychology 
services used are the primary method of contact or augments in-person contact. When 
keeping records of e-mail, online messaging and other work using telecommunication 

181
Appendix
technologies, psychologists are cognizant that preserving the actual communication 
may be preferable to summarization in some cases depending on the type of technol-
ogy used.
Disposal of Data and Information  
and Technologies
Guideline 6. Psychologists who provide telepsychology services make reasonable 
efforts to dispose of data and information and the technologies used in a manner that 
facilitates protection from unauthorized access and accounts for safe and appropriate 
disposal.
RATIONALE
Consistent with APA “Record Keeping Guidelines” (2007), psychologists are encour-
aged to create policies and procedures for the secure destruction of data and informa-
tion and the technologies used to create, store, and transmit the data and information. 
The use of telecommunication technologies in the provision of psychological services 
poses new challenges for psychologists when they consider the disposal methods to 
utilize in order to maximally preserve client confidentiality and privacy. Psychologists 
are therefore urged to consider conducting an analysis of the risks to the informa-
tion systems within their practices in an effort to ensure full and complete disposal 
of electronic data and information, plus the technologies that created, stored, and 
transmitted the data and information.
APPLICATION
Psychologists are encouraged to develop policies and procedures for the destruction 
of data and information related to clients/patients. They also strive to securely dispose 
of software and hardware used in the provision of telepsychology services in a man-
ner that insures that the confidentiality and security of any patient/client information 
is not compromised. When doing so, psychologists carefully clean all the data and 
images in the storage media before reuse or disposal consistent with federal, state, 
provincial, territorial, and other organizational regulations and guidelines. Psycholo-
gists are aware of and understand the unique storage implications related to telecom-
munication technologies inherent in available systems.
Psychologists are encouraged to document the methods and procedures used 
when disposing of the data and information and the technologies used to create, 
store, or transmit the data and information, as well as any other technology utilized in 
the disposal of data and hardware. They also strive to be aware of malware, cookies, 
and so forth and to dispose routinely of them on an ongoing basis when telecommu-
nication technologies are used.

182
A P P E N D I X
Testing and Assessment
Guideline 7. Psychologists are encouraged to consider the unique issues that may 
arise with test instruments and assessment approaches designed for in-person imple-
mentation when providing telepsychology services.
RATIONALE
Psychological testing and other assessment procedures are an area of professional prac-
tice in which psychologists have been trained and are uniquely qualified to conduct. 
While some symptom screening instruments are already being administered online 
frequently, most psychological test instruments and other assessment procedures cur-
rently in use have been designed and developed originally for in-person administration. 
Psychologists are thus encouraged to be knowledgeable about, and account for, the 
unique impacts, suitability for diverse populations, and limitations on test administra-
tion and on test and other data interpretations when these psychological tests and other 
assessment procedures are considered for and conducted via telepsychology. Psycholo-
gists also strive to maintain the integrity of the application of the testing and assessment 
process and procedures when using telecommunication technologies. In addition, they 
are cognizant of the accommodations for diverse populations that may be required for 
test administration via telepsychology. These guidelines are consistent with the stan-
dards articulated in the most recent edition of Standards for Educational and Psychological 
Testing (American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Associa-
tion, & National Council on Measurement in Education, 1999).
APPLICATION
When a psychological test or other assessment procedure is conducted via telepsy-
chology, psychologists are encouraged to ensure that the integrity of the psychometric 
properties of the test or assessment procedure (e.g., reliability and validity) and the 
conditions of administration indicated in the test manual are preserved when adapted 
for use with such technologies. They are encouraged to consider whether modifica-
tions to the testing environment or conditions are necessary to accomplish this preser-
vation. For example, a test taker’s access to a cell phone, the Internet, or other persons 
during an assessment could interfere with the reliability or validity of the instrument 
or administration. Further, if the individual being assessed receives coaching or such 
information as potential responses or the scoring and interpretation of specific assess-
ment instruments because they are available on the Internet, the test results may be 
compromised. Psychologists are also encouraged to consider other possible forms of 
distraction which could affect performance during an assessment and which may not 
be obvious or visible (e.g., sight, sound, and smell) when utilizing telecommunication 
technologies.
Psychologists are encouraged to be cognizant of the specific issues that may arise 
with diverse populations when providing telepsychology and make appropriate arrange-

183
Appendix
ments to address those concerns (e.g., language or cultural issues; cognitive, physical, 
or sensory skills or impairments; or age may impact assessment). In addition, psy-
chologists may consider the use of a trained assistant (e.g., proctor) to be on premise 
at the remote location in an effort to help verify the identity of the client/patient, 
provide needed on-site support to administer certain tests or subtests, and protect the 
security of the psychological testing and/or assessment process.
When administering psychological tests and other assessment procedures when 
providing telepsychology services, psychologists are encouraged to consider the qual-
ity of those technologies that are being used and the hardware requirements that are 
needed in order to conduct the specific psychological test or assessment approach. 
They also strive to account for and be prepared to explain the potential difference 
between the results obtained when a particular psychological test is conducted via 
telepsychology and when it is administered in person. In addition, when document-
ing findings from evaluation and assessment procedures, psychologists are encour-
aged to specify that a particular test or assessment procedure has been administered 
via telepsychology and to describe any accommodations or modifications that have 
been made.
Psychologists strive to use test norms derived from telecommunication technolo-
gies administration if such are available. Psychologists are encouraged to recognize 
the potential limitations of all assessment processes conducted via telepsychology 
and to be ready to address the limitations and potential impact of those procedures.
Interjurisdictional Practice
Guideline 8. Psychologists are encouraged to be familiar with and comply with all rel-
evant laws and regulations when providing telepsychology services to clients/patients 
across jurisdictional and international borders.
RATIONALE
With the rapid advances in telecommunication technologies, the intentional or 
unintentional provision of psychological services across jurisdictional and interna-
tional borders is becoming more of a reality for psychologists. Such service provision 
may range from the psychologists or clients/patients being temporarily out of state 
(including split residence across states) to psychologists offering their services across 
jurisdictional borders as a practice modality to take advantage of new telecommuni-
cation technologies. Psychological service delivery systems within such institutions 
as the U.S. Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs have 
already established internal policies and procedures for providing services within 
their systems that cross jurisdictional and international borders. However, the laws 
and regulations that govern service delivery by psychologists outside of those systems 
vary by state, province, territory, and country (APAPO, 2010). Psychologists should 
make reasonable effort to be familiar with and, as appropriate, to address the laws 

184
A P P E N D I X
and regulations that govern telepsychology service delivery within the jurisdictions in 
which they are situated and the jurisdictions where their clients/patients are located.
APPLICATION
It is important for psychologists to be aware of the relevant laws and regulations that 
specifically address the delivery of professional services by psychologists via telecommu-
nication technologies within and between jurisdictions. Psychologists are encouraged 
to understand what the laws and regulations consider as telehealth or telepsychology. 
In addition, psychologists are encouraged to review the professional licensure require-
ments, the services and telecommunication modalities covered, and the information 
required to be included in providing informed consent. It is important to note that 
each jurisdiction may or may not have specific laws that impose special requirements 
when providing services via telecommunication technologies. The APAPO (2010) has 
found that there are variations in whether psychologists are specified as a single type 
of provider or covered as part of a more diverse group of providers. In addition, there 
is wide diversity in the types of services and the telecommunication technologies that 
are covered by these laws.
At the present time, there are a number of jurisdictions without specific laws that 
govern the provision of psychological services utilizing telecommunication technolo-
gies. When providing telepsychology services in these jurisdictions, psychologists are 
encouraged to be aware of any opinion or declaratory statement issued by the relevant 
regulatory bodies and/or other practitioner licensing boards that may help inform 
them of the legal and regulatory requirements involved when delivering telepsychol-
ogy services within those jurisdictions.
Moreover, because of the rapid growth in the utilization of telecommunication 
technologies, psychologists strive to keep abreast of developments and changes in the 
licensure and other interjurisdictional practice requirements that may be pertinent to 
their delivery of telepsychology services across jurisdictional boundaries. Given the 
direction of various health professions, and current federal priorities to resolve prob-
lems created by requirements of multi-jurisdictional licensure, (see, e.g., FCC National 
Broadband Plan, 2010, Canadian Agreement on Internal Trade 1995), the development 
of a telepsychology credential required by psychology boards for interjurisdictional 
practice is a probable outcome. For example, nursing has developed a credential that 
is accepted by many US jurisdictions that allows nurses licensed in any participating 
jurisdiction to practice in person or remotely in all participating jurisdictions. In addi-
tion, an ASPPB Task Force has drafted a set of recommendations for such a credential.
Conclusion
It is important to note that it is not the intent of these guidelines to prescribe specific 
actions, but rather, to offer the best guidance available at present when incorporating 
telecommunication technologies in the provision of psychological services. Because 

185
Appendix
technology and its applicability to the profession of psychology is a dynamic area 
with many changes likely ahead, these guidelines also are not inclusive of all other 
considerations and are not intended to take precedence over the judgment of psy-
chologists or applicable laws and regulations that guide the profession and practice 
of psychology. It is hoped that the framework presented will guide psychologists as 
the field evolves.
References
American Educational Research Association, American Psychological Associa-
tion, & National Council on Measurement in Education. (1999). Standards for 
educational and psychological testing. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association.
American Psychological Association. (2002). Criteria for practice guideline develop-
ment and evaluation. American Psychologist, 57, 1048–1051.
American Psychological Association. (2003). Guidelines on multicultural education, 
training, research, practice, and organizational change for psychologists. American 
Psychologist, 58, 377–402.
American Psychological Association. (2007). Record keeping guidelines. American 
Psychologist, 62, 993–1004.
American Psychological Association. (2017). Ethical principles of psychologists and code  
of conduct (2002, Amended June 1, 2010 and January 1, 2017). Retrieved from 
http://www.apa.org/ethics/code/index.aspx
American Psychological Association Center for Workforce Studies. (2008). 2008 
APA survey of psychology health service providers: Module D. Information on telepsychol-
ogy, medication, and collaboration. Retrieved from http://www.apa.org/workforce/
publications/08-hsp/telepsychology/index.aspx
American Psychological Association Practice Organization. (2010). Telehealth: Legal 
basics for psychologists. Good Practice, 41, 2–7.
American Psychological Association Practice Organization. (2012, Spring/Summer). 
Social media: What’s your policy? Good Practice, pp. 10–18.
Baker, D. C., & Bufka, L. F. (2011). Preparing for the telehealth world: Navigating 
legal, regulatory, reimbursement, and ethical issues in an electronic age. Professional 
Psychology: Research and Practice, 42, 405–411.
Canadian Psychological Association. (2006). Ethical guidelines for psychologists pro-
viding services via electronic media. Retrieved from http://www.cpa.ca/aboutcpa/
committees/ethics/psychserviceselectronically
Committee on National Security Systems. (2010). National information assurance (AI) 
glossary. Washington, DC: Author.
New Zealand Psychological Association. (2011). Draft guidelines: Psychology services deliv-
ered via the Internet and other electronic media. Retrieved from http://psychologistsboard.
org.nz/cms_show_download.php?id=141

186
A P P E N D I X
Ohio Psychological Association. (2010). Telepsychology guidelines. Retrieved from 
http://www.ohpsych.org/psychologists/files/2011/06/OPATelepsychology 
Guidelines41710.pdf
U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2011). 
A glossary of key information security terms. Washington, DC: Author.
Wakefield, M. K. (2010). Health Licensing Board: Report to Congress (requested by Senate 
Report 111-66). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 
Health Resources and Services Administration. Retrieved from https://telehealth.
org/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/HEALTH-LICENSING-BOARD-Report_Final.pdf

187
A
ABA (applied behavior analysis), 60–62
Access to data
and security of data, 84
when consulting with multinational  
organizations, 65–66
American Educational Research Association, 
182
American Psychological Association (APA),  
8, 28, 101, 141n, 171
Commission on Accreditation, 8
ethical principles and code. See Ethical  
Principles of Psychologists and Code  
of Conduct
on guidelines, 168
“Guidelines on Multicultural Training, 
Research, Practice, and Organiza-
tional Change for Psychologists,” 
167
and need for guidelines, 168–169
Record Keeping Guidelines, 84, 102, 167, 
181
Standards for Educational and Psychological 
Testing, 182
telepsychology guidelines. See Guidelines  
for the Practice of Telepsychology
American Psychological Association  
Practice Organization (APAPO), 184
American Telemedicine Association, 18
American Telemedicine Association Practice 
Guidelines, 80
Antitheft software (phones), 96
Anxiety-based issues, 29–32
APA. See American Psychological  
Association
APA Insurance Trust (The Trust; APAIT), 5, 
101, 141n, 171
APAPO (American Psychological Association 
Practice Organization), 184
Applied behavior analysis (ABA), 60–62
Appropriateness of technologies/services, 
28–29, 173
client variables in, 39–41
for competent practice, 17–20
evaluating, 37–38
for outpatient VA clinic, 17–20
for posttraumatic stress disorder, 17–20
putting technology enthusiasm before 
research, 36–39
standards of care for, 36–39
for suicide risk assessment, 123–127
Army behavioral health outpatient clinic,  
confidentiality in, 75–77
Army recruiters, 131
Army tele-behavioral health (TBH) hubs
electronic assessment battery, 130–134
suicidality assessment, 123–127
testing and assessment, 123–127, 
130–134
Army Tele-Behavioral Health Operations  
Manual (U.S. Army Medical  
Command), 130
ASPPB. See Association of State and  
Provincial Psychology Boards
Index

188
I N D E X
Collaborative assessment and management  
of suicidality (CAMS), 127
Colorado, telepractice in, 153–155
Commission on Accreditation (CoA), 8
Committee on National Security Systems, 169, 170
Communication encryption software, 96–97
Competence of the psychologist, 5, 7–24
application of, 173–174
in emergency management, 20–24
Guideline for, 7, 17, 172–174
in independent practice, 12–16
in outpatient VA clinic, 17–20
in postdoctoral supervision in VA hospital 
program, 8–12
rationale for, 7–8, 172
in rural community-based clinic, 20–24
and supervision, 8–12
and technology appropriateness, 17–20
Computer security. See also Security and  
transmission of data/information
guidelines for, 94
stolen laptop, 92–94
Confidentiality of data/information, 5, 69–81
application of, 179
in Army behavioral health outpatient clinic, 
75–77
defined, 170
and Facebook friend request from patient, 
73–75
Guideline for, 69–70, 75, 77–78, 178–179
with home office, 77–80
in independent practice, 70–72, 77–80
and informed consent, 48, 177
meeting HIPAA and HITECH requirements, 
77–80
in outpatient psychology consortium  
internship, 73–75
rationale for, 69–70, 178–179
state exceptions to, 143
and stolen laptop, 92–94
and stolen phone, 94–97
use of e-mail with patients, 70–72
use of online search in evaluations, 75–77
when consulting with multinational  
organizations, 65
Consultation, 174. See also IT consultation
informed consent in, 63–66
with organization with numerous employees, 
63–66
for risk analysis, 180
Contact lists, purging, 112, 113
Continuity of care, in interjurisdictional practice, 
152–156
Continuous Performance Test (CPT), 136
Cookies, disposal of, 106–108
Council on Measurement in Education, 182
CPT (Continuous Performance Test), 136
CVT. See Clinical video telehealth technology
Assessment. See also Testing and assessment
of appropriateness of service, 175
of remote environment, 176
Association of State and Provincial Psychology 
Boards (ASPPB), 5, 101, 141n, 151,  
171, 184
Autism, informed consent and, 60–62
B
BAA. See Business associate agreement
Behavioral Health Data Portal (BHDP), 130, 
132–133
Behavioral health emergencies, 125
Behavioral health hubs. See Army tele-behavioral 
health (TBH) hubs
Behavioral health outpatient clinic, confiden­
tiality in, 75–77
BHDP (Behavioral Health Data Portal), 130, 
132–133
Billing documentation, 178
Billing practices, 16
Blogs, 41–44
Boston Naming Test, 123
Business associate agreement (BAA), 79, 80, 
101, 160
C
California
interjurisdictional practice, 146–147
licensing, 144
“Call Bruce,” 125
Call logs, purging, 112, 113
CAMS (collaborative assessment and manage-
ment of suicidality), 127
CAPS (Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale), 129
Cease and desist order, 148, 149, 155
Children
with autism, 60–62
in foster care, 54–59
informed consent with, 54–62
psychological assessment at rural primary 
care clinic for, 134–137
Cleaning of hardware/software, 100–106
Client/patient (term), 170
Client variables, failure to consider, 39–41
Clinical assessment. See Testing and assessment
Clinical video telehealth technology (CVT), 
10–12
appropriateness of, 17–20
developing competence with, 14
emergency plan with, 22–24
HIPAA-compliant, 30–31
in supervision, 33–35
Clinician-Administered PTSD Scale (CAPS), 129
Clock Drawing, 123
CoA (Commission on Accreditation), 8
Cognitive impairment, 123

189
Index
Encrypted USB drives, 101
Encryption, 180
Encryption software, 96–97
Enthusiasm for technology, 36–39
E-practice certification, 115
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct 
(APA), 5, 167
on competence, 7–8
on confidentiality, 70
on electronic transmission, storage, and  
disposal of data, 100
on informed consent, 63
on informed consent when working with 
organizations, 157
Evaluation
in Army behavioral health outpatient clinic, 
75–77
confidentiality in, 75–77
and personnel management, 156–159
use of online search in, 75–77
F
Facebook friend request, confidentiality and, 
73–75
Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act 
(1974), 115
Federal Communications Commission, 96
Federal interjurisdictional practice initiatives, 
149–150
Federation of State Medical Boards, 151
Forensic psychology, assessment via video­
conferencing in, 122
Foster care child, informed consent and, 54–59
G
Generalized anxiety disorder, IJTP for, 152–156
General telepsychology assessment, 123
Georgia, licensing in, 144
Guidelines (term), 167–168
Guidelines for Media Sanitization (Kissel,  
Regenscheid, Scholl, and Stine), 103, 111
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology  
(Joint Task Force for the Development  
of Telepsychology Guidelines for  
Psychologists), 3, 5, 167–185
APA standards and guidelines informing, 167
competence of the psychologist, 7, 17, 
172–174
confidentiality of data/information, 69–70, 
75, 77–78, 178–179
definition of telepsychology, 169
development of, 171–172
disposal of data/information/technologies, 
99, 100, 106, 108, 110, 114, 181
informed consent, 47–49, 55, 59, 63, 176–178
interjurisdictional practice, 141–142, 183–184
introduction to, 166
D
Data
access to, in multinational organizations, 65–66
confidentiality of. See Confidentiality of data/
information
developing disposal policies for, 108–114. 
See also Disposal of data/information/
technologies
security and transmission of. See Security  
and transmission of data/information
DBT (dialectical behavior therapy), 49–54
Dementia, 123
Departments, U.S. See U.S. Department of . . . entries
Dialectical behavior therapy (DBT), 49–54
Digit Span, 123
Discharge from telehealth care, 21, 174
Discrete trial distance learning, informed  
consent with, 59–62
Disposal of data/information/technologies, 5, 
99–118
application of, 181
cookies and malware, 106–108
developing data disposal policies, 108–114
Guideline for, 99, 100, 106, 108, 110, 114, 181
hardware and software cleaning and disposal, 
100–106
in independent practice, 100–106
in industrial and organizational settings, 
106–108
rationale for, 99–100, 181
and storage technologies, 114–117
in university counseling clinic, 114–117
in Veterans Affairs hospital, 108–114
Disruptive school behaviors in children, 134–137
Distance learning, informed consent with, 59–62
Documentation
billing, 178
of data disposal, 105–106, 111–114, 181
of informed consent, 177
keeping identification information for  
hardware, 92, 97
of security measures, 180–181
of testing and assessment, 183
DoD. See U.S. Department of Defense
E
Electronic mailing lists, 103
E-mail, 3
confidentiality of, 70–72
in independent practice, 70–72
risks with, 72
secure, 101, 102
on stolen phone, 94–97
Emergency management, 173–174
competence in, 20–24
with dialectical behavior therapy, 51–54
in rural community-based clinic, 20–24

190
I N D E X
HITECH requirements. See Health Information 
Technology for Economic and Clinical 
Health Act requirements
Home-based private practice
confidentiality in, 77–80
meeting HIPAA and HITECH requirements in, 
77–80
security and transmission of data/ 
information in, 92–94
and stolen laptop, 92–94
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test—Revised, 123
I
IJTP. See Interjurisdictional telepsychology  
practice
Independent (private) practice
cleaning and disposing of hardware and  
software in, 100–106
competence of psychologist in, 12–16
confidentiality in, 70–72, 77–80
disposal of data/information/technologies in, 
100–106
and factors of the remote environment, 29–32
home office. See Home-based private practice
informed consent in, 49–54
meeting HIPAA and HITECH requirements, 
77–80
risky clinical situations in, 49–54
security and transmission of data/ 
information in, 92–94
and social media, 41–44
standards of care for, 29–32, 41–44
and stolen laptop, 92–94
use of e-mail with patients, 70–72
Industrial–organizational (I/O) psychology
consultation in organization with numerous 
employees, 63–66
disposal of cookies and malware, 106–108
informed consent in, 63–66
interjurisdictional practice of, 156–159
Information
confidentiality of. See Confidentiality of  
data/information
disposal of. See Disposal of data/information/
technologies
security and transmission of. See Security  
and transmission of data/information
Information system (term), 170
Informed consent, 5, 47–66
application of, 177–178
and confidentiality, 48
in consultation with organization with 
numerous employees, 63–66
in discrete trial distance learning, 59–62
Guideline for, 47, 49, 176–178
in IJTP personnel management and  
evaluation, 157
need for, 170–171
operational definitions in, 169–170
security and transmission of data/ 
information, 83–84, 179–181
standards of care in service delivery, 27–29, 
36, 39, 41, 174–176
testing and assessment, 121–124, 128, 130, 
134, 182–183
“Guidelines on Multicultural Training, Research, 
Practice, and Organizational Change for 
Psychologists” (APA), 167
H
Hacking, 107
Hageseth v. Superior Court of San Mateo County, 
146–147
Halstead–Reitan Battery, 129
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, 128
Hardware
cleaning and disposing of, 100–106
reuse/decommissioning of old VA video­
conferencing hardware, 108–114
Health Information Technology for Economic 
and Clinical Health Act (HITECH)  
requirements
for IJTP therapy practice, 160
for independent practice in home office, 
77–80
for university counseling center telepractice, 
115
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA) requirements
audiovisual program compliance with, 30–31
for health information identifiers with  
multiprovider services, 52
for IJTP therapy practice, 160
for independent practice in home office, 77–80
for interjurisdictional practice, 154
for maintaining and disposing of data/ 
information, 102
for multidisciplinary health clinic, 85–87
in risky clinical situations, 52, 54
for security and transmission of data/ 
information, 84–87
for transmission of electronic health care 
data, 86–87
for university counseling center telepractice, 
115
when initiating a telepsychology practice, 
85–87
Health Resources and Services Administration, 
169
HIPAA requirements. See Health Insurance  
Portability and Accountability Act 
requirements
Guidelines for the Practice of Telepsychology  
continued

191
Index
J
Joint Task Force for the Development of Tele-
psychology Guidelines for Psychologists, 
168–169, 171. See also Guidelines for the 
Practice of Telepsychology
Jurisdictional (term), 170
Jurisdictions. See also Interjurisdictional tele­
psychology practice (IJTP)
and authority to impose discipline, 145
defined, 170
differences in informed consent among, 177
I/O and consulting psychologist licensing in, 
108
and minimum contacts rule, 145–149
and standards of practice, 168
telepractice regulations in, 115
K
Kissel, R., 103, 111
Knowing when one is using telepsychology, 
94–97
Kobak, K. A., 128
L
Laptop
encrypting, 101
stolen, 92–94
Letter and Category fluency, 123
Licensing boards, 144, 145, 149, 160
Licensure, 184
for consulting psychologists, 157
e-practice certification for, 115
federal initiative for, 149
for interjurisdictional practice, 108, 142, 
144–145, 150–151
for I/O psychologists, 157
state laws for, 142–145
Location of interjurisdictional transactions, 
143–144, 146, 150
M
Malware, disposal of, 106–108
Medical Board Compact, 151
Medicare telehealth services, 150, 170
Medicare Telepractice Parity Act, 150
Mini-Mental State Exam, 123
Minimum contacts rule, 145–149, 157, 160
Mississippi, licensing in, 144
Mobile devices. See Phone/telephone; Tablets
Montgomery–Åsberg Depression Rating Scale, 128
Multidisciplinary health clinic. See also Primary 
care clinics, rural
HIPAA requirements in, 85–87
initiation of telepsychology practice in, 85–87
and knowing when one is using tele­
psychology, 94–97
security and transmission of data/ 
information in, 85–87, 94–97
rationale for, 47–49, 176–177
in risky clinical situations, 49–54
self-assessment checklist for, 51
in university training clinic, 54–59
to use Army tele-behavioral health hubs, 132
Initiation of telepsychology practice, security 
and transmission of data/information in, 
85–87
In-person (term), 170
In-person supervision, 8, 9. See also Supervision
Insurance coverage, in interjurisdictional  
practice, 143–144
Interactive voice response technology, 101
Interjurisdictional telepsychology practice (IJTP), 
141–163, 172
application of, 184
continuity of care in, 152–156
federal initiatives addressing, 149–150
Guideline for, 141–142, 183–184
in industrial–organizational setting, 156–159
leveraging technology in therapy in, 159–161
and licensing boards, 145
and licensing requirements, 108, 142, 144–145
location of transactions in, 143–144
minimum contacts analysis in, 145–149
and minimum contacts rule, 157
and multistate licensure compacts, 150–151
in online therapy service, 159–161
questions to consider for, 143–145
rationale for, 141–143, 183–184
risk management in, 147–149
and state’s jurisdiction over out-of-state  
practitioners, 145–149
supervision requirements for, 116
and telepractice regulations, 115
International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 146
Internet searches. See Online searches
Internship supervision
confidentiality in, 73–75
at outpatient psychology consortium, 73–75
at public sector site, 36–39
security and transmission of data/ 
information in, 88–91
standards of care in, 36–39
when transferring training program to 
another professional, 88–91
Interstate Compact to Expedite Medical Licensure 
and Facilitate Multi-State Practice, 151
I/O psychology. See Industrial–organizational 
psychology
IT consultation
on disposal of VA videoconferencing  
information, 111–114
for disposing of cookies and malware, 
107–108
for disposing of data/information, 104–106
on security measures, 178

192
I N D E X
Primary care clinics, rural, 134–137. See also 
Multidisciplinary health clinic
Prince v. Urban, 147
Privacy. See also Protected health information (PHI)
with e-mail, 71, 72
guidelines for, 80
HIPAA Privacy rule, 79, 80
in home settings, 30–32, 58
national laws affecting, 64–65
and online searches, 76–77
with social media, 72, 74, 75
and technology appropriateness, 17, 18
in telephone communications, 14
in videoconferencing, 50
Private practice. See Independent practice
Protected health information (PHI)
client role in securing, 110
confidentiality of, 71, 72, 79, 80
on old hardware, 110
security and transmission of, 87
Psychology Interjurisdictional Compact 
(PSYPACT), 151
Psychometric assessment. See Testing and  
assessment
PTSD. See Posttraumatic stress disorder
Public sector site
failure to consider client variables at, 39–41
internship supervision at, 36–39
standards of care for, 36–41
R
RBANS (Repeatable Battery for the Assessment 
of Neuropsychological Status), 123
Record keeping, 84. See also Disposal of data/
information/technologies; Documentation;  
Security and transmission of data/ 
information
guidelines for, 102
state requirements for, 143
Record Keeping Guidelines (APA), 84, 102, 167, 
181
Referral in lieu of telepsychology, testing and 
assessment for, 128–129
Regenscheid, A., 103
Regional tele-behavioral health hubs.  
See Army tele-behavioral health hub
Remote (term), 170
Remote environment
accuracy of student reporting in, 32–36
assessing, 176
emergency management in, 20–24
factors of, 29–32
standards of care in, 29–36
storage technologies for information in, 
114–117
suicide risk assessment in, 123–127
telehealth appropriateness for, 15
Multinational organizations, informed consent 
and, 63–66
Multistate licensure compacts, 150–151, 156
N
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST), 103, 111, 169, 170
Needs assessment, 13
Nursing Licensure Compact, 150–151
O
Online public forums, in IJTP therapy practice, 
159–161
Online searches
in Army behavioral health outpatient clinic, 
75–77
and confidentiality, 75–77, 179
in evaluations, 75–77
for HIPAA compliance information, 79–80
Online therapy service, 159–161
Oral Trails, 123
Organizational case studies. See Industrial– 
organizational (I/O) psychology
Out-of-state practitioners. See Interjurisdictional 
telepsychology practice (IJTP)
Outpatient clinics
Army behavioral health, 75–77
competence in, 17–20
confidentiality in, 73–77
psychology consortium internship in, 73–75
VA, technology appropriateness for, 17–20
P
Panic disorder, 20–24
Password protection, 93, 95, 96, 101
Personnel management and evaluation, 156–159
PHI. See Protected health information
Phone/telephone
cleaning and disposal of hardware/software, 
100–106
communications via, 4, 14
disposing of data from, 103, 104
purging contacts and call logs, 112, 113
stolen, 94–97
telephone sessions, 3, 20
videoconferencing with, 101
Policy development
to address security threats, 177
for data disposal, 108–114, 181
for telesupervision, 9–12
Postdoctoral supervision in VA hospital program, 
8–12
Posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
assessment of, 129
technology appropriateness for, 17–20
Practicum. See University practicum and  
internship program

193
Index
in multidisciplinary health clinic, 85–87
password protection for, 93, 95, 96, 101
in private practice, 92–94
and protected health information, 79, 80
rationale for, 83–84, 179–180
and stolen laptop, 92–94
and stolen phone, 94–97
in university practicum and internship  
program, 88–91
when initiating a telepsychology practice, 
85–87
when transferring training program to 
another professional, 88–91
Security measures, 170
Servicemembers’ Telemedicine and E-Health 
Portability (STEP) Act, 149
Social media, 179
confidentiality with, 73–75
and Facebook friend request from patient, 
73–75
standards of care for, 41–44
Social Security Act, 150
Software
antitheft (phones), 96
cleaning and disposing of, 100–106
communication encryption, 96–97
HIPAA-compliant, 86–87
laptop lockdown, 92, 93
videoconferencing, 101, 102, 104, 109
Standards, guidelines vs., 168
Standards for Educational and Psychological Testing, 
182
Standards of care in service delivery, 5, 27–45
and accuracy of student reporting in remote 
supervisory environment, 32–36
application of, 175–176
and factors of the remote environment, 29–32
and failure to consider client variables, 39–41
Guideline for, 27, 36, 39, 41, 174–176
in independent practice, 29–32, 41–44
in internship supervision at public sector site, 
36–39
in public sector agency, 39–41
and putting technology enthusiasm before 
research, 36–39
rationale for, 27–29, 174–175
in remote training and supervision, 32–36
and social media, 41–44
STEP (Servicemembers’ Telemedicine and 
E-Health Portability) Act, 149
Stine, K., 103
Stolen laptop, 92–94
Stolen phone, 94–97
Storage technologies, 177, 180
and consulting with multinational  
organizations, 65
in university counseling clinic, 114–117
training and supervision in, 32–36
university counseling clinic in, 114–117
Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of  
Neuropsychological Status (RBANS), 123
Reporting by students, accuracy of, 32–36
Research, putting technology enthusiasm before, 
36–39. See also Online searches
Resources, availability of, 15–16
Risk analysis
for data security, 84, 180
with disposal of data/information, 181
Risk management
in continuity of care, 152–155
in industrial–organizational setting, 156–157
in interjurisdictional practice, 147–149,  
152–155, 157–158, 160–161
Risks
to confidentiality, 178–179
with social networking sites, 179
with telepsychology, 177–178
Risky clinical situations, informed consent in, 
49–54
Rural environments
child psychological assessment in, 134–137
competence in, 20–24
emergency management in community-
based clinic in, 20–24
Medicare coverage in, 150
primary care clinic in, 134–137
telehealth appropriateness for, 15
testing and assessment in, 134–137
S
Samaritans Service, 125
Scholl, M., 103
Scope of telepractice, 3
Security
of computers, 92–94
defined, 170
informed consent on, 177
policies/procedures for, 177
Security and transmission of data/information, 
5, 83–98
antitheft software for, 96
application of, 180–181
clients’ responsibilities for, 84
communication encryption software for, 96–97
and consulting with multinational  
organizations, 65
and disposal of cookies and malware, 107–108
in e-mail and text messaging, 94–97
encryption for, 96–97, 101, 180
Guideline for, 83–84, 179–181
HIPAA requirements for, 84–87
and knowing when one is using tele­
psychology, 94–97
laptop lockdown software for, 92, 93

194
I N D E X
Telehealth, 95
Telehealth and Rural Outreach postdoctoral 
training program (TROP), 8–9
Telehealth resources, availability of, 15–16
Telemedicine, 95
TELEmedicine for MEDicare (TELE-MED) Act, 
150
Teleneuropsychological assessment, 123
Telephone. See Phone/telephone
Telepractice, 3, 95
Telepsychology, 3–4
challenges in, 166
communicating risks and benefits of, 175
considerations in practice of, 168
defined, 4, 169
as extension of current practice, 4
guidelines for, 3, 5. See also Guidelines for the 
Practice of Telepsychology
knowing when one is using, 94–97
potential of, 165
practice of, 6
Telepsychology training program, transfer of, 
88–91
Telesupervision. See also Supervision
defined, 8
policy for, 9–12
Testing and assessment, 5, 121–138
application, 182–183
Army electronic assessment battery, 130–134
Army tele-behavioral health hub, 123–127
child psychological assessment, 134–137
forensic psychology, 122
general telepsychology assessment, 123
Guideline for, 121–124, 128, 130, 134, 
182–183
rationale, 121–122, 182
referral in lieu of telepsychology, 128–129
regional tele-behavioral health hubs, 130–134
rural primary care clinic, 134–137
suicidality assessment, 123–127
teleneuropsychological assessment, 123
university counseling center, 128–129
via videoconferencing, 122–123
Text messages
IJTP therapy practice, 159–161
secure, 101
on stolen phone, 94–97
TF-CBT (trauma-focused cognitive behavior 
therapy), 57–59
Thematic Apperception Test, 127
Training, 173
to increase competence, 16
and informed consent, 54–59
in remote environments, 32–36
for remote site assistants, 137
resources available for, 15–16
in risk analysis, 180
Student reporting, accuracy of, 32–36
Suicidality assessment, at Army tele-behavioral 
health hub, 123–127
Suicide prevention hotlines, 125
Supervision, 174
and accuracy of student reporting in remote 
environment, 32–36
competence in, 8–12
confidentiality in, 73–75
defined, 8
and Facebook friend request from patient, 
73–75
in-person, 8, 9
interjurisdictional guidelines for, 116
in internship at public sector site, 36–39
in outpatient psychology consortium  
internship, 73–75
postdoctoral, in VA hospital program, 8–12
standards of care for, 32–39
telesupervision, 8–12
in university counseling center telepractice, 
114–117
T
Tablets
disposing of data from, 103, 104
purging contacts and call logs, 112, 113
videoconferencing software for, 101
Task Force on Telepsychology. See Joint Task 
Force for the Development of Tele­
psychology Guidelines for Psychologists
TBH hubs. See Army tele-behavioral health hubs
Technologies. See Telecommunications  
technologies
Technology appropriateness. See Appropriateness 
of technologies/services
Tele-behavioral health (TBH) hubs. See Army 
tele-behavioral health hubs
Telecommunications, 169
Telecommunications technologies, 169–171. 
See also Appropriateness of technologies/
services
changes in, 6
in combination, 169
defined, 169
disposal of. See Disposal of data/information/
technologies
for electronic transmission of information, 95
expanding role of, 170–171
for independent practices, 14
in interjurisdictional therapy practice, 159–161
keeping identification for, 92, 97
opportunities and challenges of, 171–172
purposes of, 169
security of. See Security and transmission  
of data/information
storage, 114–117
for videoconferencing, 109

195
Index
and outpatient clinic technology  
appropriateness, 17–20
and postdoctoral supervision in hospital  
program, 8–12
service delivery policies/procedures of, 183
Telehealth and Rural Outreach postdoctoral 
training program of, 8–9
telepsychology support by, 108
training resources from, 15
typical telemental health programs of, 108–109
VA clinic, 17–24
VA hospital program, 8–12, 108–114
and VETS Act, 150
U.S. Substance Abuse and Mental Health  
Services Administration, 125
V
VA. See U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs
VA clinic
competence of psychologist in, 17–20
emergency management at community-
based outpatient clinic, 20–24
outpatient, technology appropriateness in, 
17–20
VA hospital program
competence of psychologist in, 8–12
developing data disposal policies for, 108–114
postdoctoral supervision in, 8–12
videoconferencing technologies in, 109
Veterans E-Health & Telemedicine Support 
(VETS) Act, 150
Videoconferencing, 4
for applied behavior analysis, 60–62
cleaning and disposal of hardware/software 
for, 100–106
and confidentiality, 78
for dialectical behavior therapy, 50
for home-based private practice, 78–80
in IJTP therapy practice, 159–161
and referral in lieu of telepsychology, 128–129
in suicidality assessment, 123–127
in testing and assessment, 122–129
in VA telepsychology information disposal, 
108–114
Videoconferencing software, 101, 102, 104, 109
Virtual private network (VPN), 62
W
Wakefield, M. K., 144
Web-based services, 85–87, 102
Web camera, 109
Work–family role interface, 63–66
and security and transmission of data/ 
information, 88–91
standards of care in, 32–36
for university counseling center students, 
115, 116
in university practicum and internship  
program, 88–91
in university training clinic, 54–59
when transferring telepsychology program  
to another professional, 88–91
Transmission of data/information. See Security 
and transmission of data/information
Trauma-focused cognitive behavior therapy  
(TF-CBT), 57–59
Traumatic brain injury, assessment of, 129
TROP (Telehealth and Rural Outreach post­
doctoral training program), 8–9
Trust, informed consent and, 63
The Trust. See APA Insurance Trust
U
Unfortunate instantaneous technology events, 
107
University counseling center/clinic
disposal of data/information/technologies in, 
114–117
referral in lieu of telepsychology, 128–129
storage technologies in, 114–117
testing and assessment in, 128–129
University practicum and internship program
accuracy of student reporting in, 32–36
security and transmission of data/ 
information in, 88–91
standards of care for, 32–36
storage technologies in, 114–117
transferring telepsychology training program 
to another professional, 88–91
University training clinic, informed consent and, 
54–59
U.S. Army Medical Command, 130
U.S. Department of Commerce, 169
U.S. Department of Defense (DoD)
and service delivery policies/procedures, 183
and STEP Act, 149–150
training resources from, 15
U.S. Department of Health and Human  
Services, 169
U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs (VA)
and competence, 17–20
developing data disposal policies in, 108–114
and emergency management at community-
based outpatient clinic, 20–24


197
Linda F. Campbell, PhD, is a professor in the counseling psychology program 
at the University of Georgia and director of the departmental training clinic. 
She teaches psychotherapy, assessment, and other courses, but her primary 
area of study is ethics. She is coauthor of APA Ethics Code Commentary and Case 
Illustrations and has published primarily in the area of ethics. Dr. Campbell 
is past chair of the APA Ethics Committee and is a member of the State Board 
of Examiners of Psychologists in Georgia. She was a cochair of the Task 
Force on the Development of Telepsychology Guidelines. She grew up in 
West Virginia and graduated from West Virginia University before moving 
to Georgia.
Fred Millán, PhD, ABPP, NCC, is a Latino counseling psychologist, licensed 
in New York State and board certified in psychoanalysis by the American 
Board of Professional Psychology. He is the director of the Graduate Mental 
Health Counseling Program and professor of psychology at SUNY Old West-
bury. He maintains a part-time private practice in Spanish and English and 
provides clinical supervision to doctoral students, postdoctoral fellows, and 
psychiatric residents. Dr. Millán serves as the vice chair of the APA Ethics 
Committee and president-elect of the National Latino/a Psychological Asso-
ciation. He is a former president of the Association of State and Provincial 
Psychology Boards (ASPPB), former chair of the New York State Board for 
Psychology, and former cochair of the APA, ASPPB, and The Trust Task Force 
on Telepsychology.
Jana N. Martin, PhD, received her master’s and doctor of philosophy degrees 
from the University of Mississippi and completed a child specialty internship 
About the Editors

198
A B O U T  T H E  E D I T O R S
at Duke University Medical Center. After many years practicing as a psychologist,  
Dr. Martin became CEO of The Trust in 2010. As CEO, Dr. Martin focuses on providing 
broad professional liability coverage, financial security products, and support services 
for psychologists in areas such as telepsychology. She coauthored the second edition 
of Assessing and Managing Risk in Psychological Practice and has cowritten numerous book 
chapters and articles and presents workshops on risk management topics. Dr. Martin  
was cochair of the APA/ASPPB/Trust Task Force on the Development of Telepsychology 
Guidelines for Psychologists.

