Dr Peter Moir
A Wet Look At Climate Change
Hurricanes to House Mites
Download free books at

2 
 
Dr. Peter Moir
A Wet Look At Climate Change 
Hurricanes to House Mites
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

3 
 
A Wet Look At Climate Change: Hurricanes to House Mites
© 2012 Dr. Peter Moir & bookboon.com
ISBN 978-87-403-0063-5
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
4 
Contents
Contents
	
Acknowledgments	
6
	
Introduction	
7
1	
Relative Humidity	
8
2	
Saturation	
13
3	
Equilibrium Relative Humidity	
24
4	
Hurricanes, Typhoons and Cyclones	
31
5	
Health	
35
6	
Food	
39
7	
Potato Blight	
44
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

A Wet Look At Climate Change
5 
Contents
8	
Salt	
49
9	
ERH Revisited	
52
10	
How Much Water?	
54
11	
Oh Poor Olive Tree!	
66
12	
Oil + Water = ?	
77
13	
House Mites	
85
14	
A Challenge	
90
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

A Wet Look At Climate Change
6 
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
Cover design by Yellow Branding and Digital Media Ltd. - www.yellowdesign.tv
Cartoons by Máirin Grant – mairingrant@yahoo.com
Matt Cartoons, The Daily Telegraph
My friends and close associates Andrew Lake, Larry Glick and Stuart Allcock who in that order suggested I write a book. 
I thank you greatly as I did not really think I would get this collection of thoughts, ideas and experiences together.
This book is for people who like me struggle with maths but appreciate why we must use it. I have done my best to keep 
most of the complex equations out of this book and present the more difficult concepts in a readable form. I only achieved 
this by trying out different approaches in front of classes of secondary level students for which I thank Mike O’Sullivan 
of St. Augustine’s College who made it possible and even invited me back.
To Sarah, who has no mean task having to live with my obsession.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
7 
Introduction
Introduction
I do not want to mislead you into thinking this book is about global warming and its part in climate change. My hope is 
that I can talk to you using mostly simple terms and common experiences about certain properties of water, how these 
are affecting us all, and where climate change has a role in ongoing problems.
I will describe and explain some properties of water that you need to know to understand how water and air interact 
in a predictable way. Using this knowledge, you can gain an understanding of not only why and how global warming is 
affecting climate, but also be able to explain many other things you will have seen in daily life and probably never really 
thought about.
At this point, I should issue a warning that this subject can become a bit obsessive. You could find yourself wandering 
around saying to yourself, “so what’s happening to the moisture here and why’s it doing that?” Over more than ten years 
I’ve been asking myself that question and it’s led me into all sorts of areas. Literally, from hurricanes to house mites, such 
is the diversity of the subject and all explained on some fundamental properties of water.
I suppose it’s only natural that as our bodies are largely made up of water and it is essential for life on our planet, there 
is a lot going on with water in our everyday lives, most of which we fail to appreciate or begin to understand. We are all 
of course familiar with the destructive force of water in floods, but there are unseen forces involving water vapour that 
influence our well being, both positively and negatively. 
After having lived a career in science and related subjects, I have kept my interest in science not just in my own work 
areas but in science generally. Along the way I have picked up useful tips and thought processes and have tried to pass 
these on by building some of them into the chapters as they progress.
This is not a traditional text book. It is more about looking at things differently and that includes the silly cartoons. I hope 
you enjoy this trip into the world of moisture. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
8 
Relative Humidity
1	 Relative Humidity
In the context of this book, the most important property for us to grasp is what it really means when we use the term 
‘Relative Humidity’. The best way here is to deconstruct the two terms starting with ‘Humidity’.
Humidity
Our common experience of humidity is based on climate. Depending on where you live and the local climate, or if you 
have been lucky enough to have gone somewhere warm on holiday, you have most probably at some point said or heard 
somebody say “it’s humid”. If it gets more humid than is comfortable, we hear this described as “muggy”. These terms 
describing the climate are our perception of a key property of water. Whether we can see it or not, the air contains water. 
How much water there is in the air depends on one very important factor and that is temperature. However, our common 
experience of warm or hot days that are not humid, tells us that it is not simply an increase in temperature that leads 
to muggy weather. As we will explore in this chapter it is not simply the temperature or the amount of water that is the 
answer. What we need to consider is how much water the air can hold and that is totally dependent on the temperature. 
When thinking about humidity, and I cannot state this strongly enough, you must always consider the temperature!
My first dramatic experience of a humid climate that went way beyond ‘muggy’ was in August 1987 when I was sent by 
the company I was working for at the time to an international conference at Cold Spring Harbor on Long Island. I arrived 
at JFK airport, hired a car and drove to the conference. Arriving in the car park I stepped out of the air conditioned car 
at Cold Spring Harbor and was blasted by a wave of heat. A truly unforgettable first for me. My colleagues had warned 
me, “August, Cold Spring Harbor, the humidity should be fun”. The daily 4pm thunderstorms were quite fun as well, as 
was the sweating all night in the accommodation without air conditioning.
An experience like this brings home to you the close association between temperature and moisture. Also, the thunderstorms 
tell you that there is a lot of energy being generated and moved around in the air. Walk into a sauna and feel the heat, 
then throw some water on the hot stones and you will quickly learn about ‘heat transference’.
So, the ‘Humidity’ part of “Relative Humidity” has to do with the amount of water in the air. This can be referred to 
as ‘moisture’ or, to be more precise, ‘water vapour’. We are all familiar with water vapour in many ways; two common 
experiences are steam from boiling water in a kettle, and clouds, either up where they usually are or down here at ground 
level as mist. 
The term ‘Humidity’ is used loosely on weather forecasts where often the ‘Relative’ part is dropped. If humidity describes 
the amount of moisture in the air then what has the ‘Relative’ bit got to do with it and where does temperature fit in? This 
is where it gets a bit more tricky but it is absolutely essential to understand why ‘Relative’.
You will hear and see on weather reports that humidity is given as a percentage (%). This is where the ‘Relative’ part 
comes from. One scientific fact that you must know first, and please commit this to memory, air can only hold a certain 
amount of water vapour. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
9 
Relative Humidity
Common experience tells us that when clouds have built up, and keep building up, at some point it rains. That is, the air 
cannot hold any more water vapour and droplets are formed that are heavier than air and fall to earth.
The maximum amount of water vapour that can be held by air is called ‘Saturation’. This is covered in more detail in the 
next chapter. To understand how saturation influences humidity, imagine you are in a room 5 x 5 x 5 metres in size and 
the temperature is 21ºC. The air in the room could hold about 9kg of water vapour and would be saturated. If that amount 
of water vapour was present, you would soon be damp and feel uncomfortable. Let us now half the amount of water to 
4.5kg and this would give 4.5/9.0 resulting in a ‘Relative’ amount of water equivalent to half, or 50% as a percentage, to 
what it would be at the saturation level. Now you are sitting in this room at 21ºC and 50% Relative Humidity (or 50% 
RH), a much more comfortable environment.
Relative Humidity
So, ‘Relative Humidity’ is a measure of the actual amount of water compared to the amount of water there would be at 
saturation and expressed as percentage:
5+  
DFWXDODPRXQWRIZDWHUYDSRXU

[


PD[LPXPSRVVLEOHDPRXQWRIZDWHUYDSRXU
Unfortunately, as with so many things, it’s not that simple. Remember? You must always consider the temperature!
Here is the tricky bit I mentioned; a scientific fact is that the amount of water vapour that air can hold at saturation is 
strictly dependent on the temperature. As temperature increases the amount of water vapour air can hold also increases. 
This ties in nicely with our experience of being in a humid climate. It has to be warm and there has to be a source of 
water, such as the sea, a lake, rain or any combination of these.
Air and Humidity
Now there is a further rule of nature that has to be obeyed; warm air holds more water than cold air! Quite a simple rule 
but it explains so much. A simple example, to get you started on exploring the world from the perspective of humidity, is 
where you get a rain shadow on one side of a mountain. The NASA satellite picture below of the Tibetan plateau appears 
on a Wikipedia page as an example of a rain shadow:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
10 
Relative Humidity
At the top is the Tibetan plateau which is arid. This is because the Himalayas mountain range, running across the picture, 
causes the rain to fall on the side of the mountain at the bottom of the picture. We are told that this occurs because the 
moist warm air is pushed up by the mountains and the water condenses as it cools with altitude causing rain to fall. This 
explanation tells you how and where the rain shadow occurs but not why. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
11 
Relative Humidity
Using your new knowledge of water vapour you can complete the story be saying that as the air cools it cannot hold as 
much water (because of the above rule) and this results in condensation and rain. The point where no more water can 
be held by the air is the ‘Saturation Point’. Since the Himalayas are so high, the drop in temperature lowers the saturation 
point so much that little water is retained and dry air of low relative humidity flows over the top of the mountain depriving 
the leeward side of rain. 
It is easy to demonstrate the strong relationship between temperature and humidity by measuring relative humidity and 
then heating the air. I first publicly performed such a demonstration during a talk I give to local schools entitled “What 
is Science?” where I decided to give a series of these talks on an ongoing basis to encourage students to go on and take 
science subjects. 
I use a closed container with a built-in temperature/humidity probe (measuring device) that displays via a laptop the actual 
temperature and relative humidity of the inside of the container. By applying a small amount of heat to raise the internal 
temperature by a few degrees the response is an immediate change in the relative humidity and this is what you see:
At the start the temperature is about 20ºC and relative humidity is around 60%. I applied external heat and of course, 
the temperature, the top line on the graph, can be seen to rise. The %RH immediately begins to fall. As part of my talk, 
I let the demonstration run for a few minutes and ask the students to explain why the relative humidity drops as the 
temperature increases. In the graph above I have shown what happens when you let the test run until the temperature 
and humidity return to about where they started.1 
Armed with the information above you should be able to work out why in the graph you see almost a perfect symmetry. 
Have a go and see if you agree with my explanation that follows:
1	
Moir, Peter D. A New Approach to Equilibrium Relative Humidity Testing for Moisture Sorption Studies in Pharmaceutical 
Product Stability. Tablets and Capsules May 2007; 5(4): 18-25.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
12 
Relative Humidity
Three key bits of information are required; a) warm air holds more water than cold air, b) as temperature increases the 
amount of water vapour air can hold increases and c) Relative Humidity is a measure of the actual amount of water 
compared to the amount of water there would be at the saturation point. 
The key to understanding the symmetry of the graph is remembering that the amount of water does not change inside 
the container. So, as the temperature changes and consequently changes the saturation point, the amount of water relative 
(as a percentage or ratio) to what could be held at saturation must also change up or down depending on whether the 
temperature goes up or down.
A fuller explanation: As we heat the container the internal air warms up and because warm air can hold more water vapour 
it has a higher saturation point. Since the amount of water in the closed container does not change, then the amount of 
water vapour relative to the saturation point must decrease as the saturation point increases. Just as with the clouds rising 
up the mountains, as the temperature drops the saturation level decreases and the relative humidity must increase. At the 
point the temperature starts to decrease the opposite happens and the relative humidity increases. 
In fact, if we continued to cool the container, the relative humidity can be increased to the saturation point and we would 
get condensation inside the container.
Immediately some common experiences come to mind; condensation on windows and walls on a cold night, condensation 
on surfaces in a kitchen where steam comes in direct contact with a surface, kitchen and bathroom windows getting 
steamed up. These observations can all be explained using the above properties of water.
We recently had a bathroom tiled from floor to ceiling and fitted with a new toilet. I almost called the plumber back in 
to fix a leak from the new toilet as we had water collecting on the floor. As I discovered, water vapour from showering 
was condensing on the cistern of the toilet and running down around the soil pipe and onto the floor behind the toilet. 
The toilet is against an outside wall and was also attracting condensation and this led to a pool of water on the tiled floor. 
Two compounding factors led to the problem; this started in winter where cold water from the storage tank was filling 
the cistern and because it was cold outside the bathroom windows were closed. In other words, we had a box full of water 
vapour and some cold surfaces. The air above the cold surface cooled and this increased the humidity to saturation, causing 
the water to condense onto the cistern and tiles. I talk more about houses and humidity in the next chapter.
Exactly the same principles apply on the large scale and are the reason why the international community is so worried 
about global warming. As the Earth’s atmosphere warms up, as you now know, it is capable of holding more water due to 
the temperature affect on the water vapour saturation level. This means that the air around the globe has a higher capacity 
for holding water and moving it around from one place to another. Vast amounts of water are involved and this is causing 
changes to the landscape, creating and expanding lakes and rivers and at the same time causing drought in other areas.
In this chapter I have used the term ‘saturation’ and in the next chapter I explain its importance for understanding more 
about some common experiences.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
13 
Saturation
2	 Saturation
If you have ever been caught in a downpour or had to walk a distance in the rain you say “I’m soaked through” or “I’m 
saturated”. In this state, your clothes cannot hold any more water and you have water dripping off you. The same thing 
happens with air when there is so much water vapour that water droplets are formed. This is the ‘saturation point’ of air 
and what happens next largely depends on temperature. 
It is not within the scope of this book to discuss all the different events that could occur in this situation. Plenty of 
information is available on reputable internet sites and in television documentaries. The BBC did an excellent documentary 
“Rain” (April 2009) that explained some of the science, well worth a look.
The scientific term used for saturation is the ‘dew point’ and is expressed as a temperature. At the time of writing, my 
local weather conditions are 11ºC, 82% RH and a dew point of 8ºC. If the temperature was to drop, as you now know, 
the relative humidity will increase and when the temperature reaches 8ºC it will be 100% RH (dew point), the air will be 
saturated and water droplets will form.
This is exactly what has happened when you see dew on the grass. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

A Wet Look At Climate Change
14 
Saturation
The cool surface of the ground has caused the air above the ground to reach its dew point and water droplets have 
condensed onto a convenient surface, the blades of grass. Lifting of the dew from the grass is the reverse and requires an 
increase in temperature that is large enough to reduce the relative humidity of the air above the ground. This raises the 
saturation point and allows water vapour to enter the air by evaporation.
A dew point can be calculated for any combination of %RH and temperature and there are on-line calculators freely 
available for download that will give you the dew point if you input temperature and relative humidity values. The one I 
have used for many years is a simple calculator created by Tim Padfield.
There is a great line in one of Tim’s articles,
“Humans are not good at estimating atmospheric water vapour”2 
2	
The potential and limits for passive air conditioning of museums, stores and archives, Padfield, T., Poul Klenz 
Larsen, Lars Aasbjerg Jensen and Morten Ryhl-Svendsen 2007.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
15 
Saturation
This was prompted by a person who was responsible for looking after archived military material and decided at certain 
times of the year to open the windows to reduce the humidity. Unfortunately, the outside humidity was higher than the 
archive room! 
I will stick with the concept of ‘saturation’ rather than use the term dew point. I think it is easier to apply our new 
knowledge to every day situations since saturation (being saturated) comes from common experience. Here is a very 
common example; how do 
you in winter decide whether or not to hang your clothes out to dry? One approach is to say to yourself “Doesn’t look 
like rain” and then hope it doesn’t. 
One day you hang the washing out in the morning, it does not rain as you hoped but you come home to find that it is just 
as wet as when it was hung out. The following day, the weather forecast is better, but the day does not look much different. 
However, rather than increase your carbon profile by using the tumble dryer, you hang the washing out again. This time 
when you get home, your clothes are not completely dry but good enough to air off in the house. So, what is the difference?
Before providing you with a possible explanation, I have to admit to having a weather station in the garden fitted with 
a remote temperature and humidity sensor. As I said in the introduction, this world of humidity can get a bit obsessive. 
The first thing we do before hanging out washing is check the outside relative humidity reading and see if there is a 
chance of any sunshine. If we see low temperature with high humidity and no chance of sun, we say “snowball’s”, not 
that we would be expecting snow (a rare enough event in this part of Ireland) but that, to get the washing dry, stands a 
“snowball’s chance in hell”! 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
16 
Saturation
Let us say on the first day in the example above we have 7ºC and 95% RH in the morning. This level of humidity is very 
close to saturation (100% RH) and in fact is less than 1ºC above the dew point. You would not put your clothes somewhere 
wet to dry, obviously, and, as explained above, the air at 95% RH is nearly full of moisture. If the daytime temperature 
drops slightly or stays the same your clothes are simply not going to dry. 
On the second day, the daytime temperature increases by 2-3ºC and, although it is still overcast and not feeling pleasant, 
the humidity has dropped to 70-80% RH and this allows some drying to occur, particularly if there is a very slight breeze. 
A slight breeze, every now and then, displaces the near saturated air above the wet clothes and allows evaporation of the 
water in the clothes into the air above. These small differences on the second day you may not notice because, as far as 
you perceive from the atmospheric conditions, it is not a nice day, a bit chilly and certainly not “a good drying day”, but 
these small changes make all the difference. 
The problem with cold weather is that it takes very much less water vapour to push the humidity way up. Using a moisture 
calculator such as the one above produced by Tim Padfield, the actual amount of water vapour can be calculated. This 
allows us to compare the amount of water in the air for different conditions of temperature and humidity. 
Taking 90% RH as an example, I compared my local temperature of 11°C to Orlando, Florida, 22°C, on the day of writing. 
Using Tim Padfield’s calculator I put in 90% RH and 11°C, noted the “Absolute Humidity”, and did the same for 22°C. 
The table below shows the absolute humidity converted to the amount of water in grams per cubic metre. The right hand 
column of the table shows the difference as a ratio (17.37/8.98) of the two conditions compared to my home location:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
17 
Saturation
Location
Amount of Water at 90% RH (g/m3)
Ratio
Dungarvan, Ireland
8.98
-
Orlando, Florida
17.37
1.93
You can see that you need to have nearly twice as much water in the air at 22°C to reach the same humidity as at 11°C. 
Or, to look at it the other way round, if your washing was hanging out at 11°C and 90% RH, it will not dry, but if the 
sun came out and shot the temperature up to 22°C, this would reduce the humidity to 45% RH and you would have no 
problem getting your clothes dry. 
This works even though it is the same amount of water vapour in the air! Interesting observation do you not think? Take 
a few moments to understand why this is and if you are stuck, the answer is in Chapter 3 where I talk about Equilibrium 
Relative Humidity, something you will not hear about on the weather forecasts.
Now that you have seen that temperature has a big affect on humidity, and have had a look at some common experiences, 
hopefully you are beginning to get a few new insights. Let us consider an application that you will know about, but I want 
us to look at it from a different perspective. Imagine you have never heard of ‘air conditioning’, in fact, let us imagine it 
has not yet been invented but you have this idea. Your idea is based on the fact that people are feeling uncomfortable in 
humid weather and you are going to invent a machine to turn warm moist air into cooler, drier air and make your fortune.
Using your knowledge of temperature and humidity, or from the simple observation of clouds travelling up and over 
mountains causing rain because of condensation, you have at the heart of your new machine a thing called a ‘condenser’. 
Simply pass the warm moist air through the condenser where it is cooled and releases water to give drier cooler air for 
everybody to enjoy. We will not worry about what to do with the condensed water for now but take out the patent, put 
your feet up and retire happy.
Unfortunately, it is never that easy. Instead of people singing your praises your customers are complaining that they are 
getting skin complaints and having to use large amounts of moisturiser. This is because we, as biological entities, have a 
very close relationship with humidity. Personally I am quite happy on a sunny day at 25 -30°C with middle of the scale 
humidity. I am definitely uncomfortable with these temperatures at 85% RH or higher. This is the ‘muggy’ weather I 
talked about earlier. Living on the coast in Ireland I do not have too many days of the latter to worry about and would 
like a good few more of the former!
At the other end of the humidity scale, I have seen people in offices and in pharmaceutical facilities that have dry, sometimes 
flaky, skin because the humidity must be kept low to protect the drugs during manufacture. An air-conditioned, low 
humidity working environment may not necessarily feel uncomfortable but there are consequences for continuously losing 
moisture from our bodies. I talk more on the subject of humidity and human health in Chapter 5.
The breath that we breathe out is saturated with water vapour, so we lose water on every breath. You only commonly see 
this on cold days because, as you now know, at low temperatures the saturation point of the water vapour is much lower. 
As you breathe out, the air carrying water vapour out of your body cools rapidly. This, of course, causes condensation 
and we temporarily ‘see our breath’ before the ‘mini-cloud’ is diffused into the mass of air around us and becomes part 
of the atmospheric water vapour.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
18 
Saturation
Saturation Vapour Pressure
I have put in this small section, and the section following, into separate blocks because the subject matter is much more 
technical. These two sections do not contain any new concepts or rules that you necessarily need to know about, but it 
may be useful to be familiar with the terms and their meaning. If you look up information for humidity in books or on 
the internet you will most certainly come across these terms. 
This section on Saturation Vapour Pressure (SVP) contains an equation for calculating the SVP, which clearly shows that 
the only variable is temperature. According to the Ideal Gas Law, all gases, because they are composed of molecules that 
have a mass, exert a pressure that can be measured. A common experience of gas exerting pressure is the mass of air 
around and above us that is called atmospheric pressure and reported on weather forecasts usually in millibars (mbar). 
The traditional type ‘aneroid’ barometer that you see hanging on walls uses this pressure to push on a diaphragm that is 
connected to a mechanism to give a reading.
Fortunately for us looking at the properties of humidity in terms of vapour pressure, water vapour behaves as an ‘Ideal 
Gas’. This means we can reproducibly predict and calculate certain parameters. SVP, just as the term describes, is the 
pressure exerted by water vapour in air at the saturation point. 
Here is an equation for calculating the SVP. You can see that the only variable is “TEMP”. : 
SVP = 610.78*EXP(TEMP/(TEMP+238.3)*17.2694)
Remember? You must always consider the temperature!
I have written the equation in this form so you can copy it into a spreadsheet and substitute TEMP for a target cell. Enter 
a temperature in degrees Celsius to get the result for the SVP.
If you use an on-line calculator that displays the SVP, you often see that the SVP is calculated as soon as a temperature 
value is added as shown in thea picture below. The units of pressure in the example below are ‘Pascals’, named after a 
brilliant French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623 – 1661). Dividing Pascals by 100 converts the pressure to mbar (millibar) which 
gives the SVP at 21°C of 2473 Pa a value of about 25 mbar. Compare this to ‘normal’ atmospheric pressure of 1013 mbar.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
19 
Saturation
This difference in pressure can be thought of as the difference in the amount of water compared to the air. If you wanted to 
increase pressure on something you would push harder, “put your weight behind it”, or if you wanted to flatten a piece of 
paper you could put a weight on top. Weight is mass (an amount of something) acted upon by gravity. The pressure or ‘weight’ 
of a gas can be thought of in the same way, the only difference being that a gas pushes in all directions at the same time. 
Because we have such a large difference between atmospheric pressure and water vapour at the saturation point means 
that only a small fraction of water is required to saturate air. Every time I think about this I find it fantastic; our planet 
is just the right distance from the sun (the so called Goldilocks Zone) to allow liquid water to exist; water has properties 
that means only a small amount can be held in the atmosphere relative to the amount of air. Otherwise, given that about 
80% of the Earth’s surface is water and it easily evaporates, we would not be human beings breathing air, we would be 
something akin to fish!
It is this relationship of water and air that drives our climate. Generally, on the global scale, the warm moist air above the 
sea at the equator moves towards the cooler poles, forms clouds that return the water by way of rain back to the sea. On 
a more local scale, evaporation from sea, lakes and land redistributes water. This is called the ‘Hydrologic Cycle’.
You can perhaps now see a big consequence of global warming. As the temperature increases and pushes up the SVP, 
we are not short of water to supply the atmosphere and hence the warnings in the media about climate change and to 
expect warmer, wetter and more extreme weather. The sea will hold onto water more than fresh water because of the 
salt content, something I cover in Chapter 3 on Equilibrium Relative Humidity. However, there is plenty of fresh water 
locked up on land around the South Pole, about 85% of the Earth’s fresh water, and as we hear regularly on the news, the 
ice caps are melting.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

A Wet Look At Climate Change
20 
Saturation
To finish the section and to show how all things I have talked about so far are interrelated, here is an equation that tells 
you the same thing as the equation in Chapter 1:
5+
 
93RIZDWHUYDSRXU
[



693RIZDWHUYDSRXU
VP is the actual vapour pressure of water and so relative humidity is the actual pressure of an amount of water relative 
to the pressure it would be at the saturation point.
Moving the terms around by simple algebra we can calculate the actual vapour pressure from knowing the temperature, 
which gives us the SVP and the relative humidity:
VP	
=	
SVP x %RH
Having calculated the VP, the actual amount of water present can be calculated. This is not a simple formula so I will 
not reproduce it here, but this is how the amounts of water were calculated for the table shown in the previous section 
where I compared my local conditions to Florida. I used Tim Padfield’s calculator, of course, and you can see the terms 
‘Vapour Pressure’ and ‘Kg/m3 in the calculator above. I simply entered the temperature and relative humidity values and 
multiplied the amount of water given in Kg/m3 by 1000 to turn the value into grams per cubic metre.
Psychrometry
Before the days of digital technology and calculators, in order to work out what was happening in situations where moisture 
was involved, people had to be familiar with ‘psychrometry’. This is not to be confused with the entirely different and 
modern practice of “psychometry”.
There are two aspects of psychrometry that I want to mention. One brings in two new terms that you will come across if 
you look into humidity in any detail. The other aspect involves the science behind what happens when going from one 
climatic condition to another.
The Wet Bulb and Dry Bulb
The terms ‘Wet Bulb’ and ‘Dry Bulb’ come from the original, and reportedly, the most accurate method of measuring 
humidity. The ‘Bulb’ part is the bulb at the end of a thermometer that holds the reservoir of mercury. Two thermometers 
are used in the measuring device, called a ‘psychrometer’, where they are fixed side-by-side. One of the thermometers has a 
thin piece of muslin wrapped around the bulb, which is wet with pure (distilled or deionised) water, hence, the term ‘Wet’. 
The psychrometer is waved in the air which causes the water on the wet bulb to evaporate. The amount of water that 
leaves the wet bulb is directly related to the humidity of the air. At saturation, no water will evaporate from the wet bulb, 
whereas in dry air, water vapour leaves the wet bulb very quickly.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
21 
Saturation
Just as water evaporating from our bodies cools us down, each water molecule leaving the wet bulb takes a little bit of heat 
with it and cools the bulb of the thermometer. After waving the psychrometer around for about 20 seconds, the reading 
from each of the two thermometers is recorded. The Dry Bulb is the actual air temperature that, as you now know from 
our calculator, can be used to work out the SVP. The Wet Bulb is used to calculate the VP. From these two parameters 
the %RH is easily calculated as shown above in the section on SVP.
Psychrometric Charts
Psychrometry is used to work out different properties of moisture in air. A tool used for many years by heating engineers 
is to refer to ‘Psychrometric Charts’. A typical application may be to work out what happens when air of a particular 
temperature and humidity from one part of an air conditioning system mixes with air from another part that has a different 
moisture content. There are loads of these charts available for download off the internet, as well as online calculators to 
save having to manipulate charts by hand. I’ve reproduced the chart below supplied by an air conditioning company as 
it highlights some important points.
You would not think, by the look of them, that these charts make it easy for people working with moisture parameters. 
This perhaps gives you an indication of the complexity of the physical chemistry and mathematics of the subject. Note 
that the title in the top left hand corner includes “Sea Level”. Depending on what you are working out, a different set of 
chart data may be required depending on the altitude as this affects parameters such the actual amount of moisture in a 
volume of air (purple diagonal line going upwards from the right). 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
22 
Saturation
I have expanded a part of the chart, shown below, so you can see the sections labelled “Winter Comfort Zone” and 
“Summer Comfort Zone”. These zones cover the range of temperature and relative humidity set out in guidelines from the 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) for air quality within building 
and homes for human comfort. Although not included in the ASHRAE title, engineers also have to consider ventilation 
for larger buildings (HVAC) and for designing homes. Of course, the external temperature and humidity have a massive 
influence on the challenges faced to maintain a satisfactory living and working environment.
The final point I want to illustrate from this chart uses the reddish brown line running upwards and left. If you pick a 
temperature, say 84ºF, let us follow the reddish brown line going left until you reach the “10% RELATIVE HUMIDITY” 
line as indicated by the white arrows, drop a vertical line down and you can read (approximately) that the temperature 
is 76ºF. Back up again and keep following the reddish brown until you reach the “20%” line and drop down again. The 
temperature is 70ºF. This shows graphically what we learned earlier, that as the temperature decreases the humidity goes up. 
Note that on the psychrometric chart we have the terms Dry Bulb and Saturation being used for which you should now 
have a better understanding.
Remember? You must always consider the temperature!
The first time I came across a psychrometric chart in real life was working on a proposal for mapping temperature and 
humidity around a warehouse. The engineer produced a chart to work out changes to the humidity as a result of a change 
in temperature. I discovered a new concept from this engineer that a humidity ‘statistic’, or profile, can be calculated for 
a building based on its size, shape, materials of construction and location. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
23 
Saturation
In Ireland, and particularly on the west coast, buildings are in the front line of moist air driving in off the Atlantic in 
the prevailing Westerlies. These buildings are at least twice as challenged by humidity than buildings in central England.
If the force of humidity can be measured and quantified to this extent, it makes me wonder about all the new houses built 
during the last economic boom. Have they been built to deal with only current climatic conditions in mind and will they 
cope with a greater external humidity challenge brought about by global warming? 
An interesting new approach is to build “intelligent buildings” that will monitor the internal relative humidity and adjust 
the level to within a defined range. This is now possible by the development of accurate and more precise digital humidity 
measurement that can function to feed back to a humidity controlling device. (Intelligent buildings maybe but remember 
the archivist with a liking for fresh air!)
I introduce in the next chapter the last concept you will need before we go on to look at how the properties of water 
vapour influence the world around us.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

A Wet Look At Climate Change
24 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
3	 Equilibrium Relative Humidity
This is the most difficult piece of your new knowledge on humidity for me to explain from common experiences. How 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity (ERH) works is obvious in one way but quite subtle when trying to apply the concept to 
real life situations. To begin with, you will have to imagine invisible water molecules moving around in the air. In the 
previous chapter I talked about “seeing your breath” in cold weather, but obviously water leaves your body in every breath 
and most of the time it is invisible.
The next important point is a fact:
Most materials absorb water to a greater or lesser extent.
The next step in the logic is that the water molecules you are imagining moving around in the air will come into contact 
with materials. We will think about two things that can happen: 
The water sits on the surface of the material.
The water at the surface penetrates into the material. 
Assume that there is insufficient water at the surface to cause condensation and that we are still thinking about the invisible 
water molecules. The water on the surface can evaporate back into the air or it can move into the material. If it penetrates 
into the material, this is known as ‘absorption’. Water that has already penetrated into the material can stay there, or move 
back to the surface and evaporate into the air. Where the water is lost into the surrounding air, this is known as ‘desorption’. 
See this process of absorption and desorption as continually active (or dynamic) with water molecules entering and 
leaving the material. At some point, the amount of water entering and leaving the material will be the same (balanced) 
and we have an ‘equilibrium’.
When the amount of water vapour entering and leaving is the same, an equilibrium exists.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
25 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
So there we have the “E” of ERH explained. Now we use our knowledge of relative humidity from the previous chapters. 
As you know, relative humidity is a way of measuring the amount of water vapour in the air. Imagine we have a container 
that is filled with air containing moisture. We can measure the level of moisture in this container and we call it the %RH. 
Imagine that we now place a very dry material in the container, for example, a desiccant such as silica gel. You know the 
ones: the little silica gel sachets you get with some things that have “DO NOT EAT” on them. Assuming you have not 
eaten the sachet and you place it in the container and tightly close the lid (see picture below), what happens next?
Naturally, as you would expect, the silica gel starts to take the water out of the air by the process of absorption. Because 
the air now holds less water vapour, the % RH will fall and we have ‘dehumidified’ the air, which of course is the function 
of the desiccant. However, this absorption will not continue to zero %RH, as you may have expected, but will stop at a 
particular point. The %RH at this point occurs when we have absorption and desorption at equilibrium. The %RH value 
achieved is the “Equilibrium Relative Humidity”, which for silica gel is usually around 10% to 25% RH. This means the 
desiccated air in the container is being held at 10% to 25% RH.
The graph below shows silica gel desiccant coming to its ERH. The shape of the curve is typical of a material coming to 
equilibrium and in this case the %RH dropped rapidly to below 20% in about 20 minutes and then took several hours to 
finally reach equilibrium. This shows the function and purpose of using desiccants to protect moisture sensitive materials 
from the atmospheric water vapour when the relative humidity is above a level that would cause damage. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
26 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
Some of the modern desiccants we use today started development as products around the time of World War II for use 
by the military to protect equipment from rusting in the humid Pacific region.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
“The perfect start 
of a successful, 
international career.”
CLICK HERE 
to discover why both socially 
and academically the University 
of Groningen is one of the best 
places for a student to be 
www.rug.nl/feb/education
Excellent Economics and Business programmes at:

A Wet Look At Climate Change
27 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
So here we have ERH defined as the relative humidity value measured for the air surrounding a material that is interacting 
with water vapour. By necessity, this has to be done in a closed container to prevent the air surrounding the material from 
mixing with the atmospheric air, which would add to, or reduce, the available moisture.
Before going into the subtleties of using ERH, at this point I will tell you about how my interest, and some would say my 
obsession, in the whole humidity area started. I had just started at a company as their Product Development Manager and 
was presented with a problem that was up to me to sort out. They had recently developed an amoxicillin tablet and were 
about to market the product. Unfortunately, recent batches were failing to meet the required level for one of the analytical 
tests and the product could not be released onto the market. My task was to find out why and fix it.
Our problem was brought about by a change in the ‘monograph’. This is a list of tests that the company has to pass 
before placing the product on the market. The test for water content of these tablets had changed from 7.5% to 6.0%, 
and although the tablets made during product development passed, the most recent tablets were just above 6%. After an 
extensive investigation, and to keep the story short, we discovered that the product development batches of tablets, just by 
chance, had been made during one of the driest weeks of the year. This we discovered from the relative humidity records. 
You might think “problem solved”? However, after dehumidifying the tablet production area, we were still getting 
inconsistencies in water content. Now we discovered that we also had a problem with the water test. The method used 
for this test requires a number of tablets to be ground up into powder and accurately weighed samples of this powder 
are used in the test apparatus. Each powder sample would usually be taken about 10-15 minutes apart by the time you 
perform one test and set up a repeat test. An average result of the two tests is taken, as long as the results agree within set 
limits. It was that last bit about limits that alerted us to another problem. The amoxicillin tablet powder was absorbing 
water from the atmosphere so quickly that if the analyst did not run the two samples in quick succession the result for 
the water content of the second sample was much higher than the first. This also meant you could not grind the tablets 
to a powder and leave it sitting for any length of time.
Many years later, I was presenting a talk on ERH at a pharmaceutical conference in Vienna and one of the other speakers, 
who gave a presentation before me, produced data on a problem they were having in the assay for their amoxicillin product. 
This is where the content of the drug is determined from an accurately weighed sample. They were observing the weight of 
the sample changed due to moisture absorption. Naturally, in my talk that followed, I suggested that they measure the ERH 
of their product and the humidity in the laboratory and determine if, and when, it is possible to safely test their product.
So what was going on with these samples? Here is another rule:
A material placed in relative humidity above its ERH will absorb water vapour from the surrounding air.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
28 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
Here is the graph again of the silica gel absorbing moisture. 
You can see from the graph the point where the moisture uptake levels out. This is the equilibrium point and defines 
the ERH of this sample of silica gel. As explained above, the value of the ERH is the %RH at equilibrium and so, for this 
sample, the ERH is 10%. You can also see from the graph that the relative humidity of the air in the container at the start 
was about 66% RH. Since the humidity of the surrounding air was higher than the ERH of the silica gel, moisture was 
absorbed by the silica gel and this continued until the humidity of the air reached its ERH.
Back to the amoxicillin samples. I hope now you can see what was happening with the amoxicillin tablets. During 
manufacture and testing in the laboratory, the humidity of the surrounding air at the time (also known as the ‘ambient’ 
humidity) was higher than the ERH of the amoxicillin. All the time the product was exposed to the air, moisture was 
being absorbed and this was happening fast enough to upset the test results.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
29 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
To complicate matters even more, whether or not this sort of thing is a problem depends on your geography and, as we 
found out, the time of year. Thanks to the Atlantic Ocean, there is a year round supply of moisture in Ireland, it is not 
called the “Emerald Isle” for nothing! The other speaker at the Vienna conference with the amoxicillin problem was from 
Malta, a small island in the middle of the Mediterranean. In both cases we have the necessary ingredient for trouble, a 
source of water vapour.
It is very important at this stage to understand that at the ERH point, absorption and desorption has not stopped, and 
this is a true balanced system at equilibrium.
To prove that we have a balanced system at ERH is very easy. Remember? You must always consider the temperature!
This is one of the subtleties of working with ERH that can take people a while to appreciate. Again you need to use your 
new knowledge of relative humidity. You know from Chapter 2 what happens to the humidity within a close container 
when the temperature is increased. To remind you, a decrease in relative humidity occurs because the saturation point 
(SVP) directly increases with temperature. 
Also, we know that the reverse is true and the humidity increases if the temperature is reduced. This gives us a mechanism 
we can use where, by changing the temperature, we can adjust the internal humidity of a container. The graph below 
shows what happens:
Closed container placed in a fridge 
In this case we have lowered the temperature and, as predicted by the rules of humidity, we see the % RH increase. When 
the system stabilises at the new lower temperature we get, as expected, a new % RH in the empty container. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
30 
Equilibrium Relative Humidity
Consider what would happen to a material that was present in the container. As the % RH increases to adjust to the drop 
in temperature, the material will start to absorb moisture when the humidity goes above its ERH. 
Perhaps you can now see how cold and dampness are closely linked. These changes in humidity happen instantaneously. 
There is no hurdle for the water vapour to overcome to get moving. We are dealing with a dynamic system that, when 
the environment is cold, moisture is driven into materials. 
The opposite to the above is also true:
A material placed in relative humidity below its ERH will not absorb water vapour from the surrounding air.
We also have to add to this rule that if the material contains water that has already been absorbed, then at a relative 
humidity below the ERH of the material it will lose water to the surrounding air. An example of this happening taken 
from common experience is shown in Chapter 6.
In these first three chapters, we now have enough tools to explore our world of moisture. In the next chapter, we look at 
hurricanes and use what we have learnt on water vapour and its relationship with temperature.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
American online      
LIGS University 
▶▶enroll by September 30th, 2014 and 
▶▶save up to 16% on the tuition!
▶▶pay in 10 installments / 2 years
▶▶Interactive Online education
▶▶visit www.ligsuniversity.com to 
      find out more!
is currently enrolling in the
Interactive Online BBA, MBA, MSc, 
DBA and PhD  programs:
Note: LIGS University is not accredited by any 
nationally recognized accrediting agency listed 
by the US Secretary of Education. 
More info here. 

A Wet Look At Climate Change
31 
Hurricanes, Typhoons and Cyclones
4	 Hurricanes, Typhoons and 
Cyclones
These three names describe one of the most powerful forces of nature. Which term is used depends on the part of the 
globe they are located. In the Atlantic they are hurricanes, in the Pacific they are typhoons, whereas in the Indian Ocean 
they are cyclones. 
I mentioned the role of water vapour in the Earth’s weather systems in Chapter 2. We have warm moist air rising from 
the seas around the equator and travelling towards the poles. Factors such as sea temperature, the Earth’s rotation and 
prevailing winds affect the movement of this moist air. If a particular set of factors come together over the oceans at 
the equator, vast amounts of warm moist air accumulates and this builds into the extremely powerful storms we call 
hurricanes, typhoons or cyclones. 
One essential fact from my basic research into why these massive storms begin is that the sea temperature must be at 
least 26ºC. I cannot explain why this temperature is so critical. My guess is that by observation of the sea area around 
the origin of hurricanes the one factor that always contributed was this minimum sea temperature. Using what we know 
about temperature and moisture it is easy to work out that the air above the warm sea gets heated and vast amounts of 
water evaporates due to the capacity of warm air to hold this moisture. This mass of warm moist air rises rapidly, begins 
to cool and as it does so, forms clouds.
A consequence of the rising moist air is that because it is rising very quickly it creates an area of low pressure at, and 
above, sea level. Here are a couple of common experiences that may help explain why this happens: When you drink a 
liquid through a straw the common expression is that you are “sucking” up the liquid. There is no actual force of “sucking”, 
what you are doing is creating negative pressure from the top of the straw and it is air pressure that pushes down onto 
the surface of the liquid and forces it up the straw towards the negative pressure.
As a living organism on the Earth’s surface, we have evolved under the force of atmospheric pressure and are not normally 
aware of it as we go through our daily lives. 
On occasions we do have to become very aware of it, as you will understand from this second common experience: On 
rail station platforms that have high speed trains passing through, there are warnings to stand back from the edge of the 
platform as there is a high speed train approaching and often there is a line for you to keep behind. The reason is that 
although most people think that they might be “sucked” on to the track if they are too close, the high speed train is moving 
so fast that a large amount of air is being pushed in front of the train and this creates an area of higher pressure in front 
and lower pressure along the side of the train. A partial vacuum runs along the side of the train. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
32 
Hurricanes, Typhoons and Cyclones
The laws of physics dictate that these areas of high and low pressure cannot exist beside each other and air has to move 
from the higher pressure to the lower pressure to equalise the overall pressure. The faster the train moves the greater the 
difference in the pressure and the faster the air moves into the low pressure area. Pressure from this movement of air by 
a high speed train is easily enough to dislodge a human body from the standing position, and of course you will head in 
the direction of the low pressure area on the track. By the way, the same applies to trucks flying past you on a motorway 
so be aware of this also if you have to stop on the hard shoulder.
Back to the hurricane where we have a mass of moist air travelling at high speed upwards, with low pressure underneath. 
Now you can see that due to air pressure, the surrounding air must rush into the low pressure area and this is drawn 
across the sea towards the centre of the newly forming hurricane. This air becomes heated and loaded with moisture and 
heads upwards. As you now know, this moist air will cool as it rises causing the water vapour to condense, form clouds 
and, as the mass of cloud accumulates, at some point we have rain. 
The clouds and rain are pushed outwards by the rising air around the middle of the hurricane and the cooler air that has 
lost its moisture falls back to earth away from the middle. This falling, cooler air assists in pushing more air at sea level 
in towards the centre of the hurricane. So we have a cloud generating cycle that will continue so long as there is a source 
of warm moist air at the centre.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
33 
Hurricanes, Typhoons and Cyclones
Other key factors come into play now. Rotation of the Earth and driving prevailing winds cause the mass of rising, warm, 
moist air to spin and move across the sea. The one common experience that comes to mind is water going down a plughole: 
gravity is a force that pulls things straight downwards, but water does not simply disappear straight down the plughole. 
The fluid water is affected by the rotation of the Earth and this causes it to ‘spin’ down the plughole. The situation is very 
similar with the mass of rising moist air, and that is why hurricanes and cyclones spin anticlockwise in the northern 
hemisphere and typhoons in the southern hemisphere spin the other way round. You can see the anticlockwise spin of a 
hurricane in the NASA satellite picture below.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

A Wet Look At Climate Change
34 
Hurricanes, Typhoons and Cyclones
Hurricane Isabel 
There is no upwards movement of air in the ‘eye’ of the hurricane and clouds do no form here. The rising, warm, moist 
air forms the wall of the eye as the high winds, known for their destructive force, spin around the outside.
So, the basic driving force for hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones is water vapour. As long as these storms are travelling 
across sea water, they have a source of water vapour that sustains them and has the potential for increasing their force. I 
remember a few occasions hearing on the news that a hurricane has weakened a bit when hitting the Caribbean Islands 
or Mexico and then travelled into the Gulf only to increase in strength before hitting Florida or the other southern United 
States. 
When the storms hit land, their source of energy is cut off and they weaken as their cloud generating cycle is cut off. 
Unfortunately for those individuals caught in the storm’s path, not only are they battered by strong winds, but the storm 
also dumps its water vapour as rain and this could amount to several billion tons of liquid within a short period of time 
as you’ll see in Chapter 9.
Will global warming increase the frequency and strength of these storms? I do not think anybody really knows for certain. 
The occurrence of storms depends on many different factors such that they cannot be predicted. Therefore, we can only 
hope that a temperature increase alone may not lead to an increased frequency. However, using what you now know about 
temperature and humidity, it is easy to see that a warming of the sea surface will heat the air above it to a higher degree 
and, of course, the air can then hold even more water. 
Since it is this water vapour that is the source of power for storms, it is easily imagined that we are going to see larger 
and, consequently, more violent hurricanes, typhoons and cyclones. Watch this space…
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
35 
Health
5	 Health
This is one of those subjects that raises more questions that can be answered at this stage of our understanding. 
Let us start with what can be put into the category of “old wives’ tales”. I am sure many of you will have heard somebody 
talking about the weather affecting their ‘rheumatics’ or ‘arthritis’. People living in cold and damp conditions are, without 
question, worse affected. I remember my granny sitting quietly then suddenly jumping, holding her hand saying “bad 
weather’s on its way”.
So how can forthcoming bad weather cause sudden pain to shoot through your hand, down your arm, up your neck (that 
one from my mum), or across any other part of your body? Medical science is now looking at ‘Rheumatoid Arthritis’ as 
an autoimmune disease. This on the one hand (excuse the pun) makes it even more bizarre that the weather could affect 
your immune system in some way. But, on the other hand, common experience tells us, and your GP knows, that people 
are more susceptible to ailments in the winter months. 
It is a health statistic that more people visit their GPs during these months and more deaths occur at this time of year, 
particularly in the very young and elderly. Our immune system is at a developing stage through our early years and works 
less efficiently when we are older.
I do not personally know anyone who has gone to warmer climes to fend off rheumatic attacks, but GPs will tell you that 
it can give some relief from symptoms. You hear of retired people spending the entire winter months in the Mediterranean 
and some even relocating completely to a warmer and drier climate. Some medical studies have been undertaken but no 
actual mechanism or clinical factor between damp conditions and rheumatics has been found. 
The closest ‘causal’ relationship appears to be that a drop in body temperature is not good news in the elderly. However 
any possible role of relative humidity is still not understood. Part of the problem with these types of studies is the same 
issue that I talked about in Chapter 2, which is that controlling relative humidity can be very difficult in a real life situation. 
My own experience of humidity and health goes way back to my teenage years in Edinburgh. Every winter I would get 
sinusitis and had to have some treatment or another. It became such a problem that I had two operations to drain my 
sinuses. This settled things down for a while, but the trouble started again when I moved to Nottingham. Briefly, in 
terms of the geography, Nottingham is a city with surrounding suburbs and towns all sitting in the Trent Valley. There is 
a notable landmark called the Radcliffe Power Station. The power station is located on an elevation to the south-west of 
Nottingham and its eight cooling towers can be seen for miles across the valley.
On warm summer days you can see the steam billowing from the towers and then it disappears as the water vapour 
evaporates into the surrounding atmosphere. You should know from Chapter 1 why this happens. A different sight is seen 
on damp days and especially on cold, damp, winter days. The steam still billows out but, instead of disappearing, it usually 
heads eastwards and out over the valley. I have seen clear winter days where the low-lying sun was completely blocked out 
by the cloud of steam above the cooling towers. Again, applying the reverse of the argument to the disappearing steam, 
you should now know why this cloud persists on a clear winter day.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
36 
Health
Radcliffe is, not surprisingly being in Nottinghamshire, a coal fired station. Next to the cooling towers are the chimneys 
for the coal-fired boilers. So, not only do we have all this extra moisture drifting across the valley, but mixed in are the 
exhaust gases from burning coal. By EU law these gases must be cleaned before release but there will still be a residual 
level of pollutants.
Back to my health issue. The local GPs at my time in Nottingham referred to sinusitis and related problems as ‘Trend 
Valley Blight’. During my childhood and teenage years in Edinburgh, I would have been exposed to the same type of air 
quality. Being on the east coast of Scotland, we got cold damp air blasting in off the North Sea. 
Edinburgh also used to get bad fog and often gets a sea fog called a “Haar” in winter. I also remember the coal lorries 
doing the rounds and our bunker in the back ‘green’ was filled from coal sacks humped by the coalmen round from the 
street. I was obviously susceptible to sinus problems and the combination of water vapour and coal fire pollutants was 
not good news. 
Incidentally, the current thinking is that the increase in asthma and allergic rhinitis (hay fever type reactions) in the UK 
may be related to pollutants. I would think that it must be of great concern that a general increase in humidity due to 
climate change is going to lead to an even further increase in these problems. I have not been able to work out if climate 
change is going to make the people of the Trent Valley worse or not. 
The situation in winter I would think will be much the same. Will an increase in summer temperature compensate for a 
humidity increase (Remember? You must always consider the temperature!) so that the millions of tons of water vapour 
from Radcliffe station will still evaporate away? I think I need a climatologist for that one.
At this point I should add a disclaimer: as far as I am aware there is no proven clinical link between Radcliffe power 
station and health problems in the Trent Valley region. I hope that keeps the lawyers at bay.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
37 
Health
To finish off my own personal experience related to this story, apart from sometimes being stuffed-up following a cold and 
some mild seasonal hay fever, I have not had any sinus problems since leaving Nottingham and coming to Ireland in 1993. 
However, looking out my window as I type this, and seeing the grey sky and puddles, I am now thinking Mediterranean!
There is one situation where there is a direct causal link between health and humidity. In a hot, humid climate, people need 
to be aware of its affect. Not only in this situation do we have a direct link to health but we can use our new knowledge 
to gain an understanding of the problem. The situation results in ‘heat exhaustion’ due the human body overheating.
As warm-blooded mammals, we have to regulate our body temperature to within quite narrow limits. Most people generally 
know that this is around 37ºC. You also will have heard of “hypothermia” where the body temperature drops by more than 
a few degrees and progressively shuts down organs to maintain supply of blood to the brain for as long as possible. When 
body temperature is raised by a few degrees, this causes stress on our respiratory system and is particularly dangerous as 
the onset of effects are more sudden and can quickly lead to fatalities in people with heart conditions.
Perspiration is our in-built system for cooling down. This relies on water vapour in our sweat evaporating from the skin. 
As I mentioned in Chapter 2, as the water evaporates it takes some heat away and cools the surface it left. A problem 
arises at high relative humidity where the ERH of our sweat is lower than the relative humidity of the surrounding air, as 
we have in a humid climate. In this situation no water vapour evaporates and therefore no cooling takes place. We do of 
course keep sweating more and more as our body attempts to cool itself and maintain “homeostasis” due to our in-built 
thermostat.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
 
  
 
                . 

A Wet Look At Climate Change
38 
Health
The ERH of pure water is 100% which means there is no relative humidity below saturation where water will not evaporate. 
We do not sweat pure water because if we did we would soon dehydrate as our body pumped out sweat to replace the 
loss through evaporation. Our sweat contains salt and this lowers the ERH to about 75% if it was simply pure water and 
salt (see later in Chapter 8). This means that if the surrounding air has a relative humidity above 75%, water will not 
evaporate from our sweat. As the surrounding temperature increases, as you now know, the relative humidity drops and 
when we get ‘hot’ and sweaty the water in our sweat will evaporate off into the air because it has a lower relative humidity 
than the ERH of our sweat. In a humid climate where the relative humidity is high this mechanism for cooling our body 
cannot function efficiently as water vapour will not move from our sweat to the surrounding air with a higher relative 
humidity than the ERH.
As long as you stay in the hot, humid conditions you will of course keep on sweating and the sweat will run off or soak 
into your clothes. Losing sweat this way does not cool you because evaporation is not occurring and all that happens is you 
stay hot and become dehydrated. Unless you do something to cool yourself and replace the water loss, the consequence 
will be heat exhaustion. 
Directly linked with our health is the food we eat. I discuss the consequences of climate change on our food supply in 
the next chapter. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
39 
Food
6	 Food
The amount of literature on the role of humidity in the subject of food is huge. This reflects both its importance and that 
the subject has been studied for over 50 years. This short chapter sets out, as with the previous chapters, to give you a 
little bit more information, but also more than that. My aim is to show you how the ideas and principles around relative 
humidity can be applied for you to come to your own understanding of this very important area.
Climate change and its impact on our worldwide and local food supply is a serious threat to our civilised progress. It has 
in the past and, for sure, will in the future, have random and devastating socio-economical consequences for people in all 
communities. In the first chapter I talked about how global warming causes shifts in movement of water in the atmosphere 
due to its increased capacity for holding water vapour. 
Images of failed crops and displaced people, “climate refugees”, are there in front of us to see in newspapers and on 
television. We also see and hear about the problems farmers have in bad weather when they cannot grow or harvest their 
crops. Of course, we also pay for these natural events in the form of higher food prices. Hidden from sight, and not so 
easy to comprehend, is the subtle and potentially lethal world of microorganisms in our food that are totally dependent 
on humidity and change their growth according to ERH.
Like it or not, our food is not sterile and just like us, comes naturally covered in a range of bacteria and fungi. You will 
know this intuitively even if you have not, or choose not, to think about it, as you can only keep fresh food for a certain 
length of time before it ‘goes off’ and acquires a different smell, along with cultivating various fungi.
In 1957 W.J. Scott published a scientific paper, “Water relations of food spoilage microorganisms”, reporting that he 
had found out that it is not the absolute amount of water present in food that resulted in microbial growth, but it is the 
amount of water that is available to the microorganism. This is ‘free-water’ as opposed to ‘bound-water’ and the free-water 
is measured as Water Activity. The alternative term I have been using for this property is Equilibrium Relative Humidity 
(ERH). This was a highly significant finding for the food industry. It meant for the first time a measurement of the food 
could be performed to determine if microorganisms will grow on it or not. In fact, it was even better than that, as Scott 
published a list of different species and the water activity, or ERH, that must be present for each to grow. It turns out that 
the ERH is critical for these organisms and very precise in that they simply do not grow if the ERH is one or two percent 
below their critical level for growth.
I cannot imagine the size of the impact on the safety of our food that this one discovery must have had over the past 
52 years. Below is a table of ERH values and various microorganisms. Some names you will have heard on the news as 
outbreaks and in adverts on food safety, especially around Christmas about washing turkeys. Familiar organisms are 
Escherichia coli (E. coli) and Salmonella which have a similar ERH.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
40 
Food
Micro-organism
ERH required for 
growth (%)
Pseudomonas spp.
97
Escherichia coli 
96
Bacillus subtilis
95
Clostridium botulinum,  
types A and B
94
Candida utilis
94
Botrytis cinerea
93
Most spoilage bacteria 
90
Most spoilage yeasts 
88
Penicillium patulum
81
Most spoilage molds 
80
Aspergillus conicus
70
Aspergillus echinulatus 
64
Zgosaccharomyces rouxii 
62
Xeromyces bisporus 
61
From: Jay, J.M. 1992. Modern Food Microbiology Chapman & Hall, International Thomson Publishing. New York
So where does climate change come into this story? If we are going to get wetter and warmer weather this, as you now 
know, will push up relative humidity for longer periods. However, microorganisms do not suddenly get up and start growing 
madly. They have a growth lag period to overcome first and then the right conditions for growth in their surrounding 
environment has to be maintained for them to continue growing. Maintaining high humidity provides these conditions 
for growth.
A common experience of this is fungi growing in autumn. In autumn, the temperature drops (Remember? You must 
always consider the temperature!) and the humidity is pushed up for longer periods. This allows growth of the fungi’s 
‘mycelium’, the organic growth phase of fungi that takes place in the ground or inside decaying vegetation. The fungus 
then, in the appropriate conditions for its species, starts the sexual phase of growth and we see the part we call mushrooms 
and toadstools 
Of course fungi can grow at any time of year as long as there is moisture. Carefully inspect the underside of a decaying 
piece of a log, where moisture has been trapped between the ground and log, to see the fungi performing its natural 
function. Then replace the log back into the position you found it to let nature carry on as normal.
Here is one of my favourites that regularly appears in my garden:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
41 
Food
For reasons I cannot fathom it grows along an edge of a concrete slab under the stones that you can see and in the middle 
of a path. Unfortunately, this year I kicked it over by mistake and I hoped that as this is only its sexual organ, that there 
was mycelium or spores still in the ground for it to come up the following year, it did.
So back to food. You may now have easily made the connection to problems that will be caused by climate change. As 
the environment changes, different species of microorganisms will take advantage and they are very good at adapting. 
Generally, wetter and warmer conditions are ideal for faster growth of the microorganisms that cause concern. Some can 
tolerate cooler temperatures but they all need the levels of humidity shown in the above table of microorganisms. Different 
strains within a species may become more prevalent and the longer a microorganism is growing the greater the chance 
that a new strain can arise through mutation.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.mastersopenday.nl
Visit us and find out why we are the best!
Master’s Open Day: 22 February 2014
Join the best at
the Maastricht University
School of Business and
Economics!
Top master’s programmes
• 33rd place Financial Times worldwide ranking: MSc 
International Business
• 1st place: MSc International Business
• 1st place: MSc Financial Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Management of Learning
• 2nd place: MSc Economics
• 2nd place: MSc Econometrics and Operations Research
• 2nd place: MSc Global Supply Chain Management and 
Change
Sources: Keuzegids Master ranking 2013; Elsevier ‘Beste Studies’ ranking 2012; 
Financial Times Global Masters in Management ranking 2012
Maastricht
University is
the best specialist
university in the
Netherlands
(Elsevier)

A Wet Look At Climate Change
42 
Food
Let us approach this from a more familiar and practical point of view. Say for the sake of argument, you do a weekly shop 
for some food and you place the vegetables in the very handy compartment that the manufacturers provide at the bottom 
of your fridge. If you have bought your vegetables packed, do you unwrap them, or leave them wrapped, before placing 
them in the vegetable compartment of your fridge? 
I will leave you to work out what is the effect of bringing a closed pack from the ambient conditions of the shop, to a 
car, house and then into the fridge. Also, remember that vegetables contain water and moisture enters a fridge when the 
door is opened. Whether or not the vegetables are wrapped, they end up in a high humidity environment. As you are 
probably well aware, unless you are scrupulous in both fridge cleaning and management of your food stock levels, the 
cold temperature does not stop those black and green cultures from co-habiting.
Here is the result of a test I did on a fresh loaf of bread
It is a shame I cannot show this in real time as the moisture ‘pours’ out of the bread. 
By the way, if you are wondering by now how I do these tests, I could not find a test system suitable for the type of tests I 
wanted to perform. So, the only option in these circumstances, of course, is to build one! I won’t go into the details here 
but decided that it needed a name and came up with “RELEQUA” derived from Relative humidity coming to Equilibrium.
You do not need to understand the test system to work out what I am leading to next. 
Fresh bread is moist, bread dries out. When you pack a fresh loaf of bread in a sealed polythene bag, its moisture is rapidly 
released and you have the potential for a very high humidity environment as shown in the graph above. Look up the ERH 
in the table above and you will see that it is easily above the ERH for growth of fungi.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
43 
Food
We do not eat a lot of bread and can have a loaf sitting around for a few days. Unless there is absolutely no other choice, 
I never buy a loaf packed in a polythene bag and always go for the waxed paper packaging. The latter type of packaging 
does not of course prevent fungal growth but it does let out moisture and lowers the humidity of the air around the bread, 
assuming that the humidity of the room where the loaf is kept is not too high. 
Sometimes bread on the supermarket’s shelf is cool and, not surprisingly, condensation has appeared on the inside of 
the polythene bag. This could be due to deliberate refrigeration or through early morning delivery and storage when 
temperatures are cool. Either way it is not the best packaging and not necessary in my opinion. There, I have got that 
one off my chest. 
On a very much more serious note, the problems I see with climate change for food are in the supply chain. For thousands 
of years human beings have worked with, and battled against, nature to cultivate food crops. Plants that make up the bottom 
of our food chain are open to attack by weather, disease and animal pests. The one I want to briefly focus on here is disease.
Just as in the area of food spoilage organisms, plant diseases are numerous and their causes multi-fold. Crops with better 
resistance to disease have been development by selective breeding and crop management techniques have provided us with 
a means of growing the vast quantities of food that are required to support the human population. Climate change shifts 
the balance of our control and microrgansims can quickly take advantage. This threat to our food supply is constantly 
monitored at control centres around the world so that action can be taken where possible. One of the key factors in plant 
health is the amount of rain and relative humidity levels. Too much ground water and high humidity is not good for our 
grain crops and leads to fungal attack on the growing plants and serious problems for harvesting and storage. Other key 
crops such as maize and potatoes are also badly affected.
It is not just a case of economics or a nuisance factor, fungal attack has serious health consequences in some cases. There 
is a fungus that attacks coffee beans after the outside husk has been removed. Suppliers of this product should monitor 
the humidity levels during shipping and storage to avoid processing beans that are infected with this fungus. The fungus 
produces chemicals that are carcinogenic so it is best to avoid these getting into the coffee that ends up on the market.
In the next chapter I have picked one example of a food crop where climate change has had disastrous consequences.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
44 
Potato Blight
7	 Potato Blight
I could have put this short chapter quite easily as a section in the previous chapter. My reasons for including a separate 
chapter on potato blight are two fold really; one is that I am living in Ireland and was here for the 150th anniversary of 
the “Great Irish Famine” and second, it is an example of a wake-up call of how climate change can have devastating 
consequences on our health and communities. 
In my chapter on Food, I mentioned the problems that are seen with microorganisms exploiting changes in moisture 
levels, allowing them to grow and attack our food chain. The great famine in Ireland was a consequence of such an attack. 
The potato was introduced into Ireland in the 17th century and does grow very well in the Irish soil and climate. By the 
1800s, most of the Irish population depended on the potato crop, both for income and as the main food for consumption. 
In the early1840s a new “malady” appeared in potato crops that mycologists at the time thought was a fungus. The “fungus” 
caused blackening and then defoliation of the potato plant leaves, turning the plants to mush, as well as making the tubers 
inedible. It spread rapidly during a couple of seasons of bad weather.
Estimates vary, but the Irish population of about 6-8 million nearly halved between 1845 to 1849. A minimum of 500,000 
people died, with some estimates as high as 1 million. Another million people were forced to emigrate. Ireland has not 
since recovered its population back to pre-famine levels.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

A Wet Look At Climate Change
45 
Potato Blight
We are quite familiar with wet weather here in Ireland and obviously bad seasons had occurred previously to 1845. Politics 
aside, different factors came together to lead to this disaster. First, a new strain of potato pathogen had evolved or gained an 
advantage. Remember in Chapter 6, I talked about the ability of microorganisms to grow to large populations allowing new 
strains to come through. Next, the potato crop was a single variety of potato and this lack of species variation meant that 
the blight could propagate freely from plant to plant without resistance. Also, the farming practice was to use the previous 
season’s tubers to start to next years crop and since the “fungus” also attacks the plant tubers, the disease was propagated 
into the following season by infected tubers. Finally, a change in the climate resulted in high persistent moisture levels.
The microorganism causing the problem is called Phytophthora infestans. I put “fungus” in inverted commas because we now 
know that it is not a true fungus, although you will still see it described as the ‘potato blight fungus’. All the reasons why it 
is not a fungus are not necessary in the scope of this discussion, but if you are interested in the story of this organism it is 
described in detail by experts in this area. I came across a very readable article by Gareth Griffith from a highly respected 
source, The Institute of Biological Science at the University of Wales Aberystwyth. The article is called “Phytophthora: a 
blight on Ireland”, published in Microbiology Today in February 2007 and is available for download from the internet.
Phytophthora infestans is well adapted to wreak the havoc that it does. It produces spores that, like fungi, can be transported 
across large distances by the wind. When the spores find a potato plant they germinate on the leaves, but unlike fungi, 
they produce an organism that has appendages called flagella. Equipped with flagella the ‘zoospores’, helped by rain, are 
able to “swim” and infect other parts of the plant including the potato tubers. 
The driver of the infection process is the weather. As you know from Chapter 6 on Food, an ERH of at least 60% is required 
for microbial growth. In the case of Phytophthora infestans, a humidity of 75%RH or more, has to be maintained, along 
with a minimum temperature of 10ºC for about 2 days for growth to begin. Wet conditions in the soil are also needed to 
produce a film of water around the soil particles for the organism to swim through and reach the tubers.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
46 
Potato Blight
Knowing the conditions required for growth, meteorological data are now monitored in blight susceptible areas and 
warnings issued to farmers to treat their crop with fungicide to control this disease. In Ireland, the Meteorological Service 
do not issue warnings before June as the disease rarely appears before that month. As you know from Chapter 1, I monitor 
daily the temperature and humidity in my garden and can confirm for this year that the minimum temperature certainly 
did not hold above 10ºC for more than 2 days in a row until June. 
Here is one of the little synchronicities in life: Austin Bourke (1913 -1995) who became Ireland’s expert on potato blight 
was born and educated in Dungarvan and Waterford City. I am writing this book from my home in Dungarvan. Dr. Bourke 
did his Ph.D. thesis on potato blight and became Director of the Irish Meteorological Service in 1964 and, before that, he 
was President of the Commission for Agricultural Meteorology of the World Meteorological Organisation. 
In 1953 he developed a protocol, or model, for predicting outbreaks of potato blight in Ireland based on meteorological 
data, This model is still use today. During his distinguished career he made significant contributions to the study of 
Agrometeorology and the influence of climate on crops disease. 
Agrometeorology is a multidisciplinary science that studies the affects of climate on the biosphere. If there are any budding 
scientists reading this, unsure in which direction to go with their studies, have a look at Agrometeorology. This is a varied 
and very interesting subject area that is going to become more important as we live through the anticipated climate change 
over the next 50 years and beyond.
After working a bit of ground in our garden in early spring of 2009, I planted three different types of potato, all blight 
resistant but not immune. I was concerned while starting to write this chapter in July of that year that I perceived the 
weather to be very wet, it gave the impression of generally being a “bad” month. I also measure daily rainfall and saw 
that there were only 5 days without rain at some point during the day. 
However, applying Dr. Bourke’s model, which in brief, requires a run of 16 days above 90%RH or 12 days above 90%RH if 
it rains on all days, I need not have worried. In fact, it was only on July 1st, when we had 30mm rainfall, that the humidity 
stayed above 90% for 2 days. On 18 days in July the humidity dropped to less than 70%, and as low as 41% on one day, 
and only on 5 days did the humidity remain above 90%.
I could see that the soil had been damp for most of the month and was not really drying out much, hence the reason for 
my concern. Since we generally rely on our senses, we must be careful about our subjective perceptions of the weather 
and we really need good data on which to base any actions, something I talk about in Chapter 9. 
At the very end of that July, Met Éireann, the Irish meteorological service, issued a potato blight warning. I checked my 
early potato plants and my main crop, which were showing ominous dark patches on a few leaves. I removed these leaves 
and disposed of them in the organic bin. Also, at the same time, a tomato blight warning for the East Coast in USA and 
Western Europe was issued. Clearly a good summer for microorganisms!
There are Agrometeorology stations in countries around the world collecting data to monitor climate and any changes 
to crops. The public does not hear much about these activities but we should all be thankful for the scientists working to 
protect our food supplies. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
47 
Potato Blight
I hope by now that you can see that any increase in moisture levels is potentially very serious. Microorganisms are very 
opportunistic and quickly adapt. It is not easy to stay one step ahead of them and often is impossible. 
July 2009 ended up very wet indeed, in fact, the early summer was the wettest in England and Wales since records 
began more than 240 years ago. County Kerry in Ireland had the wettest July since records began there in 1866 with the 
temperatures holding up about average or slightly higher. 
It is an ironic fact of life that apparently due to the “credit crunch” followed by recession, more people have taken to 
growing their own fruit and vegetables. Ironic, why? 
Due to the wet weather over the summer in 2009, there was concern that blight would spread to people’s gardens and 
allotments and could be spreading from there into the farmers crops. This additional human activity propagates the 
opportunistic spread of the disease and increases the cost to the farmer for disease control and through lower yields. 
Consequently, supply and demand results in higher cost to the consumer.
Obviously I am not against people growing their own fruit and vegetables as I have done so myself for several years. 
However, a level of awareness to local affects of climate change is useful for being alert to potential problems. 
Here is an example of opportunism in these wet times. Fungi, as I explained in Chapter 6, generally show up in the 
autumn because of the climatic conditions. The photo below shows a fungus that grew in the month of July on a pile of 
wood chippings. These wood chippings are courtesy of our local tree man and we use them as a mulch for weed control 
and increasing the organic content of our garden soil.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Get Help Now
Go to www.helpmyassignment.co.uk for more info
Need help with your
dissertation?
Get in-depth feedback & advice from experts in your 
topic area. Find out what you can do to improve
the quality of your dissertation!

A Wet Look At Climate Change
48 
Potato Blight
The fungus was growing under an overhanging plant. No other growth of this fungus, or any other type of fungus, appeared 
anywhere else on the large pile of wood chippings.
The surface of the wood chippings were dry, but, due to a large amount of rain and the moisture retention properties of 
wood, just under the dry surface, the wood chippings were wet.
My interpretation of this scene, through the eye of my obsession with moisture, is that the wood chippings pile was 
continuously losing water vapour because the ERH of the wood will be quite high and generally the atmospheric humidity, 
as described above, was low on most days allowing the moisture to escape. However, the space under the vegetative growth 
had trapped some of the moisture being released by the wood chippings and this localised microenvironment maintained 
a high enough humidity to allow the fungi to enter into its sexual phase and produce the fruiting bodies shown in the 
photograph.
This is the same wet environment opportunism that you see when black mould appears in corners of rooms, particularly 
in bathrooms, where water vapour is trapped. 
Fortunately for us, the high humidity requirements for Phytophthora infestans are quite stringent for it to be quickly 
opportunistic. However, in Gareth Griffiths article, he says there are over 60 different species of Phytophthora and no doubt 
many more are to be found. On top of this, there are thousands of species of bacteria and fungi. In a world of increasing 
temperature and humidity, it is only a matter of time before more virulent strains come through.
In the next chapter, I show how our new knowledge is really an evolution into a new understanding of something we 
have known about for a very long time.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
49 
Salt
8	 Salt
I was in two minds whether or not to include a chapter on salt. The subject certainly has its place in a discussion on 
relative humidity and ERH, but I did not want to get into chemistry or too detailed technical information. I decided 
in the end to include a very short chapter because a common experience came to mind that you may have seen that is 
worthwhile discussing.
Nowadays little paper packets of salt are everywhere in cafes and restaurants but, prior to this, salt sellers were left on the 
tables. I remember specifically during summer days seeing little droplets of water around the holes of the salt sellers in 
cafes. I do not see this at home because I have not sprinkled table salt on my food since my teenage years and when we 
use salt for cooking it comes out of a big jar or we use sea salt from a mill. 
The little droplets on top of the salt seller are due to three things. One is a property of salt called ‘liquefaction’. This is 
a process where the salt keeps absorbing more and more moisture from the air until it turns into a solution of salt by 
dissolving into the moisture that it has taken from the air. Substances do not normally do this as they only absorb a certain 
amount of moisture and at most become damp. The second factor is the ERH of table salt which is around 75%. Thirdly, 
you know from your new knowledge that the relative humidity of the surrounding air must be above 75% for the salt to 
absorb moisture from the air.
You can see the moisture uptake in the graph for a sample of table salt shown below.
Salts behave differently from most other materials that absorb moisture. The ERH of many materials depends on both the 
type of material and its moisture content. This usually means that as more moisture is added the ERH increases. Imagine 
that within the material there are a limited number of sites that water molecules can sit, and as you add more water it is 
difficult for the material to hold onto the water as the molecules move between the available sites. Salt on the other hand 
just keeps absorbing more and more water until it dissolves, but uniquely, up until that point of liquefaction, salt has the 
same capacity for interacting with the surrounding air and the ERH is always 75%.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
50 
Salt
In fact this property of salt is used to generate a relative humidity of a known value. For example if you wanted to calibrate 
a humidity probe at 75% you would need to place the probe in air at 75%RH and adjust its reading accordingly. If you 
prepare a saturated solution of pure table salt, chemically sodium chloride (NaCl), by adding the salt to water until no 
more salt dissolves and the solution is ‘saturated’, the air above that solution will have a relative humidity of 75%. 
The sample of salt used to generate the above ERH graph is nowhere near saturated but still results in an ERH of 75%. 
This is possible with a salt because a little amount of water added to the salt still generates the same humidity as if it was 
saturated. 
Back to the cafe and you now know that on the days I saw the droplets of water, or a short time before, the relative humidity 
must have been above 75% for long enough for the crystals of salt left around the holes of the salt seller to have absorbed 
moisture and dissolve into little droplets.
I like to include a little bit of basic science every now and then, so let me tell you about some other salts you may have 
heard of and their ERH values. Different salts generate different ERH values and you can pick salts to go from less than 
10% to over 90%. We have covered NaCl at 75%. As a bit of background to its chemical name, the Na comes from Latin 
for Natrium and Cl from Chlorum. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
By 2020, wind could provide one-tenth of our planet’s 
electricity needs. Already today, SKF’s innovative know-
how is crucial to running a large proportion of the 
world’s wind turbines. 
Up to 25 % of the generating costs relate to mainte-
nance. These can be reduced dramatically thanks to our 
systems for on-line condition monitoring and automatic 
lubrication. We help make it more economical to create 
cleaner, cheaper energy out of thin air. 
By sharing our experience, expertise, and creativity, 
industries can boost performance beyond expectations. 
Therefore we need the best employees who can 
meet this challenge!
The Power of Knowledge Engineering
Brain power
Plug into The Power of Knowledge Engineering. 
Visit us at www.skf.com/knowledge

A Wet Look At Climate Change
51 
Salt
Other salts you will see listed as ingredients in food include potassium chloride, chemically KCl, the K from Kalium, 
This has an ERH of 84%. KCl is a constituent of Sea Salt and an important salt in our diet. And then there is Magnesium 
chloride, MgCl2, ERH of 33%, used in baby formula and as a dietary supplement. The Mg from the similar Latin Magnesia 
(do you remember Milk of Magnesia?). The subscript “2” after the chloride shows that there is two parts chloride to one 
of magnesium that form the salt. Just as in H2O, two hydrogens to one oxygen. Chemistry lesson over.
Why these salts have a special and specific relationship with water is difficult to explain without a scientific knowledge of 
atoms and molecules. However, human beings have realised this relationship and used it for hundreds of centuries without 
the scientific knowledge we have now. Salt has been used for preserving and adding taste to food since ancient times. Its 
preserving properties are all to do with the interaction with water and the effect this has on the ERH. 
Referring back to Chapter 6 and the table listing the ERH values that allow microbial growth, it was not until 1957 that 
this relationship was discovered even though mankind had exploited this physical property of salt for thousands of years. 
So you can see in this simple example how scientific discoveries provide us with new knowledge and using that new 
understanding we can begin to gain some control over the world we inhabit.
In the next chapter, we see that to take advantage of our new understanding we need data.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
52 
ERH Revisited
9	 ERH Revisited
I thought now that you have read about some real life examples of where the ERH phenomenon is important, I would 
add a very short chapter on looking at ERH in a different way. 
In the last three chapters the references to ERH have been from an “investigational” aspect. That is, let us look at something 
and, using our new knowledge, provide an explanation. Generally, the more we know about something the more it leads 
to a greater understanding of the subject. The next step in science is can we use what we know “prospectively”?
Here is a prospective study of something you may have seen or are familiar with form your own experience or that of a 
family member. A recent initiative in pharmacies to improve patient compliance, particularly in the elderly, is re-packing 
supplies of medicines so that the patient has their daily requirements individually dispensed. 
This study involved investigating re-packing of a well known brand of epilepsy tablets into polypropylene type sachets. The 
intention was to include these tablets that are taken once or twice a day, along with the other daily medication required 
by the patient. A pharmacist was concerned that because the tablets are supplied in a blister pack with thick aluminium 
foil forming the blister pockets, protection from moisture may be important. 
An initial moisture profile was performed on the tablets taken directly from the blisters. Tablets from the blister left were 
exposed open to ambient (room) conditions, as well as being placed in a good quality polypropylene zip-lock bag to 
simulate the re-packing conditions. After 3 hours, moisture profiles were run of the exposed and re-packed tablets. The 
initial part of the moisture profiles, which contain the most significant comparative information in this case, are shown 
in the graph below.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
53 
ERH Revisited
The tablets taken directly from the blister pack have a low ERH that was measured as about 24% RH and, as you now 
know, will interact with atmospheric moisture at any humidity level above this value. This low ERH means that the tablets 
must be protected from atmospheric moisture using a good moisture barrier such as the aluminium blister material in 
which they are supplied by the pharmaceutical manufacturer. 
Exposure to the ambient conditions, which were 60-70% RH, caused a change in the moisture profiles after only 3 hours. 
The ERH had increased showing that moisture uptake had occurred. Naturally, the more exposed tablets absorbed moisture 
more rapidly than the packed tablets. The polypropylene bag gave some protection but insufficient to prevent moisture 
uptake by the tablets.
For the sake of simplicity, only the data from the first 3 hours are shown on the graph above, however, the prospective 
study was continued for 3 days and then stopped because of the condition of the tablets. These tablets are manufactured 
with a film coat around them and after 3 days of ambient exposure the film coat had cracked at the sides due to swelling 
of the tablet matrix. Tablets within the polypropylene bag had continued to take up moisture and had an ERH of 48% 
after 3 days.
It was concluded from this study that these tablets must not be re-packed in polypropylene sachets as physical damage 
will occur and that, based on knowledge of moisture interaction with drugs, could also result in chemical changes putting 
the patient at risk.
This study is a good example of what I love about science. You start with an observation that materials absorb and lose 
moisture until they come to an equilibrium. You gain new knowledge about this property of materials. A real life situation 
presents itself. You devise a plan of investigation. You execute the study and observe data. You come to a conclusion, 
which in this case has averted a potentially serious problem occurring.
How does this tie in with A Wet Look At Climate Change? The tablets are another example of everyday items that you 
may be using. As is the case with most materials that absorb or lose moisture, some are more sensitive than others. It 
is important to know which are sensitive and be aware of the climatic conditions to which they are exposed. Of course, 
these conditions do change as a matter of climate, or through our own handling of materials. Sometimes this can have 
disastrous consequences,
In the next chapter, you will see that having gained all this knowledge and applying tools of investigation, it pays to 
actually remember to use what you know!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
54 
How Much Water?
10	 How Much Water?
A question that struck me when thinking about ERH and running moisture profiles, was how much water is actually 
moving between the air and the material I am testing? I will come back to this specific question later in this chapter.
There is a much bigger question that is important when considering climate change and how much water. We are all 
familiar with, and probably at some time experienced what happens when a lot of rain falls in one area over a short time, 
we get “flash flooding”. In the past couple years we have seen devastating flooding in Devon in the South West of England 
following torrential rain and in April 2011 a month’s worth of rain, 5 inches, fell in 48 hours in Western Scotland.
This was followed in June by large amounts of rain across an area stretching from north-east Wales through the north 
Midlands, Lincolnshire and Yorkshire that sadly resulted in three deaths.
But how much water is 5 inches of rain? To appreciated the massive amount of water this measurement of 5 inches 
represents we need to relate this to something more familiar and easier to grasp. A mental picture and story often helps 
and here is my story of how much water.
Ireland, as you may have heard if you live in the Western World, is not in a good financial state. In order to squeeze more 
money out of the general public a water tax is most certainly going to be introduced. We have a water meter that I only 
discovered fairly recently when one day I went to turn off the mains water to fix a leaking garden tap. The local council 
had re-surfaced the road along the front of our property and had sneaked in a water meter at the same time.
We had been considering a while to set up a butt to collect rain water. As you know from the earlier chapters we have a 
garden and grow our own vegetables. So now there was a financial incentive and rain water must be better for plants than 
chemically treated tap water. I bought a water butt, going for a 110 litre slimline type as I thought it would look better 
than the more rotund 210 litre size as it was to be located at the corner of the house. 
The plan was to use a downpipe that did not drain in to a drainage pipe but emptied directly onto an area of the garden 
that was prone to flooding. Thus achieving two objectives at once, collecting rain water for the plants and alleviating an 
area of flooding. 
I removed the bottom section of the downpipe, offered up the water butt and cut a section of downpipe to end just above 
the lid of the butt. Applying simple mathematics, and using two 45° angle connector sections inserted into each other, I 
reversed the 45° angle so that the direction of the pipe was returned to 180° downwards but now a few inches out from 
the wall. Using one of the connectors as a template I cut a tight fitting hole in the lid of the but. Guessing that the butt 
was made of thermoplastic polypropylene or something similar, I used a heat gun to soften the plastic around the hole 
that I had cut and pushed in one of the downpipe 45° angle connectors to make a secure fit. 
After connecting the downpipe I stood back and feeling really quite proud of my ingenuity and efforts resulting in a tidy 
job, and I took a photograph:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
55 
How Much Water?
Have you heard the saying “pride comes before a fall”, well in my case it was “pride before a rainfall”. The climate in Ireland 
has definitely changed over the past couple of years. We have less of the Irish “soft days” of mist and drizzle and are seeing 
more heavy downpours sometimes just lasting a few minutes and then a short break followed by another downpour.
It was two days after setting up the water butt that three downpours arrived in quick succession lasting only a few minutes 
each. Naturally, and like an excited child, I went out to see how much water I had collected. The butt was overflowing!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

A Wet Look At Climate Change
56 
How Much Water?
Despite all my scientific training, years in project management, working as a consultant telling clients that we must have 
data, to plan the next step and be in a position to start drawing conclusions, did I at any stage think to calculate how much 
water would be expected from rainfall – no! I cannot explain this oversight. I can only say that I took the dangerous path 
of “assuming” that the suppliers of water butts make them at a size that would collect a reasonable amount of water over 
a reasonable period of average rainfall. 
To be fair on the water butt manufacturer they do supply a diverter for standard round downpipes. The diverter is attached 
to the downpipe and diverts water to the butt. When the butt is full, the excess water simply flows down the pipe into 
the drainage system as usual. 
So let us now do the calculations that I should have done in the first place. This will show you the importance of collecting 
good data and the useful insights that can result before embarking on an experiment or project. 

ƌĞĂŽĨƌŽŽĨс>ĞŶŐƚŚŽĨŐƵƚƚĞƌŝŶŐǆĚŝƐƚĂŶĐĞƚŽĂƉĞǆ

EŽƚĞ͗dĂŬĞĂŶŐůĞŽĨƌĂŝŶĨĂůůĂƐǀĞƌƚŝĐĂůŚĞŶĐĞƌŽŽĨĂƌĞĂŝƐŝƚƐƚǁŽͲ
ĚŝŵĞŶƐŝŽŶƉƌŽĨŝůĞĂŶĚŶŽƚďĂƐĞĚŽŶƚŚĞŚǇƉŽƚĞŶƵƐĞŽĨƚŚĞƚƌŝĂŶŐůĞ

ƌĞĂŽĨƌŽŽĨсϳŵǆϳŵ

ƌĞĂŽĨƌŽŽĨсϰϵƐƋ͘ŵ
The amount of water in 25mm (1 inch) of rain is defined as 25 litres per square metre.

ŵŽƵŶƚŽĨƌĂŝŶĨĂůůĨƌŽŵϯĚŽǁŶƉŽƵƌƐсϱŵŵ;ĂĐƚƵĂůŵĞĂƐƵƌĞŵĞŶƚďǇ
ĂƐƚĂŶĚĂƌĚƌĂŝŶŐĂƵŐĞŝŶŵǇŐĂƌĚĞŶͿ

ŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌĨĂůůŝŶŐŽŶƌŽŽĨĂƌĞĂсϱͬϮϱŵŵǆϰϵƐƋ͘ŵǆϮϱůŝƚƌĞƐ

dŽƚĂůĂŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌсϮϰϱůŝƚƌĞƐ
So, there is the proof, in just over an hour, enough rain fell to fill the water butt more than twice. Now I have to “work 
the problem”.
The aesthetics are out the proverbial window and a 210 litre butt is to be purchased. Both butts will be connected using 
the 210 litre butt as an overflow container and I also have an idea to attach a perforated garden hose. This hose is to be 
run along to irrigate a boarder that sits sheltered under the roof soffit and has usually to be watered manually even if it 
has been raining.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
57 
How Much Water?
Time for a “sanity check”. This is not what has probably come immediately to mind and you are thinking that this man 
with a fixation on all things water should go and talk to someone. This is a check on my calculations. If you can find an 
alternative way of calculating the maths to give you the same result or a “ballpark” figure, this gives better assurance that 
your approach is correct and you can rely on the result.
The key premise in my “how much water” calculation is the definition of 25mm (1 inch) of rain is 25 litres per square metre 
and the assumption that my water gauge is calibrated on this basis. So, it would be good practice to check this assumption: 


^ĂŶŝƚǇŚĞĐŬ͗
ŝĂŵĞƚĞƌŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞсϴĐŵ
ƌĞĂŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞсʋƌϮсϯ͘ϭϰǆϰǆϰсϱϬ͘ϯĐŵϮ
sŽůƵŵĞŽĨĂĐǇůŝŶĚĞƌсʋƌϮŚсƌĞĂŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞǆŚĞŝŐŚƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌ
sŽůƵŵĞŽĨϱŵŵŝŶǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞсϱϬ͘ϯǆϬ͘ϱĐŵсϮϱ͘ϭĐŵϯ

ƌĞĂŽĨƌŽŽĨĚŝǀŝĚĞĚďǇĂƌĞĂŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞсϰϵŵϮͬϱϬ͘ϯĐŵϮ
ϭƐƋƵĂƌĞŵĞƚĞƌсϭϬϬϬϬƐƋƵĂƌĞĐĞŶƚŝŵĞƚĞƌƐ
ZĂƚŝŽŽĨĂƌĞĂŽĨƌŽŽĨƚŽǁĂƚĞƌŐĂƵŐĞсϰϵϬ͕ϬϬϬͬϱϬ͘ϯсϵ͕ϳϰϭ͘ϲ
sŽůƵŵĞŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŝŶϱŵŵƌĂŝŶŽŶƌŽŽĨĂƌĞĂсϵ͕ϳϰϭ͘ϲǆϮϱ͘ϭĐŵϯ
сϮϰϰ͕ϱϭϰ͘ϭĐŵϯ
ϭůŝƚƌĞсϬ͘ϬϬϭĐƵďŝĐĐĞŶƚŝŵĞƚĞƌƐ
dŽƚĂůĂŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌсϮϰϰ͘ϱůŝƚƌĞƐ
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

A Wet Look At Climate Change
58 
How Much Water?
The mathematicians amongst you will immediately see that the “how much water” calculations above can be reduced to 
490,000 x 0.5 /1000 to give 245 litres’ but the sanity check calculation shows that the water gauge is calibrated properly. 
Also, it demonstrates in a practical way how rainfall is measured as a volume of water over a defined area. In fact, you can 
use any small container to collect rainwater and knowing the surface area and accurately measure the volume collected, 
then you can convert this to mm or inches of rain and have you own homemade rain gauge.
Just to show you that the troublesome downpours were not a freakish event, in the graph below I have included my own 
rainfall data for January and February 2011. These data tells us that there were 7 days in January and 13 days in February 
where the 110 litre butt would have filled to overflowing.
Having added the “how much water” calculation to my armoury, interesting and valuable insights start to become revealed. 
I mention above the problem of flooding in the area of the garden where the downpipe used to discharge until my recent 
diversion to the water butt. Looking at the rainfall from the 8th-12th of February we can calculate that on the 8th, a vast 
1029 litres of water was dumped onto that part of the garden. In addition of course, the area of ground will have received 
directly 21/25mm x 25 litres or 21 litres of water per sq. metre. The area that floods is about 40 sq. metres, given a total 
of over 2000 litres of water. That was followed by about 1000 litres the following day, 500 litres on the next day, a bit of 
a rest bite of only 100 litres on the 11th and then another big dump of 2000 litres the following day. Hardly surprising 
then, that the ground flooded.
Another factor is the atmospheric conditions at that time year.
Remember? You must always consider the temperature! The daily temperatures were 4.3, 2.8, 4.5, -0.1 and 4.4°C, 
respectively. Applying your new knowledge of the relationship between temperature and humidity, you can see that the 
air will have been quickly saturated and there would be no scope for evaporation to remove water between downpours. 
Of course, it is also likely that it just rained continuously. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
59 
How Much Water?
Let us now go back to 5 inches of rain and try to imagine what that would be like. We can do the maths and we get 
125/25mm x 25 litres or 125 litres of water per sq. metre. Those of you astute enough will have notice that the sum is 
1litre per 1mm of rain, but as they said in school, you must show your workings.
So, a whacking 125 litres on each square metre. I am looking at a tiled floor and a metre squared is about 3 tiles up by 
3 tiles across and trying to imagine the entire contents my lovely slimline water butt, plus a bit more, poured onto the 
square. Then multiply by 4 then by 3 and we have a room under 5 inches of water.
On a bigger scale, let us take as an example the pitch size at the new Aviva stadium Lansdowne Road in Dublin. I chose 
this because I was on the pitch on the 25th June this year at a Neil Diamond concert and perhaps because it is all enclosed, 
it is a large area that I can conceive in reality and visualize to try and get a mental picture. In fact the pitch is 105 metres 
in length and 68 metres in width. 
Actually, this was the first concert that I have ever attended where there was people with Zimmer frames and couples, 
presumably still sober at that time of the evening, supporting each other to get along the road, with and without walking 
sticks. It was a bit surreal. I forget that in my head I’m still about 24, forgetting that I remember Neil Diamond from the 
sixties, as did all the pensioners!
Anyway, back to the maths. Thankfully, with it being an open air concert, there was no rain that evening, but if we had 
5 inches, this would be:

ŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌĨĂůůŝŶŐŽŶƚŚĞƉŝƚĐŚсϭϮϱͬϮϱŵŵǆϭϬϱǆϲϴƐƋ͘ŵǆ
ϮϱůŝƚƌĞƐ

dŽƚĂůĂŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌсϴϵϮϱϬϬůŝƚƌĞƐ
Nearly 900,000 litres or the combined capacity of 30-40 large petrol tankers.  
We have reached August 2012 and just had another very wet July month that included some sudden very heavy downpours. 
Over the past 12 months in different parts of the British Isles there has been devastating flooding. This extreme weather 
has been attributed to a band of high altitude air that flows from west to east around the globe in the northern hemisphere 
and is called the jet stream. The jet stream is running further south for reasons nobody can explain, but the consequence 
is that it pulls cold and wet air from the Arctic over the British Isles. 
The reality for us at ground level is that we are having terrible summers and the pattern of rainfall is resulting in the soil 
not getting a chance to dry out and each heavy downpour is quickly saturating the ground and causing flooding. When 
the sun does appear for its occasional visits, the radiated heat begins evaporating the sodden earth and, as you now know, 
the humidity shoots up with all its consequences.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
60 
How Much Water?
If we scale our 5 inches of water calculation to a city that has very much been on our television screens recently for hosting 
the Olympics, and do the calculation for the Greater London Area, we get an enormous 217,500,000,000 litres of water.
Would this amount of water ever fall on Londoners? The UK Met Office has a page on its web site www.metoffice.gov.uk 
showing extremes of weather and the rainfall page shows that Hampstead in Greater London got 169mm, nearly 7 inches, 
of rain over 155 minutes on the 14th August 1975. So yes, a lot of wet Londoners. 
Reproduced with permission from Telegraph Media Group - Matt Cartoon © Telegraph Media Group
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
EXPERIENCE THE POWER OF 
FULL ENGAGEMENT…
     RUN FASTER.
          RUN LONGER..
                RUN EASIER…
READ MORE & PRE-ORDER TODAY 
WWW.GAITEYE.COM
Challenge the way we run

A Wet Look At Climate Change
61 
How Much Water?
In chapter 4, I briefly covered tropical storms and talked about their power and size but did not relate their destructive 
potential to events at ground level. Now you have added the “how much water” calculation to your new knowledge you 
can appreciate, even be in awe, of what the scene must have been like in Harris County, Texas in the USA on  June 5th-
9th 2001 which was hit by one of the most devastating storms in US history . 
Harris County with an area of 1778 square miles is about 3 times the size of Greater London. During tropical storm 
Allison almost two-thirds of Harris County received over 12 inches of rain in 14 hours, with rainfall amounts exceeding 
19 inches at several locations on the first two days of the storm (Tropical Storm Allison and its impact on Harris County, 
Binbin Chen, December 9, 2006).
I am not a “gloom and doom” merchant so I will not recount here the devastation that affected over half the population 
of 4 million people, but just imagine, or work out for yourself, the enormous amount of water that fell in a couple of days.
Applying your new knowledge of the relationship between temperature and humidity, you may begin to get a feel for the 
consequences of global warming. The chart below form the Climate Research Unit, School of Environmental Sciences, 
University of East Anglia, shows a graphical representation of a calculation that is performed using air temperature data 
from around the world.
The study of weather and climatic differences is a complicated science and certainly not within my expertise or the scope 
of this book. Clearly, over the last 30 years we have entered a phase of slightly increased global air temperatures. I do not 
have sufficient knowledge to comment on the significance this has in global warming and climate change, but, I can say 
with confidence that any increase in air temperature adds to the total amount of water that can be held in the air. Even 
where the temperature increase is only a small percentage, a small percentage of a very large amount of water is still a very 
large amount of water!Next, let us go from very, very large movements of water to very, very small movements.
Next, let us go from very, very large movements of water to very, very small movements.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
62 
How Much Water?
ERH and Water Vapour
When working with moisture profiles and measuring the ERH of materials, often I ask myself, “how much water” is 
actually moving in or out of the material. Another related question is “how fast”. These are not easy questions to answer 
because of the complexity of working with relative humidity. I can see this section of this chapter continuously expanding 
maybe into a chapter of its own as my own knowledge and experience grows in this area.
I will begin with a simple experiment. During demonstrations of moisture profiling with my Relequa unit I use a pack of 
tablets as my test material as tablets are a convenient form for transporting around. These tablets have a low ERH, stored 
in the presence of desiccant and therefore very useful in demonstrations as they will always absorb moisture rapidly at 
%RH values around 50-60% or higher.
In November 2007 I presented a talk entitled ‘Equilibrium Relative Humidity – Active Moisture Sorption by Pharmaceutical 
Products’ at a conference on stability testing in pharmaceuticals. One of my slides showed what happens when a tablet is 
left exposed to the atmosphere. To collect the data for the slide I simply took one of my demonstration tablets out of the 
pack, ran its moisture profile and then left the same tablet openly exposed on a table. The ambient humidity was about 
75%RH and the temperature about 18°C.After an hour the tablet moisture profile was run again and this was repeated at 
2 hours and then after 10 hours. The graph below shows that the tablet straight out of the pack (0hrs) quickly takes up 
moisture and lowers the %RH within the Relequa test chamber. After exposure to a humidity above its ERH (1, 2 and 
10hrs) the tablet continues to take up moisture and the moisture profile curve changes. 
We see two changes in that the curve becomes more shallow suggesting the rate of moisture uptake decreases as the ERH 
increases.
As far as my presentation at the conference was concerned the only point I wanted to make was that ERH is a good 
indicator that physical changes in drugs may have occurred due to moisture interactions. The same data in the context 
of this chapter demonstrates that materials easily take up moisture given the right conditions. The next question was of 
course “how much water”?
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
63 
How Much Water?
Now we get into the very small. The tablet weighs about 120 milligrams and was tested in a chamber with a volume of 
35 millilitres.  Using Tim Padfield’s humidity calculator that I intorduced in Chapter 2, we can calculate how much water 
there is in air at 18°C and 75%RH.
The figure we will use is seen in the Kg/m3 box. This number is the actual weight of water in one cubic metre of air and 
is known as the “Absolute Humidity”. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
PDF components for PHP developers
www.setasign.com
SETASIGN
This e-book  
is made with 
SetaPDF

A Wet Look At Climate Change
64 
How Much Water?
In Tim Padfield’s calculator, the absolute humidity has an inbuilt assumption in order to maintain simplicity. You will see a 
note in the screenshot of his calculator in Chapter 2 that states “natural climate near sea level” which means an atmospheric 
pressure of 1 Atmosphere or 1013 mbar (101300 Pa). This assumption, for our purposes here, makes very little difference 
to the outcome. I checked this using another humidity calculator available from a company called Viasala who make 
a range of humidity measuring equipment. Viasala seem to have some very knowledgeable people and have produced 
a number of technical webinars covering various topics associated with understanding humidity and its measurement.
Using the Viasala calculator, I took one of the highest and one of the lowest air pressure measurements from my weather 
station, 1032 and 997 mbar, and calculated the absolute humidity for 18°C and 75%RH at these two pressures. The result 
at each pressure is less than 2% different from normal atmospheric pressure and is the same difference as 1032 and 997 
mbar from 1013 mbar, showing that we are looking at a straight mathematical calculation that has a factor for air pressure 
included.
Having checked and confirmed that our absolute humidity figure is not overly sensitive to small pressure changes, we can 
proceed. We see from the calculator that, at our chosen temperature and %RH, there is 0.011465 Kg/m3, or converted to 
grams and rounded, 11.5 g/m3 of water in the air. The test chamber is 35mL so the amount of water in the chamber is:

ŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŝŶƚŚĞĂŝƌсϭϭ͘ϱŐͬŵϯ
sŽůƵŵĞŽĨĐŚĂŵďĞƌĐŽŶǀĞƌƚĞĚƚŽŵϯсϯϱǆ;ϭǆϭϬͲϲͿ
ŵŽƵŶƚŽĨǁĂƚĞƌŝŶĐŚĂŵďĞƌсϭϭ͘ϱǆϯϱǆϭϬͲϲ

сϬ͘ϬϬϬϰϬϮϱŐ
If we take it that 1 millilitre of water weighs 1 gram, the above “how much water” calculation tells us that the amount of 
water in the Relequa test chamber at our chosen temperature and %RH would be 0.4 thousandths of a mL, or just under 
half of one millionth of a litre!
This is tiny amount of water and so small you would need special equipment to measure out this amount.
But, we can go even smaller. Looking at the graph of the exposed tablet, we see in the moisture profiles that the drop in 
%RH begins quickly and then gets slower and slower until they reach the ERH point. Logically, the drop in %RH is water 
vapour being absorbed by the tablet and the difference between the starting %RH and the final %RH at the ERH point 
represents an amount of water taken up by the tablet. 
So, “how much water” has moved from the air to the tablet? We know from the humidity calculator that the air started 
with is 11.5 g/m3 and is the actual amount of water in the air at 18°C and 75%RH. Let us take the 10hr exposed tablet 
moisture profile where the ERH was 52.7%. Using the humidity calculator for 18°C and 52.7%RH:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
65 
How Much Water?
We see that the amount of water in the air has dropped from 11.5 g/m3 to 8.1 g/m3 giving a difference of 3.4 g/m3. 
Calculating this difference for the 35mL chamber we get 0.000119g, just over one tenth of a millionth of a litre absorbed 
by the tablet. As percentage, the tablet absorbed 0.099% of its weight.
By performing some simple calculations, we have gained some further insights into ERH. As well as knowing in what 
atmospheric conditions a material will take up or lose moisture, we can work out how much moisture is involved. Knowing 
over what period of time the movement of moisture occurred, we can work out a rate of moisture uptake and loss.
These measurements show the power in having a deeper understanding of ERH as a fundamental property of materials. 
To investigate moisture uptake directly by measuring such a small weight gain in the tablet, we would need to use a very 
accurate and very expensive analytical balance. 
The reality of what I have just demonstrated is that by applying a bit of knowledge we can sometimes take simple 
measurements in science and deduce facts about systems that are working at a micro level.
As my own knowledge has grown in this area, I no longer think in terms of changes in %RH, instead I think of water 
vapour and vapour pressure. I see moisture uptake and loss as movement of water molecules driven by different forces 
and interacting with materials in different ways. In this light, moisture profiles are very interesting. 
In this chapter I included some number crunching, keeping it as simple as I could. The reason was to show you that we 
have to measure things in science, and in life generally. 
Gordon Bethune in his book “From Worst To First” explains how he turned around a struggling Continental Airlines to be 
one of America’s top airlines, He includes a chapter called “What Gets Measured Gets Managed”. Basically they measured 
everything to find out where improvements could be made. Without the data, the management team were working in the 
dark. I have adopted this approach into my own thinking, turning it into the words I say to people faced with a problem 
“that you can only manage what you can measure”.
Learn the skills of measurement, practice and keep an eye on detail. These are valuable if not essential skills for students 
of science and technology, perhaps also everybody else.
In the next chapter, we start with measurement but sometimes the problem is not within your power to manage.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
66 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
11	 Oh Poor Olive Tree!
I gave a talk at a training course in February 2011 and presented some of my own data to show that local climate can, 
and does, change dramatically in a short space of time. The data I chose came from ten days in December 2010 and is 
shown in the table below. 
 
I used these data to emphasise some points about the relationship between temperature and humidity, something that 
you now know about from your new knowledge. There is no real benefit in going over the same points here as I have 
covered these in the earlier chapters. 
Observe though, the dramatic change from Christmas Eve, through Christmas Day into St. Stephen’s Day (as it is called 
in Ireland). This sequence of ten days started with another dramatic change from mild weather to the wintery scene in 
the picture below.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
67 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
Remember in Chapter 2 I referred to snow in our part of Ireland as “rare enough event” and even put in a cartoon to 
make a bit of a joke of having enough snow to make snowballs. Well, that chapter was written in summer, or what we 
laughingly referred to as summer, in that very wet year of 2009.
I also used this picture in my talk to discuss possible problems caused by long term cycles in climate change. According 
to acquaintances from the Dungarvan area, the last time this amount of snow fell was in the early 80s. Nearly thirty years 
of fairly consistent weather with mild winters, then in 2009 there were signs of change where we had a couple of spells 
of very cold and frosty days with a sprinkling of snow. This was followed a year later by the coldest and snowiest weather 
that I had experienced in 17 years on this island.
The tree in the picture, as you may have guessed from the title of this chapter, is an olive tree. I actually only found out 
recently that this is an olive tree. On a visit to the UK, I went to the annual open day at Wisley Garden in Surrey, the 
flagship garden of the Royal Horticultural Society. On the way out, walking around the rows of plants for sale, I saw a 
tree that I immediately recognized.
I had lived with this tree for nine years without knowing what it was. The way it grows held a fascination for me in that 
the young branches grow very quickly and the leaves are small ‘pinnate’ and ‘opposite’ similar to a fern. When the branches 
mature the leaves change to the characteristic oval shape of the olive tree. Pruning off branches causes the tree to sprout 
multiple new branches, a characteristic that presumably makes olive trees good for orchid management.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
68 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
The single tree in the Wisley garden centre had been managed in this way, and that is how I spotted the characteristic 
features of the new growth. A helpful assistant, who was clearly very knowledgeable about their tree, told me it was an olive.
You will see in the picture above that the tree has leaves. This unfortunately was the last time our poor olive tree had 
leaves. There is now no sign of any life at the top of the tree. Ironically, we had only just the previous summer put wooden 
edging around the tree in an approximation to an octagon shape as a feature. So now we have as a garden feature, a trunk!
My little anecdote about our poor olive tree is an example of signs that can be found in nature that are indicators of climate 
change. Our olive tree is fighting back! Over the summer new shoots have appeared low down coming out of the trunk. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
www.sylvania.com
We do not reinvent  
the wheel we reinvent 
light.
Fascinating lighting offers an infinite spectrum of 
possibilities: Innovative technologies and new  
markets provide both opportunities and challenges. 
An environment in which your expertise is in high 
demand. Enjoy the supportive working atmosphere 
within our global group and benefit from international 
career paths. Implement sustainable ideas in close 
cooperation with other specialists and contribute to 
influencing our future. Come and join us in reinventing 
light every day.
Light is OSRAM

A Wet Look At Climate Change
69 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
In the right hand picture you can see the distinctive leaves I recognised on the tree at Wisley. Look up pictures of olive 
trees and you will see how different the mature leaves are in shape and colour.
Fergal, our tree man who lops our bigger trees every three to four years, said he would cut down our poor olive tree to a 
stump and we can put a plant pot on top. However, if our tree is willing to fight back we have to give it a chance. Besides, 
my scientific curiosity has kicked in and I am wondering whether it will survive this winter. What happens when the new 
growth gets bigger? Do we end up with an ‘olive bush’ or a complete mess?
Moving on and taking the risk that you may think this is turning into a gardening book, I have another story from the 
garden that brings us back to the world of moisture. 
Over the spring and summer of that very wet year 2009, we grew courgettes. Having eaten courgettes with nearly every 
meal for about a month and frozen lots of portions of ratatouille, we decided that despite the weather, courgettes were a 
big success and we would repeat the process the following year.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
70 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
In the spring and summer of 2010 the weather pattern was quite different with several days of very little or no rain and 
the occasional heavy downpour, A pattern that has continued into this year, 2011. The courgette plants were planted 
out in May, just as the year before. They grew quite well until late June when everyone of the large leaves got covered in 
powdery mildew. 
Only two out of six of the plants survived with the others succumbing to the fungal infection. Reviewing my own climate 
data showed that, even though there had not been rain, the evening relative humidity rose above 90%RH and close to 
saturation on most days in June and July. At the end of June the day time temperatures were at least 19°C and up to 23°C 
on a few days. The night time temperatures were lower, but held up around 15 -16°C.
These were obviously ideal conditions for the powdery mildew fungus, warm with the relative humidity above its require 
ERH for growth over a significant portion of the day. I think I contributed to the problem by making a mistake. Because 
the air contained a high level of moisture, the soil around the courgette plants looked damp most of the time. Assuming 
that the intermittent rain we had was sufficient for the plants, they were not watered frequently. Although the plants seemed 
to be growing well, they were probably stressed due to lack of water and this reduces their immunity to fungal attack.
My whole approach to this situation was unscientific and too ‘subjective’. Just consider my language in the previous 
paragraph that shows the weakness in my thinking. The words “looked”, “assuming” and “seemed” have not to be used at 
all, or used with caution and qualification, in analysing problems. In science, you aim to be ‘objective’ as possible.
Applying objectivity to find a solution is not always easy and you have to first ‘define the problem’. As you may have 
perceived, we have not fully defined the problem in this case as we do not ‘know’ exactly why the courgettes were attacked 
by mildew. So we have to go to the next level, which is our ‘best guess’. On this basis, to prevent stressing the plants and 
retain soil moisture, we decided that for the next year’s courgettes a wood chip mulch would be put around the base of the 
plants and generally over the growing patch. You may remember from Chapter 7 that we have plenty of wood chippings 
available thanks to our local tree man.
This is not a complete solution as it is still only our ‘best guess’. To get control of the problem we have to apply the maxim 
from the previous chapter, “What Gets Measured Gets Managed”. The unknown parameter in our best guess is soil moisture. 
What happens to soil moisture when a woodchip mulch is placed on top of the soil? Since the mulch will be around the 
base of the plants, will the courgettes get enough water from rainfall? 
Obviously, and logically, we need to measure soil moisture. The most common and cheapest soil moisture meters have a 
scale that shows “wet”, “damp” and “dry”. This is not good enough for our purpose in this case. We need better accuracy 
and that means we need numbers to give us data. I purchased a digital soil moisture meter that gives readings as a 
percentage of moisture level.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
71 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
I picked a dry day in mid-June and armed with my new measuring device headed into the garden. Comparative data is 
always useful, so as a working procedure, I decided to measure soil moisture of some exposed earth next to the courgette 
patch as well as within the patch itself. Consistency in executing procedures is also good, so I applied three key elements 
to the procedure that I considered important: 
1.	 Testing the same patch of exposed earth and the same (first three) courgette plants closest to the exposed 
earth.
2.	 The moisture probe that is inserted into the soil is graduated along its length, so the probe was to be inserted 
to the same depth for each measurement.
3.	 Taking measurements at the same three locations in the exposed earth and at the base of each of the 
courgette plants stem. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
360°
thinking.
© Deloitte & Touche LLP and affiliated entities.
Discover the truth at www.deloitte.ca/careers 

A Wet Look At Climate Change
72 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
Here are the range of results from the dry day:
(;326('($57+ 

%$6(2)3/$17








The woodchip mulch appears to be having the desired affect with the underlying soil around the plants retaining a slightly 
higher amount of water.
Courgettes were watered and left overnight and there was no rain:








The exposed soil has dried a little and there is a significantly higher moisture level around the plants from watering the 
previous evening. I do not show the data here but this level of moisture persisted throughout the dry day.
Focussing now on my concern about what happens when it rains, the change in the weather pattern to more frequent 
heavy downpours gave the opportunity to measure the effect of rain on soil moisture in one afternoon. Here are the range 
of results from two downpours in quick succession, totalling 5mm:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
73 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!








Followed by another two downpours in quick succession resulting in a total of 10mm in a couple of hours:








The exposed earth in the vegetable growing area of ground is deeply dug and drains well so does not easily become 
saturated. In comparison, the soil moisture of the earth in one of the flower boarders that is only disturbed at the surface 
when weeded, was 80 - 90 %. The significant result is the difference between the exposed earth and the soil around the 
courgette plants.
Between the first and second measurements, the moisture content of the exposed earth does not change significantly, 
perhaps being slightly wetter. In contrast, it is not until after the second downpour that the soil around the courgettes 
reaches the moisture level of the exposed earth. My conclusion from this short investigation is that the woodchip mulch 
can prevent rain reaching the plants and you cannot ‘assume’ that on a day of moderate rain that the plants do not need 
to be watered.
After two dry days, we were back to where we started:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
74 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!








I hope this example has shown you that by adopting a simply thought, “What Gets Measured Gets Managed”, you have a 
powerful tool for dealing with problems. Also, where there is a change in a system, such as climate, we need to measure 
and generate data in order to give us any chance of drawing the best conclusion.
In case you are wondering, this year we have six out of six beautiful courgette plants, pictured below. In the immediate 
foreground you will see the exposed earth where I took the soil moisture measurements and in the rest of the picture 
the woodchip mulch.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
We will turn your CV into 
an opportunity of a lifetime
Do you like cars? Would you like to be a part of a successful brand?
We will appreciate and reward both your enthusiasm and talent.
Send us your CV. You will be surprised where it can take you.
Send us your CV on
www.employerforlife.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
75 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
I am finishing off this chapter with a third indicator and consequence of climate change. In the top left hand corner of 
the picture above is a buddleia, also known as the butterfly tree. We have a few buddleias around the garden and every 
year we get lots of butterflies coming to visit, mainly Red Admirals, Painted Lady’s and Peacocks.
Here is a Red Admiral feeding:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
76 
Oh Poor Olive Tree!
Except this year, when there have only been one or two butterflies in the garden, and it may be the same one flying around 
as far as I know. Concerned about this I contacted a very helpful chap called Michael on the Waterford Wildlife website 
and this is the reply quoted from his email “this is not a good butterfly year. It seems that the month of May was too good 
and many butterflies thought it much later, bred, laid eggs that hatched into larvae that could not find enough to eat as 
the larval food plants were not advanced enough. So, populations are down this year.”
Michael assured me that the butterflies will return. I certainly hope so, because as a different type of present last Christmas, 
I asked for, and got, a Butterfly Hibernation Box- it’s kind of redundant at the moment. 
In the next chapter we come back to ERH in a surprise observation.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
77 
Oil + Water = ?
12	 Oil + Water = ?
In the last three chapters we have looked at how in science we can go beyond simple observation and accumulation of 
knowledge into applications. My first degree in science was in Applied Chemistry and I think the applied aspect has 
defined my whole approach to science from that point onwards. 
Using real life situations and problems, I hope to have shown you the importance of “observation” and how it is linked 
to “measurement” to give us the “data” we need to “interpret” a situation to “understand” the “how” and “why” giving 
us new “knowledge” to solve a problem and/or lead to the next hypothesis.
The key words highlighted in bold in the above paragraph are the fundamentals of the analytical scientific approach known 
as “reductionism”. They are also the fundamentals behind “what gets measured gets managed”. This forensic approach has 
been tried and tested over thousands of years by us humans, and it works.
However, it is not the only way science works. 
Our fascination with the world is that it is full of surprises. Just when we think we know everything there is worthwhile 
knowing, something new and interesting comes along. Knowing this simple rule of life, I try as much as possible to keep 
an open mind and often ask myself “now why did that happen?”, the implication of course is that I did not expect that 
particular thing to occur.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
AXA Global 
Graduate Program
Find out more and apply

A Wet Look At Climate Change
78 
Oil + Water = ?
This chapter is about one of those little surprises that took me into an area of “new knowledge”.
You probably have heard sayings around oil and water; that “they do not mix”, or, “pouring oil on troubled water”; the 
former usually about two people that do not get on and the latter in a situation where things need calming down. The 
basis of these sayings is that it is commonly thought that oil and water are so different as to be opposites. Very basic 
chemistry texts tell you that oil is hydrophobic and will not mix with water.
I think sayings can be useful in particular circumstances and, as you may have noticed, I have my favourites; “ you can 
only manage what you can measure” (my version); “if it works use it” and the related “if it ain’t broke don’t fix it” 
(engineer’s saying); we can solve this problem “with a bit of luck and a fair wind” (positive thinking).
The concept of oil and water not mixing is very pervasive in human culture. You are probably well familiar from common 
experience of situations where you know that they do not mix. In order to mop up oil spills and wash a surface clean 
we use ‘surfactant’ materials, such as, soaps and detergents, that can interact between the oil and water. Where we have 
forced oil and water to mix in a suspension we use ‘emulsifiers’ that will stabilise the mixture as an emulsion for a while, 
but these often eventually “split” back into the component parts.
The point of this preamble into sayings and oil and water is that the concept was firmly implanted in my own mind. One 
of the dangerous aspects of sayings is that they can easily become embedded in our thinking that we play them back like 
a recording without really thinking about the situation. Consequently, it came as a bit of a surprise when I stumbled upon 
a situation where water was actively mixing with oil without any human interference.
This gives me an opportunity to say a bit more about the main character of this book –Water.
We are all familiar with the name H2O, which is a representation meaning there are two hydrogen atoms to one oxygen 
atom in each molecule of water. This is the ‘formula’ of water and the notation, H2O, is a convenient way to work with 
molecules in chemistry.
Other ways are use to represent molecules and you will be familiar with these as are they are commonly used. Here are 
two more ways of representing the water molecule:
,


K
,
^ƚƌƵĐƚƵƌĂů

ĂůůĂŶĚ^ƚŝĐŬ
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
79 
Oil + Water = ?
In reality, the atoms are not connected by solid structures as shown in the structural formula and the ball and stick model. 
The chemical bonds holding the atoms together are a space occupied by two electrons. These negatively charged entities 
move around in the space between the positively charged nuclei forming the molecular bond.
The two electrons that form the bond are not always shared equally between the nuclei. This is the case with water, where 
the oxygen nucleus attracts the electrons more strongly than the hydrogen nucleus. This imbalance of sharing results in 
there being overall a slightly negative charge on the oxygen and slightly positive charge on the hydrogen.
A term for separation of charge is ‘polar’, as in a magnet. or the North and South Poles on Earth. In the water molecule, the 
small separation of charge in the chemical bond, making it slightly positive at one end and slightly negative at the other, 
is called a dipole. Substances that mix well with water tend also to have polarity and contain charged atoms or molecules.
Most of the common oils we come across in everyday life are hydrocarbons. These oils are chains of carbon atoms with 
hydrogen atoms bonded to the individual carbons in the chain. The structure can range from simple chains to branched 
chains and combination of chains connected in special ways. 
Unlike water, the hydrocarbons are non-polar, and because they do not contain charged atoms, they do not mix readily 
with water. Hence, the origin of the saying “oil and water don’t mix” is based on good chemical grounds.
My justification for running through this basic chemistry is to establish with you my belief beyond any reasonable doubt 
that water and oil do not mix. 
I had reason to investigate olive oil using my Relequa test system. An explanation why I was doing this may be forthcoming 
in a future update of this chapter if the study works out well, but for now just go with the flow.
Here is the structure of olive oil:
The molecule is nineteen times bigger in its molecular weight than water. The right hand side part with the oxygen atoms 
is glycerol, which is attached to three fatty acids forming a molecule that is in the general class called, ‘triglycerides’. Two 
of the fatty acid chains are Oleic Acid which has an “unsaturated” bond (double bond) in the middle of two chains of 
carbon atoms either side. The other fatty acid is Palmitic Acid, a saturated fatty acid, which has a straight run of 15 carbon 
atoms all bonded to and surrounded by hydrogens.
Any potential polarity from O – H bonds originally present in the glycerol part, or in the acid part of the fatty acids, was 
lost when the olive oil molecule was formed.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
80 
Oil + Water = ?
Two substances, water and olive oil, both liquids at room temperature but chemically very different. 
I took a bottle of olive oil from the kitchen cabinet and ran a sample in my Relequa unit in just the same way as I had 
done with bread in Chapter 6.
Here is what happened:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
ibili
because 
e Graduate Programme  
for Engineers and Geoscientists
Month 16
I was a construction
supervisor in 
the North Sea 
advising and 
helping foremen 
solve problems
I was a
he
s
Real work 
International opportunities 

ree work placements
al 
Internationa
or

ree wo
I wanted real responsibili 
 I joined MITAS because 
www.discovermitas.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
81 
Oil + Water = ?
A surprise “observation” that the olive oil appeared to be releasing moisture. At the time I was probably expecting nothing 
much to happen. I thought the oil would just sit there minding its own business. 
Concerned that this may be some sort of artefact, I moved to the next stage of “measurement”. First, I repeated the test 
and got the same result, essential to know that it was repeatable. Next, I took an unopened bottle of olive oil, which 
happened to be from a different manufacturer, and again got a similar release of moisture.
Curiosity riding high and into the fun part of science, I took a trip the supermarket and bought old and new lots of olive 
oil from the same manufacturer based on the best before dates. This is not statistically sound because I only ran one lot 
of each, but the new lot did have a lower ERH than the older lot and it was also the lowest ERH of all the oils I tested. 
This also was repeatable.
If the older oil had gained moisture over time and was this driven by humidity, did this mean that olive oil displays a true 
moisture equilibrium in the same way as solid materials? The implications are that if we measure the ERH it will obey 
the same rules for moisture uptake and loss as described in Chapter 3.
Of course, this is easily measured and the result is shown below:
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
82 
House Mites
Now I was really starting to get some useful “data” and it was telling me, despite my ingrained belief that water and oil do 
not mix. Here was evidence that an oil had a capacity to hold water to the extent that moisture release can be detected. This 
was further supported by observing actual moisture uptake. Both of these activities continued until the same equilibrium 
point was reached and we can “interpret” these data as the oil showing the characteristics of ERH.
Having collected some data and proved to myself by repeated analysis that olive oil has an ERH, the next step was to start 
a process that could lead me to “understand” the science behind the observations.
There is a golden rule in problem solving which says, ”first define the problem”. 
Using the data I had generated, I could see that I needed to search for information on what is known about “interactions” 
of oil and water. If you simply search on the internet for “oil and water” you get a lot stuff about them not mixing and 
lava lamps and so on. 
Using my knowledge of water vapour and vapour pressure, I was able to focus on physical interactions and discovered 
Henry’s Law. If we covered this in my chemistry degree, I had forgotten to the extent that I would swear that I had never 
heard of Henry’s Law. However, the law is briefly mentioned in my copy of Linus Pauling’s General Chemistry book, 
which I occasionally use as a reference text. This law, apparently, is generally applicable to materials and in 1803 William 
Henry taught us that:
At a constant temperature, the partial pressure of the gas phase of one component of a solution is, at equilibrium, proportional 
to the concentration of the component in the solution.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
83 
House Mites
To my mind, and I hope you agree, this precisely describes the above observation of olive oil and its ERH, where water 
is the component in the gas phase. 
The driving force for a gas to enter a solution is the pressure of the gas above the liquid. This is exactly how fizzy drinks 
are made, the fizz (CO2), is release when you reduce the pressure by opening the can or bottle. In the olive oil ERH graph 
above, the pressure is seen as %RH (see Chapter 2 and SVP). The %RH decreases as the oil interacts with, and takes up 
water molecules (upper profile). Conversely, %RH increases as the vapour pressure of the water present in the oil drives 
water molecules into the air (lower profile). 
Now that we have established the “how” we should test this by experiment. Henry’s Law also tells us that if we change 
the concentration of the dissolved gas the partial pressure will also change. 
I took 20 ml of the ‘new’ olive oil and added a few drops of water. Shook the mixture and let the emulsion that formed 
settled so that I had oil with a small amount of water sitting in the bottom. Taking care to sample the oil from just below 
the liquid’s surface, and well away from the water, I ran its moisture release profile along with the starting oil as a control.
The release profiles are shown in the graph below:
By simple observation of the graph you can see that the ERH is definitely influenced by having additional water present. A 
reasonable conclusion is that the amount of water “dissolved” in the oil has increased resulting in a higher vapour pressure, 
and hence, a higher equilibrium point as determined by %RH is reached. This is in complete agreement with Henry’s Law.
Now we come to what is always the most difficult question, “why”. To provide a comprehensive answer we would need 
to know why two quite physically diverse substances interact in the way they do as shown above.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
84 
House Mites
The disappointing outcome of this chapter for you, but of immense interest for me, is that I simply do not know the “why”. 
In the context of this book, one top line outcome is that olive oil is another substance that freely interacts with water 
vapour. Local climate changes where olive oil is being produce and handled potentially could affect the quality of the oil. My 
ongoing investigations show that olive is not alone in this behaviour and water interaction occurs with other types of oil. 
Perhaps in the next update of this book the “why” might tell us that moisture interaction with oils is to be expected and 
instances where it does not occur, will be become the interesting ones.
In the next chapter, we will look at how interactions of materials with water vapour has been exploited in the natural world.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT
mim.admissions@ie.edu
Follow us on IE MIM Experience
www.ie.edu/master-management
#10 WORLDWIDE
MASTER IN MANAGEMENT 
FINANCIAL TIMES
55 Nationalities
in class
5 Specializations
Personalize your program 
Length: 1O MONTHS
Av. Experience: 1 YEAR
Language: ENGLISH / SPANISH
Format: FULL-TIME
Intakes: SEPT / FEB
• STUDY IN THE CENTER OF MADRID AND TAKE ADVANTAGE OF THE UNIQUE OPPORTUNITIES
  THAT THE CAPITAL OF SPAIN OFFERS
• PROPEL YOUR EDUCATION BY EARNING A DOUBLE DEGREE THAT BEST SUITS YOUR
  PROFESSIONAL GOALS
• STUDY A SEMESTER ABROAD AND BECOME A GLOBAL CITIZEN WITH THE BEYOND BORDERS
  EXPERIENCE
93%
OF MIM STUDENTS ARE
WORKING IN THEIR SECTOR 3 MONTHS
FOLLOWING GRADUATION

A Wet Look At Climate Change
85 
House Mites
13	 House Mites
Like it or not, we all share our lives with these little darlings shown in the picture below. They may look like some sort of 
alien armoured vehicle from a sci-fi video game, but they are ideally evolved to share homes with us in a very special way. 
Again, this is another chapter that is interrelated with others and could very well be fitted in as a section in the chapter on 
Human Health. The faeces and carcasses of house mites cause allergic reactions in people leading to asthma attacks who 
are sensitive. Why include these microscopic creatures in a chapter of their own? The answer is that they possess a special 
feature that is the epitome of the principles that I hope you have learned throughout this book, “our new knowledge”, 
as I referred to it in the previous chapters. So, if you’ve jumped to this chapter, you need to read Chapters 1, 3 and 8 to 
understand what is coming next.
Species that need to wait until a particular set of conditions come along, as described for potato blight in chapter 7, or are 
waiting for a particular host to pass by, have to adopt a strategy that involves a dormant phase. An easy one to understand, 
and familiar to most people, is fungi that form resistant spores that protect it against unfavourable conditions. 
Fleas and ticks enter a low metabolic dormant phase and it is known for people to pick up fleas from houses that have 
not had occupants for many years. Fleas and ticks, once they have found their host, obtain their water requirements by 
drinking blood from their host. House mites on the other hand are not parasites but feed off dead skin shed from our 
bodies. So how do they get water? They cannot just go and drink some, and dead skin is extremely dry. 
Millions of years ago the ancestors of house mites evolved a special gland that uses salts to absorb moisture from the 
atmosphere. This gland known as the ‘supracoxal’ produces a concentrated solution of the salts KCl and NaCl. As you know 
from Chapter 8, the ERH of these two salts are 84% and 75 % respectively. This means that when the relative humidity 
of the air is 75% and above, the salt solution will absorb moisture and this is how the house mite “drinks”. A canal that 
carries the salt solution runs from the supracoxal gland to the mite’s gut where the water is absorbed from the salt solution.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
86 
House Mites
Why this salt solution contains both KCl and NaCl is probably not known. My guess is a mite evolved that cohabited with 
early mammals in a warm humid climate and had evolved a mechanism for absorbing moisture based on KCl. When 
early humans migrated northwards and adapted to seasonal changes the mite had to adapt also to be able to scavenge 
moisture in a climate that is not humid most of the time. One simple way for the mite to do this is to produce KCl solution 
containing another salt with a lower ERH. As you know from Chapter 8, NaCl has an ERH of 75% and since NaCl is a 
common salt in biological systems, using this salt is a logical way for the mite to have evolved to pick up moisture at a 
lower humidity. Also, the house mite has a ready source of NaCl from its diet of dried skin that will have an amount of 
NaCl on it from human sweat.
My simple explanation cannot be the whole story because that means house mites would need at least 75% humidity to 
grow. All reports I have found state that house mites need a humidity of 65 -70% and some as low as 60%. Even allowing 
for an inaccuracy in measuring % RH, this does seem a bit low. There may be some other factor or substances involved, 
such as, a protein or possibly sugars combined with a proteins known as ‘glycoproteins’ that may be lowering the ERH of 
the secreted solution from the supracoxal gland.
I have not written this explanation to provide an answer to the relationship of the house mite and humidity. It is to show 
you how, by using your new knowledge on humidity and a applying a bit of thought and imagination, you can come up 
with ideas and theories on how things may be working in all sorts of situations. This could lead you to all sorts of new 
discoveries.
When we are having to tackle the problems brought about by climate change we should look towards nature for possible 
answers. After all, millions of plants and animals have been adapting to climate change for millennia before we appeared 
on Earth.
Let us take as an example the house mite mechanism for picking up moisture and use the observation that the solution 
from the supracoxal gland contains a mixture of salts.
 So what does happen when you mix a salt of lower ERH with a one of a higher ERH? The moisture profiles below show the 
result of combining NaCl (ERH 75%) with MgCl (ERH 33%) in different proportions (75:25, 50:50, and 25:75, respectively).
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
87 
House Mites
The answer is that the resulting ERH is somewhere between the ERH values of the individual salts and depends on 
the relative amounts of each one present. This demonstrates one of the fundamental properties of Equilibrium Relative 
Humidity, that the observed value depends on the composition of the material in addition to its physical properties for 
interaction with water vapour.
Thinking along these lines takes you one step further and it is easy to see how you can generate almost any relative 
humidity you want by mixing salts and adding some water. Just as in the case of the house mite, you would use salts with 
common atoms, or to use the chemical term, “ions”, to prevent chemical reactions. In the graph above, both of the salts 
used contain chloride ions, as does the salt solution from the supracoxal gland.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
88 
House Mites
One way of controlling house mites is to lower the relative humidity to less than 50%. At this moisture level the mites 
cannot absorb water as it is below the ERH of the KCl/NaCl salt solution and some reports claim that the mites may 
dehydrate. This does not get rid of them completely as a proportion of the mite population will enter a dormant phase 
until the relative humidity increases to 65-70%, allowing the mites to thrive again.

I saw one report on the internet that climate change will lead to an 80 fold increase in house mites as the climate becomes 
wetter and warmer. Actually, the temperature aspect I have not covered here, but there is an optimum temperature for 
house mites of 25°C. This is fortunate because, as you now know, it is possible to get high humidity in cold weather just 
as a function of the low temperature (Remember? You must always consider the temperature!). In fact some people get 
‘seasonal allergic rhinitis’, just like hay fever, but instead from pollen, this is due to house mite populations increasing as 
we enter into the warmer spring to summer season.
Returning to looking at the natural world for new ideas, as I was writing this chapter another little synchronicity cropped 
up. I subscribe to an engineering website called Globalspec that I have set up so I receive email alerts to new developments 
in measuring humidity. Literally, I was just starting one of the paragraphs above on observing nature for solving moisture 
problems, when an alert came in and one of the headings was “Drinking Water from Air Humidity”. 
Researchers at the Fraunhofer Institute for Interfacial Engineering and Biotechnology announced a process for extracting 
moisture from air based on “hygroscopic brine”. The idea is have salt solution running down a tower absorbing moisture 
as is does so and then evaporate the trapped water under a partial vacuum. Just in case you do not know, you can ‘boil’ 
water at room temperature by lowering the surrounding pressure. 
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
89 
House Mites
I used to do this using a syringe with a little water in the barrel, putting my finger over the end and pulling the plunger. 
You can see the water bubble and the ‘steam’ condense on the inside of the barrel. In the Fraunhofer system, they heat the 
salt solution to some extent to help evaporation. When the absorbed water has evaporated off for condensing to drinking 
water, the salt solution is recycled to the top of the tower. The system is driven by a solar powered pump.
The article describing this system states that the average humidity of the Negev desert in Israel is 64% and each cubic 
metre of air contains 11.5ml of water. Guess what they did not remember to include? As you should know by now, the 
temperature. They should have also stated an average temperature of about 21°C. If you managed to download a humidity 
calculator, you can check this; 64%RH gives 0.0117 kg/m3 water vapour at 21°C (assumes sea level). Take 1ml weighs 1g 
and multiply by 1000 gives you 11.7ml of water per cubic metre.
I really like this innovative thinking and I wish the Fraunhofer Institute every success in their new development. I contacted 
the institute to find out what salt or combination of salts they are using, but as the project is in a very early stage, they 
quite rightly did not want to release any more details. 
My imagination got going and I could see a scaled down version of this moisture capture system for houses to lower the 
humidity where house mites and condensation is a problem. This can be done already with dehumidifiers, but these use 
mains electricity whereas, the Fraunhofer system is solar powered. I can also see batteries of the moisture capture towers 
along the side of a reservoir taking moisture out of the air and toping up water levels.
I have no idea how practical these ideas may be, but included them just to show how a spark of innovation in this area of 
humidity, along with an understanding of ERH, may lead to all sorts of exciting and essential new developments.
Looking towards nature for answers to tackle the consequences of climate change seems a very good place to start.
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com

A Wet Look At Climate Change
90 
A Challenge
14	 A Challenge
Time now to apply your new knowledge. Imagine the following scene:
A south facing garden somewhere in Ireland. It is winter and there is a cloudless sky. To the west the garden has a wooden 
fence, a stone wall to the south and a metal fence to the east. There is no wind, not even a slight breeze. The time is 10am 
and you look out of a window and see steam rising from the wooden fence and from the stone wall. After 30 minutes you 
look out again, the wooden fence looks damp and there is still steam rising. The steam from the stone wall has stopped. The 
metal fence is covered in frost. The lawn is white in places and covered in dew everywhere else.
Using your new knowledge, or re-read the pertinent parts from the chapters of this book, and come up with an explanation 
of the above scene.
To construct a more comprehensive answer, you will need an understanding of at least three other pieces of information 
that I have not covered:
• 
The electromagnetic spectrum and transparency in air
• 
The electron shell structure of metals
• 
Mechanisms of heat transference
Good luck and farewell for now!
Download free eBooks at bookboon.com
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more
Click on the ad to read more

