


Text copyright © 2012 Brett Blumenthal
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or
otherwise, without express written permission of the publisher.
The information contained in this book is intended to provide helpful and informative
material on the subject addressed. It is not intended to serve as a replacement for
professional medical advice. Any use of the information in this book is at the reader’s
discretion. The author and publisher specifically disclaim any and all liability arising
directly or indirectly from the use or application of any information contained in this
book. A health-care professional should be consulted regarding your specific situation.
Published by Amazon Publishing
P.O. Box 400818
Las Vegas, NV 89140
ISBN-13: 9781612186153
ISBN-10: 1612186157

For my family, for their love, support, and encouragement.

GOOD, BETTER, BEST. NEVER LET IT REST.
’TIL YOUR GOOD IS BETTER AND YOUR
BETTER IS BEST.
—SAINT JEROME

CONTENTS
A PERSONAL NOTE TO YOU—THE READER
PART I: PREPARATION
A LOOK AT PERSONAL REINVENTION
A LOOK AT PERSONAL REINVENTION
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
PART II: YOUR PATH TO PERSONAL REINVENTION
STAGE 1: IDENTIFY THE NEED
STAGE 2: DISCOVER YOURSELF
STAGE 3: DESIGN YOUR VISION
STAGE 4: CREATE THE PLAN
STAGE 5: MAKE IT HAPPEN
STAGE 6: MONITOR YOUR PROGRESS
A FINAL WORD
PART III: The New You Journal
STAGE 1: IDENTIFY THE NEED
DIMENSIONS OF WELL-BEING SELF-ASSESSMENT
THE PERSONAL SIGNS OF CHANGE MATRIX
RATIONAL AND EMOTIONAL SOS ASSESSMENT

PHYSICAL SOS ASSESSMENT
STAGE 2: DISCOVER YOURSELF
MY VALUES WORKSHEET
MY MOST IMPORTANT VALUES WORKSHEET
MY STRENGTHS WORKSHEET
MY WEAKNESSES WORKSHEET
MY PAST FEARS WORKSHEET
MY CURRENT FEARS WORKSHEET
MY CONQUERED FEARS WORKSHEET
MY PASSIONS WORKSHEET
MY ACCOMPLISHMENTS WORKSHEET
MY FAILURES WORKSHEET
MY MOTIVATORS WORKSHEET
MY UPBRINGING WORKSHEET
MY LIFE EXPERIENCES WORKSHEET
MY COMBINED EXPERIENCES WORKSHEET
THE WHAT I WANT WORKSHEET
MY MISSION STATEMENT WORKSHEET
STAGE 3: DESIGN YOUR VISION
THE PERSONAL REINVENTION GAP MAP
MY IDEAL TOMORROW WORKSHEET
MY VISION WORKSHEET
VISION EFFECTIVENESS EVALUATION
STAGE 4: CREATE THE PLAN
THE BIG END GOALS WORKSHEET
THE PRIORITIZATION MATRIX WORKSHEET
THE END GOALS, MILESTONES, AND ACTION STEPS WORKSHEET
STAGE 5: MAKE IT HAPPEN
THE LIST OF AFFIRMATIONS WORKSHEET
DUHIGG’S HABIT LOOP MODIFICATION WORKSHEET
THE INCONSISTENT BEHAVIORS WORKSHEET
MY FAILURES OF REINVENTION WORKSHEET
STAGE 6: MONITOR YOUR PROGRESS
THE CHECKPOINT EVALUATION WORKSHEET

RESOURCES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

I
A PERSONAL NOTE TO YOU—THE
READER
BELIEVE IN TRANSFORMATION AND REINVENTION . I’ve morphed myself numerous
times over the years, trying to become better in one area or another. I’ve tweaked
aspects of my life that weren’t quite working for me, such as developing confidence and
comfort with meeting new people, and expanding my social and professional networks.
I’ve reinvented my perspective and mindset about health and fitness. I’ve renewed how
I approach love and relationships, even overhauled my way of thinking and perceptions
of myself. It’s not that I’ve been bored or needed some excitement—change was brought
on because of a real desire to address an issue in my life, and an underlying passion for
self-improvement.
The first big change I can recall was deciding I was going to take control of my
health and fitness. Up until the age of seven I lived in Manhattan, where PE class was
nonexistent and recess mostly included a rousing game of Red Light, Green Light, 1-2-3,
an activity that by no means required great athleticism. When my family moved out to
Long Island, New York, however, sports were a big part of school life.
On my first day in my new elementary school, I was herded onto the open field
with my classmates to play soccer, a game with which I was completely unfamiliar.
Within seconds, I was hit square in the face with the soccer ball. It hurt, but the shock
and embarrassment stung much worse. From that point on, anything sports related
became synonymous with humiliation. I shied away from sports, telling myself it wasn’t
for me.
It wasn’t until college that I decided I didn’t want to be judged poorly anymore
for something I knew I could control. I wanted to be fit and strong, and although I might
not have had talent in sports, I wanted to at least look as though I could hold my own.
For the first time, I started exercising regularly. The decision was as simple as that. But
I had to let go of my negative feelings from the past, make a commitment to something
with which I was uncomfortable, and stick with it for the longer term.
Before long, I became an avid fan of exercise and its many benefits. I felt
physically better, slept better at night, and was generally happier. I was better at
managing stress and had improved focus in school. And the best outcome of my
transformation was that I finally started to shed my fear of rejection and to believe in
myself. I became so passionate about wellness that by the end of my freshman year, I
had become a certified fitness instructor, teaching some of the most popular fitness
classes on campus.
Transformations in my life have not just been related to health and fitness. After

college, I started practicing architecture. Within a few years, I became frustrated by the
profession: the pay was low, the industry was highly cyclical, and the career path to
advancement was longer and more arduous than most. I realized that the aspects of my
job that I actually enjoyed—client-relationship management, problem solving, and
project management—were integral to a much higher-paying, more stable profession:
management consulting.
Given that I had no business experience and came from a design profession, a
transition to management consulting was somewhat unlikely. Yet, I was determined. I
did research and applied a relatively rigorous process to making the change. I
recognized there was a need for change; I analyzed what I wanted; I designed a vision
for the future; I created a plan to make it happen; and I executed the plan with passion
and 
determination. 
Within 
a 
few 
months, 
I 
accepted 
a 
position 
with
PricewaterhouseCoopers Consulting (PwC).
Over the next several years as a consultant with PwC and, after business school,
at Deloitte Consulting, I spent the majority of my time providing change-management
services to our clients. I helped companies manage and structure the changes, the
transformations, and the reinventions they faced in business so they could operate and
perform better. I realized that the very process I applied to changing my career looked
much like the process many businesses apply to implementing change within their
organizations.
After working on over a dozen projects, big and small, and domestic as well as
global, it became clear that the companies that chose to invest the time and resources to
appropriately plan and manage their changes were the ones most likely to succeed. The
companies that didn’t put in the time or energy to plan for it, however, often faced great
difficulty in making the changes work within their organizations, sometimes even failing
completely.
Just as I had experienced with my own changes and reinventions on a personal
level, my professional experience proved that, regardless of circumstance or situation,
if change and improvement are desired, a structured process or path is required to make
it a reality.
When I finally changed my career to become an author and wellness expert, I was
once again reminded of the importance of process. Success was (and continues to be)
dependent on a deeper understanding of myself, a constant ability to develop a clear
vision, and the determination to take my vision and make it come to fruition. It excites
me to finally be able to combine my passion for wellness with my extensive experience
in change to bring you A Whole New You.

My goal in writing A Whole New You is to provide a simple yet effective approach to
transforming any aspect of your life. Over the years, I’ve learned what works and what
doesn’t, and have become increasingly aware of factors required for success, as well as
the potential roadblocks one might encounter that can debilitate even the best of
intentions. Based on my personal and professional experience, as well as some of the
most up-to-date research presented by experts and authors within psychology and human
behavior, A Whole New You provides you with a detailed step-by-step guide to building
the best life you can.
What inspires each of us to change can differ greatly from one person to the next,
and even though your personal reinventions may differ from those of the person sitting
next to you, the simple path I outline remains applicable. Whether you want to reinvent
your career, your physique and health, your love life, or your emotional happiness,
following the path outlined will enable you to make real change, real transformation,
real reinvention.


R
A LOOK AT PERSONAL
REINVENTION
AS HUMAN BEINGS, OUR GREATNESS LIES NOT SO MUCH IN BEING ABLE TO REMAKE THE
WORLD…AS IN BEING ABLE TO REMAKE OURSELVES.
—MAHATMA GANDHI
EINVENTION IS NOTHING NEW TO us. It has existed throughout time, at every scale.
We are most concerned, however, with the type of change that is most relevant to
us as individuals: personal reinvention.
Let’s face it: we all yearn for something better, and an attempt at personal change
is what we hope will get us there.
CHANGE VERSUS PERSONAL REINVENTION
Throughout this book, the terms change and personal reinvention will be used
often, and seemingly interchangeably. That being said, the terms differ slightly. If
you look in the dictionary, change in its simplest form is defined as “to become
different,” while reinvent is defined as “to remake or redo completely.” The
difference between these terms basically comes down to semantics. For the sake
of clarity, however, you can think about it in this way: it is all about scale. A
change can be singular, or focused on one habit or characteristic. Personal
reinvention, however, tends to require many changes and is much larger in scale.
Essentially, you will make many changes that will culminate in a personal
reinvention.
WHY WE CHANGE
Whether we realize it or not, many of us change or reinvent quite frequently, modifying
our behaviors and our thoughts in order to adjust to situations and life circumstances as
they occur. As a matter of fact, most would argue that change is good for us: it allows us

to adapt, to grow, and to flourish. When we stop changing, however, we run the risk of
becoming stagnant and getting stuck. Change is a necessary component of living to our
full potential, being the best we can be, and taking advantage of all that life has to offer.
Your life does not get better by chance, it gets better by change.
—Jim Rohn
When we embark on making change, it may appear that we do so for many
different reasons. We reinvent careers because we don’t like the type of work we do or
the industry we’ve chosen. We reinvent our personality so we can appear more outgoing
or sociable. We reinvent our health so we can prevent—or possibly even help eliminate
—disease. But if you get to the very core of all of these personal reinventions, our
desire to change comes down to one very simple yet important mission: to be happy.
In Gretchen Rubin’s The Happiness Project, the author shares her experiences
and thoughts about her pursuit of a happier life through a project that extends over the
course of a year. She openly admits to her readers that she isn’t unhappy but she thinks
she could be happier. She explains that her project isn’t so much about overcoming
unhappiness as it is about maximizing happiness so she can be the happiest she can be
—not only for herself but for her family, friends, and even the world.
And so if we continually strive to be happier, even at a marginal level, it
ultimately drives our interest in change and personal reinvention.
Recently, Sam went through a career reinvention. In school he had studied
English, but when he graduated, he was lured into a job in pharmaceutical
sales. He had been working in the industry for over ten years and was making
very good money, but when he and his wife had a baby, he decided to make a
change.
Sam’s job in pharmaceutical sales required extensive travel, so he accepted a
position as a journalist with a major Boston newspaper so he could spend more
time at home. This seemed like a logical reason to change careers.
One afternoon, Sam and I discussed his new job. I asked, “The new job must pay
a great deal less than what you were making before, no?” He flatly agreed. I
then asked if this was an issue for him and his family. He explained that
although money was tighter, he wanted to be at home. Raising his newborn son
with his wife was important, and he didn’t want to miss out on that experience. I

asked if there was any way he could have worked something out with his
previous company to reduce the travel. He confessed that he actually knew other
employees who had managed to cut back their travel schedules, but it seemed
like too much of a hassle.
This made me ask, “Did you like your job?” His response was an unenthusiastic
“It paid really well.” I pushed further: “But did you like your job? Were you
happy going to work and doing what you did?” He thought for a moment and
confided that he didn’t. As a matter of fact, until the baby was born, he had
wanted to leave for over a year, but felt the money was too good to warrant the
change.
“Are you happy with your job now?” I asked. He replied that he was and that he
had always dreamed of being a writer. He went on to explain how much he now
loved going to work. Finally, I inquired, “Do you have to travel?” He admitted
he did, but somehow it didn’t bother him.
On the surface, Sam’s decision to change careers stemmed from a logistical
desire to be at home more often for his family and to travel less. But a deeper look
revealed that the change was a result of a desire for greater happiness. Yes, he still
wanted to be home more for his family, but travel wasn’t the main driver. We know this
because (1) he likely could have changed his travel schedule with his first job; (2) he
admitted that he didn’t like his job and wanted to change before the baby arrived; and
(3) he still was required to travel with his new job and yet didn’t really mind it.
Happiness in his career was the real, deeper reason for the change.
WHEN WE CHANGE
Although there are times when change is foisted upon us, choosing to change is what we
are most concerned with throughout this book. When we choose to change or reinvent
ourselves, we do so as a result of what life brings us, expected or unexpected. When we
experience changes to our environment or our circumstances, or we experience life-
changing events, we may be prompted to reflect on our life and to think about ways we
could make it better. This ultimately creates a spark that motivates us to reinvent for
tomorrow. Sometimes we refer to this as having an “epiphany” or an “Aha! moment.”
Although these realizations can occur at any time, they generally emerge as a result of
one of the following three types of life experiences we typically encounter throughout
our lifetime.

LIFE TRANSITIONS
When one door closes, another opens…
—Alexander Graham Bell
One of the most common times we are inspired to make change is when one chapter of
our life ends and another begins. These life transitions often coincide with changes to
our environment, living conditions, and potential social or familial situations. Typical
examples include the transition from high school to college, from college to starting our
first job, from single status to married, from childlessness to parenthood, or from
employee to retiree. All of these shifts from one chapter to another represent a change in
our circumstances that may require some form of adaptation, either by necessity or by
choice.
These life transitions present natural opportunities to modify our behavior or
thought processes. And if we are leaving an especially distasteful or difficult stage in
life, we may be even more motivated to wipe the slate clean, develop a new persona,
and enter our new chapter with a fresh start.
The personal desire for change I had during the transition from high school to
college isn’t so uncommon. Studies show that many people rank their adolescent years
as the worst. They are the most fragile yet growth-oriented times of our lives. We are
still trying to figure out who we are and what we want. And we are eager to establish
our independence and claim our own identity.
Jane’s parents were immigrants from China and tended to keep to themselves.
She was taught that her studies were very important and although she played the
violin and performed in the school’s orchestra, she didn’t have many
opportunities to socialize outside of school. As a result, she was perceived as
boring and antisocial. As Jane finished her last year of high school, she
desperately looked forward to escaping her status as a shy and quiet person, to
earn a more sociable and outgoing reputation.
Jane knew college would provide a whole new environment away from her social
and familial norms. She was excited to meet new people, find new activities to
get involved in, and establish a reputation that was completely unique and
separate from the one she had as a high school student. Although she was
brought up to be quiet, Jane felt deep down that she was much more social and
outgoing than was tolerated by her parents. As a result, she was inspired to

change and become the person she wanted to be.
Psychologically, Jane found it much less intimidating to take on a new persona
in college. It was unfamiliar, but it was much easier to establish a new identity
in a new place rather than trying to convert or reformulate an existing
reputation with those individuals who already knew her.
When Jane arrived at college, she demonstrated a more extroverted side,
enabling her to make friends easily. She signed up for extracurricular activities,
and even ran for student office. Since no one had known her previously, she was
able to establish a new social norm. The new people she met didn’t know the old
Jane, quiet and shy; they only knew her as the more outgoing person she now
presented herself to be.
As you can see, life transitions present us with a very natural way to make change.
By providing us with a new set of circumstances, we have less to overcome in resetting
our norm, and so it feels more manageable, even simpler.
LIFE-CHANGING EVENTS
A thought, even a possibility, can shatter and transform us.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Another typical time for personal reinvention is when we go through an event or a series
of events that change our perspective or bring us enlightenment. A new perspective may
force us to examine our life and discover that we aren’t very happy or don’t feel very
fulfilled. As a result, it causes us to evaluate what would really bring us happiness,
revealing opportunities for change. We often call these “life-changing events.”
Andy had a very successful career on Wall Street. When he was young, he put
everything into his job and into making money. As he got older, however, this
narrow focus on work eventually took a toll on other aspects of his life. He
gained fifty pounds and started to have health issues due to the tremendous
amount of travel and entertaining he did with clients. Further, he spent very
little time with his family, often missing important milestones of his children.

Andy gained new perspective, however, after the life-changing events of
September 11, 2001. For years Andy had visited dozens of money management
firms in and around the Wall Street area, and had walked through the World
Trade Center countless times. The morning of the attacks, however, he was
fortunate to be on the road traveling. Yet the events of that day dramatically
impacted him. In watching them unfold, he quickly realized that completely
unforeseen circumstances could greatly affect his life, as well as the lives of
those he loves. It made him reevaluate what was truly important to him.
The second event occurred on May 1, 2010. Andy and his family stood at the
intersection of Forty-Fifth Street and Broadway in New York City, a mere fifteen
feet from a car packed with explosives. The car was set to explode at the very
time Andy, his wife, and his kids were there. Fortunately, the explosives never
went off, but it once again reaffirmed to Andy that life is short and it is
important to live focused on genuine value, not on money.
After the events of 9/11, Andy started to reinvent his life by designing the
lifestyle he wanted. That meant setting goals to get out of corporate America
and to make his family the number one priority. Today, Andy works out of his
house most days of the week. He has addressed his health issues, making his
health and spirituality priorities. He even started a health and wellness
company to help individuals live their healthiest. Because of his strong desire to
live a life of value, Andy also started a consulting company to help others grow
their own businesses. Finally, he and his family enjoy a much more fulfilling and
rewarding life together. Andy is now present for the milestones and events that
are important in his children’s lives and can enjoy a deeper and more loving
relationship with his wife. In short, Andy is much happier and is living the
lifestyle he truly wants. His gained perspective gave him a new lease on life.
Reinventions that result from gained perspective or a heightened level of
awareness are generally less predictable than those that come during a life transition.
They are more exemplary of the “Aha! moment” or “epiphany” mentioned earlier. They
are often due to unexpected events that cause us to see things differently from how we
may have seen them previously.
LOSS OR MISFORTUNE
Every adversity, every failure, every heartache carries with it the seed of an

equal or greater benefit.
—Napoleon Hill
The third and final type of life experience that may prompt us to go through a personal
reinvention is when we experience loss or misfortune. In these situations we are dealing
with circumstances over which we have little to no control. For instance, we may lose
our spouse through a divorce, we may lose our job through a layoff, we may lose a
friend or loved one to death, or we may even lose our health through an accident or the
onset of disease. Loss in any format can create a large void, and as a result, may force
us to search for something better or to fill the hole that has developed. In these cases, a
personal reinvention can be a form of healing, or a way of dealing with the pain and
hurt.
Throughout her life, Lisa attracted needy people. Friends, family members,
colleagues, and even romantic partners all leaned heavily on Lisa, relying on
her to take care of the messes they created. She spent so much time and energy
helping everyone around her and dealing with their problems and issues that
she had little to no time for herself. She was exhausted, and in neglecting her
own health and well-being, Lisa started to feel depressed, gain weight, and
notice a series of health issues percolating.
The stress and lack of self-care Lisa experienced finally caused her to have a
breakdown that required hospitalization. After spending two weeks recovering,
she knew things had to change. She knew she couldn’t continue doing everything
for everyone else, neglecting her own health, happiness, and needs in the
process. After her release from the hospital, she sought help from a therapist.
The therapist helped her to understand that she desperately needed to draw
boundaries and learn to say no. Within a month, Lisa started to reprioritize so
she could take time for herself and her needs before attending to those of
everyone else.
Over a month or so, Lisa eventually began to feel better physically and mentally.
She learned to identify the behaviors that caused her to attract needy
individuals. And by working on modifying those behaviors, Lisa began to
minimize the unhealthy relationships in her life. She instead started to attract
those who were healthier and more supportive. Lisa felt reborn. She felt happier
and healthier, and was finally able to really enjoy life and have fun.

In Lisa’s situation, her loss in health provided her with a wake-up call. Once we
can get past the pain, hurt, or feelings of loss or misfortune, we may be inspired to
question what we want, what we hope for from our relationships, how we want to age,
or what we want or need to do to ultimately achieve happiness. Reinvention inspired by
loss can be dramatically life-changing.
WAYS WE CHANGE: DIMENSIONS OF WELL-BEING
Personal reinvention can occur on a multitude of levels, ranging from dramatic change
resulting in a full transformation to change that is less extreme and focuses on the
modification of a very specific component of life. Regardless, personal reinventions
tend to include changes associated with one or more dimensions of well-being.
Dimensions of well-being include those aspects of our life that directly contribute
to our ability to be happy. These dimensions can be categorized into the following:
career, physical, social, emotional, intellectual, and spiritual (see the “Dimensions of
Well-Being” figure on page 13). Achieving an optimal state of well-being—and thus,
happiness—is dependent on our behaviors, our thoughts, and our choices within each of
these areas. Each of these six dimensions can be broken down further into
subcategories, but for the sake of simplicity, we’ll focus on these overarching themes as
we move forward throughout the book.
You may find that certain dimensions feel more important to you than others. Each
of us is unique, and what is deemed valuable can vary greatly from person to person.
That said, whether you think you value all the following dimensions of well-being or
not, realize that each plays some factor in your ability to be happy—even if at a lower
level than others.
DIMENSIONS OF WELL-BEING

CAREER WELL-BEING
In a 2008 study by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, it was
found that Americans work an average of thirty-five hours per week. Given that this
represents more than 30 percent of our time while we are awake, it is safe to say that
what we do for work has a tremendous impact on our happiness. With the most recent
economic downturn, we’ve seen countless individuals reinvent their careers in order to
accommodate the high rate of unemployment and difficult job market. When job markets
are strong, however, individuals may embark on a career reinvention purely because
they don’t find their current job or career fulfilling or rewarding. Regardless of the
motivation, these reinventions can be as minor as a lateral shift in role or job
description within a particular industry, or much more robust, such as a full-blown
switch to a completely different career in a different industry.
PHYSICAL WELL-BEING
Personal reinventions pertaining to physical well-being occur when we make positive
change to our overall physical health. This can involve weight loss (a $60 billion

industry in the United States), changing how and what we eat, improving our level of
fitness, or even more drastic changes in order to improve certain medical conditions.
We tend to embark on this kind of change either because we have a desire to improve
our health as an act of prevention or because we have a desire to fight a diagnosis of
disease we may already have.
SOCIAL WELL-BEING
Social well-being focuses on how we socialize and interact with others and our
behavior and personality within relationships. Personal reinventions within this
dimension can extend to all types of relationships, including those with acquaintances,
colleagues, friends, or family members, and even romantic partners. At a high level,
changes might include working on body language to be more approachable, such as
looking people in the eye, keeping arms at one’s side instead of crossed, and leaning in
when speaking to another individual. Or it could include deeper modifications, such as
developing a level of comfort with meeting new people, acting more confident, and
developing better listening skills. Going even further, work may be done on
foundational behaviors such as forming, maintaining, and acting within relationships. At
this level, trust, commitment, security, openness, honesty, and other qualities might be
addressed in order to create relationships that are more meaningful and rewarding.
EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING
In contrast to social well-being, which focuses on attaining happiness through our
relationships with others, emotional well-being focuses on our ability to attain
happiness within ourselves. A personal reinvention in this dimension can address
internal character, behaviors, reactions, emotions, thoughts, and self-perceptions. As we
grow and gain experience, we begin to look at ourselves in specific ways. We also
develop certain ways of thinking, and potentially a hardened perspective, or certain
emotional and behavioral responses to typical situations. A personal reinvention that
addresses our emotional well-being requires an adjustment to these behaviors and
thoughts. It may involve diminishing anger or resentment. It might involve developing
patience, sympathy, compassion, and understanding. Or in many cases it may involve
cultivating a more positive outlook, building self-esteem and self-confidence, and
developing a strong sense of self. This type of reinvention, in particular, benefits from
deeper analysis of who we are and why we are the way we are, so we can learn from
the past and build a happier, more rewarding future.

INTELLECTUAL WELL-BEING
Although personal reinventions around intellectual well-being are probably less
common than those within other dimensions of well-being, they still warrant a brief
discussion here. Our intellectual well-being relies on the happiness we get from
developing personal interests, using our creativity, and engaging our minds. Changes
can involve learning new hobbies, growing intellectually, and challenging the mind in
order to ward off age-related disease or memory loss. For instance, you might develop
deeper passions and pursuits, such as photography or dance. Or changes might involve
stimulating your intellect and keeping your mind sharp and youthful by reading more,
through puzzles or games such as sudoku or crossword puzzles, or by tapping into your
creativity. And finally, a reinvention in this dimension might include building
knowledge or skill sets, and studying subjects of interest, either independently or within
an academic environment.
SPIRITUAL WELL-BEING
Finally, one of the most complicated and provocative personal reinventions one can
make is within the dimension of spiritual well-being. This involves a much more
intricate and deeper transformation, one that is highly emotional and transcendental.
This kind of transformation is usually all-encompassing and can involve changes within
other dimensions of well-being as well. It generally requires deep introspection, a
tremendous amount of emotional and psychological work, and great amounts of energy
and time. Personal reinvention within the dimension of spirituality is often associated
with shifts in philosophy, moral beliefs, and altruistic concerns. And although it can
involve an overhaul of many facets of one’s life, these reinventions can surprisingly
stem from the simplest and least predictable, yet most impactful, moments in our life.
Each dimension of well-being contributes to our overall happiness. As you begin the
journey on your path to personal reinvention, you may discover that one or more of these
dimensions warrant change. Be open to the possibilities of reinvention throughout all
dimensions, but pay close attention to what your heart and mind tell you. Only you know
what kind of change is most relevant and important to you.

C
A LOOK AT PERSONAL
REINVENTION
THERE ARE THREE CONSTANTS IN LIFE…CHANGE, CHOICE, AND PRINCIPLES.
—STEPHEN R. COVEY
HANGE HAS BEEN A LONG-DISCUSSED topic on many fronts and within many circles.
Although we can’t cover centuries’ worth of research and documentation on
change here, highlighting some of the most current work and discussions that have
influenced or supported what is presented on the following pages may be valuable.
Although some of these authors discuss change in the context of business, society,
or politics, many of their points can be applied at a personal level. My mission in
sharing these summaries with you is to distill some of the key points each author
presents, so that the principles and research can be applied to your own personal
reinvention and attempts at change.
THE POWER OF HABIT
In The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business , Charles Duhigg
looks at the habits of individuals, organizations, and societies, and tries to explain the
science and behavioral psychology of how habits work. He writes, “When a habit
emerges, the brain stops fully participating in decision-making.” He tells us that habits
make up about 40 percent of our daily routine, and in order to change them, we have to
understand what he calls the “habit loop.”
The habit loop consists of a cue or trigger, a routine, and a reward. Duhigg
provides a personal example where at 3:00 p.m. every day he would go to his cafeteria
and buy a cookie. Over time, this ultimately led to his gaining weight. Curious about
what was at the heart of the weight gain, he conducted a few experiments and realized
that his cue was the time of day (3:00 p.m.), his routine was a trip to the cafeteria to
purchase a cookie, and surprisingly, the reward was socialization with friends and
colleagues—not the taste of the cookie itself. As a result, he saw an opportunity to
change the overall habit by tweaking specific components of the habit loop. He decided
to maintain the reward of socialization, while modifying the less healthy routine of

purchasing and eating a cookie. At 3:00 p.m., instead of going to the cafeteria for a
cookie, Duhigg started to find ways to socialize within his office environment and avoid
the cafeteria altogether. He soon found his craving for the cookie had disappeared.
Changing a habit may not always be about changing the routine. It could involve
changing or eliminating the cue or replacing an unhealthy reward with one that is
healthier. In short, to stop or modify a bad or unwanted habit, you must understand the
habit loop, and identify what part of it is creating unwanted results. You can then
redesign it (or stop it altogether) so that new, healthier habits can form.
How It Applies to Your Path:  Your personal reinvention will inevitably require
making modifications to habits, behaviors, and thought processes. As you
progress on your path, be mindful of the habit loops you have created in your life.
For those habit loops that seem to result in negative consequences (such as
weight gain, in Duhigg’s example), you’ll want to investigate which part of the
loop is to blame. You’ll then want to identify what you can do to modify your
habit loop to produce more favorable behaviors or results. This will be
discussed more specifically in Stage 5: Make It Happen.
SWITCH
In Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard, Chip and Dan Heath discuss
a model for making change in which it is crucial to appeal to the two sides of our mind
—the rational side and the emotional side—while providing a clear, unobstructed path
on which change can be made.
Borrowing from an analogy presented in Jonathan Haidt’s The Happiness
Hypothesis, the Heath brothers label the rational side of our brains the “Rider” and the
emotional side the “Elephant.” The rational side, or Rider, knows why it should change;
however, the emotional side, or Elephant, prefers comfort and routine, and as a result,
needs motivation to want to change. Using this metaphor, they go on to explain that the
small Rider sits on top of the big Elephant, attempting to control and guide it. Yet, if
there is disagreement between the two, the Rider exhausts itself trying to get the big
Elephant to listen. In this situation, the Elephant ultimately wins due to its sheer strength
and size. In other words, our emotional side tends to win over our rational side because
it is much stronger when there is misalignment between the two.
This need to appeal to both sides of our brain can easily be demonstrated when
we go on a diet. Our Rider, or rational side, will understand the logical benefits of
eating healthily and why unhealthy food is bad for us. Thus, it will try to keep our

Elephant, or emotional side, from giving in to cravings. Our Elephant, however, is much
stronger, and unless it is motivated to stick with the diet plan, it will eventually cause us
to give in to the cravings our Rider tries to avoid. When embarking on change, you can
count on the Rider to plan and direct, but in the end you need to motivate the Elephant to
want to follow the plan.
Once you’ve gotten both your Rider and Elephant engaged in the process, the third
piece of the Heath brothers’ philosophy—“shape the path”—can be addressed. In short,
shaping the path means finding ways to make the process of change easier for both the
Rider and the Elephant, so that it is more likely to stick. For the Rider, you want to
provide a clear and simple process for it to follow, and for the Elephant, you want to
remove any obstacles that might come into its path. Obstacles can present themselves in
different ways: via environmental circumstances, people, bad habits, or an inability to
keep motivation levels high. Regardless of what the obstacles are, shaping the path aims
to remove them, or at least minimize them so that the path to change is easier.
How It Applies to Your Path:  Throughout the process outlined, you will engage
both your rational (Rider) and emotional (Elephant) sides. Both are very
important and need to be considered. Generally, the rational side of why you
might want to change is clear, but the wanting of the emotional side may not be.
To help, you’ll want to ask yourself the following questions throughout the
process: Am I motivated to do this? Do I want to accomplish this goal? How can
I become more motivated?
When it comes to shaping your path, the steps you take and activities you do
throughout the process will encourage simplifying change so it is most likely to
stick. Additionally, pay attention to the roadblocks discussed so you can be
mindful of the typical obstacles that present themselves at each stage of your path
to personal reinvention.
MINDSET
In Mindset: The New Psychology of Success, psychologist Carol Dweck discusses how
our mindset is what allows us to be successful or holds us back. She goes on to explain
that we have either a fixed mindset or a growth mindset.
The fixed mindset is one in which people believe that their basic qualities, such
as intelligence or talent, are fixed traits. Instead of trying to develop these traits, they
tend to “document” them. They also believe their talent(s) will carry them toward

success, and thus they rely heavily on what already is. As a result, they don’t put much
effort or work into strengthening their talents or strengths, or for that matter, building any
new ones.
On the other hand, the growth mindset is one in which people believe they can
continually develop their abilities through dedication and hard work. In this case, the
intellect and the talent are the foundation from which one can grow and become
stronger. Dweck argues that this mindset creates a love of learning and resilience
essential to accomplishment.
How It Applies to Your Path:  A growth mindset will be required in order for
you to believe you are capable of making change. If you maintain a fixed mindset,
change won’t be possible.
Through the self-discovery process during Stage 2: Discover Yourself,  you’ll
do a variety of activities to uncover your strengths, your weaknesses, your
accomplishments, your failures, and even your fears. All of your past experiences
will play a role in helping you to change and create the personal reinvention you
desire. When uncovering seemingly negative experiences, avoid dismissing them
or feeling bad about them. Instead, try to learn from them. If you believe you are
limited by past negative experiences, you are staying in a fixed mindset. If,
however, you learn from past mistakes and believe you can push through fear and
negativity, you will encourage a growth mindset.
THE 7 HABITS OF HIGHLY EFFECTIVE PEOPLE
The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People is an old standby in the personal development
and self-help genre of publications. Author Stephen R. Covey explains that habits are
the intersection of knowledge (what to, why to), skills (how to), and desire (want to).
Throughout the text you can find some overlap with both Charles Duhigg’s habit loop
and the Heath brothers’ change model of the Rider, the Elephant, and shaping the path.
Stephen Covey’s differentiation, however, is that instead of discussing the process, he
gets to the heart of the specific habits and personal characteristics that make people
effective.
Habits 1, 2, and 3 are focused on self-mastery. Habits 4, 5, and 6 are more
specific to effectiveness with others, and Habit 7 focuses on bringing everything
together so you can work toward continuous improvement. All are valuable, but Habits
1, 2, and 3 are most relevant to the work you’ll be doing.

Habit 1 is “Be Proactive.” This means taking responsibility for your life to make
things happen instead of waiting for them to happen. It also means that you should take
ownership of your behaviors, thoughts, and actions instead of blaming them on your
circumstances or other people.
Habit 2 is “Begin with the End in Mind.” This habit gets into visualizing your life
as if you were at the end of it. Covey asks such questions as: “What would you want to
have accomplished by the end of your life?” and “What would you want to be said at
your funeral?” Thinking with the “end in mind” means forgetting about your perceived
limitations of today and instead getting to the heart of your values and how you would
have wanted to live your life if it were at its end. This enables you to focus on
developing a vision for the future and the possibilities of tomorrow instead of getting
stuck in the past.
Habit 3 is “Put First Things First.” This habit relies on Habits 1 and 2 and
prioritizing around your principles. It encourages living life and making decisions
predicated on your values and what is truly important to you as an individual instead of
on things that are unimportant, what other people expect or want, or things that are out of
alignment with who you really are.
How It Applies to Your Path:  All three habits are essential to your ability to
complete your path to personal reinvention. To some extent, they transcend each
stage. More specifically, however, they apply as follows: In Stage 2: Discover
Yourself, you will do a lot of work to gain a deeper understanding of your
values. This will give you insight that will allow you to have a “Put First Things
First” mentality. Also, within this stage you’ll be asked to write your mission
statement, which requires that you think with “the end in mind.” In Stage 4:
Create the Plan and Stage 5: Make It Happen, you will need to be proactive
and take responsibility for your actions so you can progress forward. This
ultimately supports Stephen Covey’s Habit 1, “Be Proactive.”
There are many other books and publications on the topic of change and personal
development, but the examples discussed provide concepts that are highly applicable
and relevant to what you’ll be doing throughout A Whole New You. If you are interested
in other resources around the topics of change, personal reinvention, self-development,
and happiness, consult the resources listed at the end of this book.

N
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
WITHOUT CONTINUAL GROWTH AND PROGRESS, SUCH WORDS AS IMPROVEMENT,
ACHIEVEMENT, AND SUCCESS HAVE NO MEANING.
—BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
O DOUBT, CHANGE IS HARD. If it were easy, we’d all be able to lose weight at the
drop of a hat; would set and reach our goals effortlessly; would be the perfect
friend, spouse, or family member at all times; and would continually be successful and
happy. But change is indeed difficult. As we learned with the Heath brothers’ Rider and
Elephant metaphor, the difficulty in making change lies in the fact that we not only need
to understand why the change is good for us and how to proceed making it, but that we
also need to maintain a high level of motivation to want to make the change. We need to
continually engage both sides of our brains—the rational (Rider) and the emotional
(Elephant).
In Switch, the Heath brothers go on to describe the Rider as a long-term planner
who deliberates and analyzes while the Elephant looks for instant gratification, often
responding to emotional impulses. The Rider is the thinker, and the Elephant is the doer.
The Rider has the logical understanding while the Elephant has the motivation. The
Rider attempts to lead, but the Elephant must follow. Change couldn’t happen without
the both of them; they work in synergy.
YOUR PATH TO PERSONAL REINVENTION
In Part II, you will engage both sides of the mind to ensure that your efforts to make
change are successful. Each stage presented plays an important role and includes (1) an
explanation as to why the stage is important; (2) steps, tasks, and activities to complete;
(3) key success factors important to the stage; and (4) typical roadblocks you might
encounter and how to overcome them.
YOUR PATH TO PERSONAL REINVENTION

STAGE 1: IDENTIFY THE NEED
The first stage is to identify a need or desire for change. You will learn about the types
of signs you might experience and how to recognize them in your own life. And you will
learn to understand which dimensions of well-being are of the biggest concern to you.
STAGE 2: DISCOVER YOURSELF
In Stage 2 you will develop strong self-awareness. In order to change your behaviors,
thoughts, and emotional responses, you need to have a deep understanding of yourself,
your past, and why you are the way you are. You will go through a variety of exercises
and activities to help you identify your values, strengths and weaknesses,
accomplishments and failures, passions, fears, motivators, and more, all of which will
help you in creating a vision that is most authentic to you and what you want.
STAGE 3: DESIGN YOUR VISION
Utilizing the work you did during Stages 1 and 2, you will design your vision for your
future. Your vision will provide you with the direction you need to make meaningful
change toward your personal reinvention.
STAGE 4: CREATE THE PLAN
In Stage 4 you’ll create a plan that will be instrumental to achieving the vision you
developed in Stage 3. You will go through several activities to guide you in developing
and prioritizing end goals, milestones, and action steps, all of which will be the basis
for your plan to make the changes you want. You’ll also set target dates for completion
and devise an appropriate way to reward and celebrate your accomplishments.

STAGE 5: MAKE IT HAPPEN
In Stage 5 you’ll learn how to most effectively put your plan into action so you can
achieve all the goals you identified in Stage 4. You’ll discover how to overcome
potential roadblocks and how to keep motivation levels high throughout the process.
STAGE 6: MONITOR YOUR PROGRESS
As you make changes and follow your plan, it will be important to monitor your
progress. This allows you to make modifications to your plan in a timely manner so you
can quickly adjust things when they aren’t working. Monitoring your progress will also
enable you to identify if and when changes in your environment, relationships, or other
circumstances are impacting you and your efforts so that you can make adjustments
accordingly.
FOLLOWING THE PATH
There is great importance in following the path in the order it is presented. Each stage
represents a vital role to the process of change. Although it might be tempting to skip
one or more of the six stages, or even the steps within each, doing so would do a great
disservice to you and your efforts.
Stage 1: Identify the Need is vital to recognizing the signs that you have a desire
for change. Without this recognition you won’t be able to effectively go through Stage
2: Discover Yourself  to better understand why this desire is presenting itself. Without
self-discovery you won’t be able to craft a meaningful vision in Stage 3: Design Your
Vision. And without a vision you can’t effectively go on to Stage 4: Create the Plan.
Finally, without a plan, there’s nothing to put into action in Stage 5: Make It Happen.
Although Stage 6: Monitor Your Progress will require you to go back and revise some
of the work you did in previous stages, following the first five stages in progression is
going to make your personal reinvention much more sound and successful. Skipping any
of them, however, could result in change that is misguided.
Take your time as you go through the process and be as thorough as possible. If
change is truly important to you, you owe it to yourself to give it the time it requires for
true success. Spending the time you need will not only produce a better end result, but
your personal reinvention will also be a true reflection of who you are and what you
want, making it much more likely to stick. Lastly, by following the path outlined and
going through each of the exercises presented, you will build enthusiasm, passion, and

true momentum toward keeping your emotional side engaged in order to successfully
achieve your goals.
A FRIENDLY RECOMMENDATION
You are probably very excited about the changes you want to make, and your personal
reinvention. That said, you might find it helpful to first read through all of Part II once
before formally doing any of the work outlined at each stage. Part II is extremely
activity oriented and requires quite a bit of work. Reading through all of Part II first may
give you time to digest what will be asked of you so you can progress through the
process most effectively.
This is your journey, however, so you ultimately need to do what is best for you.
If reading through Part II in its entirety seems discouraging, then by all means, don’t do
so. This book is meant to educate, inspire, and empower you, not frustrate you.
KEEP A JOURNAL
Since Part II will require you to do a lot of exercises and activities, I recommend that
you start a personal reinvention journal. Documenting your process will be extremely
helpful and provides numerous benefits:
It Makes It More Official: Putting thoughts, feelings, and reactions down in
writing makes them seem more formal, official, and permanent. On the other hand,
keeping them purely in your mind makes it easy for them to leave as quickly as they
came. Your journal will act as an official record so that your work is meaningfully
captured. It allows you to treat the process more seriously and gives you an
opportunity to reference your inner thoughts and emotions later if you need to.
It Helps You Keep Track: Keeping a journal provides a method for tracking
progress. There is nothing more rewarding than documenting your plan, reviewing
your progress, and seeing how you are able to successfully achieve your goals.
This will keep you inspired and give you a feeling of continued success as you go
through your journey.
It Aids Expression: When we write in a journal, we are forced to articulate
ourselves in a meaningful and understandable way. Further, the simple act of
writing slows down our response time, encouraging deeper thought and more
expansive and thorough expression.
It Makes You More Observant: Keeping a journal gives us reason to look

around and observe what is going on around us and in our environment. It helps us
to think about things more carefully and seriously than we might otherwise.
It Makes You Accountable: Finally, documenting your process encourages
accountability. With every goal, milestone, and action step you create, you’ll feel
more responsible in committing to them and completing them.
Part III: The New You Journal is filled with templates for each activity and exercise
you are asked to complete in Part II. Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a
downloadable PDF of the worksheet templates.


O
STAGE 1: IDENTIFY THE NEED
THE ONLY REAL VALUABLE THING IS INTUITION.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
UR DESIRE TO CHANGE IS usually triggered by some type of dissatisfaction we
experience within one or more dimensions of well-being. We receive signs that
tell us that something about our current situation or way of living isn’t sustainable for
the future, isn’t driving us toward greater happiness, or isn’t allowing us to be at our
best.
Charlene was going through a seemingly difficult time over several months. She
felt stressed at work but was also experiencing many negative emotions in other
areas of her life. She lacked energy for things she used to look forward to, she
had little to no interest in seeing friends, and she felt generally sad most of the
time. Charlene’s emotions were all over the map. She knew something needed to
change.
In order to change her situation, Charlene needed to acknowledge her emotions as
well as understand them. She needed to identify what was causing her feelings so she
could effectively make a plan to address them and to improve her circumstances.
Sometimes the signs are quite obvious, while at other times they may be subtler.
And sometimes the signs are there, but it is difficult to decipher their root cause.
Learning to identify that change is needed is extremely important, but so is
understanding why. This is a crucial first step in constructing the life you want.
As we discussed in Part I, change depends on your ability to engage both the

emotional and the rational sides of your brain. Stage 1 specifically engages your
emotional side. Your feelings, emotions, reactions, and natural responses to your
situations or circumstances provide you with a wealth of information. They tell you that
change is needed. They provide you with insight as to how you’d like things to be
different. And, they help to ignite the passion within to make it happen. Tapping into
these deeper emotions is essential to providing you with the desire to create a better life
for yourself and to change things for the future.
STAGE 1 ACTION STEPS
Stage 1 focuses on heightening your awareness of the signs that may indicate change is
in order.
STEP 1: UNDERSTAND THE TYPES OF SIGNS
As we discussed in Part I, our ability to find happiness is closely tied to various
dimensions of well-being. Each dimension, in its own unique way, provides
opportunities for us to gauge our level of contentment or satisfaction within that specific
dimension. If we are dissatisfied, then that dimension of well-being might be a target
area within which to reinvent or change.
To effectively recognize signs of needed change, it’s essential to be perceptive
about what is happening around you, and how you are responding mentally, physically,
and emotionally. It means observing and listening for clues that give you insight into
when something is working and when something isn’t. Fine-tuning this ability is crucial.
A need for change often shows itself by way of one of three types of signs:
rational, physical, or emotional. Rational signs tend to be fact-based, with data present
that something isn’t right (e.g., an annual physical that reveals high cholesterol or high
blood pressure). Physical signs are a result of how we respond physically to various
situations or circumstances (e.g., we experience stress or pain). And finally, emotional
signs are much more qualitative and are a result of our feelings and emotional responses
to our environment and experiences within it.
RATIONAL SIGNS
Rational signs are very easy to see and understand, and tend to be relatively
indisputable. They are apparent in situations where there is very little room for

interpretation and are based more on fact than on feeling. Some dimensions of well-
being are more prone to rational signs than others. For instance:
CAREER WELL-BEING
Your salary is below your market value.
You are putting in a lot of overtime, working ten to twelve hours per day.
There are not enough employees at your company to do the work.
There is no upward mobility in your current career or job.
PHYSICAL WELL-BEING
Your body mass index (BMI) is too high.
You have high blood pressure.
You don’t exercise.
You smoke.
You drink excessively.
You have a debilitating disease.
You are dependent on medication to keep vitals (e.g., blood pressure) in check.
SOCIAL WELL-BEING
You constantly fight with your partner.
You see friends or family on a highly irregular basis.
You don’t get along with family members.
Your relationships are superficial and lack deeper connections.
INTELLECTUAL WELL-BEING
You are constantly forgetting things at work and at home.
You find everyday problem solving, such as basic arithmetic, difficult.
You constantly struggle to find the words you want to use when speaking.
You are unaware or out of touch with what is happening around you.
You lack creative outlets or hobbies.
Although rational signs are obviously clear, they have a drawback: they don’t
necessarily tap into our emotional side or motivate us to make change. For instance,

let’s say Tom has a BMI of 35. According to commonly held standards, a BMI over 25
is an indication that an individual is overweight, while a BMI of 35 or higher is an
indication that an individual is obese. Clearly, with a BMI of 35, Tom is obese, and as a
result, should want to lose weight. Yet that alone may not motivate him to want to lose
weight. By solely relying on rational signs, our emotional side may not be engaged, and
so, an attempt to change is less likely to stick.
PHYSICAL SIGNS
Physical signs, too, are obvious and somewhat indisputable. They reveal themselves
through physical symptoms that are unpleasant or uncomfortable, and—though not
always—can be connected to specific health issues. In order to read these signs, you
need to be in tune with your body and be observant enough to pick up on something that
doesn’t seem or feel right. Here are some examples:
A feeling of constant stress or anxiety
A lack of energy
Chronic pain in your joints or other parts of your body
Chronic fatigue
Inability to perform daily activities easily
Issues with one or more of your functional systems (e.g., problems with digestion)
Frequent sickness
Shortness of breath or difficulty in breathing
Frequent headaches or migraines
Rational signs within the dimension of physical well-being, and physical signs
may seem similar, but in actuality, have a couple of key differences.
1. Data versus Feelings: Rational signs around physical well-being are fact-based
and indisputably tied to your physical health. For instance, you either do or do not
have a BMI that indicates you are overweight or obese; you either do or do not
exercise; you either do or do not have high blood pressure. Essentially, rational
signs within the dimension of physical well-being can be seen via a test or an exam
that would produce a positive or negative result, a yes or no answer. Physical
signs, however, are less black and white, and show as symptoms rather than
through data. They are dependent on physical feelings or sensations that we
experience. For instance, you feel pain or experience stress.
2. Constant versus Situational: Unlike rational signs, which tend to be relatively
constant regardless of circumstances, physical signs can either be constant

throughout a multitude of circumstances or can be isolated to specific situations or
environments. For instance, you may feel stress at your job, but the stress
dissipates when you leave work and go home to family or friends.
Understanding the distinction between the two types of signs (rational signs
pertaining to physical well-being versus physical signs) is important because it will
help you identify in which dimensions you really need to focus. Whenever possible you
will want to identify the environments or situations that cause physical signs to manifest
themselves, as it will provide insight in understanding what kind of changes might be
beneficial.
Since physical signs are often unpleasant or uncomfortable, they may be more
motivating than rational signs. That being said, they may not fully tap into your
emotional side, so may not be the best incentive to get you to want to make change in the
end.
EMOTIONAL SIGNS
Emotional signs are the most motivating of the three types, and thus are probably the
most important in helping us make change that sticks. They are, however, a bit more
challenging to recognize.
First, in order to fully identify them, you must be comfortable acknowledging and
understanding your emotions and feelings. If you tend to push feelings aside or are
inclined to stifle them, it will be more difficult to pick up on emotional indicators.
Second, emotional signs aren’t always clear and can often be muddied by a variety of
factors. If, for instance, you feel bad or guilty about feelings, your rational side may try
to talk you out of your emotions or convince you that you are being overly sensitive.
This clouds feelings, making them more difficult to read. Third, human emotions are
very complex. And even though we may think we have the ability to understand what we
are feeling, our emotions can be a result of many factors that make them far from clear-
cut.
Since identifying our emotional signs can be a bit challenging, it may be helpful to
categorize them via the six dimensions of well-being. The list of signs in the “Emotional
Signs” chart below isn’t exhaustive, but it should give you a sense for some of the
typical feelings you might experience within each dimension.
EMOTIONAL SIGNS

PRIMARY VERSUS SECONDARY PHYSICAL SIGNS
How we feel mentally or emotionally can have a direct impact on how we feel
physically. This is generally referred to as a mind-body connection. When we
experience negative emotions, especially over a protracted period of time, this
can result in physical symptoms much like the physical signs discussed on pages
40 and 41. In these circumstances, our physical signs are secondary and are a
result of the situation we are in or a specific experience, and are not necessarily a

reflection of our physical health.
For instance, if you are frustrated (emotional sign) at work because you are
fighting internally with all your coworkers about a very important policy change,
you may experience stress, fatigue, and chronic pain in your chest area (physical
signs). If you were to remove the situation or trigger of work, however, the
physical symptoms of stress, fatigue, and chronic pain may never show. In this
case, the physical signs are a direct result of the situation, making them
secondary. Although it might be beneficial to have your physical signs or
symptoms looked at by a medical professional, there is a good chance that a
change within the dimension of your career might be what is most needed.
On the other hand, if you find you are generally happy and feel fulfilled within all
dimensions of well-being, but physical signs present themselves on a regular
basis, it means the physical symptoms are primary and your physical well-being
may be in jeopardy. As a result, you may seriously benefit from change within the
dimension of physical well-being.
All three types of indicators—rational, physical, and emotional—are helpful in
identifying areas for change. As mentioned, however, your emotional indicators will
most likely motivate you for the longer term. If emotional signs are presenting
themselves within a specific dimension of well-being, change may be warranted within
that dimension. If, however, a dimension of well-being exhibits emotional indicators, as
well as physical and/or rational indicators, you know you’ve hit on an area that would
greatly benefit from change.
STEP 2: TAKE A HIGH-LEVEL ASSESSMENT
Although you might have a sense of the changes you’d like to make, it is good to get a
high-level understanding of how you feel about each dimension of well-being.
Step 2 Tasks

Use the Dimensions of Well-Being Self-Assessment template in Part III: The
New You Journal to assess how you feel about each of the dimensions of well-
being today: (Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable
PDF of the worksheet templates.)
1. Rate Importance: In the column titled “Importance,” rate each dimension of
well-being on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 as the lowest and 10 as the highest) as to
how important it is to you and your ability to be happy.
2. Rate Satisfaction: In the column titled “Satisfaction,” rate each dimension
on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 as extremely dissatisfied and 10 as extremely
satisfied) in regard to how satisfied you are within each dimension today. If,
for instance, you find all your relationships with family and friends
rewarding and fulfilling, and you feel happy and content socially, you might
rate the dimension of social well-being high. If, however, you find many of
your relationships unsatisfactory or unrewarding, then you might rate it low.
3. Identify Potential Dimensions for Change: Circle the dimensions of well-
being you rated highest in importance (over 5) and lowest in satisfaction.
These are the dimensions you feel are most important yet are causing you the
most discontent. These misalignments are likely contributing a great deal to
your current dissatisfaction and are areas you may want to focus on as you
continue on your path to personal reinvention.
Although this self-assessment may seem pretty rudimentary, it drives preliminary
awareness around your feelings within each dimension. A heightened awareness will
continue to be an important aspect of the process.
STEP 3: IDENTIFY THE SIGNS
Now that you have a good understanding of the different types of signs that can present
themselves, it is time to identify the rational, physical, and emotional signs that may be
showing within your own life. Regardless of the dimensions you identified in Step 2,
look at all dimensions of well-being for this exercise. You may find there are areas you
didn’t think were causing unhappiness that are, or you may come to learn that the
dimensions you thought you wanted to change were in actuality not the source of your
current discontent.

Step 3 Tasks
Using the Personal Signs of Change Matrix template in Part III: The New You
Journal, take a survey of each dimension of well-being. Think about what signs
for change have manifested within each. You may find that you haven’t
experienced any signs in some of the dimensions or, for that matter, haven’t
experienced all three types—rational, physical, and emotional. Your job during
this step, however, is to document as many of the signs you know to be present.
1. Rational Signs: Rational signs are the most obvious since they tend to be
fact-based. For each dimension, identify any rational signs you feel are
present. Document these in the column labeled “Rational Signs.”
2. Physical Signs: Since we know that physical symptoms may or may not be
tied to multiple dimensions of well-being, the column labeled “Physical
Signs” spans across all dimensions. Later, you’ll try to identify if they are
primary or secondary indicators. Ask yourself the following:
Are there any physical signs I’ve been experiencing recently that may
be of concern?
Have I been experiencing any discomfort, pain, or other physical
symptoms?
3. Emotional Signs: Finally, for each dimension of well-being, document all
the emotional signs you have been experiencing. Start by looking at some of
the emotional-sign examples provided in Step 1: Understand the Types of
Signs for some ideas. Do any of the signs resonate with you? Are any of
them present in your life? To dig a bit deeper, ask yourself the following
questions and document your answers in the column labeled “Emotional
Signs”:
How do I feel about this dimension of well-being?
Are there any negative emotions I’ve been experiencing?
Do I feel any strong resentment, concerns, worry, or other issues within
this dimension?
Do I feel a strong desire to change something?
Take your time during Step 3. You may even want to think about your responses
over a couple of days. And of course, be honest with yourself. There may be some
dimensions in which you sincerely can’t think of any signs, and that is OK. It probably
means they are dimensions of well-being in which you are relatively content or have

little concern.
ROADBLOCK: COMPLACENCY
Complacency means being satisfied yet unaware of actual problems, concerns, or
deficiencies. In short, it signifies a false sense of contentment. If you are reading
this book in the hopes of going through a personal reinvention and haven’t
uncovered signs that something needs to change, you may be in a state of
complacency. If you think this is a roadblock you’ve hit, ask yourself the
following questions:
Why did I decide to read this book?
What was my original motivation to change?
What feelings or thoughts caused me to believe change was necessary?
Am I repressing or afraid of my feelings?
Has anything changed since I started reading this book?
Although complacency can set in, you can definitely get yourself out of the rut.
Remember that in Part I we discussed the “Aha! moment” of knowing something
needs to change. Try to recapture that feeling. Remind yourself of when and
where you felt it. Think about why you are unsatisfied and try to find a sense of
urgency within yourself that prompts you to want to begin this process.
STEP 4: FEEL THE IMPACT
Now that you’ve identified all the various signs you’ve been experiencing, it’s time to
do some analysis to understand how much they are really impacting you. Obviously, we
all experience negative or unfavorable emotions or symptoms at one time or another, but
if they are fleeting, there may not be need for concern. It just may mean you are having a
bad day or a bad week, or even a bad month. If, however, the signs are frequent or
chronic, then you may have hit upon something important, and change is likely
warranted.

Step 4 Tasks
Look at your Personal Signs of Change Matrix from Step 3: Identify the Signs
and ask yourself the following questions:
1. How often do I experience these indicators? Do they occur rarely or often?
Do they occur once a year? Once a month? Once a week? Every day?
2. How do I feel about this frequency? Does it feel overwhelming or is it
manageable?
3. How much do I want to change this indicator? How would I feel if I could
make it go away? Would I feel like a new person? Would I feel the same?
The questions above are meant to help you feel each sign’s impact. The
feeling behind the sign is what will drive you to want to change, not the sign
itself. If the probing questions elicit a passionate emotional response, then
the sign really is an indication that change is needed. If, however, you find
you are answering these questions rather flatly, with very little emotion
attached, it may not be impacting you that much.
4. Highlight the signs in the matrix that elicited a strong emotional response to
the above questions. You can circle them, highlight them in yellow, or use
whatever tool you want; just make them stand out.
The signs you’ve highlighted indicate that change is strongly needed. They are
your Signs of Significance (SOS), and are your starting point for your personal
reinvention.
ROADBLOCK: EMOTIONAL DISCONNECTION
If you tend to disconnect from your emotions, you’ll want to focus on becoming
more in tune with them. It is important to connect to your emotions to understand
how they influence your thoughts and behaviors. It is somewhat natural to want to
avoid negative or unpleasant feelings, such as sadness, anger, or fear, yet these
emotions are crucial to igniting the passion within to make change. Further, if you
tend to stifle your negative emotions, it is highly possible that you do this with
positive ones as well. Work on feeling and connecting with your emotions by
doing the following:
Practice Empathy: If you find it difficult to express emotions about your own

life, try doing it for others. You can either look toward friends or family who are
going through an emotional experience and work at fully empathizing with them,
or if you are uncomfortable with that, watch a movie or read a book that may be
especially thought provoking or emotionally gripping. Imagine you are one of the
characters who might be struggling emotionally with a situation. Try to feel her
pain, her sadness, and even her joy. Use a section in your journal to describe how
you might feel if you were in her situation.
Solicit Other People’s Responses: Some people have difficulty acknowledging
their emotions because they have never been allowed to, and so they shut them
off. They grew up believing that feelings, especially those that were negative,
were unacceptable. If you feel this describes your situation, look to other people
you know who are good at expressing emotion, both good and bad. Talk to them
about experiences they have found difficult. And if they have gone through similar
experiences to yours, that might even be better. Identifying with others and their
feelings may make it easier and more acceptable to express your own.
Pay Attention: Designate a space in your journal where you specifically focus
on capturing feelings and emotions. Start paying more attention to your reactions
and thoughts in a variety of situations. Ask yourself probing questions, especially
when you sense an unpleasant reaction brimming. For instance, you might ask:
How would I describe the way I feel?
How is my body reacting to this situation?
Am I angry? Am I sad? Am I frustrated?
Why do I feel this way?
The more you practice getting in touch with your emotions, the easier it will
become. Make a concerted effort to practice on a daily basis.
Putting energy into modifying behaviors or making change around those areas that
you don’t have much passion for may not be very long-lived. Think of it in this way: in
Step 3: Identify the Signs, you identified what brings you discontent. In Step 4 you
have now tried to identify the passion or feeling behind the discontent. When you put the
two together, you have the first Principle of Change:
Principle of Change #1

DISCONTENT + PASSION DRIVE CHANGE.
STEP 5: ASSESS CAUSES OF RATIONAL AND EMOTIONAL SOS
With some signs it may be quite clear as to what is causing them, but with others you
may have to do a little more investigation.
Step 5 Tasks
Using the Rational and Emotional SOS Assessment template in Part III: The
New You Journal, list the rational and emotional signs you highlighted in Step 4:
Feel the Impact (your physical signs will be addressed in the next step) under
the column titled “Emotional Signs of Significance” for each dimension of well-
being. For each SOS, ask yourself the following questions:
1. Why do I think these signs are presenting themselves?
2. What do I think the root causes of these signs are?
In the column labeled “Possible Cause,” write what you believe to be is the
cause of each SOS. Really think about it in detail and try to dig below the
surface. Understanding what is causing your signs to show will help you to
identify what needs to change. This will be instrumental to designing your vision
in Stage 3 and creating a plan in Stage 4.
STEP 6: ASSESS CAUSES OF PHYSICAL SOS
As we discussed earlier, physical signs can be either primary or secondary. If they are
secondary, it will be especially important to understand what might be causing them to
appear. Physical signs can often result from several triggers or root causes. For
instance, if you are feeling stressed, it might be a result of a stressful work environment,
a stressful home life, and an inability to regularly get to the gym to release stress.
Understanding all the triggers involved will help you to be more thorough in making
change. If one of the causes isn’t identified, and thus not addressed in your vision or
plan, you may not see as much improvement in your happiness as if it was.
If you haven’t identified any physical signs of significance, feel free to skip this
step; otherwise, continue.

Step 6 Tasks
Using the Physical SOS Assessment template in Part III: The New You
Journal, respond to the following:
In the column labeled “Physical Signs of Significance,” list all the physical signs
of significance you highlighted in Step 4: Feel the Impact.
1. In the column labeled “When SOS Occurs,” answer the following:
When do I generally experience this symptom or indicator?
Is it during a specific scenario or within a specific environment?
Or, do I feel this symptom at all times?
If you find that the symptom occurs often, it is highly possible that it is a
direct result of a lack in physical well-being and is a primary physical sign.
If, however, the symptom occurs only in certain situations, it means it is
likely a secondary sign and may be tied to another dimension of well-being.
2. If physical signs occur only during certain situations, they are likely
secondary. If so, you should be able to correlate them to a dimension of
well-being (other than physical) that is likely the primary cause. In the
column labeled “Possible Dimension of Well-Being,” write in the
dimension(s) to which you feel each sign is likely attributed.
KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 1
To successfully complete Stage 1, the following key factors for success will be
important:
1. EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
Emotional intelligence is crucial to this first stage and will continue to be important
throughout the other five stages as well. It gives you the ability to recognize and assess
your emotions and how they impact your thoughts and behavior. It also enables you to
manage your feelings, even those that are hurtful or negative, in healthy and constructive
ways so you can rationally approach change for a better future.

2. AN ABILITY TO TRUST YOUR INTUITION
Intuition is a “gut feeling” or a “sixth sense” about something. It is important in
identifying signs as they present themselves, and assessing situations to understand what
may be OK and what isn’t. If you find it difficult to trust your own intuition, there are a
few things you can do to develop the skill:
1. Enjoy the Silence: Give yourself time each day to meditate and focus in silence.
Calm your mind by attempting not to think or analyze problems. Instead, be open
and let your thoughts flow freely. Let your thoughts guide you instead of you
guiding them.
2. Be Alert: Intuition is often built on what is going on around you. Observe your
surroundings and environment, listen carefully to your thoughts and responses, and
gather information accordingly.
3. Go with Your Gut: If something doesn’t “feel right” then there is a good chance it
isn’t. Instead of arguing away those feelings, or coming up with reasons why you
shouldn’t think a certain way, listen to your inner voice. Practice trusting it and
making decisions predicated on what your gut tells you.
The more you practice the above, the more you’ll build confidence in your ability to
listen to your intuition.
Stage 1 Summary
Stage 1 is focused on learning to identify the signs that change is needed, and
mapping them to appropriate dimensions of well-being. The steps of Stage 1 are
as follows:
Step 1: Understand the Types of Signs. A need for change manifests itself in
one of three types of signs: rational, physical, or emotional.
Step 2: Take a High-Level Assessment.  Assess the importance and satisfaction
you feel within each dimension of well-being to gauge areas for change.
Step 3: Identify the Signs. Identify rational, physical, and emotional signs you
have been experiencing within each dimension of well-being.
Step 4: Feel the Impact. Assess the impact of each sign to evaluate if it is a Sign
of Significance (SOS).

Step 5: Assess Causes of Rational and Emotional SOS. Assess root causes of
rational and emotional Signs of Significance.
Step 6: Assess Causes of Physical SOS: Assess root causes of physical Signs
of Significance and to which dimensions of well-being they may be linked.
Principle of Change #1
DISCONTENT + PASSION DRIVE CHANGE.

T
STAGE 2: DISCOVER YOURSELF
KNOWING OTHERS IS INTELLIGENCE; KNOWING YOURSELF IS TRUE WISDOM. MASTERING
OTHERS IS STRENGTH; MASTERING YOURSELF IS TRUE POWER.
—TAO TE CHING
O SUCCESSFULLY UNDERGO A PERSONAL REINVENTION  and be your best, you need to
have a deep understanding of yourself: how you’ve become the person you are
today, and where your perspectives and thoughts originated. In short, you want to
uncover your authentic self.
The self-discovery process is probably the most intense yet rewarding stage of the
process. It is likely that you will spend a bit of time going through this stage. Through a
variety of self-assessments and activities, you’ll uncover and gain further insight into
your values, talents, passions, upbringing, and social and environmental influences, as
well as the life experiences that have made you who you are and influence how you
think and behave. Essentially, you are building self-awareness.
When we have a strong sense of self-awareness, we are able to take
responsibility for our thoughts, decisions, and actions. When we don’t, we can easily be
influenced by other people, making decisions that are predicated on their interests,
belief systems, and desires and not our own. Self-awareness also enables us to create
our own dreams so that we can live the life we want as opposed to living out dreams
that have been handed down to us or put upon us by family members, friends,
colleagues, and other individuals who may have agendas separate from ours.
In The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People, Stephen Covey explains that there
are three root causes that determine how we respond to situations and to life
circumstances. The first, genetic determinism, implies that your responses are based on

genetics: you are predisposed to act or think a certain way because you genetically
inherited these tendencies. The second, psychic determinism, is based on the principle
that your upbringing and childhood experiences have influenced your responses and
character. And the third, environmental determinism, suggests that someone or
something in your environment influences your responses. All three have merit, so all
three will be addressed in the pages that follow.
Self-discovery and building self-awareness are paramount to your ability to
change and successfully undergo personal reinvention. They lay the foundation and
groundwork for you to move forward through the next four stages of the path in a way
that is most effective to you personally. This is essentially the second Principle of
Change.
Principle of Change #2
SELF-AWARENESS IS THE FOUNDATION FOR CHANGE.
DID YOU KNOW? SELF-AWARENESS AND ITS IMPACT ON OUR
RELATIONSHIPS
Not only does building self-awareness benefit ourselves, but it can also help us
in relating to others and building healthy, sound relationships. When we are self-
aware, it makes us more capable of being honest with ourselves about our own
flaws, which in turn makes it easier to be honest with others. This makes us more
likable. Further, self-awareness gives us the ability to be open, thoughtful, and
aware of how we impact others. This promotes empathy, tolerance, and humility.
STAGE 2 ACTION STEPS
Activities within Stage 2: Discover Yourself  involve tremendous introspection, and a
lot of mental and emotional energy. This stage should not be rushed. If you haven’t fully
read through all of Part II as recommended earlier in the book, I suggest that you at least
consider a read-through of all of Stage 2 before attempting any of the exercises on the
following pages. This will give you time to fully grasp the questions asked so you can
be thoughtful in your responses.
Each activity should be done slowly. With some activities you may even consider
taking a day before responding so you have time to process your thoughts before
completing the step. This will help encourage accuracy and authenticity.

ROADBLOCK: OTHER PEOPLE’S OPINIONS AND INPUT
We can often fall victim to relying on what other people think to help guide us in
developing a perspective or viewpoint, or even to see the reality of a situation.
Although this can be helpful, it can throw us off course when we are trying to
recognize and listen to our own thoughts and feelings. If an individual providing
his opinion or perspective doesn’t understand you and what you need or value, he
could be giving you misguided information or insight. Further, if he is coming
from a psychologically unhealthy place, he may have a distorted perspective.
Instead of relying on the opinions of others to give you insight during self-
discovery and other parts of the process, try to focus on your own thoughts,
feelings, memories, and experiences as much as possible. Begin setting
boundaries with individuals who tend to give their unsolicited “two cents.” Let
them know that although you appreciate their thoughts, opinions, and concern, you
need to listen more to your own thoughts and emotions. If they care for you, they
will respect your wishes.
STEP 1: DEFINE YOUR VALUES
Your values are what make up your core beliefs and are the driving force behind
everything you think and do, who you are, and what you stand for. They are a result of
your experiences and influences throughout your lifetime, including your upbringing,
education, religious affiliation, friends and family, and more. They are instrumental to
helping you make decisions that are in your best interest and guiding you in creating the
life you want.
Your values run deep and are fairly stable in nature. They provide a foundation
from which to solve problems, maximize opportunities, and continually grow. That said,
how your values are realized can differ depending on where you are in your life.
Throughout Kimberly’s life, success was one of her core values. During
adolescence and young adulthood, success was tied very closely to her
achievement in school and business. When she was a high school student,
success meant earning straight A’s in all her classes. When she graduated high
school, success meant getting into the number one college of her choice. And,
when she graduated college, the type of job she was able to secure and the
salary she earned was what represented success. Even when she married her

husband, Evan, the money she made and the position she held at her company
was how she defined success.
When Kimberly was thirty-four, however, she and her husband had their first
child, Emily. When Emily was born, Kimberly’s view of success began to take on
a whole new meaning. Although she still valued earning good money, she
realized that the time she spent with her daughter was more valuable. As a
result, Kimberly redefined success as effectively balancing work, life, and her
family, as well as being a good mom.
As you can see, success was a core value for Kimberly and remained so
throughout various stages of her life. How she defined success, however, changed.
When she was young, success was defined by her achievements in school and at work.
When she became a parent, however, success was defined by a different set of criteria,
including family, a work-life balance, and being a good parent.
A solid understanding of your values will enable you to maintain a strong center
core from which to live your life. Your values require no justification to others and will
enable you to make optimal decisions. In order to successfully make change, it will be
important to adhere to your values as you design your vision for the future in Stage 3 and
create the plan to achieve it in Stage 4. Doing so ensures you stay true to yourself. The
more your vision and plan are in alignment with your values, the more you will continue
to feel inspired and invigorated to forge ahead with the changes you want to make.
Step 1 Tasks
Using the My Values Worksheet  in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template, (visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF
of the worksheet templates) document your responses to the following tasks:
1. Ask yourself, “What is important to me?” Don’t think too much about this
question. In the column labeled “Values,” write down all the words that
come to mind without censoring anything. Avoid listing anything you feel
you should write down and instead, focus on what truly speaks to you at a
deeper level. Also, try to keep your responses to one-word answers and
avoid lengthy phrases or sentences.
2. If you really struggled with the first task, or you feel like you need some
inspiration, look at the “List of Values” chart below, and add any words that
strongly resonate with you to your list from Task 1.
3. Assess each value on your list and provide one of the following ratings in

the column labeled “Rating”: A for extremely important, B for moderately
important, or C for not that important. Attempt to have no more than five to
ten values rated as an A. If you notice that some of the values you’ve
selected are similar, try combining them so there aren’t any duplicates or
overlapping values on your list. Some examples of similar or overlapping
values are: determination and perseverance; candor and honesty; kindness
and compassion.
4. Using the My Most Important Values Worksheet in Part III: The New
You Journal as a template, list the values you marked with an A in the
column labeled “My Most Important Values.” Go through all the values and
rank each of the five to ten values in order of importance in the column
labeled “Ranking” (1 would be most important, and 10 would be the least
important).
5. The top five values ranked in your list are your core values. Write these five
values under the “Core Values” heading on the worksheet.
Once you’ve chosen your core values, you can apply them to the work you do
throughout your path to personal reinvention. These values should also be your guide
through life, through work, and at home. They will enable you to create the life you
want.
LIST OF VALUES
Acceptance
Achievement
Adaptability
Adventure
Affection
Affluence
Agility
Ambition
Appreciation
Authenticity
Balance
Beauty
Being the Best
Belonging

Bravery
Brilliance
Calmness
Candor
Care
Career
Challenge
Charity
Cheerfulness
Clear-Mindedness
Cleverness
Closeness
Comfort
Commitment
Compassion
Confidence
Conformity
Consistency
Contentment
Control
Conviction
Courage
Creativity
Credibility
Curiosity
Decisiveness
Dependability
Determination
Devotion
Devoutness
Dignity
Diligence
Discipline
Diversity
Effectiveness
Elegance
Empathy
Energy
Enthusiasm
Enterprise

Excellence
Expertise
Faith
Fame
Family
Fearlessness
Fidelity
Financial Independence
Fitness
Flexibility
Flow
Focus
Forgiveness
Frankness
Freedom
Friends
Gratitude
Growth
Happiness
Hard Work
Health
Helpfulness
Honesty
Honor
Hopefulness
Humor
Hygiene
Impact
Inner Harmony
Innovation
Ingenuity
Insightfulness
Integrity
Intelligence
Kindness
Knowledge
Leadership
Learning
Love
Making a Difference

Modesty
Nurturing
Openness
Organization
Passion
Peace
Perseverance
Playfulness
Poise
Polish
Power
Prosperity
Quality
Resolve
Respect
Self-Actualization
Self-Control
Selflessness
Sensitivity
Serenity
Service
Sexuality
Simplicity
Solitude
Spirituality
Stability
Strength
Structure
Success
Sympathy
Teamwork
Temperance
Thankfulness
Thoroughness
Timeliness
Trust
Unity
Valor
Vigor
Virtue

Vision
Willpower
Wisdom
Wit
Youthfulness
Zeal
THE BENEFITS OF HAVING A STRONG SENSE OF VALUES
Goal Setting: Following a life predicated on your values gives you
direction in setting your goals. This enables you to set goals true to what is
important to you and not what is important to others.
Better Decision Making: Your values give you a foundation from which to
make all decisions. They ensure that your actions are in alignment with what
you find important. Without a solid understanding of your values, it is easy
to base decisions on circumstances and social pressures instead of on what
you value.
Happiness: When we are clear on our values, and make choices in
alignment with them, we promote happiness. When we don’t, we can
experience internal conflict, which ultimately leads to unhappiness.
Self-Confidence: Staying true to your values helps build self-confidence.
You feel surer of your choices, the decisions you make, your character, and
who you are. Further, your behaviors are more consistent and authentic.
STEP 2: IDENTIFY YOUR STRENGTHS AND ACKNOWLEDGE YOUR
WEAKNESSES
Each individual comes with an innate set of strengths and a set of weaknesses. Strengths
are those things that you do well, seemingly effortlessly. They come very naturally to
you and aren’t a result of acquired knowledge or skill but instead are a result of your
natural abilities.
According to Marcus Buckingham and Donald O. Clifton in Now, Discover Your
Strengths, we devote more time to fixing our shortcomings than to developing our
strengths. Focusing on our weaknesses doesn’t allow us to fully maximize our talents,
however, and can have a significant impact on our ability to be successful. Buckingham

and Clifton’s research shows that individuals who do not capitalize on their strengths at
work tend to dread going to work, have more negative interactions and feelings about
their company, are less inclined to have creative moments, are less productive, and treat
customers poorly. Those who work from a place of strength, however, are much more
productive, are more engaged, and feel they have an excellent quality of life. Although
most of their research applies to work and career, these same principles can be applied
to life as a whole. The more we tap into our talents and strengths, the more we will feel
fulfilled and find happiness and success in all areas of life.
Tony was very out of shape and knew that he needed to lose weight.
Unfortunately, due to his short attention span and competitive spirit, he was
never very good at doing the same exercises over and over again (running,
walking, weight training) with no obvious goal or “win” attached. As such, he
struggled with going to the gym. He even found working with some of the best
trainers to be rather boring. As a result, his multiple attempts at joining gyms
and working with trainers failed miserably. Losing weight continued to be a
struggle.
In exploring his strengths, Tony was reminded of his days in high school and
college, when he played team sports and was particularly talented at tennis. He
thrived on the competition of the game, and it came very easily to him. Although
it had been some time (about fifteen years) since he had played, the idea of
doing something he was good at seemed rather appealing and inspired him to
take up the sport again. Even though a lot of time had passed, he hoped his
talent might make up for his lack of athleticism, at least in the short term.
Tony joined a tennis club and started to play regularly, and as he suspected, his
talent and strength in the game compensated for his lack in physical fitness.
This kept him motivated to continue playing. He eventually lost the thirty pounds
he had gained over the last five years. Tony felt great physically and mentally,
and as a result, started enjoying other activities as well.
By tapping into his strengths, Tony was motivated to make the change he desired.
Yet when he attempted to approach the change from a place of weakness and disinterest,
he failed. Capitalizing on your strengths will not only build self-confidence but will
also keep you motivated for the longer term.
Step 2 requires that you recognize those things you do best. What are your talents?
What can you do better than most other people? Identifying your strengths should be
very automatic. You can also ask others who know you well to do this exercise with you
too. People who are close to you may have helpful feedback, but remember: in the end,

you know yourself the best.
Step 2 Tasks
My Strengths
Using the My Strengths Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as your
template, complete the following tasks:
1. In the column titled “Strengths,” write down a list of your strengths and
talents within each dimension of well-being. Try not to confuse your
strengths and talents with knowledge or skill. Instead, focus on those
activities or traits that come to you easily and naturally. To help you with the
process, answer the following four questions:
What am I good at that doesn’t require very much effort?
What do I do better than most other people?
When do I feel like I’m in a “zone” of productivity, accomplishment,
success, and happiness all at once?
What do other people tell me I’m excellent at doing?
2. Narrow down the list to no more than three strengths within each dimension
of well-being. Ideally, you want to highlight those strengths that:
Are your strongest
You can show several examples for, exhibiting why they are your
strengths
You enjoy using or working with
3. For each strength you choose, write down a story that demonstrates how it is
one of your strengths in the column labeled “Examples.”
My Weaknesses
Now it is time to think about your weaknesses. Although your vision and plan
should capitalize on your strengths, it will be helpful to understand what
activities or things cause you the most frustration or require the most effort. This
will help you to avoid developing a plan that will require extensive use of your
weaknesses, which could cause wasted time and energy. Using the My
Weaknesses Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a template,

complete the following tasks for each dimension of well-being:
1. In the column labeled “Weaknesses to Avoid,” provide a list of what you
think you struggle with the most for each dimension of well-being. To help,
answer the following questions:
What am I not good at?
What activities do I least enjoy?
What frustrates me the most?
2. Narrow the list down to three weaknesses per dimension. Reliance on these
weaknesses should be avoided or minimized as you design your vision and
create a plan for your personal reinvention.
STEP 3: IDENTIFY AND ADDRESS YOUR FEARS
All of us have experienced fear, anxiety, or stress at some point. Unfortunately, the more
we experience these emotions, the less we feel comfortable taking risks, managing
change, and moving forward with our goals. The more energy we spend in avoiding
what we fear, the less energy we have to actively pursue what we want. Many of us let
our fear of the unknown impair our ability to be positive, to plan for the future, or to
achieve the things that will bring us the most happiness.
Although fear is a very real feeling, it is often not based in reality. Fear stems
from what we imagine to be possible when we move out of our comfort zone and into
the unknown. It is rarely based on fact. We tend to imagine the worst-case scenario
instead of the best, and this propels us into a state of anxiety.
John worked for his company for over twenty years, yet he was very unhappy. He
was working with people who he felt didn’t respect him or value his talents, and
he knew he was drastically underpaid. Further, he knew that he was capable of
working in a position at a higher level. Yet John struggled to look for a new job
because he was doubtful that he would find what he was looking for, and worse,
he feared rejection.
While looking online for job openings within his industry, John found the perfect
position…a dream job. John’s experience made him an ideal candidate. Further,
the pay was better and the work was a better match for his talents and skills.
When he started the application process, he was overcome by fear of rejection.
His fear consumed him to such an extent that he convinced himself that he didn’t

really want the position, making up numerous reasons as to why it was not a
good match. But most of them were based in fear, not reality. His excuses
included:
1. His commute would be too long. The reality: it was an extra ten minutes.
2. He thought it would be difficult to take time off for the interviews. The
reality: he had an extra five days of paid time off (PTO) he hadn’t used
from the prior year and all of his PTO from the current year. Moreover, he
wasn’t heavily supervised, giving him flexibility to leave his office
throughout the day.
3. He thought he should be thankful for the job he had in an economic
downturn. The reality: companies were hiring again.
4. He believed he wasn’t really qualified. The reality: he was overqualified
for the job he presently had and perfectly qualified for the job under
consideration.
5. He worried that the new job in question could be worse than his current
job. The reality: his current job was making him miserable. He really had
nothing to lose.
John never applied for the job. His fears limited him from taking the risk to
make the change he so desperately wanted. His colleague Tim, however, did.
Tim was junior to John, and wasn’t as qualified or skilled. Even so, Tim ended
up getting the position. When John found out, he was frustrated and filled with
resentment.
John missed out on an opportunity to improve the quality of his life and his career.
His fears limited his ability to make change, and instead he stayed in the same
unfulfilling job, unhappy and stagnant. What is worse, he became bitter and resentful,
because he knew deep down that someone less qualified got the job he really wanted.
These negative feelings only compounded to make him unhappier.
Fear is debilitating. It cripples us and doesn’t allow us to take necessary risks
when we need to. Instead, we spend our time looking for the “safe way” of doing things,
which can limit our ability to experience anything at all. As a result, we miss out on
what life has to offer. The best way to avoid limiting your life as a result of fear is to
recognize your personal fears and confront them.
Step 3 Tasks
My Past Fears

Understanding past situations when you were fearful can be easier than
addressing current fears. Over time, the fear subsides and we tend to gain
perspective that allows us to see things a bit more clearly. Using the My Past
Fears Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a template, do for the
following tasks:
1. Think back to the times you’ve been most fearful and were afraid to take
action. Specifically focus on the fears that limited you. Write them in the
column labeled “Past Fears.”
2. Assess the emotions that were prevalent (and still may be) by providing
responses to the following under the column labeled “Emotions”:
What emotions did I feel during these times?
What was I most afraid of?
3. Assess the reality of the fears you experienced. Ask yourself the following
questions and put your responses in the column labeled “Reality”:
Were my fears based on realistic concerns, or were they irrational?
Is it possible that I made what I was fearful about scarier than it
actually was?
Were my fears based on past experiences or the actual situation?
4. Assess your ability to have controlled the situation you feared. If you had no
control over it then your actions would have had no influence. In these
situations, our fear isn’t helpful; once again, it is debilitating. If, however,
you did have control over the situation, provide answers to the following
questions in the column labeled “Control”:
What could I have done to better control the situation?
Was there anything I could have done to eliminate my fear?
5. For those fears that seemed to be the strongest, rewrite your stories in the
section titled “A New Story of an Old Fear.” Your stories should describe
the best-case scenarios that could have occurred if you had confronted the
fears and taken action. Discuss each fear, how you could have conquered it,
and the positive outcomes that could have resulted.
My Current Fears
Now that you understand how fear has limited you in the past, you can learn from
those experiences for the future. Looking back to the fears you described above,
you will want to assess which fears still plague you today and what else you are
afraid of. Use the My Current Fears Worksheet in Part III: The New You
Journal as a template in responding to the following tasks:

1. In the column labeled “Current Fears,” write in the fears from the past that
you believe are still limiting you today. If you feel that you have new fears
that you didn’t have in the past, feel free to add those to the list as well.
2. In the column labeled “Control,” assess if you have any control over your
fears. Ask yourself:
Do I have any control over the situations of which I’m fearful?
Is there any way I can control my fear?
3. In the column labeled “What I Can Do,” write down what you believe you
can actively do to address the situation that is causing the fear.
4. Just as you did with your past fears, write a story that describes a best-case
scenario of what would happen if you were to take the risk and push your
fear aside. What would happen? What would the outcomes be? How would
you feel? Write the story under the section titled “A Story of a Forgotten
Fear.”
Fears I’ve Conquered
Finally, there is a chance that you have had fears in the past that you actually
conquered. If so, you are fortunate in that you can use those experiences to inspire
and motivate you to address any current fears with which you are struggling.
Respond to the following using the My Conquered Fears Worksheet in Part
III: The New You Journal as a template:
1. In the column labeled “Conquered Fears,” describe the fear you had.
2. In the column labeled “Cause,” describe what caused you to feel the fear
you felt.
3. In the column labeled “What I Did,” describe what you did to overcome the
fear.
4. In the column labeled “Outcome,” describe how you felt after conquering the
fear. Did you feel proud of yourself? Were you happy? Were you glad you
took action?
5. For each fear you’ve conquered, summarize your story under the section
titled “A Story of a Conquered Fear.” This will be useful in the future when
you find yourself feeling fearful. You can use these stories as reminders of
how you were able to overcome your fears and the positive outcomes that
resulted.
This step may have seemed long and tedious, but there is a lot of benefit to really

understanding and getting to the heart of your fears. Doing so will help you address the
fears and anxieties you have that debilitate you, preventing you from achieving goals,
making change, and being your best.
As you continue to work on reinventing yourself, use this exercise as a reminder
of how unrealistic fears often are and how you can overcome them. Remind yourself of
the positive scenarios that can play out instead of dwelling on the negative. Push fear of
the unknown out of your mind and be open to the possibilities instead. Reread your
stories as you continue throughout your journey so you are continually inspired to
overcome fear throughout the process.
STEP 4: IDENTIFY YOUR PASSIONS
Your passions are what drives you and what makes life worth living. They are the things
that bring you joy and happiness. They are the things you do out of love, not out of guilt.
They are what you are naturally predisposed to do, regardless of money or recognition.
When going through a personal reinvention, integrating your passions into the plan
or action steps you develop will keep you engaged throughout the process.
Both of Joy’s parents died when they were in their sixties from preventable
diseases. Her grandparents, however, lived long, healthy lives. At the age of
forty-seven, Joy had gained about forty pounds in one year. She realized that
she was quickly following in her parents’ footsteps, and wanted to reinvent
herself to follow those of her grandparents instead.
As a librarian, Joy had a passion for reading. As a result, she decided to utilize
her passion as a motivator to lose weight. She set a goal of reading one book for
every pound she wanted to lose.
Books proved to be excellent guides, cheerleaders, and companions for Joy’s
weight-loss journey. Through reading, she was provoked to create a plan and
stick to it. The tips and tricks she learned throughout the pages of all the books
constantly encouraged her, even when failure seemed imminent. And, Joy’s path
seemed easier as a result of the many examples of dieters who made the journey
before her and lived to write the tale.
Since creating her goal, Joy was able to lose over seventy pounds and read fifty-
eight healthy-lifestyle books. Joy successfully reinvented her health. She went
from overeating to careful eating, from obesity to normal weight, and from
feeling pain in movement to grace and strength.

By tapping into her passion for reading, Joy’s personal reinvention was much
more enjoyable. She remained inspired and was successful in reaching her goals.
Step 4 Tasks
Using the My Passions Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template, do the following tasks:
1. Write a list of all the things you believe to be your passions in the column
labeled “Passion.” To help, you might want to ask yourself:
What am I happiest doing?
How would I most like to fill my time?
What can I do for countless hours and never get bored?
2. In the column “How It Makes Me Feel,” provide three adjectives that
describe how you feel when you are tapping into each passion.
3. Provide examples of activities that may allow you to tap into your passions
in the column labeled “How Can I Tap into This?” If you don’t have any
clear ideas about this now, don’t worry; you’ll have opportunities later in
the process during Stage 4: Create the Plan to understand how your
passions may play a part of your reinvention.
STEP 5: CELEBRATE YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Many of us find it difficult to acknowledge and celebrate our accomplishments. Yet
documenting them and referring back to them regularly can provide inspiration for
reaching future goals. Recognizing your accomplishments from the past instills
confidence in taking on new challenges today and in the future. It also helps in
overcoming fear when it rears its ugly head.
Step 5 Tasks
Use the My Accomplishments Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as
a template in conducting the following tasks:
1. Think back to the times you accomplished things that were important to you.

Write down each achievement in the column labeled “Accomplishment.”
2. Take a minute to identify the emotions you felt as a result of your
achievements. Write your emotions down under the column titled “The Way
I Felt.”
3. Think about how long it took for you to achieve what you did, and document
it under the column “The Time It Took.”
4. Take some time to remember the struggles, the ups and downs, the setbacks,
the obstacles, and all you went through in order to reach your goal and
accomplish what you set out to do. In the column titled “The Steps I Took,”
write down all the steps you took to overcome obstacles and to achieve
what you did.
5. Look back at all you’ve documented. Try to summarize in one or two
sentences the biggest lessons you learned from your achievements in the
section titled “Lessons Learned.”
STEP 6: LEARN FROM YOUR FAILURES
Although it may not seem like it, failure can be highly instrumental to your ability to
succeed.
When we fail, we learn valuable lessons that provide us with insights and
experience so that we can avoid making the same mistakes—or worse, bigger mistakes
—down the line. When we fail and can recover, we learn to fear failure less and can
see that risk taking isn’t so scary. You become less sensitive to the impact of failing so
that if it happens, the fall doesn’t feel as hard. This makes it easier to get back up and try
again. Finally, failure teaches us what works and what doesn’t, ultimately increasing our
chances of success down the line.
That which does not kill us makes us stronger.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Tamara chose to end her seventeen-year marriage on the eve of her thirty-ninth
birthday. After years of feeling unhappy and unfulfilled, Tamara had lost her
self-esteem, confidence, and self-worth. The decision was extremely difficult, yet
she saw the ending of her marriage as her only solution.

Leaving her marriage with three children, no career, and very little in the way
of financial help, Tamara needed to find a job…fast. Having spent years as a
stay-at-home mom, Tamara was confronted with the realization that she was not
qualified or experienced to work at a job that would pay her enough to
sufficiently support her children, and so she pursued her passion for fitness.
Tamara made the difficult decision to go away to school for eight weeks to
become a licensed fitness professional. Leaving her children for that time not
only caused her great guilt and emotional turmoil, but her friends and family
criticized her as well. The lack of support caused her to doubt her decision and
her dream of being who she wanted to be. When she returned from school,
however, Tamara quickly began her career in personal training, and shortly
thereafter was successful enough to open her own fitness company.
Today, Tamara is happy and is constantly excited about her future. She took
what most people would see as failure and used it to create a life that she loves.
Using her experience as an example, she inspires others to take risks and pursue
a better life for themselves. Maybe the biggest benefit is how it has impacted her
as a mother. Her children see their mom as a role model. They are proud of her
and continue to share a rewarding, close relationship with her, more than they
did before her transformation.
Tamara realized that by accepting the failure of her marriage, she was admitting
that she was living a life that was inauthentic to who she was as a person. Letting go
allowed her to become a more successful mother, business-woman, and person as a
whole. She would not have had the courage to re-create herself without first hitting rock
bottom.
Step 6 Tasks
Use the My Failures Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template while going through the following activities:
1. In the column labeled “Failures,” write down what you perceive to be your
top three biggest failures.
2. For each failure, write down three lessons you learned from the experience
in the column labeled “Lessons Learned.”
3. In the column labeled “Positive Impact,” write down how each lesson

learned has had a positive impact on your life or how it has led to
unexpected success.
By doing this exercise, it should become clear that failure brings with it positive
benefits, and it can act as a tool to help you achieve future success. As you continue
through your process, capitalize on the lessons you’ve learned and the positive things
that have come from perceived past failures.
STEP 7: DETERMINE YOUR MOTIVATORS
Motivators are what make us “tick.” They drive us to succeed and to accomplish, and
are at the very heart of personal and professional fulfillment. They influence our
emotional side and are powerful tools in getting us to consistently move forward until
we’ve succeeded, even after we experience failure. Our motivators inspire us and give
us the incentive, the energy, and the passion to stay on course with whatever we set our
minds to do.
Although your motivators may seem similar to your values, their roles are
different. A value is the what of your core beliefs and center, while a motivator is the
why—why your value is important to you. This relationship is further explained below
via the “Values and Motivators” chart.
VALUES AND MOTIVATORS
Your personal motivators are instrumental to staying engaged as you continue
through the process of personal reinvention. Different things motivate each of us, and so
it will be important to fine-tune your vision and plan to appeal to the motivators that
personally drive you as an individual.
Step 7 Tasks

Use the My Motivators Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template to conduct the following tasks:
1. List the core values you uncovered in Step 1: Define Your Values under
the column “Core Values.”
2. For each core value, write down at least three reasons they are important to
you in the column labeled “Motivators.”
ROADBLOCK: AN INABILITY TO LET GO OF PAST HURT
The self-discovery process may cause great and unexpected pain or hurt. If you
find it difficult to move beyond the pain and resentment you unearth from your
past experiences, practice the following:
1. Feel It: First, allow yourself to feel the hurt. Really feel it. Have a good cry
if you want. You have every right to feel the emotions you do, and allowing
yourself to feel pain from the past is an important first step toward moving
forward.
2. Analyze: Once you’ve allowed yourself to grieve the past, switch into a
more objective mode. Let your rational side identify what has caused the
pain. Analyzing what is causing the pain allows you to address it. Ask
yourself, “What might make the pain better?” If the pain is a result of another
person or several people, maybe it would be helpful to discuss your feelings
with those involved. In some cases, they may not even realize they hurt you.
If so, they may actually want to know how you feel. The honest
communication might ultimately strengthen your relationship.
3. Forgive: Next, practice forgiveness. Whether or not you are able to fully
confront the cause of your pain, forgiveness will help you move on. Remind
yourself that all of us are human and have our faults.
4. Let Go: Finally, let go. The past is the past. Learn from it. It is now time to
create a new and better future. There will always be circumstances and
people you can’t change. Worrying about things you have no power over,
however, will only cause more stress and negativity. Whenever you feel
yourself focusing on the past, ask yourself if it’s worth spending so much
energy on something you can’t change.

It will be important to factor in your motivators when designing your vision and
creating your plan for change and personal reinvention. Doing so will help you
accomplish more, achieve your goals, and ultimately find happiness.
STEP 8: UNDERSTAND YOUR UPBRINGING
Our upbringing has a tremendous impact on who we are, how we behave, and how we
think. Our relationships with parents and siblings, our position within the family
structure, and our experiences growing up all play a huge role in the development of our
value system, our priorities and our personality, and how we function from day to day.
Therefore, considering your family dynamic and your role within your family is
instrumental to effectively creating a vision and plan for change.
Step 8 Tasks
Use the My Upbringing Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template to document your responses to the following questions:
1. On a scale of 1 to 10, how would you rate your overall happiness level in
regard to your home life when you were a child (1 being not happy and 10
being extremely happy)?
2. Describe your family structure. Did you grow up with both a mom and a dad
in your home? Did they stay married throughout your childhood? Do you
have siblings? If so, what was your birth order? Describe your feelings
about your family structure.
3. Answer the following questions for each family member you lived with:
What were their positive attributes, and how did they impact you?
What were their negative attributes, and how did they impact you?
How close were you?
How did you feel about your relationship with them?
4. In regard to your home life, how did you feel as a child? As a teenager? As
a young adult? How do you feel today?
5. What did you like most about your upbringing?
6. What did you like least about your upbringing?
7. Looking back, do you feel there was anything lacking, or do you wish you
could change any aspects of your upbringing? If so, what?

The point of this exercise is to uncover how much your upbringing has impacted
your values, viewpoints, and behaviors. You may begin to see how your family and
home life have influenced you and your outlook on life. You may start to see a
correlation between your upbringing and your fears, past decisions, and even your
personality. These insights can help guide you as you make changes, and help you fully
understand when thoughts and behaviors are truly your own versus those that might have
been due to familial experiences and influences.
STEP 9: EVALUATE OTHER LIFE EXPERIENCES
Similar to our family and upbringing, our experiences outside the home can have a
tremendous impact on us. Both positive and negative experiences can cause us to look at
life in certain ways, and possibly have fears or anxieties that might not have developed
had those experiences not taken place. Many of the questions we ask in Step 9 are
similar to those in Step 8.
Step 9 Tasks
Using the My Life Experiences Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal
as a template, document your responses to the following questions:
1. Outside of the home, describe how you felt as a child. How did you feel as a
teenager? As a young adult?
2. Did you enjoy your experience in grade school? In high school? In college?
3. What kind of extracurricular activities were you involved with? Did you
enjoy them? Describe your feelings about them and your interactions with
other students or people involved.
4. How do you think the experiences from questions 2 and 3 have shaped you
as a person?
5. How would you describe work experiences? How have you related to
people you worked with? The work itself? The company?
6. List the five life experiences that provided you with the greatest level of
pleasure and happiness. Describe in detail why they were so positive.
7. List the five life experiences that caused you pain or hurt, or provided you
with the lowest level of pleasure or happiness. Describe in detail why these
experiences were so negative. How have they impacted you today?
You may find there is quite a bit of overlap between your upbringing and your

life experiences outside the home. What you experienced in school,
extracurricular activities, and even on the playground may have required the
involvement of parents or other family members.
For instance, let’s say Allison is a third grader and is subjected to bullying in the
classroom. Although the bullying is clearly a school-related experience, the way
her family responds to the situation, if at all, could have a direct impact on her as
well. The following scenarios are only a few of the countless ways her parents
might handle the situation when Allison goes home and tells them about the
bullying. Additionally, Allison’s responses could vary within each scenario.
Scenario 1: Her parents are dismissive or downplay the pain or hurt. One
way this could impact Allison is that she could feel alone and invalidated.
This could cause her to grow up doubting her emotions or shutting off her
emotions altogether.
Scenario 2: Her parents listen, are supportive, and validate her feelings.
Allison might grow up to be well adjusted and comfortable with her
emotions.
Scenario 3: Her parents take action, calling the school to set up a meeting
with the teacher, the bully, and the parents of the bully. Allison might feel
loved, taken care of, secure, and protected.
Scenario 4: Her parents become overprotective and overreactive. They pull
Allison from the school and place her in a different school. This might cause
Allison to grow up feeling uncomfortable with conflict, and she may struggle
with feeling confident in handling difficult situations.
Obviously, there are an infinite number of ways this situation could play out, but
each can have a profound impact on a child and the person she grows up to be.
Even from child to child the results may differ, depending on the family dynamic,
the child, and the additional experiences the child has growing up. The point is,
however, that experiences both at home and outside the home impact us in how
we behave, think, and act.
My Combined Experiences
Using the My Combined Experiences Worksheet in Part III: The New You
Journal as a template, respond to the following questions:
1. What experiences at school or during extracurricular activities required the
involvement of your parents or siblings?
2. How did they behave toward you? Toward the situation? Toward the other

individuals involved?
3. How did you feel about the way they handled the situation?
4. Has any of this shaped who you are today?
Understanding these experiences may help you identify any lingering hurt or
resentment you harbor as a result of situations or issues you’ve encountered in the past.
Awareness of these feelings and how they impact you should be considered as you
progress through the rest of the process.
STEP 10: DETERMINE WHAT YOU WANT
Now you will answer one of the most important questions of the self-discovery process:
“What do you want?” In Stephen R. Covey’s The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People,
his second habit is “Begin with the end in mind.” Practicing this helps us to think about
what we want out of life without the limitations of our current situation. It takes us into
the future, allowing us to think about what we hope our lives will have encompassed
from a deeper place, as opposed to a superficial or materialistic viewpoint. Step 10 is a
perfect time to implement this thought process.
Take some time and really think about this question and do so independently of
everything and everyone else. Only you have the answer. The self-awareness you’ve
developed through the previous nine steps should help you to avoid answering this
question through fear, resentment, or anger. Also, avoid basing answers on a need for
approval, or on proving yourself to the world. Instead, reach deep within and think
about what you want out of life.
Step 10 Tasks
Using the What I Want Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template, imagine change is easy for just a minute, and answer the following
questions as openly and honestly as possible.
1. When I look back on my life when I’m seventy, eighty, or ninety, what will I
want to have accomplished in my lifetime?
2. If I had children and/or grandchildren, what would I want them to remember
about me after I was gone?
3. When I die, what would I want my eulogy to say? What would I want people

to say about me?
4. What do I need, or need to do, that would bring me the most pleasure,
fulfillment, contentment, and satisfaction?
STEP 11: WRITE YOUR PERSONAL MISSION STATEMENT
By now you have done a tremendous amount of work in building self-awareness and
discovering your true authentic self. Hopefully you’ve gained insight into your
behaviors, thoughts, and emotions. You’ve identified your values, strengths and
weaknesses, passions, fears, accomplishments and failures, and motivators. And you’ve
done work to better understand your upbringing and life experiences, and what you want
from life.
In business, companies summarize who they are and their intentions with a
mission statement. This gives the company direction and a consistent message in
everything it does. Essentially, a company’s mission statement is like its constitution.
Now that you understand a bit more about yourself, you can apply all the knowledge
you’ve gained and bring it together to develop your own personal mission statement.
Unlike what you uncovered in Step 10: Determine What You Want , which
focused on what you want out of life, your mission statement should talk about the type
of person you want to be and how you want to contribute to life. It should speak about
the characteristics and qualities by which you want to live. Your mission statement
should be something you can identify with and of which you can be proud. It should be
reflective of your authentic self, and not other people’s beliefs or values. It should
inspire you and, if done well, should provide you with direction and motivation to be
proactive. Ideally your mission statement should transcend all the dimensions of well-
being—the social, career, emotional, physical, intellectual, and spiritual dimensions.
See below for some examples of mission statements:
I will see the best in others, and the best in every situation. I will not be
judgmental. I will ensure that I practice gratitude. I will take care of my body and
my health. I will treat others as I hope to be treated. And I will live life to the
fullest.
I will put my best into everything that I do. I will live with passion and choose
activities, friendships, and relationships that bring out the best in me. I will bring
out the best in others, and I will give my time and energy to the things I value.
I want to promote a healthy environment wherever I go. I want to encourage healthy
and supportive relationships with and between others. I want to be true to myself

and help others be true to themselves. I want to overcome fears that limit me from
growing and experiencing all that life has to offer.
Step 11 Tasks
Using the My Mission Statement Worksheet in Part III: The New You
Journal as a template, describe what you believe is your mission in life. Try to
keep your statement to no longer than a few sentences or a short paragraph. Keep
in mind all the positive things you just reflected on: your values, your passions,
your strengths, and what you want, while answering these questions:
What characteristics and qualities do I want to live by?
How do I want to contribute to the world?
What kind of influence do I want to have?
What legacy would I like to leave?
If you find you could use a little more guidance, a great resource for building your
personal mission statement is FranklinCovey’s Mission Statement Builder at
www.franklincovey.com/msb/.
KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 2
1. OBJECTIVE ANALYSIS
Self-awareness and self-discovery require a good level of objective analysis. Unlike
subjectivity, which draws on emotional responses to evaluate situations, objective
analysis means looking at situations through a lens of rational thinking. Essentially, you
use data to understand situations, experiences, and circumstances. Although you will be
required to identify your emotions during many of the exercises throughout Stage 2,
objectivity will help you to understand them in a nonjudgmental way, so you can analyze
your past on a deeper, more thoughtful level.
When we look at things through an emotional lens, our thoughts can become
clouded regarding what is real and what isn’t. Our emotions are very powerful, and as a
result, they can cause us to latch onto feelings and become stuck rather than find
productive ways to deal with negativity or hurtful experiences from our past.

Objectivity keeps us out of an emotional, reactive place and enables exploration of
situations so we can better understand them in a clear and rational way.
As a result of her father’s infidelities, Elizabeth’s parents got divorced when she
was very young. Although she seemed to handle the divorce relatively OK as a
child, the pain of it inevitably started to present itself when she started to date.
She struggled with romantic relationships, finding it difficult to trust her
boyfriends, often ending relationships prematurely. She judged marriage as a
worthless institution. Elizabeth felt, after all, that her parents’ marriage had
failed miserably, and that men would inevitably cheat no matter what.
At the age of thirty-seven, after years of failed relationships, Elizabeth met Jake.
Jake seemed different from any other man she had ever been with, yet she still
had a difficult time committing to him. When he proposed, she told him that she
didn’t believe in marriage, and as a result, didn’t see the point in staying
together. Jake truly loved Elizabeth and was very persistent. He didn’t want to
give up so quickly. He managed to convince her to go to couples counseling with
him.
When their therapy started, Elizabeth began with a very judgmental and
negative attitude toward marriage. She didn’t see how she could ever be
convinced that it was something she would want for herself. After a couple of
months of sessions, however, Elizabeth and Jake’s therapist managed to get
Elizabeth to move from an emotionally reactive mindset into an objectively
analytical one. He helped her to see how the reality of her parents’ divorce
impacted her emotionally, behaviorally, and mentally. She eventually realized
that the pain she harbored from her father’s infidelities and from the divorce
caused her to develop self-confidence issues, trust issues, and commitment
issues. In looking at the situation objectively, she was able to put the emotion
and judgment aside, and could see it was limiting her from living a potentially
beautiful and happy life with Jake.
After another month or so, Elizabeth developed a new mindset toward love and
finally accepted Jake’s proposal of marriage. Today, over ten years later, they
are still together and happy, and they have two beautiful children. Elizabeth
continues to practice objective analysis when problems or difficulties arise. She
is thankful that she has learned to look at situations from a rational perspective.
Staying in an emotional place limited Elizabeth, keeping her from finding true
happiness. However, when she was able to move toward an objective analytical

mindset, she was able to successfully step back and fully understand the implications of
her life experiences. This inevitably allowed her to successfully visualize and plan a
life that was meaningful.
The point of self-discovery is to gain a deeper understanding of yourself and what
makes you the person you are. Avoid passing judgment on yourself or your experiences,
and although you should identify your emotions, attempt to be rational in assessing their
meaning and their source. Finally, let go of the pain as much as possible. What is is.
What was was. Learn from it so you can move past it.
2. HONESTY
Honesty is an important characteristic in general, but in Stage 2, it helps you to discover
your most authentic self.
We are often afraid to confront our feelings and emotions. Instead, we may play
recordings in our mind that are dishonest about how we really feel or what the situation
is or was really like. Pretending you don’t feel what you do or that hurtful experiences
from the past haven’t impacted you keeps you in a place of denial. As painful as it may
be, it is important to be aware of your feelings and thoughts about the past so you can
use that information in helping you to build a better future.
Being honest with yourself provides the following benefits:
1. It Reinforces That You Are OK: Being honest means you are able to accept your
faults and life circumstances and feel OK with who you are and your personal
history. Dishonesty, however, reinforces the idea that you aren’t good enough, that
you somehow need to be different. It sets up an unhealthy dynamic that you have to
pretend to be someone different in order to be OK. We all have demons and
baggage, and yours doesn’t make you any different or any less valuable as a
person. You are OK as you are.
2. It Encourages Self-Esteem: True self-esteem stems from an ability to accept
yourself and love yourself, as you are, warts and all. The more you are able to do
this, the more you will cultivate a healthy self-esteem and level of self-confidence.
The more you lie to yourself, however, or pretend you are someone other than who
you really are, the more you undermine it.
3. It Enables Change: Real change requires that you come from a place of honesty. If
you can acknowledge the truth of your past and the circumstances of your life, you
can move past the hurt or pain so you can make changes to feel happier and enjoy a
better tomorrow. When you aren’t honest with yourself, however, you hinder your
ability to change. Unless you can honestly understand yourself, you can’t accurately
define what you want for the future, making it difficult to create a clear and

authentic path toward change. Self-awareness is the foundation for change.
All the work that you have done in Stage 2: Discover Yourself  is going to be
instrumental to your success moving forward. In order to change for the better, you will
want to factor all you learned during the self-discovery process into your vision and
plan for your future. Doing so will make your personal reinvention and the changes you
make much more genuine, putting you on a path to achieve and live the life you really
want and deserve. As you continue through each of the following stages, revisit the
work you’ve done during this stage. It will continue to impact your work and the
decisions you make throughout the process.
Stage 2 Summary
Stage 2 is focused on discovering your authentic self so you can design and plan a
personal reinvention that is most beneficial to you.
Step 1: Define Your Values.  Defining your values will provide you with the
basis from which your reinvention can start.
Step 2: Identify Your Strengths and Acknowledge Your Weaknesses.
Identifying your strengths will be important in creating a plan that capitalizes on
your talents, while understanding your weaknesses will help you know what to
avoid integrating.
Step 3: Identify and Address Your Fears.  Identify your fears, both past and
current, so you can find ways to overcome them and take more risks to build the
life you want.
Step 4: Identify Your Passions.  Identifying your passions will be helpful in
creating a plan that continues to motivate you.
Step 5: Celebrate Your Accomplishments.  Your accomplishments will act as
reminders of what you are capable of so that you stay inspired throughout the
process.
Step 6: Learn from Your Failures.  Failure is inevitable for even the most

successful of individuals. It should be seen as a positive experience that affords
you an opportunity to learn and grow.
Step 7: Determine Your Motivators.  Your motivators will be used to help keep
you motivated and inspired throughout your reinvention.
Step 8: Understand Your Upbringing.  Understanding your upbringing provides
insights into why you are the way you are and how your upbringing has influenced
your life. This will help you to evaluate what is truly important to you as an
individual rather than what might have been passed down to you or expected of
you.
Step 9: Evaluate Other Life Experiences. Life experiences outside of the home
have also had a large impact on you and your life. Understanding these will help
you to gain a deeper understanding of who you are.
Step 10: Determine What You Want.  Define what you want out of life so that
you can begin visualizing your ideal future.
Step 11: Write Your Personal Mission Statement.  A mission statement
provides you with a personal constitution of how you want to live your life and
the type of person you want to be.
Principle of Change #2
SELF-AWARENESS IS THE FOUNDATION FOR CHANGE.

W
STAGE 3: DESIGN YOUR VISION
YOUR VISIONS WILL BECOME CLEAR ONLY WHEN YOU CAN LOOK INTO YOUR OWN HEART.
WHO LOOKS OUTSIDE, DREAMS; WHO LOOKS INSIDE, AWAKES.
—C. G. JUNG
HEN A COMPANY IS INTERESTED  in driving change within its organization, it
creates a vision statement. The vision is a declaration of where the company
hopes to be in the future and provides the organization with direction and the motivation
to make changes that will get it there. Just as vision statements help companies, they can
also help individuals reach their goals.
I n Stage 3: Design Your Vision, you are going to focus on developing your
personal vision statement, which will guide you on your path to personal reinvention. A
personal vision is a picture of your future. This picture gives direction to the changes
you want to make and can be used as a tool to inspire you to move forward in aligning
your actions with specific end goals in mind. Without a vision of the future, efforts
toward change lack meaning and purpose, and instead of forging ahead, you might find
yourself aimlessly waffling through life. A vision provides the clarity needed so that
decisions are easily made and action can be taken that supports reaching future goals.
This brings us to our third Principle of Change:
Principle of Change #3
VISION GIVES CHANGE MEANINGFUL DIRECTION.
Lastly, a vision empowers you to take control of your future. For it to be effective,

however, it is essential that you design it with a commitment toward the work and effort
required to see your vision come to fruition.
STAGE 3 ACTION STEPS
The work you completed during Stage 2: Discover Yourself  was very intensive and
will prove to be very powerful as you continue on your path to personal reinvention.
The information you uncovered should have provided you with deeper insight as to why
you might be seeing or experiencing the signs you uncovered during Stage 1: Identify
the Need. To create your vision, you will reference both your findings from Stage 1 and
the work you just completed in Stage 2. Doing so will help you develop a vision that is
authentic to your true self.
STEP 1: VERIFY WORK FROM STAGE 1
Revisit the work you did in Stage 1 to verify that the signs you identified are consistent
with your findings from Stage 2. Although this may seem redundant, you originally
identified signs based on a great deal of intuition in Stage 1. With your gained insight
from Stage 2, however, you can now evaluate your interest in change from a more
rational perspective and a deeper understanding of who you are.
Step 1 Tasks
Well-Being Self-Assessment
Refer to the Dimensions of Well-Being Self-Assessment you completed in Stage
1 for the following activities:
1. Based on what you now know about yourself from the self-discovery
process, verify your initial assessment of how important each dimension of
well-being is to your overall happiness. If the work you did in Stage 2 gives
you new perspective and you feel you’d like to modify your initial ratings
for any of the dimensions, rerate them now.
2. Based on your findings from Stage 2, review the ratings you provided for
your current level of satisfaction within each dimension of well-being.
Again, if you need to revise your ratings, do so.
3. Verify that the dimensions of well-being in which you saw potential for

change are still applicable. If you feel you need to modify your initial
responses, do so.
Although each dimension of well-being is important to your overall
happiness, those dimensions you find most important yet feel most
dissatisfied with are the dimensions on which you want to focus. You may
have only one dimension in particular that stands out as needing change, or
there may be a couple. Whatever the case, these are officially your
Dimensions for Personal Reinvention.
Personal Signs of Change
4. Refer to the Personal Signs of Change Matrix you completed in Stage 1.
Based on your findings from Stage 2, do you believe the signs you originally
identified are still correct?
5. If not, revise as necessary.
Causes of Signs
Review your responses in the Rational and Emotional SOS Assessment and the
Physical SOS Assessment from Stage 1, and evaluate your findings by
completing the following tasks:
1. Based on your findings from Stage 2, do you think the possible causes you
originally cited for your signs are accurate?
2. If you see a need to revise your work, do so now.
STEP 2: MAP THE GAP
Your next step is to map the gap between where you are today and where you want to be
tomorrow. Mapping this gap will help you start to see where the opportunities are to
create change and will be the basis from which you design your vision.
Step 2 Tasks
For each Dimension for Personal Reinvention you want to address, use the
Personal Reinvention Gap Map in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template (visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF
of the worksheet templates) to do the following exercises:

1. Under the column titled “Today,” list all the signs—rational, physical, and
emotional—you verified during Step 1.
2. In the column labeled “Tomorrow,” describe how things would be if all the
signs you listed under “Today” were gone.
You now should have a fresh, clean slate from which to begin your personal
reinvention and should see a clear, simple picture of where you are today and where
you hope to be in the future.
STEP 3: PICTURE YOUR IDEAL TOMORROW
Referencing the work from both Step 1 and Step 2, you are going to paint a picture of the
future so you can develop a more structured, formal vision statement.
Step 3 Tasks
Use the My Ideal Tomorrow Worksheet  in Part III: The New You Journal as
a template to respond to the following as it applies to your life as a whole:
1. Describe in detail what your ideal life would be like. Don’t restrict yourself
or worry about the length of your description. Also, don’t worry about any
one particular dimension, just focus on the big picture for now. To help, ask
yourself the following:
If I could remove all my fears, worries, concerns or anxieties, and
current obstacles, what would my ideal life look like?
How would I feel?
What would I do?
Where would I live?
Where would I work?
What would be important to me?
What would my family be like? My friends? My colleagues?
Once you’ve completed the narrative, let the picture of your ideal life sink
into your mind. Imagine what it would feel like and how happy you’d be.
Next, you are going to do the same exercise for each of the dimensions
you’ve targeted as your Dimensions for Personal Reinvention. Using the My
Ideal Tomorrow Worksheet  template, start a new page for each dimension

and do the following:
2. Describe in detail how you envision your ideal state to be within the
dimension of [insert specific dimension of concern].
ROADBLOCK: FEELING LIMITED BY YOUR PAST
As we’ve learned during the self-discovery process, our past—both negative and
positive—is a huge part of who we are. The future, however, is where we are
headed. In order to create a vision, it is imperative that you don’t allow
limitations, or perceived limitations of past circumstances, to hinder you from
creating a powerful vision that is optimal for your future.
1. Shift Your Mindset: When we get stuck in the negativity of the past, we
become severely limited. We tell ourselves “I can’t,” “I shouldn’t,” or “It
won’t work.” As Carol Dweck tells us in Mindset, this is a fixed mindset
that limits our ability to grow and change. Start enabling a growth mindset
by encouraging proactive behavior. Think “I can,” “I should,” or “How can I
make it work?” These are much more productive thought processes that will
enable and empower you to create the future you want.
2. Focus on Your Strengths and Accomplishments: When you feel limited,
remind yourself of all the successes that you’ve had and what you’ve
accomplished. Revisit the work you did in Stage 2: Discover Yourself
around identifying your strengths and celebrating your accomplishments.
These will give you a boost in self-confidence and inspire you to take on
new challenges for the future.
3. The Past Is the Past: Remember, the negative things that happened in the
past are in the past. You can’t change them. That said, you can learn from
those experiences and choose to deal with them in a positive, healthy way.
Revisit the lessons learned from past failures, fears, or negative situations
and remind yourself of how you overcame obstacles in order to achieve all
that you have.
4. Visualize the Positive: Focusing on past limitations keeps us in an
immobile place. See the future as a new chapter to recreate your reality and
focus on what you want. This will help you to visualize positive outcomes,
mobilizing you to make them a reality.
5. You’re in the Driver’s Seat: Remind yourself that the only person who can
truly limit you and your future possibilities is you. You have the power to

create whatever life you choose. You have the ability to choose happiness.
You are in the driver’s seat of your own life.
STEP 4: DRAFT YOUR VISION STATEMENT
Although you might be anxious to get this step done quickly, a truly solid and effective
vision statement will not be created within a few minutes. You probably won’t even
develop it within an hour or two. The process will take time. Your vision is crucial to a
successful personal reinvention, so it is important to give it the time it deserves.
A vision statement is a powerful tool because it allows you to build a life that is
truly reflective of who you are and what you value. Ideally it should incorporate all
aspects of life, and for purposes of your personal reinvention, should most definitely
incorporate aspects that address your Dimensions for Personal Reinvention.
DEFINITION OVERVIEW
Although the mission statement you completed in Stage 2 may seem similar to a
vision statement, they are quite different. Refer to the following definitions for
clarity:
Mission Statement: Your mission statement is a summary of who you are,
what you stand for, your values, and your purpose in life. Most likely, this
doesn’t change very much throughout your life.
Vision Statement: Your vision statement is a picture of your future in the
next one to five years, which describes at a high level what you want to
achieve and who and where you want to be in your life. Your vision
generally changes as time passes and you achieve the goals you set.
A successful vision statement relies on several key qualities. As you draft yours, keep
the following in mind:
1. It’s Desirable: Your vision should appeal to you and your long-term interests, and
should continue to inspire you to make positive change. There is no sense in
describing a vision you have no interest in or don’t like. It should be an

improvement on today and should be something you are consistently motivated to
achieve. Don’t base your vision on a fad or trendy desires; instead, base it on
desires that will hold true for the long term.
2. It’s Simple and Undeniably Clear: Ambiguity in a vision statement won’t
effectively translate into meaningful goals. Your vision should be simple and
provide you with clear direction. Be sure you can clearly articulate it so it
continues to inspire, not overwhelm.
3. It’s Realistically Ambitious: Your picture for the future should be balanced
between what is clearly possible and what is ambitious. If your vision looks too
much like your life today, or on the other hand is too outlandish, you will only set
yourself up for disappointment down the road. Your vision should force you out of
your comfort zone, but shouldn’t stretch you beyond your capabilities.
4. It’s Measurable: Your vision should be measurable, meaning you’ll have a clear
way of assessing whether you’ve achieved it. If it is too vague or ambiguous,
you’ll never feel as though you are working toward something important. You’ll
never see “the light at the end of the tunnel.” In general, your vision should cover a
one- to five-year time frame.
5. It’s Authentic: Your vision should be consistent with your values and who you
are. To create a vision that is anything but authentic will ultimately fail.
Authenticity means staying consistent with your values, your beliefs, and your own
desires. We are incapable of living and sustaining a life that isn’t true to ourselves.
6. It’s End-Goal Specific: Your vision shouldn’t focus on the steps or milestones
you need to take to achieve it, it should focus on the end state or the end goals. It
should be a picture of what life will look like after all the work is done.
EXAMPLES OF VISION STATEMENTS
Ben: Within two years, I will be working as a pediatric nurse. I will have
purchased a two-bedroom home and will have reconnected with three friends
with whom I’ve lost touch.
Michelle: Within five years I will be partner at my law firm. I will be fit and
healthy, and will prioritize my health. My husband and I will be parents of two
healthy children.
Philip: Within one year I will lose fifty pounds and feel inspired to stay healthy
for the long term. I will stay active by finding outdoor activities to enjoy in all
kinds of weather. I will have healthy relationships with friends and loved ones,
and will be able to eliminate or minimize the unhealthy relationships of my past.
Janet: Within three years I will be president of the Rotary Club in my area. I

will have instituted a continuing education program at the local high school to
help local immigrants learn English. I will be head of the volunteer program at
the local hospital.
As you can see, these vision statement examples are specific to the individual, are
realistically ambitious, are measurable over a one- to five-year time frame, and are
simple. Each vision statement speaks directly to what the individual values.
Spend some time reviewing the work you did in Step 2: Map the Gap and Step
3: Picture Your Ideal Tomorrow  to draft your vision for the future. You’ll need to
engage both your emotional side and your rational side during this process, because
your rational side will have a sense for what is realistic and what is authentic to who
you are while your emotional side will know what you will be continually motivated
and inspired to accomplish.
Step 4 Tasks
Use the My Vision Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a template,
and respond to the following within the “Vision Statement Draft” section:
1. Ask yourself the following questions:
Who do I want to be?
What do I want to accomplish?
What do I want to change?
When do I want to achieve these things?
2. Consider the responses you gave in Step 2: Map the Gap and Step 3:
Picture Your Ideal Tomorrow, and weave them into your vision statement.
3. Be sure to apply parameters around your vision so you can make it
achievable and measurable, optimally within a one- to five-year time frame.
The process of writing a good vision statement will take time, and it might even
be a little “messy.” At some point you may think your vision is done, but after reviewing
it a day or two later, you may realize you need to further tweak it. Or you may fully
abandon your first couple of drafts or hash through a variety of revisions to get it right.
Whatever your process, remember that the resulting vision statement will be what gives
you clear direction for change. Remember, vision gives change meaningful direction.

STEP 5: EVALUATE FOR EFFECTIVENESS
The end goal in creating your vision is that it should be effective in helping you make
the change you want. As John Kotter, the author of Leading Change, states, “An
ineffective vision may be worse than no vision at all.” An effective vision is going to
incorporate all the key qualities listed in Step 4: Draft Your Vision Statement.
Step 5 Tasks
Once you’ve drafted your vision statement, evaluate its effectiveness for driving
change. You’ll want to make sure it adheres to the key qualities outlined in Step
4, and that it will truly inspire you and help you on your path to personal
reinvention. Answer the following questions using the Vision Effectiveness
Evaluation in Part III: The New You Journal as a template:
Will this vision push me beyond today?
Is it attainable and realistic?
Will achieving this vision make me happier?
Is it clear and simple?
Will I continue to be inspired by this vision?
Is it measurable?
Is it consistent with my values and my mission statement?
Is it authentic to me?
Is it achievable within a one- to five-year time frame?
Does this resonate with me? Do I like this vision?
If you’ve answered no to any of the above questions, it is an indication that your
vision statement may need to be revised to make it more effective. Modify your
statement until you feel it is where it needs to be. Ultimately, each of the answers
you provide for the questions in the Vision Effectiveness Evaluation should be a
yes.
Once you have finalized your vision and believe it is clear and well defined,
write it down in the section “My Vision Statement for Personal Reinvention” of
the My Vision Worksheet.
STEP 6: COMMUNICATE YOUR VISION

An outwardly expressed vision is more powerful than a vision that remains purely in
your mind. Studies have shown that communicating your intentions helps to increase
your sense of accountability in making things come to fruition, driving you toward
achievement. The last step of Stage 3: Design Your Vision is to figure out how to
express your vision in ways that are meaningful to you. Just because your vision is made
up of words or phrases doesn’t mean it has to remain in that format. If you’d like to have
more fun with your vision beyond the words themselves, try something creative in how
you represent it.
Step 6 Tasks
Once you’ve finalized your vision, communicate it through creative formats.
Consider any and all of the following, or if you have a method of your own, by all
means feel free to use it.
1. Speak It: Speak your vision out loud to yourself every day. Or, record
yourself saying the words and replay it every day or at any time you need a
reminder about what you are working toward. Hearing yourself express your
vision on a regular basis will make your vision seem more real and give you
ownership over making it happen.
2. Frame It: Whether you want to take a highly artistic approach or a more
simplified, no-frills approach, consider making your vision a piece of
artwork and framing it so you can visually appreciate it every day. If you use
your computer to do the artwork, you can do very simple things. Play with
fonts and colors, and incorporate some graphics to make it eye-catching.
Once you have designed a beautiful image, print it at a large enough scale to
frame it and appreciate it. Put it somewhere you can see every day.
3. Share It: If you are comfortable doing so, share your vision with people in
your life who genuinely care about you. Expressing your vision to others
helps to make you accountable. It also helps others better understand your
priorities so they can support you and your goals to make change.
4. Celebrate It: If you know of other individuals who are trying to go through
changes of their own, you may find it fun to celebrate the process together.
Consider throwing a “Vision Party” at which you and others can share your
personal visions. You might even spark some interest among friends and
family who could benefit from making some change in their own lives as
well.
5. Board It: Many people like to create vision boards, filled with images of
where they hope to be in the future and what they’d like to accomplish.

Visuals elicit emotional responses, and as a result are wonderful
inspirational tools. It is important that your vision board is designed wisely,
however, with intent and purpose. Otherwise, a vision board can become a
visual smorgasbord of materialistic desires. Avoid the temptation to put up a
smattering of images of pretty people and pretty things, as these images
aren’t really reflective of the deeper transformation or reinvention you might
be considering. Instead, look for imagery that is more profound, relevant,
and meaningful.
Vision Boards of the Twenty-First Century
If you haven’t seen or heard of Pinterest.com, you might want to explore it. It is
an online platform that allows you to create boards of images, organized by your
interests. Think of it as the intersection of social media and scrap-booking. If you
enjoy using other social-media platforms, Pinterest might be a very effective (and
fun) way to create vision boards. A few benefits:
You can change the images often.
You can create a board for each dimension of well-being.
There are no space limitations on a board.
You don’t need glue, tape, or any other messy materials.
Your boards look attractive and organized.
The boards take up no space in your home.
KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 3
1. A FUTURE-DRIVEN MENTALITY
Focusing on your future and what you want to accomplish is crucial to designing an
optimal vision. Looking forward encourages more positive thoughts and feelings, since
most of our negative thoughts are rooted in past disappointments or regrets. If you find
yourself getting stuck in the past, remind yourself that tomorrow is a new day, and you’ll

have a new opportunity to create a better, more wonderful life.
2. A GROWTH MINDSET
As Carol Dweck explains in Mindset, in order to change and grow we need to have a
growth mindset, as opposed to one that is fixed. A fixed mindset prevents us from
making change, because it is rooted in a fear of failure. A growth mindset, however,
embraces failure as part of the process of change and understands it is crucial to
succeeding in the long run. Thinking “I can learn,” “I can grow,” “I can change,” and “I
can become more [fill in the blank]” is consistent with a growth mindset. On the other
hand, thinking “I’m as good as I’m going to be,” “I’m as smart as I am,” “I’m as talented
as I am,” and “I can’t change” is consistent with a fixed mindset. If at any point you feel
that you can’t, remind yourself that you can. Instead of fearing failure, try to embrace it
as an inevitable part of the process that is instrumental to your long-term ability to
succeed. Surround yourself with people who encourage growth and live by a standard
of continual learning and growth themselves. Their growth mindset will rub off on you.
3. HEALTHY BAGGAGE HANDLING
The self-discovery process provided you with insights to help you understand what
“baggage,” or negative past experiences, you may be carrying emotionally and
psychologically. Emotional baggage can reap both good and bad outcomes. Sometimes
it inspires us to become better and pushes us to do great things, while at other times it
may become a hindrance or an excuse for maintaining a life in the status quo.
Bill grew up with parents who worked tirelessly, but constantly scraped by to
pay bills. They barely made it from paycheck to paycheck. When birthdays and
holidays came around, Bill was lucky if he received a nice card. As Bill got
older, he swore that he would create a better life for himself, and potentially for
his family.
Bill worked hard throughout high school, making him one of the top students of
his class. He was accepted to a very competitive university on full scholarship,
and still managed to work throughout his four years, anxious to build savings
for when he graduated. Upon graduation he earned a highly coveted position
with an international bank.
After about ten years and numerous promotions, Bill was offered a position as

an executive in private wealth management within a well-respected financial
institution.
Craig, too, grew up in a very poor family. His parents struggled to make ends
meet as well. Unfortunately, Craig let the circumstances from his upbringing
limit him instead of inspire him. Even though he scored well on a lot of the
standardized tests, he didn’t apply himself very much in high school. When it
was time for Craig to consider going to college, he decided not to and instead
took a job with a local hardware store. His philosophy was this: “What’s the
point? I’m not going to get very far anyway. My parents worked really hard, and
for what?” His path mirrored that of his parents. He remained relatively
stagnant throughout his life, moving from menial job to menial job, making just
enough money to get by.
Bill responded to the baggage from his past in a healthy and productive way. He
used it as a way to inspire and motivate positive change for his own life. Craig,
however, limited his future by believing it was predetermined by his past. Although Bill
and Craig came from very similar backgrounds and essentially carried similar negative
past experiences with them, how they chose to handle their situations differed.
How we deal with negative past circumstances and experiences is what can make
or break our ability to make change for the better. If you find yourself struggling to deal
with your baggage in a healthy way, consider the following tips:
1. Accept It: First, you need to acknowledge and accept past negative experiences.
We all have them. Sure, you may not like your less-than-perfect past, but ignoring it
or pretending it doesn’t exist only puts you into a state of denial and can lead to
more problems down the road. Accept that your negative experiences have had a
role in your life. Embrace how they may have molded you and come to terms with
the fact that, whether you like it or not, they are part of you.
2. Reframe It: Once you’ve come to terms with the reality, decide what you’d like to
do about the emotional hurts, resentments, or perceived limitations you are
carrying. Although our past is part of us, more likely than not we can work through
a lot of it so we can move forward and get beyond it. In Bill’s case, he used his
negative past as a motivator to create a better future. To reframe your own
experiences, ask:
How can I use my past experiences to my advantage?
What have I learned from them that can help me in the future?
This reframing exercise takes you out of a place of resentment and puts you in a
more positive frame of mind. It also puts you in a place of proactive and rational
thinking as opposed to a reactive and emotional place.

3. Seek Professional Help When Necessary: Seek the help of a professional if you
are struggling with especially difficult situations or memories. Psychiatrists,
psychologists, therapists, coaches, and social workers are professionals who can
help you move beyond the hardships and unhealthy aspects of your past.
4. Avoid Repeating History: It is human nature to be drawn to people or situations
that bring out old, comfortable habits. Relating to individuals who have similar
history or baggage may seem natural; however, doing so can keep you in an
immobile and negative place, stuck in the same ruts and behaviors of the past.
Further, it may encourage toxic and unhealthy relationships. Be hyperaware of the
circumstances you get into and avoid putting yourself in situations that let old,
unhealthy habits resurface. Look for relationships that support healthier habits, and
minimize those relationships that don’t.
5. Take Control: It is easy to feel as though you are held hostage by your past.
Remember, however, that the only way you fully lose control is if you give it up.
Ultimately, you make your own decisions and have the power to control your
destiny and to create the life you want. Although you may not be able to change the
past, you most definitely can shape your future.
You now should have a complete and formalized vision statement, which you will use
to guide you throughout your personal reinvention. This vision statement will be
instrumental in creating your plan in Stage 4.
Stage 3 Summary
Stage 3 focuses on designing a vision for your future.
Step 1: Verify Work from Stage 1.  Verify your work from Stage 1 to see if it is
consistent with your findings from Stage 2. Make revisions if necessary.
Step 2: Map the Gap. Looking at the signs of significance you verified, map the
gap between how things are today and how you want them to be in the future.
Step 3: Picture Your Ideal Tomorrow.  Tell a story of how you want your future
to look.
Step 4: Draft Your Vision Statement. Write your vision statement for the future.

Step 5: Evaluate for Effectiveness. Evaluate your vision statement to see if it
adheres to the key qualities of an effective vision stipulated in Step 4. Revise as
necessary.
Step 6: Communicate Your Vision.  Find ways to outwardly communicate your
vision so that it has a more formal and permanent role.
Principle of Change #3
VISION GIVES CHANGE MEANINGFUL DIRECTION.

Y
STAGE 4: CREATE THE PLAN
HE WHO FAILS TO PLAN IS PLANNING TO FAIL.
—WINSTON CHURCHILL
OU JUST CREATED YOUR VISION  for the future, and for a better, more improved
you. Now you need to develop a plan that helps you make it happen. A plan is
essential to taking your vision from dream to reality. It is the mechanism that provides
you with a clear path to take action and to succeed. It involves setting major goals and
milestones, and then designing a set of action steps that direct you toward meeting them.
In essence, the vision is the what you want to achieve, and the plan is the how you will
do it.
Your plan will need to address several key questions in order to be successful:
What are the desired results?
What will be required to achieve my goals?
How will I achieve them?
Where will I achieve them?
When will I achieve them?
Who will help me achieve them?
How will I evaluate my progress?
How will I reward my performance in completing milestones and tasks?
Your plan should address all these questions to ensure that it is effective in
helping you make the changes you want. Planning for your personal reinvention will
keep you moving on a path and will help you foresee potential obstacles so you can be

better prepared if and when they present themselves. Winston Churchill said it well
when he said, “He who fails to plan is planning to fail.” His philosophy provides the
basis for the fourth Principle of Change:
Principle of Change #4
PLANNING FOR CHANGE IS PLANNING TO SUCCEED.
STAGE 4 ACTION STEPS
STEP 1: IDENTIFY YOUR END GOALS
The vision you designed in Stage 3: Design Your Vision represents a big picture of
where you want to be in one to five years. However, it also provides a starting point
from which to develop end goals. To demonstrate, let’s take a look at Michelle’s vision
statement provided in Stage 3:
Within five years I will be partner at my law firm. I will be fit and healthy, and
will prioritize my health. My husband and I will be parents of two healthy
children.
This vision statement actually includes four possible end goals, extending over a
five-year period:
1. To become partner at the law firm.
2. To be healthy and fit.
3. To prioritize her health.
4. To have two children.
To begin the process of creating your plan, you are going to break down your
vision into appropriate end goals. Although it is typically suggested that you develop
“SMART” goals—those that are specific, measurable, actionable, relevant, and timely
—to ensure they are effective, such a system doesn’t appeal to your emotional side. As
discussed, engaging your emotional side is crucial to staying motivated throughout the
change process. As a result, you should make your end goals SMARTE with an E,
which stands for emotionally driven:
Specific: Your goals should be specific and clear so there is no room for

interpretation. They must articulate exactly what is expected and attempt to answer
the following questions. The clearer you can be, the less trouble you will have
finding motivation. Ask yourself:
What: What do I want to accomplish?
Why: Why is the goal important?
Who: Who else do I need to help me accomplish the goal?
Where: Where will I achieve the goal?
Which: Which steps are necessary in order to accomplish the goal?
Measurable: An effective goal must be measurable so you can evaluate your
progress and know if you’re headed in the right direction.
Actionable: Goals should be actionable. If you can’t do anything to actively work
toward your goals, you risk setting yourself up for failure. Ask yourself:
Can I take action to work toward this goal?
Do I have the power to achieve it?
Relevant: Your goals need to be closely aligned with your vision, your values,
and what you hope to get out of life. Ask yourself:
Is this goal meaningful?
Is this goal consistent with my vision and personal mission statement?
Does this goal match my needs?
Timely: No goal would be effective if it didn’t have a time frame in which you
hope to achieve it. This makes you accountable and pushes you toward completion
by a specific date. Keep in mind that although your vision might span a longer time
period, such as five years, your specific end goals may have their own individual
target dates for completion within the overall time frame of the vision (three
months, six months, one year, etc.). Ask yourself:
When do I want to accomplish these goals?
What can be accomplished in a month? Three months? Six months? A year?
Emotionally Driven: You should have emotional drive to complete the goal and
have a clear sense as to why it is important to you. The goal should create a fire in
your belly, a passion that continually inspires you to make change toward your
greater vision. If your goals hit you emotionally and grab you at a very deep level,
you will be more likely to continue with your plan. Although the emotional aspect
of a goal may not be represented in words per se, it should be apparent as to
whether it resonates with you emotionally. Ask yourself:
Am I excited about this goal?
Do I feel inspired and motivated to accomplish this goal?
Will I be able to keep motivation levels high, all the way through to
completion?
Although four end goals were preliminarily drafted for Michelle’s vision on page

100, you can now see they don’t quite fulfill all the SMARTE requirements. They do,
however, provide a good starting point. If the SMARTE framework is applied to the
same vision, it might result in the following end goals:
1. Within five years, I will become partner at my law firm so that I can support my
family and be considered a leader in the law industry. I will work with current
partners and mentors to develop a plan to help me achieve this goal.
2. Within the next year I will lose twenty pounds by eating a healthier diet and
exercising a minimum of three times each week.
3. Within six months, I will make my health a priority, by allotting three to five
hours per week to exercise, maintaining a seven- to eight-hour nightly sleep
schedule, and learning how to eat better when I travel.
4. Over the next four years, my husband and I will prepare for two children by
developing a sound financial plan, looking for a neighborhood where we want to
raise children, and purchasing a new home.
As you can see, although the preliminarily drafted end goals seemed clear, the
newly revised goals provide greater detail and specifics about how they will be
accomplished, how they will be measured, and how long each will take. When it comes
to making your goals relevant and emotionally inspiring, however, only you will know
whether your goals accomplish this. These requirements are more qualitative and don’t
necessarily get written into the end goals themselves.
Step 1 Tasks
Using the Big End Goals Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template, (visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF
of the worksheet templates) conduct the following tasks:
1. With the SMARTE framework in mind, look at your vision and evaluate
what seem to be the larger goals. In the column labeled “End Goals,” write
in each goal you identify. If you need to, refer to the example of Michelle to
see how a vision might be broken down into end goals.
2. Review each of your end goals and evaluate whether they meet the
SMARTE criteria. If they do, describe how under the column labeled
“SMARTE Criteria.”
3. If any of your end goals don’t meet the SMARTE criteria, revise them so
they do.
4. Repeat Tasks 1–3 until your vision is fully translated into SMARTE end
goals.

STEP 2: RESEARCH WHAT IS REQUIRED
In order to achieve each of the end goals you have identified in Step 1, you will need to
break them down into smaller goals, also called milestones, and action steps. To do so,
you will need to understand what will be required to accomplish each goal. Once you
have a solid understanding of what is entailed, you can then translate that into
appropriate milestones and action steps. Be as thorough as possible, as the work you do
in this step will be extremely important to the rest of the work you do during this stage.
Step 2 Tasks
In the column labeled “Key Requirements” of the Big End Goals Worksheet,
provide information for each end goal around the following categories. Sample
questions to consider have been provided for each category.
1. Knowledge: Do I need to learn anything new? Are there books I can read?
Do I need to go back to school? How else might I gain the knowledge I
need?
2. Skills: Do I need to develop or acquire any new skills? If so, how can I?
Where and how might I practice those skills? Can I take lessons? Can I get
an internship?
3. Professional or External Help: Do I need anyone else to help me in
achieving my end goals? Do I need to hire any experts or professionals? If
so, who?
4. Money: Will I need to spend any money to accomplish the goal? If so, how
much? Is it something I can afford? If I have to go back to school, do I have
the money? Are there scholarships available? If I need to hire anyone for
professional help, how much do they cost?
5. Time: How much time do I need to dedicate toward achieving this goal? If
there are other requirements, such as building knowledge or acquiring skills,
how much time will it take to fulfill them?
6. Other Resources: What else might I need to accomplish my goal?
Equipment? A professional network?

This information will be the basis for developing your milestones and action steps.
STEP 3: PRIORITIZE YOUR GOALS
As you may have discovered in Step 2: Research What Is Required, some end goals
will be easier to accomplish than others. Additionally, some of them will be more
impactful than others. When developing your personal plan for change, it will be helpful
to prioritize end goals in such a way that your efforts are most productive and
worthwhile. To do so, you will evaluate them around the following two qualities:
1. Level of Impact: It is probably fair to say that the end goals you’ve identified are
meaningful. Yet, some might be more impactful to your happiness and personal
reinventions than others. For instance, a goal may transcend several dimensions of
well-being and not just one. Or, accomplishing certain goals will help you in
accomplishing others, essentially making them prerequisites to your other goals.
Only you really know what is most meaningful to you. For illustrative purposes,
let’s look at Michelle’s four end goals, identified earlier. Of all of them, she might
feel that focusing on her health and losing weight will be most impactful, because
if she is in good health it will be easier to accomplish her other goals.
2. Level of Difficulty: Obviously, any goal you set out to accomplish is going to take
work. If it doesn’t, it probably isn’t much of a goal in the first place. If a goal is
tremendously difficult and requires a lot of effort, money, input from other people,
or new skills, however, you might find it overwhelming to achieve. You may even
run the risk of burnout. If reaching a goal is manageable, however, then the work
you put in will feel well worth the effort, and better yet, might inspire you to
continue making change. Based on the research you did in Step 2, you should have
a good sense of how difficult each goal will be to reach.
Once you’ve assessed the impact and difficulty of your goals, you will be able to
prioritize them. The goals that are of the highest impact to your vision and are the least
difficult to accomplish should naturally be your highest priority. The goals you identify
as being the lowest in impact and the most difficult should be the lowest priority. Refer
to the Prioritization Matrix on page 126 for an illustration of this.
Step 3 Tasks
Adding to the work you did on the Big End Goals Worksheet, do the following:

1. For each end goal, rate its level of impact on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 is the
lowest impact, 10 is the highest) and enter the rating in the column titled
“Impact.” You’ll want to ask yourself:
How great an impact will this end goal have on my vision?
Will this goal bring about a big difference in my happiness?
Will achieving this goal bring about desired results?
Is this goal a prerequisite to any of my other goals?
2. Reference the work you did in Step 2: Research What Is Required to
answer the following questions for each goal. Based on your answers, rate
the goal’s level of difficulty on a scale of 1 to 10 (1 is the least difficult, 10
is most) and enter the rating in the column titled “Difficulty”:
How much effort will it take to achieve this goal?
Will it require that I learn a lot of new skills or develop new
behaviors?
Will it require that I recruit the help of others?
Will it utilize my strengths or weaknesses?
Will it cost a lot of money?
How much control do I have in achieving this goal?
3. Any end goals rated 1 to 5 in impact are considered low-impact. Any rated
above 5 are considered high-impact. Similarly, any end goals rated 1 to 5 in
difficulty are considered low in difficulty, while any above 5 are high in
difficulty. Summarize your ratings in the column labeled “Priority” using the
following designations: High Impact/Low Difficulty (H/L); High
Impact/High Difficulty (H/H); Low Impact/Low Difficulty (L/L); and Low
Impact/High Difficulty (L/H).
4. Use the Prioritization Matrix Worksheet in Part III: The New You
Journal as your template. Write the number of each end goal (from the Big
End Goals Worksheet) in the quadrant that correlates with the goal’s level
of impact and difficulty. Goals rated H/L go in “High Priority; H/H goals go
in “Midpriority,” L/L in “Easy Wins,” and L/H in “Not Worth It.”
5. The goals you’ve placed in the “High Priority” quadrant are your first-
priority goals. Any goals that fall into the “Not Worth It” quadrant should be
avoided altogether; they will take too much work and will provide very
little return on your investment of time and energy. The goals you’ve placed
in the “Easy Wins” and the “Midpriority” quadrants of the matrix need to be
further evaluated.
6. “Easy Wins” might be worth doing even though they may not be
tremendously impactful, because you will gain a sense of achievement from
accomplishing them. Achievement, even on a small scale, still creates
enthusiasm and motivation to continue working toward your overall vision.

On the other hand, the “Midpriority” goals will be much more impactful,
even though they will take greater effort. In the end, you have to decide what
is more important to you.
7. In the section titled “Prioritized End Goals” at the bottom of the
Prioritization Matrix Worksheet, list your end goals in order of priority.
ROADBLOCK: INDECISION
Henry Ford once said, “Indecision is often worse than wrong action.” When
creating your plan, you may find it difficult to commit to various goals or a
direction in which you want to head. Many of us suffer from a need for certainty,
a need to be right, or assurance that things will turn out the way we want.
Indecision often stems from a fear that we will make a “wrong” decision that will
produce unfavorable results. Not making a decision, however, can cause a lot of
wasted time, anxiety, and stress, which in the end sabotages our ability to
succeed at making change and acts as a roadblock to finding happiness.
When we look at decisions through a lens of “right” or “wrong,” we limit
ourselves. Although keeping options open may seem like the best idea, it can
often result in stagnation, meaning we don’t experience anything at all. It is
interesting to note that studies have shown that regret, an unarguably negative
emotion, is more often a result of lack of action than “mistaken” or “wrong”
action. Even a perceived wrong decision can bring about better results than no
decision at all, as it can teach us and guide us in making better decisions for the
future. Reduce indecision with the following tips:
1. Prioritize around Your Values: Your values are the basis from which you
can become more decisive. When confronted with a situation or decision
you need to make, weigh your options and prioritize them against your
values so they best align with what is important to you.
2. Limit Your Options: Studies show that the more options we have, the less
likely we are to make a decision. If you find that you are overwhelmed by
all the choices you have, try narrowing down your options so that you have
less “noise” and can focus on a few things at a time.
3. Let Go of Perfection: If your indecision is a result of looking for a perfect
outcome, remember there is no such thing as perfect, “right” or “wrong,” or
“good” or “bad.” Also, keep in mind that making any decision often

provides more benefits as compared to making no decision at all: you will
make some sort of progress, may learn more about yourself, and may learn
lessons for the future.
4. Keep Your Decisions Personal: Sometimes we struggle to make decisions
because we worry about what others will think of us. For instance, if you
choose a job because it is considered prestigious, even though you don’t
have interest in the work, you are making a decision predicated on the
opinions of others and not what is best for you. Remind yourself of your
values and what is important to you, and aim to make decisions based on
these.
5. Build Your Self-Confidence: The inability to make decisions can often be a
result of a lack in self-confidence. It is important to trust your intuition and
believe in yourself to take an appropriate course of action. You have the
power to create the life you want. Believe in yourself to make it the best life
possible.
6. Turn Challenges into Opportunities: If your indecision stems from the
idea that certain courses of action present challenges or are difficult, look at
ways to turn those challenges into opportunities. For instance, if your goal is
to switch careers but you lack the necessary skills, think of it as an
opportunity to take classes and study something in which you have interest
and passion. Not only will the knowledge and new skills you develop be
helpful to your potential new career, but going back to school may also help
you expand your network and find a job.
7. Gain Outside Perspective: Although you want to ensure your decisions are
predicated on your own goals and needs, it may be helpful to get outside
perspective from a mentor, a friend you trust, or someone who knows you
well. They may be able to shed some light on making a decision.
THE PRIORITIZATION MATRIX

STEP 4: BREAK GOALS INTO MILESTONES AND ACTION STEPS
Your plan for personal reinvention requires that each end goal be broken down into
milestones and action steps. Milestones are essentially smaller goals, and action steps
are the activities you need to complete in order to accomplish them.
Breaking down end goals in this manner provides numerous benefits. First,
changes will seem much more manageable. Second, smaller goals allow you to
accomplish things more regularly and in shorter periods of time so that you stay
motivated. And third, with each accomplished goal, you’ll feel closer to achieving your
vision.
Each milestone you identify should follow the same SMARTE format as your big
end goals. They should be specific, measurable, actionable, relevant (to the end goal),
timely, and—of course—emotionally driven. The metrics you use for milestones,

however, should be smaller than those of your end goals. And your time frames to
accomplish your milestones should be shorter.
Jason’s end goal was to lose about twenty pounds in four months, culminating
on December 1. Instead of letting the number twenty overwhelm him, he broke
his end goal down into smaller milestones of weight loss over shorter periods of
time. He realized that twenty pounds over four months equated to about five
pounds per month. As a result, he identified his milestones to be: lose five
pounds by August 31, lose another five pounds by September 30, lose another
five pounds by October 31, and finally, lose the last five pounds by November
30. Losing five pounds per month seemed much easier to achieve than losing the
full twenty. As each month passed, Jason felt a great sense of accomplishment
with every five pounds he shed, keeping him motivated throughout all four
months so he could successfully achieve his end goal.
ROADBLOCK: INABILITY TO SEE BEYOND THE BIG PICTURE
It’s crucial to visualize the steps you need to take in order to achieve a goal. If
you struggle to break bigger goals into smaller milestones, consider the
following:
1. Pretend You Are a Teacher: Sometimes it is helpful to step back from a
situation so you can see it more clearly. Imagine teaching a child or a
teenager about your goals, as if they would be the ones making the changes.
Think about how you might help them make it more manageable. How would
you help them break it down?
2. Do Research: We live in an age when information is readily available at
the simple click of a button. Do research on the Internet, or read books that
address the changes you are interested in making. If, for instance, you want
to make changes on improving your outlook, read up on how to develop a
positive mindset and ways to reframe the way you think about things.
3. Get Help: Solicit the help of friends, family members, or colleagues to help
you think through what might be required to reach your goals. It may also be
helpful to speak to others who are experts or have gone through similar
changes. For instance, if you want to develop more self-confidence, speak
with people you know who exude confidence or who seem more confident
than they used to be.
4. Test Things Out: Sometimes a path doesn’t become clear unless we test
things out first. For instance, if you are interested in making change within

the dimension of spirituality, you might want to start the process by visiting
different houses of worship or trying a variety of spiritual activities, such as
yoga or meditation, to understand what resonates with you the most. Testing
things may give you better insight into what will be entailed to accomplish
your end goals and milestones.
DEFINITION OVERVIEW
At this point, you’ve been reading about a variety of terms—goals, milestones,
and action steps—that may seem similar. If you feel as though all these terms are
blending together, refer to the following definitions for clarity:
Goals: Goals or end goals are what you want to specifically achieve in order to
make your vision come to fruition. They follow a SMARTE format.
Milestones: Milestones are smaller goals you accomplish (which also follow a
SMARTE format) to help you toward achieving bigger end goals.
Action Steps: Action steps are the specific steps, tasks, or activities you take in
order to reach your milestones and goals.
Step 4 Tasks
Using the End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps Worksheet in Part III:
The New You Journal as a template, develop a detailed plan with milestones
and action steps for each major end goal you’ve prioritized in Step 3: Prioritize
Your Goals. Please note that although the template has a set number of entry
lines, your plan should be customized to your needs. This is just an illustrative
template to help you structure your plan.
1. Milestones should be bite-size chunks of your larger goal (e.g., Jason’s
weight-loss example). You should feel and believe they are achievable and
that you can succeed. If a milestone feels overwhelming, then it is too big
and should be broken down further. Starting with your highest priority goals,
break each down into smaller milestones. Be sure to make each milestone
SMARTE—specific, measurable, actionable, relevant, timely, and

emotionally driven. Aim for shorter time frames for each, such as a week or
two or a month or two. List each milestone you identify under the
“Milestones” header of the End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps
Worksheet.
2. For each milestone, identify appropriate action steps required. Go back and
reference the work you did in Step 2: Research What Is Required for each
of your end goals, and apply the same process to developing your action
steps. List the action steps you identify under the “Action Steps” section of
the End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps Worksheet.
3. For each action step and milestone you’ve identified, apply what you’ve
learned from Stage 2: Discover Yourself. Specifically, look at ways in
which you might be able to incorporate your strengths, your passions, and
your motivators. Revisit the examples of Tony and Joy; Tony utilized his
strength as a good tennis player and Joy used her passion for reading books
to stay motivated in reaching their weight-loss goals. Apply your own
strengths, passions, and motivators to your plan.
4. Repeat Tasks 1, 2, and 3 for each end goal you have prioritized.
Although the plan you just developed may change over time, especially as you
progress through it, it is an excellent starting point from which you can begin your
reinvention.
STEP 5: ASSIGN TIME FRAMES TO GOALS AND MILESTONES
Once you know all the end goals, milestones, and action steps required to achieve your
vision, you will want to create a time frame in which to accomplish them. By no means
does the process have to be linear. You may find there are end goals or milestones you
can work toward in parallel with others. For instance, if you have an end goal involving
weight loss and an end goal of improving your relationships, there is no reason you
can’t work on both at the same time. Or, you may have an end goal that requires a
variety of milestones and action steps to be done in tandem, such as going back to
school and finding an internship so you can embark on a new career. Or, you may find
that some milestones or goals can only be achieved once others have been tackled. The
most important thing is that you stay realistic about how much change you can take on at
once, and how you can most effectively progress in achieving your goals. If you can
manage or handle a lot without the risk of burnout, then feel free to do so. If, however,
you are best when you focus on one thing at a time, then consider that in developing your

time frame.
THE IMPORTANCE OF SHRINKING THE CHANGE
In Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard, Chip and Dan Heath
talk about the importance of “shrinking the change.” They note that “people find it
more motivating to be partly finished with a longer journey than to be at the
starting gate of a shorter one.” They go on to explain that “you’ll start to take
pride in your accomplishments…and that pride and confidence will build on
itself.”
You can look at each of your end goals as big changes and your milestones as
smaller ones. These smaller changes are highly beneficial to any effort you make,
because they accomplish several important things:
You Will Stay Motivated: With each small success, you will feel inspired to
complete bigger goals, as well as feeling more successful, more confident, and
headed in a good direction. Bigger goals will seem less daunting, and the
momentum you build will help carry you through more challenging moments.
They Make Change More Manageable: Every large goal is essentially made of
many smaller goals. Shrinking changes allows you to take things one step at a
time so the changes seem less daunting.
They Provide Opportunities to Fine-Tune Your Plan:  Setting up milestones
allows you to regularly assess if something isn’t working or if a shorter-term
milestone becomes impossible to achieve. You can adjust your plan in a much
more efficient and timely manner.
They Establish a Well-Defined Path: Identifying milestones will put you on a
clear path that is consistent in direction and purpose. It will keep you moving
forward, and will help eliminate potential wavering.
Step 5 Tasks
In the column titled “Due Date” in the End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps
Worksheet, fill in a target date for the completion of each end goal and
milestone. Be realistic in your expectations so that you don’t try to complete

goals or milestones too quickly.
You may find that some of your milestones or end goals, once achieved, will
need to be maintained on an ongoing basis. For instance, let’s say a
milestone is to go to the gym four times a week. At some point the hope
would be that you would be able to maintain this level of activity. In this
case, make the target date the date by which you hope you are able to
consistently maintain your goal.
You could also consider putting in target dates for your action steps, but be
careful not to overcontrol or overplan each detail to the point that it
becomes burdensome or inflexible. Depending on the end goal or milestone,
action steps might need to be completed on a more organic level. Use your
best judgment.
CREATING MILESTONES AND ACTION STEPS—AN EXAMPLE
Ilene is interested in reinventing her career by making a switch from technology
sales to marketing within the biotechnology industry. Her end goal is to gain a
marketing position at a biotech company within six months. In order to make this
goal a reality, she creates a plan by breaking her bigger goal down into several
smaller and more manageable milestones:
1. Send resumes to ten companies within four weeks.
2. Go on at least four interviews within two months.
3. Secure at least two offers within four months.
4. Obtain a new job within six months.
Next, Ilene identifies action steps for each of her milestones. For her first
milestone—send resumes to ten companies within four weeks—Ilene identifies
the following action steps:
1. Draft resume and cover letter.
2. Send resume and cover letter to five people for review and feedback.
3. Edit both based on feedback.
4. Repeat steps 1 and 2 until confident the résumé is ready.
5. Research companies within the local area.
6. Network with friends, family, and business colleagues who might have
connections at local biotech companies.

7. Contact companies to identify who should receive résumé and cover letter.
8. Send out résumés and cover letters to identified individuals.
Finally, Ilene identifies target dates for completion for each of her milestones and
end goals and, in this case, for her action steps.
Ilene’s detailed plan makes it much easier to tackle the work required to achieve
her goal. She can make progress one step at a time, and will feel a sense of
accomplishment along the way. With every step made, she will be closer to
completion. Refer to the Sample End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps Plan
on page 134 to see how Ilene’s plan might look within the template provided in
Part III: The New You Journal.
SAMPLE END GOALS, MILESTONES, AND ACTION STEPS PLAN

STEP 6: BUILD IN A REWARDS SYSTEM
At this point you have fleshed out a pretty extensive plan for your personal reinvention.
You’ve identified all your goals, milestones, and action steps, and their respective time
frames and metrics. Now, you’ll want to identify appropriate rewards to celebrate each
of the milestones and goals you accomplish.
Hopefully your inspiration to reach your goals is because doing so will bring you
a greater level of happiness and allow you to be your best self. As a result, the rewards
you build into your plan shouldn’t necessarily act as incentives but instead as symbols
of appreciation and recognition for the work you put into your achievements. Formally
acknowledging your accomplishments through a set of rewards instills a feeling of
progress and success, inspiring you to continue on the path that you created.
Step 6 Tasks

Use the End Goals, Milestones, and Action Steps Worksheet to do the
following tasks:
1. Look at each of your end goals and milestones and think about a reward
you’d like to receive for achieving them. The rewards you choose are
completely up to you, but ideally they should continue to emotionally inspire
you. Maybe you’ve wanted to take a trip. Maybe it is a celebration with
loved ones. Maybe it is a purchase you’ve been putting off for some time.
Regardless, you should look forward to your reward as much as the feeling
you will have in accomplishing the goal or milestone itself.
2. In the column titled “Reward,” fill in the reward you have identified for
each milestone and end goal.
STEP 7: BUILD IN REGULAR CHECKPOINTS
In order to monitor your progress in Stage 6, you will want to build in regular
checkpoints to assess how you are doing with your plan. Checkpoints should be frequent
enough that you don’t find yourself on an incorrect path for too long, but spread out
enough so you have sufficient time to attempt a number of the action steps outlined and
to see if they are working.
If you have a lot of smaller action steps that don’t require a tremendous amount of
effort, you might want to build in checkpoints more frequently. If, however, reaching a
milestone requires a variety of complicated or longer action steps, biweekly or monthly
checkpoints might be the right frequency. Customize your checkpoints so they best
address your needs and are appropriate for your specific situation.
Step 7 Tasks
Look at the plan you’ve just created, and assess where it makes most sense to
build in regular checkpoints for each end goal and milestone. Consider both
frequency and timing. Once you’ve evaluated how often and when your
checkpoints should occur, note them on your plan. You can either highlight the
day or put in a designation of “CP” on that day.

KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 4
1. HAVE REALISTIC EXPECTATIONS
Although making change should push you beyond your comfort zone, it is important to
remain realistic in your expectations. Setting goals or milestones that are unrealistic or
too lofty can set you up for disappointment or potential failure.
Elizabeth had wanted to be a ballerina since she was a young girl, but never
pursued her dream. When she turned forty-two, she still yearned for ballet to be
part of her life and so made it a goal. Given standards of the profession, it
would be unrealistic for Elizabeth to set a goal of becoming a professional
ballet dancer at her age. Most ballet professionals reach their prime in their
late teens, twenties, and early thirties. As a result, Elizabeth decided not to
pursue ballet as a career; she knew that if she did she would likely set herself up
for disappointment or failure. Instead, Elizabeth has chosen to incorporate
ballet into her life by taking classes at a local performing arts school or
university. This has made creating and pursuing her goal more realistic.
Another aspect of setting realistic expectations for yourself is that you want to be
sure to give yourself enough time to accomplish each step, each milestone, and
ultimately each goal. Unrealistic time frames that cause you to rush through any stage of
your process could negatively impact your chances of success. Take your time and enjoy
the process.
2. KNOW WHAT YOU CAN CONTROL
When creating your plan, your chances of success are highest when you can control your
actions and behaviors, and ultimately the outcomes. If, however, you create a plan that
is largely dependent on the actions or input of others or on external circumstances, you
run the risk of failure. Develop goals, milestones, and action steps that mostly rely on
your own abilities so that you have the greatest chance of success.
3. APPEAL TO YOUR EMOTIONAL SIDE
As we’ve discussed, engaging your emotional side is crucial to the process of personal

reinvention and change. Continue to revisit the signs you identified during Stage 1 to
recapture the feeling. Also, remind yourself of the strengths, passions, and motivators
you identified during Stage 2 so you develop a plan that inspires and encourages you to
continue working toward your goals, even during periods of frustration.
4. KEEP THE PLAN SIMPLE
The process that has been outlined throughout this stage has been very detailed. The
detail is meant to provide you with a full understanding of how to best navigate and plan
for change and personal reinvention. That said, your plan itself should be as simple as
possible. If your plan becomes cumbersome or too complicated, take a step back and try
to simplify it as best you can. You’ll be more likely to stay inspired by simplicity, not
complexity.
You now have your plan for personal reinvention. This will guide you throughout the
process of reinvention and will help keep you stay on track so you can most effectively
reach your goals and see your vision for your best life come to fruition.
Stage 4 Summary
Stage 4 requires that you create a plan to make your vision a reality.
Step 1: Identify Your End goals.  Based on your vision, create end goals that
follow the SMARTE framework.
Step 2: Research What Is Required. Do research to understand what will be
involved to achieve each of your end goals.
Step 3: Prioritize Your Goals.  Based on two qualities—impact and difficulty—
prioritize your goals so you know what to focus on first, second, third, etc.
Step 4: Break Goals into Milestones and Action Steps. Based on your findings
in Step 2, break your end goals into smaller goals—milestones and action steps.

Step 5: Assign Time Frames to Goals and Milestones. Identify appropriate
target dates for the completion of each of your milestones and end goals and, if
appropriate, action steps.
Step 6: Build In a Rewards System. Identify appropriate rewards that allow you
to acknowledge and appreciate your progress as you go through your process.
Step 7: Build In Regular Checkpoints. So that you can properly do the work in
Stage 6, identify regular checkpoints at which you will evaluate your progress.
Principle of Change #4
PLANNING FOR CHANGE IS PLANNING TO SUCCEED.

T
STAGE 5: MAKE IT HAPPEN
THE ONLY DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SUCCESS AND FAILURE IS THE ABILITY TO TAKE ACTION.
—ALEXANDER GRAHAM BELL
HE PLAN YOU CREATED IN  Stage 4 will be your guide throughout your personal
reinvention. You should have clear goals and a clear path to follow in order to
ultimately help you make your vision a reality. Now, it is time to take your plan and put
it into action.
Even the best plans can fail if the execution is faulty. Often, this can be a result of
an unforeseen roadblock that seems overwhelmingly difficult to navigate, a lack in
dedication or commitment, or a lack in sustained motivation. Regardless, proper action
is the precursor to making change successful. This brings us to our fifth Principle of
Change:
Principle of Change #5
WITHOUT PROPER ACTION, CHANGE CANNOT OCCUR.
Hopefully, due to all the work you’ve done thus far, you at least have the initial
motivation you need to take the first step. To ensure you have long-term follow-through,
however, you’ll want to know how to overcome roadblocks when they present
themselves, and how to continually fuel your internal motivation and commitment so that
you are inspired to constantly make progress.
STAGE 5 ACTION STEPS

STEP 1: FIND THE RIGHT TRACKING TOOL
The first step to execution is to find an effective way to keep track of your progress.
You’ll want to use a tool that supports you in documenting and tracking your action
steps, milestones, and goals. There are a lot of tools you can use, but you want to find
the one that you’ll be most likely to use and that will most likely work for you.
ROADBLOCK: AN INABILITY TO PRIORITIZE YOUR OWN NEEDS
If you find it difficult to say no to people or to set boundaries with others, you
may also find it challenging to prioritize your own needs. Doing so, however, is
crucial to your ability to achieve what you want and to accomplishing your goals.
When you can make your needs a priority, you are honoring your commitments to
yourself. This allows you to put in the time required to make the changes you
want and gives you more control over your life. It builds self-respect and self-
confidence, and will actually help you gain the respect and confidence of others
as well. To better prioritize your own needs, consider the following:
Evaluate Opportunities: As new opportunities present themselves,
evaluate them against your current goals. For instance, if you’re asked to
work on a special project that will require an extra ten hours per week for
several months, no might be the best response if you’re trying to spend more
time with your family. On the other hand, if you’ll be paid overtime, and one
of your goals is to buy a house, you may want to consider responding yes so
you can put money more quickly toward a down payment.
Sweat the Small Stuff: Our commitments can spiral out of control because
we say yes to too many small things. The small things, however, add up.
Realize that with every yes you’re making a commitment to something that
might take you away from your own priorities.
Take Your Time: If you’re presented with an opportunity but don’t know
how to respond, take a day or two to think about it. Rarely is a decision ever
so urgent that a response is required immediately. Also, when you take your
time to evaluate an opportunity, you are less inclined to respond from an
emotional place. Instead, you will be more likely to respond rationally and
realistically about what you can and can’t commit to.
Leave Guilt Behind: If you don’t feel like doing something or know it
won’t help you toward reaching your own goals, yet you feel obligated, this
is a cue that you are doing something out of guilt. In these situations, a no is

likely in order. Prioritizing out of guilt prevents us from taking ownership of
our lives and our decisions. We instead are letting everybody else’s needs
come first.
Be Up Front and Honest: Remember, you have every right to prioritize
yourself and say no. Whether you’re too busy, have more important things to
take care of or do, or don’t feel an opportunity is something you’re genuinely
interested in, it’s a good reason. Be up front and honest with people so they
know where you stand and where your priorities are. This will help them to
have a better understanding of what they can and can’t expect from you. Try
not to waffle or string people along, as this will only prolong the agony.
If, for instance, you avoid technological gadgets or prefer the traditional route of
putting pen to paper, then don’t choose to put your plan and tracking mechanisms on the
computer, an electronic tablet, or any other technological device. Instead, use a device
in which you can track your progress by hand—your journal might be ideal. If, however,
you sit in front of your computer a good portion of the day or like using technological
devices, then you might be better off putting your plan into a software tool like
Microsoft Excel or even Microsoft Project. The End Goals, Milestones, and Action
Steps Worksheet (visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable
PDF of the worksheet templates) used in Stage 4 is suited for these two programs. There
may be other tools or apps you might find helpful; just be sure to use something with
which you are most comfortable.
Step 1 Tasks
Regardless of the tool you choose, it should incorporate a reminder of your
vision, your big end goals, your milestones, and your action steps, and the
respective time frames for each. Further, it should be helpful, not a nuisance.
Your tool should be:
Supportive of Your Vision: The tool must support you in living your
mission and achieving your vision, goals, milestones, and action steps.
Easy to Use: Your tracking tool should be easy to use so that it helps
motivate and encourage you to make progress. Integrate your tool into
everyday life so it becomes habitual as opposed to an afterthought.
Matched to You: Your tool should match your personality, your needs, and
how you function as an individual. If you find using or updating a tool to be

a hassle, it may actually undermine your efforts.
Portable: In order to update your progress easily and regularly, regardless
of where you are or what you’re doing, the tool you choose should be
portable so you can bring it wherever you want.
STEP 2: BUILD IN TIME REQUIRED
Making time to achieve your goals and follow your path is a must for success.
Change is going to take some effort, and it will require commitment and dedication.
Build in the time you need, to make sure you don’t short-change your vision and plan.
Step 2 Tasks
A few ideas to ensure you build sufficient time into your process:
Schedule It: If you use a personal calendar or scheduling device, block off
a specific time each day or week to dedicate to your plan. We are more
likely to commit to our action items if we build them into our schedule.
Reprioritize: If your days or weeks are packed with commitments and you
don’t feel that you have time to dedicate to your goals, then it means
reprioritization might be in order. Evaluate your current priorities and
obligations and assess what you can cut out or put on hold. When making
decisions and prioritizing activities, it pays to weigh options around your
values and your vision. If an activity or an option does not support you in
meeting your goals, it should not be a high priority.
Inform Others: Let people who may be impacted by your new priorities
know you need more time for yourself. If you are open about your needs,
they’ll be more likely to respect them. If they aren’t respectful, set clear
boundaries to ensure they don’t eat into the time you need.
Reduce Time Wasters: We often fall victim to spending a lot of time doing
unimportant activities. Although many of these activities provide a source of
entertainment, they take up a lot of time we could be spending on more
important and meaningful things, especially when time is tight. For instance,
time spent watching television, playing video games, or reading through
Facebook and Twitter posts could be put to better use. If finding time for
your goals is difficult, try cutting back on these more frivolous activities.

Even a half hour less of television per day can add up, making a big
difference.
STEP 3: REMOVE NEGATIVE OBSTACLES
Our past negative experiences can cause us to think that we can’t do things when in
actuality we can. This kind of thinking can be one of our biggest saboteurs, undermining
our ability to make change.
Looking back at the work you did in Stage 2: Discover Yourself , you should
have a good sense of the obstacles you faced in your past, and what familial or life
experiences caused you to shy away from challenges or from taking risks. If these
obstacles still exist in your current life, it pays to find ways to remove them.
Step 3 Tasks
Negativity can come from several sources. To minimize negative obstacles in
your life, consider the following ideas:
1. Deal with Unhealthy Relationships: If there are individuals in your life
who tear you down or don’t support you, your vision, or your goals, they
may undermine your ability to achieve what you want. If this is an issue, try
to minimize your exposure to these people, or avoid them altogether. A few
things that might help:
Minimize Toxic Relationships: Toxic relationships often come hand
in hand with negativity. If an individual makes you feel bad about
yourself, what you do, or how you are, then the person is toxic. Toxic
people often make others feel bad so that they can feel better about
themselves. You can try to speak to the individual about how you feel,
but doing so may not produce the results you want. She may dismiss
you or slough off your message. If these individuals are family
members or work colleagues, it can be especially difficult to
completely remove them from your life. In these cases, fill your time
with healthier and more supportive relationships, which will naturally
reduce the time you are able to spend with those who are toxic.
Set Clear Boundaries: Set boundaries with the negative people in
your life. If they cross a line and go too far with their personal

commentary or opinions, let them know that although you love and care
for them, their negativity isn’t welcome. Explain to them that if they
can’t be positive or respectful, then you will need to minimize your
time with them.
Find Positive People: The more you surround yourself with positive,
happy, energetic people the less room you have for those who are
negative. Further, there is a contagiousness that we get from being
around people who are living the way we want to live or acting the
way we want to act. Their confidence and happiness, as well as their
positive habits, rub off on us.
2. Avoid Unhealthy Environments: The environments in which we live,
work, and play can have a tremendous impact on our ability to make change.
When we are in environments that are stressful, challenging, or difficult,
change becomes less likely. This can include where we work, where we
live, and even where we choose to spend our leisure time. In Switch: How
to Change Things When Change Is Hard, Chip and Dan Heath talk about
shaping the path to make change less difficult. They urge you to separate
yourself from the environment that cues old, unhealthy habits, and instead put
yourself in an environment that supports, and is most appropriate for, the
changes you want to make. If you find that certain situations or environments
bring out bad habits or cause you to feel negative, lack confidence, or act out
of congruence with your values, vision, or mission, you may want to
consider avoiding them altogether—or at the very least, minimize your
exposure to them as much as possible.
3. Deal with Negativity from Within: Our barriers to change may not always
come from external sources. They can often come from within ourselves.
Address Fear: Many of us let fear and anxiety impair our ability to
move forward and achieve the things that will bring happiness into our
lives. If you find that fear is hindering your capacity to progress in your
plan, focus on the things you want to do and imagine yourself doing
them. Push out the fear, and instead imagine the positive feelings and
happiness you’ll experience. Reread the stories you were asked to
write about overcoming fear during Stage 2: Discover Yourself.
Apply the same methodology now and ask yourself the following
questions:
What are you afraid of?
What do you feel?
Is your fear based in reality?
Are you in control?
Use your New You Journal to write the story. Think of the best-case

scenario of what would happen if you were to take the risk and push
your fears aside. Reread this story whenever you feel overwhelmed by
your fears.
Turn “I Can’t” into “I Can”: Positive thoughts beget positive results.
The more we think we can do something, the more we will be able to
do it. On the other hand, if we continually tell ourselves we can’t do
something, we limit ourselves, and it becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Negative thinking actually paralyzes us and prevents us from
making the changes we want. Remind yourself to maintain a growth
mindset. Stay positive and have a can-do attitude. The more positive
you are and the more you believe in your abilities, the more positive
things will come your way and the more capable you’ll be.
STEP 4: DEVELOP YOUR SUPPORT NETWORK
Although you are personally responsible for your reinvention and accomplishments,
building a support network to help you “cross the finish line” can be beneficial too.
Further, when we inform others of our intentions, it gives us a stronger sense of
accountability. Think about your milestones and goals, and identify areas in which you
may need to solicit help. Look to friends, family members, or even experts to guide you
through some of the action steps you need to take to reach your final destination.
Step 4 Tasks
There are two ways your support network can be helpful: emotionally and
professionally. Family members and friends will most likely provide emotional
support. Essentially, they act as your “cheering section.” Those individuals who
will be best at supporting you will:
Understand your values, mission, and purpose in going through a personal
reinvention
Have your best interests at heart, regardless of their own opinions
Remain objective and nonjudgmental
Add to your process, not take away from it
Be someone you can trust and confide in
Be thoughtful in providing you with insights, feedback, and opinions

Professionals will most likely be supportive by providing their expertise
and knowledge in educating you in areas you may not be familiar with. They
may even help support you in reaching your goals faster. For instance, if one
of your goals is to become fit and you decide as part of the process you want
to train for a marathon, you might want to hire a running coach or consult
with a fitness nutrit. If you are seriously considering a career change, you
might want to consider working with a career coach or life coach. If you are
trying to reinvent within the social or emotional dimension of well-being,
you may benefit from working with a psychologist, psychiatrist, social
worker, or life coach as well. Professionals who will be best at supporting
you will:
Provide expertise and support that is relevant to the changes you want to
make
Be legitimate experts in their field
Come highly recommended by others who have used their services
Remain professional, yet sympathetic
Support you throughout the process while pushing you to go beyond your
comfort zone
Be honest about your progress and what you could be doing better
Ultimately, cultivating a support network should help guide and encourage you as you
work toward achieving your goals. If you find that it doesn’t, you may want to rethink
the people you’ve chosen to be a part of your network.
ROADBLOCK: NAYSAYERS AND REINVENTION SABOTEURS
Although sharing your vision for a personal reinvention with others can be
helpful, it can also be a hindrance if those individuals are not supportive. If they
undermine you or are pessimistic, they will likely have a negative impact on you
and your efforts. Look for individuals who fit the criteria outlined in Step 4:
Develop Your Support Network when choosing to share your goals and
intentions with others.
STEP 5: CREATE YOUR MOTIVATIONAL TOOLBOX

By now you should have developed a plan that inspires you. At the same time, it is only
realistic that there may be times when you could use a little extra help in keeping your
motivation levels high. Creating a personal motivational toolbox will provide you with
tools that appeal to your emotional side, and encourage and inspire you when you feel
less than excited about the changes you want to make.
Step 5 Tasks
Your motivational toolbox should inspire you, especially when you need it most.
The following ideas are popular with many individuals, but feel free to tap into
what you’ve identified as your personal motivators from Stage 2, and incorporate
components or activities that speak to them directly.
1. Personal Affirmations: Although affirmations may sound hokey, they’re
actually very useful in cultivating a positive outlook and a can-do attitude.
Use affirmations in a genuine and thoughtful way to reprogram your mind
and push past negative thoughts so they become more positive and
encouraging. According to Stephen R. Covey, author of The 7 Habits of
Highly Effective People, a good affirmation will be personal to you and
your vision. It will be positive, in the present tense, and emotionally
inspiring. It should also be visual, meaning that you should be able to
visualize it either by writing it somewhere so you can see it on a daily basis
or by picturing it in your mind. A few examples of affirmations:
I am smart and successful in everything I do.
I am capable of achieving what I want.
I make healthy choices in the foods I eat, and I exercise regularly so
that I can be the healthiest possible.
I deserve love and happiness.
Using the List of Affirmations Worksheet in Part III: The New You
Journal as a template, write down affirmations you believe will be
relevant, positive, and helpful to you and your attempts to achieve your
vision and end goals. Read them in the morning; read them at night; read
them out loud to yourself at any time you feel you could use a little extra
encouragement.
2. Ask Yourself a Question: Although affirmations work for many, asking
yourself a simple question might actually provide you with more motivation.
In “Will We Succeed? The Science of Self-Motivation,” an article
published in ScienceDaily in 2010, Professor Dolores Albarracin of
University of Illinois explains that individuals who ask themselves if they

will perform a task generally do better than those who tell themselves that
they will. Albarracin’s team believes that by asking yourself a question, you
are more likely to build your own motivation. For instance:
Will I make healthy choices today?
Will I go to the gym today?
Will I be open and trusting today?
Can I let go of past hurts or resentments?
Will I find my dream job today?
Will I live in the moment today?
Will I have a positive outlook today?
Come up with questions that are specific to your plan, milestones, and goals.
Ask them of yourself each day to increase your motivation levels.
3. Fake It Until You Make It: See yourself as the changed person you want to
be. The more you think of yourself in a certain way, the more you will be a
certain way. Further, if you don’t feel motivated, you might find faking it to
be helpful too. Studies show that when we don’t feel a certain way (e.g.,
confident, motivated, etc.) but visualize ourselves or act as if we do, we can
actually cause ourselves to be or feel that way over time.
4. Don’t Be Hard on Yourself: If things don’t go as planned or you find
yourself missing target dates within your plan, don’t be too hard on yourself.
This promotes negative thinking. Instead, try to stay light and positive.
5. Revisit Your Accomplishments: You identified your accomplishments in
Stage 2: Discover Yourself. When you feel discouraged or find that
completing tasks is especially difficult, revisit the work you completed on
the My Accomplishments Worksheet. Read through the steps you took and
the obstacles you overcame to successfully achieve your goals. You might
even want to display reminders of them in highly visible places so they are
constantly at the top of your mind.
6. Don’t Forget the Rewards: Finally, be sure to implement the rewards you
built into your plan, and reward yourself when you reach your milestones
and achieve your end goals. Although your rewards shouldn’t be the primary
driver for change, they are an important part of your plan, because they
promote acknowledgment and appreciation for the work and effort you put
into your goals.
STEP 6: MODIFY KEY HABIT LOOPS THAT REQUIRE CHANGE

In The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and Business , Charles Duhigg
tell us that in order for us to make permanent, long-lasting change, we need to examine
our current “habit loops” and modify them to develop new, healthier habits that support
the change.
Duhigg explains that the habit loop is made up of the following three components:
Cue: The signal that causes you to do the habit in the first place.
Routine: The action you take that ultimately leads to a reward.
Reward: What you receive that is pleasurable from the routine.
In order to modify your habits or behaviors, Duhigg suggests that you find which
part of the loop is causing unfavorable results. Modifying that part will create healthier
habits.
Suzanne is a type 2 diabetic who was at risk for heart disease. After her doctors
increased her medication dose for a third time, Suzanne asked if there was
anything she should be doing to decrease her reliance on medicine. Her doctors
told her that if she lost weight and modified certain behaviors and habits, there
would be a chance that she could reduce her dependence on medication. As a
result, Suzanne was inspired to undergo a personal reinvention around her
physical well-being. She wanted to lose weight, decrease her dependency on her
medicine, and reduce her risks for heart disease.
Since she began a new job six months prior to the doctor’s visit, Suzanne had
gained about fifteen pounds. Given the recent increase in her medication, she
couldn’t help but wonder if the added weight was contributing to this increased
reliance. After spending some time considering possible causes, she identified a
new habit she had developed since starting the job. Every Friday, she and her
colleagues would go out to a local bar after work. She would enjoy two or three
cocktails, and over the course of the evening, the group would generally order
several appetizers to share. By no means were the appetizers healthy; they were
often fried, high-calorie foods.
Although Suzanne enjoyed the ritual of going out with her colleagues, she was
also aware that a good portion of her weight gain was possibly due to the extra
calories she was consuming each Friday night. As a result, she thought this
habit might be worth modifying.
She first identified the cue, the routine, and the reward:

Cue: When work was over on Friday afternoons
Routine: Going to a local bar and ordering cocktails, and eating unhealthy
food
Reward: Relaxation, socialization, and celebrating the end of the
workweek
Realizing the cue couldn’t change (Friday afternoons would remain Friday
afternoons) and that the reward wasn’t unhealthy (it was about socialization,
not the alcohol or food itself), Suzanne realized she had an opportunity to
modify an unhealthy habit. Specifically, she needed to change the routine. To do
so, Suzanne did two things: (1) she brought a healthy, filling snack with her
each Friday; right before going out to the pub, she would eat the snack so she
wouldn’t be hungry at the pub; and (2) instead of ordering an alcoholic
beverage, Suzanne started ordering club soda and lime. As a result, the modified
loop looked like this:
Cue: When work was over on Friday afternoons
Routine: Eating a healthy, filling snack before going to the local pub and
ordering a club soda and lime to drink
Reward: Relaxation, socialization, and celebrating the end of the
workweek
In only a month, Suzanne was able to lose about ten pounds and was thrilled to
find that she could still enjoy the socialization with her colleagues without the
added weight. Inspired by this one change, Suzanne learned to modify other
habit loops that were contributing to her poorer health, and after six months she
managed to reduce almost all her medications.
As you go through your plan for personal reinvention, you will most likely
identify habits that need to change. Use the habit loop as a way to modify unhealthy
habits so they become healthier and more supportive of your overall vision and end
goals.
Step 6 Tasks
The habits you need to change may not be immediately noticeable. As you go
through the steps of your plan, pay close attention to your current habits. Be
mindful of those that are unhealthy, producing unwanted results, or are
counteracting your ability to change. For each habit you identify as needing

modification, use the Duhigg’s Habit Loop Modification Worksheet in Part
III: The New You Journal as a template to complete the following tasks:
1. Identify the Cue, Routine, and Reward: Examine the habit and identify the
cue, routine, and reward. Write each component in its respective place in
the section titled “Current Habit Loop”:
Cue: The signal that causes you to do the habit in the first place
Routine: The action you take that will ultimately give you a reward
Reward: The pleasurable result. What is the end goal? What
pleasurable experience do you get out of it?
2. Decide Which Part Needs to Change: Decide what part of the habit loop
needs to be modified. Specifically, what part of the habit loop is causing
unhealthy or unwanted results? In the section titled “What Needs to Change,”
write in which part of the habit loop should be modified.
3. Identify Opportunities for Modification: Once you understand which part
of the habit loop needs to change, come up with ways to modify it so you can
reap healthier or more attractive results or outcomes. Write these in the
section titled “Opportunities for Modification.” Refer to the example of
Suzanne for a breakdown of what this might look like.
4. Rewrite the Loop: Finally, in the section titled “The New Habit Loop,”
write in the new components of the loop you just created.
STEP 7: ADDRESS INCONSISTENT BEHAVIOR
For change to stick, it needs to become your standard way of operating. It needs to
become part of who you are. If you only maintain change on a superficial level, when it
is convenient or when it is easy, then the change you are hoping to make won’t stick or
become standard protocol within your life. This is called inconsistent behavior.
In Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is Hard, the Heath brothers use
the term “bright spots” to describe moments when things are working for certain groups
or individuals even though they aren’t for others. You can apply this thinking to you and
your own actions. If there are certain times or situations in which your desired
behaviors are consistent, then you should look for ways to replicate them. If there are
times, however, when your desired behaviors aren’t consistent, you know to avoid those
scenarios.
Kristi decided that one of her goals was to practice and play the piano more

regularly so that she could perform in a local concert. Music brought her great
happiness, but she always felt she never had the time to play. Kristi had a full-
time job, so practicing during the week was difficult. Using the concert as a
motivator, she decided she would try playing at night after work or in the
morning before work.
After a couple of months, Kristi realized she wasn’t getting better. Her concert
was only a month away, and she needed to find a way to improve. In looking at
her schedule over the previous couple of months, she noticed that when she put
practice off until the evening, she was inconsistent. She often had reasons she
couldn’t practice: she would have to work late, she was tired, she had business
dinners, her colleagues would want to go out after work, and so on. As a result,
she played only about 30 to 40 percent of the time when she scheduled her
practice for the evenings. However, when Kristi decided she would play in the
morning, she did so 100 percent of the time. Not only was her practice in the
morning productive, but she also found that it put her in great spirits for the rest
of the day. Kristi decided that in order to properly prepare for the recital, she
needed to commit to playing solely in the morning. Her morning practice was
her “bright spot” or “moment of consistency.”
When Kristi changed her schedule to morning practices 100 percent of the time,
she saw great progress in her performance. Her hands became more agile, and
she was able to play at much faster tempos. She also found that she could play
more challenging music. Moreover, she went from practicing two or three times
a week to five or six after the schedule adjustment.
When the day of the recital arrived, Kristi was ready and excited. The
performance went brilliantly, earning her a standing ovation.
Kristi discovered her “moment of consistency” so that she could transform
inconsistent behavior to behavior that was more reliable. This helped her to
successfully reach her goal.
To address your own inconsistencies, you’ll want to understand what changes
you’ve successfully made and why so you can learn from them. You’ll also want to
identify the changes you are struggling with and analyze if there is anything you can
apply to make your behaviors more consistent.
Step 7 Tasks

To help solidify changes and create more permanent habits that are positive, use
the Inconsistent Behaviors Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a
template to document your answers:
1. Document Results of Change: Every time you successfully make a change,
document how your changes are positively impacting your life by answering
the following questions in the section titled “Results of Change” within the
Inconsistent Behaviors Worksheet:
What changes have I successfully made?
How do these changes make me feel?
How do I feel about the progress I’ve made thus far?
How would I feel if I stopped this change or habit?
2. Identify Inconsistencies: As you progress through your plan, identify
changes you struggle with and the behaviors that continue to be inconsistent
in the section titled “Inconsistencies.” Answer the following questions:
What behaviors are inconsistent?
How do I feel when I’m inconsistent?
How has this affected my ability to move forward?
3. Find Your Moments of Consistency: In looking at the behaviors you
identified in Task 2, identify any moments when your behaviors were
favorable. Use the section titled “Moments of Consistency” in the
Inconsistent Behaviors Worksheet template to answer the following
questions:
Have there been times when I’ve successfully engaged in behaviors
that support or work toward the change?
What were the “moments of consistency” I might be able to apply?
How can I change my circumstances or environment to help me in
creating more consistent behavior?
If you feel your changes begin to slip, revisit Tasks 1–3. What you document
under “Results of Change” should act as a reminder of the benefits you feel when
you successfully make change, motivating you to stay the course. The behaviors
documented under “Inconsistencies” should tell you what behaviors need to be
modified so they are more consistent; and finally, the “Moments of Consistency”
you identify should help you in making less consistent behaviors more so.
STEP 8: EXPECT TO FAIL…A LITTLE

Change is a process, and a messy one at that. Although maintaining a positive attitude
throughout your reinvention is crucial to your success, understanding that failure is
inevitable and a natural part of the process is too.
When we expect to fail, it makes the actual act of failing much less painful or
discouraging. It allows us to accept it, learn from it, and move on much more easily than
if we expect everything will work out as we plan the first time. Planning to fail is
consistent with the growth mindset discussed in Carol Dweck’s Mindset: The New
Psychology of Success. It gives us permission to make mistakes, to struggle a bit, to fall
off the horse—all with the intention of making us stronger and more successful in the
end.
As you go through your plan for personal reinvention, have a slight expectation
that failure will happen. If it does, embrace it as part of the process. If it doesn’t, well,
then you’ll be pleasantly surprised.
Step 8 Tasks
If at any point during your process you run up against failure, use the My Failures
of Reinvention Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal as a template to
do the following:
1. In the column labeled “Failures,” list the failure you experience.
2. In the column labeled “Causes,” describe why you think failure occurred.
Was it a result of your plan’s design? Was it a result of circumstances that
were out of your control?
3. In the column labeled “Lessons Learned,” describe what you took away
from the experience. Did it provide you with further clarity? Did it help you
to see a more efficient or effective way of doing things? Did it give you
better understanding of yourself?
4. In the last column, “Moving Forward,” discuss how the failure can be used
to help you move forward with your plan. Think about ways in which you
can apply what you’ve learned to improve upon your plan or in how you
approach change.
KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 5

1. ACCOUNTABILITY
Accountability requires you to take ownership of your actions. There will always be
conditions or situations that you can’t control. You do, however, have control over how
you choose to handle them.
Your life is a result of your decisions, thoughts, and behaviors, not your
circumstances. Understanding and believing this puts you in the driver’s seat of your
life, and gives you the power to achieve what you want. Instead of waiting for things to
happen, you make them happen. To be accountable, avoid blaming other people,
conditions, or past experiences for what happens today and in your future. Instead,
recognize that you have the power to succeed, to create your optimal life, and to attain
the happiness you desire.
Build Self-Confidence for Change That Sticks
Self-confidence is extremely important in our ability to achieve our goals and
create the life we desire. It can, however, be one of the most difficult attributes to
develop. Whether we are burdened with painful childhood memories, unhealthy
relationships that beat us down emotionally, or insecurities as a result of societal
pressures, self-confidence can seem highly unattainable. The truth is, self-
confidence is challenging for all of us…even for those of us who appear
extremely confident, pulled together, and self-assured. The good news is that
self-confidence can be cultivated, and the more you do so, the more of it you’ll
have. Here are a few tips to develop yours:
Build It from Within: In building self-confidence it is imperative that you
look to do so from within. There will always be people who don’t approve
of us or like us, and so seeking their approval is self-defeating and a waste
of energy. We never fully achieve the self-confidence we really want. Find
your confidence through how you view yourself. Remind yourself of your
strengths, your accomplishments, and the positive qualities you possess, and
all that you should be proud of.
Stay Positive: Individuals with a glass-half-full mentality tend to be
happier, more confident, and more comfortable with themselves. They
manage stress better and are more likely to persevere and push through
difficult situations and circumstances. Also, positive people are more
willing to take risks and conquer their fears, making them more likely to
perform well, achieve their goals, and be successful. Setbacks are merely
viewed as minor and are easily overcome. Negativity, on the other hand,

eats away at self-confidence and keeps us in an immobile place. When you
start to think negatively about yourself, a situation or another person, stop
and instead find something positive on which to focus.
Take Care of Yourself: Studies show that taking pride in yourself has a
tremendous impact on your confidence. The more you value and respect your
health, your body, and even your appearance, the better you will feel. Take
time to take care of yourself and your overall well-being.
Make Eye Contact: Making eye contact can be challenging, but the more
you do it, the easier it will become. It sends others a message that you are
comfortable connecting with them. In turn, they feel more comfortable and
confident around you, making dialogue and time with them easy and
effortless. This ease with which you interact with others will help boost
your own self-confidence.
Be Complimentary: When we find fault with others it is often because we
find fault with ourselves. Finding the good in others, however, allows you to
see the good in yourself.
Smile: Although there may be times when we aren’t in the mood to smile,
forcing a smile can help you break through some of the uneasiest of times.
Further, smiling at others often elicits a smile back, sending positive vibes
your way.
2. PASSION
In Stage 1: Identify the Need, we discussed the first Principle of Change: Discontent +
passion drive change. In truth, passion needs to be a part of the whole process of
reinvention for you to be successful. Passion stems from your emotional side and is
instrumental to staying motivated and inspired. If at any time you don’t feel passionate
about what you are doing or where you are going, it could be an indication that
something isn’t right and needs to be addressed or adjusted. At these times, think about
why you aren’t passionate and figure out what needs to change in order for the passion
to be refueled.
3. DEDICATION AND DETERMINATION
As exciting as it will be to embark on the positive changes you will make, it is
important to be cognizant of the work, energy, and time it will take. Consistent

dedication and determination is crucial to your ability to achieve what you want. Be
ready to do the work you need to do, to roll up your sleeves, to get dirty and messy, and
to throw yourself at full throttle into the effort.
If you are working toward multiple goals, you may find that the process seems
complex at times, and possibly even daunting. When this happens, take a step back and
try to remember the bigger picture of your vision and your end goals. Also, be sure to
use some of the tools from your motivational toolbox for inspiration. That is why you
created it.
THE FOUR SELVES
Without you and your own actions, change cannot happen. You, and only you, are
instrumental to creating the life you want. With this in mind, there are four factors that
are key to your success, and each one specifically pertains to you and your “selves”:
self-leadership, self-management, self-empowerment, and self-confidence.
1. Self-Leadership: Leadership in its traditional form means having a vision and
successfully motivating and inspiring others to follow you in accomplishing that
vision. Self-leadership requires that you do this for yourself. You need to define
your vision for the future, align yourself and your actions behind it, and inspire
yourself to make it happen, even in the face of uncertainty or as obstacles present
themselves. This is a never-ending practice. There may be times when you are not
motivated, but the leader within you will need to find a way to reinvigorate your
passion and inspire you to continue.
2. Self-Management: Self-leadership is important in creating your vision and
inspiring you to make the change, but self-management is what ensures that you
follow through with the plan and do the work you need to do to make it happen. It
requires diligence, and that you organize your life and your actions around your
vision. Self-management keeps you on track so you can follow through on action
steps, meet milestones, and eventually achieve your goals.
3. Self-Empowerment: Self-empowerment is what helps you to overcome negativity
and the “I can’t” mentality, and instead, gives you an “I can” attitude. To truly feel
empowered, you’ll need to arm yourself with all that is required to succeed,
including learning new skills or gaining new knowledge. If you feel as though you
don’t have the right tools to accomplish your goals, stay out of an “I can’t” or “but”
attitude, and instead adopt one of “How can I?” Go back to school, get experience
and practice, solicit help from professionals, and do what you need to do to
become the person you want to be. Remember, constant change and learning means
continual growth. This keeps you from becoming stagnant and allows you to

challenge yourself so that you can be the best that you can be.
4. Self-Confidence: Self-confidence enables a deeper belief in yourself, helping you
to forge ahead, even when things seem uncertain. It allows you to overcome fears
and challenges more easily, while maintaining a positive attitude. Also, studies
show the more confident you are, the higher your chances of success. Luckily, self-
confidence builds on itself: as you continue to achieve, your self-confidence
continues to grow. This will make taking on risks and challenges easier and easier.
Stage 5 Summary
Stage 5 is focused on developing tools and the infrastructure you need to follow
through on the plan you created in Stage 4.
Step 1: Find the Right Tracking Tool.  Choose a tracking tool that will help you
keep track of your progress throughout your personal reinvention.
Step 2: Build In Time Required. Ensure that you make time for the changes you
want to make and the goals you want to achieve.
Step 3: Remove Negative Obstacles. Find ways to remove obstacles that
present themselves along your path. This pertains to negative or unhealthy
relationships and environments, or even negativity within yourself.
Step 4: Develop Your Support Network.  Lean on friends and family for
emotional support, and utilize experts for help and assistance in achieving your
goals and vision.
Step 5: Create Your Motivational Toolbox.  Develop a personalized toolbox of
motivational tools that will continue to inspire you along your path to personal
reinvention.
Step 6: Modify Key Habit Loops That Require Change. Modify habits that are
obstacles to change or that are producing unhealthy results.
Step 7: Address Inconsistent Behavior.  Identify when you are best able to
maintain specific healthy and productive behaviors and find ways to encourage
consistency.
Step 8: Expect to Fail…A Little. Set the expectation that failure is a healthy and
necessary part of the process of change.

Principle of Change #5
WITHOUT PROPER ACTION, CHANGE CANNOT OCCUR.

C
STAGE 6: MONITOR YOUR
PROGRESS
VICTORY BELONGS TO THE MOST PERSEVERING.
—NAPOLÉON BONAPARTE
REATING YOUR BEST LIFE IS a process—one that needs to be nurtured and
reevaluated on an ongoing basis. As you proceed on your path to personal
reinvention, monitoring how you are doing will be instrumental to your success.
Regularly monitoring your progress provides numerous benefits. For starters, it
keeps you abreast of the positive impacts your changes are making in your life. This
will continue to motivate you in making further change. Second, by monitoring your
progress, you continue to hold yourself accountable for the results (or lack of results)
you see. Finally, it can strengthen your plan for change by giving you an opportunity to
evaluate what is working and what isn’t so that you can make appropriate modifications
in a timely manner. You may find your original plan needs to be adjusted to
accommodate changes you make or new circumstances that arise. Or, you may find your
action steps or milestones aren’t working as well as you had hoped, and thus they need
to be modified. Essentially, change often brings about more change, and as a result,
plans need to evolve accordingly. This brings us to our sixth and final Principle of
Change:
Principle of Change #6
CHANGE IS AN EVER-EVOLVING PROCESS.

STAGE 6 ACTION STEPS
There are few steps required during Stage 6. It is still important, however, to the
process. Essentially, it requires that you evaluate your plan for its effectiveness and to
see if it is working, and to modify it as you see fit. Without this step you run the risk of
continuing on a path that is unproductive, which could ultimately cause you to stagnate.
Or, you may continue on the wrong path, which could take you further away from your
vision and achieving your goals.
STEP 1: EVALUATE AT EACH CHECKPOINT
At each checkpoint you identified in Stage 4: Create the Plan, you will want to briefly
analyze how you are progressing and evaluate if you are on the right track.
Step 1 Tasks
Use the Checkpoint Evaluation Worksheet in Part III: The New You Journal
as a template (visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable
PDF of the worksheet templates) to respond to the following tasks:
1. Based on your responses to the following questions, place a checkmark in
either the “Yes” or “No” column of the worksheet:
Am I making progress toward the upcoming milestone or goal?
Am I staying true to my vision, values, and mission statement?
Do I feel comfortable with and in control of my current action steps?
Do they feel realistic?
Am I motivated to continue forward?
Is everything working well in the plan?
2. Provide qualitative feedback about your plan and the process you are going
through in the section titled “How It’s Going.” Discuss how you feel about
your progress, your accomplishments, and any setbacks or other issues
you’ve had along the way. Also, provide any insights you’ve gained from
going through the plan you developed.
If you answered no to any of the questions in the checklist or expressed any
concerns in the qualitative section of the evaluation, you should consider making

modifications to your plan.
STEP 2: REVISE AS NECESSARY
Based on your answers from Step 1, you will now modify your end goals, milestones, or
action steps to address anything that isn’t working optimally.
Step 2 Tasks
1. Think about what you can do to change your current plan to make it better.
Ask yourself:
How do I better align my goals, milestones, and action steps with my
vision, values, and mission statement?
How do I adjust my plan so I’m more comfortable with it or it is more
effective?
What can I do to make my plan more realistic?
How might I boost my motivation? Are there any other tools I can
create for my toolbox?
2. Evaluate if any of your habit loops need modification, and if so, apply what
you learned in Step 6: Modify Key Habit Loops That Require Change in
Stage 5.
3. Evaluate whether your behaviors and changes have been consistent. If not,
identify relevant moments of consistency that might be helpful. Apply what
you learned in Step 7: Address Inconsistent Behavior in Stage 5.
4. Use the information you uncovered in Tasks 1–3 to revise your End Goals,
Milestones, and Action Steps Worksheet. If you are using a separate
tracking tool, reflect the changes you make to the worksheet there as well.
Remember that revising your plan doesn’t mean you’ve failed or that you should
feel bad about your progress. As we discussed in Step 8: Expect to Fail…A Little in
Stage 5, it is all part of the process. Keep a positive can-do attitude as you make
revisions, and try to see your modifications as a way to make your plan more effective
and to reignite your passion.
STEP 3: REPEAT ON A REGULAR BASIS

Continue to monitor your progress at every checkpoint. If changes are required, be sure
to modify your plan so that it adheres to all that you’ve learned throughout the book.
Your plan should contain all the components outlined in Stage 4: Create the Plan, and
your follow-through should be consistent with Stage 5: Make It Happen.
KEY FACTORS FOR SUCCESS DURING STAGE 6
1. FLEXIBILITY
It is important to remain flexible as you monitor your progress. If you find that parts of
your original plan aren’t working, it is essential that you remain objective about what
didn’t work, and let go of the disappointment so you can improve upon it. This will
enable you to learn from the experience and adjust things so they work better in the
future. To maintain flexibility, consider the following tips:
Allow for Gray Areas: The process of change has a number of gray areas in it. It
is never black or white, right or wrong. There are countless ways a situation can
be handled or ways things can be done.
Accept and Move Forward: If it turns out you think you could have designed a
better plan, accept the outcome and move forward. Don’t get stuck in the past or
get angry with yourself; neither of these are productive behaviors. As discussed,
failure and mistakes are often wonderful tools in ultimately achieving success.
Stay Positive: Instead of focusing on the fact that a part of the plan isn’t working,
focus on how you handle the situation. Maintain a positive attitude, as it will have
a much bigger impact on the overall outcome of the situation than the mistake or
wrong turn made.
Learn from Mistakes: Always look for opportunities to learn from decisions you
feel weren’t in your best interest. This will teach you how to better deal with
things in the future and make you better prepared.
ROADBLOCK: STUBBORNNESS
It is very easy to become attached to your plan for reinvention. After all, you’ve
put a lot of time and effort into developing it. Unfortunately, this can also make it
difficult to let go of what isn’t working.
Stubbornness hinders us from making progress, because we waste time with

ineffective activities. We end up running in place, going nowhere—or worse, we
may find ourselves going backward. This can be frustrating and ultimately may
cause us to give up altogether. Disallow stubbornness to set, by using the
following tips:
1. Take Yourself Out of the Situation: We tend to be good at seeing the
reality in other people’s situations, but not so much for ourselves. Instead of
thinking about this as your own plan, pretend the plan is a friend’s and you
are advising him (with his solicitation, of course) on how to make it better.
If you were to give advice on ways to improve it, what would you tell him?
How would you see the situation? What changes would you recommend?
What could he do to be more successful?
2. Think about the Big Picture: When we get caught up in the details of a
plan, it limits our ability to see the bigger picture. Remind yourself of why
you have embarked on change in the first place. Revisit your values, your
vision, and your mission statement so you can focus on the overall picture
instead.
3. Remove the Emotion: The reason many of us tend to get stuck in a rut of
following through with plans that don’t work is that we become emotionally
attached. Look at your plan objectively and detach yourself from it
emotionally. Eliminate feelings of negativity or criticism, and instead stay in
an analytical frame of mind by focusing on how you can make the situation
or plan better.
4. Feel the Benefits: If you modify your original plan, it is because you are
inevitably looking to succeed in the end. Imagine how it would feel if you
achieve your goals. Imagine how it would feel if you could achieve them
more effectively and quickly. Associate the revisions you make with these
feelings of potential accomplishment and efficiency. Stubbornness and an
inability to admit a need for necessary changes to your plan will only hinder
your ability to succeed. Stay flexible and open to the evolution you have to
go through to make change work.
2. PATIENCE
As much as we’d like change to happen overnight, it will take time. If you give up or
stop before you are completely done going through your plan and all your changes, you
may fall short of reaching your goals, lose momentum, or potentially revert back to past

habits or behaviors.
If we make our goals or milestones too big, we can become frustrated or impatient
or lose motivation to continue on with more difficult changes. Making smaller changes
helps us to feel as though we are making progress and accomplishing along the way. To
encourage patience, consider the following:
1. Make Changes as Small as Necessary: As mentioned, there is no big change that
doesn’t require many smaller changes. If you feel frustrated with how long it is
taking to successfully make a change or reach a goal, it might mean that your
changes or goals are too big. Reevaluate your current milestones and goals and see
if you can make them smaller. Smaller milestones may bring a feeling of
accomplishment on a more frequent basis.
2. Celebrate Your Accomplishments: As we discussed in Stage 4: Create the
Plan, building a rewards system into your plan will help keep your motivation
levels high. It will also do wonders for your patience. When you regularly
acknowledge and appreciate your efforts, it makes it easier to wait for longer-term
benefits and accomplishments to come to fruition.
3. PERSEVERANCE
“If at first you don’t succeed, try, try again.” Success requires resilience and
perseverance that get you through the unexpected ups and downs of the process. When
things seem difficult or don’t seem to be working, these qualities are especially
important. Keep looking for ways to make your plan better and more effective or
efficient. Learn from mistakes and from what didn’t work so you don’t repeat those
mistakes or decisions again in the future. Maintain a positive, can-do attitude and
believe in yourself at all times.
Stage 6 Summary
Stage 6 requires you to monitor your progress at key checkpoints and throughout
your personal reinvention.
Step 1: Evaluate at Each Checkpoint. At each checkpoint, evaluate your
progress. Look for opportunities to improve your plan so you can be more
effective in achieving your goals.

Step 2: Revise as Necessary. Revise your plan to respond to your findings from
Step 1. Also, look at your habits to see if there are any habit loops that should be
modified or inconsistent behaviors that need to be addressed.
Step 3: Repeat on a Regular Basis. Throughout your plan, continually monitor
your progress.
Principle of Change #6
CHANGE IS AN EVER-EVOLVING PROCESS.

 
A FINAL WORD
You now have all the tools and information you need to make change, to embark on a
personal reinvention, and to be your best. You learned about all the stages important to
your path to personal reinvention and how they will help you be successful in achieving
the life you want. The path and its stages are based on six important Principles of
Change:
#1: Discontent + passion drive change.
#2: Self-awareness is the foundation for change.
#3: Vision gives change meaningful direction.
#4: Planning for change is planning to succeed.
#5: Without proper action, change cannot occur.
#6: Change is an ever-evolving process.
In Stage 1: Identify the Need, you learned how to identify rational, physical, and
emotional signs signaling a change or reinvention might be of benefit. In Stage 2:
Discover Yourself , you learned the importance of self-awareness and how a deeper
understanding of yourself provides you with important and useful information to
understand the signs you identified in Stage 1. Self-awareness is also instrumental to
your ability to create a vision and plan for change that is authentic to you, your values,
and your personal experiences. In Stage 3: Design Your Vision, you learned how to
take the work you did in Stages 1 and 2 and apply it to designing a vision for your
future. In Stage 4: Create the Plan, you learned what was required to develop a plan
to make your vision a reality. You learned about identifying and prioritizing end goals
and creating milestones and action steps that are useful in helping you succeed. In Stage
5: Make It Happen, you learned the importance of proper execution of your plan, the
types of obstacles you might encounter as you try to make changes, and how to
overcome these obstacles. You also learned how to stay motivated, how to modify
habits so they are healthier and more productive, and how to identify ways to create
more consistent behaviors so that changes are more apt to stick. And finally, in Stage 6:
Monitor Your Progress , you learned about the importance of revisiting your plan often
to evaluate what is working and what isn’t, and how you can revise it to make it more

effective.
All the stages presented are instrumental to your ability to create a wonderful,
happy life, and will help you make positive change so that you can be your best. The
process applies to any type of change or reinvention you want to go through, regardless
of the dimension or dimensions of well-being you are concerned about. No matter your
age or where you are in life, this process will work. If you give it the time and energy it
deserves, you can make whatever changes you want and achieve the happiness that you
wish.
Use this book as your guide throughout the many personal reinventions you may
experience during your lifetime, and best of luck creating the life you desire. You
deserve it.


STAGE 1: IDENTIFY THE NEED
DIMENSIONS OF WELL-BEING SELF-ASSESSMENT
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
THE PERSONAL SIGNS OF CHANGE MATRIX
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

RATIONAL AND EMOTIONAL SOS ASSESSMENT
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

PHYSICAL SOS ASSESSMENT
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.


STAGE 2: DISCOVER YOURSELF
MY VALUES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
MY MOST IMPORTANT VALUES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

MY STRENGTHS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

MY WEAKNESSES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

MY PAST FEARS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

A New Story of an Old Fear
MY CURRENT FEARS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
A Story of a Forgotten Fear
MY CONQUERED FEARS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

A Story of a Conquered Fear
MY PASSIONS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

MY ACCOMPLISHMENTS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

LESSONS LEARNED
MY FAILURES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
MY MOTIVATORS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet

templates.
MY UPBRINGING WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
How would I rate my overall happiness level at home?
What was my family’s structure like, and how did I feel about it?
What were each family member’s positive attributes, negative attributes, and my

relationship with them?
How did I feel about my home life as a child? As a teenager? As a young adult? Today?
What did I like most about my upbringing?
What did I like least about my upbringing?
What would I change if I could?
MY LIFE EXPERIENCES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
How did I feel outside the home as a child? As a teenager? As a young adult?
What were my experiences in grade school like? In high school? In college?

What activities did I get involved in? Did I enjoy them?
How have these experiences shaped me as a person?
How would I describe my work experiences?
What five experiences have provided me the greatest pleasure? Why?
What experiences have I had that caused me the greatest pain or hurt? Why?
MY COMBINED EXPERIENCES WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
What experiences outside of the home required my parents or other family members’
reactions or involvement?
What were their reactions? How did they behave toward me? Toward the situation?
Toward the other individuals involved?

How do I feel about their reactions or how they handled the situation?
How has any of this shaped my life and who I am today?
THE WHAT I WANT WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
What do I hope I will have accomplished in my lifetime?
What would I want my child to think of me? My grandchildren?
What would I want my eulogy to say?
What would bring me the most pleasure, fulfillment, contentment, and satisfaction?
MY MISSION STATEMENT WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

What characteristics and qualities do I want to live by?
How do I want to contribute to the world?
What kind of influence do I want to have?
What legacy would I like to leave?

STAGE 3: DESIGN YOUR VISION
THE PERSONAL REINVENTION GAP MAP
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
MY IDEAL TOMORROW WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
What would my ideal life look like?

MY VISION WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
Vision Statement Draft:
My Vision Statement for Personal Reinvention:
VISION EFFECTIVENESS EVALUATION
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.


STAGE 4: CREATE THE PLAN
THE BIG END GOALS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
THE PRIORITIZATION MATRIX WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.

THE END GOALS, MILESTONES, AND ACTION STEPS
WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.


STAGE 5: MAKE IT HAPPEN
THE LIST OF AFFIRMATIONS WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
DUHIGG’S HABIT LOOP MODIFICATION WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
CURRENT HABIT LOOP

What Needs to Change
Opportunities for Modification
THE NEW HABIT LOOP
THE INCONSISTENT BEHAVIORS WORKSHEET

Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
Results of Change
Inconsistencies
Moments of Consistency
MY FAILURES OF REINVENTION WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.


STAGE 6: MONITOR YOUR
PROGRESS
THE CHECKPOINT EVALUATION WORKSHEET
Visit http://www.amazon.com/newyoujournal for a downloadable PDF of the worksheet
templates.
How It’s Going

R
RESOURCES
EGARDLESS OF THE DIMENSIONS OF well-being you are focusing on, there are many
wonderful books and resources that address the topic of change. Here’s a list of
some of my personal favorites.
GENERAL WELL-BEING
Duhigg, Charles. The Power of Habit: Why We Do What We Do in Life and
Business. New York: Random House, 2012.
Dweck, Carol S. Mindset: The New Psychology of Success. New York:
Ballantine Books, 2008.
Heath, Chip, and Dan Heath. Switch: How to Change Things When Change Is
Hard. New York: Broadway Books, 2010.
Kotter, John P. Leading Change. Harvard Business Review Press, 1st edition
(January 15, 1996).
CAREER WELL-BEING
Buckingham, Marcus. StandOut: The Groundbreaking New Strengths Assessment
from the Leader of the Strengths Revolution. Nashville, TN: Thomas Nelson,
2011.
Miedaner, Talane. Coach Yourself to a New Career: 7 Steps to Reinventing Your
Professional Life. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2010.
Mitchell, Pamela. The 10 Laws of Career Reinvention: Essential Survival Skills
for Any Economy. New York: Dutton, 2010.
SOCIAL WELL-BEING
Bradberry, Travis, and Jean Greaves. Emotional Intelligence 2.0. San Diego:
TalentSmart, 2009.
Covey, Stephen R. The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People. New York: Free
Press, 2004.

EMOTIONAL WELL-BEING
Davidson, Richard J., and Sharon Begley. The Emotional Life of Your Brain: How
Its Unique Patterns Affect the Way You Think, Feel, and Live—And How You
Can Change Them. London: Hudson Street Press, 2012.
Johnson, L. Whitney. Dare, Dream, Do: Remarkable Things Happen When You
Dare to Dream. Brookline: Bibliomotion, 2012.
LaPorte, Danielle. The Fire Starter Sessions: A Soulful + Practical Guide to
Creating Success on Your Own Terms. New York: Crown Archetype, 2012.
Rubin, Gretchen. The Happiness Project: Or, Why I Spent a Year Trying to Sing
in the Morning, Clean My Closets, Fight Right, Read Aristotle, and Generally
Have More Fun. New York: HarperCollins, 2009.
Seligman, Martin E. P. Authentic Happiness: Using the New Positive Psychology
to Realize Your Potential for Lasting Fulfillment. New York: Free Press, 2002.
PHYSICAL WELL-BEING
Blumenthal, Brett. 52 Small Changes: One Year to a Happier, Healthier You.
Seattle: AmazonEncore, 2011.
Lauren, Mark, and Joshua Clark. You Are Your Own Gym: The Bible of
Bodyweight Exercises. New York: Ballantine Books, 2011.
Taubes, Gary. Good Calories, Bad Calories: Fats, Carbs, and the Controversial
Science of Diet and Health. New York: Anchor Books, 2008.
Wansink, Brian. Mindless Eating: Why We Eat More Than We Think. New York:
Bantam Books, 2010.
INTELLECTUAL WELL-BEING
Carson, Shelley. Your Creative Brain: Seven Steps to Maximize Imagination,
Productivity, and Innovation in Your Life. Harvard Health Publications. San
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2010.
Moore, Margaret, and Paul Hammerness, with John Hanc. Organize Your Mind,
Organize Your Life: Train Your Brain to Get More Done in Less Time. Don
Mills, ON: Harlequin, 2011.
Rock, David. Your Brain at Work: Strategies for Overcoming Distraction,
Regaining Focus, and Working Smarter All Day Long. New York: HarperCollins,

2009.
SPIRITUAL WELL-BEING
Chopra, Deepak. The Ultimate Happiness Prescription: 7 Keys to Joy and
Enlightenment. New York: Harmony Books, 2009.
Haidt, Jonathan. The Happiness Hypothesis: Finding Modern Truth in Ancient
Wisdom. New York: Basic Books, 2006.
Kabat-Zinn, Jon. Mindfulness for Beginners: Reclaiming the Present Moment—
And Your Life. Boulder, CO: Sounds True, 2012.

I
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
WOULD LIKE TO EXPRESS MY sincere thanks to all the individuals who have
contributed to making A Whole New You the best book possible.
Thank you to my agents Meg Thompson and Sandy Hodgman for stepping in and
running with the ball without missing a beat. To my editor, Carmen Johnson, thank you
for jumping in with two feet and providing your guidance, insight, and honesty. Your
commitment to making tight timelines a reality has been greatly appreciated. Thank you
to the team at Amazon Publishing, including Alexandra Woodworth, Alicia Criner, and
Elizabeth Johnson for your time, dedication, and support in this project, and for being
with me every step of the way through editing, design, marketing, and publicity.
Thank you to Lucinda Blumenfeld, my publicist, for being my champion,
cheerleader, and advocate throughout this process. Having you in my corner has been
wonderful.
Thank you to all the individuals who have opened their hearts and shared their
stories about their fears, challenges, passions, and personal reinventions: Jane Chow,
Tamara Davies Christie, Debra Cohen, Sam Davis, Carole Brody Fleet, Kristi Jade,
Elizabeth Jansen, Tobi Kosanke, Andy LaPointe, Lisa Lewis, Kimberly Miller, Joy
Weese Moll, Elizabeth Sandman, Susan Schenck, John Simmons, and Philip Wax.
Thank you to all the wonderful authors and writers who, unbeknownst to them,
have had an influence on this book and me: Marcus Buckingham, Donald O. Clifton,
Stephen R. Covey, Charles Duhigg, Carol Dweck, Chip Heath, Dan Heath, Napoleon
Hill, John P. Kotter, and Gretchen Rubin.
Finally, thank you to David for your unwavering belief in my work and in us. And
thank you to Mom and Bill for always encouraging me to be my best, every day.

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Brett Blumenthal is the best-selling author of 52 Small Changes: One Year to a
Happier, Healthier You,  and Get Real and Stop Dieting! She has over twenty years of
experience in wellness, and almost ten years in management consulting, advising
Fortune 100 companies on managing change within their organizations. Brett received
her MBA, as well as her bachelor’s degree, from Cornell University. She is certified by
the Wellness Council of America (WELCOA) and the Aerobics and Fitness Association
of America (AFAA).

