A. Bertram Chandler is the dean of Australia's science fiction writers and
returns to this magazine after far too long an absense with a puz-zle: How could a
planetary colony based on religious ideals have re-gressed to primitive squalor?
What caused—
 
THE LONG FALL
A. BERTRAM CHANDLER
Illustrated by STEVE FABIAN
 
 
“YOU ARE getting the feel of the ship, Captain?" asked the Baroness.
Grimes, with a mouthful of tea, could not reply at once. He hastily swallowed the almost scalding fluid
and was embarrassed by the distinctly audible gurgle. He put the fragile cup down in its saucer with too
much of a clatter.
"Perhaps," he admitted cautiously, "the ship is getting the feel of me . . . He realised that she was
regarding him even  more coldly than usual and hastily added, "Your Excellency."
"But surely, to a spaceman of your experience, a ship is only a ship," she said.
You know bloody well that this one isn't, he thought mutinously.
To begin with, a normal ship is not built of gold—even though that pre-cious metal, its molecular
structure rearranged by the Electran metallur-gists, is superior to any of the alloys usually utilised by naval
architects. And a normal ship is not automated to the extent that The Far Traveller was. A normal ship
does not possess a mind of her own—although many generations of spacemen, and of air-men and
seamen before them, have half believed that such is the case. A normal ship, come to that, does not have
a Master who is on the run from the long, punitive arm of the In-terstellar Federation's Survey Service as
ex-Commander Grimes, lately cap-tain of IFSS Discovery, most certainly was.
A normal ship does not boast an Owner's Suite decorated and fur-nished in a style appropriate to the
salon of a well-heeled titled lady in Eighteenth Century France ...
Michelle, Baroness d'Estang, was more than merely well-heeled. She was filthy rich; as a member of
the fi-nancial elite who had made their home on El, Dorado she could not possibly have been anything
else. Her spaceyacht, The Far Traveller, had been built to her own specifications by Astronautics and
Electronics of Electra, a yard specialising in the construction of non-standard vessels. The Baroness had
not intended to employ any crew whatsoever; the pilot-computer was programmed to cope with almost
every possible as-tronautical problem. But Lloyd's of London had refused to supply insur-ance cover
unless a qualified, flesh--and-blood Master were on the Regis-ter. A Captain Billinger had been the first
such and he had been happy to resign during the vessel's stay on Botany Bay. Grimes, anxious to get
away from a planet on which his popularity had diminished, had re-placed him.
So here he was, seated on a spindly-legged chair in the Baroness's boudoir, sipping tea that was far
too weak for his taste. He was attired in a uniform that he hated, all purple and gold, that would have
been more appropriate to a Strauss operetta than to a spaceship—but one of the condi-tions of his
employment was that he wear his employer's livery. What rankled most was that his captaincy was only
nominal. To begin with, the Baroness knew far too much. As Bil-linger had coarsely said, she shoved her
tits into everything. And then the ship herself had a brain—a real brain, although nonorganic—and a
personal-ity. Definitely female it was, and . . . bitchy. Billinger had referred to it—her—as Big Sister. The
nickname was apt. After lift-off from Botany Bay she had set her own trajectory for Farhaven, one of the
comparitively recently rediscovered Lost Colonies that the Baroness was visiting in search for material for

her doctorial thesis.
And what did she, a typical rich bitch from El Dorado, want a doctor-ate for? Grimes wondered,
regarding her over the gold rim of his teacup. She was ornamental enough without any academic titles.
She was languidly at ease on her chaise lounge, attired, as usual, in a filmy robe that revealed more than it
concealed. Her dark au-burn hair was braided into a coronet in which clusters of diamonds spar-kled.
She could have been posing for a portrait of a decadent aristocrat from almost any period of Man's long
history. Decadent she may have looked—but Grimes knew full well that the rulers of El Dorado were
tough, ruthless and utterly selfish.
She said, looking steadily at Grimes with her big, violet eyes, "We have decided to let you handle the
land-ing."
He replied, as nastily as he dared, "I am sure that the ship can manage by herself quite nicely."
She said, "But you are being paid—handsomely, I may add—to do a job, Captain Grimes. And this
Farhaven is a world without radio, without Aerospace Control. During your years in command in the
Survey Service your brain has been pro-grammed to deal with such situations. The ship's brain has not
been adequately programmed in that respect." She frowned. "As you already know, I have brought such
deficien-cies in programming to the attention of the builders on Electra. Fortu-nately the guarantee has
not yet ex-pired."
The golden robot butler refilled her cup from a golden teapot, added cream from a golden jug, sugar
from a golden bowl. Grimes declined more tea.
He said, "Please excuse me, Your Excellency. Since I am to make the landing, I should like to view
again the records made by Epsilon Pavonis and Investigator ...
"You may leave, Captain," said the Baroness.
Grimes rose from his chair, bowed stiffly, went up to his far from uncom-fortable quarters.
 
HE SAT BEFORE the playmaster in his day cabin watching the pictures on the screen, the charts,
the presenta-tion of data. As he had done before, as soon as he had learned of The Far Traveller's
destination, he tried to put himself in the shoes of Captain Lentigan of Epsilon Pavonis, one of the
In-terstellar Transport Commission's tramps, who had first stumbled upon this planet. Epsilon Pavonis
had been off trajectory, with a malfunctioning Mannschenn Drive. As far as Lenti-gan was concerned
Farhaven had been merely a conveniently situated world on which to set down to carry out repairs and
recalibration. He was surprised to find human inhabitants, descendants of the crew and passengers from
the long-ago missing Lode Venturer. He had reported his discovery. Then Investigator was sent to
make a proper survey. Her captain, a Commander Belton, had run into trouble. And as Farhaven was of
no commercial or strategic importance to any of the spacefaring races its people were left to stew in their
own juice.
Grimes allowed himself to wonder what they would make—if anything—of the Baroness, himself and
Big Sister ...
 
GRIMES SAT in the captain's chair in The Far Traveller's control room. The Baroness occupied
the chair that, in a normal ship, would have been the seat of the second in command. She was dressed in
standard spacewoman's uniform—white shorts and shirt, but without insignia. She needed no trap-pings
of rank; in the functional attire she was no longer the decadent aris-tocrat but still, nonetheless, the
aris-tocrat.
The yacht was not equipped with robot probes—a glaring omission that, said the Baroness, would
cost that shipyard on Electra dearly. There were, however, sounding rockets, a necessity when landing
on worlds with no spaceport facilities; a streamer of smoke is better than nothing when there are no
Aerospace Control re-ports on wind direction and velocity—and at least as good as a primitive
windsock.
The Far Traveller dropped steadily down through Farhaven's atmosphere. She was in bright
sunlight although the terrain below her was still dark. Grimes had told Big Sister that he wanted to land

very shortly after sunrise—which was S.O.P. for the Survey Service. The almost level rays of a rising
luminary show up every smallest irregularity of a surface and, when a landing is being made on a strange
world, there is a full day after the set-down to make initial explora-tions and to get settled in.
Grimes, during the preliminary or-bitings of Farhaven, had selected his landing site—an unforested
plain near the mouth of one of the great rivers, a stream that according to the charts was called the
Jordan. Epsilon Pavonis had set down there. So had Investigator. A little way upriver was what
Captain Lentigan had referred to as a small town and Commander Belton as a large village. Neither
Len-tigan nor Belton had reported that the natives were hostile, their troubles had been with their own
crews. None of the material that Grimes had seen went into great detail but he could fill in the gaps from
his imagination. He had experienced his own troubles with his own crew on Botany Bay.
Big Sister broke into his thoughts. She said, her voice metallic yet feminine, seeming to come from
eve-rywhere and nowhere, "I would suggest that I fire the first sounding rocket, Captain."
"Fire at will," ordered Grimes.
(In a normal ship some alleged humourist would have whispered, "Who's Will?")
He watched in the screen the arrow of fire and smoke streaking down-wards. Its trail hardly
wavered.
"Ideal conditions, Captain," com-mented the Baroness.
"It would seem so, Your Excel-lency," agreed Grimes.
But from his own, highly personal viewpoint they were far from ideal. Over many years he had
regarded his pipe as an essential adjunct to shiphandling—and for those many years he had been
absolute monarch in his own control room. But the Baroness neither smoked nor ap-proved of smoking
in her presence.
He allowed his attention to stray briefly from the controls to what he could see of the sunlit
hemisphere through the viewports. Farhaven was a wildly beautiful world but, save for patches of fertility
along the rivers and coasts, it was a barren beauty. To the east, beyond the narrow sea, reared great,
jagged pinnacles, ice-tipped, and to the west similar peaks were already scintillant in the first rays of the
rising sun. Unless there were considerable mineral wealth about all that this planet would be good for
would be a holiday resort—and it was too far from anywhere for the idea to be attractive to those
shipping companies involved in the tourist trade.
Big Sister said, “I would suggest, Captain, that you pay more attention to your controls. It was, after
all, with some reluctance that I agreed to let you handle the landing."
Grimes felt his prominent ears burning as he blushed furiously. He thought, I'd like five minutes
alone back on Electra with the bastard who programmed this brass bitch . . . He saw, in the screen,
that the sounding rocket had hit and that its luminous smoke was rising directly upwards. But it was
thinning, would not last much longer.
He ordered, "Fire two.”
Big Sister said, "It is not neces-sary."
"Fire Two!" snapped Grimes. He added, grudgingly, "Wind can rise suddenly, especially just after
sunrise, especially in country like this."
"Fire two," acknowledged Big Sis-ter sullenly as the second rocket streaked downwards, hitting just
as the first one expired.
And there was wind, Grimes noted with smug satisfaction, springing up with the dawn. The
luminescent pillar of smoke wavered then streamed sea-wards. Grimes applied lateral thrust, kept the
flaring rocket heal-in the centre of the stern view screen.
The sun came up relative to the land below the ship, topping the jag-ged rim of the range to the
eastward. The plain toward which The Far Traveller was dropping flared into colour—blue-green with
splotches of gold and of scarlet, outcroppings of white from which extended long, sharply defined black
shadows. Boul-ders . . . thought Grimes, stepping up the magnification of the screen. Yes, boulders, and
the red and yellow patches must be clumps of ground-hugging flowers since they cast no shadows. The
second rocket, still smoking, was almost in the centre of one of the scarlet patches; there was no
unevenness of the ground there to worry about.

The ship dropped steadily. Grimes was obliged to make frequent small adjustments to the lateral
thrust con-trols; that wind was unsteady, gust-ing, veering, backing. He reduced the rate of descent until 
The Far Traveller was almost hovering.
"I am not made of glass, you know," remarked Big Sister conversa-tionally.
"I had hoped to make the landing some time before noon," said the Baroness.
Grimes tried to ignore them both. That bloody wind! he thought. Why can't it make up its mind
which way to blow?
He was down at last—and the ship, suddenly and inexplicably, was tilted a full fifteen degrees from
the verti-cal. She hung there—and then, with slow deliberation, righted herself, far more slowly than she
should have done with the lateral thrust that Grimes was applying. There was no real danger, only
discomfort and, for Grimes, considerable embarrassment. He had always prided himself on his
shiphandling and this was the first time that he had been guilty of such a bungled landing.
When things had stopped rattling and creaking the Baroness asked with cold sarcasm, "Was that
necessary, Captain?"
Before he could think of a reply Big Sister said, "Captain Grimes was overly cautious. I would have
come down fast instead of letting the wind play around with me like a toy bal-loon. I would have
dropped and then applied vertical thrust at the last mo-ment."
And you, you cast-iron, gold-plated bitch, thought Grimes, delib-erately made a balls-up of my
land-ing . . .
"Perhaps, Captain," said the Baro-ness, "it will be advisable to allow the ship to handle her own
lift-offs and set-downs from now on.”
The way she said it there wasn't any "perhaps" about it.
 
BIG SISTER carried out the routine tests for habitability. The captains of Epsilon Pavonis and
Investigator had reported the atmosphere better than merely breathable, the water suitable for drinking
as well as for washing in and sailing ships on, a total absence of any micro-organisms capable of caus-ing
even mild discomfort to humans, let alone sickness or death. Nonethe-less, caution is always essential.
Bacilli and viruses can mutate—and on Farhaven, after the landing of Lode Venturer, there had been
estab-lished a new and sizeable niche in the ecology, the bodies of the original colonists and their
descendants, just crying out to be occupied. The final tests, however, would have to wait until such time
as there was a colonist available for examination.
Big Sister said, "You may now dis-embark. But I would recom-mend . . .
Grimes said, "You seem to forget that I was once a Survey Service cap-tain. Landings on strange
planets were part of my job."
"You are no longer in the Survey Service, Captain," Big Sister re-minded him.
The Baroness smiled maliciously. "I suppose that we may as well avail ourselves of Captain Grimes'
wide range of experience. Quite possibly he was far better at trampling roughshod over exotic terrain
than bringing ships, to a gentle set-down prior to the extra-vehicular activities." She looked away from
Grimes. "Big Sister, please have the pinnace wait-ing for us. We shall board it from the ground. Oh, and
an escort of six gen-eral purpose robots. Armed.”
"Am I to assume, Your Excel-lency," asked Grimes stiffly, "that you are placing yourself in command
of the landing party?"
"Of course, Captain. May I remind you that your authority, such as it is, does not extend as much as
one mil-limetre beyond the shell of this ship?"
Grimes did not reply. He watched her sullenly as she unbuckled herself
From her seat, left the control room.. He unsnapped his safety belt, got up, went down to his
quarters im-mediately below and abaft control. He found that his robot stewardess had already laid out a
uniform of tough khaki twill with shoulder boards of gold on purple, gold-braided cap, boots, a belt with
attached holsters. He checked the weapons. These were a Minetti projectile pistol—as it hap-pened his
favourite personal weapon—and a hand laser. They would do. He changed slowly. Before he was from

the too familiar voice came from the speaker of the playmaster in his day cabin, "Captain Grimes, Her
Excellency is waiting for you."
He buckled on the belt, went out to the axial shaft, rode the elevator down to the after airlock. He
walked down the golden ramp to the blue-green grass. The pinnace was there, a slim, torpedo shape of
burnished gold. The Baroness was there, in khaki shirt and breeches and high boots, looking like a White
Huntress out of some archaic adventure movie. The general purpose robots were there, drawn up in a
stiff line, staring at nothing. From belts about their splendidly proportioned metal bodies depended an
assortment of hand weapons.
"We are waiting," said the Baro-ness. "Now that you are here, will you get the show on the road?"
"I thought you said that you were to be in command, Your Excellency," Grimes reminded her.
"I am in command, but I do not be-lieve in keeping a dog and doing my own barking," she told him.
Grimes flushed angrily. "Your or-ders?" he asked.
"To take this pinnace to the settle-ment mentioned by Epsilon Pavonis and Investigator. Then,
when Grimes made no immediate move, "Don't just stand there. Do some-thing."
He turned to the escorting robots, tried to imagine that they were Sur-vey Service marines.
"Embark!" he ordered sharply.
The automata turned as one, strode in single file to the pinnace's airlock, stepped aboard.
He said to the Baroness, "After you, Your Excellency."
He followed her into the pinnace. She took the co-pilot's seat in the control cab. The robots were
already standing aft, in the main cabin. The airlock doors shut while he was still making his way to his
own chair. He noted that the Baroness had not touched the console before her. He sighed. This was Big
Sister again, showing him who was really in com-mand.
He buckled himself into his seat. Before he was finished the voice of the ship came from the
transceiver, "Proceed when you are ready, Cap-tain Grimes."
The inertial drive was already run-ning, in neutral. He swiched to verti-cal thrust, lifted. The river was
ahead; in the bright sunlight it was a ribbon of gleaming gold winding over the blue-green grasslands.
There was al-together too much gold in his life these days he thought. He flew until he was directly over
the wide stream then turned to port, proceeding in-land at an altitude of about fifteen metres. Ahead of
him were the dis-tant, towering ranges, their glittering peaks sharp against the clear sky.
The Baroness was not talkative. Neither was Grimes. He thought, If those were real marines back
there they'd be making enough chatter for all of us.
He concentrated on his piloting. The river banks were higher now, rocky, sheer, with explosions of
green and gold and scarlet and purple where flowering shrubs had taken hold in cracks and crevices. He
con-sidered lifting the pinnace to above cliff-top level then decided against it. While he was here he might
as well enjoy the scenery. There was little enough else to enjoy.
The canyon became deeper, nar-rower, more tortuous. And then, after Grimes had put the pinnace
through an almost right angled turn, it wid-ened. The actual river bed was still relatively narrow but,
strung on it like a bead, was an oval valley, lushly fer-tile, bounded by sheer red cliffs un-broken save for
where the stream flowed in and out.
It was as described in the two re-ports. The village was not. It was ut-terly deserted, its houses
delapidated, many of them apparently destroyed by fire at some past date. Shrubs and saplings were
thrusting up through the charred ruins.
Grimes set the controls for hover-ing, took the binoculars from their box to study the squalid
settlement. There were few houses of more than one storey. The structural material was mud or clay,
reinforced with crude frames of timber. The windows were unglazed but from some of them filthy rags,
the remains of blinds or curtains, fluttered listlessly in some faint stirring of the air.
The Baroness had found her own glasses, was staring through them.
She said softly, "A truly Lost Col-ony . . . And we have come too late to find any survivors . . .
A voice—that voice!—came from the transceiver.
"May I suggest, Your Excellency, that you observe the cliff face to the north of your present
position?"

Big Sister, thought Grimes, was still watching. She would have her sensors in and about the pinnace
and every one of the robots was no more—and no less—than an extension of herself.
He turned the boat about its short axis to facilitate observation. He and the Baroness studied the
forbidding wall of red rock. It was pitted with dark holes. The mouths of caves? He thought that he could
detect motion in some of them. Animals? And then a human figure appeared from one of the apertures
and walked slowly along a narrow ledge to the next cave mouth. It was naked. It was a woman, not old
but not young, with long, un-kempt hair that might, after a thorough wash, have been blonde. The most
amazing thing about her was her apparent lack of interest in the strange flying machine that was shattering
the peace of the valley with its cacaphonous engine beat. Although it was quiet inside the pinnace—its
builders had been lavish with sonic insulation to protect the delicate ears of its aristocratic owner—the
racket outside, with the arythmic clangour of the inertial drive echoing and re-echoing between the cliff
faces, must have been deafening.
Then she did turn to look at the noisy intruder. Somehow her attitude conveyed the impression that
she was not very interested, that she wished the clattering thing would go away. Grimes studied her
through his binoculars. Her face, which might have been pretty if cleaned and given a few slight cosmetic
touches, was that of a sleepwalker. The skin of her body, under the dirt, was pallid. That was strange.
People who habitually went naked, such as the Arcadian naturists, were invariably deeply tanned.
She turned again, walked slowly into the cave mouth.
Three children, two girls and a boy, came out on to another ledge. They were as unkempt as the
woman, equally incurious. They picked their way down a narrow pathway to ground level, walked slowly
to one of the low bushes. They stood around it, picking things—nuts? berries?—from its branches,
thrusting them into their mouths.
The Baroness said, addressing Grimes almost as though he were a fellow human being, "As you
know, Social Evolution in the Lost Colonies is the title of my thesis. But this is devolution. From
spaceship to village of mud huts . . . From mud huts to caves . . .
"Caves," said Grimes, "could be better than mud huts. Less up-keep ...
"Indeed?" Her voice was cold again. "Put us down, please. Close to those children but not close
enough to alarm them."
If they were going to be alarmed, thought Grimes, they would have been alarmed already. Surely
they must have seen the pinnace, must be hearing it. He landed about ten metres from the filthy urchins.
They did not look away from whatever it was that they were doing.
The airlock doors opened and the little ladder automatically extended. The Baroness got up from her
seat. Grimes put out a hand to detain her. She scornfully brushed it aside.
He said, "Wait, Your Excellency. The robots should disembark first, to draw the fire. If any."
"If any," she repeated derisively.
She pushed past him, jumped down from the airlock to the ground. He followed her. The robots filed
out on the heels of the humans. Grimes stood there taking stock, both pistols drawn, the Minetti in his
right hand and the laser in his left. He stared up at the cliff face, at the caves. There were no indications of
any hostile ac-tion. The Baroness sneered silently. Grimes returned his weapons to their holsters.
"Are you sure," she asked, "that you don't want to shoot those chil-dren?"
Grimes made no reply, followed her as she walked slowly towards the little savages clustered around
the shrub. The GP robots followed him. The children ignored the intruders, just went on stolidly plucking
berries—if berries they were—and thrusting them into their mouths.
They were unprepossessing brats skinny, dirty, with scabbed knees and elbows, long, tangled, filthy
hair. And they stank, a sour effluvium that made Grimes want to breathe through his mouth rather than
through his nose. He saw the Baroness's nostrils wrinkle. His own felt like airtight doors the instant after a
hull-piercing missile strike.
He looked at the berries that were growing so profusely on the bush. Berries? Elongated, bright
purple berries? But berries do not run to a multiplicity of wriggling legs and twitching antennae. Berries do
not squirm as they are inserted into hun-gry mouths. The eaters chewed busily while a thin, purple ichor
dribbled down their filth-encrusted chins.

It was no worse than eating oysters, thought Grimes, trying to rationalise his way out of impending
nausea. Or witchetty grubs ...
"Children," said the Baroness in a clear, rather too sweet voice.
They ignored her.
"Children," she repeated, her voice louder, not so sweet.
They ignored her.
She looked at Grimes. Her expres-sion said, Do something.
He put out a hand to grasp the boy's shoulder. He was careful not to grip hard or painfully. This
required no effort; his own skin was shrinking from contact with that greasy, discol-oured integument. He
managed to turn the child to face him and the Baroness. Then he was at a loss for anything to say. "Take
me to your leader," did not seem right somehow.
"Please take us to your parents," said the Baroness.
The boy went on chewing and swal-lowing, then spat out a wad of masti-cated chitin from which
spines and hairs still protruded. It landed on the toe of Grimes' right boot. He kicked it away in revulsion.
"Take us to your parents," repeated the Baroness.
"Wha'?"
"Your parents.” Slowly, patiently, "Your mother. Your father."
"Momma. Fadder. No wake."
"He says," volunteered Grimes, that his mother and father are sleep-ing.
She said, "A truly blinding glimpse of the obvious, Captain. But, of course, you are an expert on first
con-tacts, are you not? Then may I ask why it did not occur to you to bring along bright trinkets, beads
and mir-rors and the like, as gifts to people who are no better than savages?"
"I doubt if they could bear to look at themselves in a mirror, Your Excel-lency," said Grimes.
"Very, very funny. But you are not employed as court jester."
Slowly she removed her watch from her left wrist. It was a beautiful piece of work, jewel rather than
instrument—although it was fantasti-cally accurate and in the extremely unlikely event of The Far
Treveller's chronometers all becoming nonopera-tional could have been used for navi-gational purposes.
Its golden bracelet was a fragile seeming chain, its thin case was set with diamonds that flashed dazzlingly
in the sunlight. She dangled it temptingly before the boy's eyes. He ignored it. He shrugged out of Grimes'
grip, pulled another of the repulsive grubs from the bush and thrust it into his open mouth.
But one of the girls was more in-terested. She turned, made a sudden snatch for the trinket. The
Baroness was too quick for her, whipping it up and out of reach.
"Gimme!" squealed the unlovely child. "P'etty! P'etty! Gimme!"
"Take . . . us . . . enunciated the Baroness slowly and carefully, "to . . . Momma . . . Fadder . . . ." 
"Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!"
The Baroness repeated her request. It seemed to be getting through. The girl scowled, then slowly
and deliber-ately gathered a double handful of the wriggling purple horrors from the branches of the bush.
Then, reluc-tantly, she led the way to the cliff face. She paused frequently to look hack. With her busily
working mouth, with that sickening slime oozing from between her lips she was not a pretty sight.
She reached the foot of the rock wall. There was a ledge running diagonally up its face, less than a
metre wide, a natural ramp. She paused, looked back at Grimes and the Baroness, at the marching
robots. An expression that could have been doubt flickered across her sharp fea-tured face. The
Baroness waved the watch so that it flashed enticingly in the sunlight. The girl made a beckon-ing gesture
then started up the path.
The Baroness followed, almost as surefooted as her guide. Grimes fol-lowed the Baroness. The
ledge was narrow, its surface uneven. There was no handhold and he realised unhap-pily that on some
stretches he would actually be leaning outwards, over a sheer drop, as he climbed. The robots began to
come after Grimes. There was a sharp crack! as rock broke away from the edge of the path, a clatter of
falling fragments.
The Baroness called, "Robots! Wait for us on the ground!" Then, to Grimes, "You should have
realised, Captain, that their weight would be too much for this ledge."

They climbed—the half grown girl, the Baroness, Grimes.
They negotiated, a difficult crossing of the natural ramp with a more or less horizontal ledge.
Fortunately the cliff face here was scarred with cracks, affording foot- and handholds.
They climbed.
Once Grimes paused to look hack and down—at the gleaming, golden pinnace, at the equally
refulgent robots. It was an exaggeration he knew, but they looked to him like ants standing beside a
pencil dropped on to the grass. He was not, after all; so very high above ground level—only high enough
to be reasonably sure of breaking his neck if he missed his footing and fell.
After that he kept on looking up and ahead—at the Baroness's shapely rump working in the
sweat-stained khaki of her breeches, at the meagre buttocks of the naked girl. Neither spectacle was
particularly erotic.
They climbed, crossing another horizontal ledge and then, eventually, turning off the diagonal path on
to a third one. It was as narrow as the na-tural ramp.
Ahead and to the left was the mouth of one of the caves. The girl slipped into it; the Baroness
followed. Grimes followed her. Less than two metres inside the entrance was an al-most right-angled
turn. The Baroness asked, "Did you bring a torch?" Then, "But of course not. That would have required
some foresight on your part."
Grimes, saying nothing, pulled his laser pistol from its holster, thumbed the selector switch to
broadest beam. It would serve as an electric torch al-though wasteful of energy and poten-tially
dangerous.
But it was not required, although it took a little time for his eyes to be-come used to the dim
illumination after the bright sunshine outside. There was light here—wan, eerie, cold. It came from the
obscenely bloated masses of fungus dependent from the low cavern roof, growing in bulbous clusters
from the rocky walls. The girl led them on, her thin body pallidly luminescent. And there were other
bodies sprawled on the rock floor, men and woman, naked, sleep-ing . . .
Or dead . . . thought Grimes.
No, not dead. One of them, a grotesquely obese female, stirred and whinnied softly, streched out a
fat arm to a nearby clump of the fungus. She broke off a large hunk, stuffed it into her mouth, making a
disgusting gobbling sound, swallowing noisily. She sighed gustily, flopped back to her supine position.
She snored.
There were other noises—eructations, a brief trickling sound, a splattering. And there was the . . . 
stink. Grimes trod in some-thing. He knew what it was without looking. Sight is not the only sense.
Still the girl led them through the noisome cave. They passed adults, adolescents, children, babies, all
sprawled in their own filth. They came at last to a couple with limbs in-tertwined in a ghastly parody of
phys-ical love.
"Momma! Fadder!" shrilled the girl triumphantly. "Gimme!"
The Baroness handed the watch to her. It was no longer the pretty toy that it had been when first
offered. In this lighting it could have been fabri-cated from lustreless lead, from beads of dull glass.
The girl took it, stared at it, then flung it from her. "No p'etty!" she squawled. "No p'etty!"
She pulled a piece of the glowing fungus from the wall, stuffed it into her mouth. She whimpered as
she chewed it then subsided on to the rock floor beside her parents.
"My watch," said the Baroness to Grimes. "Find it." After rather too long a time she added, "Please."
Grimes used his laser pistol cauti-ously, directing its beam upwards while looking in the direction
from which the brief tinkle of the fall of the watch had come. He saw it shining there against the rock wall.
He made his way to it, picked it up. It had dropped into a pool of some filth.
The Baroness said, "I am not touch-ing it again until it has been sterilised. Put it in your pocket. And
now, will you try to wake these people?"
Grimes pocketed the watch, re-turned the laser pistol to its holster. He squatted by the sleeping
couple. He forced himself to touch the un-clean skin of the man's bare shoulder. He gave a tentative tap,
thee another.
"I said wake him, not pet him!" said the Baroness. "Shake him!"

Grimes shook the sleeper, rather more viciously than he had intended. The man slid off the supine
body of the woman, fell on to his side. He twitched like a sleeping dog afflicted by a bad dream. Dull
eyes opened, peered out through the long, matted hair. Bearded lips parted.
"Go 'way. Go 'way."
"We have come a long distance to see you . . . said the Baroness.
"S'wot?" asked the man without any display of interest. "S'wot?" He le-vered himself to a half sitting
posi-tion, broke off a piece of the omnipre-sent fungus from the near wall, brought it towards his mouth.
"Stop him!" ordered the Baroness.
Grimes caught the other's thin wrist in his right hand, forced it down. The man struggled feebly.
"I am the Baroness d'Estang," an-nounced that lady.
So what? thought Grimes.
"S'wot?" demanded the man. Then, to Grimes, "Leggo. Leggo o' me you bassar!"
Grimes said, "We'll not get much from these people."
She asked, "Are you an expert? I find it hard to believe that you are expert in anything."
The man's free hand flashed up, the fingers clawing for Grimes' eyes. Grimes let go of the other's
wrist, using both his own hands to protect his face. The cave denizen at once abandoned his attack and
crammed the handful of fungus into his mouth, swallowing it without chewing. He immediately lapsed into
unconsciou-ness.
"Now look what you've done!" snarled the Baroness.
"I didn't do anything," said Grimes.
"That was the trouble!" she said. She snarled again, wordlessly. Then, "All right. We will leave this . .
. pigsty and return when we are better prepared. You will collect samples of the fungus so that it may be
analysed aboard the ship and an effective antidote prepared. Be careful not to touch the stuff with your
bare hands."
He prodded a protuberance of the nearest growth with the barrel of his Minetti. He hated so to
misuse a cherished firearm but it was the only tool he had. He pulled his handker-chief from his pocket,
extracting from its folds the Baroness's watch, putting it down carefully on the floor. He wrapped the
cloth around the sample of fungus, making sure that there were at least three thicknesses of cloth between
it and his skin. He re-moved his cap, placed the untidy par-cel in it.
He followed his employer out to the open air.
 
AFTER THEY had returned to ground level Grimes ordered one of the robots to get specimens of
the purple grubs from one of the bushes, also samples of the leaves upon which the revolting things were
feeding. Then the party reboarded the pinnace. Grimes took the craft straight up with the automatic
cameras in action. The pictures would be of interest and value—the deserted village, the faint, rectangular
outlines on the surrounding terrain showing where fields had once been cultivated, the cliff face with the
dark mouths of the caves. No humans would be seen on these films; the children who had been feeding
from the bushes had gone back in-side.
The flight back to The Far Traveller was direct and fast. Grimes felt—and was—filthy, wanting
nothing so much as a long, hot shower and a change into clean clothing: And the Baro-ness? Whatever
he was feeling she must be feeling too, doubled and re-doubled, in spades. The robots, who should have
been doing the dirty work, were as gleamingly immaculate as when they had left the yacht.
They landed by the ramp. The Baroness was first out of the pinnace and up the gangway almost
before Grimes had finished unbuckling his seat belt. By the time that he was aboard she was nowhere to
be seen.
He saw her discarded clothing in a little heap on the deck of the airlock chamber. Big Sister said, "I
suggest, Captain, that you disrobe before com-ing inside the ship . . .
He growled, "I was house-broken at least thirty years before you were programmed."
He stripped, throwing his own soiled khaki on top of the Baroness's gear. He thought wrily, And
that's the closest I'll ever get to the bitch . . . Nonetheless he was not sorry to get his clothes off; they

were distinctly odorous. He walked naked into the elevator cage, was carried up to his quarters. The
robot stewardess, the literally golden girl, awaited him there. She already had the shower running in his
bathroom, removed her skimpy uniform to stand under the hot water with him, to soap and to scrub him.
To an outside observer not knowing that the perfectly formed female was only a machine the spec-tacle
would have seemed very erotic. Grimes wondered who was washing the Baroness's back—her butler or
her lady's maid? He hoped that which-ever it was was using a stiff brush ...
He asked his own servant, "Aren't you afraid you'll rust?"
She replied humourlessly, "Gold does not corrode.” She turned the water off. "You are now sterile."
I am as far as you're concerned, he thought.
He stood for a few seconds in the blast of hot air and then, clean and dry, stepped into his sleeping
cabin. He looked with distaste at the gold and purple livery laid out on the bed. Reluctantly he climbed
into it. As he did up the last button the voice of Big Sister said, "You will now join the Baroness in her
salon.”
Captain Grimes filled and lit his pipe. He badly needed a smoke.
Big Sister said, "Her Excellency is waiting for you."
Grimes inhaled a satisfying lungful. Big Sister repeated, "Her Excellency is waiting for you."
Grimes decided to allow himself three more inhalations.
Big Sister said yet again, "Her Ex-cellency is waiting for you."
Grimes said, "What I tell you three times is true."
Big Sister said, "What I tell you is true.”
Grimes put his pipe in an ashtray. The stewardess produced a little golden atomiser, sprayed him with
a fragrant mist.
He said, "Now I reek like a whore's garret."
Big Sister said, “You do not, now, reek like an incinerator."
Grimes sighed and left his quarters.
 
THE BARONESS said coldly, "You took your time getting here, Captain. I suppose that you were
obliged to in-dulge yourself by sucking on that vile comforter of yours. Be seated."
Grimes lowered himself cautiously into one of the frail-seeming chairs.
"I thought that we would view the film of the orgy again."
"The film of the orgy, Your Excel-lency? I didn't know that there was one."
The voice of Big Sister came from the Baroness's playmaster, an instru-ment that contrived to look
as TriVi set would have looked had such de-vices been in existence during the reign of Louis XIV of
France.
"Like the other records made on and about this planet it was obtained from the archives of the
Survey Ser-vice on Lindisfarne. It is classified—for viewing by officers with the rank of Survey Service
captain and above. You, Captain Grimes, resigned from the Survey Service with the rank of commander
only."
"Let us not split hairs," said the Baroness generously. "Although he is only a civilian shipmaster
Captain Grimes should be accorded his cour-tesy title. The film, please."
The screen of the playmaster came alive, glowing with light and colour. There was the village that
they had visited—but a living settlement, not a crumbling ghost town. There were the
people—reasonably clean, brightly clothed. There were the spacemen and spacewomen from the survey
ship. And there was music—the insistent throb and rattle of little drums, the squealing of flutes. There was
something odd about it, a tune and a rhythm that did not accord with these circumstances. Grimes
suddenly recognised the Moody and Sankey lilt. He started to sing softly to the familiar yet subtly
distorted melody.
"Yes, we'll gather at the river,
The beautiful, the beautiful river ...
"Must you, Captain?" asked the Baroness coldly.
He shut up.

It must have been quite a party, he thought. There were animal carcasses roasting over big open fires.
Pigs? And what had happened to them? There were great earthenware pots of some liquor being passed
around. There were huge plattery heaped with amorphous hunks of . . . something, something which,
even in the ruddy firelight, emanated a faint blue glow. And the music. Another familiar hymn tune . . .
The words formed in Grimes' mind:
Bread of Heaven, Bread of Heavan,
Feed me till I want no more ...
The party was getting rough—not rough in the sense implying brawls but rough inasmuch as
inhibitions were being shed along with clothing. It was fast developing into an orgy. Grimes was no
prude—but he watched with nauseated disgust three children who could not have been older than eight
or nine, two girls and a boy, fondling a fat, naked, supine crewman.
Then Commander Belton strode on to the scene. Grimes knew him slightly. After all these years he
was still only a commander, was officer in charge of a third class Survey Service base on Pogg's Landing,
a dreary, un-important planet in the Shaula Sector. A sour, embittered man . . . Looking at the
playmaster screen Grimes real-ised that Belton had changed very little over three decades.
Belton looked not only sour and embittered but righteously furious. Behind him were a couple of
lieuten-ant commanders and a captain of marines, all trying to look virtuous. Behind them were twelve
marines in full battle order.
Belton shuddered away from a plump, nude girl who, a jug of liquor in one hand, a platter of the
fungus in the other, was trying to tempt him. He barked an order. His officers and the marines opened fire
with stun-guns. Those revellers who were still on their feet fell, twitching. Grimes saw a hapless woman
topple into one of the fires. He watched the marines dragging their unconscious shipmates towards the
waiting pinnaces, caring little what injuries were inflicted in the process. Finally there was a scuf-fle
around the camera itself. It was knocked over and kicked around—but still recorded a series of shots of
heav-ily booted feet trampling on sprawling naked bodies.
And that was it.
"Well?" asked the Baroness, arch-ing her fine eyebrows.
"These things happen," said Grimes. "After all, Your Excellency, a spaceship isn't a Sunday School."
"But the colony should have been," she told him. "Surely you must be aware that the founders of the
Starha-ven colony were alt members of a re-ligious sect, the True Followers. And the True Followers
were notorious for their puritanism."
"There were spacemen too, Your Excellency—and spacemen are usu-ally agnostics."
"Not always. It is a matter of record that the Master of the Lode Venturer was a True Follower. So
were most of his officers."
"Beliefs change, or are lost, over the generations," said Grimes.
Then Big Sister's voice came from the playmaster. "Analysis of the sam-ples has been completed,
Your Excel-lency. Insofar as the larval stage of the indigenous arthropod is concerned there is protein, of
course. Amino acids. Salts. A high concentration of sugars. It is my opinion that the chil-dren of this
world regard those larvae as their counterparts on more privileged planets regard candy.
"And now, the fungus. It supplies all the nutritional needs of the people of Starhaven. By itself it
constitutes a perfect balanced diet. Analysis of the human excreta adhering to the boots of yourself and
Captain Grimes indi-cates that its donors were in a good state of physical health . . . "Physical health . .
.        interjected the Baroness.
"Yes, Your Excellency. Analysis of the fungus indicates that it is, but for one thing, a perfect food . . .
Formulae appeared on the screen.
C2H5OH ... (C2H5)20 . . .
"Alcohol," said Grimes. -Some people might think that its presence would make the food really
perfect."
"The ways of organic intelligences are, at times, strange to me," admit-ted Big Sister. "But, to
continue. There are other, very complex molecules present but, so far as I can determine, they are
non-toxic . . .

"And there was no evidence of dis-ease in the feces?" asked the Baro-ness. "No indication of
breakdown of liver, kidneys or other organs?"
"No, Your Excellency."
"Blotting paper," said Grimes. 
"Blotting paper?" asked the Baro-ness.
"A spaceman's expression, Your Ex-cellency. It means that if you take plenty of solid
food—preferably rich and fatty—with your liquor there's no damage done. That fungus must be its own
blotting paper ...
"It could be so," she admitted. "There are some people who would regard this world as a
paradise—eternal alcoholic euphoria without unpleasant consequences.”
"There were babies in that cave," said Grimes, changing the subject. 
"What of it, Captain?"
"To have babies you must have childbirth."
"A blinding glimpse of the obvious. But I see what you are driving at and I think I have the answer.
Before the colonists retreated from their village to the caves there must have been doctors, midwives.
And those doctors and midwives are still functioning."
"In those conditions?" he demanded, horrified.
"In those conditions," she replied. "Do not forget, Captain, that thee human race contrived not only to
sur-vive but to multiply long before there were such things as spotlessly clean maternity wards in hospitals
literally bulging with superscientific gadgetry, long before every passing year saw its fresh crop of wonder
drugs. And perhaps those doctors and midwives will pass on their skills to the coming generations—in
which case the colony stands a very good chance of survival. Perhaps they will not—but even then the
colony could survive.
"Nonetheless," she went on, "I must discover the reason for this quite fantastic devolution. There must
be records of some kind in the vil-lage."
"There are no records," said Big Sister. "I sent the general purpose robots back to make a thorough
search of the settlement, Your Excel-lency. It seems certain that the ar-chives were housed in one of the
buildings destroyed by fire. There are no records."
"There could be records," said the Baroness slowly, "in the memories of those living in the caves. I
must try to devise some sort of bribe, re-ward . . . Some sort of pay-ment . . . What would induce these
people to talk freely?"
That pretty watch hadn't been much good, thought Grimes.
"My watch," said the Baroness suddenly. "Have you cleaned it for me, Big Sister? Did it need
repair?"
"Your watch, Your Excellency?"
"Yes. My watch. It was a gift from the Duke of . . . No matter. The cap-tain brought it back in his
pocket. It had been dropped into a pool of . . . ordure."
"There was no watch in any of Captain Grimes' pockets, Your Excel-lency."
Grimes remembered then. The thing had been wrapped in his hand-kerchief. Then he had removed it,
to use the handkerchief to parcel up the specimen of fungus. He must have left it in the cave ...
He said as much. He added, "When we go back tomorrow morning I’ll find it."
The Baroness had been almost friendly. Now she regarded him with contemptuous hostility. She
snapped, "You will go hack to the cave and find it now.”
 
GRIMES went up to his quarters to change into his khakis; he did not think that even the Baroness
would wish him to scrabble around in that noisome cavern wearing his purple and gold finery. When he
left the ship it was almost sunset. The pin-nace was awaiting him at the foot of the ramp. There were no
general purpose robots to escort him. He had assumed that Big Sister would lay them on as a matter of
course. She had not but he could not be bothered to make an issue of it.
He boarded the pinnace. It began to lift even before he was in the pilot's chair. Big Sister knew the
way, he thought. He was content to be a passenger. He filled and lit his pipe. The more or less (rather

less than more) fumes had a soothing effect. His seething needed soothing, he thought. He might be only
an em-ployee but still he was a shipmaster, a captain. To be ordered around aboard his own vessel was
much too much. And all over a mere toy, no matter how expensive, a gaudy trinket that the Baroness had
been willing enough to hand to that revolting female brat.
The pinnace knew the way. This was the third time that it was making the trip from the yacht to the
valley. It had no real brain of its own but, when it was not functioning as an ex-tension of Big Sister,
possessed a memory and was at least as intelligent as the average insect.
It flew directly to the village while Grimes sat and fumed, literally and figuratively. When it landed
darkness was already thick in the shadow of the high cliffs.
"Illuminate the path," ordered Grimes.
As he unsnapped his seat belt he saw through the viewports the cliff face suddenly aglow in the
beams of the pinnace's searchlights, the brightest of all of which outlined one of the dark cave openings.
So that was where he had to go. He passed through the little airlock, jumped down to the damp grass.
He walked to the cliff face, came to the natural ramp. He hesitated briefly. It had been a dangerous
climb—for a non--mountaineer—even in daylight, in company. But, he was obliged to ad-mit, he could
not complain about lack of illumination.
He made his slow and careful way upwards, hugging the rock face. He had one or two nasty
moments as he negotiated the really awkward parts. Nonetheless he made steady progress although he
was sweating profusely when he reached the cave mouth. This time he had brought an electric torch with
him. He switched it on as he entered the natural tunnel.
Did these people, he wondered disgustedly, spend all their time sleeping? It seemed like it. Sleeping,
and eating, and copulating. But the paradises of some of the Terran religions had not been so much
different—although not, surely, the paradise of a sect such as the True Followers ...
The bright beam of the torch played over the nude bodies sprawled in their obscene postures, over
the clumps of fungus that looked' almost like growths of coral—or naked brains. These glowed more
brightly after the beam of his torch had played over them.
Carefully picking his way through the sleepers he made his way deeper into the cave. He was
watching for the glint of gems, of bright metal. He did not see the slim arm that stretched out from an
apparently slumbering body, the long-fingered hand that closed about his ankle. He fell, heavily. His torch
was jolted from his grasp, flared briefly as it crashed on to the rock floor, went out. His face smashed
into something soft and pulpy. His mouth was open to cry out and large portion of the semi-fluid mess
was forced into it. He gagged—then realised that the in-voluntary mouthful was not what, at first, he had
thought it was.
The fungus, he realised.
It tasted good.
It tasted more than merely good.
There was a meatiness, a sweet-ness, a spiciness and, he thought, considerable alcoholic content. It
would do no harm, he considered, if he savoured the pleasant taste a few seconds more before spitting it
out. After all, he rationalised, this was sci-entific research, wasn't it? And Big Sister had given the fungus
full marks as a source of nourishment. He chewed experimentally. In spite of its mushiness the flesh
possessed texture, fibres and nodules that broke between his teeth, that released aromatic oils which
were to the original taste as a Vintage Burgundy is to a very ordi-nary vin ordinaire.
Before he realised what he was doing he swallowed.
The second mouthful of the fungus was more voluntary than otherwise.
He was conscious of a weight on his back, of long hair falling around his head. Languidly he tried to
turn over, finally succeeded in spite of the mul-tiplicity of (it seemed) naked arms and legs that were
imprisoning him.
He looked up into the face that was looking down into his.
Why, he thought, she's beautiful ...
He recognised her.
She was the woman whom he and the Baroness had seen emerge briefly from the caves. Then her

overall filth-iness had made the biggest impres-sion. Now he was unaware of the dirt on her body, the
tangles in her hair. She was no more (and no less) than a desirable woman, an available woman. He
knew that she was looking on him as a desirable, available man. After all the weeks cooped up aboard 
The Far Traveller with an attractive female at whom he could look, but must not touch, the temptation
was strong, too strong.
 
She kissed him on the mouth.
Her breath was sweet and spicy, in-toxicating.
She was woman and he was man, and once he was out of his confining clothing they were one.
The tension-releasing explosion came.
She slumped against him, over him, her nipples brushing his face. Slowly, slowly, she rolled off him.
He realised dimly that her hand was against his mouth. It held a large piece of the fungus. He took it from
her, chewed and swallowed. It was even better than his first taste of it had been.
He drifted into sleep.
 
HE DREAMED.
He was a child.
He was one of the Lode Venturer's survivors who had made the long trek south from the vicinity of
the north magnetic pole. He could remember the straggling column of men, women and children loaded
with supplies from the wrecked ship—food, sacks of precious Terran seed grain, sealed stasis containers
of the fertilised ova of livestock, the 'incubator broken down into portable components, the parts of the
solar power generator.
He was one of Lode Venturer’s people who had survived the trek as well as the crash landing, who
had found the valley, who had helped to till the fields and plant the grain, who had worked at setting up
the incubat-ing equipment Although only a child he had shared the fears of his elders as the precious store
of provisions dwindled, the knowledge that, in spite of strict rationing, it would not last until the harvest,
until the in-cubators produced the progenitors of future herds of meat animals.
He remembered the day of the drawing of lots.
There were the losers—three young men, a middle-aged woman and another one who was little
more than a girl—standing there, frightened yet somehow proud, while further lots were drawn to decide
who would be executioner and butcher. A fierce ar-gument had developed—some of the women
claiming, belatedly, that females of childbearing age should have been exempt from the first lot-tery.
While this was going on another boy—the son of the middle-aged woman—came down from the caves
to which he had run rather than stay to watch his mother slaughtered. He was bearing an armful of the
fungus.
"Food!" he was shouting. "Food! I have tasted it and it is good!"
They had all sung a hymn of thanksgiving then, grateful for their delivery from what, no matter how
necessary, would have been a ghastly sin.
Bread of Heaven, Bread of Heaven, 
Feed me till I want no more, want no more,
Feed me till I want no more ...
He awoke then, drifting slowly up from the warm, deep sleep. He did what he had to do, relieving
the pres-sure on bowels and bladder as he lay there. He wondered dimly why people ever went to the
trouble of fabricating elaborate sanitary arrangements. The fungus needed his body wastes. He needed
the fungus. It was all so simple.
He reached out and grabbed another handful of the intoxicating stuff. The woman—or another
woman—was with him. While he was still eating they coupled.
He slept.
 
HE DREAMED.

He was the Pastor, the leader of the settlement.
He had looked over the arrange-ments for the feast and all was well. There was an ample supply of
the strong liquor brewed and distilled from grain—the last harvest had been a good one, surplus to food
require-ments. Pigs had been slaughtered and dressed, ready for the roasting. Great baskets of fungus
had been brought down from the caves. Since it had been discovered that it thrived on human manure it
had proliferated, spreading from the original cavern through the entire subterranean com-plex. Perhaps it
had changed, too. It seemed that with every passing year its flavour had improved. At first—he seemed
to remember—it had been almost tasteless, although filling and nutritious.
But now . . .
The guests from the ship, clattering through the night sky in their noisy flying boats, were dropping
down to the village. He hoped that there would not be the same trouble as there had been with the guests
from that other ship, the one with the odd name, Epsilon Pavonis. Of course, it had not been the guests
themselves who had made the trouble; it had been their captain. But this captain, he had been told, was a
True Fol-lower. All should be well.
All was well.
The love feast, the music, the danc-ing, the singing of the old, familiar hymns ...
And the love ...
And surely the manna, the gift from the all-wise, all-loving God of the True Followers, was better
than ever it had been. What need was there, after all, for the corn liquor, the roast pig?
Bread of Heaven, Bread of Heaven
Feed me till I want no more ...
He walked slowly through and among the revellers, watching be-nevolently the fleshly intermingling of
his own people and those from the starship. It was . . . good. Everything was good. He exchanged a few
words with the Survey Service petty officer who, dutifully operating his equip-ment, was making a visual
and sound recording of the feats. He wondered briefly why the man was amused when he said that the
pictures and the music would be acclaimed when presented in the tabernacles of the True Followers on
Earth and other planets. He looked at the group at which the camera was aimed—a fat, naked, supine
crewman being fondled by three children. It was a charming scene.
And why the strong sensation of déjà vu?
Why the brief, gut-wrenching dis-gust?
He heard the distant hammering in the still, warm air, growing louder and louder. More boats—what
did they call them? pinnaces?—from the ship, he thought. Perhaps the captain himself, Commander
Belton, was coming. He would be pleased to see how well his fellow True Followers on this distant
world had kept the faith ...
Then the dream became a night-mare.
There were screams and shouts. There was fighting.
There were armed men discharging their weapons indiscriminately, firing on both their own shipmates
and the colonists.
There was his confrontation with a tall, gaunt, stiffly uniformed man. (Again the flash of déjà vu.)
There were the bitter, angry words.
"True Followers, you call your-selves? I understood that my men had been invited to a religious
service. And I find a disgusting orgy in pro-gress . . ."
"But we are True Followers. We were saved. God Himself sent his manna to save us from
committing the deadliest sin of all. Here! Taste! Eat and believe!"
And a hand smashed viciously down, striking the proferred manna from his grasp, as Belton shouted,
"Keep that filthy muck away from me!"
He saw the muzzle of a pistol point-ing at him, saw the flare of energy that jolted him into oblivion.
 
HE SLOWLY DRIFTED up into semi-consciousness. There was a woman.
There was more of the manna. Again he slept.
 

HE DREAMED.
He dreamed that a bright, harsh light was beating through his closed eyelids, that something hard was
nudging him in the ribs.
He opened his eyes, immediately shut them again before he was blinded.
A voice, a somehow familiar female voice, was saying, "Captain Grimes, Captain Grimes! Wake up,
damn you!" And then, in a whisper, "Oh, if you could only see yourself!"
He muttered, "Go 'way. Go 'way:"
"Captain Grimes! John!" There was a hand on his shoulder, shaking him. He opened his eyes again.
She had put her torch on the ground so that he now saw her by its reflected light. She was a woman. She
was beautiful—but so was everybody in this enchanted cavern.
She said, "I must get you out of here.”
Why? he wondered. Why?
She got her hands under his naked shoulders, tried to lift him. He got his hands about her shoulders,
pulled her down. She struggled, kneeing him in the groin. He let go and she stood up, stepping away from
him. He was dimly aware that the shirt was torn from her upper body. In spite of the pain that she had
inflicted upon him he felt a surge of desire, reached out for her exposed breasts. She stepped back
another pace.
He wanted her, but to get up to go after her was too much trouble.
But he muttered, "Do'n' go. . . Do'n' go . . . I . . . want you. . . Always . . . wanted . . . you . . ." Her
face was glistening oddly.
Dimly he realised that she was weeping.
She said, "Not here. Not now. Pull yourself together. Come back to the ship . . .
He said—the words were coming more easily now—"I ... hate ships . . . All . . True Followers hate .
.. . Stay. . . here. . . Be. . . happy .. .
Her face and voice hardened. "I'll get you out of here by force!"
He was losing interest in the con-versation. He reached out languidly for the omnipresent manna,
chewed and swallowed.
He muttered, "You . . . should .. . try . . . this . . . Make . . . you .. . human . . ."
But she was gone.
It did not matter.
The warmth of the communal life of the cavern surrounded him.
There were women.
And always there was the manna. He slept.
 
HE DREAMED.
He was one of the crowd being ad-dressed by the Pastor.
“We must sever all ties with Earth!" he heard. "We are the true, the real True Followers. Were we
not saved by God Himself from death and from deadly sin? But these Earthmen, who have intruded into
our paradise, who have strayed from the true path, refuse to believe ...
"So burn the houses, my people! Destroy everything that links us with faithless Earth, even our herds
and our crops!
"God's own manna is all that we need, all that we shall ever need!"
And somebody else—Grimes knew that it was one of the community's physicians—was crying over
and over, in a sort of ecstacy, "Holy symbiosis! Holy symbiosis!"
Crackling flames and screaming pigs and the voices of the people sing-ing . . .
Bread of Heaven, Bread of Heaven,
Feed me till I want no more .. .
 
AGAIN THE too bright light and again the hand shaking his shoulder .. . "Wake up, John! Wake
up!"

"Go 'way . . .”
"John! Look at me!"
He opened his eyes.
She had placed her torch on a ledge so that it shone full upon her. She was naked. She said softly,
"You want me. You shall have me—but not here, among these degenerates, this filth." She turned slowly,
saying, "Follow . . .
Almost incuriously he watched her luminous body swaying away from him. Before she reached the
mouth of the cave he had fallen back into sleep.
A long while or a little while—he had no way of knowing—later he awoke. After a few mouthfuls of
manna he crawled around until he found a woman.
And slept again.
And dreamed.
 
SUBTLY the dreams changed.
There were, as before, memories from the minds of the colonists who had long lived in symbiosis
with the fungus but there were now other memories—brief flashes, indistinct at first but all the time
increasing in clarity and duration. There were glimpses of the faces and bodies of women whom he had
known—Jane Pentecost, Maggie Lazenby, Ellen Russell, Una Freeman, Maya ...
The women …
And the ships.
Lines from a long-ago read and long-ago forgotten piece of verse drifted through his mind:
The arching sky is calling 
Spacemen back to their trade ...
He was sitting in the control room of his first command, the little courier Adder, a king at last even
though his realm (to others) was an insignificant one. Obedient to the touch of his fin-gers on the console
the tiny ship lifted from the Lindisfarne Base apron.
. . . .All hands! Stand by! Free Fall-ing!
The lights below us fade . . .
And through the dream, louder and louder, surged the arhythmic ham-mering of a spaceship's inertial
drive.
 
HE AWOKE.
He scooped a handful of manna from a nearby clump.
He chewed, swallowed.
Somehow it was not the same as it had been; there was a hint of bitter-ness, a rancidity. He relieved
himself where he lay, crawled over and among the recumbent bodies until he found a receptive women.
Like a great fat slug, he thought briefly.
(But what was a slug? Surely noth-ing like this beautiful creature . . .)
After he was finished with her—and she with him—he drifted again into sleep, even though that
mechanical clangour coming from somewhere outside the cave was a continual irri-tation.
 
HE DREAMED more vividly than be-fore.
He had just brought Discovery down to a landing in the Paddington Oval on Botany Bay. His
officers and the marine guard behind him he was marching down the ramp to the vi-vidly green grass.
Against the pale blue sky he could see the tall flagstaffs, each with its streaming ensign, dark blue with the
cruciform constellation of silver stars in the fly, with the superimposed red, white and blue crosses in the
upper canton.
There was a band playing.
He was singing in time to the famil-iar tune.
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda,
You'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me . .

He awoke.
 
THERE WAS STILL that arrhythmic hammering, drifting in from some-where outside—but the
music, vastly amplified, almost drowned the mechanical racket.
Up jumped the swagman, sprang into the billabong,
"You'll never catch me alive!" cried he . . .
And what was this noisome bil-labong into which he, Grimes, had plunged? Would his ghost still be
heard after he was gone from it? Would his memories of Deep Space and the ships plying the star lanes
remain to haunt the swinish dream-ers? Would that honest old national song replace the phoney piety of
the True Followers' hymns?
Manna! he thought disgustedly, kicking out at a dim-glowing mass. It splattered under his bare foot
and the stench was sickening. He was seized with an uncontrollable spasm of nausea. Drained and
shaken he stum-bled towards the cave entrance, the music luring him as though he were one of the Pied
Piper's rats. He tripped over sleeping bodies. A woman caught hold of his ankle. He looked down at her.
He could not be sure but he thought that she was the one who had been responsible for his orig-inal
downfall. Almost he brought his free foot smashing down on to her sleepily smiling face but, at the last
moment, desisted.
She was what she was, just as he was what he was—and he had wal-lowed in the mire happily
enough ...
He stooped and with both hands almost gently disengaged her fingers.
He staggered on, finally out on to the ledge. The sunlight at first blinded him. And then he saw her
hanging there above the valley, beau-tiful and brightly golden, The Far Traveller. It was from her that
the music was blaring. It ceased sud-denly, was replaced by the amplified voice of Big Sister.
"I am sending the pinnace for you, Captain Grimes. It will come as closely alongside the cliff as
possible. The robots will help you aboard."
He waited there, naked and filthy and ashamed, until the boat came for him.
 
GRIMES—clean, clothed, depilated but still shaky—sat in the Baroness's salon telling his story.
She listened in silence, as did the omnipresent Big Sister.
When he was finished Big Sister said, "I must make a further analysis of the fungus specimens. Drug
addic-tion among humans and other in-telligent life forms is not unusual, of course, but the symbiotic
aspects of this case intrigue me."
"The dreams," whispered Grimes. "The dreams . . . I must have experi-enced the entire history of the
Lost Colony . . .
"For years," said Big Sister, "the fungus has been nourished by the waste. products of the colonists'
bodies—and when they have died it has been nourished by the bodies themselves. It has, in some way
that I have yet to discover, become the col; onists. Is there not an old saying: A man is what he eats? This
could be true for other life forms. And the symbiosis has been more, much more, than merely
physical—and by eating the fungus you, for a while, en-tered into that symbiotic relation-ship."
"Very interesting," commented Grimes. "Very interesting. But you must have known what was
happen-ing, if not why. You should have sent the robots to drag me out by force."
"Command decisions are not my prerogative," said Big Sister smugly. "Her Excellency did, however,
wish to effect a forcible rescue but I dis-suaded her. It was a matter for humans only, for humans to
resolve for themselves—and essentially for a human of your sort to resolve for him-self. I know very
well, Captain Grimes, how you hate robots. Had you been rescued by automata it would have rankled
for the rest of your life." There was a brief, almost human chuckle. "I must admit, how-ever, that after
Her Excellency had failed to recapture you by the use of a very human bait I did make some use of my
knowledge of your peculiar psychology—your professional pride, your rather childish nationalism . . .
Grimes ignored this last. He turned to the Baroness.
"So it was not a dream," he mur-mured, "when you . . .

She looked at him coldly.
"It was not a dream," she said. "And I shall not forget how I offered myself to you and how that offer
was ... ignored. There was a time when I thought that something—not permanent but mutually
satisfying—might develop between us. But no more. Our relations will remain as they have been since I
first engaged you, those between employer and employee."
Grimes remembered with increas-ing vividness how she had exposed herself to him, had tried to
tempt him.
He said, "I am sorry. But I was under the influence of the . . . manna …
She said, "In vino veritas, Captain Grimes. And what makes it worse is the knowledge that the
cacaphony of a ship's engines, the trite music of a folksong about an Austrialian sheep-stealer, succeeded
where 1 failed."
He began, "But . . .
She said, "You may leave."
If only that Lotus Land were more hygenic, he thought, he might well return there.
But he knew that he never would.
—A. BERTRAM CHANDLER
 

